Title: The Holy Bible ... Made from the Latin Vulgate by John Wycliffe
  and His Followers (the Wycliffite Bible, complete edition)
Creator: (the Wycliffite translation project) (Josiah Forshall & Sir
  Frederic Madden, Editors)
Publisher: Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1850
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Digital Bible Society's own item note states it is
  "unaware of any copyright restrictions for this item"; consistent with
  1850 publication, long past any copyright term. Checked directly
  against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item ENGW850_DBS_HS
  (archive.org/details/ENGW850_DBS_HS), fetched directly (curl, raw
  bytes, direct datanode) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors
  (Middle English orthography renders inconsistently through OCR); not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  and a mid-document sample this session. A very large file (complete
  Bible, both Earlier and Later Wycliffite Versions with Forshall &
  Madden's scholarly apparatus).

es is 
“oS THE HOLY BIBLE. 


CONTAINING 


THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS, 


WITH THE APOCRYPHAL BOOKS, 


IN THE EARLIEST ENGLISH VERSIONS 


JOHN WYCLIFFE AND HIS FOLLOWERS; 


EDITED BY 
THE REV. JOSIAH FORSHALL, F.R.S. erc. 
LATE FELLOW OF EXETER COLLEGE, 
AND 


SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H. F.R.S. erc. 


KEEPER OF THE MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 


VOLUME I. 


OXFORD, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


M.DCCC.L. 


PREFACE. 





1. TE versions now for the first time printed in an entire form*, may be regarded These versions 
as the earliest in the English language, which embrace any considerable portion ota 
the Holy Scriptures. Though never used in the public service of the Church, they 
must have been widely circulated as well among the clergy as the laity, from the 
period of their completion in the latter part of the fourteenth century, until their 
place was occupied by the editions of the reign of Henry the Eighth. The influence 
which they exercised upon the religious opinions and sentiments of the nation at large 
was, without question, extensive. In the interval between the years 1382 and 1526 
they diffused a great amount of scriptural truth ; supplied to the opponents of the papal 
system the most effectual means of exposing its abuses and errors; and thus laid a 
deep foundation for the reforms of the sixteenth century. The effect of these versions 
and the merit due to their authors will be better estimated, after a brief review of 
what had previously been done towards a translation of the Scriptures into the ver- 
nacular tongue. 

2. To commence with the Anglo-Saxon period. The poem which bears the name Angio-Sazon 
of Czedmon, gives several passages of Scripture with tolerable fidelity, and it might serprre 
require extended notice, if the epic and legendary character of the composition suffered 7” ¥ Ce” 


mon. 
it to be ranked among the versions of holy writ’. Aldhelm, bishop of Sherborn, who Aidheim; ver- 
died in 709, is reported to have rendered the Psalter into his native language‘, and the Tee him. 
Anglo-Saxon version, discovered in the Royal Library at Paris about the beginning of 
the present century, has been supposed to be at least in part his production. The 
first fifty psalms are in prose, the others in verse®. 

3. Bede wrote chiefly for the learned; yet that the common people might more Bede; trans- 
easily be taught the elements of their religion, he turned the Apostles’ creed and the Aim 
Lord’s prayer into Anglo-Saxon, and frequently presented copies of these formularies 


to such illiterate priests as came under his notice’. He died in 735, and one of his 


@ When the present edition was commenced, no part 
of the earlier of these two versions had ever heen printed, 
with the exception of the Song of Solomon, given by 
Dr. Adam Clarke in his commentary on the Bible (8 vols. 
4°, Lond. 1810-25), from a Ms. in his own library, 
(now Brit. Mus. Eg. 618, 619.) In 1848 the New Tes- 
tament in the earlier version was printed hy Mr. Lea 
Wilson from a Ms. in his own possession, (now in the 
hands of the earl of Ashhurnham,) under the title The 
New Testament in English, translated by John Wycliffe, 
circa MCCCLXXX. etc. 4°. Lond. The New Testament 
in the later version was first published hy the rev. John 
Lewis, minister of Margate, fol. Lond. 1731, the text 
being taken from two Mss., one helonging to him- 
self, (now Bodl. Gough Eccl. top. 5.) the other to sir 
Edw. Dering, bart. (now in the possession of the very 
rev. W. Conybeare, dean of Llandaff). Mr. Lewis's 
edition was reprinted hy the rev. H. H. Baber, 4°. Lond. 
1810. The New Testament in the same version was 
again published in 1841, from a Ms. then belonging to 

VOL. I. 


H.R. H. the duke of Sussex, (now in the collection of 
the earl of Ashburnham,) by Messrs. Bagster, in The 
English Hexapla, 4°. Lond. 

> The first printed edition of the New Testament in 
English, was that by Tindal in 1526; the first of the 
whole Bible, that by Coverdale in 153 5. 

¢ Cedmon was a-monk of Whitby, in the seventh 
century. The poem as it now exists has, probably, 
been materially altered by the reciters and transcribers 
of a later period. It has heen twice published, first by 
Francis Junius in 1655, and next by Mr. Benjamin 
Thorpe in 1832. 

4 Bale Scriptorum illustr. catalogues, ed. 1557, p. 84. 

e It was edited for the delegates of the Oxford uni- 
versity press hy Mr. Benjamin Thorpe, under the title, 
Liber Psalmorum, versio antiqua Latina, cum Paraphrasi 
Anglo-Sazonica, etc. 8°. Oxon. 183 5. : 

f Bede cp. ad Egbertum; see Hist. Eccl. ed. Smith, 
Cantab. 1722, p. 306. 


b 


King Alfred, 
anzxtous for the 
translation of 
Scripture. 


Anglo-Saxon 
version of the 
four Gospels. 


Anglo-Saron 
glosses on the 
Gospels. 


Anglo-Saxon 
glosses on the 
Psalter. 


éElfrie’s Hep- 
tateuch, ete. 


il PREFACE. 


last efforts was a translation of the gospel of St. John, which he seems to have com- 
pleted, just as death put an end to his labours &. 

4, Alfred, in his zeal for the improvement of his country, did not overlook the 
importance of vernacular Scripture. At the head of his laws he set in Anglo-Saxon 
the ten commandments, with such of the Mosaic injunctions in the three following 
chapters of Exodus, as were most to his purpose. What other parts of the Bible he 
translated, it is difficult to determine. A remarkable passage in his preface to the 
Pastoral of Pope Gregory”, leaves no room for doubt, that if the more necessary 
portions of holy writ were not made accessible to his subjects in their own tongue, it 
was only because this wise and pious prince failed of the opportunity to accomplish 
his wishes. 

5. Whatever might be the extent of Alfred’s biblical labours, it is beyond question 
that soon after his days the Anglo-Saxon church had her own interpretations of those 
parts of Scripture which were in most frequent use. The Psalter ascribed to Aldhelm, 
if it be not the work of that prelate, certainly cannot be later than the ninth century.” 
To the same period may be safely attributed the Anglo-Saxon translation of the 
Gospels‘. Several Mss. of it are preserved; but none of them appear to give the 
version in its original purity. Successive transcribers adapted the language to the 
idioms and inflexions of their own times and provinces. Some however of the copies 
are earlier and less degenerate than others. The latest seem to be considerably sub- 
sequent to the conquest, the most ancient may have been written more than a hundred 
years before it*. 

6. But it was not solely to this version that the unlettered Anglo-Saxon was in- 
debted for a knowledge of what the Evangelists record. Access was also afforded to 
their narratives by means of verbal glosses made in copies of the Latin Gospels. These 
glosses were written between the lines of the text, rendering it in the same order word 
by word. Of the two glosses which are now exstant, one is found in the famous book 
of Durham', and was made by the priest Aldred, probably in the tenth century; the 
other of the same age is contained in a Ms. of the Bodleian Library™, and had for its 
authors Owun and Farmen, the latter a priest at Harewood. 

7. Similar glosses had been made on the Psalter. A gloss of this kind, probably of 
the ninth century, was published in 1640 from a Ms." belonging to sir Henry Spelman, 
by his son, afterwards sir John*®. Another gloss of the same period was published by 
the Surtees Society in 1843”. Variations from these glosses are found in several other 
Mss.4 Glosses also occur on the canticles of the church, and the Lord’s prayer; on 
portions of Scripture in the ritual of Durham’, and on the more difficult words of the 
book of Proverbs’. ; 

8. Towards the close of the tenth century £lfric translated, omitting some parts 
and greatly abridging others, the Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, a portion of the books 


& Cuthberti Vita Bede; see Hist. Eccl. p. 793. 


P Anglo-Saxon and Early English Psalter. 2 vols. 
h See Annales A‘lfredi, auct. Asserio, ed. Wise, p. 84. 


8°, 1843 ; edited by the rev. J. Stevenson. The Anglo- 


i Published three times; 1. by abp. Parker in 1571; 
2. by Dr. Marshall, rector of Lincoln college, in 1665 ; 
and 3. by Mr. Benjamin Thorpe, in 1842. 

k The Mss. still remaining are, 1. Corp. Ch. Coll., 
Cambr.S.4; 2. Brit. Mus. Cotton. Otho C.1; 3. Bodl. 
441; 4. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ii 2.11; 5. Brit. Mus. Old 
R. Libr. r A. 14; and 6. Bodl. Hatton 65. The first 
two are the earliest. 

1 Brit. Mus. Cotton. Nero D. 4. 

™ Bodl. Rushworth 3946. 3 

n Afterwards in the Stowe collection No. xxviii. and 
now in the possession of the earl of Ashburnham. 

° With the title Psalterivm Davidis Latino-Saxonicum 
Vetus. 4°. Lond. 1640. 


Saxon gloss is taken from the Cotton Ms. Vespasian 
A.1, and besides the Psalter, comprises Ps. cli., nine of 
the Canticles, and hymns for matins, the evening, and 
the Lord’s day. 

q Of three Mss. partial collations are given by Spel- 
man; namely, 1. Univ. Libr. Cambr. 256; 2. Trin. Coll. 
Cambr. 35; and 3. Brit. Mus. Arundel 60. A gloss 
also occurs in Brit. Mus. Old R. Libr. 2 B. 5; Cotton. 
Vitellius E. 18 and Tiberins C.6; in Bodl. Junius 27 ; 
in the Lambeth Ms. 427, and in that of Salisbury 
Cathedral marked 141. 

r Edited for the Surtees Society by the rev. J. Ste- 
venson, 8°. Lond. 1840. 

s Brit. Mus. Cotton. Vespasian D. 6. 


PREFACE. lil 


of Kings, Esther, Job, Judith, and the Maccabees‘. He also drew up in Anglo-Saxon 
a brief account of the books of the Old and New Testament"; and lastly, by the texts 
and quotations used in his numerous homilies, he added greatly to the knowledge of 
the sacred volume’. 

9. The writings which are still exstant shew that the Anglo- Saxon ehurch must ee a 
have had in her own tongue a considerable amount of scriptural instruction. But ture dost. 
these cannot be the full measure of what our forefathers possessed. Much, it cannot 
be doubted, perished in the troubles and confusion attending the incursions and 
pillages of the Danes; and much, subsequently, through the disfavour shewn by the 
Normans to the Anglo-Saxon language and literature”. 

10. Before the year 1200 the Anglo-Normans had translated into their own dialect, 429/-Norman 
in prose, the Psalter and canticles of the church*; and towards the middle of the ee 
following century appear to have possessed not only a history of the Old Testament 
in verse, as far as the end of the books of Kings, but also a prose version of the entire 
Bibley. The knowledge of Scripture communicated to the higher classes of society in 
England by means of these productions, contributed, by satisfying the demand of those 
who were the more powerful, to delay any attempt to put the sacred volume within 
the reach of the great mass of the people. Nevertheless, the Anglo-Saxon versions 
and glosses of the Gospels, and other portions of Scripture, remained partially in use, 
as is proved by the copies still exstant, transcribed in the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries”. 

11. The earliest essays of biblical translation assumed in English, as in most other Ea fete 
languages, a poetical form. The Ormulum4, written perhaps about the commencement Ormutum. 
of the thirteenth century, is a paraphrase in verse of the narrative of the Gospels and 
Acts of the Apostles. Highly valuable as it is in a philological point of view, yet, 
never proceeding probably beyond the original copy of the author, it could have been 
of little or no use in religious teaching. To a later period of the same century belongs Abstract of Ge- 
a poem reciting the principal events comprised 3 in the books of Genesis and Exodus>,”“* “* 
Before the conclusion of the century, however, an important step had been taken in Psatter. 
scriptural interpretation by turning into verse the whole of the Psalter®. The transla- 
tion is a tolerably close rendering of the Latin, and has the additional merit of being 


simple and expressive‘. 


t What remains of this translation was printed in 
1698 by Edw. Thwaites, from the Bod]. Ms. Laud E. 19, 
under the title Heptateuchus, liber Job et ‘Evangelium 
Nicodemi, Anglo-Sazonice. Historie Judith fragmentum, 
Dano-Sazonice. 4°. Oxon. 1698. Another Ms. occurs 
in the Cotton collection Nero B. 4. 

« Edited by Will. L’Isle, with the title, A Sazon Trea- 
tise concerning the Old and New Testament. 4°. Lond. 
1623. 

¥ His homilies, eighty in number, have been edited 
for the Aélfric Society, by Mr. Benj. Thorpe, 2 vols, 8°. 
1843-1846. 

w See the remarkable verses of a writer of the 12th 
century, quoted in Wright’s Biogr. Brit. Lit. (Anglo- 
Saxon period) p. 60. 

x Ms. Cotton. Nero C. 4; Trin. Coll. Cambr. R.17.1; 
Bibl. Nat. Paris 1152 is; Colb. 278. In Ms. Harl. 4388 
is preserved an Anglo-Norman translation of the book 
of Proverbs, accompanied by a gloss, written in verse 
by Sanson de Nantuil, in the reign of K. Stephen. 

y See P. Paris, Manuscrits Francois de la Bibl. du 
Roi, tom. i. p. 1. tom. vii. pp. 183,200. A Ms. of the 
first vol. of this prose translation of the Bible, executed 
in England about the year 1260, was recently in the 


possession of Edw. Ayshford Sanford, esq. of Nynehead 
Somersetshire. 

% For instance, the Gospels in the Mss. Hatton 65, 
and Brit. Mus. 1 A.14; the Psalters in Trin. Coll. Cambr. 
Ms. R.17.1, and in Salisbury cathedral Ms. 141, and 
part of Allfric’s Genesis in a Ms. of the Univ. Libr. 
Cambr. Ii, 1. 33. 

4 It is found in the Bodl. Ms. Junius 1. 

b A single copy is preserved among Abp. Parker’s 
Mss. in Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. R. 11. (Nasmith 444.) 

¢ Six copies remain, which occasionally differ much 
from each other. The translation was edited for the 
Surtees Society by the rev. J. Stevenson, from the 
Cotton Ms. Vespasian D. 7, in Anglo-Saxon and early 
English Psalter, 8°. Lond. 1843; the other Mss. are, 
1. Brit. Mus. Egerton 614; 2. Brit. Mus..Harl. 1770; 
3. Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. O. 6. (Nasmith 278); 4. Bodl. 
3027; and 5. Bod]. 2325. 

4 During the reign of the first three Edwards there 
appeared a great variety of poetical compositions upon 
sacred subjects, containing large extracts from Scrip- 
ture. Some of these were taken from Anglo-Norman 
and French originals. The principal were in the form 
of legends of saints, and for the fasts and festivals of 


b2 


iv PREFACE. 


12. The earliest version in English prose of any entire book of Scripture appears 


Prose versions 


a ane to have been made about the time when Edward the Third ascended the throne, by 
pat. William de Schorham, vicar of Chart-Sutton near Leeds in Kent®. It is found in a 


2. Version with 
commentary, by 


Rolle. 


Ms. recently acquired for the National collection, containing the Psalter in Latin and 


English, verse by verse. The translation is 


generally faithful and literal, except that 


the words of the gloss are frequently substituted for those of the text’. To the Psalms 


are added the usual canticles, including the 


Te Deum and Athanasian creed". 


13. Schorham’s version of the Psalter could scarcely have been completed, when 


another was undertaken. 


Hampole near Doncaster, who died in 1349. 


the Psalmsi, he was afterwards induced to 
a commentary in English. 


This was the work of Richard Rolle, chantry priest at 


Having written a Latin commentary on 
translate the text, and to publish it with 


Of this work numerous copies are exstant*; but they 


differ remarkably from each other, and shew that the original must have been altered 


to a very great extent. The preface, a few 


verbal variations excepted, is the same in 


all. In the text there is also a general agreement, though the language is, in the later 
copies, rendered conformable to the southern and more polished dialect, and frequent 
changes in single words and expressions have been from time to time introduced '. 


the church; paraphrases of the Gospel lessons; narra- 
tives of the passion and resurrection of our Lord; rela- 
tions of the creation and fall of man; expositions of the 
Pater Noster, the Creeds, the Ten Commandments, and 
the Ave-Maria; and exhortations to confession and pe- 
nitence. 

€ Schorham was admitted to the vicarage of Chart- 
Sutton in 1320. That he was the author of this version 
is inferred from the following facts. The Ms. is of the 
earlier half of the fourteenth century; it is in one hand 
throughout: two poetical pieces which occur towards 
the end of the volume are expressly attributed to Schor- 
ham; and in the rubrics of these pieces, as well as in 
other parts of the book, the welfare of his soul is com- 
mended to the prayers of the devout reader. 

f Brit. Mus. Addl. Ms. 17. 376. 

& For instance, the last clause of Ps. i. 1. is given 
thus, “ne sat nau3t in fals iugement,” the translator 
rejecting cathedra pestilentia, and adopting the inter- 
linear gloss, judicio falsitatis. 

h As a specimen of this translation, a psalm is here 
subjoined : 

Ps, xxii. Addl. Ms. 17. 376. 

Our Lord gouerneth me, and nothyng shal defailen 
to me ; in the stede of pasture he sett me ther. 

He norissed me vp water of fyllynge ; he turned my 
soule fram the fende. 

He lad me vp the bistizes of riztfulnes ; for his name. 

For 3if that ich haue gon amiddes of the shadowe of 
deth ; Y shal nou3t douten iuels, for thou art wyth me. 

Thy discipline and thyn amendyng ; conforted me. 

Thou madest radi grace in my sight ; ojayns hem that 
trublen me. 

Thou makest fatt myn heued wyth mercy ; and my 
drynke makand drunken ys ful clere. 

And thy merci shal folwen me ; alle daies of mi lif. 

And that ich wonne in the hous of our Lord ; in 
lengthe of daies. 


i Printed with other works of Rolle at Cologne in 
1536; a Ms. copy is in the Lambeth library, No.3 52. 


k Copies, either entire or in part, are found in Brit. 
Mus. Arundel 158 and Harl. 1806; Sidney Coll. Cambr. 
K.5.3; Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. 388; Bod]. Laud 286; 
Bodl. 2487; Univ. Coll. Oxf. 56 and 64; Brit. Mus. 
Old R. 18 D. 1 and 18 C. 26; Lambeth 34; Bodl. 2438, 
3085, and 3089, and Tanner 16; Univ. Coll. Oxf. 74; 
Magd. Coll. Cambr. 2498; Trin. Coll. Cambr. 171, and 
Eton Coll. ro. 

1 The following psalm is, in the left hand column, 
taken from a copy with the short comment, in the Hart. 
Ms. 1806, collated with the Ms. Laud 286; in the right 
hand column, from a copy having the long comment, 
in the Old Royal Ms. 18 D. 1: the collations of this 
last are with the Arundel Ms. 158, which has a short 


comment. 
Ps. xxviii. Harl. 1806. 
God, gens® come in thin 
heritage ; thei filed thi holy 
tempul, thei sette Jerusalem 
in kepyng of appuls. 


Thei sette the dyande bo- 
dyes of thi seruaunts ‘mete to 
the fowles of the lyft ; flesche 
of thi halowes to® bestis of 
erthe. e 

Thei ‘spille hore’ blode as 
watir in vmgong of Jerusa- 
lem ; and none was for to 
graue. 

Made we are reprofe to® 
oure neghbors ; skornynge 
and hething to® alle that in 
oure vmgong are. 

Howe longe, Lord, shalt‘ 
thou be wrothe in ende ; kyn- 
delt shal be thi luf as fire. 


Helde&, ‘or 3het, thi wrathe 
in gens! that thee not knew ; 
and in kyngdoms that thi 
nome incalde not. 


Ps, Ixxviii. 18 D.1. 

God, folkis! come in to thyn 
heritage, thei defouledyn thin 
hooli temple ; thei setten Je- 
rusalem in to? kepynge of 
applis. 

Thei settyn the deede3 bo- 
dies of thi seruauntis meete4 
to the5 foulis of heuene ; 
fleische of thyn halowis to 
beestis of erthe. 

Thei ‘heeld out® ‘the bloode 
of hem? as watir in the cum- 
pas8 of Jerusalem ; and‘ there 
was not® to!® birye hem!!.° 

“We ben !? maad!5 repreef to 
oure neishoris ; scoornynge 
and hethyng to alle that ben !4 
in oure!> cumpas!6, 

Hou longe, Lord, ‘schal 
thou!” be wroth in ‘to the !8 
eende ; thi!9 loue as fijr‘schal 
be kyndlid2°, 

Heeld out thyn yre?! in to 22 
folkis23 that ‘knewen thee 
not*4; and in to? rewmys?6 
that ‘han not inclepid27 thi 
name?8, 


& genge. b metis til. ¢ til, a spild thair. e til. f shal. & Hell. h Om. i genge. 
1 folk. 2 Om. 3 deyinge. 4 metes. 5 Om. 6 schedde. 7 here blod. 8 goyng aboute. 3 non was. 
10 for to. 11 Om. 12 Om. 13 Mad we are. 14 Om. 15 the. 16 goyng about are. 17 shaltow. 18 Om. 
i aly3ted schalbe thi. 20 Om. 21 wrethe. 22 Om. 23 folk. 24 the no3t knewe. 25 Om. 26 kyngdomes. 


Om. 28 name no3t inclepede. 


PARE FAC E: Vv 


In the commentary however the case is far otherwise. Here some copies so differ 
from others, that it is only in the first twenty or thirty psalms that any correspondence 
is found beyond an occasional trace of a common original. In the Mss. of the earlier 
text the commentary is brief; in those of the latter it extends to three or four times 
the bulk, and in respect to the greater part of the work may be regarded as an 
entirely new exposition. To a Ms. in the Bodleian Library”, containing the shorter 
comment, some verses are prefixed, which give several curious particulars of its history. 
The verses as well as the Ms. appear to be of the time of Henry the Sixth®. The 
writer states in them, that the work was undertaken at the request of dame Margaret 
Kirkby, a recluse, probably at Hampole; that the autograph copy of the author was 
still remaining at the nunnery, attached by chains to his tomb; that the writer’s own 
Ms. was a faithful transcript from the original; and that many copies in ordinary use 
had been corrupted by the Lollards. Upon examination, however, the enlarged com- 
mentary appears to contain no controversial matter, nor any sentiments indicative of 
the Lollard party. Indeed, a few passages of the shorter exposition, which reflect 
upon the luxury and worldliness of the higher clergy, are altogether omitted or greatly 
softened down. The character of these and like passages led Humphrey Wanley to 
ascribe the more compendious comment to Wycliffe himself in his younger days®. If 
Wanley’s notion be received, it will be necessary to suppose that the larger com- 
mentary was composed by Wycliffe in later life, or what is perhaps not less probable, 
by one of the more moderate of his followers. One cannot, however, refuse to credit 
the main facts averred in the verses just quoted from the Bod]. Ms., and it seems 
therefore more likely, that the copy to which Wanley particularly referred, agreeing 
as it does with this Ms. except in a few unimportant variations, represents substan- 
tially the original of Rolle?. 

14. A translation of the Psalms is preserved in the library of Trinity college 3. Vesion ¢s- 
Dublin, in a volume4 which contains likewise Wycliffes commentary on the Apoca- Hyde. 
lypse. The Ms. is of the fourteenth century; and a note at the end of the Psalter, 
in the hand of the original scribe, gives the name of John Hyde as the owner of the 
book’; it has thence been inferred, that he was also the author of the version’. From 
a few passages which the editors have had the opportunity of examining, they are 
inclined to believe that the Psalter of this Ms. will be found to be a revision of the 
version of Schorham rather than an independent translation'. 


m Laud 286 (1151). 

n The following are a portion of these verses : 
Therfore a worthy holy man, cald Rychard Hampole, 
Whom the Lord, that all thingus can, leryd lely on his scole, 
Glosed the Sauter that sues here, in Englysch tong sykerly, 
At a worthy recluse prayer, cald dame Merget Kyrkby. 
This same Sauter in all degre, is the self in sothnes, 

That ly3t at Hampole in surte, at Richards own berynes, 
That he wrote with his hondes, to dame Merget Kyrkby, 
Aud ther it ly3t in cheyn bondes, in the same nonery. 

In 3orkshyre this nonry ys, who so desires it to know, 

Hym thar no way go omys, thes ben the places all on row; 
Hampole the nonry hy3t, betwene Dancastre and Pountfreyt, 
This is the way to mannys syst, euen streysth with out deseyt. 


Copyed has this Sauter ben, of yuel men of Lollardry, 

And afturward hit has bene sene, ympyd in with eresy. 

Thei seyden then to leude foles, that it shuld be al entere, 

A blessyd boke of hur scoles, of Rychard Hampole the Sauter. 

This thei seyd to make theim lene, on her scole there sotelte, 

To bryng hem in,so hem to grene, ageyn the feyth in grete fole, 

And sclaundrid foule this holy man, with her wykked waryed 
wyles, 

Hier fantom hath made mony a fon, thoro the fend that fele 
begiles. 


© See Catalogue of Harleian Mss. No. 1806. 

P An accurate examination of the various copies of 
this work, and of other writings ascribed to Rolle, 
might possibly throw further light upon the history 
both of the translation and of the commentary. 

q With the press mark A. 4.4; formerly H. 32. 

* Explicit Psalterium translatum in Anglicum ; Johanni 
Hyde constat. 

8 It is attributed to him in the summary of the con- 
tents prefixed to the volume in a hand of the xvii. cen- 
tury, and also by Le Long in his Biblioth. Sacra, vol. i. 
Pp. 425. 

t An opinion may be formed as to the extent of the 
agreement from the subjoined verses : 


Schorham. Addl. 17. 376. Bate, A. 4. 4. 
Ps. i. I—3. s. i. I-93. 

Blesced be the man that  Blyssyd be the man that 
3ede nou3t in the counseil of hath noght go in the coun- 
wicked ; ne stode nonst in seyle of wykkyd men ; and 
the waie of sinjeres, ne sat hath not stond in the wey of 
nau3t in fals ingement. synful men, and hath not syt 

in the chayer of pestilence, 
that is to seyne, of vengaunce, 
or of fals iuggement. 


Version of the 
whole Bible; 
to be mainly 
ascribed to 
Wycliffe. 


PREFACE. 


15. Down to the year 1360, the Psalter appears to be the only book of Scripture 
which had been entirely rendered into English. Within less than twenty-five years 
from this date a prose version of the whole Bible, including as well the apocryphal as 
the canonical books, had been completed, and was in circulation among the people. 
For this invaluable gift England is indebted to John Wycliffe. It may be impossible 
to determine with certainty the exact share which his own pen had in the translation, 
but there can be no doubt that he took a part in the labour of producing it, and that 
the accomplishment of the work must be attributed mainly to his zeal, encouragement, 
and direction". It was not probably until his later years that Wycliffe matured so 
extensive a design. He was led to the undertaking slowly and gradually; and it was 


not completed until after several preliminary efforts. 


It is interesting to mark the 


several steps by which he advanced in the interpretation and diffusion of holy Scrip- 
ture. The evidence indeed which bears upon the point is scanty, and only sufficient, 
it should be remembered, to afford to the conclusions which it suggests, a presumption 


of their truth. 


Ac hijs wylle was in the 
wylle of oure Lord ; and he 
schal thenche in hijs lawe 
bothe daze and ny3t. 

And he schal be as the tre 
that hijs sett hy the ernynge 
of waters ; that schal 3eue his 
frut in hijs tyme. 


Ps. xxviii. r—6. 

Ha! God, folk wyth outen 
lawe com fram the londe of 
Vs in to thyn heritage in to 
Jude ; and hij filden thyn 
holy temple, and sett Jeru- 
salem in the kepeinge of a 
maner of folk that was cleped 
Pomos. 

Hij laiden the dede bodis 
of his seruaunt; mete to the 
foules of heuen ; the flesshe 
of thyn halwen to bestes of 
the erthe. 

Hij hadden her hlode as 
water a bonten Jerusalem ; 
and ther was non that biried 
hem. 

We ben made in reproce- 
inge to our ne3burss ; scorn- 
ynge and desceit to hem that 
ben in our enmpasse. 

Vato wham, Lord, artov 
wrothe on ende ; thi luf shal 
be aly3t as fur. 

Helde thyn ire in to the 
folke that ne knewe nou3t 
the ; and in to kyngdomes 
that ne cleped non3t thy 
name. 


Bot in the law of our Lorde 
the will of hym schal be ; 
and in hys law he schal haue 
mynde day and nyght. 

And he schal he as a trow 
that is sett be syde the cours 
of watres ; that schal 3uld 
hys frute in hys tyme. 


Ps. Ixxviii. i—6, 

O! Godd, folk with oute 
lawe com fram the londe of 
Vs _ in to thin herytage of 
Jude ; and thay defoilyd thin 
holy temple, and sett Jeru- 
salem in to the kepyng of a 
maner of folk that was clepyd 
Pomos. 

Thai layde the dede bodys 
of thi sernantes mete to the 
fonles of heuen ; and the 
flesch of thin holy men to the 
bestes of the erthe. 

Thai sched her blode as 
water aboute Jerusalem ; and 
ther was none that schuld 
bery hem. 

We beth made in reprou- 
yng to our nesburs ; scorn- 
yng and disseyte to hem that 

eth aboute vs. 

How long, Lord, schaltow 
be wrothe in to the ende ; 
thi lone schal be alist as fure. 

Helde thin ire in to the 
folke that knew no3t the ; 
and in to the kyngdomes 
that clepid nost thi name. 


pee Early authorities concur in attributing the transla- 
tion of the Scriptures to Wycliffe, nor do they appear 


to mention any other name in connexion with the sub- 
ject. Knighton, in a passage written probably before 
1400, laments in forcible terms that Wycliffe should 
by this means have made the gospel common to the 
laity: ‘* Hic magister Joannes Wyclif evangelium, quod 
Christus contulit clericis et ecclesie doctoribus, ut ipsi 
laicis et infirmioribus personis secundum temporis exi- 
gentiam et personarum indigentiam cum mentis eorum 
esurie dulciter ministrarent, transtulit de Latino in An- 
glicam linguam, non angelicam; unde per ipsum fit 
vulgare, et magis apertum laicis et mulieribus legere 
scientibus, quam solet esse clericis admodum literatis et 
bene intelligentibus; et sic evangelica margarita spar- 


gitur et a porcis conculcatur, et sic quod solet esse 
carum clericis et laicis, jam redditur quasi jocositas com- 
munis utriusque, et gemma clericorum vertitur in ludum 
laicorum, ut Jaicis sit commune zternum quod ante fue- 
rat clericis et ecclesiz doctoribus talentum supernum.. - 
....Et sic adimpletum est quod preedixit Willielmus de 
S.Amore longo ante tempore, et potest applicari congrue 
de eodem populo, sic inquiens, ‘ Aliqui laborant ad mu- 
‘tandum evangelinm Christi in aliud evangelium, quod 
* dicunt fore perfectius et melius et dignius, quod appel- 
“lant evangelinm xternum, sive evangelium Spiritus 
‘Sancti. Alternum congrne dici potest, quia jam vul- 
‘ gare et commune in materna lingua, et sic in wterna 
‘memoria.’” col. 2644. And again, ‘‘ Magis tamen 
congruunt istis novis populis Lollardis qui mutaverunt 
evangelium Christi in evangelium zternum, id est, vul- 
garem linguam et communem materiam, et sic xternam, 
guia laicis reputatur melior et dignior quam lingua La- 
tina.” col. 2646. Hus, in his Replica contra Jo. Stokes, 
written in 1411, thus speaks, ‘ Quod autem Wicliff non 
fuit Tentonicus sed Anglicus, patet ex suis scriptis. Nam 
per Anglicos dicitur quod ipse tota Biblia transtulit: de 
Latino in Anglicum, et sepe in libris snis Latinis scribit 
resumendo ea que dicta sunt in Anglico.” Historia et 
Monumenta, t.i. p. 136. ed.1715. A remarkable pas- 
sage bearing on the same point occurs in a letter said 
to have been written by abp. Arundel and his suffra- 
gans to John XXHI. It is found in the Cotton. Ms. 
Fanstina C. 7, and is printed by Wilkins (Conc. t. iii. 
p. 350), who assigns it to the year 1412. “Hic enim 
est ille pestilens et damnande memoriz miserrimus Jo- 
hannes Wycliff, serpentis antiqui filius, imo et ipsius 
Antichristi previns et alumnus, qui dum vixerat, in va- 
nitate sensus ambulans, nesciens in semitis justitiz diri- 
gere gressus suos, non solum canones sacros, et monita 
paterna despicere, sed pie matris uterum, quantum in 
ipso fuerat, viperinis elegit conatibus laniare. Ex cujus 
denique plante nequissime radice nefaria, quia serpen- 
tini generis posteritas, nedum hortum, sed agrum parti- 
culariter occupans, antedictam status ecclesiastici digni- 
tatem et ministeriorum ejusdem famam et opinionem 
pro viribus sugillare, quin immo et ipsain ecclesiz sacro- 
sanctz fidem et doctrinam sanctissimam totis conatibus 
impugnare studuit, nove ad suze malitie complementum 
scripturaram in lingnuam maternam translationis prac- 
tica adinventa; nos etc.” 

Y In pursuing this inquiry, the reader will derive 
assistance from a sketch of the leading particulars of 
Wycliffe’s life—Jolin Wycliffe, according to his bio- 
graphers, was born near Richmond in Yorkshire, in the 


PREFACE. 


Vii 


16. It seems probable that Wycliffe’s first attempt at the interpretation of Scripture wycige's com- 


mentary on the 


was his commentary on the Apocalypse. The fearful pestilence which between 1 EG A pecahuiae. 
and 1349 swept away a large portion of the human race, and other calamities, arising 


year 1324, and at sixteen became a member of Queen’s 
college, Oxford, then recently founded. He was after- 
wards a fellow of Merton, and the college muniments 
shew him to have performed the duties of seneschal in 
January of the year 1356.! In April 1361 he was mas- 
ter of Balliol college?; the same year he was presented 
by that society to the rectory of Fillingham in Lincoln- 
shire’. At what time he vacated the mastership of 
Balliol is uncertain4. In December 1365 he was ap- 
pointed by abp. Islip warden of Canterbury Hall5. This 
appointment was superseded by abp. Langham in March 
and April 1367.6 But Wycliffe having denied the le- 
gality of the abp.’s acts, and appealed to the pope, was 
not finally deprived until] May 1370.” In the mean time 
he had exchanged the rectory of Fillingham for that of 
Lndgershall in Buckinghamshire, but not distant more 
than twelve or fifteen miles from Oxford. This ex- 
change was effected in Nov. 13688, probably with a view 
to a more constant intercourse with the university. That 
such was his motive may he inferred from the terms of 
a license for non-residence at Fillingham, granted him 
for two years by the bishop of Lincoln in the preceding 
April®. He had previously been made chaplain to the 
king, as it seems from the words “ peculiaris regis cle- 
ricus,” used of himself in his Determination against the 
pope’s claim of tribute, which tract cannot well be later 
than 1367.!° In April 1374 he was presented by the 
crown to the rectory of Lutterworth in Leicestershire!!, 
and at the same time, as is presumed, resigned the living 
of Ludgershall!?. The same year he was sent with 
others to Bruges to treat with the pope!®. On the 
6 Nov. 1375 he was confirmed by the crown in the 
prehend of Aust in the church of Westbury!4. There 
is no evidence to shew the date of his appointment, nor 
from whom he received it; but he must have voided 
the preferment immediately after these letters of con- 
firmation, as the patent roll records a grant of it on the 
18 of the same month of November to Robert de 
Faryngtone!®, In Feb. 1377 Wycliffe appeared before 


the convocation at St. Paul’s to answer ccrtain charges 
of false doctrine. In June following he was denounced 
from Rome in several papal hulls bearing date the 11 
of this month, and transmitting nineteen conclusions 
drawn from his teaching!® In consequence, he was 
summoned hefore a meeting of papal commissioners at 
Lambeth in the early part of 1378,!” and delivered a 
paper in answer to the articles objected against him. 
In 1381 a mandate was published by the chancellor of 
the university of Oxford, containing a definition of the 
doctrine of the eucharist, and condemnatory of the opi- 
nions supposed to be held by Wycliffe and his party !®% 
In May 1382 a synod was convened at the Preaching 
Friars in London, when twenty-four conclusions were 
pronounced some heretical and others erroneous!®. Be- 
fore this synod Philip Repingdon (afterwards bishop of 
Lincoln), Nicholas de Hereford, and John Ashton, three 
of Wycliffe’s principal adherents, were interrogated ; and 
on the 20 May Ashton was declared a heretic?9. The 
proceedings were continued by adjournment at Otteford 
and Canterbury, and on the 1st of July, in the chapter- 
house at this last place, Hereford and Repingdon, not 
then appearing, were pronounced excommunicate?!, In 
the succeeding November, at a convocation held at Ox- 
ford, recantations were made by Repingdon and Ashton”. 
According to Knighton, Wycliffe appeared both before 
the synod at the Preaching Friars, and hefore this con- 
vocation, and delivered on euch occasion a profession of 
his belief regarding the encharist™*, But from his name 
not occurring in the documents of the archiepiscopal 
register relative to these meetings, it seems more pro- 
bable that he had previously withdrawn himself from 
the university, and had taken up his residence at Lutter- 
worth. It is certain that his last years were spent there, 
and that he continued actively engaged in the duties of 
his parish, and in maintaining by his writings the prin- 
ciples he had taught, until death interrupted his occu- 
pations on the last day of December 1384.74 


1 Compotus Rie. Billingham, bursarii, 30 Edw. IT1., rot. in thesaurario Coll. Merton. 
2 Carta No. ro, in pyxide de Abbotesley in thesaurar. Coll. Balliol.—Reg. Gynwell. fol. 367 >. 


3 He was admitted ij. id. Maii 1361; Reg. Gynwell. fol. 123. 


4 In 1366 John Hungate was master; Carta No. 28 in pyxide S, Laurentii in Judaismo in thesaurar. Coll. Balliol. 


5 Reg. Islip, fol. 306 b. 


Irresistible evidence of the identity of the warden of Canterbury Hall with the reformer is to be found in 


the following passage from Will. Wydforde’s Septuaginta duo questiones de sacramento Eucharistie (Ms. Harl. 31, fol. 31.), “et hec 
contra religiosos insania generata est ex eorrupcione. Nam priusquam per religiosos possessionatos et prelatos expulsus fuerat de aula 
monachorum Cantuariz, nichil eontra possessionatos attemptavit, quod essct alicujus ponderis; et priusquam per religiosos mendi- 
cantes reprobatus fuit publice de heresihus in sacramento altaris, nichil eontra eos attemptavit, sed posterius multipliciter eos diffamavit ; 
ita quod doctrine suw# male et infeste contra religiosos et possessionatos et mendicantcs generate fnuerunt ex putrefaetionibus et 
melancoliis.”’ 

6 By the appointment of John de Radyngate ij. kal. Apr. 1367 (Reg. Langham fol. 98), and, this being revoked, of Henry de 
Wodhulle x. kal. Maii 1367 (ibid. fol. 98 b). 

7 Lambeth Ms. No. 104. fol. 213. 

8 He was admitted to Ludgershall 12 Nov. 1368; Reg. Bokyngham, fol. 419. , 

9 The following is the entry in the register: “‘Idibus Aprilis anno dni. millesimo eee™9, Ixviij. apud parcum Stowe concessa fuit 
licencia magistro Johannis de Wyclefe, reetori eeclesi de Filyngham, quod posset se absentare ab ecclesia sua insistendo literarnm 
studio in universitate Oxon. per biennium.” Reg. Bokyngham, Memoranda, fol. lvi b. 

10 Printed in Lewis’s Life of W. ed. 1820, p. 349. Nl Rot. pat. 48 Edw. II. p. 1. m. 23. 

12 Wyeliffe was rector of Ludgershall 11 Nov. 1371; Will. Neubald was rector 29 May 1376. Reg. Bokyngham. 

13 Rymeri Foedera tom. vii. p. 41. In the exehequer aceonnt given in by Wycliffe, he acknowledges £60 received for his expences 
31 July a0 48; charges at 20 8. a day, from 27 July, when he set out from London for Flanders, to 14 Sept. following, on which day 
he returned, £50—and for passage and repassage 42s. 3.d.; total 522. 28. 3d. } 

14 Rot. pat. 49 Edw. Il}. p. 2. m.8. 15 Td. m. 11. 

16 The bulls and conelusions are printed in Lewis’s Life of W. ed. 1820, p. 305 seqq. 

17 See Wilkins t. iii. p. 123. 18 Printed in Lewis, ed. 1820, p. 360. 

19 Reg. Courtney, fol. 25. 20 Thid. fol. 28. 21 Thid. 22 Thid. fol. 33. 23 Knighton, col. 2647. 

24 Reg. Bokyngham, fol. 199.—At the time of his death he seems to have been employed in completing a summary or body of 
divinity, comprising, in four books, his opinions both metaphysical (libb. i. ii.) and theological (libb. ili. iv.). The fourth book is 
divided into four parts; the first two are an exposition of the sermon on the mount; the third treats of Antichrist, from our Lord’s 
discourse in Mt. xxiiii—xxy.; and the fourth, of the discourse to the disciples at the last supper, John xiii, —xvil. This part is 
unfinished, and ends abruptly in the 14th chapter with the words “sed differre potius disputator. Hac Augustinus.” After which, 
hoth in the copy in Trin. Coll. Cambr. B. 16. 2, and in that in Trin. Coll. Dublin C. 1. 23, there occurs this note: “ Auctoris vita 
finitur et hoe opus ita.” 


vill PREFACE. 

as well from the strife of nations and parties as from the discord of the natural 
elements, cast a general gloom over society. But perhaps nowhere within the realm 
of England was there a more melancholy spectacle than that which for some years 
subsequent to the pestilence was presented by the university of Oxford. Dwelling in 
such a spot, a man of sanguine temperament would almost of necessity become imbued 
with the notion then generally prevalent, that things were preparing themselves for 
their great consummation, and that Antichrist’s personal appearance was shortly to be 
expected. This feeling prompted that which is believed to be the earliest production 
of Wycliffe’s pen, Zhe last age of the Church. It was written in 1356”. The single 
copy preserved affords indications, that it is neither a complete nor faithful transcript 
of the original. But there is enough to shew the sentiments of the author, and with 
these it was natural for him to turn his thoughts to the prophecies of the Apocalypse. 
It seems probable that Wycliffe’s exposition of this book was written not long after. 
A paragraph of the text is first given, and then its commentary. This last is brief 
and simple *; the translation of the text is literal, but in some places slightly abridged 
from the original. Several Mss. of the work remain’, which differ widely in the 
translations of the text, the latest copies adopting very closely the second of the 
versions now printed, while the early copies have no agreement with either of them’. 
In the later copies the commentary also is more modern in its language, and is a little 
more or less full in its expression. 

17. Wycliffe’s next exegetical work, though perhaps composed at some distance of 
time from the preceding, appears to have been a commentary on the Gospels. That 
on Matthew has a long prologue’, and still longer epilogue. In the former the writer 
urges, in strong language, the propriety of translating Scripture for the use of the 


His comment- 
ary on the Gos- 
pels. 


w Edited by the rev. Dr. Todd, of Trin. Coll. Dubl. The 
last age of the Church by John Wycliffe, now first printed 
from a Ms. in the Univ. Libr. Dublin, with notes, ete. 
16% Dnbl. 1840. 

x The following passage will afford a specimen of the 
commentary, ch. xiii, 11-17. ‘* By the ymage of the 
beeste ben bitokned the fals prelates that don by the 
conseil and the enticement of hem that sechen erthelich 
thinges; that he 3iueth power to the beeste for to speken, 
bytokneth the power that thai han to mysdon thorou3 
enchesoun of her dignite; that thai ben sleyn that nyl- 
leth nonjth honouren the ymage, bitokneth that thai 
shullen acursen hem that nyllen nou3th consenten to 
the fals prelates and the wicked; that the beest dude 
merken alle in her risth honde oither in her forehede 
bitokneth, that alle shullen folewen Antecriste, and none 
3iuen hem to her prelates that don her synne of lecherye 
prinelich ; and than han thai the merk in the hond prine- 
lich, and afterward in the forhede openlich. And than 
ne shal no man durre speke of God. That non ne may 
bygge ne selle bot 3if he haue the merk oither the name 
of the beest, bitokneth, that non ne shal have power to 
3ine rentes ne to resceyue bot 3if he hane merk of the 
kynrede, that is to seie, that he be comen of grete kynde, 
oither that he be in grete lordes seruise, oither that 
he come therto thorou3 symonye, oither that he goo 
to the ordre forto haue badilich delices. Alle thise ben 
Antecristes prophetes and his ypocrites and his eretikes.” 
Harl. 874. fol. 16. 

y Copies are found in Brit. Mus. Harl. 171, 874, 
1203 and 3913; Old R. Libr. 17 A. 26; Bodl. Land 235 
(1580), Land 33 (661); St.John’s Coll. Cambr. G. 25 ; 
Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 4. 4. 

z An idea of the extent of these variations may 
be formed by means of the subjoined extract, ch. i. 
g-—11, taken from three Mss. in the British Mu- 
seum : 


Harl. 874. 

Ich John 30ure 
brother and _parci- 
nere in tribulaci- 
ouns and duelle in 
pacience in Jhesu 
Crist, was in an 
yle of the cee that 
is cleped Pathmos, 
and was exiled for 
Goddes wordes and 
for I bare witnesse 
of Jhesn Crist; and 
on a sonenday in 
gost ich herd a 
grete voice hiside 
me, as it were the 
soune of a trumpe, 
that seide to me, 
Write in the book 
that thou seest... 


Harl, 1203. 


I Jon 3oure bro- 
thir and part. taker 
in tribulacionn and 
in kyngdam and in 
pacience in Crist, 
was in an yle that 
is clepid Patmos, 
exilid for Goddis 
word and witness- 
ing of Crist; and on 
a sunday Y¥ was in 
spirit, and herde a 
gret vois biside me 
as if it were the 
soun of a trumpe, 
seiynge to me, That 
thatthon seest write 
thou in the book, 


Harl. 3913. 

Joon 30ure bro- 
ther and partener 
in tribnlacionn and 
kyngdom, and pa- 
cience in Crist Jhe- 
sn, was in an yle 
that is clepid Path- 
mos, for the word 
of God and for the 
witnessyng of Jhe- 
su, ¥Y was in spirit 
in the Lordis day, 
and Y herde bi- 
hynde me a grete 
uoys as (of sec. m.) 
a trumpe, seiynge 
to me, Write thou 
in book that thing 
that thou seest... 


a The prologue commences “ Seynt Austyn seith” etc. 


much as printed vol.i. p. 44—p. 49, and after the words 
‘by that we herynge, as drynkynge, ben more holsum,” 
proceeds thus: “For this cause a synful caytif hanynge 
compassioun on lewed men, declarith the gospel of 
Mathew to lewid men in Englische, with exposicioun of 
syntis (sic) and holy writ” ete. The prologne ends, 
** but, gode Jhesu, for thi mechel my3t, mercy and cha- 
rite, encresse the knowynge and kepynge of thi lawe, 
and bate (abate sec. m.) soone Antecristis malice, ipo- 
crisie, and tirauntrie. Amen.” Bodl. Laud 235. 

b The epilogue begins, ‘‘ Blessid be almy3ti God in 
trynyte. Here endith a schort glose on Matheu whiche 
takun of holy docturis ;” and ends, “ and cumbren many 
men in endeles dispeyr.”—A volume containmg appa- 
rently the commentary upon Matthew, with a prologue, 
and also that upon John, is in the library of Trin. Coll. 
Cambr. B. 1. 38. 


PREFACE. 1X 
laity. The commentary runs to considerable length, but consists exclusively of 
extracts from the writings of previous expositors’, chiefly taken out of the Catena 
Aurea of Thomas Aquinas. No commentary has been found upon Mark. The com- 
mentaries upon Luke* and Jolin® are of a similar character to that upon Matthew. 
The three appear to have been written and published at different times; and in all, 
the translation of the text agrees with the earlier of the versions now printed. 
18. It is a remarkable circumstance, that about the time when Wycliffe must have contemporary 
been employed upon the commentaries just mentioned, another also upon the Gospels ihe Gaels, by 
should have appeared, compiled upon a like principle. The name of the author has not 7% «er. 


been discovered, but the preface implies that he knew of no previous exposition of the 


c The quotations in these commentaries are made 
chiefly from Ambrose and Bede; but sometimes from 
Augustine, Origen, Chrysostom, and various others. 

d See Mss. in Bodl. 143 and 243 ; Univ. Libr. Cambr. 
Kk. 2.9. The prologue to Luke, which has been found 
only in Bodl. 143, describes the method which Wyc- 
liffe took in these commentaries, and also shews the 
great value which he set upon holy Scripture. It he- 
gins, ‘‘ Dauith spekynge in the person of Crist seith to 
God;” and, after citing several texts, thus proceeds: 
“« Herfore {a pore] caityf, lettid fro prechyng for a tyme 
for causes knowun of God, writith the gospel of Luk in 
Englysh, with a short exposicioun of olde and holy doc- 
touris, to the pore men of his nacioun whiche kunnen 
litil Latyn ether noon, and ben pore of wit and of 
worldli catel, and netheles riche of good will to please 
God. Firste this pore caitif settith a ful sentence of the 
text togidre, that it may wel be knowun fro the expo- 
sicioun; aftirward he settith a sentence of a doctour 
declarynge the text; and in the ende of the sentence 
he settith the doctouris name, that men mowen knowe 
verili hou fer his sentence goith. Oneli the text of 
holi writ, and sentence of olde doctouris and appreuyd, 
ben set in this exposicioun. Whanne Y alegge Ambrose 
here, ether Bede here, vndurstonde on the same text 
expowned, Whanne Y alegge eny doctour, and telle 
not in what place, vndirstonde that Y alegge hym as 
Alquyn on Luk .rehersith him. Ambrose, Jerum, Aus- 
tyn, and Gregori ben wel knowun for gloriouse lyueris 
and trewe doctouris of holy chirch. Bede is an olde 
expositour of holy writ, and tellith no thing almest, no 
but the sentence of olde holy doctouris bifore hym, and 
he writith opynly and devoutly and sum tyme sharply. 
Whanne Alquyn aleggith ony doctour and tellith not 
where, he takith hym on Luk, as he witnessith in his 
prologe. He aleggith seint Denyss the martir, seint 
Gregori Nasansene martir, and seint Cipryan martir ; 
he aleggith myche Teofile, Crisostom, Basill, Cirille, 
Athanasie, Damassene, and Gregori Nycene; and alle 
these ben of a thousand 3ere ether more; and her 
bookis ben appreuyd, as the law witnessith, xv. d. in fine, 
and xvi. d. confirmamus. Also Alquin alleggith myche 
the grete Origen, Epiphanye, Eusebie, and Maximus 
famouse in omelies. These ben of a thousend 3ere and 
more, and famouse doctouris and noble lyueris. Also 
he alleggith Ysidre, Tite, and [a] Greek doctour. Thes 
weren olde men and textual, declarynge wel the text. 
Whanne a sentence is set in this exposicyon and is 
aleggid for a glos, thanne it is takun of Alquyn aleg- 
gynge other doctours lesse than these biforeseid. If 
eny lernyd man se this exposicioun and suppose eny 
errour theryane, for Goddis loue Ioke he wel his ori- 
ginals, and sette ynne the trene sentence of these doc- 
touris; for men desiren no thing in this exposicioun, 
no but profitable treuthe for cristen soulis. Y sette 


VOL. I. 


shortly and pleynly, as Y may and kan, the sentence of 
these doctouris, and not barely her wordis, in as myche 
as thei declaren the text, and seyen treuthe groundid 
on holi Scripture ether quyk resoun, and accordynge 
with the blessid lijf of Crist and his apostlis; desirynge 
that no man triste more than thus to her sentence, 
nether to eny mannys seying, in what ener staat he be 
in erthe. Thus with Goddis grace pore cristen men 
mown sumdel knowe the text of the Gospel, with the 
comyn sentence of olde holy doctouris, and therynne 
knowe the meke and pore and charitable lyuyng of 
Crist and his apostlis, to sue hem in vertues and blys; 
and also knowe the proude and coueitouse and veniable 
lyuyng of Antecrist and his fautouris, to fle hem and 
her cursid dedis, and peynes of helle. For no doute as 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist and his apostlis profesien pleynli, 
Antecrist and his cursid disciplis shnlen come, and dis- 
seyue many men by ypocrisie and tyrauntrie; and the 
beste armeer of cristen men ajens this cursid cheuenteyn 
with his oost, is the text of holy writ, and namely the 
gospel, and veri and opyn ensaumple of Cristis lijf and 
his apostlis, and good lyuyng of men; for thanne thei 
shulen knowe wel Antecrist and his meynee bi her 
opyn dedis contrarie to Cristis techyng and lyuyng. 
Crist Jhesu, for thyn endeles power, mercy and charitie, 
make thi blessid lawe knowun and kept of thi puple, 
and make knowun the ypocrisie and tirauntrie and 
cursidnesse of Antecrist and his meynee, that thi puple 
be not disseyued bi hem. Amen, gode Lord Jhesu.” 
Bodl. 143 (1913). 

€ The prologue to John is as follows: ‘ Prologe Jon. 
Oure Lord Jhesu Crist, veri God and very man, cam to 
serue pore meke men, and to teche hem the gospel; and 
for this cause Seynt Poul seith, that he and othere apo- 
stlis of Crist ben seruauntis of cristen men bi oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist. And eft he seith, Y am dettonr to wise 
men and vnwise; and eft, Bere 3e the chargis an other 
of an other, and so 3e schulen fille the lawe of Crist, 
that is of charite, as seynt Austyn expowneth. Herfor 
a symple creature of God, willinge to bere in party the 
chargis of symple pore men wel willinge to Goddis 
cause, writith a schort glos in Englisch on the gospel 
of Joon; and settith onely the text of holy writ, and 
the opyn and schorte sentencis of holy doctours, bothe 
Grekis and Latyns, and alleggith hem in general, for 
to ese the symple wit and cost of pore symple men; 
remyttinge to the grettir gloos writun on Joon, where 
and in what bokis thes doctours seyen thes sentences. 
And sum tyme he taketh the cleer sentence of lawis 
of the chirche, maad of seyntis, wel groundid in holy 
writ and pleyn resoun, to dispise synnes and comende 
vertues. First the text is set, and thanne the sentence 
of a doctour is set aftir, and the doctour is aleggid in 
the ende of the same sentence.”  Bodl. 243 (1933). 


c 


Wycliffe’s 
translation of 
Clement of 
Lanthony’s 
Harmony. 


a PREFACE. 


Gospels in English’, and the language accords with the northern dialect in the middle 


of the fourteenth century’. 


The commentary extends to Matthew, Mark and Luke®. 


The matter is chiefly extracted from the writings of others, but original remarks are 
occasionally introduced. There seems to be nothing of controversial doctrine, and few 
traces of party feeling. At the same time the writer does not conceal his opinion of 
the too general corruption and worldliness of the clergy, especially those of the higher 


orders*, 


19. No error will probably be made, if the next step in the progress of Wycliffe’s 
design be ascribed to his! Monotessaron, or Harmony of the Gospels”, a translation 
from the Latin of Clement, prior of the monastery of Lanthony in Monmouthshire, 


f The preface on Matthew is worthy of being tran- 
scrihed. ‘Here begynnes the exposicyone of Seynt 
Mathew efter the chapytres that bene sette in the bibil, 
the chapytres of which gospel bene eghte and twenty. 
This werk som tyme I was styrde to begyne of one, that 
1 suppose veraly was Goddys seruant, and oft tymys 
prayd me this werk to begyn, sevand to me, that sethyn 
the gospelle is rewle, be the whilk ich cristen man owes 
to lyf, and dyuers has draghen in to Latyn, the whilk 
tung is not knowen to ilk man but only to the leryd, 
and many lewd men are, that gladly wold kon the 
gospelle if it were draghen in to Englisch tung, and so 
it suld do grete profete to man saule, about the whilk 
profete ilk man that is in the grace of God, and to 
whome God has sent konnyng, owes hertely to bysy 
hym. Wherfor I, that throngh the grace of God began 
this werk, so styrd as I haue seid before, be sich word, 
thoghte in my hert, that I was holdun be charyte this 
werke to begyn; and so this werke I began at the eug- 
gestyon of Goddys seruant, and gretly in this doyng 
I was comforted of other Goddys seruantes dyuers, to 
sich tyme that thurgh the grace of God I broghte this 
to ane ende. In the whilk oute draghyng I sette not 
of myne hede nor of myne owne fantasy, bot as I fond 
in other expositores. In the whilk draghyng I suppose 
certanly ther is no thing sette ageyne the feyth, ageyne 
the hele of sowle, or ellys ageyne the worschype of 
God. Also in this drawyng, for cawes that I wold not 
presume of myn owen wytt, I haf to the Latyne and 
to the sagghis of the doctours als euyn proporeyond 
the Englisch as I kouthe for the tyme, and as grace 
was gyfene me for the tyme of draghinge, that bac- 
byteres suld haf no cawse of chalyngynge. Wherfor 
to some I suppose it wylle becume the more un- 
safery in the redynge, hot I suppose, if thei wylle not 
our ryne, but esely tak with hem the sentence, thei 
salle fynde gostely edyfycacioun ther in, and no mater 
of ille spekynge. Wherfor I besek and with alle my 
hert pray them that this werk redyn, that for me thei 
pray the mercy of God, that I may fulfylle that is set 
in the draghing of this boke; and that he at whos sog- 
gestyon I this werke began, and thei that [this] werk 
redyn, and alle cristen men with me, thurgh doynge of 
that that is wrytyn in this bok, may com to gider to 
that blisse that neuer salle ende. Amen.” Univ. Libr. 
Cambr. li. 2.12. Then follows a second long prologue. 

8 Mt. ix. 12. is thus translated: “And Jhesus 
herand seid, The leche is not mystere to the myghti, 
bot to the ilk hanand.” Lk, xvi. 9. thus: ‘* And ther- 
fore I sey to 30w, makys to 30w frendys of mammone 
of vneuynhed, that when 3ee fayle, thei reseyue 30w in 
to aylastand tabernakyls.” 

h That on Matthew is found in the Mss., Univ. Libr. 
Cambr. Ii. 2. 12, and Brit. Mus. Egerton. 842; that 


on Mark and Luke occurs in Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. 
Nasmith xxxii. 


i As Origen, Augustine, Jerome, Hilary, Ambrose, 
Isidore, Gregory, Maximus, Rufus, Leo and Bede. 

k The quotations which follow will shew the manner 
of the commentator: Mt. vii. 16. ‘* Prechours thei 
calle hom self, and sey that thei be sent, bot contrary 
tho thinges to tho apostels thei telle; thei magnyfie 
martirs, and bene pursuars of martirs. The apostels 
aud martirs of Crist made no pursuynge, bot sufferd ; 
thei kursed none, bot sufferd cursynges and wariynges. 
Bot fals prophetes pursue men, and vndo cristen men, 
aud blasfemen God, thof not in word, thei do in hor 
manere.” Mt. ix. 38. ‘Aud se wele here, that Crist 
owes to be prayed for, to send prechours to gedere holy 
kirke. Bot how sal thei preche, bot if thei be sent ? 
and how sal the pepul here with outen the prechours ? 
Bot bischopes of this tyme put hom self wilfully to this 
charge, and are not chosen or sent, or elles, that wors 
is, thei thrynge in to this office be money. Alle tho 
then that com and are not sent, are rohbers and theues.” 
Mt. x. 10. “ Crist biddes before, that men be warr of 
the wolues that lifen alle of rauen, and gone in schepes 
clothynge.... for to schew that tho that thei preche to, 
owen to gif hom that hom nedes, and thei for to take 
it. I sey not, to take and to geder to hom and to other 
loyterers, and to bere away with hom the godes of the 
pore pepul. Bot whether the reuerce be done in oure 
dayes, deme iche gud mon and wommon.” Egerton 
842. ff. 55%. 83>. 87d. 

1 That Wycliffe was the author of this translation is 
inferred, because, 1. It has been, from the time of Bale, 
uniformly attributed to him, and never to any other 
person; 2. It has a very close agreement with his ver- 
sion of the Gospels; 3. The prologue is partly taken 
from that to his exposition of Matthew, and is altoge- 
ther in his style of writing. 

m Many copies exist, as, Brit. Mus. Old R. Libr. 
17 C. 33, and 17 D. 8; Harl. 1862 and 6333; Arun- 
del. 254; Bodl. 2553; and Phillipps 7157. That in 
the Old R. Ms. 17 C. 33, has much the appearance 
of being the autograph of the author. The vellum is 
rough, damaged, misshapen and soiled, not such as 
is usually prepared for a fair copy, and the writing 
is not that of a professional scribe, but thick, clumsy 
and irregular ; the mistakes of omission, repetition, 
and verbal inaccuracy are numerous; no sufficient space 
has been left for the rubrics; the greater part of 
these have heen inserted by a second hand, the same 
which has corrected many of the errors, and has also 
written several leaves in the latter part of the vo- 
lume. This hand is, however, contemporary with the 
other, as is evident from this last having written the 
catchwords upon some of these leaves. But a close 
examination of the errors committed does not sustain the 
first impression, and one is compelled to conclude that 
the Ms. has either been transcribed from a still rougher 
original, or has been taken down from dictation. 


PREFACE. xl 
who lived in the middle of the twelfth century". The translation differs very slightly 
from the earlier of the two versions now printed. Besides the original prologue of 
Clement, some copies have two others added, apparently by the translator. The 
first of these® is the same with the first portion of that prefixed to Wycliffe’s Com- 
mentary on Matthew. The latter? was, it is probable, originally designed by 
Wycliffe as the preface to the Harmony. 

20. It seems to have been at first intended to attach to the Harmony of the Gospels additions to 
portions of the Catholic Epistles, and important texts touching faith and practice, 7637" 
selected from other parts of Scripture. The translations found at the end of the 
Harmony in the Old Royal-Ms. 17 C. 33, have evidently been made with the object 
of supplying an epitome of the doctrines of the Bible. They appear to be first essays 
not reduced into any strict arrangement or order. Two different translators have 
employed themselves on the work, using their own, or two different pens. One has 
written the Harmony and the greater part of the selections; the other has corrected 
the manuscript of the former, and has also furnished a small portion of the select 
passages. The selections include, besides a great number of less extensive extracts, 
the whole epistle of James, the first epistle of Peter, excepting the salutations, part 
of the second epistle of Peter, and an abridgment of the first epistle of John’. The 
selections from the New Testament made by the first hand, approach for the most 
part? so nearly to the carlier version, as to afford a very strong presumption that they 
are by the same author, or if not, that they have been adopted as the basis of the 


_corresponding passages in that version’. The passages in the Old Testament differ 
from both versions‘. 


2 A copy of the original Latin is to be found in the 
Old R. Ms. 3 A. 10. fol. 2; others in Pembroke Hall, 
Cambr. 1972; Univ. Coll. Oxf. 19; Merton Coll. 240; 
and Trin. Coll. Oxf. 6. 

© Printed in vol. i. p. 44. It is extracted almost 
entirely from Augustine on Christian doctrine. 

Pp It is printed hereafter, p. xiv. 

q In the Bodl. Ms. 2553, at the end of Wycliffe’s 
translation of the Harmony, is a like collection of pas- 
sages from Scripture; they are extracted from the Ca- 
tholic Epistles, those of St. Paul, the Acts, and several 
parts of the Old Testament. 

r There are some exceptions ; for example, the epi- 
stle of James differs much, and so the r Peter as far 
as ch. ii. 17; but this last afterwards agrees very 
closely with the earlier version, as do the other parts 
of the Catholic Epistles. 

8 The following are specimens of the translation of 
the first hand : 

Deut. xxviii. 1—8. 17 C. 33. fol. 297. 

But if thou schalt here the vois of the Lord thi God, 
that thou do and kepe alle his maundementis that I 
bidde thee to dai, the Lord thi God schal make thee 
hijere than alle the folkis that dwellen in erthe. And 
alle thes blessyngis schulen comen vpon thee, and 
taken thee, if netheles thon here his biddyngis. Thon 
schalt be blissid in citee, and blessid in feld, blessid 
the fruyt of thi womb, and the fruyt of thi lond, and 
the fruit of thi beestis, the flockis of thi droues, and 
the foldis of thi schep; blessid thi bernes, and blessid 
thi relikis. Blessid thou schalt ben in goynge and 
ont goynge. The Lord schal make thin enemyes that 
schulen rise a3en thee, fallynge in thi sijte. Bio weye 
thei schulen come ajens thee, and bi seuene thei 
schulen flee fro thi face. The Lord schal sende out 
Hones vp on thi celeres, and vpon the workis of thin 

ondis. 


Mie. vi. 6—8. 17 C. 33. fol. 300% 

What worthi thing schal Y offren to the Lord? schal 
Y bowe my kne [kneis pr. v.] to higze God? Whethir 
Y schal oflre to hym brend offryng, and o 3eris calues ? 
Whethir the Lord may be plesid in thonsund of we- 
theres or in manye thousundis of fatte got buckis? 
Whethir Y schal 3eue the firste goten for my felownye, 
the frnyt of my wombe for the synne of my soule? 
Y schal schewe thee, thou man, what is good, and what 
the Lord axith of thee; forsothe to do [iust pr. v.] dom 
and loue mercy, and besily to go with thi God. 

Eph. v. :—5. 17 C. 33. fol. 229. 

Therfore beth foleweris of God, as most dere sones, 
and goth in loue, as Crist hath loned vs, and bitaken 
hymself for us, offryng and ost to God in to savour of 
swetnesse. But fornycacioun and alle vnclennesse or 
auarice be not named in 30n, as it bi semeth seyntis, 
or filthe or foly speche or harlotrie, that parteneth 
not to [good pr. v.] thing, but more doinge of thank- 
yngis. Forsothe witith this, vndirstondinge that eche 
fornicarie, or vnclene or auarous man, that is, sernice 
of mawmetis, hath not eritage in the rewme of Crist 
and God. 

Phil. ii, s—11. 17 C. 33. fol. 2310. 

And felith this in 3on that and in Crist Jhesu; the 
whiche whanne he was in the forme of God, he demede 
not raueyn him to ben euene to God, but he aneen- 
tischide hymsilf, takynge the forme of a seruaunt, in 
to licnesse of men maad, and in habite fonnden as 
man, he Jowide hymsilf maad obedient to the deth, 
ghe, the deth of the cros. Wherfore and God hath 
enhauncid him, and jouen him a name that is aboue 
alle name, that in the name of Jhesn eche knee be 
howid, of henenly, erthely, and of hellis, and eche 
tunge knowleche for the Lord Jhesu Crist is in the 
glorie of God the fadir. 

t It is however worthy of remark, that the ten com- 


c2 


xii PREFACE. 


Additions to the 
Harmony in 
Harl. 1862. 


21. To the copy of the Harmony in the Harl. Ms. 1862. is subjoined a similar 
collection of passages from the Bible". Here however they are systematically 
arranged, in 166 chapters”, the whole forming a summary of doctrinal and practical 
theology, which indicates considerable care and judgment on the part of the compiler. 
The rendering, though literal, is not exact; very frequent abridgments having been 
made, by omitting the words and clauses which seemed not important to the argu- 


ment. 
making the sense more connected. 
skill*. 


In some instances transpositions also have been adopted, with the view of 
The translation is executed with freedom and 
It seems to be perfectly independent, and not derived in any degree from 


other versions’, and must be considered as antecedent to cither of the two now 
printed. The Ms. is evidently the original copy of the author’. 

22. About the same period, and, though not by either of the translators just men- 
tioned, by one of similar opinions, was produced a curious volume, preserved in the 


library of Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambridge®. 


It opens with a brief account of man’s state 


in paradise, the fall, and the flood; and proceeds, assuming the form of a dialogue, to 
describe the calling of the people of Isracl, their deliverance from Egypt, and guidance 


into the promised land. 


It then treats shortly of the law, moral, civil and ceremonial; 


and in speaking of this last, breaks off suddenly from the subject of the Old Tes- 


tament. 


mandments, which form the first passage extracted 
from the Old Testament, agree verbatim with the later 
version, except that in our fifth commandment they 
read worship instead of honour. 

u The excerpts from the Gospels are very few and 
very short, shewing that the collection was designed to 
be taken in connexion with the Harmony prefixed, and 
together with it, to comprise whatever in holy Scripture 
was thought necessary to be learned. 

w Of these an index is prefixed, intitled, The table 
of sentences and matieris of holi writ. It commences 
thus : 

«Cm, i. God made alle thingis of no3t. 

ij. Of his wil. 

iij. Of God merueilous in his dedis, of his my3t 
and his wit. 

iiij. Feithful, merciful, trewe and ri3tful is God.” 

x The subjoined passages will afford a specimen of 
the translator’s manner : 

Gen. iv. ro—15. Harl. 1862. fol. 183. 

And the Lord seide to hym, What hast thou don ? 
the vois of the blod of thi brothir crieth to me fro 
erthe. Now therfore thou shalt ben cursid on erthe 
that hath opened his mouth and sopen the blod of thi 
brother, of thin hond; whan thou wirkist it, it shal 
not 3yuen to thee hise frutis. Vagaunt and flizti thou 
shalt ben on erthe. And Caym seide to the Lord, 
More is myn wickidnesse than that I disserue mercy ; 
therfore eche that findeth me, shal slen me. And the 
Lord seide to Caym, It shal not be don so, but eche 
that shal slen Caym, shal be seuenefold punshid. 

Wisd. xvii. 1—3. Harl. 1862. fol. 171». 

Lord, grete ben thi domes, and thi wrdis vnable to 
ben told; for this thing vnlerid soulis han errid. For 
whil wickede men han stiring to moun lordshipen to the 
holi nacioun, thei fugitif han leyn, fetterid in bondis of 
derknesses and of long ny3t, closid vnder roues of thin 
euerelastinge wisdam. And whil thei wenen them to 
moun lurken in derke synnes, in the derke veil of for- 
3eting thei ben scaterid, dredinge hidously and with to 
myche merueiling troublid. 

1 Tim. i. 8—11. Harl. 1862. fol. 183. 
Sotheli wee witen that the lawe is good, if eny vse 


A few lines® then introduce the epistles of Peter’, James, John and 


it lawefulli, witinge this, for to the just man is not lawe 
put, but to vnjust and not soget, to faderslearis and 
modir slearis, to vnpitouse men and synneris, to fe- 
lounes and defoulid men, manslearis and fornycaries, 
sodomytus and woundcris, to lieris and forsworne men ; 
and if eny other thing is aduersarie to the doctrine that 
is vpe the gospel of the glorie of blissid God. 
Apoc. xvii. 1—s. Harl. 1862. fol. 197°. 

And oon of the seuene aungelis seide to me, Cum, I 
shal shewen to thee the dampnacioun of the grete hore 
that sitteth on manye watris, with whom the kingis of 
erthe han don fornycacioun, and thei that dwellen the 
erthe ben drunken of hire hordam. And he toc me in 
to desert in spirit, and I saw3 a womman sittinge on a 
red beste, ful of names of blasfemye, hauynge seuene 
hedis and ten hornes. And the womman was di3t 
about with purper and red silc, and gildid with gold 
and with precious ston and perlis, hauynge a goldene 
cuppe in hire hond, ful of abhominacioun and vnelen- 
nesse of hire fornycacioun; and in hir forhed a name 
writen, Babilon the grete moder of fornycaciouns and 
of abhominaciounes of erthe. 

y The text of the Vulgate which the translator fol- 
lows, differs from that usually received; for instance, 
fol. 121. Hebr. xi. he read v. 6. fit for sit; 9. cavulis or 
cavernis for casulis; 10. exspeetabant for exspectabat ; 
20. defunctus (2) for de futuris; 31. et alia via ejiciens 
for cum pace. ! 

z From a close comparison of the handwriting, as 
well as the orthography of the two Mss., it appears 
certain, that the insertions and corrections of the O. 
R.Ms. 17 C. 33, are from the same pen with Harl. 1862, 
which pen has also supplied the rubrics in both Mss. A 
series of passages from the Bible is also found, following 
Clement’s Harmony, in Ms. Bodl. 771. 

a Marked by Nasmith ccccxxxiv. 

b « Suster, the apostles that weren most priue with 
Crist, Peter and James and Jon, wrytith pisteles to the 
pepel, how thei schullen lyue; and Peter seith on this 
wyse, Yblessed” etc. ; 

¢ The translator had an indifferent Latin text; for in- 
stance, in the first verse translated, 1 Pet. i. 3, it omitted 
et, and read nos for vos, and unam for vivam. 


PREFACE. Xlil 
Jude*. After these the dialogue is continued by way of preface® to an abstract! of 
the several epistles of Paul, with the exception of that to Philemon. Then follow the 
Acts of the Apostles; and, this book finished, the translator commences the gospel 
of Matthews. He seems, however, to have proceeded no further than the Lord’s 
prayer in chap. vi, with which the volume ends. The Ms. is in the western dia- 
lect, and probably the original copy?. 

23. Among these various essays to translate portions of the Scriptures, there is version of 
one other, which, as being of the latter half of the fourteenth century, and also (te 
complete, deserves especial notice. It is a version of the whole of St. Paul’s epistles. 6" ("” 
The Latin and English are given paragraph by paragraph; a few verbal glosses are 
admitted, the translator otherwise keeps closely to his original. The epistle to the 
Laodiceans is inserted in Latin, in its usual place after that to the Colossians, but 
without any translation! 

24. The persons who were thus engaged in preparing translations of Scripture, Opposition ap- 
anticipated, it is evident, powerful opposition to its circulation among the people, and the tranclating 
regarded the task upon which they ventured, as attended with danger to themselves.” “”?”""" 
From this apprehension it is, that the obscurity in part arises which attends the 
history of these translations; since the authors never make known their names, and 
are careful to avoid the mention of circumstances which might lead to their detection. 


d The following extract will shew the character of 
the translation. The salutation both here and at the 
end of the epistle is omitted in the Ms. 


1 Pet. i. 3—9. C.C.C.C. 434. 


Yblessed be God, the fader of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 
that of his grete merci hath begeten 30w ajen into on 
hope, by the arisynge from deth to lyue of Jhesn 
Crist, and into an heritage incoruptibel, vndefouled, 
that may nat ‘welewe, that is ykept in hevene in 30w, 
that beth ykept in the vertu of God by fcith, in to 
hele that is redy to ben yschewed in the laste tyme, 
in the whiche tyme je schulleth ioyen. And now 3ef 
it behoueth to sorwe to gedere a lytel in dyuerse 
temptaciounes, that the preuynge of joure feith be 
more precious than gold that is yprened in the feer, 
and be founde in to preysynge and ioye and worschipe 
in the reuelacioun of Jhesu Crist, whom 3e loueth that 
je ne haueth nat yseye, in whom 3e beleueth that 3e 
seth nan3t, but whan 3e seth him 3e schulleth ioyen in a 
gladnesse that may nat ben ytold, yglorified, and ber- 
ynge the ende of 3oure feith, the hele of 3oure soules. 


€ This preface commences, “ Suster, thus han Cristes 
principal aposteles, Peter and James and Jon and Jude, 
ywriten to the pepel, to techen hem how thei schulden 
lyuen vertuouslyche in forsakynge the lykynges of the 
world and the lykynges of the flesch, as Crist techith 
in the gospel.—Brother, Y se wel, that these aposteles 
techeth the pepel as Crist techeth in the gospel; bote 
natheles, brother, these apostelys weren yordeyned to 
techen the chyldren of Israel; for oure aunceteres 
weren hethen men, that weren yturned to hileuen in 
Crist by Poul the apostel.” The preface ends, ‘‘ The 
thridde thyng that Poule techeth is, how men schulleth 
forsake synne in kepynge Cristes lawe of charite ; and 
of this poynt, suster, thorw Goddes grace ich will tclle 
thee what he seith in his pisteles, and of the other 
poyntes, whan ich haue grettere leyser, with the grace 
of God. Seynt Poule writeth to the Romaynes, and 
seith, [ch. v.19,] Rizt as by the vnbuxumnesse of on 
man many men beth ymad synful men,” etc. 


f The author evidently intended to make at some 
future time a more complete translation, as the follow- 
ing passage in the part of the dialogue mentioned in 
the last note shews: ‘‘ bote Y ne may not at this tyme 
write to thce alle his pisteles, as thei stondeth; bote 
natheles, 3ef it be Goddes wille, thu schalt habbe hem 
heraftir.’ fol. 36. 

s The second chapter begins thus, ‘‘ Werfore whan 
Jhesus was bore in Bethlem of the Jewery, in the dayes 
of kyng Heroude, loo! the kynges come fro the est to 
Jerusalem, seyenge, Where is he that is bore the kyng 
of Jewys?” 

h Another copy, omitting the abstract of the Old 
Testament, and St. Paul’s epistles, and giving some 
alterations of the version, is in the Bodl. Ms. Douce 
250. 

i The commencement of the epistle to the Romans 
is thus given: 


Rom. i. i—10. C.C.C.C. 32. 


“* Paulus servus etc. Poule seruaunt of Jhesu Crist, 
callid apostil, departid in to the euangelye of God, the 
whiche bifore he hadde behi;t bi his prophetis in holy 
writtis of his sone, the whiche is maad to hym of the 
seed of Dauid after the flesch, the which is before or- 
deynyd Goddis sone in vertu, aftyr the spiryte of mak- 
yng holy of the resurreccioun of the deade of oure 
Lord Jhesu Criste, bi whom we hafe tane grace and 
ofice of apostil, or power of the office of apostyl, in alle 
fole to obeische to the feith for the name of hym, 
among the which 3ee be callid of Jhesu Criste. Omni- 
bus qui sunt, etc. To alle the whiche ben at Rome, lofd 
of God, callid holy, or in holynesse, grace to 30u and 
pecs be of God oure fadyr and Lord Jhesu Criste. 
Primum quidem, ete. Firste namely I do thankyng to 
my God for alle 3ou, by Jhesu Crist, for 30ure feith is 
schewid in al the world. Testis, ete. For witness to 
me is God, to whom I serue in my spiryt in the euan- 
gelye of his sone, that without styntynge I haue maad 
mynde of 30u euere in my prayeres, besckynge if any 
maner at the laste that I haue a gate profitable of com- 
ynge other while vn to 30n in the wille of God.” 


X1V 


PREFACE. 


On the same ground they frequently enter upon a defence of their undertaking, and 


a refutation of the objections most commonly raised against it. 


Of this nature is a 


remarkable tract, or, as it might be called with greater propriety, connected series of 


tracts, found in a Ms. belonging to the University of Cambridge. 


The style is not 


unlike that of Wycliffe, plain and forcible, and the tracts may possibly be his own 


composition k, 


k Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ti. 6. 26. It commences with- 
out any rubric or title; ‘‘ Alle cristene peple stant in 
thre maner of folke. Sum kunne rede and vnderstonde, 
as good clerkis and wel letterd men, and for hem ben 
ordeyned bookis of Ebruse, of Grwe and of Latyn. 
Summe cunnyn nether rede ne vnderstonde, as lewid 
peple that kunnen no letter, and for hem God hath or- 
deinede his creaturis in heuene, in erthe and in the see, 
to schewe his grace and kuyndnesse to men and wym- 
men that han discrescion, weereby thei schulden lerne 
to lone God and drede hym, and kepe his comaunde- 
mentis, and not by peynture and ymagerye madde by 
toannis hondus, for the Spirite of God seith in Dauith 
the profete, Confundantur omnes qui adorant sculptilia, 
ete. Summe ther hen that kunnen rede but litil, or 
no3t vnderstonde, and for hem hen ordent bookis of 
her moder tongue, to Frensche men hokis of Frensche, 
to Ytaliens bokis of Latyne corrupte, to Duche men 
bokis Duche, to Englische men bokis of Englische; in 
whiche bokis thei mowen rede to konne God and his 
lJawe, and to fulfille it in worde and dede, and so to slec 
synne in hem silf and ech in other, bi ther power and 
kunnynge, wher thorou3 thei mowe desserue eendeles 
blisse. And that [it] is leful to cristyn peple [to] rede 
and connen holy Scripture, in destruccion of synne and 
in cresynge of vertu, it is opyne in many placis of God- 
dis lawe, bothe old and newe ; for thus seith oure Lord 
God, Erunt verba hee,” etc. 

Other extracts from the first piece are: p. 5. “And 
for as moche as the curatis hen often so lewid, that 
thei vnderstonden not hookis of Latyn for to teche the 
peple, it is spedful not oonly to the lewed peple but also 
to the lewed curatis, to have bookis in Englisch of 
needful loore to the lewed peple; for many curatis 
kunnen not construe ne expowne her pater noster, ne 
ane, ne crede, ne the ten comaundementis, ne the se- 
uene dedely synnes, ne many othere thingis, that thei 
ben bounden to knowe and to teche othere, as the lawe 
shewith.”-—p. 6. “* Fewe ther ben that wolden be tau3t, 
fewe that kunnen teche, and wol fewe that wolen teche; 
and so Goddis worde and Goddis lawe is ne3 forjeten 
in this lond, vertu is forsaken and vice is taken, truthe 
is in dispit, falshed is in worschip, pees and charite ben 
exilid, synne and malice, baat and dissencioun regnen, 
for with outen kepynge of Goddis lawe is no pees.”— 
p. 15. “ But 3if the ten comaundementis, the crede, 
pater noster and aue, that al cristyn peple owith kunne, 
commene thingis of holy writte, gospellis and pisteles 
rede in holy chirche, ben welle translatid and truly, 
sentence for sentence, with good declaracioun, who so 
rede it, he schal the better vnderstonden it bothe in 
Latyn and in Englische.” The piece concludes thus, 
p- 41, ** Now, leue frendis, haue I schewed 30n, that it 
is leful and nedful to the pepel for to knowe Goddis 
lawe and the feith of holy chirche in here langage, and 
that it is leefful and spedfal to hem that kunne rede, 
and nameliche to gentellis, to haue Goddis lawe writen 
in bookis, that thei mowen red it, and so the better 
kunne ; for it is a comoun sawe, and soth it is, Worde 


and wynd and mannes mynde is ful schort, but letter 
writen dwellith. And as seynt Austyn seith, ad Voluci- 
anum, that man or woman hath in writinge or in boke, 
he may rede it al wey; whanne he hath tyme and tome 
to reden, he may rede whanne he wole, and letten whan 
he wole, withouten dissese, but he may not alway haue 
prechynge ne techynge whanne he wolde, and ofte 
whanne he may haue a techere, he hath no tome. And 
therfor, leue frend, sith then 3e kunnen rede, spende- 
dit (sic) 3oure kunnynge to the worship of God, and 
whanne 3e haue tome and tyme of deuocioun, and doth 
3oure deuer after 30ure staat, to kunne and to vnder- 
stonde Goddis lawe. For Salamon seith, Acceptus est 
regi minister intelligens, Prouer. xiiij®. The seruaunt 
vnderstondynge Goddis lawe is acceptable and plesant 
to the kyng of heuene; and the bettere that 3e vnder- 
stonden what 3e reden, the more deuocioun 3e schullen 
haue, and the more knowe 3oure God, and the more 3e 
knowen him, the more 3e schullen loue him, and the 
more 3e louen him, the more he schal loue 3ou. Amen.” 

The second tract in the series deserves to be given 
entire. It is here printed from the Arundel Ms. 254, 
collated with Harl. 6333.¢ In both Mss. it occurs as 
one of the prologues to Wycliffe’s translation of Cle- 
ment’s Harmony. ‘‘ Oure Lord Jhesu Crist, very God 
and very man, seith in the gospel, Blessid ben they that 
heren Goddis word and kepen it. And eft Crist seith, 
3e ben my friends, if 3e doon tho thyngis that Y co- 
maunde to 30u. And eft, He that leuith! myn comaunde- 
mentis and kepith hem, he it is that louith me. And 
eft Danith seith, Blessid ben they that serchen Goddis 
witnessis?, and sekyn ont God in al the herte. On the 
contrarie side Dauith seith, They ben cursid that bowyn 
awey fro Goddis hestis. And Poul seith, He is cursid, 
that louith not oure Lord Jhesu Crist. But Crist seith, 
If eny man louith me, he schal kepen my word, and he 
that louith nat me, kepith not my wordis. God seith 
by Salamon, The preyer of hym is cursid, whiche turn- 
eth? awey his ere, that he here not the lawe of God. 
And Poul seith, He that knowith not Goddis lawe, schal 
not be knowen of Crist at domesday, for his trewe 
seruaunt. Crist seith, The wordis whiche Y haue spoken 
to 30ow ben sperit and lyf. Therfore Petir seith to 
Crist, Lord, to whom schul we goo; thou hast wordis 
of euere lastyng Ivf. The wyse man seith in the per- 
sone of holy writ‘, They that declaren me, schullen haue 
euerlastyng lyf. And Dauith seith, Lord, the declaring 
of thy wordis ly3tenith and 3ynith vndirstondyng to meke 
men. The prophete Danyel seith, They that techen 
many men to ry3tfulnes, schullen schyne as the firma- 
ment. Sithen [thanne®] men doyng iustly bodely 
almesse to nedy men schullen be saued, as Crist seith 
in the gospel, moche more they schullen be in hi; degre 
of blis, that 3yuen charitably the greet almes of Goddis 
word, declaryng it ry3tly to cristene puple. Cristen 
men owe moche to traueile ny3t and day aboute text® of 
holy writ, and namely the gospel in her modir tunge, 
sith Jhesu Crist, very God and very man, tau3t this7 
gospel with his owne blessid mouth, and kept it in his 


+ The Cambridge Ms. has many variations. The text printed hy the Rev. Dr. Barrett agrees generally with Ms. Harl. 6333. 


1 louith. 2 witnessyngis. 3 bowith. 


4 chirche. 


5 Om. Ms. Arund. 6 textis, 7 the. 


PREFACE. 


XV 


25. By the several productions which have been noticed, and probably by others ric eariiese 


version of the 


of a like kind now lost, the way was prepared for a more complete and correct version jis... 


of the holy Scriptures. 


lyf; and for kepyng and halewyng and confermyng ther- 
of, schedde8 his prescious blod, and jaf it writen by his 
gospeleris to his chirche in erthe, that eche cristen? man 
reule his lyf therby ; for if he kepe this gospel, he schal 
be saued, and ellis in uo maner. And thou3 he coude 
neuere other lawes maad of synful men, he may come 
sufficiently and esely to heuene. Alas! ho may for 
drede of God lette lewid men to knowe and kepe the 
gospel, and comwnly speke therof in mekenesse and 
charite, to distrie synnes and plaunte uertues in cristen 
soulis? But! coueitous clerkis!! of this world replyen 
and seyen, that lewed men mowe soon erre, and ther- 
fore they schul not dispute of cristen feith. Alas! alas! 
what cruelte is this, to reeve al bodely mete fro all? a 
rewme, for a fewe folis ‘mowen bel3 glotons, and do 
harm to hem self and othere men, be this mete take 
mesurably!4. As ly3tly may ‘a proud worldly!5 prest 
erre ajeyns the gospel writen in Latyn, as a symple 
lewid man errelé azeyns the gospel writyn in Englische. 
Svmple men owen not dispute aboute holy writ, wher 
it is!? soth or profitable forl8 mannes soule, but they 
owen stedfastly bileue that it is verrely!® soth, and pro- 
fitable to alle cristen men. For with onte kunnyng and 
kepyng therof, no man may be delyuered fro peynes of 
helle; therfor lewed men schullen lerne it of God prin- 
cipally, and by good lyuyng of hem self, and bisy tra- 
ueil ‘of studie”®, and in axyng trewe clerkis bothe of 
lyuyng and kunnyng, the verrei exposiscioun therof, 
wher it is derk. For, as seynt Austyn seith, the same 
truthe is seid openly in holy writ, whiche truthe is sette 
in derk figuris, profesies and parablis. What resoun is 
this, if a child faile in his lessoun at the first day, to 
suffre neuere children?! come at lettrure for this defaut? 
who schulde be a clerk by this processe? Euery cristen 
man takith the state, auctorite and bond of God, jhe, 
in his cristendome, to be a disciple of holy writ, and a 
real techere therof in al his lyf, vp peyne of dampna- 
cioun, and vp wynnyng of the blisse of heuene. ‘What 
Antecrist22 dar23 for schame of cristen men lette lewed 
men to lerne her holy lessoun, so hard comaundid of 
God? Eche man is bounden to do so, that he be 
saued, but eche man that schul be saued, is a real prest 
mad of God, as holy writ and holy doctours witnessen 
pleynly. Thanne eche lewed man that schul be saued, 
is a real prest maad of God, and eche man is bounden 
to be suche a verri prest. But wordly clerkis crien 
that holy writ in Englische™4 wole make cristen men at 
debate, and sugettis to rebelle ajeyns her souereyns ; 
and therfor it schal not be suffrid among lewed men. 
Alas! how may they more openly sclaundre God, auc- 
tour of pees, and his holy lawe, fully techyng meke- 
nesse, pacience and charite*>; or ellis they moten seye, 
that the comwnte of cristen puple is obstinat in her 
synnes, as fendis ben; or ellis they moten seye, that 
worldly prestis representyng the state of Cristis vickeris, 
ben in dispeir for her symony and othere robberis of 
cristen men, bothe in temporal goodis and spiritual. 
Thus the false Jewis, namely, hy3e prestis, scribis and 
pharisees, cryeden on Crist, that he maad dissencioun 
in the puple. Jhesu Crist, that deidist to conferme thy 
lawe, and for raunsome of cristene soulis, stoppe these 
blasphemyes of Antecrist, and worldly clerkis, and make 


8schedyng.§ 90m. 10 But summe. 
46 Om. 17 Om. Ms. Arund. 18 to. 
25 The remainder erased in Harl. 6333. 


11 persoones, 
19 verri, 20 Om. 


The New Testament was naturally the first object. 


12 Om. 
21 child to. 


The text 


thyn holy gospel knowen and kept of thy symple bre- 
theren, and encrese hem in feith, hope and charite, and 
meknesse and pacience, to suffre deth ioyfully for thee 
and thy lawe. Amen, Jhesu, for thy mercy !” 

The seventh piece in the series is thus intitled, 
This tretis that folewth, proueth that eche nacioun may 
lefully have holy writ in here moder tunge. The fol- 
lowing passages occur in it: p. 85, ‘‘ And thus oure 
Antecristis now, suynge the Farisees, tellen not verilich 
the truthe of the gospel, for thei lyuen contrariously 
therto.”—p. 87, ‘And thus 3if, thorou3 necligence of 
oure bischopis and prelatis and other fals techeres that 
ben in the chirche, the truthe of Goddis word be not 
sowen to the pepel, praie we,” etc.—p. 88, “ Loke whe- 
ther oure clerkis don now as yuel or worse, and namely 
oure religious, that ben fayners of holines, the whiche 
pursuen Crist in hise membris, as the Farisees diden 
his owne person.”-—p. 89, ‘ So now in these daies thei 
shewen hem faynet loueres and vntrwe children of Crist, 
that pursuen symple pepel, for thei wolden lerne, rede, 
and teche the lawe of God in here moder tunge.” 

Many passages from other writings of the time 
might be quoted, to shew the apprehensions which the 
translators felt for their own personal safety, and the 
opposition which they had to encounter in circulating 
the Scriptures. The two following are remarkable. 

The author of the volume (Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. 
ccccexxxiv.) before noticed, when requested to teach the 
lewed and uncunning what is needful for their souls, 
replies, ‘‘ Brother, I knowe wel, that I am holde by 
Crystis lawe to parforme thyn axinge, bote natheles we 
beth now so fer yfallen awey fram Cristis lawe, that 
if Y wolde answere to thyn axingus, I moste in cas 
vnderfonge the deth ; and thu wost wel, that a man is 
yholden to kepe his lyf as longe as he may. And 
perawnter it is spedful to holden oure pes awhile, tyl 
that God foucheth saf, that his wille be yknowe; for 
now the world is ful of wikkednesse,” etc. 

Wycliffe in a homily on the text, Cum persecuti vos 
Jfuerint, writes, ‘‘ And algates they dyspysen that men 
schulden knowe Cristus lyfe, for thenne prestus schul- 
den schome of hyre lyues, and specyaly these hye pres- 
tus, and for they reuersen Crist bothe in worde and iz 
dede. And herfore on gret byschop of Englelond, as 
men sayen, is yuel payed that Goddes lawe is wryten 
in Englysche to lewede men, and he pursueth a prest, 
for he wryteth to men this Englysche, and sompnet 
hym, and traueleth hym, that hyt is harde to hym to 
route; and thus he pursueth another prest by the helpe 
of Pharysees, for he precheth Cristus gospel frely with 
outen fables. O men that ben on Cristus halfe, helpe 
3e nowe ajeynes Antecrist, for the perelouse tyme is 
comen, that Crist and Poule tolden byfore. But on 
coumfort is of knyghtes, that they saueren muche the 
gospel, and haue wylle to rede in Englysche the gospel 
of Cristus lyf, for afterwarde, 3ef God wal, the lorde- 
schype schal be taken fro prestes, and so the stafe, that 
maketh hem hardy ajeynus Crist and hys lawe.” Ms. 
Magd. Coll. Cambr. Pepys, 2616. p. 192.—Copies of 
this homily also occur in Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. 
cccxxxvi. p.§2, and Brit. Mus. Old R. L. 18 B. 9. fol. 


137. 


14 ynmesurabii. 
23 dar thanne. 


13 that ben. 
22 Who sec. m. 


15 sum simple lettride. 
24 Engliseh tnnge. 


XV1 PREFACE. 
of the Gospels was extracted from the commentary upon them by Wycliffe, and to 
these were added the Epistles, the Acts, and the Apocalypse, all now translated anew. 

The New Tes- This translation might probably be the work of Wycliffe himself; at least the simi- 

tig by Wyclfe larity of style between the Gospels and the other parts favours the supposition. Pro- 
logues! were prefixed to the several books, agreeing with those commonly found in 
Latin Mss. of the fourteenth century. It seems questionable, whether the prologues 
were translated by the same hand as the text, and if they were added subsequently, 
it will account for the circumstance of their being wanting in several of the copies”. 
Short verbal glosses are frequently introduced into the text. 

Some copies of 26. It is to be observed, that the copies now existing give the original translation 

mont revised With various degrees of fidelity, and that in some it has undergone considerable 

andalteret.  yovision and alteration. Of the fifteen which have been collated, it may be assumed 
for certain, that the Mss. 4, K, 7, and Y represent most accurately the text as it 
stood at first. With these G, M,and P generally agree. These three seldom differ 
from each other, except through the errors made by the first scribe of G, or in con- 
sequence of the alterations by the second. S substantially agrees with the four first- 
mentioned Mss., but has a few readings peculiar to itself, or in common with X or 0. 
X also substantially agrees with the four first-mentioned Mss., but is singular in 
almost uniformly omitting the textual glosses, and has some readings of its own. 
N has a general agreement with the same four Mss., but has readings which are often 
erroneous, and which at other times correspond with those of O and V. Q agrees 
for the most part with G, M, and P. It often omits the ordinary glosses, and in the 
epistles of St. Paul offers long expository glosses, which as far as the epistle to the 
Ephesians are peculiar to itself, but subsequently are found in 7 likewise. These 
glosses in Q end with the epistle to Titus, but in 7 are continued through Philemon 
and the Hebrews. 7, besides the peculiarity just noticed, has a few readings of its 
own, not important. It generally agrees with G, M, P, and Q. V is a copy remarkable 
for its variations. In the Gospels it frequently omits the ordinary glosses, and 
throughout offers textual glosses of its own. It has very numerous readings found 
in no other Ms. These are more frequent after the Gospels, and approach the second 
version much more nearly than those of any other copy. Indeed the agreement with 
the second version is sometimes so marked, that one is induced to suppose the Ms. a 
revision of the earlier text made by the second translator previously to the adoption 
of the principles by which he was finally guided in preparing his version. It has 
also, subsequently to 1 Cor. vi., large marginal glosses, some of which have not been 
discovered elsewhere, and the greater part of them only in this volume and in the 
Harl. Ms. 5017, which is of the later version. U presents in part of Matthew, in Mark, 
and in Luke, so frequent a concurrence with V, that there can be no doubt of these 


‘The prologues to the Gospels are those usually 
ascribed to Jerome: 1. Mattheus ex Judea—non tacere. 
2. Marcus evangelista—Deus est. 3. Lucas Syrus na- 
tione—fastidientibus prodidisse. 4. Hic est Johannes— 
doctrina servetur. The prologue to the Romans is made 
up of the general prologue to the Pauline epistles, 
Primum queritur—manentem substantiam ; and the spe- 
cial prologue to this particular epistle, Romani sunt— 
concordiam cohortatur ; this last however being in parts 
abbreviated. 1t is remarkable, that in four Mss. G, K, 
Q and Y, a large portion of this prologue is inserted in 
that of the gospel of Luke; which mistake has appa- 
rently arisen from the misplacing of a leaf in one of the 
original copies. To each of the epistles of Paul is prefixed 
the usual brief argument. The Ms. O has an addition to 


the ordinary argument of 1 Tim., and Mss. G and V 
give another version of that to Philemon. The Acts 
have the prologue beginning, Lucas Antiochensis, and 
ending, proficeret medicina. To the Catholic Epistles is 
prefixed the epistle of Jerome to Eustochium, beg. Noz 
ita, and ending, poscentibus denegabo; and lastly, the 
Apocalypse is introduced by the shorter of the two pro- 
logues usually given in the editions of the Vulgate, 
beg. Johannes apostolus, and ending, doctrina servetur. 

m The Mss. 4, MI, P, W, have no prologues to the 
Gospels; G, Mf, P, Q, X, and generally A, are without 
prologues to the other baoks. 

n As Mt. i. 2, gendride, or bigate; 19. iust, or rizt- 
ful; pupliche, or lede ferther; 20. sleepe, or sweuea; 
23. interpretid, or expowned. 


PREFACE. XVii 
Mss. having been copied one from the other, or both from a common original. In 
parts of Matthew V differs from U, and in other parts has been made to agree with it 
by a second hand™. 0 throughout Matthew agrees very closely with U and V; in 
John it has the later version; in the other books it has more frequently readings of 
its own, or follows the generality of Mss. It often omits the textual glosses, and 
occasionally adopts the gloss instead of the text. It is a singular circumstance, that 
in the gospels of Luke and John K ceases to be a transcript of the original text, and 
agrees in its readings with U and V. 

27. Probably while the New Testament was in progress, or within a short time of 
its completion, the Old Testament was taken in hand by one of Wycliffe’s coadjutors. 
The original copy of the translator is still exstant in the Bodleian Library®. It is 
corrected throughout by a contemporary hand. A second copy, also in the Bodleian 
Library’, and transcribed from the former previously to its correction, has a note at 
the end, assigning the translation to Nicholas de Hereford4. This note was evidently 
made not very long after the Ms. was written, and there need be no hesitation in giving 
full credence to its statement": It is remarkable, that both these copies end abruptly 
in the book of Baruch, breaking off in the middle of a sentence". It may thence be 
inferred, that the writer was suddenly stopped in the execution of his work ; nor is it 
unreasonable to conjecture further, that the cause of the interruption was the suin- 
mons which Hereford received to appear before the synod in 1382. Soon after that 
event he left England, and was absent for some time. The translation itself affords 
proof, that it was completed by a different hand, and not improbably by Wycliffe himself. 


on Jt is remarkable that the Mss. U and V, and these John Purvey in Saltwood castle’. But from a mandate 


only, either in this or the later version, have the four 
introductory verses of Luke; which are given as they 
appear in Wycliffe’s Commentary on that gospel, and 
are evidently borrowed thence. 

° Bodl. 959 (3093)- 

P Bodl. Dauce 369. 

4 Nicholas de Hereford, D.D. of Queen’s College, 
Oxford!, was in 1382 one of the leaders of the Lollard 
party in that University. On Ascension day in the 
same year, he preached, by the appointment of the 
chancellor, at St. Frideswide’s. A few days suhse- 
quently, on the 18th May, he appeared upon citation be- 
fore the synod at the Preaching Friars in London2, where 
on the 20th of the same month he delivered a paper 
containing his opinions, and at an adjourned meeting, 
held at Canterbury on the 1st July, was pronounced 
excommunicate3. From this sentence he appealed to 
the pope4, and is said, in prosecution of his appeal, to 
have proceeded to Rome, and there to have been placed 
in confinement ; but having with other prisoners been 
released by the populace during an insurrection, to have 
returned to England, and soon after to have been com- 
mitted by the archbishop to prison for life>. A letter 
of the archbishop, dated 15 Jan. 1386, is exstant, re- 
questing the issue of a writ for his caption®. Ant. 
Wood also states, that Hereford suffered much with 


1 Ant. Wood Hist. and Antiq, ed. Guteb, vol. i. p. 492. 
5 Knighton, col. 2657. 6 Reg. Courtney, fol. 69. 


in a copy of Walden’s Fasciculus Zizaniorum, Ms. Bodl. e Mus. 86 (formerly, in Hyperoo 163.) 
9 Rot. pat. 15 Rie. 1]. p. 2. m. 35. 


the story told by Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 328. 


2 Reg. Courtney, fol. 27%. 
7 Hist. and Antig. vol. i. p. 493; probably borrowed from Bale’s notes 


of the bishop of Worcester it would appear, that in Aug. 
1387 he was still at liberty, and actively engaged in 
spreading doctrines considered objectionable’. He 
could not, it is certain, have remained in prison for 
any very great length of time, since on the 12th Dec. 
1391, he received from the crown letters of pratection 
against those who might trouble him, on account, as it 
seems, of his former Lollard opinions®. In Oct. 1393 
he appears to have been present at the examination of 
Walter Brute at Hereford, accused of heresy!°, On the 
16th Feb. 1394 he was made chancellor of the church 
of Hereford!!, and on the 20th March 397 treasurer in 
that cathedral. It is probably to these preferments that 
allusion is made by Thorpe, in the narrative of his ex- 
amination before archbishop Arundel in 1407!%. Here- 
ford resigned his office of treasurer in 141713, and 
entered the Carthusian monastery of St. Anne, Coventry, 
where he died/4. 

See a facsimile of this note in the description of the 
Mss., annexed to the present Preface. 

tr Bar. iii. 20. The last words are, “ place of hem. 
The 3unge..... i 

8 Hereford translates very literally, observes strictly 
the order of the original, and is usually careful to ren- 
der the same Latin words or phrases in an uniform 
manner. He never introduces textual glosses. The 


3 Ubid. fol. 28 seq. 4 Ibid. fol. 30%. 


8 Wilkins, t. iii. p. 202. See also 
10 Foxe, Acts and Monuments, cd. 1610. 


vol. i. p. 461, where see a letter to Hereford, upbraiding him for his recantation, and charging him with great want of grammatical 
knowledge. 11 Rot. pat. 17 Rieh. II. p. 2. 12 See this narrative in Bodl. Ms. Rawlinson 1030. Another copy is in tbe Impl. Libr. 
at Vienna. Denis Codd. Mss. Theol. Lat. col. 2022. It is printed by Foxe, Acts und Monum. vol.i. p. 485, and reprinted in Words- 
worth’s Eccl. Biography, vol. i. p.111. Thorpe speaks of Hereford, Purvey and Bowland, as having recanted at Paul's: Cross. 
13 Willis, Survey of Cathedrals, p. 547. 14 “Deo supradicto magistro Nicholao Herforde certum est, quod in senectute sus intravit 
ordinem Cartus’ apad Coventr’, in domo sancte Anne matris beate Marie virginis, et in cadem domo catholice vixit et obiit.”? Jfs. 
Bodl. 117 (1979). fol. 32>. 


VOL. I. d 


PREFACE. 


XVH1 


It comprises, besides the. Canonical books, all those commonly reckoned among the 
Apoeryphal, except the fourth book of Esdras. 


Prologues and 28. The prologues in the Old Testament as in the New, are for the most part those 
glosses in O'4 usually found in contemporary Mss. of the Vulgate. The Old Testament has no 


marginal glosses, neither does it appear to have been the intention of Hereford to 
admit glosses into the text; those which oceur in it previously to Baruch iii. 20, 
are the insertions of a second hand*. Subsequently to this place textual glosses are 
frequent”. 

Mes. of the od 29. The Mss. of the Old Testament are remarkably uniform in the readings of 

ja ree tlie text. They may probably be classed according to date in the following order, 
E, C, B, K, Y, A, F, H, G, D, X. This last copy always omits the glosses, and offers 
greater variations than any of the others, but they are frequently unauthorised and 


erroneous*. 


style subsequent to Bar. iii, 20 is entirely different. It 
is more easy, no longer keeps to the order of the Latin, 
takes greater freedom in the choice of words, and fre- 
quently admits textual glosses. In the course of the first 
complete chapter the new translator inserts no less than 
nine such glosses. He does not admit prologues. 

The translation of this last part of the Old Testament 
corresponds with that of the New Testament, not only 
in the general style, but also in the rendering of parti- 
cular words. Dilectus, for instance, though sometimes 
rendered foued, is generally translated dereworth, as Bar. 
ni. 37; Dan. ii. 35; Rom. xvi. 8; Eph. 1.6; James 
i. 16; li, 5 ; whereas by Hereford it is rendered either 
loved, as Deut. xxxii.15; Ps. xxviii. 6; xliv. 1; lix. 7; 
Ixviil. 13; cxxvi.2; Wisd. iv. 10: Is.v.1; xxi 4; 
Jer. x1. 15; or leef, or lemman, as Prov. xxxi. 2; Song 
of S. i. 12, 13, 15; ii. 33 vi. 1, 2, ete. 

Again, the word secundum, which by Hereford is uni- 
formly translated after, is subsequently to Bar. ili. 20, 
and in the New Testament very frequently rendered up, 
as Dan. ii. 45; Hos. ii. 3; Mic. vii. 15; Zech. i. 6; 
1 Mace. i. 15, 42, 44; ili. 39, 56; Rom. vii. 22; 11 Cor. 
vill. 3; 3 Pet. i. 2, 3, 15,17; ili. 7; iv. 6; v. 2, ete. 

The word insanio is by Hereford uniformly rendered 
to wexe wood, as iv Kings xix. 28; Is. xxiv. 6; Jer. 
xxv. 16; but hy the translator of the remaining portion 
of the Old Testament and in the New, though some- 
times to were wood, yet more frequently to be wood, as 
Ezek. xxiii. g; 11 Macc. iv. 4; 1 Cor. xiv. 23; and 
sometimes to mad, with one or other of the former ex- 
pressions as a gloss, or without any gloss, as Joh. x. 20; 
Acts xii. 15; xxvi. ty, 24, 25. 

The word puella is by Hereford translated, accord- 
ingly as the person referred to is presumed to be un- 
married, wife, widow, or servant, mayde-child, mayde- 
seruant, mayde, womman, child-womman, hand-womman, 
but never, so far as it has been observed, damsel or 
wenche ; but in the latter part of the Old Testament and 
in the New, not only mayde-child and mayde, but much 
more frequently damsel, as Dan. xiii. 15,19, 20, 363 or 
wenche, as Amos ii.7; Mt. ix. 25; xiv. 11; Mk.v. 39; 
vi. 22; vii. 30; Lk. viii. 50; Acts xii.13; xvi. 16. 

The word prepositus seems to be uniformly rendered 
by Hereford provost, as Gen. xl. 23; 1 Par. xxiii. 4; 
Esth. ii. 3; Is. xxii. 15; Ix. 17; Jer. xxxvii. 14; 
li. 25; but in the other parts of the early version, 
prepost or souereyn, as Dan. i. 3; 1 Mace. xii. 45; 
Acts vii. 10; or prepost, as Dan. i. 7, 8; 1 Mace. xiii. 
3.73 OY prepost or governour, as 1 Macc. xiv. 42; or 
souereyn, es Hebr. xiii. 7, 24; or provost or prelate, 
as Hebr, xiti.17; and once only provost, 11 Cor. xi. 32. 


The word vultus is translated by Hereford cheer ; but 
by the other translator, semblaunt, as Ezek. i. 10; 
ii. 6; Lk. xxiv. 5; sometimes face, as Mal. i. g; or 
cheer or face, as Ezek. ii. 21; Hebr. ix. 24. 

The word idolum is by Hereford translated mawmet, 
but by the other translator idol, as Ezek. vi. 4; xiv. 5; 
Amos i. §; 1 Macc. i. 45; Acts xxi. 25; 1 Cor. v.10; 
vi. g; Vili. 1, 7,10; x. 14; 1 Pet. iv. 3; Apoc. xxii. 
15; and at Rom. ii. 22, ¢dol or mawmet. 

t To Genesis is prefixed the epistle of Jerome to 
Paulinus, and also his epistle to Desiderius ; these two 
are joined together so as to make one preface, the last- 
mentioned epistle forming the ninth chapter. Joshua 
and 1 Kings have each the usual prefaces of Jerome. 
To the 1 Paralip. is prefixed Jerome’s epistle to Chro- 
matius, with another brief argument ; to the 11 Paralip. 
Jerome’s epistle to Dominio and Rogatian. The 1 Es- 
dras has the usual epistle of Jerome, a brief argument, 
and a brief ‘‘ Commendation of Esdras.’’ Before Tobit 
is placed Jerome’s epistle to Chromatius and Heliodo- 
rus, and before Judith and Esther the prefaces designed 
by him for those books. Judith has also a short argu- 
ment. The book of Job has Jerome’s two prologues. 
The Psalms have also two prologues; the latter found 
in some Mss. of the Vulgate. To Proverbs is prefixed 
Jerome’s epistle to Chromatius and Heliodorus, and to 
Ecclesiastes that to Paula and Enstochium. Wisdom 
has a short prologue. Isaiah is preceded by Jerome's 
epistle to Paula and Eustochium. Jeremiah has two 
prologues, the former being the epistle of Jerome to 
the same individuals. Baruch has the short prologue, 
usually found in copies of the Vulgate. The succeeding 
books of the Old Testament have no prologues. 

u There are none in any of the books until Proverbs, 
where four or five are found; there is a single gloss 
in Ecclesiastes, and six or seven in Wisdom; but in 
Ecclesiasticus they are numerous, and the succeeding 
books down to Baruch iii. 20 have several. All these 
glosses, with the exception of one or two peculiar 
to G, have their origin in the corrections introduced by 
the second hand of the original copy E. (Bodl. Douce 

69. 
y ae this subsequent part a few of the glosses have 
been added on some after revision or transcription : 
these are found chiefly in the Mss. G or H, or both. 
See Bar. vi. 60; Ez. xxxiii.17; Dan. ii. 29; xiv, 
12; Hag.i.g; 1 Macc. v. 42; vii. 18, 20, 22; x. 743 
ut Macc. vii. 2, §; xi. 4. 

x The Mss. X and Y were not obtained by the editors 
in time to print from them collations of the text of the 
Old Testament. The following is a specimen of their 


PREFACE. 


XiX 

30. The translation of the whole Bible having been thus completed, the next care Table of Epis- 
was to render it as extensively useful as possible. With this view, a table of, the ee 
portions of Seripture read as the epistles and gospels of the ehureh service on the 
Sundays, feasts and fasts of the year, was framedy. This table was inserted in certain 

copies of the newly translated Biblez, and the passages were marked in the text by 

letters placed in the margin over against the beginning and end of the several por- - 

tions ; or sometimes the margin contained a rubric stating at Iength the serviee for 

which the lesson was appointed*. To some copies of the New Testament such portions 

of the Old were annexed, as were used in the chureh service instead of epistles’. In 

order also to render those parts of Seripture in most frequent use accessible at a less 

cost, books were written containing nothing more than the gospels and epistles read 

in the service of the mass*. 

31. In the Cambridge University Library is an abridgment of the books of the Abridgment of 
Old Testament, from 1 Paralipomenon to 1 Maccabees, made from this version. In” ““""* 
making this abridgment the language is sometimes slightly ehanged. No other eopy 
has been met with? 

32. Wycliffe must have greatly rejoiced to see the accomplishment of an object, BEE eas 
which, it is evident, he had long and ardently desired. Numerous passages both in taken. oi 
his controversial® and pastoralf writings prove the supreme authority he assigned to 


variations, being all which they offer in the course of 
the chapters specified : 

Josh. xxiv. 7. betwe X. 10. lynerede X. 11. Ethee, 
Gergese X. 15. 3ee han serued and joure X. 32. pos- 
session to the X. Is. Ixvi. 2. no hot Y. the porelet 
AY. 3.sleth XY. breyneth X Y. 7. er he bar child 
with ynne, he bar X. Om. gloss X. he bar X. 9g. to 
bern, IX. ro. on it X. 11. and delices XY. 12. doun 
on X. and onthe knees X. one shul X. daunten, ar 
chirschen Y. 15. in flawme X Y. 17. Om. gloss X. 19. 
I shal seenden Y. 24. thei shul gon out X Y. fallinge 
X. Mal. ii. 3. caste to on 30u X. 7. Om. gloss X. is 
aungel X. 8. many in the X. 9. Om. gloss X. token 
face X Y. 13. to 3oure sacrifice X. 14. bitwen X. Om. 
gloss X. parceneres, wijf of X. 15. 3o0uthe X. Lord 
to X. 

y A table of this kind in Latin may be seen in the 
Old R. Ms. 1 B.1o. fol. 34. 

2 It is found in Mss. Corp. Ch. Coll. Oxf. 4, and 
Brit. Mus. Addl. 15,580. 

a This is the case in the Addl. Ms. 15,580. 

b See Mss. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ll. 1. 13; Sidney 
Suss. Coll. Cambr. 4. 5.14; Trin. Coll. Cambr. B. x. 
20, etc. 

¢ As in the Harl. Mss. 1029, 1710, both written 
probably before the end of the fourteenth century. The 
initial rubric in each is the same, Here byginnyth the 
Gospels and the Epistlis of alle the festis in the 3eer, 
standyng by ordir, as thei ben redde in the messebuk, after 
the vse of Salsbery. 

d See the description of Ms. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ee. 
1. 10, given in the list subjoied to this Preface. 

© See extracts from the Speculum secularium domino- 
rum, given by Lewis, Life af Wiclif, ed. 1820, p. 86; 
extracts from the treatise De veritate Scripture, in 
James’s Apolagie for J. Wickliffe, p.7 seq.; the Protestatio 
ad curiam Romanam, printed by Lewis, p. 382, art. 5; 
and the tract, How Antichrist and his clerkis traueilen to 
destraie holy writt, Mss. Corp. C. Coll. Cambr. cexcvi. 
p- 209, and Trin. Coll, Dubl. C. iii. 12. Extracts from 
this last are given by Vaughan, Life of Wycliffe, vol. ii. 
p. 205, and in Tracts and Treatises, p. 59. 


f Wycliffe’s Homilies deserve a more extended notice. 
In these the whole epistle or gospel of the day is gene- 
rally given in English, and explained paragraph by 
paragraph. The translation agrees with neither of the 
printed versions, as will be seen from the following ex- 
ample. 

Mt. ii. 13318. The gospel an children masse day. 
The Lordis aungel apperide to Joseph, and seide, Rise, 
take the child and his modir, and fle in to Egipt, and 
be thou there til that I seie to thee ; for it is to come, 
that Heroude seke the child, for to leese him. And 
Joseph roos up, and took in the ny3t the child and his 
modir, and fledde in to Hegipt; and Joseph was there 
to the deeth of Heroude. And this was don of Joseph 
to fulfille that that was seid bi the profete, Out of Egipt 
I clepide mv sone—And thanne Heroude saie, that he 
was disseyued of the kingis, and was ful wrooth, and 
sente into Bethlem, and sloow alle the children that 
were in Bethlem, and in alle the coostis biside, that weren 
of two 3eer and withyn, aftir the tyme that he sou3te 
out of these kynges.—And thanne was fulfillid that was 
seid hy Jeremye, A vois was herd in hi3, which vois 
was a weping and greet weilyng, Rachel was wepinge 
hir children, and sche wolde not be coumfortid, for thei 
weren not. Old R, Libr. 18. B. 9. fol. 14. 

The Ms. from which the above quotation is made 
contains a large collection of these homilies, hoth on 
the epistles and gospels. The collection is divided into 
three parts ; the first, comprising 120 homilies for the 
Sundays and ferials; the second, 31 homilies for the 
Commune sanctorum; and the third, 27 homilies for 
the Propre sanctorum; to which is added an exposition 
of our Lord’s prophecy on the mount, reciting the 
whole of the xxiv. chap. of S. Matthew. This it would 
seem from the preface, was not delivered as a homily, 
but designed for circulation as a written tract. It he- 
gins, “ This gospel tellith moche wisdom that is hid to 
many men, and speciali for this cause, that it is not al 
red in chirche. But sith it is of euene autorite with 
othir gospels of Crist, and of hid sentence and good, 
that were profitable to the chirche, summen wolden 
seie it in ther modir langage, as thei can. And al if 


d2 


XX 


PREFACE. 


Holy Scripture, and the importance he attached to its general circulation. Yet the 


new version was not altogether satisfactory. 


The part translated by Hereford 


differed in style from the rest; it was extremely literal, occasionally obscure, and 
sometimes incorrect; and there were other blemishes throughout incident to a first 
essay of this magnitude, undertaken under very unfavourable circumstances, by 
different persons and at different times, upon no agreed or well defined principle. 
These defects could not have escaped the attention of Wycliffe, and it is by no means 
improbable that he snggested, if he did not himself commence, a second or revised 


version of the whole Bible. 


thei witen wel, that this text is of bileeue, netheles the 
expownyng is supposid bynethe bileeue. And thei ben 
redi to take mekeli beter witt, if it be tau3t hem, and 
to forsake ther owne witt, if ony teche that it is fals.” 
Ibid. fol. 176. 

The matter of these homilies is practical, and the 
language bold, the author excluding the legends and 
tales in which much of the pulpit teaching of those days 
consisted. Touching this point he observes in his pos- 
till on Lk. ii. 33, ‘To summen it plesith for to telle 
the talis that thei fynden in seyntis lyues, or with- 
outen hooli writt. And such thing plesith ofte more 
the puple. But we holden this manere good to lene 
suche wordis, and truste in God, and telle surely his 
lawe, and specialy hise gospels ; for we trowen that thei 
camen of Crist, and so God seith hem alle. And these 
wordis, sith thei ben Goddis, schulden be takun as 
bileeue, and more wolen thei quykene men, than othir 
wordis that men knowen not.” Ibid. fol. 14%. The con- 
trast is striking between the style of Wycliffe’s homilies 
and of those most widely used in the following century. 
Such may be found in the book commonly intitled The 
Festiai, of which copies exist in Mss. Harl. 2347, 2391; 
Linc. Cath. A. 2. 15, ete. 

A very early collection of postills occurs in a book 
called The Mirrur, in the Harl. Ms. 5085. They are 
upon the gospels for the Sundays and some of the prin- 
cipal feasts of the year. The preface shews the writer 
to have had just views as to teaching the gospel in 
English, and not to have been free from apprehension 
of blame or mischief to himself in consequence. ‘‘ Ther- 
fore whan 3e han wille for to reden, taketh forth this 
boke. The godspelles of the sonundaies and a parti 
of other massedaies 3e schul finde here inne; first the 
texte, and thanne the vnderstondinge therof. Sotheliche 
wit 3e wel, ther nis nou3t o word writen inne, that it nis 
drawen out of holy writ, and out of the bokes that thes 
holi men han made, that weren here to foren. Latin ne 
wil I sette non ther inne, for it semeth as it were a prid 
for to telle another that he ne vnderstondeth nou;t. And 
so it is a gret folie for to speke Latin to lewed men. 
For iche man schal ben vndernommen at the dai of 
dome efter his owen langage.” fol. 1>,  “* Mi name ne 
wil I nou3zt nemni, for the enemis that mizht heren it, 
and mi3t drawen 3oure hertes fram gode that had wille 
to here it. For it is the maner of the enemis for to 
ben grucchand and noious, and wil blethelich coniecten 
the wordes of holy writ, and wil tellen it on hir maner, 
and ne letten nou3t for to blamen other; the wikked 
wenen for to amenden it, for to blamen the gode and 
coniecten hem.” fol. 2. ‘Nou iche biseche 3ou alle 
that heren this writ, that hu biseche to God almisti that 
he defende me fram all iuels, and so for to maken this 
werke that it mai plesen to God ; so that efter the pass- 
ing out of this lif, that I mai be in the compaine of his 
holi halwen. For this werk J do sothe for me and for 


But whatever part he might take in its origin, it is 


alle men. For alle ne han nou3t al holi writ. Swiche 
heren the godspel and reden it, that ne vnderstondeth 
nou3t it what it saith. And for to don alle men for to 
vnderstonden it, in God ich dar take this werk on honde, 
that alle men mai vnderstonden openliche what the 
godspel techeth hem. For al he mai sen in this writt, 
what the Latin amounteth. Suffissauntliche hij moun 
heren here al that nedeth to hem. I ne sai nou3t for the 
clerkes that ben founded in holi writ, ac for hem that 
ben lasse vnderstondinge, as ich am mi seluen, that ne 
mai nou3t serchen al, ac vnnethes pare the fruite.” 
fol. 6 >. 

The subjoined specimen will afford an idea of the 
translation. 

Lk. xvi. 19 —3 1. Dominica prima post festum Trinitatis. 

Jhesus saide to his disciples, It was a riche man, 
and was clad in pourper and bis, and ich dai was fedde 
deliciouslich. And ther was a begger that hijt Lazarus, 
that lai at his 3ate ful of biles, that conaited for to ben 
fild of the crummes that fel fro the riche mannes 
bord, And no man gaf him hem; ac houndes com and 
licked his biles. And the begger died, and was borne 
with aungels into the bosom of Abraham. And the 
riche is ded, and beried in helle. And he loked vp 
with his cise as he was in turment, and sau3 Abraham 
fro fer, and the laser in his bosom. Jarl. 5085, fol. 
86d. 

There is exstant also another collection of postills 
on the gospels for the Sundays and great festivals, not 
Wycliffe’s, but composed about the same time as his. 
Copies are in the University Libr. Cambr. Kk. 6. 2. 
and Kk. 6.28. The following is the translation of part 
of the gospel for Septuagesima Sunday. 

Mt. xx. r—10. The kyngdom of heuenes is lijk to an 
housebonde man, that 3ede out first in the morewnynge 
for to hiire werke men in to his vyne 3erd; and coue- 
naunt maad with the werk men for a peny huyre a day, 
he sent hem into his vyne 3erd. And whanne he was 
goon oute aboute the thirdde hour of the day, he saw 
othere stondynge ydile in the market. And he seide 
to hem, Goth 3ee also in to my vyne 3erd, and that 
that is ri3twise I shall 3eue to 30u. And thei 3eden 
forth. And eft soones he 3ede forth aboute the sixte 
and the nynthe hour, and dide on lyk maner. Also 
he 3ede forth aboute the ellenenthe hour, and fond 
othere stondynge; and he seid to hem, What stonden 
yee here al day ydile? Thei seiden to hym, For no 
man hath huyred us. He seide to hem, Gooth 3ee also 
in to my vyne 3erd. And whanne euen was maad, the 
lord of the vyne jerd seide to his proketour, Clepe the 
werkmen, and 3elde hem her meede, bygynnynge at the 
laste, and so to the firste. And so whanne thei weren 
come aboute the elleuenthe hour, thei token single 
penyes. And thanne comen the firste, and wenden thei 
schulden haue take moore. But thei token also sengle 
penyes.” Univ. Libr. Cambr. Kk. 6. 28. 


PREFACE. XX1 

certain that he did not live to witness its completion 

some time after his death. 
33. That the version which has been described in the preceding paragraphs is to a Great errors us 

greater or less degree the work of Wycliffe; that it is the earlier of the two versions Mimic mics 

now printed, and the earliest translation of the whole Bible in the English language, %! ‘”° *- 

admits of no reasonable doubt. Yet when the present edition was commenced, an 

opposite opinion prevailed, and it was generally believed that the version which is 

really the later in point of date preceded the other. Indeed from an early period very 

confused and erroneous notions seem to have been formed regarding our vernacular 

translations of Scripture. Sir Thomas More in his Dialogues, anxious to save the 

Romish party from the scandal of withholding the word of God from the laity, main- 

tains that long before the days of Wycliffe the whole Bible had been translated into 

the English tongue, and vouches for himself having scen copies of this kind®. Thomas 

James, though he had the opportunity of examining several Mss. of the Wycliffite 

versions, was led into a similar mistake, and he describes one of them as a Bible in 

the English tongue, long before the coming of Wycliffe". From him archbishop Usher 

adopted the error, assigning the translation to the year 1290, or thereabouts!. Henry 

Wharton in his Auctarium to the archbishop’s work, which, it should be observed, was 

posthumous and unfinished, truly determined the respective characters and dates of 

the two versions; rightly giving the earlier to Wycliffe, and the later to the author of 

the General Prologue, whom however he erroneously eonjectured to be John Trevisat. 

Dr. Waterland, who greatly assisted Lewis in obtaining information for his History of 

the English translations of the Bible, was at first inclined to think that both versions 

were the work of Wycliffe', but afterwards concluded that the later version and the 

General Prologue were by John Purvey™. Unfortunately having but little leisure for 

the investigation, he was induced by a comparison of the style and language employed 

in the versions, to reject the criteria of Wharton, and to take for the earlier of the 

two that which was in fact the later". Lewis adopted the opinions of Dr. Waterland, 

and interweaving in his narrative the information supplied to him much as it came to 

his hands, has compiled an account which is not only confused but sometimes incon- 

sistent with itself. Mr. Baber when he reprinted Lewis’s edition of the New Testa- 

ment, which is not the version of Wycliffe but of the later translator, repeated this 

mistake®. He appears to have been misled by passages of Scripture in Wycliffe’s 

Homilies, which, he imagined, generally agreed with the later version. The truth is, 

that in these homilies Wycliffe translated from the Latin before him at the time, with 


It was not published until 


& Dyalogues, ed. 1530, foll. cviii. exi. cxiv.5 They 
are described as Bibles fair and old, written in English, 
which had been known and seen by the bishop of the 
diocese. Such must have been copies of one or both of 
the Wycliffite translations: of these we know that at 
the reformation manuscripts were in the hands of pre- 
lates of the church, and other persons of distinction. 
One (now Lambeth 25), belonged to bp. Bonner, and a 
second (now Magd. Coll. Cambr. Pepys 2073), to Will. 
Weston, prior of St. John’s Clerkenwell. If any other 
translation of the whole Bible had been in existence, 
some traces of it would undoubtedly have remained in 
modern times. The Constitution of abp. Arundel in 
1408, upon which sir T. More is commenting in the 
above cited passage, appears to refer to two transla- 
tions and to two only, one of them composed lately in 
the time of John Wycliffe and the other since his death. 
Nor, in case of a previous translation, would the Wyc- 
lifftes have failed to cite the fact in justification of their 
own proceeding. But their writings clearly imply that 
they knew of none such, and regarded their own as the 


first version of the whole Bible. It is true that a curions 
tract, which must have been written between 1399 and 
1414, (see hereafter, p. xxxiii.) mentions a Bible possess- 
ed by one Wering of London, which had been scen by 
many, and seemed two hundred years old. If any de- 
pendance can be placed on the presumed age, this must 
have been some Anglo-Saxon version, perhaps /Elfric’s 
Heptatench. 

h Treatise of the Corruption of Scripture; table of 
authors, p. 30. See also the treatise itself, p. 74- 4to, 
Lond. 1612. 

i De scripturis et sacris vernaculis, p. 155. 

k Auctarium Historie Dogmatice J.Usserit, p.424 seqq. 
Anth. Harmer’s (Hen. Wharton’s] Specimen of Errors 
in History of Reformation, 12°. Lond. 1693, p. 16. 

1 Waterland’s Works, ed. 1823, vol. x. p. 275. 

m Thid. p. 362. : 

u Ibid. pp. , 356, 360. 

° In OL iceaeeenaat of the Saxon and English 
versions of the Scriptures, prefixed to’his edition of the 
New Testament, p. lv. 


The earlier 
version clearly 
pointed aut by 


the testimony of 


the General 
Prologue. 


1. As to the 
general method 
taken in the 
later version. 


2. As to the 
translation af 
particular 
phrases. 


xxii PREFACE. 
no attempt at great exactness, and the passages which can be selected from them 
differ no less, or perhaps more, from the later, than from the earlier text P. 

34. A very cursory examination of the two texts now published will be sufficient 
to convince any one, who is qualified to form a judgment, that the version printed by 
Lewis is the later of the two. The other text is found in those Mss. which are the 
earlier in point of date. These are comparatively rare, as, when superseded by a later 
translation, they would naturally become. In one or two Mss. which contain partly 
one text, and partly the other, the early text occupies the first places. The language 
is rather the more antiquated, and the style more involved and difficult, whilst 
the variations of the second text are such as would arise from the alterations of a 
revising hand. But it is the General Prologue which is decisive of the question. The 
author who speaks of the Bible of late translated, as requiring correction’, in giving the 
rules which he adopted in order to make the required improvement, lays them down 
with sufficient precision to identify the corrected version without any chance of mistake. 

35. The mcthod, he tells us, which he took was this’. He first, with the assistance 
of several fellow labourers, corrected the Latin text by comparison of old Bibles, 
doctors and glossest. Secondly, he studied the text thus corrected with the gloss and 
other authorities, particularly Lyra on the Old Testament*. He then made special 
reference to the works of grammarians and theologians, for the meaning of difficult 
words and passages. And lastly, he translated, not literally, but according to the 
sense and meaning as clearly as he could’; taking care to have many persons of 
ability present at the correction of the translation. 

36. This last process of avoiding too literal a translation, and rendering the Eng- 
lish as plain or plainer than the Latin, is exemplified in several particulars. First, 
the author of the prologue proceeds to say, an ablative absolute may be resolved into 
the verb with a particle prefixed, such as, the while, for, if, when, after, or and™. Se- 
condly, a participle of the present or preterite tense may be resolved into the same 
tense and a copulative conjunction®. Thirdly, the relative may be resolved into its 
antecedent with a copulative’. Fourthly, a word, though only once set in the original, 


P See passage quoted from Mt. ii. in note . at p. xix. 

a As Lambeth Ms. No. 25, and Brit. Mus. Addl. 
11,858. 

r See vol. i. p. 58. 

8 Ibid. p. 57. 

t The following are a few among very numerous 
emendations of the Latin text made in the second ver- 
sion :—Gen. i, 2. 1 vers. Dei, 2 vers. Domini; ix. 12. 
1 v. hoc, 2 v. hoc est; xX. 31. 1. isti, 2 v. isti sunt; 
xii. 20. 1 v. viris duobus, 2 v. viris; xvi. 1 v. genn- 
erat sibi, 2 v. genuerat ; Xxx. 33. 1 v. argues, 2 v. ar- 
guent; xxxvi. 24. 1 v. asinus, 2 v. asinos; xl. 1.1 2. 
itaque, 2. ita. Exod. ix. 19. 1 v. aquis, 2 v. agris. 
Num. xi. 31. 1 v. arreptas, 2v. arreptans. Deut. xxxii. 1. 
1 v. loquor, 2 v. loquar ; xxxii. 11. 1 v. eum, 2 v. e08; 
XXXilil. 23. I v. Mane, 2 vy. mare; xxxili, 26.1 v. rec- 
tissimus, 2 v. rectissimi. Job xiii. 9. 1 v. nostris, 2 v. 
vestris. Mt. iv. 16. 1 v. sedebat, 2 v. ambulabat; iv. 
18.1 v. rete, 2 v. retia; x. 28. 1 v. et animam, 2 v. 
animam; xi. 13. 1 v. Johannem baptistam, 2 v. Johan- 
nem ; xiii, 11. 1 v. mysterium, 2 v. mysteria ; xiii. 17. 
1 v. Amen quippe, 2 v. Amen. Mk. v.11. 1 v. grex, 
2 Vv. grex Magnus. 1 v. pascens in agris, 2 v. pascens ; 
X. 41. 1 v. indignati sunt, 2 v. coeperunt indignari ; 
x1. 6. 1 v, eos, 2. v. eis. 1 Cor. iii. 13. 1 v. dies, 2 v. 
dies enim. mi Cor. i. 6. 1 v. exhortatione, 2 v. tribula- 
tione. Gal. iv. 6. 1 v. spiritum filii sui, 2 v. spiritum 
suum. Col. i. 12. 1 v. Deo patri, 2. Deo et patri. 
Hebr. iii. 6. 1 v. fidem firmam, 2 v. finem firmam; iv. 1: 


1 wv. fidei, 2 v. spei. It will be observed, that the read- 
ing adopted in the second version is not always that of 
the greatest authority. 

u Jn the earlier version of the Old Testament Lyra 
is never quoted; but perpetually in- the glosses of the 
later version. 

v Examples may be found in every page, as, Gen. 
lil. 1 .1v. lifers, 2 v. lyuynge beestis; iii. 7. 1 v. hem- 
silf to be nakid, 2 v. that thei weren nakid ; iii. 14. 
1 v. soul-hauers, 2 v. lynynge thingis ; vil. 14. 1 v. iu- 
mentis, 2 v. werk-beestis; ix. 15. 1 v. to al flesh to be 
don awei, 2 v. to do awei al fleish. 

w The instance he gives, vol. i. p. 57, is from Lk. 
xxi. 26, and men shulen were drie for drede. Lat. are- 
scentibus hominibus pre timore. This in the first ver- 
sion is rendered, men waxinge drye for drede; and in the 
second, for men schulen wexe drye for drede. Other ex- 
amples may be found at Gen. viii. 10. xiii. 10. xiv. 15, 
and passim. 

x The example is seiynge, Lat. dicens ; which may be 
rendered, and seith, or that seith. See Gen. ii. 16. Mt. 
i. 20, 24, and numberless other places. 

y As qui currit may be translated and he renneth. 
See Gen. iii. 6. gui comedit, 1 v. the which ete, 2 v. and 
he eet; xxvii. 25. guos cum oblatos comedisset, 1 v. The 
which offryd wban he hadde eet, 2 v. And whanne Isaac 
hadde ete these metis brou3t; Mt. xiii. 11. gui respon- 
dens ail, 1 v. The whiche answerynge seith, 2 v. And 
he answeride and seide. 


PREFACE. XXiii 
may be repeated in the translation as often as the sense allows and perspicuity may 
require’. Fifthly, the word autem, or vero, may stand for forsothe, or but, or even and*. 
Sixthly, when literal translation is impossible, by reason of the different position of 
the words in Latin and English, the relative and antecedent may be interchanged, and 
the order otherwise required by the English idiom adopted». Lastly, he notices the 
difficulty of translating equivocal words, and instances after Jerome, the word ea, as 
signifying sometimes of, sometimes dy, and the word enim, as sometimes standing for 
forsothe, and also for cause thus, forwhi*; and likewise instances the word secundum, as 
being commonly rendered after, but signifying by or up‘. All these particulars very 
exactly agree with the version, of which the New Testament was printed by Lewis 
and by Baber as Wycliffe’s, and leave no doubt that that version is the one which the 
author of the General Prologue claims as his owns. 

37. The date of the later version is determined by that of the General Prologue. pate of he 
This last Lewis places, though not without some doubt and reserve, soon after 1395 £51 fat 
He is induced to come to this conclusion, in consequence of the references which the '395- 
prologue makes to several passing or recent events. These events are, as Lewis 
interprets them, 1. The revival in 1387 of an old statute at Oxford, requiring that 
every one taking a degree in divinity, should first have passed through arts; 2. The 
contests there between the northern and southern scholars in 1388 and 1889; 
and, 3. The conclusions said to have been exhibited by the Lollards to the Parliament 
of 1395. 

38. Mr. Baber adopts the same date, and finds in support of it another argument ar. Bede's 
in the mention which the prologue makes of Parisienceé. Understanding by this name 47m J? 
Jean Charlier of Gerson, born in 1363, he conceives that his authority could not have “"%” 
been alleged during Wycliffe’s lifetime, nor for some years after his death. But not 
to urge that Gerson could scarcely have been cited under the name of Parisiensis, even 
so early as 1395 or 1396, it is almost certain that the person meant in the General 
Prologue is William of Auvergne, bishop of Paris from 1228 to 1240, whose writings 


are frequently quoted by the Wycliffites'. 


z Examples of this are, Gen. xxiv. 10, bonis ejus, 
1v. the goodis of hym, 2 v. the goodis of his lord; Lev. 
xiii. 3. arbitrium ejus, 1v. dom of hym, 2 v. doom of the 
preest; Jer. li. 37. in tumulos, habitatio, 1 v. mynde 
hepis, the dwelling, 2 v. biriels, it schal be the dwell- 
yng; 1 Macc. xi. 53. e¢ verabat, 1 v. and traueilide, 
2, and Demetrie trauelide; Rom. xi. 16. ef massa, 
1 v. the hool gobet, 2 v. the hool gobet is hooli. 

a Autem is in the 1 v. translated forsothe, in the 2 v. 
but, at Lev. iv. 43; Is. xiv. 19; Rom. vi. 17; 1 Cor. 
xi. 3,5. In the 1 v. forsothe, or sothely, and in the 
2v. and, at Mt. iv. 22; v. 1; viii. 5, 21, 22, etc. In 
the Old Testament autem and vero are almost always 
translated in the t v. forsothe, or sothely; and very fre- 
quently so in the 2 v.; at other times in the 2 v. but. 
In the New Testament they are generally rendered in 
the 1 v. by forsothe, or sothely, in the 2 v. always but, 
or and, or they are not rendered at all. 

> The example given is from 1 Kings ii. 10, The ad- 
uersaries of the Lord shulen drede him, instead of, The 
Lord hise aduersaries shulen drede. (at. Dominum for- 
midabunt adversarii ejus. In 1 v. this is rendered, The 
Lord shulen drede the aduersaries of him ; in 2 v. Aduer- 
sartes of the Lord schulen drede him. See Gen. iii. 8. 
abscondit se Adam, et uxor ejus, 1 v. Adam hid him, and his 
wijf, 2 v. Adam and his wijf hidden hem, etc. 

¢ See Gen. iii. 5. 1 v. forsothe, 2 v. forwhi. 

d Secundum is at Gen. i. 24. in tv. aftir, in 2 v. by. 

€ This General Prologue appears to have been printed 


three times; 1. in 1536, by John Gough, under the 
title of The dore of holy Scripture; 2.in 1540, by the 
same printer, and under the same title. In the preface 
of the printer the following passage occurs, ‘“ This ori- 


‘ginall, wherout as I have penned thys lytell codicill, is a 


very auntyent thynge, and, as my simple judgement can 
esteme it, to be wryten more then two hondred yeares 
past, very hard and difficile for any man to read now 
lynynge, and to make therof ful sentence; the which 
auncient old wrytinge is the prologue of the fyrste 
translatoure of the byble out of Latyn into Englyshe.” 
3- in 1550, by Robert Crowley, with the title, The path- 
way to perfect knowledge. Crowley printed from a Ms. 
then in the king’s chamber, which is now preserved in 
the Univ. Libr. Cambr. Mm. 2.15. See Ames Typ. 
Antiq. ed. Herbert, vol. i. pp. 492, seqq. 

f History of the English Translations of the Bible, ed. 
Lond. 1818, p. 36. 

& See Gen. Prol. vol. i. p. 32. 

h Memoirs of the life of Wycliffe, prefixed to Mr. 
Baber’s edition of the New Testament, p. lit. Mr. Baber 
was misled by the printed copy of the prologue, ed. 1550, 
in which the name of Gerson is introduced by the edi- 
tor. A like mistake is made in the earlier editions of 
Thomas Walden’s Doctrinale. So also Dr. Vaughan 
is hetrayed into the same error, in speaking of the Ec- 
clesia Regimen. Life of W. vol. ii. p. 396. 

i He is twice quoted under the name Parisience, in 
the Keclesie Regimen, Ms. Cott. Titus D. 1. fol. 62», 


Mr. Lewis’s 
arguments not 
convincing. 


1388 @ more 
probable date 
than 1396. 


Reasons of Dr. 
Waterland for 


PREFACE. 


39. As to the first of the arguments alleged by Lewis, it may be remarked, that 
the impediment to students for a degree in divinity is spoken of in the prologue as a 
measure newly attempted, and not yet established in practice*. Such language could 
scarcely have been used after 1395, of a regulation revived in 1387}, even if it had 
been enforced during the interval. But there is no proof, that the attempts to put the 
statute in force were made before the commencement of 1388, and the continuance of 
them was strictly prohibited by the King’s letters of the 17th March, and again, by 
those of the 1st of August of that year™. -The expression, sleeinge of quyke men, upon 
which Lewis builds his second argument, may indeed, and probably does, refer to the 
fray which took place at the end of April 1388, when several students were killed" ; 
but even in this case, the passage is far from proving so late a date as Lewis 
desires. The remaining argument, drawn from the allusion to the last parliament, and 
its cognizance of depravities prevalent in the University, seems to have greater weight. 
But the terms used imply specific charges or proceedings, rather than such a general 
allegation of the evils arising from vows of chastity as the third of the Lollard con- 
clusions exhibits®. Imputations of this nature were, no doubt, frequent among those 
opposed to the celibacy of the clergy, and might very probably have been brought 
under the notice of parliament previously to 1395. 

40. After careful consideration of the passages cited in favour of the date of 1396, 
it is impossible to affirm that they are sufficient to establish it; on the contrary, 
they rather concur in pointing out the summer of 1388 as the time when the prologue 
was composed. This view is confirmed by other circumstances. In August, 1387, a 
mandate was issued by the bishop of Worcester, prohibiting Nicholas Hereford, John 
Ashton, or Aston, John Purvey, John Parker, and Robert Swynderby from preaching 
in his diocese; and mentioning them as leagued together in a certain college unlicensed 
and disallowed by law%. Purvey is said to have preached at Bristol in that diocese? ; 
and from the prologue it is evident® that the version of the Old Testament was pre- 
pared at a distance from the University, at some place where it was not easy to obtain 
the use of many books, and also that several persons assisted in its correction’. 

41. It was the prominence of Purvey® as the leader of the Lollard party after the 


XXIV 


and fol. 68%, and no less than four times in the piece 
printed by Dr. Todd, under the title of Wicliffe’s Apology, 
4°. Lond. 1842. pp. 53, 57, 73 and 74. 

k Prologue, vol. i. pp. 51, 52. 

1 See Wood, Hist. and Antig. vol. i. p. 517. 

m Rott. Claus. 11 Ric. If. m. 15, and 12 Ric. II. m. 45. 

» Knighton, col. 2705. 

© These conclusions are printed by Lewis, Life of 
Wiclif, ed. 1820. p. 337. 

P See Walsingham, p. 327. ed. 1602. 
p- 466. col. 2. 

4 ‘in collegio illicito et a jure reprobato nomine seu 
ritu Lollardorum confcederati.” Mandatum Ep. Wigorn. 
apnd Wilkins, Concil. t. iii. p. 202. 

r Knighton, col. 2660. 

8 General Prologue, pp. 52, 57- 

t See also the commissions to seize the writings of 
Wycliffe and Hereford, dat. 30 Mar. (1388) Rot. pat. 
11 Ric. II, p. 2. m. 20; and 16 Apr. (1388) Rot. pat. 
11 Ric. II. p. 2. m. 22; and of Wycliffe, Hereford and 
Aston, 23 May (1388) Rot. pat. 11 Ric II. p. 2. m. 26; 
and the commissions to seize their writings, and those 
likewise of Purvey, dat. 29 May (1388) Rot. pat. 11 
Ric. II. p.2.m.10; 18 Jan. (1389) Rot. pat. 12 Ric. II. 
p- 1. m.3; and 16 Dec. (1389) Rot. pat. 13 Ric. II. 


1 See Bokyngham Memoranda, in reg. Lincoln. 


Foxe, vol. i. 


2 2 Knighton, col. 2660. 
This work was printed at Wittemberg in 1528, with a preface by Luther. Panzer Annales, vol. ix. p. 87. 
5 The recantation is printed at length in Wilkins, t. iii. p. 260 seqq. 
Notes in Fuscie. Zizaniorum. Ms. Bodl. e Mus. 86.—Foxe, vol. i. p. 500. 


p. 2. m. 21.—Dr. Waterland inclined to 1388 or 1380, 
as the date of the prologue. Works, vol.x. pp. 361, 385. 

u A John Pyrvey received letters dimissory from 
bishop Bokyngham on the 13 March 1377. He is de- 
signated in the register as of Lathebury, a village near 
Olney, in Buckinghamshire!. This might possibly be 
the same individual. Purvey lived with Wycliffe in his 
later years, and after his death preached at Bristol2. 
A mandate of the bishop, dat. Aug. 1387, forbids him 
to preach in that diocese’, and his books are among 
those which the bishops of Worcester, Salisbury, and 
Hereford were authorised to seize, 29 May, 1388, and 
18 Jan. and 16 Dec. 1389. In 1390 he is said to have 
written while in prison a comment on the Apocalypse, 
compiled from lectnres delivered by Wycliffe4. Previ- 
ously to 1396 he must have attained to some note as 
an author, since from a Ms. dated in that year Foxe 
drew Purvey’s opinions collected by his opponent Ri- 
chard Lavingham as heretical or erroneous®. In 1400 
he made a recantation at St. Paul’s Cross6. On the 
11 Aug. 1401, he was admitted on the presentation 
of the archdeacon of Canterbury, to the vicarage of 
Westhithe in Kent?, which he resigned on the 8 Oct. 
1403. He is said to have been a second time imprison- 
ed under archbishop Chicheley in 1421%. His death 
3 Wilkins, tom. iii. p. 202. 4 See Bale, p. 541. 
5 Foxe, vol. i. p. 503. 


7 Reg. Arundel, fol. 278. 8 Ibid. fol. 2gob. 9 Bale's 


PREFACE. 


XXV 


death of Wycliffe, which principally led Dr. Waterland to attribute to him the revised supposing the 
version of the Scriptures; but he was confirmed in his opinion by a volume in Trinity a 
College, Dublin’, which, containing the New Testament and also the General Prologue,” ’“”"” 
bears the name of Purvey as its former possessor. This circumstance scemed to con-, 

nect Purvey both with the General Prologue and with the translation in which this 

copy of the New Testament is written; being the same which Dr. Watcrland had 
already’, upon other grounds, erroneously surmised to be Purvey’s, and the later ver- 

sion, but which, as it has been already shewn, is undoubtedly the earlier. 

42. The present editors, upon carefully examining the volume in Trinity College The evidence 
Library, found that though the New Testament and the General Prologue had both Hein Tenity 
belonged to Purvey, and had probably been in his time parts of the same volume, the ©”? 
two had no necessary connexion, and were originally distinct Mss.; they also observed, 
that while the books of the New Testament were in the earlier version, the prologues 
or arguments to these books, as well as certain parts supplied by a second scribe, were 
in the later; and they further discovered, that these prologues were in the hand- 
writing of Purvey himself. These facts seem sufficient to point out the version which 
Purvey preferred, and with which, supposing the General Prologue to be of his composi- 
tion, he identified himself. 

43. That the General Prologue is by Purvey, is capable however of more certain The General 


Prologue and 


demonstration. There is exstant a remarkable treatise’, commonly designated, He- te Ecclesia 
Regimen by the 


clesie Regimen, or Thirty-seven Articles against Corruptions in the Church, written, a8 same author. 
This treatise must have been compiled by the same author 
The style, language, arguments, manner of quotation, and 


it seems, before 1395+. 
as the General Prologue. 


authorities quoted in the two, have a resemblance so close, as not to admit of any 


doubt upon the pointy. 


could not have taken place before 1427, as in that year 
Henry Beaufort was raised ta the cardinalate, and 
on a memorial from the curate of Chedingfold to the 
cardinal, found in the Trinity coll. Dublin Ms. A. 1. 10. 
Parvey’s writing occurs. Thomas Walden speaks of him as 
a follower of Wycliffe, magnus authoritate, doctor eximius, 
and quotes his bdok, De compendiis scripturarum, pa- 
ternarum doctrinarum et canonum; and further states 
that he himself had a copy of it, taken from Purvey 
when he was put in prison, and that it comprised three 
chapters. Doctrinale, tom. i. coll. 619, 637. ed. Ven. 


ie 

: Marked A. 1. 10, and described in the annexed list 
of Mss. 

vw See Waterland’s Works, vol. x. p. 361. 

w Copies are found, in the Cotton Ms. Titus D. 1, 
and in the Bodl. Ms. No. 540 (2262), and again in the 
Trin. Coll. Dublin Ms. 208 (68). 

x The twelve Conclusions presented to Parliament, 
about the 18th of Richard II. (if dependance can be 
placed on the date in the title, in the Fase. Zizanior. Ms. 
Bodl. e Mus. 86.) and printed by Jewis, (Life of W. 
ed. 1820. p. 337,) appear to be drawn, at least in part, 
by the same hand with the Ecclesie Regimen; (See 
Conclusions, p. 337, last line, and Titus D. 1. foll. 24, 
and 42.) and if so, this last is no doubt the other book 
treating of the same matters more at large, and in the 
language of the people, to which reference is made at 
the end of the Conclusions. (See Conclusions, p. 343.) 


¥ The following are examples :— 


This proces of Paralypo- Cristene kinges and tem- 
mynon.. schulde stire cris- poral lordis shulden teche 
tene kingis and lordis to.. here meyne and sugetis the 
make Goddis lawe to be comanndementis of God.... 


VOL. 1. 


knowe and kept of her pu- 
ple..and thou; kingis and 
lordis knewen neuere more 
of hooly Scripture than.. 
the storie of king Josaphat, 
the storie of king Ezechie, 
and the storie of king Josie, 
thei miste lerne sufficiently. . 
king Josaphat sente..to ech 
citee of his rewme..to teche 
opinly Goddis lawe to the pu- 
ple.—Josie prechide opinly 
Goddis lawe in the temple to 
al the puple. Gen. Prologue, 
PPp- 29, 30. 

Now it is a comune pro- 

tection against persecuscioun 
of prelatis and of some lordis, 
if a man is customable to 
swere nedeles and fals, and 
unavised, bi the boonys, 
nailes, and sidis, and other 
membris of Crist. Gen. Prol. 
P- 33- 
..in so myche that ech lord 
and greet prelat comynly 
mabits to him an ydole of 
sum seint, whom he wor- 
schipith more than God. 
Ibid. 


But for Gaddis loue, 3e 
symple men, be war of pride 
and veyn iangling, and chyd- 
ing in wordis a3ens proude 
clerkis of scole and veyn re- 
ligious. Gen. Prol. p. 49. 


e 


Thus, manie feithful kinges, 
as Dauith, Josaphat, Ezechie 
and Josie, prechiden excellent- 
li Goddis lawe generali bi here 
owne mouth to here puple, 
and bi pistlis sente bi here 
messangeris to al the rewme, 
as it is opin bi the proces 
of bokis of Kingis and of 
Paralipomenon. Titus, D.i, 
foll. 17°. 18. 


A! 3e cristene lordis, hou 
dore 3e suffre ;oure seruauntis 
to blasfeme God in 3oure pre- 
sence bi dispitous sweringe, 
herte, boonis, and nailis, and 
othere membris of Crist, sith 
3e doren not suffre hem to dis- 
pise 3oure ertheli king in 3onre 
heringe? Titus, D. 1. fol. 18°. 
.. sith comounli ech bisshop 
and his prelat swerith by the 
patroun either special an 
of his chirche, and holdith 
that oth more solempne and 
stidefast, than if he swerith bi 
God almy3ti. Titus, D. 1. 
fol. 21». 


If ony man ful of stryf 
other of chidinge in wordis, 
seith.. Symple cristene men 
nylen stryuen in wordis, bi 
the techinge of Poul. Titus, 
D. 1, fol. 18>. 


PREFACE. 


XXV1 


Purvey the aue 44, Now the Ecclesie Regimen, in various passages, very nearly coincides as well 
thor of the Ec- 


ctesice Regimen. With the confession made by Purvey at his recantation in 14004, as with the articles 


See, 3e lordis and prelatis 
‘that maken unable curatis 
for fleschly affeccioun and 
3iftis... what tresoun 3e doon 
to God, and what harm to 
Cristis church and _ 30ure 
auaunseeis. Gen. Prol. p. 32. 


.-in lesing a part of mannis 
blaod, wherbi a child myte 
be fourmed. Gen. Prol. p. 51. 


This symonie, with porte- 
nauncis thereof, is myche 
worse and more abomynable 
than bodily——. Ibid. 

And as Parisience seith, 
whanne. Gen. Pral. p. 32. 


Grostede seith this pleynly, 
and preueth it opinly before 
the pope and al his clergie. 
Ibid. 

Grostede seith in his ser- 
moun, Premonitus a venera- 
bili patre...also in his ser- 
moun, Dominus noster Jhesus 
Cristus. Ibid. 

Seint Gregory seith in 1°. 
part of Pastoralis ij° c®. 
Ibid. 


Prelatis, other seculer 
lordis, that ordeynen vnable 
curatis, and most for fleshli 
affeccioun, othir for temporal 
lucre, ben euel enemyes of 
holi chirche, and traitouris of 
Jhesn Crist, and of al cristen 
puple. Titus, D.1. fol. 72. 

.. lesen euele mannis seed, 
bi which thei my3ten myn- 
istre mateer of a childis bodi. 
Titus, D. 1. fol. 3. 


.. ben worse as withouten 
comparison than bodili—. 
Ibid. 


As Parisience, in his treetis 
of symonie, and the lawe wit- 
nessen. Titus, D.1. fol. 3. 

The worshipeful clerk Gro- 
sted, bisshop of Lincalne, 
preuith opinli al this sentence 
in his sermoun, Dominus no- 
ster Jhesus Cristus, and in 
his sermoun, Natis et educa- 
tis, and in his sermoun, Pre- 
monitus a venerabili patre. 
Titus, D.1. fol. 3. 

Seynt Gregory seith in the 


ij. book of Pastoralis the v. 
c®. Ibid. 


% The passages ensuing may probably be considered 


a sufficient proof :— 


. in sacramento altaris post sui consecrationem 


nec est nec esse potest accidens aliquod sine subjecto, 
sed ibi remanet veraciter eadem substantia, et verus 
panis visibilis et corruptibilis (incorruptidilis Ms.), et 
idem vinum similiter, quae ante consecrationem pone- 
bantur in altari. Confession of Purvey, Old R. Ms. 8 F. 
12. fol. 17. 

Forwhi holi writ affermith not in ony place that this 
worshipeful sacrament is an accident without suget, 
neither kindeli reesoun techith this, neither experience, 
neithir mannis wit, neither holi doctouris of the chirche 
bi a thousand jeer and more tau3ten this. Titus, D. 1. 
fol. 24. 

Also greete doctouris of scole affermen generali, that 
mantis vndirstondinge mai not comprehende an acci- 
dent withouten suget. did. 

The sacrament of the auteer. 
breken. J0id. fol. 22. 

Vocalis confessio sive privata penitentia est quedam 
auriculatio destruens evangelii libertatem, et noviter in- 
troducta per papam et clerum. Confession of Purvey. 

Jerom. . Ambrose. . Crisostom. . and Decrees. . witnes- 
sen opinli. . that verri confessioun made to God suffis- 
ith to saluacioun ; and sith this confessioun suffiside in 
the tyme of Crist and hise apostlis, seie worldli preestis, 
if thei kunne, whi this suffisith not now as wel as 
thanne. Whethir a synnere or Antecrist mai distrie 
that God hath ordeinid, and lette the werkis of the 
Trinite, or worldli preestis wolen dampne now alle these 
grete seyntis, as eretikis; for Innocent the thridde hath 
maad vnreesonable statute of confessioun, for pride and 
wynnynge of prestis. Titus, D. 1. fol. 11”. 

Quicunque receperit officium sacerdotis, etiam si cu- 
yam non habuerit animarum sibi per morem ecclesiz 
delegatum, nedum potest, immo debet, evangelium po- 
pulo Dei libere preedicare. Confession of Purvey. 


. is breed which we 


Symple prestis of the chirche that han no beneficis 
bi doom of the chirche now, owen to be apaied .. and 
in 3euinge tent to werk of the gospel. Titus, D. 1. 
fol. 52. 

So it is ouir greet foli, whanne oure cristene britheren 
liggen in the depe dich of orrible synne, for brekinge of 
Goddis heestis and in poynt of drenchinge into helle, 
to suffre him ligge stille therinne, and renne to 
a worldli bisshop, enemy of Cristis lawe and of cris- 
tene soulis, to axe him licence to saue here soulis hi 
Goddis word. But it is most woodnesse to prestis, to 
preche not Goddis word, sith Crist and his seyntis and 
comoun lawe byndith hem therto, for a worldli bisshop 
forbedith it.—Therfore ech prest do truli his office 
enioynid of God, and with charitable entent, thon3 
a worldli bisshop grucche ajens him, and thou3 deth 
of bodi sue therfore. Ibid. fol. 53>. 

Omnis vero presbiter sanctus vel sacerdos Dei vera- 
citer est episcopns et prelatus atque curatus fidelium. 
Confession of Purvey. 

Sumtyme ago the same was prest which and bisshop, 
that is, prest and bisshop was al oon..therfore as 
prestis witen, that bi the custum of the chirche thei 
ben suget to him that is here souereyn, so knowe 
hisshopis, that more bi custum than bi the truthe of 
Goddis ordenaunce, thei ben grettere than prestis. 
Titus, D. 1. fol. 80>. 

Jerom preuith opinli..that the same ben bisshopis 
that ben prestis. Jbid. fol. 81. 

Quod prelati quidam, sicut clerici, male vivunt con- 
tra doctrinam et exemplum Christi et apostolorum ip- 
sius, ideo ipsi qui sic vivunt, non habent claves regni 
ccelorum, sed claves inferni, nec aliquis christianus plus 
appreciare debet eorum censuras quam sibilum serpenti- 
num; immo si papa forsitan interdiceret nostrum reg- 
num, non posset nobis nocere, sed magis prodesse. 
Confession of Purvey. 

Prelatis or curatis that lyuen euele in the sizt of the 
puple, techen errour in dede ajens cristene feith.. 
Titus, D. 1. fol. 26>. 

Prelatis or curatis that prechen not duli the gospel, 
but 3euen opinli ensaumple of perdicioun to the puple, 
ben Antecristis and eretikis, and Satanas transfigurid 
into aungel of lizt. Ibid. fol. 3. 

If the bisshop of Rome, or ony othir Antecrist, make 
a decretal, other constitucioun, contrarie to this part 
in endullynge the regalie and power of seculer lordis 
foundid in holi Scripture, holi doctouris and quik ree- 
soun, alle cristene men, and souereynili alle feithful lige 
men to oure king, owen to despise it, as venym disturb- 
linge holi chirche. Jbid. fol.15>; see also fol. 43. 

Innocentius papa tertius, et sexcenti episcopi, cum 
aliis mille prelatis et toto residuo cleri, qui cum eodem 
papa determinaverunt concorditer in concilio Lugdun. 
quod in sacramento altaris..accidens eorundem panis 
et vini remanent ibidem, sine aliquo subjecto proprio 
eorundem .. omnes illi fuerunt in hoc stulti et fatni, 
heretici et blasphemi, ac seductores populi Christiani ; 
quare non est credendum determinationibus eorundem 
.. nisi fundentur in sacra scriptura expresse vel ratione 
cui non poterit obviari. Confession of Purvey. 

Cristene men ben not holden for to bileve that ech 
determinacioun of the chirche of Rome is trewe on ech 
side. Titus, D. 1. fol. 39. 

A! how suspect semeth the determinacioun of Inno- 
cent the thridde with the multitude of fleschli prelatis, 
othir of religioun, the possessioneris of beggeris en- 


PREFACE. 


XXVH 


collected out of his writings by his opponent Lavenham, and printed by Foxe*. A full 
and accurate comparison of these documents on the one hand, and the Leelesie Regi- 
men on the other, cannot fail to produce complete conviction”, that Purvey was the 


ducyng him herto, that the sacrament of the auteer is 
an accident withouten suget .. bi what presumpcioun 
bryngith in this synful man this nouelrie, not foundid 
opinii in the lawe of God, neither in resoun? Ibid. 
fol. 41», 

a The following are instances :— 

Such as be true Christians receive none such as 
priests, uuless .. neither doe they heleeue that thei 
make the sacrament of the altar, when it pleaseth them 
.. And therfore such as be symple men will worship 
that sacrament in this doubtfulness with a silent condi- 
tion, that is, if it be made by God’s authority, and to 
haue their devotion to the body of Christ in heaven. 
Foze, vol. i. p. 501. col. 2. 

Therfore if oni man haue doute of conscience, that 
this euil man makith not the sacrament .. lat him 
worshipe the sacrament with a stille condition, and in 
as moche as it were duli maad, and lat him reste bi 
verri feith in the veri bodi of Crist that. . now is glori- 
fied in heuenis. Titus, D. 1. fol. 67. 

Innocentius the third .. after the letting loose of 
Satan invented .. that the sacrament of the altar is an 
accident without a substance .. is very and substantial 
bread and no fals nor fained bread. Foze, vol.i. p. 501. 
col. 2. 

.. 80 this sacrament is verri breed, not feynid neither 
fals .. Thanne if Innocent the thridde .. aftir the vn- 
byndynge of Satanas, affermen that this worshipeful sa- 
crament is an accident without suget. Titus,-D. 1. 
fol. 23). 

That chapter Omnis utriusque serus, by which a cer- 
taine new found auricular confession was ordained is 
full of hypocrisie, heresie, couetousness, pride and blas- 
phemy, he saith and reproueth the same chapter verba- 
tim, .. whereby the priests do oppresse the simple 
laymen, .. compelling them to confesse themselves to 
blinde and ignorant preests, .. having such in con- 
tempt as are learned and wise. Foze, vol. i. col. 500. 

..and in the decretal Omnis utriusgue sexus de peni- 
tenciis et remissionibus, be maketh a perlous statute a3en 
the olde decre put on Austyn, and ajens kyndeli resoun 
and profyt of cristene soulis. . and if for the blyndnesse 
of the preest, or for othir vnahlete, he that is repentaunt 
wole go to another preest kunnynge in this gostli office, 
he shal not do this withouten licence axid. Titus, D. 1. 
fol. 42, 

All christian kings and lords ought to exclaime against 
the pope and those that be his fautors, and hanisch 
them out of their londs, till such time as they will obey 
God and his gospell, kings and other ministers of God’s 
justice. Foze, vol. i. p. 502. col. 2. 

.. the king and seculer lordis han power and autorite 
to punshe what eucre persoone trespassinge opinli in 
here londis, thou3 he be bisshop or erchebisshop, 3ea 
and the bisshop of Rome. Titus, D. 1. fol. 15. 

If ony suche constitucions be founde, kinges and se- 
culer lordis shulden make tho to be don awei, and pri- 
sone other exile the auctouris and fautouris of tho. Ibid. 
fol. 16, 

b It should be observed, that the passages from 
Scripture recited in the Keclesie Regimen, for the most 
part agree very closely with the later version, indeed so 
closely, that they must have been taken from it, though 
not with scrupulous accuracy. Compare, for instance :— 

Exod. xviii. 21. Purveie thou of al the puple my3ti 
men and dredinge God, in whiche is truthe, and haten 


auarice ; and ordeyne thou of hem tribunis, that is, so- 
uereyns of a thousand, and centurions, that is, souereyns 
of an hundrid, and souereyns of fifti, and souereyns of 
ten, that shulen deme the puple in ech tyme. Titus, 
D. 1. fol. 57”. 

Numb. xi. 16, 17. The Lord seide to Moises, Gadere 
thou to me lxx. men of the eldere men of Israel, whiche 
thou knowist that thei ben the olde men and inaistris 
of the puple; and thou shalt lede hem to the dore of 
the tabernacle, and thou shalt make hem to stonde there 
with thee, that I come doun and speke with thee, and 
that I take awei of thi spiryt and 3eue to hem, and that 
thei susteyne with thee the birthene of the puple, and 
not thou aloone be greuid. Jbid. 

Deut. i. 12, 13, 15—-17. Moises seide to the puple, I 
aloone mai not susteine 3oure bisinessis and wei3te and 
stryuis; 3eue 3e of 30u wise men and prudent, whos 
conuersacioun is preuid in 30ure linagis, that I sette 
hem princis to 30u.. And I took of 3oure linagis wise 
men and noble, and IJ ordeinide hem princis and tribunis 
and centuriens and quinquagenaries and deenis, that 
shulden teche 30u alle thingis. And I comaundide to 
hem and seide, Here 3e hem, and deme 3e that that is 
iust, whethir he be a citeseyn, othir a pilgrym no differ- 
ence of persoone shal be; 3e shulen here to a litil man 
as a greet man, neither 3e shulen take the persoone of 
ooni man, for it is the doom of God. Ibid. fol. 58. 

Ps, ii. 10, 11. And now, kinges, vndirstonde je; be 
3e lernid that demen the erthe. Serue 3e to the Lord 
in drede, and make 3e ful out ioie to him with trem- 
blinge. Ibid. fol. 15. 

Ts. i. 15. Whanne 3e shulen holde forth 3oure hondis, 
I shal turne awei myne eeris fro 30u; and whanne je 
shulen multiplie preieris, I shal not here; for whi 3o0ure 
hondis ben ful of blood, that is, 3oure werkis ben ful of 
synnis. Ibid. fol. 10. 

Mt. xviii. 4. Who euere mekith himsilf as this litil 
child, he is the grettere in the rewme of heuenis. Ibid. 
fol. 80. 

Mk. xvi. 15. Go 3e into al the world, and preche 3e 
the gospel to cueri creature. bid. fol. 25. 

1 Pet. ii. 11. Derwortheste britheren, I biseke jou as 
comelinges and pilgrimis, that 3e absteine 30 fro fleshli 
desiris that fi3ten ajens the soule, and haue 3e 3oure 
good conuersacioun among hethene men, that in that 
that thei bachiten of jou, as of euil doeris, thei biholde 
jou of gode werkis, and glorifie God in the dai of visita- 
cioun. Ibid. fol. 57. 

Lastly, the author of the Ecclesia Regimen thus 
quotes :—‘* And God seith in the xviij. co. and xxxiij. 
c°. of Ezechiel, bi oon translacioun, ‘ In what euere hour 
a synnere is inwardli soori, he shal be saaf.’ And the 
same sentence is in ouwre translacioun, in the xxxiij. c°. 
(v.12), that hath thus, ‘ The wickidnesse of a wicked 
man shal not anoie him, in what euere dai he shal be 
conuertid fro his wickednesse ;’ and in the xviij. c°. 
(v. 21.) thus, ‘If a wickid man doth penaunce for alle 
his synnis whiche he wrou3te, and kepith alle myne 
heestis, and doth doom and riztfulnesse, he shal lyue 
by lif, and shal not die, I shal not haue mynde of alle 
the wickidnessis of him, whiche he wrou3te.’” Titus, 
D.1. fol. 1ob, These passages, as quoted from oure 
translacioun, agree closely with the later version ; but 
the passage first quoted does not agree at all with the 
earlier version. Mr. Lewis supposes two translations 
into English to be meant, and understands by oure 


e2 


By whom Pur- 
vey was assist- 
ed, not certain. 


The Old Tes- 


tament put 
forth first. 


Character of the 


later version. 


XXVill 


PREFACE. 


author of that treatise. And it may therefore be regarded as undeniable, that Purvey 
was also the author of the General Prologue, and consequently of the later version of 


the Bible, to which it belongs. 


45. It is impossible now to ascertain to whom Purvey alludes’, as aiding him in 


the preparation of this version. 


William Thorpe, in the narrative of his examination 


before archbishop Arundel in 14074, mentions John Ashton, Philip Repingdon, Nicholas 
Hereford, Dan Jeffrey Pickeringe, and John Purvey, with many others which were 


holden right wise men and prudent, as 
writing the doctrine of Wycliffe. 


those who were diligent in teaching and 


Repingdon seems to have deserted the Lollard party 


at an early period; the others mentioned, and perhaps Thorpe himself, may possibly 


have contributed some assistance to the completion of the design. 


But, if the sug- 


gestion which has been already made regarding the date and place of the version be 


well founded, it becomes highly probable 


that Purvey’s principal associates were the 


persons specified in the bishop of Worcester’s mandate, namely, Hereford, Ashton‘, 


Parker and Swynderbyt. . 


46. The General Prologue was evidently designed as a preface to the Old Testament 
only, and not to the New. Of this last it makes no mention, except in a single sen- 


tence of the first chapter. 


It is also worthy of remark, that the prologue was written. 


before the author had completed his intended gloss on the minor prophets®; and it 


bears other marks of having been finished in haste+. 


It may, perhaps, be no unreason- 


able conjecture, that the Old Testament was put forth by itself, and before the New 
was revised; which last required less alteration in order to make it conform with 


the views of the author of the prologue. 


He might have intended to prefix a similar 


prologue to the New Testament, and have been prevented by the opposition and per- 
secution he had to encounter, from carrying his intention into effect, as he appears to 


have been in his purpose of glossing the minor prophets. 


The enlarged prologues 


to the several books of the New Testament, presently to be noticed‘, strengthen this 


supposition. 


47. The version put forth by Purvey, whether made for the Old and New Testa- 


ments at the same or at different times, 


general plan. It is every where founded 


followed in all essential points the same 
upon the previous translation, and, in the 


later books of the Old Testament which were not rendered by Hereford, and in those 
of the New, it is often little more than a mere revision of the former text, presenting 


but few substantial differences of interpretation. 
proceeded have been already specified, so far as they are given by himself. 


The principles upon which Purvey 
They 


were designed to render the version more correct), intelligible and popular; and it 


translacioun that usually but erroneously ascribed to Wyc- 
liffe. Hist. of Translations of the Bible, ed. 1818. p. 39. 

© Gen. Prol. p. 57. 

d Printed in Foxe, vol. i. p. 485. 

€ See particulars of him in Lewis’s Life of Iicelife, 
p- 262. 

f He is called in the mandate of the bishop of Wor- 
cester Robert ; but it seems probable that this is a mis- 
take, and that he is the same person as William Swyn- 
derby, of whom an account is given in Lewis, p. 271. 
See also Pat. 15, Ric. IT. p. 2. m. 20. 

& See Gen. Prol. p. 41. 

h It ends abruptly. Chapters xii-—xv. are unskil- 
fully connected with what precedes. And the prologue 
to the prophetical books set at the beginning of Isaiah, 
should rather have formed part of the General Prologue, 
particularly as a large part of it is repeated in the be- 
ginning of chap. xii. 


i See p. xxx. 

J The following are a few among many instances, in 
which the translator has amended the interpretation, 
where it was, or was supposed to be, defective or errone- 
ous :—Gen. ix. 13.1. the signe of couenaunt of pees 
shal be, 2 v. and it shal be a signe of boond of pees. 
Exod. xxix. 2. 1v. puyr whete meele, 2 v. whete flour. 
Deut. xxxii. 2. 1 v. cornes, 2 v. gras. Deut. xxxili. 7. 1 v. 
fizt for it and helper of it he shal be, 2 v. fi3te for hym, and 
the helpere of hym shal be. Josh. v. 15. rv. felie redi, 
2v. felde lowe. Josb.vi.25. 1 v. curside, 2 v. preiede 
hertli. Job x. 1. 1. me, 2v. my soule. Ibid. 1 v. to 
my soule, 2 v. of my soule. Job xi. 12. 1 v. asse, 2 v. 
wilde asse. Job xiv. 12. 1 v. to the time that he be to- 
treden, hevene shal not wake out, 2 v. til heuene be 
broken, that is, be maad newe, he schal not wake. Mt. 
xii, 5. 1v. grete synne, 2v. blame. Mt. xii. 52. 1 v. 
wryter, 2 v. wise man of lawe. 1 Cor. iii. 13. 1 v. for 


PREFACE. XXIX 
manifestly becomes more easy and familiar as the translator advances‘. There is 
one remarkable distinction between the Old and New Testaments, that in the first. he 
has inserted numerous textual glosses, only occasionally omitting those of the earlier 
version, whereas in the New Testament he has made no such insertions, and carefully 
excluded all the glosses which it previously contained. 

. 48. The Old Testament, in the greater number of copies of the later version, omits Protogues of 
the prologues of Jerome, and it seems as if Purvey had supposed his own general #7ye ou Te 
preface to be a sufficient substitute for them. In the Lincoln College Ms. 15, this’ 
preface is broken up into portions, which are severally prefixed to the books to which 
they belong. In all the copies there is prefixed to Isaiah a prologue by Purvey upon 
the prophetical books, and to Baruch the short argument found also in the copies of 
the earlier versions. 

49. A few Mss., forming an exception to the general rule, require to be specially gxcep: ina 

noticed. First, to speak of O (New Coll. 66), F (Sion Coll. 18), and X (Hereford 206). 
In all three the epistle of Jerome to Paulinus is given before Genesis, and divided, 
not into eight, as in the other version, but into nine chapters. The epistle to Desi- 
derius is correctly made a separate prologue, with a rubric prefixed. The prologues 
to Joshua, 1 Kings, 1 and 1 Paralipomenon, 1 Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Esther, the two 
to Job, and the two to the Psalms, are found only in O; of these the three first men- 
tioned are alone intitled to be considered a new translation, the others being mere tran- 
scripts from the earlier version, with some very slight alterations. In the Ms. K (Bodl. 
Fairfax 2), the prologues are in the earlier version, with the exception of those to 
Isaiah and Baruch. The Ms. R (Univ. Libr. Cambr. Dd. 1.27) which has the two 
prologues to Job and the two to the Psalter in the earlier version, has, in a version 
of its own, the prologue to Wisdom, and likewise the Greek translator’s prologue to 
Ecclesiasticus. In the Ms. T (Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10), formerly belonging to Purvey, 
containing the New Testament and the General Prologue, are found the prologues to 
the Psalter in a revise of the earlier version!. The Ms. M (Queen’s Coll. 23) is peculiar 
in having a short prologue of its own prefixed to each of the books from Exodus to 
Ecclesiasticus, and also to Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the 1 Maccabees. The same 
prologues upon Ezekiel and Daniel are also found in the Ms. R. 

50. In the New Testament, Matthew has the prologue, with some inconsiderable Proiogues in 
variations introduced, which is found in many Mss. and editions of the Vulgate, and Ne" 7 
begins, Mattheus cum primo. The prologues to Mark and Luke are abridgments of 
those in the earlier version. John has the same prologue as in that version, but more 
freely rendered, and with the last sentence omitted. The epistles of Paul have the 
short arguments found in the earlier version, but with variations implying the use 
of a different Latin original™. The Catholic Epistles here, as in the earlier version, 
have the epistle of Jerome to Eustochium. Lastly, to the Apocalypse is prefixed the 
prologue frequently found in Latin Mss. and attributed to Gilbert of Poitiers”. 


ech mannis work schal be schewid in fyer, what maner 
it is; the fier schal proue, 2 v. for it schal be schewid 
in fier; the fier schal preue the werk of ech man, what 
maner werk it is. 1 Cor. iii.15. 1 v. it schal suffre peyr- 
inge, 2 v. he schal snffre harm. 

k Tn connexion with this observation it may be no- 
ticed, that the words forsothe and sothli, which are of 
such repeated occurrence in the earlier version, (see 
Dr. Waterland’s Works, vol. x. p. 354) are frequently 
retained in the former half of the Old Testament; are 
less common in the latter half, and are searcely to be 
met with in the New Testament. 


1 Printed from this Ms. in vol. i. p. 37. 

™ To the Romans is likewise prefixed in several Mss. 
which for the most part appear to be of a later date, the 
special prologue noticed when speaking of that epistle 
in the earlier version, p. xvi.2. These Mss. are, k, |, 
m,n, 0,p,qandr. A different and somewhat more 
reeent translation of the same prologue is found in a 
single copy, Ms. Brit. Mus. Addl. 11,858, from which 
it has been printed, vol. iv. p. 308. 

2 See Biblia vulgate editionis, fol. Basil, 1508, tom. 
vi. fol. 240. The prologue begins, Omnes qui pie. and 
ends, Salamonis hee sunt. 


PRERAC: 


XXX 


Additional 
prologues in 
certain copies. 


51. Two or three copies of this version occur, in which prologues, subsequently 
compiled, seem to have been added to the books of the New Testament, and which 
demand some remark. The first to be noticed belongs to the library of Emanuel 
College, Cambridge. This Ms.°, besides the prologues and arguments found in the 
ordinary copies, has generally a second prologue prefixed to each book. The exceptions 
which occur are, the epistle to the Romans, which has only the special prologue men- 
tioned above, and the short argument, the second epistle to the Thessalonians, the 
first epistle of Peter, and the second and third of John, which have no preface of 
any kind. In the greater part of these prologues the matter is taken, more or less, 
from the ordinary gloss, or from that of Lyra. The style is that of Purvey, and 
it scarcely admits of doubt that they are from his pen?. The additional prologue 
in Matthew, or, as it is more correctly called, the addition to the ordinary prologue 
on that evangelist, appears as if it did not belong to the same series; and it is 
remarkable, that it is found in the same form in two other Mss.4 The second copy 
to be noticed is one which in the year 1731 belonged to Thomas Granger, of Milk 
Street, London. It is not known where it is now deposited. Ames states that it was 
written in the year 1424", and he transcribed from it a series of additional prologues 
to the books of the New Testament’. These prologues partly, as in the epistle to 
the Hebrews, and in the first of Peter, are not found in any other Ms.; partly, as 
in most of St. Paul’s epistles, are enlarged from those in the Emanuel College Ms. ; 
and in one or two instances, as in the first epistle of John and in the Apocalypse, 
are nearly identical with them. The epistle to the Romans has only the special 
prologue and the short argument; the second and third epistles of John and the 
epistle of Jude have no prologue. A third copy belonging to sir Peregrine Acland, Bart., 
is singular in having prefixed to the Galatians, after the usual short argument, no 
less than three prologues', the first of which agrees partially with that in the Emanuel 
College Ms. ; the two others have not been found in any other copy. 

52. In two passages of the General Prologue Purvey alludes to his glosses on the 
Old Testament. In the first" he states, that he had explained the greater prophets 
and in part the lesser prophets, and that he intended shortly to complete his gloss 
on the latter’. In the second passage* he informs us, that where, according to Jerome, 
Lyra, and other expositors, the Hebrew differed from the Latin, he had set in the 
margin, by way of a gloss, what the Hebrew had’, and sometimes how it was to 
be understood’, and this chiefly in the Psalter. These marginal glosses, which are 
absent from all copies of the earlier version, are found in those of the later. They 
occur however to a far greater extent in one or two Mss., than in the generality. 
They are most numerous in the Cotton Ms. Claudius E. 2 (C), and next to this, in 
the Old Royal Ms. 1 C. 9 (B). The glosses on the Psalms have been found only in 
the Bodl. Ms. 2326. The marginal glosses on certain parts of the New Testament, 


Marginal 
Glosses. 


© Having the press mark 1.4. 33; and designated in 
the collations by the letter p. 

P These prologues are printed vol. iv. pp. 681. seqq. 

q Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ll. 1. 13 and Jesus Coll. 
Cambr. Q. B.13. It is printed vol. iv. p. 681. 

t This date appears to have heen inferred from the 
calendar prefixed, which began with that year.—See 
Waterland’s letter to Lewis, Works, vol. x. p. 392. 

8 These transcripts were made into a copy of Lewis’s 
edition of the New Testament, folio, 1731, now in the 
British Museum, and designated Addl. Ms. 15. 521. and 
in the collations as y. These prologues are printed vol. 
iv. pp. 681, seqq. 


t The three are printed in vol. iv. p. 688°. 

& Voli. p. 44. 1. 39. 

W Very few glosses on the minor prophets occur in 
any copy known to the Editors, perhaps altogether not 
more than ten or twelve. 

x Vol.i. p. 58. 1. 4. 

¥ See Gen. xli. 45; Exod. viii. 21. xii. 8. xvii.13. xxi. 
23 ete. 2 See Exod. xix. 5 etc. 

a The glosses in this Ms. were discovered, the editors 
regret to state, too late to be printed. It is singular, 
that the scribe of C should in the Psalter have omitted 
all glosses, except those which refer to the titles of the 
Psalms. 


PREFACE. 


occurring in the Mss. New Coll. 66 (V.) and Harl. 5017 (e), which last Ms. was origin- 
ally a portion of 1 C. 9 (B), have been already noticed». 

53. The table of lessons, epistles and gospels, annexed to copies of the Pre Table of 
version was revised and enlarged, and the quotations were adapted to the new’“"”* 
translation. It is found inserted in several Mss.° 

54. The copies of this later version present so great an uniformity, that their Uniformity 

peculiarities scarcely admit of an observation. E, L, and P frequently agree together in pe 
differing from the other copies, but their variations are not of an important character. 
They consist, for the most part, in the substitution of an equivalent particle, or of 
a relative for a conjunction, or the expression of a word understood. A (Fairfax 2) 
has several short marginal glosses not found elsewhere; and, in the New Testament, 
k (Lansd. 455) has peculiar textual readings, but many of these last arise from errors 
either of the first or of the correcting scribe. 

55. Within a few years after the completion of the later version some imperfect - Attempts to 
attempts appear to have been made to revise it. a 


RXx1 


One of these revised copies is pre- version. 
served in a Ms. of the Bodleian Library, which formerly belonged to king Henry the 
Sixth’. The revisor seems, as he proceeded, to have grown weary, or to have become 
dissatisfied with the result of his labours, and he gave up his plan, after having advanced 
into the Psalter; the alterations made in the subsequent parts being comparatively few 
and unimportant. His object was to render the version more plain and intelligible, 
which he endeavoured to accomplish by introducing numerous explanatory phrases’®, 
substituting nouns for pronouns, and antecedents for relatives‘, supplying words 
understood in the original®, changing expressions to those more familiar and modern}?, 
and using connective particles, either more simple than those of the later version or 
in addition to them!. In making these alterations he seems scarcely to have consulted 
the Latin, from which he sometimes unwarrantably departs, but he has frequently 
had recourse to the earlier version, and adopts itsexpressions*. ‘This revised text is 
followed in several parts by a Ms. in the library of Corp. Ch. Coll., Cambridge!. In 
the books from Joshua to 1v Kings inclusive, and after the book of Job, this last 
mentioned copy agrees with the usual text, but elsewhere it adopts many of the 
variations of the Bodleian Ms, sometimes, however, rejecting them for readings of 
its own. In these readings it proceeds upon the same principle, interpolating 
numerous paraphrastic and explanatory words. It is singular, that from the begin- 
ning of the 11 Paralipomenon to the fifth chapter of the 11 Esdras the Ms. belonging 
to the library of St. John’s College, Oxford™, generally coincides with one or both of 
the before-mentioned copies. 

56. The third book of Esdras had formed part of the early version, but was rejected » aU ates 
by Purvey as devoid of authority in matters of faith". Accordingly it had no place in oe copy. 


5 See above, p. xvi. 20. relikis, 2 v. aftircomers,I. Esth. ii. 14. bond, 2 v. 


¢ Old R. Libr. 1 B6; Harl. 1212, 1862. 4890 and 
63333 Arundel 104; Lansd. 407; Queens Coll. Oxf. 
23; Univ. Libr. Cambr. Dd. 1. 27; Emannel Coll. 2 ; 
Hereford 206, etc. 

4 Bodl. 277 (2124), marked in the collations I. 

¢ See Gen. xxx. 8. xli. 56; Num. vi. 5, 13; 
mt Paral. xviii. 10; Job xxxii. 5, 6, 7, 10, and pussim. 

f For instance, Gen. xlviii. 20, he, 2 v. Jacob, I. 
Exod. xv. 23, he, 2 v. Moises, I. 1 Esdr. ix. 12, her 
do3tris, 2 v. do3tris of thes peplis, 1. Tob. it. 23, hym, 
2v. hir husbonde, I. etc. 

& See Gen. xxxvi.3; Exod. xxix. 23, ete. 

» Deut. xxvii. 19, peruertith, 2 v. turneth vnjustly, I. 
Josh. ii.1. Raab bi name, 2 v. that hi3t Raab, 1. Tob. v. 6. 
grette, 2 v. saluede, I. Tob.ii.2, linage, av. kyn, I. xiii. 


kepyng, I. ete. 

i See 11 Kings xix. 27, forsothe, 2v. but Er Kings 
xvi. 12, and, 2v. also and J. 1 Esdr. xii. 28, sothely, 
2v. and J. ete. ete. 

k For example, Exod. xxviii. 38, 3iftis, 2 v. 3iftis to 
men, 1, I. fre jiftis, 2 v. 3iftis to God, 1 v., 1. Deut. 
xi. 14, tymeful, 2v. tymely, 1.1. 11 Paral. xxiii. 8, 
alle, 2 v. alle thei, 1v., 1—10. rv Kings xiv. 19, excit- 
ist, 2v. stirist, I v., if 1 Esdr. iv. 3, oure Lord God, 
2v. the Lord oure God, 1v.,]. Tob. i. 1, and, 2v. and 
of the, 2v., I. 

1 No. 147, and marked in the collations by the let- 
ter S. 

m No. 7, and marked in the collations N. 

1 See Gen. Prol. vol.i. p. 2. 


Epistle to the 
Laodiceans. 


Table of 
Matters. 


Copies of the 
new version 

rapidly mul- 
tiplied. 


XXXII PREFACE. 

the copies of the second version. But the Bodleian Ms. 277, containing the revised 
text just described, gives it in a translation of its own®. This is founded upon the 
early version, and formed upon the same principle which guided the writer in pre- 
paring other parts of his revision. The order is conformed to the English idiom, 
textual glosses are introduced, and many explanatory words are supplied. The re- 
visor does not appear to have translated from the Latin, bnt merely to have recast 
the early version, so far as he thought it necessary, in order to render it uniform with 
the preceding part of his Ms. 

57. The epistle to the Laodiceans was excluded as spurious both by Wycliffe and 
Purvey. Subsequently, however, it was translated together with its argument, and is 
found in several Mss, of the later version, none of which appears to have been written 
early in the fifteenth century’. Another, but nearly coeval, version of the same 
epistle occurs in a single copy4. 

58. Several copies of the later version contain a table of matters, or summary of 
the contents of the chapters in the several books of the New Testament™. These 
summaries differ in different Mss.; in some being much more full than in others’, A 
summary of the contents of the whole Bible, of a like kind, is written by way of run- 
ning titles to the several chapters, in the upper margin of the Bodl. Ms. Fairfax 2 ; 
which has also a table of contents to the New Testament, affixed at the end of the 
Apocalypse. 

59. The Bible thus completed by Purvey caused the earlier translation to fall into dis- 
use. The new version was eagerly sought after, and read. Copies passed into the hands 
of all classes of the people‘. Even the sovereign himself and the princes of the blood 
royal did not disdain to possess them. The volumes were in many instances executed 
in a costly manner, and were usually written upon vellum by experienced scribes. 
This implies not merely the value which was set upon the word of God, but also that 
the scribes found a reward for their labours among the wealthier part of the com- 
munity. The multiplication of copies must have been rapid. Nearly one hundred 


° It is printed from this Mss. vol. ii. p. 542. 

P The epistle and argument are printed from the 
Harl. Ms. 6333, vol.iv. p. 438. 

4 Magd. Coll. Cambr. Pepys 2073, from which the 
version is printed, vol. iv. p. 438. 

t These tables are found in Brit. Mus. Eg. 1165; Trin. 
Coll. Cambr. B. x. 20; Jes. Coll. Cambr. Q. A. 6; 
Lambeth 547; Bodl. Fairfax 2; Ch. Ch. Oxf. G. 10; 
Ms. belonging to Dan. Rock, D.D.; Bodl. Hatton 111, 
e Mus. 110, and Selden supra 51. 

8 The table for instance in Eg. 1165, as will be seen 
by the subjoined specimens, is more diffuse than that 
in the Ms. of Dr. Rock, e Mus. 110, and Selden supra 
51, which agree together. 

Mt. ix. Dr. Rock’s Ms. 
Hou Jhesu helide a man bi feith of othere. 
Of the chesing of Matheu. 
Hou Crist was chalengid of fastinge. 
Of helinge a womman in flux. 
Of reisynge of a damsel in the hous. 
Of helynge of a doumb man. 
Of myche rype corn. 
Mt. ix. Egerton 1165. 
Hou Crist forzaf a man his sinnes, and also helide him 
of the palesie. 
Hou Crist seide to Matthew, Sue thou me. 
Hou Crist was chalengid of fastinge. 
Hou a prince worschipide Crist, and seide, Lord, my 
dou3ter is ny3 deed. 


Hou a womman that hadde the flux xii. 3eer was heelid. 
Of reisvnge of a damysele in the hous. 

Hou ij. blinde men cryinge sueden him. 

Of heling of a doumb man. 

Of mych ripe corn and fewe werk men. 


Apoe. ili. Dr. Rock’s Ms, 
Of him that shal overcome. 
Of him that is neithir cold ne hot. 
How God chastisith for loue and knockith. 
Apoe. iii, Egerton 1165. 
To the aungil of the chirche of Sardis, write thow, How 
owre Lord seith I schal come as a ny3t theef. 
Of hem that schulen he clothid in whi3t clothis. 
Of him that hath the keie of Dauith, which openeth 
and no man closith. 
How he that schal overcome schal be maad a piler in 
the temple. 
Of him that is neither coold neither hoot. 
The Lord seith, I repreue and chastise wom I loue. 
How the Lord soupith with man that openith the 3ate 
to him. 

t As early as the year 1394, a copy of the Gospels in 
English is bequeathed to the chantry of St. Nicholas, 
in the church of the Holy Trinity at York, by John 
Hopton, chaplain there, (Testamenta Eboracens. p. 196.) 
and in 1404, Philip Baunt, merchant of Bristol, gives a 
copy of the Gospels in English to John Caunterbury, 
chaplain of Redcliffe church, (Barrett, Hist. of Bristol, 
p. 583.) 


PREFACE. xxxili 
and fifty Mss. containing the whole or parts of Purvey’s Bible, the majority of which 
were written within the space of forty years from its being finished, have been. ex- 
amined for the present edition. Others are known to have existed within the last 
century ; and more, there can be no doubt, have escaped inquiry; how many have 
perished it is impossible to calculate. But when it is remembered that from the first 
the most active and powerful measures' were take to suppress the version,—that 
strict inquisition was made for the writings and translations of Wycliffe, Hereford, 
Ashton and Purvey,—that they were burnt and destroyed as most noxious and per- 
nicious productions of heretical depravity,—and that all who were known to possess 
them were exposed to severe persecution" ;—and then if there be taken into account 
the number of Mss. which in the course of four or five centuries have been destroyed 
through accident or negligence, it is not too much to suppose that we have now but 
a small portion of those which were originally written. 

60. The effect of this circulation of Scripture among the people in their own tongue xpects of she 
was just what might have been expected. Men reading with their own eyes the™’’” 
words of the Saviour and of his apostles, found a marked contrast between the prin- 
ciples which they inculeated and many parts of the system upheld by the Romish 


church. 


Which of the two should be rejected could not be matter of hesitation. 
progress of religious truth met however with serious impediments. 


The 
These chiefty 


arose from two sources; the extravagances into which some of those who embraced 


t These measures were of various kinds. Wycliffe 
in his Treatise against the orders of Friars, chap. 36, 
writes, ‘‘and thus they pursue priests, for they reprove 
their sins as God bids, both to brenne them and the 
Gospel of Crist, written in English to most learning of 
our nation.” Vaughan’s Tracts and Tr. p. 247. The 
commissions issued to seize the books written by Wyc- 
liffe, Hereford, Ashton and Purvey have been mentioned 
before p. xxiv. Knighton, speaking of the visitation of 
Leicester by archbishop Courtney in 1392, and of Will. 
Smyth, then compelled to do penance in the market- 
place there, tells us, ‘‘ Libros eciam solempnes, quos in 
materna lingua de evangelio et de epistolis et aliis epi- 
stolis et doctoribus conscripserat, et ut fatebatur, per 
annos octo studiose conscribere laboraverat, archiepi- 
scopo coactus tradidit.” col. 2736. In 1390 a bill, 
if we may credit the Compendious treatise presently to be 
noticed, was brought into the house of lords for the sup- 
pression of the English translation ; which was however 
thrown out by the exertions of the duke of Lancaster. 
The translation was opposed in the schools, and among 
others by Will. Butler, a Franciscan, whose Determination 
against it, written in 1400, is still exstant, but imperfect, in 
the library of Merton College (No. 68, p. 202). In 1408, 
at a convocation in Oxford, archbishop Arundel published 
a constitution forbidding the reading of any book of 
Scripture translated into English, composed lately in 
the time of John Wycliffe or since his death. (Wilkins 
Cone, tom. iii. p. 317.) The Wycliffites on their part 
were not backward to defend their right to have the 
Scriptures in their own language. ‘The series of tracts 
in a volume in the Univ. Libr. Cambridge has been 
already largely quoted. Between the years 1398 and 
1405, during which period archbishop Scrope held the 
see of York, was probably composed a treatise in Latin 
of considerable extent, on the lawfulness of having the 
Scriptures in the vernacular tongue. The third and 
most important division of this work is preserved in the 
Imperial Library at Vienna, in a Ms. of the fifteenth 
cent. (See Denis Codd. Theol. Lat. Bibl. Vienn.vol.i. p.3- 
col, 842 seqq.) The author is anonymous, but appa- 


VOL, I. 


rently a theologian of Oxford, where he tells us, two 
valentes doctores successively disputed in public lec- 
tures on either side of the question. He repeats the 
arguments used on the negative side, adding some of 
his own, and then replies on the affirmative. Shortly 
after this, in the time of archbishop Arundel, and there- 
fore compiled between 1399 and 1414, appeared a 
treatise in defence of the vernacular version of Scrip- 
ture, in which some of the passages in the Latin tract 
mentioned above are introduced. No more than a frag- 
ment of this treatise is preserved in its original form, 
and this only in manuscripts of the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries. Three of these are found in Mss. 
Harl. 325, Cott. Vitell. D. 7, and C.C.C. Cambr. 171, all 
made from a fragment in Worcester Cathedral ; a fourth 
transcript is among the Lambeth Mss. No. 594. fol. 57, 
made by Wharton from a Ms. formerly in the library of 
Westminster Abbey. The entire treatise in a somewhat 
modernised form, and with interpolations, (as for in- 
stance, the notice of bishop Fleming’s death in 1431,) 
was printed, probably at Tindal’s instigation, by Hans 
Luft, at Marlborow in the land of Hessen, in 1530; and 
reprinted in England by Richard Banckes, under the 
title of 4 Compendyous olde treatyse, shewynge howe that 
we ought to haue the Scripture in Englyshe, (see Dib- 
din’s Ames, vol. ili. p.257;) in the preface to which 
edition it is described as ‘‘ a treatyse wryten about the 
3ere of our Lorde a thousande fower hundred.” It 
was introduced by Foxe into the first edition of his 
Actcs and Monuments, 1563, p. 452 seqq., but omitted 
in the subsequent impressions. It is to this treatise 
that archbishops Parker and Ussher, as well as Foxc, 
were indebted for their notices of archbishop Arundel’s 
sermon on quecn Anne, and of the bill in parliament 
brought in by the archbishops and clergy alluded to 
above. 

u See in Foxe, Acts and Mon. cxtracts from the 
Norwich registers, vol. i. 755; from the registers of 
London, vol. ii. pp. 735, 7453 and from those of 
Lincoln, ibid. pp. 751—764. 


fi 


PREFACE. 


XXXIV 


the new opinions speedily fell, and the wars and distractions from which England 
suffered during the greater part of the fifteenth century. Notwithstanding these 
obstacles truth maintained its own cause. The versions of Wycliffe and his followers 
continued to be read and circulated ; they contributed largely to the religions know- 
ledge which prevailed at the commencement of the Reformation ; and at that period 
they supplied an example and a model to those excellent men, who in like manner 
devoted themselves at the hazard of their lives to the translation of Scripture, and to 
its publication among the people of the land. 

61. Little now remains, except to give an account of the method which the editors 
have pursued in preparing these volumes for the press. The texts have been printed 
from the Mss. with scrupulous exactness. For this purpose, four copies have been 
selected in the earlier version, namely, a Ms. in the library of Corpus Christi Coll. 
Oxford, marked No. 4, two Mss. in the Douce collection, Bodleian Library, Nos. 370 
and 369, and a Ms. in the Old Royal collection, British Museum, marked 1B. 6. The 
text has been collated either verbatim or in various readings with nineteen other 
copies. These have been, with little exception, examined throughout their extent. 
In addition, eight copies have been collated for prologues and smaller portions. 

62. For the later text, one manuscript has been followed throughout, marked 1 C. 8, 
in the Old Royal collection. This has been collated either verbatim, or in the various 
readings with no less than thirty-four other copies. The greater part of these have 
been examined throughout. Thirteen more have been consulted for prologues and 
portions. The two printed editions of the New Testament in the later text, by Lewis” 
and Bagster, have likewise been collated throughout, in the varions readings. 

63. In the General Prologue the text is printed from the Harl. Ms. 1666, as far as 
chap. xv. vol. i. p. 57, 1.3, and thence to the end from a Ms. in the Cambridge Uni- 
versity Library, Mm. 2.15. An accurate collation has been made of eight other copies. 
The epistles of Jerome prefixed to Genesis are taken, in the later version, from the 
New College Ms, 66; elsewhere the source of the prologues, if it differ from that of the 
book which follows, is noted in the margin. For the table of lessons ete. the text has 
been copied from the Mss. Corp. Ch. Coll. No. 4, and Brit. Mus, Addl. 15,580, except 
it be otherwise stated in the margin, and has been collated with six other copies*. 

64. The great extent to which the collations have been carried, will be more fully 
and accurately perceived by means of the subjoined table, which will also explain the 
letters by which the several copies are designated. 


Sources af the 
texts now 
printed. 


In the earlier 
version. 


In the later 
version. 


In the General 
Prologue ete. 


IN THE OLD TESTAMENT, 
Earlier Version. 

A. Corp. Ch. Coll. Oxford, 4; forms the text from Genesis to 11 Kings, and from Ezekiel i. 26 to 
Xxxii. 23; collated verbatim elsewhere. [94.7] i 

B. Bodl. Libr. Douce 370; forms the text from 1v Kings to 11 Paralipomenon ; collated verbatim else- 
where. [88.] 

C. Bodl. Douce 369, 1st. part; forms the text from 1 Esdras to Baruch iii. 20; collated verbatim 
elsewhere. [87.] 


and sometimes from the later, and occasionally varying 


w As reprinted by Mr. Baher, 4°, Lond. 1810. 
slightly from both. It has not been thought necessary 


x Namely, Brit. Mus. 1 B. vi. (27); Arundel 104 
(E) ; Queen’s Coll. Oxf. 23 (M); Univ. Libr. Cambr. 
Dd. 1.27 (R); Hereford 206 (X); and Lansdowne 455 
(k). The quotations of the beginning and end of the 
respective lessons do not precisely agree in the different 
Mss., being sometimes taken from the earlier version, 


to note these variations. 

y The numbers here affixed designate the order in 
which these Mss. are described in the list subjoined to 
this Preface. 


Ne OFA RS QUA 


= Ie 


i) 


Pt ete} SS) 


is?) 


PREFACE. XXXV 


. Archiep. Libr. Lambeth 25, 1st. part, containing the Pentateuch; collated verbatim from Genesis 


to Numbers xx; with various readings elsewhere. [46.] 


. Bodl. 959; collated verbatim throughout. [65.] 

. Trin. Coll. Dublin, A. 1. 9; collated with various readings throughout. [150.] 

. Brit. Mus. Egerton 617, 618; collated with various readings throughout. [32.] 

. Allanson; collated verbatim 1 Paralipomenon, Ezekiel i—xxxii. and 1 Maeeabees xi.—11 Maccabees, 


end; and with various readings from Genesis to 1v Kings. [155.] 

Bodl. Fairfax 2; Prologues to books from Genesis to Eeclesiasticus, except to 1 Paralipomenon 
{where marked K]; collated verbatim. [71.] 

Bodl. Douce 369, 2nd. part; forms the text from Baruch iii. 20 to Ezekiel i. 26, and from 
Ezekiel xxxii. 23 to Deeds xxviii. 15; collated verbatim elsewhere. [87.] 


. New Coll. 66; Prologue to 1 Esdras only; collated verbatim. [97.] 


Bodl. 183; Prologues from Tobit to Wisdom; collated verbatim. [59.] 


. New Coll.66; Prologues from 11 Paralipomenon to Psalter, exeept that to 1 Esdras ; collated ver- 


batim. [97.] 


. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Dd. 1.27; Prologues from Job to Ecclesiastes ; collated verbatim. [106.] 
. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ee. 1.10; Prologue to 1 Paralipomenon only ; collated verbatim. [107.] 


Later Version. 


. Old Roy. Libr. Brit. Mus. 1 C. 8; forms the text throughout. [6.] 
. Old Roy. Libr. Brit. Mus. 1 C. 9; collated verbatim from Genesis to Deuteronomy ; with various 


readings elsewhere. [8.] 


. Cotton Claudius E. 2; collated verbatim from Genesis to Ecclesiastieus ; with various readings else- 


where. [9.] 


. Lansdowne 454; collated verbatim Genesis and Exodus ; with various readings elsewhere. [27.] 
. Arundel 104; collated verbatim from Genesis i. to Exodus xvii., rv Kings, 11 Maccabees viii. 11. 


to end; with various readings elsewhere. [29.] 


. Sion Coll. 18; collated verbatim Genesis, Exodus, Levitieus; 1 and 1 Maccabees; with various 


readings elsewhere. [42.] 


. Lincoln Coll. 15; collated verbatim in Genesis ; with various readings elsewhere. [96.] 
. Corp. Ch. Coll. Oxf. 20; collated with various readings throughout. [95-] 


Bodl. 277 ; eollated verbatim throughout. [60.] 


. Bodl. Fairfax 2; collated verbatim from Genesis to 1v Kings, and Psalms i—Ixxv.; with various 


readings elsewhere. [71.] 
Bodl. 296 ; collated with various readings throughout. [61.] 


- Queen’s Coll. Oxf. 23; forms the text of special Prologues; collated with various readings else- 


where. [101.] 


. St. John’s Coll. Oxf. 7; collated verbatim from 1 Paralipomenon to Esther, Isaiah to 1 Maccabees; 


with varions readings elsewhere. [103.] 


. New Coll. 66; forms the text of Prologues from Genesis to 1 Paralipomenon ; collated with various 


readings elsewhere. [97.] 


. Emanuel Coll. 2; collated with various readings throughout. [118] 
. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Mm. 2.15; collated verbatim from Ezekiel to 1 Maccabees; with various read- 


ings elsewhere. [112.] 


. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Dd. 1.27; forms the text of Prologues to Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus; col- 


lated verbatim from Zechariah viii. to 1 Maccabees; with various readings elsewhere. [106.] 


. Corp. Ch. Coll. Camb. 147; collated verbatim from Genesis to Psalms; with various readings else- 


where. [116.] 


T. Trin Coll. Cambr. B. II. 8; the Pentateuch; collated with various readings thronghont. [133.] 
U, 
uy 


Archiep. Libr. Lambeth 25, 2nd. part; collated verbatim from Ecclesiasticus xxxix. to Isaiah xii. ; 
Lamentations to Zechariah viii.; with various readings elsewhere. [46.] 


. Archiep. Libr. Lambeth 1033; eollated with various readings throughout. [50.] 


W. Norwich Corporation 54; collated verbatim Exodus and Leviticus; with various readings elsewhere. 


X. 


MG 


[144. 
Hereford Cathedral 206 ; collated verbatim from 1 Kings to Esther; with various readings else- 
where. [137.] 
Trin. Coll. Dub]. A. 1. 5; collated with various readings throughout. [149.] 
foe? 


XXXVI PRE PACE 


a. Bodl. 183; Tobit to Ecclesiasticus ; collated with various readings throughout. [59.] 

b. Harl. 2249; Joshua to Psalms; collated with various readings throughout. [17.] 

¢. Tenison 83; collated with various readings throughout. [44.] 

d. Magd. Coll. Cambr. Pepys 1603 ; collated in Genesis with various readings. [123.] 

e. Harl. 5017; 1 and u Maccabees; collated with various readings throughout. [22.] 

f. Harl. 3903; Tobit and Job; collated with various readings throughout. [19.] 

g. Brit. Mus. Addl. 10,596; Tobit and Daniel xii.; collated with various readings throughout. [33.] 
h. Bodl. Douce 36; Tobit ; collated with various readings throughout. [84.] 

i. Brit. Mus. Addl. 10,046; Psalms; collated with various readings throughout. [36.] 

k. Brit. Mus. Addl. 10,047; Psalms i—Ixxiii; collated with various readings throughout. [37.] 


IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


Earlier Version. 


A. Corp. Ch. Coll. Oxf..4; collated with various readings thoughout. [94.] ° 

C. Cotton, Claudius, E 2; Luke xix. 12—xx. 10, Epistle to Philemon ; collated verbatim. (9.] 

G. Brit. Mus. Egerton 617,618; collated with various readings throughout. [32.] 

K. Bodl. Douce 369, 2nd. part ; forms the text as far as Deeds xxviii. 15. [87.] 

M. Old. R. Libr. Brit. Mus. 1 B.6; forms the text from Deeds xxviii. 15 to the end of the New Testa- 
ment; collated verbatim elsewhere. [4.] 

NV. Sidney Coll. Cambr. A. 5.14; collated verbatim throughout. [127.] 

O. Magd. Coll. Cambr. L. 5.19; collated verbatim throughout. [126.] 

P. Bodl. Rawlinson C. 258; collated verbatim throughout. [79.] 

Q. Advocates’ Libr. Edinburgh, A. 6. 34; collated verbatim throughout. [143.] 

S. Banister; forms the text of the Prologues to the Epistle to the Romans, and to the Catholic 
Kpistles ; collated verbatim elsewhere. [162.] 

T. Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10; collated verbatim throughout. [151.] 

U. Brit. Mus. Addl. 11, 858; 1st. part, as far as Luke xix. 13; collated verbatim throughout. [39.] 

V. New Coll. 67; collated verbatim throughout. [g8.] 

W. Phillipps, 9302; collated verbatim throughout. [168.] 

2X. Christ Church E 4; collated verbatim throughout. [g1.] 

Y. Brit. Mus. Addl. 15, 580; collated with various readings, aud the latter part verbatim. [41.] 

a. Bodl. 277; Prologue to Romans only ; collated verbatim. [60.] 

b. Bodl. Rawlinson C. 259; Prologue to Romans only ; collated verbatim. [80.] 


Later Version. 


A. Old R. Libr. Brit. Mus. 1. C. 8; forms the text. [6.] 

C. Cotton Claudius, E 2; collated verbatim in Matthew, and froin Mark xi. to Apocalypse; with various 
readings elsewhere. [9.] 

E. Arundel 104; collated with various readings throughout. [29.] 

I. Bodl. 277; collated verbatim throughout. [60.] 

K. Bodl. Fairfax 2; collated with various readings throughout. [71.] 

M. Queen’s Coll. Oxf. 23 ; collated partially with various readings. [101.] 

N. Sidney Coll. Cambr. A. 5. 14; Prologues only ; collated verbatim. [127.] 

O. Magd. Coll. Cambr. L. 5. 19; John, and Prologues to Mark, Luke, and John; collated verbatim. 
[1 26.] 

P. Emanuel Coll. 2; collated with various readings, from Matthew to John. [118.] 

Q. Univ, Libr. Cambr. Mm. 2.15; collated verbatim from Acts viii. to Apocalypse ; with various read- 
ings elsewhere. [112.] 

R. Univ. Libr. Cambr. Dd. i. 275 collated verbatim from Acts viii. to Apocalypse; with various 
readings elsewhere. [106.] 

S. Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. 147; collated with various readings from Matthew to John. [116.] 

T. Trin, Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10; Romans i—xi. 20, and certain Prologues; collated verbatim. [151.] 

X. Hereford Cathedral 206; collated verbatim Matthew and Mark; with various readings else- 
where. [137.] 

Z. Advocates’ Libr, Edinburgh, A. 6. 34; Prologue to Matthew only; collated verbatim. [145.] 


PREFACE. XXXVil 


Brit. Mus. Addl. 11, 858, 2nd. part, from Luke xix. 3 to Apocalypse; collated verbatim. [39-] 
. Emanuel Coll. 1. 2.13; collated with various readings throughout. [119.] 
Caius Coll. 343 ; collated verbatim throughout. [114.] 
Harl. 5017; collated with various readings throughout. (22.] 
. Harl. 4890; collated with various readings throughout. [21.] 
. Harl. 272; collated with various readings throughout. [10.] 
Harl. 2309 ; four Gospels; collated with various readings throughout. [18.] 
. Lansdowne 455 ; collated with various readings throughout. [28.] 
Bod}. Rawlinson C. 237, 238; Prologue to Romans only; collated verbatim. [77.] 
. Bodl. Rawlinson C. 257; Epistle to Laodiceans and Prologue to Romans only; collated verbatim. 
[78.] ; 
. Bodl. Dugdale 46 ; Prologue to Romans only; collated verbatim. [76.] , 
Harl. 6333; collated with various readings from Romans to Apocalypse; forms the text of the 
Epistle to the Laodiceans. [25.] 
. Emanuel Coll. 1. 4. 33; additional Prologues printed from this Ms. [120.] 
. Cardwell ; Epistle to Laodiceans and Prologue to Romans ; collated verbatim. [163.] 
Ashburnham 2; Epistle to Laodiceans and Prologue to Romans ; collated verbatim. [157-] 
Jesus Coll. Cambr. Q. A. 6; Epistle to Laodiceans ; collated verbatim. [121.] 
Univ. Libr. Cambr. Gg. 6. 8; Epistle to Laodiceans ; collated verbatim. [108.] 
. Harl. 1212; Epistle to Laodiceans ; collated verbatim. [14.] 
- Magd. Coll. Cambr. Pepys 2073 ; forms a second text of the Epistle to the Laodiceans. [125.] 
. Archiep. Libr. Lambeth, 369; Epistle to Laodiceans ; collated verbatim. [47.] 
. Edition of New Testament by Baber, 4°. Lond. 1810. 
. Edition of New Testament in Bagster’s Hexapla, 4°. Lond. 1841. 


2 a Saws ere 


9 


WARK Ae tek As 


General Prologue. 


. Harl. 1666; forms the text to chap. xv. vol.i. p. 57. [15.] 

. Univ. Coll. Oxf. G. 3; collated verbatim. [105.] 

. Bodl. 277; only first chapter ; collated verbatim. (60. ] 

Lincoln Coll. 15; as far as cap. xi.; collated verbatim. [96.] 

Univ. Libr. Cambr. Mm. 2. 15; supplies the text from chap. xv. p. 57. to end. [112.] 
Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10; collated verbatim. [151.] 

. Corp. Ch. Coll. Cambr. 147; collated verbatim. [116.] 

. Old. R. Libr. Brit. Mus. 1. C. 8; only first chapter; collated verbatim. [6.] 

Univ. Libr. Cambr. Kk. 1. 8; collated verbatim. (1 10.] 


x. Harl. 6333; Prologue prefixed to Clement; printed from this Ms. [25.] 
A. Ashburnham 3; Prologue prefixed to Clement; collated verbatim. [158.] 


ST Ssna vr We 


In the Table of Lessons, etc., the references to the collations are the same as in the 
New Testament. 


65. The glossary has involved no inconsiderable labour. It has been compiled prin- Gissary. 
cipally with the view of explaining such words as seemed likely to occasion difficulty 
to an ordinary reader. Few such, it is hoped, have escaped notice. But it must be 
observed, that neither the glossary nor the various readings include af the ortho- 
graphical variations which the manuscripts present. This would indeed have been 
au useless and almost endless task. The principal forms and inflexions have, however, 
been set down, and the philologist will find the glossary highly serviceable in enabling 
him to ascertain the usage of words at a definite period of our language, employed by 
those whose purpose it must have been to make themselves as easily understood as 
possible. It is right to warn him, that some of the examples given may not belong 
to either of the original versions, but be derived either from the partial revisions of 
the text subsequently undertaken, or from the caprice of the copyists of particular 
Mss. But these are exceptional cases, and of rare occurrence; the great bulk of the 
words collected in the glossary may be confidently assigned to the last twenty years 
of the fourteenth century. 


Acknowledg- 
ments due from 
the Editors. 


Conclusion. 


XXXVI PREFACE. 


66. The editors in the course of their protracted undertaking have laid themselves 
under many obligations. First of all, their thanks are due to the Delegates of the 
University Press in Oxford, for the liberal patronage which, by providing for the 
expense of the work, encouraged them to commence their task, and has enabled them 
at length to bring it to a conclusion. They have also to express their acknowledg- 
ments to the Royal Society of Literature, who at the outset of the design, zealously, 
though ineffectually, exerted their influence to promote its success. For the loan 
of valuable Mss. the editors are widely indebted. They have particularly to mention 
the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, the Warden and Fellows of New College, the 
Provost and Fellows of Queen’s College, the Rector and Fellows of Lincoln College, 
and the Presidents and Fellows of Corpus Christi and St. John’s Colleges respectively, 
all in Oxford; the Masters and Fellows of the several Colleges of Caius, Emanuel, 
Trinity, Sidney, Magdalen and Christ’s, in Cambridge; the Deans and Chapters of 
Hereford and of Lincoln; the Corporation of the city of Norwich; the President and 
Fellows of Sion College; the Trustees of Archbishop Tenison’s Library; the Provost 
and Fellows of Trinity College, Dublin; the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh; 
H. R. H. the late Duke of Sussex; His Grace the late Archbishop of Canterbury ; 
Mrs. Allanson of Broughton ; Sir Peregrine Acland, Bart.; Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart. ; 
Sir David Dundas, H. M. Judge Advocate; the very Rev. the Dean of Llandaff; the 
late Francis Douce, Esq.; Thomas Banister, Esq. of the Inner Temple, and the 
Rev. Daniel Rock, D.D. 

During the long period in which the editors have been engaged on their work, 
they have had to visit, or to consult, very many of the principal Libraries of the 
kingdom, Every where they have met with the most ready and obliging attention. 
But they are bound to acknowledge more especially the kindness of His Grace the 
present Archbishop of Canterbury, in granting them free access to the maiuscripts 
and archiepiscopal registers at Lambeth. They are also particularly indebted to the 
Bishop of Lincoln, to the late Master and to several of the Fellows of Corpus Christi 
College, to the Master of Magdalen College, and the late and present Masters of Ema- 
nuel College, in Cambridge ; to the Masters of University and Balliol Colleges, the late 
President of Corpus Christi College, and the Principal of St. Mary Hall, in Oxford ; 
to the Rev. Dr. Bandinel, Librarian of the Bodleian Library, and the Rev. H. O. Coxe, 
Sub-librarian there; the Rev. John Lodge, and the Rev. Thomas Power, late and 
present keepers of the University Library in Cambridge; the Rev. Professor Lee, the 
Rev. Charles Blick, of St. John’s College, and the Rev. W. P. Baily, of Clare Hall, in 
that University; to the Rev. Dr. Todd, senior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin ; 
Professor Couper, Curator of the Hunterian Museum im Glasgow; David Laing, Esq. 
Keeper of the Signet Library, Edinburgh; the Rev. Wm. Gunner, Fellow of Win- 
chester College; the Rev. W. G. Anderson, senior Tutor of University College, Durham ; 
and Dr. C. P. C. Schonemaun, Librarian of the Ducal Library at Wolfenbuttel. 

67. The editors have spared no pains to render these volumes complete. A consi- 
derable portion of their time during twenty-two years has been spent in accomplishing 
their task. They will have no cause of regret, if the result of their labours shall 
remove some portion of the disgrace which has long been attached to the English 
nation, for the continued neglect of its earliest versions of holy Scripture, and if it 
shall serve in any important degree to illustrate the history and structure of the 
English language. 


British Museum, 1st October, 1850. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 





LONDON. 


Britisa Museum. 


. Old Royal Library. 1 A. rv. Thin vellum, 12°., ff. 269, 2 cols., written about the middle of 
xv. cent.; probably No. 103 of the Theyer collection purchased by Charles IT, in 1678. 
The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, epistles 
and gospels, after the use of Salisbury. 


. Old R. L, 1 A. x. Vellum, small 4°., ff. 238, 2 cols., of the early part of xv. cent.; formerly 
belonged to Lord Lumley. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. A Table of the lessons, etc. after the use 

of Salisbury, is prefixed. 

. Old R. L.1 A. xi. Vellum, 4°., ff. 241, 2 cols., written about the middle of xv. cent.; presented 
as a new year’s gift to Queen Elizabeth, by her chaplain, John Bridges, who has written a dedi- 
cation to her majesty on two spare leaves at the commencement. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. 


. Old KR. L. 1 B. vi. Vellum, large 4°., ff. 239, 2 cols., in an upright large character, written with 
great care and neatness, about 1400. It appears to have belonged in 1569 to Avery Uvedall, in 
1576 to Edmund Hasselwode, and in 1580 to Nicholas Crafford, and still earlier to Edwy Marowe. 
The volume was one of the Theyer collection, probably No. 171. 


The books of the New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the earlier version. They are preceded by a 
Table of lessons, ete. according to the use of Salisbury. The following lacunz occur, Mt. vii. 11 to viii. 19, and 
Mk. iii. 33 to iv. 37. to the end of the Apocalypse. 


. Old R. L. 1 B. 1x. Paper, small folio, ff. 54, written anperaiy 3 in the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; 


previously in the Theyer collection, No. 180. It contains :— 

1. The prologue to the Gospel of St. John, in Anglo-Saxon, fol. 1;—2. The ‘ Capitula,’ or an abstract of the 
contents, of St. John’s Gospel, in Anglo-Saxon, fol. 1 ;—3. ‘‘ Legenda de defunctis,”’ in Anglo-Saxon, fol. 2 ;— 
4. “ Legenda in quadragesima,” in Anglo-Saxon, fol. 2®;—5. The Gospel of St. John, in the later Wycliffite 
version, with the same Gospel in Anglo-Saxon, on alternate pages, fol. 4 >. 


. Old R. L. 1 C. vir. Vellum, large folio, ff. 572, 2 cols., very neatly and regularly written, pro- 
bably before 1420, with initials to the books, in gold upon coloured grounds, and to the chapters blue 
flourished with red; and having ornamented borders at the commencement of some of the books : 
prefixed to John is a small miniature, representing the evangelist and the eagle. The first leaf has 
been inserted subsequently, and has been written by a later scribe. The recto of this leaf has a 
red rose in the initial letter, and is surrounded by a border partly composed of red and white 
roses; in the lower part is a shield of France and England, quarterly, and on the side a port- 
cullis surmounted by a red rose; executed in the reign of Henry VII. This Ms. has becn care- 
fully corrected throughout by a nearly contemporary hand. : 

The books of the Old and New Testament, in the later version, with the prologues to Baruch and Isaiah, and 
those usnally prefixed to the books of the New Testament. The Ms. presents in the most material points an 
uniform and accurate text. In many places, when other copies combine, not unfrequently without exception, in 
adopting an erroneous reading, here the correct rendering is given; examples of this are found in Gen. xxxi. 35 and 
41, so for lo; xxxiv. 24, and for whanne sec.m.; xxxvili. 29, for for fro sec.m.; xliv. 30, the for this; xlix. 11, 
grape for grace sec.m.; Josh. ii. 19, oure for 30ure sec.m.; v. 13, aduersaries for aduersarie sec.m.; ix. 18, princis 
for puples sec.m.; xxii. 15, of for to; Judg. vii. 3, the for that; viii. 9, and so for and; ix. 17, to for for sec.m.; 
Xi. 33, til to thou comest for til to that he come; 1 Kings xviii. 7, pleiynge sec.m. for fleyng ; 11 Kings vii. 20, for 
for therfor sec.m.; Ezek. xiii. 21, hond for lond sec.m.; Mk. xiii. 8, begynnyngis for beginning, and 1 Cor. vii. 9, 
that for and. ite some of these cases the reading seems, nee to have been selected from another Ms., but rather to 
have been the rendering of the scribe himself, after an examination of the Latin; as for example, in Judg. ix. 
18, handmayde for concubyne; 1 Kings xxi. 11, queeris for carroulis; Eph. iii. 4, mysterie for mynysterie. These 
corrections of the ordinary text are very frequently due to the second hand, which has throughout made numerous 


xl LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


emendations, as Gen. xxxvii. 28, thristti for twenti; Judg. x. 9, passid Jordan for passid; 1 Kings xxvii. 12, he 
wrou3te for we wrou3ten, Variations also from the generality of copies are sometimes found in the adoption of a 
more modern or familiar word, as Gen. 1. 6, chargid for coniurid; Judg. iv. 15, @ foote for on foote; 1 Par. ii. 31, 
sotheli for certes; a foro; and a for sum when singular; sometimes in the insertion or repetition of a pronoun, to 
render the sense more clear, as Josh. xili. 12, hem; Judg. x. 7, he; 1v Kings vii. 17, her; and sometimes, with 
the same view, in the supplying a relative and auxiliary, as Josh. x. 6, that weren before bisegid; or the addition of 
man or men to an adjective, as Gen. xxxix. 20, bounden men. It has again other peculiarities, as the omission of 
the s in the genitive; Lk. xv. 17, fadir for fadris; of 3e after the imp. plural, Ex. v. 11. Mt. xiii, 32. Rom. xvi. 9; 
of fo after certain verbs, as brynge, comaunde, etc., and the almost uniform putting of whether for wher. In the 
New Testament, it seems as if the old version had been consulted, giving occasion to such readings as Mt. xiv. 5, 
groyneden for grucheden; and Mt. xv. 27, crucifien for crucifieden; Lk. i. 15, and for ne; vi. 1, bi cornes for bi the 
cornes. But one of the most remarkable variations occurs in the discarding of the verbal glosses from the text, 
which as far as Numb. xx. are almost always omitted ; from this place to the Psalms they are adopted, and from the 
Psalms to the end of the Old Testament are again rejected. Sometimes however an explanatory gloss is admitted 
where other copies are without it, as Gen. xxxv. 14, title ether memorial; 1 Kings v. 8, wise men ether princis ; 
1 Mace. v. 64, prosperite ether preisyngis. This Ms. has formed the text of the later version throughout the present 
edition of the books both of the Old and New Testament. 


7. Old R. L. 1 C.1x. Vellum, folio, ff. 233, 2 cols., written not later than 1410. Previously in the 
Theyer collection, No. 27. Another portion of this copy is contained in Ms. Harl. 5017. 

The books of the Old Testament, from Genesis to Job inclusive, without prologues, but with numerous marginal 
glosses hy the original hand, especially in Job; these generally agree verbatim with those printed from Ms. Cott. 
Claud. E. 11. A few, but not of much extent, are found, which do not occur there. In the margin are also written 
some remarks in a hand of the time of Henry VIIT. 


8. Old R. L. 17 A. xxvi. Vellum, small 4°., pp. 281, written by two hands; the first portion, ex- 
tending as far as p. 206, is the carlier, but both are probably before 1400; it was No. 270 of the 
Theyer collection. The volume contains :— 

An exposition of the Decalogue, p. 1.—A tract of the seven deadly sins, and other short pieces of a like kind, p. 37. 
—Wycliffe’s Commentary on the Apocalypse, with the prologue, p. 67.—This Gospel of St. John, with the prologue, 
in the early version, p. 209.—This Ms. has some readings peculiar to itself. 


9. Cotton, Claudius, E. 11. Vellum, large folio, 2 cols., ff. 352, written probably before 1420; imper- 
fect at the beginning. A leaf has been prefixed inserted from some other Ms. which contained a 
History of the Bible in French. 


The books of the Old and New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues, and large marginal 
glosses, chiefly from Lyra, many of which are found only in this copy. It also originally contained the General 
Prologue, as is evident from the list of books of Scripture given at the end of the volume; but this has been taken 
out, as well as the first chapters of Genesis, the Ms. now beginning at chap. ix. 23. It is also defective from 11 Macc. 
vii. 10 to the end of the Old Testament. The scribe has made numerous mistakes, which have been corrected bya 
second contemporary hand. The lessons are marked by letters in the margin, and in the New Testament there are 
frequent references to parallel passages. A few remarks have also been made in Latin and English by hands of 
about the year 1500. It is a remarkable circumstance, that the earlier text is introduced into this copy, by the 
original hand, from Luke xix. 12 to xx. 10, and throughout the Epistle to Philemon. 


10. Harl, 272. Vellum, 4°., ff. 155, 2 cols., written about 1420. Probably it was formerly in Sir 
Simonds d’Ewes’ collection, No. 104. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, of the later version. At the end occur some Remarks on the Apo- 
calypse, and Comments on the Commandments; with other extracts of a like nature. On the first leaf is prefixed, 
by rather a later hand, a copy of a prayer engraved in the church of St, John Lateran at Rome, granting 80,000 years 
of indulgence to all who should repeat it daily. 


ll. Harl. 327. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., ff. 128, written about the year 1410. It formerly belonged to 
Sir Simonds d’Ewes, No. 118. 

The Epistles of St. Paul, the Acts, Catholic Epistles and Apocalypse, in the later version, with the usual 
prologues. 

12. Hart. 940. Vellum, in very small 4°. or 16°., written in the first half of the fifteenth century, 
ff. 187; it formerly belonged to Edmond Pirton, Esq., and in Sept. 1645 to Roger Warfilde, by 
the gift of Wiliam Pyrton, Esq. 

The Epistles of St. Paul, with the usual prologues; the Acts, Catholic Epistles and Apocalypse, all without pro- 
logues; in the later version. It begins with Rom. vii. 24, and ends in Apoc. xxii. 12; the remaining verses of the 
chapter are however written on the next fly-leaf, in a hand of the xvi. cent. 


13. Harl. 984. Vellum, in small 4°., ff. 73, written probably before 1450; the lacune have been 
partially supplied in the sixteenth century; imperfect both at the beginning and the end; 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


2 


ws) 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. “xii 


on the first leaf is written “Thomas Lower,” and on the reverse, “4 of Oct. 1662, bought of 
Mr. Jones in litle britton.” 


The Gospel of St. Matthew, in the later version ; beginning with the concluding lines of the prologue, and endiug 
in c. xxviii. 16. The parts supplied are iv. tg—v. 13; xxiv. 15—30; xxvi. 4155. 


. Harl. 1212. Vellum, in 4°. ff. 285, written about 1420. It belonged towards the close of the 


xvit, century to Mr. Richard Smith, of the Poultry Comptcr, and afterwards to Major John 
Mould, of whom it was purchased by Lord Oxford. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. after 
the use of Salisbury, and at the end is transcribed, in the hand of Mr. Smith, the Epistle to the Laodiceans, which 
is not complete. 

Harl. 1666. Vellum, small 4°., ff. 111, written in the earlier part of the xv. century ; imperfect 
at the end. It belonged to Archbishop Parker, and subsequently to Mr. Agarde of ‘London, and 
when in-his possession furnished the extracts in Ms. James No. 3, in the Bodleian Library. It 
was afterwards No. 90 of Henry Worsley’s collection, and is wrongly described in the Catalogi 
librorum Mss. Anglia, fol. 1697, as a copy of Wycliffe’s Wicket. 

The General Prologue prefixed to the Old Testament, in the later version. It ends in the xv. chapter with the 
words “ manye other synnes and.” 

Harl. 1896. Vellum, small folio, ff. 110, written about 1450, or later; purchased by Lord 
Oxford of Humphrey Wanley. On the fly-leaves occurs twice the name “ Henry Spelman,” in a 
hand of the xvi. cent. 

The Psalter, in Latin and English, verse by verse, the Latin in red letters; the English in the more recent version. 
—The following Canticles in like manner, in Latin and English, 1. Confitebor ; 2. Ego dizi; 3. Exultavit ; 4. Can- 
temus Domino; 5. Domine, audivi; 6. Audite, celi; 7. Benedicite; 8. Te Deum; 9. Magnificat ; 10. Benedictus ; 
11. Nunc dimittis ; 12. Quicungue vult. 

Harl. 2249. Vellum, small folio, ff 173, 2 cols., written perhaps about 1420; in the margin of 
fol. 83> occurs the name “ Robert Yate ;”’ defective at both extremes, written by the same hand 
as the Addl. Ms. 11,858, and it may have origimally formed part of the same volume. 

The books of the Old Testament from Joshua to Psalms inclusive, in the more recent version. It begins in Joshua 
xix. 19, and ends in Psalm exliv. 14. 

Harl. 2309. Vellum, in small 4°., ff. 107, 2 cols., written about 1420; bought by Lord Oxford 
of Mr. Bagford ; it previously, im the sixteenth century, belonged to one Richard Dychar. 

The four Gospels in the later version, with the usual prologues. It is defective from Mt. i. 20 to viii. 26, and 
from Jobn xx. 28. ; 

Harl. 3903.. Thin vellum, 8°., ff. 64, written about the middle of the xv. century. At the end of 
Job, in a hand apparently of the original scribe, “The priis of this book is vj. s. and viij. a.” 


The books of Job and Tobit, in the later version. 


Harl. 4027. Vellum, in large 4°., ff. 186, 2 cols.; written probably as early as 1420; much 
stained in parts, and a leaf is wanting in the iv. and v. chapters of Acts. In 1678 it belonged 
to Thomas Penson, Esq. - 

The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. At the end is added a Table of 
the epistles and gospels for the Sundays and ferials of the whole year, in Latin; and, after two blank pages, a similar 
Table for the Saints’ days. 

Harl. 4890. In thin folio, vellum, ff. ¢3, 2 cols., written about 1420. 

The New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prolognes. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc., after 
the use of Salisbury. 

Harl. 5017. Stout vellum, large folio, 2 cols., ff. 117, written by the same hand with Old R. L. 
1 C. 1x. of which copy it originally formed a part. On the fly leaf, in a hand of about the year 
1720, is the name “ Rob. Keck.” 


The books of Maccabees, and those of the New Testament in the later version; the New Testament has the usual 
prologues. ‘The margin contains numerous glosses, chiefly from Lyra, many of which have been found in no other 
Ms., and the greater part only in this, and in Ms. New Coll. Oxford, No. 67. This is the copy from which, when 
in the possession of Robert Keck, Esq. of the Inner Temple, the Rev. John Russell proposed to print the New 
Testament of his intended edition. 


. Harl. 5767. Vellum, in 16°., ff. 113, 2 cols, written after 1450; presented to Lord Oxford by 


Mr. Oldisworth. 
The Gospels of St. Luke aud St. John, with the usual prologues, in the later version. 


VOL. 1- g 


xii LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


24, Harl. 5768. On thin vellum, in 16°., ff. 84, written before the middle of the xv. century. It 
belonged in the xvis. century to Abraham Olney, by whom it was given to William Eyres, who 
bestowed it on Richard Gipps. 

The Catholic Epistles and the Apocalypse; without prologues, rubrics or titles. 


25. Harl. 6333. Vellum, thick 4°., 2 cols., ff. 365, written about 1430; in 1581 it belonged to Henry 
Flycke. It contains :— 

1. A reule that tellith in whiche chapitres of the bible 3e may fynde the lessouns, pistlis and gospels, that ben 
red in the chirche after the vsse of Salisburi.” fol.1.—2. A prolog upon the gospel of Mathew,” taken out of 
Wycliffe’s prologue to his Commentary on Matthew ; beg. ‘ Seynt Austyn seith’’; (printed from this Ms. Gen. 
Prol. p. 443 and also privately by the Rev. Dr. J.T. Barrett, from a Ms. belonging afterwards to H.R.H. the Duke 
of Sussex). fol. 18.—3. Another “ prolog,” beg. “ Oure lord Jhesu Crist—mekenes and pacience and charite,” 
(printed also by Dr. Barrett, in whose Ms. some few lines are added beyond those found in this copy.) fol. 20.— 
4. The usual prologues to the four Gospels, in the later version. fol. 21>.—5. Wycliffe’s translation of Clement of 
Lanthony’s Monotessaron, with its prologue, and table of contents. fol.23—6. A Kalendar, with the Epistles and 
Gospels for Saints’ days marked in it. fol. 139.—7. The longer prologue to the Epistle to the Romans. fol. 145.— 
8. The Epistles of St. Paul, the Acts, Catholic Epistles, and the Apocalypse, in the later version, with the usual 
prologues. fol.147.—9. The Epistle to the Laodiceans, with a prologue. fol. 297.—10. Certain gospels read in the 
church, which are not to be found in Clement of Lanthony’s Monotessaron in any one place; these are in the later 
version. fol. 297 >.—11. “The lessouns and pistlis of the oolde lawe, that ben red in the chirche in al the jeer, after the 
vss of Salisbiri,”’ and “‘othere lessouns of the oolde lawe, that ben not red after the vsse of Salisburi’’; these lessons 
agree partly with the old, and partly with the recent version. fol. 307.—12. A list of the books of the Bible, including 
the Epistle to the Laodiceans, with the chapters comprised in each. fol. 364. 


26. Lansdowne 407. Paper and vellum intermixed, small folio, 2 cols., ff. 135, written after 1450. 
The following names occur, John Jackson; Alderman Dane, Frydaie Streete; and Thomas 
Turnere. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. It is defective in the Apocalypse, from i. 1. 
to vi. 6, and from xii. 2, to the end. At the commencement of the volume is, 1. A Table of the lessons, etc.; 2. A 
short harmony of the Gospels, in Latin; and 3. A Table of the principal commentators on each book of Scripture ; 
also in Latin. 

27. Lansdowne 454. ‘Vellum, large folio, 2 cols., written perhaps about 1420; on one of the fly 
leaves at the commencement is the following note, “This old copy of Wiccleve’s Bible I pur- 
chased out of the Library of Sir Joseph Jekyl. It formerly belonged to Lord Somers. This is 
the finest copy I ever knew exposed to sale. James West, February 27, 1738-9.” On the recto 
of the last leaf, m Roman capitals, in a hand of the xvir. century, ELSBETH. R. And a little 
below, within a scroll, the initials E. R. From the Ms. catalogue of Lord Somers’ Library 
(Harl. 71491), where the copy belonging to his lordship is described as Wycliffe’s Bible, in 2 vols., 
as well as from Sir Joseph Jekyll’s sale catalogue (lot 72), im which the same description is found, 
it would seem as if there had been at that time a second volume of this Ms. 

The books of the Old Testament from Genesis to Psalms inclusive, in the later version; with a few short marginal 
glosses. 

28. Lansdowne 455. Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., ff. 154, written not later than 1420; the last leaf 
supplied upon paper, at the end of the xvi. century, seemingly by Richard Smith of the Poultry 
Compter. It contains :— 


1. A series of lessons from the Old Testament, extending from Advent to Trinity Sunday, and comprising, to- 
gether with some other passages of Scripture from the same books, Is. i—ix. 8; Gen. i. ii. vi—viii. 9; xii—xy. 2; 
XXVII—Xxx. 40; xxxviii—xli. 25; Exod. i—iii.; Jerem. i—viii. 22, and Lam. i—iii. 27; all in the later version, fol. 2. 
—2. “The lessouns and pistlis of the oolde lawe, that ben rad in the chirch bi al the 3eer”; sometimes in the later, 
sometimes in the earlier version, and that with such irregularity, that successive lessons taken from the same chapter 
are in different versions. fol. 18.—3. A tract on contemplative life and the love of God, beg. “In ech synful man or 
woman” ; the latter part in a later hand. fol. 34.—4. A tract hy Richard Rolle, “of the amendinge of mannes lijf, 
other of reule of lyuynge,” in 12 chapters. fol. 44.—5. A Kalendar, in Latin. fol. 49.—6. A table “to fynde the 
lessouns, pistlis and gospels, after the vss of Salisberi.”’ fol. 50..—7. A short synopsis of the books of the Bible, and 
a few chronological notes. fol. 58.—8. The books of the New Testament, in the more recent version, with the usual 
prologues; two to the Epistle to Romans. The Ms. offers not unfrequently peculiar readings, and has been corrected 
throughout by a second, but nearly contemporary scribe. The supplied leaf at the end contains Apoc. xxi. 15 to 
the end. 


29. Arundel 104. Stout vellum, in two volumes, folio, 2 cols., ff. 379 and 425; written probably in 
the middle of the xv. century. On the last leaf is this note, “ Henricus Saville, filius Henrici 
Saville de Blatheroide et Franciscee vxoris ejus, natus fuit die Veneris, videlecit, vicesimo die 
mensis Octobris, in hora quinta post meridiem ejusdem diei, in anno Domini millesimo quin- 
genticesimo (sic) sexagesimo octauo; et die dominica tunc proxima sequen’ baptisatus fuit in 


30. 


al. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. xiii 


ecclesia parochiali de Hallifaxie, Johanne Lacyi de Brearley ct Thoma Savile de Copley armigeris 
existen’ compatribus cius, ac etiam Margareta Waterhous, vxore Gregorii Waterhous, vna filiarum 
Nicholai Tempest, armigeri existen’ comatree (sic) illius.” On the blank verso facing St. Matthew’s 
Gospel is pasted a finely illuminated capital B, cut out from a Psalter of the early part of the 
xIv, century; and on the side margin is painted a shield, with the arms of England, surmounted 
by a coronet or crown, executed probably in the xvr. century. Other capitals, apparently from 
the same Psalter, have been pasted upon the margins of the Psalms, one of which still remains. 
The initial letter to St. Matthew, which contains a winged figure symbolically representing the 
four Evangelists, is in a better style than the other ornaments. 

‘Phe books of the Old and New Testament, in the later version. The Ms. has prologues to Isaiah and Jeremiah, 
and to the books of the New Testament, where commonly found. It is defective from Gen. xlii. 11, to xliv. 25; 
1 Paral. xvi. 39, to xviii. 10. Its readings have a singular and almost uniform accordance with those of Badl. 296, 
and Eman. Coll. 1.1.6. Prefixed is a Table to find the lessons, etc. at mass; and subjoined is a list of the books 
of the New Testament. ; 

Arundel 254 (formerly 245). Vellum, 8°., ff. 135, written probably about 1400; defective at the 
end. It contains :-— 

1, A list of the books of Scripture, in Latin, imperfect. fol. 1.—2. Wycliffe’s Translation of Clement of Lanthony’s 
Harmony, or Monotessaron, with the usual prologue, and the two prologues printed by Dr. Barrett, the former of 
which has in this Ms. an additional paragraph at the commencement, beg. ‘‘ In the beginning of holy chirche it was 
forbodyn that eny man schulde speke—as oen of the puple;” and the latter has been printed from this Ms. in the 
preceding Preface, p. xiv.; also a Table of the gospels read in the church throughout the year, adapted to the Mono- 
tessaron. fol. 2.3. The Catholic Epistles, with the prologue, in the earlier version. fol. 86>.—4. The lessons from 
the Old Testament, after the use of Salisbury, in the earlier version, imperfect, ending with the epistle on St. Mat- 
thew’s eve. fol. ro4. 

Burney 30. Very small 4°., vellum, pp. 208; contains three Mss.; written probably in the middle 
of the xv. century. It formerly belonged to John Price, rector of Orleston and vicar of Halling, 
1719—1730; afterwards to the Rev. John Brand. 


The Gospel of St. John, in the later version; the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the same version. 


Egerton 617, 618. Vellum, 2 vols., which originally formed only one, in large folio, 2 cols., 
written about 1420; at the top of the second leaf, inserted in the border, arc the arms of Hum- 
phrey, duke of Gloucester, viz. quarterly, France semée and England, surrounded by a bordure 
argent; which arms are erroncously stated by Dr. Adam Clarke to belong to Thomas of Wood- 
stock. The Ms. was purchased by Dr. Clarke at the sale of Dr. Fell, in 1795, and previously, 
according to Dr. Clarke, it belonged to Dr. J. Hunter. 

The books of the Old Testament from Proverbs to 11 Macc., and those of the New Testament, in the early version, 
with the usual prologues where they are inserted; blank spaces being frequently left for them. Rubrics of the 
church lessons are inserted in the text of the New Testament. It is defective from 1 Cor. i.1 to iii.9; from ‘Titus i. 1 
to iii. 13, and from 1 Joh. vy. 9 to Jude 3. Prefixed is a table of the books contained in the Ms.; and at the end, 
a “ Kalendere to knowe alle the gospels and pistlis of the 3eer, whan thei ben radde after Salysburye vse.” In the 
part of the Kalendar called the proper sanctorum, are introduced some remarks directed against the application of the 
lessons to the saints of the Romish cburch. 

Egerton 1165. Vellum, small 4°., ff. 274, 2 cols., written about 1430. It is defective in many 
places ; the name John Harefinch, and date 1708, occur in several parts. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. after 
the use of Salisbury. And at the end of the volume, a large Table of the matters in the several chapters of each book, 
which is imperfect, ending in cap. xii. of the Apocalypse. 

Egerton 1171. Thin vellum, 12°., 2 cols., ff. 356, written about 1430. It belonged to Mr. Heber, 
who bought it at Singer’s sale in 1818, lot 345; it previously was the property of Jackson, 1794, 
lot 325; then of Edwards, the bookseller, at whose sale in 1815 it was sold to Mr. Singer, lot 
819; and in 1728 it belonged to David Jennings, who bought it of Mr. Boote of Wantage. 
Before this it was in the possession of Hen. Jeffreys, who purchased it from Mr. Atkins of 
Worcester. It contains :-— 

1. A Kalendar.—2. A Table of lessons,.epistles and gospels, “aftir the vss of Salisberi.’—3. The books of the 
New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues.—Then 4. in a rather larger, but contemporary hand, 
“the lessouns and pistlis of the olde lawe, that ben rad in the chirche in al the eer, after the vss of Salisburi.””—To 
which are annexed, s. ‘‘ Othere lessouns of the Olde Testament, that ben not rad after the vss of Salisburi.” All in 
the later version. 

Additional 58g0-—5902. Thirteen 4°. volumes, containing the transcript of the Old and New 
Testament, in the later Wycliffite version, made by or under the dircction of the Rey. John 


g2 


xliv LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Russell, Fellow of Merton College, for his projected edition, of which he printed a prospectus, 
dated August 1, 1719. 


Prefixed to vol. 1. (3890) is the following title, “The Holi Byble, translated into English by John Wickliff, S.T. P., 
about the year 1380; carefully copied from different Mss. in Oxford, afterwards collated with the Mss. in the King’s 
and Cotton Libraries, by John Casley. Finally transcribed for the press under the direction of John Russell of 
Merton College, Oxford, 1721.”—This is followed by the rough draft of a few paragraphs of an intended Preface, 
and by five pages of the General Prologue, taken from the Bodl. Ms. 277; after which is a copy of the Kalendar, 
or Rule of the Lessons, etc. from the Queen’s Coll. Ms. 23, collated with the Corpus Coll. Ms. 1471.—Then follows 
the text of the Old Testament, transcribed from the Lincoln Coll. Ms., which extends through Mss. 5890—5899 
inclusive, with occasional readings in the margin from Mss. St. John’s, Oxford, Queen’s, and Cotton Claud. E II., 
in the books of Genesis, Exodus and Leviticus ; and also with the marginal glosses of Lyra, transcribed from the 
last-mentioned Ms. as far as the book of Daniel. In Ms. 5895 the 111 Esdras is added from Bodl. 277. Some of 
the books, as Joshua—1 Kings, and part of 1 Mace., are compared with the Vulgate and the English authorised 
version, and the readings noticed, with a very few critical notes—In Mss. 5900 and 5go1 is the transcript of the 
New Testament with some of the usual prologues, taken from Ms. Harl. 5017, and the Epistle to the Laodiceans, 
from Ms. Lambeth 369.—Throughout the early chapters of Matthew are some critical notes, founded on a compa- 
rison with the Greek, the Vulgate, and the authorised version, which shew the plan on which it was intended to edit 
the work, but they are of little value. The marginal glosses are given from Har]. 5017.—After the Apocalypse, there 
follow in s901 :—1. Wycliffe’s Commentary on the Apocalypse, with the prologue, apparently from a Ms, in Norwich 
Library, fol. 231.2. Proverbs, etc. from the Old Testament, fol. 315.—3. Prophecy of St. Hildegarde, fol. 324.— 
4. “The seuene wordes that Crist spake on the crosse,” fol. 326°.—5. ‘‘ The ten comaundementis,” with a short com- 
ment, fol. 327°.—6. Seven four-line stanzas, beg. “ God that alle myghtes may, in heuen and erthe thi wille is don,” 
fol. 329°. And in Ms. 3902, 7. Translation of the Athanasian Creed, with a comment, copied from Bodl. Arch. 100 
and collated with Bodl. Th. W. 3, 5, and Arch. B. 96, fol. 1.—8. Appointment of John de Wyclyue to be Custos of, 
Cant. Hall, 5 id. Dec. 1365, from archbishop Islip’s register, fol. 35.—9. “ Protestatio Revi. Doctoris,” beg. “ Pro- 
testor publice, nt sepe alias,” transcribed from Ms. Selden Arch. B. ro, fol. 38.—10. Portions of the transcript of the 
Old and New Testament, fol. 46.—11. A computation of the expense of printing the intended edition, fol. 105°. 


36. Additional 10,046. Vellum, in 16°., ff. 132, 2 cols., written about the year 1430. It contains the 
book-plate of Joseph Ames of Norfolk (lot 826 of his sale). It afterwards belonged to the 
Whiteknights’ collection, from which it was purchased (lot 2813) by Mr. Heber. 


It commences with this rubric, Here bigynneth a prologe on the Salmes of the Sauter, beg. “Greet abundaunce 
— loue of enemyes” (corresponding verbatim with that printed vol. i. pp. 39, 40, except that the paragraph 
“This book comprehendith loue of enemyes” is placed last instead of first); then the rubric, Ende prologe. 
Then follows the commencement of chap. xii. of the General Prologue, p. 43, “But it is to wite——— in heuene.” The 
book of Psalms, in the later version, with titles and the first verse of the Latin. The canticles, 1. Confitebor ; Ego 
dixi: Exultavit ; Cantemus Domino ; Domine, audivi; Audite, celi; all in the later version: 2. Benedicite, abbre- 
viated and in a different version, with the Gloria Patri and a versicle at the end; 3. Te Deum, beg. “‘ Thee, God, we 
preise; thee, Lord, we knowleche. Thee, endelees fadir, euery erthe worschipeth”; 4. Magnificat, printed by Lewis 
from this Ms. in Hist. of Translations, p. 343; 5. Benedictus and Nune dimittis, in a different version from either of 
those now printed ; 6. Quicunque vult, with an exposition, beg. “‘ It is seid comunli that ther ben thre credis,” and 
ending, “‘ teche it to men vndir hem.” 





37. Additional 10,047. Vellum, in small 4°., ff. 149, written late in the xv. century. The name 
“ William Thorold” occurs, in a hand apparently of the xvi. cent.: at a recent period it be- 
longed to John Towneley of Corney-house, Chiswick (lot 868 in his sale), and afterwards to 
Mr. Heber. 


The Psalms, from the first to the seventy-third inclusive, in the later version. The first verse of each Psalm in the 
vulgate Latin, is given at its commencement. 


38. Additional 10, 596. Vellum, small 4°., originally perhaps two Mss., both written about 1430. 
The latter part was written for “Matilda Hayle of Berkinge,” and it afterwards belonged to 
Mary Hastynges of the same place. On the upper margin of the first leaf, “ Iste liber pertinet 
Johanni Prston (?) 1577.” 

The first contains a hook called “The crafte of deyinge,” fol.1. The second contains—1. The book of Tobit, in 


the later version, fol.25; 2. Magnificat and Benedictus, both in the later version, fol. 47,6; 3. Meditations and 
prayers, fol. 49; 4. The history of Susanna, in the later version, fol. 77. 


39. Additional 11, 858. Vellum, small folio, ff. 118, 2 cols., written in an upright character, perhaps 
about 1420. It is by the same hand with the Harleian Ms. 2249, and orginally may have 
formed part of the same volume. The initials are not inserted. At the conclusion of the 
volume is this note: “ Liber Gulielmi Cartheri, Rectoris Wermoth Episcopi, 1547;” and at fol. 
19, in a hand of the xvi. cent., “Thomas Bate younger ;” aud at fol. 56>, in a later writing, 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. xlv 


“Mr. George Dynley.” It subsequently belonged to Booker, Warmslcy, and Haslewood, at 
whose sale it came into the hands of Dr. Butler bishop of Lichfield. 
The books of the New Testament, in the usual order, and as far as Luke xix. 13 in the earlier version, the 
remainder in the later; with the usual prologues, which are all of the later version. It has the four introductory 
verses to Luke, printed from this Ms., which are found only in one other copy, namely, New Coll. Oxford, No. 67. 
The longer prologue to the Romans is in a translation found only in this Ms., and is printed, vol. iv. p. 301. 
40. Additional 15,517. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. It is imperfect at the beginning 
and end, and has other lacune; it has also suffered from damp, and a leaf has been supplied in 
Luke, in the early part of the xvr. cent. 


The four Gospels, in the later version. It begins at Mt. x. 38 and ends at John xvi. 4. 


41. Additional 15, 580. Vellum, short folio, 2 cols., written before the close of the x1v. cent. 


The books of the Old Testament, from Proverbs to 11 Maccabees, and of the New Testament throughout, with the 
usual prologues, in the early version. They are preceded by 1. A Table of the church lessons, etc., the quotations 
in which are from the early version; and 2. A list of the books in the Old and New Testament. The rubrics of the 
lessons are written in the margin. It is defective from Ecclesiastes 1x.11 to Song of S. viii.1; Ecclesiasticus 
xxvi. 20 to xxix. 18, and from Acts xxiv. 5 to xxv. 26. 


Sion CoLieceE. 

42. Sion Coll. +2, formerly 18, (4082). Vellum, large folio, 2 cols., written about 1420. On the fly 
leaves are written several names in various hands of the xvi. and xvit. centuries, and on a leaf 
in 1 Esdras the name of “ Oliver Sent Jhon.” 

The hooks of.the Old Testament, in the later version, with the prefatory epistles of St. Jerome to Paulinus and 


Desiderins, and prologues to Isaiah and Barnch. It is defective from Judith xv. 1s to Esther ii.16; and from Job 
xlii. 14 to Psalm x. 2. 


48. Sion Coll. =, formerly 20, (4084). Vellum, small 4°., written about the middle of the xv. cent. ; 
on the covers are the royal arms, France and England quartered, within the garter. 


The New Testament, with the epistles and lessons of the old law, as read in the church, all in the later version. 


Asp. Tentson’s Lipraky. 
44, Tenison, 83. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written perhaps as late as 1450. It is mutilated at both ex- 


tremes, and in some other parts. ; 

The four books of Kings, the second book of Paralipomenon, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Wisdom, 
and Ecclesiasticus, in the later version. It commences with 1 Kings xxviii. s, and ends in Ecclus. xvi. 3. It is defective 
from 11 Paral. xx. 35 to xxii.g; from Prov. xix. 4 to Eccles. ii. 7; from Eccles. xii. 3 to Song of S. iv.5; from 
Song of S. viii. 5 to Wisd. i. 8; and from Wisd. xix. 13 to Ecelus. i. 12. 


WESTMINSTER. 


CoLiEciIaTe Cuurcu op St. PETER. 


45. Westm. 85. Vellum, small 12°., written about 1450; given by the Duchess of Richmond to 
Henry Earl of Arundel, and by him in Sept. 1576 to Richard Wiclif. It was either 85 or 86 of 
the Mss. described as belonging to the Dean and Chapter, in Bernard’s Catalogi Mss. Anglie, 1697. 

The New Testament, of the later version, with a Table of lessons prefixed, and with the usual prolognes. 


LAMBETH. 
ARCHIEPISCOPAL Liprary. 

46. Lamb. 25. Vellum, large folio, written about the year 1400. On a fly leaf is pasted a paper 
containing notes of the christenings of the children of “John Tey, squier, and Constans, his 
wief,” 1543—1557, with the names of their sponsors, both at baptism aud confirmation. This is 
probably the copy which formerly belonged to Bishop Bonner. 


The books of the Old and New Testament; the Pentateuch in the earlier version, the remainder in the later 
version. The only prologues of the Old Testament are those prefixed to Genesis, Isaiah, and Baruch. In the latter 
part of the Old Testament it has numerous marginal glosses. 


47. Lamb. 369. Vellum, 4°., ff. 252, 2 cols., written about 1450. In the xv1. century it belonged to 
Wyllyam Hoskyn. 


The New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues, and the Epistle to the Laodiceans. At the end, 
the lessons, etc. of the old law, on three pages only, the volume being imperfect ; these lessons are in the later version. 


xlvi LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


48, Lamb, 532. Vellum, 8°., ff. 431, 2 cols., wntten about 1450. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, of the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. after the 
use of Salisbury. After the Apocalypse, fol. 421, “The lessouns and pistlis of the olde lawe that ben rad in the 
chirche in al the 3eer, aftir the vss of Salisburi,” and fol. 429, ‘“othere lessouns of the oolde lawe, that ben not rad 
aftir the vss of Salisburi.”” On the last leaf, the names of the books in the Bible, with the numbers of chapters in 
each, 

49, Lamb. 547. Very thin vellum, 12°., 2 cols., written about 1450; imperfect at the beginning. 

The Gospels and Catholic Epistles, in the later version, with the usual prologues. It begins in Mt. i. 1, wanting 
the prologue. After the Epistle of Jude follows “the table of the newe lawe,” or “the maters of the gospels,” that 
is, their contents; ending imperfectly in John xvii. 

50. Lamb. 1033. Vellum, 4°., 2 vols., written probably about 1430; mutilated at the beginning and 
end, and in several other places ; in parts much soiled. 

The books of the Old Testament, from 11 Paral. ii. 7 to Baruch inclusive, in the later version, with the prologues to 
Isaiah and Baruch. The textual glosses are numerous and sometimes peculiar ; it has also occasional glosses in the 
margin. On Is. ciii. 17 is a Latin note on the word gerfaucun, which supposes Wycliffe the author of the version, 
and terms him “ Latinitatis ignarus.”” The note is in a hand of about 1500. The following lacunz occur: 11 Paral. 
xx. 12 to xxi. 11; Judith iv. 13 to vi.6; Esther i.8 to iv.8; Job iv. 5 to ix. 17, and xx. 14 to xxvi.13; Ps. ix. 7 to 
xiii. 3, xe. 2 to cil. 14, and cix. 5 to exviii. 37; Prov. vi. 12 to Song of S. v.93; Is. xlix.20 to li.17; Bar. iii. 23 to 
vi. 42; and the Ms. ends in Bar. vi. 71. 

51. Lamb. 1150, 1151. Two volumes, vellum, small 4°., written about 1430. On the fly leaf of vol. i. 
the following memoranda: “George Hudson awe this booke”; “Tis boke was bowght of 
Wylliame Mathv, sum tyme parishe clearke of Sent Dunstones in the west of Londoune, by me 
John Wyttone, Cetz". and brodderer, & of the same paryshe, in ano dni 1554.—The wyche boke 
‘was extemed to be at that tyme thre vnderethe olde and more.” On the first folio, “ Hereditas 
mea providentia Dei. D.N. 25 Novembr. 1627.” This Ms. was formerly Askew’s, and sold at 
his auction in 1775, lot 321. It was presented to the Lambeth library by Edw. Jacob of 
Feversham, in 1786. 


The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the Latin version. Prefixed, in a different hand, is a Table of the 
lessons, ete. after the use of Salisbury. 


OXFORD. 


Bopieian Liprary. 


52. Laud 24, formerly C. 6, (658). Vellum, 12°. written about 1450. 
The Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark, of the later version, and with the usual prologues. 


53, Laud 25, formerly C.7, (659). Vellum, 12°., 2 cols., written about 1435. 


The four Gospels, in the later version, with the usual prologues. 


54, Laud 33, formerly C. 9, (661). Vellum, small 4°., written perhaps before 1400. It belonged to 
John Amerie, who bequeathed it to his wife Dorothy, by whom it was given in 1635, to Andrew 
Cook, by the hands (?) of John Wilson, of Maldon in Essex. 

The Epistles of Paul and the Catholic Epistles, in the later version, followed by Wycliffe’s Commentary on the 
Apocalypse. 

55. Laud 36, formerly C. 24, (676). Vellum, 8°., written about 1430; imperfect at the beginning— 
wanting a leaf. 

The four Gospels, in the later version, with the usual prologues, and a few marginal glosses. 


56. Laud 182, formerly D. 14, (781). Vellum, small 4°., written about 1420, imperfect at the 
beginning. 

Chapters selected from Gen., Exod., Deut., 1 Kings, 111 Kings, Job, Psalms, Dan., and 11 Mace. ; from Mt., Mk., 
Lk., the whole Gospel of John, 1 Cor., Hebr., and Deeds, 11 Pet., and the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse entire. 
Then another series of short extracts from the books both of the Old and New Testament; all apparently in the 
later version. 

57. Laud 507, formerly E. 6, (929). Vellum, small 4°, ff. 130, written m the earlier half of the 
xv. cent. It once belonged to “Joseph Maynard. Coll. Exon.,” and in 1574 to “Christopher 
Watson, Deiragirantus, xtat. sux 29.” 

The Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark, in the later version, with the usual prologues. 


38. Laud 361, formerly I. 6, (1346). Vellum, 4°., written perhaps about 1420. 


The New Testament, in the later version, and with the usual prologues. At the end are the lessons and epistles of 
the old law, after the use of Salisbury. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. xlvii 


59. Bodl. 183, (2084). Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., ff. 284, probably written aftcr 1450; some leaves 
are torn. 
A Table of the lessons, after the use of Salisbury. The books of the New Testament, with the usual prologues. 
Tobit, without a prologue, Judith, Esther, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, all 
with prologues except the last. The books both in the Old and New Testament are in the later version; the 
prologues in the Old Testament are of the earlier version, slightly altered. 


60. Bodl. 277, (2124). Vellum, in large thick folio, 2 cols., neatly written, with initials to the 
chapters, blue flourished with red, and to the books in colors and gold, branching into well exc- 
cuted borders, often of grotesque figures ; perhaps of the date of 1440; on the recto of the 
last leaf in a hand of the commencement of the xvi. century, Hic liber erat quodaé Hérici sexti, 
¢ postea donabat nr domui Cartusianoré: que Lidini cotigua est. 

The books of the Old and New Testament, in the later version, but in many parts much revised. It includes the 
111 book of Esdras, which of this version is found in this Ms. only, and is printed from it. The first chapter of the 
General Prologue is prefixed to Genesis. It has prologues to Isaiah and Baruch, and to the hooks of the New 
Testament, and a few short marginal glosses. The longer prologue to the Epistle to the Romans is given both in 
the early and the later version. The Ms. is defective from 111 Kings xxii. 11 to 1v Kings ii. 16. The lessons are 
noted by rubrics in the margin, with letters marking the beginning and end. 


61. Bodl. 296, (2467). Vellum, large folio, 2 cols., written about 1420. On the first fly leaf in a 
hand of xv1. Cent., “J. Herbert.” It was given to the library by Sir Thomas Herbert, Bart., 
in 1666. 
The books of the Old Testament, from Genesis to Psalms inclusive, without any prologues, in the later version. 
It ends in Psalm cxlviii. 8, the remainder having heen cut away. 


62. Bod. 531, (2249). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440. 
A Table to find the gospels, ete. after the use of Salisbury; the lessons from the Old Testament are given at 
length. Then the books of the New Testament, in the later translation, with the usual prologues. 


63. Bodl. 665, formerly Arch, B. 9, (2998). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430, bound in black 
silk, with silver clasps of the xv. century, on which are the letters IHS. and MM. 


A Table to find the lessons, epistles, and gospels. The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the 
usual prologues. ‘The lessons and epistles from the Old Testament. 


64. Bodl. 771, (2553). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1380—1390. 
Clement of Lanthony’s Monotessaron, translated by Wycliffe, with the usual prologue. Excerpts from the Epistles 
of St. Paul, the Catholic Epistles, and the Acts, followed by excerpts from the Old Testament. These passages 
appear to be in general accordance with the early version, but they present variations from it. 


65. Bodl. 959, (3093). Very stout vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written by several scribes. The first 
hand proceeds to the end of Exodus, and is followed by a thinner and smaller writing as far as 
Judges, chap. vii. 13. A third and fourth hand, in a larger letter, continues the text to Ecclus. 
chap. xlviii., where it is taken up by a fifth, which goes on to the end, and which is the same with 
a part of the Douce Ms. 369. The text bears throughout marks of erasures and corrections ; 
and to the end of chap. xxviii. of Genesis it has heen retraced with darker ink by a considerably 
later hand. The initials are in red, but with little or no ornament ; written certainly before 1390. 
On the verso of the last fly leaf, in a hand coeval with the Ms. this note, “ that thing that 3e spac 
of, touchinge Sauages do;ter wole not 3it be.” The volume is handsomely bound in green velvet 
with brass bosses and clasps, and appears to have been given to the library in 1602 by .... 
Springham. 

The books of the Old Testament, from Genesis to Baruch iii. 20, ending abruptly with the words “othere men in 
the place of hem risen. The 3unge.’’ There is no gloss or note whatever by the original scribes throughout. It has 
prologues to Genesis, Joshua, 1 Paral., 11 Paral., 1 Esdr., Tobit, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Eccles., Wisdom, 
Ecclus., Isaiah, and Baruch. It is defective from the end of Tobit to Judith iv. 16. Each scribe has peculiarities of 
orthography ; the first writes preterites, seey3, fleey3; participles often with the prefix, as yschewid, yspoken, ytold, 
ydo, y3ofe; plurals, clothes, brydde, foule; ; the second, beginning with Leviticus, writes, Ait, hul, hully, gulty, hud 
for it, hill, hilly, guilty, hid; folle for full, folfulle for fulfil, fluys for fleece, opp for up, opon for upon, been for inf. be, 
3erstynday for yesterday, here for her, heo and sheo frequently for she, hanfol for handful, 3ut for yet, prude for pride, 
sulle for sell, yeeth for goes; the third continuing to the end of 11 Paral. has present participles in ande and ende, 
neuerthelater and neuerlater for nevertheless ; beforn, besiden, besondyn, abowtyn, behynden ; sefne for seven, 3istay for 
yesterday, heryn for theirs ; and writes stroif, aboid, smoit, coistis ; a fourth hand writes participles in a, thus, 3yuyn, 
comyn, infinitives, hiexyn, demyn ; betwen for between, ther for their. 

There is no doubt that this Ms. is the original copy of the translator, from which the other copies were made. 
In numerous instances the renderings have been changed durjng the progress of the sentence; sometimes an erasure 


xl viii LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


has been made, as soon as the word was written, or even before it was completed, and another expression has been 
substituted’; and on the recto of the last fly leaf a few words occur, which have been evidently set down by the trans- 
lator for his guidance, when occasion should arrive for the like again. 


66. Bodl. 554, (2326). Vellum, 4to., written about 1400. 

The Psalter, in the more recent version, with very numerous marginal glosses from Austin and Lyra. Of these 
glosses that on the word hooli Ps, Ixxxv. 2, may serve as an example, “that is, innocent anentis Saul. Lire here. Y am 
hooli, Cristis bodi, that is cristen puple, seith verili, Y am hooli, for it hath take grace of baptym and remissioun 
of synnes, sithen alle Cristen men cristenyd in Crist ben clothid in Crist. If thei seyn that thei be not hooli, thei doon 
wrong to the heed. The heed aloon is hooli and halewith, and nedith noon halewing,” Austin here. At the end the 
following canticles in English: 1.The prayer of Manasses; 2. Confitebor; 5. Ego dizi; 4. Exultavit; 5. Cantemus 
Domino ; 6. Domine, audivi; 7. Audite, celi; 8. Benedicite; Benedictus; 10. Magnificat ; 11. Nunc dimittis. The 
Te Deum has been intended to follow, but the scribe has only written the title in ruhric. 


67. Bodl. 979, formerly Arch. B. 63 (3052).+ Thin vellum, 12°., 2 cols., written about 1440. It seems 
to have belonged to W. Waad, whose name is on the fly leaf. 
The New Testament, in the later translation, with the usual prologues. Imperfect from the middle of John xx. 
to Romans i. 


68. Selden 49, (3437). Vellum, very small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440. It formerly belonged to 
Thomas Stanley of Gray’s-Inn. 
The four Gospels, in the later version, with the usnal prologues. Prefixed is a Kalendar, and a Table of 
lessons, etc. 


69. Selden 51, (3439). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440. 
The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the prologues as usual. Prefixed is, 1. A Table of 
matters or contents of the chapters of the several books; 2. A Kalendar, with a Table of the lessons, etc. ; and sub- 
joined are the lessons and epistles read in the church at mass, out of the Old Testament. 


70. E. Mus. 110, (3552). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. The names “ Robert Parsons” and 
“J. Herbert” occur ; presented to the library in 1666 by Sir Thomas Herbert, Bart. 


The books of the New Testament, in the later version, and with the ordinary prologues. Prefixed is a Table of - 
matters or contents of the chapters ; the same as in Selden 51. 


71. Fairfax 2, (3882). Vellum, in thick and large folio, 2 cols., written in 1408, as appears by this 
note at the end of the Apocalypse: “The eer of the lord m.cce & vuj. this book was endid ;” 
the fourth c having been erased. : 

The Old and New Testament, in the more recent version, but with prologues in the Old Testament of the earlier 
version; though sometimes a little altered, particularly in the order of the words. The prologue to Isaiah, prefixed 
in this Ms. to Jeremiah, and that to Baruch, are however in the later version, and Wisdom has no prologue. There 
are many marginal glosses, several of which are additions by one or other of two hands, which have corrected the 
errors of the first scribe. Throughout the volume the contents of the chapters are written as running titles on the 
upper margin; for example, Gen. ii. “The serpent bigilide Eue. The penaunce of the serpent. Of Eue and of 
Adam.” At the end of Ps. cl. this note, “The first salm of the Canticles was the herijng to the Lord of the puple 
of Israel, that was residue of the caitiftee.”” Then the Latin titles of the several Canticles of the church, and the 
places of Scripture in which they are severally to be found. Underneath, “Se now Quicunque vulé in Englizssh, the 
wiche Athanasy, a doctor of Greke, made, ‘ Who euere wole be saaf. he mai not be saaf.’” On the recto of the 
next leaf, “the Kalender of alle the lessons, pistels and gospels of al the 3eer aftir the vse of Salisberi.” -The ortho- 
graphy is peculiar; bisgge for bie; lisgye for lie; iseching for itching ; perisshe for perish; fleissshis for fleshes ; 
quy3sskuns for cuskions ; angwi3ss for anguish ; biheulde for beheld ; leose for lese ; 3ife for give ; 30fe for given. It 
has also some peculiar readings, as knaue child, Lev. xii. 7, where all other copies read male child. At the end of 
the Apocalypse is a Table or summary of matters in the New Testament. 





72. Fairfax 11, (3891). Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1450. It belonged to “ W. Sant- 
clair of Roislin, Knecht,”? then to “D. Sinclair of Roisling.” Sir Thomas Fairfax has written 
his name at the beginning, adding “ Bought in Scotland.” 

The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. Prefixed is a Kalendar, and 
a Table of lessons, etc. after the use of Salisbury. 

73. Fairfax 21, (3901). Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1450. 

The Epistles of St. Paul, Acts, Catholic Epistles and Apocalypse, with the usual prologues, in the later version. 
Prefixed is a Table of the epistles, after the use of Salisbury. This volume is erroneously described in Bernard’s 
Catalogi Mss. Anglie, fol. 1697. 

74. Hatton 111, (4050). {Vellum, thick 16°, the greater part written before 1400; on the binding are 
impressed the royal arms, temp. James I.; damaged at each extremity. It contains :— 

Several Psalms or extracts from them, prefaced by ‘“ Lord God, vouche saf to take up these psalmes that ben 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. xlix 


writen,” etc. The first commences ‘‘ Lord, perceyue my wordis with eren.” fol. 1.—Then extracts and sentences 
from the Old Testament, beginning, ‘“‘ The wraththe of God forsothe is turned in to mercy,” 11 Mace. viii. 5. fol. 9. 
Neither the Psalms nor sentences appear to be in either of the printed versions.—A Tahle of lessons, fol .11..b.— 
The four Gospels, Catholic Epistles and Apocalypse, in the earlier version, without prologues.—At the end, a Table of 
matters or contents. This occupies nine pages, but ends imperfect in Lk. xx. 


75. Junius 29, (5141). Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1430; on the covers are stamped 
the initials E. G.; a leaf at the end is supplied by a later hand. 


The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. Prefixed is a Table of lessons, 
etc. but imperfect. 


76. Dugdale 46, (6534). Thick vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1400. On the top of the first 
leaf, “'T. Fairfax, ex dono patris H. F. 1619.” 


The Epistles of St. Paul, with the usual prologues, and two to the Epistle to Romans. The Ms. is of the later 
version. On one of the fly leaves, in a hand of the xvii. cent. is the Pater Noster and Creed, in English. 


77. Rawlinson C. 237, 238, (544). Vellum, 2 vols. 12°., 2 cols., written about 1450. On the first 
folio is the name of the Earl of “ Stamford, 1693.” 


The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues; the Epistle to the Romans has 
the two prologues. It is preceded by a Kalendar. 


78. Rawlinson C. 257. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., ff. 209, written about 1430. It seems to have once be- 
longed to Thomas Hearne; defective at the beginning. At Thomas Rawlinson’s sale, in March, 
1733-4, it formed lot 821, and was bought there by D'. Rawlinson. 


The books of the New Testament, in the later version, including the Epistle to the Laodiceans. It has the usual 
prologues, and to the Romans, two. It commences in Mt. ii. 3. 


79. Rawlinson C. 258, (615). Stout vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1400. On a slip inserted, in 
Rawlinson’s hand, “ Purvey’s New Testament, numb. 2, 4°. ninth day’s sale.” (Lot 702 of 
Thomas Rawlinson’s sale, 1733.) At the end of the Gospel of John, in a hand nearly, if not 
quite contemporary, “‘Iste liber constat fratri Johanni Lacy, ordinis predicatorum reclus’ Noui 
castri super Tynam.” A portrait of this John Lacy while in prison, with the date 1420, occurs 
in a Ms. of St. John’s College, Oxford, No. 94. 

The books of the New Testament, in the following order; the four Gospels, Acts, Catholic Epistles ,Epistles of St. 
Paul and Apocalypse, in the early version, without prologues. 


80. Rawlinson C. 259, (508). Vellum, in small 4°., 2 cols., ff. 252, written perhaps about 1430; on the 
. first fly leaf, in Hearne’s hand, “ Suum euiq. Tho. Hearne, Oct. 9, 1719. I have made mention 
of this Ms, in my Preface to Camden’s Eliz. (Oxon. 1717, p.123.) It then belong’d to Edw. 
Etterick, Esq., Fellow of New College. I purchas’d it since his death ;” and on the second fly 
leaf, “The New Testament, in old English, commonly called Wicliff’s Translation,” etc. On the 
verso of this leaf is written “ Scriptus hic liber circa A. D. 1370, nam que notantur paginis a & 
k videntur tum recentia ;” beneath, in the hand of Thomas Baker, “ Scriptum fuisse hune librum 
exploratum habeo, A. D. 1345 ;” and lower, “Sed amicus noster egregie fallitur, aut ego fallor.”’ 
It is of this copy Lewis speaks, Hist. of Translations of the Bible, p. 26 n. ed. 1820. Ina Ka- 
lendar prefixed, which is very neatly written with rubricated letters, etc. is noted by the same ori- 
ginal hand, on the lower margin of fol.1, Anno dni m.ccc.lxi in festo sct Mauri abbatis erat ventus 
validus ; and again, on lower margin of fol. 5, Anno dni mecexlvitj in festo sci Michaelis incipiebat 
prima pestilencia Lond. 

The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. There are two prologues to the 
Romans, of which the first is of the earlier version. Then “ the lessouns and pistlis of the oolde lawe, that ben rad in 
the chirche bi al the 3eer,”” which seem to be of the later version. On the fly leaves at the end are various historical 
memoranda, in the years 1531, 1553, 1554, and 1558. 


81. Rawlinson C. 752, (554). Thin vellum, 12°., 2 cols., xv. cent. In 1609 it belonged to Richard 
Staunton, and afterwards to Rob. Nash, M.A. of Wadham College ; on the verso of the last folio is 


also this note “Constat iste liber dno Rogero Wattun cleric et p’sbete.. a°. diii m®. qgisim...o et 
Regis Henrici octaui... .” 

The four Gospels, with the ordinary prologues ; the Apocalypse without a prologue; thea, in another but coeval 
hand, the Epistle of Jude; all in the later version. After the Gospels, a blank folio, on part of which and of the 
preceding column a second hand has written an exhortation relative to baptism, beginning “‘ Dere cristen soulis, I 
praie 300 with al mekenesse and charite ——-— seith in the gospel.” 


VOL. I. h 


i LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


82. Rawlinson C. 883, (835). Vellum, 4°., ff. 48, of the xv. cent. 
The Gospel of Matthew, with the usual prologue; in the later version. 


83. Gough, Eccl. Top. 5. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., of the early part of the xv. cent. On the verso of the 
last leaf but one is a copy of the will of Robert Thoft of St. Botulph, m Latin, dat. 11 Apr. 1415 ; 
inside the cover, in a hand of xvi. cent. “ W. Th. ;”’ on the top of the second leaf, “ Jane Turner;” 
on the verso of the last leaf but two, a monogram seemingly intended for “A.T.” with the date 
1563, and below “ Docter Turner, Dean of Welles ;” on the recto and verso of last leaf “ William 
Mylett est nomen meum. Wennyfred Turner.” The Ms. subsequently belonged to Dr. Daniel 
Waterland and to the Rev. John Lewis, who published from it the four Gospels of his edition in 
1731. It was purchased of his executors by Ebenezer Mussell, subsequent to whose sale in 
1766 it became the property of Wiliam Herhert. 

The books of the New Testament, of the later version, with the usual prologues. Then a Table of “the pistlis and 


gospels of the Newe Testament ;” and a list of the books contained in it. The quotations in the table appear to be 
made from the earlier translation. 


84. Douce 36. Vellum, 12°., 2 cols., written about 1440. On the fly leaf “ Hen. Jeffreyes.” In 1728 
it belonged to Jo. Ames; it was bought at his sale in 1760 (lot 825) by Mr. Tutet, at whose sale 
in 1786 (lot 500) it was purchased by Gustavus Brander. 

The book of Tobit, in the later version. 


85. Douce 240. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440. On the fly leaves at the end, “Tho- 
mas Peuerel,” with his arms tricked, early xvi. cent.; “Jas. Peuerell ;” ‘“ Lucas Campion.” 
It has the book-plate of the Rev. Fred. Ekins ; and it wants a leaf at the beginning of Matthew, 
and between the end of John xxi. and Rom. i. near the end; much damaged in parts. 


The books of the New Testament, with the usual prologues, of the later version. At the end a Table to find the 
lessons, etc. 


86. Douce 265. Thin vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440. At the end of the Table of lessons is a 
note, that the mother of Robart Hornbe gave him this New Testament, 17 March (15)43.. It 
belonged to Thomas Rawlinson, afterwards to sir Peter Thompson, who bought it in 1733 at Raw- 
linson’s sale, lot 365; and next to W. Herbert. 


The books of the New Testament, with the usual prologues, and in the later version; preceded by a Table to find 
the lessons, etc. 


87. Douce 369. Vellum, in large folio, 2 cols., ff. 486 (429 bis), consisting of two distinct Mss., both 
imperfect. 
The first is written with marginal corrections throughout, in three different hands, all before 
1390; the first of which goes as far as the end of chap. vi. of Judith; the second, to chap. 1i. 4, 
of Esther, and the third to the end. It contains :— 

The books of the Old Testament from Num. xx. 2 to Baruch iii. 20, with the usual prologues of St. Jerome, in 
the earlier version. It ends abruptly with the words “and other men in the place of hem risen. The 3unge.” 
Immediately below is written by a contemporary hand the following note, Explic'. translacom Nicholay de herford. 
a facsimile of which, accompanied by three lines of the text is annexed : 


19 Findidobperuerlio o€ Yo.Hpes UE otc 
TAH 210 Jone pe terse DOO 


veh e rien poztige 
Eee eatin, Padtalay w hevbods 


The orthography is peculiar: the present participles terminate in ende or ande, as berende, seiende, fistende, fleande, 
seande, astoneande ; the infinitives retain the final n, as dreden, turnen, ouercomyn ; it reads a3en for against, betwe 
for between; them and ther generally for them and their; and often omits the n of the 3 pers. pl. indic. Throughout 
are marginal corrections of the text by a second but coeval hand, and on the lower margin at the commencement of 
each chapter as far Ecclus. xlvi. are added Latin distichs, giving the subject or contents. These are in different and 
somewhat later hands. It is defective from Judges i. 21, toiv. 4. There is evidence, that this first part of the 
volume was transcribed from Bodl. 959 before the corrections of this last Ms. were made. See Jerem. xlix. 32, 1. 39. 
It is also remarkable, that the third hand in this first part is the same with that which has completed the Bodleian Ms. 


The second part of the volume, from fol. 251 to the end, is written about the same time as the 
former, in a neat roundish letter as far as Mark v. fol. 391», but from this place it is continued 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. li 


im a thick and clumsier hand, which same hand has corrected the former part. This last men- 
tioned writing has also been corrected by a later. It comprises 


The books of the Old Testament from Isaiah to 11 Maccabees inclusive, and the Gospels, Epistles of St. Paul and 
Acts to c.xxvili. 15., with the usnal prologues. The Ms. is defective from Ezek. i. 26 to xxxii. 23. 


88. Douce 370. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., ff. 265, written before 1400, by two or more hands, with correc- 
tions and erasures throughout. At the end is a note, temp. Eliz., by Geo. Rawdon of Fellon- 
glaye, co. Warwick; and another note, stating the volume to have becn bought in 1756 of Mr. 
John Cook of Uppingham. Mr. Douce acquired it at the sale of John Jackson, in 1794, lot 345. 
The volume is in stamped leather binding of the time of Elizabeth, with brass bosscs and clasps. 


The books of the Old Testament from Genesis to 11 Paralipomenon in the earlier version, with the usual pro- 
logues to Genesis, Joshua, 1 Kings and 1 and 11 Paralipomenon. 


AsHMOLE Museum. 


89. Ashmole 1517, (8179). Vellum, 4°., ff. 192, 2 cols., written about 1420. Much mutilated. 


The books of the New Testament, as far as the Epistle of St. Jude v. 23, in the later version, with the usual pro- 
logues. Prefixed is a Table of lessons, etc. imperfect; and at the end are the lessons of the Old Testament, also 
imperfect. 


Brasen Nose Coiiece. 
90. B. N. Coll. 10. Vellum, 4°., ff. 254, 2 cols., xv. cent. Given to the College by Edward Hiil, 
Vicar of Huddersfield, Yorkshire. 


The New Testament, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. after the use of Salisbury. 


Curist Cuurcn, 


91. Ch. Ch. E. 4. Vellum, large folio, 2 cols., written not much after 1400. It belonged to Robert 
Claye, Vicar of Flower m Northamptonshire, who in 1575 gave it to Edward Saunders of the 
same place, who again gave it to Christ Church. 


The books of the Old and New Testament, in the early version, with the usual prologues in the Old Testament 
and to the Gospels; the Epistles have none. The Epistle to the Ephesians is placed after 11 Thess. There are 
scarcely any marginal, and very few textual glosses. Those upon the titles of the Psalms are to be excepted, which 
have been added by a second hand, and do not differ from what are found in copies of the more recent text. Its 
orthography is remarkable. The present participles terminate in ende or ande ; and the infinitives retain the x, as don, 
bern, stoneyn, dreden, pershen : it uses frequently k for c, as kumpas, kuntre, kubitus, kome, kumpany ; reads kne3, ble3, 
for knew, blew ; oen, anoen, draene, for one, anon, drove ; loeues, coestis, coet, for loaves, coasts, coat ; wiche for 
which ; and often them, not hem, and ther, not her, for their. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. after the use 
of Salisbury. The quotations in the table are from the later version. 


92. Ch. Ch. G.10. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440; of the gift of Thomas Ballowe, 
M.A. and Student, Oct. 21, 1629. 


The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. and 
subjoined are the lessons and epistles out of the old law, and also a Table of the matters contained in the New 
Testament. 


93. Ch. Ch. G. 12. Vellum, written in single columns, in the latter half of the xv. cent. 
St. Paul’s Epistles, from the Galatians to the Hebrews inclusive, in the later translation. 


Corrvus Curist1 CoL.Ece. 


94. C. C. Coll. 4, (1471). Vellum, in very large and thick folio, perhaps written before 1420; on the 
fly leaves occur the names of “Thomas Moulder, gentleman,” and “Thomas Reuely,” in a hand 
of the beginning of the xvi. cent.; and in the imperfect transcript of a deed at the end of the 
vol., “ Willelmus Mason, nuper de Leighton Bussard in coun. Bedd., yeman ;” on the first leaf, 
“ Liber Collegii Corporis Christi Oxon. ex dono Mi. Antonii Langford, generosi, et Reverendi 
in Christo Patris Thome (Bilson), episcopi Wintoniensis Seerctarii, Decemh. 8, 1615.” 

It commences with a Table of the lessons, etc. the quotations heing made from the earlier version ; occupying eleven 
pages. On the verso of the last leaf the names of the books of the Bible; and on the outer margin of this page, in 
a hand of xv. cent., ‘the interpretation of certaine (40 or 50) harde wordes in this booke.’—Then follow the books 
of the Old and New Testament, in the earlier version, with the usual prologues. 

93. C. C. Coll. 20, (1487). Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written in the carlier half of xv. cent.; on the 
verso of the fly leaf at the commencement of the volume, “ per me Nicholau Hille,” and below, 
“ Frauncis Vaughan.” 


The books of the Old Testament from the 1 Esdras to the 11 Maccabees inclusive, in the later version, with prologues 
to Isaiah and Baruch. The final rubric is, ‘Here endeth the secounde book of Machabeis. Blessid be the holi 


h2 


lii LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


trinyte. Amen.” Below, by some ignorant person, in a hand of the early part of the xvi. cent., “wylke was endit 
in y®. syer of oure Lord a thousand and ij. hundreth.” 


Lincotn Couuece. : 
96, Line. Coll. Arch. 15. Vellum, large thick folio, 2 cols., written about 1420. 


The books of the Old and New Testament, in the later version. It is remarkable, in having the portions of the 
General Prologue descriptive of the several books prefixed to them respectively. That belonging to Genesis however 
has been placed after the 11 Maccabees. It has some marginal glosses, and in the text those usually found there. 
Isaiah, Baruch and the books of the New Testament have the ordinary prologues. It is defective from Job ix. 18, 
to Psalm xvii. 38. At the commencement of the vol. is inserted a copy of the printed prospectus issued by the Rev. 
John Russell, 1 Aug. 1719, for an edition of the Old and New Testament of this version. 


New Cotzece. 
97. New Coll. 66, (1030). Vellum, folio, 2 cols., written perhaps about 1430; the text is occasionally 
very inaccurate, and many corrections have been made throughout by a second hand. 


The books of the Old Testament from Genesis to the Psalter inclusive, in the later version. The Ms. originally 
contained more, as appears by the last rubric, ‘‘ Here endith the book of Salmes, and bigynneth the prolog ou the 
book of Prouerbis,” etc. The Prologues of St, Jerome are prefixed to Genesis, Joshua, 1 Kings, 1 and 11 Paralip., 
1 Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Job and the Psalter. Those to Genesis, Joshua, 1 Kings, and 1 Paralip, are of a 
later version, found, as to the three last mentioned books, ouly in this copy, but as to Genesis, found also in Sion 
Coll. 32 and Hereford 206. The remaining prologues agree with those of the copies of the earlier version. 


98. New Coll. 67, (1031). Thin vellum, small 4°., single cols., written soon after 1400. It was pre- 
sented to the College in 1588, by Thomas Martin, LL.D. 


The books of the New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the earlier version, but with numerous variations. 
The prologues have in some instances been added after the text was completed; there is none to the Apocalypse, 
but a space has been left blank for it. The four introductory verses of St. Luke, which occur only in this Ms., and 
in the Addl. Ms. 11,858, are given here, as if an ordinary prologue, with the rubric Prologe. The Ms. is remark- 
able for long marginal glosses, some of which are peculiar to it, and the greater part of them have been found only 
in this copy and in the Harleian Ms. 5017. These do not occur in the Gospels, but commence on 1 Cor. vi. 4. At 
the beginning of the volume the rubricator has struck out many textual glosses, and made other corrections, for ex- 
ample, Mt. i. 20, pr. m. forsothe, rubr. for; 23, pr. m. interpreted or expownned, rubr. interpreted; ii. 15, pr.m. fyllyd 
that thing, rudr. fulfillyd, tert. m. fyllyd; iii. 9, pr. m. for whi, rubr. for; 13, pr. m. that he shoulde be, rubr. for to 
be. The rubricator’s corrections do not extend beyond Matthew. In its first twenty-one chapters the Ms. originally 
agreed pretty closely with the text printed from Douce 369, but the first twelve chapters in consequence of 
corrections now generally coincide with the texts of Magd. Coll. Cambr. L. 5.19, and Br. Mus. Addl. 11, 858. 
From Mt. xiii, to Luke xix. it has from the original scribe readings peculiar to itself and the last mentioned 
Ms., though im some imstances even these readings have been introduced by the corrector or correctors. Thence 
to the end of the Gospels it agrees more closely perhaps than any other copy with the printed text; while in 
the remaining part of the volume it differs very much from it, and has readings of its own.—The beginning and 
end of the gospels and epistles for the church services are dicated by letters placed in the margin.—The text 
appears to have been copied from an original having the present participle terminating in ende, which has led to fre- 
quent mistakes, and particularly to the occurrence of the preterite where the participle should stand, as puttede for 
puttende. The ignorance or negligence of the scribe is elsewhere evident.—On the first two leaves, in one of the 
hands which executed the body of the Ms. are, 1. Observations on Charity, from 1 Cor. xiii. 1—8, with a short com- 
ment, beg., “‘ Saynt Poule spekith of charite, and seith on this wise, If y speke with mannus tunge;” 2. The ten 
Commandments, with a short comment on each, beg., “These ben the x. comaundementis of God, the whiche 
euereche man mot kepe, 3if he wil be saued;” 3. The seven virtues, five bodily and five ghostly wits, shortly ex- 
pounded, beg., “These ben the seuene vertues and remedies a3ens the seuen dedely synnes.’’—On the verso of the 
leaf concluding the Apocalypse is written a Table of the gospels and epistles read in the church throughout the year, 
in Latin, It fills five closely written pages, and commences with the rubric, Hie incipiunt cotaciones euangeliorum 
et epistolarum tacius anni legend. 


99. New Coll. 320, (1284). Paper, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1460. 
The Psalter, with the Prologue, in the later version. ——'The Canticles, 1. Confitebor. 2. Ego divi. 3. Exultavit. 
4. Cantemus. 5. Domine, audivi. 6. Audite, celi. 7. Benedicite. 8. Te Deum. 9. Magnificat, “My soule wor- 
shipeth the lord.” 10. Benedictus, 11. Nunc dimittis. 12. Quicunque vult, ‘“ Who that euere wil be saaf.””—After 
this some seven-line stanzas, beg., “Swete and benyngne moder and may.” Beneath, a few Latin lines, and at the 
bottom of the column, by the same scribe, in red, By Willm Hucker. 


Or1EL CoLLece. 
100. Or. Coll. 80. Vellum, 4°., ff. 90, 2 cols., xv. cent. It belonged in 1608 to John Warter. 


The Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, in the later version, It ends imperfectly in Luke xx. 32. Prefixed is 
the rule for finding the lessons, etc. after the use of Salisbury. 


101, 


102. 


103. 


104. 


105. 


106. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. Viti 


QuEEN’s CoLLEGE. 

Qu. Coll. 23, (947). Vellum, in large thick folio, 2 cols., written about 1420; on the verso of a 
blank leaf following the Table of lessons is this note, “ Ego Willm. Smyth, seruiens scutellie 
Domine Regine Elizabethe, incepi legere 2° die Octob. an°. 1561, et finem feci 10 die Junii a°. 
1563; iterum relegere incepi 12° Junii an®. praedicto.” 

It begins with a Table to find the lessons, etc. at mass, after the use of Salisbury; the quotations in which are 
made from the later version. Then the Old and New Testament, in the later version. The books from Exodus to 
Proverbs inclusive have each a prologue peculiar to this Ms. Ecclesiastes to Ecclesiasticus inclusive have no pro- 
logue. Isaiah has the ordinary prologue, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and 1 Maccabees have each a peculiar prologue. 
The books of the New Testament have the usual prologues. The text begins in Gen. i. 20, and is again defective 
from 1 Paral. xxix. 7, to 11 Paral. iii. 1. 

Qu. Coll. 369. Vellum, 4°., ff. 198, 2 cols., written in the early part of xv. cent.; imperfect at 
the end. 

The four Gospels, and the Epistles of St. Paul as far as 1 Tim. ii 12, in the early version. The rubric at the end of 
John is, “ Here eendith the gospel of Joon, and also here is the eendynge of alle the gospellis as thei stonden in the 
bible, by the seeynge of the foure Euangelistis, Matheu, Marke, Luke, and Joon.” 


St. Joun’s CoLiece. 


St. John’s Coll. 7, (1832). Vellum, folio, 2 cols., written about 1420. It was presented to the 
library in 1620 by Humphrey Haggat, a member of the College; on the upper margin of the 
first leaf, in a hand about 1700, is this note of no authority, “The translation of the Bible in 
Englishe by Master John Wicklife, in the time of King Edward the Third, written with his owne 
avid ; ”? the last words of which are petelly erased. -The volume appears to be the production | 
of more than one scribe. 

The books of the Old Testament, with the exception of the Psalter, in the more recent version; with a few 
marginal glosses. From the final rubric seems to have formerly contained the New Testament also. Isaiah and 
Baruch have each the usual prologue. This Ms. has some peculiar readings, and, from 11 Paral. i. r to 11 Esdr. 
v. 3, agrees with Bodl. 277, and C. C. Coll. Cambr. 147. 

St. John’s Coll. 79, (41). Vellum, in long 4°., 2 cols., written before the middle of the xv. cent. 
In the beginning of the next cent. it belonged to Thomas Blunt or Blounte of Syluntun 
(Sillington, co. Warwick), and also, as it seems, to SG: Weever. It was given to the College 
by Nicolas Linnebye, a fellow, in 1605. 


, The four Gospels, with the usual prologues, in the later version. It ends imperfect in John xiii. 4, and also has a 
leaf cut out, which contained part of Luke vi. 


University CoLLecE. 


Univ. Coll. G. 3, (96). Vellum, small 4°., written about 1430—1440. On the first of four fiy 
leaves at the beginning of the volume is written, “This book seemeth to have been made by 
John Wickliffe ;” and beneath, “I take this note to be of Mr. Obad. Walker’s handwriting. 
Teste Guil. Smith, Aug. 26, 1700;” on the verso of the last fly leaf at the end, the name 
“ Stephano Larkyn.” , 

The General Prologue to the books of the Bible. This is followed by,—1. A table of the books of Scripture, 
beginning, “The prolog wt. —— xv. c. Genesis wt. —— 1]. c.”? and ends “ Apocalips wt — xxij.c. The summe 
of bookes with the prolog conteynith—Ixx . . . ;”—2. A synopsis of the genealogies of the Old Testament, in Latin ; 
—3. Excerpts from the New Testament, for the Passion, and for Palm Sunday, seemingly taken from the later 
version ;—4. The ten Commandments in verse, beg. “‘ Thou shalt have no God but oon.” 


CAMBRIDGE. 


University Liprary. 


Cambr. Libr. Dd. 1. 27, (9341). Vellum, very thick folio, 2 cols., written perhaps about 1430— 
1440. It formerly belonged to Dr. John More, Bp. of Norwich, No. 155. 

The books of the Old and New Testament, in the more recent version. ‘The books to Esther inclusive have no 
prologue; Job has two, both of the earlier version; so likewise the Psalter; Proverbs and Ecclesiastes have each a 
prologue in the same version. Those to Wisdom'and Ecclus. are of a later version, found only in this Ms. Isaiah 
and Baruch have the usual prologues of the later version; and to Ezekiel and Daniel are prefixed the prologues 
which are found elsewhere only in the Queen’s College Oxf. Ms. 23. The prologues in the New Testament agree 
with the more recent text. Between the Old and New Testaments is set a Table to find the lessons, etc. after the 
use of Salisbury. In Zech. viii. a second hand commences, and continues to 11 Maccabees, which at first gives con- 
siderable variations from the text, and has often peculiar readings, for instance, Tim. v. 23, lest thou haunte ; 
1 Tim. prol. lore; Tit, iii. 2, temperat, ethir mesurable ; Gal. iv. 5, adopcioun, ether purchasyng. 


liv 


107. 


108. 


109. 


110. 


Ill. 


112. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Cambr. Libr. Ke. 1. 10, (9348). Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written in the earlier half of the xv. 
cent.; imperfect at both extremes ; formerly Ms. More, No. 162. 

An ahstract of the books of the Old Testament, from 11 Paralip. to 11 Maccabees inclusive. It is made from the 
earlier version. The language is very slightly altered, chiefly by a different collocation of words, the insertion of an 
article or pronoun, and occasionally of a verbal gloss. The matter both in the prolognes and the text is much 
abridged, one half or more heing omitted. It originally contained the first book of Paralip., hut now commences 
with this rubric, Explicit primus liber paralipom. incipit prologus libri secundi. The prologue is thus given, 
“ Eusebius, Jerom, senden — of Crist sownen, ete. { At the laste—to our trauele, etc.” The first chapter thus, 
(v. 1.) Salamon thanne —and he magnifiede —an heiste, ete. (5) And Salamon soujte —(6) steiz—he offride— 
(7) Forsothe so—(8) and thou settist —(g) forsothe thou—(r10) 3eue thou—forsothe who may worthili deme this— 
so great. (11) Forsothe God— Forsothe for—thou axidist my peple—(12) forsothe richessis—like thee etc.” 
Then “z.ch.” Again, Dan. vi.1. “It pleside— (4) the side of —feithful, ete. Thanne (6) princes —(7) or decree — 
asking — of the king — (8) king, now — sentence, efc. (10) which thing — (12) the manndement, ete. (15) Forsothe 
—of Persis—(17) with the ring— (18) vnsowpid, efe. (19) Thanne —(20) into Daniel—from the liouns— (22) 
anoieden not me, efc. (23) Thanne —(26) God of Daniel, ete.’ After the 150th Psalm, of which the first verse 
only is given, there follow these Canticles: 1. Te Dewm, “‘ We herien thee.” 2. Benedicite, ‘« Alle the werkis.”’ 
3. Benedictus, “Blessed be.’ 4. Magnificat, “ My soule magnifieth.” 5. Nune dimittis, Lord, thou leenest.” 
6. Quicunque vult, “ Whoeuere wole bee saaf.”’ The Ms. is defective from Amus ix. 2 to Jonah ii.1, and ends 
abruptly in 11 Mace. xv. 1. 

Cambr. Libr. Gg. 6. 8. Vellum, in small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1449. 

The New Testament, in the later version, with the ordinary prologues. On a fly leaf at the end, in a hand of the 
Xvi. cent. the Epistle to the Laodiceans, with its prologue. 

Cambr. Libr. Gg. 6.23. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1450. On a fly leaf, in a hand 
of xvit. cent., “M4, that I tooke Mr. Jones vis. in pawne for this book, to be paid agayne when 
I bring him to his shoppe agayne, and I to pay him j‘. a daye so long as I haue him, the xxith. of 
June. Richard Jones.” 

The Epistles of St. Paul, Acts, Catholic Epistles, and Apocalypse, in the later version, with the usnal prologues. 
It is defective to Rom. viii. 35. A second hand of xv1. cent. has supplied from 11 Thess, ii. 10 to Acts vii. 17. 
Cambr. Libr. Kk. 1. 8. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. 

The General Prologue to the Bible.—Then, in the hand which has written the chief part of the Ms., a Tahle of the 
lessons, etc. for the whole year.—The books of the New Testament, with the usnal prologues, in the later version. — 
Then, in a different hand, “Tabula noui testamenti, metrice tractata.””—Incip. “ Natns Christus est, etc. Adoratur a 
magis,” etc.—After two blank leaves, in a later hand, the lessons and epistles of the Old Testament, beginning with 
“ Feria vi. prime ebdom. Adnentus, Ys. 51.”’ They fill five leaves, and are left unfinished. 

Cambr. Libr. Ll. 1. 13, (9307). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1450; on the first leaf, in a 
hand of the xvi. cent. ‘‘ John Parker ;” formerly Ms. More, No. 121. 

The epistles and lessons from the Old Testament, in the earlier version ;—A kalendar of the lessons, etc. through- 

out the year ;—The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues, except that an addi- 
tional paragraph is subjoined to that on St. Matthew. 
Cambr. Libr. Mm. 2.15. “ex munificentia regia, 1715.” Vellum, thick folio, 2 cols., written 
about 1430; bound in calf, with the words Verbum Domini stamped on each side. On the leaf 
preceding the Psalms, is written ““Jhesus amor meus 4 Stephanus Tomson ;” and again, on one of 
the leaves in Luke, the same, with the addition “ sacri palacii notarii, in anno 1519;” and on the 
lower margin over agaiust Prov. xxii. the name “Anne Weldon,” in a hand of Henry the Highth’s 
time. In the ornamental border to Psalms, a large initial W is inserted, but perhaps by a later 
hand. Ona piece of paper stitched to the second fly leaf of vellum is written in a hand of the 
xvi. cent., “ Only vpryghtnesnes is the faythful presarver of power and dyngnyte—God send 
you therein long to persever,—and after to lyue in heauen for ever.” 


“ Sethen I knowe my lyf is short, 

And that my book and I must part, 

to you my dere and faythful frende 

My chefest juel I doo comend. 

“< Your pooer and faythful frend in the lord, 
Elyzabeth Tyrwhyt.” 

On the top of the paper, in a different hand, ‘* Calendis Januarii A°. 1571.’ On the recto of the 
next leaf, in a border richly ornamented in gold and colors, executed in the reign of Edw.VI., and 
in a large text letter, “‘ The holy Bible, the lyuely worde of the lyueynge God, the sworde of the 
spirite, and the lanterne of lyght to oure foote steppis, a treasure more preciouse then golde and 
precious stonis.” Then in gold letters, “ Deuternomiv 11.” followed by, “ Ye shall laye vp these 


118. 


114. 


115. 


116. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. lv 


wordis of myne in youre hertis, and in youre myndis, and shall bynde them in your handis 
for a signe, that thei may be as it were a remembrance bitwyx your cies.” 


The books of the Old Testament, in the more recent version, with prologues to Isaiah and Baruch.—Then, upon 

the second of two inserted leaves of thick vellum, is painted in large capitals of gold, 
EDOVERDVS j 
SEXT'VS. 

The whole on a square blue tablet set upon a sort of scroll or border. On the verso of this leaf a border of gold and 
colors, within which is written in the same large text hand before noticed, “The true copie of a Prologe, whiche 
John Wicklife wrote to this Bible, which he translatid into Englishe about two hundrid yers past, that was in the 
tyme of kynge Edwarde the thryd, as may iustly be gatherid of the mention that is had of him in diuers auncient 
Cronicles.—Anno domini 1550.”’ After this follows in the old hand the General Prologue to the Bible, beg. “ Fyue 
and twenti bookis,”’ corrected by a second seribe. From this copy Crowley printed the prologue in 1350. Then 
follow the books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. It has marginal glosses. 


Caius CoLLEcE. 
Caius Coll. 179, (1067). Vellum, small 4°., ff. 83, written soon after 1400, imperfect at the be- 
ginning. Presented to the College by . . More, formerly a fellow. 

The Gospels of Matthew and Mark, in the more recent version; the latter with the usual prologue. It is-defective 
to Mt. ix. 36, and from xx. 17 to xxi.12. The Ms. has been corrected throughout by a hand of the xv. century. 
Both the original and the amended text offer some peculiar readings, as Mt. x. 1. 1s¢ eche langour; x. 28. 2d the 
soule; x. 41. 2d he schal take; xi. 24. 1s¢ esier in the day; xii. 9. 1s¢ he entride into; 2d he ran into; xii. 10. rst 
lo! ther was a man; xy. 26. 1st seue to houndis; xvii. 16, 2d hym into me; xxvi. 1g. 1s¢ thritty penes; xxvi. 16, 2d 
souste beste tyme; Mk. i. 5. 1s¢ stones of the mounteyn; i. 7. 1st a greet vois; iv. 6. 1s¢ not moisture; 2d not rote; 
iv. 7. 1st fel among thornes. 


Caius Coll. 343, (1066). Vellum, in 4°., 2 cols., written about the commencement of the xv. cent. 
At the end of the Apocalypse is a painting representing Christ appearing to Mary Magdalen. In 
1625 it belonged to John Heath, and in 1627 to Richard Harvey of Chislehurst in Kent. Pre- 
sented to the College by . . More, formerly a fellow. 

The four Gospels with the usual prologues, in the later version, fol.1. A Table to find the lessons, etc., fol. 79. 
—The names of the books of the New Testament, and number of the chapters in each, fol. 85>.—A kalendar of the 
months, with the epistles and gospels for holidays noted in it, fol. 86. At the bottom of February this note by the 
original scribe: “Thus the lettris faylen on lepeseeris in alle tymes. This was writun in the jeer of g sonday nex 
(sic) aftir lepezeer of 6. In the 3eer of the Lord m.cce.Jxxxxvij.” See a like note in Emanuel Coll. Ms. 1. 2. 13.— 
The Epistles of St. Paul, Acts, Catholic Epistles, and Apocalypse, in the later version, with the usual prologues, fol. 92. 
——The beginnings and endings of the lessons are marked in the margin by red letters answering to the table. 


Curist’s CoLLEcE. 
Ch. Coll. F.1.14. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about the year 1420. 


The New Testament in the later version, with the usual prologues. A hand of the xvi1. cent. has noted on 
Matth. vi. 1, that instead of “ ristfulnesse” a manuscript in the Lichfield library read “ rightwisnes.” 


Corpus Curist1 CoLLece. 

C. C. Coll. 147, (1433). Vellum, 2 cols,, folio, xv. cent., written perhaps before 1430; the first 
scribe is negligent at the commencement, but more careful as he proceeds; the second scribe 
also is inaccurate, and often corrects for the worse, as in John iv. 6, after sat he expunges thus ; 
g. changes thou into than; 10. changes he into yt. 


The General Prologue to the books of the-Bible. There are several annotations in the margin of this prologue by 
Geoffrey Blith, Bp. of Lichfield and Coventry (1303-1533), who, it is evident, supposed Wycliffe to be the author; 
for instance, on the passage beginning “ Alas! Alas! Alas!’ in chap. xiii. ‘‘ Nota contra universitatem Oxonie ne- 
quiciam Wycleff, qui ingressus est, ut videret. Vana loquebatur, cor eius congregauit iniquitatem sibi, qui cum 
cerneret se non posse doctos a fide avertere, voluit et hic suasit omnibus indoctis ad sacram scripturam libernm 
debere patere ingressum, vt saltem simplices erroris sui veneno corrumperet. Contra cujus errorem et similem arro- 
ganciam tota illa laborat epistola pro deinterpretacione omniui librorum sacre scripture que incipit ‘ Frater Am- 
brosius,’ et communiter preponitur toti biblie, sed non est mirum si a veritate discedat que mentita est iniquitas 
sibi.’—A Table to find the lessons, ete.; the quotations are from the later version. A leaf has been torn out at the 
end, rendering the kalendar imperfect; it ends with the “'Translacioun of Seint Benet.” The books of the Old and New 
‘Testament in the later version, hut throughout the greater part revised. It has numerous textual glosses, and a few 
marginal glosses in the commencement of St. Matthew. Parallel passages are sometimes noted; in the New Testa- 
ment and in some few places of the Old, the lessons, gospels, and epistles are marked by letters placed in the 
margin, and in the epistles, the holiday is set down by a hand nearly contemporary with the original scribe. The 
Ms. is defective from Matth. xvii. r9 to xx. 28, and ends imperfectly in Rev. xxi.18. The orthography is in some 
respects peculiar: atte is frequently put for atthe; artow for art thou; sckit, comit for seeketh, cometh; be for by; weten 
for witen. Leaves have been inserted by a later hand at Judith vii. 18—x. 2, xiii. S—Esth. ii. 5, vili. 8—xiv. 6, in 


Ivi 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


which the text agrees with the usual copies. A second hand corrects the books from Lamentations to Daniel. In the 
margin of Ex. vi. 11 is the following note by the original scrihe, ‘‘ Thus the peple farith now, for fere of the prelatis 
more and lesse.” 


117. €. C. Coll. 440, (1440). Vellum, 8°., 2 cols., written about 1430. 


The four Gospels, with the usual prologues, and in the later text. A Table of the gospels for Sundays, after the 
use of Salisbury, is prefixed. 


EMANUEL CoLLEcE. 


118. Em. Coll. 2. Vellum, folio, 2 cols., written about 1420; on a fly leaf in a hand of about 1700, 


“ John Wickleffs translation, performed by him anno Domini, 1383.—This copy will give forty 
pounds.” 

The books of the Old and New Testament, in the more recent translation. The margins have frequent glosses in 
the original hand, and a few brief and explanatory notes written about 1500. The Old Testament has no prologues 
except to Isaiah and Baruch. It is preceded by a Table of the epistles and gospels throughout the year. At the end 
of this, “And euere thanke we oure lord eendeles in trinite.”’ After the Apocalypse, in rubric, “ Here endith the Bible; 
Jhesu, helpe us, for we ben feble.” The text amd orthography agree very remarkably with the Arundel Ms. 104. 


119. Em, Coll. 1, 2.13, (102). Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about the commencement of the 


Xv. cent. 

The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. It is preceded by a Table of the 
* gospels pistlis and lessouns that ben red in chirchis bi al the yer,” in two parts. After the first part, the names of 
the books of the New Testament with the number of the chapters in each; the second part, comprising the proper 
sanctorum, is in the form of a kalendar. In the lower margin of the page containing February, occurs this note by 
the same hand as the calendar, “Thus these lettres failen on lepe 3eres in alle tymes. This was writen in the 3er of g 
sundai next after lepeseer of 3 in the 3eer of the Lord m°.cce°.Ixxxxvij.” It is doubtful, whether the table is in the 
same hand with the body of the Ms. At the end, ina modern hand, “John Wickliffes translation of the N.T. 
finished A. D. 1383, and this copy was written A.D. 1397, and is valued at ten pounds.” The quotations in the 
table are from the later version. 


120. Em. Coll. 1. 4. 33, formerly 1. 2. 32. Very thin vellum, in 16°., 2 cols., written about the middle 


of the xv. cent.; the last leaf of the Apocalypse, and two in St. Matthew, chaps. ix. x., have been 
restored by a hand of the xvi. cent., and a few leaves are deficient ; on the recto of the third fly 
leaf ‘Thomas Ken,” and on the opposite verso, in the same hand, “ex dono Thome Hughes de 
Lincolnes Inne Armigeri, fratris mei charissimi, 17 Sep.” On the first fly leaf, “G. S. Archiep. 
Cantuar. legavit collegio Emman. Cantah.” 


A Table of the lessons, ete., after the use of Salisbury, occupying 14 leaves. On the verso of the following leaf, 
in the same hand which supplied the lost leaves, 14 verses, beginning, ‘Thou art a mirror that doest faire 
inclose,”” etc.—The books of the New Testament, including the spurious Epistle to the Laodiceans, in the later 
version, with the usual, and many additional prologues, for which last, see vol. iv. p. 681°. Many of the leaves con- 
taining these prologues have been mutilated. 


Jesus CoLuEcE. 


121. Jes. Coll. Q. A.6. Vellum, small thick 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. From memoranda in 


the Ms. it appears to have been the property of Wm. Cottrell, who left it in 1576 to Edmund 
Grindal, Fellow of Pembroke Hall, afterwards Abp. of Canterbury. It subsequently belonged to 
David Moris, alias Hanmer, preceptor of the eldest son of Sir Will. Cecil, whose only son John 
Moris, alias Hanmer, gave it in 1594 to Edw. Hughes, Fellow of Jcsus, who presented it to 
the college; his letter of presentation is dated “ Suenie juxta Oswestriam Salopiz, calend. Fe- 
bruarii 1594.” On the top of the first fly leaf is written in a hand of xvi. cent. “‘ Rd. Mar- 
kerston.” 

The New Testament, with the spurious Epistle to the Laodiceans, and the usual prologues. It is preceded by 1. a 
very full Table of matters of the canonical books of the New Testament, and 2. a Table of the lessons, epistles, aud 
gospels after the use of Salisbury throughout the year, with five other lessons not in that use. At the end are the 
lessons and epistles of the Old Testament, also after the use of Salisbury, with the five other lessons not of that use. 
Allin the later version. It was from this Ms. that Lewis printed his first text of the Epistle to the Laodiceans. 


122, Jes. Coll. Q.B.13. It contains several Mss., ‘ex dono M'. Man. Coll. Soc. Jan. 26. 1685.” The 


third in order is in 4°. on thick, woolly, rubbed vellum; written by two hands, the first before 
1400, and the second not much later. 

The Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. The first six chapters are of the earlier version and by the first hand, 
but have been corrected to the later by notes in the margin by the second hand, which has also supplied the prologue 
to Matthew and the remainder of the Ms. This prologue has the additional paragraph found in LI. 1. 13. of the 
Cambridge University Library. The Ms. is imperfect and ends in Lk. ix. 24. 


128. 


124. 


125. 


126. 


127. 


128. 


129. 


130. 


181. 


182. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. Ivii 


Macpa.en Coiece. 


Pepys. 1603, (6752). Thick vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430; supplied in the first 
and last leaves, and other places, by a more modern hand. 

The hooks of the Old Testament from Genesis to Ruth inclusive, in the more recent version, with occasional 
glosses in the margin. 

Pepys. 15, 16, (6750). Two volumes, thin vellum, in 16°., written in the year 1437. 

The four Gospels, at the end of which are: 1. a Kalendar, with notes of remarkable events, “The deere 3cer, 13155 
The greete deeth, 1350, The romoure, 1381, The erthe grone, 1382, The rnmoure of lordis, 1387 ;” 2. a Table of the 
moveable feasts; 3. a Table of the number of hooks in the Bible; 4. a Table of the lessons, etc. Then, in the se- 
cond volume, the other books of the New Testament, all in the later version, no prologues, At the end of the first 
volume this note, ‘“‘ Whanne the 3eeris were of the makinge of the worlde 6681, and whanne the seers of our (Lord) 
Jhesu Crist were of his incarnacioun 1437, tho was this book written.” 

Pepys. 2073, (6751). Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1440. It has at the end 
these notes, “ Praye for the soll of Sir Wyllm. Weston, lorde of Senct Johns Jerusalem in Eng- 
land, the which lord desessithe the vj‘s daye of Maye in the yere of our Lord God 1540, of 
whos soll Jhu. haue marcy,” etc.—‘ This booke was gyven me Edm. Randolph xxiij. die Marcij 
1607, by my frend Sir Roberte Cotton knighte ;” the names “Edmond Herenden” and “ Thomas 
Bache” also occur in hands of the xvi. cent. 

The books of the New Testament in the later version, with prologues. It has the Epistle to the Laodiceans, but 
without. the prologue, in a peculiar translation, found only in this Ms., and printed vol. iv. p. 438. At the end of 
the Ms. “‘the lessouns and pistlis of the olde lawe, that ben red in the chirche in al the jeer after the vss of Salis- 
huni,” followed by 1. ‘“othere lessouns,” five in number, ‘of the olde lawe that ben not red after the vss of 
Salisburi;” and 2. a Table of the lessons, epistles, and gospels.—Erratum. The references made to this Ms. 
(marked w) in the Prologue to the Epistle to tne Laodiceans, vol. iv. p. 438, should be omitted. 

Magd. Coll. L. 5, 19. Vellum, smail 4°., pp. 12, and 428, written probably before 1420, on the 
lower margin of a leaf of the Kalendar is written ‘ Robert Gosnelle,” in a hand of xvi. cent. 

The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the early version, excepting the Gospel of John and the 
prolognes of the last three Gospels, which are of the later; the prologue to the Catholic Epistles is by error placed 
before the 1 Ep. of Peter. The Ms. is defective from Rom. xiv. 16 to 1 Cor. v. 2. The text presents many variations 
from the ordinary copies, and omits most of the glosses. The prologue to 1 Timothy differs from that in any other 
Ms., and has been printed vol. iv. p. 453. Prefixed to the volume is by a different hand, an ecclesiastical Kalendar 
in Latin. At the end of the volume, a short passage from St. Bernard against the vices of the higher clergy, begin- 
ning “* Miror de prelatis.” On the fly leaf at the commencement are some notes in the handwriting of Dr. Daniel 
Waterland as to the authors of the Wycliffite versions. 


Sipvey Sussex CoLires. 
Sidn. Coll. A. 5.14, formerly K. 5.14, (761). Vellum, large 4°., written in the early part of the 
xy. cent. 

The New Testament, in the early version, with prologues in the latter. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc., the 
quotations in which agree generally, but uot entirely with the early text. The first leaf of this table is wanting. At 
the end of the Apocalypse ‘‘ the lessouns of the olde lawe that ben rad in the churche,” filling about 31 leaves. These 
lessons present considerable variations from the printed text of the early version. 

St. Jonn’s CoLiece. 
St John’s Coll. E.13. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1440; presented in 1635 by 
Oliver Daud, a fellow of the college. 

The Epistles of St. Paul, Acts, Catholic Epistles and Apocalypse, with the usual prologues, in the later version. 
Prefixed is “a kalender of pistles that ben rad in the chirch bi al the ere.” 

St. John’s Coll. E.14. Vellum, 12°., 2 cols., written about 1450, the first leaves are injured ; pre- 
sented by Edward Powell of this college. It belonged in the xv. cent. to Clement Ridley, 
“ seruien’ reverendi in domino domini Roherti Sturtone.” 

The Psalms, Canticles of the Church, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, without 

prologues, and in the later version. A few glosses, such as occur usually in the margin, are inserted in the text. 
St. John’s Coll. G. 26. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1420. 


The books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticns, without prologues, in the more 
recent version; and at the end, in a later hand, the book of Tobit. 


St. John’s Coll. N. 4. Vellum, 12°., single cols., written about 1450; presented by William Lynge, 
M. A. Rector of St. Vigors in Fulburne, Cambridgeshire April 23, 1688. 

The four Gospels, of the later version, with the usual prologues. 
St. John’s Coll. E.18. Vellum, 12°., coarsely written in the middle of xv. cent. 


The Gospel of St. John, with the usual prologue, in the later version. Then follow the Articles of belief and some 
Prayers. ; 
VOL. I. 1 


Iviii 


133. 


134, 


136. 


137. 


138. 


139. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Trinity CoLuEeE. 
Trin. Coll. B. II. 8, (205). Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1430. On the covers are im- 
pressed the arms of Abp. Whitgift, impaled with the see, by whom probably the volume was 
presented to the college. 

The Pentateuch, in the more recent version. 


Trin. Coll. B. X.7. Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1430. It belonged in April 1570 
to Arthur Salwey, and was presented to the college by its Master, Thomas Nevile, Dean of Can- 
terbury ; imperfect at both extremes. 


The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. It wants about five chapters of St. Matthew, 
and as much of the Apocalypse. 


. Trin. Coll. B. X. 20. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. The following notes of its 


possessors occur, “ Liber Johannis Trussell, ex dono Tho. Holcrafte, militis, a°. 1608,” “Sir John 
Haryngton,” “ Humfredus Fenne Coventr.,’ and “Trin. Coll. Cant. A. D. 1671, ex dono doctis- 
simi doctoris Scattergood, hujus collegii quondam sacellani.” 


The New Testament, in the more recent version, with the usual prologues. It is preceded by a Kalendar in Latin, 
and at the end are: 1.a Table of matters, or contents of the chapters of the several books of the New Testament; 2.a 
Table or kalendar of the lessons, epistles, etc., and the lessons out of the old law, which, as well here as in the table, 
are taken from the earlier version; at the end of this Kalendar the following note in a hand of the xvi1. cent., 
“ Becket canonised 1176.—Wicliff translated some parte of S. Powles epistles, 1375.—Tindall translated the new tes- 
tament 30 H. 8.” 


DURHAM. 


BisHop Cosins’s Liprary. 
Durham, V.v.1. Vellum, 8°., ff. 175, 2 cols., written at the commencement of the xv. cent. 
It belonged in 1617 to Thomas Maydwell; afterwards to Ryc. Baddeley, and in 1666 to the Rev. 
George Davenport, who gave it to the library. 

The New Testament, in the earlier version, without prologues. At the end is a treatise intitled, “‘Heere bigynnen 


- goode materes nedeful to be knowun ;” beg. ‘‘Seint Austyn seith, whoso prechith the Gospel ;” directed against false 


preachers, and the mendicant and conventual orders. 


HEREFORD. 


CaTHEDRAL LIBRaRy. 

Heref. 206, (1798). Vellum, large folio, 2 cols., written about 1420; in parts much mutilated, 
torn and soiled. Probably presented by Dr. Robert Bennet, bishop of Hereford from 1602 to 
1617, whose name occurs in a note partly destroyed, on the first leaf of the volume. 


The books of the Old and New Testament, in the more recent translation, with prologues to Genesis, Joshua, 
1 Kings, 1 Paral., Isaiah, Baruch, and the books of the New Testament. It commences with a Table to find the lessons, 
etc. Immediately after the 150th Psalm, a brief explanation of the first six Canticles of the Church. Then the 
names of the books of the Old Testament thus far, with the number of chapters in each. In the early books it has 
numerous marginal glosses: the textual glosses are everywhere carefully scored with red. A hand, about 1500, has 
made numerous small notes, both in Latin and English, sometimes merely to draw attention to particular passages, 
at other times to explain the translation ; an example of this last kind is Ecclus. xl. 14, an unjust man shall be glad. 
Over against these words in the side margin is written, Sicut justus, and in the lower margin, “Sicut justus in 
aperiendo manus suas letabitur, prevaricatores in consummacione tabescent. These twey wordis, sicut justus, is not 
in sum Latyn book, it is sett forth with the text, and therfore me thinketh the Englis shude not be drawen with 
reed.” The Ms. has many lacune, being defective from Gen. xxiv. 14 to xxviii. 17; 11 Kings xx. 10 to xxiii. 153 
Job ix. 18 to xx. 26; Proverbs i. 1 to vi. 9; 11 Mace. xv. 37 to Mt. iv. 243 Mt. xxvii. 62 to Mk. iii, 8; 11 Cor. xi. 
26 to Gal. iii, 22, and it ends in Apoc. ix. 17. 


LINCOLN. 


CaTHepra Liprary. 
Line. A. 2. 5. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written perhaps about 1430; it belonged about the end of 
xvil. cent. to John Walley. 


The Epistles of St. Paul, from the Epistle to the Romans ii. 11, the Acts, Catholic Epistles, and the Apocalypse ; 
in the later version, with the usual prologues. 


WINCHESTER. 


Sr. Mary’s Contes. 
Winch. 2, (1339). Vellum, small 4°., xv. cent. 


The New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. At 
the end of the Apocalypse are written the ten Commandments, in a later hand. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. lix 


WORCESTER. 
CaruepraL Liprary. 
140. Wore. 82, (926). Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1420. It formerly belonged to Dr. John 
Prideaux, bishop of Worcester. One or two leaves have been cut out. 
The New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. The Ms. commences with a Kalendar, fol- 
lowed by a Table of the lessons, etc. after the use of Salisbury, of which the last Icaf alone remains; and then, in a 
different hard, by a rule to find the primes and Sunday letters, from the year 1380. At the end of the Ms. the 
Epistles and lessons of the old law, after the use of Salisbury, in the later version. 


YORK. 
CaTuepraL Liprary. 

141. York xvi. N. 7. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written not much after 1400. At the commencement of 
the 1 Epistle to Thessalonians, on the side margin, in the handwriting of the Queen, “Elizabeth 
Regina;” in several places the name “ Emmanuel Barnes,” and at the end of the Table of lessons 
an inscription by him, on his presenting the volume, 1 Jan. 1587, to Tobias Matthew, dean of 
Durham, afterwards archbishop of York. 


The New Testament, in the more recent version, with the usual prologues. It is preceded by a Kalendar of 
“ Jessouns, pistlis and gospels, that ben rad in the chirche thoru the jeer,” imperfect at the commencement; and it 
is followed by the lessons and epistles of the Old Testament, in the later version. 


142. York xv1. O. 1. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1420; at the end, in a scrawl of the 
xv. cent. “Chrystofer Baroders ;” and on the reverse of the leaf concluding the table, “ Elenor 
Bowes.” 

The New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues; preceded by a Table of the lessons, etc. 
according to the use of Salisbury. 


MANCHESTER. 
CuetTHam Liprary. 

143. Cheth. 6723. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. On a fly leaf at the commence- 
ment, this note partially scored out, “ Margret Elynghey....... .. Smyth, her owne book.” It was 
given to the library by the Rev. John Clayton, M.A. in 1732. 

The New Testament, in the later version, with the ordinary prologues. It is preceded by a Table of the lessons, 
etc. after the use of Salisbury. 


NORWICH. 
Corporation Liprary. 
144, Norwich, 54. Vellum, in large folio, 2 cols., written probably before 1420; imperfect at the 
end; on verso of first fly leaf, “Liber Jacobi Boolene, manentis in Blicklingia” apparently 
Sir James Boleyn, who died in 1561. 
The books of the Old Testament, from Genesis to Proverbs vii. 10, in the more recent version. Part of the last 
three leaves is torn away. 


EDINBURGH. 
Apvocatss’ Liprary. 

145. Adv. A. 6. 34. Vellum, thick 8°., 2 cols., ff. 278, written about the close of the x1v. cent. It 
formerly belonged to the library of Sir James Balfour, of Kinnaird, Lord Lyon, and was with it 
purchased for the Faculty of Advocates, 14 Dec. 1698. The volume is bound in russia, and on 
the back has the rose and thistle surmounted by a crown. 

It commences with, “A general Kalender of the Newe Testament, to knowe gospels and pistels thur3 out al the 

. 3er;” the quotations are from the early version. This is followed in the same hand, which is later than that of the 

body of the Ms., by the prologue to Matthew, which is of the later version. Then the four Gospels, Epistles of St. 

Paul, Acts, Catholic Epistles, and Apocalypse in the early version, with the usual prologues, except to Matthew. It 

is remarkable, that in this Ms. as well as in Egerton 618, Douce 369, and Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10, a considerable 

portion of the prologue to the Romans is inserted in the middle of a sentence of that to the Gospel of Luke. From 

Romans to Titus inclusive, this copy has in the text numerous short glosses, in which, after the Epistle to the Gala- 
tians, Ms. Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10, generally agrees, and continues the like to the end of Hebrews. 


GLASGOW. 
Hunrerian Museum. 
146. Hunter 167. Vellum, 12°., 2 cols., written about 1420. 
The books of the New Testament, with the Epistle to the Laodiceans, and the usual prologues, in the later version. 


12 


Ix 


147. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Hunter, 168. Vellum, 12°., ff. 70. 
The Gospel of St. Mark, in the later version. It is imperfect, ending in the beginning of chapter xiv. 


148. Hunter, 173. Vellum, 12°.; formerly belonging to John Gale, of Oxford. 


149. 


The Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, in the later version. 


Trinity CoLiece. DUBLIN. 


Dubl. A. 1.5. Vellum, folio, 2 cols., written by two different hands, both of the xv. cent. On 
a slip of paper inserted, in a hand of the xv1. cent. “This ancient monyment of the holy scripture 
dothe show, how the Lord God in all ages and tymes wold haue his blessed woorde preserved 
for the comfortc of his elect children and church in all tymcs and ages, in despyte off Sathane, 
Antichrist, and all his enemyes, to ther vtter confucion and overthrow, that the wickett myghte 
have no excuse to plead yngnorance, that the wordes of our Saviour myght be verified on them, 
that they arred by cause they did not know the Scripture, as he testifyeth in the gospell of 
St. John.” 
The books of the Old Testament, from Proverbs to 11 Maccabees inclusive, in the later translation. Next follows 
a Table of the books, from Proverbs to Maccabees, shewing the folio on which they commence. ‘Then the books of 
the New Testament, also in the later translation, with the usual prolognes. At the end of the Apocalypse, “ Here 
endith the bible; Jhesu, helpe us, for we ben feble.”” It is followed by 1. a Table of the books of the New Testa- 
ment, with the folio on which each begins; 2. a Table to find the lessons, etc.; imperfect. The Ms. is defective from 


Eccles. ix. 11 to Song of S. viii. 1; from Ecclus. xxvi. 20 to xxix. 18; and from Malach. ii. 16 to 1 Macc. v. 20; and 
from Acts xxiv. 5 to xxv. 26. 


150. Dudl. A. 1.9. Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written before 1400. 


151, 


The books of the Old Testament, from Genesis to Job inclusive, in the early version, with the nsnal prologues, and 
also at the end those to the Psalms. The church lessons are noted in the margin. 


Dubl. A. 1.10. Vellum, iu smalt folio, 2 cols., written towards the end of x1v. cent. 


On the verso of the first fly leaf, and on the verso of the last leaf, are numerons entries hy Sir Henry Gate, Kt., 
of the birth and baptism of his children, between 1544 and 1555. These entries have been printed by Sir F. Madden, 
in the Collectanea Topographica, vol. i. p. 396. On the recto of the second fly leaf is written in a hand of the xvit. 
cent. the following note, “‘The author of this translation seemeth to have beene John Purvay, as Mt. Fox calleth 


him, both by the verse in the beginning, and the character in the end of the Apocalipse, thus formed P : of the 


care and paines taken therein, see toward the latter end of the Prologue to all the bookes of the Bible, which is set in 
the end of the booke. It should appeare thereby, that he translated the whole Bible, and made a glose on the hard 
places, as namely, upon Job and the greater prophets: he doth mention it fol. 23 and 24. Such a Bible there is in 
the library of Emmanuell Colledge in Cambridge, but whether the same translation with this or no, I have not yet 
compared. {j After this Prologne there followeth another to the Psalter, fol. 34; and fol. 38 an apology of a certaine 
Priest, Curate of Chedingfold, to the Cardinal of Winchester, which was Henry Beanford; but what the anthor’s 
name was, J find not. These writings do shew that in the mids of the darknes and cruell persecution of those tymes 
God euer had some which contested against those corruptions from which in this onr age it hath pleased him to 
reforme his church. Blessed be his holy name for ener and euer. Amen.’? What follows on the remainder of this 
fly leaf, from which a portion of the lower part has been cut off, appears to be in the hand of Michael Seroien, 
namely, 1. The motto, “ Moriens vive,” and below, a name which has been erased; 2. This acrostich :— 
“* Meque patresque dedit florens Antnerpia cineS, 

Instruxit schola clara Lonanii pectns inermE. 

Christo doctori, secum quem Papa MagisteR 

Hactenus abstulerat, restaurat Gallia summO ; 

Armaque ibi Italiamque, et te, Germania, vidI. 

Excipit et gremio fessum fonet Anglia mollE; 

Lucta, labor, cure versant, dum dinido semeN.”” 


On the lower margin of the recto of the next or third leaf is the following note;—‘ Ex dono clarissima Dominz 
Francisee Burgh, Baronissze, sam Michaelis Seroien P. A. AB... apnd Lambeth Marshe Londini, idibus Maij 1593.” 
The third leaf commences with the following line in rubric, and without donbt in the hand of John Purvey himself, 
Christus homo factus, J. P. prosperet actus. There succeeds in the same hand, a brief harmony of the Gospels in 
three divisions, the first with the marginal rubrics, Maria, Johannes Baptista, Apostolorum Discipuli ; the second 
is headed, De miraculis Christi; and the third, De parabolis Christi. It begins :-— 


Mt. Mr. Lae. Joh. 


Concepit et abiit in montana......... Are I 
Maria Inuenta est in utero habens ..-..-00+.+. 1 

Fugit in Egiptum et reuersa est Nazareht 2 

Peperit filium......c.ereeceee Senos 1 2 


Then follow, on the verso of the next leaf, in the same hand, the heads of a discourse, with this rubric, “ Sermo 
Doctor. Curteyse, Dominica in purificatione. Christus assistens pontifex per proprium sanguinem introivit in 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. Ixi 


(sancta).”” Next, on the following seven leaves, and ending on the recto of the cighth, a Table of the lessons, epi- 


stles and gospels, throughout the year; the quotations in which are from the early version. This Table is in the 
same hand with the bulk of the Ms. Then, in Purvey’s hand, the prologues, from the later version, of Mark, Luke, 
John, and the Apocalypse. All that has preceded, is written in a single column across the page; what succeeds is in 
double columns. The books of the New Testament, in the early version, thus: Matthew, with the prologue of the 
early version, the remaining Gospels without prologues; the Acts, with the prologue of the later version prefixed in 
Purvey’s hand; the Catholic Epistles, with the prologue of the later version in the same hand; blank spaces are left 
for prologues to each of the last six. At the end of Jude, in Purvey’s hand, this note, “ Deficit prologns, et x™. 
capitula.”” The verso commences with the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; this page has been pasted 
to the recto of the succeeding leaf, left blank for that purpose, on which and the next six leaves are contained the 
ten, and part of the eleventh, chapters, omitted, as it seems, by the original scribe. The writing, in a small cursive 
character, is the same with that of the General Prologue, etc. at the end of the Apocalypse, and appears to be con- 
temporary with Purvey’s.. On the verso of the first inserted leaf, “J Jerome in his prulog on this epistle seith alle 
this.” The prologue, however, is not given on the preceding page. Then, the Epistle to the Romans, as far as 
xi. 20 in the later, the rest in the early version; 1 Cor., with the prologue in Purvey’s hand, of the later version ; 
11 Cor., with the prologue, in the same hand, and of the same version; Galatians, with the prologne by the original 
scribe, and in the early version; Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, 1 and 11 Thessalonians, 1 and 11 Timothy, ‘Titus, 
Philemon, and Hebrews, with the prologues before each, supplied by Purvey, in the later version; the Apocalypse, 
without a prologue. Another hand, in an upright, even and close character, has supplied a leaf in Luke, ec. vii. 13— 
viii. 2, and two in the Apocalypse, c. xvi. 17—xix. 16; these insertions are in the later version. At the end of the 


Apocalypse, in the lower margin, is this monogram, P. What follows, to the end of the volume, is written by 


the same hand which supplied the chapters in the epistle to the Romans. The rubrics are partly in the handwriting 
of Purvey, who has also corrected the text, both in the margin and between the lines; the punctuation is also 
frequently by the same. The columns in this last part, as likewise in the insertion in Romans, are considerably 
longer than in the original volume, and it has also a separate paging, though not continued to the end. Its contents are, 
1. “A prolog for alle the bookis of the bible of the oolde Testament.”’—2. Remarks in the nature of a Prologue on 
the Psalter, (printed from this Ms. vol. i. pp. 37—40). The paragraph, p. 39, beg. “ This book comprehendith 
loue of enemies,”’ is repeated in the Ms. at the end of these remarks.—3, The paragraph at the beginning of cap. xii. 
of the General Prologue, p. 43, beg. ‘‘ But it is to wite——hane in heuene.”’—4. A prayer, beg. “ Lord Jhesu Crist, 
delyuerer of soulis.’—5. A Summary of Christian belief, in 12 articles, beg. ‘‘ The first article of oure bileue 
sacramentis of hooli chirche.”—6. Observations on the concluding parts of St. Matthew and St. Mark’s Gospels, 
beg. “And the elleuene——worldis of worldis. Amen.”—7.A long letter in Latin to Cardinal Beanfort, 
when Bp. of Winchester, by a priest, curate of Chedynfolde, com. Surr., giving a profession of his faith, in answer 
to accusations brought against him concerning the sacraments, particularly that of the encharist, pilgrimages, and 
images of the saints.—Lastly, The lessons and pisteles of the olde lawe, that ben redde in the chirche by alle the 
3ere. This rubric is in Purvey’s hand, and the lessons are of the later version. Purvey’s orthography is peculiar, 
writing in the 3 p. sing. pr. t. comfortet, schewet, passyt, underminet, writet, discrivet, 3evet, comeht, sendyht, beryht, 
spekyht ;—deht for death, trewht for truth, nat for not, hit for it, yen for eyes, Jues for Jews; lijsht, sowht, 
ry3htwisnes, for light, sought and righteousness. What Purvey has written in this book, at least in the latter part 
of it, must -have been inserted in or after 1427, in which year Henry Beaufort became a cardinal. 








152. Dubl. D. 5,12. Paper, 4°., transcribed in 1569 from an old Ms. given by Leonard Pilkington, 
D. D., prebendary of Durham, to Sir Thomas Gargarave, Kt., according to a note in Leo. 
Pilkington’s hand, which states that “the fyrst coppye thereof was found in Fotheringaye 
Colledge, at the suppression thereof.” 

The New Testament, in the later version. 


WOLFENBUTTEL. 


153. Ducal Library, Aug. A. 2. Vellum, folio, 2 cols., ff. 412, written at the beginning of the 
xv. cent. This volume belonged at the beginning of the xvit. cent. to Lord Lumley, whose 
autograph is in the lower margin of fol. 7, and about the middle of the same century it is stated 
to have been purchased in England by Augustus, Duke of Brunswick, for his library. 

The books of the Old and New Testament, of the earlier version, with the usual prologues. Prefixed is a Table of 
lessons, etc., the texts of which are also of the early version. In the New Testatnent, the Catholic Epistles precede 
the Deeds of Apostles. Six leaves have been cut out of this copy, viz., from 1v Kings xxiv. 5 to 1 Par. i.93 1 Esdr. 


ix. 10 to 11 Esdr. iii.5 ; from end of Judith to Esther iii. 12; part of the prologue of Job to ili. 10; and from begin- 
ning of Proverbs to ii. 9. 


PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 


Sir Perecrine AcLAND, Bart. 


154. Acland. Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written about 1410, or perhaps earlier. On the first fly 
leaf, “This is my wiues booke, G. Palmer ;” on the second, “This Bible I found in my dear 


Ixii 


155. 


157. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Father S« Will Morley’s studdy, weh Book I believe was his great grand Father’s Mr. J. Morley. 
M. Derby, 1713.” At the end of the volume, in various hands, all of the xvr. cent., are pedi- 
grees of Mery and of Bowyer, the first from Thomas Mery of Hatfield, and the other from 
Richard Bowyer of Petworth, both about the time of Edward IV., with some curious notes 
regarding his family, by Thomas Bowyer of the Middle Temple, about 1588. Then follows this 
memorandum, in the writing of G. Palmer, “ This translation of the bible, which by tradition is 
reported to have been Wickliffe’s own booke, seems by the writeing and English to have been 
written in the beginning of the reign of Hen. 4'*.; it was in the time of Edw. 4». the 
possession of Richard Mery of Hatfield, and from him descended to his grand daughter Joan 
marryed to Thomas Bowyer, whose several descendants (as appears by the memorials of them- 
selves herein written) kept it till the beginning of K. James the first’s reign; whether by 
purchase or gift I cannot tell, but on the decay of that family of Bowyer, it was their neighbours 
S' John Morley of Halvenehed in Sussex, my wives great Grandfather, the Grandchild and 
Heiresse General of which S' John Morley, the present Countess of Derby, gave it to my wife, 
her nighest relation, to be by her kept and transmitted to her posterity, as an Heirloom, and 
remembrance of the great friendship and kindnesse she has always borne her. G. Palmer— 
Fairfield. Septemb™ 25, 1723.” 

The books of the Old and New Testament, in the later version, with occasional marginal glosses. In the Old 
Testament, Isaiah and Baruch are the only books which have prologues. The hooks of the New Testament have the 
usual prologues, with the exception of the Epistle to the Galatians, to which no less than fonr are prefixed ; the first 
agreeing with that printed in vol. iv. p. 396; for the others, see vol. iv. p. 688°. The book of Genesis is preceded by 
the General Prologue, “‘ Fyue and twenti bookis ——at the laste, Amen ;” and by a Table “to fynde the lessouns, 


pistlis, and gospels that ben rad bi al the 3eer in hooly chirche.” Before the prologue to the Apocalypse is a note, 
apparently in Bale’s handwriting, “ Hunc prologum Gilb. Porretani in Apoc®. transtulit Joannes Wiclevus in 


Anglicum sermonem.” 


Mrs. ALianson, oF BroucuTon 1N FLINTSHIRE. 


Allanson. Vellum, folio, 2 cols., written early in the xv. cent. The original scribe has made 
numerous mistakes, omitting occasionally several verses together, as in Jer. 1. 3—13. A second 
scribe appears to have completed the volume, commencing at 1 Macc. ix. The names of “'T. Ma- 
rowe” and “Thomas Fytton” occur, both in writing of the xvi. cent. 

The books of the Old Testament from Genesis to 11 Maccabees inclusive, in the early version, with the usual pro- 
logues to Genesis, Joshua, 1 Kings, 1 Paral., 11 Paral., 1 Esdras, Tobit, Jndith, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, 
Ecclesiastes, Wisdom, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Baruch. A blank space of about a column in extent is left between 
Joel and Amos, and at the commencement in the margin is written, The prologe in Amos. 


Tue Eart or ASHBURNHAM. 


. Ashburnham, 1. Vellum, large 4°., 2 cols., written about 1400. On the upper margin of the first 


leaf is written, “Ed. Reynolds, ex dono D. Gulielmi Simonson, coll. Merton soci.” On the 
verso of the last leaf is a curious note, stating that on Midlent Sunday 8 Henr. VIII. the book 
was presented by Dame Anne Danvers, widow of Sir Will. Danvers, to the Master Confessor and 
brethren of Sion. It recently belonged to M'. Lea Wilson. 


The four Gospels, Acts, Catholic Epistles, Epistles of St. Paul, and Apocalypse, without prologues, in the earlier 
version. The New Testament was printed from this Ms., and published by Mr. Pickering, in 1848. 4°. 


Ashburnham, 2. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written in the year 1444. A leaf of the original Ms. is lost, 
containing Matt. chap. i., and has been supplied by a hand of xvi. cent. On the recto of 
the first vellum leaf is this note, “25 Jan. 1692. This booke was shewn to Mr. W™. Fox at 
his examination on the behalfe of John Cullum, at the suit of Tomas Shaftoe in the Court of 
Exchequer before me, John Powell.” It was presented in 1834 by Antony Merry to the 
Rev. Wilmot Marsh of Bangor, and obtained after his sale in 1847 by the Earl of Ash- 
burnham. 

A Kalendar in English; a Table to find Easter from 1448 to 15203; a Table to find the lessons, etc., after the use 
of Salisbury. The books of the New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. The Epistle to the 
Laodiceans is inserted by another and rather later hand. At the end of the Apocalypse is added in red by a different 
hand from that of the rubricator of the Ms., Here endith the Apocalipis. anno dni m®. cce®. zxliiij°. (1444). After this, 
by the hand which supplied the Epistle to the Laodiceans, is added the longer prologue to the Epistle to the Romans. 
Then follow the lessons, etc. out of the Old Testament; the first leaf of these is lost. 


158. 


159. 


160. 


161. 


163. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. Ixiii 


Ashburnham, 3. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. On one of the first fly leaves, 
“M. Edgcombs baok,” with the name “Carryle,” and date 1597. 29 July; and on the verso of 
the last fly leaf, “John Picard, Pastour of Pluckleye, 1598, 28 of June, and I have bene at 
Pluckleye thes 30 yeares,” ete. On the verso of the second fly leaf at the end is a note, in a 
hand of the xv. eent., now almost erased, which appears to read, “ A lytel boke of .... viij 1. 
vj. s. vij. d. and hit....a holy man....was over seyne, and redd be Doetor Thomas 
Ebb . . all and Doctor Ryve.... my modir bought hit.” In the present century it belonged 
to the rev. Dr. Barrett of Trin. Coll. Dublin, to H. R. H. the Duke of Sussex, and in 1844 to 
Mr. Lea Wilson. 
The New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. St. Matthew has two additional prolognes, 
which were privately printed from this Ms. by Dr. Barrett. ‘Ihe first is part of that which properly belongs to 


Wycliffe’s Commentary on that Gospel (see Ms. Laud 235). Prefixed is a Table of the lessons, etc. after the use of 
Salisbury. This Ms. formed the text printed by Bagster in his Hexapla, 4°., 1841. 


Ashburnham, 4. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written perhaps about 1420. It belonged to Mr. Lea 
Wilson. 


The books of the New Testament in the following order, Gospels, Apocalypse, Epistles of St. Paul, Acts, and 
Catholic Epistles, in the later version, with the usual prologues. It has some peculiar readings, which often proceed 
from a second hand. 


Ashburnham, 5. Vellum, 8°., 2 cols. It previously belonged to W. D. Higgs, and at his sale in 
1830, lot 719, was purchased by Mr. Wilks, and re-sold in 1847. 


The books of the New Testament, with the usual prologues, in the later version. Imperfect at the end, breaking 
off in 1 Cor. chap. vii. 


Ashburnham, 6. Thick strong vellum, 16°., written not later than 1400; in a hand of xvut. cent. 
this note, “Tho. Miles, the gift of Mr. Dyer.” It belonged to Mr. Lea Wilson. 


The Acts of the Apostles, with the usual prologue. It is in the more recent version, except from chap. vii. 31 to 
x. 6, which portion is of the early version. 


Tuomas Banister, Esq., or tHE INNER TEMPLE. 


- Banister. Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., pp. 6 and 276, written perhaps about 1390. The first three 


leaves containing the Kalendar, with the lessons inserted, are by a different scribe, though not 
much, if at all, later than the body of the Ms. At the bottom of the first page in a hand of 
xv. cent., “@ uous me ly, Gloucestre,” probably the Duke of Gloucester afterwards Rich. III. On 
the verso of the last leaf are several names scrawled in a hand of about 1500, and among them, 
“John Thomas of Westfyrle,” and below is the commencement of a writ temp. Henr. IV. to the 
sheriff of Sussex. A title has been prefixed to the vol. by a hand of the early part of the xvin. 
cent., ascribing the translation to John Wyeliffe, in 1371. On a fly leaf before the lessons, in a 
hand of the earlier part of the xviii. cent. is a note containing a reference to Lewis’ edition, 
published in 1731. 

The books of the New Testament, in the earlier version, with the usual prologues. A second hand has gone over 
the Ms. and made corrections. The readings very often agree with the Ms. Christ Ch. Oxf. E. 4. The orthography is 
remarkable, the participles present terminate in ende or ande; it reads, a noen, oen, noen for anon, one, none ; coete, 
coestis, boet, for coat, coast, boat ; 603, tho3 for bough, through ; kne3 for knew ; seew3 for sowed ; slo3 for slew ; sa3 for 
saw; often has the 2p. pl. imp. terminating in eth; retains the n of the infinitive ; has & for c, as kum, kuntree, kum- 
panyes, kuppe, and omits the vowel after w, as wrthi, wrd, wrshipen. 


Dr. Carpwe., Pruvcirar or St. ALBan Hatz, Oxrorp. 


Cardwell. Very thin vellum, small 16°., 2 cols., written about 1430—1440; imperfect at both 
extremes; on the sides, between the initials J. L., are impressed the royal arms, France and 
England, quarterly, surmounted by a crown. 
The books of the New Testament, in the more recent version, with the usual prologues, and two to the Epistle to 
the Romans. ‘The spurious Epistle to the Laodiceans is inserted after that to the Colossians. The Ms. begins in 
Mt. iii. 5 and ends in Apoc. xvii. 14. It is also defective in one or two other places. 


xiv 


164, 


165. 


166. 


167. 


168. 


169. 


170. 


LIST OF MANUSCRIPTS. 


Very Rev. Witi. Conypeare, Dean or LLANDAFF. 


Conybeare. Thin vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., written about 1420. It appears from the signature 
to have belonged formerly to Sir Ra. Bosvile of Braborne, and subsequently came to the Rev. 
John Craige, who gave it to Sir Edw. Dering of Surrenden Dering, Bt. 1637. See Lewis’ New 
Test. fol. 1731, p. 105. At the sale of the Dering Library in 1810, it was purchased by the 
Rev. J. J. Conybeare. 


The New Testament, of the later version, with the usual prologues. At the end were added, now forming a 
separate volume, the lessons and epistles of the old law, which generally but not uniformly, agree with the later 
version. This Ms. was lent to Lewis, who used the text for the Epistles, Acts, and Apocalypse of his edition. 
When Lewis saw the Ms. it contained also a Table of the epistles and gospels, which was probably taken out at the 
time the volume was rebound. 


Sir Georce Dasxwoon, Barr. 


Dashwood. Paper, 4°., containing a transcript of the New Testament, in the earlier version, made 
by one R. Ro. about the beginning of the xvi. cent. 


Sir Davin Dunpas, H. M. Juper Apvocare. 


Dundas. Vellum, small 4°., written perhaps about 1440. It belonged to Thomas Falconer of 
Chester, and afterwards to the Rev. Thomas Falconer of Bath. On the last leaf is a note by 
“ Austyn Fyschmonger,” and the date m. cece. lvij. 

The Epistles of St. Paul, in the later version, with the usual prologues. 


Rev. Cuarres Fiercuer, or SourHwe.z, Co. Norts. 


Fletcher. Vellum, 8°., written about 1430: imperfect at both extremes, and in other places. It 
was sold with his library in 1850, lot 204. 


A portion of the New Testament, in the later version, commencing in the prologue to the Epistle to Romans chap. r, 
and ending in Apoc. chap. xv. 3. 


Sir Tnomas Puiniires, Barr. 


Phillipps, 9302. Vellum, small folio, 2 cols., written before 1400. It belonged to “ W. Herbert 
17th March, 1766,” then to Gough; and at his sale in 1810 was purchased by Rev. H. H. Baber. 


The Gospels without prologues, and the Epistles of St. Paul, with the usual prologues, in the earlier version. A 
second hand has altered the text in various places. The alterations generally agree with the readings of Magd. Coll. 
Cambr. L. 5. 19, Brit. Mus, Addl. 11,858, and New Coll. 67. It begins with Mt. iii. 4, and ends in 1 Tim. i. 15. 
It is defective from Rom. ix. 22 to 1 Cor. i. 23; and much torn and mutilated, particularly in the margins, from 
which the blank vellum has been cut off, and with it sometimes a letter or two of the text. It has some singular 
readings, as 1 Cor. vi. 20, glorifie 3¢ and glorye 3e; xiii. 6, of noon; xiv. 24, prophecieden, The scribe not unfre- 
quently makes gross errors. 


Rey. Danien Rock, D. D. 


Rock. Vellum, 4°., 2 cols., written about 1430. It belonged in the xvr. cent. to “ Walter 
Mersche, in Mylkstrete.” 


The New Testament, in the later version, with the usual prologues. Prefixed is a Table of lessons after the use of 
Salisbury, in a different but coeval hand; and at the end is a Table of matters filling 13 pages, which is partly the 
same with, but much less full than, Ms. Egerton 116g. Then follow the lessons at length out of the old law, also 
of the later version. A leaf is wanting at the commencement of the Gospel of Matthew, to ch. i. 25; another from 
Luke ch. xxiv. 51 to John i. 29; and a third at the beginning of Deeds of the Apostles, to ch, ii. 2. 


Rev. J. H. Topp, D.D., or Trin. Cori. Dustin. 
Todd. Vellum, small 4°., 2 cols., of the xv. cent. 


The Apocalypse, imperfect at the heginning and end. It commences with part of the prologue, and ends in 
ch. xxii. 19. 


PROLOGUE. 


2, * 


se 


Here bygynneth a prolog for alle the bokis of the Bible of the oolde testament 


CP. I. 


F YUE and twenty bookis of the olde testament ben bookis of feith, and fulli bookis of 
holy writ; the first is Genesis, the ij. ist Exodi*, the iij. is? Leuitici‘, the iiij. is» Numeri, 
and® the v. is. Deutronomye ; and these fyue ben the bookis of Moises, whiche’ ben clepid 
propurly the lawe; the vj. book’ is%% Josue, the vij. book is Judicum, that enclosith the 
story of Ruth; the viij. book, ix.i x. and! xj.™ and! xij." and xiij.° ben the foure 
bookis of Kyngis and twey? bookis of Paralipominons the xiiij. book is Esdre, that com- 
prehendeth Neemye, and al is o bok anentis Ebreyes, as Jerom seith, but anentis Grekis 
and Latyns these ben twey bookis; and4 the xv. is Hester, the xvj. is Joob, the xvij. is 
the Sauter; the xviij. book", xix.s and" xx.t ben the iij." bookis of Salamon; the first is 
Prouerbis, either Parablis, the ij. is” Eclesiastes, and the iij. is* SongisY of Songis; the 
xxi. book*, xxij. xxiij. and** xxiiij. ben the foure grete prophetis; Isaie is the first, Jeremye 
is the ij. Ezechiel is the iij. and Daniel is the fourth; the? xxv. book is 0* book of xij. 
smale prophetis; Osee ‘is the first>, Joel ‘is the ij.» Amos ‘is the iij.© Abdie ‘is the iiij.> 
Jonas ‘is the fyuethe®, and! Michee ‘is the vj.’ Naum ‘is the vij.> Abacuk ‘is the viij. 
Sofonye ‘is the ix.’ Aggeye ‘is the x.> Sacharie ‘is the xi.” and’ Malachie ‘is the xij. ; 
and alle these xij. smale prophetis ben o book, and in this ordre. And what euer book in 
the olde testament is ‘out of! these fyue and twenty byfore* seid, shal be set among 
apocrifa, that is, with outen autorite of bileue; therfore the book of Wisdom and Ecle- 
siastici! and Judith and Tobie be™ not of bileue. The first book of Machabeies was founden 
write" in Ebreu, and the ij. book of Machabeyes was writen first in Grek. Jerom seith 
al this sentence in the prologe on the first book of Kyngis. Also° the book of Baruc and 
the pistle of Jeremye ben not of the? autorite of the bible anentis Ebreyes, ne‘ the preyer 
of Manasses, as‘ Jerom witnessith, and ‘how mich of® the book of Hester and of* Daniel is 
of autorite anentis Ebreyes, and in Ebreu lettre, it is told in the same bookis by" Jerom 
hym self; netheles Jerom, in suynge Ebreyes, comprehendith alle these" bookis in xxij. ; 
for Ebreies maken oo book of the first and ij.* book of Kyngis, and clepen it Samuel, and 
thei maken oo book of the iij. and iiij.Y book of Kyngis, and clepen it Malachym, and thei 
comprehenden in oo book the ij. bookis of Paralipominon. But certis, litel charge is of 
this rikenyng, whether the’ bookis of Kyngis ben noumbred foure, as Latyns doen, either 
tweyn, as Ebreies doen. Also litel charge is, whether Paralipominon be departid in ij. 
hookis, as Latyns vsen’, either? be oo book aloone, as Ebreis doen®; and so of the first 
book of Esdras and of4 Neemye, litel charge is, whether thei ben tweyne, as Latyns and 


8 From ¢. Prolog. ye. Prologe on the Bible.n. Here §& the xix. 6. * the xx. y@. uOm. 8. WW Om, be. 
higynneth a reule that tellith of the bookis of the oolde * Om.&. **Om.8. y¥ Song yé. 2Om.7. 8a de. 
testament, which ben of very feith, and whiche ben not » Om. de. ¢ Om. de. the iij. ¢ 4 Abdias yé. © Om, 3. 
of feith. But alle the bookis of the newe testament ben fOm.de. Om, &  » Om, de. is xij. 8. | with- 
of feith and of bileene. 8. No title in af. > Omitted  owwte de. ont 8. k fore de. i Ecclesiasticus y. 
in de. Exodus y, 4 Leniticus y. ¢ Om. de. fthe ™ ben ydeC&. 4 writen BydeG. writen first ¢, © And 
whiche Bde. € Om.s. 88 Om. de. bOm.¢ iand sog. POm.yG dner B.nether y8. "Om.5. — § 3it 
ix. 3. and the ix. y@. k and the x. 76. | Om. de. netheles ¢ super ras. t Om. de. also ¢ sup. ras. “of 0. 
m the xj. yé. "the xij. 76. ° the xiij. 7. Pthe wthis@, *the ij. Byety, Ytheilij.6. 2 tho 8, 
twey Bybenét. the bookis ¢ q Om. de. rOm¢ #®0Om.8 — 2 or de. Cysene. 4 Om, de. 


4) B ° 


2 PROLOGUE. 


Grekis vsen, ‘other oon® aloone, as Ebreyes vsen. Netheles it semeth, that Latyns and 
Grekis han more reson in this rikenyng than Ebreies han, but hou euer these bookis ben 
nowmbrid, alle these ben of autorite of bileue, either of cristen feith. Thanne if the first 
book of Esdre and the book*of Neemye ben noumbrid for tweyne, as Grekis and Latyns 
vsen, and if men taken Judith for a book of holy Scripture, as the general congregacioun 
of clergie dide at thef Seyne of Nicene, as Jerom, witnessith in the prologe on? Judith, 
What is apo thanne in the olde testament ben xxvij. bookis of bileue. Also Eclesiastici* was writen 
ee in Ebreu, and the book of Wisdom is not anentis Ebreies, but sowneth' Grek eloquence, 
and summe olde writers affermen, that the Jew Filo made it. Therfore as holy chirche 
redith Judith and Tobie and the bookis of Machabeies, but resceyueth* not tho among holy 
Scripturis', so the chirche redith™ these ij." bookis Eclesiastici® and Sapience to edifying 
of the peple, not? to conferme the autorite of techingis of holy‘ chirche; Jerom seith this 
pleynly in the prologe on™ Prouerbis*. Also Jerom translatide the first book of Esdre and 
Neemye, and biddith that no man delite in thet dremis of the iij. and itij*. book of Esdre 
that ben apocrifa, that is, not of autorite of bileue; for anentis Ebreies the wordis of Esdre 
and of¥ Neemye ben driven in to 0 book; ‘and the bookis* of the olde testament, that 
Hou the vookis ben not anentis Ebreies, and ben not of the noumbre of holy writ’, owen to be cast fer 
SRN wrawey 5 Jerom seith this in the prolog of? Esdre. And therfore Y translatide not the 
ae eee thridde neither? the fourthe book of Esdre, that ben apocrifa; but onely the first, and of 
Neemye, that ben rikened for twey bookis anentis Grekis and Latyns, and ben of autorite 
of bileue. Netheles apocrifa ‘ben seid inb twey maners, as Catholicon seith on this word 
apocrifa; a book is seid apocrifum‘, either for the’ autor is¢ vuknowen, and the treuthe 
therof is opynf; and hooly chirche resseyueth sich a book not to prenyng of feith, but to 
lernyng of vertues; and siche ben the bookis of Judith and other, whiche Seynt Jerom 
noumbrith in the prologe on’ Regum"; either a book is seid apocrifum', for me doutith 
of* the treuthe therof; and holy chirche resceyueth not siche bookis; and siche ben! the 
book of ‘the 3ong™ childhed of the" Sanyour, and the book of the takyng up of the body 
of Seynt Marye to heuen; Catholicon seith this on that word apocrifa. But sothely 
alle the bookis of the newe testament, that is, foure gospelleris, Matheu, Mark, Luk, and 
Jon; xij. pistelis of Poul, vij. smale pistils, the Dedis of Apostlis, and the Apocalips ben 
Hou men _ fulli of autorite of bileue; therfore cristen men and wymmen, olde and 3onge, shulden® 
che ee etadic fast in the newe testament, for it is of ful autorite, and opyn to vndirstonding of 
Fa gl elas” simple men, as to the poyntis that beP moost nedeful to saluacioun ; and the same sentence 
is in the derkiste placis4 of holy writ, whiche sentence’ is in the’ opyn placis; and ech 
place of holy writ, bothe opyn and derk, techith mekenes and charite; and therfore he that 
kepith mekenes and charite hath the trewe vndirstondyng and perfectioun of al holi writ, 
as Austyn preuith in his sermoun of the preysing of charite. Therfore no simple man of 
wit be aferd vnmesurabli to studie in the text of holy writ, for whi tho ben wordis of 
euerlastyng lif, as Petir seide to Crist in the vj. chapitre of Jon; and the Holy Gost stirede 
hooly men to speke and write’ the wordis of hooly writ for the coumfort and saluacioun 
of meke cristen men, as Petir in the ij. pistle in the ende, and Poul in xv.‘ chapitre to 
Romayns witnessen. And no clerk be proude of the verrey vndirstondyng of holy writ, for 
whi verrey vndirstonding of hooly writ with outen charite, that kepith" Goddis heestis, 
makith a man depper dampned, as James and Jhesu Crist witnessen; and pride and 
couetise of clerkis is cause of her blindenes and’ eresie, and prineth hem fro verrey vndir- 


e either oon e&. either be oo book & fOm.y. & of apocrifi¢, @that the 6. ¢therofis¢ f not opyn 8. 
Byd{6.  h Ecclesiasticus y. i it sowneth ¢ * thei & of Bf. } the book of Kyngis in Latyn y. iapocrifi ¢. 
resseyuen ¢, ‘Scriptures. ™redea 20Om.¢. &Om.6.fory. list mOm.8. onureg. shul ¢. 
° Ecclesiasticns y. POm.¢. and 8. athe holy & P ben ydefn&. 4 place 8. "Om. ¢.  § tu write den. 
Tof 8. § Prouerbis in Latyn y. tOm. 8. © the liij. tthe xv. yden@, and kepynge of ¢. that kepith not 3. 
veg. W Om. de. * Om. y6. Ychurche 8. Zony. VY of ¢. 
anee, > isseidon¢. ben seid ons © apocrifa 7. 


PROLOGUE. 3 


stondyng of holy writ, and maken” hem go* quyk in to helle, as Austyn seith on the 
Sauter, on that word, Descendant in infernum viventes.¥ 


ear. I. 


THE old testament is departid in to thre parties, in to moral comaundementis, iudicials, 
and cerimonyals. Moral comaundementis techen to holde and preise and cherishe vertues, Morui co- 
and to fle and repreue vicis, and these comaundementis bynden euer, and han strengthe, for Miwndigs 
tho ben groundid in charite and reson,” and in lawe® of kynde. f Judicials techen domes Vudicialsweren 
and peynes for orrible synnes, and the indicials of Moises lawe weren ful iust and profitable cfd el 
for men, for tho weren ordeined® of God, that may not erre in his domes, and lawis, and“ 
workis. Netheles sithen Crist was maad man, and ordeyned lawe of mercy and of charite, 
and wole not the deth of a° sinful man, but repentaunce and saluacioun, cristen men ben 
not bounden to kepe the’ iudicials of Moyses lawe, that was endid in the tyme of Cristis 
passioun. But 3it cristen lordis that han the swerd, and ben Goddis vikers, in xiij.f ¢°, How tordis 
to Romayns, moun punishe men, that trespassen openly, in catel and bodyly prisoun, and pone 
sumtyme bi bodily deth, whanne the synne may not ellis be distried, neither the comynte$ 
may ellis’ be stablishid in pees, as the! foure doctours and other latter preuen opynly by 
holy writ and resoun; but looke that this be don for charite and comyn profit, with mercy 
and compassioun of bretheren, not for couetise, nether pride, neither for veniaunce of a 
mannes owne wrong. 4[Cerymonials techen figuris and sacramentis of the olde lawe, How serymo- 


that figureden* Crist and his deth, and the misteries of holy chirche in the lawe of grace aera 


and these cerimonials ceessiden outirly, as to obligacioun, in the tyme of Cristis deth, and From ofthe 
ben noyful and dampnable to men that kepen tho, and for that the gospel is prechid and Soe! suficith. 
knowen generally ; for if tho cerymonyes ben kept now, the kepers of tho knowlechen, that 
Crist is not 3it comen, neither suffrid deth for mankynde; and this knowleching is opyn 
heresie!; for whi the treuthe and fredom of the gospel suffisith to saluacioun with out 
keping of cerymonyes maad of God in the old lawe, and mych more with out cerimonyes 
of sinful men and vnkunnynge, that ben made in the™ tyme of Antecrist, and of vnbyndyng 
of Sathanas, in xx." c°. of Apocalips. Therfore as it is opyn eresie to seie, that the gospel 
with his treuthe and fredom suffisith not to cristen mennes saluacioun with outen kepyng 
of cerimonyes of Goddis lawe 3ouen to Moyses, so it semith opyn heresie to seie, that the 
gospel with his treuthe and fredom suffisith not to saluacioun of cristen men with out 
kepyng of ceremonyes and statutis of sinful men and vnkunnynge, that ben maad in the 
tyme of Sathanas and of Antecrist. 
CAP, Ir 

°SYMPLE men of wit moun be edified mych? to heuenly lyuyng bi redyng and knowyng 
of the olde testament, for in the bigynnyng of Genesis they moun knowe, hou God made Genesis. 
heuen and erthe and alle creaturis of nou3t, and made man to his owne ymage and licnesse, 
and to haue blisse in body and soule with outen ende?, Also‘men moun’ knowe, how sore 
God punishide Adam and Eue for brekyng of his comaundement; and hou Abel plesid 
God by feith, mekenesse and charite; and hou Caym displeside hym by synnes, and specialli 
by enuye, hatrede'™ and manquellyng*. Also hou Noe was loued of God, and al the world, 
outaken viij. persones, was distried' for synne; and hou for pride and other synnes God 
departid many langagis, that no man vndirstood other in the tour of Babel; and hou feith- 
ful and obedient to God Abraham was, that he 3ede out of his lond in to a straunge cuntre, 
and was redy to sle his owne sone Isaac at the wille of God, and gat therfore mich reward 
of God ; and hou God distried Sodom and Gommor, and other thre cytees, for leccherye and 


Ww maketh 8(0. * to go de. yHeere endith the pro- a pr.m. mOm.y, "the xx. de(n. 9 This ts the 
log on the book of Genesis. y. 2% in resonde. the  prolog of Genesis. 8. P either holpen myche % 4 ony 
lawe {. bendidy. © Om. 8. 40m. 8. © werenée. ende de. "me may 6.men mays and hatrede « 
f the xiij. de. & comynalte de. not ellis¢. iOm. §mansleyng¢. ¢ stryed. 

B. kfiguren8. 1 errour ether heresie 8¢. ether heresie 


BQ 


4 PROLOGUE. 


other synnes, that tho weren sunkun doun; and the dede see is now where tho" grete 
cytees weren. Also hou trewe and obedient to God weren Isaac and Jacob. and Joseph, 
and hou God kepteY hem in alle perels. Al this proces of Genesis shulde stire” cristen men 
Exodus. to be feithful, and for to drede and loue God, and in alle thingis do* his willeY. 4 7Also 
in Exodi men moun? knowe, hou God kept his simple peple in Egipt, and encresside hem 
gretly in that lond, vudir the persecucioun and tirauntrie of Farao?, and deliueride hem 
by many miraclis, and punishid Farao and his peple with ten® stronge veniauncis, and 
fedde’ hem meruelously in desert xl. 3eris, where no duelling of men was bifore, and 
made hein to* ouercome the strong peple of. Amalech. Aftir this God tau3te hem wyis 
gouernayle, and bitook tof hem the? ten comaundementis and other iudicials, to punishe 
gretly opyn grete synnes. Also" they! weren ful bisy to make a costlew tabernacle to the 
onour of God, by his bidding and techyng, that figuride holi chirche and vertues in mennes 
soulis. At the laste God took gret veniaunce on hem for idolatrie, whanne thei forsoken 
the feith and worshipyng! of God, and onoureden 30ten calues bi stiryng™ of the deuel. 
And thanne Moyses was a trewe mediatour bitwix God and the® sinful peple, and seide 
thus to God, for gret trist of his mercy and ri3tfulnes®, and for? gret charite to the peple, 
* cither?? for3iue thou this trespas to hem, either do me out of thi book in which thou hast 
writen me ;” and for this deuout preier and greet charite of Moyses God sparede the synful 
pepil, and distryede not sodeynly al the pepil, but took hem to mercy and grace. And this 
proces of Exodi shulde make men trysty4 in Goddis help, and to be trewe in his loue, and 
Leviticus. — eschewe his offence with al her my3tis. §]"The iij. book clepid’ Leuitici techith men 
sacrificis due to God, and for synnes of the peple, in the' tyme of the olde testament, and 
Hou sacrificis that' no man vnworthi shulde ney3e to the seruise and sacrifice of God. These sacrificis 


schulden not 


be late owen not to be kept now, for tho figureden the passioun and deth® of Crist, and remissioun 
ane G, Orbe- 


ding of wed- Of synnes bi the blood and merit of Crist, in the lawe of grace. Also this book techith 
oe 2 men to absteyne fro wedlok of ny3 kyn and affynyte, with ynue the ij. degre’, and ordeyneth 
peyne of deeth for ydolatrie, and weddyng with ynne the ij. degre of consanguynyte and 
Hou Goddis_affynite. At the last this book techith men” to kepe Goddis heestis, and for to loue her 
lawe forbedith : 5 . ° 
wicchecrafts, neiz3boris and to* do equyte to hem, and werkis of mercy to nedy men; and comaundith 


sorceri€, ele. 


[und] rewara-lust wey3tis and mesures, and domes; and forbedith strongly ydolatrye and wicche craftis’ 
vb pes f and false coniouryngis ; and tellith prosperite that shal come to hem that kepen Goddis 
heestis, and veniaunce and peyne to hem that breken Goddis heestis. And this proces of 
Leuitici shulde make cristen men aferd to breke Goddis heestis, and ioyful to kepe tho 
Numeri. to lyf and deth, for’ reward of God in euerlastyng blisse. 4 *The iiij. book clepid Numeri 
tellith the noumbre of peple led out of Egipt, bothe of lewid men and of prestis and of 
dekenys ; and how God kept hem longe in the orrible desert, and punisshide hem alle bi 
deeth, out taken Caleph and Josue, for grucchyng and mystriste to Goddis word, and 
punisshide Marie, Moyses sistyr, with lepre, for bacbytyng of Moyses, the mylde seruaunt 
of God. Also? whanne God wolde haue distryed the peple for grucchyng a3ens hym, 
Moyses preyede with al his herte for the peple that wolde stoone® hym to deeth. Also 
Of the sabot. God techith there, that he that doth ony synne by pride shal be deed, and that he that brak 
the sabot, 3he by gaderyng of stickis, shulde be stooned of? alle the peple. Also God 
oF re punisshide soore Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, that weren rebel aj3ens Moyses and Aaron, 


Abiron, and made disceucioun in the peple, so that the erthe openyde, and deuouride hem with 
here tabernaclis, and al her catel*, and thei 3eden doun quyke in to helle. 3it whanne the 


wthe¢. Ykepe¢ W stire meche 8. stire mechel«. "Om. ¢ © for riztfulness Sey. P Om. &. PP Om. 8. 


seem. *todo 8. Y¥ Here endith the prolog of Gene. 1 to triste ¢. * Heere .... bigynneth a prolog on 
sis. 8. 2 Here.... bigynneth the prolog of Exody.8.  Leuitici and this itis.d8. 8 Om.g. Omg. U the 
a may 6. bkyng Farao fe. € Om. & d thane deth de. Y gree 8. W Om.8. * Om. By. Ywicche 
brou3te his owne peple thoruthe the reede see, and craft de. Z to haue ¢ a Prolog. [on Numeri] 6. 


fedde << ¢Om.8. fOm.¢. 8 Om. pt b And d&. and ¢ ¢ haue stonned ¢. sup. ras. 4 30a of «. 
ithis¢. kof ¢ lthe worshipyng 8. ™strengthe ¢ © catels 8. 


PROLOGUE. 5 


peple grucchide a3eyns Moyses and Aaron, and wolde sle hem vniustly, and God killide 

mony thousendis of the’ peple herfore, Moyses bad Aaron preye, and offre encense for the 

peple ; and so he ceesside the veniaunce. Also God techith there, that prestis shulen hane Hox prestis 
the firste fruytis and the first? boren thingis, and part of sacrificis and avowis and offringis ; i ee 
and dekenys shulen haue tithis of the peple, and 3iue her tithis, that is, the tenthe part of ““** 
tithis whiche thei token of the peple, to the hijest prest, and prestis and dekenys shulen 

holde hem apayed with her spiritual part of tithis and offryngis, and take no possessioun 

‘in the lond? of her britheren, for God hymself shal be the part and eritage! of prestis, in the 

myddys of the sones of Israel. Also for Moyses and Aaron bileueden not fully to Goddis 

word, but doutiden of his byheest at the water of a3enseying, God suffride not hem for* to 

entre in to the lond of byheest, but bothe wercn deed in desert. Also in this book ben told 

the duellyngis of the children of Israel in desert, and the batels whiche thei hadden ajeyns 

hethen men; and of Balaam hou he was huyrid to curse! Goddis peple, and hou God com- 

pellyd hym to blesse his peple, and to™ seye profesie of Crist. And for the peple of Israel 

dide fornicacioun and idolatrie, God bad Moyses hange alle the princis a3ens the stunne, 
‘that the strong veniaunce of God were turned awey fro the peple of Israel. And for as Of Fynees. 
myche as Fynees the prest killide a duke of Israel, that dide fornicacioun with an hethen 
womman, and dide" this for feruent loue to God, he gat of God euerlastyng presthod for 

hym and his° seed, and turned awey Goddis wraththe fro the children of Israel. Also there 

is tau3t, who shal be eyr of a man; and of halydayes, and sacrificis, and offryngis maade in 

tho; and whiche avowis shulen be holden, and whiche not; and of batels; and hou the 

preyes shulden be departid among the peple, and what shulde falle to the prest; and hon 

the lond of byheest shulde be departid to xij. lynagis; and dekenys shulden haue citees to 

enhabite in tho, and the subarbees to here shecp and beestys; and citees of refuyt shulden Hox citees of 
be ordeyned for hem that shedden blood vnwilfully, not of purpos, neithir hatrede byfore pels oar 
goynge ; and he that is gilty of mannis deeth shal be slayn with outen ony? redempcioun. 
This proces of Numeri shulde stire cristen men for to loue here enemyes, and do good to4 
hem, as Moyses and Aaron diden, and to kepe Goddis heestis, and shede™ not mannis blood 
vniustly. [*°The fyfthe book clepid Deutronomye is a rehersyng and confermyng of al the Deutronomy. 
lawe biforegoyng*, and styrith" men gretly to kepe and teche Goddis heestis, and adde no 

thing to tho, neither drawe awey ony thing fro tho; and first it techith, that wise men and 

my3ty shulen™ be maad iugis, and deme iustly’ the pore and the riche ; aftirward hou the 

Jewis ouercamen Seon, the” kyng of Hesebon, and token his lond and alle the goodis therynne 

in to her owne possessioun, and dedyn in lyk maner to Og the* kyng of Basan, and to 

his lond and goodis. Ferthermore God comaundith men to kepe hise heestis, and adde no IN to apa eo 
thing therto, neither’ drawe ony’ thing ther fro, and that they drede and loue God of* al God, ne put 


2 therfro, and 
her herte, and al> her soule, and al her strengthe, and eschewe ydolatric, and serue and ae with 


worshipe hym aloone; and that thei teche Goddis heestis to here sones, and thenke on tho Eh hale 
heestis in hous and weye, slepynge and wakynge. Also‘ God comaundith his peple toJor breking of 
eschewe weddyngis of hethen men and wymmen to her children, lest they ben drawen to [aundementis.] 
idolatrye, and bihetith many blessyngis to hem and miche encresyng of goodis, if thei 
kepen treuly hise comaundementis, and that strong veniaunce and distryyng shal coime 
on the Jewis, if thei doen® ydolatrie, and ben® ynobedient to God. Also God biddith’ hem 
haueS mynde, that they weldiden the lond of byheest, not for her owne ri3tfulnesse and 
strengthe, but for the synnes of men that duelliden therynne, and for the ooth of God which" 
he made to Abraham and to other hooly men. And‘ thanne God remembrith to hem 
many grete synnis, to make hem war that thei trespase no more, but that thei drede God 


fOm. 8. f Om. 8Om.8. ®Om. 8 itheeri-  t afore goynge de. uv teechith 6. uu shulden ¢. 
tage B. kOm, & lenowes. ™Om.¢ "hedideg. Vriztly de. WY Om.d. * Omg Yneg 7 noe. 
© for his 8¢. P Om. ¢. q for ¢. rto schedeg, @with¢& Pofale. ¢andg 4 diden ¢. €veren ¢ 
* Heere.... bigynneth a prolog on Deutronomy. 8. {bad < §& to have ¢ h the which & 1 Om. de. 


6 PROLOGUE. 


and loue hym in alle her hert and soule, kepe* hise comaundementis, and swere by his 
Hou men name, and loue pilgrymes either comelyngis. Eft God biddith hem haue hise wordis in 
fect ee her hertis and wittis, and haue tho for a singne in the hondis, and bytwyxe her y3en, and 
God in mynfésthat they teche her sones to bithenke! on the wordis! of God euere, and that they write 
Sones. the™ wordis of God on the postis and 3atis of her hous; and tellith and 3iueth his blessyng 
to hem, if thei kepen hise heestis, and 3iueth his curs to hem, if they breken hise heestis, 
and worshipen aliene goddis. Also they shulen distrye the placis wherynne hethen men 
diden ydolatrie, and distrye her auters, ymagis, woodis and ydols; and thei shulen make 
her sacrifices, and offre her tithis, and the firste fruytis, and 3iftis and avowis in the place 
which the Lord hath chose to his name, and this was the temple of Jerusalem. Also 
a prophete, either a feynere of dremys, that ‘wole styre" men to do° ydolatrye shal be slayn, 
and so shal a frend either citee that doth idolatrye, eithir styrith other men therto. Also 
thou shalt paye tithis of alle fruytis that growen in? erthe, of whete, of1 wyn, and* of 
oyle, and the® first boren thingis of neet and sheep; and in the thridde 3ere thou shalt 
departe an‘ othir tithe of alle thingis that growen to thee, and kepe it with ynne thine 
3atis, to susteyne the dekene, pylgrym outher comelyng, fadirles child either" modirles, 
Fea and wydue, that ben with ynne thy 3atis. Also in the vij. 3eer shal be remissioun of dette 
schal not be to citeseynes and kynnesmen, netheles not to a pylgrym and comelyng, for he may be 
Pee “© compellid to paye. Outirly a nedy man and begger shal not be among” Goddis peple ; 
ee but pore men shulen not fayle in the lond, therfore ryche men shulen helpe hem with 
poremen. lone, and helpe hem wilfully in here nede. Thanne God techith of thre grete solempnetees, 
of pask, of the feeste of woukis either pentecost, and of the feeste of tabernaclis*; and 
that maystris and iugis shulen be ordeyned in alle 3atisY either citees by ech lynage, to 
deme the peple by iust doom, and take not 3iftis nether persones. Ferthermore God techith, 
that who euer is conuyct by tweyne eithir thre witnessis’, that he hath do idolatrie, he 
shal be stoonyd, first by the* witnessis’, and thanne by al the pepil. He that is proud 
and wole not obeye to the comaundement of the hize prest, and to the doom of the iugis®, 
in that that® thei techen Goddis lawe, shal be deed. 'Thanne God techith, what maner 
Hou prestis yng the pepil shal ake, and what shal be his office. Aftirward God techith, that prestis 
schulde not . : © 
haue posses- and dekenys, and alle that ben of the same lynage, shulen ‘not haue* part and eritage with 
wee “the residue pepil of Israel, for they shulen ete the sacrifices of the Lord, and the offringis 
of hym, and thei shulen take noon othir thing of the possessioun of her bretheren ; for whi 
a oe Eat God hym self is her eritage. Ferthermore God forbedith idolatrie, and to enquere con- 


iureris, iourers, and to kepe dremys and chiteryng of briddis; and comaundith that no wicche 
dremeris aL: eee 8 

wicchis, nei- neithir’ enchaunter be, and that men take not® councel at hem that han spiritis in cloos, 
ther take coun- 


veitathim  neithir at false dyuynours, neithir axe of deede men the trouthe. Also God shal reise a 
that hath ho Dyofete of her brethirs, that is Crist the Sauyour, and he that hath’ not hise wordis shal 
be punishid. A profete that wole speke by pride in the name of God that thing that God 
pies ee not hym, eithir bi the name’ of othir goddis, shal be slayn. Also vj. citees of refuyt 
be. eithir’ of fraunchise shulen be, that he! that sleeth a man, not by hatrede but ajens his 
wille, be™ saued, and he that sleeth a man bi hatrede and bifore castyng, shal be slayn 
with oute mercy, eithir raunsoun. He that is conuict to have seid fals witnessyng a3eus 
his brothir, shal haue the same peyne to which his brothir shulde be put, if he hadde be 
Hou ferdfut gilty. Also prestis shulen coumforte hem that gon to iust batel, to haue trist in God, and 


men and men 


that han newe Arede not her enemyes, and that ferdful men, and thei that han newly byldyd an hous, 
Piaigsiats go eithir" newly plauntid a vyne, eithir® newly weddid a wyf, and not vsid hir, go not to batel; 


‘o tataile. and first werryours shulen profre pees to a citee, and if the citee 3elde it self, men ther 


K and kepe fy sec. m. «. sec.m. \thenket Nword. nes8. ®Om. Be ? juge 86 =¢Om. der, ce haue 
™ tho 8. "sterith de. °Om.6 Pong. dandgé now 4nege enog fOm. ge _ & brithren def. 
TOm. de. softheg tof gt UYorg Wamong Pheerith dea. inames¢ korg loons. ™schal 
jou d, *the tabernacle 8 Ythe satis Zwit- beg Mord or dete 


PROLOGUE. 7 


ynne shulen lyue vndir tribute, ellis alle men ther ynne shulen be slayn; and this is vndir- 
stonden of tho citees that be not 3ouen in to possessioun to the pepil of Israel. And there 
is teld the departyng of preyes, and what trees? shulen’ be kit doun in bisegynge’. Also 
God techith what shal be doon, whanne a man is founden slayn, and the sleer is vnknowun. 
A child rebel to the fadir and modir, and that* 3iueth hym silf to glotenye, leccherye and a ie jae 
drunkennesse, shal be stoonyd of al the citee. A man shal kepe the oxe and sheep of his and niodir. 
brothir, that is strayed awey, and bringe it a3en to his brothir, and so of other beestis and 
of ech thing; and if thou knowist not, whose thot ben, thou shalt kepe tho stille, tyl" thi ; 
brothir seke and resseyue tho. Who euer doth avoutrie, shal be deed; if’ a man defoulith’ Ph ein” F- 
a virgyne, he shal wedde hir, and 3iue I. siclis of siluer to her fadir. Thou shalt not take gyxe. 
a seruaunt to his lord, which seruaunt fledde to thee, but he shal duelle with thee in a place 
that plesith hym. Noon hoore shal be of the dou3tris of Israel, neithir a lechour of the Voor Loore 
soones of Israel. Thou shalt not leene to thi brothir for vsure. If a man hatith his wife, eae 
he shel write and 3iue to hir a libel of forsakyng; but this is forbedun of Crist in the 
gospel of Mt‘. v'°.* ca°. and ‘xix ca®.Y Whanne a man hath take late a wyf, he shal not go 
to batel, neithir ony comyn office shal be put on’ hym, but oon 3eer he shal be glad with 
his wif, and take heede to his hous. He that proloyneth his brothir, which is a fre man, 
and sillith hym, shal* be slayu. Thou shalt 3elde ‘at ny3t to a> pore man his weed, and in 
the same day thou shalt paye to a nedy traueylour his huyre. Fadris shulen not be slayn 
for the sones, neithir sones® for the fadrist. Whanne thou repist corn in the feeld, and Thou sckatt 
for3etist an handful, thou shalt not turne a3en to take it, but thou shalt suffre that Hennes 
comelyng, fadirles* child and wydewe take it awey; and so of gaderyng of olyues and of nese 
gaderyng of grapis. Whanne twey men ben at debatyng, and the wif of oon wole delyuere 
hir housbond fro the hond of the strenger, and take hym by the preuy membris, sche shall 
leese her hond withouten eny mercy. And there God forbedith false wei3tis and mesures, Of false weiseis 
af more and af lesse. Also dekenes schulen pronunce and seie with hi3 vois to alle the "eur 
men of Israel, he is cursid that doth ydolatrie, eithirs brekith eny comaundement of God He is cursid 
eithir$ doth a3ens eny part of the lawe of God; and al the peple schal seie, Amen. Also eS ge 
God biheetith greet prosperite to his peple, if thei kepe his heestis, and thei schulen be poe 3 
blessid in citee and in" feeld, and the fruit of her wombe and the fruyt of her lond shal be ra aes 
blessid, and alle thingis that perteynen to hem schulen be blessid, and thei schulen haue ¢f “2. 
victorie of hire enemyes, and manye prosperites' of soule and of* bodi schulen bifalle to 
hem; and if thei kepen not Goddis heestis, thei schulen be cursid in cite and feeld', the 
fruit™ of her wombe, and alle thingis that perteynen to hem schul be cursid™" ; God schal 
sende hem hungir, thirst, pestilence, feuer and coold, brennynge" and heete, and corupt eir, 
til thei perischen ; enemyes schulen haue victorie, and conquere hem, and take hem pre- 
soners; and 3it God schal punysche hem with huge veniaunce, that alle that heeren ben 
astonyed. Natheles if whanne alle these veniauces ben fallen on hem, thei® repenten verily 
in the? herte, and turne a3en to God, and obeyen to hise heestis in al her herte and al : 
her soule, the Lord shal haue mercy on hem, and bringe hem a3en to hire lond fro alle Of coumfort 
folkis, among whiche thei weren scaterid, and God schal blesse hem, and make hem to beeen 
of more noumbre than her fadris weren, and schal turne alle the’ cursis on her enemyest 3774) % 
and God schal 3eue to hem aboundaunce in alle werkis of her hondis, and iu alle thingis 
that perteynen to hem. Moises spac alle these wordis to al the puple of Israel, and had 
hem drede not her enemyes, for God schal go bifore* his peple, and ouercome her enemyes. 
And Moises ordeyned Josue to be ledere of the peple bifore al the multitude of the sones 

Ptree{ dschal ¢. tthe bisegyng de. bysekynge a. » blessid in Se. 1 prosperite 8 * Om.¢ | in 
*Om.¢ tthei¢t. to ®. Vand if dem. Wdefoule ¢  feeld 8. ™ fruytes ¢. mm gcursid ¢. n and 
x the fynethe < ythe nynthe chapiter ¢. 2 vnto¢ brennynge de. © and thei ¢. P Om. ¢. 4 thes 


the shal de. a%any3t + >the 8. ¢thesones¢. @ysec.m. Tenemyea. § to fores. 
4 fadir¢ and fadirles & Om. 8. & or dele. 


8 PROLOGUE. 


pice ae of Israel. Moises wroot this lawe and 3af it tot prestis, the sones of Leuy, and to the" 
ad rede the 


lowe of God toeldre men of Israel, and bad hem rede the wordis of this lawe bifore al Israel, in the 
ori’ se heeringe of alle men and wymmen, litel children, and comelingis, eithir conuersis to the 
eee feith of Jewis, that thei heere and lerne and dreede oure Lord God, and kepe and fille” alle 
the wordis of this lawe. Moises bi Goddis comaundement wroot a greet song, and tau3te 
it the children of Israel, that it schulde be into witnessing ajens hem; and Moises clepide 
togidere alle the eldre men and techeris, and clepide heuene and erthe into witnessing a3ens 
hem; and whanne Moises hadde fillid alle the wordis of this greet song, he styede into 
an hil, and was deed there, and God biryede him, and man* knew not his sepulcre til’ into 
this day. Cristen men schulde myche reede and heere ‘and kunne’ this book of Deutro- 
nomye that* conprehendith al the lawe of Moises, and disposith men for to bileeue in Crist, 
and heere and kepe his wordis. 
CAP. IV. 

Josue. “The vj. book, which is clepid Josue, tellith in general, that Josue brou3te the peple into 
the lond of biheeste, and departide it bi lott to hem; and first how God bihi3te to Josue 
that noon schulde mowe® a3enstonde him and his peple in alle the daies of his lijf; and God 
bihizste that Josue schulde departe bi lot to his peple the lond of biheest; and God 

Houaman comaundide him to kepe al the lawe, and bowe not fro it, but thenke therinne bi‘ daies 

selulds jhenke and ny3tis, that he kepe and do tho thingis that ben writen therinne. Aftir this Josue 

day and nit. gente aspies to bihoolde the lond and the citee of Jerico; and thei entriden in to the hous 

Of Raab. of a comun womman Raab, and weren sauid there bi counceil and helpe of the womman. 
Thanne Josue bad the prestis take the arke of boond® of pees of the Lord, and goo bifore 
the peple, and thei diden so. And whanne thef prestis camen with’ the arke to the brinke 

Hou the watir of Jurdan, the greet watir of Jurdan wente awey to the deed se, and the hizere wateris 

pie *® stooden stille as a wal, so that the peple:passide bi the drie botme, and the prestis stoodin 
on the drie erthe in the myddis of Jurdan. Also Josue bad xij. men of xij." lynagis of 
Israel take xij. greete stoonis fro the botme of Jordan, and sette tho in Galgalis, where the 
peple settide! tentis in the ny3t/ aftir the passage‘ of Jurdan, and take xij. stoonis of the 
lond, and putte in the myddis of Jordan, where the arke hadde stoonde; and bad that 
fadris schulden! teche hire children, hon thei passiden bi the drie botme of Jurdan, for God 
driede the™ watris theroffe, as he hadde do before in the reed se, and the prestis and 
princis and al the peple obeyede to Josue. Thanne" Josue circumcide® the peple that was 
vncireumcidid xl. 3eer in desert, and the peple made paask in the xiiij. day of the monthe 
at euentid ; and Josue si3 an aungel of the Lord, which aungel was prince of Goddis oost. 

ey. fgg Also the stronge wallis of Jerico felden doun at Goddis ordynaunce, whanne the? prestis 
brayeden with vij. trumpis, and alle the peple criede an hi3 in the vij. day of cumpassing 
of the citee. And the peple of Israel distroiede and brente the citee and alle thingis ther- 
inne, outaken Raab and tho that weren in her hous, and outtaken gold and syluer, and 
vesscls of bras and yroun ‘, whiche thei haleweden in to the tresorie of the Lord. Also for 

Of dchar, Achar dide a3ens Goddis bidding, and took to himself a thing reserued to Goddis vs, he 
was stoonid and brent, and alle hise goodis weren brent with hym; and til‘ this punysching 
was doon on hym, ‘the peple® of Israel my3te not stoonde, but was ouercomen of hire 
enemycs. After this punysching of Achar Josue took the citee of Hay, and killede the 
king and al the peple, and distroiede and brente the citee, and hangide the king therof in*s 
a iebat. Thanne Josue bildide an auter to God in the hill of Hebal, and offride theronne 
brent sacrificet and pecsible sacrificis®, and wroot the Detutronomye of Moyses lawe on 


tOm.a tOm.f. Wwfulle 8. *amang. yOm. & passynge de. Ischuleng ™Om. 8. ® And 6. 


¢. z Om. 6. a and kunne it, that 8. b Here © circumsiside 8. circumcidede be. P Om. et. 1 of 
-... bigynneth a prolog on Josue. 6. © now at. ireng Fal aey. om.6. § for afore this the puple de. 
d bothe ¢ € the boond eft. f Om. et. gand sSone ' sacrifisis de. % sacrifice BC 


brousten 8. bthe xij. & sett ¢ J mexte ny3te 


PROLOGUE. 9 


stoonis. And first he blesside the peple of Israel, and aftir these thingis he redde alle’ the Hou Josue 
wordis of blessing and of cursing, and alle thingis that weren writen in the book of lawe™ ; a 
he lefte noo hone vntouchid of these thingis whiche Moises hadde comanndid, but he de- a ee 
claride alle thingis bifore al the multitude of Israel, to wymmen and litel* children, and to?” 
comelyngis that dwellidenY among hem. Also men of Gabaon feyneden hem to be of fer 

cuntre, and bi this fraude thei ‘gaten of Josue and other princis pees and lijf#; and for~ 

this fraude thei and alle hire successouris weren maad boonde, to bringe woode and watir 

to the seruise of the auter and of* al the multitude of Israel for enere®. Also Josue by sou Josue 
Goddis help ouercam v. greete kingis in oo day, and made hise princis trede>» on the neckis 47700", (1 


kinges, and 
of these kingis, and aftirward* hangide these kingis in v. iebatis, and he ouercam alle the paride bi lor 


kingis and her peplis that awellliden in the® lond of biheest, that weren xxxj. kingis, and tees 
departide the lond of biheest to xij. lynagis of Israel bi lot, and citees of refuyt, and citees 

to prestis and dekenes to dwelle inne‘, as God comaundide. This processe of Josue schulde 

stire cristene men to haue greet trist in God, and dreede noo man neither’ peple, as longe 

as thei seruen" treuly Almy3ty God. f'The vij. book clepid* Judicum tellith' that the sudicum. 
puple of Israel was reulid with iugis, either domysmen, aftir the deeth of Josue, and sum- 

tyme bi a womman Delbora. Whanne the peple felde to greete synnes, and specialy to Of Detoora. 
ydolatrie, God sente aduersaries on hem that turmentiden the Jewis ful sore, and killide 

many thousendis of hem, and heeld othere vndir tribute and greet thraldam. And whanne Hou di very 
the peple repentide vereily, and criede to God with al her herte, he sente help to hem, and jon gurmercy. 
reiside’a iuge that ouercam her enemyes, and reulide hem wel in pees and in Goddis lawe. 

This prosces of Judicum schulde stire cristene men for to flee synne, and loue God that 

doith so greet mercy to hem that repentyn™ verili. 4["‘This book comprehendith the storie rus. 

of? Ruth, that was an hethene womman, and lefte her nacoun, and ydolatrie, and bileeuede 

in God, and kepte his lawe. Therfore sche was weddid to a noble man of the Jewis, and 

is set in the genelogie either? kynrede of oure Sanyour. This story schulde stire alle men‘ 

to forsake her synne, and serue God treuly in al hire lijf, for reward of heuenly blisse. 

4] ‘The first book of Kingis tellith, how the prest Ely and his sones weren repreued and Tis fie book 
slayn, for thei gouerneden yuele Goddis peple, and for her synne and necligence the peple of Qa ae & 
dide myche synne, and was ouercomen of hethene men, and the arke of God was "sss. 
taken of hethene men, and thei killeden manye thousindis*’ of thet Jewis; and how the ee pagel and 
trewe chijld Samuel was a feithful prophete of the Lord, and gouernede wel the peple 

in Goddis seruise and ri3tfulnesse, and dide noon extorcioun, neither" took 3iftis of eny 

man, neither coueitide eny mannis good, but dide alle thingis in his offis iustly bifore 

God and man. And whanne Samuel was eeld, he settide’ his sones inges ofYY Israel ; 

and for thei bowide aftir auarice, and tooken 3iftis, and peruertiden doom, the peple 

axiden a king on” hem, to greet indignacoun of God and harm of* hemself. Thanne 

Saul that’ was pore and meke, and sou3te the assis of his fadir, was maad king, and 

dide wel a lytel while, and aftirward for his pride and coueitise he was repreued of God, 

and pryued fro the reume, bothe he and his kyn; and pore Dauith was chosen king bi of Dauits. 
Goddis ordynaunce for his meeknesse, mersy, and charite. Dauith sparyde Saul his enemye, 

that pursuede him to deeth vniustly, and was a traitour and blasfemere’ of* God, and not 

oonly sparide him twyes bitaken in to his hoondis, whanne he my3te haue slayn him, and 

3it ascapide harmles, but also lettide hise men to smyte hym, whanne thei my3ten haue 

slayn him, and scapid>» harmles. And 3it the wickid tyraunt Saul pursuede him for enuye, 


v Om. ée, Ww Goddis lawe ¢ ¥ to litel dene. elepid ¢ 1 and tellith ¢ m fener hem ¢. 
y dwellen ¢y pr.m. z gaten of Josue pees and lijf, ™ Ieere.... bigynneth a prologe on Ruth.s. °Om. 6. 
and other princis ay. gatyn of Josue pees and lyf, of Pp of ¢. 4d cristen men ¢ r Here. . . bigynneth a 
Josue and othere pryncis 8. @to¢sup.ras. beuer-  prologe on the jfirste book of Kyngis. 5. 8 thousend 
more ¢. b>btotreder. ¢thanneheée. tho. de. tOm.de. prim. “neg. Vsett¢ Wonk Wwup 
ethat8. ftherinneg neg. hb serneden aBsen. onde. * to de. Ywhilhe de. 4a blasfemere p. 


i Here... . bigynneth a prolog on Judicum. 8. *is atog. haue scapid de, bb git haue seapid «. 
Cc 


10 PROLOGUE. 


and sou3te his deth in manye maners, and euere God kepte Dauith in alle perrels, and 
jeldide peyne® to Saul for his tyrauntrie and wickidnesse, and made him to be slayn of 
hethene men. This processe of the firste book of Kingis schulde stire prestis to be not 
necligent in her offis, neither to be coueytous, and styre seculer lordis to be meke and iust 
The secunde to God and men. 4] “The ij. book of Kingis tellith first, hou Dauith biweylide greetly the 
pee ag * deth of Saul and of¢ Jonatas, and of Goddis peple; and Dauith killede the man of Amalech 
bogie aoe that killede® Saul outirly, aftir the deeth wounde of Saul, and brou3te to Dauith the coroune 
‘and bye‘ of Saul. Aftir this the lynage of Juda corounnede either anoyntide Dauith in 
Ebron, that he schulde reyne on the hous of Juda; and thanne was longe werre bytwixxe" 
Hisboseth, sone! of Saul, and bitwixe* the hous of Dauith; Dauith encreside euere, and 
waxe strongere ‘and strongere!, and the hous of Saul dicreeside ech day; and Dauith 
rengnide vij. 3eer in Ebron, and gat vj. sones. Also Danith made mychel™ sorewe for the" 
deth of Abner, whanne Joab hadde killid him bi treesoun. Also Dauith killide Baana 
and Rechab, that killeden bi treesoun Hisboseth his enemye. ‘Thanne al Israel cam in to 
Ebron, and anoyntide Dauith in to king of® Israel, and Dauith reguede on Juda in Ebron 
vij. 3eer aud an half, and regnede? in Jerusalem xxxiij. 3eer on al Israel and Juda, and was4 
xxx. 3er eeld whaune he began to rengne, and rengnede xl. jeer. Aftir this the noble king 
Dauith hadde twyes* victories of Filisteis. Thanne Dauith took xxx. thousind chosent men 
Hou Dauith of Israel to bringe to his place the arke of God, for renerence and deuocioun. Dauith made 


oe greet mynstrelsye, and mekide himself bifore the arke, and suffride rebukinge of Mycol, the 


eg or dou3tir of Saul; therfore Dauith thou3te to" bylde an hous to the ark of God. Thanne 
seornide him. God telde to Dauith that his sone schulde bylde this hous, and the trone of the reume of 
Dauith schal be stable’ withouten ende; and this is fillid in Crist. Thanne Dauith hadde 
victorie of many londis, and made tho tributarie to Israel, and God kepte Dauith in alle 
thingis, to whiche he 3ed forth. And Dauith dide dom and ri3tfulnesse to al his peple, and 
he dide mercy and curtesie to Myfyboseth, sone* of Jonatas. Aftir these thingis Dauith 
Of the auoutrieAwellide at home, whanne Joab and the oost wente to bateile, andY ‘in this tyme Dauith? 
iat Dauith aide auoutrie with Bersabee, the wijf of Vrie, and procuride the deth of Vrie bi tresoun. 
Thanne God sente Nathan the prophete to repreue Dauith of this synne, and he took 
meckly his* repreuyng, and knoulechide that he synnede ajens God; and God for3af the 
synne, but swerd and persecusioun jede” neuere awey fro his hous, for God killede the sone 
of Bersabee, and 00 sone of Dauith killede another, and Absolon his sone roos aj3ens him, 
and droof him out of Jerusalem, and sou3te with stronge oost to slee him. Thanne Dauith 
3ede ont of Jerusalem on his feet, and stiz3ide with bare feet into the hijnesse of the hille of 
Olyuete, and wepte, and al his peple wepte bittirly. And Dauith mekede him to God, and 
seide, “ 3if God seith® to me, thou pleesist not me, I am redy, do he that that is good 
Hou Semey _“ bifore himself.” Thanne Semey, that was of the kyn of Saul, dispiside Dauith, and 
curside Dauith. 4 5 5 
clepide him a manquellere, and a man of Belial, and a rauenour of the rewme, and he 
curside Dauith, and castide stoonis and erthe ajens Dauith, and a3ens alle the seruauntis of 
king Dauith; and whanne Abisay wolde slee this cursere, Dauith bad him suffre Semey to 
curse him, and seide, God comaundide® hym ‘that he curse Dauith. And® the kyng seide 
to Abysay and to alle his seruauntis, “ Loo! my sone that 3ede out of my wombe seekith 
“ my lijf, that is, to slee me, how inyche more now this sone of Gemyny ; suffre 3e him to 
* curse bi comaundement of the Lord; if in caas the Lord bihoolde my turment, and 3elde 
“good to me for this" cursing to day.” Aftirward Absolon defoulide opynly his fadris 
wijfes bifore al Ysrael. Thanne Achitofel 3af a fel counceyl, to pursue Dauith in that! ny3t 
with xij. thousandis* of men, and sle him bifore that he were war; but this counceil was 


¢ perele A. d Here... . bigynneth a prolog on “he was ¢ T twey dee. $ victories dene. t of 
the ij. book [of Kyngis}.8. 4 Om.s. ¢seyde that chosen ¢, %Om. 8. ¥ stablischid < Won¢. %* the 
he had killide ¢ seem. € Om. 7. S this thing ¢. soneg<. yOm.¢ 2Om. dea, 4 this ¢ b wente de. 


h bytwene 8. ithe sone ~ &k bytwene 8. 10m, 8. ¢seie¢ 4 Om. de. © comaundith 8. f to curse de. 
m myche foe. 2 Om. 8. © on dec. Phe regnide de. 4 Om. de, hOm.¢ itheg  k thousande ¢. 


PROLOGUE. 1l 


distroied bi Goddis wille, and bi a wijs counceil of Chusy, the frend of Dauith. Thanne Hox Absoton 
Absolon gaderide al the power of Israel to make opyn werre a3ens his fadir ; natheles fudir pre 
Dauith for pite and charite comaundide! thre princis of his oost to kepe Absolon alyue, that 

he my3te repente, and be sauid. And whanne Dauith knew that Absolon was slayn, he Hou Dauith 
made so™ gret sorewe, that almest he was deed, and al the" peple was° in poynt to forsake Bien 
Dauith. Thanne for this perel Dauith lefte his moornyng, and sat opinly in the 3ate, to” *"* 
conforte al his oost. After this the counceil of al? Israel cam to Dauith, that thei wolde4 

brynge him in to his rewme worschipfully ; and Dauith forj3af the opyn tresoun to hem 

that thei hadden do bifore%, and stiride swetly' men of Juda, that weren specialy his tray- 

touris, to come and bringe hym in to his rewme, and for3af her tresoun, and he forjaf the 
souereyn tresoun to Amasa, that was of his owne kyn, and was prince of the oost of Absalon 

to slee Dauith; and Dauith swor to make this Amasa prince next Joab, and for3af the 

symnne and cursing and tresoun’ to Semey, and swor that he shulde not dy3e. 3it bifore that 

Dauith cam to Jerusalem, at new debate roos bitwixe the" men of Israel and the men of Of the debate 
Juda, for this bringing a3en of the king was not teld first to men’ of Israel; and bi stiring Pee ie 
of Syba, a man of Belial, that was of kyn™ of Saul, al Israel was departid fro Dauith, and 7“ Feels 
suede this Syba; and in this tyme Joab killyde bi tresoun the noble kny3t Amasa. Thanne 

this Syba passide bi alle the lynagis* of Israel til into Habela, and intoY Bethmaka, and 

alle chosen men weren gaderid to him. And Joab and his oost bysegeden these citees, 

and wolde distroie the greet citee Habela, and a wijs woman of the citee sauid it bi hire 
counceil, and made Syba to be slayn, and al the peple to be sauid on” bothe sydis. Also 

vij. men of the kyn of Saul weren slayn of Gabaonytis, bi suffring of Dauith, and bi coun- 

ceil of God, for Saul killede wickidly the men of Gabaon; and for this synne of Saul hungir 

was maad thre jeer in the daies of Dauith; and aftir this veniaunce don on the hous of 

Saul, God dide mersy to the lond. Thanne is set a greet song of Dauith, which* he spac 

to God, whanne he hadde delyuered him fro the hond of alle his enemyes; thanne sueth 

the noumbre of stronge men of Dauith. At the laste Dauith for pride and aj3ens the lawe 
noumbride the peple of Israel, and therfore 1xx. thousind of* men weren deed bi pestilence. 

Thanne Dauith repentide him¢ sore, and mekide him to God, and seide thus, “I it am, that Hou Dauit 
*¢ synnede, and I¢ dide wickidly; what‘ han these men don that ben scheep, that is, symple far vmombine 
“ and innocent in’ comparisoun of me; I biseche that® thin hond be turnid azens me, and %¢?"?* 
“ azens the hous of my fadir.” Thanne God sente his profete Gad to hym, and bad him 

make an auter, and offre brent sacrifices and peesible sacrifices; and God dide mercy to 

the lond, and the veniaunce ceeside of Israel. The! prosces of this ij. book ou3te to stire 

kingis and lordis to mersy* and ri3tfulnesse, and euere to be war of ydilnesse, that brou3te 

Dauith to auoutrie and othere myscheues, and euere to be meeke to God and hise prestis, and 

sore! repente™ of" hire mysdeedis, and make amendis to God and men, and wilfully for3eue 
wroongis don to hem, and euere be war of pride and extorcouns, leest God take veniaunce 

on al the peple, as he dide on Dauith and his peple, and euere to be pacient and mersiful, 

as Dauith was, to gete remissioun of synnes bifore don, and® to gete pees, and prosperite, 

and heuenly blisse withouten ende. 


CATs \ 


PThe thridde book of Kingis tellith first, how Adonyas, sone’ of Dauith, wolde haue 7re Bie 
regned, and Dauith in his lijf ordeynede Salomon to be king, and he regnede bifore the Lyn fe lan 


deeth of Dauith. Thanne Adonyas fledde for dreede to the tabernacle of God, ‘and’ heeld 


1 counseilide 8. mad, no his8.Om.g °Om.8. ¢Om. 8. 40m. Bt e Om. de. f and what 8. 
P Om. ¢. 4 shulden 8e, aq afore ¢. rswittly ¢ gofg htheethatée. i This deg. k do merci ¢. 
pr.m. wittly sec. m. 8 the tresoun 8, tand 8 | soone ¢y sec.m. ™ to repente f. n Om. de, 
uOm. de. VY the men 8. Wthe kyn f8¢. * lynage ~ 0 Om. bet. P Ilere.... bigynneth a prolog on the 
yOm. de, Zin 8, athe which G3. bOm. dem.  itj. book of Kyngis. 6. 4 the sone ¢. 


Cre 


12 PROLOGUE. 


the corneer of the auter, ty! Salamon seide, that if he were a good man, he schulde not 
ee ae dye ; ellis, if yuel were founden in him, he schulde di3je. Thanne Dauith, in the tyme of 
at his passing. his dy3inge, chargide Salamon to kepe wel Goddis lawe, and to quyte to the sones of Ber- 
sellay the trewthe and kyndnesse of her fadir, and to punysche Joab for his trecherouse 
manquelling of Abner and of Amasa in the tyme’ of pees, and to™ punysche wisely Semey 
for his wrste cursing, which he dide to Dauith. Aftir these thingis Salamon made Adonyas 
to be slayn, for he purposide gilefully* to be king. And Salamon castide awey Abiathar, 
that he was not the prest of the Lord, and exylide him also, for he assentide to Adonyas, 
and was traytour to the king. Alsot Salamon comaundide Joab to be slayn in the taber- 
nacle at the auter, for he hadde slayn gilefully twey princis in pees, withoute wyting of 
Dauith ; and the king ordeynede Sadoch prest for Abiathar. Thanne the king comaundide 
Semey, that he schulde not go out of Jerusalem, and if he passide the stronde of Cedron, 
he schulde be deed; and Semey acceptide this; and for he passide these boundis, the king 
comaundide him to be slayn, and so he was slayn by comaundement of the king. Aftir 
these thingis the rewme was confermed in to the hondis of Salamon, and he weddide the 
Hou God 3¢f dou3zter of Faroo, king of Egipt. Thanne God bad Salamon axe of him, what hym lykide, 
Solomon wits and he® axide that God schulde 3eue to him wijs’ herte, that he my3te deme his peple, and 
make discrescyoun eithir departyng bitwixe good and yuel. And this axing pleeside God 
ful nyche, therfore God 3af to him a wijs herte and vndirstondinge, in so myche that noon 
bifore hym was lyk hym”, neithir schal rise aftir hym. Also God 3af to him richesse and 
glorie, that noon among kingis was lyk him in alle daies bifore. Thanne for Salamon 3af 
a wijs sentense of dom bitwixe* twey comen wymmen, that passide the wit of comun men, 
thei dredden the king, and seyin that’ Goddis wisdom was in him to make dom. Thanne 
Of the bilding is toold the worschipeful meyne and houshoold of Salamon. Aftir these thingis Salamon 
eau Cad Dildide a noble hous to himself, and a famouse temple to God in Jerusalem. And aftir that? 


ee pee the temple was fully maad, alle the eldre men and princis of lynagis and dukis* of? meynes 


i ae of the children of Israel weren gaderid to king Salamon in Jerusalem, to bringe the arke 
of God fro Syon in to his owne place in® the temple. Thanne the king axide of God 
manye preieris, and profitis® for hem that preieden deuoutly in the temple, and God 

Of peraner grauntide tho. Aftir these thingis God halewide the temple, and certyfiede to Salamon, 


histe to Salu- that if he kepte alle his comaundementis, he shulde sette the trone of Salamons rewme onf 
eae Israelé withouten ende; and if the pepel of Israel and her children kepen not Goddis 


a taaccfor Heestis, but worschipen alyen goddis, he schal do awey Israel fro the face of lond? which 
breking of hem. he 3af to hem, and God schal caste awey fro his si3t the temple whichi he halewide to his 
name, and Israel schal be into a prouerbe and* fable either tale to alle peplis, and this hous 
we ES ale schal be into ensaumple. Aftir this the qwene of Saba cam to Salamon, and hadde greet 
aray of men and of! jewelis, and 3af manye jewelis to Salamon, and he a3een to hire. Also 
Salamon tau3te hire alle thingis that sche hadde in hire herte, and sche blessid God and 
Salamon and his seruauntis, and 3ede into hire lond. Thanne Salamon made manye scheeldis 
and bokelers of gold, and made a greet trone of yuer, and clothide it with fyn gold. 
Thanne king Salamon was magnified ouer alle kyngis of erthe in richessis™ and wisedom, 
and al erthe desyride to see his face, and to heere his wisdom, which his God hadde 3oue 
in his herte. Aftir alle these thingis Salamon, whanne he was eeld, louede gretly manye 
hethene wymmen, and hadde a thousind wijues, principal" and secundavies, and thanne his 
How Salomon herte was bischrewid and peruertid bi tho wymmen, that he suede alyen goddis, and wor- 


was turnid to Fee, es . i . or 42 
idolatrie. schipide hem. Therfore God reiside an aduersarie to Salamon in his lijf, and departide 


rdo¢. s gylously 8. t And de. uOm.a. fOm.8 ing. gg Om.d. hb the lond 6 see. me ¢. ithe 
Yawijs BG. wWtohymg. *bitwene< y Om. dem. which9. k eitherda.andag. 1}Om.pg. ™ richesse SeCt. 
2 this 8. athe dnkis RG sec.m. >and of aden prim.i. 4 principals deft. 
Cintog 40m. ayn. ¢ prophetis «. prophecies? ». 


PROLOGUE. 13 


his rewme in the tyme of Roboam his sone, and 3af ten lynagis to Joroboam his seruaunt, 

and kepte oo lynage to his sone for the merit of Dauith his fadir. And this departyng of Rotoun. 
bifelde myche, for Roboam forsook the counceil of eelde and wijse men, and suede the coun- 

ceil of 3unge men®, and spac harde wordis to the peple. Thanne Roboam gaderide proudly 

al the hous of Juda, and the lynage of Beniamyn, an c. thousind and iiij. score thousind of 

chosen men and werrouris, that thei schulden fi3te a3ens the hous of Israel, and bringe ajen 

the rewme to Roboam, the? sone of Salamon; but God forbed this werre to Roboam and al 

his peple, for whi this word of departyng of the rewme was don of God. Thanne Jeroboam Of Jeroboam. 
made ij. golden caluys, and bad Israel worschipe tho, and stije no more to Jerusalem, and 

seide, “ Israel, lo! these ben thi goddis, that ledden thee out of the lond of Egipt ;” and 

he made vnworthi prestis of the laste men of the peple, that were not of the sones of Leuy, 

and he made templis in hije placis. Also whanne Jeroboam stood on the auter and castide 

encense, a man of God cam fro Juda bi the word of God, and seide, “ A sone, Josias bi 

“name, schal be born to the hous of Dauith, and he schal sle on this auter the prestis of 

“ hi3e placis, that brenne now encense in this autir, and he schal brenne boonys of men on 

* this auter ;” and the prophete 3af this singne?, that the auter schal be cleft, and the asche" 

therinne schal be sched out. Thanne Jeroboam heeld forth his hond, and bad take that 
prophete, and his hond was drie, and hee my3te not drawe it a3en, and bi preier of the 
prophete the hond was heelid. And‘ singne’ bifelde on the auter, as the prophete seide ; 

and for that prophete eet breed in that place a3ens Goddis bidding, 3he bi disseit of a fals 
prophete, the trewe prophete of God was slayn of a lyoun in" the wey homward. Aftir 

these wordis Jeroboam turnede not a3en fro his worste weie, but a3enward of the laste 

peples he made prestis of hiz3e placis, who euere wolde, fyllede’ his hond”, and* was maad 

prest of hize placis; and for this cause the hous of Jeroboam synnede, and was distroied, 

and doon awey fro the face of ertheY. Aftir this the prophete Ahia, that was blynd for 

eelde’, knew the wijf of Joroboam, that feynede hire to be anothir womman, and he bifore 

seide to hire, that hire syk sone schulde di3e in hir* entryng in to hir hous, and that the 

hous of Jeroboam schulde be distroied outtirly for his synnes; and Israel schal be dryuen 

out of his good lond for the synnes of Joroboam, that synnede, and made Israel to do 

synne. Also the peple of Juda dide ydolatrie; therfore the king of Egipt took awey the Zou tie king 
tresouris of Goddis hous, and of the kingis hous, and the golden scheeldis of Salamon, for eae 
whiche Roboam made scheeldis of bras. And batail was bitwixe** Roboam and Jeroboam (evr of 
in alle daies. Thanne Abia regnede thre 3eer on Juda, and 3ede in alle the synnes of his 

fadir. Aftir‘ him‘ roos king Asa in Juda, and he dide ri3tfulnesse bifore God, and dide 4sa. 

awey idolatrie and sodomytis fro the lond, and his herte was perfit with God in alle daies. 

And schortly amonge alle the kingis of Israel was noon feithful to God; summe weren 

goode amonge the kingis of Juda; and this figurith, that among men of hooly chirche be 

summe goode, but among eretikis is noon good outtirly, as Jerom seith. Aftir manye Ofiing Achad 
yuele kingis of Israel roos Acab, the worste of alle bifore hym*, and he weddide Jesabel, an 

hethene womman, the doujtir of Mechaal, king of Sydonyes, and Achab dide manyfoold 
idolatrie. Thanne roos Elie the prophete, and seide to Acab, that in thre jeer and an half zie the pro- 
neither reyn neither dew schal be. Aftir this the prophete Elye hidde himself in the?“ 
stronde of Carith, a3ens Jordan, and drank watir, and was fed of rauenys there, whiche 
brou3ten to him breed and flesch in the euentid and morewtid, and aftir that the stronde 

was dried up, God bad Elye go into Sarepta of Sydoneyes, and there he was fed of a 

widewe, and the pot of mele and ‘the pot! of oile failede not to the widewe, til God 3af reyn 

on the® erthe. Thanne Elie reiside to lijf the deed chijld of a womman, at whom he was 

myche susteyned. And aftir manye daies God bad Elye* schewe him‘ to Acab, that God 


°Om.¢ pOm. Be. atokene dec. taischis et. athe ¢. bitwen« > in dee. ¢ And aftir y. 
Stheg. tthe tokene de. Ubi dec. v fullede®,. filledeG. dOm. 6 ¢€ Ome fOm.< gOm.g bhym s. 
whondis », * Om. de(j. Ythe erthe de. “age, i Om. 8. 


14 PROLOGUE. 


schulde 3eue reyn on the lond; and Elie dide so; and greet hungir was in Samarie. 

Thanne Elie apperide first to Abdie, that dredde God, and fedde an ec. prophetis of God, 

whanne Jesabel killide the prophetis of God ; and Elie swor to Abdie bi the Lord of oostis, 

that he wolde appere in that day to Achab, Thanne Acab axide Elye, “ Wher thou art he, 

“ that distrowblist* Israel?” And Elie seide, “Not I distrowblide! Israel, but thou and the hous 

“ of thi fadir, that han forsaken Goddis heestis, and han sued Baalym, han™ distroublid® 

Elye. “ Israel.” Aftir this the prophete Elie conuyctid bi an opyn myracle viij. c. and 1. prophetis 
of Baal of opin ydolatrie, and killede hem alle with helpe of the peple, that bileeuede to 

God for the greet myracle. And° aftir this God sente greet rayn, and Elye ran bifore 

Acab to? the citee Jesrael’. Aftir these thingis Elye fledde for dreede of Jesabel, that 

manaside to slee hym, and whanne he hadde fled into disert, bi the jurney of oo" day, he 

axide of God to di3e; and whanne he slepte, an anngel bad hym rise, and eete breed baken 

vndir aischis, and drinke watir; and he 3ede in the strengthe of that mete xl. daies and 

xl. ny3tis, til to Oreb the hil of God ; and whanne he was hid there in a denne, and seide, 

that he was left aloone a prophete of the Lord, and thei sou3ten to slei him, God* bad him 

Hou Eye goto Damask, and anoyute Asahe) king ont Sirie, and anoynte Hieu king ont Israel, and 
iomeeoas anoynte Elisee a" prophete for him, and these thre schulden do veniaunce on trespasouris, 
a en “ng and slee hem; and God lefte to’ himself vij. thousind of men in Israel, whois knees were 
not bowid bifore’ Baal. Thanne it sueth how Elisee suede Elie. Aftir these thingis king 

Acab hadde twey greete and merueilous victories ajens Benadab, king of Sirie, for he blas- 

femnede God of Israel. And for king Acab dide false mersy and killide not this blasfemere* 

Benadab, whom God bitook into hise hondis, Ged sente a prophete to Acab, and telde thus, 

* For thou suffredist a man wrthi the deth to go fro thin hond, thi lijf schal be for his lijf, 

Of Jesabet and and thi peple schal be for his peple.” Aftirward Jesabel the qwene made Nabath to 
; be stonyd to deth’ bi false witnesse, and assent of Acab, for he noolde chaunge neither” 
sille his vyner* to the king ; and whanne Acab 3ede” doun to take possessioun of this vyner, 

God bad Elye meete him, and seie thus, “ Thou hast slayn and hast take possessioun; the 

“‘ Lord seith these thingis, in this place wherinne doggis lickiden*® the blood of Nabath, thei 

* schulen licke also thi blood.” And Acab seide to Elye, “ Wher thon hast founden me 

“ thin enemy?” And Elye seide, “ I haue founde, for thou art seeld to do yuel in Goddis 

“* si3t, therfore God schal distroie and slee ech man of the house of Acab, and 3eue his hous 

* as the hous of Jeroboam, and as the hous of Baasa, for Acab terride God to wraththe, 

“and made Ysrael to do synne. Also doggis scholen ete Jesabel in the feeld of Jesrael ; if 

* Acab dizeth* in the citee, doggis scholen ete him, if he dieth* in the feeld, briddis of the 

* eir schilen ete him.” Noon othir was such as Acab*, that was seeld to do yuel bifore 

God; forwhi Jesabel his wijf excitide him, and he dide abomynable ydolatrie. Thanne 

Acab dide ful greet penaunce, and was mekid biforef God; therfore God brou3te uot yn 

this yuel in his daies, but in the daies of his soue. In the thridde 3eer aftir these thingis, 

aboute ilij. ec. prophetis of Baal counceiled Acab to make werre a3ens the king of Syrie for 

Hou Mychee a citee clepid Ramoth of Galaad, and bihiz3ten victorie and prosperite to Acab. But Mychee, 
counseiiide oo prophete of God, telde to Acab in Goddis name, that the spirit of leesingis disceyuede 
him bi his false prophetis, and that Acab schulde be slayn in that bateil; and so it bifelde 

in deede, but Mychee was dispisid and beten of the false prophetis, and was prisonyd, pur- 

posid’ to be slayn of the king, whanne he cam a3een in pees; and king Josophat, a good 

man, was in this bateile with cursid Acab, but Acab was slayn, and doggis lickeden his 

Ocosius. blood, and Josophat was sauid bi Goddis help. Thanne roos® Ocosias, king of Israel, for 
Acab his fadir, and Ocosias worschipide Baal, and terride God to ire bi alle thingis which 


k distorbelethe 8. disturblist de. Idisturble BSc. W tofore 8. * blasfeme aSty. y the dethe &. Zne¢. 
disturbled ¢ m and han an. u distorblid Bde. @vynezerde ¢. bwent 8. C¢killedena. 4 dye det. 
© Om. ¢. P in to 7. q of Jezrael deg. rade. © was Achab 6et. f tofore B. § and purposide ¢. 
5 and God ¢. t of BE. u Om, det. vOm. 8} aroos ¢. 


PROLOGUE. 15 


his fadir hadde do. This prosces of the iij. book of Kingis schulde stire kingis and lordis, 
to be mersyful and pytouse on her sugetis that trespasen ajens hem, and in alle thingis 
eschewe ydilnesse, leccherie, tresoun, ydolatrie, and false counceilouris'’ and vnwyse, and 
euere distroie synue, and take counceil at hooly scripture and trewe proplietis, and triste 
not to false prophetis, be thei neuer so manye, and crie faste ajens oon either! fewe* trewe 
men. 


CAP. VI. 


'The iiij. book of Kingis tellith in general, how the rewme of Israel and the rewme of Tie iiij. book 
Juda weren conquerid of hethene men, for manye synnes which thei diden ajens God and dani 
men, and weren obstynat, and dide not frnytfull™ penance in due tyme. First it tellith in bane 
special, hou the wickid king Ocosyas sente to take counceil at Belsabub, wher he my3te lyue, weren distroied. 
and rekyuere of his syknesse; therfore God sente Elye, the prophete, to telle to him that 0°" 
he schulde die, and go not doun of his bed. Thanne this king sent to Elye a prince on” of Eiye, and 
}, men, and ]. men with hym, to clepe Elye to the king; and fijer cam doun fro heuene, Bae pals 
and deuouride this prince, and 1. men that weren with him, for in scorn thei clepiden Elye® ee fon thei 
the man of God; and in lyk manere fijer deuouride another prince, and 1. men with him Dtecn ove 
the thridde prince and hise ].? that mekeden hem to God and to the prophete, weren sauid 
on lyue. And God bad Elie go doun with hem to the king, and repreue hiin of his synne, 
and telle to the king himself, that he schal die and go not doun of his bed. Aftir this the of Euyse the 
prophete Elie schulde be rauyschid awey fro erthe, and Elisee knew this, and suede him in”? 
ech place til to rauysching4; and Elie smoot with his mantel the watris of Jordon, and 
tho weren departid therbi, and Elie and Elysee 3eden ouere bi the drie botme therof. 

Thanne Elie was rauyschid in a char of fijer fro Elisee, and sti3ede bi a whirlwynd in to 

heuene; and the double spirit of Elye restide on Elisee, and with the mantel of Elye 

Elysee’ smoot twies the watris of Jordon, and in the secunde tyme tho weren departid, and 

Elysee passide ouere. Aftirward’ Elisee dwellide in Jerico, and heelide the watris fro bit- 

tirnesse and bareynesse, bi putting of salt in the watir. Thanne Elysee stizede into Betel, 4nd hou xi. 

and as he sti3ede bi the weye, litle children 3eden out of the citee, and seiden to him in Hees ig 
scorn, “ Thou ballard, sti3 up!” and he curside hem in the name of God, and twey beeris ne si 
3eden outt of the forest, and to-renten of hem xlij. children. After these thingis Joram, the?’ 

king of Israel,‘and Josophat, the king of Juda, and also the thridde king, that was king of 

Edom, weren in desert, and hadden no watir, and weren in poynt of perisching. These 

thre kingis camen to Elisee for helpe, and bi spirit" of prophecie he bad hem make dychis, 

and thei sijen neither wynd neither’ reyn, and the botme of dychis was fillid® of* watris ; 

and he bifore seide that God schulde bitake Moab in to the hondis of these kingis, and 

thei schulden distroie citees, and feeldis, and trees; and thus it was don in dede. Also Of Etise, and 
Elysee multypliede a litil oile, and made a pore widewe filleyY manye vessels therof, and po une 


widewe, and of 

bad hir paie her dettis bi? sum therof, ‘and that sche and her sones schulden lyne bi the phn 
residue therof*. Aftirward Elysee biforeseide to a good womman, that herbouride him ¢- 
freely and largely, that sche schulde consceyue a sone; and whanne Elisee knew, that this 

sone was deed, he» sente his seruaunt Giesi with his staaf to reise him, and neither vois 

neither® feeling was in the chijld. Thanne Elysee entride in to a closet, where the chijld 

lay deed, and preiede to God, and lay on the chijld, and leide his mouth to the mouth of 

the chijld, and hise hondis on the chijldis hondis, and the chijld 3oxide‘ vij. sithes, and 

openede his izen; and Elisee bitook the chijld qwyk to his modir. Also® Elysee, whanne 


hungir was in Galgala, heelyde the pot of noyful mete, bi sendinge in of mele, that no 


hh counceilist. ior(¢. kafeweg. IHere..... u the spirit ¢. v ne AC. w fullid 8. x with e¢. 
bigynnith a prolog on the iiij. book [of Kyngis] 8. Y to multiplie 6. to fille (2 with de. a Om. ¢. 
 fruytfulli 7, Doff8. °Om.8 Pl.men Bde. Sthe bands. ¢Cneet. A3z0nede BR, ¢ Anda. 
rauysching Beet. the de, 8 Aftir this8. t Om. 6. 


16 PROLOGUE. 


more bitternesse was in the mete. Thanne Elisee made a litil breed to suffice to an c. men, 
Hou Naaman and thei leften relijfs. Whanne the king’ of Sirie sente lettris to the king of Israel, that 
wasclensid. 1 schulde cure Naaman of his lepre, and the king of Israel to-rente his clothis for sorewe, 
Elysee bad, that Naaman schulde be waischen vij. sithes in the water of Jordan, and so het 
schulde be curid; and thus it was don in deede. Thanne’ Naaman knoulechide, that noon 
other God is in al the! erthe no! but oonly the God of Israel; and Elisee took noo 3ifte, 
3he* freely profrede and preeside of Naaman. Thanne Giesy ran aftir Naaman, vnwytinge 
either! not consentinge his maistir, and made a lesing, that Elisee sente to him, that he 
schulde 3eue a talent of syluer and double chaunging clothis to twey 3unge men of the sones 
of profetis. And Naaman constreynede him to take the double that™ he axide, and or- 
How Giesy the deynede twey children to bere bifore" him. But herfore Elisee seide, that the lepre of 
i ee Naaman schulde cleue to Giesi and to™ his seede withouten ende; and Giesi 3ede out fro 
eo ae Eliseé, and was a mesel as snow. Whanne the sonis of prophetis 3eden to the® wode, to 
hewe doun wode to bylde placis to hem to dwellin inne, the irun of an axe felde down in to 
watir?; and Elisee castide1 doun the tree, either’ helue’, and the irun houede', and was 
taken up therbi. Whanne the king of Sirie sette buschementis preuyly a3ens the king of 
Israel, Elisee warned the king of Israel therof; and whanne it was certified to the king of 
Sirie that Elisee telde his preuytes to the king of Israel, the king of Sirie sente a greet 
multitude of thet oost to take Elysee, and whanne the oost cumpaside the citee Dotaym, 
Hou God maad wherinne Elysee was, God made this" oost blynd at the preier of Elisee, aud so he ledde 
bs Aer neliem into the myddis of Samarie, and whanne the king of Israel wolde slee hem, Elisee 
i alr seide nay, but bad’ make redy a feeste to hem, and late hem go in pees to her lord. And 
whanne ful strong hungre was in Samarie, that wymmen eetyn her owne children, 00 
womman axide doom of the king a3ens another womman, that wolde not bi couenaunt bringe 
forth hir chijld to be etyn, whanne thei hadden eten the chijld of the first womman. 
Thanne the king, that weeride the heire nexte his body, to-rente his clothis for sorwe, and 
swoor strongly, that in that day he wolde girde of the heed of Elisee. Elisee biforeknew 
the comynge of this messanger to do this deede, and bad men close the dore, and suffre not 
him for to entre, for lis lord comith anoon aftir him to reuoke his ooth and sentence. 
A ha Thanne Elise seide in Goddis name, that to morewe in this tyme a buschel of wheete flour 
slayn Elise, _ Schal be for" oo stater, that is, a* litel quantite of moneye, as it were a peny, and twey 
God Rd buschiellis of barly for oo stater, in the 3ateY of Samarie. And Elisee seide to a gret duk, 
pe that bileeuede? not this* word, “ Thou schalt see it with thin ijen, and schal not ete therof ;” 
and thus it was in dede, for whanne the oost of Sirie fledde by ny3t, for drede that God 
made among hem, thei leften alle her goodis, and fledden nakid, and coueitiden oonly to saue 
her lyues; and whanne? a buschel of wheete flour was seeld on the morewe for oo° stater, 
the king made that noble duk kepere at the 3ate, and the cumpanye trade him to deeth, as 
Elisee bifore seide. Also Elisee spac to the womman whos sone he made to lyue, and bad 
hir and hir hous goo! a pilgrimage either® straunge ]ond, where euere sche fond couenable, 
for God schal bringe strong hungir on the lond vij. 3eer and at the vij. 3eeris ende the 
king restoride to hire alle hir thingis, and alle the rentis of fieldis in the tyme of hir 
absence. Benadab, king of Sirie, sent Asael to Elisee to enqueere whether this king 
my3te rekeuere of his syknesse; and God schewide to Elysee, that Benadab schulde dije ; 
and Elisee wepte ful sore, whanne he si3 Asacl, for God schewide to him that Asael 
schulde be king of Sirie, and do manye yuelis to the children of Israel, brenne of her 
strong citees, and slee bi swerd the 3unge men of hem, and ‘hurle doun! the litel children 
of hem, and kerue wymmen with chijlde. Joram, the sone of Josophat, dide yuel in Goddis 


fF Om. ¢ g And 8. And than ¢ h Om. eG. t woned £. tthiss, “theg Viet 8. Wsold 
iOm. & kK 3it it was ¢ sec.m. 1Om. ¢ mof forg. *oo68. Yy3ates8. Zleuyded. 8 to this ¢ 
that 6. =" tofore e. om Om:t °Om.f Pthe thanneg. cag. dtogog eintoag fwhere Bdet. 
watir deCs. 4 caste ¢. ror gé Sthe helue¢. €righte8. bOm.8é i hurliden af. hurle de. 


PROLOGUE. 17 


si3t, as the hous of Acab dide; for the doujtir of Acab was his wijf; but God nolde 

distroie Juda, for Dauith his seruaunt, as he bihizte to him, to 3eue a lanterne to him and 

to hise sones in alle daies. Aftir these thingis Elisee bad oon of the sones of prophetis Mou Hiew was 
anoynte Hyeu in to king on* Israel, and sey to him; “ Thou schalt distroie the hous mes 
“ Acab, and God schal make it as the hous of Jeroboam, and doggis schulen ete Jesabel in? ne nae od 
“ the feeld of Jesrael, and noon shall berie hir.” And Hieu killide Joram, king of nierel 

and Ocosias, king of Juda, and Jesabel the cursid quene; and doggis etyn the flesch of 

Jesabel ; and! hir flesch was a™ tord on the face of erthe. Thanne Hieu made Ixx. sones Hou Hiex kil- 
of Acab to be slayn of hir keperis, and nurschers; and he killide xlij. men britheren Of pte, cad 
Ocosias ; and aftir this doinge Hieu feynede hym to worschipe Baal more than Acab dide, ra ine 
and bi this feyning he gaderid to gidere alle the® prophetis, and prestis, and seruauntis of 

Baal ‘in the temple of Baal®, and killide hem alle, and castide? out of the temple of Baal 

his ymage, and brent it, and drof it al to dust; and distroiede the hous of Baal, and made 

gongis for it; and so Hieu dide awey Baal ‘fro Israel4. Natheles Hieu 3ede not awey fro 

the synnes of Joroboam, nether’ forsok golden caluis that weren in Betel and Dan; but 

for Hien dide this veniaunce ajens the hous of Acab, God seide, that his sones til the* iiij. 
generacoun schulen sitte on the trone of Israel. Thanne Atalia, the modir of Ocosias, 

whanne hir sone was deed, killede al the blood of the king, and regnide vi. 3eer. But Joas, Joas. 

the‘ sone of Ocosias king, was kept preuyly vj. 3eer in the temple of God, and in the vij. 

3eer he was maad king bi help" of Joiada, the gret prest, and Atalia was slayn. Therfore Hou Joas was 
Joiada made a boond of pees bitwixe God, and the king, and the peple, that hit’ schulde be rep a/Srrun 
the” peple of God, ‘and bitwixe the king and the peple*; and the peple distroiede the “9?” 
auteris of Baal, and al to-braken his ymagis, and killeden Mathan, the prest of Baal, bifore 

the auter. This Joas bigan to regne whanne he was vij. 3eer eld, and regnedeY xl. 3eer in 
Jerusalem, and dide 113tfulnesse bifore* God in alle the* daies in whiche Joiada the prest 

tau3te him. And Joas bad prestis take al the money that was offrid for priys of soulis, and Of the repara- 
bi free wille, to make reperacoun of the temple; and for prestis weren neclygent in this ee ae 
reparacoun, Joas the king bad the prestis 3eelde the®-money to reparacoun, and take it no 

more. And the chaunceler of the king and the bischop Joiada heelden‘ out of the arke 

the® moneye, and 3auen it in to hond‘ of maistris* of werkmen, and thei spendeden it wel 

in this offis and necessarie reparacoun; and made noo rekenyng to souereyns, but treeteden 

this moneye ih feith, eithir® good conscience. For as myche as Asael, king of Sirie, cam 

with his oost to werre a3ens Jerusalem, Joas, king of Juda, took alle thingis which fadris' 

hadden halewid, and whiche he hadde offrid and al the syluer that my3te be founden 

in the tresouris of the temple of God, and in the* paleys of the king, and sente al to 

Asael, king of Sirie; and he 3ede awey fro Jerusalem. The seruauntis of Joas sworen 

togidere, and killeden him, and Amasias his sone regnede for hym. Joachas the sone Joachas kyng.. 
of! Hieu regnede on Israel, and dide yuel™, as Joroboam dide. Therfore God bitook 

Israe] in to the hondis of Asael, king of Sirie, and of Benadab his sone in alle daies, 

that there weren not left to Joachas of al the peple of Israel no but v. hundrid hors- 

men, and x. charis, and x. thousind of footmen. Thanne Joachas bisonjte God, and 

he 3af a sauyour to Israel, and Israel was delyuered fro the hound of the king of Sirie. Fry fat Shed 
Thanne Elisee felde in to gret" siknesse, bi which he was deed; and whanne Joas®, to Eiise 
king ‘of Israel?, cam to him, and wepte, Elisee bad hym bringe a bowe and arewis, 

and bad him sette his hond on the bowe; and Elisee settide’ his hondis on the kingis 


hondis, and bad him scheete out at the eest wyndow opened; and Elisee seidé, “ This is 


K of ent. 10m, de. Masa pt. 2Om.de. °Om. 8 f the hond defn. e the maistris 8. 4 or ¢. i his 
Peasteg, 40Om.8 tTneg. 8 tothe et tOm.6.  fadris B. his fadirg &kOm.8. !Om.a. ™ yuelis ¢ 
«the help ¢. ¥ Om. an. w Om. 6. x Om. ée, 8 a greet ¢ © Joachas ¢. P Om. 7. qhe ¢ 
y regne a, he regneyde det. 2 tofore B. a Om. 6 T° sette Bd. 

b Om. den.  ¢ this Se. 4 heeldiden &. © Om. &. 


D 


18 PROLOGUE. 


“ the arewe of Goddis helthe® ajens Sirie, ‘and thou schalt smyte Sirie', in Affech, til thou 
Of Joas. “ waaste it.” Efte Elisee bad Joas" smyte the erthe with a darte; and whanne he had 
smyte’ thries, and styntide, and” Elisee was wrooth a3ens him, and seide, “ If thou haddist 
smyte v. sithes, either* vj. sithes, either* vij. sithes, thou schuldust haue smyte Sirie til to 
tae ee ee the ending, but now thou schalt smyte it thries. Elisee dizede, and was beried, and whanne 
ried, and deed a deed bodi was beried in the sepulcre of Elisee, ‘and hadde touchid the boonys of Elyse’, 
body of anor the man lyuede a3en, and stood on his feet. Amasias, king of Juda, regnede ix. 3eer, and 
amyracte. — dide ri3tfulnesse in party, but not as Dauith. He killide x. thousind men of Edom, and 
for pride therof he terride the king of Israel to werre; and Amasias was ouercomen in 
this bateile, and the king of Israel took him presoner, and brak the wal of Jerusalem bi 
iiij. c. cubitis; and the king of Israel took awey al the gold and syluer, and alle the ves- 
selis that were founden in Goddis hous, and in the tresouris of the king, and took pleggis, 
and turnede a3een in to Samarie. At the laste the men of Amasias conspireden a3ens him, 
and he fledde in to Lachis, and thei sentyn thidir, and killede hym there, and birieden him 
Of Azarie in Jerusalem with his fadris; and Asarie his sone regnede for hym in Jeruselem 1. 3eer 
He dide rijtfulnesse in party, as Amasias his fadir dide; and God smoot hym with leepre 
til into the day of his deeth; and Joathas his sone gouernede the paleys, and deemyde the 
peple of the lond, and euere the kingis of Israel diden yuele, and 3eden in the synnes of 
Jeroboam. And in the dayes of Manahen, king of Israel, Ful, the king of Assiriens, took 
greet tribute of him, to make Manahen stronge in the rewme. And in the daies of Facee 
king of Israel, that dide yuel in Goddis si3t, cam Teglath Falasar, king of Assur, and took 
manye placis in the lond of Israel, and he took Galaad, and Galilee, and al the lond of 
Neptalym, and translatide hem into Assiriens. Aftir ward’ Acas regnede on Juda xvj. 3eer 
in Jerusalem, and 3ede in the weies of kingis’ of Israel, and dide foul ydolatrie. And 
aftir these thingis Osee, the king of Israel, rengnede 1x. 3eer, and dide yuel, but not as the 
kingis of Israel that weren bifore hym. And this Osee was maad tributarie to Salmanasar, 
king of Assiriens, and whanne this Osee wolde be rebel, and paie not tribute to Salmanasar, 
he biseegide Osee, and presonyde hym, and bisegide Samarie three 3eer, and took it in the 
nynthe 3eer of Osee, and translatide Israel into Assyriens. Thanne the scripture rehersith 
many grete synnes of the peple of Israel, for whiche thei weren conquerid, and dryuen out 
of her lond. Thanne the king of Assiriens brou3te peple fro Babiloyne, and fro manye 
othere hethene cuntreis, and settide? hem in the citees of Samarie, for the children of 
Israel; and for this peple dredde not God, he sente in to hem lyouns, that killeden hem ; 
therfore the king of Assiriens sente thidir 00° prest of Israel, to teclle hem the lawe of God 
of Israel, and so thei worschipiden God of Israel, and hire hethene goddis togidere. 


CAP. VIL. 


Of Exechie. Ezechie, king of Juda, rengnide xxix. 3eer, and dide good bifore God bi alle thingis* 
whiche his fadir Dauith® hadde do; he distroiede hije placis, and al to-brak ymagis, and 
hewyde doun wodis, and brak the serpent of brasse; for the children of Israel brente 
ensense to it; and he hopide in God. Therfore of alle the® kingis of Juda was noon lyk 
him aftir him, but neither among these kingis that weren bifore him. And in the xiiij. 
3eer of Ezechie, Senagerib, king of Assiriens, stizede to alle wallide citees of Juda, and took 
tho. Thanne Ezechie 3af to hym al the syluer that was founden in Goddis hous, and in 
the tresouris of the king, for he schulde goo awey, and distrie not Jerusalem neither" Judee ; 

Hou Ezechie and for Senagerib kepte not couenaunt, Ezechie rebellide a3ens him, in trist of Goddis 

Ch help. Thanne Senagerib sente Rapsaces with strong oost' to Jerusalem, to* blasfeme God, 
and make the peple 3elde! hem to him for dreede. Thanne Ezechie to-rente his clothis for 

Shelp de. tOm. de. '%Joachest ¥ Om. 8. e Om. fm. fand B § Om.f. One ¢. ihond p. 


w Om. det. * Or det. Y Om. de. 2% Aftir that de. k ford. 1 to 3elde B¢. 
athe kyngis¢. >setteg cag 4 this thynges 8. 


PROLOGUE. 19 


sorwe, and was hilid with a sak, and entride into Goddis hous, and sente ‘the hij3e prest™ 

and othere eelde men clothid with sakkis to the prophete Isaie, that he schulde preie to 

God ajens the blasfemye of Assyriens. And Isaie seide, in Goddis name, that thei schulde Hou Ysaie con. 
not drede of thes wordis of Assiriens, for God schal sende a spirit to" Senacharib, and pee ae 
schal here a messanger, and he schal turne ajen into his lond; and God schal caste hym 

doun bi swerd in his lond ; and whanne Senacherib 3ede® hoom to defende his lond a3ens 

the king of Ethiopie, he sente blasfeme lettris to Ezechie, and seide, that his God my3te 

not delynere hym fro his hondis?. Therfore God counfortide Ezechie bi the’ prophete 

Isaie, that he schulde not dreede Senacherib, for Senacherib schal not entre into Jerusalem, 
neither’ sende arwe into it, neither ocupie it, neither™ biscege it; but God schal defende 

and saue Jerusalem, for himself, and for Dauith his seruaunt. And in that ny3t the avngel 

of God killede in the tentis of Assiriens an c. thousind and lxxxv. thousind ; and* in the 
morewe tyde Senacherib 3ede into his lond, and his owne sones killiden hym in the temple 

of his God Nestrach, while he worschipide Nestrach'. Aftir this" whanne Ezechie was 

syik to the deeth, Isaie seide ‘to hymY in Goddis name, “ Dispose thin hous, for thou schalt 

* dizje and not lyue.” And for Ezechie wepte greetly, God curide him, and made him go 

into the temple on the thridde day, and encreeside xv. 3eer to his lijf; and in singne herof 

God made the sunne go bacward bi ten grees". Aftir this doinge the king of Babiloyne 

sente lettris, messengeris*, and 3iftis to Ezechie, and bi pride he schewide alle hise tre- 

souris and iewelis to the messengeris. Therfor God seide bi Isaie to him, that daies 
schulen come, and alle thingis in thin’ hous schulen be taken awey into Babiloyne. And 
Ezechie seide, “ The word of God is good; oonly pees and treuthe be in my daies.” Aftir 
Ezechie Manasses his sone regnede lv. 3eer in Jerusalem, and dide gret yuel in Goddis si3t, AManasses. 
and mychel’ ydolatrie; and the peple of Juda was disceyued of Manasses, that thei diden 

more yuel than hetlene men, whiche God distroiede fro the face of the sones of Israel. 

And for Manasses dide these worste abomynacouns ouer alle thingis whiche the men of 
Amereys diden, and he sched ful myche innocent blood, til Jerusalem was fillid til to the 
mouth, God seide, that* he wolde bringe in yuelis on> Jerusalem and Juda, that, who enere 
heerith, bothe hise eeris tyngle; and he schal do awey Jerusalem, as tablis on boord ben 

wont to be don awey, but God® schal leue remenauntis of his eritage, and bitake hem® in 

the hond of her enemyes. Manasses diede, and was buried in the orcherd of his hous ; 

and Amon his sone regnede for hym ij. 3eer, and dide yuel® as his fadir dide, and forsook Of 4mon. 
God, and seruede vnclennessesf and ydolis, as his fadir dide, and worschipide thoo. And 

his seruauntis settiden tresoun to him, and killeden hym in his hous; and the peple of the 

lond killiden alle men, that hadden conspyrid a3ens the kyng Amon; and for hym thei 
ordeyneden Josie his sone king to hem. Josie bygan to rengne whanne he was viij.® 3eer Josie. 
eeld, and rengnede xxxj. 3er in Jerusalem; and he dide that that was pleesaunt bifore God, 

and 3ede bi alle the weies of Dauith his fadir. In the xviij. 3eer of Josie he hadde besynesse 

that the temple of God were reparailid ; and whanne the book of lawe was red bifore" the ae 
king, he to-rente hise clothis, and sente solempne messengeris to take counceil at! God for Goddis awe, 
himself and his) reume; for he seide, that* greet veniaunce of God is! kynlid a3ens vs, for ee 
oure fadris herden not the wordis of this book, to do al that is writen to vs. And God?""* 
seide bi the prophetesse Olda, the wijf of Sellum, “ I schal bringe yuelis on this place, and 

“ on the dwelleris thereof™, alle the wordis of the lawe whiche Josie redde, for they for- 
“‘sooken me, and maden sacrifice to alyen goddis ; and for thou, Josiee, herdist the wordis 

* of the book, and thin herte was afeerd, and thou were meekid bifore® me, and to-rentist 

“ thi clothis, and weptist bifore me, therfore thou schalt dije in pees, that thin i3en se not 


™ the prestis 8. "intog °wente 8. Phond dey. @Om.8 Pvp on de. ¢Om. 8. 10m. & © yuelis (¢ 
ahis¢, neg, *8Om.8 this god Nestarath de. f vnclennesse def. & of eiz3te ¢. to fore 8B. } of B. 
“this thing 8. v Om. 8. W degrees Se. * by mes- Jforhisi Om. 8¢ Lwas ¢ ™theron 8. ° tofore 8. 
sengeris de. and messangeris 7. Ythis 8. 2 myche de. afore de. 


D2 


The pask that 
Josie made. 


Hou Josie 
distroiede false 
dyuynouris, 
ete. 


20 PROLOGUE. 


“alle these yuelis, whiche I schal bringe in on this place.” Thanne Josie gaderide to hym 
alle the olde men of Juda and of Jerusalem, and the king stiz3ede into? the temple of God, 
and alle men of Juda and alle men that dwelliden in Jerusalem, prophetis and prestis, and 
al the peple styede with hym, and he redde to alle men heeringe alle the wordis of the book 
of couenaunt’ of the Lord, that was founden in the hous of the Lord. And the king stood 
on the grees, and smoot couenaunt4 bifore the Lord, that thei schulden go aftir the Lord, 
and kepe alle hise heestis, and witnessingis", and cerymonies, in al the herte and in al the 
soule, and the peple assentide to the couenaunt4. And the king bad the bischop* and 
prestis and porters caste out of Goddis temple alle vessels‘ that weren maad. to Baal, and 
to other ydols; and he brent tho out of Jerusalem, in the valey of Cedron, and bar the 
dust of tho into Bethel. And he distroide ydolatrours, and the hous" of lecchours’ that 
weren in the hous of God; and he distroide auteris and hi3e placis of ydols, and ymagis, 
and took out boonys fro“ sepulcris, and brente tho on the autir in Bethel, that seruide to 
ydolatrie. Also Josie dide awey alle templis of hije placis, that weren in the citee of 
Samarie, whiche the kingis of Israel hadden maad to terre the Lord to wraththe ; and he 
dide to tho as he hadde do in Bethel, and he killide the prestis of hij3e placis, whiche prestis 
weren there ouer the auters, and he brente mennis boonys ‘on tho* auters. Also’ Josie 
made the puple to make a solempne pask, and such pask was not maad fro the daies of 
iugis, and alle kingis of Israe] and Juda, as was this pask maad, in the xviij. 3eer of Josie. 
And hee dide awey spiritis spekinge in mennis wombis, and false dyuynouris, and? figuris 
of ydols, and vuclennessis, and abomynacyouns, that weren in the lond of Juda and of 
Jerusalem. No king bifore him” neither aftir him was lyk him, that turned a3en to God in 
al his herte, and in al his soule, and in al his vertu, bi al the lawe of Moises. Natheles for 


’ the orrible synnes of Juda God turnede not awey fro his strong veniaunce, but seide, that 


Joachas. 


Joachym. 


Hou the chil- 
dren of Israel 
weren transe 
latid. 


he wolde take awey Juda fro his face, as he dide awey Israel, and that he wolde caste 
awey the citee Jerusalem* whiche he chees. Therfor Farao Nechao, king of Egipt, killide 
Josye in Magedo, and Joachas his sone was maad kyng for his fadir; and he rengnede thre 
monethis in Jerusalem, and dide yuel bifore God bi alle thingis whiche his fadris hadden 
do; and this Farao prisonyde him in Reblatha, and took tribute of the lond®, anc. talentis 
of syluer, and oo talent of gold; and this Farao made king Elyachym, the sone of Josie, 
and turnede his name Joachym; and this Farao ledde Joachas in to Egipt ; and Joachym 
dide yuele bifore God bi alle thingis whiche his fadris hadden do. And this Joachym was 
maad seruaunt thre 3eer to Nabugodnosor, king of Babilonie, and eft he rebellyde ajens 
Nabugodnosor, and God sente theuis of Caldeys, and theuis of Sirie, and theuis of Moab, 
and theuis of the sones of Amon into Juda, that he schulde distroie it, as he spac bi his 
prophetis, and specialy for the synnes of Manasses. This Joachym di3ede, and his sone 
Joakyn rengnide ij. monethis in Jerusalem, and dide® yuel bifore God, as hise fadris 
hadden do. In that tyme the seruauntis’ of Nabugodnosor stizede to® Jerusalem, and 
biseegeden it. Thanne Nabugodnosor came to Jerusalem to ouercome it, and Joakyn, and 
his modir, and his seruauntis, and princis, and chaumbirleyns 3eden out to Nabugodunosor, 
and he translatide Joakyn and his oost, x. thousind, and many crafty men in to Babiloyne ; 
and took alle the tresouris of Goddis hous, and of the kingis hous, aud bet togidere alle 
thef golden vessels, whiche® king Salamon hadde maad in the temple. And Nabugodnosor 
ordeynede Mathanye, the brother of Josie, to be kinge, and clepide hym Sedechie, and he 
rengnede xj. 3eer in Jerusalem, and dide yuel bifore God bi alle thingis that Joachym 
hadde do; for God was wrooth aj3ens Jerusalem and Juda, til he castide hem awey fro his 
face. And Sedechie 3ede awey fro the king of Babilonye, and in the ix. 3eer of Sadechie 
Nabugodonosor cam with al his oost, and bisegide Jerusalem til to the! xi. 3eer of Sedechie, 

Pina. Gconaunt ¢. Twyttenessyng 8. sbishopisé. 2 Om. 8. 22 Om.« of Jerusalem def. > Lord a. 


tthe vessels 8. uhonsis de. Vlecheroursy. Woof de. Chedideg. 4seruauntay eintos. Om. 8. 
x of tho ay. of the 8. of tho on the de. y And de. & the weche 8 » kyng Nabugodonosor de. i Om. 8. 


PROLOGUE. 21 


and thanne the citee was broken, and Sedechie and his warriouris fledden bi ny3t, and the 

oost of Caldeys pursuede and took him, and brou3te him to Nabugodonosor in Reblatha. 

And Nabugodonosor spac dom with Sedechie, and killide hise sones bifore him, and puttide Hou Sedechie 
out his i3en, and boond him with chaynes, and brou3te hym in to Babiloyne. Phanne pis on ae ocr 
Nabusardan, the prince of the oost, brente Goddis hous, and the kingis hous, and the housis/ 4° 
of Jerusalem, and distroiede the wallis* of Jerusalem in cumpas; and he translatide into 

Babiloine the residue puple of Juda, outaken a fewe pore men, vyntilieris and erthetilieris ; 

and he brak alle the brasen vessels and of metal in the temple, and bare the metal into 

Babilone. Thanne Nabugodonosor made Godolye to be souereyn of the peple left in the! Of Godoiye. 
lond of Juda, and thanne™ alle the dukis of kny3tis camen to Godolie in" Maspha, and he 

made an ooth to hem, that it schulde be wel to hem, if thei wolden serue the king of 
Babilone. And Ismael, that was of the kingis blood, killide Godolye, and Jewis and This veniaunce 
Caldeis that weren with him, and al the peple of Juda and the princis of kni3tis fledden® is ea 
into Egipte, for? drede of Caldeys. At the laste, Euylmeradach, king of Babilone, reiside oe 
Joachyn fro presoun, and settide his trone abone the trones‘ of othir kingis that weren 

with hym in Babilone ; and Joachyn eet euere breed in the kingis si3t of Babilone, in alle 

the daies of his lijf. This prosces of Godolie and that sueth is teld largeliere™ in the ende 

of Jeremye than heere in the’ ende of Kingis. This prosces of the iiij. book of Kingis 

schulde stire alle men, and namely kingis and lordis, for to hate synne, ast ydolatrie and 

coueitise, and brekinge of Goddis heestis, for whiche the peple of Israel and the peple of 

Juda was thus punschid, and conquerid of hethene men, and for to loue vertues and kepinge 

of Goddis heestis, and distroyinge of opyn sinnes, for whiche manye goode kingis, as 

Esechie, Josie, and many othere, hadden grek thank and socour of God in manye" greete 


perels’, and blisse of heuene withouten ende. God for his mercy graunte this blisse to vs! 


Amen. 
CAP. VIII. 


~The bookis of Paralypomynon ben ful nescessarie to vndirstonde* the stories of the [Te] endir. 
stonde the sto-~ 


elde testament, in so myche, as Jerom seith, that if enyY man withouten these bookis wole ryes of [she] 
presume to haue the* kunnynge of hooly scripturis, he scorne* himself, that is, disseyue? yeni acd of 
eithir® make" himself® worthi to be scorned ; for whi the stories left out in the bookis of ¢ ~«we. 
Kingis be touchid in these bookis, and vnnumberable questiouns of the gospel ben declarid 

by these bookis. The firste book of Paralypomynon tellith in the bigynnynge the genera- 7. Paratipome- 
cyouns’ fro Adam til to Jacob, and so forth til to Dauith, and touchith schortly manye”” 
stories of Saul, and of Dauith, and of Salomon, in the ende therof; and how Dauith or- 

deynede prestis and dekyns in her offis, and how and bi® what seruise thei schulden serue 

God. The bigynnyng of the ij. book of Paralipomynon tellith hou Salomon axide of Tees 
God wisedom to deme his peple, and God 3af to him wisdom, and kunnyng, and richesse, How Salamon 
and glorie, so that noon among kingis neither bifore neither! aftir him was lyk him*. ii cucim, 
Thanne is toold how Salomon byldide the temple of Jerusalem, and an hous to himself. “74 EF s 
Aftir this the queene of Saba cam to Salomon, and brou3te many precious iewelis to him Je oe age 
and preuede his kunnynge and wisdom in many thingis. And alle the kingis of the! erthe 

desyreden to see the face of Salomon”, for® to here the wisdom of God, which® he hadde 

3oue in his herte. Aftir this it sueth hou Roboam departide the x. lynagis fro the hous of 

Dauith bi his pride and harde wordis, and bi suynge? of the counceil of 3unge men; and 

whanne the rewme of Juda was confermyd to him, he forsook the lawe of God, and al 


kwald. 10m.8. ™Om.f. ™intog and 2Om.8. @scornnythe¢ > disseyneth Cac and bet. 
f generacioun ¢ Sing 


fledden Sen pr.m.t Pfro ayn. (trooneée. Tlargiere@. org. maketh Bf. ¢him 6. 
more largely & 8 Om. tand@. tOm.¢. vpe- 4) Here.... biginnith a prolog. 6. tne é k to 
rel ¢. W Ifere.... bigynneth a prolog on the firste him de. ui Om. ¢ ™kyng Salomon 6. © and for ¢ 


bok of Parlipomenon. 8. * vnderstoudyng 8. Yaée. the weche 8B. P the suynge de. 


22 PROLOGUE. 


Israel dide the same with him. Therfore’ God sente the king of Egipt with vnnoumbrable 
peple on hem, and took awey the tresours of Goddis hous and of the kingis hous, and thei 
serueden the king of Egipt, to" knowe the dyuersite of Goddis seruise, and of the seruise of 
the rewine of thes londis. Aftirt him regnede Abia, his sone, and he tretide wijsely with 
the peple of Israel, that thei schulde forsake her synne, and werrey" not ajens Goddis puple 
and’ the rewme of Juda; and for thei wolde proudly werreye® a3ens the rewme of Juda, 
and a3ens this good” counceil of Abia, he killyde of hem bi Goddis help v. hundrid thou- 
ON gs Ae synd of stronge men. Aftir this counceil Abia dijede, and Asa his sone rengnede for him ; 
and in the daies of Asa the lond was in reste x. 3eer; and Asa dide that that was good and 
plesaunt in the si3t of God, and he distroiede auteris of ydolatrie, and hize placis, and he 
brak ymagis, and hewyde doun wodis, and comaundide the peple of Juda to seeke the Lord 
God of her fadris, and do his lawe, and kepe alle hise heestis. He rengnide in pees, and 
byldide stronge citees with wallis, and touris, and 3atis, and lockis, and he hadde in his oost 
thre hundrid thousind of Juda, of* men beringe scheeldis and speris, and of Beniamyn 
ij. hundrid thousind and Ixx. thousind of men of armes, and of archeris. And he ouercam 
the king of Ethiopie, that cam with x. c. thousind menY and iij. c. charris ; and Asa hadde 
the victorie, for in trist of Goddis help he cam a3ens this gret multitude. ‘Thanne the 
ae” prophete of God seide to Asa and al his peple, “ The Lord is with 3o0w, for 3e weren with 
ceilide Asa and * hym ; if 3e seeken hym 3ee schulen fynde?; and if 3e forsaken him he schal forsake 30u; 
bh se “ many daies schulen passe in Israe] withoute veri God, and without prest, and techere, and 
“ Jawe; and whanne thei turnen a3en in her angwische, and crien to God, and seekyn him, 
“ thei schulen fynde him. Be 3e confortid, and 3oure hondis be not maad vnstedfast, for 
“‘ whi mede schal be to 3joure werk.” And whanne Asa hadde herd these wordis, and pro- 
fecie, he was coumfortid, and dide awey alle ydols fro al the lond of Juda and of?” Benia- 
myn, and fro the citees whiche he hadde take of* Effraym. And he” gaderide to gidere 
al the puple vndir him, and he entride into Jerusalem, to make stronge the boond of pees, 
that thei schulden seeke the Lord God of her fadris in al her herte® and al‘ her soule, and 
he seide, “ If eny man® seekith' not the Lord God of Israel, di3e he, fro the leeste til to% 
* the meeste, fro?’ man til to womman.” And thei sworen with al hire herte and with al hire 
wille, thei sou3ten God and founden hym, and God 3af reste to hem bi cumpas. And 
whanne the king of Israel werride a3ens Aza, Asa sente mychil® gold and syluer to the 
king of Syrie, toi helpe him, and* to werreye! a3ens the king of Israel, and he dide so. 
Hou God sf Thanne God blamyde Asa greetly, for he triste™ in the king of Sirie, and not in God. “ And 


Sride Asa falle 


eee therfor the oost of the king of Sirie ascapide fro thin hond,” seide God, “and also bateiles 
vr r 
him, and hou “ schulen rise a3ens thee in present tyme.” And Asa was wrooth a3ens the prophete, that 


ae Mf telde this to hym, and puttide him in the" stockis; and God hadde ful gret indingnacoun on 


Sane this thing, and killide full manye men of the puple in that tyme. And in the ende of his 
Cowen fey lijf Asa hadde ful greet syknesse of his feet®, and in his syknesse he sou3te not the Lord, 
by diapising | but triste? more in the craft of lechis. And Asa di3ede, and Josophat his sone regnede 
be he never so for hym4, and wast strong ajens Israel. And king Josophat ordeynede noumbris® of kni3tis 
Of Jie in alle wallid citees of Juda, and ordeynede strong hooldis in the lond of Juda, and in the 
citees of Effraltym, whiche Asa his fadir hadde take. And the Lord was with Josophat, 
and he 3ede in the firste weies of Dauith his fadir, and he hopide not in Baalym, but in 
Hou God con- God Almy3ty, and 3ede in his comaundementis, and not bi the synnes of Israel. And God 
Sermede the : : : 
tond [to Joso. Confermyde the rewme in the hond' of Josophat, and he hadde ful many richessis and 
phat] for Ne yetnyche glorie; and whanne his herte hadde take trist for the weies of the Lord, he dide 


arog: aweye also hi3e placis and woodis fro Judea, where the puple made offring ‘out of Jerusa- 


q And therfore ¢. 'fortoS. 8 Om. de. tAnd fseke¢. into. #8 and fro. h miche dé. 
aftir da. Uwerre Bde. Vin ¢, WOm. de. *Om. de. i for toda. k Om. de. lwerre de(c. ™ tristide Adete. 
Yofmen 8. 2 fyndehim de. 22 Om... 4 froé. 2 Om. 8. © foot 8. __—*~P tristide Bdet. q Om. 8. 
b Om, det. © hertis ¢. 4 in al Bdent. eOm.8 tThewas ¢. $noumbre¢. t hondis ¢. 


PROLOGUE. 23 


lem" a3ens the lawe. And Josophat in the iij. 3eer of his rewme sente fyue of his princis, 

that thei schulde teche in the citees of Juda ;:and he™ sente ix. deknes with hem, and jj. 

prestis with hem, and thei hadden the book of Goddis lawe, and tau3ten the peple in Juda; 

and thei cumpassiden alle the citees of Juda, and tau3ten al the peple. TherforeY the drede 

of the Lord was maad on™ alle rewmys* of londis that weren bi the’ cumpas of Juda, and 

dursten not werreye’ a3ens Josophat. And he hadde redy* at his hond xj. c. thousind and 

lx. c. thousind of kni3tis, and men of armys, and archers, outaken othere whiche he ‘hadde 

set® in wallid citees, and in all Juda. And Filisteyis and Arabeyes brou3ten to Josophat 

3iftis and tributis, and many thousindis of scheep and buckis of geet. And aftir this [dnd f) ue yes 
doinge Josophat was alyed to Acab, and 3ede with hym to bateile into Ramoth of Galaad, & help of man, 
and iiij. c. prophetis, that weren disseyued bi a spirit of lesing, excitide Acab to this werre, Teenie 
and bihijte prosperite and victorie to him; but Mycheas, oo® trewe prophete of God, telde Meera 
to Acab that he schulde dize in this bataile, and so it was indeede; and Josophat, that was 

in moost perel of this‘ bateile, was sauid bi Goddis help. Aftir this bateil Josophat turnede 

a3een® in pees to Jerusalem, and a prophete of God mette him", and seide, “Thou helpist 

“ the wickid man, and art ioyned in frenschip to hem! that haten* God, and therfor thou 

‘‘ disseruedist! the wraththe of God, but goode werkis ben founden in thee, for thou didest 

“‘ awey wodis fro the lond of Juda, and madist redy thin herte to sceke the Lord God of 

“ thi fadris.”. Therfore Josophat dwellide in Jerusalem, and eft he 3ide out to the peple Of VJosopiar. 
fro Bersabe til to the hil of Effraym, and clepide hem ajen to the Lord God of her fadris ; 

and he ordeynede iugis of the lond in alle stronge citees of Juda bi ech place; and he 
comaundide thus to the iugis, “ See 3e, what 3e owen to do, for 3e vsen the dom not of man Zuere do the 
* but of the Lord, and what euer thing that™ 3e" schal° deme, schal turne into 30u; the Snead 
“dreede of the Lord be with 3ou, and do 3e alle thingis with diligence; for whi neither 7.7" 
“ wickidnesse, neither? taking of persoones, neither coueitise of 3iftis, is anentis 3oure Lord el ‘Ss 
“ God.” And in Jerusalem Josophat ordeynede dekenes and‘ prestis, and princis of meynes #%s ‘awe. 

of Israel, that thei schulde deme to the dwelleris therof the doom and cause" of God ; and 

he comaundide to hem and seide, “Thus 3e schulen do in the drede of the Lord feithfully, 

“ and in’ a perfit herte; ech cause that cometh to 30u of 3oure britheren that dwellen in 

‘“‘ her citees, bitwixe kinrede and kynrede, where‘ euere is questioun either" doute of the 

“ lawe of comaundement of cerymonies of iustifijngis, schewe 3ee to hem, that thei do not’ 

“ synne ajens the Lord, and wraththe either" veniatmce come not on 30w, and on 3o0ure 

“ britheren ; therfore do 3e thus and 3e schule ‘not do* synne; and’ Amarie, 3oure prest Rone noe 
*‘ and? bischop, schal be souereyn in these thingis that perteynyn to God.” Aftir these sophat, and 
thingis the sones of Amon, and the sones of Moab, and with men of Ydume, weren gaderid ag ct 
togidere to werrye®* a3ens Josophat. Thanne Josophat 3af him al to beseche God, and 

prechide fasting to al Juda, and al Juda was gaderid to biseeche the Lord; and Josophat 
knoulechide, that he hadde not® power to a3enstonde so greet a° multitude of enemyes. 

Thanne God coumfortide him and his peple bi a prophete, that thei schulde not dreede 

this greet multitude of enemyes, for God himself schulde fi3te and  ouercome her enemyes, 

without strook of his peple; and so it was in dede. At the laste, Josophat made frenschipe Biwar of fats 
with Ocosie, king of Israel, whois werkis weren ful yuele, and thei weren felowis to make ie UE ase 
schippis, that schulden go into Tarsis. Therfor God bi his prophete seide to Josophat, Gone lle: 
“ For thou haddist boond of pees with Ocosie, God hath smyte thi werkis,” and the 

schippis ben al to-broken and my3ten not go into Tarsis. Thanne dizede Josophat, and 


Joram his sone rengnyde for hym. This Joram weddide the doujtir of Acab, and killide 0f Joram. 


uOm. de. 4 Om. VAnd therefore de. Win 8. rnist de ™ Om. 88. he B. Oshulend. Pune ¢ 
x the rewmis de. the rewme ¢ YOm.8. 2werre de. 4Om.8 ¢° the cause¢. *¢Om.8. ¢ that is wher ¢. 
&mad redy 8. »lx.e. ae pr.m. 4. prom. sixti hundrid¢ Yor BE Ynof. Word *dono8. yOm. ¢. 
© lefte 8. 4thousand¢ ¢the¢ fthe¢. &Om.8. 2 either de @ werre Seti. » no BE. ¢ Om. 8. 
h with him den. ihym ¢ k hatith ¢< ldese- 4thyn 8, 


24 PROLOGUE. 


hise owne britheren, and 3ede iu® the weies of the kingis’ of Israel, as the hous of Acab 
hadde do; and® he dide ydolatrie, and made the dwelleris of Jerusalem and also" Juda to 
Far Joram sede breke Goddis lawe. Therfor Edom and Lobna 3eden awey fro his lordschipe, for he hadde 
me forsake the Lord God of his fadris; and therfore God reiside a3ens him Filisteys and 
God, tees Arabeys, that coosteyen with Ethiopiens, and thei distroieden the lond of Juda, and token 
awey al the catel that was founden in the hous of the king, and tooken awey his wijf and 
sones, outaken Joachas the 3ungeste. And God smoot Joram with vncurable sorewe of 
wombe twey 3er, so that he rotid on erthe, and castide! out hise entrailis, and dizjede in 
worst syknesse. And his sone Ocosias rengnyde for him, and dide yuele as the hous of 
Acab, for whi his modir excitide him to do wickidly ; and thei of the hous of Acab weren 
his councelers into his deth, and he 3ede in the counceil of hem. And therfore Hieu, 
whanne he distroyede the hons of Acab, killide Ocosie, and the prince of Juda, and the 
Josias [Joas} gones of the britheren of Ocosie. After these thingis Joas waas maad king, bi the helpe of 
aie” Joiada the prest, and the curside womman Atalia was slayn. The prestis and grete' men 
es ciwe Of the peple brou3ten out of Goddis hous the sone of the king, and settiden a coroun on his 
ee: heed, and 3auen in his hond the lawe to be kept, and maden him king. And Joiada made 
couenaunt bitwixen him and al the peple and the king, that thei schulden be the peple of 
God, that is, forsake ydolatrie, and kepe treuly Goddis lawe. Therfore al the peple 3ede 
into™ the hous of Baal, and distroyeden it, and braken the auters and symylacris, either 
ymagis of him, and thei killeden bifore the auteer Mathan, the prest of Baal. This Joas 
dide wel in the tyme of Joiada, and reparilide the temple of Jerusalem, that was distroyed 
de bi Atalia and" hir sones; but aftir the deeth of Joiada he was flaterid bi the princis® of 
counceil, and Juda, and thei felden to idolatrie, aud forsoken the temple of God. And the wraththe of 
easdsireted. God was maad a3ens Juda and Jerusalem for his synne, and he sente prophetis to hem, that 
thei schulden turne a3en to God, and thei nolde heere these profetis. And Sacarie, the prest 
and sone? of Joiada, repreuede hem for this synne, and thei stonyden hym to deth‘ in the 
purseynt of Goddis hous, by comaundement of the king. And whanne the 3eer was endid 
the oost of Syrie stijede a3ens hym, and cam in to Juda and Jerusalem, and killide alle the 
princis of the peple, and senten al the prey in to Damask to the king. And certis whanne 
a’ ful litil noumbre of men of Sirie was comen, God bitook in’ her hondis a multitude 
withouten ende, for thei hadden forsake the Lord God of her fadris, and thei vsiden 
schameful domes in Joas, and 3eden forth, and leftyn him in greet sorewis; and his ser- 
uaunts risen ages him for veniaunce of the blood of the sone of Joiada the prest, and kil- 


liden him in his bed; and Joas was deed, and Amasie his sone rengnide for him. 


CAP. Ix. 


Amasye. Amasie dide good in party, but not in a‘ parfit herte, and he killide hem that hadden 
slayn the king his fadir, but he killide not her sones, as God bad in the lawe. This 
Aiasie foond in al Juda and Beniamyn fro xx. 3eer" and aboue, xxx. thousind of 3unge 
meu that 3eden out to bateile, and heelden spere and scheeld ; and he hyride of Israel an 
c. thousind of ful stronge men for an c. talentis of syluer, to fizte a3ens the sones of Edom. 
And a man of God seide to Amasie, “A! thou king, the oost of Israel go not out with thee, 
“ for the Lord is not with Ysrael, and with alle the sones of Effraym; that if thou gessist 
“ that bateilis stonden in the strengthe of oost’, the Lord schal make thee to be ouercomen 
“ of thin enemyes; for it is propir to God for to helpe, and ‘for to turne into fli3t.” 
re A ne ae Therfore Amasie departyde awey the oost of Israel, and tristily ledde forth his puple to 
andnot in _bataile; aud he hadde the victorie, and killide xl. thousind of his enemyes in this* bataile. 


man, God sente . ° . . . ts . 
him victorie of And aftir this victorie Amasie worschipide the goddis of Edom, and brente encense to hem; 


his enemyes. 
eintog. f king ¢ £ Om, dene. hofpe. also detht Om. de. stofBX tOm. 86 Om.a. 
of den. ~icasteg¢. k Om. 8. | the grete 86 mtog Y the oost 8. WY Om. ¢. * his ¢. 
"the queen and de. prince < P the soneg. 4 the 


PROLOGUE. 25 


wherfor God was wrooth ajensY Amasie, and sente to him a prophete, that schulde seie to 

him, “ Whi hast thou worschipid goddis that delyueriden* not her puple fro thin hond ?” 

Whanne the prophete spac these thingis to him, he answeride to the prophete, “ Wher 

“ thou art a counceler of the king? ceese thou, lest perauenture I slee thee.” Therfore the 

prophete 3ede awey, and seide, “ I woot that the Lord thou3te to” slee thee, for thou hast 

“doo this yuel, and ferthermore* thou assentidist not to my counceil :” and so it bifelde in Hou Amasie 
deede, for bi? pride he terride the king of Israel to werre, and nolde ceese for heleful COUN fir he wold” 
ceil of the king of Israel. Therfore the king of Israel ouercam the puple of Juda, and”! %?)# the 
tresour and vessels whiche he foond in Goddis hous, and in the kingis hous. Andé aftir 

this doing Amasie fledde out of Jerusalem into Lachis, for tresoun doon to him of his men; 

and thei senten®, and killiden him in Lachis. And Osias his sone regnede for him lij. 3eer 

in Jerusalem, and sou3tef God in the daies of Sacarie, vndirstondinge and seeinge God, and 

whanne he sou3te God, he& louyde* him in alle thingis; and God helpide him ajens 
Filisteys, and a3ensi Arabeys, and a3jens Ammonytis. And* Ammonitis payeden 3iftis to 

Osias, and his name was puplischid til to the entring! of Egipt, for ofte victories. He™ 

bildide manye touris in Jerusalem, and also in wildirnesse, for he hadde many beestis, and 

vynes, and vyntilieris, for he was a man 3ouen to erthe tilthe. He" hadde in his oost 

ij. thousynd and vj. c. princes of stronge men, and iij. c. thousind ‘and vij. thousind® and 

v. c. that weren able to bateil, and fou3ten for the king a3ens aduersaries; and his name 

jede out fer, for God ‘helpide him?, and made him stronge. But whanne he was maad 

stronge, his herte was reisid into his deth, and he dispiside his Lord God, for he 3ede into 

the temple of God, and wolde brenne encense on the auter of encense, a3ens the lawe. 

And whanne the bischop and many noble?? prestis ajenstodyn him, and teldyn the lawe that 

was azens him, hee’ was wrooth, and helde the censer, and manaside hem; and anoon 

lepre roos in his forheed bifore the prestis in Goddis hous. Thanne thet prestis puttiden 

him out, and he hastide to go out, for drede, and for he feelide anon the veniaunce of God. 

Therfore kings Osias was leprouse til to the day of his deth, and dwellidet in an hous de- Osias was tepre 
partid. And Joathan his" sone gouernede the kingis hous, and deemyde the puple of the’ "8" 
lond. And Joathan rengnyde xvj. 3eer’ in Jerusalem, and dide ri3tfulnesse bifore God, bi 

alle thingis whiche Osias his fadir hadde do, outaken this, that he entride not into the 

temple of God’; and 3it the puple trespasside. He” byldide manye thingis, and fau3t ajens 

the king of the sones of Amon, and ouercam him; and the sones of Amon 3auen to hym 

an c. talentis of syluer, and x. thousind corus of barly, and as manye of whete; and a* 

corus conteyneth xxx. buschellis. And Joathan was maad strong, for he hadde dressid his 

weyes bifore his Lord God, and he was deed, and Achas his sone regnede for hym xyj. 3eer 

in Jerusalem. This Acas dide not ri3tfulnesse in Goddis si3t, but 3ede in the weiesY of the 4cas was di- 
kingis of Israel, and made ymagis to Baal, and dide manyfold ydolatrie; and God bitook ibe BD ae Me 
him in to the hond of the king of Sirie, which king smoot Acas, and took a gret prey of ’”""* 

his rewme into* Damask; and Acas was bitaken to* the hondis of the king of Israel, and 

was smyten with a greet wounde. And Facee, the sone of Romelye, killide of Juda yj. 

score thousind in oo day, alle the werriouris; for thei hadden forsake the Lord God of her 

fadris ; and the sones of Israel tooken of hire britheren of Juda ij. c. thousind of wymmen, 

and of children®, and of damyselis, and prey withouten ende, and baren it in to Samarie. 

And Obed, the prophete of God, seide to the men of Israel, that thei hadden do greet 

cruelte, and synned az3ens God, and bad hem® lJede ajen the prisoneris of Juda, “ for whi 


Yto8. 2delyueren ¢. 2%fortow for ¢ bOm.8. § the kyng den. t he dwellid ¢. u the kynges 8. 


©€Om.¢ 4 Om. den. €smiten 6, fhe sou3te¢. ¥v Om. a w and he ¢. x Om. Bdety pr. me t. 
& and 8. h bileuede to ¢. i Om. det. k Om. ¢. Y weie ¢y prim. 2 and broute into By sec.m. 8 in 
'entrede. ™Mandheg andheg Om. Ade. tot » litle childeren@é. ¢ Om. 8. 

P clepid ¢ PP othere t. 4 and he ¢. r Om. ¢. 


E 


26 PROLOGUE. 


Hes A et “ greet veniaunce of the Lord neizeth to jou.” Therfore the princes of Israel maden the 
restoriden azen Werriouris to forsake the prey, and alle thingis whiche thei hadden take; and the princis 
pbc, clothiden hem that weren nakid, and refreschiden hem with mete, and drinke, and anoyntyng 
peas es of oile, for traueile, and senten hem hoom benyngly. Thanne king Acas sente to the king 


ee aie of Assiriens, and axide help; and Ydumeys camen, and killiden manye men of Juda, and 
anguysh. tooken greet prey; and Filisteys tooken many citees of Juda, and dwelliden in tho. And 
God made low the puple of Juda for Acas the king of Israel, for he hadde maad ‘him nakid 
of help’, and for he hadde dispisid God. And God broujte a3ens him*® Teglath Falasar, 
the king of Assiriens, that turmentidef him, and distroiede, for noon a3enstood. Therfore 
Acas spoilide Goddis hous, and the hous of kingis® and of€® princis, and 3af 3iftis to the king 
of Assiriens; and natheles it profitide® no thing to him; and Acas, in the tyme of his 
anguysch, encreside dispising a3ens God, and offride sacrifices" to the! goddis of Damask, 
and he seide, “ The goddis of Sirie ‘helpen hem), whiche goddis I schal plese* with sacri- 
“ fices, and thei schulen helpe me,” whanne a3enward thei weren fallyng! to him, and to al 
Israel. 'Therfor Acas rauyschide and brak alle the vessels of Goddis hous, and closide the 
jatis of Goddis temple, and made to him auteris in alle corners™ of Jerusalem, and in alle 
the citees of Juda, to brenne encense, and terride God to wraththe. And he dijede, and 
Ezechie wasa Esechiee his sone rengnide for him xxix. 3eer in Jerusalem; he" dide that that® was ple- 
Boodman aunt in? Goddis si3t, bi alle thingis which’ Dauith his fadir hadde do. And he opynede 
the 3atis of Goddis hous, in’ the firste 3eer of his rewme, and made prestis and dekenes to 
clense aud halewe the’ temple and autert of God, with al the vessels and purtenaunsis of 
the temple ; and he gaderide togidere alle the princis of the citee, and stizide into" Goddis 
hous ; and thei offriden vij. boolis and™ vij. rammes, vij. lambren, and’ vij. buckis of geet, 
for synne, for the rewme, for the” sentuarie, and for Juda. And he seide to the prestis, 
the* sones of Aaron, that thei schulden offre on the auter of God, and thei diden so. And 
he ordeynede dekenys in the hous of God, with symbals and sautrees and harpis, biY the 
ordynaunce of Dauith, and of Gad, the prophete of the king, and of Nathan the prophete ; 
for it was the comaundement of God bi the hond of hise prophetis. And dekenys? stooden 
and heelden the orgenys of Dauith, and prestis heldyn trumpis. And Esechie comaundide 
that thei schulden offre brent sacrifices? on the auter, and whanne brent sacrifices weren 
offrid, thei bigunnen ‘to singe* heryingis’ to God, and to® sounne with trumpis and diuerse 
orgenys, whiche Dauith the king of Israel hadde maad redy for to sounne. And Esechie 
and the princis comaundiden to the dekenys that thei schulden herie God with the wordis 
How Ezechie of Dauith, and of Asaph the prophete. And Esechie sente to al Israel and Juda, and 
ed wroot epistlis to Effraym and Manasses, that thei schulden come to Goddis hous in Jeru- 
holde past, "4salem, and make pask to the Lord God of Israel. And it pleside the’ king and al the 
lawe to be kept. multitude, and thei demeden to sende messangeris into al Israel, fro? Bersabee til to Dan, 
that thei schulden come and make pask to the Lord God ‘of Israel®$ in Jerusalem. And cur- 
rowris 3eden out with epistlis, bi comaundement® of the king and of hise princes, ‘in to! al 
Israel and Juda, as the king hadde comaundid, and precheden, “Sones of Israel, turne 3e* 
* a3een to the Lord God of Abraliam, of Isaac, and of! Israel, and he schal turne ajen to 
“the remenauntis that ascapiden the hondis of the king of Assiriens; serue 3e to™ the" 
* Lord God of youre fadris, and the wraththe of his strong veniaunce schal be turned 
* awey°® fro 30; for if 3e turnen a3en to the Lord, 3oure britheren and joure sones schulen 
“ haue mersy bifore hire lordis, that ledden hem prisoners, and thei schulen turne a3en into 


4 naked the help of hym 8. e Om. a. ftur- Om. 8. *ofthe 8 Yand bit. 2 the dekenes ¢. 
mende 8. &thekingis(é 8 Om.« h profite +. ® a sacrifice ¢. > the brent». ¢Om.§. 4 heriyng ¢. 
hh sacrifice ¢ iQm.« ihelpme¢ k worshiped. ¢sog. ftothes. &andfrog e Om.1. 2» co- 
linto fallyng de. ™ the corneris Bde. and het. maundementis(, i toe prom. * Om.de. |} Om. BE. 
°Om. 8 Ptog. q that 8. rOm. ¢ Shisg ™ Om. 86 % youre 8. © ajen da. 

t the auteer det. uina. uu Om. ¢ v Om. 8. 


PROLOGUE. 27 


“this lond.” Therfore currouris 3eden swiftly? fro citee ‘in to citee, by the lond of Effraym 

and of Manasses ‘til to‘ Sabulon, and thei scorneden and bymowiden the messengeris ; 
natheles summe of Aser and of* Manasses and oft Sabulon assentiden:to the counceil, and 

camen in to Jerusalem. Goddis hond was maad in Juda, that he 3af to hem oon herte, and 

thei diden the word of God bi comaundement of the king and of princis, and many puplis 

weren gaderid in Jerusalem, to make the" solempnite of pask in the ij. monthe; and thei 
distroieden the anteris that weren in’ Jerusalem, and thei distroieden alle thingis in which 

encense was offrid to ydolis, and castiden forth’ in to the stronde of Cedron. Whanne 

these thingis weren halewid ri3tly, al Israel 3ede out, that was founden in the citees of 

Juda, and thei braken symylacris, either* ymagis, and hewidenY doun? wodis, and distroieden 

hize placis and auteris, and* not oonly of al Juda and Beniamyn, but also of Effraym and 
Manasses, til thei distroieden thoo outtirly. And Hsechie ordeynede cumpanyes of prestis 

and of dekenis, bi her departingis, ech man in his owne offis, as wel of prestis as of dekenis, 

to brent sacrifices> and peesible® sacrifices, that thei schulden mynystre and knouleche and 

singe in the 3atis of the castels, eithir® oostis, of the Lord. And Esechie comaundide to the 

puple to 3eue to prestis and deknes her partys, that is, the firste fruytis and tithis, that 

thei my3ten 3eue tent to the lawe of God. And there is teld myche of the paying and deel- 

ing of tithis and other® hooly thingis. Thanne it sueth hou Sennagerib blasfemede God of 

Israel, and hou Esechie counfortide the puple a3ens his blasfemye and pride. And‘ Esechie Hou Ezcehie 
and Ysaie the prophete preieden a3ens the blasfemye, and crieden til in to heuene; Gini giteae ior the 
God sente his aungel, and he" killide ech strong man, and werriour, and prince of the oost ile 
of ‘the king of: Assiriens, and he* turnide ajen with schenschipe into his lond, and hise 

owne sones killiden him bi swerd. And God sauide Esechie and the dwelleris of Jerusa- 

lem fro the hond of Senacherib, king of Assiriens, and fro the hond of alle men, and jaf to 

hem reste bi cumpas. Aftir these thingis Esechie was syk to the deeth, and he preiede to 

God, and God herde him. And the herte of Esechie was reisid to pride, and wraththe was 

maad ajens him, and a3ens Juda, and ajens Jerusalem. And aftir he was meckid, for lis 

herte was reysid, bothe he and the dwelleris of Jerusalem weren inekid, and therfore the 
veniaunce of God cam not in the daies of Esechie. And Esechie was ful riche and noble, 

and in alle hise werkis he dide welsumly, what ener thing he wolde. Natheles in the 
message of princes! of Babilone, that weren sente to him to axe of the grete wondir that 

bifel on erthe, God forsook him, that he was temptid, and alle thingis weren knowen that 

weren in his herte. Thanne™ dijede Esechie, and Manasses his sone rengnide in Jerusalem Menasses. 
Iv. 3eer. And Manasses dide yuele bifore God, bi abomynacioun of hethen men, which God 
distroiede bifore the sones of Israel, and he byldide hize placis, and made auteris to" 
Baalym, and dide manyfold ydolatrie, and seruede to wicche craftis, and sette® ydolis in the 

temple of God; and he disseyuede the puple of Juda and the dwelleris of Jerusalem, that 

thei diden yuel more than hethene men, which the Lord hadde distroied fro tle face of 

the sones of Israel. And God spac to him and to his puple, and thei nolden take heede ; 
therfore he brou3te on hem the princis? of the oost of the king of Assiriens ; and thei 

tooken Manasses, and bounden him with chaynes and gyues, and ledde him into Babilone ; 

and aftir that he was angwischid, he preiede his Lord God, and he dide penaunce gretly Hou Manasses 
bifore the God4 of his fadris, and he preiede hertily, and bisou3te,God, and God herde hiss ceeooe 
preier, and brou3te™ him a3en in to Jerusalem, into his rewme. And Manasses kuew that Poe 
the Lord himself is God, and he dide awey alien goddis, and symylacris, either‘ idolis fro . 
Goddis hous, and distroiede auteris whiche he hadde maad in the hil of Goddis houst and 


P switly a. Gto de. and of de. 8 Om. de. f£Om. dep. &€Om.B. 2Om. 8 iOm. 6 § the 
t Om. ¢. u Om. def. Vv ynaad in ¢< whem king ¢. 1 the princis ¢. m And 8. n on ¢. 
forth¢<, Xorg Yheewg 2Om.8. 20m. 86 © settide dG. P prynce de. 4 Lord Godé. °° Ged 
» sacrifice (. © to peesible de. org ¢ Om. brouz3teg Sorg, t Om. de. 


EQ 


28 PROLOGUE. 


in Jernsalem, and castide alle out of the citee, and he restoride the anteer of God, and 

offride on it sacrificis" and herying’", and comaundide’ the puple of Juda to serue the Lord 

God of Israel ; and natheles the puple offride 3it” in hij3e placis to her Lord God. Manasses 

dijede, and Amon his sone regnide for him ij. 3er in Jerusalem, and he dide yuel in Goddis 

si3t, as Manasses his fadir hadde do, and offride and seruede to alle idolis, which Manasses 

hadde maad; and he reuerenside not the face of God, as Manasses reuerenside, and he dide 

many greetere trespasis ; and whanne his seruauntis hadden conspirid a3ens him, thei kil- 

liden him; and the puple killide hem that hadden slayn Amon, and made Josie his sone 

Josie the good king for him, and he regnide xxxj. 3eer in Jerusalem. Josie* dide that that was ri3tful in 
ee Goddis si3t, and 3ede in the weies of Dauith, his fadir, andY bowide neither to the ri3t side 
neither to the lift side. In the viij. 3eer of his rewme, whanne he was 3it a chijld, he bigan 

to seke the God of Dauith, his fadir, and in the xij. 3eer, aftir that he bigan, he clenside 

Juda and Jerusalem fro hij3e placis, and ymagis and ydolis. Thei distroieden bifore him 

the auters of Baalym, and the symylacris that weren put abone; he kittide doun, and alto- 

brak wodis and grauen ymagis, and scateride the relijfis on the biriels of hem that weren 

wont to offre. Ferthermore he brente the boonys of prestis in the auteris of idolis, and 

he? clenside Juda and Jerusalem, and distroiede alle ydolis* in the citees of Manasses and 

of®* Effrahym and of** Symeon til to Neptalym. Jn the xviij. 3eer of his rewme, whanne the 

lond and the temple of God was clensid, he sente worthi men to reparaile Goddis hous, and 

’ so thei diden in deede. And Elchie, the gret prest, 3af to Saphan, the scrimeyn and 
solempne messenger, the book of Goddis lawe, and he bar it to the king; and whanne the 

Hou Josie king hadde herd the wordis of the lawe, he to-rente hise clothis, and he comaundede 
comaunde the Elchie and othere grete® men to goo, and preie the Lord for the king, and for the resydues 


grete prest El- 


chie to prete of Tsrael and of Juda, on alle the words of the book of Goddis lawe; “ for whi greet 
with othere 


nee pies veniaunce of God hath droppid on vs, for oure fadris kepten not the wordis of God, that 
book of Goddis * thei diden alle thingis that ben writen in this book.” Therfore Elchie, and thei that weren 
ay eerie sent togidere of the king, 3eden to Olda, a profetesse, the’ wijf of Sellum; and God seide 
bi hir that he schal bringe in on this place and dwelleris* therof yuelis, and alle cursinges 
that ben writen in this book of Goddis lawe; for thei forsoken God and sacrificidenf to 
alyen® goddis, to terre him to wrathfulnesse, in alle the werkis of her hondis; “ but for 
‘thou, king of Juda, herdist the wordis of the book, and were meekid in Goddis si3t, and 
“ weptist and to-rentist" thi clothis, I haue herd thee,” seith God, “ and thou schalt be born 
“in to thi sepulcre in pees, and thin ijen schuleni not see al the yuel which Y schal bringe 
“in on this place, and on the dwelleris therof.”. And whanne Josie hadde herd these 
wordis, he clepide togidere alle the eldre men of Juda and of Jerusalem, and he stizide in to 
Goddis hous, and alle meni of Juda and the dwelleris of Jerusalem stiziden togidere, prestis 
and deknis, and al the puple fro the leeste ‘til to the moste, and in audiense of hem the 
king redde in Goddis hous alle the wordis of the book ; and he stood in his trone, eithir! 
seete of doom, and smoot boond of pees bifore God, that he schulde go aftir God, and kepe 
hise heestis, and witnessingis™, and iustifyingis, in al his herte and al™ his soule, and do 
tho thingis that ben writen in that" book whiche he hadde red. And he chargide gretly on 
this thing alle men that weren founden in Jerusalem and Beniamyn; and the dwelleris of 
Jerusalem diden bi the® couenaunt of the? Lord God of her fadris. ‘Therfore Josie dide 
awey alle abomynaciouns fro alle the cuntreys of the sones of Israel, and made alle men, 
that weren residue in Israel4, to serue her Lord God; in alle the daies of his lijf thei 3eden 
not awey fro the Lord God of her fadris. Aftirward’ Josie made pask in Jerusalem, and 


u sacrifice ¢. uu heriyngis ¢. Vv comandynge 8. 4 rentist dey. igchal¢. ithe men« k into. 
w Om. de. x And Josieg Yhed. 2Om.f. ®the org ™m wytnessyng 8. mminal« ® the 8. 
ydolis 8. aa Om. ¢. b messangers ¢. ¢ Om. ¢. this de. ° Om. de. P here de. qa Jerusalem 8. 


4 Om. 8. &the dwellers ¢. fsacrifieden de. &other8. « After 8. And afterward ¢. 


PROLOGUE. 29 


ordeynede prestis in hire officis*, and bad hem mynystre in Goddis hous, and bad dekenis Of te pask of 
serne God and his puple Israel', and make hem redy bi hire housis and kinredis in the de- ioe 
parting of ech, as Dauith, king of Israel, comaundide, and bad hem serue in the seyntuarie, We ee 4 
bi the meynes and cumpanyes and" dekenis, and that thei be halewid, and offre pask, and “8? 
make redy her britheren therto. And Josie made such a pask, that noon was lyk in’ Is- 
rael, fro the daies of Samuel the prophete, neithir eny of the kingis of Israel made pask, as 
Josie dide, to prestis, and dekenes, and to al Juda and Israel, and to the dwelleris of Jerusa- 
lem ; for he 3af to al the puple that was founden in Jerusalem in the solempnite of pask, 
xxx. thousinde lambrin ‘and kidisY and othere scheep, and iij. thousind of oxun. Aftir that 
Josie hadde reparelid the temple, Necao, king of Egipt, stiz3ide to fijte in Cartamys, and 
Josie 3ede forth ajens him, and the king of Egipt seide to Josie, “ I come not to day a3ens 
“ thee, but I fi3te ajens another hous, to whiche God bad and* madeY me go in haste; ther- 
* fore ceese, thon king of Juda, to day ajens God, which is with me, lest he’ sle thee.” 
Josie nolde turne ajen, but made himself redy to bataile a3ens the king of Egipt, and 
assentide not to the wordis of the king of Egipt, spoken bi Goddis mouth. Therfore Josie 
was slayn of the king of Egipt, and the peple of the lond made Joacas his sone king in 
Jerusalem. He* regnide iij. moonthis in Jerusalem, and the king of Egipt puttide> him 
doun, and condempnide the lond of Juda in an ec. talentis of syluer, and in a® talent of gold, 
and made Eliachym his brothir kyng for him on Juda and Jerusalem, and turnide his name 
Joachym. He regnide xj. 3eer in Jerusalem, and dide yuel bifore God. Therfore Nabu- 
godonosor took him, and ledde him boundyn with chaynes into Babilone, and baar thidir 
the vessels of Goddis temple; and Joakin his sone rengnide for him iij. moonthis and x. 
daies in Jerusalem, and dide yuel in Goddis si3t. Thanne Nabugodonosor sente men that 
ledden hym into Babilone and bare® out thef preciouseste® vessels of Goddis hous; and Na- 
bugodonosor made Sedechie king on Juda and Jerusalem". Hei rengnide xj. 3eer in Jern- Sedechie dide 
salem, and dide yuel in Goddis si3t, neithir was* aschamyd of the face of Jeremye, the prose 
phete, that spac to him of Goddis mouth. He brak the ooth maad too Nabugodnosor ; £74°70s0" ledde 
therfore Nabugodnosor cam and took hym, and ledde ‘him and alle the vessels and the! tre- “yz: 
souris of Goddis hous and of the king™ and princis into Babilone, and killide the puple, and 
distroiede and brente Jerusalem; and the puple that was left alyue was led into Babilone, 
and seruede the king and his sones, til the king of Perseys rengnide, and til 1." 3er weren 
fillid®, bi Goddis word seid® bi the mouth of Jeremye. And Cirus, king? of Perseys, co- 
maundide to be prechid, 3he bi writinge in al his rewme, that Jewis schulden turne a3en 
into Judee. 

Cures, 


This proces of Paralypomynon in the j. and ij.4 book schulde stire ‘cristene kingis and 7%e coumfort 
lordis to distroie synne, and loue vertu, and make Goddis lawe to* be knowe and kept of palit 
her puple, for heere thei mown se, hou sore God punschide yuele kingis, that lyueden yuele, 
and drowen the puple to idolatrie, either' other gret synnes, and hou greetly" God preyside, 
rewardide, and cherischide good kinges, that lyueden wel, and gouernede wel the puple in 
Goddis lawe, and opin resoun, and good’ conscience. And thou3 kingis and lordis knewen 
neuere more of hooly scripture” than iij.* stories of the ij. bookY of Paralypomynon and of 
Regum, that is, the storie of king Josophat, the storie of king Ezechic, and the storie of 
king Josie, thei my3te lerne sufficiently to lyue wel and gouerne wel hire puple bi Goddis 
lawe, and eschewe al pride, and’ ydolatrie, and* coueitise, and other synnes>. But alas! 
alas! alas! where king Jozophat sente hise princis, and® dekenes, and prestis, to ech citee of 

8 office 3¢ t of Israel ¢. u of BE. Vitin g& 1 kyngis and cristene lordis dene. sOm. 8. tor ¢. 
wOm.f. *Om.ayn YOm.y 71. aAndhe gt %Om. 8. v Om. 8. w writ dee. x the thre (eG 
> putte p. €o0 8.0 ¢ 4 Om. ay. ebaren 8. Ybookisg, 2Om.¢ 40m. 8. ie From this pa- 

f not ay. & preciouse ¢. on Jernsalem 8. |! And ragraph to the beginning of cap. xi. omitted in 6. 
he¢. Khewas¢. 10m.¢ ™kingis¢ "seuenti¢, © Om. B¢. 
°fulled 8. °°Om.2. P the king 8. 9 in the secounde f. 


30 PROLOGUE. 


Sewhat good his rewme with the book of Goddis lawe, to techen opinly Goddis lawe to the puple, summe 
ie cristene lordis senden general lettris to alle her mynistris, and leegemen eithir tenauntis, 
ane fe Hers that the pardouns of the bisschopis of Rome, that ben opin leesingis, for thei graunten 
War pardouns! many ¢. 3eeris of pardown aftir domes day, be prechid’ generaly in her rewmes and lord- 
schipis, and if eny wijse man ajenseith® the opin errouris of anticrist, and techef men to 
do her almes to pore nedy men, to ascape the peynes of helle, and to winne the blisse of 
henene, he be’ prisoned, as a man out of cristen bileue, and traytour of God, and of" cristen 
kingis and lordis. Andi where king Ezechie made him ful bisy to clense Goddis hous, and 
do awey al vnclennesse fro the sentuarie, and comaundide prestis to offre brent sacrifice on 
Goddis auteer, and ordeynede dekenis in Goddis hous to herie God, as Dauith and other 
Sce lordis what prophetis ordeyneden, summe cristene lordis in name, and hethene in condiscouns defoulen 
ie ioe the sentuarie of God, and bringin in symonient clerkis, ful of coueitise, eresie, and ypocrisie, 
and malice, to stoppe Goddis lawe, that it be not knowen and kept, and frely prechid; and 
3it summe cristene lordis holden many prelatis and curatis in her courtis and in seculer 
offis asens Goddis lawe and mannis opinly, and withholden hem fro her goostly offis and 
helping of cristen soulis; and where king Josie prechide opinly Goddis lawe in the temple 
to al the puple, and castide awey idolis, and brente the boonis of prestis, that diden idola- 
lh a trie, summe cristen lordis in name notk in dede, preisen and magnifien freris lettris, ful of 
disceit and leesingis, and make hire tenauntis and meyne! to swere bi herte™, boonis, nayles”, 
and sydes, and other membris of Crist, and pursuen ful cruely hem that wolden teche treuly 
and freely the lawe of God, and preisen, mayntenen, and cherischen hem, that prechen 
fablis, lesingis, and synful mennis tradiciouns, either® statutis, and letten greetly the gospel 
to be prechid, and holy writ to be knowen and kept. But wite these vnwyse lordis, that 
Elye the prophete, oon aloone hadde the treuthe of God, and king Acab with viij.? e. and 1. 
prestis and prophetis of Baal hadde the false part; and eft Mycheas, oon aloone prophete 
of God, hadde the treuthe ajens iiij. c. prophetis of Baal, that counceileden Acab go4 to® 
Kyngisand werre to his owne schenschipe and deth; so now a fewe pore men and idiotis, in compari- 
lordis cherische : : ° . 
good prestis,for SoM Of clerkis of scole, mown haue the tretthe of holy scripture ajens many thousinde pre- 
irene f Gots Jatis and religiouse, that ben 3ouen to worldly pride and coueitise, symonie, ypocrisie and 
Bee aa other fleschly synnes, moosts sithen these pore men desiren oonly the treuthe and fredom of 
thet hooly gospel, and of hooly scripture, and accepten manis lawis" and ordynauncis’, oonly 
in as myche as thei ben groundid in holy scripture, eithir good resoun, and comyn prophit 
of cristen puple; and worldly prelatis and feyned relygious grounden hem on synful mennis 
statutis, that sounnen™ pride and coueitise, and letten the treuthe and fredom of Goddis lawe 
to be knowen and kept, and bringen cristen puple in nedeles* tharldam and greet cost. But 
it is forY to drede ful sore lest kingis and lordis ben now in the formere synnes of Manasses; 
God graunte that thei repenten verily and make amendis to God and men, as he dide, in 
Prelatis beth ~the ende; for thei setten idolis in Goddis hous, and exciten men to idolatrie, and scheden 
si innocent blood in many maners, as Manasses dide. First thei setten in her herte’, that 
schulde be the temple and specialy* chaumbre of God, the idole of coueitise, either of glo- 
tonie, either> of pride, either? of other greet synnes, for seint Poul seith, that oure bodies ben 
the temple® of the Hooly Goost, ‘and eft he seith, that auarice is the seruise of idolis’, and 
eft he seith, that glotouns maken her bely® her God; and God seith bi Job, that the denil 
is king ouer alle the sones‘ of pride, and Jhesu Crist seith, that the deuil is prince of this 
world, that is, as Austin seith, of false men that dwellen in this world. Thanne thei that 
setten pride, either® coueitise, either? glotonie, eithers ranyn, in her herte, settyn idolis of 


4 by prechyng f. © ajens seye f. azens seith ~ Ulaween. VYordenaunceg. Wsowen 8. * endeles en. 
f techith 7. to teche ¢. & schal be e¢. hOm.e. yY Om. §e. z hertis ¢. @ special e. the special ¢ 
'Om.7. Kand note. |!meyneese. many other ¢<. borg ¢templise. Ome. ¢beliese.  f chil- 


™ the herte 8¢. "and nailisg), Corg Phisey3te@. drene. €or. 
1Om.e. to go 8. tOm. 87. Sand most 8. tOm. 8. 


PROLOGUE. 31 


Baal, either’ of the deuil, in the temple of God. Specialy lordis setten idolis in Goddis #ar tordis! 
hous, whanne thei maken vnworthi prelatis either? curatis in the chirche; for whi such 

vuable prelatis either’ curatis ben idolis, as God seith in xj." ¢. of Zacarie to an vnable pre- 

lat, “ A! thou schepherde, and idole, forsakinge the floc ;” wherfor Erchedckene in Rosaricl, frckedekene, 
which is oon of the famouseste* doctouris, and! of the popis lawe, writith thus, “an yuel Ce ead 
“ prelat is seid a rorynge lyoun, and a wolf ranysching prey ;” and in the™ xxxiiij. ¢. Se we 
Esechiel, he is seid to feede him® self and not the® scheep; also he is seid to seke his owne 44 
profitis temporal, therfore he is? not of Goddis children, as Austyn seith in‘ viij.t cause, 

j. questioun, c°. sunt quidam, and for this thing power schal be taken awey fro him, as 

God seith in the* xxxiiij. c. of Ezechiel. Also an yuel prelat is seid a wolf, as the lawe 
witnessith in Ixxxiij. distincioun c°. nichil; also for defaute of gouernaile he is seid a 
vuchaast dogge, as Austyn witnessith in ij." cause vij.” questioun, c°. gui nec; also he is a” 

crowe, either* a rauen, for the blacknesse of synnes, as the lawe witnessith there, in ¢°. 207 
omnis ; also he is seid fonned salt, not prophitable to eny thing, as the lawe witnessith 

there, in ¢°. non omnis; also he is seid an hog, as the lawe witnessith in xliij.Y distinctioun, 

in? ¢°. ¢x mandatis ; also he is seid a cherl of cherlysched* of yuel lijf, as the lawe witness- 

ith in xlvij.° distinctioun, in the bigynnyng; also he is seid a capoun, for he hath the 

manere of an hen, for as a° capoun crowith not, so an yuel prelat crowith not in preching ; 

also an yuel prelat gendrith not bi preching of Goddis word, neithir he fi3tith for hise Of curatis. 
sogetis; also as the’ capoun clepith not hennis, so an yuel prelat clepith not pore men to 

mete; also as a capoun makith fat himself, so an yuel prelat makith fat himself. Therfore 

sithen he seekith plenteuousnesse®, metis', and richessis, he schal be put into theé fijer of 

helle, as Jerom witnessith on Mychee, and" in the! xxxv. distinctioun, c°. eeclesie principes. 
Erchedekene writith* al this in xliij.! distinetioun, in e°. sit rector, on the™ word muti. Also 

a doumb prelat is an ydol, and" not a very prelat; a doumb prelat is not a very prelat, 

sithen he vsith not the offis of a° prelat, but he hath oonly the licnesse of a prelat, as an 

ydol that vsith not the offis of a man is oonly lijk a man, but it is noo man; therfore? suche 

doumbe prelatis moun ri3tfully be seid‘ syinylacris, either’ ydolis, of whiche® it is seid in the 

vi. e°. of Baruk, “ the trees of hem ben maad fair of a carpenter, and tho ben araied with 

*“ gold and syluer, and moun not speke,” and thei that maken suche prelatis ben lijk hem, 

whiche makeris schulen be dampned with suche prelatis, bi that word of Dauith, “thei that 

** maken tho ben maad lijk tho.” But marke wel, that hethene men hadden symylacris of of yuetpreiatis 
vj. kyndis, that is, of cley, of tree, of bras, of stoon, of syluer, and of gold; we moun fynd pees 
these vj. kyndis in yuel prelatis; for whi symylacris of cley ben fleschly prelatis, of whiche 

God seith in the sautir, “I schal do hem awey as the cley of streetis;” symylacris of tree 

ben vnwise prelatis and boistoust and without wit, of which it is seid in holy scripture, “a 

** tree is wlappid in siluer ;” and these ben seid to be maad of nou3t in to prelatis, thes ben 

beestis clepid chyimeres, that han a part of ech beest, and suche ben not no but oonly in 
opynyoun, either speche, and not in dede, neither in kynde; symylacris of bras ben thei, 

that han oonly worldly eloquence, for whi brasse 3eueth greet" soun, in i.” pistle to Corinth.”, 

xiij.c. “if I speke in the langagis of men and of aungels, and I have not* charite, I am 

*‘maad as bras sounnynge ;” symylacris of stoon ben thei, that ben broken fro ri3tfulnesse 

and vertu, for temporal strengthe, these prelatis ben not the stoon whiehY is set into the 

heed of the corner, but these ben the stoon? of hirtyng and of sclaundre; syiylacris of 

syluer ben thei that ben maad bi moneye, eithir® richessis”,whiche prelatis seyn, what wolen 


Org h the xi. Bef. !his rosaries. kfamous¢. fofmeetise. € Ome. bOm ec. i1Om.s. * wit- 
10m. ef. ™Om. Be. to hymf. ©hisf. Pnysf.  nessith y. I the xliij. e¢ m this Be¢. nOm. ¢. 
10m... the viij. gj. 8 Om. 8¢ tthe Ixxxiij.e. °Om.8. Pwherfore Bf. dclepid< ‘org *the 
Uthe ij. Bf. Vthe vij.ef.  W seid a ¢e. x or B¢. whiche ¢. t bystowse 8. hoostours ¢. Ua grete ¢ 
y the Ixiij. e. the xliij.¢. Om... ®@acherlisched en, YOm.c. thei. 8¢ the Corinth.7 X*nof. Ythe 
b the xIlvij.e ¢Omfp dag e plenteuous Bf. weche 8 7 stoones¢~. org.  » richesse e. 


Neeligence of 
lordis. 
Erchedekene 
doctour of the 
popis lawe. 


Grostede vpon 
curatis. 


32 PROLOGUE. 


3e° 3eue to vs, and we schulen4 bitraie Crist to 30u; golden symylacris ben thei® that ben 
maad oonly for worldly nobleie, for whif gold singnefieth nobley, and therfore the heed of 
the ymage of Nahbugodonosor was of gold in ij. ¢. of Daniel. Erchedekene tellith al this 
in xliij." distinctioun, ¢°. sit rector, on thei word mutus. 'Thou3 this doctour of the popis 
lawe be pleyn and scharp, he seith treuthe sesonable*, for the chirche now acordith! with 
hooly writ, and resoun, and comun doctouris of holy scripture ; for in xi™ ¢. of Sacariee, 
God clepith an yuel prelat an ydol, and in Ezechiel and other prophetis he licneth tyrauntis 
and raueynouris to lyouns, woluis, beeris, and othere vnresonable beestis, to dispise her 
synne. Here lordis and other prelatis moun see in party, hou perilous it is to ordeyne 
yuele prelatis eithir™ curatis in the chirche, for as seint Gregory seith, in i.° part of Pasto- 
ralis, ij.? ¢°. noo man harmeth more in the chirche, than he that doth weiwardly, and hold- 
ith the name of ordre, cithix" ofS holynesse ; and the lawe seith de electiouibus, ©. nichil, 
that no thing harmeth more the‘ chirche of God, than that vnworthi men be taken to the 
gouernaile of soulis; and Grostede seith in his sermoun Premonitus a venerabili patre, that 
to make ynable prelatis eithir® curatis in the chirche of God, is to haue come to the hijest 
degree of trespasis’; also in his sermoun Dominus noster Jhesus Cristus, he writeth thus to 
the pope, “he that bitakith the cure of soulis to a man vnmy3ti, vnkunnynge, either” not 
“ wilful to kepe* duly the soulis, is gilty of alle the soulis, thou3 eny ascapith’, and? is sauid 
“bi Goddis grace, and he that bitakith the cure of soulis to him that is opinly vnable 
“ therto, techith to sette more pris bi vnresonable beestis than by men, and for to loue 
“ more erthly thingis, that passyn schortly, than everlastinge thingis, and* more than the 
“deeth and blood of Goddis sone; and he that jeueth thus the cure of soulis to ‘vnable 
“men, is werse than Eroude, that pursuede Crist, and worse thanne Jewis and hethene 
* men, that crucifieden Crist.” Grostede seith this pleynly, and preueth it opinly bifore the 
pope and al his clergie; and thei that procuren beneficis and® richessis to men*, haten hem 
to whiche® thei procuren thus, as if thei procured hem to be set in the cop of the chirche, 
in whirlwijndis and greet tempestis. Grostede seith this‘ in his sermoun Seriptum est de 
leuitis; and he that is necligent to drawe soulis out of the pit of synne, as myche as he 
may, bi the ordre of lawe, and le that lettith him of his werk, sleeth the soulis; and he 
that settith more prijs bi a fleschly scheep than a goostly scheep, that is, mannis soule, set- 
tith more pris bi a% peny than bi the lijf of Goddis sone, which is worth al this world. A 
recheles curat, and’ that sleeth sogettis' bi* yuel ensaumple, and withdrawing of Goddis 
word, is worse than vnresonable beestis, and le is wrse than the crucifieris of Crist!, for he 
crucifieth him in hise membris. Goode counceilouris thei ben aloone, that ben wijse men, 
and drede God, for whi alle coueitouse men ben foolis, and vnwijse men, and to be led bi 
the counceil of hem is to dispose™ of" henne cotis bi the counceil of foxis, and to® dispose 
of foldis of scheep bi the counceil of woluis. Grostede seith this in a sermoun Premounitus a 
venerabili patre. See, 3e lordis and prelatis, that maken vnable curatis, for fleschly affec- 
cioun and 3iftis?, and specialy for pleyinge at the bere, and othere vnleeful iapis, what tre- 
soun 3e doon to God, and what harm to Cristis chirche and 3oure auaunseeis; 3e maken 
orrible abomynacoun of discoumfort stoonde in the hooly place, for 3e make anticrist to 
stonde at the hije auter, in the stede of Crist, and trete the holy sacrament of Cristis flesch 
and his? blood ful vnworthily, and as Parisience seith, whanne 3e maken a coueitouse prest 
to stonde at the auter, 3e maken a maldworp stonde™ there, in the stede of Crist; and 
whanne 3e maken a fonned bischop, that can not and® loueth not Goddis lawe, stonde my- 


©Om.fp. ‘schalt e¢thoe. fOm.< the Pbavnablemanf. Ceithere. 4sichmeng¢, ¢whome. 
ijee€. bthe xlij.¢ ithise. kKandresonable 8. fallethese< gthe8. 4 Ome. i the sogetis ¢. 
resonable 7. landacordith¢{. ™thexj.etj. 2org. &k yndirhym by & 1Jhesu Crist & ™ dispise y pr.m. 
othe i. e{7. Pthesecundet 4theordref. ‘org Om. 8. ©Om.¢ PlustesB 4 Om. ey pr.m, 
sOm.¢ tintheet. torg Vtrespas¢. Worg ttostondeg Sne. 
xhelpe ey Yascape¢ Zeithere.  ®3he and B. 


PROLOGUE. 33 


trid at the auter, 3e make an horned asse stonde at the auter, in thet stede of Crist; and so 

of othere vnresonable beestis, as lyouns, wluis, beeris, apis, dragouns, hoggis, horsis, doggis ; 

and othere viciouse prestis, proude, coueitouse, raueynouris, wrathful, ypocritis, trecherouse, 

glotenouse, lecherouse, enuyouse, and bacbiteris; and" 3e transfiguren Satanas into an’ 

aungel of 1i3t, whanne” 3e maken curatis either? prelatis, that ben contrarie to Crist, to 

ocupie the offis of bischop, abbot, either* ofY prest. Lordis and prelatis, that han sett 

suche idolis in Goddis hous, as Manasses dide, sue 3e Manasses in very repentaunce, and 

making of? amendis to God and men. Also lordis and prelatis exciten strongly men to® ¥en preiatis 
6 ° and lordis, of 

ydolatrie, for thei sweren custumably nedelesly, and ofte vnavisily and fals, bi the membris swering. 

of God, of? Crist, and bi seintis, in so myche that ech lord and greet® prelat comynly makith 

to? him an ydole of sum seint, whom he worschipith more than God; for comunly thei 

sweren bi oure Lady of Walsingham, seint Joon Baptist®, seint Edward, seint Thomas of 

Caunterbury, and such othere seintis, and chargen more this ooth than thou3 thei sweren 

by the Hooly Trinite; and in al this thei onoren more these seintis than thei onouren the 

Hooly Trinite. Thou3 it were leeueful to swere bi seintis, this is ydolatrie, to charge more 

an ooth maad bi suche seintis than bi God Almy3ty, either‘ bi the Hooly Trinite; natheles 

Crisostom witnessith on the v. c°. of Matheu, that to swere bi eny creature, is to do idola- 

trie; for as Jerom there’, and Decrees”, in xxij. cause, j*. questione, ¢°. st quis per capil- 

lum, and c°i next bifore, and Decretals de jure jurando, c°. et si Christus, witnessen 

pleynly, to swere bi a creature is a3ens Goddis comaundement; and therfore Crist in the 

v. c°. of Math., comaundith to swere!, not bi heuene, neither™ bi erthe", and vndirstond- 

ith bi heuene and erthe creaturis of heuene and creaturis of erthe; and in al the old lawe 

it is not founden, where God grauntith to swere bi eny creature, but oonly bi his owne 

name, either® bi himself; and therfore the wise man seith in the? xxiij. c°. of1 Ecclesiastici 

**a man that swerith mychil’ schal be fillid with wickidnesse, and veniaunce schal not go 

** awey fro his hous ;” and eft he seith, ‘thi mouth be not customable to swering, for whi 

* myche fallyng is in it; the nemyng of God be not customable in thi mouth,” that is, to 

swere bi his name in veyn, either* fals, either' for an yuel ende; “and be thou not medlid 

* with the names of seintis,” that is, to swere bi seintis, “for thou schalt not be giltlees of 

“hem.” Here lordis and prelatis moun see how thei don opin ydolatrie, whanne" thei Yon preiatis. 

gessen to onoure seintis, and hire opin deedis of ydolatrie and blasfemye ben opin bookis of 

ydolatrie ‘and blasfemye’ to hire sugetis; therfore, as Gregory seith in ij.” bok of Pastrals Crsanete his 

v.* c°., prelatis ben worthi so many dethis, hou manye ensaumplis’ of perdiscoun thei senden 

to sogettis, and in xxv.” c°. of* Numery, God bad Moises hange alle the princis in iebatis 

ajens the sunne, for the peple of Israel dide leccherie and idolatrie® bi ensaumple® and suf- 

fraunce of hem. Now in Engelond it? is a comyn proteccioun a3ens persecuscioun® of pre- 

latis and off summe lordis, if a man is customable to swere nedeles, and& fals, and vnauisid, 

bi the boonys, nailes, and sidis, and other membris of Crist, and® to be proud and leccher- 

ous, and speke! not of Goddis lawe, and repreue not synne aboute him; and to* absteyne 

fro oothis nedeles and ynleeuefil, and to eschewe pride, and speke! onour of God and of his 

lawe, and repreue synne bi weie of charite, is™ matir and cause now whi prelatis and 

summe lordis sclaundren men, and clepen hem lollardis, eretikis", and® riseris of debate and fee ae ie de 

of tresoun a3ens the king; now Manasses settith idolis opinly in the temple of God, and and war vayn 

sterith men gretly to do idolatrie, and cherischen hem that breken opinly Goddis heestis, ” ae 

and punysche hem soore, as hethene men either? eretikis, that bisien hem to lerne, kepe, and 


§ 


tOmf Ome. VOm.¢. Wand whanne¢ whannet. YOm.¢ ® the ij. Bekn. x the fynethe ¢ 
xorg. yOm. fey, %Om.¢ @todofe. >and ysaumples SC % the xxv. e¢. aQm.7.  » therto 
of ¢ bie. ¢ Om. e. d Om. ¢. © of Baptist a. idolatrie ¢. © yuel ensaumple ¢. a40Om¢  ¢ per- 
for¢. €seith there ¢< in the Decrees f ithe secnciounsy, fOm.e. § Ome. Om, ¢. ito 
chapiter ¢. k Om. ¢. i not swere 7. mQm.¢.  speke 8. k for to B. 1 to speke ¢. ™ this is ¢ 
0 the erthe ¢ © or ef. P Om. Ben. 4Om.ey. "eretikitisa, OOm.e Por ¢. 
¥ myche e¢, 8 or ¢. t Om. ¢ 4 and blasfemye 

F 


34 PROLOGUE. 


teche Goddis heestis; the iij. tyme lordis and prelatis bothe schedden innocent blood, as 
Manasses dide, for thei waastyn folily hire goodis in wakingis and pleyingis’ bi ni3t", and 
in rere-soperis and othere* vanites, and taken grete and vnmesurable taxis of the comyns; 
and lesse‘ lordis and prelatis doon greet extorciouns to pore men, and taken pore mennis 
goodis, and paien litil either nou3t and out of tyme for tho. Therfore, as" Mychee the 
Grostede on  prophete seith in ij.” ¢., thei hyilden pore men, and eten her flesch ; and Grostede declarith 
ie. wel this” in his dicte ‘that bygynneth thus*, stut Jambi vestri precinti, and in theY xiij.? 
dicte ; and God seith in the* Sautir of suche tirauntis, “thei deuouren my puple as the mete 
“of breed.” How myche blood lordis scheden in werris, for pride and coueitise, by counceil 
of false prelatis, confessouris, and prechouris, it passith mannis wit to telle fully in this lif; 
but of scheding of blood and sleeing of pore men, bi withdrawing of almes, and in 3enynge 
it to» dede stockis, either® stoonis, either® to riche clerkis and feyned religiouse, were to 
Opens aispeke now, if a man hadde the spirit of goostly strengthe. Now men knelyn, and preien, 
schipperis and and offren faste to dede ymagis, that han neither hungir neither® coold ; and dispisen, beten, 
peepee, and sleen Cristen men, maad to the ymage and lyenesse of the Holy Trynite. What onour 
of God is this to knele and offre to an ymage, maad of synful mannis hondis, and to dispise 
and robbe the yinage® maad of Goddis hondis, that is, a cristen man, either! a cristen wom- 
man. Whanne men 3eue not almes to pore nedy men, but to dede ymagis, either‘ riche clerkis, 
thei robbyn pore men of her due® porcoun, and needful sustenaunce! assingned to hem of 
Hou men rob- God himself; and whanne suche offereris to dede ymagis robben pore men, thei robben 
oe heat Crist, as he seith in xxv.i c°. of Math., “that, that 3e diden to oon of these* leeste 
“ of myne, 3e diden to me,” and if thei schulen be dampned that 3euen not mete and drinke, 
and othere nescessaries to pore men, as Crist seith, where schulen thei become that robben 
pore men, and so Jhesu Crist himself; and if these tweyne, that 3euen not lyflode, and 
that robben pore men, schulen be dampned so depe in helle, where schulen false techeris, 
stireris!, and confessouris bicome, that stiren lordis and riche men to robbe thus pore men, 
and to™ do this" vndir the° colour of excellent almes and holynesse ? But? morne we sore 
for this cursidnesse, and preie we to God with al oure herte, that sithen lordis and prelatis 
suen Manasses in these opyn synnes, God stire hem to sue Manasses in very penaunce, and 
make amendis to God and men, lest oure reume be conquerid of aliens, either’ hethen men, 
for these opyn synnes and many moo. 


CAP. XI. 


Esdras. "The firste book of Esdras tellith, how Cirus, king of Perseys, 3af lycence to Jewis to 
ny: Bins turne ajen in’ to Jerusalem and Judee', and bylde" the temple of God in Jerusalem, and 
he bad that other men in his rewme schulden helpe to this bylding; and he 3af the’ vessels 
God. herto” whiche Nabugodnosor hadde take awey fro Jerusalem. Thanne is teld the noumbre 
of hem that turnede a3en into Judee, vndir Josue the prest, the sone of Josedech, and 

vndir Sorobabel, the duyk; and hon thei bygunnen to bylde the auter and temple’; and 

what letting thei hadden of enemyes, and what coumfort of God, and of hise prophetis. 

Thanne it is teld, what sorwe Esdras made, for the princis and prestis and comyns token 

hethene wommen to wyues a3ens the lawe; and how the princis and the puple repentiden 

ay Bee mekely and verily, and maden amendis to God and men. *In the book of Neemye, which 
"1s clepid the ij. book of Esdras, is teld, how Neemye gat graunt of the king to bylde the 

wallis of Jerusalem, and how he and othere men, bothe prestis and othere, princis and 

comyns, bildiden the wallis, and jatis, and lockis, and touris aboue, for defense ajens 

qd pleies 86 = niztise. Sinotheree. tleteS. ofe. andof¢. * Here... . bigynuith a prolog on 

uOm.¢. Vv the thridde ¢. w Om. ¢ xOm. 8. Esdras the 7.3. 8 Om.de. tin Judee 8. in to Ju- 

yOm. 8. Ziij.e. @his@. bof cord dnog deeg. byldede 8. Vv thes 8. theseapr.m. Wther 

®quyk ymage ¢. forg &Om.8. }substaunee to ft. *thetemples. ¥* Here.... bigynneth a 


or susteynaunce (, ithe xxv. e(j. Ktheg 10m. ¢.  prolog on the tj. book. 3. 
™Om.¢ ®thus¢é. °Om.¢ POm.¢ 4 either 


PROLOGUE. 35 


enemyes; and how the enemyes of Jewis purposidenY with strong hond to slee Jewis 

preuely, and distroie? hire werk. Thanne half the part of 3unge meu made the werk, and 

half the part was redy to bateyle; with oon hond thei maden the werk, and with the other* 

thei helden the swerd; and eche of hem that bildide was gird with his swerd. Thanne it 

sneth how Neemye, duk of the puple, dide freely his offis, and took noo costis assingned to 

the duk, and he dide thus for the? pouert of the puple. Aftir this doinge Esdras redde in 

the book of Goddis lawe, fro the morewitide til to noon bifore the® multitude of men and 

wymmen, and dekenes made silence in the puple to here the lawe; and Esdras redde in Mou Esdras 
the book of Goddis lawe fro the firste day ‘til tot the laste. Thanne the children of Israel Gen io 
camyn togidere in fasting and in sackis, either heiris, and erthe was on hem, and the seed Sn or foruel 
of the sones of Israel was departid fro ech alyen sone, and thei stoden bifore the Lord, and #"rentunce. 
knoulechiden her synnes, and the wickidnessis®¢ of hire fadris, and thei risiden‘ togidere to Nota, of trewe 
stonde, and thei redden in the book of lawe% of hire God fouresithis in the day, and foure- Se 
sithis in the ny3t thei knoulechiden and heryeden hire Lord God; and dekenes eryeden 

with gret vois to hire Lord God, and baddin the puple rise and blesse God. Thanne! sueth 

the solempne confessionn of Esdras, how he knoulechide first the glorious werkis of God, 

and aftirward the orrible synnes of al* the puple, and of hire fadris; and thanne al the 

peple made couenaunt, and swor to kepe Goddis lawe, and to! bie not in the sabat and hali- 

day of hem that brou3ten viteilis to selle; and™ thei bihizten to paie the firste fruitis to 

prestis, and tithis to the" dekenes, and to bringe al this to the temple of God. At the laste of the halyaay. 
Neemye suffride neither Jewis neither® straungeris sille neither® bie in the sabotis, not oonly 

in Jerusalem, but neither in placis ny3 the wallis; and he rebuykede, and curside, and beet 

men, and made hem ballid, that token alien wommen to be? hire wyues, as of Asotus, of 

Amon, and of Moab; and chargide! hem greetly in the Lord, that thei schulden™ not 3eue 

hire dou3tris to the sones of hethen men, and take nou3t* of the don3tris of hethen men to 

hire owne sones, and to hem self. This proces of Esdras and of Neemye schulde styre vs to 

be bisy to biylde vertues in oure soule‘, aftir turnyng a3en fro caitifte of synne", and to fizte 

a3ens temptaciouns, and byilde faste vertues, as thei fou3ten with oon’ hond a3ens enemyes, 

and biyldeden with the tothir” hond; and we schulden be ful bisy to kepe the gostely 

sabot in goode werkis and herying of God, sithen thei were so besy to kepe the figuratif 

sabot. *Thou3’ the book of Tobie is* ‘not of bileeue, it is* ful? deuout storie, and profitable 7osie. 

to the symple puple, to maken hem to* kepe patience and Goddis heestis, to do werkis* of Hou a man 
mercy, and teche® wel hire children, and to take wyues in the drede of God, for loue of clileg a7 ward teens 
dren, and not al for foul lust off body, neither‘ for coueitise’ of ‘goodis of%% this" world ; and SCRE. 
also children moun lerne heere! bi 3unge Tobie to be meke and obedient, and redy to serue 

fadir and modir in her nede. Therfore amonge alle the bookis of the elde testament symple 

men of wit schulden rede and here ofte this book of Tobie, to be trewe to God in prosperite 

and aduersite, and eschewe idolatrie, glotenye* and coueitise, and to be pacient in tribula- 

coun, and go neuere awey fro the! dreede and loue of God. ™Thou3 the” seene of clerkis, 

either? general gadering of clergie, hath take the book of Judith among the nownbre of 

hooly scripturis, natheles it is not of the canoun eithir feith of the bible? anentis Ebreis, 

for thei resseyuen not the autoritie of this book; natheles it was writen in Caldee langage, ya: sechith 
and is? noumbrid among stories, as Jerom witnessith on the prolog. But natheles this Pence, pe- 


naunce and 


book comendith™ chastite and’ abstinence, penauncet and wideuhood of Judith, and her loue widewhood. 


¥ pursuodon 8. Z to distrie £. atother 636. Pafulgé. ¢Om.¢ ‘the werkis ¢ © to teeche de. 
bOm.be. ¢Om.8 4dintof. eord eewick- fned & the coueityse & 88 Om. +. h the dec 
idnesset. frisen¢. & the lawe ¢. hand thei ¢. iOm.@. and glotonye 8. !Om.¢ ™ Here... 
TAndp, kOm. 6 10m. ™Om.8& ®Om.&.  bigynneth a prolog on Judith. n Om. 7. oor’ 
Ooneg. P Om. dc. 4 chargiden a. tr schulen ¢. P bilene ¢. qitisegé. In 6. the preceding words 
Snot ¢c. tsoulis8. Youre synne ¢ Vthe toon de. from Zhou; the scene are omitted, and it reads instead 
w other 8. * Here... . bigynneth a prolog on the The book of Judith comendith, 8% Om.8. and pe- 
book of Thobie. 6. yOm.8. %begy. ® Om. &.  naunce @¢ 

FQ 


36 PROLOGUE. 


which sche hadde to deliuere* Goddis puple fro her enemyes, and to kepe the feith and’ 
worschiping of God among his peple. Also this book comendith the feith and treuthe of 
Achior, that was conuertid to Goddis lawe bi myracle of” sleeing of* Olofernes, bi the 
Hou Judith hondis of the widewe Judith. Thanne Judith repreuede prestis for thei temtide God, and 


rtede th . ° ° . Le 
ee and the consentiden to deliuere" the citee to enemyes, if God sente not helpe to hem withinne v. 


ale ne” ydaies, and goode prestis tooken meekly this repreuyng of a womman ; and sche tau3te hem 
peaeneeh hou thei schulden do penaunce for this trespas, and coumforteY the puple to’ triste in God, 
Judith and and abyde his mercy and help, at his owne wille. Vs nedith not to excuse Judith fro 
Oufern. —_esingis and tresoun to Olofernes, but we moun fauorably excuse hire fro deedly synne in 
this doinge, for the greet loue that sche hadde to Goddis peple, and to slee Olofernes, a 
blasfemyere of God, and distroiere” of his lawe and peple; and iustly God took this* veniaunce 
on Olofernes, for his synnes and harmes don to Goddis peple, and whiche he purposide to 
do, if he my3te lyue longe. Of this proces proude werriouris schulden drede God, that 
made proud Olofernes to be slayn of a womman, and al his greet oost ‘to be® scaterid and 
distroied ; and cristen men schulden be coumfortid greetly, for to haue ful trist int God, 
and in his helpe, that so my3tily delyuerede his puple fro so greet an enemy and strong 
oost, withouten perisching of his peple. And sithen Judith hadde so greet® preising for hire 
doinge, that was medelid with manye synnes, myche more preising schulen thei haue in 
heuene, withouten ende, that putten forth hem silf to be martirid for Goddis cause, with 
Ester. trewe meenes of pacience and of charite. ‘The book of Ester tellith first, how the’ qwene 
Hou the queve Vasti was forsaken for hire pride, and was departid fro mariage’ of king Assuerus, and 
ty was dis: 


ES ie Pa hou Ester, for hire meekenesse, bewte, and Goddis grace was maad qwene in the stide of 
an SSler 


maad queene Vasty. Also the trewe Mardoche, the fadir in lawe of adopcioun of this womman Ester, 
vanes tau3te hire to loue God, and kepe his lawe, and sche was full meke and obedient to Mar- 
dochee, 3he, whanne sche was qwene, as to hire fadir in lawe. Thanne Aaman, of the kin- 

rede of Agag, conspyride bi sotil malice to distroie al the peple of Jewis, in the lond of 
Assuerus', and hadde graunt of the king, at his owne wille, and the day of distroiyng and 

of sleeing of the Jewis was pupplischid thour3 al the rewme. Thanne Mardochee and the 

Jewis diden greet penaunce, and maden gret sorwe, and preieden God to! helpe in that gret 

nede. And Mardochee sente to Ester, that sche schulde do the same, and goo to the king, 

in perel of hire lijf, to axe grace of him, and reuoking of™ lettris and power grauntid to 

Aman, the enemy of Jewis. And aftir myche fasting, penaunce, and preier, Estir bitook 

hirself to Goddis disposicioun, and to perel of her deth, and entride to the king, 3he, ajens 

the lawe of the lond, whanne sche was not clepid, to axe mercy and help of the king, for 

hirsilf and al hire puple. And God turnede the feersnesse and cruelte" of the king to 

How damon Mekenesse, mersy, and benyngnite a3ens Ester, and the peple of Jewis. And thanne he 
nas hare’ venokide the power grauntid to Aaman, and leet hange him, as he purposide® to haue 
spiracoux. — hangid the trewe Mardochee, and 3af general power to Jewis to slee alle hire enemyes in 
ee Se his empire. Aftir these thingis the king enhaunside Mardochee, and made him grettist next 
his treuthe. the king, and 3af greet fraunchise and onour to the Jewis. This story of Ester schulde 
stire men to be trewe to God and his? lawe, and putte awey pride and enuye, and euere 

triste in God in alle perrels; and tirauntis schulden be aferd to conspire ajens Goddis 
sernauntis, leest God take veniaunce on hem, as he dide on this man4 Aaman, that con- 

Job. spiride” the deeth and general distroiyng of Jewis. *The book of Job is ful sotil in vndir- 
stonding, for Job argueth a3ens hiset encmyes, that wolden bringe hym out of cristen feith, 

and concludith inany errouris that suen of" hire false bileeue and opynyon; and Job afferm- 

ith not that al is soth that he spekith a3ens hise aduersaries, but concludith hem in hire fals 

udiluerea. Vin§. Wanddey. *Om.a. Ycoum- lofée. M™the¢g "the cruelte dey. © hadde pur- 

fortid defy. Y¥ for to det. 2a distroier  @ Om. 8.  posid de. P to his Se, 4 Om. pe. t hadde con- 

» for to &. © Om. fédet. 4 to det, €meche f.  spirid de. 8 Here.... bigynneth a prolog on the 


Here... bigynnith the prolog of Hester.8.  Om.«. book of Job.8. tOm.g Yong 
8Om.¢ ) the mariage ¢ i Assiriens ¢. * Om. ¢. 


PROLOGUE. 37 


bileeue, that many errouris suen therof; and for I haue declarid in party in the glos hou 

the harde sentensis” of Job schulen be vndirstonden, therfore I passe ouer li3tly now. First 

this book tellith the kyn of Job, and hiseW richessis, and holy lijf of him and hise* chil- 

dren; and’ aftirward it tellith what tribulacoun bifelde to Joob in his catel, in hise chil- 

dren, and in his owne bodi, and hou paciently he suffride this, and thankide God in alle 

hise dissesis?. Thanne his wijf, whom the deuel reseruede as a special instrument to him, 

to disseyue Joob by his wijf, as he disseyuede Adam bi Eue, counceld him to blasfeme God, 

and therbi diz3e ; and Joob repreuede hire foly, and seide, if we han resseyued goodis of 

Goddis hond, whi suffre we not yuels, that is, peynes. In®* alle these thingis Joob synnede 

not in hise lippis. ‘Thanne sueth the disputing bitwixe Joob and hise freendis, almest til 

to the ende of the book. Job heeld strongly the treuthe of cristen® feith, and specialy of 

the rising a3en of bodies at domis day; and hise freendis seiden many treutlis, and med- 

leden falsnesse, and euere purposiden an yuel ende and falsed, for thei helden that meede 

is 3ouen oonly in this lijf for goode werkis, and that no man is punyschid here, no but for 

synnes passid, and as a° man is punyschid more than an other in this lijf, so he hath 

synned more than another man lesse punschid ; but al this is fals, as Joob preuith, and 

God confermith in the ende. For whi reward of goode deedis is myche more in the lijf 

to comynge, thanne in present lijf, and a vertuose man is punyschid here for to haue mede 

in heuene; and comunly a iust man hath more tribulacoun in this lijf thanne a wickid 

man, as it is opin of Crist, that suffride heere myche® dissese, and* of tyrauntis that han filer dias 
prosperite‘ in this lijf. And therfore Joob teldes opinly hise goode dedis to cowmforte him? sel in this 
a3ens dispeir, to whiche hise frendis wolden bringe him; but Joob dide this ouer myche, 

and with sum pride, and iustifiede himself ouer myche, that hise freendis conseyueden that 

he blasfemyde God, and preuede God vnri3tful; and of thes twey poyntis Joob repentide Hou Job re- 
in the ende. Thanne God for3af to him this litil synne, and appreued his trewe sentense, Poe am 
and dampnede the errour of hise aduersaries. ‘Thanne Job preiede, and made sacrifice for etn ae 
hise aduersaries, and God herde him, and dide mercy to hem; and God addide alle thingis EC tina 
double, that Joob hadde; and he hadde xiiij. thousind of! scheep, andi vj. thousind of “es. 
camelis, and a thousind 3ockis of oxen, and a thousind femal assis, and vij. sones, and 

iij. dou3tris; and Joob lyuede ‘vij. score* 3eer aftir his turment, and si3 hise sones and the 

sones of his sones til to** the fourthe generacoun. This proces of Job schulde stire men to 

be iust of lyuyng, and to be pacient in aduersitees, as Joob was, and to be stedfast in cristen 

feith, and answere wijsely and meekly to eretikis and aduersaries of oure feith, as Petir 

and Poul techen, and euere be meke and ful of charite, and preie for oure enemyes, and 

looke! aftir meede in heuene, and not in erthe, for oure good deedis™. The Sautir* com- Sauter. 
prehendith al the elde and newe testament, and techith pleynly the mysteries of the Trinite, 

and of Cristis incarnacoun, passioun, rising a3en, stying" in to henene, and sending doun of 

the Holy Gost, and preching of the gospel, and the® coming of Antecrist, and the general 


vsentence¢~. Wofhis¢. *ofhise 6%. yOm.¢ kk Om.s !tolooke 8. ™ This portion of the Pro- 
z disese 6. @andin de. » Cristes8. oo 86. 4Om.8, logue relative to the Psalter is wanting in 6. from a 
© Om.¢. fmyche prosperite de. €telleth 8. »him- deficiency in the ms. ® and sty3ynge Bf). ° Om. ¢& 
silf ge. tOm.s JOm. 8. Jioffemals * exl. p. 


* Whanne it is knowen alle the profetis to haue spoken bi reuelacioun of the Hooli Goost, it is knowen 
Dauith, moost of profetis, to haue spoken sumwise in worthier and ouerpassynge maner thanne other 
profetis, as the trumpe of the Hooli Goost. Forsothe other profetis proficieden bi sum maner ymagis of 
thingis and withinne coueryngis of wordis, that is, bi sweuenis, and visiouns, and sawis, and dedis ; for- 
sothe Dauith made out his profecie thoru3 stirynge of the Holi Goost aloone withouten vttermore help. 
Wherfore couenabli this book is seid the hook of solitarie spechis ; it is also seid a santer, the whiche it 
tooke of a musik instrument that Ebreuli is clepid noblun; Greekly a sauter of this Greek word 
psallym, that is, tonchynge; Latynly it is scid an orgoun that is of ten coordis, and fro the ouer part 
3eueth soun bi the touch of hondis. Forsothe of that instrument at the lettre therfore it is nemned this 


38 PROLOGUE. 


dom of Crist, and the glorie of chosen? men to blisse, and the peynes of hem that schulen 
be dampned in helle ; and ofte rehersith the stories of the elde testament, and bringith in 
the keping of Goddis heestis, and loue of enemyes. Noo book in the eld testament is 
hardere to vudirstonding’ to vs Latyns, for oure lettre discordith myche fro the Ebreu, and 
many doctouris taken litel heede to the lettre, but al to the" goostly vndirstonding. Wel 


P the chosen ¢. 4 yndirstond ¢. r Om. ¢ 


book, for at the vois of that instrument Dauith songe psalmes bifore the arke in the tabernacle of the 
Lord, and as alle the swete songis of that instrament weren clepid psalmes, so and alle the particlis or 
clausis of this book. Also aftir the spiritual vndirstondynge it takith wel name of that instrument; for 
as that instrument is of ten eoordis, so this book teehith thee al aboute the kepinge of the ten heestis ; 
and as that instrament jeueth soun fro the over part bi the touehe of hondis, so this book techith 
welle to worehe, not for erthely thingis, but for heueuly thingis that ben abouen. This book stoondith in 
an hundrid and fifti psalmes, not biside the resoun of hizere signyfiynge. Forsothe this noumbre is notid 
to moost solempne mysteries; it stondith forsothe of ei3ti and seuenti; and eizte aloone signyfieth the 
same that ei3ti dooth, and seueuti the same that seuene dooth. Eji3te forsothe signyfieth the ei3tithe age 
of ajenrisynge ; for sithen ther ben sixe agis of men lyaynge, and the seuenthe of men diynge, the eijte 
age schal be of men a3en risynge. Bi seuene forsothe is bitokened the tyme of this lif, that 1s passid bi 
the ofte sithes eomynge of seuen daies, Riztly thanne this book is maad in siche a noumbre of psalmes, 
whos parties signyfien the biforseid mysteries; for it techith so vs in the seuenthe age of this lif to 
worche and to lyue, that in the eij3the age of azenrisynge we ben not elothid with the double foold eloth 
of confueioun, but with the stoole of double glorifiynge. Or therfor it is maad in that noumbre of 
psales, for, as we han seid, this noumbre stoondith of e13ti and seuenti, that aloone bitokenen the same 
that eiste and seuene doth. Forsothe ei;ti bitokeneth the newe testament; forsothe the fadris of the newe 
testament toke to o day, that is, disseruen to ei3ti; thei kepen forsothe the eij3te day of the resurreeeioun of 
Crist, that is, the sunday, and the vtas of seintis, and abiden the eijte of ajenrisynge. Bi seuen¢ is bito- 
kened the olde testament therfore, for the fadris of the olde testament serucden to ebroady, that is, to seuene; 
forsothe thei kepten the seuenthe day, and the seuenthe woke, the seuenthe moonthe, the seuenthe 3eer, 
and the seueuthe jeer of the seuenthe, that is, the fiftithe, that is seid iubile. Wherfor Salamon seith, 3eue 
parties seuene and also ei3te. And as myehe as we seliulen rere vp to hym scuene scheepherdis and ei3te 
primatis, therfor this book is wel maad in that noumbre of psalmes, whos parties bitokenen the doe- 
tryne of euer cither testament, that bi that he schewide the heestis of either testament to be con- 
teened in this book. This book forsothe is dyuydid bi thre fifties, bi whieh the thre staatis of eristen 
religioun ben bitokened; of which the firste is in penaunce, the secunde in rijtfulnes, the thridde in 
preisynge of cuer lastynge lif. Wherfore the firste fifty is endid in penaunce, that is, the salm that bigin- 
neth thus, “‘ Haue merei of me, God ;” the seeunde in riztfalnes, that is, this salm, ‘Merci and doom I schal 
** syng to thee;” the thridde in preisyng of euer lastynge lif, that is, the word, “Eeh spirit preise the Lord.” 
And for Dauith techith these thre thingis in this book, this threfoold distinecioun of salmes is maad. 
Also it is to be notid this seripture to be ofte vsid in the chirehe seruyse more than other; that therfore 
is doon, for in this book is the ful endynge of the hooli book of Goddis word. Forsothe here ben 
discryued the meedis of good men, the tourmentis of yuel men, the playn teehinge of biginnynge men, 
the forth goynge of profitynge men, the persecucioun of ful kunnynge men, the lif of actijf men, and the 
spiritual biholdynge of contemplatijf men; here also is tau3t, what doht awei synne, what penaunee 
restorith, what the gilti of synne forthenkynge seith, that is, “ Lord, in thi woodnes vndernyme thou not 
“me,” and in another place, “‘ Haue merei of me, God, aftir thi myehil merei;” and what ben purchasid 
bi penaunee, whanne he vndirioyneth, “I sehal teehe wickide men thi weies, aud vnpitous men schulen be 
“eonuerted to thee,” bi whieh is sehewid, that no man taken to the mekenesse of forthinkynge mystriste 
of forzeuenes and of merei of God, hou myehe euere be his trespas. Whanne forsothe we biholden Dauith 
a mansleer and avouterer, maad bi penaunee a doctour and a profete, place of wanhope is left to no man 
doynge penaunee ; as [bi] the eonuertinge of Poul and his anaunsynge in to apostle we ben plenly certified 
of the merei of God. Wherefore the ehirehe vsith in office, as the profceie of Dauith, the pistle of him 
more thanne other. And therfore this profeeie is hadde ofter in vsse, for amonge othere profecies it. 
passith in openyng of sawis. Forsothe tho thingis that other profetis seiden derkly, and as bi figure, of 
the passioun and the resurreeeioun of Crist, and of euerlastynge getynge, and of other mysteries, 
Dauith, moost excellent of profetis, openyde so enydently, that he be seen more to euangelisen thanne 

to profecien. 


PROLOGUE. 39 


were him that koude wel vndirstonde the Sautir, and kepe it in his lyuyng, and seie it 
deuoutly, and conuicte Jewis therbi; for manye men* that seyn it vndeuoutly, and lyuen 
out of charite, lyen foule on hemself to God, and blasfemen hym, whanne thei crien it’ ful 
loude to mennis eeris in the chirche. Therfore God 3eue grace to vs to lyute wel in charite, 


8 Om. fp. 


Dauith, the sone of Gesse, whanne he was in his rewme, he chees foure, that schulden make salines, that 
is, Asaph, Eman, Ethan, and Edithym. Forsothe the eizti and eizte seiden the salmes, and ij. hundrid 
the vndirsyngynge; and Abyuth* smoot the harpe. Whanne Dauith, smoot the harpe, hadde broust ayen * Dauith ? 
the arke asen clepid fro Azotis in to Jerusalem, aftir twenti 3eer and+ abood in the hous of Amynadab, t that iv? 
this he putte on in a new 3ockid carte, and brou3ten in to Jerusalem men chosen of alle the kynrede of 
the sones of Israel seuenti thousaud, of the lynage of Leuy forsothe two hundrid ‘seuenti and ei3te thou- 
sandt men; of which he ordeynede foure princis to be biforn to the songis, Asaph, Eman, Ethan and t eisti and eiste? 
Edithym, dyuydynge to ech of hem two and seuenti men vndercriynge preisynge of the songis to the 
Lord. And oon forsothe of hem smoot the symbal, another the harpe, another enhaunsing the hornen 
trumpe; forsothe Dauith him silf stood in the myddil of hem holdynge a sautre. And sotheli thei 
wenten bifore the arke in seuene queeris, and the sacrifice was a calf; forsothe al the peple folowide 
aftir the arke. Thanne alle the psalmes of Dauith ben in noumbre an hundrid and fifti, of the which al 
forsothe Dauith him silf maad nyne; two and thritti han not superscripeioun ; fifti and two and twenti 
in to Dauith; twelue in to Asaph; twelue in to Ydithim; nyne to the sones of Chore; oon to Moises; two 
in to Salamon; two in to Aggie and Zacharie; and so alle the psalmes of Dauith ben maad in noumbre 
of an hundrid and fifti. The dyuysiouns of psalmes that ben clepid deapsalmes ben in the noumbre of 
seuenti and fyue; the canticlis of grece ben in noumbre of fiftene. The firste psalme to no man is asigned, 
for it is of alle, therfore what other man is vndirstonden in the firste hut the firste geten, that inscrip- 
cioun worthili schuld not be necessarie. F'erthermore for that psalme makith mencioun of Crist, as a3en 
Crist expownynge the persoone transcriued, vttirli thei han not withinne chaungid the ordre of storie. 
We reden in the titlis of psalmes, but the psalmes not aftir the storie but ben rede aftir the profecie, so 
the ordre of titlis may not disturble the ordre of psalmes. And alle the psalmes that ben inscryued to 
him Dauith, perteynen to the sacrament of Crist, for Dauith is seid Crist. 
This book comprehendith al the eeld and newe testament, and techith pleynli the mysteries of the Tri- 
nite, and of Cristis incarnacioun, passioun, risynge a3en, and stiynge in to heuene, and sendynge doone 
of the Holi Goost, and prechinge of the gospel, and the comynge of Antecrist, and the general doom of 
Crist, and the glorie of chosen men to blisse, and the peynes of hem that schulen be dampned in helle; 
and ofte rehersith the stories of the olde testament, and bringgith in the kepinge of Goddis heestis, and 
loue of enemyes. 


Greet aboundaunce of goosth eomfort and ioie in God cometh in the hertis of hem, that seien or syngen 
deuoutly these psalmes in preisynge of Jhesus Crist ; thei droppen swetnes in mannes soule, and holden 
delite in her thou3tis, and tenden her willis with the fier of loue, makynge hem hoot in charite, and 
brennynge withinne of loue, and faire and semeli to Cristis y3en. And these that lasten in deuocioun, 
thoru the psalmes thei may he reisid in to contemplatif lif, and myrthe of heuene. 'The songe of psalmes 
putteth awei feendis, excitith aungels to oure help, it doth awei synne, it quemeth God, it enformeth 
partfitnesse, it doth awei and distrieth alle noies and angris of the soule, it bringith to man desiris of 
heuene, and dispit of ertheli thingis. Sotheli this schynynge book, seid of hem denoutly that ben in 
clene lijf, is a chosun songe bifore God, as a laumpe liz3tnynge oure lif, hele of a sik herte that coueitith 
to be helid, hony to a bittir soule that langwischith in verey penaunce, dignyte of goostli persoones, 
tunge of pryuy vertues, the which ledith the proud to mekenes, and kingis to pore men it makith vndir- 
loutynge; it ledith the enuious to partfizt loue, the wrathful to pacience and suffraunce, the coueitous 
and the avarous to largenes for heuenli reward, the slouthful to denocioun and bisi traueile for desijr of 
heuenli ioie, the glotoun to abstynence and mesure of mete and drink, the lecherous to chastite and clene 
leuynge, nurischinge children with holynes. In these psalmes is myche fairnes of vndirstondinge of 
mecdycynal wordis, that this book is clepid gardyne enclosid, wel enceeled, paradis ful of alle good applis. 
Now it is with holsum lore and techinge of vertues thoru out ful sett, troublid and stonied soulis it 
bryngith to cleer and peesful lif; now amonestynge to fordo synnes with teeris of i3eu wepinge, and 
sorewe of hert of forthenkynge; now bihotinge to riz3twise men ioie ; now manassinge helle peyne to 
wickid men. The song is this that delitith the eeris of Goddis loueris, techinge her soulis to haue delite 


The Prouerbis. 


Ecclesiustes. ¢ 


The Song of 
Songis. ¢ 


Prouerbis. e( 


40 PROLOGUE. 


and sey it denoutly, and vndirstonde it treuly, and to teche it opinly to Cristen men and 
Jewis, and bringe hem therby to oure Cristen feith, and brennynge charite'. The Prouerbis 
either" Parablis of Salamon teche men to lyue iustly to God and man. Ecclesiastes techith 
men to forsake and sette at nou3t alle goodis’ in the’ world, and to drede God, and kepe 
hise heestis. The Songis* of Songis techenY men? to sette al hire” herte in the loue of 
God, and of hire nei3eboris, and to do al hire besynesse to bringe men to charite and. salva- 
coun, bi good ensample, and trewe preching, and wilful suffring of peyne and deth, if nede 
be. *Prouerbis speken myche of wijsedoin and keping of Goddis heestis, in comendinge 
trewe teching, and in repreuyng fals teching, and Prouerbis treten> mychel* of ri3tfulnesse, 
and iust® domes and gouernaunce, and of punysching of anoutrie and othere falsenessis  ; 


t From this passage to the words Prouerbis speken ® Here... . bigynneth a prolog on Prouerbis 8. 
is omitted in 8. Yorg Vthe goodis¢. Wofthis¢ > techen d&. © myche det. 4Om. 8. ¢ of just 8. 
xsongé Ytechith¢é 2 mychemen(. 22 Om. 8.  f falsenes 8. 


in God ; for it kyndelith therinne devout deuocioun of aungels song, whom we may not here slepinge 
in synne ; and he that hath not delite in setynge of these psalmes may suppose that he is an alien fro 
verrey lif. O wondirful swetnes! the which wexith not sour thoru3 the corrupcioun of this wrecchid 
world, but euermore lastinge and wexynge in grace. Alle gladnes and delite of this erthely vanyte 
vanyschith, and at the last worthith to nou3t, but the lenger tyme this swetnes lastith, the more it wexith, 
and althir moost a3enst good mennes diynge, whanne loue of Crist is moost parfi3t. This book is clepid 
the sauter, the which name it hath of an instrument of mysik, that in Ebreu is elepid noblum, in Greek 
sautrie, of psalme, that in Englisch is of tunge*; and it is of ten coordis, and 3eueth the soun fro ouere 
throu3 touchinge of hond. Also this book techith to kepe the x. comaundementis, and to worche, not for 
ertheli thingis, but oneli for heuenli ioie that is aboue, and so 3euen soun fro henene where oure loue 
schuld be, at the touchinge of oure hond, that is, in trewe worchinge aftir Cristis biddynge, whanne alle 
that we don, we do it for Cristis loue. Also this book is departid in thries fifti psalmes, in the which the 
thre statis of cristen mennes religioun ben signyfied; the firste in verey penaunce, that other in rist- 
fulnes, the thridde in preisinge of endeles lif. The firste fifti ben endid in Miserere mei, Deus ; the 
tother in Misericordiam et iudicium; the thridde in Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum. This book of alle 
holy writt is moost vsid in hooli chirche seruice, for cause that in it 1s perfectioun or duuyne pagyne, 
for it conteyneth sehortly that that other bookis drawen longly, that is to seie, of the old testament and 
of the newe. Therinne ben discryued the meedis of good men, the peynes of yuel men, the techinge of 
verey penaunce, the wexinge in ri3twise lif of actif trewe men, the which passen to heuene, the perfec- 
tioun of holi nen, the meditacioun of hem that ben contemplatif, and the greet ioie of contemplacioun, 
the hizest that may be in man leuynge in bodi and felynge. Also this book schewith what synne takith 
fro a mannes soule, and what penaunce restorith, it is no need to telle echoon here, for thoron Goddis 
grace thet schulen be open inow withinne in the book. This scripture is clepid book of ympnes of Crist; 
ympne is preisinge of God with devowte preiynge. To an ympne fallen thre thingis, preisinge of God, 
ioiynge of hertly thou3t, enteerli thenkynge of Goddis lone. Deuoute preier is a greet gladnes of mannes 
thou3t of lastinge thing in endeles ioie, berstynge out in vois of preisinge. Jt is wel clepid book of 
yimpnes, for it techith vs to loue God with glade chere, and makynge myrthe, thorou softynge oure soule 
thoru hope, not oonli in hert but also with vois plesynge Crist, and techinge hem that ben vnkunnynge. 
The mater of this book is Crist and his spouse, that is, holi chirche, or ech rijtwise mannes soule; the 
entent is to conferme men, that ben defoulid with synne of old Adam, to ecristen mennes lif thoru3 grace 
of newe Adam, that is, Jhesus Crist. The mater of this boke or this lore is sich, that sumtyme it 
spekith of Crist in his godheed, sumtyme in his manheed, in that that he vsith the vois of his sernauntis. 
Also of hooly chirche he spekith in thre maneris, sumtyme in the persoone of cristen men, sumtyme of 
yuel men, sumtyme of cursid men, the which ben in holi chirche bi bodi not bi clene thou3t, bi name 
not bi good dede, in noumbre not bi merite. In this werk I seke no straunge Englische, but that that 
is esiest and moost comyn, and sich that is moost like to the Latyn, so that thei that knowen not the 
Latyn, bi the Englisch may come to many Latyn wordis. In the translacioun I folowe the lettre as myche 
as I may, and ther I fynd no propre Englisch, I folowe the witt of the wordis, so that thet that schulen 
rede it, dar not drede errynge. AS. Z'rin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1. 10. at the end of the General Prologue. 
The last portion of these remarks on the Psalter, is borrowed, with some variations, from Hampole’s 
Preface to his Commentary on the Psalms. 


@ of two touche, Ms. Reg. 


PROLOGUE. 41 


and comenden® myche iust lordis and sogetis, and" repreueni strongly wrongful lordis and Hou euery man 
‘rebel sogettis. Also Prouerbis techen derkly the mysteries* of Crist, and of hooly chirche, yr si enone, 
and techen! myche wijsdom and prudence, for the soule and the™ body. Therfore lordis, Te oe a 
and" ‘ingis, and° comuneris also, and namely prestis, schulden stodie wel this book, and rule* 

hemself therbi, to saluacoun of body and of? soule. ‘Ecclesiastes is a ful sotil book, for Ecclesiastes.¢¢. 
Salamon spekith in many persones, and concludith her entent and sentence, not in ap- 

preuyng the sentence of fleschly men, that preisen more bodily goodis and lustis of the body 

than heuenly goodis and lyking of vertues, and dampneth many errours of worldly men, 

and schewith that al is vanite, til me come to the drede of God, and keeping of hise heestis. 

Therfore men ‘moten bee wel’ war hou thei vndirstonden Salamon in this’ book, that thei 

appreue noon errour, and dampne noo treuthe, for mysconseyuing of Salamonys wordis, 

and the Hooly Goostis wordis in this book. ‘The Songis" of Songis touchen derkly the Cantica. 
staat of the synagoge, fro the gooing out of Egipt til to Cristis incarnacoun and passioun ; 

and thanne tho* Songis touchen the staat of Cristis chirche, and ‘of theY synagoge in the 

ende of the world, and treetyn hizly of lone? to* God and neizebore also; and this book is Tie book of 
so sotil to vndirstonde, that Jewis ordeyneden, that no man schulde stodie it, no but he Teen a vid 
were of xxx. 3eer, and hadde able wit to vndirstonde the goostly preuytees of this book ; ‘fi fo tndir- 
for sum of the book seemith to fleschly men to sounne® vnelene loue of leccherie, where it 

tellith hi3 goostly lone, and greet preuytees of Crist and of his chirche. Therfore men 

moten be fulé wel war to conseyue wel® the wordis of the Holy Goost in this book, and 

knowe whanne Crist spekith to the chirche, either‘ to the synagoge, and whanne the syna- 

goge spekith to God, and whanne the chirche spekith to Crist, and whanne God spekith to 

aungels, patriarkis, and prophetis, and apostlis, and whanne these persones speken to the 

synagoge either‘ to the chirche, either‘ ajenward. &The book of Wijsedom, ‘thou3 it be not Tre book of 
a book of bileeue", techith' myche riztfulnesse, and preisith wysdom, and repreuith fleschly ”““""* § 
men for hire false bileeue and yuel lynynge, and comendith myche iust men, sadj in bileeue 

and yertuouse lyuynge, and touchith* myche of Cristis incarnacoun, his manheed and god- 

heed togidere, and dampneth gretly idolatrie, and fals worschiping of idolis, and false 

goddis. 'Thou3 Ecclesiastici be no” book of bileeue, it? techith myche wisdom and pru- Eccleziastici 
dence ‘for soule and body, and hath myclhie the sentence® of Prouerbis, and comaundith men ph a 


Veclesiastict 
to thenke and speke of Goddis heestis?, and fori to dreede God, and loue him, and euere tchith men fo 
haue mynde of deth, and oft the greet dom, to kepe men out of synne, and in parfit loue to speke of Goddis 
God and man. Also it preisith myche almes and good preier, and repreuith gretly extor- ag 
couns, and wrong*, and false oothis, and false mesuris, and false wey3tis, and al fraude, 

preuy and apert; at the laste it comendith goode men, and herieth God, that delyuereth 

fro alle perrelis. If this book be wel vndirstonden, it is profitable bothe to goostly gouern- Tris book 
ours and bodily lordis, and iustisist and comyns also. The Prophetis han a general pro- ee a: 
loge for alle, and for I declaride sumdel the grete profetis, and in party the litilY prophetis, oe 
and™ thenke soone to make an ende, with Goddis help, of the glos on* the smale prophetis, 

I thenke now to passe ouer withouten eny tarying. ‘The firste book of Macabeis tellith mMacateis j. 
hou gret distruccioun and cruelte Antioke the noble? dide ajens the Jewis, and hou many 
thousindis he killide of hem, that wolden holde Goddis lawe, and brente the bookis of The cursid an- 


4 ‘ F . tioke compellide 
Goddis lawe, and defoulide the temple of Jerusalem, and compellide men, for drede of deth, to do idotatric. 


& comendith ¢. h that ben goode, and ¢. ire. bOm. 8. iit techith¢. jandsadde« * it touch- 


preueth 8. Kk mysterie¢ Itechith¢é ™Om.¢ ith Bde. 1 Here.... bigynncth a prolog on Eccle- 
"Om.6 °Om.de. POm.¢. 4 Here.... bigyn-  siastici.8. mnot¢ ‘e The book of Ecclesiastici 8. 
neth a prolog oun Ecclesiastes. 8. ® must be ful & °Om.d.  Pcomandementis¢é; 9Om.f.  fon8. 
8 his B. t Here... . bygynneth the prolog on Song * wrongis{. ¢ to iustisis 8. 4 From this place to 


of Songis.8. "Song ¢. Wtouchithe¢< *the 88 The first book of Macabcis omitted in 8. ¥ smale ee. 
y Om. 2. zZ the loue £¢. 2 of Bf. bthis@& WI xofe. y Here.... bigynneth a prolog on 
eshewe 8. €Om.8 ¢Om¢. ford. & Here the firste book of Machabeis.8.  % wykked ¢ sup.ras. 
-... bigynneth a prolog on the book of Wysdom. 8. 


G 


42 PROLOGUE. 


to do idolatrie, and forsake God and his lawe; and he took vessels and tresouris in the 
os fewer, temple, and bar into his lond, and he brente the citee of Jerusalem, and distroiede the 
housis therof and the wallis therof in cumpas; and he took the hi3e tour of Dauith, and 
sette men of armes therinne to lette men come* to Jerusalem. And thei diden mychel® 
harm to the puple of Israel, and who euere heeld the bookis of Goddis testament and kepte 
his lawe, was slayn bi comaundement of Antiok the king, and wymmen that circumcideden® 
her children weren slayn, bi comaundement of Antioke the king, and thei hangiden children 
bi the neckis, bi alle the housis of men of Israel, and killiden hem that cireumcideden® chil- 
paves blessid rent. Thanne roos® Matatyas, the prest, and fledde fro Jerusalem into Modyn, and 
biweylide gretly this distroying of the puple, off the temple and citee, and of al the lond; 
and he a3zenstood the king and hise mynistris, and killide the kingis mynistris, that com- 
pellide men to do idolatrie, and he killide a man, that dide ydolatrie, and® distroiede the 
auter wheronne idolatrie* was don. Thanne! Matatias and hise sones fledden into hillis, 
and leften alle thingis whiche thei hadden in the citee, and manye men" that sou3ten doom 
ote aie and ri3tfulnesse, and wolden kepe Goddis lawe, camen to. hem in! desert. And™ hethen 
tuwe dife]den Men maden werre on hem in" sabatis, and manye dizeden in her sympilnesse, for thei 
fer he iy nolden make bateil in sabatis. Thanne manye Jewis were gaderid to him, and™ maden a 
Ger greet oost, and weren redy to fi3te in sabotis, and thei killeden synners in greet wraththe. 
And Matatias and hise freendis cumpassiden and distroieden auteris, and circumcididen® 
alle? children, whiche thei founden in the‘ coostis of Israel, and thei pursueden the children 
of pride; and the werk hadde prosperite in her hondis, and thei gaten the lawe fro the 
hondis of hethen men and of kingis', and 3aue not® strengthe to the synful man. And 
whanne Matatias was in point of deeth, he conmfortide hise sones to putte hire lyues for the 
lawe of God, bi ensaumple of Abraham and othere hooly men bifore goyng; and he or- 
deynede Judas Macaheus to be duk of bateil, and ordeynedet Symount his sone to be fadir 
and prest to" hem, for he was a man of counceil. Thanne ben teld many batels of Judas 
Macabeus a3ens hethene men, and of grete victories bi Goddis help. Thanne Judas Maca- 
Of the gouern-heus made frenschipe with Romayns, for hire prudence, ri3tfulnesse and power. And 
tons Onis” whanne Judas was deed in bateile, the peple ordeynede Jonathas, his brother, prince and 
duyk, for to holde werre a3ens hethen men. Thanne ben teld many bateiles of Jonathas, 
and victories whiche he hadde a3ens hethen men. Thanne Jonatas, aftir manye victories, 
sente’ to renule frenschip” with Romayns, and with* Sparciatis, that weren of the kyn of 
Jewis; and Jonathas and hise sones weren slayn at the laste, bi tresoun of Trifon, that 
was an hethene man, and my3tyY duyk. Thanne Symount was maad duyk of the peple, 
and in the’ stede of Judas Macabeus and of Jonatas; and he dide manye bateiles and 
stronge, and hadde* greet victories a3ens hethene men; and Jewis hadden myche reste 
vudir hym; and he made stronge hooldis and citees in Juda; and he renulide frenschipe 
with Romayns and Sparciatis, and hadde myche glorie of his fole, and of hethene kingis. 
At the laste Symount and his twey> sones weren slayn bi tresoun, and Jon, his sone, was 
jj. Macabeis. prince of prestis, aftir his fadir day, and dide many bateiles aj3ens hethene men. ©The ij. 
book of Macabeis tellith myche the same sentence of the first book, and hath a fewe special 
poyntis, of Elyodorus, of¢ Eleasarus, and of the noble wydue and hire vij. sones. Eliodorus 
was sent of the hethen king to take awey the tresouris of the temple of Jernsalem, and 
bere tho to the king, and thou3 the tresouris weren kept for the lijflode of widewis and 
fadirles children, and summe weren. another® mannis‘ goodis, Elyodorus wolde algate® bere 


ato come 68{. —b myche Adeti. ¢circumciden 8. ‘thekingis(. sno¢. theordeyned¢g. off. vhe 
(her children (7. ¢ aroos Sep. fand of ¢sec.m.. sented frenschipis 8. * Om. Se, Ya my3ty ¢ 
8 on the auteer, and e. 4 the idolatrie¢< iAnd 2zOm.¢ @hehaddeg. »bOm.de. ¢ Here... bi- 
thanne~, kOm.8¢. lintoB8ee. mOm.ect. 2 Ona. gyneth a prolog on the seconde book of Machabeis. 6. 
oOm.¢. °circumciden 8. POm.féde. alle the Bde. and of ée. ¢other¢. fmennus¢.  & algatis ¢. 


PROLOGUE. 43 


al to the king; but God made hym and his felowis soore aferd, and Eliodorus was beten 
almest to the deth, of a ferdful oon sittinge on a hors, that hadde twey 3unge men aboute 
him; and Eliodorus was cast doun to the grounde, and was born out on a bere, and lay 
domb. And whanne the hijest prest offride sacrifice, and preiede for the helthe of Eliodo- 
rus, God grauntide lijf to him, and he thankide God, and the hijest prest, and® 3ede to the 
king and tolde to! him* hou it stood; and he witnesside to alle men the grete werkis of 
God, whiche he hadde seyn with hise izen. Thanne is toold of! the curside deedis of 
Jason the prest, that cam in by symonye, and wolde bringe Jewis" to idolatrie and sodoinye, 
and to forsake God and his lawe. Thanne is teld of greet® cruelte of Antioke, whiche he 
dide ajens the Jewis and the hooly place of Jerusalem; and God suffride this for the 
symnes of the peple, for whi God chees not the? fole for the place, but the place for the 
fole. Thanne’ Eleasarus ches to dize a scharp deeth, rathere than he wolde breke Goddis 
lawe in a litil poynt, to ete pork, 3he, to feyne to ete pork. Aftir this it sueth hou the The widewe. 
blissid widewe and hire vij. sones were martiride, for thei nolden breke Goddis lawe, and whi ile oe 
hou gloriously the blessid modir coumfortid hem to take deeth with ioie for the lawe of 
God. This storie and proces of Macabeis schulde stire cristen men to holde Goddis lawe to 
lijf and deth', and if kni3tis schulden vse the swerd ajens eny curside men, thei schulden 
vse it ajens lordis and prestis principaly, that wolen compelle men, for drede of prisoun and 
deth, to forsake the trenthe and fredom of* Cristis gospel; but God for his greet mercy 
3eue very repentance to hem, that thus pursuen trewe men, and graunte pacience, meeke- 
nesse, ‘and charitet to hem ‘that ben thus pursued! Amen®, 


C2GR Ad). 


But it is to wite, that holy scripture hath iiij. vndirstondingis; literal, allegorik, moral, Of iii. vndir- 
and anagogik. The literal vndirstonding techith the thing don in deede; and literal vndir- ole e 
stonding is ground and foundament of thre’ goostly vndirstondingis, in” so myche as 
Austyn, in his pistle to Vincent, and othere doctouris seyn, oonly bi the literal vndirstond- 
ing a man may argue ajens an aduersarie. Allegorik is a goostly vndirstonding, that 
techith what thing* men owen for’ to bileeue of Crist either? of hooly chirche. Moral is a 
goostly vndirstonding, that techith men, what vertues thei owen to sue, and what vices thei 
owen to flee. Anagogik is a goostly vndirstonding, that techith men, what blisse thei* 
schal® haue in heuene. And these foure vndirstondingis moun be taken in this word Jeru- 
salem ; for whi to the® literal vndirstonding it singnefieth an erthly citee, as Loundoun, 
either? such another; to allegorie it singnefieth hooly chirche in erthe, that fiztith a3ens 
synnes and fendis; to* moral vndirstondinge it singnefieth a cristen soule; to anagogik it 
singnefieth hooly chirche regnynge in blisse either‘ in? heuene, and tho that ben therinne. 
And these thre goostly vndirstondingis ben not autentik either of beleeue, ‘no but! tho ben 
groundid opynly in the text of holy scripture, in oo place other* other!, either in opin 
resoun that may not be distroied, either™ whanne the gospelris either™ other apostlis taken 
allegorie of the eelde testament, and confeermyn it, as Poul in the pistle to Galat. in” iiij.° 
c°. preueth, that Sara, the free wijf and principal of Abraham, with Isaac hir sone, singne- 
fieth bi allegorie the newe testament and the sones of biheeste; and Agar, the hand mayde, 
with hir sone Ismael, signefieth bi allegorie the elde testament, and fleschly men that 
schulen not be resseyued in to the eritage of God with the sones of ‘biheeste, that holden 
the? treuthe and freedom of Cristis gospel with endeles charite. Also holy scripture hath 


h Om. an. i Om. Boel. k Om. f. 10m.¢. y Om. Bet. zand ¢. a men ». b schulen Bet. 
0 the Jewis de. © the greet tj sec.m. POm. da, ¢COm.g 4oreti. and tog for< gs On. 8. 
4And thanne ¢. to deth Bde. Sand de. tOm.d borg. ibutifg korg Jlinotheregé. Mor ¢. 
usOmae: v the thre ¢. wand f. xOm.f8. ®Om.e. the fourth ¢. POm.¢. 


G2 


Of figuratif 


spechis. 


AA PROLOGUE. 


many figuratif spechis, and as Austyn‘ seith in the iij. book of Cristen Teching, that 
autouris of hooly scripture vsiden moo figuris, that is, mo fyguratif spechis, than gramariens 
moun gesse, that reden not thot figuris in holy scripture. It is to be war in the bigynnyng, 
that we take not to the lettre a figuratif speche, for thanne, as Poul seith, the lettre sleeth, 
but the spirit, that is, goostly vndirstonding, qwykeneth ; for whanne a thing which is seid 
figuratifly is taken so as if it be’ seid propirly, ‘me vndirstondith' fleschly ; and noon is 
clepid more couenably the deth of soule, than" whanne vndirstonding, that passith beestis, 
is maad soget to the fleisch in suynge the lettre. What euer thing in Goddis word may 
not be referrid propirly to oneste of vertues neither’ to the treuthe of feith, it” is figuratyf 
speche. Onestee of vertues perteyneth to loue* God’ and the? nei3ebore; treuthe of feith 
perteyneth to knowe God and the* neizebore. Hooly scripture® comaundith no thing no® 
but charite, it’ blamith no thing no® but coueitise; and in that manere it enfoormeth the 
vertues either‘ goode® condiscouns of men. Holy scripture affermith no thing no" but 
cristen feith bi thingis passid, present, and to comynge, andi alle these thingis perteynen to 
nursche charite, and make it strong, and to ouercome and quenche coueitise. Also it is 
figuratijf speche, where* the wordis maken allegorie, ether! a derk lycnesse, either! parable™, 
and it is fyguratyf" speche in i.° c. of Jeremye, “ to day I have ordeyned thee on folkis? 
“ and rewmys, that thou draw up bi the roote, and distroie, and bylde, and plaunte;” that 
is, that thou drawe out elde synnes, and distroie circumstaunces! either" causis of thoo, and 
bylde vertues, and plaunte goode werkis and customys. Alle thingis in holy scripture, that 
seemyn to vnwijse men to be ful of wickidnesse a3jens a man himself, either" ajens his 
nei3ebore, ben figuratyf spechis, and the preuytees, either" goostly vndirstondinges, schulden 
be sou3t out of vs, to the feeding either’ keping of charite. Such‘ a reule schal be kept in 
figuratif spechis, that so longe it be turned in mynde bi diligent consideracoun, til the 
expownyng either' vndirstonding" be brou3t to the rewme of charite; ifY eny speche of 
scripture sounneth propirly charite, it owith not to be gessid a figuratijf speche; and for- 
beedithY wickidnesse, either* comaundith profyt either* good doynge, it is no figuratyf 
speche; if it seemithY to comaunde cruelte, either? wickidnesse, either? to forbede prophit, 


4 seint Austyn (jsec.m. 'the8. Sis¢ tmen Jorg. ™Maparable «fi. a figuratyf8. © the first et. 
vndirstonden ¢. u that abt. Yne ¢. wthat ¢. P alle folkis ¢ q the circumstanncis ¢. ror(¢. 
x the loue ¢. Yof God ef. 2Om. em. thie. 8Andsich¢. tort the vndirstonding «. Vand 
vwrytte 8. ¢Om.e. dandg ¢Omt ford ife. Wifit forbedith< *or¢t Ysemeg Zorg, 
& the goodee. bOm.¢ iOm.e.  * whether £. 


‘Here bigynneth a prolog upon the gospel of Mathew. 


Seynt Austyn seith, in the secunde hook of Cristen Doctrine, in the ende, what euer thing eny man 
fyndith in eny science out of holy writ, if the thing founden is veyn, it is dampned in holi writ; and 
whanne the thing founden is profitable, it is founden in holi writ. And whanne eny man schal fynde 
alle thingis in holi writ, whiche he leerned profitabli in eny other sciencis, miche plenteuouslier he schal 
fynde there tho thingis profitable, that ben not lerned in eny maner othere sciencis, not but oonli in the 
wondirful hijnes and wondirful mekenesse of holi scriptures. Also in the thridde book of Cristen Doc- 
trine Austyn seith thus, ‘¢ Be thou ware, that thou take not figuratyf speche to the lettre, for herto per- 
*‘ teyneth the Apostlis word, seiyng, ‘ the lettre slecth, truli the Spirit,’ that is, goostli vndirstondyng, 
“¢ ¢makith itb to lyue;’ for whanne thing seid bi figure is taken as seid propirli to the lettre, it is vndir- 
** stonden fleischli; no deth of soule is seid more coucnabli, than whanne vndirstondyng, that is excellent 
** in the soule thanne beestis, is suget to the fleisch in suyng the lettre, that is, turnyng to fleischli lustis.” 
Also a propir speche in holi writ schal not be taken as figuratijf; what encr thing in Goddis word, that is, 
holi writ, may not be referrid propirli to honest thingis or vertues, neither to the truthe of feith, knowe 
thou that hout it is figuratijf speche. Honest of thewis parteyneth to‘ loue God and thi nei3bore ; truthe 
of feith parteyneth to knowe God and thi neijbore. Truli to ech man is his hope, and his owne con- 


&@ Om. A. v Om. A. ¢ Om. i. 4 for ta x. 


PROLOGUE. 45 


either® good doinge, it is a figuratijf speche. Crist seith, “if 3e eten not the flesch of meee 
“‘mannis sone and drinke not his blood, 3e schulen not have lijf in jou.” This speche Cristis feser 
semith to comaunde wickidnesse either* cruelte, therfore it is a figuratif speche; and pe ES 
comaundith men to comune with Cristis passioun, and to kepe in mynde sweetly and pro- 

fitably, that Cristis flesch was woundid and crucified for vs. Also whanne hooly scripture 

seith, “if thin enemy hungrith, feede thou hym, if he thurstith, 3eue thou drinke to hym,” 

it comaundith benefice, either® good doinge; whanne it seith, “thou schalt gadere togidere 

“ coolis on his heed,” it seemith that wickidnesse of yuel wille is comaundid. This is seid 

bi figuratijf speche, that thou vndirstonde, that the coolys of fijer ben brennynge weylyngis, 

either? moornyngis of penaunce, bi whiche the pride of hym is mad hool, which sorwith, 

that he was enemy of a? man that helpith and relenith® his wrecchidnesse’. Also the same 

word either® the same thing in scripture is taken sumtyme in good, and sumtyme in yuel, 

as a lyoun singnefieth sumtyme Crist, and in another place it singnefieth the deuyl. Also 

sour don3 is set sumtyme in yuel, where Crist seith, “ be 3e war of thef sour dou3 of Fari- 

“ sees, which is ypocrisie ;” sour dou3 is sett also in good, whanne Crist seith, “the rewme 

** of heuenes is lyk sour dou3,” etc. And whanne not oo thing aloone but tweyne, either® mo, 

ben feelid, either? vndirstonden, bi the same wordis of scripture, thou3 that it is' hid, that 

he vndirstond* that! wroot, it is™ no perel, if it may be preuyd bi other placis" of hooly 
scripture®, that ech of tho thingis acordith with treuthe. And in hap the autour of scripture 

seith thilk? sentense in the same wordis which we wolen vndirstonde; and certys the 

Spirit of God, that wrou3te these thingis bi the autour of scripture, bifore si3 withoute doute, 

that thilke™ sentense schulde come to the redere, either*® to the herere, 3he, the Holy Goost 
purueyde, that thilke sentence, for it is groundid on trewthe, schulde come to the redere, 

either’ to the herere, for whit what my3te be purueyed of God largiliere and plentyuousliere 

in Goddis spechis, than that the same wordis be vndirstonden in manye maners, whiche 
maners, either" wordis of God, that ben not of lesse autorite, maken’ to be prened. Austin 4ustyn. 

in iij.* book of Cristen Teching seith al this and myche more, in the bigynnyng therof. 

Also he whos herte is ful of charite conprehendith, withouten eny errour, the manyfoold 
abundaunce and largest teching of Goddis scripturis*, for whi Poul seith, “the fulnesse of 

‘* Jawe is charite,” and in another place, “the ende of lawe’,” that is, the? perfeccioun, either* 


aorg >bOm.e. Crekenitha. <4wickidnes( ©writtet Pthat@é dOma. ‘ilke® ‘sore 
eorgi fOmp. gore h Om. 8¢. ibe en. tOm.e. Uareé. vmade (sup.ras. W the iij. et. 
k yndurstode «. Jnot that¢. ™thatis¢. "place 8. *scripturee. Ythelawe¢. 2 Om. Be. aor’ 


science, as he feelith him silf to profite to the knowyng and louyng of God, and of thi neijbore. Holi 
writ comaundith no thing but charite, neither blamcth eny thing no but coueitise; and bi this maner 
holi writ enformeth the condicions of men. Holi writ affermeth not no but general feith bi thingis 
passid, present, and to comyng; bifore tellyng of thingis to comyng, schewyng is of thingis present; but 
alle these thingis parteynen for to norische the same charite, and to strenkthe it, and to ouercome and 
quenche coueitise. Also figuratijf speche is, where cuer the wordis maken allegorie, that is goostli vndir- 
stondyng parteynyng to feith, or whanne wordis maken derkenes or parable. In al figuratijf speche 
such a rule schal be kept, that so long that that is red be ofte turned bi diligent consideracioun or studie, 
til interpreting or expownyng be brou3t to the rewme of charite, truli if it now sowneth propirli charite, 
it is no figuratijf speche. If the speche is comaunding, forbeding either corrupcion of soule or resoun, 
either forbeding trespas a3ens neizbore, cither comaundyng profizt, either good doyng, it is not figuratijf 
speche, but propre to the lettre; forsothe if the speche of holi writ seme to comaunde peruersion of soule, 
or trespas a3ens nei3bore, either to forbede profizt, either good doyng, it is figuratijf speche. Crist seith, 
** no but 3e schullen ete the fleisch of mannes sone, and schulen drinke his blood, 3c schulen nat have lijf 
“ in 30u ;” it semeth to comaunde trespas® or noiyng of neizbore, either perucrtyng of soule; therfore it 
is figuratijf speche, comaunding us for to comyne to Cristis passion, and swetli and profitable to haue in 


© trespasses A. 


Of charite, 
with vij. reutis 


of Tyconie and 


Austyn in de- 
elaring of 
seripture, 


Of the vij. 
reulis; of the 
very body and 
Seyned. 


+ the first ts? 


46 PROLOGUE. 


filling», of the® lawe, “is charite of clene herte, and of good conscience, and of feith not 
* feyned,” and Jhesu Crist seith, “ thou schalt loue thi Lord God of al thin herte, and of al 
“ thi soule, and of al thi mynde, and thi nei3ebore as thi self, for in these twey comaunde- 
“ mentis hangith al the lawe and prophetis’.” And as the roote of alle yuels is coueitise, 


_ so the roote of alle goodis is charitee. Charite, bi which we louen God and the nei3ebore, 


holdith sykirly al the greetnesse and largnesse® of Goddis spechis. Therefore if it is not 
leisir to seeke alle holy scriptures, to expounne alle the wlappingis‘ of wordis, to perse alle 
the preuytes of scripturis, holde thou charite, where’ alle thingis hangen, so thou schalt 
holde that that thou" lernydist! there; also thou schalt holde that that thou lernedist not, 
for if thou knowist* charite, thou knowist sum thing wheronne also that hangith that in 
hap thou knowist not; and in that that thou vndirstondist in scripturis', charite is opin, 
and in that that thou vndirstondist not, charite is hid, therfore he that hooldith charite in 
vertues, either™ in goode condiscouns, hooldith bothe that that is opyn and that that" is hid 
in Goddis wordis. Austyn seith al this and myche more in a sermoun of the preysing of 
charite. Also vij. reulis of Tyconye and of Austyn declaren many derke® thingis of hooly 
seripturis. The first reule is of Jhesu Crist, and of his holy spirit?; 00 persoone of the 
heed and‘ of the body, that is, of Crist and of holy chirche, is schewid to vs in this reule, 
for it is not seid in veyn to feithful men, “3ee ben the seed of Abraham,” whanne ther is 
oo seed of Abraham, which seed’ is Crist. Doute we not, whanne scripture goith fro the" 
hed to the body, either’ fro the body to the heed, and natheles it goith not awey fro oon 
and the same persone, for whi oo persone spekith in Isaie, “ he’ settide a myter to me as 
* to* a spouse, and he onourideY me as a spousesse with an? ournement.” And natheles it 
is to vndirstonde what of these tweyne acoordith® to the heed, that is, Crist, and what 
acordith to the body, that is, hooly chirche, for whi a myter acordith to Crist, which is 
the spouse, and an’ ournement acordith to hooly chirche, which is the spouse® of Crist. 
The secunde reule, as Ticonye seith, is of the bodi of Crist, which bodi is departid into 
tweyne, but ceertis this bodi of Crist ou3te not be clepid so, for treuly it is not the bodi 
of Crist, which shal not be with him withouten ende, but it sclial be seid of the veri bodi 
and of the medlid body of Crist, either® of the veri bodi and feyned' body of Crist; for whi 
ypocritis schulen be seid to be not with Crist, not oonly withouten ende, but also now, 
thou3 thei seemyn to be in the chirche of Crist. Wherfor this reule my3t be clepid thus, 
bfullyng 8. ©¢Om. 86 the profetise. ¢large- Ut Om. «. Vor ¢. W the profete he ¢ x Om. ¢ 
nessis < = fwlappinge ¢ 8wherong »Om.a Yournede& 2O0Om.y. ®acorden& » Om. 8. 
ilernest 8  knewist p. I scripture «. org. &sponsesse¢. tobeaprmiet. Cord. fof the 
7Om.a. © Om.e. P spouse 8. bedi or spousesse ¢.  feynid «. 
q Om. e. r Om. f. 8 Om. ¢ t seid Crist ¢. 
mynde, that his fleisch was woundid and crucified for us. For whanne manye sentencis ben vndirstonden 
of the same wordis of holi writ, thou3 thilk sentence be hid, which he that wroot vndirstood, no perel is, 
if ech of sentencis may be preued bi the othere placis of holi scripturis for to acorde to treuthe; for 
withouten doute the Spirit of God, that spak bi writ of that scripture, bifore siz and purneiede, that this 
trewe sentence schulde come to mynde of the redere or herere. For what my3te be proved of God 
largelier or plenteuouslier in Goddis spechis, than that the same wordis ben vndirstonden in manye 
maners, whiche othere scripturis of God, of as greet auctorite, preven’? Austyn there in the thridde 
book. Auctouris of holi writ vsen mo figuris thanne gramariens moun gesse, whiche reden not the figuris 
of hol writ. Seuene rulis ben sett to vnderstonde holi writt ajens aduersaries; ‘is firstt of oure Lord 
Jesus Crist and of his bodi, that is, veri cristen man. Bi this rule oo persoone of the heed and bodi, 
that is, of Crist and of holi chirche, is schewid to vs; for it is not seid veynli for feithful men, “3e ben the 
** seed of Abraham,” sithen oon holi seed is of Abraham, that is, Crist. Doute we not, whanne speche of 
scripture passith fro the heed to the bodi, or fro the body to the heed, and netheles it passith not from 
oon to$ the same persoones, for ov persoone spekith, seiyng, “ God sette on me, as on a spouse, and he 


f of prouen A. 8 of X. 


PROLOGUE. 47 


that it were seid of the medlid chirche, that® is, that conprehendith chosen men to blisse, 
and also ipocritis, that schulen be dampned. And this reule axith a waking either  diligenti 
redere; whanne it spekith of other men, it semith to speke now as to tlic same mén tol 
whiche it spac bifore, either* it seemith to speke of! the same men, whanne it spekith of 
othere men; as if oo body be of euer either, for temporal medlyng, and for comynyug of 
sacramentis. ‘To this reule it™ perteyneth, that the chirche seith in Songis, “I am blac 
“and fair as the tabernaclis of Cedar, as" the skynnes of Salomon ;” the chirche seide that 
sche is euer either, for temporal vnite withinne 00 net of goode fischis and of yuel fischis®; 
for whi the tabernaclis of Cedar parteynen to Ismael, that schal not be eir with the sone of 
the free wijf. The thridde reule is of byheestis and of? lawe; this reule may be seid also 
of the spirit and lettre; it1 may be seid also of grace and of comaundement ; aud Tyconie 
erride in seyinge, that werkis ben 30uen of God to vs for meryt of feith, but feith it silf is 
so of vs, that it is not of God to vs. The iiij. reule is of al and of party, whanne summ of 
a thing is set for al, eithir™ a3enward al is set for a party. The v. reule is of tymes, and The wv. reule of 
— . . : ‘i " fymes, 
this is bi a figure clepid synodoches, whanne a’ part is set for al, either‘ al is set for oo" 
part. Oon euangelist seith, that it was don aftir vilj.. daies, whanne the face of Crist 
schynede as the sunne, and another gospeler seide’, that it was don aftir vj. daies; euer 
either my3te not be soth, that is seid of the noumbre of daies, no but he that seide aftir viij. 
daies be vndirstonden to haue sett for the hool day the last part of the day, sithen Crist 
bifore seide it to come, and to haue set for the hool day the first part of the day, in whiche* 
he schewith, that the appering of Cristis face was fully don; andY that he that seide aftir 
vj. daies, rekynedeYY alle the hool daies and the myddil daies, and noon other. Bi this 
kynde of speche, bi which kinde al is singnefied by a part, thilk questioun of Cristis rising 
a3en is asoiled; the laste part of the day, wherinne Crist suffride deth, is taken for al the 
day with the ny3t passid bifore, and the first part of Sunday’, in whos morewitide he roos 
a3en, is taken for al Sunday? and the ny3t bifore goynge; and the Sabot with the* hool ny3t 
bifore goynge is al hool> day and ny3t. If these ny3tis and daies be not taken thus, ther 
moun not be iij. daies and iij. ny3tis, in whiche he bifore seide, that he schulde be in the 
herte of erthe®’. Also this reule of tymes is taken for lawful noumbris, as ben vij. x. and¢ 
xij. and suche moo, for ofte suche noumbris ben sett for al tyme, as this that Dauith seith, 
“‘seuen sithis in the day I seide preysing, either® herying, to thee,” is noon‘ othir thing 


& or bodi that ¢ 4org¢. ior diligents. jJOm.e. which ec. y Om. ¢. yy rekenynge «. z the sun- 
k or ¢. 1 now as to 8. m Om. ¢. Mandas¢. day{. @allethe¢. ban hoole. the hool ¢. © the 
°o Om. £. P Om. e. Gand e. ror ¢. so¢. erthe fei. TOme. forge fno'e 
torg Yaet. Vvj.anpr.m. Wsiethe&. *the 


‘ ournede me as a spouse with ournement ;” And netheles it is to vndirstonde, whiche of these accordith to 
the heed, that is, Crist, and whiche to the bodi, that is, holi chirche. The secunde rule is of Cristis bodi, 
partide in tweye parties, as Tyconye scith, which truli oust not be clepid so, for truli the ilke is not the 
bodi of the Lord, whiche schal not be in to withouten eende in blis, but it is to be seid of the veri hodi of 
the Lord and of the medlid bodi, or veri bodi and feyned; for not oonli withouten eende, but now also 
ypocritis schulen not be seid to be with the Lord withouten ende, thou3 thei seme to be in his chirche. 
Therfore this rule my3t be seid of the medlid chirche. This rule askith a wakyng redere, whanne holi writt 
spekith to othere men as to the same to which it spekith bifore, or whanne it semeth to speke of the 
same men, and netheles spekith of othere, as oo bodi be of hem boothe for temporal medling and 
comunyng of sacramentis. The thridde rule is of biheestis and lawe, which may be of spiritis and of 
lettre, or of grace and of maundementis. The fourthe rule is of spiec and of kynde, that is'of part and 
of al the hool thing, of the which" the part is. The fifthe reule is of tymes, that is bi figure synadochie, 
whanne al is vndirstonden bi part, or part vndirstonden bi al. In this maner Crist is seide to haue leie 
deed in the sepulcre thre daies and thre ny3tis; the laste part of Good Friday is set for al thei day, and 
the firste part of Sunday, and the Satirday al ful. Or this reule of tymes is vidirstonden of noumbris, 


h fleigch x. i that 2. 


The vp. reule 
of recapitula- 
coun. 


The vij. reul is 
of the deuil 
and of his body. 


Austyn and 
Ysidre. 


Of comenda- 
coun of scrip- 
ture bi dustyn. 


48 PROLOGUE. 


than this, “ his herying be euere in my mouth.” Also bi an ec. and xlii.® in Apoc. is singne- 
fied the vniuersite, either" al the multitude, of seintis. The vi. reule is of recapitulacoun, 
either® rehersing a thing don bifore, not in ordre, as it is sett; for whi summe thingis ben 
seid so, as if ‘tho suen! in the ordre of tyme, either* ben teld bi contynuyng of thingis, that 
is, that ben ioyned next togidere, whanne the' telling is clepid ajen preuyly to the formere 
thingis, that weren left out; and if men vndirstonden not such seying bi this reule, thei 
erren; as in Genesis it is seid, “ God plauntide paradys in Eden, at the eest, and settide 
“ there the man that he foormyde, and God brou3te forth™ 3it of erthe" ech fair tre,” etc.; 
this is seid bi recapitulacoun. In lyk maner there “the lond was of oo lippe,” that is, 
speche, it is seid bi recapitulacoun. The vij. reule is of the deuel and of his bodi, for he is 
heed of alle wickide inen, that ben his body in a manere, and schulen go with him in to the® 
turment of euerlasting fijer, as Crist is the? heed of hooly chirche, which‘ is his body, and 
schal be with hym in rewme’ and glorie® euerlastinge. Also thei that haue* lykinge for" to 
studie in holy writ, schulen’ be chargid, that thei kunne the kyndis and manersW of spe- 
kingis in holy scriptures ; and thei that perseyue diligently and holde wel in mynde, hou a 
thing is wont to be seid in holy scripturis. Also that is souereyn help*" and moost nedful, 
preie* thei, that God 3ene to hem the veri vndirstonding’ of holy scripture, for thei reden 
in tho seripturis, aboute whiche thei ben studiouse, that God 3eueth? wisdom, and kunnyng, 
and vndirstonding of his face, that is, 3ifte and grace. Also if her stodie is don with meek- 
nesse, and loue of cristen lore, it is of God. Austyn writith al this in the iij. book of 
Cristen Teching, aboute the myddil, and in the ende. Isidre, in the j. book of Souereyn 
Good, touchith these reulis schortliere, but I hane hym not now, and Lyre, in the bigyn- 
nyng of the bible, touchith more opinly these reulis, but I haue him not now, and Ardma- 
can, in the bigynnyng of his book de Questionibus Armenorum, 3eueth many goode groundis 
to vndirstonde holy scripture to the lettre, and goostly vndirstonding also, but I haue him 
not now. Also no thing may seme to*® be wijsere, no thing of more eloquence, than is 
hooly® scripture, and the autours therof, that weren enspijrid of God. And thei ou3ten not 
to® speke in other manere than thei diden, and the prophetis, and moost Amos, weren ful 
eloquent, and seint’ Poul waas ful eloquent in his pistlis. Also* the autouris of hooly scrip- 
ture spaken derkly‘, that the preuyteis therof ben hid fro’ vnfeithful men, and goode men 
ben exercisid, either® ocupied, and that in expounnynge hooly' scripture thei haue a newe 


Bxliij.¢ borg itheisnedeng. korg. !Om.¢. x and prei ¢. y wisdom and vndirstondynge ¢ 
m Om. ¢. n the erthe ene. o Om, e. POm. {2 3eue ent. 4 to me to Bt sec.m. » hooly writt or 
athe weche &. 'therewme ¢ ‘in glorief. thang.  hooly ¢. ¢ Om. 8. 4 Om. ¢. e And ¢. f ful 
u Om. ef. Vschulde ¢< Wthe maners¢. WWhelthes derklie. toe. borg iofholy ¢ 


as vij. x. or xij. and suche othere, whiche noumbris ben sett sumtyme for al tyme, as ‘ seuene sithis in 
“ the day Lord I seide preisyng to thee,” is no thing ellis than this, “‘ Goddis preisyng is euerk im my 
“ mouth ;” also in the Apocalipis, bi an hundrid fourty and foure is signifiede al the vniuersite of seyntis. 
The sixte reule is of recapitulacion; summe thingis doon bifore ben scide, as if thei suen in ordre of 
tyme, or ben teld in next suyng of thingis, whanne the tellyng is pryuyli clepid a3en to the formere 
thingis that weren left. If scripture be not vndirstonden bi this reule, errour is gendrid, as in Genesis, 
“‘ God plauntid paradise in Eden at the cest, and sette there man whom he foormede; and 3it God 
“ broust forth ech faire tre of the erthe ;” that is seid bi recapitulacion or rehersing of thing doon bifore. 
Also there, “in the lond was oo langage,” is recapitulacion. The seuenthe reule is this, of the deuel and 
his bodi, for he is heed of al vnpitous, that ben his bodi in sum maner, that schulen go with him in to 
turment of euerlastyng fire; as Crist is heed of holy chirche, that is his bodi, that schal be with him in 
the rewme and glorie eucrlastyng. Also in the eende of that book Austyn seith, “ studiers of holi serip- 
“ture schulden kunne the kynde of spekyngis in holi scripturis, and take heed, and holde in mynde in 
“‘ what maner a thing is wont to be seide in hem, and also, that is souereyn and moost nedeful, preic thei 
“ that thei vndirstonde, for the Lord 3eueth wisdom!, and vndirstondyng and kunnyng is of him.” Al 


k euer more A. l seueth vs A. 


PROLOGUE. 49 


grace, diuerse fro the first autouris. Austin, in the bigynnyng of the iiij. book of Cristen 
Teching. Also, as the litle richessis of Jewis, whiche thei baren awey fro Egipt, weren 
in* comparisoun of richessis! whieh thei hadden aftirward in Jerusalem, in the tyme of 
Salomon, so greet is the prophitable kunnynge of filosoferis bookis, if it is comparisouned 
to the kunnynge of hooly scripturis™; for whi what ever thing a man lernith withouten 
hooly writ, if the thing lerned®™ is veyn, it is dampned in holy writ, if it is prophitable, it 
is foundid there. And whanne a man fyndith theere alle thingis whiche he lernyde pro- 
fitably in other place™, he schal fynde myche more plenteuously tho thingis in hooly scrip- 
ture, whiche he lernede nenere in other place, but ben°® lerned oonly in the wondirful 
hijnesse and in the wondirful meeknesse of hooly scripturis. Austin seith this in the ende 
of ij?. book of Cristen Teching. Also hooly scripture’ conteyneth al prophitable trenthe, 
and alle othere sciencis preuyly in the vertu of wittis, either’ vndirstondingis, as wynes* ben 
conteyned in grapis, as ripe corn is conteyned in the seed', as bowis ben conteyned in the 
rootis, and as trees ben conteyned in the kernels. Grostede, in a sermoun Premonitus a Grostede. 
venerabili patre. Also hooly scripture wlatith sofymys, and seith, he that spekith sofistic- 
aly, either" bi sofymys, schal be hatful, and he schal be defraudid in ech’ thing, as the 
wijse man seith in xxxvij.” c. of Ecclesiastici. If filosoferis, and moost the disciplis of 
Plato, seiden eny treuthis, and prophitable to oure feith, not* oonly tho treuthis owen not 
to be dred, but also tho schulen be calengid intoY oure vs, eithir’ profijt, fro hem, as fro 
vniust possessouris. And as Jewis token, bi autorite of God, the gold, ‘and syluer*, and 
clothis of Egipcyans, so cristene men owen to take the trewe seyingis of filosoueris, for to 
worschippe oo God, and of techingis of vertues, whiche treuthis the filosoueris founden not, 
but diggeden out of the metals of Goddis puruyaunce, which is sched euery where. So 
dide Ciprian, the swettest doctour and moost blessid martir, so diden Lactancius, Victori- 
nus, and Ilarie, and Greekis withoute noumbre. Austin in ij.? book of Cristen Teching. 
ing of figuratijf spechis, with good lyuynge and meeknesse, and stodyinge of the bible, 
symple men moun sumdel vndirstonde the text of holy writ, and edefie myche hemself and OL ave 
other men; but for Goddis loue, 3e symple men, be® war of pride, and veyn iangling and i peer 
chyding in wordis a3ens proude clerkis of scole and veyn religions, and answere jee mekely no!" 
and prudently to enemyes of Goddis lawe, and preie 3e hertly for hem, that God of his greet 
mercy 3eue to hem very knowing of scripturis, and meekenesse, and charite, and euere be 
3e redy, what ever‘ man techith eny treuthe of God, to take that meekely, and with greet 
thankingis to God; and if eny man in erthe, either aungel of heuene, techith” 30u the 
contrarie of holy writ, either’ eny thing a3ens resoun and charite, fle‘ fro him in that, as fro 
the foul deuel' of helle, and holde 3e stedfastly to lijf and deeth the treuthe and freedom of 
the hooly™ gospel of Jhesu Crist, and take 3e mekely mennis seyingis and lawis, onely® in 
as myche as thei acorden with holy writ and good conscience, and noo ferther, for lijf 
neither® for deth. 

Klitiling. Jlrichese. ™scriptureS ®lerid8. Zor ¢. a Om, et b the secunde ¢. ¢ the iiij. ¢. 
on placise. Otheiben(¢. Ptheij. eG. Gdwritg ding € be 3e 8. beth e. f Om. ett. for ¢. 


rorg. ‘Svynes(. teeris¢ org Venery& teche< iorg * fleeth¢. !fende. ™ Om. ¢. 
w xxvij. 8. the xxxvij. et. x and not ¢. Ytog 20Om6 One. 


this seith Austyn in the thridde book of Cristen Doctryne. Auctouris of holi scripture speken derkli, 
that prudentli mysteries ben hid fro vnpiteuous men, and good men ben excercisid, and in expounnyng it 
haue grace vnlijk to the firste auctouris of holi writt. Austyn in the firste book of Cristen Doctryne. 
Therfore seynt Gregori scith in the xxix. book of Morals, the vij. chapiter, that wordis™ ben as piement 
and precious spiceries; hou myche spicerie is more powned, bi so myche vertu is encreesid in piement, 
so hou myche we pownen more Goddis spechis in expownyng, bi that we heeryng, as drinkyng, ben 
more holpen. MS. Harl. 6333. Prefixed to the New Testament. 


m Goddes wordes A. 
H 


50 PROLOGUE. 


CAP. XIII. 


Of vi. reutis. Also holy scripture is betere knowen bi licnessesP and bi derknessis1; it doth awey 

a anoyes, and we owe to" thenke and bileeue, that the thing that is writen in holy scripture, 
3he, thou3 it be hid, either’ not knowen, is betere and trewere than that* we moun vndir-- 
stonde bi vsself"; and worschipfully and heelfully the Holy Goost mesuride so holy scrip- 
turis, that in opyn placis he settide remedie to oure hungir, and in derk placis he wipte 
awey anoies; for almest no thing is seyn in tho derknessis, which’ thing is not founden 
seid” ful pleynly in other placis. Therfore bifore* alle thingis it is nedeful, that a man be 
conuertid bi Goddis drede, and be mylde bi pite, either’ cristen religioun; and that he 
azensie not hooly scripture, wher it be vnderstonden, thou3 it smyte eny synnes of oure, 
whether it be not vndirstonden, as if we moun vndirstonde betere’, either® comaunde, either® 
teche betere. Be the 3ifte of drede and of pitee, ne comith to degre> of kunnyng, for whi 
ech fructuous man of hooly scripturis exercisith himself in this thing, and to fynde noon® 
other thing in tho, than for to loue God for God himself, and for to lone his neizebore for 
God. Thanne thilke drede, bi which he thenkith on Goddis dom, and thilke pite, bi which 
he must nedis bileeue and 3eue stide to autorite of holy bookis, conpellith hym to beweyle 
hymself, for whi this kunnyng of good hope makith a man not to* auaunce* himself, but 
biweile himself; and bi this affeccioun, either®¢ good wille, he geetith with besy preieris the 
coumfort of Goddis help, that he be not broken bi dispeir; and‘ he bigynneth to be in the 
fourthe degre of goostly strengthe, in whiche he hungrith and thirstith ri3tfulnesse ; thanne 
in the v. degree, that is, in the counceyl of mercy, he purgith the soule, that makith noise 
and vnrestfulnesse of coueitise of erthly thingis; and thanne he dispisith filthis of soule, 
and louith God and neijeboris, 3he enemyes; bi this he stizith to’ the vj. degre, where he 
purgith® the ize of soule’, bi which ize God may be seyn, as myche as he may be seyn of 
hem that dizen to this world, as myche as thei mowen; for in so myche thei seen God in 
her soule, thour3 feith and loue, hou myche thei dizen to this world; ‘and in* as myche as 
thei leuyn to! this world, thei seen not God; and in this degre, wherinne a man dizith to 
the world, he neither preferrith, neither makith euene himself, neither™ his neijebore, with 
the treuthe of hooly writ; therfore this hooly man schal be so symple and clene of herte, 
that neither for plesaunce of men he be drawe awey fro treuthe, nether™ bi cause to eschewe 
eny harmys of” himself, that ben contrarie to this lijf*, such a chiild stizith to verey wis- 

In the ii. book Aom, which is the laste and the vij., which he vsith in pees and in®° reste. Seint Austyn 


he istenTech- coith al this in the bygynnyng of the ij. book of Cristen Teching. Heere is a blissid 


ane eee entring bi these vij. vertues to the kunnyng of holy scripture in this lijf, to haue here? 
lyf. reste of soule, and aftirward ful reste of bodi and soule in henene, withouten ende. Alas! 


what don proude and coueitouse wrecchis at hooly scripture, that seeken the world and 
fleschly eese, and wolen not conuerten hem fro ‘these cursidnessis1; thei disseyuen hemself, 
and the puple that gessen hem wijse men, whanne thei ben opyn foolis; and maken hem- 
self deppere dampned, and other men also that suen her folye, and blasfemyn God. Thes 
worldly foolis schulden wite, that hooly lijf is a‘ launterne to bringe a man to very kun- 
nynge, as Crisostom seith, and the drede and loue of God is thes bigynning and perfeccioun 
of kunnyng and wijsdom; and whaune these fleschly apis and worldly moldewerpis han 
neither the bigynnyng of wijsdom, neithert desyren it, what doon thei at hooly scripture, to 
schenschipe of hemself and of othere men? As longe as pride and ‘coueitise of" worldly 
goodis and’ onouris” is rootid in her herte, thei maken omage to Satanas, and offren to 
him bothe bodi and soule, and al her witt and fynding. Such foolis schulden thenke, that 

P licnes Bf. 4&derknes 8. *Om.Aysec.m. Sorg. Sinto€. h pureid ¢. i the soule ¢. k Om. f. 
t that that 8. ™ ouresilf ¢ Vthe weche 8. * Om.¢. ! in Be. mMnet. Otoe F0Om.6 Om: 


big. yofg 2Om.¢ aorg >the degre Bei. POm.¢ this cnrsednes®. ‘'asaf. * Om. 8. 
Cnog 4Om.6 Cauaunteen. eCorg fOme tnegt tOm.¢. Vand coueitise and ¢. W¥ onour e. 


PROLOGUE. 51 


wijsedom schal not entre into an yuel willid soule, neither schal dwelle in a body soget to 
synnes; and Jhesu Crist seith, that the fadir of heuene hijdith the prenytees of hooly 
scripture fro wijse men and prudent, ‘that is wijse men and prudent* to the world, andy in 
her owne si3t, and schewith tho to meke men; therfore worldly foolis, do 3e first penaunce 
for 30ure synnes, and forsake’ pride and coueitise, and be 3e meke, and drede 3e God in alle 
thingis, and loue* him ouer alle other thingis, and 3oure neizeboris® as ‘3oure self’; and Mou ti good 


thanne 3e schulen profite in stodie of hooly writ. But alas! ‘alas! alast! the moost Wie acne 


mynacoun that euer was herd among cristen clerkis is now purposid in Yngelond, bi eee 
worldly clerkis and feyned religiouse, and in the cheef vniuersitee of ouref reume, as manye 

trewe men tellen with greet weylyng. This orrible and deuelis cursednesse is purposid of 

Cristis enemyes and traytouris of alle cristen puple, that no man schal lerne dyuynite, nei- 

thers hooly writ, no but he that hath doon his fourme in art, that is, that hath" comensid 

in art, and hath ben regent tweyne 3eer aftir; this wolde be ix. 3eer either! ten bifore that 

he lerne hooly writ, aftir that he can comunly wel his gramer, thou3 he haue a good witt, 

aud traueile ful soore, and haue good fynding ix. either x. 3cer aftir his gramer. This 

semith vttirly the denelis purpos, that fewe men either* noon schulen’ lerne and kunne 

Goddis lawe; but God seith bi Amos, on thre greete trespasis of Damask and™ on the iiij., 

“I schal not conuerte him ;” where Jerom seith, the firste synne is to thenke yuelis, the ij. 

synne is to consente" to weyward thou3tis, the ilj. synne is to fille in werk, the iiij. synne 

is to do not penaunce aftir the synne, and to plese himself in his synne; but Damask is 
interpretid drinkynge blood®, either? birling blood. Lord! whether? Oxunford drinke" blood War Ozoun- 
and birlith® blood, bi sleeinge of quyke men, and bi doinge of sodomye, in leesinge a partvinge, one 
of mannis blood, wherbi a chijld myte be fourmed, deme thei that knowen; and wher” "4! 
Oxunforde drinke blood of synne, and stirith othere men of the lond to do synne, bi boold- 

nesse off clerkis, deme thei iustly, that seen it at i3e', and knowen bi experiens. Loke now" 

wher’ Oxunford is in thre orrible synnes and in the fourthe, on which God restith not til 

he punsche it. Sumtyme children and 3unge men arsistris” weren deuout and clene as 
aungels, in comparisoun of othere, now men seyn thei ben ful of pride and leccherie, with 
dispitouse oothis, needles and false, and dispising of Goddis heestis; sumtyme cyuylians 

and canonistris* weren denont, and so bisy on her lernyng, that they tooken ful litil reste 

ofY bed, now men seyn that thei ben ful of pride and nyce aray, ennye, and coueitise, with 
leccherie, glotonie!Y and ydilnesse; sumtyme dyuynys* weren ful hooly and deuout, and 
dispisiden outtirly the world, and lyueden as aungels in meeknesse, clennesse”, souereyn® 
chastite, and charite, and tau3ten treuly Goddis lawe in werk and word; now men seyn, 

thei ben as deligat of hir mouth** and wombe, and as coueitouse as othere worldly men, 

and® flateren, and maaken leesingis in preching, to eschewe, bodyly persecuscoun, and to 

gete benefices. The firste grete synne is generaly in the vniuersite, as men dreden and seen 

at i3e; the ij. orrible synne is sodomye and strong mayntenaunce thereof, as it is knowen 

to many persones of the reume, and at the laste parlement. Alas! dyuynys®», that schulden 

passe othere men in clennesse and hoolynesse, as aungels of heuene passen freel men in 
‘vertues, ben® moost sclaundrid of this cursid synne ajens kynde. The iij. orrible synne is 
symonie, and forswering in the semble hous, that schulde be an hous of ri3tfulnesse and 
hoolynesse’, where yuelis schulde® be redressid ; this symonie with portenauncis’ thereof is 

myche worse and more abomynable than bodily sodomye. 3it on these thre abomynacouns 

God wolde graciously conuerte clerkis, if thei wolden do very penaunce, and 3cue hem hooliche 


xOm. fe. Y Om. 86 7% forsaketh ¢ ®loue 3¢ 8. Y wether 8. W arsitris @. artitars «. arsetris ¢y sec.m. 


lpueth ¢. €neizbore ¢ 4. 30u self et. € Om. 8. * canonisteis Be. Yone. ins yy and glotonye «. 
fthis8. gne¢. bhehath¢ i3zeeethir 8. ore. %diuinours Bf. 2% and clennesse +. ® and souereyn « 
k or ¢y sec.m. 1 schuldon 8. schuld ¢. mbut¢ #4 mouthis¢, © Om. ¢. >> that dyuynis«. © werkis 
n asente ¢. © Om, «. P or ¢. 4 where efj. and in vertues thei ben ¢. 4 of holynes 8. ¢ shulen e:. 


¥ drinkith e¢ 8 birle Bi. t the ize ¢. uthou 8. f the purtenaunce 8. the purtenauncis ¢. 
H 2 


52 PROLOGUE. 


to vertues; but on the iiij. most? abomynacoun purposid now to letten Cristen men, 3he 
prestis and curatis, to lerne freely Goddis lawe, til thei han® spendid ix. 3eer either! x. at* 
art, that conprehendith many strong! errouris of hethene men a3ens Cristen bileeue, it 
seemith wel that God wole not™ ceese of veniaunce, til it and othere ben punschid soore ; 
for it seemith that worldly clerkis and feyned relygiouse don this, that symple men of wit 
and of fynding knowe not Goddis lawe, to preche it generaly a3ens synnes in the reume. 
But wite 3e, worldly clerkis and feyned relygiouse, that God bothe can and may, if it lykith 
hym, speede symple men ont of the vniuersitee, as myche to kunne hooly writ, as maistris 
in the vniuersite; and therfore no gret charge, thou3 neuer man of good wille be poisend 
To tettenot With hethen mennis errouris ix. 3eer either" ten, but euere lyue wel and stodie hooly writ, 
ae bi elde doctouris and newe, and preche treuly and freely a3ens opin synnes, to his deth. 
i oscad lof See therfore what Jerom seith on Amos, God bifore seith"™ yuels to° comynge, that men 
atin "4" heere, andP amende hemself, and be delyuered fro the perel, neizinge, either’ if that thei 
dispisen, thei ben punschid iustiliere; and God, that bifore seith peynes, wole not punsche 
men that synnen, but that thei be amendid. Jerom seith this in the ‘ende of the% j. book 
of Amos. God, for his gret mercy, graunte, that clerkis here the greet veniaunce manasid 
of God, and amende hemself treuly, that God punsche not hem; for if thei amenden not 
hemself, thei ben eretikis maad hard in her synnes; but see what Jerom seith a3ens ere- 
tikis, and in comendinge of hooly scripture; he seith thus on Amos, “ Eretikis that seruen 
* the wombe and glotonye, ben clepid ri3tfully fattest kyin, either" kyin ful of schenschipe.” 
* We owen to® take hooly scripture on‘ thre maneris; first, we owen vndirstonde" it bi the 
** Jettre, and do alle thingis that ben comaundid to vs therinne; the ij. tyme bi allegorie, 
“ that is, goostly vndirstonding ; and in the iij. tyme, bi blisse’ ‘of thingis¥ to* comynge.” 
Jerom seith this in the ij. book on Amos, and in iiij.’ é of Amos. Natheles for Lyre cam 
late to me, see what he seith of? the vndirstonding of holy scripture; he writith thus on® 
the ij. prologe on the bible, “ Joon seith in v.> & ‘of Apoc.¢ ‘I sy3 a book written withinne 
* and withouteforth in the hond of the sittere on the trone;’ this book is holy scripture, 
“which is seid writen without forth, ast to the literal vndirstonding, and withinue, as to 
Live declarith “ the® preuy and goostly vndirstonding ;” and in the j. prologe he declarith iiij. vndirstond- 
eerie inigis of hooly writ in this manere, “ Holy writ hath this specialte, that vndir oo lettre it 
eae “ conteyneth many vndirstondingis, for the principal autour of hooly writ is God himself, 
“‘ in whos power it is, not oonly to vse wordis to singnifie a thing as men don, but also he 
“ ysith thingis singnefied bi wordis to singnefie other thingis ; therfore bi the singnyfying 
* bi wordis is taken the literal vndirstonding, either? historial, of holy scripture, and bi the 
“ singnefying which is maad bi thingis is taken the preuy, either® goostly vndirstonding, 
“ which is thre maneres®, allegorik, moral, either’ tropologik, and anogogik. If thingis 
“ singnefied bi wordis ben referrid to singnefie tho thingis that owen to be bileeued in the 
*“ newe testament, so it is taken the sense of* allegorik ; if thingis ben referrid to singnefie 
“ tho thingis whiche we owen to do, so it is moral sense, either! tropologik ; if thingis ben 
“ referrid to singnefie tho thingis that scholen be hopid in blisse to comynge, so it is ana- 
“ gogik sense. The lettre techith what is doon ; allegorie™ techith what thou owist for® to 
“ bileeue; moral techith what thou owist for™ to do; anagogic techith whedir thou owist 
“to go; and of these iiij. sensis, either® vndirstondingis, may be set ensaumple? in this 
“ word Jerusalem ; for! bi the literal vndirstonding Jerusalem singnefieth a cyte, that was 
“ sumtyme the cheef citee in the rewme of Jude, and Jerusalem was foundid first of Mel- 


& Om. e. and moost ¢ sec.m. have 8 tore. the iiij. «on the fourthe ¢ Zone. ina prim. e. 
K ser at Bn. 10m. £. Mnog org. mbi- bthev. ef. onthe Apocalips¢ 9Om.¢. © Om. ¢. 
fore seeth ae. inf. POm.¢ org Om. f scripture ¢ fore. h manere B¢. ior ¢é 
v or eft. sOm.8. toff. to vndirstonde By. * Om. fy sec.m. Jorg M™allegorik @. ® Om. «. 
Vv anagogik, of blis ¢ vwOm 6 *Om.8 Yin Cort Pinensample8. 9Om.¢ 


PROLOGUE. 53 


“ chisedech, and aftirward it was alargid, and maad strong bi Salomon; bi moral sense it 
“ singnefieth a feithful soule, bi which sense it is™ seid in lij."" c. of Isaie, ‘ rise thou, rise thou, 
“ sette thou Jerusalem ;’ bi sense allegorik it singnefieth the chirche fi3tinge ajens synnes 
“and feendis, bi which sense it is seid in xxj.5 ¢. of Apoc., ‘I siz the hooly citee newe 
“ Jerusalem comynge doun fro heuene, as a spouse ourned to hire housbonde ;’ bi sence 
““anagogik ‘it singnefietht the chirche rengninge in blisse, bi this sence it is seid in iiij." 
“-é to’ Galat. ‘ thilke Jerusalem which is aboue, which is oure modir, is free ; and as en- 
“ saumple’ is set in 00 word, so it might be set in oo resoun, and as in oon, so and* in 
“ othereY.” Lire seith al this in the firste prologe on the bible. 


CAP. XIV. 
Natheles alle goostly vndirstondinges setten bifore, eithir? requyren, the literal vndir- Hou the titerat 


stonding, as the foundement ; wherfore* as a bylding bowing awey fro the foundement is i, ¢runte ia 
disposid to falling, so a goostly expociscoun, that discordith fro the literal sense, owith to’? 
be arettid vnseemely and vncouenable, either? lesse seemely, and lesse couenable ; and ther- 

fore it is nedful to hem, that wolen profite in the stodie of holy scripture, to bigynne at the 
vndirstonding of literal sence, moost sithen® bi the literal sense aloone, and not bi goostly. 

sencis? may be maad an argument, either® preef, to the’ preuyng, either® declaring, of a 

doute, as Austin seith in his Pistle to Vincent Donatiste. Seint Isidre, in the firste book Isidre tetrien 
of Souereyn Good xx." é. settith vij. reulis to expounne hooly scripture, and summe clepen pmunonde 
these reulis the keies of scripture’, for bi these rulis the vndirstonding of scripture is openid Ee 
in many thingis). The firste reule is of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, and of his goostly body, 

which is holy chirche, for whi for* the! knytting togidere of the heed to the body hooly 
scripture spekith sumtyme of euer either vndir oo resoun, as vndir 00 persone, and passith 

fro oon to anothir, in ensaumple in 1xj.™ ¢°. of Isaie it is seid, “ He clothide me with clothis 

“ of helthe, and he compasside me with clothing” of ri3tfulnesse, as a spouse maad fair with 

“ a coroune, and as a spousesse ourned with hire brochis ;” for whi this that is seid “as a° 

“ spouse,” etc.? is vndirstonden of Crist, and this that sueth ‘as a4 spousesse” etc.’ is vndir- 

stonden of holy chirche. Also in the j. ¢ of Songis it is seid, “ Kisse he me with the 

“ eosse of his mouth, for thi tetis ben betere than wyn;” for whanne it is seid, “ kisse 

‘he me” etc., it is the word of the spousesse desiringe to haue the spouse; and this that 

sueth, “ for thi tetis,” etc. is the word of the spouse, preising the spousesse; wherfore in 

such thingis, knyt so togidere bi resoun biforeseid, a prudent redere owith to perseyue what 
accordith to the heed, and what to the body. The ij. reule is of the very body and of the 

feyned body of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, for whi hooly chirche, which‘ is the goostly body of 

Crist, is a nett which is not drawen 3it to the brinke; therfort it hath yuele men meddlid 

with goode men til" to the doom, in whiche these schulen be departid fro hem, and ther- 

fore in holy scripture yuele men ben preisid sumtyme with goode men, with whiche’ thei 

ben medlid; as in the” xj. é& of Osee God seith thus, “Israel is a chijld, and I louede 

“ him ;” and ajenward sumtyme goode men ben blamed with yuel men, as inij.e?.vot Isaie, 

* An oxe knew his lord and an asse knew the cracche of his lord, but Israel knew not me 

“ and my puple vndirstood noty ;” and sumtyme in the same resoun it is expressid what 
perteyneth to goode men and what to yuele men, as in j.” c°. of Songis it is seid, “ I am 

“ blac but fair, 3e dou3tris of Jerusalem, as the tabernaclis of Cedar, as the skynnes of 

“ Salamon ;” these ben the wordis of the spousesse, which for resoun of yuel men conteyned 

in the chirche, seith, “ I am blac,” but for resoun of goode men it addith, “ but fair ;” and 


FOm.a. the lij.c. 8 the xxj.e. ¢tissygni- }Om.e. ™ the lxj. ¢ n clothinges «. © of e. 
fied 8. ™ the fourth ¢ *Om.y. Wanensaumple¢< POm.e. @ Om. Be. * Om. Bet. § the weche 8. 
xOm.f8. Yanother¢. Zorg. ®forwhies Port tand therfore BG. 'Om.¢ Vthe whiche «. ¥ Om.f. 
cOm.¢. ‘sensefe. ford f Ome. 8 org. xXthej.eti. Ynotmef. 7 the j. ete. 
hthe xx. ¢ iscripturiss. ijmaneres¢. Om. ?. 


The same of 
Asidre. 


54 PROLOGUE. 


this that sueth, as for ensaumple, “ as the tabernaclis* of Cedar,” is referrid to yuele men ; 
for whi Cedar was the sone of Ysmael, as it is seid in xxv.> c°. of Genesis, of whom Sara- 
cenus® camen forth, and this that is addid, “as the skynnes of Salamon,” is referrid to 
goode men. Therfore bi Salamon here is vndirstonden God himself, bi cristen expocitouris 
and Ebreies; and therfore the skynnes of Salamon ben seid tho with which the tabernacle 
was heelid, in which tabernacle goode men worschipiden God. The iij. reule is of the 
spirit and of the lettre; this reule is expounned thus comunly, that the historial, either® 
literal sense, and the mystik, either® goostly sense, is taken vndir the same lettre, for whi 
the treuthe of the storie schal be holden, and natheles it schal be referrid to the goostly 
vndirstonding. This reule may be expounned! also in another? manere, that it be referrid 
oonly®s to the literal sense, as othere reulis ben; aboute which thing it is to see, that the 
same lettere hath sum tyme double literal sense, in ensaumple® in j.' book of Paralypomy- 
non, xvij." ¢°., God seith to! Salamon, “I schal be ‘to him in to™ a fadir, and he schal be to 
“me into a sone ;” and this to" the lettere is vndirstonden of Salomon, in as myche as he 
was the sone of God, bi grace in 3ungthe, wherfore° Nathan the prophete clepide hym, 
“ amyable to the Lord” in ij.? book of Kingis, xij. €. Also the forseid autorite, “I schal 
“ be to hym in to a fadir,” etc. is brou3t in of Poul in j.4 c°. to Ebreis, as" seid to the lettre 
of Crist himself, and this is opyn bi this, that Poul bringith its’ in to preue, that Crist is 
more than aungels; but such preuynge may not be maad bi goostly sense, as Austin seith 
a3ens Vincent Donatiste; forsothe the forseid autorite was fillid to the lettre in Salomon, 
natheles lesse parfitly, for he was the sone of God oonly bi grace, but it was fillid parfitlier 
in Crist, that was the sone of God bi kinde; but natheles euer either expocisscioun is literal 
outtirly. Natheles the ij. expociscoun, which is of Crist, is goostly and preuy** in sum 
maner, in as myche as Salamon was the figure of Crist. The iiij. reule is of al and of 
part, for whi scripture passitl fro oon to the tothere', and aj3enward, as in xiij." c°. of Isaie, 
the scripture spekith first a3ens Babilone specialy, whanne it is seid, ‘‘ the birthen of Babi- 
“ lone,” and thanne the scripture passith to vndirstonde the word generaly of al the world’, 
bi this that sueth, “ the Lord cometli fro the hy3nesse of heuene, and the vessels of his 
“ stronge veniawice comen, that he distroie all erthe ;” aftirward the scripture turneth ajen 
to speke a3ens Babilone specialy, whanne it is seid, “ Lo! I schal rise on 30u Medeys, that 
“ schul not seeke syluer;” for whi Darius Medey, with Cirus, his cosyn, took Babilone, and 
killide Baltasar, the king of Babilone, as it is seid in the” v. c°. of Daniel. The v. reule is 
of tymes, which reule bifallith* in iiij. maners ; in oo manere bi a figure clepid synodoches, 
whanne a part of tyme is set for al the tyme, as it is seid in the gospel, that Crist lay thre 
daies in the sepulcre, and uatheles the firste day and the thridde weren not hool daies. In 
another maner this reule bifallith for smale partys of tyme, that ben noumbrid sumtyme in 
scripture, and sumtyme ben left out, and bi this the scripture that spekith of sum noumbre 
of 3eris, in manye placis, settith sumtyme moo 3eris, rekenynge the foreseid smale partys, 
in another place it settith fewere 3eeris, in leuyug out the smale partys. In iij.Y maner’ this 
reule bifallith*, for that the rekenyng of 3eeris bigynneth in 00 place at the formere terme, 
and? in another place at the latter teerme, as in xv.° c°. of Genesis, it was said to Abraham, 
pilgrimage, that the dwelling of the sones of Israel in the lond of Egipt was of iiij. c. 3eer 
and xxx., for the rekenyug of this more noumbre bigynneth at the tyme, in which it was 
seid to Abrahain in xij.5 c°. of Genesis, “ go out of thi lond,” etc., and the rekenyng of the 
lesse nownbre bigynneth at the natyuite of Isaac, that was xxx. 3eer aftir the goinge out. 


8 tabernacle B. >the xxv. e(. ¢the Seracenes(< dthej.e¢. Tand¢ SOm.n. §8 prene aff. t an- 
4 tahernaclis ¢ ¢or ¢ fvndirstonden or expowned ¢. other e, ™ the xiij. efm. VY word ae, ¥ Om. 7. * bi- 
& other Bf. = &8 also ew h the ensample £. ithe saweth a8. Y the thridde et. 2 maneres 8.  fallith ¢ 
firste eG.  & the xvij.¢. lof@é ™ intohym~. >» Om. 8. ¢thexv. etm. 4 the xij. ef. © the ¢ 
n into 8. © therfore Be. herfore 7. P the ip. ef. f Om. BK & the xij. ef. 


PROLOGUE. 55 


of Abraham fro Aran. The iiij. tyme this reule bifallith, for that hooly scripture spekith 7% vif. rewlis 


of thing" to comynge bi the maner of thing passid, as in the ix. c°. of Isaie, “a litil child vane 
“ was born to vs,” ete.; and this is to singnefie the certeynte of profecie, whos bifalling of 7?" 
tyme to comynge is so certeyn, as if it were passid now; and this is for certeynte of Goddis 

bifore knowing, bi whiche the reuelacoun is maad to the prophete. Natheles suck maner of 

speche hath noo place, no but in profecie of predestynacoun, either! ful determynyng of 

God; which prophecie is, whanne a thing to comynge in noun certeyn to mannis knowing, 

is schewid to the prophete in that maner, bi which it is in the bifore knowing of God, 

which bifore knowing of* God bihooldith so without fayling thingis to comynge, as thingis 

present and passid. But in profecie! of manaasinge, such maner of™ speech hath noo place, 

which profecie of manaas is, whanne eny™™ peyne worthi to be brou3t in on a" puple, either® 

on a persoone, is schewid to the prophete, not bi that that it? is in the bifore knowing of 

God, but bi the ordre of secunde causis, as bi the yuel disseruyngis of men; as is thilke4 
prophecie of Jonas iij.” c°., “ 3it xl. daies, and Nynyue schal be distroied ;” for whi the 

synnes of that citee hadden disseruyd this distroying; natheles for such a cause is chaung- 

able, therfore sumtyme the effect, that is, peyne manaasid, sueth not, as heere, for ‘Nyny- 

uytis diden* penaunce, and so the Lord brou3te not in the peyne manassid. The vj. reule 

is of recapitulacoun, that is, rehersingt of thing" don bifore, and of anticipacoun, either’ 

bifore takinge, that is, setting in of thing bifore that it” is don; for in hooly scripture not 

euere stories and deedis ben writen in the same ordre in whiche thoo ben don, and therfore 
whanne lattere’ thingis ben sett bifore, it is seid anticipacioun, either* byfore taking, and 
whanne the formere thingis ben set byhynde, it* is seid recapitulacoun, either” rehersing of 

thing* doon bifore, as in x.’ c°. of Genesis it is seid of the sones of Noe, “the ilis of hethene 

“folkis in her cuntrees weren departid of these sones of Noe, ech man bi his langage™>;” and 
withinne in® the’ same x. ¢°. it is seid, “ these ben the sones of Cham, in kynredis and 

“ Jangagis,” and aftirward it is seid in xj.° c°., “the lond was of oo langage and of the same 

“ wordis ;” wherof it is opin, that this that is bifore seid of the departyng of langagis, is 

seid bi anticipacoun ; in lyk maner in ij.f c°. of Genesis, aftir that Moises in j.8 c°. hadde 
discriued the creacoun, either" making of nou3t of heuene and of erthe, and the departing 

and ournyng! of the world, he seide, “ these ben the generacouns of heuene and of erthe, in 

the day in whiche* tho weren mad ;” wherof it is opin that this** is seid bi recapitulacoun, 

either! rehersing of thing™ don bifore. The vij. reule is of the deuil and of lis body, for as 

Gregori seith in the x. Omelie, “Certys the deuil is heed of alle wickid men, and alle Hou the deuit 
“ wickide men ben membris of this heed,” and therfore for the knytting togidere of thea. 
heed to the membris, the scripture that spekith of oon, passith in the same knytting to- 

gidere of resoun to speke of the tother, as in xilij." ¢°. of Isaie, where the scripture spekith 

of the king of Babilone, that was a membre of the deuil, it passith to speke of the prince of 

fendis, whanne it is° seid there, “ Lucifer, that rysidist eerly, hou feldist thou doun fro 

“‘ heuene;” and in the? xxviij. ¢. of Ezechiel, where the scripture spekith of the prince of 

Tire, it passith to speke of the deuil, whanne it is addid, “thou, a4 singnet, either™ a prente, 

“of the licnesse of God, were ful of wisdom, and parfit in fairnesse, in the’ delices of 

“ paradys of God.” Lyre seith al! this in the ij. prologe of" Genesis. Heere™ Lire re- Lire reersith 
hersith the sentence of seint Austyn, and of Isidre in these reulis, and declarith hem opinly Gyn end ” 
bi holy scripture’ and resoun, and countrith not Austin, but declareth him ful mychel™ to Side m these 


reulis, and 
symple mennis witt* ; and addith more bi scripture and resoun, that Austin touchith not. edith more. 


hthingisg. ‘! org. Kase. | the profecieg. xj.e. f the secunde @. & the firste@ b org 
mOm¢ ™™ Om. .onye. Cores. POm. 86 ihonournynge ¢.  * the whiche ¢. kkits lor’ 
4 that «. ‘the iij. tm. * Nynynedideg. tof re- ™thingis¢. © the xiiij.e¢. °Om.a.  P Om. Sey. 
hersing Be. thingis Be. Yor¢, WOm.¢. YWthe das ¢ roré 2 Om. ¢ t Om. 8. won ¢ 
latteres. Xorg Ythat¢, 2org¢. 4 thingis¢ where: Vwrit ¢. Wmych «{. %* wittis ¢. 
b the x. ei. bb lynager. © Om. Be. this ¢ © the 


56 PROLOGUE. 


Thou3 these reulis either’ keies of scripture bringen men to greet vndirstonding therof, 3it 
men moten taken heede, what is seid of Crist bi his godheed, and what bi his manheed, for 
Crist bi his manheed, is seid lesse than the’ fadir, and bi the godheed he is seid euene with 
the fadir; and for as myche as Crist is bothe God and man, we graunten that God is* 
We Ged disede deedly, and diz3ede on the erosse, not bi his godheed, but bi the manheed of Crist, that was 
* ioyned in oonhed of persone with the godheed, and we graunte, as the gospel doith, that 
man”, while he was deedly on® erthe, was in heuene, for his godheed was there, and he also 
bi resoun therof. Also we moun graunte wel, that a man made henene and erthe, for Crist 
Lirein decar- bi his godheed, which Crist is and was man, dide’ thus. Also® hooly scripture tellith ofte 
ee the thou3tis of men, and ofte the wordis and deedis ; and whanue the thou3tis, and wordis, 
vee fly and deedis of men ben contrarie, oo gospeller tellith the thou3tis, and® another tellith the 
wrdis; and bi this equiuocacoun, either® diuerse speking, thei ben acordid, 3he, whanne 
thei seemen contrarie in wordis; also ofte in storial mateer scripture rehersith the comune 
opynyoun of men, and affirmeth not, that it was so in dede. In this maner the gospel seith, 
that Joseph was the fadir of Crist, thou3 he neuere gendride Crist; for Marie, Cristis 
modir, was euere clene virgyne. Thus the gospel seith, that at the biheeding of Joon 
Baptist, Eroude was soory, and 3it, as doctouris seyn, he was ful glad therof; but he 
feynede him sory for the puple, and the puple gessid him sory. Also thou3 scripture! re- 
hersith, hou hooly men lyueden, and comendith hem greetly, it appreueth not alle hire 
deedis, for many greete seyntis erriden foule in manye poyntis; and thou3 scripture tellith 
the stories of yuel men and dampned, it repreuith not herfore alle thingis whiche thei 
diden, for thou3 thei weren hemsilf ful cursid, thei diden many goode deedis of kynde, 
and sumtyme perauenture goode* dedis of vertu, if thei weren in grace for a tyme. At the 
laste take 3e! good heede, whanne scripture spekith bi comaundement to all men, and 
whanne it 3eueth comaundement to certeyn persones of diuerse statis. In the first poynt, 
alle men moten™ do, as it seith; in the" ij. tyme, the persoones of staatis specified moten® 
nedis obeye ; whanne? scripture speketh oonly bi counceil, men moun be sauid, thou3 thei 
do not the counceil, as ful many men and wymmen moun be sauid, thou3 thei take not 
virginite, neither’ contynence, neither’ 3euen alle her goodis to pore men, and jit these ben 
heere™ counceils of Jhesu Crist in the gospel. 


CAP. XV. 


For as myche as Crist seith that the gospel shal be prechid in al the world, and Dauith 

seith of the postlis and her preching, “the soun of hem 3ede out into ech lond, and the 

“‘ wordis of hem 3eden out into the endis of the world,” and eft Dauith seith, “ the Lord 

“ schal telle in the scripturis of puplis, and of these princis that weren in it,” that is, in holi 

ae mrss chirche, and as Jerom seith on that vers, “ hooly writ is the scripture of puplis, for it is 
and hepe the “* maad, that alle puples schulden* knowe it,” and the princis of the chirche, that weren 
eon. therinne, ben the postlis, that hadden autorite to writen hooly writ, for bi that same that the 
eat oe postlis writiden her scripturis bi autorite, and confermynge of the Hooly Goost, it is hooly 
Jerom seth. scripture, and feith of cristen men, and this dignite hath noo man aftir hem, be he neuere 
so hooly, neuer so kunnynge, as Jerom witnessith on that vers. Also Crist seith" of the 

Jewis that crieden Osanna to him in the temple, that thou3 thei weren stille stoonis 

schulen’ crie, and bi stoonis he vndirstondith hethen men, that worshipiden stoonis for 

her goddis. And we Englische men ben comen of hethen men, therfore we ben vndir- 

stonden bi thes stonis, that schulden” crie hooly writ, and as Jewis, interpretid* knowlech- 


inge, singnefienY clerkis, that schulden* knouleche to God, bi repentaunce of synnes, and bi vois 


Yande.w org Zhis8. was e. » mannessone ¢ P and whanne ¢. Gne ¢ T 3it heere a. hize B¢. 
fupone. anden. prm.e. e and ¢. f goespelle 8. * shullon 8. tnenener¢. 4 seid ¢. VY shul B. 
£ Om.e.  § org ~ i hooli seripture¢. * manie shuldene. Wshullone 8. * that is interpretid ¢ Y sig- 
goode. 10m. 8% ™musten¢ "Om.7. °musteng. nyfiyng & 7 shulon f. 


PROLOGUE. 57 


of Goddis heriyng*, so oure lewide men, suynge the corner ston Crist, mowen be singnefied bi 
stonis, that ben harde and abydinge in the foundement; for thou3 couetouse clerkis ben 
woode by simonie, eresie, and manye othere synnes, and** dispisen and stoppen holi writ, as 
myche as thei moun, 3it the lewid puple crieth aftir holi writ, to kunne it, and kepe it, 
with greet cost and peril of here lif. For these resons and othere’, with comune charite to 
saue alle men in oure rewme, whiche God wole haue sanid, a symple creature hath trans- 
latid the bible out of Latyn into English. First, this symple creature hadde myche trauaile, 
with diverse felawis and helperis®, to gedere manie elde biblis, and othere doctouris, and 
comune glosis, and to make oot Latyn bible sumdel trewe ; and thanne to studie it of the 
newe, the text with the glose, and othere doctouris, as he mi3te gete, and speciali Lire on 
the elde testament, that helpide ful myche in this werk; the thridde tyme to counseile 
with elde gramariens, and elde dyuynis, of harde wordis, and harde sentencis, hou tho* 
mi3ten best be vndurstonden and translatid ; the iiij. tyme to translate as cleerli*¢ as he 
coude to the sentence, and to haue manie gode felawis and kunnynge at the correcting of 
the translacioun. First it is tof knowe, that the best translating’ is out of Latyn into 
English, to translate aftir the sentence, and not oneli aftir the wordis, so that the sentence 
be as opin, either" openere, in English as in Latyn, and go not fer fro the lettre; and if 
the lettre mai not be suid in the translating, Jet the sentence euere be hool and open, for 
the wordis owen to serue to the entent and sentence, and ellis the wordis ben superflu 
either false. In translating into English, manie resolucions moun make the sentence open, 
as anX ablatif case absolute may be resoluid into these thre wordis, with couenable' verbe, 
the while, for, if; as gramariens seyn; as thus, the maistir redinge, I stonde, mai be re- 
soluid thus, while the maistir redith, I stonde, either™ if the maistir redith*, etc. either® 
Jor the maistir, etc.; and sumtyme it wolde acorde wel with the? sentence to be resoluid into 
whanne, either’ into aftirward, thus, whanne the maistir red, I stood, ‘either’ aftir the 
maistir red, I stood* ; and sumtyme it mai wel be resoluid into a verbe of the same tens, 
as othere ben in the same resoun, and into this word e¢, that is, avd in English, as thus, 
arescentibus hominibus pre timore, that is, and men shulen wexe drie for drede. Also a 
participle of a* present tens, either' preterit, of actif vois, eithirt passif, mai be resoluid into 
a verbe of the same tens, and a coniunccioun copulatif**, as thus, dicens, that is, serynge, 
mai be resoluid thus, avd seith, eithirt that seith ; and this wole, in manie placis, make the 
sentence open, where to" Englisshe it’ aftir the word, wolde’ be derk and douteful. Also 
a relatif, which mai be resoluid into his antecedent with a coniunccioun copulatif, as thus, 
which renneth, and he renneth. Also whanne oo word is oonis set in a reesoun, it mai be 
set forth as ofte as it is vndurstonden, either* as ofte as reesoun and nede axen ; and this 
word autem, either* vero, mai stonde for forsothe, either* for but, and thus I vse comounli ; 
aud sumtyme it mai stonde for and, as elde gramariens seyn. Also whanne ri3tful con- 
struccioun is lettid bi relacion, I resolue it’ openli, thus, where this reesoun, Dominum for- 
midabunt adversary ejus, shulde be Englisshid thus bi the* lettre, the Lord hise aduer- 
saries shulen* drede, 1 Englishe® it thus bi resolucioun, the aduersaries of the Lord 
shulen drede him; and so of othere resons that ben like. At the bigynnyng I purposide, 
with Goddis helpe, to make the sentence as trewe and open in English as it is in Latyn, 
either? more trewe and more open than it is in Latyn; and I preie, for charite and for 
comoun profyt of cristene soulis, that if ony wiys man fynde ony defaute of the truthe of° 
translacioun, let him sette in the trewe sentence and opin of holi writ, but loke that he 


®heeringe a. 94 MS. a is defective from this place org. ‘TOm. 8. 8 Om. 8%. %Om.+ tor’. 
to the end of the Prologue. > other mo. Chelpesfé Ufortog vOm. 8. Wit wolde Bf *Xor(. yOm.e. 
dag ethey Of ceclerklic. f Om. gm. & transla 2Om.8. @schuldeng¢, » Englischid ¢ ¢ as open ¢. 
cioun(~, borg. fiand¢. kOm. Bt Itheeove- org ein®. 
nable Bf. ™org "Om. Bf. org.  P this py. 


I 


58 PROLOGUE. 


examyne truli his Latyn bible, for no doute he shal fynde ful’ manye ‘biblis in Latyns ful 
false, if he loke manie, nameli! newe ; and the comune Latyn biblis han more nede to be 
correctid, as manie as I haue seen in my lif, than hath the English bible late translatid ; 
and where the Ebru, bi witnesse of Jerom, of* Lire, and othere expositouris discordith fro 
oure! Latyn biblis, I haue set in the margyn, bi maner™ of a glose, what the" Ebru hath, 
and hou it is vndurstondun in sum place; and I dide this most in the Sauter, that of alle 
oure® bokis discordith most fro Ebru’; for the chirche redith not the Sauter bi the laste 
translacioun of Jerom out of Ebru into Latyn, but another translacioun of othere men, 
that hadden myche lasse kunnyng and holynesse4 than Jerom hadde; and in ful fewe bokis 
the chirche redith the translacioun of Jerom, as it mai be preuid bi the propre origynals of 
Jerom, whiche he gloside. And where J hane translatid as opinli or opinliere in English 
as in’ Latyn, late wise men deme, that knowen wel bothe langagis', and knowen wel the 
sentence of holi scripture. And wher" I haue do thus, or’ nay, ne’’ doute, thei that kunne 
wel the sentence of holi writ and English togidere, and wolen” trauaile, with Goddis grace, 
theraboute, moun make the bible as trewe and as opin, 3ea¥¥, and opinliere* in English 
than it is in Latyn. And no doute toY a symple man, with Goddis grace and greet trauail, 
men? mi3ten* expoune myche openliere and shortliere the bible in English, than the elde 
greete’ doctouris han expounid it* m Latyn, and myche sharpliere and groundliere than 
manie late postillatouris, eithir4 expositouris, han don. But God, of his grete merci, 
jeue to vs grace to lyue wel, and to seie the truthe in couenable manere, and acceptable to 
God and his puple, and to spille not oure tyme, be it short be it long at Goddis ordyn- 
aunce. But summe, that semen wise and holi, seyn thus, if men now weren as holi as 
Jerom was, thei mi3ten translate out of Latyn into English, as he dide out of Ebru and 
out of Greek into Latyn, and ellis thei shulden not translate® now, as hem thinkith, for 
defaute of holynesse and of kunnyng. Thou; this replicacioun seme colourable, it! hath no 
good ground, neither® resoun, neithir® charite, for whi this replicacioun is more ajens seynt 
Jerom, and a3ens the firste 1xx. translatouris, and ajens holi® chirche, than aj3ens symple 
men, that translaten now into English ; for seynt Jerom was not so holi as the apostlis and 
euangelistis, whos bokis he translatide into Latyn, neither he hadde so hije 3iftis of the 
Holi Gost as thei hadden; and myche more the 1xx. translatouris weren not so holi as 
Moises and the! profetis, and speciali Dauith, neither thei hadden so greete 3iftis of God, as 
Moises and the prophetis hadden. Ferthermore holi chirche appreueth, not oneli the trewe 
translacioun of meene cristene men, stidefast in cristene feith, but also of open eretikis, that 
diden awei manie mysteries of Jhesu Crist bi gilefil translacioun, as Jerom witnessith 
in ook prolog on Job, and in the prolog! of! Daniel. Myche more late the chirche of 
Engelond appreue the trewe and hool translacioun of symple men, that wolden for no good 
in erthe, bi here witing and power, putte awei the leste truthe, 3ea, the leste lettre, either™ 
title, of holi writ, that berith substaunce, either™ charge. And dispute thei not of the holy- 
nesse of men now lyuynge in this deadli lif, for thei kunnen not theron, and it is reseruid 
oneli to" Goddis doom, If thei knowen ony notable defaute bi the translatouris, either° 
helpis of hem, lete hem blame the defaute bi charite and merci, and lete hem neuere 
dampne a thing that mai be don lefulli bi Goddis lawe, as weeryng of a? good cloth for a 
tyme, either’ riding on™ an hors for a greet iourney, whanne thei witen not wherfore it is 
don; for suche thingis moun be don of symple men‘, with as greet charite and vertu, as 


£ Om. 8G. & Latyn bybles8. 4Om.¢6 ‘and nere Bt y¥ Om. BG. sec.m. 2 Om. Bey. 9 mizte BGy. 
nameli ¢, * and @¢. ‘lothereS. ™ the maner By. »% Om.8. ¢Om.¢ ‘org. ©¢haue translatid ¢ 
nOm.¢. otherf. Pthe Ebren ¢ 4lesse holynes(, f 3ititg eneg » alholy By. iOm.¢ Kthe 
‘ether By. * itisin Bf. tthe langagis¢ Uwhe-  firste ¢. lfirste prologe¢. UYons Mort in to. 
ther 8. vether 87. Wnog. ¥welt wWOm.e. Xopi- Sorg POm¢ Gorge rOm.s. § folk p. 


PROLOGUE. 59 


summe, that holden hem‘ greete and wise, kunnen ride in" a gilt** sadil, eithert vse cuyssyns 
and beddis and clothis of gold and of silk, with othere vanitees of the world. God graunte 
pite, merci", and charite, and loue of comoun profyt, and putte awei such foli domis, that 
ben ajens resoun and charite. 3it worldli clerkis axen gretli what spiryt makith idiotis 
hardi to translate now the bible into English, sithen the foure greete doctouris dursten 
neuere do this? This replicacioun is so lewid, that it nedith noon answer, no” but ‘still- 
nesse, eithir curteys” scorn; for these greete doctouris weren noon English men, neither* 
theiY weren conuersaunt among English men, neithir’ in caas thei kouden the* langage of 
English, but thei ceessiden neuere til thei hadden holi writ in here> modir tunge, of here 
owne puple. For Jerom, that was a Latyn man of birthe, translatide the bible, bothe out 
of Ebru and out of Greek, into Latyn, and expounide ful myche therto; and Austyn, and 
manie mo Latyns expouniden the bible, for manie partis, in¢ Latyn, to Latyn men, among 
whiche thei dwelliden‘, and Latyn was a comoun langage to here puple aboute Rome, and 
bizondis, and on this half, as Englishe is comoun® langage to oure puple, and 3it this day 
the comoun puple in Italie spekith Latyn corrupt’, as trewe men seyn, that han ben in 
Italie; and the noumbre of translatouris out of Greek into Latyn passith mannis knowing, 
as Austyn witnessith in the ij. book of Cristene Teching, and seith thus, “ the translatouris 
“out of Ebru into Greek moun be noumbrid, but Latyn translatouris, either’ thei that 
** translatiden into Latyn, moun not be noumbrid in ony manere.” For in the firste tymes® 
of feith, ech man, as a Greek book came to him, and he semyde to him silf to hane sum 
kunnyng of Greek and of Latyn, was hardi to translate; and this thing helpide more than 
lettide vndurstonding, if rederis ben not necligent, forwhi the biholding of manie bokis 
hath shewid ofte, eithir' declarid, summe ‘derkere sentencis*. This seith Austyn there. 
Therfore Grosted seith, that it was Goddis wille, that diuerse men translatiden, and that 
diuerse translacions! be in the chirche, for where oon seide derkli, oon either™ mo seiden 
openli. Lord God! sithen at the bigynnyng of feith so manie men translatiden into Latyn, 
and to greet profyt of Latyn men, lat oo symple creature of God translate into English, for 
profyt® of English men; for if worldli clerkis loken wel here croniclis and bokis, thei shulden 
fynde, that.Bede translatide the bible, and expounide myche in® Saxon, that was English, 
either? comoun langage of this lond, in his tyme; and not oneli Bede, but also king 
Alured, that foundide Oxenford, translatide in hise laste daies the bigynning of the Sauter 
into Saxon, and wolde more, if he hadde lyued lengere. Also Frenshe men, Beemers, and 
Britons han the bible, and othere bokis of denocioun! and of exposicioun’, translatid in 
here modir langage ; whi shulden not English men haue the same in here modir langage, 
I can not wite, no* but for falsnesse and necgligence of clerkis, eithert for oure puple is not 
worthi to haue so greet grace and 3ifte of God, in peyne of here olde synnes. God for his 
merci amende these euele causis, and make oure puple to haue, and kunne, and kepe truli - 
holi writ, to lijf and deth! But in translating" of wordis equiuok, that is, that hath’ 
manie significacious vndur oo lettre, mai li3tli be pereil, for Austyn seith in the’ ij. book of 
Cristene Teching, that if equiuok wordis be not translatid into* the sense, eitherY vndur- 
stonding, of the autour, it is errour; as in that place of the’ Salme, the feet of hem beu 
swifte to shede out blood, the Greek word is equiuok to sharp and swift, and he that trans- 
latide® sharpe feet, ‘erride, and a book that hath sharpe feet, is fals, and mut be® 
amendid ; as that sentence vakynde 30uge trees shulen uot 3eue depe rootis, owith to be 
thus, plauntingis of auoutrie shulex not 3eue depe rootis. Austyn seith this there. Ther- 


aq hemsilf¢. 'Ton @. 8% golden tj. torg Yand ™org. the profit ty. © into By Por. 4 deuo- 
merci ¢, ¥Om.¢ Wastille ora curteis¢é, *neg. ciouns¢. * exposiciouns¢. %Om. f% torg. 4 the 
y¥ Om. 8%. Zneg. anot the < >the Bt. ¢intoae. translatyng 8. Yhan Bf W Om. 4. * to BE Yor é. 
dweren{. a conn ¢. €€corripte. forg. &tyme 8. 7 that 8. 4 for swift translatid ¢ > Om. f&. © nedis 
hOm.¢. ftorg derk sentence 8. ! translatours ¢. be ¢. 


12 


60 PROLOGUE. 


fore a translatour hath greet nede to studie wel the sentence, both bifore and aftir, and 
loke that suche equiuok wordis acorde with* the sentence, and he hath nede® to lyue a 
clene lif, and be ful deuout in preiers, and haue not his wit ocupied about worldli thingis, 
that the Holi Spiryt, autour of wisdom, and kunnyng, and truthe, dresse him in his werk, 
and suffre him not for to erre. Also this word ea signifieth sumtyme of, and sumtyme 
it signifieth dz, as Jerom seith; and this word enim signifieth comynli forsothe, and®, as 
Jerom seith, it signifieth cause thus, forwhi; and this word secundum is taken for aftir, 
as manie men‘ seyn, and® comynli, but it signifieth wel oz, eithir® vp, thus b7 30ure word, 
either® wp 30ure word. Manie such aduerbis, coniuncciouns, and preposiciouns ben set 
ofte oon for another, and at fre chois of autouris sumtyme; and now tho shulen be taken 
as it acordith best to the sentence. Bi this maner, with good lyuyng and greet trauel, 
men moun come to trewe! and cleer translating, and trewe vndurstonding of holi writ, 
seme it neuere so hard at the bigynnyng. God graunte to us alle grace* to kunne wel, 
and kepe wel holi writ, and suffre! ioiefulli sum peyne for it at the laste™! Amen. 


d wel with Bg. € gret nede B¢. ee Om, ¢. l to suffre B€. ™ laste, to the plesaunce and wille of 
f£Om.8. §Om.m borg itruthee. k Ome, God. ¢ 


PREFATORY EPISTLES OF ST. JEROME. 


ee ee 


Heere bigynnith the epystle of saynt Jerom 
preest of alle the bokes of Goddis storye’. 


CAP. I. 


BrotHER Ambrose, to me thi litel 3iftis per- 
fitli berynge, hath brou3t with and ri3t® swete 
lettres, the whiche han shewid sothfastnes of 
now’ proued feith, fro the bigynnyng of fren- 
shipes’, and newe thingis of® olde frenship*‘ 
Verrei forsothe that frenship is, and thur3 the 
glew of Crist cowplid, the which not profit of 
famylier thing, not presens oonli of bodies, not 
grasping and trecherous flateryng, but the drede 
of God and the studies of Goddis scripturys 
ioynen. We han redde in olde stories, sum 
men to han vyrounde’ prouynees, to han gon 
to new puplis, to han passid the see, that hem 
whom thei han knowun of bokis, my3ten seen 
verreli present. So Pictagorax to the filosofers 
of Memphus', so Plato to Egipte, and to Archite 
Tarentynel, and thilk* brynk of Itali, the which 
sum tyme was scid Grete Grece, ful traueilousli 
jede; that he that in Athenys was a maister 
and my3ti, and! whos doctrine the stodies of 
Achademy perfith sowneden, wolde be maad a 
pilgrym and a disciple, more wilnyng™ other 
mennus thingis shamfastli to lernen, than his 
owne vushamfastli ‘to prece® forth. Aftirward 
whil he pursueth fleynge lettres as in al the 
world, takun of see theues and sold, also to a 
ful cruel tiraunt pered, led cheytif, boundun, 
and thral. Neuerthelater for he was a filosofre, 
he was more than his bier. To Tite Lyuy, 
wellynge with the® mylk welle of faire speche, 
we han red, summe noble men to han comen 


a From poer. Prologus. a. No title in u. In 1 as in p, adding at the end, that is clepide a prolog. 
e forsothe of 4. 
k the 1. 


© newe p. the newe 4. d frenschipe 1. 
phies spzru. Memphios 1. land Tarentyne a. 


aOm. F. Prolog. x. 
fastli rx, lag in Fx. 


b the presence Fr. ¢ the drede Fr. 


Om. F. 


Jerom in his Prolog on the Byble*. 


CAP. I. 


BrotTHir Ambrose, bryngynge fully thi litil 
3iftis to me, brouzte al so ri3t sweete lettris, the 
whiche han shewid the sothfastnesse of feith that 
is now preued, and al so newe tidyngis of olde 
frenschip. For certeyn that is veri frenschip, and . 
couplid with the glew of Crist, which not onely 
the profijt of homely thing, neither onely presense® 
of bodies, neither graspyng or trecherouse flateryng, 
ioyneth ; but that drede® of God and the studies of 
hooly scriptures councelen to gideres. We han red 
in olde stories, that sum men han go aboute pro- 
uynces, and that they han go to newe puplis, and 
that thei han passid the see, that thei my3te se 
openly present hem that‘ they knewen bi redyng 
of bookis. So* Pictagoras, the filosofere, 3ede to the 
filosoferes of Memphies; so Plato wente to Egipt, and 
to Archite Tarentyne, and passide ful trauelously 
thilke same coostis of Italie, the’ which sum tyme 
was seid Grete Grece; that he that was maistir® 
and my3ty in Athenes, and whos doctryne the scoles 
of Achademye perfitly sowneden, wolde be maad 
a pilgrym and a discyple, rather wilnynge to lerne 
shamefastly othere mennus studies, than to prece 
forth his owne vnshamefully®, Aftirward while 
he pursueth lettris fleynge ini al the world, whanne 
he was take of theues of the see and seld, he ap- 
peryde also‘ to a ful cruel tiraunt, and was lad 
prisoner, and bound, and thral. Netheles for he 
was a filosofere, he was more than his biere. Also 
we han red, that sum noble men han comen fro 
the vttemeste coostis of Spayne and of Fraunce to 


b most 1. 

f frendschepes D. € enuyrounde BDEFUL, h Mem. 
1Om. 4. m willynge peu. n beryn v. °Om.1. 
dwhomr. ¢€Oono. fOm. Fr. 8 amaister F. » ynscham- 


62 PREFATORY EPISTLES 


fro the vtmost? costis of Spayne and of Fraunse; 


and whom Rome drow not to his si3t, ‘o mannus?4 


fame fulli ledde. That age hadde a myracle 
vnherd, and to alle worldis to ben ofte wor- 
shipid, that thei, gon in so greet a cite, other 
thing™ wold sechen with oute the cite. Apolony, 
or that® denynour, ‘ort as the comunte" spekith, 
a filosofer’, as Pictagorax disciplis tellen, 3ede 
into Perses, passid Kaukasoun, Albanus, Scitus, 
and” Massegetos, 3ede thur3 the most plenteuows 
kyngdomes of Inde; and at the end, the brodest 
flode of* Phison passid, come to Bragmanony, 
that Hiearch sittynge in the golden trone, and 
drynkynge of the welle of Tantali, among” fewe 
disciplis techynge of kynde, of maners, of course 
of daies and of sterres*, he my3t heren; fro 
thens bi Elamytas, Babiloyns, Caldeos, Medos, 
Assyrios, Parthos, Syros, Phenices, Arabes, Pa- 
lestyns, turned a3en to Alisawndre, 3ede to 
Ethiop, that he my3t se the maistres of the 
studies, and the most famows borde of ‘the sonne 
in grauel®, That® man fonde ouer al that he 
mi3te lerne, and that euermore profitynge, euer- 
more he my3t be maad better than hym silf. 
Vpon this ‘Philostratus wrote most fullich in 
€i3t volumes?. 


CAP. II. 


What shal I speke of men of the world? sith 
the apostle Poul, the vessel of eleccoun and the 
maister of Gentilis, the which of conscience of 
so greet a gest in hym silf spak seiynge, “ whe- 
“ ther sechen 3e experyment of hym that spekith 
“in me Crist,” after Damask and Arabe enuy- 
round, 3ede vp to Jerusalem, that he my3t se 
Peter, and dwelte® with hym fiftene daies; bi 
this forsothe mysterie of seuene and ei3t the 
prechour of Gentilis to comyng was to be en- 
formyd; and eftsones aftir fourtene 3eer, takun 
to hym Barnaba and Tyto, expownedef with the 
apostlis the enangeli, lest peranenture in veyn 


P vttermoste BDEFHI. 
‘VY Om. 1. ¥ Om. sper. 
¢ Thilk poern. 4 Om. 1. 


4 amans 1. 
x Om. 1. 
e he dwelte 1. 


T thingis p. 


lor, 
u Om. F. 


m mi3te Fx. 


 drinkinge F. 
W gift F. 


x hethene men F. 


© vertues FO. 
Y xij. 0. 


8 thilk pperu. the 1. 
y Bragmans BDEFHI. 


P of Syre F. 


Tite Lyuye, wallynge with the mylke welle of fair 
speche; and whom Rome hadde not drawe to the 
biholdyng of him, the fame of o man brou3te fully 
to his si3t. Thilke age hadde a! merueyle vnherd, 
and to be ofte worshipid of alle worldis, that aftir 
tyme thei weren entrid in to so greet a citee, thei 
wolden seche othere kunnyng with out the citee. 
Appolonye, eithir thilke dyuynour as the comynte 
spekith, eithir a filosofore as Pictagoras disciplis 
tellen, entride in to Persis, and passide ouer to the 
cuntre of Caucasun, and Albanes, and Scitas, and 
Massagetas, and 3ede thour3 the moost plenteuouse 
kyngdomes of Ynde; and at the last whanne he 
hadde passid ouer the ful brood flood of Phison, 
he cam to Bragmanas, that he shulde™ heere Hi- 
arche sittynge in a golden troone, and drynke® of 
the welle of Tantaly, techynge, among a fewe dis- 
ciplis, of nature, of vertuous® maneris, and of the 
cours of dayes and of sterrys; and fro thennes he 
jede by Elainytes, bi folk of Babyloyne, and of 
Caldeis, and men of Meede, and of Assirie, and of 
Parthie, and Sire?, and bi folk of Fenyce, and of4 
Arabie, and bi" Palestynes, and whanne he was 
turned a3en to Alysaundire, he wente to Ethiopie, 
that he my3te se the’ maistris of studies, and the 
moost famouse boord of the sunne in grauel*. 
Thilke man foond ouer al that he my3te lerne, 
that he euere profitynge my3te be maade bettere 
than he him silf was to fore. Vpon this Philostra- 
tus wroot ful pleynlich in viij. volyms. 


Carr. il. 


What shal I speke of men of the world? sith 
Poul the apostle, the vessel of eleccioun, and mays- 
tir of Gentiles, the" whiche, of conscience of so greet 
a gest® in him silf, spak, sexynge thus, “ whether 
*“‘ sechen 3e open preef of him, that is Jhesu Crist, 
“ that spekith in me,” aftirward whanne he haade 
envyrownd Damask and Arabie, he 3ede up to Je- 
rusalem, for he wolde se Petre, and dwelte with 
him xy. dayes; for by this mysterie of seuene and 
ei3te daies he was to be enformed to be aftirward 
a prechour to comynge of the Gentiles*, to conuerte 
hem to the bileue; and eftsoones aftir fourteneY 
3eer, whanne he hadde take to him Barnabas and 


t onther peru. other p. ® comoun F. 


Zamonges D. * sternes BEF. » hem that sonen in trauele 1. 


f expounynge p. 


4Om.r. *Om.x. sOm.F. tsoond o sup.ras. 


OF ST. 


he shulde renne, or hadde ronnen. The dede 
of the quyk vois haths I not what of hidde in- 
ward worchyng, and into the eris of the disciple 
fro the mouth of the autour the vois ouer3otun 
strengerli* sowneth. Wherfor and Eschyneus, 
whan he was exylid into Rodi, and was redde 
thilk' orisoun of Demostens, that a3ens hym he 
hadde, wondrynge alle men and preisynge, si- 
3ynge seith*, “what if thilk' beest 3e hadden 
“ herd tellinge his owne wordis !” 


Cer tile 


Ne™ this Y seye, that there be eny thing in 
me siche, that other thou my3tist of me here, or 
woldist lerne; but whether" with thi feruour 
and studie of lernyng, also with outen vs, shulde 
be proued bi hem silf; a wit able to be tau3t 
and with outen teecher is preisable. Not what 
thou fyndist®, but what thou sechist?, we taken 
heed. Neshe wax and li3t to formen, 3he, if the 
hondis of the crafti man and of the fourmer 
cesen, neuertheles with ynne thoru3 vertu is al 
what ‘euere may’ be. Poul the apostle at the 
feet of Gamaliel glorieth hym silf to haue lernyd 
the lawe of Moyses and the prophetis, that he, 
armed with spirytual daartis, aftyrward my3te 
seie tristily, ‘‘forsothe the armes of our kni3hode 
“ ben not fleishli, but my3ti thoru3 God to the 
“ distruccoun of holdis, that we be destruyinge 
“ thou3tis, and al heiznes" reisynge it silf a3ens 
“ the kunnyng of God, and chatyuynge al vndir- 
“ stondyng for to obeishe to Crist, and redi to 
* yndir3joken al inobeishaunee.” To Tymothe 
tau3t in holi lettres fro childhode he wryteth, 
- and enorteth’ thet studie of lessoun, lest he leue 
of the" grace, the which is 3ouun to hym bi 
imposicoun of the prestis hond’. To Tite he 
comaundide, among” other vertues of a bishop, 
whom in short sermoun he depeyntid, that kun- 
nyng also he leue not of seripturis, “ holdynge,” 
he seith, “ that* sermoun, the which is aftir doc- 
“trine trewe sermoun, that he be my3ti to 
““myche styreY in holsum doctryne, and the 
“ withseieris* to withstonde.” 


& haue a. Om. 1. 


h strongli 1, ithat 1. 


k he seith x. 


JEROME. 63 


Tite, he expownede the gospel with the apostlis, 
lest perauenture he hadde runne and shulde haue 
runne in veyn. The dede of the quyk vois of 
Goddis word hath I noot what of hid inward spede- 
ful worchyng, and whanne the’ voys is spred 
abrood in to the eeris of the? disciple from the 
mouth of the auctor, it sowneth the more strongly. 
Wherfor whanne Eschines was exilid in to Rody, 
and thilke orisoun of Demostenes was red, that he 
hadde anentis him, alle men wondrynge and preis- 
ynge, he seide sore si33yng, “ what if 3e hadden 
“ herd thilke beest tellynge his owne wordis !” 


CAP. III. 


I seie not this, as thou3 ther were ony sich good- 
nesse in me, that thou my3tist either here of me, 
either woldist lerne; but wher with thi feruent loue 
and studie of lernyng also shulde be proued bi him 
silf withouten us; for a wit able to be tau3t and 
without a teehere is presable. We taken not heede 
what thou shuldist fynde, but what thou shuldist 
seche. Neische wax and 1i3t to fourmen, 3he, thou3 
the hondis of the crafti man and of the fourmere 
ceessen, netheles withinne forth in the wax thour3 
‘vertu is al maner shap, that may be maad therof. 
Poul the apostle ioieth that he him silf hadde 
lerned the lawe of Moyses and the profetis at the 
feet of Gamaliel, that he, armed with spirytual 
dartis, my3te aftirward speke tristily, “ for armers® 
* of oure kny3thod ben not fleishly, but the power 
“ of God to the distruecioun of synful wardis, that 
“ we be distriynge yuele thou3tis, and alle hi3nesse 
“ enhaunsynge him silf a3en? the kwinyng of God, 
“ and holdynge lowe al vndirstondyng to obeie to 
“ Crist, and redy to vndurjoke al vnbuxumnesse®.” 
He writith to Tymothe wel lerned in hooly lettris 
fro childhod, and he amonestith him to the studie 
of redyng, lest he dispise the grace, ‘the whieh' was 
3oue to him by the puttyng to of the hondis of a 
prest. He comaundide also to Tite, among othere 
vertues of a bishop, the’ whieh he declaride in a 
short word, that also he lese' not the kuunyng of 
seriptures, “ holdynge,” he seith, “ thilke word, 
“‘the whichi aftir Goddis lore is a* trewe word, 
“that he be my3ty, to moneste! in holsum doc- 
“ tryne, and to withstonde a3enseyeris™.” 


lthatr, ™ Nov. ‘where ppernu. © fynde spru. 


fyndis seem. Pseche npr. euery man F.  * hey3euesses p. $ amonestith p. stireth 1. tto ern. % Om. 1. 
Vv hondis p. W that among z. x thilk ppeFn. Y sterynge D. 2 withsiggers DEFH. 

7Om.x. *hisr. bOm.F. Carmes¥. 4aze Fr. €vnobeisauncer. fthatr. 8 Om.r. -blefer. ithat ¥. 
k Om. x. 1 ministre rx. m the a3enseyeres F. 


64 PREFATORY EPISTLES 


CAP AY. 


Holi forsothe cherlhed to hym silf alone* pro- 
fiteth ; and> as myche as he edifieth of desert of 
lijf the chirche of Crist, so myche he noieth if 
to the destruyers® he withstonde not. Malachie 
the prophete, 3he, bi Malachye the Lord, askith 
prestis the lawe; in so myche the offis of theé 
preste is®, askid, to answeren ‘of the lawe’. And 
in Deutronomy we reden, “ aske thi fadre, and 
“he shal telle thee; thi prestis, and thei shal 
“ seie to thee.” In the psalm forsothe the? 
hundryd and ei3tetene, “thi iustifiyngis were to 
“me chauntable in the place of my pilgrimage.” 
And in the discripcioun of the ri3twisman, whan 
David comparysownede hym to a tree of lijf 
that is in paradise, among other vertues this he 
brou3t forth, “in the lawe of the Lord the wil 
“ of hym, and in his lawe he shal thenk dai and 
“ ny3t.” Daniel in the ende of the most holi 
visioun seith ri3twise men to shyne as sterrys, 
and vndirstonders*, that is, tau3t men, as the 
fermament. Thou seest how myche thei ben 
atwyn, rijtwise chirlehede and tan3t ry3twisnesse. 
Other men to sterres, other men to heuene hen 
comparisoned ; al be it that, aftir the trewthe of 
Ebrew tung, either may be vndurstondun of 
lerned men. Thus we reden anentis hem, “ thilki 
*“ forsothe that weren tau3t shulen shyne as the 
“shynyng of the firmament, and thoo* that 
‘¢ techen many men to rightwisnes as sterres into 
“« perpetuel! eternytees.” Whi is Poul seid the 
vessel of eleccoun? forsothe for the vessel of 
the lawe, and of holi scripture™ he was the al- 
mery. The Faryseus ben stonyed in the doc- 
tryne of the Lord, and wondren® in Petre and 
Joon, how thei kunnen the lawe, sith lettres thei 
lerneden not®. What euer forsothe to? other 
men excersice and ech dai thenkynge in the 
lawe was wont to 3yuen, that to hem the Holi 
Gost tolde, and after that it is? writin, “ thei 
“ weren Goddis tau3t men,” that is, able men to 
li3tli be tau3t of God. Twelue 3eer the Saueour 
hadder fulfillid, and in the temple sittynge, ask- 
ynge of* questionns of the lawe more techeth, 

®Om 1 Ping, 


¢ distruyer 4. ad Om. g1. 


CAPOAV: 


Forsothe hooly homelynesse in byleeue profitith 
to him silf aloone; and as myche as he edifieth of® 
disseruyng of good lijf the chirche of Crist, so 
myche he noieth if he withstonde not the distrieres 
ther of. Malechie the profete, and also the Lord 
bi Malechie, askith the prestis the lawe; in so 
myche that the office of the prest is, whanne he is 
askid, to answere of the lawe of God. And in 
Deutronomye we reden, “ aske thi fadir, and he 
“shal tell thee; and aske thi prestis, and thei 
“ shulen seie to thee.” Also in the hundryd and 
xviij.° salm Dauith seith, “thi iustifyngis weren 
“joyful toP me in the place of my pilgrymage.” 
And in the discriuynge of the rij3twise man, whanne 
Dauith liknede him to the tre of lijf that is in 
paradijs, among othere vertues thus he seide, “ the 
“ wil of him is in the lawe of the Lord, and he 
“ shal thenke in his lawe day and ny3t.” Danyel 
in the ende of a ful hooly vysioun seith, that 
“ ri3twise men shulen shyne as sterris, and wise 
*‘ Jerned men as the firmament.” Thou seest how 
moche ri3t wise homelynesse and wyse ri;twisnes 
dyuersen ‘bitwene hem silf4. The first of hem ben 
likned to sterris, and the’ othere to heuene; al be 
it that, aftir the" treuthe of Ebrew tunge, eithir of 
hem moun be vndurstonde of Jerned men. For thus 
we redeu anentis hem, “forsothe thilke that ben wise 
* Jerned men shulen shyne as the bry3tnesse of the 
“ firmament, and thilke that techen many men to 
“ ri3twisnesse shulen shyne as sterrus in perpetuel 
euerlastyngnessis.” Whi is Poul the apostle seid 
the vessel of eleccioun? sothely for he was the 
vessel of lawe, and the almarie of hooly scriptures. 
The Farissees ben’ astonyed, ‘or merveilent, in the 


- doctrine of the Lord, and wondryden in Petir and 


Joon, hou they kouden the lawe, sithen thei lern- 
eden no" lettris. For the Hooly Goost telde hem 
al, that euer excercise 7m studie, and euery dayes 
thenkyng in the lawe of God, was wont to 3yue to 
othere men, as it is writun, “and” thei weren dis- 
“ ciplis of God able to be tau3t*.” OureY Sanyour 
hadde fulfillid xij. 3eer of his age, and? thanne he, 
sittynge in the temple, and’ askynge of questiouns 


Fer €Om.p. fOm.1 fanz. 4b vnderstondynge pr. ithor. 
oe BDEFH. ‘the perpetuel p, ™ secripturez EFUI.  %wondreden 4. Ononer. Pofi. were a. Chath rs. 

5 Om. 1. 

F 4 thorou3 F. © the eiztenthe ¥. P eithir chauntable to x marg. sec.m. q Om. Fx. r Om. F. 8 weren FX. 
Om. Fx. % not x. w Om. Fx. x tau3t as it is writun o. y Whenne oure rx. 7% Om. Fx. a Om. 0 sec.m. 


OF ST. 


whil he prudentlit demaundeth". But perauen- 
ture we seyn chirl Petre, and cherl Joon, of 
whom either my3t seyn, “ and if I be vnwise in 
*‘ word, neuerthelater not in kunnyng.” Chirl” 
Jon fissher is yntau3t; and whens that vois, Y 
prey, “In the first was the word, and the word 
‘was anentys God, and God was the word ?” 
Logos in Grece many thingis signifieth, for whi 
and word it is, and resoun, and noumbre, and 
chesoun of eech thing, bi the which alle thingis 
ben that ben; the whiche echoon* we vndur- 
stonden ri3tli in Crist. 


CAP. V. 


Thes thingis tau3te Plato knewe not; thes 
thingis Demosteynes the fayre speker wiste not ; 
*‘ J shal lese,” he seith, “the wisdom of wiseY 
* men, and the prudence of prudent men Y shal 
“reprouen.” Verreye* wisdom shal spil* the 
fals wisdom, and al be it that the foli of prech- 
yng be in the cros, neuerthelater Poul spekith 
wisdom among perfit men; wisdom forsothe 
not of this world, the which is destruyed, ne of 
princes of this world; but he spekith wisdom of 
God in mysterie hid, that God bifore ordeynede 
bifore worldis. The wisdom of God Crist is; 
“* Crist forsothe is the vertu of God and the wis- 
“dom of God.” This wisdom is in mysterie 
hid, and of the which the title of the nynthe 
salm is bifore notid, “ for the hid thingis of the 
* sone,” in the whiche ben alle the tresoures4 
of wisdom and of the® kunnyng of God hid; and 
‘he that was in mysterie hid, is‘ bifore ordeyned 
bifore the worldis; ‘bifore ordeyned forsothe’ 
and bifore figuryd in lawe> and_prophetisi. 
Wherfore and prophetis* weren clepid! seers, for 
thei seien hym, whom other men seien not. 
“ Abraham saw3 the day of hym, and he was 
“ glad.” Heuenes weren openyd to Ezechiel, 
the which weren closid to the synful puple. 
* Opene,” seith Dauid, “ myn eizen, and J shal 
*“ biholde the merueilis of thi lawe.” The lawe 
forsothe is spiritual”, and nede it is openynge, 
that it be vndirstondun, and with opyn face we 


t prudenter p. 


® leose 1. b Om. +. ¢ Om. 1. d hid tresoures 4p. 


u cherl Petre demaundeth «4. askith pr. 


JEROME. 65 


of the lawe, he techith myche the’ more while he 
askith wisely questiouns. But perauenture we seien 
Petre to be lewide, and Joon to be lewide, of whiche 
euere eithir my3te seie, ‘‘ thou3 I be vnwiys in 
* word, netheles not in kunnyng.” Joon was a lewde 
fishere, and® vntau3t 7 scolys; and fro whennus, 
I preie, cam that vois, “ In the bygynnyng was the? 
* word, and this word was anentis God, and God 
“ was this same word?” This word /ogos in Grew 
bitokeneth many thingis, for it is word, and re- 
soun, and noumbre, and cause of euery thing, by 
the which alle thingis ben, that han beyng; the® 
which ech oon we vndirstonden ri3tfuli inf Crist. 


CAP. NV. 


Wise Plato knew not thes thingis; nether De- 
mostenes the faire spekere knew these thingis ; for 
God seith, “I shal spille the wisdom of wise 
* clerkis’, and I shal repreue the prudence of pru- 
“dent men of the world.” Verry wisdom shal 
spille false wisdom, and al be it that the foly of 
prechyng be holde in the cros, netheles Poul 
spekith wisdom among parfit men; not wisdom of 
this world, which is distryed, ne of princes of this 
‘world; but he spekith wisdom of God hid in mys- 
terie, that God ordeynede bifore worldis'. Crist is 
the wisdom of God, for “ Crist is the vertu of God 
“and the wisdom of God.” This wisdom is in 
mysterie hid, of which the title of the nynthe salm 
is bifore* notid, “for the hid thingis of the sone 
* of God,” in whom ben alle the tresours of wisdom 
and of kunnyng of God hid; and he that was in 
mysterie hid, is bifore ordeyned tofore the worldis; 
also bifore ordeyned and byfore fygurid in the lawe 
and profetis. Wherfor the profetis weren clepid 
seeris, for they saien him, whom othere men saien 
not. ‘Abraham say the day of him, and he! was 
* glad™.” Heuenes weren opened to Ezechiel, the” 
whiche weren closid to the synful peple. Dauyth 
seith, “ Lord, opene thou myn y3en, and I shal 
* biholde the meruels of thi lawe.” For the lawe 
is spirituel*, and therfor it hath nede of? open 
reuelacioun, that it be vndirstonde, that with open 
face we moun! se the glorie of God. The book in 
the Apocalips is schewid seelyd with seuene seelis, 


w If chur 1. x enchesoun F. y the wise 1. 


Zz wery 4. 
e Om. 1. f the wiche in misterie is hid was 1. 


€ Om. 1. 


h the lawe 1. 1 in prophetis p. k the prophetis 1. 1 calde 1. ™ perpetuel Fr. 
b Om. o sec.m. © Om. o sec.m. d Om. rx. eOm.r.  f of Fx, Emen¥F. hOmosec.m. ithe worldes F. 
k tofore F. 10m. F. m fn) glad ¥. 2 Om. F. ° special o. P to F. a may F. 


K 


66 


bibolden the glorie of God. The book in the" 
Apoealipis is shewid seelid with senene seelis, 
which if thou 3yue to a man kunnynge letteres 
that he rede, he shal answere thee, I may not, 
it is forsothe seelid. How feel® to? dai wenen 
hem to han knowun letteres, holden the seelid 
book, and mown not openen, but if he vnlowke‘, 
that hath the keye of Dauyd, “ the which open- 
* eth and no man closith, closith and no man 
“ openeth.” In the Dedis of the Apostlis the loli 
geldyng, 3he’, the holi man, so* forsoth hym nem- 
netht holi writ, whan he shulde rede Isaye the 
prophete, is askid of Philip, “ wenest thou, whe- 
“ ther" thou vndirstondist thingis that thou re- 
“ dest?” and he answeride, “low may I, but ony 
“ man had tau3te me.” I that among speke of’ 
my silf, am not holier than this geldyng, ne more 
studious, the which from Ethiope, that is, fro the 
vttermost coostis of the world, come to the tem- 
ple, forsoke the kyngis halle, and was so greet a 
louer of Goddis kunnyug and lawe, that in a 
chare wold reden holy lettres; and 3it whan he 
shulde hold the boke, and the wordis of the Lord 
shulde conseyue in his thenkyng, with tunge 
shulde turne, with lippis shulde speke, vnknewe 
hym whom in the book unwitynge he” worshipide. 
Philip com and shewide hym Jhesu, the which 
closed satte pryue in the lettere. O meruelous 
vertu of the doctour! the same our bileuede the 
geldyng, is baptisid, feithful and holi, and a 
inaister is maad of a disciple; more fonde in thie 
desert welle of the chirche, than in* the goldun 
temple of the synagoge. Thes thingis of me 
shortli ben fulli writun. 


CAPS I. 


Forsothe the epistles streytnesY suffryd not 
lenger this to ben outstrayed, that thow my3test 
vnderstonde thee not mown entre in holi serip- 
tures with outen a forgoer and shewynge the 
stye’. I holde my pees of gramariens and re- 
torikis, filoferis, geometrers, logissians, mnsis- 
sians, astronomers, astrologerys, fisissians, whos 
sciens is ynew3, or ful* profitable, to deedli men, 
and in thre partis it is diuidid, in doctrine, re- 


PREFATORY EPISTLES 


which thou3 thou 3yue to a man knowynge lettris, 
‘for he shulde’ rede, he shal answere thee’, I may 
not rede it, for it is aselid. Hou many men weenen 
this day that thei han knowen lettris, and holden 
the book seelid, and moun not opene, but ift he 
vnlouke that hath the keie of Dauith, “ which 
“ openeth and no man closith, and closith and no 
‘** man openeth.” In the Dedis of Apostlis the hooly 
geldyng", 3he, the hooly man, for so hooly writ 
clepith him, whanne he redde Ysaye, the profete, 
he was askid of Filip, “trowist thou that thou 
‘‘ yndirstondest thilke wordis that thou redist?” and 
he answeride, “ hou may” I vndirstonde, but sum 
“ who hadde tau3t me.” I that I*speke among othere* 
of my silf, am not hoolyere than this geldyng’, 
neithir more studiouse, the? which from Ethiopie, 
that is, from the vttemeste coostis of the world, 
cam to the temple, and forsook the kyugus halle, 
and was so greet a louere of knowyng? of God and 
his lawe, that he wolde rede hooly lettris in his 
chare; and 3it whanne he helde the book, and con- 
ceyuede the wordis of the Lord in his thenkyng, 
and redde hem with tunge, and spak with lippis®, 
he knew not him whom he worshipede vnwitynge 
in the book®. Thanne Filip cam, and shewyde to 
him Jhesu, ‘the which? restide pryuely closid in 
the lettre. O the mernelouse vertu of the doctour ! 
the same our the geldyng® byleuede in God, and 
was baptysid, feithful and hooly, and of a disciple 
was maad a maistir; he foond more fruyt in the 
desert welle of hooly clirche, than in the golden 
temple of the synagoge of Jewis. 


CAP. VI. 


These thingis ben shortly and fully writun of 
me, for ‘the pistlis streytnesse£ suffride not me 
lengere to passe ouerlargely in this mater; for 
thou shuldist vndirstonde, that thou maist® not 
entre in® hooly scripturis withoute a forgoere and 
shewynge the weie therof. I holde my pees of 
gramariens, and of medeleris of retorik, of filoso- 
feris, of gemetreres, of logiciens, of musiciens, of 
astronomeris and! astrologeris, and of fysiciens, 


n Om. 1. ° manye I. P forsoth to p. avnlous gz. Om. 1. s Om. 4. t nameth 1. u wher 1. Vtor. 
w Om. aBDEFU. x Om 1. Y strejnes 4. 2 paith p. 8 fully p. 

rthat he o sec.m. 8 to thee F. t Om. F. uchast chanmberleyn F. WW mizte F. x Om. FX. y chast chaumber- 
leyn F. 2 Om. F. _ 'the science Fr, > his lippes ¥. ¢bookes Fx. 4thatr. ¢chast man.  f the schertnesse or 
streitnesse of the epistle F. & my3t F. hin to F. i of F. 


OF ST 


soun, and vse. I shal eom to the lesse craftys, 
and which not oonly with tung, but with honde® 
ben mynystrid; erthe tilyers, masouns, smythes 
of metallis, and hewers of trees, also wulle grai- 
thers and fullers, and other that forgen dyuerse 
purtynauneis to’ howsis, and fowle litle werkis, 
mowe not be, with outen a teelier, that that® thei 
coueyten. Lechis bihoten’ that that is of lechis, 
forgers treten forgeable thingis; the craft oneli 
of scripturys is the whieh alle chalengen to hem 
pasemel®. “ We writen paseinel? poyet sawes, of 
“ tau3t and of untau3t.” This eraft of seripturys 
the olde chaterynge damme, this the dotid olde 
man, this the sofistre ful of wordis, this alle pre- 
sumen, to-teren", techen or thei lernen. Other, 
with the brow born down, weiynge greet! wordis, 
among 3ong wyminen philosofien of holi lettres. 
Other lernen of wymmen that is shame that 
that* thei techen men; and whether this be litle, 
with a maner li3tnes of wordis, 3ee and hardynes, 
shewen out to other, that thei vndurstonden not. 
I holde my pees of lijk to me, the which thou;' 
perauenture comen after seculer lettris to holi 
scripturis, and with a feir sermoun deliten the 
eeris of the puple, what enere thei seiyn™, thei 
wenen it be the lawe of God, ne thei dedeynen 
to know what the prophetis, what the" apostlis 
feleden°; but to her owne cense shapen? vneouen- 
able witnesse‘, as thou3 it were greet, and not 
vicyous maner of seiyng, to depraue sentensis, 
and to drawe at ther wil holi writ repugnynge. 
As thou3 we had not red the bokys drawun out 
of Omere, and of Virgile, and not so also and 
Maronein we mowe seyn eristen with outen 
Crist, for he wroot, “ Now turneth ajen and the 
“ mayden, turnun ajen Saturnus rewmes, nowe 
“the newe kynrede is sent down fro the heize 
** heuene,” and the fadre spekinge to the sone, 
*“‘ sone, my strengthes, my greet power aloon ;” 
and after, the wordis of the Sanyour in the eros, 
“siche thingis he 3aue hauynge mynde, and 
* fiechid® he dwelt.” Childishe ben thes thingis, 
and like to the® pley of childeren pleiynge in the 
serele, to teche that thou knowist not; 3he, and 


. JEROME. 67 


whos science is sufficient, or ful profitable, to dedly 
men, and it is deuydid in* iij. parties as in doe- 
tryne, and in resoun, and ‘vse, eithir! practik. I 
shal come to the™ lesse eraftis, whiche® ben not 
mynystrid onely with tunge, but with hond; as 
erthtilyeris, inasouns, sinythis® of metals, and ear- 
penteris, and? makeris of wollen cloth, and fulleris, 
and othere that ‘forgen, either’ maken, dyuerse 
purtenaunces’ to houses’, and smale werkis and 
foule, moun not be, without a tecliere, that thatt 
they desyren. lLechis bihoten that" that is of 
leehis” erafte, smythus treten of* suche thingis 
that ben forgeable ; but the erafteY of hooly serip- 
tures is that science aloone, that alle men calengen 
ouer al. “ We writen poetis sawis largely, bothe of 
“ the lerned man and vnlerned.” This science of 
scriptures the olde chaterynge damme ealengith, 
and the olde dotid man, and the sofistre ful of 
wordis, and alle folk presuinen to knowe this, and 
to-teren it, and techen? it, or they lernen it. Othere 
folk, with lowrynge browe of pryde, ianglynge 
greete wordis, talken as filosoferes of hooly lettris 
among 3onge wymmen; othere men lernen of 
wyminen that is shame that thei techen men; and 
lest this be litil perel to semynge, thei expownen to 
othere with a maner lij3tnesse of wordis, and also 
with hardynesse, that* that they vndurstonden> 
not. Iholde my pees of siche® that ben liyk tot 
me, the whiehe perauenture whanne thei ben coine 
to hooly seriptures aftir® seeuler lettris, and with a 
fair sermoun delyten the eeris of the puple, what- 
euere thei seien, they weenen it be the lawe of 
God, neither thei dedeynen to knowe what the 
profetis, what’ the postlis feeliden; but to her 
owne wit thei schapen vncouenable witnessis, as 
thou3 it were myche worth, and not a yyciouse 
maner of seiyng, to depraue sentenses, and to drawe 
at her wille® hooly seriptures repungnynge. As 
thou3 we hedde not red the bokis drawen out of 
Omere and of Virgile, and also we moun not seie 
Maronem to be cristen with out Crist, for he wroot 
sich verse, “‘Now maide .turneth a3e, Saturnus 
“ turneth his rewmes; now newe kyn cometh fre, 
“ from an hi3, fro euenli lewmes";” and the fadir, 


bOm. Fr. Chondis p. honden r. ‘dofi. ¢€Om.p.  f biholden xr. & parselmel x. —} treten F. i eretere 1. 
kOm. por, } 3if p, thof £. therof iu, Om.1. ™ siggen per. seyen uz. 2% Om.5. °folweden F. _ P schapende p. 
4 witnessis BEFII. ¥ woundid p. 8 On, 1. 

Kintor. Jinvseofr. ™Om.r. “andwhicher. forgeresy. Palsor. 4Om.rF. _ * purtinannce F. 
Shorseso. tthingthatr. UOm.r. Wlecher, *Om.¥. Ykunnynge Fr. *totechen¥. ®Om.¥r. > vndur- 
stoden x. ¢clerkes¥. 4Om.r. ¢fror. fand what. &ownewil¥.  ) Now (the inter lin. scc.m.) maide turneth 


a3en, Saturnes turneth his rewmes, Now newe kinrede is sent fer from hy3 heuene (sup.ras. see.m.) lewnus. (Om. sec.m.) 0. 


K 2 


68 PREFATORY EPISTLES 


that I speke with indignacoun, foli is that not 
forsothe to knowe that thou knowist not. 


CAP. VII. 

It is leueful to se, that ‘the storie oft Genesis 
‘be ful knowin", in the which of the creature’ of 
the world, of“ the* bigynnyng of mankynde, of 
the denysioun of the erthe, of the confusioun 
of tungis and of folkis, and of descendyng of the 
folk of Ebrew vnto Egipt, and vnto the goyng 
out is writun. Exodus is open with the ten 
plagis, with they ten hestis, with mystik’, and 
with Goddis preceptis. Prest is the book of 
Leuy, in the which alle sacrifyces, 3he, and al- 
most alle silablis, and the clothis of Aron, and 
the hole ordre of Leuy, enspiren heuenli sacra- 
mentis. Numeri forsothe, whether thei con- 
teynen not the ‘mysteries of al the® hole craft of 
noumbrarie, and of prophecie® of Balaam, and 
of the two and fourti mansiouns thur3 wilder- 
nes? Deutronomy forsothe the secounde lawe, 
and the prefiguracoun of the lawe of the euan- 
gelie, hath he not so thilk*® thingis, that ben ra- 
ther’, that neuertheles® alle thingis ben newe of 
the olde? Hider to Moyses, ‘hider to’ Penta- 
teuchon, that is, the fyue bokis, with the which 
fyue wordis the apostle glorieth hym silf wilne® 
to speke in the chirche. Job, the sawmpler" of 
pacience, the which whethir not mysteries with 
his word knytteth? In proos he bigynneth, in 
verse he goth forthe, in word a fote, that is, in 
meke word, he is endid; and he determyneth 
alle the lawes of dialatik, in proposicoun, assuinp- 
coun!, confirmacioun, conclusioun. Ech wordis 
in it ben ful of wittis; and, that I holde my 
pees of other, the resurreccoun of bodies so pro- 
fecieth*, that no man of that, othere more open, 
or more slyly, my3t wryte. “ I wote,” he seith, 
“ that! my forbier™ lyueth, and in the last dai Y 
Om. err. “is fulopyn spEFHI. VY creatour m1. 


prophecie BpeFrHI. ¢thor. 4 bifore 7. 
assumpcion 1. k prophecie r. |} Om. 7. 


i sone, my my3tis, my greet power aloone ‘by riztis. (Om. sec.m.) 0. 
1 Om. F. 


there (Om. sec.m.) he dwelte o. 
dwellyngis 0 pr.m. 


1 childlich F. 
twhethir rx. § Om. F. 


mQOm., F. 


Wand 7. 
€ neuere the lattere 1. 
m forbigger BDEFH. biere 1. 


t whether Fx. 


spekynge to the sone, seith, “‘mi sone, mi mi3tes, 
“ gret power alone bi ri3tes';” and aftir the wordis 
of our Sauyour in the cros, he writith this verse, 
“‘such word he felte, thenkinge ficchid ther he 
“ dwelte.” These thingis ben childish', and liyk 
to the pley of children pleiynge at the™ sercle, to 
teche that thou knowist not; 3he, so" that I speke 
with herte®, it is foly to feyne thee to knowe that 
thou knowist not. 
CAP. VII. 

It is to wite, that the storie of Genesis is ful 
open, in the which it is writen of the makyng of 
the world, and of the bigynnyng of mankynde, 
and of dyuysioun of the lond, and of the confu- 
sioun of tungis, and of the? goyng doun of the folk 
of Ebrew vnto Egipt. The book of Exodi is open 
with the ten plages, with the ten heestis, with 
mystik and goodlich comaundementis. The book 
of Leuytes is opun, in the which alle sacryfices, 
3he, and al most alle silablis, and the clothis of 
Aaron, and the hool ordre of Leuy, shewen heuenly 
sacramentis. The book of Noumbre, that 7s neat, 
wher’ he conteyne not the mysteries of al the hool 
crafte of noumbre, and of the profecie of Balaam, 
and of the xlij. dwellyngis%4 in wildirnesse ? Deu- 
tronomye forsothe, the secounde lawe and the pre- 
figuracioun of the lawe of the gospel, wher™ he 
conteyne not so thilke thingis that ben bifore, that 
netheles alle thingis ben newe spryngynge of the 
olde? Thus fer lasten the fyne bookis of Moyses, 
that me clepith Pentateuchon, with the’ whiche 
fyue wordis the apostle ioyeth him silf, that he 
hath wille to speke hem in the chirche. Job, that 
is ensaumple of pacience, whert he knyttith not 
misteries with his word? He bigynneth prose", he 
procedith in vers, and with lowlich word he makith 
an ende; and he determyneth alle the lawis of the 
science of art, in proposicioun, in enydence takynge, 
in confermynge by argument, and in open shewyng 
bi¥ conclusioun. Alle the wordis of* it ben ful of 
wittis ; and, that I holde my pees of othere thingis, 
he profecieth the risyng a3en of bodies, that no 
man my3te write more openly, eithir more slily, of 
that mater, for he seith thus, “I woot that myn 
“ azenbiere lyueth, and I shal rise fro they erthe 


b the 
iin 


yOm.p. the mistik:. @ Om. 1. 
g willeth p. to wilne z. 4 ensampler r. 


x Om. 1. 
f Om. z. 


K sich word he grauntide, thenkynge and ficchid 
Ostomak Fr. POm.F. 4whetherF. 49 perpetuel 
u with prose Fx. WofFx, *in Fx. Y Om. x. 


OF ST 


“am to aryse" fro the erthe; and eftsones I shal 
‘be enuyround with my fel°, and in my flehs? 
* Y shal se God, my Saueour, whom Y my silf 
“ am to se, and myn ei3en ben to biholden, and 
“noon othere. This is myn hope put vp into4 
“my bosum.” Y shal com to Jhesu of Naue, 
the which berith the figure of the Lord, not oonli 
in gestis™, but also in name. He passith Jordan, 
the rewmes of enemyes turneth vpsedoun, he de- 
uydeth the erthe to the puple ouercomer, and* bi 
alle cytees, villagis, hillis, and‘ flodis, rennynge 
watres, and the ny3 coostis he discriuede of the 
chirche, and of the" heuenli Jerusalem the spi- 
ritual rewmes. In the book of Juges’ how feel 
princes of the puple, so feel figurys there ben. 
Ruth Moabites fulfillith the prophecie of Ysaie 
seiynge, “ Lord, sende out the lomb, the lord- 
* shiper of erthe, fro the stoon of desert to the 
*“mownt of the dow3ter of Syon.” Samuel 
shewith the old lawe don awey in Heli deed, and 
in the sla3ter of Saul. Forsothe in Sadok and 
Dauid ben witnessid the sacramentis of the uew 
presthod, and of new’ empyre. Malachym, 
that is, the thrid and the ferthe book of Kynges, 
discryueth the rewme of Juda, and the rewme of 
Israel, fro Salomon to Jecony, and fro Jeroboam, 
sone of Nabath, vnto Osee, the which was led 
into Asyries. If thow biholdist the storye, the 
wordis ben -symple; if in the lettres thow bi- 
holdist the preuey witt, the fewnesse of the 
chirche, and the batails* of eretikis a3ens the 
chirche, ben told. The twelue prophetis, togidre 
artidY into the narewnes’ of o¥* volym, myche 
othere than sowneth in the lettre bifore figuren. 
Osee often nemneth Effraym,Samary, Joseph, Jez- 
rael, and the fornycary wijf, and the sonis of for- 
nycacoun, and the auowtres closid in the bed of 
the hushond to setten myche tyme wydow, and 
vndir the** mornyng cloth of the husbond to abide 
the comyng ajen tohir. Joel, the sone of Pha- 
tuel, discryueth the lond of the twelue lynagis 
wastid thur3 the wort worm, bruk, locuste, thur3’Y 
rust wastynge; and after the outturnyng of the 
rather’? puple, the Holi Gost shed out vpon the 
seruauntis of God and hond maydenes, that is, 


Pself1. in sDEFUI. 
Xbataile npr. 
2Z formere I. 


orise 1. % skyn 1. 
w the newe BDEFIII. 
thorou BDEFHI. 


Y ben artide 1. 


¥ gestis or in werkis 1. 


. JEROME. 69 


“in the laste day; and I shal be kyuerid with my 
* skyn, eftsones and in my fleish I shal se God, 
* my Sauyour, whom I my silf am to se, and myn 
“ y3en ben to biholde, and* J beynge noon othere 
“ an persoone thanne, than I am now. This is myn 
“ hope put vp in my bosum.” I shal come to the 
book of Jhesu of Naue, the* whiche berith figure? 
of the Lord, not onely in worthi dedis, but also in 
name. He passith Jordan, he turneth upsodoun the 
rewmes® of enemyes, he departith the erthe to the 
puple that hadde victorie, and bi alle citees, vilages, 
hillis, floodis, rennynge watris, and ny3 coostis, he 
discryuedet the spiritual rewmes of hooly chirche 
and of heuenly Jerusalem. In the book of Juges 
as many princes as ther ben of the puple, so fele 
figures ther ben. Ruth Moabitis fulfillith the pro- 
phesie of Ysaye, seiynge, “ Lord, sende out the 
“lomb, the lordly gouernour of erthe, fro the 
* stoon of desert to the mounte of the dou3tir of 
* Syon.” Samuel shewith that® the olde lawe 
shuldef be doon awey in ‘Ely deed8, and in slau3tre" 
of Saul the kyng. Forsothe in Sadoch and ini 
Dauyth the sacramentis of the newe presthod, and 
of the newe empire, ben witnessid fully. Mala- 
chym, that is, the thridde and the fourthe book of 
Kyngis, discryueth the rewme of Juda, and the 
rewme of Israel, fro Salamon to Jechonye, and fro 
Jeroboam, sone* of Nabath, vuto Osee, which! was 
lad into Assiryens. If thou biholdist the storie, 
the wordis ben symple ; and if thou biholdist™ the 
pryuy wit ther of in the lettris, the fewnesse of 
hooly chirche, and the bateile of eretikis az3enus the 
chirche ben toold. The twelue profetis, set to gi- 
deres in the streytnesse of o volym, byfore figuren" 
myche othir thing than sowneth openly in the 
lettre. Osee nempneth ofte Effraym, Saimarie, Jo- 
seph, Jesrael, and the wijf of fornycacioun, ‘and 
the sones of fornycacioun®, and the anoutresse 
closid in the bed of the hosebonde, to sitte myclie 
tyme widewe, and vndur ve morenyng cloth of 
the hosebonde to aboide his comyng a3en to hir. 
Joel, the sone of Fatnel, discryueth the lond of 
the xij. lynagis, that was wastid thorou the wort 
worm, and the bruyke?, and the locuste, and 
thorou3 cancrynge’ rust ; and aftir the ouerturn- 


v Domes 1. 
yy and 


u Om. 1. 
xx Om. 1. 


t Om. BDEFHI. 
WW one BDEFH. 


8 that 1. 
Z narownessis BEH. 


zOm.r. 2 Om. ¥. > the figure r, © rewmeo prim. x. 4 discryucth F, © Om.osee.m. f toosec.m. & the 
deth of Helir. the slau3tre r. 4 Om. Fo sec.m. kK the sone Fr. ‘Ithatr. ™biholder, "% figureth ry. © Om. P. 
P breese F, 4 the cancre ¥. 


70 PREFATORY EPISTLES 


vpon an hundrid and twenty names of bileuers, 
and the sunne shynynge like a reynbow held? 
oute in the comune etyng place of Syon, the 
whiche hundrid and twenti, fro oon vnto fyftene, 
arawe* and bi encrees arysynge, maken oute the 
noumbre of the fyftene grees, the whiche in the 
Sawter ben mystili conteyned. Amos, shepherd? 
and cherl, and wel knowynge the beries of busshis, 
may not be openyd in fewe wordes. Who for- 
sothe worthili>» may shew out the thre and foure 
wickidnessis of Damask, of Gaze, of Tyry, of 
Ydume, of the sones of Amon, and of Moab, and, 
in? the seuenth® and ei3te degre, of Juda and of 
Israel? This spekith®® to the fatt kien, that ben 
in the mownt of Samarie, and witnessith the 
more hows and the lesse to fallen. He seeth the 
maker of the locust, and the Lord stondynge 
vpon the dawbed wal and the adamauntyn, and 
the appel croke drawynge tourmentis to synful 
men, and hunger in the erthe, not hunger of 
bred, ne thrist of water, but of heryng of! the 
word of God. Abdias, that is as myche to seie 
as the seruaunt of the Lord, ful thundreth a3ens 
Edom, and the blodi and erthli® brother; also 
the euermore enemye of the brother Jacob, he 
smytith with a goostli dart. Jonas, the moost 
fayre culuer, in his shipbreche bifore figurynge 
the passioun of the Lord, clepith> a3en the world 
to penaunce, and, vndir name of Nynyue, tellith 
helthe to Gentils. Micheas of! Moraschym, the 
witheire of Crist, tellith the wastyng of ak dow3- 
ter of a priue thef, and he settith bisegyng a3ens 
hire, for she smote the cheke bone of the iuge of 
Israel. Naum, coumfortour of the world, blaineth 
the citee of blodis, and after his turnyng awey 
spekith, “ Loo, vpon the hiltis the fete of the 
“ euangelisynge and tellynge pees.” Abacuc, a 
strong wristeler and a! sharp, stondith vpon his 
waard, and ficcheth a weie of grees vpon the 
strengthe, that Crijst in cros™ he biholde®, and 
seie®, “ The glorie of hym coueride? heuenes!, 
“ and" of hys preisyng ful is the erthe; his 
“ shynyng shal be as li3t, and hornes in his 
“ hondis, there his strengthe is hid.” Sophonyas, 
the wayter and the knower of the priuetees* of 


a 3ott r 94 an arowe I. 
sentence F. © spekis p>. =f Om, 4 sec.m. BDEFR. 
m the crosse BEFI. 1 behelde pr. © sayth p. P curith p. 

Fr ouer comynge F. § Om. F. 
2 ajen the F. ajens the x, 


t Om. Fr. 
® steppes F, 


u and of F. 


ba shepherd z. >» worthierly p. 
& the ertheli r. 
q heuene £. 


w of Ydumee rx. 


yng" of the formere puple, he proficiede that the 
Hooly Goost shulde be held out upon the ser- 
uauntis of God, and upon his hondmaydens, that 
is to seie, upon c. xx. names of newe feithful men, 
and the sunne schynynge liyk a reyn bowe held 
out in the comyn eting place of Syon; the whiche 
hundryd and twenty arysynge by encrees fro oon 
to fiftene arewe, maken fully the numbre of xv. de- 
grees, which ben conteyned mystily in the Sauter. 
Amos the profete, that was bothe schepparde and 
a’ feeld man, and wel knowynge the beries of the 
busches, may not be opened in fewe wordis ; for 
who may worthily shewe the thre and thet foure 
wickidnesses of Damask, of Gaze, of" Tire, and 
Ydume", and of the sones of Amon, and of Moab, 
and* in the seuenthe and eiz3tthe degree of Juda 
and Irael? ‘He this spekethY to the fatte kiyn 
that ben in the mounte of Samarie, and witnesseth 
that the inore hows and the lesse of Samarye 
shulde falle doun. He byholdith the feynour of 
the lokuste, and the Lord stondynge upon the 
teride wal and the adainauntyne, and the appil 
crook drawynge turmentis to synful men, and hun- 
gur in erthe, not hungere of breed, neither thirst of 
watir, but of heeryng of the word of God. Ab- 
dias, that is as myche to seie as the seruaunt of 
the Lord, thundryth and sowneth a3ens Edom, 
and a3en the bloodi man, and the? erthely brothir; 
also he smytith with a goostly dart the contynuel 
enemye of oure brothir Jacob. Jonas, that is, the 
moost fair culuer, and in his schipbreche byfore 
fygurynge the passioun of Crist, clepith a3en the 
world to penaunce, and, vndir the name of Ny- 
nyue, he shewith saluacioun to come to hethene 
men. Michee of Morasty, that was eir of heuene 
to gideres with Crist, shewith the wastyng of the 
dou;tir of a pryuy theef, and he sittith bisegyng 
ajens hir, for she smot the cheek boon of the inge 
of Israel. Naum, comfortour of the world, blaimeth 
the citee of bloodis, and aftir the ouerturnyng 
therof he spekuth thus, “ Lo! upon the hillis of 
“vertu ben the feet of him that prechith the gos- 
“ pel, and shewith pees to the puple.” Abacuk, 
the strong wrastelere and my3ty, stondith stifly 
upon his warde, and he settith faste his step* vpon 


cand ofr. @Om.n. 
h calleth 1. 
r Om. Hn. 


€ seuenty 4. seuente BE. seuene D. 
iand «4. kthe spernr. 10m. sprn. 
§ preuete D. 


xOm.r. ¥ Thes spekith r. These speken x. 


OF ST. JEROME. 


‘the Lord, herith a cry fro the 3aat of fisshes, 
and 3ellynge fro the secound, and contricoun fro 
litle hillis ; he tellith also the crie of weilynge 
to the dwellers of Pile; for al the puple of Cha- 
naan helde his pees togidre, and echon ben dis- 
parpulid, that weren inlappid with siluer. Ag- 
geus, solempne and glad, the whiche sewe* in 
teres that he repe in ioy, edifieth" the temple dis- 
truyed, and ledith in God the fadre spekinge, 
‘ 3it and’ a® litle while and Y shal moue to 
“ gider heuene and erthe, the see and the drye, 
“and I shal moue al folk, and the desyred shal 
* com to al folk.” Zachary, mynde* of his Lord, 
manyfold in profesie, Jhesus clothid with fowle 
clothes, and the stoon of seuene eijen, and the 
goldun candilstik with as feel’ lanternes as ei3en, 
and two olyues fro tlie left syde of the lawmpe 
he biholdith, and fro the ri3t side; that after the 
reed horsis specked? whith’, and scatered plowes” 
of fowre horsis® of Effraym, and the hors of Jeru- 
salem, he prophecie’ the pore kyng, and preche® 
the kyng sittynge vpon the colt, sone of the she 
asse vsed to 30k. Malachi, apertlich and inf the 
ende of alle prophetis, of the castyng out of Is- 
rae] and the clepyng® of Gentilis seith, “ Wil is 
* not to me in 30w, seith the Lord of oostis, and 
“ 3ift shal I not take of 3oure honde"; fro! the 
“‘ sunne arysyng® yvnto the goyng down greet is 
“my name “in Gentilis, and a clene offryng is 
“ sacrified, and offrid to my name in alle places!.” 
Ysaie, Jereinye, Ezechiel, and Danyel, who may 
other vndirstond or expown ? Of whom the first 
is not seyn to me to™ weuen prophecie, but 
euangelie. ‘he secounde knyttith the note 3erde, 
and the pot a" fier fro the face of the north, and 
the leparde spuylide his colours, and the foure 
fold abice in dyuerse metres. The thrid hath 
bigynnyngis and ende with so feel derknessis 
enuolued, that, as anentis the Ebrewis, thilk® 
partis with the bigynnyng of Genesis shulde not 
be rad bifore thretti wynter. The ferthe forsothe, 
the which and the laste among the foure pro- 
phetis, knower of tymes, aP louer of stories of al 
the world, feer bifore tellith the stoon before 
kit of the hil with outen hondis, and al rewmes 


alk 


a sikir strengthe, that he my3te biholde Crist in 
the cros, and seie thus, “The glorie of hym ky- 
* ueryde heuens, and the erthe is ful of his preis- 
“ yne; the schynyng of him shal be as hi3t, and 
* hornes shulen be in his hondis, and ther on is 
* his strenthe hid.” Sophonye the profete, the 
biholdere and the knowere of the prinytees of the 
Lord, herith a cry from the 3ate of fischis, and 
weilyng fro the secounde 3ate, and contricioun fro 
litil hillis; he bryngith yn also the? weylyng to 
the dwelleris of Pile, for al the puple of Canaan 
held his pees to gideres, and ech oon ben disparplid 
that ben® wlappid with silner. Aggeus the pro- 
fete, that was solempne and glad, the’ whiche sew 
his seed in teeris that he my3te repe in loye, 
bildith the temple that was distrued, and bryngith 
yn God the fadir spekynge thus, “ 3et hereaftir 
ther shal be a litil while, and I shal meue to 
*‘ gidere heuene and erthe, the see and the drie 
“Jond, and I shal mene alle folk, and Jhesus®, 
“the Sauyour that is desirid of alle folkis, shal 
* come among hem.” Zacharie the profete, beynge 
myndeful of his Lord, and many fold in profecie, 
biholdith Jhesus clothid with foule clothis, and the 
stoon of setlene i3en, and the golden candilstik 
with as fele lanternes as y3en, and two olyues fro 
the liftside of the lJaumpe and fro the ri3t side, that 
aftir the reed horsis’,and the spekkid, and the white, 
and aftir scaterid® charietes of Effraym, and the 
hors of Jerusalem, he my3te shewe the pore kyng 
by profesie, and preche the kyng sittyuge on! a 
colt, that was the sone of a she asse vudir 30k. 
Malechie the profete, and in the ende of alle pro- 
fetis, tellith of the castyng out of Israel, and of 
clepyng of hethene men to the bileeue, “ The Lord 
“ of oostis seith these thingis, my wille is not in 
* 30u, and I shal not take a 3ifte of 3oure hond, for 
*‘ my naine is greet among folk, fro the risyng of 
“the sunne vnto the goyng doun, and in euery 
“ place cleene offryng is sacryficed* and offrid to 
“my name.” Ferthermore who mai vndurstonde, 
ethir expowne Ysaie, and Jeremye, and Ezechiel, 
and Daniel ? Of the! whiche profetis it semeth me, 
that the firste tellith not derk profesie, but veri 
gospel. The secounde by profecie schewid™ of the 


'seweth pn. Uedifieo, VYOm.1. Wor. *meuedrt. Ymanyr. %spleckid z. and whizte 1. > chartes pn. 
© hors aperHi. 4 prophecyeth p. ©¢ prechith p. fintor, & wepyng u. callyng 7. hondis p. i forsothe fro peFitt. 
kK risyng 1. 1 place aperur. ™Om.p. "ofafirer. thor. P Om. p. 

>Om.r. ¢werenr, 4QOm.r. ©Om.r. ftor. hors F. » the scateride rx. iuponr. halowidr. 1 Om. 


™ scheweth Fx. 


72 PREFATORY EPISTLES 


subuertynge, with a clere sermoun. Dauid, oure 
Symphonydes, Pyndarie, and Alcheus‘, Flaccus, 
and Catullus, and Serenus, precheth Crist with 
the harp, and in the ten ‘cordid sawtri" arereth’ 
vp the arisert fro" helle’. Salomon, the pesible 
and the ful loued of the Lord, mendith maneres, 
techith kynde, ioyneth Crist and the chirche, and 
the swete bryde song singith of the holi brydalis. 
Hester, in” figure of the chirche, delyuerith the 
puple fro peril, and, Aman, that* is as myche to 
sey as wyckidnes, slawn, she sendith partis of 
the feest, and a solempne day into the after geten. 
Perlipomynon, that is, the book of the olde in- 
strument, recapitulatour, word bregger’, is suche 
and so myche, that who so euere with onten it 
wole” prowdli take to hym kunnynge of scrip- 
tures, scorne he hym silf; forsothe be alle 
names ‘o rewe®, and ioynters of wordis, outlaft® 
stories in the boke of Kyngis ben towched, and 
questiouns vnnoumbrable of the euaungelye ben 
maad open. Esdras and Neemy, helper, that is 
to sey, and coumfortour fro the Lord, ben artyd° 
in o volume, enstoren the temple, the walles of 
the citee maken out, and al that’ congregacoun 
of the puple a3engoynge into her cuntre, and the 
discripeoun of prestis, of deknes, of Israel, and 
of men takun fro hethenes to the ryte of Jewis, 
and the deuydid werkis of walles and of toures 
bi singuler meynes, bryngen forth other thyng 
in the rynde, and in® the mergh other thing 
withholden. Seest thow me for the loue of serip- 
turys rauyshid to haue passid the maner of a 
pistle, and 3it not haue fillid’ that I wolde? We 
han herd oonlich, what we wnowe know, what 
coueyten, and forsothe that we mowe sey, “my 
** soule coneytide to desire thi justyfyyngis in al 
“tyme.” Forthermore that of Socrates is ful- 
fyllid in vs, “ this oonli Y knowe’ that Y knowe 
* not.” I shal towehe and shortly the newe tes- 
tament. Mathew, Mark, Luke, and Joon, the 
foure hors plowes" of the Lord, and the verrey 
cherubyn, that is to sey, plente of kunnyng, 
thoru3 out al the bodi ben ized, sparklis shynen 
out, li3tes hidir and thidir rennen, han ri3t feet 
and streychynge into heize', rigges fethered, and 


8 reiseth 1. 
@ arewe D. on rowe I. 
ithe hyeje #. heizte rz. 


aq Acheus 4. ‘¥ cordis of the psautrie m2. 
x Om. 1. Ybrynger 4. 2 wyll eg. 
& knew3 1. 4 plow v. plow3 z. 


2 biginnyngis F. 
tthe F. 4 hillis o. 


P to fore F. 
W word FX sec.m. 


° the Ebrewes F. 
Vv enformacoun F. 


t riser 1. 
b outtake pb. 


4 with a F. 
x withoute this F. 


haselne jerd, and of a pot set afire fro the face of 
the north, and of the libard ispoilid of his colours, 
and he knyttith the iiij. maner abece in dyuerse 
metris. The thridde hath bygynnyng" and ende 
wlappid with so many derknessis that, as anentis 
Ebrews®, thilke parties with the bigynnyng of 
Genesis shulde not be rad bifore? thritty wyntir. 
The fourth forsothe, which is the laste among the 
foure profetis, and a knowere of tymes, and a 
louere of stories of the world, schewith with‘ cleer 
word, that ther shulde be a stoon korue out of an 
hil without mannis hondis, turnynge upsedouu 
alle the rewmes of the world; and that stoon is 
Crist, born of a mayde without medlyng of man, 
that turnede bothe™ hethen men and Jewis to the 
bileeue. Dauith, the sownere of symphonie, ‘Pyn- 
darie, and Alcheus, Flaccus, and Catullus, and 
Serenus’, prechith Crist with ant harpe, and in a 
sautre of ten cordis he reisith him up fro hellis", . 
that roos fro deth to liyf. Salamon, the pesible 
and the amyable child of the Lord, amendith ma- 
neris, and techith kynde, and ioyneth Crist and 
hooly chirche to gideres, and syngith the sweete 
bryddis song of hooly brydalis. Hester, in figure 
of hooly chirche, delyuerith the puple fro perel, 
and whanne Aman, that is as myche to seie as 
wickidnesse, was slayn, she sendith partis of the 
feeste aboute, and ordeyneth a solempne day to 
hem that shulden be bore aftirward. Paralipo- 
menon, that is, the hook of the olde instrument’, 
rehersour of chapitres bifore seid, and breggere of 
wordus”, is sich and so myche worth, that whoso 
euere ‘withouten it* wole proudly take to him kun- 
nyng of scripturis, he may worthily scorne him 
silf; for sikirly this book berith greet misterie bi 
alle the names therof and ioynyngis of wordis, 
and the stories that ben lefte vnwriten in the 
bookis of Kyngis, ben touchid in this, and also 
questiouns of the gospel ben opened’ in it with- 
outen noumbre. Esdras, and Neemye his helpere, 
that is to seie, a comfortour sent fro the Lord, ben 
conteyned in o volym; thei restoren the temple, 
and maken up the wallis of the citee, and also al 
the congregacioun of the puple that turnede a3en 
in to her cuntre, and the diseryuyng of prestis and 


v the helle p sec.m. hellisr. Wisar. 
dQOm. 8. €Om. 28. f fulfellid p. 


U of B. 
© arettide 1. 


rOm. x. § semlich, and wys, and cleer of lynage F. 


Y touchid x. 


OF ST. JEROME. 73 


holden hem togidre ouer al fleynge, and to hem 
siluen ben thur3 out pleitid, and as a wheel with 
yune a wheel ben turned, and gon whidre euer 
the breeth of the Holi Goost hem perfitly ledith. 
Poul the apostle writith to seuene chirches; the 
ei3t forsothe to Ebrewis* of summe men out of 
the! noumbre is put. Tymotlie he enfourmeth, 
and Tite; Philomon he preieth for the seruaunt 
fugitife, vpon the whiche I wene beter to be stil, 
than to few thingis write. The Actes of the! 
Apostlis forsothe nakid™ storye semen to sownen, 
and to weuen the childhod of the waxynge 
chirche; and for® we knowen the wryter of hem 
Luke to ben a phisisian, whos preysyng is in the 
euangelie, we taken hede there with alle his 
wordis to ben medecyn of the langwissynge soule. 
James, Petre, Joon, Jude®, seuene epistlis maden 
as wel mistik? as‘ redi, and short ‘togidre, and 
long; short in wordis, long in sentencis, that 
he be seldom, that not wexeth'’ blynd in the 
redyng of hem. The Apocalips of Joon so fele 
hath sacramentis, how fele wordis. Litle Y haue 
seid, and for the desert of the volym, al the 
preysyng is the lower; in euery® wordis manyfold 
vnderstondyngis sitten hid. I prey thee, dere 
brother, among these thingis to lyuen, these 
thingis to thenken, noon othre thingis' to 
knowun, and no thing ellis to sechen. Semeth 
it not to thee now here in erthis a dwellyng 
place of" heuenli kyngdom? I wole’ not, that 
thou be offendid in holi scripturis thur3 symple- 
nes, and as thur3 foulnes of wordis, the whiche, 
or“ thur3 the vice of the* vndoers, or of verrey 
purpose, ben so spokun, that the li3tloker thei 
my3ten enfourme aY churlishe’ cumpany; and 
that? in oon and the’ same sentence other wise 
the tau3t, othre wise the vntau3t my3ten fele. 
Iam not so lustsum and dul, that I shulde bi- 
hote thes thingis me to know, and the fruytis 
of hem to gadere?» in the erthe, whos rotis ben 
ficchid® in heuene; but I knowelech to wiln, but 
I professe me to enforse, I profer me to the 
sitter; forsakynge mayster* Y° bihote a leder, “to 
“the asker me 3yueth, to the knocker me openeth, 
“the seker fyndith;” lerne we in erthis whos 


kundekenes of Israel and of men newe turned fro 
hethenesse to the rite of Jewis, and the dyuerse 
werkis of wallis and of toures bi alle the meynees, 
beren o thing in the rynde bitokened bi the lettre, 
and an othere thing they conteynen withinne in 
the mary of gostly vndurstondyng. ‘Thou? seest 
wel that I haue passid the maner of epistil, for I 
am rauyshid with loue* of scriptures, and 3it I 
hane not fulfillid that I wolde; netheles we han 
herd what we moun knowe and desire, that we 
moun seie also, “ my soule hath coueytid to desire 
“ thy iustyfyingis in al tyme,” and al so thilke 
prouerbe of Socrates is fulfillid in us, that seith 
thus, “I knowe oneliche this thing, that I knowe 
“no thing fully.” 


CAP. VIII: 


I shal touche the newe testament, ‘and that? 
shortly ; as Matheu, Mark, Luyk, and Joon, that 
ben the foure whelid cart of the Lord, and the veri 
cherubyn, that is to seie, plentee of kunnyng; they 
ben ful of i3en thorou3 al the body, sparcles shynen 
out fro hem, leitis rennen hidur and thidur, thei 
han euene strei3t feet and strecchyng an hi3, and 
backes fetherid, and holden hem togideres ouer al 
fleynge, and they ben faste plettid ech to othere, 
and they ben turned as o wheele with ynne an 
othere wheele, and goon whidur euere the Hooly 
Goost ledith hem. Poul the® apostle writith to 
seuene chirches, for the viij. epistle that he wroot 
to Ebreus is put of sum men out of the noumbre. 
Also he enformeth Tymothe and Tite; and he 
preieth Filomone for the seruaunt that fley awey, 
upon the whiche I weene it is betere to be stille 
than to write a fewe thingis. Also the Actus of 
Apostles semen to sowne nakid storie, and to con- 
teyne the childhood of the wexyng chirche; but 
for we knowen that the writere of hem was Luyk, 
that was a ficisien, whose® preisyng is in the gos- 
pel, we taken heede therfor that alle his wordis 
ben medycyn of the morenyng soule. James, Petre, 
Joon, and Judee, maden seuene epistlis, as wel 
goostly and mystik as compendiouse ; they ben 
bothe schorte in® wordes and longe in sentences, so 
that selden it is, that sum man ne waxith blynde 


k the Hebrewis spern1. 10Om.1. ™the nakidr. 2 Om. a. and Juder. P mistiliche >. 9 Om. ap. * waxe 1. 
Seuereche sperut. thing perm. “ina. Vv willesper. other spru. *Om.1. Yani. 2 churliche sperm. 
a Om. p. bin the pu. bb gidere arr. gyther 8. geder p. ¢ stykyd pb. 4 the maister 1. eand Iu. 

% Thanne thou x sup.ras, 4thelouer. >%Om.F. ¢Om.x. 4anda leche whas¥. ¢ and longe, schorte in Fx. 


L 


74 PREFATORY EPISTLES 


nyng to vs dwellith in heuene. I shal take thee 
with met hondis ajens otlire, and that I heelde 
out sum what vnecouenably that be of thef bol- 
nyng of Ermagore, what euer thou shuldeS seek 
with thee, I shal enforse to kunne. 


CAP. VIIL. 


Thou hast here the moost louyd brother of 
thee Eusebi, the which dowblid to me the grace 
of thi lettres, tellynge the honestee of thi ma- 
ners, the dispisyng of the world, the feith of 
frenship, the loue of Crist; for prudence and 
fayrnes of speche also with outen hym thilke! 
epistle tolde bifore. Hye, Y preye thee, and the 
corde of the boot dwellynge in the see rather 
kut of, than vubynd; no man to renounse the 
world, wel may selle thingis that he hath dis- 
pisid for to selle. What euer into thi costagis of 
thin thow takest, cownte it for wynnyng; in 


f Om. n. & schuldist pepr. 
fOm.rx. €Om.rF. bonerther. iwilr. Om. F. 
P Om. F. 4 dwelle x. T oftake F. 8 I be o pr.m, xX. 


in the redyng of hem. The Apocalyps of Joon 
hath as feele sacramentis, as he hath wordis. Litil 
I haue seyd, and for the worthynesse of the volym 
al the preisyng is the lowere; in alle the wordis 
many manere vndirstondyngis ben hid. I preie 
thee, dere brother, that thou lyue among these 
thingis, and to thenke on these thingis, and noon 
othere science to knowe, ne noon othir sciencef to 
seche. Semeth it not now® to thee, whyle thou 
art here ‘in erthes, to be a dwellynge place in 
heuenly kyngdom? I wole! not that thou be of- 
fendid in hooly scriptures thorou3 symplenesse, and 
as thorou3 foulnesse of wordis, the* whiche thorou3 
the vice of expowneris', either of verry pwwpos, ben 
so™ spoken, that thei my3ten the liz3tlyere enforme 
the lewid puple, and that the lerned man my3te 
feele in o wise in the same sentence, and the vn- 
lerned in an other maner. I am neither so lusty, 
ne so dul, that I shulde bihote me to knowe these 
thingis, to" gadere the fruytis of hem on erthe, 
whose rootis ben fastned in heuene; but I know- 
lech to° wilne, and enforse me?, and profre me as a 
disciple to him that sittith in chayre; forsakynge 
me to be a mastir, I bihote me to be a felowe in 
lernyng ; for “ to the askere me 3yueth, and to the 
* knockere me openeth, and he that sekith fynd- 
“ith ;” lerne we on erthe siche: thingis, whose 
kunnyng dwellith? to us in heuene. I shal atake" 
thee with hondis netynge togideres, and that I 
helde out sum what vncouenably that bes of the 
bolnyng of Ermagore, I shal enforse tot kunne al 
that thou shuldist seke. 


CAP.AX, 


Thou hast here Eusebie oure wel biloued bro- 
thir, that doublide to me the grace of thi lettris, 
tellynge the oneste of thi maneris, and the dispis- 
yng of the world, the feyth of frendship, and the 
loue of Crist; for thilke epistle without him telde 
openly thy prudence and fairnesse of speche. Hize 
thou thee, I biseche thee, and rather kit of the 
coorde of the boot that abydith in the see, than 
thou shuldist tarie to vnbynde it; for no man that 
wole forsake the world, may wel sille siche thingis 
that he hath dispisid to sille. What euere thing 
that thou takist of thin owne in to costages", rykene 


h lettre E. ithe r. 


1 the expowneris x. ™thusF. “andtor. © me to F. 


t me to F. = thi costages F. 


OF ST. JEROME. 


olde maner it is seid, to an auerowse man lack- 
ith, as wel that that* he hath, as that that* he 
hath not; to hym that bileueth al the world of 
richessis is, forsothe, an vnfeithful man, 3he, 
nedith an half peny. So lyue we, as no thing 
hauynge and alle thingis holdynge in posses- 
sioun; lyuelod and clothing ben richessis of 
cristen men. If thow hast in thi power thi 
thing, selle; if thow hast not, cast awey; to 
hym that takith awey thi coote, the mantil is to 
be laft. And! but thow euermore makynge ajen 
moru fro moru, and drawynge day fro day, sle3li 
fote™ bi fote thow sille thi litle possessiouns, 
hath" not Crist wherof his pore men he® fede ? 
Al he hath 3yuen to God, that offride hym silf. 
The apostlis oonli forsoken the boot and the 
nettis; the widwe putte two mytis? into the 
tresorye of God, and it is put bifore the richessis 
of Cressi. Li3tli he dispisith alle thingis, the 
whiche hym silf euermore’ thenkith to be to 
dien. 


CAR Mx: 


I haue takun desired epistlis of my man De- 
siderie, the which, thur3 a maner bifore kun- 
nynge of thingis that ben to com, with Danyel 
is fallun the name of hym, preiynge, that I 
shulde take to the erys of ourne the fyue bokis 
of Moyses translatid fro Ebrewe speche into* 
Latyn tung. Certeyn a perylous werk, open to 
the berkyngis of backbyters, that seyn' me to" 
forgen new thingis for olde into the stranglyng 
of the seuenti interpretours, so wit as wyn prou- 
ing; sith Y ful oft haue witnessid me to offre in 
the tabernacle of God for a li3t’ porcoun thingis 
that I may, new the* richessis’ of an othre man 
to be defowlid with the porenes of othre. The 
which thing that I shulde dore don’, me styryde 
the studie of Orygen, the which to olde transla- 
cioun mengide the translacoun of Theodocioun, 
with astericho, that is, with the signe of a ‘sterre*, 
whan he makith clere the thingis that weren to 


k Om. p. 10m. 1. 


75 


it for wynnyng; for it is an old sothsawe, to the 
auarouse inan as wel lackith the” good that he 
hath, as that he hath not; and to him that bi- 
leueth as he shulde, al the world is of his rychese*, 
but the vnfeythful man hath euere nede, 3he, to an 
halpeny. Therfor lyue we in siche maner, as 
hauynge no thing and weldyng alle thinges; liflode 
and clothing ben richessis of cristen men. If 
thou hast thin owne good in thi power, selle it; 
if thou hast not, cast awey and lett it go; for 
Crist seith, thi? mantil is to be lefte to him that 
berith awey thi? coote. But if it be so that 
thou puttynge ouer euermore fro morewe to mo- 
rewe, and tariynge fro day to day, sli3lich and 
foot by foot thou selle thi litil possessiouns, hath 
not Crist, trowist thou, wher of he may feede his 
pore folk? He that hath offrid him silf, hath 3oue 
al his good to God. The apostlis forsoken onely 
the boot and the nettis; the widowe putte two 
minutis in to the treserie of God, and it is put in 
worship bifore the richesse of gold. Li3tly he dis- 
pisith alle worldly goodis, that thenkith euere 
more in him silf that he shal die. 


‘Preface of Seint Jerom?. 

I haue take the® epistlis myche desirid of my 
man Desiderye, the whiche, with a maner profecie 
of thingis to come, vside the name of an hooly bi- 
sechere’ with Danyel the profete, preiynge, that I 
wolde take to the eeris of 30ure frendis the fyue 
bookis of Moyses translatid fro Ebrew speche into 
Latyn tunge. Certenly this is a perelouse werk, 
and opene to the berkyngis® of bacbiteris, that 
seyn, that I forge new thingis for olde in to the 
hindryng of the seuenty interpretours, and they 
ben preuyng wit as wyn; sithen I ful ofte hane 
witnessid me to offre in the tabernacle of God for 
my symple porcioun siche thingis as I may, not 
wilnynge the richesse of o man to be defoulid with 
the pouert of othere men. The which thing for I 
shulde be hardy to do, the studie of Orygen stiryde 
me therto, the which imedlide the translacioun of 
Theodosyon to the olde translacioun, merkynge al 
his werk with the sigue of a sterre and with the 


ms ™ and fote apEFII. 5 has 1. to F. P minutis 7. q euere 1. Toft. $n p. 
siggen BDEFH. u Om. ov. Vlitel 7. W nob, x Om. 8. Y recches B sup.ras. EFI. 2 that don eg. 
" asterye AD. 
Wthatr. ‘*richessesr. Ytor. 2 the Fo sec.m. ®theosec.m. » Prologus ¥. Prologisx. © Om.¥. ‘ biddere r. 


©berkynge Fr. fto me o pr.m. x. 


1.2 


76 


litle, and with obelo, that is, with signe” of an 
arow, whan he any wast thing® distroieth and 
scrapith awey, al his werk markynge’; and 
moost tho® thingis the whiche the autoryte of 
the apostlis and of the euangelistis openyde ; in 
the which many thingis we reden of the olde 
testament, thef whiche ben not had in oure bokis ; 
as is that, “fro Egipt I clepid’ my sone ;” and, 
“for he" shal be clepid!' Nazare;” and, “men 
“ shalk seen, in whom thei han pungid;” and, 
“ flodis shal! flowe of his womb quyk watres ;” 
and, “ thingis™ that nether eiz3e sei3, ne eere 
“ herde, ne in to the herte of man stiede, that 
* God greithid to hem that hym louen;” and 
many othre thiugis, the whiche desyren propre 
ordre. Aske we" thanne® hem, where thes 
thingis ben wrytun; and whanne thei mown? not 
seye, of the bokis of Ebrewe brynge we forthe. 
The first witnes is in Osee, the secounde in 
Ysaye, the thrid in Zacharye, the ferthe in Pro- 
uerbis, the fifte as wel in Ysaye; the whiche 
many men vnknowynge folwen the deceyuyngis 
of scripturys, whos autor is vuknowun, and 
setten bifore, Spanyshe songes vpon deed men, 
or of noresses vpon ther children, autentik bokis. 
The cause’ of the errour is not myn to expown. 
Jewis seyn, that it is don with wise counsel, lest™ 
Ptholome herier of o God, also as anentis the 
Ebrewis shulde of take dowble Godhede; the 
whiche moost therfor thei diden, for he was 
knowen® to falle into the techyng of Plato. 
Wherfore wher enere holi wrytt witnessith ony 
holi thing of the Fadre, and the Sone, and the 
Holy Goost, ort othre wyse thei vndiden, or al- 
gatis helden ther pees, that thei my3ten do 
aseth to the kyng, and that thei opened not the 
priuete of the bilene. And I not who, the first 
auctour, thur3 his lesyng maad out seuenti sellis 
at Alysawndre, in the whiche thei deuydide the 
same thingis" shulde wryte; sith’ Arestens, of 
the same Ptholome chefe counseylour, and keper 
of bokis, and myche tyme aftir Josaphus, not” 
suche thinge tolden, but wryten hem, gadrid to 


the signe BDEFHI. ¢ thingus BDEFHI. 
icalds. -schullen soerux. | schullen u:. 
T that lest p>». 8S vnknowun 4. ¢t outher aEFH. 


&€Om.r. 4 thilke r. 


i that the auctorite Fr. * Om. F. 


songes upon deede men, or of norices songes ouer here childrene F. 


u whanne thei were departid F. 


4 derkyng p. 
™ thes thingis 1. 
¥ thinge kz. 


PREFATORY EPISTLES 


signe of an arowe ; whanne he made ony scripturis 
more clereli tof shyne that weren bifore lesse cleer, 
there he made the sygne of a sterre; and whanne 
he scrapide or raside awey ony waast writyng, he 
made the sygne of an arowe; and moost in thoo® 
thingis ‘the whiche auctoryte! of the euangelistis 
and of the apostlis openyden; in the* which we 
reden many thingis of the olde testament, that 
ben not had! in oure bookis; as is that auctorite, 
“from Egipt I clepide my sone;” and, “ for he 
* shal be clepid a Nazarey ;” and, “men shulen se, 
“ in whom they han thorou3 persid ;” and, “ floodis 
“ of water of liyf shulen flowe of his wombe ;” and, 
“ thingis that ueithire i3e saw, nether eere herde, 
“ neither styede in to™ the herte of man, that God 
“ hath ordeyned redy for hem that louen him ;” 
and many othere thingis that" ben, that desyren 
her propur ordire. Axe we thanne hem, where these 
thingis ben writun; and sithen they moun not seie 
hem, of the bookis of Ebrew brynge we hem forth. 
The firste witnesse is in Oose, the secounde in 
Ysaie, the thrydde in Zacharye, the fourthe in 
Prouerbis, the fyuethe also in Ysaye; the which 
thing many men vnknowynge folowen the errours 
of siche scripturis that ben with out auctorite, and 
they® setten her ‘veyn taalis? in more worship than 
autentik bookis. Jt is not in my power to ex- 
powne the causis of errour. Jewis seyn, that it was 
doon with’ wise counsel, leste Ptolome, worshipere 
of oo God, shulde haue vndurstonde double Godhed 
anentis' Ebrews ; which thing thei dide moost for 
this cause, for he was knowe to falle to the lore of 
Plato. Wherfor where euere hooly writ witnessith 
ony hooly thing of the Fadir, and the Sone, and 
of* the Hooly Goost, or ellis they expowneden it 
in othere maner, or algatis helde her pees, that 
they my3te aquyte hem to the kyng, and that they 
openyden not the priuyte of the byleene. And the 
firste auctour her of; I woot neuere who, thorou3 
his lesyng made seuenty sellis at Alysaundre, in 
thet whiche they, departid" at twynne, shulden 
write; sith Aristeus, that was cheef councelour of 
the same Ptolome and kepere of his bookis, and 


f Om. u. & calde 1. b that he 1. 
° Om. 1. P mai f. 4 causes BDEFII. 
W no BDEFH. noon J. 


€ thilk aperu. 
2 thon 1. 
Vv since J. 


1 Om. F. n ther Fr. 


T as anentes F. 


m Om. F. 


°Om.F. P Spaynyssche 
abi F. 


s Om. F. t Om. F. 


OF ST. 


gider in o* chirche, to han spokin togider, and 
not to haue prophecied. It is another to be a 
prophet, and an other to ben an vndoer of lan- 
gage; there the spiryt seith bifore thingis that 
ben to comen, here teching and plente of wordis, 
thingis that he vndurstondith translateth. But 
perauenture Tullyus is to be wenyd enblowid 
with the spirit of retorik, to haue translatid the 
boke that is seid Economyk of Zenofontes, and 
the boke that is seid the’ Pictagore of Plato, and 
the boke that is seid Prothesifontes of Demos- 
tynes; other the Holi Gost wenyde witnessis 
of the same bokis othre wise bi the seuenti vn- 
doers of tungis, othre wise bi the apostlis, that 
that? thei helden ther pees, thes han li3id to ben 
writun. What thanne? dampne we the olde? 
nay, but after the studies* of the rather> men, in 
the hous of the Lord we traueileu that that® we 
may. Thei han? undon scripturis before the 
coming of Crist; and that that® thei wisten not, 
thei han spokin with doutous sentence’; we after 
the passioun and the resurreccoun of hym not 
oonli profesie, but storye wrytun. Othre weys 
forsothe thingis seen, other wise thingis herd 
ben told; that we beter vndirstonden, beter we 
tellen. Here than, thou enemye, herkyn, thow 
backbiter; I dampe not, I reprehende uot the 
seuenti, but trustily I putte bifore the apostlis 
to alle thos; bi the mowthe of these to me 
Crist sowneth, whom before the prophetis amonge 
spiritual 3iftis Y rede sett, amonge the’ which 
the vudoers of tungis holden fulli the last degre. 
Wherto art thou tourmentid with enuy ? what 
sterist thow vnwise mennus willis ajens me? if 
where Y seme to thee erre“ in the! translating, 
aske the Ebrewis, conseil the maystrys of dyucrse 
citees ; that thei han of Crist, thi bokis han not. 
It is another, if the witnessis vsurped of the 
apostlis after proueden ajen hem seluen, and the 
Latyn saumplers™ ben more amendid than Grekis, 
Grekis than Ebrews. But thes a3enus the en- 
uyows. Now, ful dere Desidery, I preye thee, 
for that" thou hast maad me to vndergon so greet 
werk®, and to take the bigynuyng of Genesis, 


JEROME. T¢ 


myche tyme aftir Josophus, tellen* no’ sich thing, 
but they writen, whanue thei weren gaderid to 
gideris in to* a chirche, hem to haue talkid to 
gideres, and not to haue profecied. For it is oon to 
be a profete, and an othire to be a translatour of 
langage*; for in profecie the spirit seith bifore 
siche tlingis that ben to come, but in translacioun, 
enformacioun and plentee of wordis, translatith 
siche thingis as he vndirstondith. But parauenture 
Tullius is to be trowid to be blowen with the spirit 
of retorik, and to haue translatid the book that is 
seyd Yeonomyk of Zenofontes, and the book that 
is seyd Pictagore of Plato, and the book that is 
seid Prothesifontis of Demostenes; or ellis the 
Hooly Goost shewide witnessis of the same bookis 
in 0 wise by the seuenty interpretours of langagis, 
and in an othere manere by the postlis, that that? 
thing that they han holde stille, othere men ‘han 
lied to be writen. What thanne? dampne we the 
olde? nay, but aftir the studies of othere men that 
weren bifore® us, what that we may, we traueylen 
in the hous of the Lord.. Thei han translatid 
scriptures bifore the comyng of Crist; they® han 
spoken with douteful’ sentences, that they knewen 
-not®; but we, aftir the passioun and the resurrec- 
coun of him, not onely writen profecie, but open 
storie. For thingis seyn ben telde in o maner, and 
thingis herd ben teld in an other maner; for the 
bettere that we vndurstonden a thing, the bettere 
we tellen it. Therfor here, thou enemye, and 
herkene, thou bacbitere ; I dampne not the" seuenty 
interpretours, but tristylich I putte the apostlys 
tofore) alle hem zx autorite; for bi the mouth of 
thes apostlis Crist sownede* openli to me; the! 
whiche apostlis I rede to be set bifore the profetis 
among goostly 3yftis, among whom the interpret- 
ours of langagis holden fully the laste degree. 
Wher to art thou turmentid with enuye? what 
stirist thou vnwise mennus willes a3ens me? if I be 
seyn in ony place to erre in trauslatynge of hooly 
writ, aske the Ebrews, counceil maistris of dyuerse 
citees; that thei® han of Crist, thi bookes han not. 
It is an othere, if the witnessis vsurpid of the 
apostlis preuyd aftirward ajents hein silf, and the 


* one BDEFH. yYOm. sprit. %Om. pt. 4studiep. > fortherern ¢Om. po. Om. 4. © Om. vr. f sen- 
tensis BDEFIII. & thilk ppEFu. hOm.1. i wherto 1. ktoerrez. $1Om. Bp. ™saumples 4. © Om. er. 
° a werk 1. 

*tolden Fr. Ynotx. 2Om.r. ®langagesr. %suchr. ¢toforer. %Om.¥F. and thei rx. f douteuous F. 
£ Om. F. h ne I repreue not the rx. i alle the F. J bifore x. k sowneth Fx. 1Om, F. 1 or draweres of F. 


® thing that thei F. 


78 PREFATORY EPISTLES OF ST. JEROME. 


helpe thow with preiers, that I mowe thur3 the Latyn ensaumpleris ben more amendid than Grekis, 
same spyryt, thur3 which? the bokis ben wrytun, and Grekis ensaumpleris ben more amendid than 
translaten hem into Latyn sermown. Ebrewis. And forsothe these thingis ben a3enus 
‘Here endith the Prologis4. theP enuyouse men. Now, my ful dereworthe’ 
frend Desiderie, for cause that thou hast maad me 
to vndurtake so greet a werk and to take the by- 
gynnyng at the book of Genesis, I preie thee, helpe 
thou me, that" I may translate hooly writ in to 
the langage of Latyn, thorou3$ the same Spirit that 

the bookis ben writen. 

‘Jerom in his prolog and preface seith al this‘. 


Pthewiche 1. 4 Here endith the prolog of Genesis and other bookis. p. Heere endith the prolog, now bigynneth Genesis. F1. 
No rubric in aru. Erased in £. 


POm.F. 4derewarde Fr. ‘with thi preieresthatr. Sin Fr. t Om, Fx. 


GENESIS. 





Here bigynneth Genesis*. 


TAP. I. 


1 IN the firste made God of nou3t henene 
zand erthe. The erthe forsothe was veyn 
with ynue and void, and derknessis weren 
vpon the face of the see; and the Spiryt 
30f God was born vpon the watrys. And 
God seide, Be maad 1i3t; and maad is 
41i3t. And God saw3 li3t>, that it was 
good, and deuydid 1li3t fro derknessis ; 
sand clepide 1i3t, day, and derknessis, 
ny3t. And maad is ‘euen and moru’, o 
éday. Seide forsothe God, Be maad a fir- 
mament in the myddel’ of watres, and 
7dyuyde® it’ watres fro watrys. And God 
made the firmament, and dyuydid® watris 
that weren vndre the firmament fro thes 
that weren aboue the fermament; and it 
sis maad so. And God clepide the firma- 
ment, heuene. And maad is euen and 
gmoru, the seconde day. God forsothe 
seide, Gadrid be watris, the whiche ben 
vndre heuene, in to o place, and apere 
1othe drie; and maad it is so. And God 
clepid" the drie, erthe; and the! gader- 
yngis of watris he clepide, sees. And 
11God sai3 that it was good; and saith, 
Burion the erthe grene erbe* and mak- 
ynge seed, and appletre! makynge fruyt 
after his kynd, whos seed ben in hym 
silf, vpon the erthe; and maad it is so. 
12 And the erthe brou3te forthe grene erbe™ 
and makynge seed aftre his kynde, and 
tree makynge fruyt, and echon hanynge 


b Om. F. 
h clepith «. 


®@ Genesis, BDEFI. 
fOm. pv. & dyuyde a. 


© euentide and morutide & pr. 2. 
Om. a. 


Here bigynneth Genesis*. 


CAP» J. 


IN the bigynnyng God made of nou3t1 
heuene and erthe. Forsothe the erthe was e2 
idel and voide, and derknessis weren on 
the face of depthe; and the Spiryt of the 
Lord was borun on the watris. And God3 
seide, Li3t be maad, and li3t? was maad. 
And God sei3 the lit, that it was good,4 
and he departide the® li3t fro derknessis ; 
and he clepide the 1i3t, dai, and the derk-s 
nessis, ny3t. And the euentid and morwe- 
tid? was maad, o daie. And God seide,6 
The firmament be maad in the myddis of 
watris, and departe® watris fro watris. And7 
God’ made the firmament, and departidef 
the watris that weren vndur the firmament 
fro these® watris that weren on the fir- 
mament; and it was don so. And Gods 
clepide the firmament, heuene. And the 
euentid and morwetid® was maad, the se- 
counde dai. Forsothe God seide, The wa-9 
tris, that ben vndur henene, be gaderid in 
to o place, and a drie place appere; and 
it was doon so. And God clepide the drie 10 
place, erthe ; and he clepide the gadryngis 
togidere of watris, the sees. And God 
sei3 that it was good; and seide, The erthe 11 
brynge forth greene eerbe and makynge 
seed, and appil' tre makynge fruyt bi his 
kynde, whos seed be in it silf on erthe; 
and it was doon so. And the erthe brou3te 12 
forth greene erbe and makynge seed bi his 
kynde, and a* tre makynge fruyt, and ech 


4 myddis pb. © dyuydide ap. 


kherbis p. appeltreis p. ™ herbis p. 


® Here bigynneth the bible playnly the text, and where that ony maner elause is set in the text and is 
not therof, Lire eertifieth it plainly, Here bigynneth Genesis. Bd. Here bigynneth the book of Ge. 
nesis. p10. Genesis Ges. Now bigyuneth Genesis. x. Here bigyuneth playnly the text of the byble in 


English: Genesis. N. Here bigynneth Genesis, the firste booc of the bible. x. No title in EFQRTW. 
€ departide Go pr.m. X pr.nt. 


ligt r. ¢Om.1. 4 the morwetid EFKLSs. 
h the morwetid Kxs. 


ian appil BDFGINP pr.m. QorsTWxd. 


bthe 
f God departide cq. & the s. 


x Expuncted p. 


80 GENESIS. 


seed after his special kynde. And God 
138ai3 that it were” good. And maad is 
i4euen and moru, the thrid day. God for- 
sothe seide, Be ther maad 1i3t 3yuers in 
the firmament of henene, and deuyde thei 
dai and ny3t ; and be thei into signes, and 
istymes, and daies, and 3eers; and lij3tne 
thei in the firmament of heuene, and 
liztne thei the erthe; and maad it is so. 
16 And God made two greet 1i3t 3yuerys, 
the more 1i3t 3yner that it were bifore to 
the day, and the lesse 1i3t 3yuer that it 
17 were bifore to the ny3t, and sterres. And 
he putte hem in the firmament of heuene, 
that thei shniden 3yue 1i3t vpon the erthe, 
isand that thei were bifore to the day and 
to the ny3t, and shulde deuyde li3t and 
derknessis. And God sai3 that it wer® 
19good. And maad is euen and moru, the 
20ferthe day. God also seide, Watres bryng 
thei forthe the crepynge kynd of the 
lynynge soule, and the fleeinge kynde 
vpon the erth, vndre the firmament of 
2theuene. And God made of nou3t greet 
whallis, and al soule lyuyng and mouable, 
whom? watres brou3ten forth into ther 
special kyndes, aud al fleynge thing’ after 
his kynd. And God sai3 that it wer 
22g00d ; and blisside to hem, seiynge, 
Growith, and beth® 3e multiplyed, and 
fulfillith the watres of the see, and the 
briddis be multiplied vpon the erthe. 
23 And maad is even and morn, the fyueth 
24day. God forsothe seide, Bryng forthe 
the erthe soule lyuynge in his kynde, 
imnentis', and crepynge thingis, and 
beestis of the erthe, after ther special 
2kyndis; and so it is maad. And God 
made beestis of the erthe aftir ther spe- 
cial kyndes, iumentis, and al the" crep- 
ynge thing of the erthe in his kynde. 
26And God sai3 that it wer’ good; and 
seith, Make we man to the ymage and 


I. 13-——26. 


hanynge seed by his kynde. And God 
sei3 that it was good. And the euentid1s 
and morwetid! was maad, the thridde dai. 
Forsothe God seide, Li3tis be maad in the 14 
firmament of henene, and departe tho™ the 
dai and ni3t"; and be tho® in to signes, and 
tymes, and daies, and 3eeris; and? shyne1s 
tho in the firmament of heuene, and li3tne 
tho4 the’ erthe; and it was doon so. And 16 
God made twei grete li3tis, the gretter li3t 
that it schulde be bifore to the dai, and 
the lesse 1i3t that it schulde be bifore to - 
the nijt; aud God made sterris ; and set-17 
tide’ thot in the firmament of heuene, that 
tho" schulden schyne on erthe, and that 1s 
tho’ schulden be bifore to the dai and 
ny3t, and schulden departe 1i3t and derk- 
nesse. And God sei3 that” it was good. 
And the eventid and the* morwetid was 19 
maad, the fourthe dai. Also God seide, The 20 
watris brynge forth a¥ ‘crepynge beeste’ of 
lyuynge soule, and a* brid fleynge> aboue 
erthe® vndur the firmament of heuene. 
And God made of non3t grete whallis, and 21 
ech lyuynge soule and mouable, whiche 
the watris han brou3t forth in to her 
kyndis ; and God made of nou3t ech vola- 
tile bi his kynde. And God sei; that it 
was good; and blesside hem, and seide, 22 
Wexe 3e, and be 3e° inultiplied, and fille 3e 
thee watris of the see, and briddis be mul- 
tiplied on erthe. And the euentid and 23 
thef morwetid was maad, the fynethe dai. 
And God seide, The erthe brynge forth a® 24 
lyuynge soul in his kynde, werk beestis, 
and ‘crepynge beestis*, and vnresonable 
beestis of erthe, bi‘ her kyndis; and it was 
don so. And God made vnresonable beestis 25 
of erthe* bi her kyndes, and werk beestis, 
‘and! ech™ crepynge beeste of erthe" in his 
kynde. And God sei3 that it was good; 
and seide, Make we man to oure ymage 26 
and liknesse, and be he souereyn to the 


Dwasa. %was4. Pwhos4. 40m. 4. thingisp. ‘was se. ‘%be BDEFH.  t bestayle p. 
uQOm. BDEFH. YV was AE. 

1the morwetid EKL. ™Om. 1. they ox. "the ni3txk. ©Om.F, they ox. POm.c 4Om.a. 
thei xn. °Om.xGumpad. §settes. themwn. thei Nox. Vthein. WOm.p. * Om. spenrartwd. 
y Om. EILP sec.m, % reptile cther a crepinge beeste BNd. reptile or cr. 6.1. 2 Om. EILP sec.m. vo- 
latijl ether a brid fleinge Bnd. volatile or br. fle.1. ¢theerthe ma. 4Om.EFL~P. © Om.p. f Om, BDE 
GILMNPQRTWd. € Om. Lr sec.m. ‘- reptils ether erepinge becstis pnd. iing. the erthe BLN. 
'Om.n. ‘mor thes sup.ras. ™ the erthe E. 


I. 27——II. 5. 


oure lickenesse, and bifore be he to the 
fishis of the see, and to the volatils of 
heuene, and to the beestis of the erthe, 
and to al creature, and to al the crepynge 
27thing that moueth in the erthe. And 
God made of nou3t man to the ymage 
and his lickenes; to the ymage of God 
he made lym; maal and femaal he made 
28hem” of nou3t. And God blissid to hem, 
and seith, Growe* 3e, and be 3e multi- 
plied, and fulfille 3e the erthe, and sogette 
3e it, and haue 3e lordship to the fishis of 
the see, and to the volatilis of heuene, 
and to alle thingis hauynge soule that 
29mouen vpon theY erthe. And God seyde, 
Se! Y haue 3ouun to 3ow al erbe bryng- 
inge forthe seed vpon the erthe, and alle 
trees that han in hym silf seed of ther 
kynde, that thei ben to 3ow into? mete; 
30and to alle thingis hauynge soule of the 
erthe, and to al foule* of heuene, and to 
alle thingis that mouen in the erthe, and 
in the which is soule 3yuynge lif, that 
thei haue for to eet; and maad it is so. 
31 And God sai3 alle thingis that he made, 
and thei weren ful good. And made is? 
euen and moru, the sixte day. 


CAP. dy 
1 Therfor parfite ben heuene and erthe, 
zand al the anowrnyng of hem. And God 
fulfillide in the seuenthe day his werk 
that he made; and he restide the¢ senen- 
eth day fro al werk’ that he hadde® ful- 
3filid ; and he blisside to the seuenthe 
day, and he halwide it; for in it he had® 
sesyd fro al his werk that God shapide 
4that he shulde make. Thes ben the ge- 
neraciouns of heuene and erthe, whan 
thei ben fourmed, in the day that the 
5 Lord God made heuene and erthe, and 
ech bushe of the feeld or it were growun 
in the erthe, and al erbe of regioun bifore 
that it buriownde. The Lord God for- 
sothe had not reyned vpon the erthe, and 
was noo man that my3te worche the 


w~Om. Fr. *Xgrowithp. YOm.p. 2 vnto a. 
werke B pr.m. werkes pn. = =& Om. & prem. 
° reptile nnd. POm.s. 4 fulfille zp. 1° of the c. 


Vv the morwetid Kn. WW whiche s. 
4 the erthe pirst sec.m. 


GENESIS. 


x make tn werk BGNOQX. 


81 


fischis of the see, and to the volatilis of 
heuene, and to vnresonable beestis of erthe, 
and to ech creature, and to ech ‘crepynge 
beest®, which is moued in erthe. And? 27 
God made of nou3t a man to his ymage 
and liknesse; God made of nou3t a man, 
to the ymage of God; God nade of nou3t 
hem, male and female. And God blesside 28 
hem, and seide, Encreesse 3e, and be 3e 
multiplied, and fille’ 3e the erthe, and 
make 3e it suget, and be 3e lordis to fischis 
of the see, and to® volatilis of heuene, and 
to alle lyuynge beestis that ben moued 
on erthe. And God seide, Lo! Y hauegs 
3oue to jou ech eerbe berynge seed on 
erthe, and alle treest that han in hein silf 
the seed of her kynde, that tho" be in to 
mete to 3ou; and to alle lyuynge beestis 30 
of erthe, and to ech brid of heuene, and 
to alle thingis that ben moued in erthe, 
and in whiche is a lyuynge soule, that 
tho" haue to ete; and it was doon so. 
And God sei3 alle thingis whiche hes 
made, and tho" weren ful goode. And 
the euentid and morwetid’ was maad, the 
sixte day. 


CAP. II. 


Therfor heuenes and erthe ben maad1 
perfit, and al the ournement of tho. And2 
God fillide in the seuenthe dai his werk 
which he made; and he restide in the 
seuenthe dai fro al his werk which he 
hadde maad; and he blesside the seuenthes 
dai, and halewide it; for in that dai God 
ceesside of al his werk which he made of 
nou3t, that” he schulde make*. These4 
ben the generaciouns of heuene and of 
erthe, in the day wherynne the Lord God 
made heuene and erthe, and ech litil tres 
of erthe bifore that it sprong out in erthe ; 


._ and he made ech erbe of the feeld bifore 


that it buriownede. For the Lord God 
had not reyned onY erthe’, and no man 
was* that wrou3te erthe>; but a welles 


8 foulis prim. » it is 4. ¢ in the zg. his 


u thei Nn. 
8 ther was I. 


8 Om. 5G. t the trees BN. 
Yupons. 2 the erthe x. 


to the MKs. 


M 


82 GENESIS. 


certhe; but a welle ascendide fro the 
erthe, watering al the ouermost of the 
zerthe. The Lord God thanne fourmede 
man of the slyme of the erthe, and spi- 
ride ‘in tof the face of hym an entre of 
breth of lijf; and maad is man into a 
ssoule 3yuynge lijf. Forsothe the Lord 
God had plawntid paradise of delice fro 
bigynnyng, in the which he sette man 
9whom he had fourmed. And the Lord 
God brou3te forthe of the erthe eche tree 
fayre in si3t, and swete to ete; also the 
tree of jf in the inydle of paradys, and 
a tree of kunnyng of good and of yuels. 
10 And a flood 3ede out of the place of delice 
to watre paradis, the which fro thens ts 
ildenydid in foure hedis; name of" the 
toon Phison, he is that goth abowt al the 
erthe of Euilath, where growith gold, 
1zand the gold of that erthe is best; and 
ther is foundun bdelyum, and the stoon 
130nychynus; and name to the secounde 
flood Gyon, he is that gothe abowt al the 
iserthe of Ethiope; name! forsothe of the 
thrid flood Tigrys, he gothe a3ens Assy- 
rios; the ferthe forsothe flood, he is Eu- 
isfrates. Thanne the Lord God toke man, 
and putte hym in paradis of delice, that 
16he shulde worche and kepe* it. And he 
commaundide to hym, seiynge, Of ech tree 
iwof paradis ete; of the tree forsothe of 
kunnyng of good and of yuel ete thow 
not; in what euer day sotheli thow etist 
isthere of', with deth thow shalt die. The 
Lord God forsothe seide, It is not good 
man to be alone; make we to hym help 
19like hym. Fourmed thanne of the moist 
erthe alle thingis of the erthe hauynge 
soule, and al volatile of hewene, the Lord 
God brou3te hem to Adam, that he shulde 
se what he shulde clepe hem; al thing 
forsothe of soule lyuynge that Adam 
20clepid, that is the name of it. And 
Adam clepide alle thingis hauynge soule, 
and al™ volatile of henene, and alle beestis 
of the erthe, bi her names. To Adam 


fino. 8yllez. } to pperu. 


¢ sede 1, d Om. BDEFGILMNOPQRTWX. 
' to BDEFGILMNOPQRTWX. 
© flood py. POm. a. 4sette s. 


Wand therfors. * that x. 


r Om. B. 


jand name a. 


© the erthe s. 
k Om. EmNoperstwxd. 
s Om. s. 


Il. 6—20., 


stiede® out of the’ erthe, and moistide al 
the hijere part of erthe®. Therfor the7 
Lord God formede man of the sliym of 
erthe, and brethide in to his face the 
brething of lijf; and man was maad in to 
a lyuynge soule. Forsothe the Lord Gods 
plauntide at the bigynnyng paradis of 
likyng, wherynne he settide’ man whom 
he hadde formed. And the Lord Gods 
brou3te forth of the erthe ech tre fair in 
si3t, and swete to ete; also he brou3te forth 
the tre of lijf in the middis of paradis, 
and the tre of kunnyng of good and of 
yuel. And a ryuer 3ede out fro the place 10 
of likyng to moyste paradis, which" ryuer 
is departid fro thennus in to foure heedis. 
The name of! the* o ryuer is Fyson, thilke 11 
it! is that cumpassith al the lond of Eui- 
lath, where gold cometh forth, and the1z 
gold of that lond is the beste, and there is 
foundun delium, ¢hat is, a tree of spicerie, 
and the stoon onychyn™; and the name13 
to" the secounde ryner® is Gyon, thilke it 
is that cumpassith al the loond of Ethi- 
opie; forsothe the name of the thridde14 
ryuer isP Tigris, thilke goith a3ens Assi- 
riens; sotheli the fourthe ryuer is thilke 
Eufrates. Therfor the Lord God took1s 
man, and settidel hym in paradis of lik- 
yng, that he schulde worche and kepe it. 
And God comaundide to hym and seide, 16 
Ete thou of ech tre of paradis; forsothe 17 
ete thou not of the tre of kunnyng of good 
and of yuel; for in what enere dai thou 
schalt ete therof, thou schalt die bi deeth. 
And the Lord God seide, It is not good 18 
that" a’ man be aloone, make we to hym 
an helpt lijk to® hym silf. Therfor’ 19 
whanne alle lyuynge beestis of erthe, and 
alle the volatils of heuene weren formed 
of erthe, the Lord God brou3te tho to 
Adam, that he schulde se what he schulde 
clepe tho; for al thing that Adam clepide 
of lyuynge soule, thilke* is the name therof. 
And Adam clepide bi her names alle ly-20 
uynge thingis, and alle volatils, and alle 


lherof pperu. ™ Om. v. 


‘Om. usw. &settes.  ) the which 1. 
10Om.s. ™ofonychyn ELP. " of BDGILI. 
t helper ox sup.ras. “Om. mss. ceferi omnes. 


k schuld kepe z pr.m. 


Il. 21—IIl. 8. 


forsothe was not foundim an helper like 
21hym. Thanne send ynne the Lord God 
slep into Adam, and whanne he was 
asleep", he toke oon of his ribbis, and 
22 fulfillide flehs for it. And the Lord God 
edifiede the rib, the which he toke of 
Adam, into a woman, and brou3te hir to 
23 Adam. And Adam seide, This now boou 
of my bonys, and flehs of my flehs; this 
shal be clepid mannus dede, for she is 
24takun of a man. Wherfor a man shal 
forsake his fadre and modre, and shal 
draw to hys wijf, and two shal be in o 
25flehs. Either forsothe was nakid, Adam, 
that is; and his wijf, and thei shameden 
no3t. 


CAP. III. 

1 But and the edder® was feller than 
ony lifers of the erthe, the which made 
the Lord God. ‘The which seide to the 
woman, Whi comaundide God to 3ow, 
that 3e shulden not ete of ech tree of pa- 

2radis? To whom answeryde the woman, 
Of the fruyt of trees that ben in paradis 

3we eten; of the fruyt forsothe of the tree 
that is in the mydil of paradis, commaund- 
ide us God, that we shulden not eten, 
and that we shulden not towche it, lest 

.4perauenture we dien. Forsothe the eddre 
‘seide to the woman, Thur3 deth 3e shal 

shot die; God forsothe wote, that in what 
euer day 3e eten therof, 3oure ei3en shul 
be openyd, and 3e shal ben as Goddis, 

eknowynge good and yuel. Thanne the 
woman sai3 that the tree were good, and 
swete for to ete, and fayre to the eijen 
and delitable in the si3t; and she toke of 
the fruyt of it, and ete, and 3aue to hire 
7man, the which ete. And the eizen of 
both ben openyd; and whanne thei knewen 
hem silf to be nakid, thei soweden to 
gidre leeues of a fige tree, and maden 
éhem brechis. And whanne thei herden 
the voys of the Lord God goynge in pa- 
radis at the shynyng after myd dai, 


. o slepe BEF. 


% sche this 17 sec.m. 
© Eue his Eur. 


Ya fleisch gn. 
4 he schal s. 


8 virago, that is, takun of man BYKNOX. 
f Om. Go pr.m. QRT. 


M 2 


GENESIS. 83 


vnresonable beestis of erthe. Forsothe to 
Adam was not foundun an helpere hjk 
hym. Therfore the Lord God sente sleepei 
in to Adam, and whanne he slepte, God 
took oon of hise ribbis, and fillide fleisch 
for it. And the Lord God bildide the rib 22 
which he hadde take fro Adam iu to a 
womman, and brou3te hir to Adam. And 23 
Adam seide, This is now a boon of my 
boonys, and fleischY of my fleisch; this? 
schal be clepid virago*, ‘for she? is takun 
of man*. Wherfor a man schal forsake 24 
fadir and modir, and schal* cleue to his 
wijf, and thei schulen be tweyne in o 
fleisch. Forsothe euer eithir was nakid, 25 
that is, Adam and his® wijf, and thei 
weren not aschamed. 


CAP. III. 

But andf the serpent was feller than alle1 
lyuynge beestis of erthe, whiche the Lord 
God hadde$ maad. Which" serpent seide 
to the womman, Why comaundide God to 
3ou, that 3e schulden not ete of ech tre of 
paradis ? To whom the womman answerde, 2 
We eten of the fruyt of trees that ben in 
paradis; sothely God comaundide to vs,3 
that we schulden not ete of the fruyt of 
the tre, which is in the myddis of para- 
dijs, and that we schulden not touche it, 
lest perauenture we dien. Forsothe the4 
serpent seide to the womman, 3e schilen 
not die bi deeth; for whi God woot that's 
in what enere dai 3e schulen ete therof, 
joure izen schien be opened, and 3e schulen 
be as Goddis, knowynge good and yuel. 
Therfor the womman:sei3 that the tre was6 
good, and swete to ete, and fair to the 
izen, and delitable in biholdyng; and sche 
took of the fruyt therof, and eet, and 3af 
to hir hosebonde, and he eet. And the7 
ijen of bothe weren openid; and whanne 
thei knewen that thei weren nakid, thei 
sewiden the leeues of a fige tre, and maden 
brechis to hem silf. And whanne theis 
herden the vois of the Lord God goynge 
in paradijs at the wynd after myddai, 


© nedder 4 throughout the chaptcr, but n expunct. 


bthisw. ‘¢ Om. F. 


fhathr. 45 The whicher. i fors. 


84 


Adam hid hym and his wijf fro the face 
of the Lord Ged in the myddel of the 
9tree of paradis. And the Lord God 
clepide Adam, and seide to hym, Where 
loart thow ? The which seide, Thi voys I 
herde in paradis, and I dredde, there 
thur3 that I was nakid, and hidde me. 
11 To whom seide the Lord, Who forsothe 
shewide thee that thow was nakid, but 
that thow ete of the tree of the which Y 
had? comaundid thee that thow shuldist 
iznot ete? And Adam seide, The woman 
whom thow 3atte me felow, 3aue to me of 
13 the tree, and I ete. And‘ the Lord seide 
to the woman, Whi didst thow that? The 
which answeryde, The eddre bigilide me, 
i4and Y ete. And the Lord God seide 
vnto® the serpent, For thow hast do this, 
thow shalt be cursid among alle the’ 
soue hauers and beestis of the erthe; 
vpon thi breest thow shalt gon, and erthe 
15 thow shalt ete alle daies' of thi lijf; ene- 
myte I shal put bitwix thee and the wo- 
man, and thi seed and the seed of hire; 
she shal treed thin hede and thow shalt 
igaspie to hyre heel". ‘To the woman for- 
sothe God seide, I shal multiply thi my- 
seses and thi conceyuyngis; in sorwe 
thow shalt bere, children; and thow 
shalt be vndre power of thi man, and he 
17shal haue lordship of thee. To Adam 
forsothe he seide, For thow hast herd the 
vois of thi’ wijf, and thow hast etun of 
the tree, of the which I comaundide thee 
that thow shuldist not etun, cursid is the 
erthe in thi werk ; in traueyls thow shalt 
isete of it alle the daies of thi lijf; it shal 
buriown to thee thornes and brembles, 
igand thow shalt ete erbis of the erthe; in 
the swoot of thi chere, ‘or face”, thou 
shalt ete thi brede, to the tyme thow 
turne ajen into the erthe of the which 
thow art take; for powdre thow art, 
20and into powdre thow shalt turne. And 
Adam clepide the name of his wijf Eue, 


q Om. B. 
Ww Om. BpEFH. 


10m. s. 


P Om. £ prim. 
Vv the aDEFH. 


¥ to BDEFH. 


k and Adam Fe. 
4the which 1, © Om. a. 
muNoPWwxd. W thin pLRT. 
@ cheer cther bodi BGNog. ch. or b. K. 


™ trees s. 
8 the dayes x sec.im. 


b Om. s. 


GENESIS. 


n Om. GQ pr.m. 


x werk, that is, for thi synne BGKNOQ. 


III. g—20. 


Adam and his wijf hidden hem fro the 
face of the Lord God in the! middis of the 
tre™ of paradijs. And the Lord Godo9 
clepide Adam, and seide to hym, Where 
art thou? And Adam seide, Y herde thito 
vois in paradijs, and Y drede, for Y was 
nakid, and Y hidde me. To whom theu 
Lord seide, Who forsothe" schewide to 
thee that thou were nakid, no but for 
thou hast ete of the tre of which® Y co- 
maundide to thee that thou schuldist not 
ete? And Adam seide, The womman 12 
which thou 3auest felowe to me, 3af me? of 
the tre, and Y eet. And the Lord seide to13 
the womman, Whi didist thou this thing? 
Which’ answerde, The serpent disseyued 
me, and Y eet. And the Lord God seide14 
to the serpent, For thou didist this, thou 
schalt be cursid among alle lyuynge thingis 
and vnresonable beestis of erthe; thou 
schalt go on thi brest, and thou schalt ete 
erthe in™ alle daies’ of thi liif; Y schalis 
sette enemytees bitwixe thee and the wom- 
man, and bitwixe thi seed and hir seed; 
schet schal breke thin heed, and thou schalt 
sette aspies" to hir heele. Also God seide 16 
to the womman, Y schal multiplie thi 
wretchidnessis and thi conseyuyngis; in 
sorewe thou schalt bere thi children; and 
thou schalt be vndur power’ of the” hose- 
bonde, and he schal be lord of thee. Sothely 17 
God seyde to Adam, For thou herdist the 
voys of thi wijf, and hast ete of the tree, 
of which Y comaundide to thee that thou 
schuldist not ete, the erthe schal be cursid 
in thi werk*; in traneylis thou schalt ete 
therof inY alle daies* of thi lijf; it schal1s 
brynge forth thornes and breris to thee, 
and thou schalt ete eerbis of the erthe; in19 
swoot of thi cheer* thou schalt ete thi 
breed, til thou turne a3en in to the” erthe 
of which® thou art takun; for thou art 
dust, and thou schalt turne a3en in to dust. 
And Adam clepide the name of his wijf2o 
Eue, for sche was the moder of alle men 


8 Om. BDEFH. 


t the days BDEFH. u heelthe 4. 


© the which 1. 
t and sche BN. 


P to me MSS. cet. omnes. 
Uspies DGQRT. Y the power BEFL 
Yanding. 2 the daies Kx sec.m. 
¢ the which A pr.m. BEFGKN. 


III. 21——IV. tro. 


thur3 that that she was moder of alle 
21thingis lynynge. The Lord God forsothe 
made to Adain and his wijf lether cootis, 
2zand clothide hem; and seide, Se! Adam 
is maad as oon of vs, knowynge good and 
yuel ; now than, lest perauenture he putte 
out his hond, and take also of the tree of 
23 lijf, and ete, and lyue euermore. And 
the Lord God sente hym out of paradis 
of delyte, that he my3te wyrk the erthe, 
240f the which he was takun. And he 
threwe out Adam, and he sette cherubyn 
bifore paradis of delite, and a flawmynge 
swerd and pleaunt to the weye of the tree 
of lijf to be kept. 


CAP Tye 


1 Adam forsothe knewe Eue his wijf, the 
which conceynede*x, and bare Caym, sei- 
2ynge, I haue had a man bi God. Andy 
eft soons she bare his brother Abel. For- 
sothe Abel was a sheepherd of sheep, and 
3Caym an erthe tilyer. And don it is 
after many dayes, that Caym shulde offre 
of the fruytis of the erthe 3iftis to the 
4Lord; Abel forsothe offride of the first 
gotun of his flok, and of the fatnes? of 
hem. And the Lord bihelde to Abel and 
sto his 3iftis; to Caym forsothe and to 
the 3iftis of hym he bihelde not. And 
Caym was greetli wroth, and therwith 
6felle his chere. And the Lord seide to 
hym, Whi art thow wroth, and whi ther- 
7 with fallith thi face? Shalt thow not re- 
seyue wel*, if thou wel dost; ellis for- 
sothe euel, anoon in the 3atis thi synnes 
shal ben at thee®? but vndre thee shal be 
the appetite of hym, and thow shalt haue 
slordship of hym. And Caym seide to 
Abel his brother, Go we out. Whanne 
thei weren in the feeld, aroos there with 
Caym a3ens his brother Abel, and slowe 
9him. And the Lord seide to Caym, 
Where is Abel thi brother? The which 
answeryde, I wote neuere; whether am I 


GENESIS. 85 


lyuynge. And the Lord God made cootis 
of skynnys to Adam and Eue his wijf, 
and clothide hem; and seide, Lo! Adame 
is maad as oon of vs, and knowith good 
and yuel; now therfore se 3e, lest per- 
auenture he putte his hond, and take of 
the tre of lijf, and ete, and lyue with 
outen ende’, And® the Lord God sentef 23 
hym out of paradijs of likyng, that he 
schulde worche the erthe, of which he was 
takun. And God castide® out Adam, and 24 
settide® bifore paradis of lykyng cheru- 
byn', and a swerd of flawme and* turn- 
ynge! aboute™ to kepe the weie of the tre 
of lijf. 


CAP. IV. 


Forsothe Adam knewe Eue his wijf,1 
which conseyuede, and childide Cayn, and 
seide, Y haue gete a man bi God. Ande 
efte sche childide his brother Abel. For- 
sothe Abel was a kepere of scheep, and 
Cayn was an erthe tilyere. Sotheli it wass 
don after many daies, that Cayn offride 
3iftis to the Lord of the fruytis of erthe"; 
and Abel offride of the first gendrid® of 4 
his floc, and of the fatnesse® of tho. And 
the Lord bihelde toP Abel and to the j;iftis 
of hym; sotheli he bihelde not to Cayns 
and to hise 3iftis. And Cayn was wrooth 
greetli, and his cheer felde dount. Andé 
the Lord seide to hym, Whi art thou 
wrooth, and whi felde donn thi face? 
Whether" not if thou schalt do wel, thou7 
schalt resseyue’; but if thou doist yuele, 
thi synne schal be present anoon in the 
jatis ? but the desir theroft schal be vndur 
thee, and thou schalt be lord therof. Ands 
Cayn seide to Abel his brother, Go we 
out. And whanne thei weren in the feeld, 
Cayn roos a3ens his brother Abel, and 
killide him. And the Lord seide to Cayn,9 
Where is Abel thi brother? Which" an- 
swerde, Y woot not; whether’ Y am the 
kepere of my brothir? And God seide to10 


* forsothe conceyued £ pr.m. Y Om.p. 2 fatnesses ppEu. ® Om. per. » Om. Bpen. 
4 ende, that is, by long tyme. BaKNogx. © Om. 5N. f puttem. &kestes. }settes. 1 cherubyn, 
that is, keping of aungels BKNOQ. k Om. N. | of turnynge K. ™ turnynge aboute ethir pleaunt x. 


2 theerthe Fr. © first gendrid or of the cheef s. 
he was heuy s. * wher mss. cet. omnes. 
Y wher ass. cet. omnes. 


60 fatnessis BKN. 
8 resseyue wel s. 


P Om. Ga. 
t therof, that is, of synne s. 


4 felde doun, that is, 
u the which 1. 


86 GENESIS. 
othe keper of my brother? And he seide - 


to hym, What hast thow don? the® vois 
of the blood of thi brother crieth to me 
ifro the erthe. Now than thow shalt be 
cursid vpon the erthe, the which openyde 
his mowthe, and toke the blood of thi 
12brother of thin honde. Whanne thow 
worchist the erthe, it shal not 3ite thee 
his fruytis ; vagaunt and fer‘ fugitif thow 
shalt be vpon the® erthe alle the daies of 
isthi lijf. And Caym seide to the Lord, 
More is my wickidnes than that I de- 
1aserue forjeuenes ; se! thow castist me out 
to day fro the face of the erthe; and fro 
thi face I shal be hid, and I shal be va- 
gaunt and fer fugitif in the erthe; al 
thanne’ that shal fynd me shal sle me. 
15 And the Lord seide to hym, It shal not 
be do so, but al that shal sle Caym shal 
seuene fold be punysshid. And the Lord 
sette a signe in Caym, that ech that 
16fonde hym shulde not sle hym. And 
Caym, passid out fro the face of the 
Lord, dwellide fer fugitif in the erthe, at 
17the eest plage of Eden. Caym forsothe 
knewe his wijf, the which forsothe con- 
seyuede, and bare Enok; and he bildide® 
a citee, and callide® the name of it after 
isthe name of his sone Enok. Forsothe 
Enok gate Yrad, and Yrad gate Manyael, 
and Manyael gate Mathusael, and Ma- 
igthusael gate Lameth; the which toke 
two wyues, the name of! the toon Ada, 
20and name of! ‘the tother* Sella. And 
Ada gate Jabel, that was fadre of dwellers 
2iin tentis and of sheepherdis; and the! 
name of his brother Tubal, he was the 
fadre of syngerys in harp and orgon. 
22Sella forsothe gate Tubalcaym, that was 
an hamer smyth™, and a smyth" into alle 
werkis of bras and of yrun; the sister 
23 forsothe of Tubalcaym, Noema. And La- 
meth seide to his wijfes Ade and Selle, 
Here 3e my vois, wifes of Lameth, herken 
je my word; for I slowe a man into my 


dferer p. © Om. pv. f thei'p. 
1Om. speEH. ™ smyter BDEFH. 


¢ Om. BDEFN,. 
other p. 


yOm.s. 2 Om. G. 
¢ Om. pGOoQRTx. 
& the singers E. 


Wacursid &. * Om. ELP. 
GKNQ. Ed. that is, in e. p. OX. 
*the oa pr.m. a. f oother 1. 


& belde ber. 
Rn smyter E. 


4 sette s passim. 


b here ye DGOQRTX pr.m. hereth Fr. 


IV. 10——23. 


Cayn, What hast thou do? the vois of 
the blood of thi brother crieth to me fro 
erthe. Now therfor thou schalt be cursid” 11 
on erthe, that openyde his mouth, and 
resseyuede of thin hond the blood of thi 
brothir. Whanne thou schalt worche the 12 
erthe, it schal not 3yue his fruytis to thee; 
thou schalt be vnstable of dwellyng and 
fleynge aboute on erthe in alle the* daies of 
thi lijf. And Cayn seide to the Lord, My 1s 
wickidnesse is more than that Y disserue 
for3yuenesse ; lo! to dai thou castist me i4 
out fro they face of the? erthe; and Y 
schal be hid fro thi face, and Y schal be 
vnstable of dwellyng and fleynge aboute 
in erthe; therfore ech man that schal 
fynde me schal slee me. And the Lord 1s 
seide to hym, It schal not be don so, but 
ech man that schal slee Cayn shal be 
punyschid seuenfold. And the Lord set- 
tide® a signe in Cayn, that ech man that 
schulde fynde hym schulde not slee hym. 
And Cayn 3ede out fro the face of the16 
Lord, and dwellide fleynge aboute in erthe, 
at the eest coost of Eden>. Forsothe Cayn17 
knewe his wiif, which conseyuede, and 
childide Enoth; and Cayn bildide a citee, 
and clepide the name therof® of the name 
of hise sone Enoth. Forsothe Enoth gen-18 
dride Irad, and Irad gendride Manyael, 
and Manyael gendride Matusael, and Ma- 
tusael gendride Lameth; that took twei19 
wyues, the name to o® wijf was Ada, and 
the name to the totherf was Sella. And 20 
Ada gendride Jabel, that was the fadir of 
dwellers in tentis and of shepherdis; and 21 
the name of his brother was Tubal, he 
was the fadir of syngeris® in harpe and 
orgun. And Sella gendride Tubalcayn, 22 
that was an hamerbetere, and smy3t on alle 
werkis of bras and of yrun; forsothe the 
sistir of Tubaleayn was Neoma. And23 
Lameth seide to his wyues Ada and 
Sella, 3e wyues of Lameth, here" my 
vois, and herkne! my word; for Y haue 
k that 


h clepid sper#. ito ppEFrH. 


b Eden, that zs, of ertheli paradys 
d gaat 1 throughout this and two following chapters. 
i herkne 3e IX sec.m. 


IV. 24——V. 13. 


wound, and a litle waxen man into my 

24wannesse; veniaunce shal be jouun of 
Caym seuene fold, of Lameth forsothe 

25seuenti sithes® seuenfold. Forsothe 3it 
Adam knewe his wijf, and she bare a 
child, and callide? the name of hym Seth, 
seiynge, God sette to me another seed for 

26 Abel, whom Caym slowe. But and to 
Seth is borne a sone, whom he callide? 
Enos; this bigan inwardli to clepe the 
name of the Lord. 


CAP. V. 

1 This is the boke of the generacioun of 
Adam, in the day in which" God made 
of nou3t man. To the ymage and lyknes 

20f God he made hym; male and female 
he made hem of nou3t, and he blisside to 
hem, and he callide® the name of hem 
Adam, in the dai in thet which thei weren 

3maad of nou3t. Adam forsothe lyuede an 
hundrid and thretti wynter, and he gat 
a sone to the liknes and hys ymage, and 
acallide" the name of hym Seth. And the 
daies of Adam ben maad after that he 
gat Seth ei3te hundrid 3eer, and he gat 
5sones and dow3tres. And al the tyme is 
maad in the which Adam lyuede nyne 
hundrid and thritti jeer, and deed he is. 

6 Seth forsothe lyuede au hundryd and fyue 

7 3eer, and he gat Enos. And Seth lyuede 
aftir that he gat Enos ei3t hundrid wyn- 
tir and seuene, and he gat sones and 

sdow3tres. And alle the daies of Seth 
ben maad nyne hundrid and twelue 3eer, 

gand deed he is. Enos forsothe lyuede 
lonynti 3eer, and” he gat Caynan; after 
whos birthe he lyuede ei3t hundrid and 
fiftene 3eer, and he gat sones and dow3- 
tris. And alle the dayes of Enos ben 
maad of nyne hundrid and fyue jeer, and 
12deed he is. Caynan forsothe lyuede se- 
izuenti 3eer, and he gat Malalehel. And 
Caynan lyuede after that he had gotun 
Malalehel ei3t hundrid and fourty 3eer, 


© sith BDEFH. 4 thees pb. 


P clepid poeru. 
« clepid spern. 


¥ Om. pv. 


kOm.s. linn. 
bi my v.b.N. 2Om.s. © Om. x. 
t Om. Exp. 


GENESIS. 87 


slayn a man bi my wounde, and* a 3ong 
wexynge man bi! my ‘violent betyng™; 
veniaunce schal be 3ouun seuenfold of24 
Cayn, forsothe of® Lameth seuentisithis 
seucnsithis. Also 3it Adam knewe his2s5 
wijf, and sche childide a sone, and clepide 
his name Seth, and seide, God hath put 
to me another seed for Abel, whom Cayn 
killide. But also a sone was borun to26 
Seth, which sone he clepide Enos; this 
Enos? bigan to clepe inwardli the name of 
the Lord. . 
CAP. V. 

This is the book of generacioun? of1 
Adam, in the dai wher ynne God made 
man of nou3t. God made man to the4 
ymage and licnesse of God; God formede2 
hem male and female, and blesside hem, 
and clepide the name of hem Adam, in 
the day in which thei weren formed. 
Forsothe Adam lyuede an hundrid 3eers 
and thretti, and gendride a sone to his 
ymage and liknesse, and clepide his name 
Seth. And the daies of Adam after that4 
he gendride Seth weren maad ei3te hun- 
drid 3eer", and he gendride sones and 
dou3tris. And al the tyme in whichs 
Adam lyuede was maad nyne hundrid 3eer 
and thretti, and he was deed. Also* Sethe 
lyuede an hundrid and fyue 3eer, and gen- 
dride Enos. And Seth lynede aftir that7 
he gendride Enos ei3te hundrid and seuen 
3eer, and gendride sones and dou3tris. And 8 
alle thet daies of Seth weren maad nyne 
hundrid and twelue 3eer, and he was deed. 
Forsothe Enos lyuede nynti 3eet", andy 
gendride Caynan; aftir whos birthe Enos to 
lyuede ei3te hundrid and fiftene jeer, and 
gendride sones and dou3tris. And alle the 1 
daies of Enos weren maad nyne hundrid 
and fyue 3eer, and he was deed. Also12 
Caynan lyuyde seuenti 3eer, and gendride 
Malalehel. And Caynan lyuede after that is 
he gendride Malalehel ei3te hundrid and 
fourti 3ecr, and gendride sones and dou3- 

t Om. BEF. 


r the which p. 8 elepide BDEFI. 


™ sorowe B. violent betyng ether my sorewe G. v.b. ether in m.s. KOQX. sorowe ether 
P the generacioun Goxd. 
® nynti 3eer, that is, foure score 3eer and ten KN. 


qQOm.p. ‘3erist 8 And Ex. 


88 GENESIS. 


14and he gat sones and dow3tris. And alle 
the dais of Caynan ben maad nyne hun- 
15 drid and ten 3eer, and deed he is. Mala- 
lehel forsothe lyuede fyue and sixti 3eer, 
isand he gat Jared. And Malalehel lyuede 
after that he gat Jared ei3t hundryd and 
thritti jeer, and he gat sones and dow3trys. 
17 And alle the daies of Malalehe! ben maad. 
ei3t hundrid and nynti and fyue 3eer, and 
isdeed he is. And Jared lyuede an hun- 
dryd and two and sixti 3eer, and he gat 
19 Knok. And Jared lyuede after that he 
gat Enok ei3t hundrid 3eer, and he gat 
20sones and dow3tris. And al the daies of 
Jared ben maad nyne hundrid 3eer and 
21two and sixti, and deed he is. Forsothe 
Enok lyuede fyue and sixti 3eer", and he 
22gat Matusale. And Enok 3ede with God; 
and Enok lyuede after that he gat Matu- 
sale thre hundrid 3eer, and he gat sonys 
23and dow3tris. And alle the daies of Enok 
ben maad thre hundrid and fyue and 
24sexti jeer. And he 3ede with God, and 
25 he aperyde not, for God toke hym. For- 
sothe Matusale lyuede an hundrid and 
seuen and ei3ti jeer, and he gat Laimeth. 
26 And Matusale lyuede after that he had 
getun Lameth seuene hundrid and two 
and ei3ti wynter, and he gat sones and 
27dow3tris. And alle the daies of Matusale 
ben maad nyne hundrid and* sixti and 
asnyne jeer, and deed he is. Lameth for- 
sothe lyuede an hundryd and two and ei3ti 
29 3eer, and he gat a sone; and he callideY 
the name of hym Noe, seiynge, This shal 
coumforte vs fro the werkis and the tra- 
ueils of oure hondis in the erthe, the? 
30 whiche werkis* the Lord curside. And 
Lameth lyuede after that he gat Noe fyue 
hundrid and fyue and nynti 3eer”, and he 
aigat sonys and dow3tris. And alle the 
daies of Lameth ben maad seuene hun- 
dryd and seuenti and seuene 3eer, and 
deed he is. Noe forsothe whan he was 
of fyue hundrid 3eers, he gat Sem, Cam, 
and Japheth. 
x Om, B. 


W wynter z. y clepid ppEeFrn. 


Vv he gendride n pr. m. 
GKLMNOPWX. 


w Om. ELP. 
Z jij. score and xv. RT. 


Z Om. RDEFH. 


X senene and ei3ti jeer BEKLMNOPWX. 
4 seuenti and seuen BEGKLMNOPQW. 


V. 14-—31. 


tris. And alle the dayes of Caynan weren 14 
maad nyn hundrid and ten jeer, and he 
was deed. Forsothe Malalehel lyuede sixti 1s 
jeer and fyue, and gendride Jared. And i6 
Malalehel lyuede aftir that he gendride 
Jared ei3te hundrid and thretti 3eer, and 
gendride sones and dou3tris. And alle the 17 
daies of Malalehel weren maad ei3te hun- 
drid nynti and fyue 3eer, and he was deed. 
And Jared lyuede an hundrid and two1s 
and sixti 3eer, and gendride Enoth. And 19 
Jared lyuede aftir that he gendride Enoth 
ei3te hundrid 3eer, and gendride sones and 
dou3tris. And alle the dayes of Jared 20 
weren maad nyn hundrid and twei and 
sexti 3eer, and he was deed. Forsothe 21 
Enoth lyuede fyue and sixti 3eer, and gen- 
dride Matusalem. And Enoth 3ede with 22 
God ; and Enoth lyuede after that he gen- 
dride Matusalem thre hundrid 3eer, and 
gendride’ sones and dou3tris. And alle2s 
the daies of Enoth weren maad™ thre hun- 
dride and fyue and sexti 3eer. And Enoth 24 
3eed with God, and apperide not afterward, 
for God took hym awei. Also Matusalem 25 
lyuede an hundrid and ‘fourscoor 3eer and 
seuene*, and gendride Lameth. And Ma-26 
tusalem lyuede after that he gendride La- 
meth sevene hundrid and ‘fourscoor 3eer 
and twei’, and gendride sones and dou3tris. 
And alle the daies of Matusale weren 27 
maad nyn hundrid and nyn and sixti 3eer, 
and he was deed. Forsothe Lameth lyuede 2s 
an hundrid and ‘fourscoor 3eer and two’, 
and gendride a sone; and clepide his name 29 
Noe, and seide, This man schal comforte 
vs of the werkis and traueilis of oure 
hondis, in the loond which the Lord 
curside. And Lameth lyuede after that3o 
he gendride Noe fyue hundrid ‘nynti and 
fyue” 3eer, and gendride sones and dou3- 
tris. And alle the daies of Lameth weren31 
maad seuene hundrid ‘thre scoor and se- 
uentene® 3eer, and he was deed. 


28QOm. speru. » wynter BDEFH. 


Y two and ei3ti.jeer BE 


VI. I-—I5. 


CAPS¥V 1. 
1 Whan men bigunnen to be multiplied 
vpon the erthe, and hadden brou3t forth 
2dow3tris, the’ sones of God, seynge the 
dow3tris of men that thei weren faire, 
token wyues to hem of alle the whiche 
3thei chosen’, And God seide, My spiryt 
shal not dwel in man with outen ende, 
for flehs he is; and the daies of hym 
shal ben an® hundrid and twenti 3eers. 
4Giauntis forsothe weren vpon the erthe 
in thof daies, aftir forsothe that the sonys 
of God weren gon ynne to the dow3trys 
of men, and thei goten; thes ben my3ti 
5of the world and famows men. God for- 
sothe seynge that myche malice of men 
was in the erthe, and al thou3t of the 
eherte was 3owun to yuel al tyme, it for- 
thou3t him that he had made man in 
erthe; and ‘bifore war? in tyme to come, 
and towchid with sorwe of herte with 
zynforth, I shal do awey, he seith, man, 
whom I made of nou3t, fro the face of 
the erthe, fro man vnto thingis hauynge 
soule, fro crepynge beest® vnto fowles! of 
heuen; forsothe it ‘othenkith* me to 
shaue maad hem. Noe forsothe founde 
ggrace bifore the Lord. Thes ben the ge- 
neraciouns of Noe. Noe a ri3twis man 
and a perfit was in his generaciouns; with 
10 God he 3ede, and he gat thre sones, Sem, 
n Cham and Japheth. Forsothe the erthe 
is corupt before God, and is fulfillid with 
12schrewidnes. And whanne God had seen 
the erthe to! be corupt, al forsothe flehs 
had™ coruptid his weie vpon the erthe, 
13he seide to Noe, The ende of al flehs 
cometh bifore me; the erthe is fulfullid 
with wickidnes fro the face of hem, and 
14] shal seater hem with the erthe. Make 
to thee ‘an ark" of planed trees; litel 
dwellyng places in the ark°® thow shalt 
make, and with ynne and with oute thow 
15 shalt di3ten it with glew. And so thow 


d chesden Bern. 
k athinkith ppern. 


© and the a. 
i the foulis gc. 


b the erthe E. 
chouris, BFGKNQX. fam. men or of yuel faam. 8. 
pentide K sec.m. it rep.s. & Om. ELP. 
™ or ELP. "corrupted kox. © the fleisch EL. 


GENESIS. 


€ of an BDEFH. 
1 Om. BDEFH. 


N 


m Om. £ prim. 


89 


CAPA 
Forsothe Noe whanne he was of fyue1 
hundrid 3eer gendride Sem, Cham, and Ja- 
feth. And whanne men bigunnen to be 
multiplied on erthe, and hadden gendrid 
dou3tris, the sones of God seizen the dou3-2 
tris of men that thei weren faire, and 
token wyues to hem of alle whiche thei 
hadden chose. And God seide, My spirit s 
schal not dwelle in man with outen ende, 
for he is fleisch; and the daies of hym 
schulen be an hundrid and twenti jeer. 
Sotheli giauntis weren on erthe? in tho4 
daies, forsothe aftir that the sones of God 
entriden to the dou3tris of men, and tho 
doustris gendriden; these weren my3ti of 
the world and famouse men*. Sotheli God 5 
sei3 that myche malice of men was in 
erthe, and that al the thou3t of herte’ was 
ententif® to yuel in al tyme, and repentide'é 
himf that he hadde® maad man in erthe; 
and God was war bifore a3ens tyme to 
comyng, and was touchid with sorewe of 
herte{ with ynne; and seide, Y schal do7 
awei man, whom Y made of nou3t, fro the 
face of the" erthe, fro man til to lyuynge 
thingis, fro crepynge beeste til to the 
briddis of heuene; for it repentith' me 
that Y made hem. Forsothe Noe foonds 
grace bifore the Lord. These ben the ge-9 
neraciouns of Noe. Noe was a iust man 
and perfit* in hise generaciouns ; Noe 3ede 
with God, and gendride thre sones, Sem, 


t+ repentide 
hym. Pe- 
naunee, so- 
rowe, and 
othere pas- 
syouns, ethir 
disesis, ben not 
in ony maner 
in God hy 
trnthe, but hy 
liknesse ; and 
therfore it is 
seid that he 
repentide, for 
he hadde hym 
silf at the ma- 
ber of a mau 
repentinge, and 
wolde distrye 
that that he 
made bifore. 
BFGKQUX. 

2 sorowe of 
herte. For he 


10 hadde him silf 


Cam, and Jafeth. Forsothe the! erthe was 11 *¢ Me marer of 


corrupt bifore God, and was fillid with 
wickidnes. 
the erthe was corrupt, for ech fleisch 
ether™ man hadde corrupt his weie on 


erthe, he seide to Noe, The ende of a}is 


fleisch® is comen bifore me; the ertlie is 
fillid with wickidnesse of the face of hein, 
and Y schal distrye hem with the erthe. 


Make thou to thee a schip of trees hewun 14 


and planed; thou schalt make dwellynge 


fthilk spern. & byfore by war p. h beestis p. 


a schep p. © schyp vb. 


© famouse men, that is, of yuel fame, (name k) for thei weren rauenouris and lec- 
4 her herte s. 
bh Om. EN prim. 


f he re- 


€ ententif ethir 30uun BDIN. 
10m. s. 


i forthenkith 6. ‘a perfit s. 


a man sorow- 
inge, in doynge 
awey man, 


And whanne God sei3, that 12 whom he hadde 


formed to his 
ymage. Lyre 
here. BEGKQUX. 
Penaunce,ecither 
sorewe of herte, 
fallith not in 
God, to whom 
the sentence of 
alle thingis is 
as stidefast as 
the hiforeknow- 
ynge is certeyn, 
sith hooly 
scripture vsith 
comoun wordis, 


90 GENESIS. 


and confermeth 
it to oure litil- 
uesse, either 


shalt make it. The lengthe of the ark? 
shal be of thre hundrid cubytis, the brede 
freele, tat bi OF Ffti cubitis, and the hist of it of thretti 
Knows things, ecubitis. A wyndow in the ark‘ thou shalt 
for whi theire make, and in o cubite thow shalt ende 
the hijt of it; the dore forsothe of the 
ark’ thow shalt sett aside’ bynethen ; 
sowpyng placis, and thre chaumbred thow 
17shalt make in it. Se! I shal lede to wa- 
tres of a flood vpon the erthe, and I shal 
slee al flehs in the which spiryt of lif is 

chaungid; God . 
Bee hae vndre henene, and alle thingis that ben 
ree }*isin the erthe, shal be wastid. And I shal 
Bae We: sett my couenaunt' of pees with thee, and 
theles his wil thow shalt gon into the ark", thow and 
and ordinaunce ? * es : 
dwellith vo- thi sones, thi wijf, and the wyfes of thi 
Teeaen. 19 children with thee. And of alle thingis 
trimaniehere  hauynge sowle of ony flehs, two thow 
shalt brynge into the ark’, that maal sex 
20and femaal lynen with thee; of fowles 
after ther kynde, and of iumentis in ther 
kynde, and of alle crepynge beest of the 
erthe after his kynde; two of alle shulen 
go ynue with thee, that thei mown lyue. 
21 Thou shalt take thanne with thee of al 
maner metis that mown be eten, and 
thow shalt bere with thee, and thei shulen 
be bothe to thee and to hem into meet. 
22 Thanne Noe dide alle thingis that God 

comaundide hym. 


of God is not 
disturblynge of 
wil, but doom 
whiche is 3ouen 
to the synuere ; 
forsothe the 
thong3t of his 
herte is vn- 
chauugeable re- 
soun of thingis, 
that shulen he 


CAP. VH. 


1 Forsothe the Lord seide to hym, Go 
thow yn and al thin hows” into the 
arke*, thee forsothe I haue seen ry3twis 
2bifore me in this generacioun. Of alle 
hauynge sowles clene, thow shalt take 
seuene and seuene, inaal and femaal ; and 
forsothe of vnclene hauynge sowle, two 
3and two, maal and femaal; but of’ the 


VI. 16—VII. 3. 


placis in the schip, and thou schalt anoynte 
it with pitche with ynne and with out- 
forth. And so thou schalt make it. Theis 
lengthe of the schip schal be of thre hun- 
drid cubitis, the? brede schal be of fifti 
cubitis, and the hijnesse therof schal be 
of4 thretti cubitis. Thou schalt make a16 
wyndow in the schip, and thou schalt 
ende the hijnesse therof in a’ cubite; so- 
theli thou schalt sette the dore of the 
schip in the side binethe; thou shalt make 
soleris and placis of thre chaumbris in the 
schip. Lo! Y schal brynge ‘watris of di-17 
lunye ether’ greet' flood on erthe", and 
Y schal sle ech fleisch in which is the spi- 
rit of lijf vndir heuene, and alle thingis 
that ben in erthe, schulen be wastid. And 1a 
Y schal sette my couenaunt of pees with 
thee; and thou schalt entre in to the 
schip, and thy sones, and thi wijf, and the 
wiues of thi sones schulen entre with thee. 
And of alle lyuynge beestis of al fleisch 19 
thou schalt brynge in to the schip tweyne 
and tweyne, of male kynde and female, 
that thei lyue with thee; of briddis bi her 29 
kynde, and of werk beestis in her kynde, 
and of ech crepynge beeste of erthe, by 
her kynde; tweyne and tweyne of alle 
schuwlen entre with thee, that thei moun 
lyue. Therfore thou schalt take with thee a1 
of alle metis that moun be etin, and thou 
schalt bere to gidre at thee, and tho schulen 
be as well to thee as to the’ beestis in to 
mete. Therfor Noe dide alle thingis whiche 22 
God comaundide to hym. 


CAP. VII. 


Also the Lord seide to Noe, Entre thou 
and al thin hous in to the” schip, for Y 
sei3 thee iust bifore me in this genera- 
cioun. Of alle clene lyuynge beestis thou2 
schalt take bi senene and bi seuene, male 
and female; forsothe of vnelene lyuynge 
beestis thou schalt take bi tweyne and bi 
tweyne, inale and female; but* also of vo-3 


Pp schypp. 4schypp. *schyp p. § in the syde z pr.m. tcomenount D passim. “schip p, VY schip D. 
whoushold p. * schip p throughout this and following chapter. ¥ and of BDE sec.m.FH. 


qin x. Om. GLQrt. 
« ypon the erthe s. 


P and the ELP pr.m. 
of greet DFGKMOQRTWxd. 


roos. 
v tho pn. Om. s. 


8 Om. s. diluuye or ELP. 


t of the greet BN. 
wthiz. *ands. 


VII. 4—18. 


fowlis of heuene, seuene and seuene, maal 
and femaal, that the seed be sauyd vpon 
4the face of al erthe. 3it forsothe and 
aftir seven daies I shal reyn vpon the 
erthe fourti daies and fourti ny3tis, and 
I shal do awey al substaunce? the which 
Y made, fro the ouermost of the erthe. 
5Thanne Noe dide all thingis that the 
6 Lord comaundide him. And he was of 
sixe hundryd 3eeris, whanne the watris 
of the flood floweden vpon the erthe. 
7 And Noe is gon yune, and his children, 
hys wijf, and the wyues of his children 
with hym into the arke for the watres of 
sthe flood. Of the clene forsothe hauynge 
sowlis, and vnclene, and of the fowlis of 
heuene, and of alle that mouen vpon the 
9erthe, two and two ben gon ynne to Noe 
into the arke, maal and femaal, as the 
io Lord comaundide Noe. And whan the 
seuene daies weren passid, the watris of 
11the flood floweden vpon the erthe. The 
sixt hundrid 3eer of the lijf of Noe, the 
secounde moneth, the seuententhe day of 
the moneth, ben brosten alle the wellis of 
the greet see, and the goteris of henene 
i2 ben openyd, and reyn is maad vpon the 
izerthe fourti daies and fourti ny3tis. In 
the poynit of that* day Noe is gon ynne, 
Sem”, and Cham, and Japheth?®, his sones, 
his wijf, and thre wyues of his sonys with 
them, into the arke. Thei, and al beest 
after her kynde, and alle inmentis® in her 
kynde, and al that moueth vpon the erthe 
in his kynde, and al volatile after his 
iskynde, alle bryddis and alle fowlis, ben 
gon into Noe into the arke, two and two 
of al flehs, in the whiche was spirit of 
i6lijf. And the whiche ben gon ynne, maal 
and femaal of all flehs 3eden ynne, as 
God had comaundide to hym. And the 
17 Lord encloside hym fro without. And 
the flood is maad fourti daies and fourti 
ny3tis vpon the erthe, and the watres ben 
multiplied, and arereden the arke in hi3t 
isfro the erthe. Greetli thei floweden, and 
alle thingis thei fulfilliden, in the ouer- 


2 substaunce3 z. 8 thilk sperH. 


Yand:t 2Om.r. ®Om.s. »Om.s. 


band Sem pperu, 


¢ Om. s. 
& bi her kynde, alle briddis and alle volatils entriden 1. 


N2 


GENESIS. 61 


latils of heuene thou schalt take, bi seuene 
and bi seuene, male and female, thatY her 
seed be saned on the face of al erthe. For4 
3it and aftir seuene daies Y schal reyne on 
erthe fourti daies and fourti ny3tis, and Y 
scha] do awey al substaunce which Y made, 
fro the face of erthe. ‘Therfor Noe dides 
alle thingis whiche the Lord comaundide 
to hym. And he was of? sixe hundrid¢ 
3eer, whanne the® watris of the greet flood 
flowiden on erthe. And Noe entride in7 
to the schip, and hise sones, and hise wijf, 
and the wyues of his sones, entriden with 
him for the watris of the greet flood. Ands 
of lyuynge beestis clene and vnclene, and 
of briddis of heuene, and of ech beeste 
which is moued on erthe, bi tweyne and 9 
bi tweyne, male and female entriden to 
Noe in to the schip, as the Lord co- 
maundide to Noe. And whanne seuene 10 
daies hadden passid, the> watris of the 
greet flood flowiden on erthe. In the sixe 11 
hundrid 3eer of the lijf of Noe, in® the 
secunde moneth, in the seuententhe dai of 
the moneth, alle the wellis of the greet see 
weren brokun, and the wyndowis of he- 
tlene weren opened, and reyn was maad 12 
on erthe fourti daies and fourti ny3tis. In 13 
the ende of that dai Noe entride, and Sem, 
Cham", and Japheth, hise sones, his*® wijf, 
and the wyues of hise sones, entriden with 
hem into the schip. Thei entriden, and 14 
ech beeste bi his kynde, andf alle werk 
beestis in her kynde, and ech beeste which 
is moued on erthe in his kynde, and ech 
volatil bi his kyude; alle briddis and alle 
volatils entriden® to Noe in to the schip,1s ; 
bi tweyne and bi tweyne of ech fleisch in 
whiche the spirit of lijf was. And thot 
that entriden, entriden male and female of 
ech fleisch, as God comaundide to hym. 
And the Lord encloside hym fro with out- 
forth. And the greet flood was maad 17 
fourti daies and fourti nijtis on erthe, and 
the" watris weren multiplied, and reiseden 
the schip on! hi3 fro erthe*. The watris 18 
flowiden greetli, and filliden alle thingis in 


bb Jaseph 4. © beestayle p. 


€and hisx. f Om. £5. 
k the erthe iLs. 


dand Cham pe.ent. 
h Om. s. ian BoE e¢ plures. 


92 GENESIS. 


most of the erthe. Forsothe the arke 

19 was born upon the watris. And the wa- 
tris hadden fult myche maystry vpon the 
erthe, and alle the heije hillis vndre alle 

20heuenes® ben coueryd; fiftene cubitis 
hei3er was the watre vpon hillis whiche 
21itf couered. And al flehs is wastid that 
was moued vpon the erthe, of fowlis, off 
hauynge sowles, of beestis, and of alle 
crepynge thingis that crepen vpon the 
zzerthe. Alle men, and alle thingis in the 
whiche is weie of breeth of lijf in the 
azerthe, ben deed. And God dide awey al 
the substaunce that was vpon the" erthe, 
fro man ynto! beest, as wel crepynge as 
fowlis of henene; and thei ben don awey 
fro the erthe. Noe forsothe dwellyd 
aloone, and tho* that weren with hym in 
2ithe arke. And the watris of the flood al 
abowt with hilden the erthe an hundryd 
and fifti dayes. 
CAP. VIII. 

1 The Lord forsothe reeordide of Noe, and 
of alle hanynge soulis, and of alle iumen- 
tis!, that weren with hym in the arke ; 
and he brou3te to a spirit vpon the erthe. 

2 And the watris ben lessid, and the wellys 
of the see and the™ goterys of heuene ben 
closid, and reynes fro henene ben for- 

3fendid. And the wateres fro the erthe 
ben turned a3en, goynge and a3en goynge 5 
and thei bigunnen to be maad lesse after 

4an hundrid and fifty daies. And the arke 
restide the seuenthe moneth, the seuene 
and twentith day of the moneth, vpon 
5the mowntis of Armonye. And forsothe 
the watres 3eden and decreesseden vnto 
the" tenthe moneth, the tenthe forsothe 
moneth, the firste day of the moneth, 
6aperyden the coppis of the hillis. And 
whan fourti dayes weren passid, Noe, 
openynge the wyndow of his arke the 
7whieh he made, sente out a crow, the 
which 3ede out, and turnede not a3en to 
the tyme that watris vpon the erthe weren 


f is 4. 
n Om. B. 


e heuen BDEFH. 
m Om. bd. 


d wol p. 
1 bestaylis p. 


1 the erthe s. ™ the maistrie BN. 
¥ decreessid or snagid s. * Om. E. 
sxd. Om. a. 


& Om. an. 


2 crepinge beestis s. 
t the erthe s. 


VII. 19-——VIII. 7. 


the face of erthe!. Forsothe the schip was 
borun on the watris. And the watris 19 
hadden maistrie™ greetli on erthe, and alle 
hije hillis vndur alle heuene weren hilid ; 
the watyr was hijere bi fiftene cubitis ouer 20 
the hilis whiche it hilide. And ech fleisch 21 
was wastid that was moued on erthe, of 
briddis, of lyuynge beestis, of vnresonable 
beestis, and of alle ‘reptilis that crepen™ on 
erthe. Alle men, and alle thingis in whiche 22 
the brething of lijf was in erthe, weren 
deed. And God dide awei al substaunce® 23 
that was on erthe, fro man til to beeste, 
as wel a crepynge beeste as the briddis of 
heuene; and tho weren doon awei fro 
erthe. Forsothe Noe dwellide aloone, and 
thei that weren with hym im the schip. 
And the watris of the greet? flood ouere- 24 
jeden the erthe an hundrid and fifti daies. 


CAP. VIII. 

Forsothe the Lord hadde mynde of4 Noe, 1 
and of alle lyuynge beestis, and of alle 
werk beestis, that weren with hym in the 
schip; and brou3te a wynd on the erthe. 
And watris weren decreessid', and the2 
wellis of the see weren closid, and the’ 
wyndowis of heuene weren closid, and 
reynes of heuene weren ceessid. And wa-3 
trys turneden a3en fro erthe', and 3eden 
a3en, and bigunnen to be decreessid" aftir 
an hundrid and fifti daies. And the schip4 
restide in the seuenthe monthe, in the se- — 
uene and twentithe dai of the monthe, on 
the hillis of Armenye. And sotheli thes 
watrys 3eden and decresiden til to the 
tenthe monethe, for in the tenthe monethe, 
in the firste dai of the mnonethe, the coppis 
of hillis apperiden. And whanne fourtié 
daies weren’ passid, Noe openyde the wyn- 
dow of the schip which he hadde maad, 
and sente out a crowe, which 3ede out,7 
and” turnede not ajen til the watris weren 
dried on erthe. Also Noe sente out a cul- 


hOm. evern. itor prem.  * thilk aperu. 


POm.G 4 ont. 
v hadden BDEGIKLMNP 


© the substaunce s. 
« decreessid or swagid s. 


VII. 9-21. 


sdried. Forsothe he sente out a culuer 
after hym, that he my3te se, if now 
hadden sesyd waterys vpon the face of 
othe erthe; the which whan he® had not 
foundun where his foot my3te rest, is 
turned a3en to him into? the arke, watres 
forsothe weren vpon al the erthe ; and he 
straw3te out? his honde, and it takun 
lo putte™ into the erke. Forsothe forther- 
more other seuene daies abiden, eftsones 
ithe lete out of the arke a culuer; and she 
come to hym at euen, berynge a brawnche 
of olyue with grene leeues in hir mouthe. 
Than Noe vndirstode that wateres hadden 
12 cesyd.vpon erthe ; and he abode neuer the 
later other seuene daies, and he sente out 
a culuer, the which is no more turned 
i3a3en to hym. Thanne in the sixte hun- 
dryd jeer and oon of the lijf of Noe, the 
first moneth, the first day of the moneth, 
ben lessid the waterys vpon erthe; and 
Noe, openynge the roof of his arke, bihelde 
and saw3 that ‘al out’ dried was the 
uouermost of the erthe. The secounde 
moneth, the seuene and twentith' day of 
15the moneth, the erthe is maad drye. The 
16 Lord forsothe spake to Noe, seiynge, Go 
out of the arke, thow, and thi wijf, thi 
children,-and the wyues of thi children 
17 with thee ; and alle hauynge soules that 
ben with thee of al flehs, bothe in vola- 
tylis", and in beestis, and in alle crepynge 
that crepen vpon the erthe, lede out” with 
thee; and go 3e ynne vpon the erthe, 
grow je, and be 3e multiplied vpon it. 
18 Thanne Noe 3ede out, and his children, 
and his wijf, and the wyues of his chil- 
i9dren with hym; but and alle hauynge 
soules, iumentis”, and crepynge that 
crepen vpon the erthe, aftir her propre* 
20kynde, ben gon out of the arke. Noe 
forsothe bildideY an auter to the Lord, 
and takinge of alle clene beestis and 
fowlis, offryde brent sacrifices vpon the 
ziauter. And the Lord smellid* a smel of 


GENESIS. 93 


uer aftir hym, to se if the watris hadden 
ceessid thanne on* the face of ertheY ; and» 
whanne the culuer foond not where hir 
foot schulde reste, sche turnede a3en to 
hym in to the schip, for the? watris weren 
on al erthe; and Noe helde forth his 
hoond, and brou3te the culuer takun in to 
the schip. Sotheli whanne othere seuene ic 
daies weren abedun aftirward, eft he leet® 
out a culuer fro the schip; and sche cam 11 
to hym at euentid, and bare in hir mouth 
a braunche of olyue tre with greene leeuys. 
Therfor Noe vndirstood that the watris 
hadden ceessid on erthe; and neuerthe-12 
lesse® he abood seuene othere daies, and 
sente out a culuer, which turnede ‘no more 
ajen to hym. Therfor in the sixe hundrid 13 
and o 3eer of the lijf of Noe, in the firste? 
monethe, in the firste day of the monethe, 
watris weren decreessid on erthe; and Noe 
openede the roof of the schip, and bihelde 
and sei3 that the face of the erthe was 
dried. In the secunde monethe, in the 14 
seuene and twentithe dai of the monethe, 
the: erthe was maad drie. Sotheli thes 
Lord spak to Noe; and seide, Go out of 16 
the schip, thou, and thi wijf, thi? sones, 
and the wyues of thi sones with thee ; and 17 
lede out with thee alle lyuynge beestis 
that ben at’ thee of ech fleiscli, as wel in 
volatilis as in? vnresonable beestis, and alle 
‘reptils that crepen" on erthe; and entre 
3e on the! erthe, encreesse 3e, aud be 3e 
multiplied on erthe. Therfor Noe 3ede18 
out, and hise sones, and his wijf, and the 
wyues of hise sones with hym; but alsol9 — 
alle lynynge beestis, and werk beestis, and 


‘reptils that crepen* on erthe, bi her kynde, 


jeden out of the schip. Forsothe Noe 20 
bildide an auter to the Lord, and he took 
of alle clene beestis and briddis, and offride 
brent sacrifices on the auter. And the2! 
Lord sauerede the odour of swetnesse, and 
seide to hym, Y schal no more curse the 
erthe for men, for the wit and thou3t of 


9 Om. DE sec.m. rit. Pin p. 4 Om. Bern. * putte ynn pu. 8 aboute a. tthe twentythe apex. 


the twenty F. "volatile 4. VY Om. & pr.m. 


w in beestaylis p. 


xOm.apern. Yedefiede p. bilde peru. 


® smellith 4. 
Xofa. Ytheerther. 2% QOm.s. 4 sente ELP. > neuerthelattere x. netheles10sTx. © not G. 
4tenthe wm. Om. EFKLPs. and this. fwiths. 8 @Om.x. 4 crepinge beestiss. !Om.¥. * crepinge 


beestis s. 


94 GENESIS. 


swetnes, and seide to hym, I shal no more 
curse to the erthe for men, the witt for- 
sothe and the thou3t of mannus herte ben 
redi in to yuel fro his tyme of waxyng ; 
therfore I shal smyte no more ech soule 
22 lyuynge as Y haue don; alle the daies of 
the erthe, seed and ripe, coold and hete, 
somer and wynter, ny3t and day, shulen 
not rest. 
CAP. IX. 

1 And God Dlisside to Noe, and to the 
sonys of hym, and seide to hem, Growe 
3e, and be 3e multiplied, and fulfillith the 

2erthe; aud 30ure feer? and 3oure trem- 
blyng be vpon alle the beestis of erthe, 
and vpon alle fowlis® of heuene, with alle 
that ben moued in erthe; alle fishes of 

3the see ben takun to 30ure honde. And al 
that is meued and lyueth shal be to 30w 
into meet; as green wortis I haue takun 
4to 30w alle thingis, out takun that flehs 
swith blood 3e shulen not ete, blood for- 
sothe of 3owre sowles I shal requyre 
of the honde of alle beestis and of the 
honde of man, of the honde of man and 
of the brothir of hym J shal requyre the 
6soule of man. Who so euer shal sheed 
mannus blood, the blood of hym shal be 
shed; to the ymage forsothe of God 
7man is maad. 3e forsothe growith®, 
and be 3e multiplied, and go 3e in vpon 
8the erthe, and fulfille 3e it. Thes thingis 
forsothe the Lord seide to Noe, and to 
ghis sonys with hym, Se! I shal make 
stable my couenaunt with 30u, and with 
1030ur seed after 30u, and to alle sonle 
lyuynge that is with 3ou, as wel in 
foulis as in immentis’ and in beestis of 
the erthe, and in alle that ben gon out of 
the arke®, and in alle beestis of the erthe. 

11] shal make stable my couenaunt with 
3ou, and no more al flesh shal be slayn of 
the watris of the flood, ne shal herafter‘ 

12be a flood scaterynge al erthes. And 
God seide, This signe of couenaunt of 
pees Y 3eue bitwix me and 3ou, and to al 


aferde nEFH. drede p. » the foulis p. 
ward sppeFH. & the erth BDEFH. 


e grow E pr. m. 


VIII. 22——IX. 1—12. 


manuus herte ben redi! in to yuel fro 30ng 
wexynge age; therfor Y schal no more 
smyte ech lyuynge soule as Y dide; in2a 
alle the™ daies of erthe, seed and ripe 
corn, coold and heete, somer and wyntir, 
ny3t and dai, shulen not reste. 


CAP. IX. 


And God blisside Noe and hise sones, 1 
and seide to hem, Encreesse 3e, and be 3e 
multiplied, and fille 3e the erthe; andz 
joure drede and tremblyng be on alle vn- 
resonable beestis of" erthe, and on alle 
briddis of heuene, with alle thingis that 
ben moued in erthe; alle fischis of the 
see ben 3ouun to 3oure hond. And als 
thing which is moned and lyueth schal be 
to 30ou in to mete; Y have 3o0ue to jou 
alle thingis as greene wortis, ontakun that 4 
3e schulen not ete fleisch with blood®, fors 
Y schal seke the blood of 30ure lyues of 
the hoond of alle vnresonable beestis and 
of the hoond of man, of the hoond of man 
aud of hys brother Y schal seke the lijf 
of man. Who euere schedith out mannus6¢ 
blood, his blood schal be sched; for man 
is maad to the ymage of God. For-7 
sothe encreesse 3e, and be 3e? multiplied, 
and entre 3e on erthe, and fille 3e it, 
Also the Lord seide thes thingis to Noe, s 
and to his sones with him, Lo! Y schalg 
make my couenaunt with 3ou, and with 
jour seed after 30u, and to ech lyuynge le 
soule which is with 30u, as wel in 
briddis as in werk beestis and smale 
beestis of erthe, aud to alle thingis that 
jeden out of the’ schip, and to alle vnre- 
sonable beestis of erthe. Y schal make1 
my couenaunt with 3ou, and ech fleisch 
schal no more be slayn of the" watris of 
the greet flood, nethir the greet flood dis- 
triynge al erthe schal be more. And God 12 
seide, This is the signe of boond of pees, 
which Y 3yue bitwixe’ me and you, and to 
f here after- 


dbestayle p. © schip . 


1 redi ether proone FK. prome ether redi BN. ™ Om. BEGIN. ons. the bloods. POm.s. 4 this. 


rOm.s. § bitwene Fogx. 


1X. 13-——27. 


soule lyuynge that is with 30u, in to euer- 
13lastinge generaciouns®. Y shal sette my 
bow in the clowdis, and the signe of co- 
uenant of pees shal be bitwix me and the 
uerthe; and whan Y shal ouerhelde! the 
heuen with clowdis, my bow shal apere 
isin the clowdis, and I shal recorde of my 
couenaunt of pees that Y couenantide* 
with 3ou, and with alle soulis! lyuynge 
that quikeneth flesh; and there shal be no 
more watris of flood to al flesh to be don 
isawei. And my bow shal be in the 
clowdes, and I shal se it, and Y shal re- 
corde of the euerlastynge boond of pees, 
that is couenauntid™ bitwix God and alle 
soule lyuynge of al flehs that is vpon the 
iyerthe. And God seide to Noe, This shal 
be tokne of the bonde of pees, that I haue 
ordeyned bitwix me and al flelis vpon 
iserthe. Weren thanne the sonys of Noe 
that ben gon out of the arke", Sem, Cam, 
and Japheth; Cam forsothe, he is the 
19fader of Chanaan. Thes thre ben the 
sones of Noe, and of thes it® is out sedid 
20 al the kynde of men vpon al erthe?. And 
Noe, a man erthe tylyer, bigan to excer- 
sise the erthe, and he plauntid a vyne, 
2t.and drynkynge wyn was drunkun, and 
gzenakid he’ lay in his tabernacle. The 
which whan Cham, the fader of Chanaan, 
had seen, that is’, the priuey herneis of his 
fader to be nakid, he tolde it to his two 
23 britheren with out. And forsothe Sem 
and Japheth putten a mantel vpon her 
shulderis, and goynge in bacward couer- 
eden’ the priuy harneis of her fader, and 
the faces of hem weren turned awey, aud 
the mannus harneys of the fader thei sawen 
24not. Noe forsothe wakynge of the wyn, 
whan he had lerned the thingis that his 
2530nger sone dide to hym, seith, Curside 
child Chanaan, thral of alle thrallis he 
26shal be to his britheren. And he seide, 
Blissid be the Lord God of Sem, be Cha- 
27naan his seruaunt; God sprede abrood 
Japheth, and dwel he in the tabernaclis 


i overhelen p. ouerheelden 1. 


 generacyoun pb. 
1 schip p. 


uenaunt BEH. comenount pb. 
¥ cureden p. 


u bitwene L. 
b Om. pa. 


t generacioun 1. 
2Om.s. ®Om.1. 


GENESIS. 


Vv the euerlastynge s. 
© was wakide X sec.m. 


95 


ech lyuynge soule which is with you, in 
to euerlastynge generaciouns'. Y schalis 
sette my bowe in the cloudis, and it schal 
be a signe of boond of pees bitwixe" me 
and erthe; and whanne Y schal hile 
heuene with cloudis, my bowe schal ap- 
pere in the cloudis, and Y schal haueis 
mynde of my boond of pees which Y made 
with 3ou, and with ech soule lyuynge, that 
nurschith fleisch; and the watris of the 
greet flood schulen no more be to do awey 
al fleish. And my bowe schal be in the 16 
cloudis, and Y schal se it, and Y schal haue 
mynde of euerlastynge’ boond of pees, 
which is maad bitwixe* God and man, 
and ech soul lyuynge of al fleisch which 
is on erthe. And God seide to Noe, This 17 
schal be a signe of boond of pees, which 
Y made bitwixe* me and ech fleisch on 
erthe. Therfore thei that jeden out of1s 
the schip weren Noe, Sem, Cham, and 
Japheth; forsothe Cham, thilke is the fadir 
of Chanaan. These thre weren the sones 19 
of Noe, and al the kynde of men was 
sowun of hem on al erthe. And Noe, an20 
erthe tiliere, bigan to tile the erthe, and 
he plauntide a viner, and he drank wyn, 21 
and was’ drunkun; and he was _ nakid, 
and lay in lis tabernacle. And whanne22 
Cham, the fadir of Chanaan, hadde seien 
this thing, that is, that the schameful 
membris of his fadir weren maad nakid, 
he telde to” lise tweye britheren with out 
forth. And sotheli* Sem and Jafeth put- 2s 
tiden a mentil on her scliuldris, and thei 
jeden bacward, aud hileden the schameful 
membris of her fadir, and her faces weren 
turned awei, and thei sien not the priuy 
membris of her fadir. And forsothe® Noe 24 
wakide® of the wyn, and whanne le hadde 
lerned what thingis his lesset sone hadde 
do to hym, he seide, Cursid be the child 25 
Canaan, he schal be seruaunt of seruauntis 
to hise britheren. And Noe seide, Blessid 26 
be the Lord God of Sem, and Chanaan be 27 
the seruaunt tot Sem; God alarge Jafeth, 


k coumenountid p passim. Jsoule BpEFH. ™ co- 
© Om. BDEFH. P the erth npFi. 4 Om. «. 
whbitwene nw. *bitwene w.  Y he was ca. 


d Jesse or 3unger 8. © of omnes. 


96 GENESIS. 


of Sem, and Chanaan be the thral of hym. 
28 Noe forsothe lyuede after the flood thre 
29hundrid and fifti wynter; and alle the 
daies of hym ben fulfilled of nyne hun- 
drid and fifti 3eer, and deed he is. 


CAP ae 


1 Thes ben the generaciouns of the sonys 
of Noe, Sem, Cham, and Japheth. And 
sonys ben born to hem after the flood. 

2The sones of Japheth, Gomer, and Ma- 
gog, and Maday, and’ Jauan, and Tubal, 

3and Mosoth, and Thiras. The sonys for- 
sothe of Gomer, Assenes, and Riphath, 
4and Thogorna. The sones forsothe of 
Janan, Helisa, and Tassis, Cethym, and 

5 Dodanym; of thes ben diuydid yles of 
Gentils in her generaciouns, echone aftir 
the tung and her meynes, in her naciouns. 

6 The sones forsothe of Cham, Chus, and 

7 Mesraym, Futh',and Chanaan. The sones 
forsothe of Chus, Saba, and Euila, and 
Sabatha, and Regma, and Sabatathia. 
The sonys of Regma, Saba and Dadan. 

8Chus forsothe gat Nemeroth; he bigan 

9to be my3ti in the" erthe, and he’ was a 
strong hunter bifore the Lord; of that 
3ede out a prouerbe, as Nemoroth, a strong 

1ohunter bifore the Lord. The bigynyng 
forsothe of his rewme was Babiloyn, and 
Arach, and Archad, and Thalamne, in the 
1lerthe of Sennaar. Of that londe was gon 
out Assur, and he bildide” Nynyuen, and 
12the stretis of the cytee, and Chale*, Re- 
sen also bitwix Nynyuen and Chale; this 
131s the greet citee. And forsothe Mesraym 
gat Ludym, and Anamym, and Laabym, 
14 Neptym’, and Phetusym, and Chesluym ; 
of the which ben gon out Philistiym and 
isCapturym. Chanaan forsothe gat Sydo- 
ienem, his first gotun, Etheum, and Jebu- 
17seum, and Amoreum, Gergeseum, Eueum, 
igand Arathenm, Cyneum, and Aradium, 
Samaryten, and Amatheum; and bi thes 


IX. 28—X. 18. 


and dwellef in the tabernaclis of Sem, and 
Chanaan be seruaunt’ of hym. Forsothe 2a 
Noe lyuede aftir the greet flood thre hun- 
drid and fifti 3eer; and alle the-daies of29 
hym weren fillid nyn hundrid and fifty 
3eer, and he was deed. 


CAP. X. 


These ben the generaciouns of the sones1 
of Noe, Sem, Cham, and Jafeth. And 
sones weren borun to" hem aftir the greet 
flood. The sones of Jafeth weren Gomer, 2 
and Magog, and Madai, andi Jauan, and 
Tubal, and Mosoth, and Thiras. For-3 
sothe the sones of Gomer weren Asseneth, 
and Rifath, and Thogorma. Forsothe the4 
sones of Jauan weren Helisa, and Tharsis, 
Cethym, and Dodanym; of these soness 
the ylis of hethen* men weren departid in 
her cuntrees, ech bi his! langage and mey- 
nees, in hise naciouns. Sotheli the sonese 
of Cham weren Thus, and Mesraym, and 
Futh, and Chanaan. Forsothe the sones7 
of Thus weren Saba, and Kuila, and Saba- 
tha, and Regma, and Sabatacha. The 
sones of Regma weren Saba, and Dadan. 
Forsothe Thus gendride™ Nemroth; hes 
bigan to be my3ti in erthe, and he was a®9 
strong huntere® of men bifore the Lord ; 
of hym a prouerbe 3ede? out, as Nemroth, 

a strong huntere bifore the Lord. Sotheli1o 
the bigynnyng of his rewme was Babi- 
loyne, and Arach, and Archad, and Tha- 
lamye, in the lond of Sennaar. Assurii 
3ede out of that lond, and bildide Nynyue, 
‘and stretis of the! citee", and Chale, and 12 
Resen bitwixe Nynyue and Chale; this* 
is a greet citee. And sotheli Mesraym13 
gendridet Ludym, and Anamym, and Laa- 
bym, Neptuym®, and Ferrusym, and Ces-14 
Iuym; of which the Filisteis and Captu- 
rym camen forth. Forsothe Chanaan gen-15 
dride Sidon, his firste gendride sone, Ethei, 
and’ Jebusei, and Amorrei, Gergesei, Euei, 1? 
and Arathei, Ceney, and” Aradie, Sama-1s 


8 Om. ppern. tand Futh speru. °%Om.spern. YOm.p.  * bilde peu. edifiede p. * the 
Chale p. Y and Neptuym p. 

fdwelle he xs. & the seruaunt cet. omnes. 4 0fs. iOm. cet. omnes. ‘* the hetheng. her a. 
™ bigaat 1. "Om. w. © huntere, that is, oppressere BCN. or opp. ELP. either opp. GKQSWS. P went D. 
athatx. ‘rOm.w. ‘Sthatg@. + gaati1. and Neptuymenx. VYOm.E. WOm.1, 


XK. 19——XI. 4. GENESIS. 97 


ben sowed? out the puplis of Chananes. rites, and Amathei; and puplis of Cha- 
i9 And the termes of Chanaan ben maad to —_naneis weren sowun abrood bi these men. 
thilk that comen fro Sidon Geraran, vnto And the termes of Chanaan weren maad 19 
Gazan, to the tyme that thou? come into to men comynge fro Sidon to Gerara, til 
Sodomam, and Gomorram, and Adamam, to Gasa, til thou entre in to Sodom and 
zoand Seboin, vnto Lesa. Thes ben the Gomore, and Adama, and Seboyne, til to 
sonys of Cham, in> kynredis, and tungis, Lesa. These weren the sones of Cham, 20 
and® generaciouns, and erthis, and her in her kynredis, and langagis, and genera- 
21 folkis. Of Sem forsothe ben born the fa- * ciowuns, and londis, and folkis. Also of2i 
deres of alle the sonys of Heber, the more Sem weren borun the fadris of alle the 
22 brother of Japheth. The sonys of Sem; — sones of Heber, and Japhet was the more* 
Elam, and Assur, and Arfaxad, and Lud, brother. The sones of Sem weren Elam, 22 
23and Aram. The sonys of Aram; Vs,and and Assur, and Arfaxath, and Lud, and 
24 Hul, and Gether, and Mes. And for- Aram. The sones of Aram weren Vs, and 23 
sothe Arfaxad gat Sale, of whom is born Hul, and Gether, and Mes. And sotheli2s 
25 Heber. And there ben born to Heber Arfaxath gendride Sale, of whom Heber 
two sonys, name to the toon Phalig, there was borun. And twei sones weren borun 25 
thur3 that in the daies of him the erthe to Heber, the name to oY sone was Faleg, 
is dyuydid; and the name of his brother for the lond was departid in hise daies; 
26Jactan. The which Jactan gat Elmodad, and the name of his brothir was Jectan. 
27and Saleth, and Sarmoth, Jare, and Ad- And thilke Jeetan gendride” Elmodad, and 26 
ashuram, and Vzal, and Deda, and Ebel, Salech, and Asamoth, Jare, and Adhuram, 27 
2gand Abuimael, Saba and Ophir, and Euila, | and Vsal, and Deda, and Ebal, and Aby-2s 
and Jobab; alle thes the sonys of Jactan. mahel, Saba, and Ofir, and Euila, and Jo-29 
30 And the abitacioun of hem is maad o bab; alle these weren the sones of Jectan. 
Messa, as men goon vnto Sephar, the est | And the habitacioun of hem was maad fro 30 
31 hille. Thes the sones of Sem, after cogna- = Messa, as ‘me goith* til to Sefar, an hil of 
ciouns, and tungis, and regiouns, in her the eest. These ben the sones of Sem, bisi 
szfolkis. Fhes the meynes of Noe, aftir kynredis, and langagis, and cuntrees, in 
puplis and her naciouns; of thes ben dy- her folkis. These ben” the meynees of32 
uydid the gentilis aftir the flood in the Noe, bi her puplis and naciouns; folkis 


erthe. in erthe weren departid of these aftir the 
greet flood. 
CAP. XI. CAPs XI: 
1 Forsothe the erthe was of oo lip, and Forsothe the lond was of o langage‘,1 


2of the same wordis. And whan men and of the saine speche. And whanne2 
shulden go fro the est, thei founden a thei 3eden forth fro the eest, thei fonden 
feeld in the lond of Sennaer, and thei a feeld in the lond of Sennaar, and dwell- 
3dwelleden in it. And the tother seide to iden’ ther ynne. And oon® seide to his3 
his nei3bore, Cometh, and make we tile nei3bore, Come 3e', and make we tiel 
stoons, and sethe we hem with fier; and _—stonys, and bake we tho with fier; and 
thei hadden tiles for stoons, and tow3 thei hadden tiel for stonus, and pitche" for 
1cley forsyment. And thei seiden,Cometh, morter; and seiden', Come 3e, and make 4 
and make’ we to vs a citee and a towr, we to vs a citee and tour*, whos hijnesse 
whos hei3t fulli ateyne ynto heuene; and _ stretche ‘til to! henene; and make we 
halow we oure name, or we ben dyuydid solempne oure name bifor that we be de- 


Z sowen D. #@me Bs sec.m. £ sce.m.F. Pand pu. © Om. p. 4 maketh v. 


* more or eldirs. YtheorGcK. bigaat1. ®men goinge BN. > werenc. ¢lange Lp. 4 thei 
dwellidens. ¢anotherc. fOm.s. & bake or eelde’'s. 4 picche ether strong glu cq. 1 thei seiden s. 
Kk a toures. 1] ynto 1, 


oO 


98 GENESIS. 


sinto alle londis. The Lord forsothe de- 
scendide, that he my3te se the citee and 
the towre, the which the children of Adam 
6bildeden; and seide, Se! the puple is oon, 
and oo lippe is to alle, and this thei han 
bigunnen to make, ne thei wolen leeue of 
fro her thenkyngis, to the tyme that thei 
yzhan fulfillid hem in dede; thanne come 
3e, descende we, and confounde we there 
the tung of hem, that noon here the vois 
sof his nei3bore. And so the Lord de- 
uydide hem fro that place into alle londis; 
gand thei sesyden to bilde® the citee. And 
therfor was callidf the name of it Babel, 
for there was confoundid the lippe of al 
the? erthe; and fro thens the Lord dis- 
parpoilide hem vpon the face of alle re- 
iogiouns. hes ben the generaciouns of 
Sem. Sem was of an hundrid 3eeris 
whanne he gat Arfaxad, two 3eer aftre 
ithe flood. And Sem lyuede aftir that he 
gat Arfaxad fyue hundrid wynter, and 
iggat sonys and dow3tres. Forsothe Ar- 
faxad lyuede fyue and thretty wynter, 
izand gat Sale; and Arfaxad lyuede aftir 
that he gat Sale, thre hundrid and thre 
143eer, and gat sonys and dow3tres. And 
Sale lyuede thretti 3eer, and gat Heber; 
usand Sale lyuede after that he gat Heber, 
fowre hundrid wynter and thre, and gat 
is sonys and dow3tris. Heber forsothe lyuede 
fowre and thretti wynter, and gat Pha- 
17leth ; and Heber lyuede after that he gat 
Phaleth fowre hundrid and thritti wyn- 
ister, and gat sonys and dow3tres. Phaleth 
forsothe lynede thritti wynter®, and gat 
19Reu; and Phaleth lyuede aftir that he 
had getun Reu two hundrid and nyne 
203eer, and gat sonys and dow3tris. Reu 
forsothe lyuede two and thretti 3eer, and 
2igat Saruch; Reu forsothe lyuede aftir 
that he gat Saruch, two hundrid and se- 
uene 3eer, and gat sonys and dow3tres. 
22Saruch forsothe lyued thretti' 3eer, and 
23 gat Nachor; and Saruch lyuede aftir that 
he gat Nachor, two hundrid 3eer, and 
24 gat sonys and dow3tres. Nochor forsothe 


© edifien p. fclepide ppEFH. 


© bilden x. 
t hade gendride s. 


mQOm. 5, © the tour ks. 
8 Forsothe cet. omnes. 


& Om. BDEFH. 


P the Ks. 


XI. 5-—24. 


partid in to alle londis. Forsothe thes 
Lord cam down to se™ the citee and tour", 
which the sones of Adam bildiden®. Ande 
he seide, Lo! the puple is oon, and o lan- 
gage is to alle, and thei han bigunne to 
make this, nethir thei schulen ceesse of 
her thoustis, til thei fillen tho in werk; 
therfor come 3e, go we doun, and scheende7 
we there the tunge of hem, that ech man 
here not the voys of his nei3bore. Ands 
so the Lord departide hem fro that place 
in to alle londis; and thei cessiden to 
bielde a? cytee. And therfor the names 
therof was clepid Babel, for the langage 
of al erthe was confoundide there; and fro 
thennus the Lord scaterede hem on the 
face of alle cuntrees. These ben the ge-10 
neraciouns of Sem. Sem was of an hun- 
drid 3eer whanne he gendride4 Arfaxath, 
twey 3eer aftir the greet flood. And Semi 
lyuede aftir that he gendride Arfaxath 
fyue hundrid 3eer, and gendride sones and 
dou3tris. Forsothe Arfaxath lyuede fyue 12 
and thretti 3eer, and gendride Sale; and13 
Arfaxath lyuede aftir that he gendride 
Sale thre hundride and thre 3eer, and 
gendride sones and dou3tris. Also" Sale1s 
lyuede thretti 3eer, and gendride Heber ; 
and Sale lynede after that he gendrideis 
Heber foure hundrid and thre 3eer, and 
gendride sones and dou3tris. Sotheli He-16 
ber lyuede foure and thretti 3eer, and gen- 
dride Falech ; and Heber lynede aftir that 17 
he gendride Falech foure hundrid and 
thretti 3eer, and gendride sones and dou3- 
tris, Also Falech lyuede thretti jeer, and is 
gendride Reu; and Falech lyuede aftiri9 
that he gendride Reu two hundrid and 
nyne 3eer, and gendride sones and dou3- 
tris. And* Reu lyuede two and thretti20 
jeer, and gendride Saruch; and Reu lyuede 21 
aftir that he gendride Saruch two hundrid 
and senene 3eer, and gendride sones and 
dou3tris. Sotheli Saruch lyuede thretti22 
3eer, and gendride Nachor; and Saruch 2s 
lyuede aftir that he gendride' Nacor two 
hundrid 3eer, and gendride sones and dou3- 


hsere apeFH. after thretti «. 


4 gaat 1, and so throughout the chapter. r And IK. 


RiGeG aT. «. 


lyuede nyne and twenti 3eer, and gat 
25 Thare ; and Nachor lyued after that he 
gat Thare an hundrid ‘and nyne ten/ 
263eer, and gat sonys and dow3tres. And 
Thare lyued seuenti 3eer, and gat Abram, 
evand Nachor, and Aran. Thes ben for- 
sothe the generaciouns of Thare. Thare 
gat Abram, Nachor, and Aran. Aran’ 
esforsothe gat Loth; and Aran was deed 
bifore Thare, his fadre, in the lond of his 
29birthe, in Vr of Caldeis. Abram for- 
sothe and Nachor token hem wyues; the 
name of the wijf of Abram, Sarai, and 
the name of the wijf of Nachor, Melcha, 
the dou3ter of Aron, fadir*® of Melche 
30and! fadir of Jesse. Saray forsothe was 
3ibareyn, and had no fre children. And 
also Thare toke Abram, his sone, and 
Loth, the sone of Aran, the sone of hys 
sone, and Saray, his sonys™ wijf, the wijf 
of Abraam, his sone, and he ledde hem 
out fro Vr of Caldeis, that thei my3ten 
go into the lond of Chanaan; and thei 
comen vnto Aran, and dwelliden there. 
32 And the daies of Thare ben maad of two 
hundrid and fyue 3eer, and deed he is in 
Aran. 


CAP. XII. 


1 The Lord forsothe seide to Abram, Go 
out fro thi lond, and fro thi kynreden, 
and fro the hows of thi fadir, and com in 

2to the lond that I shal shew to thee; and 
I shal make thee in to a greet folk of 
kynde, and I shal blis to thee, and I shal 
magnyfie thi name, and thow shalt be 

sblissid; and" I shal blis to thoo® that 
blissen thee, and I shal curse to thoo° 
that cursen thee; and in thee shal be 

4 blissyd alle cosynages of the erthe. And 
so Abraam 3ede out, as the Lord co- 
maundide to? hym, and Loth 3ede with 
hym. Of seuenti and fyue “3eers was 
Abram whan he shulde go fro Aran. 

5And he toke Saray, his wijf, and Loth, 
the sone of his brother, and al the sub- 


j tenne and nyne aperu. & the fader z pr.m. 
othilkk sperH. P Om. RDEFH. 

« thre score and x. p. 
seuenty 3eer BEKMNOQW. 


vOm. pv. ¥ ynto1. 


x thei dwelliden F pr.m. 


GENESIS. 99 


tris. Forsothe Nachor lyuede nyne and2s 
twenti 3eer, and gendride Thare; and Na-2s 
chor lyuede after that he gendride Thare 
an hundrid and nynetene 3eer, and gen- 
dride sones and dou3tris. And Thare2e 
lyuede seuenti" 3eer, and gendride Abram, 
and’ Nachor, and Aran. Sotheli these ben 27 
the generaciouns of Thare. Thare gen- 
dride Abram, Nachor, and Aran. For- 
sothe Aran gendride Loth ; and Aran diede 28 
bifore Thare, his fadir, in the lond of his 
natiuite, in Vr of Caldeis. Forsothe Abram 29 
and Nachor weddiden wyues; the name 
of the wijf of Abram was Saray, and the 
name of the wiif of Nachor was Melcha, 
the dou3ter of Aran, fadir of Melcha and 
fadir of Jescha. Sotheli Saray was ba-30 
reyn, and hadde no children. And soa 
Thare took Abram, his sone, and Loth, . 
the sone of Aran his sone, and Saray, his 
dou3ter in lawe, the wijf of Abram, his 
sone, and ledde hem out of Vr of Caldeis, 
that thei schulen go in to the lond of Cha- 
naan; and thei camen ‘til to” Aran, and 
dwelliden® there. And the daies of Thare 32 
weren maad two hundrid 3eer and fyue, 
and he was deed in Aran. 


CAP. XII. 


Forsothe the Lord seide to Abram, Go. 
thou out of thi lond, and of thi kynrede, 
and of the hous of thi fadir, and come 
thou in to the lond which Y schal schewe 
to thee; and Y schal make thee in to a2 
greet folk, and Y schal blisse thee, and Y 
schal magnyfie thi name, and thou schalt 
be blessid; Y schal blesse hem that blessen 3 
thee, and Y schal curse hem that cursen 
thee; and alle kynredis of erthe schulen 
be blessid in thee. And so Abram 3ede4 
out, as the Lord comaundide hym, and 
Loth 3ede with hym. Abram was of 
‘thre scoor 3eer and fiftene? whanne he 
3ede out of Aran. And he took Saray,s 
his wijf, and Loth, the sone of his brother, 
and al the substaunce which thei hadden 
n Om. BDEFII. 


10Qm. eprom. ™ sone BE pr.m. 


y Om. p et plures. % fyue and 


0 2 


100 


staunce that thei hadden, and the lyues 
that thei maden in Aran; and thei 3eden 
out that thei my3ten gon in to the lond 
of Chanaan. And whan thei weren comen 
éinto it, Abram passide thur3 the lond vnto 
the place of Sichim, and vnto the noble 
valeye. Chananeus forsothe’ was thanne 
7in the lond. The Lord forsothe apperyde 
to Abram, and seide to hym, I shal 3yue 
to thi seed this lond. The which bildide™ 
there an auter to the Lord, the which 
had apperyd to hym, and he inwardly 
scallide’ there the name of him. And fro 
thens ouerpassynge to the mownt that 
was ajens the est of Betel, and‘ stran3te 
there his tabernacle, hanynge Betel fro 
the west, and fro the est Hay. And he 
edefiede there an auter to the Lord, and 
dinwardli" clepide the name of hym. And 
Abram 3ede goynge, and’ ferthermore 
10 passynge to the west. Forsothe hungur 
was maad in the lond; and Abram de- 
scendide into Egipt, that he my3te pil- 
grimage there; forsothe hungir wex greet 
Nin the lond. And whan he was ny3e that 
he shulde go into Egipt, he seide to Sa- 
ray, his wiif, I knew that a fayr wo- 
man thow art, and that whan Egipciens 
shulen se thee, thei ben to seyn, the 
wijf of hym she is, and thei shal slee 
i3me, and thee thei shal reserue’. Seie 
thanne, I preye thee, that thow art my 
sistre, that it be to me wel for thee, and 
14my sowle lyue for the grace of thee. And 
so whan Abram was gon into Egipt, 
Egipciens sawen the woman that she was 
is ful fayre; and the princis tolden to Pha- 
rao, and preyseden hir anentys hym; and 
the woman was takun into the hows of 
16Pharao. Abram forsothe thei wel vseden 
for hir; and there weren to hym sheep, 
and oxen, and he assis, and seruauntis, 
and meynes, and she assis, and camelis. 
17 The Lord forsothe scourgide Pharao with 
moost plagis* and the hows of hym, for 
18 Saray, Abrams’ wijf. And Pharao clepide 


: GENESIS. 


XIE. 6—18. 


in possessioun, and the men whiche thei 
hadden bigete in Aran; and thei jeden 
out that thei ‘schulen go* in to the loond of 
Chanaan. And whanne they camen in to 
it, Abram passide thorou the lond til tos 
the place of Sichem, and til to the noble 
valey. Forsothe Chananei was thanne in 
the lond. Sotheli the Lord apperide to7 
Abram, and seide to hym, Y schal 3yue 
this lond to thi seed. And Abram bildide> 
there an auter to the Lord, that apperide 
to hym. And fro thennus he passide forth s 
to® the hil Bethel, that was ajens the eest, 
and settide’ there his tabernacle, hauynge 
Bethel fro the west, and Hay fro the eest. 
And® he bildide also there an auter to 
the Lord, and inwardli clepide his name. 
And Abram 3ede goynge and goynge forth» 
ouer to the south. Sotheli hungur was 10 
maad in the lond; and Abram 3ede doun 
in to Egipt, to be a pilgrime ther, for hun- 
gur hadde maistrief in the lond. Andu 
whanne he was ny3 to entre in to’ Egipt, 
he seide to Saray, his wijf, Y knowe that 
thou art a fair womman, and that whanne 12 
Egipcians schulen se thee, thei schulen 
seie, it is his wijf, and thei schulen sle me, 
and ‘schulen reserue thee’. Therfor, Y bi-13 
seche thee, seie thon’, that thou art my 
sistir, that it be wel to me for thee, and 
that my lijf lyne for loue* of thee. And. 
so whanne Abram hadde! entrid in to Egipt, 
Egipcians sien the womman that sche was 
ful fair; and the prynces telden to Farao, 
and preiseden hir anentis him; and theis 
womman was takun vp in to the hous of 
Farao. Forsothe thei vsiden wel Abram 16 
for hir; and scheep, and oxun, and assis, 
and seruauntis, and seruauntessis, and sche 
assis, and camels weren to hym. Forsothe 17 
the Lord beet Farao and his hous with 
moste veniaunces, for Saray, the wijf of 
Abram. And Farao clepide Abram, and 18 
seide to hym, What is it that thou hast 
do to me? whi schewidist thou not to me, 
that sche was thi wijf? for what cause 19 


9 Om. Epr.m. 'made pd. §$cleped spernH. tOm. pon.andhe rr. the inwardly gperH. Vin a, 
Wreseyue 4. * wondis p. Y Abram gpEF. 

asedenc. Dbiltex. c¢tilto pcart. dhesettes. ¢€ Om.asec.m. {the maistrie rc. & Om. s. 
h kepe thees. iOm.r1x. * the loue px. |! Om. a. 


XII. 19——XIII. 10. 


Abram, and seide to? hym, What for- 
sothe is this that to me thow hast don? 
why shewide? thow not to me that she 

i9was thi wijf? for what cause seidist 
thow hir to be thi sister, that to me I 

20 shulde take hir into a wijf? Now thanne 
se! thi wijf, and take hir and go. And 
Pharao comaundide vpon Abram two 
men, and thei conueyden hym, and the 
wijf of him, and al that he had. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Abram thanne ascendide fro Egipt, 
he, and his wiif and al that he had, and 
2 Loth with hym, to the sowth plaag. He 
was forsothe ful® riche in possessioun of 
3siluer and of gold. And he was turnyd 
ajen bi the weye that he come fro the 
sowth in Betel, vnto the place in the 
which biforhond he had ficchid® a taber- 
4nacle, bytwix Betel and Hay, in the place 
of the auter that he made bifore, and he 
inwardli clepide there the name of the 
sLord. But and of Loth, the which was 
with Abram, weren flockis of sheep, and 
é6droues, and tabernaclis; and the lond 
my3te not reseyue hem, that thei dwell- 
iden to giderys; forsothe the substaunce 
of hem was inyche, and thei my3ten not 
7dwel comounli. Wherfor and there was 
strijf maad bitwix the shepherdis of the 
flockis of Abram and of Loth. That 
forsothe tyme Chananeus and Fereseus 
sdwelliden in that lond. Seide thanne 
Abram to Loth, I biseche, be there not 
strijf bitwix thee and me, and bitwix 
my sheepherdis and thi sheepherdis; bri- 
9theren forsothe we ben. Se! al the lond 
is bifore thee, I preye, go awey fro me; 
if thow to the left side gost, Y shal 
hold the ri3t side; if thow the ri3t side 
19 chesist, Y shal go to the left’. And so 
Loth, his eyen heued vp, sawe al the re- 
gioun abowt of Jordan, the which al was 
watered, bifore the Lord shulde ouer- 
turne Sodom and Gomor, as paradis of 


2 ynto Epr.m. ® schewdist BDEFH. 


mOm. xk. "that thei eri. © vnto I. 
u biseche thee s. ¥ goist 1. chesist 1. 


GENESIS. 


b wol pb. 


P a tabernacle s. 


‘101 


seidist thou, that sche was thi sister, that 
Y schulde take hir in™ to wife to me? Now 
therfor lo! thi wiif; take thou hir, and 
go. And Farao comaundide to men on20 
Abram, and thei® Jedden forth hym, and 
his wijf, and alle thingis that he hadde. 


CAP. XIII. 


Therfore Abram stiede fro Egipt, he,1 
and his wijf, and alle thingis that he hadde; 
and Loth stiede with hym, to the south 
coost. Forsothe he was ful riche in pos-2 
sessyoun of siluer and of gold. And he3 
turnede ajen bi the weye in which he cam 
fro the south in to Bethel, ‘til to® the 
place, in which bifore he hadde sett taber- 
nacle?, bitwixe Bethel and Hay, in thea 
place of the auter which he made bifore, 
and inwardli clepide? there’ the name of 
thes Lord. But also flockis of scheep, ands 
droues of oxun, and tabernacls weren to 
Loth, that was with Abram ; and the londsé 
mi;te not take hem, that thei schulden 
dwelle togidre, for the catel of hem was 
myche, and thei mi3ten not dwelle in 
comyn. Wherfor also strijf was maad bi-7 
twixe the keperis of flockis of Abram and 
oft Loth. Forsothe Chananei and Feresei 
dwelliden in that lond in that tyme. Ther-3 
for Abram seide to Loth, Y biseche", that 
no strijf be bitwixe me and thee, and bi- 
twixe my scheepherdis and thi scheep- 
herdis ; for we ben britheren. Lo! al thes 
Jond is bifore thee, Y biseche, departe thou 
fro me; if thou go’ to the left side, Y schal 
holde the rij3t side; if thou chese” the 
ri3t side, Y schal go to the left side. And 10 
so Loth reiside hise ijeu, and sei3 aboute 
al the cuntrei of Jordan, which was al 
moistid, bifor that the Lord distriede So- 
dom and Gomorre, as paradis of the Lord, 
and as Egipt, as men comen in to Segor. 


¢maadp. 4 left side p. 


aclepe nN. 'Om.G. § oure L. t Om. gE. 


102 GENESIS. XIII. 11—XIV. 5. 


the Lord, and as Egipt to comers into 
1Segor. And Loth ches to hym the re- 
gioun abowt Jordan, and 3ede fro the est ; 
and thei ben either diuydid fro his bro- 
izther. Abram dwelte in the londe of Cha- 
naan; and Loth forsothe abode in the 
borow townes that weren abowte Jordan, 
and dwellid in Sodomys. Men forsothe 
of Sodom weren the werst men, and syn- 
ners before the Lord mych. And the 
Lord seide to Abram, aftir that Loth 
was dyuydyd fro hym, Heue vp thin 
eyen euen ry3t, and se fro the place in 
the® which thow art now, to the north 
isand sowth, to the est and west; al the 
lond that thow‘ biholdist, I shal 3yue to 
thee and to thi seed, for to® euermore. 
i¢ And I shal make thi seed as powdir" of 
the erthe; if eny men my3ten nowmbre 
the powdre of the erthe, and thi seed he 
17shal mow nowmbre. Aryse thanne and 
ouergo the lond in lengthe and in brede’, 
1sfor I am to 3yue* it to thee. Abram 
thanne, mouynge his tabernacle, com and 
dwellide biside the valey of Mambre, the 
which is in Ebron, and bildide! there™ 
an auter to the Lord. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 And it was don in that tyme, that 
Amraphel, the kyng of Sennaer, and Ar- 
yoth, the kyng of Ponty, and Chodor- 
laomor, the kyng of Elemytarum, and 
2 Thadal, kyng" of fole of kynd, 3eden into 
a° batail ajens Bara, the kyng of Sodom, 
and a3ens Bersa, the kyng of Gomor, and 
aj3ens Sennaar, the kyng of Adame, and 
ajens Sebamar, the kyng of Soboym, and 
a3ens the kyng of Bale, that? is, of Se- 
sgor. Alle thes comen to gidre into the 
wodi valey, the which now is the see of 
4salt. Forsothe twelue 3eer thei serneden 
to Chodorlaomor, and the threttenthe 3eer 
5thei 3ede awey fro hym. Therfor the 
fourtenthe 3eer com Chodorlaomor, and 
the kyngis that weren with hym, and 


And Loth chees to him the cuntre aboute 1 
Jordan, and departide fro the eest; and 
thei weren departid ech fro his brother. 
Abram dwellide in the lond of Chanaan ; 12 
sotheli Loth dwellide in townes aboute 
Jordan, and wonide in Sodom. Forsothe 13 
men of Sodom weren ful wickid, and syn- 
neris greetly bifore the Lord. And thei 
Lord seide to Abram, aftir that Loth was 
departid fro him, Reise thin iz3en forth 
ri3t, and se fro the place in which thou 
art now, to the north and south, to the 
eest and west; Y schal 3yue al the londis 
which thou seest to thee and to thi seed, 
til in to with outen ende. And Y schal ic 
make thi seed as the* dust of ertheY’; if 
ony man may noumbre the dust of erthe?, 
also he schal mowe noumbre thi seed. 
Therfor rise thou, and passe thorou the*17 
lond in his lengthe and breede, for Y schal 
3yue it to thee. Therfor> Abram, mouynge 18 
his tabernacle, cam and dwellide bisidis 
the valei of Mambre, which is in Ebron; 
and he bildide there an auter to the 
Lord. 


CAP. XIV. 


Forsothe it was don in that tyme, that: 
Amrafel, kyng of Sennaar, and Ariok, 
kyng of Ponte, and Chodorlaomor, kyng of 
Elemytis, and Tadal, kyng of folkis, bigun-2 
nen batel a3ens Bara, kyng of Sodom, and 
ajens Bersa, kyng of Gomorre, and ajens 
Sennaar, kyng of Adama, and a3ens Se- 
meber, kyng of Seboym, and ajens the 
kyng of Bale; thilke Bale is Segor. Alles 
these camen togidre in to the valey of 
wode, which is now the see of salt. Fora 
in twelue 3eer thei seruyden Chodorlaomor, 
and in the threttenthe 3eer thei departiden 
fro hym. Therfor Chodorlaomor cam ins 
the fourtenthe 3eer, and kyngis that weren 
with him, and thei ‘han smyte* Rafaym in 
Astaroth Carnaym, and Susym with hem, 


© Om. pperu. fOm.p. £ Om. pn. } the pouder speru. i his brede speru.  * 3euing x. 
'bylde seru. madep. ™ Om. p. and the kyng x. ° Om. epern. P it £ sec.m. 


*Om.s. Ytheerthe kK. 2 the erthes. this 4 pr.m. et plures. » And therfor x. © smyten K. 


XIV. 6-16, 


smytyn Raphaym in Astaroth, Carnaym, 
and Zuzym with hem, and Emim in Sabe 
6Chariathaim, and Chorreos in the hillis 
Seher, vnto the feeldy?? placis of Pharam, 
7that is in wildernes. And thei weren 
turned ajen, and comen vnto the welle 
of Mesphat; it is of Cades. And thei 
smyten al the regioun of Amalechitis, 
and Amorre, the whiche dwellid in Asa- 
sson of Thamar. And the kyng of So- 
dom, and the kyng of Gomorre, and the 
kyng of Adame, and the kyng of So- 
boym, also and‘ the kyng of Bale, that is 
of Segor, 3eden out, and thei dressiden 
a3ens hem sheltrun in the wodi valey, 
gthat is, ajens Chodorlaomor, kyng™ of 
Elamytarum, and Thadal, kyng* of folk 
of kynde, and Amraphel, the kyng of 
Sennaar, and Arioth, the kyng of Ponty; 
10 foure kynges ajens fyue. The wodi valei 
forsothe had manye pyttis of gluwyt cley; 
and so the kyng of Sodom and of Gomor 
turneden backis and fellen there; and tho® 
i1that laften flowen to the hil. Forsothe 
thei token al the substaunce of Sodom 
and of” Gomor, and alle thingis that par- 
12teyneden to mete, and 3eden awey; also 
and Loth, the sone of the brother of 
Abram, the which dwellid in Sodom, and 
13the substaunce of hym. And lo! oon 
that ascapide, toolde to Abram Ebrew, 
the which dwellid in valey* of Mambre 
of Amorey, brother* of Escol, and bro- 
ther of Aner; thes forsothe hadden coue- 
14nauntid bond of pees with Abram. The 
which whanne Abram had herd, ‘that is, 
Loth his brother takun’, he noumbride 
thre hundrid ten and ei3t men of his own 
howshold redi, and he pursuede hem vnto 
15Dan. And, his felows dyuydid, he felle 
vpou hein in the ny3t, and he smoot hem, 
and he pursuede hem vnto Saba’, and 
Phenysem, the which is at the left side 
160f Damask. And he brou3te ajen al the 
substaunce, and Loth his brother with 


q Om. p. 
v Om. pFil. 
2 Hoba pprit. 


PP feeldly 4. 
u thilk poern. 
takyn p. 


4Om.u. ¢ of Mesphath ex.  f smyten x. 
pr.m. Gx. — k of Gomorre KLs. 


Pong. 40m. ELP. *Om.R. §$ vnto i. 


GENESIS. 


t the kyng epr.m. 
w the valey BDEFII. 


& batel c. 
1 the thingis 5. 
t Om. c. 


103 


and Emyin in Sabe Cariathaym, and Cho-« 
reis in the hillis of Seir, til to the? feldi 
placis of Faran, which is in wildirnesse. 
And thei turneden a3en, and camen til to7 
the welle Mesphath*; thilke is Cades. And 
thei ‘han smytef al the cuntre of men of 
Amalec, and Amorrei, that dwellide in Asa- 
son Thamar. And the kyng of Sodom,s 
and the king of Gomorre, and the kyng of 
Adama, and the kyng of Seboym, also and 
the kyng of Bale, which is Segor, jeden 
out, and dressiden scheltrun a3ens hem in 
the valei of wode, that is, a3ens Chodorla-9 
omor, kyng of Elamytis, and Thadal, kyng 
of folkis, and Amrafel, kyng of Sennaar, 
and Ariok, kyng of Ponte; foure kyngis 
a3ens fyue. Forsothe the valey of the" 10 
wode hadde many pittis of pitche'; and 
so the kyng of Sodom and the kyng of 
Gomorre turneden the backis, and felden 
doun there; and thei that leften fledden 
to the hil. Sotheli thei token awei al thei 
catel of Sodom and Gomorre*, and alle 
thingis! that perteynen to mete, and 3eden 
awei; also and thei token awey Loth and 12 
his catel, the sone of the brother of Abram, 
which Loth dwellide in Sodom. And,13 
lo! oon that ascapide, telde to Abram 
Ebrew™, that dwellide in the valei of 
Mambre of Amorrei, brother of Escol, and 
brother of Aner; for these maden coue- 
naunt of pees with Abram. And whanne14 
Abram hadde herd this thing, that is, Loth 
his brothir takun, he nowmbride his borun 
seruauntis maad redy thre" hundrid and 
ei3tene, and pursuede hem ‘til to® Dan. 
And whanne his felowis weren departid,i5 — 
he felde on hem in? the ni3t, and he‘ sinoot 
hem, and pursuede hem" ‘til to* Hoba, and 
Fenyce, which is at the left side of Da- 
mask. And he brou3te a3en al the catel, 16 
and Loth his brother with his catel, also 
wymmen and thet puple. Sotheli the kyng17 
of Sodom 3ede out in to the metyng of 
him, after that he turnede a3en fro sleyng 


t glewyche Beri. toow pb. 


8 the kyng Epr.m. 
ee y that Loth his brother is 


x the brother epr.m. 


i picche ether strong glu c. 
nthere threG. © vntol. 


h Om. EILMPs. 
m the Ebrew EPL. 


104 


the substaunce of hym, and wymmen and 
17puple. Forsothe the kyng of Sodom 3ede 
out into the ajen-goyng* of hym, after 
that he was aj3en turned fro the slaw3tir 
of Chodorlaomor, and of the kyngis that 
weren with hym, in the valey of Sabe, 
isthe which is the valey of the kyng. And 
forsothe Melchisadech, the kyng of Salem, 
bryngynge forth breed and wyne, for- 
sothe he was the? prest of the heijest 
19God, blisside® to’ hym, and seide®, 
Blissid be Abram to the heye God, the 
which maad of nou3t heuene and erthe, 
goand the heye God be blissid, whom de- 
fendynge, the enemyes ben takun in thin 
hondis. And he 3aue hym dymes of alle 
aithingis. Forsothe the kyng of Sodom 
seide to Abram, 3yue ine the sowlis; 
220thre thingis take to thee. The which 
answeride hyim, I heeue vp myn hond to 
the Lord, the‘ heye God, welder of heuene 
g3and erthe, that fro a threed of the weeft 
vnto a garter of an hoos I shal not take 
of alle thingis that ben thin, lest thow 
2aseye, I haue maad Abram ryche; out 
take thes thingis that 3ong men han etun, 
and the partyse of men that camen with 
me, Aner, Eschol, and Mambre; thes 
shulen take there partyes. 


CAP. XV. 


1 So thes thingis past ouer, the word of 
the? Lord was maad to Abram bi a vi- 
sioun, seiynge, Abram, wolt" thow not 
dreed, I am thi defendour, and thi meed 

2is ful greet. Aud Abram seide, Lord 
God, what shal thow 3yue me? I shal go 
withouten fre children, and the sone of 
the proctour of myn hows, this Damask 

3of Elyzar, shal be myn eyre. And Abram 
addide, To me forsothe thow hast not 
3ouun seed, and, lo! the seruaunt of myn 
4howshold shal be myn eyre. And anoon 
the word of God was maad to hyni, sei- 
ynge, This shal not be thin eire, but he 


4 a3en-comyng B. 


b Om. 4 prim. 
£ Om, x prom. 


& Om. Epr.m. 4} wil aver. wole H. 
u the kingus s. 

z Om. p. 

to Iks. 


¥Om. BNsw. W the hizeste KN. 
48 oof werk cc. 84 Abraham a. » yisioun 
€ he this 1. 


GENESIS. 


¢ And he blesside Epr.m. 


XIV. 17-—XV. 4. 


of Chodorlaomor, and of kyngis" that weren 
with him, in the valei of Sabe, which is 
the valey of the kyng. And sotheli Mel-18 
chisedech, kyng of Salem, brou3te forth 
breed and wyn, for he was the’ preest of 
hijeste’ God; and he blesside Abram, and 19 
seide, Blessid be Abram of hi3 God, that 
made heuene and erthe of nou3t, and blessid 29 
be hi3 God, bi wliom defendynge, enemyes 
ben bitakun® inY thin hondis. And Abram 
jaf tithis of alle thingis to hym. For-ai 
sothe the kyng of Sodom seide to Abram, 
3yue thou the men to me; take thou othir 
thingis to thee. And Abram answerde to 22 
hym, Y reyse myn hondis’’ to the hi3 Lord 
God, Lord? cf heuene and of erthe, that23 
fro the threde of oof* til to the layner of 
the hose I schal not take of alle thingis that 
ben thine, lest thou seie, I nade Abram** 
riche ; out takun these thingis whicheas 
the 3onge men eeten, and the partis of 
amen that camen with me, Aner, Escol, 
and Mambre; these men schulen take her 
partis. 


CAP. XV. 


Aud so whanne these thingis weren don, ; 
the word of the Lord was maad to Abram 
bi a visioun>, and seide, Abram, nyle thou 
drede, Y am thi defender, and thi meede is 
ful greet*. And Abram seide, Lord God, 2 
what schalt thou 3yue to me? Y schal go 
with oute fre children, and this Damask, 
sone of Elieser, the procuratour of myn 
hous, schal be myn eir. And Abrams 
addide*, Sotheli thou hast not 3oue seed to 
me, and, lo! my borun seruaunt schal be 
myn eir. And anoon the word of the, 
Lord was maad to hym, and seide, This* 
schal not be thin eir, but thou schalt haue 


da ynto BDEFH. € seith Esec.m. 


xtaken EGLP.  Y into 18. 


yy hond Bc. pr.m. N. 
ether reuelacioun BON. 


© moche Beqgrtr. 4 addide 


XV. 5—18. 


that shal gon out of thi womb, hym thow 
sshalt make! thin eire. And he ledde hym 
out, and seide to hym, Biholde heuene, 
and noumbre the sterrys, if thow mayst. 
And he seide to hym, So shal be thi seed. 
6 Abram leuede to God, and it was alowid 
7to hym to ry3twisnes. And he seide to 
hym, I the Lord, that out lad thee fro Vr 
of Caldeis, that I shulde 3yue to thee this 
slond, and thow shuldist haue it. And he 
seide, Lord God, wherof may I knowe 
9that I am to haue it? And the Lord an- 
sweride, Take, he seith*, to thee a kow 
of thre 3eer, and a she gehet of thre jeer, 
and a-wethir of thre 3eer, and a turtur', 
1oand a culuer. The which, takynge alle 
thes thingis, dyuydide hem by the mydil, 
and putte™ eithir partis a3ens -hemsilf, 
either to othre; the briddis forsothe he 
1idyuydide not. And fowlis descendiden 
vpon the careyns", and Ahram ‘droue 
12hem® awey. And whanne the sunne was 
goon down, feer? felle vpou Abram, and 
greet grisynes and derk assaileden hym. 
13 And it was seid to him, Bifore knowynge 
know thow, that thi seed is to be a‘ pil- 
grym in the lond not his, and men shulen 
suget hem to thraldom, and men shulen 
ouer traueile hem fowre hundrid wynter; 
i4netheles’ I shal deme the folk of kynde 
to whom thei ben to serne; and after thes 
thingis thei shulen gon ont with a greet 
issubstaunce. Thow forsothe shalt go to 
thi fadres in pees, biried also* in god 
iseld. The ferthe forsothe generacioun thei 
shulen turne a3en hidir, ne 3it forsothe 
ben not fulfillid the shrewidnes of thet 
Amoreis, vnto the tyme that is now. 
17 Thanne whan the sunne is" gon down, 
there was maad a derk clowd, and a fur- 
neys smekynge aperyde, and a lawmpe 
of fijr, passynge bitwix tho’ dyuysiouns. 
18In that day the Lord couenauntide with 
Abram a bond of pees, seiynge, To thi 
seed I shal 3yue this lond, fro the flood 


GENESIS. 105 


hym eir, that schal go out of thi wombe. 
And the Lord ledde out Abram, aid seides 
to hym, Biholde thou heuene, and nowm- 
bre thouf sterris®, if thou maist. And the 
Lord seide to Abram, So thi seed schal be. 
Abram bileuede to God, and it was arettid' ¢ 
tot hym to rijtfulnesse*. And God seide7 
to hym, Y am the Lord, that ladde thee 
out of Vr of Caldeis, that Y schulde 3yue 
this lond to thee, and thou schuldist haue 
it in possessioun. And Abram seide, Lords 
God!, wherbi may™ I wite that Y schal 
welde it? And the Lord answerde, ando9 
seide, Take thou to me a cow of thre 3eer, 
and a geet of thre 3eer, and a ram of thre 
3eer, a" turtle also, and a culuer. Which® 10 
took alle these thingis, and departide tho 
bi the myddis, and settide? euer eithir 
partis? ech ajens other; but he departide 
not the briddis. And foulis camen dounu 
on the careyns, and Abram drof hem 
awey. And whanne the sunne was gon 12 
doun, drede felde on Abram, and a’ greet 
hidonsenesse and derk asaylide’ him. And 13 
it was seid to hym, Wite thou bifore know- 
inge, that thi seed schal be pilgrim foure 
hundrid 3eer in a lond not his owne, and 
thei schulen make hem suget to seruage, 
and thei schulen turment hem; netheles t 
Y schal deme the folk to whom thei schulen 
serue; and aftir these thingis thei schulen 
go out with greet catel. Forsothe thou 1s 
schalt go to thi fadris in pees, and schalt 
be biried in good age. Sotheli in the 6 
fourthet generacioun thei schulen turne 
az3en ludir, for the wickidnesses" of Amo- 
reis ben not 3it fillid, ‘til to” present tyme. 
Therfor whanne the sunne was gon doun, 17 
a derk myst was maad, and a furneis 
smokynge apperide, and a laumpe of fier, 
and passide thorou tho’ departingis. In 1s 
that dai the Lord made a couenaunt of 
pees with Abram, and seide, Y schal 3yue 
to thi seed this lond, fro the ryuer of 
Egipt til to the greet ryuer Eufrates; 


Thane speru. X said spe prmrn. \turtil epern. ™ he putte spEFH. ™ eareyng B. © drow hym p. 


P feerd peru. drede vp. 4 Om. BDEFH. 
Vv thilk spern. 


F neverthelese apEF. &Om. BoEFu. * Om, BDEFH. Uwas BDEFH. 


fOm.s. 8 the sterrissx. 4 rettidr. |Om.¢.  & rijtwisnesse ErxNrs. |!Om.s.  ™ shal a. 
Nandacx. the which 1. P sette nLrs. 4 part w. 'Om.s. ‘Sassayedes. ¢foure vp. ® wickid- 
nesse 1B. Vvutor. W the rLoswx. 


P 


106 


of Egipt vnto the greet flood of Eufraten; 
19 Cyneos, and Cynyseos, and Sephmonios, 
20and Etheos, and Phariseos, Raphaim for- 
2i1sothe, and Amorreos, and Chananeos, and 
Gergeseos, and Gebeseos. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 For Saray, the wijf of Abram, had not 
geet to hym fre children; but hauynge 
an hand mayden Egipcian, Agar bi name, 

2seyde to hir howsbond, Loo! the Lord 
hath closid me, that Y may not bere; go 
into myn hand maydyn, if peranenture 
at the leste” of hir I take children. And 

3whanne he assentide to hir preiyng, he 
toke Agar the Egipcian, hir hand mayden, 
aftir ten 3eer that thei bigunnen to dwelle 
in the londe of Chanaan, and she j3aue 
shir a wijf to hir husbond. The which 
3ede into hir; and she seynge hir silf 
that she had conseyued, dispiside hir ladi. 
sAnd Saray seide to Abram, Vneuenli 
thow dost a3ens me; I haue 3yuun myn 
hand mayden_ into thi bosum, the which 
seynge that she hath conseyued, hath me 
to despit; the Lord deme bitwix me and 
6thee. To whom answerynge Abram, Lo! 
he seith, thin hand maydyn is in thin 
hond; vse hir as it is leueful. Thanne 
Saray ouertraueilynge hir, she 3ede into 
7fly3t. And whanne the aungel of the 
Lord hadde foundun hir biside the welle 
of water in wildirnes, the which is in the 
sweye of Sur in desert, he seide to hir, 
Agar, the hand mayden of Saray, whens 
comyst thow, and whithir gost thow ? 
9The which answeride, Fro the face of 
Saray my ladi I flee. And the aungel 
of the Lord seide to hir, Turne ajen to 
thi ladi, and be meke vndir the hondis of 

iohir. And eft, Multipliynge, he seith, I 

shal multiplie thi seed, and it shal not be 
unowmbrid for the multitude. And her- 
afterward*, Loo! he seith, thow hast con- 
seyued, and thow shalt bere a sone, and 
thow shalt cleep the name of hym Ys- 


W laste p. 
xOm.c. Y the wijf pegiLNrarsT. 
prem. 8. 4 Om. ps. 
Julx. €Om.co. hatha, 4 he this 1. 


GENESIS. 


Z she seide kK. Sara seide s. 


XV. 19-—XVI. 12. 


Cyneis, and Cyneseis, and* Cethmoneis, 19 
and Etheis, and Fereseis, and Raphaym, 20 
and Amorreis, and Cananeis, and Gerge-21 
seis, and Jebuseis. 


CAP. XVI. 


Therfor Sarai, wijfY of Abram, hadde} 
not gendrid fre children; but sche hadde 
a seruauntesse of Egipt, Agar bi name, 
and seide? to hir hosebonde, Lo! the Lord*2 
hath closid me, that Y schulde not bere 
child ; entre thou to my seruauntesse, if in 
hap Y schal take children, nameli of hir. 
And whanne he assentide to hir preiynge, 
sche took Agar Egipcian, hir seruauntesse, 3 
after ten 3eer aftir that thei begunne to 
enhabite in¢ the lond of Chanaan, and sche 
saf Agar wiif to hir hosebonde. And4 
Abram entride to Agar; and Agar sei3 
that sche hadde conseyued, and sche di- 
spiside hir ladi. And Saray seide to Abram, 5 
Thou doist wickidli ajens me; I 3af my 
seruauntesse in to? thi bosum, which seeth, 
that sche conseyuede, and dispisith me; 
the Lord deme betwixe me and thee. And6é 
Abram answerde and seide to hir, Lo! thi 
seruauntesse is in thin hond; vse thou hir 
as ‘it likith®. Therfor for‘ Sarai turmentide 
hir, sche fledde awei. And whanne the7 
aungel of the Lord hadde founde hir bi- 
sidis a welle of watir in wildernesse, which 
welle is in the weie of Sur in deseert, hes 
seide to hir, Fro whennus comest thou 
Agar, the sernauntesse of Sarai, and whi- 
dur goist thou? Which answerde, Y fle fro 
the face of Sarai my ladi. And the aun-9 
gel of the Lord seide to hir, Turne thou 
a3en to thi ladi, and be thou mekid vudur 
hir hondis. And eft he seide, Y multi-10 
pliynge schal multiplie thi seed, and it 
schal not be noumbrid for multitude. And 
aftirward he seide, Lo! thou hast® con- 
seyued, and thou schalt bere a sone, and 
thou schalt clepe his name Ismael, for the 
Lord hath herd thi turment; this" schal ie 


x ther afterward BDEFH. 


a Lord God x. bOm.s. ¢ Om.6 


€ the likith p sec.m. o sec.m.sx. likith to thee er. likith, ether as té is leue- 


XVI. 12—XVII. Io. 


mael, therthur3 that the Lord hath herd 
12thin affliccioun; this shal be a feers man; 
the hoond of hym a3ens alle, and the 
hoond of alle az3ens hym; and ‘forn a3ensY 
alle his britheren he shal ficche taber- 
i3snaclis. Agar forsothe clepide the naine 
of the Lord that spak to hir, Thow God 
that saw me; and she seide, Forsothe 
here I haue seen the hyndirmore of thilk 
14that saw me. Therfor she nemnyde that 
pytte, the pytte’’ of hym lyuynge and se- 
ynge me; thilk is bytwix Cades and Ba- 
israd. And Agar bare to Abram a sone, 
the which clepide the name of hym Is- 
is6mael. Of ei3ti and sixe wynter was 
Abram, whanne Agar bare to hym Is- 
mael. 
CAP. XVII. 

1 After forsothe that he bigan to be of 
nynti and nyne 3eer, the Lord aperide to 
hym, and seide to hym, I God Almy3ti; 

2goo bifore me, and be thow perfite; I 
shal sett my couenaunt of pees bitwix 
me and thee; and I shal multiplye thee 

3ful hugeli. And Abram felle down al 

4redi in to the face. And God seide to 
hym, I am, and I shal sett my couenaunt 
with thee, and thow shalt be fader of 
smany folk of kynde; and thi name shal 
no more be clepid Abram, but thow shalt? 
be clepid Abraham, for I haue ordeyned 
é6thee fadir”” of many folk of kynde; and 
I shal make thee grow moost hugeli, and 
I shall sett thee in folk of kynde, and 
7kyngis shal gon out of thee; and J shal 
stable my couenaunt bitwixe me and thee, 
and bitwix thi seed after thee, in thi 
kynredis, with euerlastynge boond of pees, 
that I be thi God, and of thi seed after 
sthee; and I shal 3yue to thee and to 
thi seed aftyr thee the loond of thi pil- 
grimage, al the loond of Chanaan, into 
euerlastyng possessioun, and J shal be the 

9God of hem. Eftsones God seide to A- 
braham, And thow thanne shalt kepe my 
couenaunt, and thi seed aftir thee, in her 


1okinredis. This is my couenaunt, that 3e 
y from a3enst £ sec.m. YY spirit 4. 
'hyndere car pr.m. Kqrd. * Om. ELP. 


2Om. 1: ° Om. ip. POm.G. 4 bitwene 1. 


GENESIS. 


107 


be a wielde man; his hond schal be a3ens 


‘alle men, and the hondis of alle men 


schulen be a3ens him; and he schal sette 
tabernaclis euene aj3ens alle his britheren. 
Forsothe Agar clepide the name of the13 
Lord that spak to hir, Thou God that 
seizjest me; for sche seide, Forsothe here 
Y sei3 the hynderere' thingis of him that 
si3 me. Therfor sche clepide thilke pit, 14 
the pit of hym that lyneth and seeth me; 
thilk pit is bitwixe Cades and Barad. 
And Agar childide a sone to Abram, which 15 
clepide his name Ismael. Abram was of* 16 


‘ei3ti 3eere and sixe!, whanne Agar childide 


Ysmael to hym. 


CAP. XVII. 

Forsothe aftir that Abram bigan to be1 
of nynti 3eer and nyne, the Lord apperide 
to hym, and seide to him, Y am Almy3ti 
God; go thou bifore me, and be thou per- 
fit; and Y schal sette my conenaunt of pees 2 
bitwixe me and thee; and Y schal mul- 
tiplie thee ful greetli. And Abram feldes 
doun lowe on™ his face. And God seide to4 
hym, Y am, and my couenaunt of pees is 
with thee, and thou schalt be the” fadir of 
many folkis; and thi name schal no mores 
be clepid Abram, but thou schalt be clepid 
Abraham, for Y haue maad thee fadir of 
many folkis; and Y schal make thee toe 
wexe fil greetli, and Y schal sette thee in® 
folkis, and kyngis schulen go out of thee ; 
and? Y schal make my couenaunt bitwixe47 
me and thee, and bitwixe4 thi seed after 
thee, in her generaciouns, bi euerlastynge 
bond of pees, that Y be thi God, and of 
thi seed after thee; and Y schal 3yue tos 
thee and to thi seed after thee the lond of 
thi pilgrymage’, al the lond of Chanaan, 
in to euerlastynge possessioun, and Y schal 
be the God of hem. God seide eft tos 
Abraham, And therfor thou schalt kepe 
my couenaunt, and thi seed after thee, in 
her generaciouns. This is my couenaunt, jo 
which 3e schulen kepe bitwixe me and 


zshal an. 22 the fadir BDEFH. 


! fourescore and sixe 3eer pr. f. 3eer and s. jeer R. ™ in tos, 
God of s. 


PQ 


8 pilgrymaging s. 


108 


shulen kepe bitwix me and 30w, and thi 
seed after thee; ech maal of 3ow shal be 
11 cireumeidid, and 3e shulen circumside the 
flehs of the ferthermore parti of 3oure 
3eerde, that it be in tokne of bond* of 
12 pees bitwix me and 3ow. A child of ei3t 
dayes shal be circumsidid in 30w, ech 
maal in 3oure kinredis, as wel the freman 
of 3oure howshold as the bow3t man shal 
be circumsidid, and who so euer were 
13 of 3oure lynage; and iy couenaunt shal 
be in 30ure flehs into euerlastynge boond 
of pees. The maal whos flehs of the vt- 
l4termore parti of his 3erde were not cir- 
cumsidid, that soule shal be don awey 
fro his puple; for he hath maad my 
Iscouenaunt wast. And God seide to Abra- 
ham, Saray, thi wijf, thou shalt not clepe 
i6Saray, but Sara; and I shal blis to hir, 
and ‘of hir? I shal 3yue to® thee a sone, 
to whom I am to blis, and he shal be into 
naciouns, and kyngis of puplis shal grow 
170f hym. And Abraham fel into his face, 
and low3 in his herte, seiynge, Wenyst 
thow, whethir a sone shal be born to a 
man of an hundrid wynter, and Sara 
isnynti winter shal bere? And he seide to 
the Lord, Wolde God Ysmael lyue bifore 
19thee. And the Lord seide to Abraham, 
Sara, thi wijf, shal bere to thee a sone, 
and thow shalt cleep the name of hym 
Ysaac, and I shal ordeyne my couenaunt 
to hym into euerlastynge boond of pees, 
20and to his seed after hym; and vpon Is- 
mael J haue herd thee, loo! I shal blis 
to hym, and I shal encrees, and J shal 
multiplie hym greetli; twelue dukis he 
shal gendre, and I shal make hym into 
21a greet folk of kynde. But my coue- 
naunt I shal maak stonde to Ysaac, whom 
Sara shal bere to thee this tyme in the 
22tother 3eer. And whan the sermoun of 
the speker with hym was endid, God 
a3 stiede’ vp fro Abraham. Abraham for- 
sothe toke Ysmael, his sone, and alle 
the fre men of his hows, and alle whom 
he had bow3t, alle the malis of alle men 


a bondis p. » Om. pv. 


child Rr. 
2 oothir 1. 


wa child EFLPR. 


GENESIS. 


¢ hyre p. 


Vv linede BLP. my3le lyue s. 


XVII. 1i1-—23. 


jou, and thi seed after thee; ech male 
kynde of 3ou schal be circumeidid, and 3e11 
schulen circumside the fleisch of 3o0ure 
mannes 3eerd, that it be in to a signe of 
boond of pees bytwixe me and 3ou. A 30ng 12 
child of ei3te daies schal be circumsidid in 
jou, al male kynde in 3oure generaciouns, 
as wel a borun sernaunt as a seruaunt 
bou3t schal be circumsidid, and who euere 
is of 30ure kynrede he schal be circum- 
sidid ; and my couenaunt schal be in joure 13 
fleisch in to euerlastynge boond of pees. 
A man whos fleisch of his 3erde schal not 14 
be circumsidid, thilke man schal be doon 
awei fro his puple; for he made voide my 
conenaunt. Also God seide to Abraham, 15 
Thou schalt not clepe Saray, thi wijf, Sa- 
rai, but Sara; and Y schal blesse hir, and 16 
of hir I schal 3yue to thee a sone, whom I 
schal blesse, and he schal be in to naciouns, 
and kyngis of puplis schwen be borun of 
hym. Abraham felde doun on his face, 17 
and. lei3ede in his hert, and seide, Gessist 
thou, whethir a sone! schal be borun to a 
man of an hundrid 3eer, and Sara of nynti 
3eer schal bere child"? And he seide to1s 
the Lord, Y wolde that Ismael lyue” bifore 
thee. And the Lord seide to Abraham, 19 
Sara, thi wijf, schal bere a sone to thee, 
and thou schalt clepe his name Ysaac, and 
Y schal make my couenaunt to” hym in to 
euerlastynge boond of pees, and to his seed 
aftir hym; also on Ysmael Y haue herd 20 
thee, lo! Y schal blesse him, and Y schal 
encreesse, and Y schal multiplie him greetli; 
he schal gendre twelue dukis, and Y schal 
make hym in to a greet folk. Forsothe Y 21 
schal make my couenaunt to* Ysaac, whom 
Sare schal childe to thee in this tyme inY 
the tother* 3eer. And whanne the word 22 
of the spekere with hym was endid, God 
stiede fro Abraham. Forsothe Abraham 23 
took Ismael, his sone, and alle the borun 
seruauntis of his hous, and alle which he 
hadde bou3te, alle the malis of alle men of 
his hous, and circumsidide the fleisch of 
her 3erde, anoon in that dai, as the Lord 


4 stey3 BDEFH. 


W with s. x with s. y in to L. 


XVII. 24——XVIII. 10. 


of his hows, and he circumsidide the 
flehs of the vttermor parti of ther 3erde, 
anoon in that day, as God had comaundid 
athym. Abraham was of nynti and nyne 
3eer whan he circumsidide the flehs of 
25 the vttermore parti of his 3erde, and Is- 
mael, his sone, had fulfillid thrittene 3eer 
2¢in tyme of his circumsicioun. And the 
same day was Abraham circuwmnsidid, and 
27 Ysmael his sone, and alle men*® of hys 
hows, as wel fre men as bow3t and aliens, 
togideris weren circumsidid. 


CAP. XVIH. 


1 The Lord forsothe aperyde to hym in 
the valey of Mambre, sittynge in the dore 
of his tabernacle, in that heet ofthe day. 

2And whan he had areride vp the eyen, 
thre men stondynge ny3 hym aperiden 
to hym. Whom whan he had seen, he 
ranne into the ajen comyng of hem fro 
the dore of his tabernacle, and he low- 

3tide into’ the erthe, and seide, Lord, if 
I haue foundun grace in thin eyen, ouer- 
4passe thow not thi seruaunt, but I shal 
bringe to a litil mesure of water, and 
3oure fete be wayshid, and reste thow® 
svnder a tree; and I shal sett a morsel 
of breed, and joure herte be coumfortid ; 
aftyrward 3e shulen passe forthe; and 
therfor forsothe 3e boweden down to 
3oure seruant. The whiche seiden, Do 
gas thow hast spokun. Abraham hyede 
into the tabernacle, to Sara, and seide to 
hir, Hye, and mynge togidre thre half 
buysshelis of clene flowre; and make 
7looues bakun vndur ayshen. He forsothe 
ranne" to the droue, and toke thens a 
calf moost tendre and best, and 3aue a 
child, the which hyede, and sethede it; 
sand toke butter, and mylk, and the calf 
the which he had sothun, and sette bifore 
hem; he forsothe stode biside hem vndir 
9the tre. And whanne thei hadden etun, 
thei seiden to hym, Where is Sara thi 
wijf? He answeride, Loo! in hir taber- 


© the men npern. fin BpEFH. 


bthe men p. ¢ Abraham s. 


i sette s. 


2 to him. s. 
ther. 4b Om.p. 


GENESIS. 


& 30u BDEFH. 


4 reisid vp. s. 


109 


comaundide him*. Abraham was of nynti24 


jeer and nyne whanne he circumsidide 


the fleisch of his 3eerd, and Ismael, his 25 
sone, hadde fillid threttene 3eer in the 
tyme of his circumsicioun. Abraham was 26 
circumsidid in the same day, and Ismael 
his sone, and alle men” of his hows, as27 
wel borin seruauntis as bou3t and aliens, 
weren circumcidid togidre. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Forsothe in the valei of Mambre the1 
Lord apperide to Abraham, sittynge in the 
dore of his tabernacle, in thilke heete of 
the dai. And whanne he hadde reisid‘2 
his ijen, thre men apperiden to hym, and 
stoden ny3 hym®. And whanne hef hadde 
seyn hem, he ran fro the dore of his taber- 
nacle in to the meting of hem, and he 
worschipide on erthe, and seide, Lord, ifs 
Y haue founde grace in thin izen, passe 
thou not thi seruaunt, but I schal brynge’ 4 
a litil watir, and 3oure feet be waischid, 
and reste 3e vudur the tre; and Y schals 
sette a mussel of breed, and joure herte be 
coumfortid ; aftirward 3e schulen passe; 
for herfor 3e bowiden to 3oure seruaunt. 
Whiche seiden, Do thou as thou hast 
spoke. Abraham hastide in to the taber-6 
nacle, to Sare, and seide to hir, Hast thou, 
meddle thou thre half buschelis of clene 
flour ; and make thou looues bakun vndur 
aischis. Forsothe he ran to the droue of7 
beestis, and took therof a calf inoost tendre 
and best, and 3af to a child, which hastide, 
and sethede the calfe; and he took botere,s 
and mylk, and the calf which he hadde 
sode, and settide’ bifore hem; forsothe 
Abraham stood bisidis hem vudur the tre. 
And whanne thei hadden ete, thei seidens 
to hym, Where is Sare thi wijf? He an- 
swerde, Lo! sche is in the tabernacle. To 10 
whom the Lord seide, Y schal turne a3en, 


h yennyd Bern. rennyng D. 


e Om. px. f Abraham xz. 


§ brynge 


110 


ionacle she is. To whom he seide, Turn- 
ynge a3en I shal com to thee this tyme, 
the lijf ledere; and Sara, thi wijf, shal 
haue a sone. The which thing herd, 
Sara low3 biliynde the dore of the taber- 
11nacle. Forsothe thei weren bothe oold, 
and of greet age, aud to Sara fluxis of 
12blood hadden laft to be maad. The 
which low3 priueli, seiynge, After that 
I am bicom oold, and my lord is an 
olde man, shal I 3yue bysynes to Just ? 
1s The Lord forsothe seide to Abraham, 
Whi low3 Sara, thi wijf, seiynge, whe- 
ther I an oold woman am verreily to 
14 bere child ? whether eny thing is to God 
hard? Aftir the sawe bitwix vs I shal 
turne a3en to thee this* same tyme, the 
lijf leder ; and Sara shal haue a sone. 
15Sara denyede, seiynge, I low3 not, thur3 
drede afeerd. The Lord forsothe, It is 
16 not, he seide!, so, but thow low3. Thanne 
whanne the men were rysun thens, thei 
dressiden her eyen a3ens Sodom; and 
Abraham 3ede with, ledynge forth hem. 
17And the Lord seide, Whether I mow 
hide fro Abraham thingis that Y am to 
18do, sith he is to be into a greet folk of 
kynde and moost strong, and alle na- 
ciouns of the™ erthe ben to be blissid in 
19hym ? I woot forsothe that he is to co- 
maunde his sones, and to his hows aftir 
hym, that thei kepen the wey of the 
Lord, and that thei do ry3twisnes, and 
dom, that the Lord brynge to for Abra- 
ham alle thingis that he hath spokun to 
20hym. And so the Lord seide, The cry 
of Sodom and Gomor is multiplied, and 
21the synne of hem is myche agredgyd; I 
shal go down, and se whether the cry 
that is comen to me thei han fulfillid in 
22dede, or it" is not so that I wyte. And 
thei turneden hem silf°® thens, and 3eden 
awey? to Sodom. Abraham forsothe 3it 
23 stode bifore the Lord, and nei3ynge seith, 
Whether thow shalt lese the 113twis with 
24the wickyd ? if there ben4 fifti ri3twis in 


k Om. pb. 
4g Om. pb. 


lseyth £ sec.m. ™Om. BDEFH. 


k leigide plures. 1a child Lx sec. m. 


°wher peqrrd. POm. Fr. dak. 'Om.s. 


GENESIS. 


2 whether it £ pr. m. 


™ the ELP. 


XVIII. 10-——25. 


and Y schal come to thee in this tyme, if 
Y lyue; and Sare, thi wijf, schal haue a 
sone. Whanne this was herd, Sare leiz3ede 
bihynde the dore of the tabernacle. For-11 
sothe bothe weren olde, and of greet age, 
and wommans termes ceessiden to be maad 
to Sare. And she leizede, seiynge pryueli, 12 
after that Y wexede eld, and my lord is 
eld, schal Y 3yue diligence to lust? For-13 
sothe the Lord seide to Abraham, Whi 
leizeth* Sare, thi wijf, seiynge, whether Y 
an eld womman schal bere child! verili? 14 
whether ony thing is hard to God? Bi 
the biheeste Y scha] turne a3en to thee in 
this™ same tyme, if Y lyue; and Sara 
schal haue a sone. ‘Sare was aferd for 1s 
drede, and denyede, seiynge, Y leiz3ede not. 
Forsothe the Lord seide, It is not so, but 
thou leizedist. Therfor whanne the men 16 
hadden risen" fro thennus, thei dressiden 
the izen azens Sodom; and Abraham 3ede 
togidre, ledynge hem forth. And the17 
Lord seide, Wher Y mowe hele fro Abra- 
hain what thingis Y schal do, sithen he1s 
schal be in to a greet folk and moost 
strong, and alle naciouns of erthe schulen 
be blessid in hym? For Y woot that Abra-19 
ham schal comaunde hise children, and his 
hows after hym, that thei kepe the weie of 
the Lord, and that thei do ri3tfulnesse and 
dom, that the Lord bringe for Abraham 
alle thingis whiche he spak to Abraham. 
And so the Lord seide, The cry of men20 
of Sodom and of nen of Gomorre is mul- 
tiplied, and her synne is agreggid greetli; 
Y schal come doun, and schal™ se whether 21 
thei han fillid in werk the cry that cam to 
me, that Y wite whether® it is not so. And 22 
thei turneden han fro thennus, and 3eden 
to Sodom. Abraham sotheli? stood 3it bi- 
fore the Lord, and neizede, and _ seide, 23 
Whether thou schalt leese a inst man with 
the’ wickid man’? if fifti inst men ben in 24 
the citee, schulen thei perische togidere’, 
and schalt thou not spare that place for 


fifti just men, if thei ben ther ynne? Fer 2s 
© seluen BDEFH. P Om. F. 


a be risen L. 22 Om. Km sec.m. 8 pr.m. I shal x. 


58 Om. 6 sec.m. 


XVIII. 25—XIX. 2. 


the citee, shulen thei peryshe to gidere, 
and shalt thow not spare to that place 
for fifti riztwis, if thei shulen be in it? 
25 Be it fer fro thee that thow do this thing, 
and sle the ry3twis with the wickid, and 
the ri3twis be maad as the wickid; this 
is not thin that demyst al the erthe; 
26thow shalt not do that dom. And the 
Lord seide to hym, If Y shal fynde in 
Sodom fifti riz3twis in the myddil of the 
cytee, I shal for3yue to al the place for 
azhem. Abraham answeride and seith', 
For oons I bigan, I shal speke to the 
Lord my God, whan Y am powder and 
23aske’; what if there weren bi fyue lesse 
than fifti ry3twis, shalt thow do awey al 
the cite for fyue and fourty? And he 
seith, I shal not do awey, if I shal fynde 
29 there fyue and fourti. And eftsonys he 
spake to hym, If forsothe fourti weren 
foundun there, what shalt’* thow do? He 
30seith, I shal not smyte for fourti. Y bi- 
seche thee, he seith, ne indeyne thow, 
Lord, if I speke; what if there weren 
foundun thretti? He answeryde, I shal 
31 not do, if I shal fynde threttit. For onus, 
he seith, I bigan, I shal speke to my 
Lord; what if there weren foundun 
twenti? ‘He seyde", I shal not sle for 
s2twenti. I biseche, he seith, Lord, be 
thow not wrooth, if 3it oons I speke; 
what if there be foundun ten? He seide, 
331 shal not do awey for ten. The Lord 
jede aweie, after that he had ceesid to 
speke to Abraham, and he was turnyd 
ajen into his place. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 And two aungels comen to Sodom at 
euen, sittynge Loth in the jatis of the 
cyte. The whiche, whanne he had seen 
hem, roos, and 3ede to mete with hem, 
and honowride’ bowide into the erthe, 

2and seide, I prey 3ow, syres, bowith down 
into the hows of 3oure child, and dwell- 
ith there; wayshith j3oure fete, and erly 


Y seyde x sec.m. Sasches p. 8 shal 4. 
worschepede p. 

tthes. tOm.s. YOm.s. Wasshen Exp. 
bin to w. ¢the erthe grkums. 


€ ther thretti spEru. 


x Om. c. 


GENESIS. Litt 


be it fro thee that thou do this thing, and 
sle at iust man" with at wickid man", and 
that a iust man be maad as a wickid man; 
this is not thin that demest al erthe; thou 
schalt not make this doom. And the Lord 2¢ 
seide to him, If Y schal fynde in Sodom 
fifti iust men in the’ myddis of the citee, 
Y schal for3yue to al the place for hem. 
Abraham answerde and seide, For Y bigan 27 
onys, Y schal speke to my Lord, sithen Y 
am dust and aische’; what if lesse than: 
fifti iust men bi fyue ben, schalt thou do 
awey al the cite for fyue and fourti? And 
the Lord seide, Y schal not do awei, if I 
schal fynde fyue and fourti there. And* 29 
eft Abraham seide to hym, But if fourti 
ben there, what schalt thou do? The 
Lord seide, Y schal not smyteY for fourti. 
Abraham seide, Lord, Y biseche, take thou 30 
not to “indignacioun®, if Y speke; what if 
thretti be foundun there? The Lord an- 
swerde, Y schal not do, if Y schal fynde 
thretti there. Abraham seide, For Y bigan 31 
onys, Y schal speke to my Lord; what if 
twenti be foundun there? The Lord seide, 
Y schal not sle for twenti. Abraham seide, 32 
Lord, Y biseche, be thou not wrooth, if Y 
speke 3it onys; what if ten be founden 
there? The Lord seide, Y schal not do 
awey for ten. The Lord 3ede forth, afters: 
that he ceesside to speke to Abraham, and 
Abraham turnede a3en in to his place. 


CAP. XIX. 


And tweyne aungels camen to Sodom 
in the euentide, while Loth sat in the 3atis 
of the citee. And whanne he hadde seyn 
hem, he roos, and 3ede ajens hem, and 
worschipide lowe to” erthe®, and seide, My 2 
lordis, Y biseche, bowe 3e in to the hous 
of 3oure child, and dwelle 3e there; waische 
3e joure feet, and in the morewtid 3e 


useith apr. Vanourede BEFH. 


yOm. rtp. Zintos. & dignacioun cg. 


112 GENESIS. 


3e shal go forth into 30ure weye. The 
whiche seiden, Nay, but in the street we 
sshulen dwel. He myche constreynede 
hem, that thei shulden turne tohym. And 
hem. goon into his hows, he made a feest, 
4 sethedeW therf breed, and thei eten. For- 
sothe bifore that thei shulden go to leg- 
gen, men of the cytee setten abowt his 
hows, fro child to oold man, al the puple 
stogider; and thei clepeden Loth, and 
_ seiden to hym, Where ben the men that 
comen in to thee at ny3t? lede hem out 
chidir, that we knowen hem. Loth gon 
oute to hem bilynde the rigge, and tynd- 
zynge to the dore, seith, Wole 3e not, J 
preye, my britheren, wole 3e not this 
,yuel don. I haue two dou3tren, the 
whiche 3it knewen not* man; I shal lete 
hem out to 30w, and mysvsith hem as it 
shal like to 30w, so that 3e don no thing 
of yuel to thes men, for thei ben comun 
)ytne vndur the shadew of my roof. And 
thei sciden, Go aj3en thider. And eft- 
sonys, Thow art comen in, thei seiden, 
as a comelyng; whether that thow deme ? 
thee thi silf thanue more than thes we 
shulen ouertraueyl. And foors thei maden 
to Loth moost hidowsly. Now ny3 it was 
that thei shulden vpbreke the j3atis ; 
jo and lo! the men putten to hoonde, and 
brou3ten into hem Loth, andY closeden’ 
the dore. And hem that weren with out 
" thei smyten with blyndnes, fro the leest 
vnto the moost; so that the dore thei 
my3ten not fynde. And thei seiden to 
12 Loth, Hast thow here eny man of thin, 
sone in lawe, or sones, or dou3tres; alle 
that ben thin lede out of this citee, we 
shulen do awey this place, therthur3 
" that the cry of hem is ful encresid bifore 
the Lord, the which sende vs that we 
lesen hem. And so Loth gon out, spake? 
to his sonys in lawe, the whiche weren 
'4 to take his dou 3teres, and he seide, Risith, 


wseeth p. * no BDEFH. 


4the whiche ks. ¢ Om.c. fandr. 
ajenus kynde BctNopx. _ * on the bachalf ks. 
tridist hithers. — P whether s. 
puttiden fos. ™%smytiden in. smote s. 
% yuel place B prem. 4% Om. E. 


y Om. pb. 


h to nes. vnto 1. 
1 whiche s. 


g Om. «a. 


qd shalt deme us s. 
Vv or ELP. 
b thei schulden a pr.m. 


XIX. 3-——14. 


schulen go in to j3oure weie. Whichet 
seiden, Nay, but we schulen dwelle in the 
street. He constreynede hem greetli, thats 
thei schulden turne to hym. And whanne 
thei weren® entrid in to his hous, he made 
a feeste, he! bakide therf breed, and thei 
eten. Forsothe bifore® that thei 3eden to4 
sleepe, men of the citee compassiden his 
hows, fro a child ‘til to® an eld man, al 
the puple togidre ; and thei clepiden Loth, 5 
and seiden to him, Where ben the men 
that entriden to thee to ny3t? brynge hem 
out hidur, that we ‘knowe hem‘. Ande 
Loth 3ede out to hem ‘bihynde the bak*, 
and closide the dore, and seide, Y biseche,7 
nyle 5e, my britheren, nyle 3e do this yuel. 
Y haue twey dou3tris, that! knewen™ not 3its 
man; Y schal lede out hem to 30u, and 
mys vse 3e hem as it plesith 3ou", so that 
je doon noon yuel to these men, for thei 
entriden vudur the schadewe of my roof. 
Aud thei seiden, Go thou fro hennus. Andg 
eft thei seiden, Thou entridist® as a come- 
lyng; wher? that thou deme? therfor we 
schulen turment thee more than these. 
And thei diden violentlié to Loth ful 
greetli. Thanne it was ny3 that thei wolden 
brekeS the doris; and lo! the men put-10 
tident hoond, and ledden in Loth to hem, 
and thei closiden the dore. And thei 
smyten" with blyndenesse hem that weren 
withoutforth, fro the leest til to the moost ; 
so that thei my3ten not fynde the dore. 
Forsothe thei seiden to Loth, Hast thou iz 
here ony man of thine, hosebonde of thi 
dou3ter, ethir’ sones, ethir” dou;tris ; lede. 
thou* out of this citee alle men that ben 
thine’, for we schulen do awey this place’, 13 
for the cry of hem encreesside bifor the 
Lord, which sente vs that we leese hem. 
And so* Loth 3ede out, and spak to thes 
hosebondys of his dou3tris, that schulden® 
take hise dou3tris, and seide, Rise 3e, and 
go 3e out of this place; for the Lord schal 


zschetten p. ® spekith p. 


i knowe hem, that is, bi leccherye 
m knowen s. n to 30u Ks. ° en. 

r violence cel. omnes. & breke vps. * putten c. 
Wor ELP. other Fr. * Om. pv. Y therinne K sec.m. 


XIX. 15—26. 


and goth out fro this place, for the Lord 
shal do aweie this cite. And he was 
isseen to hem as pleiynge to speke. And 
whanne was morutyde, the aungels con- 
streyneden hym, seiynge, Aryse, and take 
thi wijf, and thi two dow3trys, that thow 
hast, lest and thow with? perishe in the 
16 wickidnes of the citee. And hym deny- 
inge, thei token the honde of hym, and 
the honde of the wijf, and of the two 
dow3tren of hym; ther thur3 that the 
17Lord wolde spare to hym. And thei 
ledden hym out, and puttiden® hym out 
of the cyte. There thei speken to hym, 
seiynge, Saue thi soule; wole’ thow not 
bihold bihynde thi bak, and stonde thow 
not in al the regioun about, but in the 
hille make thee saf, lest and thow with 
isperishe. And Loth to hem seide, My 
i9lord, I biseche, for thi seruaunt hath 
foundun grace bifore thee, and thow hast 
magnyfied grace and thi mercy, that thow 
hast don with me, that thow sauedist my 
soule; I may not in the hil be sauyd, 
lest perauenture yuel take me, and die; 
20there is a cite here ny3 a litle, to which 
Y may fle, and I shal be saf in it; whe- 
ther it is not litel? and® my soule shal 
2ilyue in it: And he seide to hym, Lo! 
in that I haue take thi preieris, that I 
subuerte not the citee for the which thow 
22 hast spokun; hye, and be thow! maad saf 
there, for I shal not mow do eny thing 
to the tyme that? thow be gon yn thidir. 
Therfore the name of that citee is clepid 
23Segor. The sunne is gon out vpon the 
erthe, and Loth is gon in to Segor. 
21 Thanne the Lord reynede vpon Sodom 
and Gomor brenstoon and fier, fro the 
25 Lord fro henene, and he subuertide thes 
citees, and al the regioun about, alle 
dwellerys of citees, and alle growynge 
e¢thingis of the erthe. And the wijf of 
hym, biholdynge> bihynde her, was turned 


bOm. pv. © putten sDEFH. 
h biholdyndynge a. 


¢Loths. @Om.s. ¢thiss. f the while xs. 
k made gretes. Jtos, ™hilxn. the which 1. 
Sist. tofx. 'QOm.s,  Y the duellers s. 


GENESIS. 


d wilne BeFH. wele p. 


w tho citees Ksx. 


113 


do awey this citee. And he was seyn to 
hem to speke as pleiynge. And whanne1s 
the morewtid was, the aungels constreyn- 
eden hy’, and seiden, Rise thou, and take 
thi wijf, and thi twey dou3tris whiche 
thou hast, lest also thou perische to gidere 
in the’ synne of the® citee. While’ heic 
dissymelide’, thei token his hond, and the 
hond of his wijf, and of his twey doutris ; 
for the Lord sparide hym®. And _ theii7 
ledden out hym, and settiden' with out the 
citee. There thei spaken to him, and 
seiden, Saue thou'! thi lijf; nyle thou bi- 
holde bihynde thi bae, nether stond thou 
in al the cuntre aboute, but make thee 
saaf in the hil; lest also thou perische to- 
gidere. And Loth seide to hem, My lord, 1s 
Y hiseche, for thi seruaunt hath founde 19 
grace bifore thee, and thou hast magny- 
fied‘ thi grace and mercy, which thou hast 
do with' me, that thou schuldist sane my 
lijf; Y may not be saned in the hil, lest 
perauenture yuel take me, and Y die; a20 
litil citee™ is here bisidis, to which" Y may 
fle, and Y schal be saued® ther ynne ; where 
it is not a litil citee? and my soule schal 
lyue? ther ynne. And he seide to Loth, 21 
Lo! also in this Y haue resseyued thi 
preieris’, that Y distrye not the citee, for 
which thou hast spoke; haste thou’, and 22 
be thou saued there, for Y may not do ony 
thing til thou entre thidur. Therfor the 
name of that citee was* clepid Segor. The 23 
sunne roos on erthe, and Loth entride in 
to Segor. Therfor the Lord reynede ona 
Sodom and Gomorre brynston and fier, fro 
the Lord frot heuene, and distriede these 2s 
citees, and" al the cuntrey aboute; he 
destriede alle enhabiters’ of citees*, and 
all grene thingis of erthe. And his* wijf2e 
lokide abac, and wasY turned in to an 
ymage of salt. Forsothe Abraham risynge 27 
eerly, where he stood bifore with the Lord, 
bihelde Sodom and Gomorre, and al the 28 


e€ Om. pv. fOm. spern. 8 Om. BDEFH. 
& feynede s. hems. | sette hims. ti Om. a. 
Osaafs. Pbesauedc. 4@preiera. * thee BLP. 


x Lothiss. Y she was s. 


114 


27 into an ymage of salt. Abraham forsothe 
arysynge eerly, where he stode bifore- 
28hond with the Lord, bihelde Sodom and 
Gomor, and al the erthe of thati regioun; 
and saw a multitude of sparkis* steiynge 
vp fro the erthe, as smook of a furneys. 
29 Whan forsothe God had subuertid the 
citees of that regioun, he recordide of 
Abraham, and dylyueride Loth fro the 
subuersioun of citees in whiche he had 
30dwellid. And Loth stiede! vp fro Segor, 
and dwellid in the hil, and hys two dow3- 
tris with hym, forsothe he dredde to dwel 
in Segor; and he dwellide in a spelune™, 
‘or a den”, he and his two dow3terys with 
3lhym. And the more seide vnto? the lesse, 
Our fadir is old, and noon of the men is 
left in the lond, that my3ten gon into vs, 
32after the maner of al londe; come, and 
make we hym drunkun with wyne, and 
slepe we with hym, that we mown kepe 
33 the seed of oure fadir. And so thei 3anen 
to her fadir to drynk wyne that ny3t, 
and the more was gon yn, and slept with 
the fadir; and he felide nother whan the 
dow3ter ley down, ne whan she aroos. 
a4 And the tother day the more seide to the 
lasse, Lo! 3istirday I slept with my fadir, 
3yue we hym to drynk wyne also this 
ny3t, and thow shalt slepe with hym, that 
36we sauen the seed of oure fadir. And 
thei 3auen also that ny3t to her fadir 
wyne for to drynk, and the lesse gon 
ynne slept? with hym; and nother than 
forsothe he felide whan he lay bi hir, or 
36whan she aroos. Thanne conseyueden 
the two dow3tris of Loth of her fader. 
27 And the more bare a sone, and clepide 
the name of hym Moab; he is the fadir 
of Moabytes vnto the day that is now. 
38 And the lesse bare a sone, and clepid the 
name of hym Amon, that is, the sone of 
my‘ puple; he is the fadir of Amonytes 
3it to this day. 


ithilk ppern. 
P slepe pv. 


kK sperklis pperu. 
qd many 4. 


@ the erthe s. 
h Om. k. 
P lasse or the 3unger s. 


Z stiynge vp s. 
of BN. € on KL. 
© oothir 1. 
tt Om. 1. 


iOm. E. 
4 Om. vb. 


GENESIS. 


| stey3 BDEFU. 


» he delyuerede s. 
k the seed s. 
t the seed EKs. 


XIX. 27-——38. 


lond of that cuntrey; and he sei3 a deed 
sparcle stiynge’ fro erthe*, as the smoke of 
a furneis. For whanne God distriede the 29 
citees of that cuntrey, he hadde mynde of 
Abraham, and delyuerede> Loth fro de- 
striynge of the citees in whiche he dwell- 
ide. And Loth stiede® fro Segor, and so 
dwellide’ in the hil, and hise twey dou3- 
tris with him, for he dredde to dwelle in 
Segor ; and he dwellide in a denne, he and 
his twey® dou3tris with hym. And thes 
more dou3tre seide to the lasse, Oure fadre 
is eld, and nof man is left in’ erthe, that 
may entre to vs, bi the custom of al 
erthe; come thou, make we him drunkun 32 
of wyn, and slepe we! with him, that we 
moun kepe seed‘ of oure fadir. And so33 
thei 3auen to her fadir to drynke wyn in 
that ny3t, and the more! dou;ter entrede, 
and slepte with™ hir fadir; and he feelide 
not, nethir whanne the dou3tir lay doun, 
nether whanne sche roos. And in" thes 
tothir® dai the more dou3tir seide to the 
lasse?, Lo! Y slepte 3istirdai with my fa- 
dir, 3yue we to hym to drynk wyn also in 
this ny3t; and thou schalt4 slepe with 
hym, that we saue seed’ of oure fadir. 
And thei 3auen to her fadir also in thatss 
ny3t to drynke wyn, and the’ lesse dou3tir 
entride, and slepte with him; and sotheli 
he feelide not thanne whanne sche lay 
doun, nether whanne sche roos. Therfor 36 
the twei dou3tris of Loth conseyuede of 
hir fadir. And the more dou3tre childide 37 
a sone, and clepide his name Moab; he is 
the fadir of men of Moab ‘til in tot present 
dai. And the lesse dou3ter childide a sone, 38 
and clepide his name Amon, that is, the 
sone of my puple; he is the‘ fadir of men 
of Amon til to day. 


m cawe D. n Om. aDEFH. °to BDEFH. 


€Om.c. f noon 
mywith him kz. © Om. s. 
tynto this 1. til in to this s. 


© stiede vp. 4 duelte s. 
! more or the eldre s. 
$ so the 1. 


XX. I-13. 


CA PaeX os 
1 Abraham thens gon into the sowth 
londe, dwellide bitwix Cades and Sur, 
2and he was pilgrym in Gererys; and he 
seide oft Sara, his wijf, My sistyr she is. 
Thanne sende* Abymalech, the kyng of 
3Gerere, and toke hyr. God forsothe com 
to Abymalech bi sweuyn in the ni3t, and 
seide to hym, Lo! thow shalt die, for the 
wijf that thow hast takun, fort she hath 
4a man. Abimalech forsothe had not 
towchid hir, and seith, Lord, whether an 
vnkunnynge folk of kynde and a ry3twys 
sthow shalt slee? Seide he not to me, my 
sistir she" is, and she seith, my brother 
he is? In symplenes of myn herte, and 
6clennes of myn hondis I dide this. And 
the Lord seide to hym, I knowe that 
thur3 symplenes of herte thow didist, and 
therfor Y kepte thee, that thow shuldist 
not synne in ine, and I suffryde not that 
7thow shuldist towche hyr; now thanne 
3elde the wijf to hir man, for a prophet 
he is; and he shal preie for thee, and 
thow shalt lyue; if sotheli thow wolt 
not 3eldyn, wite thow’ that thur3 deeth 
thow shalt die, thow and alle that ben 
sthin. And anoon of the ny3t rysynge, 
Abimalech clepide alle his seruauntis, and 
spake alle thes wordis in the eeris of 
hem; and alle men dredden hem greetli. 
9 Abymalech forsothe clepide also Abra- 
ham, and seide to hym, What hast thow 
don to vs? what han we synned in thee, 
for thow hast brow3t ynne vpon me and 
' vpon my rewme a greet synne? thingis 
that thow shuldist not do thow hast don 
oto vs. And eftsonys askynge seith, What 
hast thow seen that that’ thow shuldist 
11don? Abraham answeryde, I thou3te with 
my silf, seiynge, perauenture the drede 
of God is not in this place, and thei shal 
i2sle me for my wijf; ellis forsothe and 
verreili my sister she is, the dow3ter of 
my fadir, and not the dow3ter of my mo- 
i3dir; and I toke her into a* wyif; and 


GENESIS. 


115 


CAP. XX. 

Abraham 3ede" forth fro thennus in to1 
the lond of the south, and dwellide bitwixe 
Cades and Sur, and was’ a pilgrym in 
Geraris; and he seide of Sare, his wijf,2 
Sche is my sistir. Therfor Abymalec, 
kyng of Gerare, sente, and took hir. 
Sotheli God cam to Abymalec bi a sweuene3 
in the ny3t, and seide to hym, Lo! thou 
schalt die, for the wooman which thou 
hast take, for sche hath an hosebond. For-4 
sothe Abymalech touchide not hir; and 
he seide, Lord, whether thou schalt sle 
fole vnkunnynge™ and iust? Whether hes. 
seide not to me, Sche is my sistir, and sche 
seide, He is my brother? In the* sym- 
plenesse of myn herte, and in the* clen- 
nesse of myn hondis Y dide this. And thes 
Lord seide to hym, AndY Y woot that thou 
didist bi symple herte, and therfor Y kepte” 
thee, lest thou didist synne a3ens me, and 
I suffride not that thon touchidist® hir; 
now therfor 3elde thou the wijf to hir7 
hosebonde, for he is a profete; and he? 
schal preye for thee, and thou schalt lyue ; 
sotheli if thou nylte* 3elde‘, wite thon that 
thou schalt die bi deeth, thou and alle 
thingis that ben thine. And anoon Aby-s 
nalech roos bi ny3t, and clepide alle his 
seruauntis, and spak alle these wordis in 
the eeris of hem; and alle men dredden 
greetli. Sotheli Abymalec clepide alsog 
Abraham, and seide to hym, What hast 
thou do to vs? what synneden we ajens 
thee, for® thou hast brou3t in on me and 
on my rewme a greuouse’ synne? thou 
hast do to vs whiche thingis thou ous3tist 
not do®’. And eft Abimalech axide, and 10 
seide, What thing" sei3ist! thou, that thou 
woldist do this? Abraham answerde, Yu 
thou3te with) me*, and seide, in hap the! 
drede of God is not in this place; and thei 
schulen sle me for my wijf; in other ma-12 
ner forsothe and sche is my sister verili, 
the dou3ter of my fadir, and not the dou3- 
ter of my moder; and Y weddide hir in™ 


FtopF. §Ssent speFH. ‘ forsoth sperm. “3e sche p>. VY Om. ppern. W Om. be. * Om. BDEFi. 

“wente pgqrtd. Vhe wass. Wvnknowyngexr *Om.1. yYOm.s. %keepea. 4 touchide s. 
>Om.1. ¢ wilt not 1. 4 3elde hirs. © for that w. that ceteri. fgreet1. & todo Kus. >» thingis x. 
‘sawes, Jwithinnec. -kmysefs. 1Om.5. ™Om.n. 


Q 2 


116 


sith God led me out fro the hows of my 
fadir, I seide to hir, This mercy thow 
shalt do with me in al place to which we 
shulen go to; thow shalt sey, that thi 
isbrother Y am. Thanne Abymalech toke 
sheep, and oxen, and seruauntis, and 
handmaydens, and 3aue to Abraham; 
isand 3ildide to hym Sara, his wijf, and 
seith, The lond is bifore 30w; where 
igeuer it shal plese to thee, dwel. And to 
Sara he seide, Lo! a thowsynd pens of 
siluer IY haue 3ouun to thi brother; this 
shal be to* thee into veyl of eyen to alle 
that ben with thee; and whidir euer 
thow shalt gon, haue mynde thee o-* 
iztaken. Abraham forsothe preiyuge, God 
helide Abymalech, and wijf, and hand 
is maydenes of hym, and beren child>; God 
forsothe had closid al the womb of the 
hows of¢ Abymalech, for Sara, Abra- 
hams wijf. 


CAP. XXI. 
1 God forsothe visitide Sara, as he had 
bihi;t*, and fulfillide that that he spak. 
2 And she conseyuede, and bare a sone in hir 
elde, in the tyine that God bifore scide to 
shir. And Abraham clepide the name of 
his sone, whom gat to hym Sara, Ysaac. 
4And he circumsidide hym the eijte day, 
sas God had comaundid hym, whan he 
was of an hundrid wynter; this forsothe 
gage of the fadir Ysaac was born. And 
Sara seide, The Lord hath lawyng maad 
to me, and who so euer shal here shal 
zwith lawe to me. And eft she seith, 
Who to heren shulde leue Abrahain, that 
Sara shulde 3yue a child to sowk, whom 
sshe bare to hym now oold? Thanne the 
child growide and was don awey fro 
sowkyng; and Abraham made a. greet 
feest, in the day of the wanyng of hym. 
9 And whan Sara had seen the sone of 
Agar Egipcian pleiynge with Ysaac, hir 
10sone, she seide to Abraham, Throw out 
this hand mayden, and the sone of hir; 


yYandIp. 20m. 4. 


n Om. BC sec.m. 
dride c pr.m. 
ord. y. N. 


© handmaydes vp. P Om. a. 
u circumcide ac. 


x Om. kuswd. J this plures. 


GENESIS. 


4 to 4 rec.m. the etakyn pb. 


4 plese s. 
v hath made s. 


XX. 14-—XXI. 10. 


to" wijf; sotheli aftir that God ladde me13 
out of the hous of my fadir, Y seide to hir, 
Thou schalt do this mercy with me in ech 
place to which we schulen entre; thou 
schalt seic, that Y am thi brother. Ther-14 
fore Abymelech took scheep, and oxun, and 
seruauntis, and handmaydenes®, and jaf to 
Abraham ; and he 3eldide to him Sare, ‘his 
wijf?, and seide, The lond is bifor 30u315 
dwelle thou, where euere it plesith*’ thee’. 
Forsothe Abymelech seide to Sare, Lo! Y 16 
jaf a thousand platis of siluer to thi bro- 
ther; this schal be to thee in to hiling of 
izen to al men that ben with thee; and 
whider euere thou goist, haue thou mynde 
that thou art takun. Sotheli for Abraham 17 
preiede, God curide Abymelech, and his 
wijf, and handmaydens*, and thei child- 
iden; for God hadde closid ech wombe of 18 
the hows of Abymelech, for Sare, the wijf 
of Abraham. 


CAP ee. 

Forsothe God visitide Sare, as he bi-1 
hi3te, and fillide tho thingis, that he spak. 
And sche conseyuede, and childide a sone2 
in hir eeld, in the tyme wherynne God 
biforseide to hir. And Abraham clepides 
the name of his sone, whom Sare childide* 
to him, Ysaac. And Abraham circumcidide® 4 
hym in the ei3te dai, as God comaundide 
to him, whanmie he was of an “hundrids 
3eer; for Ysaac was borun in this age of 
the fadir. And Sare seide, The Lordeé 
made’ leiz3ynge to me, and who euer schal 
here schal leize with me. And eft sche7 
seide, Who schulde here, and bileue to 
Abraham, that Sare schulde 3yue soukyng 
to a sone, whom sche childide to him now 
an eld man? Therfor the child encreesside, s 
and was wenyd; and Abraham made a 
greet feeste in the dai of his wenyng. 
And whanne Sare sei3 the sone of Agars 
Egipcian pleiynge” with Ysaac hir sone, 
sche seide to Abraham, Cast thou* out theY 10 
handmayde and hir sone; for the sone of 
¢ Om. 4. 


b childrin p. 4 byhote spzrn. 


T to thee Ks. * handmaides eoqx. +t gen- 
w pleiynge ether doynge ydolatrie Bca10gx. pleiynge 


XXII. J1—23. 


the sone of the handmayden shal not be 
lieyre with my sone Ysaac. Hard toke 
12 that Abraham for his sone; to whom God 
seide, Sharp be it not seen to thee vpon 
the child, and vpon thi® hand mayden; alle 
thingis that Sara shal seye to thee, here 
the voys of hir, for in Ysaac shal be 
13clepid seed to thee; but and the sone of 
the handmaydyn I shal make into a greet 
i4folk of kynde, for thi seed he is. And 
so Abraham aroos erly, and takynge 
breed, and a botel of water, leide to the 
shuldur of hym, and bitoke the childe, 
and lefte hir; the which, whanne hef ‘was 
gon® awey, erride in the wildirnes of 
is Bersabee. And whan the water in the 
botel was doon, she threwe awey the 
ischild vndir a tree, that there was, and 
3ede awey, and she set forn ajens ‘a fer", 
as myche as a bow may cast; she seide 
forsothe, I shal not se dyinge the child, 
and sittynge ajens', heuede vp hir voys, 
izand wepte. And the Lord herde the 
vois of the child, and the aungel of the 
Lord clepide Agar fro heuene, seiynge, 
Agar, what dost thow? wole thow not 
drede; God forsotlie hath herd the vois 
of the child, fro the place in which he is. 
is Aryse, and take the child, and holde the 
honde of hym; for into a greet folk I 
i9shal make hym. And God openede the 
eyen of hir, the whiche seynge the pit of 
water, 3ede, and fillide the botel, and 3aue 
20the child to drynk; and was with hym, 
the whiche wex, and dwellid in wildyrnes, 
21and he was maad a 3ong sheter, and 
dwellid in the desert of Pharan; and his 
modir toke to hym a wijf of the lond of 
22Egipt. The same tyme seide Abyma- 
lech, and Phicol, the prince of his oost, 
to Abraham, God is with thee in alle 
23 thingis that thow dost; thanne swere by 
God that thow noye not to me, ne to 
myn aftir comers, and to my lynage; but 
after the mercy that I haue do to thee, 
do thow to me, and to the loond in which 


ethe ppru. f sche BDEFH. 


a handmaidin &. 
& o cpRX. 


2 the pGQns pr.m. vr. 


f caste 8 passim. h Om. Exp. 


GENESIS. 


& went B sup.ras. 


b putte it s. 
i Om. s 


117 


the handmayde schal not be eir with my 
sone Ysaac. Abraham took this heuyli for 11 
his sone; and God seide to hym, Be it not 12 
seyn scharp to thee on the? child, and on 
thin handmayde*; alle thingis whiche Sare 
seith to thee, here thou hir vois, for in 
Isaac seed schal be clepid to thee; butis 
also I schal make the sone of the hand- 
maid in to a greet folk, for he is thi seed. 
And so Abraliam roos eerli, and took 14 
breed, and a botel of watir, and puttide” 


_on hir® schuldre, and bitook@ the child, and 


lefte hir; and whanne sche hadde go, 
sche 3ede out of the weie in the® wildir- 
nesse of Bersabee. And whanne the watir 15 
in the botel was endid, sche castide‘ awei 
the child vndur a8 tre that was there; and 16 
sche 3ede awei, and sche sat euene a3eus 
as fer as a bowe may caste; for sche seide, 
Y schal not se the child diynge; and sche 
sat a3ens, and reiside hir vois, and wepte. 
Forsothe the Lord herde the vois of the i7 
child, and the aungel of the Lord clepide 
Agar fro heuene, and seide, What doist 
thou®, Agar? nyle thou drede, for God 
hath herd the vois of the child fro the 
place where ynne he is. Rise thou, and is 
take the child, and holde his hoond ; for Y 
schal make hym in to a greet fole. And io 
God openyde hir i3en, and sche sei3 a pit 
of watir, and sche 3ede, and fillide the 
botel, and sche 3af drynk to the child; and 20 
was with him, and he encresside, and 
dwellide in wildernesse, and he was maad 
a 3ong man an archer, and dwellide in the 21 
deseert of Faran; and his modir took to! 
him a wijf of the lond of Egipt. In the 22 
same tyme Abymelech, and Ficol, prince 
of his oost, seide to Abrahain, God is with 
thee in alle thingis whiche® thou doist ; 
therfore swere thou bi God that thou noye 23 
not me, and myn eiris, and my kynrede ; 
but bi the mersi whych Y dide to thee, do 
thou to me, and to the lond in which thou 
lyuedist! a comelyng. And Abraham seide, 24 
Y schal swere. And he blamyde Abyme-25 


hoferre per. there ajens pu. 


dhe bitook Air's. © Om. KLP. 


1 lyuest s. 


¢ his x. Agar s. 
k that peqrr. 


118 


24 thow hast dwellid comelyng*. And Abra- 
25 ham seide, I shal swere. And he blamyde 
Abymalech for the pit of water, the which 
thur3 force token awey the seruauntis of 
2shym. And Abymalec answerid, I wiste 
not who dide this thing, but and thow 
shewedist not to! me, and J herde not for- 
27to to™ day. And so Abraham toke sheep, 
and oxen, and 3aue to Abymalech, and 
28 bothe thei smyten a boond of pees. And 
Abrahame ordeynede seuene she Jambis 
29 of the flok asyde. To whom sayde Aby- 
malech, What to hem wilne thes seuen 
she lambis, the which thow hast maad 
30 stoond asyde?. And he, Seuen, he seith, 
she lambis thow shalt take of myn honde, 
that thei be into witnes to me, for I del- 
siuyde this pit. Therfore this place was 
clepid Bersabee, for there eithir swore, 
szand 3eden in couenaunt of pees for the 
33 pitt of othe. Abymalech forsothe aroos, 
and Phicol, the prince of his chyualrye", 
and turneden a3en into the loond of Pa- 
lestynes. Abraham forsothe plauntide a 
wode in Bersabee, and inwardli clepide 
there the name of cuerlastynge® God; 
34and was a tilier of the erthe of Palestynes 
many dayes. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 <Aftyr that thes thingis weren doon, 
God temptide Abraham, and seide to 
hym, Abraham! Abraham! He answer- 
2ide, Iam ny3. He seide to hym, Tak 
thin oonli gotun sone, whom thow louest, 
Ysaac, and go into the loond of visioun, 
and there offre hym into sacrifice al brent, 
vpon oon of the hillis whiche I shal 
3shewe to thee. Thanne Abraham on? 
the ny3t with rysynge, dijte his asse, 
ledynge with hym two 3ong men, and 
Ysaac his sone; and whanne he had hewid 
his wode into brent sacrifice, he 3ede to 
the place which comaundide hym God. 
4 And the thrid day, the eyen heued vp, he 


k a comelyng & pr.m. 
yng BDEFH.  P of BDEFH. 


10m. BDEFH. 


m Om. G. 


DEMS sec,m. xX. 4 the prince ELPs. 
U_oon bigotun sone 1, 


GENESIS. 


m Om. nu. 


n smytiden Brn. han smyte c. smoten ox. smetin Pp. smoten to gidre s. 
yi y g 
¥ wode ether a gardyn c pr.m. 


XXII. 24-—XXII. 4. 


lech for the pit of watir, which hise ser- 
uauntis token awey bi violence. And26 
Abymelech answerde, I wiste not who 
dide this thing, but also™ thou schewidist 
not to me, and Y herde not outakun to dai. 
And so Abraham took scheep and oxun, 27 
and 3af to Abymalech, and bothe smyten"™ 

a boond of pees. And Abraham settide® 2s 
seuene ewe Jambren of the flok asidis half. 
And Abymelech seide to hym, What wolen 29 
these seuene ewe lambren to hem silf, 
whiche thou madist stonde asidis half? 
And he seide, Thou schalt take of myn 30 
hond seuene ewe lambren, that tho be in 
to witnessyng to me, for Y diggide this 
pit. Therfor thilke place was clepid Ber-3i 
sabee, for euere eithir swore there; and 32 
thei maden boond of pees for the pit of 
an? ooth. Forsothe Abymelech roos, and 33 
Ficol, prince’ of his chyualrie, and thei 
turneden a3en in to the lond of Palestyns. 
Sotheli Abraham plauntide a wode™ in 
Bersabee, and inwardli clepide there’ the 
name of euerlastinge God; and he was anai 
erthetiliere ether a comelynge of the Jond 
of Palestynes in many dayes. 


CAP. XXII. 

And aftir that these thingis weren don,1 
God assaiede Abraham, and seide to hym, 
Abraham! Abraham! He answerde, Y am 
present. God seide to him, Take thi ‘sonee 
oon gendrid", whom thou louest, Ysaac; 
and go into the lond of visioun, and offre 
thou hym there in to brent sacrifice, on 
oon of the hillis whiche Y schal schewe to 
thee. Therfor Abraham roos bi ni3t, ands 
sadlide his asse, and ledde with hym twey 
3onge men, and Ysaac his sone; and whanne 
he hadde hewe trees in to brent sacrifice, 
he 3ede to the place which God hadde co- 
maundid to him. Forsothe in the thridde4 
dai he reiside hise ij3en, and sei3 a place 


n kny3thode ppe pr.m. ru. © the enerlast- 


settes. P Om. 


8 Om. ssec.m. tor ELP. other ¥F. 


XXII. 5—17. 


ssawe a place ‘a feer4; and seide to his chil- 
dren, Abydith here with the asse, I and 
the child vnto thidir goynge, aftir that 
we han onowryd, we shulen com ajen to 
630w. And he toke the wode of the sacri- 
fice, and putte vpon Ysaac, his sone; he 
forsothe bare in his hondis fier, and a 
swerd. And whanne thei two 3eden to 
7gideris, seide Ysaac to his fadir, My fa- 
dir! And he answeride, What wilt thow, 
sone? Lo! he seith, fier and wode, where 
is the sacrifice of that that shal be brent ? 
8 Abraham seide, God shal puruey to hym, 
my sone, the sacrifice of that that shal be 
9brent. Thanne thei 3eden togider, and 
comen to the place whom God shewide 
to hym, in the which he bildide" an au- 
ter, and aboue made the wode; and whan 
he had boundun Ysaac, his sone, he putte 
hym in the auter, vpon the heep of wode. 
10 And he straw3te his honde, and toke the 
uswerd, that he my3t offre his sone. And 
loo! the aungel of the Lord fro heuene 
cryede, seiynge, Abraham! Abraham! 
12 The whiche answeride, Iam ny3. And 
he seide to hym, Strecche thow not thins 
hond out vpon the child, and do not‘ eny 
thing to hym; now I haue knowun that 
thow dredist God, and thow hast not 
sparid to thin one" goten sone for me. 
13 Abraham heuede vp his eyen, and sawe 
bihynd his bak a wether amonge thornes, 
tyed bi the hornes, whom takynge to 
14 offryd brent sacrifice for the sone. And 
he clepide the name of the’ place, The 
Lord seeth; wherfor 3it this¥ day it is 
1sseid, In the hil the Lord shal se. And 
the aungel of the Lord clepide Abraham 
iseftsonys fro heuene, seiynge, Bi my sylf 
I swore, seith the Lord, for thow hast do 
this thing, and thow hast not sparid to 
17thin oon gotun sone for me, I shal blis 
to thee, and I shal multiply thi seed as 
sterris of heuene, and as grauel that is in 
the brenk of the see; thi seed shal weeld 


9 o ferre BEF. 


GENESIS. 


119 


afer; and he seide to hise children, Abides 
je here with the asse, Y and the child 
schulen go thidur’; and aftir that we han 
worschipid, we schulen turne a3en to 30u. 
And he took the trees of brent sacrifice, ¢ 
and puttide*” on Ysaac his sone; forsothe 
he bar fier, and a swerd in hise hondis. 
And whanne theiX tweyne 3eden togidere, 
Isaac seide to his fadir, My fadir! And7 
he answerde, What wolt thou, sone? He 
seide, Lo! fier and trees?, where is the 
beeste of brent sacrifice? Abraham seide, s 
My sone, God schal puruey to hym the 
beeste of brent sacrifice. Therfor theio 
jeden to gidere, and camen to the place 
whiche God hadde schewid to hym, in 
which place Abraham bildide an auter, 
and dresside trees? aboue; and whanne he 
hadde bounde togidere Ysaac, his sone, he 
puttide® Ysaac in the auter, on¢ the heep 
of trees?. And he? helde forth his hond, and 10 
took the swerd to sacrifice his sone’. And 1 
lo! an& anngel of the Lord criede fro 
heuene, and seide, Abraham! Abraham! 
Which answerde, I ain present. And the 12 
aungel seide to hym, Holde thou not forth 
thin honde on the child, nether do thou 
ony thing to him; now Y haue" knowe 
that! thou dredist God, and sparidist not 
thin oon gendrid* sone for me. Abraham 13 
reiside hise ijen, and he sei3 ‘bihynde his! 
bak™ a ram cleuynge bi hornes” among 
breris, which® he took, and offride brent 
sacrifice for the? sone. And he clepide 1s 
the name of that place, The Lord seeth ; 
wherfore it is seyd, til to daii, The Lord 
schal see in the hil. Forsothe the aungel 15 
of the Lord clepide Abraham the secounde 
tyme fro heuene, and seide, The Lord is 
seith, Y haue swore bi my silf, for thou 
hast do this thing, and hast not sparid 
thin oon gendrid® for me, Y schal blesse 17 
thee, and Y* schal multiplie thi seed as thet 
sterris of heuene, and as grauel" which is 
in the’ brynk of the see; thi seed schal 


edifiede p. byld rz. ‘Sther., ¢tthounot rperu. own 4. ¥ that ppern. 
win this a. to this £ pr.m. 
Ytogidres.  Wlaides. *Om.Apr.m.et plures. 2woodes.  ®laides. Pons. ¢ vpons. 
4 woodes. © Om.8. f sone ether to sle his sone into sacrifice x sccm. &therm. Om. rv. / fors, 
Kbigetuns. Jhimx. ‘™Om.s. the hornesks. whoms. Phiss. 4 ¢thisdaik. * bigotun 
sone. getens. *Om.p. tOm.s. ¥ the grauel up. grauel ether soondc. V Om. 8, 


120 


isthe 3atis of his enemyes; and al folk of 
the erthe shal be blessid in thi seed, for 
19thow hast obeishid to my vois. And 
Abraham turnyde ajen to his children, 
and 3ede to Bersabee togider, and he 
20 dwellide there. And so thes thingis don, 
it was told to Abraham, that Melcha for- 
sothe had getun sones to Nachor, his bro- 
aither; Hus, the fyrst getun, and Buz, the 
brothir of hym, and Chamuel, the fadir 
220f Sirus, and Cased, and Azan, and Phel- 
23 das, and Jedlaphat, and Batuel, of whom 
Rabecca was born; thes ei3t gat Melcha 
24 to Nachor, the brother of Abraham. The 
secundarie wijf forsothe of hym, Roma 
bi name, bare Thabee, and Gaon, and 
Thaas, and Maacha. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 And Sara lyuyde an hundrid and seuen 
zand twenti 3eer, and she was deed in the 
citee of Arbee, that is Ebron, in the loond 
of Chanaan; and Abraham cam, that he 
3my3te weyl and wepe hir. And whanne 
he was rysun fro the office of the deed cors, 
he spake to the sonys of Heth, seiynge, 
4A comelyng and a pilgrime I am anentis 
jow ; 3yue 3e to me ry3t of a biryyng 
place with 30w, that I mow biry ynne 
smy deed. And the sones of Heth an- 
6sweriden, seiynge, Lord, here vs; the 
prince of God thow art anentis vs; in 
oure chosun berielis birye thi deed, and 
no man shal mow wern thee, but in the 
monument of hym thow byrye thi deed. 
7And Abraham aroos, and lowtide the 
puple of the erthe, the sones, that is, of 
8 Heth. And he seide to hem, If it plese to 
joure soule that I byrye my deed, here 
je me, and preye 3e for me anentis 
9 Ephron, the sone of Seor, that he 3yue 
to me the dowble spelunk, ‘or caue*, that 
he hath in the vttermore party of his 
feeld; for the worth of money take he it 
to me bifore 3ow into possessioun of a 
10sepulcre. Ephron forsothe dwellid in the 


GENESIS. 


XXII. 18——-XXIII. 10. 


gete” the jatis of hise enemyes; and alle 1s 
the folkis of erthe schulen be blessid in thi 
seed, for thou obeiedist to my vois. Abra-19 
ham turnede a3en to hise children, and 
thei 3eden to Bersabee togidere, and he 
dwellide there. And so whanne these 20 
thingis weren don, it was teld to Abraham 
that also Melcha hadde bore sones to Na- 
chor his brother ; Hus the firste gendrid*, 21 
and Buz his brothir, and Chamuhel the 
fadir of SireisY, and Cased, and Asan, and 22 
Feldas, and Jedlaf, and Batuhel, of whom 23 
Rebecca was borun; Melcha childide these 
eijte to Nachor brother? of Abraham. For- 24 
sothe his* concubyn?, Roma bi name, child- 
ide Thabee, and Gaon, and Thaas, and 
Maacha. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Forsothe Sare lyuede an hnndrid andi 
seuene and twenti 3eer, and diede in thee 
citee of€ Arbee, which® is Ebron, in the 
lond of Chanaan; and Abraham cam to 
biweyle and biwepe hir. And whanne hes 
hadde rise fro the® office of the deed bodi, 
he spak to the sones of Heth, and seide, 
Yam a comelyng and a pilgrym anentis4 
303 3yue 3e to me ri3t of sepulcre® with 
jou, that Y birie my deed body. And thes 
sones of Heth answeriden, and seiden, 
Lord, here thou vs; thou’ art the princee 
of God anentis vs; birie thou thi deed 
bodi in oure chosun sepulcris, and no 
man schal mow forbede thee, that ne thou 
birie thi deed bodi in the sepulcre of him. 
And Abraham roos, and worschipide the7 
puple of the lond, that is, the sones of 
Heth. And he seide to hem, If it plesith s 
3oure soule that Y birie my deed bodi, here 
3e me, and preie 3e for me to Efron, the 
sone of Seor, that he 3yue to me the doubles 
caue, whiche he hath in the vttirmoste 
part of his feeld; for sufficiaunt money 
3yue he it to me bifore 30u into posses- 
sioun of sepulcre. Forsothe Efron dwellide 10 
in the myddis of the sones of Heth. And 


x Om. BDEFH. 


wweldes.  * bigotun 1. 
the brothir s. 28 Nachor s. 


nyfEeLr. © Om. plures. 4 the which c. 


y Sireis ether of men of Sirie BcFGKNQX sec.m. Sireis or of m. of S. ELP. 
»b secundary wyf s. concubyne ether secondarie wiyf BCFGIKNQX. C. Or see. 
e Om. s. 


fsepulture ELpd. & that v. 


XXIII. 1I—XXIV. 3. 


myddil of the sones of Heth. And Ephron 
answeryde to Abraham, alle men herynge 
the which 3ede into the 3aat of the cite 
1of hym, seiynge, My lord, so shal it not 
be, but thow more herkyn that I speke ; 
the feeld I take to thee, and the spelunk 
that is in yt, present the sonys of my 
12 puple; birye thi deed. Abraham lowtide 
bifore the Lord, and the puple of the 
13loond, and spake to Ephron, stondynge 
aboute the folk of hym, I biseche, that 
thow here me; I shal 3yue money for 
the feeld, take it, and so Y shal birye my 
14deed in the feeld. And Ephron answer- 
isyde, My lord, here ine, the erthe that 
thow askist is worth foure hundryd sicles 
of siluer, this is the pryis bitwix me and 
thee, but what is that? birye thiY deed. 
16 The which whanne Abraham had herd, 
he peyside the money that Ephron had 
askyd, herynge the sonys of Heth, foure 
hundrid siclys of siluer, and of preued 
17comune money. And the feeld sumtyme 
of Ephron, in the which was the dowble 
spelunk, biholdynge to Mambre, as wel 
it as the spelunk and alle the trees of it, 
in alle the termes of it bi enuyroun, is 
isconfermyd to Abraham into possessioun, 
seynge the sones of Heth and alle that 
entreden the 3ate of the cite of hym. 
ig And so Abraham byriede his wijf Sara 
in the dowble spelunk of the feeld, the 
which bihelde Mambre; that is Ebron 
20in the londe of Chanaan. And the feeld 
is confermed, and the pit that was in it, 
to Abraham, into possessyoun of a monu- 
ment, of the sones of Heth. 


CAP. XXIV. 
1 Forsothe Abraham was oold, and of 
manye daies, and the Lord in alle thingis 
2had blissid to hym. And he seide to the 
elder seruaunt of his hows, that was bi- 
fore in rulyng to alle thingis that he had, 
3Put thin hoond vndir myn hip, that I 
adiure thee bi the Lord God of heuene 


GENESIS. 121 


Efron answerde to Abraham, while alle 
men herden that entriden bi the 3ate of 
that citee, and seide, My lord, it schal notin 
be doon so, but inore herkne thou that 
that> Y seie; Y 3yue to thee the feeld, and 
thei denne which is therine, while the 
sones of my puple ben present; birie thon 
thi! deed bodi. Abraham worschipide bi-12 
for the Lord, and bifor the puple of the 
lond, and™ he spak to Efron, while hisis 
puple stood aboute, Y biseche, that thou 
here me; Y schal 3yue money for the feeld, ~ 
resseyue thou it, and so Y schal birie iny 
deed bodi in the feeld. And Efron an-14 
swerde, My lord, here thou me, the lond1s 
which thou axist" is worth foure hundrid 
siclis of siluer, that® is the prijs bitwixe 
me and thee, but hou myche is this? birie 
thou thi deed bodi. And whanne Abra-16 
ham hadde herd this, he noumbride the 
monei which Efron axide, while the sones 
of Heth herden, foure hundrid siclis of 
siluer, and of preuyd comyn monei. And 17 
the feeld that was sumtyme of Efron, in 
which feeld was a double denne, biholdinge 
to Mambre, as wel thilke feeld as the 
denne and alle? the! trees therof, in alle 
termes’ therof bi cuinpas, was confermed 
to Abraham in to possessioun, while the is 
sones of Heth sei3en and alle men that 
entriden bi the 3ate of that citee. Andi 
so Abraham biriede Sare, his wijf, in the 
double denne of the feeld, that bihelde to 
Mambre; this is Ebron in the lond of 
Chanaan. And the feeld, and the denne 
that was therynne, was confermyd of the 
sones of Heth to Abraham, in to posses- 
sioun of sepulcre’. 


CAP. XXIV. 

Forsothe Abraham was eld, and of many 1 
daies, and the Lord hadde blessid hym in 
alle thingis. And he seide to the eldere2z 
seruaunt of his hows, that was souereyn on 
alle thingis that he hadde, Put thon thin 
hond vndur myn hipe, that Y coniure thees 
bi the Lord God of heuene and of erthe, 


Y the g£. 


hOm. x. 
q Om. 1. 


i Om. gE. 
¥ the termes s. 


keaues. the Ex. 
8 sepulture px. 


m Om, ELP. 


naskist kK. © this plures. P Om. oc. 


hr 


122 


and of erthe, that thow take not wijf? 
to my sone of the dow3tris of Chananeys, 
4among the whiche I dnelle; but go to 
the loond and to my cognacioun, and fro 
4thens take a wijf to my sone Ysaac. The 
sertiaunt answeride, If the womman wole 
not com with me into this loond, whether 
I shal lede a3en thi sone to the place, of 
6the which thow were goon out? Abra- 
ham seide, Be war, lest ony tyme thow 
7lede a3en thider my sone; the Lord God 
of heuene that toke me fro the hows of 


my fadir, and fro the loond of my birth, 


the which hath spokun to me, and swore, 
seiynge, To thi seed I shal 3yue this 
loond, he shal send his anngel bifore thee, 
and fro thens thow shalt taak a wijf to 
smy sone; and if the woman wole not 


folow thee, thow shalt not ‘be holden® to © 


the oth; neuerthelater my sone ne lede 
9thow a3en? thidir. Thanne the seruaunt 
putte his hoond vndir the hip of Abra- 
ham, his lord, and swore to hym vpon 
lothis word. And he tok ten camelis of 
the flok of his lord, and 3ede, berynge 
with hym of alle the goodis of hym; and 
goon he 3ede to Mesopotany, to the citee 
niof Nachor. And whan he had maad the 
camelis resten out of the wallid town, 
bisydis a pit of watre, at enen, that® tyme 
that woinmman ben wont to goon out to 
12draw water, seide, Lord God of my lord 
Abraham, Y preye, to day ajen-com to 
me, and do mercy with my lord Abra- 
i3ham. Loo! I stoond ny3 the welle of 
water, and the dow3tres of the dwellers 
of this citee shal goon out to draw watyr ; 
i4thanne the mayden* child, to whom I 
shal seye, Bouwe down thi water pot that 
I drynke, and she shal answere, Drynke, 
but and to thi camels I shal 3yue drynk, 
she is whom thow hast bifore ordeyned to 
thi sernaunt Ysaac; and bi this I shal vn- 
durstond that thow shalt do mercy with 
ismy lord Abraham. Ne 3it fully with 


Za wijf 4 prom. 
¢thilk pperu. 4 mayde Bp sec.m. EFH. 
twilenot1, Uthen. Ytolede asec.m. EILPS. 
Zaks. and Eoqrrw. and to exd. 


€ an kK. a wsd. to the x. 


GENESIS. 


_ Ysaac. 


abihold 4. byholden pu. be holde £ pr.m. ben holde sec.m. 


Ww Lord God a sec. m. BCIN. 
b my Lord s, 
f the enhabiters rip. dwelleris w. the dwelleris s. 


XXIV. 4—15. 


that thou take not a wijf to my sone of 
the dou3tris of Chanaan, among whiche Y 
dwelle; but that thou go to my lond and4 
kynrede, and therof take a wijf to my sone 
The seruaunt aunswerde, If thes 
womman nylet come with me in to this" 
lond, whether Y owe lede’ a3en thi sone 
to the place, fro which thou 3edist out ? 
Abraham seide, Be war, lest ony tymes 
thou lede a3en thidur my sone; the Lord¥7 
of heuene that took me fro the bows of 
my fadir, and fro the lond of my birthe, 
which spak to me, and swoor, and seide, 
Y schal 3yue this lond to thi seed, he schal 
sende his aungel bifore thee, and thou 
schalt take fro thennus a wijf to my sone; 
forsothe if the womman nyle* sue thee, s 
thou schalt not be holdun biY the ooth; 
netheles lede not a3en my sone thidur. 
Therfore the seruaunt puttide his hond9 
vndur the hipe of Abraham, his lord, and 
swoor to him on this word. And he took 10 
ten cainels of the floc of his lord, and 3ede 
forth, and bar with him of alle the goodis 
of his lord; and he 3ede forth, and cam 
to Mesopotanye, to the citee of Nachor. 
And whanne he hadde maad the camels11 
to reste with out the citee, bisidis the? pit 
of watir, in the euentid, in that tyme in 
which wymmen ben wont to go out to* 
drawe watir, he seide, Lord® God of my 12 
lord Abraham, Y biseche, meete® with me 
to dai, and do mersi with my lord Abra- 
ham. Lo! Y stonde ny3 the* welle of watir, 13 
and the dou3tris of enhabiters‘ of this citee 
schulen go out to drawe watir; therfor 14 
the damysel to which Y schal seie, Bowe 
doun thi watir pot that Y drynke, and 
schal answere, Drynke thou, but also Y 
schal 3yue drynke to thi camels, thilke it 
is which thou hast maad redi to thi ser- 
uaunt Ysaac; and bi this Y schal vndir- 
stonde that thon hast do mersi with? my 
lord Abraham. And he hadde not 3it1s 
fillid the wordis with” ynne hym silf, and 


» not ajen BDEFI. 


¥ wile not 1. 
€ to meete G. to meete thou Ksw. 
& to K. 


Y to GOQRTX. 
d thee ew. 
h Om. 1. 


XXIV. 16—29. 


ynne hym silf he had fulfillid the wordis, 
and loo! Rabecea 3ede out, the dow3ter 
of Batuel, sone of Melche, wijf of Na- 
chor, brother of Abraham, hauynge a 
16 water pot in hir shulder; a ful sembly 
damysel, and moost fayr mayden, and 
vnknowun to man. She descendide for- 
sothe to the welle, and had fulfild hir 
i7 water pot, and was turned aj3en. And 
the® seruaunt 3ede ajens hir, and seide, 
3yue to me a litle of water to drynk of 
isthi water pot. The which answeride, 
Drynk, my lord. And anoonf she putte 
down the water pot vpon hir arm, and 
19 3aue drynk to hym. And whanne he had 
drunkun, she addide to, But and to thi 
camelis I shal draw water, to the tyme 
20thei han drunkun’. And she, heldynge 
out the water pot into the water trowis, 
and rennede a3en to the pit, for to draw 
water, and drawun she 3aue to alle the 
eicamelis. He forsothe biheelde her stilli, 
wilnyng" to wite whether the Lord had 
22maad his weye welsom, or noon. Thanne 
after that the ecamelis hadden drunkun, 
the man brou3te forth goldun eer ryngis, 
peisynge two sicles, and as feel arm ser- 
23 clisyspeiys of ten siclys. And he seide to 
hir, Whos dow3ter art thow ? shewe thow 
to me, is there in the hows of thi fadir 
21place to dwelle? The which answeryde, 
The dow3ter of Batuel Y am, sone of Na- 
gschor, whom Melcha bar to hym. And 
she addide, seiynge, Of chaf forsothe and 
of hey myche! there is at vs, and a large 
26 place to dwelle. The man bowide hym 
27silf, and onouryde* the Lord, seiynge, 
Blissid be the Lord God of my lord Abra- 
ham, the which hath not takun awey 
mercy and his sothefastnes fro my lord, 
and in ri3t wei hath fulli! lad me into the 
28 hows of the brothir of my lord. And so 
the damysel renuede, and tolde in the™ 
hows of hir modir alle thingis that she 
29hadde herd. Rabecca forsothe hadde a 


fhera. f bylyue ppern. 8 alle dronken sper. 
lfulle. ™Om., p. 

'schaply c. kOm.s. J the whiehr. ™ Om. s. 
4 to thers, til thei Kad. r han drunken Gc. 
Vor ELP. VY hadden drunken pikmnswd. W dwelle inne xs. 
echide w. %dwelle inne ks. ®Om.s. 


GENESIS. 


8 helte mw. heldede port. 


123 


jo! Rebecca, the dou3tir of Batuel, sone 
of Melecha, wijf of Nachor, brothir of 
Abraham, 3ede out, hauynge a watir pot 
in hir sehwidre; a damysel ful comeli', 16 
and faireste virgyn, and vnknowun of man. 
Sotheli sche cam doun to the welle, and 
fillide the watir pot, and turnide a3en. 
And the seruaunt mette hir, and seide, 17 
3yue thou to* me a litil of the watir of 
thi pot to drynke. Which! answerde, 1s 
Drynke thon, my lord. And™ anoon sche 
dide doun the watir pot on™ hir schuldre, 
and 3af drynk to hym. And whanne hes 
hadde drunke, sche addide®, But also Y 
schal drawe watir to thi? camelis, til4 alle 
drynken'. And sche helde’ out the watir 20 
pot in tronjis, and ran a3en to the pit, tot 
drawe watir, and sche 3af watir drawun 
to alle the camels. Sotheli he bikelde hir 21 
priueli, and wolde wite whether the Lord 
hadde sped his wei, ethir® nay. Therfor 22 
after that the camels drunken’, the man 
brou3te forth goldun eere ryngis, weiynge 
twei siclis, and as many bies of the arm, 
in the wei3te of ten siclis. And he seide23 
to hir, Whos dou3ter art thou? schewe thou 
to me, is ony place in the hows of thi 
fadir to dwelle’? Which* answerde, Y am 24 
the dou;ter of Batuel, sone of Nachor, 
whom Melcha childide to him.’ And sche vs 
addideY, seiynge, Also ful myche of pro- 
uendre and of hey is at vs, and a large 
place to dwelle’. The man bowide hym26 
silf, and worschipide the Lord, and seide, 27 
Blessid be the Lord God of my lord Abra- 
ham, which God? took not aweie his mersy 
and treuthe fro my lord, and ledde me bi 
ri3t weie in to the hous of the brother of 
my lord. And so the damesel ran, and 2s 
telde in the hous of hir modir alle thingis 
whiche sche hadde herd. Sotheli Rebecca 29 
hadde a brothir, Laban bi name, whiche 
3ede out hastili to the man, where he was 
with out forth. And whanne he lhaddeso 
seyn the eere ryngis and byes of the arm 


bh wyllynge p. mochil p. * anourid spEFH. 


P the m. 
t that sche schulde c pr.m. 
y adde L. addide to Ksd. 


nofs. © addide tor. seide Kiswd. 


x the which 1. 


b the rijt Gs. 


R Q 


! 


124 


brothir, Laban bi name, the which hiynge 
3ede out to the man, where he was with 
3oo0uten, And whan he had seen the eer 
ryngis and the arm serclis in the hondis 
of his sister, and he hadde herd alle the 
wordis of hir tellynge, thes thingis the 
man spak to me, he com to the man, that 
stode bisidis the camelis, and ny3 the welle 
31 of water, and seide to hym, Go ynne, thow 
blissid of the Lord; whi stondist thow 
with oute? Y hane greithid the hows, 
szand the place to thi ecamelis. And he 
ladde hym into the hows of herbergrye, 
and unsadelynge dischargide the camelis, 
and 3aue to hem chaf, and hey, and water 
for the camelis fete to be wayshun, and 
sz3inennys whiche comen with hym. And 
there was sett brede in his si3t, the which 
seith, Y shal not eet, to the tyme Y speke 
my wordis. He answeride to hym, Spek. 
34. And he, The seruaunt, he seith, Y am of 
35 Abraham, aud the Lord hath blissid to 
my lord ful myche, and he is magnyfied ; 
and he hath 3ouun to hyim sheep, and 
oxen, siluer, and gold, seruauntis, and 
36hand maydens, camelis, and assis. And 
Sara, the wijf of my lord, hath born a 
sone to my lord in his eeld, and he hath 
373yuun to hym al that he had. And my 
lord hath adiurid me, seiynge, Thow shalt 
not take to my sone a wijf of the dow3- 
tres of Chananeis, in whos loond Y dwel, 
38 but thow shalt go to the hows of my fa- 
dir, and of my cognacyoun thow shalt 
39take a wijf to my sone. I forsothe an- 
sweride to my lord, What if the womman 
40 wole not go with me? The Lord, he seith, 
in whos si3t Y goo, shal sende his aungel 
with thee, and shal make redi thi weye; 

* and thow shalt take a wijf to my sone of 
my kynredun, and of the hows of my fa- 
4idir. Thow shalt be ynnocent fro my 
curse, whan thow shalt com to my ny3 
42kyn, and thei 3yue not to thee. I com 
thanne to day to the welle of water, and 
seyde, The Lord God of my lord Abra- 
ham, if thow hast maad redy my weye, 

¢ makid Fr. 

Uthe which 1. 


© and camels 1. 
u Om. bz. 


dan kms. © he 3af's, 
k Om. Ks prom. 
Pmy lordis wyfs. @ her k. 
vhirr, wOmge X*Xas. 


GENESIS. 


f the camels kK. 
Vand siluur Bn. 

t Abraham my lord s. 
y heere s. 


XXIV. 30—42. 


in the hondis of his sister, and hadde herd 
alle the wordis of hir tellynge, the man 
spak to me these thingis, he cam to the 
man that stood bisidis the camels, and ny3 
the welle of watir, and seide to him,s1 
Entre thou, the blessid of the Lord; whi 
stondist thou with outforth ? J haue maad® 
redi the’ hows, and a place to thi camels. 
And he brou3te hym in to the ynne, and 32 
unsadlide the camels, and 3af¢ pronendre, 
and hey, and watir to waische the feet of 
camels‘, and of men® that cainen with hym. 
And breed was set forth" in his  si3t,s3 
which seide, Y schal not ete til Y speke my 
wordis. He answerde to the man, Speke 
thouk. And the man seide, Y am the ser-34 
uaunt of Abraham, and the Lord hath3s 
blessid my lord greetli, and he is maad 
greet; and God 3af to hym secheep, and 
oxun, siluer', and gold, seruauntis™, and 
handmaides", camels°, and assis. And Sare, 36 


‘the wijf of my lord?, childide a sone to 


my lord in his‘ eelde, and he" jaf* alle 
thingis that he hadde to that sone. And 37 
my lord chargide ine greetli, and seide, 
Thou schalt not take to my sone a wijf 
of the dou3tris of Canaan, in whos lond Y 
dwelle, but thou schalt go to the ‘hous3s 
of my fadir, and of myn kyurede thou 
schalt take a wijf to my sone. Forsothe39 
Y auswerde to my lord, What if the wom- 
man nyle' come with me? He seide, The 40 
Lord in whose si3t Y go, sehal sende his 
aungel with thee, and he" schal dresse thi 
weie; and thou sehalt take a wijf to my 
sone of my kynrede, and of my fadris 
hows. Thou schalt be innocent fro my 41 
curs, whanne thou comest to my kynes- 
men, and thei 3yuen not ‘the womman’ to 
thee. Therfor Y cam to day to the welle 42 
of watir, and Y™ seide, Lord God of my 
lord Abraham, if thou hast dressid my 
weie in which Y go now, lo! Y stonde bi-43 
sidis the* welle of watir, and the maide 
that schal go out to drawe watir herithY 
me, 3yne” thou to me a litil of water to 
drynke of thi pot, and seith? to me, And 44 


‘s camels feet and the mennes s. 4 Om. plures. 
M men seruauntis Ksw. ® handmaidenes plures. 
S hath jyeuen s. wile not 1. 


Zand 3yue I. 8 sei E. she seie s. 


XXIV. 43—53- 


43in the whieh now Y go, loo! I stonde 
bysides the welle of the" water, and the 
maydyn that shal goon out to draw watre 
here of me, 3yue to me a lytil of water to 
44drynke of thi watre pot, and she seye® to 
me, And thow drynke, and Y shal draw 
water to thi camelis, she is the womman 
that the Lord hath maad redi to the sone? 
45of my lord. While thes thingis Y turn- 
“ede stilly with my silf, Rebecca aperide, 
comynge with the water pot that she bare 
in hir shuldir; and she descendide to the 
welle, and drowe water. And Y seide‘ 
46to hir, 3yf to me a litil to drynk; the 
which hiynge dide down hir water pot 
fro hir shulder, and seide to me, And thow 
drynk, and to thi camelis Y shal 3yue 
drink ; and™ I drank, and she wateryde 
47the camelis. And I askide hir, and seide, 
Whos dow3ter art thow? The which an- 
sweryde, The dow3ter of Batuel Y am, 
sone of Nachor, whom bare to hym Mel- 
cha. And so I hengide™ eer ryngis to 
honoure® the face of hir, and arm serclis I 
48 putte in the hondis of hir, and bowid I 
honowridet the Lord, blissynge to the 
Lord God of my lord Abraham, the which 
hath ful lad me the ry3t weye, that I 
shulde take the dow3ter of the brother ‘of 
ag9mny lord" to the sone of hym. Wherfor 
if 3e doon mercy and sothenes with my 
lord, shewith to me; if forsothe other 
thing plesith, and that seie’ 3ee, that Y 
50 g0 to the ry3t or to the left. Laban and 
Batuel answeryden, Fro the Lord the 
word is goon out; we mown not out of 
the plesyng of hym ony thing othir speke 
51 with thee. Loo! Rebecca is bifore thee ; 
taak hir, and go, and be she the wijf of 
the sone of thi lord, as the Lord hath 
szspokun. The which whan the child of 
Abraham hadde herd, fallynge down in 
53the¥ erthe honowrede* the Lord. And 
vesselys of siluer, and of gold, and clothis 


n Om. BDEFH. 
anoure I. 


© seide p. Ploue a. 


tanourides DEFH, 


band. © with inne a. 
which 1. ithe sones,  puttes. !on x. 
Gorenp. Tthig. ‘*thica. tOms. 


GENESIS. 


4 say BDEF. 
uOm. 4 sec.m. BF, Ysigge BDEFH. 
4 pot to the welle x. = ¢ hir ceLps. 
™m the which: x. 


u seide s. 


125 


thou drynke, and Y schal drawe watir to 
thi camels, thilke is the womman which 
the Lord hath maad redi to the sone of 
my lord. While Y turnede in” thou3te4s 
these thingis with® me, Rebecca apperide, 
eomynge with a pot whieh sche bare in 
the® schuldre; and sche 3ede down to the 
welle, and drowe watir. And Y seide to 
hir, 3yue thouf a litil to me to drynke; 
and sche hastide, and dide doun the pote 
of the schuldre, and seide to me, And thou 
drynke, and Y sehal 3yue drynke to thi 
camels; Y drank, and watride® the camels. 
And Y axide hir, and seide, Whos dou3tir 47 
art thou? Which® answerde, Y am the 
dou3tir of Batuel,’ sone! of Nachor, whom 
Melcha childide to him. And so Y hangide 
eere ryngis to ourne hir face, and Y put- 
tide* bies of! the arm in hir hondis, and 48 
lowliche Y worschipide the Lord, and Y 
blessid the Lord God of my lord Abraham, 
which™ God ledde me bi ri3t” weie, that 
Y schulde take the dou3tir of the brothir 
of my lord to his sone. Wherfor if 3e don 49 
mercy and trenthe® with ‘my lord?, schewe 
3e to me; ellis if othir thing plesith, also 
seie 3e this, that Y go to the ri3t side ethir1 
to the left side. Laban and Batuel an-s50 
sweriden, The word is gon out of the 
Lord ; we moun not speke ony other thing 
with thee without his" plesaunce. Lo! Re-51 
becca is bifore thee; take thou hir, and 
go forth, and be sche wijf of the sone of 
thi lord, as thes’ Lord spak. Andt whanne 52 
the child of Abraham hadde herd this, he 
felde doun, and worschipide the Lord in 
erthe. And whanne vessels of siluer, and 53 
of gold, and clothis weren brou3t forth, he 
jaf tho to Rebecca for 3ifte, and he 3af 
3iftis to hir britheren, and modir. Ands: 
whanne a feeste was maad, thei eeten and 
drunken togider, and dwelliden there. For- 
sothe the ehild roos eerli, and spak¥, De- 
lynere 3e me, that Y go to my lord. Hirss 


r Om. BDEFH. S anourne BDF. 


Xanouride BDEFII. 


rr hynge pb. 
wOm, BDEFH. 


f Om. &. 
1 the rijt G. 


h the 
P me F sup.ras. 


& she watride Ks. 
° turne L. 


126 


brou3t forth, 3aue hem to Rebecca for 
3ifte, and to the britheren of hir and to 
54the modir he offride 3iftis. And the feest 
bigun, thei etynge togideris and drynk- 
ynge dwelliden there. The child forsothe 
rysynge eerly, spak, Lat me, that Y go to 
ssmy lord, The britheren of hir and the 
modir answeryden, The mayde child at 
the leest dwelle ten dayes anentis vs, and 
séaftirward sche shal go. WilnY 3e not, 
he seith, me a3en-holde, for the Lord hath 
maad redi my weie; late 3e me, that Y 
s7go to my lord. And thei seiden, Clepe 
we the maydyn’ child, and aske we the 
sswil of hir. And whan she clepid was 
comun, thei askiden, Wolt thow with this 
s9man go? She seide, I shal go. Thanne 
thei leten hir, and Delbora, hir noryshe, 
and the seruaunt of Abraham, and the 
60 withfolweris of hyr, inwardli preyinge 
weelsom thingis of her sistyr, and seiynge, 
Oure sistir thou art, growe thow into 
thowsand thowsandis, and welden thi seed 
sithe 3atis of thin enemyes. Thanne Re- 
becca and the damysels of hir, the camelis 
steied vp, foleweden the man, the which 
szhyinge turnede ajen to his lord. That 
tyme Ysaac 3ede bi the weye that ledith 
to the pit, whos name is of hym lyuynge 
and seiynge; forsothe he dwellide in the 
6ssowth loond. And he was goon out to 
bithenk in the feeld, the day now goon 
doun; and whan he had houun vp the 
64eyen, he saw3 camelis comynge afer. And 
Rebecca, Ysaac biholdyd, descendide of 
65the camel, and seith to the child, Who is 
this man that cometh bi the feeld in ajen 
comyng to vs? And he seide to hir, He 
is my lord. And she anoon, takynge a 
66 mantel, coueride hir. And the seruaunt 
alle thingis that he had doou tolde to his 
67lord Ysaac; the which led hir with ynne 
into the tabernacle of Sara, his modir, 
and toke hir to wijf; and in so mych he 
louede hir, that the sorowe that of the 
deth of the moder felle it? swagid. 


Ywylp. 2 meyde gpern. 
vYOm.r. W3eande.  * axeden hirs. 
chise sys. ‘itr. ¢ Om. xs, the which 1 


GENESIS. 


y welde xsd. 
f On, s. 


XXIV. 54-—67. 


britheren and modir answerden, The dame- 
sele dwelle nameli ten daies at vs, and 
aftirward sche schal go forth. The child 56 
seide, Nyle 3e holde me, for the Lord hath 
dressid my weie; delyuere 3e me, that I go 
to my lord. And thei seiden, Clepe we’ 57 
the damysele, and axe we hir wille. And" ss 
whanne sche was clepid, and cam, thei 
axiden*, Wolt thou go with this man? 
And sche seide, Y schal go. Therfor they 59 
delyueriden hir, and hir nurse, and the 
seruaunt of Abraham, and hise felowis, 
and wischiden prosperitees to her sister, 60 
and seiden, Thou art oure sister, enereesse 
thou in to a thousand thousandis, and thi 
seed geteY the 3atis of hise* enemyes. 
Therfor Rebecca and hir damesels stieden 61 
on the camels, and stteden the man, which 
turnede a3en hasteli to his lord. In that62 
tyme Ysaae walkide bi the weie that ledith 
to the pit, whos name is of hym that 
lyueth and seeth; for he dwellide in the 
south lond. And he 3ede out to thenke 63 
in the feeld, for the dai was ‘bowid thanne?; 
and whanne he hadde reisid® the® iz3en, he 
sei3 camels comynge afer. And whannec 
Ysaac was seyn, Rebecca li3te doun of the 
camel, and seide to the child, Who is that ¢5 
man that cometh bi the feeld in to the 
metyug of vs? And the ehild seide to hir, 
Het is my lord. And sche took soone a 
mentil, and hilide hir. Forsothe the ser-6s5 
uaunt tolde to his lord Ysaac alle thingis 
whiche he hadde do; which® Ysaae leddes7 
hir in to the tabernacle of Sare‘, his mo- 
dir, and took hir to wijf; and so myche 
he louede hir, that he temperide’ the so- 
rewe which bifelde’ of the deeth of the! 
modir. 


a Om. 4 sec.m. BDE pr.m. FH. 


z Om. s. 


8 than ny3 goon s. 
& swagide s. 


bd bifelle to him s. 


b lift up s. 
i his s. 


XXV. 1—18. 


CAP. XXV. 
1 Abraham forsothe toke another wijf, 
2Cethura by name, the which bare to hym 
Zamram, and Jexam, and Madan, and 
3Madian, and Jesboth, and Sue. And 
Jexam gat Saba, and Dadan. The sones 
of Dadan weren Assurym, and Latusim, 
4Laomym. And forsothe of Madian was 
sprongun Epha, and Epher, and Enoch, 
and Abida, and Eldaa; alle thes the sonys 
sof Cethure. And Abraham 3aue alle that 
6he had to Ysaac; to the sonys forsothe 
of the secoundarye wyues he 3aue 3iftis ; 
and he seueryde hem fro Ysaac, his sone, 
73it while he lyuede, to the est plage. And 
the dayes of the lijf of Abraham weren 
an hundryd and seuenti and fyue 3eir ; 
8and failynge he was deed in® a good elde, 
and-of greet age, and ful of dayes, and 
9he was gaderyd to his puple. And Ysaac 
and Ysmael, his sonys, biryeden hym in 
the dowble spelunk, the which is set in 
the feeld of Ephron, sone of Seor Ethei, 
10forn a3jens Mambre, that® he bou3te of 
the sones of Heth; there he was byried 
ttand Sara his wijf. And after the obite 
of hym God bDlisside to Ysaac, his sone, 
which dwellid bisidis the pit of hym 
12liuynge and seiynge bi name. Thes ben 
the generaciouns of Ysmael, the sone of 
Abrahe, whom bare to hym Agar the 
13 Egipcian, the seruaunt of Sare; and thes 
the names of the sones of hy, in names 
and in his generaciouns. The first gotun 
of Ysmael, Nabaioth, thanne after Sedar, 
isand Abdaeel, and Mabsan, and Masma, 
isand Duma, and Massa, and Adad, and 
Thema, and Ychur, and Naphir, and 
16Cedma. ‘Thes ben the sones of Ysmael, 
and thes the names, bi castelis and towns 
of hem, the twelue princis of his lynages. 
17 And the 3eers of the lijf of Ysmael beu 
maad an hundrid and seuene and thritti, 
and faylynge died, and was put to his 


GENESIS. 


127 
CAP. XXV. 


Forsothe Abraham weddide another wijf, 1 
Ceture bi name, which* childide to hime 
Samram, and Jexan, and! Madan, and Ma- 
dian, and Jesboth, and Sue. Also Jexans 
gendride™ Saba and Dadan. Forsothe the 
sones of Dadan weren Asurym, and Lathu- 
sym, and Laomym. And sotheli of Ma-4 
dian was borun Efa, and Ofer, and Enoth, 
and Abida, and Heldaa; alle these weren 
the sones of Cethure. And Abraham 3afs 
alle thingis whiche he hadde in possessioun 
to Isaac; sotheli he jaf 3iftis to the sones6 
of concubyns"; and Abraham, while he 
lyuede 3it, departide hem fro Ysaac, his 
sone, to the eest coost. Forsothe the daies 7 
of lijf? of Abraham weren an hundrid and 
‘fyue and seuenti? 3eer; and he failide, and s 
diede in good eelde, and of greet age, and 
ful of daies, and he was gaderid to his 
puple. And Ysaac and Ismael, his sones, 9 
birieden him in the double denne, which 
is set1 in the feeld of Efron, sone of Seor 
Ethei, euene ajens' Mambre, which denne 10 
he bou3te of the sones of Heth; and he was 
biried there, and Sare his wijf. And aftir1 
the deeth of Abraham God blesside Isaac 
his sone, which dwellide bisidis the pit bi 
name of hym that lyueth and seeth. These 12 
ben the generaciouns of Ismael, sone® of 
Abraham, whom Agar Egipcian, ser- 
uauutesse' of Sare, childide to Abraham ; 
and these ben the names of the sones of 13 
Ismael, in her names and generaciouns. 
The firste gendride" of Ismael was Na- 
baioth, aftirward Cedar, and Abdeel, and 
Mabsan, and Masma, and Duma, andis 
Massa, and Adad, and Thema, and’ Ithur, 15 
and Nafir, and Cedma. These weren the 16 
sones of Ismael, and these weren names” 
by castels and townes of hem, twelte* 
princes of her lynagis. And theY 3eeris17 
of lijf* of Ismael weren maad an hundrid 
and seuene and thretti, and he failide, and 


18 puple. He dwellid forsothe fro Euila to  diede, and was put to his puple. For- 1s 
bandinp. ¢the un. 
kthe which1. 10m.5. ™gaat1. 1” his secoundary wyues s. concubyns ether secoundarie myues 
BCGIQ. cone. that is, sec. w.N. © the lijfs. Pthrescore and xv. v1. 4maads, Tanentiss. § the 
sone Es. thande maides, 4 bigotuni. VOm.1. Wthenamess. *andtwelues. YOm.s. 2 the 


lif s. 


128 


Sur, which biholdith Egipt hem* comyng 
ynne to the Assyryes; bifore® alle his 
19 britherenf he died. And thes ben the ge- 
neraciouns of Ysaac, the sone of Abraham. 
20 Abraham gat Ysaac, the which, whan he 
was of fourti 3eer, took a wijf, Rebecca, 
the dow3ter of Batuel, of Syre of Meso- 
21 potany, the sister of Laban. And Ysaac 
preyede the Lord for his wijf, ther thur3 
that she was bareyn; the which herde 
hym, and 3aue conceyuyng to Rebecca. 
22 But the litil children in the womb of hir 
weren hurtlid togidere; the which seide, 
If thus it was to com to me, what nede 
was to conseytie? And she 3ede to® coun- 
23seil the Lord, the which answerynge, 
seith, Two folk ben in thi wombe, and 
two puplis of thi wombe shulen be dy- 
uydid, and a puple a puple shal ouer- 
com, and the moor shal serue to the 
24lesse. Now tyme of beryng was comen, 
and loo! twynlingis in the wombe of hir 
25weren foundun. He that first was goon 
out was brown, and al in maner of a 
skyn row3; and the name of hym was 
26clepid Esau. Anooni aftir the tother 
goynge out, helde with his hoond the for- 
ther parti of his brother foot; and ther- 
for she clepide him Jacob. Sixti 3ere was 
Ysaac whanne the children weren born. 
27 The whiche wexen, Esau was maad a 
sleiz3 man of huntyng, and a man erthe 
tilier; Jacob forsothe a symple man 
28dwelte in tabernaclis. Isaac louede Esau, 
there thur3 that he ete of the huntingis of 
29him; and Rebecea louede Jacob. Jacob 
forsothe hadde sothun potage ; to whom 
whan Esau was comen wery fro the felde, 
30 seith, 3if to me of this brown sething, for 
Y am ful wery; for the which cause the 
3siname of hym was clepyd Edom. To 
whom seide Jacob, Sel me the ry3tis of 
32thi fyrst getyng. He answeride, Loo! 
I dye, what shal profyt to me the ri3tis 


4 the 4. Om. £ pr.m. 
k Om. BDE sec.m. FH. 


© to forn BDEFH. 


amen DE. _ P the sone ts. 
& ouerturne s sec.m. 
P his name Ga. 


bb bigaat 1. 


h childinge s. i Om. c. 


wseide x, *Esaus.  Y bigotun 1. 


GENESIS. 


f brether BE. 


¢ the dou3tir Is. 
k Om. n. 
4 an erthe tilier prsrw. erthe tilier kmd. 
gile BCEGKLNoPQd. s.m. that is, a man withouten gile. s. 
z Esau s. 


XXV. 19 —32. 


sothe he enhabitide fro Euila til to Sur, 
that biholdith Egipt, as me* entrith in to 
Assiriens; he diede bifore alle his britheren. 
Also these ben the generaciouns of Ysaac 19 
sone’ of Abraham. Abraham gendride®> 
Isaac, and whanne Isaac was of fourti 3eer, 20 
he weddide a wijf, Rebecca, dou3ter® of Ba- 
tuel, of Sirie of Mesopotanye, the sistir of 
Laban. And Isaac bisou3te the Lord for 2i 
his wijf, for sche was bareyn; and the 
Lord herde him, and 3af conseiuyng to 
Rebecca. But the litle children weren2e2 
hurtlid togidre in hir wombe; and sche 
seide, If it was so to comynge to me, what 
nede was it to conseyue? And sche 3ede 
and axide® counsel of the Lord, which® an-23 
swerde, and seide, Twei folkis ben in thi 
woinbe, and twei puplis schulen be de- 
partid fro thi wombe, and a‘ puple schal 
ouercomes a puple, and the more schal 
serue tlie lesse. Thanne the tyme of child-24 
beryng® cam, and lo! twei children weren 
foundun in hir wombe. He that 3ede outs 
first was reed, and al rou3 in the! manere 
of ak skyn!; and his name was clepid Esau. 
Anoon the tothir™ 3ede out, and helde with 26 
the" hond the heele of the" brother; and 
therfore® he clepide him? Jacob. Isaac was 
sixti jeer eeld, whanne the litle children 
weren borun. And whanne thei weren27 
woxun, Esau was maad a man kunnynge 
of huntyng, and a man erthe tilier; for- 
sothe’ Jacob was a symple man‘, and 
dwellidet in tabernaclis. Isaac louyde E-28 
sau, for he eet of the" huntyng’ of Esau ; 
and Rebecca louyde Jacob. Sotheli Jacob 29 
sethide’ potage; and whanne Esau cam 
weri fro the feld, he seide to Jacob, 3yue 30 
thou to me of this reed sething, for Y am 
ful weri; for which cause his* mame was 
clepid Edom. And Jacob seide to him, 3i 
Sille to me the ri3t of the first gendridY 
childe. He? answerde, Lo! Y die, what 32 
schulen the firste gendrid* thingis profite 


& for tO BDEFH. i And anoon 4 pr.m. 


€the which1. foos. 

nhiss. © herfore 1. 
8 symple man, that is, without 
uQOm.N. VY huntingis BcrN. 


4 to axe plures. 
Iswin L. ™ oothir 1. 

T sothly s. 
t he duelte s. 
4 gotun I. 


XXV. 33—-XXVI. 1c. 


330f my first getyng? Jacob seide, Thanne 
sweer to me. Thanne Esau swoor, and 

34 soold the ri3tis of his first getyng. And 
so breed takun and the sowil of potage, 
ete, and dronk, and 3ede forth, settynge 
at nou3t that he hadde soold the ri3tis of 
his firste getyng. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 Hungur forsothe sproong vpon the 
erthe, after thilk bareynte that felle in 
the daies of Abraham, 3ede Ysaac to 
Abymalech, the king of Palestynes, in 
2Gerera. And the Lord apperide to hym, 
and seith, Desend thow not down into 
Egipt, but rest thow in the loond that I 
3shal seye to thee, and be pilgrym in it; 
and I shal be with thee, and I shal blis 
to thee; to thee forsothe and to thi seed 
Y shal 3yue alle thes regyouns, fulfillynge 
the oth that Y bihijt to Abraham, thi 
4fader. And Y shal multiplie thi seed as 
sterrys of heuen, and Y shal 3yue to thin 
aftir comers alle thes regiouns, and alle 
folkis of the erthe shulen be blissid in 
5 thi seed, therthur3 that Abraham obeishid 
to my voys, and wolde kepe myn heestis 
and maundementis, and wolde holde my 
6seremonyés and lawis. And so Ysaac 
7dwelte in Gerarys. Which, whan he was 
askid of the men of thilk place vpon his 
wijf, answeride, My sister she is; for- 
sothe he dredde to knowlechen that she 
was to hym felowshipte thur3 mariage, 
letyng lest peranenture thei** shulden slee 
shym for the fairnes of hir. And whan 
many dayes weren passid, and there 
dwellyd, the kyng Abymalech of Pale- 
stynes biloldynge thur3 a wyndow, saw3 
hym pleiynge with Rebecca, his wiyf. 
9And hym clepid seith, It is clere that 
she is thi wijf; whi hast thow lyed hir 
to be thi sistir? He answeryd, I dredde, 
lolest Y shulde dye for hir. And Abyma- 
lech seide, Whi hast thow put! blame to 
vs? Sum man of the puple my3te hane 


kk the 4, 


bhes. ¢gotun1. 4 seide to him x. 
leuntreys plures. the erthe u. 
P he gesside s. 4 biheud x. 


T seidest E. $i K. 


GENESIS. 


€ go thou s. 
1 myn heestis s. 
t answere E. 


129 


to me? Jacob seide, therfor swere thou to% 2 
me. Therfor Esau swoor, and selde the 
firste gendrid thingis. And so whanne he 3+ 
hadde take breed and potage, Esau? eet 
and drank, and 3ede forth, and chargide 
liti] that he hadde seld the ri3t of the firste 
gendrid¢ child. 


CAP. XXVI. 


Forsothe for hungur roos on the lond,1 
aftir thilke bareynesse that bifelde in the 
daies of Abraham, Isaac 3ede forth to 
Abymelech, kyng of Palestyns, in Gerara. 
And the Lord apperide to hym, and seide’, 2 
Go® not doun in to Egipt, but reste thou 
in the lond which Y schal seief to thee, and3 
be thou a pilgrym ther ynne; and Y schal 
be with thee, and Y schal blesse thee; for 
Y schal 3yue alle these cuntrees to thee 
and to thi seed, and Y schal fille’ the ooth 
which® Y bihi3te to Abraham, thi fadir. 
And Y schal imultiplie thi seed as thes 
sterris of henene, and Y schal 3yue alle 
these thingis! to thin eyris, and alle folkis 
of erthe* schulen be blessid in thi seed, 
for Abraham obeide to my vois, and keptes 
‘my preceptis! and comaundementis™, and 
kepte" cerymonyes and lawis®. And so6 
Ysaac dwellide in Geraris. And whanne7 
he was axid of men of that place of his 
wijf, he answarde, Sche is my sistir ; for 
he dredde to knowleche that sche was 
felouschipid to hym in matrymonye, and 
gesside? lest peraduenture thei wolden sle 
him for the fairnesse of hir. And whannes 
ful many daies weren passid, and le 
dwellide there, Abymelech, kyng of Pa- 
lestyns, bihelde’ bi a wyndow, and sei3 
hym pleiynge with Rebecca, his wijf. Ands 
whanne Isaac was clepid, the kyng seide, 
It is opyn, that sche is thi wijf; whi 
liedist™ thou, that sche was* thi sistir ? 
Isaac answerdet, Y" dredde, lest Y schulde 
die for hir. And Abymelech seide, Whi 10 
hast thou disseyned vs? Sum man of the 
puple my3te do letcherie with thi wijf, and 


1 putt ine Ber pr.m. puttyn pb. 


h the whiehe 1. that s. 
omy s. © my lawess. 
« for I ELP pr.m. 


f shewe aw. & fulfille s. 
™ my comaundementis s. 


130 


ley with thi wijf, and thow haddist yn- 
brou3t vpon vs a greet synne. And he 
comaundide to alle the puple, seiynge, 
11 Who towchith the wijf of this man, 
12with™ deth he shal die. Isaac forsothe 
sowide in that Joond, and he fonde that 
jeer the hundryd foold; and God blisside 
13to hym. And the man fel ryche, and he 
3ede profytynge and vudurgrowynge to 
the tyme that he was maad hugeli greet. 
14 And he hadde possessiouns of sheep, and 
of droues, and of meyne mych. For that 
15 Palestynes uoiynge” to hym, stoppiden 
alle the pittis the whiche the seruauntis 
of his fader Abraham that tyme hadden 
16 doluun, fulfillynge with erthe, in so myche 
that hym silf Abymalech seide to Ysaac, 
Goo awey fro vs, for greetli thow art 
17inaad my3tyer than we. And he goynge 
thens, that he come to the rennynge watir 
isof Gerare, and dwelle there, eftsones he 
deluyde other pittis, the whiche the ser- 
uauntis of his fader Abraham delueden, 
and whom, hym deed, stuntyme Phili- 
stiens stoppiden ; and he clepide hem the 
same names, in the whiche the fader hadde 
i9clepid bifore. The deluyden in the ren- 
nynge watir, and thei fonden quyk watir. 
20 But and there was striyf of the sheep- 
herdis of° Gerare a3enus the sheepherdis 
of Isaac, seiynge, Oure? is the water ; 
wherfor the name of the pit of that that4 
21 felle he clepide chalange. And thei del- 
ueden anothir, and for thilk forsothe thei 
22 stryuen, and he clepide it enmytese. J*ro 
thens goon he deluyde another pit, for 
which thei stryuen not, and so he clepide 
the naine of it breede, seiynge, Now God 
hath sprad vs a brood, and he hath maad 
23 growe ypon the erthe. Forsothe fro that 
24 place he stei3 vp into Bersabe, where thie 
Lord aperyde to hym in that ny3t, sei- 
ynge, I am the God of Abraham, thi 
fader; nil thou not drede, for I am with 
thee, and I shal blisse to thee, and I shal 


m Om. BEF. ® enuying BDEFH. 


Yagreuouse s. Wvpons. * sewes. 


GENESIS. 


° Om. «4. 


Y fold enerese s. 


XXXVI. 11-24. 


thou haddist brou3t in grenous’ synne on” 
vs. And the kyng comaundide to al the 
puple, and seide, He that touchith then 
wijf of this man schal die bi deeth. For-12 
sothe Isaac sowide* in that lond, and he 
foond an hundrid foldY in that jeer; and 
the Lord blesside hym. And the man1s 
was maad riche, and he 3ede profitynge 
and encreessynge til he was maad ful 
greet. Also he hadde possessioun’ of scheep 14 
and grete* beestis, and ful myche of meyne. 
For this thing Palestyns hadden enuye to 
hym, and thei stoppiden in that tyme and 15 
filliden with erthe alle the pittis whiche 
the sernauntis of Abraham his fadir had- 
den diggid, in so myche that Abymelech 16 
him silf seide to Ysaac, Go thon awei fro 
vs, for thou art maad greetly my3tier than 
we. And he 3ede awei, that he schulde 17 
come to the stronde of Gerare, and dwelle 
there. And he diggide eft other pittis, 18 
whiche the seruauntis of Abrahain his 
fadir hadden diggid, and whiche the Fi- 
listeis hadden stoppid sumtyme, whanne 
Abraham was deed; and he® clepide thot 
pittis bie the same names, bi whiche his 
fadir hadde clepid bifore. Thei diggiden 19 
in the stronde, and thei founden wellynge! 
watir. But also strijf of scheepherdis of 20 
Gerare was there a3ens the® scheepherdis 
of Isaac, and thei seiden, The watir is 
oure"; wherfor of that! that bifelde he* 
clepide the name of the! pit fals chaleng. 
And thei diggiden anothir, and theiai 
stryueden also for that, and Ysaac clepide 
that pit enemytes. And he 3ede forth22 
fro thennus, and diggide another pit, for 
which™ thei stryueden not, therfor he 
clepid the name of that pit largenesse" ; 
and seide, Now God hath alargid vs, and 
hath maad® to encreesse on erthe. For-o23 
sotheP he stiedei fro that place in to Ber- 
sabee, where the Lord God" apperide to 24 
him in that ny3t; and seide, Y am God of 
Abraham, thi fadir; nyle thou drede, for 


Pourn BEH. 4@4Om. 4. 


2 possessiouns plures. 8 of grete plures. 


b dwellide 1 pr.m. he duellide s. ¢ Ysaacs. ‘thers. © Om.x.  f wellynge vp kK. quyk or wellinge 
ups. Om. x. bonress. fthat stryfs. & Ysaacs. I that xs. ™the which1. =» breede ether 
largenesse BC, OS maadvss, P Ysaacs. 4stiede vps. ¥* Om. pv. 


XXXVI. 25—XXVII. 3. 


multiplie thi seed for my seruaunt Abra- 
2;ham. And so he bildide” there an auter 
to the Lord; and iuwardli clepid the 
name of the Lord, straw3te ont a taber- 
nacle, and comaundide his seruauntis that 
26thei shulden delue pittis. To the which 
place whan thei® weren comen fro Gera- 
ris, Abymalech and Ochojat, frendis of 
hym, and Phichol, the duyk of kny3tis, 
27 Ysaac spak to hem, What ben 3e comen 
to me, a man whom 3e hatiden, and put- 
28tident awey fro 30w? Whiche answer- 
iden, We han se the Lord to be with 
thee, and therfor we seiden, Be there an 
oth bitwix vs, and maak we to gider 
29 boond of pees, that thow do not to vs eny 
thing of yuel, and as we towchiden no 
thing of thin, ne han doon that shulde 
harm thee, but with pees we han laft 
thee encreessid with the blissyng of the 
30 Lord. Thanne he made hem a feest; 
3iand aftir meet and drynke arysynge eerli, 
thei sweren to hem siluen to gidere; and 
Ysaac peesibli laft hem into her place. 
32 Loo! forsothe in that day comen the ser- 
uauntis of Ysaac, tellynge to hym of the 
pit that thei delueden, and seiynge, We 
33han foundun watir. Wher of he clepide 
it plente"; and the name of” the cyte is 
set Bersabee, vnto the day that is now. 
31Esau forsothe fourti wyntir olde took 
two wyues, Judith, the dow3ter of Beery 
Ethei, and Bethsamath, the dowter of 
35Elon, of the same place; the whiche 
bothe hadden offendid the inwitt of Ysaac 
and Rebecca. 


CAP. XXVII. 


,  Ysaac forsothe was olde, and his eyen 
wexen derk, and he my3te not se. And 
he clepide Esau, his moor sone, and seide 
to hym, My sone! The which answeryde, 

2I am uy3. To whom the fader, Thow 
seest, he seith, that Y am wexun™ olde, 

3and vnknowe the day of my deeth. Take 


T bylde speru. 8% Om. spern. 


8 stran3te s. ¢ digge there s. 4 han hated s. 
thing s. 2 hurtlid s. 


fenden rear. offendiden to o. f wexide ixrr. 


GENESIS. 


t putten z. 


a risiden prn. han rise ¢ pr.m. 


131 


Y am with thee, and Y schal blesse thee, 
and Y schal multiplie thi seed for my ser- 
uaunt Abrahani. And so Ysaac bildide ther 25 
an auter to the Lord; and whanne the 
name of the Lord was inwardli clepid, he 
stretchide’ forth a tabernacle; and he co- 
maundide hise seruauntis that thei schulden 
digge' pittis. And whanne Abymelech, 26 
aud Ochosat, hise frendis, and Ficol, duk 
of kny3tis, hadden come fro Geraris to that 
place, Isaac spak to hem, What camen 3e 27 
to me, a man whom 3e hatiden", and put- 
tiden awei fro 301? Whiche’ answeriden, 28 
We seizen that God is with thee, and 
therfor we seiden now, An ooth be bi- 
twixe vs, and make we a couenannt of 
pees, that thou do not ony yuel to vs, as29 
we touchiden ‘not ony thing* of thine, 
nethir diden thatY that hirtide? thee, but 
with pees we leften thee encressid bi the 
blessyng of the Lord. Therfor Isaac made 30 
a feeste to hem; and after mete and drynk 
thei risen eerli, and sworen ech to other 331 
and Isaac lefte hem peisibli in to her place. 
Lo! forsothe in that dai the seruauntis of 32 
Ysaac camen, tellynge to him of the pit 
which thei hadden diggid, and seiden, We 
han foundun watir. Wherfor Ysaac clepide 33 
that pit abundaunce; and the name of 
the? citee was set Bersabee til in® to pre- 
sent? dai. Esau forsothe fourti 3eer eld ss 
weddide twei wyues, Judith, the dou3tir of 
Beeri Ethei, and Bethsamath, the dou3ter 
of Elon, of the same place; whiche bothe3s 
offendiden® the soule of Isaac and of Re- 
becca. 


CAP. XXVII. 


Forsothe Isaac wexef eld, and hise izen1 
dasewiden, and he mi;te not se. And he 
clepide Esau, his more sone, and seide® to 
hym, My sone! Which answerde, Y am 
present. To whom the fadir seide, Thoue 
seest that Y haue! woxun eld, and Y knowe 
not the dai of my deeth. Take thinks 


« plentith sperH. Vto BpEFH. W wexid £. 
Vthe whiche 1. W Om.s. * nothing plures. Y that 
bthat ep. ¢Om.a. ‘éhis present is. © of- 
fhe seides. iamx. * thon My. 


82 


132 


thin armes*, quyuer and bowe’, and go 
forth oute; and whan thow hast with 
ahuntyng eny thing takun, make to me 
therof sowil, as thow knowe? me to wiln, 
and brynge to me* that I ete, that my 
ssoule blis to thee or I dye. The which 
whan Rebecca hadde herd, and he was 
goon a wey in to the feeld, that he ful- 
é6fille the heest of the fader, she seide to 
hir sone Jacob, I herde thi fader spekynge 
with Esau, thi brother, and seiynge to 
z7hym, Brynge to me of thin huntyng, and 
maak metis, that I ete, and Y shal blisse 
sto thee bifore the Lord or I dye. . Now 
thanne assente to my counseyls, my sone, 
yand goynge to the flok, brynge to me two 
the best kyddis, that I make of hem 
meet? to thi fader, the which he eet 
logladly ; the whiche whan thow bryngist 
yn, and he etith, he blisse to thee or than 
ithe die. To whom he answeride, Thow 
hast know that Esau my brother is a 
1zman ful of heer, and I soft; if my fader 
groop and° fele, Y drede lest he wene me 
wiln to bigile hym, and brynge on me 
ismalysoun for benysoun. To whom the 
moder, In me be, she seith, this mali- 
soun, my sone; oonli here my vois, and 
goynge forth brynge to that Y seide. 
14 He 3ede a wey, and brou3te to, and 3aue 
to his modir. She greithide meetis, as 
1sshe knewe the fader of hymn wiln’, and 
with the clothis of Esau ful good, the 
whiche anentis hyr she hadde at hoom, 
igshe clothid hym. And she dide about his 
hondis litel skynnes of kiddis, and she 
17forconeride the nakid of the nak; and 
3aue sowil, and took the looues that she 
ishadde sothun. The whiche thingis brou3t 
to, seide, Fader nyn! And he answeryde, 
19I here; who art thow, sone myn? And 
Jacob seide, Y am Esau, thi first getun. 


Ya bowe e. 


* armour B. arwe3 E. 
4 to wila a prim. 


and BDEF. 


l armes D pr.m. EK arewis rud. 
°Om. Gc. P wole eete s. 
hes. 4 fulfille s. 
cther playn c. 
fsaf it s. 
seew Ss. 


4 brynge it to me s, 
Vheest s. W his s. 


& wolde haue s. 
n him s, 


h wlappide his s. 
© these mefis s. » Jacobs. 


GENESIS. 


z knowst p. knew Bru. 


m and arewe caas FMW. an arewe caas S. arwes caas L. 
r that s. 
Xfto me BcKMNaswd. Om, Mm. 
b shal touche or drawe me to him and fele me s. 
i hondis aboute s. 


XXVII. 4—~19. 


armeres!, ‘arewe caas™, and a" bowe, and 
go out; and whanne thou hast take ony 
thing bi huntyng, make to® me a seew4 
therof, as thou knowist that Y wole?, and 
brynge’ that Y ete, and’ my soule blesse 
thee bifore that Y die. And whanne Re-5 
becca hadde herd this thing, and he hadde 
go’ in to the feeld tot fille? the comaund- 
ment’ of the’ fadir, sche seide to hir sones 
Jacob, Y herde thi fadir spekynge with 
Esau, thi brothir, and seiynge to him, 
Brynge thou ime* of thin huntyng, and 7 
make thow metis, that Y ete, and that Y 
blesse thee bifor the Lord bifor that Y 
die. Now therfor, my sone, assent to mys 
counsels, and go to the floc, and brynges9 
to me tweyne the beste kidis, that Y make 
metis of tho to thi fadir, whiche he etithY 
gladli; and that whanne thow hast brou3t 10 
in tho metis, and he hath ete, he blesse 
thee bifore that he die. To whom Jacobi 
answerde, Thou knowist that Esau my bro- 
ther is an heeri man, and Y am? smethe®; 
if my fadir ‘touchith and feelith me, Y 12 
drede lest he gesse that Y wolde scorne him, 
and lest® he brynge in cursyng on me for 
blessyng. To whoin the! modir seide, My 13 
sone, this cursyng be in me; oonly here 
thou my vois, and go, and brynge that 
that Y seide. He 3ede, and brou3te®, and 14 
j3aff to his modir. Sche made redi metis, 
as sche knewe that his fadir wolde&, and 15 
sche clothide Jacob in ful goode clothis of 
Esau, whiche sche hadde at home anentis 
hir silf. And sche ‘compasside the hondis! 16 
with litle skynnys of kiddis, and kyuerede 
the ‘nakide thingis* of! the necke; and17 
sche 3af seew™, and bitook the" loouys 
whiche sche hadde bake. And whanne1s 
these® weren brou3t in, he? seide, My fadir! 
And he answerde, Y here; who art thou, 
my sone? And Jacob seide, Y am Esau, 19 
me 


a Om. poern. > metis Boen. 


n Om. BCILN. 
* that he schulde c pr. m. that 
zOm. bp. 4 smethe 
This s. © bron3te it s. 

lhis s. ™ to him the 


8 go forth s. 
Yshal ete kK. 
¢ Om. ks. 

k nakidnes s. 


XXVIT. 20-—31. 


Y haue do to thee as thow hast co- 
maundide me; aryse, sit, and eet of myn 
20 huntyng, that thi soule blisse to me. Eft 
Ysaac to his sone, How, he seith, so 
soone fynde thow my3tist, sone myne? 
The which answeride, The wil of God 
was, that soone it shulde com to me that 
21I wolde. And Ysaac seide, Come nerre 
hider, that I towche thee, sone myn, and 
proue whethir thow be my sone Esau, or 
22noon. He com nerre to the fader; and, 
hym gropid, seide* Ysaac, The vois for- 
sothe is the vois of Jacob, but the hondis 
23 ben the hondis of Esau. And he knewe 
hym not, for the heery hondis expressiden 
the liknes of the moor. Thanne blyssynge 
241to hym, seide, Thow art my sone Esau? 
25 He answeride, I am. And he, Brynge 
forth, he seidef, to me meetis of thin hunt- 
ing, sone myn, that my soule blisse to 
thee. The which offryd, whan he hadde 
eet, also and wyyn he offride, the which 
26drunkun, seide to hym, Come nerre to 
me, and 3yue to me a cosse, sone myn. 
27He com nerre, and cossyde hym; and 
anoon that he felide the good smel of his 
clothis, blissynge to hyin seith, Loo! the 
smel of my sone as the smel of a ful 
feeld, to ‘the which the Lord blisside. 
28God 3yue to thee of the dew of heuen, 
and of® fatnes' of the erthe, plente of 
29wheet, and of wyyn, and of oyle; and 
to thee seruen puplis, and lowten thee 
lynagis; be thow the lord of thi bri- 
theren, and the sonys of thi moder be 
thei bowid bifore thee; who shal curse 
to thee, be he cursidi, and who shal blis 
to thee, with blissyngis be he fulfillid. 
30 Vaneth Ysaac had fulfilid the word, and 
31Jacob goon out, Esau com, and sothen 
meetis of the huntyng broute yn to the 
fader, seiynge, Aryse, fader myn, and eet 
of the huntyng of thi sone, that thi soule 
f seith E. 


© seyth p. 8 Om. p. 


4 bigotun s. = commaundidist cGixmNopswd. 


GENESIS. 


h the fatnes ppern. 


3 Om. Qn. 


133 


thi first gendrid4 sone. Y haue do to thee 
as thou comaundist™ to* me; rise thou', 
sitte, and ete of myn huntyng", that thi 
soule blesse me. Eft’ Ysaac seide to his 20 
sone, My sone, hou mi3tist thou fynde so 
soone? Which answerde, It was Goddis 
wille, that this* that Y wolde schulde come 
soone to me. And Isaac seide, My sone, 21 
come thou hidir, that Y touche thee, and 
that Y preue wher’ thon art” my sone Esau, 
ethir? nay. He? neizede to the® fadir; and 22 
whanne he® hadde feelid hym, Isaac? seide, 
Sotheli the vois is the vois of Jacob, but 
the hondis ben the hondis of Esau. Andes 
Isaac knew not Jacob, for the heery hondis 
expressidenf the licnesse of the more® sone. 
Therfor Isaac blesside him, and _ seide, 24 
Art thou my sone Esau? Jacob answerde, 
Yam. And Isaac seide, My sone, brynge 25 
thou to me metis of thin huntyng, that 
my soule blesse thee. Andi! whanne Isaac 
hadde ete these metis brou3t*, Jacob brou3te 
also wyn to Isaac!, and whanne this was 
drunkun, Isaac seide to him, My sone, 26 
come thou hidir, and 3yue™ to me a cos. 
Jacob neizede", and kisside hym; and anoon 27 
as Isaac feelide the odour® of hise clothis, 
he blesside him, and seide, Lo! the odour 
of my sone as the odour of a ‘feeld ful? 
which the Lord hath blessid. God 3yue28 
to thee of the dewe of heuene, and of the 
fatnesse of erthe, aboundaunce of whete, 
and of wyn, and of oile; and puplis serue 29 
thee, and lynagis worschipe thee; be thou 
lord of thi britheren4, and the sones of thi 
modir be bowid bifor thee; be he cursid™ 
that cursith’ thee, and he that  blessith 
thee, be fillid‘ with blessyngis. Vimethis 30 
Isaac hadde fillid the word, and whanne 
Jacob was gon out, Esau cam, and brou3te" 31 
in metis sodun’ of the” huntyng to the* 
fadirY, and seide, My fadir, rise thou?, aud 
ete of the huntyng of thi sone, that* thi 


Hacursid 4 pr.m. Fr. 


* thou vp ands, 4 my verry sone s. 


vand eft c. W fynde vensone s. * this thing s. Ywhether 10 sce.m.s. 2be K. ®orxELps. % andhek. 


1 Ysaacs. ¢hes. 
™ 3yue thou 1. 

q brother w. 
x hiss. 


Jacobs. ¢ his s, 
1 Isaac the wyn x. 
plentynouse feeld s. 


was bedens. ¥ hiss. y fadris E. 


f shewide s. 
2 neijede to s. 
F acursid GoorT. 
2 thon vp s. 


Seldres. » Jacobs. 1Om.s. * brou3t to him s. 

© good sauour s. __P feeld ful of Houris B pr. m. 
Seurse zr, the fillids. he brou3tes. Vas he 
® that that G. 


134 


32 blisse to me. And Ysaae seide, Who for- 
sothe art thow ? The which answeride, 
33 Y am thi first getun sone Esau. Isaac 
wexe adred in a hidows stonying, and 
more than it may be leuyd wondrynge, 
seith, Who is thanne he that now ri3t 
brou3te to me huntyng takun, and Y 
ete of al bifore that thow com, and Y 
blisside hym? and he shal be blissid. 
34 Esau, the wordis of the fader herd, roride 
with a greet crye, and stonyed seide, 
35 Also blis and to ine, fader myu. The 
which seide, Thi brothir com gilyngliche, 
36and took thi blissyng. And he ekyde to, 
Justli is the name of hym elepid Jacob; 
he forsothe hath subplauntid me loo! 
anothir sithe; the rijtis of my fyrst geting 
biforn he took a wey, and now secounde 
he hath vnder rauyshide my benysoun. 
Aud eftsonys to the fader, And whethir 
thow hast not reseruyd, he seith, to me 
37 thi blissyng ? Ysaae answeryde, Thi lord 
I haue ordeynyde him, and alle his bri- 
theren I haue vndir 3oekid to the seruyee 
of hym; with wheet, and wyne, and oyle 
I haue stablid hym; and to thee, sone 
myn, after these‘ ouer what shal Y doon ? 
38 To whom Esau seide, Whether oonlich o 
blissyng thow hast fader? And to me Y 
preie thee that thow blis; and with a 
s9greet 30wlyng he wepte. Ysaac moued, 
seide to hym, In the fatnes of the erthe, 
4oand in the dewe of heuene fro aboue shal 
be thi blissyng; thow shalt lyue in swerd, 
and to thi brother thow shalt serue, and 
tyme shal come whanne thow shalt shaak 
out, and lowse the 30k of hym of thi nollys. 
41 Than Esau evermore hatide Jaeob for the 
blissyng that the fader blisside to hym, 
and seide in his herte, The dayes of weil- 
yng of my fader shal come, and I shal 
42slee Jacob, my brother, Thes thingis 
weren tolde to Rebecca, the which send- 
ynge and clepynge hire! sone Jaeob, seide 
to hyin, Loo! Hsau, thi brother, thretith 


k this p. 


e with kK. 
m Om. kK. 

' kepte s. 
y Om. 1. 


bOm,G ¢ Om. ve. 
came Lp. & he was s. 
rauischide s. P Esau s. 
W to ine K see. nan. 


4 bigotun 1. 
1 addide to 1s. 

q his s. 
x Om. 1K. 


GENESIS. 


Soos. 
z Om. s. 


XXVIT. 32—43. 


soule blesse me’, And Isaae seide, Who32 
forsothe® art thou? Whieh answerde, Y 
am Ksau, thi firste gendrid’ sone. Isaaess 
dredde bit a greet astonying'; and he 
wondride more, than it’ mai be bileued, 
and seide, Who therfor is he which a while 
ago brou3te to me huntyng™ takun, and Y 
eet of alle thingis bifor that thou eamest '; 
and Y blesside hin? and he sehal be blessid. 
Whanne the wordis of the fadir weren 34 
herd, Esau rorid with a greet ery, and 
was* astonyed, and seide, My fadir, blesse 
thou also me. Whieh seide, Thy brother 35 
eam prudentli, and took thi blessyng. And 36 
Esau addide!, Justli his name is elepid 
Jacob, for lo™! he supplauntide me another 
tyme; bifor he took awei ‘ny firste gen- 
dride thingis®, and now the secounde tyme 
he rauyschide® priueli my blessyng. And 
eft he? seide to the? fadir, Wher thou hast 
not reserued' a’ blessyng also to me? Ysaae 37 
answeride, Y haue maad him' thi lord, and 
Y haue maad suget alle hise britheren to 
his seruage; Y haue stablisehid hin in 
whete, and" wyn, and oile; and, my sone, 
what sehal Y do to thee aftir these thingis? 
To whom Esau saide, Fadir, wher thouze 
hast oneli o blessyng? Y bisecheY that also 
thou blesse me*. And whanne Esau wepte 
with greet 3ellyng, Isaae was stirid, and 39 
seide to hym, Thi blessyng sehal be in 
the* fatnesse of erthe, and in theY dew of 
heuene fro? aboue; thou sehalt lyue bio 
swerd, and thou sehalt serve thi brothir, 
and tyme schal come whanne thou sehalt 
shake awei, and vubynde his 30k fro thi 
nollis. Therfor Esau hatide euer* Jacob 41 
for the blessyng bi which the fadir hadde 
blessid hym; and Esau seide in his herte, 
The daies of morenyng of my fadir sehulen 
eome, and Y schal sle Jacob, my brothir. 
These thingis weren teld to Rebecea, and 42 
sche sente, and elepide hir sone Jaeob, and 
seide to hym, Lo! Esau, thi brothir, ma- 
naasith to sle thee; now therfor, my sone, 43 


lhis a, 


fstonyings. €Om.s. bvenysons. icome x. 
1 my firste gotun thingis 1. myn eritage s. © hath 

tJacohs. Om.eELp.  V biseeche thee s. 
& euir more G. 


Sv 13 eS VIII. 9. 


43that he slee thee; now thanne, sone, here 
my vois, and arysyuge fle to Laban, iny 

44brother, in Aran; and thow shalt dwelle 
with hym a fewe dayes, to the tyme that 

45 the woodnes of thi brother reste, and the 
indignacioun of hym ceesse, and he for- 
jeete the thingis that thow hast doon to™ 
hym. Afterward Y shal sende and lede 
thee fro thens hydir. Whi shal Y be 

46 priued of® eithir sone in o day? And Re- 
becca seide to Ysaac, It noieth® me of ny 
lijf for the dow3trys of Heth; if Jacob 
shal taak a wijf of the lynage of this 
loond, Y nyl not lyue. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


t And so Ysaac clepide Jacob, and blisside 
hym, and comaundide hym, seiynge, Wole? 
thow not taak a wijf of the kynred of 

2Chanaan; but go, and forthpasse into 
Mesopotany of Syry, to the hows of 
Batuel, the fader of thi moder, and taak 
to thee fro thens a wijf of the dow3tris4 

3o0f Laban, thin vnkle. God forsothe Al- 
my3ti blisse to thee, and make thee growe, 
and inultiplie, that thow be into the cum- 
4panyes of puplis; and 3yue he to thee 
blissyngis of Abraham, and to thi seed 
aftir thee, that thow haue tlie loond of 
thi pilgrimage, the which he hath bihoot 
sto thi graunsire. And whan Ysaac had 
laft hym, he forthpassid com into Meso- 
potanye of Syre, to Laban, the sone of 
Batuel Siry, the brother of Rebecca, his 
emoder. Seynge forsothe Hsau that his 
fader hadde blissid to Jacob, and hadde 
sent hym into Mesopotany of Syry, that 
fro thens he shulde taak hym a wijf, and 
that aftir the blissyng he hadde co- 
maundid hym, seyynge, Thow shalt not 
taak a wijf of the dow3trys1 of Canaan ; 
zand that Jacob obeishynge to his fader 
sand moder shulde go into Syrye; and 
prouynge that his fader wolde not gladli 

9 biholde the dow3tris of Chanaan, 3ede to 

Ysmael, and took a wijf, with out hem 


GENESIS. 


135 


here thou my vois, and rise thou, and fle 
to Laban, iny brother, in¢ Aran; and thou 44 
schalt dwelle with hym a fewe daies, til 
the woodnesse of thi brother reste, and his 45 
indignacioun ceesse, and til he for3ite tho 
thingis whiche thou hast don aj3ens hym. 
Aftirward Yschal sende, and Y schal brynge 
thee fro thennus hidir. Whi schal Y be 
imaad soneles of euer eithir sone in o dai? 
And Rebecea seide to Isaac, It anoieth ine 46 
of ny lijf for the dou3tris of Heth; if Ja- 
cob takith¢ a wijf of the kynrede® of this 
lond, Y nylef lyue. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


And so Isaac clepide Jacob, and blesside 1 
hym, and comaundide to hym, and seide, 
Nyle thou take a wijf of the kyn of Ca- 
naan; but go thou, and walke forth in to 
Mesopotanye of Sirie, to the hows of Ba- 
tuel, fadir of thi modir, and take to thee 
ofS theunus a wijf of the dou3tris of La- 
ban, thin vnele. Sotheli® Almy3ti God: 
blesse! thee, and make thee to eucreesse, 
and multiplie thee, that thou be in to cum- 
pauyes* of puplis; and God 3yue to thee 
the blessyugis! of Abraham, and to thi seed 
aftir thee, that thou welde the lond of thi 
pilgrymage, which he bihi3te to thi graunt- 
sir. Aud whanne Ysaac hadde left hym®,5 
he® 3edeP forth, and cam in to Mesopo- 
tanye of Sirie, to Laban, the sone of Ba- 
tuel of Sirie, the brother of Rebecca, his 
modir. Forsothe Esau sei3 that his fadir6 
hadde blessid Jacob, and hadde sent him 
in to Mesopotanye of Sirie, that he schulde 
wedde a wijf of thennus, and that aftir 
the blessyng he comaundide to Jacob, and 
seide, Thou schalt not take a wijf of the 
dou3tris of Canaan; and that Jacob obeiede7 
to his fadir ‘and modir%, and 3ede in to 
Sirie; also Esau preuyde" that his fadirs 
bihelde not gladli the doutris of Canaan. 
And he’ 3ede to Ismael, and weddide a9 
wijf, with out these whiche he hadde bi- 


tw 


ue 


Minto BpEFW. °Om. sper prom. it. ° anoyith aperu., Pnyl poern. 4dou3tren BoEFN. 940m. b. 


e 
b thou vps. ¢intos. 
k a cumpanye G. 1 blessinge s. 
therbis. % Esau s. 


4 take CELPRs. 
m Om. E. 


e kynredis G. 
n Jacob s. 


i blessede zr. 
r preuyde 


h Om. ne. 
qa Om. G. 


& fro 1. 
P wente s. 


fwile not 1. 
© Jacob s. 


136 GENESIS. 


that he hadde byfore, Melech, the dowter 
of Ysmael, sone of Abraham, the sister 
10of Naboiot. Thanne Jacob, goon out to 
11 Bersabee, 3ede to Aran. And whan he 
was comun to a maner place, and he 
wolde rest in it after the sunne goyng 
down, took of the stonys that lyen, and 
vnderputting to his heed, slepte in the 
122same place. And he saw3 in his slepis a 
laddre stondynge vpon the erthe, and the 
hei3t of it towchynge heuene, and aungels 
forsothe of God steiynge vp and goynge 
13down bi it, and the Lord cleuynge to the 
ladder, seiynge to hym, Y am the Lord 
God of Abraham, thi fader, and God of 
Ysaac; the loond in which thow slepist 
14 Y shal 3yue to thee, and to thi seed. And 
thi seed shal be as the powdre of the 
erthe, thow shalt be sprad abrode” to the 
est, and west, and north, and sowth; and 
alle lynagis of the erthe shulen be blissid 
13in thee aud this seed. And Y shal be thi 
keper, whidir euer thow gost; and Y shal 
brynge the a3eyn into this loond, ne Y shal 
not leeue forto Y‘ fulfille alle the thingis 
isthat Y seide. And whan Jacob was 
wakun of the sleep, seide, Forsothe the 
Lord is in this place, and Y wiste not. 
17 And dredynge seide, Howe feerful is this 
place! Here is nother" but the hows of 
18 God, and the 3aat of heuene. Arysynge 
thanne eerly, took the stoon, the which he 
hadde vnderput to his heed, and areryde 
into a signe of worship, heeldynge oyle 
igaboue. And he clepide the name of the 
cyte Bethel, that bifornhoond was clepid 
20 Luza. And he avowide a vowe, seiynge, 
If God were with me, and kepide me in 
the weye bi which Y goo, and 3yue me 
looues to etun, and clooth to be elothid, 
21 and’ shal be turned ajen welsumly to the 
hows of my fader, the Lord shal be to 
22me into God. And this stoon, that I 
haue areryde into a signe of worship, 


¥o brood p. of brode z. §$ in thi F& see.m. 

t in to s. u in tos. Vv putte s. 
2 fastede G. neizides. 4 Om. G. 
f fulfilles. & haue seides. » Om. s. 
f.orw.s. Knys¥. | reiside it s. 
mark Mm. signe ether title c. s. or t. E. 8. or tokne s. 
toGx pr.m. Tintos. §toknes. 


t Om. ov. 


w slepis 4 pr. m. ef plures. his slepis s. 
b to the north s. 

i worschipful, that is, ferdful caxax. ferdful m. f. that is w. BIN. 
m title ether sigue BGIKNXd. t. either as. Q. t. or S. LY. t. cither a 
0 helde out s. 


XXVIII. 10—22. 


fore, Melech, the dou3ter of Ismael, sone 
of Abraham, the sistir of Nabaioth. Ther- 10 
for Jacob 3ede out of Bersabee, and 3ede 
tot Avan. And whanne he hadde come to" 1 
sum place, and wolde reste ther inne aftir 
the goynge doun of the sunne, he took of 
the stoonus that laien ther, and he put- 
tide’ vndur his heed, and slepte in the 
same place. And he sei3e in sleep” a lad-12 
dir stondynge on the erthe, and the cop 
ther of touchinge heuene; and he sei3 
Goddis aungels stiynge vpY and goynge 
doun ther bi, and the Lord fastned’ to the 13 
laddir, seiynge to hym, Y am the Lord God 
of Abraham, thi fadir, and God of Isaac; Y 
schal 3yue to thee and to thi seed the lond in 
which thou slepist. And thi seed schal be 14 
as the dust of erthe, thou schalt be alargid 
to the eest, and west, and? north”, and 
south; and alle lynagis® of erthe schulen 
be blessid in thee and in thi seed. And Y1s 
schal be thi kepere, whidur euer thou 
schalt go; and Y schal lede thee a3en in to 
this lond, and Y schal not leeue’ no® but Y 
schal filf alle thingis whiche Y seideS. And 16 
whanne Jacob hadde wakyd of sleep, he 
seide, Verili the Lord is in this place, and 
Y wiste not. And" he seide dredynge, !7 
Hou worschipfuli is this place! Here is‘ 
noon other thing no but the hows of God, 
and the 3ate of heuene. Therfor Jacob 8 
roos eerli, and took the stoon which he 
hadde put vndur his heed, and rejside! in 
to a title", and helde® oile aboue. And he !9 
clepide the name of that citee Bethel, 
which was clepid Lusa bifore. Also he® 20 
anowide a vow, and seide, If God is with 
me, and kepith me in the weie in which 
Y go, and 3yueth to me looues to ete, and 
clothis to be clothid?, and Y turne ajen in421 
prosperite to" the hows of my fadir, the 
Lord schal be in to God to me. And this 22 
stoon, which Y reiside in to a title’, schal be 
clepid the hows of God, and Y schal offre 


U no nother BEF. noon other pH. VID. 


y Om. plures. 


¢ the lynagis s. 4 leeue thee xk. © Om. ELP. 


© Jacobs. P clothid with Ksx. 4 in 


Searx i—13. 


shal be clepid the hows of God; and of 
alle thingis that thow shalt 3yue to me Y 
shal offer dymes to thee. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 Jacob thanne forth goon, cam into the 
zest loond. And he saw3 a pit in the feeld, 
and thre flockis of sheep liggynge bisidis 
it; for of it beestis weren wateryd, and 
the mouth of it was closid with a greet 
3stoon. And the maner was, that alle the 
sheep gaderyd togidir, men shulden turne 
vp the stoon, and, the flockis fulfillid, 
eftsones thei shulden putte vpon the 
4mouth of the pit. And he seide to the 
sheepherdis, Bretheren, whens be 3e? The 
swhiche answeriden, Of Aran. _ Whom 
askynge, Whethir, he seide, knowe 3e La- 
ban, the sone of Nachor? Thei seiden, 
6We han knowun. Whethir is he, he 
seith, hool? Thei seiden, He farith wel; 
and loo! Rachel, the dow3ter of hym, com 
7with his flok. And Jacob seyde, Aboue 
there is 3it myche of the day, ne” tyme 
is that flockys ben ladde ajen to the 
fooldis; 3yueth bifore drynke to the 
sheep, and so lede 3e hem a3en to the pas- 
sture. The whiche answeryden, We mowen 
not, to thé tyme that alle beestis ben ga- 
deryd togider, and we mouen awey the 
stoon fro the mowth of the pit, that we 
g9watren the flok*. 3it thei speken, and 
loo! Rachel com with the sheep of-hir 
ifader; for she fedde the flok. Whom 
whanne Jacob hadde seen, and wiste hir 
his vnkil dow3ter, and the sheep of Laban 
his vnkle, he mouede awey the stoon with 
which the pit was closid; and the flok 
watered, he kisside hir, and with areryd 
12 voys she wepte. And he shewide to hir 
that he was the brother of hir fader, and 
the sone of Rebecca; and she hiynge tolde 
isto hir fader. The which whan he hadde 
herd, Jacob, his sister sone, comen, 3ede 
a3en metynge with hyim, and clippynge 


GENESIS. 


137 


tithis to theet of alle thingis whiche thou 
schalt 3yue to me. 


CAP. XXIX. 


Therfor Jacob passide forth, and cam int 
to the eest lond; and sei3" a pit in the2 
feeld, and thre flockis of scheep restynge 
bisidis it’, for whi scheep weren watrid 
therof, and the mouth therof was closid 
with a greet stoon. And the custom wass 
that” whanne alle scheep* weren gaderid 
togidere, thei schulden turne awei the stoon, 
and whanne the flockis weren fillidY thei 
schulden put it? eft on* the mouth of the 
pit. And Jacob seide to the scheepherdis, 4 
Brithren, of whennus ben 3e? Whiche 
answeriden, Of Aran. And he axide hems 
and scide, Wher 3e knowen Laban, the 
sone of Nachor? Thei seiden, We knowen?. 
Jacob seide, Is he hool? Thei seiden, Hes 
is in good staat; aud lo! Rachel, his dou3- 
tir, cometh with his flok. And Jacob seide,7 
3it myche of the dai is to come, and it is 
not tyme that the flockis be led ajen to 
the fooldis; sotheli 3yue 3e drynk to the 
scheep, and so lede 3e hem ajen to mete. 
Whiche* answeriden, We moun not til alles 
scheep* be gederid to gidere, and til we re- 
mouen the stoon fro the mouth of the pit 
to watir the flockis. 3it thei spaken, ands 
lo! Rachel cam with the® scheep of hir 
fadir. And whanne Jacob sei3 hir, and 10 
knewe the dou3tir of his modris brothir, 
and the scheep of Laban his vnele, he re- 
meuyde the stoon with which the pit was 
closid; and whanne the flok was watrid,1 
hef kisside hirf, and he" wepte with ‘vois 
reisid’, And he* schewide to hir that he ie 
was the brothir of hir fadir, and the sone 
of Rebecca; and sche hastide, and telde 
to hir fadir. And whanne he hadde herd, 13 
that Jacob, the sone of his sistir, cam, he 
ran a3ens hym, and_ he! biclippide Jacob 
and kisside hym, and ledde™ in to his 


him, and fallynge in cossis, ladde hym hows. Forsothe whanne the cansis of the 
Wnopd. * flocke3 £. 
tthe Lords. Uhesci3s. vYOm.c. WOm.c. *the scheeps. Ywatrids. %Om.a 4 ing. 


b knowen him s. 


vois s. k Om. F. Jacobs. |! Laban s. 


¢ The whichet. ‘the scheep s. ¢ Om. plures. f Jacobs. 8 Rachels. shes. 
m ledde him s. 


I hie 


15 


138 


into his hows. Forsothe the causis herd 
110f his weye, answeryde, My boon thow 
art, and my fleish. And after that the 
isdayes of aY moneth weren fulfillid, he 
seide to hym, Whether for thow art my 
brother, in veyn thow shalt serue to me? 
16Sey what of mede thow shalt take. He 
hadde forsothe two dow3trys?, name of 
the more Lya, the lesse forsothe was 
17clepid Rachel ; but Lya was with blerid 
eyen*, Rachel fayr in face, and with 
isseemly biholdynge. Whom louynge Ja- 
cob, seide, I shal serue to thee for Rachel, 
19 thi lasse dow3ter, seuen 3eer. Laban an- 
sweryde, Betir is that Y 3yue hir to thee 
than to another man, dwelle with me. 
20 Thanne Jacob serued for Rachel seuen 
3eer, and thei semeden to hym fewe dayes 
21for greetnes of loue. And he seide to 
Laban, 3yf to me my wiyf, for the tyme 
is fulfillid that Y shulde goo yn to hir. 
22The which, manye cumpanyes of his 
frendis clepid to the feest, made the bry- 
23 dalis, and at euen brou3te yn to hym Lya, 
21his dow3ter, 3yuynge an handmayden to 
the dow3ter, Zelpha bi name. To whom 
whan after the maner Jacob was goon yn, 
25the morutide doon, saw3 Lya, and seide 
to his wyues fader, What is that thow 
woldist doon ? whether for Rachel Y ser- 
uede not to thee? whi vndurputtist thow 
26 Lya to me? Laban answeride, It is not 
of custom in oure place, that the lesse bi- 
27 fore we taken to sposeyls; fulfil the wike 
of dayes of this cowple, and this forsothe 
I shal 3yue to thee for the werk that thow 
2s art to serue to me, senen other 3eris. He 
assentide gladli; and the wike ouerpassid, 
29he took Rachel to wiyf; to whom the fa- 
3odir jaune a seruaunt, Balam. And at the 
laste he vside the desirid sposeyls, put 
bifore to the rather the loue of hir that 
com after, seruynge anentis hym seuen 
31 othere 3erys>. The Lord forsothe seynge 


Yor. 2 dou3tren BDEFH. 


© fulfillid s, P Jacob s. 
wlouely ELP. YV3ungers. W with s. 
© sunger dousters. 4 fulfilles. © thi ca. 
1hirs. ™an hondmaydes. % Jacob s. 
t Om. s. 


napa 


GENESIS. 


4 eyjes BDEFH, 


4 wherefore EG. 
x fulfillid s. 
f wedding s. 
© sette s. 


XXX. 14—31. 


iurney weren herd, Laban answeride, Thou 14 
art my boon and my fleisch. And aftir 
that the daies of o" moneth weren fillid®, 
Laban seide to him?,‘Whethir for? thous 
art my brothir, thou schalt serue me frely? 
seie thou what mede thou schalt take. For-16 
sothe Laban hadde twei dou3tris, the name 
of the more’ was Lya, sotheli the lesse* 
was clepid Rachel; but Lya was blere17 
ized, Rachelt was of fair face, and semeli® 
in si3t. And Jacob louede Rachel, and 1s 
seide, Y schal sertte thee seuene jeer for 
Rachel thi lesseY dou3tir. Laban an-19 
sweride, It is betere that Y 3yue hir to 
thee than to anothir man; dwelle thou at” 
me. Therfor Jacob seruyde seuene 3eer 20 
for Rachel; and the daies semyden fewe 
to hym for the greetnesse of loue. And he21 
seide to Laban, 3yue thou my wijf to me, 
for the tyme is fillid* that Y entre to hir. 
And whanne many cumpenyes of freendis 22 
weren clepid to the feeste, he made wed- 
dyngis, and in the euentid Laban brou3te 23 
inY to hym’ Lya his dou3tir, and 3af an 24 
handmaide, Selfa bi name, to the* dou3ter. 
And whanne Jacob hadde entrid to hir bi 
custom, whanne the morewtid was maad, 
he sei3 Lya, and seide® to his wyues fadir, 25 
What is it that thou woldist do? wher Y 
seruede not thee for Rachel? whi hast 
thou disseyued met? Laban answerde, It 26 
is not custom in oure place that we 3yue 
first the ‘lesse dou3tris® to weddyngis; fille’ 27 
thou the wouke of daies of this® couplyng*, 
and Y schal 3yue to thee also this Rachel, 
for® the werk in which thou schalt serne 
me bi" othere seuene 3eer. Jacob assentide! 28 
to the couenaunt, and whanne the wouke 
was passid, he* weddide Rachel, to whom 29 
the! fadir hadde 3oue Bala seruauntesse™. 
And at the laste he" vside the weddyngis 30 
desirid, and settide® the loue? of the ‘wijf 
suynge! bifore the former’; and he’ seruede 
att Laban seuene othere jeer. Forsotlie the 31 


b sere BDEFH. 


reldres. 8 3unger s. t and Rachel ce. 
yOm. sn. #%Jacobs. @hiss. » he seides. 
Sands. Om. ca. ianswerdes. k Jacobs. 


Psone k. (later wijfs. ‘firsts. §& Jacobs. 


+ disseyuede 
me, this is the 
veri lettre, as 
Lire seith here, 
but comyn La- 
tyn bokis han 
thus, Whi hast 
thou priuyly 
put Lya to me, 
but this is fals 
lettre, as Lire 
se.th bere.cGox. 


EMIX. 52——XXX. 9. GENESIS. 139 


and = tthatis, louede 
hir lesse than 


that he dispiside Lya, opnyde the wombe Lord sei3 that he" dispiside Lyat, 


320f hir, hir sister bareyne dwellynge. The 
which a conseyued sone gat, and clepide 
the name of hym Ruben, seiynge, The 
Lord hath sey my mekenes, now my man 

33shal loue me. And eftsonys she consey- 
uede, and bare a sone, and seide, For the 
Lord hath seen me ben had to dispiyt, 
hath 3yuun also this to me; and she cle- 

34 pide the name of hym Symyon. And the 
thridde tyme she conseyuede, and gat an- 
other sone, and seide, Now forsothe myn 
husboond shal be cowplid to me, ther- 
thur3 that I bere to hym thre sonys; and 
therfor she clepide the name of hym 

35 Leuy. The ferth tyme she conseyuede, 
and bare a sone, and seith, Now I shal 
knowlech to the Lord; and for that she 
clepide the name of him Juda; and she 
ceesside to bere chyld. 


(OOP Gee ONG 


1 Seynge forsothe Rachel that she was 
withouten fruyt of wombe, enuyede to 
the sistir, and seide to the husboond, 3Byf 

2to me free childryn, ellis Y shal dye. To 
whom wrooth Jacob answeride, Whether 
for a God Y am, the which haue priuede 

3thee the fruyt of thi wombe? And she, 
I haue, she seide, a seruaunt, Balam, goo 
yn to hir, that she bere vpon my kneen, 
4and I haue of hiv sones. And she 3aue 
sto hym Balam into maryage; the which, 
the man goon yn to hir, conseyuede, and 
‘ cbare a sone. And Rachel seide, The Lord 
hath shewid me, and he hath herd my 
vois, 3yuynge to me a sone; and therfor 
7she clepide the name of hym Dan. And 
eftsones Bala conseiuinge, bare another, 
sfor the which seide Rachel, The Lord 
hath comparisownd me with my sister, 
and J haue recouered ; and she clepide 
ohym Neptalym. Lya felynge that she 
had laft for to bere children, she took 
to the husboond Zelpha, hir handmayden. 


- openyde’ hir wombe” while the* sistir 


dwellide bareyn. And Lia childide a sone 32 
conseyued, and clepideY his name Ruben, 
and seide, The Lord sei3? my mekenesse ; 
now myn hosebonde schal loue me. And33 
eft sche conseyuede, ‘and childide* a sone, 
and seide, For the Lord sei3 that Y was 
dispisid, he 3af also this sone to me; and 
sche clepide his name Symeon. And sche 34 
conseyuede the thridde tyme, and childide 
anothir sone, and she seide also, Now myn 
hosebonde schal be couplid to me, for Y 
childide> thre sones to him; and therfor® 
sche clepide his name Leuy. The fourthie 35 
tyme sche conseyuede, and childide a sone, 
and seide, Now I schal knouleche to the 
Lord; and herfor she clepide his name 
Judas; and ceesside! to childe. 


CAP. XXX. 


Forsothe Rachel sei3, that sche® was1 
vnfruytful, and haddef enuyet to the® sis- 
ter, and seide to hir hosebonde, 3yue thou 
fre children to me, ellis Y schal die. To2 
whom Jacob was wrooth, and answerde, 
Wher Y am for God, which haue priucd 
thee fro the fruyt of thi wombe? Ands 
sche seide, Y haue ‘a seruauntesse" Bala, 
entre thou to hir that she childe on my 
knees, and that Y haue sones of hir. Anda 
sche 3af to hym Bala in to matrimony ; 
and whanne the! hosebonde hadde* entrids 
to hir, sche conseyuede, and childide a 
sone. Aud Rachel seide, the Lord demede!c 
to me, and herde™ my preier, and 3af a 
sone to me; and therfor sche clepide his 
name Dan. And eft Bala conseyuede, and7 
childide anothir sone, for whom Rachiels 
seide, The Lord hath maad" me lijk to° 
my sistir, and Y wexide strong; and sche 
clepide hym Neptalym. Lya feelide thata 
sche ceesside to bere child, and sche 3af 
Selfa, hirP handmayde, to the’ hosebonde. 


« Jacob. s. he openyde s. W hir pryuy wombe c pr.m. Lya wombe s. * hers. Y she clepide s. 
z hath seen s. ®Om.e. > haue childids. ¢Om.c. 4sheceesside xs. ©¢hirselfs, f she hadde s. 
Shire ks. ban handmaides. ‘hirs. * Om. plures. lath demedes. ™hathherdes. ™ com- 
paride c pr.m. makidr. © Om. plures. Pthe ag. 4 hirs. 


TQ 


Rachel. s. 


t enuye, that 
is, sorewide of 
hir owne de- 
faute in com- 
parisoun of hir 
sister, that 
hadde no sich 
defaute. Lire 
here. BN, 


140 


10 The which aftir conseyuynge® bryngynge 
11 forth a child, seide, Gracyously; and ther- 
for she clepide the name of hym Gad. 
tj And Zelpha bare anothir, and Lya seide, 
That for my blisfulnes; forsothe alle 
wymmen shulen sey me blisful; therfor 
she clepide hym Aser. And Ruben goon 
out in tyme of wheet heruest into the 
feeld, fonde mandraggis, that he brou3te 
to Lya, the moder. And Rachel seide, 
3yue me parte of the mandraggis of thi 
issone. She answeride, Ne semith it to 
thee a litil, that thow hast bifore takun 
the husbond to me, but also the man- 
draggis of my sone thow taak? And 
she, Slep he with thee this ny3t for the 
isinandraggis of thi sone. And to Jacob 
comynge ajen at euen fro the feeld Lya 
was goon out into the azencomyng of 
hym, and seith, To me, she seith, thow 
shalt come yn, for thur3 mede I haue 
hyryde thee for the mandraggis of my 
17sone. He slepte with hir that ny3t; and 
God herde the preicrs of hir, and she 
isconseyuede, and bare the fift sone; and 
seith, God hath jeuun mede to me, for I 
haue 3ouun myn handemaiden to my 
man; and she clepide the name of hym 
19 Ysachar. Eftsonys Lya conseyuynge bare 
20 the sixte sone, and seith, The Lord hath 
enrychide me with a good dower; also 
this while with me shal be myn hus- 
boond, therthur3 that Yhaue getun to hymn 
sixe sones; and therfor she clepide the 
2iname of hym Zabulon. After whom she 
22 bare a dow3ter, Dyne® bi name. And the 
Lord, recordid of Rachel, herde hir, and 
230penyde the wombe of hir. Which con- 
seyuede, and bare a sone, seiynge, God 
24hath doon awey my reprofe; aud she 
clepide the name of hym Joseph, seiynge, 
25 The Lord adde to me ancther sone. Jo- 
seph forsothe born, Jacob seide to his 
wyues fader, Lat me that Y go a3en into 
26my cuntre, and to my loond. 3yue to me 


GENESIS. 


XXX. 10—26. 


And whanne Selfa aftir conseyuyng’ chil- 10 
dide a sone, Lya seide, Blessidly ; and 
therfor sche clepide his name Gad. Also !2 
Selfa childide anothir sone, and Lia seide, 13 
This is for my blis, for alle wymmen 
schulen seie me blessid; therfor sche 
clepide hym Aser. Forsothe Ruben 3ede 14 
out in to the fecld in the tyme of wheete 
heruest, and foond’ mandragis, whiche he 
brou3te to Lya, his modir. And Rachel 
seide, 3yue thou to me a‘ part of the" 
mandragis of thi sone. Lya answeride, 15 
Whether it semeth™ litil to thee, that thou 
hast rauyschid the’ hosebonde fro me, no 
but thou take also the mandragis of my 
sone? Rachel seide, The hoseboude sleepe 
with thee in* this ny3t for the mandragis 
of thi sone. And whanne Jacob cam ajen is 
fro theY feeld at euentid?, Lya 3ede ont in 
to his comyng*, and seide, Thou shalt entre 
to me, for Y haue hired thee with hire for 
the mandragis of my sone. He? slepte 
with hir® in that ny3t; and-God herde17 
hir preiers, and sche conseyuede, and 
childide the fyuethe sone; and seide, God 1s 
jaf meede to me, for Y 3af myn hand- 
mayde to myn hosebond ; and sche cle- 
pide his name Isacar. Eft Lia con-19 
seyuede, and childide the sixte sone, and 20 
seide, The Lord hath maad me riche with 
a good dower, also in this tyme myn hose- 
bonde schal be with me, for Y childidef 
sixe sones to hym; and therfore sche 
clepide his name Sabulon. Aftir whom 2i 
sche childide a dou3ter, Dyna bi name. 
Also the Lord hadde mynde on Rachel, 22 
and herde! hir, and openyde hir wombet. 
And sche conseyuede, and childide a sone, 23 
and seide, God hath take awey my schen- 
sehipe ; and sche clepid his name Joseph, 24 
and seide, The Lord 3yue to me another 
sone. Sotheli whanne Joseph was borun, 25 
Jacob seide to his wyues fadir, Delyuere 
thou me, that Y turne ajen in to my cun- 
trey and to my lond. 3yue! thou to meas ° 


© conceyued £ prm. 4 Didyn a. 
T the conceyuynge s. She foonds. tOm.1. Uthis, ™ semen. Ymys. Wthat thour. *Om.«. 
yOm.«. %the euentids. @metynges. >Jacobs. ¢Lyas. 4 hathjouens. ¢Om.5.  f gen- 
dride pleres. haue gendrid s. & Lya s. ihe herdes. * pryuy wombec pr.m. | And 3yue s. 


XXX. 27-—37. 


wyues, and my free children, for the 
whiche I haue seruede thee, that I goo; 
thow forsothe hast knowe the sernyse 
27 that I haue seruyde to thee. Laban seide 
to him, Shal I fynde grace in thi si3t, 
thur3 experyens Y haue lernyd for God 
28hath blissid to me for thee; ordeyn thi 
29mede that Y 3yue to thee. And he an- 
sweryde, Thou hast knowe what maner 
~'Y haue seruede to thee, and thi pos- 
sessioun how myche was in myn hondis ; 
30a litil thow haddist bifore that I com to 
thee, and now thow art maad ryche, and 
God hath blissid to thee at myn yncom- 
yng; thanne it is ri3tful that sumtyme 
31also Y puruey to myn hows. And Laban 
seide, What shal Y 3yue to thee? And 
he seith, Y wole nothing, but if thow 
dost® that I aske, eft I shal feede and 
3zkepe thi beestis. Turne abowt alle thi 
flockis, and seuer‘ alle thi speckid sheep, 
and with speckyd flese, and what euere 
3olow, and speckid, and dyuerse colourid 
were, as wel in sheep as in geyt, shal be 
33my mede. And my ri3twisnes shal an- 
swere to morwe, whan tyme of plesaunce 
shal come bifore thee; and alle that 
weren not dyuerse, and speckid*, and 
3alow, as wel in sheep as in geyt, of 
31theft thou shalt vndirnym me. And La- 
ban seide, Agreede Y haue that thow 
3saskist. And he seuerde" that day the 
she geyt, and the sheep, and the hye3 
geyt, and the wetheres, dyuerse and 
spotti, And al the flok of o colour, that 
is, of whyet or* of blak flese, he toke in 
36the hoond of his sones; and putte a 
space of thre daies weye bitwix hein and 
his! dow3tir husboond, the whiche fedden 
37 the tother flockis of hym. Thanne Jacob 
takynge green popil 3erdis, and of alman- 
ders, and of planes, a parti vnryendide 


e dist BDEFH. f serue A. 


Vhir ar. 

mmyfres. "haueseruedes. © Jacobs. 
thaue serued 5. "fors. VY that thou x. 
® fleeces s. > of dunn hew s. 
o coloure c pr.m. ©Om. EKLPd. that msw. 
6 thingis that c pr.m.F. » dunned s, 


schulen F sup.ras. K. * thefte that is, 3if eny siche be with me, founden. s. 
P sette s. 


tid; and puttide in the hondis c pr.m. © in tos. 


dides. trindes Gc. ¥% hem ns. 


GENESIS. 


& specky £. specke F pr.m. 


P hath blessid s. 
wdoo Ln. * go aboute s. Y¥ dyuerse colourd s. 
© dyuerse of colour s. 
f mede and al that schal be of o colour schal be thyn c prim. 
i be foundun at me thou schalt c. prim. thou shalt plures. thei 


141 


my wyues and fre™ children for whiche Y 
seruede" thee, that Y go; forsothe thou 
knowist the seruyce bi which Y seruede” 
thee. Laban seide to hym®, Fynde Y 27 
grace in thi si3t, Y haue lerned bi expe- 
rience that God blessideP me for thee; 
ordeyne thou thel meede which" Y schal 2s 
3yue to thee. And he* answeride, Thou 29 
woost hou Y seruedet thee, and hou greet 
thi possessioun was in myn hondis; thouso 
haddist litil bifore that Y cam to thee, and 
now thou art maad riche, and the Lord 
blesside thee at myn entryng; therfor it 
is iust that Y purueye sum tyme also to" 
myn hows. And Laban seide, What schal31 
Y 3yue to thee? And Jacob seide, Y wole 


no thing{ but if thou" doist’ that that Yt x0 tyne. 


axe, eft Y schal fede and kepe thi scheep. 
Cumpasse thou* alle thi flockis, and de-32 
parte thou alle diuerseY scheep and of 
spottid? flees*, and what euer thing schal 
be dun, and spottid, and dyuerse®, as wel 
in scheep as in geet’, it® schal be my 
medef, And my rijtfulnesse schal answere 33 
to me to morewe, whanne the tyme of 
couenaunt schal come bifor thee; and alle 
that® ben not dyuerse and spottid and 
dunne, as well in sheep as in geet, schulen! 
repreue me of theftek. And Laban seide, ss 
Y haue acceptable that that thou axist. 
And he! departide in that dai the™ geet, ss 
and scheep, geet buckis, and rammes, dy- 
uerse aud spottid®. Sothely he bitook al 
the flok of o coloure, that is, of white and 
of blak flees in° the hond of hise sones ; 
and he settideP the space of weie of thre 3s 
daies bitwixe hise sones and the hose- 
bonde of hise dou3tris, that fedde othere?? 
flockis' of hym4. Therfor Jacob took greene 37 
3erdis of popeleris, and of* almoundis, and 
of planes, and in parti dide’ awei the 
rynde' of tho", and whanne the ryndis 


hseruede 4. isplotty ez. © and gprri. 


rwhats. § Jacobs. 
2 the spottid 1. 
4 geet that schal come forth of scheep and geet of 


4 thi RLP. 


I Laban s. 
q Om. s. 


mQm.s. ®spot- 


pp his other s, rOm. Em. $ he 


142 


hem; and riendis™ drawun awey; in 
thilke that weren pilde semede whytnes, 
thilke forsothe that weren hool dwelten 
stil green, and so in this maner was 
38maad of" dyuerse colour. And he putte 
hem in the water trowes, where the wa- 
tyr was held ont, that whanne the flockis 
weren comen to drynke, bifore the eyen 
thei shulden han the jerdis, and in the 
398i3t of hem thei shulden conseyne. And 
so it was doon that in that heet of goynge 
togidere the sheep shulden biholde the 


j3erdis, and beere spotty, and speckid,. 


4oand spreyned with dyuers colour. And 
Jacob dyuydide the flok, and putte the 
jerdis in the watyr trowis, bifore the 
eyen of the rammys; forsothe alle the 
whyte and the blak weren of Laban, the 
tothere forsothe of Jacob, seueryd bitwix 
41hem silf the flockis. Thanne whanne the 
first tyme the sheep weren steyed vp, 
Jacob putte the jerdis in the trowis of 
watrys, biforn the eyen of rammys and 
of sheep, that in the si3t of hem thei 
42shulden conseyue. Whanne forsothe the 
laat comyng togidere of beestis weren, 
and the last conceyuyng tyme, he putte 
not hem. And thilke that weren of the™ 
later tyme ben maad of Laban, and 
43 thilke of the fyrst tyme of Jacob. And 
the man is maad ryche wonder myclie, 
and he hadde manye flockis, handmayd- 
enys, and seruauntis, camels, and assis. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 After that he herde the wordis of the 
sonys of Laban, seiynge, Jacob hath takun 
alle that weren of oure fader, and of the 

2faculte of hym richid is maad noble. And 
he took liede to the face of Laban, that it 
was not towards hym as 3istirday and the 

3thrid day hens, moost the Lord seiynge 
to hym, Turne ajen into the loond of thi 
fadrys, and° to thi kynred, and Y shal be 

4 with thee. And he sente, and clepide Ra- 


™ the ryndis BDEFH. 


v drawun awei ether shauede K. 
schulden s. > Om. plures. 
Balle the s. h putte ms. 
lynge or gendringe s. 


0 conceyuyngus S, 
8 Jacobs. t Om. pen, 


u hondmaydens plures. 


GENESIS. 


Da BDEFH. 


W coloure of sheep and geet s. 
¢ the riding x. riding or gendringe s. 
i water trou3is s. trouzis of watris plures. 
° putte s. 
V,mani seruauntis L. men seru. & 


Sn 78 alee 


weren ‘drawun awei’, whitnesse apperide 

in these that weren maad bare; sothely 

tho that weren hoole dwelliden grene, and 

bi this maner the coloure” was maad dy- 

uerse. And Jacob puttide* tho’ 3erdis in3s 

the trowis, where the watir was held out, 

that whanne the flockis schulden come to 

drynke, thei schulden haue the 3erdis bi- 

for the’ izen, and schulden* conseyue in 

the? sizt of the 3erdis. And it was doon3e 

that in thilke heete of riding® the sheep 

schulde biholde the? 3erdis, and that thei 

schulden brynge forth spotti® beestis, and 

dyuerse, and bispreynt with dyuerse co- 

lowr. And Jacob departide{ the floc, and 40 + Me foc, that 
puttide® the 3erdis in the trowis bifor the eee 
izen of the rammys. Sotheli alle the white 

and blake weren Labans; sotheli the® othere 
weren Jacobis; for the flockis weren de- 
partid bytwixe hem silf. Therfor whanne 41 
the scheep weren ridun in the firste tyme, 
Jacob puttide" the 3erdis in the ‘troujis of 
watir! bifor the i3en of rammys and of 
scheep*, that thei schulden conseyne in 
the sij3t of tho! 3erdis. Forsothe whanne 42 
the late medlyng™ and the laste consey- 
uyng" weren, Jacob puttide® not tho 3erdis ; 
and tho that weren late?, weren maad La- 
bans, and tho that weren of the4 firste 
tyme’ weren Jacobis. And he’ was maad43 
fult riche, and hadde many flockis, hand- 
maydis", and seruauntis’, camels, and 
assis. 


the ewes til to 
the tyme of 
wateryng. BCG 
NOX. 


CAP. XXXI. 


Aftir that Jacob herde the wordis oft 
the sones of Laban, that seiden, Jacob 
hath take awei alle thingis that weren 
oure fadris, and of his catel Jacob is maad 
riche, and noble. Also Jacob perseyuede2 
the face of Laban, that it was not ajens 
hym as 3istirdai, and the thridde dai 
agoon, moost for the Lord seide to hym‘,3 
Turne ajen into the lond of thi fadris, and 
to thi generacioun, and Y shal be with 


on Om. £. ° Om. BDEFH. 

Xputtes. Ythex. Zhers. 4 thei 
tho sw. ¢spottids. f putte ms. 
k ewe scheep s. 1the 1x. ™ med- 
P late gendrids. 9Om.G@, tyme gendrid s. 
w Jacob s. 


XXXI, 5—18. 


chel and Lya into the feeld, where he 
sfedde the flockis®, and he seide to hem, 
Y se the face of 3oure fader, that it is not 
toward ime as 3istirday aud the thridde 
day hens; God forsothe of my fader was 
ewith me. And 3e han knowun that with 
alle my strengthis Y haue seruyd to 3oure 
7fader; but and 3oure fader hath comen 
aboute me, and chaungide my mede ten 
sithis; and neuerthelater God hath not 
letun hym that he shulde anoye to me. 
8If otherwhile he seide, The dyuers co- 
lourid4 shulen be thi medis, alle the sheep 
beren conseyuyng of dyuers colours; 
whanne forsothe a3enward he seith, Alle 
the whyet thow shalt taak for thi mede, 
galle the flockis beren whyet; and God 
hath taak the substaunce of 3oure fader, 
loand 3euen to me. Forsothe bifore that 
the tyme of conseyuyng of sheep com, Y 
henede vp myn eyen, and saw3 in sleep 
the’ malis steilyng up’ vpon femalis, varye, 
ll and spotti', and of dyuers colours. And 
the aungel of the Lord seide to me in 
slepe, Jacob! and I answeride, Y am ny3. 
12 The which seith, Rere up thin eyen, and 
se alle the malis steiyng up vpon the fe- 
malis, varye, and sprynklid, and spottid ; 
forsothe Y haue seen alle thingis that 
13 Laban hath doon to thee; Y am God of 
Bethel, where thow anoyntidist the stoon, 
and thow vowedist" auowe’ to me. Now 
thanne aryse, and goo out fro this loond, 
turnynge a3en into the loond of thi birth. 
14 And Rachel and Lya answeryden, Whe- 
ther han we eny thing of residewe in 
faculteis and erytage of the hows of oure 
1sfader ? Whether as aliens hath he not 
holdun vs, and soold, and hath etun oure 
ispryis? But God hath takun the richessis 
of oure fader, and 3euun hem to vs, and 
to oure sonys; wherfor alle thingis that 
17God comaundith to thee, do. Forsothe 
Jacob aroos, and the fre children and his 
18 Wyues put vpon camels”, 3ede awey; and 


GENESIS. 


143 


thee. He sente, and clepide Rachel, and + 
Lya, in to the feeld, where he kepte flockis, 
and he seide to hem, Y se the face* of 5 
joure fadir, that it** is not ajens me as 
‘zisterdai and the thridde dai agoonY; but 
God of my fadir was with me. And 3e6 
witen that with alle my strengthis Y ser- 
uede” 30ure fadir; but and 3oure fadir dis-7 
seyuyde® me, and chaungide my meede ten 
sithis; and netheles God suffride> not hym 
to anoye me. If he seide ony tyme, Dy-s 
uerse colourid sheep schulen be thi medis*®, 
alle sheep’ brou3ten forth dyuerse co- 
lourid® lambren; forsothe whanne hef seide 
ajenward, Thou shalte take alle white? for 
mede®, alle thei flockis brou3ten forth white 
beestis; and God took awey the substaunce 9 
of joure fadir, and 3af* to me. For aftir 10 
that the tyme of conseyuyng of sheep cam, 
Y reiside myn ijen, and sei;! in sleep malis 
dyuerse, and spotti, and of dyuerse co- 
louris, stiynge on™ femalis. And the aun-11 
gel of the Lord seide to me in sleep, Jacob! 
and Y answeride, Y am redy". Which? 12 
seide, Reise thin ijen, and se alle malis 
dyuerse, byspreynt, and? spotti, stiynge 
on’ femalis ; for Y sei3" alle thingis whiche 
Laban dide’ to thee; Y am God of Bethel, 13 
where thou anoyntidist a stoon, and madist 
auow to me. Now therefor rise thou, and 
go out of this loud, and turne ajeu in to 
the lond of thi birthe. And Rachel and 14 
Lya answeriden, Wher we han ony thing 
residue‘ in the catels, and eritage of oure 
fadir ? Wher he ‘arettide not" ys as’ aliens, is 
and selde, and eet oure prijs? But Godis 
took awei the richessis of oure fadir, and 
jaf tho” to vs, and to oure sones; wherfor 
do thou alle thingis whiche God hath co- 
matundide to thee. Forsothe Jacob roos, 17 
and puttide* hise fre children and wyues 
on camels, and 3ede forth; and he took alis 
his catel, flockis, and what euer thing he 
hadde gete in Mesopotanye, and 3ede to 
Isaac, his fadir, into the lond of Canaan. 


P flock z pr.m. eoloures pp. Om. speru. SOm.u. tsplotty ra. Uwoldist Fr. Y Om. p. 
Ww the camels spEFI. 

wJaeobs. Xeheers. xX hea. Yit waswontes. %haueseruedes. ® hath disceyueds.  » suf. 
frith penertr. ©meeds. ‘the sheep is. & Om. Bc prm, fthathes. £ the white 1s. h thi mede ais. 


iOm. en. * yafits. 11siz3s. ™vpons. ®redy fo heere s. © Tho which 1. Pors. dvpons. Thane 


sien s. hath dos. ¢ residue or left 1s. 


U arettide not or helde s. 


vOm.s. ¥Om.ELP. * putte s. 


144 


took al his substaunee, flockis, and alle 
thingis that he hadde purchasid in Meso- 
potany, goynge to Ysaac, his fader, in the 
19 loond of Chanaan. That tyme Laban was 
goon to the sheep that shulden be clippid, 
and Rachel hadde stone the mawmetis of 
20hir fadir. And Jacob nolde knowleche 
to his wyues fader, that he wolde flee; 
21and whanne he was goon, bothe he and 
alle thingis that weren of his ri;t, and the 
flode passid ouer shulde go a3ens the hil 
20f Galaad, it was tolde to Laban, the 
23 thridde day, that Jacob fleei3.. The which, 
his britheren takun with hym, pursuede 
hym seuen dayes, and ouertook hym in 
24the hil of Galaad. And ‘he saw3 in his 
sleep the Lord seiynge to hym, Be war 
lest eny thing sharply thow speek a3ens 
25Jacob. And now Jacob hadde strau3te 
a tabernacle in the hil; and whan he 
hadde takun* hym with his britheren, in 
the same hil of Galaad, he ficchide a tent; 
esand he seide to Jacob, Whi didist thow 
thus, that bisyde me thow dryue awey 
my dow3trisY as caytyues with swerde ? 
27 Whi vnwitynge me’ woldist thow fle, ne 
shewe to me, that Y my3te forth folwe 
thee with ioye, and songis, and tympans, 
2sand harpis? Thow suffredist not that Y 
my3te kisse my sones and dow3tris’; fo- 
29 lily thow hast wrou3t. And now forsothe 
myn hoond may 3eeld to thee yuel, but 
God of thi fader 3istirday seide to me, Be 
war lest thow speek with Jacob eny thing 
soharder. And if thow coneytidist? to* goo 
to thine, and the hows of thi fadir was 
in desiyr to thee, whi hast thow stoln my 
31goddis ? Jacob answeride, That thus fro 
thee I am goon forth, Y dredde lest vio- 
lentli thow shuldist taak awey thi dow3- 
32tris®; that forsothe thow vndirnymist me 
of thefte, anentist whom euer thow fyndist 
thi goddis, be he slaw biforn our bri- 
theren ; and serch what euer of thi thing* 
anentis me thow fyndist‘, and taak awey. 


Xataken pen. atake p. 


Ydoustren sDEFH. 
¢ thingis BDEFHR. 


4 fynde spr. 


Ywentes. 4% clippe c. 
thennes s. 8 Jacob s. 
© woldist not L. 
isti. +t take its. 


h ouertoke s. 


u hade stolne s. 


GENESIS. 


yy Oni. B. 


& wolde not 1. > wyues s. 
i the sleep a. 
P eaitifs ether takun prisoneris BCGIQX. 


XXXI. 19—33. 


In that tyme Laban 3ede’ to schere’ scheep, 19 
and Rachel stal the idols of hir fadir. And 20 
Jacob nolde* knouleche to the fadir of his 
wijf>, that he wolde fle*; and whanne hea 
hadde go®, as wel he as alle thimgis that 
weren of his rij3t, and whanne he hadde 
passid the water, and he 3ede ajens the 
hil of Galaad, it was teld to Laban, in the 22 
thridde dai, that Jacob fleddef. And La-23 
ban took his britheren, and pursuede hym& 
seuene daies, and took® hym in the hil of 
Galaad. And Laban sei3 in sleep! the 24 
Lord seiynge to him, Be war that thou 
speke not ony thing sharpli a3ens Jacob. 
And thanne Jacob hadde stretchid* forth 2s 
the! tabernacle in the hil; and whanne 
he™ hadde sued Jacob with his britheren, 
‘he settide™ tente in the same hil of Ga- 
laad; and he seide to Jacob, Whi hast 26 
thou do so, that the while I wiste not 
thou woldist®? dryue awey my dou3tris as 
caitifsP by swerd? Whi woldist thou fle 27 
the while Y wiste not, nether woldist 
shewe to me, that Y shulde sue thee with 
ioie, and songis, and tympans, and harpis ? 
Thou suffridist not that Y schulde kisses 
my sones and dou3tris; thon hast wrou3t 
fohli. And now sotheli myn hond mai 29 
jelde yuel to thee, but the God of thi fadir 
seide to me 3isterdai, Be war that thou 
speke not ony harder’ thing with Jacob. 
Suppose, if thou coneitedist to go to thisn 
kynesmen, and the hows of thi fadir was 
in desir to thee, whi hast thou stole my 
goddis? Jacob answeride, That Y 3edesi 
forth while thou wistist not, Y dredde lest 
thou woldist take awey thi dou3tris"™ vio- 
lentli; sotheli that thou repreuest’ me ofs2 
thefte, at whom euer thou fyndist thi 
goddis, be he slayn bifor oure britheren ; 
seke thou, what euer thing of thine thou 
fyndist at me, and taket awei. Jacob seide 
these thingis, and wiste not that Rachel 
stal" the idols. And so Laban entridess 
into the tabernacle of Jacob, and of Lya, 


Zeoueydist 4. for tox. » dou3tren BpEFH. 
¢gothenness. 4 Jacobs. ¢goforths. f 3ede 
K strauj3t s. Tas. ™Labans, ™ Laban sette as. 


Ghard kms. 1 dou3tris fro mes. & repreued- 


XXXII. 33—44. 


Thes thingis seiynge, he knewe not that 
33 Rachel hadde stoln the mawmetis. And 
so Laban, goon into the tabernacle of Ja- 
cob, and Lya, and of either meyne, fonde 
nou3t; and whan he was goon yn to the 
sitentis of Rachel, she hiynge hidde the 
mawmetis vndur the literyng of a camele, 
and sat aboue. And to hym, aserchynge 
35al the tent and no thing fyndynge, she 
seith, Be not, my lord, wroth that Y may 
not aryse bifore thee, for after the vsage 
of wymimen now it is fallun to me; and 
so bigilid is the bisynes of hym sechinge. 
36 And Jacob swellynge, seith with striyf, 
For what my trespas, and for what my 
synne, hast thow thus fulbrent after me, 
37 and hast enserchid alle ny necessaryes of 
hows? What hast thow foundun of eny 
substawnce of thin hows? Putte that bi- 
fore my britheren and toforn thi bre- 
theren, and deme thei bitwix me and thee. 
38 Therfor twenti wynter haue I ben with 
thee? Thi shep and thi geit® weren not 
barein, the wetheris of thi flok Y ete not, 
39ne takun of beest I shewide to thee; Y al 
the harm 3olde; al thing of thefte that 
40 perishide, of me thow askidist; day and 
ny3t with hoot and coolde Y was streynyd, 
aiand sleep flei3 fro myn eyen; so thur3 out 
twenti 5eer in thin hows Y seruede to thee, 
fourtene for thi dow3tres‘, and sixe for 
thi flockis ; forsothe thow chaungedist my 
42mede ten sithis. But the God of my fa- 
der Abraham, and the drede of Ysaac 
hadde ben to me, perauenture nakid now 
thou haddist laft me; myn affliccioun and 
the traueil of myn hondis the Lord bi- 
43 helde, and vndernam thee 3isterday. La- 
ban answeride to hym, My dow3tres‘, and 
sones, and thi flockis, and alle that thow 
biholdist, ben myne, and’ what may Y 
44do to my sones, and to my neces? Com 
thanne, and goo we into couenaunt of 
pees, that witnesse be bitwixe me and 


© sche geet x. 


Was. *camelis x. 
tos. ¢hastow r. 4 founden here s. 
fourtene s. k but pengt. but if ELPRX. 
nn mi ELP sup.ras. x. ° Om. FN. thes. 
Jacob 8. tawitnessings. log. Vit vp 8. 
a signe x. 


Vv he foond nes. 


GENESIS. 


f dougtren BpEFH. 


Y slie sat s. 
eshewes. f bifore a. 
1 holpen x. 

P thi flockis an. the fl. s. 


w signe ether title N. t. ether signe BCK sup.ras. t. ether 


145 


and of euer eithir meyne, and foond’ not ; 
and whanne Laban hadde entrid in to the 
tente of Rachel, sche hastide, and hidde3s 
the idols vndur the strewyngis of the 
camel*, and satY aboue. Aud sche seide 
to Laban, sekynge al the tente and fynd- 
ynge no thing, My lord, be not wroothss 
that Y may not rise bifore thee, for it 
bifelde now to me bi the custom of wym- 
men; so” the bisynesse of the sekere was 
scorned. And Jacob bolnyde, and seide sc 
with strijf, For what cause of me, and* 
for what synne of me, hast thou come so 
fersly aftir me, and hast sou3t al ‘the por-37 
tenaunce of myn hous? What ‘hast thou‘ 
foundet of al the catel of thin hows ? 
Putte® thou here bifore my britheren and 
thi britheren, and deme thei betwixe me 
and thee. Was I with thee herfore twenti ss 
jeer? Thi sheep and geet weren not ba- 
reyn, Y eet not the rammes of thi flok, 
nether Y schewide to thee ony thing takin 39 
of a beeste; Y 3eldide al harm; what euer 
thing perischide bif thefte, thou axidist of 
me; Y was angwischid® in dai and ny3t 40 
with heete and frost, and sleep fledde fro 
myn izen; so" Y seruede thee bi twentiai 
3eer in thin hows, fourtene! 3eer for thi 
dou3tris, and sixe 3eer for thi flockis; and 
thon chaungidist my mede ten sithis. If 42 
God of my fadir Abraham, and the drede 
of Isaac hadde not helpid! me, perauenture 
now thou haddist left me nakid ; the Lord 
bihelde™ my turmentyng and the traueyl 
of myn hondis, and repreuyde thee 3istir- 
dai. Laban answeride hym®, The™ dou3- 43 
tris, and thi® sones, and flockis?, and alle 
thingis whiche thon seest, ben myne, what 
mai Y do to my sones, and to the’ sones 
of sones™? Therfor’ come thou, and make 44 
we boond of pees, that it be witnessyng* 
bitwixe me, and thee. And so" Jacob4s5 
took a stoon, and reiside it’ in to a signe’, 
and seide to hise britheren, Brynge 3e 46 


& Om. BDEFU,. 


zlo peKMNeRTX. ors. » thing that longith 

8 aguishid s. 4 loxFKLMpswd. i and 
m hath biholde s. n Jacob s. to him x. 
qOm. se. ' my soness. § therfor 


U 


146 


4sthee. And so Jacob took a stoon, and 
46 areryde it into a title, and seide to his 
britheren, Bryngith to stoons; the whiche 
gederynge togidere, maden an hillok, and 
47eten ther vpon. The which Laban clep- 
yde an hillok of witnes, and Jacob an 
hipil of wytnessyng; either after the pro- 
ssprete of his tunge. And Laban seide, 
This hillok shal be witnes bitwixe me 
and thee to day, and therfor the name of 
it is clepid Galaad, that is, the hillok of 
49 witnes. And Laban leide to, The Lord 
biholde, and deme bitwixen vs, whanne 
50 we shulen goo from ys ; if thow turmente 
my dow3tres, if thow bryngist yn other 
wyues vpon hem, no man of oure word is 
witnes, saue God, that present biholdith. 
51 And eft he seide to Jacob, Loo! this hil- 
lok, and the stoon that I haue rerid bi- 
s2twixe me and thee, witnes shal be; this 
hilloc, and the stoon ben into witnessyng, 
if forsothe I shall passe it goynge to thee, 
or thow ouerpassist" yuel to me thenk- 
ssynge. God of Abraham, and God of 
Nachor, deme bitwix vs, the God of the 
fader of hem. Thanne Jacob swore by 
sithe drede of his fader Ysaac; and, offrid 
slayn sacrifice in the hil, he clepide his 
britheren that thei shulden eete breed, 
the whiche whanne thei hadden etun, 
s5dwelten there. Laban forsothe at ny3t 
arysynge, kisside the sones, and his dou3- 
tris', and blisside to hem, turnynge a3en 
into his place. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 Jacob forsothe wente in his weie that 
he biganne, and there weren to hym met 
zaungels of the Lord. Whom whanne he 
hadde seen, seith, The tentis of God ben 
thes; and he clepide the name of that 
3place Manaym, that is, tentis. And he 
sente forsothe messangeris biforn hym to 
Esau, his brother, into the loond of Seyr, 
4in the regioun of Edom; and he co- 
maundide to hem, seiynge, Thus spek 3e 


h ouerpasse BDEFH. 


x the stonus B. Y witnessing Nx. 
€shalt s. f Laban s. & the stoon s. 
thei schulden c pr.m. 3 Om. p@nx. 


GENESIS. 


2 clepide it 1s. 
h haue reiside s. 
° he comaundid 1s. 


SOO i — OIE 


stoonus*; whiche gadriden, and maden an 
heep, and eten on it. And Laban clepide 47 
it the heep of wittnesse’, and Jacob clepide 
it the heep of witnessyng; ever eithir 
clepide’ bi the* proprete of his® langage. 
And Laban seide, This heep schal be wit-48 
nesse bytwixe me and thee to day, and 
herfor the name therof was clepid Galaad, 
that is, thee heep of witnesse. And Laban 49 
addide*’, The Lord biholde, and deme bi- 
twixe vs, whanne we schulen go awei fro 
30ow ; if thou schalt turmente my dou3tris, 50 
and if thou schal® brynge yn othere wyues 
ou hem, noon is witnesse of oure word, 
outakun God, whiche is present, and bi- 
holdith. And eft hef seide to Jacob, Lo!s1 
this heep, and stoon®, whiche Y reiside® 
bitwixe me and thee, schal be witnesse ; 52 
sotheli this heep, and stoon! be in to wit- 
nessyug, forsothe if Y schal passe it, and 
go to thee, ether thou shalt passe‘, and 
thenke yuel to me. God of Abraham, and 53 
God of Nachor, God of the fadir of hem, 
deme bitwixe vs. Therfor Jacob swoor 
by the drede of his fadir Ysaac; ands4 
whanne slayn sacrifices weren offrid in 
the hil, he! clepyde his britheren to™ ete 
breed, and whanne thei hadden ete, thei 
dwelliden there. Forsothe Laban roos bi5s 
ny3t, and kisside his sones, and dou3tris, 
and blesside hem, and turnede ajen™ in to 
his place. 


CAP. XXXII 


Forsothe Jacob wente forth in the weie! 
in which he began, and the aungels of the 
Lord metten him. And whanne he hadde2 
seyu hem, he seide, These ben the castels 
of God; and he clepide the name of that 
place Manaym, that is, castels. Sothelis 
Jacob sente bifore him also messangeris to 
Esau, his brother, in to the lond of Seir, 
in the cuntrey of Edom; and comaundide® 4 
to hem, and seide, Thus speke 3e to my 


i doujtren BDEFH. 


aOm.s. Phers. 


¢clepid £. 4 addide to 1s. 
i the stoon s. 


k passe its. 1 Jacobs. ™ that 


XXXIL. s—16. 


to my lord Esau, Thes thingis seith thi 
brother Jacob, At Laban I haue pylgrim- 
sagid, and was vnto the present day; 1 
hane oxen, and assis, and sheep, and ser- 
uauntis, and handmaydens, and I sende 
now a message to my lord, that Y fynde 
é6grace in thi si3t. And the messangeris 
ben comun a3en to Jacob, seiynge, We 
comen to Esau, thi brother, and loo! he 
goth into thin a3en-comyng, with foure 
7hundrid men. Jacob ful myche dred, and 
afeerd dyuydide his peple that with him 
was, the flockis forsothe, and sheep, and 
oxen, and camels diuydid in two compa- 
snyes ;.seiynge, If Esau come to the too 
companye, and smyte it, the tother com- 
opanye that is lafte shal be sauyd. And 
Jacob seide, God of my fader Abraham, 
and God of my fader Ysaac, thow Lord, 
that seidist to me, Turne ajen into thi 
loond, and into the place of thi birthe, and 
10 I shal wel do to) thee, Y am lasse than alle 
thi mercyes, and thi treuthe that thow 
hast fulfillid to thi seruaunt; in my staf 
Thaue passid this Jordan, and now with 
two companyes Y turne a3en; delyuer 
me of the hoond of my brother Esau, 
for greetly Y drede hym, lest perauen- 
ture comynge he smyte the moders with 
izthe children. Thow hast spokun that 
thou shuldist wel do to me, and that 
thow shuldist sprede abrood my seed as 
the grauel of the see, that for multitude 
i3may not be noumbred. And whanne he 
hadde slept there that ny3t, he seueride 
of that that he hadde 3iftys to Esau, his 
4 brother, she geyte two hundrid, hee geyte 
twenty, sheepe two hundrid, and wetheris 
15 twenti, camels fille with her coltis thretti, 
kien fourti, and bullis twenti, she assis 
istwenti, and the coltis of hem ten. And 
he sente bi the hondis of his seruauntis 
eche oon after other the flockis aside; 
and he seide to his children, Goo 3e bi- 
fore me, and be there a space bitwixe 


J Om. a. 


P haue ben 1s prom. but I was seem. 4 Om. c. 
present K pr.m. til into this pr. 1. til this pr. s. 


GENESIS. 


r and there I was k. Om. s. 
Xmen seruauntis s. VY maydens plures. 


147 


lord Esau, Thi brothir Jacob seith these 
thingis, Y wasP a4 pilgrym at Laban, ‘and 
Y wast ‘tils in to presentt dai; Y haues 
oxun, and assis, and scheep, and ser- 
uauntis", and hand maydis’, and Y sende 
now a message to my lord, that Y fynde 
grace in thi si3t. And the messagerisé 
turneden azen to Jacob, and seiden, We 
camen to Esau, thi brother, and lo! he 
hastithY in to thi* comyng, with foure 
hundrid men. Jacob dredde greetli, and7 
he was aferd, and departideY the puple 
that was with hym, and he departide the 
flockis, and scheep, and oxun, and camels, 
in to twei cumpenyes ; and seide’, If Esau s 
schal come to o cumpeny, and schal sinyte 
it, the tothir? cumpeny which is residue 
schal be saued. Aud Jacob seide, A‘! God 9 
of my fadir Abraham, and God of my fa- 
dir Isaac, AC! Lord, that seidist to me, 
Turne thou ajen in to thi lond, and in tof 
the® place of thi birthe, and Y schal do wel 
to thee, Y am lesse than alle thi mercifulf1o 
doyngis, and than® thi treuthe which thou 
hast. fillid® to! thi seruaunt; with my staf 
Y passide this Jordan, and now Y go a3en 
with twei cumpanyes; delyuere thou me1i 
fro the hond of my brothir Esau, for Y 
drede him greetli, lest he come and sle* 
the modris with the sones. Thou spakist 12 
that thou schuldist do wel to me, and 
shuldist! alarge my seed as the™ grauel of 
the see, that mai not be noumbrid for 
mychilnesse. Aud whanne Jacob hadde is 
slept there in that ny3t, he departide of 
tho thingis whiche he hadde 3iftis to sau, 
his brothir, two hundrid geet, and twentit4 
buckis of geet, two hundrid scheep", and 
twenti rammys, camels fulle with her®is 
foolis thretti, fourti kyen, and tweuti 
boolis, tweuti sche assis, and ten foolis of 
hem. And he? sente bi the hondis of his 16 
seruauntis alle flockis’ bi hem silf; and 
he seide to hise children, Go 3e bifore me, 
and a space be betwixe flok and flok. And 17 


ji Om. p. 


sOm. Nn. ‘€ til to this 
w hastith hym rs. 


*the 1. Yhe departide cs. 2heseides. ®oothir1. » left vunsmyten is. ¢ O 18. dtoc. ¢thikz. 
fmercy s. & lesse than 1s. » fulfillidis. iwiths. ® smytec. !woldist  ™ Om.1s. © of scheep 1. 
© Om. 1Ks. P Jacobis. 4 the flockis 1s. "Om. EKLNPR. 


U2 


148 


i7flok and flok. And he comaundide to the 
forther, seiynge, If thow mete my bro- 
ther Esau, and he aske thee, whos art 
thow, or whidir thow gost, or whos ben 
wthes that thow folwist, thou shalt an- 
swere, Of thi seruaunt Jacob, 3iftis he 
hath sent to his lord Esau, and he cometh 
igafter vs. The same wyse he 3ane maunde- 
mentis to the secounde, and the* thridde, 
and to alle that folweden the flockis, sei- 
ynge, In the same wordis spek 3e to Esau, 
20whanne 3e fynden hym, and 3e shulen 
adde, And he thi sernaunt Jacob oure 
weie in folwith. He seide forsothe, Y 
shal plese hyn with 3iftis that goon bi- 
fore, and afterward Y shal se hym 5; per- 
auenture he shal be maad plesid to me. 
21 And so bifore 3eden the 3iftis bifore hym; 
he forsothe dwelte that ny3t in tentis. 
22And whanne sobirly he was arysun, he 
toke his two wyues, and as feel ser- 
uauntis with ellenen sones, and he ouer- 
23 passide the foorth of Jaboth. And, ouer- 
ladde alle thingis that to hym perteyn- 
24eden, he dwelte aloon, and loo! a man 
25 wristlide with hym vnto the morwe. The 
which whanne he saw3 that he my3te not 
ouercome hym, he towchide the synwe 
260f his hip, and anoon it wexe drye. And 
he seide to hym, Leeue me, forsothe now 
vpsteyeth the morwetide. He answeride, 
I shal not leene thee, but if thow blisse 
27to me. Thanne he seith, What is the 
name of! thee? He answeride, Jacob. 
28 And he, No more, he seith, Jacob shal be 
clepid thi name, but Israel; for if anentis™ 
God thow hast ben strong, myche more 
anentis" men thow shalt haue the may- 
29stri. Jacob askide hym, Sey to me what 
name art thow clepid? He answeride, 
Wherto askist thow my name, that is 
merueilows ? And he blisside hym in the 
30same place. And Jacob clepide the name 
of that place Phanuel, seiynge, I haune 
seen the Lord face to face, and my soule 


k Om. spen. !to B super ras. DEFIL. 


GENESIS. 


M ajeynst BDEH. aneyst F. 


XXXII. 17—30. 
he comaundide to the formere, and seide, 
If thon schalt mete my* brothir Esau, and 
he schal axe thee, whos man thou art, 
ethert whidir thou goist, ethert whos ben 
these thingis whiche" thou suest, thou schalt 18 
answere, Of thi sernaunt Jacob, he hath 
sent 3iftis to his lord Esau, and he cometh 


aftir vs. In lijk maner, he 3af comaunde- 19 
mentis’ to the secounde, and to the 


thridde, and to alle that sneden flockis’; 
and seide, Speke 3e bi the same wordis to 
Esau, whanne 3e fynden hym, and 3e20 
schulen adde*, Also Jacob hym silf thi ser- 
uaunt sueth oure weie. For Jacob seide, 
Y schal plese Esau with 3iftis that goon 
bifore, and aftirward Y schal se hym; in 
hap he schal be mercyful to me. And so2i 
the’ 3iftis 3eden bifore hym*; sotheli he 
dwellide in that ny3t in the® tentis. And 22 
whanne Jacob hadde arise? auysseli*, he 
took hise twei wyues, and so many ser- 
uauntessis* with enleuen sones, and passide® 
the forthe of Jaboth. And whanne alle 23 
thingis that perteyneden to hym weren led 
ouer, he’ dwellide aloone, and, lo! a man 24 
wrastlide with hin til to the morwetid. 
And whanne the man sei3 that he mizte 25 
not ouercome Jacob, he touchide the se- 
newe of Jacobis hipe, and it driede anoon. 
And he seide to Jacob, Leeue" thou me, 26 
for the morewtid stieth' now. Jacob an- 
sweride, Y schal not leeue thee, no but thou 
blesse me. Therfore he* seide, What 27 
name is to thee? He answeride, Jacob. 
And the! man seide, Thi name schal noes 
more be clepid Jacob, but Israel; for if 
thou were strong a3ens God, hou miche 
more schalt thou haue power a3ens men. 
Jacob axide him, Seie thou to me bi what 29 
name thou art clepid ? He answerde, Whi 
axist thou my name, whiche is wondirful ? 
And he blesside Jacob in the same place. 
And Jacob clepide the name of that place 30 
Fannel, and seide, Y si3 the Lord face to 
face, and my lijf is maad saaf. And3i 


n ajeynst BDEFH. 


Swithmyc. torELp. “the whicheg. V comaundement GNert. WY the flockis is. * adde to 1s. 
yOm.xLr. 2Jacobis. ®Om.1s. Prise plures. ¢hastili a marg. mowd. hastiliche s. 4 hand- 
maides 1s. © he passide 1s. f forde ernqrt. & Jacob 1s. © leef thou ether delyuere thou BcN. i stieth 


vp 1. sueths. k the manis. 1} Om. a. 


XXXII. 31—XXXIII. 11. 


31is maad saaf. And anoon is rysun to 
hym the sunne, after that he was ouer- 
passid Phanuel ; he forsothe haltide with 

32the too foote. For what cause the chil- 
dren of Israel eten not synwe, that wexe 
drie in the hipe of Jacob, vnto the day 
that is now, therthur3 that he towchide 
the synwe of his hipe, and it was 
stoneyd. 

CAP. XXXIII. 

1 Jacob forsothe heuynge vp the eyen 
saw3 Esau comynge, and with hym foure 
hundrid men ; and he departide the sones 
of Lya, and of°® Rachel, and of both his 

2sernauntis. And he? putte either hand- 
mayden, and the fre children of hem, in 
the bigynnynge; Lya forsothe in the se- 
counde place, and the sones of hyr; Rachel 

3and Joseph laste. And he bifore goynge 
anouride bowide! into the erthe seuen- 
sithes', to the tyme that the brother ‘of 
4hym® shulde neiz3, And so Esau ren- 
nynge to meete with his brother, cleppide 
hym, and streynynge hys necke and kiss- 
synge wepte. And the eyen heued vp, 
saw3 wymmen, and the children of hem, 
and seith, What to hem wiln thes? and 
if thei perteynen to thee? He answeride, 
Litil children thei ben, whom God hath 
630uun to me, thi seruaunt. And nei3ynge 
the handmaydens and the sones of hem, 
7ben doun bowid. And Lya with hir chil- 
dren com nerre; and whanne the same 
maner thei hadden anowrned, the laste 

8 Joseph and Rachel anowryden. And E- 
sau seide, What forsothe ben thes com- 
panyes that Y mette? He answerde, That 

91 shulde fynde grace bifore my lord. And 
he seith, Y haue many thingis, brother 

1omyne, ben thi thingis to thee. Jacob scide, 
Ny] thow so, Y preye, but if Y haue foundun 
grace in thin eyen, taak a hitil 3ift of myn 
hoondis ; so forsothe Y haue seyn thi 
face as Y se the chere of God; be thow 
11to me benygne, and taak the blissyng that 


°QOm.s. POm. aspen. redy £ pr.man. 
m hadde passid 1s." Jacob 1s. 
r the sernauntessis s. 8 putte 5. t putte Gis. 


Vv lo EFLMPS. 
2 thin i. 
founde s. 


w cosside hym u. kisside hym 1s. 
8 handmaidenes pemnrrd. 
fhaue seins. &lo¥. 4 hadde seen 1. 


GENESIS. 


©ynto this 1. into this s. til to DENQRT. 


b Om. 1K sec.m. MS. 


149 


anoon the sunne roos to hym, aftir that 
he passide™ Fanuel; forsothe he" haltide 
in the foot. For which canse the sones32 
of Israel eten not ‘til in to® present day the 
senewe, that driede in the hipe of Jacob; 
for the man touchide the senewe of Ja- 
cobs hipe, and it driede. 


CAP. XXXIII. 

Forsothe Jacob reiside? hise i3en, and! 
sei31 Esau comynge, and foure hundrid 
men with hym; and he departide the 
sones of Lia, and of Rachel, and of bothe 
sernauntessis". And he puttide’ euer either 2 
handmaide, and the fre children of hem, 
in the bigynnyng ; sotheli he puttidet Lia, 
and her sones, in the secounde place; for- 
sothe he puttidet Rachel and Joseph the 
laste. And Jacob 3ede bifore, and wor-3 
schipide lowli to" erthe seuensithis, til his 
brothir neizede. And so’ Esau ran ajens4 
his brothir, and collide hym, and Esau 
helde his necke, and kisside’, and wepte. 
And. whanne the izen* weren reisid’, hes 
sei3 the wymmen, and the litle children 
of hem, and seide, What wolen these to 
hem silf? and wher thei pertenen to thee? 
Jacob answeride, Thei ben the Htle chil- 
dren, whiche God hath 3oue to me, thi 
seruaunt. And the? handmaydis* and hers 
sones neijeden, and weren bowid. Also7 
Lya neizede with hir fre children; and 
whanne thei hadden worschipid in lijk 
maner, Joseph and Rachel the> laste wor- 
schipeden. And Esau seide, What bens 
these cumpanyes, whiche Y mette? Jacob® 
answerde, That Y schulde fynde grace bi- 
fore my lord. And he seide, My brother,» 
Y haue ful many thingis, thi tlringis be to 
thee. And Jacob seide, Y biseche’, nyle io 
thou so, but if Y foond® grace in thin 
izen, take thou a litil 3ifte of myn hondis; 
for Y sei3 so® thi face as I sei3" the cheer 
of God; be thou merciful to me, and res-11 


¥rseuensithe BpEFH. % Om. 4. 

Preiside vp1. 4 he sei3 1s. 
u into c prim. KM. to the BGIN pr. m. SX sec.m. 
Y reisid vp 1s. 


x the igen of Esaut. Esau izen s. 
e haue 


cand Jacob 1k. 4 biseche thee pa. 


150 


Y haue brou3t to thee, and that God de- 
lyuerynge alle thingis hath 3ouun to me. 
Vnneth, the brother compellynge, takynge 
12seith, Goo we togideres, and Y shal be 
13felowe of thi weye. And Jacob seyde, 
My lord, thow hast knowun that Y haue 
tender litil children, and sheep, and oxen 
ful wombe with ynne’, the whiche if more 
yn goynge Y do to traueyl, thei shulen o 
14 day alle the flockis dyen; my lord go bi- 
fore his seruaunt, and Y shal folwe litil 
mele the steppis of hyim, as Y se my litil 
children to mowen, to the tyme that Y 
1scome to my lord, in Seyr. Esau an- 
sweride, Y preye thee, that of the puple 
that is with me, algatis felawis dwellen 
of thi weye. It is not, he seith, nede; 
this oon oonlich Y nede, that Y fynde 
16grace in thi si3t, lord myne. And so 
Esau is" turned ajen that day in the 
17 weye that he come, into Seyr. And Ja- 
cob com into Sachot, where a hows bild’, 
and the tentis fyechid, he clepide the 
name of that place Sachot, that is, taber- 
18snaclis. And he passide forth into Salem, 
the cite of Sychymor, that is in the loond 
of Chanaan, aftir that he was turned a3en 
fro Mesopotany of Syrye, and dwellide 
19bisydis the wallid town; and boun3t a 
parti of the feeld,in the which he ficchide 
tabernaclis, of the sones of Emor, the 
fader of Sichym, with an hundrid lombis. 
20 And there, an auter reryd, he inwardly 
clepide vpon” the moost strong God of 
Israel. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 Dynex, the dow3ter of Lya, forsothe was 
goon oute, that she my3te se wymmen of 
2that regionn. Whom whanne hadde seen 
Sichym, the sone of Emor Eney, the 
prince of that loond, louede hir, and ra- 
uyshide, and slepte with hir, with force 
3oppressideY a mayden. And the soule of 
hym was glewid with hir, and hir sory 


tine B Sup. TAS. E. uUwas B. 


ynge E sec.m. 


Vv bylded pv. 


GENESIS. 


W ypon that BDEFH. 


XXXII. 12—XXXIV. 3. 


seyue the blessyng which Y brou3te! to 
thee, and which* blessyng God 3ynynge 
alle thingis 3af to me. Vnnethis!, while 
the brothir compellide, he resseyuede, and 12 
seide, Go we to gidere, and Y schal be 
felowe of thi weie. And Jacob seide, My ts 
lord, thon knowist that Y haue litle chil- 
dren tendre, and scheep, and kien with 
calue with me, and if Y schal make hem 
for to trauele more in goynge, alle the 
flockis schulen die in o dai; my lord gous 
bifore his seruaunt, and Y schal sue litil 
and litil hise steppis, as I shal™ se" that 
my litle children mown, til Y come to my 
lord, in to Seir. Jisau answeride, Y preie 1s 
thee, that of the puple which is with me, 
namceli® felowis of thi weie dwelle?. Jacob 
seide, It is no nede; Y haue nede to this 
o thing oneli, that Y fynde grace in thi 
siz3t, my lord. And so? Esan turnede a3en 16 
in that dai in the weie bi which™ he cam, 
in to Seir. And Jacob cam in to Sochot, 17 
where whanne he hadde bildid an hows, 
and hadde set tentis, he clepide the name 
of that place Sochot, that is, tabernaclis. 
And Jacob’ passide in to Salem, a citee of 1s 
Sichimis, whiche is in the lond of Ca- 
naan, aftir that he turnede a3en fro Meso- 
potanye of Sirie, and he dwellide besidis 
the citee. And he bou3te for an hundrid 19 
lambren at part of the feeld, in which he 
settide" tabernaclis, of the sones of Emor, 
fadir of Sichem. And whanne he hadde20 
reisid an auter there, he inwardly clepide 
on it the strongeste’ God of Israel. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


Forsothe Dyna, the dou3tir of Lya, 3ede1 
out to’ se the’ wymmen of that cuntrey. 
And whanne Sichem, the sone of Emore 
Euey, the prince of that lond, hadde seyn 
hir, he louede hir, and ranyschide’, and* 
sclepte with hir, and oppresside the vir- 
gyn bi violence. And his soule was: 
boundun? faste with hir, aud he pleside 


x Didyn 4 sup ras. 3 oppress- 


ihaue bron3t is. the which lynnether, ™Om.1. ™®soands. © dwelle thei nameli 1s. 
P Om. 1s. dloeng. the whiches. Sher. tthers. sette reitgs. * ful strong1. W that sche 
schulde ¢ pr.m. * Om. Rrw. Ytheg. 2#he rauyschid 1s. 4 hir and Forks. > knyt 1. 


Sool) 408. 


4he swagide with softnessis. And he’ 
goynge to Emor, his fadir, Tak to me, 
she seith, this dainysele to wijf. The 
which whanne Jacob hadde herd, absent 
the sones, and in the foode of the beestis 
occupied, he heelde his pees, to the tyme 
6thei comen a3en. Enmor forsothe, the fa- 
der of Sichem, goon oute, that he my3te 
zspeke to Jacob, loo! the sones of hym 
comen fro the feelde. And the thing herd 
that was fallun, thei weren ful wroth, 
therthur3 that a fowle thing he hadde 
wrou3t in Israel, and the dow3ter of Ja- 
cob defowlid, an vnleueful thing hadde 
sfulfillid. And so Emor speke to hem, 
The soule of my sone Sichem hath cleued 
to 3o0ure dow3ter, 3yueth hir wijf to hym, 
gand ioyne we togidere maryagis; 3oure 
dow3tres* 3if 3e to vs, and oure dow3tres* 
lotaak 3e, and dwel 3e with vs; the loond 
is in 30ure power, excersise 3e, chaffare 3e, 
iiand haue 3e it. But and Sichem to the 
fader and to the bretheren of hir seith, 
Fynde Y grace bifore 3ow, and what 
i2thing> 3e ordeyne Y shal 3yue; eche 3e 
dower, and aske 3e 3iftis, gladly Y shal 
jyue that 3e asken; oonly 3yf 3e to me 
13this damesele to wijf. The sones of Ja- 
cob answeriden to Sichem and to the 
fader of hym in trechory, waxynge cruel 
i4for the stupre of the sister, We mowen 
not doon that 3e asken, ne 3yue oure sister 
to a man vucireumsidid, the which is vn- 
isleful and wrongful anentis vs. But in 
that we mowen ben togidere boundun, if 
je wole be like vs, and al kynde of maal 
16 be circumsidid in jow, thanne we shulen 
3yue and take togidere oure dow3tris® and 
3ouren; and we shuwen dwelle with 3ow, 
i7and we shulen be o peple. If forsothe 3e 
wolen not be circumsidid, we shulen take 
isour dow3tres’, and goo awey. The pro- 
fre of hem pleside to Emor and to Si- 
2 Om. v. 


@dou3tren nperu. > thingez x. 


GENESIS. 


¢ dou3tren BDEFI. 


ui 


hir sory® with¢ flateringis. And he 3ede4 
to Emor, his fadir, and seide, Take to ines 
this damysel a wijf. And whanne Jacob 
hadde herd this thing, while the® sones 
weren absent, and ocupied in the fedyng! 
of scheep, he was stille, til thei camen a3en. 
Sotheli whanne Emor, the fadir of Sichem, 6 
was gon out, ‘that he schulde® speke to Ja- 
cob, lo! hise sones camen fro the feeld.7 
And whanne this thing that bifeldet was 
herd, thei weren wroothe greetli; for he 
wrou3te! a foul thing in Israel, and* he! 
hadde do™ a thing vuleueful in the de- 
foulyng of the dou3ter of Jacob. And so"s 
Emor spak to hem, The soule of my sone 
Sichem cleuyde® to 3oure dou3tir, 3eue 3e 
hir a wijf to hym, and ioyne we wed-9 
dyngis to gidere; 3yue je? 30ure dou3tris to 
vs, and take 3e oure dou3tris, and dwelle 10 
3e with vs; the lond is in 3oure power, 
tiled 3e", make’ 3e¢ narchaundise, and welde 
3e it. But also Sichem seide to the fadir1! 
and britheren of hir, Fynde Y grace bifor 
jou, and what euer thingis 3e ordeynen Y 
schal 3yue; encreesse 3e the dower, and axe 12 
je 3iftis, YY schal 3yue wilfuli that that 3e 
axen; oonli 3yue 3e this damysele a wijf 
tome. The sones of Jacob answeriden in 13 
gile to Sichem.and his fadir, and weren” 
feerse for the defoulyng of maidenhod* of 
they sistir, We moun not do this that 3e 14 
axen, nether we moun 3yue oure sistir to 
a man vieireuncidid, which’ thing is vn- 
leueful and abhomynable anentis vs. But is 
in this we schulen mowe be boundun in 
pees, if 3e wole be lijk vs, and ech* of 
male kynde be cireumcidid in 30u, thanne t6 
we schulen 3yue and take togidre oure 
dou3tris and 30ure; and we schulen dwelle 
with 30u, and we schulen be o puple. 
Forsothe if 3e nylen’ be circwneidid, we 17 
schulen take oure dou3tir®, and schulen# 
go awei. The profryng of hem pleside 1s 


4 douster spe. doujtre Fn. 


© Om. cbEGKLMNPsx prim. d. Uby B prom. ¢hise 1s. f pasturyng 1. & that he wolde 1. to Be sec.m. 


hb hadde bifalle 1. i hadde wrou3te 1s. 


K and for ¥. 


1 of Jacob was defoulid, he a prim. ELO pr.m. P. 


the do3ter of Jacob defoulid, he x. the dou3tir of Jacob was defoulid, he prenqrr. ™ Om. ELP. "thus. 
°o hath cleuydis. POm.s. <dtilthes. © ge itis. S maketh is. and make kK. t Om.EFis.  Umar- 
chaundye plures. Vand YG. W thei weren 1s. * the maidenhed 1xs, Yherts. 2 the which 1. 2 ech 


man is. » wolen not 1. 


¢ sistre s.4 we schulen 1s. 


152 


i9chem, his sone, ne the 3onglyng tariede, 
but anoon that that was askid he shulde 
fulfil; forsothe he louede ful greetli the 
damysele, and he was noble in al the 
20 hows of his fader. And thei goon yn the 
jate of the cite, speken to the puple, 
21'Thes men ben pesible, and wolen dwelle 
with vs; chaffare thei in the loond, and 
excersise thei it, the which large and 
broode nedith tyliers; the dow3tris of 
hem we shulen take wyues, and oure® we 
22shulen 3yue to hem. O thing is that 
puttith off so myche good; if we circum- 
siden oure males, folwynge the ryte of 
23 the folk, and the substaunce of hem, and 
the beestis, and al that thei han shulen 
be ouren; oonli in that assent we, that 
dwellynge togidrys we maken o peple. 
24 And alle thei ben assentid, alle the malis 
25circumsidid. And loo! the thridde day, 
whanne the sorwe of the woundes is 
moost grenows, the two sones of Jacob, 
Symyon and Leuy, the britheren of Dyne, 
drawen to her swerdis, ben goon into the 
cyte tristiliche, and sleyn alle the males ; 
26 Emor and Sichem togideres thei slewen, 
takynge Dyne, her sister, fro the hows of 
27Sichem. The which goon onte, the tother 
sones of Jacob fellen vpon the slayn men, 
and thei distruyden the cyte, in to ven- 
28 geaunce of the stupre, the sheep of hem, 
droues, and asses, and alle thingis wast- 
ynge, that in the howsis and in the feeldis 
2g9weren; the litil children forsothe, and 
the wyues of hem thei ladden cheytiues. 
30 The whiche thingis ful doon hardilich, 


Jacob seyde to Symyon and Leuy, 3e han ° 


disturbid me, and 3e han maad me haatsum 
to Chananeis and Phare3eis, the dwellers 
of this loond; we ben fewe, and thei 
gederyd togiderys shulen smyte me, and 
Y shall be doon awey and myn _ hows. 

31 Thei answeriden, Whether as a strumpet 
thei shulden mysuse oure sistre ? 


GENESIS. 


XXXIV. 19—31. 


Emor and Sichem, his sone, and the 3ong 19 
wexynge man® dilaiede not, that ne he 
fillidef anoon that that was axid, for he 
lonede the damysele grectli, and he was 
noble in al ‘the hous of his fadir®. And 20 
thei entriden in to the 3ate of the citee, 
and spaken to the puple, These men ben2i 
pesible, and wolen dwelle with vs; make 
thei marchaundie in the loond, and tile® 
thei it, which is large and brood, and hath 
nede to tileris; we schulen take her don3- 
tris! to wyues, and we schulen 3yue oure 
dou;tris' to hem. O thing is, for which 22 
so greet good is dilaied; if we circumciden 
oure malis, and suen the custom of the 
fole, bothe her substaunce, and scheep, and 23 
alle thingis which thei welden, schulen be 
oure; oneli assente we in this, that we 
dwelle to gidere, and make o puple. And 21 
alle men assentiden, and* alle malis weren 
cireumcidid. And lo! in the thridde day, 25 
whanne the! sorewe of woundis™ was moost 
greuous, twei sones of acob, Symeon and 
Leuy, britheren of Dyna, token swerdis, 
and entriden in to the citee booldeli; and® 
whanne alle malis weren slayn®, thei26 
killiden Emor and Sichem togidere, and 
token Dyna, her sistir, fro the hous of 
Sichem. And whanne thei weren goon27 
out, othere sones of Jacob felden in on the 
slayn men, and rifeliden the citee for the 
veniaunce of defoulyng? ‘of a4 virgyn. And 28 
thei wastiden the scheep of tho men, and 
droues of oxun, and assis, and alle thingis 
that weren in howsis™ and feeldis, and 29 
ledden’ prisoneris the litle children, and 
wyues of tho men. And whanne these 30 
thingis weren don hardili, Jacob seide to 
Symeon and Leuy, 3e han troblid me, and 
hant maad me hateful to Cananeis and 
Fereseis, dwellers of this lond; we ben 
fewe, thei schulen be gaderid to gidere 
and schulen sle me, and Y schal be don 
awey and" myn hous. Symeon and Leuy31 
answeriden, Whether thei oujten mysuse’ 
oure sistir as an hoore ? 


© ourn BDEFH, 


e man Sichems. f fulfillide 1s. & his fadir hous 1s.‘ tilie s. i dou3tren G. k whanne plures. 
!Om.s. ™wounde re. 8 Om.c. °slaynofhems. Pfoulingt. 4 ther. ‘the housisc. § ledden 
aney 1s. tOm,is. Ying VY to mysuse CIN see.m.s, Wa strumpett Is. 

Y y P 


XXXV. I—r12. 


CAP. XXXV. 

1 The mene tyme the Lord spak to Ja- 
cob, Aryse, and stey to Bethel, and dwel 
there, and mak an autere to the Lord, 
that aperide to thee whanne thou flow3 

2Esau, thi brother. Jacob forsothe, al his 
hows clepid togidere, seith, Doth awey 
alyen goddis, that ben in the mydil of 
jow, and be 3e clensid, and chaunge 3e 

330ure clothis; rise 3c, and steye we vp in 
to Bethel, that we maken there an autere 
to the Lord, the which hath herd me in 
the day.of my tribulacioun, and was felaw 
4of my weye. Thanne thei 3yuen to hym 
alle alyen goddis that thei hadden, and 
the eer ryngis, that weren in the erys of 
hem; and he indeluede hem vudur an 
theribynte, that is bihyude the-cite of 
sSichem. And whanne thei weren goon, 
feerde of God 3ede vpon alle the cytees 
by enuyroun, and thei weren not hardi 
6to pursue hem awey goynge. Thanne 
Jacob com to Luzam, that is in the looud 
of Chanaan, Bethel bi name, he and alle 
7the peple with hym. And he bilde there 
an auteer, and clepide the name of that 
place The hows of God; there forsothe 
aperyde God to hym, whanne he shulde 
sflee his brother. The same tyme was 
deed Delbora, the norisch of Rebecca, and 
was byried at the rootis of Bethel, vndur 
an ook, and the name of the place is 
aclepid The ook of weping. God forsothe 
aperyde eftsones to Jacob, after that’ he 
was turnyd a3en fro Mesopotany of Syrye, 
and com into Bethel, and blissid to hym, 
loseiynge, Thow shalt no more be clepid 
Jacob, but Yrael shal be thi name. And 
ithe clepid hym Yrael, and seide to hym, 
Y God Almy3ti, grow, and be thow mul- 
tiplied, folke of kynde and peplis of na- 
ciouns’ of thee shulen ben, kyngis of thi 
12leendis shulen goon oute; the loond that 
¥ haue 3ouun to Abraham and Ysaac, Y 


GENESIS. 


153 


CAP. XXXV. 

Yn the mene tyme the Lord spak to} 
Jacob, Ryse thou, and stie* to Bethel, and 
dwelle thou there, and make thou an au- 
ter to the Lord, that apperide to thee 
whanne thou fleddist Esau, thi brother. 
ForsotheY Jacob seide, whanne al his hous2 
was clepid to gidere, Caste 3e a wei alien 
goddis, that ben ‘in the myddis’ of 30u, 
and be 3e clensid, and* chaunge 3e 3oure 
clothis ; rise 3e, and stie’ we* into Bethel, 3 
that we make there an auter to the Lord, 
which? herde me in the dai of my tribu- 
lacioun, and was felowe of my weie. Ther- 4 
for thei 3auen to® hymn! alle alien® goddis 
which thei hadden, and eere ryngis, that 
weren in ‘the eeris of hem"; and he: del- 
uyde tho* vndur a ‘tre, clepid therubynte’, 
which is bihynde the citee of Sichem. Ands 
whanne thei 3eden, drede assailide alle 
men by cumpas of the citee, and thei 
weren not hardi to pursue hem goynge 
awei. Therfor Jacob cam to Lusa, which™ ¢ 
is in the lond of Canaan, bi ‘sire name" 
Bethel°®, he and al his puple with hym. 
And he? bildide there an auter to the7 
Lord, and clepide the name of that place 
The hows of God, for God apperide there 
to hym, whanne he fledde his brothir. 
Delbora, the nurische of Rebecca, diede ins 
the same tyme, and sche was biried at the 
roote of Bethel, vndir an ook, and the 
name of the place was clepid The ook of 
wepyng". Forsothe God apperide eft to9 
Jacob, aftir that he turnede a3en fro Meso- 
potanye of Sirie, and cam into Bethel, 
and blesside* hym, and seide, Thou schalt 10 
no more be clepid Jacob, but Israel schal 
be thi name. And God clepide hym Is- 
rael, and seide to hym, Y am God Almy3ti, 11 
encreesse thou, and be thou multiplied, 
folkis and‘ puplis of * naciouns schulen be 
of thee, kyngis schulen go out of thi 
leendis; and Y shal 3yue to thee, and to12 


f Om. DEFH. 


*govpt. stiethou vps. yYSothlig. 7% amyddis 1. in the myddils. ®Om.s. gor. ¢we yp is. 
4the which 1. ¢Om.eup. fJacobis. &the alien is. bher eris 1s. i Jacob is. khemis. ! therebynte 
treers. ™thatis. the sire names. the names. ° of Fyre Bethel s. PJacobis. 4 he clepide 1s. 
‘the wepynga. ‘he blesside rs. tofa. Yand Nn. 


x 


L154 


shal 3yue to thee, and to thi seed after 
'3thee. And he 3ede a wey frohym. He 
forsothe areride a stonen signe of wor- 
ship, in the place that God speke to hym, 
sacrifiynge vpon it sacrifice of licowres, 
isand heldynge oute oyle, and clepynge the 
16name of that place Bethel. And he goon 
out thens, com in veer tyme to the loond 
that ledith to Effratam, in the which 
17whanne Rachel shulde bere childe, for 
the hardnes of birth she biganne to pe- 
rishe; and the meedwijf seide to hir, 
Wole thow not drede, for also and this 
isthow shalt haue a sone. The soule for- 
sothe goynge oute for sorwe, and now 
deeth fallynge ynne, the name of hir sone 
she clepide Benony, that is, the sone of 
my sorwe; the fader forsothe clepide 
hym Beniamyn, that is, the sone of the 
19ri3t side. Thanne Rachel was deed, and 
was biryed in the weye that ledith to 
20 Effratam, that is Bethleem. And Jacob 
reyside a signe of preysing vpon the se- 
pulere of hir; this is the title of the 
monument of Rachel vnto the present 
2iday. He goon out thens ficchide a taber- 
22nacle ouer the towre of the flok. And 
whanne he shulde dwelle in that regioun, 
Ruben 3ede, and slepte with Bala, the 
secundarye wijf of his fader, that to hyin 
was not vnwist. Forsothe the sones of 
23 Jacob weren twelue; the sones® of Lia, 
the! first gotun Ruben, and Symyon, and 
Leuy, and Judas, and Ysachar, and Zabu- 
24lon; the sones of Rachel, Joseph, and 
25Beniamyn; the sones of Bale, the ser- 
uaunt of Rachel, Dan, and Neptalym ; 
26the sones of Zelphe, the handmayden of 
Lye, Gad, and Aser. Thes the sones of 
Jacob, which ben born to hym in Meso- 
27 potanye of Syrye. He cam also to Ysaac, 
his fadyr, into Mambre, the cyte of Ar- 
bee, this is Ebron, in the which pil- 


§ sone 4. 


V fro him, that is, 3ede out of his si3t. BCGNQX. 
Yvpon is. # he clepide is. 2 sothely 1s. 
hanea1. > passide fro hir 1. i his 1s. 

P the biriel 1s. 


kOm. s. 


GENESIS. 


Wor EILPs. Om. plures. 
b he cam Is. 
I that 1. 
4 vnto this 1. til in to this K pr.m. s. 


XXXV. 13—27. 


thi seed after thee, the lond which Y 3af 
to Abraham, and Ysaac. And God de-1i3 
partide fro hym’. Forsothe Jacob reiside 14 
a title ether* memorial* of stoonys, in 
the place where ynne God spak to hym, 
and he sacrifiede ther onneY fletynge sacri- 
fices, and schedde out oile, and clepide? 1s 
the name of that place Bethel. Forsothe® 16 
Jacob 3ede out fro thennus, and cam? in 
the bigynnynge of somer to‘ the lond 
that ledith to Effrata; in which lond 
whanne Rachel tranelide in child beryng, 
sche bigan to be in perel for the® hard-17 
nesse of childberyng; and the medewijf 
seide to hir, Nyle thou drede, for thou 
schalt haue’ also this® sone. Forsotheis 
while the soule 3ede out» for sorew, and 
deeth neizede thanne, she clepide the name 
of hir sone Bennony, that is, the sone of 
my sorewe; forsothe the! fadir clepide hym 
Beniamyn, that is the’ sone of the ri3t 
side. Therfor Rachel diede, and was biriede 19 
in the weie that ledith to Effrata, this! is 
Bethleem. And Jacob bildide a title™ on™ 20 
the sepulcre of hir; this is the title® of 
birielP of Rachel ‘til into’ present dai. 
Jacob 3ede fro thennus, and settide™ taber- 21 
nacle* ouer the tour of the flok. And 22 
while he dwellide in that cuntrei, Ruben 
3ede, and slepte with Bala, the secundarie 
wijf of his fadir, whicht thing was not 
hid fro hym. Forsothe the sones of Jacob 
weren twelue; the sones of Lia weren, 23 
the firste gendrid® Ruben, and" Symeon, 
and Leuy, and Judas, and Isachar, and 
Zabulon ; the sones of Rachel weren, Jo-24 
seph and Beniamyn; the sones of Bala, 25 
handmayde’ of Rachel, weren Dan, and 
Neptalym; the” sones of Zelfa, hand-26 
mayde of Lya, weren Gad, and Aser. 
These weren the sones of Jacob, that 
were borun to hym in Mesopotanye of 
Sirie. Also Jacob came to Isaac, his fadir, 27 


h Om. a. 


x @ memorial ms. Om. plures. 
dintor, €Om.s. fOm.1. & now 
™ memorial s. 4vpon is. © memorial is. 
rhe sette 1s. § a tabernacle Kx sec.m. taber- 


to L. 


naclis s. tthe which i, "bigotuni. tuOQm. x. Vthe handmayde is. W and the Is. 


XXXV. 28—XXXVI. 13. 


asgrimagid Abraham and Ysaac. And ful- 
fillid ben the dayes of Ysaac an hundryd 

agand ei3ti of 3eris; and endid thur3 age is 
deed, and he is put to his peple, olde, and 
ful of dayes; and biryeden hym Esau 
and Jacob his sones. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Thes forsothe ben the generaciouns of 
2Ysau; he is Edom. Esau took wyues of 
the dowtres of Chanaan, Ada, the dow3- 
ter of Elom Ethei, and Oolibama, the 
3dow3ter of a sone of Sebeon Euehi, and 
Bethsemath the dow3ter of Ismael, the 
asistir of Nabaioth. Ada forsothe bare 
5Eliphat; Bathsemath gat Rahuel; Ooli- 
bama gat Hyeus, and Hielon, and Chore. 
Thes the sones of Esau, that weren 
born to hym in the loond of Chanaan. 
6 Esau forsothe took his wyues, and sones, 
and dow3tres', and al the soule! of his 
hows, and substaunce, and beestis, and al 
that he my3te haue in the loond of Cha- 
naan, and 3ede into anothir regioun, and 
7wente awey fro Jacob his brother ; for- 
sothe ryche thei weren greetli, and to- 
gidere dwellen my3ten not, and the loond 
of the pilgrimage of hem susteynede hem 
snot, for the multitude of flockis. And 
Esau dwelte in the hil of Seyr; he is 
9Edom. Thes forsothe ben the genera- 
ciouns of Esau, fader of Edom, in the hil 
10 of Seyr, and thes the names of the sones 
of hym. Eliphath, the sone of Ada, wijf 
of Esau, and Rahuel, the sone of Bath- 
lisemath, wijf of hym. And the soues of 
Eliphat weren, Cheman, Emath, Sephu, 
12Gatan, Ceneth, and Chore. Tanna for- 
sothe was the secundarie wiyf of Elipath, 
sone of Esau, that bare to hym Amalech. 
Thes ben the sones of Ada, wijf of Esau. 
13 The sones forsothe of Rahuel, Naath, and 
Ara™, Semma, and Mera". Thes the sones 


i dou3tren speEFH. * Om. &. 


GENESIS. 


1 soules nm. 


155 


in to Manbre, a* citee ArabeeY, this is 
Ebron, in which Manbre Abraham ‘and 
Isaac? was a pylgrym*. And the daies of 28 
Isaac weren fillid> an hundrid and foure 
scoore of 3eris; and he was wastid in age, 29 
and diede, and he was put to his puple, 
and was eeld, and ful of daies; and Esau 
and Jacob his sones birieden hym. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


Forsothe these ben the generaciouns of 1 
Esau; he is¢ Edom. Esau took wyuese 
of the dou3tris of Canaan, Ada, the dou3- 
tir of Elom Ethey, and Oolibama, the 
dou3ter of Ana, sone’ of Sebeon Euey ; 
also® Bathsemath, the dou3tir of Ismael,3 
the sistir of Nabioth. Forsothef Ada4 
childide Elifath ; Batsemath childide Ra- 
huel; Oolibama childide Hieus, and Hie-s 
lon, and Chore. These weren the sones 
of Esau, that weren borun to hym in the 
lond of Canaan. Sotheli® Esau took hisee 
wyues, and sones", and dou3tris, and ech 
soule! of his hows, and* catel, and scheep, 
and ‘alle thingis whiche he ‘my3te haue! in 
the lond of Canaan, and 3ede™ into anothir 
cuntrey, and departide fro his brother Ja- 
cob; for thei weren ful riche, and thei7 
mi3ten not dwelle togidere, and the erthe" 
of her pilgrymage susteynede not hem, for 
the multitude of flockis. And Esau dwellide s 
in the hil of Seir; he is®° Edom. Forsotheo 
these weren the generaciouns of Esau, fa- 
der of Edom, in the hil of Seir, and these 10 
weren the? names of hise sones. Elifath4, 
sone’ of Ada, ‘wijf of Esau’; also Rahuel 
sone of Bathsemath, ‘wijf of hym™. Andi 
the sones of Elifath weren, Theman, E- 
math, Sephu, and Gathan, and Ceneth, 
and Chore. Forsothe Tanna was the se-12 
cundarie wijf of Elifath, ‘sone of Esau’, 
whiche Yanna childide to hym Amalech. 
These weren the sones of Ada, ‘wijf of 
Esau”. Forsothe the sones of Rahuel.s 
weren, Naath, and Zara, and* Semna, and 


m Zara BDE. % Meza rpEFI. 


xthe kmowd. _y Arbee plures. of Arbee 1kmorswd. 7% Om.1. 8 pylgrym and Isaac1. > ful- 
fillid 1s. ¢isclepid1s. 4the sone1s. ¢ also he took to wijf'1s. fAndi1s, § And sothelic. » hise 
sones 1s. /lijfis. k Om. penart. and hiss. ‘hadde1s. ™ he 3ede 1s. ™londe rs. © is clepid 1s. 
POm. 3s. 4 And Elifath ¢. ‘the soners. § Esau wif's. tthe soneis. ¥ wijf of Esau 1. Esau wif s. 


Y the sone of Esau 1. Esau sone s. 


w Esans wijf 1. Esan wyf s. 


x Om, kK. 
x 2 


156 


u40f Bathsemath, wijf of Esau. And thes 
weren the sones of Oolibama, dow3ter of 
Ane™, sone of Sebeon, wiyf of Esau, whom 
she get tohym; Hyeus, and Hielon, and 
13Chore. Thes the dukis of the sones of 
Esau; the sones of Elyphath, the first 
getun of Esau, duke Theman, duke Omar, 
16duke Sephua, duke Seneth, duke Chore, 
duke Datan, duke Amelech. Thes the 
sones of Eliphath, in the loond of Edom, 
iyand thes the sones of Ade. And thes 
the sones of Rahuel, sone of Esau, duke 
Naath, duke Zara, duke Semma, duke 
Mera®; thes forsothe dukis of Rahuel, in 
the loond of Edom. Thes the sones of 
18 Bathsemath, wijf of Esau. Thes forsothe 
the soues of Oolybama, wijf of Esau; 
duke Hyeus, duke Hyelon, duke Chore ; 
thes the dukis of Oolibama, dow3ter of 
i9 Anee, wijf of Esau. hes ben the sones 
of Esau, and thes the dukes of hem; he 
ais Edom. Thes ben the sones of Seyr 
Horrey, the dwellers of the loond, Jo- 
than, and Sobal, and Sebeon, and Anam, 
21and Dyson, and Eser, and Dysan; thes 
the dukis of Horrei, sones®® of Seyr, in 
22 the loond of Edom. The sones forsothe of 
Jothan ben maad, Horrey, and Theman ; 
forsothe the sister of Jothan was Thanna. 
23 And thes the sones of Sobal; Aluan, and 
Maneeth, and Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. 
24. And thes the sones of Sebeon; Achaia, 
and Ana; this is Ana, that fonde hoot 
watris in wildernes, whanne he fedde the 
25she assis of Sebeon, his fadir; and he 
hadde a sone Dysan, and a dow3ter Ooli- 
26bama. And thes the sones of Dysan; 
Amdam, and Jesban, and Jetran, and 
27 Charan. And thes the sones of Hesar; 
28 Baalan, and Zanan, and Acham. And 
Dysan hadde sones, Hus, and Haran. 
29 Thes the dukis of Horreis; duke Jothan, 
30 duke Sobal, duke Sebeon, duke Ana, duke 
Dyson, duke Heser, duke Dysan; thes 


the dukis of Horreis, that? comaundeden: 


Mn an AF, 


GENESIS. 


© Meza BpDEFU. 


XXXVI. 14—30. 


Meza. These weren the sones of Bathse- 
math, ‘wijf of Esau’. And these weren 14 
the sones of Oolibama, dou3ter? of Ana, 
sone of Sebeon, ‘wijf of Esau, whiche sche 
childide to hym; Hieus, and Hielon, and 
Chore. These weren the” dukis of the1s 
sones of Esau; the sones® of Elifath first? 
gendrid® of Esau, duk Theman, duyk 
Omar, duk Sephua, duyk Ceneth, duyk 16 
Chore, duyk Dathan, duykf Amalech. 
These weren the sones of Eliphat, in the 
lond of § Edom, and these weren the sones 
of Ada. Also these weren the sones of 17 
Ralnel, ‘sone of Esau", duyk Naath, duyk 
Zara, duyk Senna, duyk Meza; forsothe 
these duykis weren of Rahmel in the lond 
of Edom. These weren the sones of Bath- 
samath, ‘wijf of Esau. Forsothe theses 
weren the! sones of Oolibama, ‘wijf of 
Esau'; duyk Hieus, duyk Hielon, duyk 
Chore; these weren duykis of Oolibama, 
dou3tir* of Ana, ‘wijf of Esau‘. These ig 
weren the sones of Esau, and thei™ 
weren duykis of hem; he is Edom. 
These weren the sones of Seir Horrei, 20 
enhabiteris of the lond; Jothan, and So- 
bal, and Sebeon, and Anam, and Dison, 21 
and Eser, and Disan; these duikis weren 
of Horrey, sone” of Seir, in the lond of 
Edom. Forsothe the sones of Jothan22 
weren maad°®, Horrey, and Theman; so- 
theli the sistir of Jothan was Tanna. AndP 23 
these weren the sones of Sobal; Aluan, 
and Maneeth, and Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. 
And these weren the sones of Sebeon ; 21 
Achaia, and Ana; this is Ana that foonde 
hoote watris in wildirmesse1, whanne he 
kepte the assis of Sebeon, his fadir; andes 
he’ hadde a sone Disan’, and‘ a dou3tir 
Oolibama. And these weren the sones of 26 
Disan ; Amadan, and Jesban, and Jethran, 
and Charan. Also these weren the sones 27 
of Heser; Baalan, and Zeuan, and Acham. 
And Disan hadde sones, Hus, and Haran. 2g 
These weren the duykis of Horreis; duyk 29 


00 sone BDEFH. P the p. 


y Esaus wijf 1. Esau wifs. 2 the don3ter 1s. % Esans wijf1. Esau wifs. > Om.1s. © sone 1. 
(the firstis. ¢bigotun1. fandduyks. &Om.p. 4 Esanssone1. Esau sone s. i Esans wijf 1. 
Esau wifs. the donjtiris. 1Om.c. ™ theses. the sonexs. °Om.K. POm.1s. 4 the 
wildirnesse s. *Om.c. 8 that hizte Disans. * Om. re. 


XXXVI. 31—XXXVIIL. 3. 


3iin the loond of Seyr. The kyngis for- 
sothe that regneden in the loond of Edom, 
or that’ the children of Yrael hadden a 
3z2kyng, weren thes; Balach, the sone of 
Beor, and the name of his cyte Denaba. 
33 Balach forsothe died, and for hym regned 
34 Jobab, the sone of Zare of Bosra. And 
- whanne Jobab was deed, regnede for hym 
35 Husam of the loond of Thamaus. This 
forsothe deed, regnede for hym Adad, the 
sone of Badady, the which smote Madyan 
in the regioun of Moab, and the name of 
36the cite of hym Abyuth. And whanne 
Adad was deed, regnede for hym Semla 
37 of Masarech. And this deed, regnede for 
38 hym Saul of the flood of Robooth. And 
whanne and this was deed, folwide into 
the kyngdom Balaanan, the sone of A- 
39chobor. And this deed, regnede for hym 
Adad, and the name of the cite of hym 
Phoa, and the wijf of hym was clepid 
Meesabel, the dow3ter of Mathret, dow3- 
4oter of Mesaab. Thes thanne the names 
of the dukis of Esau, in kynredis, and 
places, and her names; the duke Thanna, 
4ithe duke Alua, the duke Jezeth, the duke 
42 Oolibama, duke Ela, duke Phynon, duke 
43 Zeneth, duke Theman, duke Mabsar, duke 
Madiel, duke Yram; thes the dukys of 
Edom, the dwellers in™ the loond of his 
empire ; he is Esau, the fader of Ydumeis. 
iJacob forsothe dwelte in the loond of 
Chanaan, in the which his fader pil- 
2grimagide; and thes ben the generaciouns 
of hym. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


Joseph whanne he was of sextene 3eer 
fedde a flok with his bretheren, 3it a 
childe, and he was with the sones of Bale 
and of Zelphe, wyues of his fader; and 
he accuside his bretheren anentis the fa- 


q Om. BpeFr pr.m. 


uOm.K. %YOm. a. W¥ the sone ts. 
b the douzter 1. ¢the duykisis. 4 dwellynge 1s. 
was s. ithe wyues 1s. & her ts. 


GENESIS. 


x Om. B sec.m. 
ehe this1s. Om. 1s. 


157 


Jothan, duyk Sobal, duyk Sebeon, duyk 
Ana, duyk Dison, duyk Heser, duik Di- 30 
san; these weren the" duykis of’ Horreis, 
that weren lordis in the lond of Seir. For-31 
sothe kyngis that regneden in the lond of 
Edom, bifore that the sones of Israel had- 
den a kyng, weren these; Balach, the sonese 
of Beor, and the name of his citee was 
Deneba. Forsothe Balach diede, and Jo-33 
bab, sone” of Sara of Bosra, regnede for 
hym. And whanne Jobab was deed, Hu-34 
sam of the loud of Themayns regnede for 
hym. And whanne he was deed, Adad, the 35 
sone of Badadi, that smoot Madian in the 
lond of Moab, and the name of his citee 
was Abyuth, ‘regnede for him*. And 36 
whanne Adad was deed, Semla of Mase- 
racha regnede for hym. And whanne he37 
was deed, San) of the flood Robooth 
ragnede for hym. And whanne he was38 
deed, Balanam, the sone of Achobor, was 
successour in to the rewme. And whanne’Y 39 
this? was deed, Adad regnede for hym, and 
the name of the citee of Adad was Phan, 
and the name of his wijf was clepid? Mee- 
zabel, the dou3ter of Mathrect, dou3ter of 
Mesaab. Therfor these weren the names 4o 
of duykis® of Esau, in her kynredis, and 
places, and names; duyk Thanna, duyk 
Alua, duyk Jetech, duyk Oolibama, duyk 41 
Ela, duyk Phinon, duyk Ceneth, duik 42 
Theman, duyk Mabsar, duyk Madiel, duyk 43 
Iram; these weren the duykis of Edom, 
dwellerist in the lond of hys lordschip; 
he® was Esau, thef fadir of Ydumeis. For-1 
sothe Jacob dwellide in the lond of Ca- 
naan, in which® his fadir was a pilgryin ; 
and these weren the generaciouns of hym. 2 


CAP. XXXVII. 


Joseph whanne he was of sixtene 3eer, 
jit a child, kepte a flok with hise bri- 
theren, and was’ with the sones of Bala 
and Zelfa, wyues! of his fadir; and he ac- 
cuside his britheren at the fadir of ‘the 


Yin to BDEFH. 


2 this king s. 8 Om. ks. 
& which lond is. hhe 


y whanne he 1. 


158 


3der of the werst synne. Yrael forsothe 
louede Joseph ouer alle his sones, ther- 
thur3 that in elde he hadde getun hym; 
and he made hym a coote of dyuerse co- 
4lours. And the bretheren of hym seynge 
that of the fader more than alle the sones 
was loued, hatiden hym, and my3ten not 
sto hym eny thing pesebli speken. And 
it felle, that a seen sweuen he tolde to 
his britheren, the which cause was seed 
cof more haat. And Joseph seide to his 
britheren, Here 3e my sweuen that Y 
7saw3, I wenede vs to bynden hondfullis 
in the feelde, and myn hondful as to ryse, 
and stonde, and 3oure hondfullis stond- 
ynge al aboute to loute myn hondful. 
sAnd the britheren of hym answeriden, 
Whether thow shalt be oure kyng, oither 
we shal be vndirloute® to thi bidding ? 
This thanne cause of sweuenes and of 
wordis mynystride norishyuge of ennuye 
gand of haate. And another sweuen he 
saw3, that tellynge to his britheren, seith, 
I sawe bi dreem as the sunne, and the 
mone, and the elleuen sterrys to lowtun 
toine. That whan to his fader and bri- 
theren he hadde tolde, blamede hym his 
fader, and seide, What to it silf wole this 
sweuen that thow hast seen? Whether Y, 
and thi moder, and thi britheren shulen 
l1lowt thee vpon erthe ? Thanne enuyeden 
to hym his britheren. The fader forsothe 
12the thing stilli bihelde, and whanne the 
britheren of hym in the flockis of the 
fader to ben fedde dwelliden in Sichem, 
13 Yrael seide to hym, Thi britheren feden 
sheep in Sichemys; come, Y shal sende 
Mthee to hem. Who answerynge, Y am 
redi, he seith, Go, and se if alle thingis 
be welsum anentis thi britheren, and 
beestis, and a3en tel thow to me what is 
doon. He, sent fro the valey of Ebron, 
15cam into Sichym; and a man fonde hym 


GENESIS. 


XXXVII. 3—15. 


worste! synne. Forsothe Israel louyde Jo-3 
seph ouer™ alle hise sones, for he hadde 
gendrid" hymn in eelde®; and he made to 
Joseph a cote of many? colours. For-4 
sothe hise britheren sien that he was 
loued of the fader more than alle‘, and 
thei hatiden hym, and my3ten* not speke 
ony thing pesibli to hym. And it bifeldes 
that he telde to hise britheren a sweuene* 
seyn®, which cause was ‘the seed* of 
more hatrede. And Joseph seide to hise 
britheren, Here 3e the sweuene which Y 
sei3, Y gesside that we bounden to gidere7 
handfuls’, and that as myn handful roos?, 
and stood, and that 3onre handfuls stoden 
aboute and worschipiden myn handful. 
Hise britheren answerden, Whether thous 
shalt be oure kyng, ethir we shulen be 
maad suget to thi lordschip? Therfor this 
cause of sweuenys* and wordis mynystride 
the nurschyng of enuye, and of hatrede. 
Also Joseph sei3 another sweuene, which9 
he telde to the’ britheren, and seide, Y 
sei3 bie a sweuene! that as the sunne, and 
moone®, and enleuen® sterris worschipiden 
me. And whanne he hadde teld this10 
sweuenef to his fadir, and britheren®, his 
fadir blamyde him, and seide, What wole 
this sweuene" to it silf! which) thon hast 
seyn? Whether Y and thi modir, and thik 
britheren, schulen worschipe thee on erthe? 
Therfor hise britheren hadden enuye tot 
hym. Forsothe the fadir bihelde pryuely 
the thing, and whanne his britheren dwell- 12 
iden in Sichem, aboute flockis of the&% 
fadir ‘to be kept*", Israel seide to Joseph, 13 
Thi britheren kepen scheep in Sichymys; 
come thou, Y schal sende thee to hem. 
And whanne Joseph answerde, Y am redi, 14 
Israel seide, Go thou, and se whether alle 
thingis ben esi anentis thi britheren, and 
scheep!; and telle thou to me what is 
doon. He was sent fro! the valey of E- 


8 sugett BDEFH. 


lful wickid 1. ™aboue1. ® getuu 1. 
rOm. 1. § thei my3ten 1s. ¢ metels 1. 
seed or enchesoun s. _-¥ scheues or handfuls 1. 
4dreem1. € the moone EIKs. 
iitself menes. Jthatrs. k Om. c. 
iiwelsumis. 1 the scheep 3s. 1 to G. 


© his eelde 1s. 
a that he sau3 1. seyn of hims. W the which 1. 
2 roos vp I. 
ee the enleuen s. 
ff kepyng flockis 1. keeping of fl. s. 


dalle hise sones 1. alle thei s. 
Xa sowyng I. 
a dremes I. b his pers. ¢ Om. Is. 

Shise britheren 1s. 4 dreme mene 1. 
eg heris. bh Om. ts. 


P dyuerse 1. 


f dreem 1. 


XXXVII. 16—209. 


in the feelde errynge, and askide, what he 
i6sou3te. And he answeride, My bretheren 
Y seche, shew thow to me where thei 
17feden the flockis. And the man seide to 
hym, Thei wenten a wey fro this place, 
forsothe I herde hem seiynge, Go we into 
Dothaym. And Joseph 3ede after his bri- 
istheren, and fonde hem in Dothaym. The 
whiche whanne thei seyen hym ‘a ferret, 
or he neizede to hem, thon3ten to sleen 
19hym, and togidere thei speken, Loo! the 
20dremer cometh, go we, and sle we hym, 
and pntte we hyin® in an olde sistern, 
and we shulen seye, The werst wiylde beest 
hath denowrid hym; and thanne it shal 
apere what profiten to hym hys dremes. 
21Thes thingis forsothe herynge Ruben, 
enforside to delyuere hym of the hondis 
22 of hem, and seide, Slee we not the hif of 
hym, ne shede we blood, but throw 3e 
him into the olde sisterne, that is in wil- 
dernes, and kepe 3e 3oure hondes vngilti. 
That forsothe he seide, wilnynge to de- 
lyuer hym fro the hondes of hem, and to 
233elde to his fader. ‘Thanne anoon as he 
cam to his britheren, thei nakiden hym 
the side coote to the hele, and of manye 
2tcolowrs, and puttiden into an olde sis- 
25terne, that ladde no watyr. And sit- 
tynge for to eet breed, thei seen Ysmael- 
itis weiegoers to comen fro Galaad, and 
camels of hem berynge swete spyces, and 
swete gumme, and myrre, into Egipte. 
26Thanne Judas seide to his britheren, 
What shal it profit vs if we sleen oure 
brother, and we hiden the blood of hym ? 
27It is betere that he be sold to Ismaelitis, 
and our hondes ben not defoulid; for- 
sothe the brother and onre flesh he is. 
The britheren assentiden to thes wordes ; 
28and the marchaundes Madyanytes goynge 
bisides, thei, drawynge hym oute of the sis- 
terne, solden hym to Ysmaelytis for thretti 
siluer pens ; the whiche ladden hym into 
29 Egipte. And Ruben turned a3en to the 


t o feer pin. 


™ goynge amys1. he k. 


GENESIS. 


° axide hym qiks. 


159 


bron, and cam into Sichem; and a man 1s 
foond hym errynge™ in the feeld, and ‘the 
man” axide®, what he sou3te. And he an-ic 
swerde, Y seke my britheren, schewe thou 
to me where thei kepten? flockis1. And 17 
the man seide to hym', Thei 3eden awei 
fro this place; forsothe Y herde hem 
seiynge, Go we into Dothaym. And Jo- 
seph 3ede® aftir his britheren, and foond 
hem in Dothaym. And whanne thei had-1s 
den seyn hym afer, bifor that* he nei3ede 
to hem, thei thou3ten to sle hym, and1y 
spaken" togidere, Lo! the dremere cometh, 
come 3e, sle we hym, and sendeY we into 20 
an eld sisterne, and we schulen seie, A 
wielde beeste ful wickid hath deuourid 
hym; and thane it schal appere what hise 
dremes profiten to hym. Sotheli Ruben 21 
herde this, and enforside* to delyuere hymY 
fro her hondis, and seide, Sle we not the 22 
lijf of hym, nether schede we out his 
blood, but caste 3e? hym into* an eeld 
cisterne, which is in the® wildirnesse, and 
kepe 3e 3oure hondis gilteles. Forsothe he 
seide this, willynget to delynere hym fro 
her hondis, and to 3elde® to his fadir. 
Therfor anoon as Joseph cam to hise bri- 23 
theren, thei dispuyliden hym of the‘ cootes, 
doun to the heele, and of many colours, 
and senten" into! the’ eeld cisterne, that24 
hadde no water. And thei saten ‘to ete! 2s 
breed; and thei sien that Ismaelitis wei- 
goers camen fro Galaad, and that her ca- 
mels baren swete smellynge spiceries, and 
‘rosyn, and™ stacten, into Egipt. herfor 26 
Judas seide to hise britheren, What schal 
it profite to vs, if we schulen sle oure bro- 
ther, and scliulen hide his blood? It is 27 
betere that he be sceld to Ismalitis, and 
oure hondis be not defoulid, for he is oure 
brother and fleisch”. The® britheren as- 
sentiden to these wordis; and whanne2s 
marchauntis of Madian passiden forthp?, 
thei drowen hym4 out of the cisterne, and 
seelden hym to Ismaelitis, for thri3tti‘ 


u Om. Boru. 


Pkepen ncaiswx. her flockis. 1° Joseph 1s. 


swente 1s. ¢ Om. kK pr.m. 4theispaken 1s. VY putte 1s. Wwehimiks. * enforside himis.  YJo- 
sephis. %we1. @inis. bthatr. ¢Om.ce. dwilnyngs. ¢3elde kimis. fhis EKLP.  & coote 
sijd1s. hsenten him x. thei puttiden him is. putten wm. ‘inis. kanis. land eeten B. that thei 


sehulden ete c pr.m. ™Om. 3, ® oure fleiseh 1s. ° His 1s. P ther forthis. 4 Joseph 1s. ™ twenty a pr.m. 


BCELNOPW,. XxX. FL. 


160 


sosisterne, foude not the child; and the 
clothis to-rent goynge to his bretheren, 
seith, The childe not aperith, and whider 
31 Y shal go? Forsothe thei token the coote 
of hym, and in the blood of a kyde that 
x2thei hadden slayn steyneden; the which 
serdynge shulden bere to fader’, and 
seyn, This we han foundun, loke whether 
33 the coote of thi sone it be or noov. The 
which whanne the fader knowith”, seith, 
The coote of my sone it is, the* moost 
yuel wiylde beest hath etun hyin, a beest 
34hath deuowrid Joseph. And the clothis 
to-reut, was’ clothid with an heyr, weil- 
35 ynge his sone myche tyme. And alle his 
free children gedered togideres, that thei 
my3teu swage the sorow of the fader, he 
nolde coumfortyng take, but seith, Y 
shal descende to my sone weilynge into 
helle. And hym stedfastli dwellynge in 
36 wepyng, Madenytis solden Joseph in E- 
gepte, to Putiphar, the geldyng of Pha- 
rao, the mayster of chyualrye’. 


CAP. XXXVUI. 


1 Judas descendynge the same tyme fro 
his britheren, turnede to a man QOdolla- 
2myte, Hyram bi name; and he saw3 
there the dow3ter of a Chanany man, Sue 
bi name. And a wijf takun, 3ede into 
shir, the which conseyuede, and bare a 
childe, and clepide the name of hym Her.” 
4And eftsones conceyued the kynde, she 
snemnyde the born sone Onam. And the 
thridde child she bare, whom she clepide 
Sela, the which born, seeside to more 
ébere childe. Judas forsothe 3aue a wijf 
to his first getun Her, Thamar bi name. 
7And Her, the first getun of Jude, was 
wickid in the si3t of the Lord, and ther- 
sfor was slayn of hym. Thanne Judas 
seide to Onam, his sone, Go yn to the 


v the fader £. 
rye E see.m. 


8 dippiden itixs. tthat 1s. 4 thei senten 1s. 


and hee. ®deuourid hims. bpreseu. ¢her ts. 
&achaastis. 4 Om.1s. {the mayster 1s. * his 1s. 
© Sotheli is. ? that hijte Thamar rs. 49 bigetun 1. 


GENESIS. 


w had knowen spew. knowen F. 


XXKXVII. 30-—XXXVIII. 8. 


platis of siluer; whiche ledden hym in to 
Egipt. And Ruben turnede ajen to the29 
cisterne, and foond not the child; and he3o 
to-rente his closis, and he 3ede to hise 
britheren, and seide, The child apperith 
not, and whidir schal Y go? Forsothesi 
thei token his coote, and dippiden* in the 
blood of a kide, which thei hadden slayn ; 
and senten" men that baren’ to the fadir, 32 
and seiden, We han founde this coote, 
se*, whether it is the coote of thi sone, 
etherY nai. And whanne the fader haddess 
knowe it, he* seide, It is the coote of my 
sone, a wielde beeste ful wickid hath ete 
hym, a beeste hath deuourid*® Joseph. And 34 
he to-rente his clothis, and he was clothid 
with an heire, and biweilide his sone in 
myche tyme. Sothely whanne hise fre3s 
children weren gaderid to gidere, that thei 
schulden peese> the sorewe of the® fadir, 
he nolde take counfort, but seide, Y schal 
go doun in to helle, and schal¢ biweile my 
sone. And the® while Jacob contynude 
in wepyng, Madianytis seelden Joseph intof 36 
Egipt to Putifar, chast* ‘and onest® ser- 
uaunt of Farao, maistir! of the* chy- 
ualrie. 
CAP. XXXVIII. 

Yn the same tyme Judas 3ede doun fro1 
his britheren, and turnede! to a man of 
Odolla, Hiram bi name; and he si3 ther2 
a dou3tir of a man of Canaan, Sue bi 
name. And whanne he hadde takun hir 
to wijf, he entride to hir, and sche con-3 
seytede, and childide a sone, and clepide 
his name Her. And eft whanne a™ child4 
was conseyued, sche nemyde" the child 
borun Onam. And sche childide thes 
thridde sone, whom sche clepide Cela, and 
whanne he was borun, sche ceesside tq 
bere child more. Forsothe® Judas 3af ac 
wijf, ‘Thamar bi name, to his firste gen- 
drid’ sone Her. And Her, the firste gen-7 
drid4 sone of Judas, was weiward in the 
si3t of the Lord, and therfor he was slayn 


x and &. Y and was D. 2 the chyual- 


Xsethon 1. Yor ELP. 
e€Qm.1. fin plures. 
” nempned Gmw. 


vbaren it 1s. W her 1s. 
4 Y schal a pr. m. et plures. 
lhe turnede 1s. ™an ofhir Is. 


XXXVIII. 9—18. 


wijf of thi brother, and be thow felaw- 
shipte to hir, that thow rere seed to thi 
9brother. He wytynge sones to be born 
not to hym, goynge to the wijf of his 
brother, shede the seed into the erthe, 
lest fre children weren born in name of 
10the brother; and therfor the Lord smote 
hym, therthur3 that a cursid thing he 
idide. Wherfore Judas seide to Thamar, 
the wijf of his sone, Be thow a widwe in 
the hows of thi fader, to the tyme that 
Sela my sone growe; forsothe he dredde 
lest and he shulde dye as the britheren® 
of hym. The which 3ede, and dwelte in 
12the hows of hir fader. And manye 3erys 
ouergoon, diede Sue, the wijf of Jude, 
the which after weilyng coumfort takun, 
steiede vp to the sheepherdis® of his sheep, 
he and Yras, the sheepherd of the flok, 
13Odollamyte, in Tampnas. And it was 
told to Thamar, that hir housbonde fader 
steiede vp into Tampnas, to the sheep 
i4that shulden be clippid. The which, the 
clothis of widewhed don down, toke to a 
roket, and the abite chaungid, sat in the 
place of two weyes that ledeth to Tamp- 
nam; therthur3 that Sela was growun, 
and she hadde not takun hym to hous- 
15 bonde. Whom whanne Judas hadde seen, 
he trowide hir to ben a> strumpet; she 
forsothe hadde couerede hir chere, lest 
icshe were knowun. And he yngoynge to 
hir, seith, Lat me, that Y goo togidere 
with thee; forsothe he wiste not that she 
was the wijf of his sone. The which an- 
swerynge, What shal thow 3yue me, that 
17thow vse me with liggyng? he seide, Y 
shal sende to thee a kidde fro the flockis. 
And eft she seiynge, I shal suffre that 
thow wolt, if thow 3yue to me a wedde, 
to the tyme that thow sende that that 
18 thow bihotist. Judas seith, What to thee 
wolt thow be 3ouun for a wedde? She 
answeryde, Thi rynge, and thin arm- 


a brether pu. brother p. 


tand fors. Sknowynger. ¢ Oi. 1. 
wijf 1. his sone wyf's. Y a widewe 1s. 
1s ands. f wenten vp1. 


GENESIS. 


» elypparis z. 


u his seed 18. 
z hise i. 
& hir hosbondis fader went up in 1. her husbonde fadir stiede in s. 


a while c. 


161 


of the Lord. Therfor Judas seide tos 
Onam, his sone, Entre thou to the wijf of 
thi brothir, and be thou felouschipid to 
hir, that thou reise seed to thi brothir. 
And he wiste® that sones schulden not bes 
borun to him, ‘and het entride to the wijf 
of his brother, and schedde seed® in to the 
erthe, lest the’ fre children schulden be 
borun bi the name of the brother”; and 10 
therfor the Lord smoot hym, for he dide 
abhomynable thing. Wherfor Judas seide11 
to Thamar, ‘wijf of his sone*, Be thou 
wideweY in the hous of thi fadir, til Sela 
my sone wexe, for he dredde lest also he 
schulde die as hise britheren. And sche 
3ede, and dwellide in the hous of hir? 
fadir. Forsothe whanne* many 3eeris weren 12 
passid, the dou3ter of Sue, ‘the wijf of Ju- 
da, diede, and whanne coumfort was takun 
aftir morenyng, he stiede* to the schereris 
of hisé scheep, he and Iras of® Odolla, 
that was kepere of the floc, stieden‘ in to 
Thampnas. And it was teld to Thamar, 13 
that ‘the fadir of hir hosebonde stiede® to 
Thampnas, to schere scheep. And sche14 
dide awei the clothis of widewehod, and 
sche took a roket, and whanne the cloth- 
inge was chaungid, sche sat in the weilot 
that ledith to Tampna; for Sela hadde 
woxe, and sche hadde not take hym toi 
hosebonde. And whanne Judas hadde seyn 1s 
hir, he supposide hir to be an hoore, for 
sche hadde hilid hir face, lest sche were 
knowun. And Judas entride to hir, and 16 
seide, Suffre me that Y ligge with thee ; 
for he wiste not that sche was the wijf of 
his sone. And whanne sche answeride, 
What schalt thou jyue to ime, that thou 
ligge bi‘ me? he seide, Y schal sende to17 
thee a kide of the flockis. And eft whanne 
sche seide, Y schal suffre that that thou 
wolt, if thou schalt 3yue to me a wed, til 
thou sendist! that that thou bihetist™. Ju-18 
das seide, What wolt thou that be 3ouun 


bb Om. A pr.m. 


x his sones 
e¢ Judas rs. 4 stiede 


vOm. «rp.  W deed brothir ts. 
b Judas wijf rs. 


h roket cloth with many wrynclis c pr.m. roket vp om hir 1s. iin tos, k with k. ! sende Eres. ™ be- 


hij3te ELP. 


Ys 


162 


sercle, and the staf that thow holdist in 
thin hoond. Thanne at oon togiders 
iy goynge the womman conceyuede, and 
arysynge, she 3ede a wey; and the abite 
doon doun that she toke, she is clothid 
20with the clothis of widewhod. Judas 
forsothe sente a kidde bi his sheepherd 
Odollomyte, that he shulde take a° wedde 
that he 3aue to the womman; the which 
21 whanne he hadde not foundun hir, askide 
the men of that place, Where is the wom- 
man that sat in the two weies? answer- 
ynge alle men, There was not in this 
22place a strumpet. And he turnede a3en 
to Juda, and seide to hym, I haue not 
foundun hir, but and the men of that 
place seiden to me, neuer there to haue 
23 sittun a°¢ strumpet. Judas seith, Hane she 
to hir silf, certis of lesynge vndurnym vs 
she may not; I haue sente a kydde that 
Y bihizte, and thow hast not foundun 
2thir. Loo! forsothe after thre monethis 
men tolden to Jude, seiynge, Thamar, thi 
sones* wijf, hath doon fornycacioun, and 
the wombe of hir is seen to wexe ful 
greet. And Judas seide, Bryng hir forth, 
25that she be brent. The which whanne 
she shulde be lad to the peyne, sent to 
her® housbond fader, seiynge, Of the man 
whos thes ben Y haue conseyued ; know 
thow whos is the ryng, and the arm 
26sercle, and the staf? The which, the 3iftis 
knowun, seith, She is more ri3twise than 
Y, for I haue not takun hir to Sela, my 
sone; and neuerthelater ouer that tyme 
27he knewe hir not. Forsothe instondyng 
the beryng, gemels apereden in the wombe, 
and in that heeldyng out of the children, 
the toon putte forth an hoond, in the 
which the medewife bonde a reed threed, 
3, Seiynge, This shal goon out rather. He 
forsothe drawynge a3en the hoond, 3ede 
out the tother, and the womman seide, 
Whi is the wal for thee dyuydid? And 
for that cause she clepide the name of 


¢ the BDEFH. 


n thin 1s. © don off ts. 
uthe menis. Y tolden x. 
wijf is. 2 Om. 1. 
staf ixs. ¢ Judas is, 


P don on Is. 


a hir peyue Is. 
f the children 1s. 


GENESIS. 


ce Om. 4 prem. 


q Om. A sec.m. Is. 
w hirsilf, that we be not dispisid nc. hirsilf that thing 1s. 
b hir husbondes fadir 1. hir husbonde f. s. 
& put Is. 


XXXVIIL. 19 — 209. 


to thee for a wed? She answeride, Thi 
ryng, and thi bie of the arm, and the staaf 
which thou holdist in the" hond. Therfor 
the womman conseyuide at o liggyng bi, 
and sche roos, and 3ede; and whanne the 19 
clooth was ‘put awei® which sche hadde 
takeP, sche was clothid in the clothis of 
widewhod. Forsothe Judas sente a kide20 
bi his scheepherde of 4 Odolla, that he 
schulde resseyue the wed which" he hadde 
3oue to the womman; and whanne he* 
hadde not founde hirt, he axide men of that 21 
place, Where is the womman that sat in 
the weie lot? And whanne alle men an- 
sweriden, An hoore was not in this place ; 
he turnede aj3en to Judas, and seide to22 
hym, Y foond not hir, but also men" of 
that place seidenY to me, that an hoore sat 
nenere there. Judas seide, Haue sche to23 
hir silf’, certis sche may not repreue vs 
of a leesyng; Y sente the* kyde which Y 
bihiz3te, and thou foundist not hir. Lo!2s 
sotheli aftir thre monethis thei telden to 
Judas, and seiden, Thamar, ‘wijf of thi 
sone’, hath do fornycacioun, and hir womb 
semeth to wexe greet. Judas seide, Brynge 
3e” hir forth, that sche be brent. And2 
whanne sche was led to peyne®, sche sente 
to ‘the fadir of hir hosebonde®, and seide, 
Y haue conseyued of the man, whose these 
thingis ben; knowe thou whose is the 
ryng, and bie® of the arm, and staf4? And 26 
whanne the 3iftis weren knowun, he® seide, 
Sche is more iust than Y, for Y 3af not 
hir to Sela, my sone; netheles Judas knewe 
hir no more fleischli. Sotheli whanne the 27 
childberyng neizede, twei chyldren ap- 
periden in the wombe, and in that birthe 
of children‘, oon brou3te® forth the hond, 
in which" the mydwijf boond a reed 
threed, and seide, This schal go out ‘the2s 
formere’, Sotheli while he withdrowe the 29 
hond, the tother 3ede out, and the womman 
seide, Whi was the skyn in which the 
child lay in the wombe departid for! thee? 


@sone E. ¢ his 4. 


¥r that rs. § Odollais. t the womman Is. 
Xak. Y thi sonis 
ethe bie 1xs. 4 the 


h whiche fend is. i bifore 1s. } fro BPLNSX. 


XXXVIIL. 30 —XXXIX. 12. 


30hym Phares. Afterwarde 3ede out the 
brother of hym, in whos hoond was the 
reed threed, whom she clepyde Zaram. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


1 Thanne Joseph was lad into Egepte, 
and bou3tf hym Putiphar, the geldyng of 
Pharao, the prince of his oost Egipcien, 
fro the hondis$ of Ismaelitis, of whiche® 

2he was brou3t!. And the Lord was with 
him, and he was a man in alle thingis 
welsumly doynge. And he dwellide in 

3the hows of his lord, the which alther- 
best knewe the Lord to be with hym, 
and alle thingis that he shulde doon, of 


hym to be greithid in the hoond of hym. . 


4And Joseph fonde grace bifore his lord, 
and mynystride to hym, of whom bifore 
putte to alle thingis, gonernede the hows 
takun to hym, and alle thingis that to 
shym weren bitau3t. And the Lord 
blisside to the hows of the Egipcyen for 
Joseph, and multipliede, as wel in howsys 
as in feeldis, al the substaunce of hym; 
sne eny thing other knewe but the. breed 
that he eete. And Joseph was fayr in 
zface, and seemly in si3t. And so after 
many dayes the ladi keste hir eyen in 
sJoseph, and seith, Sleep with me; the 
which not assentynge to the shrewid 
dede, seide to hir, Loo! my lord alle 
thingis to me takun, vnknowith what he 
ghath in his hows, ne eny thing is, that is 
not in my power, or hath not takun to 
me, saue thee, that art the wijf of hyin; 
how thanne may Y that yuel don, and 
losynne in my God? With siche maner 
wordis bi alle daies thei speken, and the 
womman was greuyd to the 3onge man, 
uand he* refuside the hordom. It felle 
forsothe a day, that Joseph shulde goo 
into the hows, and sumwhat of werk he 
izshulde do with outen witnessis. And 


GENESIS. 


163 


And for this cause sche clepide his naine 
Fares. Afterward his brothir 3ede™ out, so 
in whos hond was the reed threed, whom 
sche clepide Zaram. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


Therfor Joseph was led in to Egipt,1 
and Putifar, ‘chast and onest seruaunt® of 
Farao, prince of the oost, a man of Egipt, 
bou3te hym of the hondis°® of Ismaelitis, 
of which he was brou3t?. And the Lordz 
was with hym, and he was a man doynge 
with prosperite in alle thingis. And Jo- 
seph dwellide in ‘the hows of his lord4, 
which knew best’ that the Lord was withs 
Joseph, and that alle thingis whiche he 
dide, weren dressid of the Lord in ‘the 
hond of hym’. And Joseph foond grace 
bifor his lord, and ‘mynystride tot hym, 
of whom Joseph was maad souereyn of 
alle thingis, and gouernede" the hows bi- 
taken to hym, and alle thingis’ that weren 
bitakun to hym. And the Lord blessides 
the ‘hows of Egipcian” for Joseph, and 
multipliede al his catel, as wel in howsis 
as in feeldis; nether he* knew ony othereé 
thing noY but‘breed + which’ he eet. For- 
sothe Joseph was fair* in face, and schapli 
in si3t. And so aftir many daies the ladi7 
castide> hir izen in to Joseph, and seide, 
Slepe thou with me; which assentide nots 
to the vuleueful werk, and seide to hir, 
Lo! while alle thingis ben bitakun to me, 
my lord woot not what he hath in his 
hows, nether ony thing is, which is not ing 
my power, ether which ‘he hath¢ not bitake 
to me, outakun thee, which art his wijf; 
how therfort may Y do this yuel, and do 
synne ajens my lord? Thei spaken siche 10 
wordis ‘bi alle daies*, and the womman 
was diseseful to the 3ong waxynge' man, 
and he forsook auoutrie’. Forsothe it bi-1 
felde in a dai, that Joseph entride in to 
the hows, and dide sum werk! with out 


+ Bi breed in 
holi scripture 
is vndirstonden 
al manere of 
mete, and bi 
watir al mancre 
of dryuk. Go. 


f brou3te 4. & honde apeu. 4 the which spery. ‘bon3t 4. * Om. un. 
m wente I. na geldyng1. a geldinge, the chaast honest seruaunt s. © hond ts. P brou3t 
thidir 1s. 9 his lordis housis. ¥* ful wel1. §& hishond1s. ¢ he seruyders. ¥ he gonernyde ts. 


Y othere thingis 1. 
y Om. gq. 2 the breed that 1s. 
& the anoutrie 1ks. 


8 ful fair p. 


w the hows of the Egipcian ma. Egipcianis hons 1. Egipcian hous s. 
b keste 18. 
h preuei werk fallinge to his office 1s. 


x his lord 1s. 


cigszu, 4Om.xE. ¢longe tyme rs. f Om. 1s. 


¥ 2 


164 


she, the hemme takun of the clothing of 
hym, shulde seye, Slep with me; the 
which, forsakun the mantil in the honde 
130f hir, flei3, and 3ede oute. And whanne 
the womman hadde seen the cloth in hir 
ushondes, and hir to be dispisid, clepide to 
hir men of hir hows, and seide to hem, 
Loo! he hath bron3t yn an Ebrew man, 
that he shulde bigile vs; he was comun 
yn to me, that he shulde togidere goo 
with me, and whanne Y hadde vnder- 
iscried, and he herde my voys, he forsoke 
the mantil that I heelde, and flei3 out. 
16 Thanne in argument of bileue, the holdun 
mantil she shewide to the housbonde 
17turnynge a3en hoom. And! seith, To me 
is comun yn an Ebrew seruaunt, whom 
thow hidir brou3tist, that he shulde bigijl 
isme; and whanne he hadde seen me to 
erye, he forsoke the mantil that I heelde, 
yand flei3 out. Thes thingis herd, and 
the lord to mych leueful to the wordis of 
20the wijf, was ful wroth; and toke Jo- 
seph into prysoun, where the gyued men 
of the kyng weren kept, and he was there 
2iclosid. The Lord forsothe was with Jo- 
seph, and hauynge rewthe of hym, 3aue 
to hym grace in the si3t of the prince of 
22the prysoun, the which toke in the hond 
of him alle the gyued men™ that weren 
holdun in kepyng, and what thing was 
23doon was vndur hym, ne he knewe eny 
thing, alle thingis takun to hym; the 
Lord forsothe was with hym, and made 
redi alle the werkys of hyn. 


CAP. XL. 


1 And so thes thingis doon, fel that two 
geldyngis synneden, the botler of the kyng 
of Egepte, and the baker, to her lord. 

2And Pharao wroth a3ens hem, for the 
tother was bifore to botlers, and the 

3tothir to bakers, putte hem into the pri- 


1 Om. aprn. 


iwitnesse s. * the ladi 1s. 
ins. 4 dispisid of Joseph 1s. 
trou3e E. VY that sche heelde r. 
Was 18. bOm.is. ¢ Om. plures. 
h chaaste men of the kingis of Egipt 1s. 
the 1s. 2 Om.1. 


whir s. 


GENESIS. 


lhim bi the cloth 1s. 
r that he schuld c. pr. m. 
x brou3tist in s. 
4d he 3af Is. 
i Om. ts. 


Sik, 13— 00g. 


witnessis'. And sche‘ took ‘the hem of 12 
his clooth’, and sche™ seide, Slepe thou 
with me; and he lefte the mentil im hir 
hoond, and he fledde, and 3ede out". Andi3 
whanne the womman hadde seyn® the 
clooth in? hir hondis, and that sche was 
dispisid4, sche clepide to hir the men of1 
hir hows, and seide to hem, Lo! my lord 
hath brou3t in an Ebrew man, that he 
schulde scorn vs; he entride to me to" do 
leccherie with me, and whanne Y criede, 
and he herde my vois, he lefte the mentil1s 
which® Y helde, and he fledde out. Ther-16 
for in to thet preuyng of trouthe", sche 
schewide the mantil, holdun’ to the” hose- 
bonde turnynge ajen hoom. And she17 
seide, The Ebrew sernaunt, whom thou 
brou3tist®, entride to me toY scorne me; 
and whanne he si3 me crye, he lefte the 1s 
mentil which? Y helde, and he fledde out. 
And whanne these thingis weren herd, 19 
the lord bileuyde ouer myche to the wordis 
of the wijf, and was* ful wrooth ; and he 20 
bitook Joseph in to prisoun, where the® 
bounden men° of the kyng weren kept, and 
he was closid there. Forsothe the Lord 21 
was with Joseph, and hadde mercy on 
hym, and 3af¢ grace to hym in the si3t 
of the prince of the prisoun, which bitook 22 
in the hond of Joseph alle prisoneris® that 
weren holdun in kepyng, and what euer 
thing was doon, it was vndur Joseph, 
nethir the prince knewe ony thing, for23 
alle thingis weren bitakun to Joseph; for 
the Lord was with hym, and dresside alle 
his werkis. 


CAP. XL. 


Whanne these thingis weren doon so&,1 
it bifelde that twei geldyngis", the boteler 
and the baker ‘of the kyng of Egipt', syn- 
neden to her lord. And Farao was wrooth 2 
a3ens hein, for the toon* was ‘souereyn to 
boteleris!, the™ tother was" ‘souereyn to 


m Om. BDEFH. 


m™ Om. 1s. 1" out fro hir s. 
$8 that is. t Om. FrerKsw. 
¥ that he schuld c pr. m. 
f was don 1s. 
1 maistir boteler 1s. 


Oo sawe Is. P left 
u the treuthe 1s. 
Zthatis. 4he 

Om. plures. 


€ the prisoneris 1s. 
m and 


k tother plures. 


XL. 4-—17. 


soun of the prince of kny3tis, in the 
4which and Joseph was gyued. And the 
kepere of the prisoun tok hem to Joseph, 
the which and mynystryde to hem. A 
litil of tyme 3ede bitwixe, and thei in 
skeping weren holdun, and both seen a 
sweuen oon ny3t, aftir conenable vndoyng 
sto hem. ‘To whom whanne Joseph cam 
zyn eerly, and saw3 hem drery, askide 
hem, seiynge, Whi dreryer is 3oure face 
sto day than it was wonte? The which 
answeryden, A sweuen we han seen, and 
ther is not that wol vndo it vs. And 
Joseph seide to hem, Whether not of God 
is the vndoyng? Telle 3e to me what 3e 
o9han seen. And the prouest of botlers 
bifore tolde his sweuen; I saw3 bifore 
1ome a vyne, in the which weren thre 
braunchis growun litil mele into clustris, 
and after floures the grapes to wexe rijp, 
iiand the chalice of Pharao in myn hoond; 
thanne I toke grapes, and wrong into the 
chalice that Y heelde, and toke drynke to 
12Pharao. Joseph answeryde, This is the 
vndoyng of the sweuen; thre braunches 
i3thre 3it dayes ben, after whiche Pharao 
shal record of thi seruyce, and shal re- 
store thee to" the bifore had gree, and 
thow shalt 3yue to hym a chalice, after 
thin office, as thow were wont to do bifore. 
14 As myche haue mynde of me, whanne it 
were wel with thee, and mercy thow shalt 
do with me, that thow make suggestioun 
to Pharao, that he lede me out of this 
is prisoun; for theuelich Y am had awey 
fro the loond of Hebrew, and here an 
16ynnocent Y am sent into a laak. Seynge 
the mayster of bakers that he hadde vndo 
wiseli the sweuen, seith, And I saw3 a 
sweuen, that I hadde three basketis of 
i7melow vpon myn heed, and yn the® o 
basket, that was heizer, Y trowide me to 
bere al maner metis that ben made with 
bakers craft, and bryddis to eet therof. 


nin to BDEFH. 


© maistir baker 1s. P Om. CEGILPs. 
whatt 1. thei saw3e 1s. Y 00 15. 
% expowneth it 1s. 
bifore mers. ¢€Om.1s.  f wexes. 
hems. Ithatis. mher. 2 Om. 1s. 
T maister baker rs. 98 declarid rs. t also 1. 


GENESIS. 


qQOm.1. * the which 1. 
Ww cheer heuyer s. 
@ wher celeri omnes, ul plerumque. 
& burionnyng ELP. 

© declaryng 1s. 
u Om. a. 


165 


bakeris®. And he sente hem in to the? pri-3 
soun of the4 prince of kny3tis, in whicht 
also Joseph was boundun. And the keper4 
of the prisoun bitook hem to Joseph, which 
also ‘mynystride to hem’. Sumdelt of tyme 
passide, and thei weren hooldun in kep- 
yng, and bothe sien" a’ dreem in o ny3t,5 
bi couenable expownyng to hem. Ande 
whanne Joseph hadde entrid to hem eerli, 
and hadde seyn hem sori, he axide hem,7 
and seide, Whi is 3oure ‘face soriere* to 
dai than it ys* wont ? Whiche answeriden, 8 
We seijen a dreem, and ‘noon isY that ex- 
powneth? to vs. And Joseph seide to hem, 
Whether* expownyng? is not of God? Telle 
je to me what 3e han seyn. The ‘souereyng 
of boteleris® telde first his dreem; Y sei34 
that a vyne bifore me®, in which weren1o 
thre siouns, wexidef litil and litil in to 
buriounnyngis®, and that aftir flouris? 
grapys' wexiden ripe, and the cuppe of11 
Farao was in myn hond; therfor Y took 
the grapis, and presside* out in to the 
cuppe which! Y™ helde, and Y 3af drynk 
to Farao. Joseph answerde, This is the" 12 
expownyng® of the dreem; thre siouns ben 
jit thre daies, aftir whiche Farao schalis 
haue mynde of thi sernyce, and he schal 
restore thee in to the firste degree, and 
thou schal 3yue to hym the cuppe, bi thin 
office, as thou were wont to do bifore. 
Oneli haue thou niynde on me, whanne 14 
it is wel to thee, and thon schalt do merci 
with me, that thou make suggestioun to 
Farao, that he lede me out of this pri- 
soun; for theefli Y am takun awei frot 
the lond of Ebrews?, and here Y am sent 
innocent‘ in to prisoun. ‘The ‘maister of 16 
bakeris’ seij3e that Joseph hadde expown- 
ed’ prudentli the dreem, and‘ he seide, 
And" Y sei3 a dreem, that Y hadde thre 
panyerisY of mele on myn heed, and Y1!7 
gesside that Y bar in o panyere”, that 
was heijere*, alle metis that ben maad bi 


© that p. 


8 seruede or keepte hems. sum 


X was EKS. Y ther is no man I. no maniss. 
b the expownynge 1. © maistir boteler 1s, 4 si3 
b the flowris 1s. ithe grapyss. * presside 


Pp Ebrewe s. 
w baskett 1s, 


00 of kK. 
Vv basketis 1s. 


4 withoute gilt 1. 
x heijest F. 


166 


is And Joseph® answeride, This is the vn- 
doyng of the sweuen; thre baskettis thre 

i93it dayes ben, aftir whom Pharao shal 
take a wey thin heed, and shal honge 
thee in the crosse, and fowlis shulen teere 

20 thi fleish. And fro thens the thridde day 
was the birthe day of Pharao, the which 
makynge a greet feeste to his children, 
recordid amonge the meetis of the mays- 
ter of botlers, and of the prince of bakers; 

ziand restoryde the tother into his place, 
that he brynge forth drynke to the kyng, 

22the tother he hongide in a gibite, that 
the sothnes of the remener were proued. 

23 And neuerthelater after fallynge welsum 
thingis, the prouest of botelers for3ete of 
his dreem reder. 


CAP. XLI. 


1 After two 3eer Pharao sawe a sweuen ; 
2he trowide hiin to stonde vpon a flood, of 
the which steyden vp seuene fayre oxen 
and ful fatte, and thei weren fed in 
smershi places; and other seuene out 
comen of the flood, fowle and al ouer- 
comen with leenesse, and thei weren fedde 
in the? brenke of the flood, in moost 
4plenteuows grene places; and thei de- 
uouriden hem of whom was merueilows 
fayrnes and proporcioun of bodies. Pha- 
srao wakned4, slepte eftsones, and saw3 
another sweuen ; setiene eerys buriounde 
6in o stalk and ful fayr, and other as feel 
eerys, thinne and smytun with meldew, 
7 weren growun, deuowrynge al the fayrnes 
of the first. Pharao, awakynge after reste, 
sand the morwetide bigunne, feerd for 
drede, sente to alle the reders of Egepte, 
and to all the wise men, and hem clepid 
to, tolde the sweuen, and there was not 
%that vndide it. Thanne at the last the 


o Josep A. 


y the craft 1s. 2% declaryng 1s. 4 basketis rs. 
dren ether sugetis BCGKOQX. ch. or sogels ELP. 
Kofp. Ithat B. ™toon ins. ® office rs. 
drinke rs. 4 himis. ° that oother x. 
ler is. Vhe forjat 1s. 
jeden vps. 4 riuer m. 
£Om.s.  »} this reste rs. 
pownede if 15. 


» the grene E. 
ithe morewtide ts. 


GENESIS. 


P that BDEFH. 


b the whiche 1, 
f and he EI. 
o bryng Is. 
8 Joseph declarynge the dremes 1s. 
w Joseph that declaride his dreem ts. 
© tho kyen 1s. 
Kk Om. Gx. 


XL, 18-——-XLI. 9. 


craft’ of bakers, and that briddis eeten 
therof. Joseph answerde, This is the ex-18 
pownyng” of the dreem ; thre panyeris* ben 
3it thre daies, aftir whiche® Farao schal 1s 
take awei thin heed, and he schal hange 
thee in a cros, and briddis schulen to- 
drawe thi fleischis®. Fro thennus the20 
thridde dai was the dai of birthe’ of Fa- 
rao, which made a greet feeste to hise 
children’, and’ hadde mynde among metis® 
on® the maistir ‘of boteleris', and on* the 
prince of bakeris; and he restoride the! 2 
oon™ in to his place", that he schulde 
dresse® cuppe? to ‘the kyng4, and he hangide 22 
‘the tothir™ in a gebat, that the treuthe of 
‘the expownere’ schulde be preued. And 23 
netheles whanne prosperitees bifelden, thet 
‘souereyn of boteleris" forjat’ ‘his ex- 
pownere™. 


CAP. XLI. 


Aftir twei 3eer Farao sei3 a dreem; het 
gesside that he stood on a flood*, froz 
which seuene fairey kiyn and ful fatte 
stieden”?, and weren fed in the places of 
mareis; and othere seuene, foule and leene, 3 
camen out of the flood*®, and weren fed in 
thilk brenke of the watir, in grene? places ; 
and tho® deuoureden thilke kien of whiche4 
the fairnesse and comelynesse of bodies 
was‘ wondurful. Farao wakide, and sleptes 
eft, and sei3® another dreem; seuen eeris 
of corn’ ful and faire camen forth in o 
stalke, and othere as many eeris of corn‘,6 
thinne and® smytun with corrupcioun of 
brennynge wynd, camen forth, deuourynge7 
al the fairenesse of the firste. Farao wakide 
aftir reste®, and whanne morewtid'! wass 
maad, he was aferd bi inward drede, and 
he sente to alle the’ expowneris of Egipt, 
and to alle wise! men; and whanne thei 
weren clepid, he telde the dreem, and 
noon™ was that expownede". ‘Thanne ato 


4 wakynde spew. 


€ flesch Frus. ‘the birthe rs. ¢ chil- 
& the meetis 1s. 4 of pis. i! boteler rs, 
P cuppes E. the cuppe ether drinke X sec.i. 
tto the 1s.  maistir bote- 
x riner mM. Y ful faire Gn. 2% wenten vp 1. 
dweren is. ¢heseiz 31s. f corn eeris Is. 
1the wise 1s. ™noonofhems. 1 ex- 


XLI. 10——25. 


maister of botlers remembrynge, seith, I 
1oknowleche my synne; the king wroth 
to his seruauntis, ine and the mayster of 
bakers comaundid to be put in%4 prisoun 
nof the prince of kny3tis, where either o 
ny3t seen a sweuen, bifore shewynge of 
12 thingis that ben to comun. There was ‘a 
sernant, Hebrew childe’, of the same duke 
of kny3tis, to whom tellynge the sweuenes, 
13 we herden alle thingis*® that afterward the 
oute comyng of the thing proned ; for- 
sothe Y am 3oldun a3en to myn office, 
isand he was hongid in the crosse. Anoon 
thei doddiden' Joseph lad out of the pri- 
soun, at the maundement of the kyng, 
and with chaungid clothing offreden to 
ishym. To whom he seith, I saw} sweuens, 
ne there is that opnith, the which I haue 
1¢herd: the moost wiseli to caste. Joseph 
answerde, God with outen me shal an- 
17swere welsum thingis to Pharao. Thanne 
Pharao tolde that he saw3; I wende me 
to stonde vpon the brynk of the flood, 
isand seuen oxen fro the flood togideres 
steyden vp, ful greetli fayr and thur3 oute 
with fatt fleish, the whiche in the pasture 
of mershe" the grene leswis cheseden ; 
i9and loo! thes folweden other seuen oxen, 
in as myche defourme and leene, that 
neuer siche in the loond of Egipte Y 
208aw3; the whiche the rather deuowrid 
21and wastid, no merke of fulfedyng 3ouun, 
but with the same leenesse and foulnes 
thei dwelten. A wakynge, eftsones born 
22doun with sleepe, I saw3 a sweuen; se- 
uene eeris buriounde in o stalk, ful and 
a3moost fayr, and other seuen, thinne and 
smytun with a brennynge blaste, growiden 
240f the stalk, the whiche deuowreden the 
2sfayrnes of the rather. I haue tolde to 
the reders the sweuen, and no man is 
that out openith. Joseph answeride, The 


44 in to BE. 
piden £ pr.m. doddidyn see.m. 


° boteler 1s. P bithou3te him 18. 
¥ tellinge 1s. WOm.1s.  * herden of him ts. 
soun ts. © his clothing 1. Joseph clothinge s. 
pownest siche thingis ts. bfult. iats. 
gadrens. °thop.  P pasturis 1. qd Om. N. 
8 the plures. t leene keyn 18, 
y Om. ts. 


GENESIS. 


rane Hebrew chylde, seruaunt porn. 
yide, 
uthe mershe BEFH. 


4 he comaundide ts. 
¥ the thing 1. 

4 brou3ten yn B. 

k Om. 18. 


U steppe or fokne Is. . 


167 


the laste the maistir ‘of boteleris® bi- 
thou3te?, and seide, Y knowleche my 
synne; the kyng was wrooth to hise ser-10 
uauntis, aud comaundidel me and the’ 
maister ‘of bakeris™ to be cast doun in to 
the’ prisoun of the prince of kny3tis, where 11 
we bothe saien a dreem in 0 ny3t, bifore- 
schewynge of thingis to comynget. An 12 
Ebrew child, seruaunt of the same duk of 
kny3tis was there, to whom we" telden’ 
the dremes, and” herden* what euer thing 13 
the bifallyng of thingy preuede afterward; 
for Y am restorid to myn office, and he? 
was hangid m a cros. Anoon at the co-14 
matndement? of the kyng thei polliden 
Joseph led out of prisoun>, and whanne 
‘the clooth® was chaungid, thei brou3ten® 
Joseph* to the kyng. To whom the kyng 1s 
seide, Y seize dremes, and noon is that? 
expowneth tho thingis that Y sei3, I haue 
herd that thou expownest® moost' pru- 
dentli. Joseph answerde, With out me, is 
God schal answere prosperitees to Farao. 
Therfor Farao telde that that he sei3; Y17 
gesside that Y stood on the brenke of thet 
flood, and seuene kiyn, ful faire and* with 1s 
fleischis! able to etyng, stieden™ fro the 
watir, whiche kiyn’ gaderiden" grene seggis 
in the® pasture? of the1 marreis; and lo!19 
seuene othere kiyn, so foule and leene, 
stleden these, that Y sei3 neuere siche in 
the lond of Egipt; and whanne the for-20 
mere kien weren deuourid and wastid’, 
tho® secoundet 3anen no steppe" of ful-21 
nesse, but weren slowe’ bi lijk leenesse 
and palenesse. I wakide, and eft Y was 
oppressid bi sleep, and Y sei3 a dreent; 22 
seuene eeris of corn, ful and faireste’, camen 
forth in* o stalke, and othere seuene, 23 
thinne and smytun with ‘corrupcioun of¥ 
brennynge wynd, camen forth of the stobil, 
whiche denouriden the fairenesse of the 24 


8 thing BE. t diden ar. dedden pv. clyp- 


tbakeris. 8 Om.1s. tcomer. thea. 
zthe baker 1s. 4 heest 1s.» the pri- 

€ Om, EFLP. himis. fOm.1. & ex- 
! fleishe rs. m wenten vp I. stieden vp s. 
t wastid of the lecne keyn 1. w. of tho lene kyen s 
¥ slowe or feble 1s. © moost faire 1. * ont. 


168 


sweuen of the kyng is oon; the thingis 
that God is to do he shewede to Pharao. 
26Seuen oxen fayr, and seuen eerys fulle, 
seuen 3eris of plentith ben, and the same 
e7strengthe of sweuen holdun; and the 
seuen oxen thinne and leene, the whiche 
steyden after hem, and seuen eeris thinne 
and smytun with a brennynge wynde, 
setten 3eris ben of hungur to comen, the 
28whiche bi this ordre shulen be fulfillid. 
29 Loo! seuen 3eres’ shulen come of greet 
30 plente” in al the loond of Egipte, whom 
shulen folwe othere seuen 3eer of as greet 
bareynes, that to forgetyng be takun al 
the bihynd plentethnes*; forsothe to 
3lwaste is hungur al the erthe, and the 
greetnes of myseys’ is to spille the greet- 
senes of plentithe. That forsothe thow 
hast seyn secoundli a sweuen perteynyng 
to the same thing, shewyng is of fast- 
nesse”, therthur3 that the worde of God 
33 be doon, and swiftloker be fulfild. Now 
thanne puruey the kyng a wise man and 
a® redi, and bifore maak hym to the loond 
3tof Egipte, the which ordeyn prouestis® 
thoru3 out alle regiouns, and the fifte part 
of fruytis thur3 out the seuen 3eer of 
35 plenteth, that now ben to comen, now ge- 
der he in to the beernes ; and al the wheet 
be leide vndur the power of Pharao, and 
36 be kepte in the cytee®, and be bifore made 
redi to the hungur to come of the seuen 
3eer, the which is to oppresse Egipte, and 
the Jloond be not consumed with myschef. 
37 The counseil pleside to Pharao, and to 
3salle the mynystris of hym, and he spake 
to hem, We mowen not fynde such a man 
the which be ful of the spiryt of God. 
39 Thanne he seide to Joseph, For God hath 
shewed to thee alle thingis that thow hast 
spokun, whether a wiser or a4 liyk to thee 
4ofynde Y may? Thow shalt be vpon myn 
hows, and at the maundement of thi 


Vv 3eere BDEFH. 
uest 4. 


W plentith sperx. 
© cytees BpEH. 4 Om. B. 


Zthisis. ®there isis, > expowneth it 1s. 
tho same thingis s. fOm.1s. § the dreem Is. 
nseeresG. © fulfillid 1s. Pin to 1s. 
unedynesse Is. Vwaste is. W Om. Is. 
Z ordeyne hym z pr.m. 8 3eeris Is. 
f seruauntis is. & Om. 1s. 


GENESIS. 


x plentenes £. 


¢ al oon 1s. 
h stieden vp 1s. 
@ schal 1s. 
x sch. of sadn. that is, confermyng of the firste 1. 
¢ the senene is. 
i man than thou 1s. 


b shal ELP. 
h man liche Joseph 1s. 


XLI. 26—40. 


formere; Y telde the? dreem to expowneris, 25 

and no man is* that expowneth>. Joseph 

answerde, The dreem of the king is oon®; 

God schewide’ to Farao what thingis he 

schal do. Seuene faire kiyn, and seuene26 

ful eeris of corn, ben seuene 3eeris of 

plentee, and tho® comprehenden the samef 

strengthe of dreem®; and seuene kiyn27 

thinne and leene, that stieden" aftir tho, 

and seuene™ thinne eeris of corn and 

smytun with brennynge wynd, ben seuene 

3eer" of hungur to comynge, whiche schulen 28 

be fillid® bi this ordre. Lo! seuene 3eer 29 

of greet plentee in? al the lond of Egipt 

schulen4 come, and seuene othre 3eer™ of so 30 

greet bareynesse schulen sue tho, that al 

the abundaunce bifore be* 3ouun to for3et- 

yng; for thet hungur schal waste al the 

lond, and the greetnesse of pouert" schal 31 

leeseY the greetnesse of plentee. Forsothe 32 

this that thou sijest the secunde tyme a 

dreem, perteynynge to the same thing, is 

a¥ ‘schewyng of sadnesse*, for the word of 

God schal be doon, andY schal be fillid ful 

swiftli. Now therfor puruey the kyng a33 

wijs man and a redi, and make the kyng 

hym souereyn to the lond of Egipt, which 34 

man ordeyne? gouernouris bi alle cuntreis, 

and gadere he in to bernys the fyuethe part 

of fruytis bi seuene 3eer® of plentee, that 35 

schulen? come now; and al the wheete be 

kept vndur the power of Faraof, and be bomen el 

it kept in citees, and be it maad redi to36 bi fre sifte, bat 
bi biyng and 

the hungur to comynge of seuene® 3eer _ paiyng of priys. 

that schal oppresse Egipt, and the lond be ™*™ 

not wastid bit pouert. The counsel® pleside 37 

Farao, and alle his mynystris‘, and he spak 38 

to hem, Wher we moun fynde sich’ a man} 

which is ful of Goddis spirit? Therfor39 

Farao seide to Joseph, For God hath 

schewid to thee alle thingis whiche thou 

hast spoke, wher Y mai fynde a wisere 

mani and lijk* thee? Therfor thou schalt 40 


ymysesis pv. 2 fatnes 4. ® Om. x. > pro- 


d hath shewid 1s. © the same thingis 1. 

lithe faire keyn 1s. ™ the seuene 1s. 
rOm. £E1LPs. §&§ schal be 1s. t Om. pd. that is. 
Yand it 1. 
© counsel of Joseph 1s. 
k ijk to prs. 


d with 1s. 


XLI. 41—53. 


mouth al the puple shal obeishe; in o 
thing oonli in dignyte of the rewme thee 
41 Y shal go bifore. And eft Pharao seide 
to Joseph, Loo! Y haue ordeynyde thee 
42 vpon al the loond of Egipte. And he took 
a ryng of his hoond, and 3aue hym in his 
hoond, and he clothide hym a stool of 
biys, and putte aboute his necke a goldun 
43 bee3e, and made him stey3 vpon his se- 
cound chaar, criynge a bedel, that alle men 
shulden bifore hym knele, and thei shulden 
wite hym to be pronest to al the loond of 
44 Egipte. And the kyng seide to Joseph, 
Iam Pharao, with outen thi maundement 
shal not eny man meue hoond or foot in 
4sthe loond of Egipte. And he turnede 
the name of hym, and he clepide hym in 
Egipcian tunge, the saueor of the world; 
and he 3aue to hym a wijf, Asenech, the 
dow3ter of Putifar, preest of Helyopoleos. 
And so Joseph, goon oute to the loond of 
46 Egipte, forsothe was of thritti wynter 
whanne he stode in the si3t of kyng Pha- 
rao, and he 3ede aboute alle the regiouns 
47 0f Egipte. And plentithnes cam of the 
seuen 3eer, and the cornes maad into 
handfullis ben gederyd into beernes® of 
43 Egipte, and al the plentith of fruytis in 
49 alle the citees was leide to kepe, and the 
plentithe of wheet was so myche, that to 
the grauel of the see it was mesurid euen, 
50and the plentith passide mesure. To Jo- 
seph forsothe weren borne two sones bifore 
that the hunger cam, whom to him bare 
Asenech, the dow3ter of Putifar, preest 
510f Helyopoleos. And he clepide the name 
of the first gotun Manasses, seiynge, God 
hath maad me to for3ete alle my trauayls, 
s2and the hows of my fader; and the name 
of the secounde he clepide Effraym, sei- 
ynge, God hath maad me growe in the 
s3loond of my pornes. Thanne ouerpassed 
seuen 3eer of plentithe that weren in E- 


GENESIS. 


_ 169 


be ouer myn hous, and al the puple schal 
obeie to the comaundement! of thi mouth; 
Y schal passe thee onely by o trone of the 
rewme. And eft Farao seide to Joseph, 41 
Lo! Y haue ordeyned thee on™ al the lond 
of Egipt. And Farao took the ryng fro 42 
his hond, and 3af it in the hond of Joseph, 
and he clothide Joseph with a stoole of 
bijs", and puttide® a goldun wrethe aboute 
theP necke; and Farao made Joseph to43 
‘stie on’ his’ secounde chare, while a bidele 
criede, that alle men schulden knele® bifore 
hym', and schulden knowe that he was 
souereyn of al the lond of Egipt. And 44 
the kyng seide to Joseph, Y am Farao, 
without thi comaundement" no man shal 
stire hond ether’ foot” in al the lond of 
Egipt. And he* turnede the name of Jo-45 
seph, and clepideY him bi Egipcian? lan- 
gage, the sauyourt of the world; and he 
jaf to Joseph a wijf, Asenech, the dou3- 
ter of Potifar, preest* of Heliopoleos’. And 
so Joseph-3ede out® to the lond of Egipt. 
Forsothe Joseph was of thretti 3eer, whanne 46 
he stood in the sist of kyng@ Farao, and 
cumpasside alle the cuntreis of Egipt. And 47 
the plente of seuene 3eer cam, and ripe 
corn® weren bounden into handfuls‘, and 
weren gaderid into the® bernys of Egipt, 
also al" the aboundaunce of cornes' weren 4s 
kept in alle citeis', and so greet abound-4a 
aunce was of wheete, that it was maad™ 
euene to® the grauel of the see, and° the 
plente passide mesure. Sotheli twei sones 50 
were born to Joseph bifor that the hungur 
came, whiche? Asenech, dou3tir of Putifar, 
preest™ of Heliopoleos, childide to hym. 
And he® clepide the name of the firstes1 
gendridt sone, Manasses, and seide, God 
hath maad me to for3ete alle my traueilis, 
and the hous of my fadir; and he clepides2 
the name of the secunde sone .Effraym, 
and seide, God hath maad me to eucreesse 


© the beernes BDEFU. 


lheest 1s. ™ vpon Is. 
putte rs. P his 1s. 
Vv nether nis. or ELP. 


2the Egipcian p. 8 a preest 18. 


= biys ether of whit selk ncagx. b. or of w.s. ELP. b. ether red silk x. 
4 gon vpon 1. stie vp vpon s. 
w ether foot, that is, do ony notable thing BCGNQX. 


T the k. 


» Heliopoleos, that is, the cite of the sunnc BCGKNQX. 


ohe 
t Joseph 1s. 4 heest 18. 
x Pharao 1s. Y he clepide 1s. 
¢ forth 15. 


8 bowe c pr. m. 


4the kyng F, his kyng s. © cornes ceferi omnes. fschefes1. 8Om. 1. 4Om.4L. !ripe cornes c prim. 


k was plures. 


1 cuntreis a pr.m. 
dou3tir 1s. 


Ta preest 1s. & Joseph 1s. 


m maad or aymed 1s. 
t bigeten 1. 


nwith 1s. °Om.u. Pthe whicher. 4 the 


Z 


+n Ebrew it is 
schewinge 
priuitees, as Je- 
rom and Lire 
here seyen. ¢ 
GQ. 


170 


54 gipte, bigunne to come tof the® seuen 3eer 
of meseys', whom Joseph seyde byfore, 
and in al the world hungur wex greet; 
also in al the loond of Egipte was hun- 

ss gur; the which hungring, the peple cryede 
to Pharao, askynge lyuelod, to whom he 
answeride, Goth to Joseph, and what 

s6enere he shal seye to 30w, doth. For- 
sothe ech day hungur encreside in al the 
loond, and Joseph openyde alle the 
beernes, and solde to Egipcyens, for and 

s7hem oppresside hungur; and alle the! 
prouynces camen into Egipte, that thei 
my3ten bigge meetis and the yuel of 
myseis swagen. 


CAP. XLII. 


1 Jacob forsothe herynge that lyuelodes 
weren solde in Egipte, seide to his sones, 
2Whi ben 3e necgligent? I haue herd 
that wheet is solde in Egipte, descende 
3e, and biggith to vs nedeful thingis, that 
we mowen lyue, and we ben not consumed 
3with myseysi. Thanne descendynge the 
ten britheren of Joseph that thei my3ten 
4bigge whete in Egipte, Beniamyn with- 
holdun at home of Jacob, the which seide 
to the britheren of hym, Lest perauenture 
in the weye eny thing he suffre* of yuel. 
5 Thei ben goon into the loond of Egipte, 
with othere that 3eden to bigge; forsothe 
there was hungur in the loond of Cha- 
é6naan. And Joseph was prince of Egipte, 
and at his bikenyng whete cornes weren 
solde to the peplis. And whanne his bri- 
7theren hadden lowtid him, and he knewe 
hem, as to aliens harder he spak, askynge 
hem, Whens cam 3e? The which an- 
sweryden, Fro the loond of Chanaan, that 
we biggen nedeful thingis to oure lyue- 
8lod. And neuerthelater he the britheren 
9knowinge is not knowun of hem, and re- 


f£Om. peEH. & Om. 8B. 4} meseses nD. 


u the whiche 1. VY Om. pis. W whom Is. 
ands. had oppressid 1. » cornes 1s. 
whiche Jacob 1. whiche Jacob s, 
hoom 1. * 3eden thidir 1s. | bie corn 18. 


© oure lyiflode 1s, P his 1s. 4 the whiche a. 


GENESIS. 


iOm. gE. 


x solde cornes 1. solde corn s. 
¢ with K. 
& the 1. Beniamyns s. 
m the prince Is. 
¥ that 1s. 


Xl s4—— x Cleo: 


in the lond of my pouert. Therfor whanne 53 
seuene 3eer of plentee that weren in Egipt 
weren passid, senene 3eer of pouert bi-54 
gunnen to come, whiche® Joseph bifore 
seide, and hungur hadde the’ maistri in al 
the world; also hungur was in al the lond 
of Egipt ; and whanne that lond hungride, 55 
the puple criede to Farao, and axide metis; 
to whiche” he answeride, Go 3e to Joseph, 
and do 3e what euer thing he seith to 3ou. 
Forsothe hungur encreesside ech dai ins6 
al the lond, and Joseph openyde alle the 
bernys, and seelde* toY Egipcians, for also” 
hungur oppresside? hem; and alle pro-57 
uynces camen in to Egipt to bie metis®, 
and to abate the yuel of nedynesse. 


CAP. XLIL. 


Forsothe Jacob herde that foodis weren1 
seeld in Egipt, and he seide to hise sones, 
Whi ben 3e necgligent? Y herde that2 
wheete is seeld in Egipt, go 3e doun, and 
bie 3e necessaries to vs, that we moun 
lyue, and be not wastid bi® nedynesse. 
Therfor ten britheren of Joseph 3eden douns 
tot bie wheete in Egipt, and Beniamyn4 
was withholdun® of Jacob at hoome, that! 
seide to hise® britheren", Lest perauenture 
in the weie he suffre ony yuel!. Sothelis 
thei entriden in to the lond of Egipt, with 
othere men that 3eden* to bie!; forsothe 
hungur was in the lond of Canaan. Andé 
Joseph was prince™ of Egipt, and at his 
wille whetis weren seeld to puplis. And 
whanne hise britheren hadden worschipid 
hym, and he hadde knowe hem, he spak7 
hardere® as to aliens, and axide hem, Fro 
whennus camen 3e? Whiche answeriden, 
Fro the lond of Canaan, that we bie ne- 
cessaries to lyiflode®. And netheles hes 
knewe the? britheren, and he was not 
knowun of hem, and’ he bithou3te ong 
the dremys whiche™ he sei3 sumtyme. 


jmesesis p. * suffrid 4 pr.m. 


ytothe rs. 2 whi 1. whi 
4 that thei schul c pr.man. © biholdun pv. f the 
b pbritheren of Beniamyn1. 1 yuel, be he at 
n hardere fo hem 1. h. thingis to hem s. 


XLII. 1o——22. 


cordid of the sweuen! that sumtyme he 
saw3, seith to hem, Aspies 3e ben, 3e ben 
comen that 3e my3ten se the febler thingis 
100f the loond. The whiche seiden, It is 
not so, lord, but thi seruauntis comen, 
uthat thei my3ten bie meetis; alle the 
sones of 0 man we ben, pesibli we comen™, 
ne thi seruauntis eny thing casten of 
izyuel. To whom he answeryde, Other 
weies yt is, the vnwardid thingis of this 
13 loond 3e ben comen to biholde. And thei 
seiden, Twelue britheren, thei seyn, thi 
seruauntis we ben, the sones of o man in 
the loond of Chanaan ; the leest is with 
14 0ure fader, the tother is not aboue. That 
is, he seith, that I speke, aspies 3e ben, 
isfor now experyment of j3ow I shal taak, 
bi the helthe of Pharao 3e shulen not 
goon hens, to the tyme that 3oure leest 
isbrother come; sendith of 30u oon, and 
bringe he him, 3e forsothe shulen ben in 
boondis, to the tyme that the thingis that 
3e han seide ben proued, whether fals or 
soth thei ben; ellis bi the helth of Pha- 
17rao aspies 3e ben. Thanne he took hem 
isto warde thre daies; the thridde for- 
sothe dai ledynge out of prisoun, seith, 
Do 3e that I seide, and 3e shulen lyue, 
i9God forseth Y drede; if 3e be pesible, 
3oure o brother be boundun in prisoun ; 
3e forsothe goth, and berith the whete 
20that 3e han bou3t into 3oure howsis, and 
3oure leest brother bryngith to me, that 
Ymay proue 3oure wordis, and 3e not 
2idie. And thei diden as he seide, and 
thei speken to gideres, Thur3 desert thes 
thingis we suffren, for we han synned in 
oure brother, seynge the angwishe of the 
soule of hym, while he preyde vs, and 
we herden not, therfore cometh vpon vs 
22 this tribulacioun. Of the whiche oon, Ru- 
ben, seith, Whether Y seide not to 30w, 
Nyle 3e synne in the childe, and 3e herden 


1 sweuenes BDEFH. 


8 a spies Is. 
* ymagen DFG. 
sones Is. 


t that 3e schul c pr. man. 
ywhom Joseph 1s. 7 comen. 
© 3ungest 1s. 4 alyue 18. 


GENESIS. 


u The whiche 1. 


€ that 3e F sec.m. 


171 


And he seide to hem, 3e ben aspieris’, 3¢ 
camen tot se the feblere thingis of the lond. 
Whiche" seiden, Lord, it is not so, but thiio 
seruauntis camen to bie metis; alle we ben 11 
the’ sones of 0 man, we comen™ pesible, 
and thi seruauntis ymaginen* not ony 
yuel. ‘To ‘whiche heY answeride, It is inie 
other maner, 3e camen’ to se the feble 
thingis of the lond. And thei seiden,1s 
“We twelue britheren, thi seruauntis, ben® 
sones® of o man in the lond of Canaan; the 
leeste® is with oure fadir, an other is not 
‘on erthe’, This it is, he seide, that Y14 
spak to 30u, 3e° ben aspieris‘, rizt now Y 1s 
schal take experience’ of 301", bi the 
helthe of Farao 3e schulen not go! fro 
hennus, til 3oure leeste! brother come™; 
sende 3e oon of 30u, that he brynge hym, 16 
forsothe 3e schulen be in boondis, til tho 
thingis that 3e seiden" ben preued, whe- 
ther® tho? ben false ether? trewe; ellis, bi 
the helthe of Farao, 3e ben aspieris™. Ther-17 
for he* bitook hem tot kepyug" thre daies; 
sotheli in the thridde dai, whanne theiis 
weren led out of prisoun’, he” seide, Do 
3e that that Y seide, and 3e schulen lyue, 
for Y drede God ; if 3e ben pesible, 0 bro- 19 
ther of 3ou be boundun in prisoun; for- 
sothe go 3e, and bere* wheetis’, whiche 3e 
bou3ten’, in to 3oure housis, and brynge2o 
3e 3oure leeste* brother to me, that Y may 
preue 30ure wordis, and 3e die not. Thei 
diden as he seide, and thei spaken togidere, 21 
Skilfuli® we suffren these thingis, for we 
synneden a3ens* oure brother, and we sei3en 
the anguysch of his soule, while he preiede 
vs, and we herden? not; herfore® this tri- 
bulacioun cometh on vs. Of which oon, 22 
Ruben, seide, Whether Y seide not to 30w, 
Nyle 3e do® synne ajens the child, and 3e 
herden not me? lo! his blood is sou3t®. 
Sotheli thei wisten not that Joseph vndir- 23 
stoodi, for he spak to hem by interpretour*. 


m ben comen BDEFH. 
vOm.1. W camen fidir 1. comen hidir s. 


&® We thi seruauntis ben twelue bretheren s. b the 
fOm.1s. § verrey knowyng 1s. } 30u, 3e ben 


aspieris 1. 30u,3e ben aspiess. 1Om.s. * Om.rm. !laste 1. ™come hidirs. "han seid 1s. ° wher Bre. 


P3e1s. 4 other G. or LP. 
seph 1s. ‘bere 3e Bs. 

4 herden him 18, 
hem 1s. 


T aspies Is. 
Y the whete 1s. 
€ wherfore s. 


8 Joseph 1s. 

Z han bou3t 1s. 
f wher celeri omnes. 
k interpretour ether expownere BCGKNQX. an expowner 18. 


t into 1s. Ukeperisc. Vthe prisoun p. W Jo- 
&30ungiste 1s. > worthily 1. © ageyn 1. 


gOm.1s. 4 xow out souz3tis. ' vndirstood 


Z 2 


172 


not me? loo! the blood of hym is out 
23sou3;t. Thei wisten not forsothe that Jo- 
seph shulde vndurstonde, therthur3 that 
bi a mene persone vndoynge both the lan- 
21gagis he spak to hem. And he turnyde 
hym silf awey a htil, and he wepte, and 
25 turned a3en he spak to hem; and takynge 
Symeon, and byndynge hym, hem pre- 
sent, and comaundide to the mynystris, 
that thei shulden fille the sackis of hen 
with whete, and leggen a3en the money 
of eche in her sackis, 3euun ouer meetis 
2¢in the weie; the whiche diden so. And 
thei berynge” the whete in her assis 3eden 
27forth, and the sak of oon openyd, that 
he my3te 3yue to his beest meete in an 
inturnyng place to reste, biholdun the 
2gmoney in the mouth of the sak, seide to 
his britheren, To me is 3oldun my money, 
loo! it is had in the sak; and thei sto- 
nyed al aboute and sturbed, seiden to- 
gideres, What forsothe is this that God 
29 hath doon to vs? And thei comen to Ja- 
cob, her fader, in the loond of Chanaan, 
and tolden to hym alle thingis that was 
30fallun to hem, seiynge, The lord of the 
loond hard spake to vs, and he wenyde 
31vs to be spies of the prouynce; to whom 
we answerden, We ben pesible, ne we ben 
senot aboute eny spies; twelue britheren 
of o fadur gctun we ben, the oon® is not 
aboue, the leest with the fadur dwellith 
33in the loond of Chanaan. The which 
seith to vs, So I shal prone that 3e ben 
pesible ; 3oure o brother leeue 3eP anentis4 
me, and meetis to 3oure housis nedeful 
34take 3e, and goth, and 3oure leest brother 
ledith to me, that Y knowe that 3e ben 
not aspyes, and this that is holdun in 
boondis 3e mowen reseyue, and theraftir 
of biggyng that 3e wolen™ 3e han leue. 
35 Thes thingis seid, whanne eche heelden 
out whete, thei founden in the mouth of 


GENESIS. 


XLII. 23—35.- 


And he turnede awei hym silf a litil and 24 
wepte; and he turnede ajen, and spak to 
hem. And he took Symeon, and boond! 2s 
hym, while thei weren present; and he 
comaundide the mynystris™, that thei 
schulden fille her sackis with wheete, and 
that thei schulden putte the" money ‘of 
alle° in her baggis, and ouer this 3yueP 
metis? in the weie™; whiche diden so. And 26 
thei ‘baren wetis’ on‘ her assis, and 3eden 
forth, and whanne the sak of oon" wasez 
opened that he schulde 3yue meete to the 
werk beeste in the yn, he bihelde the 
money in the mouth of the bagge, and 2s 
seide’ to his britheren, My monei is 3oldun 
to ine, lo! it is had in the bagge; and thei 
weren astonyed, and troblid, and seiden to- 
gidere, What thing is this that God hath 
doon to us. And thei camen to Jacob, her 29 
fadir, in the loond of Canaan, and telden 
to hym alle thingis that bifelden to hem, 
and seiden, The lord of the lond spak harde 30 
to vs, and gesside that we weren aspieris* 
of theY prouynce; to whom we answer-31 
iden, We ben pesible, nether we purposen 
ony tresouns’?; we ben twelue britheren, 32 
gendrid of o fadir, oon is not ‘on erthe*, 
the leeste® dwellith with the fadir in the 
lond of Canaan. And he seide to vs, Thus 33 
Yschal preue that 3e ben pesible; leeffe 3e 
o brother of 30u with® me, and take 3e 
metis nedeful to 3oure housis, and go 3e, 
and brynge 3e to me 30ure leeste’ brother, 31 
that Y wite that 3e ben not aspieris*, and 
that 3e moun resseyue this brother which 
is holdunf in boondis, and that fro thennus® 
forth 3e haue licence" to bie what thingis 
3e wolen. While these thingis weren seide, 35 
whanne alle! schedden* out wheetis!, thei 
founden inoney™ boundun in ‘the mouth of 
sackis". And whanne alle° togidere weren 
aferd, the? fadir Jacob seide, 3e han maad 36 
me to be with out children?; Joseph is 


the sackis boundun moneys. And alle not alyue, Symeon is holdin in bondis, 3e 
nbryngen 4. °tone spEFH. P Om. £. Ganens BDEFH. ° wylne spEFH. 

lhe boonde 1s. ™ seruauntis 1s. "al her 1s. ° Om. 1s. P3yue fohemis. dmete L. * weie 30uun 

aboue c pr.m. § ledden forth whete 1s. tvpon is. toonofhemis. Vheseiders. thei seiden 1s. 

X aspies Is. Y thats. 2 tresonn G, a alyue1s. > 3ungest 1s. © at plures. 4 soungeste 1s. 

faspies is. fbounde is. &hennuse. bleeueis. itheialle xs. khelden1. !the wheetis1. ™ the 

money 1s. ® the mouthis of her sackis 1. her sakis mouthis s. © theialleis. Pheris. 4 fre chil- 


dren gis. 


XLII. 36—XLIII. 9. 


36 togideres afeerd, the fader Jacob seide, 
With outen free children 3e han maad me 
to be; Joseph is not aboue, Symeon is 
holdim in bondes, Beniamyn 3e shulen 
take awey fro me; alle thes yuels in me 

37han bacwarde fallun. To whom an- 
swerde Ruben, My two sones sle thou’, 
if Y brynge hym not agen to thee; taak 
hym in myn hoond, and Y hym to thee 

3eshal 3elde ajen. And he, My sone, he 
seith, shal not descende with 30ow; the 
brother of hym is deed, and he alone 
abiditht; if ony thing to hym of aduer- 
site falle in the loond to the which 3e 
shulen goon, 3e shulen lede doun myn 
hoore heeris with sorwe to helle. 


CAP. XLIII. 


1 The meene tyme hungur al the loond 
2greetly bare doun; and, the meetis brou3t 
to ende, that fro Egipte thei hadden 
brou3t, Jacob seide to his sones, Turne 3e 
a3en, and bigge 3e to vs a litil of meetis. 
3Judas answerde, Thilke man denounside 
to vs vndur witnessyng of othe, seiynge, 3e 
shulen not se my face, but 3oure leest bro- 
4 ther 3e bryngen with 30w; if thanne thow 
wolt sende hym with vs, we shulen goon 
togidere, and to thee we shulen bye nede- 
sful thingis; if forsothe thou wolt not, we 
wolen not goon; the man forsothe, as we 
han ofte seide, denounside to vs, seiynge, 
3e shulen not se my face with outen 3oure 
cleest brother. And Israel seide, This 3e 
han doon in to" my wrecchidnes, that 3e 
wolden shewe to hym and another 3ow to 
zhan a brother. And thei answerden, The 
man askide vs bi ordre oure progenye, if 
the fader lyued, if we hadden a brother ; 
and we answerden to hym sewyngly, 
aftir that that he askide; whether we 
my3ten wite that he was to seyn, Bryngith 
8 with 30w 30ure brother? And Judas scide 
to his fader, Send the child with me, 
that we goon forth, and we mowen lyue, 
dlest dien we and oure children; I take 


GENESIS. 


173 


schulen take awey fro me Beniainyn; alle™ 
these yuels felden’ in me. To whom Ru-37 
ben answeride, Sle thou my twei sones, if 
Y shal not brynge hymt a3en to thee; take 
thou hym in myn hond, and Y schal re- 
store hym to thee. And Jacob seide, My 38 
sone schal not go down with 30u; his bro- 
ther is deed, he aloone is left; if ony ad- 
uersite schal bifalle ‘to hym" in the lond 
to which 3e schulen go, 3e schulen lede 
forth myn hoore heeris with sorewe to 
hellis’. 


CAP. XLIII. 


In the meene tyme hungur oppresside 1 
greetli a] the lond; and whanne the meetis 2 
weren wastid, whiche thei brou3ten fro 
Egipt, Jacob seide to hise sones, Turne 
3e azen, and bie 3e a litil of meetis to 
vs. Judas answeride, The ilke man de-3 
nounside” to vs vndir witnessyng of an* 
oothy, and seide, 3e schulen not se my face, 
if 3e schulen not brynge with 30u 3oure 
leeste brother; therfor if thou wolt? sende4 
hym with vs, we schulen go togidere, and 
we schulen bie necessaries to thee; ellis ifs 
thou wolt* not, we schulen not go; for as 
we seiden® ofte, the man denounside? to vs, 
and seide, 3e schulen not se my face with 
out 3oure leeste brother. Forsothe Israel 6 
seide to hem, 3e diden this in to my 
wretchidnesse, that 3e schewiden® to hym, 
that 3e hadden also another brother. And? 
thei answeriden, The man axide vs bi or- 
dre oure generacioun, if the’ fadir lyuede, 
if we hadden® a brother; and we answeriden 
suyugli to hym, bi that that he axide ; 
whether we my3ten wite that he wolde 
seie, Brynge 3e 3oure brothir with you? 
And Judas seide to his fadir, Sendef thes 
child with me, that we go, and moun lyue, 


lest we dien, and oure litle children}; Y9 + 20, prestis 
oblishyne. 1s. 


S3en. tabyt sperm. in a. 
Talso s. * han falle 1s, t Beniamynis. %Om.s. Vhelle1. Wschewide rs. *Om. plures. Y face . 
zwilt in. ®@hanseidi. > denounside or schewide 1s, © sueredent. 4ourers. ¢anothirc. f sende 


je FM. 


174 


the child, of myn hoond a3en aske hym; 
but if I come® a3en and take hyin to thee, 
Y shal be gilti of synne in thee al tyme ; 
wif tariyng hadde not falle bitwix, now 
11eftsones we hadden comen. Thanne Yrael, 
the fader of hem,-seide to hem, If so it is 
nede, doth what 3e wolen; take 3e of the 
beste fruytis of the loond in 3oure vessils, 
and berith 3iftis to the man, a litil of 
precious licoure of swete gumme, and of 
hony, and of licoure? of the tree of storax, 
and of stactes, the licoure of myrre tree, 
izand of therebynt, and of almaundis; and 
dowble money bere 3e with 30w, and that 
that 3e han foundun in the sackis bere 3e 
a3en, lest perauenture thur3 errour it be 
isdoon; but and 3oure brother takith, and 
ia4goth to the man; and my God Almy3ti 
make hym plesable to 3ow, and send he 
a3en witli 30w 3oure brother, that he 
holdith in boondis, and this Beniamyn ; 
Y forsothe as priued with outen free chil- 
dren shal be. Thanne the men token 
3iftis, and dowble money, and Beniamyn, 
and descendiden into Egipte, and stoden‘ 
isbifore Joseph. Whom whanne he hadde 
seen, and Beniamyn togidere, he co- 
maundide to the dispensatowr of his 
hows, seiynge, Lede yn the men hoom, and 
slee the beestis of sacrifice, and ordeyne a 
feeste; for with me thei ben to etun to 
iwday. And he dide as it was comaundid, 
isand brou3te in the men hoom; and there 
thei agast seiden togideres, For the money 
that we brou3ten bifore in oure sackis we 
ben lad yn, that chalengyng he turne in 
vs, and violently sugette to thraldom and 
i9vs and our assis. Wherfore in thilke 
jatis goynge to, speken to the dispensa- 
zotour, Syre, we preyen thee, that thow 
here vs; now bifore we descenden™ that 
2iwe biggen meetis; the whiche bou3t, 
whanne we comen to the place of turn- 


© brynge BDFH. 


& brynge him 1. 
bers. “taketh 3. takes. © Om. Gc. 
precious gumme Be. st. that is, pr. g. K. 
resyns K. Ubere DG. berith 1s. ¥ berith 1s. 
or necgligence 8. 
4 beden him 1. boden to him s. 
to the disp. and spaken ¢o him 18. 


© this 18. 


© he ledde 1. 


GENESIS. 


P the lycour BDEFH. 


h this delaiyng 1. this delay or taryng s. 
P berith 1s. 
8 mirre, that is, a bitter gumme K. 
w that 1s. 
z plesable plures. plesable ether quemeful Bex. 
f thei seiden rs. 


1 preien thee 1s. ™ this tyme that 1s. 


XLIITI, 10-~-21. 


take the child, require thou hym of myn 
hoond; if Y schal not brynge® a3en, and 
bitake hym.to thee, Y schal be gilti of 
synne a3ens thee in al tyme; if delai®10 
hadde not be, we hadden come! now an- 
othir tyme. Therfor Israel, ‘the fadir of 11 
hem*, seide to hem, If it is nede sol, do 3e 
that that 3e wolen; ‘take 3e™ of" the beste 
fruytis of the® lond in 3oure vesselis, and 
‘bere 3eP 3iftis4 to the man, a litil of gumme, 
and of hony, and of storax", and of mirre’, 
and of therebynte', and of alemaundis; and 12 
‘bere 3e" with 30u double money, and ‘bere 
3e” a3en that money which” 3e founden in 
baggis*, lest perauenture it be doon bi 
errour’; but also take 3e 3oure brother, and 13 
go 3e to the man; forsotlle my God Al-14 
my3ti mak him pesible? to 30u, and sende 
he a3en 30ure brother, whom he holdith in 
boondis, and* this Beniamyn; forsothe Y 
schal beb as maad bare without sones. 
Therfor the men token 3iftis, and double is 
monei, and Beniamyn; and thei 3eden 
doun in to Egipt, and stoden bifore Jo- 
seph. And whanne he hadde seyn ‘hem 16 
and® Beniamyn togidere, he comaundide 
the dispendere of his hows, and seide, 
Lede these men in to the hous, and sle 
beestis, and make a feeste; for thei schulen 
ete with me to dai. He dide as it was17 
comaundid‘, and ledde® the men in to the 
hows; and there thei weren aferd, and 1s 
seidenf togidere, We ben brou3t in for 
the monei which we baren aj3en_bifore® 
in oure sackis, that he putte chalenge ‘in 
to! vs, and make suget bi violence to ser- 
uage bothe vs and oure assis. Wherfor 19 
thei nei3eden in the ‘3atis, and spaken to 
the dispendere‘, Lord, we preien! that thou 20 
here vs; we camen doun now bifore that™ 
we schulden bie metis; whanne tho werenai 
bou3t, whanne" we camen to the ynne, we 
openeden oure baggis, and we founden 


4stonden p. 1 descendeden BpEFH. 


i come thenns 1s. * her fadir 1s. 10 to 

q the 3iftis F@kK pr.man.  * storax ether 
t therebynte, that is, beste 
x the baggis 1s. Y errour or vnqwiting 1. errour 
aand also1s. > be xow its. ¢ Om. s. 


¢Om.pv. »Om.3B. ‘agents. & gatis 
o and i. aud whenne s. 


XLII. 22—32. 


yng into reste, we opnyden oure sackis, 
and we fonden money in the mouth of 
the’ sackis, that now in the same peyse 
22 we han brou3t a3en; but and other money 
we han brou3t, that we biggen thilke 
thingis, that ben necessarye to vs; it ys 
not in oure conscience, who it putte in 
23oure bagges. And he answerde, Pees 
with 3ow, wole 3e not drede; 3oure God 
and the God of 3oure fader hath 3yue 
to 3ow tresours in 3oure sackis; for the 
money that 3e 3yuen to me, J haue it 
aproued’s, And he ladde out to hem Sy- 
24meon; and thei in lad hoom, brou3t wa- 
tir, and thei weschen her feet, and he 
253aue fodder to the asses of hem. Thei 
forsothe greithiden 3iftis to the tyme that 
Joseph shulde come yn at mydday, thei 
hadden herde forsothe, that there thei 
26weren to etun breed. Thanne Joseph 
cam into his hows, and thei holdynge 
3iftis in her hondis, offerden to hym, and 
27lowtiden bowid into the erthe. And he 
goodly hem ajen salutid, askide hem, sei- 
ynge, Whether 3oure oold fader is saaf, 
of whom 3e spaken to me? 3it lyueth 
28he? The whiche answerden, He ys al hool, 
thi seruaunt oure fader 3it lyueth; and 
29thei bowid lowtiden hym. And Joseph 
heuynge vp the eyen, saw3 Beniamyn, 
his brother of o wombe, and seith, This 
is 30ure litil brother, of whom 3e speken 
to me? And eft, God, he seith, haue 
somercy of thee, sone myne. And he 
hizede into the hows, for the entrayls of 
hym weren moued vpon his brother, and 
teeris bristen oute, and he, goynge in to 
3ithe bed place, wepte. And eft his face 
waishun, goon oute, stillide hym self, and 
32seith, Settith loones. The whiche sett 
forth, Joseph bi hym self, and the bri- 
theren bi hem seluen, and the Egipciens 
togiderest eetun bi hem seluen; forsothe 
it is vnleueful to Egipciens to etun with 


8 Om. BDEF sec.m. I. 


the money 1s. P the sackis 1s. oure s. L. 
uthatis. Y¥Om.p.  W her assis mete 1s. 
aheris. » the erthe rKL8x sec.m. 
h barsten plures. 1 his 18. 


°set forth is. Phisr. 4 the Egipcyans 1xsx. 


GENESIS. 


88 proued 4 pr. m. 


4 the which 1. 
* the 3iftis 1s. 
¢ he seide Is. 

k hymsilf fro weping 13/ 
T gessiden G. 


Wes 


money® in the mouth of sackis?, which‘ 
money" we han brou3t a3en now in the 
same wei3te; but also we han brou3t 22 
other siluer, that we bie tho thingis that 
ben nedeful to vs; it is not in oure con- 
science’, who puttidet the money in oure 
pursis. And he answerde, Pees be to 30u, 23 
nyle 3e drede; 3oure God and God of 3oure 
fadir 3af to 30u tresouris in 3oure baggis ; 
for J haue the monei preued, which" 3e 
3auen to me. And he ledde out Symeon 
to hem; and whanne thei weren’ brou3t 24 
in to the hows, he brou3te watir, and thei 
waischiden her feet, and he 3af ‘meetis to 
her assis”. Sotheli thei maden redi 3iftis* 25 
til Joseph entride at myd day, for thei 
hadden herd that thei schulden ete breed 
there. Therfor Joseph entride in to his26 
hows, and thei offridenY 3iftis to hym, and 
helden? in the? hondis, and worschipiden 
lowe to erthe®, And he grette hem a3en27 
mekeli; and he axide hem, and seide, 
Whether 3oure fadir, the elde man, is saaf, 
of whom 3e seiden to me? lyueth he 3it ? 
Whiche answeriden, He is hool, thi ser-28 
aunt oure fadir lyueth 3it; and thei 
weren bowid, and worschipiden hym. For-29 
sothe Joseph reyside hise izen, and si3 
Beniamyn his brother of the same wombe, 
and seide®, Is this 3oure litil’ brother, of 
whom 3e seiden to me? And eft Joseph 
seide, My sone, God haue merci of® thee. 
And Joseph hastidef in to the® hous, for 30 
his entrailis weren moued on his brother, 
and teeris brasten out, and he entride into 
a closet, and wepte. And eft whanne thes: 
face was waischun, he 3ede out, and re- 
freynede hym silf*, and seide, Sette 3e! 
looues. ‘And whanne™ tho" weren set? to 32 
Joseph by hym silf, and to the? britheren 
bi hem silf, and to Egipcyans4 that eeten 
to gidre by hem silf; for it is vuleueful 
to Egipcians to ete with Ebrewis, and 
thei gessen™ sich a feeste vnhooli. Therfor 33 


t that to githers spzeru. 


tT Om. plures. ® knowyngi. ¢ putte 1s. 
y profriden nc pr.m. 2 helden hem 1s. 
€on pes. fhastide himis. & an 1s. 


4 soung Is. 
mQm.1ts. thei r. whiche ts. 


1 3e forth 1s. 


176 


Ebrews, and a fowle thing thei wenen 
33sich a manere feeste. Thei setten bifore 
hym the first geten, aftir the riztis® of 
his first getyng, and the leeste aftir his 
34age; and thei wondreden mych, the par- 
tise takun that thei token of hym, and 
the more party cam to Beniamin, so that 
bi fyne partis he passide; and_ thei 
drunken, and ben fulfillid with hym. 


CAP. XLIV. 


1 Joseph forsothe comaundide to the dis- 
pensatour of his hows, seiynge, Fille the 
sackis of hem with whete, as myche as 
thei mowen take, and ley the money of 

zeche in the cop of her sak; my silueren 
forsothe coppe, and the prise of whete 
that he 3af, putte in the mouth of the sak 

3of the 3onger; and it is do so. And the 
morwetyde sprongun, thei ben lete go 
4with her assis. And now the cyte thei 
3eden oute, and forth 3eden a litil; also 
Joseph, the dispensatour of his hous 
clepid, seith, Aryse, he seith, pursue the 
men, and hem takun sey thow, Whi han 
53e 3oldun yuel for good? The coppe that 
3e han stoln, it is in the which my lord 
drynkith, and in the which he is wonte 
to dyuyne; the moost ynel thing 3e han 
6do. He dide as he comaundide, and, hem 
7takun, bi ordre spak. The whiche an- 
swerden, Whi thus spekith oure lord, that 
thi seruauntis so meche of wickidnes 
sshulden han doon? The money that we 
founden in the cop of the sackis we han 
brou3t azen to thee fro the loond of Cha- 
naan, and what maner is it folwynge that 
we shulden haue stolne fro the hows of 
9thi lord gold or siluer? Anentys whom 
euere of thi sernauntis it were foundun 
that thou sekist, be he deed, and we the 
1oseruauntis shulen be of oure lord. The 
which seide to hem, Be it doon after 3oure 
sentens; anentis whom it be foundun, 
be he my sernaunt; 3e forsothe shulen 


GENESIS. 


XLIII. 33—XLIV. Io. 


theis saten bifore hym, the firste gendrid* 
bi the" rite of his” firste gendryng’, and 
the leeste* bi his age ; and thei wondriden 
greetli, whanne the partis weren takun34 
whiche thei hadden resseyued of him, and 
the more part cam to Beniamyn, so that 
it passide in fyue partis ; and thei drunken, 
and weren fillid with him. 


CAP. XLIV. 


Forsothe Joseph comaundid the dispen-1 
dere of his hous, and seide, Fille thou her 
sackis with wheete, as myche as thoY moun 
take, and putte thou the money of ech in 
the hiznesse’ of the sak ; forsothe put thou2 
in the mouth of the sak* of the 3ongere” 
my silueren® cuppe, and the prijs of wheete® 
which he 3af; and it was doon so. Ands 
whanne the morewtid roos, thei weren de- 
lyuered with her assis. And now thei had-4 
den go out of the citee, and hadden go 
forth a litil; thanne Joseph seide, whanne 
the dispendere of his hous was clepid, 
Rise thou, pursue*® the men, and seye thou 
whanne thei ben takun, Whi han 3e 3olde 
yuel for good? The cuppe, which 3e hans 
stole, is thilk in which my lord drynkith, 
and in which he is wont to dyuyne; 3e 
han do a ful wickid thing. He dide ase 
Joseph comaundid, and whanne thei weren 
takun, he spak bi ordre. Whiche® answer-7 
iden, Whi spekith oure lord so, that thi 
seruauntis han do so greet trespas? Wes 
brou3ten a3en to thee fro the lond of Cha- 
naan the monei which! we founden in the 
hijnesse* of sackis!, and hou is it suynge 
that we han stole fro ‘the hows of thi 
Jord™ gold ether" siluer? At whom euere9 
of thi seruauntis this that thou sekist is 
foundun, die he, and we schulen be ser- 
uauntis of my lord. Which seide to hem, 10 
Be it doon bi 30ure sentence; at whom it 
is foundun, be he my sernaunt; forsothe 
3e schulen be gilteles. And so thei diden 11 


U siftis H. 


8 the britheren of Joseph 1s. 
ytheirKs. 2 heizthe 1s. 
4 the wheete 1. 


t bigeten 1. 


€ and pursue pis, f Om. kK. 


u Om. 1KMs. 
4 mouth pe. sackis mouth 1. sak mouth s. 


Vthers. W bigetun 1. 


* 30ungest Is. 
b 30ungest 1s. 


© siluer pis. 


& these thingis; the whiche 1. thees thingis; whiche s. 


ba trespas pagrt. trespassis K. ithat 1s. * heigte 1s. ]oure sackis 1s. ™ thi lordis hous 1s. ™ or 1LPs. 


XLIV. 11—23. 


ibe giltles. And so blyue doynge down 
into the erthe the saekis, eche opnyde; 
12the which aserchinge, bigynnynge fro 
the more vnto the leeste, fonde the eoppe 
i3in the sak of Beniamyn. And thei the 
elothis to-rent, and eft chargid the assis, 
ben turned a3en into the wallid town. 
14And Juda the firste with the bretheren 
wente in to Joseph; ne forsothe 3it fro 
the place he hadde goon; and alle to the 
is erthe togidere fallen.. To whom he seith, 
Whi thus wolden 3e doon? whethir 3e 
vnknowen, that there is noon lijk me in 
is kunnynge of dyuynynge? To whom Juda, 
What, he seith, shulen we answere to 
my lord, or what shulen we spek, or ri3t- 
wisly we mowen a3en stryue? God hath 
foundun the wickidnes of thi seruauntis; 
loo! alle sernauntis we ben of my lord, 
and we and anentis whom the euppe is 
17foundun. Joseph answerde, Fer be it fro 
me, that Y thus do; he that hath stolne 
the cuppe be my seruaunt; 3e forsothe 
isgoth awey free to j3oure fader. For- 
sothe Judas comynge ner, seith tristily, 
My lord, Y preye, thi seruaunt spek a 
word in thin eeris, and ne wrath thow to 
thi seruaunt; thow art forsothe after 
19 Pharao, my lord. Thow askidist bifore 
thi seruauntis, Haue 3e a fader or bro- 
20ther? And we answerden to thee, my 
lord, There is to vs a fader oold, and a 
litil ehild, the which in eeld of hym is 
born, whos brother of 0 wombe is deed, 
and him oonli hath his moder; the fader 
21forsothe tenderli loueth him. And thow 
seidist to thi seruauntis, Bryngith hym 
to me, and Y shal putte myn eyen vypon 
22hym. We imeueden to thee, my lord, the 
child may not leeue his fader; if forsothe 
23he leeue hym, he shal dye. And thow 
seidist to thi seruauntis, But 3oure leeste 


GENESIS. Pi? 


doun hastili the® sackis on erthe?, and alle 
openyden? tho™ whiche® he sou3te; and 12 
bigant at the more" til to the leeste, and 
foond’ the cuppe in ‘the sak of Benia- 
myn”. And whanne thei hadden ‘to-rent 13 
her elothis*, and hadden chargid eft theY 
assis, thei turneden a3en in to’ the citee. 
And Judas entride ‘the firste* with bri-14 
thren> to Joseph ; for he® hadde not go 3it 
fro the place; and alle felden* togidere on 
erthe® bifore hym. To whichef he seide, 15 
Whi wolden 3e do so? whether® 3e witen 
not, that noon is lijk me in the kunnyng 
of dyuinyng'? To whom Judas seide,16 
What schulen we answere to my lord, - 
ether* what schulen we speke, ether* moun! 
iustli ajenseie? God hath founde the wiekid- 
nesse™ of thi seruauntis; lo! alle we ben 
the seruauntis of my lord, bothe we and 
he at whom the euppe is foundun. Joseph 17 
answeride, Fer be it fro me, that Y do so; 
he be my seruaunt that stal the cnppe; 
forsothe go 3e fre to 30ure fadir. Sotheli1s 
Judas neizede neer, and seide tristili, My 
lord; Y preye", thi seruaunt speke a word 
in thin eeris, and be thou not wrooth to 
thi seruaunt; for aftir Farao thou art 
my lord. Thou axidist first thi seruauntis, 19 
Han 3e a fadir, ether™ a brother? And we 20 
answeriden to thee°, my lord, An eld fadir 
is to vs, and a litil child that was borun 
in his eelde, whos brother of the same 
wombe is deed, and his modir hath hym 
aloone ; forsothe his fadir loueth hym ten- 
dirli. And thou seidist to thi seruauntis, 21 
Brynge 3e hym to me, and Y sehal? sette 
myn izen on hym. We maden suggestionn 22 
to thee, my lord, the child may not forsake 
his fadir; for if he sehal leeue the4 fadir, 
he’ sehal die. And thou seidist to thi2s 
seruauntis, If j3oure leeste’ brother schal 
not come with 30u, 3e schulen no more se 


brother come to vs’, 3e shulen no more my face. Therfor whanne we hadden2: 


V with jou p sup.ras. 


Chers. Pthe erthe 1s. 4 thei openyden is. * hems. % the whiche1. the bigan 1s. ¥ mooste 1s. 
Vv he foond 1s. _W Beniamyns sak 1. Beniamyn sak s. * to-rent h.c. for scerowe 1. for sorew to-rent h.c. s. 
Yherer. 2Om.s, 4% firsteo. Om.s. > his britheren xs, ¢ Josephis. ‘thei fellenis. ¢ the 
erthe 1s. f whom 1s. & what p. wher plures, ut passim. 2to me 1s. i dyuynowring 1. * or ue. | what 
moun wes, ™ wickidnessis peqxtT. % praye thee rs. ™ np, 9Om.K. POm.G. ‘hist. his 
fadir 1s. goungist 18. 


Aa 


178 


21se my face. ‘Thanne whanne we hadden 
steyed vp to oure fader, thi seruaunt, we 
tolden hym alle thingis that my lord 
25spak; and oure fader seyde, Goth ajen, 
2¢6and biggith” vs a litil of whete; to whom 
we seiden, We mowen not goon; if oure 
leeste brother shul descende with vs, we 
shulen go togideres; ellis, hym absent, we 
27dorun not se the face of the lord. And 
he answerde, 3e witen that two children 
28 gat to me my wijf; the oon* is goon oute, 
and 3e seiden, a beest hath deuowryd 
hym, and 3it hidir to he aperyde not; 
20and if I take this, and eny thing to hym 
shal falle in the weye, 3e shulen doun 
lede myn hoore heeris with mournyng to 
30helle. Thanne if I shal goo to thi ser- 
uaunt, oure fader, and the child were 
thens, sith the lijf of hym hongith of the 
31lijf of this, and se hym not be with vs, 
he shal dye, and thi seruauntis shulen 
down lede the hoore heeris of hym with 
szsorwe toY helle. Be I propirli thi ser- 
uaunt, the which haue resseyued this into 
my feith, and haue bihoote, seiynge, But 
I brynge ajen hym, Y shal be gilti of 
33synne in my fader al tyme; and so Y 
shall dwelle thi seruaunt for the child 
in to the seruyce of my lord, and the child 
34ascend with his britheren ; forsoth Y may 
not turne ajen to my fader, the child ab- 
sent, lest a witnes I stonde to of myschef, 
that is to oppresse my fader. 


CAP. XLV. 


1 Joseph my3te no ferthere with holde 
hym self, many biforn stondynge ny3; 
wherfor he comaundide that alle men 
shulden goon out, and noon alien were 
2amonge to the knowyng togideres. And 
he arerid a voys with wepyng, that Egip- 
cyens herden, and al the hows of Pharao. 
3 And he seide to his bretheren, I am Jo- 
seph ; 3it my fader lyueth ? The britheren 
my3ten not answere, for ful myche drede 


Ww bygge x. * toone BDEFH. 
t gon vp. stied vps. spak fovsis. VY dar 1. 
Zapperide ct. bifalles. >ajzentor1s. ¢ hiss. 
hgovpt. stievps. iberms. Kloprr 10m. ¢. 
his is. © the Egipcians 1s. P His 1s. 


GENESIS. 


XLIV. 24—XLV. 3. 


stiedt to thi seruaunt, oure fadir, we telden 
to hym alle thingis whiche my lord spak®; 
and oure fadir seide, Turne 3e ajen, and 25 
bie 3e to 30u a litil of wheete; to whom 26 
we seiden, We moun not go; if oure leeste 
brother schal go doun with vs, we schulen 
go forth togidere ; ellis, if he is absent, we 
doren’ not se the ‘face of the lord¥. To27 
whiche thingis the* fadir answeride, 3e 
witen that my wiif childide twei sones to 
me; oon 3ede out, and 3e seiden’, a beeste 28 
deuouride hym, and hidir to he apperith? 
not; if 3e taken also this sone, and ony 29 
thing bifallith® to hym in the weye, 3e 
schulen lede forth myn hoor heeris with 
morenyng to hellis. Therfor if Y entre to®30 
thi seruaunt, oure fadir, and the® child 
faile, sithen his lijf hangith of the lijf of 
the? child, and he se that the® child is not31 
with vs, he schal die, and thi seruauntis 
schulen lede forth hise hoor heeris with 
sorewe to hellis. Be Y propirli thi ser-32 
uaunt, which resseyuede this child on my 
feith, and bihi3zte‘, and seide, If Y schal 
not brynge a3en® hym, Y schal be gilti of 
synne a3ens my fadir in al tyme; and so33 
Y schal dwelle thi seruaunt for the child 
in to the seruyce of my lord, and the child 
stie’ with hise britheren; for Y may not 34 
go ajen to my fadir, if the child is! absent, 
lest* Y stonde a! witnesse of the wretchid- 
nesse that schal oppresse my fadir. 


CAP. XLV. 


Joseph my3te no lengere absteyne hym1 
silf, while many men stoden bifore™; 
wherfor he comaundide that alle men 
schulden go out, and that noon alien were 
present in the knowyng of Joseph and 
hise britheren. And Joseph reiside the™2 
vois with wepyng, which Egipcians?® herden, 
and al the hows of Farao. And he seide3 
to hise britheren, Y am Joseph ; lyueth my 
fadir 3it? The? brithren my3ten not an- 


Y into 4 sec.m. D. 


W lordis face 1s. -* oure 1s. _¥ thei seiden plwres. 
d this plures. ¢this1. ‘I bihizjter, & Om.s. 
m bifore him 1. there bifore hims. 4% reiside vp 


XLV. 4-——16. 


4afeerd. Tio whom he goodliche, Come? 
ner, he seide, to me. And whanne thei 
weren comun ny3, Y am, he seith, Joseph 
3oure brother, whom 3e solden in to E- 
sgipte; wole 3e not drede, ne seme it to 
30w to be harde, that 3e han soold me in 
thes regiouns; forsothe for 3oure helthe 
God hath sent me bifore 3ow into Egipte. 
6 Two 3eer it ys that hungur began to be 
in the loond, 3it fyue 3eers leeuen, in the 
whiche it may not be eerid, ne ropun; 
zand God hath bifore sent me, that 3e ben 
kepte vpon erthe, and meetis to lyue han 
33e mowen. Not thur3 3oure counseil, but 
thur3: the wil of God Y am sent hydir, 
the which hath maad me as the fader of 
Pharao, and lord of al the hows of hym, 
and prince in al the loond of Egipte. 
9 Hye 3e, and stye 3e vp to my fader, and 
3e shulen seye to hym, This biddith thi 
sone Joseph ; God me hath maad lord of 
al the loond of Egipte; descende to me, 
ione abide thow, and dwel in the loond of 
Gessen; and thow shalt be biside me, 
thow, and thi sones, and the sones of thi 
sones, thi sheep, and thi droues, and al 
11that thou hast, and there Y shal fede 
thee ; 3it forsothe fyue 3eer ben leeued of 
hungur, lest and thow perishe, and thin 
12hows, and al that thow hast. Loo! 3oure 
eyen, and the eyen of my brother Benia- 
myn seen, that my mouth spekith to 3ow; 
13tellith to my fader al my glorie, and alle 
thingis that 3e han seen in Egipte; hye 
143e, and bryng 3e hym to me. And 
whanne cleppid hadde thrist to hym the 
necke of Beniamyn, his brother, he wepte, 
and hym wepynge also vpon the necke of 
ishym. And Joseph kisside alle his bri- 
theren, and wepte vpon echone; aftir that 
‘6thei weren hardi to speke to him. And 
it is herd, and with solempne word pup- 
plishid in the halle of the kyng, The bre- 
theren of Joseph ben conn. And Pha- 


GENESIS. 


179 


swere, and weren agast bi® ful myche 
drede. To whiche he® seide mekeli, Neij3e 4 
3e" to me. And whanne thei hadden neized 
ny3, he seide, Y am Joseph 3oure brother, 
whom 3e selden in to Egipt; nyle 3e drede, 5 
nether seme it to be hard to 3oun, that 3e 
seelden me in to these cuntreis; for God 
hath sent me bifore 3ou in to Egipt for 
3oure helthe. For it is twei 3eer thats 
hungur bigan ‘to be’ in the” lond, 3it fyne 
3eer suen, in whiche meX* schal not” mow“ 
ere*, nether? repe ; and God bifor sente me, 7 
that 3e be reserued® on erthe, and moun 
haue metis to lyue. Y was sent hidur nots 
bi 3oure counsel, but bi Goddis wille*, 
which made® me as the fadir of Farao, 
and the’ lord of al his hows, and prince 
in al the lond of Egipt. Haste 3e, andy 
‘stie 3e® to my fadir, and 3e schulen seie 
to hym, Thi sone Joseph sendith these 
thingis* ; God hath maad me lord of al 
the lond of Egipt; come doun! to me, and 
tarie not, and dwelle in the lond of Ges-10 
sen; and thou schalt be bisidis me, thou, 
and-thi sones, and the sones of thi sones, 
thi scheep, and thi grete beestis, and alle 
thingis whiche thou weldist, and there Y 11 
schal fede thee; for 3it fyue 3eer of hun- 
gur ben residue‘, lest bothe thou perische, 
and thin hows, and alle thingis whiche 
thou weldist. Lo! 3oure izen, and the izen 12 
of my brother Beniamyn seen’, that my 
mouth spekith to 30u; telle 3e to my fadir 13 
al my glorie, and alle thingis whiche 3e 
sien in Egipt; haste 3e, and brynge 3e™ 
hym" to me. And whanne he® hadde bi- 14 
clippid, and hadde?P feld4 in to the necke 
of Beniamyn, his brother, he wepte, the 
while also Benjamin wepte in lijk maner* 
on the* necke of Josepht. And Josephs 
kisside alle hise britheren, and wepte on 
alle"; aftir whiche’ thingis thei weren 
hardi to speke to hym. And it was herd, 16 
and pupplischid bi famouse word in the 


Z commith RDE sec.m. FH. 


¥ with 1. 


8’ whom Joseph 1s. 
y neither 1s. 


2 Om. DEGLNP. 


€hath made ys. f£ Om.1. & stieth 1. stieth vps. 
'sawjen1. ™bringeth 1s. " my fadir s. 
FOm.1. Shisi €Om.1. 4 hem alle 1s. 


t cometh ni3 Is. 
® eren erthe ELP. 


© Joseph Is. 
v the whielie r. 


Usith thatis. YOm.1s. Wthisis. * men m. 
bnerirs. ¢keptis. 4 councel and wille £. 
h thingis to thee 1s. ! thou dounis. « left 1s. 


P Om. kos. 41 falle erFuMPws. fallen 1. 


Aag 


180 


rao ioyede, and al the meyne of hym; 
1z7and he seide to Joseph, that he shulde 
comaunde to his britheren, seiynge, 
Chargynge the beestis goth into the 
isloond of Chanaan, and takith fro thens 
joure fader, and kynrede, and cometh to 
me, and I shal 3yue to 30w al the goodis 
of Egipte, that 3e eeten the mary of the 
i9loond. Comaunde also, that thei taken 
the waynes of Egipte to the kariyng of 
her children, and wiues, and sey thow, 
Takith* 30ure fader, and anoon as 3¢ 
20mowen comynge makith redi, ne leue 5e 
not eny thing of eny purtenaunce to 3oure 
howshold, for al the ryches of Egipte 
21shulen be 3ouren. The children of Yrael 
diden, as it was bodun to hem; to whom 
Joseph 3af waynes, after the heeste of 
22 Pharao, and metis in the weye; and to 
echone he comaundide to be brou3t forth 
two stolys; forsothe to Beniamyn he 3af 
thre hundryd silueren> pens, with fyue 
23the best stolis; as feele of money and of 
clothing seendynge to his fader, addynge 
to hem ten hee assis, that shulden karye 
of alle the ricchessis of Egipte, and as 
feele she assis, whete in the weye, and 
24breed berynge. Thanne he lafte his bri- 
theren, and to hem forth goynge seith, 
25 Ne wraththe 3e in the weye. The whiche 
steyynge vp fro Egipte camen into the 
loond of Chanaan, to her fader Jacob; 
26and tolden to hym, seiynge, Joseph, thi 
sone, lyueth, and he is lord in al the 
loond of Egipte. The which herde, Ja- 
cob as of a greet sleep awakynge; neuer- 
27 thelater he trowide not hem. Thei a3en- 
ward tolden al the ordre of the thing; 
and whanne he hadde seyn the caryagis, 
and al that he hadde sent, a3en quyckenyd 
28the spiryt of hym, and seith, It sufficith 
to me, if 3it Joseph my sone lyue, I shal 
go and shal se hym or Y dye. 


a take £. 


wkyngis halle rs. * seie to hem charge 3e Is. 
bher wyues 1s. ¢ thou fo hem. 4 takith rs. 
W longe clothis 1. marg. stoolis or garmentis s. 
2 of femal1. > Joseph is. ¢ the whiche r. 
Slohemalr. tohimals. } thatrs. i quykide 1. 


GENESIS. 


Y 3oure kynrede Is. 
© sours Is. 
x ech brother ts. 
4 wenten vp 1. stieden vp s. 
kK Tyne s. 


XLV. 17—28. 


halle of the kyng’, The britheren of Jo- 
seph ben comun. And Farao ioiede, and 
al his meynee; and Farao seide to Joseph, 17 
that he schulde comaunde hise britheren, 
and ‘seie, Charge* 3oure beestis, and go 3e 
in to the lond of Canaan, and take 3e frois 
thenunus 30ure fadir, and kynredeY,and come 
3e to me; and Y schal 3yue to? 30u alle 
the goodis of Egipt, that 3e ete the merow 
of the lond. Comaunde thou® also, that 19 
thei take waynes of the lond of Egipt to 
the cariage of her litle children, and wyues?, 
and seie thou‘, ‘Take 3e4 3oure fadir, and 
haste 3e comynge soone, nether leeue 3e 20 
ony thing of the purtenaunce of 3oure 
hows, for alle the richessis of Egipt schulen 
be 30ure®. The sones of Israel diden, as21 
it was comaundid to hem; to whichet Jo- 
seph 3af waynes, bi the comaundement" 
of Farao, and metis in the weie; and he’ 22 
comaundide twei stoolis” to be brou3t 
forth to ech*; forsothe he 3af to Beniamyn 
thre hundrid platis of siluer, with fyue the 
beste stoolis; and senteY to his fadir so 23 
myche of siluer, and of cloothis, and he 
addide to hem ten male assis, that schulden 
bere of alle? richessis of Egipt, and so 
many femal® assis, berynge wheete and . 
looues in the weie. Therfor he? lefte hise 24 
britheren, and scide to hem goynge forth, 
Be 3e not wrooth in the weie. Whiche°2s 
stieden* fro Egipt, and camen in to the 
lond of Canaan, to her fadir Jacob; and 26 
telden® to hym, and seiden, Joseph, thi 
sone, lyueth, and he is lord in al the lond 
of Egipt. And‘ whanne this was herd, 
Jacob wakide as of a greuouse sleep; 
netheles he bilenyde not to hem. Thei27 
telden a3enward al the ordre of the thing; 
and whanne Jacob hadde seyn the waynes, 
and alle thingis whiche* Joseph hadde sent, 
his spirit lyuede! a3en, and he seide, It suf-28 
fisith to me, if Joseph my sone lyueth* 3it, 
Y schal go and ‘Y! schal™ se hym bifore” 
that Y die. 


b siluer BDEFH. 


z Om. Is. @ thi britheren 1s. 
uheest 1s. ¥ Joseph rs. 
z the eq. alle the 1s. 
f Om. B. 


t the whiche 1. 
y he sente 1s. 
€ thei tolden rs. 


10m. rr. ‘™Om.p. or K. 


XLVI. I—17. 


CAP. XLVI. 

1 And Yrael forth goon with al that he 
hadde, cam to the pit of ooth ; and slawn 
there the beestis of sacryfice to the God 

2of his fader Ysaac, herde hym bi a vy- 
sioun the ny3t clepynge hym, and sei- 
ynge to hym, Jacob! Jacob! To whom 

3answerde, Loo! I am ny3. God seith to 
hym, Y am the moost strong God of thi 
fader; nyl thou: not drede, descend into 
Egipte, for into a greet folk of kynde Y 
4shal make thee there; I shal descende 
with thee thidir, and Y shal thens Iede 
thee comynge a3en, and Joseph shal leye 
shis honden vpon thin eyen. Jacob aroos 
fro the pit of ooth, and his sones token 
hym, with the children, and his wyues, 
in the waynes that Pharao sente to bere 
6the®:-oold man, and al that he hadde in 
the loond of Chanaan; and he cam into 

7 Egipte with al his seed, and the sones 
of hym, and cosyns, dow3teres, aud al the 

sprogenye togideres. hes ben forsothe 
the names of the sones of Yrael, the 
whiche ben goon into Egipte; he with 
his free children. The firste getun Ruben; 

9the sones of Ruben, Enoch, and Phallu, 
1oand Esrom, and Carmy. The sones of 
Symyon, Jemuhel, and Jamyn, and 3a- 
hoth, and Jachyn, and Sab, and Saber, 
uiand Saul, the sone of Chanynytidis. The 
sones of Leuy, Gerson, Caath, and Me- 
lzraryf. The sones of Juda, Her, and 
Onam, and Sela, and Phares, and Zara. 
Deed forsothe ben Her and Onam in the 
loond of Chanaan; and born ben the sones 
130f Phares, Esrom, and Amul. The sones 
of Ysachar, Thola, and Phua, and Jobab, 
i4and Semron. The sones of Zabulon, Sa- 
wred, and Thelom, and Jahelel. Thes the 
sones of Lye, that she gat in Mesopotanye 
of Syrie, with Dyna hir dow3ter; alle 
the soulis of the sones of hir and of dou3- 

16 tres®, three and thretti. The sones of Gad, 
Sephyon, and Aggy, Suny, and Hesebon, 

17 Hery, and Arodi, and Arely. The sones 


Cin the ascc.m. Om. poe. 


mm went Is. ° to hymp. Om.kK. © Om. LZ. 
his 1s. Jacob 1s. ¥ bigeten 1. W is Ruben 1s. 


€ dou3tren BDEFII. 


P ful strong 1. 
x Om. F. 


GENESIS. 181 


CAP. XLVI. 

And Israel 3ede"" forth with alle thingis 1 
that he hadde, and he cam to the pit of 
ooth; and whanne sacrifices weren slayn 
there to God of his fadir Isaac, he herde2 
God bi a visioun in that ny3t clepynge 
hym®, ‘and seiynge to hym®, Jacob! Ja- 
cob! To whom he answeride, Lo! Y am 
present. God seide to hym, Y am thes 
strongeste? God of thi fadir; nyle thou 
drede, go doun in to Egipt, for Y schal 
make thee there in to a greet folk; Y schal4 
go doun thidir with thee, and Y schal 
brynge thee turnynge a3en fro thennus, 
and Joseph schal sette his hond on‘ thin 
izen. Jacob roos fro the pit of ooth, ands 
the™ sones token him, with her litle chil- 
dren, and wyues, in the waynes whiche 
Farao hadde sent to bere the eld man, 
and alle thingis whiche’ he weldide in thes 
lond of Canaan; and he cam in to Egipt 
with his seed, hiset sones, and her sones,7 
and dou3tris,“and al the generacioun to- 
gidere. Forsothe thes ben the names ofs 
the sones of Israel, that entriden in to 
Egipte; he" with hise fre children. The 
firste gendrid’ Ruben”; the sones of Ru-» 
ben, Enoch, and Fallu, and Esrom, and 
Carmi. The sones of Symeon, Jemuliel, 10 
and Jamyn, and Ahoth, and Jachyn, and* 
Sab, and Saber, and Saul, the sone of a 
womman of Canaan. The sones of Leuy, 11 
Gerson, Caath, and Merarie. ‘The sones 12 
of Juda, Her and Onam, and Sela, and 
Fares, and Zara. Forsothe Her and Onam 
dieden in the lond of Canaan; and the 
sones of Fares weren borun, Esrom, aud 
Amul. The sones of Isacar, Thola, and 13 
Fua, and Jobab, and Semron. The sones14 
of Zabulon, Sared, and Thelom, and Jahel. 
These ben the sones of Lia, whiche sche 15 
childide in Mesopotanye of Sirie, with 
Dyna, hir dou3ter; alle the soules of hise 
sones and dou3tris, thre and thretti. The is 
sones of Gad, Sefion, and Aggi, Suny, and 
Hesebon, Heri, and Arodi, and Areli. The17 


fMethary ar. & dov3tre Bru. dou3tren £. 


dvponis, Thisis. that rs. twith 


182 


of Asar, Jamne, and Jesua, and Jesuy, 
and Berya; and Sara, the dou3ter of lem. 
The sones of Berya, Heber, and Melchiel. 
is Thes the sones of Zelphe, whom Laban 
jaf to Lye, his dou3ter, and thes gat Ja- 
19 cob, sixtene soules. The sones of Rachel, 
wijf of Jacob, Joseph, and Beniaimyn. 
20 And born ben the sones of Joseph in the 
loond of Egipte, the which gat to hym 
Asenech, the dou3ter of Putyphar, of the 
preest of Heliopoleos, Manasses, and Ef- 
aifraym. The sones of Beniamyn, Bela, 
and Becor, and Asbelgora, and Naaman, 
and Jethi, and Resemophym, and Ophyn, 
ggand Ared. Thes the sones of Rachel, the 
whiche gat Jacob; alle the soules four- 
tene. The sones of Dan, Vsym. The 
sones of Neptalym, Jasyel, and Gumy, 
2,and Jeser, and Salem. Thes the sones of 
Bale, whom 3af Laban to Rachel, his 
26dou;ter. Thes gat Jacob, alle the soules 
seuen, And alle the soules that ben goon 
with Jacob into Egipte, and goon out of 
the leende of hym, with oute wyues of 
27 his children, sexti and sexe. The sones 
forsothe of Joseph, that ben born to hym 
in the loond of Egipte, soules two. Alle 
the soules of the hows of Jacob, that ben 
28goon into Egipte, weren seuenty. Jacob 
forsothe sente Juda before hym to Jo- 
seph, that he shulde telle to hy, and he 
29shulde a3en come into Gessen. Whider 
whanne he was comun, Joseph, ioyned his 
chare, steiede vp to mete with his fader 
at the same place. And seynge hy, felle 


vpon the nek of hym, and bitwix the. 
And the fader seide - 


3oclippyngis wepte. 
to Joseph, Now glad Y shal dye, for I 
hate seen thi face, and at thin aboue thee 
31 Y leeue. And he spak to his bretheren ; 
and to al the hows of his fader, Y shal 
steye", and telle to Pharao, and Y shal 
sele to hym, My bretheren, and the hows 


GENESIS. 


XLVI. 18—31. 


sones of Aser, Jamne, and Jesua, and Je- 
sui, and Beria; and Sara, the sister of 
hem. The sones of Beria, Heber and 
Melchiel. These weren the sones of Zel-18 
fa, whom Laban 3af to Lia, his dou3ter, 
and Jacob gendrydeY these sixtene per- 
sones. The sones of Rachel, ‘wijf of Ja-19 
cob’*, weren Joseph and Beniamyn. And 20 
sones* weren borun to Joseph in the loond 
of Egipt, Manasses and Effraym, whiche? 
Asenech, ‘dou3tir of Putifar®, preest’ of 
Heliopoleos, childide to hym. The sones of 21 
Beniamin weren Bela, and Becor, and As- 
bel, Gera, and Naaman, and Jechi, ‘Ros, 
and Mofym®, and Ofym‘, and Ared. These 22 
weren the sones of Rachel, whiche® Jacob 
gendride*; alle the! persones weren foure- 
tene. The sone* of Dan, Vsym. The sones 53 
of Neptalym, Jasiel, and Guny, and Jeser, 
and Salem. These weren ‘the sones of 25 
Bala!, whom Laban 3af to Rachel his dou3- 
tir. And Jacob gendride™ these; alle the 26 
soules" weren seuene. And alle the men 
that entriden with Jacob in to Egipt, and 
jeden out of his thi3, with out ‘the wynes 
of his sones®, weren sixti and sixe. For-27 
sothe the sones of Joseph, that weren borun 
to hym in ‘the loond of Egipt?, weren two 
men. Alle the soulis of ‘the hows of Ja- 
cobi, that entriden in to Egipt, weren 
seuenti. Forsothe Jacob sente Judas bi-28 
fore hym to Joseph, that he schulde telle 
to hym, and he schulde™ ‘come’ in tot Ges- 
sen. And whanne Jacob hadde come thi-29 
dir, Joseph stiede" in his chare to mete 
his fadir at the same place. And he si3 
Jacob, and felde on ‘his necke*, and wepte 
bitwixe collyngis*. And the fadir seide to 30 
Joseph, Now Y schal die ioiful, forY Y si;? 
thi face, and Y leeue thee lyuynge. And 31 
Joseph spak to hise brithren, and to al 
‘the hows of his fadir®, I schal stie>, and 
‘Y schal® telle to Farao, and Y schal seie to 


h stey up BDEFH. 


y bigaate 1. 2 Jacob’s wijf 1s. 4 évo sones Is, 


& the whiche x. 4b bigaat1. i these a. 
ngsones s, © his sones wifes Is. 

5 Om.qtT. ‘t meete with him in 1. 
pingis 1. ¢. or biclippingis s. Y Om. s. 
vps. ©Om. DGIKN sec.nt. OQRSTX sec.m. d. 


> the whiche 1. 
¢ and Jesemouphyn peqrtx. and Ros, and Mofym 1. and Ros, and Jesemouphyn s. 
k sones DEGN sup. ras. ogrsTd. 
P Egipt lond 1s. 

u wente vp in to 1. stiede vp in s. 
z haue seen 1. hane si3 s. 


¢ Putiphar doustir 1s. 4 the prest 1s. 
f Sophin pearsrx. 

1 Bala sones s. ™ bigaate 1. 
r Om. DIKMN sec.m. ogRsTWwd. 
W the nek of himis. * biclip. 
ahis fadir hous 1s. > go vp 1. stie 


q Jacobs hous Is. 


XLVI. 32——XLVII. 9. 


of my fader, the whyche weren in the 
32Joond of Chanaan, ben comen to me, and 
ben men kepers of sheep, and han bisynes 
of flockys to ben fedde; her beestis, and 
her droues, and al that thei mowen haue, 
33 thei brou3ten with hem. And whanne he 
shal clepen 30u, and seie, What is 3oure 
34 werke? 3e shulen answere, Men sheep- 
herdes we ben, thi seruauntis, fro oure 
childhod vnto the tyme that is now, and 
we and oure faders. Thes thingis for- 
sothe 3e shulen seye, that 3e mowen 
dwelle in the loond of Gessen, for alle 
Egipcyens haten alle sheepherdes of 
sheep. 
CAP. XLVII. 

1 Joseph thanne goon yn tolde to Pha- 
rao, seiynge, My fader and bretheren, the 
sheep of hem, and droues, and alle the 
thingis that thei han, ben comen fro the 
loond of Chanaan; and loo! thei ben in 

athe loond of Gessen. And fyue men, the 
last of his bretheren, he sette bifore the 

3kyng, whom he askide, What han 3e of 
werke? Theii answerden, Sheepherdes of 
sheep we ben, thi seruauntis, and we and 
4our fadres; to pilgrimage into thi loond 
we ben comen, for there is noon eerbe 
to the flockis of thi seruauntis; hunguri 
meche wexynge greuows in the loond of 
Chanaan, and we axen that thow co- 
maunde vs to be thi seruauntis in the 
sloond of Gessen. And so the kyng seide 
to Joseph, Thi fader and thi bretheren 
6ben comen to thee; the loond of Egipte 
is in thi si3t, in the beste place make hem 
to dwelle, and tak to hem the loond of 
Gessen; and if thow hast knowe to be 
redi men in hem, ordeyne hem maystrys 
7of my beestis. After thes thingis Joseph 
ladde yn his fader to the kyng, and sette 
hym beforn hym, the which blessynge to 
shym, and askyde of hym, How feele ben 
the dayes of the 3eris of thi lijf? He 
answerde, The dayes of the pilgrimage 


ithe a. 


€ Om. IKMN sec.m. swd. 
1 to come bifore 18. 
P Om. Dp. 


4 this present 1s. 
k laste or mekeste 1s. 
Jor a tyme Becknad. 


4 for hungur B. 
Paws. Vand he rs. 


GENESIS. 


J hurgur 4. 


f the grete ELP. 
m whom 1, 
rlo ELP. 


183 


hym, My britheren, and the hows of my 
fadir, that weren in the lond of Canaan, 
ben comun to me, and thei ben men kepers 32 
of scheep, and han bisynesse of flockis to 
be fed; thei bron3ten with hem her scheep 
and grete beestis, and alle thingis whiche 
thei mijten haue. And whanne Farao schal 33 
clepe 3o0u, and schal seie, What is joure 
werk ? 3e schulen answere, We ben thi ser-34 
uauntis, men scheepherdis, fro oure child- 
hed til in to present’ tyme, bothe we and 
oure fadris. Sotheli 3e schulen seye these 
thingis, that 3e moun dwelle in the lond 
of Gessen, for Egipcians wlaten alle keperis 
of scheep. 
CAP. XLVII. 

Therfor Joseph entride, and telde to1 
Farao, and seide, My fadir and brethren, 
the® scheep and gretef beestis of hem, and 
alle thingis whiche® thei welden, camen> 
fro the lond of Canaan; and lo! thei 
stonden in the lond of Gessen. And hei2 
ordeynede fyue, the laste‘ men of hise bri- 
theren, bifore! the kyng, whiche™ he axide®, 3 
What werk han 3e? Thei answeriden, We 
thi seruauntis ben kepers of scheep, bothe 
we and oure faderis; we camen in to thi4 
lond to be pilgrymys®, for noo gras is 
to the? flockis of thi seruauntis; hungur4 
wexith grenouse in the lond of Canaan, 
and we axen that thou comaunde vs thi 
seruauntis to be in the lond of Gessen. 
And so the kyng seide to Joseph, This 
fadir and thi britheren camen’ to thee; thec 
lond of Egipt is in thi sijt, make thou 
hem to dwelle in the beste place, and 3yue 
thou to hem the lond of Gessen; that if 
thou woost that witti men ben in hem, 
ordeyne thou' hem maystris of my beestis. 
After these thingis Joseph brou3te in his7 
fader to the king, and settide" him bifor 
the king, which’ blesside the king; ands 
he was axid of the king, Hou many ben 
the daies of the 3eeris of thi lijf? And heo 
answeride, The daies of pilgrymage of my 


ji Om, eperu. 
& that 1s. 


n axide hem Ep. 
$s han come 1. 


hhan come x. i Joseph ts. 
© pileryms, that is, to divelle 
t Om. 1ks. ™ sette EG1LM 


s 


184 


of iny lijf ben of an hundrid and thretti 
jeer, litil and yuel, and thei comen not 
vito the dayes of my fadris, in the whiche 
iothei han pilgrimagid. And the kyng 
i blissid, he 3ede oute. Joseph forsothe to 
the fader and to his bretheren 3af posses- 
syoun in Egipte, in the best soyl of the 
loond of Ramesses, as comaundyde Pha- 
12rao; and he fedde hem, and al the hows 
of his fader, 3yuynge meetis to eche oon. 
13 Forsothe in al the world breed lackide, 
and hungur oppresside* the erthe, moost 
14 of Egipte and of Chanaan; of the whiche 
al the money he gederyde togider for the 
sellyng of whete, and putte it to! the tre- 
issorye of the kyng. And whanne to the 
biggerys faylide prijs, cam al Egipte to 
Joseph, seiynge, 3if to vs breed; whi 
isdien we bifore thee, faylynge money? To 
whom he answerde, Bryngith j3oure 
beestis, and Y shal 3yue to 30w for hem 
17meetis, if prijs 3e han not. ‘The whiche, 
whanne thei hadden brou3t, he 3af to 
hem foode for horsis, and sheep, and oxen, 
and assis; and he susteynede hem that 
is3eer for chaungyng of beestis. And thei 
camen the secounde 3eer, and seiden to 
hym, We hiden not to oure lord, that 
failynge the money and the beestis to- 
gideres han failid, ne it is priue fro thee, 
that with outen bodies and loond we han 
19not; whi thanne shulen we dye, thee se- 
ynge? and we and our loond of thee 
shulen ben, bie vs in to the kyngis thral- 
dom, and 3if vs seedes, lest peryshynge 
the tilyer™, the loond be turned a3en into 
20 wildernes. Thanne Joseph bou3te al the 
loond of Egipte, echoon sellynge his pos- 
sessiouns, for the greetnes of hungur ; 
2ziand he sugettide it to Pharao, and al 
the puplis of it, fro the laste termes of 
22 Egipte vnto the vttmest® coostis of it, out 
takun the loond of prestis, the which of 
the kyng was take to hem, to whom and 
certeyn meetis of the comoun beernes 


k ouerpressid BDEFH. 


Wserandz. *hannotcomer. YOm., 1s. 
4 Om. plures. this N pr.m. © kingis tresorie 1s. 
Kk whom is. 1Om.1s. ™ Om.3s. 2 hors F. 
this 1s, +t vs seedis fo sowe ts. % Om. Ks. 


GENESIS. 


lin to BDEFI. 


z Jacob 1s. 
f the prijs cKo. 
© oxis s. 
¥ the puplis rs. 


XLVII. 1o—22. 


lijf, ben feewe and yuele, of an hundrid 
and" thretti 3eer, and tho ‘camen not* tilY 
to the daies of my fadris, in whiche thei 
weren pilgryms. And whanne he’ hadde10 
blessid the kyng, he 3ede out. Forsothe 11 
Joseph 3af to hise fadir and britheren pos- 
sessioun in Egipt, in Ramasses, the beste 
soile of erthe, as Farao comaundide; and 12 
he fedde hem, and al the hows of his fadir, 
and 3af metis to alle. For breed failide13 
in al the world, and hungur oppresside 
the lond, moost of Egipt and of ® Canaan ; 
of whiche londis he* gaderide al the money 14 
for the! sillyng of wheete, and brou3te it 
in to the ‘tresorie of the kyng®. Andis 
whanne prijs‘ failide to the® bieris, al E- 
gipt cam to Joseph, and seide, 5yue thou 
‘looues to vs; whi shulen we die bifore! 
thee, while monei failith ? To whiche* he 16 
answeride, Brynge 3e 3oure beestis, and Y 
schal 3yue to! 30u metis for tho, if 3e han 
not prijs. And whanne thei hadden brou3t 17 
tho, he 3af to™ hem metis for horsis®, and 
scheep, and oxun®, and assis; and he sus- 
teynede hem in that 3eer for the chaung- 
yng? of beestis. And thei camen in the1s 
secunde jeer, and seiden to hym, We 
helen’? not fro oure lord, that the while 
monei failith, also beestis failiden togidere, 
nether it is hid fro thee, that with out 
bodies and lond we han no thing; whit9 
therfor schulen we die, while™ thou seest* ? 
bothe we and oure lond schulen be thine, 
bie thou vs in to the kyngis seruage, and 
3yue thon seedis*, lest the" while the tiliere 
perischith, the lond be turned in to wil- 
dirnesse. Therfor Joseph bou3te al the20 
lond of Egipt, while all men seelden her 
possessiouns, for the greetnesse of hungur; 
and he made it and alle puplis’ therof21 
suget to Farao, fro the laste termes of 
Egipt til to the laste endis therof, outakun 22 
the lond of preestis, that was 3ouun of the 
kyng to hem, to whiche” preestis also metis 
Weren 30uun of the* comun bernys, andY 


m tylyers D. vttermest BDEFH. 


a hem alle ts. 
gs Om. pD. 


P chaunge s. 4 wolen 6. 
wthe whiche r. * Om. Is. 


bOm.c.  ¢ Joseph rs. 
b ys Joones 1s. i for E. 
rwhiliss. § seest 
y Om. a. 


XLVII. 23—XLVIII. 2. 


weren 3ouun, and therfor thei ben not 

23 nedid to sellen her possessiouns. Thanne 
seide Joseph to the peplis, Loo! as 3e be- 
holden, and 30w and 3oure loond Pharao 
hath; takith seedis, and sowith feeldis, 

24that 3e mowen han lyuelodis; the fyfthe 
part? se shulen 3yue to the kyng, the 
tother foure partis Y leeue to 30w into 
seed, and into metys, to meynes, and to 

2530ure children. The whiche answerden, 
Oure helthe is in thin hoond; oureP God 
oonly bihold vs, and gladliche we shu- 
26len serue to the kyng. Fro that tyme 
vuto the day that is now, in al the loond 
of Egipte the fifthe part to kyngis is 
payed, and yt is maad as into a lawe, 
with outen the preestis loond, that free 
27was fro this eondicioun. Thanne Yrael 
dwelte in Egipte, that is, in the loond of 
Gessen, and hadde it, and was encreesid 
2sand multiplied greetly. And he lynede 
in it sixtene™ 3eer, and alle the dayes of 
the lijf of hym ben maad of an hundryd 
29and seuene and fourti jeer. And whanne 
he bihelde the day of deeth to nei3, he 
clepide his sone Joseph, and seide to hym, 
If Y haue foundun grace in thi sij3t, putte 
thin hoond vnder myn hippe, and thow 
shalt do to me mercy and treuthe, that 

30 thow byrie me not in Egipte; but I shal 
sleepe with my fadris, and thow shalt 
take me fro this loond, and birye me in 
the sepulcre of myn eldres’. To whom 
Joseph answerde, I shal do that thow 

3lhast bodun. And he, Sweer thanne, he 
seith, to me; whom swerynge, Yrael 
anowrede God, turned to the heed of the 
bedde. 
CAP. XLVIII. 

1 And so thes thingis passid ouer, it was 
toold to Joseph, that the fader of hym 
wex sik. The which with hym takun 
two sones, Manasses and Effraym, forth 

23eden to go. And it was seide to the 
olde man, Loo! thi sone Joseph is comen 


GENESIS. 


185 


therfor thei weren not compellid to sille 
her possessiouns. Therfor Joseph seide to23 
the puplis, Lo! as 3e seen, Farao weldith 
bothe 3ou and 3oure lond; take 3e seedis, 
and ‘sowe 3e” feeldis, that 3e moun hauegs 
fruytis; 3e* schulen 3yue the fifthe part 
to the kyng; Y suffre to 30u the foure® re- 
sidue partis in to seed® and in to meetis, 
to 30u, and to 3oure fre children. Whiche? 2s 
answeriden, Oure helthe is in thin hond; 
oneli oure God biholde vs*, and we schulen 
ioifuli serue the kyng. Fro that tyme til26 
inf to present® dai, in al the lond of Egipt, 
the fynethe part is paied to the’ kyngis, 
and it is maad as in to ai lawe, with out 
the lond of preestis, that was fre fro this 
condicioun. Therfor Israel dwellide in E-27 
gipt, that is, in the lond of Jessen, and 
weldide it; and he was encreessid and 
multiplied ful mych. And he lynede ther- 28 
ynne sixtene 3eer; and alle the daies of 
his lijf weren maad of* an hundrid and 
seuene and fourti 3eer!. And whanne he29 
sei3 the dai™ of deeth™ ny3e, he clepide his 
sone Joseph, and seide to hym, If Y haue 
founde grace in thi si3t; putte thin hond 
vndur myn hipe, and thou schal do merci 
and treuthe to me, that thou birie not me 
in Egipt; but ‘Y schal slepe® with my fa-30 
dris, and take thou awey me fro this 
lond, and birie in? the sepulcre of my 
grettere’. To whom Joseph answeride, Y 
schal do that that thou comaundist. And 31 
Israel seide, Therfor swere thou to me; 
and whanne Joseph swoor, Israc] turnede 
to the heed of the bed*, and’ worschipide 
God. 


CAP. XLVIILI. 


And so whanne these thingis weren don, 1 
it was teld to Joseph, that his fadir was 
sijk. And he took hise twei sones, Ma- 
nasses and Effraym, and he disposide tot 
go. And it was seid to the elde man, Lo!2 
thi sone Joseph cometh to thee; which" 


8 eldren BDEFU. 


° party BDEFH. Pandoure «4. din vs a. * seuenten D sup.ras. 

2 soweth 18s. ®theic. » fourthe apr.m. x. ¢ the seed x, 4 The whiche 1. ¢€thou vss. f Om. 1s. 
® this present 1s. » Om. crKN sec.m.sw. '!Om.s. * Om. Faiqrst. !3cerlsG, ™daies vp. % his 
deeths, ©slepe Ycpr.m. P meiniKs. 4 gretterefadris 1s. ‘*beddis heed 1. bed heeds. * Om.1. 
t him to1s. ¥ the which a. 


Bb 


186 


to thee; the which coumfortid sat in the 
3bedde. And to Joseph comun in to him, 
seith, God Almy3ti aperyde to me in 
Luza, that is in the loond of Chanaan, 
4and he blisside to me, and seith, Y thee 
shal encreese and multiplie, and make 
into cumpanyes of peples, and Y shal 
3yue to thee this loond, and to thi seed 
after thee, into everlastynge possessioun. 
5 Thanne thi two sones, that ben born to 
thee in the loond of Egipte bifore Y com 
hider to thee, shulen ben myne, Effraym 
and Manasses as Ruben and Symeon 
é6shulen ben acountid to me; the tother 
forsothe whom thow shalt gete after hem 
shulen be thine, and bi name of her bre- 
theren shulen be clepid in her posses- 
z7siouns. To me forsothe whanne Y cam 
fro Mesopotanye, Rachel was deed in the 
loond of Chanaan, in that weie, and it 
was veer tyme; and Y cam into Effra- 
tam, and Y biryede hir biside the weie 
of Effrathe, the which in another name 
_8is clepid Bethleem. And Jacob, seynge 
“the sones of hym, seide to hym, Who ben 
thes? He answerde, My sones thei ben, 
whom God hath 3ouun to me .in this 
place. Bryng hem, he seith, to me, that 
10I blisse to hem. The eyen forsothe of 
Yrael weren derke for greet eelde, and 
cleerli he my3te not se; and hem put to 
iuhym, kissynge and cleppynge hem, seidet 
. to his sone, Y am not bigilid of thi si3t ; 
forthermore God hath shewid to me thi 
izseed. And whanne Joseph hadde takun 
hem fro the bosum of the fader, he 
i3auowride, bowid into the erthe. And he 
putte Effraym at his ri3t hoond, that is, 
at the left syde of Israel; Manasses for- 
sothe in his lift side, at the ri3t side of 
the fader, and he putte bothe to hym. 
14The which strecchynge out the ri3t 
hoond, putte vpon the heed of Effraym, 
the lasse brother; the left forsothe vpon 


GENESIS. 


XLVIII. 3—14. 


was couifortid, and sat’ in the bed. And3 
whanne Joseph entride to hym, he seide, 
Almy3ti God apperide to .me in Luza, 
which” is in the lond of Canaan, and 
blesside me, and seide, Y schal encreesse4 
and* multiplie thee, and Y schal make thee 
in to campanyes of puplis, and Y schal 3yue 
to thee this lond, and to thi seed aftir 
thee, in to euerlastinge possessioun. Ther-5 
for thi twei sones, that ben borun to thee 
in the lond of Egipt bifore that Y cam 
hidir to thee, schulen be myne, Effraym 
and Manasses as Ruben and Symeon 
schulen be arettid to me; forsothe: thes 
othereY whiche thou schalt gendre’ aftir 
hem schulen be thine; and thei schulen 
be clepid bi the name of her britheren in 
her possessiouns?. Forsothe whanne Y cam 7 
fro Mesopotamye, Rachel was deed to me 
in the lond of Canaan, in thilke weie; and 
it was the> bigynnyng of somer®; and Y 
eutride in to Effrata, and beriede® hir bi- 
sidis the weie of Effrata, which® bi an- 
othir name is clepid Bethleem. Forsothes 
Jacob sei3 the sones of Joseph, and seidef 
to him, Who ben these? He answeride,9 
Thei ben my sones, whiche® God 3af to 
me in this place. Jacob seide', Brynge* 
hem to me that Y blesse hem. For ‘the 10 
izen of Israel', dasewiden for greet eelde, 
and he my3te not se clereli; and he kisside 
and collide tho children ioyned to hym, 
and seide™ to his sone, Y am not defraudid 11 
of thi si3t; ferthermore God schewide" to 
me thi seed. And whanne Joseph hadde 12 
take hem fro ‘the fadris® lappe, he wor- 
schipide lowe to? erthe’, And he sette™13 
Effraym on his ri3t side, that is, on the lift 
side of Israel; forsothe he settide’ Ma- 
nasses in‘ his lift side, that is, on the ri3t 
side of the" fadir; and he ioyuede bothe 
to hym. Which’ helde forth the ri3t hond, i4 
and settide” on ‘the heed of Effraym*, the 
lesseY brothir; sotheli he settide” the* left 


t seith Ez. 


Ysat vpis. Wthatis. * thee and B. 
© the somer DN pr.m. QRTX sec. 
hOm.1s. iseide tohim. k brynge 3e ¥. 
fadir 1. his fadriss, P in-to c pr.m. 
tonis. uhisis. Y The which x, 


2 sette LMP. leide is. 2 his 1s. 


Y tothere kK. 
4 briede a. I beriede ts. 
1 Tsrael izen s. 
q the erthe BEGIKSX sec. m. 
W sette ELM. leide it 1s. 


2 gete 1. 4 possessioun E. » Om..£. in the e. 
ethe which 1. fheseide rs. §& that 1s. 
m he seide Fis, "hath schewider. © his 
¥ settide FGKMNS. §& sette EILPS. 


x Effraym heed s. ¥ lest E. 30ungere Is. 


XLVIII. 15-—XLIX. 2. 


the heed of Manasse, the which was more 
’ thur3 birthe. Jacob togidere chaungynge 
isthe hondes, blisside the sones of Joseph, 
and seith, God, in whos si3t 3eden my 
fadres Abraham and Ysaac; God, that 
fedde me fro my 3o0ngthe" into the day 
isthat is now; that aungel that delyueride 
me fro alle yuels, blesse to thes children, 
and my name be inwardly clepid vpon 
hem, and the names of my fadris Abra- 
ham and Ysaac; in multitude vpon erthe 
17growe thei. Joseph forsothe seynge that 
his fader hadde putte the ri3t hoond vpon 
the heed of Effraym, greuowsly tok, and 
the hoond of the fader takun, enforside 
to heue fro the heed of Effraym, and to 
is ber ouer vpon the heed of Manasse. And 
he seide to the fader, Not so, fader, it 
fallith to be, for this is the first getun ; 
put thi rij3t hoond vpon the heed of hym. 
i9 The which forsakynge seith, I knowe, 
sone iyne, Y knowe; and this forsothe 
shal be into puples, and shal be multi- 
plied ; but the brother of hym lasse more 
than he shal be, and the seed of hym 
20Shal growe into folk of kynde. And he 
blisside hem in that tyme, seiynge, In 
thee Yrael shal be blissid, and shal be 
seide, God do to thee as to Effraym and 
Manasse; and he sette Effraym bifore 
21Manasse. And he seith to Joseph, his 
sone, Loo! Y dye, and God shal be with 
3ow, and he shal brynge 3ow a3en to the 
22loond of 3oure fadris; Y 3yue to thee o 
parti oute of thi bretheren, that Y tok of 
the hoond of Amorrey, in swerde and in 
my bowe. 


CAP. XLIX. 


1 Jacob forsothe clepide his sones, and 
seide to hem, Be 3e gederid togidris, 
that Y telle that ben to comen to jou in 
2the laste daies; be 3e gadered togidris, 


GENESIS. 


187 


hond on ‘the heed of Manasses®, that was 
the more thur3 birthe. Jacob chaungide 
‘the hondes®, and blesside his sone Joseph, 15 
and seide, God, in whos si3t my fadris 
Abraham and Isaac 3eden; God, that 
fedith me fro my 3ong wexynge age til in 
to present? day; the aungel that delyuerede 16 
me fro alle yuelis, blesse thes® children, 
and my name be clepid on hem, and the 
names of my fadris Abraham and Ysaac; 
and wexe thei in multitude on erthe. For-17 
sothe Joseph sei3 that his fadir hadde set 
thef ri3t hond on the heed of Effraym, and 
took heuyli, and he enforside to! reise the* 
fadris' hond takun™ fro the heed of Ef- 
fraym, and to bere ‘ouer on" ‘the heed of° 
Manasses. And he? seide to the fadir, 1s 
Fadir, it acordith not so; for this is the 
firste gendrid"; sette thi ri3t hond on the® 
heed ‘of hym'. Which" forsook and¥ seide, 19 
Y woot, my sone, 'Y woot; and sotheli this 
child schal be in to puplis”, and he schal 
be multiplied; but his 3onger brother schal 
be more than he, and ‘his seed* schal en- 
creesse in to folkis. And heY blesside hem 20 
in that tyme, and seide, Israel schal be 
blessid in thee, Joseph”, and it schal be 
seid’, God do to thee as to® Effraym and 
as to Manasses. And he settide® Effraym 
bifore Manasses ; and seide to Joseph, his 21 
sone, Lo! Y¥ die, and God schal be with 
3ou, and schal? lede 3ou a3en to the lond 
of 30ure fadris ; Y 3yue to thee o part ouer 22 
thi britheren which Y took fro the hand of 
Amorei, in my swerd and bowe. 


CAP. XLIX. 


Forsothe Jacob clepide hise sones, and! 
seide to hem, Be 3e gaderid that? Y telle 
what thingis schulen come to 3ou in the 
laste daies‘; be 3e gaderid, ‘and here, 3e% 2 


t southe BpEFH. 


b Manasses heed 1s. ¢ his hond 1. his hondis s. 
ouer on the heed of Effraym, and 5. 


4 this present ts. 
h he took that 1s. 


& and to bere 
m and take 


f his 1s, 
1 fadir 1s. 


e the E. 


ihim toss. * his Fis. 


it 1. 2 it ouer vp onis. °Om.s. PJosephis. Ghisis. ‘bigeten 1. Shis 1s. tOm. is. 4 The whieh 1. 


Yiodosoand is. W¥ many puplis 1s. 
uerbe,1 marg. » he dide to 1. he shal to s. 
& there the F. 


x the seed of him 1s. 
© sette EGILPS. 


y Jacob 1s, 


z Effraym 1.  % seid in pro- 
@ he schal 1s. 


€ to gidre that 1. f dai F. 


Bb2 


188 


and here 3e, the sones of Jacob, here 3e 

3 Yrae] 3oure fader. Ruben, my first getun, 
thow my strengthe, and the bigyning of 
my sorwe ; first in 3iftis, and more In co- 
4maundyng; thow art held out as water; 
ne grow thow, for thow hast steied up 
the cowche of thi fader, and thow hast 
sdefoulid the bedde of hym. Symeon and 
Leuy, bretheren, the vessels of shrewid- 
6nes, makynge batails; in the counseil of 
hem come not my soule, and in the cum- 
panye of hem be not my glorie; for in 
her woodnes thei slewen a man, and in 
her owne wil thei vndurdelueden the 
7wal; cursid is the woodnes of hem, for 
it is stedfast, and the indignacioun of 
hem, for it is hard; Y shal denyde hem 
in Jacob, and I shal seater em in Yrael. 

8 Juda, thee shulen preyse thi britheren, 
thin hondis in the skulles of thin ene- 
myes, the sones of thi fader shulen lowte 
9thee. The whelp of lyon Juda; to the 
prey, sone myne, thow steydist vp; rest- 
ynge thow ley down as a lyon, and as a 
10 lionesse who shal arere hym? The septre 
fro Juda shal not be takun awey, and a 
duke fro the leende of hym, to the tyme 
that he come that is to be sent, and he 
shal be the abidynge of folk of kynde, 
11 byndynge to a vyn3erd his colt, and toa 
vyn, OY! my sone, his” she asse; he shal 
wasshe in wyne his stoole, and in blood of 
12a grape his mantil; fayrer ben the eyen 
of hym than wyn, and the teeth of hym 
13 whitter than mylk. Zabulon in the brynke 
of the see shal dwelle, and in the stacioun 
i40f shippes, arechynge vnto Sidon. Ysa- 
char, an hee asse strong, liggynge bitwix 
15the teermes, saw3 rest that it was good, 
and the loond that it was best, and vn- 
derputte his shuldur to bere, and he is 
i6maad to tributis seruynge. Dan shal 


v of A. 


hthesonesr. i bigetun 1. 
foulist err. 
the c. 
Zz leie 1. 
4 schee 1s. ¢€ O! 1s. 
kKareche gE. lass. 
t. ether to rente Nn. 


falinc. & Om. plures. 
m he san3e Is, 


GENESIS. 


k we. into foul leccherie « marg. 
° bed, that is, his wiyf pcpaKNeKsrx. b. his wijf 1 marg. 
9 the wal, ether hoxiden a bole, as tt is in Ebrew cangx. 
v Judas the whelp of a lioun 1. a lyoun whelp s. 
4 septre, that is, dignite of kyng Bcakax. 
h grace EGKLMNPRTWXd. the grape Is. 
n vndirsette Gras. 


XLIX. 3—16. 


sones" of Jacob, here 3e Israel 3oure fadir. 
Ruben, my firste gendridi sone, thou arts 
my strengthe and the bigynnyng of my 
sorewe; thou ou3tist to be the former in 
3iftis, the more in lordschip; thon arts 
sched out as watir*; wexe thou not, for 
thou stiedist! on the bed™ of thi fader, and 
defoulidist" his bed®°. Symeon and Leuy,s 
britheren, fiztynge vessils of wickidnesse ; 
my soule come not in to the councel ofé 
hem, and my glorie be not in the congre- 
gacioun of hem; for in her woodnesse thei 
killiden a man, and in her wille thei 
myneden? the wal4; curside be the wood-7 
nesse of hem, for it is obstynat, and the 
indignacioun of hem for? it is hard; Y 
schal departe hem’ in Jacob, and‘ I schal 
scatere hem in Israel. Judas, thi britherens 
schulen preise thee, thin hondis schulen 
be in the nollis of thin enemyes; the" 
sones of thi fadir schnlen worschipe thee. 
‘A whelp of lioun’ ‘is Judas”; my soneg 
thou stiedist* to prey’; thou restidist, 
and hast leyn? as a lioun, and as a lionesse 
who schal reise hym? The septre* schal1o 
not be takun awey fro Juda, and a duyk 
of his hipe, til» he come that schal be 
sent, and he schal be abiding® of hethene 
men; and he schal tye his colt at thei 
vyner, and his femal? asse at the vyne; 
A! my sone, he schal waische his stoole 
inf wyn, and his mentil in the® blood of 
grape? ; hise i3en ben fairere than wyn, 12 
and hise teeth ben whittere than imylk. 
Zabulon schal dwelle in the brenk of the 13 
see, and in the stondyng of schipis; and 
schali stretche* til to Sydon. Isachar, a! is 
strong asse, liggynge bitwixe termes, sei} 15 
reste, that it was good and sez3™ the lond 
that 74 was best, and he vndirsettide” his 
schuldre to bere, and he was maad seru- 
ynge to tributis®. Dan schal deme hisi¢ 


W is his nu. 


l wentist vp 1. ™ couche r. 4% de- 
P vndirmyneden 1. meueden s. 
rhe cursid for pc. ©Om.Gc. t Om. 1s. "and 

wOm.1. * hast gonvpr.  Y the prey 1. 
b schal not be takun awey til Bc. © the abiding rs. 
i he schal 1s. 
© tributis, ether to rente, as it is in Ebreu BcGQx. 


XLIX. 17—30. 


deme his puple, and as another lynage in 
17 Yrael. Be maad Dan an eddre of sha- 
dowe in the weie, and an horned eddre 
in the path, bitynge the cleen of an hors, 
that the steyer up of hym falle bac- 
1ward; and thi 3yuer of helthe* Y shal 
1g9abyde, Lord. Gad gird shal fei3t bifore 


20hym, and he shal be gird bihynde. Aser, . 


the fat breed of hym, and he shal 3eue 
21delices to kyngis. Neptalym, the herte 
sent out, and 3yuynge the spechis of 
22fayrnes. The sone acreesynge, Joseph, 
the sone acresynge, and semly in si3t; 
the dou3tresY hidir and thider renneden 
23 vpon the wal, but thei eggiden hym out, 
and streuen, and enuyden to hym, hau- 
24ynge dartis. Sat in the strong the bowe 
of hym, and vnbounden ben the bondis of 
armes’, and of the hondis of hym bi the 
hoond of the my3ti of Jacob; thens a 
shepherde 3ede out, the stoone of Yrael. 
25God of thi fader shal be thin helper®, 
and the Almy3ti shal blesse to thee with 
blessynges of henene fro aboue, and with 
blessyngis of the see liggyng beneth, and 
with blessyngis of tetis, and of the wombe; 
26 the blissyngis of thi fader ben coumfortid 
with the blissyngis of the fadris of hym, 
to the tyme that were comen the desyre 
of euerlastynge hillis; ben thei maad in 
the heed of Joseph, and in the heed of 
27 Nazarei amonge his bretheren. Benia- 
myn, a wulf rauimpynge, the morwen tide 
he shall eete a pray, and the euentide he 
28shal dyuyde spoylis. Alle thes in the 
lynagis of Irael twelue; thes thingis 
spak to hem her fader, and blesside hem 
2veche with propre blessyngis. And he 
comaundide hem, seiynge, Y am gedered 
to my puple, birye 3e me with my faders 
in the dowble spelunk, that is in the feeld 
300f Effron Ethei, ajens Mambre, in the 


GENESIS. 


189 


puple, as also another lynage in Israel. 
Dan be maad a serpent in the weic, and !7 
cerastes? in the path, and bite‘ the feet of 
an hors, that the ‘stiere therof® falle bac- 
ward; Lord, Y schal abide thin helthe’, 18 
Gad schal be gird, and schalt fi3te bifor1 
hym, and" he schal be gird bihynde. Aser 20 
his breed schal be plenteuouse™", and he 
schal 3yue delicis to kyngis. Neptalymai 
schal be an hert sent out, and 3yuynge 
spechis of fairenesse. Joseph, a sone en-22 
creessynge, ‘a sone encresinge’, and fair in 
biholdyng ; dou3tris runnen aboute on the 
wal, but hise brithren wraththeden hym, 23 
and chidden”, and thei hadden dartis, and 
hadden* enuye to hym. His bowe sat ines 
the stronge’, and the boondis of his aries, 
and hondis? weren vnboundun bi the hond 
of the my3ti of Jacob; of hym a scheep- 
herd 3ede out, the stoon of Israel. God of 25 
thi fadir schal be* thin helpere, and AI- 
my3ti God schal blesse thee with blessyngis 
of henene? fro aboue, and with blessyngis* 
of the see liggynge binethe, with bless- 
yngis* of tetis’, and of wombef; the bless-26 
yngis of thi fadir ben coumfortid’, the" 
blessyngis of his fadris, til the desire of 
euerlastynge hillis cam; blessyngis ben 
maad in! the heed of Joseph, and in the 
nol of Nazarei* among his britheren. Ben- 27 
iamyn, a rauyschynge wolf, schal ete prey! 
eerly, and in the euentid he schal departe 
spuylis. Alle these weren in twelue kyn-28 
redis of Israel; her fadir spak these™ 
thingys to hem, and blesside" hem alle by 
propre blessyngis, and comaundide® hemP, 29 
and seide, Y ain gaderid to my puple, birie 
3e me with my fadris in the double denne, 
which? is in the lond of Efron Ethei, 
ajens Manbre, in the lond of Canaan, 30 
which’ denne Abraham bou3te with the 
feeld of Efron Ethei, in to possession of 


xhele x. Ydoun3tren pperu. 4 the armes speFn. ®helpe a prim. p, 


P cerastes, that is, an horned eddre pcnpEGKLPQRS. an horned addre 1x. 
8 helthe 3inere pGtkMN sup. ras. qusx. heelthe euere w. 
fat ether plenteuouse neGNog. f. or plenteous K. f. that is, plenteuous X. 
% his hondis 1s. 
f pryny woinbe c pr.m. the wombe ts. 
than we. of the a pr.m. with the 1. to K sup.ras. 
°o he comaundide 1s. 


* thei hadden 1. 


Y the Lord 1 marg. 
4 blesing x. 


© citees pg. tete ¥F. 
n he blesside 18. 


Ithe prey 1. ™ alle these c. 


t the which 1. 


4 bite he 1s. * rider of him 1. 
uOm.K. WY fat DEFILPRSTWd. 
vOm. exw. W chidden him x. 
b the heuene x. © the blessyngis x. 
& confortid, that is, ben betere 
k Nazarei, that is, hooly BCDEGKLNPQRSTX. 
P to him cet, omnes. 4 that 1s. 


t he schal 1s. 
2al be a. 


ionc. 


190 


loond of Chanaan, that Abraham bou3te 
with the feeld of Effron Ethei, into pos- 

3rsessioun of a sepulere. There thei bi- 
rieden hym, and Sara, the wijf of hym; 
there also byried is Ysaac, with Rebecca 
the wijf; there and Lya biried lieth. 

32 And endid the maundementis with whiche 
the sones he enfourmyde, he gederede to- 
gedere his feet vpon the bed, and dyed, 
and put he? is to his puple. 


CAP. L. 


1 That seynge Joseph, fel vpon the face 
of the fader, wepynge, and kyssynge hym, 
2and comaundide to the seruauntis, his 
leches, that with swete oynementis thei 
3shulden anoynte the fader. The whiche 
the maundementis fulfillynge, passiden 
ouer fourti dayes; this forsothe manere 
was of bodies anoynt, and Egipte wepte 
thym seuenti dayes. And fulfillid the 
tyme of weilyng, Joseph to the meyne of 
Pharao spak, If Y haue founde grace in 
3oure si3t, spek 3e in the eeris of Pharao, 
stherthur3 that my fader hath chargid me 
with ooth, seiynge, Loo! Y dye, in my 
sepuicre that I deluede to me in the Joond 
of Chanaan, thow shalt byrye me; thanne 
I shal steie vp that Y byrye my fader, 
cand shal turne ajen. And Pharao seyde 
to hym, Stey vp, and byry thi fader, as 
7thow hast sworne. Whom stiynge vp, 
jeden with hym alle the oold men of the 
hows of Pharao, and alle the more thur3 
sbirthe of the loond of Egipte, the hows 
of Joseph with his bretheren, with outen 
litil children, and flockis, and droues, that 
9laften in the loond of Gessen. And he 
hadde® in his ledyng chares, and rydynge 
men, and there was maad the companye 
1onot a litil, And thei camen to the 
thresshyng feelde of Adad, the which is 
set bizjonde Jordan, where holdynge the 


b Om. £. 


Sasepulcre is. +t lyth ELP. 
tide B pr.m. 2% he fel 1s. 
filliden his heestis 1s. 4 Jacob 1s. 
vp. stievps. * hast a. 
© elder w. eldre d. 
Vv seruyces plures. 


u heestis 1s. 
© weping kK. 


qin s. 
x Om. plures. 


P Farow hous s. 
Ww for 18. 


GENESIS. 


v the whiche 1. 
@ the face of his fadir c. his fadris face 1. his fadir face s. 
f fulfillid 1s. 
1 coniurid DEFGIKLMNPQRSTWXxd. 

s the cnmpany cet. omnes. 


XLIX, g1—— Ly 108 


sepulcre’. There thei birieden hym, ands 
Sare his wijf, also Ysaac was biried .there 
with Rebecca his wijf; there ‘also Lia 
liggitht biried. And whanne the comaunde-32 
mentis" weren endid, bi whiche” he tau3te 
the” sones, he gaderide*.hise feet on the 
bed, and diede, and he was putY to his 
puple. 


CAP. L. 


Which thing Joseph sei3, and felde? on1 
‘the face of the fader*, and wepte, and kiste 
hym; and he comaundide hise seruauntis, 2 
lechis, that thei schulden anoynte the? fadir 
with swete smellynge spiceries. While theis 
‘filliden the comaundementis®, fourti daies 
passiden, for this was the custom of deed 
bodies anoyntid; and Egipt biwepte hym® 
seuenti daies. And whanne the tyme of4 
weiling® was fillid’, Joseph spak to the 
meyne of Farao, If Y haue founde grace in 
3oure si3t, speke 3e in the eeris of Farao; 
for my fadir chargide me, and seide, Lo!s 
Y die, thou schalt birie me in my sepulcre 
which® Y diggide to me in the lond of 
Canaan; therfor Y schal stic’ that Y birie 
my fadir, and Y schal turne ajen. Andé 
Farao seide to hym, Stie!, and birie thi 
fader, as thou art* chargid!. And whanne7 
“he stiede™, alle the elde® men of ‘the hous 
of Farao? 3eden with him, and alle the 
grettere men in birthe of? the lond of E- 
gipt; the hous of Joseph with her bri-s 
theren, without litle children, and flockis, 
and grete beestis, whiche thei leften in the 
lond of Gessen, 3eden with him. And heo 
hadde charis, and horsmen, and felouschip, 
and cumpany’ was maad not litil. Ando 
thei camen to the cornfloor of Adad, which* 
is set ouer Jordan, where thei maden the" 
serniceY of” the* deed bodi, with greet 


¢ Jadde ppru. 


whis 1s. * gaderide togidre 1s. Y put- 
bhisis. ¢ ful. 

&thatis. 4 gonvpt. stievps. i go 
m Joseph wente vp 1. Joseph stiede vp s. 


tthe which 1. t Om. ts. 


L. 11——22. 


offices for the deed, with greet weilyng 
11 and hydows, fulfilliden? setten dayes. That 
whanne hadden seen the dwellers of the 
loond of Chanaan, seiden, A greet weil- 
yng is this to the Egipcyens, and therfor 
thei clepiden the name of that place The 
12 weylyng of Egipte. Thanne the children 
of Yrael diden as it was comaundid hem, 
13and berynge hym into the loond of Cha- 
naan, byryden hym in the dowble spel- 
unk, that Abraham bou3te with the feelde, 
into possessioun of a sepulcre, of Ephron 
14 Ethei, ajens the face of Mambre. And 
Joseph is turned ajen into Egipte, with 
his britheren, and with al the cumpanye, 
15 the fader beryed. The which deed, dred- 
ynge the bretheren of hym, and togidere 
spekyng, lest perauenture he haue mynde® 
of the wrong that he suffrede, and 3eelde 
isto vs al the yuel that we han do, senten 
to hym, seiynge’, Thi fader comaundide 
i7vs or he shulde die, that thes wordes to 
thee we shulden seye, Y preye, that thow 
for3ete the wickidnes of thi bretheren, 
and of the synne, and of the malyce that 
thei wrou3ten in thee; and we preyen, 
that to the seruaunt of God, thi fader, 
thow for3eue this wickidnesse. The whiche 
isthingis herd, Joseph wepte. And to hym 
comen his bretheren, aud mekid into the 
19 erthe lowtiden, and seiden, Thi seruauntis 
we ben. To whom he answerde, Wole .3e 
not dreden, whether mowen we a3en- 
20stonde the wil of God? 3e thou3ten of 
me yuel, and God turneth it into good, 
that he shulde enhaunce me, as 3e now 
seen, that saaf he make many puples; 
21 wole 3e not dreden, Y shal fede 30w, and 
3oure children. And he coumfortide hem, 
22and fayre and softly he spak, and dwelte 
in Egipte, with al the hows of his fader, 
and lyuede an hundrid and ten 3eer, and 
saw3 the sones of Effraym vnto the 
thridde generacioun; and the soues of 


GENESIS. 191 


weilyng and strong, and fillidey seuen? 
daies. And whanne the dwellers of thei 
lond of Canaan hadden seyn this, thei 
seiden, This is a greet weiling to Egip- 
cians*; and? therfor thei clepiden the name 
of-that place the weilyng of Egipt. Therfor 12 
the sones of Jacob diden, as he hadde* co- 
maundid to hem; and thei baren hym ins 
to the lond of Canaan, and thei birieden 
hym in the double denne, which’ denne 
with the feeld Abraham hadde bou3t of 
Effron Ethei, a3ens the face of Mambre, 
into possessioun of sepulcre®*. And Jo-14 
seph turnede ajen in to Egipt with hise 
britheren and al the felouschipe, whanne 
thef fadir was biried. And whanne the® 1s 
fadir was deed, the britheren of Joseph 
dredden, and spaken togidere, lest per- 
auenture he be myndeful of the wrong 
which" he suffride, and 3elde to vs al the 
yuel, that we diden. And thei senten to16 
hym, and seiden, Thi fadir comaundide to 
vs, bifore that he diede, that we schulden 17 
seie to thee these thingis bi hise wordis; 
Y beseche, thati thou for3ete the wickid- 
nesse of thi britheren, and the synne, and 
malice which* thei hauntiden a3ens thee ; 
also we preien, that! thon for3yue this 
wickidnesse to thi fadir, the sernaunt of 
God. Whanne these thingis weren herd, 
Joseph wepte. And hise britheren camen 1s 
to hym, and worschipiden lowe to™ erthe®, 
and seiden, We ben thi seruauntis. Tots 
whiche he answeride, Nyle 3e drede; whe- 
ther we moun a3enstonde Goddis wille ? 
3e thou3ten yuel of me, and God turnede 20 
it in to good, that he® schulde? enhaunse 
me, as 3e seen in present? tyme, and that 
he schulde™ make saaf many’ puplis; nyle21 
3e drede, Y schal fede 30u and 3oure litle 
children. And he coumfortide hem, and 
spak swetli, and 1i3tly'; and he" dwellide 22 
in Egipt, with al the hows of his fadir. 
And he lyuyde an hundrid jeer, and he 


4 thei fulfilliden z. € in mynde pu. Om. u. 


y fulfilliden 1s. 2there seuent. ®the Egipeiansis. bOm.a. ¢Om.s. ¢@the whieh 1. a se- 
pulere is. fhisrs. Sheris. bthatis. ithee, thatis. kthatis. | thee, thatis, ™ in toc prom. 
1 the erthe BEGIKSX sec.m. ©3¢G. Pwoldex. this present xs. Twoldex. § bi me many ts. 


thiztly to hem 1. 1. or mytili to hem 8. 


u Joseph 1s. 


192 


Machir, sone of Manasse, ben born in the 

23kneen of Joseph. The whiche thingis 
ouerpassid, he spak to his bretheren, 
After my deeth God shal visite 30w, and 
make 30w steyen vp fro this® loond to 
the loond that he fastnede with ooth to 

24 Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob. And whanne 
he hadde adiuryd hem, and seide, God 
shal visite 30w, bere 3e with 3ow my 

25 bones fro this place, he diede, fulfillid an 
hundred and ten 3erys of his lijf, and 
anoyntide with swete oynementis, was 
leid in to" towmbe in Egipte. 


Heere endith Genesis and now 
bigynne[ th] Exodus‘ 


GENESIS. 


L. 23-—25. 


sei3 the sones of Effraym til to the thridde 
generacioun ; also the sones of Machir, 
son’ of Manasses, weren borun in the knees 
of Joseph. Whanne these thingis weren23 
don, Joseph spak to hise brithren, Aftir 
my deeth God schal visite 30u, and he 
schal make” to stie* fro this lond to the 
loond whichyY he swoor to Abraham, Ysaac, 
and Jacob. And whanne he” hadde chargid 24 
hem, and hadde seid, God schal visite 3ou, 
bere 3e out with 3ou my boonus fro this 
place, he diede, whanne an hundrid and 2s 
ten yeeris? of his lijf weren fillid® ; and he 
was anoyntid with swete smellynge spice- 
ries, and was° kept in a beere in Egipt. 


Here endith Genesis, and here bigynneth . 
Exodi4, 


thes. Om. speFrn. 1 Here endith Genesis vp. No rubric in BFH. 

wmake jou1s. *govpi. stievps. Ythe whichi. 2Josephis. ®3eer1s. > ful- 
fillid 1s. ¢he was1s. ¢ Here eendith Genesis and bigynneth the book of Ezody.p. Here eendith G. and 
bigynneth the prologt of Exody.«c. Here endith G. and bigynnith Exodus 19rs. Here endeth G..se now 
Exodus. x. Here endith the book of Genesis, and here bigynneth a prologe on the book of Exodi m. Here 
endith the book of G. and bigynneth the book of Exodus. x. Here endith the book of G. and here biginnith 
Exodi. w. No final rubric in aEFLopTxd. 


¥ the son Is. 


+ The Prologuc 
here referred to 
is iucluded in 
the General 
Prologue, pp. 4, 
é. 


EXODUS. 


[ Prologue on the book of Evodus.] 


Tuts book of Exodi, that is to seie, of going out, makith mencioun, that whanne 
Joseph was deed, and alle hise brethren, and the sones of Israel encresseden, and weren 
multiplied as buriownyng, a newe king, that knew3 not Joseph, and Egipcians togidere, 
oppresseden the peple of Israel with grete werkis, and hateden hem, and turmenteden, 
and scorneden hem. Also how God bifore ordeynde Moises and Aaron, of the kynrede 
of Leuy, to lede the peple of Israel out of the lond of Egipt, by strengthe and vertu 
doon of God; in so myche that thei weren constreyned to lete hem go, lest thei 
scholden alle haue perischid. And how Moises smoot the rede see with the 3erde of 
God, and the see stood vp as a wal, while the peple of God passide thoru3; and that 
Farao and al his oost, pursuwinge hem, were drenchid in the see comynge vp on hem. 
Also how the peple goinge forth bi desert gruccheden a3ens the Lord, and Moises and 
Aaron, her leders, for hungur and thurst, trauaile and werynesse ; and how God spak 
to the peple, and thei herden his vois, and dredden greetli, and 3af to hem the ten 
comaundementis writen in tablis of stoon. Also Moises wroot to hem the lawe, to 
iustifie alle wrongis doon bitwixe man and man. Also how Moises was comaundid to 
make a tabernacle, to wurschipe therinne the Lord, and offre sacri[fi]se, and how he 
scholde make the prestis clothis, and hise mynystris, and al her aray in the seruyse of 
God, and the auters, and propiciatorie, candilstike and li3tis, lanternes and encens, and 
alle othere ournementis of the tabernacle. Here endith the prologe, and here biginneth 


the book of E:xodi*. 


Here bygynneth Exodi*. Here bigynneth the book of Exodi*™. 


CAP. I. 
1 THES ben the names of the sones of 
Yrael, that 3eden into Egipte with Ja- 
20ob ; eche with her housholdes 3eden yn ; 
3Ruben, Symeon, Leuy, Judas, Isachar, 
4Zabulon, and Beniamyn, Dan, and Nep- 
5talym, Gad, and Aser. Thanne weren alle 
the soules of hem that 3eden out of the 
6hipe of Jacob seuenti and fyue. Joseph 
forsothe was in Egipte; the which deed, 
and alle hys bretheren, and al his cosyu- 
7age, the sones of Yrael wexen, and as 


GAP. I. 

THESE ben the names of the” sones of! 
Israel, that entriden into Egipt with Ja- 
cob ; alle® entriden with her housis’; Ru-2 
ben, Symeon, Leuy, Judas, Isachar, Zabu-3 
lon, and Benjamin, Dan, and Neptalim, 4 
Gad, and Aser. Therfor alle the soules®s 
of hem that 3eden out of ‘the hipe of Ja- 
cob‘ weren seuenti and fyue. Forsothe é 
Joseph was in Egipt; and whanne he was 
deed, and alle hise brithren, and al his 
kynrede, the sones of Israel encreessiden, 7 


a From p. Exodus. np. No rubric in aru but only running title. 


a This Prologue is from m. 


bOm. ¥. alle these 1s, 


4 meynee 1s. © sones 8. 


aa Here biginnyth Exodi. Lor. Incipit liber Exedi. x. No title in rrxd. 


f Jacobs hipe ts. 
ce 


194 EXODUS. 


burionynge ben multiplied, and thei 
sstrengthid fulfilliden the erthe. Thanne 
a newe kyng roos vpon Egipte, that 
9knewe not Joseph, and he seide vnto his 
puple, Loo! the puple of the sones of 
Yrael is myche, and stronger than we; 
10cometh, wiseli oppresse we it, lest per- 
auenture thei ben multiplied, and, if ba- 
tayle aryse a3ens vs, it be addid to oure 
enemyes, and, we ouercomen, he? go out 
1iof the loond. And so he bifore putte to 
hem maystris of werkis, that thei shulden 
ouertraueylen hem with birtheus. And 
thei bildeden to Pharao the citees of ta- 
12 bernacles, Phiton®, and Ramesses. And 
in as myche as thei oppressiden hem, so 
myche more thei weren multiplied, and 
iswexen. And the Egipciens hatiden the 
sones of Yrael, and tourmentiden, scorn- 
i4ynge to hem, and enuyinge; and to bit- 
ternes thei brou3ten her lijf with harde 
werkis of cley and tyle’, and with al 
seruage, thur3 the which thei weren thrist 
15 down in werkys of the® erthe. And the 
kyng of Egipte seide tof the mydwyues 
of Ebrews, of the whiche oon was clepid 
is Sephora, and ‘that other® Fua, comaund- 
ynge hem, Whanne 3e shulen serue the 
wymmen of Ebrew, to taken her chil- 
dren of her wombe, and the tyme of 
birthe come, if it be a maal, sleeth hym ; 
17if a femaal, kepith. Forsothe the myd- 
wyues dredden God, and diden not after 
the heeste of the kyng of Egipte, but 
iskepten the males. The whyche to hym 
clepid, seide’ the kyng, What now is this 
3e! wolden do, that the knaue children 3e 
19wolen kepe? The whiche answerden, 
Wymmen of Ebrew ben not as the wym- 
men of Egipte, thei forsothe han the kun- 
nyng of mydwyuyng, and er we comen 
20to hem, thei ben delynered. Thanne 
God dide wel to the mydwyues; and the 


Dit # sec.m. ¢and Phiton 4. 4 of tyle z. 
E seem. ithat 3e BDEFU. 
& fulfilliden is. b3eG. irise ep. * Om. Eve. 


e Om. BDEFH. 


I, 8—20. 


and weren multiplied as buriounnyng, and 
thei weren maad strong greetli, and filliden® 
the lond. A newe kyng, that knewe nots 
Joseph, roos in the meene tyme on Egipt, 
and seide to his puple, Lo! the puple ofo 
the sones of Israel is myche, and strongere 
than we; come 3e, wiseli oppresse wel it, 10 
lest peranenture it be multiplied; and 
lest, if batel risith' ajens vs", it be addid 
to oure enemyes, and go out of the lond, 
whanne we ben ouercomun. And so heli 
made maistris of werkis souereyns to 
hem™, that thei schulden turmente hem 
with chargis. And thei maden citees of™ 
tabernaclis® to? Farao, Fiton, and Ramesses. 
And bi hou myche thei oppressiden hem, 12 
bi so myche thei weren multiplied, and 
encreessiden more’. And Egipcians™ hat-13 
iden the sones of Israel, and turmentiden’, 
and seorneden hem ; aud brou3ten* her lijf 14 
to bitternesse bi hard werkis of cley and 
of tijl stoon, and bi al" seruage, bi which 
thei weren oppressid in the werkis of erthe. 
Forsothe the kyng of Egipt seide to theis 
mydwyues of Ebrews, of whiche oon was 
clepid Sefora, the tother Fua; and he com-16 
maundide to hem, Whanne 3e schulen do 
the office of medewyues to’ Ebrew wym- 
men, and the tyme of childberyng schal 
come, if it is a knaue child, sle 3e him; if 
it is a womman, kepe 3e¥. Forsothe* the 17 
medewyues dredden God, and didenY not 
bi the comaundement? of the kyng of E- 
gipt, but kepten*? knaue” children. To*1s 
whiche clepid to hym the kyng seide, 
What is this thing which’ 3e wolden do, 
that 3e wolden kepe the children® ? Whichef 19 
answeriden, Ebrew wymmen ben not as 
thes wymmen of Egipt, for thei han kun- 
nyng of the craft of medewijf*, and chil- 
den bifore that we comen to hem. Ther-20 
for God dide wel to medewyues*; and 
the puple encreesside, and was coumfortid 
h seith 


fynto peu. §& the tother DEFH. 


\the kyngis. ™ the children of Israel 1s. 4 of 


the 1s. © tabernaclis, ether tresours, as it is in Ebrew nce. t. ether of t. as it is in Eb. gx. t. ether of t.N. 


Pofs. 4the more B. T° the Egipcians 1. 


8 turmentiden hem Is. 


t thet brou3ten 1s. Uap. Vin cEG. 


“5e 1s. * Butis. Y thei diden 1s. 7 heest 1s. 2 thei keptenis. > the knave zr. ©¢ the 1s. d that 1s. 


© knaue children s. 


eden x. thei childen 1s. & the medewyues plures. 


fthe whiche 1. &Om.c. the medewyf L. mydewyues G. mydwifyng ts. 


i child. 


1. 21—II. 11. 


puple growide,and.was coumfortid greetli. 
21.And for the mydwiues dredden God, he 
22 byldyd* to hem housis. Thanne Pharao 
comaundide to al his puple, seiynge, What 
euer of maal kynde shal be born, throwe 
3e it in to the flode; what euer of femaal, 
kepith. 
CAaP: Ii. 
1 Aftir this 3ede out a man of the hows 
of Leuy, and tok a wijf of his lynage, 
2that conceyuede, and bar a child, and, 
seynge hym shaply, hydde hym thre 
3monethis. And whanne he my3te hide 
hym no lenger, he tok a ionket of resshen, 
and glewide it withe glewishe cley, and 
with picche, and putte the litil faunt! 
with ynne, and sette out hym in the 
flaggi place of the brinke of the flode, 
4his sister stondynge afer, and biholdynge 
5the auenture of the thing. And, loo! the 
dou;ter of Pharao descendide for to be 
wasshid in the flode, and hir mayden ser- 
uauntis 3eden bi the brynke of the flode. 
The which, whanne she hadde seen the 
ionket in the growyng place of resshes, 
esente oon of hir mayden seruauntis, and, 
it brou3te forth, opnynge and biholdynge 
in it a litil child wepynge, hanynge rewth 
of it, seith; Of the children of Ebrews he 
zis. To whom the sister of the child, Wolt 
thow, she seith, that Y go, and clepe to 
thee a womman of Ebrew, that may no- 
grishe the child ? She answerde, Go. The 
mayden child 3ede, and clepide hir moder. 
9To whom spak the dow3tir of Pharao, 
Tak, she seide, this child, and norisch to 
me, and Y shal 3yue to thee thi mede. 
The womman tok, and norisshide the 
child, and fil waxen tok to™ the dow3ter 
100f Pharao, whom she clepide to hir in 
steede of a sone; and she clepide his 
name Moyses, seiynge, For of the water 
11 Y tok hyin. In thilke daies, after Moyses" 


EXODUS. 


195 


greeth. And for the mydewyues dredden 21 
God, he! bildide ‘housis to hem™. Therfor 22 
Farao comaundide al his puple, and seide, 
What ener thing of male kynde is borun 
to Ebrewis", ‘caste 3e° into the flood; 
what euer thing of wymmen kynde, kepe 
3eP. 
GA Pot. 

Aftir these thingis a man of ‘the hows! 
of Leuy’ 3ede out, and took a wijf { of his 
kyn, which™ conseyuede, and childide® a2 
sone. And sche* sei3 hym wel farynge, 
and hidde zm" biY thre monethis. And3 
whanne sche my3te not hele’, thanne sche 
took a ‘leep of segge*, and bawmedeY it 
with tar’ and* pitch, and puttide® the 3ong 
child with ynne, and puttide’ hym forth 
in a ‘place of spier of the brenke of the 
flood, the while his sistir stood afer, and 4 
bihelde the bifalling® of the‘ thing. Lo!s 
forsothe the dou3tir of Farao cam doun to 
be waischun in the flood, and hir damysels 
walkiden bi the brenke of the flood. And 
whanne sche hadde seyn a leep in the 
‘place of spier’, sche sente oon of hir ser- 
uauntessis®, and sche openyde the leepc 
brou3t to hir, and sei3! a litil child wep- 
ynge ther ynne. And sche hadde mercy 
on the child, and seide, It is of the 3onge 
children of Ebrews. ‘To whom the ‘sister7 
of the child* seide, Wolt thou that Y go, 
and clepe to thee an Ebrew womman, that 
may nurische the yong child? She an-s 
sweride, Go thou. The damysel 3ede, and 
clepide the ‘modir of the child!. To whom 
‘the dou3tir of Farao™ spak, and _ seide, 
Take thou this” child, and® nurische? to 
me; Y4 schal 3yue to thee thi mede. The 
wominan took, and nurischide the child, 
and bitook” hym woxun to ‘the dou;tir of 
Farao®, whom sche purchasidet ‘in to" the 1 
place of” sone’; and sche clepide.his name 
Moises, and seide, For Y took hymn fro the 


k bilden 4. I childe vp. ™ Om. a4. ® that Moyses apeu. 
1God 1s. ™ hem housis 1s. ® the Ebrewis is. © casteth itis. P3eitrs. 4 Leuy housrs.- "the 
which 1. Sehilde xp. ¢ the modiris. Om. BopeGumNorx. VY Om. 1Ks. © hele him lengre 1s. 


x leep of seggis ELP. segge leep 1s. Y clemede mw. Zeoode 1, # Om. ELP. > putte Faw. sche putte 1s. 


io 
‘ 4 flaggy place Is. 
ische saw3e 1s. k childis sistir rs. 
P nurische it rs, 4 and Y GKN prim. 
u Om. DGKMNO see.m.QrtT. ‘VY in stede of a 18. 


© putte FiMs. 


€ quenture 1. fallinge s. 
1 ehildis modir 1s. 

r sehe bitook 1s. 
Wa sone A pr. m. 


f this 1. 
m Pharao dou3tir Is. 
8 Farow dou3tre s. 


& flagsy place is. 5) damesels 1s. 
£sy p 
nthe rte. ° Om. s. 
t purehaside or took 13, 


ccQ 


+ took a wiyf 
into fleisly cou- 
pling: for sche 
was his wiyf bi- 
fore, and hadde 
ehildid Aaron 
aud Marie his 
sister, Lire 
here. BCGKO, 


196 


was waxen, goon out to his bretheren,saw3 
the tourmentyng of hem, and a man of 
Egipte smytynge oon of the Ebrews, his 
izbritheren. And whanne he hadde be- 
holdun al abowt hider and thider, and no 
man he hadde seen to be ny3, the Egip- 
13 cien smytun he hidde in the soonde. And 
goon out another day, he bihelde two 
Ebrews chidynge, and he seide to hym 
that dyde the wrong, Whi smytist thow 
14thi brother® ? The which answerde, Who 
ordeynede thee prince and doimesman 
vpon vs? Whether thow wole slee ine, 
as thow slewe j3istirday the Egipcien ? 
Moyses dradde, and seith, What manere 
15is maad opyn® this word? And Pharao 
herde this word, and sou;te to slee 
Moyses, the which fleynge fro hys si3t, 
dwelte in the loond of Madyan, and sat 
isbisidis a pitt. Forsothe there weren to 
the preest of Madian seuen dou3tres?, the 
whiche ‘comen to? drawe watir; and, the 
water goters fillid, thei coneytiden to wa- 
17ter the flok of hyr fader. There ouer- 
camen shepherdes, and threwen hem out ; 
and Moyses aroos, and, the mayden chil- 
is dren defendid, he watride her sheep. The 
whiche, whanne thei were turnyd ajen to 
Jetro, her fader, he seide to hem, Whi 
ben 3e comen swifter than 3e ben wonte ? 
19 Thei answerden, A man of Egipte hath 
delyuered vs fro the hoond of the shep- 
herdis; also and he hath drawun water 
with vs, and 3yue drynke to the sheip. 
20 And he, Where is he? he seith, whi han 
3e laft the man? clepe 3e hym, that he 
21eete breed. Than Moyses swere, that he 
shulde dwelle with hym; and he tok a 
22 wijf, Sephoram, the dou3ter of hym. The 
which bar to hym a sone, that he clepide 
Gersan, seiynge, A comlyng Y was in a 
straunge loond. And* another forsothe 
she bar, whom he clepide Elie3er, seiynge, 


©ney3bour E. °° vpon AFH. 


whe sei3.s. an Ebrew man oon of s. 

Cars. P Om. Gx. 

u swiftili =. swiftir L. 
» Jethro 1s. 


m face w. 1 he sat 1s. 
8 her scheep t. 
3af Is. 

& she g. 


t now Is. 
zOm.18s. 4 vs E, 


EXODUS. 


P dou3tren BDEFH. 


Y Moises s. 
¢ Ebrew mens. 4 Moises s. ¢ the which 1. for ELP passim. 
‘a her fadres flockis 1. h. fadir f. s. 
vy Om. s. 
¢ that ELP. 


II. 12—22, 


watir. In tho daies, aftir that Moises en-1) 
creesside, he 3ede out to hise britheren, and 
sei3¥ the turment of hem, and a man 
Egipcian smytynge ‘oon of Ebrews*, hise 
britheren. And whanne he’ hadde bi-12 
holdun hidur and thidir, and hadde seyn, 
that no man was present, he killide the 
Egipcian, and hidde? in soond*. And he? 13 
3ede out in another dai, and sei; tweyne 
Ebrews® chidynge, and he seide to hym 
that dide wrong, Whi smytist thou thi 
brother? Which® answeride, Who or-14 
deynede thee prince, ether’ iuge on vs? 
Whether? thou wolt sle me, as thou kill- 
idist" j3isterdai the Egipcian? Moises 
dredde, and seide, Hou is this word maad 
opun? And Farao herde this word, and 1s 
sou3te to sle Moyses, which! fledde fro his 
si3t™, and dwellide in the lond of Madian, 
and sat" bisidis a pit. Forsothe seuene 16 
dou3tris weren to the° preest of Madian, 
that camen to drawe watir; and whanne 
the trou3is weren fillid, thei coneitiden to 
watere ‘the? flockis of her fadir’. Scheep-17 
herdis camen aboue’, and dreuen hem 
awei; aud Moises roos, and defendide the 
dameselis ; and he watride ‘the scheep of 
hem’. And whanne thei hadden turned 18 
ajen to Jetro, her fadir, he seide to hem, 
Whi camen 3e! swiftliere" than 3e weren 
wont? Thei answeriden, A man of Egipt19 
delyuerede vs fro the’ hond” of scheep- 
herdis* ; ferthermore and he drow watir 
with vs, and 3afY drynk to* the* scheep. 
And he? seide, Where is that man? whi20 
leften 3e the’ man? clepe 3e hym‘, that 
he ete breed. Therfor Moises swoor, that 21 
he wolde dwelle with Jetro; and he took 
a wijf, Sefora, ‘the dou3ter of Jetro®. And 22 
sche childide a sone to hym, whom he 
clepide Gersan, and seide, Y was a comel- 
yng in anf alyen lond. Forsothe sche 
childide an othir sone, whom he® clepide 


4 come to ben BDF premou. F Om. BDEFH. 


Zhidde him cxs. the soonds. » Om. kz. 
& wher plures. ) slow3 1s. ! the which 1. 
Typon hem M. ypon w. 

x the scheepherdis 1. Y¥ he 
e Jethro dou3tres. fOm.a. 


w hondis FE. 
4 that man &. 


II. 23——III. 8. 


Forsothe the God’ of my fader is myn 
helper, and hath delyuered me fro the 

23hoond of Pharao. After myche forsothe 
of tyme died the kyng of Egipte, and in- 
wardly weilynge the sones of Yrael for 
the werkis, crieden out, and the crye of 
‘hem to God oft her werkis steyde vp. 

21And he herde the weilyng of hem, and 
was recordid of the boond of pees, that 
he couenauntide with Abraham, Ysaac, 

25and Jacob; and he bihelde the children" 
of Yrael, and knewe hem. 


CAP. III. 


1 Moyses forsothe fedde the sheip of Je- 
tro, hys wyues fader, preest of Madian ; 
and whanne he had dreuen the flok to 
the ynnermore™ partis of deserte’, he cam 

2to the hil of God, Oreb. And the Lord 
apperide to hym in a flawme of fier fro 
the mydle of a busshe, and he saw3 that 
the busshe was ofier, and was not brent. 

3Thanne seide Moyses, Y shal go, and se 
this greet si3t, whi the busshe is not 
4brent. And the Lord biholdynge that 
he 3ede to seen, clepide hym fro the 
mydle of the busshe, and seith, Moyses! 
Moyses! The which answerde, Y am ny3. 

5 And he, Ne come thow, he seith, no nerre 
hidur, but lowse thow thi shoyng’’ fro 
thi feyt; the place forsothe that thow 

6stondist yn is an holi loond. And he 
seith, Y am the God of thi fader, God of 
Abraham, and God’ of Ysaac, and God” 
of Jacob. Moises hidde his face, forsothe 

7he dorst not loke a3ens God. To whom 
the Lord seith, I haue seen the affliccioun 
of my puple in Egipte, and Y haue herd 
the crye of it, for the hardnes of hem 
that ben before to the werkis. And 
knowynge the sorwe of it, Y descendide 
to delyuere it fro the hoondis of Egip- 
ciens, and Y shal lede out fro that loond 


8 Lord 1. 
God E pr.man, 


t Om.4. 4 sones B sup.ras. E. 


h he delyuered 1s. 
8 that 1s. 
deseert 1s. 'hym ¢éherets. Sais. t myddil 1s. 
ether not wastid cexa. f. ether wastid Bx. 
bOm.s. ¢schoon is. ‘it is EB. 
k the werkis 1s. ! that Y plures. 


1 poyous werkis 18. 


€ Om. ELP. 
mhem rE. 


EXODUS. 


k thei crieden 1s. 
° knewe hem, that is, scheride loue to hem BCGKNQX. 


y I shal yp. Om. 1km0s. 
f Om, £. 
4 the Egipcians 1s. 


197 


Eliezer, and seide, For God of my fadir 
is myn helpere, and delyuerede’ me fro 
the hond of Farao. Forsothe aftir myche 23 
tyme the kyng of Egipt diede, and the 
sones of Israel inwardli weiliden for 
werkis', and crieden®, and the cry of hem 
for werkis! stiede™ to God. And he herde 24 
the weilyng of hem, and he hadde mynde 
of the boond of pees, which" he hadde 
maad with Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob; 
and he bihelde the sones of Israel, and 25 
knewe® hem. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothe Moises kepte the scheep of! 
Jetro, ‘his wyues fadir, preest? of Madian ; 
and whanne he hadde dryue the floc to 
the ynnere partis of deseert‘, he cam to 
Oreb, the hil of God. Forsothe the Lord 2 
apperide to hym' in the’ flawme of fier fro 
the myddis* of the" buysch, and he’ sei3 
that the buysch brente, and was” not for- 
brent*. Therfor Moyses seide, Y schal gos 
and schal’ se this greet si3t, whi the buysch 
is not forbrent’. Sotheli the Lord sei3 that 4 
Moises 3ede to se, and he clepide Moises* 
fro the’ myddis of the buysch, and seide, 
Moyses! Moises! Which answeride, Y am 
present. And the Lord seide, Neize thous 
not hidur, but vnbynde thou the scho® of 
thi feet, for the place in which thou 
stondist ist hooli lond. And the Lordé 
seide, Yam God of thi fadir, God of Abra- 
hai, and® God of Isaac, and‘ God of Ja- 
cob. Moises hidde his face, for he durste 
not biholde® a3ens God. To whom the7 
Lord seide, Y' sei3 the affliccion of my 
puple in Egipt, and Y herde the! ery 
therof, for the hardnesse of hem that ben ~“ 
souereyns of werkis*. And Y knew thes 
sorewe of the puple, and Y cam down to! 
delyuere it™ fro the hondis of Egipcians", 
and lede® out of that lond in to a good 
wschone B. = the 


uu ynnemore 4 V derserte 4. 


lher werkis is. ™ stei vp 1. stiede vp s. 
P the fadir of his wijf, a prestis. 4 the 
whe k. itis. * not forbrent 

z wastid 1s. brent w. 2 him 1. 

Slokec. handIp, i Om. pen prim. grr. 

© Jede it s. 


uais. VY Moises is. 


198 


into a good loond and a wide, into a loond 
that flowith mylk and hony, to the places 
of Chananey, and Ethey, Amorrei, and 
9 Phere3ei, Enuehey, and Jebusey. Thanne 
the crye of the children of Yrael is comen 
to me, and Y haue seen the affliccioun of 
hem, with the which thei ben oppressid 
1 of the Egipcyens. But come, and Y shal 
sende thee to Pharao, that thow lede my 
puple, the sones of Yrael, out of Egipte. 
11 And Moyses seide to God, Who am Y, 
that I shulde goo to Pharao, and lede out 
12 the sones of Yrael fro Egipte ? The which 
seide to hym, I shal be with thee, and 
this thow shalt haute to tookun, that I 
haue sent thee, whanne thow shalt lede 
my puple fro Egipte, thow shalt do sa- 
i3eryfice to God vpon this -hil. Moyses 
seith to God, Loo! Y shal goo to the 
sones of Yrael, and Y shal seie to hem, 
the God of 3oure fadris hath sent me to 
jow; if thei seyn to me, what is his 
Mname, what shal Y seye to hem? The 
Lord seyde to Moyses, I am the which 
Y* am; he seith, thus thow shalt seye to 
the children of Israel, He that is hath sent 
sme to 30w. And eftsones God seithY to 
Moyses, Thes thingis thow shalt seye to 
the sones of Yrael, The Lord God of 
3oure fadrys, God? of Abraham, and God? 
of Ysaac, and Godé of Jacob, hath sent me 
to 30w; this is name to me withouten 
ende, and this my memoriale in genera- 
16cioun and into generacioun. Goo, and ge- 
dere togidere the aldyr men of Yrael, and 
thow shalt seye to hem, The Lord God of 
j3oure fadris hath apeeryd to me, God? of 
Abraham, and God* of Ysaac, and God? 
of Jacob, seiynge, Visytynge Y haue vi- 
sitid 3ow, and Y haue seen alle thingis 
17that haue fallun to 3ow in Egipte; and 
Y seyde, that Y shal lede 3ow out fro 
the affliccioun of Egipte into the loond of 
Chananei, and Ethei, and Amorrei, Phe- 
rejey, and Euehi, and Jebusey, to the 
loond flowynge mylk and hony. And 


x Om. pe. Y seide pen. 


EXODUS. 


2 the God £ pr.m. 


III. 9—18. 


lond and brood, into a lond that flowith 
with? milk?P and hony, to the places’ of 
Cananey, and of Ethei, of Amorrey, and 
of" Feresei, of § Euey, and of Jebusei. 
Therfor the cry of the sones of Israel camtg 
to me, and Y sei3 the turment of hem, bi 
which" thei ben oppressid of Egipcians’. 
But come thou, I schal sende thee to Fa-10 
rao, that thou lede out my puple, the sones 
of Israel, fro Egipt. And Moises seide toi 
hym, Who am Y, that Y go to Farao, and 
lede out the sones of Israel fro Egipt? 
And the Lord seide to Moises, Y schal be 12 
with thee, and thou schalt haue this signe, 
that Y haue sent thee, whanne thou hast 
led out my puple fro Egipt, thou schalt 
offre to God on this hil. “Moises seide to13 
God, Lo! Y schal go to the sones of Is- 
rael, and Y schal seie to hem, God of 3oure 
fadris sente me to 30u; if thei schulen seie 
to me, what is his name, what schal Y seie 
to hem? The Lord seide to Moises, Y am14 
that am’. The Lord seide, Thus thou 
schalt seie to the sones of Israel, He that 
is sente me to 30u. And eft God seide to1s 
Moises, Thou schalt seie these thingis to 
the sones of Israel, The Lord God of 3oure 
fadris, God of Abraham, and God of Isaae, 
and* God of Jacob, sente me to 30u; this 
name is to me with onten endef, and this 
is my memorial in generacioun and in toY 
generacioun. Go thou, gadere thou theié 
eldere men, that is, tugis, of Israel, and 
thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord God of. 
3oure fadris apperide to me, God of Abra- 
ham, and God of Ysaac, and God of Jacob, 
and seide*, Y visitynge haue visitid jou, 
and Y sei3* alle thingis that bifelden to. 
jou in Egipt; and Y seide, that Y ledeb17 
out 3ou fro the affliccioun of Egipt in to 
the lond of Cananey, and of Ethei, and of 
Amorrei, and of Ferezei, and of Enei, and 
of Jebusei, to the lond flowynge with mylk 
and hony. And thei schulen here thi vois ; 18 
and thou schalt entre, and the eldere men 
of Israel to the kyng of Egipt, and thou 


+ for thes thre 
witnessis lynen 
withouten 
eende. 1. 


a Om. p. the God gz. » the God ez. 


POm.£. pPmik a. Glondeis. 'Om.c. Sand of xs. t fro cami. Uthe which i. ¥ the Egipcians rs. 


Ww Yam ser *Om.k. Y Om. nN. 


z he seide Is. 


ahaue seen. ? schulde lede 1s. 


III, 19-——IV. 7. 


thei shulen here thi voyce; and thow 
shalt goon yn, and the alder men of Yrael 
to the kyng of Egipte, and thow shalt 
seye to hym, The Lord God of Ebrews 
hath clepid us ; we shulen goon a weye of 
thre dayes into wildernes, that we doon 
19sacrifice to the Lord oure God. But Y 
wote, that the kyng of Egipte shal not 
3yue 30w leue that 3e goon, but bi strong 
20hoond ; forsothe Y shal strecche out myn 
hoond, and Y shal smyte Egipte in alle 
my merueyles, that Y am to do in the 
mydle of hem, and after thes thingis he 
21 shal 3yue to® 3ow leue. And Y shal 3eue 
grace to this puple bifore the Egipciens, 
that whanne 3e gon out, 3e shulen not 
22 g00n out voyd ; but a womman shal aske 
of hir nei3bore and of hir gest silueren 
and goldun vessels, and clothes, and 3e 
shulen ligge’ hem vpon 3oure sones, and 
vpon 3oure dou3tres®, and 3e shulen spoyle 
Egipte. 
CAP. IV. 
1 Moyses answerde, and seith, Thei shulen 
not leue me, ne here my yoyce; but seyn‘, 
2The Lord apeeryde not to thee. Thanne 
he seide vnto hym, What is that that 
thow holdist in thin hoond? He an- 
3swerde, A’ 3erde. And the Lord seide, 
Throw it into the erthe; he threwe it, 
and it was turned into a boske eddre, so 
4that Moyses flei3. And the Lord seide, 
Strecch out thin hoond, and tak his 
tayle; he strauzte out, and helde, and it 
5was turned into a 3erde. That thei bi- 
lenen, he seith, that God of thi fadres 
aperide to thee God® of Abraham, and 
6God’ of Ysaac, and God’ of Jacob. And 
the Lord seide eftsones, Putte thin hoond 
into thi bosum; the which whanne he 
hadde putt into his bosum, he brou3te it 
7forth leprows, at liknes of snow. Drawe 
a3en, he seith, the hoond into thi bosum: 


¢Om.gpern. 4 leyn £ sec.m, 


¢ hath clepid 1s. 4 go thennes 15. 
kOm.1. 10m. x. ™ Om. pegrrx. 
P Om. cog. 4Om.G. "yponis. 8 that 1s. 
RSTX. W castide it EKLY. keste 71. caste its. 
@ seide this schal be into witnes to hem 1s. 
& his ersx. 


EXODUS. 


€ dou3tren BDEFH. 


€ no but plures. 
1 hoostresse plures. that sche is herborid with 1s. 
t 3erde, that is, a seheperdis staff 1. 
x forth his honde ts. 
b On. ELP. 


196 


schalt seie to hym, The Lord God of 
Ebrews clepide® vs; we schulen go the 
weie of thre daies in to wildirnesse, that 
we offre to oure Lord God. But Y woot, 19 
that the kyng of Egipt schal not delyuere 
3ou that 3e go’, but® bi strong hond; for‘ 20 
Y schal holde forthe myn hond, and I 
schal smyte Egipt in alle my marueils; 
whiche’ Y schal do in the myddis of hem; 
aftir these thingis he schal delyuere 3ou. 
And Y® schal 3yue grace to this! puple bi-21 
fore Egipcians, and* whanne 3e schulen go 
out, 3e schulen not go out yoide; but azz 
womman schal axe of hir nei3boresse and 
of! her™ hoosteesse" siluerne vesselis®, and 
goldun, andP clothis?, and 3e schulen putte 
tho on™ 3oure sones and dou3tris, and 3¢ 
schulen make nakid Egipt. 


CA Bs a1V: 


Moyses answeride, and seide, The comyns 1 
schulen not bileue to me, nether thei schu- 
len here my vois; but thei schulen seie, 
The Lord apperide not to thee. Therfor2 
the Lord seide to hym, What is this’ that 
thou holdist in thin hond? Moises an- 
sweride, A 3jerde'. And the Lord seide,3 
Caste it forth into erthe"; and he castide” 
forth, and it was turned in to a serpent, 
so that Moises fledde. And the Lord 4 
seide, Holde forth thin hond, and take the 
tail therof; he stretchide forth*, and heldeY, 
and it was turned’ into a jerde. And thes 
Lord seide®, That thei bileue, that the Lord 
God of thi fadris apperide to thee, God of 
Abraham, and® God of Isaac, and God of 
Jacob. And the Lord seide eft®, Putteé 
thin hond in to thit bosum; and whanne 
he hadde put it® in tof thes bosum, he 
brou3te forth it leprouse, at the licnesse of 


f thei shullen seyn ze prem. & the God £ prim. - 


hOm. xr. this x. 
© vessel DELP. 
uthe erthe n¢ikNP 

z turned ajen 1s. 
€Om.s. fOm.eLP. 


f forsothe 1s. & the which 1. 


y helde 7é 18. 


c eft to Moises 1s. Uther. 


200 


he ajen drew3, and brou3te it forth eft- 
sones, and it was lijk vnto® the tother! 
sfleshe. If thei leuen not, he seith, to thee, 
ue here the word of the former signe, 
thei shulen leue to the word of the signe 
9that folweth ; and if forsothe they lenen 
not to thes twey signes, ne heren thi 
voys, tak water-of the floode, and heeld it 
out vpon the drye loond, and what euere 
thow drawist* of the floode, it shal be 
lo turned into bloode. Moyses seith, Lord, 
Y biseche, I am not wel spekynge fro 
3isterday and fro the thridde dai hens; 
and sith thow spak to thi seruaunt, Y am 
of more latsum and of more slow tonge. 
11 The Lorde seide to hym, Who made the 
mouth of man', or who forgide the 
dowmbe and the deef, the seer and the 
12blynde? whether not Y? Goo thanne, I 
shal be in thi mouth, and Y shal teche 
is thee what thow shalt spek. And he, Y 
biseche, he seith, Lord, sende whom thow 
uart to sende. The Lord wrooth ajens 
Moyses, seith, Aaron, thi brother, Le- 
uyte™, I" wote that he is a fayr speker ; 
loo! he shal goo out into thin a3en go- 
ynge, and seynge thee he shal ‘be glad® 
isin herte. Spek to him, and put my 
wordis in his mouth, and Y shal be in 
thi mouth and ‘in his mouth?; and Y 
shal shewe to 30u what 3e shulen do. 
16 He shal speke for thee?? to the puple, and 
he shal be thi mouth ; thow forsothe shal 
be to hym in thes thinges, that pertenen 
17to God. And this 3erde tak in thin 
hoond, in the which thow art to doon 
issignes. Moyses 3ede, and turned a3en to 
Jetro, his wyues fader, and he seide to 
hym, Y shal goo, and turn ajen to my 
bretheren in to Egipte, that Y se if thei 
3it lyuen. To whom seide Jetro, Goo in 
19pees. Thanne the Lord seide to Moyses 
in Madian, Goo, and turn a3en into E- 


EXODUS. 


IV, 8— 19, 


snow. The Lord seide, Withdrawe" thin7 
hond in to thi bosum; he withdrow', and 
brou3te forth* eft, and it was lije the! 
tother fleisch. The Lord seide, If theis 
schulen not bileue to thee, nether schulen 
here the word of the formere signe™, thei 
schilen bileue to the word of the signe" 
suynge; that° if thei bileuen not sotheli%9 
to? these twei signes, nether heren thi vois, 
take thou watir of the flood, and schedde 
out it on the drie lond, and what euer 
thing thou schalt drawe vp of the flood, it 
schal be turned into blood. Moises seide, 10 
Lord, Y biseche??, Y am ‘not eloquent! fro 
3istirdai and the thridde dai ago; and 
sithen thou hast spokun to thi seruaunt, 
Y am of more lettid and slowere™ tunge. 
The Lord seide to hym, Who made thei 
mouth of man", ethers who made a doumb 
man and ‘deef, seynge and blyndt? whe- 
ther not Y? Therfor go thou, and Y schal 12 
be in thi mouth, and Y schal teche thee 
what thou schalt speke. And* he’ seide, 13 
Lord, Y biseche*, sende thou* whom thou 
schalt sendeY. And the Lord was wrooth 14 
ajens Moises, and seide, Y woot, that Aa- 
ron, thi brother, of the lynage of Leuy, is 
eloquent’; lo! he schal go out in to thi 
comyng, and he schal se thee, and schal* 
be glad in herte. Speke thou to hym,1s 
and putte thou my wordis in his mouth, 
and Y schal be in thi mouth, and in the 
mouth of hym>; and Y schal schewe to 
30u what 3e owen todo. He schal speke 16 
for thee to the® puple, and he schal be thi 
mouth ; forsothe thou schalt be to him in 
these thingis, that perteynen to God. Also 17 
take thou this 3erde in thin hond, in which 
thou schalt do myraclis. Moises 3ede, and 18 
turnede a3en to Jetro, his wyues fadir, and 
seide to hym, Y schal go, and turne’ ajen 
to my britheren in to Egipt, that Y se, 
whether thei lyuen 3it. To whom Jetro 


hto x. i that other p. kdrawe speru. !a mane. ™of the kynrede of Lenytes £ pr.m. Om. 4FH. 


© gladen £ sec.m. Pin the mouth of him 2. 

h agen drawe Is. 
racle BCGKQX. ™ signe ether myracle N. 
slowere 1s. © mannes mouth 1s. 
VY Moyses 1s. ® biseche thee 1s. 
mouth 1s. ¢ Om. Nn. 


x Om. 1Ks. 
4 T schal turn 1s. 


i Moises a3en drewe his hond 1s. 

© Om. plures. 
a fair spekere c sup. ras. no fair speker 1s. not el. ether f: sp. BGNKQX. not el. that is, a f. sp. M. 
t a deef man a seynge man and a blynd ts. 
y Om. 1s. 


8 or ELP passim. 


PP the 4. 


1 to the 1s. 
Pof c. 


kK it forth 1s. 


™ signe ether my- 
00 Om. Is. 


Pp biseche thee 1s. 4 not 
qq of 
uOm.s. 
b his 


29 fair speker 1s. 8 he schal 1s. 


1V. 20-—31. 


gipte; forsothe alle thei ben deede, that 
20 sou3ten thi lyf. Moyses tok his wyf, and 
his sones, and putte hem upon an asse, 
and he is turned a3en into Egipte, berynge 
21 the 3erde of God in his hoond. And the 
Lord seide to hym turnynge a3en into 
Egipte, Looke, that alle the signes4 wor- 
thi to be shewid thow do, the whiche Y 
have putte in thin hoond, before Pharao ; 
Y shal hardun his herte, and he shal not 
22leeue the puple; and thow shalt seye to 
hym, Thes thingis seith the Lord, My 
23sone first getun Yrael; Y seide to thee, 
leeue my sone, that he serue to me; and 
thow woldist not leeue hym; loo! Y shal 
24slee thi first gotun sone. And whanne 
he was in the weie, in the syde turnyng 
place to reste, the Lorde 3ede aj3ens hym, 
25and wold slee hym. Anoon Sephora tok 
a ful sharp stoon, and kitte al aboute the 
vttermore skynne of the 3erde of hir sone, 
and it touchide his feet; and she seith, 
26 A spouse of blodis thow art to me. And 
she lafte hym, for the" circumsicioun, aftir 
that she hadde seid, A spouse of blodes 
27thou art to me. The Lord forsothe seide 
to Aaron, Goo into the a3en comyng to 
Moises, into desert; the which 3ede to 
mete with-hym into the hil of God, and 
28he kysside hym. And Moyses tolde Aaron 
alle the wordis of the Lord, for the 
whiche he sente hym, and the toknes 
29that he comaundyde. And thei comen to- 
gidere, and thei gadereden togidere alle 
30 the alder men of the sones of Yrael. And 
Aaron spak alle the wordis, that the 
Lord hadde seyde to Moyses; and he 
sidide the signes beforn the puple; and 
the puple bileuede’ ; and thei herden that 
the Lord hadde visitid the sones of Yrael, 
and that he hadde biholdun the affliccioun 
of hem; and redi thei anourden. 


EXODUS. 201 


seide, Go thou in pees. Therfor the Lord 19 
seide to Moyses in Madian, Go thou, and 
turne a3en into Egipt; for alle thei ben 
deed that sou3ten thi lijf. Moises took his 20 
wijf, and hise sones, and puttide® hem on 
an asse, and he turnede a3en in to Egipt, 
aud bar’ the 3erde of God in his hond. 
And the Lord seide to hym turnynge ajen 21 
in to Egipt, Se®, that thou do alle won- 
dris, whiche Y haue put in thin hond, 


bifore Farao; Y schal make hard{ his +/ shat make 
: harde, that is, 
herte, and he schal not delyucre the! pu- 1 shal suffre 


ple‘; and thou schalt seie to hym, The 22 pe maad hard. 
Lord seith these thingis, My firste gendrid!  7%¢ giase here. 
sone is Israel; Y seide to thee, delyuere 23 cause of ae 
rdynge 
thou my sone, that he serue me, and thou 2 
miche as it is 
synne, for so it 
firste gendrid" sone. And whanne Moises 24 jut Godis cause 
was in the weie, in an yn, the Lord cam__ of bardyage of 
Sefora took 25 miele as it is 
E peyne, for in 
anoon a moost scharp stoon?, and circum- ec 
oa . doa bifore he 
cidide the 3erde of hir sone; and sche — withdrawith 
grace it per- 
Thou art an hosebonde of bloodis to me. ee 
And het lefte hym, aftir that sche hadde 26 the berte; and 
grace is with- 

. o . drawe, manois 
for circumcisioun. Forsothe the Lord seide 27 herte 3s maad 
to Aaron, Go thou in to the comyng of  [ardin hisenyl. 
Moises in to’ deseert; whicht 3ede a3ens °*- 
Moises in to the hil of God, and kisside® 
wordis of the Lord, for whiche he hadde 
sent Moises; and ‘he teldeY’ the myraclis”, 
thei camen togidere, and gaderiden* alle 
the eldere men of the sones of Israel. And so 
Lord hadde seid to Moises, and he dide 
the signes bifore the puple; and the puple3) 
hadde visitid the sones of Israel, and that 
he hadde biholde the turment of hem; 


that his herte 
God is not 
herte iu as 
noldist delyuere hym; lo! Y schal sle thi™ 
is of fre wille; 
; the herte io as 
to him, and wolde sle® hyin. 
peyne of synue 
towchide ‘the feet of Moises’, and seide, 8c®!¢ whiche 
i z therefor wh: 
seid, Thou art an hosebonde of bloodis to me ee iawit: 
Lyre here. 6k 
him. And Moises telde to Aaron alle the 28 
whiche the Lord hadde comaundid. And 29 
Aaron spak alle theY wordis, whiche the 
bileuede; and thei herden, that the Lord 
and thei worschipiden lowe’. 


a syngne p. ¥ that £. § leeucd spzrn. 
€ putte Fm. setters. fhe baris. & Loker. the wondris 1s. ihis es. * puple, that is, no but he 
be compellid therto wc. \bigetun1. ™the kK. "bigetun1. © han sleyn is.  P stoon ether rasour Be. 
9 Moises feet rs. * sche BcrLs. SOm.1. tthe whicli 1. % he kisside rs. ¥ Moises tolde s. ¥ tookenes 1. 


x thei gaderiden 1. thei gad. togedere s. 


y these w. 


z lowe or mekely the Lord 18. 


pd 


202 EXODUS. V. 1—14. 


CAP. V. 

1 Aftir thes thingis 3eden in Moyses and 
Aaron, and seiden to Pharao, Thes thingis 
seith the Lord God of Yrael, Leeue my 
puple, that theit doo sacrifice to me in 

2desert. And he answerde, Who is the 
Lord, that I here his voys, and leeue 
Yrael? Y knowe not the Lord, and Yrael 

3 Y shal not leeue. Thei seiden, The God 
of Ebrews hath clepid vs, that we goon 
the weie of thre dayes into wildernes, 
and sacrifye® unto the Lord oure God, 
lest perauenture falle to us pestilence, or’ 

aswerd. The kyng of Egipte seith to 
hem, Whi, Moyses and Aaron, bisyen 3e 
the puple fro her werkis? Go 3e to 3oure 

scharges. And Pharao seide, Mych is the 
puple of the loond; 3e seyn that the folk 
vudur growith; myche more, if 3e 3yuen 
shem reste fro werkis. He comaundide 
thanne that day to the maystris of werkis, 
and to the constreyners of the puple, sei- 
z7ynge, No more 3e shal 3yue chaf to the 
puple, that tiles” ben maad as before; 
but goo thei hem siluen, and gadere sto- 
sble; and the mesure of tyles” that thei 
before maden, 3e shulen putt vpon hem, 
and 3e shulen not lassen eny thing; for- 
sothe thei ben voyd, and therfor thei 
cryen out, seiynge, Goo we, and sacrifye 

9 we to oure God; be thei oppressid with 
werkis, and fulfille thei hem, that thei 

19 assenten not to lesynge wordis. Thanne, 
goon out, the maystris of werkis and the 
constreyners seyden to the puple, Thus 

iiseith Pharao, Y 3yue 30u not chaf; goth, 
and gederith, where euer 3e mowen fynde; 


ne eny thing shal be lasse* of 3oure werk. . 


12And the puple is scaterid thur3 out al 
the loond of Egipte to be gadered chaf. 
13 And the maystris of werkis greetly stoden, 
seiynge, Fulfilleth 3oure werk eche day, 
as before 3e weren wont to doon, whanne 
ii1chaf was 3ouun to 30u. And thei ben 


CAP. V. 

Aftir these thingis Moises and Aaron1 
entriden, and seiden to Farao, The Lord 
God of Israel seith these thingis, Delyuere 
thou my puple, that it make sacrifice to 
me in deseert. And he® answeride, Who2 
is the Lord, that Y here his vois, and de- 
lyuere Israel ? I knowe not the Lord, and 
Y schal not delyuere Israel. Thei seiden,s 
God of Ebrews clepide vs, that we go the 
weie of thre daies in to wildirnesse, and 
that we make sacrifice to oure Lord God, 
lest perauenture pestilence, ether’ swerd, 
bifalle to vs. The kyng of Egipt seide to4 
hem, Moises and Aaron, whi stiren 3e the 
puple fro her werkis? Go 3e to 3oure 
chargis. And Farao seide, The puple ofs 
the loond is myche ; 3e seen that the® cum- 
pany hath encreessid; hou myche more 
schal it encreesse, if 3e schulen 3yue to 
hem! reste fro werkis. Therfor Farao co-6 
maundide in that dai to the maistris of 
werkis, and to® rente' gadereris of the 
puple, and seide, 3e schulen no more 3yue7 
strei to the puple, to make tijl stoonys as 
bifore* ; but go thei, and gedere stobil ; 
and 3e schulen sette on hem the mesure ofs 
tijl stoonys, which thei maden bifore, ne- 
ther 3e schulen abate ony thing; for thei 
ben idil, and! therfor thei crien, and seien, 
Go we, and make we sacrifice to oure 
God™; be thei oppressid bi werkis, and 9 
fille" thei tho, that thei assente not to the® 
false wordis. Therfor the maistris of the 10 
workis and the rente gadereris 3eden out 
to the puple, and seiden, Thus seith Fa- 
rao, Y 3yue not to 30u streP; go 3e, andi) 
gadere4, if 3e moun fynde ony where; ne- 
ther ony thing schal be decreessid" of 3oure 
werk’. And the puple was scaterid bi ale 
the lond of Egipt to gadre stre. And the1s 
maystris of werkist weren bisi, and seiden, 
Fille" 3e 3oure werk ech dai, as 3e weren 
wont to do, whanne the’ stre was 3ouun 


tit e sec.m. IH. sacrifice p. Yto aBD pr.m. FH. W slattis E prim. * the lasse RpEFn. 


a Pharao 1s. >» Om. ELP. © Om. ¥. 4 or ELP, 


e Om. prc. fitis. 8 Om.c. 1 the rente EIKs. 


i cheff' 1.  3¢ han do bifore 1s. 1Om.G. ™ Lord vp. © fulfulle ts. ° Om. plures. P cheff1. 4 gadre 
3e Biks. F maad lesse 1s. 8% werkis is. tthe werkis 1s. UFulfille 1s. V that 1s. 


V. I5—VI. 2. 


tourmentid, that weren maystris to the 
werkis of the children of Yrael, of the 
constreyners of Pharao, seiynge, Whi 
han 3e not fulfillid the mesure of tylis, 
as bifore, nowther’Y 3istirday ne to day ? 
15 And the maystrys of the children of Yrael 
camen, and crieden out to Pharao, sei- 
ynge, Whi dost thow thus ajens thi ser- 
i6uauntis ? Chaf ben not 3ouun to vs, and 
tiles aliche many ben comaundid. Loo! 
we thi seruauntis ben betun with scourges, 
and wrongfuli it is doon a3ens thi puple. 
17 The which seith, 3e tenden? to ydelnes; 
and therfor 3e seyn, Go we and sacrifye 
18to the Lord; goth thanne and worchith ; 
chaf shal not be 3ouun to 3ow, and 3e 
shulen 3elde the customyd noumbre of 
19tilys. And the maystris of the sones of 
Yrael seen hem seluen into yuel, for that 
it was seide to hem, There shal not be 
maad lasse eny thing of the tiles bi eche 
20daies. And thei a3en wenten to Moyses 
and to Aaron, that stoden enen a3ens, 
21 goynge out fro Pharao, and thei seiden 
‘to hem?, Se the Lord, and deme, for to 
stynken 3e han maad oure smel before 
Pharao and his seruauntis; and 3e han 
2230uun hym a swerd, that he slee vs. And 
Moyses turnede a3en to the Lord, and 
seith, Lord, whi hast thow turmentid this 
23 puple? whi hast thow sent me? Fro? that 
tyme forsothe that Y 3ede yn to Pharao 
for to spek in thi name, he turmentide 
thi puple, and thow hast not delynered 
hem. 


CAP. VI. 


1 And the Lord seide to Moyses, Now 
thow shalt seen, what thingis Y am to do 
to Pharao ; forsothe bi a strong hoond he 
shal leeue hem, and in a my3ti hoond he 

2shal throwe hem out of his loond. And 
the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, Y the 


y nayther p. 
w fulfillede 1s. * 3e diden bifore 1s. ¥ tho s. 
¢thilk x. 4 maner bifore 1s. 
fro Pharao, metten 1. 4 ther agens1s. i Om. 1. 


mynable and hateful n. 


EXODUS. 


2 tendith BDEFH. 


Z children 1s. 
€ yuel manere tretid 1s. 
k hem 1. 
stynke bifore Farao, that is, 3¢ han maad vs abhomynable and hateful seca. 
P swerd, that is, occasioun N. 


203 


to 30u. And thei, that weren maistris of 14 
the werkis of the sones of Israel, weren 
betun of the rent gadereris of Farao, that 
seiden, Whi filliden” 3e not the mesure of 
tijl stoonus, as bifore*, nether 3istirdai ne- 
thir to dai? And theY sonereyns of the1s 
sonys’ of Israel camen, and crieden to Fa- 
rao, and seiden, Whi doist thou so ajens 
thi seruauntis? Stre is not 3ouun to vs, 16 
and tij] stoonus ben comaundid* in? lijk¢ 
manere’. Lo! we thi seruauntis ben betun 
with scourgis, and it is doon vniustli a3ens 
thi puple. Farao seide, 3e 3yuen tent to17 
idilnesse, and therfor 3e seien, Go we, and 
make we sacrifice to the Lord; therfor gois 
3e, and worche; stre schal not be 3ouun 
to 30u, and 3e schulen 3elde the customable 
noumbre of tijl stoonus. And the soue-19 
reyns of the children of Israel sien hem 
silf in yuel®, for it was seid to hem, No 
thing schal be decreessid‘ of tijl stoonus 
bi alle daies. And thei ‘camen to® Moises 20 
and Aaron, that stoden euene a3ens’, and 
thei ‘3eden out fro Farao, andi seiden to21 
‘Moises and Aaron*, The Lord se, and 
deme, for 3e han maad oure odour! to™ 
stynke bifore Farao" and hise seruauntis®; 
and 3e han 3oue to hym a swerd?, that he 
schulde sle vst. And Moises turnede a3en 22 
to the Lord, and seide, Lord, whi hast 
thou turmentid this" puple? why sentist 
thou me? For sithen Y entride to Farao, 23 
that Y schulde speke in thi name, thou 
hast turmentid thi puple, and hast not de- 
lyuered hem. 


CAP. VI. 


And the Lord seide to Moises, Now) 
thou schalt se, what thingis Y schal do to 
Farao; for bi strong hound he schal dely- 
uere hem’, and in my3ti hond he schal caste 
hem out of his lond. And the Lord spak2 
to Moises, and seide, Y am the Lord, thats 


aOm. a4. >» for a, 


*anot comaundid 1. ¢o vs as in 18. 
f maad lesse of the noumbre 1s. & comynge out 
lodour or faame 1s. mQOm.1s. © to 
© seruauntis, that is, abho- 
4 and 3e han 3oue to him a swerd etc. that is, 3e 


han 3oue occasioun to turmente vs with trauels til to the deth wcany. that is, turm. with t. til to the dn. 


¥ thi po sec.m. 


8 delyuere hem, that is, the sones of Israel c. 


pd@ 


204 


3 Lord, that aperyde to Abraham, and to 
Ysaac, and to Jacob in the God Almy3ti ; 
and my name Adonay Y shewyde not to 

s+hem; and I couenauntide a boond of pees 
with hem, that Yshulde 3yue hem the 
loond of Chanaan, the loond of her pil- 
grimage, in the which thei weren com- 

slyngys. Y haue herd the weylyng of the 
children of Yrael, in the which the Egip- 
ciens han oppressid hem, and Y haue re- 
scordide of my couenaunte. Therfore sey 
to the sones of Yrael, Y the Lord, that 
shal lede 3ow out of the traueilous prisoun 
of Egipciens® ; and delyuere fro seruage ; 
and forbigge in an ouerpassyng arm, and 
7in greet domes; and Y shal tak 30w to 
me into a puple, and Y shal be 3oure 
Lord; and 3e shulen kuowe, that Y am 
the Lord 3oure God, that hath ladde 30w 
out fro the traueylows prisoun of Egip- 
sciens, and brou3te 30w into the loond, 
ypon the which Y have lift up myn 
hoond, that Y 3yue it to Abraham, Ysaac, 
and Jacob, and Y shal 3yue it to be had 
9to 30w; I a‘ Lord. Thanne Moyses tolde 
alle thes thingis to the sones of Yrael, the 
whiche assentiden not to hym for the an- 
gwisch of spyryt, and the moost hard 
iowerk. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 

1 seiynge, Goo yn, and spek to Pharao, the 
kyng of Egipte, that he leeue the sones 

of Yrael from his loond. Moyses an- 
swerde before the Lord, Loo! the sones 
of Yrael heren me not, and what manere 
shal Pharao here, namelich sith Y am vn- 

i3circumcidid® in lippes? And the Lord 
spak to Moyses and Aaron, and 3af a 
maundement to the sones of Yrael, and 
to Pharao, the kyng of Egipte, that thei 
leden the sones of Yrael out of the loond 
140f Egipte. Thes be the princis of the 
honsholdis bi her meynese. The sones of 
Ruben, the first goten of Yrael, Enoch, 
isand Fallu, Esrom, and Carmy; thes the 


¢ the Egipciens peru. 


EXODUS. 


dam B pr.m. 


VI. 3-——15- 


apperide to Abraham, and to Isaac, and 
to Jacob int Almy3ti God"; and Y schewide 
not to hem my greet name Adonait; and’4 
Y made couenaunt with hem, that Yschulde 
3yue to hem the lond of Canaan, the lond 
of her pilgrymage, in which thei weren 
comelyngis. Y herde the weilyng of thes 
sones of Israel, in which the Egipcians 
oppresseden hem, and Y hadde mynde of 
my couenaunt. Therfor seie thou to thee 
sones of Israel, Y am the Lord, that schal 
lede out 30u of the prisoun" of Egipcians*; 
andy Y schal delyuere fro” seruage; and Y 
schal ajen bie in* ‘an hi3 arm», and in grete 
domes; and Y schal take 30u to me in to7 
a puple, and Y schal be 3oure God; and 
3e schulen wite, for Y am 3oure Lord God, 
‘which haue® led 30u out of thet prisoun 
of Egipcians, and haue led 3o0u in to thes 
lond, on which Y reiside myn hond, that 
Y schulde 3yue it to Abraham, and to 
Ysaac, and to Jacob; and Y® schal 3yue 
to 30n that lond to be weldid‘; I the 
Lord. Therfor Moises telde alle thingis9 
to the sones of Irael, whiche® assentide 
not to hym for the angwisch of spirit, and 
for" the hardesti werk*. And the Lord 1o 
spak to Moises, and seide, Entre thou, and 
speke to Farao, kyng of Egipt, that he 
delyuere the children of Israel fro his lond!, 
Moises answeride bifore the Lord, Lo! the 12 
children of Israel here not me, and hou 
schal Farao here, moost sithen Y am vn- 
circumcidid™ in® lippis®? And the Lord 13 
spak to Moises and toP Aaron, and 3af4 
comaundementis’ to the sones of Israel, 
and to Farao, kyng of Egipt, that thei 
schulden lede out the sones of Israel fro 
the lond of Egipt. These ben the princis 14 
of housis’ bi her meynees. The sones of 
Ruben, the firste gendrid' of Israel, E- 
noch, and Fallu, Esrom, and Charmy ; 
these ben the kynredis of Ruben. Theis 
sones of Symeon, Jamuel, and Jamyn, and 


€ circumcidid H. 


t Yama. Om. w. "that is, I am almy3ti God 1 marg. VOm. K. ¥ prisounsc. * the Egipcians rvs. 


yOm.G. 2 30u fro rks. 
f had in possessioun 1. 
Vhond a pr.m. EGLPW. 


a 30u in IKs. 


& the whiche 1 5 Om. 1. 


> an arm strei3t ont 1. 
i ful hard 1. 
™ vncireumeidid, that is, defautiyf BoKXx. vne. that is vnredy Is. 


cthat hathis. 4Om.o. ¢& Om. 1. 
k werk by whiche thei weren troublid s. 
nin my Is. 


© lippis or spechis 1.1. that is,in my sp.s. POm.1Isx. dhe jaf 1s. Theestis 1s. § the housis rs. * bigetun 1. 


t+ Adonay, that 
is, tetragrama- 
ton, that signe- 
fieth Goddis 
beyng nakidly, 
without consi- 
deracioun to 
creature. BCG 

K 


VI. 16—29. 


cognaciouns of Ruben. The sones of Sy- 
meon, Jamuel, and Jamyn, and Adod, and 
Jachym, and Soer, and Saul, the sone of 
Chananytidis; thes the progenyes of Sy- 
ismeon. And thes the names of the sones 
of Leuy bi her cognaciouns, Gerson, and 
Caath, and Merary. Forsothe the 3eres 
of the lijf of Leuy weren an hundred and 
17Seuen‘and thretti. The sones of Gerson, 
Lobny and Semei, by her cognaciouns. 
18 The sones of Caath, Amram, and Ysuar, 
and Ebron, and Oziel; the 3eris forsothe 
of the lijf of Caath an hundryd and six 
i9and thretti. The sones of Merary, Mooly 
and Musi. Thes the cognaciouns of Leuy 
20bi her meynese. Amram forsothe tok a 
wijf, Jochabed, the dou3ter of the brother 
to hys fader, the which bar to hym Aa- 
ron, and Moysen, and Mary; and the 
3eris of the lijf of Amram weren an hun- 
2idryd and seuen and thretti. And the 
sones of Ysuar, Chore, and Naphes, and 
22Zethry. The sones forsothe of Oziel, My- 
23sael, and Elizaphan, and Sethri. Aaron 
forsothe tok a wijf, Elizabeth, the dow3ter 
of Amynadab, the sister of Naason, the 
which bar to hym Nadab, and Abyut, and 
21 Aleazar, and Ythamar. The sones for- 
sothe of Chore, Aser, and Elchana, and 
Abiasab; thes ben the cognaciouns of Cho- 
asrytis. And forsothe Eliazar, the sone of 
Aaron, tok a wijf of the dow;tris’ of. 
Phatiel, the which bar to hym Phynees. 
Thes ben the princis of the® Leuytis 
26 meynese bi her cognaciouns. This is Aa- 
ron and Moyses, to whom the Lord co- 
maundide, that thei shulden lede the® 
sones of Yrael out of the loond of Egipte 
27 be her companyes; thes ben that speken 
to Pharao, the kyng of Egipte, that thei 
leden the sones of Yrael out of Egipte; 
28 this is Moyses and Aaron, in the day that 
the Lord spak to Moyses in the loond of 
20 Egipte. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 
seiynge, Y the Lord; spek to Pharao, 


f doujtren spEFu. 


Win 1s. 
© the whiche 1. 


« the lijf pis. 


V the lijf E108. 
% Om. v. 


®Om.s. »Om. w. 


£ Om. pi. 


x the dou3tir 1s. 
4 Om. a. 


EXODUS. 205 


Aod, and Jachym, and Soer, and Saul, the 
sone of a womman of Canaan; these ben 
the kynretis of Symeon. And these ben 16 
the names of the sones of Leuy by her 
kynredis, Gerson, and Caath, and Merary. 
Forsothe the 3eeris of lijf" of Leuy weren 
an hundrid and seuene and thretti. The1i7 
sones of Gerson, Lobny and Seimei, bi her 
kynredis. The sones of Caath, Amram, 18 
and Isuar, aud Hebron, and Oziel; and 
the 3eeris of lijf’ of Caath weren an hun- 
drid and thre and thretti. The sones of 19 
Merari weren Mooli and Musi. These 
weren the kynredis of Leuy bi” her mey- 
nees. Forsothe Amram took a wijf, Jo-20 
cabed, dou3tir® of his fadris’ brother, and 
sche childide to hym Aaron, and Moises, 
and Marie; and the 3eeris of lijf** of Aim- 
ram weren an hundred and seuene and 
thretti'Y. Also the sones of Isuar weren 2! 
Chore, and Nafeg, and Zechry. Also the 22 
sones of Oziel weren Misael, and Elisa- 
phan, and Sechery. Sotheli Aaron took a23 
wijf, Elizabeth, the dou3tir of Amynadab, 
the sistir of Naason, and sche childide to 
hym Nadab, and Abyu, and Eleazar, and 
Ythamar. Also the sones of Chore weren 24 
Aser, and Eleana, and Abiasab ; thes weren 
the kinredis of Chore. And? sotheli Elea-2s 
zar, sone of Aaron, took a wijf of the* 
dou;tris of Phatiel, and sche childide Fy- 
nees to hym. These ben the princis of 
the’ meynees of Leuy bi her kynredis. 
This is Aaron and Moises, to whiche® the 26 
Lord comaundide, that thei selulden lede 
out of the lond of Egipt the sones of Is- 
rael by her cumpanyes ; these it ben, that 27 
speken to Pharao king of Egipt, that thei 
lede the sones of Israel out of Egipt ; this 28 
ist Moises and Aaron, in the dai in which 
the Lord spak to Moises in the lond of 
Egipt. And the Lord spak to Moises, 29 
and seide, Y ain the® Lord; spek thou to 
Farao, kyng of Egipt, alle thingis whiche 
Y speke to thee. And Moises seide bi-30 


h Om. n. 


yfadir is, %** the lijfis, YY twenti kK. 
€ Om. DGIKMN sec.m. P sec.m. QRSTX scc.m. 


206 


kyng of Egipte, alle thingis that Y speke 
s0to thee. And Moyses seith bifore the 

Lord, Loo! Y am vncircumcidid in lippys, 

what manere shulde Pharao here me ? 


CAP. VII. 


1 And the Lord seide to Moyses, Loo! 
Y haue ordeyned thee the god of Pharao; 
and Aaron, thi brother, shal be thi pro- 

2phete. Thow shalt spek to hym alle 
thingis that Y seende to thee, and he 
shal spek to Pharao, that he late the sones 

3of Yrael out of his loond. And ¥ shal ful 
harden his herte, and Y shal multiplie 
toknes and" signes worthi to be shewid in 
athe loond of Egipte, and he shal not here 
3ow; and Y shal seend yn myn hoond 
upon Egipte, and Y shal lede myn oost, 
and my puple, the sones of Yrael, out of 
the loond of Egipte bi the grettist domes ; 

sand the Egipciens shulen knowe, that Y 
am a Lord, that may strecche out! myn 
hoond vpon Egipte, and lede the sones of 

6 Yrael out of the myddil of hem. And so 
diden Moyses and Aaron; as the Lord co- 

7maundide, so thei diden. Forsothe Moyses 
was of ei3ti 3eris, and Aaron of ei3ty and 

8thre, whanne thei spaken to Pharao. And 
the Lord seide to Moyses and Aaron, 
9Whanne Pharao shal sey to 30u, Shew 
to us sigues, thow shalt sey to Aaron, 

Tak thin 3erde, and throw it bifore Pha- 
rao, and be it turned imto a bosk eddre. 

10 And so Moyses and Aaron, goon yn to 
Pharao, diden as the Lord comaundide ; 
and Aaron tok the 3erde bifore Pharao 
and his seruauntis, that was turnyd into 

1iak boske addre. Pharao forsothe clepid 
sages, and clepers of deuels to doon yuel, 
and thei also diden bi Egipciens en- 
chauntyngis, and sum priue thingis lyik 
izmanere; and eche threwe forth her 3erdes, 
that weren turned into dragouns; but 
the 3erde of Aaron denouride her 3erdes. 


bh in 4, 


EXODUS. 


i Om. BpEH. 


VI. 30—VII. 12. 


fore the Lord, Lo! Y am vneircumcidid in 
lippis; hou schal Farao here me? 


CAP. VII. 


And the Lord seide to Moises, Lo! Y. 
haue maad thee the god of Farao’; and 
Aaron, thi brother, schal be thi prophete®. 
Thou schalt speke to Aaron alle thingis2 
whiche Y comaunde to thee, and he schal 
speke to Farao, that he delyuere the sones 
of Israel fro his hond’. But Y schal makes 
hard his herte, and Y schal multiplie my 
signes and merueils in the lond of Egipt, 
and he schal not here 30u; and Y schala 
sende myn hond on Egipt, and Y schal 
lede out myn oost, and my puple, the sones 
of Israel, fro the lond of Egipt bi mooste 
domes; and Egipcians schulen wite, thats 
Yam the! Lord, which* haue holde forth 
myn hond on Egipt, and haue led out of 
the myddis of hem the sones of Israel. Andé 
so Moises dide and Aaron; as the Lord co- 
maundide, so thei diden. Forsothe Moyses 7 
was of fourescoor 3eer, and Aaron was! of 
fourescoor 3eer and thre, whanne thei 
spaken to Farao. And the Lord seide tos 
Moises and to Aaron, Whanne Farao schal 9 
seie to 3ou, Schewe 3e signes to vs, thou 
schalt seie to Aaron, Take thi 3erde, and 
caste forth it before Farao, and be it turned 
into a serpent. And so Moises and Aaron 10 
entriden to Farao, and diden as the Lord 
comaundide; and Aaron took the 3eerde, 
and castide™ forth bifore" Farao and hise 
seruauntis, which® 3erde was turned in to 
a serpent. Forsothe Farao clepide? wise 11 
men, and witchis‘, and ,thei also diden bi 
enchauntementis of Egipt, and bi summe 
priuy thingis in lijk™ maner; and alle12 
castiden forth her 3erdis, whiche’ weren 
turned in to dragouns; but the 3erde of 
Aaron deuouride ‘the 3erdis of hem*. And 13 


k Om. Boru. 


£ god of Farao, that is, my3ty over [on BGKX] hin, to bringe in veniaunces bi Goddis vertu and doom ca. 


ven. and doom B. ven. on him bi Geddis v. and d. G. bi Goddis wraththe and d. x. 
pretour ether biforspekere BCGKQX. p. that is, forspekere N. 
m keste IMs. 
8 the whiche 1. 


k the which 1 =! Om. 1. 


r thilke E. 


P sec.m. QRST. 
forth ELP. 4 witti Lv. 


& profete, that is, inter- 
hlond nc sup. ras. pis. }1Om. DGIKN sec.m. 

2 it biforersw. °the whichi. Pclepide 
t her jerdis 1s. 


VIL. 13—22. 


13And the herte of Pharao was myche 
hardid, and he herde hem not, as the 
14Lord comaundide. Forsothe the Lord 
seide to Moyses, Engregid is the herte of 
15 Pharao, he wole not Jeeue the puple; go 
to hym eerli; loo! he shal goon out to the 
watris, and thow shalt stoond into his 
a3encomyng upon the brynk of the 
floode ; and thow shalt tak the 3erde, that 
was turned into a dragoun, in thin hoond, 
isand thow shalt sey to hym, The Lord 
God of Ebrews hath sent me to thee, 
seiynge, Leeue my puple, that thei sacri- 
fye to me in desert; and vnto now thow 
17 woldist not heren. Thanne thes wordis 
the Lord seith, In that thow shalt knowe, 
that Y am a Lord; loo! Y shal smyit 
with the 3erde, that is in myn hoond, the 
water of the floode, and it shal turne into 
1s bloode; the fisshis forsothe, that ben in 
the floode, shulen dye; and the water shal 
stynke, and turmentid shulen be the E- 
gipciens drynkynge of! the water of the 
i9floode. And the Lord seid to Moyses, 
Sey thow to Aaron, Tak thi 3erde, and 
strecche thin hoond out vpon the watris 
of Egipte, and vpon her floodes, and her 
ryuers, and mershis, and alle lakis of wa- 
tris, that thei ben turned into bloode; and 
that there be corrupte rennying bloode in 
al the loond of Egipte, as wel in treen™ 
20 vessel” as in stony. And™" so Moyses and 
Aaron diden, as the Lord comaundide; 
and arerynge the 3erde, he smote the wa- 
tris® of the floode before Pharao and his 
seruauntis, the which was turned into 
2iblood; and the fisshes, that weren in the 
floode, dieden ; and the floode stonke, that 
the Egipciens my3ten not drinke the wa- 
ter of the flood ; and there was bloode in 
22a] the loond of Egipte. And the clepers 
of deuels to doon yuel of the Egipciens 
diden in liyk manere in her enchaunt- 
yngis; and the herte of Pharao was myche 
hardid; and he herde hem not, as the 


10m. £. ™ trenen £. 


EXODUS. 


n vessels BDEH. 


207 


the herte of Farao was maad hard, and he" 
herde not hem, as the Lord comaundide. 
Forsothe the Lord seide to Moyses, The 14 
herte of Farao is maad greuouse, he nyle” 
delyuere the puple; go thou to hym eerli ; 15 
lo! he schal go out to the watris, and thou 
schalt stonde in the comyng of hym on 
the brynke of the flood; and thou schalt 
take in thin honde the 3erde, that was 
turned into a dragoun, and thou schalt 16 
seie to hym, The Lord God of Ebrews 
sente me to thee, and seide, Delyuere thou 
my puple, that it make sacrifice to me in 
desert; til” to present* time thou noldist 
here. Therfor the Lord seith these thingis, 17 
In thisY thou schalt wite, that Y am the? 
Lord; lo! Y schal smyte with the? 3erde, 
which” is in myn hond, the watir of the 
flood, and® it schal be turned in to blood ; 
and the fischis that ben in the flood schulen 18 
die; and the watris schulen wexe rotun, 
and Egipcians’ drynkynge the® watir of 
the flood schulen be turmentid. Also the 1s 
Lord seide to Moises, Seie thou to Aaron, 
Take thif 3erde, and holde forth thin hond 
on the watris of Egipt, and on the flodis 
of hem, and on the stremys ‘of hem, and 
on the mareis, and alle” lakis' of watris, 
that tho be turned in to blood; and blood 
be in al the lond of Egipt, as wel in ves- 
sils of tree as of stoon. And Moises and 20 
Aaron diden so, as the Lord comaundide ; 
and Aaron reiside the 3erde, and smoot 
the watir of the flood* bifore Farao and 
hise seruauntis, which! watir was turned 
in to blood; and fischis, that weren in the 21 
flood, dieden ; and the flood was rotun, and 
Egipcians™ my3ten not drynke the" water 
of the flood; and blood was in al the lond 
of Egipt. And the® witchis? of Egipcians 22 
diden in lijk maner by her enchaunte- 
mentis ; and the herte of Farao was inaad 
hard, and he’ herde not hem, as the Lord 
comaundide. And he turnede awei hyin 23 
silf, and entride in to® lis hows, nethir he 


nn As 4. © water E. 


u Om. s. Y wil not 1. and til plures. * ihis present 1s. Y these E. 7 Om.1Ks. 2 Om. s. » that 1s. 


¢Om.r. 4 the Egipcians 1s. ¢ Om.s. 
Klond 1. the which 1. ™ the Egipcians 1s. 
10Om.p. * Om.c. 


f thou thi G. 
n Om. IKs. 


honalleis. ithe lakis 1s. 


& Om. Isx pr. mt. 
P Jannes and Mambres 1 marg. 


© Om. G. 


208 


23 Lord comaundide. And he turnede hym 
self awey, and 3ede into his hows, ne he 
putte not to the herte, also this while. 

24 Forsothe alle the Egipciens deluyden bi 
enuyroun of the floode, that thei my3ten 
drynk the? water; forsothe thei mi3ten 

25not drynk of the water of the floode. And 
senen dayes weren fulfillid, after that the 
Lord hadde smyten the floode. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Forsothe the Lord seide to Moyses, 
Goo into Pharao, and thow shalt sey to 
hym, Thes thingis seith the Lord, Leeue 

2my puple, that he sacrifye to me; ellis 
forsothe if thow wolt not leeue hem, loo! 
Y shal smyte alle thi coostis with frogges; 

sand the floode shal boy] up froggis, that 
shulen steyn vp, and goo in to thin hows, 
and into thi bedchaumbre, and vpon thi 
beddynge, and into the houses of thi ser- 
uauntis, and into thi puple, and into thi 
ouenes, and in to the relyues of thi metis ; 
4and to thee, and to thi puple, and to alle 
thi seruauntes shulen goon yn froggis. 
sAnd the Lord seide to Moyses, Sey to 
Aaron, Strecche out thi hoond vpon 
floodes, and vpon ryuers, and mershes ; 
and brynge out frogges vpon the loond 
sof Egipte. And Aaron strau3te out the 
hoond vpon the watris of Egipte; and 
there steyden vp frogges, and couerden 
7the loond of Egipte. « And the clepers of 
denels diden by her enchauntyngis lijk 
maner; and bron3ten out frogges vpon 
sthe loond of Egipte. Forsothe Pharao 
clepide Moyses and Aaron, and seiden to 
hem, Preye 3e the Lord, that he do awey 
frogges fro me, and fro my puple; and 
Y shal lat the puple, that thei sacryfye to 
othe Lord. And Moyses seide to Pharao, 
Ordeyn me a tyme, whan Y shal preye 
for thee, and for thi seruauntis, and for 
thi puple, that the frogges ben dreuen 
awey fro thee, and fro thin hows, and 


P Om. 2. 


EXODUS. 


VII. 23—VIII. 9. 


took it* to herte', 3he", in this tyme’. For- 24 
sothe alle Egipcians diggiden watir ‘bi 
the cumpas of” the* flood, to drinke; for 
thei my3ten not drynke of theY ‘watir of? 
the flood. And seuene daies weren fillid?, 25 
aftir that the Lord smoot the flood. 


CAP. Vil 


Also the Lord seide to Moises, Entre! 
thou to Farao, and thou schalt seie to hym, 
The Lord seith these thingis, Delyuere thou 
iny puple, that it make sacrifice to me; 
sotheli if thou nylt® delyuere, lo! Y schal2 
smyte alle thi termys* with paddoks; and3 
the flood schal buyle out paddokis, that 
schulen stie’, and schulen® entre in to thin 
hows, and in to thef closet of thi bed, and 
on thi bed, and$ in to ‘the hous of thi 
seruauntis®, and in to thi puple, and in to 
thin ouenes, and in to the relyues of thi 
metis; and the paddoks schulen entre to4 
thee, and to thi puple, and to alle thi ser- 
uauntis. And the Lord seide to Moises,5 
Seie thon to Aaron, Hold forth thin hond 
on the floodis, and on the! streemes, and 
mareis*; and bryng! out paddoks on the 
lond of Egipt. And Aaron helde forthe 
the hond on the watris of Egipt; and 
paddoks stieden™, and hileden the lond of 
Egipt. Forsothe and" the witchis diden7 
in lijk maner bi her enchauntementis; and 
thei brou3ten forth paddoks on the lond of 
Egipt. Forsothe Farao clepide Moises ands 
Aaron, and seide to hein, Preie 3e the Lord, 
that he do awei the paddoks® fro me, and 
fro my puple; and Y schal delyuere the 
puple, that it make sacrifice to the Lord. 
And Moises seide to Farao, Ordeyne thous 
a tyme to me, whanne Y schal preie for thee, 
and for thi seruauntis, and for thi puple, 
that the paddokis? be dryuun awei fro thee, 
and fro thin hows, and fro thi seruauntis, 


Yon Ez. 


s Om. plures. tthe herte pc. talsor. ¥ tyme the Lordis heest 1s. Waboute 1. *Om.s. ¥Om. piKm. 


zOm.m. & fulfillid is. > wilt not 1. 


= Om. o. 


1 lede plures. ™ wenten vp 1. stieden vp s. 


€ termys or coostis 1. 
» the housis of thi s. plures. this. honsis 1. this. hous s. 
0 also 1. Om, E. 


dgovp. stievps. © Om.1s. f thin 
iOm. x.  § on the mareis s. 


° frogges 1. P paddis a. frogyes 1. 


VIII. 1o——20. 


fro thy seruauntis, and fro thi puple; and 
i0oonly in the floode thei abiden. The 
which answerde, To morwe. And he, 
After thi word, he seith, Y shal do, that 
thow knowe, for there is not a Lord as 
11oure God; and the frogges shulen goon 
awey from thee, and from thin hows, and 
fro thi children, and fro thi seruantis, and 
fro thi puple ; and oonli in the floode thei 
i2shulen abijd. And Moyses and Aaron 
3eden out fro Pharao. And Moyses criede 
to the Lord, for the biheeste of froggis, 
13that he couenauntide to Pharao. And the 
Lord dide after the word of Moyses; and 
the frogges weren deed of the howsis, 
and of the townes, and of the feeldes ; 
11and thei gedered hem togidere into greet 
heepes withouten nowmbre, and the erthe 
15 stonke. Pharao forsothe seynge that there 
was jeue rest, his herte engredgide, and 
herde not hem, as the Lord comaundide. 
16 And the Lord seide to Moyses, Spek to 
Aaron, Strecche out thi 3erde, and smyit 
the powdre of the erthe, that there ben 
stynggynge gnattes™ in al the loond of 
17 Egipte. And he dide so; and Aaron 
strau3te out the hoond, holdynge the 3erde, 
and he smote the powdre of the erthe; 
and there weren maad stynggynge gnattes 
in men, and in beestis; al the powdre of 
the erthe is turnyd into stynggynge 
gnattes thur3 out al the loond of Egipte. 
18And liyk manere diden the clepers of 
deuels in her enchauntyngis™, that thei 
mny3ten dryue out the stynggynge gnattes, 
and thei my3ten not; and stynggynge* 
gnattes weren bothe in men and in beestis. 
19 And the clepers of deuels seiden vuto 
Pharao, The fyngur of God ys here. And 
the herte of Pharao was greetli hardid, 
and he herde lem not, as the Lord 
20 hadde®s comaundide. And the Lord seide 
to Moyses, Aryse eerli, and stoond before 
Pharao, forsothe he shal goon out to the 
watris ; and thow shalt sey to hyin, Thes 


t houndflese passim & pr.m. 
t thei 1. 


a he herde z. 
& the erthe 1s. 


t Pharao 1s. 8 frogges 1. 
2 rotun or corupt with stink 1s. 
€hesmootis. f Om. gc. 


EXODUS. 


rr enchauntis 4. 


u wenten I. 
b the F. 
h the erthe 1. 


, 209 


and fro thi puple; and dwelle oneli in the 
flood. And he’ answeride, To morewe. And 10 
Moises seide, Y schal do bi thi word, that 
thou wite, that noon is as oure Lord God ; 
and the paddoks’ schulen go awei fro thee, 11 
and fro thin hous, and fro thi children, 
and fro thi seruauntis, and fro thi puple ; 
and thot schulen dwelle oneli in the flood. 
And Moises and Aaron 3eden" out fro Fa-12 
rao. And Moises criede to the Lord, for 
the biheest of paddoks’, which he hadde 
seid to Farao. And” the Lord dide bi the 13 
word of Moises; and the paddoks* weren 
deed fro housis, and fro townes, and fro 
feeldis ; and thei gaderiden tho’ in to grete 14 
heepis, and the lond was rotuu’. Sotheli1s 
Farao sei3 that reste was 3o0uun, and he 
made greuous his herte, and herde* not 
hem, as the Lord comaundide. And theis 
Lord seide to Moises, Spek thou to Aaron, 
Holde forth thi> 3erde, and smyte the dust 
of erthe®, and litle flies, ether* gnattis, be 
in al the lond of Egipt. And thei diden 17 
so; and Aaron helde forth the hond, and 
helde the 3erde, and smoot*® the’ duste of 
erthes; and gnattis weren maad in men, 
and in werk beestis; al the dust of erthe®™ 
was turned in to gnattis bi al the lond of 
Egipt. And witchis! diden in lijk* maner 1s 
bi her enchauntementis, that thei schulden! 
brynge forth gnattis, and thei mi3ten not ; 
and gnattis weren as wel in men as in 
werk beestis. And the witchis seiden to 19 
Farao, This is the fyngur™ of God. And 
the herte of Farao was maad hard, and he 
herde not hem, as the Lord comaundide. 
And the Lord seide to Moises, Rise thou 20 
eerli, and stonde bifore Farao, for he schal 
go out to the watris; and thou schalt seie 
to hym, The Lord seith these thingis, De- 
lyuere thou my puple, that it make sacri- 
fice to me; that if thou schalt® not dely-21 
uere the® puple, lo! Y schal sende in to 
thee, and in to thi seruauntis, and in to 
thi? puple, and in to thin housis4, al the 


5 styngge 4. 88 Om. BDEFH. 


v frogges1. “Om. xz. *frogges1. Yhemt. 
¢the erthe 1s. 4 or passim ELP, Om. pIMRT. 
ithe witchis1s. Kalyky. !wolden 1. 


m fyngur, thal is, power BcEGKLPQ. f. ether p.N. f. or the p.s. » wilt 1. mix, Pthe B. 4d hous pemn. 


Ee 


210 


thingis seith the Lord, Leeue my puple, 
21 that thei sacrifye to me; and if thow late 
hem not, loo! Y shal seende into thee, 
and into thi seruauntis, and into thi pu- 
ple, and into thin howses, al kynde oft 


fli3is; and the howsis of Egipte" shulen - 


be fulfillyd with fliz3is of dyuerse kynde, 
and al the loond in which thei shulen ben. 
22 And Y shal mak merveylows in that day 
the loond of Gessen, in the which is my 
puple, that there ben not there flizis ; and 
wyte thow’ that’ Y am Lord in the 
esmyddel of the erthe; and Y shal sette 
partynge bitwix my puple and thi puple ; 
24to morwe shal be this tokne. And so 
‘dide the Lord. And there cam the moost 
greuows fli3e in to the hows* of Pharao, 
and of his seruauntis, and into al the 
loond of Egipte; and the loond was cor- 
asrupte of lycheY maner fliz3is. And Pha- 
rao clepide Moyses and Aaron, and seith 
to hem, Gooth, and sacrifieth to the Lord 
2630ure God in this loond. And Moyses 
seith, It may not be doo so; the abho- 
mynaciouns forsothe of Egipciens shulen 
we offre to oure Lord? that if we sleen 
thes thingis that Egipciens heryen be- 
forn hem, they shulen felle us down with 
27 stones. We shulen goon the weye of three 
dayes into wildernes, and we shulen sa- 
cryfie to the Lord oure God, as he hath 
28comaundid vs. And Pharao seid, Y shal 
leeue 30w, that 3e sacrifie to the Lord 
joure God in deserte; neuertheles go 3e 
29a wey no ferthere; preieth for me. And 
Moyses seith, Y goon out fro thee shal 
preye the Lord; and the flize shal goo 
a. wey fro Pharao, and fro his seruauntis, 
and fro his puple to morwe; neuertheles 
wole thou no more desceyue me, that 
thow lat not the puple sacryfie to the 
30 Lord. And Moyses goon out fro Pharao 
31 preiede the Lord, that dide aftir his word, 


EXODUS. 


VIII. 21-31. 


kynde' of flies{; and the housis of Egip- 
cians® schulen be fillidt with flies of dyuerse 
kyndis, and al the lond in which thei 
schulen be. 
make wondurful the lond of Gessen, in 
which my puple is, that flies be not there ; 
and that thou wite that’ Y am the Lord 
in the” myddis of erthe; and Y schal sette 23 
departyng* bitwixe my puple and thi pu- 
ple; this signe schal be to morewe. And 21 
the Lord dide so. And a moostY greuouse 
flie? cam in to the hows? of Farao, and of? 
hise seruauntis, and in to al the lond of 
Egipt; and the lond was corrupt of siche 
flies. And Farao clepide Moises and Aaron, 25 
and seide to hem, Go 3e, make 3e sacrifice 
to ‘soure Lord God° in this lond. And 26 
Moises seide, It may not be so, for ‘we 
schulent offre to oure® God the abhomyna- 
ciouns of Egipcians; that if we schulen 
sle bifore Egipcians' tho thingis whiche 
thei worschipen, thei schulen ‘ouerleie vs® 
with stoonus. We schulen go the weie of 27 
thre daies in to wildirnesse, and we schulen 
make sacrifice to oure Lord God, as he co- 
maundide vs". And Farao seide, Y schal 28 
delyuere 5ou, that 3e make sacrifice to ‘joure 
Lord God' in descert; netheles go 3e not 
ferthere; preie 3e for me. And Moises seide, 29 
Yschal go out fro thee, and Y schal preie 
the Lord; and the fli* schal go awei fro 
Farao, and fro hise seruauntis, and puple! 
to morewe; netheles nyle thou more dis- 
seyue me, that thou delyuere not the puple 
to make sacrifice to the Lord. And Moises 30 
3ede out fro Farao, and preiede the Lord, 
whiche™ dide bi the word of Moyses, and 31 
took awei flies" fro Farao, and fro hise 
seruauntis, and puple®; noon lefte, ‘sotheli 
nether oon’. And the herte of Farao was 32 
maad hard, so that he delyueride not the 
puple, sothli nethir in this tyme.- 


t Om. F. u Egypciens sperm. V that thou wyte £ sup.ras. W for rperN.  ¥* houses DEFII. 
Y seche DE. 

tkindis e, * the Egipcians1s. + fulfillid is, *Om.1. Vforcery. for thatp. WOm.1s.  * part- 
yngp. Yfuli. 2 kinde of flies 1. flie, thai is, multitude of flies BeQx. ® housis plures. b in to the 


housis of s. — & the L. 3oure G. 1s. 
& throwe vs doun 1. 


multitude of flies 1s. | his puple K. 


@ whi schulen we ts. 
ouerleie or throwe vs doun s. 
m the whiche 1. 


h to vs s. 


e the Lord oure 1s. the Egipcians Ets. 
ithe L. 3oure Gods. & flie, that is the 
‘the flies 1. © fro his puple 1s. his puple x. 


P noon left sotheli not oon ELP. ther lefte not-oon sotheli 1. noon lefte there neither oon s. 


+ tn Ebru that 
is a medlynge, 
and signifyeth 
dinerse beestis. 


GOX 
And in that dai® Y schal 22 : 


VIII. 32-——IX. 11. 


and he tok awey flijes fro Pharao, and 
fro the seruauntis, and fro his puple; 
32 there ouerlafte not oon? forsothe. And 
the herte of Pharao was engredgid, so 


that 3it this while he wolde not leeue the © 


puple. 
CAP. IX. 


1 To Moyses forsothe seyde the Lord, 
Goo yn to Pharao, and spek to hym, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God of E- 
brews, Leeue my puple, that it sacrifie to 
2me; that if 3it thow forsakist, and holdist 
3hem, loo! myn hoond shal be vpon thi 
feeldis, vpon horsis, and assis, and cha- 
mels, and oxen, and sheip, a ful greuows 
4pestilence; and the Lord shal do a mer- 
uelows thing bitwix* possessiouns of Yrael 
and the possessions of Egipcyens?, that 
no thing algatis perishe of thes thingis 
5that pertenen to the sones of Yrael. And 
the Lord ordeynede a tyme, seiynge, To 
morwe the Lord shal do this word in 
éthe loond. The Lord dide thanne this 
word the tother day, and alle the beestis 
of Egipciens dyeden; of the beestis for- 
sothe of the children of Yrael no thing 
zalgat perishide. And Pharao sent to 
looke, ne eny thing was deed of thes 
thingis that Yrael hadde; and the herte 
of Pharao was inwardly agreued, and he 
slafte not the puple. And the Lord seyde 
to Moyses and Aaron, Tak 3e hoondes ful 
of asken® fro the chymney, and Moyses 
sprenge it into heuene before Pharao; 
sand be there powdre vpon al the loond 
of Egipte; and there shulen ben in men 
and yn beestis biles, and bleynes swell- 
loynge, in al the loond of Egipte. And 
thei token asken of the chymney, and 
they stoden before Pharao; and Moyses 
sprengide? it into heuene; and there ben 
maad woundes of the swellynge bleynes 
11in men, and in beestis; ne the clepers of 
deuels my3ten stoonde before Moyses, for 


EXODUS. 


8 


CAP. IX. 


Forsothe the Lord seide to Moises, En-1 
tre thou to Farao, and speke thou to hym, 
The Lord God of Ebrews seith these 
thingis, Delyuere thou my puple, that it 
make sacrifice to me; that if thou for-2 
sakist 3it, and withholdist hem, lo! myns 
hond schal be on thi feeldis, on horsis9, 
and® assis, and camels, and oxun, and 
scheep; a pestilence ful greuous; and the4 
Lord schal make a merueilous thing bi- 
twixe the possessiouns of Israel and the 
possessiouns of Egipcians’, that outirli no 
thing perische of these' thingis that per- 
teynen to the sones of Israel. And thes 
Lord ordeinede a tyme, and seide, To 
morewe the Lord schal do this word in 
the" lond. Therfor the Lord made thise 
word in the tother dai, and alle the’ lyu- 
ynge beestis of Egipcians* weren deed ; 
forsothe* outirli no thing perischide of the 
beestis of the sones of Israel. And Farao7 
sente to se, nether ony thing was deed of 
these thingis whicheY Israel weldide ; and 
the herte of Farao was maad greuouse?, 
and he delyuerede not the puple. Ands 
the Lord seide to Moises and Aaron, Take 
3e the* hondis ful of askis of the> chym- 
eney, and Moises sprynge® it in to heuene 
bifore Farao; and be there dust on? al thes 
lond of Egipt; for whi botchis schulen be 
in men and in werk beestis, and bolnynge 
bladdris schulen be in al the lond of E- 


gipt. And thei token askist of the® chym- 10 t kis of the 


ney, and stodenf bifore Farao; and Moises 
spreynt® it into heuene; and woundis of 
bolnynge bladdris weren maad in men, and 
in werk beestis; and the witchis my3ten it 


Zne oon BDEFH. ® bitwene ppEFH. ) the Egipciens peu. © askes p. 4 spreynde £ sec.m. 
q the horsis 1s. Yonex. *the Egipcians1. tthon, “thisis. YOm.ELP. W the Egipcians 1s. 
x sotheli1. ythe whiche 1. ful grenonse 1. ®30ure 1s. bas. thow1s. ©springynge B. spryngede ¢. 


spreynn. 4vponis. aus. f thei stodenis. & springide rt. 4 Om. s. 


Eeg 


chemeney, in 
Ebren it is of 
the brennynge 
chymeney, that 
is, brennynge 
aische. c. 


212 


the woundis that weren in hem, and in 
zal the loond of Egipte. And the Lord 
hardid the herte of Pharao, and he herde 
not hem, as the Lord spak to Moyses. 
13And the Lord seide to Moyses, Eerli 
aryse, and stoond before Pharao, and 
thow shalt sey to hym, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God of Ebrews, Lat my puple, 
luthat he sacrifie to me; for in this while 
Y shal sende alle my veniaunces vpon thin 
herte, and vpon thi seruauntis, and vpon 
thi puple, that thou knowe, that there is 
1s noon like me in al the loond. Now for- 
sothe I shal stretche out® the hoond, and 
Y shal smyit thee and thi puple with 
pestilence, and thou shalt perisshe fro the 
iserthe ; therfor forsothe Y haue sett-thee, 
that Y shewe my strengthe in thee, and 
17my name be toold in eche loond. 3it 
thow holdist my puple, and wole not leeue 
isit ? Loo! Y shal reyne to morwe this same 
our ful myche hawle, what maner was 
not in Egipte, fro the day that it was 
19 sett, vnto the tyme that is now. Seend 
thanne now ri3t, and gedere togidere thi 
beestis, and al that thou hast in the 
feelde; men forsothe, and beestis, and 
alle that shulen be foundun withouten, 
and not gedered togidere fro watres, and 
the hawle fal vpon hem, thei shulen die. 
20 He that dradde the word of the Lord, of 
the seruauntis of Pliarao, made his ser- 
uauntis and beestis flee togidere irtto 
21howsis; he forsothe that rou3te not the 
word of the Lord, left his seruauntis and 
22 beestis in the feeldis. And the Lord seide 
to Moyses, Strecche out thin hoond into 
heuene, that there be maad hawle in al 
the loond of Egipte, vpon men, and vpon 
beestis, and vpon al erbef of the feelde 
23in the loond of Egipte. And Moyses 
strau3te the 3erde into heuene; and the 
Lord 3af thundres, and hawle, and dy- 
uersly reunynge leytis vpon the erthe ; 
and the Lord reynede hawle vpon the 


e Om. BDEFH. 


k Om.s. 10m. s. 
t this present 1s. 


i the woundis or soores 15. 
P wilt not 1. 4 what 1. 


EXODUS. 


m myn I. 
§ anoon ri3t 1. 


IX. 12-—— 23. 


not stonde bifor Moises, for woundis! that 
weren in hem, and in* al the lond of! E- 
gipt. And the Lord made hard the herte 12 
of Farao, and he herde not hem, as the 
Lord spak to Moises. Also the Lord seide 1s 
to Moises, Rise thou eerli, and stonde bi- 
fore Farao, and thou schalt seie to hym, 
The Lord God of Ebrews seth these 
thingis, Delyucre thou my puple, that it 
make sacrifice to me; for in this tyme Y 14 
schal sende alle my veniauncis on thin 
herte, and on thi seruauntis, and on thi 
puple, that thou wite, that noon is lijk me 
in al erthe. For now Y schal holde forth 1s 
the™ hond, and Y schal smyte thee and 
thi puple with pestilence, and thou schalt 
perische fro erthe"; forsothe herfor Y haue 16 
set thee, that Y schewe my strengthe in 
thee, and that my name be teld in ech lond. 
3it° thou withholdist my puple, and nylt? 17 
delyuere it? Lo! to morewe in this same 18 
our Y schal reyne ful myche hail, which4 
maner hail was not in Egipt, fro the dai 
in which it was foundid, til in to present™ 
tyme. Therfor sende thou ‘ri3t now’, and 19 
gadere thi werk beestis, and alle thingis 
whichet thou hast in the feeld; for men 
and werk beestis and alle thingis that 
ben in feeldis with outforth, and ben not 
gaderid fro the feeldis, and haile falle on 
tho, schulen" die. He that dredde ‘the 20 
Lordis word", of the seruauntis of Farao, 
made his sernauntis and werk beestis fle 
in to housis; sotheli he that dispiside’ 21 
the ‘Lordis word*, lefte his sernauntis and 
werky beestis in the feeldis. And the Lord 22 
seide to Moises, Holde forth thin hond in 
to heuene, that hail be maad in al the lond 
of Egipt, on men, and on werk beestis, 
and on ech eerbe of the feeld in the lond 
of Egipt. And Moises held forth the 3erde 23 
in to henene; and the Lord 3af thundris, 
and hail, and leitis reunynge aboute on the 
lond; and the Lord reynede hail on the 
lond of Egipt; and hail and fier meddlid 24 


f the erbe 4 pr.m. F. 


n the erthe ts. 
t that 1. 


© 3if C sec.m. D sec.m. OR. 
thei schulen is. V the wordis of 


the Lord s. W was necligent of 1. * Lordis wordis E. word of the Lord is. Y Ais werk 1s. 


1<s29——X. 1. 


z1loond of Egipte; and hawle, and fier 
mengid togidere weren brou3t; and it 
was of so greet mychelnes, how greet bi- 
fore neuer apeeride in al the loond of 
25 Egipte, sith that folk® was maad. And 
the hawle smoot in al the loond of Egipte 
alle that weren in feeldes, fro man vnto 
beest; and al erbe of the feelde smoote 
the hawle, and eche tree of the cuntree it 
26breke togidere; oonly in the loond of 
Gessen, where weren the children of Y- 
e7rael, the hawle fel not. And Pharao 
sente, and clepide Moyses and Aaron, 
seiynge to hem, Y haue synned also now ; 
the Lord is ri3twiys, Y and my puple 
28 wickid ; preye 3e the Lord, that the thun- 
dres of God and the hawle leeuen of, and 
Y shal leten 30w, and 3e shulen dwelle 
zahere no more. Moyses seith, Whanne 
Y¥ shal goon out fro the citee, Y shal 
strecche out my hoond® to the Lord, and 
the thundres shulen ceesse, and hawle 
shal not be, that thow knowe, for of the 
30 Lord is the erthe ; forsothe Y knowe, that 
thow and thi seruauntis dreden not 3it 
3ithe Lord God. The flax thanne and bar- 
lich was hurt, for that that the barlich 
was grene, and the flax now buriownde 
32coddes ; whete forsothe and corn weren 
not hurt, for thei weren of late growyng. 
33 And Moyses goon out fro Pharao, and 
out of the citee, strau3te the hondes to the 
Lord, and thundres and hawle ceesiden, 
and no more droppide the reyn vpon the 
3iloond. Pharao forsothe seynge that the 
reyne hadde ceesid, and hawle, and thun- 
35 dres, encreesid the synne; and the herte 
of hym and of hys sernauntis is en- 
gredgid, and his herte was ful myche 
hardid; and he lafte not the sones of 
Yrael, as the Lord comaundide by the 
hoond of Moyses. 


CAP. X. 


1 And the Lord seide to Moyses, Goo 
yn to Pharao, Y forsothe haue hardid the 


£ flok p. 


b Om. «a. 
k streiz3te 1. ! his 1s. 


zOm.c. ®%a} the pn. 


i late sowen 18. m hond s. 


EXODUS. 


cOm. xu. dit brak s. 


213 


togidere weren borun forth; and it was of 
so myche greetnesse, how greet apperide 
neuere bifore in al the lond of Egipt, sithen 
thilke puple was maad. And? the hails 
smoot in the* lond of Egipt alle thingis? 
that weren in the® feeldis, fro man til to 
werk beeste; and the hail smoot al the 
eerbe of the feeld, and brak al the flex of 
the cuntrey; oonli the® hail felde not in 26 
the lond of Gessen, where the sones of Is- 
rae] weren. And Farao sente, and clepide 27 
Moises and Aaron, and seide to hem, Y 
haue synned also now; the Lord is iust, 
Yf and my puple ben wickid; preye 3e 28 
the Lord, that the thundris and hail of 
God ceesse, and Y schal delyuere 30u, and 
dwelle 3e no more here. Moyses seide, 29 
Whanne Y schal go out of the citee, Y 
schal holde forth myn hondis to the Lord, 
and leitis and thundris schulen ceesse, and 
hail schal not be, that thou wite, that the 
lond® is the Lordis; forsothe Y knowe, 30 
that thou and thi seruauntis dreden not 
3it the Lord. Therfor the flex and barlisi 
was hirt, for the barli was greene, and the 
flex hadde buriounned thanne® knoppis ; 
forsothe wheete and beenys weren not32 
hirt, for tho weren late. And Moyses 33 
3ede out fro Farao, and fro the citee, and 
helde* forth the! hondis™ to the Lord, and 
thundris and hail ceessiden, and reyn drop- 
pide ‘no more on the erthe. Sotheli Farao3s 
si3 that the reyn hadde ceessid, and the 
hail, and thundris, and he encreesside 
synne; and the herte of hym and of hise35 
seruauntis was maad" greuouse, and his 
herte was maad hard greetli; nethir he 
lefte the sones of Israel, as the Lord co- 
maundide bi‘the hond of Moises®. 


CaP. xX. 


And the Lord seide to Moises, Entre1 
thou to Farao, for Y haue maad hard the 


h hondis z. 
eOm.iKs. fand Ys. 8 erthe sc. 4Om.s. 
n Om. F. © Moises honde 1s, 


214 


herte of him, and of his seruauntis, that 
2Y make thes my signes in hym; and 
thow telle in the erres of thi sone and of 
thi cosyns, how ofte sithes Y haue born 
doun togidere the Egipciens, and haue 
doon toknes in hem; and knowe 3e for 
3¥ a Lord. Thanne Moyses and Aaron 
3eden yn to Pharao, and seiden to hym, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God of He- 
brews, How long wolt thow not be suget 
to me? Leeue my puple, that it sacrifie 
4to me; yf forsothe thow withstonde, and 
wole not leeue it, loo! Y shal leede yn to 
smorvwe a locust into thi coostis, that shal 
couer the vttermost of the erthe, that eny 
thing of it shal not apeere, but be etun 
that was lafte to the hawle; forsothe he 
shal gnawe alle trees that buriounen in 
6the feeldes; and thei shulen fulfille thin 
howses, and of thi seruauntis, and of alle 
the Egipcyens, how many han not scen 
thi fadris, ne her fadris, sith thei weren 
born vpon erthe, vnto the day that is 
now. And he turnede hym a wey, and 
73ede out fro Pharao. And the seruauntis 
of Pharao seiden to hym, How long 
shulen we suffre this sclaundre? Leeue 
the men, that thei sacrifye to the Lord 
her God; seest thow not, that Egipte 
8 perishith ? And thei clepeden a3en Moyses 
and Aaron to Pharao, the which seide to 
hem, Goth, and sacrifieth to the Lord 
joure God; who forsothe ben that ben 
9to goon? Moyses seith, With oure chil- 
dren and aldren we! shulen goon; and 
with sones, and dou3tres", with sheip, and 
drones ; it is forsothe the solempnyte of 
10the Lord oure God. And Pharao an- 
swerde, So the Lord be with 30w, what 
maner thanne Y shal leeue 3ow and 3oure 
children ? to whom is it dout, that ful 
uyuel 3e thenken? It shal not be doon so, 
but go 3e oonly men, and sacryfye! to 


EXODUS. X. 


2——II. 


herte of hym, and of hise seruauntis, that 
Y¥ do these signes? ‘of me‘ in hym; and'2 
that thou telle in the eeris of thi sone and 
of ‘thi sones sones’, how ofte Y al to-brak 
Egipcians‘, and dide signes in hem; and 
that 3e wyte that Y am the" Lord. Ther-3 
fore Moises and Aaron entriden to Farao, 
and seiden to hym, The Lord God of E- 
brews seith these thingis, How long ‘nylt 
thou" be maad suget tome? Delyuere thou 
my puple, that it make sacrifice to me; 
ellis sotheli if thou a3enstondist, and nylt™4 
delyuere it, lo! Y schal brynge in* to mo- 
rewe a locusteY in to thi? coostis, which*®s 
schal hile the hijere” part of erthe’, nether 
ony thing therof schal appere, but that, 
that was ‘residue to’ the hail schal be 
etun®; forf itf schal gnawe alle the trees 
that buriounnen in feeldis ; and tho" schu- 6 
len fille’ thin howsis, and the howsis of 
thi seruauntis, and of alle Egipcians*, hou 
greet thi fadris and grauntsiris! sien not, 
sithen thei weren borun on erthe, til in to 
present™ dai. And Moises turnede awei 
hym silf, and 3ede" out fro Farao. For-7 
sothe the seruauntis of Farao seiden to 
hym, Hou longe schulen we suffre this 
sclaundre? Delyuere® the men, that thei 
make sacrifice to ‘her Lord God?; seest 
thou not that Egipt perischide1? And theis 
a3en clepiden Moises and Aaron to Farao, 
and he seide to hem, Go 3e, and make" 3e* 
sacrifice to ‘joure Lord God‘; whiche ben 
thei, that schulen go? Moises seide, We9 
schulen go with oure litle children and 
eldre, and with sones, and dou3tris, with 
scheep, and grete" beestis; for it is the 
solempnyte of ‘oure Lord God’. And Fa-10 
rao answeride, So the Lord be with jou ; 
hou therfor schal Y delyuere 30u and 3oure 
litle children? to whom is it doute, that 
3e thenken worst’? It schal ‘not be so*;11 
but go 3e men oneli, and make 3e sacrifice 


tand we 4, * dou3tren zpern. ! sacrifyeth BpEFH. 
P my signes a pr.m. ct plures. 4Om.1sw. 'Om.1s. 8 the sones of thisone1. * the Egipcians ts. 
u Om. DIKMN sec. m. P pr.m. sv sec.m. VY wilt thou nat 1. W wilt not 1. nyles. *Om. xk.  ¥ locuste, 
that is, a multitude of locustis Bcaikgsx. *#the H. ® that 1s. bDouert. Ctheerthes. 4 left of 1. re- 
€ etun of locustes 1s. f forsothe 1. & het. the locusts, » thei 1. 


sidue, either lefte vndistruyed to s. 


ifulfille rs. k the Egipcians 1s. 


1 thi grauntsires EIs. 


™ this present Is. "went 1. © delyuer thou 1s. 


P the Lord her God 1s. 4 hath perischid 1s. * maketh is. *the o. tthe L. 3oure G. 1s. ¥ with grete 1s. 


Vv the L. oure G. 1s. 


w ful wickide fhinges 1. worst thingis s. 


x ben done so E. 


t+ So the Lord 
be with you. He 
seide this in 
scorn, vodpr- 
stondinge the 
contrarie. BCG 
Kx. 


X. 12-——23. 


the Lord; this forsothe and 3oure seluen 
askiden. And anoon thei weren put out 
l2fro the si3t of Pharao. And the Lord 
seide to Moyses, Strecche out thin hoond 
vpon the loond of Egipte, to a locust, that 
it stey vp vpon the loond, and deuowre 
al herbe that to the hawle was laft of. 
13 And Moyses strau3te out the 3erde vpon 
the loond of Egipte, and the Lord brou3te 
yn a brennynge wynde al that day and 
ny3t; and the morwe tyde biganne, a 
14 brennynge wynd reride™ vp locustes, the 
whiche steiden vp fro® al the loond of 
Egipte, and seeten in alle the coostis of 
Egipciens ynnoumbrable, whiche maner 
before that tyme weren not, ne afterward 
15 ben to comen. And thei couerden al the 
vttermost party of the loond, wastynge 
alle thingis; thanne the heerbe of the 
loond was deuowryd, and what euer thing 
of apples that was in trees, that the hawle 
hadde laft; and algatys no grene thing 
was laft in the trees and in heerbis of 
16the loond, in al Egipte. Wherfor hiynge 
Pharao clepide Moyses and Aaron, and 
seide to hem, Y haue synned in the Lord 
1730ure God, and yn 30w ; but now for3yue 
3e the synne to me; also this sithe prey 
je the Lord 3oure God, that this deeth he 
18doo a wey frome. And Moyses 3ede ont 
fro the sijt of Pharao, and preide the 
19 Lord; the which made blow the moost 
hidows wynde fro the west, and the lo- 
cust takun he threwe a fer into the reed 
see; and there laft not forsothe oon® in 
20alle the coostis of Egipte. And the Lord 
hardide the herte of Pharao, and he lafte 
2inot the children of Yrael. Forsothe the 
Lord seide to Moyses, Strecche out thin 
hoond into heuene, and be there derlknes? 
vpon the loond of Egipte, so thik that 
22thei mown be gropid. And Moyses 
strau3te out the hoond’ into heuene, and 
orrible derknesses ben maad in al the 
23loond of Egipte; thre dayes no man 


m arered £ pr.m. 1 about 4 sup.ras. 


EXODUS. - 


° not oon BDEFU. 


215 


to the Lord; for also 3e axiden this. And 
anoon thei weren cast out fro the si3t of 
Farao. Forsothe the Lord seide to Moises, 12 
Holde forth thi hond on the lond of Egipt, 
to aY locust?, that it stie on® the lond, and 
denoure al the eerbe” which¢ is residue toe 
the hail. And Moises helde forthe the ts 
3erde on the lond of Egipt, and the Lord 
brou3te in a brennynge wynd al that dai 
and ni3t; and whanne the morewtid was 
maad, the brennynge wynd reiside locustis, 
whichef stieden on® al the lond of Egipt, 14 
and saten in alle the coostis of Egipcians ; 
‘and the locustis" weren vnnoumbrable, 
and suche weren not bifore that tyme, 
nether schulen come aftirward. And tholis 
hiliden al the face* of the erthe, and wast- 
iden alle thingis; therfor the eerbe of the 
erthe was deuourid, and what euere of! ap- 
plis was in trees, whiche the hail hadde 
left, ‘¢¢ was deuourid™ ; and outirli no green 
thing was left in trees and in eerbis of 
erthe", in al Egipt. Wherfor Farao hastide, 16 
and clepide Moises and Aaron, and seide 
to hem, Y haue synned a3ens 30ure Lord 
God®, and ajens 30w; but now for3yue 3e 17 
the synne to me; also in this tyme preie 
je 30ure Lord God, that he take awey fro 
me this deeth. . And Moises 3ede out of ie 
the si3t of Farao, and preiede the Lord ; 
which? made a moost‘ strong wynd to1g 
blowe fro the west, and took’, and castide’ 
the locust in to the reed see ; ‘noon dwell- 
ide, sotheli nether oon, in alle the coostis 
of Egipt. And the Lord made hard the 20 
herte of Farao, and he lefte not the sones 
of Israel. Forsothe the Lord seide to21 
Moises, Holde forth thin hond in to he- 
uene, and derknessis" be on the lond of 
Egipt, so thicke that tho’ moun be gropid. 
And Moises helde forth the” hond in to22 
heuene, and orrible derknessis weren maad 
in al the lond of Egipt; in* thre daies no 2s 
man sei3 his brother, nether mouede himY 
silf fro that place in which he was. Where- 


P derknessis Em. Ghondes sDEFH. 


ythe 1. locust, that is, multitude of locustis on. 4vponis. Peerbis E. that 1s. 4lefte EILP sec.m. 


residue or lafts. © of1. {the whiche 1. 
mQOm.1. ® the erthe 1s. °Om. zB. 
t sotheli ther lefte not oon 1. 4 derknesse cx. 


g vp on Is, 
y the which 1. which Lord s. 
Vv thei 1. 


h thei 1. 1 Om, c. 


5 easte GI. 


itheir. * ouer part 1. 
Qful1. Tittook1. het. s. 


whisis. *andinis. Yhem a. 


216 - EXODUS. X. 24— XI. 6. 


‘my3te se’ his brother, ne mouede him _ euer the sones of Israel dwelliden, li3t was. 

out of that place that he was ynne; And Farao clepide Moises and Aaron, and 24 

where euer the children of Yrael dwelten, seide to hem, Go 3e, make 3e sacrifice to 
2awas 1i3t. And Pharao clepide Moyses the Lord; oneli 3oure scheep and grete” 

and Aaron, and’ seide to hem, Gothe, _ beestis dwelle stille; 3oure litle children 

and sacrifieth to the Lord'; 3oure sheep go with 30u. Moises* seide, Also thou 25 

oonli and droves abiden thei stil; 3oure —schalt 3yue{ to vs offryngis and brent sa- + also tou 
2schildren goo thei with 30w. Moyses  crifices, whiche? we schulen offre to ‘oure tarienn” 

seith, Forsothe oostis and brent sacrifices Lord God‘; alle the flockis schulen go 2¢ Schalt suffre 


that we lede 
thow shalt 3yue to vs, that we offren to with vs, for ‘a cle’ schal not dwelle of tho _ beestis to sa- 


2¢ the Lord oure God; alle the flockis shulen _thingis, that ben nedeful in to the® wor- pag ie 
goon with vs; there shal not leeue a clee —_ schipyng of ‘oure Lord God‘, moost sithen 
of the thingis that ben necessarie into the we witen not what owith to be offrid, 
heriyng of the Lord oure God, namely, — til we comen to that place. Forsothe the27 
whan we knowen not what shal be offryd, | Lord made hard the herte of Farao, and 
to the tyme that we comen fullich to that he nolde® delyuere hem. And Farao seide 28 
27 place. And the Lord hardide the herte to Moises, Go awei fro me, and be war 
of Pharao, and he wold not leeue hem. that thou se no more my face; in what- 
28 And Pharao seide to Moyses, Goo awey  euer dai thou schalt appere to me, thon 
fro me, and be war that thow se no more _ schalt die. Moyses answeride, Be it doon 29 
my face; what euer day thow aperist to so, as thou hast spokun; I schal no more 
2gme, thow shalt dye. Moyses forsothe® se thi face. 
answerde, So be it doon, as thow hast 
spokun; Y shal se no more thi face. 


CAPSS CAP. XI. 


1 And the Lord seide to Moyses, 3it with And the Lord: seide to Moises, 3it Y1 
o veniaunce Y shal touche Pharao and _ schal touche Farao and Egipt with o ve- 
Egipte, and aftyr thes thingis he shal niaunce, and after these thingis he schal 
leeue 30w, and constreyne to goon out. delyuere 30u, and schal® constreyne 3o0u' to 

2 Thanne thow shalt seie to al the puple, go out. Therfor thou schalt seie to al the2 
that a man aske of his freend, and a  puple, that a man axe of his freend, and a 
womman of hir neizbore, silueren and womman of hir nei3boresse, silueren* ves- 

sgoldun vessels, and clothis; forsothe the sels! and goldun, and™ clothis ; forsothe thes 
Lord shal 3yue grace to his puple befor Lord schal 3yue grace to his puple bifor 
the Egipcyens. And Moyses was a ful Egipcians". And Moises was a ful greet 
greet man in the loond of Egipte, before man® in the lond of Egipt, bifore the ser- 
the sernauntis of Pharao and al the pu- __uauntis of Farao and al the puple; and 4 

4ple; and seith’, Thes thingis seith the he seide, The Lord seith these thingis, At 
Lord, At myd ny3t Y shal goon yn to mydny3t Y schal entre in to Egipt; ands 

5Egipte; and there shulen dye alle the ech firste gendrid? thing in the lond of 
fyrst gotun in the loond of Egipciens, fro | Egipcians schal die, fro the firste gendrid?P 
the first gotun of Pharao, that sittith in of Farao, that sittith in the trone of hym, 
his see, vnto the first gotun of the hand- __ til to the firste gendrid? of the handmayde, 
mayden, that is at the queern; and alle which is at thei querne; and alle the firste 

6the first gotun of beestis; and there shal _gendrid of beestis schulen die; and greets 


T seey3 BpEFH. ® Om. 8. t Lord 30ure God 4 prim. % Om. ppern. Vhe seith & sup.ras. 
Z30ure greteg. * And Moisesk. the whicher. ¢ the L.oureG.1s. 4 ooclawer. oocles. 


e Om. scox. fthe L. oure G.1is. & wolde not 1. 6 JI schal p. he schalis. iOm.zc. | siluer ELp, 
vessel ELP. ™Om. EG. "the Egipcians 1s. © man of good fame s. P bigeten 1. 4 Om.1. 


Sage MII. 7. 


be a greet erye in al the loond of Egipte, 
what maner was not bifore, ne aftirward 
7is to’ come. Anentis forsothe alle the 
children of Yrael there shal not grucche 
a ‘dog, fro man vnto beeste; that je 
knowen, bi how myche myracle the Lord 
sdyuydide the Egipciens and Yrael. And 
alle thes thi seruauntys shulen descende’” 
to me, and thei shnulen preye for me, sey- 
ynge, Go out thow, and al the puple that 
is suget to thee; after thes thingis we 
9shulen goon out. And greetly wrooth he 
3ede out fro Pharao, The Lord forsothe 
seyde to Moyses, Pharao shal not here 
sow, that many signes be doon in the 
i0loond of Egipte. Moyses forsothe and 
Aaron diden alle the signes and alle the 
toknes worthi shewynge, that ben wrytun, 
before Pharao; and the Lord hardide the 
herte of Pharao, ne he -lafte the sones of 
Yrael fro his loond. 


CAP. XII. 


1 The Lord forsothe seyde to Moyses and 
2 Aaron in the loond of Egipte, This moneth 
to 30w the bigynnynge of the* monethis 
shal be the first in monethes of the 3eer. 
3 Spek 3e to al the cumpanye of the sones 
of Yrael, and sey 3e to hem, The tenthe 
day of this moneth tak echon a lombe bi 
4meynese and her howsis; if forsothe the 
noumbre is to litil, that it may not suffice 
to eet the lombe, he shal tak his nei3bore, 
that is ioyned to his hows after the noum- 
bre of the soules, that may suffice to the 
setyng of the lombe. Forsothe it shal ben 
a lombe withouten wemme, a maal of oY 
3eer 5 after the which riyt 3e shulen take 
salso a kydde; and 3e shulen kepe it vnto 
the fourtenthe day of this moneth; and 
al the multitude of the sones of Yrael 
7shal offre it at? euen. And thei shulen 
take of his bloode, and leggen vpon either 
post, and in the thresshwoldes of the 
howses, in the whiche thei shulen eet it ; 


EXODUS. 


917 


ery schal be in al the lond of Egipt, which" 
maner cry was not bifore, nether schal be 
aftirward. Forsothe at alle the children7 
of Israel a dogge scha] not make priuy 
noise, fro man til to beeste; that 3e wite 
bi how greet myracle the Lord departith 
Egipcians and Israel. And¥8 alle these this 
seruauntis schulen come doun to me, and 
thei schulen preye me, and schulen seie, 
Go out thou, and al the puple whicht is 
suget to thee; aftir these thingis we schu- 
len go out. And Moyses was? ful wrooth, 9 
and’ 3éde’ out fro Farao. Forsothe the 
Lord seide to Moises, Farao schal not here 
30u, that many signes be maad in the lond 
of Egipt. Sotheli Moises and Aaron maden 10 
alle signes* and wondris, that ben writuny, 
bifor Farao; and the Lord made hard the 
herte of Farao, nether he delyuerede the 
sones of Israel fro his lond*. 


CAP. XII. 


Also the Lord seide to Moises and Aa-1 
ron in the lond of Egipt, This monethe, 2 
the* bigynnyng of monethis to jou, schal 
be the firste> in the® monethis of the 3eer. 
Speke 3e to al‘ the cumpanye of the soness 
of Israel, and seie 3e to hem, In the tenthe 
dai of this® monethe ech man take a lomb 
by hise meynees and housis; but if the 
noumbre is lesse, that it may not suffice to 
ete thef lomb, he schal take his nei3bore, 
which® is ioyned to his hows, bi the 
noumbre of sotlis*, that moun suffice to 
the! etyng of the lomb. Forsothe the lombs 
schal be a male of o 3eer, without wem ; 
bi which* custom 3e schulen take also a 
kide} ; and 3e schulen kepe hym til to thee 
fouretenthe dai of this monethe; and al 


+ a hide, ifia 
Jomb may not 
be had in good 
maner. Lire 


the multitude of the sones of Israel schal dere. ccox. 
offre hym at euentid{. And thei schulen7 ¢ that is, ech 

« a th 
take of his blood, and schulen! put™ on clare 


offre oon, if 
fewnesse of 
persoones let- 
tith not. Lire 
here. BCGKQX. 


euer either post, and in lyntels", ‘ether° 
hizer threschfoldis? of the housis, in whiche 


Wnot to £. WW denscende 4. * Om. BDEFH. YaE. 7a, 
r what 1. Sand Pharao,1s. tthe whichy. tOm.1. VOm.1. Wwentex. * the signes is. Y here 
writunis. Zhond a pr.m. EGKLP. *Om.F¥. > firste or the checfs. ° Om. g. 4a Om. s. ¢€ the ELoP, 
fthis eur. 8 the which1. }lyfes1. 1 Om. 1kmorst sec.m.w. * the which 1. 1thei schulen is. ™ put 


itis. " Om.c. the lyntels1, © Om. c. 


‘p Om. virr. or hizer thresehfoldis s. or h. threshols e. or 


h. thressholdis uP. either h. thresscholdis ak. either ouercheekis w. 


Ff 


218 


sand thei shulen eet flesh that ny3t, rostid 
with fier, and therf looues with wylde 
9letuse. 3e shulen not eten of it eny thing 
raw, ne sothun with water, but oneli 
rostid with fier; the heed with his feet 
i0and entrayls 3e shulen vowre; ne there 
shal not leene of it eny thing to to mor- 
wen; and if eny thing be laft, with fier 
113e shulen brenne it. So forsothe 3e shu- 
len eteu it; 3e shulen girde about 3oure 
reynes, and 3e shulen haue shoon in 30ure 
feet, holdynge staues in hoondis; and 3e 
shulen eete hastiliche; it is forsothe 
phase, that is to seye, the passyng forth 
120f the Lord. And Y shall: passe thur3 al 
the loond of Egipte that ny3t, and Y 
shal smyit alle the first gotun in the 
loond of Egipte, fro man vnto beeste; 
and in alle the goddis* of Egipte Y shal 
13mnake domes ; Y a Lord. The bloode for- 
sothe shal be to 30w into tokne, in the 
housis in the> which 3e shulen be; and 
Y shal se the bloode, and Y shal ouerpasse 
3ow ; and there shal not be in 30w a ven- 
iaunee destruyinge, whanne Y shal smyit 
14 the loond of Egipte. Forsothe 3e shulen 
han this day into mynde, and 3e shulen 
halwe it solempne to the Lord in 3oure 
generaciouns with heriyng euerlastynge. 
15Seuen daies 3e shulen eten therf breed ; 
in the first day there shal be no sour 
dow3 in 3oure howses ; who so euer etith 
sowred breed, shal perishe that soule fro 
Yrael, fro the first day vnto the seuenthe 
isday. The first day shal be holy and so- 
lempne, and the seuenthe day shal be 
wurshipful in the same feeste; no thing 
of werk 3e shulen doon in hem, out tak 
17thes that perteyneth to etyng; and 3e 
shulen kepe therf breed. Forsothe in that 
same day Y shal leede 30ure oost out of 
the loond of Egipte; and 3e shulen kepe 
this day in 3oure generaciouns in ryte 
iseuerlastynge. The firste moneth, the four- 
tenth* day of the moneth, at euen, 3e shulen 


@ goodis aF. 


4 flesh pe1s. 1 loone s. 
Vv to the 1x. Om. L. 
3e K. 430u the F. 


b 30ure Is. 
h Om. 1s. 


ibigeten 1. * Om. F. 


EXODUS. 


b Om. BDEFU. 


$ the erbe letuse 1. bittir locustis s. 
w Om. plures. thing therof 1s. 
€ s0ure hondis 1s. 


XII. 8—18. 


thei schulen ete hym; and in that ni3ts 
thei schulen ete fleischis4, roostid with 
fier, and therf looues', with letusis{® of rca 
the feeld. 3e sehulen not ete therof ony 9 with biter 
raw thing, nether sodun in watir, but 
roostid oneli by fier; 3e schulen deuoure 
the heed with feett and entrailis" therof ; 
nether ony thing therof schal abide til the’ vw 
morewtid; if ony thing” is residue*, 3e 
schulen brenne’ in the fier. Forsothe thus 11 
3e schulen ete hym; 3e” sehulen girde 3oure* 
reynes, and 3e schulen haue schoon in the 
feet, and 3e schulen holde stauys in hondis*, 
and 3e sehulen ete? hastili; for it is fase, 
that is, the® passyng of the Lord. And Y‘12 
schal passe thorou the lond’ of Egipt in 
that ni3t, and Y schal smyte al® the firste 
gendrid! thing in the lond of Egipt, fro 
inan til to beeste; and Y the Lord schal 
make domes im alle the goddis of Egipt. 
Forsothe blood schal be to 3ou in to signe, 13 
in the housis in whiche 3e schulen be; 
and Y schal se the blood, and Y sehal passe 
jou; nether a wounde distriynge schal be 
in 3ou, whanne Y schal smyte the lond of 
Egipt. Forsothe 3e schulen haue this daiis 
in to mynde, and ‘3e sehulen* make it so- 
lempne to the Lord in 3oure generaciouns 
bi euerlastynge worsehipyng. In! seuene 15 
daies 3e sehulen ete therf breed; in the 
firste dai no thing diz3t with sour dou3 
sehal be in 3oure housis; who euer sehal 
ete ony thing di3t with sour dou3, fro the 
firste dai til™ the seuenthe dai, that soule 
sehal perische fro Israel. The firste day ts 
schal be hooli and solempne, and the sc- 
uenthe dai‘schal be worsehipful bi the 
same halewyng; 3e schulen not do ony 
werk in® tho daies, outakun these thingis 
that perteynen to mete; and 3e schuleni7 
kepe therf breed. For in that same dai Y 
sehal lede out of the lond of Egipt 3oure 
oost ; and 3e schulen kepe this dai in 3oure 
generaciouns bi euerlastynge custom. Inis 
the first monethe, in the fouretenthe dai 


¢ fourten .. 


u with the entrailis 1s. 
y brenne #/1s. Zand 


tthe feet EGIKs. 
x left ErLP. resid or lefte s. 


dete itis, © Om.K. * Y the Lord is. & myddil p. 
1 Om. A sec. m. BC prem. 


m til to plures. 2 Om. G, 


XH. 19-— 29. 


eet therf breed, vnto the oon and twentith 
i9day of the same moneth at euen. Seuen 
dayes soure breed shal not be foundun in 
3oure howses; who so etith soure breed, 
his soule shal perishe fro the companye 
of Yrael, as wel of cumlyngis, as of with 
20 ynne borne of the loond. AI soure breed 
3e shulen not eet, and in alle 3oure dwell- 
yng places 3e shulen eet therf breed. 
21Moyses forsothe clepide alle the eldren 
of the sones of Yrael, and seyde to hem, 
Gothe, takynge a beeste bi 3owre meynese, 
22 offre 3e paske; and the litil sprynkil of 
ysop wetith in bloode, that is in the ne- 
thir threswold, and sprengith of it the 
ouerthreswold, and either post; noon of 
3ow alle shal go out of 4 the dore of his 
23 hows vnto the morwen tyde. The Lord 
forsothe shal passe forth® smytynge the 
Egipciens; and whanne he seeth‘ the 
bloode in the threswald, and in either 
post, he shal ouer goo the dore of the 
hows, and he shall not suffre the smyter 
24g00 into 3oure howsis, and hurten. Kepe 
thow this word lawful to thee and to thi 
25sones ynto withouten ende. And whanne 
3e shulen goon into the loond that the 
Lord is to 3yue to 30w, as he hath biho- 
26 tun, 3e shulen kepe thes cerymonyes*; and 
whanne 3oure sones shulen seye to 3ow, 
27 What is this religioun? 3e shulen seye to 
hem, It is the sacrifice for the ouercomun 
enemys of the passing of the Lord, 
whanne he passide forthe vpon the hows® 
of the sones of Israel in Egipte, smytyng" 
the Egipciens, and oure hows! delyuer- 
ynge. And the puple bowid anowryde. 
28 And the sones of Yrael goon out, diden 
as the Lord comaundyde to Moyses and 
29 Aaron. It was doon forsothe in the myd- 
dil of the ny3t, the Lord smoot alle the 
fyrst gotun in the loond of Egipte, fro the 


EXODUS. 


219 


of the monethe, at euentid, 3e schulen ete 
therf breed, til to the oon and twentithe® 
dai of the same monethe at euentid. In1w 
seuene dayes no thing ‘dijt with sour dou3? 
schal be foundun in 3oure housis; if ony 
etith’ ony™ thing di3t with sour dow, his 
soule schal perische fro the cumpeny of 
Israel, as wel of comelyngis*, as of hem 
that ben borun in the lond. 3e schulen2o 
not ete ony thing di3t* with sour dow, and 
3e schulen ete therf breed in alle 3oure 
dwellyng placis. Forsothe Moises clepide 21 
alle the eldre men of the sones of Israel, 
and seide" to hem, Go 3e, and take’ a 
beeste by 3oure meynees, and offre 3e fase ; 
and dippe 3e a bundel of isope, in the blood 22 
which ‘is in the” threisfold*, and sprynge 
3e therof theY lyntel, and euer either post ; 
noon of 30u schal go out at the dore of his 
hows til the morewtid. For the Lord schal 23 
passe smytynge Egipcians?; and whanne 
he schal se the blood in the lyntel*, and in 
euer either post, he schal passe the dore 
of the’ hows; and he schal not suffre the 
smytere to entre in to 3oure® housis, and 
to hirte’, Kepe thou this word; it schal be 24 
a° lawful thing to thee and to thi sones 
til in to with outen ende. And whanne2s 
3e schulen entre in to the lond which! the 
Lord schal 3yue to 3ou, as he bihi3te, 
3e schulen kepe these cerymonyes; and 26 
whanne 3oure sones schulen seie to 3ou, 
What is this religioun ? 3e schulen seie to 
hem, It is the® sacrifice of the passyng of 27 
the Lord', whanne he passide ouer! the 
housis of the sones of Israel in Egipt, 
and smoot Egipcians*, and delyueride oure 
housis. And the puple was bowid, and 
worschipide. And the sones of Israel 3eden 28 
out, and diden as the Lord comaundide to 
Moises and to! Aaron. Forsothe it was 29 
doon in the myddis of the ny3t, the Lord 


4 Om. pve sec.m. F sec.m. #. ©Om.ar. fseey3 spr. fsermonyes 4. &housis c. bh smyten 4 sup. ras. 


i houses BDEII. 


°twenti bm. Pmaad sourr. 4etel. 


r Om. IL. 


8 comelingis, that is, hethen men conuertid to the 


Feith of Jewis ncexngx. comelyngis, that ben h.m. conuertid to the bileene 1. comel., that is, h. m. ete. s. 
tmad1. the seide rs. V take 3e a. taketh 1s. W Om. wN. ‘x in the threshold xciraq. in the threisfold, 
that is, a vessel bistdis the threisfold ac. thresh. etther av. b. the thresh, G. threisf. either in a v. ete, KNQX. 
YontheG. inthe x. 2 the Egipcians 1s. ® lintels u. > thatis. ¢Om.a. ‘hirte jov1s. ¢ Om. GN. 
fthat1. #Om,1s. 4 Lord God c. ivponr. * the Egipcians 1s. 1 Om. ke. 


F f 2 


220 


fyrst gotun of Pharao, that sat in his see, 
vnto the first gotun of the eaytif wom- 
man, that was in prisoun, and alle the 
30 first gotun of beestis. And Pharao aroos 
the ny3t, and alle his seruauntis, and al 
Egipte; and ther was sprongun a greet 
crye in Egipte; and forsothe there was 
not an hows, in the which leye not the 
sideed. And Moyses and Aaron elepid in 
the ny3t, Pharao seith, Ryseth, and goth 
out fro my puple, and 3e and the sones of 
Yrael; gothe, and saerifieth to the Lord, 
32as 3e seyn; 30ure sheip and 3oure* droues 
takith, as 3e han askid; and goynge a 
33 wey blesse 3e to me. And the Egipeiens 
nediden the puple to goon out of the 
loond swiftly, seiynge, Alle we shulen 
3idye! Thanne the puple tok sprengid 
meell, or it were sowrid ; and byndynge it 
35in ehaf, putte vpon her shuldres. And 
the sones of Yrael diden as the Lord co- 
maundide™ to" Moyses ; and thei askiden 
of the Egipeiens silueren and goldun ves- 
36sels, and myehe elothing. Forsothe the 
Lord 3af grace to the puple before the 
Egipeiens, that thei wolden leene hem; 
3zand thei spuyleden the Egipciens. And 
the sones of Yrael 3eden fro Remesse into 
Soehoth, almoost six hundryd thowsynd of 
foot men, with outen children and wym- 
38men; but and the eomoun of either sex°® 
‘or kynde? vnnoumbrable! steyden vp with 
hem; sheip, aud droues, and ful many 
39 hauynge lijf of dyuerse kynde. And thei 
bakiden meele, that a litil before spreng- 
ide thei token out of Egipte, and thei 
maden therf loones vnder asken; and 
thei my3ten not be maad sowre, the Egip- 
ciens constreynynge to goon out, and not 
suffrynge to mak eny dwellyng, ne eny 
thing of sowel there com to to maken redi. 
40 The dwellyng places forsothe of the sones 


EXODUS. 


XII. 30—40. 


smoot al the firste gendrid™ thing” in the 
lond of Egipt, fro the firste gendrid® of 
Farao, that sat in the trone of hym, til to 
the first gendrid® of the? eaitif womman, 
that was in the? prisoun, and’ alle the first 
gendrid of beestis. And Farao roos in the 30 
ny3t, and alle hise seruauntis, and al H- 
gipt; and a® greet' ery was maad in Egipt, 
for noon hows was, in whieh a deed man 
lay not. And whanne Moises and Aaron 31 
weren elepid in the ny3t, Farao seide, Rise 
3e, go" 3e out fro my puple, bothe 3e and 
the sones of Israel; go 3¢e, offre 3e to the 
Lord, as 3e seien; take 3e 3oure seheep32 
and greete beestis, as 3e axiden; and go 
3e, and blesse 3e me. And Egipeians’ 33 
constreyneden the puple to go out of the 
lond swiftli, and seiden, All we sehulen 
die! Therfor the puple¥ took meele spreynd 34 
togidere, bifor that it was di3t with sour 
dou3; and boond* in mentils, and puttideY 
on her schuldris. And the sones of Israel 35 
diden as the Lord eomaundide to Moises ; 
and thei axiden of Egipcians siluerne? ves- 
selis and goldun, and ful myehe elooth?. 
Forsothe the Lord 3af grace to the puple® 36 
bifor Egipcians®, that the Egipeians lenten 
to hem; and thei maden bare Egipeians‘. 
And the sones® of Israel 3eden forth fro 37 
Rainasses in to Soeoth, almest sixe hun- 
drid thousind of foot men, with out litle 
ehildren and wymmen; but also eomynf3s 
puple of malis and femalis®? ynnoumbrable® 
stiedeni with hem; seheep, and oxun, and 
ful many beestis of diuerse kynde*, stieden! 
with hem™. And thei bakiden meele, whieh" 39 
spreynd togidere ‘a while ago® thei token 
fro Egipt, and maden? therf4 looues bakun"™ 
vnder the® aisehis; for the looues mi3ten 
not be di3tt with sour dow, for Egipcians" 
compelliden’ to go out, and suffriden” not* 
to make ony tariyng, nether it was leiserY 


k Om. spex. 1 melu spern. ™had comaundid spe sec.m. F pr.m.H. 9 Om. D. SIX 4 prem. sexus D. 


DP Om. BDEFH. id est, sexus, F marg. H interlin. 


n Om. G. 
¥ the Egipcians 1s. 
Z siluer ELP. & clothinge 1s. 
dren 1s. f the comyn 1s. 
i wenten vp 1. stieden vp s. 
ago 1, P makiden 1. 

Y compelliden hem xs, 


m bigeten 1. 
uand go Is. 


b puple of Israel 1s. 


k kynde also 1. 
q therof x. ther s. 
W thei suffriden ts. 


obigoten 1. POm. F. ais, 4Om. Is. 
W puple of Israel 1s. 
¢ the Egipcians Isx. 
& of femalis BCEGMNIKQHSTX. 

! stieden vp s. 
tr ybake 1. 
X not hem 1Ks. 


@ and vunoumbrable spen, 


sOm.1. tOm.o. 
¥ putte Fw. putte ié 1s. 

4 the Egipcians Beis. © chil- 
bh and vnnoumbrable DEFGLOPX. 
‘mOm.1. "5 the which 1. © not 3ore 
8 Om. crkmosw. tmadi. © the Egipcians ris. 
Y leiser to hem is. 


rand he smoot Bc. 
X thei boond i 1s. 


XIL. 41——XIII. 3. 


of Yrael, that thei dwelliden yn Egipte, 
4i was of four hundred and thretti 3eer ; the 
whiche fulfillid, the same day 3ede al the 
oost of the Lord out of the loond of E- 
a2gipte. This is ny3t of the Lord able to 
be kept, whanne he ladde hem out of the 
loond of Egipte; this owen to kepe alle 
the sones of Yrael in her generaciouns. 
43 The Lord forsothe seide to Moyses and 
Aaron, This is the religioun of phask; 
44ech alien shal not ete therof; al forsothe 
seruaunt' bou3t be he circumcidid, and 
4580 eet he; comlyng and hyryd seruaunt 
46 shulen not eet thereof; in oon hows it shal 
be etun, ne 3e shulen not bere of his 
fleshe out, ne boon of it 3e shulen breek. 
47 Alle the companye of the sones of Yrael 
48shal doo it ; that if eny of pilgrymes wole 
come into 30ure heriyng of religioun, and 
do the pask of the Lord, before eche maal 
child of him shal be circumcidid, and 
thanne with ri3t he shal halewe, and he 
shal be togidere as a with ynne gotun of 
the loond ; if eny forsothe be not circum- 
49 cidid, he shal not ete therof. The same 
lawe shal be to the with ynne gotun, and 
to the comlyng tilyer, that pilgrimagith 
soanentis 3ow. And alle the sones of Yrael 
diden as the Lord comaundide to Moyses 
stand Aaron. And in the same day the 
Lord ladde the sones of Yrael out of the 
loond of Egipte, bi her companyes. 


CxeP.. X INE 


1 Forsothe the Lord spak to Moyses, sei- 
2ynge, Halwe to me alle the fyrst gotun 
that openith the wombe in the sones of 
Yrael, as wel of men as of beestis, alle 
3forsothe ben myne. And Moyses seide to 
the puple, Hath’ mynde of this day, in 
the which 3e ben goon out of Egipte, and 


¥ seruauntes D, 


% potage 1. tho 3eris 1s,» fulfillid 1s. 
f fase, that is, pask x. 
\ecircumsid n. ™ bifore the solempnyte 3. 


hems. ‘the whichr. § Om.1. t Om. s. 


EXODUS. 


¢ Om. 1s. 4 his peple s. 
Sahirid 1. anh. s, h fleishe 1s. 1 in to 30ure worschipyng 1s. * solempnitee 18. 
© make 7 18. 


u Also and pb. And E. 


, 221 


to make ony seew’. Forsothe the dwell-40 

yng of the sones of Israel, bi which thei 

dwelliden in Egipt, was of foure hundrid 

and thretti 3eert ; and whanne tho* weren 41 t ii. hundrid 
fillid®, al the oost of the Lord 3ede out of SL ak us 
the lond of Egipt in the same dai. This 42 Ser awalitee 
ny3t is worthi to be kept in the® worschip- 


as pilgryms in 
the loond of 
yng of the Lord, whanne he Jadde hem? 


Canaan, and 
of Egipt, and 


out of the lond of Egipt; alle the sones of of Filisteys. 
. . Lire here. cG 
Israel owen to kepe this® in her genera- ox. 


ciouns. Also the Lord seide to Moises 43 
and Aaron, This is the religioun of fase‘; 
ech alien schal not ete therof; sotheli ech 44 
seruaunt bou3t schal be circumcidid, and 
so he schal ete; a comelyng and hiridé 45 
man{ schulen not ete therof; it schal be 46+ sirid man, 
etun in oon hows; nether 3e schulen bere jaya" ie 
ont of the fleischis* therof; nether 3e of the feith and 
schulen breke a boon therof. Ech company 47 the Jewis, thous 
of the sones of Israel schal make that hem for hire. 
fase; that if ony pilgrym wole passe into 48 aga 
3oure feith and worschipyng', and make 
fase‘ of the Lord, ech male kynde of hym 
schal be circumcidid' bifore™, and thanne 
he schal make" lawfuli®, and? he schal be 
togidere’ as a man borun of the lond; for- 
sothe if ony man is not circunicidid, he 
schal not ete therof. The same lawe schal 49 
be to a man borun of the lond, and to a 
comelyng, that takith 3oure feith, which" 
is a pilgrym anentis 3ou. And alle the50 
sones of Israel diden as the Lord co- 
maundide to Moises and Aaron. And in*5! 
the same dai the Lord ladde out of ‘the 
lond of ‘ Egipt the sones of Israel, bi her 
cumpanies. 
CAP. XIII. 

Also" the Lord spak to Moises, and! 
seide, Halewe thou to me ech firste gen-2 
drid’ thing that openeth the wombe among 
the sones of Israel, as wel of men as of 
beestis, for whi alle ben myn. And Moises3 
seide to the puple, Haue 3e mynde of this 
dai, in which 3e 3eden” out of Egipt, aud 


s haueth De, 


€ this ny3t 1. this solempnytee s. 


© laweful s, Pandthanne p. 4 to gidere with 


Vv bigeten 1. W wenten 1. 


222 


of the hows of thraldom, for yn a strong 
hoond the Lord hath lad 30w out of this 
4place, that 3e eeten not sowrid breed. To 
day 3e goon out, in the moneth of new 
sfruytis; and whanne the Lord shal leede 
thee into the loond of Chananey, and E- 
thei, and Amorrei, and Euehi, and Jebu- 
sei, that he swoore to thi fadrys, that he 
shulde 3yue to thee, the loond flowynge 
mylk and hony, aud 3e shulen halwe this 
smanere of holy thingis this moneth. Se- 


uen dais 3e shulen eete therf breed, and - 


in the seuenthe day shal be the solem- 
7pnyte of the Lord; therf breed 3e shulen 
eete seuen dayes, there shal not apere 
anentis thee eny thing maad sowre, ne 
8in alle thi coostis. And thow shalt telle 
to thi sone that day, seiyng, This is that 
the Lord hath doon to me, whanne Y 
93ede out of Egipte. And it shal be as a 
tokne in thin hoond, and as mynde before 
thin eyen, that the lawe of the Lord euer- 
more be in thi mouth ; forsothe in strong 
hoond the Lord ladde thee out of Egipte, 
1oand of the hows of thraldom. Thow 
shalt kepe this maner heriyng the or- 
11deyned tyme, fro dayes into dayes. And 
whanne the Lord shal leede thee into the 
loond of Chananei, as he hath sworn to 
thee, and to thi fadris, and shal 3yue it 
12to thee, thow shalt seuer al that openeth 
wombe, to the Lord, and that that cheef 
is in thi beestis; what euer thow shalt 
hane of maal kynde, thow shalt halwe it 
13to the Lord. The first gotun of an asse 
thow shalt chaunge for a sheip, the which 
if thow ‘a3en biyst* not, thow shalt sleen ; 
alle forsothe the first gotun of man of thi 
14 sones thow shalt ‘a3en bye" in priys. And 
whanne thi sone shal aske thee to morwe, 
seiynge, What is this? thow shalt an- 
swere to hym, In a stronge hoond the 
Lord hath lad us out of the loond of 
15 Egipte, fro the hows of thraldom; for 
whanne Pharao was hardyd, and wold 


t for byist E pr. m. 


xno¥F. Y for which1. 7 Om. B. And. 
jeer. BQX. d. that is, fro 3eeris into 3eeris. G. 


EXODUS. 


@ In senene B. 
d Om. 1Kosx. 


XIII. 4—15. 


of the hows of seruage, for in strong hond 
the Lord ledde 30n out of this place, that 
3e ete not* breed di3t with sour dow. To4 
dai 3e gon out, in the monethe of new 
fruytis; and whanne the Lord hath leds 
thee in to the lond of Cananey, and of 
Ethei, and of Amorrei, and of Euei, and 
of Jebusei, whichY lond he swoor to thi 
fadris, that he schulde 3yue to thee, a lond 
flowynge with mylk and hony, thou schalt 
halowe this custom of holy thingis in this 
monethe. In? seuene daies thon schalt ete« 
therf looues, and the solempnete of the 
Lord schal be in the seuenthe dai; 3e7 
schulen ete therf looues seuene® daies, no 
thing di3t with sour dow schal appere at 
thee, nether in alle thi coostis. And thous 
schalt telle to thi sone> in that dai, and 
schalt seie, This it is that the Lord dide 
to me, whanne Y 3ede out of Egipt. Ando 
it schal be as a signe in thin hond, and as 
a memorial before thin ijen, and that the 
lawe of the Lord be enere in thi mouth ; 
for in a strong hond the Lord ledde thee 
out of Egipt, and of the hows of seruage. 
Thou schalt kepe siche a worschipyng in 10 
tyme ordeined, ‘fro daies in to daies*. And 11 
whanne the Lord hath brou3t thee in to 
the lond of Cananey, as he swoor to thee, 
and to thi fadris, and hath 3oue it to thee, 
thon schalt departe to the Lord al the12 
thing that openeth the* wombe, and that 
that is thef firste’ in thi’ beestis; what 
euer thing thou hast of male kynde, thou 
schalt halewe! to the Lord. Thou schalt13 
chaunge the firste gendrid of an asse for 
a scheep, that if thon a3en biest* not, thou 
schalt sle!; forsothe thou schalt a3zen bie 
with prijs al the™ firste gendrid" of man® 
of thi sones. And whanne thi sone schal 14 
axe thee to morewe, and seie, What is 
this? thou schalt answere to hym, In a 
strong hond the Lord ladde ys out of the 
lond of Egipt, of the hows of sernage ; 
for whanne Farao was maad hard?P, and 15 


u for beggin E pr.m. a3eyn byggen BDE see.m. FH. 


b sones 1s. ¢ daies, that is, fro 3eer in to 
e thi screxertw. f Om.s. _ & firste 


fruyt 1. firste or cheef's. » the v. ihalewe if 1s. * ajenbiest ¢ 1s. 'sle a1s. ™thic. ™ bigeten 1. 


Camanis. P hard zz herte ts. 


XII. 16—XIV. 3. 


not leeue vs, the Lord slowe al the first 
gotun in the loond of Egipte, fro the 
first gotun of man vnto the first gotun 
of beestis; therfor Y offre to the Lord al 
that openeth wombe of maal kynde, and 
al the first gotun of my sones Y ‘a3en 
isbye’. It shal be thanne as a tokne in 
thin hoond, and as a thing hongid vp for 
recordyng before thin eyen, therthur3 
that in a strong hoond the Lord hath lad 
i7vs out of Egipte. Thanne whanne Pha- 
rao hadde leten out the puple, God ladde 
hem not out bi the weie of the loond of 
Philisten, the which is ny3 ; holdynge lest 
perauenture it ‘shulde othenkyn” hym, if 
it hadde seen bateyls a3ens hym to aryse, 
isand* turnen a3en into Egipte; but he 
ladde hem about bi the weie of desert, 
that: is biside the reed see. And armed 
steyden vp the sones of Yrael fro the 
i9loond of Egipte. Forsothe Moyses tok 
the boons of Joseph with hym, therthur3 
that he hadde with ooth chargid the sones 
of Yrael, seiynge, God’ shal vysyte 30w, 
and ber 3e my boons out hens with 3ow. 
20 And thei goon from Sochoth, setten tentis? 
in Etham, in the vttermest coostes of wil- 
2idirnes. The Lord forsothe wente beforn 
hem to be shewide* the weie, bi day in 
the pilere of a clowde, and bi ny3t in a 
piler of fier, that he were leder of the 
22 weye either tyme; neuer faylide of» the 
piler of the clowde bi day, ne the piler of 
fier bi ny3t, before the puple. 


CAR wAXIy. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to the sones of Yrael; turned sette 
thei tentis ‘forn a3ens* Phyayroth, that is 
bitwix Magdalum and the see, a3enst Beel- 
sephon; in his si3t 3e shulen sett tentis 
3vpon the see. And Pharao is to sey vpon 
the sones of Yrael, Thei ben artid togi- 


EXODUS. 


298 


nolde4 delyuere vs, the Lord killide™ alle 
the firste gendrid* thing in the lond of 
Egipt, fro the firste gendrid" of man til 
to the firste gendrid of beestis; therfor Y 
offre to the Lord al thing of male kynde 
that openeth the wombe, and YY a3en bie 
alle the firste gendrid” thingis of my sones. 
Therfor it schal be as a signe in thin hond, 16 
and as aX thing hangid for mynde bifore 
thin i3en, for in a strong hond the Lord 
ledde vs out of Egipt’. Therfor whanne 17 
Farao hadde sent out the puple, God ledde 
not hem? out bi the weie of ‘the lond of* 
Filisteis, which? is ni3; and arettid® lest per- 
auenture? it wolde repente the puple, if he® 
had seyn batelis rise a3ens hym‘, and ‘the 
puples wolde turn} a3eni in to Egipt; but is 
God \edde* aboute by the weie of deseert, 
which! weie is bisidis the reed see. And 
the sones of Israel weren armed, and 
stieden™ fro the lond of Egipte. Andis 
Moises took the boonus of Joseph with 
hym, for he hadde chargid the sones of Is- 
rael, and hadde seid", God schal visite 30u, 
and ‘bere 3e out ‘fro hennus® my boonus 
with 30u. And thei 3eden forth fro? So- 20 
coth, and settiden tentis in Etham, in the 
laste endis? of wildirnesse’. Forsothe the 21 
Lord 3ede bifore hem to schewe’ the weie, 
bi dai in a piler of clowde', and" bi ny3t 
in a piler of fier, that he schulde be ledere 
of the weie in euer either time; the piler22 
of clowde failide neuere bi dai, nether the 
piler of fier bi ni3t, bifor the puple. 


CAP. XIV. 


Forsothe the Lord spak to Moises, and1 
seide, Speke thou to the sones of Israel ;2 
turne thei a3en, and sette thei tentis euene 
a3ens Fiayroth, which’ is bitwixe Magda- 
lum and the see, a3ens Beelsefon; in the 
si3t therof 3e schulen sette tentis oner* the 
see. And Farao schal] seie on the sones of 


v for bigge E pr.m. a3eyn bygge Box sec.m. Fu. W had athou3t prim. *he wold haue Epr.m. Y The 
God £ pr.m. % her tentis £ pr.m. ®besshewide 4. schew £ pr.m. >Om.npen, ¢ fro the regyoun of £ pr.m. 


dwolde not 1. Tslouzjex. § bigeten 1. 
lond of w. » the which 1. 
thei rs. 4 han turned 1s. 
stieden vp s. 


wildernesse 1s. 


i Om. x. 
n seid to hem 18. 


8 schewe hems. * a clowde 1s. 


t thingus Em sec. m. LP. Om. 0. 
w bigeten 1. *Om.c. y the londe of Egipt 1s. 2 him plures. it 1. hem, that is, that peple s. 
¢ bifore thinkynge 1s. arettinge kK. 
k Jedde it 1. ledde the peple s. 

® thanne hennus 1. fro hennus thanne s. 
u Om. G. 


vOm. kK. 
@ Om. Is. 
fitis. & thanne 
1 the which 1. ™ wenten vp 1. 
PtoGL. 4coostesr. T the 
Wandins. *on1. 


u bigeten 1. 


dOm.c. ©¢ it Is. 


Vv the which 1. 


224 


dere in a loond, desert hath enclosid hem. 
4 And Y shal harden his herte, and he shal 
pursue 30w, and Y shal ‘be glorified’ in 
Pharao, and in alle his oostis®; and the 
Egipciens shulen wyte for Y am a Lord ; 
sand thei diden so. And it is‘ told to the 
kyng of Egipciens, that the puple ‘hadde 
flowuné ; and ful myche chaungid is the 
herte of Pharao, and of his seruauntis 
vpon the puple, and thei seiden, What 
wole we doon, that we leeuen Yrael, lest 
cit serne not to vs? Thanne he ioynede 
the chare, and al his puple he tok with 
zhym; and he tok six" hundryd chosun 
charys, and al that of chares was in 
s Egipte, and the leders of his oost. And 
the Lord hardide' the herte of Pharao, 
the kyng of Egipte, and he pursuede the 
sones of Yrael; and thei weren goon out 
9in a hize hoond. And whanne the Egip- 
ciens pursueden the steppes of the goers 
before, thei fonden hem in the tentis 
vpon the see; alle the ridynge, and the 
chares of Pharao, and al the oost weren 
ioin Phyayroth, a3ens Beelsephon. And 
whanne Pharao was ny3, the sones of 
Yrael, henynge vp her eyen, seyen the 
Egipciens after hem, and thei dradden 
greetli; and thei crieden to.the Lord, 
liand seiden to Moyses, Perauenture there 
weren not sepulcris in Egipte, therfor 
thow tok vs, that we dieden! in wilder- 
nes? what woldist thow do™ this, that 
12 thow woldist lede vs out of Egipte ? Was 
not this the word that we spaken to thee 
in Egipte, seyinge, Goo awey fro vs, that 
we seruen to the Egypcyens? it is for- 
sothe myche betere to serue to hem, than 
13to dye in wildernes. And Moyses seide™ 
to the puple, Wole 3e not drede, stondeth, 
and seeth® the greet wondres of God, that 
he is to doon? to day; forsothe the Egip- 
ciens that 3e now seen, 3e shulen seen 
14n0 more vnto with outen ende; the Lord 


f was E pr.m. 
™ to BR. 


@ glorye E pr.m. © coostis A. 
Om. £ sec.m. | dyen BDEFH. 


¥ the Egipcians 1s. 2 Om. 1Kos. 
Egipcians is. f neized 73 18. 
weren 1. lawei dhennes 1s. ™ in what E. 


T the Egipcians 1s, * the whiche 1. 


EXODUS. 


n saith £. 


® gschulden leeue 1. 
& the Egipcians 1s. 
n that s. 


XIV. 4—14. 


Israel, Thei ben maad streit in the lond, 
the deseert hath closid hem togidere. And 4 
Y schal make hard his herte, and he schal 
pursue 30u, and Y schal be glorified in Fa- 
rao, and in al his oost; and EgipciansY 
schulen wite that Y am the? Lord; and 
thei diden so. And it was teld to thes 
kyng of Egipcians, that the puple hadde 
fled; and the herte of Farao and of hise 
sernauntis was chaungid on the puple, and 
thei seiden, What wolden we do, that we 
leften? Israel, that it schulde not> serne 
us? Therfor Farao ioynede the chare, and 6 
took with him al his puple; and he took7 
sixe hundrid chosyn charis, and what euer 
thing of charis was in Egipt, and duykis 
of al the oost. And the Lord made hards 
‘the herte of Farao’, kyng of Egipt, and 
he’ pursuede the sones of Israel; and thei 
weren go out in an hi3 hond. And whanne9 
Egipcians® pursueden the steppis 9f the 
sones of Israel bifor goynge, thei founden 
hem in tentis on the see; al the chyualrye 
and charis of Farao, and al the oost weren 
in Fiayroth, ajens Beelsefon. And whanne 10 
Farao hadde nei3ed‘ the sones of Israel, 
reisiden her izen, and thei sien Egipcians*® 
bihynde hem, and dredden" greetli; and 
thei criedeni to the Lord, and seiden tou 
Moises, In hap sepulcris weren* not in 
Egipt, therfor thou hast take vs awei’, 
that we schulen die in wildirnesse? what™ 
woldist thou do this, that thou leddist vs 
out of Egipt? Whether this is not the 12 
word which" we spaken to thee in Egipt, 
‘and seiden®, Go awei fro vs, that we serue 
Egipcians? ? for it is myche betere to serue 
hem, than to die in wildirnesse. Andis 
Moises seide to the puple, Nyle 3e drede, 
stonde 3e, and ‘se 3e4 the grete werkys of 
God, whiche he schal do to dai; for 3e 
schulen no more se Egipcians", whiehe® 3e 
seen now, til in to with outen ende; thet 
Lord schal fi3te for 3ou, and 3e schulen 
i endored £ pr.m. 


& fleey3 E pr.m. 4 thre £ pr.m. 


see BFH. P doyng E pr.i. 
bOm.cG. ¢Farao hertes. @Pharaois. € the 
h thei dreddenis. ‘crieden gretliz. * there 


© seyinge K. P the Egipcians. 4 seeth 1. se KLOS. 


XIV. i5—25. 


shal fi3t for 30w, and 3e shulen hoold 
15 30ure pees. And the Lord seide to Moyses, 
What cryest thow to me? Spek to the 
16sones of Yrael, that thei goon forth ; thow 
forsothe arere thin 3erde, and strecche out 
thin hoond vpon the see, and dyuyde it, 
that ‘the sones of Yrael goon thur3 the 
17drye, in the myddil see. Y forsothe shal 
harden the hertes of the Egipciens, that 
thei pursue 30w, and Y shal be glorified’ 
in Pharao, and in al his oost, and in the 
18 chares, and in the" riders; and the Egip- 
ciens shulen wyte that Y am Lord God, 
whanne Y shal be glorified in Pharao, 
1gand in chares, and in his ryders. And 
the aungel of the Lord, that 3ede before 
the castels of Yrael, takynge hym self 
3ede after hem, and with hym togidere 
the pilere of the clowde, the forthermore 
20leeuynge bihynde the bak, stode bitwix 
the tentis of Egipciens and the tentis of 
Yrael; and there was a derk clowde, and 
liz3tynge the ny3t, so that to hem self to- 
gidere al the tyme of the ny3t thei my3ten 
21not cum ny3. And whanne Moyses hadde 
strau3t out his’ hoond vpon the see, the 
Lord tok it awey, blowynge an hidous 
wynde, and brennyuge al ny3t, and he 
turnede it into drow3t; and the watir 
22 was dyuydid. And the children of Irael 
‘wenten yn' thur3 the myddel of the drye 
see; forsothe the water was as a wal at 
23 the ri3t syde of hem and the lefte. And 
the Egipciens pursuynge, 3eden yn after 
hem, al the horsyng of Pharao, his chares, 
and his ryders, bi the myddil of the see. 
24 And now was comun the morwetide, and 
loo! the Lord biholdynge vpon the tentes 
of the Egypciens, by the pilere of fyer, 
and of the clowde, slewe" the oost of 
2shem; and he turnede vpsedown the 
wheles of the chares, and thei weren born 
into the depthe. Thanne seiden the E- 


.4glorye e prom. ‘his BpEFu. 8 the BDEFH. 


tOm.1xs. hem plures. VY charis of him 1s. 
that is, tentis 1, east. or tentis 8. 


ehe stood 1s.  Egipeians castels 18. 


EXODUS. 


t was gone by E pr. m. 


w Om. pm. 
@ took, or ordeynede 18. 
& the castels EINs. 


925 


be stille. And the Lord seide to Moises, 15 
What criest thou to me? Speke thou to 
the sones of Israel, that thei go forth; 
forsothe reise thou thi 3erde, and stretche 16 
forth thin hond on the see, and departe 
thou it, that the sones of Israel go in thet 
myddis of the see, by drie place. For-17 
sothe Y schal make hard the herte of 
Egipcians, that thei pursue 30u, and Y 
schal be glorified in Farao, and in al the 
oost of hym", and in the charis’, and in 
the kny3tis of hym ; and Egipcians schulen 1s 
wite that Y am the* Lord God, whanne 
Y schal be glorified in Farao, and in the* 
charis, and in the kny3tis of hym. And 19 
the aunge] of the Lord’, that 3ede bifore 
the castellis? of Israel, took* hym silf, and 
3ede bihynde hem ; and the piler of cloude® 
3ede° to gidir with hym, and lefte’ the 
formere thingis aftir the bak, and stood®20 
bitwixe the ‘castels of Egipcians‘ and cas- 
tels? of Israel; and the cloude was derk 
toward Egipcians, and li3tnynge! ‘the 
ny3t* toward ‘the children of ** Israel, so 
that in al the! tyme of the ni3t thei mi3ten 
not nei3 togidere to hem silf. And whanne 21 
Moises hadde stretchid forth the™ hond on 
the see, the Lord took® it® awei?, the while 
a greet wynde and’ brennynge blew in al 
the ni3t, and turnede™ in to dryenesse’’ ; 
and the watir was departid. And the sones 22 
of Israel entriden by the myddis of the 
drye see; for the watir was as a wal at 
the rizt side and left’ side of hem. And*‘23 
Egipcians pursueden, and entriden aftir 
hem®*, al™ the ridyng’ of Farao, hise cha- 
ris, and kny3tis, bi the” myddis of the see. 
And the wakyng of the* morewtid cam 24 
thanne, and lo! the Lord biheldeY on the 
castels of Egipcians’, bi a piler of fier, and 
of cloude*, and killide> the oost of hem ; 
and he destriede® the wheelis of charis®, 25 
and tho weren borun in to the depthe. 


“he slewe £ pr.m. sup.ras. 


x Om. tks. yYLordGod 5. 2 castellis, 
b the cloude 1s. © mouyde 1s. 4 he lefte 1s. 
h the Egipeians 1s. ii was liztnynge 1. 


the ny3t wasl.s. kOm.s. kkOm.1. 10m. plures. ™his 1s. "took or withdrowe the sees. ° Om. 1s. 
P awei the see 1. Gandai.as. T° turnede é 1. turnede the sees. t™derknesse a pr.m. 8 the left EIMNPs. 


t The 1s. Israelis. 0 and alle 1s. 


Vv ridinge men f. 


wOm.1s. *Om.1. ¥ bihelde wrathfuly 1s. 


2 the Egipcians 1s. 2 a eloudeis. » he killide 1s, ¢ ouerturnede 1. 4 the charis1s. ¢ depthe of the see 1. 


Gs 


226 


gipciens, Flee we Yrael; forsothe the Lord 
26fy3tith for hem azens us. And the Lord 
seith to Moyses, Strecche out thin hoond 
vpon the reed’ see, that the watris turnen 
a3en to Egipciens”, vpon the chares, and 
27 the horsmen of hem. And whanne Moyses 
hadde strau3t out the hoond a3ens the see, 
fyrst the morwetide it was turned a3en 
to the rather place; and the Egipciens 
fleynge, watres a3en comen, and the Lord 
wrapte hem with ynne in the myddel 
28 floodes. And the watris weren turned 
aj3en, and thei couerden the chares, and 
the horsmen of al the oost of Pharao, 
the whiche folwynge weren goon into 
the see; ne oon forsothe overlafte not* of 
29hem. Forsothe the sones of Yrael fulliche 
jeden thur3 the myddil of the drye see, 
and the watris weren to hem as for a 
wal, fro the ry3t half and fro the left halfy. 
30 And the Lord delyuerede Israel in that 
day fro the hoond of the Egipciens, and 
thei seen the Egipciens deed vpon the 
31 brenk of the see, and the greet hoond that 
the Lord hauntide ajens hem; and the 
puple dredde the Lord, and leueden? to 
the Lord, and to Moyses his seruaunt. 
1Thanne Moyses soong, and the sones of 
Israel, this ditee to the Lord; and seiden. 


CAP. XV. 


Synge we to the Lord, forsothe glori- 
ously he is magnyfied ; the hors and the* 
steyer> up he threwe down into the see. 

2 My strengthe and my preysyng the Lord ; 
and he is maad to me into helthe. This 
my God, and hym Y shal gloryfie; the 
God of my fader, and hym Y shal en- 

shaunce. The Lord as a man fi3ter, Al- 
4my3ti his name; the chare of Pharao and 
his oost he threwe fer into the see. His 
chosun princes weren turned vpsedoun in 
5the reed see; the depe watris conerden 
hem; thei descendiden into the depthe as 


v Om. BDEF. see.m. mm. W the Egipciens aperu. 

4Om. pv. > steyers p. 

& forsothe 1. 
© flood 1s. 


f the Egipcians 1. 
mOm.s. 0 Om. xk. 
8 the Egipcians c. 
w Lord God gE. 


x magnetied or maad grete s. 
b Lord s. 


¢ fadris s. 4 Om. Is. 


EXODUS. 


h on the kny3tis 1s. 
P the which 1. 

t hond or power 1. hond or my3t s. 

y hath cast 1. 


XIV, 26—XvV. 5. 


Therfor Egipcians‘ seiden, Fle we Israel ; 
for the Lord fi3tith for hem a3enus vs. 
And the Lord seide to Moises, Holde 26 
forth thin hond on the see, that the wa- 
tris turne a3en to Egipcians, on the charis, 
and kny3tis of hem. And whanne Moises 27 
hadde hold forth the! hoond a3ens the see, 
it turnede ajen first in the morewtid to 
the formere place ; and whanne Egipcians* 
fledden, the watris camen ajen', and the 
Lord wlappide hem in the™ myddis of 
the" floodis®. And the watris turneden 2s 
ajen, and hiliden the charis, and kny3tis 
of al the oost of Farao, which? sueden; 
and entriden in to the see; sotheli not 
oon of hem was alyue4. Forsothe the 29 
sones of Israel 3eden thorou3 the myddis 
of the drye see, and the watris weren to 
hem as for a wal, on the ri3t side and left* 
side. And in that dai the Lord delyuerede 30 
Israel fro the hond of Egipcians, and thei 
sien Egipcians* deed on the brynke of the 
see, and thei sei3en the greet hond* which 31 
the Lord hadde vsid a3ens hem"; and the 
puple’ dredde the Lord, and thei bileueden 
to the Lord, and to Moises his seruaunt. 


CAP gxVs 


Thanne Moises song, and the sones of1 
Israel, this song to the Lord”; and thei 
seiden, Synge we to the Lord, for he is 
magnefied* gloriousli; he castideY doun 
the hors and the stiere” in to the see. Mye 
strengthe and my preisyng is the Lord; 
and* he is maad to me in to heelthe. This 
is my God, and Y schal glorifie hym; the 
God> of my fadir®, and Y schal enhaunse 
hym. The Lord is as¢ a man fi3ter, hiss 
name is Almi3ti; he castide doun in to4 
the see the charis of Farao, and his oost. 
Hise chosun princis weren drenchid in the 


x Om. spern. Y Om. sperx. 2 byleuyd E pr.m. 


ihisis. & the Egipcians g1s. 1 a3ens hem 1s. 
9 on lyne B. left 1. not alyne qa. —-* on the left 3. 
u the Egipcians 1s. ¥ puple of Israel 1s. 
z horsman 1. stiere vp K. a Om. Ep. 


XV. 6—18. 


6a stoon. Lord, thi rijt hoond is magny- 
fied in strengthe; thy ry3t hoond, Lord, 
7hath smytun the enemye. And in mul- 
titude of thi glorie thow hast put doun 
alle myn aduersaryes ; thow hast sent thi 
wrath, that deuowride hem as stoble. 
8And in the spirit of thi woodnes watris 
ben gederid togidere ; the flowynge wa- 
ter stode, the depe watris ben gederid to 
ggidere in the myddil see. The enemye 
seide, Y shal pursue, and Y shal tak; ro- 
bries Y shal dyuyde, my soule shal be 
fulfillid. I shal drawe out my swerd; 
19and myn hoond shal slee hym. Thi spi- 
ryt blewe, and the see couerde hem; and 
thei ben vnder dreynt as leed in hidows 
uwatris. Who, Lord, is lijk to thee in 
strong* thingis, who is lijk to thee? thow 
doer of greet thingis in holynes, and feer- 
ful, and preysable, and doynge merueyls. 
12 Thow hast strau3t out thin hoond, and 
i3the erthe hath deuourid hem; a duke 
thow hast ben in thi merci to thi puple, 
that thow hast ajenbou3t4; and thow 
hast born it in tli strengthe to thin holi 
14dwellyng place. Puples steiden vp, and 
ben® wrooth; sorwes withheelden the 
is dwellers of Philistien. ‘Thanne ben dis- 
turbid the princes of Edom; tremblyng 
withheelde the strong men of Moab. 
i¢ Alle the dwellers of Chanaan ajenfrussh- 
iden for ferde; imward drede fal vpon 
hem, and outward drede in the mykilnes 
of thin arme. Be thei maad vnmouable 
as a stoon, to the tyme, Lord, that thi 
puple passe; to the tyme that thi puple 
17 passe, this that thow hast weeldid. Thow 
shalt lede hem yn, and thow shalt plaunt 
in the hil of thin heritage; with thi 
moost stedfast dwellyng, Lord, that thow 
hast wrou3t; Lord, thi seyntuarye, that 
18 thin hondes® fastiden. The Lord shal regne 


¢ streinth £ pr.m. 


€Om.1. thi tp. f multitude A sec... 1. 


land Y o. 
P the spirit of God 15. 


k Om. 18. 
fillid 1s. 
¥ wenten vp 1. stieden vp s. 
2Om.uPx. @ Oin. EM. 
fthe whieh 1. & makiden k. 
ende and ouer al thing 1s. 


m spoile E. 
94 a greet 18. 


4 forbou3t £ pr.w. 


& the zr. 
thi gret veniaunce BcQx. Ww. that is, of thi veniaunce ec. w. that is, gret v. K. 
4 soule, that is, wille BCEGIKNPQX. 8. that is, my wille 5. 
T feerful 1s. 
w heleden F. hiliden s. 
b weldist cis. hast in possessioun 1. 
hy, in tot. w. a. f. chat is, withoutex ende BCGKNOQX. regne withouten 


EXODUS. 227 


reed see; the depe watris hiliden hems 
thei 3eden doun in to the depthe as a 
stoon. Lord, thi ri3thond is magnyfied ine 
strengthe ; Lord, thi ri3thond smoot the 
enemye. And in the® ychilnessef of thif7 
glorie thou hast put doun alle myn{ ad- 
uersaries; thou sentist thin ire, that de- 
uouride hem as stobilh, And watris weren 8 
gaderid in the spirit of thi woodnesse!; 
flowinge watir stood, depe watris weren 
gaderid in the* middis of the see. Thes 
enemy seide, Y schal pursue, and Y schal 
take ; Y! schal departe spuylis™, my soule” 
schal be fillid®?. I scha] drawe out my 
swerde; myn hond schal sle hem. Thiio 
spiritP blew, and the see hilide hem; 
thei weren drenchid as leed in grete wa- 
tris. Lord, who is lijk thee in stronge1l 
men, who is lijk thee? thou art greet’ 
doere in hoolynesse; ferdfwl", and preisa- 
ble, and doynge myraclis. Thou heldist 12 
forth thin hond, and the erthe deuouride 
hem; thou were ledere in thi merci toi3 
thy puple, whichis thou a3en bou3tist ; and 
thou’ hast boret hym in thi" strengthe to 
thin holi dwellyng place. Puplis stieden’, 14 
and weren wroothe; sorewis helden” the 
dwelleris of Filistiym. Thanne the pryncis 15 
of Edom weren disturblid*; tremblyng held 
the stronge men of Moab. Alle the dwell- ie 
eris of Canaan ‘wereu starkeY; inward 
drede falle on hem, and outward drede in 
the greetnesse of thin arm. Be thei maad 
vnmouable as a stoon, til thi puple passe, 
Lord; til this? thi* puple passe, whom 
thou weldidist». Thou schalt brynge hem 17 
in, and thou schalt plaunte® in the hil of 
thin eritage; in the moost stidefast dwellyng 
place which® thou hast wrou3t, Lord; Lord, 
thi seyntuarie, which’ thin hondis made® 
stidefast. The Lord schal ‘regne in to the 18 
world and ferthere". Forsotlie Farao,‘a ri-19 


€ thei ben E prim. &hoon a. 


i woodnesse, that is, of 
w. that is, thi g.v.N. 
© ful- 
8the which 1. ¢t bifor ELp. 4% the E. 
x distrublid 1s. Y dredden, or were acumbred 1s. 
¢ plaunte hem is. 4 thin ge. ¢ that 1s. 


h the stobil 1. a stob. s. 


Gg 


228 


19 withouten ende and ouer. Forsothe Pha- 
rao, rydynge with charys, and his hors- 
men 3eden yn to the see, and the watris 
of the see the Lord a3enbrou3te vpon 
hem; the sones forsothe of Yrael jeden 

20 thur3 the drye, in the myddil of it. Thanne 
Mary, a prophetesse, the sister of Aaron, 
tok a tympan in hir hoond, and alle the 
wymmen 3eden out after hir, with tym- 

21 panes and daunses; with the whiche she 
before songe, seiynge, Synge we to the 
Lord, gloriously forsothe he is magny- 
fyed; the hors and his steier up! he threw 

22doun into tle see. Forsothe Moyses tok 
Yrael fro the reed see, and thei 3eden out 
into the desert of Sur, and thei 3eden thre 
dayes thur3 wildirnes, and thei fonden no 

23 watyr. And thei camen into Marath, and 
thei my3ten not drynk the watris of Ma- 
rath, forthi that thei weren bitter ; wher- 
for and a couenable name he putte to the 
place, clepynge it Mara, that is, bitternes. 

21 And the puple grucchide ajens Moyses, 

25selynge, What shulen we drynk? And 
he cryede to* the Lord, the which shewide 
hym a tree; the which whanne he hadde 
put into the watris, thei weren turned 
into swetnes. There he ordeynede to him 
heestis and domes, and there he temptide 

26hym, seiynge, If thow herist! the voys of 
the Lord thi God, and dost that that is 
ry3t before hym, and obeyshist™ to his 
maundementis, and kepist alle his heestis, 
al the langour that I putte in Egipte, Y 
shal not brynge yn vpon thee; I forsothe 
am the Lord thi Sauyour. The sones of 
Yrael forsothe cainen into Helym, where" 
weren twelue welles of watris, and se- 
uenti paline trees, and thei meueden 
tentis® bisides the waters. 


CA Rev I: 


1 And thei jeden forth fro Helym, and 
al the multitude of the sones of Yrael 


hOm. e. 1 Om. BpEeru. 
oher tentis E pr. m. 


kK ynto E prem. 


ion horse 1. Om. s. * horsmen rs. 


EXODUS. 


lheere apEFH. 


1 Om. 10sx sec.m. 


XV. 19 —XVI. 1. 


dere’, entride with his charis and kny3tis* 
in to the sce, and the Lord brou3te the 
watris of the se on hem; sotheli the sones 
of Israel 3eden bi the drie place, in the! 
myddis of the see. Therfore Marie, pro-20 
fetesse™, the" ‘sistir of Aaron®, took a tym- 
pan in hir hond, and alle the wymmen 
3eden out aftir hyr? with tympans and 
cumpanyes; to whiche sche song bifore’, 21 
and seide, Synge we to the Lord, for he 
is magnyfied’ gloriousli; he castidet doun 
in to the see the hors and the" stiere’ of 
hym. Forsothe Moises took Israel fro the 22 
reed see, and thei jeden out in to the” de- 
seert of Sur, and thei 3eden thre daies bi 
the wildirnesse, and thei founden not wa- 
tirx. And thei camen in to Marath, and 23 
thei mi3ten not drynk the watris of Ma- 
rath, for thoY weren bittere; wherfor and? 
he® puttide® a couenable name to the® place, 
and clepide’ it Mara, that is, bitternesse. 
And the puple grutchide azens Moises, 24 
and seide, What schulen we drynke? And 25 
Moises criede to the Lord, which® schewide 
to hym a tre; and whanne he‘ hadde put 
that tre in to® watris*, tho weren turned 
in to swetnesse. There the Lord ordeyn- 
ede comaundementis and domes to the pu- 
ple, and there he asayede the puple, and 26 
seide, If thou schalt here the vois of thi 
Lord God, and schalt do that that is ri3t- 
ful byfore hym, and schalt obeie to his 
comaundementis', and schalt kepe alle hise 
heestis*, Y schal not brynge yn on thee 
al the syknesse, which Y puttide! in E- 
gipt, for Y am thi Lord Sauyour. 


CAP. XVI. 


Forsothe the sones of Israel camen in! 
to Helym, where weren twelue wellis of 


un obeysche BDEFH. a ther £ pr.m. 


m the profetesse ins. "2 Om.1s. © Aaron 


sisters. P Om. u. Gther. bifores. ™Om.s. 8 maad greet 1s. t hath cast 1s. %Om. £MN sec.m. OPX. 
Vrider 1s, W Om. Ex. * watris © sup.ras. yY-thei 1s. 7Om. Go. ®Moises1s. > putte mts. © that rs. 
dhe clepide 1s. © the which 1. f Moises 1s. € Om.s. 4 the watris plures. i heestes 1s.  biddyngis 1s. 
1 haue putt rs. 


XVI. 2—12. 


cam into desert? of Syn, that is bitwix 
Helym and Synai, the fiftenthe day of 
the secounde moneth after thei weren 
2goon out of the loond of Egipte. And 
alle the congregaciouns’ of the sones of 
Yrael grucchiden a3ens Moyses, and a3ens 
3 Aaron, in wildernes. And the sones of 
Yrael seiden to hem, Wolde God we had- 
den be deed bi the hoond of the Lord in 
the loond of Egipte, whanne we seeten 
vpon the pottis of flesh, and eten breede 
in fulnes; whi hast thow ladde vs into 
this desert, that thow my3tist%4 slee al thisT 
4multitude with hungur? The Lord for- 
sothe seide to Moises, Y shal reyn to 30w 
looues fro henene; the puple goo out that 
he gadere that sufficen bi eche dayes; that 
Y tempte hym, whether he goo in my 
slawe, or noon. The sixte day forsothe 
greithe thei that thei bryngen yn, and 
dowble be there that thei weren wont to 
6gedere bi eche dayes. And Moyses and 
Aaron seiden to alle the sones of Yrael, 
At euen 3e shulen wyte that the Lord 
hath lad 30w out of the loond of Egipte ; 
z7and the morwetide 3e shulen se the glorye 
of the Lord; I haue herd forsothe 3oure 
grucchyng a3ens the Lord; what forsoth 
g ben we, that 3e grucchen ajens vs? And 
Moyses seith, The Lord shal 3yue to 30w 
at euen flesh for to eete, and eerli looues 
in fulnes, for thi that he hath herd 3oure 
grucchyng, the which 3e han grucchid 
ajens hym; what forsothe ben we? ne 
a3ens vs is 30ure grucchyng but a3ens the 
gLord. And Moyses seide to Aaron, Sey 
to al the congregacioun® of the sones of 
Yrael, Goo 3e to before the Lord, for- 
19 Sothe he hath herd 3oure grucching. And 
whanne Aaron spak to al the companye 
of the sones of Yrael, thei bihilden to 
wildernas, and loo! the glorye of the 
11. Lord aperyde in a clowde. Forsothe the 
12Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, Y haue 
herd the grucchyng of the sones of Yrael ; 


P the desert BpEFH. 4 congregacioun BDEFH, 


0 the deseert FIS. 
8Om. xr. tthus that 5, U thei s. 
» fleish 1s. ¢ anentis EN. 


m watir 1s. 
fleshe pottis s. 
® the eventid 1s. 


EXODUS. 


* 229 


watris™, and seuenti palm trees, and thei 
settiden tentis bisidis the watris. And 
thei 3eden forth fro Helym, and al the 
multitude of the sones of Israel cam in to 
deseert" of Syn, which® is bitwixe Helym 
and Synai, in the fiftenethe dai of the 
secunde monethe aftir that thei 3eden out 
of the lond of Egipt. And al the congre-2 
gacioun of the sones of Israel grutchide 
a3ens Moises, and azens Aaron, in the? 
wildirnesse. And the sones of Israel seiden 3 
to hem, We wolden that we hadden be 
deed bi the ‘hoond of the Lord‘ in the lond 
of Egipt, whanne we saten on the ‘pottis 
of fleisch, and eeten looues in plentee ; 
whi leden 3e vs in to this’ deseert, that* 
3e schulden sle al the multitude with hun- 
gur? Forsothe the Lord seide to Moises, 4 
Lo! Y schal reyne to 30u looues fro he- 
uene; the puple go out, that it" gadere 
tho thingis’ that sufficen bi ech day; that 
Y asaie the puple, whethir it goith” in my 
lawe, ether* naiY. Sotheli in the sixte dais 
make thei’ redi that that thei schulen bere 
yn, and be it double ouer that thei weren 
wont to gadere bi ech dai. And Moises6 
and Aaron seiden to alle the sones of Is- 
rael, At euentid® 3e schulen wite that the 
Lord ledde 30u out of the lond of Egipt; 
and in the morewetid 3e schulen se the7 
glorie of the Lord; for Y herde 3oure 
grutchyng a3ens the Lord; sotheli what 
ben we, for 3e grutchen a3ens us? Ands 
Moises seide, The Lord schal 3yue to 3ou 
at euentid fleischis> to ete, and loones in 
the morewetid in plentee, for he herde 
3oure grutchyngis, bi which 3e grutchiden 
aj3ens hym; for whi, what ben we? 3oure 
grutchyng is not a3ens* vs but a3ens the 
Lord. And Moises seide to Aaron, Seles 
thou to al the congregacioun of the sones 
of Israel, Neize 3e bifore the Lord, for he 
herde 3oure grutchyng. And whanne Aa- 10 
ron spak to al the cumpeny of the sones 
of Israel, thei bihelden to the wildirnesse, 


44 my3t BpEFH. ‘the e. § generacioun 4. 


®the which 1. P Om. w. 4 Lordes hond 1s. * pottis of fleischis plures. 
Vv meles 18. 


W go I. Xor EILPS. YnatiI. 72 3eG. 


230 EXODUS. 


spek thow to hem, At euen 3e shulen eete 
flesh, and eerli 3e shulen be fillid with 
looues, and 3e shulen wyte that Y am 
13the Lord 30ure God. Thanne it was doon 
at euen, and steiynge vp a curlew couerde 
the tentis, and eerly dew cam by thet en- 
14 uirown't of the tentis. And whanne it 
hadde couerde the vttermore parti of the 
erthe, it aperid in wildernes lassid, and 
as with a pestel pownyd, into the lyknes 
150f an hoore frost vpon the erthe. The 
which thing whanne the sones of Yrael 
hadden seen, thei seiden togidere, Man 
hu? that bitokneth, what is this? forsothe 
thei knewen not what it was. To whom 
Moyses seith, This is the breed that the 
1c Lord hath 3ouun to 30w for to eete. This 
is the word that the Lord comaundide, 
Echon gedere of it how myche it" sufficith 
for to eete, the tenthe part of thre 
busshels bi ech heedes, after the noumbre 
of soules that dwellen in the tabernacle, 
1780 3e shulen taak. And so dyden the 
sones of Yrael, and thei gadreden an- 
18 other’ more, another lesse; and thei me- 
surden it at the mesure of gomor, that is, 
of threttenthe” pownde, with the tenthe 
part of two pownde; ne he that gederede 
more hadde more, ne he that gaderyde* 
lesse foond lesse, but eche after that that 
i9he my3te eete gadreden. And Moyses 
seide to hem, No man leeue therof vitoY 
20the morwen ; the whiche herden him not, 
but sum therof lafte vnto the morwen, 
and it biganne to boyle wormes, and 
stonk; and Moyses was wrooth a3ens hem. 
21 Forsothe eche gaderede the morwetide as 
myche as my3te suffice to ete, and whanne 
22 the sunne bigan to heet, it moltid. The 
sixte day forsothe thei gadreden dowble 
metis, that is to seye, two goimors bi eclie 


XVI. 13-22. 


and lo! the glorie of the Lord apperide 
in a cloude. Forsothe the Lord spak tou 
Moises, and seide, Y herde the grutch- 12 
yngis of the sones of Israel; spek thou to 
hem, At enentid 3e schulen ete fleischis®, 
and in the morewtid 3e schulen be fillid® 
with looues, and 3e schulen wite that Y 
am ‘3oure Lord God’. Therfor euentid13 
was maad, and ‘curlewes stieden® and® 
hiliden the castels; and in the morewtid 
deew cam bi! the face of the castels. And 14 
whanne it hadde hilid the erthe®, a litil 
thing', and as powned with a pestel, in the 
licnesse of an hoorfrost on erthe™, ap- 
peride® in the® wildirnesse. And whanne 1s 
the sones of Israel hadden seyn that, thei 
seiden to gidere, Man hn? which? signyfieth, 
what is this? for thei wisten not what it 
was. To whiche! Moises seide, This is 
the’ breed, which® the Lord hath 3oue tot 
30u to ete. This is the word which" the 16 
Lord comaundide, Ech man gadere’ therof 
as myche as suffisithY to be etun, gomor* 
bi ech heed’, bi the noumbre of 3oure 
soulis that dwellen? in the tabernacle, so 
3e schulen take. And the sones of Israel 17 
diden so, and thei gaderiden oon more, an- 
other* lesse; and thei metiden at the me-18 
sure” gomor‘; nethir he that gaderide more 
had more, nethir he that made redi lesse 
fond lesse, but alle gaderiden bi that that 
thei my3ten ete. And Moises seide to hem, 19 
Noon® leeue therof in to the morewtid ; 
whiche® herden not him, but summe of20 
hem leftenf til to the? morewtid, and it 
bigan to buyle with wormes, and it was 
rotun; and Moises was wrooth a3ens hem. 
Forsothe alle’ gaderiden in the morewtid 21 
as myche as ‘ni3te suffice! to be eten; and 
whanne the sunne was hoot, it was mol- 
tun. Sotheli in the sixte dai thei gader- 22 


‘Om. ze. ttenurown a. tOm. spern. Yoner prim. Wthritteve speru. *greythid E. Yinto £ pr.m. 


@fleishe 1s. © fulfillid rs. 


f soure Lord gc. the L. 3oure God ts. 
corolues stiede BcGNQX. c. that is, the m. of e. stiede K. corlu stiede tT. 


& a corolu, that ts, a multitude of 
h vp and Is. i bifore 1s. 


kK ouer part of the erthe x see.m. 1 Om, c see.m. DGIKMN sec. m. SX see.m. “the erthe 1s. 7 it ap- 
peride is. ° Om. pixsw. Pthe whichr. 4 whomis, "Om.1s. * the which F. thats. + Om.1. 
“that is. Vv gadride x. W it suflisith 1s. | * gomor, that is, conteynynge a qwart and half. Ly. he. 8. 


g. conteyneth a quart and an half paqrs marg. Tx. g. that contenith a quarte and half HLNo. a goomor, 


that is, other half quart 18. g. the whiche counteth a qwart and half x. 
@ and another c. and another oon v. 


2 dwelliden pL. 


© the whiche 1. f leften therof'is, & Om. x. 


h alle thei 1s. 


Y pole, text, heed marg,. 1. 
b mesurus L. ¢ of gomor wx. 4 no main Is. 
i suffiside rs. 


XVI. 23-—~35. 


man. And alle the princes of the multi- 
23tude camen, and tolden to Moyses, the 
which seith to hem, This is that the Lord 
spak, The rest of the holy day is halwid 
to the Lord, to morwe al that is to 
worchynge dothe, and ‘that ben to seeth- 
ing* seetheth*, and what euer shal be 
2trelif, leith vp til? to morwe. And thei 
diden so as Moyses hadde’ comaundide, 
and it stonk not, ne worme was founde 
2sthere yn. And Moyses seide, Etith that 
to day, for it is the saboth of the Lord, yt 
shal not be founde to day in the feelde; 
26six dayes gedere 3e, in the seuenthe day 
forsothe is the saboth of the Lord, ther- 
27for it shal not be foundun. The seuenthe 
day cam, and goon out of the puple that 
thei my3ten gedere, thei fonden no3t. 
28 And the Lord seide to Moyses, How long 
wolen 3e not kepe my maundementis, and 
29my lawe? Seeth that the Lord shal 3yue 
to 30w a saboth, and therfore he shal 
3yue to 3ow the sixt day dowble meetis; 
dwel euerechon anentis hym silf, no man 
goo out of his place the seuenthe day. 
30 And the puple halowide the seuenthe day. 
31 And the hows of Yrael clepide the name 
of it man®, that was as the seed of coli- 
aundre white, and the taast of it as of! 
sztryed floure with hony. And Moyses 
seyde, This is the word that the Lord 
comaundide, Fulfil thow gomor of it, and 
be it kept into generaciouns afterward to 
comen, that thei knowen the breed with 
the which Y norshide hem in wildernes, 
whanne 3e weren® lad out of the loond of 
33 Egipte. And Moyses seide to Aaron, Tak 


ah vessel, and putte ther yn mani, how. 


myche may take gomor, and ley vp be- 
fore the Lord, to kepe into 3oure genera- 
34 ciouns, as the Lord comaundide to Moyses; 
and Aaron putte it in the tabernacle, to 
35be reserued. And the sones of Yrael 


% all that is to seething & pr.m. 
€ manna a sec.m. {the a prom. & ben E prim. 
1 Om. 18. 

t the sixt L. 


k two gomors Is. m ben to I. 


POm.u. 1 3¢ it rs. 


@ seeth E pr. m. 
h 00 BDEFN. 


n left eELP. left ouer 1. residue, or lefte over s. 
8 in that day it 3s. 


EXODUS. 231 


iden double metis, that is, ‘twei gomor* by! 
ech man. Forsothe alle the princis of the 
multitude camen, and telden to Moises, 
which seide to hem, This it is that thees 
Lord spak, The reste of the sabot is ha- 
lewid to the Lord, do 3e what euer thing 
schal be wrou3t to morewe, and sethe 3e 
tho thingis that schulen™ be sodun; so- 
theli what euer thing is residue", kepe 3e° 
til in? to the morewe. And thei diden so 24 
as Moises comaundide, and it was not 
rotun, nether a worm was foundun ther 
ynne. And Moises seide, Ete 3e that in2s 
this dai, for it is the sabat of the Lord, it 
schal not be foundun to dai in the feeld; 
gadere 3e4 in sixe™ daies, forsothe the sa-26 
bat of the Lord is in the seuenthe dai, 
therfor it* schal not be foundun. The se-27 
uenthe dai cam, and summe of the puple 
3eden out ‘to gadire', and thei founden" 
not. Forsothe the Lord seide to Moises, 28 
Hou long ‘nylen je” kepe my comaunde- 
mentis®, and my lawe? Se 3e* that the 29 
Lord 3af to 30u the’ sabat, and for this? 
he 3af* to 3on in the sixte” dai double 
meetis; ech man dwelle at him silf, noon® 
go out of his place in the senenthe dai. 
And the puple kepte sabat? in the se-30 
uenthe dai. And the hous? of Israel clepide s1 
the name therof’ man, whichs was whijt 
as the seed of coriandre®, and the taast 
therof! was as of flour with hony. For-32 
sothe Moises seide, This is the word which* 
the Lord comaundide, Fille thou a gomor! 
therof, and be it kept in to generaciouns 
to comynge aftirward, that thei knowe the’ 
breed bi™ which Y fedde 3ou in the" wil- 
dirnesse, whanne 3e weren led out of the 
lond of Egipt. And Moises seide to Aa-33 
ron, Take thou o° vessel, and putte ther- 
inne man, as myche as gomor? mai take, 
and putte? bifore the Lord, to be kept in 
to’ 30ure generaciouns, as the Lord co-31 


bo were ue pram. © to BpEH. 4 Om. E prim. 


i manna 4 see. m. 


o 3e it Is. 


t Om. 1. togadere its.  founden zis. V wil 


3e not 1. Wheestis 1s. *Om.c. yOm.¢. #that1. this thing s. *hath jouen 1s. >seuenthe w sup.ras. 


d the sabat pers. 
1 gomor or a@ mesure 8. 


©no man Is. 
k that rs. 
r Om. B. 


© meynee Is. 
m with 1. 


f of that mete 1s. 
n Omi ts. 


hcoliaundre pc. iOm. G. 
4 putte it rs. 


g the which 1. 
9 a EIMS. P a gomor Is, 


232 


eten man fourti wynter, to the tyme that 
thei camen into a loond able to dwel yn; 
with this meet thei weren norishid forto* 
thei towcheden to! the coostys of the loond 

360f Chanaan. Gomor forsothe is the tenthe 
party of ephi, that is, a mesure of thre 
busshels. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 Thanne goon forth al the multitude of 
the sones of Yrael fro the desert of Syn, 
bi her mansiouns, after the word of the 
Lord, ‘setten tentis™ into Raphidym, 
where was not" water to the puple for 

2to drynke. The which ianglynge ajens 
Moyses, seith, 3if to vs water, that we 
drynken. To whom answerde Moyses, 
What iangle 3e a3ens me, whi tempte 3e 

3the Lord? The puple thanne thristide 
there, for meschef of water, and , it 
grucchide a3en Moyses, setynge, Whi hast 
thow maad vs? to goo out of Egipte, that 
thow my3te slee vs, and oure fre chil- 
4dren, and beestes, thur3 thrist ? Moyses 
forsothe criede to the Lord, seiynge, 
What shal Y do to this puple? 3it a litil 
swhile, and it? shal stonen me. The Lord 
seided to Moyses, Goo before the puple, 
and tak with thee of the aldren of Yrael, 
and the 3erde, with the which thow smoot 
the floode tak in thin hoond, and goo; 

6loo! Y shal stoond before thee there, vpon 
the stoon of Oreb, and thow shalt smyte 
the stoon, and there shal goon out of it 
water, that the puple drynk. Moyses 
dide so beforn the eldren men™ of Yrael; 

zand he clepide the name of that place 
Temptynge, for the ianglyng of the sones 
of Yrael, and for thei temptiden the Lord, 
seiynge, Whether is God in vs, or noon? 

8 Forsothe Amalech cam, and fau3te ajen 

9Yrael in Raphidym. And Moyses seide 
to Josue, Chees men, and thow goon out, 


1 Om. BpE. 
tT Om. BDEF pr.m. H. 


kK as long # pr.m. 

4 saith £. 
s putte rms. tintor. man plures. 

¢ the whiche 1. 
land 1. 


> no Is. 
h oure beestis 1s. 
9° or ELP. P nati. 


tiden rs. & Ofym w. 
grutchiden 1s. 
" Wher plures. 


EXODUS. 


m meuyden her tentis £ pr.m. 


Vv Om. ze. bi rs. 
enhabited Re@KNQ. able to be enh. 1. abitable, that is, a lond able to be enh. s. 
dQOm. 1. 
k with the which 1. 
4 the men Is. 


XVI. 36—XVII. 9: 


maundide to Moises; and Aaron puttide® 
that to be kept in‘ the tabernacle. For-3s 
sothe the sones of Israel eeten manna" in’ 
fourti 3eer, til thei camen in to the lond 
abitable*; thei weren fed with this mete 
til thei touchiden the endisY of the lond 
of Canaan. Forsothe gomor is the tenthe 36 
part of efy. : 


CAP. XVII. 


Therfor al the multitude of the sones of 1 
Israel 3ede forth fro the deseert of Syn, bi 
her dwellyngis, bi the word of the Lord, 
and settiden? tentis in Rafidym*, where 
was not> watir to the puple to drynke. 
Whiche® pzuple* chidde a3ens Moises, and2 
seide, 3yue thou® water to vs, that we 
drynke. To whichef Moises answeride, 
What chiden 3e ajens me, and whi tempten 
3e the Lord? Therfor the puple thristides 
there for the scarsnesse of watir, and 
grutchiden® a3ens Moises, and seide, Whi 
madist thou vs to go out of Egipt, to sle 
vs, and oure fre children, and beestis", for 
thrist? Forsothe Moises criede to thea 
Lord, and seide, What schal Y do to this 
puple? 3it a litil, also' it schal stone me. 
The Lord seide to Moises, Go thou bifores 
the puple, and take with thee of the eldre 
men of Israel, and take in thin hond the 
3erde, ‘bi which* thou hast smyte the flood, 
and go; lo! Y schal stonde there beforee 
thee, aboue the stoon of Oreb, and thou 
schalt smyte the stoon, and water schal go 
ont therof, that the puple drynke!, Moises 
dide so byfore the eldere men of Israel ; 
and he clepide the name of that place7 
Temptacionn, for the chidyng™ of the sones 
of Israel, and for thei temptiden the Lord, 
and seiden, Whether® the Lord is in vs, 
ether® nay? ? Forsothe Amalech cam, ands 
fau3t ajens Israel in Rafidym. And Moises 9 
seide to Josue, Chese thou men, and go 
out, and fiz3te to morewe ajens men’ of 


1 no BDEFH. © Om. 8B. Phe E pr.m. 


wOm.1. *abitable, thai is, able to be 
Y coostis 1s. . 2 thei set- 
€ Om. DIKRsT sec.m. Ww. f whom is. & thei 


1 drynke therof r. ™ chidyngs «. 


XVII. 10—XVITII. 5. 


fiz3t ajens Amalech, to morwen; and Y 
shal stoond in the frount of- the hil, hau- 
ynge the jerde of God in myn hoond. 
10 Josue dide as Moyses had spokun, and 
he fau3te a3jens Amalech. Moyses for- 
sothe, and Aaron, and Hur steiden vp vpon 
ithe cop of the hil; and whanne Moyses 
rereden vp the hoondes, Yrael ouercom ; 
ellis forsothe if he a litil abatide, Ama- 
i2lech ouercam. Forsothe the hoondes of 
Moyses weren heuy; thanne thei, takynge 
a stoon, puttiden vnder hym, in the which 
he sete. Aaron forsothe and Hur sus- 
teyneden the hoondes of hym, on either 
syde; and it was doon, that the hoondes 
of hym werieden not, vnto the goyng 
13down of the sunne. And Josue made 
Amalech to flee, and the puple of hym, 
14in the mouth of the swerd. And the 
Lord seide to Moyses, Wryte this in the 
book for mynde, and tak in the eeris 
of Josue; forsothe Y shal do awey the 
ismynde of Amalech vnder heuene. And 
Moyses bilde an auter, and clepide the 
name of it The Lord myn enhaunsyng, 
16seiynge, For the hoond of the Lord oonli, 
and the batayle of God it was a3ens Ama- 
lech, fro generacioun into generacioun. 


CAP. XVIII. 
1 And whanne Jethro, the preest of Ma- 


dian, cosyn’ to Moyses, hadde herd alle - 


thingis that God dide to Moyses, and to 
Yrael his puple, forthi that the Lord 
2hadde ladde Yrael out of Egipte, he tok 
Sephoram, the wijf of Moyses, whom he 
3sente ajen, and the two sones of hym, of 
whom oon was clepid Gersan, seiynge the 
fader, a comlyng Y was in an alien loond, 
athe tother forsothe Eliezar, God forsothe, 
seith, myn helper of my fader, and he 
hath delyuered me fro the swerd of Pha- 
srao. Thanne cam Jetro, cosyne to Moyses, 


EXODUS. 


233 


Amalech ; lo! Y schal stonde in the cop of 

the hil, and Y schal haue ‘the 3erde of God" 

in myn hond. Josue dide as Moises spak, 10 

and fau3t* a3ens Amalech. Forsothe Moises, 

and Aaron, and Hur stieden' on the cop 

of the hil; and whanne Moises reiside the" 11 

hondis, Israel onercam ; forsothe if he let’ 

down a Hhitil, Amalech ouercam. Sothelit2 

‘the hondis of Moises¥ weren heuy*, ther- 

for thei token a stoon, and puttideY vndir 

hym, in? which stoon he sat. Forsothe 

Aaron and Hur susteyneden hise hondis, 

on euer eithir side; and it was don, that 

hise hondis weren not maad weri, til to 

the goyng down of the sunne. And Josuef 13 ea ae 
droof awey Amalech and his puple, in“the pasate 
mouth of swerd, that ts, bi the scharpnesse Ebreus en 
of the swerd*®. Forsothe the Lord seide 14 eee 
to Moises, Wryte thou this in a book, for jp of dme 
mynde, and take in® the eeris‘ of Josue ; oneal 
for Y schal do awei the mynde of Ama- 

lech fro vndur heuene. And Moises bildide 15 

an auter, and clepide® the name therof The 

Lord myn enhaunsere, and seide’, For the 16 

hond of the Lord aloone, and the bateil of 

God schal be a3ens Amalech, fro genera- 

cioun in to generacioun. 


CAP. XVIII. 


And whanne Jetro, the prest of Madian, 1 
‘the alye of* Moises {, hadde herd alle 
thingis which! God hadde do to Moises, 
and to Israel his puple, for the Lord hadde 
led Israel out of the lond of Egipt, he™2 
took Sefora, ‘the wijf of Moises", whom 
he® hadde sent a3en, and hise twei sones,3 
of which oon was clepid Gersan, for the 
Jadir seide?, Y was a comelyng in alien4 
lond, forsothe the tother was" clepid Eli-4 
ezer, for Moises seide’,God of my fadirt 
is myn helpere, and he delyuerede me fro 
the swerd of Farao. Therfor Jetro, ‘alie of 5 


t the alie of 
Moises, in E- 
bren it is, fadir 
of the wiyf of 
Moises. Lire 
here. BCGQX. 


8 the alye E pr.m. 


tGoddis jerde1. *he faugt 1. twenten vp1. stieden vps. “hisrs. Vlet hems. W Moises hondes 1s, 


yY putten mw. 7 on Is. 


x heuy, or oa s. 


She clepide 1s. » Lord iss. ihe seide 1s. 
which 1. ™ Jetro1s. ® Moises wijf 1s. 


T sone wasts. 8 at his birthe seide 1s. 


Om. BDEILMPRTW. 
seharpnesse of swerd Josue killide the stronge men of Amelech 1s. 
k cosyn to 1. the alye ether fadir of the wijf of n. 

© Moises 1s. 
t fadris 1. 


‘e scharpnesse of the swerd, that is, bi 
dtake it rs. © in tos. f herynge rs. 
\the 


P at his birthe seide 1s. 4 an alien DMNIRSTX. 


Hh 


234 EXODUS. XVIII. 6—16. 


and the sones of hym and his wijf, to 
Moyses in desert, where he hadde sett 
6tentis biside the hil of God. And he 
sente to Moyses, seiynge, I, thi cosyn 
Jethro, come to thee, and thi wijf, and 
7thi two childrent with hir. The which, 
goon out into the a3encomyng of his 
cosyn, lowtide, and kisside hym, and thei 
salutiden hem silf togidris with pesible 
swordis. And whanne he was goon into 
the tabernacle, Moyses tolde to his cosyn 
alle thingis that God hadde doon to Pha- 
rao, and to the Egipciens, for Yrael, and 
al the traueyle that hadde fallun to hem 
in the weye, fro the which the Lord 
ghadde delyuered hem. And Gethro was 
glad vpon alle the goodis that the Lord 
dide to Yrael, forthi that he hadde dely- 
uered hym fro the hoondis" of the Egip- 
iwciens; and seith, Blissid be the Lord 
God’ that hath delyuered jou" fro ‘the 
hondes* ofY the Egipciens, and fro the 
hoond of Pharao, that hath drawun out 
ihis puple fro the hoond of Egipte; now 
I haue knowun for greet is the Lord 
aboue alle goddis, forthi that thei prowdli 
wdiden ajens hem. Thanne Jethro, the 
cosyn to Moyses, offrede to God brent 
sacrifices’, and oostes?; and Aaron, and 
alle the aldren of Yrael, camen, that thei 
my3ten eete breed with hym before God. 
13 Another forsothe day Moyses sat for to 
deme the puple, the which stood ni3 to 
14 Moyses, fro morwe to euen. The which 
thing whanne his cosyn hadde seen, that 
is, alle thingis that he dide in the puple, 
seith, What is this that thow dost” in the 
puple ? whi alone sittist thow, and al the 
puple abidith fro morwetide vnto euen ? 
15 To whom answerde Moyses, To me 
cometh the puple, sechynge the sentence 
160f God; and whanne there fallith to hem 


Moises", cam, and the sones of Moises and 
his wijf camen to Moises’, in to deseert, 
where Jetro settide” tentis bisidis the hil 
of God; and sente* to Moises, and seide,6 
Y Jetro, thin alie, come to thee, and thi 
wijf, and thi twei sones with hir. And7 
Moises 3ede out into the comyng of his 
alieY, and worschipide, and kiste hym, and 
thei gretten hem silf to gidere with pesi- 
ble? wordis. And whanne he*® hadde en-8 
trid in to the tabernacle, Moises tolde to 
‘his alie> alle thingis whiche God hadde 
do to Farao, and to Egipcians®, for Israel, 
and he tolde4 al the trauel which® bifelle 
to hem in the weie, of which the Lord 
delyueredef hem. And Jetro was glad on’9 
alle the goodis whiche the Lord hadde do 
to Israel, for he delyuerede Israel fro the 
hond of Egipcians. And Jetro  seide, 10 
Blessid be ‘the Lord , that delynerede 30u 
fro the hond' of Egipcians*, and fro ‘the 
hond of Farao!, which™ Lord delyuered 
his puple fro the hond® of Egipt ; now Y1 
knowe® that the Lord is greet aboue alle 
goddis, for ‘thei diden? proudli ajyens hem4. 
Therfor Jetro, ‘alie of Moises", offride brent 12 
sacrifices and offryngis,to God; and Aa- 
ron, and alle the® eldere men of Israel, 
camen to ete breed with hymt bifore God. 
Forsothe in the tother dai Moises sat that13 
he schulde deme the puple, that" stood ni3 
Moises’, fro the morewtid til to euentid’. 
And whanne ‘his alie* hadde seyn this, 14 
that is, alle thingis ‘whiche heY dide in the 
puple, he seide, What is this that thou 
doist in the puple? whi sittist thou aloone, 
and al the puple abidith? fro the morewtid 
til to euentid*? To whom Moises answer-15 
ide, The puple cometh to me, and axith 
the sentence of God; and whanne ony 16 
strijf bifallith to hem, thei comen to me, 
that Y deme bitwixe hem, and schewe ‘the 


tsones p. Uhonde z& YOm. sDEFH. Wys kr pr.m. Xhonde se. ‘YOm. 4, 2 sacrifice a. 
‘a sacrifises to brynn and to slaa x pr.m. > dist BpFH. 


u Moises alije 1. alieto M.s. vhimis. Wsetterrs. *hesenters. Ycosyni. # plesible co. 
aJetrois. Phimis. ¢the Egipcians1s. 4 toldetohimis. © thatis. fhad delynered is. & of 1. 
h Lord God a. ihondis x. * the Egipcians 1s. 1 Farao hond s. ™the which 1. ™ lond pex. © haue 
know p. P the Egipcians han do 1. the Egipcians diden s. 4 Israel 1s. * Moises cosyn 1. Moises alie s. 


8 Om.s. t Jetro1s, the whiche 1. whiche s. 


¥to Moises 1s. W the enentid 1s. * Jetrois. Y that 
Moises 1s. 2 abidith thee p. 4 the euentid Berts. 


XVII. 17—~27. 


eny strijf*, thei comen® to me, that Y 
deme betwix hem, that Y shewe the 
17heestis of God, and his lawe®. And he, 
Not good thing, he seith, thow dost, 
isthow art consumyd with foli labour, and 
thow and this puple that is with thee ; 
ouer thi strengthes is this doyng of 
causis, alone ‘that thow shalt not mowe 
i9susteyne®. But here my wordis and coun- 
sels, and the Lord shal be with thee; be 
thow to the puple in thes thingis that 
perteynen to God, that thow telle to hem 
20that ben seyd; and thow! shewe to the 
puple the serymonyes, and the ryte of 
heriyng, and the weie bi the whych thei 
owen to goon yn, and the werk that thei 
2i0wen to doon. And puruey of al the 
puple men my3ti, and dredinge God, in 
whom be trewthe, and the whiche haten 
aueryse; and ordeyne of hem rewlers 
vpon thowsaundes, and rewlers vpon hun- 
drethes, and rewlers vpon fifti, and rewlers 
22vpon ten, that mowen deme the puple al 
tyme; and what euer ‘shal be more, telle 
thei it to thee, and deme thei the lasse 
thingis oonli, that lijter it be to thee, the 
23charge partid vnto othere. And if thow 
dost thus, thow shalt fulfil the comaunde- 
ment of Ged, and his heestis thow may! 
susteyne™; and al this puple shal" turne 
24with pees to her places. The whiche 
thingis herd, Moyses dide alle thingis 
25that he meuyde to. And dow3ti men, 
chosun of al Yrael, he ordeyned hem 
princes of the puple, rewlers vpon thow- 
sandes, and rewlers vpon hundrethis, and 
rewlers upon fifti, and rewlers vpon ten, 
2¢6that demeden the puple al tyme; what 
euer forsothe were harder, thei tolden to 
hym, oonli the lizter thingis demynge. 
27 And he lafte his cosyn, the which turnyd 
a3en, 3ede into his loond. 


¢ disputisoun £ pr.m. 4 comith p. 
Mayst not susteyne it E pr.m. 
"may E pr.m. 


b Goddes heestis 1s. & lawe to hem 1s. 


EXODUS. 


e Jawes DEU. 
ithat thow £ pr.m. to u. 


ad Om. B. 


235 


comaundementis of God, and hise lawis®. 

And Jetro seide, Thou doist a? thing not® 17 

good, thou art wastid with a fonned tra-1s 

nel, bothe thon and this puple which is 

with thee; the werk is aboue thi strengthis, 

thon aloone maist not suffre it. But here ig 

thou my wordis and counseils’, and the 

Lord schal be with thee; be thou to the 

puple in these thingis that perteynen to 

God, that thon telle the" thingis that ben 

seid to the puple; and schewe to the puple 20 

the! cerymonyes, and custom of worschip- 

yng, and the weie bi which* ‘thei owen! 

to go, and the werk which™ ‘thei owen" 

to do. Forsothe® puruey thou? of al the2i 

puple my3ti ment‘, and dredynge God, in + Another 

whiche is treuthe, and whiche' haten aua- eee ta 

rice; and ordeyne thou of hem tribunes}, "yer re pen, 

and centuriouns, and quinquagenaries, and &* 

deenys, whiche’ schulen deme the puple in 22 he be union: 

al tyme; sotheli what ever thing is grettere, Soe: 

telle thei tot thee, and deme thei ooneli jmquyet a 

lesse thingis, and be it esiere to thee, guienee of . 

‘ sas y 

whanne the burthun is departid in to othere ten. Lire here. 
en.- If thou schalt do this, thou schalt 23°°*°*™’ 

fille? the comaundement’ of God, and thou 

schalt mowe bere’ hise comaundementis* ; 

and al this puple schal turne aj3en with 

pees to her places. And whanne these24 

thingis weren herd, Moises dide alle thingis 

whicheY Jetro counselide?. And whanne2s 

noble men of al* Israel weren chosun, 

Moises ordeynede hem princis of the pu- 

ple, tribunes, and centuriouns, and quin- 

quagenaries, and denes, whiche demeden 26 

the puple in al tyme; forsothe, whateuer 

thing was hardere, thei telden to Moises, 

and thei demeden esiere thingis oneli. And 27 

Moises lefte ‘his alieb, which turnede a3en, 

and 3ede in to his lond. 


fdest ppEFH. & this nDEU. 
k wer eprom. | mayt p. 


h all thy self thou 
m kepe E pr.m. 


e thatisnotis. fthat1is. & my counseils 1s, 


hOm.s. ithos. the which 1. ! hem oweth 1. hem owen s. ™that 1s. hem oweth1. hem owen s. 
° And is. P30u vp. 4 my3ti men, ether wyse men N. "the whiche 1. *% the whiche1. Om. pv. ¥ ful- 
fille 1s. ¥ comaundementis p. heest s. W here G. susteyne 1. *heestists. Ythe whiche 1. 2 coun. 


selide him 1s. Om. plures. 


b Jetro the 1. Jetro s. 


Hh@ 


236 


CAP. XIX. 

1 The thridde moneth of the goyng of 
Yrael out of the loond of Egipte, in this 
day thei camen into the wildernes of Sy- 

2nai; for thei goon forth fro Raphidym, 
and comynge vnto deserte® of Synay, 
‘setten tentis? in the same place; and 
there Yrael ficchid tentis, ‘forn ajens‘ the 

3hil. Moyses forsothe steyde vp into the 
hil to God; and the Lord clepide hym 
fro the hil, and seith, Thes thingis thow 
shalt seye to the hows of Jacob, and thow 
4shal telle to the sones of Yrael, 3oure self 
han seen what I haue doon to the Egip- 
ciens, what maner wise Y haue born 30u 
vpon the weenges of eglis, and haue takun 
s5tome. If thanne 3e heren my voys, and 
kepen my couenaunt, 3e shulen be to me 
into my propre tresour of alle puples; 
6myn forsothe is al the erthe ; and 3e shu- 
len be to me into a preestis kyngdom, and 
an holi folk; thes ben the wordis that 
thou shalt spek to the sones of Yrael. 
7Moyses cam, and clepide togidere the 
more men thur3 birthe of the puple, he 
expownede alle the wordes that the Lord 
shadde comaundid. And al the puple an- 
swerde togidere, We shulen doon alle thet 
thingis that the Lord hath’ spokun. And 
whanne Moyses hadde told the wordis of 
9the puple to the Lord, the Lord seyde to 
hyin, Now ri3t Y shal com to thee in 
derknes of a clowde, that the puple here 
me spekynge to thee, and leue to thee, 
intot with outen eende. Thanne Moyses 
tolde the wordes of the puple to the 
10 Lord, that seide to hym, Goo to the pu- 
ple, and halwe hem to day and to mor- 
i1wen, and wasshe thei her clothis, and 
be thei redi into the thridde day; in the 
thridde day forsothe the Lord shal des- 
sende before al the folk vpon the hil of 
i2Synay. And thow shalt ordeyn termes 


© the deserte BDEFH. 
8 Om. p. t ynto E. 


¢ Om. EFGIKLNPQST pr.m. X. 
h the descert Is. 
° the Egipcians G1. 
himis. ¥ hath spoken ts. 


P haue bore rs. 4 300 to Is. 


EXODUS. 


P thei setten her dwellingis z pr. m. 


4 the firste 1s. 
i thei settiden rs. * went vp 1. stiede vp s. 
r eerthe Is. 
w wordis, or the answers s. 


XIX. 1—12. 


CAP. XIX. 

In the thridde monethe of the goyng1 
‘of Israel* out of the lond of Egipt, in this4 
dai®* thei camen in to thef wildirnesse of — * in this day, 
Synai; for thei 3eden forth fro Rafidym, 2 ee of 
and camen til in® to deseert of Synai, and [e tvidte 
settiden' tentis in the same place; aud “ere. sccoax. 
there Israel settide tentis, enen ajens the 
hil. Forsothe Moises stiede* in to the hils 
to! God; and the Lord clepide hym fro 
the mount, and seide, Thou schalt seie 
these thingis to the hows of Jacob, and 
thou schalt telle to the sones of Israel, 
3e™ silf" han seyn what thingis Y haue4 
do to Egipcians®, how Y bar? 30u on the 
wengis of eglis, and took to1 me. Therfors 
if 3e schulen here my vois, and schulen 
kepe my couenaunt, 3e schulen be to me 
in to a specialtet of alle puplis; for al the ie pie 
lond® is myn; and 3e schulen be to me iné a frendshipe, 
to a rewme of preesthod, and ‘3e schulen ara 
bes an hooli folk; these ben the wordis ‘'eny- ¢9*- 
whiche thou schalt speke to the sones of 
Israel. Moyses cam, and whanne the7 
gretter men in birthe of the puple weren 
clepid' to gidere, he expownede alle the 
wordis whiche the Lord comaundide". Ands 
alle the puple answeride to gidere, We 
schulen do alle thingis whiche the Lord 
spak’Y, And whanne Moises hadde teld the 
wordis* of the puple to the Lord, thes 
Lord seide to hym, Ri3t now* Y schal 
come to thee in aY derknesse of a* cloude, 
that the puple here ine spekynge to thee, 
and bileue* to thee withouten ende. Ther- 
for Moises telde the wordis of the puple 
to the Lord, which seide to Moises, Go 10 
thou to the puple, and make hem holi® to 
dai and to morewef, and waische thei her + Here hatow- 
clothis, and be thei redi in to the thridde Meee ied 
dai; for in the thridde dai the Lord schal ‘fan here 
come doun bifore al the puple on® the hil 
of Synai. And thou schalt sette termes 12 


clothis, and 
neize not her 
wifes. 1 


4 fro the regyonn of = pr.m. * Om. £. 


f Om. x. gs Om. pr. 

0 30ur self Ls. Om. 1. 
¥ comaundide 
2 Om. plures. 


€ dai of that monethe 1s. 
lofeg. ™3ou w. 
8Om.1. +t gedered 1s. 


Xanooni. Y Om. 1s. the o. 


a that it bilene 1. » the which 1. © holi bi ensaumple of thi selfs. 4Om.@. © in ex. 


XIX. 13—23. 


to the puple, bi enuyroun; and thow 
shalt seye to hem, Be" war that 3e steyen 
not into the hil, ne touche the endes of 
it; eche that touchith the hil, with deth 
13shal dye. Hondes shulen not touche hym, 
but with stones he shal be pressid down, 
or he shal be stickid with dartis; whe- 
ther he be beest, or man, he shal not 
lyne; whanne the trumpe begynneth to 
crie, thanne stey’ they” vp into the hil. 
14 And Moyses descendide fro the hil to the 
puple, and halowede yt*; and whanne 
15 thei haddun wasshun her clothes, he seith 
to hem, Be 3e redi into the thridde day, 
igand neize 3e not to 3oure wyues. And 
now the thridde day was comen, and the 
morwetide was ful cleerid; and loo! 
thundres biganne to be herd, and leytes 
to shynen, and the moost thik’ clowd to 
couer the hil; and the erye of the trump 
more” hidously made noyse, and the pu- 
17ple dredde, that was in the tentes. And 
whanne Moyses hadde led hem out into 
the a3en comyng of God, fro the place of 
the tentes, thei stoden at the rotes of the 
ishil. And-al the hil of Synay smokide, 
forthi that the Lord deseendide* vpon it 
in fier; and the smeek steyde vp of it as 
of a furneys, and al the hil was ful feer- 
19ful; and the sown of the trompe litil 
mele spronge into more, and lenger was 
strecchid. Moyses spak, and the Lord 
20answerde hym, and the Lord descendide 
vpon the hil of Synay, in that cop of the 
hil, and he clepide Moyses in the hei3t 
of it. Whider whanne he hadde steied 
2ivp, he seide to hym, Descende, and as 
with ooth charge the puple, lest perauen- 
ture it? wole passe ouer the termes to se 
the Lord, and of hem perisshe a myche 
22multitude; the preestis forsothe that 
camen ny3 to the Lord, be thei halewed, 
23 lest Y smyte hem. And Moyses seide to 
the Lord, The comounte may not stey vp 


Vv steeth p. W thow 4F pr.m. 
bhe £ pr.m. 


u Beth speri. 
descendide BoE sec.m. UN. 


f gon nat vp I. stien not vp 8. 8 or ELP. 


EXODUS. 


x hem £ pr.m. 


237 


to the puple, bi cumpas; and thou schalt 
seie to hem, Be 3e war, that 3e ‘stie not! 
in to the hil, nether touche 3e the endis 
therof ; ech man that schal touche the hil, 
schal die bi deeth. Hondis schulen not13 
touche hym, but he schal be oppressid 
with stoonus, ethir® he shall be persid® 
with dartis; whether it schal be a heest, 
ethir' ak man, it schal not lyue; whanne! 
a clarioun schal bigynne to sowne, thanne 
‘stie thei™ in to the hil. And Moises cam 
doun fro the hil to the puple, and halewide 
it; and whanne thei hadden waischun her 
clothis, he seide to hem, Be 3e redi ins 
to the thridde dai, neije 3e not to 3oure 
wyues. And now the thridde day wasic 
comun, and the morewetid was cleer; and, 
lo! thundris bigunnen to be herd, and lei- 
tis to schyne, and a moost" thicke cloude 
to hile the mounteyn ; and ‘the sownyng 
of a clarioun® made noise ful greetli?, and 
the puple dredde, that was in the castels?. 
And whanne Moises hadde led hem outi7 
in to the comyng of God, fro the place of 
castels', thei stoden® at the rootis of the 
hil. Forsothe al the hil of Synai smokide, 18 
for the Lord hadde come doun theronne 
in fier; and smoke' stiede" therof as of a 
furneis, and al the hil was ferdful’; and 1s 
the ‘sown of a clarioun™ encreesside litil 
and litil, and was* holdun forth lengere. 
Moises spak, and the Lord answeride toY 
hym, and the Lord eam doun on the hilzo 
of Synay, in thilke cop of the hil, and 
clepide’ Moises to* the eop therof. And 
whanne he hadde sticd” thidur, the Lord 21 
seide to hym, Go thou doun, and witnesse 
thou to the puple, lest perauenture it wole 
passe the termes to se the Lord, and ful 
greet multitude therof perische; also‘ 22 
preestis, that nei3en to the Lord, bet ha- 
lewid, lest Y smyte hem. And Moises 23 
seide to the Lord, The comyn puple may 
not stie® in to the hil of Synai; for thou 
a had 


Yderkk vp, 2 full g pr.m. 


h partid cq. ior exp. k Om. a prem. Ks. |) and whanne c. 
P P 


™ go thei vp 1. stie thei vps. "ful 1. ©clarioun sownyng 1s. the s. of cl.o. P greet prT sec.m. 4 tentis 1s. 


¥ the tentis 1. her tentiss. % stieden w. + the smoke therofs. stiede vp 1s. Y feerful 1s. ¥ clari- 
ouns soun I. clarioun souns. *it was1s. Y Om. pixs. 2 he clepide 1s. ®in to plures. > gon vp 1. 
stied vps. Cand p. 4be theirs. ©¢ stie vp 1s. 


238 


into the hil of Synay; thow forsothe hast 
witnessid, and comaundid seiynge, Put 
the termes about the hil, and halwe it. 

24T'o whom seith the Lord, Goo, descende, 
and thow shalt stey vp, and Aaron with 
thee; the preestis forsothe and the puple 
passe thei not the termes, ne steye thei vp 
to the Lord, lest perauenture he slee hem. 

25 And Moyses steiede vp to the puple, and 
alle thingis tolde to hem. 


CAP. XX. 


1 And the Lord spak alle thes wordes ‘to 
2 Moyses*, Y am the Lord thi God, that 
hath lad thee out of the loond of Egipte, 
3fro the hows of thraldom. Thow shalt 
4not haue alyen goddis before me. Thow 
shalt not mak to thee grauen thing, ne 
eny liknes that is in heuene aboue, and 
that is in erthe benethe, ne of hem that 
sben in watrys vnder erthe; thow shalt 
not anoure hem, ne herye hem; I for- 
sothe ain the Lord thi God, strong ge- 
lows, visitynge the wickidnes of fadris 
in sones into the thridde and the ferthe 
sgeneracioun of hem that hatiden me, and 
doynge merci into thousyndes to hem 
that louen me, and kepen myn heestis. 
7 Thow shalt not tak the name of the Lord 
thi God in veyn, ne forsothe the Lord 
shal haue innocent hym, that takith the 
gname of the Lord his God in ydel. Haue 
gmynde to halwe thin® holy day; sixe 
daies thow shalt worche, and doonf alle thi 
10 werkis; the seuenthe forsothe day is the 
haliday of the Lord thi God; thow shalt 
not doon al werk, thow, and thi sone, 
and thi dow3ter, and thi seruaunt, and 
thin handmayden, thi beeste, and com- 
ulyng that is with ynne thi 3atis; sixe for- 
sothe daies God made heuene and erthe, 
the see, and alle thingis that ben in hem, 
and he restide the seuenthe day; ther- 
fore the Lord blisside to the holi day, 


¢ Om. BDEFII. 


fstievpiks. &vptos. bseideL. i that ss. 
schalt not x. Om. 1. 
CDGKMNOQATWX sec.m. fadris in children 1. 

t sabot day 1s. dai of sabat w. 4% Om. pKos. 
uyle werk 1. syche seruyl werk s. 


fore s. 


EXODUS. 


4 that thou apEFH. 


k bynethe the 1. vndir the s. 
» worschipe tho Bc. worsch. hem 1s. ° Om. A sec.m. 1K. P fadris in sones A see.m. 


Z man seruaunt s. 


KIX. 94= eX) re 


hast witnessid, and hast comaundid, seiy- 
inge, Sette thou termes aboute the hil, and 
halewe it. To whom the Lord seide, Go24 
thou doun, and thou schalt stief, and Aa- 
ron with thee; forsothe the preestis and 
the puple passe not the termes, nethir stie 
thei to® the Lord, lest perauenture he sle 
hem. Moises 3ede doun to the puple, and 25 
telde® alle thingis to hem. 


CAP. XX 


And the Lord spak alle these wordis,1 
Y am thi Lord God, that ladde thee out2 
of the lond of Egipt, fro the hous of ser- 
uage. Thou schalt not haue alien goddis3 
bifore ine. Thou schalt not make to thee4 
a grauun ymage, nethir ony licnesse of 
thing which! is in heuene aboue, and 
which! is in erthe bynethe, nether of tho 
thingis, that ben in watris vndur* erthe; 
thou schalt not ‘herie tho!, nether ‘thous 
schalt™ worschipe"; for Y am thi Lord 
God, a stronge gelouse louyere; and® Y 
visite the wickidnesse of fadris? in to the 
thridde and the? fourthe generacioun of 
hem that haten™ me, and Y do mercy ine 
to ‘a thousynde’, to hem that louen me, 
and kepen myn heestis. Thou schalt not7 
take in veyn the name of thi Lord God, 
for the Lord schal not haue hym giltles, 
that takith in veyn the name of his Lord 
God. Haue thou mynde, that thou ha-s 
lowe the ‘dai of the sabatt; in sixe daies9 
thou schalt worche and schalt" do alle thi 
werkis ; forsothe in the seuenthe day is’ 10 
the’ sabat of thi Lord God; thou schalt 
not do* ony werk’, thou, and thi sone, and 
thi dou3tir, and thi seruaunt’, and thin 
handmaide, thi werk beeste, and the come- 
lyng which* is withynne thi 3atis; for inu 
sixe dayes God made heuene and erthe, 
the> see, and alle thingis that ben in tho, 
and restide® in the seuenthe dai; herfor® 


éethe c. f thou schalt do £ pr.m. 


llonte hem zr. ™ thou 


4 Om. a sec.m. et plures. * hatiden 1. —§ thousendes Is. 
Vv of BCDEKLMNOQRSTX. WY Om. w. *doiniti. Y ser- 
athatis. bandthe ps. Che restides. 4 ther- 


XX. 12—26, 


izand halwide it. Honour thi fader and 
thi moder, that thou be of ® long lijf vpon 
erthe, that the Lord thi God shal 3yue to 
lithee. Thow shalt not slee. Thow shalt 
is‘do no leccherye. Thow shalt not do 
16thefte. Thow shalt not spek ajens thi 
i7nei3bore fals witnes. Thow shalt not 
coueyte the hows of thi neizbore, ne thow 
shalt desyrei the wijf of hym, ne ser- 
uaunt, ne hoondmayden, ne oxe, ne asse, 
isne alle thingis that ben of hym. Al the 
puple forsothe herde voyces, and saw3 
lawmpes, and herde the sown of the 
trompe, and the hil smokynge ; and ferde 
and smitun togidere with vttermore drede, 
19thei stoden afer, seiynge to Moyses, Spek 
thow to vs, and we shulen here; spek 
not the Lord to vs, lest perauenture we 
2zodien. And Moyses seide to the puple, 
Wole* 3e not drede, that forsothe God 
proue 3ow he cam, and that the drede! of 
hym were in 3ow, and that 3e synnen not. 
21And the puple stood afer; Moyses for- 
sothe cam ny3 to the derknes, in the 
22 which was God. And the Lord seide for- 
thermore to Moyses, Thes thingis thow 
shalt seye to the sones of Yrael, 3e han 
seen that from heuene I haue spokun to 
23 30w ; 3e Shulen not mak with me silueren 
goddis, ne goldun goddis 3e shulen mak 
24to 3jow. An auter of erthe 3e shulen mak 
to me, and 3e shulen offre vpon it 3oure 
‘brent sacrifices, and pesible™, 3oure slicep, 
and oxen, in al place in the which shal 
be mynde of my name; I shal com to 
25thee, and Y shal blesse to thee. That" 
if a stonen auter thow makist to me, 
thow shalt not edifie that of hewun 
stoons; if forsothe thow rerist thi ‘grau- 
ynge yrun® vpon it, it shal be polutid. 
26 Thow shalt not stey vp bi greeses to myn 
auteer, lest thi filthe be shewyd. 


EXODUS. 


239 


the Lord blesside the ‘dai of the sabate, 
and halewide it. Onoure thi fadir and 12 
thif moder, that thon be long lyuyng on 
the lond, which thi® Lord God schal 3yue 
to thee. Thou schalt not sle. Thou schalt aH 
‘do no! letcherie. Thou sehalt ‘do uois 
theft. Thou schalt not speke fals witness- 16 
yng a3ens thi neizbore. Thou! schalt not™ 17 
coueyte ‘the hous of thi nei3bore", nether 
thou schalt desyre his wijf, not® seruaunt?, 
not? handmaide, not? oxe, not’ asse, nether 
alle thingist that ben hise. Forsothe alis 
the puple herde voices, and si3 laumpis®, 
and the sowne of a elarioun, and the hil 
smokynge; and thei weren’ afeerd, and 
schakun with inward drede, and” stoden* 
afer, and seiden to Moises, Speke thou to 19 
vs, and we schulen here’; the Lord speke 
not to vs, lest perauenture we dien. And 20 
Moises seide to the puple, Nyle 3e drede, 
for God cam to proue 30u, and that his 
drede schulde be in 3ou, and that 3e 
schulden not do synne. And the puple2: 
stood afer; forsothe? Moises neizede to the 
derknesse, wherynnue God was. And the 22 
Lord seide ferthermore to Moises, Thou 
schalt seie these thingis to the sones* of 
Israel, 3e seizen that fro heuene Y spak® 
to 30u; 3e schulen not make goddis of sil-23 
ver, nethir 3e schulen make to 30u goddis 
of gold. 3e schulen make an auter of erthe 24 
to me, and 3e schulen offre theronne 3oure 
brent sacrifices, and pesible sacrifices, 3oure 
scheep, and oxun, in ech place® in which 
the mynde of my name schal be; Y schal 
come to thee, and Y schal blesse thee. That 25 
if thou schalt make an auter of stoon to 
me, thou schalt not bilde it of stoonys 
hewun; for if thou schalt reise thi knyif¢ 
theronne®, itf schal be ‘polluted, ether® de- 
Jfoulid. Thou schalt not stye" bi grees! to26 
myn auter, lest thi filthe be schewid. 


gone. }not do sper. inot desyre x prem. F pr.m. k Wyln sper. lferde per see.m.H. ™ sacri- 


fises to brynn and to make peese E pr. m. 


© sabot days. fOm.p. & thats. hthe ge. 


® Bot £ prem. 


inot do BeEILP. 


° cullter gE prim. 


k not do ncpEGQRT pr.m. | Neither 


thou 1s. ™ Om. 1s. ® thi neizboris hous 1s. © ne a sec.m. ne his 1Ks. Pmans. 4ne A sec.m. ne his 1xs. 
Fne a sec.m. ne his K. § nea sec.m. ne his kK. ‘ thingis, that is, ony thing of alle thinges 1s. ™ laumpis, 


V beinge 1. 


that is, Sikhs leitis BCGKNQSX. 
¢ 1 
placis p. 


8 house s, haue spoke 1. 


€ther vp on 1s. f éhat auter s. 


w Om. I. 
4 knyif, or other instrement wher with blood may be shed out s. 
& pollutid or ety. Om. 18. 


x thei stoden s. Y here fhee1s, 7% and ts. 


h gon vp I. stie vps. ! gresis kK. 


240 


CAP. XXI. 
1 Thes ben the domes, that thow shalt 
2 purpose to hem. If thow bye an Ebrew 
seruaunt, sixe 3eer serne he to thee, in 
the senenthe jeer he shal goo out fre, 
3freliche; with what maner clothing he 
com yn, with siche he go out; and if he 
is hauynge a wijf, and the wijf goo out 
aat ones. If forsothe the lord 3yue to hym 
a wijf, and she ber sones and dow3tris, 
the womman and the fre children of hir 
shulen be of his lord; he forsothe shal 
5goo out with his clothing. That? if the 
seruaunt seie, Y loue my lord, and wiljf, 
and fre children, I shal not goon out fre ; 
sthe lord offre hym to the goddis, and he 
shal be presentid4 to the dore, and postes ; 
and he shal thril’ his eer with an alle’, 
and he shal be to hym a seruaunt into 
7the world. If eny sille his dow3ter into 
a seruaunt, she shal not goo out as hand- 
smaydens wereu wont to goon out; if she 
displese in the eyen of hir lord, to whom 
she was takun, he shal leene hir; for- 
sothe to an alyen puple he shal not haue 
9 power of sillyug, if he leeue hir. If for- 
sothe he spouse hir to his sone, after thet 
imaner of dow3tres" he shal do to hir; 
ioand if he tak another womman to hym, 
he shal purueyY to the mayden bridalis 
and clothes, aud the pryse of the” clennes 
i1he shal not denye. If thes thre thingis 
he do not, she shal goon out frelich with 
yzouten money. Who sinytith a man, wil- 
isnynge to slee, with deeth die le; who 
forsothe is not aweytid, but God hath 
takun hym into his hondes, Y shal or- 
deyne to thee a place whidyr hym awe 
i4to flee. If eny man of avysement sle his 
nei3bour and by aspyes, fro myn auteer 


P Bot £ pr. m. 
tren BDEFH. 


4 applyed x pr. im. 


Vpreuey p. W here £ pr. m. 


k the puple 1s. 
dais. ° Andis. 
to ingis s. 


lin sixe A pr.m. et plures. 

Simy wijf Is. 
X to the postis 1s. Y his 1. 
d handmaidens kx. 
by custom Ls. 
man, or wyf s. 


€ thou3 1. 
iof his in. as he doth to his s. 
n his sone Is. 
he 1Ks. 


U settith GLw. haue sett 1s. ¥ spies R. 


EXODUS. 


r thirllen £ see. m. 


m sixte K. 
t wil 1. schal, or wole s. 
Zan al IMNW. 
Jiftithe 3cer BCGNQX. world, that is, to the fiflithe 3eer UKs, 
f forsake 1. forsakith, or leeuith s. 
k and 1s. 
© damysele, or handmaide s. 
sche hath lost bi him 1 marg. ch. that is, the houre of 3eelding dett s. * not to hir 1s. 
w bitook, or suffride him to be take 1s. 


XXI. 1—I14. 


CAP. XXI. 

These ben the domes, whiche thou schalt 1 
sette forth to hem*. If thou biest an E-2 
brew seruaunt, he schal serue thee sixe! 
3eer; mm the seuenthe™ 3eer he schal go 


out fre, with out prijs; with what maners . 


clooth he entride, with siche clooth" go he 
out; if he entride hauynge a wijf, and® 
the wijf schal go out to gidere?. But if4 
the lord of the’ servaunt 3af a wijf ft to 
hym, and sche childide sones and dou3tris, 
the womman and hir children schulen be. 
hir lordis; sotheli the sernaunt schal go 
out with his owne clooth. That’ if thes 
seruaunt seith, Y loue my lord, and wijf’, 
and children, Y schal' not go out fre; the™6 
lord brynge’ liym to goddis, that ts, ingis”; 
and he schal be set to the dore, and postis*; 
and theY lord schal perse his eere with a 
nal’, and he schal be seruaunt to hym til?® 
in to the world>, If ony man sillith his7 
dou3ter in to seruauntesse’, sche schal not 
go out as handmaidis’ weren wont to go 
out; if sche displesith in the i3en of hirs 
lord, to whom sehe was bitakun, he schal 
delyuere hir; sotheli he schal not haue 
power to sille Atv to an alien puple, if he 
forsakithf hir. Forsothe if he weddith®s 
hir to his sonne, he schal do to hir ‘bi 
the custom" of! dou3tris; that* if hef1o 
takith’ another womman™ to hym®, he 
schal puruey to the damysele® weddingis, 
and clothis, and he schal not deuye? the 
prijs of chastite1. If he doith not’ these1 
thre, sche schal go out freli without money. 
He that smytith a man, and wole sle‘, diet 12 
bi deeth; forsothe if a man settide® noti3 
aspies’, but God ‘bitook hym™ in to hise 
hondis, Y schal ordeyne a place to thee, 
whidur he* owith to fle. If ony man sleeth 14 


Snal ze prim. t thilk g prom,  % dou3- 


P to gidere with him 1s. 


nQOm.1s. © also 1. 
uhisis. Y shal brynges. W to preestis 1. 
aOm.1s. 5 world, thal is, dil to inbile ethere 


¢ a seruauntesse 1s. fo be a coneubyne 1 marg. 
& Jat wedde1. 4 aftir the maner 1. 
ltake c. take with this hondmaides. ™wom- 
P denye hir 1s. @ here chastite 1. that 
Ssle him ks. t die 
x him Is. 


+ a wiyf, his 
owne seruaunt- 
esse, which is 
an hethen wom- 
man, and his 
sernauntesse 
for euere, for if 
sehe were an 
Ebrew wom- 
man and thral, 
sche schulde go 
out fre with 
hir children in 
the seventhe 
jeer. Lire here. 
CGKOQX. 


t In Ebru it 
ts thus, that if 
he take to him 
another wom- 
man, he shal 
not deerecse 
exspencis and 
hilynge and bir 
our, that is, if 
he takith to 
him, that is, to 
his sone, un- 
other wyf with 
the handmayde 
takuo bifore 
into wyf, ke 
shal decreese 
spensis, that is, 
sufficieat ly- 
flode in hir 
hylynge, that 
is, eouenable 
elothinge, and 
hir our, that 
is, tyme to 
3elde dette, he 
shal not de. 
ereesse this in 
withdrawynge 
fro hir for the 
tother wyf wed. 
did aboue, for 
thanne thei 
mizten have 
manye wyues * 
togidere. Lyre 
here. GQX. 


XXI. 15 —28. 


thow shalt pul hym, that he be slayn. 
is Who smytith his fader, or* moder, with 
igdeethY dye he. Who? cursith his* fader, 
170r moder, be he deed. Who stelith a 
man, and sellith hym, conuycte of the 
is trespas, with deeth dye he. If men chiden, 
aud ‘that oon? smyte his neizbour with 
stoon, or with fist, and he be not deed, 
ig but lye in the bed, if he aryse and goo 
out vpon his staf, he shal be ynnocent 
that smoot; so neuertheles that he re- 
store the bisy traueils of hym, and the 
20expensis into leches. Who so smyteth 
his seruaunt, or haudmayden, with a 
jerde, and thei dien in her hondes, he 
21shal be gilti of deedly blame. If forsothe 
he lyue ouer a‘ day, or two, he shal not 
be vndurcast to that peyne, for the money 
220f hym he is. If men chiden, and a man 
smyte a womman with child, and make 
forsothe the child deed born, but she 
lyueth, he shal be vndurcast to the harme, 
as inyche as the housbond of the wom- 
man wole aske, and domes men shulen 
23deme. If forsothe hir deeth® folwe, he 
21shal 3eld lijf for lijf, eye for eye, tooth 
for tooth, hoond for hoond, foot for foot, 
2sbrynnyng for brymnyng, wounde for 
26 wounde, blones for blones. If eny man 
smyte the eye of his seruaunt, or of hond- 
mayden, and make hem ‘pure blynde®, he 
shal Jeeue hem free for the eye that he 
27hath drawun out. A tooth forsothe if 
eny man smyte out to his seruaunt, or 
to his handmayden, liyk maner he shal 
2¢leeue hem free. If an oxe with the horn 
smyte a man, or a womman, and thei 
weren deed, he shal be throwun doun to 
deeth with stones, and his flesh shal not 
be etun, and the lord shal be innocent of 


xand p. Ydeed c. 2% who so BDEFH. 


© one ey3id & pr.m. 


yY Om. pe6ogrr. 2 Om. GQ. 4 or ELPS. 
he Exs. Sore. bquyitc. § Om. mw. 
°Om.s. P lith exp. liggith sijk s. 
trespas 18. ™lyueth ouer this beeting 1s. 
pr.m. et plures. ¥ the smyter 18. 
makith 1s. 4 lyueth ouer that smiting 1s. 
page Nn. wommans hosbonde t. womman h. s. 

Om. 1. 
° putte rm. smytide G. 
“either 1s. Y or EILPS. 


EXODUS. 


@to his ppreFru. 


b his modir kr. 
K die he Exs. 
q his costis rs. 
Vino A pr.m. et plures. 
a Om. Is. 
e harm, that is, to peyne for the harm ncoGkogx. harm, or 
& as the 1s. 
lsoor for soor 1. a wan w. that is, a bloo stroke, for a wan w. 8. 
‘p that that he smot out, either 1s. 
wa Om. a pr.m. et plures. 


2 the peyne Irs. 


241 


his neizbore bi’ biforecastyng, and bi’ 
aspies, drawe thou hym awey fro myn 
auter, that he die. He that smytith his 1s 
fadir, ether* modir’, diet by deeth. Heise 
that cursith his‘ fadir, ether® modir, die’ 
bi deeth. He that stelith a man, and®17 
sillith hym, 7f he is conuyt® of the! gilt, 
diek bi decth. If men chiden, and theis 
tother! smyte™ his neij3bore with a stoon, 
ether" with the® fist, and he is not deed, 
but liggith? in the bed, if he risith, and 19 
goith forth on his staf, he that smoot 
schal be innocent; so netheles that he re- 
store hise trauelis, and costis’ in lechis. 
He that smnytith his seruaunt, ether’ hand-20 
mayde, with a 3erde, and thei ben deed 
in hise hondis, schal* be gilti of crymet. 
Sotheli if the seruaunt ouerlyueth® oY dai, 21 
ether“ tweyne*, heY schal not be suget to 
peyne?’, ‘that is* of deeth, for the seruaunt 
is his catel®. If men chiden, and a man22 
smytith a womman with childe, and so- 
theli makith® the child deed borun, but 
the womman ouerlyueth*, he schal be su- 
get to the harm’, as myche as tlie ‘hose- 
bonde of the wommanf axith, and the® 
iugis demen. But" if the! deeth of hires 
sueth, le schal 3elde lijf for lijf, i3e for ize, 24 
tooth for tooth, hond for hond, foot for 
foot, brennyng for brennyng, wounde ‘with 25 
schedyng of blood* for wounde ‘with sched- 
yng of blood*,‘a wan wounde for a wan 
wounde!. Ifa man smytith the ize of his 26 
seruaunt,ethir™ of ® handmaide, and makith 
hem oon i3ed, he schal delyuere hem fre for 
‘the ize which he puttide® out. Also? if27 
he smytith’ out a tooth fro" his sernaunt, 
ethirs handmaide, in lijk maner he schal 
delyuere hem fre. If an oxe smytith with 28 
hornt a" man, ether’ a¥ woman, and thei 


bthe tone speEFH. Cok. 4.deed BoFH. 


cdieheeKs. @Om.s. €or eps. f die 
loothir 1. ™smyteth plures. ® or EPs. 
she schal rs. t the eryme, or hidous 

Wor Erps. other L. * in tweyne a 
> maistris eatel 1. master catel s. © he 


T or ELP. 


i the Om. ceé. omnes. 
2 of his 1s. 
this horn ts. 


4 sotheli plures. 
™ or BLP. 
Sor ELP, 


Gsmite L. Tof ¥. 


li 


242 


29the oxe. And if an oxe be an hornputter 
fro 3isterday and the thridde day hens, 


and thei han warned the lord of hym, 
befor witnes, and the lord hath’ not 


holdun hym yn, and he slee a man, or 
womman’, the oxe shal be throw doun 
to the® deeth with stones, and the lord 
30 of it thei shulen slee; and if pryis be set 
to hym, he shal 3yue for his lijf what 
sieuer be askid. The sone forsothe and 
the dou3ter if it! smyte with horn, to 
32the lijk sentence he shal vnderligge. If 
seruaunt and hondmayden iti asey], thretti 
ownces* of siluer he shal 3yue to his lord ; 
the oxe forsothe shal be throwun down 
33 with stoons. If eny man open a cystern, 
and delue, and not couerith it, and oxe 
340r asse fal into it, the lord of the cistern 
shal 3eeld the prijs of the beestis, and 
35 that that is deed shal be his. If au alyen 
oxe wounde an oxe of another mannus, 
and he were deed, the quyk oxe thei 
shulen selle, and thei shulen dyuyde the 
prijs; the careyn forsothe of the deed 
36thei shulen depart bitwix hem. 
sothe he wiste, that the oxe was an horn- 
putter fro 3isterday and fro the thridde 
day hens, and his lord kepide hym not, 
he shal 3eeld oxe for oxe, and the hool 
careyn he shal al! take. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 If eny man hath stoln sheep, or oxe, 
and sleeth, or sellith, fyue oxen for oon 
oxe he shal restore, and foure sheep for 

20 sheep. If a theef brekynge an hows, 
or were foundun vndurmynynge, and with 
a wounde takun were deed, the smyter 


EXODUS. 


If for- . 


XX 29—— X Klee 


ben deed, the oxe schal be oppressid* with 
stoonus, and hise fleischis’ schulen? not be 
etun, and the lord of the oxe schal be in- 
nocent®, That if the oxe was ‘a pultere29 
with horn” fro 3isterdai and the thridde 
dai ago, and men warneden® ‘the lord of 
hym4, nether the lord closide hym, and he 
sleeth a man, ethir® wommanf, bothe the 
oxe schal be oppressid® with stoonus, and 
thei schulen sle ‘the lord of hym®; that if3o 
prijs! is‘ put to the lord, he schal 3yue for 
his lijf what euer he is axide. And if hes: 
smytith with horn a son’, and a™ dou3tir, 
he" schal be suget to lijk® sentence. Ifse 
the oxe asailith a seruaunt?, and hand- 
maidel, the lord of the oxe schal 3yue 
thretti siclis{ of siluer to ‘his lord’; for- 
sothe the oxe schal be oppressid with 
stoonus. If ony man openeth a cisterne’, 33 
and diggith', and hilith it not, and an oxe 
ether" asse’ fallith in to it, the lord of the 34 
cisterne™ schal 3elde the* prijs of the werk’ 
beestis; forsothe that that is* deed schal 
be his*. If another> mannus oxe woundith¢ 35 
the oxe of another man, and he is deed, 
thei schulen sille the quyke oxe, and thei 
schulen departe the prijs; forsothe’ thei 
schulen departe bitwixe hem the karkeis 
of the deed oxe. Forsothe if his® lord 36 
wiste, that thef oxe was a puttereS fro 3is- 
tirdai and the thridde dai ago, and kepte 
not him, he schal 3elde oxe for oxe, and he 
schal take the hool carkeys*. 


CAP. XXII. 


If ony mani stelith a scheep, ether oxe',1 
and sleeth™, ether® sillith®, he schal restore 
fiue oxenP for oon’ oxe, and’ foure scheep 
for o scheep. And® if a ny3t theef brek-2 
ynge' an hows, ether™ vndurmynynge, is 
foundun, and’ is deed bi a wonnde® 


fhas ec. Sawomman se, ) Om. ener. ihe £ prm. * syclis e prm. 1 Om. spEFn, 


x throwe dounr. Yfletsh 1s. 2 schal 1. 


a giltlees 1. 


b a pilter w. h. B. a piltere w. h. F. a puttere 


w. h. DEGKLMNPQRTX. an horn puttere 1s. © warneden to a pr.m, DEFGLNPQRTX. chis lord1s. © Or ELp. 


fawomman EILs. & throwe adoun 1. 
nhis lord 1s. © the same Is. 
8 cisterne or a pult 1s. * diggith it 1s. 
therofs. * Om. a pr.m. et plures. ¥ Om. 18. 
© wounde Is. @ sothli 1. € the 1s. 
Kk or Ep. other Fr. | an oxe Gis. 
QnTX. dano. *° and he schal restore ne. 
W wounde, or hirt 1s. 


h his Jord 1s. 
P man seruaunt s. 

U or ELP. other F. 

z shal be a. 
f his 1s. 
m sleeth if 1s. or ELP. other F. 
$s Om. Bc. 


lmwannis son 1s. ™ his Is. 
q an handmaide 1s. _‘° the lord of that seruaunt 1s. 
VYanasse is. W cisterne, that is, maker 

a his that paicth therfore 1s.» oo L. 
& pulter pcrow. 4 deed carkeysis. i Om. pb. 
o sillith it 1s. P oxis BCDFGKO 
Uor ELP. Vand he taken 1s. 


ithe prijs1. * be 1s. 


tbreke 1. 


XXIE. 3—13. 


3shal not be gilti of the blood ; and if the 
sunne sprongne he do that, he hath doon 
manslau3ter, and he shal die. And if he 
haue not to 3elde for the thefte, he shal 
abe soold; and if there be founde anentis 
hym lyuynge that that he lath stoln, 
either oxe, or asse, or sheep, the dowble 
she shal restore. If eny man harme feeld, 
or vynjeerd, and leeue his beeste, that it 
waste other mennus thingis, what euer 
best thing he hath in his feeld, or vyn- 
jeerd, he shal restore for estymacioun of 
6the harm. If fyer goon out fynde eeres, 
and cacche the rekes of corn, or the corn 
stondynge in feeldis, he shal 3eeld the 
7harm that tyndeth the fier. If eny man 
leene money to a freend, or vessel into 
kepyng, and fro hym that tok thei weren 
takun awey bi theft, if the theef be 
sfoundun, he shal 3eeld the dowble. And 
if the theef is vnknowun, the lord of the 
hows shal be presentid™ to the goddis, 
and he shall sweer, that he strau3te not" 
9hoond into the thing of his nei3bore, for 
to be® don gijl; as wel in oxe, and in 
asse, and sheep, and clothing1; and what 
euer of" harm he maye brynge yn, to 
the goddis the cause of either shal com, 
and if thei demen, he shal 3eeld the’ 
iodowble to his neiz3bour. If eny leene to 
his neiz3bore oxe, asse, sheep, and al beeste 
to kepynge, and it were deed, or feblishid, 
or takun of enemyes, and no man se it, 
iithere shal be the lawe of ooth in the 
mydle, that he strau3te not out the hoond 
to the thing of his nei3bore ; and the lord 
shal tak the ooth, and he shal not be 
12constreyned to 3eeld ajen. That if thru;¢ 
theft it were takun awey, he shal restore 
isthe harm to the lord; and if it be etun 


mapplyed £ pr.m. 4% ont E pr.m. not not B. 
rOm.£ pr.m 8 Om. 8B. ¢ ther vp. 


x Om. Is. 
‘ood 18. 


Y of the c. of his 1s. of that x. 
4 or ELP. € a vyner ILs. 


EXODUS. 


° Om. £ pr.m, 


Z blood, or deeth 1s. 
f Om. 1s. 


. 243 


takun*, the smytere schal not be gilti of Y 
blood? ; that if he dide this? whanne the; 
sunne was rysun, he dide man sleyng, and 
he schal die. If a theef hath not thats, 
that he schal 3elde for thefte, he schal be 
seeld; if that thing that he staal, is4 
foundun quyk at hym, ether oxe, ether 
asse, ether scheep, he schal restore the 
double. If a man harmeth a feeld, ethir4s 
vyner®, and suffrith his beeste, that it 
waaste othere mennus thingis, he schal re- 
store for thef valu of harm’, ‘what euer 
beste thing? he hath in his feeld, ethiri 
vyner*, If fier goith out, and fyndith'c 
eeris of corn, and catchith heepis of corn, 
ethir™ cornes stondynge in feeldis, he that 
kyndlide" the fier schal 3eelde the harm. 
If a man bitakith in to kepyng monei to7 
a freend, ether® a vessel ‘in to keping?, 
and it is takun awey bi thefte fro hym 
that resseyuedei, if the theef is foundun, 
he schal restore the double. If the theefs 
is hid", the lord of the’ howst schal be 
brou3t to" goddis, ‘that ts, tugis’, and he 
schal swere, that he helde not forth the” 
hond in to ‘the thing of his neizbore*, to9 
‘do fraudeY ; as wel in oxe, as in asse, and 
in scheep, and in clooth; and? what euer 
thing may brynge in harm, the cause of 
euer eithir schal come to goddis*, and if 
thei demen?, he schal restore the double 
to his nei3bore. If ony man bitakith to10 
his nei3bore oxe, asse, scheep, and al® werk 
beeste’ to kepyng, and it is deed, ether® 
is’ maad feble, ethir® is takun of enemyes, 
and no man seeth this, an ooth schal be1 
in the" myddis{, that he helde not forth 
thei hond to the ‘thing of his neizborek ; 
and the lord’ schal resseyue the™ ooth, 
and he" schal not be compellid to 3elde’®. 


4 iument, othnr clothing « see. m. 


4 this slau3ter 1s. bhauec. © that 
&the harm 1s. 4 the beste thing whateuer rs. 


Tor Eup. «in his vyner rs. ! findith, or brenneth 1. findith, or brenneth the s. ™or ELv. © kyndelith rs. 


SoriLps. P Om. ¢ sec.m. DIKMN Sec.m. ORSTW. 
t hows that resseyuede that good 1s.“ to the 1. 


Zandin 1, and nezther in 8. 
CorrLp. f Om. peras. it is K. 
enpeir. of his neizbore thing s. 

© 3elde it 1. 3elde, or restore it s. 


& Or exp. 


4 resseyuede if IKs. 
Vv Om. DEFGILPQRTW. that is, to iuges 0s. 
x the thingis of his n. e. his neizboris thing 1. his neigbore thing s. 
@ the iuges 1. iugis s. 
h Om. pis. 
llord that ou3te that good 1s. 


8 that kK. 
W his 1s. 
y do fraude therios. defraude w. 
b demen him gilty 1s. ¢eche1. 4 beestis o. 
ihis 1s.  enpeiring of his neizbores thing 1. 
mhists. ® he to whom it was taken s. 


t hid, or unknowe 1s. 


1i2 


t that is, he 
schal purge 
him openli bi 
ooth. Is. 


244 


of a beeste, brynge he forthe to hym that 
that is slayn, and he shal not restore. 
14 Who of his nei3bore eny thing of thes 
askith to borwe, and it were enfeblished", 
or deed, the lord not present, he shal be 
iscompellid to 3eeld; and if the lord were 
present, he shal not restore, moost if the 
hirid was soold’, for mede of his werk. 
16 And if eny man bere down a mayden not 
3it spowsid, and he sleep with hir, he 
shal dowe hir, and he shal haue hir to 
i7wijf. And if the fader of the mayden 
wole not 3yue™”, he shal 3eeld the money, 
after the maner of dowyng, that maydens 
18 weren wont to tak. Clepers of deuels 
19thow shalt not suffre to lyue. What man 
so gothe* togidere with a beeste, with 
20deeth die he. Who offreth to goddis, but 
21to the Lord oonly, be he slayne. A com- 
lyng thow shalt not mak sory, ne tur- 
ment hym; forsothe comlyngis and 3oure 
22seluen weren in the loond of Egipte. To 
the wydowe and the faderles child thow 
23shalt not anoye. If thow harmest hem, 
thei shulen crye to me, and Y shal here 
21the crye of hem, and my woodnes shal 
dedeyn, and Y shal smyte 30w with 
swerd, and 3oure wyues shulen be wy- 
25dewes, and 30ure sones faderles. And if 
thow leenyst money to my pore faderles 
child, that dwellithY with thee, thow shalt 
not constreyn hym, as a fraward asker, 
ne thow shalt not oppresse him with 
gevsurys. If thow takist of thi nei3bore a 
clooth wed, before the goynge down of 
the sunne thow shalt 3eeld it to hym; 
27that is forsothe al oonli thur3 which is 
couerid the clothing of his flesh, ne he 
hath noon other, in the which he sleep’; 
if he crye to me, Y shal here hym; for 
28 Y am mercyable. To the goddis thow 
shalt not bacbite, and to the prince of 


« enfeblisch pp. 
may slepe £ pr.m. 


Vit come £ pr.m. 


P bers. 4 thefte ix his defaute 1s. 
tenfeblid 1s. Yor xy. VY lord theroff 1s. 
foke its, 4Om.s, 4 disceyned s. 
himis. f3yue w. & the which 1, 
™ Om. Bc. " serowful 1. sory, or heuy s. 
on 30 F. sup.ras. indign. of 30u 18. 
v 3elde it 1s. W the which 1. * schal slepe 1s. 


h by aa. 


EXODUS. 


W hyre EB pr.m. 


Tr restore tt other wise 18. 
W 3elde it 18. 
b he schal 1Ks. 
i Om. Lo. 
o noye B. 
8 Om. DEFGKLMNOPQRT. 
Yme for xeede 1s. 


XXIL. 14 —28. 


That if it isP takun awei bi thefte%, heiz 
schal restore the harm to the lord ; if it is 13 
etun of a beeste, he schal brynge to the 
lord that that is slayn, and he schal not 
restore’. He that axith of his nei3bore14 
ony thing of these’ bi borewyng, and it is 
feblidt, ether" deed, while the lord’ is not 
present, he schal be constreyned to 3elde”; 
that if the lord is in presence, he schal.s 
not restore*, moost if it cam hirid’Y, for 
the? meede of his werk. If a man dis-16 
seyneth* a virgyn not 3it weddid, and 
slepith with hir, he schal 3yue dower to 
hir, and schal® haue hir wijf*. If the fadir 17 
of the virgyn nyle’ 3yue®, he schal 3elde‘ 
money, bi the maner of dower, which® vir- 
gyns weren wont to take. Thou schaltie 
not suffre witchis to lyue. He that doith 19 
letcherie with a‘ beeste, die* by deeth. 
He that offrith to goddis, out takun to! a9 
the Lord aloone, be he™ slayn. Thou2i 
schalt not make sory" a comelyng, nether 
thou schalt turmente hym; for also 3e 
weren comelyngis in the lond of Egipt. 
3e schulen not anoye® a widewe, and a22 
fadirles ethir? modirles4 child. If 3e hirten 23 
hem, thei schulen crye to me, and Y schal 
here the cry of hem, and my greet veni-24 
aunce schal hane indignacioun', and Y 
schal smyte 30u with swerd, and 3oure 
wyues schulen be widewis, and 3oure sones 
schulen be fadirles. If thou 3yuest money 25 
to loone to my pore puple, that dwellith 
with thee, thou schalt not constreyne hym, 
as an’ extorsioner doth, nether thou schalt 
oppresse hym' by vsuris. If thou takist 26 
of thi neiz3bore‘a wed a clooth", thou schalt 
3elde’ to hymn bifore the goyng doun of 
the sunne; for that aloone is the clooth-27 
ing of his fleisch, with which” he is hilid, 
nether he hath another, in which he slep- 
ith*; if he crieth to me’, Y schal here hym; 


x gendrith gE prim, Y¥ dwellis x. 7 slepeth p. 


8 these forseid 1. these forseid thingis s. 
x restore it 1s. ¥ hirid, that is, 3if to hyre he 
© to wyf Gisx sec.m. 4wilnot1. © 3yue dir to 
k dieth pcorr. die he ks, 1 Om. regr. pr.m. 
9a modirles@1. 1 indignacioun 
« a cloth to wed 1s. 


P or EILP and s. 
t Om. sc. hem m. 


XXII. 29-—XXIII. 11. 


29thi puple thow shalt* not curse. Thy 
dymes and fyrst fruytis thow shalt not 
tarye to offre. The first gotun of thi 

30sones thow shalt 3yue to me; of oxen? 
forsothe, and sheep thow shalt doon 
hjk maner; seuen dayes be he with his 
moder, and the ei3tith’ day thow shalt 

31 3eeld hym to me. 3e shulen be holy men 
to me; the flesh that were before tastid 
of beestis 3e shulen not eete, but 3e shu- 
len caste it to doggis. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 how shalt not tak the voys of lees- 
ynge, ne ligge to thin hoond, that for the 
2vnpyteuows thow seye fals witnes. Thow 
shalt not folwe the puple to doon yuel, 
ne in dome of many thow shalt assente 
to the sentence, that thow goo out of the 
3weye off trewthe. Of the pore forsothe 
thou shalt not haue merci in cause" 
4of strijf. If thou a3en come to the ox of 
thin enemy, or to the errynge asse, lede 
sa3en to hym. If thow se an asse of hym 
that hatith thee lye vnder the charge, 
thow shalt not ouerpasse, but thow shalt 
6vnderheue ‘with hym. Thow shalt not 
bowe awey in the dome of the pore. 
7Lesyng thow shalt flee. The innocent 
and the ry3twis thow shalt not slee, for 
Y am aduersarye ajens the unpiteuows. 
8 Ne tak thou 3iftes, that also blynden wise 
men, and turnen vpsedoun the wordis of 
9riz3twys men. To the pilgrime thow shalt 
not be greuous; 3e knowen forsothe the 
lyues of comlyngis, for and 3e 3oure silf 
weren pylgrimys in the loond of Egipte. 
to Sixe 3eer thow shalt sowe thi loond, and 
thow shalt gedere togidere the fruytis of 
lit; the seuenthe forsothe 3eer thow shalt 


& schall £ et sic sepius. 
dome £ pr.m. 


EXODUS. 


b thin oxen x pr.m. 


| O45 


for Y am mercyful. Thou schalt not bac-28 
byte goddis’, and thou schalt not curse the 
prince* of thi puple. Thou schalt not tarye 29 
to offre to the Lord thi tithis, and firste® 
fruytis. Thou schalt 3yue to me the firste 
gendrid® of thi sones; also of oxen, and 30 
of scheep thou schalt do in lijk maner; 
seuene daies be he! with his* modir, in the 
ei3tithe dai thou schalt 3elde lym to me. 
3e schulen be holi men to me; 3e schulens3i 
not ete fleisch$ which" is bifore taastid 
of beestis, but 3e schulen caste! forth to 
houndis. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Thou schalt not resseyue a‘ vois of1 
leesyng, nether! thou schalt ioyne* thin 
hond{™, that thou seie fals witnessyng" for 
a wickid man. Thou schalt not sue the°®2 
cumpanye to do yuel, nether thou schalt? 
ascente to the sentence of ful many men in 
doom, that thou go awey fro treuthe. Also: 
thou schalt not4d haue mercy of a pore 
man in at ‘cause, ethir doom*{. If thou4 
meetist ‘the oxe of thin enemye', ethir" 
the’ asse errynge™, lede thou* a3en to hym. 
If thou seest that the asse of hym thats 
hatith thee liggythY vndir a_burthun, 
thou schalt not passe’, but thou schalt 
reise* with hym>. Thou schalt not bowe*« 
in the doom of a pore man. Thou schalt7 
fle al lesyng. Thou schalt not sle an in- 
nocent man, and iust*; for Y am aduer- 
sarie to a wickid man. Take thou nots 
3iftis, that blynden alsof prudent men, and 
destryen the wordys of iust men. Thous 
schalt not be diseseful® to a pilgrym, for 
3e knowen the soulis' of comelyngis, for 
also 3e weren pilgryms in the lond of 
Egipt. Sixe jeer thou schalt sowe thiio 
lond, and thou schalt gadre fruytis therof ; 
forsothe in the seuenthe 3eer thou schalt 11 
h the 


d ey3ten BF. ey3t E. f fro the BDEF. 


% that is, the prestis (marg.) 1. g. that is, prestis or iugis s. g. that is, iugis x. ®princis 1.» thi firste s. 


¢ bigotun 1. 
fleisch 1s. 4 the which x. that 1s. 

couenaunt 8. ™ witnesses. © a Is. 
doom exp. doomis. + thin enemyes oxe 18, 


4 it (text) the first bigcten thing 1 (marg.) the frayt of a becst s. 
1 caste it 1K. 

P schalt not a. 
Yor ELP. 


k the 1s. 


ethers. fitis. & the 
m $i couenaunt 1 (marg.) hond bi 
5 cause or 

* it Is. 


1 ne 1s. 
t Om. A pr.m. et plures. 
W straiynge 1. 


q Om. a. 
v Om. asx. his 1. 


y lijth rx. 2 passe aweys. ® reise vp it 1. reise vps. >hym the beest s. © bowe fro treuth s. 4 Om. 1s. 


faiustis. f3he1. & disesy 1s. 4 lyues 1s. 


* joyne, in E- 
breu it is, thou 
schalt not reise 
thyn hond.cex. 
+ thyn hond, 
that is, make 
conenaunt 
ether biheete. 
BCGKX, 


t for iust doom 
accepteth no 
Person. 18. 


246 


leeue it, and thow shalt mak reste, that 
pore men of thi puple eeten, and what 
euer ‘shal bei relif, eete the beestis of the 
feeld; so thow shalt doon in thi vyne 
123eerd, and in thin oliue 3eerd. Sixe dayes 
thow shalt worche, the seuenthe day thow 
shalt ceese, that the oxe reste, and thin 
asse, and the sone of thin handmayden be 
13refreshid, and the comlyng. Alle thingis 
that Y haue seyd to 30w, kepith; and bi 
the name of straunge goddis thow shalt 
not sweer, ne shal not be herd of 3oure 
1u4mouth. Thre sithes thur3 eche 3eer feeste 
15 dayes thow shalt halowe to me. The so- 
lempne* of therf looues thow shalt kepe ; 
seuen dayes thow shalt eete therf looues, 
as Y haue comaundid to thee, in the 
tyme of the moneth of new fruytis, 
whanne thow 3edist out of Egipte; thow 
isshalt not apere in my sijt voyde; and! 
the solempnete of the moneth of the cheef 
frnytes of thi werk, what euer thingis 
thow shalt sowe in thi feelde; and the 
solempnete in the goyng out of the 3eer, 
when thow hast gedered togidere alle 
17thi™ fruytis fro the feeld. Thries a3eer 
shal apere al thi maal child" before the 
isLord thi God. Thow shalt not offer 
vpon ‘sour dow3° the blood of thi sacri- 
fice; ne there shal not leeue the talow3? 
i90f my solempnete vnto the morwen. The 
cheef fruytis of the tilthe of thin erthe 
thow shalt bere into’ the hows of the 
Lord thi God. Thow shalt not seethe a 
20 kydde in the mylk of his moder. Loo! Y 
shal seende myn aungel, that he goo before 
thee, and kepe in the weye, and lede into 
2ithe place that Y haue greithid. Wayt 
hym, and here his voys, ne wene thow 
hym to be dispisid, for he shal not for- 
3yue, whanne thou synnest, and my name 
g2is in hym. That* if thow here hys vois, 
and dost alle thingis that Y speke, Y shal 


iwern EF pr.m. 
fatte E pr.m. Gin p. ‘and EB pr.m. 

i Om. pimogrst sec.m. w. thou schalt x. 
vngedrid s. ™eteitis. the place 11s. 
say Is. 
Ythi pcert. 2% Om. c. 
thin hous BoGQsx. 
k lede thee 1s. 


athis. > the plures. 
e fatnesse, or plentee s. 
1 that 1. 


EXODUS. 


k solempnite £. 1Om. 4. ™ the v. 


k make it Ks. 
© thin olyue 8. 
s Om. xu. tin seuene ko pr.m. Uhaue comaundid 1. YOm.1s. W the monethe 1s. * werkiss. 
¢ brent w. 
f Om. e. 
ll dispisid, or dispisable s. 


XXIII. 12——22. 


leeue it, and schalti make* to reste, that 
the pore men of thi puple ete, and what 
euer is residue!, the beestis of the feeld 
ete™; so thou schalt do in thi vyner, and 
in place of olyue® trees. Sixe dayes thou 12 
schalt worche, in? the seuenthe dai thou 
schalt ceesse, that thin oxe and asset‘ reste, 
and the sone of thin handmaide, and the 
comelyng be refreischid. Kepe 3e alle13 
thingis, whiche Y seide™ to 3ou; and 3e 
schulen not swere bi the name of alien 
goddis, nether it schal be herd of 3oure 
mouth. In thre tymes bi alle 3eeris 3e14 
schulen halewe feestis to me. Thou schalt 15 
kepe the’ solempnyte of therf looues; se- 
uenet daies thou schalt ete therf breed, as 
Y comaundide" to thee, in the’ tyme of 
monethe” of newe thingis, whanne thou 
jedist out of Egipt; thou schalt not ap- 
pere voide in my si3t. And thou schaltic 
kepe the solempnete of the monethe of 
the firste thingis of thi werk*, what euer 
thingis thou hast sowe in the’ feeld. Also 
thou schalt kepe the solempnyte in the’ 
goyng out of the 3eer, whanne thou hast 
gaderid all thi fruytis of the* feeld. Thries 17 
in the 3eer al thi> male kynde schal ap- 
pere bifore thi Lord God. Thou schaltis 
not offre the blood of thi slayn® sacrifice 
on sour dou3%; nether the fatnesse® of my 
solempnete scha] dwelle til to the morew- 
tid. Thou schalt bere the firste thingis 19 
of the fruytis of thi lond in to the hows 
of thi Lord God. Thou schalt not sethe 
a kide in the mylke of his modir. Lo!20 
Y schalf sende myn aungel, that schal go 
bifore thee, and schal® kepe* in the weie, 
and schali lede* to the place which! Y 
haue maad redi to thee. Take thou hede2i 
to hym{, and here thou his vois, nether 
gesse thou hym to be dispisid'; for he 
schal not for3yue, whanne thou synnest™, 
and my name is in him. For if thou herest 22 
2 children p. 


© whete E pr.m. P talw3s BDFH. 


1 left vngederid 1. left u. residue, etther left 
Pandin Biks. 4 thin asse DGIQRST. 


4 sour dou3, that ts, while sour dowe is in 
She schalis. bkepe thee rixs. ihe schal ts. 
m synnest, di thou forthinke thy synne s. 


t take thou 
heede to him, 
tbat is, per- 
seyue thou 
bisily, that 
thou obeie to 
him. Be. 


XXIII. 23 —33. 


be enemy to thin enemyes, and Y shal 
23turmente hem that turmenten thee; and 
myn aungel shal goo before thee, and he 
shal lede thee into Amorre, and Ethe, 
and Phereze, Chanane, and Eue, and Je- 
24buze, whom Y shal totreede. Thou shalt 
not anowre the goddis of hem, ne thou 
shalt not herye hem; thow shalt not do 
the werkis of hem, but destrye hem, and 
25al to breek the ymagis of hem. And 3e 
shulen serue to the Lord 3oure God, that 
Y blesse* to thi looues, and watris, and Y 
shal take awey wickidnes fro the myddil 
a6 of thee; ne‘ thi loond shal be vnfructuous®", 
ne bareyn; the noumbre of thi dayes Y 
27shal fulfille. My feerde Y shal seende into 
thi before comyng, and Y shal slee al the 
puple, to whom thow shalt goon yn’, and 
of alle thin enemyes before thee Y shal 
asturne the backis; sendynge out before 
stynggynge flies, that ben sprungun of 
deed bodies, hauynge the stonges enue- 
nymd, the which shulen make flee Eue, 
and Chanane, and Ethe, er thow goon 
ggyn. Y shal not throwe hem out fro thi 
face o 3eer, lest the loond be turned into 
wildernes, and beestis growen a3ens thee ; 
30 litil meele Y shal putte hem out fro thi 
si3t, to the tyme thow be encreesid, and 
31 weelde the loond®. Forsothe Y shal sette 
thi termes fro the reed see vnto the see 
of Palestynes, and fro the desert vnto the 
flood. Y shal take to 3oure hoondes the 
dwellers of the loond, and Y shal throwe 
szhem out fro 3oure si3t; thow shalt not 
goon with hem into couenaunt of pees, 
3sne with the goddis of hem. Dwelle thei 
not in thi loond, lest perauentur thei 
maken thee synne ajens me, if* thow 
seruest to the goddis of hem, that certis 
shal be to thee into sclaundre. 


8 schulen blesse £ pr.m. t Om. ek. 


* that if 4 pr.m. 


« breke, or destrie 18. 
rence 18. 
cioun 1s. * tho Be. her 1s. 
fille rs. x the which 1. 
stinginge flies tp. and Y xk. 
f shullen 1s. 


8 goddis of hem x. 


EXODUS. 


u schall not be vuf. £. 


© onoure as to outward reuerence BCGQX. 
4 hem as to innere reuerence cag. hem as with innere reuerence x. hem with ynward affec- 
t thi watris 1s. ™ siknessis G. 
y bifore thee rsw. 

b the desert ars. 


247 


his vois, and doist alle thingis whiche Y 
speke, Y schial be enemy to thin enemyes, 
and Y sclial turment hem, that turmenten 
thee; and myn aungel schal go bifore thee, 23 
and he schal lede yn thee to Amorrei, and 
Ethei, and Ferezei, and Cananey, and E- 
uey, and Jebusei, whiche Y schal breke". 
Thou schalt not onoure® ‘the goddis of 24 
hem?, nether thou schalt worschipe hem‘; 
thou schalt not do the werkis of hem, but 
thou schalt destrie the’ goddis*, and thou 
schalt breke the ymagis of hem. And 3e25 
schulen serue to 3oure Lord God, that Y 
blesse thi looues, and watrist, and do awei 
sikenesse® fro the myddis of thee; neithir 26 
a womman vnfruytful, neither bareyn’, 
schal be in thi lond; Y schal fille” the 
noumbre of thi daies. Y schal sende my 27 
drede in to thi biforgoyng, and Y schal 
sle al the puple, to which* thou schalt 
entre, and Y schal turne the backis of alle 
thin enemyes bifore thee; and Y schal2e 
sende out biforeY scrabrouns’{, that schulen — ¢ scrabrouns, 
dryue awei Euey, and Cananey, and Ethei, event nets 
bifore that thou entre. Y schal not caste 29 Ve nab 
hem out fro thi face in 0 3eer, lest the lond ‘eet! careyns: 
be turned in to wildirnesse, and beestis en- 
creesse azens thee; litil and litil I schalso 
caste hem out fro thi si3t, til thou be en- 
creessid, and welde the loond. Forsothe31 
Y* schal sette thi termys fro the reed see 
til to the see of Palestyns, and fro desert 
til to the flood. Y schal 3yue to 3oure 
hondis the dwelleris of the lond, and Y 
schal caste hem out fro 3onre si3t; thous2 
schalt not make boond of pees with hem, 
nethir with ‘the goddis of hem’. Dwelle 33 
thei not in thi lond, lest perauenture thei 
make thee to do synne a3ens me, yf thou 
seruest her goddis, which’ thing® certis 
schalf be to thee in to sclaundir. 


V ajeynst E pr.m. Werth £ prim. 


P here goddes with outward reue- 
Yabareyn is. W ful- 


% scrabrouns, a kynde of flies 1. scrabrouns, or 
¢ her goddes 1s. 4 the which 1. © thinges 1s. 


248 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 To Moyses forsothe he seide, Stye vp 
to the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, 
and Abyu, and the seuenti aldren of 
2Yrael; and 3e shulen anowrn afer’, and 
oonly Moyses stey? vp to the Lord, and 
thei shulen not neiz to hym, ne the pu- 
3ple shal stye vp with him. Thanne 
Moyses eame, and tolde to the puple alle 
the wordis of the Lord, and the domes; 
and al the puple answerde with o voys, 
Alle the wordis of the Lord that he hath 
4spokun, we shulen do. Moyses forsothe 
wrote alle the wordes of the Lord; and 
eerli rysynge, he bildide an auteer to the 
Lord at the rotis of the hil, and twelue 
5titlis by twelue lynagis of Yrael. And 
he sente the 3ong men of the sones of 
Yrael, and thei offreden alle brent sacri- 
fiees, and thei offreden pesible sacrifice to 
6the Lord, twelue calues. And so Moyses 
took the half parti of the blood, and putte 
it into ehalices*?; and ‘that other> party 
7he shedde vpon the anteer. And takynge 
to the book of the couenaunt? of pees, 
radde®, herynge the’ puple, the whiche 
seiden, Alle thingis that the Lord hath 
spokun we shulen do, and we shulen be 
sobeysauut. He forsothe the blood takun 
sprengide® into the puple, and seith, This 
is the blood of the boond of pees, that 
the Lord couenauntidef with 30w vpon 
galle thes wordes. And Moyses, and Aa- 
ron, Nadab, and Abyu, and the seuenty 
100f the® aldren of Yrael, stieden vp, and 
seen the God of Yrael, vndur the feet of 
him, as a werk of a saphire stoon, as’ 
iheuene whanne iti is bry3t. Also vpon 
hem that 3eden fer awey fro the sones of 
Yrael he sente his hoond; and thei seen 


EXODUS. 


XXIV. I-—tl. 


CAP. XXIV. 


Also he’ seide to Moises, ‘Stie thou” to1 
the Lord, thou, and Aaron, and Nadab, 
and Abyu, and seuenti eldere men of Is- 
rael; and 3e schulen worsehipe afer, and 2 
Moises aloone stic! to the Lord, and thei 
schulen not nei3e, nether the puple schal 
stie* with hym. Therfore Moises eam, and3 
telde to the puple alle the wordis and 
domes! of the Lord; and a] the puple an- 
sweride with o vois, We sehulen do alle 
the wordis of the Lord, whiehe he spak™. 
Forsothe Moises wroot alle the wordis of 4 
the Lord; and he roos eerli, and bildide 
an auter to the Lord at the rootis of the 
hil, and he bildide" twelue titlis® bi twelue 
lynagis of Israel. And he sente 3onges 
men of the sones of Israel, and thei of- 
friden brent sacrifices, and ‘thei offriden? 
pesible sacrifices ‘to the Lord, twelue* tterforit 
calues. And so Moises took half the part Sree ie 
of the’ blood, and sente* in to gretet yereo there. | 
euppis; forsothe he sehedde the residue °*- 
part on" the auter. And he took the book 7 
of the’ boond of pees, and redde”, while* 
the puple herde; whicheY seiden, We schu- 
len do alle thingis which? the Lord spak, 
and we schulen be obedient. Forsothe he*s 
took’, and sprengide® ‘the blood on the 
puple, and seide, This is the® blood of the 
boond of pees, which the Lord eoue- 
nauntide with 3ow on alle these wordis. 
And Moises, and Aaron, and Nadab, and» , 
t+ and sien God, 
Abyu, and seuenti of the eldere men of _ not iu his be- 
Israel stieden’, and seijen Godt of Israel, 10 He Rist 
vndur hise feet, as? the werk of safiret  Coitinee him. 
stoon’, and as heuene whanne it is cleer. /47¢ Here. eck 
And he sente not his hond on hem} of thei: Ebrus seyp, 
that this is the 
sones of Israel, that* hadden go fer awei; very text, and 
and thei sien God!, and eeten and drunkun. 


* twelue is not 
in Ebreu, and 


he sente not 


his bond on 

the lordis of 

J ‘ Pp the sones of 

¥y offere p. %stiede anpri. ®wyne chalices « pr.m. » the tother nner. >> comenaunt D passim. Israel. cax. 
¢ and he rad it gE prim. ‘all the ze prom. © spreynde speFn. fcomenanntid p passim. & Om. £,  thatis, on 
handase. ihe e prim. lordis, the 


& he, that is, the aungel BcKuv. the aungel 1s. he, the aun 
I the domes s. 


stie he vps. * go vps. stie vp s, 
stonys BCEGKNPQX. titlis or stones 18. 
itis. putte mw. ¢ the grete Lr. u vpon Is. 
ythe whiche 1. %thatis. 4 Moises 1s. 
blood m pr.m.w.  ¢ Om. Is. 
i stoones Kk. k the whiche 1. 


P Om. DIKMN see.m. ORST sec.m.w. 10m. F. 
v Om. paqrst. 
> took the blood ts. 
f wenten up 1. stieden yp s. 

1 God, that eamen ni3 to him 1s. 


gloos scith. s. 


clx. 5 go thou vpt. stiethou vps. igovpt. 
n bildide or leide s. © titlis ether 
TOm. 1s. § putte 
whe redde 1s. x the while F pr.m. 

€ spreinte L.-sprengide it 1s. 4 Om. tos. 
& sawzen asi. thei sienass. > a safir Ibs. 


eg 
fal 


m hath spoke 1s. 


XXIV. 12—XXV. 7. EXODUS. 949 
12God, and eten and drunken. The Lord Forsothe the Lord seide to Moises, ‘Stie 12 


forsothe seide to Moyses, Stye vp to me 
into the hil, and be there, and Y shal 
3yue to thee stonun tablis, and the lawe, 
and mawndementis! that Y haue wrytun, 
13that thow teche hem. And Moyses and 
Josue his seruaunt rysen, and Moyses 
14stiynge vp into the hil of God, seith to 
the aldren, Abide 3e here to the tyme 
that we* turnen a3en to 30w; 3e han Aa- 
ron and Hur with 3ow, if eny thing of 
questioun were sprongun, 3e shulen telle 
isit to hem. And whanne Moyses hadde 
isstyed vp, a clowd couerde the hil, and 
the glorye of the Lord dwellide vpon Sy- 
nay, couerynge it with a clowd six dayes; 
the seuenthe forsothe day the Lord cle- 
pide! hym fro the mydil of the derknes ; 
17and the liknes of the glorie of the Lord 
was as brennynge fyer vpon the cop of 
the hil in the si3t of the sones of Yrael. 
is And Moyses goon into the myddil of the 
clowd, styede vp into the hil, and was 
there fourti dayes an@ fourti ny3tis™. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, sei- 
zynge, Spek to the sones of Yrael, that 
thei taken to me the fyrst fruytis; of ech 
man that wilfuly offerith, 3e shulen tak 
sthilke thingis. And thes ben the thingis 
that 3e shulen take, gold, and siluer, and 
4brasse, and iasynkt, that is, ‘silk of violet 
blew", and purpur, that is, sangwyn? silk, 
and coctun twyes died, that is, silke ‘of 
flawme colour?, and biys, that is, the’ 
fynest lynen™ clooth of Egipte, and heeris 
sof geyt, and skynnes of wetheres maad 
reed, and skynnes iacynktynes’*, and trees 
sof Sychym, and oyle to make li3tes, and 
swete smellynge thingis into oynement', 
7and ensensis of good smel, onychen 


j mawdementis 4. I clepe £. 
lyke blode z pr. m. 


8 of iacynctynes B. 


kT & pr.m. 


t oynmentes p. 


™ come thou vp 1. stie thou vp 8. heestis 1s. 
triso, Trisiden B. * 3ede vp 1. stiede vp s. 
* the glorie 1sx. 
hijs or w. s. ELP. bijs, that is, while silk kK. 
8 with ephod, that is, a chesiple 18. 


mny3t £. 
P mene bytwix reed and 3alow £ pr. m. 


© teche hem Fis. 
ttos. 
y3ede up 1. stiede vp s. 2 and iacynt K. 
¢ wetheris skynnes Is. 
h tabernacle 1 marg- 


thou™ to me in to the hil, and be thou 
there, and Y schal 3yue to thee tablis of 
stoon, and the lawe, and comaundementis", 
whiche Y haue write, that thou teche® the? 
children of Israel. Moises and Josue his 13 
mynystre‘ risen’, and Moises stiede® in to 
the hil of God, and seide to the eldere 14 
men, Abide 3e here, tilt we turnen a3en 
to 30u; 3e han Aaron and Hur with 30u, 
if ony thing of questioun is" maad, 3e 
schulen telle to hem. And whanne Moises ts 
hadde stied’, a cloude hilide the hil, and 16 
the glorie of the Lord dwellide on” Synai, 
aud kyueride it with a cloude sixe daies ; 
forsothe in the seuenthe dai the Lord cle- 
pide hym fro the myddis of the cloude ; 
forsothe the licnesse of glorie* of the Lord 17 
was as fier brennynge on the cop of the 
hil in the si3t of the sones of Israel. And 18 
Moises entride into the myddis of the 
cloude, and stiedeY in to the hil, and he 
was there fourti daies and fourti ny3tis. 


CAP. XXV. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, that2 
thei take to me the firste fruytis; of ech 
man that offrith wilfuli, 3e schulen take 
tho. Forsothe these thingis it ben, whiches 
3e schulen take, gold, and siluer, and bras, 
jacynt’, and purpur*, and reed si/k twies4 
died, and bijs®, heeris of geet, and ‘skynnes 
of wetheris® maad reed, and skynnes ofs 
iacynt, aud trees of Sechym, and oile@ to®¢ 
liz3tis to be ordeyned, swete smellynge 
spiceries in to oynement, and encensis‘ of 
good odour, onochym stoonys, and gemines 7 
to ourne ephod®, and the racionalt. Ands 
thei schulen make a seyntuarie" to me, 
and Y schal dwelle in the myddis of hem, 


of colour lyke ayre c prim. © of colour 
4 of whyte colour z pr.m. ° lyne BE sec.m. 


POm.o. 4 seruaunt Is. mynys- 
ubeis. Ygon vps. stied vps.  ® vpon w. 

apurpul L. » bijs ether whit selk nc@LNogx. 
dthe oileo. ofa. £ encense Is. 


Kk 


t+ that is, an 
ouche hang- 
inge on the 
prestis breest, 
in whiche was 
writen dome 
and treuth, s. 


250 


stoonus and gemmes to anowrn ephoth, 
that is, a preestis ouermest clothing, that 
we cleepen a coope, and the racionale, 
that is, the clooth in the brest: of the 
coope, and in the brest of the preest. 
sAnd thei shulen make to me a seyn- 
tuarye, and Y shal dwelle in the myddil 
9of hem, after al the liknes of the taber- 
nacle that Y shal shewe to thee, and of 
alle the vessels into the heriynge of it. 
10 And thus 3e shulen make it; 3e shulen 
ioyne of the trees of Sychym an arke, 
whose lengthe haue two cubites and an 
half, the brede o cubijt and an half, the 
uhei3t o cubijt also and an half. And 
thow shalt gilte it with moost clene gold 
with ynne and with oute; and thou shal 
make aboue a goldun coroun bi enuy- 
12roun, and foure goldun cerclis, the whiche 
thow shalte putte vp on the foure cor- 
ners of the arke; be there two cercles in 
‘that o" syde, and two in ‘that other’. 
13 And thow shalt make berynge staues of 
the trees of Sychym, and thow shalt 
14couere hem with gold, and bryng yn thur3 
the cerclis that ben in the sides of the 
warke, that it be born in hem, the which 
euermore shal be in the cerclis, ne eny 
istyme shal be drawun out of hem. And 
thow shalt putte in to’ the arke the wit- 
i7nessyng, that Y shal 3yue to thee. And 
thow shalt make a propiciatorye, that is, 
a place of purchasyng mercy, of moost 
cleene gold; the lengthe of it shal holde 
two cubitis and an half, and the brede of 
18it o cubijt and an half. And two goldun 
cherubyns* and forgid with hamers, thow 
shalt make on either party of the preiyng 
19 place; that o.cherubyn be in the o syde 


uthe to BpEFU. Y the tother spEFH. 


EXODUS. 


w Om. 3. 


XXV. 8—19. 


bi al the licnesse of the tabernacle, which'9 
Y schal schewe to thee, and of alle the* 
vessels of ournyng therof. And thus 3e10 
schulen make it; ioyne 3e! togidere an 
arke™ of the® trees of Sechym, whos 
lengthe haue® twey cubitis and an half, 
the broodnesseP haue’ a™ cubit and halfs, 
the hij3nesset haue" ‘in lijk maner’ a¥ cubit 
and half*. And thou schalt ouergilde itii 
with clennesteY gold with ynne and with 
out forth?; and thou schalt make a goldun 
crowne aboue ‘bi cumpas®, and foure goldun 12 
cerclis*, whiche® thou schalt sette bi foure 
corneris of the arke’; twei® ceerclis’ be in’ 
o" syde, and twei cerclis' in the tother* 
side. Also thou schalt make barris of the ts 
trees of Sechym, and thou schalt hile tho! 
with gold, and thou schalt brynge yn™ bis 
the cerclis" that ben in the sidis of the 
arke, that it be borum in tho®, whicheP is 


schulen euere be in the ceerclis?, nether™ ‘ 
* It was seid 
the arke of 


schulen ony tyme be drawun out of thoo’. _ the arke 
And thou schalt putte in to the arke the‘ is bape 
witnessing"*, which” Y schal 3yue to thee. es Age 
And thou schalt make a propiciatorie} of 17 Manne © nit 
clenneste gold; ‘that is, a table hilinge  fedde hem with 
the arke*; the lengthe therof schal holde  uene, and ta- 
twei cubitis and an half, the broodnesseY phe 
schal holde a? cubit and half*, Also thou Tene tee On 
schalt make on euer eithir side of ‘Goddis apie tee 4 
answeryng place} twei cherubyns® of gold, of Aaron, to 
and betun® ont with hamer®; o cherub‘ be 19 beens 
in® o syde of ‘Goddis ausweryng place’, Galenetee: 
and the tother* in the tother* side!; hele 20 ramomye, to 
thei euer™ either side of the propiciatorie", Le wee 
and holde thei forth wyngis°, and hile thei + Io the dai of 
merci the gloric 


‘Goddis answeryng place?; and biholde of God de- 
thei hem silf togidere, while the’ faces ‘*cendide alwey 
there. 1. 


} that is the 
place that God 
answeride fro 
to men prei- 
ynge- I. 


ben turned in to the propiciatorie, with 


x cherubyn BDEFU. Ythe ton BDE pr.m. FH. 


ithatr. & Om. plures. 10Om.s.  ™ arke ether cofere nceKNQx. arke or cofere Eup. arke or 
acofers. °% Om. pit sec.m. shal haue1. P breeder. 4@schalhaue1. ‘oxsw. §a halfe. an 
half ixs. t hisnesse therofc. hijte pinup. 'Om.cr. ValsorLp. Worx, *anhalfixs.  ¥ ful 
clene 1. 2 Om. 1s. al aboute 1. » rynges 1. cerclis or rengess. ¢the whiche 1. 4 coffre is. © and 
tweic. fryngistw. & bit. bthetoo x. iryngistw. * other1s. Jhemr. ™ yn hem. yn tho s. 
2 ryngis w.. ©hem1. P the whiche barres 1. whiche barress. 4 ringes 1. cerclis or ringis s.  * nethir 
thei 1s. s hem 1. t tho the arke of w. u witnessing, that is, lawe BCEGKLNPQX. Witnessing of 
lawe 1 pr.m. witnessing or lawes. Ythatis. Wfulclenet. *Om.c. Ybreedis. 2Zo1mks. an 
half ixs. > the oracle 1. ¢ cherubyns, that is ij. liknesse 1s. 4 forged 1. ¢ hameris G. an hamer s. 
fcherubin ELe. &on x. bthetoox. ithe oracler, * other 1s. 10m, plures. ™ ouer Gc. © table ts- 


° the wyngis 1. Pthe oracle 1. 4 her 1s. 


XXY. 20—3I. 


200f ‘Goddis answeryng place*, and ‘that 
othere® in ‘that othere, that thei coueren 
either syde of the propiciatorye, strecch- 
ynge out the wenges, and couerynge 
‘Goddis answeryng place®; and beholde 
thei hem seluen togidere*, the cheeres 
turned into the propiciatorie, with the 
whiche is to be couered the arke of the 
21 Lord, in the whiche thow shalt putte the 
- witnessyng, that Y shal 3yue to thee. 
22F ro thens Y shal comaunde, and speke 
to thee vpon the propiciatorye, ‘that is, 
and® fro the myddil of the two cheru- 
byns‘, that shulen be vpon the arke of 
witnessyng, alle thingis that I shal co- 
inaunde bi thee to the sones of Yrael. 
23 And thow shalt make a meet bord of the 
trees of Sichym, hanynge two cubitis ‘of 
lengthe®, and in brede o cubiyt, and in 
24hei3t o cubijt and an half. And thow 
shalt gilte it with moost purid gold, and 
thow shalt make to it by enuyroun a 
25goldun mergyn; and to thilk mergyn 
eueramong grauen' coroun with foure 
fingur mele hei3t, and vpon it another 
26 goldun coroun. And foure goldun cerclis 
thou shalt greithe, and thow shalt putte 
hem in the foure corners of the same bord, 
27 bi eche feet. Wnder the corouns* shulen 
be goldun cerclis, that beryng staues 
mmowen be put thur3 hem, and the bord 
2smay be born. Thilke berynge staues 
thow shalt make of the trees of Sychym, 
and thow shalt enuyronn with gold, to 
29‘be born! the bord. And thow shalt 
greithe eysel vesselis, and phiols, censures, 
and litil euppis, in the wliyche ‘sacrifices 
of lycours ben to be offred™, of moost 
3oclene gold. And thow shalt putte vpon 
the bord looues of propicisioun, euermore 
31in my si3t. And thow shalt make a can- 


EXODUS. 


251 


which the arke of the Lord schal be hilid, 21 
in which’ arke thou schalt putte the ‘wit- 
nessyng, which® Y schal 3yue to thee. Fro 22 
thennus Y schal comaunde, and schal® speke 
to thee aboue the propiciatorie, that is, fro 
the myddis" of twei’ cherubyns, that schu- 
len be on the arke of witnessyng, alle 
thingis whiche Y schal comaunde ‘bi thee” 
to the sones of Israel. Also thou schalt 23 
make a boord of the* trees of Sechym, 
hauinge twei cubitis of lengthe, and aY cu- 
bit in* broodnesse, and a* cubit and half» 
in hizenesse*. And thou schalt ouergilde 24 
the bord with purest4 gold, and thou 
schalt make to it a goldun brynke® ‘bi 
cumpas'; and ‘thou schalt make? to that 25 
brynke a coroun rasid bitwixe foure fyn- 
gris hi3, and ‘thou schalt make® on that an- 
other lytil goldun coroun. And thou schalt 26 
make redi foure goldun cerclis®, and thou 
schalt puti thook in foure corners of the 
same boord, bi alle feet!. Vndur the coroun 27 
schulen be goldun cerclis™, that the barris 
be put" thorou tho°®, and thatP the boord4 
may be borun. Thou schalt make tho™es 
barris of the trees of Sechym, and thou 
schalt cumpas* with gold to bere the boord. 
And thou schalt make redi vessels of vy-29 
negre, and viols, cenceris', and cuppis of 
pureste" gold, in whiche fletynge sacrifices 
schulen be offrid. And thou schalt sette 30 
on the boord looues of proposicioun’, in” 
my si3t euere*. And thou schalt make asi 


_eandilstike ‘betun forthY with hamer?, of 


clenneste gold, and* thou schalt make the 
schaft» therof, and 3erdis, cuppis®, and litle 
rundelis, and lilies comynge forth therof. 
Sixe? 3erdis schulen go out of the sidis,32 
thre of o& side, and thre of the tother’. 
Thre cuppis as in the maner of a notes: 
bi ech 3erde, and litle rundelis to gidere, 


@ the preying place x pr.m. » the tother speru. ¢ the preying place & pr.m. 4 to togidere 4. © and 


also Epr.m. fcherubyn pperH. & olength spern. bar. ia grauen zx. * corners 4. ! beer £ pr.m. 
™ ben sacrifyses of offryng & pr.m. 

‘the which kK. Slawethatis.  ¢ Y schal a pr.m. ef plures. “myddil1. Y Om. eg. the two 1. 
wOm.1 *Om.rs, Yoorks. Zofi. ®ok. banhalf rs. ¢ heiz3t 1s. 4 most purer. ¢ brynke or 
aribans. fabouter, 8 Om.1. — ) ryngis sw. i pnt to L. k hem 1. 1 the feet theroff 1s. 
™ rynges Isw. sent DEFGKLOPERTX. Shem. Psor tables. "the Bpr.m.co.  § cumpas 
hemis. t and cenceris x. " most pure 1. ¥ proposicioun ether of settyng forth ncxNn. prop. or sett. 


forth Lp. prop. or of sett. forth 1s. setting forth or proposicioun &. ¥ whiehe shulen euer ben ins. *Om.s. 


y forged 1. beten out s. 
to K. 


2 an hamer s. 
f tother syde bp. other 1s. 


a Om. Bets. 


b staffr. Cand cuppis B. 4 vij.o, ¢the or. the 


Kk 2 


252 


delstik ‘betun out with hamers®, of moost 
cleene gold, the staf of it, and the® 3erdes, 
cuppes?, and litil balles, and lilyes goynge 
szout of it. Six 3erdes shulen goon out of 
the sides, thre of ‘that 01 side, and thre 
aso0f ‘that other’. Thre cuppes as into® 
maner of a note bi eche 3erdes, and the 
litil balles togidere, and lylye, and the 
same wyse three cuppes at the lyknesse 
of a note in ‘that othert 3erde", and balles, 
and lilye’; and this shal be the werk of 


six 3erdes, that ben to be brou3t forth 
In that forsothe 


s4out of the candelstaf. 
candelstik shulen be foure cuppes in ma- 
ner of a note, and balles bi eche and 
35 lilies ; and the balles vndur the two 3erdes 
bi thre places, the whiche six togidere 
ben maad, goynge forth from o candelstaf ; 
36and the balles thanne, and the 3erdes of 
it shulen be, al‘betun out” of moost puyr 
s7gold. And thow shalt make seuen lan- 
ternes, and thow shalt put hem vpon the 
candelstik, that thei lijten eche a3ens 
ssother. Candelquenchers, and forsothe 
where the snoffes ben quenclid, be thei 
s9inaad of moost puyr gold. And al the 
wei3t of the candelstyk with alle his ves- 
sels shal haue a talent of moost clene gold. 
40 Bihold and do after the sawmplere, that 
to thee is shewid in the hil. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 The tabernacle forsothe thow shalt 
make thus; ten curteyns of biys a3en- 
foldid, and iacynkt, and purpur, and coc- 
tyn twies died, dyuersid with nedle* werk, 

2thow shalt make. The lengthe of o cur- 
tyn shal haue’ei3t and twenti cubitis, the 
brede slial be of foure cubitis; of o me- 

3sure shal be made alle the tentis. Fyne 
curtyns to hem seluen shulen be ioyned 
togidere, and other fyue shulen ioyne 
4togidere lijk manere ioynyuge. Litil oyle- 
© Om. pb. 


n 3eten E pr. m. P the cuppes p. 


EXODUS. 


@ the too BDEFH. 


XX. 92— XV 


and a lilie, and in ijk maner thre cuppis 
at the licnesse of a note in the tother’, 
and litle rundelis togidere, and a lilie; 
this schal be the werk of sixe® 3erdis, that 
schulen be brou3t forth of the schafti. 
Forsothe in thilke candilstike schulen be 34 
foure* cuppis in the maner of a note, and 
litle rundels and lilies by ech cuppe; and 35 
litle! rundelis schulen be vndir twey 3erdis 
bi thre places, whiche™ 3erdis to gidere® 
ben maad sixe, comynge forth of o schaft; 
and therfor the litle rundelis and 3erdis° 36 
therof schulen be alle betun? out with 
hamer4, of clenneste™ gold. And thou schalt 37 
make senene lanternes, and thou schalt 
sette tho® on the candilstike, that thot 
schyne euene ajens". Also tongis to ‘doss 
out’ the snottis”, and where tho thingis*, 
that ben snottid’ out, ben quenchid, be? 
maad of clenneste® gold. Al the wei3t of ss 
the candilstike with alle hise vesselis sclial 
haue? a talent of clennest gold. Biholde 40 
thou, and make® bi the saumpler, which? 
ys schewide to thee in the hil. 


CAP. XXVI. 


Forsotlie the tabernacle schal be maad 1 
thus; thou schalt make ten curtyns of bijs 
foldyd a3en, and of iacynt, of* purpur’, and 
of reed silk twies died, dyuersid® bi broi- 
dery werk. The lengthe of o% curteyne 
schal hane ei3te and twenti cubitis, the 
broodnesse! schal be of foure cubitis); alle 
tentis‘ schulen be maad of o mesure. Fyues 
curtyns schulen be ioyned to hem silf to 
gidere!, and othere fiue cleue™ togidere bi 
lijk boond. Thou schalt make handels” of + 


tthe tother BpeEFH. § the F pr.m. 


tthe tother aperu. Usyde a. Vlylyes p. © forgid e pr.m. * neelde Be. 

§ tother 3erde aco. tother side 1s. ) vij.o. i candilstik schaft 1s. * thre w. IJ the litle is. ™ the 
whiche 1. "all togidere 1s. © the 3erdists. Pforgid1. @anhamers. T most clener. 8S hem 1. 
tthei x. 4 ajens ech ather 1. a3ens, or cche ajens other s. Y snoffe1. W candels 1. candil snufiis s. 
xsnofisr. ysnuffids. 2bethei rs. 4 most clene 1. » haue or wei3s. make althingis. 4 that 1s. 
eand of isw. f purpul exe. & mad dyuersis. » ais. the tox. i breeder. jcubities a. * the 
tentis 1s. ! Om, Gex. ™ schulen cleue plures.  smale ryngis 1. smale ringis or oylettis s. 


XXVI. 5—15. 


tisY iacyntyns in the sides, and in the 
ouermest? of the curtyns, thow shalt make, 
5 that thei mowen be cowplid togidere. The 
curtyn shal haue fifti oiletis? in either 
parti, so set in, that o oylete’ may come 
a3en another, and ‘the other® may be leide 
6to ‘the other’, And thow shalt make fifty 
goldun cerclis, with the whiche the veyles 
of the curtyus ben to be ioyned, that o 
7tabernacle be maad. And thow shalt 
make elleuen ‘heeren sarges® to couer the 
sroof of the tabernacle ; the lengthe of the 
too sargef shal haue thretti cubitis, and 
the brede foure; euen mesure shal be of 
9alle the sarges*. Of the whiche fyue thou 
shalt ioyne aside, and sixe to hem silf 
thou shalt couple togider, so that the 
sixt sarge! thou double in the frount of 
10the roof. And thou shalt make fifti 
oiletis* in the hemme of the too sarge’, 
that it™ mai be ioyned with the tother ; 
and fifti oiletis" in the hemme to® the 
tother sarge?, that it? mai be couplid 
Mwith the tother; and’ fifti knoppis of 
bras with whiche’ the oyletist mowen be 
ioyned, that there be maad o couertour 
120f alle. That forsothe that leeueth of in 
the sarges", that ben greithid to the roof, 
that is, o sarge’ that is the larger, of the 
half of it, thow shalt couere the hynder- 
13more parties of the tabernacle; and o cu- 
bijt shal hong on ‘that o” parti, and an- 
other on ‘that other*, that is more ouer 
in the lengthe of the sargesy, either side 
140f the tabernacle wardynge. And thon 
shalt make another couertour to the roof, 
of the skynnes of wetheres maad reed, 
and vpon that eftsones another couertour 
1so0f blew skynnes. And thow shalt make 
the tables stondynge of the tabernacle, of 


Yrengis E pr.m. 2 ouermostis Bem. 


4 another & pr.nt. 
isaye E prom. * eeris E prim. 
ghe speFru. * Om. BDEFII. 

Wthe too epE. * the tother ppern. 


Isaye £ pr.m. 


© jn the hei3tis 1s. 
other oylett r. an oylete s. 
y the whiche k.  % curtyn veiles is. 
foyletis is. & the too K. » ioyned togidere w. 


P the eurtyns is. 4 thei 1. 
Vv that the Is. 


EXODUS. 


arengis E prom. 
€ saye couertours of heere x pr.m. 
mhe BDEFU, ® eeris E prim. 
$ the whiehe BpEFU. 

¥ sayes E pr.a. 


rOrs. 
Ww tothir plures. toon curteyn Is. 
@ with the 1s. 
i to 1s. 


| 253 


iacynt in the sidis, and hiznessis® of cur- 
tyns?, that thot moun be couplid to gidere. 
A® curteyn schal hane fyfti handlis’ ins 
euer eithir part, so set yn, that ‘an handlet 
come a3en an handle", and the’ toon” may 
be schappid* to the tothir. And thous 
schalt make fifti goldun ryngis, bi whicheY 
the ‘veilis of curteyns’ schulen be ioyned, 
that o tabernacle be maadf. Also thou7 
schalt make enleuene saies to kyuere the* 
hilyng of the tabernacle; the lengthe ofs 
o> say schal haue thretti cubitis, and the 
breed schal haue foure cubitis; euene me- 
sure schal be of alle saies®. Of which thous 
schalt ioyne fyne by hem silf, and thou 
schalt couple sixe to* hem silf togidere, 
so that thou double the sixte say in the® 
frount of the roof. And thou schalt make 10 
fifti handles in the hemme of o$ say, that 
it may be ioyned with' the tother; and 
‘thou schalt make fifti handles! in the 
hemme of the tothir say, that it be cou- 
plid with the tothir; thow™ schalt make 
fifti fastnyngis" of bras, bi° whiche the 
handles? schulen be ioyned to gidere, that4 
oon hylyng be maad of alle. Sotheli thatt 12 
that is residue* in the saies, that ben maad 
redi to the hilyng, that ist, 0 sai whych" 
is more’, of the myddis” therof thou schalt 
hile the hyndrere* part of the tabernacle ; 
and a cubit schal hange on o part, and} 
the tother cubit on the tother part, which 
cubit is more in the’ lengthe of saies*, and 
schal> hile euer either syde of the taber- 
nacle. And thou schalt make another hil-14 
yng to the roof, of ‘skynnes of wetheres® 
maad reed, and ouer this thou schalt make 
eft anothir hilyng of ‘skynnes of iacyut*. 
Also thon schalt make stondynge tablis of 15 
the tabernacle, of the® trees of Sechym, 


b renge E pr.m. 
fsay E pr.u. & says E prom. 

° of E. 
Uw sayis E prim. 


¢ that o renge E pr.m. 
hbeneth e pr. m. 
Psaye E prem. 


teeris E pr.m. Vsaye & prim. 


t oon oilet 1s. handle r. an 
x schappid or mesurid s. 
Dthe took. ¢thesaiesis. Ubimw. ¢€ Om. Is, 
kOm. 1. !oyletisis. ™ and thou 1K. 


8 oyletis Is. 


1 bokelis 1. festnyng bofouns s. © with 1. P curtyn ryngis 1s. 4 andso1.ands. ‘Om. w. § left EILPs. 


tis fo sey 1. 4 that 1s. 


v left more 1. 
saies 1s. » it sehal 1s. 


Ww myddil w. 
¢ the wetheris skynnys 1. wetliris skynnys s. 


Ythe which 1. 2 Om. Is. 
4 jaeynet skinnys Is. 


a the 


x hyndere @1ks. 
e Om. K. 


+t tabernacle 
be maad, that 
is, oon hiling 
of the taber- 
nacle, BCGKQx. 


254 


16the trees of Sichym, the whiche echon 
han in lengthe ten cubitis, and in brede 
17eche oon and an half. In the sides of the 
tabernacle? be there made two rabitis, 
with the whiche the to table be sett fast 
to the tother; and so in this manere 
ialle the tablis shulen* be> greithid. Of 
the whiche twenti shulen be in® the myd- 
day side, that drawith toward the sowth"; 
19to the whiche and fourti silueren stakis 
thow shalt 3eete°, that two stakis ben vn- 
20 derput to ech table, bi twof corners. And 
in the secounde syde of the tabernacle, 
that drawith to the north, there shulen 
21 be twenti tablis, hauynge fourti silueren 
stakis; two stakis to eche table shulen be 
22vnderput. Forsothe to the west coost of 
the tabernacle thow shalt make sixe ta- 
23 bles; and eftsones other two, the whiche 
in the corners ben® arerid, bihynde the bak 
24o0f the tabernacle; and thei shulen be to 
hem seluen ioynd to gidere fro byneth 
vnto aboue, and o ioynyng shal holde 
hem alle. To the two forsothe tables 
that ben to be put in the corners lijk 
25manere ioynyng shal be kept", and there 
shulen be togidere ey3t tablis; the sil- 
ueren stakis of hem sixtene, two stakys 
26noumbrid! by o table. And thow shalt 
make fyue beryng staues of the trees of 
Sichym, to ‘be holdun* to gidere the tablis 
27in the o side of the tabernacle, and fyue 
other in the tother, and of the same 
28 noumbre at the west coost; that shulen be 
putte bi the myddel tables fro the heijest! 
29 ynto the hei3est!. And thilke tablis thou 
shalt gilden, and thou shalt 3eten™ in 
hem goldun rynges, bi the whiche the 
staues holden togidere the bordid sides, 
the whiche thow shalt couere with goldun 
30 plates. And thow shalt arere the taber- 


2 table gE. 
grounde E pr.m. 
kK hold & pr.m. 


a Om. £ prem. 
f here two £ pr.m. 
lheyxst BDEFIH. 


fthe whiche 1. & hitr. himxu. boos. 
whiche 1. 9° setter. P siluer ELF. 
uer ELP. ¥ baasis 1. foundementis or tresélis s. 
bi twei corners G. 7 reisid or sett vp s. 
e baasis 1. trestliss. fhem 1. 
1 sent plures. ™ oon plures. 
tablis rks. § the whyche 1. 


EXODUS. 


> ben thei £ pr.m. 
& now ben E pr.m. 
m festen E pr.m. 


© toward E pr.m. 


ian half Ks. 
q baasis 1. or foundement 1 marg. 
Vv that twei G. 
a on the bachalff 1s. 

& baasis 1. trestlis s. 
notherr. ©setter. Phemz. thotabliss. the whicher. 1 the 


XXVI. 16—30 


whichef fablis schulen haue ech bi hem§ 16 
silf ten cubitis in lengthe, and in brede a> 
cubit and half!. Forsothe twei dentyngis 17 
schulen be in the sidis of a‘ table, bi which 
al table schal be ioyned to another table ; 
and in this maner alle the tablis schulen 
be maad redi. Of whiche™ tablis twenti1s 
schulen be in the myddai side, that goith 
to the south; to whiche® tablis thou schalt 19 
jete® fourti silueren? foundementis’, that 
twei foundementis™ be set vndir ech table, 
bi twei corneris. In* the secounde side of20 
the tabernacle, that goith to the north, 
schulen be twenti tablis, hauynge fourti 
siluerent foundementis"; twei’ foundemen- 
tis” schulen* be set vndir ech tableY. So-21 
theli at the west coost of the tabernacle 
thou schalt make sixe tablis; and eft thou 22 
schalt make tweine othere tablis, thats 
schwen be reisid? in the corneris ‘bihynde 
the bak® of the tabernacle; and the tablis24 
schulen be ioyned to hem silf fro bynethe 
til to aboue, and o ioynyng schal with- 
holde® alle the tablis. And lijk ioynyng 
schal be kept to the twei tablis, that schu- 
len be set in the corneris, and tho® schulen 2s 
be eiz3te tablis togidere; the siluerne* foun- 
dementis® of thof schulen be sixtene, while 
twei foundementis® ben rikenyd bi o table. 
Thou schalt make also fyue barris of ‘trees 26 
of Sechym", to holde togidere the tablis 
in o side of the tabernacle, and fyue othere 27 
barris in the tother! side, and of the same 
noumbre at the west coost ; whiche* barris 28 
schulen be put! thorou the myddil tablis 
fro the toon™ ende til to the tothir™. And 29 
thon schalt ouergilde tho tablis, and thou 
schalt 3ete® goldun ryngis in tho?, bi 
whiche! ryngis, the barris schulen holde 
togidere the werk of tablis', whyche’ barris 
thou schalt hile with goldun platis. And 30 


4 west £ pr.m. © fytche in the 


h holde = pr.m. } vnderputt E£ pr. in. 


mthe whiche k. ™ the 
rbaasist. 8 Andink. tsil- 
Whaasis 1. trestliss. *Om.«. Y table 
b biholde Bp. ¢their. 4 siluer Exp. 


h Sechim trees 1s. iothers. the whiche 1. 


k the ca. 100 1Ks. 


XXVI. 31-——-XXVII. 3. 


nacle, after the saumplere that is shewid 
sito thee in the hil. And thow shalt make 
a veyle of iacynkt, and purpur, and coc- 
tun twies died, and bijs foldun a3en with 
nedle" werk, and with fayre dyuersite 
3zweuyd togidere; the whiche thow shalt 
honge before the foure pilers of the trees 
of Sichym, the whiche also shulen be gilt ; 
and thei shulen han goldun heedes, but 
33silueren feet. The veyle forsothe be it 
sett yn bi cercles, with ynne the whiche 
thou shalt put the arke of testymonye, and 
with the which the seyntuarye and the 
seyntuarye® of the seyntuarie shulen be 
34dyuydid. And thow shalt putte the pro- 
piciatorie vpon the arke of testymonye?, 
into the parti of the tabernacle that is 
as clepid holi of halowes; and the bord with 
outen the veyle, and ajen the bord the 
candelstik in the sowth side of the taber- 
nacle; the bord forsothe shal stonde in 
36the parti of the north. And thow shalt 
make a tent in the goyng ynne of the 
tabernacle, of iacynkt, and purpur, and 
coctun twies died, and bijs foldun a3en 
37 with nedle? werk. And fyue pilers thow 
shalt gilte of trees’ of Sichym, before the 
whiche shal the tente be lad, of the 
whiche shulen be goldun heedes, and bra- 
sun feet. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 Thow shalt make an auteer of trees* 
of Sichym, that shal haue fyue cubites in 
lengthe, and as feele in brede, that is to 
seye, squaar', and thre cubites in hei3t. 

2 Hornes forsothe bi the foure corners shu- 
len be of it; and thow shalt couere it with 

3brasse. And thow shalt make into the 
vsis of yt cawdrones, to be takun the asken, 
and toonges, and hokes, and fyer vessels ; 


" neeld BE. © sayntuarise EF. 
trees E. tasquaar 4 pr.m. F. querry E pr.m. 


treise vp 1. vpreise s. "of prr. 
Zthilke 1 2 oner gilt 1s. © thei 1. 
© with m. f cerclis ether ryngis Bc. ryngis w. 
the seyntnarie cia. thi Kk. ™ that ce. 
®baasis1. tof the auter 1s. "asche s. 


P the testimonye nprFn pr.m. 


¥ purpul evr. 
¢ the baasis 1. the fonndementis s. f. ether feet B. 
& the which 1. h Om.6. ! seyntuarie F. 

n Om. 1. 


EXODUS. . 255 


thou schalt reise‘ the tabernacle, bi the 

sampler that was schewid to thee in the 

hil. Thou schalt make also a veil ofa 

iacynt, and" purpur’, and of reed silk twies 

died, and of bijs foldid a3en bi broideri 

werk, and wouun togidere bi fair dy- 

uersite ; which* veil thou schalt hange bi-s2 

for foure pileris of ‘the trees of Sechymy; 

and sotheli tho? pileris schulen be ouner- 

gildid?; and tho’ schulen haue goldun 

heedis, but foundementis¢ of@ siluer. For-33 

sothe the veil schal be set in bi® the cer- 

clis', with ynne which® veil thou schalt 

sette the arke of witnessyng, wherbi the 
seyntuarye and the seyntuaries' of seyn- 

tuarie* schulen be departid. And thou34 

schalt sette the! propiciatorie{ on the arke 

of witnessyng, in to the hooli of hooli kiting the arke 
thingis; and™ thou schalt sette a boordss% °° ™ 
with out the veil, and a3ens the boord 
‘thou schalt® sette the candilstike in the 
south side of the tabernacle; for the bord 
schal stonde in the north side. Thouse 
schalt make also a tente in the entryng 
of the tabernacle, of iacynt, and purpur?, 
and of reed sedk twies died, and of bijs 
foldid a3en bi broidery werk. And thous7 
schalt ouergilde fyue? pileris of ‘trees of 
Sechyim4, bifor whiche pileris the tente 
schal be led, of whiche pileris the heedis 
schulen be of gold, and the foundementis" 
of bras, 


t that is, a 
golden table 


CAP. XXVILI. 


Also thou schalt make an auter of thei 
trees of Sechym, which schal hane fyue 
eubitis in lengthe, and so many in brede, 
that is, sqware, and thre cubitis in hei3the. 
Forsothe hornes schulen be bi foure cor-2 
neris theroft; and thou schalt hile it with 
bras. And thou schalt make in to the vsiss 
of the auter pannes, to resseyue aischis", 
aud tougis, and fleisch hookis, and resettis 
$ the 


dneelde ar. *the trees BDEFH. 


y Sechim trees 1s. 

4 schnl be 1s. 
K seyntuaries c. 
@ Sechim trees 1s. 


Ww folden 1, * the which r. 


opurpul ep.  P the fyne 1s. 


256 


alle the vessels thow shalt forge of brasse. 
4 And a brasun gredyrne in the manere of 
a nett, bi whos foure corners shulen be 
sfoure brasun rynges, the whiche thow 
shalt putte vnder the ‘fier panne" of the 
auteer ; and the’ gredyrne shal be to the 
émyddil of the auteer. And thow shalt 
make two beryng staues of the auteer, 
of the trees of Sichym, the which thow 
7shalt couere with brasun plates; and 
thow shalt lede ynne thur3 cercles, and 
thei shulen be on either side of the au- 
steer, to bern”. Thow shalt make it not 
massy, but withinne voyde, and with 
ynne holow3, as it is shewid to thee in 
9the hil. And thow shalt make the porche 
of the tabernacle, in whos sowth coost 
aj3en the sowth shulen be tentes of bijs 
ajen foldid; the to side shal holde an 
tohundred cubites in lengthe, and twenti 
pilers, with so feele brasun feet, the 
whiche shulen han silueren heedes with 
liher grauyngis. Also in the side of the 
north, bi the lengthe, shal be tentis of an 
hundryd cubites, the pilers twenti, and 
brasun foot stakes of the same noumbre ; 
and the heedes of hem with here grau- 
1zyngis silueren. In the brede forsothe of 
the porche, that biholdith to the west, 
there shulen be tentis bi fifti cubitis, and 
13ten pilers, and as feele footstakis. In 
that forsothe brede of the porche, that 
biholdeth to the eest, shal ben fifty cu- 
14 bitis, in the whiche tentis of fiftene cu- 
bitis shulen be ordeyned to ‘that o* side, 
and thre pilers, and so feele footstakesy ; 
15in the tother side shulen be tentis hold- 
ynge fiftene cubitis, and thre pilers, and 
16as feele footstakis. In the entre forsothe 
of the porche there shal be maad a tente 
of twenti cubitis, of iacynkt, and purpur, 
and cocto twies died, and bijs foldid a3en 
with nedle? werk ; and he shal haue foure 


u flore £ pr.m. Vso that the E pr.m. W bren a, 


v fijr pannes 1s. w= and thou x. 
8 fijris. > be of heizi ts. © the twey 1. 
htheir ithe. & massy 1s. 1 poorche is. 
uer ELP. fF feet is. 8 the cigs. + porche 1s. 
¥Y the whiche x. 2 baasis1. ® others. » baasis 1. 


EXODUS. 


x thes vesselis 1s. 
d the whiche 1. 
m thi L. 
ubere GQ pr. m. 

¢ large entree 18. 


KRVIT. s— 16: 


of fyris’; thou schalt make alle vessilis* 
of bras. And thou schalt make a brasun4 
gridele in the maner of a net, and bi fourY 
corneris therof schulen be foure brasun 
ryngis, whiche* thou schalt putte vndurs 
the yrun*® panne of the auter; and the 
gridele schal be® til to the myddis of the 
auter. And thou schalt make twey® harris6 
of the auter, of the trees of Sechym, whiche* 
barris thou schalt hile with platis of bras; 
and thou schalt lede® yn ‘the barris® bi the7 
cerclis, and tho" schulen be on euer eithir 
side of the auter, to bere. Thou schalts 
make that! a@ufer not massif*, but voide, 
and holowe with ynne, as it was schewid 
to thee in the hil. Also thou schalt make» 
a large street! of the™ tabernacle, ‘7 the 
maner of a chirche 3eerd”, in whos myd- 
day coost a3ens the south schulen be tentis 
of bijs foldid® a3en; 0 side schal holde 
an hundrid cubitis in lengthe, and twenti1o 
pileris, with so many brasun foundementis?, 
whiche pileris schulen haue silueren‘ heedis 
with her grauyngis. In lijk maner in theu 
north side, bi the lengthe, schulen be tentis 
of an hundrid cubitis, twenti pileris, and 
brasun foundementis’ of the same noum- 
bre; and the heedis of tho’ pileris with 
her grauyngis schulen be of siluer. For- 12 
sothe in the breede of the large street*, 
that biholdith to the west, schulen be 
tentis bi fifti cubitis, and ten pileris schu- 
len be*, and so’ many foundementis*. In13 
that breede of the large street*, that bi- 
holdith to the eest, schulen be fifti eu- 
bitis, in whiche’ the tentis of fiftene cu-14 
bitis schulen be assigned to o side, and 
thre pileris, and so many foundementis? ; 
and in the tother* side schulen be tentis 15 
holdynge fiftene cubitis, and thre pileris, 
and so many foundementis®. Forsothe in 16 
the entryng‘ of the ‘greet strete’ schal be 
maad a tente of twenti cubitis, of iacynt, 


x the too sperm. Y footstaues 4. 2 neelde BE. 


y the four s. 2 the which gridel 1. which gridel s. 
€ledehemr. fOm.1.  & ryngis 1ws. 

nOm.1s. © foldeni. P baasis1. 4 sil- 

VYasis. Wbaasis1. * porche 1s. 
d porche 1s. 


XXVII. 17-—X XVIII. 4. 


17pilers, with as feele footstakis. Alle the 
pilers of the porche bi enuyroun shulen 
be clothid with silueren platis, the heedes 

issilueren, and the feet brasun. In lengthe 
the porche shal ocupie an hundred cn- 
bitis, in brede fifti; the heijt shal be of 
fyue cubitis; and it shal be maad of 
bijs foldun a3en, and it shal hane brasun 

i9footstakis, Alle the vessels of the taber- 
nacle, into alle vsis and serymonyes, as 
wel the litil stakes of it as of the porche, 

20thow shalt make of brasse. Comaunde 
to the sones of Yrael, that thei bryngen 
to thee oyle of olyue trees moost puyre, 
and powned with a pestel, that the lan- 

21 terne brenne euer more in the tabernacle 
of witnes with outen the veyle, that is ajen- 
strau3t to the testymonye; and Aaron and 
his sones shulen sette it, that it 3yue li3t 
vnto the morwen before the Lord; it 
shal be euerlastynge? by the successioun> 
of hem of the sones of Yrael. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 And present® to thee Aaron, thi bro- 
ther, with his sones, fro the myddil of 
the sones of Yrael, that thei beren prestis 
office to me, Aaron, Nadab, and Abiut, 
2Eliezer, and Ythamer. And thow shalt 
make to Aaron, thi brother, an holi clooth, 
3into glorie and fayrnes. And thow shalt 
speke to alle the wise men in herte, that 
Y haue fulfillid with the spiryt of pru- 
dence, that thei make the clothis of Aa- 
ron, in the whiche he halowid mynystre 
4to me. Thes forsothe shulen be the vest- 
mentis that thei shulen make; the breest 
broche, and coope, coote, and a® rochet, 


&® euerlastynge herying E. 


€ purpul ELP passim. 
k poorche 1s, | baasis 1. ™ poorche 1s. 
mentis BCEOLPX. * the stakis 1s. * entre 1s. 
the which kK. * successiouns, or after comyngis 1. 
athe whicher. ©» fnlfillid 1s. ¢ Om. ow. 


EXODUS. 


b successyouns E, 


f cocto, that is, reed silk 8. 
n hei3t 1s. 
t thou also x. 
y thee, or brynge to thi presence 3. 
4 a racional rx sec. m. a racional, that is, a nowche vpon the 
breest, in whiche dome and treuthe shal be writen s. : 


257 


and purpur*, and of reed selk‘ twies died, 
ands of bijs foldid® a3en bi broideri werk ; 
it schal haue four pileris, with so many 
foundementis?. Alle the pileris of the17 
grete streete* bi cumpas schulen be clothid 
with platis of siluer, with hedis of siluer, 
and with foundementis! of bras. The greet 1s 
street™ schal ocupie an hundrid cubitis in 
lengthe, fifti in breede; the hizenesse® of 
the tente schal be of fine cubitis; and it 
schal be maad of bijs foldid® a3en; and it 
schal haue brasun foundementis?. Thou 19 
schalt make of bras alle the vesselis4 of 
the tabernacle, in to alle vsis and cery- 
nionyes, as wel stakis' therof, as of the 
greet street’. Comaunde thout to the sones 20 
of Israel, that thei brynge to thee the 
clenneste oile of ‘the trees of olyues’, and 
powned with a pestel, that a lanterne 
brenne euere in the tabernacle of witness-21 
yng with out the veil, which” is hangid 
in the tabernacle of witnessyng ; and Aa- 
ron and hise sones schulen sette it, that it 
schyne bifore the Lord til the morewtid ; 
it schal be euerlastynge worschiping bi her 
successiouns* of the sones of Israel. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Also applie thou to theeY Aaron, thii 
brother, with hise sones, fro the myddis of 
the sones of Israel, that Aaron, Nadab, 
and Abyu, Eleazar’, and Ythamar, be set 
in preesthod to me. And thou schalt make 2 
an hooli clooth to Aaron, thi brother, in 
to glorie and fairenesse. And thou schalts 
speke to alle wise men in herte, whiche* 
Y haue fillid> with the spirit of prudence, 
that thei make clothis to Aaron, in whiche 
he schal be halewid, and schal mynystre 
to me. Forsothe these schulen be the4 
clothis, whiche thei schulen make; ‘thei 
schulen make® racional4, and a clooth on 


¢ draw E prem. ad Om. a prem. H. 


& Om. a pr.m. et plures. % folden 1s. | baasis 1. - 
© folden 1s. P baasis 1. 4 vesselis, that ts, instru- 
uOm. Go. Volyne trees 1s. ¥ that 1s. 


Zz and Eleazar 1s. 


Ll 


258 


and a® streytf myter, and a girdil thei 
shulen make; to Aaron, thi brother, and 
to the sones of hym, holi clothingis, that 

5 thei beren prestis office to me. And thei 
shulen take gold, and iacynkt, and pur- 
pur, and coctun twies died, and bijs; 
éand thei shulen make the coope of gold, 
and iacynkt, and purpur, and coctun 
twies died, and bijs a3en foldid, with 
7nedleg werk of dyuerse colours. Two 
hemmes ioyned he shal haue in eithir 
side of the hei3tes, that thei goon into 
soon. That weuyng, and al the dyuersite 
of the werk shal be of gold, and of 
iacynkt, and of purpur, and of coctun 
9twies died, and of bijs ajen foldid. And 
thow shalt take two onychen stonus, and 
thow shalt graue in hem the names of 
1the sones of Yrael, six names in ‘that o> 
stoon, and six in ‘that other!, after the 
11ordre of her birthe; in the werk of the 
grauer, and in the grauyng of the gem- 
marye thow shalt graue hem, with the 
names of the sones of Yrael, enclosid 
l2with gold, and enuyround. And thow 
shalt put in either syde of the coope a 
memoryale to the sones of Yrael; and 
Aaron shal bere the names of hem before 
the Lord vpon either shuldre, for record- 
izynge. And thow shalt make the hokys 
uof gold, and two litil cheynes of moost 
puyre gold, to hem seluen togidere cleu- 
ynge to, the whiche thow shalt sett into 
isthe hokis. The breest broche forsothe 
of dom thou shalt make with werk of 
dyuerse colours, after the weuyng of the 
coope, of gold, iacynkt, and purpur, and 
coctun twies died, and bijs foldun a3en. 
16 Foure cornerd it shal be, and dowble; the 
mesure of a spanne it shal haue, as wel 
i7in lengthe as in brede. And thow shalt 
put in it foure ordres of stonus; in the 
first verse shal be the sardo stoon, and 

e€ Om. E. 


fOm £ prim. € neeld BE. 


€ rochet is. f Om. plures. 
k cocco 1s. !foldenis. ™ to 1s. on x. 
Tofrr Scoccors. tof bijs1s. 4 folden 1s. 
hem 1s. 8 cumpasse hem 1s. 


© the whiche 1. f aftir 1. 
™ spanne O pr. 2. QT prem. X. 


& Om. Kosw. 
D an IS. 


EXODUS. 


h the too BDEFH. 


& shulen these be tos. 

n hij3nesse 108. 
v hem 1. 
b with Bpr.m.E. and in L. 
h of s. 
° the lengthe o. 


XXVIII. 5—17. 


the schuldris, a coote, and a streyt lyn- 
nun clooth®, a mytre, and af girdil; hooli 
cloothis to’ Aaron, thi brother, and to hise 
sones, that thei be set in preesthod to me. 
And thei schulen take gold, and iacynt,5 
and purpur, and ‘reed selk twies died}, 
and bijs; forsothe thei schulen make thes 
clooth on the schuldris of gold, and of 
iacynt, and! purpur, and of ‘reed selk 
twies died*, and of bijs foldid! a3en, bi 
broyderi werk of dynerse colours. It schal7 
haue twey hemmes ioyned in™ euer either 
side of hiznessis", that tho® go a3en? in to 
oon. Thilke weuyng, and al dyuersite ofs 
the werk schal be of gold, and iacynt4, 
and* purpur, and of ‘reed sedk* twies died, 
and bijst foldid® a3jen. And thou schalte 
take twei stoonys of onychym, and thou 
schalt graue in tho’ the names of the sones 
of Israel, sixe names in o¥ stoon, and sixe 10 
othere in the tother stoon, bi the ordre of 
her birthe; bi the werk of a grauere, and} 
bi the peyntyng of a man that ourneth 
with gemmes thou schalt graue tho* 
stoonys, with the names of the sones of 
Israel; and thou schalt encloseY and cum- 
passe* in? gold. And thou schalt sette tho®12 
stoonus in euer either side of the cloth on 
the schuldris, 2 memorial to the sones of 
Israel ; and Aaron schal bere the names of 
hem bifor the Lord on euer either schuldre, 
for remembryng. And thou schalt make 13 
hookis of gold, and twey litil chaynes of 14 
clenneste gold, cleuynge to hem silf to- 
gidere, whiche® litil chaynes thou schalt 
sette in the hookis. Also thou schalt make 15 
the racional of doom by werk of dyuerse 
colours, bif the? weuyng of the cloth on? 
the schuldre, of gold, iacynt, and purpur, 
of ‘reed si/ki twies died, and of bijs foldid* 
a3en. It! schal be foure cornerid, and dou-1i6 
ble; it schal haue the mesure of a pawme™ 
of the® hond, as wel in lengthe®, as in 


ithe tother speru. * Om. sz. 


i of pcoart. and of wx sec. m. 
© thei ci. P Om. plures. 4 of iacynt 1Ks. 
wtheog. Xthilke 1. the Lo. Y enclose 

¢ thilke 1. the Lo. d euere to K. 
k folden 1s. 1 The brest broche, it s. 


h cocco Is. 


i cocto s. 


XXVIII. 18—3o0. 


18 topazi, and smaragdo; in the secounde, 
igcarboncle, saphijr, and iasp; in the 
20 thridde, ligyre, achates, and amatyst; in 
the ferthe, crisolide, onychen, and _ beril ; 
thei shulen be enclosid with gold, bi her 
2.ordres, and thei shulen han the names of 
the sones of Yrael; with twelue names 
thei shulen be graued, eche stonus ‘bi the 
22 name! of eche, bi the twelue lynagis. And 
thou shalt make in the breest broche 
cheynes to hem seluen togidere cleuynge, 
230f moost puyre gold, and two goldun 
ryngis, the whiche thow shalt putte in 
24either creeste of the broche. And thow 
shalt ioyne the goldun cheynes to the 
rynges that ben in the mergyns of it, 
2;and the eendis of thilke cheynes thow 
shalt cowple to the two hokes in either 
side of the coope, that the breest broche 
2¢biholdith. And thow shalt make two 
golden rynges, the whiche thou shalt 
putte in the creestis of the breest broche, 
and in the hemmes, the whiche ben ‘forn 
ajen™ of the shuldre clooth, and by- 
27holden® the hyndermore of it. Also and 
other two goldun rynges, the whiche ben 
to be sette in either side of the coope be- 
nethe, that biholdeth a3ens the face of 
the nethermore ioynyng, that it may be 
28leyd to with the coope. And the breest 
broche with his rynges be streyned with 
the rynges of the coope, with a iacync- 
tyne filete, and the ioynyng dwel forgid, 
that the breest broche and the coope 
29mowen not be seueryd atwynne. And 
Aaron shal bere the names of the sones 
of Yrael in the breest broche of dome 
vpon his breest, whanne he gothe into 
the seyntuarye, a memoryale before the 
30 Lord into with outen eende. And thow 
shalt ‘putt in° the breest broche of dome, 
doctryne and trewthe, that shulen be in 


1 with namys E sec. m. 


P tho stoonys K. 4 that is clepid sardius s. 
stoon ligurie is. V and in 1s. the ston 1s. 
Zheris. ®thesis. » the stoonys 1Ks. 
tthe whicher. Son x. } creeste s. 


EXODUS. 


™ fro the regyoun E pr.m. 


rOm. s. 
w the ston crisolitus Is. 
¢ alle plures. alle the ks. 
ithe racional 1xx. the breest broche s. 


959 


breede. And thou schalt sette ther ynne 17 
foure ordris of stoonys?; in the firste or- 
dre schal be the stoon sardius‘, and" to- 
pazyus, and smaragdus; in the secunde 1s 
ordre schal be charbuncele’, safirt, and ias- 
pis; in the thridde ordre schal be ligurie®, 19 
achates, and ametiste; in’ the fourthe or-20 
dre schal be crisolitus”, onochyn, and be- 
rille; tho* schulen he closid in gold, bi her 
ordris, and schulenY haue the? names of 21 
the sones of Israel: tho* schulen be graven 
with twelue names; al stonus? bi hem 
silf, with the names of the® sones ‘of Israel 
bi hem silf, bi twelue lynagis. Thou schalt 22 
make in the racional® chaynes cleuynge to 
hem silf togidere of pureste gold, and thou 23 
schalt make twei goldun ryngis, whichef 
thou schalt sette in® ever either hi3nesse" 
of racionali. And* thou schalt ioyne the 24 
goldun chaynes with the ryngis that ben 
in the brynkis! therof, and™ thou schalt 2s 
couple the ‘last thingis" of tho® chaynes to 
twey? hookis in euer either side of the 
‘cloth on the schuldur4, that biholdith™ 
the racional’. And thou schalt make twei 26 
goldun ryngis, whichet thou -schalt sette 
in the hiznesses" of the racional’, and in 
the hemmes of the cloth on the schuldur, 
that ben euene a3ens”, and biholden the 
lattere thingis therof. Also and* thou schalt 27 
make tweyne othere goldun ryngis, that 
schulen be set in euer either side of the 
cloothY on the schuldur bynethe, that bi- 
holdith a3ens the face of the lowere ioyn- 
yung, that it may be set couenabli with the 
‘cloth on the schuldre?. And the racional® 28 
be boundun bi hise ryngis with the ryngis 
of the ‘cloth on the schuldre>, with a lace 
of iacynt, that the ioyning maad craftili 
dwelle, and® that the racional’ andé¢ ‘cloth 
on the schuldref moun not be departid ech 
fro other. And Aaron schal bere the names 29 


‘biholdeth 4. ° putte 4. puttyn eH. putten DF. 


t the safir is. the 
Xthes 1s.  Y thei schulen 1s. 
d Om, ies € breste broche Is. 

And alsox. ! brynke mn. 


8 the charbuncle stoon ts. 


margyns 1s. ™QOm.s. .eendisis. the ecrnognwx. Om.s. P the twey 1s. coop s. * hooldith &. 
is forn ajen s. § brest broche 1s. the whicle 1. 4 hignesse cz. crestis 1s. V breest broche s. W ther 
ajens 1s. *Om.1. Ycoopers. 2% coopers. 4 breest broche s. coopers. Cand also1. 4 breest 
broche s. andthe x. f the coope 1s. cloth on the shuldres 1. 


L12 


260 


the breest of Aaron, whanne he shal go 
ynne before the Lord; and he shal bere 
the? dome of the sones of Yrael in his 
breest, in the si3t of the Lord euermore. 
3tAnd thow shalt make the coote of the 
z2coope al iacynctyne, in whos myddil 
aboue shal be an hood, and a weuyd 
hemine bi enuyroun of it, as it is wont 
to be maad in the eendis of clothis, lest 
33it listly to-breke. Benethe forsothe at 
the feet of the same coote, bi enuyroun, 
thow shalt make as powm garnettis, of 
iacynkt, and purpur, and coctun twies 


died, and bijs ajen foldid; in the myddil. 


34litel belles menged, so that the litel belle 
be gold, and a powm garnet; and eft- 
sones another litel goldun belle, and a 
35powm garnet. And Aaron shal be clothid 
it in the office of the seruyce, that the 
sown be herd whanne he gothe yn and 
out the seyntuarye, in the si3t of the 
36 Lord, and that he dye not. And thow 
shalt make a plate of moost puyre gold, 
in the which thow shalt graue with werk 
37 of a grauer, the hooly to the Lord. And 
thow shalt bynde it with a iacynctyne 
filete, and it shal be vpon’ the coyif 
ss stondinge ouer® to’ the forheed of the 
bishop. And Aaron shal bere the wyckid- 
nest of thilke thingis that the sones of 
Yrael shulen offre, and halowe, in alle 
3iftis to men, and in her 3iftes to God; 
and the plate shal be euermore"® in the 
frownt of hym, that the Lord be plesid 
39to him. And thou shal streyne the coote 
with bijs, and the coif of bijs, and thou 
shalt make the girdil with werk of a 
40 broderere. Forsothe to the sones of Aa- 
ron thow shalt greithe lynnen cootes, and 
girdlis™, and coyfes, into glorye and 
41fayrnes. And thow shalt clothe with alle 
thes Aaron, thi brother, and his sones 


EXODUS. 


XXVIII. 31—4I1. 


of the sones of Israel in the racional® of 
doom on" his brest, whanne he entrith in 
to the seyntuarie, a memorial‘ bifor the 
Lord with outen ende. Forsothe thou30 
schalt sette in the racional* of doo, tech- 
yng, and treuthe, whiche schulen be in the 
brest of Aaron, whanne he entrith bifor 
the Lord, and he schal bere! the doom of 
the sones of Israel in his brest in the™ si3t 
of the Lord euere®. And® thou schalt make 31 
the coote of the ‘cloth on the schuldre? al 
of iacynt, in whos myddil aboue schal be32 
an hood4, and’ a wouun hemme ‘bi cum- 
pas therof’, as it is wont to be don‘ in the 
hemmes of clothis, lest it be brokun 1i3tli. 
Forsothe bynethe at the feet of the same 33 
coote, bi cumpas, thou schalt make as ‘piyn 
applis", of iacynt, and purpur, of ¥ ‘reed 
selk* twies died, and of * biis foldidY a3en ; 
while smale bellis ben medlid in the myd- 
dis, so that a litil ‘belle of gold’ be and a3 


‘piyn appil*, and eft another litel belle of 


gold and a‘pyn appil*. And Aaron schal 3s 

be clothid with that coote® in the® office of 

seruyce’, that sown® be herd, whanne he 

entrith in to the seyntuarie, and goith out, 

in the’ si3t of the Lord; and that he die 

not. And thou schalt make a plate of36 

pureste gold, in which® thou schalt graue 

bi the werk of a grauere, the holi®} to! the ce es, : 
Lord}. And thou schalt bynde that plate 37 ees se 
with a lace of iacynt, and it schal be on tragramaton. 
the mytre, and schal* neize the forheed of 38 s TROREET 
the bischop. And Aaron schal bere the ™¢?™* 
wickidnessis of hem! whiche™ the sones 

of Israel ‘offeriden, and halewiden" in alle 

her 3iftis® and? fre 3iftis1; forsothe™ the 

plate schal euere be in ‘his forhed’, that 

the Lord be plesid tot him. And thous 

schalt bynde the coot of biis", and the 

myter of bijs, and’ thou schalt make also 

a girdil, ‘bi werk of broiderye’. Forsothe 40 


pOm.p. dons. tapperyng £ pr.m, 8 Om. 4. t wyckidnesses spEFH. “ouvermore D. ™ girldlis 4. 


& broche s. 
© And also kK. 
rOm.s. Saboute it 1. ¢ maad 1s. 
y folden 1s. 2 gold belle 1s. powme garnet Is. 
sown. fOm.1s. §& the which 1. 
synnes BCGKOQX. tho thingis 1s. 
her ts. 4 3iftis fo men 1s. T and ts. 


hvpon s. { myndefulnesse s. 


m that Is. 


k breest broche s. 
P coope 1s. cloth of the schuldre w. 
2 powme garnetis Is. 
b coote, or aube s. 
b holi name 18. 
2 shul offre and halowe Is. 
8 the forhed of Aaron x. Aaron foreheed s. 


l bere ever is. ™Om.s. ® Om. 1s. 
a hood, that is, an hoole for the heed ncGKogx. 
Vand rx. andofs. Wcoccos. ¥* Om. Is. 
eOnt.s. his sernyce ts. ¢ the 
k it schal 1s. | hem, that is, offryngis for 
9 3iftes fo God 1s. P and in 
tofx. " biys, that is, 


i of 1. 


maad of biys BcGQ. Y Om. cet.omnes. W with broudery werk 1. bi brouderi werk s, 


XXVIII. 42—XXIX. 8. 


with hym; and of hem alle thow shalt 
sacre the’ hondes; and thow shalt halwe 
hem, that thei beren the office of prest- 
42hode to me. And thow shalt make lyn- 
nen brecches, that thei coueren the flesh 
of her filthehed, fro the reynes vnto the 
43hippes. And vse thei hem Aaron and his 
sones, whanne thei shulen goo into the ta- 
bernacle of witnes, or whanne thei neizjen 
to the auteer, that thei mynystre in the 
seyntuarye, lest thei gylti of wickidnes 
dyen; lawful euerlastynge it shal be to 
Aaron, and to his seed after hym. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 But and this thou shalt doon, that thei 
be sacrid to me in presthode; tak a calf 
from the droue, and two whetheris with 

zouten wemme, and therf looues, and a 
cake with outen sour dow3, the whiche 
ben thei spreynde with oyle, and therf 
cramcakes wett with oyle; and of puyr 
whete meele thow shalt make alle thingis, 

3and put in-a leepe thow shalt offre. The 

acalf forsothe, and the two wetheris, and 
Aaron and his children, thou shalt brynge 
to the dore of the tabernacle of witnes; 
and whanne thow hast wasshe the fader 
swith the sones with water, thow shalt 
clothe Aaron with his clothes, that is to 
seie, with rocket, and coote, and coope, 
and breest broche, that thow shalt streyne 

éwith a girdel. And thow shalt putte a 
coyif in to his heed, and the holi plate 

7vpon the coyif, and the oyle of anoynt- 
ynge thow shalt heelde vpon his heed, 

sand with this ryte he shal be sacrid. The 


sones forsothe of hym thow shalt pre-— 


sente”, and thow shalt clothe with lyn- 


Vv here £ pr.m. 


x Aaron soness. Yofc, 2 by 3B. 
breches 8. for ELP passim.  & entren FP. 


a hem alle 1s. 
bh Om. c. 


EXODUS. 261 


thou schalt make redi to ‘the sones of Aa- 
ron* linnun cootis, and girdlis, and inytris, 
in to glorie and’ fairnesse. And thouai 
schalt clothe Aaron, thi brother, with? alle 
these, and hise sones with hym. And 
thou schalt sacre the hondis of alle*; and 
thou schalt halewe hem, that thei be set 
in preesthood to me. Also thou schalt 42 
make? lynnun brechis, that thei hile the 
fleisch of her filthe fro the reynes ‘til to® 
the’ hipis. And Aaron and hise sones 43 
schulen vse tho®, whanne thei schulen en- 
tre in to the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
etherf whanne thei neijen® to the auter, 
that thei mynystren in the seyntuarie, lest 
thei ben gilti of wickidnesse, and dieu; it 
schal be a lawful thing ecuerlastynge to 
Aaron, and to his seed after hym. 


CAP. XXIX. 


But also thou schalt do this, that thei! 
be sacrid to me in preesthod; take thou a 
calf of the droue, and twei rammes with 
out wem, and therf Jooues, and a4 cakea 
with out sour dow, whiche! be spreynt to 
gidere with oile, and therf paast sodun in 
watir, ‘bawmed, ether fried, with oile; 
thou schalt make alle thingis! of whetel! 
flour, and thou schalt offre ¢ho™ put in as 
panyere". Forsothe thou schal presente the 
calfe, and twey rammes, and Aaron and4 
his sones, at the dore of tabernacle® of wit- 
nessyng ; and whanne thou hast waische 
the fadir and the? sones in watir, thous 
schalt clothe Aaron with hise clothis, that 
is, the1 lynnen cloth’, ‘and coote’, and the 
clotht on the schuldris, ‘and the racional", 
which thou schalt bynde with a girdil. 
And thou schalt sette the mytre on hisé 
heed, and the hooli plate on’ the mytre, 
and thou schalt schede the oile of anoynt-7 
yng on his heed; and bi this” custom he 
schal be sacrid. Also thou schalt presente 8 
hise sones, and thou schalt clothe* with 


w bryng forth £ pr. m. 


dheris. ¢ tho 
1 thes thingis 1s. 


¢ ynto Is. 
k Om. 1. 


b make to hem s. 
ithe whiche 1. 


2 pure whete1s. ™ hem 1. these s. %baskett 1s. °the tabernacle rciksx. P hisis.Om.x. 4 with the 1s. 
¥ cloth or rochet s. *Om.1. and the coote kK. and with the coope s. * cooper. breest broche s, %Om.s. 
Yvponis. * Om.v. * clothe hem 1ks. ; 


262 


nen clothes, and thow shalt girde with a 
9 girdle, that is, Aaron and his free chil- 
dren; and thow shalt putte vpon hem 
mytrys, and thei shulen be my preestis 
with enerlastynge religioun. And after 
that* thow hast sacryde the hondes of 
10hem, thow shalt brynge forth andy a calf 
before the tabernacle of witnes, and Aa- 
ron and his sones shulen putte yn hondes 
11 vpon the heed of it; and thow shalt slee 
it in the si3t of the Lord, biside the dore 
of the tabernacle of witnes. And that 
that is takun of the blood of the calf, 
thow shalt putte vpon the hornes of the 
auter with thi fyngre; the relif blood 
forsothe thow shalt heelde beside the foot 
i3of it. And thow shalt take al the fatnes 
that couereth the entreyls, and the calle 
of the mawe, and the two kydneers, and 
the fatt that is vpon hem, and thow 
14shalt offre encense vpon the auter. The 
flesh forsothe of the calf, and the skynne, 
and the dryt, thow shalt outforth brenne 
out of the tentis, forthi that it is for 
issynne. And thow shalt take o wether, 
vpon whos heed Aaron and his sones 
isshal ligge the hondes; the which whanne 
thou hast slawe, thow shalt take of the 
blood of it, and thow shalt heelde aboute 
i7the auter. And thow shalt kutte that 
wether in gobettis, and the entrayls of it 
washid, and the feete, thow shalt putte 
vpon the cut flesh, and vpon his heed; 
isand thow shalt offre al the wether into 
ensence’” vpon the auter ; offrynge it is to 
the Lord, the moost swete smel of the 
19slawn sacrifice of the Lord. And thow 
shalt take another wether, vpon whos 
heed Aaron and his sones shulen putte 
20hondes, the’ which whanne thow hast 
offrede, thow shalt take of the blood of 
it, and thow shalt putte vpon the eende 


xOm. pe. Y Om. B. 


EXODUS. 


X XIX. g-—20. 


lynnun cootis’, and thou schalt girde Aa-9 
ron and hise sones with a girdil; and 
thou schalt sette mytris.on hem?; and thei 
schulen be my preestis bi euerlastynge re- 
ligioun. After that thou hast halewid ‘the 
hondis of hem*, also thou schalt presente 10 
the calf bifore the tabernacle of witness- 
yng; and Aaron and hise sones schulen 
sette> hondis® ‘on the heed therof4; andi1 
thou schalt sle it in the® si3t of the Lord, 
bisidis the dore of the tabernacle of wit- 
nessyng. And thou schalt take the blood 12 
of the calf, and schaltf putte? with thi fyn- 
gur on the corneris of the auter. For- 
sothe thou schalt schede the ‘tothir bloodi 
bisidis the foundement* therof!. And thou 1s 
schalt take al the fatnesse that hilith the 
entrailis™, and the calle of the mawe, and 
twey® kidneris®, and the fatnesse which? 
is on hem; and thou schalt offere1 en- 
cense on’ the auter. Forsothe thou schalti4 . 
brenne with out the castels* the ‘fleischis 
of the calf*, and the® skyn, and the dung, 
for it is for’ synne. Also thon schalt take 1s 
a¥® ram, on whos heed Aaron and hise 
sones schulen sette hondis; and whanneie 
thou hast slayn that ram*, thou schalt 
take of ‘his blood’, aud schalt? schede?®. 
aboute the auter. Forsothe thou schalt17 
kitte thilk ram in to smale gobetis, and ° 
thou schalt putte hise entrailis waischun?, 
and feet® on’ the® fleischisf koruun, and 
on® his heed; and thou schalt offre' alis 
the ram in to encence oni the auter; it is 
an offryng to the Lord, the swettest odour 
of the* slayn sacrifice of the Lord. And 19 
thou schalt take the tothir ram, on! whos™ 
heed Aaron and hise sones schulen sette 
hondis" ; and whanne thou hast offrid that 20 
ram, thou schalt take of his blood, and 
schalt® ‘putte on? the last part of the ri3t 
eere of Aaron, and of hise sones, and on 


2 the ensence 4. 


y clothis 1s. 2 her heedisis. ® her hondis 1s. > pntte 1s. ¢ her hondis 1s. 4 vp on the calfes heed 1s. 
¢Om.s. fOm.n. thou schaltrs. ¢ putteitis. bvponis. i other blood that is left 1. other left 
blood s. * foundementis c. 1} of the auter 1s. ™ calfes entrailiss. 4% the twey 1s. © kideneiren ELP. 
Pthat 1s. offere hem1s. Uvponis. Stentisis. ¢ fleishe 1. calmis fleshe ss. %Om.1s. VY sleyn 
forts. Wo plures. *ram into smale gobetiss. Y the blood of itr, % thou schalts.  schede it 1s. 
b yweischen 1. waischids. ¢ his feet1s. ‘yponis. ¢hisis. ffleishe 1s. Svponis. » offre thus 1s. 
ivp onis. * Om.1xs. !ypon kx. ™his plures. ® her hondis 1s. © thou schalt 1s. P putte it vp on 1s. 
dvp ons. 


XXX. 21-—29. 


of the ry3t eer of Aaron, and of his sones, 
and vpon the thoumbis of the hoond of 
hem, and of the ri3t foot ; and thow shalt 
heelde the blood vpon the auter, bi enuy- 
airoun. And whanue thow hast takun of 
the blood, that is vpon the auter, and of 
the oyle of anoyntyng, thow shalt sprenge 
Aaron and his clothes, the sones and the 
clothingis of hem. And so hem sacryd, 
22and the clothes, thow shalt take the 
talw3° of the wether, and the tayle, and 
the vttermore fatnes that couereth the 
entrayls, and the fatt calle of the mawe, 
and the two reynes, and the fat that is 
vpon hem, and the ri3t shuldre, forthi 
that it is the wether of consecracioun ; 
23and a eake of a loof, a crustid cake 
spreynde with oyle, a crompid cake, of 
the leepe of therf looues, that is sett in 
athe si3t of the Lord. And thow shalt 
putte al vpon the hondes of Aaron, and 
of the sones of hym, and thow shalt ha- 
lowe hem, areryng vp before the Lord. 
25 And thow shalt take alle the thingis fro 
the hondes of hem, and thow shalt teende 
vpon the auter, into alle brent sacrifice, 
the moost swete smel in the si3t of the 
26 Lord, for it is the offryng of hym. And 
thow shalt .take the litel breest of the 
wethir, with the which Aaron is saerid, 
and thow shalt halowe it, arerid vp be- 
fore the Lord, and it shal falle into thi 
ajpart. And thou shalt halwe the sacrid 
litel breest, and the shuldre that thow 
2esenerdist fro the wether, with which Aa- 
ron was halowed, and his children; and 
thei shulen falle into the part of Aaron, 
and the sones of hym, thur3 euerlastynge 
ri3t, fro the sones of Yrael; for thei ben 
the first fruytis, and the bigynnynges of 
the peesible sleyne sacryfice of hem that 
29ben offred to the Lord. And the hooli 
cloth that Aaron shal vse, the sones of 


EXODUS. 


263 


the thombis of her hond’; and of* hert 
ri3t foot; and thou schalt schede the blood 
on the auter, ‘bi eumpas". And whanne2! 
thou hast take of the blood, which’ is on 
the auter, and of oile’ of anoynting, thou 
schalt sprenge Aarou and hise clothis, the* 
sones and her elothis. And whanne thei 
and theY clothis ben sacrid, thou schalt 22 
take the ynnere fatnesse of the ram, and 
the tayl, and the fatnesse that hilith the 
entrailis, and the calle of the mawe, and 
twey” kideneris*, and the fatnesse that is 
on tho; and thou schalt take the ri3t 
schuldur, for it is the ram of consecra- 
cioun®; aud thou schalt take a tendur23 
cake of o loof, spreynd with oile, paast® 
sodun inf watir, and after fried in oile, of# 
the panyer" of therf looues, which! is set 
in ‘the si3t of the Lord*. And thou schalt 24 
putte alle ‘thingis on! the hondis of Aaron 
and of hise sones, and schalt™ halewe hem, 
and reise" bifor the Lord. And thou schalt 2s 
take alle thingis® fro ‘the hondis of hem?, 
and schalt4 brenne’ on the autir, in to brent 
sacrifice, ‘swettist odour in the si3t of the 
Lord’, for it is the offryng of the Lord. 
Also thou schalt take the brest of thea 
ramt, bi which Aaron was halewid, and 
thou schalt halewe it reisid" bifor the 
Lord; and it schal turne in to thi part. 
And thou’ schalt halewe also the brest 27 
sacrid, and the schuldur which” thou de- 
partidist* fro the ram, bi which Aaron 2s 
was halewid, and hise sones; and thoy 
schulen turne in to the part of Aaron, 
and of hise sones, bi euerlastinge ri3t, of 
the sones of Israel; for tho? ben the firste 
thingis, and the bigynnyngis® of the pe- 
sible sacrifices® of hem, whiche thei offren 
to the Lord. Forsothe the sones of Aaron 2g 
schulen haue aftir hym the hooli cloth, 
which® Aaron schal vse, that thei be 
anoyntid ther ynne®, and herf hondis® be 


8 fatt E prim. 


Thondis Fka. Son K.vpons. tthe plures, "aboute1. Vthat 1s. Wtheoile EiLps. *and the F. sec.m. 


hiss. Yherrs. % the twey 1s. 
fand a. & this shalt thou take of 1s. 
m thou schalt 1s. ® reise hem 1s, 
hem Is. 
w also which 1s. 


x departist F. Y thei 1. 
d that 1s. 


Cinitis. fthat her is. & hond s. 


a kideneiren ELP. 
h baskett is. i that as. 
© thes thingis 1s. 

8 the most swete smel in the Lordis si3t 3s. 


% thei 1s. 


bhem 3s. Chalewyngi1s. ‘ars. © the paast 1s. 
k Lordis sizt 1s. |! thes thingis vp on 1s. 
4Om. G. thou schalt 1s. * brenne 
warerid 1s. V also thou peqrr. 

bOm.c. © sleyn sacrifices. 1s. 


P her hondis 1s. 
t wether 1s. 
a higynnynge GQ. 


264 


hym shulen haue after hym, that thei 
ben anoyntid in it and sacrid the hondes 
300f hem. Seuen daies he shal vse it, that 
‘shal be® of his sones ordeynd bishop for 
hym, and that shal goo into the taber- 
nacle of witnes, that he mynystre in the 
3iseyntuarye. And thow shalt take the 
wether of halowyng, and thow shalt 
seethe the flesh of it in the holy place, 
32o0f the which Aaron shal eete, and the 
sones of hyin; and the looues that ben 
in the leepe thei shulen eete in the ves- 
33 tiarye of the tabernacle of witnes, that it 
be a pesible® sacrifice, and that the hondes 
of the offrers ben halowid. A man of 
other kynne than the sones of Aaron, 
shal not eete of thilke thingis, for thei 
3iben holy. That if there leeue of the sa- 
crid flesh, or of the looues, vnto the mor- 
wetide, thow shalt brenne the relif with 
fier; thei shulen not ben etun, for thei 
35ben halowid. Alle thingis that Y co- 
maundide’ to thee, thow shalt do ypon 
Aaron, and vpon the sones of hym. Seuen 
daies thow shalt sacre the hondes of hem, 
36and thow shalt offre a calf for synne bi 
eche dayes to perfitely clense; and thou 
shalt clense the auter, whanne thow of- 
frest the sacrifies of parfite clensyng, and 
thow shalt anoynte it into the halwyng. 
37Seuen daies thow shalt clense the auter, 
and halowe, and it shal be holy® of ha- 
lowis; echef that towchith it shal be ha- 
38lowid. This is that thow shalt do in the 
auter; two loombes of 0 3ere bi eche day 
39 bisili, o loombe at morwetide, and another 
aoat euen tide; the teuthe part of the tried 
flowr spreynd with oyle, powned, that 
haue a mesure, the fourthe part of hyn, 
that is a sextarye, that is a mesure of 
two pownd, and wyn to offre of the same 
4lmesure, in o lombe,. Another forsothe 
lombe thou shalt offre at euen, after the 


bis BE pr.m. © pleysyble BDEFH. 


h thilke that hise sones A pr.m, thilke of hise sones that sec.m. 
1 seyntuarie, shal vse that cloths. ™ And sotheli ts. 
u sacr. fo the Lord s. 


‘ baskett 1s. $8 Om.o. + plesyng 1s. 


EXODUS. 


d comaunde £ pr.m. 


XXIX. 30—41. 


sacrid. ‘Thilke, that of hise sones' schal 30 
be maad bischop for hym, schal vse that 
cloth seuene daies, and whichi sone* schal 
entre in to the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
that he mynystre in the seyntuarie!. So-31 
theli™ thou schalt take the ram® of con- 
secracioun®, and thou schalt sethe hise 
fleischis? in the hooli place, whiche fleischis4 32 
Aaron and his sones schulen ete, and thei 
schulen ete the looues, that ben in the 
panyere’, in the porche of the tabernacle 
of witnessyng, that it be a* pleasaunt* sa-33 
crifice", and that’ the hondis of the offreris 
be halewid. An alien schal not ete of tho’, 
for tho ben hooli. That if ony thing3s 
leeueth of the fleischisY halewid, ether of 
the looues, til? the morewtid, thou schalt 
brenne the relifs by* fier, tho schulen not 
be etun’, for tho? ben halewid. Thous3s 
schalt do on Aaron, and hise* sones, alle 
thingis whiche® I comaundef to thee. Se- 
uene daies thou schalt sacre ‘the bondis 
of hem’, and thou schalt offre a calf forse 
synne bi ech day to clense ; and thou schalt 
clense the auter, whanne thou hast offrid 
the sacrifice of clensyng, and thou schalt 
anoynte the auter in to halewyng. Seuene37 
daies thou shalt clense and halewe! the 
auter, and it schal be the! hooli of hooli 
thingis ; ech man that schal touche it schal 
be halewid. This* it is, that thou schalt3s 
do in the auter, twei lambren of o 3eer 
contynueli bi ech dai, o lomb in the morew-39 
tid, and the tothir in the euentid; ‘¢hoz 40 
schalt do' in o lomb the tenthe part of 
flour spreynt with oyle, powned, that schal 
haue a mesure, the fourthe part of hyn™, 
and wyn of™ the same mesure, to make 
sacrifice. Sotheli thon schalt offre thea 
tother lomb at euentid, bi the custom of 
the offryng at° the? morewtid, and bi tho 
thingis, whiche we seiden, in to the odour 
of swetnesse; it is a sacrifice to the Lord 42 


ethe holy spzu. fall £ pr.m. 


ithe which 1. sone of him 1s. 
n wether 1s. ° halewyng ts. P fleishe 1s. 4 Om.1s, 
vOm.c. thes thingis is. * thei is. 


¥ fleishe 1s. til to Bcikusw. 4with1. btheiis. ¢ kept to be eten afters. Itheis. Mon hiseis. ¢that 1s. 


f comaundide EGLor. & her hondis 1s. 


b halewe it 1s. 


{Om. rx. * bifore thisis. !so1i. ™ hyn, that 


is, a mesure of two pound EiLPs. h, that is, of twey pound x. ® shal be of s. 9% of pc. P Om. Fis. 


KAT XX. 7. 


riyt of the morwetide offryng, and after 
‘tho thingis¢ that ‘we han! seid, into the 
y2smel of swetnes; a sacrifice to the Lord 
it is with euerlastynge offryng into 3oure 
generaciouns, at the dore of the tabernacle 
of witnes before the Lord, where Y shal 
43 ordeyne that I speke to thee; and there 
Yi shal comaunde to the sones of Yrael, 
and the auter shal be halowid in my glo- 
asrye. And I shal halowe the tabernacle 
of witnes with the auter, and Aaron with 
the sones of hym, that thei beren the 
45 0ffice of preesthod to me. And Y shal 
dwelle in the mnyddil of the sones of 
4g Yrael, and Y shal be to hem a God; and 
thei shulen knowe, for Y am the Lord 
God* of hem, that hath ladde hem out of 
the loond of Egipte, that Y my3t dwelle 
among hem; Y the Lord God of hem. 


CAP. XXX. 


, And thou shalt make an auter, for to 
brenne ‘the maad! ensence of the trees of 
2Sichym, hauynge o cubijt of lengthe, and 
another of brede, that is foure cornerd, 
and two cubites in hei5t; hornes shulen 
3goo out of it. And thow shalt clothe it 
with moost puyr gold, as wel the litel 
fier panne of it, as the walles bi enuy- 
roun, and the hornes; and thow shalt 
make to it-a coroun of gold bi enuy- 
4roun, and two rynges of gold vnder the 
hornes bi eche sides, that the berynge 
staues mowen be putte into hem, and the 
sauter born. And thilke berynge staues 
thow shalt make of the trees of Sichym, 
6and gilden™; and thow shalt sette the au- 
ter ajens the veyle, that hongith before 
the arke of testymonye before the propi- 
ciatorye, with the which is couerd the 
witnessynge, where Y shal speke to thee. 
; And Aaron shal brenne the ensence swete 
smellynge vpon it erly; whanne he shal 
araye the lanternes, he" shal teenden?® it ; 


& that £ pr.m. i Om. p. 


h T haue & pr.m. 
u Om. aBDFIE. 


© eende AB pr. m. FH. 


rAnd Ye. 8 and 1s. 
yors. 2Om.1. 
€ ringis 18. 


4 shal speke es. 
maad encense s. 
4 tho cs. thilke 1. 
1 with 1. 


f so the 1. 


EXODUS. 


k Om. 4. 


t Om. 1s. 
® gridil therof or the over part 1 marg. 
& the plures. 
™ witnessing, that is, the tablis of the lawe ucGKLNorax. 


265 


bi euerlastynge offryng in to 30ure genera- 
ciouns, at the dore of the tabernacle of 
witnessyng bifor the Lord, where Y schal 
ordeyne that Y speke4 to thee; and there 44 
Y schal comainde to the sones of Israel ; 
and the auter schal be halewid in my 
glorie. Y" schal halewe also the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng with the auter, and 
Aaron with® hise sones, that thei be set in 
presthod to me. And Y schal dwelle in 45 
thet myddis of the sones of Israel, and Y 
schal be God to hem; and thei schulen 46 
wite, that" Y am her Lord God, which’ 
ledde hem out of the lond of Egipt, that 
Y schulde dwelle among hem; for Y am 
her Lord God. 


CAP. XXX. 


Also thou schalt make an auter of the} 
trees of Sechym, to” brenne encense*; and 2 
the auter schal haue aY cubit of lengthe, 
and another cubit? of brede, that is foure 


cornerid, and twei cubitis in hei3the; cor- emesis 
neris schulen come forth of the auter. — bren itis, the 


i : roof therof, 
And thou schalt clothe it with clennest3 that is, the 


gold, as wel the gridilt therof*, as the ao 
wallis and corneris bi cumpas therof; and 
thou schalt make to the auter a litil goldun 
coroun, ‘bi cumpas?, and twei goldun ser-4 
clis vndur the coroun by alle sidis, that 
barris be put® in to the serclis®, and thef 
auter be borun. Also thou schalt makes 
tho barris of the trees of Sechym, and 
thou schalt ouergilde’; and thou schalté 
sette the auter ajens the veil, whichi veil‘ 
hangith bifor the ark of witnessyng bifor 
the propiciatorie, bi! which the witness- 
yng™ is hilid, where Y schal speke to thee. 
And Aaron schal brenne theronne" encense7 
smellynge swetly eerli; whanne he schal 
araye the lanternes, he schal brenne it; 


1Om. £ prim. ™gilden hem £ pr.m. 


w for to Is. 
b aboute 1. 

h ouergilde hem ixs. i that ts. 
" vpon that auter 1s. 


u for is. ¥ the which 1. x vpon the 
¢ sent plures. 


k Om. 1ks. 


M om 


266 


8and whanne he settithP hem at euen, he 
shal brenne the euerlastynge maad4 en- 
sense before the Lord, into 3oure genera- 
sciouns. 3e shulen ‘not offer vpon it en- 
sence of other makynge, ne offrynge, ne 
sacrifice, ne offrynge loues 3e shulen taste. 
10 And Aaron shal preye vpon the hornes 
of it ones bi the 3eer, in blood that is 
offerd for synne, and he shal plese vpon 
it in 3oure generaciouns ; the holy of ha- 
tilowen it shal be to the Lord. And the 
12 Lord spake to Moyses, seiynge, Whanne 
thow takist a sowme of the sones of 
Yrael, eche shal 3yue prijs after the 
noumbre for her soules to the Lord, and 
there shal be no veniaunce in hem, whanne 
13 thei shulen’ be nowmbred. And eche® shal 
3yue this that passith to a name, half ‘an 
nouncet after the mesure of the temple ; 
a sicle, ‘that is, a nounce", hath twenti 
half scripilles; the half perty of a sicle 
11shal be offerd to the Lord. He that is 
had in the noumbre, fro twenti 3eer and 
1saboue, shal 3yue the prijs; the riche shal 
not adde to an half sicle, and the pore no 
i6thing shal lesse. And the money takun, 
that is gederid of the sones of Yrael, 
thow shalt take in to the vses of the ta- 
bernacle of witnessynge, that there be the 
inynde of hem before the Lord, and he 
i7haue merey to the soules of hem. And 
isthe Lord spake to Moyses, seyynge, And 
thow shalt make a brasun lauatory with 
his foot to washe with, and thow shalt 
putte it betwix the tabernacle of witnes 
and the auter; and the water put yn, 
i9 Aaron and his sones shulen washe in it 
20 her hondes and feete, whanne thei ben to 
goynge ynto the tabernacle of witness- 
yng, and whanne thei ben nei3ynge to 
the auter that thei offren in it maad” en- 
2isence to the Lord, lest perauenture thei 
dyen; lawful euerlastynge it" shal be to 
hym and to the seed of hym bi succes- 


P schall sett £ pr. m. 
«Om Ee prim. Y Om. E£ prim. 


4 Om. £ pr.m. 
w Om. £. 


© the euerlastynge maad 1s. 


P ther vpon ts. 
it 1s. ™ blood of beeste Be. 


V that 1s. 


EXODUS. 


qd ne Is. 
W ther vpon 1s. 


XXX. 8—z21. 


and whanne he settith the lanternes ats 
euentid, he schal brenne euerlastynge® en- 
cense bifor the Lord, in to 3oure genera- 
ciouns. 3e schulen not offre theronne?9 
encense of other makyng, nethir offryng, 
and‘ slayn sacrifice, nether 3e schulen offre 
fletynge offryngis thereonne™. And Aaron 10 
schal preie on the corneres* therof * onis bi 
the 3eer, in the blood" which’ is offrid for 
synne, and he schal plese theronne™ in 
3oure generaciouns ; it schal be the hooli 
of hooli thingis to* the Lord. And then 
Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Whanne 12 
thou schalt take theY summe of the sones 
of Israel, alle bi hem silf schulen 3yue ‘bi 
the? noumbre prijs for her soulis* to the 
Lord, and veniaunce schal not be in hem, 
whanne thei ben® noumbrid. Sotheli ech 13 
that passith to the name’, schal 3yue this‘, 
half a siecle bi the mesure of the temple; 
a sicle® hath twenti halpens; the myddilf 
part of a cicle schal be offrid to the Lord. 
He that is’ hadde in noumbre", fro twenti 14 
3eer and aboue, schal 3yue prijs'; a riche 1s 
man schal not adde to the myddil* of 
cicle!, and a pore man schal no thing abate. 
And thou schalt bitake in to ysis™ of the 16 
tabernacle of witnessyng the money takun, 
which" is gaderid of the sones of Israel, 
that it be the? mynde of hem bifor the 
Lord, and he schal be merciful to ‘the 
soulis of hem?. And the Lord spak to17 
Moises, and seide, Also thou schalt make 1s 
a greet vessil of bras with his founde- 
ment%f to waische', and thou schalt ‘sette 
it bitwixe the tabernacle of witnessyng 
and the auter ‘of brent sacrifices’; and 
whanne watir is put therynne, Aaron and 19 
hise sones schulen waische therynne her 
hondis and feet', whanne thei schulen en-20 
tre in to the tabernacle of witnessyng, and 
whanne thei schulen neize to the auter 
that thei offre therynne encense to the 
Lord, lest perauenture thei dien; it schal2! 


rOm. £ pr.m. 8 alle prim. tasycle £ prim. a nounce DFU. 


8 hornys A pr.m. et plures. ¢ of 


T ther vpon s. 
zaftir heris. ® lijfes 1. 


Xof GQ. Y a tos. 


» schul be 1s. that ts, of xa. 3eer A marg. et plures. “this prijs 1s. © sicle, that is, a nounse s. fhalf 1s. 


& Om. aA. 


h the noumbre x. i this prijs 1s. k half urs. half deel w. ! a cicle c1Ksx sec.m. 


m the vsis s. 


that 1s. 921. P her lijfes 1. her soulis s. dor seete 1 marg. * waische ynne 1s, *Om.1. ¢ her fect 1s. 


+ in Ebru it is 
with his feete. 
GQX. 


XXX. 22——35. 


zzsyouns. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 
23seiynge, Tak to thee swete smellynge 
thingis, of the first myrre and chosen, 
fyue hundryd siclis ; and the half* of the 
canel, that is, two hundrid and fifti si- 
24clis; and of chaalamy also two hundryd 
and fifti, and of chasee fyue hundryd 
sicles, in the wei3t of the seyntuarye ; 
oyle of the olyues, the mesure of hyn, 
25‘that is, of two pownd’; and thow shalt 
make the holy oyle of anoyntyng’, an 
oynement maad with the werk of un- 
2¢gwentarye. And thow shalt anoynt of 
it the tabernacle of witnessynge, and the 
27 arke of testament, and the bord with his 
vessels, and the candelstik, and the neces- 
28 saryes* of it, the auter of ensence, and of 
al brent sacrifice, and al the necessarye? 
that perteyneth to the heriying to hem. 
29 And alle thow shalt halowe, and _ thei 
shulen be the holi thingis of halowes; 
he that towchith hem, shal be halowid. 
30 Thow shalt anoynt Aaron, and the sones 
of hym, and thow shalt halwe hem, that 
thei beren the office of preesthod to me. 
31 And to the sones of Yrael thow shalt 
seie, This oyle of anoyntyng holy it shal 
32be to me into 3o0ure generaciouns. The 
flesh of man shal not be anoyntyde of it, 
and biside the composicioun of it 3e shu- 
len not make another, for it is halowid, 
33and hooli shal be to 30w. What euer 
man make sich on, and 3yue of it to an 
alyen, he shalle be putte out of his puple. 
31 The Lord forsothe seyde to Moyses, Tak 
to thee swete smellynge thinges, stacten, 
and onycha, galbantum of good smel, and 
ensence moost li3tynge®, and alle thei shu- 
35len ben of euen wei3te. And thow shalt 
make the maad ensence with werk of 
oynement makynge, meyngid bisily, and 
puyr, and moost worthi with halowyng. 


x mydill e pr.m.  ¥Y Om. £ prim. 
ment E prim. © liztnyng BDEFH. 


uAaronis. Vandofis. YW Om. 1s. 


of s. > take also 1s. © the seyntuarie 1s. 4 the oile 1Ks. 


EXODUS. 


Z the anoyntyng £ pr.m. 
y Sep 


x siclis in valu s. 


267 


be a lawful thing euerlastinge to hym" 

and to his seed bi successiouns. And the 22 

Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Take to23 

thee swete smellynge spiceries, of’ the firste 

and” chosun myrre, fyue hundrid siclis* ; 

and of canel the half, that is, twei hundrid 

and fifti siclisy; in ijk maner? of? calamyt 24 + “at is, « 
twei hundrid and fifti siclis ; also” of casia pee ie: Ean 
fyue himdrid siclis, in the weiste of seyn- (ae 
tuarie®; oile’ of olyue trees, the’ mesure °°* 
hynft; and thon schalt make the hooly 25 sae is, i 
oile of anoyntyng, an oynement maad bi ”""“ 

the werk? of a* ‘makere of oynementi, 

And thou schal anoynte therof the taber- 26 

nacle of witnessyng, and the ark of testa- 

mentk, and the boord with hise vessels, the 27 
candilstike, and the purtenaunces therof, 

the auteris of encense, and of brent sacri-2s 

fice, and al the purtenaunce, that per- 

teyneth to the ournyng of tho’. And thou29 

schalt halewe alle thingis, and tho™ schulen 

be the® hooli of holi thingis; he that schal 

touche tho, schal be halewid®. Thou schalt 30 

anoynte Aaron, and hise sones, and thou 

schalt halewe hem, that thei be set in 

presthod to me. And thou schalt seie to31 

the sones of Israel, This oile of anoyntyng 

schal be hooli to me? in to 30ure genera- 

ciouns. The fleisch of man schal not bes2 
anoyntid therof, and bi the makyng ther- 

of 3e1 schulen not make another’, for it is 

halewid, and it schal be hooli to 3o0u. 

What ever man makith sich oile, and33 

3yueth therof to an alien, he schal be ‘de- 

stried fro’ his puple. Forsothe the Lords 

seide to Moises, Take to thee swete smell- 

ynge spyceries, stacten},and onycaj, galban + that is, the 
of good odour‘, and pureste" encense, alle” Soares 
schulen be of euene wei3te. And thou3s ane ae 
schal make encence, maad by werk of  Ynse sweetely. 
oynement* makere, meddlid’ diligentli’, and 

pure, and moost worthi of* halewyng. And 36 


8 hustilmentis £ pr.m. > anour- 


Y siclis in priss. %Om. K. 4 take thou 
¢ take the 1s. f of hyn 1sx sec.m. & crafte 1s. 


hOm.1K. loynement maker isw. the testament xs. | thothingisis. ™ theirs. ™% Om. a pr.m. 
et plures. © halewid bifore 1. halewid bifore hond s. _P me, the Lords. 4 theiw.  ° another sich 
oile 1. another holy s. ® putt out of 1s. tsmell zs. " moost pureis. Valle these1s. the craft 1s, 


* an oynement plures. Y ensenee meddlid se. 


2 togedre diligentli s. 


a bi ts. 
Mim 2 


268 


36 And whanne thow hast pownede alle to- 
gidere into moost smal powdre, thow 
shalt pntte of it before the tabernacle of 
wytnessynge, in the which place Y shal 
apere to thee; hooly of halowes shal be 

37to 30w the maad‘ ensence. Siche a mak- 
ynge 3e shulen not make into 3oure owne 

33vses, for hooli it is to the Lord. Eche 
man that doth lyik thing’, that he ful 
vse the smel of it, he shal peryshe fro his 
puplis. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Loo! JI haue clepid Beseleel bi name, the 
sone of Hury, sone of Hur, of the lynage 
sof Juda; and Y haue fulfillid hym with 
the spiryt of God, with wisdom, and vn- 
4derstondyng, and kunnyng in al werk, to 
caste what euer thing may be forgid of 
5 gold, and of siluer, and of brasse, marble, 
cand gemmes, and dyuerste of trees. And 
Y hane 3enen to hym a felaw, Ooliab, the 
sone of Achisamech, of the lynage of Dan; 
and in the herte of echef taw3t I haue 
putte wisdomes, that thei maken? alle 
thingis that I haue comaundide to thee ; 
7the tabernacle of the boond of pees, and 
the arke of witnessyng, and the propi- 
ciatorye that is vpon it, and alle the ves- 
asels of the tabernacle ; and the meetbord, 
and the vessels of it, the moost puyr can- 
delstik with his vessels, and the aunteers 
9of the maad® ensence, and of the albrent 
sacrifice, and alle the vessels of hem; the 
10lauatorie with his foot; the holi clothes 
in the sernyis to Aaron the preest, and 
to the sones of hym, that thei vsen hyr 
1Loffice in sacrid thingis; the oyle of 
anoynting, and the maad> ensence of 
swete smellynge thingis in the seyntua- 
rye; alle thingis that I hane comaundide 
12 to thee, thei shulen make. And the Lord 
isspak to Moyses, seiynge, Spek to the 


EXODUS. 


XXX. 36—XXXI. 13. 


whanne thou hast powned alle? thingis in 
to smalleste poudre, thou schalt putte ther- 
of bifor the tabernacle of witnessyng, in 
which place Y schal appere to thee; en- 
cense® schal be to 30u the’ hooli of hooli 
thingis. 3e schulen not make siche a mak-37 
yng in to 3oure vsis, for it is hooli to the 
Lord. What ever man makith® af lijkss 
thing®, that he vse the odour therof, he 
schal perische fro his puple*. 


CAP. XXX]. 


And the Lord spak to Moyses, ‘andi 
seide', Lo! Y haue clepid Beseleel bi name, 2 
the sone of Hury, sone of Hur, of the 
lynage of Juda; and Y haue fillid* hyms 
with the spirit of God, with wisdoin, and 
vudirstondyng, and kunnyng in al werk, 
to fynde out! what euer thing may be4 
maad™ suteli, of gold, and siluer, and bras, 
and marbil, and gemmes, and dyuersite"s 
of trees. And Y haue 3oue to hym a fe-6 
lowe, Ooliab, the sone of Achisameth, of 
the kynrede of Dan; and Y haue put in 
‘the herte of hem® the wisdom of ech 
lerned man, that thei make alle thingis, 
whiche Y comaundide? to thee; the taber-7 
nacle of -boond of pees, and the arke of 
witnessyng, and the propiciatorie, ether’ 
table, which’ is theronne, and alle the 
vessels of the tabernacle; also the bord,s 
and vessels* therof, the clenneste candil- 
stike with hise vessels, and the auteris of 
encence, and of brent sacrifice, and alles 
the vessels of hem; the greet ‘waischyng 
vesselt with his foundement® ; hooli clothis 10 
in seruyce to Aaron prest’, and to hise 
sones, that thei be set in her office in hooli 
thingis; the oile of anoyntyng, and en-11 
cence” of swete smellynge spiceryes in 
the seyntuarie; thei schulen make alle 
thingis* whicheY Y comaundide* to thee. 
And the Lord spak to Moises, ‘and seide®, 12 


4Om. £ prom. © thinges p. falle the e pr.m. & done E pr.m. 4h Om. £ pr.m. 


b alle thes 1s, © the maad encense 1s. © Om. plures. ¢ makeo. {Om.1s.  & thing fo if 1s. 
h puplis plures. i seiynge ts. & fulfillid 1s. | fynde out, or caste 1s. ™ Om.1s. ® of dyuersite ts. dy- 
uersitees F. 


© her hertis 1s. 
ubaasi. V the prest 1Ks. 
Z comaunde Gert. haue comaundid s. 


t lauatorie 1s. 
that s. 


P haue comaundid 1s. 
w the ensence 1s. 
® selynge Is. 


r that i. 
® these thingis s. 


Gor EILP. or the s. 8 the vessels Gis. 


y the whiche 1. 


XXXII. 14-——XXXIL 5. 


sones of Yrael, and thow shalt seie to 
hem, Looketh that 3e kepen myn holy 
day, for it is a tokne bitwix me and 30w 
in 30ure generaciouns ; that 3e witen for 
144Y a Lord, that halowith jow. Kepith 
myn holi day, holi forsothe it is to 30w; 
who so poluteth it, with deth dye he; 
who so doth in it werk, shal pervishe the 
hijf of hym fro the myddil of his puple. 
15 Six dayes 3e shulen do werk; in the se- 
uenthe day is holy day, the holi reste to 
the Lord; eche that doth werk in that 
16day shal dye. The sones of Yrael kepe 
thei the holy day, and halowe thei it in 
her generaciouns ; a couenaunt it is euer 
l7durynge bitwix me and the sones of 
Yrael, and a perpetuel tokyn; six for- 
sothe dayes God made heuene and erthe, 
and in the seuenthe day fro the werk he 
isceside. And the Lord 3af to Moyses ful- 
fillid thes maner wordes, in the mownt 
of Synay, two stonen tablis of witness- 
yng, writun with the fyngre of God. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 The puple forsothe, seynge that Moyses 
made abidyng of comyng doun fro the 
hil, gederid to gidere a3zens Aaron, seith, 
Arise, mak to vs goddis, that goon beforn 
vs; to this man Moyses, that hath! ladde 
vs out fro the loond of Egipte, we knowen 

2not what is fallyn. And Aaron seide to 
hem, Tak 3e the goldun eer rynges fro 
the eerys of wyues, and of sones, and of 
joure dow3tres!, and bryngith™ to me. 

2The puple dide that he comauudide, 
4bryngynge the eer rynges to Aaron; the 
whiehe whanne he hadde takun, he four- 
inyde with 3etun werk, and made of hem 
a 30tun ealf. And thei seiden, Thes ben 
thi goddis, Yrael, that ladde thee out of 
sthe loond of Egipte. The whiche thing 
whanne Aaron hadde seeyn, he made vp 


ihas ze. * of speru. 


¢thatis. 4 halewide ris. 
sixec. the hooli ts. 
tokene 1s. © Om. F. 
peal 1s. bifel L. 
f formede hem 8. 
Aaron b. 


btor e lijf'r. 


POm. kr. 4 God is. 


v¥ man Moises s. 


& jetinge werk 1. 


EXODUS, 


1 dou3tren BDEFH. 


f werk forboden s. 
! thei the holy day 1s. thei sabat K. 
r fulfillid is. 
w hath ladde rs. 
of dou3tris plures. 30ure dou3tris 1. of 3oure dou3tris s. 
h he made 1s. 


269 


Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and thou 13 
schalt seie to hem, Se 3e that 3e kepe my 
sabat, for it is a signe bytwixe me and 
jou in> 30ure generaciouns; that 3e wite, 
that Y am the Lord, whieh® halewe® 3o0u. 
Kepe 3e my sabat, for it is hooli to 3003 14 
he that defoulith it, schal die bi deeth, 
the soule® of hym, that doith werkf in the 
sabat,:schal perische fro the myddis® of 
his puple®. Sixe! daies 3e schulen do werk ; 15 
in the seuenthe dai is sabat, hooli* reste 
to the Lord; ech man that doith werk in 
this dai schal die. The sones of Israelis 
kepe sabat!, and halewe™ it in her genera- 
ciouns ; it is a couenaunt euerlastinge bi-17 
twixe me and the sones of Israel, and it 
is ‘a signe euerlastynge"; for in sixe daies 
God made heuene and erthe, and® in the? 
seuenthe day he ceessid of werk. Andis 
whanne siche wordis{ weren fillid', the 
Lord 3af to Moises, in the hil of Synay, 
twei stonun tablis of witnessyng, writun 
with the fyngur’ of God f. 


CAP. XXXII. 


Forsothe the puple si3, that Moises made 1 
tariyng to come doun fro the hil, and it 
was gaderid' ajens Aaron, and seide, Rise 
thou, and make goddis to vs, that schulen 
go bifore vs, for we witen not what bi- 
felde" to this Moises’, that ladde*® vs out 
of the lond of Egipt. And Aaron seide2 
to hem, Take 3e the goldun eere ryngis 
fro the eeris of j3oure wyues, and* of 
sones? and* dou3tris®, and brynge 3e° to. 
me. The puple dide tho thingis, that’ hes 
comaundide, and brou3te eere® ryngis to 
Aaron; and whanne he hadde take tho, 4 
he formedef bi ‘werk of 3etyng®, and made® 
of‘ tho‘ a 30tun ealf. And thei! seiden, Is- 
rael, these ben thi goddis, that ladde thee 
out of the lond of Egipt. And whannes 
Aaron™ had seyn this thing, he bildide an 


m bryng B- 


gmiddile. }peplisn. it And 
m halewe theiis. ® an euerlastinge 
8 fyngris w. ¢ gaderid togidere 18. ¥ is 
xOm.1. YOm.s. 2 30ure sonests. ® Om. kz. 
@3ehemis. 4 the whiche 1. © the eere 1s. 
iOm.s. *hem in, | the puplet marg. ™ he 


+ In Ebru it is 
not, siche 
wordis, but 
oonly, whan he 
hadde fillid to 
speke to 
Moyses. Gax. 
t that is, bi 
werk of God, 
not of man. 
BCGINQX. 


270 


an” auter before it, and in voys of a bedel 
he cryede, seiynge, To morwe is the so- 
slempnyte of the Lord. And thei arysun°® 
erly offreden sacrifices albrent and peesi- 
ble sacrifices? ; and the puple sat to ete 
and to drynke, and arysen to pleyen. 
7 The Lord forsothe spak to Moyses, sei- 
ynge, Go, descende, thi puple hath synned, 
whom thow hast ladde out of the loond 
sof Egipte. Soone thei han goon back- 
ward fro the weie that thow shewedist 
to hem, and thei han inade to hem a 30- 
tun calf, and anourden, and offrynge to 
it sacrifices seiden, Thes ben thi goddis, 
Israel, that han ladde thee out of the 
9loond of Egipte. And eftsones the Lord 
seithi to Moyses, Y se wel that this pu- 
lople is of hard nol; late me that my 
woodnes wreth a3en hem, and that I do 
hem awey; and thee I shal make into a 
ligreet folk of kynde. Moyses forsothe 
preyede the Lord his God, seiynge, Whi, 
Lord, wraththith thi woodnes a3en thi 
puple’, whom thow hast ladde out of the 
loond of Egipte in greet strengthe, and 
12in a stroong hoond? Lest, Y biseche, the 
Egipciens seyn, fellich he hath ladde hem 
out, that he my3te slee in the hilles, 
and doon awey fro the erthe, reste thi 
-wraththe, and be peesybles’ vpon the 
13 wickidnes of thi puple. Record of Abra- 
ham, Ysaac, and of Yrael, thi seruauntis, 
to whom thow hast sworn bi tli seluen, 
seiynge, Y shal multiplie 3oure seed as 
the sterres" of henene,-and al this loond 
of the which Y haue spokun, Y shal 3yue 
to 3oure seed, and 3e shulen welde it 
iseuermore. And the Lord was plesid that 
he dide not the harme, that he spake 
isazens his puple. And Moyses is turned 
a3en fro the hil, berynge in hoond two 


EXODUS. 


XXXH. 6—15. 


auter bifore hym", and he criede bi the 

vois of a° criere, and seide, To morewe is 

the solempnete of the Lord. And theié 

rysenP eerli, and offeridend brent  sacri- 

fyces, and pesible sacrifices; and the pu- 

ple sat to ete and drynke', and thei risen‘ 

to pley't. Forsothe" the Lord spak to7 + In Ebreu it 
Moises, and seide, Go thou, go’ doun, thi He rine ie 
puple hath synned, ‘whom thou leddist™ ost 
out of the lond of Egipt. Thei 3eden*8 "6xoax. 
awei soone fro the weie which’ thou 

schewidst to? hem, and thei maden® to 

hem a 3otun calf, and worschipyden® it®, 

and thei offeriden® sacrifices to it, and 

seiden, Israel, these ben thi goddis, that 

ledden thee out of the ond of Egipt. Ando 

eft the Lord seide to Moises, Y se, that 


this puple is of hard nol; suffre thou mef, 101 suffre thou 
me, etc. God 


that my woodnesse® be wrooth azens hem, — spekith bi 
and that Y do awey hem; and Y schal Yuna” 


make thee in to a greet folk. Forsothe 11 fone offendith 
. . . . 7 u 
Moises preiede ‘his Lord God8, and seide, the fadir hola- 
capa e . ith a swerd as 
Lord, whi is thi veniaunce wrooth ajels  tasle him, the 
‘ : fadir seith to 
thi puple, whom thou leddist® out of the ; man beynge 
Jond of Egipt in greet strengthe and ini peidis him, 
stronge* hond? Y biseche}, that Kgip- 12 smysng, 
a oe) a and he mecreth 
cians™ seie’ not, he ledde™ hem out felli, cpucene bi 
5 -_. this, that is 
‘that he schulde sle® in? the hillis, and to that he wole 
: ¢. . * iaaaike also he with- 
do4 awei fro erthe’, thin ire’ ceesse, and be heldun ; and 
thou quemeful on the wickidnesse of thit ued 
puple. Haue thou mynde of Abraham, of JE te eee 
< 5 or the puple 
Ysaac, and of Israel, thi seruauntis, to" _ to withholde 
s . . ceaegs the veniannce 
whiche’ thou hast™ swore bi thi silf, and — of God. Lire 
seidist, Y schal multiplie 3oure seed as the* er oe let. 
sterris of heuene, and Y schal 3yue to 30ure £2, {he ire of 
. . Be, IC 
seed al this lond of which Y spak, and bese 
4 am that they 
3e schulen welde it euere. And the Lord 14 sette forth hem 
: : ilf ; elli 
was plesid, that he dide not the yuel lick Bane 


thing a3en- 
Be * stondith Goddis 
whichY he spak ajens his puple. And 15;.0"7y. ie 
Moises turnede a3en fro the hil, and bar? “ferlynarie 

here and Greg. 


bi many auto- 
rites of hooly 
writ. CGKQX. 


in his hond twei tablis of witnessyng, 


1 Om. 4. @arysyng £. P sacrifice 4. 4 seide p. * puple alone 4. 5 pleysable spern. and Jacob 4. 


U sternes BE. 


" the calffis. © Om. s. 


risen vp 1s. ' pley, or to scorne 1. pl. or to scorne God s. 
led 1. whom thon hast ledde s. * han go 1s. 
schippid 1s. © Om. plures. ‘han offrid is. 


nesse, or veniaunce s. f grettere Is. 
stronge 10s. | biseche thee, Lord s. 
Pheminixs. 4dohenmrxs. 1 the erthe ts. 
Ww Om. is. * Om.ixs. Ythatis. 2 he bar is. 


P risiden BCD sec.m. 0. 4 thei offeriden 1s. 
Y that 1s. 
© woodnesse, that is, stronge veniaunce BCGIKOQX. wood- 
& the Lord his Ged 1s. 
m the Egipcians 1. the Egipmen s, 
Sire, Lord s. 


‘to drynke 1s, § risiden Bcow. 
vOm. K. W¥ the whiche thou hast 
z2Om.s. ® hanmaadss. ? han wor- 


u And is. 


bhast led 1s. i Om. peqrr. * a 
Ohathledis. © toslec. 


tthers, andtos. Ythe whiche 1. 


XXXIM. 16—27. 


tablis of testymonye wrytun on eithir side, 
igsand maad with the werk of God; the 
wrytyng forsothe of God was grauen in 
17the tables. Josue forsoth herynge the 
noyse of the puple criynge out, seide to 
Moyses, 3ellynge of fi3tynge is herd in 
‘ isthe tentis. ‘To whom he answerde, It is 
not a erye of men biddynge to fistyng, ne 
an out erye of men compellynge to flee, 
19 but a voys of men syngynge Y here. And 
whanne he was ny3 to the tentis, he saw3 
the calf, and eompanyes of men al abowt; 
and ful wrooth he threwe the tablis out 
of the hoond, and he brake hem at the 
20rotes of the hil. And’ cacchynge the calf 
that thei hadden made, he brente, and 
gronde it al to dost, the which he 
sprengide ‘in to“ water, and 3af of it 
2idrynke to the sones of Yrael. And 
Moyses seide to Aaron, What dide this 
puple to thee, that thow woldest* brynge 
22vpon hem the moost synne? To whom 
he answerde, Ne endeyn, my lord, thou 
fursothe knewe this puple, that it is redy 
23to yuel; thei seiden to me, Make to vs 
goddis, that goon beforn vs, to this Moyses 
‘forsothe, that ladde vs out of the loond 
of Egipte, we knowen not what is be- 
24faln. To whom Y seide, Which of 3ow 
hath gold? Thei token, and 3auen to me, 
and Y threwe it into the fier, and there 
253ede out this calf. Seynge thanne Moyses 
the puple, that it was nakid; Aaron for- 
sothe hadde spoylde it for the senship of 
the filthe, and among the enemyes he 
2¢hadde sette it nakid; and stondynge in 
the 3atis of the tentis, seith, If eny man 
be of the Lord, be he ioyned to me; and 
there ben gedered to tym alle the sones 
270f Leuy. ‘To whom he seith, Thes thinges 
seith the Lord God of Yrael, Put a man 


v Om, pb. 


EXODUS. 


win the 4. 


271 


writun in euer*® either side, and maad bi 16 
the werk of God; and the writyng of God 
was grauun in tablis’. Forsothe Josue 17 
herde the noise of the puple criynge, and 
seide® to Moyses, 3ellyng of fiz3tyng is herd 
in the castels!. To whom Moises an-1s 
sweride, It is not® cry’ of men exitynge 
to batel, nether the ery of men® compell- 
ynge to fleyng, but Y here the vois of 
syngeris. And whanne he! hadde nei3idii9 
to the castels*, he si3 the calf, aud dauncis!; 
and he was wrooth greetli, and ‘eastide 
forth the tablis fro the hond™, and brak” 
tho® at the rootis of the? hil. And helo 
took the" calf, which’ thei hadden maad, 
and brentet, and brak" ‘til to” poudur, 
which” he spreynte in to watir*, and 3af 
therof drynke to the sones of Israel’. And 21 
Moises seide to Aaron, What dide this 
puple to thee, that thou brou3tist? in? on 
hym? the gretteste synne? To whom he 22 
answeride, My lord, be not® wrooth, for 
thou knowist this puple, that it* is en- 
clynaunt® to yuel; thei seiden to me, Make 23 
thou goddis to vs, that schulen go bifore 
vs, for we witen not, what bifeldef to this® 
Moises, that ladde vs out of the lond of 
Egipt. To whiche® Y seide, Who of jou 24 
hath gold? Thei' token‘, and 3auen to me, 
and Y castide! it forth™ in to the fier, and 
this ealf™ 3ede out. Therfor Moyses si3 25 
the puple, that it? was maad bare?; for 
Aaron hadde spuylid it for the sehenschip 
of4 filthet, and hadde’ maad the puple 
nakid among enemyes. And Moises stood 26 
in the 3ate of the eastels', and seide, If ony 
man is of the Lord, be he ioyned to me; 
and alle the sones of Leuy weren gaderid 
tohym. To whiehe" he seide, The Lord 27 
God of Israel seith these thingis, A man 
putte swerd’ on” his hipe, go 3e, and ‘go 


x wolde E pr.m. 


2Om.c. >the tablisis. Che seide ts. 4tentisis. ¢noe. facryis. & Om. 1s.) Moises ts. 
i neizid or comen ny3s.  * tentis1s. | cumpanyes, ether queeris x marg. ™ he threwe out of his honde 
the tablis 1s. "he brak is. Ohemisw. POm.p. @Om.c. Taz. Sthatis. he brente it 1s. 
« brak it rks. Vvnto1. too. Ww the whiche powdre 1. whiche poudres. * the watir 1K. Y into con- 
Sfusioun of her ydolatrie s marg. 2 hast brou3t 1s. 2 Om.EeLr. » hem plures. © he not 1. not thou K. 
4 Om. 1xks. ¢ enclynaunt, edher redi nc. enclynynge 1s. f hath bifalle 10s. & Om. Gq. 4 whom z. 
‘and thei 1s, k token her golds. \threwe 1s. ™ Om. 1s. "calf therofs. °Om.s. P bare of gold s. 
ofthe 1s. © filthe, that is, for the makyng of an idol Bcanogx. filthe of makynge of the ydols. * he 
hadde 1s. tentis 1s. the whiche 1 ¥ his swerd is.  vpon 1s. 


a swerd vpon his hippe, goth, and turneth 
ajen fro 3ate vnto 3ate by the myddel of 
the tentis, and slee echon brother, and 
28frende, and his nei3bore. The sones of 
Leuy diden after the word of Moyses, 
and there fellen in that day as thre and 
z9twenti thowsynd of men. And Moyses 
seith, 3e han sacrid 3oure hoondes to day 
to the Lord, echon in sone, and in his 
brother, that there be 3eue to 30w bliss- 
30yng. And another dai begun Moyses 
spake to the puple, 3e han synned the 
moost synne; Y shal stye vp to the Lord, 
if eny manere Y may preye hym for 3oure 
aigilt. And he goon azen to the Lord, 
seith, Lord, Y biseche, this puple hath 
synned a greet synne, and thei han made 
to hem goldun goddis; outher for3if hem 
32this gilt, or if thow dost not, do me ont 
330f thi book, that thou hast wrytun. To 
whom the Lord answerde, Who so syn- 
neth to me, Y shal do hym out of my 
34 book; thow forsothe goo, and lede this 
puple whider Y spake to thee; myn aun- 
gel shall goo before thee, and Y in the 
day of veniaunce shal visite this synne of 
3s5hem. Than the Lord smoot the puple for 
the gilt of the calf, that Aaron made. ~ 


CAP. XXXII. 


i And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
Go, and stye vp fro this’ place, thow, and 
thi puple, that thow hast ladde out of 
the loond of Egipte, in to the loond that 
Y swore to Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob, 

2seiynge, To thi seed Y shal 3yue it. And 
Y shal sende an aungel, thi before renner, 
that Y throwe out Chanane, and Amorre, 
and Ethe, and Phereze, and Eue, and Je- 

3buze, and thow go into” the loond flow- 
ynge mylk and hony; forsothe Y shal not 
stie vp with thee, for a puple ‘it is* of 
hard nol, lest perauenture Y skater thee 


y the a. 


x turneth 1. turne3e 8s. Y the gate B. 
4 neizbore, whiche consentide to this ydolatrie s. 
other ts. ibigunnen is. * go vp 1. stie vp s. 
Pthes. 4 Om. vist sec.m. 1 that 1s. 
w hast led 1s. * of the which 1. 
Cit is A sec. m. EILP sec.m. 


EXODUS. 


Zto B. 


Z to po. vnto Is. 
e And the 1s. 

1 biseche thee s. 
s Om. 1Ks. 
y and seide p. seiynge Is. 


XXXII. 28—XXXIII. 3. 


3e* azen fro 3ateY ‘til to? 3ate bi the myd- 

dil* of the castels*, and ech man sle his 

brother, freend®, and nei3bore*, The® sones28 

of Leuy diden bi the word of Moises, and 

asf thre and twenti thousyndf of men fel- + Iu Ebru itis 
den doun® in that day. And Moises seide, 29 Billectty, “ 
3e han halewid 3oure hondis to dai to the erg Thus 
Lord, ech man in his sone, and brother, ‘tis diuer- 
that blessyng be 3ouun to 30u. Sotheli go in Phreu ben 


site, and seyn, 
whanne ‘the tother' day was maadi, Moises - oonly thei that 


weren prydci- 
pals in the 
trespas, that is, 


spak to the puple, 3e han synned the moost 
synne; Y schal stie* to the Lord, if in ony inate 
maner Y schal mowe biseehe hym for 3oure — othere men, 
but with these 
felony. And he turnede a3en to the Lord, 31 were slayu so 
. i 3 mani of othere 
and seide, Lord, Y biseche!, this puple hath _ that the noum- 
: bre stie to 
synned a greet synne, and thei han maad xxilj. thou- 
goldun goddis to hem; ethir forsyue thou  sndes either 
this gilt to hem, ether if thou doist not, 32 sede felden bi 
: - the swerdis of 
do™ awey me fro thi® book, which® thou Lenya 
hast write. To whom the Lord answeride, 33 felden bi othere 
Y schal do awey fro my? book hym that yincynses. 
synneth a3ens me; forsothe go thou, ands 
lede this puple, whydur Y spak to thee; 
myn aungel schal go bifore thee ; forsothe 
in the day of veniaunce Y schal visite also 
this synne of hem. Therfor the Lordss 
smoot the puple for the‘ gilt of the calf, 
which® ca/fs Aaron made. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


And the Lord spak to Moyses, andi 
seide, Go and stiet fro this place, thou, 
and the" puple, whom’ thou leddist* out 
of the lond of Egipt, in to the lond, 
which* Y haue swore to Abraham, and to 
Ysaac, and to Jacob, ‘and Y seideY, Y schal 
3yue it to thi seed. And Y schal sendeg 
thi bifore goere an aungel, that Y caste 
out Cananey, and Amorei, and Ethei, and 
Ferezei, and Euey, and Jebusey; and thats 
thou entre in to the lond flowynge with 
mylk and hony; for? Y schal* not stye> 
with thee, for ‘thou art® a puple of hard 


a thou ert £ pr.m. 


amyddis F. > tentis1s. ¢ his freend 1s. 
fas ii were1. &doun slayns. ban 

mdothouis. thes. © that 1s, 
twende vp. stye vps. "thiis. VY that 1s. 
z forsothe plures. ®wil1. > stye vp Is. 


XXXIII. 4—13. 


4in the weie. The puple herynge this 
werst word weilide, and noon after the 
swonne was clothid his ournyng. And 
the Lord seide to Moyses, Spek to the 
sones of Yrael, A puple of hard nol thow 
art; ones Y shal stye vp in the myddil of 
thee, and Y shal do thee awey; now ri3t 
put down thin ournement®, that I knowe, 
6what Y shal do to thee. Thanne the 
sones of Yrael diden doun her ourne- 
z7ment® fro the hil of Oreb. And Moyses 
takynge a tabernacle strau3te it afer out 
of the tentis, and he clepyde the name of 
it the tabernacle of the boond of pees. 
And al the puple that hadde eny ques- 
tioun, 3ede out to the tabernacle of thet 
sboond of pees, out of the tentis. And 
whanne Moyses 3ede out to the taber- 
nacle, alle the puple aroos, and echon 
stode in the dore of his tente, and thei 
biheelden the bak of Moyses, to the tyme 
9he 3ede into the tente. He forsothe goon 
into the tabernacle of the boond of pees, 
discendide a piler of a clowde, and stode 
at the dore; and ‘the Lord® spak with 
10 Moyses, alle men beholdynge that the 
piler of the clowde stode at the dore of 
the tabernacle; and thei stoden, and low- 
tiden thur3 the 3ates of her tabernaclis. 
ul The Lord forsothe spak to Moyses face 
to face, as a man is wonte to speke to8 
his freende; and whanne he turnede a3en 
into the tentis, the seruaunt of hym, child 
Josue, the sone of Num, 3ede not fro the 
igtabernacle. And Moyses seide to the 
Lord, Thow comaundis, that I lede out 
this puple, and thow shewist not to me, 
whom thow art to sendynge with me, 
namelich sith thow seist, Y knewe thee 
bi name, and thow hast founde grace be- 
i3fore me. If thanne Y haue founde grace 


EXODUS. 


273 


nol, lest perauenture Y leeset thee in the 
weie. The puple herde® this worste word, 4 
and‘ morenyde, and noon was clothid with 
his ournyng® bi custom’. And the Lords 
seide to Moises, Spek thou to the sones of 
Israel, Thou art a puple of hard nol; onys 
Y schal stie! in the myddis of thee, and 
Y schal do awey thee; rijt now  putte! 
awei thin ournyngt, that Y wite, what Y 
schal do to thee. Therfor the sones of Is-6 
rael puttiden awey her ournyng fro the 
hil of Oreb. And Moises took the taber-7 
nacle, and settide™ fer with out the castels", 
and he clepide the name therof the taber- 
nacle of boond of pees. And al the puple 
that hadde ony questioun, 3ede out to the 
tabernacle of boond® of pees, with out the 
castelsP, And whanne Moises 3ede out tos 
the tabernacle, al the puple roos, and ech 
man stood‘ in the dore of his tente, and 
thei bihelden ‘the bak of* Moises, til’ het 
entride in to the" tente. Sotheli whanneg 
he entride in to the tabernacle of boond’ 
of pees, a” piler of cloude* cam doun, and 
stood. at the doreY; and* the Lord spak 
with Moises, while alle men sien that the1o 
piler of cloude* stood at the ‘dore of taber- 
nacle® ; and thei stoden, and worschipiden 
bic the dores of her tabernaclis. Forsothe 11 
the Lord spak to Moises face to face’, as 
a man is wont to speke to® his freend ; 
and whanne he turnede a3en in to ‘the 
castels*, Josue, his mynystre", the sone of 
Nun, a child, 3ede not! awey* fro! the ta- 
bernacle. Forsothe Moises seide to thei2 
Lord, Thou comaundist, that Y lede out 
this puple, and thou ‘schewist not™ to me, 
whom thou schalt sende with me, ‘most 
sithen" thou seidist, Y knewe thee bi name, 
and thou hast founde grace bifore me. 
Therfore if Y haue founde grace in thiis 


banournment £. ¢anornement sperm. 4QOm.z. ¢whenheezpr.m. ftoa, & with £ prim. 
b and that «. 

4spille1. ¢heryngers. fOm.is. & ournyng, that is, preciouse clothis BGNQx. 0. or altyr 1. teat. 
0. that is, preciouse clothing. marg. h as he was wont 1. as bi custom he was wont s. i stie vp Is. 
kanoont. !putte thou is. ™sette itis. ™tentists. the boonde ts. Ptentis1s. 4 roos and 
stood cq. ‘aftiris. *%tos. tthetymehers. Uthisis. ‘the boond1. Wthers. *acloude ts. 
¥ dore of the tabernacle #1. tabernacle dore s. 7% Om. 4. ®the cloude 1. > dore of the tabernacle pri 


KMQRTW. tabernacle dore s. 
nacle 1s. 4 sernaunt 1s. 
™m hast not schewid 1s. 


€ at Is. 


0 namely sith ts. 


4 that is openly 1 marg. 
} out A pr.m. EF pr.m. GLNO séc.m. PQT sec.m. X. 


f Moises 1s. & his taber- 
k out F sec.m. 1s. ! of 1s. 


e with 1. 


Nn 


ft ournyng, 

that is, co- 

rounes whiche 
thei maden in 
resseyuinge of 
the lawe. sce 
Qx. 


274 


m thi si3t, shew to me thi face, that I 
knowe thee, and fynde grace before thin 
eyen; behold thi puple, and this folk. 
14 And God seide, My face shal goo before 
15 thee, and reste Y shal 3yue to thee. And 
Moyses seith, If thow thi silf gost not 
before, ne lede thow vs fro this place ; 
16in what forsothe mowen we knowe, I and 
this puple, that we han founde grace in 
thi si3t, but if that thow go with vs, 
that we ben glorrifyed of alle puples that 
17dwellen vpon the erthe? ‘Fhe Lord for- 
sothe seith to Moyses, And this word that 
thow hast spokun, Y shal do; thow hast 
forsothe founde grace before me, and thi 
issilf Y haue knowe bi name. The which 
igseith, Shew to me thi glorie. He an- 
swerde, Y shal shewe al good to thee, 
and Y shal be clepid in the name of the 
Lord. before thee, and Y shal haue mercy 
to whom Y wole, and goodliche Y shal 
20be to whom it likith to me. And eft he 
seith, Thow shalt not mowe se my face, 
forsothe there shal not mowe! se me a 
21man, and lyue. And eft, Loo! he seith, 
there is a place anentis me, and thow 
22shalt stonde vpon a stoon; and whanne 
my glorie shal passe, Y shal putte thee 
in the hool of the stoon, and I shal de- 
fende with my ri3t hoond, to the tyme 
23 that Y passe; and I shal take myn hoond, 
and thow shalt se myn hyndermore, my 
face forsothe thow shalt not mowe se. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 And therafter, Cut, he seith, to thee 
two stonun tables at the liknes of the 
former, and Y shal write vpon hem the 
wordes that hadden the tablis, that thow 

2brak. Be redi eerli, that thow stie vp 
anone into the hil of Synay; and thow 
shalt stonde with me vpon the cop of the 

3 hil; no man stie vp with thee, ne be seen 
eny man thur3 out al the hil; oxen for- 


EXODUS. 


XXXIII. 14—XXXIV. 3. 


si3t, schewe thi face to me, that Y knowe 
thee, and fynde grace bifor thin ijen ; bi- 
holde thi® puple, and this? folk. And God is 
seide, My face schal go bifor thee, and 
Y schal 3yue reste to thee. And Moises is 
seide, If thid silf schalt not go bifore’, ‘lede 
not* vs out of this place ; for in what thing 16 
moun we wite, Y and thi puple, that we 
han founde grace in thi si3t, if thou schalt 
not go with vs, that we be glorified of alle 
puplis that dwellen on erthe? Forsothe17 
the Lord seide to Moises, Y schal do also 
this word, whicht thou hast spoke; for 
thou hast founde grace bifor me, and Y 
knewe" thi silf bi name. And Moisesis 
seide, ScheweY thou thi glorie to me. God 19 
answeride, Y schal schewe al good to thee, 
and Y schal clepe in the ‘name of the 
Lord* bifor thee, and Y schal do merci to 
whom Y wole, and Y schal be merciful* 
onY whom it plesith tot me. And eft God 20 
seide, Thou maist not se my face, for a 
man schal not se me, and schal* lyue. And 21 
eft Ged seide, A place is anentis me, and 
thou schalt stonde on’ a stoon; and2e 
whanne my glorie schal passe, Y schial sette 
thee in the hoole of the stoon, and Y schal 
kyuere® with my ri3t hond, til’ Y passe ; 
and® Y schal take awey myn hond, and 2s 
thou schalt se myn‘ hyndrere® partis, for- 
sothe thou mayst not se my face. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


And aftirward God seide, Hewe to thee! 
twey tablis of stoon at the licnesse of the 
formere, and Y schal write on tho tablis 
thilke' wordis, whiche the tablis, that thou 
‘hast broke*, hadden. Be thou redi in the2 
morewtid, that thou stie! anoon in to the 
hil of Synai; and thou schalt stonde with 
me on™ the cop of the hil; no man stie™3 
with thee, nether ony man be seyn bi al 


i Om, E-. 
othisc. P they. 4thouthiz. 7 biforeysis. 8 lede thou not 1. ne ede thous.  ¢ that 1s. 
«know plures. ¥ Lord, schewe s.  Lordisname. ¥% ether goodlix marg. Ytors. % Om. plures. 
2Om.1s. >vponis. ¢ kyuere thee 1. hile or defende thee s. ‘til thats. ¢ and thanne 1. f the s. 
& hyndere cixkrex. 4} thilke 1s. itho1s.  brakist 1s. ‘go vp. stie vps. ™vponis. ™ go vpr. 


stie vp s. 


. 


XXXIV. 4—14. 


sothe and sheep, be thei not fedde there 
4a3ens. Thanne he hewide out two stonun 
tables, what manere thei weren before, 
and fro ny3t arysynge he stiede“ vp into 
the hil of Synay, as the Lord comaundide 
to him, berynge with hym the tables. 
5s And whanne the Lord had stiede vp bi 
the clowde, Moyses stood with hym, in- 
wardli clepynge the name of the Lord, 
6whom passynge before hym, seith, Lord- 
shiper!, Lord God, mercyable, and good- 
liche, and™ pacient, and of myche mercy, 
z7and verrey, that kepist couenaunt and 
mercy into thowsandes, that dost awei 
wickidnes®", and hidows giltis, and synnes, 
and no man anentis thee bi him silf is 
innocent, that 3eldist wickidnes® of fadris 
to sones and neces, into the thridde and 
athe ferthe progenye. And Moyses hast- 
ynge is bowid redi into the erthe, and 
9anowrynge, seith, If Y haue founde grace 
in thi si3t, Lord, I biseche that thow goo 
with vs, forsothe the puple is of hard nol, 
and that thow do awey oure wickidnes?, 
1oand synnes, and that thow welde vs. The 
Lord answerde, Y shal goo ift couenaunt, 
seynge alle men, I shal do signes, that 
neulere weren seen vpon erthe’, ne in eny 
folkis' of-kynde, that this puple seen, in 
whos myddil thow art, the feerful werk 
1iof the Lord, that Y am to do’. Kep alle 
thingis that to day I haue comaundide to 
thee; Y my silf shal throwe out before 
thi face Amorrey, Chananey, and Ethei, 
Pheresei forsothe, and Euei, and Jebuzei. 
12 Be war, lest eny tyme thow ioyne frend- 
ships with the’ dwellers of that loond, 
13that ben to thee into fallyng. But and 
the auteers of hem destrye, brek togidere 
the ymages, and the mawmete"® woodes 
shew down; wole’ thow not anowre an 
alien God; the Lord gelows the name 


K gtey p. 
nesses BDEFH, 
herying places £ pr. m. 


llordys £ pr. im. 
4 the erthe peu.  * folk v. 
vwiln se. wilt p. 


© thei pastured 1 Piti. 4 hewide out 1. 
& the which i. 


h to gc. in.o. 


bnomanis. © in tos. 
i the erthe ixs, 


r the whiche 1. 
names. V passide or shewide him s. Ww Moises s. * plentynouse s. Y merci A. 
dher sones 1s. © the sones 1s. 
k he worschipide ts. 


EXODUS. 275 


the hil, and oxun and scheep be not fed® 
azens ‘the hil?. Therfor Moises hewide%4 
twey tablis of stoon, whiche™ manere tablis* 
weren bifore, and he roos bi ny3t, and 
stiedet in to the hil of Synay, as the Lord 
comaundide to hym; and he bar with hym 
the tablis. And whanne the Lord haddes 
come doun bi a cloude, Moises stood with 
hym, and clepide inwardli ‘the name of the 
Lord"; and whanne the Lord passide’ bi-6 
fore hym”, he seide, Lordschipere, Lord 
God, mercyful, and pitouse*, pacient, and 
of myche mersifulYy doyng, and sothefast, 
which kepist couenaunt and mercy in to ‘a7 
thousande’, which* doist awey wickidnesse, 
and trespassis, and synnes, and noon? bi 
hym silf is innocent anentis thee, which 
3eldist the wickidnesse of fadris to® sones* 
and to sones® of sones‘, into the thridde 
and fourthe® generacioun. And _ hastilis 
Moises was bowid low ‘in to" erthe’, and 
worschipide*, and seide, Lord, if Y haue9 
founde grace in thi sij3t, Y biseche! that 
thou go with vs, for the puple is of hard 
nol, and that thou do awey oure wickid- 
nesses and synnes, and welde vs. The1o 
Lord answeride, Y schal make couenaunt, 
and in si3t of alle men Y schal make 
signes, that weren neuer seyn on™ erthe, 
nether in® ony folkis, that this puple, in 
whos myddis thou art, se the ferdful werk 
of the Lord, which Y schal make. Kepe11 
thou alle thingis, whiche® Y comaundide?P 
to thee to dai; I4 my silf schal caste 
out bifor thi face Amorrey, aud Cananey, 
and Ethei, and Ferezei, and Euey, and 
Jebusei. Be war, lest ony tyme thoui2 
ioyne frendschipis with the dwelleris of 
that lond, whiche' frenschipis be in to 
fallyng* to thee. But also distrie thouis 
‘the auteris of hem', breke the ymagis, and 
kitte" doun the’ woodis; ‘ny] thou wor-14 


m™ Om. ppeFru. ® wyckidnesses ppg. © wickydnesses RpFH. P wyckyd- 
8 doying E pr.m. 


tOm.4. mawmettes Bp. preve 


8 the tablisis. t3idevp1. 4 Lordis 
2 thonsandes A sec.m. 15S. 
& the fourthe cis. 


Nong. © that 1s. 


f her sones 1s. 


I biseche thee 1s. ™ vpon is. 


P haue comaundid 1s. shal comannde L. comaunde Ne. and A pr.m. sed expunct.m. sec. * the whiehe 1. 


- Smyscheefr. ther autris 1s. 


uhewe thou 1. kitte thou sw. 


v her isw. 
NnQ 


276 


isof hym, God is a louer; ne go thow not 
into couenaunt with men of that regioun, 
lest whanne thei han do fornycacioun with 
her goddes, and anourden the mawmetis 
of hem, eny man clepe thee, that thow 
iseete of the thingis that ben offerd. Ne 
wijf of the dow3tris of hem thow shalt 
tak to thi sones, lest after that thei han 
do fornycacioun, thei maken to do forny- 
caciouns and thi sones into her goddis. 
1730tun goddis thow shalt not make to 
isthee. The solempnyte of therf looues 
thow shalt kepe; seuen dayes thow shalt 
eete therf looues, as I haue comaundide 
to thee, in the tyme of the moneth of 
new thinges; in the moneth forsothe of 
19 veer tyme thow 3edest out of Egipte. Al 
that openith the wombe of maal kynde 
shal be myn, of alle hauynge lijf, as wel 
20 of oxen, as of sheep, shal be myne. The 
first goten of an asse thow shalt bigge 
with a sheep; ellis forsothe if thow 3yuest 
not for it the priys, it shal be slawn. The 
first gotun of thi sones thow shalt ‘a3en- 
bigge” ; ne thow shalt not apere in my 
21si3t voide. Six dayes thow shalt worche, 
the seuenthe day thow shalt ceese to 
22eeren and to repen. The solempnyte of 
weekis* thow shalt make to thee in the 
first bigynnyng of fruytis of thi whete 
heruest, and the solempnete whanne, the 
tyme turnynge a3eu of the jeer, alle 
23 thinges ben putte vp. Thre tymes of the 
3eer shal apere eche maal child that is 
thin in the si3t of the Almy3ti Lord, thi 
24God, Yrael. Whanne forsothe Y shal take 
the gentiles fro thi face, and I shal sprede 
abrood thi teermes, no man shal putte 
spies to thi loond, thee styinge vp and 
apperynge in the siz3t of the Lord thi God, 
2s thries in the 3eer. Thou shalt not offre 
vpon theY sowr dow3 the blood of my 
sacrifice, nether” shal not leeue vnto the 
morwe tide of the sacrifice of the so- 


W for bigge £ pr.m. 


W worschipe thou nati. * Om. s. 
Lpex. f. ether ydolatrie nN. f. or ydolatrie 18. 
that is, idolatrie, ac. ff Om.is. 8 Om. F. 
™ Om. plures. fruytis 1s. o Om. Is. 
1Om. Fr. © stiest vp 1s. 


EXODUS. 


x werkis AD. 


y the Lordis s. 
b the thingis ts. 
b goten 1. 
© of the 3eer Bers. Om. L. 


XXXIV. 15—25. 


schipe” an alien God; ‘the Lord* a gelous 
louyere is hisY name, God is a feruent 
louyere; make thou not couenaunt with 15 
the men of tho? cuntreis, lest whanne thei 
han do fornycacioun® with her goddis, and 
han worschipid the symylacris of hem, ony 
man clepe thee, that thou ete of thingis® 
offrid to an ydo]. Nether thou schalt take 16 
a wyif of her dou3tris to thi sones, lest 
aftir that® tho’ dou3tris han do fornyca- 
cioun®, thei make also thi sones to do for- 
nicacioun in to her goddis. Thou schalt17 
not make to thee 3otun goddis. Thou!s 
schalt kepe the solempnyte of therf looues; 
seuene daies thou schalt ete therf looues, 
as Y comaundide to thee, in the! time of 
the? monethe of newe fruytis; for in the 
monethe of veer tyme thou 3edist out of 
Egipt. Al thing of male kynde thatis 
openeth the wombe schal be myn, of alle 
lyuynge beestis, as wel of oxun, as of 
scheep, it schal be myn. Thou schalt ajen-20 
bie with a scheep the firste gendrid of an 
asse, ellis if thou 3yuest not prijs therfor, 
it schal be slayn. Thou schalt a3enbie the 
firste gendrid® of thi sones; nether thou 
schalt appere voide in my si3t. Sixe daies21 
thou schalt worclie, the! seuenthe day thou 
schalt ceesse to ere and repe*. Thou schalt 22 
make to thee the solempnyte of woukis in 
the firste thingis of fruytis of thi ripe corn 
of wheete, and! the solempnyte, whanne 
alle thingis™ ben gadrid ix to bernes, 
whanne the" tyme ‘of 3eer® cometh ajen. 
Ech male kynde of thee schal appere in23 
thre tymes of the 3eer in the si3t of the 
Lord Almy3ti, thi? God of4 Israel. For 24 
whanne Y schal take awei folkis fro thi 
face, and Y schal alarge thi termes, noon 
schal sette tresouns to thi lond, while thou 
stiest® and apperist in the si3t of thi Lord 
God, thries in the 3eer. Thou schalt not25 
offre on sour dow tle blood of my sacri- 
fice, nethir ony thing of the slayn sacrifice 


y Om. ppEu. 4% ne 4 pr.m. 


2the c. 4 fornycacioun, that is, idolatrie ncEGK 
¢Qm.1os. ‘thilke1. © fornycacioun, 
iinthep. k torepeis. ! and alsos. 

Pp 


P Om. DMO sec.m. RT sec.m. Ww. 


XXXIV. 26—XXKXV. 2. 


26lempnyte of pask. The chefe of the 
fruytes of thi loond thow shalt offre in 
the hows of the Lord thi God. Thow 
shalt not seethe a kidde in the mylk of 
27his moder. And the Lord seide to Moyses, 
Write to thee thes wordes, with whiche 
Y haue couenauntide a boond of pees, 
28 with thee and with Yrael. Thanne Moyses 
was there with the Lord fourti dayes 
and fourti ny3tis, and eete no breed, ne 
drank water*; and he wroot in the ta- 
bles the ten wordes of the boond of pees. 
29 And whanne Moyses descendide fro the 
mownt of Synay, he held two tables of 
testymonye, and he wiste not that his 
face was horned of the cumpanye of the 
30 word of God. Aaron forsothe and the 
sones of Yrael, seynge the face of Moyses 
3thorned, thei dredden to comen ny3, and 
thei clepid of hym turneden a3en, as wel 
Aaron as the princes of the synagoge ; 
3zand after that he had spokun, comen to 
hym also alle the sones of Yrael; to whom 
he comaundide alle thinges that he hadde 
herd of the Lord in the mownt of Synay. 
33 And fulfillid the wordes, he putte a veyle 
3svpon his face; the which, he goon yn to 
the Lord, and spekynge with him, dide 
awey, to the tyme that he shulde goo 
out; and thanne he spak to the sones of 
Yrael alle thinges, that to hym weren co- 
35maundid; the whiche seen the face of 
Moyses goynge out be horned, but eft he 
conerde his face, if eny tyme he spak to 
hem. 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 Therfore alle the cumpanye of alle the 
sones of Yrael gedered, he seid to hem, 
Thes ben that the Lord hath comaundide 

2to be doon. Six daies je shulen” doo werk, 
the seuenthe day shal be to 3ow holy, an 
holi day and the reste of the Lord; who 


8 no water £ pr.m. 


8 fase, that is, pask BCGKNX. paske 1. 
wwith the 1 *Om.er Y and hex. 


EXODUS. 


t vnto DIKOMRST sec.m. W. 


Zueis. 4 Om. 1. 


277 


of the solempnyte of fase* schal abide int 

the morewtid. Thou schalt offre in the 26 

hows of thi Lord God the firste" of the’ 

fruytis of thi lond. Thou schalt not sethe 

a kide in the mylk of his modir. And the 27 

Lord seide to Moises, Write thou these 

wordis, bi¥ whiche Y smoot a boond of 

pees, bothe with thee and with Israel. 

Therfor Moises was there with the Lord 28 

bi fourti daies and bi* fourti ny3tis, heY 

eet not breed, and? drank not? watir; and 

he wroot in tablys ten> wordis of the 

boond of pees. And whanne Moises cam 29 

doun fro the hil of Synai, he helde>» twei 

tablis of witnessyng, and he wiste not 

that his face was horned‘t of the felou- et a te 
schipe of Goddis word. Forsothe Aaron 30 durful schyn- 
and the sones of Israel sien Moises face 10970" 


au hi3 (from 
horned, and thei dredden to neize ni3, and 31 Bim XK] at the 


maner of 


thei weren® clepid of hym, ‘and thei turn- betes, whiche 
res the postle in 
eden® ajen, as wel Aaron as the princis of i. pistlc to 
or. lij. ce. 


the synagoge ; and after that Moises spak,  clepiti te glo- 
rie of Moises 


thei camen to hym, 3he alle the sones of 32 face, wherfor 


Israel; to whiche* Moises? comaundide alle ee 
thingis, whiche he hadde herd of the Lord _ [Israel k] 


new not that 
And whanne the 33 the ‘lst [skyn 


in the hil of Synai. 5 
wordis weren fillid®, he puttide! a veil on* ge 
his face; and he entride to the Lord, and 34 ae ae 
spak with hym, and dide! awey that veil, 

til™ he 3ede out; and thanne he spak to 

the sones of Israel alle thingis, that weren 

comaundid to hym; whiche" sien that the 35 

face of Moyses goynge out was horned, 

but eft he hilide® his face, if ony tyme he 


spak to hem. 
CAP. XXXV. 


Therfor? whanne al the cumpanye of the 
sones of Israel was gaderid, Moises seide 
to hem, These thingis it ben, whiche the 
Lord comaundide to be doon. Sixe daies2 
3e schulen do werk, the seuenthe dai schal 
be hooli to 30u, the sabat and reste4 of the 


b thou schal & pr. m. 


u firste, or cheefs. ¥ Om. 18. 
bthe tenis. > helde iz his honde 1s. 


© that is, beemes of gloriouse sehynyng » marg. h. in the beemys of wondirful shynyng iN. h. with wondirful 


d Om. 1. 
lhe dide bs. 


shynynge beemes 8. 
1 putte rk. —* vpon 1s. 
4 the reste is. 


€ weren turned 1. 
m til that 1s. 


b fulfillid is. 
P Wherfor a. 


§ he 0 see.nt. 
© hidde 1. 


f the whiche tr. 
a the whiche 1. 


278 


3so doth werk in it he shal be slayn. 3e 
shulen not tiende fier in al 3oure dwell- 
ayng place bi the holi day. And Moyses 
seith to alle the companyes of the sones 
of Yrael, This is the word that the Lord 

~ scomaundide, seiynge, Seuer 3e anentis 
jow the chefe fruytis to the Lord; eche 
wilful and of redi inwit offer hem to’ the 

6 Lord, gold, and siluer, and brasse, iacyncet, 
and purpur, and>» cocto twies died, and 
7bijs, heeris of goote, and the skynnes of 
wethers maad reed, and iacynctyne, the 
strees of Sichym, and oyle to® the li3tes 
‘to be maad4, and that there be maad an 
oynement, and the moost swete ensence, 
gsonychyn stonus and gemmes, to the 
anowrnnyng of the coope, and of the 
10breest broche. Who so euere of 3ow is 
wijs, come he, and mak that the Lord 
11 hath comaundide, that is, the tabernacle, 
and the roof of it, and the coueryng; 
rynges, and the ‘tablid sides’, with the 
12 berynge staues, litil stakes‘, and feet® ; the 
arke, and the berynge staues; the propi- 
cyatorie, and the veyle, that before it is 
13sprad abrood; the meetbord with berynge 
stanes, and the vessels, and the looues of 
14 proposicioun ; the candelstik to susteyne 
the li3tes, the vessels of it, and lanternes, 
1sand oyle to the norishyng of fyres; the 
auter of the maad® ensence, and the ber- 
yng staues; oyle of anoynting, and the 
maad® ensence of the swete smellynge 
spices ; the tente at the dore of the taber- 
lénacle; the autere of the al brent sacrifice, 
and the brasun gredeyrne of it, with the 
berynge staues, and his vessels; the laua- 
17torie, and the feet of it; the cortynes of 
the porche, with pilers, and feet; the tentis! 
18in the 3atis of the vestiarie; the liti] stakis 
of the tabernacle, and of the porche, with 
19 her cordes; the clothes whose vse is in the 


bb Om. E. 
h Om. £ prem. i tennt Ben. 

T seruyle werk 1. forboden werk s. 
VY Om. Faqrt. thes thinges 1s. hem Nn. 
trees A pr.m. 2 the liz3tis1. 8 the encense Is. 
ddoheis. © Om. rv. f make he the 1s. 
linto gg. m nurschyng R. 
‘the pileris is. s her baasis 1. her feet s. 
xx the seyntuarie DIRTX. 


EXODUS. 


S dai of the s. a pr.m. sabot day 1s. 
W purpul passim ELP. 

b coope Is. 

& Om. 1. 

n berynge staaues 1s. 

tand a. 


XXXV. 3—19. 


Lord; he that doith werk" in the sabat 
schal be slayn. 3e schulen not kyndle fiers 
in alle 3oure dwellyng places bi the ‘dai of 
sabat®’. And Moises seide to al the cum-4 
peny of the sones of Israel, This is the 
word whicht the Lord comaundide, and 
scide, Departe 3e at 30u the firste fruytiss 
to" the Lord; ech wilful man and of redi 
wille offre tho’ to the Lord, gold, and sil- 
uer, and bras, and iacynct, and purpur”, 6 
and reed se/k twies died, and bijs, heeris* 
of geet, and skynnys of rammes maad reed, 7 
and of iacynt, trees’ of Sechym, and oile’Ys 
to li3tis* to be ordeyned, and that the 
oynement be maad, and encense* moost 
swete, stoonus of onochyn and gemmes, to9 
the ournyng of the ‘cloth on the schuldris?, 
and of the racional®. Who euer of 3011 is 10 
wijs, come he, and make? that, that® the 
Lord comaundide, that is, the® tabernacle, 11 
and the roof therof*, and the hilyng; 
ryngis, and bildyngis" of tablis, with barris, 
stakis, and foundementis; the arke, and [2 
barris; the propiciatorie, and the veil, 
whichi is hangid byfore it; the bord with 13 
barris, and vesselis, and with looues of set- 
tyng forth; the candilstike* to susteyne 14 
lijtis, the vesselis, and lanternes therof, 
and oile to! the nurschyngis™ of fyris; 
the auter of encense, and the barris"; the ts 
oile of anoyntyng, and encense of swete 
smellynge spiceries ; the tente at the dore 
of the tabernacle; the auter of brent sa- 16 
crifice, and his brasun gridele, with hise 
barris", and vessels; the ‘greet waischyng 
vessel°, and ‘his foundement?; the curteyns 17 
of the large street4, with pileris" and foun- 
dementis®; the tente int the doris of the 
porche"; the stakis of the tabernacle and 1s 
of the large street’, with her coordis; the19 
clothis, whose vss is in ‘the seruyce 
of* seyntuarie™ ; the clothis of Aaron bi- 


“to teende £ prim. of H. 9Om. £ prom. © made tablisz pr.m. fstanes B. & fotise pr. m. 


tthati. Om.s. 4% of Ga. 
x and heerisa. Yofoiles. yy and 
¢ breste broche 1s text. racional 1 marg. 
bh the bildyngis 1s. ithatis. * candelstyckis et. 
© Jauatorie 1s. P the feet theroff1s. 4 entree Is. 
U vestiarie 1s. VYentreeris. WOm.1. *Om.s. 


XXXV. 20—33. 


seruyce of the seyntuarye; the clothes of 
Aaron the bishop, and of his sones, that 
thei beren the office of* preesthod to me. 
20 And al the multitude of the sones of 
Yrael goon out fro the si3t of Moyses, 
2\offerde with moost redi mynde and de- 
uoute the chefe thinges to the Lord, to 
make the werk of the tabernacle of testy- 
monye, what thing to the heriyng and to 
22the holy clothes was nessessarye. Men 
with wymmen 3euen hongynge rynges, 
and eer rynges, and hoond rynges, and 
bee3is ; al gilden vessel! is seuerd into the 
23 3iftis of the Lord. Who so euer hadde 
iacynet, and purpur, and cocco twies died, 
bijs, and heeris of goote, wether skynnes 
24maad reed, and blew, the metals of sil- 
ner, and of brasse, thei offreden: to the 
Lord, and the trees of Sichym into dy- 
25 uerse!l ysis. But and wymmen 3yuen that 
come thur3 dower, iacynet, and purpur, 
26and reed ‘silk, and bijs, and the heeris 
of goote, wilfully™ alle propre thingis 
273euynge. The princes forsothe offerden 
onychyn stonus and gemmes, to the coope 
28and breest broche, and swete smellynge 
spices, and oyle to make the li3tes, and to 
greithe the" oynement, and to make the 
29 encense of moost swete smel. Alle men 
and wymmen with a deuowt mynde of- 
ferden 3iftis, that the werkis ‘shulden be° 
maad, that the Lord comaundide bi the 
hoond of Moyses ; alle the sones of Yrael 
halowiden wilful thinges to the Lord. 
30 And Moyses seide to the sones of Israel, 
Loo! the Lord hath clepid Beseleel bi 
name, the sones of Hury, the sone of 
3\ Hur, of the lynage of Juda; and he hath 
fulfillede hym with the spiryt of God, of 
wisdom, and vuderstondyng, and of kun- 
32nyng, with al doctrine, to cast aud to 
make the werk, in gold, and siluer, and 
33 brasse, and in stonus to ben graued, and 


k ofthe u. ! vessels p. 1 dyuerses a. 


y the bischop 1s. 2 Moises si3t 1s. 


EXODUS. 


m wilful 4. 


a mynde 1s. 


279 


schop’, and of hise sones, that thei be set 
in preesthod to me. And al the multitude20 
of the sones of Israel 3ede out of ‘the si3t 
of Moises’, and offride with moost redizi 
soule* and denout the firste> thingis to the 
Lord, to make the werk of the tabernacle 
of witnessyng, what euer was nedeful to 
the® ournyng“, and to hooli® clothis. Men 22 
and wymmen 3auen bies of the® armes, 
and eeryngis, ryngis‘, and ournementis of 
‘the arm ni3 the hond; ech goldun’ vessel 
was departid in to the! 3iftis of the Lord. 
If ony man hadde iacynt, and purpur, and 23 


‘reed selki twies died, bijs, and the heeris 


of geet, skynnes of rammes* maad reed, 
and of! iacynt™, metals of siluer, and ofa 
bras, thei offeryden to the Lord, and trees 
of Sechym in to dyuerse vsis. But also2s 
wymmen tau3t 3auen tho thingis, whiche 
thei hadden spunne, iacynt, purpur™”, and 
vermyloun, and bijs, and the" heeris of26 
geet; and j3anen°® alle thingis by her 
owne fre wille. Forsothe princes offeriden 27 
stoonys of onychyn and iemmes, to the 
‘cloth on the schuldris?, and to the ra- 
cional4, and swete smellynge spiceries, and 2s 
oyle to the" liztis to’ be ordeyned, and* to 
make redi oynement", and to make the’ 
encense of swettistY odour. Alle men2z9 
and wymmen offeriden 3iftis with deuout 
soule*, that the werkis schulden be maad, 
whiche the Lord comamndide bi the hond 
of Moyses; alle the sones of Israel ha- 
lewiden wilful’ thingis to the Lord. And 30 
Moises seide to the sones of Israel, Lo! 
the Lord hath clepid Beseleel bi name, 
the sone of Hury, sone* of Hur, of the 
lynage of Juda; and the Lord hath fillid’s: 
hym with the spirit of God, of wisdom, 
and of yndurstondyng, and of kunnyug, 
and with al doctryn, to fynde out and to®*:2 
make werk in gold, and siluer, and bras, 
and in stoonys to be grauun, and in werk 33 


2 Om. Dd. © were E pr.m. 


b cheef is. ¢Om.a. 4ournement r. 44 the 


hooliis. ©hers. f Om. Fr. and othere ryngis 1s. & her armes 1s. 4 Om. 1s. icocco 1s.  wetheris 1s. 


10m. x. ™ ether blew x marg. ™™ and purpur a m.pr. 
t Om. Is. 
Z the sone Is. 


8 that schul 1. 
Y wilfulli x. 


broche s. * Om. pxKs. 
most swete 1s. * mynde Is. 


n reed Is. © thei 3auen Is. P coope 1s. 4 breest 
vOm. BE. W the swettist c. 
aa Om. s. 


u the oynement Be. 
a fulfillid is. 


280 


in carpentarye werk ; what thing craftily 
may be fonnde, he hath 3ouun in his 
herte; and Ooliab, the sone of Achyma- 
sech, of the lynage of Dan; bothe he hath 
tau3te with wisdom, that thei maken the 
werkis of carpentarye, of browdrye, and 
of werkyng? with needlis, of iacynet, and 
purpur, and cocto twies died, and of bijs, 
and alle thinges weue thei, and alle newe 
thingis fynde thei. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Thanne diden Beseleel, and Oliab, and 
eche wise man, to whom the Lord 3aue 
wisdom and vndirstondynge, that thei 
cowden craftili worche that ben neces- 
sarie into the vses of the seyntuarie, and 
that the Lord hath comaundide to be 
2maad. And whanne Moyses hadde cle- 
pide hem, and eche taw3t man, to whom 
the Lord hadde 3eue wisdome, and that 
wilfulli hadden offerd hem to make the 
a werk, he toke to hem alle the 3iftis of the 
sones of Yrae]l. The whiche whanne thei 
stoden stedfastly to her werk eche daye, 
4eerly the puple offerde the auowes. Wher- 
for the crafti men constreyned to come, 
5 Seiden to Moyses, The puple more offerith 
ethan is nede. Thanne Moyses comaundide 
in the voyce of a bedel to be cryde, Nei- 
ther? man ne womman eny thing more 
offre in the werk of the seyntuarie; and 
so was ceesside fro the 3iftis to ben of- 
7ferd, forthi that the offred thinges suf- 
8ficeden, and aboundide more ouer. And 
alle the wise men in herte maden to fille 
the werk of the tabernacle ten cortyns of 
bijs foldun a3en, and iacynct, and purpur, 
and cocto twies dyed, with diuers werk, 
gand with browdrye craft. Of the whiche 
oon hadde in lengthe ei3te and twenti cu- 
bites, and in brede foure; 0 mesure was 
10of alle the cortyns. And he ioynede fyue 


EXODUS. 


XXXVI. I—tro. 


of carpentrie; what euer thing may be 
foundun craftili, the Lord 3af® in his herte; 
and the Lord clepide® Ooliab, the sone of 
Achymasech, of the lynage of Dan; the 
Lord tau3te4 bothe® ‘with wisdomf, that 
thei make the werkis’ of carpenter’, of* 
steynour, and of! broiderere™, of iacynt, and 
purpur", and? of ‘reed sedk?, and of bijs, and4 
that thei make alle thingis, and fynde‘ 
alle newe thingis. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


Therfor Beseleel, and Ooliab, and echi 
wijs man, to whichet the Lord 3af wis- 
dom and vndurstondyng, that thei kouden 
worche crafteli, maden thingis that weren 
nedeful in to vsis" of the seyntuarie, and 
whiche the Lord comaundide to be maad. 
And whanne Moises hadde clepid hem,2 
and ech lerned’ man*, to whom the Lord 
hadde 3oue wisdom and kunnyng, and 
whiche* profridenY hem? bi her* wille to 
make werk>, he bitook to hem alle thes 
3iftis of the sones of Israel. And whanne 
thei weren bisi in the’ werk ech dai, the 
puple offride auowis* eerli. Wherfor thes 
werkmen weren compellid to come, ands 
thei seiden to Moises, The puple offrith 
more than is nedeful. Therfor Moisese 
comaundide to be cried bif the vois of a 
criere, Nether? man nether® womman offre 
more ony thing in the werk of seyntuarie'; 
and so it was ceessid fro 3iftis to be offrid, 
for the thingis offrid sufficiden, and weren7 
ouer abundant. And alle wise‘ men ing 
herte to fille! the werk of the tabernacle 
maden ten curteyns of bijs foldid™ a3en, 
and of iacynct, and purpur, and of reed selk 
twies died, bi dyuerse werk, and bi the® 
craft of many colouris. Of whiche® curteyns 9 
oon hadde in lengthe ei3te and twenti cu- 
bitis, and foure cubitis in breede; o me- 
sure was of alle curteyns?. And he ioynede 10 


q ne BDEFH. 


P werkry E pr.m. 


b hath 3ouun 1s. ¢ hath clepide 1s. ‘hath taugte 1s. ¢ bothe thesis. fOm.o. Swerk a. ofan. 
i carpentrie artes. k and c. 1 Om.1. ™broiderie EFILoprsTxw. ® of purpuri1sx. °Om,1Is. P cocco 
twies died 1s. 4 Om. 0. weeuen sys. §Sapareile 1. twhom EIs. Uthe vsist. Vtanjtis, W Om. EF 
KLNPQT sec.m. *the whiche 1. ¥ offriden K. 2 hemsilff is. ® her owen 1s. >the werk 1. ¢ Moises rs. 
hers, ¢herauowiss. {with cor pr.m.x. €that nethir1. 4 nein. ithe seyntuarie 1s. * the 
wise 18. | fulfille rs. ™ folden is. 2 Om. plures. © the whiche 1. P the curteyns Is. 


XXXVI. 11 —26. 


cortyns either’ to other’, and othere fyue 
ithe cowplede togidere to hem seluen ; and 
he made iacynctyne oyletist in the hemme 
120f the o cortyn on either syde, and in the 
hemme of the other also, that the oyletis' 
my3ten come ajens hem seluen togidere, 
izand togidere be ioyned; wherfore and 
fifti golden cerclis he 3eetide, that my3ten 
hold the oiletest of the cortyns, and that 
isthere were maad o tabernacle. And he 
made enleuen sarges" of the heeris of 
goote, to couere the roofe of the taber- 
isnacle; o sarge’ in lengthe hadde thretti 
cubitis, and in brede foure cubitis; of o 
ismesure weren alle the sarges” ; of whom 
fyue he ioynede a side, and othere six a- 
17twynne. And he made fifty oyletis* in 
the hemme of the o sarge’, and fifti in 
the hemme of the tothin sarge’, that to 
hem seluen thei my3ten be ioynede to 
isgidere; and fifti brasun knoppis with 
whiche® the roof my3te be knyt, and o 
i9mantil be made of alle the sarges>, And 
he made the couertour of the tabernacle 
of skynnes of wethers maad reed, and 
another aboue the veyle of skynnes® maad 
20 blew. And he made the tablis of the ta- 
bernacle of the’ trees of Sichym stond- 
2tynge; of ten cubites was the lengthe of 
the to® table, and other half cubijt the 
22brede heeld. Two rabitynges weren bi 
eche tables, that the tone‘ to ‘that other® 
my3t be ioyned; so he made in alle the 
23tablis of the tabernacle. Of the whiche 
twenti weren at the mydday coost a3ens 
24 the sowth, with fourti silueren footstakys; 
two footstakis vndur o table weren put 
at eithir parti of the corners, where the 
rabityngis of the sides in the corners 
2sweren endid. At the coost forsothe of 
the tabernacle that biholdith to the north 
26he made twenti tablis, with fourti sil- 


¥ one E pr.m. other sec.m. 8 the tother EF. 
W sayse E pr.m. * eeris E prem. 


¢heeris e prom. 4Om,. poen. & Om. aF. 


Qwith rs. ‘oyletisis. 8 the or. 

oiletis 1s. %*the curteyns 1s.  Y that x. 

¢ ryngis 1. oyletis o sup.ras. 3. f oother 1, 
Om. 1u. ™ ton EkLP. © Om. B. 


r dentyngis or rabitingis 8. § and he «. 


t eeris EB pr.m. 
Y say EB prim. 
f tother RDEFH. 


t oyletis 1s. 
2 $001. 
& with the 1. 
° other B. 
t baasis 1. trestlis s. 


EXODUS. 281 


fyue curteyns oon to4 anothir, and he cou- 
plide othere fyue to hem silf togidere; andi 
he made handlis" of iacynt in the hemme 
of o§ curteyn on euer either side, and in i2 
lijk maner in the hemme of the tother cur- 
teyn, that the handlist schnlen comen to 
gidere ajens hem silf, and schulen" be 
ioyned togider ; wherfor he 3ettide also1s 
fifti goldun serclis’, that schulen ‘bite the 
handlis” of curteyns*; and’ o? tabernacle 
was maad. ‘He made? also enleuene saies 14 
of the heeris> of geet, to hile the roof of 
the tabernacle; o saie hadde thretti cn-1s 
bitis in lengthe, fore cubitis in breede ; 
alle the saies weren of o mesure; of whichet 16 
saies he ioynede fyue bit hem silf, and 
sixe othere bi hem silf. And he made fifti17 
handlis® in the hemme of o say, and fifti 
in the hemme of the tother’ say, that tho 
schulden be ioyned to hem silf togidere ; 
and he made fifti bokelis of bras bi whiche ts 
the roof was fastned togidere, that oon 
hilyng were maad of alle the saies. He1s 
made also an hilyng of the tabernacle of 
the skynnes of rammes' maad reed, and 
another veil aboue of skynnes* of iacynt. 
He made also stondynge tablis of the ta-20 
bernacle of the trees of Sechym; the21 
lengthe of o table was of ten cubitis, and 
the breede helde o cubit and an! half. 
Twey dentyngis weren bi ech table, that 22 
the oon™ schulde be ioyned to the” tother®; 
so he made in al the tablis of the taber- 
nacle. Of whiche tablis twenti weren at 23 
the mydday coost aj3ens the south, with 24 
fourti foundementis? of siluer; twey foun- 
dementis1 weren set vndur o table on euer 
either side of the corneris, where the den- 
tyngis’ of the sidis weren endid in the cor- 
neris. And at the coost of the tabernacle 25 
that biholdith to the north he* made twenti 
tablis, with fourti foundementis* of siluer, 26 


Usayes E pr.m. 
2 other p. a the which p. 
& the tother apeFu. 


v say E pr.m. 
b says B prem. 


uthei schulen 1s. Yryngistws. W holde the 
aQOm.n. Pheerrs. ¢the whicher. 4 to 1s, 
hbe a. iwetherisas. the skynnes tw. 
p baasis 1. 4 baasis 1. foundementis or trestlis s. 


00 


282 


ueren footstakis, two footstakis bi eche 
27tablis. A3ens the west forsothe, that is 
at that parti of the tabernacle that bi- 
28 holdith the see, he maad six tables, and 
two other bi eche corners of the taber- 
29nacle bihynde, the whiche weren ioyned 
fro benethe vnto abouen, and into o ioyn- 
yng togidere thei weren born ; so he nade 
300n eithir parti bi the corners, that e13t 
tablis weren togidere, and hadden sixtene 
silueren footstakis, that is, two silueren 
31 footstakis vnder eche tablis. And he made 
berynge staues, fyue of the trees of Si- 
chym to hold togidere the tablis of the 
32 to side of the tabernacle, and fyue othere 
to make togidere the tables of the tother 
side, and withouten thes, fyue othere ber- 
ynge staues at the west coost of the ta- 
33bernacle agens the see. And he made 
another berynge staf, that shulde come 
thur3 the myddil tables fro corner vnto® 
3icorner. And thilk tablid thingis he giltide, 
3otun the siluer footstakis of hem, and he 
made the cercles of hem golden, bi the 
whiche the berynge barres' my3ten be lad 
ynne, the whiche and hem he couerde 
35 with golden" platis. And he made the 
veyle dyuerse and sondrye, of iacynct, 
and purpur, ‘reed silk!, and bijs foldid 
36a3en, with browdrye werk ; and foure pi- 
leris of the trees of Sichym, the whiche 
with the heedis he gildide, 30ten the sil- 
s7uer footstakis of hem. And he made a 
tente in the entre of the tabernacle, of 
iacynct, and purpur, reed silk, and bijs 
38foldid aj3en, with the werk of nedlis; and 
fyue pylers with her heedis, the whiche 
he couerde with gold, and the brasun 
footstakis of hem he 3etide, the whiche 
he couerde with gold. 


hinto x pr.m. i barren a. 


t baasis 1. trestlis s. 4 the whiche 1. 

trestlis s. % berynge staaues 1s. ® Om. s. 
berynge staanes Is. © beringe staff 1s. 
tablis ts. he 3etiders.  ! her 1s. 
hem nN. Pheris. 4 ryngis 1sw. 
Om. Mx sec.m. _Y of bijss. — W folden 1s. 
’he 3etide 1s.» her 1s. 
&Om.s. 4 folden1. i Om. mswx. 
stakis s. ° Om.1s. of hem ny. P the whiche 1. 


EXODUS. 


k glodun a. 


v thei weren Is. 
b the to k. 
f myddis of the w. 
m siluer passim ELP. 
t Om. 1s. of hem n. 
x the werk x see.m. 
€ baasis 1. foot stakis s. 
k broudrere CEGLP. 


XXXVI. 27 —38. 


twei foundementis' bi ech table. Forsothe 27 

ajeus the west? he made sixe tablis, and 23+ This that 
tweyne othere tablis bi ech corner of the iuuet pane 
tabernacle bihinde, whiche" weren ioyned 29 te: biota 
fro bynethe til to aboue, and werenY borun {hse is vot 
in to o ioynyng togidere; so he made on 

ener either part bi the corneris, that tho¥ 30 

weren eizte tablis togidere, and hadden* 

sixtene foundementisY of siluer, that is, 

twei foundementisY vndur ech table. He31 

inade also harris” of the* trees of Sechym, 

fyue barris? to holde togidere the tablis 

of o” side of the tabernacle, and fyue32 

othere barris’ to’schappe° togidere the ta- 

blis of the tother side; and without these, 

he made fyue othere barris’ at the west 

coost of the tabernacle ajens the see. He33 

made also another barre®, that schulde 

coine bi the myddilf tables fro corner til 

to corner. Forsothe he ouergildide® thos: 

wallis of tablis', and 3etide* the! siluerne™ 
foundementis® ‘of tho°®, and he made theP 

goldun serclis4 ‘of thot, bi whiche* the 

barris my3ten be brou3t in, and be hilide 

thet same barris with goldun platis. He3s 

made also a veil dyuerse and departid, of 

jacynt, and purpur, and" reed selk, and 

bijs’ foldid® a3en bi werk* of broiderie. 

He made also foure pileris of ‘the trees 36 

of SechymY, whyche pileris with the heedis 

he onergildide’, and 3etide* the siluerne 
foundementis® ‘of tho’. He made also in37 

the entryng of the tabernacle a tent of 

iacyut, and purpur, and® reed! sedk ‘and 

bijs$ foldid® a3en bi the werk of a‘ broy- 

dreie*, And he made fyue pileris with 3s 

her heedis, whiche! he hilide with gold, 

and he 3etide the™ brasun foundementis" 

‘of tho®, whiche? he hilide with gold. 


land reed silk p. vermylonn E pr.m. 


W thei 1. x thei hadden 1s. _—*Y ~baasis 1. 
emake 1s. 4 barris of the trees of Sechym e. 
& ouergilde ¥. ) the Grog pr.m. s. ithe 

n baasis 1. foot stakis s. ° Om. 1s. of 
8 the whiche 1. t tho prekmNow. " of plures. 
y Sechim trees 1s. 2 ouergilte F. 
4Om. 1s. ofhem N. ¢ Om. plures. of reed 18. 
lthe whiche 1. ™heris. % baasis 1. foot 


Xecev its 17 4. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Beseleel forsothe made also the arke 
of the trees of Sichym, hauynge two cu- 
bites™ and an half in lengthe, and other* 
half cubijt in brede, and the hi3te was of 
other half cubijt; and he clothid it with 
moost puyr gold with’ ynne, and with 

2zoute. And he made to it a goldun crown 

3bi enuyroun, 3etynge foure goldun rynges 
bi foure corners of it, two rynges in the 
4to side, and two in the tother. And he 
made berynge stanes of the trees of Si- 
schym, which he clothide with gold, and 
the whiche he putte into the rynges that 
weren in the sides of the arke, to bere it. 

6 And he inade the propiciatorye, that is, 
Goddis spekynge place, of moost puyr 
gold, of two cubites and an half in 
lengthe, and of other half cubijt in brede. 

7 Also two cherubyu of gold forgid, whiche 
he putte on either side of the propicya- 

storie, o cherub in the ouermest hei3t of 
the o parti, and ‘that other’ cherub in 
the ouermest hei3t of ‘that other? parti; 
two cherubyn in either hei3ztis of the pro- 

9piciatorye, strecchynge out the wenges, 
and couerynge the propiciatorye, and hem 
seluen togidere, and it a3enbiholdynge. 
io And he made the meet bord of trees of 
Sichym, in lengthe of two cubites, and in 
brede of o cubijt, that hadde in hei3t o 
ilcubijt and an half. And he enuyrounde 
it with moost clene gold, and he inade to 
12it a goldun brerde bi enuyroun; and to 
thilke brerde a goldun coroun bitwix 
grauen of foure fyngris, and vpon it an- 
i3other goldun coroun. And he 3etide foure 
goldun cercles, the whiche he putte into 
the foure corners, bi eche feet of the bord 
i4a3zen the coroun, and he putte into hem 
berynge staues, that the bord my3te be 


™ eobite £ pr.m. 


q1Om. 1. T heizte 1s. lienesse 0. 5 Om. c. 
xother 1s. YOm.o. 2 the whiche 1, 
moe ELP. €Om.xu. f Om, em. 

sette GEILPS. ™in GQ. © heizte 1s. 
rAndheis. &Om.1.  t mete boord s. 


EXODUS. 


n an other p. 


t hilide 1s. 
® Om. 1Ko sec.m. Ss. 
& a plures. 
othe tok. Phei3t 1s. 4 and that propiciatorie 1s, Om. kK. sec.m. 
« Sechym trees s. 


283 


CAP. XXXVII. 


Forsothe Bescleel made also an arke of 1 
the trees of Sechym, hauynge twey cu- 
bitis and an half in lengthe, and a cubit 
and an’ half in breede; forsothe the hi3- 
nesse® was of o cubit and an’ half; and he 
clothidet the arke with purest gold, with 
ynue and without forth. And he made: 
to it a goldun coroun ‘bi cumpas", ands 
3etide’ foure goldun ryngis, bi foure cor- 
neris therof, twey ryngis in o side, and 
twei ryngis in the tother* side. And he4 
inade barris of theY trees of Sechym, 
whiche? barris* he clothide> with gold, ands 
whiche® barris he putte’ into the ryngis 
that weren in the sidis of the arke, to bere 
it. He made also a propiciatorie, that is, 6 
Goddis answeryng place, of pureste gold, 
of twei cubitis and an® half in lengthe, 
and off o& cubit and an” half in breede. 
Also he made twei cherubyns of gold,7 
betun out with hamer‘, whiche* he set- 
tide! on™ euer eithir side of the propi- 
ciatorie, o cherub in the" hijnesse of 0°: 
part, aud the tother cherub in the hi3- 
nesseé? of the tothir part; twei cherubyns, 
oon in ech hiz3nesse of the propiciatorie, 
stretchynge out the wengis, and hilynges 
the propiciatorie, and biholdynge hem silf 
togidere and that’. He* made also* aio 
boord' of ‘the trees of Sechym", in’ the” 
lengthe of twey cubitis, and in the* breede 
of o cubit, whicheY boord? hadde ‘a cubit 
and an half* in hei3the. And he cwn-11 
paside the boord® with clenneste gold, and 
made‘ to it a goldun brynke® bi cumpas ; 
and he made* to that brynke a goldun tz 
coroun, rasid® bitwixe of foure fyngris®; 
and on the same coroun he made anothir 
goldun coroun. Also he 3etide foure goldun 13 
serclis' whiche* he settide! in™ foure cor- 


© the tother BpEFU. 


u aboute 1. 
b hilide 1s. 
lures. ian hamer s. 


vhe 3etide 1s. W the foure r. 
¢the whiche 1. 4 sente Be. 


bh Om. k the whiche 1. 


vando. WOm.1s. * Om.is.  Y the 


whiche 1. 2 table 1s. @ a enbit and half plurcs. other half cubits. > table 1s. ¢he made 1s. 4brerde ts. 


€ Om. 1. 
putte Is. 


f brerde is. & grauen Is. 
™m in to the Is. 


h fyngre breede 1s. 


iryngisisw. the whiche1. !sette exp. 


0028 


284 


isborn. And thilk berynge staues he made 
of trees of Sichym, and enuyrounde hem 
ieéwith gold. And the vessels. to dyuerse 
vses of the bord, eysel vessels, fiols, and 
litil cuppes, and ensensers? of moost cleue 
gold, in the whiche ben sacrifice’ ‘of li- 
17 cours" to ben offerd. And he made a can- 
dilstik, forgid of moost clene gold, of 
whose berynge staf, 3eerdis, cuppis, and 
18 bollis, and lilies 3eden out; sixe in either 
side, three 3eerdes on o side, and thre on 
the tother; thre cuppes in the maner of 
a note thur3 eche 3erdes, and litil ballis 
19 togidere, and lilies; and three cuppes at 
the liknes of aS note in o 3eerde, and ballis 
togidere, and lilyes; the werk was euen 
of six 3eerdes, that 3eden out of the stok 
200f the candelstik. In that forsothe ber- 
ynge staf were foure cuppes, in maner of 
a note, and balles thur3 ech, and lilies; 
21and the balles vnder the two 3eerdes bi 
thre places, the whiche togidere maken 
six 3eerdes, goynge out of o berynge staf; 
2zzand thanne the ballis, and 5eerdes of it 
weren alle forgid of moost clene gold. 
23And he maad seuen lanternes with her 
candelquenchers, and the vessels, where 
the snuffes ben quenchid, of moost clene 
21 gold. A talent of gold peyside the candel- 
25stik with alle his vessels. And he maade 
the auter of maad' ensence of the trees 
of Sichym, hauynge thur3 square eche 
cubitis, and in hei3t two, of whose corners 
26 3eden out hornes. And he clothide it with 
moost clene gold, with the fier panne, 
27and walles, and hornes; aud he made to 
it a litel golden crown by enuyroun, and 
two goldun rynges vnder the crown, bi 
eche sides, that in hem ben put yn the 
berynge staues, that the auter may be 
28born. Thilke forsothe berynge staues he 
made of the trees of Sichym, and he co- 


Peenceris DE. 4 sacrytices E sec.m. 


® table 1s. 
'Om.o. § tho Bckmns. Om. F. 
x hem 1s. y Om. DIKSoO sec.m. 
schaftis Bog. © 3erdis ether schaftis cana. 
1 Om. 1Ko. ithe cuppis is. * weren vndur is. 
P Om. s. 
VY vessels ether instrumentis BCNQX. 
2 )lide 1s. 8 with i. » the hornes 1s. 


t ringis 1s. 
Zan hainer s. 


EXODUS. 


vr Om. £ prim. 


© coroun, that is, next undir the coroun BCGNQX. 
u table mi3t 1s. 


4 other 1s. 
1 the two 1s. 
4 rundels or ballis 1s. 1 the schaftis 1s. § candi] quenchers Is. 
w the trees 1. * square, that is, on ech side o cubit BCGNQ. 


XXXVIL. 1g—28. 


neris, bi alle the feet of the boord" a3ens 14 
the coroun®’, and he puttide? barris? in to™ 
the’ serclis*, that the ‘boord may" be borun. 
And he made thoY barris’ of the trees of 15 
Sechym, and cumpasside tho* with gold. 
And he made vesselis to dyuerse vsis of 16 
the boord, vessels of vynegre, violis, and 
litle cuppis, and censeris of pure gold, in 
whiche the’ fletynge sacrifices schulen be 
offrid. And he made a eandilstike, betun 17 
out with hamer*, of clenneste gold, of 
whos barre® 3erdis®, cuppis, and litle run- 
delis and lilies camen forth; sixe in euer 18 
eithir side, thre 3erdis° on o side, and thre 
on the tother’ side; thre cuppis in the 
maner of a note bi ech 3erde, and litle 
rundels togidere, and lilies; and thre 19 
cuppis at the lienesse of a note in the 
tother’ jerde, and litle rundels togidere, 
and lilies; forsothe the werk of sixe 
schaftis, that camen forth of the ‘stok of 
the candilstike®, was euvene. Sotheli in2o 
that’ barreS weren foure cuppis, in the 
maner of a note, and litle rundels and 
lilies weren bi alle ezppisi; and litle run-21 
dels vndur* twei! schaftis, bi thre placis, 
whiche™ togidre be maad sixe schaftis 
comynge forth of" o barre®; therfor and? 22 
the litle rundels’, and schaftis’ therof, 
weren alle betun out with hamer, of 
pureste gold. He made also seuene lan-23 
ternes, with her ‘snytyng tongis*, and the 
vessels where ‘tho thingis, that ben snytid 
out', ben quenchid, of clennest gold. Thees 
candilstike with alle" his vessels’ weizede 
a talent of gold. He made also the auter 25 
of encense, of trees“ of Sechym, hauynge 
a cubit bi square‘, and twei cubitis in 
hei3the, of whos corneris camen forth 
hornes. And heY clothide? it with clen-26 
neste gold, and the gridele, and* wallis, 
and hornes®; and he made to it a litile7 


So ppeFu. tt Om. E pr.m. 


q beringe staues 1s. 
v the c. thilke 1. W beringe staues 1s, 
a barre ether stok BcGq. stok 1s. b 3erdis ether 
€ candilstik stok s. fthe x. &stoks. 
mthe whiche1. ong. © stok s. 
tthe snofis 1s. Om. plures. 
y¥Om.cG. 


P putte IMs. 


XXXVIL. 29 —XXXVIIF. 12. 


29uerde with goldun plates. And he inade 
oyle to oynement of halowyng, and the 
maad* ensence of moost clene swete smell- 
ynge spices, with the werk of pymen- 
tarye". 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


1 And he made the auter of brent sacri- 
fyce of the trees of Sichym, of fyue cu- 
bitis bi square, and of three in hei3t ; 

2whose hornes 3eden out of the corners ; 
and he couerde it with brasun plates. 

3And he greithide into the vses of it dy- 
uerse vessels of brasse, cawdrowns, toonges, 
4fleshhokes, hokes, and fier pannes. And 
the gredyrne of it in manere of a nett he 
made brasun, and yvnder it in myddil of 
5the auter a ‘fier panne’. Foure ryngis 
jotun, be so feele hei3tes of the netwise 
gredyrne, to the berynge staues to be put 
éyn, for to bere; the whiche and hem he 
made of the trees of Sichym, and he co- 
7uerde with brasun plates. And he ladde 
yn cercles, the whiche ‘stoden ouer™ in 
the sides of the auteer. And thilk au- 
ter was not massye, but holw3 of tabled 
8thingis, and with ynne voyde. And he 
made a brasun lauatorye, with his foot, 
of the shewers of wymmen, the whiche 
wacchiden in the porche of the taber- 
onacle. And the porche, in whos sowthe 
coost weren the tentis of bijs folden a3cn 
1oof an hundrid cubites, twenti brasun pi- 
lers with her feet, the heedes of the pilers 
and al the grauyng of the werk siluer; 
leuen at the north coost the tentis, pilers, 
and feet, and the heedes of pilers weren 
of the same mesure and of werk and of 
izmetal. In that forsothe coost the which 


t Om. £ prom. %spycery mengyng g£ pr.m. VY lytyll flore e pr.m. W 3eden ferre oute £ pr.m. 
P pycery syng Ep yty. P 3 P 


© beringe staues 1s. 4 sent plures. 
beringe staues s. iOm.s.  & hilide hem 1xs. 
P Om. peg. 1 fijr pannis 1s. * in 1s. 
xthe EFiLopsw. YOm.1s. 2 hilide hem rks. 
lures. 4massy is. ¢ Om. 1s. f bildynge EF. 
1the wymmen s._ * poorche 1s. 
pilers 1s. P the pilers 1. 


EXODUS. 


e hem 1. 
10m. s. 
8 fijr panne 1s. 
a he ledde hem 1s. he ledde x. 
& the tablis k. 
1 poorche or greet entree 1. poorche s. 


285 


goldu coroun bi cumpas, and twei goldun 
ryngis vndur the coroun, bi ech syde,’that 
barris® be put? in to tho’, and the auter 
mow bef borun. Forsothe he made tho’ 28 
barris" of the! trees of Sechym, and hilide® 
with goldun platis. He made also oile to29 
the oynement of halewyng, and encense of 
swete smellynge spiceries, moost clene, bi 
the! werk of ‘a makere of oynement™. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


He made also the auter of brent sacri-1t 
fice of the trees of Sechym, of fyue cu- 
bitis bi square, and of thre cubitis in 
hei3the ; whose hornes camen forth of the2 
corneris, and he hilide it with platis of 
bras. And in to" vsis® therof he made redis 
of bras dyuerse vessels, caudruns, tongis, 
fleischhokis, hokis?, and ‘resseittis of firis4. 
He made also the brasun gridile therof,4 
‘bi the™ maner of a net, and a ‘panne for 
colis’ vudur it, int the’ myddis of the an- 
ter. And he 3etide foure ryngis, by sos 
many endis of the gridile, to putteY in the 
barris to bere’; and he inade tho* sameeé 
barris of theY trees of Sechym, and hilide’* 
with platis of bras. And ledde* in to the7 
serclis® that stonden® forth in the sidis of 
the auter. Forsothe thilke auter was not 
sad‘, but holowe of the® bildyngis‘ of ta- 
blis%, and voide withynne. He made alsos 
a ‘greet waischyng vessel of bras*#, with 
his foundement®, of the myrours of wym- 
men! that wakiden in the ‘greet street of 
the tabernacle. And he made the greets 
street', in whose south coost weren tentis 
of bijs foldid™ a3en, of an hundrid cubitis, 
twenti brasun pilers with her fonndemen-io _ 
tis", the heedis{ of pilers®, and al the grau- + In kbra it 


yng of the werk, weren of silner; euentii ' the heokis 


of peleris, aud 


at the north coost the tentis, pilers, and Pw tee 
3 cs of tho, weren 
foundementis and heedis of pilers?, weren of siluer, and 
in the same 


of the same mesure, and werk, and metal.  manere where 
lijk wordis ben 
set. GQx. 


f so bet. 
™ apotecarie Is. 
u Om. pv. 


8 thilke 1. the w. = beringe trees 1. 
nOm.o. © the vsis 1s. 
Vvsende ne. W bere it 1s. 

brynges w. ¢@ stodun 
ge brasen lauatorie 1s. © baas 1. foots. 
m folden 1. 1 baasis1. © the 


t Om. 15. 


286 


biholdeth* the west, weren tentis of fifti 
cubites, ten pilers with her feet brasun, 
and the heedes of the pilers, and al the 
13 grauyng of the werk, silucren. Forsothe 
i4azen the est he greithide tentis of fifti 
cubites, of the whiche o side helde fiftene 
is cubites of three pilers with his feet; and 
in ‘that other’ party, for bitwix either he 
made the entre of the tabernacle, weren 
the tentis euen of fiftene cubites, thre 
is pilers, and so feele feete. Alle the tentis 
of the porche bijs folden ajen hadde co- 
izuerde. The feet of the pilers weren bra- 
sun, the heedes forsothe of hem with alle 
her grauyngis silueren?; but and thilk 
pilers of the porche he clothide with sil- 
iguer. And in the entre of it he made a 
tent with nedle* werk, of iacynct, and 
purpur, and reed clooth, and of bijs folden 
a3en, the whiche hadde twenti eubites in 
lengthe, the hei3t forsothe was of fyue 
cubitis, aftir the mesure that alle the 
19tentis of the porche hadden. The pi- 
lers forsothe in the comyng ynne weren 
foure, witli brasun feete, and the heedes 
20 of hem, and the grauynges silueren; the 
litil stakis forsothe of the tabernacle and 
of the porche by enuyroun he made bra- 
zyisun. Thes ben the instrumentis of the 
tabernacle of witnessyng, that ben noum- 
bred out after the heestis® of Moyses in 
the serymonyes® of Leuytis, by the hoond 
220f Ythamer, sone’ of Aaron, preest®. The 
whiche thingis Beseleel, the sone of Hury, 
the sone of Hur, of the lynage of Juda, 
the Lord bi Moyses comaundynge, hadde 
a3fulfillid; ioyned to hym a felawe, Ooliab, 
the sone of Achisamech, of the lynage of 
Dan, the which and he was a noble crafti 
man of trees, and a browdrer, and a 
worcher with nedlis‘, of iacynct, and pur- 
24 pur, ‘reed clooth’, and bijs. Al the gold 


x biholdeth to x pr.m.  Y the tother Bern. 


EXODUS. 


XXXVHI. 13——~24. 


Forsothe in that coost that biholdith the 12 
west weren tentis of fyfty cubitis, ten 
brasun pilers with her foundementis4, and* 
the’ ‘heedis of pilers‘, and al the grauyng 
of werk, weren of siluer. Sotheli ajens 13 
the eest he made redi tentis of fifti cu-1i4 
bitis, of whiche" tentis o side helde’ fiftene 
cubitis of thre pilers with her founde- 
mentis’ ; and in the tother* side, for he1s 
made the entryng of the tabernacle bi- 
twixe ener either, weren tentis euenli of 
fiftene cubitis, thre pilers, and so many’ 
foundementis’. Bijs foldid* a3zen hilide is 
alle the tentis of the greet street®. The1j 
foundementis® of pilers’ weren of bras; 
forsothe the heedis of tho pilers, with alle 
her grauyngis, weren of siluer; but also 
he clothide® with siluer tho pilerst of the 
greet street®. And in the entryng therofis 
he made a tente, bi‘ werk of broiderie", of 
iacynt, purpur', vermyloun*, and of bijs 
foldid! ajen, which™ tente hadde twenti 
cubitis in lengthe, and the heiz3the was of 
fyue cubitis, bi the" mesure which® alle 
the tentis of the greet street? hadden. For-19 
sothe the pylers in the entryng weren 
foure, with brasun foundementis, and the 
heedis of tho pilers and grauyngis? weren 
of siluer; and he made brasun stakis of20 
the tabernacle, and of the greet street", bi 
cumpas. These ben the instrumentis{ of 21 In Ebru itis, 
the tabernacle of witnessyng, that ben ee eee 
noumbrid, bi the comaundement’ of Moises, 

in the cerymonyes' of Leuytis, bi the hond 

of Ithamar, sone" of Aaron, preest. Whiche’ 22 
instrumentis Beseleel, sone” of Huri, sone 

of Hur, of the lynage of Juda, fillide*; for 

the Lord comaundide bi Moises, while2s 

Ooliab, soneY of Achysameth, of the lynage 

of Dan, was ioyned felowe to hym, and he 

hym silf was a noble crafti man of trees, 

and a” tapesere® and> a broderere of ia- 


+ {n Ebrea it 
it is, he hilide 
with siluer the 
hedis of the 

pileris. cGax. 


4 neelde Br. 


z syluer &. b heste BDEFIT, © ser- 
uyse E pr.m. the sone £ pr.m. © the preest x pr.m. fneeldes se. §& vermycle EF pr.m. 

a baasis1. "Om. pr. *Om.omg. t pilers heedisxs. the whiche 1. vhadders.  W baasis 1. 
xotherrs. Y feles, 2 baasis1. 2 foldenis. » entrees. © baasis1. feet s. 4 the pilers 1s. 
ehilide 1s. f the rks. S entree 1s. 4 brouderie werk 1s. ‘of purpur kK. * vermyloun ether rede 
cloth Bcgnex. | folden rs. ™ the which 1 2" Om.1. © that 10 sec.m.s. P entree 10 sup.ras.s. 4 the 
grauyngis 1s, entree 1s. 8% heest 1s. t cerymonyes, éhai is, seruycis Bc. the sone ts. ¥ the whiche 1. 
w the sone 1s. ¥* fulfillide 1s. Y the sone 1s. 2 Om. w. 2 tapesere, that is, weuyng of diuersc colours Bc. 


tapserere DGKNQT. tapserie ELP. that is, a peyntour K marg. 


b or Ww. 


XXXVIII, 25-—XXXIX. 3. 


that was spendid" in the werk of the seyn- 
tuarye, and that was offerd in 3iftis, was 
of twenti and nyne" talentis, and of seuen 
hundrid and thretti siclis, at the mesure 
20f the seyntuarie. There was forsothie 
offerd of hem that camen to the noumbre, 
fro twenti 3eer and abone, of six hundrid 
thre thowsynd and of fyue hundrid and 
a6fifti men of aarmes. There weren for- 
thermore an hundryd talentes of siluer, 
of the which ben 3otun the footstakis of 
the seyntuarye, and of the entre, where 
27 the veyle hongith ; an hundred footstakis 
ben maad of an hundrid talentes, eche ta- 
aslentis countid bi eche footstakis. Of a 
thowsynd forsothe and seuen hundrid 
and seuenti and fyue sicles he made the 
heedes of the pilers, the whiche and hem 
29he clothide with siluer. Of brasse for- 
sothe there weren offred talentis seuenti 
and two thowsynd, and foure hundrid 
30ouermore! sicles. Of the whiche ben 
3oten footstakis in the entre of the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng, and a brasun auter 
with his fier panne, and alle the vessels 
31 that perteyneden to the vse of it, and the 
footstakis of the porche, as wel in the 
enuyroun as in the comyng yn of it, and 
litle stakis of the tabernacle, and of the 
porche al aboute. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


1 Off iacynect forsothe, and purpur, ‘reed 
clooth*, and bijs, he made the clothis, 
with whiehe Aaron was clothid yn, 
whanne he mynystryde in the hoolise, as 

2the Lord comaundide to Moyses. Thanne 
he made a coope of gold, iacynct, and 
purpur, and cocto twies died, and bijs 

3a3en foldid, with browdrye werk ; and he 
cutte ther yn goldun peeses, and he made 
hem into thredes, that thei my3ten be 


EXODUS. | 


287 


cynt, purpur, vermyloun and bijs. AJ the 24 
gold that was spendid in the® werk of 
seyntuarie!, and that was offrid in 3iftis, 
was of° ‘nyne and twentif talentist, and + tn Ebreu it 
5 een ney is, of xxix. hun- 
of senene hundrid and thretti® siclis, at aijais, and an 
bh . ‘ai 84k o- hundrid con- 
the" mesure of seyntuarie. Forsothe it* 25 teynede au 
was offrid of hem{ that passiden to noum-_— ledrid and 
: xx. besauntis. 
bre! fro™ twenti 3eer and aboue, of sixe  ceax. 
. t Tu Ebrn it is 
hundrid® and thre thousand, and fyue hun- _ thus, forsothe 
: the silucr of 
drid and fifty of armed men. Ferther-26 ioymbrynce 
more®, an hundrid talentis of siluer weren?, pete pups 
of whiche the foundementis of the seyn- Ae neadis, 
. and a thou- 
tuarie weren 30tun togidere, and of the _ sende and vij. 
, ° hundrid and 
entryng, where the veil hangith ; an hun-27 xx. sictis at 
a : . the weiste of 
drid foundementis weren maad of an hun- SeuiLahHeelalt 
drid talentis, aud4 for echt foundement pene 
was ordeyned o§ talent. Forsothe of a 28 that passen to 
; i‘ noumbre tro 
thousynde seuene hundrid and ‘thre seoor xx. seer and 
Ys : bone, of ¥j. 
and fiftene' siclis he made the heedis of  junarid and ij. 
< ut ‘ * v oTyaye thousende and 
pilers"}, and he ‘elothide tho’ same pilers  gfvyenne wee 
with siluer. Also of bras weren offrid 29+ In Ebru itis 
; thus, of a thou- 
thre scoor and twelue’ thousyude talentis, sende vi. hua- 
; ae . rid aud Ixxv. 
and foure hundrid siclis ouer*. Of whicheY 30 sictis ie made 
s,s . the hokis of pe- 
the’ foundementis in the entryng of the jejs, and hile 
tabernacle of witnessyng weren 3otun, and {he fae 
the brasun auter, with his gridele, and al alae aa , 
1s seme ne 
the vessels that perteynen to the vss ther-  trewe lettre. 

: Lire here. GQ 
of, and the foundementis of the greets °°" 
street®, as wel in the cuimpas, as in the en- 
tryng therof, and the stakis of the taber- 
nacle, and of the greet street* bi cumpas. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


Forsothe of iacynt, and purpur?, ver-i 
myloun, and bijs*, he made clothis, in 
whiche Aaron was clothid, whanne he 
mynystride in hooli thingis, as the Lord 
comaundide to Moises. Therfor he madee 
the ‘cloth on the schuldris* of gold, ia- 
eynt®, and purpur‘, and of reed seli< twies 
died, and of bijs foldid® a3en, bi werk" of3 
broiderie; also he kittide’ thinne* goldun 
platis, and made! thinne in to threedis™, 


h pendid a. bh of nyne spen. 3 seyrpluse eprom. * vermycle & pr.m. 
¢Om.1s. 4 the seyntuarie rks. © of the sum ofs. €xxxixis. 8 fiftiw. 4 Om.1s. i the seyn- 
tuarie 1ks,  ¢his sums. |! the noumbre 10 sup.ras.s. ™ of 1s. © hundrid thousinde pcr. © Ferther- 


more ther weren 10 sup. ras.s. POm.1s. 40m. plures. Ttoechis. Sais. tfyue and seuenti BKNNWX, 


0 the pilers 1s. 
thats. y the whiche 1. 
jacynt 1s. of purpur s. 
m the threedis pear. 


z Om. Is. 
& folden 1s. 


Vhilide thilke 1. clothide the x. hilide tho s. 
4 entree Is. 
b the werk 1s. 


w two and seuenti BKMNWXx. = * ouer 
€ of bijs1s. coopers. & of 


b of purpur 1s. 
k therynne rt. | he made hem rs. 


i kitte x. 


288 


plattid with the weft of the rather co- 
slours; and two hemmes to hem seluen 
cowplid togidere in either side of the 
s hei3tis, and a girdil of the same colours, 
sas the Lord comaundide to Moyses. And 
he greithide two onychyn stonus, boundun 
and closid with gold, and grauen with 
gemmarye craft with the names of the 
sones of Yrael; six names in ‘that o! stoon, 
and six in ‘that other™, after the ordre of 
7the birthe of hem. And he putte hem in 
the sydes of the coope, into mynde" of 
the sones of Yrael, as the Lord co- 
smaundide to Moyses. And he inaade the 
breest broche with browdrye craft, after 
the werk of the coope, of gold, iacynct, 
purpur, and cocto twies died, and bijs 
9foldun ajen, dowble, foure cornerd®, of 
10the inesure of a spaune. And he putte 
in it foure ordres of gemmes ; in the first 
il veers was saarde, topazi, smaragd; in the 
12secounde, carbuncle, saphijr, iasp; in the 
13 thridde, ligury, achatese, amatist; in the 
ferthe, crisolit, onychin, and beril; enuy- 
round and enclosid with gold, bi her or- 
wdres. And thilke twelue stonus weren 
graued with the names of the twelue 
lynages of Yrael, eche after the name of 
iseche. And thei maden in the breest 
broche litle cheynes, cleuynge to hem 
16 Seluen togidere, of moost puyr gold, and 
two hokis, and as feele goldun rynges. 
Forsothe the rynges thei putten in either 
17side of the breest broche, fro the whiche 
shulden honge the two goldun cheynes, 
the whiche thei setten yn with hokis, the 
whiche stoden oner? aferre in the corners 
130f the coope. Thes thingis andt? beforn 
and bihynde so acordiden to hem seluen, 
that the coope and the breest broche 
igStreyt my3ten be knyt togidere to the 
girdil, and with rynges strengere cow- 


EXODUS. 


XXXIX. 4-—19. 


that tho" moun® be foldid? a3en, with the 
warp? of the formere colouris; and he4 
made tweyne hemmes couplid to hem silf 
togidere, in euer either side of the endis; 
and ‘he made® a girdil of the same co-s 
lonris, as the Lord comaundide to Moises. 
And he made redi twei ‘stonys of onychyn’, 6 
boundun and closid in gold, and grauunt 
bi the craft of worchere® in iemmys, with 
the names of the sones of Israel; sixe 
names in oY stoon, and sixe in the tother 
stoon, bi the ordre of her birthe. And he7 
settide’ tho* stoonus in they sidis? of the 
‘elooth on the schuldris*, in’ to a memo- 
rial of the sones of Israel, as the Lord 
comaundide to Moises. Het made also thes 
racional‘, ‘by werk of broiderie®, bif the 
werk of the ‘cloth on the schuldris®, of 
gold, iacynt, purpur’, and reed se/k twies 
died, and of biis foldid* ajen; he made 
the racional' foure cornerid, double, of the 9 
mesure of foure fyngris. And settide™ io 
thereynne foure ordris of iemmes ; in the 
firste ordre was sardius, topazius, sinarag- 
dus; in the secounde" was carbunele®°, sa-11 
fir, iaspis? ; in the thridde ordre was ligu-12 
rie, achates, ametiste ; in the fourthe ordre 1s 
was crisolite, onochyn, and berille, cum- 
passid and enclosid with gold, bi her or- 
dris. And tho twelue stoiys weren grauyn 14 
with twelue names, of the’ lynage™ of Is- 
rael, alle stonys® bi hem silf, bi the names 
of alle lynagist bi hem silf. Thei maden is 
also in the racional” litle chaynes, cleaynge 
to hem silf togidre, of pureste gold, and 16 
tweyne hokys, and so many ryngis of 
gold. Forsothe thei settiden’ the ryngis 
on” ener either side of the racional*, of ¥17 
whiche ryngis twei goldun chaynes hang- 
iden, whiche thei settiden? in the hokis, 
that stonden* forth in the corneris of the 
‘cloth on the schuldris®. These* acordiden is 


ithe too npEFH. ™ the tother ppEFH. the mynde EH. © couered apDF. Poute E pr.m. PP Om. vb. 


D theirs. © my3ten3s.  P folden 1s. 
band inc. ¢ And he ts. 
fafter1, € Om.s, 


2 secounde ordre plures. 


Z side 1s. @ coope 18, 
derie werk and s. 
™ he sette Is. 


4 warp undir hilynge either in the warp GNOQX 
8 onychyne stones is. ¢ graued rw. "a worchere plures. V the tooK. W sette EI. 
4 brest broche s. 
h coope Is. 

° a carbuncle L. 


r Om. 1. 
Xthe cng. YOm. F. 
e with browdery werk 1. bi brow- 
i and purpur Fea. k folden 1s. ! breest broehe s. 
Pand iaspis B. 9Om.c.  * lynagis plures. 


S the stonys os. tthe lynagis os. ¥ brest broche o sup.ras. s. ether racional 0 marg. sec.m. V setten 1. 


x breest broche s. 
4 acorden 6. 


W in cet. omnes. 
thingis is. 


Yon A sec. m. 18. 


Z setten 1. 4stoden Bco. coope 1s. ¢ So these 


XXXIX. 20— 36. 


plid, the whiche the iacynctyne filete 
ioyned, lest large thei my3ten loose, and 
be meuyd togidere fro hem seluen, as the 
20 Lord comaundide to Moyses. And thei 
maden the coope coote, al iacynctyne ; 
ztand a hode in the ouerest parti, a3ens the 
myddel, and a hemme weuyd al aboute 
22the hode; benethe forsothe at the fecte 
powmbe garnettis of iacynct, purpur, and 
23‘reed clooth4, and bijs folden aj3en; and 
litil bellis of moost puyr gold, the whiche 
thei puttiden bitwix the powmbe gar- 
nettis, in the nether more party of the 
24coote bi-enuyroun ; a litel golden belle 
and a powmbe garnet; with which 
anowrned the bishop 3ede, whanne he 
vsid the office, as the Lord comaundide 
25to Moyses. And thei maden bijs cootis, 
with weuen werk, to Aaron and to sones™ 
26o0f hym, and inytrys with her litil crownes 
*7 of bijs, and bijs lynnen breches; the gir- 
dil forsothe of bijs foldun ajen, iacynct, 
purpur, and ‘reed clooth’, twynned with 
nedle‘ craft, as the Lord hath comaundide 
29to Moyses. And thei maden the plate of 
holi worshipyng of moost puyr gold, and 
thei graueden in it with gemmary werk, 
30 The holi of the Lord. And thei streyn- 
eden it with the mytre with a iacynctyne 
filete, as the Lord comaundide to Moyses. 
31 Thanne was ful maad al the werk of the 
tabernacle, and of the roofe of witness- 
yng; and the sones of Yrael maden alle 
thingis that the Lord comaundide to 
32 Moyses. And thei offerden vp the taber- 
nacle, and the roofe, and alle the neces- 
saries", rynges, tablis, berynge staues, pi- 
33 lers, and footstakis; a couertour of wether 
skynnes maad reed, and another couer- 
34 tour of blew skynnes ; the veyle, the arke, 
35 the berynge staues, the propiciatorye; the 
meetbord with the vessels, and the looues 
36 of proposicioun ; the candelstik, lanterns, 


4 vermycle £ pr.m. * the sones E. 


€Om.3s. fOm. 13,  & coope 1s. 
m the ryngis s. "the whiehe 1. © thei s. 
or the amyt s. 
litle nc. * the pum garnadis 1s. 
© folden 1s. 4 writen © sec. m. BILPS. 
pileris m. platis w. i Om. a. 


y hemme rs. 


EXODUS. 


8 vermycle E pr. m. 


h breest broche s. 
P lousid s. 

t thei maden piyn Rew. qweren piyn Is. 
2 aube s. 
e the werk w. craft Is. 
k the foundementis s. the baasis 1. 


289 


so® to hem silf, bothef bifore and bihynde, 
that the‘cloth on the schuldris&, and the 
racionalh, weren knyti togidere, fastned* to t9 
the! girdil, and couplid ful strongli with 
ryngis™, whiche" ryngis a lace of iacynt 
ioynede togidere, lest tho® weren loose?, 
and ‘fletiden doun‘, and weren moued ech 
from other, as the Lord comaundide to 
Moises. 'Thei maden also ‘a coote on the 20 
schuldris', al of iacynt; and the hood’ in2i 
the hijere part, aboute the myddis, and a 
wouun hemmne, bi the cumpas of the hood; 
forsothe bynethe at the feet piyn' applis 22 
of iacynt, and" purpur, and vermyloun, 
and biys foldidY a3en; and litle’ bellis of 23 
pureste gold, whiche thei settiden bitwixe 
pum garnadis*, in the ‘lowest part’ of the 
coote’, bi cumpas ; a goldun litle belle, and 24 
a piyn apple; with whiche the bischop 3ede 
ourned, whanne he ‘was set in seruyce*, 
as the Lord comaundide to Moises. Thei 25 
maden also cootis of bijs, bi wouun werk, 
to Aaron and to hise sones, and inytres 26 
with smale corouns of biys, and lynnun 27 
clothis of bijs; forsothe a? girdil of bijs 2s 
foldid® a3en, of iacynt, purpur, and vermy- 
loun,-departid bi craft of broyderie, as the 
Lord comaundide to Moises. Thei maden 29 
also a plate of hooli worschipyng, of pureste 
gold, and thei writeden4 therynne bi werk* 
of a worcheref in iemmes, The hooli of the 
Lord. And thei bounden it with the my-30 
tre bi a lace of iacynt, as the Lord co- 
maundide to Moises. Therfor® al the werk 31 
of the tabernacle, and the hilyng of the 
witnessyng, was parformed ; and the sones 
of Israel] diden alle thingis whiche the 
Lord comaundide to Moises. And theise 
offeriden the tabernacle, and the roof, and 
al the purtenaunce, ryngis, tablis, barris, 
pileris®, and! foundementis*; the hilyng of'ss 
‘skynnes of rammes™, maad reed, and an- 
other hilyng of skynnys of iacynt; thes 


t neelde ne. ™ hustylment £ pr.m. 


LOm. z. 

8 hood 
Ww thei maden 
b thet maden a BCISW. 
& wherfor p.  } and 
™ ramme skynnes s. 


iknyttide 1s. * and fastned 1s. 
4 slakid s. * the eoop coot or aube s. 
u Om. plures. Vv folden 1s. 
a yside his office Is. 
f grauere Is. 
lof the 1. 


Pp 


290 


and the vsable thingis of it, with the 
370yle; the goldun auter, and the oyne- 
ment, and the maad ensence of the swete 
asspices; and the tente in the entree of 
39 the tabernacle; the brasun auter, the net- 
wise gredyrne, berynge staues, and alle 
the vessels of it; the lauatorie with hys 
foote; the tentis of the porche, and the 
40 pilers with her feet; the tente in the en- 
tre of the porche, and the litil cordis of 
it, and the litil stakis. No thing failide 
of the vessels, that weren comaundid to 
be maad into the sernyce of the taber- 
nacle, and into the roofe of the boond of 
4) pees. And the clothes whiche the prestis 
vsen in the seyntuarye, Aaron, that is, 
4zand the sones of hym, offerden the sones 
430f Yrael, as the Lord comaundide. The 
whiche thingis after that Moyses saw3 
alle thingis fulfillid, blisside to hem. 


CAP. XL. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2The first moneth, the first day of the 
moneth, thow shalt rere the tabernacle of 
3witnessyng. And thow shalt putte in it 
the arke, and thow shalt lene before it 
ithe veile. And the meetbord brow3t 
forth thow shalt putte vpon it, that with 
ri3t ben comaundid. The candelstyk shal 
sstonde with his lanterns, and the goldun 
auter, in whiche shal be brent the encense 
before the arke of witnessyng. The tente 
in the entre of the tabernacle thow shal 
gsett; and beforn it the auter of alle brent 
7 sacrifices’, the lauatorie betwix the atuter 
and the tabernacle, which thow shalt ful- 
sfille with water. And thow shalt enuy- 
roun the porche with tentis into the com- 
9yng yn of it. And the oyle of anoyntyng 
takun thow shalt anoynte the tabernacle, 


EXODUS. 


SOM GUS hes 


veil, the" arke, barris®, propiciatorie? ; thes 
boord with vessels, and with the looues 
of settyng forth ; the candilstike, lanternes, 36 
and the purtenauncis of tho, with oile; the37 
goldun auter, and oynement", and encense 
of swete smellynge spiceries; and the tente 38 
in the entryng of the tabernacle; the bra-s9 
sun auter, gridile’, barris, and alle vessels* 
therof; the ‘greet waischyng vessel", with 
his foundement’; the tentis of the greet 
street”, and the pilers with her* founde- 
mentis’; the tente in the entring of the 40 
greet street”, and the coordis, and stakis* 
therof. No thing of the vessels failide, 
that weren’ comaundid to be maad im to 
the® seruyce of the tabernacle, and in to 
the roof of thet boond of pees. Also the 41 
sones of Israel offriden the clothis whiche 
the prestis, that is, Aaron and hise sones, 
vsen in the seyntuarie, as the Lord co-42 
maundide. And aftir that Moises si3 alles 
tho thingis® fillid, he blesside hem. 


CAP. XL. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, ‘and1 
seidef, In the firste monethe, in the firste2 
dai of the monethe, thon schalt reise® the 
tabernacle of witnessyng. And thon schalts 
sette the arke therynne>, and thou schalt 
leeue a veil bifore it. And whanne thes 
bordi is borun* yn, thou schalt sette ther 
onne! tho thingis, that ben comaundid 
lustlim. The candilstike schal stonde with 
hise lanternes, and the goldun auter,5 
where ynne encense" is brent bifor the arke 
of witnessyng. Thou schalt sette a tente 
in the entryng of the tabernacle; and bi-6 
for it the® anter of brent sacrifice, theP7 


‘waischyng vessel? bitwixe™ the auter and 


the tabernacle, which’ ‘waischyng vessel* 
thou schalt fille with water. And thous 
schalt cumpas the greet street", and the 
entryug therof with tentis. And whanne9 


7 


Vv sacrifice BDEFH. 


2 aud the 1s. © berynge staaues 1s. the barris K.P and the propiciatorie 1. the prop. K. and prop. s. 


4 Om. cis. * the oynement is. § girdel x. 
treers. *theG. Ybaasis1. foundement s. 
4 On. remgsr prom. © fulfillid 1s. 
K broust s. 1 thervpon s. 
encense Is. 


be bitwixe s. 


Sthe which1. ¢ lauatorie 1s. 


t the vessels Gis. 
2 porche 1s. 
f seiynge s. 
m justli ether bi the lawe Bc. iustli either bi resonable custum GKNQX. 
© thou schalt sette the nc. shal be the s. 
u porche Is. 


v baas1, foot s. W en- 

bwasis. ©¢ Om. 1s. 
i mete bord s. 
2 the 
v shal 


u Jauatorie 18. 
a the stakis 1s. 
& areere 18. h with ynne it rs. 


P thou schalt sette the Bc. 4 lauatorie 1s. 


XL. 10-27. 


with his vessels, that thei ben halowid; 
lo the auter of al brent sacrifice, and al the 
11 vessels of it; the lanatorye with his foot. 
A] with the oyle of anoynting thow shalt 
12sacre, that thei ben holi of halowes. And 
thow shalt sett Aaron and the sones of 
hym at the dore of the tabernacle of wit- 
13 nessyng ; and, wasshen” with water, thow 
shalt clothe with lol: clothes, that thei 
mynystre to me, and the anoyntyng of 
hem profit into euerlastynge presthod. 
14And Moyses dide alle thinges that the 
15 Lord comaundid*. Thanne the first mo- 
neth of the secounde 3eer, the first day 
of the moneth, the tabernacle was sett. 
i¢ And Moyses areryde it, and sette the ta- 
bles, and the footstakis, and the berynge 
17Staues, and he sette the pilers. And he 
strau3te the roofe vpon the tabernacle, 
the couertour in sett abone, as the Lord 
iscomaundide. And he putte the witness- 
yng in the arke with ynne, berynge staues 
vnder sctt, and Goddis answerynge place 
1y ther aboue. And whanne he hadde brou3t 
yn the arke into the tabernacle, he hong- 
ide beforn it the veyle, that he fulfille 
20 the heest of the Lord. And he putte the 
meetbord in the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
at the north coost, with outen the veyle, 
21 ordeynd before the looues of proposicioun, 
22as the Lord comaundide to Moyses. And 
he putte the candestik in the tabernacle 
of witnessyng, ‘forn a3ensY the meetbord, 
23m the sowth parti, sett bi ordre the lan- 
24terns, after the heest of the Lord. And 
he putte the goldun auter vnder the roofe 
25o0f witnessyng, a3ens the veile, and he 
brent vpon it encense’ of swete smellynge 
spices, as the Lord comaundide to Moyses. 
26 And he putte the tente in the entre of 
27 the tabernacle, and the auter of alle brent 
sacrifices* in the vestiarie of witnessyng, 


whem wasshen eg. 
4 sacrifice BDEFH. 


Ythe oyle k. W the vessels rs. * lauatorie ts. 
binis. ¢thatrs. 4 set forth s. 
ivpon is. khe putters. ! putte rs. 
the 1. sette s. © he settide Goddis Bc. 
tOm.s. "mete tables. Vv him 1s. 

4 maundement 1. heest s. b putte rs. 
e and s. 


EXODUS. 


x had comaundid BpEFH sec. m. 


Y baas 1. 
© areeride Is. 
m witnessyng, that is, the tablis of the lawe BCKNSx. 

P fulfille issw. 
W sette 18. 
¢ witnessyng, that is, of the tabernaele Be. 


291 


thou hast take oyleY of anoyntyng, thou 
schalt anoynte the tabernacle, with’ hise 
vessels, that tho be halewid; the auter of 10 
brent sacrifice, aud alle vessels” therof ; 
the ‘waischyng vessel*, with his founde-11 
ment’, Thou schalt anoynte alle thingis 
with the oile of anoyntyng, that tho” be 
hooli of hooli thingis. And thou schalt 12 
present Aaron and hise sones to the dore 
of the tabernacle of witnessyng; and, 15 
whanne thei ben ‘waischid in® water, thou 
schalt clothe hem with» hooli clothis, that 
thei mynystre to me, and that the anoynt- 
yng of hem profite in to euerlastynge 
preesthod. And Moises dide alle thingis 14 
whiche® the Lord comaundide. Therfor 1s 
in the firste monethe of the secunde 3eer, 
in the firste dai of the monethe, the ta- 
bernacle was set’. And Moises reiside® it, 1¢ 
and settidef the tablis, and foundementis®, 
and barris, and he ordeynede pilers; and 17 
‘spredde abrood* the roof on’ the taber- 
nacle, and puttide* an hilyng aboue, as the 
Lord comaundide. He puttide! also the1s 
witnessyng™ in the arke, and he settide" 
barris withynne, and Goddis® answeryng 
place aboue. And whanne he hadde brou3t 19 
the arke in to the tabernacle, he hangide 
a veil bifor it, that he schulde fille? the 
comaundement! of the Lord. Het settide* 20 
also the boord" in the tabernacle of wit- 
nessyng, at the north coost, without tlie 
veil, and he ordeynede the looues of set-21 
tyng forth bifore, as the Lord comaundide 
to Moises’. He settide” also the candil-22 
stike in the tabernacle of witnessyng, eulene 
a3ens the boord*, in the south side, and 23 
settideY lanternes? bi ordre, bi the co- 
maundement* of the Lord. He puttide 24 
also the goldun auter vndur the roof of 
witnessyng‘, ajens the veil, and he brente 25 
theronne’ encense of® swete smellynge 
z the encense E. 


y fro the coost of £ pr.m. 


z thei N. 
f he sette 1s. 


8 weishe with 1. waijshen in K. 
Sbaasist. 4 he streizte out 1s. 
1 sette 
§ sette 1. putte s. 
Z the lanternes s. 

4 ther vpon ts. 


rand he s. 
y he sette 1s. 


q heest ts. 
x mete table s. 


Pp2 


292 


offrynge in it al brent sacrifice, and sacri- 
fices, as the Lord hadde** comaundide. 
28 The lauatorie forsothe he sette betwix the 
‘tabernacle of witnessyng and the auter, 
29 fulfillynge it with water. And Moyses and 
Aaron and the sones of hym wasshen her 
s0hoondes and feet, whanne thei 3eden in 
the roof of the couenaunt of pees, and 
‘neije 3eden> to the auter, as the Lord 
31 hadde’> comaundide to Moyses. And he 
reride the porche, bi enuyroun of the ta- 
bernacle and of the auter, a tent lad in 
the entre of it. After that alle thingis 
32ben fulfillid, a clowd couerde the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng, and the glorie of the 
33 Lord fulfillide it; ne Moyses my3te goo 
in the roofe of the couenaunt of pees, the 
clowd couerynge alle thinges, and the 
maieste of the Lord li3tnynge, for alle 
34 thingis the clowd hadde® couerede. And 
if eny tyme the clowd lafte the taber- 
nacle, the sones of Yrael 3eden forth bi 
35her companyes; if it hongide* there 
aboue, thei dwelten in the same place; 
s¢the clowd forsothe of the Lord lenyde 
in® day to the tabernacle, and fier in the 
ny3t, and the puple of Yrael seynge, bi 
alle her dwellyngis. 


Here endith Exodus and now bigynneth 
Leuyticus. 


EXODUS. 


XL. 28—36. 


spiceries,as the Lord comaundide to Moises‘. 
He settide also a tente in the entryng of 26 
the tabernacle, and the" auter of brent sa- 27 
crifice in the porche' of the* witnessyng, 
and he offride therynne! brent sacrifice, 
and sacrifices, as the Lord comaundide. 
Also he ordeynede the ‘waischyng vessel", 28 
bitwixe the tabernacle of witnessyng and 
the auter, and fillide" it with watir. And 29 
Moises, and Aaron, and his sones, waisch- 
iden her hondis and feet®, whanne thei30 
entriden into the roof°° of boond? of pees, 
and nei3eden to the auter, as the Lord co- 
maundide to Moises. He reiside4 also the 31 
greet street’, bi the’ cumpas of the taber- 
nacle and of the auter, and settydet a 
tente in the entryng therof. Aftir that 
alle thingis weren perfitli maad, a cloudes2 
hilide the tabernacle of witnessyng, and 
the glorie of the Lord fillide" it; netherss 
Moyses my3te entre in to the tabernacle 
of the’ boond of pees, while the cloude 
hilide alle thingis’, and the maieste of the 
Lord* schynede, for the cloude” hilide alle 
thingis. If ony tyme the cloude lefte the 34 
tabernacle, the sones of Israel 3eden forth 
bi her cumpanyes ; if the cloude hangide 35 
aboue’, thei dwelliden in the same place; 
for the cloude of the Lord restide on the 36 
tabernacle bi dai, and fier in the ny3t, in 
the si3t of the puplis* of Israel, bi alle her 
dwellyngis. 


Flere endith Exodi>. 


aa Om. E pr. im. 
e by & pr. m. 
Leuilicus E. 


b ney3tiden pen. ney3eden pr, bb Om. x prim. © Om. £ pr.m. Thong £ pr.m. 
f Here endith Exodus and here bigynneth Leuiticus p. Here endith Exodus and bigynneth 
No final rubric in Bru. 


fhimis. &setters. 6 he settide the wc. i porche, that is, in the grete street wc. * Om. Gigst pr. ne. 
'there B. ™lauatorie 10 sup.ras. s. “he fillide 10 sup. ras.s. © her feet therynne 10 sap.ras. her feet s. 
0 tabernacle a pr.m. P the boond is. 4 areeride 1s. * street, that is, pileris and curtyns closynge the 
grete street BCKX. poorche 1s. §Om.1s. the setters. 4 fulfillide 1s. Y Om. Gisx.  W the thingis Fr. 
x clothing 0. Yclotho. 2 ther aboue1s. *peples. » Here eendith the book of Exodi and bigynneth 
Leuitici. wx. Here endith E. and here bigynneth Leuyticy. crow. Here eendith E. and bigynneth the 
hook of Leuyltiey. pr. EHeere eendith E. and bigynneth a prologt on Leuitici, and this it is. & Heere 
endith E. and biginnith Leuyticus. 1s. Here endeth E. se now Leuylicus. x. Here endith the book of E. 
and here biginneth a Prologe on the book of Leuitici. um. Here endith the book of E. and bigynneth the 
book of Leuitict. N. No final rubric in ELPT. 


+ The Prologue 
referred to is 
included iu the 
General Pro- 
logue, p. 4. 


te rr ic UN. 


[Prologue on the book of Leviticus. | 


Tus book of Leuitici makith mencioun, how God tau3te the sones of Israel, by 
Moyses, to offre sacrifises to the Lord of oxen, and of scheep, of lambren, and of geet ; 
and for which synne what sacrifise owith to be doon te the Lord; and the manere of 
brennyng, and of offring; and that the prest preie for the offrer ; and if the man is 
pore, and is not of power to offre beestis for his synne, he shal offre whete flour, or 
therf loues, or briddis. Also it is contened therinne the ordre of halewing of the 
bisschop, and of prestis, and of alle holi vessels of the tabernacle ; and how the Lord 
slow3 Nadab and Abyu, prestis, the sones of Aaron, for necligence doon in the auter. 
Also the Lord techith the children of Israel discrecioun bitwixe clene beestis and 
vnelene, and of fisschis, and of foulis, that thei vse the clene to mete, and leue the 
vnelene; and the verrei knowing of lepre, and he that is preued lepre to be put out of 
the comynycacioun of men, till he be maad clene, and to do sacrifise for his cleusing. 
Also the Lord techith hein to fle abhomynaciouns, whiche the peple of Canaan vseden, 
for whiche thei weren cast out of her lond; and to kepe hise comaundementis and 
lawis; and to vse trewe mesure, and trewe wei3te, in biyng and silling, for the drede 
of God. Here endith the prologe, and here bigynneth the book of Leuitici*. 


ee 


Here begynneth the bok of Leuiticus*. Here bigynneth Leuytici”. 


CAP. I. CAP. I. 


1 THE Lord forsothe clepide Moyses, FORSOTHE the Lord clepide Moyses, ! 
and spak to hym from the tabernacle of | and spak to him fro the tabernacle of wit- 
2witnessyng, selynge, Spek to the sones nessyng, ‘and seide®, Speke thou to the2 
of Yrael, and thow shalt seie to hem, The —sones of Israel, and thou schalt seie to 
man that offreth of 3ow an oost to God hem, A man of 30u, that offrith to the 
of the beestis that is, of oxen, and of , Lord a sacrifice of beestis, that is, of oxun 
3Sheep, offrynge slawn sacrifices, if al brent and of scheep, and offrith slayn sacrifices, 
sacrifice were the offryng of hym, and of _ if his offryng is brent sacrifice, and of thes 
the droue, a maal with outen wemme he — droue of oxun, he schal offre a male beeste 
shal offre at the dore of the tabernacle without wem at the dore of the tabernacle 
of witnessyng, to plese to hym the Lord. of witnessyng, to make the Lord plesid to 
4And he shall putte the hondes vpon the hym. And he schal sette hondis' on the4 
heed of the oost, and it shal be acceptable, heed of the sacrifice, and it schal be ac- 


. 


a From r. Leuiticus 8. No initial rnbric in apen, but only running title. 


a This Prologue is from a. > Here biginnith the book of Leuitici. Eup. Here biginneth the iij. hook, 
that is Leuiticus. G. No initial rubric in qr, but only running title. © seiyng s. 4 Ais hondis 1s. 


294 


and profytynge into the clensyng of hym. 
5 And he shal offre a calf before the Lord, 
and the sones of Aaron, the preest, shulen 
offre the blood of it, shedynge bi enuy- 
roun of the auter, that is before the dore 
sof the tabernaele. And the skyn of the 
oost drawun of, the greet lemes thei shu- 
7len kit in gobetis; and thei schulen leye 
fier in the auter maad bifore the heep of 
s wodde; and the lemes that ben kyt aboue 
ordeynynge, the heed, that is, and alle 
gthat cleuen to the mawe, the entrails and 
the feet wasshe with watir; and the 
preest shal brenne hem vpon the auter 
in to al brent sacrifice, and swete smel to 
iothe Lord. That if of the beestis is the 
offeryng, the al brent sacrifice of sheep, 
or of geyt, he shal offre a loombe of o 
113eer with outen wemme, and he shal offre 
at the side of the auter that biholdith to 
the north, bifore the Lord. The blood for- 
sothe of it the sones of Aaron shulen 
12heelde vpon the auter bi enuyroun, and 
thei shulen dyuyde the lemes, the heed, 
and alle that clenen to the mawe, and leie 
vpon the wodde, to the which fier is to be 
isvnder putte; the entrayls forsothe, and 
the feet thei shulen wasshe with water ; 
and the preest shal brenne alle thingis 
offred vpon tlie auter into brent sacrifice, 
i4and inoost swete smel to the Lord. If 
forsothe of the briddis the offryng of> 
brent sacrifice were to the Lord, of tur- 
1sturs, or culuer briddis, the preest shal 
offre it at the auter; and the heed crokid 
a3en to the necke, and the place of a 
wounde broke, he shal make the blood 
renne down vpon the brenke of the auter. 
16 The litil bleedre forsothe of the throot, 
and the fetheres, he shal cast out biside 
the auter, at the eest coost, in the place 
where askis® ben’ wonte to be cast out; 
17and he shal breke the wynges of it, and 


b be a. 


f schede it 1s. & Om. s. 


e the clensyng 1s. 
n redi hifore 1s. 


m the fier 1IKLNSW. 


LEVITICUS. 


¢ the askis er, 


h that 1s. 
© that wode 1s. 


I. 5-17. 


ceptable, and profityng in to clensyng* of 
hym. And he schal offre a calf bifor thes 
Lord, and the sones of Aaron, preestis, 
schulen offre the blood therof, and thei 
schulen schedef bi the’ cumpas of the au- 
ter, which" is bifor the dore of the taber- 
naele. And whanne the skyn of the sa-6 
crifice is drawun awei, thei schulen kitte 
the! membris in to gobetis; and thei schu-7 
len put* vndur in’ the auter fier™{, and 
thei schulen make an heep of wode bi- _ nursehyng and 
fore"; and thei schulen ordeyne aboues SE Re 
‘the trees® tho thingis that ben kit, that  [ehenene- Re 
is, the heed, and alle thingis that cleuen 
to the mawe, whanne the entrailis ando 
feet? ben waischid’ with watir; and the 
preest schal brenne tho 011" the auter, in to 
brent sacrifice, and swete® odour to the 
Lord. That if the offryng is of litle1o 
beestis, a brent sacrifice of scheep, ethir of 
geet, he schal offre a male beeste with out 
wem, and he schal offre at the side of the 11 
auter that biholdith to the north, bifore 
the Lord. Sotheli the sones of Aaron 
schulen schede" the blood therof on the 
auter ‘bi cumpas’, and thei schulen de-12 
parte the membris, the heed, and alle 
thingis that eleuen to the mawe, aud thei 
schulen putte” on the trees*, vudur whiche 
the fier schal be set; sotheli thei schulen 1s 
waische in watir the entrailis and feet; 
and the preest schal brenne alle thingis 
offrid on the auter, in to brent sacrifice, 
and swettest odour to the Lord. Forsothe 14 
if the offryng ofY brent sacrifice to the 
Lord is? of briddis, of turtlis, and® of cul- 
uer briddis, the preest sehal offre it at the ts 
auter; and whanne the heed is writhun? 
to the necke, and the place of the® wounde 
is brokun, he schal make the blood renne 
doun on the brenke of the auter. Sotheliic 
he schal caste forth the litil bladdir of the 
throte®, and fetheris‘ bisidis the auter, at 


t+ fier, that is, 
trees to the 


4 beth BDEFH. 


1 Om. ELuPaQ. 
S to swete K. 


i alle the s. 
P the feet 1s. 4 weishe 1. 


k put to Is. 
Tint 


t offre thatis. theelde 1. Vv aboute 1. W putte hemi. putte thos. Xwodeis. Yisw. if o. if it is w. 
aorkK. > crokid agen 1s. ¢ Om. plures. a 1s. 4 the prest 1s. © throte or the cropp s. f the fetheris 1s. 


If. 1—11,. 


not kyt, ne® with yrun dyuyde it ; and he 
shal brenne it vpon the auter, fier vnder 
put to the wodde; al brent sacrifice it is 
and offryng of moost swete smel to the 
Lord. 


CAP. LL 


1 Whanne a lijf offreth offryng of sacri- 
fyce to the Lord, tryed flour shal be the 
offryng of him. And he shal heelde vpon 

2it oyle, and putte cense, and brynge to 
the sones of Aaron, the preest, of whom 
oon shal take an handful of tried flour, 
and of oyle, and al the cense; and putte 
the memorial vpon the auter, into moost 

3swete smel to the Lord. That forsothe that 
leeneth of the sacrifice shal be of Aaron 
and of § his sones, holi of halowes ‘of of- 
4frynges* to the Lord. Whanne forsothe 
he shal offre baake sacrifice of tried flour 
in the ouen, that is, looues with outen 
sourdow3, spreynt with oyle, and the! 
stherf kaakis medlid with oyle; if thin 
offryng shal be fro the friynge panne, of 
tryed flour spreynt with oyle and with 
souten sour dow3, thow shalt dyuyde it in 
7litil parties, and heelde vpon it oyle. If 
forsothe fro the gridil sacrifice, enen 
maner the tried flour shal be spreyut 
swith oile; the which offrynge to the Lord 
thon shalt take in the hondis of the 
9preest. The which whanne he shal offre 
it, he shal take a memorial fro the sacri- 
fice, and make brenne vpon the auter into 
10smel of swetnes to the Lord. What euer* 
forsothe leeueth, shal be of Aaron and his 
sones, holi of halewis of offringis to the 
i1Lord. Al offryng that is offred to the 
Lord, shal be maad with outen sour dow3, 
ne eny thing of sour dow3, and of hony, 


€nop. fto a, 


§ the which 1. bOm,s. i cast 1. 
n Om. C sec. m. DGIKMQRSTWX. 
8 smell 1s. 
itis. Wthe whiche 1. * oon of hem 1s. 
the swettest nc. > smell 1s. 
whete 1s. 1 dow, taken of the friyng panne 1s. 


uQm.s. that 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


& Om. ppern. 


k the prest 1s. 
© Om. A see.m. BCKMO. 
t soule, thaé is, a pore man BCEGIKLNOPQX. lijf, that is, a pore man 18. 
y tried shee flour 1s. 

4 tried whele 18. 
k Om. 1s. 
00 speynd a. P the which 1. 4 thou schalt 1s. 7 bitake it 1s. 8 swete smelling 1s. 


¢ is left in. leuith s. 


295 


the eest coost, in the place in? which the" 
aischis ben wont to be sched‘ out; andi7 
he* schal breke the wyngis therof, and he 
schal not kerue!, nether he™ schal" departe 
it with yrun; and he schal brenne it® on 
the auter, whanne fier is set? yndur the 
trees’; it is a brent sacrifice, and an of- 
fryng of swete" odour’ to the Lord. 


CAP. II. 


Whanne a soulet offrith an offryng oft 
sacrifice to the Lord, flour of wheete schal 
be his offring. And he schal schede" oile 
theronne, and he schal putte encense, and 2 
he schal bere’ to the sones of Aaron, preest, 
of whiche’ sones oon* schal take an hand- 
ful of ‘flour of whetey, and of oile, and alle 
the encense; and he schal putte? a memo- 
rial on the auter, in to swettest® odour to 
the Lord. Forsothe that that ‘is residue®s 
of the sacrifice schal be Aarons and hise 
sones, the hooli of hooli thingis of offryngis 
to the Lord. Forsothe whanne thou of-4 
frist a sacrifice bakun in an ouene of echete® 
flour, that is, loouys without sour dow, 
spreynd with oile, and therf breed sodun 
in watir, bawmed with® oile; if thin of-s 
fryng isf ‘of a friyng panne’, of wheete> 
flour spreynd with oile and without sour 
dowi, thon schalt departe it* in! smales 
partis, and thou schalt schede™ oile ther 
onne. Ellis if the sacrifice 2s" of a° gridele, 7 
euenli the whete flour schal be spreynd® 
with oile; which? whede flour thou schalt 8 
offre to the Lord, and schalt4 bitake™ in 
the hondis of the preest. And whanne hes 
hath offrid it, he schal take a memorial of 
the sacrifice, and he schal brenne 7¢ on the 
auter, in‘ to ‘odour of swetnesse’ to the 
Lord. Sotheli what ener thing ‘is residue’, 10 
it schal be Aarons and hise sones, the 
hooly of hooli thingis of the" offryngis to 
the Lord. Ech offryng which” is offrid 


hOm. 4a. iOm. x. Ker e. 


m Om. € sec. m. DGIKMOQRSTWX. 
4 wode Is. ¥ swetiste plures. 
uheelde 1s. VY bere 
% putte thees 1s. 8 swete 4 pr.m. 
€inw. fbhexu. 8Om.1s. } tried 
mheelde is. "is taken s. °% the 1s. 
t is left 11. leeuith s. 


1 kerue it 1s. 
Pp put Is. 


linto 1. 


296 


shal be brent in the sacrifice of the Lord. 
12 The cheefe fruytys oonly 3e shulen offre 
of hem, and 3iftis; vpon the auter for- 
sothe shal not thei be leyde, into smel of 
isswetnes. What euer’ thow shalt offre of 
sacrifice, thow shal anoynte it with salt, 
ne thow shalt not! take awey salt of the 
boond of pees of the Lord thi God fro 
thi sacrifice; in al offring thow shalt offre 
issalt. If forsothe thow shalt offre a 3yfte 
of the cheef thingis of thi fruytis to the 
Lord, of eerys 3it green, thow shal parche™ 
it with fier, and breke in maner of brysid 
corn; so thow shalt offre thi cheefe fruytis 
isto the Lord, heeldynge vpon hem oyle, 
and encense puttynge yn, for the offryng 
isof the Lord it is. Of the whiche the 
preest shal make brynne, into mynde of 
the 3ifte, a part of the brisde corn, and of 
the oyle, and al the cense. 


CAP TI: 


1 And if the oost of pesible thingis were 
the offryug of hym, and of the oxen he 
wole offre, a maal, or a femaal, with outen 
wemme he shal offre before the Lord. 

2 And he shal putte the hoonde vpon the 
heed of his slawe sacrifice, the which shal 
be offred in the entryng of the taber- 
nacle ; and the sones of Aaron, the preest, 
shulen heelde the blood bi enuyroun of 

athe auter. And thei shulen offre of the 
oost of pesible thingis into offryng to the 
Lord, the talw3" that couereth the en- 


trailes, and what euer of fatnes is with’ 


synforth; the two reyns, with the talw3 
with the which ben couerd the reyn gut- 
tis, and the calle of the mawe with the 
ssmale reyns. And thei shulen brenne 
hem vpou the auter, in to al brent sacri- 


ker ec. 1Om. aperu. 


weheefis. Xhemis. Ytheirs. 2 smel 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


™m perishe 4. 


8 either s. 


Il, 12——Ill. 5. 


to the Lord, schal be without sour dow, 
nether ony thing of sour dow, and of hony, 
schal be brent in the sacrifice of the Lord. 
3e schulen offre oneli the firste” fruytis of 12 
tho*, and 3iftis; sotheli thoY schulen not 
be put on the auter, in to odour of swet- 
nesse. Whateuer thing of sacrifice thouts 
schalt offre, thou schalt make it sauery 
with salt, nether* thou schalt take awey 
the salt of the’ boond of pees of thi God 
fro thi sacrifice; in ech offryng thou 
schalt offre salt. Forsothe if thou offrist 14 
a 3ifte of the firste® thingis of thi fruytis 
to the Lord, of ‘eeris of corn 3it grene, 
thou schalt seenge® tho in fier’, and thou 
schalt breke" in the maner of seedis'; and 
so thou schalt offre thi firste* fruytis to 
the Lord, and thou schalt schede! oyle1s 
theronne™, and schalt" putte encense, for 
it is the offryng of the Lord. Of which te 
the preest schal brenne, in to mynde of the 
3ifte, a part of the ‘seedis brokun®, and of 
oyle?, and al the encense. 


CAP. III. 


That if his offryng is a sacrifice of pesi-1 
ble thingis, and he wole offre of oxun, he 
schal offre bifore the Lord a male, ether 
a female, without wem. And he schale 
sette hond4 on™ the heed of his sacrifice’, 
that' schal be offrid in the entryng of the 
tabernacle; and the sones of Aaron preest® 
schulen schede’ the blood bi the” cumpas 
of the auter. And thei schulen offre ofs 
the sacrifice of pesible thingis in to offryng 
to the Lord, the fatnesse that hilith the 
entrailis, and what ener thing of fatnesse 
is withynne; thet schulen offre twey kyde-4 
neris*, with the fatnesse bi which the gut- 
tis clepid ylyon’ ben hilid, and the calle of 
the lyuer* with the litle reynes. And thei?s 
schulen brenne tho on” the auter, in to 
brent sacrifice, whanne fier 1s put vndur 


n fat E prem. 


bOm.1s. ¢cheef1s. 4 corn eeris Is. 


© scorche 1 feal. or seenge 1 marg. seenge or parche s. fhem1. € the fier x. » breke hem 1s. 3 bruysid 


corn 1s. k cheefis. lheelde 1. ™ ther vp on 1s. 
4 kis hond 1s, *vpon1s.  § sleyn sacrifice 1s. 
w Om. Is. x kideneiren L. 


4 preestis 1s. > vpon 1s. 


t the whiche 1. whiche s. 
¥ ylyon, that is, the kidneris guttis 1s. 


n thou schalt 1s. © brisid corn is. _P the oyle 1s. 
uthe preest 1s. V heelde 1. 


Z mawe A marg. S€C.m. 1S. 


Ill. 6—17. 


fice, the fier vnder put to the wodde, into 
offryng of moost® swete smel to the Lord. 
6If forsothe of sheep were the offeryng of 
hym, and oost of pesible thingis, whether 
maal or femaal he shal offre, thei shulen 
7be with outen wemme. If he shal offre 
8a loombe before the Lord, he shal putte 
his hoond vpon the heed of his slawn sa- 
crifice, the whych shal be offerd in the 
vestiarye of the tabernacle of witnessyng; 
and the sones of Aaron shulen heelde the 
9 blood of it bi ennyroun of the auter. And 
thei shulen offre of the oost of pesible 
thingis a sacrifice to the Lord, talw3?, and 
10al the tail with the reynes, and the fatnes 
that couereth the wombe, and alle the 
entrayls, and either litil reyne, with the 
talw31 that ys biside the reyne guttes, 
and the calle of the mawe, with the litil 
lireynes. And the preest shal brenne hem 
vpon the auter, into foode’ of the fier, and 
120f the offryng to the Lord. Ifa she goet 
were the offryng of hym, and he shulde 
30ffre it to the Lord, he shal putte his 
hoond vpon the heed of it, and he shal 
offre it in the entre of the tabernacle of 
witnessyng; and the sones of Aaron shu- 
len shede the blood of it bi enuyroun of 
4the auter. And thei shulen take of it, 
into foode of the Lordis fier, talw38 that 
couereth the wombe, and that helith alle 
isthe entrayles, two litil reyns with the 
calle that is on hem biside the reyne 
guttes, and the fatt of the mawe, with 
igthe litil reynes. And the preest shal 
brenne hem vpon the auter, into foode of 
the fier, and of moost swete smel; al the 
17talw3t shal be of the Lord, thur3 perpe- 
tuel ri3t, in kynredes and alle j3oure dwell- 
yng places, and blood, and fat algatis 
shulen 3e not ete. 


° the moost £. 
fatnes EB pr.m. 


P fatnes £ pr.m. 


© wodeirs. 4 the swettist c. © smell 1s. 


as, in the grete street BOEGKLNPQX. 


ether the entrailes, that eleuen to the reynes BCEGLNYQX. 


LEVITICUS. 


4 ynner fat £ pr.m. 


f or EILPS. 
K heelde x. 1 enuyroun rs. ™ the preestis 1s. 


297 


the trees®, in to offryng of swettest* odour® 
to the Lord. Sotheli if his offryng’ is of¢ 
scheep, and a sacrifice of pesible thingis, 
whether he offrith a male ether‘ a female, 
tho schulen be without wem. If he of-7 
frith® a lombe bifor the Lord, he schal sette 8 
his hond on" the heed of his sacrifice, that 
schal be offrid in the porche! of the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng; and the sones of 
Aaron schulen schede* the blood therof bi 
‘the cumpas! of the auter. And thei™9 
schulen offre of the sacrifice of pesible 
thingis a sacrifice to the Lord, the innere 
fatnesse, and al the tail with the® reynes®, 10 
and the fatnesse that hilith the wombe, 
and alle the entrailis, and ener eithir litil 
reyne, with the fatnesse which? is bisidis 
the ‘guttis clepid ylion’, and the calle of 
the mawe, with the litle reynes. And thei 
preest schal brenne thot on* the auter, in to 
the fedyng* of fier, and of the offryng to 
the Lord. If his offryng is a geet, and he 12 
offrith it to the Lord, he schal sette his 13 
hond on the heed therof, and he schal 
offre it in to" the’ entryng™” of the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng; and the sones of 
Aaron schulen schede* the blood therof bi 
theY cumpas of the auter. And thei schu- 14 
len take therof, in to ‘the fedyng’ of the 
Lordis fier, the fatnesse that hilith the 
wombe, and that hilith alle the entrailis, 
and twei* litle reynes with the calle which? 15 
is on tho bisidis* ilion*, and the fatnesse 
of the mawe, with the entrails that clenen 
to the litle reynes. And the preest schal i¢ 
brenne tho on the auter, in to the® fedyng* 
of fier®, and" of swettest odour'; al the 
fatnesse schal be the Lordis, by euerlast- 17 
ynge ri3t in generaciouns, and in alle 3oure 
dwellyng placis, nether in ony maner 3e 
schulen ete blood, nethir fatnesse. 


tthe foode vp. § faat x prim. t inward 


ffthei 1s. 8 offre 1s. 4h vpon 1s. ' porche, that 
nsmale w. © reynes, 


P that rs. q ylion, that is, reyne guttis 18. 


rhem 1. 8 vpon Is. t nurishyng 1s. uOm. scikmnw. YOm. Gas. Wentree1s. * heelde 1. 

yOm. 1s. 2 nurisehing 1s. ®thetwo1s. > thatis. ¢sidiss. 4the ilion1s. ¢ Om, Fims. f nurish- 
ngis. & the fieris. 4 Om.is. 1! smellyng 1s. 

yng yng 


aq 


298 LEVITICUS. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to the sones of Israel, Whanne a 
lijf synneth bi ignoraunce, and of alle the 
heestis of the Lord, the whiche he hath 
comaundide that thei shulden not be do, 
seny thing doth; if the preest that is 
anoyntid, synne, makynge the puple to 
trespasse, he shal offre for his synne a 
acalf with outen wemme to the Lord; and 
shal lede it to the dore of the tabernacle 
of witnessyng before the Lord, and he 
shal putte the hoond vpon his heed, and 
she shal offre it to the Lord. And he 
shal take of the blood of the calf, berynge 
it in to the tabernacle of witnessyng. 
6 And whanne he hath wette the fyngre 
in the blood, he shal sprenge it seuene 
sithes" before’ the Lord, ajens the veyle 
7of the seyntuarye. And he shal putte of 
the same blood vpon the hornes of the 


auter of moost kyndli encense to the 


Lord, that is in the tabernacle of witness- 
yng; al forsothe the laft blood he shal 
helde into the foot of the auter of brent 
sacrifice in the entre of the tabernacle. 
8 And the talw3” of the calf he shal offre 
for synne, as wel it that couerith the en- 
9 treyles, as alle that ben with ynforth, two 
lytil reynes, and the calle that is aboue 
hem biside the reyne guttes, and the 
talw3 of the mawe, with the litil reynes, 
1oas it is doon awey fro the calf of the 
oost of pesible thingis; and he shal brenne 
11 hem vpon the auter of brent sacrifice. The 
skynne forsothe, and al the flesh with the 
heed, and feet, and the entreyles, and the 
12dryt, and the laft body he shal bere out 
of the tentis into a clene place, where the 


asken ben wont to be held out; and he. 


U sithe BDEFH. 


K sonle, that is, a man BCEGKLNPQ. man 1s. 


Vv afore Ii. 


IV. I—12, 


CAPA. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, Whanne 2 
a soule* hath do synne! bi ignoraunce™, 
and hath" do ony thing of alle comaunde- 
mentis® ‘of the Lord’, whiche he co- 
maundide that tho™ schulen not be don; 
if a preest® whicht is anoyntid", hath dov3 
synne, makynge” the puple to* trespasse, 
he schal offre for his synne a calf without 
wem to the Lord. And he schal brynge4 
it to the dore of the tabernacle of witness- 
yng, bifor the Lord, and he schal setteY 
hond on the heed therof, and? he schal 
offre it to the Lord. And he schal takes 
vp of the* blood ‘of the calf®, and schai¢ 
brynge it in to the tabernacle of witness- 
yng. And? whanne he hath dippid the®s 
fyngir in to the blood, he schal sprenge it 
senen sithis bifor the Lord, a3ens the veil 
of thef seyntuarie. And he schal putte of7 
the same blood on® the corners of the au- 
ter of encense: moost acceptable to the 
Lord, which auter is in the tabernacle of 
witnessyng; sotheli he schal schede al 
the ‘tother blood: in to the foundement* of 
the auter of brent sacrifice in the entryng! 
of the tabernacle. And he schal offre fors 
synne™ the ynnere fatnesse of the calf, as 
well it that hilith the entrails, as alle 
thingis that ben with ynne", twei litles 
reynes, and the calle, which® is on? tho4 
bisidis ilion’, and the fatnesse® of thet 
mawe, with the litle reines, as it is offrid 10 
of the calf of the sacrifice of pesible 
thingis ; and he" schal brenne tho on’ the 
auter of brent sacrifice. Sotheli he’ schalu 
bere out of the castels* the skyn’, and alle 
the fleischis?, with the heed, and feet*, and 
entrails, and dung», and the ‘residue bodi* 12 


W faat E pr.m. 


1a synne o. ™ ignoraunce or vnkunnyngnesse s. ® Om. 1. 


° the comaundementis cixs. POm.1s. 4the Lord hath is. ‘theiis. § ¢had is, the hijeste preest BCGNQX. 


t that 1s. \ the prest anoyntid is the hizest prest s. marg. ¥Om.s. 
¢ schal he is. 
i blood that is left 1. left blood s. 

P abone 1s. 
W the prest 1s. 
© hodi that is left 1. left bodi s. 


hiss. 2Om.1. @Om.s. > ther off ts. 
ino. 4 heelde 1. 
forth 1s. © the which F see. m. that 1s. 
tOm.s. the prest is. V thingis vpon 1s. 


* the feet 1s. > the dung ts. 


Wmakynge so1. * todo 1s. Y putte 
10m. w. ¢his 1s. f Om. plures, & vpon ts. 
k ground 1s. J entree rs. ™ his synne ts. ® ynne 

qhemins. ‘the reyne guttisis. § talou3 rs. 
Xtentis 1s. Yskynness. 2 fleishe ts. 


IV. 13——25. 


shal tende hem vpon the hepe of wode, 
the which in the place of heeld out asken 
13shulen be brent. And if al the companye 
of the sones of Yrael bi vnknowyng and 
bi vnwisdam do that that is ajens the co- 
14 maundeiment* of the Lord, and afterward 
vnderstonde his synne, he shal offre for 
the syne a ealf, and he shal lede it to 
15 the dore of the tabernacle. Aud the eldre 
of the puple shal putte hoondes vpon the 
heed of it before the Lord; and the calf 
16 Offred in the si3t of the Lord, the preest 
that is anoyntid shal bere yn of the blood 
of it into the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
17 With the weet fyngre sprengynge seuen 
1s SithesY ajens the veyle. And he shal putte 
of the same blood in the hornes of the 
auter, that is before the Lord in the ta- 
bernacle of witnessyng ; the lafte forsothe 
blood he shal helde biside the foot of the 
auter of brent sacrifices, that is in the 
dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng. 
19 And al the talw3* of it he shal take, and 
20he shal brenne vpon the auter; and so 
doynge of this calf, as he dide before, and 
the preest preyinge for hem the Lord shal 
2ihaue mercy. That forsothe calf he shal 
bere out of the tentis, and he shal brenne 
as the? other calf, for it is for the synne 
220f the multitude. If a prynce synne, and 
doo oon of manye bi ignoraunce, that is 
e3defendid in the lawe of the Lord, and 
afterwarde vnderstonde his synne, he shal 
offre an oost before the Lord, au hee geit 
210f the geetis, with outen wemme, and he 
shal putte his hoond vpon the heed of it. 
And whanne he shal offre it in the place, 
where is wont to be slawe the brent sa- 
crifice before the Lord, for it is for synne; 
25the preest shal wete the fyngre in the 
blood of the oost for synne, towchynge 
the hornes of the auter of brent sacrifice, 
and the relif heldynge at the foot of it. 


LEVITICUS. 


299 


in to a clene place, where aischis ben wont 
to be sched out; and he schal brenne tho® 
onf the heep of trees’, whiche" schulen be 
brent in the place of aischis sched’ out. 
That if al the cumpeny of the sones of 13 
Israel knowith not, and doith by vnkun- 
nyng that that is ajens the comaunde- 
ment’ of the Lord, and aftirward vndir-14 
stondith his synne, it' schal offre a ealf for 
synne™, and it" schal brynge the calf to 
the dore of the tabernacle. And the eldere 15 
men of the puple schulen sette hondis on 
the heed therof bifor the Lord; and 
whanne the calf is offrid in the® si3t of the 
Lord, the preest which? is anoyntid sehal 16 
bere ynne of his blood in to the tabernacle 
of witnessyng; and whanne thei fyngur17 
‘is dippid', he schal sprenge* seuen sithis 
ajens the veil. And.he schal putte of the ts 
same blood in the hornes of the auter, 
whieh is bifor the Lord in the tabernacle 
of witnessyng ; sotheli he schal schede' the 
‘residue blood" bisidis the foundement of 
the auter of brent sacrifice, which is in 
the dore of tabernacle’ of witnessyng. And 19 
he” schal take al the fatnesse therof*, and 
schalY brenne 7¢ on the auter; and so* he 20 
schal do also of this calf, as he dide also* 
bifor® ; and whanne the prest schal preye 
for hem, the Lord schal be merciful. For- 21 
sothe he® schal bere out thilke calf, and 
schal4 brenne 7°, as‘ also the formere calf, 
for it is for the’ synne of the multitude. 
If the prince synneth, and doith bi igno- 22 
rauuce 0 thing! of many, which is forbodun 
in the lawe of the Lord, and aftirward vn-23 
dirstondith his synne, he schal offre to the 
Lord a sacrifice, a ‘buk of geet, ‘that hath 
no! wem; and he sehal sette his hond on™ 24 ~ 
the heed therof. And whanne he hath of- 
frid it in the place, where brent sacrifice 
is wont to be slayn, bifor the Lord, for it 
is for synne; the preest schal dippe the" 2s 


x maundement pperN, Ysythe £, %faat £ pr.m. 8 that BDEFH. 
dhelde 1s. © tho thingis s. fvponis. g wode1s, 4 the whiche 1s. icast 1. heldes. * heest 1s. 
'he1rs. ™that synne is. "hers. © Om.1s. P that 1s. dhe hath dippid his 1s. *‘Om.1s. § sprenge 
it 1. sprenge the blood s. theelder. 4 blood that leeueth 1s. ¥ the tabernacle plures. W the prest s. 
* of the calff'1. of calfs. Yheschalis. 20Om.1s. ® Om. DIKMN sec.m. ogRstwx. > bifor of the 
tother 1s, © the preest 1s. 4heschal 1s. ¢ Om. plures. fas he dide1s. & Om.1s. ais. isynnes. 
k keet bukke 1. geet bukke s. ! withoute 1s. ™ vpon 1s. 2 his Is. 


Qaqg2 


300 


26 The talw3> forsothe he shal brenne aboue, 
as in slawn sacrifices of pesible thingis is 
wont to be doon, and he shal prey for 
hym, and for his synne, and it shal be 

27for3euen to hym. That 3if a lijf of© the 
puple of the loond synne bi ignoraunce, 
that he doo eny thing of thes thinges 
that ben defendid in the lawe of the 

28 Lord, and trespassith, and knowlechith* 
his synne, offre he an hee geyt with outen 

29wemme, and ‘he shal® putte the hoond 
vpon the heed of the oost that is for the 
synne, and he shal offre it in the place of 

30the brent sacrifice. And the preest shal 
take of the blood in his fyngre, and 
towchynge the hornes of the auter of 
brent sacrifice, the relif he shal helde at 

31 the foot of it. Al forsothe the talw3‘ tak- 
ynge awey, as yt is wont to be takun fro 
the slawn sacrifices of pesible thinges, he 
shal brenne vpon the auter into smel of 
swetnes to the Lord ; and he shal preye 

s2for hym, and it shal be forzjeue hym. If 
forsothe of the beestis he shall offre slawn 
sacrifice for synne, that is, a sheep with 

33o0uten wemme, he shal putte the hoond 
ypon the heed of it, and he shal offre it 
in the place where ben wonte to ben 
34slawun the oostis of brent sacrifices. And 
the preest shal take of the blood of it 
with his fyngre, and towchynge the® 
hornes of the auter of brent sacrifice, he 

35 shal heelde the relif at the foot of it. And 
al the talw3" takynge awey, as the talw3 
of a wether is wonte to be takun awey 
that is offrid for synnes, and he shal 
brenne vpon the auter the encense of the 
Lord; and he shal preye for hym, and for 
his synne, and it shal be for3ouun hym. 


b> faat gE prem. ¢for a. Aknowleche sperH. @ Om. £ prim. 


© touche with his bloodi finger s. 
is, @ synguler man BCGINQSX. tas. 
xypons. Y Om. Brag. 4% thats. 
dcorners 1. € heelde 1. 
i Om. plures. that s. 
P touche ther with 1s. 
prest s. “that 1s. 


k smellyng 1s. 
q heelde 1. 


LEVITICUS. 


IV. 26—35. 


fyngur in the blood of sacrifice for synne, 
and he schal touche® the corneris of the 
auter of brent sacrifice, and he schal schede? 
the ‘residue blood‘ at the foundement ther- 
of. Sotheli the preest schal brenne the in- 26 
nere fatnesse aboue the auter, as it is wont 
to be doon in the sacrifice’ of pesible 
thingis, and the preest schal preye for hym, 
and for his synne, and it schal be for- 
jouun to hym. That if a soule® of theo7 
puple of thet lond synneth bi ignoraunce, 
that he do ony thing of these that ben 
forbodun in the lawe of the Lord, and 
trespassith, and knowith his synne, he2s 
schal offre a geet" without wem; and he29 
schal sette’ hond” on* the heed of theY 
sacrifice which? is for synne, and he schal 
offre it in the place of brent sacrifice. And 30 
the preest schal take of the blood* on? his 
fyngur, and he schal touche® the hornes? 
of the auter of brent sacryfice, and he 
schal schede® the residue’ at the founde- 
ment therofs. Sotheli he" schal take aweis1 
al the ynnere fatnesse, as it is wont to be 
don awei of the sacrifices of pesible thingis, 
and he schal brenne 7¢: on the auter, in to 
odour of swetnesse to the Lord; and the 
preest schal preye for hym, and it schal 
be forjouun to hym. Sotheli! if he™ of-s2 
frith of litle beestis a sacrifice for synne, 
that is, a scheep without wem, he schal33 
putte the" hond on the heed therof, and 
he schal offre it in the place where the 
beest® of brent sacrifices ben wont to be 
slayn. And the preest schal take of the34 
blood therof in his fyngur, and he schal 
touche? the hornes of the autir of brent 
sacrifice, and he schal schede4 the residue’ 
at the foundement therof*. And het schal3s 
do awey al the ynnere fatnesse as the in- 
nere fatnesse of the ram which" is offrid 
for pesible thingis, is wont to be don awei, 


ffoat gE pr.m. & Om. 4. } faat & prem. 


P heelde 1. 4 blood that leeneth 1s. ° sacrifices plures. 8 soule, that 
Uschee geet 18. 

8 hlood theroff 18. 

f hlood that is left 1. blood that leeuith s. 

1 Forsothe plures. ™ siche a mans. % his 1s. 

r blood that is left 1. bl. that leeuith s. 


Vv putte k ¢ert. ether sette marg. ~ his hond 1s. 

bin we. vponis. © touche with that fingre s. 
8 of the auter 1s.) the preest 1s. 
° beestis IKORSTW. 


Softhe auter 1s. tthe 


V. I—I0. 


CAP. V. 


1 If a lijf synne, and here the voyce of 
a swerer, and were witnes, that other he 
seethi, or to hym silf is knowun gilti, but 
if he shewe, he shal bere his wickidnes. 

2 The lijf that towchith eny vnclene thing, 
other that is slawe of a beest, other bi 
hym silf deed, or‘ eny other crepynge 
beest, and he were forgeten of his vnclen- 

3nes, he is gilti, and hath trespassid. And 
if he towche eny thing of the vnclennes 
of man, after al vnclennes with the which 
he is wont to be defowlid, and for3eten 
afterward knowe, he shal vnderlye to the 

4trespas. The hjf that swerith, and spekith 
with his lippes, that or eny thing yuel 
shal do, or* wel, and doth not, and the 
same thing with ooth or word stableth, 
and for3eten afterward vndirstonde his 
strespas, do he pernaunce for the synne, 
sand offre he of the flockis an shee! lombe, 
or a shee! geyt; and the preest shal 

Tpreye for hym, and for his synne. If 
forsothe he may not offre a beeste, offre 
he two turturs™, or two culuer bryddis 
to the Lord, oon foy the synne, and an- 

sother into brent sacrifice. And he shal 
3yue hem to the preest, the which, the 
first offrynge for the synne, shal bowe 
ajen the heed of it to the fethers, so that 
it cleue to the nek, and not fullich it be 

*broke. And he shal sprenge of the blood 
of it the wal of the auter; what euer" for- 
sothe were lefte he shal make to drop at 
the foundement of it, for it is for syne. 

10 The tother® forsothe he shal bremne in to 
brent sacrifice, as it is wont to be doo, 


LEVITICUS. 


301 


and he’ schal brenne 7¢ on” the auter of 
encense of the Lord; and the preest ‘schal 
preye for hym, and for his synne, and it 
schal be for3ouun to hym. 


CAPR. V. 


If a soule* synneth, andY} hereth the1- 
vois of a” swerere{, and is witnesse®, ‘for 
ether he si3>, ether® ‘is witynge", if he 
schewith® not‘, he schal bere his synne. 
A persone that touchith ony vnclene thing, 2 
etheré which! is slayn of a beeste, ether is 
deed bi it silf, ether fowchith ony other 
crepynge beeste, and for3etith his vnelen- 
nesse, he is gilti, and trespassith. And ifs 
he touchith ony thing of the vnclennesse 
of man’, bi al the vnclennesse bi which he 
is wont to be defoulid, and he forjetith*, 
and knowith! afterward, he™ schal be suget 
to trespas". A soule® that swerith, and4 
bryngith forth with hise lippis, that it? 
schulde do ether yuel, ether? wel, and doith 
not', and confermeth the same thing with 
an ooth, ethir with a word, and for3etith’, 
and aftirward vndirstondith his trespas, 
do itt penaunce for synne”, and offre it’ of? 
the flockis a femal lomb, ethir a goet ; and 
the preest schal preie for hyn, and for his 
synne. But if he may not offre a beeste, 7 
offre he twei turtlis, ethir* ‘briddis of cul- 
ers’ to the Lord, oon for synne’, and the 
tother in to brent sacrifice. And he schals 
3yue tho to the preest, which* schal offre 
the firste for synne, and schal® folde a3en 
the heed therof to the wengis, so that it® 
cleue to the necke, and be not ‘brokyn 
outirli#, And the preest schal sprynge9 
the wal of the auter, of the blood therof; 
sotheli what euer ‘is residue’, he! schal 
make to® droppe doun at the ‘foundement 
of the auter®, for it ist for synne. Sotheli*10 
he! schal brenne the tother brid in to brent 


i seei3 ppern. * other x. ‘heo x, ™ turteles pu. ere. © other z. 
vthe preest 1s. Wvponis.  * soule, thal is, man ncGKNQ. manis. Yand thalisn. %Om. &. 
a witnesse theroff'1s. » either herith its. ¢ ors. ethirhe w. 4 knowith 71s. ¢ shewe s. f id not 1s. 


§ or passim HLP. othir o. eny s. 


mOm.B. "that trespasis. %manis. Phet. 
seides. theis. 4 the synne 1. his synne s. 
briddis 1s. 4 his synne s. @ the which 1. 
leenith s. {the preest 1s. & Om. s. 
prest s. 


h that thing that is. 
q or EKLP. 

v he. 

b he schal ts. 

h auteris foot 1. auter foot s. 


famany. forzetith it 10s. 1 knowith this s. 
Tytnots. § forzetith what he swore or 
Ww sichais. * ethir twey K sec.m. Y culuere 

© the heed s. 4 fully broken awey s. © blood 
iis offrid s. * Forsothe 1s. ! the 


+ This word 
and is seet for 
that is. Lire, 
and the glos 
here, CGQX. 

+ In Ebren it is 
of ao ooth, and 
this lettre is 
vndurstondnu 
of him, that is 
requirid to bese 
witoessyng of 
a thiog that he 
koowith, and 
wole not, but 
hidith the truth. 
Lire here. cG 
Qx. 


302 


and the preest shal preye for hym and 
for his synne, and it shal be for3enen 
ithym. And if his hoond mowe? not offre 
two turturs’, or two culuer briddes, offre 
he for his syne of tried flowre the tenthe 
part of ephi; he shal not putte into it 
oyle, ne leye yn eny thing of encense, 
i2for it is for synne. And he shal take it 
to the preest, the which takynge of it a 
fnl hoondful, shal brenne vpon the auter, 
into the mynde of hym that offrede, 
13preiynge for hym, and purgynge; that 
other forsothe part he shal haue in 3ifte. 
14 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
is If a lijf synne, forfetynge the cerymonyes 
hi errour, in thes thingis that ben halowed 
to the Lord, offre he for his trespas a 
wether with out wemme of the flockis, 
the which may be bou3t with two sicles, 
isafter the wei3te of the seyntnary. And 
that that he hath doo of harm he shal 
restore, and the fifthe part he shal putte 
abone, takyuge to the preest, the which 
shal preye for hym, offrynge a wether, 
1zand it shal be for3jouen hym. The lijf 
that synneth bi ignoraunce, and dooth 
oon of thes thingis that ben defendid bi 
lawe of the Lord, and gilti of the synue 
is vnderstonde his wickidnes, he shall offre 
a wether with onten wemme of the flockis 
to the preest, after the mesure and eym- 
yng of the synne; the which shal preye 
for hym, for vnknowynge he dide, and it 
i9shal be for3eue to™ hym, for bi errour he 
1trespasside in the Lord. And the Lord 
2spak to Moyses, seiynge, The lijf that 
synneth, and, the Lord despiside, denye to 
his neiz3bore the laft thing’ that to his 
feith was takun, ort with fors eny thing 
stakith, or doth wrong chalenge, ort fynde 
lost thing, and denyynge ouermore for- 
swerith, and eny other of manye doo in 
4the whiche men ben wonte to synne, he 


Pmay £. 4 turtlis F. 


LEVITICUS. 


t Om, BDEFU. 


. Ve. r1—VI. 4. 


sacrifice, as it is wont to be doon; and 

the preest schal preie for hym, and for his 

synne, and it schal be for3jouun to hym. 

That if his hond™ mai not offre twei tur-11 

tlis, ethir twei ‘briddis of culueris", he schal 

offre for his synne the tenthe part of ephif + thatis, the 
otto tenthe part of 

of wheete® flour; he schal not putte oile ‘in jij. buschetis. 

to itP, nether he schal putte’ ony thing of ™ 

encense, for it is for synne. And he 

schal 3yue it’ to the preest, which’ preestt 

schal take vp an handful therof, and schal# 

brenne’ on the auter, in to mynde of hym 

that offeride’, and the preest schal preie1s 

for hym, and schal* clenseY; forsothe he? 

schal have the tother part in* 3ifte. And 14 

the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, If ais 

soule? brekith cerymonyes® bi errour, and 

synneth? in these® thingis that ben hale- 

wid to the Lord, it’ schal offre for his tres- 

pas a rain withont wem of the flockis, that 

may be bou3t for twey siclis, big the wei3te 

of the seyntuarie. And he schal restore is 

that harm that he dide, and he schal putte 

the fynethe part! aboue, and schal* 3yue' 

to the preest, which preest schal preye 

for hym, and offre the ram, and it schal 

be forjouun to hym. A soule™ that syn-17 

neth bi ignoraunce, and doith oon of these 

thingis that ben forbodun in the lawe of 

the Lord, and is gilti of synne, and yndir- 

stondith his wickidnesse, it® schal offre to1is 

the preest a ram without wem of the 

flockis, bi the mesure of® estymacioun? of 

synne?; and the preest schal preye for 

hym, for he dide™ vnwytynge, and it schal 

be for3ouun to him, for by errour he tres-19 

passide aj3ens the Lord. And the Lord: 

spak to Moises, and seide, A soule* that2 

synneth, and dispisith the Lord, and de- 

nyeth to his neijbore a thing bitakun to 

kepyngt, that was bitakun to his feith", 

ethir takithY maisterfuli a thing bi vio- 

lence, ether makith fals chaleng, ether: 


“ 


sthinges p. + other E. 


m hond for pouerty s. “culuere briddis 1s. © tried whete 1s. P therto1. in to that floure s. 4 putte fo 1. 
putte thertos. ‘Om. K. 8 the which1. t Om.1. the schal 1s. Ybrenne it a pr.m.is. ® offeride i s. 


xOm.1s. Yclense him rs. % the preest 1s. 2into1s. » mans. that is,a man K marg. © the cery- 
monyes 1. my cer.s. dsynnek. ¢thoapr.m. fheis, Satis. hOm.«. } part therofs. * he 
schal s. l3yue its. ™man is. that is, a mau K marg, 2 Om. A sec.m.B. he is. © and BDFGIMNOSWX. 


P estymacioun ether valu BCKNQX. estym. or valu HELPS. 4 the synue 1s. * dide yuel s. * man 1s. that is, 


a man K marg. * his kepyng Is. 


u feithfulnesse Bc. 


V bitakith w. 


VI. 5—I15. 


sateynt of the trespas shal 3elde alle thingis 
hool that thur3 frawde he wolde with 
hoolde, and ferthermore the fifthe part to 
the Jord, to whom lhe dide the harm. 

6For his synne forsothe he shal offre a 
wether withouten wemme of the flok, and 
he shal 3yue it to the preest, after the 

z7eymyng and mesure of the trespas; the 
which shal preye for hym before the 
Lord, and it shal be for3eue to hym, for 
al that in doynge he synnede. 


CAP EVI. 


8 And the Lord spake to Moyses, seiynge, 
9 Comaunde to Aaron and his sones, This 
is the lawe of the" brent sacrifice ; it shal 
be brent in the auter al ny3t vito the 
morwen; fyer it shal be of the same au- 
1oter. The preest shal be clothid with a 
coote, and with lynnen breches; and he 
shal take the asken, the whiche the fier 
vowrynge brent out, and puttynge bisyde 
11the auter he shal be spoylid the rather 
clothes, and clothid with other he shal 
offre hem out of the tentes, and in moost 
clene place vnto a litil sparcle he shal 
12make to be wastid. The fier forsothe in 
the auter evermore shal brenne, the which 
the preest shal norishe, ynder puttynge 
wode eerly bi eche dayes; and putte yn 
aboue’ the brent sacrifice, he shal brenne 
isthe talw3” of the pesible thingis. This 
fier is perpetuel that shal neuer* fayle in 
uthe auter. This is the lawe of sacrifice 
and of sacrified licours, the whiche the 
sones of Aaron shulen offre before the 
15 Lord, and before the auter. The preest 
shal take an handful of tryed flour, the 
which ys spreynt with oyle, and al the 
encenseY that is putte vp on the tryed 


uQm. apern. Val aboue a. 


wdenyeth its. * manye forboden s. 
surert, €the whiche 1. fand the k. 
brente out 1s. | putte ¢ho 1s. 
© wastid er quenchid s. P the which 1. 
9 the which 1. 


Ww faat E pr. m. talewis E sec. m. 


yY Om. plures. 

& with lynnen brechis 1s. 
k he schal 1. the prest schal s. 
q wode Is. 
v Aaronus sones 1. Aaron gones 8. 


LEVITICUS. 303 


fyndith a thing lost, and denyeth” fer- 
thermore and forswerith, and doth- ony 
other thing of manye* in whiche thingis 
men ben wont to do syune, ‘if it is con-4 
uict of the gilt¥, it? schal 3elde hool alles 
thingis whiche it* wolde gete bi fraude, 
and ferthermore the fyuethe part to the 
lord, to whom it® dide harm. Sotheli foré 
his synne it> schal offre a ram vnwemmed 
of the floc, and it schal 3yue that ram to 
the preest, bi the valu and* mesure® of the 
trespas; and the preest schal preie for7 
hym bifor the Lord, and it schal be for- 
jouun to hym, for alle thingis whiche* he 
synnede in doyng. 


CAP. VI; 


And the Lord spak to Moises, ands 
seide, Comaunde thou to Aaron, and to9 
hise sones, This is the lawe of brent sacri- 
fice; it schal be brent in the auter al ny3t 
til the morewe; fier that is 30uun fro he- 
uene schal be of the same auter. The1o 
preest schal be clothid with a coote, andf 


‘pryuy lynnun clothis?; and he schal take 
_awei the aischis, whichs* the fier deuour- 


ynge brente", and he schal putte! bisidis 
the auter; and he schal be spuylid of thei 
formere clothis, and he schal be clothid 
with other, and schal* bere! aischis out of 
the castels™, and in a moost clene place he 
schal make tho" to be wastid® til to a deed 
sparcle. Forsothe fier schal brenne euere 12 
in the auter, which? fier the preest schal 
nurische, puttynge trees? vndur, in the 
morewtid bi ech dai; and whanne brent 
sacrifice is put aboue, the preest schal 
brenne the ynnere fatnessis' of pesible 
thingis’, This is euerlastynge fier, that 13 
schal neuer faile in the auter. This is the 4 
lawe of sacrifice, and of fletynge’ offryngis, 
whiche" ‘the sones of Aaron’ schulen offre 
bifore the Lord, and bifor the auter. Theis 
preest schal take an handful of wheete 


XnereE. Y sens€ RDEFII. 


aheis. bhers. ¢ors. 4 the me- 
eg while praxmNnoqrrwx.  » hath 
I bere tho 1s. ™tentis 1s. ® hem is. 


8 offrid thingis 8. t the fletynge o. 


zhes. 


r fatnesse s. 


W tried wheete 1s. 


304 


flour, he shal brenume it in the auter, in 
to mynde of moost swete smel to the 
is Lord. The laft forsothe part of the tryed 
flour Aarou with his sones shal ete, with 
outen sour dow3; and he shal ete in the 
holi place of the porche of the tabernacle. 
17 Therfore forsothe it shal not be souryd, 
for the part of it is offred into the? en- 
cense of the Lord; holi of halowes it 
shal be, as for the synne and for the tres- 
is pas. The maalis oonlich of the lynage of 
Aaron shulen ete it; lawful and euerlast- 
yuge it is in 3oure kynredes, of the sacri- 
fices of the Lord; eche that touchith tho 
19thinges shal be halowid. And the Lord 
20spak to Moyses, seiynge, This is the of- 
fryng of Aaron, and of the sones of him, 
that thei shulen offre to the Lord in the 
day of her anoyntyng; the tenthe part of 
ephi thei shulen offre of the* tried flour, 
in euerlastynge sacrifice, the half of it 
2leerli, and the half of it at euen; the 
which in a panne spreynt with oyle shal 
22be fryed. And the preest that to the fa- 


der thur3 ry3t cometh after, shal offre it ; 


hoote, into” the moost swete smel to the. 
Lord; and al shal be brent in the anter. 
23 Al forsothe sacrifice of preestis with fier 
shal be consumyd, ne eny shial eete of it. 
24And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
25 Spek to Aaron and his sones, This is the 
lawe of oost for synne; in the place where 
is offred brent sacrifice, shal it be offerd 
before the Lord; holi of halowis it is. 
26 The preest that offreth it, shal eete it in 
holi place, in the porche of the taber- 
27nacle. What euer shal towche the fleishe 
of it, shal be halowid; if a clooth be* 
spreynt of the blood of yt, it shal be 
28 washe in an holy place. The bretil vessel 
forsothe in the which it is sothen, shal be 
broken; that if it were a brasun vessel, 
it shal be rubbid, and washe with water. 


LEVITICUS. 


VI. 16—28. 


flour, which is spreynd with oile, and al 
the encense which* is put on the wheeteY 
flour, and he schal brenne it in? the auter, 
in to mynde* of swettist® odour? to the 
Lord. Forsothe Aaron with lise sonesi¢ 
schal ete the tother part of wheete® flour, 
without sour dow; and he schal ete* in 
the hooli place of the greet street® of the 
tabernacle. Sotheli herforf it’ schal not17 
be ‘di3t with sour dow, for a part therof 
is offrid in to encense of the Lord; it 
schal be hooli ‘of the noumbre‘ of holi 
thingis‘, as! for synne and for™ trespas. 
Malis® oonli of the kynrede® of Aaron is 
schulen ete it; it is a lawful thing and 
euerlastynge in 30ure generaciouns, of? the 
sacrifice! of the Lord; ech man _ that 
touchith tho" schal be halewyd’. And the 19 
Lord spak to Moises, and seide, This is 20 
the offryng of Aaron, and of lise sones, 
which thei owen offret to the Lord in the 
day of her" anoyntyngt; thei schulen of- 
fre the tenthe part of ephi of wheete’ 
flour, in” euerlastynge sacrifice, the myd- 
dis* therof in the morewtid, and the myd- 
dis* therof in the euentid ; whichY schal be 21 
spreynt with oile in the’ friyng panne, 
and schal* be fried. Sotheli the preest 22 
which? is successour to the® fadir ‘bi ri3t4, 
schal offre it hoot, in to sweteste odour® to 
the Lord; and al it schal be brent in the 
auter, For al the sacrifice of preestis schal 23 
be wastid! with fier, nether ony man schal 
ete therof. And the Lord spak to Moises, 24 
and seide, Spek thou to Aaron and to hise 25 
sones, This is the lawe of sacrifice for 
synne; it schal be offrid bifor the Lord, 
in the place where brent sacrifice is of- 
frid; it is hooli ‘of the noumbre’ of hooli 
thingis. The preest that offrith it, schal26 
ete it in the hooli place, in the greet 
street" of the tabernacle. What ener thing 27 
schal touche the fleischis' therof, it schal 


zOm.B. *Om.z. Pinas. © were BDEFH. 

Xthatr. YOm.1. Zon x. @the mynde k. 24 swete a pr.m. > smellis.  ¢ tried wheete 1s. the 
wheete K. ‘ete thiss. © porches. fOm.1. & the tried flours. » maad sour1. 1 Om.1. * thing x. 
las offringes. ™Om.1ks. "Menis. © kynde Fr. P to prestis for fo vse of s. 4 sacrifices B. 7 tho 
thingisis. hem nN. § halewyd biforeis. ‘to offreis. his a pr.m. et plures. Vtried is. Win to K. 
x halff 10 sec.m.s. Ythe which1. 2a 10 sup.ras.s. 4 it schal 10 sup.ras.s. >» the which 1. ¢ his is. 
4 Om, ts, e smell is. f brent 1 deat. s. waastid 1. marg. 8 Om. 1KoRT sec.m.w. —-» porche 18. 
i fleish is. k Om. s. 


+ In Ebro it is, 
in the day in 
whiche he an- 
oyntide him. 
GQx. 


VEL 29—VII. 10. 


29 Eche maal of the preestis kynrede shal 
eete of the fleshe of it; for holi of halowis 
30it is. An oost forsothe that is slawe for 
synne, whos blood is born into the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng to clense in the seyn- 
tuarie, shal not be eete, but brent with 
1fier. And this lawe of oost for trespas 
2is holy of halowis. Therfore where the 
brent sacrifice is offred, and the sacrifice 
for the trespas shal be slawe; the blood 
of it bi enuyroun of the auter shal be 
3heelde. Thei shulen offre of it the tayl, 
and the talw3¢ that couereth the entrayls, 
4the two litel reynes, and the fatnes that 
is biside the reyne guttes, and the calle 
5of the mawe, with the litil reynes. And 
the preest shal brenne hem vpon the au- 
ter; the encense it is of the Lord for thef 
6trespas. Eche maal of the preestes kyn- 
rede in holi place shal ete this flesh, for 
zholi of halowis it is. As for a synne is 
offred an oost, so and for a trespas, of 
either hoost shal be o lawe; to the preest 
sthat it shal offre it shal perteyne. The 
preest that offreth the slawn offryng of 
brent sacrifice, shal haue the skynne of it. 
9 And alle the sacrifice of tried floure, that 
is bake in the ouen, and what euer thing 
in the gredyrne, or in friynge panne is 
greithid, of that preest it shal be, of 
iowhom it is offred, whether thei ben 
spreynt with oyle, or drye. ‘T’o alle the 
sones of Aaron even mesure bi echon shal 
be dyuydid. 


4 shalt 4. 


Y be spreint ns. ™ withis. ™ Om. 1s. 
tthat is. "the ilioun is. VYinis. W Om. k. 
4 Om. scart. > thatis kK. ¢ wilful synne s. 
Sothern. » Om.1s. idried nN. & Om. B. 
hem silf kx. Om.s. hem silf x sec.m. 


LEVITICUS. 


© faat BE pr.m. 


oin Le 
x kynde s. 
4 jgnoraunt trespas 8. 
1 bi alle eF~NePx. bi ech oon 1s. bi eche K. Om. Ga. 


P the preestis 1. 


305 


be halewid; if a cloth is bispreynt! of™ 
the blood therof, it schal be waischun in 
the hooli place. Sotheli the erthun vessel, 2s 
in which it is sodun, schal be brokun; 
that if the vessel is of bras, it schal be 
scourid, and ‘schal be" waischun with® wa- 
tir. Ech male of preestis? kyn schal ete29 
of the fleischis4 therof; for it is hooli ‘of 
the noumbre® of hooli thingis. Sotheli the 30 
sacrifice which is slayn for synne, whos 
blood is borun in to the tabernacle of wit- 
nessyng to clense in the seyntuarie, schal 
not be etun, but it schal be brent in fter. 
And this is the lawe of sacrifice for tres-1 
pas; it is hooli‘of the noumbre™ of hooli 
thingis. Therfor where brent sacrifice is2 
offrid, also the sacrifice for trespas schal 
be slayn; the blood therof schal be sched 
bi the’ cumpas of the auter. Thei schulens 
offre the tail therof, and the fatnesse that 
hilith the entrailis, the twei litle reynes, 4 
and the fatnesse whicht is bisidis ilioun", 
and the calle of the mawe, with the litle 
reynes. And the preest schal brenne thos 
on’ the auter; it is encense of the Lord, 
for trespas. Ech male of the” preestisé 
kyn*'‘schal ete these fleischis in the hooli 
place, for it is hooli ‘of the noumbrey of 
hooli thingis. As? a* sacrifice is? offrid7 
for synne®, so and for trespas’, o lawe 
schal be of euer eithir sacrifice; it schal 
perteyne to the preest, that offrith it. Thes 
preest that offrith the beeste of brent sa- 
crifice, schal haue the skyn therof. And9 
ech sacrifice of wheete® flour, which‘ is 
bakun in an ouene, and what euer is maad 
redi in a gridile, ethir in a friyng panne, 
it schal be that’ preestis, of whoin it is 
offrid, whether it is spreynt with oile, 10 
ethirs ist dryc', To alle the sones of Aa- 
ron euene mesure schal be departyd, ‘to 
ech! ‘bi hem silf™. 


f Om. zB. 


q fleishe rs. ° Om.1. 8 Om.is. 
2 Om. A pr.m, DEFGKLMNOPWX. 
etried is. fthatis. f€ thes. 

™ to 


y Om. I. 


Rr 


306 


CAP. VII. 


11 This is the lawe of the oost of pesible 
12 thinges, that is offerd to the Lord. If for 
doynge of thankyngis* were the offryng, 
thei schulen offre looues with outen sour 
dow3 spreynt with oyle, and thinne therf 
cakis anoynt with oyle, and bakun tryed 
floure, and litil rownd looues spreynt with 
i3mengyng of oyle; and looues maad with 
sour dow3, with the oost of thankynges" 
14 that is offerd for the! pesible thinges; of 
the whiche oon for the chefe fruytis shal 
be offerd to the Lord, and it shal be of 
the preest that shal heelde the blood of 
15 the oost, whos fleshe that same day shal 
be etun, ne there shal leeue of it eny 
igthing vnto the morwe. If thur3 a vow, 
or wylfully, eny man offreth an oost, the 
same day also it shal be eten; but if eny 
thing leeue to the morwe, it is leful to 
izeete; what euer forsothe the thridde 
isday fynde, the fier shal consume. If eny 
man eete the thridde day of the flesh of 
the oost of pesible thinges, his offrynge 
shall be sett at no3t, ne it shal profyte 
to the offrer; but rather ech lijf that de- 
fowlith hym silf with syche meete, shal 
i9be gilti of trespassyng. The flesh that 
eny vnelene thing touchith, shal not be 
etun, but brent with fier; he that is clene, 
20shal eete it. A lijf defowlid, that etith 
of the flesh of the oost of pesible thingis, 
that is offred to the Lord, shal perishe 
2ifro his puplis. And he that towchith the 
vnclennes of man, or of beeste, or of eny 
thing that may defowle, and etith of siche 
maner flesh, shal spille fro his puples. 
22 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
23 Spek to the sones of Irael, The talw3* of 
sheep, and of oxe, and of geyt, 3e shulen 


& thank p. 


0 Om. EFGNPQST pr.m. x. the oost of 1. 


LEVITICUS. 


h thankynge 4 pr.m. £. 


© the pesible c. 


VIL. 11—23. 


CAP. VII. 


This is the lawe of ‘the sacrifice of" pe-11 
sible® thingis, which? is offrid to the Lord. 
If the offryng is for doyng4 of thankyngis", 12 
thei schulen offre looues without sour dow 
spreynt with oile, and’ ‘therf looues sodun 
in watirt, that ben anoyntid with oile; 
and thei schulen offre whcete* flour bakun, 
and thinne’ looues” spreynt togidere with 
the* medlyng of oile. Also thei schulenis 
offre ‘\ooues di3t with sour dow’, with the 
sacrifice of thankyngis? which* is offrid 
for pesible thingis; of whiche®f 0 loof scha] 14 + In Ebru it is, 
be offrid to the Lord for the firste® fruytis, rE 
and it schal be the? preestis that schal 
schede® the blood of the sacrifice, whose 15 
fleischis‘ schulen be etun in the same dai, 
nether ony thing of tho schal dwelle til® 
the morewtid. Ifa man offrith a sacrifice 16 
bi a vow, ethir bi fre wille, it schal be 
etun in" lijk maner in the same dai; but 
also if ony thing dwellith ‘in to! the’ mo- 
rew, it is leueful to ete ¢¢; sotheli fier17 
schal waaste, whateuer thing the thridde 
day schal fynde. If ony man etith in the is 
thridde dai of the fleischis! of sacrifice of 
pesible thingis, his offryng schal be maad 
voide, nethir it schal profite to the offerere; 
but rather whatever soule™ defoulith hym 
silf with suche mete, he schal be gilti of 
‘brekyng of the lawe®. Fleisch® that 19 
touchith ony vnclene thing, schal? not be 
etun, but it schal be brent bit fier; he 
that is clene, schal ete it. A pollutid'20 
soule’, that etith of the fleischis* of the sa- 
crifice of pesible thingis, which is offrid to 
the Lord, schal perische fro hise puplis. 
And he that touchith vnclennesse" of man, 2! 
ether of beeste, ether of alle thing that 
may defoule’, and etith” of suche fleischis*, 


iOm. ez. * fat x prom. 


P the which 1. @ the doyng plures. 


t thanking s. San A. t thinne therff kakis 1s. u tried Is. Vv litle rounde Is. w looues ether 
cakis BcGKNQ. * Om.1s. Ysoure loones1. % thanking s. the which 1. > the whiche x. © cheef 1s. 
4QOm.s. ¢heelder. ffleishe 1. & tilto w. tors. bir. ivntom. & Om. cu. ! fleishe 10 sup.ras.s. 


m soule, that is, man BCGKNQ. man Is. 


pesyble sacrifice c@NQx. The fleisch 1. Tho fleisch s. 
foulid 3. p. eithir defoulid cxqx. p. that is, def. yp. defoulid 1s. 
Vv defoule man s. 


t fleishe is. U the vnclemnesse Is. 


n the lawe brekyng 1s. 


© Fleisch, that is, onely the fleish of 
P that schal 1 prem.s. 4 with 1. ¥ pollutid, ether 
$ soule, that is, man BCK. man Is. 


whe that etith 1s. * fleishe 1s. 


VII. 24—38. 


24not eete; the talw3 of deed careyn, and 
of that beeste that is takun of a wilde 
beeste, 3e shulen haue into dyuerse vses. 
25 If eny man eete the talw3, that shulde be 
offred into the encense of the Lord, he 
26shal perishe fro his puple. And the blood 
of eche beeste 3e shulen not take in 
meete, as wel of bryddes, as of beestis ; 
27eche lijf that etith blood shal perishe fro 
2shis puplis. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 
29seiyng, Speke to the sones of Yrael, He 
that offreth slawn offryng of pesible 
thinges to the Lord, offre he therwith 
and sacrifice, that is, his offrynges of 
30 licours. He shal holde with hondes the 
talw3 of the oost, and the litil brest ; and 
whanne bothe, offred to the Lord, he hath 
3isacred, he shal take to the preest, the 
which shal brenne the talw3 vpon the 
auter; the litil brest forsothe shal be of 
32 Aaron and his sones; and the ri3t shul- 
dre of the oostis of pesible thingis shal 
33 falle into chefe! fruytis of the preest. He 
that offreth the blood, and the talw3, of 
the sones of Aaron, shal haue and the 
341i3t shuldre in his porcioun. The litil 
brest forsothe of areryng, and the shul- 
dre of seueryng, Y haue take fro the 
sones of Yrael of the pesible hoostes of 
hem, and haue 3yue to Aaron the preest 
and his sones, thur3 perpetuel lawe, fro 
35 al the puple of Yrael. This is the anoynt- 
yng of Aaron and his sones, in the cery- 
monyes of the Lord, the day that Moyses 
offred hem that thei shulden vse preest- 
36hod, and the thinges that the Lord co- 
maundide to be 3eue to hem of the sones 
of Yrael, thur3 perpetuel relygioun in her 
37 generaciouns. This is the lawe of the™ 
brent sacrifice, and of sacrifice for synne, 
and for trespas, and for the sacryng, and 
for slawn offrynges of pesible thinges, 
38 that the Lord ordeyned to Moyses in the 
mownt Synay", whanne he comaundide 


\ the chefe Br. 


LEVITICUS. 


m Om. BDEFU. 


307 


schal perische fro hise puplis. And the 22 
Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Speke 23 
thou to the sones of Israel, 3e schulen not 
ete the ynnere fatnesse of a scheep, of an 
oxe, and of a geet; 3e schulen haue in to24 
dyuerse vsis the ynnere fatnesse of a car- 
keis deed by it silf, and of that beeste 
which’ is takun’ of a rauenus beeste. If25 
ony man etith the ynnere fatnesse, that 
owith to be offrid in to encense of* the 
Lord, he schal perische fro his puple. Also 26 
3e schulen not take in mete the blood of 
ony beeste, as wel of briddis as of beestis ; 
ech man that etith blood schal perische 27 
fro his puplis. And the Lord spak toes 
Moises, and seide, Speke thou to the sones 29 
of Israel, He that offrith a sacrifice of pe- 
sible thingis to the Lord, offre” togidere 
also a sacrifice, that is, fletynge® offryngis 
therof. He schal holde in the? hondis the 30 
ynnere fatnesse of the sacrifice, and the 
brest ; and whanne he hath halewid bothe® 
offrid to the Lord, he schal 3yue' to the 
preest, which® schal brenne the ynnere31 
fatnesse on™ the auter; sotheli the brest 
schal be Aarons and hise sones; and these 
ri3t schuldur of the sacrifices of pesible 
thingis schal turne! in to the firste’ fruytis 
of the preest. He that of Aarons sones 33 
offrith the blood, and the ynnere fatnesse', 
schal haue also the rij3t schuldur in his 
porcioun. For Y haue take fro the sones 34 
of Israel the brest of reisyng, and the 
schuldur of departyng, of the™ pesible sa- 
crifices ‘of hem®, and Y haue 3oue to® Aa- 
ron the precst and to hise sones, bi euer- 
lastynge lawe, of al the puple of Israel. 
This is the anoyntyng?{ of Aaron, and 35 Pi aa 
of% hise sones, in the cerymonyes of the _ fring in the day 
Lord, in the dai where ynne Moises of- pers 
fride hem that thei schulden be set in 
preesthod, and whiche"™ thingis the Lord 3c 
comaundide to be 3ouun to hem of the 
sones of Israel, bi euerlastynge religioun 


n of Synay p. 


ythat rs. %takun or slayns. ®to1s. »offrehers. ¢ the fletyngeis. ‘hisis. © bothe thees 1. 
ftake hems. % the which 1. the which prests. 4 vpons. ifallers.  cheefis. 1 fatnesses c. 
mheris. "Om.1s. 9° tho tor. these tos. P oyntyug plures. anoyntyng of offryng s. 4 Om. plures. 


t the whiche 1. 


Reg 


308 


to the sones of° Yrael that thei shulden 
offre her offrynges to the Lord, in the de- 
sert of Synay. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 The Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2 Tak Aaron with his sones, the clothes of 
hem, and the oyle of the anoyntyng, a 
calf for synne, two wethers, a leepe with 
3therf loues; and thow shalt gedere togi- 
dere al the companye at the dore of the 
4tabernacle. Moyses dyde as the Lord co- 
maundide; and al the puple gadered be- 
5fore the 3ates of the tabernacle, he seith, 
This is the word that the Lord comaun- 
6dide to be do. And anoon he offred Aa- 
ron and his sones; and whanne he hadde 
7washe hem, he clothide the bishop with 
a lynnen sherte, girdynge hym with a 
gyrdle and clothing hym? with a blewe 
scoote, and putte aboue the coope, the 
which streynynge with a lace ioyned it 
to the brest broche, in the which was 
gloore and sothenes. And he couerde the 
heed with a mytre, and vpon it, aboute 
the frownt, he putte a goldun plate, sacrid 
in halowyng, as the Lord comaundide to 
iohim. And he took the oyle of anoynt- 
yng, with the which he anoyntide the ta- 
11 bernacle with alle his ournementis; and 
whanne halowynge he hadde spreynt the 
auter seuen sithes, he anoyntide it; and 
alle the vessels of it, and the lauatorye 
12 with his foot he halowide with oyle. The 
which heeldynge vpon the heed of Aaron, 
i3he anoyntide hym, and sacrede, and his 


° Om. pD. 


8 halewyng ether sacring BQ. + sacrifice F. 
togidre 1s. Y Moisesis. 7 that 1. 
4 schirte or an aube s. © and girde x. girdinge s. 


m breest broche s. " Aarons. 
heed o. Psacrid is. 4 the halewyng 1s. 
wide 1s. ¥ lauatorie 1s. W foot 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


u her clothis 1s. 
ahe1. > offride or presentide to prestis office s. © clothide Aaron 1s. 
f him is. 
putte aboue a coope that 1. he putte aboue a coop whiche coop s. 


VIIL, 1—13. 


in her generaciouns. This is the lawe of37 
brent sacrifice, and of sacrifice for synne, 
and for trespas, and for halewyng’, and 
for the sacrificest of pesible thingis ; which 38 
lawe the Lord ordeynede to Moises in the 
hil of Synay, whanne he comaundide to 
the sones of Israel] that thei schulden offre 
her offryngis to the Lord, in the deseert 
of Synay. 


CAP. VIII. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Take thou Aaron with hise sones, ‘thee 
clothes of hem", and the oile of anoynt- 
yng, a calf for synne, tweiY rammes, a 
panyere™ with therf looues; and thou schalt3 
gedere* al the cumpanye to the dore of the 
tabernacle. Moises dide as the Lord co-4 
maundide; and whanne al the company 
was gaderid bifor the 3atis of the taber- 
nacle, heY seide, This is the word which’s 
the Lord comaundid to be don. And anoone 
Moises* offride® Aaron and hise sones; 
and whanne he hadde waischun hem, he7 
clothide® the bischop with a lynnun schirte4, 
‘and girdide® ‘the bischopf with a girdil, 
and clothides with a coote of iacynt, and 
‘puttide the cloth on the schuldris aboue, 
which cloth on the schuldris' he boonds 
with a girdil*, and ‘dresside to! the ra- 
cional™, wherynne doctryn and truthe was. 
And Moises hilide the" heed with a my-9 
tre, and ‘settide theronne, a3ens the forhed®, 
the goldun plate halewid? in halewyng‘, 
as the Lord comaundide to hym. Het took 10 
also the oile of anoyntyng, with which’ he 
anoyntide the tabernacle with al his pur- 
tenaunce; and whanne he hadde halewid 11 
and hadde' spreynt the auter seuen sithes, 
he anoyntide it, and halewide® with oile 
alle the vessels therof, and the ‘greet waisch- 
yng vessel’ with his foundement’. Which* 12 


P Om. p. 


Vv and twei 1s. W baskett 1s. * gedere 
hhim with ixs. ibe 


1 joynede ther to 15. 


€ he clothide 1s. 
k lace 1s. 


© yp on the mytre about the frount he putte 1s. settide ajens the for- 
t And he x. Moises’s. 
x The which 1. 


$the whichi. tOm.1. "he hale- 


VIII. 14—24. 


sones offrede he sacride, and clothid with 
lynnen cootys, and girde™ with girdles, 
‘and putte on hem mytrys, as the Lord 
ig4comaundide. And he offrede a calf for 
synne; and whanne Aaron and his sones 
hadden putte her hondes vpon the heed 
15 of it, he offrede it, takynge the blood; and 
the fyngre wett, he towchede the hornes 
of the auter bi enuyroun, the which 
clensid and halowid, he heelde the laft 
1sblood at the foundementis of it. The 
talw3 forsothe that was vpon the en- 
trayles, and the calle of the mawe, and 
the two litil reynes with her grece he 
17 brent vpon the auter; the calf with the 
skynne, flesh, and dryt, brennynge out of 
18the tentes, as the Lord comaundide. And 
he offred a wether into brent sacrifice ; 
vpon whos heed whanne Aaron and his 
19sones hadden putte her hondes, he offred 
it, and heelde the blood of it bi enuyroun 
200f the auter. And thilk wether cuttynge 
in gobetis, the heed of it, and the lemes, 
2iland the talw3 he brente with fier, washed 
before the entraylis and the feete; and al 
the wether he tende to gidere vpon the 
auter, forthi that it was brent sacrifice of 
moost swete smel to the Lord, as he co- 
22maundide to hym. And he offrede the 
secounde wether, into the sacringe of 
preestis; and Aaron and his sones put- 
tiden* her hondes vpon the heed of it. 
23 The which whanne Moyses hadde offride, 
takynge of the blood towchid the ende of 
the ri3t eere of Aaron, and thet thowmbe 
of his ri3t hoond, also" and of the foote. 
24 And he offred the sones of Aaron. And 
whanne of the blood of the offred wether 
he hadde towchid the eende of the ri3t 
eere of echon, and the thoumbe of the 
hoond, and of the ri3t foote, the relif he 


T gerdede zr. 


Yvponis. 2 Aarons heed 1s. 
© elothide him k. 4 and he 13. 
offrid 1, Om. K sec. m. 8. h he sette 1s. 
heed s. 
ther off 1. dippid in bl. therof's. ° Moises ts. 


LEVITICUS. 


® putten FE. 


a oyntide plures. 
€ girde hem 1. girdide him s. 
i her heedis s. 
1 takynge the blood he 1. takynge the hi. therof he s. 
P helde 1. 


309 


oile he schedde onY ‘the heed of Aaron?, and 
anoyntide* hym, and halewide. And he? 13 
clothide® with lynnun cootis, and girdide® 
with girdils‘ ‘his sones offrid®, and settide® 
on! mytris, as the Lord comaundide. Hes 
offeride also a calf for synne; and whanne 
Aaron and hise sones hadden put her 
hondis on ‘that calf*, he! offride it, and 1s 
drow up blood; and™ whanne the fyngur 
was dippid", he touchide the corneris of 
the auter bi cumpas; whanne the auter 
was clensid and halewid, he® schedde? the 
‘residue blood4 at the ‘foundement therof*. 
Sotheli he brent on the auter the ynnere 16 
fatnesse that was on the entrails, and the 
calle of the mawe, and the twei litle reynes 
with her litle fatnessis; and he brente 17 
without the’castels* the calf, with the skyn, 
fleischist, and dung", as the Lord co- 
maundide. He’ offride also’ a ram in to* 18 
brent sacrifice; and whanne Aaron and 
hise sones hadden set her hondis onY the 
heed therof, he offride it, and schedde? the 19 
blood therof bi the* cumpas of the auter. 
And he kittide thilke’ ram in to gobetis, 20 
and brente® with fier the heed therof, and 
memrbris', and ynnere® fatnesse, whanne 21 
the entrails and feet weren waischun bi- 
fore; and he brente al the ram togidere 
on® the auter, for it was the brent sacri- 
fice of swettiste odour® to the Lord, as the 
Lord comaundide to hym. Hei offride also 22 
the secounde ram, in to the halewyng of 
preestis; and Aaron and hise sones put- 
tiden her hondis on* the heed therof. And 23 
whanne Moises hadde offrid the! ram, he 
took of the™ blood, and touchide® the laste 
part of the ri3t eere of Aaron, and the 
thombe of his ri3t hond, in® lijk maner 
and? of the’ foot. Her offride also ‘the sones 24 
of Aaron. And whanne he hadde touchid 


tOm.u. "and also a. 


b Moyses 1. his sones offrid or presentid Moises s. 
fa girdel kK. & his sones that weren 
k the heed of that calf a sec. m. 1. that ealf 


m Om. 1s. 1 dippid in the blood 
q blood that was left 1. lafte bloods. * auteris 


foot 1. auter foot s. 8 tentis 1s. t and fleischis a pr.m. the fleishe 1s. the dungis. ¥ And he 1s. 
wOm.1. *Om.s. Yvponis. 7hehelder. he sheddes. ®Om.1n. >that x. +¢ he brente ts. 
(the membris 1s. ¢ the ynnere rs, fthe feetis. §$vpous. ®smellis. 1 Moysesis. * vpon ts. 
I that cet.omm. ™Om.s. ®% touechide therwithis. © andinis. P Om. 1s. GQhisis. * Moises s. 


8 Aaron sones 8. 


310 


25 heelde vpon the auter bi enuyroun. The 
talw3 forsothe, and the tayle, and al the 
fatnes that couereth the entrayles, and 
the calle of the mawe, and the two reynes 
with her talw3es, and the ry3t shuldre he 

26seuerede. T'akynge forsothe of the leepe 
of therf loones, that was before the Lord, 
looues with outen sour dow3, and a litil 
rownd loof spreynt with oyle, and a 
thinne caake, he putte vpon the talw3es, 

2j7and the ri3t shuldre, takynge alle togi- 
23dere to Aaron and hys sones. The which 
whanne thei hadden rerede hem beforn 
the Lord, eftsones takynge of the hondes 
of hem, he brente vpon the auter of brent 
sacrifice, forthi that it was the offring of 
consecracioun, into smel of swetnes of sa- 

29 crifice to the Lord. And he took the litil 
breest, rerynge it before the Lord, of the 
wether of consecracioun into his part, as 

30the Lord hath comaundide hym, And 
takynge the oynement, and the blood that 
weren in the auter, he spreynde vpon 
Aaron, and his vestementes, and upon his 

3) sones, and her clothis. And whanne he 
hadde halowide hem in her clothinge, he 
comaundide hem, seiynge, Seethe 3e the 
flesh before the 3atis of the tabernacle, 
and ther etith it; and the looues of conse- 
cracioun etith, that ben putte in the leepe, 
as God hath comaundide to me, seiynge, 
Aaron and his sones schulen eete hem; 

32 what euer’ forsothe were laft of the flesh 
and of the looues, the fier shal consume. 

33 Fro the dore forsothe of the tabernacle 3e 
shulen not goo out senen daies, vuto the 
day in the which the tyme of 3oure con- 
secracionn shal be fulfillid; seuen” for- 


34sothe daies is endid the consecracioun, as_ 


now it is doon, that the ryte of the* sacri- 
35 fice be fulfild. Day and ny3t 3e shulen 


Ver E. 


t blood that was offrid 1. offrid blood s. 
of alle B sec. m. 
a blood that was left 1. laft blood s. 
& vpon 1s. | fatnessis x. 
thees thingis 1s. 9 eft sone I. 
of her hondis Alotses brent hem vpon s. 


b vpon Is. 


rerid is. the blood 1s. Yon L. 
a Moises s. » the fleishe 1. fleshe s. 
heft wus. | of the luoues 1s. k waste it 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


W in seuen D. 


u Om. Is. 
x the thombe of the rizt nc. her rijt thumbis of 1s. 
© Moyses ts. 
i Om. plures. on the s. 


w he spreynte hem vpon Is. 
¢ tabernacle 3atis 18. 


VIII. 25—35. 


of the blood! of the ram offrid" the laste 
part’ of ‘the rist eeris of alle*, and ‘the 
thombis of the ri3t* hond and foot, heY 
schedde? the ‘tothir blood* on> the auter bi 
cumpas. Sotheli he departide the ynnere 2s 
fatnesse, and the taile, and al the fatnesse 
that hilith the entrails, and the calle of the 
mawe, and the twey reynes with her fat- 
nessis and with the ri3t schuldur. For-26 
sothe he® took of the panyere? of¢ therf 
looues, that was bifor the Lord, loones 
without sour dow, and a cake spreynt 
with oile, and he puttide looues first sodun 
in watir and aftirward fried in oile on 
the ynnere fatnesse!, and the! ri3t schuldur; 
and bitook* alle thingis! togidere to Aa-27 
ron, and to hise sones. And aftir that 
thei ‘reisiden tho™ bifore the Lord, eft® ‘he 28 
brente tho takun of her hondis, on® the au- 
ter of brent sacrifice, for it was the offryng 
of halewyng, in to the odour? of swetnesse 
of sacrifice ‘into his part4 to the Lord. Het 29 
took also the brest of the ram of consecra- 
cioun’ in to his part, and reisidet it bifor 
the Lord, as the Lord comaundide to hym. 
And he took the oynement, and blood" 
that was in’ the auter, and ‘spreynte on” 
Aaron, and hise* clothis, and onY ‘the sones 
of hym?, and on her clothis. And whanne 3 
he* hadde halewid hem in her clothing, he 
comaundide to hem, and seide, Sethe 3e 
fleischis® bifor the ‘3atis of the tabernacle‘, 
and there ete 3e tho’; also ete 3e the looues 
of halewyng, that ben put in the panyere®, 
as God comaundide to me, ‘and seidef, Aa- 
ron and hise sones schulen ete tho’ looues; 
sotheli whateuer thing is residue" of the 32 
fleisch and loouesi, fier schal waste*. Also 33 
3e schulen not go out of the dore of the 
tabernacle in seuene daies, til to the day 
in which the tyme of 3oure halewyng schal 


x Om. BDEFH. 


Yeende 1s. W alle her rizt eeris 1s. the rizt eere 
yandhea prim. 7% heldet. 
dhasket 1s. ¢withis.  f aftir s, 


k he bitook 1s. 1 thees thingis 1s. | ™ had arerid 


% he took hem of her hondis and brente hem vpon 1. these thinges taken 
P smell rs. 


qOm. A sec.m. * Moyses 1s. § halewyng is. the 
x on hise s. Yvponis. 4 his sones 1s. 


ditr. ebaskett 1s. fseiyng x. &thilker. 


VIII. 36—IX. 9. 


dwelle in the tabernacle, al about kepynge 
the wardes of the Lord, lest 3e dien; so 

36forsothe it is comaundide to me. And 
Aaron and his sones diden alle thingis, 
that the Lord spak bi the hoond of 
Moyses. 


CAP. IX. 


1 The ei3t day forsothe doon, Moyses 
clepide Aaron, and his sones, and the 
greet men thur3 birthe of Yrael; and he 
2seide to Aaron, Tak fro the droue a calf 
for synne, and a wether into brent sacri- 
fice, eithir with out wemme, and offre 
3hem before the Lord. And thow shalt 
speke to the soues of Yrael, Take 3e a 
geyt for synne, and a calf, and a lombe 
of o 3eer and without wemme, into brent 
4sacrifice, an oxe and a wether for pesible 
thingis; and offre 3e hem before the Lord, 
in the sacrifice of echon offrynge tried 
flour spreynt with oyle; to day forsothe 
5the Lord shal apere to 30ow. Thanne thei 
token alle thingis, that Moyses hadde co- 
maundide, at the dore of the tabernacle, 
where, whanne al the multitude stoode, 
6 Moyses seith, This is the word that the 
Lord comaundide, do 3e, and the glorie 
70f hym shal apere to 3ow. And he seide 
to Aaron, Come ny3 to the auter, and 
offre for thi synne; offre brent sacrifice, 
and prey for thee, and theY puple; and 
whanne thou sleest the hoost of the pu- 
ple, prey for hem, as the Lord hath co- 
smaundide. And anoon Aaron goynge to 
the auter offred a calf for his synne ; 
9whos blood his sones offreden to hym, in 
the which wetynge the fyngre he towchide 
the hornes of the auter, and heelde the 


LEVITICUS. 


311 


be fillid!; for the halewyng is endid in 
senene dayes, as it is doon™ in present" 34 
tyme, that the ri3tfulnesse® of sacrifice? 
were fillid4, 3e schulen dwelle dai and 35 
ny3t in the tabernacle, and 3e" schulen 
kepe the kepyngis of the Lord, that 3e die 
not; for so it is comaundid to me. And36 
Aaron and hise sones diden alle thingis, 
whiche the Lord spak bi the hond of 
Moises. 


CAR. 1X: 


Forsothe whanne the ei3tithe’ dai was. 
maad', Moises clepide Aaron, and hise 
sones, and the grettere men in birthe of 
Israel; and he seide to Aaron, Take} thou2 
of the droue a calf for synne, and a ram 
‘in to" brent sacrifice, euer either with oute 
wem, and offre tho’ bifor the Lord. And3 
thou schalt speke to the sones of Israel, 
Take 3e a buk of geet for synne, and a 
calf, and a lomb of o 3eer and with ont 
wem, in to brent sacrifice, an oxe and a4 
ram for pesible thingis ; and offre 3e tho” 
bifor the Lord, and offre 3e whete* flour 
spreynt with oile in the sacrifice of echY; 
for to dai the Lord schal appere to 30u. 
Therfor thei token alle thingis, whiches 
Moises comaundide, to* the dore of the 
tabernacle, where, whanne al the multi- 
tude stood, Moises seide, This is the word, 6 
which? the Lord comaundide, do 3c, and 
his glorie schal appere to 30u. And Moises7 
seide to Aaron, Neiz3e thou to the auter, 
and offre thou for thi synne; offre thou 
brent sacrifice, and preye for thee, and for 
the puple; and whanne thou hast slayu the 
sacrifice of the puple, preye thou for hein, 
as the Lord comaundide. And anoon Aa-s 
ron neizjede to the auter, and offride® a 
calf for his synne; whos blood hise sones9 
offriden* to him, in which® blood hef dip- 
pide the® fyngur, and touchide® the hornes 


Y for the p. 


1 fulfillid rs. ™doon now. ® this present ts. 


9 fulfillid 13. * Om. F. § eiz3te &. viij. s. 
Xtried 1s. Yechofhemits. Zatis. 4 that 1. 
¢ the which x, f Aaronis. §& his 1s. 


o ri3tfulnesse, ether du ordre BNQX. 
t fulfillid s. 
b 3e if Is, 
h he touchide ts. 


P the sacrifice is. 
Vv thou hem 1. thou thos. W hem 1. 
4 offriden or brou3zlen s 


u for is. 
© he offride 1s. 


t that is, pur- 
ueie of thi 
coostis a calf 
to be offrid for 
thi synne. Lire 
here. ¥X. that 
is, purneie of 
thin owe costis. 
8. 


312 


lorelyf at the foot of it; and the talw3, and 
the litil reynes and the calle of the mawe 
that ben for synne, he brent vpon the au- 
ter, as the Lord comaundide to Moyses. 
1 The flesh forsothe, and the skynne of it 
with out the tentis he brent with fier. 
12 And he offrede the slawn offryng of the 
brent sacrifice, and his sones offreden the 
blood of it to hym, the which he heelde 
13bi ennyroun of the auter; that also oost 
cutt in to gobetis, with the heed, and alle 
the lymes thei offriden; the whiche alle 
uvpon the auter he brente with fier, before 
wasche with water the entrayles, and the 
isfeet. And offrynge for the synne of the 
puple he slewe a goote, and the auter 
1. clensid he made brent sacrifice, echynge 
into the sacrifyce offrynges of licours that 
ben offryd togidere, and brennynge hem 
vpon the auter, with out the cerymonyes 
isof the morutide brent sacryfice. And he 
offrede an oxe, and a wether, the pesible 
oostes of the puple; and his sones of- 
freden the blood to hym, the which he 
19 heelde vpon the auter in enniroun. The 
talw3 forsothe of the oxe, and the tay] of 
the wether, and the litil reynes with her 
29 talw3es, and the calle of the mawe, thei 
putten vpon the breestes. And whanne 
21the talw3es weren brent in the auter, the 
breestis of hem, and the ri3t shuldres 
Aaron areryuge before the Lord seuerde, 
22as Moyses comaundide. And strecchynge 
out hondes to the puple he blesside hem; 
and so fulfillid the oostes for synne, and 
the brent sacrifices, aud the pesible thinges, 
23he descendide. Moyses forsothe and Aa- 
ron goon into the tabernacle of witness- 
yng, and therafter goon out blissiden to 
the puple; and the glorie of the Lord 
24aperyde to al the multitude. And loo! 
fier goon out fro the Lord deuowrede the 
brent sacrifice, and the talw3es, that weren 


ihe helde 1. he shedde s. * blood that was left 1. lefte hlood s. 
4 with 1. 
x the membris crs. 
4 sacrifices K. 


N ypon Is. © the litle 1s. p Aaron Is. 
u brouzten rKLOgRSTX. VOm. 1s. W that K. 
b he addide 1s. © the cerymonyes rs. 


LEVITICUS. 


IX. 10—24. 


of the anter{, and schedde! the residue at — + #he auter, 
the foundement! therof™; and he fente ho scnnccumee 
on® the auter the ynnere fatnesse, and "* °*** 
litle? reynes, and the calle of the mawe, as 
the Lord comaundide to Moises. Forsothe 11 
he? brente bi4 fier without the castels™ the 
fleischis* and skyn‘ therof. And he of-12 
fride the beeste of brent sacrifice, and hise 
soues offriden" to hym the blood therof, 
which he schedde bi the’ cumpas of the 
auter; thei offriden also thilke” sacrifice 13 
kit in to gobetis, with the heed, and alle 
membris* ; and he brente bi fier alle these 
thingis onY the auter, whanne the entrailis 14 
and feet? weren waischun* bifor with wa- 
tir. And he offride and killide a buk ofis 
geet, for the synne of the puple; and 
whanne the auter was clensid, he madeis 
brent sacrifice, and addide? in to the sacri-17 
fice fletynge offryngis that ben offrid to- 
gidere; and he brente tho on the anter, 
without cerymonyes® of brent sacrifice’ of 
the morewtid. He offride also an oxe, and1s 
a ram, pesible sacrifices® of the puple; and 
hise sones offriden to hym the blood, which‘ 
he schedde’ bi the" cumpas of the auter. 
Forsothe thei puttiden oni the brestis* the 19 
ynnere fatnesse of the oxe, and the tail of 
the ram, and the litle reynes with her fat- 
nessis, and the calle of the mawe. And 20 
whanne the ynnere fatnessis weren brent 
in! the auter, Aaron departide the brestis, 21 
and the ri3t schuldris of tho™, and reiside” 
bifor the Lord, as Moises comaundide. 
And he strei3te forth hondis® to the puple, 22 
and blesside it; and so whanne the sacri- 
fices? for synne, and brent sacrifices’, and 
pesible sacrifices, weren fillid’, he’ cam 
dount, Sotheli Moyses and Aaron entriden 23 
in to the tabernacle of witnessyng, and" 
3eden out’ aftirward, and blessiden the pu- 
ple; and the glorie of the Lord apperide 
to al the multitude. And lo“! fier 3ede 24 


Ifoundementis ca. ™ of the auter ts. 
r tentis Is. 8 fleishe 1. t the skyn isw. 
Yvpon 1s. Zthe feet s. 4 wasched L. 


€sacrifice c. fthe which1. & helde x. »& Om. 1. 


ivpon is. brestis of these beestiss. Jvponis. ™hemr. ®reisidehemis. © his hondis rks. 
P sacrifice B. 4 sacrificec. 1 fulfillid 1s. § Aaron 1s. t doun fro the place of sacrifying s. 4 and 


vdoun w. Wso 5. 


they 1s. 


X. 1—9. 


vpon the auter; the which whanne the 
puple hadde seen, thei preiseden the Lord, 
fallynge doun in to her faces. 


CAP. X. 


1 And Nadab and Abin, the sones of Aa- 
ron, cau3t the censerys, putten’ fier and 
encense there aboue, offrynge before the 
Lord alien fier, that to hem was not co- 

2gmaundid. And fier goon out fro the Lord, 
deuowrede hem, and thei ben deed before 

3the Lord. And Moyses seide to Aaron, 
This is that the Lord hath spokun, Y 
shal be halowid in hem that neizen to: 
me, and in the si3t of al the puple Y shal 
be glorified ; the which thing herynge, 

4 Aaron helde his pees. Moyses forsothe, 
Mysael,and* Elizaphan, the sones of Osyel, 
the vncle of Aaron, clepid, seith to hem, 
Gothe, and takith 3oure britheren fro the 
si3t of the seyntuarie, and berith out of 

sthe tentis. And anoon goynge thei token 
hem, as thei lien clothid with her lynnen 
clothes, and thei kesten hem out, as it 

6was comaundid to hem. And Moyses 
spak to Aaron, and to Eliazar and to 
Ytamar, his sones, Wole 3e not make 
jonre heedes nakid, and wole 3e not kutte 
joure clothes, lest perauenture 3e dien, 
and vpon al the cumpanie sprenge indig- 
nacioun; 3oure bretheren and al the hons 
of Yrael weilen thei the brennyng that 
7the Lord hath reryde. 3e forsothe shulen 
not goon out the 3ates of the tabernacle, 
ellis 3e shulen peryshe; the oyle forsothe 
of the holi anoyntyng is vpon 30w. The 
whiche diden alle thinges after the heeste 
sof Moyses. And the Lord seide to Aa- 
gron, Wyn, and alle that may make dronke, 
thow and thi sones shulen not drynke, 
whanne 3e shulen goo into the tabernacle 


2 putten in EB. 


Xyponts. Y fallinge doun vpon is. 2 the censeris 1s. @ and w. 


LEVITICUS. 


313 


out fro the Lord, and deuouride the brent 
sacrifice, and the ynnere fatnesses .that 
weren on* the auter; and whanne the cum- 
panyes hadden seyn this thing, thei preis- 
eden the Lord, ‘and felden onY her faces. 


CAP. Xx. 


And whanne Nadab and Abyu, the sones 1 
of Aaron, hadden take censeris’, thei* put- 
tiden? fier and encense abou, and offriden® 
bifor’ the Lord alien fier, which® thing’ 
was not comaundid to hem. And fier 3ede2 
out fro the Lord, and deuourides} hem, 
and thei weren deed bifor the Lord. Ands 
Moises seide to Aaron, This thing it is 
which" the Lord spak, Y schal be halewid 
in hem that nei3en to me’, and Y schal be 
glorified in the  si3t of al the puple; which! 
thing Aaron herde, and was stille. So-4 
theli whanne Moises hadde clepid Mysael 
and Elisaphan, the sones of Oziel, brother™ 
of Aaron’s fadir, he" seide to hem, Go 3e, 
and take® awey 3oure britheren fro the? 
si3t of seyntuarie4, and bere 3e" out of the 


castels’. And anoon thei 3eden, and tokens 


hem, as thei laien clothid with lynnun 
cootis, and castiden' out", as it was co- 
maundid to hem. 
Aaron, and to Eliasar and Ithamar, the 
sones of Aaron, Nyle 3e make nakid{ 
3oure heedis’, and nyle 3e reende™ clothis*, 
lest perauenture 3e dienY, and indigna- 
cioun’ rise on* al the cumpany; 3oure 
britheren and all the hows of Israel by- 
weile> the brennyng which® the Lord 
reiside’, But 3e schulen not go out of the7 
jatis of the tabernacle, ellis 3e schulen 
perische ; for the oile of hooli® anoyntyng 
is on jou. Whiche' diden alle thingis bi 
the comaundement® of Moises. Also the® 
Lord seide to Aaron, Thou and thi soness 
schulen not drynke wyn, and al thing that 
may make drunkun, whame 3e schulen 


a Om. ABEFH. 


b puttiden yn 1. puttiden info hem s. 


¢ thei offriden 1s. 4to1s. €the which rx. f fier k. & deuouride, that is, hillide hems, ” that 1s. 
ime onwarlys. * Om.s. \the which 1, ™ the brothirrs. ®clepidhes, ©takethis. P Om. 1s, 
‘the seyntnarier. '3ehemis. S$ tentis1s. t thei threwen hemis. “hem out x.  V heedis, feeringe 


off 3oure heer 1s. © to rente 15. 


X 30ure clothes 1Ks. 


y dien bi veniaunce s. 2 indignacioun of God ts. 


@ vpon 1s. » biweile thei s. ¢ that 1s. 4 hath reiside vp 1s. ¢ the hoolic. fthe whiche 1. & heest 1s. 


Ss 


And Moises spak to¢ 


+ deuouride 
hem, that is, 
killide hem, for 
nether her bo- 
dies, nether her 
elothis weren 
wastid, and so 
it semeth that 
thei weren 
sauyd. Lire 
here. CGOQX. 


t make nakid, 
ete. in Ebren it 
it, 3e selmlen 
not encreesse 
3onre heedis, 
that is, suffringe 
the heeris wexe 
over comyn 
maner, as he- 
then diden iu 
deth of frendis. 
Lire here. 8c 
GQ@x. 


314 


of witnessyng, lest 3e dien; for the euer- 
lastynge heeste it is into 3o0ure genera- 
lo ciouns ; and that 3e han kunnyng of dem- 
yng bitwix holy and cursid, bitwix de- 
u1fowlid and clene; and that 3e techen the 
sones of Yrael alle my lawful thinges, that 
the Lord hath spokun to hem bi the hoond 
120f Moyses. And Moyses spak to Aaron, 
and to Eliaz3ar and to Ytamar, his sones, 
that weren laft, Tak 3e the sacrifice that 
was laft of the offryng of the Lord, and 
etith it with outen sourdow3, biside the 
i3auter, for holy of halowis yt is. 3e shu- 
len eete forsothe in holy place that that 
is 3euen to thee and to thi sones, of the 
offrynges of the Lord, as it is comaundid 
14to me. And the litil breest that is offered, 
and the shuldre that is seuered, 3e shulen 
eete in the moost cleene place, thow, and 
thi sones, and thi dou3tren with thee; to 
thee forsothe and to thi free children ben 
put vp, of the hoolsum oostis of the sones 
15 0f Yrael; forthi that the shuldre, and the 
breest, and the talw3es that ben brent in 
the auter, thei han arerede before the 
Lord; and perteynen to thee, and to thi 
sones, thur} perpetual lawe, as the Lord 
1shath comaundide. Among thes thingis 
the goot that was offred for synne whanne 
Moyses sou3te, he foonde ful brent, and 
wrooth a3ens Eliazar and Ytamar, the 
17sones of Aaron that laften, seith, Whi 
han 3e not eetun in hooli place the oost 
for synne, that is holy of halowes, and 
3yue to 30w, that 3e bere the wickidnes 
of the multitude, and preye for it in the 
1ssi3t of the Lord; nameliche sith of the 
blood of it is not brou3t® with ynne the 
halowes, and 3e shulen eete it in the 
seyntuarie, as the Lord hath comaundide 
i9to me? And Aaron answerde, To day is 
offred the slawn offryng for synne, and 
brent sacrifice before the Lord; to me 
forsothe is faln that thou seest; what 
manere iny3te I eete it, aud plees to the 


LEVITICUS. 


X. 10—19. 


entre in to the tabernacle of witnessing, 
lest 3e dien; for it is euerlastynge co- 
maundement%® in to 3oure generaciouns, 
that 3e haue kunnyng to make doom by-10 
twixe hooli thing and vnhooli, bitwixe 
pollutid® thing and cleene; and that 3e11 
teche the sones of Israel alle my lawful 
thingis, whiche the Lord spak to hem bi 
the hond of Moyses. And Moises spak to 12 
Aaron, and to Eliazar and Ythamar, hise 
sones, that weren residuc', Take 3e ‘the 
sacrifice that lefte of the offryng of the 
Lord, and ete 3e it with out sour dow, bi- 
sidis the auter, for it is hooli ‘of the noum- 
bre* of hooli thingis. Sotheli 3e schulen 13 
ete in the hooli place that that is 3ouun 
to thee and to thi sones, of the offryngis 
of the Lord, as it! is comaundid to me 
Also thou, and thi sones, and thi dou3tris 14 
with thee, schulen ete in the clenneste 
place the brest which™ is offrid, and the 
schuldur which is departid; for tho ben 
kept to thee and to thi fre sones, of the 
heelful sacrifices of the sones of Israel; for 15 
thei reiseden bifor the Lord the schuldur 
and brest", and the ynnere fatnessis that 
ben brent in the auter; and perteynen 
tho® to thee, and to thi sones, bi euer- 
lastynge lawe, as the Lord comaundide. 
Among these thingis whanne Moises sou3te 16 
the ‘buk of geet? that was offrid for synne, 
he foond 7¢ brent, and he was wrooth a3ens 
Eliazar and Ythamar, ‘the sones of Aaron 
that weren left™. And he seide, Whi eten 17 
not 3e the sacrifice for synne in the hooli 
place, which sacrifice is hooli ‘ofthe noum- 
bre‘ of hooli thingis, and is" 30uun to 3o0u, 
that 3e bere the wickydnesse of the multi- 
tude, and preye for it in the sij3t of the 
Lord; moost sithen of the blood therof is 18 
not borun yn with ynne hooli thingis, and 
je ou3ten ete’ it in the seyntuarie, as it is 
comaundid to me? And Aaron answeride, 19 
Sacrifice for synne, and brent sacrifice is 
oftrid to dai bifor the Lord; sotheli this’ 


b broust in DE. 


egheestis. » defoulid 1s. ileft alyue 1s. leftu. k Om. mr sec.m, 1O0m.s. ™thatis. the brest 13. 


© thei N, 


P geet bucke 1s. buk w. 
is 18. 


Ytoete sw. W this thing rs. 


q Aarons sones 18s. 


r left alyue 1s. the which1. tOm.1. Vit 


X. 20-——XI. 16. 


20 Lord in cerymonyes with weilynge mynde? 
The which thing whanne Moyses hadde 
herde, he resseyuede satysfaccioun. 


CAP. XI. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses and 
2 Aaron, seiynge, Sey 3e to the sones of 
Yrael, Kepe 3e alle thingis that Y haue 
writun to 3ow, that I be 3oure God. 
Thes ben the beestis that 3e shulen eete, 
3 of alle that beren lijf on erthe; alle that 
han* the clee’ dyuydid, and chewith kude, 
4in beestis 3e mowen eete; what ever for- 
sothe chewith kude, and hath clee, but 
dyuydith it not, as camel and othere, 3e 
shulen not eete it, and among vnclenne 
sthinges 3e shulen holde it. An vrchon, 
that chewith kude, and dyuideth® not the 
6clee, is vnclene; an haar forsothe, for and 
he chewith kude, but the clee he dyuidith® 
znot; and a sowe, that al be it that sche 
dyuidithf the clee, she chewith not kude. 
3 Of the flesh of thes eete 3e not, ne towche 
3e the careyns, for thei ben vnclene to 
930w. Thes ben also that ben getun in 
10 Watris, and it is leeful to eete; alle that 
han® fynnes and scaales, as wel in the 
see, as in the" floodes and stondynge wa- 
tris, 3e shulen eete; what euer! forsothe 
hath no fynnes and scaales, of hem that 
in watris ben meued and lyuen, shulen 
11be abhomynable to 30u, and as cursid ; 
je shulen not eete the flesh of hem, and 
12the faln to deeth 3e shulen shonne. Alle 
that han not fynnes and scaales in wa- 
13 tris‘, shulen be polute!. Thes ben that 
3e shulen not eete of bryddes, and ben to 
be shoned of 3ow ; an egle, and a griffyn, 
14and a merlyoun; and kijt™, and a grijp 
isafter his kynde; and alle of crowe kynde 
i¢into his liknes; ‘an ostriche", and a ny3t 


‘hath spern. ‘claw.  ¢ deuydid p. 
k the watris sperHu. | polutid p. 


x Om. 1s. 
¢ han 1. 
il K. 
partith 1s. 
x han s. 
© fleishe 1. 


dthe 1s. ¢the code 1s. quede L. 
8 fleishe 1. 
% thingis s. 

& beyng in ts. 


q the codeis. ° it ts. 
Y freshe floodis s. 
f her 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


f deuyde BDEFH. 
ma kijt BDEFH. 


Y satisfaccioun or couenable answere s. 
fheest 1s. 8 it departith 1s. 
I that 1s. 

t these beestis 15. 
ahem 1. 
h the whiche 1. 


k cirogrille, cther a conyng N. c. or a cony 8. 


315 


that thou seest, bifelde to me; how my3te 
¥ ete it*, ether plese God in cerymonyes 
with soreuful soule? And whanne Moises 20 
hadde herd this, he resseyuede satisfac- 
cioun’. 


CAP. XI. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and Aa-1 
ron, and seide, Seie 3e to the sones of Is-e 
rael, Kepe 3e alle thingis whiche Y wroot? 
to jou, that Y be 3oure God. These ben 
the beestis, whiche 3e schulen ete, of alle 
lyuynge* beestis of erthe; 3e schulen ete3 
‘al thing’ among beestis that hath* a‘ clee 
departid, and chewith code®; sotheli what 4 
euer thing’ chewith code, and hath a clee, 
but departith® not it, as a camel and 
othere beestis doon", 3e schulen not ete it, 
and 3e schulen arette! among vuclene 
thingis. A cirogrille*+, which! chewiths +44 cirogrite, 
code, and departith not the clee, is vn-  'stis,» beeste 


ful of thornes, 


clene; and an hare, for also he™ chewithg¢ 494 more than 
an irchoun. BC 


code", but® departithP not the clee; andy xex. In Ebru 

a swiyn, that chewith not code‘, thou3 he’ ee ae 

departith the clee. 3e schulen not ete thes 

fleischis® of these, nether 3e schulen touche 

the" -deed bodies, for tho ben vnclene to 

jou. Also these thingis ben’ that bens 

gendrid in watris, and is leueful to ete; 

3e schulen ete al thing’ that hath* fynnes 10 

and sealis, as wel in the see, as in floodisY 

and stondynge watris; sotheli what euer 

thing? of tho* that ben moued and lyuen? 

in watris, hath not fynnes and scalis, schal 

be abhominable, and wlatsum¢ to jou; 3e¢11 

schulen not ete the fleischis® of tho, and 

3e schulen eschewe the’ bodies deed bi 

hem silf. Alle thingis in® watris that han 12 

uot fynnes and scalis, schulen be pollutid, 

These thingis ben of foulis whiche" 3e13 

schulen not ete, and schulen be eschewid 

of 30u; an cgle, and ai grippe, aliete{*, + atiete, thatis, 
: akynde of cgle. 

and a kyte, and a vultur by his kynde 314 scéxxex. 

h Om. E. 


& hath gpern. ier eE. 


ng strucion £ pr.m. 


athe lynynge rs. > alle thingis s. 
hOm.1. i acounte if ts. arette 
mits. 4thecodes. Sand F. Pit de. 
uheris. Vit beni. W thingis 1s. 
b lyneth w. ©asacursid is. 4 and 3e 18, 
1Om. plures. * an aliete ts. 


8s 2 


z haue write 1. 


316 


crowe®, and a coote, and an hawke after 
i7his kynde; an owle, and a deuedep?, and 
the vnelene watir foule, that with his 
bille puttynge water into his ars, purgith 
ishym silf; a swan, a cormaraunt, and a 
19 pellicane; and a gerfawcoun, and a iay 
after his kynde; and a lapwynk, and a 
2zoreremous. Alle of fowles that goth4 on 
foure feete, shal be abhomynable to 30w ; 
21what euer forsothe goth on foure feete, 
but hath lenger theis bihynde, bi the 
whiche he lepith vpon the’ erthe, 3e shu- 
22]en eete; as is bruk in his kynde, ‘that is 
the kynde of locust er it haue wenges’, 
and attachus, ‘that is the kynde of locust, 
whanne it bigynneth to flee’, and opy- 
machus, ‘that is a foule enemy to ser- 
pentes’, and a locust, eche after his kynde. 
23 What euer' forsothe of foules that oonli 
hath foure feete, shal be to 30w as cursid 
24thing; and who so euert towchith the faln 
to deeth of hem, shal be polutid" and vn- 
25clene vnto the euentyde; and if it were 
nede that he bere eny of hem deed, he 
shal washe his clothes, and he shal he 
vnelene vnto the goyng doun of the 
2¢sunne. LEche forsothe beeste that hath 
aY clee, but dyuideth not it, ne chewith 
kude, shal be vnclene; and what euer” 
27 touchith it, shal be defoulid. That that* 
goth vpon hondes, of al that berith lijf 
that goon on foure feete, shal be vnclene ; 
who so touchith the faln to deth of hem, 
28 shal be polutidY vnto euen?; and who so 
berith siche maner careyns, shal wasshe 
his clothis, and he shal be vnelene vnto 
the euen; for alle thes ben vnelennes* 
20to 30u. Thes forsothe among polutid? 
thinges shulen be holde, of hem that ben 
meued in erthe; a wesil, and a mouse, 
and a cokedril, eche after his kynde ; ‘that 


© fowl £ pr.m. 
v Om. BDEFII. 
> polute BDEFI. 


P deuedoppe BpEt. 
Werk. *X Om. 8B. 


I the gras. 
P Om. F. 4 a dippere 1s. 
tit hath 1s. 4 thies rs. 
cursid rs. > pollutid z. 
the rs. til to the x. 
Om. 1. 


tOm. 6. 


w Om. c. 
a ynto 1s. 


Vv vpon Is. 
e Om. 18. 
i acountid 1s. 
® eche aftir his 1s. P kyndes w. 

U ynto the 1s. til to the x. 


LEVITICUS. 


q gon D. 
¥ polute serum. 


m rauenous kynde npFKLMNowx. kynde of rauens 18. 

Ya cormoraunt DGIS. 
X alle locustus s. 

€ the euentid ks. 

k foule pcart. 

4a mygal 1. an amygal s. 


XI. 17-—29. 


and al of! ‘rauyns kynde™ bi his licnesse 3 15 « itis, that is, 


. i a eiconye, that 
a strucioun, and” ny3t crowe, a lare®, and? 16 cui peadotle 


thi . . +1. 77 and serpentis. 
an hauke bi his kinde ; an owle, and dip- 17 sree a 
pere?, and ibis*; a swan and cormoraunt’, sane ee 

4 ; . “i elene watir 
and a pellican; a faweun, a iay bi his 19 foul, that with 


his hille put. 
kynde; a leepwynke, and a reremows®.  tyoge hese 


Al thing of foulis that goith on foure oe 


aan + 9) ailf. s. 
feet, schal be abhomynable to jou; sotheli21 ee Pa: 


what euer thing goith on foure feet, but frayt of locust, 
oe . . . ‘ ifor that it 
hath! lengere hipis" bihynde, bi whiche it hath wyngis. 


rOm. ze. 8 Om. E prem. 
2 the even BDEF sce.m. H. 


tere. 4 pollute z. 


is a bruket in his kynde, and acatus{, and — **» uyt of lo- 
haue wyngis. 
that is, a beeste 
nable* to 301; and who euer touchith her 24 
QX. opymacus, 
ae: ‘ to serpentis. s. 
if it is nede, that he bere ony deed thing 
of iiij. feet, that 
of the sunne. Sotheli ech beeste that hath 26 yege the nether 
restith on the 
é . : : di ter bi 
thing touchith it, schal be defoulid. That27 iy a 
an orchuy.cax, 
that touchith her bodies deed bi heim silf, 
an anygat, 
gileful aod 
to? euentid; for alle these thingis ben vn- 
BCGKQX. @ Ctt- 
sele, and” mows, and a cocodrille*, ‘alle * 
iu to dyuerse 
§ stellio, that is, 
her bodies deed bi hem silf, schal be vn- bath many brist 
woime peyntid 
a yneleene BDEFU. that hath many 


. e BCGEK . 
skippith on’ the erthe, 3e schulen ete; as22y ‘cars, that 
fi eust, whauue it 
opymacus), and” a locuste, alle* bi her _ higymneth to 
kynde. Forsothe what euer thing’ of briddis 23 scexasx. 
oe opymacus, 
hath? foure feet oneli, it schal be abhomy- oe : 
that fiztith with 
serpentis. BCGK 
bodies deed bi hem silf, schal be defoulid4, : 
: se that is, a foule 
and ‘schal be* vnelene ‘til to’ enentid®; and 25 that is enemye 
* a cocodrille, 
2 ‘ . that is, a beest 
of these, he schal waische his clothis, and 4 < 
. hath nailes and 
he schal be vnelene til to the goyng doun yeh, and fees 
, f eheke vamou- 
a clee, but departith’ not it, nether chew- able, and be s.J 
ith code, schal be vnelene ; and what ever _ iond hi day, 
ny3t BCGKQsx. 
that goith on® hondis, of alle beestis that 18 Porm itis 
gon on’ foure feet, schal be vnclene; he, + sat, ether 
a glotenonuse 
nOWS. BCGKQX. 
schal be defoulid ‘til to® euentid; and he, 28 that is, a tre- 
: ‘ : ; 1 b 
that berith siche deed bodies, schal waische feet ent. 
Z| 
hise clothis, and he schal be vnelene ‘til 
most glotcrouse 
mous. $s. 
he t camelion 
clene to 30u. Also these thingis schulen 29 that is, a heeste 
cat . 5 4 dyuersid iu dy- 
be arettid! among defoulid*® thingis, of terse colours 
1 pian 
these! that ben moned on™ erthe; a we-  jretion that Hs 
a beest diuersid 
bi her® kynde?; mygal4{, camelion™{, and 30 colours ate 
* yuerse i0K- 
stellio§, and lacertas||, and' a maldewerp. _ yugis. s. 
Alle these ben vnelene; he that touchith 313 yor that 
jemmes in the 
clene ‘til to" euentid ; and that thing schal 32 bak. nccxex. 
stellio, that is, a 
as with sterris. s. 
|| facerta, that 
is, a serpent 
schuldris as 
hondis. nce@ 
$x. 


nac.andars. ©lare or a coot s. 
5 reremous ether a backe BGKNQX. r. or a backe s. 

Ythingisc. 2that haths. as 
fhe departith 1. & vpon 1s. b ynto 
I these thingis1, ™im plures. ™ and a 1KLsw. 
racamelion s. $a lacerta s. 


XI. 30—39. 


is a beest of foure feete, hauynge the ne- 
ther cheke lap vnmeuable, and® meuynge 
30the ouere’; a mygal, ‘that is a beeste 
born trecherows to bigile, and moost glo- 
terous®, a camelion, ‘that is a beeste varyed 
in to diuerse colours, after diuerse lok- 
ingis®, and a stellioun, ‘that is a werme 
depeyntid as with sterris®, and a lacert’, 
‘that is a serpent that is clepid a liserd®, 
3iand a moldwerp. Alle thes ben vnelene ; 
who toucheth$ the faln to deth of hem, 
32shal be vnelene vnto the euen; and vpon 
what thing fal eny thing of the faln to 
deth of hem, shal be polut®, as wel the 
treen' vessel and clothing, as skynnes and 
heren shertes; and in what thing is werk 
maad, it shal be wett with water, and 
thei shulen be polut* vnto the enen, and 
33so afterward thei shulen be clensid. A 
britel vessel forsotlie, in the which eny of 
thes fallith with ynne, shal be polut*, and 
34therfor it is to be broke. Al the meete 
that 3e shulen eete, if water were shied 
vpon it, shal be vnelene; al meltynge 
thing, that shal be dronke of! eny vessel, 
35shal™ be vnelene; and what" thing of 
siche thing faln° to deeth falle vpon it, 
shal be vnclene, other forneyses, ‘or ke- 
tels?, shulen be destruyed, and shulen be 
36 vnclene. The welles forsothe and sisterns, 
and al the gederyng togidere of watris, 
shulen be clene. He that touchith the 
37 faln to deth of hem, shal be polutid. If 
it falle vpou the seede, it shal not polute 
381t; if forsothe eny man with water helde 
vpon the seede, and afterward with the 
faln to deth were touchid, anone it shal 
39be polutid. If the beeste that is leeful to 
30w to eete were deed, he that touchith 
the careyn of it shal be vnelene vnto 


LEVITICUS. 


317 


be defoulid, on’ which ony thing of her 
bodies deed bi hem silf fallith, as wel a 
vessel of tree, and a cloth, as“ skynnes 
‘and heiris* ; and in what euer thing werk 
is maad, it schal be dippid in watir, and 
thoY thingis schulen be defoulid ‘til to 
euentid, and so aftirward tho* schulen be 
clensid. Sotheli a> vessel of erthe, ins 
which ony thing of these fallith with 
ynne, schal be defoulid, and therfor it 
schal be brokun. Ech mete, which* 3e31 
schulen ete, schal be vnelene, if water*{ is 
sched‘ thereon’; and ech fletynge thing, 
which! is druukun of ech! vessel, ‘where 
ynne vuclene thingis* bifelden', schal be 
vuelene; and what euer thing of siche deed 35 
bodies bi hem silf felde theronne™, it schal 
be vnelene, whether furneisis®, ethir® ves- 
selsP of4 thre feet, tho" schulen be destried, 
and schulen* be vnelene. Sotheli wellis36 
and cisternes, and al thet congregacioun" 
of watris, schal be clene’. He that touch- 
ith her bodi deed bi it” silf, schal be de- 
foulid. If it fallith on* seed, it schal nots7 
defoule the seed; sotheli if ony man3s 
schedithY seed with watir, and aftirward 
the watir is touchid with deed bodies bi* 
hem silf, it schal be defoulid anoon. If39 
a beeste is deed, whieli* it is leueful to 30n 
to’ ete, he that touchith the deed bodi 
therof schal be vnelene ‘til to® cuentid; 
and he that etith therof ony thing, ethir 40 
berith*, schal®@ waische his clothis, and 
schalf be vnelene ‘til tof euentid. Al thing + 
that crepith on erthe, schal be abhomy- 
nable, nether schali be takun* in to mete. 
‘What euer! thing goith on™ the brest and 42 
foure® feet, and hath many feet, ethir 
drawun?® bi the erthe, 3e schulen not ete, 
for it is abhomynable?. Nyle 3e defoule 


Cin papern, ‘40m. prem. ¢ Om. & prim. flacort ar. & touchid p. » polutid p. i treenen ar. 
trenned x, * polutid vp. 13if 8. ™Om. 2. © whatever apru. whater x. © falled x. falle r. P other 
eheteles Ee. 

Yvponis. WofF. * or pilehis either heeren sehertis 1s. and of heiris w. yYOm.1. 2 vnto the is. 
tiltothe kK. @thei1. > of rr sup.ras.ofaoprmw. © in EILNoparrwx. ‘that 1. ¢ watir of sich 


a vessel 1. w. of an vnelcne vessel. s. f helde out 1s. 
™ sehal falle vpon 1s. 
t Om. z. 


k Om. 1s. 1 felden sew sec.m. Om. ts. 
4 stondynge vpon 1s. ‘theirs. * thoschulen F. 
“whem K. X*vponis. Y seheddith out ts. 
to1 ¢vnto ther. til to the s. 
the 1s. til to the x.» vpon 1s. 


2 on foure 1s. © ig drawun Is. 


iit schal 1. 
P ete 21. 


Z of s. 
@ berith 2 1. berith therof s. 

k Om. 1. takun of 307 8. 
4 abhom. fo ele s. 


Sthervpon s. )that1s. i sich a4. siche vnelene s. 

n furneys FG. © or HILPs. P chetelis s. 
u gederingis togidre 1s. V vnelene a pr. m, 
a bi it selff the which 1. bi z self which s. > for 
ehesehals. fhesehals. 8 vnto 
land whateuer w. ™ vpon ts. 


+ watir, thud is, 
vaclene watir. 
B. watir, that 
is, conteyned 
in a vessel, 
wherynue vn- 
clene thing bi- 
forseid felde. 
CGKQX. 


318 


4oeuen?; and he that etith of it eny thing, 
or berith, shal wasshe his clothes, and he 
41 shal be vnclene vnto euen. Al that crepith 
vpon erthe shal be abhomynable, ne shal 
42 be take vnto’ meet. What thing of foure 
feete goth’ vpon the breest, and hath 
many feete, ort bi the erthe is drawun, 3e 
shulen not eete, for it is abhomynable. 
43 Nyl 3e defoule 3oure soules, ne touche 
aseny thing of hem, lest 3e ben vnelene; Y 
forsothe am the Lord 30ure God; be 3e 
holy, for Y am hooli. Ne defoule 3e j3oure 
soules in eny crepynge thing that is 
4smeuyd vpon erthe; Y forsothe am the 
Lord, that hath" ladde 3ow fro the loond 
of Egipte, that Y shulde be to 3ow into 
God; 3e shulen be holy, for Y am holy. 
46 This is the lawe of the berynge lijf, and 
of foules, and of al lyuynge soule that is 
47meuyd in water, and crepith in erthe; that 
3e mowen knowe the differences of clene 
and of vnelene, and that 3e witen what 
3e owen to eete, and what to forsake. 


CAP. XII. 


1 The Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2 Spek to the sones of Yrael, and thow shalt 
seye to hem, A womman, if thur3 res- 
seyued seed she bare a maal, she shal be 
vnelene seuen dayes after the daies of the 
3seueryng of the flux of rotun blood; and 
the ei3t day the fawnt shal be circum- 
acidid. She forsothe thre and thretti daies 
shal dwelle in the blood of hir purifiyng ; 
al holi thing she shal not touche, ne goo 
in to the seyntuarie, to the tyme that the 
sdaies of hir purifiyng ben fulfillid. If for- 
sothe she bere a maydyn’ child, she shal 
be vnelene twey wekes, after the ryte of 
the flux of the rotun blood, and six and 
sixty dayes she shal dwelle in the blood 
sof hir puryfiyng. And whanne the daies 
of hir purifiyng weren fulfillid, other for 
sone, or for dou3ter, she shal bere a lomb 


the euen speru. Tinto £. § gon D. 


thems.  §& thing that 1s. 
¥ to forsake 1s. 2 seiynge s. 
rnptible 1s. f renneth fro hir s, 
tyme touche 1s. ynto 1. to s. 
clene 1s. 


€ Om. s. 

a Om. s. 
& the monethis c. 
m Om. L. 


LEVITICUS. 


U ypon 4s. 
b and childith s, 


 fulfillid 1s. 
* sixe ten A pr.m. sixe and fourti B. sixe and sixti IKMNWX. 


XI. 40—XII. 6. 


30ure soulis, nether touche 3e ony thing of 
tho’, lest 3e ben vnelene; for Y am 3oure 44 
Lord God; be 3e heoli, for Y am hooli. 
Defoule 3e not 3oure soulis in ech crep- 
ynge ‘beeste which’ is moued' on" erthe; 
for Y am the Lord, that ladde 30u out of4s 
the lond of Egipt, that Y schulde be to 
jou in to God; 3e schulen be hooli, for Y 
am hooli, This is the lawe of lyuynge4s 
beestes, and of foulis, and of ech lyuynge 
souleY which’ is moued in watir, and 
crepith in erthe; that 3e knowe differences* 47 
of clene thing and vnelene, and that 3e 
wite what 3e schulen ete, and what 3e 
owen forsake’. 


CAP 


And the Lord spak to Moises, ‘and seide?,1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and thou 2 
schalt seie to hem, If? a womman, whanne 
sche hath resseyued seed, childith a knaue 
child, sche schal be vnclene bi seuene daies 
bi the daies of* departyng’ of corrupt® 
blood, that renneth! bi monethis®; and the3 
3ong child schal be circumsidid in the 
eiz3tithe dai®, Sotheli sche schal dwelle4 
thre and thretti daies ini the blood of hir 
purifiyng ; sche schal not touche* ony hooli 
thing, nethir sche schal entre in to the 
seyntuarie, til! the daies of her™ clensing 
be fillid", Sotheli if sche childith a fe-s 
male, sche schal be vnelene twei woukis, bi 
the® custom of flowyng? of vnclene’ blood, 
and ‘thre scoor and sixe™ daies sche’ schal 
dwelle in the blood of her clensyng. And6é 
whanne the daies of hir clensyng, for a 


t otherz. thane £. VY meyde BpEn. 


x the differences 1s. 
4 departyng awey 1. © co- 
iunclene ins.  * in that 
Phir flowyng 1s. 4 the vn- 
8 Om. s. 


w that Is. 
¢ of hir s. 
h Om. CF prom. ELNP. 
© Om. Is. 


¥ thing plures. 


XII. 7——XIII. 6. 


of o 3eer in to brent sacrifice, and a cul- 
uer brid, or a turtil, for synne, at the 
7dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng ; and 
she shal take to the preest, the which 
shal offre it before the Lord, and shal 
preye for hir, and so she shal be maad 
clene fro the flux.of hyr blood. This is 
the lawe of the berynge maal and femaal. 


sAnd if the hoond of hir fynde not, ne’ 


may offre a lombe, she shal take two tur- 
turs’, or two cnluer bryddes, the oon into 
brent sacrifice, and that othir for synne; 
and the preest shal preye for hir, and so 
she shal be maad clene. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 The Lord spak to Moyses and Aaron, 
2seiynge, A man in whos skymne and flesh 
were sprongun dyuerse colour, or bleyne, 
other eny* thing li3tyng, that is to seie, 
a plaage of lepre, he shal be brou3t forth 
to Aaron, the preest, or to oon of eny of 
3his sones; the which whanne he seeth 
the lepre in the skynne, and the heeris 
chaungid into whijt colour, and thilk 
spice of lepre lower than the skynne and 
that other flesh, a plaage of lepre it is, 
and at the dom of hym he shal be se- 
auered. If forsothe li3tynge whitnesse 
were in the skynne, and no more lowe 
than that other flesh, and the heeris of 
before hadden colour, the preest shal re- 
scluse hym seuen daics; and he shal be- 
holden** the seuentheY day, and if forsothe 
theYY lepre be no forthermore runne, ne 
passe in the skynne the’ former*® termes, 
eftsones he shal recluse hym seuen other 
edayes; and the seuenthe® day he shal 
loke, if more derker were the lepre, and 


Xas eny BDEFH. 
b seuene E. 


W turtils Hu. 
more AF pr.m. 


torsrnr. fulfillidis. to be slayn in tos. 
% the whieh 1. @he sehal rks. »® Om.1s. © that childith 1s. 
£Om.1s. 4 fynde ss. i not, that is, hir power ts not s. 


to the prestis part for to preie s.. _ hir synne s. 
P the prest 1s. 4dofony 1s.  * the lepre rks. 

lowere 1s. W other 1s. * the fleisch 1s. 
ists. ¢ daies fro olher men 8. 


schal 1ks. i biholde Aim 1Ks. * Om. K. 


LEVITICUS. 


xX be holdun a. 


319 


sone, ether‘ for a dou3tir, ben fillid", sche 
schal brynge a lomb of o 3eer in to’ brent 
sacrifice, and a ‘bryd of a culuer™, ethir a 
turtle, for synne*, to the dore of the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng ; and sche schal 3yueY7 
to the preest, which’ sclial offre tho bifor 
the Lord, and schal* preye for hir, and 
so sche schal be clensid fro the flowyng 
of hir blood. This is the lawe of a zcom- 
man childynge® a‘ male®, ethirf af female. 
That if hir hond fyndith? not, nethir may* « 
offre a lomb, sche schal take twei turtlis, 
ethir twei ‘briddis of culueres!, oon in to 
brent sacrifice, and the tother™ for synne”; 
and the preest schal preye for hir, and so 
sche schal be clensid. 


CAP. XIII. 


The Lord spak to Moyses and Aaron,1 
and seide, A man in whos skyn and fleisch 2 
rysith dynerse colour, ether whelke, ethir 
as ‘sum scbynynge thing®, that is,a wounde 
of lepre, he schal be brou3t to Aaron 
preest?, ether to oon ‘who euer’ of hise 
sones ; and whanne he seeth lepre™ in’ thes 
skyn, and the heerist chaungide in to 
whijte colour, and that spice" of lepre 
lowere’ than the tother’ skyn and fleisch*, 
it is aY wounde of lepre, and he schal be 
departid at the ‘doom of the preest”. So-4 
theli if schynyng* whijtnesse is’ in the 
skyn, nethir is lower than the tother fleisch, 
and the heeris ben of the formere colour, 
the preest schal close hym seuene daies* ; 
and schal’ biholde hym in the seuenthes 
dai, and sotheli if the lepre wexith® not 
ferther, nethir passith the formere termes 
in the fleisch, eft the preest schal‘ close 
hym a3en seuene® other daies; and schal! 
biholde! in* the seuenthe day, if the lepre 
is! derkere™, and wexith not in the fleisch, 


Yseuene c&. Y¥ Om. 4. Zne A. 8 forther- 


Y 3yue fhis 1s. 
f or EILPs. 
m™ tothir 


Ww culuer brid 1s. 
4 Om. ts. 
K sche may Is, 


x hir synne 1s. 
e knane child x. 
1 enluer briddis 1s. 


© ony thing sehynynge 1. eny shynynge soor thing s. 
8 or meselrie in 8. 
y thanne as, 
4 the preest schal 1s. 
lis thanne 1. 


theer 3s. “the spicers. Ves 


2 preestis dooms. the schynyngis. » that 
ewexeis. fOm.1. &bisenenes. bhe 
m derk 1s. 


320 


not waxed® in the skynne, he shal clense 
hym, for it is a scab; and the man shal 
wasshe his clothis, and he shal be clene. 
7 That if afterward that he is seen of the 
preest, and 3oldun to clennesse, eftsone 
the lepre wexith, he shal be brou3te to 
hym, and of¢ ynclennes he shal be con- 
sdempnyd. The plaage of lepre if it were 
in a man, he shal be brou3t to the preest, 
yand he shal se hym; and whanne whijt 
colour were in the skynne, and of the 
heeres chaungith the si3t, thilke forsothe 
loquyk flesh apeerith®, the moost olde lepre 
it shal be demyd, and fulle rootid to the 
uskynne; and so the preest shal defoule 
hym, and not recluse, for it is of vnelen- 
iznesse ful open. If forsothe out flowef the 
rennynge Jepre in the skynne, and couer 
al the flesh, fro the heed vnto the feet, 
what thing vndir the si3t of the eyen 
isfallith ; the preest shal beholde hym, and 
deme’ it to be holdun moost" clene lepre, 
‘for thi! that a] be turned into whitnes, and 
14therfor the man shal be clene. Whanne 
forsothe quyk flesh aperyde in hym, 
isthanne thur3 the dome of the preest he 
shal be polut, and among vnclene he shal 
holdun; if the quyk flesh is spreynt with 
i6lepre, it is vnelene. That* if eftsones it 
were turned into whitnesse, and couereth 
17a] the man, the preest shal behoolde hym, 
isand deme to be clene. The flesh and 
the skyune, in the whiche a bocche! is 
19 growun, and helid, and in the place of 
the bocche! aperith a fel wounde, whijt, 
or derk reed, the man shal be brou3t to 
20the preest; the which whanne he hath 
seen the place of the lepre lower than 
that other flesh, and the heeris turned 
into whitnes, he shal defoule hym; a 
plaage forsothe of lepre is sprongun in 
2ithe bocche!. That if the heere is of the 
rather colour, and the fel wounde vnder 


¢ srowed E pr.m. 
moost E see. im. 


4 of his £ prim. 
i forther ar. Kk And & see.m. 


x thus seyn s. © b: the prestis dome is s. 


LEVITICUS. 


© peerith z. 


Som. 7—21- 


the preest schal clense hym*, for it 18 @ x she prese 
Schul elense 


scabbe; and the man schal waische hise se ee 
clothis, and he schal be clene. That if the7 schal deme 

fe . : him [to be 1s.] 
lepre wexith eft, aftir that he is seyn™ of  cleene. ncoixt 
the preest, and is® 30ldun to clennesse, he 7" 
schal be brou3t? to the preest, and schal4 
be demed of" vnclennesse. If the woundes 
of lepre is in man‘, he schal be brou3t to 
the preest, and he schal se the man; and9 
whanne whijt colour is in the fleisch, and 
chaungith* the si3t' of heeris}, and thilke" + chaungita 

A 4 A A the sizt af 

fleisch apperith quyk’, it scha] be demid 10 iceris, that is, 
eldest” lepre, and growun to the skyn; Raa 
therfor the preest schal defoule hym{, and 11 2 defense winks 
he* schal not closeY eft, for it is of opyn {ht fo a 
vnelennesse. But if lepre* rennynge about 12 foul. ncotkixe 
in the skyu ‘flourith out®, and hilith al the “~ 
fleisch, fro the heed til to the feet, what 
euer thing fallith> vndur the® si3t of isen; 
the preest schal biholde hym, and schal¢13 
deme ‘that he is® holdun with clennestef 
lepre, for all the skyn is turned in to whijt- 
nesse, and therfor the man schal be cleene. 
Sotheli whanne quyk fleisch apperith in14 
hym, thanne$ he schal be defoulid bi the is 
doom of the preest, and he schal be arettid' 
among vncleene men; for quyk fleisch is 
vnelene, if it is spreynt with lepre. That 16 
if the fleisch is turned eft in to whijtnesse, 
and hilith al the man, the preest schal bi-17 
holde hym, and schal deme, that he is 
cleene. Fleisch* and skyn', in which ais 
botche is bred, and is heelid, and ‘a stepi9 
of wounde™ apperith whijt, ethir ‘sum deel” 
reed, ‘in the place of the botche®, the man 
schal be brou3t to the preest ; and whanne 20 
the preest seeth the place of lepre? lowere 
than the tother4 fleisch, and the heeris 
turned in to whijtnesse, the preest schal 
defoule hym'||; for the wounde of lepre 
is bred in the botche. That if the heer is2! 
of the former colour, and the signe of 
wounde * is sumdeel derk, 


ll that ts, aeme 
him foul. K. 


and is not 


f floure x sec.m. & he shal deme £ pr. m.  » with 
1 beel p. bogge x pr.m. 
P broust agen 1s. Ghe schalixs. ' fo be of s. Sa mans. 


88 it chaungith is. tsi3t or former colour s. Uthat K. VY quyk or wexinge s. “the eldest 1s. * the preest 1s. 
g 3 quy Ss P 


Y close him s. 


Z the lepre ts. 
€ him to be ts. 


f the clenneste 1s. & Om. s. 


a il. erther wexith 1s. 
h Om. 1. 


b fallith to be knowen 1s. 
i acountid 1s. 


¢ Om. s. 
k the fleisch 1s. 


4 he schal ts. 
the skyn 1s, 


™ the place of the bocche or a fell sore 1. the p. of the b. felle sore s.5 "Om.1ks. °Om.1s. P the lepres. 


q other 1s. 


rhym bi domes. § the wounde 1s. 


a 


XITI. 22-34. 


derk, and thanne the ny3 flesh is not 
lower, he shal recluse hym seuen dayes; 
geand if forsothe it wax, he shal deme hymn 
23 of the lepre; if forsothe it stoonde in his 
place, it is the fel wounde of the boeche™, 
esand the man shal be clene. The flesh 
and the skynne, that the fyer brekith 
out, and, heelid, haue a whijt or a reed 
25 fel wounde, the preest shal biholde it, and 
loo! if it is turned into whijtnes, and 
the place of it is lower than that other 
skynne, he shal defonle hym, for the 
plaage of the" lepre is sprougun im the 
26fel wounde. That if the colour of the 
heeres were not fulle chaungid, ne the 
plaage lower than that other flehs, and 
thilke spice of lepre were vnder derk, he 
27shal recluse hym seuen daies; and the 
seuenthe® day he shal loke; and if the 
lepre wax in the skynne, he shal defoule 
eshym; if forsothe in his place stonde 
whijtnes not cleer ynow3, a plaage of 
brennyng it is, and therfor it shal be 
clensid, for a fel wounde of brennyng? ‘it 
29is1, Man or womman, in whos heed or 
beerde boriouneth a lepre, the preest shal 
30Joke hem ; and if forsothe the place were 
lower than that other flesh, and the heer 
3alow, and sotiler than it is wont, he shal 
defoule him, for lepre of the heed it is, 
‘siand of the beerde. If forsothe he se the 
place of the wemme euen to the ny3 flesh, 
and the heer blak, he shal recluse hym 
32seuen daies, and the seuenthe™ day loke ; 
and if the wemme growe® not, and the 
heer is of his colour, and the place of the 
33plage to that other flesh enen, the man 
shal be shauen, out-take the place of the 
wemme, and he shal be reclusyd seuen 
3iother daies. If the seuenthet day the 
plaage were seen ‘to haue" stoonde in his 
place, ne lower than that other flesh, he 


m beel p. 1 Om. BDEFH. 
u Om. £ prim. 


© seuene E. 


t tother fleisch F pr.m. G. fleiseh bisidis 18. 


P birnyng n. 


u his sore 8. 


LEVITICUS. 321 


lowere than the ‘uy3 fleischt, the preest 
schal close the man senene daies; and so-22 
theli, if it" wexith, the preest schal deme 
the man of” lepre; forsothe if it stondith 23 
in his” place, it is a¥ signe of botche’, and 
the man schal be cleene. Fleisch? and 24 
skyn*, which the> fier hath brent, and is 
heelid, and hath a whijt ethir reed ‘signe 
of wounde’, the preest schal biholde it, 25 
and lo! if it is turned in to whijtnesse, 
and the place therof is lowere than the 
tothir skyn, the preest schal defoule the 
man, for a wounde of lepre is bred in the 


‘signe of wounde’, That if the® colour of26 


heeris is not chaungid, nether the woundef 
is lowere than the tother® fleisch, and 
thilke® spice of lepre is sumdeel derk, 
the preest schal close the man bi‘ seuene 
daies; and in the seuenthe dat he schal 97 
biholde*; if the lepre wexith in the fleisch, 
the preest schal defoule the man; ellis ifes 
the whijtnesse stondith in his place, and 
is not cleer ynow, it is a wounde! of bren- 
nyng, and therfor the man schal be clensid, 
for it is a signe of brennyng. A man ethir™ 29 
womman", in whos heed ether™ beerd 
lepre® buriounneth, the preest schal se 
hem; and if the place is lowere than the 30 
tothir fleisch, and the heer is whijt, ‘and 
isP sotilere4, ‘ether smallere*, than it’ is 
wont, the preest schal defoule hem, for it 
is lepre of the heed, and of the beerd. 
Ellis if he* seeth the place of wem" euene 31 
with the ny3V fleisch, and” seeth* theY here 
blak, the preest schal close hem bi* seuene 
daies, and schal* se in the seuenthe dai; 32 
if the wem waxith not, and the heer is of 
his colour, and the place of wounde® is 
enene with the tother fleisch, the man schal 33 
be schauun, without the place of wem4, 
and he schal be closid eft bi® serene othere 
daies. If in the seuenthe day the woundef 34 
q Om. H. tseuene E. 


Tsenene E. ® glowe 4. : 


Yto bers. Wtheis. *Om.1s. Ya 


botche 1s. 2 the fleisech 1s. the skynis. > Om.iKos. ¢ tokene of sorenesse 1s. 4 tokene of the 
soor 1s. €©QOm.s. f sorenesse 1s, & other 1s. ) the ilke r. that x. 10m. plures. * biholde him 1s. 
1 soornesse 1s. ™or EILP. a womman plures. © the leprer1. POm.1s. 4 Om. 1s. smallere ko. 
rOm. xo. $Omu.L. §t€Om.o. the wemr. the sooris. Ytotheris. Wandheis. * Om. F. 
yOm.u. 2 Om.1s. @heschalis. > se hemis. ¢ the soorts. “the wemi. € Om. plures. { soor- 
nesse Is. 


Tt 


322 


shal clense hym, and his clothes wasshid 
35he shal be clene. If forsothe after the 
clensyng eftsones growe a wemm in the 
36skynne, he shal na more seche, wher’ the 
heer be chaungid in to 3alow colour, for 
szapertly he is vnelene. Forsothe if the 
wemme stoonde, and the heeris weren 
blak, know he that the man is hool, and 
38trustili pronounce he hymn clene. A man 
or a® womman, in whos skynne whijtnes 
sgaperith, the preest shal loke hem; if he 
perceyue vnder derk whijtnes to shyne in 
the skynne, know he that it is no lepre, 
but a wemme of whijt colour, and that 
40the man is clene. A man of whos heed 
the heeres fallen, he is ballid, and clene; 
aland if fro the frount fallen the heeres, he 
42is bihynde ballid, and clene; if forsothe 
in the ballidnes, or* in the bihynde ballid- 
nes, whijt or reed colour were sprongun 
430ut, and that the preest seey3, he shal 
condempne hym, not of dowtows lepre it 
is, that is sprougun in the ballidnes. 
44 Whoso euer were thanne defoulid with 
lepre, and seuered at the dome of a preest, 
45he shal haue his clothis vnsewyd, the 
heed nakid, the mouth couered with the 
cloothe, and he shal crye hym wemmed, 
46and foule; al tyme that he is leprows and 
yneleene, alone he shal dwelle out of the 
47tentes. A wullun clooth, or lynnen, that 
48hath a lepre in the oof, or in the werpe, 
other of a certeyn skynne, or ou3t that is 
49maad of skynne, if it were infect with 
whijt or reed wemme, it shal be holdun 
a lepre, and shal be shewid to the preest ; 
509the which, it lokid, shal recluse seven 
sidaies. And the seuentheY day eftsones 
biholdynge, if he perseyue that it hath 
wox, it shal be a stedfast lepre; he shal 
deme the clooth polut, and al thing in 
sethe which it were founde; and therfor it 


¥ whether pb. 


hitisr. iOm. x. 
© to be clene 1s. 
tthe heeris 1s. he is 1s. 
vp is. 2thatis. a ele ade other men 8. 
athe tyme is. ©& Om. ers. that 1s. 
Imakidr. ™holdeis. the which 1. 
schal 1. w. he hath b. he schal s. 
8 the lepre therinne s. 


§ Om. ts. 
he opynly 1s. 
sumdele derk s. 


Pit yp. 
t hath woxen 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


w Om. BDEFH. 


k stondith stille 1s. 
P or ELP ué passim. 


b and his heed baar 1s. bareheeded x. 

& leprouse z. 
© schal biholde and A see.n. Be sec.m. whanne he hath biholden 
pp Om. A see. m. © sec. m. 1S. 


XIII. 35——52. 


is seyn to haue® stonde in his place, nether 
is" lowere than the tother fleisch, the preest 
schal clense the man; aud whanne his 
clothis ben waischun, he schal be cleene. 
Ellis! if aftir the clensyng a spotte wexith as 
eft in the skyn, the preest schal no more 36 
enquere, whether the heer is chaungid in 
to whijt colour, for apeertli he is vncleene. 
Sotheli if the spotte stondith*, and the37 
heeris ben blake, knowe! the preest that 
the man is heelid, and™ tristili ‘pronounce 
he" the man cleene®. A man ethir? a4ss 
wolmman, in whos skyn whijtnesse apper- 
ith, the preest schal biholde hem; if hess 
perseyneth, that whijtnesse ‘sum deel derk 
schyneth’ in the skyn’, wite he, that it is 
no lepre, but a spotte of whijt colour, and 
that the man is cleene. A man of whos 40 
heed heerist fleten awei, is" calu’, and 
clene; and if heeris” fallen fro the forheed, 41 
he is ballid, and is* cleene; ellis if in the 42 
ballidnesse bifore, ether in the ballidnesse 
bihynde, whijt ether reed colour is bred’, 
and the preest seeth this, he schal con-43 
dempue the man without doute of lepre, 
which? is bred in the ballidnesse. Ther- 44 
for whoeuer is defoulid with lepre, and is 
departid* at the doom of the preest, he 4s 
schal haue hise clothis vnsewid, bareheed>, 
thee mouth hilid with a cloth, he schal 
erye hym silf defoulid, and viyl; in alae 
tyme in® which' he is lepre® and vnclene, 
he schal dwelle aloone without the castels®. 
A wollun cloth, ethir lynnun, that hath 47 
lepre in the warp, ethir oof, ethir certis a4 
skyn*, ether what euer thing is maad! of 
skiyn, if it is corrupt with a whijt spotte, 49 
ethir reed, it schal be arettid™ lepre, and 
it schal be schewid to the preest ; which"s0 
schal® close it? biholden?? bil seuene daies. 
And eft he schal biholde” in the seuenthes1 
dai, and if he perseyueth, that it’ wexide’, 


x other £. Y seuene z£. 
1 knowe thanne s. m Om. s. n schewe 
q Om. L. T appeerith 1s. is 0. 8 skyn 
VYballidis. Wtheheeris1. *Om.1is.  ¥ sprungun 


¢ and his 1s, 


h tentis 1s. iin the oof 1s.  pilche is. 


qOm.1. * biholde it 1s. 


XIII. §53-——XIV. 6. 


53shal be brent with flawmes of fier. That 
if he se that it hath not waxen, he shal 
54 comaunde, and thei shal wasshe it in the 
which is the lepre, and he shal recluse it 
ssseuen other daies; and whanne he seethi 
forsothe the rather face not turned a3en, 
and neuerthelater the lepre not to haue 
woxe, he shal deme vnclene, and with 
fier he shal brenne, forthi that it is spred 
in the vttermost? of the clooth, other ‘al 
56thur3*. <A lepre, if forsothe the place of 
the lepre were derker, after that the clooth 
is wasshun, he shal breke it, and fro the 
57 hoole dyuyde. That if forthermore apere 
in that places, the whiche weren before 
vndefoulid, the lepre fleynge and vagaunt, 
5sshal be brent with fier; and if it ceese, 
he shal wasshe secoundlich tho thinges 
that ben pure, and thei shal be clene. 
59 This is the lawe of the lepre of wullen 
clooth, and lynnen, of oof and of warpe, 
and of al letherin purtenaunce, how thei 
shal be clensid, or be defoulid. 


CAE eel. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2This is the rijt of the leprows, whanne 
he is to be maad clene. He shal be brou3t 
3to the preest, the which goon out of the 
tentis, whanne he fyndith that the lepre 
4is clensid, he shal comaunde to hym that 
is purified, that he offre for hym silf two 
quyk sparowes, whom it is leeful to eet, 
and cedre tree, and ‘flawm reed silk, and 
sysope. And oon of the sparows he shal 
comaunde to be offred in a britil vessel, 
6vpon quyk watris; that other forsothe 
quyk, with cedre tree, and ‘reed silk‘, 
and ysope, he shal weete in the blood of 


Z hotemost ez. 


ube demed 1s. Y continuel ether abydinge Bx. 
a the preest 1s. > hath woxen ts. 
preest is. fOm.1s.  & lickenesse 18. 
m that 1s. ™ thorou3 itis. © Jepre place s. 
tthei 1s. Uacloths. vv Om. w. 
which 1. 4tentisis. >thatis. ¢ Om. 1s. 
eerthen vessel vpon 1s. & the preest 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


8 thour out al z pr.m. 


w that 1s. 
© comaunde fo hem that owen the eloth s. 

» chaungid 1s. 
P derk place s. 
W the purtenaunce 10 pr.m. s. 
4 cedre tree 1. cedre wood s. 


323 


it schal be" contynuel’ lepre; he schal 
deme the’ cloth defoulid, and al thing in 
which it is foundun; and therfor the cloth 52 
schal be brent in* flawmes’. That? if he*s3 
seeth that the spotte wexide® not, he schal 
comaunde*, and thei schulen waische that 54 
thing wherynne® the lepre is, and he® 
schal close it a3en bif seuene othere daies ; 
and whanne he seeth the formere face® not 55 
turned" ajen, netheles that nether the le- 
pre wexede', he schal deme that thing vn- 
clene, and he schal brenne 7¢* in fier, for 
lepre! is sched in the ouer part of the™ 
cloth, ether thorou3" al. Ellis if the ‘place 56 
of lepre® is derkere, aftir that the ‘cloth is 
waischun, he schal breke awey that place?, 
and schal‘4 departe' fro the hool. That if 57 
fleynge lepre and vnstidefast apperith fer- 
thermore in these places, that weren vn- 
wemmed bifore, it owith be’ brent in fier ; 
if it ceessith, he schal waische the secounde 58 
tyme tho thingis that ben cleene, and thot 
schulen be cleene. This is the lawe of le-59 
pre of cloth", wollim and lynnun, of warp 
and of’ oof, and of al purtenaunce’ of 
skiyn*, hou it owith to be clensyd, ethir ‘to 
beY defoulid. 


CAP. XIV. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
This is the custom of a leprouse man, 2 
whanne he schal be clensid. He schal be 
brou3t to the preest, which’ preest schals 
go out of the castels*, and whanne he schal 
fynde that the lepre is clensid, he schal 4 
comaunde to the man which” is clensid, 
that he offre for hym silf twei quyke spa- 
rewis, whiche it® is leueful to ete, and a . 
‘tree of cedre4, and vermylyoun +, and UL T bt 
isope. And the preest schal comaunde®s thread. ncrcr. 
that oon of the sparewes be offrid in ‘a *°** 
vessel of erthe, onf quyke watris; sothelisé 
he® schal dippe the tother sparewe quyk 


b yermycle E pr.m. © cook E pr.m. 


x with 1s. Y flawmes of fijr rs. 2 and 18. 
din whiche rs. © the 
k Om. plures. | the lepre 1. 
q he schal 1s. ° departe it 1s. § to be ts. 
Xtheskyn1. YOm.1rs. 2 the 
© comaunde dims. f an 


i hath woxen 1s. 


rt2 


324 


7the sparowe that is offred, with the which 
he shal sprenge hym that is to be clensid 
senene sithes, that thur3 ri3t he be purgid; 
and he shal late goo the quyk sparowe, 
sthat she flee awei into the feelde. And 
whanne the man hath wasshide his clothes, 
he shal shaue alle the heeres of the bodi, 
and he shal be wasshe with water, and 
purified he shal goo into the tentis; so 
oonli that he dwelle out of his tabernacle 
gseuen daies; and the seuenthe day that 
he shaue the heeris of the heed, and 
beerde, and browes, and the heeres of al 
the body. And eftsones the clothes and the 
10 body wasshid, the ei3t¢ day he shal take 
two lombes with outen wemme, and a 
sheep of o 3eer with outen wemme, and 
thre dymes of tried floure, into sacrifice, 


that be spreynt with oyle, and bisides a . 


11sextarie of oyle. And whanne the preest, 
puryfiynge the man, ordeyneth hym and 
alle thes thingis before the Lord, in the 
12dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng, and 
he shal take a lombe, and offre it for 
trespas, and a sextarye of oyle; and alle 
i3sthingis offred before the Lord, he shal 
offre a lombe, where is wont to be offred 
the oost for synue and the brent sacri- 
fice, that is, in holy place ; forsothe as for 
synne so for trespas to the preest per- 
teyneth the oost; holi of halowes it is. 
14And the preest takynge of the blood of 
the oost that is offrid for trespas, he shal 
putte vpon the ende of his ri3t ere that is 
clensid, and vpon the thoumbes of the 
15113t hoond and foot. And of the sextarie 
of oyle he shall putte in® his left hoond, 
igsand he shal wete the ri3t fyngre in it, 
and he shal sprenge before the Lord se- 
1jzuen sithes. That forsothe of the oile 
that is laft in the left hoond, he shal 
heelde vpon the eende of his ri3t eere that 


4 ey3the x. 


i the 1s. 
4 his browis 18. 


h cedre tree 1. cedre wode s. 


ajen is. P_ his 1s. t his s. 


LEVITICUS. 


k the preest Is. 
8 his Is. 


XIV. 7-——17. 


with the ‘tre of cedre", and with ai reed 
threed and ysope, in the blood of the spa- 
rewe offrid, with which he* schal sprenge7 
seuensithis hym that schal be clensid, that 
he be purgid ri3tfuli; and he! schal de- 
lyuere the quyk sparewe, that it™ fle in to 
the feeld. And whanne the man haths 
waische hise clothis, he schal schaue alle 
the heeris of the® bodi, and he schal be 
waischun in watir, and he schal be clensid, 
and he schal entre in to the castels®; so 
oneli that he dwelle without his tabernacle 
bi seuene daies ; and that in the seuenthe9g 
dai he schaue the heeris of the heed, and 
the? beerd, aid brewis!, and the heeris of 
al the’ bedi. And whanne the* clothis and 
bodit ben waischun, eft in the eizetithe dai 10 
he schal take twei lambren without wem, 
and a scheep of 0 3eer without wem, and 
thre dymes" of wheefe’ flour, in to sacri- 
fice, which” be* ‘spreynteY with oile, and 
bi it silf a sextarie’ of oyle. And whanneu 
the preest, that purgith the man, hath set 
hym? and alle hise® thingis bifor the Lord, 
in the dore of the tabernacle of witness- 
yng, he* schal take a’ lomb, and schale1z 
offre it for trespas‘, and schals offre the 
sextarie® of oyle ; and whanne alle thingis: 
ben offrid bifor the Lord, he schal offre 13 
the lomb, where the sacrifice for synne 
and the brent sacrifice is wont to be of- 
frid, that is, in the hooli place; for as for 
synne so and for trespas the offryng per- 
teyneth to the preest; it is hooli of the 
noumbre of hooli thingis. And the preest 14 
schal take of the blood of sacrificek which! 
is offrid for trespas, and schal™ putte" on 
the laste part of the® ri3t eere ‘of hym? 
which? is clensid, and on™ the thumbis of 
thes ri3t hond and foot. And he schalis 
putte of the sextariet of oyle in to his left 
hond, and he" schal dippe the’ ri3t fyngur 16 


€ in to BDEFI. 


mher. hisis. ° tentis 
udymes ether thre tenthe 


1 the preest Is. 
t his bodi 1s. 


partis Bog. d. ether tenthe partis No. d. or thre tenthe partis iv. d. either ten partis s. ten partis 1. thre 


fen parlis x. VY tried Is. 
dtheis. © he schal ts. 
1 that 1s. 

t pynt Is. 


orswx. ¢ the man 1s. 
thingis ts. * the sacrifice 1s. 
athat is. 'vponis. § his 1s. 


W the which 1. that shal s. 
ether a pynte BGIQsx. sext. that is, a pynte c. sext. or a pynte LP. 
f his trespas Is. 
™ he schal Is. 
™ the preest Is. 


xhe ABDEGQRT. YspreyngN. 2 sextarie 
&the manis.  » these cDEGIKLMN 
&he schal rks. 4 pynt 1s. i thees 
n putte that blood vp1s. © hisis. P Om. Is. 
v his Is. 


XIV. 18—32. 


is clansid, and vpon the thoumbes of 
hoonde and of ri3tf foot, and vpon the 
18 blood that is shed for trespas%, and vpon 
i9his heed. And he shal preye for hym 
before the Lord, and he shal doo sacri- 
fice for synne ; thanne he shal offre brent 
20sacrifice, and putte it in the auter with 
his offryng of licours, and the man law- 
21fullich shal be clensid. That if he is a 
pore man, and his hoonde may not fynde 
that ben seyde, he shal take for the tres- 
pas a lombe to the offryug, that the preest 
preye for hym, and the tenthe part of 
tried flour spreynt with oyle, into sacri- 
22 fice, and a sextarie of oyle, and two tur- 
turs4, and two culuer bryddis, of whom 
the oon be for synne, and the other into 
23 brent sacrifice; aud he shal offre hem 
the ei3t! day of his purifiyng to the preest, 
at the dore of the tabernacle of witness- 
24 yng, before the Lord. The which takynge 
a lombe for trespas, and a sextarie of oile, 
25shal rere togidris ; and the lombe offryd, 
of the blood of it he shal putte vpon the 
eende of the ri3t eere of hym that is 
clensid, and vpon the thoumbes of his 
2¢6hoonde and of the ry3t foote. Of the 
oyle forsothe a part putte he into his left 
27 hoonde, in the which wetynge the fyngre 
of the ri3t hoonde, sprenge he seuen 
28 sithes** a3ens the Lord; and weet he the 
eende of the ry3t eere of hym that is 
clensid, and the thoumbes of the hoonde, 
and of the ri3t foot, in the place of the 
29blood that is shed out for! trespas. The 
laft forsothe part of the oyle that is in 
the lefte hoonde, putte he vpon tle heed 
of the purified, that he plese the Lord for 
3ohym. And a turtre™, or a culuer bryd, he 
31 shal offre, oon for trespas, and another 
into brent sacrifice, with her offrid licours. 
32 That" is the sacrifice of the leprows, that 


f thi ri3t 4. b turtelis pr. 


m turtele pi. 


& the trespas zr. 
n this BDEFH. 


LEVITICUS. 


» the Lord. 


i ey3the x. 


325 


therynne, and schal” sprynge* seuensithis 
bifor the Lord. Sotheli heY schal schede? 17 
that that is residue* of the oile in the left 
hond, on? the laste® part of the ri3t eere 
‘of hym® whichf is clensid, and on’ thes% 
thombis of the’ ri3t hond and foot, and 
on! the blood which* is sched for trespas, 18 
and on the! heed ‘of hym™, And the1s 
preest schal preye for hym bifor the Lord, 
and schal" make® sacrifice for synne; 
thanne he? schal offre brent‘ sacrifice, and 20 
schal’ putte it in the auter with hise flet- 
ynge sacrifices, and the man schal be 
clensid ri3tfuli. That if he is pore, and2i 
his hoond may not fynde* tho thingis that 
ben seid, he schal take for trespast a lomb 
to offryng, that the preest preie for him, 
and the tenthe part of wheete" flour spreynt 
togidire with oile in to sacrifice, and’ a 
sextarie’ of oile, and twei turtlis, ethir 22 
twei ‘briddis of culueris*, of whiche oon 


beY for synne, and the tothir in to brent 


sacrifice; and he schal offre tho in the 2s 
ei3tthe dai of his clensyng to the preest, at 
the dore of tabernacle’ of witnessyng bifor 
And the preest schal take the 24 
lomb for* trespas, and the sextarie? of oile, 
and schal* reise’ togidere; and whanne the 25 
lomb is offrid, he® schal putte of the blood 
therof onf the laste part of the? ri3t eere 
‘of hym" that is clensid, and oni the 
thumbis of his ri3t hond and foot. Sotheli26 
the preest putte the part of oile in to his* 
left hond, in which he schal dippe the fyn-27 
gur of the! ri3t hond, and schal™ sprynge 
seuensithes" a3ens the Lord; and the preest 28 
schal touche the laste part of the® ri3t eere 
‘of hym? that is clensid, and the thombe4 
of the’ ri3t hond and foot, in the place of 
blood which’ is sched out for trespas. So-29 
theli het schal putte the tother part of oile, 
which" is in the’ left hond, on” the ‘heed 


Kk Om. pu. kk sithe speru. fro a. 


whe schal 1s. * sprynge it 1s. Ythe preest 1s. 2 heelde1. #left ins. bvponis. ¢lefte rs, ‘his 1s. 


€ Om. Is. sé Om. a. 
preest shal rs. 

t his trespas is. 
nacle CDEFGIKORSWX. 
fvpon is. & his 3s. 
ohists. P Om, 1s. 


W vpon Is. 


f that Is. & vpon Is. 
osle the 1s. P the preest Is. 
u tried 1s. VOm.s. 
@ offrid for 1s. 

h Om.1s. ivpon 1s. 

4 thombes Be sec.m. 


hhis 1s. i vpon 1s. 
q the brent 1s. 
W piynt 1s. 
b pynte Is. 
k his owne Is. 


rhisis. * that 1s. 


Kthatis. !'hisis. ™ Om. 1s. ® the 
the schalis. 8 for povert fynde s. 
x culuer briddis is. Y shal bes. #2 the taber- 

¢heschal 1s. 4rere hem vp is. ©¢ the preest 1s. 

Ihisis. ™heschalrs. " it sevensithes 1s. 

tthe preest 1s. “thatis. Vhis1. Om.s, 


326 


may not haue alle thingis in the clensyng 
330f hym. And the Lord spak to Moyses 
3iand Aaron, seiynge, Whanne 3e weren 
goon into the loonde of Chanaan, that Y 
shal 3yne to 30w into possessyoun, if there 
35 were a plaage of lepre in howsis, whos is 
the hows shal goon tellynge to the preest, 
and seie, As a plage of lepre it is seen 
36to me to be in myn hows. And he shal 
comaunde, that alle thingis be born out 
of the hows or? he goo into it, and be 
seen whether? it be a lepre, lest alle 
thinges that ben in the hows ben maad 
vnelene; and afterward he shal goon yn, 
that he behoolde the lepre of the hows. 
37 And whaune he seeth in the walles of it 
as litil valeys defourmed with paalnes, or 
with reednes, and lower than that other 
38 vttermore’ partie’, he shal goo out of the 
dore of the hows, and anoon he shal close 
39it senen dayes. Aud the seuenthe day 
turned ajen he shal beholde it; and if he 
4ofynde that the lepre hath waxen, he shal 
comaunde the stonus, in the whiche is 
the lepre, to be drawe out, and hem to 
be throwe ‘a ferre’ out of thet cyte, in an 
41 vnclene place; that forsothe hows to be 
parid with ynforth bi enuyroun, and the 
powdre of the paryng to be spreynt out 
azof the citee, in an vnclene place, and 
other stonus to be put ajens for hem that 
were takun awey, and with other cley the 
43 hows to be dawbid. If forsothe after that 
the stonus ben drawen out, aud the pow- 
dre born out, and with other erthe daw- 
44bid, and the preest goon yn se the lepre 
turned a3en, and the walles aj3en spreynt 
with spottis, it is a stedfast lepre, and 
45the hows vnelene; the whiche anoon thei 
schulen distruy; and the stonus of it, and 
trees, and al the powdre thei shulen 
throwe afer ont of the wallid town, in an 
46vnclene place. Who goth into the hows, 
whanne it is elosid, shal be vnclene vnto 
4 outmore E. 


Cer eH. P where BEFH. 


x heed of the man that is clensid x. clensid mannes heed s. 
f he schal ts. 


bOm1 ¢ Om.is. 4 Om. plures. ¢ Om. 1s. 

hems. * tors. 1 that he mai see ELP. to be seen 1. 
P defoulid with 1s. 4 with is. 1 ouer BC sec, m. 
Wintors. *that Kk. YOm.s, 


LEVITICUS. 


8 that s. 


XIV. 33—46. 


of the man clensid*, that he plese the Lord 
for hym. And he schal offre a turtle,30 
ethirY a? culuer brid, oon for trespas, and 31 
the tothir in to brent sacrifice, with her 
fletynge offryngis. ‘This is the sacrifice ofs2 
a leprouse man, that may not hane alle 
thingis* in to the’ clensyng of hym silf. 
And the Lord spak to Moises and Aaron, 33 
and seide, Whanne 3e han entrid in to thes4 
lond of Canaan, which lond* Y schal 3yue 
to 30u in to possessioun, if the wounde of 
lepre is in the’ housis, he schal go, whos 3s 
the hous is, ‘and schal telle® to the preest, 
and schal! seie, It semeth to me, that as¥ 
ah wound of lepre is in myn hous. And 36 
the preest schal comaunde’, ‘that thei* bere 
out of the hous alle thingis bifore that he 
entre in to it,‘and me se! where” it be le- 
pre, lest alle thingis that ben in the hows, 
be maad vuclene ; and the preest schal en- 
tre aftirward, that he se the lepre of the 
hows. And whanne he seeth in the wallis37 
therof as litle valeis® ‘foule bi? palenesse, 
ethir bid reednesse, and lowere than the 
tother hijere™ part, he schal go out at thes3s 
dore of thes hows, and anoon he schal 
close itt bi seuene daies. And he schal39 
turne ajen in the seuenthe day, and schal™ 
se it; if he fyndith that the lepre en- 
creesside’, he schal comaunde that the 40 
stoonys be cast out, in whyche the lepre 
is, and that tho stonys be cast out of the 
citee in” an vneleene place. Sotheli hei 
schal comaunde that thilke* hows be rasid 
with ynne bi cumpas, and that the dust 
of the rasyng be spreynt without the citee, 
in an vnelene place, and that othere stoonys 42 
be put ajen for these, that ben takun 
awey, and that the hows be daubid with 
othir morter. But if aftir that the stoonus 43 
ben takun awey, and the dust is borun 
out, and othere erthe is’ danbid, the preest 44 
entrith, and seeth the lepre turned ajen, 
and the wallis spreynt with spottis, the 


r parte BDE. § ofeer pFH. ‘t Om. z. 


Yor Eines. 7Om.3B. 4 ¢hees thingis 1s. 

fasit weres. 4 Om.1. i comaunde 
n whether 1s. © creueysis s. 
vhath encreesid 1s. 


and be sien s. 
tOm.1. he schal rs. 


i, 47 XV, 2, 


47the® euen, and who slepith in it, and 
etith eny thing, shal wasshe his clothes. 
48 That if the preest goynge in se that the 
lepre hath not waxen in the hows, after 
that it is newe dawbid, he shal purifie it, 
49 helthe 3oldun a3en. In the purifiynge of 
it he shal take two sparows, and the ce- 
dre tree, and ‘fier reed silk”, and ysop. 
50 And that oon sparow offred in a britil 
51 vessel, vpon quik watris, he shal take the 
cedre tree, and ysop, and* ‘fier reed silk’, 
and a quyk sparow, and he shal weete 
alle thingis in the blood of the offrid spa- 
row, and in quyk? watres; and he shal 
szsprenge the hows seuen sithes; and he 
shal purifie it, as wel in the blood of a 
sparow as in quyk watrys, and in the 
quyk sparow, and in the cedre tree, and 
53 ysop, and ‘fier reed silk?, And whanne 
he hath late the sparow freliche flee awey 
in® the feelde, he shal preye for the hows, 
s4and thur3 ry3t it shal be maad clene. This 
53is the lawe of al lepre, and hurtynge, and 
56 of lepre of clothes, and howsis, and of fel 
wounde, and of bleynes brekynge ont, 
and of wemme 1i3tynge, and in® dyuerse 
s7spices the colours chaungid, that it may 
be knowe what tyme eny thing be clene, 
or vnelene. 


CAPE, XV. 


i And the Lord spak to Moyses and 
2 Aaron, seynge, Speke ye to the sones of 
Yrael, and seith to hem, The man that 


LEVITICUS. 


327 


lepre is’ stidfastly dwellynge, and the 
hows is vnelene; which? hows thei schu-45 
len destrye anoon, and thei schulen caste 
out of the citee, inb an vnclene place, the 
stoonys therof, and the trees, and al the 
dust. He* that entrith in to thet hous, 46 
whamne it is schit, schal be vnelene ‘til to® 
euentid’, and he that slepith and etith47 
ony thing therynne, schal® waische hise 
clothis. That if the preest entrith, and 48 
seeth that the lepre encreesside not in the - 
hows, aftir that it was daubid the secounde 
tyme, he> schal clense it; for heelthe is 
3oldun', And ink the clensyng therof he! 49 
schal take twey sparewis, and ‘a tre of 
cedre™, and ‘a reed threed", and isope. 
And whanne o sparewe is offrid in a ves-50 
sel of erthe, on quyk watris, he® schal takes: 
the ‘tre of cedre?, and ysope, and reed4 
threed, and the quyk sparewe, and he 
schal dippe™ alle’ thingis in the blood of 
the sparewe offrid', and in lyuynge" wa- 
tris; and he schal sprynge the hows seuen 52 
sithis; and he schal clense it as wel in 
the’ blood of the sparewe as in lyuynge 
watris, and in the quyk sparewe, and in 
the ‘tre of cedre*, and inY ysope’, and ‘reed 
threed®. And whanne he hath left» thes 
sparewe toe fle’ in to the feeld frely, he® 
schal preye for the hows, and it schal be 
clensid ri3tfuli. This is thef lawe of al 54 
lepre, and of smytyng, of lepre of clothis, 55 
and of housis, of syngne" of wounde, and 56 
of litle whelkis brekynge out, of spotte 
schynynge, and in colours channgid in to 
dyuerse spices‘, that it may be wist, what 57 
is cleene, ether* nucleene. 


CAPA. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and Aa-1 
ron, ‘and seide!, Speke 3e to the sones of2 
Israel, and seie 3e to hem, A man that 


2 Om. peru. Yandiner, Wvermycle Epr.m. *and the ede sec.m.u. Yeok x.  % whyk gz. 
avermycle £ pr.m. Yin to aDEFH. © into &. 

Zisthanne 1s. @the which 1. » into osup.ras.s. ¢Om.¥. ‘that 1s. ¢vntors. f the euentidixs, 
Sheschals. the preestis. ‘3oldun thertois. ktois. Ithe preestis. ™cedre tre 1. wood 
of cedre cs. ‘vermilounis. © the preest rs. P cedre tre1. cedrewood s. 4thereedis. * dippe 
or weete 8. Salle thees1s. + offrid or slayns. “the quyk 1s. VOm.1s. W the lyuynges. * cedre 
tre r. cedre wood s. yOm.rErw. 7the ysopers. ®the reed silk 1. the fyer reed silk s. > late 10 
SUP.TAaS. 8. © Om. 10 sup-ras. 8. d fle awey 10 sup.ras. 8. € the preest 10 sup. ras. 8. f Om. a. 


Sa spEGarT. the sygne 1s. 


i spices or kyndes s. spottis x. 


k or EILP. | seiynge s. 


328 


suffreth the flux of seede, shal be vn- 
3clene; and thanne he shal be demyd to 
vndur ligge to this vice, whanne bi eche 
momentis it cleueth to the flesh of hym, 
and to gidere groweth the foule humour. 
4A] the bed that he sleepith yn shal be 
5 vuclene, and where euer he sitteth. Who 
so euer of men towchith hys bed, he shal 
washe his clothes, and he washid with 
¢ water shal be vnclene vnto the euen. And 
if he sitte where he satt, he® shal wassh 
his clothes, and wasshid with water shal 
7 ben vnclene vnto the euen. He that towch- 
ith the fleshe of hym, shal wasshe his 
clothes, and he wasshid with water shal 
&be vnelene. to the euen. And if siche a 
man caste out spotil vpon hym that is 
clene, he shal wasshe his clothes, and 
wasshid with water shal® be vnelene vn- 
9to the euen. The sadel vpon the which 
Whe shall sytt, shal be vnclene; and what 
euer® were vnder hym that suffreth flux 
of seede, shal be vnclene® vnto the enen. 
He that berith eny thing of thes, shal 
wasshe his clothes, and he wasshid with 
water shal be vnclene vnto the euen. 
11 Eche whom he that is suchon towchith 
with not wasshun! hondes before, shal 
wasshe his clothes, and wasshid with wa- 
12 ter shal be vnclene vnto the euen. The 
britil vessel that he towchith, shal be to- 
brokun ; the treen vessel forsothe shal be 
13 wasshid‘ ‘with water!. If he were helid, 
that suffreth siche a maner passioun, he 
shal noumbre seuen daies after his clens- 
yng, and the clothes wasshid, and al the 
bodi in qwik watris, he shal be clene. 
14 The ei3t™ day forsothe he shal take two 
turturs", other two culuer briddes, and 
he shal come in the si3t of the Lord, at 
the dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
isand he shal 3yue hem to the preest; the 


dere, ¢andhe spern.  f shulen a. 
kK whasche z. 1Om. 4. ™ ey3the z. 


LEVITICUS. 


Ser FE. 
2 turteles pu. 


XV. 3—15- 


suffrith the rennyng out of seed, schal be 
vneleene; and thanne he™ scha) be demed 3 
to be suget to this vice, whanne bi alle 
momentis foul vmour ‘ethir moysture™ 
cleueth to his fleisch, and growith togidere. 
Ech bed in which he slepith schal® be vn-4 
cleene, and where euer he sittith. If onys 
man? touchith his bed, he schal waische 
his clothis, and he schal be waischun in 
watir, and schal! be vncleene ‘til to™ enen- 
tid’. If a man sittith where he satt, alsoc 
thilket man schal waische hise clothis, and 
he schal be waischun in watir, and schal® 
be vnelene ‘til to’ euentid. He that touch-7 
ith hise fleischis”, schal waische hise clothis, 
and he schal be waischun in watir, and 
schal* be vncleene ‘til to’ euentid. If sichs 
a man castith out spetyng? on® hym that 
is cleene, he schal waische his clothis, and 
he schal be waischun in watir, and schal> 
be vucleene ‘til tot euentid. The sadil on“9 
which he sittith‘, schal be vneleene; and 10 
ech man that touchith what euer thing is 
vndur hym that suffrith the fletyng out of 
seed, schal be defoulid ‘til to® euentid. He 
that berith ony of these thingis, schal 
waische hise clothis, and he schal be 
waischun in watir, and schal® be vncleene 
‘til tot euentid. Ech man, whom he that 11 
is such touchith with hondis not waischun 
bifore, schal waische hise clothis, and he 
schal be waischun in watir, and schal* be 
vncleene ‘til to! euentid. “A vessel of erthe™ 12 
which” he touchith, schal be brokun; but 
a ‘vessel of tre® schal be waischun in wa- 
tir. If he that suffrith sich a passioun, 13 
is heelid, he schal noumbre seuene daies 
aftir his clensyng, and whanne the? clothis 
and al ‘the bodi? ben waischun in lyuynge 
watris, he schal be clene. Forsothe in the 14 
ei3tthe dai he schal take twei turtlis, ethirs 
twei ‘briddis of a culuer‘, and he schal 


4 polnte peru. polutid p. { waschid BpEFH. 


m™Om.s. 2 Om. plures. °that schal 1s. Pof men a pr.m.ELPQRTW. “he schalis. ‘vnto the xs. § the 


t that 3. 
y vnto the 1s. til to the kK. 


euentid K. 


schal 1s. Z spotil 1s. 


whe schal 10 swp.ras. s. ¥ vnto the 10 sep.ras. s. til to the kK. 
® vpon Is. 


w fletshe 1. * he 


b he schal 1s. © vnto the 1s. til to the kK. 


€Om.is. ¢thatr1  f sittith vpon is. & ynto the 1s. tiltothe kK. he schalis. i vnto the 1s. til to 
the k. khe schal rs. !ynto the rs. til to the kK. ™an eerthen vessel xs. the vessel of erthe K. that 1s. 
© treen vesse] is, Phis1. 4 thei a. his bodiis. ° rennynge BCDKMORT sup.ras. W. § or EILPS. t cul- 


uer briddis 1s. 


XV. 16—26. 


which shal doon oon for synne, and that 
other into brent sacrifice; he shal preye 
for him bifor the Lord, that he be clene 
i6fro the flux of his seede. The man of 
whom goth out the seede of goyng togi- 
dris, shal wasshe with water al his body, 
and he shal be vnclene vnto the euen. 
17Clooth and skynne that he hath, he shal 
wasshe with water, and it shal be vn- 
isclene vnto the euen. The womman with 
whom he goth togider with, shal be 
wasshe with water, and she shal be vn- 
19clene vnto the euen. The womman that, 
turnynge ajen the moneth, suffreth the 
flux of blood, seuen daies shal be seuerd ; 
eche that towchith hir shal be vnelene 
zovnto euen, and the place in which she 
sleepith or sittith the daies of her seuer- 
z1yng, shal be polut®. He that towchith 
her bed, shal wasshe his clothes, and he 
wasshid with water shal be vnclene vnto 
22the euen. Eche vessel vpon which? she 
sittith who so euer? towchith, shal wasshe 
his clothes, and he wasshid with water 
23shal be polut’ vnto the euen. If man 
goth’ togidere with hir in the tyme of 
hir blood flowynge bi monethes, he shal 
be vnclene seuen daies, and al the bed in 
24which he slepith shal be polutt. The 
woman that suffrith manye daies the 
flux of blood, not in tyme of the flux bi 
the moneth, other that aftir the flux of 
blood bi the moneth cesith not to flowe 
blood, as longe as she shal vnderligge to 
this passioun she shal be vnclene, as it 
be in tyme of the flux of blood" bi the 
2zsmoneth. Al the bed in which’ she slep- 
ith, and the vessel in which” she sittith, 
26shal be polut*. Who so towchith hir, 
shal wasshe hys clothis, and he wasshid 
with water shal be vnclene vnto the euen. 


Ver E. 
x polutid p. 


P the which npreFru. 
W the which apern. 


© polutid p. 
v the which &. 


LEVITICUS. 


T polutid p. 


329 


come in" the ‘sijt of the Lord’ at the dore 
of tabernacle’ of witnessyng, and schal* 
3yue tho to the preest; and the preest 1s 
schal make oon? for synne*, and the tother 
in to brent sacrifice; and the preest schal 
preye for hym bifor the Lord, that he be 
clensid fro the fletyng out of his seed. Ais 
man fro whom the seed of letcherie, ‘ethir 
of fleischi” couplyng’, goith out, schal4 
waische in watir al his bodi, and he schal 
be vncleene'‘til to® euentid. He schal waische 17 
in watir the cloth ‘and skynf which? he 
hath", and it schal be unclene ‘til to! euen- 
tid. The* womman with which he ‘is cou- 1s 
plid! fleischli, schal be waischun in watir, 
and schal™ be vncleene ‘til to” euentid. A 19 
womman that suffrith the fletyng® out of 
blood, whanne the moneth cometh ajen, 
schal? be departid bi seuene daies; ech 
man that touchith hir schal be vncleene 
‘til tol euentid, and the place in which20 
sche slepith ether sittith in the daies of 
hir departyng, schal’ be defoulid. He21 
that touchith her bed, schal waische hise 
clothis, and he schal be waischun in watir, 
and schal* be vneleene ‘til tot euentid. 
Who euer touchith ony vessel" on” which” 22 
sche sittith, he schal waische hise clothis, 
and he schal be waischun in watir, and 
schal* be defoulidY ‘til to” euentid. If a2 
man is couplid fleischli with hir in the 
tyme of blood that renneth* bi> monethis, 
he schal be vncleene bi seuene daies, and 
ech bed in which he slepith schal be de- 
foulid®. A womman that suffrith in many 24 
daies the ‘fletyng out? of blood, note in the 
tyme of monethis, ethir whichf womman 
ceessithé not to flete" out blood aftir the 
blood' of * monethis, schal! be vncleene as 
longe as sche ‘schal be™ suget to this pas- 
sioun, as if"® sche is in® theP tyme of 
u the blood peru. 


Sgorn. ¢ polutid p. 


uinto is. V Lordis sizt 1s. the tabernacle nErGikmos. %* he schalis. y make or offre s. 2 oon 


ofhems. 4 the mannes synnes. bOm.m. ¢ knowyng is. Om.m. ‘he schalis. © vnto the 1s. til 
tothe x. fskyn or pilche s. & that 1s. hath vside that tyme s. i vnto thers. tiltothe Kx. Kats. 
1 goth togedre s. ™ sche schal rks, ™ vnto the 1s. tilto the x. © flowyngis. P sche schal 1s. 4 vnto 


the 1s. tiltothe x. Tit schali. 8 he schal 1s. 
Yvpons. Wthat1. * he schal ixsw. 
b fro hir bis. ¢vnclene ts. 4 flowyng 18. 


i fowyng out of blood 1s. * biis. sche shal 1s, 


t ynto the 1s. til to the x. 4 vessel or thing s. 


Y vneleene B pr.m. pais. 2% vnto the ts. til to the x. 4 cometh 1s. 
€ not onely 1s. 
™m is 18. 


h shede s. 
P Oni. is. 


& that ceessith 1s. 
© 3if sche be in is. 


f that 1s. 
n Oni. 15. 


UN 


330 


27 If the blood stoonde, and ceese to flowe, 
she shal noumbre seuen daies of hir puri- 

28 fiyng, and the ei3tith day she shal offre 
for hir silf to the preest two turtursY, or 
two culuer briddis, at the dore of the ta- 

29bernacle of witnessyng; the which shal 
do oon for the synne, and that other into 
brent sacrifice; and he shal preye for hir 
before the Lord, and for the flux of the 

30 vnelennes of hir. 3e shulen teche ther- 
fore the sones of Yrael, that thei shonnen 
vnclennes’, and die not in her fluxes®, 
whanne thei defoulen my tabernacle that 

sris among hem. This is the lawe of hym 
that suffreth flux of seede, and that is po- 

szlutid thur3 goynge togidris, and of hyr 
that thur3 moneth tymes of flowing of 
blood is seuerd, and that flowith ful oft 
blood, and of the man that slepith with 
hir. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, after 
the deeth of the two sones of Aaron, 
whanne thei offrynge alien fier were 

2slawn, and comaundide® to hym, seiynge, 
Spek to Aaron, thi brother, lest alle tymes 
he goo into the seyntuarye, that is with 
ynue the veile before the propiciatory, 
with the which the arke is couerd, that 
he dye not; for in a clowde Y shal apeere 

3vpon the heuenli answerynge place; but 
if thes thinges he do before. He shal offre 
a calf for synne, and a wether in to brent 
4sacrifice ; with a lynnen coote he shal be 
clothid, and with lynnen breches he shal 
hile the shame worthi membres; he shal 


y turteles pu. 2 vnclennessys E. 


4 the monethis 1s. 
the 1s. til to the x. 
¢ that 1s. 
k thats. 1 the Lord comaundide 1s. 
answerynge place s. 4 with 1s. 
Yin ut. Welothis. hiss. 


t what euer thing Is. 
Whiris. * flowe rs. 


¥ vpon Is. 
y Om. s. 


LEVITICUS. 


a their filthes Be. 


8 sittith vpon 1s. 
y culuer briddis 1s. 
4 the fletyng plures. the flowyng 1s. ¢ thats. fandalsois. § the 1s. } that 1s. i tyme 1s. 

m Noyses 1s. 
8 the heuenly s. 
Z brechis 1s. 


XV. 28—XVI. 4. 


monethis'. Ech bed in which sche slep-25 
ith, and ‘vessel in which" sche sittith’, 
schal be defoulid'. Who euer touchith hir 26 
schal waische his clothis, and he schal be 
waischun in watir, and schal" be vncleene 
‘til to’ euentid. Ifthe” blood stondith, and 27 
ceessith to flete* out, sche schal noumbre 
seuene daies of hir clensyng, and in the2s 
ei3tthe dai sche schal offre for hir silf to 
the preest twei turtlis, ethir twei ‘briddis 
of culueris’, at the dore of the tabernacle 
of witnessyng ; and the preest schal make? 29 
oon for synne*, and the tothir in to brent 
sacrifice ; and the preest schal preye for 
hir bifor the Lord, and for the fletyng> 
out of hir vnclennesse. Therfor 3e schulen 30 
teche the sones of Israel, that thei eschewe 
vneleunessis, and that thei die not for her 
filthis, whanne thei defoulen my tabernacle 
which is among hem. This is the lawe3t 
of hym that suffrith fletyng¢ out of seed, 
and which® is defoulid with fleischly cou- 
plyng, and! of a& womman which” is de-32 
partid in the tymes' of monethis, ethir 
which* flowith out in coutynuel blood, and 
of the man that slepith with hir. 


CARMI, 


Aud the Lord spak to Moises, aftir the1 
deeth of the twei sones of Aaron, whanne 
thei offriden alien fier, and weren slayn, 
and comaundide! to hym®™, and seide, Speke 2 
thon to Aaron, thi brother, that he entre 
not in” al tyme in to the seyntuarie, which® 
is with ynne the veil bifor the propicia- 
torie?, bil which the arke is hilid, that he 
die not; for Y schal appere in a cloude 
on’ Goddis* answeryng place; ‘no butt hes 
do these thingis bifore". He schal offer a 
calf for synme, and a ram in to brent sa- 
erifice; he schal be clothid with’ a lynnun4 
coote™, he schal hide the* schamefast mem- 
bris with pryuy’ lynnun clothis?; he schal 


b he comaundide £ pr.m. 


tynelene is. he schal rks. Y vnto 
Z offre 1s. %hir synne is, © flowyng ts. 
n Om. 1s. © that 1s. 


P propiciatorie or Goddis 
¢ but if x. 


u that ben seid bifore 1s. 


XVI. 5—15. 


be gyrd with a lynnen gyrdil, and a lyn- 
nen mytre he shal putte to the heed; thes 
forsothe ben the holy clothes, with the 
whiche al he shal be clothed, whanne he 
5 were wasshid®. And he shal take of al 
the multitude of the sones of Yrael two 
gootes for synne, and a wethir into brent 
esacrifice; and whanne he offreth a calf, 
and preieth for hym silf, and for his 
z7hows, two gootes he shal make stoonde 
before the Lord, in the dore of the ta- 
sbernacle of witnessyng; puttynge vpon 
either loot, oon to the Lord, and another 
9to the goot that shal be sent out. Whos 
loot goth out to the Lord, shal offre thilke 
iofor synne; whos forsothe into the goot 
that shal be sent out, shal ordeyne him 
quik before the Lord, that he heelde 
preiers vpon hym, and sende hym out 
uinto wildernes. Thes thingis lawfully so- 
lempnysid¢, he shal offre a calf, and prei- 
ynge for hym silf, and for his hows, shal 
woffre it. And the censure taken to, the 
whiche he hath fulfillide of the coolis of 


the auter, and takynge with hoond® the , 


maad ensencef of dyuers spices into en- 
sensyng, he shal goo yn bijonde the veile, 
13in to the hooli thingis; that the swetes 
smellynge spices putt vp on the fier, the 
clowde of hem and the breeth couer 
Goddis answeryug place, that is vpon the 
14 witnessynge, and die not. And he shal 
take of the blood of the calf, and he shal 
sprenge with the fyngre seuen sithes! 
13 a3ens the propiciatorye, at the eest. And 
whanne he hath slawe the goot, for the 
synne of the puple, he shal bere ynne his 
blood with ynne the veile, as it is co- 
maundid of the blood of the calf, that 
he spreynge forn a3en Goddis answeryng 


LEVITICUS. 


331 


be gird with a lynnun girdil, he schal 

putte a lynnun mytre on his heed ;° for 

these clothis ben hooli, with whiche® alle 

he schal be elothid, whanne he is waischun. 

And he schal take of al the multitude ofs 

the sones of Israel twei kidis for synne, 

and o> ram in to brent sacrifice; andé 

whanne he offrith® a calf, and preieth${ — + and preieti, 
for hym®, and for his hows, he schal make7 ‘na consi” 
twei ‘buckis of geet‘ to stonde bifor the {at's prdeyn- 
Lord, in the dore of the tabernacle of wit- °° 
nessyng; and he% schal sende" ‘on' euers 

eithir‘, o lot! to™ the Lord", and another lot® 

to the goot that schal be sent out. Whos9 

lot goith out to the Lord, he? schal offre’ 

it for synne; sotheli whos lot goith out. 

in to goot® that schal be sent out, he® schal 

sette' hym quyk bifor the. Lord, that he 

sende preyers ‘on hym", and sende hym’ 

out in to wildirnesse. Whanne these! 

thingis” ben doon ri3tfuli, he schal offre 

the calf, and ‘he schal preye* for hym silf, 

aud for his hows, andY schal offre the? 

calf. And whanne he hath take the* cen- 12 

seer, which> he hath fillid of © thet coolis 

of the auter, and ‘he hath take in® hond 

the ‘swete smellynge spicery maad‘ into 

encense®, he schal entre ouer" the veil in 

to the! hooli thingis*; that whanne swete 13 
smellynge spiceries ben put on! the fier, 

the cloude™ and ‘vapour of tho" hile Goddis 

answeryng place®, which? is on4 the wit- 

nessyng{, and he™ die not. Also he’ schal 14 ¢ whieh is on 
take of the ‘blood of the calft, and he ee 
schal sprenge seuensithis with the" fyngur {hen 
a3ens ‘the propiciatorie’, to the eest*. And 15 #¢¢x@- 
whanne he* hath slayn the ‘buk of geet’, 

for? synne of the puple, he schal brynge 

in the blood therof with ynne the veil, as 

it is comaundid of the ‘blood of the calf®, 


e wasche x. in to heuenc doon & pr.m. ¢ his hoond x pr.m. fcense npEFH. & soote h ¢o. 
uerth p. isithe speru. 

a hem Is. bars. che offrith, that is, disposith to offre BCGNQ. 4 ether purueieth a. e hym- 
self plures. geet buckisis. 8 Aaronis. >} putte w. caste plures. ilot vponits.  * either side p. 


‘la lot on euer eithir A. oo lot on euer either wr sec.m. 


that owith that geet s. 4 offre or sie s. 


the goot rkmsWwx. 


°Om. 1s. Phe 
t offre s. vp on 


mo lott to1s. 4 dore ea. 
8 he that owith him s, 


his offryng 1s. Vv that goot 1s. WOm.q. * preiynge 1s. Yhes. and he ksw. 7 thatis. 4aQ. > thatis. 


€withis. 4Om.1s. e takynge with his 1s. 
bahoue 1s. 1 Om. plures. * place is. 
place, that is, the propiciatorie BCQN. P that rs. 
uhis is. v Goddis answeringe place 1s. 
2 offrid for s. ® calues blood 1s. 


f maad encense with dyuers spices 1s. 
lypon 1s. ™ cloude of hem ts. 
4 vpon Is. 


W eestwarde 1. to eestwarde s. 


& encensyng 1s. 
. her breeth 1s. 9 answering 
8 Aaron 1s. ¢ calues blood 1s. 
x Aaron 1s. ¥ goot bucke 1s. 


r Aaron 1s. 


uu2g 


332 


16 place, and purge the seyntuarye fro the 
vnclennes) of the sones of Yrael, and fro 
the trespassynges of hem, and fro alle 
synnes. After this rijt he shal doo in 
the tabernacle of witnessyng, that is fic- 
chid betwix hem, in the myddil of the 

17sortes of dwellyng* of hem. No man be 
in the tabernacle, whanne the bishop shal 
goo into the seyntuarye, that he preye for 
hym silf, and for his hows, and for al the 
companye of Yrael, to the tyine that he 

18 goo out of the tabernacle. And whanne 
he goth out to! the auter that is before 
the Lord, prey he for hym silf, and the 
taken blood of the calf, and of the goot, 
heelde he vpon the hornes of it, bi enuy- 

i9roun; and sprenge!! with the fyngre se- 
uen sithes™, purge he, and halowe it fro 
the vnclennes™™ of the sones of Yrael. 

20 After that he hath clenside the seyntuarye, 
and the tabernacle, and the anter, thanne 

210ffre he a quyk goot; and either hoond 
put on his heed, knowleche he al the 
wickidnes" of the sones of Yrael, and alle 
the giltis, and alle the synnes of hem, the 
which inwardly preiynge to his heed, he 
shal sende it out bi a man al redy into 

22desert. And whanne the goot hath born 
al the wickidnes® of hem into solitarye 
23loonde, and were left in desert, Aaron 
shal turne a3en into the tabernacle of wit- 
nessyng; and the clothes doon of, with 
the whiche he was clothed before, whanne 
he entride the seyntnarye of God, and 
24hem laft there, he shal wasshe his flesh 
in an holi place, and shal be clothid? with 
his owne clothes, and afterward that he, 
goon out, hath offred his and the puples 
brent sacrifice, he shal preye as wel for 
25hym silf, as for the puple; and the talw3 
that is offred for synne he shal brenne 
26vpon the auter. He forsothe that letith 
k dwellyng placys & pr. m. 


J vnelennessys £. 


LEVITICUS. 


1 fro p. 


XVI. 16—26. 


that he sprynge? euene a3ens Goddis an- 
sweryng place, and he schal clense the1é 
seyntuarie fro vnclennessis® of the sones 
of Israel, and fro her trespassyngis, and 
alle’ synnes. Bi this custom he* schal do 
in the tabernacle of witnessyng, which! is 
set among hem, in the? myddis of partis"{ fis ee iw 
of the! abitacioun ‘of hem*. No man be 17 filthis. cca. 
in the tabernacle, whamne the bischop schal 
entre in to the seyntuarie, that he preye 
for hym silf, and for his hows, and for al 
the cumpeny of Israel, til! he go out of 
the tabernacle. Sotheli whanne he hath1s 
go out to the auter which™ is bifor the 
Lord, preye he" for hym silf, and schede® 
he on the hornes? therof, bi cumpas, the 
blood ‘that isi takun of the calf, and of the 
‘buk of geet"; and sprynge he* seuensithis 19 
with thet fyngur, and clense he, and ha- 
lewe" the antir fro vnclennessis of the 
sones of Israel. Aftir that he hath clensid 29 
the seyntuarie, and tabernacle’, and auter™, 
thanne offre he the lyuynge ‘buc of geet* ; 
and whanne euerY eithir hond is set? on®21 
the heed therof, knowleche the preest alle 
the wickidnessis of the sones of Israel, and 
alle the? trespassis and synnes ‘of hem, 
whiche® the preest schal wische® to the 
heed‘ therof®, and schal® sende hym' out 
in to deseert bi a man maad redi*. And 22 
whanne the ‘buc of geet! hath bore alle 
the™ wickiduessis ‘of hem" in to a° deseert 
lond, and is? left ‘in deseert?, Aaron schales 
turn ajen in to the tabernacle of witness- 
yng; and whanne the clothis ben put of’, 
in whiche he was clothid bifore, whanne 
he entrid in to the seyntuarie of God, and 
ben® left there, he schal waische his fleisch 24 
in the hooli place, and he schal be clothid 
in his owen clothis, and aftir that he hath 
go out, and hath offrid the brent sacrifice 
of hym silf, and of the puple, he schal 
mm yn_ 


I sprengynge eu. ™ sithe BDEFH. 


clennessys E. ™ wikkydnesses e. © wyckydnesses speu. P clothid in p. 4 synnys E. 

b sprynge it 1s. ¢vnelenness. ‘alle Aeris. © Aaronis. fthat1s, & Om.1s. 1} the partis 1s. 
iheris. * Om.is. | til thatis. ™that 1s. "he thanneis. © heelder. P corners 1. h. or corners s. 
4 Om. sc. * goot bukke 1s. * Om. xu. he itis. thisis. halowe he pr pr.m. Vv the tabernacle 1s. 
w the auter 1s. *goot bucke rs. Yhiseneris. 2 putis. ®vpons. bheris, ¢Om.1s. 4 whiche 
synnus 18. © waizsshe KLO sup. ras. waishe x. wische or wolne s. f goot heeds, $Om.s. bhe schal 1s. 
ithe goot 1s.  redi ¢hertos. } goot bucke 1s. ™her1s. 9 Om.1s. 9 Om.1s. Pheisis. 4 there Is. 


t of fra him s. 8 tho clothis ben s. 


XVI. 27—XVIL. 2. 


goo the sent out goot, shal wasshe his 
clothes and his" bodi with water, and so 
az7he shal goo into the tentis. The* calf 
forsothe and the goot, that weren offred 
for synne, and whios blood is brought in 
seyntuarye, that the clensyng were ful- 
fillid, thei shulen bere out of the tentis; 
and thei shulen brenne with fier, as wel 
the skynnes, as the flesh of hem and the 
ge drit. And who so euer' brenne" hem, shal 
wasshe his clothes and the flesh with wa- 
ter, and so he shal go into the tentes. 
29 And this shal be to 3ow lawful euer- 
lastyng; the seuenth moneth, the tenthe 
day of the moneth, 3e shulen traueyle 
3oure soules, and no werke 3e shulen do, 
whether with ynne bore or comlyng that 
30 pilgrimagen among 30w. In this day shal 
be the purgyng of 3ow, and clensyng fro 
alle 30ure synnes, before the Lord 3e shu- 
3ilen be maad clene; the holiday forsothe 
of restyng it is, and 3e shulen traucil 
3oure soules thur3 perpetuel religioun. 
32 The preest forsothe, that were anoynt, 
shal purgen out, and whos hondes ben 
sacrid, that he bere the office of preest- 
hod for his fader; and he shal be clothid 
with a lynnen stoole, and with holy 
33 clothes, and he shal purge the seyntu- 
arie, and the tabernacle of witnessing, 
and the auter, and the preestis, and alle 
3athe puples’. And this shal be lawful to 
jow euermore, that 3e preyen for the sones 
of Yrael, and for alle the synnes of hem, 
ones in the 3eer. He dide thanne, as the 
Lord hadde comaundide to Moyses. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to Aaron and his sones, and to alle 


Om. apen. *andthe es. tere. 


t Aaron is. & vpon Is. Vv that 1s. 
bucke 1s. 4 fulfilidis. % int. © fleishe 1. 
Stentisis. bOm. ns. 1? that is. 


clense s. "the which 1. first himself that s. 


LEVITICUS. 


W goot bucke 1s. 
4 tho beestis 1s. 
k the sabat 10 sup. ras. 8. 
© that prest 8. 


333 


preye as wel for hym silf, as for the puple; 
and het schal brenne on" the auter the in-25 
nere fatnesse which’ is offrid for synne. 
Sotheli he that leet go the ‘buk of geet™ 26 
able to be sent out, schal waische lise 
clothis and bodi* with water, and so he 
schal entre in to the castelsY. Forsothe 27 
thei schulen bere out of the castelsY the 
calf and ‘buk of geet”, that weren offrid 
for synne, and whos blood was brou3t in 
to the seyntuarie, that the clensyng were 
fillid*; and thei schulen brenne bi? fier as 
well the skynuys, as the fleischis® and dung 
of tho’. And who euer brenneth¢ tho, schalfes 
waische hise clothis and fleisch in watir, 
and so he schal entre in to the castels®, 
And this schal be to jou a lawful thing 29 
euerlastynge ; in the seuenthe monethe, 
in the tenthe dai of the monethe, je schu- 
len turment 3oure soulis, and 3e schulen 
not do ony werk, nethir a" man borun in 
the lond, nether a comelyng which! is a 
pilgrym among 3ou. The delyueryng fro 30 
synne, and the clensyng of 30u schal be in 
this dai, 3e schulen be clensid bifore the 
Lord fro alle 3oure synnes; for it is sabat* 31 
of restyng, and 3e schulen turment 3oure 
soulis bi euerlastynge religioun'’. Sothelis2 
the preest schal clense™, which" is anoyntid, 
and whos hondis ben halewid, that he be 
set in preesthod for his fadir; and he® 
schal be clothid in a lynnun stoole, and in 
hooli clothis, and he schal clense the seyn-33 
tuarie, and the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
and the auter, and the preestis, and al the 
puple. And this schal be to 30u a lawful 34 
thing euerlastynge, that 3e preye for the 
sones of Israel, and for alle the? synnes ‘of 
hem4, onys in the 3eer. Therfor he" dide, 
as the Lord comaundide to Moises. 


CAT XY il. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Speke thou to Aaron, and to hise sones, 2 


nu brynneth speru. VY peple aspen. 


x his bodi 1s. Ytentis ts. 2 the goot 
© schal hrenneis.  f he schal 1. 
l yeligioun in this saboth 18.  ™ out 


Pheris. @Om,ts. 1? Aaron ts. 


334 


the sones of Yrael, seiynge to hem, This 
is the word that the Lord hath comannd- 
3ide, seiynge, Eche man of the hows of 
Yrael, if he slee an oxe, or a sheep, or a 
she goot in the tentes, or out of the 
4tentes, aud offreth not at the dore of the 
tabernacle offrynge to the Lord, he shal 
be gilti of blood; as he hadde shedde 
blood, so he shal perishe fro the myddil 
sof his puple. Therfor the sones of Yrael 
shulen offre to the preest her oostes, that 
thei slewen in the feelde, that thei ben 
halowid to the Lord, before the dore of 
the tabernacle of witnessyng, and offre 
6 thei the* oostes pesible to the Lord. And 
the preest shal heelde the blood vpon the 
auter of the Lord, at the dore of the 
tabernacle of witnessyng; and he shal 
brenne the talw3 into smel of swetnesY to 
7the Lord. And thei shulen no more offre 
her oostes to feendes, with the whiche 
thei han do fornyeacionn; lawful ecuer- 
lastynge it shal be to hem, and to the 
safter comers of hem. And to hem thow 
shalt seye, A man of the hows of Yrael, 
and of the comlinges that pilgrimagen 
anentis 30w, that offrith brent sacrifice, 
9other slayn offryng, and? to the dore of 
the tabernacle of witnessyng bryngith it 
not, that it be offred to the Lord, he shal 
1ospille fro his puple. Eche man of the 
hows of Yrael, and of comlyngis that pil- 
grimagen among 30w, if he eete blood, Y 
shal a3en fastne my face a3ens the soule 
of hym, and Y shal lese hym fro his pu- 
1 ple ; for the soule of flesh is in blood, and 
I hane 301mm it to 30w, that 3e purgen 
myn auter for* 30ure soules, and blood 
izbe fore the hidows gilt of soule. And 
therfor Y seide to the sones of Yrael, 
Eche lijf of 30w ete no blood, ne of the 
comlyngis that pilgrymagen among 3ow. 
13 Eehe man of the sones of Yrael, and of 


Ww that offre 2 pr.m. 


LEVITICUS. 


x thoo £. 


XVII. 3—13. 


and to alle the sones of Israel, and seie 

thou to hem, This is the word which’ the 

Lord comaundide, and seide, Ech man of3 

the hows of Israel schal be gilti of blood*, 

if he sleeth" an oxef, ether™ a scheep, ethir m 
a geet in the castels’, ethir ont of the eas- 907 Of Sxeribee: 
tels’, and offrith not an offryng to thea *% 

Lord at the dore of the tabernacle’; as* he 
schedde mannus blood, so he schal perische 
fro the myddis of his puple. Therfor thes 
sones of Israel owen to offre her sacrifices 
to the preest, whiche thei sleen in the feeld, 
that tho be halewid to the Lord, bifor the 
dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng, and 
that thei offre thoY pesible sacrifices to the 
Lord. And the preest sehal sehede? thee 
blood on* the auter of the Lord, at the 
dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng ; and 
he> schal brenne the ynnere fatnesse in 
to odour® of swetnesse to the Lord. And7 
thei schulen no more offre her sacrifices - 
to fendis, with whiche thei diden fornyea- 
cioun®; it schal be a lawful thing euer- 
lastynge to hem, and to the aftircomeris® 
‘of hem", And thou schalt seie to hem, As 
man of the hows of Israel, and of the 
comelyngis' that ben pilgryms among 3on, 
that offrith a brent sacrifice, ethir a slayn 
sacrifice, and bryngith it not to the dores 
of the tabernacle of witnessyng, that it be 
offrid to the Lord, schal* perische fro his 
puple. If ony man of the sones of Is-10 
rael, and of comelyngis! that ben pilgryms 
among 30u, etith blood{, Y schal sette 
faste™ my face ajens ‘the sonle of hym®*, 
and Y schal leese hym fro his puple; fori 
the lijf of fleisch is in blood®, and Y 3af 
that blood to 3ou?, that 3e clense on? myn 
auter ‘for 3o0ure sonlis', and that the blood 
bes’ for thet synne of soule". Therfor Y 12 
seide to the sones of Israel, Ech lynynge 
man of jon schal not ete blood, nethir of 
the’ comelyngis that ben pilgryms among” 


+ if he slecth, 
ete. bi the ma- 


t In Ebreu it is, 
eny blood. x. 


Ysootnes e. “in «a 4 fro s. 


Sthatis. tblood or gret synuet. grete synne s, Uslee 1s, U4 or E1LPS. Ytentis1s. W tabernacle of witness. 
. : gree Sy g y 
ingw. * as if plures, Y thilke1. 2 heelde out 1s. schede out s. @vpon 1s. » the preest 1s. © smellyng 1s. 


4 folkis 1s. 


KLMNOPQRTWX. 
therwith vpon s. 


n his soule 1s. 


rOm.s. sbe sprengid 1s. 


€ fornyeacioun, that is, idolatrie BCGINQS. 
lyngis, that is, conuertid to the lawe of Jewis Bccoa. 

© the blood 1. 

t Om. 1s. 


fhleris. g aftercummer s. 5 Om. ts. 
k he schal 1s. 1 the comelyngis 1s. 
P 30u for 3oure soulis s. 
u the soule 1s. 


i come- 
m first DEFGI 
4 ther with vpon 1. hem 
Vony of the is. W anentis x. 


XVII. 14—XVIII. 9. 


the comelyngis that pilgrymagen anentis 
3ow, whether with huntyng or with foul- 
yng, take wilde beeste, or bridd, the which 
it is leeful to eete, sheed he his blood, 

i4and couer it the erthe; the sonle forsothe 
of al flesh is in blood. Wherfor Y seide 
to the sones of Yrael, The blood of al 
flesh 3e shulen not eete, for the soule of 
flesh is in blood, and who so euer etith 

sit, shal dye. The lijf that etith faln to 
deth, other the takun of a beeste, as wel 
of with ynne getun, as of comlyngis, shal 
washe his clothis and hym silf with wa- 
ter, and he shal be defowlid vnto the 
euen, and bi this ordre he shal be maad 

ie6clene; that if he wasshe not his clothes, 
or body, he shal bere his wiekidnes. 


CAP. XVIII. 


i And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Speke to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
3shalt seie to hem, Y am the Lord 3oure 
God; after the custome of the leond of 
Egipte, in the which 3e han dwellid, 3e 
shulen not doo; after the maner of the 
regioun of Chanaan, to the whiche Y am 
to bryng 3ow yn, 3e shulen not don, ne 
in the lawful thingis of hem 3e shulen 
4goo. 3e shulen doo my domes, and the 
heestis 3e shulen kepe, aud 3e shulen goo 
sin hem; Y the Lord 3oure God. Kepith 
my lawes and domes, the whiche doynge, 
a man shal lyue in hem; Y the Lord 
630ure God. Eche man to the nexte wo- 
man of his blood shal not goo to, that 
7he opne the filthed of hir; Y Lord. The 
filthheed of thi fader and the filthheed of 
thi moder thow shalt not discouer; thi 
moder she is, thow shalt not opne the 
sfiltheheed of hir. The filthheed of the 
wijf of thi fader thow shalt not discouer ; 
the filthheed forsothe of thi fader it is. 
9The filthheed of thi? sister, of fader or 


LEVITICUS. 


335 


jou. What euer man of the sones of Israel, 13 
and* of the comelyngis that ben pilgryms 
anentis 30u, takith a wielde beeste, ethir 
a brid, whiche it is leueful to ete, whether 
bi huntyng, whether’ bi haukyng, schede* 
the blood therof, and hile* it with erthe ; 
for the lijf of ech fleisch is in blood®.14 
Wherfor Y seide to the sones of Israel, 3e 
schulen not ete the blood of ony fleisch, 
for the lijf of fleisch is in blood’, and who 
ener etith blood, schal perische. A mans 
that etith a thing deed{ bi it silf, ethir 


+ deed, this is 
vadirstondun 


takun of a% beeste, as wel of men borun of Bess 

: grauntid to 

in® the lond, as-of comelyngis, he schal  incte. Lire 
here. CGQX. 


waische hise clothis and hyin silf in watir, 
and he schal be ‘defoulid til to! euentid* ; 
and by this ordre he schal be maad eleene; 
that if he waischith! not his clothis, ether™ 16 
his bodi, he sehal bere his wickidnesse. 


CAP. XVIII. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and thou 2 
schalt seie to hem, Y am 3oure Lord Goad ; 
3e schulen not do by the custom of thes 
lond of Egipt, in which 3e dwelliden; 3e 
schulen not do bi the custom of the eun- 
trei" of Canaan, ‘to which® Y sehal brynge 
30u yn?, nethir 3e schulen go in the law- 
ful thingis of hem‘. 3e schulen do my4 
domes, and 3e schulen kepe myn heestis, 
and 5e schulen go in tho"; Y am 3oure 
Lord God. Kepe 3e my lawis and domes, 5 
whiches a man ‘schal do, and‘ sehal" lyue 
in tho; Y am 3o0nre Lord God. Eeh’ mane 
schal not nei3 to the” ny3{ eomman of his 
blood, that he schewe ‘the filthe of hir*; 
Yam the Lord. Thou schalt not disky-7 
uere the filtheY of thi fadir and the filthe? eee 
of thi modir; sche is thi modir, thou schalt vax. 
not schewe hir filthe*. Thou schalt nots 
vnhile the filthe* of the wijf of thi fadir, 
for it is the filthe® of thi fadir. Thongs 
sehalt not schewe the filthe* of thi sistir, of 
fadir ‘ether of inodir, whieh sister is gen- 


t ny3, onely de- 
grees of con- 
sanguinyle ex- 
pressid in this 
e®, ben forbe- 


b the 4. 


Xor1t. Ywherg. Zora. 
€ the hlood 1. f the blood 1x. 
™ neither 1s. or ELP ut pass. 


custum of worschyping BGNOX. 
x hir filthheed 1s. 


€ Om. 4. 
0 londe 1s. 
r them 1. 


Y filthheed 1s. 2 filthhood 18. 


a heelde he 1. schede he plures. 
hof s. 

© into the which 1. 
8 the whiche I. 
a filthheed ts. 


bd out the 1s. ¢ hile he rs. 
k the euentid kK. 

pOm.1. in tos. 
t that doith 1. 
band w. 


d Om. x. 
1 weishe 1s. 
9 hem that is, in the 
whe schals. Vat, Wat 
¢ the which 1, 


ivnclene vnto Is. 


336 


of moder, that at home or with outen is 
1ogotun, thow shalt not opne. The filth- 
heed of the dow3ter of thi sone, or of thi 
dou3ter dou3ter, thow shalt not opne, for 
11 thi filthheed it is. The filthheed of the 
dou3ter of the wijf of thi fader, that she 
hath bore to thi fadir, and is thi sister, 
12thow shalt not opne. The filth of the 
sister of thi fader thow shalt not disco- 
isuer; the flesh she is of thi fader. The 
filthhed of the sister of thi moder thow 
shalt not opne, for thi that she is flesh of 
14thi moder. The filthheed of the brother 
of thi fadir thow shalt not opne, ne thow 
shalt goo to the wijf of hyin, the which 
15is ioyned to thee thur3 affynyte. The 
filthheed of the wijf of thi sone thow 
shalt not opne, for the wijf of thi sone 
she is, ne thow shalt dyscouer the shen- 
shyp of hir; and no man take the wijf 
1g¢of his brother. The filthheed of the wijf 
of thi brother thow shalt not opne, for 
17the filthhed of thi brother it is. The 
filthheed of thi wijf, and of the dou3ter 
of hir, thow shalt not opne; the doujter 
of the sone of hir, and the dou3ter of the 
dou3ter of hir thou shalt not take, that 
thow opne hir shenship, for the flesh of 
hir thei ben, and siche a goyng togidere 
1ais incest. The sister of thi wijf into lig- 
gyn’ bi hir thow shalt not take, ne opne 
19 the filthhede of hir, 3it she lyuyng. To 
the womman that suffreth flux of blood 
thow shalt not goo, ne opne the stynk- 
20yngnes of hir. With the wijf of thi 
neij3bore thow shalt not goo togidir, ne 
with mengyng togidere of seede thow 
aishalt ‘be defoulid’, Of thi seede thow 
shalt not 3yue, that it be sacryd to the 
mawmet of Moloch, ne thow shalt de- 
fowle the name of thi God; Y a Lord. 
22 With a maal thow shalt not be mengid, 


¢ ly3ynge E. 


4 bigeten 1. either gendrid s. 
nedlok Gq. £. out of wedlok 1s. & filthheed, 1s. 
mitis ¥. sche isis, " filthheed 1s. 
heed is. $ brother 1s. t filthheed is. 


LEVITICUS. 


€ home, that is, in wedlok eq. h. in wedlok s. 
h thi neece 1s. 
© fadris sistir 18. 

u thi brother s. thi brothers wijf w. 


XVIII. 10—22. 


drid¢ at hoome® ether without forth*}. Thou 10 
schalt not schewe the filthe® of the dou3ter 
of thi sone, ether of neece"{ ‘of thi dou3ter’, 
for it is thi filthe*, Thou schalt not schewe 11 
the filthe* of the dou3ter of the wijf of thi 
fadir, which! sche childide to thi fadir, and 
is™ thi sistir. Thou schalt not opene the 12 
filthe" of the ‘sister of thi fadir®, for sche is 
the fleisch of thi fadir. Thou schalt not13 
schewe the filthe? of the sistir of thi mo- 
dir, for sche is the fleisch of thi imodir. 
Thou schalt not shewe the filthe? of the t4 
brothir of thi fadir, nethir thou schalt 
neije to his wijf, which’ is ioyned to thee 
bi affinyte. Thou schalt not schewe theis 
filthe’ of thi sones wijf, for sche is the 
wijf of thi sone, nether thou schalt dis- 
kiuere hir schenschip; and no man take 
his brotheris®’ wijf. Thou schalt not schewe 16 
the filthet of ‘the wijf of thi brother", for 
it is the filthe’ of thi brothir. Thou schalt 17 
not schewe the filthe’ of thi wijf ||, and of 
hir dou3ter; thou schalt not take the dou3- 
tir of hir sone, and the dou3tir of hir dou3- 
ter, that thou schewe hir schenschip ; thei 
ben the fleisch of hir, and siche letcherie 
is incest*, Thon schalt not take ‘the sister 18 
of thi wijf*, in to concubynageY§ of hir, 
nethir thou schalt schewe ‘the filthe of hir?, 
while thi wijf lyueth 3it. Thou schalt not 19 
neizje to a womman that suffrith rennyng* 
of blood of» monethe’, nethir thou schalt 
schewe hir filthe’, Thou schalt not do20 
letcherie with ‘the wijf of thi nei3bore®, 
nether thou schalt be defoulid with med- 
lyng of seed’, Thon schalt not 3yue of thi21 
seed, that it be offrid to the idol Moloch, 
nether thou schalt defoule the name of thi 
God; Yam the Lord. Thou schalt not22 
be medlid with a man bi letcherie® of wom- 
man‘, for it is abhomynacioun. Thou23 
schalt not do letcherie with ony* beeste, 


4 not defoule hir p. 


f forth, that is, out of 

K filthheed 1s. ! the which 1. 
q that 1. the which s. ° filth- 
V filtheheed 1s. W incest, 


1Om. s. 
P filthheed 1s. 


that is, leecherie of kynesmen and wymmen BCGKLNYQ. that is, lecherie of hem that ben kynny 1 marg. 


incest, of kinsmen or mymmen 8. 
nyng 1s. > bi cours of 1. © the monethe 1. 
& Lord God x. 1 the letcherie 18. 


x thi wyues sistre s. 
4 filtheheed 1s. 
2 a Wwomman Isw. 


% hir filthheed 1s. 
€ thi neisboris wijf is. 


@ the ren- 
f unclene seed s. 


y leecherie is. 


Kas, 


+tathoomecther 
withoute, that 
is, in wedloc, 
ether out ther- 
of. BCKLNPX. 
t neece, that is, 
the dou3tir of 
thi dou3tir. Bce 
1kas. 


|| of chi wizf, 
ete., in Ebrew 
itis, the filthe 
of a womman, 
and of hir dou3- 
tir. cax. 


§ In Ebru it is, 
to anguish of 
hire. Gax. 


XVIII. 23-——XIX. 6. 


bi maner of goyng to gidere with wom- 
23man, for abhomynacioun it is. With 
alle beestis thow shalt not goo to gidere, 
ne thow shalt be defoulid with it. <A 
womman shal not vnder ligge to a beeste, 
ne shal be mengid to it, for hidows synne 
24it is. Ne be 3e polut® in alle thes thinges, 
with the whiche alle gentilis ben de- 
foulid, that Y shal throwe out before 3oure 
_ 25$13t, of whom the erthe is polut, whos 
hidows synnes Y shal visite, that it caste‘ 
26out his dwellers. Kepe 3e my lawes and 
my& domes, that 3e do not of alle thes 
aboinynaciouns, as wel the with ynne 
gotun as the dwellers" that pilgrymageni 
27anentis 30ow. Alle forsothe thes cursid- 
nessis* diden the tiliers of the erthe that 
28 weren bifore 30w, and polutide it. Shon- 
eth therfor, lest and also 30w it caste! out, 
whanne the same thinges 3e doon, as it 
29 keste™ out folk that was before 3ow. Eche 
lijf that doth of thes abomynaciouns eny 
thing, shal perisch fro the myddil of his 
30puple. Kepe 3e myn heestis, and wole 
3e not doo thingis that diden thes that 
weren before 3ow, lest 3e ben polut® in 
hem; Y the Lord 3oure God. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 The Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to al the companye of the sones of 
Yrael, and thow shalt seie to hem, Be 3e 
holy, for Y am holy, the Lord 3oure God. 
3Echon drede his fader and moder. Kepe 
3e myn holy day°®; I the Lord joure God. 
4Nyle 3e be conuertid to mawmetis, ne 
goddis 30tun to gidere make 3e to 30w; 
5I the Lord 3oure God. If 3e offren an 
oost of pesible thingis to the Lord, that 
she be plesable, thilk dai that it were 
offryd 3e shulen eete it, and that other 
day; what euer thing forsothe were laft 
into the.thridde day, 3e shulen brenne 


LEVITICUS. 


337 


nethir thou schalt be defoulid! with it. A 

womman schal not ligge vnder a beeste, 

nether schal™ be medlid" therwith°f, for ty a 
it is greet synne. Be 3e not defoulid in 24 therwith, that 
alle these thingis, in whiche alle ‘folkis, fee Gaocing 
ether hethen men?, ben defoulid, whichea "oF BcGex. 
Jfolkis ¥ scha] caste out bifor 3oure si3t, of 25 

whiche’ the lond is defoulid, of which® 

lond Y schal vysyte the grete synnes, that 

it spewe’ out hise dwellers. Kepe 3e my 26 

lawful thingis and domes", that 3e do not’ 

of alle these abhomynaciouns, as wel a man 

borun in the lond as a comelyng which” 

is a pilgrym at* 3ou. For the dwellers of27 

the lond, that weren bifor 3ou, diden alle 

these abhomynaciouns, and defoulidenY that 

lond. Therfor be? 3e? war, lest it caste out 28 

viliche also® 30u in lijk® manere, whanne 3e 

han‘ do lijk® synnes, as it castide’ out 

vileche the folk®, that was bifor 3ou. Ech 29 

man that doith® ony thing of these abho- 
mynaciouns, schal perische fro the myddis 

of his puple. Kepe 3e myn heestis; nyle30 

3e do tho thingis, whiche thei that weren 

bifor 30u diden, and be 3e not defoulid in 

tho; Y aim 3oure Lord God. 


CAP. XIX. 


The Lord spak to Moises, and seide,1 
Speke thou to al the cumpenye of thee 
sones of Israel, and thou schalt seie to 
hem, Be 3e hooli, for Y am_hooli, 30ure 
Lord God. Ech man drede his fadir ands 
his modir. Kepe 3e my sabatis; Y am 
joure Lord God. Nyle 3e be turned to4 
ydols, nether 3e schulen make to 30u 30tun 
goddis ; Yam 3oure Lord God. If 3e of-s 
fren a sacrifice of pesible thingis to the 
Lord, that it be quemefuli, 3e schulen etec 
it in that day, in which it is offrid, and in 
the tother dai; sotheli what euer thing is 
residue‘ in to! the thridde dai, 3e schulen 


© polutid p>. fvome spern. & Om. spern. 4 dweller sen. i pilgrimagith spzru.  * cursyd- 
hedes ppeFu. | vome nperu. ™ vomyd speFrn. % polutid p. © days BDEFH. 
I defonlid ix conscience s. ™ it schalr, ™medler with hiri.  P folkis of kynde either hethene 1. 


folkis of k.e. h. mens. 4the whiche r 'whoms.  % the which 1. t yoome or thrawe 1. vome s. Um 
domes 8. Ynoonr. not eny s. Wthatrs. X*anentis1. Ythei defouliden 1s. 7 beth 1s. ® Om. plures. 
bOm.1. ¢thesamei. %schulr. ¢sicher. fhathecastr. g hethen folk 1. 5 schaldor. ito him 


quemeful s. * left zines. 1 Om. x. 


XX 


338 LEVITICUS. XIX. 7—19. 


7with fier. If eny after two dayes etith 
of it, he shal be cursid, and gilti of vn- 
8 pitowsnes; he shal bere his wickednes, 
for the holy of the Lord he hath polutide, 
and that soule shal perish fro ‘the myd- 
9dil of ? his puple. Whanne thow repist 
the tilthes of thi loond, thow shalt not 
kitte vnto the grounde the vttermost! of 
thet erthe, in the leeuyng eerys thow 
ioshalt gedere; ne in thi vyne 3eerd the 
reysonus and cornes fallynge down thow 
shalt not gedere, but to pore men and pil- 
grimes to ben lesid thow shalt leene; Y 
the Lord 3oure God. 3e shulen do no 
theft. 3e shulen not lize, ne desseyue 
izeny man his nei3bore. Thou shalt not 
forswere in my name, ne thou shalt polut 
isthe name of thi God; Y a Lord. Thow 
shalt not doo wronge chalenge to thi 
nei3bore, ne with force bere hym down. 
Ther shal not bide*® anentis thee thet 
werke of thin hyred seruant vnto the 
umorwen. Thou shalt not curse to the 
deef, ne before the blynde thow shalt 
putte" thing of offence; but thou shalt 
drede the Lord thi God, for J am a’ Lord. 
15 Thow shalt not do that is wickid, ne vn- 
ry3twisly thow shalt deme; thou shalt 
not biholde the persone of the pore, ne 
thow shalt onoure the chere of the my3t1; 
riz3twisly deme thow to thi nei3bore. 
16 Thow shalt not be a wrongful acuser of 
greuous synne, ne a pryue yuel speker in 
peplis; ne thou shalt stvonde ajens the 
17 blood of thi nei3jbore; Y’ a Lord. Haat 
thow not thi brother in thin herte, but 
opynli vndernym hym, lest thow haue 
ison hym synne. Thow shalt not seche 
veniaunce, ne thow shalt haue mynde of 
the wronge of thi citeseynes; thow shalt 
loue thi frende as thi silf; Y a Lord. 
19 Kepe 3e my lawes. Thi beestis thow 


brenne™ in fier. If ony man etith therof7 
aftir twei daes, he schal be vnhooli, and 
gilti of vnfeithfulnes ‘ether wichidnesse® ; 
and he schal bere his wickidnesse, for hes 
defoulide the hooli thing of the Lord, and 
his soule schal perische fro his puple. 
Whanne thou schalt repe the fruytis of9 
thi lond, thou schalt not kitte ‘til to® the 
ground the corn? of the lond, nether thou 
schalt gadere the eeris of corn? that ben 
left; nethir in thi vyner™ thou schalt ga-10 
dere reysyns® and greynes‘ fallynge doun, 
but thou schalt leeue" to be gaderid of 
pore men and pilgryms’ ; Y am 3oure Lord 
God. 3e schulen not do thefte. 3e schu-11 
len not lye, and no man disseyue his nei3- 
bour. Thou schalt not forswere” in my 12 
name, nethir thou schalt defoule the name 
of thi God; Y am the* Lord. Thou schalt 13 
not make fals chalenge to thi nei3bore, ne- 
thir thou schalt oppresse hymY bi violence. 
The werk? of thin hirid* man” schal not 
dwelle at® thee til the morewtid. Thou1s 
schalt not curse a deef man, nether thou 
schalt sette an hurtyng® bifor a blynd man; 
but thou schalt drede thi Lord God, for 
Yam thef Lord. Thou schalt not do that, 15 
that is wickid, nether thou schalt deme yn- 
iustli; biholde thou not the persoone of a 
pore man, nethir onoure thou tle face of 
a my3ti man"; deme thou iustli to! thi 
nei3bore. Thou schalt not be a sclaun-16 
derere*, nether a priuey bacbitere in the 
puplis!; thou schalt not stonde a3ens the + Thou schatt 
blood of thi neiz3bore™+; Y am the® Lord. 720 stande @- 


3enus the blood 


Thou schalt not hate thi brothir in thin 17° estore, 
loynyng thee 


5 0 p ith h h 
herte, but repreue® hym opynly?, lest thou at lee 


haue synne on hym. Thou schalt not seke 1g deth of the in- 
veniaunce, nether thou schalt be myndeful4 eens 
of the wrong of thi cyteseyns; thou schalt 
loue thi freend as thi silf; Y am the’ Lord. 


Kepe 3e my lawis. Thou schalt not make19 


P Om. £. Ghotemost z *Om.H. Sabyde pperu. *Om.p. "not putte BDEFH. vOm. B sec.m. 


m brenne itis. "ether of wickidnesse c. Om. DIKN sec. m. RST sec.m, vnto Is. Pcornes ELP. 4 the 
corn Bis. * vyne3erd is. Sthe reysyns is. tthe greynes 1s. tleeue hem is. Vof pilgryms1s. W forswere 
thee 1s. *Om.18s. YOm.s. Zhyrex. @werk1. > man, thai ts, the hire of his werk Boexgx. © with 1s. 
4 ynto 1s. tilto x. ¢ hurtling w. f Om. 1Ko sec.m.s. & man, that is, azens ri3tfulnesse BOGNQ. } man, 
that is, azens riztfulnesse BCGQX. man, that is, azens riztwiznesse iN. man, azens riziwisnesse 8. 3 of 1. 
K sclaunderere, ether [that is N] a false accuser ecexngx. | peples. ™ neizbore, consentinge lo eny 
wronge 8. a thi r. Om. KMO sec.m. s. 0 reprene thou plures. P opynly, chat is, by vois schewid 


out BCNQxX. mercyfulo. * Om. 10s. 


_ XIX. 20—32. 


shalt not make goo to gidere with beestis 
of another kynde. <A feelde thow shalt 
not sowe with dyuerse seede. A clooth 
that is woven of two, thow shalt not be 
20clothid. A man if he sleepe with a wom- 
man, bi goyng to gidere of seede, the 
which is booud womman, also noble, and 
neuerthelater” bi prijs not bou3t, ne the 
fredam 3yuen, bothe shulen be scourgid, 
and thei shulen not die, for she was not 
2ifree. For her trespas forsothe, he shal 
offre to the ‘Lord at the* dore of the ta- 
22 bernacle of witnessyng, a wether; and the 
preest shal preye for hym, and for his 
trespas, before the Lord; and he shal eft 
haue mercy to hym, and the synne shal 
23 be forzeuen. Whanne 3e weren gon in to 
the loond, and plauntiden’ in it apple trees, 
3e shulen doo awey the first fruytis of 
hem; the apples that buriounen™ shulen 
be vnclene to 30w, ne 3e shulen eete of 
24hem. ‘The ferthe forsothe 3eer al the 
fruyt of hem shal be halowid and preys- 
asable to the Lord; the fift 3eer forsothe 
3e shulen eete the fruytis, gedrynge to gi- 
dere apples that thei bringen forthe; Y 
26the Lord 30ure God. 3e shulen not eete 
flesh with the blood. 3e shulen not dy- 
uyne in bryddis, ne 3e shulen sette kep- 
27 ynges*? vpon sweuenes*; ne 3e shulen in 
28rownde dodde heer, ne shaue beerde; and 
vpon the deed 3e shulen not kitte 3oure 
flesh, ne eny figuris, or pryckyngis, 3e 
29shulen make to 3ow; Ya Lord. Ne putt 
thow thi dou;ter to.bordel, and the loond 
be defoulid, and it be fulfillid with tres- 
30pas ynto deth. My holi dayes kepe 3e, 
and my seyntuarie drede 3e; Y a Lord. 
31 Ne declyne thow to dyuynours, ne aserche 
eny thing of takers her answeris of de- 
uels, that 3e ben polut® bi hem; I the 
32Lord 30ure God. Before the hoor heed 
aryse, and onour the persone of the oolde, 
and drede the Lord thi God; Y am a 


LEVITICUS. 


339 


thi beestis to gendre with the lyuynge‘ 
beestis of another kynde. Thou schalt not 
sowe thet feeld with dyuerse sede. Thou 
schalt not be clothid in a cloth, which" is 
wouun of twei thingis. If a man slepith 20 
with a womman by fleischly knowyng of 
seed, whichY womman is an ‘hand maide”, 
3e, a noble womman of kyn, and netheles 
is* not a3enbou3t biY prijs, nethir re- 
wardid with fredom, bothe?* schulen be 
betun, and thei schulen not die, for sche 
was not fre. Sotheli the man for his tres-21 
pas schal offre a ram to the Lord, at the 
dore of the tabernacle of witnessyng; and 22 
the preest schal preye for hym, and for 
his trespas, bifor the Lord; and the Lord 
schal be merciful to hym, and the synne 


® bothe etc. in 
Ebrue it is, 
sche schal be 
betun. coax. 


.schal be for3jouun. Whanne 3e han entrid 23 


in to the lond of bzheest, and han plauntid 
therynne appil trees, 3e schulen do awei 

the firste flouris*; the applis whiche tho® 

trees bryngen forth, schulen be vncleene 

to 30u, nethir 3e schulen ete of tho®. For-24 

sothe in the fourthe 3eer al the fruyt of 

tho trees schal be ‘halewid preiseful4t to ee 
the Lord; forsothe in the fifthe 3eer 3e 25 hem that 
schulen ete fruytis®, and schulenf gadere ee: 
applis, whiche tho trees bryngen forth ; Y 

am 3oure Lord God. 3e schulen not ete26 
fleisch with blood. 3e schulen not make 

veyn diuynyng, nether 3e schulen kepe 
dremes ; nether 3e schulen clippe the heer 27 

in® round, nether 3e schulen schaue the 

beerd; and on deed men 3e schulen not 28 
kitte® 3oure fleischis*, nether 3e schulen 

make to 3ou ony fyguris, ether markis in 

joure fleisch; Y am the! Lord. Sette thou 29 

not thi dou3tir to do leccherie for hire, 

and the lond be* defoulid, and be! fillid™ 

with synne. Kepe 3e my sabatis", and 30 


drede 3e my seyntuarie ; Y ‘am the° Lord. 


Bowe 3e not to astronomyers, uether axe31 
3e ony thing of fals dyuynours, that 3e be 
defoulid bi hem; Y am 3oure Lord God. 


wnerthelater ze. *Om.4. Yplauntenz, 2 kepynge zr. 4% sweues 4. > polutid p. 
8Om.s. tars. 'thatss. Ythe which r. Whandmaide or boond s. *scheis1s. Ywith1. 2 bothe 
thei1s. *fruytist. bthes. ¢hemr. 4 halewid and preisable 1. hal. and be preisable s. © the 
fruytisis, f3eschulenis. ff Om.1s. &kitte or reises. hfleishe1, iOm.1s.  & therbi be is. 


1Om. 1s. ™ fulfillid is. © lawes s. 


Cams. Om. s. 


xXx 2 


340 LEVITICUS. XIX. 33-—XX. 7. 
33Lord. If a comlyng dwelle in 3oure Rise thou bifor an hoor heed, and onoure32 


and — t 2% eeld man 


thou the persoone of an eld 
, at Tt vndurstonde of 


drede thou thi Lord God?; Y am the4 
Lord. 
lond, and dwellith’ among 30u, dispise 3e 


loond, and were abidynge amonge 3ow, 
3ine myssey 3e to hym, but be he among 
jow as a° with inne born; and 3e shulen 
loue hym as 3o0ure? self; forsothe and 3e 


him that is eeld 
ve 3 in vertues and 
If a comelyng enhabitith" in joure 33 wisdom. Lire 


here.CGLNPQX. 


weren comelyngis in the loond of Egipte; 

35 Y the Lord 3oure God. Nyle 3e do eny 
wickid thing in dome, in rewle, in wei3t, 

36in mesure; ri3t balaunce, and euen ben 
the wei3tis, ry3t bushel, and euen sexta- 
rye; Y the Lord 3oure God, that haue 
ladde 30w out of the loond of Egipte. 

37 Kepe 3e myn heestis, and alle the domes, 
and do 3e hem; ‘I the Lord®. 


CAP. XX. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2 Thes thinge spek to the sones of Yrael, 
The man of the sones of Yrael, and of 
the comlyngis that dwellen in Yrael, if 
eny of his seede 3yue to the mawmet of 
Moloch, thur3 deth die he; the puple of 
3the loond shulen stonen hym. And Y 
shal putte my face ajens hym, and Y shal 
kitte hym doun fro the myddil of my 
puple, forthi that he 3aue of his seede to 
Moloch, and hath defowlide my seyntua- 
arye, and polutf myn holy name. That if 
the puple of the loond necgligent, and as 
despisynge myn heestes®, forjyue> the 
man that hath jouun of his seede to Mo- 
5 loch, ne wole®” slee hym, Y shal putte my 
face vpon that man, and his kynrede, and 
I shal kitte hym down, and alle that con- 
senten to hym, that thei doon fornyea- 
cioun with Moloch, fro the myddil of his 
6puple. The lijf that declyneth to dyuy- 
nours, and herkeners to deuels, and doth 
fornycacioun with hem, I shal putte my 
face a3ens hym, and J shal slee hym fro 
7the myddel of his puple. Be 3e maad 


not hym, but-be he among 3ou as a man34 
borun in the lond; and 3e schulen Ioue 
hym as 3out silf, for also 3e weren come- 
lyngis in the lond of Egipt; Y am 3o0ure 
Lord God. Nyle 3e do ony wickid thing 35 
in doom, in reule, in wei3te, and in me- 
sure; the balance be iust, and the wei3tis 36 
he euene, the buschel be iust, and the sex- 
tarie® be euene; Y am 3oure Lord God, 
that ladde 30u out of the lond of Egipt. 
Kepe 3e alle myn heestis, and alle domes’, 37 
and do 3e tho¥; Y am the* Lord. 


CAP. XX. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, } 
Speke thou these thingis to the sones of2 
Israel, If eny man of the sones of Israel, 
and of the comelyngis that dwellen in Is- 
rael, 3yneth of his seed to the ydol Mo- 
loch, die he bi deeth; the puple of the 
lond schal stone him. And Y schal settes 
faste my face a3ens hym, and Y schal kitte . 
awei him fro the myddis of my puple, for 
he 3af of his seed to Moloch’, and defoul- 
ide? my seyntuarie, and defoulide* myn 
hooli name. That if the puple of the lond4 
is necgligent, and as? Jitil chargynge® myn 
heeste, and suffrith the man that 3af of 
his seed to Moloch, nether wole’ sle hym, 
Y schal sette my face on that man, and5 
his* kynrede, and Y schal kitte doun hym, 
and alle that consentiden to him, that thei 
schulden do fornyeacioun with’ Moloch, 
fro the myddis of her puple. If a mane 
bowith" to astronomyersi, and false* dy- 
uynours, and doith fornyeacioun with hem, 
Y schal sette my face a3ens hym, and Y 
schial sle hym fro the mydis of hys puple. 
Be 3e halewid, and be 3e hooli, for Y am7 


Om. 4. Vjowe, @ Om. a. fpolutid >. € heeste z. h forzeueth x. b» wole not 4 pr.m. 
POm.s. 9Om.s. *dwellithis, sabidithrs. tgzoures, 4 pynts. Ymydomesis. W hem 1. 
x Om. 1s. ¥ Moloch, that king or prince of idolis s. 2 he defoulide 1. ® made vnclene 1s. > Om. 1s. 


© chargith 1. 4 if wole 1. ¢ on his 1s. f founycacioun, that is, ydolatrye Bcnx. forn. or idolatrie s, & toc. 


h bowers, i astronomyens w. to false 1s. 


xXx. 8—18. 


holy, and beth holy, for I am holi, the 
8 Lord 3oure God. Kepe! myn heestes, and 
doth hem, for Y am the Lord that halow- 
gith* 30u. Who so cursith to his fader, or 
moder, with deeth die he; who sok* to 
his fader or moder eursith, lis blood be 
1oypon hym. Who so! doth leccherie with 
wijf of another, and hath wrou3te auow- 
trye with the wijf of his nei3bore, thur3 
deth dye both™ the lecchour and the auow- 


1itres. He that slepith with his stepdam, 


and opneth the shenship of his fader, 


thur3 deth dien thei bothe; the blood of 
izhein be vpon hem. If eny man sleepe 
with his sones wijf, either be deed, for 
hidows trespas thei han wrou3t; the 
13blood of hem be vpon hem. He that 
slepith with a maal, bi maner of goyng 
togidere with a womman, either hath 
wrou3t ful vuleeful thing, thur3 deth die 
14thei; the blood of hem be vpon hem. He 
that vpon the wijf takith the dou3ter, the 
moder ‘of hyre®, hidows trespas hath? 
wrou3t; ful myche he shal bren with 
hem, and so greet vnleeful thing shal not 
isdwelle in the myddil of 30w. He that 
with hows beeste or feelde beeste goth 
togider, with deth die he, and the beeste 
icslee 3e. The womman that lieth’ to eny 
beeste, to gidere be she slayn with it; 
17 the blood of hem be vpon44 hem. He that 
takith his sistir, the dou3ter of his fader, 
or the dou3ter of his moder, and seeth 
the filthheed of hir, and she bihoolde the 
shenship of the brother, a ful vnleeful 
thing thei han wron3t, bothe shulen be 
slayn in the si3t of her puple ; forthi that 
her filthheed thei opneden to gidere, and 
18thei shulen bere her wickidnes. He that 
goth to gidere with a’ womman in the 
flux of the moneth blood, and opneth hir 
filthehed, and she opneth’ the welle of hir 


k hahwe zr. 


i kepe 3e BDEFN. 
P has Br. 


n sone BDEF. ° a lyue a. 
5S opyn BDEN. 


lhalewith 1s. ™ therfore hes. ® die he 1Ks. 
synne 8. 4do1. * another mannus wijf 1s. 
tresse is. V die thei 1s. W slepe ts. 
ahe hath s. » or with 1s. © Om. FIMs. 

i his fadir dou3ter or his modir dou3ter is. 
the 1. of bl. of the s. 9° schewith thanne s. 


LEVITICUS. 


kk Om. BD sec. m. E sec. m. 
q vnder lieth apEFu, 


0 his fadir cELP. 
S his neizbor wif s. 
x his faders schensehip 1s. 
ddie he 1ks. ¢ hjth rinp. -f be sche ixks. Sher is. 6 Om, is. 
k hir 18. 

P bothe thei is. 


341 


hooli, 3oure Lord God. Kepe 3e myn8 
heestis, and do 3e tho, for Y am the Lord 
that. halewe! 30u. He™ that cursith his9 
fadir, ether modir, die” bi deeth; if a man 
cursith fadir® and modir, his blood? be on 
hym. If a man doith4 leccherie with ‘the 10 
wijf of another man’, and doith anowtrie 
with ‘the wijf of his nei3bore’, bothe auow- 
tert and auowtresse" die” bi deeth. If ail 
man slepith” with hys stepdamme, and 
schewith ‘the schenschip of his fadir*, 
botheY die bi deeth; her blood be on hem. 
If ony man slepith with ‘his sones wijf?, 12 
euer either die, for thet han wrou3t greet 
synne; her blood be on hem. If a mani3 
slepith with a man, bi letcherie of a wom- 
man, euer either hath wrou3t vnleueful 
thing, die thei bi deeth; her blood be on 
hem. He that weddith ouer his wijf hir1s 
moder, hath* wrou3t greet synne; he schal 
be brent quyk with hem, and so greet vn- 
leueful doynge schal not dwelle in the 
myddis of 3ou. He that doith letcherie is 
with a greet beeste, ethir® a litil beeste* 
die’ bi deeth, also sle 3e the beeste. A 16 
womman that liggith® vndur ony beeste, 
bef slayn togidere with it; the’ blood ‘of 
heim be on hem. He that takith his sis- 17 
tir ‘the dou3tir of his fadir, ether the dou3- 
ter of his modir!, and seeth hir filthe, and 
sche seeth the schenschip of the* brothir, 
thei han wrou3t an vuleueful thing, bothe 
schulen be slayn in the si3t of her puple ; 

for thei schewiden togidere her filthe, and ie sae 
thei schulen bere! her wickidnesse. If aig 0%) tat wit 


+ Ifaman 
doith fleisli 
knowing with 
a womnan, etc. 


: : ingly knowith 
man doith fleischly knowyng with a wom- _ sich a wommao, 
i and is counyct 
mant in the flux™ of® monethet, and __ therof is doom, 
° ° ellis he schal 
schewith® hir filthe, and sche openetli the — te vnctene in 
. vij. dayes, as in 
welle of hir blood, bothe? schulen be slayn 3 Oo higre. 
fro the myddis of her puple. Thou schalt 19 “7 2. ax. 
| , ; ; t that is, while 
not diskyuere the filthe of thi modris sistir, the blood durith 
: : Pe ee = f that revveth by 
and of thi fadris sistir; he, that doith this, mocethes. ace 
Qx. 
m And RDEFH, 
T Om. BDEFH. 


1 Om. BoEFHu. 
qq vnpon 4, 


P thal is, synne 1. marg. blood or 

t the anouter sx sec.m. the auou- 
Y both thei 1s. 7 the wijf of his sone 1. 
3 of blood in 


I bere togidere w. _™ flowynge 1s. 


342 


blood, bothe shulen be slayn fro the myd- 
i9del of her puple. The filthheed of thi 
moder sister, and’ thi fader sister, thow 
shalt not discouer; who that doth this, 
the shenship of his flesh he shal nakyn, 
20and both shal bere her wickidnes. He 
that goth togidere with the wijf of his 
fader brother, or of his vncle, and opneth 
the shenship of his kynrede‘, bothe thei 
shulen ber her synne, and with out free 
2ichildren thei shulen dye. Who so wed- 
deth the wijf of his brother, an vnleeful 
thing doth; the filthheed of his brother 
he hath opned, and with out fre children" 
22he shal be. Kepe 3e my lawes, and my 
domes, and doth hem, lest and the loond 
cast* 30w out, that 3e ben to goynge yn, 
azsand to dwellynge. Nyle 3e goo in the 
lawful thingis of naciouns, the whiche Y 
am to puttynge out before 30w; alle for- 
sothe thes thinges thei han do, and Y 
2ahaue wlatid hem. To 3ow forsothe Y 
speke, Weeldith the loond of hem, that 
Y shal 3yue to 3ow in to erytage, the 
loond flowynge mylk and hony; Y the 
Lord 3oure God, that hath” seuerde 3ow 
25fro other puples. And 3e thanne seuer a 
clene beeste from vnclene, and clene* bryd 
fro vnclene, lest 3e poluten 3oure soules in 
beestis’, and in bryddis, and in alle that 
mouen in erthe, and that to 30w Y haue 
26shewid to be polut?. 3e shulen be holi to 
me, for Y the Lord am holy, and haue 
senerd 30w fro other puples, that 3e ben 
27myne. Aman or womman, in the which 
is a spirit of wicchecraft, or of dyuynynge, 
with deth die thei, and with stonus men 
shulen ouer-falle hem; the blood of hem 
be vpon hem. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 And the Lord seide to Moyses, Spek 
to the preestis, sones of Aaron, and thow 


Sand of BEFH. U chirdren 4. 


t kynredene &. 
2 polutid pb. 


4 opene ts. ¥ thei schulen 1s. 


2 the naciouns s. the whiche1. her lond 1s. 
& beestis s. } the whiche 1. 
crafte or 1s. ™ Om. Js. 


nher °% witht. 


LEVITICUS. 


VYvyome BDEFH. 


8 the brother of his fadir. 
Vhis brotheres filth s. “the which 1. *dwelle ynne 1s. 
€ that Is. 
i Y the Lord am holiis. Y am the Lord x. 
P Also A sec. m. BC. 


XX. 19-—-XXIL 1. 


schal ‘make nakid4 the schenschip of his 
fleisch, and bothe schulent bere her wickid- 


nesse. He that doith fleischli knowyng 20 


with the wijf of ‘his fadris brother’, ether 
of his modris brother, and schewith the 
filthe of his kyn, bothet schulen bere her 
symne, thei schulen die without fre chil- 


dren}. He that weddith ‘the wijf of his21 with out fre 


brother", doith an vnleueful thing; he 
schewide ‘the filthe of his brother’, he schal 


be without fre children. Kepe 3e my lawis22 


and my domes, and do 3e tho, lest the lond, 
in to which” 3e schulen entre and dwelle*, 


caste out viliche also 3ou. Nyle 3e go ins 


the lawful thingisY{ of naciouns’, whiche* 
Y schal caste out bifor 30u, for thei diden 
alle these thingis, and Y hadde abhomyna- 


children, that 
is, if children 
be horun of 
sich wedloc, 
thei schulen be 
yolawful and 
schulen not be 
eiris. Austyn 
and Lire here. 
cGax. 


I nyle 3e go in 
the lawful 

thingis of na- 
ciouns, that is, 
in worschiping 


cioun of hem. Forsothe Y speke to 30u, 24224 in the ma- 


Welde 3e ‘the lond of hem?, which¢ Y schal 
3yue to 30u in to eritage, the’ lond flow- 
ynge with mylk and hony; Y am 3oure 
Lord God, that departide 3ou fro othere 


puplis. Therfor also 3e departe a cleene 25 


beeste fro vnelene®, and a cleene brid fro 
vneleene®, lest 3e defoule 30ure soulis in af 
beeste®, and in briddis, and in alle thingis 
that ben moued “in erthe, and whiche® 
thingis Y schewide to jou to be defoulid. 


3e schulen be hooli to me, for ‘Y am the2e 


hooli Lordi, and Y departide 30u fro othere 


puplis, that 3e schulen be myne. A man27 


ethir ak womman, in which is an vncleene 
spirit spekynge in the ‘wombe, ethir! ‘a spi- 
rit™ of fals dyuynyng||, die thei" bi deeth ; 
men schulen oppresse hem bi® stoonus; 
her blood be on hem. 


CAP. XXI. 


And? the Lord seide to Moyses, Speke 1 
thou to preestis, the sones of Aaron, and 


whane zx. *aclene z. Y beeste £. 


t bothe thei 1s. 4 his brotheris wif s. 
Y thingis, that is, worshipful or manerly thingis s. 
(that is. @anvneleners. fOm, EIKLPs, 
kOm.c. |! wombe of wicche 


ner of lyuyng 
of hem. Lire 


here. CGQX. 


|| This is not 
vndurstondun 
of wade men 

in which the 
wickid spirit 
spekith with out 
her procuryng, 
but of hem that 
procuren that 
the deuel speke 
in hem. Lire 
here. CGXQ 


XXI. 2-—17. 


shalt seye to hem, Be not the preest de- 
2foulid in the deed of her cyteseyns, but 
oonly in cosyns, and ny3, that is, vpon 
fader and moder, and sone and dou3ter, 
3and brother and sister, mmayden, that is 
4not spousid to man; but and in the prynce 
5 of his puple he shal not be defoulid. Thei 
shulen not shaue heed, ne beerd, ne in 
her flesh thei shulen make in kyttynge ; 
choli thei shulen be to her God, and thei 
shulen not polute his name ; -ensence for- 
sothe of the Lord, and the looues of her 
God thei offren, and therfor holi thei 
7Shulen be. A strompet, and foule hor- 
dam, 3e shulen not take to wijf, ne hir 
that is forsakun of her housboond, for he 
sis sacryd to his God, and looues of propo- 
sicioun he offreth ; be thanne he holi, for 
Y am holi, the Lord that halowith* 3ow. 
9The dou3ter of the preest, if she were 
takun in hordam, and defouleth® the name 
of hir fader, with fier flawmes she shal be 
1obrent. The bishop, that is the moost 
preest amonge his britheren, vpon whos 
heed is heelde® the oyle of anoyntyng, 
and whos hondes in preesthod* ben sa- 
crid, and is clothid with holi clothes, his 
heed he shal not discouer, his clothis he 
11) shal not kitt, and to al deed he shal not 
goo yn algate; and vpon his fader and 
12moder he shal not be defoulid, ne he shal 
goo out fro the halowes, lest the seyntu- 
arie of the Lord be polut, for the oyle of 
holi anoyntynge of his God is vpon lym; 
i3I the Lord. A mayden he shal take to 
14 wijf; a widewe, and a departid, and a de- 
foulid oon, and a strompat, he shal not 
take, but a maydyn® child of his puple; 
1sne menge he the lynage of his kynde to 
the comounte of his puple, for Y a Lord, 
wthat halowe hym. And the Lord spak 
17to Moyses, seiynge, Spek to Aaron, A 
man of thi seed, bi the meynees, that hath 


LEVITICUS. 


343 


thou schalt seie to hem, A preest be not 
defoulid in the deed men of hise citeseyns, 
no but oneli in kynesmen4 and ni3 of2 
blood, that is, on fadir and modir, and" 
sone and dou3ter, and brother and sister,3 
virgyn’, which is not weddid to man; 
but nether he schal be defoulid in thes 
prince of his puple. Preestis schulen nots 
schaue the" heed, nether beerd, nether thei 
schulen make keruyngis in her fleischis ; 
thei schulen be hooli to her God, and theie 
schulen not defoule his name; for thei 
offren encense of the Lord, and the looues 
of her God, and therfore thei schulen be 
hooli. A preest schal not wedde a’ wijf7 
a corrupt womman, and a ‘foul hoore™, 
nether he schal wedde ‘hir that is* for- 
sakun of theY hosebonde, for he? is hale- 
wid to his God, and offrith® the looues ofs 
settyng forth; therfor be he® hooly, for 
“Y am the hooli Lord that halewith® 3ou. 
If the ‘doutir of a preest’ is takun in de-g 
foulyng of virgynite, and defoulith the 
name of hir fadir, sche schal be brent in 
flawmes*. The bischop, that is the moost 10 
preest among hise britheren, on whose 
heed the oile of anoyntyng is schedi, and 
whose hondis ben sacrid in preesthod, and 
he is clothid in hooli clothis*, schal' not 
diskyuere his heed, he schal not tere hise 
clothis, and outirli he schal not entre tou 
ony deed man; and he schal not be de- 
foulid on his fadir and modir, nether het 
schal go™ out of hooli thingis®, lest he 
defoule the seyntuarie of the Lord, for 
the oile of hooli anoyntyng of his God is 
on hym; Yam the® Lord. He? schali3 
wedde a4 wijf virgyn"; he schal not take’ 14 
a widewe, and forsakunt, and" aY foul zwom- 
man, and hoore’, but a damesele* of his 
puple ; medle he not the generacioun of his 15 
kyn to the comyn puple of his folk, for Y 
am the Lord, that ‘halewe hymY. And the 16 


ahalowe seru. defoule speFru. Chilte po. ‘the presthod p. ¢& mayde p. 

d his kynesmen s, *Om.s. Savirgynis. tthats. Utherzos. VYto1s. Wstrumpettis. *a wom. 
manis. Yhirrs. 2the preest 1s. 4 he offrith 1s. > forth to be offrid s. ¢ the preest1s. 4 Y the 
Lord am holir. Ythe L. holis. ¢ halewe scrw. f doutir of the preest 1. prestis douzter's.  & fijr 1s. 
hvponis. ihelds. Kthingisa prem. Jheschalis, ™notgou. %placisis. °Omis, Pa 
preest is. (to1s. Tavirgynis. 8% wedde w. ta forsakun wominan 1s. %Oim. 6. YOm. Bc. W de- 


foulid strumpett 1s. = virgyne 1s. 


y halewith it 1. halewith him s. 


344 LEVITICUS. XXI. 18—XXII. 4. 


a wemme, offre'he not breed to his God, 
isne go he to the seruice of hym; if he 
were blynde; if halt; if other’ with litil, 
190r with greet, and erokid noose; if with 
20brokun foot, or hoond; if erokid rigge, 
or bleer eyed; if whijt perle hauynge in 
the eye; if contynuel seab; if a drye scab 
21in the body; or brosten. Eche that hath 
a wemme, of the seed of Aaron the preest, 
hes shal not goo to offre oostis to the 
22 Lord, ne looues to his God; he shal ne- 
uerthelater" eete looues that ben offred in 
23the seyntuarye, so oonli that with ynne 
the veyle he goo not, ne goo to the auter, 
for a wemme he hath, and he shal not 
defoule my seyntuarie; I a Lord that ha- 
24Jewe hem. Thanne Moyses spak to Aa- 
ron, and his sones, and to al Yrael, alle 
that weren comaundid to hym. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Speke to Aaron, and his sones, that thei 
shunnen fro thes thingis that ben saerid 
of the sones of Yrael, and defoule thei not 
the name of halowid thingis to me that 
3thei offren; Y a Lord. Sey to hem, and 
to the aftercomers of hem, Eche inan that 
goth to, of 3oure lynage, to thilk thinges 
that ben sacrid, and that the sones of 
Yrael offreden to the Lord, in the whiche 
is vnclennes, he shal perishe before the 
4Lord; Yam a Lord. The man of the 
seed of Aaron that were leprows, or suf- 
frynge flux of seed, shal not eete of thes 
thingis that ben halowid to me, to the 
tyme that he be heelid. He that towch- 


Lord spak to Moyses, and seide, Speke 17 
thou to Aaron; a man of thi seed, bi 
meynes, that hath a wem?, schal not offre 
breed to his God, nethir scha]l* nei3 to his 18 
seruyee; if he is blind; if he is crokid; ifs 
he is ether of litil>, ether of greet*, and° 
wrong? nose; if he is ‘of brokun foot®, 
ethir hond; if he hath a botehe‘; ether if20 
he is blereijed; if he hath whijt colour’ 
in the" ije, that lettith the si;t ; if he hath 
contynuel scabbe ; if he hath a drye scabbe 
in the" bodi; ethir ‘is brokun! ‘in the pryuy 
membris*. Ech man of the seed of Aaron 2i 
preest!, which™ man" hath a wem, schal 
not neize to offre sacrifices to the Lord, 
nether ‘to offre® looues to his God; netheles 22 
he schal ete the looues that ben offrid in 
the seyntuarie, so oneli that he entre not 23 
with ynne the veil; he schal not neize to 
the auter, for he hath a wem, and he 
schal not defoule my seyntuarie; Y am 
the? Lord that halewe hem. Therfor Moises 24 
spak to Aaron, and to hise sones, and to al 
Israel, alle thingis that weren comaundid 
to hym. 


CAP. XXII. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 
Speke thou to Aaron and to hise sones,2 
that thei be war of these thingis of the 
sones of Israel, whiche thingis4 ben ha- 
lewid'; and that they defoule not the 
name of thingis* halewid to me, whiche 
thingist thei offren; Y am the" Lord. Seie3 
thou to hem, and to the aftir comeris of 
hem, Ech man of 3oure kynrede, ‘which 
man’ neijeth to tho thingis that ben ha- 
lewid, and whiche thingis the sones of Is- 
rael offreden to the Lord, in ‘which man” 
is vnelennesse, sehal* perische bifor the 
Lord; Yam theY Lord. A man of thea 
seed of Aaron, ‘which man? is leprouse, 
ethir suffrith ‘fletyng out* of seed, schal 


for Er. & Om. £ sec.m. 1} nerthelater £. 


zwem, that is, a notable foulnesse BCGNQX. ®he schal1. Pa litil 1s. ¢a greet is. Cor Ls. 4a crokid rs. 
© broke footidis. f botche ether unmesurable risyng in the brest ether in the bak BcGNnQx. botche or a bouge 
on his bak s. & colour or a peerle 1s. » his 1s. + if he be borsten 1s. ‘in priuy membris 1. Om.s. | the 
preest 1s. ™thatis. 2 Om. prs. °Om.1. POnm.is. ¢Om.1s. Thal. that is, offrid BcELNPOX. 
hal. or offrid s. § the thingis 1s. t Om. 1Ko sec.m.s. UOm.s. YVthatis. Wwhomi. * he schal 1s. 


yOm.1s. “thats. ® flowyng 1s. 


XXII. 5—18. 


ith the vnclene vpon the deed, and of 
whom goth out the! seed as of goynge 
5togidere, and that shal touche crepynge 
beeste, and eny vnclene, whos touchynge 
Gis hoory, shal be vnclene vnto the euen, 
and he shal not eete thes thinges that ben 
halowid to me; but whanne he wasshith 
jhis flesh with water, and the sunne is 
goon down, thanne, clensid, he shall eete 
halowid thinges, for it is the meete of 
shym. The fallid to deth, and taken of 
a beeste, he shal not eete, ne he shal be 
9 polut* in hem; I the Lord. Thei shulen 
kepe myn heestis, that thei vndur liggen 
not to synne, and dyen in the seyntuarie, 
whanne thei poluten it; I the Lord that 
10halowe 3ow. Eche alyen shal not eete of 
the halowid thingis; the alien tilier of the 
preest, and hyrid seruaunt, shulen not 
neete of thilk thinges. Whom forsothe the 
preest biggith, and he that were a free 
man of his hows, thes shulen eete of thilk 
igthingis. If the dou3ter of the preest to 
eny of the puple were spousid, of thes 
thinges that be halowid, and of the cheef 
isfruytys she shal not eete; if forsothe a 
widewe, or departyd, and with oute free 
children weren turned ajen to the hows 
of hir fader, as a child mayden was wont 
she shal be norisshid of the meetis of hir 
fader; eche alien of etyng of thilk thingis 
is4hath no power. He that etith of the ha- 
lowid**« thinges bi ignoraunce, shal adde 
the fifthe part with that! he etith, and he 
15 Shal 3yue to preest™ in the seyntuarie, ne 
thei shulen defoule the halowid thingis 
of the sones of Yrael, that thei offren to 
i¢the Lord, lest perauenture thei susteynen 
the wickidnes of his trespas, whanne ha- 
lowidk« thingis thei eeten; I the Lord that 
izhalowe hem. The Lord spak to Moyses, 
isseiynge, Spek to Aaron, and his sones, 
and to alle the sones of Yrael, and thou 
shalt seie to hem, A man of the hows of 


i Om. pperi. 


4 Om. 1s. 


b me or offrid s. 
1Om. rs. 


© vpon Is, 
schal rs. i Om. c. 


k tho thingis 18. 


Kk polutid p. kk holowid a. 


e that rs. 
m halewith s. 


LEVITICUS. 345 


not ete of these thingis, that ben halewid 
to me?, til he be heelid. He that touchith 
an vneleene thing on® a deed bodi, and fro 
whom the‘ seed as of leccherie goith out, 
and which® touchith a crepynge beeste,s5 
and what euer vncleene thing, whos touch- 
yng is foul, schal’ be vneleene ‘til to euen-6 
tid, and he schal not ete these thingis, that 
ben halewid to me; but whanne he hath 
waische his fleisch in watir, and the sunne7 
hath go doun, thanne he schal be clensid, 
and schal ete halewid thingis, for it is 
his nete. He schal not ete a thing deeds 
bi it silf, and takun of a‘ beeste, nethir he 
schal be defoulid in tho’; Yam the! Lord. 
Thei schulen kepe myn heestis, that theis 
be not suget to synne, and die in the seyn- 
tuarye, whanne thei han defoulid it; Y am 
the! Lord that halewe™ 3ou. Ech alien 10 
schal not ete of thingis halewid; the hyne 
which" is a straunger, and the hirid man 
of the preest, schulen not ete of tho®. So- 
theli these? servauntis, whom’ the preest 11 
hath bou3t, and which' is a* borun ser- 
uaunt of his hows, schulen ete of tho®. If 12 
the ‘dou3ter of the preest" is weddid to 
ony’ of the puple, sche schal not ete of 
these thingis that ben halewid, and of the 
firste’ fruytis ; sotheli if sche is a widewe, 13 
ether forsakun, and turneth a3en with out 
fre children to ‘the hows of hir fadir*, sche 
schal be susteyned bi the metis of hir fa- 
dir, as a damysel was wont; ech alien 
hath not power to ete of thoy. He thatis 
etith bi ignoraunce of halewid thingis, 
schal? adde* the fyuethe part with that 
that he eet, and ‘schal 3yue> to the preest 
in® seyntuarie, and thei schulen not de-1s 
foule the halewid thingis of the sones of 
Israel, whiche’ thei offren to the Lord, 
lest perauenture thei suffren the wickid- 16 
nesse of her trespas, whanne thei han ete 
halewid® thingis; Y am thef Lord that 
‘halewe hem®. The Lord spak to Moises, 


I that that x. ™ the preest £. 


& ynto the rs. tilto the x. hhe 
© tho thingis 1s. P thilke r. 


f he schal 1. 
a that 1s. 


(that 1. which w. The thatr. §Om.c. t tho thingis 1s. ¥ preestis dou3ter rs. Yony man 1s. W cheef 1s, 


x hir fadris hous 1s. 


y tho thingis rs. 
d the whiche 1. 


€ the halewid 1s, # Om, 1s. 


2 he schal 1s. 
& halewith jou s. 


aaddeto1s. > he schal 3yue it 1s. © in the 1s. 


EN 


346 


Yrael, and of comlynges" that dwellen 
anentis hem, that offrith his offrynge, 
other vowes 3eeldynge, or wilfuly of- 
frynge, what thing that he offreth into 
19 brent sacrifice of the Lord, that it be of- 
frid bi 3ow, a maal with outen wemme it 
shal be, of the oxen, and of the sheep, 
20and of the geet; if it haue a wemme, 3e 
shulen not offre, ne shal be acceptable. 
21The man that offreth slayn sacrifice of 
pesible thingis to the Lord, other vowes 
3eeldynge, other wilfully offrynge, as wel 
of oxen as of sheep, with outen wemme 
he shal offre, that it be acceptable; al 
22wemme shal not be in it. If it were 
blynde, if broken, if hauynge fel wounde, 
if litil bleynes, or shab, or drye rownd 
shab, 3e shulen not offre hem to the Lord, 
ne 3e shulen brenne of hem vpon the au- 
23ter of the Lord. Ox and sheep, with eer 
and tay] kit, wilfully may be offred; the 
vowe forsothe of thes thingis may not be 
2iquyt. Al beeste, that outher with al to- 
brokun, or crippid, or kitt and taken 
awey the ballokes is, 3e shulen not offre 
to the Lord, and in 3oure loond thes 
25 thinges algatis 3e shulen not do. Of the 
hoond of the alyen 3e shulen not offre 
looues to 3oure God, and what euer® other 
thing he wole 3yue, for alle thei ben cor- 
rupt and defoulid; 3e shulen not take 
26hem. And the Lord spak to Moyses, sei- 
27 ynge, Oxe, sheep, and geet, whanne thei 
weren geten, seuen dayes thei shulen be 
vnder the teete of her damme; the ei3tP 
forsothe day, and therafter, thei mowen 
28 be offrid to the Lord, whether shee oxe, 
other shee sheep; thei shulen not be of- 
fryd o day with fruytis in her wombe. 
29 If 3e offren an oost for doynge of thonk- 
yngis to the Lord, that it may be ples- 
30able, the same day that it is offred 3e 
shulen eete it; there shal not leene eny 


0 the comlynges BDEFH. 


h On. plures. 
P Om. 1s. 


i of the ILo pr.m. s. 


wascheep is. Y the tail rks. 
wertid 1. 3yne that is not c. to bileue s. 


eOm.rmw. 4Om.1s. ¢ her modir teet Is. 


LEVITICUS. 


k anentis 1. 
4 sear, that is a notable fouleuesse divellinge after the helinge of a wounde BcGQx. wounde or 
a scar 1. wounde or au arre, that is, a foulnesse afler the heelynge s. 
W the lond of an alien EXMNPWxX. an alien lond s. 
Y her thingis 1s. 
f Om. Is. 


XXII. 19-—30. 


and seide, Speke thou to Aaron and to® 
hise sones, and to alle the sones of Israel, 
and thou schalt seie to hem, A man of the 
hous of Israel and of! comelyngis} that 
dwellen at* hem, which! offrith his offryng 
to the Lord, and ethir paieth avowis, ethir 
offrith bi his fre wille, what euer thing he 
offrith in to brent sacrifice of the Lord, 
that it be offrid bi jou, it schal be a maleig 
without wem, of oxen, and of scheep™, and 
of geet; if it hath a wem, 3e schulen not 20 
offre", nether it schal be acceptable. A man ai 
that offrith a sacrifice of pesyble thingis to 
the Lord, and ethir paieth auowis, ethir 
offrith bi fre wille, as wel of oxun as of 
scheep, he schal offre a@ beeste without 
wem, that it be acceptable; ech® wem schal 
not? be ther ynne. If it is blynd, if it is22 
brokun, if it hath a scar$, if it hath 
whelkis, ether scabbe, ethir drie scabbe, 3e 
schulen not offre tho beestis™ to the Lord, 
nether 3e schulen brenne of tho* beestis ont 
the auter of the Lord. A man may offre2s 
wilfuli an oxe and scheep"{, whanne the tan ore and 
eere and tail’ ben kit of; but avow may Re 


+ comelingis, 
that is, con- 
uertid to the 
lawe of Jewis. 
Lire here. ca. 


breu it is, a 

not be paied of these beestis. 3e schulen SE we age 

not offre to the Lord ony beeste, whose fi jyqyunt 

priny membris ben brokun, ethir brisid, a 

ether kit, and takun awey, and outerli je  failingeamem- 

schulen not do these thingis in 3oure lond. pags 

Of ‘the hond of an alien|| 3e schulen not 25) that is, ne- 
ther Jew, ne- 

offre Jooues to 3oure God, and what ener ther connertid 

other thing he wole 3yue*, for alle thingisy { "We lave of 

ben corrupt and defoulid; 3e schulen not 

resseyue tho. And the Lord spak to26 

Moises, and seide, Whanne an oxe, scheep? 27 

and goet? ben brou3t forth? ‘ef the mo- 

dris wombe®, in’ seuene daies tho schu- 

len be vnder ‘the tete of her modir®; so- 

theli in the ei3te dai, and fro thennus forth, 

tho moun be offrid to the Lord, whether 238 

thilke is a cow, whether ‘thilke is‘ a scheep; 

tho schulen not be offrid in o dai with her 


Ser gz. P ey3the £. 


[that 1s. ™ascheep a. % offre @#1Ks. ® no Is. 


rOm.1. §Sthilke 1.  ¢ vpon 1s. 
X 3yue that is not con- 
z a scheep 1s. 4a goet Is, b Om. Is, 


XXII. 31—XXIII. 10. 


' thing vnto the morwe of that other day; 

3t] a Lord. Kepe 3e myn heestis, and do 

323e hem; Ya Lord. Ne polute 3e myn 
holy name, that Y be halowid in the myd- 
del of the sones of Yrael; Y the Lord 

33 that halowe 30w, and haue ladde 3ow out 
of the loond of Egipte, that Y were to 
jow into God‘; I the Lord. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Speke to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
shalt seie to hem, Thes ben the cesynge 
dayes of the Lord, the whiche 3e shulen 
sclepe holi. Sixe daies 3e shulen do werk, 
the seuenthe day, for it is the reste of the 
weke, it shal be clepid holi; al werk 3e 
shulen not do in it; the day of the Lord 
4it is in alle 30ure dwellynges. ‘Thes ben 
the holy cesyng daies of the Lord, the 
whiche 3e shulen halowe in 3oure tymes. 
5The first moneth, the fourtenthe day of 
the moneth, at euen, is the pask of the 
6 Lord; and the fiftenthe day of this moneth 
is the solempnyte of the therf looues of 
the Lord; seuen dayes 3e shulen eete 
7therf looues; the fyrst day shal be to 30w 
moost solempne and holy; al seruyle werk 
83e shulen not doo in it, but 3e shulen offre 
sacrifice in fier to the Lord seuen dais; 
the seuenthe forsoth dai shal be more so- 
lempne and holier, and no seruyle werk 
93e shulen do in it. And the Lord spak 
10 to Moyses, seiynge, Spek to the sones of 
Yrael, and thow shalt seie to hem, Whanne 
3e weren goo into the loond that I shal 
3yue to 30w, and han ropun the tilthe, 3e 
shulen bere hondfullis of eeris, the first 


LEVITICUS. 


347 


fruytis. If 3e offren to the Lord a sacri-29 
fice for the doyng of thankyngis, that it 
mai be plesaunt, 3e schulen ete it in the3o 
same dai in which it is offrid; ony things 
schal not leeue in® the morewtid of the 
tother dai; Y am the! Lord. Kepe 3e myn31 
heestis, and do 3e tho; Y am the* Lord. 
Defoule 3e not myn hooli name, that Y bese 
halewid in the myddis of the sones of Is- 
rael; Y am the! Lord, that halewe™ 3ou, 
and ledde 30u out of the lond of Egipt,33 
that Y schulde be to 30u in to God; Y am 
the" Lord. 


CAP. XXIII. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and thoue 
schalt seye to hem, These ben the feries® 
of the Lord, whiche? 3e schulen clepe4 
hooli’. Sixe daies 3e schulen do* werk,3 
the seuenthe dai schal be clepid hooli, for 
it is the restet of sabat"; 3e schulen not 
doY ony werk” ther ynne*; it is the sabatY 
of the Lord in alle 3oure abitaciouns?. 
These ben the hooli feries* of the Lord, 4 
whiche” 3e owen to halewe in her tymes. 
In the firste monethe, in the fourtenthes 
dai of the monethe, at euentid, is pask of 
the Lord; and in the fiftenthe dai of thise 
monethe is the solempnyte of therf looues 
of the Lord; seuene® daies 3e schulen ete 
therf looues; the firste dai schal be moost7 
solempne and hooli to 30u; 3e schulen not 
do ony ‘seruyle werk ther ynne‘, but 3e8 
schulen offre sacrifice in fier to the Lord 
seuene daies; sotheli the seuenthe dai scha] 
be more solempne and hooliere, ‘that is*, 
‘than the formere dates goynge bitwixe', 
and 3e schulen not do ony seruyle werk 
ther ynne. And the Lord spak to Moises9 
and seide, Speke thou to the sones of Is-io0 
rael, and thou schalt seye to hem, Whanne 
je han eutrid in to the loud which? Y schal 


Ga God E. 


§ thing theroffis. binto1s. iOm. 1s. 


k Om. I0 sec. ml. RST sec.m. 


1Om.s. ™ halewith s. 


1 Om. 1s. © feries, that is, halidaies cecrKunorgx. f. or haly daies s. P the whiche 1. 4 kepes. * holi, 


Sor it is the restinge dai of the nooks. % Om. 1s. 
in it Is. 

placis 15. 
to 30u in that day s. 


€Om.1s. f Om. 1 


t restynge day Is. 
W that ts, seruyle werk 1 marg. werk forboden of God s. 

4 feries ether solempnytees nc. daies 18. 
& that 1s. 


b the whiche 1. 


u the sabat c. the woke 1s. ¥ do 
xOm.1Is. Yresters. 2% dwellinge 
© and seuene B. 4 werk forboden 


Yy2 


348 


fruytis of joure repyng, to the preest; 
11the which shal rere vp the litil birthen 
before the Lord, that it be acceptable for 
12 30w, that othir day of the weke; and he 
shal halowe it; and in the same day that 
the hondful is sacryd, shal be slayn a 
lomb with outen wemme of o jeer into 
13sbrent sacrifice of the Lord; and the of- 
fryngis of the? Jicours shal be offred with 
it, two dymes of tryed flour spreynt with 
oyle, into the ensence of the Lord, and 
moost swete’ smel, and offryngis* of wyn, 
14 the fourth part of hyn. Breed, and brokun 
corn, and potage 3¢ shulen not ete of the 
corn, vnte the day that je offren of it to 
joure God; euerlastynge heest it is in 
joure generaciouns, and in joure dwell- 
isynge places. 3e shulen noumbre thanne 
fro that other day of the weke, in the 
which 3¢ han offred the hoondful of first 
16 fruytis, seuen wekis fulle, vnto that othir 
day of fulfillynge* of the seuenth weke, 
that is, fifti dates; and so 3e shulen offre 
17a newe sacrifice to the Lord of alle joure 
dwellynge places, two looues of the first 
fruytes, of the two dymes of tried flour, 
soured, the which 3e shal baake into the 
izfirst fruytis to the Lord. And je shal 
offre with the looues seuen loombes vn- 
wemmed of o 3eer, and a® calf of the 
droue, and two wethers, and thei shulen 
be in brent sacrifice, with her offryngis of 
licours, into the moost swete” smel to the 
i9 Lord. And 3e shulen do a geit for synne, 
and two lombes of o jeer, the oost of pe- 
msible thingis. And whanne the preest 
arereth hem, with the looues of the fyrst 
fruytes, before the Lord, thei shulen falle 
ziinto the* vse of hym. And 3e shulen 
clepe* this day moost solempne, and moost 
holi; al seruyle werk 3e shulen not do in 
it; lawful euerlastynge it shal be in alle 


7 Om. ez. 
¥ Om. p. 


F snot £. 


* the offryngis pen. 
* kepe a. 


h repen 1s. repe KL. i cheef 18. 
Pamell 1s. 4 Om. 4 pr.m. et plures. 
‘heest 18. © alle soure 1s. 
Z sacrifisis of w. 
¢ tried femria. f maad sour t. 
Vsmell 1s. ™ goot bucke 15. 


k frost s. 


LEVITICUS. 


I reise vp 13. 
7 Om. ELP. 

x of the 1ks sec.m. 
@ the firste w. the cheef 1. joure cheef s. 
& the whiche 1. 
® thingis bifore the Lord s. 


XXUI. 11:-—21. 


3yue to 30u, and han rope® corn, 3e schulen 

bere handfuls of eeris of corn, the firste! 
fruytis* of joure rype corn, to the preest ; 

and the preest scha] reise! a bundelf bifor 1 heme is 
the Lord, that it be acceptable for 3ou, in ener, tot te 
the tother dai of sabat™, that is, of* pask; Tato ooa i 
and the preest schal halewe that bundel ; 128:2°4 2° 
and* in the same dai, wher ynne the hand- Shs» & 
ful is halewid, a lomb of o jeer without sctalers oot, 
wem schal be slayn in to brent sacrifice of  frid se. Lire 
the Lord; and fletynge offryngis schulen13°7*“* 
be offrid ther with, twei tenthe partis of 

wheete® flour spreynt togidere with oile, 

in to encense of the Lord, and swettist 

odour?, and fletynge offryngis of wyn, the 

fourthe part of hyn. je schulen not ete1 

a? loof, nether a’ cake, nether’ podagis' of 

the corn, ‘til to® the dai in which je schu- 

len offre therof to joure God; it is a co- 
mnaundement” euerlastynge in joure gene- 

raciouns, and alle” dwellyng placis. ‘Ther-1s 

for 3e schulen noumbre fro the tother dai 

of * sabat’, in which je offriden handfullis 

of? firste* fruytis, seuene fulle? woukis, tilis 

to the tothir day of fillyng of the seuenthe 

wouk, that is, fifti dayes; and so 3e° schu- 

len offre newe sacrifice to the Lord of alle17 

joure dwelling placis, twei Jooues of the 

firste? fruytis, of twei tenthe partis of flour, 

‘di;t with soure dow‘, whiche? looues je 

schulen bake in to the firste fruytis to the 

Lord. And je schulen offre with the®1z 

looues seuene lambren of o jeer with out 

wem, and o calf of the droue, and twey 

rammes, and these schulen be in brent sa- 

crifice, withi her fletynge offryngis, in to 

swettest* odour’ to the Lord. 3e schulen19 

make also a buk of geet™ for synne, and 

twey lambren of o jeer, sacrificis of pesible 

thingis". And whanne the preest hath 

reisid tho, with the? looues of firste? fruytys 

bifor the Lord, tho schulen falle in to his? 


t the fulfillynge z. "oo BDEFH. * soot E pass. 


™ the sabat is. *Om.c. © tried 1s. 
Snex. 'potage rs * til z. wnto 1s. til into x. 
¥ sabat, that is, of pask ecexq Pape ie ee Is. 
b hoole 1s.  ¢3e¢thannes. 4 cheef 1s. 
h thos. Om. plures. 4 of s. * the swettest c. 
Om. s. P the first zisw. the preestis 1s. 


XXII. 22—36. 


dwellynge places, and 3oure generaciouns. 
22And afterward, whanne 3e repenY the 
tilthe of 3oure loond, 3e shulen not kitt it 
vnto the ground, ne the leeuyng eeris 3e 
shulen gadere, but to pore men and pil- 
grymes 3e shulen leeue hem; Y the Lord 
23 30ture God. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 
24 seiynge, Spek to the sones of Yrael, The 
seuenthe moneth, the first day of the 
moneth, shal be to 30w an holi day me- 
moryale, with sownynge trompes, and it 
25Shal be clepyd holi; alle seruyle werkes 
3e shulen not do in it, and 3e shulen offre 
2¢ brent sacrifice to the Lord. And the Lord 
27spak to Moyses, seiynge, The tenthe dai 
of this seuenthe moneth, a day of purg- 
‘ ynge shal be moost solempne, and it shal 
be clepid holy; 3e shulen trauey] 3oure 
soules to God, and 3e shulen offre brent 
2ssacrifice to the Lord; al werk 3e shulen 
‘not doo in tyme of this day, for a day of 
hauynge merey it is, that the Lord joure 
29God hate mercy to 30w. Al soule that 
were not traueilid this day, shal peryshe 
30fro his puple’, and he that doth eny thing 
of werk, Y shal do hym awey fro his 
3ipuple; uo thing therfore of werk 3e shal 
do in it; lawful euerlastynge shal be to 
3ow in alle generaciouns and 3oure dwell- 
szyngis; the dai of restynge it is. 3e shu- 
len trauey] 3oure soules the nynthe day 
of the inoneth; fro euen to euen 3e shu- 
33len halowe 3oure holi dayes. And the 
34Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, Spek to 
the sones of Yrael, Fro the fiftenthe day 
of this seuenthe moneth shulen be the 
cesynge dayes of the tabernacles, in seuen 
3sdayes to the Lord; the first day shal be 
clepid moost solempne and moost holy, 
alle seruyle werkes* 3e shulen not do in 
soit; and seuen dayes 3e shulen offre brent 
sacrifices to the Lord, the ei3t® forsothe 
day shal be moost soleinpne and imoost 
‘holy; and 3e shulen offre brent sacrifice 


Yrepith Boren. 


tT solempne day 1s. 


8 ripe I. repe Ls. 
Lord 3. G. 1s. 


x he the myndeful 1s. 
band init s. © forboden werk 8. 
boden werk s. ) dwellyngis 1s. 

2 feries or daies 8. 


@ Om. plures. 


© the tabernaelis 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


‘3o0ure Lord God". 


2 peples spEFU. 


t ynto s. to 0 sec.m. 
¥ hooly day s. 
e Jijf that 1, man that s. 
i schulen ther ynne 1s. 
P the moost s. 


349 


vss. And 3e schulen clepe this dai most 21 
solempne’, and moost hooli; 3e schulen not 
do ther ynne ony seruyle werk; it schal be 
a lawful thing euerlastynge in alle j3oure 
dwellyngis, and generaciouns. Forsothe 22 
aftir that 3e han rope’ the corn of joure 
lond, 3e schulen not kitte it ‘til tot the 
ground, nether 3e schulen gadere the ‘eeris 
of corn" abidynge’, but 3e schulen leeue 
tho to pore men and pilgrymys; Y am 
And the Lord spak to 2s 
Moises, and seide, Speke thou to the sones 24 
of Israel, In the seuenthe monethe, in the 
firste day of the monethe, schal be* sabatY 
memorial’ to 30w, sownynge with trumpis, 
and it schal be elepid hooli; 3e schulen2s 
not do ony seruyle werk ther ynne, and 3e 
schulen offre* brent sacrifice™* to the Lord. 
And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 26 
In the tenthe day of this seuenthe monethe, 27 
the day of clensyngis schal be moost so- 
lempne, and it sehal be clepid hooli ; and? 
3e schulen turmente 3oure soulis to God, 
and 3e schulen offre brent sacrifice to the 
Lord; 3e schulen not do ony werk* in the 2s 
tyme of this day, for it is the day of thet 
clensyng, that 3oure Lord God be merciful 
to 30u. Ech ‘man which is not tourmentid 29 
in this day, schal perische fro his puplis, 
and Y schal do away fro his puple thatso 
man that doith eny thing’ of werk é that 
dai; therfor 3e schulen not do ony things: 
of werk® in that dai; it schal be a lawful 
thing euerlastynge to 30 in alle 3oure ge- 
neraciouns and abitaciouns"; it is the sa-s2 
bat of restyng. 3e schulen! turmente j3oure 
soulis fro the nynthe day of the monethe ; 
fro euentid® ‘til to! euentid 3e schulen ha- 
lewe joure sabatis. And the Lord spaksa 
to Moises, and seide, Speke thon to the3s 
sones of Israel, Fro the fiftenthe day of 
this senenthe monethe sehulen be the™ fe- 
ries" of tabernaclis®, in seuene daies to the 
Lord ; the firste dai schal be clepid moost? 35 


awerke npen. » ey3the Ee. 


Vv that abiden rt. ¥* the 
a@thanne offre s. 84 sacrifices K. 


f thing forboden s.  & for- 
lynto 1s. too. ™ Om. 0. 


" corn eeris s. 
Zz Om. Is. 


k the euentid w. 


350 


to the Lord, it is forsothe of * companye, 
and of quelet’; al seruyle werk 3e shulen 
37not doon in it. Thes ben the cesynge 
dayes of the Lord, the whiche 3e shulen 
clepe moost solempne and moost holy ; 
and 3e shulen offre in hem offryngis to 
the Lord, brent sacrifices, and sacrifices 
38 of licours, after the ryte of euery day, out 
take the holy dayes of the Lord, and 
3oure 3iftis, and the whiche 3e shulen of- 
fre of a vowe, othere the whiche ‘wilful- 
39 lich 3e han 3euen® to the Lord. Thanne 
fro the fiftenthe day of the seuenthe 
moneth, whanne 3e shulen gadere togi- 
dere alle the fruytis of 3oure erthe, 3e 
shulen halowe the cesynge day of the 
Lord seuen dayes; in the first day and 
the ei3tf day shal be holy day, that is, 
aorest. And 3e shulen take to 30w the first 
day fruytis of the moost fayr tree, and 
the braunches of palmes, and braunches 
of a tree of § thykke&? burionyngis, and 
withies of the rennynge water, and 3e 
shulen glaad before the Lord 3oure God ; 
41 and 3e shulen halowe the solempte of hym 
seuen dayes, bi the 3eer; lawful euerlast- 
ynge it shal be in 3oure generaciouns. 
The seuenthe moneth 3e shulen halowe 
42the feeste daies, and 3e shulen dwelle se- 
uen dayes in shadewe places; eche that 
is of the lynage of Yrael, shal dwelle in ta- 
43 bernaclis, that 3oure aftercomers leernen, 
that in tabernaclis Y have made to dwelle 
the sones of Yrael, whanne Y ladde hem 
out of the loond of Egipte; Y the Lord 
4430ure God. And Moyses spak vpon the 
solempnytees of the Lord to the sones of 
Yrael. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Comaund to the sones of Yrael, that thei 
bryngen to thee oyle of olyues, moost 


LEVITICUS. 


BNO ye Ne Fe 


solempne’ and moost hooli, 3e schulen not 
do ony seruyle werk ther ynne; and in'36 
seuene daies 3e schulen offre brent sacri- 
fices to the Lord, and the ei3the dai schal 
be moost solempne and moost hooli; and 
3e schulen offre® brent sacrifice to the Lord, 
for it is the day of cumpany, and of gader- 
yng; 3e schulen not do ony seruyle werk 
ther ynne. ‘These ben the feries' of the37 
Lord, whiche 3e schulen clepe moost so- 
lempne and moost hooli; and ini tho" 3e 
schulen offre offryngis to the Lord, brent 
sacrifices, and fletynge offeryngis, bi the 
custom of ech day, outakun the sabatis of 38 
the Lord, and 3oure 3iftys, and whiche’ 3e 
offren bi avow”, ether whiche* 3e 3ynen bi 
fre wille to the Lord. Therfor fro theY39 
fiftenthe day of the seuenthe monethe, 
whanne 3e han gaderid alle the fruytis of 
3oure lond, 3e schulen halewe the feries? of 
the Lord seuene daies; in the firste day 
and the* ei3te> schal be sabat, that is, 
reste. And 3e schulen take to 30u in the4o 
firste day fruytis of the faireste tree, and 
braunchis of palm trees, and braunchis® of 
a ‘tree of thicke boowis*, and salewis of 
the rennynge streem, and 3e schulen be 
glad bifor 3oure Lord God; and 3e schulen 41 
halewe his solempnyte seuene daies bi® the 
jeer; it schal be a lawful thing euerlast- 
ynge in 3oure generaciouns. In the se- 
nenthe monethe 3e schulen halewe feestis‘, 
and 3e schulen dwelle in schadewynge42 
placis seuene daies; ech man that is of 
the kyn of Israel‘, schal dwelle in taber- 
naclis, that 3oure aftercomers lerne, that Y 43 
made the sones of Israel to dwelle in ta- 
bernaculis, whanne Y ledde hem out of the 
lond of Egipt; Y am 3oure Lord God. 
And Moises spak of the solempnytees of 44 
the Lord to the sones of Israel. 


CAP. XXIV. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Comaunde thou to the sones of Israel, that2 
thei brynge to thee oile of olyues, pureste’ 


¢Om.p. 4 gedered p sec.m. © 3e sholen dele x pr.m. f ey3the z. Sand of appru. &€ thilk appFH. 


4 solempne day 1s. *Om. nc. 8 thanne offres. tdaiesis. Uhemi. thodaiess. V that that 1s. 
Wavowes ELP. * that thatis. YOm.s. Zdaiess. in thes. > eijtiday B, © the branchis 1s. 
4 thicke bowid trees. e¢inis. f the feest daies1s. ff Irael a. & moost pure Is. 


=eiv. 3—16. 


pure, and bry3t, to the lanternes to ben 
3tende contynueli with oute the veyle of 
witnessynge, in the tabernacle of the 
boond of pees; and Aaron shal sette hem 
fro euen vnto morwen" before the Lord, 
thur3 heriynge and ryte perpetuel in 3oure 
4generaciouns ; vpon the moost clene can- 
dilstik thei shulen be sett euermore in 
5the siz3t of the Lord. Thow shalt take 
forsothe tried floure, and thow shalt baal 
of it twelue looues, the whiche echon shal 
6haue two dymes, of whom thou shalt sette 
syx anentis other six, vpon the moost 
7clene bord before the Lord; and thow 
shalt putt on hem ensence' moost bri3t, 
that the breed be into mynde of the of- 
sfrynge of the Lord ; bi eche holi day thei 
shulen be chaungid before the Lord, takne 
of the sones of Yrael thur3 euerlastynge 
9boond of pees; and thei shulen be of Aa- 
ron and his sones, that thei eten hem in 
holy place, for holy of halowes it is, of 
the sacrifices of the Lord, thur3 perpetuel 
lori3t. Loo! forsothe a sone goon out of a 
womman of Yrael, that beer of an Egip- 
cyen man, amonge the sones of Yrael, 
hath streuen in tentis with a man of 
11 Yrael, and whanne he hadde blasfemyd 
the name of the Lord, and hadde cursid 
to hym, is brou3t forthe to Moyses; and 
the moder of hym was clepid Salumyth, 
the dou3ter of Dabry, of the lynage of 
12Dan; and thei puttiden* hym! in to pri- 
soun, to the tyme that thei knewen what 
13the Lord comaundide. The which spak 
ito Moyses, seiynge, Leed thow out the 
blasfeme out of the tentis, and putt alle 
that herden her hoonden™ vpon his heed, 
1; and al the puple stone hym. And to the 
sones of Yrael thou shalt speke, The man 
that cursith to his God, shal bere his 
igsynne, and he that blasfemeth the name 
of the Lord, thur3 deth die he; al the 


h the moru sp. the morwe ev. the morwen Fr. 


BDEFH., 
h Om. 1ks. ! vnto the 1. vnto s. 
which 1. P the whiche1. 4 ful clene 1. 


Vthei1. tho looues s. W Aarons. * whan x. 
atentis is. bOm.c. ¢sothely 1s. 


him1s. 4% gshulen sette k. sette thei 1s. 


LEVITICUS. 


a puttiden w. 
i vpon Is. 


351 


oile, and bri3t, to the" lanternes to be or- 
deyned contynueli with out the veil of wit-3 
nessyng, in the tabernacle of boond of pees; 
and Aaron schal araye tho lanternes fro 
euentid ‘til to! euentid bifor the Lord, bi 
religioun aud custom euerlastynge in 3oure 
generaciouns; tho schulen be set euere on! 4 
a clenneste™ candilstike in the si3t of the 
Lord. Also thou schalt take wheete® flour, s 
and thou schalt bake therof twelue looues, 
which® schulen haue ech bi hem silf twei 
tenthe partis, of whiche? thou schalt settes 
sexe on euer eithir side, on a clenneste4 
boord bifor the Lord; and thou schalt sette7 
clereste™ encense on’ thot looues, that the 
looues be in to mynde of offryng of the 
Lord; bi ech sabat tho schulen be chaungids 
bifor the Lord, and schulen" be takun of 
the sones of Israel bi euerlastynge boond 
of pees; and tho’ schulen be Aarons¥ and9 
hise sones, that thei ete tho in the hooli 
place, for it is hooli of the noumbre of 
hooli thingis, of the sacrifices of the Lord, 
bi euerlastynge lawe. Lo! forsothe the1o 
sone of a womman of Israel, whom* sche 
childide of a manY Egipcian, 3ede out 
among the sones of Israel, and chidde* in 
the castels’ with a man of Israel, and®11 
whanne he hadde blasfemyd the name of 
the Lord, and hadde cursid the Lord, he was 
brou3t to Moises; forsothe® his modir was 
clepid Salumyth, the dou3tir of Dabry, of 
the lynage of Dan; and thei senten’ hym 12 
to® prisoun, til thei wisten what the Lord 
comaundide. And the Lord spak to Moises 13 
and seide, Lede out the blasfemere with-14 
out the castels‘, and alle men that herden’, 
settet her hondis oni his heed, and al the 
puple stone hym. And thou schalt spekeis 
to the sones of Israel, A man that cursith 
his God, schal bere his synne, and he that 16 
blasfemeth the name of the Lord, die* bi 
deeth; al the multitude of the puple 
Them p. ™ hondes 


icense spEFH. * putten z. 


k thei 1. tho lanternes s. }vponis. ™fulclene 1. tried 1s. © the 
T moost cleer 1. 
y Om. s. 
€ into CDEGIKLMNOPQRSTWX. 


Sypons, tthilke1. theo. 4 thei schulen rs. 
2 childide a pr.m. he chidde 1. she childide s. 
f tentis 1s. & herden 
k die he 1Ks. 


352 


multitude of the puple with stonus shal 
throwe hym down; whether he were cyte- 
seyn or pilgrym that blasfemeth the name 
170f the Lord, thur3 deth dye he. He that 
smytith and sleeth a man, thur3 deth die 
ishe; he that smyteth a beeste, 3eeld he 
another of the same kynde, that is, lijf 
19for lijf. He that wrongfuli 3yueth a 
wemme to eny of his" cyteseyns, as he 
20 hath doon, so be it do to hym; brusur for 
brusur, eye for eye, tooth for tooth he 
shal 3eelde; what maner of wemme he 
wrongfuli 3yueth, sichon be he constreyn- 
21ed to suffre. He that smytith a beeste, 
3eeld he another; he that smytith a man, 
22be he punyshid. Euen doom be there 
among 30w, whether pilgrime or cyteseyn 
synne, for I am the Lord 3oure God. 
23 And Moyses spak to the sones of Yrael, 
and thei brou3ten hym forthe that blas- 
phemede out of the tentis, and thei beren 
hym down with stonus. And the sones 
of Yrael diden, as the Lord comaundide 
to Moyses. 


CAPL XV: 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses in the 
2zmownt of Synay, seiynge, Spek to the 
sones of Yrael, and thow shalt seye to 
hem, Whamnne 3e weren in® goon into the 
loond that I shal 3yue to 30w, ‘halowe 3e? 
3the holiday of the Lord; six 3eer thow 
shalt sowe thi feelde, and six 3eer thou 
shalt kytte thi vyn, and geder the fruytis 
4of it; the seuenthe forsothe jeer of the 
loond shal be the saboth of the restynge 
of the Lord; feelde thow shalt not sowe, 
sand vyn thow shalt not kitte, thingis 
that the erthe frely bryngith forth thow 
shalt not reepe, and grapes? of thi first 
frnytis and" vyndage thou shalt not ge- 
dere ; the 3eer forsothe it is of the rest- 
6ynge of the loond; but thei shulen be to 


LEVITICUS. 


SOV ory NN Oe 


scha] oppresse hym with stoonus, whether 
he that blasfemede the name of the Lord 
is a citeseyn, whether! a pilgrym, die he™ 
bi deeth. He that smytith and sleeth a17 
man, die" bi deeth; he that smytith ais 


beeste, 3elde° oon in his stide, that is, lijf 

for lijf*. If a man 3yueth a wem?f{ to ony 19 * tiyf for liyf, 
5 : . ; that is, a beeste 

of hise citeseyns, as he dide, so be it don of the same 

to him; he schal restore brekyng for brek-20 Kynde re sia 

yng, i3e for ize, tooth for tooth; what man- i the doum of 

er wem he jaf, he schal be compellid to Aere. ncenax. 

‘ - + that is, 

suffre sich a wem". He that smytith® 221 meymyng ether 

werk beeste, 3eeldet another; he that smyt-  77ile/irting- 

ith a man, schal be punyschid}. Euene mat be Bomechait 

in Ebren it is, 

doom be among 30u, whether a" pilgrym die. ccax. 

ethir a" citeseyn synneth, for Y am 3oure 

Lord God. And Moyses spak to the sones23 

of Israel, and thei brou3ten forth out of 

the castels’y hym that blasfemede, and op- 

pressiden” with* stoonns. And the sones 

of Israel diden, as the Lord comaundideY 

to Moyses. 


CAP. XXV. 


And the Lord spak to Moises in the hili 
of Synai, and seide, Speke thou to thee 
sones of Israel, and thou schalt seye to 
hem, Whanne 3e han entrid in to the lond 
which? Y schal 3yue to 3ou, ‘the erthe* 
kepe the sabat> of the Lord; sixe* 3eeris®3 
thou schalt sowe thif feeld, and® sixe 3eeris® 
thou schalt kitte thi vyner', and thou schalt 
gadere the fruytis ther of; forsothe in* the 4 
seuenthe 3eer schal be sabat! of the erthe 
of the™ restyng of the Lord; thou schalts 
not sowe the feeld, and" thon schalt not 
kitte the vyner, thou schalt not® repe tho 
thingis whiche the erthe bryngith forth 
‘bi fre wille?, and4 thou schalt not gadere 
the grapis of thi firste fruytis, as vyndage’; 
for it is the 3eer of restyng of the lond ; 


othes 4. ° Om. £. P3e sholen halwe £ pr.m. 4 the grapes BDEFH. ° as BDEFH. 
lor ™Om.u. dieherxs. O3eldehe rks. Pwemorameymis. VofwemF. oon its. 
§ sleeth 1s. - t 3eelde he xs. % Om. 1s. Vtentis 1s. W thei killide 1. killiden s. * hym with a pr. m. 
Ybad1s. 2 thatis. @Om. a see.m. > halewe 3e the haly day is. ¢to pk. ‘in sixe a pr.m. et plures. 
®3eeriurs. fthev. andin ELMoPW pr.m.sing. 43cer1L. ‘ivynejerdis. *Om.s. ! the 
sabats. ™Om.1s. "Om.s. 9 Om.1. Pfrely 1s. 9 Om. ¥F. '* vyndage in the vij. 3eer s. 


XXV. 7—19. 


3ow into meet, to thee, and to thi ser- 
uauntis’, to thin handinaydet, and to thin 
hyryd man, and to the comlyng that pil- 
7grimagith anentis thee; to hous beestis 
and thi feelde beestes, alle thingis that 
sgrowen shulen 3yue meete. And thow 
shalt noumbre to thee seuen wekes of 
3eerys, that is, seuen sithes seuen, the 
whiche togidere maken nyn and fourty 
»3eer; and thow shalt sowne with trompe 
the seuenthe moneth, the tenthe day of 
the moneth, in the tyme of doyng mercy, 
10in al 3o0ure loond. And thow shalt halowe 
the fyftith jeer, and clepe it for3ifnesse to 
alle the dwellers of thi loond; he is for- 
sothe the iubilee; a man shal turne a3en 
to his possessioun, and eche shal turne 
1,a3en to his before hadde meyne, for the 
inbilee it is, and the fyftethe 3eer. 3e 
shulen not sowe, ne reepe the free grow- 
ynge thingis in the feelde, and the first 
fruytis of the vyndage 3e shulen not ge- 
igdere, for the halowynge of the iubile; 
i3but anone offryd 3e shulen eete; the 3eer 
of iubilee" alle goo thei a3en to her pos- 
l4sessiouns. Whanne thow shalt selle eny 
thing to thi cyteseyn, other bigge of hym, 
ue peire thow thi brothir, but aftir the 
noumbre of the 3eeris of inbilee thow 
1sshalt bigge of hym, and after the noum- 
isbre of fruytis he shal selle to thee. As 
myche as mo 3eeris dwellen after the in- 
bilee, so myche and the prijs shal creese, 
and as inyche as lasse of tyme’ thow shalt 
nowmbre, so myche lasse and the big- 
gynge shal coste; the tyme forsothe of 
i7fruytis he shal selle to thee. Nyle 3e 
wrongfully traueyl] 3oure men of o lynage, 
but echon drede his God; for Y the Lord 
ig30ure God. Do 3e myn heestis and domes, 
kepith and fulfille 3e hem, that 3e mowen 
dwelle in the loond with outen eny drede™, 
wand the erthe brynge forth to 3ow his 
fruytis, the whiche 3e eten vnto fulfill- 


Ssernaunt eru. ¢ hondemayden spru. 


LEVITICUS. 


uthe inbilee apEFH. VY the tyme BDEFH. 


353 


but tho’ schulen be to 30u in to mete, tos 
thee, and to thi seruaunt, tot thin hand- 
maide, and to thin hirid man, and to the 
comelyng which" is a pilgrym at’ thee ; 
alle thingis that ‘comen forth’, schulen7 
3yue mete* to thi werkY beestis and smale? 
beestis. Also thou schalt noumbre to thees 
seuene woukis of 3eeris, that is, seuene 
sithes seuene, whiche togidere maken nyn 
and fourti jeer; and thou schalt sownes 
with a clarioun in the seuenthe monethe, 
in the tenthe dai of the monethe, in the 
tyme of propiciacioun’, ‘that is, merci”, in 
al 3oure lond. And thou schalt halewe the 10 
fiftithe 3eer, and thou schalt clepe® remis- 
sioun® to alle the dwellers of thi lond; for 
thilke® 3eer is iubileef; a man schalé turne 
a3en to hys possessioun, and ech man schal 
go azen® to thei firste meynee, for it is in-11 
bilee*, and the fiftithe 3eer. 3e schulen 
not sowe, nether 3e schulen repe thingis', 
that comen forth freli in the feeld, and 
3e schulen not gadere the firste fruytis of 
vyndage, for the™ halewyng of iubilee; but 12 
anoon 3e schulen ete thingis takun awey ; 
in the 3eer of iubilee alle men go a3en to" 13 
her possessiouns. Whanne thou schalt sille 14 
ony thing to° thi citeseyn, ether schalt bie 
of hym, make thou not sory? thi brother, 
but bi the noumbre of ‘3eeris of iubile4 
thou schalt bie of him, and bi the reken- 15 
yng of fruytis he schal sille to thee. Bi asi¢ 
myche as mo 3eeris dwellen after the iubilee, 
by so myche also the prijs schal encreesse, 
and bi as myche as thou noumbrist lesse 
of tyme, bi so myche and the biyng schal 
cost lesse; for he schal sille to thee the 
time of fruytis. Nyle 3e turment men of 17 
3oure lynagis, but ech man drede his God; 
for Y am 30ure Lord God. Do 3e my co-15 
maundementis’, and kepe 3e my domes, 
and fille 3e tho, that 3e moun dwelle in 
his lond without ony drede, and that the 9 
erthe brynge forth hise fruytis to 3ou, 


w ferde BEFU. 


8 tho fruytis 1s. tand tos. the which 1. thats. Vanentis 1. W growens. *metis a. Y honse s. 
Z feeld s. 4 doyng mercy 1s. > Om.is. ¢clepe it 1s. 4 forzjenenesse s. © in that 1s.  f inbilee, that 
is, the ioiful 3eer 1s. & that schal K. 1 agen in that 3eer's. \his1s. the inbilee 1s. | tho thingis 18. 


mQOm.1s. intos. °ofs. 


P heny 1s. 
8 fulfille rs. 


4 the 3eeris of iubilec 1. the inbilce 3eeris s. 


r heestis Is. 


ZZ 


354 


‘ynge, dredynge the feersnes of no man. 
20 And if 3e seyn, what shulen we* eete the 
seuenthe 3eer, if we sowenY not, ne ga- 
21 dren” oure fruytis? Y shal 3yue my bless- 
ynge to 3ou the sixte 3eer, and it shal 
22make the fruytis of three 3eer; and 3e 
shulen sowe the ei3tthe 3eer, and 3e shulen 
eete oolde fruytes vnto the nynthe jeer ; 
to the tyme that newe be growen 3e shu- 
23len eete oolde. The loond forsothe shal 
not be solde ‘in to** with outen ende, for 
myn it is, and 3e comlingis and myn 
a4erthe tyliers ben; wherfor al the regioun 
of 30ure possessioun vndur condicioun of 
2sa3enbigeyng shal be solde. If thi bro- 
ther maad pore, selle his litil possessioun, 
and he wole, the nygh kyn of hym may 
26 a3enbigge that that he solde; if forsothe 
he haue noon nei3bore, and he mowe fynde 
27 the pryse* to ajenbigge, the fruytis shulen 
be countid fro that tyine that he solde, 
and that that is laft 3eelde he to the 
bigger, aud so he shal resseyue his pos- 
zesessyoun. Aud if his hoond fynde not, 
that he 3eelde the prijs, the bigger shal 
haue that he bou3te, vnto the iubilee 3eer; 
in that forsothe 3eer** al biggyng shal 
turne ajen to the lord, and to the rather 
209hauer. Who sellith his hows, with ynne 
the walles of the cytee, he shal haue lene 
of biggynge a3en to the tyme that o 3eer 
30be fulfillid; and if he bigge not a3en, and 
the cercle of the 3eer were ouer caste, the 
bigger shal welde it, and his aftercomers 
into with outen ende, and it may not be 
si bou3t aj3en, also in the iubilee. If for- 
sothe in a town that hath no wallis were 
the hows, thur3 rij3t of the feeldes it shal 
be sold; if forsothe it were not a3enbou3t 
in the iubilee, it shal turne a3en to his 
szlord. The hows? of the Lenytes, that ben 
in the cytees, euermore mowen be ajen- 
33 bon3t; if thei weren not a3enbou3t, in 
the inbilee thei shulen turne a3en to the 
Y soweth E. 


X 3e BE. 2 gedereth BEFN. 


u drede je 1. dredith s. 
z myn eerthe tilieris 1s. 


t vunto Is. to opr.m. 
Y til into ELPX sec. m. 


LEVITICUS. 


2Z ynto E. 


¥ 30u, seith the Lord, s. 
a he sillith 1. 


XXV. 20——33. 


whiche 3e schulen ete ‘til tot fulnesse, and 
drede" not the assailyng of ony man. That 20 
if 3e seien, what schulen we ete in the se- 
uenthe 3eer, if we sowen not, nether ga- 
deren oure fruytis? Y schal 3yue my bless-2) 
yng to 3ou" in the sixte 3eer, and it schal 
make fruytis of three” 3eer; and 3e schu-22 
len sowe in the ei3te 3eer, and 3e schulen 
ete elde fruytis ‘til to* the nynthe 3eer; til 
newe thingis comen forth 3e schulen ete 
the elde thingis. Also the lond schal not 2s 
be seeld ‘in toY with outen ende, for it is 
myn, and 3e ben my comelyngis and te- 
nauntis?; wherfor al the cuntre of j3oure 24 
possessioun schal be seeld vndur the con- 
dicioun of ajenbiyng. If thi brother is2s 
maad pore, and sillith* his litil possessioun, 
and his ny3 kynesman wole, he may a3en- 
bie that that he seelde; sotheli if he hath 26 
no ny3 kynesman, and he may fynde prijs 
to a3enbie, the fruytis schulen be rekynyd 27 
fro that tyme in which he seelde®, and he 
schal 3elde ‘that that is° residue’ to the 
biere, and he schal resseyue so his posses- 
sioun®*. That if his hond fynde' not, that2s 
he 3elde the prijs, the biere schal hane 
that that he bou3te, ‘til tof the jeer of 
inbilee; for in that 3eer ech sillyng schal 
go a3en to the lord, and to" the firste wel- 
dere. He that sillith his hows, with ynne29 
the wallis of a citee, schal’ hane Hcence to 
a3enbie til o 3eer be fillid*; if! he a3en-s0 
bieth not, and™ the sercle™ of the 3eer is 
passid, the biere schal welde it, and his 
eiris ‘in to with outen ende®, and it schal 
not mow? be a3enbou3t, 3e, in the iubilee. 
Forsothe4’ if the hows is in a town ‘thats 
hath not wallis', it schal be seeld bi the 
lawe of feeldis; sotheli if it is not a3en- 
bou3t in the iubilee, it schal turne a3en to 
‘his lord’, The howsis of dekenes, that s2 
ben in citees, moun euer be ajenbou3t; 
if tho ben not a3enbon3t, tho schulen3s 
turne a3en in the iubilee ‘to the lordis'; 

b houses pb. 


a peyse 4. 2@ Om. BDEFH. 


W the thridde kK. * vnto ts. 
b seelde it 1. seelde Ais possesstoun s. 


cthe r. left rinps. © possessioun ajen 1s. f fyndith plures. & vnto1s. b&Om.s. * he schal irs. 
k fulfillidis. landifw. ™Om.c. ‘coursis. © euermorets. POm 1. 4 Sothely rs. not 
wallid ts. § the lord ther off'1s. * Om. o. to the Lord s. 


XXV. 34-—47. 


lordes; for the houses of cytees of Le- 
uytes ben for the possessiouns among the 
34sones of Yrael; the suburbes forsothe of 
hem thei shulen not selle, for euerlast- 
35 ynge possessioun it is. If thi brother 
were maad pore, and feble in hoond, and 
thow resseyuest hym as a comlyng and a 
36 pilgrym, and lyueth with thee, ne take 
thow of hym vsurys, ne more ouer than 
thow hast 30uun ; dreed thi God, that thi 
37 brother mowe lyue anentis thee. Thi 
money thow shalt not 3yue to him to 
vsure, and of the fruytes ouer aboun- 
3sdaunce thou shal not axe; Y the Lord 
3our God, that haue ladde 30u out of the 
lond of Egipte, that I* 3yue 30w the loond 
of Chanaan, and that Y were 3oure God. 
39 If thur3 porenesse compellid, thi brother 
selle hym silf to thee, thow shalt not op- 
presse hym thur3 thraldom of seruauntis, 
4obut as an hiryd man and a dweller he 
shal be; vnto the iubilee 3eer he shal 
4tworche anentis thee, and aftirward he 
shal goo out with his free children, and 
turne a3en to the kyn, and to the posses- 
42sioun of his fadres. Forsothe thei ben ny 
seruauntis, and Y haue ladde hem out of 
the loond of Egipte; thei shulen not be 
43sold bi condiciouns® of thralles; ne ouer 
traueyle thou him bi thi power, but 
4idrede thow thi Lord. Thral and ‘boond 
womman® ben to 3ow of the naciouns that 
4s ben in 3oure enuyroun, and of the com- 
lynges that pilgrimagen anentis 3ow, 
other that of hem weren bore in 3oure 
loond; thes 3e shulen haue seruauntis, 
4é6and thur3 rijt of erytage 3e shulen ouer- 
leeuenf hem to the after comers, and 3e 
shulen welde hem with outen ende; 3oure 
forsothe britheren, the sones of Yrael, 3e 
47shulen not oppresse bi power. If anentis 
3ow the hoond of the comlyng and of the 
pilgrym wax greet, and thi brother bi- 
come pore, selle him silf to hym, or to 


© Om. 4. 4 condycyoun spEFu, 


u dekens housis of citees 1s. v sothely 18. 


LEVITICUS. 


© hoondmaydyn £ pr. m. 


W suburbanys F. 


355 


for the ‘howsis of the citees of dekenes" 
ben for possessiouns among the sones of 
Israel; forsothe’ the suburbabis” of heimn* 34 
schulen not be seeld, for it is euerlastynge 
possessioun. If thi brother is maad pore, 35 
and feble in power, and thou resseyuest 
hym as a comelyng and pilgrym’, and he 
lyueth with thee, take thou not vsuris of 36 
hym, nether more than thou hast 3oue; 
drede thou thi God, that thi brothir mai 
lyue anentis thee. Thou schalt not 3yue37 
to hym thi money to vsure, and thou 
schalt not axe ouer ‘aboundaunce, ether en- 
crees ouer of fruytis?; Y am 3oure Lord 38 
God, that ladde 30u out of the lond of 
Egipt, that Y schulde 3yue to 3ou the lond 
of Canaan, and that Y schulde be 3oure 
God. If thi brother compellid bi pouert 39 
sillith hyin silf to thee, thou schalt not 
oppresse hym bi seruage of seruauntis, but 40 
he schal be as an* hirid man and tenaunt?; 
‘til to® the 3eer of iubilee he schal worche 
at? thee, and aftirward he schal go outa 
with his fre children, and he schal turne 
ajsen to the® kynrede, and to ‘the posses- 
sioun of his fadris‘. For thei ben my ser-42 
uauntis®, and Y ledde hem out of the lond 
of Egipt; thei® schulen not be seeld bi the 
condicioun of seruauntis; turmente thou 43 
not hem bi thi‘ power, but drede thou thi 
Lord. A seruaunt and handmaide be to 44 
3ou of naciouns* that ben in 3oure cumpas, 
and of comelyngis that! ben pilgrimys at™ 4s 
3ou, ether thei that ben borun of hem” in 
3oure lond; 3e schulen haue these ser- 
uauntis, and bi ri3t of eritage 3e schulen 4¢ 


‘sende ouer® toP aftir comeris, and 3e schu- 


len welde1 with outen ende; sothely op- 
presse 3e not bi power 3oure britheren, the 
sones of Israel. If the hond of a comelyng 47 
and’ of a pilgrim wexith strong at 30u, and 
thi brother is maad pore, and sillith hym 
silf to hym‘, ether to ony of his kyn, he 48 
may be ajenbou3t aftir thet sillyng; he 


f forleue E pr.m. 


x citeess. Yapilgrymis, 2 that thal 


thou lenyst, encrees of fruytis 1s. ®Om.F. %atenaunt1. ¢vntors. too. ‘anentis1. ¢ his 1s. 
f his fadris possessioun 1s. & sernauntis, seith the Lord, s. hand theiss. iOm.a._ § othere na- 
clounsts. !the whiche1, ™anentis 1. %cumlyngis 1s. %leeue hem 1. ouer leeue hem s.  P to 3oure 1s. 


4 welde hemis. Tors. §& that cumlinge 8. 


t that s. 


ZZ 


356 


sseny of the lynage of hym, after the sell- 
ing he may be a3enbou3t; who so wole 
49 of his britheren, bigge he hym; and the 
fadres brother, and the fader brother® 
sone, and the cosyn, and? the alyei. If 
forsothe and he mowe, ajenbie he hym 
50silf, noumbred oonli the 3eeris fro the 
tyme of his sillynge vnto the iubilee 3eer; 
and the money with the which he was 
soold, after the noumbre of 3eeris, and 
51 thur3 resoun of an hirid man rekened. If 
there were many 3eris that leeuen vnto 
the inubilee, and after that he shal 3eelde 
s2the prijs; if fewe, he shal leye resoun 
with hym after the noumbre of 3eeres ; 
s3and he shal 3eelde to the bigger that 
that is laft of the 3eeris, in the whiche 
before he seruede, the medis with ynne 
rekenyd*; he shal not traueil hym vio- 
s4lentlich in thi siz3t. And if bi that he 
may not be a3eynbou3t**, the iubilee 3eer 
he shall goon out with his free children ; 
55myn forsothe sernauntis ben the sones of 
Yrael, the whiche Y haue ladde out of 
the loond of Egipte; I the Lord 3oure 
God. 
CAP. XXVI. 

1 3e shulen not make to 301 a mawmett, 
and grauen thing, ne titlis 3e shulen rere, 
ne huge stoon 3e shulen putte in 3oure 
erthe, that 3e honouren it; Y forsothe am 

2the Lord 3oure God. Kepe 3e myn hali- 
daies, and inwardli drede 3e at my seyn- 

stuarye; Ya Lord. If 3e goon in myn 
heestis, and my maundementis kepen, and 
doon hem, Y shal 3yue to 30w reynes in 
4her tymes, and the loond shal brynge 
forth his burionynge, and with apples 
sthe trees shulen be fulfillid; and the 
thresshynge of repyn™ tilthes shal atake 
the vyndage, and the vyndage shal occu- 
pie the sowynge tyme, and 3e shulen ete 
3oure breed in plente ‘in fulnes", and with 


& brotheres x sec.m. of A. 


ialyen ar. 
™ repynge 4. 9 at the folle £ pr.m. 


u bie he ts. 
kynesman 1s. _‘¥ his alye 1s. 
in 1, © a straunger s. 


LEVITICUS. 


k rekenyng 4 pr.m. 


v the br. of the fad. c. the br. of his fad.1. his fadir brother s. 
z vn to the iubilee 3eer 1s. 
f an hoom born man s. 


XXV. 48==XXVI. 5. 


that wole of hise britheren, ajenbie" hym ; 
bothe ‘the brother of fadir’, and the sone 4» 
of ‘the fadris” brother, and kynesman*, and 
alyeY. Ellis if also he schal mow, he schal 
ajenbie hym silf, while the 3eeris ben ry- 50 
kenid oneli fro the tyme of his sillyng ‘til 
in to the 3eer of iubylee’; and while the 
money, for which he was seeld, is rikenyd 
bi the noumbre of 3eeris, and while the 
hire of an hirid man is rikenyd. If mosi 
3eeris ben that dwellen ‘til to? the iubilee, 
bi these 3eeris he schal 3elde also the prijs; 
if fewe 3eeris ben, he schal sette rikenyng 52 
with hym bi the noumbre of 3eeris®; and 53 
he schal 3eelde to the biere that that is re- 
sidue® of 3eeris, while tho 3eeris, bi4 whiche 
he seruyde bifore, ben rikenyd for hiris; 
he® schal not turmente ‘that J7breuf vio- 
lentli in thi sijt. That if he may not besa 
a3enbou3t bi this*, he schal go out with 
his free children in the ‘jeer of iubilee>; 
for’ the sones of Israel ben myn ser-s5 
uauntis, whichek Y ledde out of the lond 
of Egipt. 


CAP, XXVIL 


Y¥ am 3o0ure Lord God; 3e schulen not1 
make to 30u an ydol, and a grauun ymage, 
nether 3e schulen reise! titlis™, nether 3e 
schulen sette a noble stoon in 3oure lond, 
that 3e worschipe it; for Y am 3oure Lord 
God. Kepe 3e my sabatis, and drede 3e at2 
my seyntuarie; Y am the" Lord. If 3e gon3 
in myn heestis, and kepen my comaunde- 
mentis®, and doon tho, Y schal 3yue to 30u 
reynes? in her tymes, and the erthe schal4 
brynge forth his fruyt, and trees schulen 
be fillid with applis; the threschyng ofs 
ripe cornes schal take vyndage', and vynd- 
age’ schal occupie seed’, and 3e schulen ete 
j3oure breed in fulnesse, and 3e schulen 
dwelle in 3oure lond without drede. Ys 


kk ajensbou3t 4-1 mawment a. 


whis fadiris. * his 
b the 3eeris is. ¢ left E1LPs. 
h 5eer of the iubilee 1. iubilee 


& ynto Is. 
& this maner 1s. 


jeer s. 1Om.rtmopsw. ‘the whiche 1. ! reise vp 1s. ™ titlis, that is, auteris for ydolatrye BCEGIKNPQN. 


n Om. 1s, 
8 the seed tyme 1s. 


titlis, that is, ydol auters s. 
creses. * the vyndage s. 


9 biddingis 1s. 


Preyne s. 4 the vyndage 1. vyndage or en 


XXVI. 6—19. 


outen drede® 3e shulen dwelle in 3oure 
6loond. I shal 3yue pees in 3oure coostis 5 
3e shulen sleepe, and there shal not be 
that shal afeere jou’; I shal take aweie 
yuel beestis, and swerd shal not thur3 
7 passe 30ure termes. 3e shulen pursue 3oure 
enemyes, and thei shulen falle before 
830w; fyue of 30w shal pursue an hun- 
dryd aliens, and an?? hundred of 3o0w ten 
thousyndes ; 30ure enemyes shulen falle 
9 with swerd in 3oure si3t. Y shal beholde 
30w, and make growe; 3e shulen ben mul- 
tiplied, and I shal fastne my couenaunt 
10 with 3ow; 3e shulen ete the moost oold 
thingis of oold, and the newe vpon com- 
ynge, the oold 3e shulen cast aweye; 
irand I shal sette my tabernacle in the 
myddil of 3ow, and my soule shal not cast 
1230w aweie; I shal goo among 3o0w, and 
I shal be 3oure God, and 3e shulen be to 
i3me a puple. I the Lord 3oure God, that 
haue ladde 30w out of the loond of Egip- 
cyens, that 5e seruen not to hem, and the 
whiche haue brokun the chaynes of 30ure 
i4nolles, that 3e my3ten goo vp ry3t. But 
if 3e heren me not, ne doon4 alle myn 
15 heestis, and if 3e spurne my lawes, and 
my domes despisen, that 3e doon™ hem 
the whiche ben ordeyned of me, and my 
iécouenant 3e fulli bryngen’ to nou3t, I 
thanne this‘ thing" shal do to 3ow; Y 
shal visyte 30w swiftly in nedynes, and 
in brennynge, that make faylY 3oure eyen, 
and waste 3oure lyues; in veyn 3e shulen 
sowe 30ur seed, that of the enemyes shal 
17 be deuowryd ; I shal putte my face a3ens 
3ow, and 3e shulen falle before 3oure ene- 
myes, and 3e shulen be suget to hem that 
hatiden 30w ; 3e shulen flee, no man pur- 
issuynge. If forsothe and so 3e obeishen 
not to me, I shal adde 3oure correccions 
i9seuen foold for 3oure synnes; and I shal 
altobreke the prijd of 3oure hardnes, and 
I shal 3yue heuene to 30w aboue as of 


LEVITICUS. 


357 


schal 3yue pees in‘ 3oure coostis; 3e schu- 
len slepe, and noon schal be that schal 
make 3ou aferd; Y schal do awei yuel 
beestis fro 30u, and a swerd schal not passe 
bi 3oure termes. 3e schulen pursue 30ure7 
enemyes, and thei schulen falle bifor 3ou ; 
fyue of 3oure men schulen pursue an hun-s 
drid aliens, and an hundrid of 30u schu- 
len pursue ten thousande ; 30ure enemyes 
schulen falle bi swerd in 3oure siz3t. Yo 
schal biholde 30u, and Y schal make 302" 
to encreesse ; 3e schulen be inultiplied; 
and Y schal make stedfast my couenaunt 
with 30u; 3e schulen ete the eldest’ of elde 10 
thingis, and 3e schulen caste forth” elde 
thingis, whanne newe thingis schulen come 
aboue; Y schal sette my tabernacle in their 
myddis of 30u, and my soule* schal not 
caste 30u awey; Y schal go among 3on, 12 
and Y schal be 30ure God, and 3e schulen 
be a puple to me. Y am 3oure Lord God, 13 
that ledde 30u out of the lond of Egip- 
cians, that 3e schulden not serue hem, and 
which’ haue broke the chaynes of 3oure 
nollis, that 3e schulde go vpri3t. That ifi4 
3e heren not me, nether doon alle myn 
heestis, and if 3e forsaken my lawis, and 1s 
despisen my domes, that 3e doon not tho 
thingis that ben ordeyned of me, and that? 
3e brengen* my couenaunt to auoydyng”, 
also® Y schal do these thingis to 30u; Yi 
schal visyte 30u swiftly in nedynesse and 
brennyng®, which schal turment 3oure ij3en, 
and schal® waste 3oure lyues; in veyn 3e 
schulen sowe seed, that schal be deuonrid 
of enemyes; Y schal sette my face" a3ens 17 
3ou, and 3e schulen falle bifor 3oure ene- 
myes, and 3e schulen be sugetis to hem 
that haten 3ou; 3e schulen fle, while no 
man pursueth!, But* if nether so 3e obeyen is 
to me, Y schal adde! 3oure chastisyngis™ 
seuenfold for 30uxe synnes; and Y schal jg 
al tobreke the pride of 3oure harduesse, 
and Y schal 3yue to" 3ou heuene aboue as 


© ferde ser. P Om. BppEFH, PPand 4. 4doth spern. * doon not pv. § 3e bryngen 4. ¢ thes spEFH. 


uthinges Fr. Vfalle B. W the peri. 

tto1s. Om. plures. Vv eldest thingis s. “ awey the 1s. * soule, that is, wille BenGiLr@. soule or 
wiles. Ys. 2Om.a. 4 brenge folily sy. bnonjts. ¢ Om. s. ddothannes. © in bren. 
nyngis. fthewhich1. & Om.1s. "cheers. {pursuethj3ous. ‘Om. x. Jenereece 1s. ™ chas- 


tinge s. 2 Om.s. 


358 


20yrun, and the erthe brasun; 3oure tra-~ 
neyl in veyn shal be wastyd, ne the erthe 
shal brynge forth burionyng, ne the trees 
21shulen 3yue apples. And if 3e goon oner- 
thwart* to me, ne wolenY here me, I shal 
adde 30ure” veniawices vnto the seuenth 
22 foold for 3oure synnes; and I shal® sende 
out to> 30w beestis of the feeld, that 
wasten and 30w and 3oure beestis, and to 
skarsnes alle thinges thei shulen brynge, 
23 and that 3oure weies be maad desert. And 
if 3e wolen not resseyue disciplyne, but 
24goon ouerthwart* to me, I forsothe con- 
trarius aj3ens® 3ow shal goo, and I shal 
smyte 30w seuen sithes for 3oure synnes ; 
2,and I shal brynge vpon® 30w a swerd, 
vengesonre of my boond of pees; and 
whanne 3e fleen® into 3ouref cytees, I shal 
sende pestilence into the myddil of 3ou, 
and 3e shulen be take in the hoondes of 
2630ure® enemyes, after that I breke the 
staf of 3oure breed, so that ten wyimmen 
in con onen baken looues, and 3elden hem 
at wei3t; and 3e shulen eete, and not be 
27fulfillid. If forsothe and bi thes thinges 
283e heren not me, but goon a3ens me, and 
I shal go ajens 30w in contrarye woodnes, 
and I shal vndernym 3ow with seuen ve- 
29 niaunce! for 30ure synnes, so that 3e eten 
the flesh of 3oure sones, and of 3oure 
s0dou3tres*; and I shal destruye 3oure hey3 
thinges, and 3oure mawmetis Y shal breke; 
3e shulen falle amonge the fallynges of 
joure mawmetis, and my soule shal wlaate 
3130W, in so myche that 3oure cytees Y shal 
brynge down in.to wildernes, and the de- 
sertis I shal make 3oure seyntuaries, ne 
more ouer Y shal resseyue the noost swete! 
32smel; and I shal scater 3oure loond, and 
joure enemyes, whanne thei weren dwell- 
agers of it, shulen wondre vpon it; 3ow for- 


* from ajeyns E pr.m. outward E sec.m. ouerthwart £ fer. m. 


b into BDEFH. 
& the BDEFH. 


BDEFH. a Onn. nu. 


f Om. BpEFH. h goth BDEFUH. 


° Om. 1s. P of plures. 4 encreece 1s. 
t freli Y w. 4 thees schulen 1. these beestis schulen s. 
wOm.s. *Om.c. Ythem. 2 takun ce. 


» that for grete nedynesses. © schul hake 1s. 


& woln heren 1s. h bi is. 


LEVITICUS. 


XXXVI. 20-—33. 


of® yrun, and the erthe as? bras; 3oure 20 
tranel schal be wastid in veyn, nether the 
erthe schal brynge forth fruyt, nethir trees 
schulen 3yue applis. If 3e goon contrarie 21 
to me, nether wolen here me, Y schal adde® 
3oure woundis' til’ in to seuenfold for 3oure 
synnes ; Y‘ schal sende out in to 30u cruel22 
beestis of the feeld, that schulen waste 3ou 
and 3oure beestis, and schulen" brynge alle 
thingis to fewnesse, and 3oure weies schu- 
len be forsakun. That if nether so 3e wolen 23 
resseyue doctryn’, but goon contrarie to 
me, also Y schal go aduersarie a3ens 30u, 24 
and” Y schal smyte 30u seuen sithis for 
3oure synnes; and Y schal brynge yn* on25 
jou the swerd, vengere of my’ boond of 
peest; and whanne 3e fleen in to citees, 
Y schal sende pestilence in the myddis of 
jou, and 3e schulen be bitakun? in the 
hondis of enemyes, aftir that Y haue broke 26 
the staf* of joure breed, so that> ten 
wymmen bake® looues in oon ouene, and 
jelde® tho looues at wei3te; and 3e schulen 
ete, and 3e schulen not be fillid’. But if27 
nethir bi these thingis 3e heren® me, but 
goon azens me, and Y schal go ajens 30u28 
in" contrarie woodnesse', and Y schal chas- 
tise 30u bi senene veniaunces for 3oure 
synnes, so that 3e ete* the fleischis’ of29 
3oure sones, and of 3oure dou3tris!!; Y schal 30 
destrie 3oure hijse thingis™, and Y schal 
breke 3oure symylacris; 3e schulen falle 
bitwixe the fallyngis of 3our ydols, and 
my soule schal haue 3ou abhomynable, in 31 
so myche that Y turne™ 3oure citees in to 
wildirnesse, and make® 3o0ure seyntuaries 
forsakun, nether Y schal resseyue more? 
the swettest odour; and Y schal destrye32 
3oure lond, and 3oure enemyes schulen be 
astonyed theronne?, whanne thei schulen™ 
be enhabiters* therof; forsothe Y schal 33 


y willith sp. wolleth zn. 4 to 3o0ure 
Cand ajens BDEFU. in vpon BpEFU. © flee3ith BDEFH. 
iveniaunces BDEFH. k douj3tren spEFU. ! soot E. 


T woundis ether veniaunces BCGWQX. vengeaunces Is. § Om. 0, 


Vv doctryn ether chastisyng BcGiNQx. chastinge s. 


a staf, that is, susteyuyng BCGINQX. staf or susleynynge s. 
d her looues Is. 
i woodnesse, thai is, in strong veniaunce BCGNQ. vengeaunce 18. 


f fulfillid ts. 


€ 3elde or delyuere s. 
k ete or 


waaste 8. \fleishe 1. 'Udouztis a. ™ thingis of pride s. % schalturne 1s. © I schal make 1s. P more for 


joure synne Ss. 4 on 30ure distruceioun s. 


r Om. s. 


8 dwellers 1s. 


+ that is, for 
the brekyng of 
my bond of 
pecs. BCGNQX. 


XXXVI. 34—-43. 


sothe Y shal scatre amonge gentiles and 
I shal drawe out a swerd after 3ow, and 
3oure loond shal be desert, and 3o0ure cy- 
34tees fallen down. Thanne her holi dayes 
shulen pleese to the erthe, alle the daies 
33 of her wildirnes; whanne 3e weren in ene- 
myes loond, it shal halowe, and rest in 
the seuenthe tymes of his wildernes, for- 
thi that it restide not in 3oure seuenthe 
3¢tymies, whanne 3e dwelten in it. And 
whiche of 30w leeuen, Y shal 3yue drede™ 
in the hertes of hem, in regiouns of the 
enemyes; the sown of a fleynge leef shal 
fere" hem, and so thei shulen flee it as 
the swerd; thei shulen falle, no man pur- 
37suynge, and eche vpon his britheren shal 
falle togidere, as men fleynge batailes ; 
no man of 30w shal be hardi to with- 
ssstoonde to enemyes; 3e shulen perishe 
among the gentiles, and the enemyes 
39 loond shal waste 3ow. But and if of hem 
eny leeuen stille, thei shulen wax stynk- 
ynge in her wickidnes°, in the loond of 
her enemyes, and for the synne? of her 
fadres and her owne thei shulen be tur- 
somentid, to the tyme that thei know- 
lechen her wickidnesses, and of her yuels 
thei recorden, in the whiche thei han 
trespassid a3ens me, and han goo ouer- 
4ithwert to me. Therfor Y4 shal goo a3ens 
hem, and I shal lede hem™ into the ene- 
myes loond, to the tyme that the vneir- 
cumsidid thou3t of hem wax ashamed ; 
than thei shulen preie for her vnpytow- 
42nesses, and I shal recorde of my boond 
of pees, that I haue couenauntide with 
Jacob, Ysaac, and Abraham; of the loond 
43forsothe I shal hane mynde, that whanne 
it were forsakun of hem, it shal pleese 
to hym silf in his seuenthe tymes, suf- 
frynge wildernesses* for hem; thei for- 


m ferde peru. 4 drede p. 
8 wyldernes aDEFH. 


LEVITICUS. 


© wickidnesses BDEFH. 


359 


scatere 30u in to folkis, ether hethen men, 
and Y schal drawe ont of the schethe the 
swerd aftir 30u, and 3oure Jond schal be 
forsakun, and 3oure citees schulen be cast 
doun. ‘Thanne ‘hise sabatis" schulen plese 34 
the erthe, in alle the daies of his’ wildir- 
nesse’ ; whanne 3e ben in the lond of ene-35 
myes, it* schal ‘kepe sabat’, and? schal* 
reste in the sabatis> of his wildirnesse®, 
for it restide not in 30ure sabatis, whanne 
3e dwelliden therynne. And Y schal 3yue 36 
drede in ‘the hertis of hem®, whiche' schu- 
len abide of jon, in the cuntreis of ene- 
myes’; the sown of a leef fleynge schal 
make hem aferd, and so thei schulen fle 
it as a" swerd; thei schulen falle, while 
noon’ pursueth, and alle* schulen falle on! 37 
her britheren, as™ fleynge bateils"; no 
man of 30u schal be hardi to a3enstonde 
enemyes; 3e schulen perische among he- 38 
then men, and the lond of enemyes schal 
waaste 30u. That if summe of these Jewes® 39 
dwellen?, thei schulen faile? in her wickid- 
nessis, in the lond of her enemyes, and 
thei schulen be turmentid for the synne™ 
of her fadris, and for her owne synnes, til’ 40 
thei knoulechen her wickidnesses, andt han 
mynde of her yuels, bi whiche thei tres- 
passiden" a3ens me, and 3eden contrarie to 
me. Therfor and Y schal go ajens hem, 41 
and Y schal brynge hem in to the lond of 
enemyes’, til” the vncireumcidid soule* of 
hem be aschamed; thanne thei schulen 
preie for her wickidnessesY, and Y schal 42 
haue mynde of my boond of pees, which? 
Y couenauntide with Jacob, Ysaac, and 
Abraham*; also Y schal be myndeful of 
the lond, which”, whanne it is left of hem‘, 43 
schal* plese to it silf in ‘his sabatis, and 
schal suffre wildirnesse® for hein; forsothe 
thei schulen preye for her synnes, for thei 
r Om. PEFH, 


Psynns BpEFN. and Y RDEFH. 


t of w. or into s. her hali daies 1s. my sabatis K sec.m. Vv heris. W wildirnesse, for the erthe sehal reste, 


whanne God sehal make it bareyne 1s. 


x that lond s. 


yhalewes. Zandit1. ®Om.s. >? seuenthe 


tymes, that is, the sabot daies s. © wildirnesse or bareynnesse s, 4 forthi that the erthe s. © her hertis 1s. 


f that is. 
thei es. 1 vpon 1s. 
Qstynke s. * synnes plures. 

enmemyes B pr.m. W to tyme s. 
which 1. ¢hem as bareyne s. 
fhem that rebelden azens God s. 


™ as men I. as alle men s. 

8 yn tos. 
x will ts. 
4 3¢ schal 1s. 


€ 30ure enemyes B pr.m. henenes DGNQRT. 
n bateils for fere s. 
t and til thei 1. and to thei s. 
¥ wickidnesse plures. 
€ the restinge daies ther off, suffrynge deseertnesse 1s. 


k alle 
P dwellen 32é stille s. 
u han trespasside 1s. V her 

awith Abraham is. the 


b Om. 10 sec. m. 8. ino man o sup.ras. 
© rebels 8. 


2 that 1s. 


360 


sothe shulen preye for her synnes, forthi 
that thei han cast aweie my domes, and 

44my lawes despiseden; and neuerthelest 
also whanne thei weren in the enemyes 
loond, Y keste hem not aweie fulli, ne 
so Y despiside, that thei weren consumed, 
and that I shulde make my couenaunt 
brou3t to nou3t with hem; Y forsothe am 

45the Lord God of hem. And I shal re- 
corde of my rather boond of pees, whanne 
I ladde hem out of the loond of Egipte, 
in the si3t of gentils", that I were the 
God of hem; Y the Lord God. Thes 
ben the heestis, and domes, and lawes, 
that the Lord 3af bitwix hym and betwix 
the sones of Yrael, in the mowut of Sy- 
nay, bi the hoond of Moyses. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
shalt seie to hem, The man that doth 
avowe, and bihotith to God hijs soule, 
3 vndir eymyng he shal 3yue the prijs. And 
if it were a maal, fro the twentithe jeer 
vnto the sixtithe 3eer, he shal 3yue fifty 
sicles of siluer, at the mesure of the seyn- 
5 tnarye, if a womman, thritti; fro the 
fifthe forsothe 3eer vnto the twentithe, a 
maal shal 3yue twenti cycles, the wom- 
éman ten; fro o moneth vnto the fifthe 
3eer, for the maal shal be 3yue fyne cy- 
7elis, and for the femaal three; of sixti 
wynter and more, a maal shal 3yne fiftene 
ssiclis, the womman ten. If he were a pore 
man, and at the eymynge he shal not 
mowe 3eelde, he shal stoonde before the 
preest, and how myche he eymeth’, and 
seeth” that he may 3eelde, so myche he 
9shal 3yue. A beeste forsothe that nay be 
offred to the Lord, if eny auowith, holi it 
10shal be, and it may not be chaungid, that 
is, nother betere for ynel, ne the wors for 
good* ; but if he shalY chaunge, and that 
that is chaungid and it for the which it 


t natheles x. the Gentiles BpEFH. 


y Om. ppoern. 
i threwe 1s. 


S also 1s. 4 her enmyes lond ts. 


© the valu Fw. P preisyng ther off 1s. 4 man s. 
seyntuarie 1ks. Vyntors. Wmans, *a Is. 
schalis. 4a worsi. ¢an yuel rs. 


LEVITICUS. 


Vv eyme BDEFH. 


XXVI. 44—-XXVII. 10. 


castiden awey my domes, and despyseden 
my lawis; netheles, 3he8, whanne thei 44 
weren in ‘the lond of enemyes", Y castide! 
not hem awey outirli, nether Y dispiside 
hem, so that thei weren wastid, and that 
Y made voide my couenaunt with hem; 
for Y am the Lord God of hem. And Yas 
schal haue mynde of my formere boond of 
pees, whanne Y ledde hem out of the lond 
of Egipt, in the sij3t of hethene men, that 
Y schulde be her God; Y am the Lord 
God. These ben the comaundementis*, and 
domes, and lawis, whiche the Lord 3af bi- 
twixe hym silf and bitwixe! the sones of 
Israel, in the hil of Synay, bi the hond of 
Moises. 


CAP. XXVII. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and thouz 
schalt seye to hem, A man that makith 
avow, and bihetith his soule to God, schal™ 
3yue the® priys vndur valu°, ether preis- 
yng?. If it is a male, fro the twentithes 
3eer ‘til to’ the sixtithe 3eer, he schal 3yue 
fifti siclis of siluer, at thet mesure of seyn- 
tuarie’, if it is a womman, sche schal 3yue 4 
thretti siclis; forsothe fro the fifthe 3eers 
‘til to’ the twentithe jeer, a male” schal 
3yue twenti cyclis,a womman schal 3yue 
ten ciclis; fro oX monethe ‘til toY the fifthes 
jeer, fyue ciclis schulen be 3ouun for a 
male’, thre ciclis for a womman; a male*7 
of sixti 3eer and ouer schal 3yue fiftene 
ciclis, a womman schal 3yue ten cyclis. Ifs 
it is a pore man, aud may not 3elde the 
valu, he schal stonde bifor the preest, and 
as myche as the preest preisith, and seeth 
that the pore man may 3elde, so myche he 
schal 3yue. Forsothe if ony man avowiths 
a beeste, that may be offrid to the Lord, 
it schal be hooli, and schal® not mow be1o 
chaungid, that is, nethir a betere for ‘an 
yuel4, nether ‘a worse® for a good; and if 


W leye p. sey F. see3 u. X the good BDern. 


K heestis 1s. 1 Om. ixkos. ™ he schalis. ® Om. ¥. 
' that auoweth fro 1s. %vntors. t*Om.sw. tthe 
Yvyntois. 2Zmans. @manis. > Sothly is. ¢ it 


XXVIF, 1i——23. 


is chaungid shal be sacryd to the Lord. 
i The vnelene forsothe beeste that may not: 
be offred to slau3ztre, whoso auowith, it 
1gshal be brou3t? before the preest, the 
which demynge whether it be good or 
13 yuel, sha] sette the prijs; and if he that 
offreth wole not 3yue, he shal adde aboue 
14the eymynge the fifthe part. A man if 
he auowe his hows, and halowe it to the 
Lord, the preest shal behoolde, whether 
it be good or yuel, and after the prijs, 
that of hym were ordeyned, it shal be 
issoold; if forsothe he that auowith wole 
bigge it ajen, he shal 3yue the fifthe part 
of the eymynge aboue, and he shal haue 
16the hows. And if the feelde of his pos- 
sessioun he auowe, and halowe to the 
Lord, after the mesure of the seed shal 
be eymed the prijs; if with thritti busshels 
of barly the feelde is sowun, for fifti siclis 
170f siluer it shal be soold. And if anoon 
fro the 3eer of the biginnyng iubilee he 
auowe the feeld, as myche as it may be 
18 worth, so myche shal* be eymed; if for- 
sothe a? litil of tyme, the preest shal 
noumbre the money after the noumbre of 
jeeris that ben laft vnto the iubilee, and 
19it shal be drawe aweie fro the prijs. And 
if he that anowide wole bigge the feeld 
aj3en, he shal adde the fifthe part of the 
20eymed money, and he shal weelde it; if 
forsothe he wole not a3enbigge, but to 
eny other were sold ouer hym that auow- 
2iede, he may not a3enbigge; for whanne 
the day of the iubilee cometh, it shal be 
halowid to the Lord, and the possessioun 
sacrid perteyneth® to the ry3t of preestis. 
22I1f a feelde is bou3t, and not? of the pos- 
sessioun of the more men, were halowid" 
23to the Lord, the preest shal noumbre the 
prijs, after the noumbre of 3eeres vnto 


LEVITICUS. 


361 


hef chaungith it8, bothe that, that is chaung- 
id, and that", for which it is chaungid, 
schal be halewid to the Lord. Sotheli if 
ony man avowith an vncleene beeste, that 
may not be offrid to the Lord, it schal be 
brou3t bifor the preest, and the preest 12 
schal deme whether it is good ether yuel, 
and schal! sette the prijs; which prijs if he 13 
that offrith* wole! 3yne, he schal adde™ 
the fifthe part ouer the valu. If a mani 
avowith his hows, and halewith it to the 
Lord, the preest schal biholde, ‘whether it 
is" good ether yuel, and bi the prijs, which° 
is ordeyned of hymP, it schal be seld; so-is 
theli if he that avowide wole a3en-bie it, 
he schal 3yue the fifthe part of the valu 
aboue, and he schal haue the hows. Thatic 
if he’ avowith the feeld of his possessioun, 
and halewith™ to the Lord, the prijs schal 
be demed bi the mesure of seed; if the 
feeld is sowun with thritti buyschels of 
barli, it schal be seeld for fifti siclys of 
siluer. If he anowith the feeld anoon for® 17 
the 3eer of* the" iubilee bigynnynge’, as 
myche as it may be worth, bi so myche it 
schal be preisid ; but if ¢¢ be after ‘sumis 
part of* tyme, the preest schal rykeneY the 
money bi’ the noumbre of 3eeris* that ben 
residue? ‘til to® the iubilee, and it schal be 
withdrawun of? the prijs. That if he that 19 
avowide wole a3enbie the feeld, he schal adde 
the fyuethe part of the® money preisid‘, 
and he schal welde it; but if he nyle# 20 
ajenbie", but it is seeld to ony othir man, 
hei that avowide® schal ‘no more! mowe 
a3enbie it; for whanne the dai of inbilee 2 
cometh, it™ schal be halewid to the Lord, 
and the possessioun halewid perteyneth to 
the ri3t of preestis. If the feeld is bou3t, 22 
and is not of the possessioun of grettere 
men", and is® halewid to the Lord, the es 


z brent 4. ® it shal sperm. Pafter a BE sec.m. © and perteyneth x. @nogr. noru. 44 ho- 
lowid a. 

famanis. & his vow 1s. that thing 1s. !he schal 1s. * auowiths, ! wole not a. scc.m. ™ adde 
tors. wher that hons bers. ©that 3s. P the preestis. Gamanis. Thalewithits,  § fro rs. 
t of bigynnyng of is, %Om.B. YOm,18.  W preisid ether set a [at GN} valu BcoKNQ. * a litil 1s. 
yrykene ether determyne BcGKNQ. noumbre Is. 2 aftir Is. a the 3eeris w. bleft 11s. ¢ vnto Is. 
toosec.m. ‘frors. e€Om.w. f that is preisidi, §& wil not1. » ajenbie itis. i he thanne s. 
k auowide it 1s. Jnenerss. ™ that feelds, ™ men, that is, of auncetries BCGKNQX. men of auncetry s. 


° it is is. 


3A 


362 


the iubilee, and he shal 3yue, the which 
24auowide it to the Lord; in the iubilee 
forsothe it shal turne a3en to the rather 
lord that solde it, and hadde into the 
25 soort of his possessioun. Al eymynge shal 
be peysid with the cycle of the seyntua- 
2érye; the sicle hath twenty halpens. The 
first getun that perteyneth to the Lord 
no man may halowe and vowe, whether 
oxe or sheep it were, of the Lord thei 
27ben. And if the beeste is vnclene, he 
that offreth shal a3enbigge aftir his eym- 
ynge, and shall adde the fifthe part of the 
prijs; if he wole not ajenbigge, it shal 
be soold to another, how myche euer it 
28 were eymed. Al that to the Lord is sa- 
crid, whether it were man, or beeste, or® 
feelde, it shal not be soold, ne may be 
a3enbou3t ; what euer thing ones were 
sacrid, holi of halowes it shal be to the 
29 Lord, and eche sacrid thing that is offryd 
of man, shal not be bou3t a3en, but thur3 
30deeth die. Alle the dymes of the erthe, 
whether of the cornes, orf of the’ apples 
of trees, ben of the Lord, and to hym 
31 thei ben halowid; if eny man wole bigge 
a3en his dymes, adde he the fifthe part of 
szhem; of alle the’ dymes of sheep, or‘ of 
oxe, and of geyte, that vndur the 3eerde 
of the sheepherd goon, what euer* dyme 
33come, it shal be halowid to the Lord; it 
shal not be chosen, nothir good nother 
yuel, ne for another chaungid; if eny 
man chaunge, and that, that is chaungid, 
and that, for what it is chaungid, shal be 
halowid to the Lord, and shal not be 
s4azenbou3t. Thes ben the heestis that 
the Lord comaundide to Moyses, and to 
the! sones of Yrael, in the mownt of Sy- 
nay. 


LEVITICUS. 


XXVIII. 24—34. 


preest schal determyne? the prijs bid the 
noumbre of 3eeris ‘til to™ the inubilee, and 
he that avowide the feeld schal 3yue the , 
prys* to the Lord; forsothe in the iubilee 2s 
it schal turne a3en to the formere lord that 
seelde it, and ‘haue het in to the eritage of 
his possessioun. ‘Ech preisyng" schal be 2s 
peisid’ bi the sicle of seyntuarie” ; a sicle 
hath twenti halpens. No man may ha-26 
lewe and avowe the firste gendrid thingis 
that perteynen to the Lord, whether it is 
oxe, whether* scheep, thoY ben the Lordis 
part. That if the beeste is vncleene*, he 27 
that offride> schal ajenbie by® his‘ valu®, 
and he schal adde' the fyuethe- part of 
prijs®; if he nyle ajenbie', it schal be 
seeld to another man, as* myche euer! as 
it is ‘set at valu”. AJ] thing which" is ha-23 
lewid to the Lord, whether it is man, whe- 
ther® beeste, whether® feeld{, it schal not 
be seeld, nether it schal mow be a3enbou3t; 
whateuer thing is halewid onys, it? schal 
be hooli of the noumbre of hooli thingis 
to the Lord, and ech halewyng which is29 
offrid of man", schal not be a3enbou3t, but 
it schal die bi deeth’. Alle the tithis of30 
erthe, whether of fruytis', whether of ap- 
plis of trees, ben the Lordis par?, and ben 
halewid to hym; sotheli if ony man wole31 
aj3enbie hise tithis, he schal adde™ the 
fyuethe part of tho; of alle tithis’, ofse 
scheep, and of” oxen, and of geet, that 
passen vndur the ‘3erde of scheepherde*, 
whateuer thing cometh to the tenthe part, 
it schal be halewid to the Lord; it schal33 
not be chosun, nether good, nether yuel ; 
nethir it schal be chaungid for another ; if 
ony man chaungith’, bothe that, that is 
chaungid,and that”, for which it is chaungid, 
schal be halewid to the Lord, and it schal 


+ in Ebreu it 
is, feeld of his 
eritage. CKQ. 


e other z. f other BDEFII. & Om. F. h Om. BDEFH. i and BpEFH. k er g. 
1Om., £. 
Pnoumbre 1s. 4 aftir is. Fr ynto Is. 8 prijs therof s. t he schal haue it 1. haue it s. U ech 


preisyng, that ts, setting of valu BcKNQ. al the preisyng or valu 1. ech preisyng or thing noumbrid s. 


Vv preisid s. W the seyntuarie 1s. * or 1. Y thei rs. 


¢ Om. A. it aftir is. 
i agenbie it 1s. 
Tr aman B. 
x scheperdis 3erde 1s. 


b offrith it 1. offride it s. 
& the prijs is. } wil not 1. 
Phes. 4 thatis. 
tithis1. W Om, ELP. 


Y chaungith it 1s. 


z part withouten avow s. *vneleene that ts avowid s. 
4 the 1s. 
k for as 1s. 

8 deeth and be offrid s. 


€ valu that it ts preisid tos. f adde to Is. 
10m. is. ™ preisid is, that 1s. © or 18. 

t fruytis of corns. “addetors. Y the 
2 that thing s. 


ee 


XXVII. 34. LEVITICUS. 363 


Here endith the book of Leuiticns, and not be ajenbou3t. These ben the co-31 
now bigynneth the book of Numeri™. maundeinentis* whiche the Lord comaund- 
ide to Moises, and to the sones of Israel, 


in the hil of Synay. 


Here eendith the book of Leuitici, and 
here bygynneth the book of Numer». 


m Here endith Leuyticus, and here bigynneth Numery.p. Here endith Leuitici, and bigynneth Numeri. kr. 
Here endith the bok of Leuitiei, and here bigynneth the bok of Numeri. Fr. No final rubric in Bu. 


aheestists. > From ps. Here endithe Leuyticy, and here bigynneth Numery.c. Here endith the book 
of L. and bigynneth the book of Numeri. pnor. Here endithe L. and here bygynneth Numeri. rw. Heere 
eendit L. the tij boke. @. Here endith Leuyticus.1. Here endeth L., see now the book of Noumbre. x. 
Here endith the book of L. and here bigynneth a prologe on Numeri.m. Here endith L. and bigynneth 
Numeri. x. No final rubric in AELP@T. 


8a2 


NUMBERS. 


[Prologue on the book of Numbers. | 


TuIs book clepid Numeri, that is to seie, the book of Noumbre, makith mencioun, 
how the Lord comaundide Moises and Aaron to noumbre the sones of Israel bi her 
names writen, alle men that weren fro twenti 3eer and aboue, of stronge men and able 
to batel. Sothli the Leuytis weren not noumbrid with hem, bi the comaundement of 
the Lord, but bi hem self in to the seruyse of the tabernacle. And the Lord comaundide 
to Moises to sende aspiers to biholde the lond of Canaan, of ech lynage 0 man; whiche 
whanne thei hadden biholde, and weren comen ajen, discomforteden al the peple, out 
taken Josue and Caleph, whiche ajenseiden the othere aspiers. And al the peple 
mournede and wepte, wherfore the Lord turnede hem a3en in to desert, and seide, that 
noon of tho that weren noumbrid scholde come in the lond of Canaan, but Josue and 
Caleph; but walke aboute in wildernesse fourti 3eer, and deie therinne; and after 
fourti 3eer the sones of hem, that weren not noumbrid, scholden entre, and welde the 
lond. Also of alle dissenciouns that bifellen in the desert, and veniaunces of the peple, 
and how thei wunnen al the londe bizjende Jordan; and of the deeth of Aaron; and 
how the peple was noumbrid eftsone by Moises and Eleasar prest; and the Lord bad 
Moises to take veniaunce of the peple of Madian, and thanne he scholde be gaderid to 
his peple. ere endith the prologe and here bigynneth the book of Numert*. 


oe ie 
Numeri*. Here bigynneth the boke of Numeri*. 
CAP. I. CAP. I. 
1 THE Lord spak to Moyses in deseert AND the Lord spak to Moises in they 


of Synay, in the tabernacle of the boond — deseert of Synay, in the tabernacle of the? 
of peese, the first day of the secounde  boond of pees, in the firste day of the se- 
moneth, that other 3eer of the goyng of counde monethe, in the tother 3eer of her 
2hem out of Egipte, seiynge, Take 3e the goyng out of Egipt, and seide*, Take 3e2 
sowme of al the congregacioun of the ‘the summe? of al the congregacioun of the 
sones of Yrael, by kynredis, and her _ sones of Israel,bi her kynredis,and howsis®, 
howses, and the names of eche, what euer and ‘the names of allef bi hein silf, what 
3of the? maal kynd, fro the twentithe 3eer ener thing is’ of male kynde fro thes 
and aboue, of alle the stronge men of twentithe 3eere and aboue, ofi alle the 
Yrael; and 3e shulen noumbre hem bi her — stronge men of Israel; and thou and Aa- 


a From 8. No initial rubric in apzu but only running title. b Om. BDEFH. 


@ This Prologue is from m. 24 Numeri g. Here bigynneth Numeri. Leg. No initial rubric in corexm 
norstwx. > Om. plures. ¢heseideis. noumbres. ¢meyneesrts., f alle her names ech 1s. 
£Om.1s. hOm.1s. iand a pr.m. 


I. 4—24. 


4companyes, thow and Aaron. And there 
shulen be with 30w the prynces of the 
lynages, and of the howsis, in her kyn- 
sredes, whos names ben thes; of Ruben, 
6 Elisur, the sone® of Sedeur; of Symeon, 
Salamyel, the sone of Sury of Sadday ; 
z70f Juda, Naason, the sone of Amynadab ; 
sof Ysachar, Nathanael, the sone of Suar; 
,,0f Zabulon, Eliab, the sone of Elon; of 
the sones forsothe of Joseph, of Effraym, 
Elizama, the sone of Amyud; of Ma- 
nasse, Gamaliel, the sone of Phadasseur ; 
110of Beniamyn, Abidan, the sone of Ge- 
izdeon; of Dan, Aiezer, the sone of Amy- 
issadday; of Aser, Phegiel, the sone of 
14Ochran; of Gad, Elizaphan, the sone of 
15 Duel; of Neptalym, Ayra, the sone of 
16 Henam. Thes the moost noble princes of 
the multitude, bi the lynages, and her 
kynredes, and the heedes of the cost of 
17 Yrael, the whiche Moyses and Aaron 
token, with al the multitude of the co- 
ismoun. And thei gadreden togidere the 
first day of the secounde moneth, noum- 
brynge hem bi kynredes, and howses, and 
meynees, and heedes, and names of echon, 
19fro the twentith? 3eer and aboue, as the 
Lord comaundide to Moyses; and thei 
ben noumbred in the desert of Synay.. 
20 Of Ruben, the fyrst goten of Yrael, bi ge- 
neraciouns, and meyneys, and his howses, 
and the names of the heedes of echon, 
and al that is of maal kynde, fro twenti® 
jeer and aboue, of men goynge forth to 
21 batayl, six and fourti thowsynd and fyue 
22 hundreth. Of the sones of Semeon, bi his 
generaciouns, and meyneis, and howses of 
his kynredes, ben noumbred bi names and 
heedes of echon, al that is of maal kynde, 
fro the twentith 3eer and aboue, of men 
23 goynge to bateil, nyn and fyfti thowsynd 
2aand thre hundreth. Of the sones of Gad, 
by generaciouns, and ineyneis, and howses 
of her kynredes, ben noumbred bi the 
names of echon, fro twenti 3eer and aboue, 


€sones 4. 4 twenty pv. 


k the lynagis 1s. | the meynees 1s. 
whiche 1. ‘theiteldenis. Sechis. ¢ Om. Is. 
Yech oon ts. 2xx.s. the twentithe 1, 


NUMBERS. 


m the whiche 1. 
« bigoten I. 


365 


ron schulen noumbre hem bi her cumpa- 
nies. And the princes of lynagis* and of4 
housis!, in her kynredis, schulen be with 
3ou, of whiche™ princes these ben thes 
names; of Ruben, Elisur, the sone of Sede- 
ur; of Symeon, Salamyel, the sone of Surié 
Sadday; of Juda, Naason, the sone of Amy-7 
nadab; of Ysacar, Nathanael, the sone of8 
Suar; of Zabulon, Eliab, the sone of Elon; 9 
sotheli of the sones of Joseph, of Effraym, 10 
Elisama, the sone of Amyud; of Manasses, 
Gamaliel the sone of Phadussur; of Ben-11 
ianryn, Abidan, the sone of Gedeon; of 12 
Dan, Aiezer, the sone of Amysadday; of 13 
Aser, Fegiel, the sone of Ochran; of Gad, 14 
Elisaphan, the sone of Duel; of Neptalym, 15 
Hayra, the sone of Henam. ‘These wereni¢ 
the noblest" princes of the multitude, bi® 
her lynagis, and kynredis, and the heedis? 
of the oost of Israel, whiche4 pryneis 17 
Moises and Aaron token, with al the mul- 
titude of the comyn puple. And thei ga-1s 
deriden in the firste dai of the secounde 
monethe, and telden" hem bi kynredis, and 
housis, and meynees, and heedis, and names 
of alle* by hem silf, fro thet twentithe jeer 
and aboue, as the Lord comaundide to. 
Moises. And of Ruben the firste gendrid® 20 
of Israel weren noumbrid, in the’ deseert 
of Synai, bi her generaciouns, and meynees, 
and housis, and bi the names of alle heedis”, 
al thing that is of male kynde, fro ‘the 
twentithe 3eer* and aboue, of men goynge 
forth to batel, sixe and fourti thousynd 21 
and fyue hundrid. Of the sones of Sy-22 
meon, bi her generaciouns, and meynees, 
and housis of her kyneredis, weren noum- 
brid, bi the names and heedis of alle’, al 
that is of male kynde, fro ‘the twentithe’ 
3eer and aboue, of men goynge forth to 
batel, nyn and fifty thousand and thre 2z 
hundrid. Of the sones of Gad, by genera- 24 
ciouns, and meynees, and housis of her 
kynredis, weren noumbrid, bi the names 
of alle, fro twenti* 3eer and abone, alle nen 


¢ the twentith BpEFN, 


4 the 
X XX, 5S. 


P heedis men s. 
w the heedis ts. 


n ful noble 1. © of s. 
v Om. BL. 


366 


25 alle that shulden goo to batail, fyue and 
fourti thowsynd and‘ six hundrith and 
26 fifti. Of the sones of Juda, by genera- 
cyouns, and meyueis, and howses of her 
kynredes, bi the names of echon, fro the 
twentith 3eer and aboue, alle that my3ten 
27 goo forthe to batails, ben noumbred foure 
and seuenti thowsyndes and six hundrith. 
28 Of the sones of Ysachar, bi kynredys, and 
meyneis, and howses of her kynredes, bi 
the names of echon, fro the twentith 3eer 
and aboue, alle that shulden goo to batail, 
29ben noumbred foure and fifti thousynd 
30and four hundrith. Of the sones of Za- 
bulon, bi generaciouns, and meyneis, and 
houses of her kynredes, ben noumbred bi 
names of echon, fro the twentith 3eer and 
aboue, alle that my3ten goo forthe to ba- 
31 tayl, seuen and fifti thousyndes and foure 
szhundrith. Of the sones of Joseph, of the 
sones of Effraym, bi generaciouns, and 
meyneis, and houses of her kynredes, ben 
noumbred bi the names of echon, fro the 
twentith 3eer and abone, alle that my3ten 
33g00 forth to batail, fourti thousynd and 
3ifyue hundrith. Forsothe of the sones of 
Manasse, bi generaciouns, and meyneis, 
and houses of her kynredes, ben noum- 
bred by the names of echon, fro twenti 
jeer and aboue, alle that my3ten goo 
35 forthe to batail, two and thretti thowsynd 
36and two hundrith. Of the sones of Ben- 
jamyn, bi generaciouns, and meyneis, and 
honses of her kynredes, ben noumbred 
with the names of eclion, fro the twen- 
tith? jeer and aboue, alle that my3ten goo 
37 forthe to batail, fyue and thritti thow- 
38synd and foure hundrith. Of the sones 
of Dan, bi generaciouns, and meyneis, aud 
houses of her kynredes, ben noumbred 
with the names of echon, fro twentith 
3eer aud aboue, alle that my3ten goo 
39 forthe to batayl, two and sexti thousynd 
4oand seuen hundreth. Of the sones of 
Aser, bi generaciouns, and meyneis, and 


f Om. BDEFH. 


bbatel 1. ¢ xx, 18. 
xx.s. K Om. 1. 
twentithe plures. 


4 thousyndis w. 
1 her generaciouns 1. 
q XxX. FILS, 


NUMBERS. 


& twenty BFH. 


© her generaciouns 1. 
mM meynees O sup.ras. 


I, 25——40. 


that 3eden forth to batels>, fyue and fourti 2s 
thousand sixe hundrid and fifti. Of the26 
sones of Juda, bi generaciouns, and mey- 
nees, and housis of her kynredis, by the 
names of alle, fro ‘the twentithe® 3eer and 
aboue, alle men that mi3ten go to batels, 
weren noumbrid foure and senenti thou-27 
sand‘ and sixe hundrid. Of the sones of28 
Ysacar, bi gencraciouns®, and meynees, and 
housis off her kynredis, bi the names of 
alle, fro ‘the twentithes 3eer and aboue, 
alle men that 3eden forth to batels, weren 29 
noumbrid foure and fifti thousande and 
foure hundrid. Of the sones of Zabulon, 30 
bi generaciouns, and meynees, and housis 
of her kynredis, weren noumbrid, bi the 
names of alle, fro ‘the twentithe" jeer and 
aboue, alle men that my3ten go forth to 
batels, senene and fifti thousynde and foure 31 
hundrid. Of the sones of Joseph, of thes2 
sones of Effraym, bi generaciouns, and 
meynees, and housis of her kynredis, weren 
noumbrid, bi the names of alle, fro ‘the 
tweutithe’ 3eer and aboue, alle men that 
my3ten go forth to batels, fourti thousynde 33 
and fyue hundrid. Forsothe of* the sones34 
of Manasses, bi generaciouns', and mey- 
nees, and housis of her kynredis, weren 
noumbrid, bi the names™ of alle, fro the 
twentithe" 3eer and aboue, alle men that 
my3ten go forth to batels, two and thretti 35 
thousynd and two hundrid. Of the sones36 
of Beniamyn, bi generaciouns, and mey- 
nees, and housis of her kynredis, weren 
noumbrid, bi the names of alle®, fro twenti? 
jeer and aboue, alle men that mizten go 
forth to batels, fyue and thretti thousinde 37 
and foure hundrid. Of the sones of Dan, 38 
bi generaciouns, and meynees, and housis 
of her kynredis, weren noumbrid, bi the 
names of alle, fro ‘the twentithe4 3ere and 
aboue, alle men that my3ten go forth to 
batels, two and sixti thousynde and se-39 
nene hundrid. Of the sones of Aser, bi 40 
generaciouns, and meynees, and housis of 


h twenty aru. the twentith z. 


fand s. hyx.s. itwenti B. 


°Om.s. Pthe 


& xx. 8 
2 twenti plures. 


I. 41-53. 


housis of her kynredes, ben noumbred bi 
the names of echon, fro the twentith 3eer 
and aboue, that my3ten goo forth to ba- 
4i tail, fourti thousynd and a thousind and 
42fyue hundreth. Of the sones of Nepta- 
lym, bi generaciouns, and meyneis, and 
houses, and her kynredes, ben noumbred 
with the names of echon, fro the twentith 
3eer and aboue, alle that my3ten goo! to 
43 batail, thre and fifti thousynd and foure 
44hundrith. Thes ben whom noumbred 
Moyses and Aaron, and the twelue princes 
of Yrael, eche bi the houses of her kyn- 
4sredes. And ‘there were alle togidere of 
the sones of Yrael, bi howses, and her 
meyneis, fro twenti 3eer and aboue, alle 
4sthat my3ten go forth to batail, six hun- 
drith thre thousyndis of men, fyue hun- 
47drith and fifti. Leuytes forsothe in the 
lynage of her meyneis ben not nowmbrid 
with hem. 


CAPR. I: 


48 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
49 The lynage of Leuy wole thow not noum- 
bre, ne putte the sowm of hem with the 
sosones of Yrael; but thow shalt ordeyne 
hem vpon the tabernacle of witnessynge, 
alle the vessels of it, and what euer thing 
to the serymonyes perteyneth. Thei shu- 
len bere the tabernaele, and alle the vsable 
thinges of it, and thei shulen be in the 
seruyce, and bi enuyroun of the taberna- 
51 Cle thei shulen sette her! tentes. Whanne 
it were to go forth, the Leuytes shulen 
sett down the tabernacle, whanne thei 
shulen arere the tentis to be sett; who so 
euer™ of other lynages comen there nei3, 
s2Shal be slayn. And the sones of Yrael 
shulen sette tentes, eche bi the companyes, 
53and felowships, and her oostis"; forsothe 
the Leuytes bi enuyroun of the tabernacle 
shulen ficche tentes, lest there be maad 


t go forth BDEFH. 


' XX. ILQRST. % xx. 18. twenti x. 
xx.1Ls.  Y alle togidere 1s. 
4noumbre 1s. ¢ vponis. f vpon what 1s. 
tenaunces 1s. Kin thes. ! seruyce of i 1s. 
removed 1s. 4 take 1s. putte K sec. m. 


tentis 1s. W Om. ts. 


NUMBERS. 


k thei deden £ pr.m. 


t the whiche 1. 
z thousynde of men w. 
g Om. &. 
m thei schulen 1s. 
¥ sette it vp 1. sette vp the dab. s. 
lynage BCGKQX. straungeris, that is, of other lynage s. 


367 


her kynredis, weren noumbrid, bi the 
names of alle, fro ‘the twentithe™ 3eer and 
aboue, alle men that my3ten go forth to 
batels, fourti thousynde and a thousynde 4! 
and fyue hundrid. Of the sones of Nep-42 
talym, bi generaciouns, and meynees, and 
housis of her kynredis, weren noumbrid, 
bi the names of alle, fro ‘the twentithe® 
3eer and aboue, alle men that my3ten go 
forth to batels, thre and fifty thousynde43 
and foure hundrid. These men it ben, 44 
whichet Moises and Aaron and the twelue 
princes of Israel noumbriden, alle" bi the’ 
housis ‘of her” kynredis. And alle men 45 
of the sones of Israel bi her housis, and 
meynees, fro ‘the twentithe* 3eer and aboue, 
that my3ten go forth te batels, weren to- 
gidereY sixe hundrid thousynde’ and thre 46 
thousynde of* men, fyue® hundred and fifti. 
Sotheli the dekenes in the lynage of her 47 
meynes weren not noumbrid with hem. 


CAP. II. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 48 
‘Nyle thou noumbre‘ the lynage of Leuy, 49 
nether sette thou the summe® of hem with 
the sones of Israel; but thou schalt ordeyne so 
hem on® the tabernacle of witnessing, and 
on? alle the vessels therof, and what‘ cuer 
thing perteyneth to? cerymonyes" ether sa- 
crifices. Thei schulen bere the taberna- 
cle, and alle purtenaunces! therof, and thei 
schulen be in* seruyce!, and schulen™ sette 
tentis bi the? ecumpas of the tabernacle. 
Whanne me? schal go?, the dekenes schu-s1 
len do’ doun the tabernacle; whanne the 
tentis schulen be sette, thei schulen ‘reise 
the tabernacle’. Who euer of straungeris* 
neizeth, le schal be slayn. Sotheli the sz 
sones of Israel schulen sette tentis, ech man 
bi cumpenyes', and gaderyngis", and his 
oost; forsothe the dekenes schulen sette 53 
tentis’ bi the” cumpas of the tabernaele, 


Ithe spEFH. ™Merr. host BDEFH. 

wechis. Vherrs. Wandis. * twenti B. 
aQm. 1s. > and fyne s. © Noumbre thou not 1. 
h the cerymonyes EWX see.m. i the pur- 
nQOm.ts. © mens. P go forth or be 
8 straungeris, that is, another 


t his cumpenyes 1s." his felouschipes rs. ¥ her 


368 


indignacioun vpon the multitude of the 
sones of Yrael; and thei shulen watche in 
the waardes of the tabernacle of wytness- 
stynge. Thanue the sones of Yrael diden 
after alle thingis that the Lord hadde co- 
1maundide to Moyses. And the Lord spak 
2to Moyses and Aaron, seiynge, Eche bi 
companyes, toknes, and baners, and howses 
of her kynredes, shulen sette the tentis of 
the sones of Yrael, bi enuyroun of the 
3tabernacle of the boond of pees. At the 
eest Judas shal picche® tentis, bi compa- 
nyes? of his oost; and Nason, the sone of 
Amyuadab, shal be prynce of his sones ; 
gand al the sowme of fi3tynge men of his 
lynage, foure and seuenti thousynd and 
ssix hundreth. Bisides hym setten tentes, 
of the lynage of Ysachar, whos prynce 
ewas Nathanael, the sone of Suar; and al 
the noumbre of his fi3ters, foure and fifti 
7thousynd4 and foure hundreth. In the 
lynage of Zabulon, prynce was Eliab, the 
ssone of Elon; al the oost of fiztynge 
men of his lynage, seuen and fifti thou- 
gsynd and foure hundreth. Al that in the 
tentis of Juda ben noumbred, weren an 
hundryth six' and ei3ti thousyndis and 
foure hundrith; and bi her companyes 
10first thei shulen go out. In the tentes of 
the sones of Ruben, at the southe plage, 
shal be prynce, Elisur, the sone of Se- 
1ideur; and al the oost of his fiz3ters, that 
ben noumbred, six and fourty thowsynd 
yand fyue hundreth. Biside hym setten 
tentes, of the lynage of Symeon, whos 
prynce was Salamyel, the sone of Sury 
13Sadday; and al the oost of his fy3ters, 
that ben nonmbred, nyn and fifti thow- 
14synd and thre hundrith. In the lynage 
of Gad, prince was Eliasaph, the sone of 
15 Duel; and al the oost of his fi3ters, that 
ben noumbred, fyue and fourti thousand 
issix hundrith and fifti. Alle that ben 
noumbred in the tentes of Ruben, an hun- 


© fytche BDEFU. 


* the dekens 1s. Y waardis 1s. 
signes FKLO. and bi her tokenes ts. 
brets. }Om.s. kOm.1s. lin plures. 


4 Om. ts. 


thousinde Nx. ei3ti and sixe thousinde mM. Ixxxvj plures. 


sone 1s. t and sixe A pr.m. Is. 


NUMBERS. 


P the companyes E. 


z tabernaclis of witnessinges s. 
€ bi her baneris ts. 
m tentis 1s. castel x. 


II. 1—16. 


lest indignacioun be maad on the multi- 
tude of the sones of Israel; and thei* schu- 
len wake in the kepyngisY of the ‘taberna- 
cle of witnessyng’. Therfor the sones of 54 
Israel diden bi alle thingis whiche* the 
Lord comaundide to Moises. And thei 
Lord spak to Moises and to Aaron, and 
seide, Alle men of the sones of Israel schu- 
len sette tentis bi the? cumpenyes, signes®, 
and@ baneris®, and housis‘ of her kynredis, 
bi thes cumpas of the tabernacle of boond 
of pees. At the est Judas schal sette tentis, 3 
bi the cumpenyes of his oost; and Naason, 
the sone of Amynadab, schal be prince of 
the sones of Juda; and al the summe® of4 
fi3teris of his kynrede, foure and seuenty 
thousynde and sixe hundrid. Meni of thes 
lynage of Ysachar settiden tentis bysydis 
hym, of whiche the* prince was Nathanael, 
the sone of Suar; and al the noumbre ofe 
hise fizteris, foure and fifti thousynde and 
foure hundrid. Eliab, the sone of Elon,7 
was prince of! the lynage of Zabulon; als 
the oost of fijteris of his kynrede, seuene 
and fifti thousynde and foure hundrid. 
Alle that weren noumbrid in the castels™9 
of Judas, weren an hundrid thousynde" 
‘foure scoore thousynde and sixe® and foure 
hundrid; and thei schulen go out the? 
firste bi her cumpanyes. In the castels410 
of the sones of Ruben, at the south coost, 
Elisur, the sone of Sedeur, schal be prince; 
and al the oost of hise fizteris, that” weren 11 
noumbrid, sixe and fourti thousynde and 
fyue hundrid. Men of the lynage of Sy-12 
neon settiden tentis bisidis hym, of whiche 
the prince was Salamyhel, the sone of Su- 
risaddai; and al the oost of hise fi3teris, 13 
that weren noumbrid, nyne and fifty thou- 
synde and thre hundrid. Eliasaph, sone’ 14 
of Duel, was prince in the lynage of Gad; 
and al the oost of his fizteris, that weren 15 
noumbrid, fyue and fourti thousynde sixet 
hundrid and fifti. Alle that weren noum- 16 


4 thousandes z. * and six E. 


bherys. Cand 
£Om.1s. » noum- 
© sixe and ei3ti 
rQOm.s. 8 the 


a aftir that 3s. 
f meynees Is. 
0 thousynde and 1s. 
POm.1s. 41 tentis 1s. 


II, 17~~32. 


dreth fifti thousynd’ and a thousynd foure 
hundreth and fifty, bi her companyes ; in 
the secounde place thei shulen goo forthe. 
17 And the tabernacle of witnessynge shal 
be arered bi offices of Leuytes, and the 
companyes of hem; what maner wyse it 
shal be areryd, and so it shal be sett 
down; eche bi places and her ordres shu- 
islen goo forthe. At the west plage shulen 
bet the tentis of the sones of Effraym, 
whos prince was Elizama, the sone of 
i9 Amyud; and al the oost of his fi3ters, 
that ben noumbred, fourti thousynd and 


20fyue hundreth. And with hem the lynage * 


of the sones of Manasse, whos prynce 
21 was Gamaliel, the sone of Phadassur; al 
the oost of his fijters, that ben noumbred, 
two and thretti thousynd and two hun- 
22drith. In the lynage of the sones of Ben- 
lamyn prynce was Abidan, the sone of 
23 Gedeon; and al the oost of his fi3ters, that 
ben noumbred, fyue and thretti thousynd 
e4and foure hundryd. And alle that ben 
noumbred in the tentes of Effraym, an 
hundryd ei3t thowsyndis and an hundrid, 
bi her companyes; the thrid thei shulen 
25g00 forthe. At the north part" settiden’ 
tentes the sones of Dan, whos prince was 
26 Abiazar, the sone of Amysadday ; al the 
oost of his fizters, that ben noumbred, two 
and fourti thowsyndes and seuen hun- 
2jdryd. SBisides hym fitchiden tentis of 
the lynage of Aser, whos prynce was Phe- 
28 gyel, the sone of Othran ; and al the oost 
of his fijteres, that ben noumbred, fourti 
thousyndis and a thousynd and fyuc hun- 
2odrid. Of the lynage of the sones of Nep- 
talym prince was Ahyra, the sone of He- 
30nan; and al the oost of his fi3ters, thre 
and fifti thowsynd and foure hundryd. 
31 Alle that ben noumbred in the tentes of 
Dan, weren an hundred seuen and fifti 
thowsyndes and six hundred; alther last 
32 thei shulden go forth. This noumbre of 


8 thousandys E. 


uofis. Vtentisis. Wand fifty 1s. *js. 
CalleasK. 4 reisid vp bi hem is. & Om. 1s, 
sones 8. weren twos. | weren fyue 18. 
P north coost 1s. 4 weren twos. ° fourti x. 


weren fourti s. Y Om. 1. and j thousynde s. 


NUMBERS. 


t Om. «pr. 


y and foure s. 
f doun bi hem s. 
m alle men 1s. 
s And men Kx. 
Ww weren thre 1s. 


369 


brid in® the castels’ of Ruben, an hundrid 
thousynde fifty” thousinde and a* thou- 
sinde foure’ hundrid and fifty ; thei schu- 
len go forth in the secounde place bi her 
cumpenyes. Sotheli the tabernacle of wit- 17 
nessyng schal be reisid* bi the offices of 
dekenes, and bi the* cumpenyes ‘of hem>; 
as it schal be reisid4, so and® it schal be 
takun doun; alle? schulen go forth bi her 
places and ordris. The castels" of the sones 18 
of Effraym schulen be at the west coost, 
of whiche the prince was Elisama, the 
sone of Amyud; and al the oost of hisi9 
fi3teris, that weren noumbrid, fourti thou- 
synde and fyue hundrid. And with hem 20 
was the lynage of ‘the sones of Manasses’, 
of whiche the prince was Gamaliel, the 
sone of Fadassur; al the oost of hise fi3t-21 
eris, that weren noumbrid, twok and thretti 
thousande and two hundrid. In the lynage22 
of the sones of Beniamyn the prince was 
Abidan, the sone of Gedeon; and al thees 
oost of hise fiz3teris, that weren noumbrid, 
fyue! and thretti thousynde and foure hun- 
drid. Alle™ that weren noumbrid in the 24 
castels" of Effrayin weren an hundrid 
thousynde and ei3te thousynde and oon 
hundrid; thei schulen go forth ‘the thridde® 
bi her cumpenyes. At the ‘part of the25 
north? the sones of Dan settiden tentis, of 
whiche the prince was Abiezer, the sone 
of Amysaddai; al the oost of hise fi3teris, 26 
that weren noumbrid, two and sixti™ thou- 
synde and seuene hundrid. Men* of the 27 
lynage of Aser settiden tentis bisidis hym‘, 
of whiche the prince was Fegiel, the sone 
of Ochran; and al the oost of hise fizteris, 28 
that weren noumbrid, fourti" thousynde 
‘and a thousyndeY and fyue hundrid. Of29 
the lynage of the sones of Neptalym the 
prince was Ahira, the sone of Henam; 
and al the oost of hise fijteris, thre” and 30 
fifti thousynde and foure hundrid. Alles: 
that weren noumbrid in the castels* of Dan 


Upaartee E. VY settynge 4. 


aheris. > Om. 1s. 
htentis1s. i Manasse 
© in the thridde place 1s. 
u weren oon and fourti 1. 


Z reisid vp 18. 
& alle thet 1s. 
n tentis 18. 

t hem w. 
x tentis Is. 


3B 


370 


the sones of Yrael, bi howsis of her kyn- 
redes, and companyes of the dyuydid oost, 
six hundrid thre thowsyndes fyue hun- 

33 drid and fifti. Leuytes forsothe ben not 
noumbred among the sones of Yrael; so 

34 forsothe comaundide God to Moyses. And 
the sones of Yrael diden after alle thinges 
that the Lord comaundide; thei settiden’ 
tentes bi her companyes, and goon forthe 
bi meyneis, and howses of her fadres. 


CAP. III. 


1 hes ben the generaciouns of Aaron 
and of Moyses, in the day that the Lord 
spak to Moises, in the mownt of Synay. 

2And thes the names of the sones of Aa- 
ron; the first goten of hym Nadab; aftir- 
ward, Abyu, and Eliazar, and Ythamar ; 

3thes the names of the sones of Aaron, 
prestis, that ben anoynt, and of whom 
the hoondes fulfillid and sacrid ben, that 
4thei vsen preesthod. Nadab and Abyu 
dieden, whanne thei offerden alien fier in 
the si3t of the Lord, in desert of Synay, 
with outen free children; and Eliazar and 
Ythamar vseden preesthod before Aaron 
sher fader. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 
éseiynge, Sett* the lynage of Leuy, and 
mak stonde in the si3t of Aarony, the 
7preest, that thei mynystren to him; and 
waken, and weyten aboute al thing that 
to the heryynge perteyneth of the multi- 
tude, before the tabernacle of witness- 
synge; aud that thei kepen the vessels of 
the tabernacle, seruynge in the seruyce” 
9of hym. And thow shalt 3yue bi 3iftis? 
Leuytes to Aaron, and to the sones of hym, 
to the whiche thei ben take of the sones 
ioof Yrael. Aaron forsothe and his sones 


W setten E. * sett to BDEN. 


y and senene nis. 2 laste éyme ts. 
jeden 1s. £ Aaronus sonus Is. 
he gendride s._ the sones of Aaron 1s. 
siz3ts. Philp pr.m. 4 vsiden 1s. 
departe thon fro other lynagis s. 
Ww Om. 1s. * the multitude isw. 


T seiynge s. 
t make it 1s. 
Yof it 1 


NUMBERS. 


y Om. E sec.m. 


a and thre plures. 
& bigetun sone was 1. gendrid was s. 
lfulfillid with blessyngis 1s. 


TI. 33—III. ro. 


weren an hundrid thousynde seueneY and 
fifti thousynde and sixe hundrid; thei 
schulen go forth the laste. This is thes2 
noumbre of the sones of Israel, bi the 
housis of her kynredis, and bi cumpenyes 
of the oost departid, sixe hundrid thou- 
synde thre* thousynde fyue’ hundrid and 
fifti. Sotheli the dekenes weren not noum-33 
brid among the sones of Israel; for God 
comaundide so to Moises. And the sones34 
of Israel diden bi® alle thingis whiche 
the Lord comaundide; thei settiden tentis 
bi her cumpenyes, and 3eden® forth bi the 
meynees, and housis of her fadris. 


CAP. iE 


These ben the generaciouns of Aaron1 
and of Moises, in the dai in which the 
Lord spak to Moises, in the hil of Synay. 
And these ben the names of ‘the sones of2 
Aaron; his first gendrid’, Nadab; aftir- 
ward), Abyu, and Eleazar, and Ythamar; 
these ben the names of ‘Aarons sones*,3 
preestis, that weren anoyntid, and whos 
hondis weren fillid! and halewid™, that 
thei schulden ‘be set in” preesthod. Nadab« 
and Abyu, whanne thei offeriden alien fier 
in the ‘si3t of the Lord®, in the deseert? of 
Synay, weren deed without fre children; 
and Eleazar and Ythamar ‘weren set in‘ 
preesthod bifor Aaron hir fadir. And thes 
Lord spak to Moises, ‘and seide’, ‘Presente 6 
thon’ the lynage of Leuy, and make* to 
stonde in the si3t of Aaron, preest", that 
thei mynystre to hym; and wake’, and7 
that thei kepe what euer thing perteyneth 
to the” religioun of multitude*, bifor the 
tabernacle of witnessyng; and that theis 
kepe the vessels of the tabernacle, and 
serue in the seruyce therofY. And thoug 
schalt 3yue bi fre 3ifte the Leuytist to + tat is, the 
Aaron and hise” sones, to whiche* thei ben °22°°,2f the Iy- 


nage of Leuy. 
jouun of the sones of Israel. Sotheli thou 10 ®°o**8*- 


% seruyses E. ® 3ifte BDEFH. 


bfonre w. © Om.1s. aftir thatis. ¢ thei 
haftir him he gaat 1. aftir him 


m sacrid Is. 2 yse is. © Lordis 


$8 presente thou, ether departe thou fro olher BCEKNYQX. 
u the preest Is. 
2 to hise Is. 


Vv wake in the tabernacle maardis 1s. 
® whom 1, : 


III, 11—28. 


thow shalt ordeyne vpon the heriynge of 
preesthod ; of another kynrede that goth 
11to mynystre, he shal die. And the Lord 
lzspak to Moyses, seiynge, I toke the Le- 
uytes fro the sones of Yrael for al the 
firste geten that openeth the wombe in the 
sones of Yrael; and thei shulen be my 
i3Leuytes, myn is forsothe al the first 
goten; sithen I smoot the first gotun in 
the loond of Egipte, I halowide to me 
al thing that is first born in Yrael; fro 
man vnto beeste myn thei ben; I the 
14Lord. And the Lord spak to Moyses, in 
isdesert of Synay, seiynge, Noumbre the 
sones of Leuy, bi the howses of her fa- 
ders, and meyneis, eche maal from a> 
i¢moneth and aboue. And Moyses noum- 
17 bred, as the Lord comaundide. And there 
ben founden the sones of Leuy, bi her 
names, Gerson, and Caath, and Merary ; 
isthe sones of Gerson, Lebyn, and Semey ; 
19 the sones of Caath, Amram, and Jessaar, 
20and Ebron, and Osiel; the sones of Me- 
2irary, Mooly, and Musy. Of Gerson weren 
twey meyneis, Lebyntica, and Semetica; 
220f the whiche is noumbrid a puple of 
maal kynde, fro o monet and aboue, se- 
23uen thowsyndes and fyue hundred. Thes 
after the tabernacle shulen sette tentis at 
24 the west, vndur the prince Eliasaph, the 
25 sone of Jael. And thei shulen hauewacches 
in the tabernacle of the boond of pees, 
thilke® tabernacle, and his couertour, the 
tente that is drawen before the 3ates of 
the roof of witnessynge of boond of pees; 
2¢and the cortyns of the porche, and the 
tente that is hongid in the entre of the 
porche of the tabernacle, and al thing 
that to the rijt of the auter perteyneth, 
the coordes of the tabernacle, and alle 
27 vsable thinges of it. The kynred of Caath 
shal haue the puples Amramytas, Jessaa- 
2erytas, and Ebronytis, and Esielites; thes 
ben the meyneis of Caatices, noumbrid bi 


> 00 BDEFH. 


> vpon 1s. 
Sfor1. b bigetun 1. 
© hane halewide rs. 
t nonmbride hem 18. 
yngis 1s. 
& that 1s. 


¢ straungere of another lynage 1s. 
iamong1. dekenes 1. 

P vnto Is. to 0 sec.nl. 
uOm.1. VY Om. plures. 
® therof thei shulen kepe s. 
hentree is. !Om.s.  vus is. 


NUMBERS. 


4 serue in the tabernacle 1s. 
1 goten 1. 

q4Om.s. 

w And of 1s. 

btentiss. ¢ that rs. 


10m. c, 


371 


schalt ordeyne Aaron and hise sones on® 

the religioun of preesthod; a straungere‘y, 

that neijeth for to mynystre’, schal die. is not of the 

And the Lord spak to Moyses, ‘and seide®, 11 pa eey: 

Y haue take the Leuytis‘ of8 the sones of 12 

Israel for ech firste gendrid’ thing that 

openeth the womb ini the sones of Israel ; 

and the Leuytis* schulen be myne, for ech 13 

firste gendrid! thing is myn; sithen™ Y 

smoot the firste gendrid" in the lond of 

Egipt, Y halewide® to me what euer thing 

is borun first in Israel; fro man ‘til toP 

beest thei ben myne; Y am the Lord. 

And the Lord spak to Moises in the de-14 

seert of Synay, and seide, Noumbre thou 1s 

the sones of Leuy bi ‘the housis of her fa- 

dris', and bi meynees’, ech male fro o 

monethe and aboue. Moises noumbride'’, 16 

as the Lord comaundide. And the sones17 

of Leuy weren foundun, bi her names, 

Gerson, and Caath, and Merary ; the sones 1s 

of Gerson weven Lebny, and Semey; the 19 

sones of Caath weren" Amram, and Jes- 

saar, Hebron, and Oziel; and’ the sones2o0 

of Merari weren Mooly, and Musi. Of¥2) 

Gerson weren twei meynees, of Lebny, and 

of Semei; of whiche the puple of malege 

kynde was noumbrid, fro 0 monethe and 

aboue, seuene thousynde and fyue hundrid. 

These schulen sette tentis aftir* the taber-23 

nacle at the west’, vndur the prince Elia-24 

saph, the sone of Jahel. And thei schu-2s 

len haue kepyngis? in the tabernacle of 

boond of pees, the tabernacle it silf, and 

the hilyng therof*, the tente>{ which® is + tn Ebru itis, 

drawun bifor the 3atis of the hilyng of {he reylof the 

the’ witnessyng of boond® of pees; and the 26 s7°'s stot 

curteyns of the greet street‘, also the tente _ the tabernacle 
s . . . and auteer. bi 

which® is hangid in the entryng of the — cumpas. exax, 

greet street" of the tabernacle, and what 

euer thing perteyneth to the! custom* of 

the auter, the cordis of the tabernacle, and 

al the! purtenaunce™ therof||.. The kynrede 27 iit Ebren it is, 

of Caath schal haue" the puplis of Am- i See's 


uice therof. Kx. 


t+ «@ straunger, 
that is, which 


e thnke e. 


@ seiynge s. f dekens 1s. 
2 gendrid thing 1s. 


m sith the tyme s. 
8 her meynees Is. 


r her fadris housis ts. 
x bihynde 1s, Ywest partis. 7 the kep- 

4QOm.s. ¢€the boond is. f entree ts. 
™ purtenauncis c. ® haue in waard s. 


3 BQ 


372 


her names, of al maal kynd, fro a4 moneth 
and aboue, ei3t thousyndes and six hun- 
2odrith. And thei shulen haue bisy wardes 
of the seyntuarie, and thei shulen sette 
30 tentes at the sowth plage; and the prince 
of hem shal be Elyzaphan, the sone of 
31 Oziel**, And thei shulen kepe the ark, and 
the table, and the candelstik, the auters, 
and the vessels of the seyntuarie in the 
which it is mynystryd, and the veyl, and 
32a] siche maner purtenaunce. The prince 
forsothe of the princes of Leuytes, Elea- 
zar, the sone of Aaron, preest®; and he 
shal be vpon the wakers of the warde of 
33 the seyntuarie. And forsothe of Merarye 
shal be puples, Moolites‘, and Musites, 
34noumbred bi her names, of al maal kynde 
fro o moneth and aboue, six thousyndes 
35and two hundreth; the prynce of hem 
Suryel, the sone of Abiahiel; in the north 
3¢plage thei shulen sette tentes. There 
shulen be vnder the warde of hem the 
tables of the tabernacle, and the berynge 
staues, and the pilers, and the feet® of 
hem, and alle thinges that to suche maner* 
37 heriynge perteynen!, and the pilers of the 
porche bi enuyroun, with her feet, and 
33 the stakis, with the coordes. Thei shulen 
sette tentes before the tabernacle of the 
boond of pees, that is, at the eest plage, 
Moyses, and Aaron with his sones, hau- 
ynge warde of the seyntuarye, in the 
mydil of the sones of Yrael; ‘who soj 
39 euer* alien come ther to, shal die. Alle the 
Leuytes, the whiche noumbreden Moises 
and Aaron, after the heest of the Lord, 
bi her meyneis, in maal kynde, fro o 
moneth and aboue, weren two and twenti 
40 thousyndes. And the Lord seith to Moyses, 
Noumbre the firste geten of maal kynde 
of the sones of Israel, fro o moneth and 
aboue; and thou shalt haue the sowm of 


dor. dd Oriel 4. 


: € the precst E pr.m. 
1 
peteynen 4. 


Jwhose Berm. & er £. 


NUMBERS. 


III. 29—40. 


ram, and° of Jessaar, and of Ebron, and of 
Ozicl; these ben the meynees of Caathitis, 28 
noumbrid bi her names, alle of male kynde, 
fro o monethe and aboue, ei3te thousynde 
and sixe hundrid. Thei? schulen haue29 
kepyngisi of" the seyntuarie, and schulen’ 
sette tentist at the sonth coost"; and ‘the3o 
prince of hemY schal be Elisaphan, the 
sone of Oziel. And thei schulen kepe the 3: 
arke, and the boord”, and the candilstike, 
the auters, and vesselis* of the seyntuarie 
in whicheY it is mynystrid2, and the veil, 
and al sich* purtenaunce. Sotheli thes 
prince of princis of Leuytis schal be Elea- 
zar, the sone of Aaron, preest®; and he 
schal be on* the keperis of the kepyng of 
the seyntuarie. And sotheli of Merary33 
schulen be the puplis of Mooli, and of 
Musi, noumbrid bi her names, alle of male 34 
kynde fro o monethe and aboue, sixe thou- 
synde and two hundrid; ‘the prince of hem® 35 
schal be Suriel, the sone of Abiahiel; thei 
schulen sette tentis’ in the north coost. 
And vndur ‘the kepyng of hem! schulen36 
be the tablis of the tabernacle, and the 
barris*, and the pileris, and ‘the founde- 
mentis of tho!, and™ alle thingis that per- 
teynen to sich ournyng, and the" pileris of37 
the greet street® bi cumpas, with her foun- 
dementisP, and the stakis with coordis‘. 
Forsothe Moises and Aaron with hise sones 38 
schulen sette tentis™ bifor the tabernacle of 
boond of pees, that is, at the eest coost, 
and schulen’ haue the kepingt of the seyn- 
tuarie, in the" myddis of the sones of Is- 
rael; what euer alien neizeth’{, he schal + ne 
die. Alle the Leuytis, whiche Moises and 39 ue da 
Aaron noumbriden, bi comaundement of “7: &°*88*- 
the Lord, bi her meynees, in male kynde, 
fro o monethe and aboue, were two and 
twenti® thousynd. And the Lord seidey 40 
to Moises, Noumbre thou the firste gen- 


+ netzith, that 


f in Moolites p. & footes E. h a maner BDEFN. 


°Om. w. Pthees is. 4 the kepyngis c. bisy waardis 1s. kepynge w. ‘in p. thei schulen rs. t her 


tentis 1s. © coost tkerof's. V her prince 1s. 
2Z sich manere Is. # Om. Is. 
& her prince 1s. © her tentis1s. ‘her keping ts. 
nOm.w. entree rs.  P baasis 1. 
keping s. 4% Om. 1s. 
y spak gs. 


Ww table ts. 
b preestis A prim. 1. 
k beringe staues rs. 
q her coordis 1s. 
V nelzith ther do 1. neizith therto without leeue s. 


yY the whiche 1. 2 serned 1s. 
dyponis. ¢ Om. isx. f the rs, 

1 her foundementis 1s. ™Om.s. 
Ther tentists. $theischulents.  t cheef 
w the heest 1. heests.  ¥ xij s. 


x the vesselis is. 
¢ the preest 1. 


Ia —IV. 3. 


4ihem; and thon shalt take Leuitis to me 
for alle the first gotyn of the sones of 
Israel ; [am the Lord; and the beestis of 
hem for alle the first gotyn of the sones 
42of Israel. And Moises tolde, as the Lord 
comaundide, the first goten of the sones 
430f Israel; and there weren maalis bi her 
names, fro o moneth and aboue, two and 
twenti thousandis two hundrid and se- 
a4uenti and thre. And the Lord spak to 
45 Moises, seiynge, 'T'ak Leuites for the first 
goten of the sones of Yrael, and the 
beestis of Lenytes for the beestis of hem, 
and Lenytes shulen be myn; I am the 
46 Lord. In the prijs forsothe of two hundrith 
seuenti and thre, that passen the noumbre 
of Leuytes, of the fyrst gotun of the sones 
47o0f Yrael, thow shalt take fyue siclis bi 
eche heedes, at the mesure of the seyntu- 
asarie; acicle hath twenti halfpens ; and 
thou shalt 3yue the money.to Aaron and 
his sones, the prijs of hem that ben abone. 
49 Therfor Moyses toke the money of hem 


that weren more ouer, and the whiche thei. 


a3enbou3ten of the Leuytes, for the first 
50 gotun of the sones of Yrael, of a thousynd 
thre hundrid and fyue and sixti sicles, 
si after the wei3t of the seyntuarie; and he 
jaue it to Aaron and his sones, after the 
word that the Lord comaundide to hym. 


CARO AV. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses and Aa- 
2ron, seyynge, Take the sowm of the sones 
of Caath, fro the myddil of Leuytes, bi 
3 houses, and her meyneis, fro the thrytti! 
jeer and aboue vnto the fifty™ 3eer, of alle 


I thrittith eben. 


zbigetuni. ®Om.1. > noumbre 1s. 
& bigetun 1. h and two A pr.m. 18. 
8 the Leuytis 1s. 9° take thou for s. 

t Om.s. the Leuytis of w. ® bigetun 1. 
Y ben noumbrid 1s. 2 noumbrid aboue 1s. 
thre s, f and sixti kKLMowx. 


meynees 1. bi her meynees s. 


P Om. s. 


m ynto Is. 


NUMBERS. 


€ the Leuytis 1s. 
i the Leuytis 18. 

q and seuenti crs. 

v¥ Om. DIMORT sec.m. W. 
a the whiche 1. 
& the seyntuarie 1s. 


373 


drid? children* of male kynde of the sones 
of Israel, fro o monethe and aboue;-and 
thou schalt haue the summe? of hem; and 
thou schalt take Leuytis® to me for alle4i 
the firste gendrid‘ of the sones of Israel ; 
Y am the® Lord; and thou schalt take 
‘the beestis of hem! for alle the firste gen- 
drid® of the sones of Israel. And:as the 42 
Lord comaundide, Moises noumbride the 
firste gendrid® children of the sones of Is- 
rael; and the males weren bi her names, 43 
fro o monethe and aboue, two and twenti 
thousynde two! hundrid and seuenti and 
thre. And the Lord spak to Moises, and 44 
seide, Take thou Leuytis! for the firste 45 
gendrid* children! of the sones of Israel, 
and the™ beestis of Leuytis" for® the beestis 
of hein, and the Leuytis schulen be myne; 
Yam the? Lord. Forsothe in the prijs of 46 
two hundrid seuenti4 and' thre’, that passen 
the noumbre of ‘Leuytis, oft the firste gen- 
drid® children’ of the sones of Israel, thou 47 
schalt take fyue ciclis bi ech heed, at the 
mesure of seyntuarie’; a sicle hath xx. 
halpens; and thou schalt 3yue the* money 48 
to Aaron and to hise sones, the prijs of 
hem: that ben’ aboue. Therfor Moises 49 
took the money of hem that weren abone?, 
and whiche* thei hadden a3enbou3t of the” 
Leuytis, for the firste gendrid° of the’ sones 
of Israel, a thousand thre® hundrid sixtifs0 
and fyue of siclis, bi the wei3te of seyn- 
tuarie® ; and he 3af that money to Aarons 
and to hise sones, bi the word which" the 
Lord comaundide to hym. 


CAP. IV. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and to1 
Aaron, and seide’, Take thou the sumimek 2 
of the sones of Caath, fro the myddis of 
Leuytis, bi her housis and meynees!, fros 
the threttithe 3eer and aboue ‘til to™ the 


m fyftithe spern. 


dbigetun rt. ¢Om.s.  f her beestis 1s. 

k bigetun 1. 10Om..imos. ™ take the 1. 
r Om. peLos. § thre persoonus 1s. 
w the seyntuarie 1s. * that 1s. 
bOm. Bs. Cbigetent. ¢Om.c. ¢and 
hthatis. ‘'heseide1s. *noumbreis. 1! her 


374 


that goon in, that thei stonden and my- 
nystren in the tabernacle of the boond of 
apees. This is the heriynge of the sones 
of Caath; the tabernacle of the boond of 
spees, and the holi of halowis shulen go 
yn Aaron and his sones, whanne the 
tentis ben to be moued; and thei shulen 
sette down" the veile that hongith before 
the 3atis, and thei shulen wrap with ynne 
6it the ark of witnessynge; and thei shu- 
len eftsones couer it with the conerynge 
of iacynetyne skynnes, and thei shulen 
strecche aboue a mantel al iacynctyne, 
and thei shulen lIede in°® the berynge 
7staues. The table forsothe of proposicioun 
thei shulen wrappe with ynne the iacyne- 
tyne mantil, and thei shulen putte with 
it the encenseris, and goldun morters, litil 
cuppes, and the eryd chalices to the sacri- 
fices of licours to ben heelde ; looues euer- 
smore shulen be in it. And thei shulen 
strecche there aboue the reed mantil, the 
whiche eft thei shulen couer with the 
conerynge of iacynctyn skynnes, and thei 
9shulen lede ynne the berynge staues. And 
thei shulen take the iacynetyn mantil, 
with the which thei shulen couer the 
candelstik, with theP lanterns, and her 
toonges, and snyters!, and with alle the 
vessels of oyle, the whiche ben necessary 
1oto the lanterns to be maad redi; and 
vpon alle thei shulen putte the couerynge 
of iacynetyn skymnes, and thei shulen 
irlede ynne her berynge staues. Also and 
the goldun auter thei shulen wrappe with 
ynne the iacynctyn clothing; and thei 
shulen strecche ont there aboue the couer- 
ynge of iacynetyn skynnes, and thei shiu- 
12len lede yn the beryng staues. Alle the 
vessels, with the whiche it is mynystryd 
in the seyntuary, thei shulen wrappe with 


n adoun BDEFI. 


© the boond 1s. © Om. s. P the boond 1, 
skynnys s. ¢ Om. ms. 
staness. *ofn. YOm. plures. 2 table ts. 


forth «x. » the cenceris 1s. ¢ to schede with 1s. 


h jacinctyn skynnus ts. 1 leede plures. Jede or bere s. 
P jacinctyn skynnus Is. 
¥ jacinctyn skynnus Is. 


vessels Is. ®yponis. © thees thingis rs. 
berynge staues 1s. § Om.3s.  t aboue it 1s. 
staues 1s. * Also thei 1s. Y serned 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


© Om. 4. 


a hile zé 1s. 
¥ leede plures. lede or bere s. VY Om. 1s. al in L. y 
@ proposicionn ether of selling forth BcGNQx. that is, setting 
d Om. 1s. 


Z abone dé 1s. 


IV. 4——12. 


fiftithe 3eer, of alle that entren, that thei 
stonde and mynystre in the tabernacle of 
boond® of pees. This is the religioun of 4 
the sones of Caath; Aaron and his sones 
schulen entren in to the® tabernacle of 
boond? of pees, and in to the hooli of 
hooli thingis, whanne the tentis schulen bes 
moued; and thei schulen do doun the veil 
that hangith bifore the 3atis, and thei schu- 
len wlappe in it the arke of witnessyng ; 
and thei schulen hile’ eft with a veil ofe 
‘skynnys ef iacynt’, and thei schuwlen 
stretche forth aboue a mentil al' of ia- 
cynt, and thei schulen putte" in’ barris® 
‘on* the schuldris of the bererisy. Also7 
thei schulen wlappe the boord? of proposi- 
cioun* in a mentil of iacynt, and thei schu- 
len putte therwith cenceris”, and morteris 
of gold, litil cuppis, and grete cuppis to® 
fletyng sacrifices ‘to be sched‘; looues schu- 
len euere be in the boord®. And thei schu-s 
len strecche forth abouef a reed mentil, 
which® thei schulen hile eft with an hilyng 
of ‘skynnes of iacynt, and thei schulen 
putte! yn barris*. Thei schulen take alsoo 
a mentil of iacynt with which! thei schulen 
hile the candilstike, with hise lanternes, 
and tongis, and snytels, and alle the ‘ves- 
sels of oile™ that ben nedeful to the lan- 
ternes to be ordeyned; and on” alle thingis® 10 
thei schulen putte an hilyng of ‘skynnys 
of iacynt?,and thei schulen putte? in barris". 
Also and’ thei schulen wlappe the goldunu 
auter in a clooth of iacynt; and thei 
schulen stretche forth aboue’ an hilyng of 
‘skynnys of iacynt®, and thei schulen putte’ 
in barris*. Thei* schulen wlappe in aiz 
mentil of iacynt alle the vessels in whiche 
it is mynystridY in the seyntuarie, and 
thei schulen strecche forth aboue’ an hil- 
yng of ‘skynnys of iacynt*, and thei schu- 


Pthe sper. 11 liztters «. 


¥ the sky of iacinctyne 1. iacinctyne 
w beringe staues 1. the beringe 
e table 1s. fther abone 1s. & the which 1. 
k the berynge staues 1s. 1 which also rs. ™ oile 
9 leede plures. bring 1s. * the 
Vv leede plures. W berynge 
® jacinctyn skinnes 5. 


IV. 13-21. 


inne the iaeynetyn mantel, and strecch 
there aboue a couertour of iacyuctyn 
skyunes, and thei shulen lede yn the ber- 
13 ynge staues. But and the auter thei shu- 
len clense with asken, and thei shulen 
14 wrappe it with a purpur clothinge. And 
thei shulen putt with it alle the vesselis, 
the whiche thei vsen in the seruyee of it, 
that is, the resseyuable thinges of fiers, 
fleshokis, and ‘hokys of thre teeth’, and 
hokes, and fyre pannes; alle the vessels 
of the auter thei shulen couer togyder 
with a couerynge of iacynctyn skynnes, 
and thei shulen lede yn the berynge 
is staues. And whanne Aaron and his sones 
han inwrappid the seyntuary, and alle the 
vessels of it, in the meuynge of tentes, 
thanne shulen goon yn the* sones of 
Caath, that thei beren with ynne wrap- 
pid, and that thei touchen not the vessels 
icof the seyntuary, lest thei dien. Thes 
ben the charges of the sones of Caath, in 
the tabernacle of thet boond of pees, vpon 
whom shal be Eliazar, the sone of Aaron 
preest" ; to whos cure it perteyneth oyle 
to the lanterns to be maad redi, and the 
encense of composicioun, and the sacrifice 
that euermore is offred, and the oyle of 
anoyntinge, and what-euer thing to the 
heriynge ‘of the tabernacle’ perteyneth, 
and of alle the vessels that ben in the 
17seyntuarye. And the Lord spak to Moyses 
isand Aaron, seyynge, Wole 3e not lese the 
puple of Caath fro the myddel of Le- 
1guytes; but this doth to hem, that thiei 
lyuen, and dien not, if thei towchen the 
holi thingis of halowes. Aaron and his 
sones shulen go yn, and thei shulen dys- 
pose the werkis of echon, and thei shulen 
20dyuyde what eny owith to bere. Other 
thur3 no euriouste seen that ben in the 
seyntuarye, before that thei ben inwrap- 


NUMBERS. 


375 


len putte” yn barris®. But also thei sehu-13 
len clense the auter{ fro aische*, and thei 
sehulen wlappe it in a clooth of purpur. 
And thei schulen putte with it alle vessels® 
whiche thei vsen in the seruyee therof, 
that is, ressettis’ of firist, tongis®, and 
fleischokis, hokis', and censeris*, ether! 
pannys of coolis; thei sechulen hile alle 
the vessels of the auter togidere in a veil 
of ‘skynnes of iaeynt™, and thei sehulen 
putte™™ in barris®. And whanne Aaron and 15 
hise sones han wlappid the seyntuarie, and 
alle vessels® therof, in the mouyng? of ° 
tentis!, thanne the sones of Caath schulen' 
entre, that thei bere the thingis wlappid’, 
and touche’ not the" vessels of the seyn- 
tuarie, lest thei dien. Thes ben the bir-16 
thuns’ of the sones of Caath, in the taber- 
nacle of boond” of pees, on* whiche Elea- 
zar, the sone of Aaron, preest’, sehal be ; to 
whois cure ‘the oile? perteyneth to ordeyne 
lanternes*, and the encense which” is maad 
bi craft, and the sacrifice which” is offrid 
euere®, and the oile of anoyntyng, and 
what euere thing perteyneth to the ournyng 
of the tabernacle, and of alle vessels that 
ben in the® seyntuarie. And the Lordi 
spak to Moises and to Aaron, and seide, 
Nyle 3e leese the puple of Caath fro the 1s 
myddis of Leuytis®; but do 3e this thing 19 
to hem, that thei lyue, and die not, if thei 
touchen the hooli of hooli thingis. Aaron 
and hise sones sehulen entre, and thei 
schulen dispose the werkis of alle men', 
and thei schulen departe! ‘what who* ow- 
ith to! bere. Othere imen se not™ bi ony" 20 
euriouste® tho thingis that ben in the seyn- 
tuarie, bifore that tho? ben wlappid‘; ellis 
thei sehulen die. And the Lord spak to21 
Moises, and seide, T'ake thou the summe* 22 
also of the sones of Gerson, bi her housis, 
and meyuees, and kynredis; noumbre thou’ 


t+ clense the 

auter, ete. of 

brent sacrifices. 

Tare here, CKN 
Max, 


’ brandyrys & pr.m. 8 Om. spern. ¢ Om. gpg sec.m. ru. ™ the preest £ prem. Y Om. 4. 


» leede plures. 


the berynge staues Is. 
resettis Is. 


& fier 1s. ) the tongis s. 
skynnus 1s. ™ leede plures. 

tOm.s. § wlappid to gidre ts. 
Ythe preest 1. 2 Om, s. 
yn ech day Bc. euere more Is. 

sones of Cuath 1. Caaths sones s. 
"no 18s. ©curiouste or sleizt 1s. P tho thingis ts. 


t tonche thei Is. 


4 the vessels rs. 


4 gisshis G. 
i and othere hokis 1s. 
8 the beringe staues 1s. 
u Om. zB. 
@ of the lanternes 1. the oile of the lanternes s. 
e thi Ko. 
i departe to ech 18. 
4 wlappid togidre 1s. * noumbre 1s. 


€ the vessels A prim. IsT prom. X sec.m.  f the 
k the cenceris 1s. ! or the ts. ™ iacinctyn 
Premouyng Is. 4 the tentis Is. 
w the boond 1s. * ypon 1s. 
bthatis. ¢ euere, that is, 
f leese or distries. & the Leuytiss. } the 
k that that hem is. 1] Om. plures. ™ Om. 18. 
8 thou hem 1s, 


© the vessels 1. 
Vv chargis Is. 


376 


21 pid, ellis thei shulden die. And the Lord 
22spak to Moyses, seiynge, Tak also the 
sowm of the sones of Gerson, bi howses, 
23 and meyneis, and his kynredes; fro thretti 
jeer and aboue and vnto the'Y 3eres of 
: fifti, noumbre alle that goon yn, and 
seruen in the tabernacle of the boond of 
24pees. This is the office of the meyne of 
Gersonytes, that thei beren cortyns” of 
the tabernacle, and the roof of the boond 
250f pees, that other couertour, and vpon 
alle the iacynctyn couerynge, and the 
tente that hongith in the entre of the ta- 
26bernacle of the boond of pees; the cor- 
tyns of the porche, and the veil in the 
27entre that is before the tabernacle. Alle 
thingis that perteynen* to the auter, litil 
coordes, and the vessels of seruyce, co- 
maundynge Aaron and his sones, the 
sones of Gerson shulen bere; and eche 
shal knowe to what charge thei owen to 
28be takun. This is the heriynge of the 
meyneis’ of Gersonytes, in the tabernacle 
of the boond of pees; and thei shulen be 
yndir the hoond of Ythamar, the sone of 
29 Aaron, preest”?. The sones forsothe of 
Merarye, bi meyneis and howses of her 
30fadris, thou shalt noumbre, fro thretti 
3eer and aboue vnto the 3eers of fifti, alle 
that goon into the office of his seruyce, 
and heriynge of the boond of pees of wit- 
ainessynge. Thes ben the charges of hem; 
thei shulen bere the tablis of the taber- 
nacle, and his berynge staues, the pilers, 
szand the feet* of hem; and the pilers of 
the porche bi enuyronn, with her feet, 
and stakys, and her coordes; alle vessels 
and purtenaunce at noumbre thei shulen 
33take, and so thei shulen bere. This is 
the office of the meyne of Merarytes, and 
the seruyce in the tabernacle of the boond 
of pees; and thei shulen be vndir the 
hoond of Ythamar, the sone of Aaron, 


NUMBERS. 


IV. 22——34. 


fro thretti 3eer and aboue ‘til to' fifti® 3eer 23 
alle that entren and mynystren’ in the ta- 
bernacle of boond” of pees. This is the24 
office of the sones of Gersonytis, that thei 
bere the curteyns of the tabernacle, and 
the roof* of the boond of pees, an other 
hilyng, and aY veil of iacynt aboue? alle2s 
thingis, and the tente which* hangith in 
the entryng> of the tabernacle of the® 
boond of pees; and the curteyns of the26 
greet street’, and the veil in the entryng*f, 
‘which veil! is bifor the tabernacle. Whanne 27 
Aaron comaundith and hise soues, the sones 
of Gerson schulen bere alle thingis that 
perteynen to the auter, the coordis, and 
vessels§ of seruyce}; and alle schulen® 
wite, to what charge thei owen to be 
boundun. This is the office of the meynee! 2s 
of Gersonytis, in the tabernacle of boond of 
pees; and thei schulen be vndur the hond* 
of Ythamar, the sone of Aaron, preest. 
Also thou schalt noumbre the sones of29 
Merary, bi the meynees and housis of her 
fadris, fro thretti 3eer and aboue ‘til to! so 
fifti jeer, alle that entren to the office of 
her seruice, and to the ournyng of the 
boond of pees of witnessyng. These bensi 
‘the chargis of hem™; thei schulen bere 
the tablis of the tabernacle, and the barris® 
therof, the pilers and her foundementis; 
also the pilers of the greet street? bi cum-32 
pas, with her foundementis, and her? stakis, 
and coordis1; thei’ schulen take alle in- 
strumentis’ and purtenaunce't at" noumbre, 
and so thei schulen bere’. This is the33 
office of ‘the meynee of” Meraritis, and 
the seruyce in the tabernacle of boond* of 
pees; and thei schulen be vndur the hond 
of Ythamar, the sone of Aaron, preest’. 
Therfor Moises and Aaron and the princes 34 
of the synagoge noumbriden the sones of 
Caath, bi the kynredis and housis of her 
fadris, fro thretti jeer and aboue ‘til to’3s 


w Om. Bprm. Wthe cortyns £. * perteyneth x. Ymeyne speri. 7 the preest £ pr.m. 8 footys E. 


t vnto 1s. to O sec. m. 
yng 18. y the rs. 
dentree is. entree is.  f that 1s. 
hond or warde s. ' vnto 1s. ™ her chargis 1s. 
coordis 1s. ° And thei is. 
kemis. *© Om.s. * the boond ts. 


u the fiftithe s. fiftith p. thrittithe r. 
Zz be aboue 1. that shal be aboue s. 
& the vessels 1s. 
1 beringe staues Is. 
s the instrumentis 1s. ¢ the purtenaunce 1s. ™ of the tabernacle bi 1s. ¥ bere 
y the preest 1. 


wthe boond 1s. * hil- 
¢ Om. plures. 

k hondis c. 
q her 


¥ seruen 18. 
a thats. > entree Is. 

h thet schulen 1s. i meynees cis. 
© entree Is. P with her ts. 


Z ynto Is. to O sec. 7m. 


+ and the veil 
in the entryng, 
in Ebreu it is 
thus, the veil of 
the dore of the 
grete street, 
which is bifor 
the tabernacle 
bi cumpas. cx 
Qx. 

t of seruyce, 

in Ebrew it is, 
of her seruyce, 
and vessels here 
ben takun for 
instrumentis, 
Lire here. cx 


1V. 35—49. 


34 preest», Thanne Moyses and Aaron, and 
the princes of the synagoge, noumbreden 
the sones of Caath, bi kynredes, and 


35 howses of her fadres, fro thretti jeer and - 


aboue vnto fifti® jeer, alle that goon into 
the sernyce of the tabernacle of the boond 
36 of pees; and there ben foundun two thow- 
37 syndes senen hundred and fifti. This is 
the noumbre of the sones* of Caath, that 
goon’ into the tabernacle of the boond of 
pees; ‘thes noumbredenf Moyses and Aa- 
ron, aftir the word of the Lord, bi the 
38hoond of Moyses. And sones® of Gerson 
ben noumbred, bi kynredes, and howses 
390f her fadris, fro thretti 3eer and abone 
vnto the fiftith 3eer, alle that goon yn 
that thei mynystren in the tabernacle of 
40 the boond of pees; and there ben foundun 
two thowsynd six hundreth and thretti. 
41 This is the puple of Gersonytes, the 
which noumbreden Moyses and Aaron, 
42after the word of the Lord. The sones 
of Merarye ben noumbred, bi kynredes, 
4zand houses of her fadres, fro thretti 3eer 
and aboue vnto the fifty! 3eer, alle that 
goon yn to fulfille the rytis of the taber- 
44nacle of the boond of pees; and ther ben 
foundun thre thowsyndes and two hun- 
4sdrith. This is the noumbre of the sones 
of Merarye, the whiche noumbreden 
Moyses and Aaron, aftir the heest of the 
46 Lord, bi the hoond of Moyses. Alle that 
ben noumbred of the Leuytes, and the 
whiche he dide to be noumbred at the 
name, of Moyses and Aaron, and the 
princes of Yrael, bi kynredis, and howses 
470f her fadres, fro thretti 3eer and aboue 
vnto the fifti* 3eer, goynge into the ser- 
nyce of the tabernacle, and berthens! to 
48be bore, and™ there weren togidir ei3t 
49 thowsyndes fyue hundrid and ei3ty. Af- 
ter the word of the Lord Moises noum- 
bred hem, echon aftir his office and his 
charges, as the Lord comaundide to hym. 


b the preest £ pr.m. 
noumbre 4. & the sones speFH. >» fyfty Bp. 
berthens r. ™ Om. BDEFH. 
el.s. 

h Lordis wordis 8. 
m fulfille 1s. or thes. 


&that is. » ynto Is. to o sec.m. 
kyndredis and housis 1. 
1 fiftithe c. 1. rLos. 
whiche 1. * heest Is. 


wvyntois. V1.8, W the chargis ther off 13. 


NUMBERS. 


¢ the fifti spru. the fiftithe z. 
i fiftythe £. 


4 serue Is. 
ithritti BikMNWw. xxx. plures. 
© the boond s. 
® the Leuytis 1s. Leuytis, that is, of the lynage of Leuy BceKa. 
x Lordis word 1s. 


377 


the fiftithe jeer, alle that entren to the 
seruyce of the tabernacle of boond of pees; 
and thei weren foundun two thousynde 36 
seuene hundrid and fifti. This is the37 
noumbre of the puple of Caath, which* 
entrith in to the tabernacle of boond of 
pees ; Moises and Aaron noumbriden these, 
bi the word of the Lord, bi the hond of 
Moises. And the sones of Gerson weren 3 
noumbrid, bi the kyneredis and housis of 
her fadris, fro thretti 3eer and aboue ‘til 39 
to” ‘the fiftithe® 3eer, alle that entren that 
thei mynystre‘ in the tabernacle of boond 
of pees; and thei weren foundin two thou- 40 
synde sixe hundrid and thretti. This isa 
the puple of Gersonytis, which! Moises 
and Aaron noumbriden§, bi the ‘word of 
the Lord®. And the sones of Merary 42 
weren noumbrid, bi the kynredis and 
housis of her fadris, fro threttithe! 3eer 43 
and abone ‘til to* ‘the fiftithe! 3ere, alle 
that entren to fille™ the customs, ether® 
seruices, of the tabernacle of boond® of 
pees; ‘and thei? weren foundun thre thou-44 
synde and two hundrid. This is thes 
nounbre of the sones of Merari, whiche! 
Moyses and Aaron noumbriden, bi ‘the co- 
maundement' of the Lord, bi the hoond of 
Moises. Alle that weren noumbrid of Le- 46 
uytis*, and whiche' Moyses and Aaron and 
the princes of Israel maden to be noum- 
brid, bi the kynredis and housis of her fa- 
dris, fro thretti 3eer and aboue ‘til to" ‘the 47 
fiftithe’ 3eer, and entriden to the seruyce 
of the tabernacle, and to bere chargis™, 
weren togidere ei3te thousynde fyue hun- 48 
drid and foure scoor. By the ‘word of the 49 
Lord* Moises noumbride hem, ech inan bi 
his office and hise chargis, as the Lord co- 
maundide to hym. 


dpeple speFH. © goth spEeFi scc.m. this 
k fiftythe 2. the berthens ganz. ther 


& noumbriden bi the 
k ynto 1s. to 0 scc.m. 
P Om. Isw. and rt sec.m. 4 the 
t the whiche 1. 


eOm.s. f that 1s. 


3c 


378 


CAP. V. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Comaund to the sones of Yrael, that thei 
casten out of the tentes alle leprows, and 
that flowith seed, and is polut vpon the 
3deed; as wel the maal as the femaal 
casteth out of the tentis, lest thei de- 
foulen hem, whanne thet dwellen with 
430w. And the sones of Yrael dyden so, 
and thei casteden hem out of the" tentes, 
as the Lord hadde spokun to Moyses. 
5 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
6Spek to the sones of Irael, A man or 
womman, whanne thei doon of alle the 
synnes that ben wont to falle to men, and 
bi negligence ouer passid the maunde- 
z7ment of the Lord, and trespassen, thei 
shulen knowleche her synne, and thei® 
shulen 3eelde that heed, and the fifthe 
part there aboue, to hym in whom thei 
ssynneden. If forsothe there weren not 
that shulde resseyue, thei shulen 3yue to 
the Lord, and it shal be of the preest, 
out take the wether that is offryd for the 
9 purgynge, that the oost be plesable. Alle 
forsothe the first fruytis that offren the 
sones of Yrael, to the preest perteynen ; 
i0and what thing in the seyntuarye is of- 
fred of eche, and is takun to the hondes 
11 of the preest, shal be of hym. And the 
Lord spak to Moyses, seyynge, Spek to 
the sones of Yrael, and thow shalt seye 
12to hem, A man, whos wijf erreth?, and, 
13 the housbonde despisynge, slepe with an- 
other man, and that the housbonde may 
not knowe of, but the auowtrye is hidde, 
and with witnes? may not be vndurnom, 
14for she is not foundun in the hordom; if 
the spiryt of gelousnes stire the man 
a3ens his wijf, the which outher is polut, 
1sor with fals suspecioun is coueitid, he 
shal lede hire to the preest, and he shal 
offre for hir an offrynge, the tenthe part 


nOm. DE, © that 4. 
Ytentis1s. 2 flowethis. 4 the seed 1s. 
ftentisis. & hath s. 4 do ony 1s. i the synnes 1s. 


is, delle BCEGLNPQX. heed or det? 1s. 
is of Lordis K marg. 4 that is. 
vYamannes wif s. © hir 1s. 
bonde Is. 


t cheef 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


P erre BDEFIH. 


b and that 1s. 
™ ther is 1s.  éhaé theit. that of hem thei s. © 3uye it 1s. 
8 that ts. 
x the gelousie c. geloustee 1s. 


Vv. I—I5. 


CAP. V. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Comaunde thou to the sones of Israel, that 2 
thei caste out of the castels’ ech leprouse 
man, and that fletith? out seed*, and” is 
defoulid on® a deed bodi; caste 3e out of 
the castels4, as wel a male as a female,3 
lest thei defoulen tho, whanne thei dwellen 
with 3ou. And the sones of Israel diden4 
so; and thei castiden® hem out of the cas- 
telsf, as the Lord spak to Moises. Ands 
the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Speke 6 
thou to the sones of Israel, Whanne a man 
ethir a womman han® do} of alle synnes! 
that ben wont to falle to men, and han 
broke bi necgligence the ‘comaundement of 
the Lord, and han trespassid, thei schu-7 
len knowleche her synne, and thei schulen 
3elde thilke heed!, and the fyuethe part 
aboue, to hym azens whom thei synneden. 
But if noon is™ that schal resseyue thei" s 
schulen 3yue® to the Lord?, and it schal be 
the preestis part, outakun the ram which‘ 
is offrid for clensyng, that it be a queme- 
ful sacrifice. Also alle the firste™ fruytis, 9 
whiche*® the sones of Israel offren, per- 
teynen to the preest; and what euer thing 10 + hing that is 
is offrid of ech man in the seyntuarie, and erie 
is jouun to the ‘hondis of the preest't, it fcnrts 
schal be the preestis part". And the Lord u saci ae 
spak to Moises, and seide, Speke thon to 12 eae is f 
the sones of Israel, and thou schalt seie to the prest, in 
hem, If ‘the wijf of a man’ hath errid, and aiaee ae 
hath dispisid the” hosebonde, and hathis hgnipad3et 
slept with another man, and the hosebonde Pa ated 
may not take ether preue this, but the 
auowtrye is hid, and may not be prenyd 
bi wituessis, for sche is not foundun in 
leccherie; if the spirit of gelousie* stirith 14 
the housebonde a3ens his wijf, which’. is 
ether defoulid, ethir is? apechid bi fals sus- 
pecioun, the man* schal brynge hir to the 15 
preest, and he schal offre an offryng for 


@ wyttnesses BDEFH. 


Cvponis. ‘tentists.  ¢ puttiden ts. 
k heest of the Lord 1. Lordis heest s. ! heed, that 
P that 
u Om. 10RST sec.m. W. 
Zsche isis. 4 hous- 


t prestis hondis 1s. 
y the which 1. 


Vv. 16—26, 


of a busshel of barly melowe; and he 
shal not heelde vpon it oyle, ne putte™ 
ensence, for the sacrifice of gelouste it 
is, and offrynge enserchynge auowtrye. 
16 Therfor the preest shal offre it, and sette 


17 before the Lord; and he shal take the’ : 


holy watre in a britil vessel, and a litil 
of the erthe of the pament of the taber- 
ignacle he shall putt into it. And whanne 
the womman stonditht in the ‘si3t_ of 
the Lord, she shal discouere her heed, 
and putt vpon hir¥ hondis the sacrifice of 
recordynge, and offryng of gelowste. He 
forsothe shal holde the most bittir wa- 
tris, in the whiche with cursid cursyng 
19 he cast togidir. And he shal swere to her, 
and seie, If another man hath not slept 
with thee, and if thow art not polut’, 
forsaked the bedde of the housboond, thes 
moost bittre watris shten not anoye thee, 
into the whiche cursid thinges I haue ge- 
20deryd togydere; if forsothe thow hast 
bowide aweie fro thin housboond, and art 
polut’, and hast leyn with anothir man, 
21to thes cursingis thow shalt vndurligge ; 
the Lord 3yue thee into cursynge, and 


ensaumple of alle in his puple; mak he - 


thin hippe to stynke, and thi swellynge 
22wombe be al to brostun”; goon in thee 
cursyd watris into thi wombe, and swell- 
ynge thi wombe stynke thin hippe. And 
the womman shal answere, Amen! amen! 
23 And the preest shal wryte in a libel thes 
cursid thingis, and he shal do hem out 
with the moost bittir watris, into the 
whiche cursid thinges he dide togidris, 
ziand he shal 3yue hir to drynke. The 
which whanne she hath dronkuu vp*, 
25 the preest shal take of hir hoond the sa- 
crifice of gelowste, and he shal arere it 
vp before the Lord, and he shal putte 


26vpon the auter; so oonli, that before he - 


‘ thei sholyn putte z prom. 8 Om. DEFH. 


wborsten BDEFH. * vpon D. 


band thec. ‘¢ Om. s. 
satum, that is, the x. part of a buschel s. 
kitr. lheschal is. ™ sette it 1. sette hire ks. 
40m. 1s. * Om. cEisx. §$ the preest rs. 
gedenid is. *Om.1. YOm.s. 

hei. be itis.  f thees cursid 1s. 
\the whiche 1. ™ the watris to 1s. 


d that is clepid 1s. 


& Om. o. 
n thilke 1. 


NUMBERS. 


t stonte peru. stonde p. 


379 


hir ‘the> tenthe part of° a mesure clepid@ 
satumé of barli meele; he schal not schedef 
oyle ther onne®, nethir he schal putte en- 
cense!, for it is the sacrifice of gelousiel, 
and an offryng enquerynge auowtrye. 
Therfor the preest schal offre hir*, and 16 
schal! sette™ bifore the Lord; and he schal 17 
take holi" watir in ‘a vessel of erthe™", and 
he schal putte in® to itP a litil of? the’ 
erthe of the pawment of the tabernacle. 
And whanne the womman stondith in the 138 
sijt of the Lord, he’ schal diskyueret hir 
heed, and he schal putte ‘on the hondis of 
hir" the sacrifice of remembryng, and the 
offryng of gelousie. Sotheli he schal holde 
moost’ bittir watris, in whiche he gader- 
ide’ togidere cursis with cursyng. And 19 
he-schal conioure hir*, and schal’ seie, If 
an alien man? slepte not with thee, and if 
thou art not defoulid in the* forsakyng the 
bed of the” hosebonde, these bittereste® wa- 
tris schulen not anoye thee, in to whiche 
Y haue gaderid togidere cursis; ellis if2o 
thou bowidst awei fro thin hosebonde, and 
art defoulid, and hast leyn with another 
man, thou schalt be suget to these curs-21 
yngys; the Lord 3yue thee in to cursyng, 
and in to ensaumple of alle men in his 
puple; ‘the Lord‘ make thin hipe to wexe 
rotun, and thi wombe swelle, and be: 
brokun; cursid! watris entre in to’ thi 22 
wombe, and while the" wombe swellith, 
thin hipe wexe rotun. And the womman 
schal answere, Amen! amen! And theo23 
preest schal write thes! cursis in a litil 
book, and he schal do awey tho cursis 
with bittereste* watris, in to whiche! he 
gaderide cursis, and he schal 3yue to hir2s 
to™ drynke. And whanne sche hath drunke 
tho" watris, the preest schal take of hires 
hond the sacrifice of gelousie®, and he 
schal reise? it bifor the Lord, and he schal 


uhis 4 prom. s polatid p. 


€ satum, that conteyneth a buschel and half BcEGKLNPQX. 
f heelde tr. 
a hali a. 
t vnkeuere 1s. 

2 man, other than their hosbonde s. 
h thi rs. 
© geloustee 1s. 


& vponne 1s. encense therto 1s. ‘ geloustee 1s. - 

nn an erthen vessel 1s. © Om.1. P that L. 
u vpon hir hondis 1s. VY the moost 1s. W hath 
aOm.is. Pthinis. © bittir 1s. 
iQm.1. * the ful bittir 1. the bittereste s. 
P areere Is. 


beet Ba 


380 


take an hondful of sacrifice of it that is 
offerd, and tynde vpon the auter, and so 
3yue drynke to the womman the moost 
27 bitter watres. The whiche whanne she 
drinkith, if she is polutY, and, despisid 
the man, she is gilti of anowtrie, the 
watres of cursynge” shulen passe thur3 
hir, and the womb blow with ynne, the 
hippe shal stynke, and the womman shal 
be into cursynge, and into ensaumple to 
2gal the puple. And if she* were not polut?, 
she shal be harmles, and make free chil- 
ogdren. This is the lawe of gelowsnes, if 
the womman bowe doun fro bir man, and 
30 were polut», and the housboond, thur3 
spiryt of gelowsnes stired, brynge hir in 
the si3t of the Lord, and the preest do to 
31 hir after alle thinges that ben writun, the 
housboond shal be with outen blame, and 
she shal resseyue hir wickidnes. 


CAP. VI. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
shalt seye to hem, A man or womman, 
whanne he doth auowe, that thei ben ha- 
lowid, and thei wolen him self sacre to 
3the Lord, fro wiyn, and fro al that may 
make dronkun, thei shulen absteyne; eisel 
of wiyn, and of eny othir maad drynke, 
and what thing of grape is out pressid, 
thei shulen not drynke; new grapes and 
4dried thei shulen not eete, alle the daies 
in the which of auowe to the Lord thei 
ben sacryd; what thing may be of vyn®, 
of grape dried¢ vnto the popyn’, thei shu- 
slen not eete. Al the tyme of his seuer- 
ynge a rasour shal not passe vpon his 
heed, vnto the fulfillid day in the which 
he is sacred to the Lord; he shal be holy, 


NUMBERS. 


¥. lee 


putted on the auter; so oneli that he take26 
bifore an handful of sacrifice’ ‘of that’ that 
is offrid, and brenne ont the auter, and so 
3yue" drynke to the womman the moost 
bittere watris. And whanne sche hathe7 
drunke tho watris, if sche is defoulid, and 
is gilti of auowtrie, for the’ hosebonde is 
dispisid”, the watris of cursyng schulen 
passe thorou3 hir, and while the* wombe 
is bolnyd’, the? hipe schal wexe rotun, and 
the womman? schal be in to cursyng and 
in to ensaumple to al the puple. That ifes 
sche is not pollutid®, sche schal be harme- 
les, and schal‘ brynge forth fre children. 
This is the lawe of gelousie®, if a womman 29 
bowith awei fro hir hosebonde, and is de- 
foulid, and the hosebonde is stirid with 30 
the spirit of gelousye', and bryngith hir 
in to’ the ‘si3t of the Lord", and the preest 
doith to hir bi alle thingis that ben writun, 
the hosebonde schal be with out synne, 31 
and sche sclial resseyue hir wickidnesse. 


CAP. VI. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and thou 2 
schalt seie to hem, Whanne a man ether a 
womman makith auow, that thei be ha- 
lewid, and thei wolen halewe hem silf to 
the Lord, thei schulen absteyne' fro wyns 
and fro al thing that may make drunkun; 
thei schulen not drynke vynegre* of wyn, 
and! of ony other drynkyng™{, and what 
euer thing is pressid out of the” grape; 
thei schulen not ete freisch® grapis and 
drie?, alle! dayes in whiche thei ben ha-4 
lewid bi a vow to the Lord; thei schulen 
not ete what euer thing may be of the 
vyner, fro a° grape dried ‘til to® the draf*{. 
In" al tyme’ of his departyng” a rasours 
schal not passe on* his heed, ‘til toY the 
day fillid? in which he is halewid to the 


y polutid p. 7 acursinge perl. 43e p. » polutid p. Cwyue ep. 4soffrede £ pr.m. © pepyn BDEN. 


r that sacrifice 18. 
x hir Is. 


4 putte it 1Ks. 
w dispisid of hir 1s. 
schal rs, 
the wijf poaKax. f geloustee 1s. 
ne rs. m jn lijk manere maad drynke 1s. 
Took. § vnto Is. 
w departyng or of his auowe holding 1s. 


Y swolle ts. 


& Om, plures. 


sOm.1s. tit vponis. it on K. 
zhir Is. 
© geloustee 1. geloustee or of suspicioun s. gelousie, ether of yuel suspicioun of the husbonde azens 

h Lordis si3t 1s. 
nQm. o. 
t draf ether casting out after the pressing BCKQX. 


X ypon Is, Y vnto 1s. 


v hir rs. 
4 sche 


u thanne jyue s. 
ahirs. > womberxs. ©¢ defoulid ts. 

Vabsteyne hem ts. 
© newe 15. P dried 1s. 4 in alle Fiks. 
uOm.s.  Y the tyme E:Lopsx. 
Zbe fulfillid 1s. be fillid x. 


Kk the vynegre 1s. 


+ Io Ebren it 
is, of ony thing 
able to make 
drankuu. 36K 
Qx. 


t Iu Ebreu it 
is, fro the rynde 
til to the litil 
greynes that 
ben in the 
myddis of the 
grape. KQx. 


VI. 6—17. 


6growynge the heer of his heed. Alle 
tyme of his sacrynge he shal not goo yn 
7vpon the deed, ne vpon faders forsothe, 
and moders, and bretheren‘, and sistren® 
careyn he shal be defoulid, for the sa- 
scrynge of his God is vpon his heed ; eche 
day of his seuerynge shal be holy to the 
9Lord. If forsothe eny man were sodeyn- 
lich deed before hym, the heed of his 
consecracioun shal be polut®, the which 
anoon he shal shaue in the same day of 
his purgacioun, and eftsones the seuenthe 
1oday; in the ei3tith forsothe day he shal 
offre two turturs', or two culuer briddes, 
to the preest, in the entre of the boond 
11of pees of witnessynge. And the preest 
shal do oon for the synne, and anothir in 
to brent sacrifice; and he shal preye for 
hym, for he hath synned vpon the deed, 
and he shal halowe the heed of hym in 
12that day. And he shal sacre to the Lord 
the daies of his seuerynge, offrynge a 
lombe of o 3eer for the synne, so neuer- 
thelater* that the rather daies ben maad 
as for no3t, for polut! is the halowynge of 
ishym.° This is the lawe of consecracioun. 
Whanne the daies which of auow he 
demed ben fulfillid, he shal brynge hym 
to the dore of the!! tabernacle of the 
14boond of pees, and he shal offre his of- 
frynge to ‘the Lord, a lombe of o 3eer 
with outen wemme, into brent sacrifice, 
and a sheep of o 3eer with outen wemme, 
for synne, and a wethir with outen 
15 wemme, a pesible oost; a leepe forsothe 
of theerf looues, that ben spreynt with 
oyle, and thinne cakys with out sour- 
dow3, anoynt with oyle, and of echon the 
16 sacrifices of licours; the whiche the preest 
shal offre before the Lord, and he shal doo 
as wel for synne as into brent sacrifices™. 
17A wethir forsothe he shal offre a pesible 
oost to the Lord, offrynge togidre a leepe 


f brotherys 5. 
lutid pb, Om. £. 


& sosterys E. 
m sacrifice BDEFH. 


aand plures. Om. 1. » wexynge the 1. 
h his modir 1s. i vpon 1s. 
° make or offre s. P vpon Is. 
him to fulfille his auowe s, * his synne 1s. 
schal 1s. W baskett 1s. * oyntid plures. 


NUMBERS. 


h polutid speru. 


¢ Om. 1, 

k departyng or auowyng 18. 

4 dai, that is, schal dispose to fille the vow ncEGKLPX. dai, that is, dispose 
§ halewyng 1s. 

¥ alle these s. 


381 


Lord; he schal be hooli while* the? heer 
of his heed ‘schal wexe®. In al the tymee 
of his halewing he schal not entre on! a 
deed bodif, and sotheli he schal not be; 
defoulid on® the deed bodi of fadirf and 
of€ moder*, of brothir and of sistir, for the 
halewyng of his God is on! his heed; echs 
dai of his departyng* schal be hooli to the 
Lord. But if ony man is deed sudeynly 9 
bifore hym, the heed of his halewyng 
schal be defoulid, which! he schal schaue 
anoon in the same dai of his clensyng, and 
eft in the seuenthe dai; forsothe in the1o 
ei3te dai he schal offre twei turtlis, ether 
twei ‘briddis of a culuer™, to the preest, in 
the entryng of the" boond of pees of wit- 
nessyng. And the preest schal make® oon 11 
for cynne, and the tothir in to brent sacri- 
fice; and the preest schal preie for hym, 
for he synnede onP a deed bodi, and he 
schal halewe his heed in that dai9. And12 
he schal halewe to the Lord the daies of 
his departyng, and he schal offre a lomb 
of o 3eer for synne’, so netheles that the 
formere daies be maad voide, for his ha- 
lewyng is defoulid. This is the lawe of13 
conseeracioun’. Whanne the daies schulen 
be fillid', whiche he determynede" by a 
vow, the preest schal brynge hym to the 
dore of the tabernacle of boond of pees, 
and schal* offre his offryng to the Lord, 14 
a lomb of 0 3eer with out wem, in to brent 
sacrifice, and a scheep‘of o 3eer with outen 
wein, for synue, and a ram with out wem, 
a pesible sacrifice; also a panyere” of theerf 15 
looues, that ben spreynt togidere with oile, 
and cakis sodun in watir, and aftir an- 
oyntid® with oile, with out sourdow, and 
fletyng sacrifices of alle’ bi hem silf; whiche 16 
the preest schal offre bifor the Lord, and 
schal? make* as wel for synne as in to 
brent sacrifice. Sotheli he schal offre the 17 
ram a pesible sacrifice to the Lord, and he 


k nerthelater &. 


iturtelis pu. turtris EF. 1 po- 
dypon is. © vponis, fhis fadir1s. § Om. 1. 
I the which 1. ™ culuer briddis 1s. 2 Om. L. 


t fulfillid is. 
z he schal 1s. 


Vv he 


« demyde to fulfille 1s. 
a make or offre these s. 


t that is, he 
shal not con+ 
sente to hem 
that ben deed 
by sinne. s. 


382 


of therf looues, and sacryfices" of licours, 
1sthat of maner ben owed. Thanne the 
Nazare shal be shaued at the dore of the® 
tabernacle of the boond of pees, fro the 
heere of his consecracioun; and he shal 
take his heeres, and putte vpon the fijr, 
that is vndurput to the sacrifice of pe- 
i9sible thinges; and a shuldre sothen? of 
the wether, and a caake of breed with 
outen sowrdow3, oon of the leepe, and o 
thinne therf caake, and he shal take in 
the hoondes of the Nazare, after that 
20 were shauun the heed of hym. And the 
takun thingis eftsones of hym he shal 
arere in the si3t of the Lord. And the 
halowid thinges shal be of the preest, as 
the litil brest that is comaundid to be 
seuered, and the hippe. Aftir thes thingis 
21the Nazare may drynke wiyn. This is 
the lawe of the Nazare, whanne he auow- 
ith his offrynge to the Lord, the tyme of 
his consecracioun, out taak thes thingis 
the whiche the hoond fyndeth. Aftir that 
that he hath4 auowid in thou3t, so he shal 
22 do, to the perfeccioun of his holynes. And 
23the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, Spek 


to Aaron and his sones, So 3e shulen | 


blesse to the sones of Yrael, and 3e shu- 
24len seie to hem, The Lord blesse to thee, 


2sand kepe thee; the Lord shewe his face - 


26 to thee, and haue mercy of thee; the Lord 
conuerte his chere to thee, and 3eue to 

27 thee pees. Thei shulen inwardly clepe my 
name vpon the sones of Yrael, and Y shal 
blesse to hem. 


CAP. VII. 


i It is doon forsothe in the day in™ the 
whiche Moyses fulfillide the tabernacle, 
and areryde it, and anoyntide and ha- 
lowede with alle his vessels, the auter 


n gacrifice BF. © Om. £. 


© baskett 1s. 
& hem vpon 18. 
P Lordis si3t s. 
w Om. s. 


b therwith 1s. 
wyng 1s. f he schal rs. 
n Om. L. © arere hem rs. 
u soule or in will 1s. YOm., s. 
fulfillede or eendide s. © areride 15s. 
vessels or instrumentis therof's. & and the 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


d Nazarei, that is, halwed ep. 
h therf cake s. 
q tho 1s. 
X ypon 18s. 
4 anoyntide it rs. 
h he halewide in s. 


VI. 18—VII. 1. 


schal offre togidere® a panyere‘ of therf 
looues and fletyng sacryfices, that ben due 
bi custom. Thanne the Nazarei‘ schal bes 
schauun fro the heer of his consecracioun®, 
bifor the doore of the tabernacle of boond 
of pees; and the preest schal take hise 
heeris, and schal‘ putte on$ the fier, which. 
is put vndur the sacrifice of pesible thingis. 
And he schal take the schuldur sodun of 19 
the ram, and o ‘cake of breed with out 
sourdow® fro the panyere’, and o* theerf 
caak first sodun in watir and aftirward 
fried in oile, and he schal bitake! in™ the 
hondis of the" Nazarei, aftir that his heed 
is schauun. And the preest schal reise® 20 
in the ‘si3t of the Lord? the thingis takun 
eft of hym. And the’ thingis halewid 
schulen be the preestis part, as the brest 
which’ is comaundid to be departid, and 
the hipe. Aftir these thingis the Nasarey 
may drynke wyn. This is the lawe of the21 
Nasarei, whanne he hath avowyd his of- 
fryng to the Lord in the tyme of his con- 
secracioun', outakun these thingis whiche 
his hond fyndith}. By this that he avowide 
in soule", so’ he schal do, to” the perfec- 
cioun of his halewyng. And the Lord 22 
spak to Moyses and seide, Speke thou to23 
Aaron and to hise sones, Thus 3e schulen 
blesse the sones of Israel, and 3e schulen 
seie to hem, The Lord blesse thee, and 24 
kepe thee; the Lord schewe his face to25 
thee, and haue mercy on* thee; the Lord 26 
turne his cheer to thee, and 3yue pees to 
thee. TheiY schulen clepe inwardli my 27 
name on? the sones of Israel, and Y schal 
blesse hem. 


CAP. VII. 


Forsothe* it was don in the dai im which 
Moises fillide> the tabernacle, and reiside® 
it, and anoyntidet and halewide® with alle 
‘hise vessels‘, the? auter in® lijk maner and 


Psodden p. sooden #. sodyn £. soothen r, 4Om. BpEFH. * Om. BDEFH. 


Naz. or he that is halewid s. € hale. 
kas. Jbitake hem is. ™ into 1s. 
rthilke 1. thos. 8 the which 1. t halewyng 1s. 
y Prestis 1s. 2vponts. ® Ands. > eendide 1.° 
e halewide it 1s. f the vessels ther off 1. the 


ibasket s. 


t+ or his power 
mai strecche 
to. 18. 


VII. 2—17. 


2also, and his vessels. And the prynces of 
Yrael, and the heedes of the meyneis that 
weren bi eche lynages, the maystres of 
3hem that weren noumbred, offerden 3iftes 
before the Lord, six waynes conered, with 
twelue oxen; o wayne offreden two dukes, 
and oon ox eche. Thei offerden thilk 
4thingis in the si3t of the tabernacle. And 
5the Lord seide to Moyses, Tak of hem, 
that thei my3ten’ serue in the seruyce of 
the tabernacle, and tak thow thilk thingis 
to the Leuytis, after the ordre of her ser- 
suyce. And so whanne Moyses hadde take 
the waynes, and the oxen, he took hem 
7to the Lenytes. Two waynes and foure 
oxen he 3af to the sones of Gerson, af- 
stir that thei hadden nede. Foure other 
waynes and ei3t oxen he 3af to the sones 
of Merary, aftir the officeé and her heri- 
ynge, vndir the hoondis" of Ythamar, the 
9sone of Aaron, preest. To the sones for- 
sothe of Caath he 3af not carrys and 
.oxen, for in the seyntuarie thei seruen, 
and birthens thei beren with her propre 
10shuldres. Thanne the dukes offreden, in 
the dedicacioun of the auter, in the day 
the which it is anoyntid’, her offrynge 
11to the Lord, before the auter. And the 
Lord seide to Moyses, Alle duykis” bi 
eche daies offren thei 3iftes, into the dedi- 
12cacioun of the auter. The firste day of- 
frede his offrynge Nason, the sone of 
13 Amynadab, of the lynage of Juda; and 
there weren in it a silueren eisel vessel, 
peyse of an hundred and thretti sicles, a 
silueren fiole, hauynge seuenti sicles aftir 
the peyse of the seyntuarye, eithir ful of 
tryed floure spreynt with oyle, into sacri- 
14 fice; a litil morter, of ten siclis of gold, 
isful of encense; an oxe of the droue, and 
a wethir, and a loomb of o 3eer, into 
16brent sacrifice; and a goot, for synne; 
17and in the sacrifices* of pesible thinges, 


8 Om. spern. ¢officys x, ¥ honde spEeru. 


i cheef men 1. heedis men s. 
P thees thingis 1s. 4theis. * tho thingis 1s. 
wneede is, *oflicec. Y the preest 1. 
4 and ther weren in that offryng 1s. 
k thees weren 1s. Om. K sec. m. 


© seluer L. 


NUMBERS. 


VY anoynt BDEFI, 


k her souereyns Is. 
s the dekenes cis. 
z the chargis 1s. 
f eysel vessel s. 
m the sacrifice 1s. 


383 


the vessels therof. And the princes of Is-2 

rael, and the heedis! of meynees that weren 

bi alle lynagis, ‘the souereyns of hem* that 
weren noumbrid, offeriden 3iftis bifor thes 
Lord, sixe waynes hylid with twelue 
oxun; twei duykis offeriden o wayn, and 

ech offeride oon oxe. And thei! offeriden 

tho™ waynes ‘in the si3t of" the tabernacle. 
Forsothe® the Lord seide to Moises, Take 

thou of hem?, that tho4 serue in the ser- 

uice of the tabernacle, and bitake thou tho" 

to dekenes* bi the ordre of her seruice. 

And so whanne Moises hadde take thee 
waynes, and the oxun, he bitook tho! to 

the dekenes. He 3af twei waynes and7 
foure oxun to the sones of Gerson, bi" that 

that’ thei hadden nedeful¥. He 3af fours 
other waynes and ei3te oxun to the sones 

of Merari, bi her offices* and religioun, vn- 

der the hond of Ythamar, the sone of Aa- 

ron, preestY. Forsothe he 3af not wayneso 

and oxun to the sones of Caath, for thei 
seruien in the seyntuarye,and beren chargis? 

with her owne schuldris. Therfor the1o 
duykis offeriden, in® the halewyng of the 
auter, in the dai in which it was anoyntid, 

her offryng to the Lord, bifore the auter. 

And the Lord seide to Moises, Alle dukis® 11 

bi hemsilf offre® 3iftis, bi alle daies bi hem 
silf,in to the halewyng of the auter. Naa-12 
son, the sone of Amynadab, of the lynage 

of Juda, offeride his offryng in the firste 

day ; and@ a siluerne® vesself ‘to preue en-13 
sense and siche thingis®, in the weizte of 

an» hundrid and thretti siclis, a viol of 
siluere}, hauynge! seuenti siclis bi the wei3t + In Ebru itis, 
of the seyntuarie, ‘weren ther ynne*, euer ieee” 
eithir ful of flour spreynt togidere with 

oile, in to sacrifice™; a mortert, of ten gol-141 In Ebr ive 
dun siclis, ful of encence. He offride an 1s goitene spe 
oxe of the droue, and a rai, and a lomb °*°* 
of o 3eer, in to brent sacrifice; and a ‘buk 16 

of geet", forsynne. And he offeride in the17 


wduke 4. * sacrifice BDEFII. 


1Om.c, ™thilke 1. ®bifore 1s. © Sothely rs. 
them n. Uaftiris. VY Om. 1s. 
aintok. >the dukisis.  ¢ offre thei rs. 
& for eisel 1, 4 j.s. i weiynge 1s. 


n geet buk rs. 


384 


two oxen, fyue wetheres, fyue geet’, 
lombes of o 3eer fyue. This is the of- 
frynge of Naason, the sone of Amynadab. 
1s The secounde day offrede Nathanael, the 
sone of Suar, duke of the lynage of Ysa- 
i9char, a silueren eisel vessel, peysynge an 
hundrid and thretti sicles, a silueren fiole, 
hauynge seuenti sicles aftir the wei3t of 
the seyntuary, either ful of tryed flour 
2ospreynt with oyle, into sacrifice; a litil 
golden morter, hauynge ten sicles, ful of 
21encense; an oxe of the droue, and a we- 
thir, and a loomb of o 3eer, into brent 
sacrifice; and a goot, for synne; and in 
sacrifice of pesible thinges, two oxen, and 
wethris fyue, geit fyue, lombes of 0 3eer 
fine. This was the offrynge of Nathanael, 
24the sone of Suar. In the thridde day the 
prince of the sones of Zabulon, Elyab, 
25 the sone” of Elon, offride a silueren eysel 
vessel, peysynge an hundryd and thretti 
sicles, a silueren fyole, hauynge seuenti 
sicles at the peyse of the seyntuary, either 
ful of tried flour spreynt with oyle, into 
26 sacrifyce ; a litil golden morter, peysynge 
27ten sicles, ful of encense; an oxe of the 
drone, and a wethir, and a loomb of o 
28 3eer, into brent sacrifice; and a geit, for 
29synne; and in the sacrifice of pesible 
thinges, two oxen, wethris fyne, geit 
fyue, lombes of 0 3eer fyue. This is the 
offrynge of Heliab, the* sone of Helon. 
30 The firthe day the prynce of the sones of 
31 Ruben, Helisur, the sone of Sedeur, of- 
fred a silueren eysel vessel, peysynge an 
hundrid and thretti cyclys, a silueren 
fyole, hauynge seuenti siclis at the wei3t 
of the seyntuarie, either ful of tryed flour 
3zspreynt with oyle, into sacrifice; a golden 
morter, peysynge ten sicles, ful of en- 
33 cense; an oxe of tlie droue, and a wether, 
and a loomb of o 3eer, into brent sacri- 
B fice; and a geit, for synne; and into the® 


22 
23 


NUMBERS. 


VII. 18—35. 


sacrifice of pesible thingis, tweyne oxun, 
fyue rammys, fyue ‘buckis of geet®, fyne 
lambren of 0 3eer. This is the offryng of 
Naason, the sone of Amynadab. In the1s 
secounde dai Nathanael, the sone of Suar, 
duyk of the lynage of Isachar, offeride aig 
siluerne? vessel4 ‘to preue encense and 
siche thingis*, peisynge an* hundrid and 
thretti siclis, a siluerne’ viole", hauynge se- 
uenti syclis biv the weiz3te of seyntuarie™, 
euer either ful of flour spreynt togidere 
with oile, in to sacrifice ; a goldun morter, 20 
hauyngeY ten siclis, ful of encense; an oxe 21 
of the droue, and a ram, and a lomb of o 
3eer, in to brent sacrifice; and a‘ buc of geet?, 22 
for synne. And in the® sacrifice of pesi- 23 
ble thingis he offride tweyne oxun, and> 
fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet*, fyue 
lambren of o 3eer. This was the offryng 
of Nathanael the sone of Suar. In the 2s 
thridde dai Eliab, the sone of Elon, prince 
of the sones of Zabulon, offeride a siluerne® 25 
vessel! to ‘preue encence and siche thingis®, 
peisynge an> hundrid and thretti siclis, a 
siluerne viol, hauynge seuenti siclis at the 
wei3te of seyntuarie!, ener eithir ful of 
flour spreynt togidere with oile, in to sa- 
crifice; a goldun morter, peisynge ten siclis, 26 
ful of encense; an oxe of the droue, and a27 
rain, and a lomb of o 3eer, in to brent sa- 
crifice ; and a buc of geet, for synne. And 3? 
in! sacrifice of pesible thingis he offride 
tweyne oxen, fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of 
geet™, fyue lambren of 0 3eer. This is the 
offryng of Eliab, the sone of Helon. In30 
the fourthe dai Helisur, the sone of Se- 
deur, the prince of the sones of Ruben, 
offride a siluerne" vessel° ‘to preue encense 31 
and siche thingis?, peisynge an‘ hundrid 
and thretti siclis, a siluerne™ viol, hauynge 
senenti syclis at the wei3te of seyntuarie’, 
euer eithir ful of flourt spreynt togidere 
with oile, in to sacrifice; a goldun morter 32 


Y gootys E. Zsones 4. ® Om. apru. > Om. BpEFH. 

° geet buckisis. PseluerL. deisel vesselis. *Om.1 %j.s. tseluerL. 4 viole ether 
basyn BCGKNQ. Vat L. W the seyntuarie c pr.m.is. *tried flourrs. Ypeising i. 7 geet buk ss. 
4Om.L, >%Om.L. ¢ geet buckis1s. 4 the prince rs. ¢seluer L. feisel vessel 1s. & Om. 1s. }j. s. 
i the seyntuarie 1s. * tried flour rs. inthe 1x sec.m. ™ geet buckis1s. "seluerL. © viol a. eisel 
vessel 1s, POm.1ts. @j.s. "seluer x. § the seyntuarie 1s. +t tried flour 1s. 


VII. 36—353. 


oostis of pesible thinges, oxen two, we- 
thers fyue, geit® fyne, lombes of o 3eer 
fyue. This was the offrynge of Elysur, 
36the sone of Sedeur. The fifthe day the 
prynce of the sones of Symeon®, Sala- 
3z7myel, sone of Surysadday, offrede a sil- 
ueren eysel vessel, peysynge an hundrid 
and thritti sicles, a silueren fyole, hau- 
ynge seuenti sicles at the wei3t of the 
seyntuarye, eithir ful of tried flour spreyut 
38 with oyle, in to sacrifice; a goldun mor- 
ter, peysynge ten sicles, ful of encense ; 
39an oxe of the droue, and a wethir, and a 
40looinb of o 3eer, into brent sacrifice; and 
4ia geet, for synue. And into the oostis of 
pesible thinges, oxen two, wethers fyue, 
geet® fyue, loombes of 0 3eer fyue. This 
was the offrynge of Salamyhel, sone* of 
42Surysadday. The sixte day the prince 
of the sones of Gad, Helizaphat, the sone 
430f Duel, offerde a silueren eysel vessel, 
peysynge an hundrid and thretti sicles, a 
silueren fyol, hauynge seuenti sicles at 
the wei3t of the seyntuarye, either ful of 
tried flour spreynt with oyle, into sacri- 
44 fice; a golden morter, peisynge ten sicles, 
45 ful of encense; an oxe of the droue, and 
a wether, and a loomb of o 3eer, into 
4c¢brent sacryfice; and ‘o geet®, for synne. 
47 And into oostis of pesible thinges, oxen 
two, wethers fyue, geet’ fyue, loombes of 
o3eer fyue. This was the offrynge of Eli- 
48 zaphat, sone’ of Duel. The seuenthe day 
the prynce of the sones of Effraym, Eli- 
49 zaina, the sone of Amyud, offrede a sil- 
ueren eisel vessel, peysynge an hundred 
and thretti sicles, a silueren fyol, hau- 
ynge seuenti sicles at the wei3t of the 
seyntuarye, either ful of tried flour 
50 spreyut with oyle, into sacrifice; a goldun 
morter, peisynge ten sicles, ful of en- 
steense; an oxe of the droue, and a wether, 
and a loomb of o 3eer, into brent sacry- 
*efice; and a geet, for synne. And into 


€ gootes E. ¢¢ Syme of 4 man. sec. 
¥ the sone & pr.m. 


ubuk o. geet buk 1s. ¥ geet bukis rs. 
8 the seyntuarie 1s. _— tried flour 18. 
& eisel vessel is. bOm.1s. 'j.s. * siluer ELP. 
© sacrifices BCX sec.m. P geet buckis 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


4 the sone £ pr.m. 


w lombis Is. 
¢ Om. 8. 

1 the seyntuarie 1s. 
q siluer ELP. 


385 


peisynge ten siclis, ful of encense ; an oxe33 
of the drooue, and a ram, and a lomb of o 
3eer in to brent sacrifice, and a ‘buc ofs4 
geet", for synne. And in to sacrifice of 35 
pesible thingis he offride tweyne oxun, 
fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet’, fyue 
lambren” of 0 3eer. This was the offryng 
of Elisur, the sone of Sedeur. In these 
fyuethe dai Salamyhel, the sone of Suri- 
saddai, the prince of the sones of Symeon, 
offeride a siluerne”Y vessel ‘to preue encense 37 
and siche thingis*, peysynge anY hundrid 
and thretti siclis, a siluerne’ viol, hauynge 
seuenti siclis at the wei3te of seyntuarie*, 
euer either ful of flour spreynt togidere 
with oile, in to sacrifice ; a goldun morter, 38 
peisynge ten siclis, ful of encense; an oxe39 
of the drooue, and a ram, and* a lomb of o 
jeer, in to brent sacrifice ; and a ‘bucke of 40 
geet’, for synne. And in to sacrifice of 41 
pesible thingis he offeride tweyne oxun, 
fyuie rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet*, fyue 
lambren of o 3eer. This was the offring 
of Salamyhel, the sone of Surisaddai. In 42 
the sixte day Elisaphat, the sone of Duel, 
the prince of the sones of Gad, offride a43 
siluerne® vessel ‘to preue encense and sich 
thingis", peisynge an’ hundrid and thretti 
siclis, a siluerne* viol, hauynge seuenti si- 
clis at the wei3te of seyutuarie!, ener eithir 
ful of flour™ spreynt togidere with oile in 
to sacrifice; a goldun morter, peisynge ten 44 
siclis, ful of encense; an oxe of the droue, 45 
and a ram, and a lomb of o 3eer, in to 
brent sacrifice; and a ‘buc of geet", for 46 
synne. And in to sacrifice® of pesible 47 
thingis he offride twei oxun, fyue rammes, 
fyue ‘buckis of geet?, fyue lambren of o 
jeer. This was the offryng of Elisaphat, 
the sone of Duel. In the seuenthe dai 48 
Elisama, the sone of Amyud, the prince 
of the sones of Effraym, offride a siluerne’ 49 
vessel' ‘to preue encense and siche thingis®, 
peisynge ant hundrid and thretti siclis, a 


€ a goot E. agey F. oo geyt u. f gootes E. 


Z seluer ELP. 

f siluer ELP. 
1 geet buk ts. 
tj.s. 


ww siluer EP. 
4 geet buk ts. 


xOm. Is. Yj. 8. 
€ geet buckis 15. 
™ tried flour Is. 


r eisel vessel 1s. §& Om. 18, 


3D 


386 


oostis of pesible thingis, oxen two, we- 
thers fyue, geet® fyue, loombes of 0 3eer 
fyue. This was the offrynge of Elizama, 


sasone' of Amyud. The ei3tith day the 


prynce of the sones of Manasse, Gamaliel, 
55 the sone of) Phadassur, offerde a silueren 
eysel vessel, peysynge an hundryd and 
thretti sicles, a silueren fyol, hauynge se- 
uenti sicles at the wei3t of the seyntua- 
rye, either ful of tried flour spreynt with 
s6oyle, into sacrifice; a goldun morter, 


57 peysynge ten sicles, ful of* encense; an 


oxe of the droue, and a wethir, and a 
58loomb of o 3eer, into brent sacrifice ; and 
59a goot, for synne. And into oostis of pe- 

sible thinges, oxen two, wethers fyue, 

geet! fyue, loombes of o 3eer fyue. This 
was the offrynge of Gamaliel, sone™ of 
6o Phadassur. The nynthe day the prynce 
of the sones of Beniamyn, Abidan, the 
61sone of" Gedeon, offerde a silueren eisel 
vessel, peysynge an hundred and thretti 
sicles, a silueren fyol, hauynge seuenti si- 
cles at the wei;t of the seyntuarye, eithir 
ful of tried flour spreynt with oyle, into 
62sacrifice; a golden morter, peisynge ten 
63 sicles, ful of eucense; an oxe of the droue, 
and a wether, and a loomb of 0 3eer, into 
64brent sacrifice; and a goot, for synne. 
cs And into the® oostis of? pesible thingis, 
oxen two, wethers fyue, geet’ fyue, 
loombes of o 3eer fyue. This was the of- 
6¢ frynge of Abydan, sone’ of Gedeon. The 
tenthe day the prynce of the sones of 

Dan, Abiezer, the sone of Amysadday, 
67 offerde a silueren’ eysel vessel, peisynge 

an hundrid and thretti sicles, a silueren 

fyol, hanynge seuenti sicles at the wei3t 
of the seyntuarye, either ful of tried flour 
68 spreynt with oyle, into sacrifice; a goldun 
morter, peisynge ten sicles, ful of en- 
69cense; an oxe of the drone, and a wether, 
and a lomb of o 3eer, into brent sacrifice ; 
if and a goot, for synne. And into oostes of 


jOm. 1. 
P for BDF. 


h gootes E. ithe soue E pr.m. 
n Om. BF sec.m. H. © Om. BDEFH. 


NUMBERS. 


Vi 4 


siluerne® viol, hauynge seuenti siclis at the’ 
wei3te of seyntuarie’, euer either ful of 
flour spreynt togidere with oyle, in to sa- 
crifice; a goldun morter, peisynge ten si-50 
clis, ful of encense; an oxe of the drooue, 51 
and a ram, and a lomb of o 3eer, in to 
brent sacrifice; anda ‘buc of geet*, for synne. 52 
And in to sacrifices” of pesible thingis he 53 
offride tweyne oxun, fyue rammes, fyue 
‘buckis of geet*, fyne lambren of o 3eer. 
This was the offryng of Elisama, the sone 
of Amyud. In the ei3tthe dai Gamaliel, 54 
the sone of Fadussur, the prince of the 
sones of Manasses, offride a siluerne’ ves-55 
sel® ‘to preue encense and siche thingis', 
peisynge an® hundrid and thretti syclis, a 
siluerne® viole, hauynge! seuenti siclis at 
the wei3te of seyntuarie‘, euer eithir ful of 
flour spreynt togidere with oile, in to sa- 
crifice; a goldun morter, peisynge ten siclis, 56 
ful of encense; an oxe of the drooue, and 57 
a ram, and a lomb of o 3eer, in to brent 
sacrifice; and a ‘buc of geet!, for syune. 5s 
And in to sacrificis of™ pesible thingis he 59 
offride tweyne oxun, fyue rammes, fyue 
‘buckis of geet", fyue lambren of 0 3eer. 
This was the offryng of Gamaliel, the sone 
of Fadussur. In the nynthe dai Abidan, co 
the sone of Gedeon, the prince of the sones 
of Beniamyn, offeride a siluerne® vessel? ‘fo 61 
preue encense and siche thingis4, peisynge 
an’ hundrid and thretti siclis, a silnerne’ 
viol, hauyuge seuenti siclis at the wei3te of 
seyntuarie’, ener eithir ful of flour sprent 
togidere with oile, in to sacrifice; a goldun 62 
morter, peisynge ten siclis, ful of encense ; 
an oxe of the drooue, and a ram, and aos 
lomb of o 3eer in to brent sacrifice; and a 64 
‘buc of geet", for synne. And in to sacri-6 
fice’ of pesible thingis he offride tweyne 
oxun, fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet”, 
fyne lambren of 0 3eer. This was the of- 
fryng of Abidan, the sone of Gedeon. Ince 
the tenthe dai Abiezer, the sone of Amy- 


k Om. BDEFH. 
q gootys E. 


1 gootys E. 


m the sone E pr.im. 
T the sone E pr. m. 


S$ seluer E. 


useluer ELp. *¥Om.1s. W the seyntuarie 1s. * geet buk 1s. ? sacrifice c. ¢ geet buckis 1s. 4 sil- 


uer ELP. © eisel vessel 1s. f Om. Is. 


gj.s. 


hseluer ELP. i peisynge Is. 


kK the seyntuarie is. | geet 


buk 1s. ™for1. ® geet buckis 1s. ° siluer ELP. P eisel vessel 1s. 4Om.1s. "j.s. Ssiluer eELp. ¢ the 


seyntuarie 1s. ° geet bucke rs. 


¥ sacrifices plures. the sacrifice 1. 


W geet buckis 1s. 


VII. 72—86. 


pesible thinges, oxen two, wethers fyue, 
geet’ fyue, loombes of o 3eer fyue. This 
was the offrynge of Abiezer, sone" of 
72Amysadday. The enleuetheY day the 
prince’’ of the sones of Aser, Phegiel, the 
73sone of Ochran, offride a silueren eisel 
vessel, peysynge an hundryd and thretti 
sicles, a silueren fiol, hauynge seuenti si- 
cles at the wei3t of the seyntuarie, either 
ful of tried flour spreynt with oyle, into 
z4sacrifice; a goldun morter, peysynge ten 
75 sicles, ful of encense; an oxe of the droue, 
and a wether, and a loomb of 0 3eer, into 
76brent sacrifice; and a goot, for synne. 
77 And into oostes of pesible thinges, oxen 
two, wethers fyue, geet* fyue, loombes of 
o 3eer fyue. This was the offrynge of 
78 Phegiel, the sone of Ochran. The twelfth 
day the prynce of the sones of Neptalym, 
79 Ahira, the sone of Henan, offerde a sil- 
neren eisel vessel, peisynge an hundryd 
and thretti sicles, a silueren fyol, hauynge 
senenti sicles at the wei3t of the seyntua- 
rie, eithir ful of tried flour spreynt with 
80 oyle, into sacrifice; a golden morter, peis- 
81 ynge ten sicles, ful of encense; an oxe of 
the droue, and a wether, and a loomb of 
820 3eer, into brent sacrifice; and a goot, 
s3for synne. And into oostis of pesible 
thingis, oxen two, wethers fyue, geet** 
fyue, loombes of o 3eer fyue. This was 
the offrynge of Ahyra, soneY of Henan. 
84 Thes offrynges? in the dedicacioun of the 
auter ben offred of the prynces of Irael, 
in the day the which it is sacred; sil- 
ueren eisel vessels? twelue, silueren fiols 
#85 twelue, golden morters twelue; so that an 
hundred and thretti sicles of siluer hadde 
oon eisel vessel, and seuenti sicles o fiol, 
that is, in comune of alle vessels of siluer®, 
sicles two thowsand foure hundred, by 
u6 peyse of the seyntuarie; golden morters 
.twelue, ful of encense, ten sicles peisynge 


t gootys E. 
xX gootes E. 


u the sone £ pr.m. 
y the sone £ pr.m. 


z Om. 1s. 
f siluer ELP. 


Y eisel vessel rs. 
4 geet bucke 1s. © geet buckis 18. 
!Om.s. ™ the seyntuarie 1s. 
8 eisel vessel 15. t Om. 1s. 

Z sacrifise F. 


x siluer ELP. 


uj. s. 


NUMBERS. 


Vv ellefthe npr. 


z thinges BDEH. ® vessel p. 


aand a A pr.m. Os. 
& eisil vessel rs. 
2Om.s. © geet buk 3s. P sacrifice Giw. 4 gect buckis 1s. * siluer ELP. 
Vv siluer ELP. 


387 


saddai, the prince of the sones of Dan, 
offride a siluerne* vesselY ‘to preue encense 67 
and siche thingis?, peisynge an hundrid 
and thretti siclis, a* siluerne® viol, hauynge 
seuelti siclis at the wei3te of seyutuarie’, 
euer ethir ful of flour spreynt to gidere 
with oile in to sacrifice; a goldun morter, 68 
peisynge ten siclis, ful of encense; an oxe 69 
of the drooue, and a ram, and a lomb of 
0 3eer, in to brent sacrifice; and a ‘buc of70 
geet’, for synne. And in to sacrifices of 71 
pesible thingis he offride tweyne oxun, 
fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet®, fyue 
lambren of 0 3eer. This was the offryng 
of Abiezer, the sone of Amysaddai. In7z 
the enleuenthe dai Phegiel, the sone of 
Ocran, the prince of the sones of Aser, of-73 
fride a siluernef vessel8 ‘to preue encense 
and siche thingis', peisynge an‘ hundrid 
and thretti siclis, a siluerne* viol, hauynge 
seuenti siclis at the! wei3te of seyntuarie™, 
euer either ful of flour spreynt togidere 
with oile, in to sacrifice; a goldun morter, 74 
peisynge ten ciclis, ful of encense; an oxe 75 
of the drooue, and a ram, and a lomb of 
o 3eer, in to brent sacrifice; and” a ‘bucke 76 
of geet°, for synne. And in to sacrifices? 77 
of pesyble thingis he offride tweyne oxun, 
fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet4, fyue 
lambren of 0 3eer. This was the offryng 
of Phegiel, the sone of Ochran. In the7s 
tweluethe dai Ahira, the sone of Enan, 
the prince of the sones of Neptalym, of-79 
fride a siluerne’ vessel* ‘fo preue encense 
and siche thingis', peisynge an" hundrid 
and thetti siclis, a siluerne’ viol, hauynge 
seuenti siclis at the” wei3te of seyntuarie*, 
euer eithir ful of flour spreynt to gidere 
with oile, in to sacrifice ; a goldun morter, so 
peisynge ten siclis, ful of encense; an oxe 81 
of the drooue, and a ram, and a lomb of 
0 3eer, in to brent sacrifice; and a ‘bue of s2 
geetY, for synne. And in to sacrifices” of 83 


w and either prin. 


* gootys F. 
b silueren 4. 


VV princes 4. 


b siluer ELP. 


¢ the seyntuarie 1s. 
h Om. 18. 


ij.s.  * siluer Exp. 


wOm.s. * the seyutuarie is. Y geet bucke 1s. 


3D 2 


388 NUMBERS. VI. 87—VIII. 2. 


bi wei3t of the seyntuarie, that is, togider, 
sicles of gold an hundrid and twenti; 

s7oxen of the droue into brent sacrifice 
twelue, wethers twelue, loombes of o 3eer 
twelue, and the sacrifice’ of licours of 

sshem, twelue geet? for synne; the oostis 
of pesible thingis, oxen foure and twenti, 
wethers sexti, geet’ sexti, loombes of o 
3eer sexti. Thes thinges ben offrid in the 
dedicacioun of the auter, whanne it is 

ssanoynt. And whanne Moyses went into 
the tabernacle of the boond of pees, that 
he conseile the answer of God, he herde 
a voyce of spekynge to hym fro the pro- 
piciatorye, that was vpon the arke of wit- 
nessynge, bitwix the two cherubyn, and 
fro whens he spak to hym. 


CAP. VIL. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to Aaron, and thow shalt seie to 
hym, Whanne thow settist the seuen lan- 
terns, the candelstyke be arered in the 
sowth part; this thanne comaund, that 
the lanterns a3en the north ‘forn ajens® 


€ sacrificys E. 4 gootes E. 


a geet buckus 1s. > siluer ELP. © eisel vessels 1s. 


pesible thingis he offride tweyne oxun, 
fyue rammes, fyue ‘buckis of geet*, fyue 
lambren of o 3eer. This was the offryng of 
Haira, the sone of Henan. These thingis ss 
weren offrid of the sones of Israel, in the 
halewyng of the auter, in the dai in which 
it was halewid; siluerne® vessels‘ ‘to preue, 
encense and siche thingis* twelue, siluerne® 
viols twelue, goldun morteris twelue; so8s 
that o vessel! ‘to preue encense and siche 
thingis’ hadde ani hundrid and ‘thretti 
siclis ‘of siluer*, and o! viol hadde™ seuenti 
siclis, that is, in comyn, two thousynde and 
foure hundrid siclis of alle the ‘vessels of 
siluer", bi the® wei3te of seyntuarie?; gol-s6 
dun morteris twelue, ful of encense, peis- 
ynge ten siclis bi the1 wei3te of seyntuarie’, 
that is to gidere an’ hundrid and twenti 
siclis of gold; oxun of the drooue ing7 
to brent sacrifice twelue, twelue rammes, 
tweluet lambren of o 3eer, and the" flet- 
ynge sacryfices ‘of tho’, twelue ‘buckis of 
geet" for synne; the sacrifices of pesi-ss 
ble thingis, fonre and twenti oxun, sexty 
rammes, sexti ‘buckis of geet*, sixti lain- 
bren of o jeer. These thingis weren of- 
frid in theY halewyng of the auter, whanne 
it was anoyntid. And whanne Moysess9 
entride in to the tabernacle of boond* of 
pees, ‘to axe counsel ‘of Goddis answeryng 
place’, he herde the vois of God spekynge 
to hym fro ‘the propiciatorie, which® was 
on’ the arke ef witnessyng, bitwixe twei® 
cherubyns, frof whennus also’ God spak 
to Moises. 


CAP. VIII. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, ; 
Speke thou to Aaron, and thou'schalt scie2 
to hym, Whanne thou hast sett seuene® 
Jaunternes, the candilstike be! reisid* in 
the south part; therfor comaunde! thon 
this, that the lanternes biholde euene a3ens 


€ fro the region E pr.m. 


4QOm. 1s. ¢siluer Exp. f silueren eisel vessel 1s. 


§ Om. 1s. b hadden a. weizide ys. ij.s, kOm.1s. la Erinps. ™ weizide 1s.  silueren vessels 1s. 
°Om.10s. Pp the seyntuarie1s. 4 Om.1s. ‘the seyntuariers. Sj.s. tandtwelue 1s. ¥ her 1s. 
Vv Om. 3s. W geet buckis 1s. * geet buckisis. yOm.1s. 2 the boond1. @thathe1s. » the answere 
of God is. ¢ Goddis answeringe place, the whiche place 1. Goddis answ. pl. whiche place s. 4 ouer 18. 
ethe twei1s. fandfrors. & Om.is. b the seuene1. ibe thanne rs. * arerid rs. | comaundide pv.’ 


Vii 3—Ts. 


biholden to the table of the looues of pro- 
posicioun, a3ens that part that the candil- 
3 stik biholdith, the: owen to liz3ten. And 
Aaron dyde, and putte yn lanterns vpon 
the candelstyk, as the Lord comaundide 
4to Moyses. This forsothe was the mak- 
ynge of the candelstik; of betun out 
golde, as wel the myddil ‘stok as al the 
thinges that of either side of the 3erdes 
weren born out; after the ensaumple that 
the Lord shewide to Moyses, so he wrou3te 
5the candelstyk. And the Lord spak to 
6 Moyses, seiynge, Tak the Leuytes ‘fro the 
myddil of the sones of Yrael; and thow 
7shalt purifie hem aftir this -rijt. Be thei 
spreynt with water of purgynge‘, and 
shaue thei alle the ‘heerys of her flesh. 
And whanne thei han wasshun her clothes, 
sand weren clensid, ‘take thei an ‘oxe of 
the droue, and his sacrifice of licours®, 
tried flour spreynt with oyle; and anothir 
oxe of the droue thow shalt take for 
gsynne; and thow shalt sette to the Le- 
uytes before the ‘tabernacle of the boond 
of pees, clepid togidere al the multitude 
100f the sones of Yrael. And whanne the 
Leuytes weren before the Lord, the sones 
of Irael shulen .putte her hoondes vpon 
ithem; and Aaron shal offre the Leuytes, a 
3ift in the si3t of the Lord of the ‘sones 
of Yrael, that thei seruen in the seruyce 
wof hym. And the Leuytes shulen putte 
her hoondes vpon the heedis of the oxen, 
of the whiche oon thow shalt doo for 
synne, and another into brent sacrifice of 
13the Lord, that thow preye for hem. And 
thow shalt sette the Leuytes%* in the si3t 
of Aaron, and of his sones, and thow shalt 
14sacre hem offred to the Lord; and seuer 
fro the myddil of the sones of Yrael, that 
15thei be myyn. And afterward goo thei 
in the tabernacle of the boond of pees, 
that thei seruen to me; and so thow shalt 


f purynge B. 


5 table 1s. © the looues 1s. 
rthat 1s. § biholdith to 1s. 


m fore Is. 
lanternes s. 


* the thingis ts. Yon s. 2 ensaumple 1s. 
@ dekenes 1s. € the boond 1. f dikens 1s. 
k dekenes 1s. lasas. ™Om.s. ® vpon 1s, 


NUMBERS. 


& lyeour Bru. 


P proposicioun K ._ ether setting forth « (marg.) 

t dide so 1s. 
a that God 1s. 
& ben presentid s. 

© make or ordeyne s. 


389 


the north to™ the boord" of looues® of ‘set- 
tyng forth?, tho4 schulen schyue ajenus 
that part which’ the candilstike biholdith:. 
And Aaron didet, and puttide® lanternes’3 
on the candilstike, as the Lord comaund- 
ide to Moises. Sotheli this was the mak-4 
yng of the candilstike; 2¢ was of gold 
betun out with hameris, as wel ‘the myd- 
dil stok as alle thingis* that camen forth 
ofY euer eithir side of the 3eerdis; ‘bi the 
saumple? ‘whych the Lord* schewide to 
Moises, so he wrou3te the candilstike. Ands 
the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Take 6 
thou Leuytis® fro the myddis of the sones 
of Israel; and thou schalt clense hem bi7 
this custom. Be thei spreynt with wa- 
tir of clensyng, and schaue thei alle the 
heeris of her fleisch. And whanne thei 
han waische her clothis and ben clensid, 
take thei an oxe of drooues‘, and the flet-s 
yng sacrifice therof, flour spreynt togidere 
with oile; forsothe thou schalt take an- 
other oxe of the drooue for synne; and9 
thou schalt present the Leuytis* bifor the 
tabernacle of boond® of pees, whanne al the 
multitude of the sones of Israel is clepid 
togidere. And whanne the Leuytis® ben 10 
bifor the Lord, the sones of Israel schulen 
sette her hondis on' hem; and Aaron schal 11 
offre! the Leuytis* in the si3t of the Lord, 
a! 3ifte of the sones of Israel, that thei 
serue in the seruice ‘of hym™. Also the 12 
Leuytis schulen sette her hondis on" the 
heedis of the oxun, of whiche oxun thou 
schalt make® oon for synne, and the to- 
ther in to brent sacrifice of the Lord, that 
thou preye for hem. And thou schalt or-13 
deyne the Leuytis? in the si3t of Aaron, 
and of hise sones, and thou schalt sacre 
hem offrid to the Lord; and thou schalt 14 
departe em fro the myddis of the sones 
of Israel, that thei be myne. And aftir-15 
ward entre thei in to the tabernacle of 


sg Leuytees 4. 


4 tho 
whe puttide rs. Vv the lanternes 1s. W vpon is. 
b the dekens 1. dekens s. © the drooues 18, 
hvpon 1s. i offre or presente s. 
P dekenes 1s. 


390 


puryfye and sacre hem, into the offrynge 
of the Lord, for thur3 3ift thei ben 3eue 
16to me of the sones of Yrael. For the first 
goten that opnen® al woinbe in Yrael Y 
i7haue takun hem; myyn forsothe ben al 
the fyrste goten of the sones of Yrael, as 
wel of men as of beestis, fro the day that 
I smoot al the firste goten in the loonde 
of Egipte, I haue halowed hem to me. 
is And Y haue take the Leuytes for al the 
19 firste goten of the sones of Yrael; and Y 
haue take hem bi 3ifte to Aaron and his 
sones, fro the myddil of the puple, that 
thei seruen to me for Yrael, in the taber- 
nacle of the boond of pees, and preien for 
hem, lest there be in the puple veniaunce, 
if thei weren hardi to nei3 to the seyn- 
2o0tuarye. And Moyses and Aaron diden, 
and al the multytude of the sones of 
Yrael, vpon the Leuytes, that the Lord 
21 comaundide to Moyses. And thei ben puri- 
fied, and thei wassheden her clothes; and 
Aaron arerede hem in the si3te of the 
22 Lord, and preiede for hem, that puryfyed 
thei weendeni into her offices, into the ta- 
bernacle of the boond of pees, before Aa- 
ron and his sones, as the Lord comaundide 
to Moyses, of the Leuytes so it is doon. 
23 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
zt This is the lawe of the Leuytes; fro 
twenti 3eer and aboue thei shulen weende 
in, that thei mynystren in the tabernacle 


NUMBERS. 


VIII. 16—26. 


boond of pees, that thei serue me; and so 
thou schalt clense and schalt4 halewe hem, 
in to an offryng of the Lord, for bi fre 
3ifte thei ben 3ouun to me of the sones of 
Israel. Y haue take hem for the firste16 
gendrid’ thingis that openen ech wombe‘ 
in Israel; for alle the firste gendrid‘ thingis 17 
of the sones of Israel ben myne, as wel of 
men as of beestis, fro the dai in which Y 
smoot ech firste gendrid thing in the loond 
of Egipt, Y halewide hem" to me. Andis 
Y took the Leuytis for alle the firste gen- 
drid’ children* of the sones of Israel; and 19 
Y 3af hem bi fre 3ifte to Aaron and hise* 
sones, fro the myddis of the puple, that 
thei serue me for Israel, in the tabernacle 
of boond’ of pees, and that thei preie for 
hem, lest veniaunce be in the puple, if thei 
ben hardi to neize to the seyntuarye. And 20 
Moises and Aaron, and al the multitude 
of the sones of Israel, diden on? the Le- 
uitis tho thingis that the Lord comaundide 
to Moyses. And thei® weren clensid, and 21 
thei waischiden her clothis; and Aaron 
reiside> hem in the si3t of the Lord, and 
preiede® for hem, that thei schulen be22 
clensid, and schulden entre to her offices 
in to the tabernacle of boond of pees, bifor 
Aaron and hise sones; as the Lord co- 
maundide to Moises of the Leuytis, so it 
was don. And the Lord spak to Moises, 23 
and seide, This is lawe’ of Leuytis; fro24 


t+ fro xxv. jeer, 


230f the boond of pees; and whanne the Henrie 4 
‘or thaane thei 


fyftithe* 3eer of age thei han fulfillid, thei 
26 shulen ceese to serue. And thei shulen be 
the seruauntes of her brytheren in the 
tabernacle of the boond of pees, that thei 
kepen thinges that weren comaundid to 
hem; tho forsothe werkis doo thei not; 
so thow shalt dispose the Leuytes in her 


fyue and twentithe® 3eert and aboue thei 
schulen entre, for to mynystre in the ta-  entriden to 
bernacle of boond of pees; and whanne 25 oe Mees ae 
thei han fillid‘ the fiftithe 3eer of age’, thei ***. Hey 
schulen ceesse to serue®. And thei schulen 26 ed mynystris, 
ee é if they weren 
be the mynystris of her bretheren in the able. Lire 
tabernacle of boond of pees, that thei kepe “7 °*** 
tho thingis that ben bitakun to hem; so- 


wardis. thely thei schulen not do tho werkis* ; 
thus thou schalt dispose Leuytis in her 
kepyngis. 
h opencth p. iwenten p. wyndyn £. * fifthe a. 
4 Om. Is. T goten I. 8 priuy wombe c pr.m. t goten I. u hem, that is, the firste gendrid 


a the Leuylis 1s. 
4 the lawe plures. 
i seruauntis 18. 


Sones BCGKNQX. Vbigotent. WOm.1. *tohisers. ¥the boond i. 2 vpon Is. 
h reiside, that is, presentide BCEGKLNPQX. reiside or presentid s. © he preiede 1s. 

© twenti plures. f fulfillid is. & her age 1s. 4 serue, that is, fo bere burthuns BoekQsx. 
k werkis, as thei diden bifore s. 


EX. I—14. 


CALS LX. 


1 The Lord spak to Moyses, in deseert 
of Synay, the secounde 3eer aftir that thei 
weren went out of the loond of Egipte, 

- athe first moneth, seiynge, The sones of 

3 Yrael doo thei paske in his tyme, the 
fourtenthe day of this moneth, at euen, 
aftir alle the serymonyes and the iusti- 

afiyngis of it. And Moyses comaundide 
to the sones of Irael, that thei shulden 

5doo paske; the whiche diden in his tyme, 
the fourtenthe day of the moneth, at euen, 
in the mount of Synay; aftir alle thingis 
that the Lord comaundide to Moyses, 

6 diden the sones of Yrael. And loo! summe 
vnelene. vpon the soule of man, that 
my3ten not doo paske in that day, go- 

zynge to Moyses and Aaron, seiden to 
hem, Vnclene we ben vpon the soule of a! 
man; whi be we bigilid, that we mowen 
not offre the offrynge to the Lord in his 

gtyme, amonge the sones of Yrael? To 
whoin answerde Moyses, Stoonde 3e, that 
I counseil, what the Lord comaundith® of 
930w. And the Lord spak to Moyses, sei- 
io ynge, Spek to the sones of Yrael, A man 
that were vnclene vpon a soule, other in 
the fer weye, in the folk of 3oure kynde, 
ido he paske to the Lord the secounde 
monethe, the fourtenthe day of the moneth, 
at euen; with therf looues and wijlde le- 
12tuses he shal eete it. Thei shulen not 
leeue of it eny thing vnto the morwe, 
and boon of it thei shulen not breeke; 

13 al the rijt of phase thei shulen kepe. And 
if eny forsothe is clene, and was not in 
the weye, and 3it dide not the paske, that 
soule shal be out putte fro his puples, for 
sacrifice he offrede not to the Lord in his 

14tyme; his synne he shal bere. A pil- 
grime forsothe and a comlynge, if there 
were anentis 30w, do he paske to the 


10m. Bpbern. 


10m. 1s. ™ make thei1. ®° that is, in 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


© Om. plures. 


391 


CAP. IX. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, in the ‘de-1 
seert of Synay, in the secounde 3eer aftir 
that! thei 3eden out of the lond of Egipt, 
in the firste moneth, and seide, The sones2 
of Israel make™ pask in his tyme, in” thes 
fourtenthe day of this monethe, at the° 
euentid, bi alle the cerymonyes and iusti- 
fiyngis therof?. And Moises comaundide4 
to the sones of Israel, that thei schulden 
make pask; whiche? madent in his tyme,s 
in the fourtenthe dai of the monethe, at 
euentid, in the hil of Synai; bi alle thingis 
whiche® the Lord comaundide to Moises, 
the sones of Israel diden. Lo'! forsothes 
sumimen" yneleene on’ the soule of man, 
that my3ten not” make pask in that dai, 
nei3iden to Moises and Aaron*, and seiden 7 
to hem, We ben vicleene ‘on the soule of 
many; whi ben we defraudid’, that we 
moun not offre an offryng to the Lord in 
his tyme, among the sones of Israel? Tos 
whiche* Moises answeride, Stonde 3e?, that 
Y take counseil, what the Lord comaundith 
of 3ou. And the Lord spak to Moises, and9 
seide, Speke thou to the sones of Israel, A 10 
man of 30ure folk which* is vncleene ‘on 
the@ soule, ether® in the weie fert, make he  -t fe, in La- 
‘ tyu bokis it is 
pask to the Lord in the secounde imonethe, 11 adaia, in joure 
in the fourtenthe dai of the monethe, at a a 
euentid; with therf looues and letusis of 14" %ere &* 
the feeld he schal ete it. Thei sehulen not 12 
leene ony thing therof til’ the morewtid, 
and thei schulen not breke a boon therof ; 
thei schulen kepe al the custom of pask. 
Forsothe if ony man is bothe® cleene, and 13 
is’ not in the weie, and netheles made’ not 
pask, thilke man schal be distried fro hise 
puplis, for he offeride not sacrifice to the 
Lord in his tyme*; he schal bere his synne. 
Also if a pilgrym and comelyng'{ is anentis 14 ¢ tat is, « 


‘ ertid 
3ou, make he pask to the Lord, bi the cery- fine tawe of 


Jewis. BCGEQ. 


™ comaunde BEFH. 


P of that solempnytee 1s. 4 the whiche 1. 


t maden if 1. maden paske ss, ‘%thatis. tOm.1n. summe pagrt. Vine. pr.m. vpis. not for 
unclennesse s. *to Aaroni. Yvponmannussonlers. bigilid 1s. the whiche1. > 3e aside, or 
abidiths. C¢thatis. 4yponais. Cethirisis. ftiltokerrx. & Om. plures. bheisis. the 
made 1g. * tyme sett or couenable s. 1a comelyng BpiKLs. 


392 


Lord, aftir the cerymonyes and iustifi- 
yngis of it; the same heest shal be anentis 
jou, as wel of the comlyng as of the® 
1s with ynne born. Therfor the day in the 
which the tabernacle is arerid, conerde it 
a clowd; fro euen forsothe vpon the tent 
16 was as liknes of fier vnto the morwe. So 
it was doon contynuly, bi the day conerde 
it a clowd, and bi the ny3t as liknes of 
\7fier. And whanne the clowd was takun 
awey, that kepte the tabernacle, thanne 
wenten forthe the sones of Yrael, and in 
the place where stood the clowd, there 
is thei setten tentes. At the maundement of 
the Lord thei wenten forthe, and at the 
maundement of hym thei picchiden® the 
tabernacle. Al the daies in the whiche 
stood the clowd ypon the tabernacle, thei 
19 dwelten in the same place. And if it felle 
that myche tyme it dwelte vpon it, the 
sones of Yrael weren in the bisi waardes 
of the Lord, and thei wenten not forthe, 
20as feel dais as the clowde were vpon the 
tabernacle. At the maundement of the 
Lord, thei arereden tentes, and at the 
maundement of hym thei putten down. 
21 And if the clowd were fro enen to the 
morwe, and anoon the morwe tide laft of, 
thei wenten forthe ; and if aftir day and 
ny3t it 3ede awey, thei scaterden the 
22tentes. Whether twey or o moneth, or 
lenger tyme, it were vpon thet abernacle, 
the sones of Yrael dwelliden in the same 
place, and wenten not forthe ; anoon for- 
sothe as it wente awey, thei meueden 
23the tentes. Bi the word of the Lord thei 
pijten tentes, and bi the word of hym 
thei wenten forthe; and thei weren in the 
bisy waardes of the Lord, after the heest 
of hym, bi the hoond of Moyses. 


n Om. BDEFI. 


m the iustifiyngis 1s. "heest 1s. © licnesses o. 
tente, ether tab. GKQ. $ the enentid 1s. 
vheeste 1s. W heeste 1s. * the dates rs, 


4 heeste 1s. ¢€diden hem a pr. m. Is. 


ther w. ita. 7 vpon 1s. 
* hond or ordynaunce Is. 


NUMBERS. 16.2 


P vpon Is. 

t ynto 1s. til to ELP. 
Yvpon Is. 
£ was stonding vpon the tabernacle s. 
i left or gor thennus 1s. & a ny3t 1s. 1 the cloude 1. ™ Om. 1. 


sand plures. * the cloude 1s. 


. 1§—23. 


monyes and iustifiyngis™ therof; the same 
comaundement" schal be anentis 3ou, as wel 
to a comelyng as to a man borun in the 
loond. Therfore in the dai in which the 15 
tabernacle was reisid, a cloude hilide it; 
sotheli as the licnesse® of fier was on? the? 
tente’ fro euentid: til' thett morewtid. Thus 16 
it was don continneli, a cloude hilide it* 
bi dai, and as the licnesse of fier bi ny3t. 
And whanne the cloude that hilide the 17 
tabernacle was takun awei, thanne the 
sones of Israel 3eden forth, and in the 
place where the cloude stood, there thei 
settiden tentis. At the comaundement’ of 1s 
the Lord thei 3eden forth, and at his co- 
maundement thei settiden the tabernacle. 
In alle daies* in whiche the cloude stood 
onY the tabernacle, thei dwelliden in the 
same place. And if it bifelde that itis 
dwellide in? myche tyme on® the taber- 
nacle, the sones of Israel weren in the 
watchis of the Lord, and thei 3eden not 
forth, in hou many ever daies the cloude 20 
was on" the tabernacle. At the comaunde- 
ment? of the Lord thei reisiden tentis®, and 
at his comaundement* thei diden® doun. 
If the cloude was! fro euentid’ ‘til to” the 21 
morewtid, and anoon in the morewtid 
hadde left’, thei 3eden forth; and if aftir 
a dai and ny3t* it! hadde go awei, thei 
seateriden, ‘ether diden doun™, tentis™. 
Whether in two°® monethis, ether? in 022 
monethe, ether in lengere tyme, ‘the 
cloude. hadde be on* the tabernacle, the 
sones of Israel dwelliden in the same 
place, and 3eden not forth; but* anoon 
as itt hadde go awey, thei moueden tentis”. 
Bi the word of the Lord thei settiden 23 
tentis*, and bi his word thei wenten forth; 
and thei weren in the watchis of the 
Lord, bi his comaundement", bi the hond* 
of Moyses. 


© fytchiden BDEFU. 


aOm. vp. Ttente, thal is, tabernacle Be. 
tt Om. EP. u the tabernacle 1s. 
b heeste rs. © the tentis 1s. 
& the euentid 1s.) vnto ts. 
nthe tentis 1s. ° the tweye B. P whe- 
u the tentis 1s. V her tentis ts. ® heeste is. 


ZOm.s. 4 vpon Is. 


X. 


1—I12. 


CAP. X. 


1 The Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, . 


2Mak to thee two beten out silueren 
trompes, with the whiche thow mayst 
clepe togidere the multitude, whanne the 
3 tentis ben to be meued. And whanne thow 
* sownest with thi trompes, al the folk shal 
be gederid ‘to thee? at the dore of the 
4tabernacle of the boond of pees. If onys 
thow sownest, shulen come to thee the 
princes and the heedis of the multitude 
5of Irael; if forsothe lenger and stownd- 
meel trompynge sowne, the firste, that ben 
at the eest plage, shulen meue the tentis. 
6In the secounde forsothe sownynge and 
euen 3ollynge of the trompe, shulen rere 
the tentys that dwellen at the sowth; 
and aftir this maner that other shulen 
doo, 3ollynge the trompes into weendynge 
7forthe. Whanne forsothe the puple is to 
gederynge togidre, shal be symple criynge 
of trompes, and not stowndmeel thei shu- 
slen 3olle. The sones of Aaron preest4 
shulen sowne with the trompes, and this 
shal be lawful euerlastynge in 3oure ge- 
yneraciouns. If 3e goon out to batayle fro 
3oure loond a3ens the enemyes that stry- 
uen ajens 30w, 3e shulen crye with 3oll- 
ynge trompes, and it shal be recordynge 
of 30w before the Lord 3our God, that 
3e ben delynerid fro the hondes of 3oure 
loenemyes. And if eny tyme 3e shulen 
haue meetship, and feeste daies, and ka- 
lendes, 3e shulen synge with trompes 


vpon the brent sacrifices and the44 pesible _ 


sleyn sacrifices, that thei ben to 3ow into 
recordynge of 30ure God; Y the Lord 
130ure God. The secounde jeer, the se- 
counde moneth, the twentithe day of the 
moneth, the clowd rered* vp fro the ta- 
2 bernacle of the boond of pees. And the 
sones of Yrael ben goon forthe bi her 


P to gider a. 
Ysiluerenr. 2 with the 1. 


yng of ij. trumpis s. 


tentis 1s. lin lijk 1s. ™ south coost 1s. 
trumpis s. 4 or dyuersely s. * the preest 1s. 
ynge 1s. vp onthe is. * the deseert 1sx sec. m. 


NUMBERS. 


q the preest E pr.m. 


a sowne or blowe s, 
otrump 8. © onys, that is, with oo trumpe GkNQx. f eheef men 3. heedis mens, & and a 1s. 

i sowne, that is, ij. trumpis cag. sowne, that is, in twey trumpis KNX. 
= her tentis Is. 


5 trumpe Is. 


393 


CAP. X. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, | 
Make to thee twei siluerneY trumpis betun 2 
out with hameris, bi? whiche thou maist 
clepe togidere the multitude, whanne the 
tentis schulen be moued. And whanne thous 
schalt sowne*® with trumpis, al the cum- 
peny schal be gaderid to thee at the dore 
of the tabernacle of the® boond of pees. 
If¢ thou schalt sowne’ onys°t, the princes 4 
and the heedis‘ of the multitude of Israel 
schulen come to thee; but if a lengeres 
and& departid trumpyng" schal sowne’, 
thei that ben at the eest coost schulen 
moue tentis* first. Forsothe in the se-¢ 
counde sown and lijk! noise of the trumpe 
thei that dwellen at the south™ schulen 
reise tentis"; and bi this maner othere 
men schulen do, whanne the trumpis schu- 
len sowne in to goyng forth. Forsothe7 
whanne the puple schal be gederid to gi- 
dere, symple® ery of trumpis schal be, and 
tho? schulen not sowne departyngli4. Thes 
sones of Aaron preest* schulen sowne’ with 
trumpis, and this schal be a lawful thing 
euerlastynge in 3oure generaciouns. If 3e9 
schulen go out of 3oure lond to batel ajens 
enemyest that fi3ten ajens 30u, 3e schulen 
crye" with trumpis sownynge’, and the 
bithenkyng of 30u schal be bifor 3oure 
Lord God, that je be delyuered fro the 
hondis of 3oure enemyes. 
schulen haue a feeste, and halidaies, and 
calendis{, 3e schulen synge in trumpis om 
brent sacrifices and pesible sacrifices, that 
tho be to jou in to remembryng of 3oure 
God; Y am 30ure Lord God. In the se-11 
counde 3eer, in the secounde monethe, in 
the twentithe dai of the monethe, the 
cloude was reisid fro the tabernacle of 
boond of pees. And the sones of Israel 12 
3eden forth bi her cumpenyes fro deseecrt* 


qq Om. 8. ‘is rered £. 


bOm.1s. ¢Andge. 4trumper. trumpe with 
b trump- 

k her 
P the trumpis 1. tho 


Utrumpe Is. ¥ trump- 


© symple or a litle s. 
t the enemyes Is. 


3E 


t ln Ebreu it is, 
in oon, that is, 
trumpe. KQx. 


If ony tyme 3e 10 


t that is, the 
Jirste day of 
the monethe. 158. 


394 


companyes, fro the deseert of Synay ; 
and the clowd restyde in the wildernes 
130f Pharan. And the first meueden tentes, 
after the heest of the Lord doon in the 
14hoond of Moyses, the sones of Juda bi 
her companyes, of whom the prince was 
1s Naason, the sone of Amynadab. In the 
lynage of the sones of Ysachar prince 
i¢ was Nathanael, the sone of Suar. In the 
lynage of Zabulon prince was Heliab, the 
17sone of Helon. And the tabernacle is sett 
down, the which berynge wenten out the 
issones of Gerson, and of Merarye. And 
the sones of Ruben wenten forthe bi 
companyes in her ordre, whos prince was 
19 Elisur, the sone of Sedeur. In the lynage 
forsothe of the sones of Symeon prince 
was Salamyel, the sone of Surysadday. 
20 Forsothe in the lynage of Gad was prynce 
21 Helisaphat, the sone of Duel. And wenten 
forthe the Caatthites, berynge the seyntu- 
arie; as longe the tabernacle was bore, 
to the tyme that thei camen to the re- 
22rynge place. And the sones of Effraym 
meueden tentis, by her companyes, in 
whos oost prince was Elizama, the sone 
230f Amyud. In the lynage forsothe of the 
sones of Manasse prynce was Gamaliel, 
24the sone ofS Phadassur. And in the ly- 
nage of Beniamyn duke was Abidan, the 
25sone of Gedeon. Laste of alle the tentes 
wenten forthe the sones of Dan, bi her 
companyes, in whos oost prynce was Ai- 
2cezer, the sone of Amysadday. In the 
lynage forsothe of the sones of Aser 
prynce was Phegiel, the sone of Ochran. 
27 And in the lynage of the sones of Nepta- 
lym prince was Ahira, the sone of Henan. 
2s These ben the tentes and the goyngis 
forthe of the sones of Yrael, bi her com- 
29 panyes, whanne thei wenten out. And 
Moyses seide to Heliab, the sone of Ra- 
guel Madianyte, his cosyn, We goon 
forthe to the place that the Lord is to 
3yuynge to vs; com with vs, that we 


8 Om. BFH. 


z heest 1s. 
f thei baren 18. 
2 cosyn Is. 


Y her tentis 1s. 
forth 1s. 


& restinge s. 
m forth 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


4 maad or ordeyned s. 
h her tentis 1s. 
© Om. CDIMORST sec.m. W. 


X. 13—29. 


of Synay; and the cloude restide in the 

wildirnesse of Faran. And the sones of13 

Juda bi her cumpenyes, of whiche the 

prince was Naason, the sone of Amyna- 

dab, moueden first tentisY, bi the Lordis14 

comaundement? maad* in? the hond of 

Moises. In the lynage of the sones of 15 

Ysacar the prince was Nathanael, the sone 

of Suar. In the lynage of Sabulon the1e 

prince was Heliab, the sone of Helon. 

And the tabernacle was takun¢ doun, which® 17 

the sones of Gerson and of Merary baren, 

and ‘3eden out®. And the sones of Rubens 

3eden forth bi her cumpenyes and ordre, 

of whiche the prince was Helisur, the sone 

of Sedeur. Forsothe in the lynage of the 19 

sones of Symeon the prince was Sala- 

myel, the sone of Surisaddai. Sotheli in2o 

the lynage of Gad the prince was Helisa- 

phath, the sone of Duel. And the soues2i 

of Caath 3eden forth, and barenf the seyn- 

tuarie; so longe the tabernacle was borun, 

til thei camen to the place of reisyng®} + in Ebren it 

therof. Also the sones of Effraym, bi her 22} 753,47" 

cumpanyes, moueden tentis’, in whos oost [i tabernacle 

the prince was Elisama, the sone of A- yng of hem. 
5 GKax. 

myud. Forsothe in the lynage of the23 

sones of Manasses the prince was Gama- 

liel, the sone of Phadussur. And in thee 

lynage of Beniamyn the duk was Abidan, 


the sone of Gedeon. The sones of Dan, 25 
bi her cumpenyes, 3eden forth the laste of 

alle tentis'}, in whos oost the prince was + in Ebren it 
Aizer, the sone of Amysaddai. Sothelia¢is tss, the 
in the lynage of the sones of Aser the  costof Dan 
prince was Phegiel, the sone of Ochran. deride to ite 
And in the lynage of the sones of Nepta-27 Se a 
lym the prince was Haira, the sone of 

Henan. ‘These ben the castels* and the 28 

goinges' forth of the sones of Israel, bi her 
cumpenyes, whanne thei jeden ont™. And 29 

Moises seide to Heliab, the sone of Ra- 

guel, of Madian, his alie" ‘ethir fadir of 

his wijf°, We goon forth to the place 

which? the Lord schal 3yue to vs; come 


t Om. «4. 


bbirs. ¢ doon ks. 
i the tentis 1s. 


P that 1s. 


d that 1s. 


¢ thei jeden 
k tentis 1s. 


1 goynge A. 


X. 30—XI. 5. 


doon good to thee, for the Lord good 
30 thingis hath bihoot to Irael. To whom 
he answerde, I shal not goo with thee, 
but I shal turne a3en into my loond, in 
3ithe which Yam bore. And he, Wole 
thow not, he seith, vs forsaak ; thow for- 
sothe hast knowe in what places bi de- 
seert we owen to sette tentes, and thow 
32shalt be oure leder; and whanne thow 
comyst with vs, what thing best were of 
the ritchessis that the Lord is to 3yuynge 
33 to vs, we shulen 3yue to thee. Thanne 
thei wenten forthe fro the mownt of the 
Lord, weie of thre daies; and the arke 
of the boond of pees of the Lord wente 
before hem, bi three daies, purueiynge 
3ithe place of the tentes. And the clowd 
of the Lord was vpon hem bi the day, 
35 Whanne thei shulden goon. And whanne 
the arke shulde be arered", Moyses seide, 
Aryse, Lord, and be scateryd thin ene- 
yes, and flee3 thei fro thi face that 
36 haten thee; whanne forsothe’ it was sette 
down, he seide, Torn a3en, Lord, to the 
multitude of the oost of Yrael. 


CLAP. XT. 


Ther amonge was sprongun a grucch- 
ynge of the puple, as of men sorwynge 
for the traueyl ajens the Lord; the 
whiche whanne he hadde herde, he was 
wrooth; and the fier of the Lord, tend 
into hem, deuowride the latter part of 
2the tentes. And whanne the puple hadde 

cryede to Moyses, Moyses preiede to the 
3 Lord, and the fier is sowpyd vp. And he 
clepide the name of that place Tendynge, 
forthi that the fier of the Lord was tende 
4aj3ens hem. The comoun forsothe of eithir 
kynde that hadde steyd vp with hem, 
brent with desijr of flesh, sittynge and 
wepinge, ioynede to hem togider the sones 
of Yrael, and seith, Who shal 3yue to vs 
5to eete flesh ? We recorden of the fisshes 


1 


Urered BDEFH. 


S$ that 1s. 
¥ jeden forth ts. 

€ it deuouride 1s. f her 3s. 
1 fleishe 1s. ™ thei satten 1s. 


q Om. rkqrstx. 1 Om. x, 
* vpon I. vpon or over 8. 
d vpon 18. 


desire c. n with s. 


NUMBERS. 


t the boond xz. 
2 sett Is. 

& Moises 18. 

© Om. I0sx. 


395 


thou with vs, that we do wel to thee, for 
the Lord bihijte goode thingis to Israel. 
To whom he answeride, Y schal not go39 
with thee, but Y schal turne ajen in to 
my lond, in which Y was borun. And3! 
Moises seide, Nyle thou forsake vs, for 
thou knowist in whiche places we owen 
to sette tentis, and thou schalt be oure 
ledere ; and whanne thou schalt come with 32 
vs, what euer thing schal be the beste of 
the’ richessis whiche® the Lord schal 3yue 
to vs, we schulen 3yue to thee. And ther-33 
for thei 3eden forth fro the hil of the 
Lord the weie of thre daies; and the arke 
of boond' of pees of the Lord 3ede bifor 
hem, bi" thre’ daies, and purueyde the 
place of tentis". And the cloude of the34 
Lord was on* hem bi day, whanne thei 
3edenY. And whanne the arke was reisid, 35 
Moises seide, Ryse thou, Lord, and thin 
enemyes be scaterid, and thei that haten 
thee, fle fro thi face; forsothe whanne36 
the arke was put? doun, he? seide, Lord, 
turne a3en to the multitude of the oost of 
Israel. 


CAP. XI. 


Yn the meene tyme the® grutchyng of1 
the puple, as of men sorewynge for trauel, 
roos ajens the Lord. And whanne Moises 
hadde herd this thing, he was wrooth; and 
the fier® of the Lord was kyndelid on? 
hem, and deuouride® the laste part of thef 
tentis. And whanne the puple hadde cried 2 
to Moises, Moises preiede the Lord, and 
the fier was quenchid. And he® clepid thes 
name of that place Brennyng, for the fier 
of the Lord was kyndlid a3ens hem. And 4 
the comyn puple of ‘malis and femalis®, 
that hadde stied! with hem, brent with 
desire*t of fleischis'{, and sat™, and wepte 
with the sones of Israel ioyned togidere 
to" hem, and seide, Who schal 3yue to® vs 
fleischis? to ete? We thenken on‘ thes 


v Om, 4. 


w her tentis 1s. 
¢ fier or wrath s. 
istied vp 1s. the 
4 vpon 1s. 


uQm. x. Y tho thre ts. 

@ Moyses 1s. » Om. Is. 
h men and wymmien Is. 

P fleishe 1s. 


3E2 


+ or caueitide 
lusty melis. 8. 
marge. 

t This word 
of fleischis is 
not in Ebreu, 
netber in bokis 
amendid, for 
thei desiriden 
fleischis and 
fischis and 
othere thingis; 
as itis seid 
with ynne. 
Lire here. ce 
Qx. 


396 NUMBERS. XI. 6—16. 


that we eten in Egipte gladly; into 
mynde come to vs the goordis, and the 
peponys, and the leeke, and the’’ vniowns, 
6and the garlekes; oure soule is drye; noon 
othir thing byholden™” our eyen but man- 


fischis™ whiche* we eten in Egipt freli‘; 
gourdis, and melouns, and lekis, and oyn- 
iouns, and garlekis" comen in to myndeY 
‘to vs”; oure soule is drief; oure izjen by-6 + 7 ore 


i 4 mynde is 
holden noon other thing ‘no but* manna. very. s. 


7na*. Manna* forsothe was as the seed 
scoryaundre, of the colour of¥ bdelli?. And 
the puple wenten abowt, gederynge it, 
and. breke in a gryndstoon, or powned in 
a morter, seethinge in a pot, and makynge 
of it litil thinne kakis of sauour, as ‘of 
soylid breed. And whanne the dewe de- 
scendide the ny3t vpon the tentes, de- 
loscendide togider and manna*. Thanne 
Moyses herde the puple wepynge bi 
meynees, and eche bi the dores of his 
tent; and the woodnes of the Lord was 
ful wrooth, but and to Moyses it was 
i1seen a thing vusuffrable. And he seith 
to the Lord, Whi hast thow tourmentid 
thi seruaunt ? whi fynde I not grace be- 
fore thee, and whi hast thow put the bir- 
12then of al the” puple vypon me? whether 
Y haue conceyued al this multitude, and 
goten it, that thow sey to ne, Ber hem in 
thi bosum, as a noryshe is woned to bere 
a litil child, and bere into the loond for 
the which thow hast swore to the faders 
130f hem? wherof to me flesh that Y 3yue 
to so myche a multitude? Thei wepen be- 
fore me, seiynge, 3if to vs flesh, that we 
igeten; Y may not aloone susteyne al this 
15 puple’, for it is grenows to me. If othir 
weies it is seen to thee, Y preye that 
thow slee ine, and Y fynde grace in thin 
eyen, that with so myche yuels Y be 
isnot turmentide. And the Lord seide to 
Moyses, Geder to me seuenti men of the 
aldren of Yrael, the whiche thow hast 
knowun, that thei ben oolde of the puple, 


ForsotheY manna was as the seed? of cori-7 
aundre, of the colour of bdellyum, whch? 
is whijt and bri3t as cristal. And thee 
puple 3ede aboute, and gaderide it, and 
brak® with a queerne stoon, ether pownede® 
in a morter, and® sethide® in a pot; and 
madef therof litle cakis of the sauour, as of 
breed maad with oile. And whanne dewo 
cam doun in the ni3t on’ the tentis, also 
manna cam doun togidere*. Therfor‘1o 
Moises herde the puple wepynge bi mey- 
nees, and ‘alle bi* hem silf! bi the doris 
of her tentis™; and the woodnesse® of the 
Lord was wrooth greetli, but also the 
thing® was seyn vnsuffrable to Moises. 
And he seide to the Lord, Whi hast thou 
turmentid thi seruaunt?? whi fynde Y not 
grace bifor thee? and whi hast thou put 
on? me the burthun of al this puple? whe-12 
thir Y conseyuede’ al this multitude, ethir 
gendride® it, that thou seie to me, Bere 
thou hem in thi bosum as a nurise is wont 
to bere a litil 3ong child, and bere thou‘ 
in to the lond for" which thou hast’ 
swore’ to the* fadris ‘of hemY. wherof13 
ben fleischis? to me, that Y ‘3yue to® so 
greet multitude>? Thei wepen bifore me, 
and seyn, ‘3yue thou fleischis to vs* that 
we ete; I mai not aloone suffre’ al ‘this 14 
puple, for it is grenouse to me. If inis 
other maner it semeth to thee*, Y biseche’ 
that thou sle me, and that Y fynde grace 
in thin ijen, that Y be not punyschid® bi‘ 
so grete yuelis. And the Lord seide to1s 
Moises, Gadere thou to me seuenti men* 


wOm. pb. ® bihoolden a. Xman £, manne BDEFH. YOm.e£. 2 wastel p sec.m. cristal p marg. 
@man E. manne BDEFH. » thy gE. Cmy p. 4 multitude £ pr.m. 

Tfishe ts.  § that 1s. t freli, that is, for litil prijs Bcaxgx. freli or plentith of metis for itil pris s. 
ugarlik 1. Youremynders. WOm.1s. *thanis. ySothely 1s. 4 seed or flours. 4 that Bis. 
bbrak it1xs. © pownede if/1xs. ‘and thei1is. ¢ seetheden itiks. thei madenis. & vpon 1s. 
h togidere therwith 1s. i Thanne 1s. ‘ech of is. 1Om.1s. ™ tente Bc. tentis grucchides. % wood- 
nesse, that is, strong veniaunce BCEGKLPQ. © grucchynge 1s. P seruauntiss. 4vponis. ' haue con- 


seyuede 1s. Shaue goten 1. 
x her 1s. Y Om. ts. 
fre or reul s. 
» punyschid or traveilid s. 


Zmetisis. fede 1s. 


i with 1s. 


t thou this puple 1s. "Om. F. for the 1. 
b a multitude ts. 
€ thee that thou releue not this peple and reule it, s marg. 
k Om. Kosx. 


vOm.1s. ¥ swore to 3eue it s. 
© 3yue vs fleishe 1s. 4 susteyne 1. suf- 
f biseche thee 1s. 8 Om. s. 


XI. 17-—25. 


and maystris; and thow shalt lede hem 
to the dore of the® tabernacle of the boond 
of pees, and thow shalt make there to 
17stoonde with thee, that Y descende, and 
speke to thee; and Y shal take awey of 
thi spiryte, and 3yue to hem, that thei 
susteynen with thee the birthen of the 
is puple, and not thow alone be greued. To 
the puple forsothe thow shalt seye, Be 
3e halowid, to morwe 3e shulen eete flesh; 
Y forsothe haue herde 30w to seye, Who 
shal 3yue to vs metis of flesh? wel it was 
to vs in Egipt; that the Lord 3yue to 
1930w flesh, and eete not o day, ne two, 
nef fyue, or tenne, ne® twenti forsothe, 
20 but vnto the moneth of days, to the tyme 
that it come out bi 3oure noose thrillis®, 
and be turnyd into fomynge; forthi that 
je han putte abak the Lord, the which 
is in the myddil of 5ow, and han wepte 
before hy, seiynge, Whi wenten we out 
2iof Egipte? And Moyses seith to the 
Lord, Six hundryd thousandes of foot 
men ben of this puple, and thou seyst, Y 
shal 3yue to hem etynge of flesh an hool 
22moneth. Whether a multitude of oxen 
and of sheep shal be slayn, that it may 
suffice to meete, or alle the fisshes of the 
see shulen be gedryd in oon, that thei 
23fulfillen hem? To whom answerde the 
‘Lord, Whether the hoond of the Lord be 
vnmi3ty? now now thou shalt se, whether 
24my word in dede be fulfillid. Thanne 
Moyses came, and toolde to the puple 
the wordis of the Lord, gedrynge seuenti 
men of the aldren of Yrael, the whiche 
25 he made stonde about the tabernacle. And 
the Lord cam down bi the clowd, and 
spak to hym, takynge of the spiryt that 
-was in Moyses, and 3yuynge to the se- 
‘uenty men; and whanne the spiryte hadde 
restid in hem, thei! profecyden, ne more 


NUMBERS. 


397 


of the! eldre men of Israel, whiche™ thou 
knowist, ‘that thei ben the elde" men® and 
maistris of the puple; and thou schalt lede 
hem to the dore of the tabernacle of boond 
of pees, and thou schalt make? to stonde 
there with thee, that Y come doun, and 17 
speke to’ thee; and Y schal take awey of 
thi spirit?, and Y sclial 3yue" to hem, that 
thei susteyne’ with thee the birthunt of 
the" puple, and not thou aloone be greuyd’. 1 
And thou schalt seie to the puple, Be HO 10 patae Lie lense, 
halewid; to morew 3e schulen ete fleischis” ; Haren Ree 
for Y herde 30u seie, Who schal 3yue to* 


+ and ¥ schal 
take awey of 

thi spirit, that 
is, of the spirit 
of grace 3onun 
to thee, not 


decreessing of 
the grace of 


vsY the? metis* of® fleischis®? it was wel Moises, as 
: ; ees ‘ many candils 
to vs in Egipt; that the Lord 3yue ‘fleischis ben listned of 


g = : the list of 
to 30u4, and® that’ 3e ete not? o dai, ethir19 wth nea.” 


tweyne, ethir fyue, ethir ten, sotheli nether eee of his 
é yo 5 3 : ijt. Lire here. 
twenti, but ‘til tot a monethe of daies, til 20 sceKLrax. As 


. " ci sh 3if many can- 
it* go out bi 3oure nosethirlis, and turne lis weren listid 


by o candi) and 


in to wlatyng; for! 3e han put awei the 5 that candil 
ih™ js j ; hath neuer the 
Lord, which™ is in the myddis of 5o0u, and {acti s. 


3e wepten bifor lym, and® seiden, Whi 
3eden we out of Egipt? And Moises seide 21 
to the Lord, Sixe hundrid thousynde of 
foot men ben of this puple, and thou seist, 
Y schal 3yue to° hem ‘mete of? fleischis‘ 
an hool monethe. Whether the multitude 22 
of scheep and of oxun schal* be slayn, that 
it may suffice’ to mete, ethir' alle the 
fischis of the see schulen be gaderid to gi- 
dere, that tho fille hem? To whom thegs 
Lord answeride, Whether the ‘hond of the 
Lord" is vamy3ti? ri3t now thou schalt 
se, wher’ my word schal be fillid” in werk. 
Therfor Moises cam, and telde* toY the 21 
puple the wordis of the Lord; and he ga- 
deride seuenti men” of the eldere* of Is- 
rael, whiche’ he made stonde aboute the 
tabernacle. And the Lord cam doun bias 
a cloude, and spak to Moises, and took‘ 
aweye of the spirit that was in Moises, 
and 3af¢ to® the seuenti men; and whanne 


€Om.e. fore. gOm.a. Uthyrlys re. i that v. 

- 10m. zr. ™whomis. "to be oolde 1s. © mildemenrip. Pmakehemis. 4withis, * 3yue 
therofs. Sberers. tchargeis. Uthix. Vtraueilidis. W fleishe 1. * Om. plures. ¥ vs to ete s. 
zQOm. mows. ®meten. Om.s. >%Om.s.  ©¢ fleishe cr. d syne 30u fleishe 18. € Om. ¢ pr. im. 
fOm.1s. not oonly1s.  htwentidaies. ‘vnto1s, * the meters.  ! for 67 30ur grucching s. 
‘Mthatr. Mand3es. °Om.1s. Ptoeters. Qfleishe is. 'schal mowe s.  §& suffice this peple s. 
* ethir wher is. 4 Lordis hond s. VY whether eup. wher thers. W fulfillid is, *seide rnp. Y Om. 1s. 
2 Om. 1s. ® eldere men Bis. » the whiche1. ¢hetook 1s. 4he3afis. © therof to s. 


398 


26ouer cesiden. There dwelten forsothe in 
the tentis two men, of whom oon was 
clepid Heldad, and that other Medad, 
vpon whom restide the spiryt; for and 
thei weren discryued, and thei wenten 
27not out to the tabernacle. And whanne 
thei propheciden in the tentis, rennede a 
child, and toolde to Moyses, seiynge, Hel- 
dad and Medad prophecien in the tentes. 
28 Anoon Josue, the sone of Nun, the ser- 
uaunt of Moyses, and chosun of many, 
29 seith, My lord, Moyses, defend hem. And 
he, What, he seith, enuyest thow for me? 
who 3yueth that the puple prophecie, and 
30 God 3yue to hem his spiryt? And Moyses 
is turned a3en, and the more thur3 birthe 
310f Yrael into the tentes. A wynde for- 
sothe goynge out fro the Lord, brou3te 
cau3t curlowis ouer see fro the Lord, and 
he lafte into the tentis, bi the weye, as 
myche as o day my3te be maad redy, on 
eche side of the tentis bi ennyroun; and 
thei flowen in the eyre two cubitis on 
x2 hei3t vpon the erthe. Thanne the puple 
arisynge al that day and ny3t and that 
other day, gederide a multitude of cur- 
luwis; the which made redi ten chorys; 
a chore is a mesure of thretti busshels ; 
and drieden hem bi enuyroun of the 
33tentes. 3it flesh was in the teethe of 
hem, ne defautide siche a maner meet; 
and loo! the wodenes of the Lord styrid 
into the puple, smoot hem with a ful 
34 greet veniance. And that place is clepid 
The sepulcris of couetynge; there for- 
sothe thei byrieden the puple that de- 
syride flesh. And thei goon out fro The 
sepulcres of Lust, camen into Asseroth, 
and dwelten there. 


f and more ouer thei 1s. 
restide s marg. ivpon the 1. vpon s. 
chosen s. ™ tabernacle to profecie s. 
P manye for a wise man and a redis marg. 
tit took 1s. ¥ brou3te hem 1s. 
x Om. Is. y and bare as nT sec. m. 
¢ Om. plures. Gais. ¢ Om. 1s. 
k fleishe was 1s. Iheris. ™ Om. 1s, 
40m. un. ° biriels 1s. 


t forth fro 1s. 4 lust 1s. Om. BE. 


NUMBERS. 


§ Om. 1s. forthere plures. 

k spirit of Moises s. 
2 ran out ELP. 

4 Moyses 1s. 

v he lefte hem 1. he lefte hem or made hem io abide s. 
2 thei 1. tho curlenis s. 
f chore is a mesure that s. 
mm failide hem 1s. 
8 fleishe 1. fleishe, on whom God toke ventaunce and slowe hem for her grucchinge s. 


XI. 26—34. 


the spirit hadde restid in hem, thei profe- 
sieden, andf ceessiden not ‘aftirward®. For-26 
sothe twei men" dwelliden stille in the 
tentis{, of whiche men oon was clepid Hel- 
dad, and the tothir Medad, on' whiche the 
spirit’ restide; for also thei weren des- 
cryued!, and thei 3eden not out to the ta- 
bernacle™. And whanne thei profesieden 27 
in the tentis, a child ran", and teld to 
Moises, and seide, Heldad and Medad pro- 
fecien in the tentis. Anoon Josue, the sone 28 
of Nun, the ‘mynystre of Moises®, and 
chosun of manye?, seide, My lord Moises, 
forbede thou hem. And he‘ seide, What29 
hast thou enuye for me? who 3yueth" that 
al the puple profesie, and that God 3yue 
his spirit to hem? And Moises turnede 30 
a3en, and the eldre men‘ in birthe of Is- 
rael in to the tentis. Forsothe a wynde31 
3ede forth fro the Lord, and took‘ curlewis, 
and bar" ouer the see, and lefteY in to” the 
tentis, in the* iurney, as’ myche as mai be 
parformed in o day, bi ech part of the 
tentis bi cumpas; and tho” flowen in the 
eir bi twei cubitis in ‘hiznesse ouer® the 
erthe. Therfor the puple roos in al that 32 
dai and ny3t> and in to® the tothir dai, 
and gaderide the’ multitude of curlewis ; 
he that gaderide litil, gaderide ten ‘mesuris 
clepid® chorus ; ‘and o chorus conteyneth 
ten® buschels*; and thei drieden tho cur- 
lewis bi the’ cumpas of the tentis. 3it33 


‘fleischis weren* in the! teeth ‘of hem™, 


and siche mete failide™™ not; and lo! the 
woodnesse” of the Lord was reisid a3ens 
the puple, and smoot° it with a ful greet 
veniaunce. And thilke? place was clepid 34 
The? sepulcris' of coueitisef, for there thei 
birieden the puple that desiride fleischis*. 
Sotheli thei 3eden ‘out of* the sepulcris of 
coueitise", and camen in to Asseroth, and 
dwelliden there. 


bh men vpon whom the Spirit of the Lord 

1 descryued or ordeyned 1. ordeyned or 

© seruaunt of Moises 1. Moises seruaunt s. 
t wher not God 8 marg. 8 men also 1s. 
w Om. lows. 
® heizt aboue 1s. b that ny3t 1s. 
& thrittis pr.m. “hOm.1 1Om. 1s. 
v wraththe 1s. 9° he smootis. P that 1. 


t wey men 
dwelliden stille 
in the tentis, 
not bi dispit, 
but by meke- 
nesse, aretting 
hem silf vn- 
worthi to so 
greet auauDs- 
ing; and therfor 
they resseyu- 
eden the 3ifte 
of God, as and 
othere men. 
Lire here. cEK 
LPQX. 


t This is vot iu 
breu. KQx. 


XII, 1-14. 


CAP. XII. 


1 And Mary spak and Aaron ajens Moy- 
ses, for the Ethiopis his wijf, and seiden, 
2 Whether oonli bi Moyses hath the Lord 
spokun ? whether not and to vs also he 
hath spokun? The which whann the 
Lord hadde herde, he was ful wrooth. 
3Moyses forsothe was moost mylde man, 
4ouer alle men that dwelten on erthe. And 
the Lord anoon spak to hym and Aaron 
and Mary, Goo 3e thre alone out to the 
stabernacle of the boond of pees. And 
whanne thei weren comyn ynne, the Lord 
descendide in a piler of* a clowde, and 
stood in the entre of the tabernacle, 
clepynge Aaron, and Marye; the which 
6 whanne weren! goon, seide to hem, Here 
je my wordes; if eny were amonge 30w 
the prophete of the Lord, in visioun Y 
shal apere to hym, other bi sweuen I shal 
7speke to hym. And he™ seith, And not 
sichon my seruaunt Moyses, that in al 
smyn hows is moost trewe; mouth for- 
sothe to mouth I shal speke to hym, and 
opynly, and not bi derknesses and figuris 
he seeth God. Whi thanne dreden 3e not 
9 to bacbite to my seruaunt Moyses? And 
10 wrooth a3ens hem, wente aweie. The 
clowde forsothe wente awey, that was 
vpon the tabernacle, and loo! Marye 
aperide shynynge with lepre as snowe. 
And whanne Aaron hadde beholdun hir, 
1iand saw3 hir thur3 hilid with lepre, seith 
to Moyses, My lord, Y preye, ne sett thow 
not" to vs this synne, that folily we han 
12doon, ne this be maad as deed, and as 
deed with ynne wombe that is throwun 
out fro the wombe of his moder; loo! 
now the myddil of her flesh is deuowrid 
13with lepre. And Moyses cryed to the 
Lord, seiynge, Lord, I preye, heel hir. 
14 To whom answerde the Lord, If the fa- 


k On. zB. 


v thei sciden 1s. 
thidir s. 4 the 18. b a cloude 1s. 
fsweuents. & the whiche 1. 
sec. m. W. 1Qm. A sec.m. Bop. ™ wente ILs. 
q bispreynd ether bisched s. bispred LP. 


v deuourid or ouverhilid s. | biseche thee is. 


NUMBERS. 


I thei weren £ pr.m. 


w spak his will 1. spak or shewede his wille s. 
c entree Is. 
h spechis ether derk liknessts BcGKQX. 
n vpon Is. 
T beseche thee 1s. 


399 


CAP. 2ab: 


And Marie spak and Aaron a3ens Moises, 1 
for his wijf a womman of Ethiope, and2 
seiden’, Whethir Godspak” oneli by Moises? 
whethir he spak not also to vs in lijk 
maner? And whanne the Lord hadde herd 
this, he was wrooth greetli; for Moises3 
was the myldest man, ouer alle men that 
dwelliden in erthe. And anoon* the Lord4 tn Ebm itis, 
spak to Moises and to Aaron and to Ma- ey Li a 
rye, Go* out 3¢ thre aloone to the taber- 
nacle of boondY of pees. And whanne 
thei weren gon yn’, the Lord cam douns 
in a* piler of cloude®, and he stood in the 
entryng® of the tabernacle, and clepide? 
Aaron and Marie. And whanne thei had-« 
den go*, he seide to hem, Here 3e my 
wordis ; if ony among 3ou is a profete of 
the Lord, Y schal appere to hym in reue- 
lacioun, ethir Y schal speke to hym bi ‘a 
dreem'. And he seide, And my sernaunt7 
Moises is not sichet, which? is moost feith- 
ful in al myn hows; for Y speke to hyims 
mouth to mouth, and he seeth God opynlif, 
and not bi derke spechis and figuris. Why 
therfor dredden 3e not to bacbite' ‘ether 
depraue* my seruaunt Moises? And thes 
Lord was wrooth aj3ens hem, and he! wente 
awei. And the cloude 3ede™ a wei, that was 10 
on” the tabernacle and lo! Marie apperide 
whijt® with lepre asP snow. And whanne 
Aaron biheelde hir, and si3 hir bispreynd4 
with lepre, he seide to Moises, My lord,n 
Y beseche’, putte thou not this synne on‘ 
vs, which we diden folili, that this ewon- 12 
man be not maad as deed, and as a deed 
borun thing whicht is cast out of the 
‘wombe of his modir"; lo! now the half of 
hir fleisch is deuourid’ with lepre. - Andis 
Moises criede to the.Lord, and seide, Lord, 
Y biseche’, heele thou hir. To whom the 14 
Lord answerid, If hir fadir hadde spet in 


tor so straunge 
to mie. 18. 


for elerli pass- 
inge other. 8. 


mQOm. £&. ™ in BDEFH. 


xGothi1. Ythe boond bp, 2 yn 
€ gon forth 1. go forth to him s. 
idepraue r.  * Om. pimorst 

© schynynge 1s. Om. L. — P whijt as 1s. 
Svponis. that1s. ™modir wombe 1s. 


4 he clepide 1s. 


400 


der of hir hadde spitte into hir face, 
whether shulde she not namelich® seuen 
days with reednes be vnderhilid? Be she 


seuered seuen days out of the tentis, and . 


is afterward she shal be ajenclepid. And 
so Mari is putte out of the tentis senen 
dayes; and the puple is not meued fro 
that place, to the tyme that Marye is 
a;enclepid. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 And the puple wente forthe fro Asse- 
roth, piz3te the tentes in the deseert of 
2Pharan. And there the Lord spak to 
3 Moyses, seiynge, Seend men that biholden 
the loond of Chanaan, that Iam to 3yu- 
ynge the sones of Yrael, eche of eche 
4}ynagis, of the princes. And Moyses 
dide that the Lord hadde comaundid, fro 
the deseert of Pharan seendynge men 
sprinces, of whom thes ben the names. 
Of the lynage of Ruben, Semmya, the 
csone of Zeeeur. Of the lnage of Sy- 
z7meon, Saphat, the sone of Hury. Of the 
lynage of Juda, Caleph, the sone of Je- 
sphone. Of the lynage of Ysachar, Agal, 
the sone of Joseph. Of the lynage of 
10 Effraym, Osee, the sone of Nun. Of the 
lynage of Beniamyn, Phalti, the sone of 
11 Raphu. Of the lynage of Zabulon, Gedi- 
12hel, the sone of Sody. Of the lynage of 
Joseph, Gaddi, of the septre of Manasse, 
the sone of Susy. Of the lynage of Dan, 
14Ammyhel, the sone of Gemalli. Of the 
lynage of Aser, Sur, the sone of Mychael. 
15Of the lynage of Neptalym, Nabdi, the 
16sone of Naphi. Of the lynage of Gad, 
17 Guhel, the sone of Machi. hes ben the 
names of the men, the whiche Moyses 
sent to biholdeP the loond of Chanaan; 
and he clepide Osee, the sone of Nun, 
18 Josue. Thanne Moyses sente hem to bi- 
holde? the loond of Chanaan, and seyde 
to hem, Stye 3e vp bi the sowth plage; 


© onlich pb. 
x fulfillid 1s. y Om.s. 7 putis. ® Om. K@rTx. 
sende thous. os. fhesente 1s. & the whiche 1. 


gouernaunce 1s. *Om.1s.  * the men Is. 


Stie 3e vp s. 


NUMBERS. 


1 the which 1. 


XII. 15 —XIII. 18. 


to hir face, where sche ou3te not to be 
fillid* with schame, nameli inY senene 
daies? Therfor be sche departid out of the 
tentis bi seuen daies, and aftirward sche 
schal be clepid a3jen. And so Marie wasis 
excludid? out of the tentis bi seuene daies; 
and the puple was not mouyd fro that 
place, til Marie was clepid ajen. 


CAP. XIII. 


And the puple 3ede forth fro Asseroth, 1 
whanne the tentis weren set in the® de- 
seert of Pharan. And? there the Lord2 
spak to Moises, and seide, Sende thou mens 
that schulen biholde the lond of Canaan, 
whiech® Y schal 3yue to the sones of Israel, 
of ech lynage’ o® man of the princes. 
Moises dide that that the Lord comannd-4 
ide, and sente’ fro the deseert of Pharan 
princes, men of whiche® these ben the not propirly a 
names. Of the lynage of Ruben, Semmya,5 (orendenen" 
the sone of Zectur. Of the lynage of Sy-«¢ fausce: cxax. 
meon, Saphat, the sone of Hury. Of the7 
lynage of Juda, Caleph, the sone of Je-. 
phone. Of the lynage of Isachar, Igal,s 
the sone of Joseph. Of the lynage of Ef-9 
fraym, Osee, the sone of Nun. Of theio 
lynage of Beniamyn, Phalti, the sone of 
Raphu. Of the lynage of Zabulon, Ge-11 
diel, the sone of Sodi. Of the lynage of12 
Joseph, of the gouernaunce® of Manasses, 
Gaddi, the sone of Susy. Of the lynage1s 
of Dan, Amyel, the sone of Gemalli. Of1s 
the lynage of Aser, Sur, the sone of My- 
chael. Of the lynage of Neptalym, Nabdi, 15 
the sone of Napsi. Of the lynage of Gad, 16 
Guel, the sone of Machi. These ben the‘17 
names of men*, which! Moises sente to bi- 
holde the lond of Canaan ; and he™ clepide 
Osee, the sone of Nun, Josue. Therfor 18 
Moises sente hem to biholde the lond of 
Canaan, and seide" to hem, ‘Stie 3e° bi-the 
south coost; and whanne 3e comen to the 


+ In Ebru it is, 
seid, for it was 


P ben biholde BE sec. m. FH. 


bOm.s. ¢the which 1. 4 lynage sende 1. lynage 

h generacioun Aa pr.m. ceptre sec.m. sceptre or 
8 D P P P 

m Moises is. "he seiders. 9° Go3e vp 1. 


XIII. 19—30. 


19and whanne 3e come into’ the hillis, be- 
holde 3e the loond, what it is; and the 
puple that is dweller of it, whethir it be 
stronge, or feble, fewe in noumbre, or 
2omany; that loond, good, or yuel; what 
maner citees, wallid, or with outen wallis; 
21the erthe, fat, or bareyn, wodi, or with 
outen trees. Be 3e comfortyd, and brynge 
je to vs of the fruytis of that loond. It 
was forsothe tyme, whanne now the be- 
z2fore rijp grapes my3te be eete. And 
whanne thei steyden vp, thei enserchiden 
the loond, fro the deseert of Syn vnto 
23 Rohob, hem entrynge Emath. And thei 
styeden vp to the sowth, and camen into 
Ebron, where weren Achyman, and Si- 
say, and Tholmay, the sone of Enath; 
forsothe Ebron seuen 3eris before Than- 
2inyn, the eytee of Egipte, is maad. And 
thei goynge vnto the rennynge watir of 
the clustre, kyttiden™ a vyn with his 
grape, the which two men beeren in a 
staf; of the powmgarnettis forsothe, and 
250f the figis of that place thei token, the 
which is clepid Nehelescol, that is, the 
rennynge water of the clustre, for thi that 
the children of Yrael brou3ten thens a 
26clustre. And the spiers of the loond 
turneden® aftir fourti days, al the regioun 
27g00on about, thei camen to Moyses, and 
to’ Aaron, and to al the companye of the 
sones of Yrael, into deseert of Pharan 
that is in Cades. And thei speken to hem, 
and to al the multitude thei shewiden 
28the fruytis of the loond. And thei tolden, 
seiynge, We camen to the loond, to the 
which 3e senten vs, the whiche forsothe 
flowith mylk and hony, as of thes fruytis 
20it may be knowe; but moost stronge 
dwellers it hath, and greet citees, and 
wallid; the lynage of Enachym we han 
3soseen there; Aimalech dwellith in the 


NUMBERS. 


401 


hillis, biholde 3e the lond, what maner lond 19 
it is; and biholde 3e the puple whicli? is 
the dwellere’ therof, whether it is strong, 
ethir feble, ‘whether thei ben" fewe in 
noumbre, ether manye ; whether that lond 20 
is good, ethir yuel; what maner citees ben’, 
wallid, ether without wallis; whether the 21 
lond is fat, ether bareyn, ‘whether tt ist 
ful of woodis, ethir without trees. Be 3e 
coumfortid, and ‘brynge 3e" to vs of the 
fruytis of that lond. Sotheli the’ tyme 
was, whanne grapis first ripe my3ten be 
etun thanne®. And whanne thei hadden 22 
stied*, thei aspieden the lond, fro the de- 
seert of Syn ‘til to”? Rohob, as men? en- 
tryth*? to Emath. And thei stieden? to23 
the south®, and eamen* in to Ebront, 
where Achyman, and Sisai, and Tholmai, 
the sones of Enach, weren; for Hebron 
was maad bit seuen 3eer bifor Thainnys, 
the citee of Egipt. And thei 3eden tilf to 24 
the stronde of clustre, and kittiden® doun 
a sioun with his grape", which twei men - 
baren in! a barre*; also thei token of 
pumgarnadis, and of the figis of that place 
which! is clepid Nehelescol", that is, thees 
stronde of grape™, for the sones of Israel 
baren a clustre fro thennus. And _ the26 
aspieris" of the lond, whanne thei hadden 
cumpassid al the cuntrey, after fourti daies 
camen® to Moises and Aaron, and to al the 27 
cumpany of the sones of Israel, in to the 
deseert of Pharan which? is in Cades. And 
‘the aspieris4 spaken to hem, and schew- 
iden’ the fruytis of the lond to al the mul- 
titude, and telden’, and seiden, We camen 2s 
to the lond, to which thou sentest vs, 
whieh lond treuli flowith with® mylk and 
hony’, as it may be knowun bi these 
fruytis; but it hath strongeste” inhabi-29 
terisX, and grete eytees, and wallid; we 
sien there the kynrede of Anachym’; 


q4Om.z. ‘kuttynofz. Sturnede ajeyn sper. 88 Om. £. 

Pthatis. 4dwelleriscenrp pr.m. 'Om.1 ‘&bentheres. tQOm.1. bringiths. ¥ thanne 
the 1s. Om, 1s. *stied vpis. Yvntors. 2meBcEFLP. 4 entren plures. entring ELP. >» wenten 
vp 1. stieden ups. south coost1s. 4theicamenis. ¢ Om. plures. £QOm. 10s, §& thei kittiden 1s. 
h grapis 1Kos. iwith 1s. * berynge staffis. !1the which 1 4 Nehelesool a. ™ clustre 1s. 8 spiers 1s. 
© thei camen is. Pthatis. (their. ‘thei schewiden 1s, 8 thei teldents. the which 1. Om. c. 


v with hony part. 
giauntis 8 marg. 


W moost stronge 1s. 


x dwellers 1s. 


y Anachym, that is, gyauntis BCRGKLNPOX. 


3 F 


+ In Ebru it is, 
and he cam in 
to Ebron, for 
Caleph atoone 
3ede thidir, as 
Rabi Salomon 
seith, GKQx. 


402 


sowth; Etheus, and Jebuzeus, and Amor- 
reus in the mownteyns ; Chananeus for- 
sothe dwellith biside the see, and about 
31 the flodis of Jordan. Amonge thes thingis 
Caleph swagynge the grucchynge of the 
puple, that spronge a3ens Moyses, seith, 
Stie we vp, and weeld we this‘ loond, for 
32 we mowen gete it. Other forsothe that 
weren with hym, seiden, Nay, to this 
puple we ben" not my3ti to stye vp, for 
33strenger than we he is. And thei mys- 
seiden of the loond that thei bihelden, 
anentis the sones of Yrael, seiynge, The 
loond that we han passid deuowrith his 
dwellers; the puple the which we han 
34 biholde is of huge stature; there we seyen 
thingis passynge the course of kynde, of 
the sones of Enach, of the kynde of ge- 
auntis, to whiche comparysound as lo- 
custis we weren seen. 


CGR Oa. 


1 Therfore rerynge crye al the puple, 
2wepte that ny3t, and grucchiden ajens 
Moyses and Aaron, that is alle the sones 
3of Yrael, seiynge, Wolde God we weren 
deed in Egipte, and not in this wast wil- 
dernes; wolde God we perisshen, and that 
the Lord lede vs not into this loond, lest 
we fallen bi swerd, and wyues and oure 
free children ben lad caytyues’; whethir 
were it not beter to turne a3en into E- 
4gipte? And thei seiden oon to that othere, 
Ordeyn we to vs a duke, and turne we 
5a3en into Egipte. The which thing herd, 
Moyses and Aaron fellen redy into the 
erthe, before al the multitude of the sones 
cof Yrael. And forsothe Josue, the sone 
of Nun, and Caleph, the sone of Jephone, 
the whiche and thei hadden goon the 
7loond, renten her clothes, and to al the 
multitude of the sones of Yrael speken, 


tthe spern. 4 beeth z. 


2 dwellith there 1s. 
the Is. 


a dwellen r. 
€ gon vp. stie vps. 


comp. or lickened s. © locustis or flies 8. 
8 ferful lond that oure bretheren spaken of s. 
Ww betere to vs Is. x or a leder s marg. 


erthe niksw. ¢€the whiche x. 4 thei spaken 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


»b thingis or seiynges 8. 

f spaken yuel of 1. for fere spaken yuel of s. 

uourith or waastith s, * dwelleris duelling among hem s marg. 

P Om. A. 
t fallen there s. 

Y this seiynge s. 

e thus to s. 


XIII. 31—XIV. 7. 


Amalech dwellith? in the south; Ethei, and 30 


Jebusei, and Amorey dwellen in the hilli 
placis; forsothe Cananey dwellith® bisidis 
the see, and bisidis the floodis of Jordan. 
Among thes thingis® Caleph peeside thesi 
grutchyng of the puple, that was maad 
ajens Moises, and seide, ‘Stie we‘, and 
welde we the lond, for we moun gete it. 
Forsothe? other aspieris, that weren with 32 
hym, seiden, We moun not stie® to this 
puple, for it is strongere than we. And33 
thei deprauydenf the lond which thei had- 
den biholde, anentis® the sones of Israel, 
and seiden, The lond which" we cumpass- 
iden deuourithi hise dwelleris* ; the puple 
which! we bihelden is of large stature; 
there we syen summe wondris a3ens kynde, 34 
of the sones of Enach, of the kynde of ge- 
auntis, to whiche™ we weren comparisound®, 
and weren seien as locustis°®. 


CAP. XIV. 


Therfor al the cumpeny criede, and) 
wepte in that ny3t, and alle the? sones of2 
Israel grutchiden ajens Moises and Aaron, 
and seiden, We wolden that we hadden3 
be deed in Egipt, and not in this waast 
wildirnesse +; we wolden that. we pe- 
rischen3, and’ that the Lord lede vs not 
in to this lond’, lest we fallent bi swerd, 
and oure wyues and fre" children ben led’ 
prisoneris ; whether it is not betere” to 
turne a3en in to Egipt? And thei seiden4 
oon to another, Ordeyne we a duyk* to vs, 
and turne we a3en in to Egipt. Ands 
whanne thisY was herd, Moises and Aa- 
ron felden? lowe to® erthe>, bifor al the 
multitude of the sones of Israel. Ande 
sotheli Josue, the sone of Nun, and Caleph, 
the sone of Jephone, whiche® also cum- 
passiden the lond, torenten her clothis, 
and spaken* to® al the multitude of the7 


V chaytyue BDEF pr.m. H. 


© go we vp I. stie we vp s. 4 sothely 
Stois. Athatis. ide- 
Uthat 1s. ™the whichexz. © lickned 1. 
4 schulden perische 18. or diens marg. * Om. 1s. 

u oure fre EILPS. V led or taken s. 
z fellen doun 1s. a into cw. b the 


+ In Ebreu it 
is, ether that 
we weren dede 
in this wildir- 
nesse KX. 


XIV. 8—19. 


The loond that we han enuyrownde is 
sful good; if the Lord were mercyful, he 
shal lede vs into it, and take the loonde 
9flowynge mylk and hony. Wole 3e not 
be rebel ajeus the Lord, ne drede 3e the 
puple of this loond, for as breed so we 
may denowre hem; there is goo from 
hem al helpe, the Lord is with vs, wole 
103e not drede. And whanne al the mul- 
titude cryede, and with stonus wolden 
throwe hem down, the glorye of the Lord 
aperide vpon the roof of the boond of 
11 pees, seynge alle the sones of Yrael. And 
the Lord seide to Moyses, How longe 
shal this puple bacbite to me? How longe 
shulen thei not leue to me, in alle the 
12signes that Y haue doon before hem? Y 
shal therfor smyte hem with pestilence, 
and waast; thee forsothe Y shal make a 
prince vpon a greet folk of kynde, and a 
13strenger than this is. And Moyses seyde” 
to the Lord, That the Egipcyens heren, of 
whos myddil thow hast ladde out this 
14 puple, and the dwellers of this loond, the 
whiche han herde, for thow, Lord, in this 
puple be, and with face to face thow be 
seen, and thi clowde defende hem, and in 
a pyler of a clowde thow goo before hem 
bi day, and in a pyler of fier bi ny3t, 
is that thow slee so myche a multitude as o 
ig6man, and seyn, thow my3tist not brynge 
yn this puple in the loond for the whiche 
he swore, and therfor he slew hem in 
17 wildernes. Thanne the strengthe of the 
Lord be magnyfied, as thow hast sworne, 
isseiynge, the Lord pacient, and of myche* 
mercy, doynge aweye wickeduesse and 
hidows trespassis, and no man giltles for- 
sakynge, the which visitist the synnes of 
fadres into sones into the thridde and the 
l9ferthe generacioun. For3yue, Y preye, the 
synne of this thi’ puple, aftir the greet- 
nes of thi mercy, as thow were merciable 


NUMBERS. 


403 


sones of Israel, The lond whichf we cum- 
passiden is ful good; if€ the Lord is mer-s 
ciful to vs, he sclial lede vs in to it, and 
schal® 3yue ‘Zo vs the lond flowynge with 
mylk and hony. Nyle 3e be rebel ajens9 
the Lord, nether drede 3e the puple of this 
lond, for we moun deuoure hem so as 
breed ; al her* help passide! awei fro hem, 
the Lord is with vs, nyle 3e drede. And 10 
whanne al the multitude criede, and wolde 
oppresse™ hem with stonys, the glorie of 
the Lord apperide on" the roof of the° 
boond of pees, while alle the sones of Israel 
sien. And the Lord seide to Moises, Hout 
long schal this puple bacbite me?? Hou 
longe schulen thei not bileue to me in alle 


‘signes, whiche1 Y haue do bifor hem ? 


Therfor Y schal smyte hem with pesti- 12 

lence, and Y schal wastet hem"; forsothe® 

Y schal make} theet prince on™ a greet’ Coavdlaa.ner 
folk, and strongere than is this. Andis He ne 
Moises seide to the Lord, Egipcians” ‘here Cees 
not*, fro whos myddil thou leddist out this eae 
puple, and the dwelleris of this loond, 14 seide, they dis- 
whicheY herden? that thou, Lord, art in yoyeg ht 
this puple, and art seyn* face to face, and aera 4) 
that> thi cloude defendith hem, and that Peacite 
thou goist bifore hem in a° pilere of cloude4 Ries ae ails 
bi dai, and in a piler of fier bi ny3t, that? 15 in mcondieatis 
thou hast slayn so greet a multitude aso 77" "7" & 
man, and seie thei‘, He my3te not brynge 16 
this puple in to the lond for whiche he 
swoor’, therfor he killide hem in wildir- 
nesse; therfor the strengthe of the Lord 17 
be magnified’, as thou hast swore!, And 
Moises seide, Lord pacient, and of myche1s 
mercy, doynge awei wickidnesse and tres- 
passis, and leeuynge * no man vngilti, 
which visitist the synnes of fadris in to 
sones in to the thridde and fourthe! gene- 
racioun, Y biseche™, for3yne thou the syune 19 

of this thi puple, aftir the greetnesse of thi 
merci, as thou were merciful to men™ go- 


t and Y¥ schal 


Wsaith e. *mychel ze. Y Om. p. 

fthat 1s. ffof good a pr.m. &fors. bheschalis. 4Om. plures. vs is. k Om. plures. hath 
passide 1s, ™ haue oppressid 1s. "%vponis. ©°Om.s.  P ether mysdeme of me scGKQx. or mysdeme 
mes. 4 the signes whiche a pr.m. the wondris that 1s. r Om. plures. 8 sothely 1s. t the a, 
“vpon Is. VY gretterer., Wthe men of Egipt 1s. * Om.1s. Ythe whicher, #han herd is. 4 seyn 
ofhems. bOm.1. ¢thers. 4aclouders. ©¢ heere thei not thatis. f Om. 18. & to 3ene to 
hem s marg. © maad gretes marg. 1 treuli bihi3t s marg. _* forsakynge 1s.) into the fourthe 1s. 
m biseche thee 1s. 4 hem 1s, 


3 FQ 


404 


to hem goynge out fro Egipte into this 
20 place. And the Lord seide, Y haue for- 
2a13yue to hem, after thi word. Y lyue; 
and fulfillid shal be the glorye of the 
22 Lord, in al theYy loond ; netheles? al men 
that han seen my maieste, and my signes, 
and that Y haue do in Egipte and in 
wildernes, and han temptid me now bi 
ten sithes, ne han obeshid to my voys, 
a3shulen not seen the loond for the which 
Y haue swore to the fadris of hem, ne 
eny of hem that han* bacbytide to me, 
24shal se it. My seruaunt Caleph, that ful 
of another spyryt hath folwid me, I shal 
lede into this loond, that he hath goon 
about, and the seed of hym shal welde it. 
25 For the Amelechites and Chanane dwellen 
in the valeys, to morwe ‘meue 3c” the 
tentis, and 3e shulen torne a3en into wil- 
9¢ dirnes, bi the weie of the rede see. And 
the Lord spak to Moyses and Aaron, 
27 seiynge, How longe this moost shrewid 
multitude grucehyth a3ens me? The 
pleyntes of the sones of Yrael Y haue 
esherde. Sey thanne to hem, Y lyue, seith 
the Lord; as 3e han spokun, herynge me, 
2980 Y shal do to 30w; in this wildirnes 
shulen ligge 30ure careyns. 3ee alle that 
ben noumbrid, fro twenti 3eer and aboue, 
30and han grucchid ajens me, 3e shulen 
not goon into the loond, vpon the which 
Y haue reryde myn hoond, that Y make 
jow to dwelle, out take Caleph, the sone 
of Jephone, and Josue, the sone of Nun. 
31 30ure litil children forsothe, of which 3e 
han seyde, that thei shulen be to preye 
to the enemyes, Y shal lede yn, that thei 
seen the loond, the which displesid to 
3230w. 3oure forsothe careyn® shal ligge 
33in wildirnes; 30ure sones shulen be va- 
gaunt" in descert fourti 3eer®, and thei 
shulen bere joure fornycacioun, to the 


NUMBERS. 


XIV.. 20——33. 


ynge out of Egipt ‘til to® this place. And 20 
the Lord seide, Y haue for3ouun to hem, 
bi thi word. Y lyue?; and the glorie of21 
the Lord schal be fillid’+ in al erthe ; ne-~22 + the sistwis 
theles alle men™ that sien’ my mageste’, bows Of Ne 
and my signes", whiche’ Y dide in Egipt bas ‘ 
and in the wildirnesse, and temptiden” me 
now bi ten sithis, and obeieden not to my 
vois, schulen not se the lond for which Y 23 
swore to her fadris, nethir ony of hem 
that bacbitide me, schal se it. Y schalos 
lede my seruaunt Caleph, that was ful of 
anothir spirit*, and suede me, in to this 
lond, whichY he cumpasside, and lis seed 
schal welde it. For Amalech and Cana-95 
nei dwellen in the valeis, to morewe moue? 
3e* tentis, and turne 3e a3en in to wildir- 
nesse** bi the weie of the reed see. And26 
the Lord spak to Moises and to Aaron, 
and seide, Hou long grutchith this werste 27 
multitude a3jens me? Y haue herd the 
pleyntis® of the sones of Israel. Therfor 2s 
seie thou to hem, Y lyue, seith the Lord; 
as 3e spaken® while Y herde, so Y schal do 
to 30u; 30ure careyns* schulen ligge in29 
this wildirnesse. Alle 3e that ben noum- 
brid, fro twenti 3eer and aboue, and grutch- 
iden® a3ens me, schulen not entre im to the 30 
lond, on‘ which Y reiside’ myn hond, that 
Y schulde make 30u to dwelle® outakun 
Caleph, the sone of Jephone, and Josue, 
the sone of Nun. Forsothe Y schal lede 31 
in! 5oure litle children, of whiche 3e seiden 
that thei schulden be preyes ‘ethir ra- 
aeyns* to enemyes, that thei se the lond 
which! displeside 30u™. Forsothe" 3oure 32 
careyns schulen ligge in the° wildirnesse ; 
joure sones schulen be walkeris? aboute in 33 
the deseert bi fourti 3eer, and thei schulen 
bere 30ure fornycacioun, til the careyns of 
the? fadris ben wastid in the deseert, by 34 
the noumbre of fourti daies, in whiche 3e 


yyOm.x, Znertheles zc. @hath sper. »3e shal meue E pr.m. ©careynys E. 4 veniaunt 4. 
© 3eers F. 

oynto1s. Pandas sothlys marg. 4fulfillidis, ‘the menis. Shanseenis. ¢ mageste or my 
grete wondirful doynge s.  % tokenessis 1. tokenes s, ¥ the whiche 1. W han temptidis. * of trew 
bileues marg. Ythatis. #%remoueis. 3e30nre1s. 4 the wildirnesse a prom. > grucchinge 
pleyntis s. © grucchingli s marg. 4 careyns or deed bodies s. han grucchid 1s. fvponis. & haue 
reiside 1s. > dwelle ¢here ts. iin thidir ts. kOm.1. | that 1. ™ to 3ou 8.  sothely 1s. 
° Om. E10 sec.m.LPs. P and vustable s merg. hers. * Om. is, 


XIV. 34—45. 


tyme that the careyns of 3ouref faders 
31 ben wastid in deseert, after the noumbre 
of fourti days, in the whiche je han bi- 
holdun® the loond; a 3eer for a day shal 
be in noumbrid, and fourti 3eer 3e shu- 
len resseyue 3oure wickidnesses, and 3e 
35shulen knowe my veniannce. For as I 
haue spoke, so I shal doo to al this mul- 
titude moost shrewid, that hath togidir 
rysun ajens me in this wildernes; it shal 
36fayle, and dye. Therfor alle the men that® 
Moyses sente to beholde' the loond, and 
the whiche turned a3en, maden al the 
multitude grucchen ajens hym, myssel- 
s7ynge of the loond, that it was yuel, ben 
deed, and smytun in the si3t of the Lord. 
38 Josue forsothe, the sone of Nun, and Ca- 
leph, the sone of Jephone, lyueden, of alle 
39 that wenten to beholde! the loond. And 
Moyses spake alle thes wordes to alle the 
sones of Yrael, and the puple weilide ful 
4omyche. And, loo! eerly firste arysynge, 
thei steiden vp the cop of the hil, and 
seiden, We ben redi to stye vp to the 
place, of the which the Lord hath spokun, 
sifor we han synned. To whom Moyses, 
Whi, he seith, ouerpassen 3e the word of 
the Lord, the which thing shal not falle 
42to 30w into good spede? Wole 3e not 
stye vp, forsothe God is not with 3ow, 
aszlest 3e fallen before youre enemyes. A- 
malechitees and Chanane ben before 30w, 
bi whos swerd 3e shulen falle, for thi that 
3e wolden not assent to the Lord, ne the 
44 Lord shal be with 3ow. And thei blyndid 
togidere styeden vp into the cop of the 
hil; the arke forsothe of the testament 
of the Lord and Moyses wenten not fro 
45the tentis. And Amalecchite descendide, 
and Chanane, that dwelten in the hil, 
and smytynge hem, and hewynge togi- 
dere, pursueden hem vnto Horma. 


fthe speru. & byholdid germ. 


NUMBERS. 


h the whiche sperun. 


405 


bilelden the loond; a jeer schal be aret- 

tid’ for a dai, and bi fourti 3eer 3e schulen 

resseyue 30ure wickidnesse’, and 3e schulen 

knowe my veniaunce. For as Y spak, so3s 

Y schal do to al this werste multitude, 

that roos togidere ajens inc; it schal faile, 

and schal" die in this wildirnesse. Therfor 36 

alle the men whyche Moises hadde sent to 

see the lond, and whiche’ turniden aj3en, 

and maden al the multitude to grutche 

a3ens hym, and depraneden the lond, that 

it was yuel, weren deed, and smytunt in 37 t deed and 
the si3t of the Lord. Sotheli Josue, the Sine satiate: 
sone of Nun, and Caleph, the sone of Je- iy ee 
phone, lyueden, of alle men” that 3eden to 01 te Lord, to 
se the lond. And Moises spak alle these go ethere men. 
wordis to alle the sones of Israel, and the me sen 
puple mourenyde gretli. And, lo! thei 4o 

riseden® in the morewtid first, and ‘stieden 

iny to the cop of the hil, and seiden, We 

ben redi to stie” to the place, of which* the 

Lord spak, for we synneden>. To whiche® 41 

Moises seide, Whi passen4 3e the word of 

the Lord, that schal not bifalle to 3ou in 

to® prosperite ? Nyle 3e stie‘, for the Lord 42 

is not with 30u, lest 3e fallen bifor 3oure 

enemyes. Amalech and Cananei ben bifor 43 

jou, bi the swerd of whiche 3e schulen 

falle£, for 3e nolden® assente to the Lord, 

nether the Lord schal be with jou. And 44 

thei weren maad derk', and stieden* in to 

the cop of the hil; forsothe the ark of the 

testament of the Lord and Moises 3eden 

not awey** fro the tentis. And Amalech 45 

cam doun, and Chananei, that dwelliden in 

the hil, and he smoot hem!, and kittide™ 

doun, and pursuede hein til? Horma. 


i ben biholde pe sec.m. Fu. 


5 rettid pkgr. reckened 1s. t or be punischid for jour grucching s marg. %Om.1s. the whiche 1. 
Wthe ments. ‘*risynis. Y thei wenten vp 1. thei stieden vp ins. %gonvp4. stievps. the 
which 1, > han synned 1s. misbileuing and grucching ajens thee s marg. © whom. 4 ouerpasse Is. 
©€Om.s. fgovpt. stievps. §& falle or be distruyed s. » wolden not 1. i derke, that is blindid in her 


synne BCEGKLNPQX. togidre blynde 1s.  wenten vp 1. stieden vps. k* forth 1s. | the children of Israel 1s. 


m he kittide hem 1s. 


n til to BELP. to 1s. vito K. 


406 


CAP. XV. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
shalt seye to hem, Whanne 3e weren 
goon into the loond of 3oure dwellynge 
3that I shal 3yue to 30w, and shulen doo 
offrynge to the Lord into brent sacrifice, 
or slayn pesible sacrifice, quytynge the 
auowes, othir wilfulli offrynge 3iftis, other 
in j3oure solempnytees brennynge smelle 
of swetnesk to the Lord, of oxen, or of 
4sheep!; who so euer™ offrith slayn of- 
frynge, the sacrifies of tryed flour, the 
tenthe part of ephi, spreynt with oyle, 
the which the mesure shal haue the 
sfourthe part of hyn, and wyn to helde 
the sacrifices of licours, of the same me- 
sure, he shal 3yue into brent sacrifyce, or 
sinto slayn. Bi eche loombis and wethers 
shal be the sacrifice of tryed flour, of two 
dymes, that be spreynt with oyle, of the 
7thridde part of hyn; and wyn to the sa- 
crifice of licour, of the thridde part of the 
same mesure, he shal offre into the smelle 
sof swetnes to the Lord. Whanne for- 
sothe of oxen he doth brent sacrifice, 
other oost, that thow fulfille the vowe, 
90ther pesible slayn sacrifices, thow shalt 
3yue, bi eche oxen, of tryed flour ten 
dymes, spreynt with oyle, that shal haue 
iohalf of the mesure of hyn, and wyn to® 
the sacrifices of° licours to ben helde, of 
the same mesure, into offrynge of moost 
118wete? smell to the Lord. So 3e shulen 
12doo bi eche oxen, and wethers, and 
13loombes, and geetis; as wel with ynne 
14getun as pilgrymes with the same rijt 
isshulen offre sacrifices; o maundement 
shal be and dome, as wel to 30w as to 
isthe comlyngis of the loond. The Lord 
17spak to Moyses, seiynge, Spek to the 
sones of Yrael, and thow shalt seie to 


NUMBERS. 


XV. I—I5. 


CAP. XV. 


And the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, 1 
Speke thou to the sones of Israel, and2 
thou schalt seie to hem, Whanne 3e han 
entrid in to the lond of 3oure abitacioun® 
which? Y schal 3yue to 30u, and 3e make4s 
an offryng to the Lord in to brent sacri- 
fice, ether a pesible sacrifice, and 3e" payen‘® 
auowis, ethir offren 3iftis bit fre wille, 
ethir" in 30ure solempnytees 3e brennen’ 
odour’ of * swetnesse to the Lord, of oxun, 
ether of scheep; who euer offrith the’4 
slayn sacrifice, schal offre a? sacrifice of flour, 
the tenthe part of ephi, spreynt togidere 
with oile, which* oil schal haue a mesure 
the fourthe part of hyn; and he schals 
3yue wyn to fletynge sacrifices to be sched’, 
of the same mesure, in to brent. sacrifice, 
and slayn sacrifice. Bi ech loomb andé 
ram schal be the sacrifice of flour, of twey 
tenthe partis, which® schal be spreynt to- 
gidere with oile, of the thridde part of 
hyn; and he schal offre wyn to the flet-7 
ynge sacrifice, of the thridde part of the 
same mesure, in to odour! of swetnesse to 
the Lord. Forsothe® whanne thou makist 8 
a brent sacrifice, ethir an offryng of oxun, 
that thon fillef avow, ethir pesible sacri- 
fice, thou schalt 3yue, bi ech oxe, thre tenthe9 
partis of flour®, spreynt togidere with oile, 
which? schal haue the half of! mesure of 
hyn; and thou schalt 3yue wyn to fletynge 10 
sacrifices‘ to be sched!, of the same mesure, 
in to offryng of the swettest odour™ to the 
Lord. So 3e schulen do bi ech oxe, and i 
ram, and lomb, and kide; as wel men13 
borun in the lond, as pilgrymyst{, schulen 14 + that is, men 
offre sacrifices bi the same custom; 0 co-15 (eine of 
maundement and doom schal be, as wel ‘%!* ®°x@*- 
to 30u as to comelyngis of the lond. Andie 
the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Speke 17 
thou to the sones of Israel, and thou schalt 


k sootnes E passim. 1 sheep schal offer speru. mer £. 1 to helde z pr.m. © Om. BEFH. 
P soot E passim. 

© dwelling is. Pthat1, 4 schul make 3s. 3if 3e 1s. § schul paie 3oure 1. shulen paie or do joure s. 
tbijzoures. Uethir 3if1s. Vv shul brenne 1s. smelling 1s. *Om.s. Y¥ Om. 10R sec.m. sT sec.m. 
7Om.a. athe which. bheldi. ¢thewhichi. 4 smellyng is. ©sothely 1s, f fulfilis. & tried 
flour is. b the which 1. iQm.is.  sacrificec. held 1. ™ smell ts. 


XV. 16—30. 


ishem, Whanne 3e comen into the loond 
19that I shal 3yue to jou, and eete of the 
looues of that regioun, 3e shulen sever 
20the first fruytis to the Lord of 3oure 
meetis ; as of the flores the’? first fruytis 
213e shulen seuere, so and of sowelis 3e 
shulen 3yue the first fruytis to the Lord. 
22 That if bi ignoraunce 3e passen bisides 
eny thing of thes that the Lord hath 
23spokun to Moyses, and hath comaundide 
bi hym to 3ow, fro the day that he bi- 
214gunne to comaunde, and ouer, and weren 
for3etun to do, the multitude shal offre 
a calf of the droue, brent sacrifice into 
moost swete smelle to the Lord, and sa- 
crifices of it, and offerd lycours, as the 
cerymonyes of it axen, and a goot for 
25synne. And the preest shal preye for al 
the multitude of the sones of Irael, and 
it shal be for3euen4, for not wilfuli thei 
synneden; netheles offrynge the encens 
to the Lord for hem silf, and for synne, 
2¢and her errour; and it shal be for3ounn 
to al the folk of the sones of Irael, and 
to the comlyngis that pilgrymagen a- 
monges hem, for the blame is of al the 
27puple bi ignoraunce. That if a lijf vn- 
knowynge synne, he shal offre a she goot 
asof o 3eer for his: synne; and the preest 
shal preye for hym, for vnwityngly he 
synnede before’ the Lord; and he shal 
purchase to hym for3yuenes, and it shal 
29 be for3eue toé hym. As wel to the with- 
ynne born as to the comlyngis, 0: lawe 
shal be of alle that synnen vnknowynge. 
30 A lijf forsothe that bi pride eny thing of 
synne doth, whether citeseyn he be, other’ 
pilgrime, for a3ens the Lord he was rebel, 
3the shal perishe fro his puple; the word 
forsothe of the Lord he dispiside, and the 
heest of hym he made at nou3t; therfor 
he shal be doon awey, and he shal: bere 
32his wickidnes. And it was doon whanne 
the sones of Yrael weren in wildernes, 


PP of the a. 


P Om. 8. 
t fro now forth 3 marg. 


Xthat 1s. © whanne 3e schul ete 1s. 
3oure sewis or somlis 8. 


NUMBERS. 


4 forzeuen to al the folc of the sones 4. 


4 30ure corn Is. 
udo this 1. do his heest s. 


407 


seie to hem, Whanne 3e comen in to the1s 
lond which" Y schal 3yue to jou, and '‘3e 19 
eten® of the looues of that? cuntrey, 3¢e 


schulen departe the firste fruytis} of 3oure 20 + the firste 


metis to the Lord; as 3e schulen departe 
the firste fruytis of corn4 flooris, so 3e21 
schulen 3yue the firste fruytis also’ of 
sewis* to the Lord. That if bi ignoraunce 22 
3e passen ony of tho thingis whiche the 
Lord spak to Moyses, and comaundide bi23 
hym to 30u, fro the dai in which he bigan 
to comaunde, and ouvert, and the multitude 24 
hath for3ete to do", it schal offre a calf of 
the drooue, brent sacrifice in to swettist’ 
odour to the Lord, and the sacrificis ther- 
of, and fletynge offryngis’, as the cerymo- 
nyes therof axen; and it schal offre a‘buc 
of geet* for syntie. And the preest schal 2s 
preie for al the multitude of the sones of 
Israel, and it schal be for3ounn to hem, 
for’ thei synneden not wilfuli. And ne- 
uerthelesse thei schulen offre encense to 
the Lord for hemsilf, and for her synne 
and errourY; and it schal be for3ouun to26 
al the puple of the sones of Israel, and to 
comelyngis’ that ben pilgryms among hem, 
for it is the synne of al the multitude bi 
ignoraunce. That if a* soule> synneth vn-27 
wityngli®, it schal offre a geet of o 3eer for 
his synne; and the preest schal preye for 
that soule, for it synnede vnwityngli bifor 
the Lord; and the preest schal gete for-2x 
3yuenesse to it, and synne* schal be for- 
3ouun to it®. As wel to menf borun in the29 
lond' as to comelyngis, 0 lawe schal be of 
alle that synnen vnwityngli. Forsothe® a30 
man that doith ony synne bi pride, schal 
perische’ fro his puple, whether he be a 
citeseyn, ethir a pilgrym, for he was rebel 
ajens the Lord; for he dispiside the word 31 
of the Lord, and made voide his co- 
maundement"; therfor he schal be doon 
awei, and schali bere his owne*® wickid- 
nes. Forsothe! it was doon, whanne the32 


r Om. BDEFH. 


ralso and K. — 8 3oure sowuels 1. 


Vv ful swete smellyng 1. 


swettist smelling s. _ W offryngis that the peple shal offre s. * goot bucke 1s. -Y her errour is, 2 the 
comelyngis 1s. ®o plures. blijf1. ¢vnwitynge. thesynnerkx. ¢himgx. famank. 
&sothely 1s. bheest 1s. ihe schal1. * Om. isx. ! sothely 1. 


408 


and thei fonden a man gederynge stikkis 
33in the holi day, thei brou3ten hym to 
Moyses and Aaron, and to al the multi- 
34tude; the whiche closeden hym into pri- 
soun, vnknowynge what vpon hym thei 
35 oweden’ to doo. And the Lord seide to 
Moyses, Bi deeth die this man; throw 
hym down with stonus al the folk ‘with 
360ut' the tentis. And whanne thei had- 
den ladde hym with out, thei threwen 
hym down with stonus, and he was deed, 
37as the Lord comaundide. And the Lord 
3sseide to Moyses, Spek to the sones of 
Yrael, and thou shalt seie to hem, that 
thei maken to hem" hemmes bi foure 
corners of the mantils, puttynge in hem 
solacynetyn filetis; the whiche whanne thei 
seen, thei reeorden of alle the maunde- 
mentis of the Lord, that thei folowen not 
her owne thou3tis and eyen, by dyuerse 
4othingis lecherynge; but more thei hau- 
ynge mynde of the heestis of the Lord, 
41doon hem, and ben holy to her God’. I 
the Lord 3oure God, that haue ladde 30w 
out of the loond of Egipte, that Y were 
joure God. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 Loo! forsothe Chore, the sone of Ysuar, 
the sone of Caath, the sone of Leuy, and 
Datan and Abyron, the sones of Heliab, 
and Hon, the sone of Pheleph, of the 

2sones of Ruben, arysen a3ens Moyses, 
and other of the sones of Yrael, two hun- 
dryd and fifty noble men of the synagoge, 
and the whiche in tyme of counseil bi 

3names weren eclepid. And whanne thei 
stoden a3ens Moyses and Aaron, thei 
seiden, It sufficith to vs, for al the multi- 
tude of halowis is, and in hem is the 
Lord ; whi ben 3e arered vpon the puple 
4of the Lord? The whiche thing whanne 
Moyses hadde herde, he felle redy into 


Sowten bp. t out of BDEFH. 


m Om. cK. thei hadden 1s. ™ sabot day 1s. 


wisten Is. $ to Is. t killiden 1s. 
wOm.1s.  * heestis 1. the heestis s. 
athats. >6Om.1. © the sone Is. 


& thees stoden Is. 


presumptuously s marg. * fel doun 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


u Om. aprH. to him pb. 


© the whiche 1. 
u her mentils 1s. 
the comaundementis x. 
4 yiseden c. han rise plures. 
&€ 30ur owne comyng or doing 8 marg. 
1 ypou 3s. 


XV. 31-—XVI. 4. 


sones of Israel weren in wildirnesse, and 

hadde™ founde a man gaderynge woode in 

the ‘day of sabat", thei brou3ten hym to3s 

Moises, and to Aaron, and to al the mul- 

titude ; whiche® closiden? hym in to4 pri-34 

soun, and wisten™t not what thei schulden — ¢ «xd wisten 

do of* hym. And the Lord seide togswisten north 

Moises, This man die bi deeth; al the cum- *4°44° a 

peny oppresse hym with stoonus with out die oneareee 
the tentis. And whanne thei hadden leds pea ry 
hym with out forth, thei oppressiden' him to bem. Lire 

with stoonus, and he was deed, as the ei 

Lord comaundide. Also the Lord seide37 

to Moises, Speke thou to the sones of Is-38 

rael, and thou schalt seye to hem, that 

thei make to hem hemmes bi foure cor- 

neris of mentils", and setteY laces of ia- 

cynet ‘in tho”; and whanne thei seen thoo, 39 

haue thei mynde of alle comaundementis* 

of the Lord, lest thei suen her thou3tis 

and izenY, doynge fornycacioun bi dyuerse 

thingis ; but more be thei myndeful of the 4o 

‘Lordis heestis?, and do thei tho, and be 

thei hooli to her God. Y am 3oure Lord 41 

God, which® ledde 30u out of the lond of 
Egipt, that Y schulde be 3oure God. 


CAP. XVI. 


Lo”! forsothe Chore, the sone of Isuar, 1 
sone® of Caath, sone® of Leuy, and Dathan 
and Abiron, the sones of Heliab, and Hon, 
the sone of Pheleph, of the sones of Ru- 
ben, rysen? ajens Moises, and othere* of2 
the sones of Israel, two hundryd men and 
fifti, prynces of the synagoge, and whiche 
weren clepid bi names‘ in the tyme of 
counsel. And whanne ‘thei hadden stonde’s 
a3ens Moises and Aaron, thei seiden, Suf- 
fice it to 30u88, for al the multitude is" of 
hooly men, and the Lord is in hem; whi 
ben 3e reisid' on the puple of the Lord ? 
And whanne Moises hadde herd this, he4 
felde* lowe on! the™ face. And he spaks 


Vv good 4. ¥ Om. E sec.m. 


P closiden or puts. @Om.1. © thei 
v festne thei in hem 1. feste thet in tho s. 

Yher izenis. 2 heestis of the Lord 1. 
e othere also s. _‘ f her names 15. 
h of this peple is comen s. _} reisid vp 18. 


m his Is. 


t 


XVI. 5—16. 


5the face; and he spak to Chore, and to 
al the multitude; Eerly, he seith, the 
Lord shal make knowun whiche per- 
teynen to hym, and the halowis he shal 
sett to hym; and whoin he chesith, shal 
enei3 to hym. This therfor doo 3e; tak 
echon his censere, thow Chore, and al thi 
7counseil; and to morwe the fier drawun 
vp, put 3e there aboue the maad encense 
before the Lord, and whom euer* he 
chesith, he shal be holy. Myche 3e sones 
sof Leuy ben areryd. And eft he seide to 
9 Chory, Herith, 3e sones of Leuy. Whether 
litil it is to 3ow, that God of Yrael hath 
seuerde 3ow fro al the puple, and ioynede 
to hym silf, that 3e seruen to hym in 
heriynge of the tabernacle, and stoonden 
before the myche comynge of the puple, 
ioand mynystre to hem? Therfor to hym 
silf he hath maad thee to come ny3, and 
alle thi britheren the sones of Leuy, that 
11 to 30w also preesthood 3e chalengen, and 
al thi glubbe stoonde a3ens the Lord? 
What is forsothe Aaron, that 3e grucchen 
12a3ens hym? Thanne Moyses sente for to 
clepe Datan and Abyron, the sones of 
13 Helyab; whiche answerden, We comen 
not. Whether litil it is to thee, that thow 
hast ladde vs fro the loond that flowide 
mylk and hony, that thow slee in de- 
seert, but and thow haue lordship on vs ? 
14 Forsothe thow hast lad vs into the loond 
that flowith ryuers of mylk and hony, 
and thow hast 3yue to vs possessiouns of 
feeldes, and of vynes; whether and oure 
eyen thow wolt drawe out? We comen 
isnot. And Moises ful wrooth seith to the 
Lord, Bihold thow not the sacrifices of 
hem; thow wost that and a litil asse 
forsothe Y neuer took of hem, ne wrong- 
i6fully traueylde eny of hem. And he 
seide to Chore, Thow and al thi congry- 
gacioun stondith asijd before the Lord, 


1 whiche mens. © applie or drame s. 
parte. § hath toyned 1s. anointide ELP. ¢ Om. 
w the puple Eis. = * Om. c sec.m. 10RST sec. m. W. 


NUMBERS. 


P reisid in to pride s leat. 
plures. 


409 


to Chore, and to al the multitude; he 
seide, Eerli the Lord schal make knownn 
whiche" perteynen to hym, and he schal 
applie® to hym hooli men; and thei whiche 
he hath chose, schulen neizje to hym. 
Therfor do 3e this thing; ech man takee 
his cencere, thou Chore, and al thi coun- 
sel; and to morewe whanne fier is takun7 
vp, putte 3e encense aboue bifor the Lord, 
and wliom euer the Lord chesith, he schal 
be hoolif. 3e sones of Leuy ben myche 
reisid?, And eft Moises seide to Chore, s 
3e sones of Leuy, here?. Whether it iso 
litil to 3o0u, that God of Israel departide™ 
3ou fro al the puple, and ioynede® 302! to 
hym silf, that 3e schulden serue hym in 
the" seruyce of tabernacle’, and that 3e 
schulden stonde bifor the multitude of pu- 
ple”, and schulden* serue hym? Made heY 10 
therfor thee and alle thi bretheren the 
sones of Leuy to nei3 to hym silf, that 3e 
chalenge to 30u also preesthod, and al* thin 
gaderyng* togidere stonde a3ens the Lord? 
For whi what is Aaron, that 3e grutchen 
aj3ens hym? Therfor Moises sente to clepe 12 
Dathan and Abiron, the sones of Heliab; 
whiche> answeriden, We comen not. Whe-13 
thir is it itil to thee, that thou® leddist vs 
out of the lond that flowide with mylk 
and hony’, to sle vs in the® deseert, nof but 
also thou be Jord of vs? Verilit thou 
hast brou3t vs in to the lond that flowith 
with streemys of mylk and hony%, and 
hast 3oue to vs possessioun of feeldis, and 
of vyneris*; whethir also thou wolt putte 
out oure izjen? We comen not!. Andis 
Moises was wrooth greetli, and seide to 
the Lord, Biholde thou not the sacrifices 
of hem; thou wost that Y took neuere of 
hem, 3he™, a litil asse, nethir Y turmentide 
ony of hem. And Moises seide to Chore, 16 
Thou and al" thi congregaciour® stonde? 
asidis half bifor the Lord, and Aaron to 


q hereth 1. hecrith mes. 1° de- 
Vv the tabernacle EIKLPQST pi. m. 
2 that alis. 4 glubbe or heep 1. 


u Om. Is. 
y the Lord 1s. 


glub or 3oure gedrynge logedre s. > the whiche 1. © Om. DEFKLMNoPWx. 4 with hony ts. ¢€ Om. plures. 


fnot a. 8 of hony 1s. 
to thee at thin heest s. 
P stondeth 1s. 


h thow hast 1s. 


m Om. cis. n Om. A. 


i possessionns ce. 


k vyne jerdis tr. | not fo thee 1. not 
© congregacioun, thal ts, gaderyng togidere BCKQX. 


3G 


+ be holi, that 
is, assigned to 
Goddis offices 
and presthod. 
BCEGKLPQX. 


t Thei seiden 
this in scorn, 
to signefie that 
Moises dissey- 
nede the puple 
bi false bibestis. 
Lire here. 3cG 
Kax. This thei 
seiden in scorn 
to Moises, hold- 
ing him fals. 8. 


410 


iz7and Aaron to morwe atwynne. Take 3e 
eche 3oure senserys, and puttith vpon hem 
encense, offrynge to the Lord, two hun- 
drid and fifti censerys; AaronY forsothe 
iholde he his censer. The which thing 
whanne thei hadden doo, stoondynge 
19 Moyses and Aaron, and thei hadden ge- 
deryde on an heepe a3ens hem al the mul- 
titude at the dore of the tabernacle, to 
20alle aperyd the glorye of the Lord. And 
the Lord spak to Moyses and Aaron, and 
21seith, Be je seuerd fro the myddil of this 
congregacioun, that hem grijslich? Y make 
22lost. The whiche fellen redi into the 
face, and seiden, Moost stroong God of 
the spirytis of al flesh*, whether oon syn- 
nynge, ajens alle thi wrath shal waxe 
z3cruel? And the Lord seith to Moyses, 
24Comaund to al the puple, that it be se- 
uerd fro the tabernaclis’ of Chore, and 
25 Datan, and Abiron. And Moyses aroos, 
and wente to Datan and Abiron; and 
26folwynge hym the aldren of Yrael, he 
seide to the puple, Goth awey fro taber- 
naclis of © vnpitows men, and wole 3e not 
touche that to hem parteynen, lest 3e be 
27 wrapped in the synnes of hem. And 
whanne thei weren goon fro the tentes 
of hein bi enuyroun, Dathan and Abiron 
goon out, stoden in the entre of her tentes, 
with wyues, and free children, and al the 
28felowshipe. And Moyses seith, Yn this 
3e knowen that the Lord sente me, that 
I doo alle the thingis that 3e seen, and 
not of propre herte hem I brynge forthe. 
29 If thur3 vsid deeth* of men thei dien, and 
visyte hem a veniatnce, with the which 
and other ben woned to be visytid, the 
30 Lord hath not sente me; if forsothe a 
newe thing the Lord doo, that the erthe 
opnynge his mouth swelowe hem, and 


NUMBERS. 


XVI. 17—30. 


morewe bi‘ hym silf. Take" 3e alle bi 3ou* 17 
silf 3ouret censeris, and putte 3e encense 
in" tho, and offre 3e to the Lord, tweyn 
hundrid and fifti censeris; and Aaron 
holde’ his censer. And whanne thei had-1s 
den do this, while Moises and Aaron 
stoden”, and thei hadden gaderid al the19 
multitude to the ‘dore of the tabernacle* 
ajens hem’, the glorie* of the Lord ap- 
peride to alle. And the Lord spak to20 
Moises and Aaron, and seide, Be je de-21 
partid fro the myddis of this congrega- 
cioun, that Y leese® hem sodeynli. Whicheé 22 
felden® lowe on‘ the® face, and seiden, 
Strongeste" God of the spiritis of al fleisch, 
whethir ‘thin yre! schal be fers a3ens alle 
men, for o man synneth? And the Lord23 
seide to Moises, Comaunde thou to al the 2s 
puple, that it be departid fro the taber- 
naclis of Chore, and of Dathan, and of * 
Abiron. And Moises roos, and 3ede to25 
Dathan and Abiron; and while the eldre 
men of Israel sueden hym, he seide to the 26 
cumpeny, Go 3e awey fro the tabernaclis of 
wickid! men, and nyle 3e touche tho thingis 
that parteynen to hem, lest 3e ben wlappid 
in the synnes of hem. And whanne thei27 
hadden gon awei fro the™ tentis" ‘of hem® 
bi the? cumpas, Dathan and Abiron 3eden 
out, and stoden in the entryng? of her 
tentis, with wyues", and fre’ children, and 
alt the multitudet. And Moises seide, In 2s 
this 3e schulen wite that the Lord sente 
me, that Y schulde do alle thingis whiche’ 
3e seen, and YY brou3te* not forth tho’ of 
myn owne herte. If thei perischen bi cus-29 
toinable deeth of men, and wounde? visite 
hem, bi which also othere men ben wont 
to be visitid, the Lord sente not me; but30 
if the Lord doith a newe thing, that the 
erthe opene his mouth, and swolewe hem, 


yand Aaron p. 2 feerlyche puri. ferslich p. the flesh 4. » tabernacle 4. ¢Om. 4. 4 deed anprn. 


a schal stonde bi 1s. 
W stoden there s. 


t Om. Is. § 3oure s. 
x tabernacles dore 1. 


t takith joure Is. 
tabernacle dore s. 


uon plures. vponis. V holde he1. 
y hem, that is, a3ens Moyses and Aaron nce 


KNQX. Moises and Aaron 1s. 7 glorie or riz3twisnesse s marg. *®hemalle 1s. » to Aaron is. © spille 1. 
4 The whiche 1. ¢ fellen doun is. fvponis. & her1s. 4 Moost strong1. i thi wrathis. * Om.1s. 
'the wickid1. ™Om.s. "her tentis1. © Om.1s. P Om. 1sx. QGentree is. Ther wyuesis. § her 


freis. twithal 1s. 


y Om. 1s. 


u holding with hem s marg. 
2 wounde ether pestilence BCGKNQX. wounde, a vengeaunce 1S. 


Vthe whiche 1. that Yis.  * brou3te hem 1s. 


XVI. 31—42. 


alle thingis that to hem perteynen, and 
goon down lynynge into helle, 3e shulen 
wyte that thei han blasfemyd the Lord. 
31 Anoon thanne as he cesyde to speke, the 
erthe is brokun vndur the feet of hem, 
szand openynge his mouth deuowride hem, 
with her tabernaelis, and al the substaunce 
330f hem; and thei dessendiden quyk into 
helle, couerd with the erthe, and thei per- 
shyden fro the myddil of the multitude. 
31 And forsothe al Irael that stood bi enuy- 
roun, flee3 fro the crie of hem perishynge, 
seiynge, Lest perauenture and vs the erthe 
3sswelow. But and fier goon out fro the 
Lord, slew3 two hundrid and fifti men 
36that offerden encense. And the Lord 
37 spaak to Moyses, seiynge, Comaund to E- 
leazar, the sone of Aaron, preest®, that 
he take the encensers that liggen in the 
brennynge, and the fier hidir and thidir 
3sseater he; for thei ben halwid in the 
dethis of synful men; and beet he hem 
forthe into platis, and fitche he to the 
auter, forthi that there is offerd in hem 
encense to the Lord, and be halwid, that 
the sones of Yrael biholden hem for 
39 tookne and mynde. Thanne Eleazar, the 
preest, took the brasen censerys, in the 
whiche offerden thes whom the tendyuge 
deuowride, and he bette hem forthe into 
40 plates, fitehyhge to the auter; that aftir- 
ward the sones of Yrael my3ten haue, bi 
the whiche thei shulden take mynde, lest 
eny of other kynrede, and that is not of 
the seed of Aaron, come ni3 to offre en- 
cense to the Lord, lest he suffre as Chore 
suffrede, and al the multitude of hym, 
41spekynge the Lord to Moyses. Forsothe 
al the multitude of the sones of Irael 
grutchide the day folwynge a3ens Moyses 
and Aaron, seiynge, 3e han slayn the 
42puple of the Lord. And whanne there 


NUMBERS. 411 


and alle thingis that perteynen to hem, and 
thei goen doun quyke in to helle, 3e schu- 
len wite that thei blasfemeden the Lord. 
Therfor anoon as he* cesside to speke, the 31 
erthe was brokun vndur her feet, and the32 
erthe openyde his? mouth, and denowride 
hem, with her tabernaclis, and al the* 
catel ‘of hem; and thei 3eden doun quike 33 
in to helle, and weren hilid with erthe, 
and perischiden® fro thef myddis of the 
multitude. And sotheli al Israel that stood 34 
bié the® cumpas", fledde fro the cry of men 
perischinge, and seide, Lest perauenture 
the erthe swolewe also vs'. But also fier 35 
3ede out* fro the Lord, and killide! tweyn 
hundrid and fifti men that offriden en- 
eense™, And the Lord spak to Moises, 36 
and seide, Comaunde thou to Eleasar, sone" 37 
of Aaron, preest, that he take® the cen- 
seris that liggen in the brennyng, and that 
he schatere the fier hidur and thidur; for 
tho? ben halewid in the dethis of syn-3s 
neris; and that he bringe forth tho" in 
to platis, and naile* tot the auter, for en- 
cense is offrid in tho to the Lord, and tho 
ben halewid, that the sonis of Israel se 
tho" for a signe” and memorial”. Therfor 39 
Eleazar, preest*, took the brasun senseris, 
in whiche censerisY thei? whiche the bren- 
nyng deuouride* hadden offrid, and he 
‘brou3t forth tho® in to platis, and nailide® 
to the auter; that the sones of Israel 40 
schulden haue ¢hingis* aftirward, bi whiche 
thei schulden remembre®, lest ony alien‘, 
and which® is not of the seed of Aaron, 
nei3 to offre encense to the Lord, lest he 
suffre, as Chore sufferide, and al his multi- 
tude, while the Lord spak to Moises. For-41 
sothe® al the multitude of the sones of Is- 
rael grutchide in the dai suynge a3ens 
Moises and Aaron, and seide, 3e han slayn 
the puple of the Lord. And whannei dis- 42 


€ the preest £ pr.m. 


a Moysesis. thers. Cheris. 4 Om. 1s. 


€ thei perischiden Is. 


fOm.s. §Om.1 4 Om.c. 


bhaboute 1. ivs, hie we hennes.s. kdoun s. ! itkitlide 1s. ™cense n. ence EP. "the sone is. © or gedre 


vp 8 marg. P tho censers1s. 4QOm. A. 
maad tos. them 1. 
2 that is, Chore and his felawis. s marg. 


hem 1s. 4 tho 1. tho censeris anentis hem s. 


¥ tho censers 1. 
V signe fo holde in mynde s. 
a had deuourid 1s. 


t censeris 
y Om. 18. 
¢ nailide 


8 naile hem 1. naile he hem s. 
x the preest Js. 
b bett out tho censers 1s. 


wa memorial 1s. 


e take mynde 1. this grete veniaunce of God s. marg. 


f of other kynde x. §that31. » Sothly 1s. i whanne this s. 


3G2 


412 


was sprongun dissencioun, and noyse with 
43 ynue waxed, Moyses and Aaron flowen 
to the tabernacle of the boond of pees; 
the whiche aftir thei ben goon ynne, 
couerde a clowde the tabernacle, and 
4taperyde the glorie of the Lord. And 
the Lord seide to Moyses and Aaron, 
45 Goth awey fro the myddil of this multi- 
tude, also nowe J shal doo hem awey. 
46 And whanne thei lyen in the erthe, Moy- 
ses seide to Aaron, Take a censer, and 
fier drawun vp fro the auter, put incense 
there aboue, goynge anoon to the puple, 
that thow preye for hem; now forsothe 
is goon out wrath fro the Lord, and a 
47veniaunce waxith wood. The whiche 
thing whanne Aaron hadde do, and hadde 
runne to the myddil multitude, that nowe 
wastid the brynnynge, he offrede the 
4smaad encense; and stondynge betwix 
the deed and the lyuynge, for the puple 
49 preyde, and the veniaunce ceside. There 
weren forsothe that weren® smyttun four- 
tene thowsynd of men and seven hun- 
drid, withouten hem that pershiden in 
sothe dissencioun of Chore. And Aaron 
turnede a3en to Moyses, at the dore of the 
tabernacle of the boond of pees, aftir that 
restide the deeth. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Spek to the sones of Yrael, and tak of 
hem sondry 3eerdis, bi her kynredis, of 
alle the princes of the lynagis twelue 
3erdes; and of echon the name thow shalt 
3vpou write to his 3erde; the name for- 
sothe of Aaron shal be in the lynage of 
Leuy, and o 3erde alle the meynees of 
4hem shal conteyn. And thow shalt putte 
hem in the tabernacle of the boond of 
pees, before the witnessynge, where I shal 
sspeke to thee; whom of hem Y shal chese, 


f bytwene BDEFH. 


k ether strijf k marg. 1 the noise 1s, 
Jor the puple 1 marg. s marg. 
forth 1s. 
y he preide 1. he bison3te s. 
ceesside 1s. 4seiyngeis. ars. f vpon Is. 
meynees of the lynage of Leny acakqx. Leuy Is. 


NUMBERS. 


1 Om. plures. 
P thi EFrkLoParstTw. 4 the fyer rs. * fro s. 
u wrathth 1s. ¥ wounde ether veniaunee Bc. vengeaunce 1s. W slayn deed s. * the lyuynge 1s. 
Z vengeaunce 1s. @sleyn 1s. > the boond a pr.m. Br. © perischyng of men 
8 sothely 1s. 
k with kK. 


XVI. 43-—XVII. 5. 


censioun* roos, and noise! encresside, Moi- 43 
ses and Aaron fledden to the tabernacle of 
the boond of pees; and aftir that thei en- 
triden in to it, a cloude hilide the taber- 
nacle, and the glorie of the Lord apperide. 
And the Lord seide to Moises and to™ 44 
Aaron, Go 3e awey fro the myddis of this 4s 
multitude, also now Y schal do awey hem. 
And whanne thei® laien in the erthe®°, 
Moises seide to Aaron, Take the? censer, 46 
and whanne fyer4 is takun vp of? the au- 
ter, caste’ encense abone, and go‘ soone to 
the puple, that thou preye for hem; for 
now ire“ jis gon out fro the Lord, and the 
woundeY is feers. And whanne Aaron 47 
hadde do this, and hadde runne to the 
myddis of the multitude, which the bren- 
nynge wastid thanne, he offeride encense ; 
and he stood bytwixe the deed” men and 4s 
lyuynge*, and bisou3teY for the puple, and 
the wounde? ceesside. Sotheli thei that 49 
weren sinytun® weren fourtene thousynde 
of men and seuene hindrid, withouten 
hem that perischiden in the discencioun 
of Chore. And Aaron turnyde ajen toso 
Moyses, to the dore of the tabernacle of 
boond? of pees, aftir that the perischyng® 
restide. 


CAP. XVI 


And the Lord spak to Moises, ‘and seide4, 1 
Speke thon to the sones of Israel, and take2 
thou jerdis, bi her kynredis, bi ech kyn- 
rede o° 3eerde, take thou of alle the princes 
of the lynagis twelue 3erdis; and thou 
schalt write the name of each dynage 
abouef his 3erde; forsothe® the name of3 
Aaron schal be in the Jynage of Leuy, 
and o 3erde schal conteyne alle the meynees 
of hemi, And thou schalt putte tho 3erdis4 
in the tabernacle of boond of pees, bifor 
the witnessyng, where Y schal speke to* 


& ben BDEFN, 


n Moises and Aaron 1s. © to prete the Lord 


S caste thou 1s. t go thou 


h be writen is. i hem, that is, of the 


XVII. 6—XVIII. 2. 


shal buriowne his 3erde; and I sha] chas- 
tyse fro me the pleyntes of the sones of 
Yrael, in the whiche ajens 30w thei 
égrutchen®, And Moyses spak to the sones 
of Yrael; and alle the princes 3auen to 
hem 3erdes, bi alle the lynages ; and there 
weren twelue 3erdes, with out the 3erde 
zof Aaron. The whiche whanne Moyses 
hadde putte before the Lord, in the ta- 
sbernacle of witnessynge, the day folw- 
ynge he goon a3en, foond that the 3erde 
of Aaron, ‘in the house of Leuy', hadde 
buriowned; and swellynge the gemmes, 
breken out flowres, thei spred abrood 
with leeues, into almaundes be fourmed *. 
9Thanne Moyses brou3te forthe alle the 
3erdes fro the si3t of the Lord to alle the 
sones of Yrael; and eche seen*«, and token 
loher 3erdes. And the Lord seide to Moy- 
ses, Ber a3en the 3erde of Aaron into the 
tabernacle of witnessynge, that it be kept 
there into tokne! of the rebel sones of 
Irael, and the querels of hem resten fro 
1ime, lest thei dien. And Moyses dide, as 
y2the Lord comaundide. The sones of Y- 
rael forsothe seiden to Moyses, Loo! we 
13 ben wastid, and alle we perisshen; who 
so euer™ cometh ni3 to the tabernacle of 
the Lord, dieth ; whether vnto the deeth 
alle we ben to be doon awey? 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 And the Lord seide™ to Moyses and 
Aaron, Thow, and thi sones, and the 
hows of thi fader with thee, shal bere 
the wickidnes of the seyntuarie; and® thou 
and thi sones togidere shulen suffre the 
2synnes of 30ure preesthod. But and thi 


h grucchiden pe pr.m. 


iOm. a. 
uspak p, 9 Om. 4. 


1hem fo the office of presthoode s. 
grucchingis 8. 9 the princes BGikKs. 
8 and he zs. 
knoppis 1. the knoppis or buriounynges 8. 
weren 1s. » Bere thouis. ¢ a tokeue ts. 
€ sothely 1s. f han perishede 1s. € alle be is. 


NUMBERS. 


k oute fourmed rpern. 


m sehal herbi s. 
P alle her is. 

t founde in the house or /ynage of Leny s. 
x woxren greet Ss. 
4 playnyngis ceesse 1. pleynynges or grucchinges ceese 8. 
hOms. i 
3e shulen han tho thingis that ben offrid in the seintuarie for synne of peple. 8 marg. 


413 


thee; the 3erde of hym sclial buriowne, 
whom Y schal chese of hem!; and Y schal™s 
refreyne" fro me the playnyngis"™ of the 
sones of Israel, bi whiche thei grutchen 
ajens 3ou. And Moyses spak to the sonesé 
of Israel; and alle princes? 3anen to hym 
3erdis, bi alle? lynagis; and the 3erdis weren 
twelue, without the 3erde of Aaron. And7 
whanne Moises ladde put tho 3erdis bifor 
the Lord, in the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
he 3ede ajen4 in the day™ snynge, and’s 
foundet that the 3erde of Aaron, ‘in the 
hows of Leuy*, buriounnede’; and whanne 
knoppis” weren greet*, the blossoms ‘had- 
den brokeY ont, whiche? weren alargid in 
leeuys, and weren* fourmed in to ale- 
maundis. Therfor Moyses brou3te forth 
alle the 3erdis fro the si3t of the Lord to al 
the sones of Israel; and thei sien, and res- 
seyueden ech his 3erde. And the Lord io 
seide to Moises, Bere’ a3en the 3erde of 
Aaron in to the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
that it be kept there in to ‘the signe® of 
the rebel sones of Israel, and that her 
‘playntis reste’ fro me, lest thei dien, Andn 
Moises dide, as the Lord ecomaundide. For-12 
sothe® the sones of Israel seiden to Moises, 
Lo! we ben wastid, alle we perischiden‘; 
who euer ueijeth to the tabernacle of the1s 
Lord, he dieth; whethirf we schulen be 
doon awei alle! ‘til to! deeth ? 


CAP. XVIUI. 


And the Lord seide to Aaron, Thou,1 
and thi sones, and the hows of thi fadir 
with thee, schulen{ bere the wickidnesse 
of the scyntuarie* ; and thou and thi sones 
togidere schulen suffre the synnes of 3oure 
preesthod!. But also take thou with thee2 


Kk sisyn gE, Ithetokne x. M™er kz. 


an pleynyngis or 

t day next 1s. 
w the 
a thei 


o refreyne or quenche 8. 
4 azens to biholde the 3erdis 8. 
uOm.s. VY hadde buriouned se sec.m. 
Y braken is. 2 the whiche 1. 


to o see.m. vato thes. * for 
1 that is, 3if eny man 


1 ynto 1. 


presume hinself bi 30ur necligence, not oonli he shal be punished for his fool hardynes, but also 3e for 30ur 
necligence ; therfore it perteynith to 30ur charge to dryue siche awei, and to cthehewe siche diligently, lest 


eny man wize to 30ur office vnduli. s mare. 


t wher, etc. 
thei seiden this, 
not in grnech- 
inge a3enns 
God, but in ax- 
inge remedy, 
and therfor thei 
weren not pu- 
nischid. Lire 
here. CGKQX. 
This was her 
soruful con- 
Sessioun, de- 
siring merci. 8. 
t schulen bere 
the wickidnesse 
of the seyn- 
tuurie, that is, 
3e schulen have 


414 


britheren of the lynage of Leuy, and the 
septre of thi fader tak with thee, and redi 
be thei, and mynystre to thee. Thow for- 
sothe and thi sones shulen mynystre in 
3the tabernacle of witnessynge; and the 
Leuytes shulen wake to thin heestis, and 
to alle the werkis of the tabernacle; so 
oonlich that to vessels? of the seyntuarie, 
and to the auter thei comen not ny3, lest 
and thei dien, and 3e perishen togidre. 
4Be thei forsothe with thee, and waake 
thei in the wardis of the tabernacle, and 
in alle the cerymonyes of it. Of another 
lynage shal not be meengid to 3ow. 
5 Wake 3e into the waarde of the seyntua- 
rye, and in the seruyce of the auter, lest 
indignacioun sprynge vpon the sones of 
6Yrael. Y haue 3yue to 30w the Leuytes 
3oure britheren, fro the myddil of the 
sones of Yrael, and I haue takun a 3ift 
to the Lord, that thei seruen in the ser- 
zuyces of his tabernacle. Thow forsothe 
and thi sones, kepe 3e 30ure presthod ; 
and alle thingis that to the heriynge of 
the auter perteynen, and withynne the 
veil ben, bi the preestis shal be mynys- 
tred; and if eny of other lynage come 
8ni3, he shal be slayn. And the Lord 
spak to Aaron, Loo! Y haue 3yue to thee 
kepynge of my cheef fruytis; alle thingis 
that ben halowid of the sones of Yrael, to 
thee I haue take, and to thi sones, for 
the preestis office lawful euerlastynge. 
9Thes thingis thanne thow shalt take of 
thes thingis that ben halowid, and offerd 
to the Lord; al offrynge, and sacrifice, 
and what euer thing for synne and for 
trespas is 30ldun to me, and fallith into 
holy of halowis, thin shal ben, and of thi 
1osones. In the seyntuarye thow shalt eete 
it; maalis oonli shulen eete of it, for it 
1iis sacryd to the Lord. The cheef fruytis 
forsothe that the sones of Yrael han 


NUMBERS. 


XVIII. 3—11. 


thi britheren of the lynage of Leny, and 
the power™ of thi fadir, and be thei redi, 
that thei mynystre to thee. Forsothe thou 
and thi sones schulen mynystre in the ta- 
bernacle of witnessyng ; and the dekeness. 
schulen wake at thi comaundementis®, and 
at alle werkis® of the tabernacle; so oneli 
that thei neize not to the vessels of seyn- 
tuarie?, and to the autir, lest bothe thei 
dien, and 3e perischen4 togidere. For-4 
sothe’ be thei with thee, and wake thei in 
the® kepyugis of the tabernacle, and in alle 
the cerymonyes therof. An alien schal not 
be meddlid with 30u. Wake 3e in thes 
kepyng" of the seyntuarie, and in the" ser- 


uyce of the auter, lest indignacioun rise 


on the sones of Israel. Lo! Y hauec 
3ounn ‘to 30u*+ 3o0ure britheren, dekenesy, 
fro the myddis of the sones of Israel, and 
Y hane 3oue’ a fre 3ifte to* the Lord, that 
thei serue in the seruyces of his? taber- 
nacle. Forsothe® thou and thi sones, kepe7 
3oure preesthod ; and alle thingis that per- 
teynen to the ournyng of the auter, and 
ben withynne the veil, schulen be mynys- 
trid bi preestis; if ony straunger nei3eth4, 
he schal be slayn. The Lord spak to Aa-s 
ron, Lo! Y haue 3oue to thee the kepyng 
of my firste fruytis; Y haue 3oue to thee 
and to thi sones alle thingis, that ben 
halewid of the sones of Israelt, for preestis 
office euerlastynge lawful thingis. Ther-9 
for thou schalt take these thingis of tho 
thingis that ben halewid, and ben offrid 
to the Lord ; ech offryng, and sacrifice, and 
what euer thing is 3oldun to me for synne 
and for“ trespas, and cometh in to hooli? of 
hooli thingis, schal be thin and thi sones. 
Thou schalt ete it in the seyntuarie; 10 
malisf oneli8 schulen ete therof, for it is 
halewid to the Lord. Forsothe® Y haue1! 
3oue to thee, and to! thi sones and dou3- 
tris*, bi enerlastynge ri3t, the firste fruytis 


P the vessels £. 


™M septre or power 18. 0 heestis 1s. 
t Sothely 1s. 8 On. 10R8T sec. m. 
xOnm.c. yY the dekenes 1s. 
neize therto s. dd fro a. 


i Om. o sec. m. 


° the werkis isx. 
t Om. 10sT sec. m. Ww. 
Z 3oue jou 1. 30ue 30u hem s. 
€ the hooli noumbre 1. 
k thi dou3tris 1. to thi dou3tris s. 


P the seyntuarie 1s. 4 and perischen 15. 


ukepingis re. VOm.1s.  ¥ vponis. 
a of s. theis. ¢Sothely 1s. 4 neize x. 
fmen1. sothly mens. £Om.s.  } Sotheli is. 


tho thingis that 
schulen be of- 
frid iu the 
seyutuarie for 
the syones of 
the puple, as 
Austin and the 
glos here ex- 
powueu. It 
semeth hetere 
thus; thou and 
thi sones schu- 
len suffre the 
synnes of 30ure 
presthod, that 
is, if ony me 
pressen forth 
hem silf bi 
joure necli- 
gence, not one- 
ly thei sehulen 
be punyschid 
for her fool- 
hardyaesse, but 
alsa 3e schulen 
be punyschid 
for 3oure nec- 
gligence, and 
therfor charge 
perteyneth to 
30u to dryue 
awey hem, and 
to hifere es- 
chewe [schewe 
BC.] diligently, 
lest ony man 
neize unduly. 
Lire here. 3c 
GKex. 

+ Lo! Vhaue 
30ue to 304, ete. 
not to do 3oure 
werkis in joure 
housis, but to 
serue in the. 
seruyces of the 
tabernacle. 
Lire here. cox 
ax. 


t that ts, that 
ben bihize to 

the Lord by a 
vow. BCGKQX. 


XVIII. 12—209, 


vowid and offred, Y haue 3ouun to thee, 
and to the sones, and thi dou3tres’, bi 
perpetuel ri3t; he that is clene in thin 
12hows, shal eete hem. <A] the mary of 
oyle, and of wyne, and of whete, what 
euer thing thei shulen offre of first fruytis 
13to the Lord, to thee Y haue 3euen. Alle 
the bigynnyngis of fruytis that the erthe 
getith, and to the Lord ben brou3t, thei 
shulen falle into thin vsis; he that is 
14clene in thin hows, shal eete of hem. Al 
thing that of auowe the sones of Yrael 
153euen, shal be thin. What euer thing 
firste shal breek out of the wombe of al 
flesh, that thei offren to the Lord, whe- 
ther of. men, or of beestis it were, of thi 
¥i3t shal be; so oonlich that for the first 
getun of man prijs thow shalt" take, and 
al beeste that is vnelene, thou make be 
16a3enbou3t; whos a3enbiggynge* shal bet 
after o moneth, with fyue siclis of siluer, 
bi peise of the seyntuarie; a sicle hath 
i7twenti halpens. The first goten forsothe 
of oxe, and of sheep, and of shee goot, 
thon shalt not maak be a3enbou3t, for 
thei ben halowid to the Lord; oonli the 
blood of hem thow shalt heelde vpon the 
auter, and the talw3 thow shalt brenne 
1sinto moost swete smel to the Lord. The 
flesh forsothe shal falle in to thin vse, as 
the sacryd litil brest and the ri3t shulder, 
i9shulen be thin. Alle the firste fruytis of 
the seyntuary, that the sones of Yrael 
offren to the Lord, to thee I haue 3eue, 
and to thi" sones and thi dow3tren, bi 
perpetuel riz3t; the couenaunt of salt is 
ener lastynge before the Lord, to thee, 
20and to thi sones. And the Lord seide to 
Aaron, In the loond of hem no thing 3e 
shulen weelde, ne 3e shulen haue part 
amonge hem; Y the part and thi hery- 


4 dou3tren apern. * Om. BDEFH. 


1 tho thingis 1s, _™ haue 3oue rs. 


NUMBERS. 


8 3enbigeynge BDEFH. 


n merowe or the beste 18. 


415 


whiche the sones of Israel avowen and of- 
fren; he that is clene in thin hous, schal 
ete tho!. Y 3af™ to thee al the merowe" 12 
of oile, and of wyn, and of wheete, what 
euer thing of the? firste fruytis thei schulen 
offre to the Lord. Alle the bigynnyngis 13 
of fruytis whiche the erthe bryngith forth, 
and ben brou3t to the Lord, schulen falle 
in to thin vsis; he that is cleene in thin 
hous, schal ete of tho. Al thing? which414 
the sones of Israel 3elden bi avow, schal 
be thin. What euer thing ‘schal breke 15 
out' first of’ the wombe of al fleisch, 
which* fleisch" thei offren to the Lord, 
whether it is of men, ethir of beestis, it 
schal be of thi ri3t; so oneli that thou 
take prijs for the firste gendrid’ child of 
man, and that thou make ech beeste which” 
is yneleene} to be bou3t azen; whos azen-16 f vnclene, aud 
. ° hath nede to 
biyng schal be aftir o monethe, for fyue — asenbyynze. 
siclis of siluer, bi the* wei3te of seyntua- 747° “7° 
rieY; a sicle hath xx. halpens. Forsothe 17 
thou schalt not make the firste gendrid of . 
oxe*, and of scheep, and of goet, to be 
a3enbou3t, for tho ben halewid to the 
Lord ; oneli thou schalt schede* the blood 
of tho on the anter, and thou schalt 
brenne the ynnere fatnesse in to swettist 
odour to the Lord. Forsothe* the fleischis® 13 
schulen falle in to thin vss, as the brest 
halewid and the ri3t schuldur, schulen be 
thine. Y 3aff to the and to thi sonesiy 
and dou3tris%, bi enerlastynge ri;t, alle the 
firste fruytis of seyutuarie>, whiche' the 
sones of Israel offren to the Lord; it is 
euerlastynge couenant of salt* bifor the 
Lord, to thee, and to thi sones. And the2o 
Lord seide to Aaron, 3e schulen not welde 
ony thing! in the lond of hem™, nether 3e 
schulen haue part among hem; Y am thi 
part and erytage", in the® myddis of the 


t Om. p. the sDEFH. 


© Om. A see.m. Morsw. PP thingis s. 


that is. ‘comithis. 8 forthofis. tthatr. Om. orsr sec.m.w. Vbigeten3. W that 1s, 
xOm.1s. Y the seyntuarieis. Zanoxers, ®heelder vponis. ¢smellingis. 4 Sothely 1s. 
© fleishe 1. fhaue 3ouen 1s. & thi dougtris 1. to thi dou3tris s. 4 the seyntuarie is. 1 the whiche 1. 


K salt, that is, of stidfastnesse BCEGKLNOPQX. of salt, or durable 1s. 


. thin erytage 1s. © Om. 1s. 


1 thing of heritage 1s. ™ Israel ts. 


416 


tage, in the myddil of the sones of Yrael. 
21To the sones forsothe of Leuy Y haue 
3yue alle the dymes of Yrael into posses- 
sioun, for the seruyce that thei seruen to 
me in the tabernacle of the boond of pees; 
2zthat the sones of Yrael comen nomore 
ny3 to the tabernacle of the boond of 
pees, ne doo synne that bryngith yn 
23deeth, oonly the sones of Leuy, to me 
in the tabernacle seruynge, and berynge 
the synnes of the puple; lawful euerlast- 
ynge it shal be in 3oure generaciouns. 
24 Noon other thing thei shulen weelde, of 
the offrynge of dymes payed, the whiche 
into the vsis of hem and necessaries Y 
2shaue seuerde. And the Lord spak to 


26 Moyses, seiynge, Comaund to the Le- - 


uytes, and tel out, Whanne je taken 
dymes of the sones of Yrael, that Y haue 
3yue to 30w, the firste fruytis of hem 
offre 3e to the Lord, that is, the tenthe 
a7 part of the dyme, that it be put to 30w 
in the offrynge of the cheef thingis, as 
28 wel of the flores as of the pressis; and 
of alle thingis of the whiche je taken the 
firste fruytis, offre 3e to the Lord, and 
293yue" to Aaron, the preest. Alle thingis 
that 3e offren of dyines, and into the 3iftis 
of the Lord 3e shulen seuere, the best 
3oand chosen alle* shulen be. And thow 
shalt seye to hem, If the inore clene and 
the beter eche thingis 3e offren to the 
Lord of the dymes, it shal be put to 30w, 
as of the flore and of the presse 3e 3euen 
3ithe firste fruytis. And 5e shulen eete 
hem in alle 3oure places, as wel 3e as 3oure 
meyne, for prijs it is for the seruyce that 
3e seruen in the tabernacle of witness- 
szynge. And 3e shulen not synne vpon that, 
the noble and the fatt to 30w reseruynge, 
lest 3e poluten the offrynge of the sones 
of Yrael, and dyen. 


W 3eneth BDEFH. 


P Sothely 1s. 9Om.s. "tomers. 8 ands, 


NUMBERS. 


t Om. s. 


XVIII. 21—32. 


sones of Israel. Forsothe? Y 3af to the2i 
sones of Leuy alle the tithis of Israel in 
to possessioun, for the. seruyce bil whyche 
thei seruen ine in the tabernacle of boond 
of pees; that’ the sones of Israel neize no22 
more to the ‘tabernacle of‘ boond of pees, 
nether do" dedli synne’. To the sones23 
aloone of Leuy, seruynge me in the taber- 
nacle, and berynge the ‘synnes of the pu- 
ple, it* schal be a lawful thing euerlast- 
ynge in 3oure generaciouns}. Thei schulen 24 
welde noon other thing, and thei schulen 


t to entre in to 
the tabernacte 
and to lyue 


be apeied with the offryng of tithis, whichey *7” “his. s. 


Y departide in to vsis and necessaries of 
hem. And the Lord spak to Moises and 25 
seide, Comaunde thou, and denounse” to26 
the dekenes, Whanne 3e han take tithis of 
the sones of Israel, whiche Y jaf to 30u, 
offre 3e* the firste fruytis of tho to the 
Lord, that is, the tenthe part of the dyme®, 
that it be arettid® to 30u in to offryng of27 
the firste fruytis, as wel of corn flooris 
as of pressis®; and of alle thingis of whiche 28 
3e taken tithis, offre 3e the firste fruytis to 
the Lord, and 3yue 3ef to® Aaron, preest”. 
Alle thingis whiche 3e schulen offre of29 
tithis, and schulen' departe in to the 3iftis 
of the Lord, schulen be the beste, and alle 
chosun* thingis. And thou schalt seye to30 
hein, If 3e offren to the Lord alle the clere! 
and betere thingis of tithis, it schal be 
arettid™ to 30u, as if 3e 3auen the firste 
fruitis of the corn floor and presse". And31 
3e° schulen ete tho ¢this in alle 3o0ure 
placis, as wel 3e as 3oure meynees?, for it 
is the’ prijs for™ the seruyce, in* whiche 
3e seruen in the tabernacle of witnessyng. 
And 3e schulen not do synne on‘ this32 
thing, ‘and resserue" noble thingis and fat 
to 30u, lest 3e defoulen the offryngis of the 
sones of Israel ||, and 3e dien’. 


X alle thei £. 


udotheis. ¥Om.s. W pnples synnes Is. 


xOm.1s. ¥ the whicher. 2% schewe rs. 20m. vp. »tenthers. © putis. ¢the corn 1s. ¢ the pressis Is. 


‘Om. s. §thotors. the preest mks. 
chois s._! clene Is. m put Is. n of the presse 1s. 
a4 Om, 1s, ¥ of s. 8 for IKST sec. m. RW. 


this ze. 


i the whiche 3e schulen 1. whiche 3e schulen s. 


t vpon s. 


k the chois 1. 
© 3e dekenes 1. the dekenis s. P meynee s. 
u reseruynge Is.  Vdien, if 3¢ doon 


ll that is, the 
tithis offrid of 
em to 30u. BCG 
Kax,. 


XTX. 1-—12. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses and 
2 Aaron, seiynge, This the religioun of 
slayn offrynge, that the Lord hath or- 
deynde. Comaunde to the sones of Yrael, 
that thei brengen forthe a reede kowe of 
hool age, in the which no spot be, ne 
3berith 30k. And 3e shulen take hir to 
Elyazar, the preest, the which hir, lad out 
of the tentes, shal offre in the si3t of alle; 
4and wetynge the fyngre in hir blood, 
shal spreynge a3ens the 3ates of the ta- 
5 bernacle seuen sithes. And he shal bren 
hir, alle men seynge, as wel with skynne 
and flesh of hir as with the blood and 
édryt; to the flawme 3e shulen take. Ce- 
dre forsothe tree, and ysoop, and ‘fijr 
reede silkY twies died, the preest shal 
putte into the flawme that vowrith the 
7kowe. And thanne at the last, the clothis 
wasshid, and his body, he shall goo into 
the tentes, and he shal be defoulid vnto 
8the euen. But and he that shal brenne 
hir, shal wasshe his clothis, and bodi, and 
gvnclene shal be vnto the euen. A clene 
forsothe man shal gedre the asken of the 
kowe, and heelde hem out of the tentes in 
the moost clene place, that thei ben to the 
multitude of the sones of Yrael into kep- 
ynge, and into water of sprengynge ; for 
10 for synne the kowe is brent. And whanne 
he hath wasshe his clothes, that beer the 
askis? of the kowe, he shal be vnclene 
vuto the euen. And the sones of Yrael, 
and comlyngis* that dwellen amonge hem, 
itshulen han this holi bi perpetuel rijt. He 
that towchith the careyu of a man, and 
i2for that seuen daies were vnclene, he shal 
be spreynt of this water the thridde 
day, and the seuenthe, and so he shal be 


¥Y cook £ prim. 


x whom Is. 
4 he schal 1s. 


W that Is. 


e Om. 0 sec. m. € the fleishe rs. 


NUMBERS. 


Z aschen bp. 


Yitx. Om. rst sec. m. 
f the dung 1s. 


417 


CAP. XIX. 


And the Lord spak to Moises and to1 
Aaron, and seide, This is the religioun of2 
sacrifice, which” the Lord ordeynede. Co- 
maunde thon to the sones of Israel, that 
thei brynge to thee a reed cow of hool 
age{, in which* is no wem, nether scheY 
hath bore 30k. And 3e schulen bitake hirs 
to Eleazar, preest?, which? schal offre ‘the 
cow, led out of the® tentis, in the siz3t of 
alle men. And he schal dippe his fyngur4 
in the blood therof, and schal‘ sprynge 
seuene sithis a3ens the 3atis of the taber- 
nacle. And he schal brenne that cow,s5 
while alle men sien; and he schal 3yue as 
wel the skyn and fleischis® therof as the 
blood and dung‘ to flawme%. Also thee 
preest schal ‘sende a tre of cedre', and 
ysope, and reed threed died twies, into the! 
flawine* that deuourith' the cow. And7 
thanne at the laste, whanne hise™ clothis 
‘and bodi® ben waischun, he schal entre in 
to the tentis, and he schal be defoulid® ‘til 
toP euentid. But also he that brente thes 
cow4, schal waische hise clothis, and bodi', 
and he schal be vneleene ‘til to’ euentid'. 
Forsothe" a cleene man schal gadere theo 
aischis of the cow’, and schal¥ schede* out 
thoY with out the tentis, in a place moost 
cleene, that tho” be to® the” multitude 
of the sones of Israel in to keping, and in 
to watir of spryngyng; for the® cow is 
brent for synne. And whanne he that io 
baré the aischis of the cow, hath waische 
hise clothis, he schal be vucleene ‘til to® 
euentid. And the sones of Israel, and, 
comelyngis' that dwellen among hem, 
schulen haue® this* hooli bi euerlastynge 
lawe. He that touchith a deed bodi of11 
mani, and is vneleene for this* bi seuene 


4 the comlyngis e. 


b hir 1. that cow s. 
h putte wode of 


@ that 1s. 
& brennyng ts. 


z the preest 1s. 


cedre 1. putte cedre wood s. 'Om.o. £ fijrrs.  'brenneth is. ™ the preestis 1s.  ™ Om. o. and 
his bodi 1s. © ynclene is. P vnto the Is. to o sec. m. til to the x. 4 he for whom the cow was brent 
{offrid s] 1s. marg. his bodiis. 8 vnto1s, too sec.m. tthe euentid1ks. sothely is. ¥ brent 
cows. Wheschal rs. * heelde hemi. shede hems. YOm.1s. 2 tho aishesis. aintos. >» Om. sz. 
€that is. ¢ bar ont rs. ¢€ vnto the is. tiltothe x. f the comelyngis 1s. & han or holdes. — this 
doyng 1s. 1amani. this toxehinge s. 


3H 


+ In Ebru it is, 
not of age, but 
reed hoollich, 
that is, with- 
oute diuersite 
of ony colour. 
Lire here. ok 
Qx. 


418 


clensid. If the thridde day he were not 
spreynt, the seuenthe day he may not be 
i3maad vtterly clene. Al that towchith of 
mannus soul the faln to deeth, and with 
this mengynge were not spreynt, he po- 
lutith the tabernacle of the Lord, and 
shal perishe fro Yrael; for with the wa- 
ter of purgynge he is not spreynt, he 
shal be vnelene, and his filthe shal dwelle 
l4vpon hym. This is the lawe of man that 
dieth in the tabernacle; eche that goth 
into the tente of hym, and alle the ves- 
sels that there ben, shal be polutid seuen 
isdaies. The vessel that hath not a couer- 
ynge, ne byndynge there aboue, shal be 
isvnelene. If eny man towche in the feelde* 
a careyn of a slayn man, or of the bi hym 
silf deed, othir the mouth® of hym, or the 
sepulcre, shal be vnelene seuen daies. 
i7And thei shulen take of the askes of 
brennynge, and¢ of synne, and thei shu- 
len putte quyk waters vpon hem, into the 
18 vessel ; in the which whanne a clene man 
wetith ysoop, he shal sprenge of it the 
tente, and al the purtenaunce, and the 
polut men with siche a maner towch- 
i9ynge. And with this maner the clene 
shal goo about the vnclene, the thridde 
and the seuenthe day; and clensid the 
seuenthe day, he shal wasshe hym silf, 
and his clothis, and vneclene he shal be 
20 vnto the euen. If eny man with this rijt 
were not purgid, shal perishe the soule of 
hym fro the myddil of the chirche; for 
the seyntuarie of the Lord he polutide, 
and he is not spreynt with the water of 
21enuyrownynge. This shal be the heest 
lawful euerlastynge. He forsothe that 
shal sprenge the watrys, shal wasshe his 
clothis; eche’ that towchith the watris 
of purgynge, shal be vncelene vuto the 


NUMBERS. 


XIX. 13-21. 


daies, schal! be spreynt of this watir in the 12 
thridde, and in the seuenthe dai; and so 
he schal be clensid. If he is not spreynt 
in the thridde dai, he schal not mow be 
clensid in the™ seuenthe dai. Ech" that13 
touchith the® deed bodi bi it silf of P’ man- 
nus soule’, and is not spreynt with this 
medlyng*, defoulith the ‘tabernacle of the 
Lord‘, and he schal perische fro Israel ; 
for he is not spreynt with the wateris" of 
clensyng, he sclial be vneleene, and his 
filthe schal dwelle on’ hym. This is the14 
lawe of a man that dieth in the taber- 
nacle; alle* that entren in to his tente, 
and alle vessels* that ben there, schulen be 
defoulid bi seuene daies. <A vessel that1s 
hath not an hilyng, nethir a byndyngy 
aboue, schal be vneleene. If ony mani6 
touchith the deed bodi of man? slayn in 
the* feeld, ether deed bi hym silf, ether a 
boon®, ether® the’ sepulcre ‘of hym®, he 
schal be vneleene bi seuene daies. And17 
thei schulen take ‘of thef aischis of the 
brennyng, and of the synne*®, and thei 
schulen sende" quyk' watris in to a ves- 
sel on* tho! aischis; in whiche whanne ‘ais 
cleene™ man hath dippid ysope, he schal" 
spreynge therof°® the? tente, and al the 
purtenaunce of howshold’, and men" de- 
foulid bis sich defoulyng. And in thisio 
maner a cleene man schal clense an vn- 
cleene', in the thridde and in” the’ se- 
uenthe dai; and be schal” be clensid in 
the seuenthe dai. And* he schal waische 
hym silf, and hise clothis, and he schal be 


vncleene ‘til toY euentid?. If ony man® is 20 
not clensid bi this custom, the soule of 


hyn: schal perische fro the? myddis of the 
chirche; for he defoulith the ‘seyntuarie 
of the Lord®, and is‘ not spreynt with the 
watir of clensyng. This comaundement®21 


bbon pb. © Om. 4p. ¢¢Om.v. 4eche thing 4. 
lheschalisr prom. ™Om.p. Oech mancr. Cars. Ponec, 4 kynde is. hiss. § of mater 
and aschis s marg. + Lordis tabernacle 1s." watir plures. Yvpon is. Walle ments. * the vessels Is. 
ybidinge ss. %amannrs. 80m. eLp. > boonofhimis. ¢ofs. 4Om.c. his1s.  ¢ Om. 1s. 


f Om. mest pr.m.w. 
quyk vt prom. * vpon 1s. 
howshold 1s. * the men also 1s. 
thannes. * Om.s. Y vnto 1s. too. 
dheisis. ¢ heest 13. 


lthilke 1 ™ Om. s. 
8 with s. 


§ synne, that is, of the cow offrid for synne BCEGIKLNIQSX. 


t vncleene thing 18. 
z the euentid 1ks. 


h putte 1s. 1 the 
nOm.q. ther withis. Palthe xsec.m. (the 
u Om. Bporkx. VYOm. xr. WY schal 


aQm.a. >Om.s. © Lordis seyntuarie is. 


XIX. 22—XxX. 8. 


22euen. What thing the vnclene towchith, 
he shal make vnclene; and the soule that 
of thes thingis eny thing towchith, shal 
be vnclene™ vnto the euen. : 


CAP. XX. 


i And the sones of Yrael camen, and al 
the multitude into the deseert of Syn, the 
firste moneth. And the puple dwelte in 
Cades; and Mary is there deed, and by- 

2ryed in the same place. And whanne 
the puple nedide water, thei camen a3ens 

3 Moises and Aaron, and, turned into dis- 
sencioun, seiden, Wold God we~hadden 
perisshide amonge oure britheren, before 

4the Lord. Whi han 3e ladde ont the 
chirche of the Lord into wilderenes, that 

sand we and oure beestis dyen ? Whi han 
3e maad vs to stie vp fro Egipt, and 3e 
han ladde into this worst place, that may 
not be sowid®, the whiche ne fige getith, 
ne vyhes, ne powmgarnettis, ‘more ouerf 
sand water it hath not to drynke? And 
Moyses and Aaron, the multitude laft, 
goon into the tabernacle of the boond of 
pees, fellen down redi into the erthe, and 
cryeden to God, and seiden, Lord God, 
here the crye of this puple, and opyn to 
hem thi tresour, the welle of quyk wa- 
ter, that, hem fillid, ceese her grutchynge. 
And the glorye of the Lord aperide vpon 
7hem; and the Lord spak to Moyses, sei- 
synge, Tak the 3erde, and gedre the pu- 
ple, thow, and Aaron thi brother; and 
speke 3e to the stoon before hem, and it 
shal 3yue watris. And whanne thow hast 
ladde out water fro the stoon, shal drynke 
al the multitude, and the beestis of it. 


© sowe c. sowen D. 


& the euentid rks. 
m the euentid Ks. 
 gruechinge s marg. 

Wthe which 1. * Om. s. 

4d the erthe EIKLPs. 


f ynto Is. 
to 0 sec.m. 
sister 8 marg. 
vOm. A see. im. ne. 
© vpon 1s. into kK, 


h Om. plures. 
. On. plures. 


NUMBERS. 


o Synae s. 
5 rebelnesse 1s. 

Y ne 1s. 
€ thei crieden 1s. 


419 


schal be a lawful thing euerlastynge. .Also 
he that schal sprenge thé watris schal 
waische his clothis; ech man that touchith 
the watris of clensyng, schal be vncleene 
‘til tof enentid®. What euer thing an vn- 22 
cleene man touchith, he schal make it» yn- 
cleene; and a soule! that touchith ony of 
these thingis ‘defoulid so*, schal be vn- 
cleene ‘til to! enentid™. ' 


CAP. XX. 


And the sones of Israel and al the mul-1 
titude camen in to the" deseert of Syn°, 
in the firste monetheP+. And the puple 
dwellide in Cades; and Marie! was deed 
there, and biried in the same place. And 2 
whanne the puple hadde nede to watir, 
thei 3eden togidere™ a3ens Moises and Aa- 
ron; and thei weren turned in to dissen-3 
sioun*}, and seiden, We wolden that we 
hadden perischid among oure britheren 
bifor the Lord. Whi han 3e led out thes 
chirche of the Lord in to wildirnesse, that 
bothe we and oure beestist die? Whi hans 
3e maad vs to stie" from Egipt, and han 
brou3t vs" in to this werste place, which 
may not be sowun, which nether bryngith 
forth* fige tre, nether’ vineris’, nether pum- 
granatis, ferthermore and hath*® not watir 
to drynke? And whanne the multitude was 6 
left, Moises and Aaron entriden in to the 
tabernacle of boond of pees, and felden” 
lowe to® erthe’, and crieden® to God, and 
seiden, Lord God, here the cry of this pu- 
ple, and opene to hem thi tresour, a welle 
of quyk watir, that whanne thei ben fillid, 
the grutchyng of hem ceesse. And the 
glorie of the Lord apperide onf hem; and7 
the Lord spak to Moises, and seide, Takes 
the 3erde®||, and gadere the puple, thou, 
and Aaron thi brother; and speke 3e to 
the stoon bifore hem, and it schal 3yue! 
watris. And whanne thou hast led watir 


t in the firste 
monethe of the 
xl. 3eer fro the 
going ont of 
Egipt. Lire 
here. COKQX. 


t in to dissen- 
cioun, that is, 
rebelte and 
stryuyng. Lire 
here. CGKQX. 


ll the gerde, this 
was the jerde 
of Aaron. Lire 
here. ¢. 


f ouer mor CE. 


k Om. 1. thus defoulid s. 1 vnto 1s. 
P of the fourtithe 3eer s marg. 4 Moises 
t bretheren s. Ugo vp 1. stie vp s. 
@ jt hath is. » thei fellen doun 1s. 
& 3erde of Aaron B. with whiche 


i}ijf is. 


2 vynes Is. 
f vpon Is. 


thou smot the reed see, s marg. » gadre togidre 1s. 4 3yue out 13. 


3H Q 


420 


9 Thanne Moyses took the 3erde, that was 
in the si3t of the Lord, as he comaundide 
10 to’ hym, the multitude gedryd before the 
stoon ; and he seyde to hem, Here 3e, re- 
bellst and harde to bileue; whether of 
this stoon water to 30w we mowen cast 
1 out? And whanne Moyses hadde areryde! 
the hoond, smytynge with the 3erde twijs 
the flynt, wenten out moost large watris, 
so that the puple my3t drynke, and the 
12beestis. And the Lord seide to Moyses 
and Aaron, For 3e bileueden* not to me, 
that 3e halweden me before the sones of 
Irael, 3e shulen not lede in thes puples 
into the loond that I shal 3yue to hem. 
13 This is the water of contradiccioun; there 
the sones of Yrael iangleden a3ens the 
14 Lord, and he is halwid in hem. Moyses 
there amonge sente messengers fro Cades 
to the kyng of Edom, the whiche shulden 
seie, Thes thingis sendith to thee thi bro- 
ther Yrael. Thow hast knowun al the 
istrauey] that hath cau3t vs, what maner 
oure faders descendiden into Egipt, and 
we han dwelte there myche tyme, and 
the Egipciens han tourmentide vs, and 
isoure fadres; and what maner wyse we 
han cried to the Lord, and he hath herd 
vs, and he hath sent an aungel, that hath 
ladde vs out of Egipte. And loo! we sett 
in the cytee of Cades, that is in thin ut- 
17termoost! coostis, bisechen, that to vs it 
be leueful to passe bi thi loond ; we shu- 
len not goo bi feeldis, ne bi vynes, ne 
we shulen drynke watris of thi pittis; 
but we shulen goo the comoun weye, ne 
to the ry3t ne to the left bowynge, to 
isthe tyme that we passen thi coostis. To 
whom answerde Edom, 3e shulen not 
passe bi me, ellis armed Y shal come 
yajens thee. And the sones of Yrael 
seyden, Bi the beryd™ weye we shulen 


£Om.csec.m. 4 rebel ce. the rebelles yu. irerid c. 
m berdyd B. 

Kherrs. !Om.1. ™thanne1. ® Lordis sizt 1s. 
‘moun not 1s. *Om.s. thisis. " moost Jarge 1s. 
hooly s. ythisa. 2 thats. 
hims. 4 thingis to thee 1. tithingis to thee s. 


Egipt is, © he sente 1s. 
0 harming thee s marg. 
8 coostis Is. 


© thi feeldis 1s. thi 1s, 
t but thou here mes marg. 


NUMBERS. 


a makinge hem to knowe his holines. 8 marg. 
€ hath taken 15. 
i the lond of Egipt evr. 
P thi vyneris 1. thi vynes s. 


XX. g—19. 


out of the stoon, al the multitude schal 
drynke, and the* beestis therof ‘schulden 
drynke', Therfor™ Moises took the 3erde9 
that was in the ‘si3t of the Lord", as the 
Lord comaundide to hym, whamne the 10 
multitude was gaderid bifor the stoon; and 
he® seide to hem, Here? 3e, rebel? and vn- 
bileueful; whether we moun" brynge out 
of this stoon’ watir to jou? And whannei1 
Moises hadde reisid thet hond, and hadde 
smyte the flynt twies with the 3erde, 
largeste" watris 3eden out, so that the pu- 
ple drank, and the’ beestis drunken”. And 12 


t that je schul- 
den halewe me, 


the Lord seide to Moises and to Aaron, 
For 3e bileueden not to me, that 3e schul- 
den halewe me*{ bifor the sones of Israel, 

3e schulen not lede these” puples in to the that is, in bi- 
lond which? Y schal 3yue to hem. This 18 ae 
is the watir of ajenseiyng ; there the sones oecrenie 
of Israel stryueden a3ens the Lord, and he of my et 
was halewid in hem*. In the meene tyme 14 nounsinge 
Moises sente messangeres fro Cades to the eta 
kyng of Edom, whiche? seiden®, Israel thi sea fae 
brother sendith these thinges*. Thou know- He eae 
ist al the trauel that took® vs, hou oure 1 Jen not lede, 
fadris 3eden doun in to Egipt', and we Pion o 
dwelliden there myche tyme, and Egip- 

cians turmentiden vs and oure fadris; 

and hou we crieden to the Lord, and hes 

herde vs, and sente" an aungel that ledde 

vs out of Egipt'. And lo! we ben set in 

the citee of Cades, which* is in thi laste! 

coostis, and we bisechen™ that it be leue-17 

ful to vs to passe thorou thi lond; we 

schulen not go" bi feeldis®, nether bi vyne- 

ris?, nether we schulen drynke watris of 

thi pittis ; but we schulen go in the comyn 

weie, and we schulen not bowe to‘ the ri3t 

side, nether’ to the left side, til we passen 

thi termes*. To whom Edom answeride, 1g 

3e schulen not passe bi me, ellist Y schal 

be armed, and come ajens thee. And thei9 


k leueden ecperu. 1 utmost c. otemost £. 


© Moyses 1s... Pheereth 1s. 4 rebel men s. 
vher 1s. WOm. Rsv sec.m. * me or shewe me 
b the whiche 1. © seiden to 
f out of Canaan s marg. & the men of 

l vttermest 1s. _™ bisechen thee 1s. 
4 neither to 1s. * ne Is. 


k that 1s. 


XX. 20—XXI. 2. 


goon, and if we shulen drynke thi wa- 
tris, we and oure beestis, we shulen 3yue 
that is ri3t; no difficulte shal be in the 
20 prijs, oonli swiftly passe we. And he 
answerde, 3e shulen not passe. And anoon 
metynge he wente out, with a multitude 
with out noumbre, and with a stronge 
21 hoond, and he wolde not assente to hym 
preiynge, that he graunte passynge bi his 
coostis. Wherfor turnede aside fro hym 
22 Yrael. And whanne thei hadden meuyde 
tentis fro Cades, thei camen into the hil 
of Hor, that is in the coostis of the loond 
230f Edom; where the Lord spak to Moy- 
2ises, Aaron, he seith, go he to his puplis; 
forsothe he shal not goo into the loond 
that I haue 3eue to the sones of Yrael, 
forthi that he were harde of bileue to 
my mouth, at the watris of contradic- 
zicioun. Tak Aaron, and his sone with 
hym, and thow shalt lede hem into the 
26 hil of Hor; and whanne thow hast made 
nakyd the fader of his clooth, thow shalt 
clothe with it Eleazar, his sone, and Aa- 
ron shal be leide togidre, and die there. 
27 And Moyses dide as the Lord comaund- 
ide; and thei stieden vp into the hil of 
23 Hor, before al the multitude. And 
whanne Aaron he hadde spuylid his 
clothis, he clothide with hem Eleazar, his 
z9sone; and hym deed in the brenk of the 
30 hil, he descendide with Eleazar. Al for- 
sothe the multitude seynge Aaron to haue 
died, wept vpon hym thretti dayes, bi alle 
her meynees. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 That whanne Arad, the Chanane kyng, 
that dwellide at the south, hadde herde, 
that Yrael was comen bi the espiours 
weye, fau3te ajens hym, and onercomer 

2beynge, brou3te of hym a prey. And 
Yrael bi vowe hym silf to the Lord 
obleschynge”, seith, If thow takist® this 


® obeshynge 4. 


Ynors, © the prijs rs. 
a with strong power 1s. 


u 3yue therfore is. 
2 passe bi me s. 
which 1. 
m And Moises 1s. 


t the ouercomere Is. 


n Moises 1s. © clothith 1. 
u he ledde awey 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


* palynge, onely s. 
b passyng 18. 
& puple a pr.m. puplis, that is, dye he 18. 

P hil cop s. 
Vv the prey 1. 


421 


sones of Israel seiden, We schulen go bi 
the weie comynli vsid, and if we and oure 
beestis drynken thi watris, we schulen 3yue" 
that that is iust; noon’ hardnesse schal be 
in prijs”, onely* passe we swiftliY. And 20 
he answeride, 3e schulen not passe’. And 
anoon he 3ede out a3ens Israel, with a 
multitude without noumbre, and ‘strong 
hond?, nether he wolde assente to Israel2i 
bisechynge, that he schulde graunte pas- 
sage” bi hise coostis. Wherfor Israel turn- 
ede awey fro hym. And whanne® thei422 
hadden moued tentis® fro Cades, thei cameu 
in to the hil of Hor, whichf is in the endis 
of the lond of Edom ; where the Lord spak 23 
to Moyses and seide, Aaron go to his pu-e4 
ples®; for he schal not entre in to the lond 
which! Y 3af to the sones of Israel, for he 
was vnbileueful to my mouthi, at the wa- 
tris of ajenseiyng. Take thou Aaron, and 2s 
his sone with hym, and thou schalt lede 
hem in to the hil of Hor; and whannees 
thou hast maad nakid the fadir of his 
cloth}, thou schalt clothe ‘with itk Eleazar, 
his sone, and Aaron schal be gederid, and 
schal die there. Moises™ dide as the Lord 27 
comaundide; and thei stieden in to the hil 
of Hor, bifor al the multitude. And whanne 2s 
he" hadde maad nakid Aaron of hise clothis, 
he clothide® with tho Eleazar, his sone. 
Sotheli whanne Aaron was deed in the29 
‘cop of the hil?, Moises cam doun with 
Eleazar. Sotheli al the multitude si3 that so 
Aaron was deed, and wepte? on* hym 
thretti daies, bi alle her meynees. 


ft cluth, that is, 
the hisehops 
coote. Lire 
here. BC. 


CAP. XXI. 


And whanne* Chananei, the kyng oft 
Arad, that dwellide at the south, hadde 
herd this, that is, that: Israel cam bi the 
weye of aspieris, he fau3t a3ens hem; and 
Chananei was ouercomeret and ledde" pray’ 
of Israel*. And Israel bounde hym sylf bie 
avow to the Lord, and seide, If thou schalt 


© take BCDEFH. 


y in haaste 1. swiftli bi thee s. 


eOm.1. Israelis. ¢hertentisis. f the 
hthatis. iwords. *therwithis. 1 Om. 1s. 
dit wepte1. 'vponrs. ofo. §Om.s. 


w the men of Israel s. 


422 


puple in myn hoond, Y shal doo awey 
3his citees. 
the preyers of Yrael, and hath take Cha- 
nane; the which he? hath slayn, turned 
vpsedoun the citees of hym; and he cle- 
pide the name of that place Horma, that 
4is, a cursynge. And forsothe thei wenten 
forth fro the hil of Hor, by the weie that 
ledith to the reede see, that thei my3ten 
goo about the loond of Edom ; and it bi- 
ganne to greue the puple, of the weie 
sand of the traueyl. And speken™ a3ens 
the Lord and Moyses, seith, Whi hast 
thow ladde vs out of Egipte, that we 
dien in wildirnes? there faylith to vs 
breed, watris there ben not; oure soule 
now wlatith vpon this moost 1i3t meet. 
6 Wherfore the Lord hath sente into the 
puple eddres afier; at whos woundis 
jand dethes of manye, thei comen to Moy- 
ses, and seiden, We han synned, for we 
han spoken a3ens the Lord and thee; 
sprey, that he take fro vs eddres. And 
Moyses preiede for the puple; and the 
Lord spak to hym, Mak a brasun addre, 
and put it’ for a tokne; who smytun bi- 
gholditht it, shal lyue. Thanne Moyses 
maade a brasun eddre, and putte for a 
signe; whom the smytun_ biholdynge, 
10 were maad hool. And the sones of Yrael 
11goon forthe, setten tentis in Oboth; fro 
whens goon out, thei pi3ten tentis in Jea- 
barym, in the wildernes, that biholdith 
12 Moab, a3ens the eest coost. And fro 
thens meuynge, thei camen to the ryn- 
i3nynge water of Zareth; the whiche leu- 
ynge, thei setten tentis a3ens Arnon, that 
is in deseert, and fer stondith® ouer in’ 
the coostis of Amorrey. Forsothe Ar- 
non” is the eende of Moab, dyuydynge 
14 Moabites and Amorreis. Wherfor it is 
seide in the book of bateyls of the Lord, 
As he hath doo in the rede see, so he 


q Om. c. 
w Ermon 4pFit. 


x her citees Is. y And he 1. 
Ccallider. 4 Om.1.  ¢sothely, Israel 1s. 
wlaten eve. vpon ts. 
whiche 1, eddris 1s. ° for the rs. 
bifore the peple s marg. 
€ sothely 1s. 4 coost 1s. 


P Om, 4. 
v Om. ut. 


e it departith 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


And the Lord hath? harde ' 


T spekeng 4 sec.m. spoken CE. 


z bitook to hem 1s. bitook to p. 
f Om. Is. 
1 }iztist meete 18. manna s marg. 
shan synned 1s. t spak plures, YQm. 1s. Vit vpis. W tokene 1s. 
x sette it vp rs. settide it K. 


XXI. 3-——14. 


bitake this puple in myn hond, Y schal do 

awei ‘the citees therof*. And the Lord3 

herde the preieris of Israel, and’ bitook? 

the* Chananey ; and Israel killid hym, and 

distruyede hise citees; and? clepide® .the 

name of that place Horma, that is, curs- 

yng, ‘ethir hangyng up*. ‘Forsothe thei*4 

jeden forth also fro the hil of Hor, bi the 

weie that ledith to the reed see, that thei 

schulden® cumpasse the lond of Edom; 

and it bigan to anoye the puple, of the 

weie and trauel. And the puple spak5 

ajens the Lord and Moises, and seide, 

Whi leddist thou vs out of Egipt, that we 

schulden die in wildirnesse? breed failith, 

watris ben not; oure soule" wlatith' now 

on* this ‘meete moost li3t!, Wherfor the6é 

Lord sente ‘firid serpentis" in to the pu- 

ple; at the woundis° of whiche? serpentis4, 

and the™ dethis of ful many men, thei7 . 

camen to Moyses, and seiden, We synned- 

en’, for we spaken a3ens the Lord and 

thee; preie thou, that he take awey fro vs 

the serpentis. And Moises preiede for the 

pple; and the Lord seidet to hym, Make 

thou a serpent of bras*, and sette thou" 

it” for a signe’ +; he that is smytun and enc 
biholdith it, schal lyue. Therfor Moyses9 $y ine, in 
made a serpent of bras, and settide* for a mae BE a 
signe; and men smytunY and biholdynge 

it, weren heelid. And the sones of Israel] 10 

jeden forth, and settiden tentis in Oboth 311 
fro whennus thei jeden forth, and settiden 
tentis in Neabarym{, in the wildirnesse, 
that biholdith Moab, ajens the eest coost. 
And thei moueden fro thennus, and camen 12 
to the stronde of Zareth; which thei leften, 13 
and settiden tentis ajens Arnon, which? is 
in the* deseert, and apperith” in the coostis 
of Amorrei. Forsothe® Arnon is the terme 

of Moab, and departith® Moabitis and Am- rege ree 


Wherfor it is seid in the book|| 14 Peres seven, 
for the Ebreu 


word here sig- 
nefieth hothe 
book and tell- 
ing. c. 


* of bras is not 


t that is, in 
the wildirnessis 
of Abarym. Bc 
eKax. 


moreis. 
of batels of the Lord, As he dide in the 


8 Om. a4. ¢ byholde scern. stant BCDEFH. 


b and Israel 1s. 
i wlate plures. 
P the 


a Om. plures. 

& wolden 1. b soulis ELP. 
 firy eddris 1s. © styngyngis 18. 
zthatis. 4 Om.s. 


y hurt 1s. b it apperith 1s. 


XXI. r5—26: 


shal doo in the rennynge watris of Ar- 
isnon*; the roches of the rennynge watris 
ben bowid, that thei resten in Arnon’, 
and that thei liggen? in the coostis of 
16 Moabites. Of that place aperide a pitt, 
vpon the which the Lord spak to Moyses, 
Geder the puple, and IJ shal 3yue to hym 
17watir. Thanne Yrael song this ditee, 
is Sty vp the pit; thei songen togidre, The 
pit that delueden* the prynces, and greith- 
eden the dukis of the multitude, in the 
3euer of the lawe, and in her staues. And 
thei wenten fro the wildrenes of Mathana, 
19fro Mathana to Naaliel, fro Naaliel into 
20 Bamoth; Bamoth is a valey in the re- 
gioun of Moab, in the frount of Phasga, 
2ithat biholdith a3ens the deseert. And 
Yrael sent messangers to Seon, the kyng 
220f Amorreys, selynge, I biseche ‘that it 
be leueful to me to passe bi thi loond ; 
we shulen not bowe down to the ri3t ne 
to the left; we shulen not passe bi feelds 
and vynes, ne we shulen not® drynke .wa- 
tris of pittis; the kyngis weye we shulen 
goo, to the tyme that we passen thi 
23coostis. The which woold not graunt 
that Yrael my3te passe bi his coostis, but 
rathir, the oost gedryd togidre, wente out 
to mete in deseert. And he cam into 
24 Jasa, and he fau3te a3ens hym; of whom 
he is smytun in the mouth of the swerd, 
and his loond is weeldid fro Arnon vuto 
Jebboth and to the sones of Amon; for 
with a stronge helpe weren holde the 
25 coostis of Amonytes. Thanne Jrael took 
alle the citees of hym, and dwelte in the 
wallid towns of Amorrey, in Esebon that 
2cis, and in the litil. touns® of it. The 
cytee of Esebon was of Seon, the kyng 
of Amorrey, that fanzte a3en the kyng 
Moab, and took al the loond that was of 


x Ermon 4. Armon Boru. 
¢ lanys £ pr.m. 


NUMBERS. 


y Armon ar. Arnon ce. 


423 


reed see, so he schal do inthe strondis of 
Arnon ;’the harde rochis' ofthe strondis 15 
weren bowid‘, that tho? schulen reste in 
Arnon, and schulden ligge in the coostis 
of Moabitis. Fro that placet the pit ap-ic 
peride, of which the Lord spak to Moyses, 
Gadere thou! the puple, and Y schal 3yue 
watir to it. Thanne* Israel soong this 17 
song, The pitt stie!; thei sungen togidere, 18 
The pit which™ the princes diggiden, and 
the duykis of the multitude maden redi*, 
in the 3yuere of the lawe, and® in her 
stauys. And thei 3eden forth fro the? 
wildirnesse to Mathana, fro Mathana to19 
Naaliel, fro Naaliel in to Bamoth; Bamoth 20 
is a valey in the cuntrey of Moab, in the 
cop! of Phasga, that biholdith a3zens the 
deseert. Forsothe™ Israel sente messan-21 
geris to Seon, kyng* of Ammorreis, and 
seide, Y bisechet that it be leueful to me 22 
to passe thorou thi loond; we schulen not 
bowe in to the" feeldis and vyneris’; we 
schulen not drynke watris of pittis”; we 
schulen go in the kyngis weie, til we 
passen thi termes*. Which’ nolde’ graunte 23 
that Israel schulde passe thur3 hise coostis, 
but rather, whanne the* oost was gaderid, 
he 3ede out ajens Israel”, in to deseert. 
And he cam in to Yasa, and fau3t a3ens 
Israel; of whom he was smytun in thes: 
scharpnesse of swerd, and his lond was 
weldid* fro Arnon ‘til tot Jeboth and ‘the 
sones of Amon®; for the termes! of A- 
monytis weren holdun bis strong help. 
Therfor Israel took alle ‘the citees of hymi, 2; 
and dwelliden* in the citees of Amorrei, 
that is, in Esebon, and hise! townes. Thees 
citee of Esebon was Seons™, kyng" of Am- 
morei, which® Seon fau3t aj3ens the kyng 
of Moab, and took? al the lond that was 
of his4 lordschip, ‘til to" Arnon. Therfor 27 
b Om. BCDEFH. 


z lien c. 8 doluen c. 


f bowid doun 1. bowid or broken douns.  &thei1s. » Arnon, or abide there s. _} thou togidre 1. 
kandthanne a pr.m. \stievpis. ™thatis. © her hertis to troste her reulers vpberinge hem s marg. 
°Om.ELP. Pthatis. 4heiz3tis, ‘sothely 1s, ‘%thekyngr. tbiseche thee 1s. "Om. plures. 
thirs. Yvynesis. thi pittisis. %*coostiss. Ythe whichi. 7@woldenot1. ®hisi1s. > i¢1, 
© weldid of Israel 1s. 4 vuto 1s. ¢ Amons sonus 18. or his oost s marg.  coostis1s. § withis. } or 
powers marg. his citees1s. * dwellide primo sec.m.s. Jin hisers ™Seons. 1 the kyng1. 
othe which 1. Phe took 1s, 4 Moabsis. * ynto 1s. 


t+ fro that 


place, in Ebres 


it is thus, fro 
this place to th. 
pit, and they 
camen to the 
place, where 
the pit was 
jouun. Lire 
here. C. 

3 that is, wa- 
ter of the pit. 
BCGKNQSX. 


424 


27 his comaundynge, vnto Arnon. Therfor 
it is seyd in prouerbe*, Come 3e into Ese- 
bon, be bilde, and maad vp the citee of 

28Seon; fier went out of Esebon, and 
flawme of the wallid town of Seon, and 
deuowryde Arnon of Moabites, and the 
dwellers of the hie thingis of Arnon. 

229 Woo to thee, Moab! thow, puple of 
Chamos, hast perishid ; he hath 3yue the 
sones of hym into flijt, and the dou3tren® 
into caytiftee to Seon, the kyng of Amor- 

30reis ; the 30k of hem he scatrede, fro Ese- 
bon vnto Dibon; wery thei camen into 

31 Ophe, and vnto Medaba. And so Yrael 

32dwelt in the loond of Amorrey. And 
Moyses sente ‘the whiche' shulden aspie 
Jasar, whos litil towns thei token, and 

33 weeldeden the dwellers. And thei turn- 
eden hem silf, and stieden vp bi the weie 
of Basan. And ajen wente to hem Og, 
the kyng of Basan, with al his puple, to 

34 fijtynge® in Edray. And the Lord seide 
to Moyses, Ne drede thow hym, for in 
thin hoond Y haue takun hym, and al the 
loond, aud the pnple of hym; and thow 
shalt doo to hym as thow hast doon to 
Seon, the kyng of Amorreis, the dweller of 

35 Esebon. Thow hast smytun therfore and 
this with his sones, and al his puple, 
vnto the deth; and thei weelden® the 
loond of hym. 


CAP. XXIE ‘ 


1 And thei goon forthe, settiden' tentes 
in the wijlde feeldes of Moab, where bi- 


230nde Jordan Jericho is set. Seynge for- - 


sothe Balach; the sone of Sophor, alle 
3thinges that Yrael dide to Amorrei, and 
that Moabites dredden hym, and the 
4feersnes of hym thei my3ten not bere, he 
seide to the more thur3 birthe of Madian, 


d the prouerbe 4. © do3tres c. 


8 strong citee rs. +t Om. Eps. tOm.s. 
X heiztis 1 fext. or hiz placis marg. 

ylis S marg. © vnto Is. to o sec. m. 
stieden vps. § Og 18. 
™ smeten EIP, smiten L. smote s. 


in F sec.m. dwelliden pr.m. ¥ his lond 1s, 


NUMBERS. 


f that c. 


Vv it brente 1s. 

y hast perischid 1, 
d ynto 1. to oO sec.m. into s. 

hal bis puple 1. his puple s. 

n Ogi. bothe Og s. 

§ the sonus of Israel 1s. 


XXI. 27——KXII. 4. 


it is seid in prouerbey, Come 3e in to Ese- + that is, ina 
bon, be it bildid, and maad the citee of jnaad of the. 
Seon ; fier 3ede out of Esebon, flawme 3ede28 joe 
out of the citee’ ‘ethir greet castelt of" 

Seon, and deuourydeY Ar’ of Moabitis, and 
the dwelleris of the ‘hi3e places* of Arnon. 
Moab, wo to thee! thou, puple of Cha-29 
mos, perischidist’ ; it 3af the sones therof 
in to flizt, and the dou3tris in to caitifte 
to Seon, kyng’ of Ammoreis; the 30k? of30 
hem>{ perischide, fro Esebon ‘til to® Di- 
bon; the wery men camen in to Jophe,  afoutitis. acc 
and ‘til to! Medaba. And so Israel dwell-31 ““** 

ide in the lond of Ammorrey. And Moises 32 

sente men that schulden aspie Jaser, whos 

‘townes thei® token, and weldiden the 

dwelleris. And thei turniden hem silf,33 

and stieden’ bi the weie of Basan. And 

Og, the kyng of Basan, with al his puple 

cam ajens hem, to fi3te in Edray. Anda 

the Lord seide to Moises, Drede thou not 

hym, for Y haue bitake hym®, and al his 

loond, and puple’, in thin hoond; and 

thou schalt do to hym as thou didist to 

Seon, kyng of Ammorreis, the! dwellere* 

of Esebon. Therfor thei! smytiden™ ‘bothe 3s 

hym® with hise sones and al his puple, 

‘til to® deeth; and thei? weldiden®4 ‘the 

lond of hyim’. 


I that is, the 
lordschip of 


CAP. XXII. 


And thei 3eden forth, and settiden tentis1 
in the feeldi places of Moab, where Jerico 
is set oner Jordan. Forsothet Balach, thee 
sone of Sephor, si3 alle thingis whiche" 
Israel hadde do to Ammorrei, and thats 
men of Moab ‘hadden dred’ Israel, and 
mi3ten” not|| bere* the assailing of him’. wlatde Wey 


And he? seide to the grettere men 14 tael, and this 
semeth the ve- 
riere lettre. 
Lire here. c. 


|| and mayzten 
not, in Ebren it 
is, and Moab 


& fiztec. bweeldedyn £. # sette c. 


w Arnon s feat. a cheef place marg. 
Zthe kyng K. 8 30k or lordship s. >» Ammon- 
e rewmes Israel 1s. £ wenten vp 1. 
i and to the 1s. k duellers s. l Israel s. 

© yn to Is. P Israel s. a dwelliden 
tsothelirs. that 1s. V dred- 


den is. ™ thei mizten 1s. * bere or suffres. Y Israel 1s. 2 Balac 1s. 


XXII. 5-—16. 


So this puple shal doo awey alle that 
in oure coostis dwellen, what maner is 
woned an oxe to take eerbe vnto the 
rotys. He forsothe was kyng that tyme 
sin Moab. Thanne he sente messangers 
to Balaam, the sone of Beor, dyuynour, 
that dwelled vpon the flood of the loond 
of the sones of Amon, that thei iny3ten 
clepe hym, and seye, Loo! a peple is 
goon out of Egipte, that couereth the vt- 
termoost* of the erthe, sittynge a3ens 
6me. Com therfore, and curs to this pu- 
ple, for it is strenger than I, if eny maner 
Y may smyte, and throwe hym out of 
my loond; Y haue! knowun forsothe, that 
he is blissid to whom thow blissist, and 
cursid in whom thow castist cursyngis. 
7 The aldren™ of Moab and the more thur3 
birthe of Madian wenten forthe, hauynge 
prijs of the dyuynynge in the hoondes ; 
and whanne thei weren comen to Ba- 
laam, and hadden toold alle the wordes 
sof Balach, he answerde, Dwelle 3e here 
the ny3t, and Y shal answere what thing 
shal seie to me the Lord. Hem forsothe 
dwellynge anentis Balaam, cam God, and 
9seide to hym, What to hem wolen thes 
iomen anent thee? He answerde, Balac, 
the sone of Sephor, kynge of Moabites, 
l1sente to me, seynge, Loo! the puple that 
is goon out of Egipte couereth the vttcr- 
most" of the loond; come, and curse to 
hem, if eny maner Y fi3tynge may dryue 
i2hem out. And .God seide to Balaam, 
Wol thow not goo with hem, ne curs 
i3thow to the puple, for it is blissid. The 
which eerli arysynge°®, seide to the 
prynces, Goo 3e into 3oure loond, for God 
hath defended me to come with 30w. 
14 The? princes, turned a3en, seiden to Ba- 
15laec, Balaam wold not come with vs. Eft- 
sones he many mo, and nobler than he 
1ebifore hadde sent, sende; the whiche 


NUMBERS. 


425 


birthe of Madian, So this puple schal do 
awei alle men that dwellen in oure coostis, 
as an oxe is wont to do awei an eerbe ‘til 
to* the rootis. Forsothe” he‘, ‘that is, Ba- 
laac', was kyng in that tyme in Moab. 
Therfor he sente messangeris to Balaam, 5 
the sone of Beor, a fals diuynour, that 
dwellide on® the flood of the lond of the 
sones of Amon, that thei schulden clepe 
hym, and schulden seie, Lo! a puple 3ede 
out of Egipt, ‘which puplef hilideS the 
face of erthe®, and sittithi ajens me. Ther-¢ 
for come thou, and curse this puple, which 
is strongere than Y, if in ony maner Y 
may smyte and dryue hym! out of my 
lond; for Y knowe, that he is blissid 
whom thou blissist, and he is cursid whom 
thou hast cursid. The eldere men of7 
Moab and the grettere™ men in birtlie of 
Madian 3eden forth, hauynge in hondis® 
the prijs of fals dyuynyng; and whanne 
thei hadden come to Balaam, and hadden 
teld to hym alle the® wordis of Balaach, 
he? answeride, Dwelle 3e here to ny3t, and 8 
Yschal answere’ what euer thing the Lord 
schal seie to me. Sotheli while’ thei dwell- 
ident at* Balaam,God cam, and seide to t thei dwett- 
hym, What wolen these men att thee ‘to9 ceili, 
hem silf"? Balaam answeride, Balaach, He eae 
the sone of Sephor, kyng of Moabitis, 3°" © 
sente to me, and seide, Lo! a puple which’ 1! 
is gon out of Egipt hilide” the face of 
erthe*; come thou, and curse hem, if in 
ony maner Y may fi3teY, and dryue hym? 
awey. And God seide to Balaam, Nyle12 
thou go with hem, nether curse thou the 
puple, for it is blessid. Which® Balaami3 
roos eerli, and seide to the princes, Go 3e 
in to 30ure lond, for God forbeed® me to 
come with 30u. The princes turneden 14 
ajen, and seiden to Balaach, Balaam nolde® 
come with vs. Eft Balaach sente many 1s 
mo and noblere men, than he hadde® sent 


K ouermost c. ottmost Ee. !hac. Melderec. ® vtmostc. Orisendec. P And the ce. 
avnto 1s. toosec.m. » Sothely 1s. © Balact. @ Om. 18. €on or ny3s. f that 1. which s. & hath 
hilid 1s. } the erthe cis. i with ful purpose s marg. * thatis. 1Om.s. ™eldrer. ® her hondis 18. 
°thos. PBalamis. 4 fo Balacs marg. ‘the whiles, Swithis. ‘withis. %Om.1.  V that 1s, 
w hath hilid is, * the erthe crs. Y fizte with hems. Zhemi1s. 4Andis. > hath forbode rs. ¢ wolde 
notr. 4 Om. rrst scc. m. w. 


31 


426 


whanne thei weren comen to Balaam, 
seiden, Thus seith Balac, the sone of Se- 
phor, And tary thow-not to come to me, 
i7redi to worshipe thee; and what euere 
thow wolt, Y shal 3yue to thee; com, 
isand curs to this puple. Balaam an- 
swerde, If Balac 3yue to me his hows ful 
of siluer and of gold, Y shal not mowe 
chaunge the word of my God, that other‘ 
i9more or lasse I speke. Y biseche, that 
here 3e dwellen also in this ny3t, that Y 
may wite what to me eft the Lord an- 
20swerith*, Thanne the Lord cam to Ba- 
laam the ny3t, and seith to hym, If thes 
men comen to clepe thee, aryse', and go 
with hem, so oonly that that Y comaunde 
21to thee, thow doo. Balaam roos eerlich, 
and maad redy the shee asse, wente 
22forthe with hem. And God is wrooth. 
And an" aungel of the Lord stood in the 
weye a3ens Balaam, that satt to the asse, 
and two children with hym he hadde’. 
23 The asse biholdynge an aungel stond- 
ynge in the weye, with a swerd drawun 
out, turnede hir out of the weie, and 
wente bi the feelde. The which whanne 
Balaam bette, and wold lede ajen to the 
24 path, the aungel stood in the” narwenes 
of two stonen wallis, to the whiche vynes 
25 weren boundun. Whom seynge, the asse 
ioynede hym< silf to the wal, and briside** 
the foot of the sitter; and he eftsones 
26 bette. And neuerthelaterY the aungel to 
a streyt place goynge, where nother at 
the rijt ne at the left my3t goon out of 
aj7the weie, metynge stood. And whanne 
the asse hadde seen the aungel stond- 
ynge, she felle down vndir the feet of the 
sitter, the which more hydowsly wrooth, 
28 bette with a staf the sides of hir. And 
the Lord openyde the mouth of the asse, 


qorce. * Om. 4. 
y nerthelater z. 


S answer ACDEFH. tris c. 


€the whicher. fOm.s.  & that thou L. 
with mes. »® Om.c. © thatis. P sche ts. 
tsche 1s.  Balaam haddeis.  ¥ Om. tos. 
% streitnesse plures. | ® the whiche 1. 
hurtlide 1s. & sittere upon hir s. 

m place and stode ajens Balaam s. 
IRST sec.m. * Balaami. 8 Om. 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


uthec. Vladdec. ~Om. 4. Xhirc. 


h 3if rs. 
q with Balaam 8 marg. 
wa swerd Is. 

b Om. 1s. 

h hir xs. Om. plures. 

1 men B pr.m, Om. 18. 

t sittere vpon hir s. 


XXIT. 17—28. 


bifore; whiche® seiden, whanne thei had-16 
den come to Balaam, Balaach, the sone of 
Sephor, seith thus, Tarye thou not to come 
to me, redi to onoure thee; and’ whati7 
euer thing thou’ wolt, Y schal 3yue to 
thee; come thou, and curse this puple. 
Balaam answeride, Thou3> Balaach schal 1s 
3yue to me his howsful of siluer and of 
gold, Y schal not mowe chaunge the word 
of my God, that Y speke ethir more ethir' 
lesse. Y biseche*, that 3e! dwelle™ herei9 
also in® this ny3t, that Y may wite what 
the Lord schal answere eft to me. Ther-20 
for the Lord cam to Balaam in the® ny3t, 
and seide to hym, If these men comen to 
clepe thee, rise thou, and go with hem, so 
oneli that thou do that that Y schal co- 
maunde to thee. Balaam roos eerli, and 21 
whanne his femal? asse was sadelid, he 
jede forth, with hem. And God was22 
wrooth’, And the ‘aungel of the Lord’ 
stood in the weie ajens Balam, that sat 
on’ the femal asse, and hadde® twei chil- 
dren with hym. The femal’ asse si3 the 2s 
aungel stondynge in the weie, with swerd” 
drawun, and ‘turnede awei* hir silf fro 
the weie, and 3ede bi the feeld. And 
whanne Balaam beet hir, and wolde ledeY 
a3en to the path, the aungel stood in the 24 
streitnessis* of twei wallis, with whiche# 
the® vyneris® weren cumpassid. And the 25 
femal asse si3 the aungel, and ioynede® hir 
silf to® the wal, and hurtlidef the foot of 
the sittere?; and he beet eft ‘the asse>. 
And neuer the lesse' the aungel 3ede* to 26 
the! streit place™, where me" ‘my3te not 
go° out of the weie, nether to the ri3t side 
nether? to the left side4, and stood a3ens 
hym*, And whanne the femal* asse si327 
the aungel stondynge, sche felde doun vn- 
dir the feet of the sittere', which® was 


xx brosede cp. 


k biseche 30u s. !Ieq. ™ dwelle 
t Lordis aungel 1s. _* vpon is. 
«the asse turnide 1s. _—*Y lede hir 1xs. 
dsche sede 1s. ¢nizto1s. {sche 
inethelesse inst. Kwenter. !a 1s. 
was no goyng Is. PneELps. 40m. 

u the which 1. 


t or 1s. 


© vynes Is. 


XXII. 29—39. 


and she spak, What haue I doo to thee ? 
whi smytist thow me, loo! now the 
2othridde tyme? Balaam answerde, For 
thou hast deseruyde, and bigilide me; 
wold God Y hadde a swerd, that I my3te 
3osmyte thee. And the asse seide, Whethir 
Y am not thi beeste, to the? which euer- 
more thow were wont to sitte vnto the 
day that is now? sey, what thing lijk 
euer Y dide to thee? And he seith, 
31 Neuer. Anoon the Lord openyde the 
eyen of Balaam, and he see3 an aungel 
stondynge in the weie, holdynge a drawun 
swerd in the hoond; and he lowtide hym 
32redi to* the erthe. To whom the aungel, 
Whi, he seith, tries thow hast bette thin 
asse? Y am comen, that I be aduersarie 
to thee, for shrewid is thi weie, and con- 
33trarie to me; and but the asse hadde 
bowide fro the weye, 3yuynge stede to 
the withstonder, thee I hadde slayn, and 
3ishe shulde haue lyued. And Balaam 
seide, I haue synned, vnwitynge that 
thow stood ajens me; and now, if it dis- 
plese to thee that Y goo, Y shal turne 
35a3en. The aungel seith, Go with these, 
but be war lest eny other thing than Y 
comaunde to thee thow speke. He wente 
36thanne with the prynces. The which 
thing whanne Balac hadde herde, he 
wente out into ajenmetynge of hym, in 
the wallid town of Moabitis, that is sett 
37in the vttermoost? coostis of Arnon. And 
he seide to Balaam, Y haue sent messan- 
geris, that I clepe thee ; whi anoon come 
thow not to me? whether® for I mi3te 
3snot 3eelde mede to thi comynge? ‘To 
whom he answerde, Loo! I am ny3, whe- 
ther othir thing Y may speke but that 
39God shal putte in my mouth? Thanne 
thei wenten® forthe togidre, and camen 
into the cytee, that was in the vtter- 


Z2Om.c. 4 into BCDEFH. 


V he beet 1s. 
2 Om. plures. » vpon 18. 
seruedist me s marg. 
™m hast thon thries beten 1s. ™ Om. 1s. 
lyned 1s. * haue synned 1s. + displese to 18. 
was ni3.8 marg. Ythe whiche 1. = coost s. 


¢ ride Is. 


NUMBERS. 


b vtmost c. otemost £. 


w mouth of the asse 1. asse mouth s. 

4 Om. plures. 
h Balams igen 1. Balam izen s. 
° me 8 marg. 
uhe thon 1s. ¥ 3ede forth rs. 
a Balac 1s. 


427 


wrooth ful greetli, and beet’ hir sidis with 
a staaf. And the Lord openyde the ‘mouth 28 
of the femal asse’, and sche spak, What 
have Y doon to thee*? whi smytist thou 
me, lo! now the thridde tyme? Balaam 29 
answeride, For thou hast disserued, and 
hastY scornyd me; Y wolde that Y hadde 
a swerd to sle thee. And the femal? asse 30 
seide, Whether Y am not® thi beeste on” 
which thou were wont to sitte® euere til 
in to thist present dai? seie thou, what 
lijk thing® Y dide euere to thee? And he 
seide, Neuere®. Anoon the Lord openyde31 
‘the izen of Balaam*, and he si3 the! aun- 
gel stondynge in the weie, holdynge a 
drawun swerd in the* hoond; and Ba- 
laam worschipide hym lowli in to erthel. 
To whom the aungel seide, Whi ‘betist 32 
thou™ thi femal" asse ‘the thridde tyme"? 
Y cam to be aduersarie to thee, for thi 
wele is weiward, and contrarye to me; 
and if the femal" asse hadde not bowid 33 
awey fro the weie, and 30ue place to® 
a3enstondere?, Y hadde slayn thee, and 
sche4 schulde lyue'. Balaam seide, Y syn-34 
nede®, not witynge that thou stodist ajens 
me; and now, if it displesith' thee that 
Y go, Y schal turne ajen. The aungel 3s 
seide, Go thou with these men, but be" 
war that thou speke not other thing than 
Y schal comaunde to thee. Therfor Ba- 
laam 3ede’ with the princes. And whanne36 
Balaach haddeW herde this‘, he 3ede out 
in to the comyng of hym, in the citee of 
Moabitis, whiche’ is set in the laste coostis* 
of Arnon. And he®* seide to Balaam, Y 37 
sente messangeris to clepe thee; whi 
camest thon not anoon to me? whethir 
for Y may not 3elde meede to thi comyng? 
To whom Balaam answeride, Lo! Y am3s 
present, whethir Y schal® mow speke other 
thing than that, that God schal putte in 


¢ Om. zB. 


yOm.1s. 7 Om. 1s. 
fF Balaam is. & thus thou 

ian s. k his 1s. 1 the erthe 1ksx pr. m. 
P the ajenstondere 1s. 4 the asse 1s. Tf hane 
wOm.s. * that Balaam 


x siche, she seide 8 marg. 
© thing fo this 18. 


b scha] not m. 


812 


428 


somoost? coost of his kyngdom. And 
whanne Balac hadde slayn sheep and 
oxen, he sente to Balaam and the prynces 

4ithat with hym weren, 3iftis. Morwn- 
ynge forsothe doon, he ladde hym to hye 
thingis of Baal, and he beheelde the vtter- 
moost® part of the puple. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 And Balaam seide to Balac, Bilde to 
me here seuen auters, and mak redi as 
feel calues, and of the same noumbre 

2wethers. And whanne he hadde doon 
after the word of Balaam, thei putten to 
gydre a calf and a wether vpon the au- 

3ter. And Balaam seyde to Balac, Stoond 

a litil while biside thi brent sacrifice, to 
the tyme that Y goo, if peranenture the 
Lord aj3en come to ine; and what euer 
thing he comaunde I shal speke to thee. 

4And whanne he hadde goon awey swiftli, 

God a3en come to hym; and Balaam 
spak to hym, Seuen, he seith, auters Y 
haue areryd‘, and putte in a calf and a 

5 wether there aboue. The Lord forsothe 
putte the word in the mouth of hym, and 
seith, Turn a3en to Balac, and thes thingis 

6 thow shalt speke. He turned a3en, foonde 
Balac stoondynge bisidis his brent sacri- 
fice, and alle the prynces of Moabitees. 

7 And takun to his parable, seith, Fro A- 
ran lath ladde me Balac, the kyng of 
Moabites, fro the hillis of the eest ; Com, 
he seith, and curs to Jacob; go forthe, 

sand wari to% Israel. What maner wise 
shal I curse to whom God hath not 
cursid ? bi what resoun shal Y wary 

9whom God warieth not? Fro the hiest 


d ytmost c. outmost FE. 


€ thei camen 1s. 4 that 1s. 
h Balaam is. 4 over al the oost s marg. 


NUMBERS. 


© vtmost c. otemost E. 


e the rewme of Balach 1. Balaakis rewme s. 
k Om. 1. 


XXL. sacest 


my mouth? Therfor thei 3eden forth to39 
gidere, and camen® in to a citee, which? 
was in the laste coost of ‘his rewme®. And 40 
whanne Balaach hadde slayn scheep and 
oxun, he sente 3iftis to Balaam and thef 
princes that weren with hym. Forsothe® 41 
whanne the morewtid was maad, Balaach 
ledde Balaam to the hije placis of Baal, 
and he bihelde’ the laste part of the* puple, 
‘that is, al the oost til to! the laste part™. 


CAP. XXIII. 


And Balaam seide to Balaach, Bildet 
thou here to me seuene auteris, and make® 
redi so many caluys, and rammes of the 
same noumbre. And whanne he® haddez 
do bi the word of Balaam, thei puttiden 
a calf and a ram togidere on? the auter. 
And Balaam seide to Balaach, Stond thous 
a litil while bisidis? thi brent sacrifice, 
while Y go’, if in hap the Lord meete me‘; 
and Y schal ‘speke tot thee what euer 
thing he schal comaunde". And whannes 
he’ hadde go” swiftli, God cam to hym; 
and Balaam spak to hym, and seide, Y 
reiside* seuene auteris, and YY puttide? a 
calf and a ram aboue*. Forsothe” thes 
Lord ‘puttide a° word? in his® mouth, and 
seide, Turne ajen to Balaach, and thou 
schalt speke these thingis.. He turnedes 
aj3en, and fond Balach stondynge bisidis 
his brent sacrifice, and alle the princes of 
Moabitis. And whanne his parable ‘was7 
takun8, he seide, Balaach, the’ kyng of 
Moabitis, brou3te me fro Aran, fro the 
‘hillis of the eesti; and* he seide, Come 
thou and curse Jacob; haaste thou!, and 
greetli@ curse thou" Israel. How schals 
Y curse whom God cursid® not ? bi what 
resoun schal Y ‘haue abhomynable? whom 
God ‘hath not abhomynable1? Fro theg 


freridc. & Om. BCDEFH sec. m. 


ftothe 1s. & Sothely ts. 


10m. BEFLMoPW. ‘™ Om.1s.  ® make thou 1s. 


© Balach is. P vponis. 4 biside L. ° to counseile with the Lord s marg. * to me A pr.m, EFKLOPQRTWX. 


t telle 1. speke or felle s. 
y Om. u. % haue putt Is. 
€ Balaams 1. Balaam s. 
h Om. rrsv sec.m. w. i eest hillis 1s. 
° hath cursid 1s. P wlatith 1. warie s. 


u comaunde ¢o be don s. 
a eche of hem s marg. 
f thingis to him is. that I haue shewid to thee s marg. 
k Om. plures. 
4 wlatith not 1. werith not s. 


» Sotheli 1s. 


Vv Balaam is. x haue reisid vp is. 
4 of his wille s marg. 
& he had take 1s. 


n Om. Isx. 


W go forth Is. 
© putte the 1s. 


Ithee ELp. ™ Om. IRST sec. m. 


XXIII. 1o—21. 


flyntis Y shal see hym, and fro the hillis 
Y shal biholde tot hym; the puple aloon 
shal dwelle, and amonge the! gentilis he 
io shal not be rekned. Who may ful noum- 
bre the powdre of Jacob, and knowe the 
noumbre of the lynage of Yrael? Dye 
my sowe thur3 the! deeth of ri3twise 
men, and ben maad my last lijk to* thes! 
i1. And Balac seide to Balaam, What is that 
that thow dost? that thow shuldist curse 
to myn enemyes, Y clepide! thee, and 
12 thow ajenward blissist to hem. To whom 
he answerde, Whether other thing Y may 
speke but that the Lord shal comaunde? 
13 Thanne Balac seide to Balaam,Com with 
me into another place, whens a part of 
Irael thow see3, and al see3™ thow may" 
1inot; thens curs thow to hym. And 
whanne he hadde ladde hym into-an hye 
place, vpon the cop of the hil of Phasga, 
he bilde to Balaam seuen auters, and putt 
isyn there aboue calues and wethers, he 
seide to Balac, Stond here biside thi sa- 
is crifice, to tyme that Y go metynge. To 
whom whanne the Lord was a3en comen, 
and hadde putte the word in the mouth 
of hym, seith, Turn a3en to Balac, and 
thes thingis thow shalt speke to hym. 
i7 Turned ajen, he fonde hym stondynge 
bisidis his sacrifice, and the princes of 
Moabites with hym. To whom Balac, 
What thing, he seith, hath the Lord 
isspokun? And he takid° to his parable, 
seith, Stoond Balac, and herkne; here, 
thow sone of Sephor. God is not as 
ig9man?, that he lye, ne as the sone of man, 
that he be chaungid; thanne he seide, 
and shal not doon? he hath spokun, and 
20shal not fulfille? To blesse I am brou3t 
forthe, blessynge Y may not defende. 
2iThere is no mawmet in Jacob, ne fals 
liknes is seen in Yrael; the Lord God of 


NUMBERS. 


429 


hizeste flyntis Y schal se hym, and fro 
litle’ hillis Y schal biholde hym; the pu- 
ple’ schal dwelle aloone, and it schal not 
be arettid' among hethene men. Whoo 
may noumbre® the dust, that is, kynrede’, 
of Jacob, and knowe’ the noumbre of the 
generacioun of Israel? My lijf die* in the 
deeth of iust men, and my laste thingis be 
maad lijk hem! And Balaach seide to Ba-11 
laam, What is this that thou doist? Y 
clepide thee, that thou schuldist curse myn 
eneinyes, and ajenward thou blessist hem. 
To whom Balaam answeride, Whether Y 12 
may speke othir thing no but that thaty 
the Lord comaundith? Therfor Balaach 13 
seide to Balaam, Come with me in to an- 
othir place, fro whennus thou se? a part of 
Israel, and mayst® not se al; fro thennus 
curse thou hym. And whanne he hadde14 
led Balaam in to an hi3 place, on” the cop 
of the hil of Phasga, he bildide® seuene 
auteris to Balaam, and whanne calues and 
rammes weren put aboue4, he® seide to15 
Balaach, Stonde here bisidis thif brent 
sacrifice, while Y go®&. And whanne thes 
Lord, hadde ‘come to him", and hadde put 
‘a word: in his mouth, he seide*, Turne 
a3en to Balach, and thou schalt seie these 
thingis to hym. He turnyde a3en, and17 
foond Balach stondynge bisidis his brent 
sacrifice, and the princis of Moabitis with 
hym. To whom Balach seide, What spak! 
the Lord? And whanne his parable ‘was 18 
takun™, he seide, Stonde", Balach, and 
herkene ; here, thou sone of Sephor. God 
is not ‘as a° man, that he lye, nethir he is 19 
as the sone of aP man, that he be chaungid; 
therfor he seide4, and schal he not do'? 
he spak’, and schal he not fulfillet? Y am 20 
brou3t" to blesse, Y may not forbede’ bless- 
yng”. Noon idol is in Jacob*, nethir sy-21 
mylacre is seyn in Israel; his Lord God is 


hOm. scourn,. iOm.a. of scpern. clepe ce sec.m. ™seenc. Xmayst pv. 9° take c. 
P aman CE, 

t the litle 1s. 8 puple of Gods. trikened 1s. %noumbre for myeheness. the kynrede is. ¥ who 
may knowe 1s. Xdieorendes. YOm.GNQ. 2 maist seis. ®thou maistis. > vponis. © bildide 
there1s. aboue hems. © Balaamis. fthe x. & to meete God c. to meete with the Lord 1s. » mett 
with Balaam 1. come to Balaam s. ithe wordis 1. the words. * seide fo Balaam s. | hath spoken 1s. 
™ he had taken 1s. © Stonde thou 1s. © a4 pr.m.as sec.m. P Om. plures. 9 hath seide 1s. "do it 1 


that that he seide s marg. & hath spoken 1s. 
Lords. Y forbede or lette s. ¥ the blessyng 1. 


t tille nc. fulfille it 1. fulfille that s. 
x Jynage 8 marg. 


" brou3t hider bi the 


430 


hym is with hym, and the noyse of the 
22victorie of the kyng is in hym. The 
Lord God hath ladde hym out of Egipte, 
whos strengthe is lijk to an vnycorn; 
23there is no dyuynynge bi briddis in 
Jacob, ne dyuynacioun in Yrael. In his 
tymes it shal be seide to Jacob and 
to Yrael, What the Lord hath wrou3t! 
241Loo! the puple as a liones shal aryse4 
togidre, and as a lioun shal be reryd; the 
lioun shal not ligge’, to the tyme that he 
deuowre the pray3, and drynke the blood 
250f the slayn. And Balac seide to Ba- 
lam, Ne curs thow to hym, ne _ blisse 
26thow. And he seithe, Whether seide Y 
not to thee, that what euer thing God 
comaundide to me, that Y wolde doo? 
27 And Balac seide’ to hym, Com, and Y 
shal lede thee to another place, if per- 
auenture it plese to God that fro thens 
28 thow curse to it. And whanne he hadde 
ladde hym out vpon the cop of the hil 
of Phegor, that biholdith the wildernes, 
29 Balaam seide to hym, Bilde here to me 
seuen auters, and mak redy so feel calues, 
zoand of the same noumbre wethers. Ba- 
lac dide as Balaam seide, and putte yn 
calues and wethers, bi eche auters. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 And whanne Balaam hadde seen that 
he shulde plese to the Lord for to blesse 
to Yrael, he wente not as he wente bi- 
fore, for to seche dynininge, but dressynge 

2his chere a3ens the deseert, and arerynge 
the eyen, saw3 Irael in the tentis dwell- 
ynge bi her lynagis. And the Spirit of 

3God fallynge into hym, takun to a para- 
ble, seith, Balaam, the sone of Beor, 
seide, a man whos eye is stoppid seide, 
4the herer of the wordes of God seide, the 
which the si3t of the almy3ti God hath 
inwardli lokid, the which fallith, and so 


drisec. THe c. 


y the victorie 1s. 4 akyngis. ® Om.s. 
and hou God wolc s marg. © to Israel 1s. 
1Qm. a sec.m. Bois. ™ that rs. 
8 make thou 1s. ¢ putte the 1s. 
forth 1s. 2 dide xs. 4 for to 1. 
& the rs.) of affeccioun s marg. 


n plese Is. 


b speke z. 


NUMBERS. 


8 seith cE. 


b diuynyng 1s. 
f it schal 1s. 
© Israel 1s. 
u the rammes Is. 
¢ Om. 1. 
ithat rs. & priuytee 1s. 


XXIII, 22—XXIV. 4. 


with hym, and the sown of victorieY of 
kyng’ is in hym. The Lord God ledde 22 
hyn out of Egipt, whos strengthe is lijk 
an* vnicorn; fals tellyng® bi chiteryng of 23 
bryddis, ‘ethir idolatrie‘, is not in Jacob, 
nethir fals dyuynyng is in Israel. In his 
tymes it schal be seide to Jacob and Is- 
rael®, What the Lord hath wrought! Lo!2s 
the puple schal rise togidere as a lionesse, 
and schalf be reisid as a lioun; the lioun 
schal not reste, til he deuoure prey, and 
drynke the’ blood of hem that ben slayn. 
And Balach seide to Balaam, Nether curse 2s 
thou, nether blesse thou hymi. And hes 
seide, Whether Y seide not to thee, that 
what euer thing that! God comaundide to 
me, Y wolde do this™? And Balach seide 27 
to hym, Come, and Y schal lede thee to 
another place, if in hap it plesith™ God 
that fro thennus thon curse hym®. And 2g 
whanne Balaach hadde led hym out? on 
the ‘cop of the hil4 of Phegor, that bi- 
holdith the wildirnesse, Balaam seide toe9 
hym’, Bilde here seuene auteris to me, 
and make’ redi so many caluys, and ram- 
mes of the same noumbre. Balaach dide 30 
as Balaam seide, and he puttide‘ caluys 
and rammes?, bi alle auteris’. 


CAP. XXIV. 


And whanne’ Balaam si3 that it pleside1 
the* Lord that he schulde blesse Israel, he 
3ede notY as he ‘hadde go? bifore, ‘that he 
schulde* seke® fals dyuynyng ‘bi chiteryng 
of briddis*, but he dresside his face a3ens 
the desert, and reiside* iz3en, and si3° Israel 2 
dwellynge in tentis bi hise lynagis. And 
whanne the Spirit of God feldef on hym, 
and whanne a® parable was takun, hes 
seide, Balaam, the sone of Beor, seide, a 
man whois i3e" is stoppid seide, the herere4 
of Goddis wordis seide, whichi bihelde the 
reuelacioun* of almy3ti God, which! fall- 


t and if B. 


¢ Om. DIRST sec. m. W. 
£Om.1. bOm.is. ilIsrael is. * Balaam 1s. 
Pforth vpis. Q@hilcops. 1° Balac 1s. 
vthe auteris1s. * Om.s. *tothe rks. Y not 

4 he reiside vp his 1s. © he saw3 1. ‘ fel vp 1s. 
1 the which 1. 


4 whenne, where 


XXIV. 5—16. 


5 ben openyd his eyen, How feyr thi taber- 
é6naclis, Jacob, and thi tentis, Yrael! as 
wodi valeys, and as watri gardeyns bi- 
side the flodis, as the tabernacles that the 
7 Lord pi3te, as cedres biside watres; and 
watris shal flowe of his boket, and the 
seed of hym shal be into many watris. 
The kyng of hym for Agag shal be take 
awey, and the kyngdom of hymm shal be 
sdoon awey. God hath ladde hym out of 
Egipte, whos strengthe is lijk to an vny- 
corn; gentilis shulen deuowre the ene- 
myes of hym, and the boonus of hem thei 
shulen breek, and thrille* with arwis. 
9 Liggynge’ he shal sleep as a lioun, and 
as a liones, that no man shal be hardi to 
rere. Who’ blessith to thee, he shal be 
blessid; and who cursith, into cursynge 
ioshal he be rettyd. 
a3en Balaam, with wrongun hoondis seith, 
To curse to my enemyes I haue clepid 
thee, to whom a3enward the thridde tyme 
ulthow hast blissid. Turn ajen to thi 
place; Y ordeynede forsothe hugeli to 
honoure thee, but the* Lord hath’ priu- 
izyde thee thi worship set down. Balaam 
answerde to Balac, Whether seide Y not 
to thi messangers, that thow sendist to? 
sme, If Balac 3yue to me his hous ful of 
siluer and gold*, Y may not ouerpasse 
the word of the Lord my God, that other 
of good or of yuel I speke of myn herte, 
but what thing seith the Lord, that I 
1ishal speke ? Netheles> goynge to my pu- 
ple, I shal 3yue to thee>> counsel, what 
thi puple to this puple shal doo the last 
tyme. Thanne the parable taken, eft 
seith, Balaam, the sone of Beor, seide, a 
16man whos stoppid is the eye, seide, the 
herer of the wordis of God seide, that 
knewe the lore of althir® heijest, and the 


NUMBERS. 


And Balac -wrooth - 


431 


ith doun™, and hise i3en ben openyd so, 
Hou faire ben thi tabernaclis, Jacob, ands 
thi tentis, Israel! as valeys ful of woodis”, 6 
and moiste gardyns bisidis floodis, as ta- 
bernaclis whiche the Lord hath set, as ce- 
dris® bisidis watris ; watir? schal flowe of7 
his4 bokat", and his seed schal be in to 
many watris, ‘that ts, puplis’. The kyng 
of hym schal be takun awei fort Agag”, 
and the rewme of hym schal be doon 
awai. God ledde hymn’ out of Egipt, whoss 
strengthe is lijk an vnicorn; thei” schulen 
deuoure*} hethene men, enemyesy ‘of hym, 
that is, of Israel?; and thei schulen breke* 
the boonus® of hem, and® schulen* perse 


- with® arowis. Hef restide and slepte as a9 


lyoun, and as a lionesse, whom no man 
schal dore reise. He that blessith thee’, 
schal be blessid; he that cursith', schal 
be arettid' in to cursyng And Balaach 10 
was wrooth a3jens Balaam, and seide|, 
whanne™ the" hondis weren wrungun to 
gidere, I clepide thee to curse myn ene- 
myes, whiche® a3enward thou hast blessid 
thries. Turne ajen to thi place; forsotheP 11 
Y demede? to onoure’ thee greetli, but the 
Lord priuyde’ thee fro onour' disposid". 
Balaam answeride to Balaach, Whethir Y 12 
seide not to thi messangeris, whiche thou 
sentist to me, Thou3 Balaach schal 3yue13 
to me his hows ful of siluer and of gold, 
Y schal not mow passe the word of my 
Lord God, that Y brynge forth of myn 
herte ony thing, ethir of good ethir’ of 
yuel, but what euer thing the Lord schal 
seie, Y schal speke this”? Netheles Yu 
schal go* to my puple, and Y schal 3yue 
counsel to thee, what thi puple schal do 
in the laste tyme to thisY puple. Therfor ts 
whanne a? parable was takun, he seide 
eft®, Balaam, the sone of Beor seide, a man 


uthirle ce. ¥ Liyngec. W And who 4 sec.m. Who sop. *thia. yOm. 4. 2 Om. ppern. 4 of 
gold cz. » Neuerthelese spru. Nertheles z. > the 4. ¢ the althir cx. 
m bi mekenesse 8 marg. “treesis. ©cedretreesis. P of doctreynes marg. ther. * bokat of 


Israel 1s. 8 or puplisimarg. + fro 1. 
x waaste 18. Y his enemyesis. 2% Om. ts. 
sec.m.w. €& hemwithis.  f Israel 1s. 
Ihe seide 1s. ™ whanne for surwe s. 
honourid 1s. 8 hath take 1s. 


x ajzen fro thee s marg. ¥ Israel, Goddis s. 


n his rs. 


« blasfemyng him 8 marg. 
@ berste 18. 

& thee, Israel s. 
© whom Is. 
t the onour 1s. 4 ordeyned to thee 1. disposid to thees. Voris, W thats. 
z the 1s, 


vhemu.  W the sones of Israel s. 
¢ and thei x. 

i cursith thee 1s. 
4 purposide 1s. 


4 Om. 10rst 
k putt 1s. 
r haue 


b strengthis 18. 
h and he K. 
P sothely rs. 


a eft to Balach 1s. 


+ thei schulen 
deuoure ete. [n 
Ebren it is 
thns, Israel 
scbal deuoure 
bethen men hise 
enemyes, and 
schal gnawe the 
bonys of hem, 
that is, schal 
distrie the 
strengthe of 
hem. Lire kere. 
c. 


432 


seynge of the Almy3ti seeith, that fall- 
i7ynge hath the eyen openyd, I shal se 
hym, but not now; I shal inwardly Joke 
hym, but not ny3; a sterre shal sprynge 
of Jacob, and a 3eerde shal ryse of Yrael ; 
and he shal smyte the dukis of Moab, 
and he shal wast alle the sones of Seth; 
isand Ydume shal be the possessioun of 
hym, the herytage of Seir shal falle to 
his enemyes; Yrael forsothe strongly 
19 shal doo, of Jacob shal be that lordship*, 
20and leese the relykes of the cytee. And 
whanne he hadde seen Amalech, takynge 
to a parable, seith, The bigynnynge of 
gentiles Amalech, whos eendis shulen be 
21lost. He see3 forsothe Cyneum, and taken 
to a parable, seith, Stronge forsothe is thi 
dwellynge place, but if yn a stoon thow 
22 puttist® thi nest, and were chosen of the 
lynage of Synne, how longe mowe! thow 
dwelle? Assur forsothe shal take thee. 
23 And taken to a parable, eft spak, Alas! 
who to lyuynge®, whanne the Lord shal 
24doo thes thingis? Thei shulen come in 
greet shippis fro Ytalie, and thei shulen 
ouercome Assiries, and thei shulen waast 
the Ebrewis, and at the last thei also 
25shulen perishe. And Balaam roos, and 
is turned ajen into his place; Balac for- 
sothe the weye that he cam, turnyde 
ajen, 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Trael forsothe dwelt that tyme in Se- 
chym, and the puple dide fornycacioun 
2with the dou3tres of Moab; the which 
clepen» hem to her tabernacles, and thei 
eten, and honoureden the goddis of hem ; 


4 shal haue lordship £ pr.m. 


NUMBERS. 


© putt BCDEFU. 


XXIV. 17— XK. 2 


whos i3e> is® stoppid, seide, the herere of 16 

Goddis wordis seide, which knowith the 

doctrine of the hijeste, and seeth the reue- 

lacioun® of almi3ti God, which fallith 

doun® and hath opynf izen%, Y schal se17 

hy, but not now; Y schal biholde hym», 

but not ny3; a sterre schal be borun of 

Jacob, and a 3erde! schal rise of Israel ; 

and he schal smyte the duykis of Moab, 

and he schal waste alle the sones of Seth; 

and Ydumye schal be hys possessioun, the 18 

eritage of Seir schal bifalle to his ene- 

myes; forsothe* Israel schal do strongli, 

of Jacob schal! be he that schal be lord, 19 

and schal™ leese the relikis" of the citee®. 

And whanne he? hadde seyn Amalech4, he 20 

took a parable, and seide, Amalech is the 
bigynning + of hethene men, whos laste + 4malech is 
thingis schulen be lost. Also ‘he siz" Cy-21 nae 
ney’, and whanne a parable was takun, [Cs frstasenu» 
he seide, Forsothet thi" dwellyng place is Tape shad 
strong, but if thou schalt sette thi nest in Aere. sc. 

a stoon, and schalt be chosun of the gene-22 

racioun of Cyn*, hou longe schalt thou 

mow dwelle? forsothe’ Assur schal take 

thee. And whanne a parable was takun”, 23 

he spak* eft, Alas! who schal lyue,whanne 

the Lord schal make’ thes thingis? Thei? 21 

schulen come in grete schippis fro Ytalie, 

thei schulen ouercome Assiries*, and thei 

schulen distrie Ebrews, and at the last 

also” thei hem silf schulen perische. And 25 

Balaam roos, and turnide a3en in to his 

place; and Balaach 3ede a3en bi the weye® 

in which he cam. 


CAP. XXV. 


Forsothe’ in that tyme Israel dwellide1 
in Sechym; and the puple® dide fornyca- 
cioun with the dou3tris of Moab; whiche'2 
dou3tris clepiden hem& to her sacrifices, 
and theis eten", and worschipiden the 
& line c. 


f mai cE. h clepeden c. 


» of good entent s marg. © wast. 4 priuytee 1s. ¢ fro grace s marg. ! to yuels marg. & hir izen 1s. 


bh afer s marg. i of chastising s marg. 
rs g g 


k sothely 1s. 


10m.s. ™ he schal ts. D relifs Be. aftir 


leeuyngis 1s. © contrarie to hims marg. P Balaamis. menof Amalech is. 1° Balaam saw3 1s. 
8 Euey EFLOx prim. Pp. +tSothely1s. Uutheo. Cham x marg. ‘sothely 1s. W or shewid to 
him s marg. * seidets. Ydo1s. %Menis. 8 Assiriens plures. %Om.s. © of shrewid pur- 
poss marg. 4Sothely xs. © puple of Israelis. the whiche 1. 8 Israelis. 4 eete 1. eete s ¢eat. 


lustily marg. 


XXV. 3—15. 


sand Irae] sacrifiede to Belphagor. And 
4the Lord was wrooth to Moyses; Tak; 
-he! seith, alle the prynces of the puple, 
and honge hem a3ens the sunne in iebet- 
tis, that my woodnes be turned awey fro 
5Yrael. And Moyses seide to the domes- 
men of Yrael, Sle echon* his nei3bors, 
éthat han sacrifiede to Belphegor. And 
loo! oon of the sones of Yrael wente yn 
before his brytheren to a Madyanyte 
strompet, seeynge Moyses, and al the 
puple of the sones of Yrael, the whiche 
wepten before the 3atis of the tabernacle. 
7The which thinge whanne hadde seen 
Phynees, the sone of Eleazar, sone of 
Aaron, preest, roos fro the myddil of the 
smnultitude, and, cau3t a swerd, wente yn 
after the man of Yrael into the hoor- 
hows, and he stikide thur3 both togidre, 
the man, that is, and the womman, in the 
genytale places. And the veniaunce ce- 
gside fro the sones of Yrael, and there ben 
slawe foure and twenti thowsandis of men. 
i, And the Lord seide to Moyses, Phynees, 
the sone of Eleazar, sone of Aaron, 
preest, hath tak awey my wrath fro the 
sones of Irael; for thur3 my loue he is 
styryd a3ens hem, that I my silf dide not 
awey the sones of Yrael in my gelouste. 
12 Therfore spek to hym, Loo! I 3yue to hym 
13the pees of my boond of pees, and it shal 
be, as wel to hym as to his seed, euerlast- 
ynge couenaunt! of presthod ; for he hath 
loued for his God, and hath purgid the 
14 hidows synne of the sones of Yrael. The 
name forsothe of the man of Yrael, that 
was™ slayn with the Madianyte, was 
Zambri, the sone of Salu, duke of the 
15 kynrede of the lynage of Symeon. For- 
sothe the womman of Madianyte that to- 
gidre was slayn, was clepid Chobry, the 
.dou3tre of Sur, moost noble prynce of 


iOQm.c.  eche c. 


k that han cure s marg. 


1 wymmen 1s. 
© entride boldely s. 


geaunee 1s. " Om. ts. 


NUMBERS. 


1 comenaunt D passim. 


l that thet be known s marg. 
P a strumpett Is. 


433 


goddis of tho dou3tris'; and Israel made 
sacrifice to Belphegor. And the Lord was 
wrooth, and seide to Moises, Take thous 
alle the princes* of the puple, and hange 
hem ajens the sunne in iebatis!, that my 
wodnesse™, ‘that ts stronge veniaunce”, be 
turned awai fro Israel. And Moises seides 
to the iugis of Israel, Ech man sle his 
neiz3boris, that maden sacrifice to Belpha- 
gor. And, lo! oon of the sones of Israel é 
entride® bifor his britheren to ‘an hooreP 
of Madian, in the si3t of Moises, and al4 
the cumpeny of the sones of Israel, whiche" 
wepten® bifor the 3atis of the tabernacle. 
And whanne Phynees, the sone of Elea-7 
zar, sonet of Aaron, preest", hadde seyn 
this’, he roos fro the myddis of the mul- 
titude; and whanne he hadde take a 
swerd, he entride aftir the man of Israels 
in to* the ‘hoore hows’, and stikide? tho- 
rou both togidere, that is, the man and 
the womman, in the places of gendryng. 
And the veniaunce ceesside fro the sones 
of Israel, and foure and twenti thousand 9 
of men weren slayn. And the Lord seide 10 
to Moises, Fynees, the sone of Eleazar, 11 
sone? of Aaron, preest, turnede> away 
myn yre® fro the sones of Israel; for he 
was stirid’ a3ens hem bi my feruent loue, 
that Y my silf schulde® not do awai the 
sones of Israel in my greet hetef, ‘ether 
strong veniaunces. Therfor speke thou 12 
to hym, Lo! Y 3yue to hym®" the pees of 
my couenaunt}, and it schal be an ewer-13 4 conenaunt, 
lastynge couenaunt of preesthod, as wel Mat 's,?he dig- 


nete of prest- 
to hym silf as to his seed; for he louyde bod aftir his 
Pe > f fadir. Lire 
feruentli! for his God, and he clenside* the ere. xe. 
greet trespas of the sones of Israel. For-14 


sothe! the name of the man of Israel, that 
was slayn with the womman of Madian, 
was Zambri, the sone of Salu, duyk™ of 
the kynrede and lynage® of Symeon. For-1s 


™ ig BCDEFH. 


m woundis A pr.m. ven- 


qofalcs. tthe whiche1. 8 for 


hidoustee of the vile synne 8 marg. * the sone 1s. the preest 1. ¥ unshamfast doing s marg. W Om. 8. 


x Om. 15, Y bordelrie 1s. z he stikide hem 1s. 
4d moued is. €Om.s.  feruentnesse 1. feruentnesse of veniaunce s. 
loue s marg. ‘chastitees marg. _* hath elenside 1s. 


whiche Zambri was duyk s. 5 of the lynage 1s. 


b hath turnede 1s. ¢ wrath 1. 
&Om.1s. 4 hauing this feruent 
m the whiche Zambri was duyk 1. 


@ the sone BN, 


! sothly 1s. 


3K 


434 


16 Madianytees. And® the Lord spak to 

17 Moyses, seiynge, Enemyes feele 30w the 

18 Madianytees, and smyte 3e hem; for and 
thei enemylich han? doo a3eyns? 30w, and 
han bigilid bi aspies, bi the mawmet of 
Phegor, and the dou3tre Chobry of the 
duke of Madian, hys sister, that is smytun 
in the day of veniaunce, for the sacrilegie 
of Phegor. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 Aftir that the blood of gilti men is 
shed, the Lord seide to Moyses and to 
Eleazar, the sone~of Aaron, the preest, 
2Noumbre 3e al the summe of the sones 
of Yrael, fro twenti jeer and aboue, by 
howses, and ther’ kynredis, and alle that 
3mowen goo forth to batails. And so 
‘speken Moyses and Eleazar, the preest, 
in the wijlde feeldes of Moab, vpon Jor- 
4dan, a3ens Jerico, to hem that weren of 
twenti 3eer and aboue, as the Lord co- 
maundide ; of whom this is the noumbre. 
s Ruben, the first getun of Yrael; of this 
the sone Enoch, of whom the meyne of 
Enochitees; and Fallu, of whom the 
émeyne' of Falluytees; and Esrom,of whom 
the meyne of Esromytees; and Charmy, 
70f whom the meyne of Charmytis. Thes 
ben the meyneis of the lynage of Ruben, 
whos noumbre is foundun thre and fourty 
thowsandes* seuen hundrid and thretti. 
; The sone of Fallu of Heliab; of this the 
sones, Namuelt, and Datan, and Abiron. 
Thes ben Dathan and Abyron, the princes 
of the puple, that rysen a3ens Moyses 
and Aaron, in the dissencyoun of Chore, 
10 Whanne ajeus the Lord thei rebelden, and 
the erthe openynge his mouth, deuowr- 
ide Chore, diynge many, whanne the fier 


nQOm. 4. Chath 4. Pto a. @Om. 4. 


° sothely 1s. P with the hoorling s marg. 
strie 1s. t han do 1s. 
sistir Corbri, dou3tir of the duyk of Madian 1s. 
aunce for lecherie s marg. » the preest 1s. 
& the preest 1s. h fro plures. 
n meynecs AF. 9° whom came Is. 


resin EP. Vthe 3s. Wit denouride ts. 


NUMBERS. 


F meynees 4. 


q feele the Madianytis 1s. 
V disseyueden 30 IKs, 
Z sacrifice 1. or bi hidous gilt s marg. 
¢ rikene Is. 
i whiche men 1s. 


P thretti men s. 4 Om. 1. 


XXV. 16—XXVI. 10. 


sothe® the womman of Madian that was 
slayn togidere?, was clepid Cobri, the 
dou3ter of Sur, the nobleste prince of Ma- 
dianytis. And the Lord spak to Moises 16 
and seide,‘Madianytis feele? 30u enemyes*, 17 
and smyte* 3e hem; for also thei diden‘is 
enemyliche a3ens 30u, and disseyuedenY 
thorow™ tresouns, bi the idol of Phegor, 
and bi ‘the dou3ter of Corbri*, duyk of Ma- 
dian, her sister’, which dou3ter was sleyn 
in the dai of veniaunce, for the sacrilege? 
of Phegor. 
CAP. XXVI. 

Aftir that the blood of gilti men was1 
sched out®, the Lord seide to Moises and 
to Eleasar, preest®, sone of Aaron, Noum-2 
bre® 3e al? the summe® of the sones of 
Israel, fro twenti 3eer and aboue, bi her 
housis, and kynredis‘, alle men that mowen 
go forth to batels. And so Moises ands 
Eleasar, preest’, spaken in the feeldi places 
of Moab, ouer Jordan, a3ens Jerico, to hem 
that weren of twenti jeer and aboue, as4 
the Lord comaundide; of whiche: this is 
the noumbre. Ruben, the firste gendrid* 5 
of Israel; the sone of hym was Enoch, of 
whom was! the meynee of Enochitis ; and 
Phallu, of whom™ the meynee of Phallu- 
ytis; and Esrom, of whom™ the meynee"6 
of Esromytis ; and Charmy, of whom? the 
meynee of Charmytis. Thes weren the7 
meynees of the generacioun of Ruben, of 
whiche meynees the noumbre was foundun 
thre and fourti thousand seuene hundrid 
and thretti?. The sone of Phallu wasis 
Heliab; the sones of hym™ weren’ Na-9 
muel, and Dathan and Abiron. ‘These 
weren Dathan and Abiron', prynces of the 
puple, that riseden" ajens Moises and Aa- 
ron, in the rebelte of Chore, whanne thei 
rebelliden ajens the Lord; and the erthe 10 
openyde his’ mouth, and deuouride” Chore, 


Sthousend c. t of Namuel as. 


8 de. 
‘y her 
& bi veni- 
€noumbre 1s. her kynredis 1s. 

1 came 1s. m whom came Is. 
sOm.1. tOm.s. risen FILS. 


t to be her enemyes Is. 
W bi rs. x Cobri ¢ pr.m. F sec. m. 0. 
d Om. L. 

k bigoten 1. 
¥ this 1. 


“XXXVI. 11—26. 


brente two hundrid and fifti men; and a 
igreet myracle was done, that Chore pe- 
izrishynge®, his sones pershiden not. The 

sones of Symeon bi her kynredes; Na- 

muel, of this the meyne of Namuelitis ; 

Jamyn, of this the meyne of Jamynytees ; 

Jachym, of this the meyne of Jachym- 
isytis’; Zare, of this the meyne of Zaren- 

ytis; Saul, of this the meyne of Saulitis. 
14 Thes ben the meynees of the lynage of 

Symeon, of whom al the noumbre was 

two and twenti thousandis” and two hun- 
isdrid. The sones of Gad bi her kynredes ; 

Sephon, of this the meyne of Sephonytis ; 

Aggy, of this the meyne of Aggitis; 

Sumy,.of this the meyne of Sumytis ; 
isOzny, of this the meyne of Oznytis; 

Hery, of this the meyne of Hereytis; 
17Arod, of this the meyne of Aroditis; 

Ariel, of this the meyne of Aryelitis. 
ig Thes ben the meyne* of Gad, of whom al 

the noumbre was fourti thowsand and 
i9fyue hundred. The sones of Juda, Her 

and Onan, the whiche both ben deed in 
20the loond of Chanaan. And there weren 
the sones of Juda bi his’ kynredis, Sela, 
of whom the meyne of? Selaytis; Phares, 
of whom the meyne of? Pharesitis; Zare, 
210f whom the meyne of Zareitis. For- 
sothe the-sones of Phares; Esrom, of 

whom the meyne of Esromytis; and A- 

mul, of whom the meine of Amulitis. 
22 Thes ben the meynees of Jude, of whom 

al the nowmbre was seuenti thowsynd 
2sand fyue hundrid. The sones of Ysachar 
bi her kynredis; Thola, of whom the 
meyne of Tholaytis ; ‘Phua, of whome 
24 the meyne of Phuaytis?; Jasub, of whom 
the meyne of Jasubitis; Semram, of 
25 whom the meyne of Semramytis. Thes 
ben the kynredis of Ysachar, of whom 
the noumbre was foure and sexti thow- 


NUMBERS. 


435 


while* ful many menY dieden, whanne the 
fier brente two hundrid men and fifti; and 
a greet myracle was maad’, that whanne 11 
Chore perischide, hise sones perischiden 
not. The sones of Symeon bi her kyn- 12 
redis*; Namuel, of hym was the meynee 
of Namuelitis ; Jamyn, of hym was” the 
meynee of Jamynytis ; Jachin, of hym was¢ 
the meynee of Jachynytis ; Zare, of hym413 
the meynee of Zarenytis; Saul, of hym® 
the ineynee of Saulitis. These weren the 14 
meynees of Symeon, of whicle all the 
noumbre was two and twenti thousynde 
and® two hundrid. The sones of Gad bis 
her kynredis'; Sephon, of hym$ the meynee 
of Sephonytis ; Aggi, of hym’ the meynee 
of Aggitis; Sumy, of hym? the meynee of 
Sumytis ; Ozny, of hym? the meynee of 16 
Oznytis; Heri, of hym® the meyneei of 
Hereytis ; Arod, of hym® the meynee of 17 
Aroditis; Ariel, of hym> the meynee of 
Arielitis. These weren the meynees of ts 
Gad, of whiche al the noumbre was fourti 
thousynde and fyue hundrid. The sones 19 
of Juda weren* Her and Onan, whiche 
bothe weren deed in the lond of! Canaan. 
And the sones of Juda weren™ bi her kyn-20 
redis ; Sela, of whom" the meynee of Se- 
laitis; Phares, of whom® the meynee of 
Pharesitis; Zare, of whom? the meynee 
of 4 Zareitis. Sotheli the sones of Phares 21 
weren Esrom, of whom? the meynee of 
Esromytis; and Amul, of whom the 
meynee' of" Amulitis. These weren the 22 
meynees of Juda, of whiche al the noum- 
bre was seuenty thousynde and fyue hun- 
drid. The sones of Isachar bi her kyn-23 
redis; Thola’, of whom” the meynee of 
Tholaitis; Phua, of whom’ the meynee 
of Phuitis; Jasub, of whom’ the meynee 21 
of Jasubitis; Semran,of whom” the meynee 
of Semranytis. These weren the kynredis 25 


u peryschid BoE. v Jamynytis 4. w thousend c. x meynees 4. Y her a. zOm. 4. 
a Om. 4. 

* and DIMORST sup. ras. W. y Om. plures. z don Is. & weren these 8 marg. b Om. plures. 
© Om, plures. came is. Uhymcameis. © Om. BCDEFLOPX pr.m. f kynredis weren thees 1s. & hym 
came1s. bhymcames. 'meynees pKqgrt. * werenthees1s. !Om.s. ™ weren thees 1s. % whom 
cameis. Shimis. Phims, 4@Om.s. ‘Thimis, Shimis. tmeyneesc. "Om. a. Y weren 
Thola 1s. * him 1s. 


3K 2 


436 


26sandis> and thre hundrid. The sones of 
Zabulon bi her kynredes; Sared, of whom 
the meyne of Saradites; Helon, of whom 
the meyne of Helonytis; Jalel, of whom 
27the meyne of Jelelitis. ‘Thes ben the 
kynredis of Zabulon, of whom the noum- 
bre was sexti thousynd and fyue hundrid. 
28The sones of Joseph bi his kynredis, 
29 Manasses and Effraym. Of Manasse ‘is 
commen’ Machir, of whom the meyne of 
Macherytis. Machir gat Galaad®, of whom 
30the meyne of Galaditis. Galaad hadde 
sones; Yezer, of whom the meyne of 
Yezerytis ; and Helech, of whom the 
31meyne of Helechitis; and Ariel, of whom 
the meyne of Arielitis; and Sechem, of 
3zwhom the meyne of? Sechemytis; and 
Semyda, of whom the meyne of * Semy- 
daytis ; and Epher, of whom the meyne 
330f Epherytis. Epher forsothe was fader‘ 
of Saphaad, that had no sones, but oonli 
dou3tres’, of whom thes ben the names ; 
Maala, and Noha, and Egla, and Melcha, 
stand Thersa. Thes ben the meynees of 
Manasse, and the noumbre of hem two 
aud fifti thowsand and seuen hundryd. 
35The sones forsothe of Effraym bi her 
kynredis weren thes; Suthala, of whom 
the meyne of Suthalitis; Bether, of whom 
the meyne of Betheritis ; Theen, of whom 
36the meyne of Theennytis. Forsothe the 
sone of Suthala was Heram, of whom the 
37meyne of Heramytis. Thes ben the kyn- 
redis of the sones of Effraym, of whom 
the noumbre was two and thretti thow- 
3ssand and fyue hundrid. Thes ben the 
sones of Joseph, bi his" meynees. The 
sones of Beniamyn in his kynredis ; Bale, 
of whom the meyne of Baleytis; Asbel, 
of whom the meyne of Azbelitis ; Ahi- 
ram, of whom the meyne of Ahyramytis ; 
39Suphan, of whom the meyne of Suphan- 
ytis; Huphan, of whom the meyne of 
40 Huphanytis. The sones of Bale, Hered, 


b thousend c. © camen A. 


h her a. 

y him 1s. 
& him 1s. 
Pp him 1s. 


x weren Sarad 1s. 
ehimis. f bigaat 1. 
nmeynee s. © sothely is. 
Vv him ts, 


NUMBERS. 


ce Galaal 4. ¢ Om. so. 


Z meynees Is. 
h thees sones 18. 
q sothely 1s. 


XXXVI. 27—40. 


of Isachar, of whiche the noumbre was 
foure and sixti thousynd and three hun- 
drid. The sones of Zabulon bi her kin-26 
redis ; Sarad*, of whomY the meynee* of 
Sareditis; Helon, of whom* the meynee> 
of Helonytis; Jalel, of whom®* the meynee 
of Jalelitis. These weren the kynredis of 27 
Zabulon, of whiche the noumbre was sixti 
thousynde and fyue hundrid. The sones es 
of Joseph bi her kynredis weren Manasses 
and Effraym. Of Manasses was‘ borun 29 
Machir, of whom? the meynee of Machir- 
itis. Machir gendridef Galaad, of whom’ 
the meynee of Galaditis. Galaad hadde 30 
sones'; Hizezer, of whom the meynee of 
Hizezeritis; and Helech, of whom* the 
meynee of Helechitis; and Ariel, of whom 31 
the meynee of Arielitis; and Sechem, of 
whom* the meynee of Sechemytis; and 32 
Semyda, of whom" the meynee of Semy- 
daitis ; and Epher, of whom* the meynee 
of Epheritis. Forsothe! Epher was the33 
fadir of Salphath, that hadde not sones, 
but oneli dou3tris ; of whiche™ these weren 
the names; Maala, and Noha, and Egla, 
and Melcha, and Thersa. These weren31 
the meynees® of Manasse, and the noum- 
bre of hem was two and fifty thousynde 
and seuene hundrid. Forsothe® the sones3s 
of Effraym bi her kynredis weren these; 
Suthala, of whom? the meynee of Sutha- 
laitis; Bether, of whom? the meynee of 
Betherytis; Tehen, of whom? the meynee 
of Thehenytis. Forsothe’ the sone of Su-36 
thala was Heram, of whom’ the meynee 
of Heramytis. These weren the kynredis 37 


‘of the sones* of Effraym, of whiche* the 


noumbre was two and thretti thousynde 
and fyue hundrid. These weren the sones 38 
of Joseph, bi her meynees. The sones of 
Beniamyn in her kynredis; Bale", of 
whom’ the meynee of Baleytis; Azbel, of 
whom’ the meynee of Azbelitis; Ahiram, 
of whom’ the meynee of Ahiramitis ; Su-s9 


f the fader cz. & dou3tren BDEFH. 


e Om. 4BDF. 


ahim is. bmeyneesis. ¢himis. 4 cam 1s. 
ihimis. Ehimis. }sothely 1s, ™ the whiche s. 
rlimis. §Om.s. twhomis. weren Bale 1s. 


XXVI. 41—57. © 


and Noeman; of Hered the meyne of 
Heredytis; of Noeman the meyne of 
41 Noemanytis. Thes ben the sones of Ben- 
iamyn bi his kynredis, of whom the 
noumbre was fyue and fourti thowsand 
azand six hundryd. The sones of Dan bi 
his kynredis ; Suhan, of whom the meyne 
of' Suhanytis. Thes ben the kynredis of 
43 Dan bi his meynees; alle weren Sunan- 
itis, of whom the noumbre was foure and 
44sixti thowsynd and foure hundrid. The 
sones of Aser bi his kynredes; Jemma, 
of whom the meyne of Jemmanytis; Je- 
suy, of whom the meyne of Jesuitis; 
Brye, of whom the meyne of Brieytis. 
45 The sones of Brye; Haber, of whom the 
meyne of Haberytis; and Melchiel, of 
4¢6whom the meyne of Melchielitis. The 
name forsothe of the dou3ter of Azar was 
47Sara. Thes ben* the kynredes of the 
sones of Aser, and the noumbre of hem 
foure and fyfty thowsand and foure hun- 
48dryd. The sones of Neptalyin bi his 
kynredis ; Jesyel, of whom the meyne of 
Jesyelitis; Guny, of whom the meyne of 
49Gunytis; Jeser, of whom the meyne of 
Jeserytis; Sellem, of whom the meyne 
50 of Sellemytis**. Thes ben the kynredis of 
the sones of Neptalym bi his meynees, of 
whom the-noumbre was fyue and fourti 
51 thousyndis! and foure hundrid. This is 
the summe of the sones of Yrael, that 


ben noumbred, six hundryd thowsand- 


and a thowsand and seuen hundrid and 
s2thretti. And the Lord spak to Moyses, 


s3seiynge, To thes shal the loond be dy-— 


uydid, aftir the noumbre of the™ names 
54into her possessiouns; to the moo the 
more part thow shalt 3yuec, and to the 
fewer the lasse; to eche as thei ben 
noumbred shal be take the possessioun ; 
5580 oonli that lot dynyde the loond to the 
s6lynagis and meynes. What euer thing 
bi lot falle, that othere" mo taken or 


NUMBERS. 


437 


phan, of whom the meynee of Suphanitis ; 
Huphan, of whom’ the meynee of Hu- 
phanitis. The sones of Bale, Hered and 40 
Noeman; of Hered, the’ meyne of Here- 
ditis; of Noeman, the meynee* of Noe- 
manitis. Thes weren the sones of Benia-41 
myn bi her kynredis, of whiche the noum- 
bre was fyue and fourti thousynde and 
sixe hundrid. The sones of Dan bi her 42 
kynredis; Suphan’, of whom? the meynee 
of Suphanytis. These weren the kyuredis 
of Dan bi her meynees; alle weren Su-43 
phanytis, of whiche the noumbre was foure 
and sixti* thousynde and foure hundrid. 
The sones of Aser bi her kynredis; Jem-44 
ma>, of whom® the meynee of Jemmaytis ; 
Jesuy, of whom’ the meynee of Jesuytis ; 
Brie, of whom the meynee® of Brieitis. 
The sones of Brie; Haber®, of whomf the 4s 
meynee of Haberitis; and Melchiel, of 
whom! the meynec of Melchielitis. Sotheli 46 
the name of ‘the dou3tir of Azer® was 
Zara. These weren the kynredis of the 47 
sones of Aser, and the noumbre of hem 
was foure and fifti thousynde and foure 
hundrid. The sones of Neptalym bi her 4s 


_ kynredis; Jesehel', of whom! the meynee* 


of Jeselitis; Guny, of whom! the meynee™ 
of ® Gunytis; Jeser, of whom® the meynee 49 
of Jeserytis; Sellem, of whom? the meynee 
of Sellemytis. Thes weren the kynredis so 
of the sones of Neptalyin bi her meynees, 
of whiche? the noumbre was? fyue and 
fourti thousynde and foure hundrid. This si 
is the summe? of the sones of Israel, that 
weren noumbrid’, sixe hundrid thousynde 
and a thousynde seuene hundrid and 
thretti. And the Lord spak to Moises, s2 
and seide, The lond schal be departid toss 
these, bi the noumbre of names in to her 
possessiouns ; thou schalt 3yue the gret-s4 
tere part to mo men, and the lesse part to 
fewere men; possessioun scha] be 30nun 
to alle bi hem silf, as thei ben nowmbrid 


iOm.£. * Om. sceru. kk Sollemytis 4. | thousend c. ™ ther c. "or ce. 
vhim is. W came the s. * meynees1. Y weren Suphan is. 2 himis, 8 fourti x. > weren Jemma 1s. 
chimrs. names. € weren Haber is. fhimys. & Azer dou3ters. » weren Jesehel 1s. + him 1s. 
k meynees 1. 1himis. ™meyneesr. "Om.as. himis. Pwhoms. 40Om.s8, * noumbre 1s. 


§ rikened 1s. 


438 


57fewe. This forsothe is the noumbre of 
the sones of Leuy bi her meynees; Ger- 
son, of whom the meyne of Gersonytis ; 
Caath, of whom the meyne of Caathitis ; 
Merary, of whom the meyne of Meraritis. 
58 Thes ben the meynees of Leuy; the 
meyne of Lobny, the meyne of Ebron, 
the meyne of Mooli, the meyne of Musy, 
the meyne of Chory. And forsothe Caath 
sogeet Amram, that hadde a wijf, Jocho- 
beth, the dow3ter of Leuy, that is bore 
to hym in Egipte. Thes geet to hir man 
Amram sones, Aaron, and Moysen, and 
60 Mary, the sistir of hem. Of Aaron ben 
comen forthe Nadab, and Abyu, and 
61 Eleazar, and Ythamar; of whom Nadab 
and Abyu ben deed, whanne thei hadden 
czoffred alien fier before the Lord. And 
alle that ben noumbred weren thre and 
twenty thowsynd of maal kynde, fro o 
moneth and aboue, the whiche ben not 
noumbred amonge the sones of Yrael, ne 
to hem with othere is 3ouen possessioun. 
63 This is the noumbre of the sones of 
Yrael, that ben discryued of Moyses and 
Eleazar, the preest, in the wijld feeldis 
of Moab, vpon Jordan, a3ens Jerycho; 
64among whoom noon of hem was that be- 
fore ben noumbred of Moyses and Aaron, 
65in the deseert of Synay; the Lord for- 
sothe seide before, that alle thei shulden 
dye in wildernes, and noon of hem abood 
but Caleph, the sone of Jephone, and 
Josue, the sone of Nun. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 Camen ny3 forsothe the dou3tres°® of 
Salphaad, sone? of Ephor, sone? of Ga- 
laad, soneP of Machir, sone? of Manasse, 


© dou3tryn £. 


u fallith a. 

b the douzter 1s, © gaat 1. 

h of this lynage s marg. ias. 

n of Eleasar is. © the preest 1s. 
8 dwellide alyue 1s. *t Om. 1. 


t to meynees Is. 
athe which 1. 
§ goten I. 
kened 1s. 
ing S marg. 


¥ that Is. 


NUMBERS. 


w ts the Is. 
4 sones of Amram 1. 
k noumbrid fro o monethe and aboue 1. 

P Om. s. 

u Jephonus sone Is. 


XXVIb 58—XXVII. r. 


now; so oneli that lot departe the lond toss 
lynagis and meynees'. What euer thing 56 
bifallith" bi lot, ethir mo ether fewere men 
take this’. Also this is the noumbre of 57 
the sones.of Leuy bi her meynees; Ger- 
son, of whom the¥ meynee of Gersonytis ; 
Caath, of whom* the meynee of Caathitis ; 
Merary, of whom’ the meynee of Mera- 
ritis, These weren the meynees of Leuy ; 58 
the meynee of Lobny, the meynee of E- 
bron, the meynee of Mooli, the meynee of 
Musi, the meynee of Chori. And sotheli 
Caath gendride? Amram, which* hadde aso 
wijf, Jocabeth, dou3ter? of Leuy, which 
dou3ter was borun to hym in Egipt. This 
Jocabeth gendride® to hir hosebonde ‘Am- 
ram sones’, Aaron, and Moyses, and Ma- 
rie®, ‘the sister of hem’. Nadab, and Abyu, 60 
and Eleazar, and Ithamar weren bigetun’ 
of Aaron; of whiche Nadab and Abyuéi 
weren deed, whanne thei hadden offrid 
alien fier bifor the Lord. And alle thatce 
weren noumbrid® weren thre and twenti 
thousynde of male kynde, fro o' monethe 
and aboue, whiche weren not noumbrid* 
among the! sones of Israel, nether posses- 
sioun was 30uun to hem with othir men. 
This is the noumbre of the sones of Israel, ¢3 
that weren discryued™ of Moises and E- 
leasar", preest®, in the feeldi places of 
Moab, ouer Jordan, ajen Jerico; among és 
whiche noon of hem was that weren 
noumbrid bifor of Moises and Aaron, in 
the deseert of? Synay; for the Lord bifore 65 
seide, that alle’ schulden die in ‘the wil- 
dirnesse"; and noon of hem dwellide’, not 
but Caleph, ‘the sone of Jephone", and 
Josue, the sone of Nun. 


CAP. XXVII. 


Forsothe’ the dou3tris of Salphaat, sone™ ! 
of Epher, sone of Galaad, sone of Machir, 
sone of Manasses, that was ‘the sone of 


P the sone E pr.m. 


x Om. A. him i. him is s. 


yhim is. 2 bigat 1. 
e Om. s. 


f his sistir 1. hir sistir s. 
lothers. ™re- 
Galle tho1s. * deseert 1s. for her grucch- 
¥ Sothely 1s. ¥ the sone s. 


Xavi a—rgt 


that was the sone of Josep; of whom 
thes ben the names; Maala, and Noba, 
2and Egla, and Melcha, and Thersa. And 
thei stoden before Moysen and Eleazar, 
the preest, and alle the prynces of the 
puple, at the dore of the tabernacle of 
sthe boond of pees; and seiden4, Oure 
fader is deed in deseert, and’ was not in 
the dissencioun, that is styryd ajens the 
Lord, vndur Chore, but in his synne is 
deed; this hadde not maal children. 
Whi is take the name of hym fru’ his 
meyne, for he hadde no sone? 3yfe 3e to 
vs possessions amonge the cosynes of oure 
4fader. And Moyses toolde the cause of 
shem to. the doom of the Lord; the which 
sseide to hym, Ry3twise thingis™ asken the 
dou3tres of Salphaad; 3yf’to hem posses- 
siouns* amonge the cosyns of her fader, 
and to hym in heritage come thei aftir. 
7To the sones forsothe of Yrael thow 
sshalt speke thes thingis, A.man whanne 
he were deed with out sone, to the dou3- 
9ter shal passe the herytage; if he hane 
no dou3ter, he shal haue successours his 
lo britheren;- and if there weren no bri- 
theren, 3e shulen 3yue the herytage to 
11 thet britheren of the fader of hym; if 
forsothe he have not men britheren to his 
fader, the herytage shal be 3eue to hem 
that ben next to hym. And this shal be 
hooly to the sones of Yrael, bi perpetuel 
law, as the Lord comaundide to Moyses. 
12 The Lord forsothe seide:to Moyses, Sty 
vp into this hil of Abarym, and bihold 
fro thens the loond, that I am to 3yu- 
i3ynge" to the sones of Irael. And whanne 
thow seest it, and thow shalt goo to thi 
14puple, as wente thi brother Aaron; for 
thow hast offendide me in the deseert of 
Syn, in the contradiccioun of the mul- 
titude, ne halowe me 3e wolden before it, 


dseiende c. * thinge scperH. 


x Joseph sone s. 


NUMBERS. 


§ possessioun CE. 


y the preest 1s. 2 bifore alle s. 


439 


Joseph *, neizeden; of whiche dou3tris these 
ben the names; Maala, and Noha, and 
Egla, and Melcha, and Thersa. And thei2 
stoden bifore Moises, and Eleazar, preestY, 
and alle? the princes of the puple, at 
the dore of tabernacle* of boond of pees ; 
and seiden», Oure fadir was deed in the°3 
deseert, nether he was in the rebelte, that 
was reisid ajens' the Lord, vndur Chore, ° 
but he was deed in his synne; he hadde 
no male sones. Whi is ‘the name of hym4 
takun awei fro his meynee, for he hath no 
sone? 3if 3e possessioun to vs among ‘the 
kynesmen of oure fadir®. And Moises 
telde ‘the cause of hemf to the doom of 
the Lord; which® seide to Moyses, The’ 
dou3tris of Salphaath axen a inst thing; 
3yue thou possessioun to hem among ‘the 
kynnysmen of her fadir', and be thei suc- 
cessouris to hym in to eritage. Forsothe!7 
thon schalt speke these thingis to the 
sons of Israel, Whanne a man is deeds 
with out sone, the eritage schal go to his 
dou3ter; if he hath not* a! don3ter, heo 
schal haue eiris™ his britheren; that” and 10 
if britheren® ben? not4, 3e schulen 3yue the 
eritage to ‘the britheren of his fadir™; for-11 
sothe® if he hath* no" britheren of his fa- 
dir, the eritage schal be 3ouwun to hem 
that ben next to hym. And this’ schal be 
hooli, ‘that is, stidefast*, bi euerlastynge 
lawe to the sones of Israel, as the Lord 
comaundide* to Moises. Also the Lord 12 
seide to Moises, StieY thou? in to this? hil 
of Aberym, and biholde thou fro thennus 
the lond, which> Y schal 3yue to the sones 
of Israel. And whanne thou hast seyn it, 13 
also thou schalt go to thi puple, as thi 
brother Aaron 3ede ; for thou offenddidist®® 14 
me in the® deseert of Syn4, in the a3en 
seiyng of the® multitude, nether woldist! 
haleweé me bifor it, oni the watris. These 


t Om. 4. ¥3iue c, 


®the tabernacle 1s. thei seiden 1s. © Om. 1orstT 


sec.m.w. 4 his name Is, © oure fadir kynnusmen 1s. f her cause 1s. &the which 1. 4 her fadris kynnus- 


men 1. her fadirk.s. i Sotheliis. kno1s. 1O0m.1. ™hiseiris1s. 2 Om.1s. © ther britheren 1. 
Pthat bens. 4 not fohims. ‘his fadir bretherens. %sothely 1s. thavei. not plures. Vv this 
doyng is. WOm.1. *hath comaundidis. Ygovps. stievps. 2Om.1. ®the Exp. > that 1s. 


bb offendist a. ¢Om.1. 
DEFGIIIKLMNOPQRSTWX. 


4 Synay s. 
h the puple is. 


e Om. plures. 
‘ vpon Is, 


f thou woldist is. & schiewe Ac sec. m. 


440 NUMBERS. XXVIII. 15-——-XXVIIIL. 5. 


vpon the watris. Thes ben the watris of 
contradiccioun in Cades, of the deseert of 
He Syn. To whom answerde Moyses, Pur- 
uey the Lord God of the spyritis of al 
fleshe a man that be vpon this multitude, 
izand may goo out, and goo yn before 
hem, and leden hem out, or leden hem’ 
yn; lest the puple of the Lord be as 
issheep with out sheepherd. And the Lord 
seyde to hym, Take Josue, the sone of 
Nun, a man in whom is the spirit of 
19 God, and put thin hoond vpon hym; the 
which shal stoond before Eleazar, the 
20 preest, and al the multitude. And thow 
shalt 3yue to hym heestys”, alle* men 
seynge, and a part of thi glorye, that al 
the synagoge of the sones of Yrael here 
2thym. For that if eny thing shal be to 
doynge’, Eleazar, the preest, shal’ coun- 
seil the Lord; at the word of hym shal 
goo out, and shal goo yn; he, and* al 
the sones of Yrael with hym, and that® 
220ther multitude. Moyses dide as the 
Lord comaundide, and whanne he hadde 
takun Josue, he sette hym before Elea- 
zar, the preest, and al the myche com- 
23 ynge of the puple; and putt the hoondis 
to his heed, alle thingis a3en told that 
the Lord comaundide. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 The Lord forsothe seide to Moyses, 
2Comaund to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
shalt seye to hem, Myn offrynge, and 
looues, and encense of moost swete* smelle 
30ffre 3e bi 30ure tymes. Thes ben the 
sacrifices that 3e shulen offre; loombes 
of o 3eer, vnwemmed, two eche day into 
4brent sacrifice euerlastynge. Oon 3e shu- 
len offre eerliche, and another at euen. 
5 The tenthe part of ephi of4 tryed flour, 
that be spreynt® with moost pure oyle, 


v Om. BDF sec.m. H. W oostys ABFH. ¥* of A, 
soot e. and a. © sprengd c. 


k that I 3aue hem flowing out of the stoon in s. 


ben the watris of a3en seiyng, in* Cades, 
of! the deseert of Syn™. To whom Moi-15 
ses answeryde, The Lord God of spiritis® 16 
of al fleisch puruey a man, that be° on? 
this multitude, and may‘ go out, and en-17 
tre™ bifor hem, and lede hem out, and lede 
hem yn, lest the ‘puple of the Lord’ be 
as scheep with out schepherde. And the1s 
Lord seide to hym‘, Take thou Josue, the 
sone of Nun, a man in whom the spyrit 
of God is, and set" thin hond on’ hym; 
and he schal stonde bifore Eleazar, preest”, 19 
and bifore al the multitude. And thougo, 
schalt 3yue to hym comaundementis*, in 
the si3t of alle men, and a part of thi 
glorie, that al the synagogeY of the sones 
of Israel here hym. If ony thing schalei 
be worthi to be do for this man?, Elea- 
sar, preest*, schal counseil the Lord; he> 
schal go out, and schal® go yn, at the 
word of Eleazar; he, and alle the sones 
of Israel with him, and the tother4 mul- 
titude. Moises dide as the Lord comaund-22 
ide, and whanne he hadde take Josue, he 
settide® hym bifore Eleazar, preest', and 
bifore al the multitude of the puple; and 23 
whanne he hadde set hondis on" his 
heed, he reherside alle thingis whiche! the 
Lord comaundide. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Also the Lord seide to Moises, Co-} 
maunde thou to the sones of Israel, and 
thou schalt seie to hem, Offre 3e bi her 
tymes* myn offryng, and looues, and en- 
cense of swettist odour!. These ben thes 
sacrificis whiche 3e owen to offre; twey 
lambren™ of o 3eer, with out wem, ech dai 
in to euerlastynge brent sacrifice. 3e4 
schulen offre oon” eerli, and the® tother 
at euentid. _ ‘3e schulen offre? the’ tenthes 
part of ephi ‘of floure', ‘which be’ spreynt 


ydoc. 2Om.3. 2 Om. 4. Ythec. ¢sotec. 


lins., ™ Synay s. the spiritis 1s. © he be Is. 


Pvpons. 4 that may 1s. Tentre ynis. § Lordis puple is. ¢ Moises1. putte ts. VYvpons. the 
preest 1s. Xheestis 1. my heestis s. Ylynage s. 2 Josue 1. man Josue s. ® the preest A pr.m. > Josue is. 
¢heschals. 4 that otheris. ¢sette 1s. fthe preestis. & putt hisis, 4 vponis. i that 1s. kas 


resoun techith s marg. smell 1s. ™ lombes 1s. 


the s. © of tried floure1. Om. s. 8 that schal be 1s. 


nolombes. °thatxn. POm.1. 4 tried flour 


XXVIII. 6——16. 


eand haue the ferthe part of hyn. The 
bisy sacrifice is, that 3e offreden in the 
mownt of Synay, into smellef of moost 
7Swete’ ensence to the Lord. And 3e shu- 
len offre of wyn the ferthe part of hyn, 
bi eche loombes, in the seyntuarye of the 
8 Lord. And another loomb also 3e shulen 
offre at euen, and aftir al the rijt of 
the morwtide sacrifice, and of the offryd 
licours of it, an offrynge of moost swete?® 
osmelle to the Lord. The saboth day for- 
sothe 3e shulen offre two loombes of oo 
jeer, vnwemmed, and two dymes of tried 
flour spreynt with oyle, in the sacrifice, 
1oand the! offryd licours, that lawfullich 
ben held, bi eche sahotis, into brent sa- 
1) crifice euerlastynge. In the calendis for- 
sothe, that is, in the bigynnyngis of 
monthes, 3e shulen offre brent sacrifice to 
the Lord, calues of the droue two, 0 we- 
ther, seuen loombis of o 3eer, vynwemmed, 
12zand thre dymes of tryed flour spreynt* 
with oyle, in sacrifice!, bi eche calues, and 
two dymes of tryed flour spreynt* with 
130yle, bi eche wethers; and the tenthe of 
the tenthe of tried flour of oyle, in sacri- 
fice, bi eche loombis ; brent sacrifice!, and 
of moost swete™ smelle, and of encense it 
14is to the Lord. The offryngis forsothe of 
wyn, that -bi eche slayn sacrifices ben to 
be held, shulen be thes; half part of hyn 
bi eche calues, the thridde bi a wether, 
the ferthe bi a loomb; this shal be the 
brent sacrifisis" bi eche monthis, that to 
hem silf the 3eer turnynge about comen 
isaftir. A goot forsothe shal be offred to 
the Lord for synnes®, into brent sacrifice? 
euerlastynge, with this offryngis of li- 
16cours?. The firste forsothe moneth, the 
fourtenthe day of the monthe, shal be the 


£ sote c. soot £. 
P sacrifises Bu. 


f the smelle ec. 
4 gacrifice 4. © synne 4. 


h springd c. 


t haue it 1. holde it s, 
moist 1s. Y smell ss. . @ Sotheli 1s. 
flouris. fintotT. & Om.1. 4 the moiste x. 
QD into A sec.m. ° the sacrifice s. 
sacrifice 1s. ¢ the brent 1s. 
out s. * the slaynis, Y the brent 18. 
bucke 1s. ¢ Sotheli 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


i of a. 
4 colours B pr.m. FU. 


P the tenthe 1s. 
U moost sweet smell 3. swettist smelle s. 
Zz sacrifice cm. 


441 


with pureste oile, and haue the fourthe 
part of hyn. It is continuel" brent sacri-6 
fice, which’ 3e offriden in the hil of Synai, 
in to ‘odour of swettiste” encense to the 
Lord. And 3e schulen offre the fourthe7 
part of hyn of wyn, bi ech lomb, in the 
seyntuarie of the Lord. And 3e schulens 
offre in lijk maner the tother lomb at euen- 
tid, bi al the custom of the morewe sacri- 
fice, and of moist* sacrifices therof, an of- 
fryng of swettist odour’ to the Lord. 
Forsothe* in the ‘dai of sabat> 3e schuleng 
offre twey lambren® of o 3eer, without 
wem, and twei‘ tenthe partis of flour® 
spreynt togidere with oile, in‘ sacrifice, 
‘and 3e schulen offre® moiste" sacrificis 
that ben sched: bi custom, bi alle sabatis, 10 
in to euerlastynget brent sacrifice. 
sothe* in calendis’, that is, in the bigyn- 
nyngis of monethis, 3e schulen offre brent 
sacrifice to the Lord, tweyne calues of the 
droue, 0 ram, seuene lambren of 0 3eer, 
without wem, and thre™ tenthe partis of 12 
flour spreynt togidere with oile; in® sacri- 
fice°, bi ech calf, and twey tenthe partis of 
flour.spreynt togidere with oile, bi ech 
ram; and the tenthe part of ‘a dyme? of 13 
flour? of oile in sacrifice’, bi ech lomb;,. 
it is brent‘ sacrifice of ‘swetist odour", and 
of encense to the Lord. Forsothe’ the1s 
moiste sacrifices of wyn, that schulen be 
sched” bi alle slayn* sacrificis, schulen be 
these; the half part of hyn bi ech calf, 
the thridde part bi a ram, the fourthe 
part bi a lomb; this schal be brent’ sacri- 

fices? bi ech monethe, that comen oon aftir ye ate 
anothir while the 3eer turneth®. Also ais eee 
‘buc of geet schal be offrid to the Lord ieeine eta 
for synnes}, in to euerlastynge brent sacri- _ ouer continuel 
fice||, with his moiste offryngis. Forsothe® 16°" “8 


For-11 +t inio euer- 
lasiynge ete. 
in Ebreu it is, 
oucr the con- 
tynnel brent 
sacrifice. c. 


k springdc. | sacrifices c. ™ sote c. soot F. 


u lastinge 18. Y that 1. Wmoost swete smellynge 1. swettist smellinge s. * the 
b sabot day 1s. 
theld 1. 


Clombes 1s. 4 the twei Kar pr.m. x. © tried 
k Sothely 1s. 1 the calendis1s. ™ twey 4. 
4 tried flours. * spreynt togidre with 1. § the 
Vv Sothely is. Ww held 1. sched 


4 turneth aboute 18. bi his course 8 marg. » geet 


3.1L 


442 


day the solempnyte of therf looues. Seuen 
18daies thei shulen eete therf looues; of 
the whiche the firste day worshipful and 
holy shal be; al seruyle werk 3e shulen 
ignot doon in it. And 3e shulen offre into 
encense brent sacrifice to the Lord, calues 
of the drone two, o wether, loombes of o 
203eer, vnwemmed, seuen; and the sacri- 
fices of eche, of tried flour, that be 
spreynt’ with oyle, thre dymes bi eche 
21calues, and two dymes bi o wether, and 
the tithe of the tithe bi eche loombis, 
2athat is, bi seuen loombis; and o goot 
23 for synne, that it be purgid for 3ow, bi- 
side the morwtide brent sacrifice, that 
g4euermore 3e shulen offre. So 3e shulen 
doo bi eche dayes of the seuen dayes, 
into the norishynge of the fier, and into 
the moost swete® smel to the Lord, the 
which shal ryse of the brent sacrifice, 
», and of the offred licours of echon. The 
seuettthe forsothe day shal be moost so- 
lempne and holi to 3ou; al seruyle werk 
9g3¢ Shulen not don in it. The dayes also 
of the fyrste fruytis, whanne 3e shulen 
offre newe cornys to the Lord, the ‘senen 
wykis* fulfillid", worshipful and holy shal 
be; al sernyle werk 3e shulen not do in 
97it. And 3e” shulen offre brent sacrifice to 
the Lord, into moost swete smel; calues 
of the droue two, o wether, loombes of o 
og 3eers VnWemmed, scuen ; and in the sacri- 
fices of hem, of tried flour spreynt with 
oyle, three dymes bi eche calues, bi we- 
thers two, bi loombes the tenthe” of the 
tithe, the whiche ben togidre seuen 
,loombes; a goot forsothe that is offred 
for the purgynge, bisyde the brent sacri- 
fice euerlastynge, and the offrid licours 
of it; 3e shulen offre alle thingis vawem- 
med, with her sacrified licours. 


29 


3 


31 


Y sprengd c passim. 
W tithe 4 prom. 


dpaske rs. ©Om.1s. f Om.1. 8 Om. plures. 
that dayis. ™Om.s.  ™ sacrifice 1s. 
8thetentheis. tlombisrs. Om. 1. 


2 the moisters. ® ech offring 1s. 
smel 1. swettist smelle s. ¢ lombus 1s. 


k the whiche 1. | al togidere 1s. ™ lombus 1s. 


NUMBERS. 
17pask of the Lord; and in the fiftenthe- 


8 sote C passim. soot E passim. 


° shal be s marg. 
Vv geet bucke 1s. 
b forboden s marg. 

f tried flour 1s. 


XXVIII. 17——31. 


in the firste monethe, in the fouretenthe 
dai of the monethe, schal be phase’, ‘that 
is, pask® ‘ethir passyng', of the Lord; 
and in the fiftenthe day schal he the so-17 
lempnyte of the® therf looues. Bi seuene 
daies 3e schulen ete therf looues; of1s 
whichet the firste dai' schal be worschip- 
ful and hooli; 3e schulen not do ony ser- 
uyle* werk therynne!. And 3e schulen19 
offre brent sacrifice to the Lord™, twey 
calues, 0 ram, seuene lambren of 0 3eer, 
without wem; and the sacrifices" of ech® 20 
bi itsilf of flour?, which4 be spreynt to 
gidere with oile, thre tenthe partis bi ech 
calf, and twey tenthe partis bi a" ram, and 21 
the tenthe part of ‘a dyme* bi ech lomb, 
that is, bi seuene lambren*. ‘And 3e schu-22 
len offre’ o ‘buc of geet” for synne, that 
clensyng be maad for jou, outakun the 23 
brent sacrifice of the morewtid, which 3e 
schulen offre euere. So 3e schulen do bi2¢ 
ech dai of seuene daies, into the” nursch- 
yng of fier, and in to swettist* odour’ to 
the Lord, that schal rise of the brent sa- 
crifice, and of moiste* sacrifices of ech®. 
Also the seuenthe day schal be moost so-25 
lempne and hooli to 30u; 3e schulen not 
do ony seruyle® werk ther ynne. Also the 26 
dai of the firste fruytis, whanne 3e schulen 
offre newe fruitis to the Lord, whaune the 
wokis schulen be fillyd*, schal be worschip- 
ful and hooli; 3e schulen not do ony ser- 
uyle werk ther ynne. And 3e schulen offre 27 
brent sacrifice to the Lord, in to ‘swettiste 
odour’; twey calues of the droue, o ram, 
and seuene lambren® of o 3eer, with out 
wem; and in the sacrifices of tho 3¢28 
schulen offre thre tenthe partis of flour‘ 
spreynt togidere with oile, bi ech calf, 
twei tenthe partis bi rammes%, the tenthe 29 
parte of ‘a dyme* bi the lambren', whiche* 
ben togidere!, seuene lambren™. ‘And 3¢ 


t senenthe wike 4. Utfullid ra, VY Om. Bru. 


h whiche daies ts. iOm.1s.  * forboden 1s. Jin 
P tried flouris. 4that schalis. To Is. 
wOm.c. * the swettist 1.  Y smell rs. 
¢ folfillid 1. fulfillid that dais. 4 moost swete 
the rammes 1s. ) the tenthe rs. 1‘ lombis 1s. 


XXIX. 1—11. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 Of the seuenthe moneth forsothe* the 
firste day holy and worshipful shal be to 
3ow ; al seruyle werk 3e shulen not doon 
in it, for the day of noyse it is, and of ¥ 

2trompes. And 3e shulen offre brent sa- 
crifice, into moost swete smel to the Lord, 
a calf of the droue oon, o wether, and 

3loombes of 0 3eer, vnwemmed, seuen; and 
in the sacrifices of hem, of tried flour 
spreynt with oyle, thre dymes bi eche 
acalues, two dymes bi a” wether, o dyme 
bi a loomb, that ben togidre-seuen 
sloombes. And a goot for synue shal be 
coffred, in clensynge of the puple, biside 
the brent sacrifice of calendis, with her 
sacrifices, and brent sacrifice euerlastynge, 
with woned offred licours; with the same 
serymoyns 3e shulen offre into the moost 
7swete smel, encense to the Lord. The 
tenthe forsothe day of this seuenthe 
monthe shal be to 30w hooly and wor- 
shipful, and 3e shulen traueyl joure 
soulis; al seruyle werk 3e shulen not doo 
sin it. And 3e shulen offre brent sacri- 
fice to the Lord, into moost swete smel ; 
a calf of the droue oon, a wether oon, 
sloombis of o jeer, vawemmed, seuen ; and 
in the sacrifices of hem, of tried flour 
spreynt with oyle thre dymes bi eche 
iocalues, two dymes bi a wethre, a dyme 
of the tithe bi eche loombis, that ben 
utogidir seuen loombis; and o® goot for 
synne, with outen hem that ben woned 
to be offred for trespas in purgynge, and 
the brent sacrifice euerlastynge in sacri- 


NUMBERS. 


443 


schulen offre” a° ‘buc of geet?, which’ is 
ofirid for clensyng, outakun brent sacri- 
fice euerlastynge, and the moiste sacrifices 
therof; 3e schulen offre alle thingis with 31 
out wem, with her moyste sacrifices. 


CAP. XXIX. 


Forsothe® the firste dai of the seuenthe! 
monethe schal be hooli, and worschipful 
to 30u; 3e schulen not do ony seruyle® 
werk ther ynne, for it is the day of sown- 
yng, and of trumpis. And 3e schulen offre2 s 
brent sacrifice, in to swettestt odour to the 
Lord, o calf of the droue, o ram, and se- 
uene lambren" of 0 3eer, with out wem; 
and in the sacrificis’ of tho ‘3e schulen3 
offre’ thre tenthe partis of flour* spreynt 
togidere with oile, bi ech calfe, twey tenthe 
partis bi a¥ ram, o tenthe part bi a? lomb, 4 
whiche* togidere ben seuene lambren?. 
And ‘3e schulen offre’ a ‘buc of geet*,s 
which? is offrid for synne, in to thef clens- 
yng of the puple, with out the brent sa-6 
crifice of kalendis*, with hise sacrifices, 
and without euerlastynge! brent sacrifice, 
with* customable fletynge offryngis; and 
bi the same cerymonyes! 3e schulen offre 
encense in to swettiste odour™ to the Lord. 
Also the tenthe dai of this seuenthe7 
monethe schal be hooli and worschipful 
to 3ou, and 3e schulen™ turmente 3oure 
soulis°; 3e schulen not do ony seruyle 
werk ther ynne. And 3e schulen offre? s 
brent sacrifice to the Lord, in to swettiste 
odour; of calf of the droue, o1 ram, se- 
uene lambren™ of o 3eer with out wem. 
And in the sacrifices’ of tho ‘3e schuleno 
offret thre tenthe partis of flour" spreynt 
togidere with oyle, bi ech calf, twey tenthe 
partis bi a” ram, the tenthe part of” a10 
dyme* bi each lomb, that ben togidere se- 
uene lambrenY. And 3e schulen offre ali 


x Om. 4B prmp. YOm.4. 204. 8a cE. 

"Om.1. Calsoar. Pgeet buckets. 4thatis. 'Sothely 1s. 8 forbodens. t moost swete 1 
ulJombus 18. VY sacrifice crs. WOm.1. * tried flouris. youis. #001. ®the whiche 1. > lombis 1s. 
cOm.1. ¢geet buckers. ¢thatis. fOm.1s. 8 Om.1s. 4 the bigynnyng of monethis 1s. ithe 
euverlastynge 1s. k without s. 1 cerymonyes or customs s. ™ smell 1s. ® schulen therinne s. © soulis 
in itt. P thanne offres. Gaz. Flombiss. ®sacrificec. tOm.1. 4% tried flouris. Yors. ¥Om.s. 
x the tenthe 1. Om.s. Y lombis 1s. 


Bee 


444 


1g fice, and offrid licours of hem. The fif- 
tenthe forsothe day of the seuenthe 
onthe, the which to 30w shal be holi 
and worshipful; al seruyle werk 3e shu- 
len not doo in it, but 3e shulen halwe the 
issolempnyte to the Lord seuen days; and 
3e Shulen offre brent sacrifice, into the> 
moost swete smel to the Lord, calues of 
the droue threteen, wethers two, loombis 
14of o 3eer, vnawemmed, fourteen; and in 
the sacrifices of licours of hem, of tryed 
flour spreynt with oyle thre dymes bi 
eche calues, that ben togidre calues thret- 
teen, and two dymes to o wether, that is, 
to two wethers togidre, to o wether oon, 
1sand the tithe of a dyme to eche loombis, 
isthat ben togidre loombis fourteen; and 
o°® goot for synne, with out the brent sa- 
crifice euerlastynge, and the sacrifice, and 
17the sacrified licour of it. In that other 
day 3e shulen offre calues of the droue 
twelue, wethers two, loombis of 0 3eer, 
18 Vawemmed, fourteen; and sacrifices, and 
sacrified licours of echon, bi the calues, 
and wethers, and loombis, dulich 3e shu- 
i9len halwe; and a goot for synne, with 
outen brent sacrifice euerlastynge, and 
the sacrifice of it, and the offrynge of li- 
20cours. The thridde day 3e shulen offre 
calues elleuen, wethers two, loombis of o 
2) 3eer, vuwemmed, fourteen ; and the sacri- 
fices, and the sacrified licours of echon, bi 
calues, and wethers, and loombs, dulich 
223e shulen halwe; and a goot for synne, 
with outen brent sacrifice euerlastynge, 
and the sacrifice, and the offryng of li- 
23cours of it. The ferthe day 3e shulen 
offre calues ten, wethers two, loombs of 
240 3eer, vnwemmed, fourteen; and the sa- 
crifices, and the sacrified licours of echon, 
bi calues, and wethers, and loombis, due- 
25lich 3e shulen halwe; and a goot for 


b Om. «4. 


aQOm.1.  » the sacrifice 1s. 
& the solempnyte 1s. 4 biixorstw. i Om. 1. 
bi prr. © geetbucke 1s. P the euerlastynge 1s. 
* the sacrifices 1s. "the calves 1. tho calues s. 
yOn.1, 2Om x. of. >» the moist 1s. 
fOm. x.  & geet bucke 1s. 


% geet bucke 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


¢ tho thingis 1s. 

k tried flour 1s. 
qaOm. c. 

v lombis 1s. 

¢ and fourtene 1s. 


XXIX. 12——25. 


‘buc of geet* for synne, with out these 
thingis that ben wont to be offrid for 
synne in to clensyng, and ‘3e schulen offre® 
euerlastinge brent sacrifice in sacrifice®, 
and fletinge offryngis of tho®. Forsothe? 12 
in the fiftenthe dai of this® seuenthef 
monethe, that schal be hooli and wor- 
schipful to 3ou, 3e schulen not do ony 
seruyle werk, but 3e schulen halewe so- 
lempnyte® to the Lord in® seuene daies; 
and 3e schulen offre brent sacrifice, in to13 
swetiste odour to the Lord, threttene 
calues of the droue, twey rammes, foure- 
tene lambren of 0 3eer, without wem. And 14 
in the moiste sacrifices of tho ‘3e schulen 
offre’ thre tenthe partis of flour* spreynt 
togidere with oile bi ech calf, that ben to- 
gidere threttene calues, and 3e schulen 
offre twei tenthe partis to twei rammes 
togidere, that is, o tenthe part to o ram, 
and ‘3e schulen offre! the tenthe part of ‘ais 
dyme®™ to" ech lomb, whiche ben togidere 
fourteene lambren. And 3¢ schulen offre is 
a ‘buc of geet? for synne, with out ever- 
lastynge? brent sacrifice, and ‘with owt4 
the’ sacrifice and moiste’ offryng therof. 
In the tother dai 3e schulen offre twelue!7 
calues of the droue, twei rammes, foure- 
tene lambren* of o 3eer without wem. 
And 3e schulen halewe ri3tfuli sacrifices*, 18 
and moiste offryngis of alle, bi calues", 
and rammes, and lambren’. And 3e schu-19 
len offre a ‘buc of geet” for synne, with 
out euerlastynge* breut sacrifice, and ‘with 
outY the” sacrifice and* moist? offryng 
therof. In the thridde dai 3e schulen offre 20 
euleuen calues, twei rammes, fourtene* 
lambren of o 3eer, without wem. And 3e21 
schulen halewe ri3tfuli the sacrifices, and 
moiste? offryngis of alle®, bi thef caluys, 
and rammes, and lambren. And 3¢ schu-22 
len offre a ‘buk of geetS for synne, with 


bb a cE. 


4Sothely 1s. ¢thec. fOm.n. 
10m. ™the tenthe 1s. 4 by B. to 
qi Om. ar. * the fletinge 1s. § lombes 1s. 

W geet bucke 1s. * the euerlastynge rs. 


athe moistes. © alle thees 1s. 


XXIX. 26—39. 


synne, with oute the brent sacrifice euer- 
lastynge, and the sacrifice of it, and the 
2offringe of licours. 
shulen offre nyne calues, wethers two, 
loombis of o 3eer, vnweinmed, fourteen ; 
27and the sacrifices, and the offrynge of li- 
cours of® echon, bi calues, and wethers, 
28 and loombs, duelich 3e shulen halwe ; and 
a goot for synne, with out the brent sa- 
crifice euerlastynge, and the sacrifice of 
29it, and the offrynge of licours. The sixte 
day 3e shulen offre calues ei3t, and we- 
thris two, loombes of o jeer, and? vn- 
30 wemmed, fourteen; and the sacrifices, 
and the offryngis of licours of echon, bi 
calues, and wethers, and loombis, duelich 
313e shulen halwe; and a goot for synne, 
with out the brent sacrifice enerlastynge, 
and the sacrifice of it, and the offrynge 
320f licours. The seuenthe day 3e shulen 
offre calues seuen, wethers two, loombs 
33 0f o 3eer, vnwemmed, fourteen; and the 
sacrifices, and the offryngis of licours of 
echon, bi calues, and wethers, and loombs, 
34duelich 3e shulen halwe; and 0° goot for 
synne, with oute the brent sacrifice euer- 
lastynge, and the sacrifice of it, and the 
35 offrynge of licours. The ei3tith day that 
is moost solempne, al seruyle werk 3e 
3sshulen not doo, offrynge brent sacrifice 
into the moost swete sme] to the Lord, 
o calf, o wether, loombis of 0 3eer, vn- 
37 wemmed, seulen; and the sacrifices, and 
the offryngis of licours of echon, bi calues, 
and wethers, and loombs, duelich 3e shu- 
38len halwe; and a goot for synne, with 
out the brent sacrifice euerlastynge, and 
the sacrifice of it, and the offrynge of li- 
sscours. Thes thingis 3e shulen offre to 
the Lord, in 3oure solempnytees, biside 
the vowes, and wilful offryngis, in brent 


¢ bia. 


h the euerlastynge ts. iOm.x. * the euerlastynge 1s. } and twey s. 
q Om. 1. 
x geet bucke 1s. 
4 alle the moiste 1s. 
1Om. c. 
r Om. Is. 
Y and the 1s. of o. 


° geet bucke 1s. P the euerlastynge 1s. 
Walle the moiste 1s. YOm.1s. W Om. c. 
the 1s. of o. b Om. xs. ¢ lombis 1s. 
bucke 1s. ithe euerlastynge 1s. * Om. 1. 
POm.1. 4 alle moiste 1. alle the moiste s. 

euerlastynge 1s. WOm.ic. * Om. K. 


NUMBERS. 


The fifthe day 3e 


4 Om. c. 


445 


out euerlastynge" brent sacrifice, and with 
out the! sacrifice and moiste® offryng ther- 
of. In the fourthe day 3e schulen offre 23 
ten calues, twey! rammes, fourtene lam- 
bren™ of o 3eer with oute wem. And 3e24 
schulen halewe ri3tfuli the sacrifices, and 
moiste® offryngis of alle, bi the calues, and 
rammes, and lambren. And 3e schulen2s 
offre a ‘buk of geet for synne, with out 
euerlastynge? brent sacrifice, and ‘with 
out4 the sacrifice and moiste' offryng® 
therof. In the fyuethe dai 3e schulen 26 
offre nyne calues, twei' rammes, fourtene 
lambren of o 3eer, with oute wem. And 27 
3e schulen halewe ri3tfuli the sacrifices, 
and moiste" offryngis ‘of alle’, bi the 
calues, and rammes, and lambren. And 28 
‘3e schulen offre’ a‘buc of geet* for synne, 
with out euerlastynge’ brent sacrifice, and 
‘with out? the sacrifice and’ moiste offryng 
therof. In the sixte dai 3e-schulen offre 29 
eijt calues, and> twei rammes, fourtene 
lambren¢ of o 3eer with out wem. And 3e30 
schulen halewe ri3tfuli the sacrifices, and 
moiste’ offryngis ‘of alle’, bi the calues, 
and rammes, and lambren’. And ‘3e schu- 33 
len offre? a ‘buk of geet for synne, with 
out euerlastynge! brent* sacrifice, and ‘weth 
out! the sacrifice and moiste™ offryng 
therof. In the seuenthe dai 3e schulen 32 
offre seuene calues", twei rammes, four- 
tene lambren® ‘of o 3eer? with out wem. 
And 3e schulen halewe ri3tfuli the sacri-33 
fices, and moiste’ offryngis ‘of alle", bi the 
calues, and rammes, and lambren*. And 34 
‘3e schulen offre a ‘buc of geet" for synne, 
with out euerlastynge’ brent sacrifice, and 
‘with out* the* sacrifice andY moiste of- 
fryng therof. In the eizthe dai, which? is3s 
moost solempne ‘ether hooli*, 3e schulen 
not do ony seruyle werk, and 3e schulen 36 


a EF. 


m lambis 1s. © the moiste 1s. 
8 offryngis A pr.m. ¢ and twei K. 
Y the euerlastynge 1s. 7Om.c, 8 and 
e€Om.is. flombisis. € Om.c. »} geet 

m the moiste 18. ™calueren K. © lombis 1s. 
8 lombis 1s. tOm.c. "geet bucke 1s. ¥ the 
Z that 1s. @ Om. cINs. 


¥ the moist 1s. 


446 


sacrifice, in sacrifice, in‘ offrynge® of li- 
cour", and in pesible oostis. 


CAP. XXX. 


1 Moyses forsothe tolde to the sones of 
Yrael alle thingis that the Lord co- 
2maundide hym. And he spak to the 
princes of the lynagis of the sones of 
3Yrael, This is the word that the Lord 
comaundide, If eny of men auowe to the 
Lord auowid', other’ hym silf bi ooth 
streynede, he shal not make at no3t his 
word, but al that he bihij3t he shal fulfil. 
4A womman 3if! eny thing she auowith, 
and hir silf streyn bi ooth, the which 
is in the hows of hir fader, 3it in childis 
age, if the fader knowe the vowe, that 
she hath bihoot, and the ooth, bi the 
which hir soul she hath oblishid, and 
holde his pees, she shal be gilti of the 
5auowe™; what thing she hath bihoot and 
6swerith, in werk she shal fulfil. If for- 
sothe anoon as the fader herith, he with- 
seith it, and the vowis and the oothis of 
hir shulen be at nou3t, ne she shal ‘be 
holdun" gilti to the biheest, forthi that 
7the fader ajenseide it. If she haue® an 
housboond, and auowe? eny thing, and 
onys a word of hir mouth goynge out 


NUMBERS. 


XXX. I—v7. 


offre? brent sacrifice in to swettest odour 
to the Lord, o* calf, o° ram,.seuene lam- 
bren® of o 3eer with out wem. And 3e37 
schulen halewe ri3tfuli the sacrifices and 
moiste® offryngis ‘of allef, bi the calues, 
and rammes, and lambren®. ‘And 3e schu-38 
len” offre a ‘bue of geet' for synne, with 
out everlastynge* brent sacrifice, and ‘with 
out! the sacrifice, and moiste™ offryng 
therof. 3e schulen offre these thingis to 39 
the Lord, in 3oure solempnytees, with out 
avowis", and wilful° offryngis, in brent? 
sacrifice, in sacrifice, in? moist’ offryng, 
and in peesible sacrifices. 


CAP. XXX. 


And Moises telde to the sones of Israeli 
alle thingis whiche the Lord comaundide 
to hym. And he spak to the princes of2 
the lynagis of the sones of Israel, This 
is the word, which’ the Lord comaundide, 
If ony of men makith a vowe to the Lord,s 
ethir byndith hym silf bi an ooth, he schal 
not make voidet his word, but he schal 
fille? al thing which’ he bihi3te. If a4 
womman which’ is in the hows of hir fa- 
dir, and is 3it in the age of a damysel”, 
‘that is, not 3it weddid*, avowith ony 
thing, ethir byndith hir silf bi an ooth, 
‘if theY fadir knowith the avow, which? 
sche bihi3te, and the ooth* bi which sche 
boond hir soule, and he is stille®, sche 
schal be gilti of the ooth’, that ts, boundun 
bi the ooth®; what ever thing sche bihiztes 
and swoor, sche schall fillef in werk. For-6 
sothes if thet fadir ajenseide! anoon as he 
herde*, bothe the! vowis and ‘oothis of 
hir™ schulen be voide, and sche schal not 
be holdun boundun to the biheeste, for 
the" fadir aj3enseide®’. If sche hath an7 
hosebonde, and avowith? ony thing, and 


fandu. &offringusc. 4 lycours ze. ivowedece. Kore. Iwhannea. ™vowearu. % by- 
holde sperH. © hath «a. P awowith 4. 

b offre thannes. Caz. ‘4lombisis. alle the moisters. fOm.1s. 8 lombisis. 5 Om.c. 
i geet bucke 1s. k the euerlastynge rs. !Om.c. ™ the moiste 1s. ® 30ure auowis s.  ° jour wilful 1s. 
Pthe brent is. 4dandxeLp. ‘the moistis. ‘Sthatis. tvoide or falss. fulfillers. v that rs. 
w39ung damyselis. *Om.3s. Yhir1. Zthatr. ‘@Om.s. > after that he knoweth it s marg. 


© that 1s. 
hhir is. i agenseide Air avonis s. 


ajenseide hir avow s._ P seke avowith 1s. 


ooth or vow 3if sche breke it s. 3if sche breke it 1. 
k herde hem s. 


eOm.is. ffulfillers. £& Sotheli zs. 


1Om.1. “™hir oothis 1s. hiris. © ajenseide i 1. 


XXX. 8—16. 


sthe soul of hir oblishe bi ooth, what day 
the man herith, and withseith not, she 
shal be gilti of the vowe; what thing4 
geuer she hath bihoot, she shal 3elde. If 
forsothe anoon herynge he withseith, and 
he makith at nou3t al the bihest™ of hir, 
and the wordis by the which she streyn- 
ede hir soul,'the Lord shal for3yue to 
whir. A widew, and a departid, what 
1 thing thei auowen thei shulen 5eelde. A 
wijf in the hows of hyr man, whanne 
12she byndith hir bi auowe, and bi ooth, if 
-the man here, and holde his pees, ne 
withseith to the’ biheest, she shal 3eeld 
13 what euer thing she hath bihoot. If for- 
sothe anoon he withseith, she shal not 
‘be holdun’ gilti of the biheest, for the 
husboond withseith, and the Lord shal 
14for3yue to hir. If she auowe, and bi ooth 
streyne hir self, that bi fastynge and ab- 
stynens of other thingis she trauey]* hir 
soul, in the dome of the man it shal he, 
isthat she do it", or not do it. And if the 
man herynge holde his pees, and into an- 
other day deferre the sentence, what euer 
thing she hath vowid and bihoot, she 
shal 3eeld, for anoon as he herde, he 
1¢heelde his pees. If forsothe he withseith, 
after that he assentide, he shal bere the 
wickidnes .of hir. Thes ben the lawes 
that the Lord ordeynde to Moyses, bi- 
twix’ man and womman, bitwix’ fader 
and doujter that is 3it in childis age, 
other® that in the hows of fader and 
modir*® dwelleth. 


q Om. 4. 
Wore. 


T behestus c. byheestes 5. 
x of modir a. 


qghir1is. Tf herith this rs. 
v herith if 1. herith Air s. 
house s. 2 hir 1s. 
biheest Bcrxw. hir biheest s. 
&hiris, do that 1s. 
°in to crkmow. Phir housbonde 1s. 
8 Sotheli rs. t hir 1s. 
breking ¥ marg.s marg. * Om. L. 
chery. ‘4 hir fadris [fadir s] hous vnmaried 1s. 


8 ajenseith it 18. 
W azenseith Airs. 


e hir is. 
idoitis.  hir 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


8 byholde spzFu. 


t gilti, or bounden s. 
x Om. ELP. 
8 herith it 1. hir avow and hir ooth 3 marg. 


447 


a word goynge out of hir mouth onys 
byndith hir soule with an ooth, in whats 
dai the’ hosebonde herith', and a3enseith® 
not, sche schal be giltit ‘of avow"; sche 
schal 3elde, what euer thing sche bihi3te. 
But if the hosebonde herith’, and anoons 
a3enseithY, and makith void alle hir bi- 
heestis, and wordis bi whiche sche boond 
hir soule, the Lord schal be merciful to 
hir. A widewe, and a womman forsakun io 
of hir hosebonde, schulen 3elde, what euer 
thing® thei avowen. Whanne a wijf ini 
‘the hous of hir hosebondeY byndith hir 
silf bi avow and an ooth, if the? hose-12 
bonde herith’, and is stille and ajenseith 
not the” biheest, sche schal 3elde, what 
euer thing sche bihi3te. Sotheli if the1s 
hosebonde a3enseide® anoon, sche schal not 
be holdun gilti of biheest*, for thee hose- 
bonde ajenseide‘, and the Lord schal be 
merciful to hir. If sche avowith, and 14 
byndith hir silf bi an ooth, that sche tur- 
mente hir soule bi fastyng, ethir bi ab- 
stynence of othere thingis, it schal be in 
the doom of the$ hosebonde, that sche do}, 
ether. doi not. That if the* hosebonde 15 
herith!, and is™ stille, and delaieth® the 
sentence in® the tother dai, sche schal 3elde 
what euer thing sche avowide and bihi3te, 
for he? was stille4, anoon as he herde'. 
Forsothe’ if thet hosebonde asenseide" af- 16 
tir that he wiste’{, he schal bere his 
wickidnesse™. These ben the lawis, which 
the Lord ordeynede to Moyses bitwixe the 
hosebonde and the wijf, bitwixe the fadir 
and the dou3tir, which is jit in the age 
of a* damysel’, ‘that is, not 3it maricd*, 
‘ether which* dwellith> in ‘the hows of 
the® fadir‘, 


+ aftir that he 
wiste ; that is, 
Lot anoon, 
whanne he 
wiste first, but 
aftirward. Lire 
here. C. 


t tranaileth ce. 4Om. ap. VY betwec. 


«to that vowe r. to that arow s. 
y hir honsboundus hous 1. hir husbond 
bhiris. ¢agenseide hirts. 4 the 


f a3enseide it anoon 1s. ajenseide anoon EF sec. m. KLOPQTW. 
Uherith it 1. herith Air avow s. 
@ stille and a3enseide hir not s. 
u a3enseide hir avow and hir ooth s. 
¥ 3oung damysel ts. 


mheiss. 4 tarieth rs, 
T herde hir avome or swere s. 
v wiste therof's. Was gilli of a vowe 
zOm. crs. @orthat rs. > sit dwellith 1s. 


448 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 And the Lord spak to Moyses, seiynge, 
2Venge first the sones of Yrael of the 
Madianytis, and so thow shalt be gedryd 
3to thi puple. And anoon Moyses, Arme 
3e, he seith, of 30w men to the fi3t, that 
mowen the veniaunce of the Lord out take 
4of the Madianytis. A thowsand men of 
ech lynagis ben chosun of Yrael, that ben 
ssent to batayl. And thei 3enen thow- 
sandis of eche lynagis, that is, twelue 
thowsandisY of men, redy to the fi3t; 
éwhoin Moyses sente? with Fynees, the 
sone of Eleazar, the preest. Forsothe 
the hooli vessels, and the trumpes to 
7cerye, he took to hem.- And whanne thei 
hadden fou3t ajens Madianytes, and had- 
den ouercomen, alle the maalis thei slewen, 
sand the kyngis of hem, Euy, and Reem, 
and Sur, and Hur, and Rebe, fyue princes 
of the folk of hem. Balaam forsothe, the 
sone of Beor, thei slewen with swerd. 
9 And thei token the wymmen of hem, and 
children, and alle the* beestis, and al pur- 
tenaunce ; what thing euer thei my3ten 
io haue, thei destruyden ; as wel cytees as? 
litil towns and castels bi flawme he brent. 
11 And thei token praye, and alle that thei 
12token, as wel of men as of beestis, and 
brou3ten to Moises, and Eleazar, the 
preest, and to al the multitude of the 
sones of Yrael. Forsothe other vsable 
_thingis thei beren to the tentis, in the 
wijld feeldis of Moab, biside Jordan, a3en 
13 Jericho. And Moyses and Eleazar, the 
preest, wenten out, and alle the® prynces 
of the synagoge, into a3encomynge’ of 
14hem, out of the tentis. And Moyses 
wrooth to the prynces of the oost, leders 
of thousandis, and gouernours of hun- 
15 dredis, that camen fro the batayl, seith, 


ythousend c. % sende BE et alibi. ® Om. c. 

€ the men of Madian 1s. 
forth 1s. ! the preest 1. 
ther folke 1s. $Israelis. t with 1. 
tenaunce 1s. 2 her howshold 1s. 4 destrieden Is. 
preest 1s. fSotheli1s. & vsable thingis 1s. 
mQm.o. "tentisis. © Om. 1s. 
* the batel rns. batels B pr.m. 


f the Madianytis 1s. 
™ Moises 1s, 


NUMBERS. 


band BCDEFH. 


2 overcomen hem s. 
u Israel 1s. 


h her 1s. 
Panda. 4 the tribunes nv. 


" XXXI. 115. 


CAP. XXXI. 


And the Lord spak to Moyses, and1 
seide, Venge thou firste the sones of Israel2 
of Madianytis*, and so thou schalt be ga- 
derid to thi puple. And anoon Moisess 
seide, Arme 3e men of 30u to batel, that 
moun take of Madianytis‘ the veniaunce 
of the Lord. Of® ech lynage be chosun}4 
a thousynde men of Israel, that schulen 
be sent to batel. And of ech lynage theis 
3auen a thousynde, that is twelue thou- 
synde of men’, redi to batel; whiche Moises 6 
sente* with Fynees, the sone of Eleazar, 
preest!, And he™ bitook to hem hooli 
vesselis, and trumpis to make sown. And7 
whanne thei hadden fou3t a3ens Madian- 
ytis, and hadden ouercome’, thei® killident 
alle the? malis, and ‘the kyngis of hem4,s 
Euy, and Reem, and Sur, and Hur, and 
Rebe, fyue princes of ‘the fole of hem’. 
Also thei’ killiden bit swerd Balaam, the 
sone of Beor. And thei" token the’ wym-9 
men of hem, and the” litle children, and 
alle beestis*, and al purtenaunceY of hows- 
hold?; what euer thei my3ten haue, thei 
spuyleden*; flawme? brente as wel citees®, 10 
as litle townes and castels. And they 
token pray, and alle thingis whiche thei 
hadden take, as wel of men as of beestis, 
and thei brou3ten to’ Moyses, and to Ele-12 
azar, preest®, and to al the multitude of 
the sones of Israel. Forsothef thei baren 
othere ‘thingis perteynynge to vss8, to 
the castels' in* the feldi places of Moab 
bisidis Jordan, a3ens Jericho. Moises and 13 
Eleazar, preest!, and alle the princes of 
the synagoge, 3eden out in to the comyng 
of hem, with ont the™ castels", ‘that zs, of 
the tabernacle’. And Moises was wrooth 14 
to the princes of the oost, to? tribunes’, 
and centuriouns’, that camen fro batels; 


© Om. 4. 4 ajen the comynge c. 
hther chosunr1. iQOm.is.  * sente 
oJlsraelis. Pheris. 4 her kyngis 1s. 
wher1s. her beestis1s. Y the pur- 
b the flawme 1s. ¢ the citees B. “ d thotois. ¢ the 
itentis1s.  stondynge in1s. ! the preest 1s. 
r the centuriouns 1. to the centuriouns s. 


€ and of Is. 


v Om. c. 


+ thei killiden, 
ete. Io Ebreu 
it is, and thei 
killiden the 
kyngis of hem 
on slayn men, 
that is, on men 
cast doun bi 
Goddis vertu, 
as Ehrews ex- 
pownen. Lire 
here. C. 


XXXI. 16—28. 


16 Whi han 3e kept the wymmen? ben not 
thes that han deseyued the sones of 
Yrael, at the suggestioun of Balaam, and 
han maad 30w trespasse® in the Lord, 
vpon the synne of Phegor, wherfor and 

17the puple was smytun? Therfor al slee 
3e what euer thing is of maal kynde, 
and litil children; and wymmen that 
han knowun men in goynge togidre, 

iskytte 3e the throotis; mayde children, 
and alle wymmen maydens kepe 3e to 

19 30w, and dwellith out of the tentes seuen 
days. Who sleeth a man, orf a man sleyn 
touchith, shal be passid about the thridde 

20 day, and the seuenthe; and of al the praye, 
whether clothing it were, other® vessel, 
and eny thing into vsable thingis maad 
redi, of the skynnes of gootis, and heerys, 

21 and tree, it shal be purgid. Eleazar for- 
sothe, the preest, to the men of the oost 
that hadden fow3t, thus spak, This is the 
maundement of the lawe, that the Lord 

22comaundide to Moyses, Gold, and siluer, 
and brasse, and yren, and tynne, and 
leed, and al that may passe bi flawmes, 

23 sha] be purgid thur3 fier; forsothe what 
euer thing fier shal not mowe susteyn, 
with water of clensynge shal be halowid. 

24 And 3e shulen wasshe 3oure clothis the 
seuenthe day; and puryfied afterward 3e 

a5Shulen goo into the tentes. And the 

26 Lord seide to Moyses, Take the summe 
of hem that ben takun, fro man vunto 
beest®, thow, and Eleazar, the preest, and 

27alle the prynces of the comoun. 
thow shalt dyuyde euen the praye among 
hem that fau3ten and wenten out to the 
batayl, and among al the laft multitude. 

28 And thow shalt seuer a part to the Lord, 
of hem that han fouj3ten, and weren in 
the batayl, o soule of fyue hundrid, as 
wel of men, as of oxen, and assis, and 


© to trespasse c. 


t seide to hem 1. 
8 the litle 1s. 


u kepte Is. 


bhan knowe 1s. © sotheli 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


fei (00am 


f other aDEFN. 


Vv these wymmen 8. 


449 


and he seidet, Whi reserueden" 3e wyin-15 
men? whether it be not these’ that” dis- 16 
seyueden the sones of Israel, at the sug- 
gestioun of Balaam, and maden 3ou to do 
trespas az3ens the Lord, on* the synne of 
Phegor, wherfor also the puple was slayn? 
And therfor sle 3e alle menY, what euer17 
thing” is of male kynde, and litle* chil- 
dren; and strangle 3e the wymmen that 
knew men fleischli; forsothe* reserue® is 
je to 30u damesels*®, and alle wymmen vir- 
gyns, and dwelle 3e with out the castels‘ ts 
in® senene daies. He that sleeth a man, 
ether touchith a slayn man, schal be 
clensid in the thridde and the! seuenthe 
dai*; and of! al™ the pray, whether it is20 
clooth, ether™ vessel, and ony thing maad 
redi in® to thingis perteynynge to vss, of 
the skynnys and heeris of geet, and ‘of 
treP, it schal be clensid. And Eleazar,2i 
preest?, spak this to the’ men of the oost 
that fou3ten, This is the comaundement‘ 
of the lawe, whicht the Lord comaundide 
to Moises, The gold, and siluer, and bras, 22 
and yrun, and tiyn, and leed, and al thing 
that may passe" by flawme, schal be purgid 
bi fier; sotheli what euer thing may notes 
suffre fier, schal be halewid’ bi” the watir 
of clensyng. And 3e schulen waische 3oure 24 
clothis in the seuenthe dai, and 3e schulen 
be clensid; and aftirward 3e schulen entre 
in to the* castelsY ‘of the tabernacle’. 
And the Lord seide to Moises, Take 3e 3 
the summe? of tho thingis that ben takun, 
fro man ‘til to» beeste, thou, and Eleazar, 
preest®, and alle the princes of the comyn 
puple. And thou schalt departe euenli27 
the prey bytwixe hem that fou3ten and 
jeden out to batel, and bitwixe al the 
multitude’, And thou schalt departe a°2s 
part to the Lord, of hem that fou3ten‘, and 
weren in batel’, ‘o soule’ of fine hundrid, 


§ Om. 1s. 1 or nuP passim. 1 Om. plures. * Om. N. 1 the thing of 1, Om. s. ™ al thing s. ® or BILPs. 


© Om. rorsTw. P wode 1s. 
maastid 3 marg. Vhalewid or purgid s. 
b ynto Is. too sup.ras. © the preest 1s. 
thou 8.» vo lijf 1. 


4 the preest ts. 


Ww with 1. * Om. plures. 
4 other multitude 1s. 


force. ba beest cz. 
wwhiches. *vponis. Ythemeniss. % Om. 1. 
4 kepe 1s. € the 3ounge damesels 1s. _‘f tentis 18. 
rQm.10s. Sheestis. ‘that rs. passe vn-. 
Ytentis1s. 2Om.1. 4 noumbre ts. 


€o1, fhan fouztenis. € batel take 


3M 


450 


29sheep. And thow shalt 3yue it to Elea- 
zar, the preest, for the cheef fruytis of 
30the Lord thei ben. Of the half forsothe 
parti of the sones of Irael, thow shalt 
taak the fiftith heed of men, and of oxen, 
and of* asses, and of sheep, and of al 
hauynge soule ; and thow shalt 3yne hem 
to the Leuytes, that waken in the waardis 
310f the tabernacle of the Lord. And Moy- 
ses and Eleazar diden as the Lord co- 
szmaundide. Forsothe the pray was that 
the! oost took, of sheep six hundrid fyue 
s3and seuenti thowsand, of oxen two and 
34 Seuenti thowsand, of assis sexti thowsand 
33and o thowsand; the soules of men of 
wymmen kynde, that knowen no men, 
36 two and thretti thowsand. And the half 
part is 3euen to hem that weren in the 
batayl, of sheep thre hundrid seuen and 
37thretti thowsand and fyue hundrid; of 
the whiche into the part of the Lord ben 
nowmbred sheep six hundryd and seuenti 
ssand fyne; and of oxen six and thretti 
39 thowsand, oxen seuenti and two, of assis 
thretti thowsand and fyue hundrid, assis 
40sexti and oon; of the soules of men six- 
tene thowsand, fellen into the™ part of 
41the Lord, two and thretti soulis. And 
Moyses took the noumbre of the chefe 
fruytis of the Lord to Eleazar, the preest, 
4gas it was comaundid, of the half part of 
the sones of Irael, that he seuerde to hem 
43 that in the batayl weren. Of the half 
part forsothe that felle to that other 
rnultitude, that is, of sheep thre hundryd 
seuen and thretti thousand and fyue hun- 
as drid, and of oxen six and thretti thon- 
as sand, and of thretti thowsand assis and 
4ofyue hundrid, and of sixtene thowsand 
47men, Moyses took the fiftith heed, and 
jaf to the Leuytis, that wakiden in the 
tabernacle of the Lord, as the Lord co- 
4smaundide. And whanne® the prynces of 


iparty ce. k Om. 4, 


i that that thour. k Om.r1. ! the preest 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


10m. «4. 


m heed or moost cheef's marg. ™ Om. Is. 


XXXII. 29—~48. 


as wel of men, as of oxun, and of assis, 
and of scheep. And thou: schalt 3yue2y 


‘that part‘ to Eleazar, preest', for tho ben 


the firste fruytis of the Lord. Also of the 30 
myddil part of the sones of Israel, thou 
schalt take the fiftithe heed™ of men, and 
of oxun, and of" assis, and of" scheep, 
and of alle lyuynge beestis; and thou 
schalt 3yue tho to the dekenes, that waken 
in the kepyngis of the tabernacle of the 
Lord. And Moyses and Eleazar diden, 31 
as the Lord comaundide. Forsothe® the 32 
prey which? the oost hadde take, was sixe 
hundrid fyue?P and seuenti thousynde of 
scheep, of oxun two and seuenti thou-33 
synde, of assis sixti thousynde and a thou-3s 
synde; the soules of persones of femal" 35 
kynde, that knewen not fleischlis men, 
twot and thretti thousynde. And the myd-36 
dil part was 3ouun to hem that weren in 
the" batel, of scheep thre’ hundrid seuene 
and thretti thousynde and fyue hundrid ; 
of whiche sixe hundrid fyue and seuenti 37 
scheep weren noumbrid in to the part of 
the Lord; and of sixe and thretti thou-33 
synde oxun, two and seuenti oxun”, and* 39 
of thretti thousynde assis and fyne hun- 
dryd, oon and sixti assis; ofY sixtene4o 
thousynde persoones? of men, twei and 
thretti persoones bifelden in* to the ‘part 
of the Lord’. And Moises bitook thei 
noumbre of the firste fruytis of the Lord 
to Eleazar>, preest®, as it was comaundid 
to hym, of the myddi] part of the sones of 42 
Israel, which’ he departide to hem that 
weren in batel. And of the myddil part 4s 
that bifelde to the tother multitude, that 
is, of thre hundrid seuene and _thretti 
thousynde scheep and fyue hundrid, and 44 
of® sixe and thretti thousynde oxun, and 45 
of thretti thousynde assis and fyue hun- 
drid, and of sixtene thousynde wymmen, 46 
Moyses took the fyftithe’ heeds, and 3af®47 


mOm. 4. Othec. ° Om. «4. 


© Sothely 1s. 


P that 1s. PP and fyue A pr.m. the persones s. ‘ wymmen is. &*Om.s. tweren two 1s. %Om. plurcs. 


¥ her part was thre s. 
fellen to his part of s. 


2 of persones s. 
4 the which 1, 


w oxun fellen to her part s. 
a Om. Is. 
© Om.s. f first x. & heed or pool 1. heed or polle s, h he jaf hem 1. 


x Om. A sec. m. 


y fellen to the Lord as part of 1. 
b Lordus part Is. 


bb Elezar a. © the preest 1s. 


XXXII. 49——XXXII. 5. 


the oost weren goon to Moyses, and the 
leders of thowsandis, and rewlers of 
49 hundredis, seiden, We thi sernauntis han 
tolde the noumbre of fiz3ters, the which 
we hadden vndre oure hoond, and not 
s00on forsothe faylid; for what cause we 
offren in the places of the free 3iftis of 
the Lord, eche, that in the praye of gold 
we my3ten fynde, wymmens? ournementis 
about her reynes4, and ournementis about 
her shuldres, and rynges, and ourne- 
mentis about her armes, aud ournementis 
about her neckis, that thow preye the 
51Lord for vs. And Moyses and Eleazar 
the preest, token al the gold in dyuers 
s2 spices, bi peyse of the seyntuarye, sixtene 
thousand seuen hundrid and fifti siclis, of 
the leders of thowsandis, and rewlers of 
53 hundredis. Forsothe echon that he:cau3te 
sin the praye, was his; and the taken thei 
brou3ten into the tabernacle of witness- 
ynge, into mynde of the" sones of Irael, 
before the Lord. 


CAP. XXXII 


1 The sones forsothe of Ruben and Gad 
hadden many beestis, ‘and ther was to 
hem in bestis’ substaunce with outen 
noumbre. And whanne thei hadden seen 
Jaser and Galaad, able loondis to beestis 

2to be fedd, thei camen to Moyses and 
Eleazar, the preest, and prynces of the 

3smultitude, ‘and seyden', Astaroth, and 
Dibbon, and Jaser, and Nemra, Esebon, 
and Eleale, and Sabam, and Nebo, and 

4 Beon, the loond that the Lord smoot in 
the si3t of the sones of Yrael, is of a re- 
gioun moost plenteuous to the food of 
beestis ; and we thi seruauntis han many 

sbeestis; and we preyen, if we han 
foundun grace before thee, that thow 


P wymmens 4. 4 eerys 4 sec. m. 
iwaken x. * the centuriouns 1s. 1} hoond or power s. 
°Om.s.  P oure EILPs. 


NUMBERS. 


4 wymmens myddlis 1. wymmen myddlis s. 


451 


to the dekenes, that wakiden! in the taber- 
nacle of the Lord, as the Lord comaundide. 
And whanne the princes of the oost, and 48 
the tribunes and centuriouns* hadden 
neiz3ed to Moises, thei seiden, We thi ser-49 
uauntis han teld the noumbre of fizters, 
whiche we hadden vndur oure hoond!, and 
sotheli not oon failide; for which™ cause 50 
we offren™ ‘in the® fre 3iftis of the Lord, 
alle bi vs? silf, that that we my3ten fynde 
of gold in the pray, girdelis for ‘the myd- 
dil of wymmen4, and bies of the armes, 
and ryngis, and ournementis of the arm 
ny3 the hond, and bies of the neckis of 
wymmen, that thou preye the Lord for vs. 
And Moises and Eleazar, preest", token als1 
the gold in dyuerse spices’, ‘ether kyndis*, 52 
bi the weizte of the seyntuarye, sixtene" 
thousynde seuene hundrid and fifti siclis, 
of the tribunes, and centuriouns’. Fors3 
that that ech man rauyschide in the prey, 
was his owne; and thei baren the golds 
taken in to the tabernacle of witnessyng, 
in to the” mynde of the sones of Israel, 
bifor the Lord. 


CAP. XXXII. 


Forsothe* the sones of Ruben and of1 
Gad-hadden many beestis, and catel with 
out noumbre was to hem, in werk beestis. 
And whanne thei hadden seyn Jazer and 
Galaad, couenableY londis to beestis to be 
fed, thei camen to Moyses and Eleazar’,e 
preest*, and to the? princes of the multi- 
tude, and seiden, Astaroth, and Dibon,3 
and Jacer, and Nemra, Esebon, and Eleale, 
and Sabam, and Nebo, and Beon, the lond 4 
which® the Lord smoot? in the sizt of the 
sones of Israel, is of moost® plenteuous‘ 
cuntrey to the® pasture of beestis; and we 
thi seruauntis han ful many beestis; and 5 
we preyen, if we han founde grace bifor 
thee, that thou 3yue to vs thi seruauntis 


r Om. spEFH. & Om. 4. t Om. a. 


mthe which 1. " offren or brengen to thee s. 


Tthe preest rs. § kyndis 1s. 


tOm.1s. ‘and sixtene 1. Vthe centuriouns1s. W Om. 1s. x Sothely 1s. Y to be couenable 1s. 
2 to Eleazar 1s. the preest 1s. > Om.1s. ¢that1s. 4 destriede 1s. ¢ the moost 1s. f plenteuost x. 
& Om. 18. } preyen thee s. 


3M 2 


452 


jyue to vs thi seruauntis it into posses- 
sioun, ne maak thow vs passe" ouer Jor- 
6dan. To whom answerde Moyses, Whe- 
ther 3o0ure britheren shulen go to the fi3t, 
7and 3e here shulen sitte ?, Whi mysturnen 
3e the thou3tes of the sones of Irael, that 
thei doren’ not passe into the place that 
8the Lord is to 3yuynge” to hem? Whe- 
ther diden not so 3oure fadres, whanne 
Y sente fro Cades Barne to aspie the 
9loond, and whanne thei camen to the 
valey of Cluster*, al the regioun about 
passid, thei mysturnedenY the herte of 
the sones of Yrael, that thei wenten not 
in to the coostis, that the Lord 3af to 
1ohem. The which wrooth, swaar, seiynge, 
11 Thes men shulen not seen, that stieden 
vp fro Egipte, fro twenti 3eer and aboue, 
the loond that ‘under ooth? Y bihi3te to 
Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob, and thei 
12Wolden not sue me, saue Caleph, the 
sone of? Jephone, Ceneze, and Josue, the 
sone of Nun; thes fulfilden my wille. 
13 And the Lord wrooth a3ens Yrael, ladde 
hym about by deseert fourti 3eer, to the 
tyme that were endyd al the generacioun 
that dide the yuel in the si3t of hym. 
14 And, Loo! he seith, 3e han rysen for 3oure 
fadres the waxyngis” and the norshid,of 
synful men, that 3e encresen the woodnes 
15 0f the Lord ajens Yrael. And if 3e wolen 
not folwe hym, in wildirnes the puple he 
shal forsaak, and 3e the enchesoun shulen 
igbe of the deeth of alle. And thei ny3 
comynge to, seiden, We shulen make vs 
fooldis of sheep, and stablis of beestis, to 
oure litil children forsothe waardid cytees. 
17 Forsothe we oure® silf armed and gyrd, 
we shulen goo to batayl before the sones 
of Irael, to the tyme that we leden hem 
into her places; oure children, and what 
euer thing we mowen han, shulen be in 


NUMBERS. 


XXXII. 6—17. 


that cuntrey in to possessioun, and make 
not vs to passe Jordan. To whiche' Moises 6 
answeride, Whether 3oure britheren schu- 
len go to batel, and 3e schulen sitte here ? 
Whi peruerten* 3e the soulis! of Israel,7 
that thei duren not passe in to the place, 
which™ the Lord schal 3yue to hem? 
Whether joure fadris diden not so, whanne8 
Y sente" fro Cades Barne to aspie the 
lond, and whanne thei camen to the valey 9 
of Clustre, whanne al the cuntrey was 
cumpassid, thei peruertiden® the herte of 
the sones of Israel, that thei entriden not 
in to the coostis, whiche the Lord 3af? to 
hem. And the Lord was4 wrooth, and 10 
swoo1', seiynge, Thes men that stieden*11 
fro Egipt, fro twenti 3eer' and aboue, 
schulen not se the lond which" Y bihi3te 
yndur an ooth to Abraham, Isaac, and Ja- 
cob, and nolden’ sue me, outakun Caleph, 12 
Cenezei, the sone of Jephone, and Josue, 
the sone of Nun; these fweyne filliden” 
my wille. And the Lord was wrooths 
a3ens Israel, and ledde hym aboute the 
deseert bi fourti 3eer, til al the generacioun 
was wastid, that hadde do .yuel in the 


‘siz3t of the Lord*. And Moyses seide, 14 


Lo! 3e encressyngis’, and nurreis*, ‘ether 
nurschid children*, of synful men, han 
ryse for? 3o0ure fadris, that 3e schulden en- 
creesse the strong veniaunce of the Lord 
ajens Israel. That if 3e nylen® sue the1s 
Lord, in ‘the wildirnesse’ he schal forsake 
the puple, and 3e schulen be cause of the® 
deeth of alle men. And thei neizidenfic 
ny3, and seiden, We schulen make foldis 
of scheep’, and the" stablis of beestis, and 
we schulen make strengthid citees to oure 
litle children. Forsothe' we vs* silf schu-17 
len be armed ‘to defence', and schulen be™ 
gird ‘with armerts to asailyng™, and schu- 
leu® go to batel bifor the sones of Israel, 


U to passe c. VY dur cp. der cE. W3iue c. ¥ Clustrue 4. Y mystorden px. ZOm. 4. ?Om. BDF sec.m. 


bwexyng G © vs CE. 
i whom 1s. 


k mysturne 1s. 
fere s, 


P had 3ene s. 


uthatis. Vwoldennot1. W¥ fulfilliden is. 
drenits. @Om.1s. fro ELP.+« ¢ wil not 1. 
hOm.1s. ' Sothelirs. & our eves. 1 Om. 1s, 


schulen 1s. 


1 thou3tis of the sonus ts. 
4 herfore was s. * he swoor s. § wenten vp t. stieden vp s. t 3eer of age s marg. 
x Lordis si3t Is. 
4 desert 1s. 
m Om. Is. 


m that ts. ®sente hem rs. © turneden in to 
y the encressyngis 1s. 2 norished chil- 
eQOm.s. f3eden1.  & sheep foldis s. 


2 Om. 1. with defensable wepnes s. © we 


XXXII. 18—31, 


the waardid citees, for the aspies of the 
igdwellers. We shulen not turnen a3en 
into oure howsis, into the tyme that the 
19sones of Yrael welden her herytage; ne 
eny thing we shulen seche bizonde Jor- 
dan, for nowe we han oure possessioun 
20in the eest coost of it. To whom seith 
Moises, If 3e doon that 3e bihooten, ful- 
spede goo 3e before the Lord into fi3t*; 
2iand eche fi3tynge man armed passe he 
ouer Jordan, to the tyme that the Lord 
22turne doun his enemyes, and al the loond 
be suget to hym; thanne 3e shulen be 
vneulpable® anentis God, and anentis 
Irael, and 3e shulen weeld the regiouns, 
‘the whichef 3e wolen, before the Lord. 
a3 If forsothe that 3e seyn, 3e doon not, to 
no man dowt is, that ne 3e synnen a3ens 
God; and wite 3e, that 3our synne shal 
zacatche 30w. LBilde je thanne cytees to 
joure children, and fooldis and stablis to 
sheep and beestis; and that 3e han bi- 
2shoot, fulfillith. And the sones of Gad 
and Ruben’ seiden to Moyses, Thi ser- 
uauntis we ben; we shulen doo that the 
26 Lord comaundith. Oure litil children, 
and wymmen, and feeldbeestis, and hows- 
beestis we shulen leeue in the cytees of 
27Galaad; forsothe we thi seruauntis alle 
fulspede shulen goo to batayl, as thow, 
aslord, slialt speek. Thanne Moyses co- 
maundide to Eleazar, the preest, and to 
Josue, the sone of Nun, and to the 
prynees of the meynees, bi the lynagis 
2090f Irael, and he seide to hem, If the 
sones of Gad and the sones’ of Ruben 
with 30w passen oner Jordan alle armed, 
to bateil before the Lord, and to 30w 
were the loond suget, 3yue 3e to hem Ga- 
30laad into possessioun; if forsothe thei 
wolen not passe with 3ow into the loond 
of Chanaan, among 3ow take thei places 
310f dwellynge. And the sones of Gad and 
the sones of Ruben answerden, As the 


4 the fizt 2. 


P tresonn 15S. 
u whom 1s, 
seheep 1s. 
preest rs. 


q Om. plures. 
V figting man Is. 
¢ fulfille 1s. 
i Om. 1s. 


w passe he 1s. 
4 han bihizte 18. 
k the meynees 1. 


NUMBERS. 


€ yneoupable pepern. £ that c. 


® dweller aboute 1. 

x tilals. toals. YOm.s. 2weelde rs. @nox. > 30ure 
© oure scheep s. 
lhe scide 1s. 


453 


til we bryngen hem in to her places; oure 
litle children and what euer thing we 
moun haue, schnilen be in strengthid 
cytees, for the tresouns? of the! dwelleris". 
We schulen not turne ajen in to oure1s 
housis, til the sones of Israel welden’ her 
eritage ; and we schulen not axe ony thing 19 
ouert Jordan, for we han now oure posses- 
sioun in the eest coost therof. To whiche" 20 
Moises seide, If 3e doen that, that 3e bi- 
heten, be 3e maad redi, and go 3e to batel 
bifor the Lord; and ech man fi3tere” be 21 
armed, and passe” Jordan, til the Lord 
distrye hise enemyes, and al* theY lond be 22 
maad suget to hym; thanne 3e schulen be 
giltles anentis God, and anentis Israel, and 
je schulen holde’ the cuntreys, whiche 3e 
wolen, bifor the Lord. But if 3e doon not 23 
that, that ye seien, it is not* doute to ony 
man, that ne 3e synnen a3ens God; and 
wite 3e, that 3oure synne schal take 3ou. 
Therfor bilde 3e citees to 3oure litle chil-24 
dren, and foldis and stablis to scheep», and 
to beestis; and fille 3e that, that 3e bi- 
hiz3ten*, And the sones of Gad and ofes 
Ruben seiden to Moises, We ben thi ser- 
nauitis; we schulen do that, that oure 
lord comaundith. We schulen leene oure 26 
litle children, and wymmen, and scheep*, 
and beestis in the citees of Galaad; for-27 
sothef alle we thi seruauntis schulen go 
redi to batel, as thou, lord, spekist®. Ther- 2s 
for Moyses comaundide to Eleazar, preest®, 
and to Josue, the sone of Nun, and to the! 
princes of meynees*, bi the lyuagis of Is- 
rael, and seide! to hem, If the sones of 29 
Gad, and the sones of Ruben goen alle 
armed with jou, to batel bifor the Lord, 
and the lond be maad suget to 3ou, 3yue 
3e to hem Galaad in to possessioun; but 30 
if thei nylen™ passe with jou in to the 
lond of Chanaan, take thei" places to 
dwelle among jou. And° the sones of31 
Gad and the sones of Ruben ainsweriden, 


& of Ruben ce. 4} oure ce. 


dwelleris aboute s. 8 weldiden s. — t bijonde 1s. 


& spekist fo vss. 5 the 


o Om, 1s. 


f sothely 18. 


m wil not 1. ™ thei thanne s. 


454 


Lord hath spoken to his seruauntis, so 
3zwe shulen doon; we armed shulen goo 
before the Lord, into the loond of Cha- . 
naan, and we knowlechen, that we han 
take now possessioun bijonde Jordan. 
33 And so Moyses 3af to the sones ‘of Gad 
aud of! Ruben, and to the half lynage of 
Manasse, the* sone of Joseph, the kyng- 
dam of Seon, kyng! of Amorrei, and the 
kyngdam of Og, kyng! of Basan, and the 
loond of hem, with her cytees, bi enuy- 
34roun. ‘Thanne the sones of Gad maden 
350ut Dibon, and Astaroth, and Aroer, and 
3¢ Roth-Sophan, and Jazer, and Jeebaa, and 
Beth-Neura, and Betharan, waardid ci- 
artees; and fooldis to her beestis. The 
sones forsothe of Ruben edifieden Ese- 
asbon, and Eleale, and Cariathiarym, and 
Nabo, and Balmyon, turned the names 
Sabama forsothe ; puttynge names to the 
39 cytes that thei maden out. Forsothe the 
sones of Machir, sone of Manasse, wenten 
forth into Galaad, and wastiden it, A- 
4omorre slayn, the dweller of it. Than 
Moyses 3af the loond of Galaad to Ma- 
chir, sone of Manasse, that dwellide in 
41it. Forsothe Jair, the sone of Manasse, 
wente, and ocupiede the stretis of it, the 
whiche he clepide Anochiair, that is, the 
42townes of Jayr. Forsothe Nobe wente, 
and cau3te Canath, with his litil townes, 
and he clepide it, of his name, Nobe. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


1 ‘These ben the dwellyngis of the sones 
of Yrael, that wenten out fro Egipte, bi 
her companyes, in the hoond of Moyses 

gand Aaron; the whiche Moyses dis- 
cryuede biside the places of the tentis, 
the whiche weren chaungid thur3 the 

sheest of the Lord. Therfor thei goon 
forth fro Ramesse, the firste moneth, the 
fiftenthe day of the firste moneth, diden 
that™ other day pask the sones of Yrael, 


iOm.ce. * Om. c. of the Fr. 
Yr her lond 1s. 


P hath spoken 1s. 4 the sone 1s. 
w Sotheli 1s. 


uSotheliis. Vv thei puttiden 1s. 
&the sone is. » the which 1. 
fhe clepide is. &Om.s. 4 the whiche 1. 
a strong power Is. 


NUMBERS. 


8 and thei strengthiden ¢hees 1s. 
* the sone 1s. 
¢ dwellide aftir 1. dwellide after that s. 
i rikenede 1s. 


XXXII. 32—-XXXIII. 3. 


As the Lord spak? to hise seruauntis, so we 
schulen do; we schulen go armed bifors2 
the Lord, in to the lond of Chanaan, and 
we knowlechen, that we han take now 
possessioun ouer Jordan. And so Moises 33 
3af to the sones of Gad and of Ruben, and 
to half the lynage .of Manasses, sone’ of 
Joseph, the rewme of Seon, kyng of Am- 
morey, and the rewme of Og, kyng of 
Basan, and ‘the lond of hem", with her 
citees, bi cumpas. Therfor the sones of34 
Gad bildiden Dibon, and Astaroth, and 
Aroer, and Roth-Sophan, and Jazer, and 3s 
Jebaa, and Beeth-Nemra, and Betharan, 36 
strengid’ citees; and foldis* to her beestis. 
Forsothe" the sones of Ruben bildiden 37 
Esebon, and Eleale, and Cariathiarym, 
and Nabo, and Balmeon, whanne_ the3s 
names weren turned, and thei bildiden 
Sabama; and puttiden’ names to the citees, 
whiche thei hadden bildid. Forsothe’ the 39 
sones of Machir, sone* of Manasses, 3eden 
in to Galaad, and distrieden it, and kill- 
idenY Ammorei, enhabitere* therof. ‘Ther- 40 
for Moises 3af the lond of Galaad to Ma- 
chir, sone? of Manasses, which> Machir 
dwellide® ther ynne. Forsothe’ Jair, the «1 
sone of Manasses, 3ede, and occupiede the 
townes therof, whiche® he clepide Anochi- 
air, that is, the townes of Jair. Also42 
Nobe 3ede, and took Canath, with hise 
townes, and clepidef it, bi his name, Nobe. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


These ben the dwellyngis of the sones1 
of Israel, that 3eden out of the lond of 
Egipt, bi her cumpenyes, in the hond of 
Moises and of& Aaron; whiche" dwell-2 
yngis Moises discriuede! bi the* places of 
tentis!, that weren chaungid bi comaunde- 
ment™ of the Lord. Therfor the sones of3 
Israel 3eden forth in ‘an hi3 hond® fro 
Ramesses, in the firste monethe, in the 
fiftenthe dai of the firste monethe, in the 


lthe kyng £ prim. ™ the c. 


t maden foldis 1s. 
2 the dweller 1s. 


€ the whiche 1. 
m heeste 1s. 


y thei killiden 1s. 
4 Sothely 1s. 


kOm.1s. | the tentis 1s. 


XXXIII. 4—26. 


in ‘an hi3 hoond, seiynge alle the Egip- 
aciens, and byryyng® the first gotun, the 
whiche the Lord hadde smytun ; forsothe 
and in the goddis of hem he enhauncide 
sveniaunce. Thei setten tentis in Socoth, 
eand fro Socoth thei camen in to Etham, 
that is in the vttermest® coostis of wildir- 
7nes; thens thei goon out, camen a3ens 
Phiairoth, that biholdith Beelsephon, and 
sthei setten tentis before Magdalun. And 
thei goon forth fro Phiairoth, passiden 
thur3 the myddil se in wildirnes, and thei 
goynge thre dayes thur3 the? deseert of 
9 Ethan, setten tentis in Maara. And thei 
goon forth fro Maara, camen into Helym, 
where weren twelue wellis of water, and 
seuenti palmes; and there thei settiden4 
lotentis. But and thennes thei goon out, 
piz3ten tentes vpon the Reed See- And 
11 thei goon forth fro the Reed See, set- 
12tiden’ tentis in the deseert of Synay, fro 


whens thei goon out, ¢amen into Del- 


i3pheca. And they goon forth fro Del- 
14pheca, settiden’ tentis in Halijs. And 
thei goon fro Halijs, pizten tentes in Ra- 
phidyn, where to the peple water faylide 
15to drynke. And thei goon forth fro Ra- 
phidyn, settiden™ tentes in deseert of Sy- 
1énay. But and fro the wildirnes of Synay 
goon out, thei camen to the Sepulcres of 
17Lust. And thei goon forth fro the Se- 
pulcris of Lust, settiden* tentes in As- 
isseroth. And fro Asseroth thei camen 
19into Rethma. And thei goon forth fro 
Rethma, settiden* tentes in Remmon 
20 Phares; fro whens thei goon out, camen 
21into Lemphna. And fro Lemphna theit 
22 settiden" tentis in Ressa. Goon out fro 
23 Ressa camen in Celatha; fro whens goon 
forth, settiden" tentis in the hil of Se- 
2tpher. ‘Goon out fro the hil of Sepher, 
23camen into Arada; thens goynge forth, 
26settiden" tentes in Maceloth. And goon 


. beringe 4. © otemost cE. P Om. orn. 

© whanne 1s. P the Egipcians 1s. 
Uvypon is. Vheris. WOm.1s, * And thei 1. 
Cthat is. 4 thei settiden 15. 
{ Om. rst sec.m. w. * thei settiden 1s. 
settiden 1s, setten mM. 4 Synay a pr. m. cILNOSW. 
uOm.s. ¥Om.s, W desert 5. * thei camen Is. 
settiden 1s. 4 her tentis 1s. © thei settiden 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


q sette c. 


4 the Egipciens birieden s. 
Y that 1s. 
€ thei Maly Is, 
her tentis 1s. 
r forth Is. 
y Om. s. 
f forth 1s, 


455 


tother dai of pask+, while® alle Egipcians? 
sien, and birieden4 the" firste gendrid® chil-4 
dren, whiche the Lord hadde slayn; for 
the Lord hadde taket veniaunce also on™ 
the’ goddis ‘of hem”. ‘The sones of Is-s 
rael* settiden teutis in Socoth, and fro6 
Sochoth thei camen into Etham, which’ 
is in the laste coostis of ‘the wildirnesse?; 
fro thennus thei 3eden out*, and camen?7 
ajens Phiayroth, whiche® biholdith Beel- 
sephon, and -settiden* tentis bifor Magda- 
lun. And thei 3eden forth fro Phiairoth,s 
and passiden® bif the myddil® see" in to 
thet wildirnesse, and thei 3éden thre daies 
bi the deseert of Ethan, and settiden* 
tentis in Mara. And thei jeden forth frog 
Mara, and camen in to Helym, where 
weren twelue wellis of watir, and seuenti 
palm trees; and there thei settiden tentis'. 
But also thei 3eden out™ fro thennus, and to 
settiden tentis" on® the Reed See. And 
thei 3eden forth fro the Reed See, and set-11 
tiden? tentis in the deseert of Syn4, fro1e 
whennus thei 3eden out’, and camen in to 
Depheca. And thei 3eden forth fro De-13 
pheca, and settiden tentis in Haluys. And 14 
thei 3eden forth fro Haluys, and settiden’ 
tentis in Raphidyn, where watir failide 
tot ‘the puple" to drinke. And thei 3eden1s 
forth’ fro Raphidyn, and settiden teutis 
in the deseert of Synai. But also theiis 
jeden out of the wildirnesse’ of Synay, 
and camen* to theY Sepulcris of Couei- 
tise’. And thei 3eden forth* fro the Se-17 
puleris of Coueytise®, and settiden*® tentis? 
in Asseroth. And fro Asseroth thei camen 1s 
in to Rethma. And thei 3eden forth fro19 
Rethma, and settiden® tentis in Remon 
Phares; fro whennus thei 3eden forth, 29 
and camen in to Lemphna. And fro2i 
Lemphna thei settiden tentis in Ressa. 
And thei 3eden out fro Ressa, and camen® 22 
into Celatha; fro whennus thei jeden 


fr sette c. settin p. 8 sette c. t Om. &. Usette c. 
theris. §bigotuni.  ¢ took as. 
a forth 1s. » thei camen 1s. 
f thorou3 Is. & myddis s. bh of the see 1s. 
i forth 1s. ™ her tentis 1s. ° vponis. P thei 
8 thei setten 1. thei settiden s. tOm. 15s. 
z Lustis. ® Om, ELP, » Lustis. ¢ thei 


& thei camen 1s. 


2 desert Is. 


t in the lothir 
day of pask, 
that is, in the 
morewe of the 
offring of the 
lomb of pask. 
Lire here. c. 


456 


forth fro Maceloth, camen into Thaat. 
27 And’ fro Thaat thei settiden” tentis in 
28 Thare ; fro whennus gon out, thei fitch- 
29iden tentis in Methcha. And fro Methcha 
30 thei settiden” tentis in Esmona. And 
gon forth fro Esmona, thei camen ‘into 
31 Moseroth*, and fro Moseroth thei settiden 
setentis in Benelachan. And goon forth 
fro Benelachan, camen into the hil of 
33 Galgad ; fro whens goon forth, thei set- 
34tiden” tentes in Jethebacha. And fro 
35 Jethebaca thei camen into Ebrona. And 
goon out fro Ebrona, settiden” tentis in 
36 Asion Gaber; andY thens goon forth, 
camen into the deseert of Syn; this is 
37Cades. And goon out of Cades, settiden” 
tentes in the hil of Hor, in the vtter- 
33moost” of the loond of Edom. And 
Aaron, the preest, steyede vp in to the 
hil of Hor, comaundynge the Lord, and 
there died, the fourtithe 3eer of the go- 
ynge out of the sones of Yrael fro Egipte, 
the fifthe moneth, the fyrst day of the 
39 moneth ; whanne he was of 3eres an hun- 
4odrid and thre and twenti. And Chanane, 
the kyng Arad, that dwelt at the south, 
in the loond of Chanaan, herde that the 
4isones of Yrael weren comen. And goon 
forth fro the hil of Hor, settiden tentis 
42in Salmana; fro thens goon out, camen 
43into Phynon. And goon forth fro Phy- 
44non, thei settiden tentes in Oboth. And 
fro Oboth camen into Jeabarym, that is 
45in the coostis of Moabitis. And goon 
forth fro Jeabarym, thei pi3ten tentis in 
46 Dibongad ; fro whens goon out, thei set- 
47 tiden tentis in Helmon Deblathaym. And 
goon out of Helmon Deblathaym, camen 
into the hillis of Nabarym, a3ens Nabo. 
48 And goon fro the hillis of Abarym, 
wenten to* the wijld feeldis of Moab, vp 
49 Jordan, aj3ens Jericho. And there thei 
settiden tentis, fro Bethsymon vnto Bel- 
sathym, in the more pleyn places of 
v Om. E. 


W sette c passim. * seroth a. 


i And thei 1s. 
4 her tentis 1s. 


b thei settiden 1s. 
camenis. POm.c. 
Vv forth 1s. Om. Kx. W the desert 1s. 
ages. »thekyng cis. ¢ camen thider s. 
‘& that is, a desert 1 marg. stext. » that 1s. 


k forth 1s. 


NUMBERS. 


y Om. BpErn. 


1 thei camen 1s. 

t forth 1s. 
x forth fro Be. 
a Jsrael 1. the sones of Israel s. 


XXXII. 27—49. 


forth, and settiden® tentis in the hil of 
Sepher. Theii 3eden out* fro the hil of24 
Sepher, and camen! in to Arada; froes 
thennus thei 3eden forth, and settiden 
tentis™ in Maceloth. And thei" 3eden26 
forth fro Maceloth, and camen® in? to 
Caath. Fro Caath thei settiden tentis427 
in Thare; fro whennus thei 3eden out’, 28 
and settiden tentis in Methcha. And fro29 
Methcha thei settiden tentis in Esmona. 
And thei 3eden forth fro Asmona, and 30 
camen’ in to Moseroth; and fro Moseroth31 
thei settiden tentis in Benalachan. And 32 
thei 3eden forth fro Benalachan, and 
cament in to the hil of Galgad"; fro3s3 
whennus thei 3eden forth, and settiden 
tentis in Jethebacha. And fro Jethebacha34 
thei camen in to Ebrona. And thei 3eden 35 
out’ fro Ebrona, and settiden tentis in 
Asiongaber ; fro thennus thei 3cden forth, 36 
and camen in to deseert® of Syn; this is 
Cades. And thei 3eden fro* Cades, and 37 
thei settiden tentis in the hil of Hor, in 
the laste coostis of the lond of Edom. 
And Aaron, the preest, stiedeY in to the3s 
hil of Hor, for the Lord comaundide, and 
there he was deed, in the fourti? jeer of 
the goyng out of the sones of Israel fro 
Egipt, in the fyuethe monethe, in the 
firste dai of the monethe ; whanne he was 39 
of an hundrid and thre and twenti 3eer’. 
And Chanaan, kyng” of Arad, that dwell-4o0 
ide at the south, in the lond of Canaan, 
herde that the sones of Israel camen®. 
And thei? 3eden forth fro the hil of Hor, 41 
and settiden® tentis in Salmona; fro42 
thennus thei 3eden forth, and camen in to 
Phynon. And thei 3eden forth fro Phy-4s 
non, and settiden tentis in Oboth. And 4a 
fro Oboth thei camen in to Neabarym, 
‘that is, into the’ wildirnesse of Abarymé, 
which" is in the endis of Moabitis. And 45 
thei 3eden forth fro Neabaryin, and thei 
settiden tentis in Dibon of Gad; fro4e 


Z ytmoost c. otemost E. 8 into 4. 


nOm.c. © thei 
u Galgal c. 


a 3eer oold 1. 3eer of 
€ thei settidenis. Om.c. 


m her tentis 1s. 
8 thei camenis. +t thei camen Is. 
Y3ede 3. 2 fourtithe Fik. 


XXXIII. so—XXXIV. 6. 


30 Moabites, where the Lord spak to Moy- 
sisen, Comaund to the sones of Yrael, and 
sey to hem, Whanne 3e passen Jordan, 
52 goynge into the loond of Chanaan, scater 
3e alle the dwellers of that region; breeke 
je the calues, and the ymagis destrye 3e, 
s3and alle the hy3e thingis waste 3e, clens- 
ynge the loond, and alle the dwellers in 
it. Y forsothe haue 3eue to 3ou it into 
54 possessioun, the which 3e” shal dyuyde 
to 3ou bi lot; to the mo 3e shulen 3yue 
the bradder, and to the fewer the narwer; 
to ech as the lot fallith, so shal be 3eue 
the herytage; bi lynagis and meynees 
55the possessioun shal be dyuydid. For- 
sothe if 3e wolen not sle the dwellers of 
the loond, that abiden, thei shulen be to 
3ow as nayles in eyen, and speris in sidis; 
and thei shulen contrarye 3ou in the 
56loond of 3oure dwellinge ; and what euer 
thing I thow3t to do to hem, I shal doo 
to jow. 


CAP. XXXIV. 
1 


2 TheLord spak to Moyses, seiynge, Co- 
maunde to the sones of Yrael, and thow 
shalt seye to hem, Whanne 3e goon into 
the loond of Chanaan, and into posses- 
sioun to 3ow felle bi lot, with thes eendis 

3it shal be ‘endid. The south part shal 
bigyn fro the wildirnes of Syn, that is 
biside Edom, and it shal haue termes 

4a3ens the eest, and moost salt see, the 
which shal enuyroun the south coost bi 
the stiyng up of scorpioun, so that thei 
passen into Sennam, and camen to® the 
south, vnto Cades Barne; fro whens shu- 
len®¢ goo oute’, the ny3 coostis, to a toun, 
Abder bi name, and thei shulen strecche 

5 vnto Assemonam ; aud the coost shal goo 
bi enuyroun fro Assemona vnto the ren- 
nynge water of Egipte, and it shal be 

Sendid in the brenk of the greet see. The 


b Om, anFH. 
k thei camenis. lintos. 


Y or IS. ® Om. 1s. 
* thingis of pride 1s. Y the men 1s. 


i forth 1s. 
4 her titlis 1s. 
hei3 18. 


NUMBERS. 


€ into 4. 


m Om. s. 
t into Is. 
z haue 3oue 1s. 


457 


whennus thei 3eden forth, and settiden 
tentis in Helmon of Deblathaym. And 47 
thei 3eden out! fro Helmon of Deblathaym, 
and camen* to! the hillis of Abarym, a3ens 
Nabo. And thei™ 3eden forth fro thes 
hillis of Abarym, and passiden™ to the 
feeldi places of Moab, ouer Jordan, a3ens 
Jericho. And there thei settiden tentis®, 49 
fro Bethsymon ‘til to? Belsathym, in the 
pleynere places of Moabitis, where theso 
Lord spak to Moises, 


CAP. XXXIV. 


Comaunde thou to the sones of Israel, 51 
and seie thou to hem, Whanne 3e han 
passid Jordan, and han entrid in to the 
lond of Canaan, distrie 3e alle the dwell-s2 
eris of that cuntrey; breke 3e the titlis9, 
‘that ts*, auteris, and dryue 3e tot poudre"” 
the’ ymagis, and distrie 3e alle hei; 
thingis*, and clense 3e the lond, and alles3 
men’ dwellynge thereynne. For Y 3af* to 
30u that /ond into possessioun whiche* 3e¢ 54 
schulen departe to 30u bi lot; to mo men? 
3e schulen 3yue largere lond, and to fewere 
men¢ streytere* lond, as lot® fallith to alle 
men, so eritage schal be 3ouun; posses- 
siounf schal be departid bi® lynagis and 
meynees. But if 3e nylen® sle the dwelleris 5s 
of the! lond*, thei, that abiden!, schulen be 
to 30u as nai/les in the izen, and speris™ in 
the sidis, ‘that is, deedli aduersaries®; 
and thei schulen be aduersaries® to 3ou in 
the lond of 3oure abitacioun?; and whatse 
euer thing Y thou3te4 to do ‘to hem’, Y 
schal do to 3ou. And the Lord spak tot 
Moises, and seide, Comaunde thou to thee 
sones of Israel, and thou schalt seie to 
hem, Whaune 3e han eutrid in to the lond 
of Canaan, and it bifelde’ in to possessioun 
‘to 30u' bi lot, it schal be endid bi these 
endis". ‘The south part schal bigynne ats 
the wildirnesse of Syn, which” is bisidis 


ce shalen 4. 4 vnto aH. 


0 thei passiden s pr.m. © her tentis 1s. P ynto Is. 
u poudre, waaste 3e 1. Vheris. W hise c. her 
athe whiche 1. > ix noumbre s marg. 


© in noumbre s marg. 4 streytere or lesse 1s. © the lot 1s. f the possessioun 1. eche of hem possessioun s. 


&tois. bwilnatz. ithat 1. 
that is, deedli enemyes  marg. 
Lord 3 marg. 


Ycoostu 1. coostis or termese s. VY that 18. 


Kk lond of Chanaan s. 
© contrarie enemyes 1s. dedli aduersaries 1. 
¥ to him FK. a [of 8] vengeaunce to that puple 1s. 


lof hem alyue s marg. ™as sperists, ® Om, 1. 
P dwelling 1s. 4 seith the 
® hath falle 1s. bifalle nue. ¢ Om. 1. 


On 


458 


west plage forsothe shal begynne fro the 
greet see, and with that his eend shal be 
7closid. Forsothe to the north plage, fro 
the greet see teermes shulen begynne, ful 
scomynge vnto the moost hize hil, fro the 
which thei shulen come into Emath, vnto 
»the eendis of Sedeba; and the ny3 coostis 
shulen go vnto Effrona, and the town of 
io Enan. Thes shulen be the teermes in the 
part of the north. Thens shulen be sett 
the eendis ajens the eest plage, fro the 
11 toun of Henam vnto Sephama®; and fro 
Sephama the termes shulen descende vnto 
Reblath, a3ens the welle of Daphym; 
thens thei shulen come ajens the eest to 
i2the see of Cenereth; and thei shulen 
stretche vuto Jordan, and at the last thei 
shulen be closid with the moost salt see. 
This loond 3e shulen haue bi 3oure coostis 
isin enuyroun. And Moyses comaundide 
to the sones of Yrael, seiynge, This shal 
be the loond that 3e shulen welde bi lot, 
and that the Lord comaundide to be 
3euen to nyne lynagis, and to the half 
lilynage ; forsothe the lynage of the sones 
of Ruben bi her meynees, and® bi the 
lynage of the sones of Gad, aftir the 
kynrede and noumbre, and the half lyn- 
sage of Manasse, that is, two lynagis and 
an half, token her parte be3onde Jordan, 
igajens Jericho, at the eest plage. And 
17the Lord seith to Moyses, Thes ben the 
names of the men that shulen dyuyde 
the loond to 30w, Eleazar, the preest, 
isand Josue, the sone of Nun, and alle the 
l9prynces of alle lynagis; of whom the 
names ben thes, of the lynage of Juda, 
20Caleph, the sone of Jephone; of the 
lynage of Symeon, Samuel, the sone of 
21Amyud; of the lynage of Beniamyn, 
22 Klyad, the sone of Casselon; of the 
lynage of the sones of Dan, Bochri, the 
23sone of Jogli; of the sones of Joseph and 


dd Sepham 4. 


wthe termes is. * most salt 1. 
4Om. EFKLPW sec.m. ‘> Om. 1s. 
schulen 1s. 1 ynto 18. to o sec. m. 
nwhich Als. ©tho termes s. 
' These termes s. 4 Om. plures. 
termes 1s. 
to 0 Sec. m. 


i Sothely 1s. 
vOm.s. 
f Om. s. 


€ aboute 1. § that 1. 


NUMBERS. 


y the whiche 1. 
© tho fermes 1s. 
k it schal 1s. 
P vnto Is. to O sec. m. 
Ww the coostis Is. 
a Om. BEFGLNPQX. Daphnyn A sce. m. 

h that 1s. 


XXXIV. 7—23. 


Edom, and it schal haue termes” a3ens 
the eest, the saltiste* see, whicheY’ fermes4 
schulen cumpasse the south coost bi the 
‘stiynge of” Scorpioun, ‘that zs, of* an hil 
clepid Scorpioun», so that tho® passe in 
to Senna, and come to the south, ‘til to4 
Cades Barne; fro whennus the coostis® 
schulen go out’ to the town, Abdar bi 
name, and schulen® strecche forth ‘til to® 
Asemona ; and the terme schal go bi cumn-5 
pas fro Assemona ‘til to the stronde of 
Egipt, and it schal be endid bi the brynke 
of the grete see. Forsothe! the west coost 6 
schal bigynne at the greet see, and schal* 
be closid bi that ende. Sotheli at the7 
north coost, the termes schulen bigynne 
at the greet see, and sclulen! come ‘til to™ 
the hizeste hil}, fro which" tho® schulens | dees 
come in to Emath, ‘til to? the termes of ‘teil to the hil 
Sedada ; and the coostis schulen go‘ ‘tils “ ve 
to’ Ephrona, and the* town of Enan. 
Theset schulen be the" termes’ in the 
north part. Fro thennus thei schulen1o 
mete coostis” a3ens the eest coost, fro the 
town Henan ‘til to¥ Sephama; and frou 
SephamaY termes’ schulen go doun in to 
Reblatha, a3ens the welle ‘of Daphnyn®; 
fro thennus tho? schulen come aj3ens the 
eest to the se of Cenereth; and tho* schu- 12 
len strecche forth ‘til to’ Jordan, and at 
the laste tho schulen be closid with the 
salteste see. 3e schulen haue this lond bi 
hise coostis ‘in cumpas®. And Moises13 
comaundide to the sones of Israel, and 
seide, This schal be the lond which’ 3e 
schulen welde bi lot, and which the Lord 
comaundide to be 3ouun to nyne! lynagis 
and to the half lynage; for the lynage of 14 
the sones of Ruben, bi her meynees, and 
the lynage of the sones of Gad, bi kyn- 
rede* and noumbre, and half the lynage of 
Manasses, that is, twey lynagis and ans 
half, han take her part ouer Jordan, a3ens 


¢ Om. ce. 


Z goyng vp of the hil 1. stiynge vp of the hil s. 
dyntois. @termesis. fforthis.  § thei 
I thei schul 1s. ™vnto 1s. to 0 sec.m. 
4 go or last s. * vnto 1s. too sec.m. § to the Is. 
x ynto 1s. too sec.m. YOm.1. 2 the 
b tho fermes 1s. © tho termes s. d ynto Is. 
ithe nyne B. her kynrede 1s. 


XXXIV. 24-—-XXXV. 6. 


the lynage of Manasse, Hamyel, the sone 
240ff Ephoth; of the lynage of Effraym, 
25Camuel, the sone of Septhan; of the 
lynage of Zabulon, Elizaphan, the sone 
260f Pharnath; of the lynage of Ysachar, 
27 duke Phaltiel, the sone of Ozan; of the 
lynage of Aser, Abyud, the sone of Sa- 
28lomy ; of the lynage of Neptalym, Feda- 
29hel, the sone of Amyud. Thes ben, to 
whom the Lord comaundide, that thei 
shulden dyuyde to the sones of Yrael the 
loond of Chanaan. 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 These thingis forsothe spak the Lord to 
Moyses, in the wijlde feeldis of Moab, 
2vpon Jordan, a3ens Jerycho, Comaunde 
to the sones of Irael, that thei 3yuen to 
3the Leuytis, of her possessiouns, citees to 
dwellen yn, and the suburbs of hem bi 
enuyroun, that thei dwellen in wallid 
towns, and the suburbis ben to feelde 
4beestis, and housbeestis ; the whiche fro 
the wallis of the citees with outen forth 
bi enuyroun ben stretchid, bi space of a 
sthowsand paase; a3ens the eest, two 
thowsand shulen be the cubitis, and a3ens 
the south, also two thowsand; forsothe 
at the see that biholdith to the west, the 
same mesure shal be, and the north plage 
bi euen teerme shal be eendid. And ci- 
tees shulen be in the myddil, and sub- 
surbis withoute. Forsothe of thilk wallid 


NUMBERS. 


459 


Jerico, at the eest coost. And the Lord 16 
seide to Moises, These ben the ‘names of 17 
men! that schulen departe the lond to 30u, 
Eleazar, preest™, and Josue, the sone of 
Nun, and” of each lynage, o prynce; of jy 
whiche these ben the names, of the lynage 
of Juda, Caleph, the® sone of Jephone ; of 29 
the lynage of Symeon, Samuhel, the? sone 
of Amyud; of the lynage of Beniamyn, 21 
Heliad, sone’ of Casselon; of the lynage22 
of the sones of Dan, Bochi, sone’ of J. ogli; 
of the sones of Joseph, of the lynage of 23 
Manasses, Hamyel, sone’ of Ephoth; of 24 
the lynage of Effraym, Camuhel, sonet of 
Septhan; of the lynage of Zabulon, Eli-25 
saphan, sone” of Pharnat; of the lynage 26 
of Isacar, duyk Phaltiel, the sone of Ozan; 
of the lynage of Azer, Abyud, the sone of 27 
Salomy ; of the lynage of Neptalym, Fe- 2s 
dahel, the sone of Amyud. These men it 29 
ben, to whiche the Lord comaundide, that 
thei schulden departe to the sones of Is- 
rael the lond of Chanaan. 


CAP. XXXV. 


And the Lord spak these thingis to1 
Moises, in the feeldi places of Moab, aboue 
Jordan, a3jens Jericho, Comaunde thou toe 
the sones of Israel, that thei 3yue to de- 
kenes’ of her possessiouns, citees tos 
dwelle’t, and the suhurbabis of tho bi 
cumpas, that thei dwelle in ‘the citees *, 
and the suburbabis be to beestisY, and 
‘werk beestis?; whiche* suburbabis» schu-4 
len be strecechid forth fro the wallis of 
citees® with outforth ‘bi cumpas‘, in the 
space of a thousynde paacis*; ajens thes 
eestf schulen be two thousynde cubitis, 
and a3ens the south in lijk manere schulen 
be two thousynde cubitis%, and at the see 
that biholdith to the west schal be the 
same mesure, and the north coost sclial be 
endid bi euene terme®. And the citees 
schulen be in the myddis', and the subur- 


f Om. £. 


1 mennus names Is. 
sone ces. 8 the sone 1s. 
townes 1s. Y her feeld beestis 1s. 
citees BINs pr.m. 4 aboute 1. 
thu termes s marg. 


t the sone 1s. 


™ the preest 1s. ® Om. 4. © Om. BG. 
u the sone Is. 
2 to her hous beestis 1s. 


€ paas 1. spaacis s. f eest coost s. 


athe sone cErLMPRs. * the 
w dwelle ynne 1s. * wallid 

b Om. c. ¢ the 
h ijk termeis. | of 


P Om. B. 
v the dekenes 18. 
a the whiche 1. 
& Om. plures. 


3N2 


t cilecs to 
dwelle, he seith 
not to be lord, 
ether to res~ 
seyue rentis 
there, for the 
citees in whiche 
the dekenes 
dwelliden, weren 
so the kyngis, 
ether of othere 
lordis; wherfor 
and Ebron was 
oon of tho ci- 
tees, as it isha 
in xx. e°. of 
Josue; and ne 
theles Caleph 
was lord therof 
for it was jouwun 
to him in to 
possession, as 
it is had ia xv. 
c°. of Joane. 
Lire here. c. 


460 


townes also to the Leuytes 3e shulen 3yue, 
six shal be seuerd into the helpes of fu- 
gityues, that he that shedith blood, flee3 
to hem; and out taken hem, othir two 
yand fourti wallid townes, that ben to 
gidre ei3t and fourti, with her suburbis. 
sAnd thilk® citees that shulen be 3euen, 
of the possessiouns of the sones of Yrael, 
of hem that more han, mo shulen be take 
awey, and that lasse, fewer; eche aftir 
the mesure of her herytage, shulen 3yue 
9 wallid townes to the Leuytes. The Lord 
1oseith to Moyses, Spek to the sones of 
Yrael, and thow shalt seye to hem, 
Whanne 3e goon ouer Jordan, into the 
t1loond of Chanaan, biholdith what citees 
owen to be into the helpis of fugityues, 
12that not wilnyng! sheeden* blood. In 
the whiche whanne the forth fleer flee3- 
ith, the cosyn of the slayn man shal not 
mowe slee hym, to the tyme tliat he 
stoond in the si3t of the multitude, and 
i3the cause of hym be demed. Of thilk! 
forsothe citees that ben seuerd to the 
uhelpis of the fugityues, thre shulen be 
be3onde Jordan, and three in the loond 
150f Chanaan; as wel to the sones of Yrael 
as to comlyngis and pilgrimes; that he 
flee3 to hem, ‘the which™ not wilnynge® 
ieshedith blood. If eny man smytith a 
man with yren, and were deed, he that 
is smyter® shal be gilti of mannus slau3- 
iyter, and he shal dye. If a stoon he 
throwe, and with the cast sleeth, lijk 
igmaner he shal be punishid. If with a 
tree smyten he dye?P, in blood of the 
iysmyter he shal be vengid. The ny3 
kynne of the slayn the man sleer shal 
slee; anoon as he catchith hym, le shal 
20slee. If bi haat eny man a man a3en put- 
tith, other throwith eny thing into hym 


NUMBERS. 


XXXV. 7—20. 


babis with outforth. Forsothe* of tho!s 
citees whiche 3e schulen 3yue to dekenes, 
sixe schulen be departid in to helpis™ of 
fugityues", ‘ether of fleynge men, that? 
he that schedde blood, fle to tho4; and 
outakun' these sixe’, 3¢ schulen 3yue to 
dekenes' othere two and fourti citees, that 7 
is, togidere" ei3te and fourti, with her sur- 
burbabis. And tho citees that schulen bes 
3ouun of the possessiouns” of sones” of Is- 
rael, schulen* be takun awey, moY fro hem 
that han more’, and fewere ‘schulen be 
takun awey* fro hem that han lesse®, alle* 
bi hem silf schulen 3yue bi the’ mesure of 
her® eritage, citees to dekenesf. The Lordo 
seide to Moises, Spek thou to the sones 10 
of Israel, and thou schalt seie to hem, 
Whanne 3e han passid Jordan, in the lond 
of Canaan, deme 3e whiche citees owen to 11 
be in to the helpis of fugityues%, whiche 
not wilfuli han" schedi blood. In whiche* tz 
whanne the fleere hath fled, the kynesman 
of hym that is slayn, schal not mow sle 
hym, til! he™ stonde in the" si3t of the 
multitude, and the cause of hym be demed. 
Forsothe® of tho citees that ben departid 13 
to? the helpis of fugityues4, thre schulen 14 
be ouer? Jordan, and thre in the lond of 
Canaan ; as wel to the sones of Israel asis 
to comelyngis and pilgryms; that he fle 
to tho citees, that schedde blood not wil- 
fuli. If ony man smytith a man withie 
yrun, and he that is smytun is deed, ‘the 
snyters schal be gilti of mansleyng, and 
he schal die. If he castith a stoon, and 17 
a man is deed bi the strookt, he" schal 
be punyschid in lijk maner. If a manis 
smytun with a staf dieth, he schal be 
vengid bi ‘the blood’ of the smytere. Theis 
ni3 kynesman of lyin that is slayn schal 
sle the mansleere”; anoon as he takith 


Ethooc. this. iwilnnedec. willynge v. *shedethe. ‘!thooc. ™the whichith 4. that c. 
2 willende c. willynge p. ©% smetun x. P Om. cz. 

k Sothly 1s. Ither. ™thehelpisis. 4 fleyngemenis. © Om.is. P On. B. 4 tho citees 1s. 
rwithoute 1. ‘Ssixe citeess. them i. the dekenes s. u al togidere 1s. Y possessioun s. W the 
sones BCISWX pr.m. M sec.m. * mo citees schulen is. YOm.1ts. 7 of possessioun s marg. 2 citees 8. 
2Om.1. >} lesse of possessioun s. © alle the sonus of Israel 1s. 1Om.u. ¢Om. xx. £ the dekenes 1s. 
& fleynge men is. Shan not i. isched out is. k whiche citeesis. 1tilthat 1s. ™ he that takith 
griths. "Om.1s. © Sothly is. Pintos. Gfleynge men is. ‘bigjondets. Sher. + strook therof s. 
“the casters. Ydeth 1s. W bi dome of the lawe s marg. 


XXXV. 21——34. 


21 bi aspies, other" whanne he were enemye 
with hoond smytith, and he were deed, 
the smyter shal be gilti of manslau3ter. 
Anoon the cosyn of the slayn, whanne 
he fyndith hym, shal kyt his throot. 

22 And if bi hap, and with outen haat and 

33 enemytees, eny thing of these doth ; and 
that herynge the puple were pryuyd, and 
bitwix® the smyter and the ny3 of the 

25 blood the questyoun were meuyd, the in- 
nocent shal be delyuerd fro the hoond of 
the vengesour, and he shal be brou3t ajen 
bi sentence into the cytee, to the which 
he flee3, and he shal dwelle there, to the 
tyme that the greet preest that with hooli 

26oyle is anoynt, dye. If the sleer out of 
the coostis of the cytees that to outlawis 

27 ben ordeynd, were foundun, and smytun 
of hym that is vengesour of the blood, 
withouten gilt shal he be that slewe 

2shym ; the forth fleer forsothe shulde vnto 
the deeth of the bisshop in this citee 
dwelle stil; aftirward forsothe that he 
dye, the mansleer shal turne a3en int his 

29loond. Thes thingis euerlastynge shulen 
be, and lawful in alle 3oure dwellyngis. 

30 A mansleer vndur witnesse", shal be pu- 
nishid; at the witnessynge of oon no 

3iman shal be condempnyd. 3e shulen not 
take prijs-of hym that is gilti of blood’, 

szanoon and he shal dye. Outlawis, and 
ferre fleejers, before the deeth of the 
bisshop no wise into her citees mowen 
33turne ajen, lest 3e poluten the loond of 
3oure dwellynge, the which is defoulid bi 
the blood of the innocentis, ne other 
wayes” may be purgyd, but bi his blood, 
34that that* others blood shedde. And so 
shal be clensid 3oure possessioun, me 
dwellynge with 30u; forsothe Y am the 


NUMBERS. 


461 


hym*, ‘that is, the manquellere’, he schal 
sle hym. If bi haterede a man hurtlith?,20 
‘ethir schoufith*, ‘a man’, ethir castith ony 
thing in to hym bi aspiyngis‘’, ether 21 
whanne he was enemy*, smoot® with‘ 
hond, and he is deed, the smytere schal 
be gilti of mansleyng. The® kynesman 
‘of him} that is slayn, anoon as he findith 
hin, ‘that is, the sleere*, schal sle hym. 
That if bi sudeyn caas, and without 22 
hatrede and! enemytees, he™ doith ony 23 
thing of these; and this is" preued in 
heryng® ‘of the puple?, and the questioun 
of4 blood' is discussid bitwixe the smytere 
and the kynesman’, the innocent! schal he 2s 
delyuered fro the hond of the" vengere, and 
bi sentence of zugis’ he schal be led a3en 
in to the citee, to which” he fledde, and 
he schal dwelle there, til the grete* preest 
die, which’ is anoyntid with oile. If the2e 
sleere? is foundun with ont the coostis* 
‘of the citees® that ben asigned to exilid 
men, and is* slayn of him that is vengere, 27 
he that sleeth him, ‘that zs, the exilid man®, 
schal be with out gilt; for the® exilid man 2s 
ou3te sittef in the citee ‘til to® the ‘deth 
of the bischop®; forsothe’ aftir that thilke 
bischop is deed, the mansleere schal turne 
ajen in to his lond. These schulen bees 
euerlastynge and lawful thingis in alle 
3oure dwellyngis. A mansleere schal be 20 
punyschid vndur witnessis; no man schal 
‘be dampned* at the witnessyng of o man. 
3e schulen not take prijs of him which! iss: 
gilti of blood™, anoon and he schal die. 
Men exilid, and fugityues", schulen not32 
mow turne ajen in ony maner in to her 
citees, bifore the deeth of the® bischop, 
lest 3e defoulen the lond of 3oure abita-33 
cioun?, which is defoulid bi. the blood" of 


Forc. 8 betwec. bytwene zru. tintoce. “witnessisce. the blood Fr pr.m. W wei c. 
x the c. 

x the man sleer1s. Y Om. Is. zhirtithi, ®Om.1. >another1s. ¢ aspiyngis disceyuably s. 
denemy fohims. c¢smytes. fhymwithhisrs. & Hists. 4 Om.is. !thesleer1s. * Om. cis. 


land withoutes. ™amanis. ™ Om. 4. 
thes. ¥ blood or of deeth 1. blood or deeth s. 
that slow not wilfully that man s. “Om. plures. 


© the pesible heryng 1. the peple heryng s. 
8 kynesman of him that is slayn s. 
Vihe wugisis. W the which 1. * grettiste 1s. Y that 1s. 


POm.1s. of 
' giltlees 1. innocent 


2 man sleere 1s. 4 citee coostis1s. bOm.1s. ¢heisis. 4Om.1. that is foundun withoute the coostis s. 


Canis. f to sitte or abide 1s. 
k dampne another to deeth s. 
qint. 


1 that ts. 
’ blood sheed utr. blood shedinge s. 


& vnto 1s. to 0 sec. m. 
™m blood or deth s. 


h bishopis deth 1. bishop deth s. 
a fleynge is, ° Om, g. 


} Sothely 1s. 
P dwellyng ts. 


462 


Lord, that dwelle among the sones of 
Israel. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Camen ny3 forsothe and the prynces 
of the meynees of Galaad, theY sone of 
Machir, the* sone of Manasse, of the 
lynage of the sones of Joseph, and speken 
to Moyses before the princes of Yrael, 

zand seyden, To thee* oure lord comaund- 
ide the Lord, that the loond bi lot thow 
shuldist dyuyde to the sones of Yrael, 
and that to the dou3tres’ of Salphaad, 
oure brother, thow shuldest 3yue posses- 

3sioun duwe to the fader. The whiche if 
men of another lynage taken to wyues, 
shulen folwe her possessioun, and trans- 
latid to another lynage, of oure herytage 
ashal be lassid; aud so shal be doo, that 
whanne the iubyle, that is the fiftithe 
jeer of remyssioun, come, be confoundid 
the delynge of lottis, and other mennus 

5 possessioun passe to othir. And Moyses 
answerde to the sones of Yrael, and, the 
Lord comnaundynge, seith, Ry3t the lynage 

sof the sones of Joseph hath spoken, and 
this lawe vpon the dou3tren® of Salphaad 
of the Lord is opynly shewid; wedden 
thei to whom thei wolen, oonly to the 

7men of her lynage ; lest the possessyouns® 
of the sones of Yrael be mengid fro lyn- 
age into lynage. Forsothe alle men shu- 
len take wyues of her lynage, and of her 
8kynrede, and alle wymmen housboondes 
of the same lynage take thei, that the 
gherytage dwelle in the meynees, ne to 
10hemsilf be mengid the lynagis, but so 
dwelle thei, as of the Lord thei ben se- 


yOm.c. 2 Om. pepe sec.m. Fu. 2 Om. A. 
8 giltlees 1. tOm.1. 4 blood shedinge s. 
sioun is. @heris. bOm.1. © sue hem 18. 


that thet came of s. © dwelle sélle s. 
Sdwelle theiis. 'tthei rs. 


NUMBERS. 


b dongtren BDEFH. 


Ww Sothely 1s. 
4 thanne to s. 
£ men due io hems. bh men vnaduly s. ihath spoken 1s. * schewid 1s. 
P the meynees ¢heroff 1s. 


XXXVagg—=xXXVie 


innocent’ men; and it may not be clensid 
in other maner, no* but bi the blood" of 
hym, that schedde the blood of anothir 
man. And so 3oure possessioun schal be 34 
clensid, for Y schal dwelle with 30u; for 
Yam the Lord, that dwelle among the 
sones of Israel. 


CAP, XXXVI. 


Forsothe” and the princes of the meynees 1 
of Galaad sone* of Machir, sone of Ma- 
nasses, of the generacioun of the sones of 
Joseph, neiz3iden, and spaken to Moises 
bifor the princes of Israel, and seiden, The2 
Lord comaundide to thee oure lord, that 
thou schuldist departe the lond bi lot to 
the sones of Israel, and that thou schuldist 
3yueY to the dou3tris of Salphaat, oure 
brothir, possessioun? due to the* fadir. 
And if men of anothir lynage schulen take 3 
to wyues these dou3tris», her possessioun 
schal sue®, and it schal be translatid to 
anothir lynage, and schal® be decreessid 
fro oure eritage ; and so it schal be doon,4 
that whanne the iubilee, that is, the fiftithe 
3eer of remyssioun, cometh, the departyng 
of lottis be schent', and that the posses- 
sioun of othere men® passe to othere men", 
Moises answeride to the sones of Israel,s 
and seide, for the Lord comaundide, The 
lynage of the sones of Joseph spak! ri3t- 
fuli, and this lawe is denounsid* of thes 
Lord on! the dou3tris of Salphaat; be 
thei weddid to whiche men thei wolen, 
oneli to the™ men of her lynage ; lest the7 
possessioun of the sones of Joseph be 
meddlid fro lynage in to lynage. For alle 
men schulen wedde wyues of her lynage 
and kynrede; and alle wymment schulen s ee Ewe 
take hosebondis of the same lynage®, that ae io 
the erytage dwelle® in meynees?, and9 douster that 
lynagis be not’ meddlid™ to hem silf, but S72Lbaus 


eritaze, schal be 


dwelle® so, as thot ben departid of the Wis eine 


of hir fadir. c. 


¢ do3tris c. ¢ possessioun cz. 


xthe sone 1s. Yleeuer. 2 the posses- 
€ soit schal 1s. £ confoundid or faile 1s. 
}vpon is. ™ Om. 1s. 4 lynage 
4 thei not 1s. * meddlid togidre 1s. 


XXXVI. 11—13. NUMBERS. 463 


uerd. And the dou3ters of Salphaad Lord. And the dou3tris of Salphaat diden, 
11diden, as to hem was comaundid. And as it was comatndid to hem. And Maala,11 
Maala, and Thersa, and Egla, and Mel- and Thersa, and Egla, and Melcha, and 
cha, and Noha, weren weddid to the Noha, weren weddid to the sones of her 
12sones of the brother of her fader, of the fadris brother, of the meynee of Ma-12 
meynee of Manasse, that was the sone naasses, that was ‘the sone of Joseph", 
of Joseph. And the® possessioun that and the possessioun that was 3ouun to 
was to hem delyuerd, abood in the lynage hem, dwellide in the lynage and meynee’ 
and the meynee of the fader of hem. of her fadir. These ben the comannde-13 
13 Thes ben the maundementis‘ and domes, mentis” and domes*, whiche the Lord 
that the Lord comaundide ‘bi the hoond comaundide, bi the hond of Moyses, to 
of Moyses, to the sones of Yrael, in the the sones of Israel, in the feeldi places of 
wijlde feeldis of Moab, vpon Jordan, Moab, aboue Jordan, a3ens Jericho. 

a3ens Jericho. ; 


Here endith the book of Numeri and Here eendith the book of Numery, and 
nowe bygynneth the book of Deutronomyt. bigynneth the book of Deutronomy?. — 


*tothe azcprn. fcomaundementis 4. & Here endith N. and here bigynneth Deutronomy pv. Here 
endith N. and biginneth Deutronomy r. Here eendith the bok of N. F. 


u Josepus sone 1. Vin the meynee 1s, W¥ heestis ts. * the domes1s. Y From gor. Here endith N. 
and here bigynneth Deutronomij crew. Heere endith N. and bigynneth a Prolog on Deutronomy G. Heere 
endith N. and bigynnith Deutronomye 1. Heere endeth the book of Noumbre and the lawe, se now Deutro- 
nomy K. Here endith the book of N. and here bigynneth the prologe on Deutronomye mn. Here endith 


N. and bigynneth the book of Deutronomy ox. Here eendith N. and Deutronomij sueth s. No final rubric 
in AELPQT. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[Prologue on the book of Deuteronomy. | 


In this book of Deutronomye ben contened the wordis whiche Moises spak to al 
Israel, in the wildernesse ouer Jordan, and declaride to hem the lawe; and schewide 
to hem, what goodis scholden bifalle to hem, if thei kepten the lawe, and also what 
yuels scholden bifalle to hem, if thei forsoken the lawe, and wurschipiden alien goddis, 
and the blessingis with whiche thei scholden be blessid, that kepten the lawe, and also 
alle the cursis bi whiche thei scholden be cursid, that breken the lawe. He delyuerede 
also Josue, the sone of Non, to hem, to be her leder, as he hadde be, and to departe to 
hem the lond of Canaan, and to counseile the Lord for hem, by Eleasar, prest. And 
Moises blesside the peple, and wente in to the hil of Nebo, in to the cop of Phasga, 
and the Lord schewide to him the lond, which he hadde bihote to Abraham, Ysaac, 
and Jacob, her fadris; but Moises passide not Jordan, for he hadde wraththid the 
Lord in desert, and Moises diede there in the hil, and the Lord biriede him, and 
no man knew3 his sepulcre*. 


o 


Here [begynneth] the bok of Deutro- 


nomie*. 


Here bigynneth Deutronomy?. 


CAP. 1. 


1 THEs ben the wordis that Moises spak 
to al Yrael, bizonde Jordan, in the wijld 
feeldi wildernes, a3ens the reed see, by- 
twix® Pharan and Tophel and Laban 
and Asseroth, where is mych thing of 

2gold, bi enleuen days fro Oreb bi the 
wey of the hil of Seyr, ynto Cades Barne. 

3The fourteenthe 3eer, the enlenenth?» 
moneth, the first day of the moneth, 
Moyses spak to the sones of Yrael alle 
thingis that the Lord hadde comaundid 
4to hym that he shulde seye to hem, after 
that he smoot Seon, the kyng of Amor- 
reis, that dwellid® in Esebon, and Og, the 
kyng of Basan, that dwellid in Asseroth 


Deutronomii pz. 
bb enleueth 4. ¢ dwllid a. 


a From F. 
betwe c. 


a This Prologue is from m. 


No initial rubric in acpeu but only running title. 


b From Le. Deutronomit £. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


CAP. I. 


THESE ben the wordis whiche® Moysesi 
spak to al Israel ouer’ Jordan, in the wil- 
dirnesse® of the feeld, ajens the reed see, 
bitwix Pharan and Tophel and Laban 
and Asseroth, where is ful myche gold, 
by enleuene daies‘ fro Oreb bi the weie of 
the hil of Seir, til to Cades Barne. In thes 
fortithe jeer, in the enleuenth monethe, in 
the firste dai of the monethe, Moises spak 
to the sones of Israel alle thingis whiche 
the Lord commandide to hym that he 
schulde seie to hem, after that he smoot® 4 
Seon, kyng® of Ammorreis, that dwellide 
in Esebon, and Og, the kyng of Basan, 
that dwelide in Asseroth and in Edray, 


b bytweue BDEFH. 


¢ that 1. 


4 bigonde 18. ¢€ deseert 1s. f daies iurney 1s. & had smyte t. or killid 1 marg. or killid s. } the kyng Is. 


I, 5—18. 


sand in Edray, bijonde Jordan, in the 
loond of Moab. And Moyses biganne to 
6opne the lawe, and seie, The Lord oure 
God hath spoke to vs in Oreb, seiynge, 
It suffisith to 30w that in this hil 3e han 
7dwelt; turneth ajen, and cometh to the 
hil of Amorreis, and to other that there 
ben next, feeldi, and hilli, and the more 
lower places ajens the south; and to the 
loond biside the brenk of the see of Cha- 
nanees, and of Libany, vito the greet 
8flood of Eufraten. Loo! he seith, I haue 
take it to 30w; goo 3e yn, and weelde 3e 
it, vpon the which the Lord hath sworn 
to joure fadres Abraham, Ysaac, and Ja- 
cob, that he 3yue it to hem, and to the 
9seed of hem after hem. And I haue seid 
10 to 30w in that tyme, I may not aloone 
susteyne 30w, for the Lord 3oure God 
hath multiplied 3ow, and 3e ben many as 
lithe sterres of heuene; the Lord God of 
oure® fadris adde to this noumbre many 
thowsandis, and blesse to 30w, as he hath 
izspokun. Y may not alone 3oure nedis 
13 susteyn, and birthens*, and stryues; 3yue 
3e of 30w wyse men, and herti, and“ 
whos conuersacioun be preued in 3oure 
lynagis, that I putte hem to 30w princes. 
14 Than 3e answerden to me, A good thing 
Wit is that thou wolt doon. And I took of 
joure lynagis wise men, and noble; and 
I haue ordeynd hem princes, and tri- 
bunes, and centuriouns, and quynquage- 
naryes, and denes, that techen 3ow alle 
16thingis. And I haue comaundide to hem, 
seiynge, Here 3e hem, and that is ri3t- 
wize demeth, whether he be cyteseyn, or 
17 pilgrime. Noon shal be distaunce of per- 
sones ; so the litil 3e shulen here as the 
more, ne 3e shulen accept eny mannus 
persone, for the dome of God it is. And 
if eny thing hard to 30ow were seen, 
\8tellith to me, and I shal here. And I 


DEUTERONOMY. 


465 


ouer! Jordan, in the lond of Moab. Ands 
Moyses bigan to declare* the lawe, and to 
seie, Oure Lord God spak to vs in Oreb,6 
and seide, It suffisith to 3ou that 3e han 
dwellid in this hil; turne 3e ajen, and7 
come 3e to the hil of Amorreis, and to 
othere placis that ben next it!; to™ 
places" of feeldis, and of hillis, and to 
lowere places ajens the south, and bisidis 
the brenke of the see, to the lond of Ca- 
naneys, and of Liban, ‘til to the greet 
flood® Eufrates. Lo, ‘he seith?, Y haue 3oue8 
to 30u4; entre 3e, and‘welde 3e" ‘that /ond’ 
ont which the Lord swoor to 3oure fadrys, 
Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob, that he schulde 
3yue it" to hem, and to her seed after hem. 
And Y seide to 30u in that time, Y may {, 
not aloone susteyne’ 3ou, for 3oure Lord 
God hath multiplied jou, and 3e ben ful 
many to dai, as the sterris of henene ; thei 
Lord God of 3oure fadris adde” to this 
noumbre many thousyndis, and blesse* 3ou, 
as he spak**, Y may not aloone susteyneY 12 
3oure causis, and birthun’, and stryues ; 
3yue 3e of jou men wise ‘7x dyuyn thingis*, 13 
and witti ‘22 mennus thingis worthi to be 
don’, whose conuersacioun is preued in 
3oure lynagis, that Y sette hei princes to 
jou. Thanne 3e answeriden to me, Theis 
thing is good which® thou wolt do. And15 
Y took of? 30nre lynagis men wise® and 
noble‘, ‘ix vertues and kyn®; and Y or- 
deynede hem? princis, tribunes', and cen- 
turyouns,and* quynquagenaries, and denys, 
whiche schulden teche jou all thingis. 
And Y comaundide to hem, and seide, 16 
Here 3e hem!, and deme 3e that that is 
iust, whether he™ be a citeseyn, whether" 
a pilgrym. No difference schal be® of per-17 
soues; 3e schulen here so a litil man, ‘thaé 
78, pore?, as a greet man, nether 3e schu- 
len take’ the persoone of ony man, for it 
is the doom of God. That" if’ ony thing 


©3ourc. ‘birthen scperu. Om. acpe. 

ibigonde 1s. * openets. Jtoitis. Mandtor., % the placest. ©vntos. P seith the Lords. 
4 30u that lond 1. this londs, __* haue it in possessioun 1. welde 3e its. §Om.1s. tvpons. ¥ that 
lond 1s. _¥ susteyne or gouernes. Wadde hes. *blesse hers. ** hath seid 1s, Y susteyne or bere s. 
2 3oure chargis 1. 3oure birthens s. @in dyuininges ELP. Om. tosw. > Om. imosw. ¢thatis. ins. 
€ wise in vertues s. f noble in dyn 8. in vertues 1 marg. € Om.1s.  ) hem fo be 30ures. 1 30ure tri- 
buness, kOm.1. 1 the pupleis. ™he that3edemes. ort. Sbeindomes. POm.1. 4 take 
hede tos. * That that 3e deme s, 9 i? thar s 


30 


t+ that is, he 
bihi3t stide- 
‘asili 18. 


466 


comaundide alle thingis that 3e shulden 
i9doo. And goon forth fro Oreb, we pass- 
iden bi feerful deseert and moost wilder- 
nes, that 3e han seen, bi the weye of the 
hil of Amorrei, as the Lord 3oure God 
hath comaundide to 30ow. And whanne 
203e weren comen into Cades Barne, Y 
seide to 30w, 3e ben comen to the hil of 
Amorrei, that the Lord oure God is to 
21 3yuyngef to vs; looke the loond that the 
Lord thi God shal 3yue to thee; and sty 
vp, and weelde it, as the Lord oure God 
hath spoken to thi fadris; nyl thow 
22drede, ne eny thing be agast. And 3e 
comen to me alle, and seiden, Sende we 
men, that biholden the loond, and tellen 
to vs bi what weie we slulden stye vp, 
23and to what cytees goon. And whanne 
to me the word pleside, Y sente of 30w 
2atwelue men, eche by® her lynagis. The 
whiche whanne thei weren goon, and 
hadden stied vp into the hillis, thei camen 
into the valeye of Clustre ; and the loond 
25 biholdid®*, takynge of the fruytis of it, 
that thei my3ten shewe the plenteuouste, 
thei brou3ten to vs, and seiden, Good is 
the loond that the Lord oure God is to 
263yuynge" to vs. And 3e wolden not stye 
vp, but mysbileuynge to the word of the 
27 Lord oure God, 3e grutchiden in joure 
tabernaclis, and seiden, The Lord hatith 
vs, and therfore he hath ladde vs out of 
the loond of Egipte, that he take vs in 
the hoond of Amorrei, and doo awey. 
28 Whether shulen we stie vp ? the messan- 
geris han feerde oure hertis', seiynge, The 
moost multitude is, and‘ in stature more 
shapplych than we; greet citees, and in 
to heuene wallid; the sones of Enachym 
29we han seen there. And I seide to 30w, 
30 Wole 3e not be feryde, ne drede 3e; the 


f3ine cc. & of BCDEFII. 

t3e that 1s. ¥ here it 1s. 
2 feereful ts. 8 bi the grettiste 1s. 
f thou, Israel 1s. & that 1s. h the 1s. 
™ Om. ts. ™ thin herte ts. ° be thou ony Is. 
8 Om.s. t owen to BC prim. IKS. 
*stied vps. Yvntots. 7? plentee of ié 1s. 
4 wolden not weende vp 1. nolden stie up thider s. 
i weende vp 1. stie vp s. k han maad 1s. 
© lengre Is. P ynto 1s, to 0 sec. m. 


b that 1s. 


4 Om. plures. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


4 


fg behelden pz. 


¥ and answere to jou and 1s. 
¢ han sien Is. 

i go thou vp 1. stie thon vp. 

P thing agast 1s. 4 heringe this s marg. 
u wende vp I. stie vp thider s. 
a thei broujten tho fruytees 1s. 


I the s. 


I. 19-30. 


semeth hard to 3ou, telle 3et to me, and 
Y schal here". And’ Y comaundide™ alle 1s 
thingis whiche 3e ou3ten to do. Forsothe* i9 
weY 3eden forth fro Oreb, and passiden bi 
a feerdful’ deseert, and grettiste* wildir- 
nesse, which? 3e sien®, bi the weye of the 
hil of Ammorrey4, as oure Lord God®* co- 
maundide to vs. And whanne we hadden 
come in to Cades Barne, Y seide to jou, 20 
3e ben comen to the hil of Ammorrey, 
which 3oure Lord God schal 3yue to 30u; 
se thou’ the lond which’ thi Lord Goda 
schal 3yue to thee; ‘stie thou, and welde 
it, as oure Lord God spak to thi fadris ; 
nyle thou drede!, nether ‘drede thou™ in 
herte" ony° thing?. And alle 3e4 neiziden 22 
to me, and 3e seiden, Sende we men, that 
schulen biholde the lond, and telle™ to’ vs 
bi what weye we owen!’ stie", and to 
whiche citees we owen to go. And23 
whanne the word’ pleside to met, Y sente 
of 3ou twelue men, of ech lynage oon. 
And whanne thei hadden go’, and hadden 24 
stied* in to the hilli places, thei camen ‘til 
toY the valet of Clustre; and whanne thei 
hadden biholde the lond, thei token of the e5 
fruytis therof, to schewe the plentee”, and 
brou3ten* ‘to vs’, and seiden, The lond is 
good which* oure Lord God schal 3yue to 
vs. And 3e ‘nolden stie’, but 3e weren 26 
vnbileueful to the word of oure Lord God. 
And 3e grutchiden in joure tabernaclis, 27 
and 3e seiden, The Lord hatith vs, and 
herfor he ledde vs out of the lond of E- 
gipt, that he schulde bitake vs in® the 
hond of Ammorey, and schuldef do awei 
vss, Whidur® schulen we stie!? the mes- 28 
sangeris maden* aferd oure herte, and 
seiden, A! grettiste™ multitude" is, and 
largere® in stature than we; the citees 
ben greete, and wallid ‘til to? the’ heuene; 


hsiuec. iherte ce. k Om, a. 
W comaundide éo jon s. * Sothely 1s. Y 3e1. 
4d Ammorrey we passiden 8. © Om. 1. 
' drede thou not 1. 
t schul telle 1s. 
VY word of 30% s. © gon forth 1. 
bOm.1. © that 1s. 
& Om. pleres. 4 so whidur 1. 
a multitude of puple ther 1s. 


eintos. fOm.1. 
m ful greet 1. 


I. 31-41. 


Lord God, that is oure ledere, for vs he 
shal fizte, as he hath doo in Egipte, alle 
31men seynge. And in wildernes, 3e han 
seen, the Lord thi God hath born thee, 
as aman is wonyd to bere a litil child, 
his sone, in alle weie bi the which 3e han 
goo, to the tyme that 3e comen to this 
32place. And 3it not thus forsothe 3e 
33leeueden to the Lord 3oure God, that 
wente before 3ou in the weie, and hath 
set the place in the! whiche 3e shulden 
picche tentis, the ny3t shewynge the 
weie to 30w bi fier, and the dai bi piler™ 
240f a clowde. And whanne the Lord 
hadde herde the voyce of 3oure wordis, 
35 wrooth he swore, and seith, There shal 
not se eny man of the men of this worst 
generacioun the good loond, that vndur 
360oth Y haue bihoot to 3oure fadris, sane 
Caleph, the sone of Jephone; he forsothe 
shal se it, and to hym I shal 3yue the 
loond that he hath troden, and to his 
37sones, for he hath folwid the Lord. Ne 
the indignacioun a3en the puple is to be 
meruelid, sith to me forsothe the Lord 
wrooth for 30w, seide, Ne thow shalt go 
38in thidir, but Josue, the sone of Nun, thi 
seruaunt, he shal goo yn" for thee; this 
eufourme thow, and strengthe, that he 
39the loond bi lot dyuyde to Yrael. 3oure 
litil children, of the® whiche 3e han seid, 
that? cheytif thei shulen be lad, and the 
sones that to day of good and yuel vn- 
known the distaunce, thei shulen goon 
yn; and to hem Y shal 3yne the loond, 
4oand thei shulen weeld it. 3e forsothe 
turneth a3en, and goth thens into wilder- 
4ines, bi the weie of the Reed See. And 
3e answerden to me, We han synned to 
the Lord ; we shulen stie vp, and fi3ten, 
as the Lord oure God hath comaundid. 


1Om.c. ™ the piler ce. 


T sien thei seidens. * haue 3e no 1. 
3e agast 1s. drede 3e without forth x sec. m. 
Lord. ®Om.1s. » Israel bar s. 
3oure tentis s. & he schewide 1s. 
» wordis, misbileuynge to him and grucchinge s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


n yn thidir 4. 


t herof haue drede s. 
* that 1s. 
© so God doinge to 30u s. 
hthe ny3tas. i 


467 


we sien’ there the sones of Enachym, that 
is, giauntis. And Y seide to 30u, ‘Nyle29 
3e° dredet ‘with ynne", nether’ ‘drede with- 
outforth” ; the Lord God hym silf, which* 30 
is 3oure ledere, schal fi3te for 30u, as he 
dide in Egipt, while alle men sien. Anda 
3eY sien? in the* wildirnesse, thi Lord God 
bar> thee, as a man is wont to bere his 
litil sone, in al the weie bi which 3e 3eden 
til 3e camen to this place. And sothelis2 
nether so° 3e bileueden to 3oure Lord God, 
that 3ede bifor 3ou in the weie, and me-33 
suride the place in which 3e4 ou3ten to® 
sette tentis‘, and schewide® in ny3t? the! 
weie to 30u bi fier, and in dai‘ bi a! piler 
of cloude™. And whanne the Lord hadde3s 
herd the vois of 3oure wordis", he was 
wrooth, and swoor®, and seide, Noon of3s 
the men of this werste generacioun schal 
se the good lond, which? Y bihi3te vndur 
an? ooth to 3oure fadris, outakun Caleph f, 36 + ouwakun Co- 
the sone of Jephone; for" he schal se it, nomen 
and Y schal 3yue to hym the lond ons #n4 Lents 
which he trad‘, and to hise sones, for he aie ae 
suede the Lord. Nether che indignacioun® 37 
a3ens the puple is wondirful’, sithen the 
Lord was wrooth also to me for 3ou, and 
seide, Nether thou schalt entre thidur, but 38 
Josue, the sone of Nun, thi mynystre, 
he schal entre* for thee; excyteY and 
strengthe” thou* him*, and he schal de- 
parte the lond bi lot to Israel. 3oure litle s9 
children, of whiche 3e seiden, that thei 
schulden be led prisoneris, and the sones 
that kunnen” not to dai the diuersite of 
good and of yuel, thei schulen entre®; and 
Y schal 3yue to hem the lond, and thei 
schulen welde it. Sotheli turne 3e ajen, 40 
and go 3e in to the’ wildirnesse, bi the 
weie of the Reed See. And 3e answeriden 41 
to me, We synneden® to the Lord; we 


°QOm.c. P Om. a. 


VYner. W be 


u Om. 1. with ynne 3o0u s. 
z sien the same goodnesse of the 


¥ 3e also 1. 


dthei ca. ©¢Om.sc.  £ the tentis 1. 
iOm.s. Kthedairs. '!theis. ™ a clowde ts. 
©he swoor1s. Pthatis. 4Om.1s. ° forsothe 1s. 


Svpon 1s. thath troden rs. ™ Lordis indignacioun 1s. to be merueilid 1s. W seruaunt 1s. * entre 
into that lond s. y enforme thou Josue 1s. in my drede 8 marg. Zin my lowe 8 marg. a Om. 1. 
28Om.s. > knowen 1s. ¢ entre thidre 1. entre into that lond s, 4 Om. plures. © han symed 18. 


302 


468 
And whanne 3e, tau3t in armes, wolden 
42g00 into the hil, the Lord seith to me, 
Sey thou to hem, Wole 3e not stie vp, ne 
fiz3te; forsothe Y am not with jow, lest 
433e fallen before 30ure enemyes, I spak, 
and 3e herden not, but contrariynge to 
the heest of the Lord, and bolnynge bi 
44 pride, 3e stieden vp into the hil. And so 
Amorre gon out, that dwelt in the hillis, 
and aj3en comynge pursnede vs, as been 
ben? wont to be pursued, and slewen 
45doun fro Seyr ynto Horma. And whanne 
turned ajen 3e wepten before the Lord, 
he herde 3o0w not, ne to 30ur voys wolde 
4cassent ; 3e seeten therfor in Cades Barne 
myche tyme. 


CAP. II. 


1 And goon forth thens, we commen into 
wildernes that ledith to the Reed See, as 
the Lord seide to me; and we enuy- 

2rounden the hil of Seyr long tyme. And 

sthe Lord seide to me, Suffice it to 30w 
to goon about this hil; goo 3e ajens the 
4north. 
ynge, 3e shulen passe bi the coostis of 
joure britheren, the sones of Esau, that 
dwellen in Seyr, and thei shulen drede 
530w. Se 3e therfor bisilych, that 3e ben 
not meued a3ens hem; ne forsothe I shal 
3eue to 30w of the loond of hem as 
myche as the stap of a foot may treede, 
for into the possessioun of Esau Y haue 
63yue the hil of Seyr. 
bigge" of hem for money, and eten; wa- 
ter bou3t 3e shulen drawe, and drynke. 
7The Lord thi God hath blessid to thee 
in al the werk of thin hoondes; he hath 
knowun thi weie, what maner wise thow 
hast passid this greet wildernes, bi fourti 


DEUTERONOMY. 


And to the puple comaund, sei- ° 


Meetis 3e shulen 


I. 42—II. 7. 


schulen stie‘, and we schulen fi3te, as oure® 

Lord God comaundide. And whanne 3e! 

weren arayed with armeris, and 3eden 

‘into* the hil, the Lord seide to me, Seie 42 

thou to hem, ‘Nyle 3e stye!, nether fi3te 3e, 

for Y am not with 3ou, lest 3e fallen bifor 

joure enemyes. Y spak™, and 3e herden” 43 

not; but 3e ‘weren aduersaries to the co- 
maundement of the Lord®, and bolnden? 

with prijde, and‘ stieden™ in to the hil. 

Therfor Ammorrey 3ede* out, that dwell-44 

ide in the hillis, and he cam a3ens 30, 

and pursuede 3ou, as bees ben wont to 

pursue’, and killide" fro’ Seir til” Horma*. 

And whanme 3e turnedenY a3en, and wepten 45 

bifor the Lord, he herde not 30u, nether + tu Ebreu it 
woldez asente” to 3oure vois; therfor je 46380" vd 


* - bi many daies. 
satenft im Cades Barne bi myche tyme. pee aire: 


whiche 3e saten 
in othere dwell- 
ingis. c. 


CAP. IT. 

And we® 3eden forth fro thennus, and 1 
camen in to the wildirnesse' that ledith 
to the Reed See, as the Lord seide to me; 
and we cumpassiden® the hil of Seir in 
long tyme. And the Lord seide to me,2 
It sufficith to 3ou to cumpasse? this hil; go3 
3e a3ens the north. And comaunde thou to4 
the puple, and seie®, 3e schulen passe bi 
the termes} of 3oure britheren, the sones of — ¢ 6i the termes, 
Esau, that dwellen in Seir, and thei schu-  [&t's "y3 the 
len drede 30u. Therfor se 3e diligentlif,s ’7e © 
that 3e be not moued az3ens hem; for Y 
schal not 3yue to 30u of the® land ‘of hem" 
as myche as the steppe of o foot may 
trede, for Y 3af' the hil of Seir in to the 
possessioun of Esau. 3e schulden bie of¢ 
hem metis for money, and 3e schulen* ete; 
je! schulden drawe, and drynke watir 
bou3t. Thi Lord God blesside™ thee in al7 
the werk” of thin hondis; he knewe® thi 
weye, hou thou passidist? this moste wil- 
dirnesse, bi fourti 3eer; and thi Lord God 


abeth z. ' biec. 
fwende vp1. stievps. S30urex. 4Om.x. iwec. Ktoa. lweende 3e not vp 1. nyle 3e stye 
vps. ™ this to30us marg. ‘herden mers. © contrariynge the Lordis heestis 1s. _- P bolnynge 1s. 
4QOm.1s. '3eden vp 1. stieden vps. Swentenr. them that anoie hems marg. he killide 1. Am- 
morrei killide s. ¥ 30u doun fro1s, W tilto BEGLY. vntois. * Horma pursuynge 30u 8. Y turneden 
hooms. %he wolde 1. 22 ansente a. ®3es. » deserts. ©3eden aboute 1s. 4 go aboute rs. ©& sele 
fohemis. fbisily 1s. §heris. » Om.1s. ihaue 3ouen is. * Om. 1kogrstwx. land 3e Kx. ™hath 


blesside 1s. schal blesse m, ® werkis m. 


© hath knowe 1s. 


P hast passid 1s. 


ll. 8——20. 


jeer, the Lord thi God dwellynge with 
8thee, and no thing failed to thee. And 
whanne we hadden passid bi oure bri- 
theren, the sones of Esau, that dwelliden 
in Seyr, bi the feeldi weie fro Elath, and 
fro Asiongaber, we camen to the weie 
9that ledith into deseert of Moab. And 
the Lord seide to me, F'i3t thow not a3ens 
Moabites, ne go thou in a3ens hem to 
bateyl; forsothe I shal not 3yue to thee 
eny thing of the loond of hem, for to the 
sones of Loth Y haue take Ar into pos- 
josessioun. Emyn weren the first dwellers 
of it, a greet puple, and a stroong, and 
nso hize, that of Enachym lynage as 
geauntis thei ben trowed, and weren lijk 
of the sones of Enachym; therfor Moab- 
12ites clepen hem Emyn. In Seyr forsothe 
rather dwelten Horrey, the whiche put 
out and doon awei, the sones of Esau 
dwelliden, as Yrael dide in the loond of 
his possessioun, that the Lord 3af to hym. 
is Thanne arysynge, that we mny3ten passe 
the streem of Zareth, we camen to it. 
11 Forsothe the tyme, in the which we 
wenten fro Cades Barne vnto the pass- 
ynge of the streem of Zareth, was of ei3t 
and thretti 3eer, to the tyme that al the 
congregacioun of men of batey] weren 
wastid fro, the tentis, as the Lord swore; 
is whos hoond was ajens heim, that thei 
16dien fro the niyddil of the tentis. For- 
17 sothe aftir that alle the® fizters fellen, the 
ig Lord spak to me, sciynge, Thou shalt 
passe to day the coostis of Moab, the 
19 citee, Ar bi naine; and comyuge ny3 into 
the side coostis of the sones of Amon, 
be war lest thow fizjte a3ens hem, ne be 
thou meued to batayl; forsothe Y shal 
not 3eue to thee of the loond of the sones 
of Amon, for to the sones of Loth I hauet 
203eue it into possessioun. The loond of 
geauntis it is holdun, and in it sum tyme 
dwelten geauntis, whom the Ainmonytes 


8Om. 4. 


4 the deseert is. ‘heris. %Om..1. 
W the first 1. *astrong is. Y lo be as 18. 
¢ sothely 1s. ¢QOm.1s. © Esau soness. f that 1s. 
inge men is. lher tentisis. ™hath1. . 
@ schalt not ELPX scc.m. Yinto1s. §& Om. Is. 


x haue 3ouen is. Y Loth soness. 2 holde 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


t haue 3ouen 1s. 
2 in griselynesse 8 marg. 


her tentis. Sothely 1s. 
t coostus 18. 
a dwelliden 1s. 


469 


dwellide with thee, and no thing failide to 
thee. And whanne we hadden passid bis 
oure britheren, the sones of Esau, that 
dwelliden in Seir, bi the weie of the feeld 
of Elath, and of Asiongaber, we camen to 
the weie that ledith in to deseert4 of Moab. 
And the Lord seide to me, Fi3te thoumiot 9 
a3ens Moabitis, nether bigyn thou batel 
a3ens hem, for Y schal not 3yue to thee 
ony thing of the’ lond ‘of hem’, for Y 3af' 
Ar in to possessioun to ‘the sones of 
Loth®. Emyn, ‘that is, griseful men, 10 
weren first® dwelleris therof, a greet pu- 
ple, and strong*, and so hi3, that thei weren 
bileued asY giauntis, of the generacioun of 11 
Enachym, and thei weren lijk* the sones 
of Enachym; forsothe* Moabitis> clepen 
hem Emyn. Forsothe® Horreis dwelliden 12 
bifore in Seir, and whanne thei weren put 
out, and weren‘ doon awey, ‘the sones of 
Esaue dwelliden ¢here, as Israel dide in 
the lond of his possessioun, which! the 
Lord 3af to hym. Therfor we riseden®, 13 
that we schulden passe the stronde of Za- 
red, and camen" to it. Sotheli the tyme 14 
in whiche we 3eden fro Cades Barne ‘til 
to! the passynge of the stronde of Zared, 
was of ei3te and thretti jeer, til al the 
generacioun of ‘men fi3teris* was wastid 
fro ‘the castels!, as the Lord hadde™ swore; 
whos hond was a3ens hem, that thei schul- 1s 
den perische fro the myddis of ‘the castels. 
Forsothe" after that alle the fizteris felden® 16 
doun, the Lord spak to me, and seide, 17 
Thou schalt passe to dai the termes? of 12 
Moab, the cytee, Ar bi name, and thou. 
schalt4 net3 in” the ny3§ coost' of the sones 
of Amon; be thou war that thou fiz3te not 
a3ens hem, nether" be moued’ to batel; for” 
Y schial not 3yue to thee of the lond of the 
sones of Amon, for Y 3af* it to the ‘sones 
of LothY in to possessioun. It is arettid? 20 
the lond of giauntis, and giauntis enhabit- 
iden* theryime sumtyme, whiche? giauntis¢ 


thac. 


v Om. DIORT sec. m. W. 
@ sothely is. > men of Moab 1s. 
h we camen 1s. i vntors. * fizt- 
© hadden falle 1s. PP coostus Is. 
vthou moulds.  W forsothe 1s. 
¢ Om. 1. 


u Loth sones s. 
& risen vp Is. 


Une i. 
> the whiche 1. 


470 


2iclepen Zoumym ; myche puple, and greet, 
and of feyre lengthe, as Enachym, whom 
the Lord dide awey fro the face of hem, 
ezand made hem to dwelle for hem, as he 
dide to the sones of Esau, that dwellen® 
in Seyr, doynge awey Horreis, and the 
loond of hem to hem takynge, the which 
thei weelden vnto the tyme that is nowe. 
23 Forsothe Eueos, that dwellen in Asserym 
vnto Gazam, men of Capadoce putten 
out; the whiche goon out fro Capadoce, 
diden hem awey, and dwelliden for hem. 
24 Ryse 3e, and passith the streem of Ar- 
non; loo! Y haue takun in thin hoond 
Seon, the kyng of Esebon, and’ Amor- 
reis”; and the loond of it bigynne to take 
possessioun, and doo ajens hym batayle. 
25 To day Y shal bigynne to sende drede 
and thi feerde into puplis that dwellen 
vndur al heuen, that thi name herd, thei 
dreden, and bi maner of wymmen berynge 
child thei bigynnen to tremble, and with 
26sorwe biholden. Y sente* therfore mes- 
sangeris fro the wildernes of Cademoch 
to Seon, the kyng of Esebon, bi pesible 
27 wordis, seilynge, We shulen passe bi thi 
loond, the comoun weye we shulen goo ; 
we shulen not goo aside, ne to the ry3t 
28ne to the left. Lyuelodis bi prijs sel to 
vs, that we eeten; water for money 3if, 
and so we shulen drynke. Oonlich is, 
that thow graunte to vs passyng forth, 
29as the sones of Esau diden, that dwellen 
in Seyr, and Moabitis, that dwellen in 
Ar, to the tyme that we comen to Jor- 
dan, and passe to the loond that the Lord 
30oure God is to 3yuyngeY to vs. And 
Seon, the kyng of Esebon, wolde not 
3yue to vs passynge; for the Lord, thi 
God, inwardly hardide the spirite of hym, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Il. 21-——30. 


Amonytis* clepen Zonym; a myche puple21 
and greet®, and of noble’ lengthe, as Ena- 
chym, whiche the Lord dide awey fro the& 
face of hem, and made hem to dwelle! for 22 
‘tho giauntis*, as he dide to! the sones of 
Esau, that dwellen™ in Seire, ‘and dide® 
awai°® Horreis, and 3af? to hem the? lond 
‘of Horreis', which’ ‘the sones of Esaut 
welden ‘til in to present" tyme’. Also23 
men of Capadocie puttiden out Eueys, 
that dwelliden in Asseryn, ‘til to” Gaza; 
which* 3eden out fro Capadocie, and didenY 
awey Eneis, and? dwelliden* for hem. 
Rise 3e, and ‘passe 3e" the stronde of Ar-24 
non; lo! Y haue bitake in ‘thin hond* 
Seon, king¢ of Esebon, of Amorreis; and 
his lond bigynne thou ‘to welde, and 
smyte thou batel® ajens him’. To dai Y 2s 
schal bigynne® to sende thi drede> and 
strengthe! in to puplis* that dwellen vndir 
al heuene, that whanne thi name is herd, 
thei drede, and tremble bi the maner of 
wymmen trauelynge of child, and ‘be 
holdun! with sorewe. Therfor™ Y sente 26 
messangeris fro the wildirnesse of Cade- 
moch to Seon, kyng of Esebon; and Y* 
seide® with pesible wordis, We? schulen 27 
passe thorou thi lond, we sehulen go in 
the comyn weie; we schulen not bowe 
nether to the rijt side, nether! to the left 
side. Sille thow’ metis’ ‘to vs for prijs, 28 
that we ete; 3if thow" watir for money, 
and so we schulen drynke. Oneli it is* 
that thou graunte passage to vs, as the 29 
sones of Esau diden™, that dwellen* in 
Seir, and asY Moabitis? diden*, that dwellen 
in Ar, til we comen to Jordan, and passen 
to the lond which” oure Lord God schal 
3yue to vs. And Seon, kyng* of Esebon, 30 
nolde® 3yue passage ‘to ys%; for® thi Lordi 


udwelten c. Y Om. 2. W of Amorreis cr. *sende re. Y 3iue c. 
dmen of Amonis. ¢€agreetis. ffairers. hers. » Amonylis is. + dwelle there1s. * hem 1. 
lofr. ™ dwelliden crs. ™ doynge 1s. © aweifro hemis. Ptakinge 1. he jaues. @heri. * Om.1. 
8 that 1. which hond s. t Esaussonus1. ™ vnto this 1. vnto the s. ¥ tyme that is now s.  ¥ vnto 1s. 


x the which 1. Y thei diden rs. 
¢thi poweris. 4 the king 1s. 
Esebon s. 8 seith the Lord s marg. 
holdun 1. the shulen beholden s. 
Gnes. ‘thou vss. § meter 

tous s. * dwelleden x. 
thi coostis § marg. 
Lord 1KogrtTwx. 


Z and thei 1. 


tOm. s. 
Y Om. plures. 

4 the kyng ts. 
i Om. 1KogrTwx. 


a dwelliden there 1s. 
€ and take possessioun ther ynne, and make batail 1s. 
h drede Israel s, 

m seith Moises s marg. 


> passeth 1. seith the Lord s marg. 
f the king of 
¥ the puplis rs. 1 thei ben 
9 seide to him s. YP we Israels. 


i thi feere 1s. 
n Om. s. 


uthou vs is. V that we axen of thee s marg. W diden graunte 
2 the Moabitis 1s. 
e wolde not 1. 


aOm.1. » that 1s. 


¢ We azen to passe bi 
f vs passyng I. passinge s. 


&Om.1. 4» for the 


II. 31—-IIl. 4. 


and a3en festnede the herte of hym, that 
so he were take into thin hoondis, as 
3inow thow seest. And the Lord seide to 
me, Loo! Y haue begunne to take to thee 
Seon, and the loond of hym; bigynne to 
32weelde it. And Seon goon out to mete 
with vs, with al his puple, to the batayle 
33in Jasa. And the Lord oure God took 
hym to vs, and we han smyten hym, with 
31 his sones, and al his puple. And alle the 
cytees in that tyme we token, sleyn the 
dwellers of hem,‘men, and? wymmen, and 
children; we laften not in hem eny thing, 
35out take beestys that camen into the 
part of the praye takers, and spoylis of 
36¢the citees whiche we token. Fro Aroer, 
that is vpon the brenke of the streem of 
Arnon, fro the wallid town that in the 
valeye is set, vnto Galaad, was nov street 
or cytee, that oure hoondis askapide. Alle 
37the Lord oure God took to vs; with oute 
the loond of the sones of Amon, to the* 
which we comen not ny3, and alle that 
liggen? to the streem of Jeboch, and the 
mounteyn citees, and alle the places fro 
the® whiche the Lord oure God hath de- 
fendid¢ vs. 


CAP. III. 


1 And so turned we stieden® vp bi the 
weye of Basan; and Og, the kyng of 
Basan, wente out into ajencomynge to 
2vs with his puple, to fiz3te in Edray. And 
the Lord seide to me, Ne drede thow 
hym, for in thin hoond he is taak, with 
al the puple, and his loond; and thow 
shalt doo to hym as thow didist to Seon, 
the kyng of Amorreis, that dwellid in 
3Esebon. The Lord oure God took also 
thanne in oure hoondis Og, the kyng of 
Basan, and al the puple of hym; and we 
4han smytun hym vnto the deeth, wast- 
ynge alle the cytees of hym o tyme; 
z Om. 4. 


aOm.c. line. 


k thi God, Israel s. 


© now that he iss. P haue bigunne 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


© Om. c. 


thath ynly hardid 1. hath inwardli hardide s. 


471 


God* made hard! his spirit, and made sad™ 
in yuel ‘the herte of hym", that he schulde 
be bitakun in to thin hondis, as thou seest 
now®, And the Lord seide to me, Lo, Y 3: 
biganP to4 bitake" to thee Seon, and‘ his 
lond; bigynne thou to welde it. Ands2 
Seon 3ede out a3ens vs with al his puple 
to batel in Jasa. And oure Lord God bi-33 
took hym to vs, and we han smyte hym 
with hise sones, and al his puple. And ss 
we token in that tyme alle the’ citees, 
whanne the dwelleris of tho citees, men,- 
and wymmen, and children weren slayn; 
we leften not in hem ony thing, outakun 3s 
beestis that cament in to the part of men 
takynge prey, and outakun spuylis of the 
cytees whiche we tokun. Fro Aroer,36 
which" is on’ the brenke of the stronde 
of Arnon, fro the toun which” is set in 
the valey, ‘til to* Galaad, no town was 
ether’ citee, that ascapide oure hondis. 
Oure Lord God? bitook alle to vs; outakun 37 
the lond of the sones of Amon, to which® 
lond we neiziden not, and outakun» alle 
thingis that liggen to the stronde of Je- 
both, and oufakun the citees of the mun- 
teyns, and alle places® fro whiche oure 
Lord God forbeed vs. 


CAP. III. 


And so we turneden, and stieden® bi the: 
weie of Basan; and Og, the kyng of Ba- 
san, 3ede out a3ens vs with his puple, to 
fiz3te in Edrai. And the Lord seide to me, 2 
Drede thou not hym, for he is bitakun 
in® thin hond, with al his puple, and his 
lond; and thou schalt do to hym, as thou 
didist to Seon, kyng of Ammoreis, that 
dwellide in Esebon. Therfor oure Lord 3 
God bitook in oure hondis also Og, kyng* 
of Basan, and al his puple; and we han 
smyte hym ‘til to$ deeth, and wastiden" 4 
alle thei citees ‘of him* in o tyme; no 
town! was™ that ascapide vs; ‘we destri- 


ddefenden p. © steyn p. 


m sad his herte 1s. Om. 1s. 


qOm. x. ttake a. Sheris. tfellenis. Ythat 1s. VY vpon is. 


W that is. *vnto1s. Yneis, 2Om.1s, the which 1, > Om.1, © the placesis. 4 3eden yp 1. 
stieden vps. €intors. fthe kyng pis. €vntos. we wastidenis. ‘hisis. *Om.1s. | town 
ther 1. ™ was of his 18. 


472 


there was no wallid town that vs my3te 
askape; sexti citees, al the regioun of 
Argob, of the kyngdom of Og in Basan. 
5 Alle the cytees weren strengthid with 
moost hije wallis, 3atis, and barris; with 
outen townes vnnoumbrable, that hadden 
6no wallis. And we diden hem awey, as 
we diden to Seon, the kyng of Esebon, 
destruyinge al citee, and men, and wym- 
7men, and litil children; beestis forsothe 
and spuyles of the cytees we han fro- 
edrawen’. And we han take that tyme 
the loond fro the hoond of two kyngis of 
Amorreis, that weren bi3onde Jordan, fro 
the streem of Arnon vnto the hil of Her- 
9mon, that Sydonys Saryon clepen, and 
10 Amoreis Sanyr; alle the cytees that ben 
set in pleyn, and al the loond of Galaad, 
and Basan, vnto Sewa and Edrai, the 
citees of the kyngdom of Og, in Basan. 
11 Oonli forsothe Og, the kyng of Basan, 
left of the stok of geanntis; and the 
bedde of hym is shewid yren, that is in 
Rabath, of the sones of Amon, ten cu- 
bites hauynge of lengthe, and foure of 
brede, at the mesure of the cubite of 
izmannus hoond. And the loond we weeld- 
iden in that tyme, fro Aroer, that is 
vpon the brenk of the streem of Arnon, 
vnto the myddil part of the hil of Ga- 
laad; and the cytees of it Y haue 3euen 
13to Ruben and Gad. Forsothe thaté 
other part of Galaad, and al Basan, of 
the kyngdom of Og, Y haue take to the 
half lynage of Manasse, al the regioun of 
Argob. Al Basan was clepid the loond 
140f geauntis. Jayr, the sone of Manasse, 
weeldide al the regioun of Argob, vnto 
the teermes of Gessuri, and Machati; and 
he cleep® Basan bi his name, Anothiayr, 
that is, the towns of Jayr, vnto the day 
that is nowe. Forsothe to Machir Y haue 
15 3eue Galaad; and to the lynage’ of Ru- 


f fordrawen 4. & the c. 

Om. 1. © most hige 1. 
men is, ¥ the wymmen 1. 
b men of Sydone ts. 
b the which t. 
n that Is. 
Yofis. . 
&% ynto Is. 


Pno Is, 
Vv and Is 
¢ clepen it 18. 
i citee s marg. k it hath ts. 
°vpon is. P strondis brinke 1. 
Ww the sone of Manasses 1. 


| And we I. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


h clepede cpu. 


4 the kyng 1. 
w Om. Is. 
€ vnto IS. 

la mannus BIMNSWX. 
q vnto Is. 
Manasses sone s. 


Ill. 5—15- 


eden® sixti citees, al the cuntrei of Argob, 
of the rewme of Og in Basan. Alle thes 
citees weren strengthid with hizest° wallis, 
and with jatis and barris; with out townes 
vnnoumbrable, that hadden not? wallis. And 6 
we diden awey thilke men, as we diden to 
Seon, kyng4 of Esebon; and we losten™ 
ech citee*, and men', and wyminen®, and 
litle children; forsothe’ we token bi prey 7 
beestis, and the” spuylis of citees*. Andg 
we token in that tyme the lond fro the 
hond of tweyY kyngis of Ammorreis, that 
weren bij3onde Jordan, fro the stronde of 
Arnon ‘til to* the hil of Hermon, ‘which 5 
hil* Sidonyes® clepen Sarion, and Ammor- 
reis clepen® Sanyr. We‘ tooken alle theo 
citees that weren set in the pleyn, and al 
the lond of Galaad, and of Basan, ‘til to® 
Selcha and Edray, citees of the rewme of 
Og, in Basan. For Og aloone, kyngf of 11 
Basan, was left of the generacioun of gi- 
auntis; and his yrun bedé is schewid, 
which" is in Rabathi, of the sones of A- 
mon, and hath* nyne cubitis of lengthe, 
and foure cubitis of breede, at the me- 
sure of a cubit of mannus! hond. And qo 
we weldiden™ in that tyme the lond, fro 
Aroer, which" is on® the ‘brynke of the 
stronde? of Arnon, ‘til tol the myddil paart 
of the hil of Galaad ; and Y 3af the" citees 
‘of hym’ to Ruben and Gad*. Forsothe" 13 
Y 3af the tother part of Galaad, and al’ 
Basan, of the rewme of Og, to the half 
lynage of Manasses, and al the cuntrei of 
Argob. Al Basan was clepid the lond of 
giauntis. Jair, ‘sone of Manasses”, weld-14 
ide al the cuntrey of Argob, ‘til to* the 
lond of Gesuri and of Machati; and he 
clepide bi his name Basan Anothiair, that 
is, the townes of Jair, til in to presentY 
dai. Also Y 3af Galaad to Machir; and 1° 
to the lynagis* of Ruben and of Gad Y 3af 
the lond of Galaad, ‘til to® the strond of 


ilynagis cDEH. 


t destrieden 1s. 8 citee of that lond ss. the 
x the citees 1s. Ythetwor. 2vntors. 4 that 1. 
f the kyng 1s. & of cruel tourment s marg. 
m hadden in possessioun 1. 
8Om.1s. tto Gadi. ® And ts. 

¥ this present 1s. 2 lynage a. 


r his Is. 
x ynto IS. 


It. 17-—26. 


ben and Gad Y haue 3eue the loond .of 
Galaad, vnto the streem of: Arnon, half 
of the streem, and the ny3 coostis* vnto 
the streem of Jeboch, that is the’ teerme 
170f the sones of Amon; and the pleyn of 
wildirnes, and Jordan, and teermes! of 
Cenereth vnto the see of deseert, that is 
moost salt, to the rotis of the hil of 
18 Phasga, a3ens the eest. And Y haue co- 
maundid to 3ow in that tyme, seyynge, 
The Lord oure God 3yueth to 30w this 
loond into herytage; fulspeed goo 3e be- 
fore 30ure britheren, the sones of Yrael, 
walle the stronge men, with outen wyues 
and litil children and beestis. I haue 
knowun forsothe that 3e han manye 
beestis, and in thes citees shulen abide, 
20‘the whiche Y 3af™ to 3ow, to the" tyme 
that the Lord 3yue rest to 3oure bri- 
theren, as he hath 3yue to 3ow; and also 
that thei weelden the loond that he is to 
3yuynge® to hem, bizonde Jordan; thanne 
shal turne azen echon? into his posses- 
2isioun, that Y.haue 3eue to 3ow. To 
Josue forsothe in that tyme I haue co- 
maundid, seiynge, Thin eyen han seen 
that the Lord oure God dide to thes two 
kyngis ; so he shal do to al the rewmes, 
22 to the whiche thow art to passynge?; ne 
drede thow hem; the Lord oure God 
23 shal fi3t for us. And I preyede the Lord 
24in that time, seiynge, Lord God, thow 
hast’ bigunne to shewe to thi seruaunt 
thi mochilnes, and moost strong hoond, 
ne forsothe there is another God or in 
heuene or’ in erthe, that may doo thi 
werkis, and be comparysound to thi 
25strengthe. I shal passe therfor, and se 
this best loond bizonde Jordan, and this 
2¢noble hil and Liban. And the Lord 
was wrooth to me for 3ow, ne herde me, 


1 the teermes cE. 
n that c. 


k cooste BCDEH. 
that I haue take c. 
or c. 


band the1s. © Om.1s. 4% coostus 1s. 
iOm.1. k yntors. Ithe which 1, ™ Om, 1. 
T the citees 1s, ®that 1s. ¢ haue joue 1s. 
xman of jou s. Ythatis. 7 hane 3joue rs. 
4 to meis. ¢ thi ful strong 1. f ther is 18. 
k Wende thon vp x. Stye thou vp s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


© ynto 1s. 
n the moost 1s. 
u hath jouen rs. 

a han sien Is. 
& I schal 1s. 


473 


Arnon, the myddil of the stronde, and 
of© the endis‘ ‘til to® the stronde of Je- 
both, which! is the terme of ‘the sones of 
Amons. And Y 3af the" pleyn of thei17 
wildernesse ‘til tok Jordan, and the termes 
of Cenereth ‘til to* the see of deseert, 
which! see™ is moost®" salt°, at the rotis of 
the hil of Phasga, a3ens the eest. And Y 18 
comaundide to 30u in that tyme, and seide, 
3oure Lord God 3yueth to 30u this lond 
in to erytage; alle 3e stronge men, with-19 
out wyues and litle children and beestis, 
be? maad redi, and ‘go 3e1 bifor 3oure bri- 
thren, the sones of Israel. For Y knowe 
that 3e han many beestis, and tho schulen 
dwelle in citees" whiche* Y 3af* to 3o0u, til2o 
the Lord 3yue reste to 3oure brithren, as 
he 3af" to’ 30u, and f/ thei also welden 
the lond ‘which the Lord™ schal 3yue to 
hem bi3onde Jordan; thanne ech man* 
schal turne ajen in to his possessioun 
whichY Y 3af? to 3ou. Also Y comaundid 2i 
to Josue in that tyme, and seide, Thin 
igen sien* what thingis 3oure Lord God 
dide to these twei kyngis®; so he schal do 
to alle rewmes*, to whiche thou schalt go; 
drede thou not hem. And Y preiede the2? 
Lord in that tyine, and seide, Lord God, a4 
thou hast biguune to schewe to® thi ser- 
uaunt thi greetnesse, and strongeste® hond, 
for noon other God is ether in heuene, 
ether in erthe, that mai do thi werkis, and 
may be comparisound to thi strengthe. 
Therfor Y schal passe, and schal® se this 2s 
beeste lond bijende Jordan, and this noble 
hil and Liban. And the Lord was wrooth 26 
to me for 30u, nethir he herde me, but 
seide* to me, It suffisith to thee; speke 
thou no more of this thing to me’. ‘Stye27 
thou* in to the hi3nesse of Phasga, and 
caste aboute thin ijen to the west, and 


™ the which I 3aue np pr.m. the whiche I haue take a sec. m. E. 
° 3euyn BCDFH. 


Pechec. 4 passec. ‘hath appr.m. § ne 


fthat 1s. & Amon soness. 1} do hem the is. 
© salt see is. Pbe3ers. 4 goth 1s. 
Vresttos. ™ that hex. that the Lord s. 
» Seon and Og 8 marg. © the rewmes 18. 
hhe seide 1s. 1 to passe over Jordan 8 marg. 


3P 


474 


but seide to me, It sufficith to thee; na- 
27more spek thow of this thing to me. Sty 
vp to’* the cop of Phasge, and thin eyen 
turn about! to the west, and*t north, 
south, and eest, and bihold; ne forsothe 
28thow shalt passe this Jordan. Comaund 
to Josue, and strengthe hym, and com- 
fort; for he shal goo before this puple, 
and dyuyde to hem the loond that thou 
29art to seynge. And we dwelliden in the 
valeye, ajens the ‘mawmet temple" of 
Phegor. 
CAP. IV. 
1 And nowe, Irael, here the heestis and 
domys, that Y teche thee; that doynge 
them thow lyue, and goynge yn thow 
weelde the loond that the Lord God of 
230ure fadres is to 3eue to 30w. 3e shulen 
not adde to the word that Y speke to 
3ow, ne take awey from it; kepe 3e the 
heestis of the Lord 3oure God, the whiche 
3Y comaunde to 30w. 3oure eyen han 
seen alle thingis that the Lord dide a3ens 
Belphegor; what maner wise he hath 
brusid down al the heriers of it, fro the 
sinyddil of 30u. Forsothe 3e that cleuen 
to the Lord 3oure God, lyuen alle, to’ the 
sday that is nowe. 3e witen that I tau3t 
3ow heestis, and ri3twisnesses*’, as hath 
comaundid to me the Lord my God; 
so 3e Shulen doo hem in the loond that 
63e ben to weeldynge™”, and kepe and ful- 
fille in dede. Forsothe this is 3oure wis- 
dam, and vndirstondynge before the pu- 
plys, that thei alle, herynge thes heestis, 
seyn, Loo! a wise puple and an vndir- 
7stondynge! a greet folk of kynde! Ne 
there is other nation so greet, that hath 
goddis nei3ynge to hem, as oure God is 
suy3 to alle oure holi preiers. What is 
forsothe other folk of kynde so noble, 
that hath ceremoyns, and ry3twis domys, 


ss Om. rx. thou about c. Om. p. 


1 to the eest 1s. ™ thou him 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


u phane E pr.m. 


2 coumfourte ¢hou B. 


III. 27—Iv. 8. 


north, and south, and eest!, and biholde, 
for thou schalt not passe this Jordan. 
Comaunde thou to Josue, and strengthe 28 
thou” and coumforte® hym; for he schal 
go bifore this puple, and he schal departe 
to hem the lond, which® thou schalt se. 
And we dwelliden in the valey a3ens the 29 
temple of Phegor. 


CAPS 


And now, thou Israel, here the co-1 
maundementis? and domes whiche Y teche 
thee, that thou do tho, and lyue, and that 
thow entre and welde the lond which’ the 
Lord God" of 30ure fadris schal 3yue to 
jou. 3e schulen not adde to the word2 
which’ Y speke to 3ou‘t, nether 3e schulen 
take awei ‘fro it"; kepe 3e the comaunde- 
mentis’ of 3oure Lord God, which® Y 
comaunde* to 30n. 3oure izen sienY alles 
thingis whiche the Lord dide a3ens Bel- 
phegor; how he alto brak alle the? wor- 
schiperis ‘of hym* fro the myddis of 3ou. 
Forsothe” 3e that cleuen® to 30ure Lord 4 
God lyuen alle ‘til in to present day4, jes 
witen that Y tau3te 30u the comaunde- 
mentis® and ri3tfulnessis’, as my Lord God 
comaundide to me; so 3e schulen do tho’ 
in the lond whiche" 3e schulen welde, and 6 
se schulen kepe', and schulen* fille! in 
werk. For this™ is 30ure wisdom{ and 
vndurstondyng bifor puplis”, that alle men 
here these comaundementis®, and seie, Lo! 
a wise puple? and vnderstondynge4! a 
greet folk™! Noon other nacioun is so7 
greet’, ‘vot 1m noumbre ether in bodili 
quantite, but in dignite', that hath Goddis 
nei3ynge to it silf, as oure God is redi to 


alle oure bisechyngis. For whi" whats 
Y ynto ce. ‘Vrizwisnesse 2. W welden c. 
othat 1. Pheestists. @thatrs. 'Om.s. 


Sthatis. t fals vndirstonding s marg. ™ ther fro 1. treu vndirstondinge s marg. V heestis 1s. W the 
which 1. * comanndid cpr. Y han sien 1s. 7 his1s. 2 Om.1s. » Foris. ¢ fethfully s marg. 4 vnto 
the day that is now 1s, © heestis 1s. the riztwisnessis 1. the witnessis s. 8 hemi. bthatis. !kepe 
thos. * Om.is. |! fulfille hem is. ™ deinges marg. "the puple1. peples. © heestisis. P Om. 1. 


@ an vnderstondynge Is. 


¥ folk in graces. § greet in dignyte s. 


tOm.is. t Om. 1Kqrst. 


tT 3¢ schulen 
not adde to the 
word etc. Here 
that adding is 
forbedun, that 
depraueth, ether 
peruertith the 
vndurstonding 
of the lawe; 
that adding, 
that declarith, 
ether makith 
cleer, is not for- 
bedun, bi this 
that is writun 
in xxiiij. c°. of 
Ecci. in the 
name of wis- 
dom, ether of 
hooly scripture ; 
Thei that de- 
claren me, schu- 
len haue euer- 
lastynge liyf. 
Lire here. sc. 
t wisdom, that 
is, saueri kun- 
nyng, that 
briugith in to 
the Jone of God. 
Bc. Sothely 
the wisdom of 
filosoforis 
brou3ten more 
to hiznesse and 
pride. Lire 
here. C. 


IV. 9—19. 


and al the lawe, that I purpose to day 
9 before 30ure eyen? Keep therfor thi silf, 
and thi soule bisilich; ne for3eet thow 
the wordis that thin eyen han seen, and 


ne falle thei out of thin herte, alle the. 


dayes of thi lijf. Thow shalt teche hem 
10thi sones, and thi sone* sones; the day 
‘the whichY thow stodist? before the Lord 
thi God in Oreb, whanne to me spak the 
Lord, seiynge, Gedre to me the puple, 
that he here my wordis, and lerne to 
drede me al tyme that he lyueth in 
1ierthe, and teche he his sones, And 3e 
neiz3eden to the root of the hy], that brent 
vnto heuene; and there weren in it derk- 
12nessis, and clowde, and mystynes*. And 
the Lord spak to 30w fro the myddil of 
the fier ; the voyce® of the wordis of hym 
3e herden, and the forme out ry3t saw3 
133e not. And he shewide to 3ow his co- 
uenaunt, that he comaundide that 3e 
shulden doo, and the ten wordis, that he 
14 wroot in the two stonen tablis. And to 
me he comaundide in that tyme, that I 
shulde teche 3ow cerymoyns, and domes, 
that 5e owen to doo in the loond that 3e 
15 ben to weelden. Kepe 3e therfor bisiliche 
3oure soulis; 3e han not* seen cny® licke- 
nes, in the day that the Lord spak to 
16300 in Oreb, fro the myddil of fier; lest 
perauenture disseyued 3e maken to 30w a 
graued® liknes, other! ymage of maal, or 
170f8 femaal; liknes of alle beestis that 
ben vpon erthe, or of briddis vndur he- 
isuene fleynge, and” of crepynge beestis 


that meuen in the erthe, other of fisshis. 


that vndir the erthe dwellen in watrys; 
wlest perauenture the eyen reryd to he- 
uene, thou se the sunne, and the mone, 
and alle the sterris of henene, and by 
errour disseyued thow honoure hem, and 


Ythatc. 2 stode c. 
§Om.c. h other £ prim. 


x sonus CE. 
¢grauenc. forc. 


Vv that 1s. 
» that it lerne 1s. 
fynto 1s. & a cloude s. 
creaturus 8 marg. ™ the Lord 1s. 
4that1. ‘'myndisis. § Om. 18. 
wmanis. * Om. Kx. Y womman 1s, 
erthe 1s. © yp to I. vp in os. 


W purpose to schewe Is. 
¢ this drede 8 marg. 
h jn that hill is. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


a dasewynge E pr. m. 


x Therfor, Israel s. 
4 camen ni3 1. neiziden ni3 s. 
i Om. 1s. 
the which 1. © Om. 1. he schewide ¢o 3ou s. 
t Om. 1. hadden therbi ben s. 


“ or a IKS. 


AT5 


other folk is so noble, that it hath cery- 
monyes and iust domes, and al the lawe 
which’ Y schal ‘sette forth” to dai bifor 
joure i3en? Therfor* kepe thi silf, and9 
thi soule bisili; forjete thon not the wordis 
whiche thin iz3en sien’, and falle tho? not 
doun fro thin herte, in alle the daies of thi 
lijf. Thou schalt teche tho thi sones and 
thi sones sones. Telle thou* the day in10 
which thou stodist bifor thi Lord God in 
Oreb, whanne the Lord spak to me, and 
seide, Gadere thou the puple to me, that it 
here my wordis, and lerne” for to drede 
me in al tyme in which it lyueth in erthe, 
and teche hise sones®. And 3e nei3iden® ii 
to the ‘roote of the hille®, that brente ‘til 
tof heuene; and derknessis, and cloude®, 
and myist weren therynmne. And thei 
Lord spak to 30u fro the! myddis of fier*; 
je herden the vois of hise wordis, and 
outirli 3e sien no fourme!, And he™13 
schewide to 30u his couenaunt, which" he 
comaundide, that 3e schulden do, and ‘he 
schewide® ten wordis, whiche he wroot in 
two tablis of stoon. And he comaundide 14 
to me in that tyme, that Y schulde teche 
jou cerymonyes? and domes, whiche je 
owen to do in the lond whiche’ 3e schulen 
welde. Therfor kepe 3e bisili 3oure soulis’; 15 
3e sien not ony licnesse in the dai in which 
the Lord spak to 30u in Oreb, fro the’ 
myddis of the fier; lest perauenture 3e be‘ 16 
disseyued and" make’ to 30u a grauun 
licnesse, ether an ymage of male, ether 
of* female’; a? licnesse of alle beestis? 17 
that ben on? erthe, ether of bridis fleynge 
vndur heuene, and® of crepynge beestis 18 
that ben moued in erthe®’, ether of fischis 
that dwellen vndur the erthe in watris; 
lest perauenture, whanne thin ij3en ben 19 
reisid to® henene, thou se the sonne, and 


b noyce AH. ¢ Om, apr. 4 no Pp see.m. 


Ztheiis. 4 thou to hem ts. 
e hillus roote 1. hil root s. 
1 fonrme or schapp 1s. text. of eny 
P his cerymonyes s. 

v hadden maad 1s. 
4 the 


y han seen 1s. 
k the fier 18. 


u therbi 1. 


athe beestis s. > vponis. © either. 


3 PQ 


476 


herye, the whiche of noujt maad the 
Lord thi God, into sernyce to al folk of 
20kynde, that ben vndur heuene. Forsothe 
the Lord took 3ow, and ladde 30w oute* 
fro the yren forneys of Egipte, that he 
haue a puple bi herytage, as it is in the 
aiday that is nowe. And the Lord was 
wrooth a3ens me, for 30ure wordis, and 
swore that I shulde not passe Jordan, ne 
goo into the best loond, that he is to 
223yuynge! to 30w. Loo! I dye in this 
erthe; I shal not passe Jordan; 3e shu- 
len passe, and weelde the noble loond. 
23 Be war, lest eny tyme thow for3eete the 
couenaunt of the Lord thi God, that I 
made couenaunt with thee, and make to 
thee a™ graued® liknes of hem that the 
24 Lord defendide tomake. For the Lord 
thi God fier wastynge is; a God gelows. 
25If 3e geten sones, and sones sones, and 
dwelliden in the loond, and desseyued 
make to 30w eny liknes, doynge yuel be- 
fore the Lord 3oure God, that 3e° terrenP 
2shym to wraththe, witnesses Y inwardly 
clepe to day heuene and erthe, that soone 
je ben to perishen’ fro the loond, that, 
Jordan ouerpassid, 3e ben to weelden’; 3e 
shulen not dwelle in it long tyme, but 
27 the Lord 30u shal doo awey, and scater 
into alle folkis of kynde, and 3e shu- 
len dwelle fewe in the’ naciouns, to 
28whiche the Lord is to lede® 30u. And 
there 3e shulen serne to goddis, the 
whiche bi hoond of men ben forgid’ of” 
tree, and stoon, that seen not, ne heren, 
29ne eten, ne smellen. And whanne thou 
sechist there the Lord thi God, thow 
shalt fynde hym; so neuerthelater * 
that with al thin herte thow seche, and 


kOm. 4. IJ3iuec. ™Om.u. © grauenc. 
r weeldynge E pr. 72. § Om. c. u ledynge z pr.m. 
later E. 

fthe moone cis. & thou be is. 


k onour hem 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


© thei p. 


h thilke thingis 1, tho creaturis s. 
1Qm. 1. bi inward affecciaun s. 


IV, 20—29. 


moone’, and alle the sterris of heuene, and 

be® disseyued bi errour, and worschipe 

tho", ‘bt outermer reuerence', and onour*, 

‘bi ynner reuerencel, ‘tho thingis whiche™ 

thi" Lord God made of nou3t, in to ser- 

uyce® toP alle folkis that ben vndur he- 

uene. Forsothe’ the Lord took 30u, and 20 

ledde out" of the yrun furneys* of Egipt, 

that he schulde haue a puple of ¢ eritagef, ee is 

as it is" in ‘present dai’. And the Lord 21 cleuynge to him 
i vnmouably ; as 

was wrooth a3ens me for 3o0ure wordis,  eritage is pos- 

and swoor™ that Y schulde not passe Jor- Sasble. Lire 

dan, and schulde* not entre in to the beeste 7 ®* 

lond, which’ he schal 3yue to 30u. Lo! Y 22 

die in this erthe?; Y* schal not passe Jor- 

dan; 3e schulen passe, and schulen® welde 

the noble lond. Be thou? war, lest ony 23 

tyme thou for3ete the conenaunt of thi 

Lord God, which® he made with thee, and 

lest thou make to thee a grauun licness of 

tho thingis whiche the Lord forbeed‘ to 

make. For thi Lord God is fier? wast- 24 

yngel ; ‘God, a feruent louyere®. If 3¢25 ter an 

gendren' sones, and sones of sones, and 3e 


nyschinge 
dwellen in the lond, and 3e* be disceyued, peal 
othere ele- 


and make to 3ou ony licnesse!, and doen 
yuel bifor 3oure Lord God, that 3e terren 
hyim to greet wrathe, Y clepe witnesses™ 26 
to dai heuene and erthe, ‘that ts, ech re- 
sonable” creature beynge® in heuene and 
ix erthe?, that 3e schulen perische soone 
fro the lond, which? 3e schulen welde, 
whanne 3e han passid Jordan; 3e schulen 
not dwelle’ long tyme therynne, but the 
Lord schal do awey 30u, and schal* scatere 27 
‘in to" alle hethen men, and 3e schulen 
leeue’ fewe among naciouns”, to whiche* 
the Lord schal lede 30u. And there 3e28 
schulen serue to goddis, that ben maad bi 


mentis worch- 
ith more. Lire 
Te. Ce 


P tarre BDEFH, 


q perischynge E pr. m. 
Vv enforgid c. 


W to BCDEFH. x nerthe- 


i Om. 1. bi outward reuerence s. 
m whiche thingis pwNorstwx. thingis which eka. 


the whiche thingus 1. %thec. © the seruyce 1s fext. and not in to souereintce s marg. P of 1s, 4 Fors. 


T 30n out 1Ks. § or strong tribulacioun 1s. t bi rKsx. 
z ond rs. 
f hath forboden éhce 1s. 


swoor 1s. * that I schulde rs.  y that 1. 
43e3. thou Israels. © that 1s. 
Seruently s marg. .1 geten 1. 
sonable DGQR pr.mt. TX prem. 
dwelle x marg. & he schal 1s. 


naciouns s. * the whiche 1. 


k Om. 1. 3if 3e s. 
° Om. N. 


1 icnesse or ymage s. 
‘Pp Om. 1. 
t scatre 30u abrood 1. scatre 30u xs. 


\ shewid 8 marg. 
aand a pr. mt. 
& a fier 1s. 


Vv the dai that now is 1s. Whe 
b passe it 1s.  ¢ 3e schulen 1s. 
ba gelous God 1s tert. louyng 
™ withesse A pr.m.cis. © vare- 
t leene FKogrwx. liue ELPR. ether 
wamong 1. Vdwelle is. W the 


q that 1. 


IV. 30—4o. 


30 with al the tribulacioun of thi soule. Af- 
ter that thee han foundun alle thingis 
that ben before seid, forsothe the last 
tyme thow shalt turne a3en to the Lord 
thi God, and thow shalt here the voyce 

3iof hym. For a mercyable God the Lord 
thi God is; he shal not leeue thee, ne 
vtterlich doo awey, ne he shal for3ete the 
couenaunt in the which he swore to thi 

sefadris. Ask thow of the oold dayes that 
weren before thee, fro the daye that the 
Lord thi God fourmedeY man vpon erthe, 
fro the hizest of heuene vnto the hizest 
of it, if there is doon eny tyme siche a 
33maner thing, or euer is knowun, that the 
puple herde the voyce of the God’ spek- 
ynge fro the myddil of fier, as thow 

34 herdist, and” saw3; if God dide, that he 
jede in, and took to hym a folk of kynde 
fro the myddil of naciouns, bi tempta- 
ciouns, signes, and wondres, bi fi3t, and 
strong hoond, and strei3t out the arme, 
and orrible si3tes, after alle thingis that 
dide for 30w the Lord 3oure God, in E- 

35 gipte, seynge thin eyen; that thow knewe 
for the Lord he a God, and there is noon 

360ther but oon. Fro heuene he made thee 
to here his voyce, that he teche thee; 
and in the loond he hath shewid to thee 
his moost.fier, and thow hast herde the 
wordis of hym fro the myddil of fier; 

37for he hath loued thi fadres, and chosun 
the seed of hem after hem. And he Jadde 
out thee, goynge before in his greet ver- 

38 tue, fro Egipte, that he doo awey moost 
naciouns, and the strengere*, in thin en- 
tree, and in lede thee, and 3eue to thee 
the loond of hem into possessioun, as 
thow biholdist in the day that is now. 

39 Know thow therfor to day, and thenk in 
thin herte, that the Lord he is a God in 
heuene aboue, and in erthe benethe, and 

4othere is noon other. Kepe thow the 


y fourmede thee 4. 


y mennus hondis1s. 2 Om. 1, 
thely 1s. fisais. 8 do thee 1s. 
1Qm.1s. © Om. ppreent.  P hast herd 1s. 
knowe thats. ®3edeynis. t Om. x. 
Y outakun him 1. outakun fhe s. 


Z ful greet 1. 
d the grettist 1s. © entree 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


_ han founde thee, that ben biforseid{, for- 


z Lord A. 


ator toas. neither seen 1. 
b daies or tymes 18. 
q seen 18. 
2 myddil 1s. 
2Z hierdis A. 


477 


‘the hond of men’, to a*% tre and a* stoon, 
that ‘seen not», nether heren, nether eten, 
nether smellen. And whanne thon hast29 
sou3t there t thi Lord God, thou schalt 
fynde hym; if netheles thou sekist® with 
al the’ herte, and with al the tribula- 
cioun of thi soule. Aftir that alle thingis 30 


+ in the heestis, 
domes, and in 
cerymonies, pa- 
ciently abidinge 
the Lord. 8. 


t that is, after 
sothe® in the laste tyme, thou schalt turne , 
ajen to thi Lord God, and thou schalt 4"? * 
here his vois. For thi Lord God is‘ merci-31 

ful God; he schal not forsake thee, nethir 

he schal do® awey outirli, nethir he schal 

for3ete the couenaunt, in which he swoor 

to thi fadris. Axe thou of elde dates" that 32 

weren bifor thee, fro the day in which 

thi Lord God made of nou3t man oni 

erthe, axe thou fro that* oon ende of he- 

uene ‘til to! the tother ende therof'||, if sich 

a thing was doon ony tyme, ether if it was  thinges that 
euere knowun, that a™ puple herde WES Gs. 
vois of God spekynge fro the" myddis of 

the® fier, as thou herdistP, and siest’; if "34 

God ‘dide, that he entride’, and took to 

him silf a fole fro thet middis® of na- 

ciouns, bi temptaciouns, myraclis, and 

grete wondris, bi batel, and strong hond, 

and arm holdun’ forth, and orrible si3tis, 

bi alle thingis whiche 3oure Lord God 

dide for 30u in Egipt, ‘while thin ijzen 

sien’; that thou schuldist wite, that the 35 

Lord hym silf is God, and noon other is*, 

outakunY oon. Fro heuene he made thee36 

to here his vois, that he schulde techie 

thee; and in erthe he schewide to thee his 

grettiste’ fier, and thou herdist” the* wordis 

‘of hym® fro the? myddis of the fier; fors7 

he louyde thi fadris, and chees her seed 

aftir hem. And he ledde thee out of Egipt, 

and 3ede bifore® in his greet vertu, that 3s 

he schulde do awei grettiste’ naciouns, and 

strongere than thou, in thin entryng®, and 

that he schulde lede thee ynne, and schulde 


ll that is, take 
hede to alle 


zZad 4. 4strengthe 4 pr.m. 


© sekist hims. ‘this. © so. 
Kk the plures. Jynto1s. ™the a. 
T either 3if that 1. either 3if eny tyme it were 
V strei3t 1. W in sizt of thin izen is. * Om. 1s. 
ahisis. bOm.1s. © bifore thee s. 


i vpon Is. 


478 


heestis of hym, and maundements, that I 
comaunde to thee, that wel it be to thee, 
and thi> sones after thee, and dwelle? 
thow myche tyme vpon the erthe, that 
the Lord thi God is to 3yue® to thee. 
41 Thanne Moyses seuerde thre citees, bi- 
4230nde Jordan, at the est plage, that to 
hem flee3 the which sleeth a nei3bour, 
not wilnynge, ne were enemy before oon 
and other day, and to oon of these citees 
43 my3te ascape; Bosor, in wildernesse, that 
is set in the wijlde feeldi loond, of the 
lynage of Ruben; and Ramoth, in Ga- 
laad, that is in the lynage of Gad; and 
Golan, in Basan, that is in the lynage of 
4iManasse. This is the lawe that Moyses 
45 purposide before the sones of Yrael, and 
these the witnessyngis, and cerymoyns, 
that he spak to the sones of Yrael, 
46 whanne thei wenten out of Egipte, ouer 
Jordan, in the valey a3ens the ‘mawmet 
temple’ of Phegor, in the loond of Seon, 
kyng® of Amorrei, that dwellid in Ese- 
bon, whom smoot Moyses. Forsothe 
the sones of Irael goon out of Egipte, 
47weeldiden the loond of hyin, and the 
loond of Og, kyug of Basan, of the two 
kyngis of Amorreis, that weren bijonde 
43 Jordan, at the rysynge of the sunne; fro 
Aroer, that is set vpon the brenk of the 
streme of Arnon, vnto the hil of Seon, 
49that is in Hermon; al the pleyn biz3onde 
the’ Jordan, to the eest plage, vnto the 
see of widernes, and into the rotis of the 
hil of Phasga. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


IV. 41——49. 


3yue tof thee the? Iond ‘of hem" in to pos- 
sessioun, as thou seest in ‘present dayi. 
Therfor wite thou to dat, and thenke in39 
thin herte, that the* Lord him silfe is 
God in heuene abone, and in erthe by- 
nethe, and noon other is! Kepe thou hise4o 
heestis, and comaundementis™}, whiche Y 
comaunde® to thee, that it be wel to thee, 
and to thi sones after thee, and that thou 
dwelle mych tyme on® the lond, which? 
thi Lord God schal 3yue to thee. Thanne4i 
Moises departide thre citees bi3ende Jor- 
dan at the eest coost, that he fle to tho4, 42 
that sleeth his neighbore not wilfuli, and 
was not enemy’ bifore oon’ and ‘the to- 
ther dai’, and that he mai fle" to summe 
of these citees ; Bosor’ in the’ wildirnesse, 43 
which is set in the feeldi lond, of the 
lynage of Ruben; and Ramoth* inY Ga- 
laad, which’ is in the lynage of Gad; and® 
Golan? in® Basan, which‘ is in the lynage 
of Manasses. This® is the lawe which! 44 
Moises ‘settide forth bifor the sones of 
Israel, and these ben the witnessyngis, 45 
and cerymonyes, and domes*, whiche he 
spak to the sones of Israel, whanne thei 
jeden out of Egipt, bizeude! Jordan, in the 46 
valey a3ens the temple“ of Phegor, in the 
lond of Seon, kyng of Ammorreis, that 
dwellide in Esebon, whom Moises killide!. 
And the sones of Israel 3eden out of E- 
gipt, aud weldiden ‘the lond of him™, and 47 
the lond of Og, kyng of Basan, twei 
kyngis of Ammoreis, that weren bizende 
Jordan, at the rysyng of the sunne; fro 4s 
Aroer which" is set on® the brenke of the 
stronde of Arnon, ‘til toP the hil of Seon, 
which is! Hermon; thei weldiden al the 9 
pleyn bizende Jordan, at the eest coost, 
‘til to’ the see of wildirnesse, and ‘til tot 
the rootis of the hil of Phasga. 


t preueilt and 
appertli, in pro- 
speritee and in 
aduersitee. s. 


btothice. bb dwel 4. ¢3euynge e pr.m. 4 phane x pr.m. ¢the kyng z pr.m. °¢ Om. e. 
fOm.s. §heris. > Om. xs. ithe tyme that is nowe 1s. EK thiis. |! but he is. 1. is God but he. s. 
m his maundementis 1s. ™ comaundide cprgnogx. © vponis. Pthatis. 4thilker. 1 enemy fo 
him is. Soon day 1s. ‘an other1s. Uascape is. V0 citee of the thre s marg. ¥ Om.1s. * Ramoth 
the tother citee s. the other citee1 marg. Yisinis. *the which 1. 20m. 8. > Golan the thrid citee s. 
the thrid citee1 marg. Cisinis. 4the whichi. ¢ And this1. fthatis. ¢ hath ordeyned 1s. » the 
domes 1s. iouerB. * mawmett temple 1s. Idestriede rs. ™hislondis. 4thatz. © vpon 1s. 


P vnto 1s, 4 clepid s marg. * and thei 1. 


8 ynto 1s, 


t vnto Is. 


VY. I—14. 


ey 


1 And Moyses clepidef al Yrael, and 
seide to hym, Here, Yrael, cerymoyns, 
and domys, that I speke in 3oure eris to 
day; lerne 3e hem, and fulfillith in dede. 

2The Lord oure God hath’ couenauntid 

3with vs a boond of pees in Oreb; not 
with oure fadres he made couenaunt, but 
4with vs, that nowe ben, and lyuen. Face 
to face he hath spoke to vs in the hil, fro 
5the myddil of fier. I felawe and meene 
was bitwix’ God and 30w in that tyme, 
that I tolde to 30w the wordis of hym; 
forsothe 3e dreden the fier, and 3e stieden 
snot into the hil. And he seith, I the 
Lord thi God, that haue ladde thee out 
of the loond of Egipte, fro the hows of 
7seruage. Thow shalt not haue alyen 
sgoddis in my si3t. Thow shalt not make 
to thee grauen thing, ne liknes of alle 
thingis that in heuen ben aboue, and that 
in erthe bynethe, and that dwellen in 
9watres vudur erthe; thow shalt not ho- 
noure hem, ne herye; forsothe I am the 
Lord thi God, a ielouse God, 3eeldynge 
wickidnes! of fadres into sones, into the 
thridde and thej ferthe generacioun to 
10hem that hatiden me, and doynge mercy 
into many thowsandes to hem that louen 
11me, and kepen myn heestes. Thow shalt 
not mystaak the name of the Lord thi 
God idillich, for he shal not be vnpu- 
nyshid, that vpon veyn thing the name 
iz0t hym takith. Kepith the day of the 
saboth, that thow halwe it, as the Lord 
13thi God hath comaundid to thee. Six 
dayes thow shalt worche, and doo alle 
14thi werkis; the seuenthe day is of the 
saboth, that is the rest of the Lord thi 
God. Thow shalt not doo in it eny thing 
of werke, thow, and thi sone, and dow3- 
ter, seruaunt, and handmayden, and _Oxe, 


fclepe erm. & haue 4. 


wheryngis. Vhemis. W fulfillith 1s. 
bandas. © his 1s. d Om. 1s. 

erthe pianst. ihemis. k Om. 1. 
JSeruently louynge 8. or a feruent louere 1 marg. 
Tink, vponis. § Om. 1. 


day of sabot 18. * of 3. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


h bytwene speri. betwe c. 


x deede Is. 
€ 3e 3eden not vp 1. 3e stieden not s. 
1 ne worschipe 1s. 
© the sones K. 
t day of the sabat Kogrtwx. sabot day 1s. 


479 


CATaaY 


And Moises clepide al Israel, and seide 1 
to hym, Here, thou Israel, the cerymonyes 
and domes, whiche Y speke to dai in 3oure 
eeris"; lerne 3e tho’, and ‘fille’ 3e in werk*, 
Oure Lord God made a boond of pees with 2 
vs in Oreb; he made not conenaunt, ‘thats 
is, of lawe writunY, with oure fadris’, but 
with vs that ben present, and lyuen. Face 4 
to face he spak to vs in the hil, fro the* 
myddis of the fier. Y was recounceleres 
and> mediatour bitwixe God and 3ou in 
that tyme, that Y schulde telle to 30u the 
wordis ‘of hym*‘, for 3e dredden the fier, 
and ‘stieden not® in to the hil. And ‘the 
Lord’ seide, Y am thi Lord God, that6 
ladde thee out of the lond of Egipt, fro 
the hows of seruage. Thou schalt not7 
haue alien Goddis in my si3t. Thou schalt 3 
not make to thee a grauun ymage, nether 
a licnesse of alle thingist that ben in he- 
uene aboue, and that ben in erthe by- 
nethe, and that lyuen® in watris vndur 
erthe’; thou schalt not herie tho', ‘ands 
thou schalt not* worschipe! thom; for Y 
am thi Lord God, ‘God a feruent louyer”; 
and Y 3elde the wickidnesse of fadris, in 
to sones® in to the thridde and the? fourthe 
generacioun to hem that haten me, and Y 10 
do mersy in to many thousyndis to hem 
that louen me, and-kepen myn_heestis. 
Thou schalt not mystake the name of thi!ll 
Lord God‘ in veyn, for he schal not be 
vnpunyschid, that takith the name of God 
on’ a’ veyn thing. Kepe thou the ‘day of 12 
sabatt that thou halewe it, as thi Lord 
God comaundide to thee. In sixe daies 13 
thou schalt worche, and thou" schalt” do 
alle thi werkis; the seventhe day is ‘of 14 
sabat’, that is the* reste of thi Lord God. 
Thou schalt not do therynne ony thing 
of werk{; thou, and thi sone, and dou3- 


i wickedenesses c. J Om. g. 


2 fadris bi lawe wrilen s. *% Om. 1s. 
fher. &bena. Hthe 
m™hemis. a gelous God 1. a gelous God or 
p Om, Eve. in tothe 1s. 49Om. a. 


uOm. Bis. Y Om. 1s. 


y Om. 1s. 


Ww the 


t that is, of 
nothing of eny 
of alle tho 
thingis. s. 


t forbooden of 
God to the. s, 


480 


and asse, and al thi beest, and pilgryme 
that is with ynne thi jatis; that thi ser- 
uaunt and handmayde* resten, and as 
isthow. Haue mynde, that and thi self 
seruede! in Egipte, and the Lord thi God 
ladde thee out thens in a stronge hoond, 
and in an arme strei3t out; therfore he 
hath comaundid to thee, that thow kepe 
16 wel the day of the saboth. Honour thi 
fader and thi moder, as the Lord thi 
God hath comaundid to thee, that longe 
tyme thow lyue, and wel be to thee in 
the loond that the Lord thi God is to 
173yuynge™ to thee. Thow shalt not slee. 
i, And thow shalt do no® leccherye. And 
20thow shalt doo no" theft. Thou shalt 
not speke a3ens thi nei3bore fals witnes. 
21 Thow shalt not coueyte the wijf of thi 
nei3bour, ne hows, ne feelde, ne seruaunt, 
ne handmayde, ne oxe, ne asse, and alle 
22thingis® that of hym? ben. Thes wordes 
the Lord spak to al oure multitude, in 
the hil, of% the myddel of fier and 
clowde and derknesse, with a greet voyce, 
no thinge addinge more ouer; and he 
wroot hem in two stonen tablis, that he 
23took to me. 3e forsothe, after that 3e 
herden a voice fro the myddel of derk- 
nessis, and that 3e seen the hil to brenne, 
je comen to me alle the™ princes of the 
lynages, and the more thur3 birthe, and 
aiseiden, Loo! the Lord oure God hath 
shewid to vs maieste’, and his mychyl- 
nesse; the voyce of hym we han herd 
fro the myddil of the‘ fier, and we han 
preued to day that thur3 God spekynge 
25 with man a man lyueth. Whi thanne 
shulen we die, and shal deuowre vs this 
moost fier? Forsothe if we heren more 
the voice of the Lord oure God, we shulen 


k hondmaide zr. 1 seruedest c. 


afro scpru. *Om. 4. § the majeste cz. 


¥ thi dou3ter F sec.m. IKOQRSTWX. 
asse 1s. 4 thin ech helpinge 1. © beestis w. 
iOm.1s.  * also reste 1. resten s. 
P sabot day 1s, 4 thatis. t Om. xs. 
Ww Om. 1s. x the fieris. _Y the cloude 1s. 
that sueth of these heestis s marg. © Om. 1. 
h brennynge p. {the lynagis 1s. * gretteste N. 
fiers. Phan preued 1s, 4 lyueth 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


™ 3euyn BDE sec. m.FII. 310e C. 
t Om. BCDEFH. 


2 thi seruaunt Is. 
f that Is. 
1 Haue mynde ts. 
Sin yuel S marg. 
% the myist is. 
ad And 1s. 
1 se seiden s. 
¥ God spekinge 1s. 


V. 15——25- 


ter’, sernaunt’, and handmaide?, and oxe?, 
and asse®, and ‘al thi werk beeste®, and 
the pilgrym whichf is with ynne thi satis; 
that’ thi seruaunt reste’ and thin hand- 
maide, as! also‘ thou. Bithenke thou’, that 1s 
also thou™ seruedist in Egipt, and thi 
Lord God ledde thee out fro thennus, in 
a strong hond, and arm" holdun® forth; 
therfor he comaundide to thee, that thou 
schuldist kepe the ‘dai of sabatP. Onoure 16 
thi fadir and thi modir, as thi Lord God 
comaundide to thee, that thou lyue in long 
tyme, and that it be wel to thee, in the 
lond which thi Lord God schal 3yue to 
thee. Thou schalt not sle. Thou schalt}7 
not do letcherie. And’ thou schalt not dog 
thefte. Thou schalt not speke fals wit-20 
nessyng a3ens thi nei3bore. Thou schalt21 
not coueite’ ‘the wijf of thi neizbore‘, not" 
hows, not" feeld, not" seruaunt, not" hand- 
mayde, not" oxe, not’ asse, and alle thingist — + that is, no 
that ben hise. The Lord spak these wordis 22 pli by 
to al 3oure multitude, in the hil, fro the 
myddis of fier* and of cloudeY and of 
myist’, with greet vois, and addide* no 
thing more>; and he wroot tho wordis* in 
two tablis of stoon, whiche he 3af to me. 
Forsothe* after that 3e herden® the vois2s 
fro the myddis of thef derknessis, and sien? 
the hil brenne}, alle 3e princis of lynagis', 
and the grettere* men in birthe, neiziden 
to me, and seiden!, Lo! oure Lord God 24 
schewide™ to vs his maieste and greet- 
nesse ; we herden his vois fro the" myddis 
of fier°, and we preueden? to day that a 
man lynede’, ‘while God spak'* with man. 
Whi therfor schulen we die, aud schal es 
this gretteste fier deuoure vs? For if we 
heren more the vois of oure Lord God, 
we schulen die. What is ech man, that 26 


Xnotc. ©thinge ar. » hem 4. 


b thin oxe 1s. ¢ thin 
h Om. Is. 


a thi handmaide 1s. 

& that as thou 1. that also as thou s. 
mthisilffis. inanarmyis. © strei3zt 1s. 

t thi neigboris wijf1s. Une his is. VY ne ts. 

a he addide to 1s. b than that 
€had herd 1. f Om, plures. & 3e saw3en Is. 
m hath schewid 1s. 2 Om.18. © the 


V. 26—VI. 2. 


26die, What is al flesh, that he here the 
voice of God lyuynge, that fro the myd- 
dil of fier spekith, as we han herd, and 
27my3ten lyue? Thow more goo ni3, and 
here alle thingis that the Lord oure God 
shal seye to thee; and thow shalt speke 
to vs, and we herynge shal doon hem. 
28 The which thing whanne the Lord 
hadde herd, seith to me, I haue herd the 
voys of the wordes of this puple, that 
thei han spokun to thee; wel alle thingis 
29 thei han spokun. Who 3yueth hem siche 
thou3t to haue, that thei dreden me, and 
kepen alle my maundementis in al tyme, 
that wel it be to hem, and to the sones 
300f hem, into with outen ende? Go, and 
sey to hem, Turneth a3en into 3oure 
31 tentis. Forsothe thow stoond here with 
me, and I shal speke to thee a] the maun- 
dementis, and ceremoyns, and domes, that 
thow shalt teche hem, that thei doon hem 
in the loond that Y shal 3eue to hem into 
32 possessioun. Kepe 3e therfore, and doth 
hem, ‘the whiche" the Lord God hath 
comaundid to 30w; 3e shulen not bowe 
as aside, ne to the ry3t, ne to the left, but 
hi the weie that the Lord 3oure God hath 
comaundid, 3e shulen goo, that 3e lyuen, 
and wel be to 30w, and 3oure daies ben 
drawun along in the loond of 3oure pos- 
sessyonn. : 


Crk yl. 


1 These ben the heestis, and cerymoyns, 
and domes, that the Lord oure God co- 
inaundide that Y shulde’ teche 3ow, and 
3e doon hem in the loond to the which 

2to be weeldid 3e passen forthe ; that thow 
drede the Lord thi God, and kepe alle 
the maundementis, and heestis of hym, 
that I comaunde to thee, and to thi¥ 
sones, and to thi* sones sones, alle the 


DEUTERONOMY. 


481 


he here the vois of God lyuynge, that 

spekith fro the’ myddis of fier', as we 

herden", and that he may lyue? Rathere 27 

nei3je thou’, and here thou alle thingis 

whiche oure Lord God schal seie to thee ; 

and thou schalt speke to vs, and we schu- 

len here’, and schulen® do tho wordisY. 

And whanne the Lord hadde herd this, 28 

he seide to me, Y herde’* the vois of the 

wordis of this puple, whiche thei spaken* 

to thee; thei spaken® wel alle thingis. 

Who schal® 3yue® ‘that thei haue® siche29 

soule®, that thei drede me, and kepe alle 

my comaundementis‘ in al tyme, that it 

be wel to hem and to the sones ‘of hem?, 

with outen ende? Go thou, and seye to30 

hem, Turne 3e a3en in to 3o0ure tentis. 

Sotheli' stonde thou here with me, and Y 31 

schal speke to thee alle comaundementis*, 

and! cerymonyes, and domes, whiche thou 

schalt teche hem, that thei do tho in the 

lond which™ Y schal 3yue to" hem in to 
possessioun. Therfor kepe 3e, and ‘do 3e° 32 

tho thingis, whiche the Lord God co- 
maundideP to 3ou; 3e schulen not bowe 

awey, nether to the ri3t side{ nether’ to ie ate 
the left side, but 3e schulen go bi the weie 33 for ony pro- 
whiche® 30ure Lord God comaundide’, that porte, eae 
je lyue, and that it be wel to jou, and? uersite to be 
that 3oure daies be lengthid in the lond of 

3oure possessioun. 


eschewid. Lire 
here. c. 


CAP. VI. 


These ben the comaundementis", and’ 1 
cerymonyes, and doimes, whiche 3oure 
Lord God comaundide® that Y schulde 
teche 30u, and that 3e do tho* in the lond 
to which 3e passen ouer to welde; that2 
thouY drede thi Lord God, and kepe alle 
hise comaundementis, and heestis, whiche 
Y comaunde? to thee, and to thi sones, and 
sones* of sones?, in alle the® daies of thi 


uthatc. Om. acpern. WOm. acpern. * Om. E. 
®Om.1s. tthe fier1s. than herd is. Vthou to him 1. thou éo the Lords. where thee s. * Om. 11s. 
¥ wordis that thou spekist tovss. %haue herdeis. ®han spokeis. »Om.1s. © 3iueth to hem 1s. 
40Om.1. © thou3t 1. thou3t or myndes. fheestisis. & heris, bOm.1s. iand is. * the heestis 1s. 
10m.1s. ™thatis. "Om.1s. %dothis. P hath comaundidis. Qneis. ‘thatis, § hath co- 
maundide 1s. ¢Om.s. 1% heestis1, Om.s. YOm.1s.  W® hath comaundid 1s. *hemis.  Y thou, 
Israels, 2 comaundede preiogrt. to the sones 1s. > thi sones A prim. 1s. ¢ Om. B. 


3Q 


482, 


dais of thi lijf, that thi days ben drawen 
3along. Here, Yrael, and keep wel, that 
thow doo that the Lord hath comaundid 
to thee, and wel be to thee, and thow be 
multiplied forthermore, as the Lord God 
of thi fadres hath behoot, to 3yue to thee 
4the loond flowynge mylk and hony. Here, 
5 Yrael, the Lord thi God o God is. Thow 
shalt loue the Lord thi God of al thin 
herte, and of al thi soule, and of alle thi 
estrengthisy. And thes wordis that I co- 
maunde to thee to day, shulen be in thin 
7herte; and thow shalt telle hem to thi 
sones, and deuowtly thenk, syttinge in 
thin howse, and goynge in the weie, and 
sslepynge, and arysynge. And thow shalt 
bynd hem as a tokne in thin hoond ; and 
thei shulen be before thin eyen, and not 
9be meued; and thow shalt write hem in 
the? thresfold” and dores of thin hows. 
10 And whanne the Lord thi God hath lad 
thee into the loond, for the? which he 
swore to thi fadrys Abraham, Ysaac, and 
Jacob, and 3eueth to thee greet and best 
11 citees, that thow hast not bilde, howses 
ful of alle ritchesses, that thow hast not 
made out, and cysterns, that thow hast 
not doluen, vyyn places, and olyue places, 
12that thow hast not plantid, and eetist, 
isand were fulfillid®, be war bisily that 
thow for3ete not the Lord, that hath lad 
thee out of the loond of Egipte, fro the 
hows of seruage. The Lord thi God thow 
shalt drede, and to hym oonli thou shalt 
serue, and bi the name of hym thow 
u4shalt swere. 3e shulen not go aftir alyen 
goddis, of alle gentilis that about 30w 
is ben; for a gelonse God the Lord thi God, 
in the myddil of thee, lest eny tyme the 
woodnes of the Lord thi God wraththe 
a3ens thee, and doo thee awey fro the 
16 vttermoost® of the erthe. Thow shalt not 


y streyngthe aceru. 7% Om. BcDEFun. 


© vtmost c. otemost E. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


2Z threshold c. thressholdes p. 


VI. 3—16. 


lijf, that thi daies be lengthid. Thou4s 
Israel, here®, and kepe, that thou do tho 
thingis whichef the Lord comaundide® to 
thee, and that it be wel to thee, and thon 
be multiplied more, as the Lord God of 
thi» fadris bihiste!, to 3yue to thee a lond 
flowynge with mylk and hony. Thou Is-4 
rael, here, thi Lord God is 0 God. Thous 
schalt loue thi Lord God of al thin herte, 
and of al thi soule*, and of al thi strengthe. 
And these wordis whiche Y comaunde toc 
thee to dai, schulen be in thin herte; and7 
thou schalt telle tho to thi sones, and thou 
schalt thenke on! tho™, sittynge in thin 
hows, and goynge in the weie, slepynge, 
and rysinget. And thon schalt bynde tho" 
as a signe® in thin hond; and tho? schulen 
be’, and schulen be moued bifor thin i3en; 
and thou schalt write tho" in the lyntel,9 
and in’ the doris of thin hows. 
whanne thi Lord God hath brou3t thee in 
to the lond, for which he swoor to thi fa- 
dris, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob‘, and 
hath" 3oue to thee grete citees, and beeste’, 


+ slepynge and 
risynge. In E- 
bren it is thus, 
ligginge doun 
and risinge. Bc. 
for in the en- 
tring of the 


And 10 bed to slepe, 


and in the go- 
yng ont to 
wake, a man 
owith reduce 
his herte bi his 
loue in to God; 
also sppicge 

mi 


be ex. 
whiche thou bildidist not, housis fulle of ii pareet a thus, 


alle richessis, whiche thou madist not, and 
cisternes, which thou diggedist not, ‘places 
of vynes”, and ‘places of olyues*, whiche 


fur fantasies 
ben wont to 
come to aman 
in sleep of these 
thingis, aboute 
whiche he is 


thou plauntidist not, and thon’ hast ete, 12 bisied in wak- 


ng; and so if 


and art fillid”, be war diligentli, lest thon 13men in waking 


for3ete the Lord, that Jadde thee out of the 
lond of Egipt, fro the hows of seruage. 
Thou schalt drede thi Lord God, and thou 
schalt serue hym aloone, ‘bi seruyce due 
to God onely*, and thou schalt swere? bi 


en bisi abonte 
the loue of God, 
liyk fantasies 
hen wont to 
come in sleep. 
Lire here. c. 
he that spendith 
wel al his wak- 
inge. 8. 


his name}. 3e schulen not go aftir alien 14 ¢ speking treuth 


goddis, of alle hethen men that ben ‘in 
3oure cumpas®; 
louyere, thi Lord God is in thet myddis 
of thee, lest ony tyme the ‘strong ven- 
jaunce® of thi Lord God be wrooth a3ens 
thee, and do awei thee fro ‘the face of the 


8Om.c. » fyllyd acern. 


4Qm.1. ¢herethous. fthatrs. & hath comaundidis. 430ures. ‘hath bihizte rs. * soule, 
and of al thi mynde 1 pr.m.sx. Jvponis. ™hemis. "hemrs. otokene rs. Pptheiis. 4 be in 
thi myndeis. Shemis. 8% Om.1s. tto Jacobis. he hath is. the beeste rs. W vyne 3erdis 1. 
x olyue placis 1. Y whanne thou1. 2 fulfillid 1s. @ Om. pimonst sec.m.w. ) not swere m. © aboute 


jour, ¢Om. 1s, © feersnesse 1. 


for God is a feruent15 


and fulfilling 
it. Ss. 


VI. 17-—VII. 2. 


tempte the Lord thi God, as thow hast 
17 temptid in the place of temptynge’. Keep 
the heestis of the Lord thi God, and wit- 
nessyngis, and cerymoyns, that he co- 
ismaundid® to thee; and do that is ple- 
saunt and, good in the si3t of the Lord, 
that it wel be to thee, and thow goon yn 
weelde the best loond, of thef which the 
i9 Lord hath swore to thi fadres, that he 
shal do awey alle thin enemyes bifore 
20 thee, as he hath spokun. And whanne 
thi sone askith thee to morwe, seiynge, 
What to hen self wolen thes witness- 
yngis, and cerymoyns, and domes, that 
the Lord oure God hath comaundid to 
21 vs? thow shalt seie to hym’, Thrallis of 
Pharao we weren in Egipte, and the 
Lord ladde vs out of Egipte, in a strong 
22hoond; and hath doo signes, and greet 
wondris, and moost yuel in Egipte, ajens 
Pharao, and alle the seruauntis of hym, 
23in 3oure si3t. And he ladde 30w out 
thens, that vs lad ynne, he 3yue the loond, 
vp the which he hath swore to oure fa- 
24dres. And the Lord hath comaundid to 
vs, that we doon alle thes lawful thinges, 
and drede the Lord oure God, that it 
wel be to vs alle the dayes of oure lijf, as 
25it is today. And he shal be merciable 
of vs, if we doon and kepen alle the 
heestes of hym, bifore the Lord oure 
God, as he hath comaundyd to vs. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Whanne the Lord thi God hath lad 
thee into the loond, the which to weelde® 
thow shalt goo yn, and doth awey many 
gentilis before thee, Ethee, and Gergese, 
and Amorre, Chananee, Pherese’, Euee, 
and Gebuse ; seuen folkis, of myche more 
noumbre than thow art, and stronger 

2‘than thow*; and the Lord God take 


4 the temptynge 4 pr.m. 


ynge E prem. iand Pherese sern. 


f the face of erthe BcpEFGKLMNPQRTWX. above erthe 1s. 

m Om. 1. 
° after comyng 1. to comyng s. POm.1s. 4 hath comaundid 1s. * Pharaois seruauntis 18. 
x of plures. 


nessing K. hath comaundid 1s. _} plesynge 18. 
£ Om. nimorst sec.m.w. 4 Om. mm. 


he hath s marg. ® whenne s marg. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


e hath comaundid rcperi. 
k Om. E pr.m. 


Ww spak s. 


483 


erthef. Thou schalt not tempte thi Lord 16 
God, as thou temptidist® in the place of 
temptyng. Kepe thon the comaunde-17 
mentis® of thi Lord God, and the wit- 
nessyngis', and cerymonyes, whiche he co- 
maundide* to thee; and do thou that thats 
is plesaunt! and good in the™ si3t of the 
Lord, that it be wel to thee, and that thou 
entre, and welde the beste lond, of which 
the Lord swoor to thi fadris, that he19 
schulde do awey alle thin enemyes bifor 
thee, as he spak". And whanne thi sone 20 


_schal axe thee to morewe, that is, in tyme 


comyng®, and schal seie, W hat wolen these 
witnessyngis, and? cerymonyes, and domes 
to hem silf, whiche oure Lord God co- 
maundide1 to vs? thon schalt seie to21 
hym, We weren ‘seruauntis of Farao™ in 
Egipt, and the Lord ledde vs out of E- 
gipt, in strong’ hond; and he dide myra-22 
clis, and grete wondris, and werste, ‘that 
is, moost peyneful* veniaunces", in Egipt, 
a3ens Farao and al his hows, in oure si3t. 
And he ledde vs out therof, that he schulde23 
3yue fo vs led yn, the lond of which he 
swoor™ to oure fadris. And the Lord co-24 
maundide to vs, that we do alle these law- 
ful thingis, and drede oure Lord God, that 
it be wel to vs in alle the daies of oure 
lijf, as it is to dai. And he schal be mer-25 
ciful to* vs, if we schulen do and kepe alle 
hise heestis, bifor oure Lord God, as he 
comaundide to** vs. 


CAP. VII. 


Whanne thi Lord God hath lad thee ini 
to the lond, in to which thou schalt entre 
to weldeY, and hath? do awey many folkis 
bifor thee, Ethei, and Gergesei, and Am- 
morrey, Canenei, and Pherezei, Euey, and 
Jebusei; seuene folkis, of myche gretter 
noumbre than thou art, and strengere than 
thou; and* thi Lord God hath bitake hem 2 
h weeld- 


fOm.c. §& hem aBcdE pr. m. FU. 


& temptidist Aim 1Ks, 1h heestis1. { wit- 

n hath spoke or bihi3t 1. spak or hizte s. 
Sa strong Is. 
xx Om.c. Ywelde 1. 2% whenne 


3Q 2 


484 


hem to thee, and thow shalt smyte hem 
ynto the deth, thow shalt not maak with 
hem couenaunt of pees, ne haue mercy 
3of hem, ne felawship with hem mariagis; 
thi dou3ter thow shalt not 3eue to his 
sone, ne his dou3ter thow shalt! take to 
4thi sone; for she shal lede aside thi sone, 
that he folwe not me, and that more he 
serue to alyen goddis; and the woodenes 
of the Lord shal wraththe, and soone do 
sthee awey. But rather thes thingis ‘3e 
shulen™ doo to hem; the auters of hem 
vndurturneth, and brekith togidres the 
ymagis, and the ‘mawmet wodis” hewith 
down, and the grauen thingis brenneth. 
6For an holy puple thou art to the Lord 
thi God; the Lord thi God hath chosen 
thee, that thow be to hym a special pu- 
ple, fro al the puples that ben vpon erthe. 
7Not for al the® gentilis in noumbre 3e 
vencusiden, the Lord is ioyned to 3o0w, 
and hath chosun 30w, whanne 3e ben 
sfewer than alle the puples; but for the 
Lord hath loued 3ow, and hath kept the 
testament that he hath sworn to 3our fa- 
dres; and he hath lad 30w out in a strong 
hoond, and hath raunsomyd fro the hows 
of seruage, and fro the hows of Pharao, 
othe kyng of Egipte. And thow shalt 
wyte, for? the Lord thi God he is a strong 
God, and a feithful, kepynge couenaunt 
and mercy to thilk’ that louen hym, and 
to hem that kepen his heestis, into thow- 
1osande generaciouns ; and 3eeldynge anoon 
to hem that haten hym, so that he scater 
hem, and ferther differre not; anoon 3eld- 
lrynge to hem that thei deseruen. Kepe 
therfore the heestis, and cerymoyns, and 
doines, that I comaunde to thee to day, 
12 that thow doo. If after that thow herist 
thes domes, kepist hem, and doost', the 


DEUTERONOMY. 


VIT. 3—12. 


to thee, thou schalt smyte hem ‘til to? 
deeth, thou schalt not make ‘with hem®¢ 
a boond of pees, nether thou schalt haue 
merci on* hem, nether thou schalt felow-3 
schipe mariagis with him; thou schalt not 
3yue thi douzter to the® sone ‘of hym‘f, 
nether thou schalt take his dou3tir to thi, 
sone; for sche schal disceyue thi sone, that 4 
he sue not me, and® that he serue more 
alien goddis; and" the strong! veniaunce 
of the Lord schal be wrooth, and schal* do 
awei thee soone. But rather thou schalts 
do these thingis to hem; destrie 3e the! 
auteris ‘of hem™, and breke 3e yimagis"™ 


‘of metal, and? kitte 3e doun wodis4, and 


brenne 3e grauun™ ymagis. For thou arte 
an hooli puple to thi Lord God; thi 
Lord God chees thee, that thou be a spe- 
cial puple to hym, of alle pwplis* that ben 
ont erthe. Not for 3e" ouercamen in7 
noumbre alle folkis’, the Lord is ioyned 
to 30u, and chees” 3ow, sithen 3e ben 
fewere than alle puplis; but, for the Lords 
louede 30u, and kepte* the ooth whichY 
he swoor? to 30ure fadris; and he ledde 
jou out in strong hond, and a3en* bou3te 
30u fro the hows of seruage, fro® ‘the 
hows of Farao’, kyng of Egipt. Andg 
thou schalt wite, that thi Lord God hym 
silf is a strong God, and feithful’, and 
kepithf conenaunt and mersi to hem that 
louen hym, and to hem that kepen hise 
comaundenentis®, in to a® thousynde ge- 
neraciouns ; andi 3eldith* anoon to hem 10 
that haten hym, so that he destrie hem, 
and differr! no lengere; restorynge™ anoon 
to hem that that thei disseruen. Therfori 
kepe thou the comaundementis®, and cery- 
monyes, and domes, whiche Y comaunde 
to thee to dai, that thou do®. If aftir that 12 
thou herist these domes, thou kepist, and 


1 shalt not c. ™ thou shalt pr.m. 3e shole correxil ead. m. ™templys £ pr.m. mawmet templys ead. m. 
mawmet wodis sec. m. © On. 3B. P that ze pr.m. in for sec. m. q thoo c. t deest BDEF. deest 
hen nu. 

byntors. ¢Om.s. @vponis. ¢hisis. fOm.1s. §Om.s. © and thanne Is. ifeersis. k he 
schalis. lheris. ™Om.1s. ™ her joten ymagis 1. the ymagis j3oten KR. ymagis 3oten oT sec.m. W. 
the ymagis er pr.m. her forgid ymagis 3oten s. ° Om. ort sec.m.w. POm.w. 4 her wodis 1s. Ther 
grauun 1s. § the puplis1. thi peple s. tvpon 3s. "that 3e 18s. Vv othere folkis1. Whe chees1. * he 
kepte 1s. ythatis. % trenli bikotinge s marg. ®heajens. > Om. plures. Cand fror. 4 Pharaois 
hous 1. Farow house s. ©a feithful is. fhe kepith1s. & heestisrs. »Om.s. iandhers. * her 


while s marg. ! tarie 1s. 


m restorynge or 3eldinge Is. 
3 f=) 


2 heestis 1s. © do hem a pr.m. 


+ that duellith 
in eny of these 
londis. 8. 


VII. 13—22. 


Lord thi God shal kepe couenaunt’ to 
thee, and mercy, that he swore to thi fa- 
i3dres. And het shal loue thee, and mul- 
tiplie, and he shal blesse to the fruyt of 
thi wombe, and to the fruyt of thi loond, 
and to thi whete, and to thi" vyndage, 
oyle, and droues, flockis of thi sheep, 
vpon the loond for the which he hath 
swore to thi fadris, that he 3eue it to 
i4thee. Blissid thow shalt be among alle 
puples; there shal not be anentis thee 
bareyn of either kynde, as wel in men, 
isas in thi flockis. The Lord shall doo 
awey fro thee al sorwe; and the worst 
infirmytees of Egipte, that thow hast 
knowun, he shal not put in to thee, but 
16 to al thin enemyes. And thow shalt de- 
uowr alle the” puples, ‘the whiche* the 
Lord thi God is to 3yue to thee; thin 
eye shal not spare to hem, ne serue to 
the goddis of hem, lest thei ben into 
17dounfallynge of thee. If thow seist in 
thin herte, Mo ben thes folk than Y, 
what maner wise shal I mowe doo awey 
1shem ? wol thow not drede, but recorde 
that the Lord thi God hath doo to Pha- 
l9rao, and to alle the Egipciens, moost 
veniaunces, that thin eyen han seen, and 
toknes, and wondres, and a strong hoond, 
and a strau3t out arme, that the Lord thi 
God out lede thee; so thow shalt doo to 
alle puples ‘the which* thow dredist. 
20 Forthermore and horsefle3is the Lord thi 
God shal sendeY to hem, to the tyme that 
he doo awey alle, and seater, that fleen 
21 thee, and ben ‘hid mowen thei not. Thou 
shalt not drede hem, for the Lord thi 
God is in the myddil of thee, the greet 
22God, and feerful. He shal waste thes 
naciouns ‘in thi sijt*, litilmele* and bi 
partees ; thow shalt not inowe doo hem 


8 eomenaunt D passin, ¢t Om. cE prim. 


u Om. c, thi £ sed expunct. ab eadem am. 


DEUTERONOMY. 485 


doist tho?, thi Lord God schal kepe to 
thee couenaunt, and mersi, which he swoor? 
to thi fadris. And he schal lone thee, 13 
and schal™ multiplie ¢hee’, andt he schal 
blesse the fruyt of thi wombe, and the 
friyt of thi lond, thi wheete, and vin- 
dage", oile’, and droues” of beestis, and 
the flockis of thi scheep, on* the lond for 
which he swoor to thi fadris, that he 
schulde 3yue it to thee. Thou schalt bei 
blessid among alle puplis; noon bareyn 
of euer eithir kynde schal be atY thee, as 
well in men, as in thi flockis?. The Lord 1s 
schal do awei fro thee all ache, ‘ether 
sorewe*; and he schal not brynge to thee 
the worste” siknessis of Egipt, whiche® 
thou knewist’, but to alle thin enemyes®. 
And thou schalt ‘deuoure, that is‘, distrie, 16 
alle puplis, whiche thi Lord God schal 
3yue to thee; thin i3e% schal not spare hem, 
nethir thou schalt serue the" goddis ‘of 
hemi, lest thei ben in to the fallyng of thee. 
If thou seist in thin herte, These folkis* ben 17 
mo than Y, hou may Y do awei hem? ‘nyle 1s 
thou drede!, but haue thou mynde, what 
thingis thi Lord God dide to Farao, and 
alle Egipcians™ ; ‘he dide™ the gretteste® 19 
veniannces, whiche thin i3en sien’, and 
miraclis and grete wondris, and the‘ strong 
hond', and arm’ ‘holdun forth‘, that thi 
Lord God schulde lede thee out"; so he 
schal do to alle puplis whiche thon dredist. 
Ferthermore and thi Lord God schal sende 20 
venemouse flies in to hem, til he do awei, 
and destrye alle men, that fledden’ thee, 
and thei schulen not mowe be hid. Thou2i 
schalt not drede hem, for thi Lord” is in 
the* myddis of thee, greteY God, and ferd- 
ful. He hym silf schal waste these na-22 
ciouns in thi si3t, litil and litil, and bi 
partis ; thou schalt not mow do awey ‘tho 


w Om, BCcDEFH. 


xthatc. Ysendein rcpru. 2 Om. a. ® bi litil mele 4 prim. litil melum c. 
Phem 1s. 4 swoor or bihiz3fe 1s. * Om. 10 sec.m.s. % Om. plures. tOm.nump. 4% thi vindage ts. 
Y thin oile 1s. Wthidroues1s. *vponis. Yanentis1. 2 flockis shal be Goddiss. 20Om,1. » ful 
nelt. ¢thatrs. hast knowe1s. © these sikenessis shulen comes marg. fOm.ct. & Ren ELP. 
heris. iQm.1. &Om. x. I! drede thou not1. ™ the Egipcians1s. 7 Om. 1. he dide to hems. 
9 ful greter. Phanseenis. dat bias. Tmy3tis. Sanarmss. +t straizt ont 1s. "out thennus Is. 


V that wolden anoye thee and mowen not s marg. 
% feerful 1s. 


w Lord God nc pr.m. pe. 


x*Om.1. Ya grete ts. 


486 


awey togidre, lest perauenture be multi- 
plied a3ens thee the beestys of the erthe; 
23and the Lord thi God shal 3eue hem in 
thi si3t, and sle hem, to the tyme that 
24fulli thei ben doon aweie. And he shal 
take the kyngis of hem into thin hoondes, 
and thow shalt scater the names of hem 
vndur heuene; no man shal mowe with- 
stoonde to thee, to the tyme that thow 
25al to-trede hem. The grauen thingis of 
hem with fier thow shalt brenne; thow 
shalt not coueyt siluer and gold, of the 
whiche thei ben maad, ne thow shalt 
take of hem to thee eny thing, ne offend 
thow for hem, for abhomynacioun it is of 
26the Lord thi God. Ne brynge thow yn 
eny thing of the mawmet into thin hows, 
lest thow be maad accursid, as and it is; 
as stynk thow shalt looth, and as fil- 
thhed and horthe> of abbomynacioun 
thow shalt haue, for cursid it is. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Al maundement that I comaunde to 
thee to day be war bisili that thow doo, 
that 3e mowen® lyue, and that je ben 
multiplied, and goon yn, 3e weelden the 
loond, for the’ which the Lord hath 
2sworn to 3oure fadres. And thow shalt 
recorde of al the weie, bi the which the 
Lord thi God hath lad thee fourti win- 
tir, bi deseert, that he traneyle thee, and 
tempte; and weren knowun that in thin 
inwitte weren styryd, whether thow 
woldist kepe the heestis of hym, or noo®. 
3 He trauelde thee with scarsenes, and 3af 
to thee meet manna, the which vnknewe 
thow, and thi fadres, that he shewe to 
thee, that not in oonly breed lyueth man, 
but in eche word of God, that goth out 
4of the mouth of the Lord. Thi cloth- 


b horuthe c. horuths ge. horrede p. 


ahem is. » the erthe 1s, 
h Om. 1s. 
P Om. plures. 4 looth as 1s. Tas filthis s. 
W that Gis. * comaundide cp. Y the which 1. 
ter1s. Cin EIKLPs. 4 tnrmente thee plures. 

h bisily ymagyned 1s. i thin ynwitt 1s. 
turmentid 1s. ™ hath jonen ts. 
it not s. $%wolde1. t metex. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


© may BDFH. 


© to hem s teat. to thee marg. 
iOm.1. * thi ymagis s. | offende God s. ™ the abhominaciouns. ® Om. plures. al up. 
8 abhomynaciouns 1. 

2 hath ledde 1. 
€ schude a. Om. no. 
k heestis or no 1. heestis or nay s. 
n manna éo efe Ss. 


VII. 23—VIII. 4. 


naciouns* togidere, lest peraventure beestis 
of erthe® be multiplied aj3ens thee; and 23 
thi Lord God schal 3yue hem¢ in thi si3t, 
and he schal sle hem, til thei be doon 
awey outerly. And he schal bitake the‘ 24 
kyngis ‘of hem® in to thin hondis, and 
thou schalt destrie the? names ‘of hem® 
vndur heuene; noon schal mow aj3enstonde 
thee, til thou al to-breke hem. Thowes 
schalt brenne in fier thef grauun® ymagis 
‘of hem"; thou schalt not coueite the siluer 
and gold, of whiche ¢ho ymagis' ben maad, 
nether thou schalt take of tho* ony thing 
to thee, lest thou offende! therfor, for it is 
abhominacioun™ of thi Lord God. Nether 2 
thou schalt brynge ony thing of the idol 
in to thin hous, lest thou be maad cursid, 
as also that idol is; thou schalt wlate 7¢” 
as° filthe, and thou schalt haue 72? as4 de- 
foulyng, and filthis' of abhomynacioun', 
for it is cursid'. 


CAP. VIII. 


Be thou war diligenth", that thou do: 
ech comaundement*® which” Y comaunde* 
to thee to dai, that 3e moun lyue, and be 
multiplied, and that 3e entre, and welde 
the lond, for which the Lord swoor to 
joure fadris. And thou schalt haue mynde2 
of al the weie, bi whichY thi Lord God 
ledde? thee by* fourti 3eer>, bi° deseert, 
that he schulde turmente*, and schulde® 
temptef thee’; and that tho thingis that 
weren tretid! in ‘thi soule' schulden be 
knowun, whether thou woldist kepe hise 
comaundementis, ethir nay*. And he tur-3 
mentide! thee with nedynesse, and he 3af™ 
to thee meete, manna" which® thou knew- 
istP not, and‘ thi fadris ‘/newen not', that 
he schulde* schewe to thee, that a man 
lyueth not in breed' aloone, but in ech 


2 Om. c. © naic. noon pD. 


Gheris. ¢ Om.is. fheris. & Om.s. 
t acursid 1s. tbisily 1s. ¥ heest 1s. 
4 in BCDFGNQRX. Om. mow. » wyn- 
fOm. nN. assaye 1s. & Om. plures. 
i turmentitide a. hath 
aand neither 1. * knewen 


Othati1. P knewes 1. 


that he 
schulde tur- 
mente thee, and 
schulde tempte, 

at thi pa- 
cience were 
knowun to 
othere men, to 
ensaumple of 
hem, and to 
merit to thee; 
and the Serip- 
ture spekith 
here, as to the 
goode men of 
that puple, for 
bi the rule of 
Isidore, ofte a 
thing is arettid 
to al the puple, 
which thyng 
acordith to it 
bi resoun of o 
part. Lire 
here. C. 


VIL. 5—15. 


inge, with the which thow were couerd, 
for eelde faylide not, and thi foot was 
not vndur bryssed, loo! the fourtith 3eer 
sis; that thow a3en thenke in thin herte, 
for as a man techith his sone, so the 
6Lord thi God tau3te thee, that thow 
kepe the heestis of the Lord thi God, 
and goo in the weies of hym, and drede 
zhym. Forsothe the Lord thi God shal 
lede thee into a good lond, the lond of 
ryuers, and of watrys, and of welles, in 
whos feeldis and hillis breken out ge- 
sdrynges of flodes; the loond of whete, 
and of barly‘, and of vynes, in the% 
which figis, and poomgernettis, and 
olyues growen; the loond of oyle and 
9of hony; where with out eny scarsenes 
thow shalt eete thi breed, and thow shal 
ful vse the plente of alle thinges; whos 
stones ben yren, and of the hillis of it 
l0ben doluen metallys of brasse; that 
whanne thow eetist, and were fulfillid’, 
thow blesse to the Lord thi God for the 
best loond that he hath 3eue to thee. 
11 Kepe wel, and bewarre, lest eny tyme 
thow for3ete the Lord thi God, and mys- 
leue the heestis of hym, and domes, and 
cerymoyns, that Y comaunde to thee to 
lzday ; lest after that thow etist, and were 
fillid, feyr -howses bildist, and dwellidist 
13in hem, and hast droues of oxen, and 
flockis of sheep, and plente of siluer, and 
14 of gold, and of alle thinges, thin herte be 
reryd, and haue no mynde of the Lord 
thi God, that hath lad thee out of the 
loond of Egipte, and of the hows of ser- 
1suage, and thi leder was in greet wilder- 
nes, and feerfuli, in the which was ser- 
pent) thur3 blast brennynge, and scor- 
pioun, and ‘dipsas, that is, an* eddre 
that whom he bitith, he maketh thur3 
threste die!, and noon algatis watris; the 
which ladde out ryueres of the moost 


fbarlych pa.» € Om. c. 4 fillyd apern. 


u forth fro 1s. 


Xwith 1. Ybrusidis. 2 How that 1. now comen 8 marg. 
4 gedringists. @ vynes1s. folynesis. 8 Om. 1s. 
landy. ™ fulfillidis. ™m™ blesse to F sec.m. 1 that 1. 


rhemis. 4 be thanne 1. 
QRT sec.m. WX pr.m. *he was Is. 
weren in the desert, the which 1s. 


t in to pride 8 marg. 
y feerful 1s. 
¢ the Lord c. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


i ferdful er. 


vy Om. 1m. for manna cam doun Ss marg. 


« thou thenke 1s. 
2 which wildirnesse Is. 
4 brou3te I. 


487 


word that cometh ‘out of" the Lordis 
mouth, ‘that is, bi manna, that cam down’ 
‘at the heest of the Lord”. Thi cloth, bi*4 
which thou were hilid, failide not for eld- 
nesse, and thi foot was not brokunY under- 
nethe, lo! the fourtith 3eer is; that? thous 
thenke in thin herte, for as a man techith 
his sone, so thi Lord God tau3te* thee, that ¢ 
thou kepe the comaundementis? of thi Lord 
God, and go in hise weies, and drede hym. 
For thi Lord God schal lede thee in to a7 
good lond, in to the lond of ryueris, and 
of ‘stondynge watris®, and of wellis, in 
whos feeldis and mounteyns the depthis* 
of floodis breken out; in to the lond ofs 
wheete, of barli, and of vyneris®, in which 
lond fige trees, and puingranadis, and 
‘olyue trees‘ comen forth; in to the lond 
of oile, and of § hony; where thow schalt9 
ete thi breed with out nedynesse, and 
schalt® vse! the aboundaunce* of alle 
thingis; of which lond the stonys ben 

yrun, and metals of tyn ben diggid of the — thee; and the 
hillis therof; that! whanne thou hast ete, 10 Oe ee for 
and art fillid™, thou blesse™™ thi Lord a ae is, 
God for the beste lond which" he jaf? to s<*Pentis and 
thee. Therfor kepe thou, and be war, lest 11 24 dipsas, as 


+ word is not 
in Ebreu. c. 


t+ in which was 
a serpent and 
so forth, fro 
the hirting of 
whiche the 
Lord defendide 


so of scorpioun 

in viij c°. of 
ony tyme thou forjete thi Lord God, and — Exodi, gre. 

uouseste flre 
dispise hise comaundementis?, and domes, cam, that is, 

: the multi 
and cerymonyes, whiche Y comaunde to (fies; ne 
thee to dai; lest aftir that thon hast ete, 12 fhe Bi set 
and art fillid4, hast bildid faire housis, and lends of the 

. a eeste serpent. 

hast dwellid in tho, and hast droues of 1350 that itis” 
° thi - 

oxun, and flockis of scheep, and plente of  fevued, ahd 


seyued, and he 
siluer, and of gold, and of alle thingis, 


perischith 

soone, whom 
thine herte be reisid', and thenke" not on’) ee ‘ipsss 

11 tre 


thi Lord God, that ledde thee out of the here c 
lond of Egipt, and fro the’ hous of ser- eth 


feyneth swet- 
nesse with the 
heed, but vene- 
meth with the 


uage, and was* thi ledere in the greet wil-15 
dirnesse and ferdfulY, in which? was a 


serpentt brenninge with blast, and scor- ae K. 
° . eye that Js, an 
pioun*{, and dipsas||, and outirli no ‘wa- cadre. x. 


dipsas is an ed- 
dre, that makith 
hem whom he 
stinggith to die 
for thirst. 8. 


tris; which> Lord* ledde? out stremes of 


jspent 4. k Om. £ prim. ! to die c. 

w Om. bin. at the Lordis hest s marg. 
ahath tau3t 1s. > heestis 1s. ¢ poondis 1s. 
h thou schalt 1s. i vse theres. * plentee 1s. 
Ohath gone 1s. Pheestis1s. 41 fulfillid 1s. 
VYvpon is. W Om. BEF pr. m. LNP 
&q scorpioun 1s. > watris 


488 


ighard stoon, and fedde thee with manna 
in wildernes, the which knewen not thi 
fadres. And after that he trauelde thee, 
and strengthide, at the eende he hadde 
i7mercy of thee, lest thow seidist in thin 
herte, My strengthe, and iny3t of myn 
hoond alle thes thingis to me han 3euen. 
is But record thow of the Lord thi God, 


that he strengthes hath jeue to thee, that 


he fulfille his couenaunt, ‘vp the™ which 
he hath sworne to thi fadris, as the pre- 
igsent day shewith. If forsothe for3eten of 
the Lord thi God, folwedist alien goddis, 
and herye hem, and honoure®, loo! now 
Y before seye to thee, that vtterly thow 
2oshalt perishe; as the gentilis, that the 
Lord dyde awey in thin entre, so and 3e 
shulen perishe, if inobeishaunt 3e ‘shnlen 
be® to the voys of the Lord 3oure God. 


CAP. IX. 


1 Here, Yrael; thow shalt to day gon 
ouer Jordan, that thow weelde moost 
naciouns, and strenger than thow; greet 
2cytees, and into heuene wallid; a grect 
puple, and an hieje; the sones of Ena- 
chym, ‘the whiche? thi self hast seen, and 
herd, to the whiche no man may ajen 
3withstoond. Thanne to day thow shalt 
wite, that the Lord thi God he shal go 
before thee; fier deuowrynge and wast- 
ynge, the which brisse1 hem down, and 
doo awey, and scatre™ before thi face 
4swiftly, as he hath spokun to thee. Ne 
sey thow in thin herte, whanne the Lord 
thi God hath doo hem awey in thi si3t, 
For my ri3twisnes the Lord hath lad me 
in, that this loond I weelde; sith for her 
wickidnesses’ thes naciouns ben doon a- 
swey. Forsothe ne for thi ri3twisnesses, 
and euennesse of thin herte thow shalt 


DEUTERONOMY. 


VIII. 16—IX. 5. 


the hardeste® stoon, and feddef thee with 16 
manna in the® wildirnesse, which manna 
thi fadris knewen not. And after that 
the Lord turmentid' thee, and preuede®, at 
the last he hadd mersi on! thee, lest thou 17 
woldist seie in thin herte, My™ strengthe, 
and the my3t of myn hond jaf" alle these 
thingis to me. But thenke thou on° thils 
Lord God, that he 3af? strengthis to thee, 
that he schulde fille? his conenaunt, of 
whiche he swoor to thi fadris, as present’ 
dai schewith. Forsothe® if thou for3etist 19 
thi Lord God, and suest aliene goddis, and 
worschipist hem ‘in herte', and onourist 
‘with outforth", lo! now Y biforseie to 
thee, that thou schalt perische outerli; as’ 20 
hethen men pertschiden“, whiche* theY 
Lord? dide awei in thin* entryng, so and> 
3e schulen perische, if 3e schulen be vn- 
obedient to the vois of 3oure® Lord God. 


CAP. IX. 


Here thou, Israel; thou schalt passe 
Jordan to dai, that thou welde mooste! 
naciouns, and strengere than thou; grete 
citees, and wallid ‘til to® heuene; a greet 2 
puple, and hi3; the sones of Enachym, 
whiche thi silf ‘siest, and herdist‘, whiche 
no man may a3enstonde in the contrarie 
part. Therfor thou schalt wite to dai,3 
that thié Lord God* hym silf schal passe 
bifor thee; Ae is a fier deuourynge and 
wastynge', that schal al to breke hem‘, 
and! schal™ do" awei, and destrie® bifor 
thi face swiftli, as he spak to thee. Seie4 
thou not in thin herte, whanne thi Lord 
God hath do hem awey in thi si3t, For 
my ri3tfulnesse® the Lord brou3teP me 
yn4, that Y schulde welde this lond; sithen 
these naciouns ben doon awey for her 
wickidnessis. For not for thi ri3tfnl-s 
nessis', and equyte’ of thin herte thou 


™ vpon c. » honoure hem 4 pr. m. © weren E pr. ml. P that c. 4 bruse Ez. ? shatere E. 
8 wickidness p. 

efulhard1. fhefedders. ¢ Om.1. § the which 1. ihade turmentid s. k preuede thee s. ! of 1s. 
™ myn own 8. ® 3auen BCDEFKLMNOPX. han 3oue 1s. © vpon is. Phath3oue rs. 4 fulfille rs, this 
present 1s. 8 For 1s. t yawardly 1. withinne forth in thin affeccioun s. ™ hem outward 1. hem withoute 
forth s, Vasdident. *Om.1. *thewhicher.  Y thi EFIKLopastwx pr.m. 7 Lord God w. 
*Om.s. myn w. Palsor Courer. the mooste rs. ¢vntors. fhast seen and herdis. & the s. 
bOm.1. i his enemyess marg. * hem that wolen not obeie tohims. andhes. ™Om.1. do 
hem 1s. © distrie hem 1s. © riztwisnesse 1s, P hath brou3te 1s. 4 yn Aidre s. * riztwisnesse 1s. § for 


the equyte 1s. 


IX. 6—15. DEUTERONOMY. 489 


goon yn, that thow weelde the loondes 
of hem; but for thei diden vnpitownes'*, 
the comynge yn, ben doon awey, and 
that the Lord fulfille his word that vn- 
der ooth he hath bihoot to thi fadres 
6 Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob. Wite thow 
then, that not for thi ri3twisnesse" the 
Lord thi God shal 3yue to thee this best 
loond into possessioun, sith thow art a 
7puple of moost hard nolle. Haue mynde, 
and for3ete thow not what maner wise 
to wraththe thow terredist the Lord thi 
God in wildernes; fro that day that thow 
wentist out of Egipte vnto this place, 
euere more ajens the Lord thou striued- 
sist’. For and in Oreb thow terredist 
hym, and wrooth he wolde doo thee a- 
9 wey, whanne I stiede into the hil, that I 
took two stonen tablis, tablis of_ coue- 
naunt, the’ Lord couenauntide with 3o0u, 
and I abood in the hil fourti days and 
ny3t, breed not etynge, and water not 
i drynkynge. And the Lord 3af to me 
two stonen tablis, either wrytun with the 
fyngre of God, and conteynynge alle the 
wordis that to 3ow he spak in the hil, 
fro the myddil of fier, whanne al the 
1, companye of the puple was gedrid. And 
whanne fourti days weren passed, and so 
feele ny3t, the Lord 3af to me two stonen 
igtablis, tablis of boond of pees; and he 
seide to me, Ryse, and go hens anoon, 
for thi puple, that thow hast lad out of 
Egipte, han forsake swiftli the weie that 
thou hast shewid to hem, and han maad 
isto hem self a 3oten calf. And eft* the 
Lord seideY to me, J biholde, that this 
14 puple is of hard nolle; suffre me, that I 
trede hym doun, and doo awey the name 
of hym vndur henene; and Y shal set 
thee vpon folk that is more and strenger” 
isthan this. And whanne I shulde de- 


t wikkydleche E pr.m. ™rijtwisnesses nCDEFI. 


% steuere E pr.m. 


theris. "Om.1s. VY fulfille 1s. WW that 1s. 


schalt entre that thou welde thet lond ‘of 
hem"; but for thei diden wickidli, thei 
weren doon awey, whanne thou entridist, 
and that the Lord schulde fille’ his word 
which he bihi3te vndur an ooth to thi 
fadris, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 
Therfor wite thou that not for thi ri3t-6 
fulnesses’” thi Lord God 3af* to thee this 
beste lond in to possessioun, sithen thou 
art a puple of hardesteY nol. Haue thon?7 
mynde, and for3ete® not, hou in the wil- 
dirnesse thou terridist thi Lord God to 
greet wraththe; fro that dai in which thou 
3edist out of Egipt ‘til to this place, thou 
striuedist® euere ajens the Lord. For whis 
also in Oreb thou terridist hym, and he 
was wrooth, and wolde do thee awei, 
whanne® Y stiedef in to the hil, that Yo 
schulde take two tablis of stoon, the tablis 
of conenaunt which® the Lord made with 
jou, and Y continuede® in the hil fourti 
daies andi ny3tis, and Y eet not* breed, 
and Y drank not watir. And the Lord 3af to 
to me!, twey tablis of stoon, euer either 
wrytun with Goddis fyngur, and conteyn- 
ynge alle the wordis whiche he spak™ to 
3ou in the hil, fro the" myddis of the fier, 
whanne the cumpany of puple was ga- 
derid togidere. And whanne fourti daies 11 
and so many® ny3tis hadden passid, the 
Lord 3af to ime twei tablis of stoon, tablis 
of boond? of pees; and he seide to me, 12 
Rise thou, and go doun fro hennys soone, 
for thi puple, which$ thou leddist™ out of 
Egipt, han forsake swiftli the weie which’ 
thou schewidist to hem, and thei han 
maad to hem a 3otun calf. And eft theis 
Lord seide to me, ‘Y se‘ that this puple is 
of hard" nol; suffre thou me, that I alto 14 
breke hym, and do awey the” name ‘of 
hym fro vndur heuene; and Y schal or- 
deyne thee on* a folk which’ is grettere 


Vstriuec. Wthatthe cpr. Xoft Fr. Yseith BCDEFH. 


ww riztwisnesses 18. * hath 3ouen 1s. Y¥ moost hard 1. 


z Om. Is. a forzete thon 1s. aa Om. Is. dD ynto Is. ¢ hast stryuen Is. dhaue dois. € and 
whanne 1s. f wente vp 1. stiede vps. & that 1s. haboode ts. iand xl. isx prom. Knot theres. 1 me 


theres. ™hath spoken 1s. " Om.1s. © feel s. 
tI se, Isen. tanhards. Vhisis. W Om. ts. 


p the boond 1s. 4thati1, ‘hast led. § that 1s. 
X vpon is. Y that 1s. 


3R 


490 


scende fro the hil brennynge, and two 
tablis of the boond of pees I heelde with 
iseither hoond, and saw3 30w to hane syn- 
ned to the Lord 3oure God, and haue 
maad to 30w a 3oten calf, and han for- 
sake swiftly the wey of hym, that he 
17 shewide to 30w, I threwe afer the tablis 
fro myn hoondis, and breek hem in 30ure 
issi3t. And I felle down before the Lord 
as before, fourti days and fourti ny3t, 
breed not etynge, and water not drynk- 
yuge, for alle 3oure synnes that 3e diden 
a3ens the Lord, and hym to wraththe 
i9han terred; forsothe I dredde the indig- 
nacioun and the wraththe of hym, ‘in 
which* ajens 30w styryd, wold doo 30w 
awey. And the Lord herde me also this 
20while. Forsothe ajens Aaron hugeli 
wrooth, he wolde hym trede, and for 
2thym lyk maner Y preiede. Forsothe 
3oure synne that 3e diden, that is, the 
calf, takynge Y brent with fier, and in 
gobetis brekynge, and vtterly into pow- 
dre doynge, Y threwe ferre into the 
22streem that descendide fro the hil. In 
the brennynge forsothe, and in the tempt- 
ynge, aud in the Sepulcres of Lust, 3e 
23terreden the Lord; and whanne Y sente 
3ow fro Cades Barne, seiynge, Stye 3e 
vp, and weelde 3e the loond that I haue 
jeune to 30w, and 3e han dispisid the 
maundement of the Lord 30ure God, and 
han not leued to hym, ne his voyce heren 
243e wolden; but euler more 3e weren rebel, 
fro the day that I biganne to knowe 3ow. 
25 And Y leye before the Lord fourti days 
and fourti ny3tis®, in the whiche hym 
mekely Y preyede, that he ne shulde do 
2630u. awey, as he thratte. And preiynge 
I seide, Lord God, ne scater thow thi pu- 
ple, and thin herytage, that thow hast 


@ that e pr.m. 


ZT heelders. @Om.1 
schewide 1s. & thanne I s. 
in that tyme 1s. © ne I dronk ts. 
dois. + preinge for 30u s marg. % Om. 5. 
zdiden is. 4 calf that 3e maden, I took ts. 


b the twei rs. 
hthrew is. | of 1. 


3e vp 1. Stie 3e vp s. © that 1. 


tyme 1. whiche tymes s. 


n welde 3e Is. 
t fordo 1. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


¢ the boond 1s. 
K I brak 1s, 
P wrathfulnesse FIKLOs. 

v wolde haue 1s. 
> Om. plures. 
fI made it 1s. § caste G. I keste it 1s. ba K. Om. plures. 
P haue 3ouen 1s. 

u preiede him 18. 


IX. 16—26. 


and strongere than this folk. And whanne 1s 
Y cam doun fro the hil brennynge, and 
helde* with euer® either hond twei® tablis 
of boond® of pees, and Y sei3, that 3e hadde 16 
synned to 3oure Lord God, and hadden 
maad to 30u a 30tun calf, and hadden® for- 
sake swiftli the weie of God which® he 
schewidef to 30u, Y castide doun the ta-17 
blis fro! myn hondis, and brak* tho tablis 
in 30ure si3t. And Y felde doun bifor the is 
Lord as ‘biforto, in! fourti daies and fourti™ 
ny3tis, and Y eet not" breed, ‘and drank 
not® watir, for alle 3oure synnes whiche 
3e diden ajens the Lord, and terriden hym 
to ‘greet wraththeP; for Y dredde the in-19 
dignacioun and yre’ of hym"', by which he 
was stirid ajens 30u, and wolde do® 30u 
awey. And the Lord herde me also in this 
tymet. Also the Lord was wrooth greteli" 20 
azens Aaron, and wolde’ alto breke” hym, 
and Y preiede in lijk maner for hym. 
‘Forsothe Y took 3oure* synne which’ 3e 21 
maden, that is, the calf*, and brente 22> 
in fier, and® Y alto brak’ in® gobetis, and 
droof outerli in to dust, and castide® forth 
in to ¢he® stronde, that cam doun fro the 
hil. Also in the brennyng, and in the 22 
temptacioun at the watris of aenseiyng, 
and in the Sepuilcris' of* Coueytise!, 3e 
terriden the Lord; and whanne Y sente 23 
30u fro Cades Barne, and seide, ‘Stye 3e™, 
and welde" the lond which® Y 3af? to 30u, 
and 3e dispisiden the comaundement4 of 
3oure Lord God, and 3e bileneden not to 
him, nether 3e wolden here his vois ; but 21 
euere 3e weren rebel, fro the day in which 
Y bigan to knowe 3o0n. And Y lay byfore 2s 
the Lord fourti daies and fourti ny3tis, in 
whiche’ Y bisou3te hym mekeli, that he 
schulde not ‘do awey' 3ou, as he manaas- 
side. And Y preiede", and seide, Lord 26 


Dv ny3t BCEFH. 

4 that 3e haddens. © that 1s. 

1 bifore hond bi 1s. ™ bi fourti 1s. 

4 the wraththe 1s. ° the Lord s. 
whrokenis. *Andthe1is. yY that 1s. 
cOm.c. ‘brak itis. © into plures. 

iSepulcreqa. Kbi xk. 1 Lustis. ™ Wende 

aheest 1s. ‘inthe. *® whiche 


‘ had 
2 not 
s haue 


1X. 27—X. 6. 


bou3t in thi mychilnes, the which thow 
hast lad out of Egipte in a strong hoond. 

27 Record of thi seruauntis, Abraham, Ysaac, 
and Jacob; ne bihold thow the hardnes 
of this puple, and vnpitowsnes’, and 

zasynne, lest perauenture the dwellers of 
the loond, of thet which thow hast lad 
vs out, seyn, The Lord my3te not lede 
hem into the loond that he bihijte hem, 
and hatide hem; therfor he hath lad out, 

ggthat he sle hem in wildernes, that ben 
thi puple, and thin herytage, ‘the which* 
thow hast lad out in thi greet strengthe, 
and in thi streijt out arme. 


CAP. X. 


1 In-that tyme the Lord seide to me, 
Plaan to thee two stonen tables, as the 
rather weren; and sty vp to me into the 
hil. And thow shalt make a treen ark, 

gand I shal write in the tablis wordes that 
weren in hem ‘the whichef before thou 
breeke ; and thow shalt putt hem into 

3the ark. I made therfor the ark of trees 
of Sechym; and whanne IJ hadde planed 
two stonen tablis, at the lyknes of the 
rather, I stide vp into the hil, hanynge 
shem in hoondes. And he wroot in the 
tables, after that that he hadde wryten 
before ten wordes, that the Lord spak to 
vs in the hil, fro the myddil of fier, 
whanne the puple was® gedryd, and 
shath jeue hem tome. And turned aj3en 
fro the hil, Y dessendid, and putte the ta- 
bles into the ark that I made,’the whiche 
3it hidir to there ben, as the Lord 
6hath comaundid to me. Forsothe the 
sones of Yrael meeueden tentis fro Be- 
roth, of the sones of Jachan, in Mosera, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


491 


God, distrye not thi puple, and thin eri- 
tage, which’ thow” ‘a3en bou3tist* in thi 
greetnesseY, which thou leddist? out of 
Egipt in strong* hond. Haue thou mynde27 
of thi seruauntis, of Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob’; biholde thou not the hardnesse of 
this puple, and the wickidnesse, and the 
synne ¢herof, lest perauenture the dwell-28 
eris of the lond, out of which thou leddist® 
vs, seien, The Lord my3te not bryng hem 
in to the lond which* he bihi3te to hern, 
and he hatide hem; therfor he ledde hem 
out that he schulde® sle hem in wildir- 
nesse; and‘ thei ben thi puple and thin2y 
eritage, which? thou leddist out in thi 
greet strengthe, and in thin arm holdun"™ 
forth. 


CAP. Be 


In that tyme the Lord seide to me,1 
Hewe thou twei tablis of stoon to thee, as 
the formere weren; and stie thou! to me 
‘in tok the hil. And thou schalt make an 
arke, ‘ether a cofere', of tree, and Y schal2 
write in the™ tablis, the wordis that 
weren in these tablis whiche thou brakist 
bifore ; and thou schalt putte tho tablis in 
to the arke. Therfor Y made an ark of3 
the trees of Sechim, and whanne Y hadde 
hewe twei® tablis of stoon, at the licnesse 
of the formere tablis, Y stiede® in to the 
hil, and hadde? the’ fabs in the™ hondis. 
And he’ wroot in the tablis, bi that' that 
he ‘hadde writun" bifore, ten’ wordis, 
whiche the Lord spak to 30u in the hil, 
fro the” myddis of the fyer, whanne the 
puple was gaderid, and he* 3af theY ¢ablis 
to me. And Y turnide a3en fro the hil,s 
and cam doun, and puttide? the tablis in 
to the arke which? Y hadde maad, ‘whiche 
tablis’ ben there hidur to, as the Lord 
comaundide to me. Forsothe® the sones¢ 


¢ wikkednes z pr.m. 4Om.c. ¢thatc. fthatc, Sis g prim. 
vthat 1 thon hast 1s. *agenbou3t 1. Y of mercy s marg. 7 hast ledis. 4astrongis. » of 
Jacob 1s. Chast led 1s. 4thatr. ¢woldex. fand, Lordis. & thats. © streigtis. i thou vp rs. 
kinc. 1Om.1. ™tho xs. thesx pr.m. thetwei1s. °3edevp1. stiedevps. PI hadde ts. 
Gtho asec.m. *mynis. * the Lords. ‘that maner is, “wroot 1s. Vthe tenis. W Om. 1s. * the 
Lord 1s. ¥ tho a sec.m.c sec.m. 21 putters. ®thatis, the whicher. ¢ And rs. 


3R2Q 


492 


where Aaron is deed, and biryed, for 
whom his sone Eleazar bere the office of 
z7preest. Thens thei camen in Galaad; 
fro the which place goon forth, thei set- 
tiden® tentis in Gethabatha, in the loond 
sof watris and of stremes. That tyme I! 
seuerde the lynage of Leuy, that he bere 
the ark of the boond of pees of the Lord, 
and stoond before hym in seruyce, and 
blesse in the name of hym, into the pre- 
gsent day. Wherfor Leuy hadde no part 
ne possessioun with his britheren, for he 
the Lord is the possessioun of hym, as 
the Lord thi God hath bihoot to hym. 
101 forsothe stood in the hil, as bifore, 
fourti dais and fourti ny3t, and the Lord 
herde me in this while, and wold not 
11lese thee. And he seide to me, Go, and 
weend before the puple, that he goo yn, 
-and weelde the loond that I haue sworn 
to the fadres of hem, that I shulde take 
12to hem. And nowe, Yrael, what thing 
the Lord thi God askith of thee, but that 
thow drede the Lord thi God, and goo in 
the weies of hym, and loue hym, and 
serue to the Lord thi God in al thin 
isherte, and in al thi soule; and kepe the 
heestis of the Lord thi God, and the 
cerymouns of hym, that I to day co- 
maunde to thee, that wel it be to thee. 
14 Loo! of the Lord thi God is heuene, and 
heuene of heuene, erthe, and alle thingis 
15 that in it ben; and neuerthelater* to thi 
faders ioyned is the Lord, and he! louede 
hem, and hath chosen the seed of hem, 
after hem, that is, 3ow, fro alle gentils, as 
ig to day is preued. 
fore the vttermore part of 3oure herte, 
and 3oure nolle forthermore harde 3e 
iznot. For the Lord oure God he is God 
of goddis, and Lord of lordyngis; a 
greet God, and my3ti, and dreedful”, that 


hsettec. ihe p. 


4 her tentis 1s, € a place s marg. 
schulde 1s. lin kiss. ™ Om. 1s. 
wolde not1. Sthat1.  t swoor of 1. 
2 ioyned 1. bi feruent affeccioun 8 mare. 
‘¢ Om. 1. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Kutte 3e about ther- 


k nerthelater £. 


f Israel s. 
n this present 1s. 
U 3eue if IS. 
& he louede rks. } circumciden acrx pr.m. 


X. 7-17. 


of Israel moueden tentis’ fro Beroth® of 

the sones of Jachan in to Mosera, where 

Aaron was deed, and biried, for whom his 

sone Kleazar was set in preesthod. Fro7 

thennus theif camen in to Galgad®; fro 

which place thei 3eden forth, and settiden 

tentis in Jehabatha, in the lond of watris 

and of strondis. In that tyme Y departides 

the lynage of Leuy, that it schulde bere 

the arke of boond of pees of the Lord, 

andi schulde* stonde bifor hym in! seruyce, 

and schulde blesse in his name til™ in to 

present? dai. For which thing Leuy hadde9 

not° part, nether possession with hise bri- 

thren, for the Lord hym silf is his posses- 

sioun, as thi Lord God bihi3te to hym. 

Forsothe? Y stood in the hil as‘ bifore, 10 

fourti daies and fourti ni;tis, and the 

Lord herde me also in this tyme, and 

nolde™ leese thee. And he seide to me,1 

Go thou, and go bifor this puple, that it 

entre, and welde the lond which’ Y swoort 

to her fadris, that Y schulde jeue" to hem. 

And now’, Israel*, what axith thi Lord 12 

God of thee, no* but that thou drede thi 

Lord, and go in hise weies, and that thou 

loue hym, and serue thi Lord God in al 

thin herte, and in al thi soule; and thatis 

thou kepe the comaundementis’ of thi 

Lord God, and the cerymonyes of hym, 

whiche Y comaunde to thee to dai, that it 

be wel to thee. Lo! heuene is of thi Lord 14 

God, and heuene of heuene; the erthe 

aud alle thingis that ben ther ynne ben 

hise; and netheles the Lord was glued?f 15 the ey 

to thi fadris, and louede*? hem, and he tel lorie 

chees her seed after hem, and 30u of alle Pak tani 

folkis, as it is preued to dai. Therfor cir- 16 panne ie ihe 

cumcide® 3e the prepucie, ‘ethir>» vnclen- ae ee: 

nesse°, of 30ure herte}, and no more make __ ther to thee. 

3e harde 3oure nol. For 3oure Lord God 17 Sy wadinmes 

hym silf is God of goddis, and Lord of oes 
yuel thou3t and 
wille. Lire 

1Om.ce pr.m. ™ ferdeful ecpern. wes 


& Galaad s.  _ the boond 1s. ithats.  & it 
Onors. P Andis. das idideis. the 
Vthoux. WOm.1. *Om.1. _ Y heestis 1s. 


bb that is, the s. 


X. 18—-XI. 6. 


lspersoone taketh not, ne 3iftis. He doth 
doom to the faderles child, and to" wi- 
dewe, and loueth the pilgrime, and 3yueth 

19to hym lyuelod, and clothinge. And 3e 
therfore loueth pilgrimys, for and 3e 3oure 
self weren pilgrimys® in the loond of E- 

20 gipt. The Lord thi God thow shalt drede, 
and to hym? thow shalt serue, and to hym 
thow shalt drawe to, and swere in the 

ziname of hym. He is thi preysynge, and 
thi God, that hath do4 to thee thes greet 
thingis, and feerful, that thin eyen han 

22seen. In seuenti soules thi fadres des- 
sendeden into Egipte, and loo! now the 
Lord thi God hath multiplied thee as 
sterres of heuene. 


CAP XI. 


1 Loue also the Lord thi God, and kepe 
wel the heestis of hym, and cerymoyns, 
2 domes,and maundementis,al tyme. Knowe 
3e to day that 3oure sones vnknowen, that 
han not seen the disciplyne of the Lord 
joure God, the greet thingis of hym, and 
3strong hoond, and strau3t arme, toknes 
and werkis, that he dide in the myddil of 
Egipte to Pharao the kynge, and to al 
4his loond, and to al the’ oost of Egip- 
ciens, and’ to hors and charys; what 
maner wise couerden hem watris of the 
reed see, whanne thei pursueden 3ow, 
and the Lord dide hem awey vnto the 
sday that is now; and to 30ow what 
thingis he hath doo in wildernes, to the 
étyme that 3e camen to this place; and to 
Dathan and Abyron, the sones of Eliab, 
that was the sone of Ruben, whom the 
erthe, his mouth opned, sowpide awey, 
with howses and tabernaclis, and al the 
snbstaunce of hem that thei hadden, in 


DEUTERONOMY. 


493 


lordis, ‘God greet’, and mi3ti, and feerd- 
ful*, whichf takith not persoone®, nether 
3iftis, He makith doom to the fadirles, 18 
and modirles, and to the widewe; he 
loueth a pilgrym, and 3yueth* to hym lyif- 
lode and clothing. And therfor ‘Ioue 3e!19 
pilgryms, for also™ 3e weren comelyngis 
in the lond of Egipt. Thou schalt drede2o 
thi Lord God, and thou schalt serue hym 
aloone, and thou schalt cleue to hym, and 
thou schalt swere in his name". He is21 
thi preisyng, and thi God, that made to 
thee these grete dedis®, and ferdful?, 
whiche thin ijen si3en1. In seuenti ment 22 
thi fadris 3eden doun in to Egipt, and 
lo! now thi Lord God hath multiplied 
thee as the sterris of henene. 


CAP. XI. 


Therfor® loue thi Lord God, and kepei 
thou hise comaundementis and cerymo- 
nyes, domes' and heestis", in al tyme. 
Knowe 3e to day tho thingis whichee 
3oure sones knowen’ not, ‘whiche sones 
sien not” the doctryn of 3oure Lord God, 
hise* grete dedis’, and strong? hond, and 
‘arm holdun forth*, myraclis® and werkis®,s 
whiche he dide ‘in the myddis of 4 Egipt 
to Farao, kyng, and to al ‘the lond of hym®, 
and to al the oost of Egipcians‘, and to4 
horsis®, and carris; hou the watris of the 
reed see hiliden hem, whanne thei pur- 
sueden 3ou, and the Lord ‘dide awei! hem 
‘til in to‘ ‘present dai!; and whiche™s 
thingis the Lord dide" to jou in wilder- 
nesse, til 3e camen to this place; and to6 
Dathan and Abiron, ‘the sones of Heliab®, 
that was ‘the sone of Ruben?, whiche4 the 
erthe swolewide, whanne his mouth was 
openyd, with ‘the housis" and tabernaclis, 
and al§ the catel ‘of hem’ which" thei 


nto the c. © comlynges scpz. Phym oonly © pr.m. made xz prim. 'Om. 3B. § Om. 4. 


efereful is. f that 1. 
k he 3yueth 1s. 1 Joueth 1. 
P fereful 1s. 4 han seen 1s. 
v kunnen sp. knewen m. 
% his strong 18. 
€ his lond 1s. f the Egipcians 1s. 
vnto the s. ! day that is now s. 
4 the whiche 1 fet. Daton and Abiron marg. 
u that 1. 


da pret God 1s. 
i tust doom s. 
© werkis 1s. 
heestis 1s. 
Y werkis 1s. 


& a persoone Is. 

™ alle is. 
T lyues 1. 
w that han not seen 1. which sones han not seen s. 
a his stre3t arm Is. 
& the horsis 1. her horsis s. 
m the whiche 1. 
her housis 1. his housis s. 


h but iustli he demith riche and pore s marg. 
” trewly speking and fulfilling s marg. 
t and domes BEGILPsxX pr.m. ™ his 

X ne hise 1s. 
b his myraclis 1s. © his werkis 1s. 4 a myddus 1. 
hOm.1s. i fordidex. * vnto this 1. 
° Heliab sones s. P Ruben sone s, 

8 with als. t Om. rs. 


8 Herfor a. 


n hath do 1s. 


494 


7the myddil of Yrael. 3oure eyen saw3en 
alle the greet werkis of the Lord, ‘the 
swhiche’ he dide, that 3e kepen alle the 
maundementis of hym, the whiche I to 
day comaunde to 3ow, and mowen goo 
yn, and weelde the Joond, to the which 
93e shulen goon yn, and myche tyme lyue 
in it, that vndur ooth the Lord hath bi- 
hoot to 3oure fadres, and to the seed of 
10hem, mylk and hony flowynge. Forsothe 


the loond, to the which to be weeldid - 


thow shalt goon yn, is not as the loond 
of Egipte, of the" which thow wentist 
out, where the seed throwun in maner of 
ll gardyns moystynge watrys ben lad; but 
it is hilli, and feeldi, abidynge fro heuene 
12reynes, that the Lord thi God evermore 
visitith, and the eyen of hym in it ben, 
fro the bigynnynge of the 3eer vnto the 
i3eend of it. If thanne 3e obeshen to myn 
heestis that I to day comaunde to 3ou, 
that 3e lonen the Lord 3oure God, and 
serue to hym in al 3oure herte, and in al 
1430ure soule; he shal 3yue to 3oure loond 
reyn tymeli and laate, that 3e gederen 
1stogider whete, and wyn, and oyle, haye 
of the feeldes to beestis to ben fed, and® 
i6that 3e eten and ben fulfillid?. Be 3e 
war, lest perauenture 3oure herte be dis- 
seyued, and 3e goon awey fro the Lord, 
and seruen to alyen goddes, and honoure 
whem; and the Lord wrooth cloose he- 
uenesi, and reynes comen not down, ne 
the erthe 3yue his buriownynge’, and 3e 
perishen swiftli fro the best loond that 
isthe Lord is to 3euynge® to 30w. Putte 
je thes my wordis in the hertis, and in 
3oure inwittis, and honge 3e hem vp for 
a tokne in hoondis, and among 3oure eyen 
19 sette 3e. Teche 3e 30ure sones, that hem 
thei denowtli thenken, whanne thow sit- 
tist in thin hows, and gost in the weye, 


t that c. u Om. c. ° Om. 4. P fillyd acern. 
S 3euyn BCDE sec. m. FH. 
whan seen ts. *hathdors. Y eomaundide spo. 


¢ fadres, and her fadres s. ¢ Om. 1s. 
k Jed therto 1. led to moiste ii s. 

Stymely 1. P feeld s. 
4 wrooth herfore s. 
@ in 3onre soulis 1s. 
& vpon 1s, 


4 feed with 1. 
Vv or the firmament t marg. 
bhem vp1s. © tokene 1s. 
h risist vp 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. , 


© her seed rs. 
1 the lond that Israel shal welde s. 
tT and 30ur beestes 8 marg. 
W reyn I. 

4 soure ts. 


XI. 7—19. 


hadden, in the myddis of Israel. 3oure7 
izen sien“ alle the grete werkis of the 
Lord, whiche he dide*, that 3e kepe alles 
hise heestis whiche Y comaunde’Y to dai to 
jou, and that 3e moun entre, and welde 
the lond, to which 3e schulen entre, ands 
3e lyne therynne in? myche time; which* 
lond, flowynge with mylk and hony, the 
Lord bihi3te vndur an ooth? to 3oure fa- 
dris® and to¢ ‘the seed of hem’. For the 10 
lond, to which thou schalt entre to welde, 
is not as the lond of Egipt, ‘out of which? 
thou 3edist", where whanne the seed is 
cast! in the maner of gardyns, inoist wa- 
ters ben led‘; but it! is hilli, and feldi, 11 
and abidith™ reynes fro heuene, which 12 
lond thi Lord God hiholdith, and hise 
izen ben therynne, fro the bigynnyng 
of the 3eer ‘til to" the ende therof. Ther-13 
for if 3e schulen obeie to myn _heestis 
whiche Y comaunde to dai to 30u, that 3e 
loue 30ure Lord God, and serue hym in 
al 3oure herte, and in al 3oure soule; hei4 
schal 3yue to 30ure lond reyn tymieful° 
and late, that 3e gadere wheete, and wyn, 
and oile, hey of the feeldis? to feede415 
beestis, that 3e" bothe ete and be fillid’. 
Be 3e war, lest perauenture 3oure herte be i¢ 
disseyued, and 3e go awei fro the Lord, 
and serue alien goddis, and worschipe 
hem; and the Lord bet wrooth", and close 17 
heuene’, and reynes* come not doun, ne- 
ther the erthe 3yue his fruyt, and 3e pe- 
rische swiftli fro the beste* lond which’ 
the Lord schal 3yue to 3o0u. Putte 3e thes 18 
wordis? in 3oure hertes and soules*, and 
honge 3e ‘tho wordis? for a signe in the! 
hondis, and sette 3e° bitwixe 3oure ijen. 
Techef 30ure sones, that thei thenke on® 19 
tho wordis, whanne thou sittist in thin 
hows, and goist in the weie, and lyggist 
doun, and risist». Thou schalt write tho 20 


4 heuene pcpEeFu. t boriounyngis BD. 


zOm.1.  4&the which rt. > stidfastly s marg. 
fOm. a. &that1. 4 3edist out off 1. 1 sowe 1s. 
™ it abidith ts. a ynto Is. 


8 fulfillid 1s. 
* ful good 1. y that 1. 
€ 3e hem ts. 3e tho k. 


t therfore be 1. 
2 my wordis s. 
f Teche 3¢ 1s. 


XI. 20—~-31. 


20 and lyist, and arysist. Thow shalt wryte 
hem vpon the postis and 3atis of thin 
21 hows, that thi days and of thi sones be 
multiplied in the loond that the Lord 
swore to thi fadris, that he shulde 3yue 
to hem, as long as heuene stoont aboue 
22to erthe. Forsothe if 3e kepen the heestis 
that I comaunde to 3ow, and doon hein, 
that 3e louen the Lord 3oure God, and 
goon in alle the weyes of hym, drawynge 
23to hym, the Lord Almy3ti shal scater 
alle thes gentilis bifore 3oure face, and 3e 
shulen weelde hem that ben more and 
24strenger than 3e. LEche place that joure 
foot tredith, shal be 3our; fro deseert, 
and fro Libane, and the greet flood of 
Effrate vnto the west see, shulen ben 
2530ure termes. No man shal stoond a3ens 
30w ; 3o0ure dreed and feerd shulen 3yue 
the Lord 3oure God vpon al the loond 
that 3e ben to trede, as he hath spoke to 
2630w. Loo! I purpose in 3oure si3t to day 
27blessynge and cursynge ; blessynge, if 3e 
obeishen to the heestis of the Lord jour 
God, that to day I comaunde to 30w; 
eg cursynge, if 3e heren not the maunde- 
mentis of the Lord j3oure God, but gon 
awey fro the weie that Y now shewe to 
3ow, and gon after alien goddis that 3e 
29knowen not. Forsothe whanne the Lord 
thi God ledith thee into the loond, to the 
which to be had thow goost, thow shalt 
putte blessynge vpon the hil of Garisym, 
30 cursynge vpon the hilt Hebal", that ben 
bizonde Jordan, after the weye that turn- 
eth to the sunne goynge down, in the 
loond of Chananey™, that dwellith in the 
wilde feeldes ajens Galgalam, that is bi- 
side the valey strecchynge and entrynge 
siaferre. Forsothe 3e shulen passe Jordan, 
that jee weelden the loond that the Lord 
joure God is to 3yue to 30w, and 3e han 


DEUTERONOMY. 


495 


wordis oni the postis, and j3atis* of thin 
hous, that the daies of thee and of thi2i 
sones be multiplied in the lond which! 
the Lord swoor™ to thi fadris, that he 
schulde 3yue" to hem, as long as heuene 
is aboue erthe. For if 3e kepen the heestis 22 
whiche Y comaunde to 3ou, and 3e° do tho, 
that 3e loue 30ure Lord God, and go in alle 
hise weies, and cleue to hym?, the Lord 23 
schal destrie alle these hethen men bifor 
3oure face, and 3e schulen welde tho folkis 
that ben grettere and strongere than 3e. 
Ech place which? 3o0ure foot schal" trede, 24 
schal be 30ure; fro the® deseert, and fro 
thes Liban, and fro the greet flood Eu- 
frates ‘til tot the west see, schulen be 
3oure termes. Noon schal stonde a3ens25 
jou; 30ure Lord God schal jiue 30ure" out- 
ward drede and inward drede on* ech 
lond whichY 3e schulen trede, as he spak 
to 30u. Lo! Y sette forth in 3oure sizt to26 
day blissyng and cursyng; blessyng, if 3e27 
obeien to the heestis of 30ure Lord God, 
whiche? Y comaunde* to 3ou® to dai; curs-28 
yng, if 3e heren not the heestis of 3oure Lord 
God‘, but goen awei fro the weie which 
Y schewe® now! to 30u, and goen after alien 
goddis whiche 3e knowen not. Sotheli29 
whanne thi Lord God hath brou3t thee in 
to the lond, to which to enhabite® thou 
goist, thou schalt sette blessyng on the 
hil Garisymi, cursyng* on! the hil Hebal™, 
whiche Addis" ben bizende Jordan, aftir30 
the weie that goith to the goyng doun of 
the sunne, in the lond of Cananey’, that 
dwellith? in the feeldi places aj3ens Gal- 
gala, which’ is bisidis the valey goynge 
and entrynge fer. Fer 3e schulen passe 31 
Jordan, that 3e welde the lond which" 
3oure Lord God’ schal 3yue to 30u, and 
that 3e haue and welde that lond. Ther-32 
for se 3e, ‘that 3et fille" the cerymonyes 


Om. r. Yof Hebal cz. W Chaney a. 
ivponis. the jatists. !thatr.. ™ stidefastly bihigt is. "3yue irs. © Om.1.  P bi trewe 
bileue 8 marg. (thatis. 'Om.1. §&Om.1s, tvnto is. 4 30u plures. W 30ure inward Is. *vpon Is. 
Ythatr. 2thati. ®comaundides. bthees. ¢Om.s. ‘Uthatrs. ¢shalschewea. f Om. c. 
& dwelle ynne is. 4 vponis. }of Garisym c. that hizt Garisym s. * and cursyngs. !vpon is. ™ that 
hit Hebal s. =" Om.1. © the men of Chananey 1s. P dwellenis. 4thatrs. * of which Gq. that 1s. 


® Om. plures. tOm.1. 4% fulfille rs. 


496 


szand weelde it. Se 3e therfore that 3e ful- 
fillen the cerymoyns and domes, that I to 
day shal putte in 3oure si3t. 


CAP. XII. 


1 hes ben the heestes and domes, that 
je owen to doon in the loond that the 
Lord God’ is to 3yue to thee, that thow 
weelde it, alle dayes in the whiche vpon 

2the’’ erthe thow shalt goon. Turne 3e 
doun alle places in the’’ whiche the gen- 
tilis that 3e ben to weelde, heried” her 
goddis, vpon hije mounteyns, and hillis, 

3and vndir al thik braunchid tree. Scatre 
3e the auters of hem, and brekith togidre 
the ymagis; the* mawmet wodesY bren- 
neth with fier, and the mawmettis de- 
struy 3e3; scatre 3e the names of hem fro 
atheYY places. 3e shulen not doo so to the 
sLord 30ure God; but to the place that 
the Lord 3oure God chesith of alle 3oure 
lynages, that he putte his name there, 

«and dwelle in it; 3e shulen come, and 
offre in that place brent sacrificis, and 
3oure slayn offryngis, and dymes, and 
first fruytis of 3oure hoondis, and auowis* 
and 3iftis, the first goten of oxen, and of 

zsheep. And 3e shulen eete there in the 
si3t of the Lord 3oure God; and 3e shu- 
len glade in alle thingis, to which putten 
hoond, 3e and 3oure howses, in the whiche 

gthe Lord 30ure God blesse to jou. 3e 
shulen not doo there that we doon here 
to day, eche that to hym self semeth ri3t. 

9 Forsothe ne vnto the tyme that is nowe 
3e comen to rest and to the possessioun, 

19 that the Lord God is to 3eue to 30w. je 
shulen passe Jordan, and dwelle in the 
loond that the Lord 3oure God is to 3yue 
to 30w, that 3e resten fro alle enemyes bi 
enuyroun, and dwellen with outen eny 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XI. 32—-XIf. 11. 


and domes, whiche I schal sette to dai in 
joure si3t. 


CAP. XII. 


These ben the heestis and domes, whiche1 
3e owen to do, in the lond which’ the Lord 
God of thi fadrys schal 3yue to thee, that 
thou welde it, in alle daies in whiche thou 
schalt go on” erthe. Distrie 3e alle the*2 
places wherynne hethen men whiche 3e 
schulen welde, worschipidenY her goddis, 
on? hi3 mounteyns, and litle hillis, and 
vndur ech tre ful of bowis. Distrie 3e ‘thes 
auteris of hem’, and ‘breke 3e the” ymagis ; 
brenne® 3e the wodis with fier, and al to 
breke 3e the idolis; destrie 3e ‘the names 
of hem® fro the places. 3e schulen not4 
do so to 3oure Lord Godt; but 3e schulens 
come to the place which® 3oure Lord God 
chees' of alle 30ure lynagis, that he putte 
his name there, and dwelle therynne; andé 
3e schulen come’, and schulen" offre in 
that place 3oure brent sacrifices, and slayn 
sacrifices, the dymes', and firste fruytis of 
3oure hondis, and avowis and 3iftis, the 
firste gendrid thingis of oxun*, and of 
scheep. And 3e and 3oure housis! schulen7 
ete there in the si3t of 3oure Lord God; 
and 3e schulen be glad in alle thingis to 
whiche 3e putten hond™, in whiche 3oure 
Lord God blesside” 30n. 3e schulen nots 
do there® tho thingis whiche we? don here 
to dai, ech man that™ semeth ri3tful to 
‘hym silf’, For ‘til in to present tymets 
3e camen not to reste and possessioun", 
which’ the Lord God schal 3yue to 3ou. 
3e schulen passe Jordan, and 3e schulen io 
dwelle in the lond which’ 3oure* Lord 
God schal 3yue to 30u, that 3e reste fro 
alle enemyes ‘bi cumpas’, and dwelle? 


;,drede. In the place that the Lord 3our without ony drede. In the place which* U 
Vv God of thy faders x. YY Om.c. Whanheried ucpz. *and a. ytemplis £ pr.m. YY thoo ci. 
2 VOWYS BCDEF,. 
vthat1. Wvponis. x Om.ne. Ywirschipenis. %vponis. her autrisis. > breketh her r. 
breke her s. ¢and brenne 1s. ‘her namesis. ¢€ that is. f cheseth x. cheesith osx. & come ¢hidre s. 
h Om. insx. itithes1s. &3joure oxuns. !meyneesis. ™thehond1. "hath blessid 1s. © in the 
lond that 3e ben to eumme s marg. P3e10s. 4 but echt. rthat that Bi. §hymy. hym silf that 


now he doths. * vnto the tyme that is now 1s. 
Yabouter, 2 that 3e dwelle s. ® that 1s. 


4 to possessioun Is. 


vthati1. Wthatis. * thers. 


t+ 3e schulen not 
do so to 30ure 
Lord God; that 
is, in offringe 
sacrifices in dy- 
uerse places, as 
idolatrouris 
diden to her 
idols. Lire 
here. BC. as 
mysbileuing 
men don, sech- 
ing her Goddis 
hither and thi- 
der 8. 


XIl. 12—18. 


God chesith, that his name be in it. 
Thidre alle thingis that Y comaunde 3e 
shulen bere, brent sacrifices, and oostis, 
and dymes, and first fruytis of 3oure 
hoondes, and what euer thing cheefe is 
in 3iftis, that 3e han vowid to the Lord. 
12There 3e shulen eete before the Lord 
joure God, 3e, and sones, and 3oure dou3- 
tres, men seruauntis, and wymmen ser- 
uauntis, and Leuytis, that in 3oure cytees 
dwellen; forsothe ne thei han other part 
13and possessioun® among 30w. Be war 
that thou offre not thi brent sacrifices in 
i4alle places that thou shalt se, but in it 
that the Lord shal chese in oon of thi 
lynagis thow shalt offre oostis, and doo 
alle thmgis that Y comaunde to thee. 
15 Forsothe if thow wolt eete, and thee the 
etynge of flesh delyte, sle, and eete after 
the blessynge of the Lord thi God, that 
he hath 3eue to thee in thy> cytees, other® 
vnelene it were, that is, wemmed and 
feble, other® cleene, that is, hool and 
withouten wemme, that is leueful to ben 
offrid, and as capret and hert thow shalt 
ieete; with outen etynge oonli of the 
blood, that’ vpon the erthe as water thow 
17shalt heeld out. Thow shalt not* mowe 
eete in thy’ burghtownes dimes of whete, 
of wyn, and of thin oyle, the first geten 
of® droues, and beestis, and alle thingis 
that thow auowist, and wilfulli wolt offre, 
isand the first fruytis of thin hoondes ; but 
bifore the Lord thi God thow shalt ete 
hem, in the place that the Lord thi God 
chesith, thow, and thi sone, and thi} 
dou3ter, knane seruaunt, and meyde ser- 
uaunt, and the Leuyte that dwellith in 
thi citees; and thow shalt glade, and be 
fulfild’ before the Lord thi God, in alle 
thingis to the‘ which thou strecchist thin 


DEUTERONOMY. 497 


3oure Lord God chees® that his name* be 
therynne. Thidur 3e schulen bere alle 
thingis, whiche Y comaunde’, brent sacri- 
fices®, and sacrifices’, and the dymes®, and 
firste’ frnytis of 3oure hondis, and what 
euere is the beste! in 3iftis, whiche* 3e 
auowiden! to the Lord. Ther 3e schulen 12 
ete bifor 3oure Lord God™, 3e, and 3oure 
sones, and dou3tris, 30ure" seruauntis °, 
and seruauntessis?, and the dekenes, that 
dwellen in 3oure citees; for thei1 han not" 
other part and possessioun among jou. Be 13 
thou war lest thou offre thi brent sacri- 
fices in ech place which’ thou seest, but 14 
in that place whicht the Lord chees in oon 
of thi lynagis thou schalt offre sacrifices, 
and schalt" do what euer thingis Y co- 
maunde to thee. ForsotheY if thou wolt1s 
ete, and the etyng of fleischis” delitith 
thee, sle thou, and ete, bi the blessyng of 
thi Lord God, which* he 3afY to thee in 
thi citees, whether it is vnclene, ‘that is, 
spottid ether wemmed* and feble, ether 
clene, ‘that is, hool in membris* and with 
out wem?, which is leneful to be offrid, 
thou schalt ete® ast a capret and¢ hert!; 
oneli without etyng of blood’, which” thou 16 
schalt schede out! as watir on‘ the erthe. 
Thou schalt not mowe ete in thi citees 17 
the tithis of thi wheete, wyn!, and oile™, 
the" firste gendrid thingis of droues®, and 
of? scheep, and alle thingis whiche thou 
hast avowid and wolt offre bi fre wille, 
and the firste fruytis of thin hondis; but 1s 
thou schalt ete tho4 bifor thi Lord God, 
in the place which™ thi Lord God chees, 
thou, and thi sone, and dou3ter’, seruaunt*, 
and sernauntesse", and the dekene that 
dwellith in thi citees; and thou schalt be 
glad, and schalt’ be fillid’ bifor thi Lord 
God in alle thingis to whiche* thou holdist 


@ possessiouns F prom. >Dher a. Corc. and aspri. enos. fhera. $Om.c. » Om. ce. 
ifyllyd scpern. * Om. c. 

b chesith 1s, © that his fame s marg. 4 comaunde to 30u 8. © sacrificeg. f Om. plures. & tithes 18. 
h the firste a pr.m. ibeste thingis. Kthat1. Jlauowen1s. ™ these offringiss marg. © Om. 1. 
© men seruauntis 1s. P wymmen seruauntis1s. 4dekeness. ‘noont. Sthatis. tthatis. thou 
schalt 1s. Vv Foris. W fleishe 1s. *thatis. Yhath 3ouenis. %Om.1. &Om. 1s, © wem, that is, 
hool in eche membres. ¢ ete thor. Yofs. Candanis. fhert ben eter. her bloodis. 4} that 1. 
iOm.1. Kk vponis. 1 thi wynis. ™ of thin oile 1. thin oiles. "ne thers. ©thi dronesi1s. P thi 1s, 
(tho thingis 1s. *that1. *® thi dou3ter 1s. ¢tthiman seruaunt 1s. U thi womman seruaunt rs, Y thou 
schalt 1s.  fulfillid 1s. * the whiche 1. 


358 


498 


i9hoond. Be war that thow forsake not the 
Leuyte in al tyme, in the** which thow 
20dwellist in erthe. Whanne the Lord thi 
God shal large thi termes, as he hath 
spoke to thee, and thow wolt ete flesh, 
21 that thi soule desireth, forsothe the place 
that the Lord thi God chesith, that his 
name be there, if it were ferre, thow 
shalt slee of the! droues, and of thi 
beestis, ‘the whiche™ thow hast, as he 
hath comaundid to thee; and tlow shalt 
eete in thi bur3touns, as it plesith to thee. 
22 As is etun a capret and an hert, so thow 
shalt eete hein; and eleene and unclene 
23in comun shulen be ete. That oonli shun, 
lest thow eete blood; forsothe blood of 
hem is for the soule, and therfore thow 
2ishalt not eete a soule with flesh, but as 
25 water thow shalt heeld vpon erthe, that 
wel it be to thee, and to thi sones after 
thee, whanne thow dost that plesith" in 
26the si3t of the Lord. And that thow 
auowist and halowist to the Lord, thow 
shalt take, and come to the place that 
27 the Lord chesith, and offre thin offryngis, 
flesh and blood, vpon the auter of the 
Lord thi God; the blood of the oostis 
thou shalt heelde in the auter, and flesh 
28thi silf shalt eete. Kepe wel and here 
alle thingis that I comaunde to thee, that 
it wel be to thee, and to thi sones after 
thee, into with outen eende, whanne thow 
dost that is good and plesaunt in the si3t 
290f the Lord thi God. Whanne the Lord 
thi God scaterreth before thi face the 
gentilis, to the whiche to be weeldid® 
thou shalt goon yn, and weelde hem, and 
30dwelle in the loond of hem, be war that 
thow folwe not hem, after that the com- 
ynge yn thei-weren vnder turned, and 
seche the cerymoyns of hem, seiynge, As 
these gentils heryden her goddis, so and 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XII. 1g—~-30. 


forth thin hond. Be thou war lest thou 19 
forsake the dekene in al tyme, ‘in whichY 
thou lyuest in erthe. Whanne thi Lord 20 
God? hath alargid thi termes, as he spak 
to thee, and thou wolt ete fleischis, 
whiche” thi soule desirith, forsothe® ife1 
the place is* fer, which® thi Lord God 
chees‘, that his name be there, thou schalt 
sle of thin oxun, and scheep’, whiche thou 
hast, as ‘the Lord® comaundide to thee; 
and thou schalt ete’ in thi citees as it 
plesith thee. As a capret and hert* is! 22 
etun, so thou sehalt ete tho; bothe a cleene 
man and yneleene™ schulen ete therof in 
comyn. Oneli eschewe thou this, that 23 
thou ete not blood; for the blood ‘of tho 
beestis® is for the® lijf, and therfor thon 
owist not ete? the lijf4 with fleischis", but 24 
thou schalt schede® as watir ‘the blood 
on" the erthe, that it be wel to thee, and 25 
to thi sones after thee, whanne thou hast 
do that, that plesith in the si3t of the 
Lord. Sotheli thou sehalt take that that 26 
thou ‘auowidist, and halewidist’ to the 
Lord, and thou schalt come to the place 
which” the Lord chees; and thou schalt 27 
offre* thin offryngis, fleischis’, and blood, 
on® the auter of thi Lord God; thou 
schalt schede* in the auter tlie blood of 
sacrifices®; forsothe® thou schalt ete the 
fleischis’. Kepe thou and here® alle thingis 28 
whiehe Y ecomaunde to thee, that it be wel 
to thee, and to thi sones after thee, with 
outen ende, whanne thou hast do that, 
that is good and plesaunt in the si3t of 
thi Lord God. Whanne thi Lord God29 
hath distryed bifor thi face folkis, to 
whiche thou schalt entre to® welde", and 
thou' hast weldid tho folkis, and hast 
dwellid in ‘the lond of hem*, be thou 30 
war lest thou sue hem, aftir that thei ben 
distried, whanne thou entrist, and thou 


kk Om.c. Uthip. ™thatc. plese ce. ° to weeldid a. 
ythatr. Om. xk. ®fleishe is. bthatz. ¢ Thatis. bers. e€thatis. fhath chosenis. & of 
thi scheep Is. hher. i ete thees Is. K an hert 1s. 10m. B. man vnelene is. 4% Om.1. of 
heestis Ko sec.m. QRstwx. Oheris. Ptoeters. 4 blood 1. blood of a beest s. «the fleishe 1. the 


fleishe therof s. 8 heelde z# ont 1. schede out s. 
w that is. * offre there 1s. 

b the sacrifices 1s. © but Is. 
h welde hems. i whanne thou Is. 


d fleishe 1. fleishe of hem s. 
k her lond 1s. 


tOm.1. Uvponis. VY hast auowid and halewid 1s. 
y¥ and fleischis a pr.m. EFLopQRTWX. and fleishe Is. 2 vponis. @ heelde 1. 
€here thous. f plesinge 3s. & and 1s. 


XIL 31—XIII. 6. 


31Y shal hery. Thow shalt not do lijk 
maner to the Lord thi God; forsothe alle 
abhomynacionns that the Lord contrari- 
eth thei? han doon to her goddis, of- 
frynge sones, and dow3tris, and bren- 

s2nynge with the fier. What I comaunde 
to thee, that thow oonly do to the Lord, 
ne adde thow eny thing, ne lasse. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 If there rise in the myddil of thee a 
prophete, othere eny man seith hym silf 
to haue seen a sweuen, and he seith be- 

2fore a tokne and wondre, and comith that 
he spak, and seith to thee, Goo we, and 
folwe we alien goddis, that thow vn- 

3knowist, and serue we to hem, thow shalt 
not here the wordis of this prophete and 
dremer; for the Lord 3oure God temptith 
3ow, that. ‘it be maad opyn’ whether 3e 
louen hym or not’, in al 3oure herte, and 
4in al 30ure soule. The Lord 3oure God 
folowe 3e, and hym drede 3e; the heestis 
of hym kepith, and herith the voyce of 
hym; to hym 3e shulen serue, and to 
shym 3e shulen drawe to. Forsothe that 
prophete or feyner of sweuens shal be 
slayn; for he hath spoken that he turne 
j3ow awey fro the Lord 3oure God, that 
hath lad 30w out of the loond of Egipte, 
and hath raunsomed 30w fro the hows of 
seruage, that he make thee to erre fro 
the weye that the Lord thi God hath co- 
maundid to thee; and thow shalt doo 
sawey yuel fro the inyddil of thee. If thi 
brother, the sone of thi moder, wol mene 
thee, or thi sone, or thi doujter, other® 
wijf that is in thi bosome, othert freende 
that thow louest as thi soule, pryueli sei- 
ynge, Goo we, and" serne we to alien 


Pthat abpru. opynly he knowe £ pr.m. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


T noon DE. nai c. 


499 


seke ‘the cerymonyes of hem!, and seie, 
As these folkis worschipyden her goddis, 
so and Y schal worschipe™. Thou schalt3) 
not do in lijk manere to thi Lord God; for 
thei diden to her goddis alle abhomyna- 
ciouns" whiche the Lord wlatith, and of- 
friden® her sones and don3tris?, and bren- 
ten? with fier. Do thou to the Lord this32 
thing oneli which' Y comaunde to thee, 
nethir adde thon’ ony thing, nether abatet. 


CAP. XIII. 


If a prophete risith in the myddis of1 
thee, ethir he that seith hym silf to haue 
seyn a dreem, and he biforseith a signe" 
and a wondur to comynge” aftir’, and2 
this* that he spak’ bifallith, and? he seith 
to thee, Go we, and sue* alien goddis, 
whiche thou knowist not, and serue we 
hem, thou schalt not here the wordis ofs 
that prophete, ether of dremere”; for 30ure 
Lord God assaieth 30u}, that he witet 
opynli whether 3e louen hym ether nay‘, 
in al 3oure herte, and in al 3oure soule. 
Sue 3e 3oure Lord‘, and ‘drede 3e° hym ;4 
kepe 3e his comaundementis‘, and here 3e 
‘the vois of hym®; 3e schulen serue hym, 
and 3e schulen cleueb to hym. For-s 
sothe! thilke prophete, ether the feynere 
of dremes, schal be slayn||; for he spak 
that he schulde! turne 3ou awei fro 3oure 
Lord God, that ladde 30u out of the lond 
of Egipt, and a3enbou3te 30u fro the hous 
of seruage, that ‘thilke prophete schulde™ 
make thee to erre fro the weie which" thi 
Lord God comanndide to thee; and® thou 
schalt do awey yuel fro the myddis of 
thee. If thi brothir, the sone of thi mo-6 
dir, ether thiP sone, ethir4 thi™ dou3ter, 
ether the wijf which’ is in thi bosum, 
ethir thi freend whom thou louest as thi 
soulet, wole counsele thee, and seith" pri- 


Sorc. torcp. 4 that ce prim. 


l her cerymonyes 1s. ™ worschipe hems. "the abhomynacionns 1s. © thei offriden 1s. P her dou3- 
tris 1s. 4 thei brenten hem is. 'thatis. Sthoutos. tlasser, U'toknes. Ycomeis, ¥ long 
aftir a pr.m. BCcEFM pr.m.p. * this thing 1s. Yseideis. 2 herfores marg. sue wets. 1a dre- 
mere A pr.m.¥X. that dremere K sec.m.s. ¢not1. 4 Lord God kK. ¢dredith1. fheestis1s. & his 
vois 18, } in ¢rewe loves marg. 1Andis. kOm.is. !wolde1, ™heis. "that is. ° and in killinge 
of himis. Ptheris. YOm 1. ‘ofthirs. Sthatis, tlijfi. seis. sei to thee s. 


382 


+ asaieth 301, 
that is, suffrith 
siche thingis to 
be doon, that 
3e be preued. c. 
t that he wite, 
that is, that he 
make to be 
knowun of 
othere men, for 
he takith not 
of newe the 
knowing of ony 
thing, but he 
knewe alle 
thingis fro with 
out bigynnyng, 
and in this 
maner God 
spekith in xxij. 
e°, of Genesis, 
Now Y haue 
knowe that 
thou dredist 
the Lord, that 
is, Y hane made 
knowun, for bi 
the offring of 
Isaac the obe- 
dience of A- 
braham was 
knowun to 
men, and was 
put to hem in- 
to ensaumple. 
Live here. c. 

Il sehal be slayn 
without mersy, 
while he is con- 
uyet bi wit- 
nessis ether 
knoulechith. 
Lire here. c. 


500 


goddis, ‘the whiche” vnknowist thow, and 
7thi fadres, of alle gentilis in enuyrown, 
that biside or ferre ben, fro the bigyn- 
snynge vnto endynge’ of the loond, assent 
thou not tohym,ne hyre’™, ne spare to hym 
thin eye, that thow haue mercy, and hide 
ohym, but anoon thow shalt sle hym. Be 
first thin hoond vpon hym, and after thee 
ioal the puple put on hoond. He shal be 
clepid the throwun down with stonus; 
for he wold drawe thee awey fro the 
Lord thi God, that ladde thee out of the 
loond of Egipte, fro the hows of seruage, 
iithat al Irael herynge drede, and no more 
i2do eny thing lijk of this thing. If thow 
here in oon of thi citees, that the Lord 
thi God shal 3yue to thee to dwelle*, sum 
men seiynge, The sones of Belial ben 
goon out fro the myddil of thee, and han 
take awey the dwellers of thi citee, and 
seiden, Goo we, and serue we to alyen 
14 goddis, the whiche 3e knowen not, seche 
wisely and bisily, the sooth of the thing 
ful lokid ; if thow fynde it to be certeyn 
that is seid, and this abomynacioun in 
15 dede fulfillid, anoon thou shalt smyte the 
dwellers of that citee in the mouth of 
theY swerd, and do it awey, and alle 
thingis that in it ben, vnto the beestis. 
1¢6And what euere thing were of purte- 
naunce, thow shalt gedre in the myddil 
of the stretis of it, and with that citee 
thow shalt brenne vp, so that alle thingis 
thow waaste to the Lord thi God, and 
there be an euere lastynge sepulcre ; it 
17shal be bild no more. And there shal not 
cleue of that cursid heed eny thing in 
thin hoond, that the Lord turne awey 
fro the wraththe of his wodenes, and 
hane mercy of thee, and multiplye thee, 
isas he swore to thi faders. Whanne thow 
herist the voyce of the Lord thi God, 


VY that c. W the ende c. the endynge ez. 


Vv knowen not s marg. Waboute 1. * vnto ts. 
seilith thee s. thou him 1s. 
dounis. fOm.1s. g here ¢hiss. ) that 1s. 
we A pr.m.is. ™"knewen cm. that 1s. POm.s. 
awey s. tvnto the is. “is founden there 1s. 
itis. 2 bifore 1. bi orstTwx. 


there prkogrstTx. 4 that citee s. © dwelle rs. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


¥ knowen these goddis s marg. 
b ize BCS sec. 2. DIMORTW. 
i Om. 1. 
qadeede 1s. ‘with 1. 
V gadere it togidre 1s. 
a bi bidding of thi Lord God s marg. 
f wraththe 1s. 


XIII. 7-—18. 


ueli, Go we and serue alien goddis, whiche 
thou knowist not, and thi fadris’, of alle7 
the folkis ‘in cumpas”, that ben ni3 ether 
fer, fro the bigynnyng ‘til to* the ende of 
the lond’, assente thou not to hym’, nether s 
here thou*, nether thin iz3en> spare hyn, 
that thou haue mercy*, and hide hym, but9 
anoon thou schalt sle hymt+. Thin hond be 
fyrst on’ him and aftir thee al the puple 
° demed bi iugis. 
putte to hond. He schal be oppressid® 10 Zire here, c. 
with stoonus, and ‘schal bef slayn; for he 
wolde drawe thee awei fro thi Lord God, 
that ledde thee out of the lond of Egipt, 
fro the hous of seruage, that al Israeli 
here’ and drede, and do no more ony thing 
lijk this thing. If thou herist ony men 12 
seiynge in oon of thi citees, whiche" thi 
Lord God schal 3yue to! thee to enhabite*, 
The sones of Belial jeden out fro the1s 
myddis of thee, and turneden awei the 
dwelleris of the citee, and seiden!, Go we, 
and serue™ alien goddis whiche 3e knowen" 
not, enquere thou bisili, and whanne the 14 
treuthe of the thing is biholdun diligentli, 
if thou fyndist that this thing is certeyn, 
which® is seid, and? that this abhomina- 
cioun is doon in werk4, anoon thou schalt15 
smyte the dwelleris of that citee bi’ the 
scharpnesse of swerd, and thon schalt ‘do 
it awey*’, and alle thingis that ben ther 
ynne, ‘til tot beestis. Also what euer thing 16 
of purtenaunce of houshold is", thou schalt 
gadereY in the’ myddis of the* stretis 
therof, and thou schalt brenneY with that 
citee, so that thou waste alle thingis to” 
thi Lord God4, and it® be® a biriel euer- 
lastynge; it’ schal no more be bildid. And 17 
no thing of that cursyng schal cleue® in 
thin hond, that the Lord be turned awei 
fro the yref of his strong veniaunce, and 
haue mercy on® thee, and multiplie thee, 
as he swoor" to thi fadris. Whanne thous 


+ anoon thou 
schalt sle him, 
whanne he is 


ww hir a. * dwellynge £ prim, ¥ Om. c. 

Zhym that thus coun- 
© mercy ofhims. 4vponis. ¢€ throwen 

k dwelle ynne 1s. | thei seidenis. ™ serue 

8 fordo that citee 1. do that citee 

wOm.1s. * Om. 3. Y brenne 
b Om. 10 sec.m. qrst. © be 


& vpon is. } trewli bihotynge s marg. 


AIV. 1-13. 


thow shalt kepe alle the heestis of hym 
that I comaunde to thee to day, that thow 
doo that is plesaunt in the si3t of the 
Lord thi God. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Sones be 3e of the Lord 3our God; 3e 
shulen not kut, ne make ballidnes, vpon 
2the deed, for ‘a puple holi thow art? to 
the Lord thi God, and thee hath ehoesun 
that thow be to hym into a spectal pu- 
ple, of alle gentilis that ben vpon erthe. 
4 Ne eete 3e thingis that ben vnclene. This 
is the beest that 3e owen to eete; oxe, 
sand sheep, and she geet, hert, capret, 
bugle, ‘tragelaphum, that is, a beest in 
part lijk an hert, and in part lijk a goot?, 
phigarg®, origen, camelion, that is, a beest 
lijk a camele in the heed, in the bodi to 
a paard, and in the nek to an horse, in 
the feet to a bugle®, and pardelun, ‘that 
6is, a litil pard®. Al beest that in two 
partis deuydith the clee, and chewith 
7code, 3e shulen eete. And of thes that 
chewen code, and dyuyden not clee, thes 
je shulen not eete; chameyl, haare, yr- 
chun, for thei chowen code, and deuyden 
not the clee, thei shulen be vunelene to 
830wW; a suwe forsothe, for she denydith 
the clee, aud chewith no code, she shal 
be vnelene; the flesh of hem 3e shulen 
not ete, and the careyns 3e shulen not 
9towche. Thes thingis 3e shulen eete, of 
alle thingis that dwellen in watris; tho 
1othat han fynuys and scalis eete 3e; tho 
that with onten fynnys and scales ben, 
\1eete 3e not, for thei ben vnclene. Alle 
i2clene briddis eete 3e ; vnclene eete 3e not, 
that is, egle, and griffun, and a merlizon, 
13and yron, ‘that is, a whyte foul, lasse 
than a grijp, and of his kynde*, and 


DEUTERONOMY. 


501 


hast herd the vois of thi Lord God, thou 
schalt kepe alle hise! hceestis whiche Y 
comaunde to‘ thee to day, that thou do 
that! that is plesaunt™ in the si3t of thi 
Lord God. 


CAP. XIV. 


Be 3e the sones of 3oure Lord God; 3e1 
schulen not kitte 30ut, nether 3e schulen 
make ballidnesse, on" a deed man, for® thon 2 
art an hooli puple to thi Lord God, and 
he chees thee that thou be to hym in to 
a special puple, of alle folkis? that ben on4 
erthe. Ete 3e not tho thingis that bens 
vneleene. This is a beeste which" 3e sehu-4 
len ete; an oxe, and a scheep, and a goet, 
an* hert, a capret, at ‘wielde oxe", trege-s 
lafun, ‘that is, a beeste in parti lijk ‘a buk 
of geet’, and in parti hik an hert*, a 
figarde, an ostrich, a camelioun, ‘that 1s, 
a beeste lijk in the heed to a camel, and 
hath* white spottis in the bodi as a parde, 
and ‘is lijk an hors in the neckeY, and 
in® the feet is* lijc a ‘wilde oxe*, and a 
parde*. 3e schulen ete ech beeste thats 
departith the clee ‘in to® twei partis, and 
chewith code’. Sotheli® 3e schulen not ete7 
these beestis, of these" that chewen code’, 
and departen* not the! clee; a camel, an 
hare, and™ a cirogrille, ‘that is, a beeste 


ful of prickis, and" is more than an® 


trchoun?; for tho’ chewen code’, and’ de- 
parten not the clee, thot sehulen be vn- 
cleene tv 30u; also a swyn, for it de-s 
partith the clee, and chewith not code", 
schal be vncleene; 3c schulen not ete the 
fleischis’ of tho, and 3e schulen not touche 
the* deed bodiesY. 3e schulen ete theses 
thingis, of alle that dwellen in watris; ete 
3e tho thingis that han fynnes and scalis; 


ete 3e not tho thingis’? that ben with out to 


fynnes and scalis, for tho ben vncleene. 


2 the peple is holy z pr.m. goot hert £ pr.m. sed suppl. sec.m. in marg. © phigars 4. Om. £ pr. m. 


sed suppl. sec.m. in marg. 


k Om. GigT pr.m. 
T that 1s. 
x it hath s. 


1 Om. plures. the crs. 
P the folkis 1s. 4 vpon Is. 
‘¥ The whole gloss omitted in 1. 
b Om. o. 
code 1s. quide ELP passim. 


gandis. » hems. 


» and its. © Om. EL. ‘Pp The whole gloss om. in 1. 
x here 1s. 


uthe code is. Vfleishe 1s, Ww hem 1s. 


1 that thing 1s. 
8 and an G. 
Y it hath a necke lijk a hors s. 
© bugle s. ‘4 The whole of this gloss and three words following omitted in 1. 
i the code 1. 


m plesinge 1s. ™vponis. © for, Israel s. 
tandacKosx. Ubhmugleis. Va geet buk s. 
zOm.s. 4bens. 
eins, fthe 
m Om. 1s. 

t thei 1s. 


k departith w. ! Om. Kx. 
rthe code 1. 8 and thei s. 
zOm. 1. 


4 thees 18. 
Y bodies of tho ELY. 


+ kille jou, in 
Ebreu it is, 

je schulen not 
to-reende jou. ¢. 


502 


ligryip, and kyte, aftir his kynde, and al 
1sthing of crowe kynde, and ostrich*, and 
ny3t foul, and a koote, and an hawke, 
igafter his kynde, a gerfawkon, and a swan, 
and an® ybynf‘, ‘that is a foule of Nyle 
flood, that puttynge his bille into his ers, 
i7purgith hym self, and a dyuedap, a 
18 pellican, and a ny3t crowe, a cormeraunt, 
and a jay, eche in his kynde, and a lap- 
19 wynk, and a reremos. And al that crep- 
ith, and® hath fynnes, shal be vnclene, and 
20not ben eten. Alle that is clene, eete 3e; 
2ial that is faln with deeth, eete 3e not of 
it. To the pilgryme that is with ynne 
the 3atis 3if that he eete, or sel to hym, 
for thow art an hooli puple of the Lord 
thi God. Thow shalt not seethe the 
22kidde in the mylk of his moder. The 
tenthe paart thow shalt seuer fro alle the 
fruytis that growen in thi lond, bi eche 
233eer; and thow shalt eete in the si3t of 
the Lord thi God, in the place that he 
chees, that in it the name of hym be in- 
wardli clepid, the dyme of thi whete, of 
wyn, and oyle; and the first gotun of 
droues, and of thi sheep thow shalt offre, 
that thow lerne to drede the Lord thi 
21God, in al tyme. Forsothe whanne lenger 
were the weye, and the place that the 
Lord thi God chees, and hath blessid to 
thee, ne thow mayst not to hym alle thes 
25 thingis brynge, thow shalt selle alle, and 
into priys turne, and thow shalt bere in 
thin hoond, and go to the place that the 
26 Lord thi God chesith; and thow shalt 
bigge®® of the same money what euere 
thing to the plese, other® of droues, or” 
of sheep; forsothe wyn, and sidre, and al 
that desyrith thi soule; and‘ thow shalt 
eete before the Lord thi God, and shal 
27 eete, thow, and thin hows, and the Le- 
uyte that is with ynne thi j3atis; be war 


4 strucion E pr.m. © Om. BCDEFH. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


f foule that eteth froggys and eddrys £ pr. nt. 


XIV. 14—27. 


Ete 3e alle clene briddis; ete 3e not. vn- a 
cleene briddis, that is, an egle, and a 
gripe, and an? aliete, ixon>, ‘that is, a whijtis 
brid lesse than a vultur*, and is* of the 
‘kynde of vultris*, and‘ a vultur8, and a 
kite bi his kynde, and al thing of rauenys 14 
kynde, and a strucioun, and a ny3t crowe, 15 
and a lare, and an hauk bi his kynde, a'i¢ 
fawcun, andi a swan, and a siconye, and17 
a dippere, a pursirioun, and a reremons, 
a cormeraunt, and a caladrie, alle* in her 1s 
kynde ; also a lapwynke and a backe. And 19 
al thing that crepith, and hath fynnes, 
schal be vncleene, and schal not be etun. 
Ete 3e al thing that is cleene; sothelit3? 
what euer thing is deed bi it silf, ete 3e 
not therof. jyue thou™ to the pilgrym 
which" is with ynne thi 3atis, that he ete, 
ether sille thou® to hym, for thou art the? 
hooli puple of thi Lord God. Thou schalt 
not sethe a kyde in ‘the mylk of his mo- 
dir’. Thon schalt departe the tenthe part 22 
of alle thi fruytis that comen forth in the 
lond bi ech 3eer; and* thou schal ete in23 
the si3t of thi Lord God, in the place 
which* he chees, that his name be clepid 
therynne; thou schalt offre the tithe of 
thi wheete, wyn', and oile, and the firste 
gendryd thingis of thi droues, and scheep®, 
that thou lerne to drede thi Lord God in 
al tyme. SotheliY whanne the wei is len-24 
gere, and the place which” thi Lord God 
chees zs fer, and he hath blessid*® thee, 
and thon maist not bereY alle these thingis 
to that place, thou schialt sille alle thingis’, 25 
and schalt® turne® in to prijs, and thon 
schalt bere® in thiu hond, and thou schalt 
go to the place which thi Lord God 
chees; and thou schalt bie of the same26 
money what euer thing plesith to thee, 
ethir of droues, ether of scheep; also thou 
schalt bie wyn, and sidur, and al thing® 


ff Om. £ pr.m. 


suppl. sec.m.in marg. Sana. &&biec. Lorc. bhOm.c. ‘other c. 

2 Om. co. banixonis. grips. ditiss. © gryp kyndes. The whole gloss omitted in 1. 
fOn.1s. €&gryps. handaxKopr.mx. iOm.r. Kalle theses. butis. ™ thou mete is. 
nthatis. thou mefeis. Panis. 4@his modir mylke 1s. *Om.s. ‘thati. tof wynis. 4 of thi 
scheep 1s. ¥ Butis. Wthatis. * blessid or encreesid s. or encresid 1 marg. Ybrynge 1s. 2 thees 
thingis 1s. @ thou schalt 1s. > turne tho 1. turne hem Ks. © bere hemis. ¢thatis. & thingis s. 


XIV. 28—XvV. 7. 


that thow forsake not him, for he hath 

28noon other paart in thi possessioun. The 
thridde 3eer thow shalt seuer an other 
dyme of alle thingis that growen to thee 
that tyme, and put vp with ynne the 

293atis. And the Leuyte shal come, that 
hath noon other paart ne possessioun 
with thee, and thej pilgryme, and fader- 
les child, and wedowe, that with ynne 
thi 3atis ben; and thei shulen eete, and 
be fulfillid, that the Lord thi God blesse 
to thee, in alle the werkis of thin hoondes 
that thou shalt doo. 


CAP. XV. 


1 The seuenthe 3eer thow shalt doo re- 
2myssyoun, that in this ordre shal be ha- 
lowid. To whom is owed* eny thing, of 
freend, or neijbore, and his brother, he 
shal not mowe a3en aske it, for 3eer of 
sremyssioun of the Lord it is. Of pil- 
grime and comlyng thow shalt aske; 
thow shalt not haue power of a3en ask- 
aynge the citeseyn and ny3! kyn; and 
algatis nedi and begger there shal not be 
among 30w, that the Lord thi God blesse 
to thee, in the loond that the Lord is to 
5take to thee in to possessioun. If neuer- 
thelater™ thou here the voyce of the Lord 
thi God, and kepist alle thingis that he 
comaundith, and that I to day comaunde 
to thee, he shal blesse to thee, as he hath 
6bihoot. Thow shalt leen yndur wed to 
many folk of kynde, and thi silf shalt 
borowe of no man; thow shalt haue lord- 
ship vpon manye naciouns, and no man 
7shal haue lordship vpon" thee. If oon 


JOm. eprom. * a3tc. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


1 thi ny3 4 sec. m. 


503 


that thi soulef desirith; and thou schalt 
eteS bifor thi Lord God, and thou schalt 
make feeste®, thou, and thin hows!, and 27 
the dekene which* is withynne thi jatis; 
be thou war lest thou forsake hym!, for ° 
he hath not other part in possessioun™. 
In the thridde 3eer thou schalt departe 28 
another dyme® of alle thingis that growen 
to thee in that 3eer, and thou schalt kepe° 
withynne thi 3atis. And the dekene schal29 
come, whych? hath noon other part ne- 
ther? possessioun with thee, and the pil- 
grym, and the’ fadirles, ether’ modirles 
child, and widue', that ben withynne thi 
jatis, ‘schulen come", and schulen’ ete, and 
be fillid’, that thi Lord God blesse thee, 
in* alle werkisY of thin hondis whiche* 
thou schalt do. 


CAP. XV. 


Jn the seuenthe 3eer thou schalt make} 
remyssioun®, that schal be fillid> bi this2 
ordre. To whom ony thing is ‘dettid, ethir 
owid® of his freend, ether neiz3bore, and 
brother, he schal not mowe axe‘, for it is 
the 3eer of remyssioun® of the Lord. Thou; 
schalt axef of a pilgrymt and comelyngs; 
thou hast not» power to axe! of a citeseyn 
and nei3bore*; and outerli a nedi man and 4 
begger! schal not be among 3ou, that thi 
Lord God blesse thee, in the™ lond which" 
he schal 3yue to thee in to the® posses- 
sioun. If netheles thou schalt? here thes 
vois of thi Lord God, and schalt kepe 
alle thingis whiche he comaundide4, and 
whiche’ Y comaunde’ to dai to thee, he 
schal blesse thee, as he bihizte’. Thoue 
schalt leene to many folkis{, and thou 
schalt not take borewyng of ony man; 
thou schalt be lord of fnl many naciouns, 
and no man schal be lord of thee. If oon7 
of thi britheren that dwellen" with yune 


m nerthelater x. 4 of BCDEFU. 


flijf1. Sete theesis. ba feesteis. imeyneers. *that1s. Ithe dekenes1s. ™ thi posses- 
sioun EFIKLOPSX. "tithe 1s. Ckepeitis. Pthatas. ners. 1 Om. plures. Sandpvg. tthe 
widue nis. % Om. plures. ¥ thei schulen ts. w fulfillid 1xs. Xands.  Y the werkis sx sec. m. 
2 that 1. 4 relesyng 1. a relesinge or forzezenesscs. » fulfillid 1s. ¢owid1s. 4 axe if 1. axe that s. 
© forziuenesse 1s, f axe it 1. axe dette s. 8 of acomelyngis. 4nors. iaxeitis. * of a nei3- 
bore 1s. Jabeggeris. ™thir ™thatis. ©Om.FiKis. Ppwilt1. hath comaundidis. the 


whiche 1. ® comaundide a pr.2m. F. 


t hath bihizt 1s. 


u dwellith 1s. 


+ of a pilgrym, 
in Ebreu it is, 
of a straungere ; 
a straungere is 
he, that is not 
of the feith of 
Jewis. Lire 
here. Cc. 


} leene to many 
Solkis, in Ebren 
itis, thon schalt 
take weddis of 
many folkis. 
Lire here. c. 


504 


of thi bretheren, that dwellith with ynne 
the 3atis of thi citee, in the loond that 
the Lord thi God is to 3yne to thee, to 
pouerte come, thow shalt not ajen hard 
sthin herte, ne withdrawe the hoond, but 
opyn it to the pore, and thow shalt 3yue 
9loon® that thow seest hym to nede. Be 
war lest perauenture vndur crepe to thee 
a wickid? thou3t, and seye in thin herte, 
The seuenthe 3eer of remyssioun neijzeth; 
and thow turne awey thin eyen fro thi 
pore brother, not wilnynge’ to leene hym, 
that he askith to borwe; lest he crye 
ajens thee to the Lord, and it be maad 
10 to thee into synne. But thow shalt 3yue 
to hym, and thow shalt not doo eny thing 
fellich in his nedis to be releued, that the 
Lord thi God blesse to thee in al tyme, 
and in alle thingis to whiche thow puttist 
11hoond. There shulen not faile pore men 
in the loond of thi dwellynge; therfor I 
comaunde to thee that thow opyn the 
hoond to® this medi brother, and pore, 
that in the loond dwellith with thee. 
12 Whanne to thee were sold thin Ebrewe 
brother, or Ebrewe womman, and sixe 
jeer serue to thee, in the seuenthe 3eer 
13thou shalt leene hym free. And whom 
with freedam thow 3yuest, thou shalt not 
14suffre fo goon awey voyd; but thow shalt 
3yne weyfode of the flockis, and of the 
flore, and of thi presse, in the’ which 
the Lord thi God hath blessid to thee. 
15 And hane mynde that thi self seruedist 
in the loond of Egipte, and the Lord thi 
God hath delyuered thee, and therfor I 
i6now comaunde to thee. Forsothe if he 
seith, Y wole not goo out, for thi that he 
loueth thee, and thin hows, and wel felith 
i7hym silf to be anentis thee, thow shalt 
take ‘a nal’, and thril his eer in the 3ate 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XV. 8—17. 


the 3atis of thi citee, in the lond which’ 
thi Lord God schal 3yue to thee, cometh 
to pouert, thou schalt not make hard thin 
herte, nether thou schalt ‘drawe to gydere” 
the* hond, but thou schalt opene it to thes 
pore man, and thou schalt ‘3yue loone to 
which’ thou siest hym haue nede”. Beso 
thou war lest perauenture wickid? thou3t 
crepe” priueli to thee, and thou seie in 
thin herte, The seuenthe 3eer of remys- 
sioun® nei3eth; and thou turne awey the 
izen fro thi pore brother®, and thou nylef 
3yue to hym the loone that he axith; lest 
he crie aj3ens thee to the Lord, and it be 
maad to thee in to synne®. But thou te 
schalt 3yue to hym, and thou schalt ‘not 
do ony thing falsly® in releuynge ‘hise 
nedis!, that thi Lord God blesse thee in al 
tyme, and* in! alle thingis™ to whiche thou 
schalt sette” to hond®. Pore men schulen11 
not faile in the lond of ‘thin habitacioun?; 
therfor Y comaunde to thee, that thou 
opene the hond to thi brother nedi and* 
pore, that lyuen’ with thee in the lond. 
Whanne thi brothir an Ebrew man, etlir 12 
an Ebrew woman, is seeld to thee, and 
hath serned thee sixe' jeer, in the seuenthe 
3eer thou schalt delyuere hym fre. And 13 
thou schalt not suffre hym go awey" voide, 
to whom thou hast 3yue fredom; but thou 4 
schalt 3yue’ lijflode in the weye, of flockis”, 
and of cornfloor*, and of thi pressour, in 
whiche thi Lord God hath blessid thee. 
Haue thou mynde that also thou seruedist 15 
in the lond of Egipt, and thiY Lord God 
delyurede thee, ‘ether made thee free’, and 
therfor Y comaunde now to® thee’. For-16 
sothe® #f ‘the seruaunt seith®, Y nylef go 
out, for he loueth thee, and thin hows, 
and feelith® that it is wel. to hym at® thee, 
thou schalt take ‘a nal‘, and thou schalt 17 


© hym the borwed thyng x pr.m. Pwickec. 4 willende c. willynge p. ‘ofa. Sthec. tina. 
uOm.c. Yan hal x, 

Vthatis. Wwithdrawe is. *thinis. yleene him what so1is. Znede tors. ®a wickid 1s. » vnder 
crepe 1s. © forginenesse is. thin is. © lest in the L. seer he axe forzeuenesse of the dette s marg. wilt 


not 1. nylte s. 
eny thing disceynably s. 

n putte 1s. © then hond 1. 
uawey fro thee s. 
Z Om. c1. 
feelith 1s. 


i of hise nedynessis 18. 
P thi dwelling 1s. 


a Om. 1s. 


» to thinke her on § marg. 
h anentis Is. 


ian all kK. an al ox. 


& that thou lente him not that that him nedid s marg. 
kOm. s. 
q thi 1s. 
¥ 3yue him 1. 3yue Aim or hirs. 


h no thing do disceynably 1. do not 
10m.o0. ™nedis and in alle thingis B pr. m. 

rOm.1s. § liveth 1x. +t bi sixe A sec. m. BC. 
w thi flockis 1s. x thi cornfloor 1s. ——-Y the a. 
cbhutis. ‘her eseyis. fwilnots. fhe 


XV.18-=—XVI. 3. 


of thin hows, and serue he to thee into 
with outen eende; and to the thral wom- 
18man lijk maner thou shalt doo. Thow 
shalt not take awey fro hem thin eyen, 
whanne thow leeuest hem fre, for after 
the mede of the hired man bi sixe 3eer 
he seruede to thee; that the Lord thi 
God blesse to thee, in alle the werkis that 
19 thow doost’’. Of thi first goten, that ben 
born in droues, and thi sheep, and what 
euere thing is of maal kynde, thow shalt 
halwe to the Lord thi God. Thou shalt 
not worche in the first goten of oxe, ne 
thou shalt shere the first goten of sheep. 
20In the si3t of the Lord thi God thow 
shalt eete hem bi eche 3eer, in the place 
that the Lord hath chosen, thou, and 
21thin hows. Forsothe if it haue weinme, 
or were crokid, or blynde, or in eny part 
defourme, or feble, it shalt not be offerd 
22to the Lord thi God; but with ynne the 
3atis of thi cytee thow shalt eete it, as 
wel clene as vnelene, lijk maner thei 
23shulen eete hem, as capret and hert. This 
onely thow shalt kepe wel, that the blood 
of hem thou eete not, but held thou out 
into the erthe as water. 


CAP. XVI. 


1  Kepe wel the monthe of the” newe 
fruytis, and of the first veer tyme, that 
thou doo pask to the Lord thi God; for 
in this monthe the Lord thi God ladde 
2thee out of Egipt bi ny3t. And thou shalt 
offre paske to the Lord thi God, of sheep, 
or* of oxen, in the place that the Lord 
thi God chees, that the name of hym 
3dwelle there. Thou shalt not eete in it 
sowred breed ; seuen days thou shalt eete 
with outen sourdow3, breed of greet tra- 


vy deest 4 prim. 


K peerche 1. Idoreis. ™word a. 
© an 1s. 
ugchere 1. Vin the ELP. 
b hanes. ¢ Om. 1s. 


it 1s. the erthe ms. 


W thoo thingis 1s. 
dan vneleene 1s. 
I that 1s. 


Ww Om. BDEFH. 


P of merci, good wille, and help s marg. 4 in thi scheep 18. 
x that thou 1. 
© of tho 1s. 
m in that place s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 505 


peerse* his eere in the 3ate' of thin hous, 
and he schal serne thee til in to the 
world", ‘that is til to the iubilee, ethir 


Jiftithe 3eer™; also thou schalt do in lijk 


maner to the? handmayde. Thou schalt1 
not turne awei fro hem thin iz3en?, whanne 
thou schalt delyure hem fre, for bi the 
hire of an hirid man thei serueden thee bi 
sixe 3eer; that thi Lord God blesse thee, 
in alle the werkis whiche thou doist. Of 19 
the first gendrid thingis that ben borun in 
thi droues, and scheep', what ener is of 
male kynde, thou schalt halewe™ to thi 
Lord God. Thou schalt not worche in‘ 
the firste gendnid thing ‘of oxe‘, and thou 
schalt not clippe" the’ firste gendrid thinges 
of scheep. Thou schalt ete tho” bi alle2o 
3eeris in the si3t of thi Lord God, thou*, 
and thin hows’, in the place ‘which the? 
Lord chees. Sotheli# if it hath” a wei, 21 
ethir is ecrokid, ethir is* blynd, ethir is 
foul, ethir feble in ony part, it schal not 
be offrid to thi Lord God; but thou schalt 22 
ete it with ynne the jatis of thi citee, bothe 

a cleene man and vncleene’ schulen ete 
tho® in lijk maner, as af capret and ans 
hert. Onely thou schalt kepe this, that 23 
thou ete not the blood of tho, but schede' 
out as watir in to erthe*. 


CAE aay i 


Kepe thou the monethe of newe fruytis, | 
and of the bigynnyng of somer, that thou 
make pask to thi Lord God ; for in this 
monethe thi Lord God ledde thee out of 
Egipt in the ny3t. And thou schalt offre: 
pask to thi Lord God, of scheep and of 
oxun, in the place which! thi Lord God 
chees, that his name dwelle there. Thou; 
schalt not ete ‘ther ynne™ breed ‘di3t with 
sourdou3®; in seuene daies thou schalt 
ete breed of affliccioun, with out sourdou3, 


X and BcDEFII. 


0 Oni. 1. that is, iubilee ethir fiftithe 3eer m. that is, to the 1. 3eer s. 


tOm. s. 
a And 1s, 
i schede 


rhalewe it 1s. 8 with 1. 
z that thi 1s. 


y meynee 18. 
h this thing 1s. 


fofais. & of an Is. 
2 maad sour I. 


3T 


506 


ueyle, for in inward drede thou wentist 


out of Egipt, for thou shuldist haue. 


mynde of the day of thi goynge out of 
4 Egipt, alle the days of thi lijf There 
shal not apere sowred breed seuen days 
in alle thi teermys, and there shal not 
leeue of the flesh of it that is offerd the 
seuen, in the first day the morwen. Thou 
shalt not mowe offre paske in eche of 
thes thi’ citees that the Lord thi God is 
6to 3yue to thee, but in the place that the 
Lord thi God chesith, that the name of 
hym dwelle there; thou shalt offre paske 
the euen, at the sunne goynge down, 
7 whanne thow wentist out of Egipt. Thou 
shalt make it ynow3, and eete, in the place 
that the Lord thi God clesith, and erly 
rysyng thew shalt goo into thi taber- 
snaclis. Sexe dayes thou shalt eete theerf 
looues; and in the seuenthe day, for it 
is the quylet? of the Lord thi God, thou 
oshalt not doo werk. Seuen wekis” thou 
shalt noumbre to thee, fro that day that 
thou puttist thi kuttynge yren into the 
i0corn; and thou shalt halwe the feest day 
of the seuen wekes to the Lord thi God, 
a wilful offrynge of thin hoond, that thow 
shalt offre after the blessynge of the Lord 
11thi God. And thou shalt eete before the 
Lord thi God, thou, and thi sone, and thi 
dou3tre, and thi seruaunt, and thin hand- 
mayde, and Leuyte that is with ynne thi 
jatis, and comlynge, and faderles child, 
and wydowe, that dwellen with 3ow, in 
place that the Lord thi God chesith, that 
izhis name dwelle there. And thou shalt 
record for seruaunt thou were in Egipt, 
and kepen and doon that ben comaundid. 
13. And the solempte* of the tabernaclis thou 
shalt halwe, bi seuen days, whanne thou 
hast gedrid of the flore, and of the presse 
i4thi frnytis; and shalt eete in thi feest 
day, thou, and thi sone, and thi? dou;ter, 
and thi seruaunt, and handmayd, Leuyte 


yOm. £ pr.m. 2 quyet 4. gedrynge p. 


© maad sour. P coostis Is. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


2Z werkes 4. 


svi. 4 


for in drede thou 3edist outt of Egipt, 
that thou haue mynde of the dai of thi 
goyng out of Egipt, in alle the daies of thi pero erie 
lijf. No thing ‘di3t with sourdou3° schial 4 sedist out. c. 
appere in alle thi termesP by seuene daies, 

and of the fleischis4 of that{ that is offrid 4 of the feischis 
in the euentid, schal not dwelle in the CA aie elt 
firste dai in the morewtid. Thon schalts p2k: Jr 
not mow offre pask in ech of thi citees 

whiche thi Lord God" schal 3yue to thee, 

but in the place which’ thi Lord Godse 

chees, that his name dwelle there; thou 

schalt offre pask in the euentid, at the 

goyng doun of the sunne, whanne thou 

3edist out of Egipt. And thou schalt7 

sethet, and ete", in the place which’ thi” 

Lord God hath chose, and thou schalt rise 

in the morewtid of the secunde* dai, and 

thou schalt go in to thi tabernaclis. Bis 

sixe daies thou schalt ete therf breed; and 

in the seuenthe dai, for it is the gaderyng 

of thi Lord God]|, thou schalt not do werk. 4 the gadering 
Thou schalt noumbre to thee seuene woukis, 9 pe a ee 
fro that dai in which thou settidist a sikil faite ea 
in to the corn; and thou schalt halewe 10 Lord God. c. 
the feesteY dai of woukis? to thi Lord God, 

a wilful offryng of thyn hond, which* thou 

schalt offre by the blessing of thi Lord 

God. And thou schalt ete bifore thi Lordi 

God, thou, and thi sone, and thi dou3tir, 

and thi seruaunt, and thin handmayde, 

and the dekene which® is with ynne thi 

jatis, and the’ comelynge, and the® fadir- 

lesf ethir modirles child, and the widue, 

that dwellen with 30u, in the place ‘which 

thié Lord God chees that his name dwelle 

there. And thon schalt haue mynde for 12 

thon were sernaunt in Egipt, and thou 

schalt kepe and do tho thingis that ben 

comaundid. And thou schalt halewe the 13 
solempnytee of tabernaclis bi seuene daies, 

whanne thou hast gaderid thi fruytis of 

the" cornfloor, and pressour!, And thou 4 

schalt ete in thi feeste dai‘, thou, and thi 


t+ in drede thou 
jedist out; in 
Ebreu it is, 


asolempnyte £. > Om. acpEeFH. 


dfleishe 1s. * Om. x. Sthatis. tsethe thi offryug is. ¥ ete it 1s. 
Ythatis. Wthe Kx. *seuenthe a. Y firste1s. 2the woukisis. @that1. >soness. © that 1s. 
‘thice. ¢Om. plures. f fadirles chyld a. & that the 1s. thir. fof the pressour is. Om. plures. 


XVI, 15—~XVII. 2. 


also® and comlynge, and faderlesse child, 
and widew, that ben with ynne thi 3atis. 
15Seuen days to the Lord thi God feestis 
thou shalt halowe, in the places that the 
Lord chesith ; and the Lord thi God shal 
blesse to thee, in alle thi fruytis, and in? 
al werk of thin hoondis, and thou shalt 
i¢be in gladnes. Thre sithes in® the 3eer 
shal apere echef thi maal child in the si3t 
of the Lord thi God, in the place that 
he chesith, in the solempnyte ‘of therf 
looues, and& the solempnyte" of wekis, 
and in the solempnyte of tabernaclis. He 
17Sha]l not apere before the Lord voyd; but 
echoni shal offre, after that he hath, after 
the blessynge of the Lord his God, that 
ishe 3yueth to hym. Domesmen and may- 
stris thow shalt ordeyn in alle thi jatis, 
that the Lord thi God shal 3yne to thee, 
bi alle thi lynagis, that thei demen the 
19 puple bi ri3t doom, ne into another paart 
declinen. Thou shalt not accept persone, 
ne 3iftis, for 3iftis blynden eyen of wise 
men, and chaungen wordis of ri3twis 
zomen. Riztwisly that is ri3t thou shalt 
pursue, that thou lyue, and weeld the 
loond, that the Lord thi God shal 3yue 
2ito thee. Thou shalt not plaunt! a maw- 
met wode™, and al tree biside the auter 
22 of the Lord thi God; ne thou shalt make 
to thee and ordeyn ymage; the whiche 
thingis hatith the Lord thi God. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 Thow shalt not offre to the Lord thi 
God ox, and sheep, in whom is wemme, 
or eny thing of vice, for abhomynacioun 

2it is to the Lord thi God. And whanne 
weren" founden anentis thee, with ynne 
oon of thi 3atis, that the Lord thi God 
shal 3yue to thee, man or womman, that 
doth® yuel in si3t of the Lord thi God, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


‘and chaungen the wordis of iust men}. 


507 


sone, and dou3tir!, and thi seruaunt™, and 
handmayde", also the dekene, and come- 

lyng®, and the fadirles ether modirles child, 

and the widewe, that ben with ynne thi 

3atis, ‘schulen ete?. Bi seuene daies thou 1s 

schalt halewe feestis to thi Lord God, in 

the place which’ the Lord chees'; and thi 

Lord God sechal blesse thee, in alle thi 

fruytis, and in al the werk of thin hondis, 

and thou schalt be in gladnesse. In thre 16é 

tymes bi the 3eer al thi male kynde schal 

appere in the si3t of thi Lord, in the place 

which* he cheest, in the solempnyte of therf 

looues, and in the solempnyte of woukis, 

and in the solempnyte of tabernaclis. A 

man schal not appere voide bifor the 

Lord; but ech man schal offre vpe® this’ 17 

that he hath, bi the blessyng of his Lord 

God, which” he 3af to ‘that man*. Thou 18 

schalt ordeyne ‘iugis, and maystrist, in + jugis and 
alle thi 3atist whiche thi Lord God schal 7au/e3 ti, 
3yue to thee, bi ech of thi lynagis, that jr /pire vag 
thei deme the puple bi iust doom, and 19 re tin the 
boweY not in ‘to the? tother® part for fa- _ lawis; in Ebreu 
uour>, ethir® 3ifte ‘a3ens equete’. Thou  exacours col 
schalt not take persoone! nether 3iftisS, for 


exactours 5 €X- 
actours ben thei 
whi 3iftis blynden the i3en of wise men, 


that enqueren 
the truthe bi 
mesurable he- 
tingis and tur- 
moentis ; and 


Thou schalt pursue iustli that! that is iust, 20 performen the 

that thou lyne and welde the lond which jig.” 

thi Lord God schal 3yue to thee. Thow2) ji (a 

schalt not plaunte a wode, and ech tre bi ‘he 3tis of each 
: citee, netheles 

the auter of thi Lord God; nether thou samt su cncbiaaee 

schalt make to thee, and ordeyne an herac 

ymage; whiche! thingis thi Lord God 

hatith. Thou schalt not offre to thi Lord! 

God an oxe and a scheep in which is a 

wem, ether ony thing of vice™, for it is 


abhominacioun to thi Lord God. 


CAP. XVII. 


And whanne a man ether a womman,2 
that doon yuel in the sizte of thi Lord 


¢ forsothe z pr.m. 4Om. £ prem. by scpern. fale prim. Binc. ‘hb Om. xz prem. ieche c. 
k Om. £ pr.m. lsette x prom. ™temple E pr.m. thei E pr.m. © don cpE. 

'thi dou3tir sx pr.m. ™ man seruaunt 1s. thin handmayde is. © the comelyngis. P Om. prko 
RST see.m. Wx. that 1s. thath choser. %thatis. t hath chosex. afters, Vthat 1. W that ts. 
xhimis. Ybowe their. 2 Om. ax. ® oother 1. tother wronges. dredes. ¢nes. 4 for 3ifle rKSx. 
© Om. 1s. fa persoone 1X sec.m. eny persoone s. 8 3iftis ajens trewth s. 4 Om.s. i that things. 
k that 1s. ! the whiche 1. ™ repreef 1s. 


372 


508 


3and ouerpasse the conenaunt of hym, that 
thei goon, and seruen to alien goddis, and 
honoure hem, the sunne, and the mone, 
and al the kny3thod of heuen, the whiche 
4thingis I comaunde? not; and this were 
told to thee, and herynge thou enserchist 
bisilich, and fyndist it to be sooth, and 
sabhomynacioun is doon in Yrael; thou 
shalt lede out the man and womman, that 
the moost yuel1 thing han’ doon, to the 
jatis of thi cytee, and with stonus thei 
6shulen be throwen doun. In mouthe of 
two or three witnessis, shal perish he, 
that shal be slayn; no man be slayn, oon 
7a3ens hym seiynge witnesse. The hoond 
of the witnessis first shal slee hym, and 
the hoond of that’ other puple last shal 
be put to, that thou doo awey yuel fro 
sthe myddil of thee. If hard and dowtous 
anentis thee doom to be thow biholdist, 
bitwixt blood and blood, cause and cause, 
lepre and not lepre, and of the domes 
men with ynne thi 3atis thou seest the 
wordis to be varied; aryse, and sty vp 
to the place, that the Lord thi God hath 
9chosun; and thow shalt come to the 
preestis of Leuyte kynde, and to the 
doinysman that were that tyme; and 
thow shalt aske of hem, the whiche shu- 
len shewe to thee the trewth of the" dom. 
10 And thow shalt doo what enere thing 
thei seyn, that ben before to the place 
that the Lord hath chosun, and teche 
11thee after the lawe of hym; thou shalt 
folowe the sentence of hem; thou shalt 
not bowe aside, to the’ ri3t or to the left. 
12 Who forsothe wexith prowd, not wil- 
nynge” to obeishe to the maundement of 
the preest, that that tyme serueth to the 
Lord thi God, and to the doom of the 
domysman, shal die that nan; and thow 
shalt doo awey yuel fro the myddil of 


P comanndide cE. 


4 hydouse yuel acDEFH. 
uQOm. vp. Y Om. Hy. 


Ww willynge p passim. 


© the moone 1s. 

u that abhomynacioun Is. 
Z at the rs. athe hond 1s.  » other 1s. 
danentis 1s. © in her deming s marg. 
trewe dome s marg. | that 1s. 
r Om. 1s. § Om. o. 


n anentis 1. 
‘thon fyndist 1s, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


r hath c. 


P the whiche 1. 

¥ Om. B. 
¢ put to 1s text. for to throwe him doun with stones s marg. 
f go vp I. stie vp s. 
™ bowe éher fro 1s. 


XVII. 3—!2. 


God, ben foundun at" thee, with ynne 
oon of thi 3atis whiche thi Lord God schal 
jyue to thee, and thei breken the coue- 
naunt of God, that thei go and serue aliens 
goddis, and worschipe hem, the sunne, and 
moone®, and al the kny3thod of heuene, 
whiche? thingist Y comaundide not; and4 
this is teld to thee, and thou herist', and 


‘enquerist diligentli’, and fyndist' that it 


is soth, and abhomynacioun" is doon in 
Israel; thou schalt lede out the man ands 
the’ womman, that diden a” moost cursid 
thing, to the 3atis of thy* citee, and thei 
schulen be oppressid with stoonus. Hee 
that schal be slayn, schal perische in the 
mouth of tweyne, ethir of thre witnessis ; 
no man be slayn, for o man seith wit- 
nessyng ajens hym. The hond of wit-7 
nessis” schal first sle hym, and the’ last 
hond* of the tothir® puple schal be sent, 
that thou do awei yuel fro the nyddis of 
thee. If thou perseyuest, that hard ands 
douteful doom is at4 thee, bitwixe blood 
and blood, cause and cause, lepre and not 
lepre, aud thou seest that the wordis of 
iugis with ynne thi 3atis ben dyuerse®; 
rise thou, and stief to the place which® thi 
Lord God hath choose; and thou schaltg 
come to the preestis of the kyn of Leuy, 
and to the iuge which® is in that tyme, 
and thou schalt axe of* hem, whiche! 
schulen schewe to thee the treuthe of 
doom. And thou schalt do, what euer 10 
thing thei seien*, that ben souereyns in the 
place which! the Lord chees, and techen 
thee bi the lawe of the Lord; thou schalt11 
sue the sentence of hem; thou schalt not 
bowe™ to the ri3t side, ether to the lefte. 
Forsothe" that man schal die, which® is12 
proud, and nyle? obeie to the comaunde- 
ment of the preest, ‘that mynystrith in 
that tyme to thi Lord God’, and to® the 


Sthec.  bytwene ppEFH. betwee c. 


S sechist bisili 1s. 
y the witnessis c1os. 


Y herist it rs. 
x the Kx. 


4 this thing 1s. 
w that Is. 


ithe whicher. § bi 
q heeste Is. 


@ that 1s. bOm.s. 


a Foris. Othatis. P wil not 1. 


XVII. 13-—X VIII. 1. 


13]Trael; and al the puple herynge shal 
drede, that no man therafter inwardli 
14boln with prijd. And whanne thow shalt 
goo* ynto the loond, that the Lord thi 
God shal 3yue to thee, and weeldist it, 
and dwellist yn it, and seist, Y shal set 
‘vp onY me a kyng, as han alle naciouns 
15 bi enuyroun; hym thow shalt set, whom 
the Lord thi God chesith of the noumbre 
of thi bretheren. Thow shalt not mowe 
of other folk a man kyng make, that be 
16not thi brother. And whamne he were 
ordeyned, he shal not multiplye to hym 
horses’, ne lede a3en puple into Egipt, 
bi noumbre of horsynge arered, namelich 
sith the Lord hath comaundid to 3ow, 
that no more bi the same weie 3e turnen 
iza3jen. He shal not haue many wyues, 
that mysdrawen the soule of hym, ne of 
isSiluer ne* of gold greet birthens. And 
after that he sittith> in the dygnyte of 
his rewme, he shal diseriue to hym a 
deelaracioun of this lawe in a volym, tak- 
ynge® a‘ saumpler of the preestis of Le- 
iguyte lynage; and he shal haue it with 
hym, and he shal rede it alle the dais of 
his lijf, that he knowe to drede the Lord 
his God, and to® kepe the wordis and 
cerymoyns of hym, that in the lawe ben 
20comaundid; ne be areryd‘ the herte of 
hym into prijd vpon his bretheren, ne 
bowe he aside in to the ri3t paart or left, 
that long tyme regne he, and his sones 
vpon Yrael. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Preestis and Leuytes, and alle that ben 
of the same lynage, shulen not haue part 


DEUTERONOMY. 


509 


sentence of' iuge", and’ thou schalt do 

awei yuel fro the myddis of Israel; and alis 

the puple schal here’, and drede*, that no 

man fro thennus forth bolne with pride. 

Whanne thou hast entrid in to the lond, 14 

whichY thi Lord God schal 3yue to thee, 

and weldist? it, and dwellist ther ynne, and (ape 
seist, Y schal ordeyne a kyng on* me, as the king 3 tht 
alle naciouns‘bi eumpas® han; thou schalt 15 oe 
ordeyne hymt{, whom’ thi Lord God ches- Bee ie 
ith of the noumbre of thi brethren. Thou bela ae 
sehalt not mow make king’ a man of an-__ heest, the puple 
othir folk, which® maz‘ is not thi brother. ee 
And whanne the king is ordeyned, hei 

schal not multiplie horsis to hym, nethir 


+ thow schalt 
ordeyne him, 


ned in axinge 
a king, but the 
puple synnede 
in this axing, 
as it is seid in 


he schal lede a3zen the puple in to Egipt, TOT 
° e 8 e Wgis XT. 7 
nethir he schal be reisidS bi the noumbre Lire here. c. 


t sehal write, 


of kny3tis, moost® sithen the Lord co-  thatis, schal 
make to be 


maundide to 3ou, that 3e turne no more PAK to ™ 
a3en bi the same weie. The kyng schali7 Le tae 
" aue with him; 
not haue ful!’ many wyues, that drawen — Ebrews seyen 
tai lek ‘4 h wah } that he sehulde 
is soule* ‘to ouer myche fleischlynesse', have ij. vokis, 
‘ ™M orp, * n oon to bere 
nether ‘he schal haue™ grete burthuns® of With him, that 
siluer and of gold. Forsothe® after that 18 be myste ofte 
, rede there, and 
he? hath sete? in the trone’ of his rewme, ances Beaks to 
° . . e kept mn the 
he schal write} to himsilf the* deuterono- hows of his tre. 
myt of this lawe in a ‘volym ether book, preciouse thing: 
and he schal take‘a saumpler’ at’ preestis* '?¢ ae pa 
of ‘the kyn of Leny’; and he schal haue 19 chargis of sil- 
uer and of gold, 


at? with hyml|, and he schal rede it in alle that is to su 
the daies of his lijf, that he lerne to drede ata bee 
nede of his 


his Lord God, and to kepe hise wordis {iat and to 
defence of his 


and cerymonyes*, that ben comaundid in defence offi 
the lawe; nether his herte be reisid in to20 King echal not 

8 : fi . multiplie horsis 
pride on? hise brithren, nether bowe he in 


to him silf to 
to the rizt side, ether left side, that he  Prge butonely 


to the oneste of 


j d__ his staat, and 
regne long tyme, he and hise sones on® ° hist, am 
Israel. his rewme. 


Lire here. c. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Preestis and dekenes, and alle men that1 
ben of the same lynage, schulen ‘not haue® 


Xwere Epr.m. Yupa. Zhorsc. and wep.  sytt sceru. Cand takyuge vp. 4 the scperi. 
¢Om.c. freride. 

t of the 1sx sec.m. |“ inge that serneth in that tyme to thi Lord Godis. vYOm.1. Where this 1. 
here this thing s. _ * drede the Lord s. ¥ that Is. z thou weldist 1s. @ ypon 1s. » aboute 1. 
¢whannes. Ithekingis. ¢thatis. f Om. plures. 8 in to pride or tiraunterie s marg. » namely ts. 
1 Om. DE pr. m. Gikmorstwx. k mynde rs. 1% lustns is. ™Om.1. ™ weiz3tusis. °For 1s. POm.s. 
Gsitens. ‘trone or sefes. 8 Om.pis. t denteronomy, that is, declaracioun 1s. % booke 18. volym 


ether a book peqrt. 
y Leuy kyn ts. 
no Is. 


Z this saumplere s. 


Yensanmple a pr.m. saumpler 1. the saumpler of zt s. © of plures. 
P [lie Ue P P LE 
a his cerymonyes Is. 


x the prestis 1. 


bypon 1s. €Om. Fx. ‘¢vponis. €haue 


510 


and herytage with that other puple of 
Yrael, for the sacrifices of the Lord, and 
2offryngis of hym thei shulen eete; and 
noon other thing thei shulen take of the 
possessioun of her bretheren ; forsothe the 
Lord he is the herytage of hem, as he 
3hath spoke to hem. This shal be the 
doom of preestis of the puple, and of hem 
that offren slayn offryngis; whether’ oxe, 
or sheep thei offren, thei shulen 3yue 
to the preest the shuldre, and the litil 
4woombe, the first fruytis of whete, of 
wyn, and of oile, and a paart of wollis 
5 of sherynge! of sheep. Forsothe hym the 
Lord thi God hath chosun, of alle thi 
lynages, that he stoonde and serue to the 
name of the Lord, he and his sones, into 
6with outen ende. If a Leuyte goo out 
fro oon of his citees of al Yrael, in thei 
which he dwellith, and desyrynge* a 
z place that the Lord chesith, ‘wol come** 
he shal serue in the name of the Lord his 
God, as alle his britheren Leuytis, that 
shulen stoonde that tyme before the Lord. 
3 That same paart of meetis he! shal take, 
‘the which" and other; out take that, that 
in his" cytee of the fadre successyoun is 
9 owed? to hym. Whanne thow goost® into 
the loond that the Lord thi God shal 
3yue to thee, be war that lest? thow wol4 
folowe the abhomynaciouns of thilk’™ gen- 
10 tils ; ne be foundun in thee that go aboute 
his sone, or his dou3ter, ledynge bi the 
fier, other’ that askitht dyuynours, that 
he kepe sweuens and dyuynyngis ; ne be 
11 ther cleper" of deuels, ne enchaunter’, ne 
counseil® rerers of deed men, ne dyuyn- 
ours, and® seche of the deed the treuth. 
12 Forsothe alle thes thingis the Lord wlat- 


Sor £5 pr.m. hthe sherynge ce. i Om. c. 
other Ee prim. aztc. geest 4 pr.m. 
t be rered by E pr.m. ™ clepers ap. 


f£Om. 1s. & Om. cs. 
© hath chosun 1s. 


h her eritage s. 
P thi prest s. q serue 1s. 
uthat 1s.  chees and wole come thidir 1. 
dekenes kx. Ydonthatis. 2 And hes. 
succession 1. of his fadir eritage s. 4 that 1s. 
lynage 18 marg. 
¥ demaundis 1s. 
q dremeres L. 

u ony Ins, 


land ELP. 
T to chiterynge BIS. 
Vv enchauntere or tregitour 8. i 301 1. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


k desirith . 
P Om. £ prim. 
VY enchauniters 4 sec. m. 


i temple 1. 
r thi Lordis name 1s. 
chees and wole come s. 

a that also 1. that and s. 


h that ledith bi exp. ledynge hem abonte 1. and ledith hem aboute bi s. 
m fals dyuynouris 15. 
8 wicches R sec.m. witche amonge 304 S. 
w Om. c. 


XVIII. 2—12. 


part and eritage with the tother puple of 
Israel, for thei schulen ete the sacrifices of 
the Lord, and the offryngis of hym; and2 
thei schulen not take ony othir thing of 
thef possessioun of her britheren; for the 
Lord hym silf is the? ‘eritage of hem}, as 
he spak to hem. This schal be the doomt3 
of preestis of the puple’, and of hem that 
offren sacrifices; whether ‘thei offren* an 
oxe, ether a scheep, thei schulen 3yue to 
the preest the schuldre, and the paunche, 
the! firste fruytis of wheete, and™ of wyn,4 
and of oile, and a part of wollis of the® 
scheryng of scheep. For thi Lord God chees®s 
hym? of alle thi lynagis, that he stonde 
and mynystre? to ‘the name of the Lord’, 
he and hise sones, with outen ende. If ae 
dekene goith out of oon of thi citees of al 
Israel, in which he dwellith, ‘and wole 
come’ and desirith' the place which" the 
Lord chees’, he schal mynystre” in the7 
name of his Lord God as alle hise bri- 
theren dekenes*, that’ schulen stonde in 
that tyme byfore the Lord. He* schals 
take the same part of meetis, ‘which and? 
othere dekenes schulen take; outakun that 
that is due to hym in his citee, bi ‘succes- 
sioun ethir eritage> ‘of fadir®. Whannes. 
thou hast entrid in to the lond which! thi 
Lord God schal 3yue to thee, be thou war 
lest thou wole sue abhomynaciouns® of tho 
folkis; noon‘ be foundun in thee& that io 
clensith his sone, ether his dou3tir, ‘and 
ledith bi the! fier, ethir that axith ques- 
tiouns* of! dyuynouris™ ‘that dyuynen" 
aboute the auteris, and°® that taketh? hede 
to dremes’ and chiteryng’ of bryddis; ne- 
thir ony wicche® be‘, nethir an® enchaun-11 
tere’, ‘that is, that” disseyueth mennus 


m that c. 
8 orc. 


kk welcome 4. ! thei © pr.m. 
4 wol not £ pr.m. * thoo c. 
W counseil he cern. * that 4. 


kOm. a. land the rs. ™ Om. plures. » Om. 1. 
§ Om. 1s. t he desirith 1s. 
Wserue 1s. * the dekenes 1. and 


>the suyngis. © of his fadris 


¢ the abhominaciouns 1s. f no man 1s. & of thi 
i Om. Ksx. 
o dyuynynge 1s. andofhems.  P taken 1s. 


t ther be 1s. to be R sec. m. 


t that ts, the 
thing iusily 
3ouun ether 
grauntid, Lyre 
here. 3B marg. 


XVIII. 13——22. 


ithY, and for thes maner hidows synnes 
he shal doo hem awey in thin entre. 
13 Thow shal be parfite and with outen 
14 wemme, with the Lord thi God. 'Thes 
gentils, whos loond 3e shulen weeld, brydd’ 
coniurers and dyuynours heren ; forsothe 
thow of the Lord thi God otherweys art 
1senfourmyd*. A prophete of thi folk and 
of thi britheren as me, the Lord thi God 
shal arere> to thee, hym thow shalt here ; 
16as thow hast askid of the Lord thi God, 
in Oreb, whanne the company was ge- 
dryd, and thow seydest, I shal here na- 
more the voyce of the Lord my God, and 
this® moost fier Y shal se namore, lest Y 
izdye. And the Lord seide’ to me, Wel 
igalle thingis thei han spoken. A prophet 
Y shal rere to hem, fro the myddil of her 
britheren, lijk thee; and I shal put my 
wordis in the mouth of hym, ‘and he 
shal® speek to hem alle thingis that Y 
i9comaundef to hym. Forsothe who the 
wordis of hym that spekith ‘in my name®, 
20 wol not here, Y veniesour shal be. For- 
sothe a prophete that thur3 prijd bi 
shrewid, wil speke in my name thingis 
that Y comaundid® not hym for to seye, 
other! of name of alyen goddis, he shal 
aibe slayn. And if bi stille thou3t thow 
answerst, What maner may I vndurstonde 
the word, that the Lord hath not* spokun? 
22this tokne thow shalt haue, That! in the 
name of the Lord™ thilk" prophete seith 
bifore, and cometh not, that the Lord 
hath not spokun, but bi bolnynge of his 
inwit the prophet hath feyned, and ther- 
for thow shalt not drede hym. 


DEUTERONOMY. 511 


a3en that a thing seme* thaty ts not*;. ne- 
ther a man take counsel at? hem that han 
a feend spekynge ‘in the wombe, nether 
take® counsel at® false dyuynouris nethir 
sekef of deed men thef treuthe. For the1z 
Lord hath abhomynacioun of alle these 
thingis, and for siche wickidnessis he schal 
do awei hem in thin entryng'. Thouis 
schalt be perfit and without filthe’, with 
thi Lord God. These hethen men, ‘the14 
lond of whiche* thou schalt welde, heren 
hem that worchen bi chiteryng of briddis, 
and false dyuynouris; forsothe! thou art 
tan3t in other maner of thi Lord God. Thi1s 
Lord God schal reise a prophete of thi 
folk and of thi britheren as me™, thou 
schalt here hym; as thou axidist of thiis 
Lord God in Oreb, whanne the cumpany 
was gaderid”, and thou seidist, Y schal no 
more here the vois of my Lord God, and° 
Y schal no more se ‘this grettiste? fier, lest 
Y die. And the Lord seide to me, Thei17 
spaken‘ wel alle thingis. Y schal reise" to1s 
hem a prophete, lijk thee, of the myddis 
of her britheren, and Y schal putte my 
wordis in his mouth, and he schal speke 
to hem alle thingis, whiche I schal co- 
maunde to him. Forsothes Y schal be1s 
vengere' of ‘that man”, that nyle’ here 
the” wordis ‘of hym*, whiche he schal 
speke in my name. ‘Sotheli aY prophete 20 
‘schal be slayn, which’ is bischrewid with 
pride, and wole* speke in my name tho 
thingis, whiche Y comaundide not to hym, 
that he schulde seie, ethir® bic the name 
of alien goddis*. That if thou answerist21 
bi pryuy thoujt, Hou may Y vuadirstonde 
the word, which® the Lord spak not? 


thou schalt haue this signe‘t, ‘The Lord 22 + to knowe a 
spak not this thing’ which? thilke pro- 


¢ thi 4. 
lorc 


Y shal wlate & pr.m. z breed 4 sec.m. @ordeyned £ pr.m. Dyere c. 
€ that he £ pr.m. fshal comaunde x sec.m. Om. 4. 1 comaunde £ pr. m. FH. 
L3if eprom. ™ Lord thiGod x. ™ thuk gz. that c. 

suey 


‘z2Om.is. 4 of 1s. 
g Om. 18. 


Xsemeth R. Y that it pFNTRX. that that it K. 
Om. 1s. 4 Om. 1s. € of Bis. f seke a man Is. 
thingis s marg. ifilthed s. * whos lond1s. ' but 1s. ™ me to thee s. ® gaderid togidre 1s. 
P his ful greet 1. his grettist s. q han spoke 1. Tyerers. § Andis. 
whim is. Y wilnot1. Whis1s. *Om.1s. y And thilke schrewid 1. And thats. 2 that s. 
pride, that schal 1.» ethir prophecieth or prechith s. ©of1. 4 goddis, he schal be slayn t. 
eethat s. f tokene, 3if that that 1. tokene s feat. hertomarg. € Om.1. 4 Om. 1, thats. 


b with ynne hem ts. 


4 seith cz. 
k Om. 4E prem. 


¢ takith B. 
h that vsen or triste in eny siche 
°Om. kK. 
t taking veniaunee $ marg. 
‘a thorou3 

€ that rs. 


Salse prophete 
fro a trewe pro- 
phete. 8 marg. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Whanne the Lord thi God shal scatre 
the gentilis, whos loond he is to take to 
thee, and thow weeldist it, and dwellist 
in the citees of it, and in the howses; 

2thre citees thow shalt seuer to thee in 
the myddil of the loond that the Lord 
thi God shal 3yue to thee into possessioun. 

3 Thow shalt bisily make redi a weye, and 
dyuyde in thre partis euenlich al the 
prouynce of thi loond, that he that for 
manslau3ter is flowun, hane fro ny3 whe- 

4dir he may scaap. This shal be lawe of 
the mansleer fleynge, whos lijf is to be 
kept. He that smytith his nei3bore vn- 
witynge, and that 3isterday or the thridde 
day hens, noon a3ens hym to haue had 

shaat is preued, but to haue goo aweye 
with hym symplich into the wode to 
trees to be kit, and in the hewynge of 
the trees the axe fleeth the hoond, and 
the yren, slipt of" fro the haft, smytith 
his freend, and sleeth; this to oon of the 
6forseid citees shal flee3, and lyue; lest 
peranenture the ‘next of kyn® of hym, 
whos blood is shed, thur3 sorwe styryd 
pursue, and take hym, if lenger the weie 
were, and smyte the soule of hym that is 
not gilty of deeth; for noon a3ens hym 
that is slayn haat to haue hadde before 
7is shewid. Therfor Y comaunde to thee, 
that thre citees of euen space bitwixe? 
hem self thow deuyde. Forsothe whanne 
the Lord thi God hath largid thi teer- 
mys, as he swore to thi fadres, and hath 
3yue to thee al the loond, that to hem he 
’bihizt ; if neuerthelater4 thow kepist' the 


» Om. 4. ° neizjbor £ pr.m. 


iseith bifore 1. —_* cometh 1. 
phecie s marg. © thorou3 1. 
" Disily is. ¥ mansleyng vawilfully s. 
malice s marg. 2 Om.1. 4 fallinge Brn. 
foun is marg. & sleeth 1. sles.) his lijf that 1s. 
bihizte is. © he hath 1s. P that 1s. 


P Om. 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


P bitwen BCDEFH. 


1 not, the Lord spake it not 1. 
q in housis Is. 
W ny3 hoonde 1. of ny3 a grith place s. 
D his ts. 
i For 1s. 


XIX. 1—9: 


phete biforseidi in the name of the Lord, 
‘and it bifallith* not!, but ‘the prophete™ 
feynede" bi° the? pride of his soule, and 
therfor thou schalt not drede hym. 


CAP. XIX. 


Whanne thi Lord God hath distried the1 
folkis, whose lond he schal 3yue to thee, 
and thou hast weldid it, and hast dwellid 
in the citees and housis? therof; thou™2 
schalt departe thre citees to thee ‘in the* 
myddis of the lond whicht thi Lord God 
schal 3yue to thee into possessioun. Thous 
schalt make redi diligentli® the weye, and 
thou schalt departe euenly in to thre 
partis al the prouynce of thi lond, that 
he that is exilid for mansleyng’, haue ‘of 
ny3” whidur he may ascape. This schal4 
be the lawe of a mansleere fleynge, whos 
lijf schal be kept. If a man smytith vn- 
wityngli his neizbore, and which is preuyd 
to haue not had ony hatered a3ens hym 3is- 
tirdai and the thridde dai agoon*, but tos 
haue go sympli” with hym in to the wode 
to hewe doun trees, and in the’ fellyng* 
doun of trees the axe fleeth fro the hond, 
and the yrun slidith fro the helue, and 
smytith, and sleeth his freend; this man 
schal flee to oon of the forseid citees, and 
schal® lyue; lest perauenture the nexte 
kynesman of hym, whos blood is sched 
out, be prickid with sorewe, and ‘pursue, 
and! take hym, if the weie is® lengere’, 
and smyteS ‘the lijf of hym which" is not 
gilti of deeth; for it is schewid that he 
hadde not ony hatered bifore a3ens hym 
that is slayn. Therfor Y comaunde to thee,7 
that thou departe thre citees of euene 
space bitwixe hem silf. Forsothe! whanne s 
thi! Lord God hath alargid thi termes”, as 
he swoor® to thi fadris, and hath® 30ue to 
thee al the lond which? he bihi3te to hem ; 


q nerthelater c. ° kepe acpEFH. 


mhel. 
r and thou c. 


n feynede it 1. his pro- 
Sint. Om.s. t that 1s. 
x hennus is. Y with out 
eheschalis. 40Om.s. ¢wereis. f fro the grith 
kOm.1s.. ! ther. ™coostus1s. ® treuli 


XIX, 10o—21. 


heestis of hym, and dost that to day I 
comaunde to thee, that thow loue the 
Lord thi God, and goo in his weyes al 
tyme, thow shalt adde to thee three 
other citees, ‘and of the three cytese* aboue 
10 seide the noumbre thow shalt dowble, that 
giltles blood be not shed in the myddil 
of the loond that the Lord thi God shal 
3yue to thee to be weldid, lest thou be of 


ui blood gilti. Forsothe if eny hauynge his . 


nei3bour to haat, weitid to the lijf of hym, 
and rysynge smyte hym, and were‘ deed, 
and fleeth" to oon of the aboue seid citees, 
12the aldren’ of that citee shulen seende, 
and taken hym fro the place of his out 
fleynge; and thei shulen take into the 
hoond of the nei3bour ‘of hym™”, whos 
13 blood is shed, and he shal die, ne thow 
shalt haue mercy of hym; and thow shalt 
doo awey gilti blood fro Yrael, that wel 
14it be to thee. Thow shalt not take, and 
ouerbere the teermes of thi nei3bour, ‘the 
whiche* han maad rather men in thi pos- 
sessioun, that the Lord thi God shal 3yue 
to thee, inY the loond that thow takist to 
15 be weldid. O witnes shal not stoond a3ens 
eny man, what euere thing it were of 
synne, or of greet trespas ; but in mouth 
of two’ or of three witnessis shal stoonde 
i6ech word. -If there stoonde a witnes ly3er 
17 a3ens man, aceusynge hym of trespas, thei 
shulen stoond bothe, of whom is the 
cause, before the Lord, in the si3t of 
preestis, and domysmen, that weren in 
1sthilk* days. And whanne moost bisily 
enseerchynge thei fynden the fals witnes 
to haue seide azens his brothir leesynge, 
i93eelde thei to hym, as he thou3te to doo 
to his brother; and thou shalt doo awey 
20 yuel fro the myddil of thee, that othere 
men herynge, han drede, and be not hardy 
21 to doo siche thingis. Thow shalt not haue 


8 Om. A. 
Y into 4. 


t he were c. 
Ztweyne E. 4 thooc. 


Gkepe 1s. * heestis 1s. 
inge 8s marg. Y For 1s. 

aQOm.1Kosx. » take L. 
malice ne coueitise 8 marg. 
! in to possessioun 1. to welde s. 
¥ sekynge the cause 1s. 


8 comaundide x. 
yy Om. 1s. 
¢ Om. plures. 


m Om, Mx. 
8 haue do 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


u fleeje BcDEFH. schal senden Bp. 


t Om. 1s. 
Z yisith vp 18 der. a3ens him preuely s marg. 
4 Om. v. 
& the which 1. zustly s. 

» bothe thei 1s. 


513 


if netheles thou kepist’ hise comaunde-9 
mentis', and doist tho thingis whiche Y 
comaunde*® tot thee to day, that thou Ioue 
thi Lord God, and go in hise weies in al 
tyme, thou schalt adde to thee thre othere 
citees, and thou schalt double the noumbre 
of the forseid citees, that gilteles blood be 10 
not sched out in the" myddis of the lond 
which’ thi Lord God schal 3yue to thee to 
haue in” possessioun, lest thou be gilti of 
blood*. ForsotheY if ony man hatith his 
nei3bore, and settith aspies, ‘ether tre- 
souns’Y, to his lijf, and risith?, and smytith 
him, and he is deed, and he? fleeth to oon 
of the forseid citees, the eldere men of that 12 
eitee schulen sende, and ‘thei schulen® take 
hym fro the place of refuyt; and thei schu- 
len bitake> hym* in to the hond of the 
nexte kynesman of hym, whos blood is 
sched out, and he schal die, and thonis 
schalt not haue mercy on® hym; and thou 
schalt do awey gilti blood fro Israel, that 
it be wel to thee. Thou schalt not take, 14 
and turne ouer the termes of thi neizbore, 
which the> formere men settiden' in thi 
possessioun, which thi Lord God schal 
3yue to thee in the lond,‘which Iond* thon 
schalt take ‘to be weldid'. O witnesses 
schal not stonde a3ens ony man, what euer 
thing it is of synne and of wickidnesse; 
but ech word schal stonde in the mouth 
of tweyne ethir of™ thre witnessis. If a6 
fals witnesse stondith ajens a man, and 
accusith hym of brekyng of the lawe, 
bothe", of whiche® the cause is, schulen 17 
stonde bifor the Lord, in the? si3t of 
preestis4, and of iugis, that ben in tho daies. 
And whanne thei sekynge" moost diligentli 1s 
han founde that the fals witnesse seide a 
leesyng a3jens his brothir, thei schulen is 
3elde to hym, as he thou3te to do’ to his 
brother; and thou schalt do awey yuel fro 


Velderesc. WOm. Eprom. * that c. 


uQOm.1s. Vthatis. Winto nc. * shed- 
2Z the man sleer s. 

f ouer passe 18 lert, bi pride ne 
isetten m. han settis. that 1s. 


© whom is, POm.1s. 4 the prestis 1s. 


© vpon 18. 
h Om. 1s. 


3U 


514 


mercy of hym, but lijf for lijf, eye for 
eye, tooth for tooth, hoond for hoond, 
foot for foot thow shalt axe. 


CAP. XX. 


1 If thow gost out to batail a3ens thin 
enemyes, and seest rydinge, and charys, 
and more multitude of the aduersarye 
oost than thow hast, thow shalt not drede 
hem; for the Lord thi God is with thee, 
that hath lad thee out of the loond of 

2Egipt. And ney3inge now batayl, the 
preest shal stoond bifore the poynt, and 

3thus he shal spek to the puple, Here, 

Yrael, 3e to day a3ens 3oure enemyes doon 
fiz3t; drede not 3oure herte, wol 3e not 
be feerd ; wole 3e not 3yue sted, ne drede 

43e hem; for the Lord 3oure God is in the 
myddil of 3ow, and for 30w a3ens the ad- 
uersaryes ‘shal fiz3t®, that he delyuer 30w 

sfro perel®. The® leders forsothe bi alle 
companyes, herynge the oost, shal crye, 

Who is the man that hath bild a newe 
hows, and hath not parformed it? goo 
he, and turne he a3en into his hows, lest 
perauenture he dye in the® bateyl, and 

sanother parfourme it. Who is thatf man 
that hath plauntid a vyn, and 3it not hath 
maad it comoun, aud of the which it is 
leeueful to alle men to eete? go he, and 
turn he a3en into his hows, lest perauen- 
ture he dye in bateil, and another man 

This office vse. Who is a man that hath 
spousid a wijf, and hath not taak hir? 
goo he, and turn he a3en into his hows, 
lest perauenture he dye in bateil®, and 

sanother man take hir. Thes thingis seid, 
thei® shulen adde other thinges, and spek 
to the puple, Who is a man dreedful, and 


» he fy3teth z prom. 
hhe £ prim. 


© perels 4 sec. m. 


ua multitude ts. 
® be 3e not afeerd 1. 
the leders 1s. © of tht oost schulen s. 
seies marg. itheis. & hath bildid 1s. 
P hath spowsid 1s. 4 hath not take 1s. 7 Om. 1. 
u thei schulen 1s. 


t thou seest 18. 
2 neijzeth nig 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


a of Fr. 


V of charis ts. 
» to 30ur enemyes to entre Ss marg. 
f the cumpanyes Is. 

l hath halewid 1s. 

8 the duykis 1. the lederis of the oost s. 

¥ peple thus 1. peple and seie s. 


XX. 1—8. 


the myddis of thee, that othere men here, 20 
and haue drede, and be no more hardi to 
do siche thingis. Thou schalt not haue2i 
mercy on hym, but thou schalt axe lijf 
for lijf, ize for ize, tooth for tooth, hond 
for hond, foot for foot. 


CAP. XX. 


If thou goist out to batel ajens thin! 
enemyes, and seest' multitude" of kny3tis, 
and charis’, and grettere” multitude of the 
aduersarie oost than thou hast, thou schalt 
not drede hem; for thi Lord God is with 
thee, that ledde thee out of the lond of 
Egipt. Sotheli* whanneY the batel nei3-2 
eth2 now, the preest schal stonde bifor the 
scheltrun, and thus he schal speke to the 
puple, Thou, Israel, here to dai, 3e han3 
batel a3ens 3oure enemyes; 30ure herte 
drede not, ‘nyle 3e drede*; nyle 3e 3yue 
stede”, drede 3e not hem; for 3oure Lord 4 
God is in the myddis of 3ou, and he schal 
fi3te for 30u azens aduersaries*, that he 
delyuere 30u fro perel. ‘Also the duykis*s 
schulen® crie bi alle cumpanyes*, ‘while the 
oost schal here’, Who is ai man that 
bildide* a newe hows, and halewide! not 
itt? go he and turne ajen into his hows, 
lest perauenture he die in batel, and an- 
other man halewe it. Who is a™ man thaté 
plauntide a vyner, and not® 3it made it to 
be comyn, and of which it is leeueful to 
alle men to ete? go he, and turne a3en in 
to his hows, lest perauenture he die in 
batel, and anothir man be set in his office. 
Who is a° man that spowside? a wijf, and7 
‘took not’ hir ‘bi fleischli knowyng?? go 
he, and turne ajen in to his hows, lest 
perauenture he die in batel, and anothir 
man take hir. Whanne these thingis bens 
seid, thei’ schulen addet othere thingis, and 
schulen® speke to the peple’, Who is a 


é 


t and halewide 
not it, that is, 
made not a 
solempne feeste 
of enhabiting 
therof. Lire 
here. C. 


© Om.c. f the Eg. & the bateil F sec. m. 


x But is. .« Y now whanne s. 
© 30ure aduersaries 1s. 4 but 
& heriuge the cost 1. h and thet shulen 

mthers. hath notis. © the ts. 
t adde to 1s. 


Wa gretter Is. 


XX. g—19. DEUTERONOMY. 515 


with feerd herte? goo he, and turn ajen 
into his hows, lest he make to! drede the 
hertis of his britheren, and* as he by 
9dreed is gast. And whanne the duykis 
of the oost ben stil, and the eende of 
spekynge han doon, echon! his companyes 
i0shal make redi to fi3tynge™. If eny tyme 
thow comest ny3 to a citee to be ouer- 
comen, first thow shalt offre to it pees. 
11 If he resseyue, and open to thee the jatis, 
al the puple that is in it shal be saued, 
and shal serue to thee vudur tribute. 
12 Forsothe if thei" wolen not make coue- 
naunt of pees, and bigynnen a3ens thee 
i3batayl, thow shalt fi3t az3ens it. And 
whanne.the Lord thi God hath take it to 
thee in thin hoond, thow shalt smyit al 
that is in it of maal kynde in mouth of 
14 the® swerd, with outen wymmen, and litil 
children, and beestis, and other that ben 
in the cytee. Al the praye thow shalt 
dyuyde tothe oost, and thon shalt eete 
of the spuyles of thin enemyes, that the 
15 Lord thi God hath 3ene to thee. Thus 
thow shalt doo to alle cytees, that fro 
thee ben ful fer, and ben not of thes 
cytees that thow art to take into posses- 
issyoun. Forsothe of thes cytees that shal 
be 3eue to thee, no man thow shalt suffre 
17 to lyue, but-thow shalt slee in the mouth 
of swerd; Ethee, that is, and Amorre, 
and Chananee, and Phereze, Eue, and 
Jebusee, as the Lord thi God hath co- 
ismaundid ‘to thee; lest peranenture thei 
techen 30w to doon alle abhomynacyouns, 
that thei han wrou3t to her goddis, and 
3e synnen a3ens the Lord 3oure God. 
19 Whanne thow besegist a citee myche 
tyme, and with waardis enuyrounnyst 
that thow ouercome it, thow shalt not 
kyt down trees, of the? whiche may be 
eeten, ne bi entlyroun with axes thow 
shalt waast the regioun; for a tree it is 


iOm.epr.m. kOm. £ prim. leche c. 


ferdfulY man, and of gastful* herte? go 
he, and turne a3en in to his hows, lest he 
make ‘the hertis of his britherenY for” to 
drede, as he is agast bi drede: Ando 
whanne the duykis of the oost ben stille, 
and han maad ende* of speking, ech ‘of 
the princis and cheuenteyns of the oost 
schal make redie his cumpeneyes to batel. 
If ony tyme thou schalt go to a citee to10 
ouercome it, first thou schalt profire pees 
toit{. If the citee resseyueth®’, and openeth 11 t ue Nae: 
to thee the jatis, al the puple that is ther — vndurstondun 
ynne schal be saued, and schal4 serue thee rari ae 
vndur tribut. Sotheli¢ if they nylenf make 12 $f hee Lire 
boond of pees®, and bigynnen" batel a3ens 
thee, thou schalt fiz3te ajens it. And whanne 1s 
thi Lord God hath bitake it: in) thin hond*, 
thou schalt smyte bi the scharpnesse of 
swerd al thing of male kynde which! is 
ther ynne, with out wymmen, and 3onge 14 
children, beestis and othere thingis that 
ben in the citee. Thou schalt departe al 
the prey to the oost, and thou schalt ete 
of the spuylis of thin enemyes, whiche 
spuylis thi Lord God 3af™ to thee. Thus1s 
thou schalt do to alle the citees, that ben 
ful fer fro thee, and ben not of these citees 
which thou schalt take in to possessioun. 
Sotheli" of these citees that schilen be 1s 
jouun to thee, thou schalt not suffre eny 
to lyue, but thou schalt sle bi the scharp- 17 
nesse of swerd; that is to seie, Ethei, and 
Ainmorrey, and Cananei, Ferezei®, Euey, 
and Jebusei, as ‘thi Lord God? comaund- 
ide to thee; lest perauenture thei techen 1s 
3ou to do alle abhomynaciouns’, whiche 
thei wrou3ten™ to her goddis, and 3e doon 
synne a3ens 3oure Lord God’. Whanne 19 
thou hast bisegid a citee ‘in mychet tyme, 
and hast" cumpassid’ with strengthingis‘Y 
that thou ouercome it, thou schalt not* 
kitte doun trees*, of whiche ‘me may’ ete, 
nether thou schalt waste the cuntrey ‘bi 


mfiztec. hex prm. °Om.c. POm.c. 


w feerful 1s. * dredeful 1s. y his bretheren hertisis. 2 Om.is. ®anender. b Om.1. chefteyne 
of thi oost 8. © resseyueth if 1. resseyueth hi pees s. it schalis. ¢ Butis. fwilnot1. 8 pees with 
thee is. thei bygynnent. iOm.1. Jin toa pr.m. Khondis w. Ithat 1s. “hath 30uen 1s. ® Bot ts. 


© and Ferezei kx. P the Lord exp. thi Lord c. 
t bilonge 1s. “thou hast 1s. Y cumpassid it 18. 
*the trees 1, ¥ fruyl may be 18. 


9 the abhomynaciouns 1s. han wrou3t is. 8 Om. 1. 
W strong thingis A. strengthis Einps. W Om. LP pr.m. 


3U3 


516 


and no man, ne yt may encrees the 
noumbre of men fi3tynge azens thee. 
20 Forsothe if eny trees ben’ not berynge 
applis, but wijlde, and able into other 
vses, kit doun, and mak engynes, to the 
‘tyme that thow taak the cytee that 
fijtith azens thee. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Whanne there were founde in the 
loond that the Lord thi God is to 3yue 
to thee, a careyn of a slayn man, and 
shal be vnknowun the gilti of the deth, 

2the more thur3 birth shulen goon out, 
and thi domesmen, and the spacis of alle 
the cytees bi enuyroun shal be meetid* 

3fro the place of the careyn; and which 
thei biholden be ner than other, the aldre 
men of that citee shulen taak a shee calf 
fro the droue, that hath not taak 30k, ne 
sloond hath kit with shaar; and thei 
shulen lede it to the row3 valey, and 
stony, that neuer was eeryd, ne seed 
hath resseyued ; and thei shulen kit in 
sit the scullis of the calf. And preestis, 
the sones of Leuy, whom the Lord thi 

God hath chosun, that thei seruen to 
hym, and blessen in his name, shulen goo 
to, and at the word of hem al the nede 
shal honge; and what euere*® thing is* 

6¢lene or vnelene, be it demyd. And the 
more thur3 birth of that cytee shulen 
come to the slayn man, and thei shulen 
wasshe her hoondis vpon the shee calf, 

;that ys smyten in the valey; and thei 
shulen seye, Oure hondis han" not shad 

athis blood, ne eyen han seen. Lord, be 
merciable to thi puple Yrael, that thow 
hast bou3t, aud rette not the innocent 
blood in the myddil of thi puple Irael. 
And the gilt of the blood shal be taak 


4 bet ws. beth peru. * meten co. 


Zzabonte 1. ®wodeis. > no 10s. not a Kx. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Ser &. 


¢ And Is. 


XX. 20-—XXI. 8. 


cwmpas? with axis; for it is ‘a tree®, and 
not? man, nether it may encresse the 
noumbre of fiz3teris a3ens thee. Forsothe* 20 
if onye’ ben not appil trees, but ‘of the 
feeld¢, and benf able in to othere vsis, kitte’ 
doun, and make® thou engynes, til thou 
take the citee that fiz3tith a3ens thee. 


CAP. XXI. 


Whanne the! careyn of a man slayn is1 
foundun in the lond which* thi Lord God 
schal 3yue to thee, and ‘the gilti of sleyng! 
is vnknowun, the grettere men in birthe2 
and thi iugis schulen go out, and schulen™ 
mete fro the place of the careyn the spaces 
of alle citees" ‘bi cumpas®; and? the eldres 
men of that citee,‘ which thei seen to be 
neer than othere4, schulen take of thet 
drone a cow calf, that ‘drow not’ 30k, ne- 
ther kittidet the erthe with a" schar; anda 
thei schulen lede that cow calf to a’ scharp 


‘valey, and ful of stoonys”, that was neuere 


erid, nether* resseyuede seed ; and in that 
valey theiY schulen kitte the heed of the 
cow calf*, And the preestis, the sones ofs 
Leuy, schulen neize*, whiche thi® Lord 
God chees, that thei mynystre to hym, 
and blesse in his name, and al the cause 
hange® at ‘the word of hem‘; and what 
ener thing is cleene ethir vncleenc, be 
demed*®. And the grettere men in birthes 
of that citee schulen come to the slayn 
man, and thei schulen waische her hondis 
on the cow calf, that was slayn in the 
valei; and thei schulen seiet, Oure hondis 7 
schedden not out this blood, nether? oure 
igen sien*, Lord, be inercyful to thi pu-s 
ple Israel, whom thou ‘ajen brou3tist', and 
arette thou not innocent blood in the 
myddis of thi puple Israel. And the gilt* 
of! blood™ schal" be don awey fro hem?®. 


tbe ez pr.m. "hath spru. 


donye ofhem is. ¢ben wijlde 1s. f Om. 1s. 


g kitte hem 1s. bmake of hemis. iOm.s. ‘that 1s. lhe that is gilty of his dethis. ™ thei schulen 1s, 


n the citees Is. © aboute 1. 


Pand whiche citee thei seen to be neer éhat careyn, than an oother ts. 


4Om.1s. *Om.1. as. S hath not drawe1. ¢ hath kitter. kittes. uOm.1. VY the plures. W stony 
valey 1s. Xnes. Y the eldre mens. 2 calfor slehirs. nee nizis, > the rIKLOPQRSTWx. © shal 
hanges. ‘her wordrs. ¢itdemed bihemis. fvponzs. &Om.c. 4} han seen ts tert. who 
shedde it s marg. ihast a3en bon3t 1s. * gilti kx. of that1. ™ blood of this deed mans. ® schak 


thus 1. schal bi this ordre s. © Israel 1s. 


+ seye with an 
ooth. Lire 


here. c. 


XXI. 9—20. 


gaweye fro hem. Forsothe thow shalt be 
alyen fro the blood of the innocent that 
is shad, whanne thow dost that the Lord 
10hath comaundid. If thow gost out to 
the’ fi3t ajens thin enemyes, and the Lord 
thi God hath taken hem in thin hoond, 
1iand hast brou3t chaytyues, and seest in 
the noumbre of cheytyues a feyr wom- 
man, and louest hir, and wolt han hir to 
12 wijf, thow shalt lede hir into thin hows; 
the which shal shaue the heer, and shal 
wkyt about the naylis, and she shal do 
of’Y the clooth in the which she is taak, 
and sittynge in thin hows, she shal 
weepe fader and hir moder o month; 
and aftyrward thow shalt goon yn to 
hir, and thow shalt sleep with hir, and 
14she shal be thi wijf. Forsothe if after- 
ward she sittith not in thin inwit, thow 
shalt leeue hir free, ne selle thow mayst 
bi money, ne oppresse bi power, for thow 
ishast mekid hir. If a man haue two 
wyues, oon loued, and another odyows, 
and getith of hir free chyldren”, and the 
1csone of the odiows were first goten, and 
wold the substaunce among his sones 
dyuyde, he shal not mowe the sone of 
the loued make first goten, and put he- 
17 fore the sone of the odiows, but the sone 
of the odyows he shal knowe first goten, 
and he shal 3yue to hym of thes thingis 
that he hath alle thingis dowble; for- 
sothe this is the bigynnynge of the free 
children” of hym, and to this ben owen* 
isthe first goten. If a man gete a rebel 
sone, and a fraward, that herith not the 


fadres and modresY heest, and clepid to ~ 


iw obeyshe, dispise, thei shulen taak hym, 
and lede to the aldre men of the citee of 
20hym, and to the 3ate of doom; and thei 


¥Om, £ prom. F prom. VV on of £. 


rT Om. 1s, 

w thoo prisounneris ts. 
¢ sche schal 1s. 
i plesinge to thi wil 1 marg. s teat. 


P fortis. 4 alien or ungilty 18. 
ledist hem with thee s. 
b sitte or abide s. 
h mynde rs. 
bi 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


8 that Is. 
d hir modir Is. 


ohast mekid hir 1s. sié thi wille s marg. 


517 


Forsothe? thou schalt be alien’ fro the™9 
blood of the innocent which® is sched, 
whanne thou hast do that that the Lord 
comaundide. If thou goist out to batel1o 
azens thint enemyes, that thi Lord God 
bitakith® hem in thin hond, and thou 
ledist’ prisoneris, and thou seest in the1! 
noumbre of prisounneris” a fair womman, 
and thou louest hir, and wole haue fir fo 
wijf, thou schalt brynge hir in to thin12 
hows; ‘which womman* schal schaue theY 
heer, and schal? kitte the? nailes aboute, 
and sche schal putte awei the clooth, wher 13 
ynne sche was takun, and sche schal sitte> 
in thin hows, and schal* biwepe hir fadir 
and modiré o¢ monethe; and aftirward thou 
schalt entre to hir, and schalt sleepe with 
hir, and sche schal be thi wijf. But® if14 
aftirward sche sittith not in thi soule}, 
‘that is, plesith not thi wille', thou schalt 
delyuere hir fre, nethir thou schalt* mowe! 
sille hér™ for money, nether oppresse bi® 
power, for thou ‘madist hir lowe®. If ais 
man hath twey wyues, oon loued?, and 
‘the tothird hateful’, and he gendrith® of 
hirt fre children, and the sone of the" 
hateful’ wijf is the” firste gendrid*, and 16 
the manY wole? departe the* catel bitwixe 
hise sones, he schal not mowe make the 
sone of the loued wijf the? firste gendrid®, 
and sette’ bifor the sone of the hateful 
wijf, but he schal knowe the sone of the17 
hateful wijf the® firste gendrid‘, and he 
schal 3yue to that sone alle thingis double 
of tho thingis that he hath; for this sone 
is the begynnyng of his fre children, and 
the firste gendrid thingis ben due to hym. 
If a man gendrithS a sone rebel, and18 
ouerthewert®, which' herith not the co- 
maundement* of fadix! and modir, and he 


Wchilder c. *a3t £. ¥ the modres cpE. 


tOm.1 Ubitakeis. VY ledist with thee 1. 
xthe which 1. Yhiris. 2sche schal is. # hir is. 
€ebiarz bios. fthou schaltis. & Om. Be. 
k Om. p. 1! not mowe B. m Om. plures. ™ hir 

P of him s marg. 4 an oother 1s. that other L. 


Thateful tohims. ‘gettithi. tthe hateful 1 marg. hir the hateful wyfs. %Om.8B.  Y odioust. 
whiss. * bigotun 1. gendrid sone s. Yfadir1. 7 wole aftirwards. 4his1s. hiss. © goten 
sone 1. gendrid sone s. ‘settehimis. ¢tobehisis.  fgoten sone 1. gendridsones.  & gete Is. 


-h 9 froward 1, an ouerthwert s. i that us. 


Kk heest 1s. 


1 his fadir 1s. 


518 


shulen seye to hem, This oure sone is 
fraward, and rebel; oure heestis dispisith 
to here, to glotryes takith hede, and to 

21 leccherye, and to feestis. The puple of the 
cytee shal throw hym down with stonus, 
and he shal dye, that 3e doon awei yuel 
fro the myddil of 3ou, and al Israel her- 

ezing wexe afeerd. Whanne a man syn- 
neth that that is to punysshynge bi deth, 
and demed to deeth were hongid in the 

23 gebet, the careyn of hym shal not abide 
in the tree, but in the same day shal be 
biried; for cursid he is of God that hong- 
ith in the tree, and thow shalt not de- 
foule thi loond that the Lord thi God 
shal 3yue to thee into possessioun. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Thow shalt not see the oxe of thi bro- 
ther, other? sheep errynge, and _ biside 
passe, but thow shalt leede ajen to thi 

2brother. And if he is not thi ni3 brothir, 
ne knowist hym, thow shalt lede into 
thin hows, and thei shulen be anentis 
thee, as long as thi brothir sechith hem, 

3and resseyue. Lijk maner thow shalt 
doo of asse, and of clothinge, and of al 
thing of thi brother, that is lost; if thow 
4fynde? it, ne leeue it as alyen. If thou 
seest the asse of thi brother, or oxe, to 
haue faln in the weie, thow shalt not 

sdispise, but vndur heeue with hym. A 
womman shal not be clothid® with man- 
nus® clothinge, ne man shal vse wom- 
mannus clothing; abomynable forsothe 
anentis God he is, that doth thes thingis. 
olf goynge bi the weie, in tree or in erthe 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XXI. 21——XKXII. 6. 


is chastisid™, and dispisith to obei", thei19 


schulen take hym, and schulen® lede? to 
the eldre men of that citee, and to the 3ate 


of doom; and thei schulen seie to hem,20 


This oure sone is ouerthewert and rebel ; 
he dispisith to here oure monestyngis4, 
‘ethir heestis*, he 3yueth tent to glotonyes, 
and letcherie’, and feestis'. The puple of2i 
the" citee schal oppresse hym with stoonus, 
and he schal die, that 3e do awei. yuel fro 
the myddis’ of 3o0u, and that al Israel 
here’, and drede*. Whanne a man doith 22 
a synne which’ is worthi to be punyschid 
bi deeth, and he is demed to deeth’, and 
is hangid in a iebat, his careyn schal not23 
dwelle? in the tre, but it schal be biried 
in the same dai; for he that hangith in 
the cros® is cursid of Godt, and thou 
schalt not defoule thi lond which* thi 
Lord God® 3af¢ thee‘ in to possessioun. 


. CAP. XXII. 


Thou schalt not se ‘thi brotheris oxe%,i 
ethir scheep, errynge, and schalt passe», 
but thou schalt brynge ajen' to thi bro- 
thers. And if thi brother! is not ny3™,2 
nether thou knowist hym, thou schalt 
lede tho beestis in to thin hows, and tho 
schulen be at" thee, as long as thi brother 
sekith tho®°, and til he resseyue hem?. In3 
lijk maner thou schalt do of ‘the asse, 
and clooth’, and of ech thing of thi bro- 
ther, that was lost; if thou fyndist it, be 
thou not necgligent as of* an alien thing*. 
If thou seest that" the asse, ethir oxe’ of 4 
thi brothir felde” in the weye, thou schalt 
not dispise, but thou schalt ‘reise with 
hym*. A womman schal not be clothids 
in a mannys cloothY{, nether a man schal 
vse a wommannys cloth’; for he that doith* 
thes thingis is abhomynable bifor God. 


Zorc. 4fyndist z, cladc. ¢a mannus cE. 
™ or vndirnomen s marg. 4 obeie fo hems. ©Om.1s. Plede him rs. 4 heestisis. Om. 1s. 
Sto letcherie 1s. to feestisis. Uthat xx. VY myddils. Where it 1. here éhiss. * drede the Lord s. 
Ythat 1s. 2the deeth kK. ®abideis. Dtrers. ¢thatr. 4d Om.1s. ¢€hath gouenrs. f to thee ne. 


& the oxe of thi brothir 1. thi brother oxe s. 
'neizbore s. —_™ dwellinge there s marg. 
brother 1. thi brother asse s. 


b passe therbi s. 
B anentis Is. 
T of clooth 1. of his clooth s. 


i it agen 1s. K brother Ais beest s. 
P Om. plures. 4 the asse of thi 
t Om. x. but kepe it feithfulli 


© hem Is. 
$s Om. s. 


and 3elde it a3en trewly s marg. “Om. ™m. Y the oxe A pr.m. an oxe 1s. Whath fallers. * helpe to reise 


it [the beest s] vp with thi brothir 1s. y clothing 1. 


2 clothing 1. Om. s. 


aysith 1. 


+ that is, curs 
is takun here 
for peyne of 
hangyng, 3ouun 
of the iugis 
that holdun the 
place of God. 
Lyre here. B. 
is cursid of 
God: In Ebreu 
it is thus, the 
iustifiyng of 
God is hanging 
hi oure trans- 
lacioun; curs 
is takun here 
for the peyne 
of hanging, 
3ouun of the 
iugis that 
holden the 
place of God : 
that this be the 
vndurstonding, 
for he that 
hangith in the 
tre, is cursid of 
God, that is, 
for sich peyne 
set of hem that 
holden the place 
of God, owith 
to suffise, and 
therfor oner 
this he owith 
not to be prined 
fro biriyng. 
Lire here. c. 
tin a mannes 
clooth: In Ebreu 
it is thus, the 
vessel, that is, 
armer of a man 
schal not be on 
a womman. G. 


XXII. 7—18. 


a nest of briddis’ thou fyndist*, and the 
moder tof the bryddis® or to the eyren 
aboue sittynge, thow shalt not hold hyr 
7 with the sones, but thow shalt suffre hir 
to goo awey, holdynge the sones takyn, 
that wel it be to.thee, and loong tyme 


sthow.lyue. Whanne thow bildist a newe- 


hows, thow shalt mak the wal of the roof 
bi enuyroun, lest there be shad blood in 
thin hows, and thow be gilti, that» other 
9slidynge and fallynge hedlynge’. Thou 
shalt not sowe thi vyn3eerd with* other 
seed, lest and the seed that thow hast 
sowun, and that growen of the vynjeerd, 
10 togidre ben halowed. Thow shalt not 
11eere in oxe togidre and asse. Thow shalt 
not be clothid! the clothing, that is weuen 
120f wulle and of flex. Litil cordis in the 
hemmes thow shalt make bi foure cor- 
ners of thi mantil, with the™ which thow 
i3Shalt be couerd. If a man taak a wijf, 
14and afterward haue hir to haat, and sech- 
ith occasioun bi the which he leeue hir, 
and castynge ajens hyr a moost yuel 
name, and seye, This wijf I haue take, 
and goon yn to hir J foond hyr not 
ismayde; the fadir and the moder of hir 
shulen taak hir, and bere with hem the 
toknes of hir maydynhod to the aldre 
men of the-citee, that ben in the 3ate; 
igand the fader shal seye, My dou3ter I 
haue 3yue wijf to this, whom for he 
i7hatith, he puttith to hir a moost yuel 
name, that ‘he seye, I haue not founde 
thi dow3ter mayde; and loo! thes ben 
the tokens of the meydynhod of my 
dou3ter; and thei shulen spreede out the 
clothing before the ‘aldre. men” of the 
igcytee. And the aldre men of the citee 
shulen taak the man of hir, and thei 


efindec. f of 4. 


4 bryd scepEFu. 
1 eldres c. aldryn £. 


leladc. ™Om.c. 


> by BCDFGIKLMNOs. 
fdammes 1s. &vponis. 4 here 1. hirs. 
the daam s. a thou sehalt 1s. © -briddus ts. 
ficient bilding 18 mare. r fallith brs. 
VYvyne is. W halewid or haugid s. 
bhilid with 1, ¢maileuer. 4 he puttith is. 
htokens 1s. 1 iugis sittixge ins. * hir s. 
P the virgynyte s. PPthos. deldea. "thes. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


& gollis & pr. m. 


¢ briddus nest 1. brid nest s. 
i or ypon Is. 
P that thow 1s. 
S with other 1. with another s. 
Xan asse plures. with an asse KX. 
ea ful wiekid 1. 
la ful yuel 1. 


519 


If thou goist in® the weie, and fyndist a6 
‘nest of a brid® in a tree, ethir in the! 
erthe, and fyndist® the modir‘ sittynge 
on’ the" briddis ethir‘ eyrun, thou schalt 
not holde the modir* with ‘the children!, 
but thou schalt suffre ‘the modir™ go, and7 
schalt® holde the sones® takun, that it be 
wel to thee, and thou? lyue in long tyme. 
Whanne thou bildist a newe hows, thou 8 
schalt make a wal of the roof bi cumpas, 
lest blood be sched out in thin hows, and 
thou be gilti?, if another man slidith, and 
falle in to a dich. Thou schalt not sowe9 


thi vynert ‘of another’ seed, lest bothe the — t “ou schaie 


not sowe thi 
vyner: In E- 
bren it is thus, 


3 sprede forth 
clooth; that is, 
as Ebrews 


seed whicht thou’ hast sowe, and tho 
thingis that ‘comen forth" of the vyner’, © thou schalt not 
* ay a. sowe meddlid 
ben halewid™ togidere. Thou schalt not 10 yin test the 
ere with an oxe and asse* togidere. Thou 11 flness¢ of the 
° . ° . > 
schalt not be clothid in a cloth, which’ is He pat ore 
-. e defoulid, anc 
wouun togidir of wolle and ‘of flex’. Thou 12 the fruyt of the 
: . . : vyner; the 
schalt make litle cordis bi foure corneris  giise of sich 
in the hemmys of thi mentil, ‘with which®  dyuersite is 
. oe * iu 
thou art hilid>. Ifa man weddith a wijf, 13 Ebreu word 
; 7 ‘ f here signefieth 
and aftirward hatith hir, and sekith occa- 14 bothe balewing, 
: ° : 0 ' and defouling ; 
siouns bi which he ‘schal forsake® hir, and fryt of the 
and oat vere vyner, plauntid 
puttith® azens hir” the werste® name, and ofthe dewe, is 
seith, Y haue take this wijf, and Y en-  vneleene bi ij. 
Fs E 2 3ecr, and the 
tridef to hir, and Y foond not hir virgyn$; corm touchinge 
a C : the fruyt vn- 
the fadir and modir of hir schulen take 15 cleene schulde 
: . : Iso be vnel 
hir, and thei schulen bere with hem the  andsoofringic 
s h oe ; as the firste 
signes" of her i the eldre men fame aad 
of the citee, that ben in’ the 3ate; and 16 tithis, mysten 
é : i‘ not be maad 
the fadir schal seie, Y 3af my dou3tir therof to the 
on é . 6 ord. Lire 
wijf to this man, and for he hatith hir, here. c. 
he puttith to hir ‘the werste! name, that 17 
he seye™, Y foond not thi dou3tir virgyn”; 
and lo! these ben the signes® of virgynyte? 
of my dou3tir; thei schulen sprede forth a seven, thei 
“ i schulen declare 
cloth} bifor the eldre men of the citee. ne sueinele 
. of her dou3ter 
And the?? eldere? men of that' citee schulen 19 bi the wordis of 
witnessis. Lire 
here. C. 


hthec. iheeldendec. * of £ pr.m. 


4 Om. plures. € Om. 1. thou fyndist s. 
kdamme is. Jhir briddusis. ™hir to 1. 
9 gilti ther off is. for thin vnsuf- 
t that ts. U growen 18. 

Ythats. #flexens. that 1. 
fhaue entride rs. & a virgyn 1s. 
™seith is, avirgynis. © tokeus Is. 


520 


i9shulen beet hym, condempnynge also in 
an hundrid siclys of siluer, ‘the whiche® 
he shal 3yue to the fader of the mayde, 
for he hath loosed the moost yuel naine 
vpon a maydyn? of Yrael; and he shal 
haue hir to wijf, and he shal not mowe 
29 leeue hir, al the tyme of his lijf. And if 
it is soth, that he putte aj3ens hyr4, and is 
not in the womman founden maydenhod, 
21 thei shulen throw hir out of the jatis of 
the hows of hir fader; and men of that 
citee shulen throw hyr down with stonus, 
and she shal dye, for she hath doon an 
vnleful thing in Yrael, that she dide 
lecherie in the hows of hir fader; and 
thow shalt doo awei yuel fro the myddil 
g2of thee. If a man sleep with the wijf 
of another, eyther shal die, that is, the 
auowtreer and the auowtresse; and thow 
23 shalt do awey yuel fro Yrael. If a wom- 
man mayden" a man spowse, and eny 
man in the cytee fynde hir, and lye with 
os hir, thow shalt lede either to the 3ate of 
that cytee, and thei shulen be throwun 
doun with stonus; the maydyn‘, for she 
cryed not, whanne she was in the cytee; 
the man, for he hath mekid the wijf of 
his nei3bour; and thow shalt doo awey 
25 yuel fro the myddil of thee. Forsothe if 
in the feeld a man fynde a womman that 
is spowsid, and takynge ligget with hir, 
2¢he shal dye alone; the womman no thing 
shal suffre, ne is gilti of deeth; for as a 
theef rysith a3ens his brother, and sleeth 
the soule of hym, so and the womman 
27 hath suffred ; aloone she was in the feeld, 
and criede, and no man was ni3 that 
23 my3t delyuer hir. If a man fynde a wom- 
man meydyn’, that hath no spows, and 
takynge lie’ with hir, and the thing 


othatc. Pmaidec. 4 Om. BcEFH. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


r maide c. 


XXII. 19—28. 


take the man‘, and schulen' bete hym, and 19 
ferthermore thei schulen condempne hym 
in an hundrid siclis of siluer, whiche he 
schal 3yue to the ‘fadir of the damysel", 
for he diffamide’ the werste name” on* a 
virgyn of Israel; and he schal haue hir 
wijf¥, and he schal not mowe forsake hir, 
in al ‘the tyme of his lijf%. That if it is*2o 
soth, that he puttith a3ens hir, and vir- 
gynyte is not foundun in the damysel?, 
thei schulen caste hir ‘out of¢ ‘the 3atis of 2 
the hous of hir fadir’; and men of that 
citee schulen oppresse fiz with stoonys, 
and sche schal die, for sche dide vnleue- 
ful thing in Israel, that sche dide forny- 
cacioun’t} in ‘the hows of hir fadirf; ands 
thou schalt do awey yuel fro the myddis 
of thee. If a man slepith with ‘the wijfze 
of another man?, euer eithir schal die, that 
is, auowter' and auowtresse*; and thou! 

schalt do awey yuel fro Israel. 
spousith a damysel virgyn, and a™ man oe aa 
fyndith hir” in the citee, and doith letcherie 

with hir, thou schalt lede euer eithir to24 

the 3ate of that citee, and thei schulen 

be® oppressid? with stoonus; the damy- 

seli schal® be stonyd, for sche criede not, 

whanne sche was in the citee’; thet man 

schal ‘be stonyd", for he ‘made low the 

wijf of his neizbore’; and’ thou schalt do 

awei yuel fro the myddis of thee. For-25 

sothe* if a man fyndith in the feeld a 
‘damysel, whichY is spousid, and he tak- 

ith’, and doith letcherie with hir, he aloone 

schal die; the damysel* schal suffre no26 

thing of yuel, nethir is® gilti of deeth; 

for as a theef risith® a3ens his brothir, and 

sleeth ‘his lijf4, so and the damysel® suf- 

fridef; sche was aloone in the feeld, sche27 

criede, and noon was present, that schulde 


+ that sche dide 
Sornycacioun, 
aftir feith 3ouun 
to the hose- 
honde, ellis sche 
schulde not die 
for sich synne, 
as it is had in 
the ende of this 
If a mange’. a in xxij. 


sOm.4. the %maidec. Vlithe z. 


8 that hadde weddid hir s marg, + thei schulen ts. ¥ damesels fadir 1. damesel fadir s. ¥ diffamide hir 


bithe 1s. W that mai be s marg. 
b womman Is. Cat Q. 
f hir fadris hous 1. hir fadir hous s. 
auowter 1s. k the auowtresse Is. 
P killid 1. @wommanis. Om. s. 
foulide his neigboris wijf1s. W and éhus 1s. 
theres. ®wommants.  ? sche is Is. 
fbi fals ... ping s marg. 


x vpon Is. 


Y to wijf ¢ sec. m. 1s. 
4 the 3atis of hir fadir screLuNpgr pr. m. hir fadir jatis 1s. 
£aud sot. doing thus s marg. 
1 thus thou Is. 
S and mize haue hade help s marg. 
x But Is. 
¢ risith vawar 1. risith vnwarned s. 


Zhis lijftyme ts. 4 is founden s. 
© leccherie 1s. 
h an other mannus wijf 1s. 3 the 
nhir or takiths. © bothe bes. 

tand thes. 4dyers. VY de- 
Y womman that is. 2 takith hir 1. takith hir 
dhimis. © womman Is. 


m an oolher 1s. 


XXII. 29——A XIII. 11. 


29cometh to doom, he shal 3yue, that hath 
slept with hyr, to the fader of the wom- 
man fifti sicles of siluer, and he shal 
haue hir to wijf, for he hath mekid hir ; 
he shal not mowe leeue hyr, alle the dais 
of his lijf. 


CAP. XXIII. 


A man shal not taak the wijf of his 
fader, ne shal opne the couerynge of hym. 
1A geldynge, the ballokis brisid, or kyt of, 
and the 3erde kyt awey, shal not goon 
2into the chirche of the Lord. ‘The born 
of an hore shal not goon into the chirche 
of the Lord, vnto the tenthe” genera- 
3cioun. Amonytis and Moabites also aftir 
the tenthe generacioun shulen not goon 
into the chirche of the Lord, with outen 
aeende; for thei wolden not ajen come to 
3ow with breed and water in the weie, 
whenne 3e wenten out of Egipt; and for 
thei hiryd ajens thee Balaam, the sone of 
Beor, fro Mesopotany of Syrye, for to 
scurse to thee; and the Lord thi God 
wolde not here Balaam, and turnede the 
cursynge of hym into thi* blessynge, for- 
éthi that he louede thee. Thou shalt not 
make with hem pees, ue seche thow to 
hem goodis, alle the days of thi lijf vnto 
7with outen eende. Thow shalt not wlaat 
Ydome, for he is thi brother, ne Egip- 
cian, for comlynge thow were in the 
sloond of hem. Tho that weren born of 
hem, the thridde generacioun shulen go 
9into the chirche of the Lord. Whanne 
thow gost out aj3ens thin enemyes into 
fizt, thow shalt keep thee fro al yuel 
1othing. If there were among 3ow a man 
that with ny3t sleep is polut, he shal goo 
110ut of the tentis; and he shal not turn 
a3en before that at euen he wereY wasshe 


30 


Wten E pr.m. 


8 fynde 1s. b he takith is. i thisis. 
hir 1s. © his fadris wijf 1. his fadir wijf s. 
t kitt off, he 1s. bite awey kK. tAndas, Thes. 
Y refresche s marg. %Om.c. and also s. 
€him is. f his curs 1s. the curse of Balaam xk. 
chirche 1s. }t01s. ™a batel 1. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


x Om. 4. 


k that damesel 1s. 
P hir priuetee 1s. 


a Om. s. 
& goode thingis ts. 


521 


delyuer hir, If a man fyndith® a damysel 2z 
virgyn that hath no spowse, and. takith*, 
and doith letcherie with hir, and the! thing 
cometh to the doom, he that slepte with 29 
hir* schal 3yue to ‘the fadir of the damy- 
sel! fifti siclis of siluer, and he schal haue 
hir wijf™, for he ‘made hir low"; he 
schal] not mow forsake hir, in alle the daies 
of his lijf. A man schal not take ‘the wijf3o 
of his fadir®, nethir he schal schewe ‘the 
hilyng of hir?. 


CAP. XXIII. 


A geldyng whanne hise stoonys beni 
brokun, ethird kit awey, and his" 3erde is® 
kit awei', schal not entre in to the chirche 
of the Lord. A" child borun of hordome 
schal not entre? in to the clirche of the 
Lord, ‘til to’ the tenthe generacioun. Am-3 
monytis and Moabitis, 3he aftir the tenthe 
generacioun, schulen not entre into the 
‘chirche of the Lord” with outen ende; 
for thei nolden* come to’ 3ou with breed 4 
and watir in the weie, whanne 3e 3eden 
out of Egipt; and? for thei hireden a3ens 
thee?-Balaam, the sone of Beor, fro® Me- 
sopotanye of Sirye, that he schulde curse 
thee; and thi Lord God nolde* here Ba-s 
laam®, and God turnede ‘the cursyng of 
Balaamf in to thi blessyng, for he louyde 
thee. Thou schalt not make pees with 
hem, nethir thou schalt seke goodis® to 
hem, in alle the daies of thi lijf in to with 
outen ende. Thou schalt not ‘haue abho- 7 


* mynacioun of! a man of Yduinye, for he 


is thi brothir, nethir of a man of Egipt, 
for thou were a comelyng in the lond of 
hymi, Thei that ben borun of hem, schu-s 
len entre in the thridde generacioun in to 
the ‘chirche of the Lord*. Whanne thong 
schalt go out ‘in to! batel™ ajens thin ene- 
myes, thou schalt kepe thee fro al yuel 


Y be ce. 


lhir fadir 1s. ™to wijfc sec.m. ™"mekide 
qOm.m. '3ifhiss. §& Om. plures. 
vvnto1s. W Lordis chirche 1s. * wolden not 1. 
» the fals prophete s marg. © of s. 4 wolde not 1. 
hwlaters. iEgiptis. * Lordis 


OE 


+ a child born 
of hordum schal 
not entre etc. 
that is, to the 
hij gouernaunce 
of the peple, but 
ech man that 
wolde, was res- 
seyued to feith, 
and vertnouse 
liyf nedeful to 
saluacionn. 
Lire here. Bc. 


522 


with watyr; and after the sunne goynge 
down he shal turn ajen into the tentis. 
12 Thow shalt haue a place out of the tentis, 
to the which thow shalt goon out to the 
i3sneedful thingis of kynde, berynge a stake 
in a girdel; and whanne thow sittist, 
thow shalt delue bi enuyrown, and the 
defied out thou shalt couer with erthe, 
14in the whych thow art releued. For- 
sothe the Lord thi God goth in the myd- 
dil of tentis, that he delyuer thee, and 
taak to thee thin enemyes, that thi tentis 
ben hooli, and no thing in hem apere of 
15 filthed, lest he forsake thee. Thow shalt 
not take a sernaunt to his lord, that to 
16thee hath flowen; he shal dwelle with 
thee in the place that to hym plesith, 
and in oon of thi citees shal rest; and 
17make thow not hym sory. There shial 
be no strumpet of the dou3tres of Yrael, 
isne horlyng of the sones of Yrael. Thow 
shalt not offre the mede of the hoorhows, 
ne the prijs of an hounde, in the hows of 
the Lord thi God, what euere thing it 
be that thow auowist ; for abomynacioun 
iis either anentis the Lord thi God. Thow 
shalt not leene* to thi brother at vsure 
money, ne fruytis, ne eny other thing, 
20 but to an alien. Forsothe to thi brother 
with outen vsure that that? to hym ned- 
ith thow shalt lene, that the Lord thi 
God blisse to thee in al thi werke, in the 
loond to the which to be weeldid thow 
2\shalt goon yn. Whanne thow auowist 
auowe to the Lord thi God, thow shalt 
not tary to 3eelde, for the Lord thi God 
shal reqnyre it; and if thow taryest, it 
22Shal be rettid to thee into synne. And 
if thow wolt not bihoot, thow shalt be 
23 with outen synue. Forsothe that that is 


2 okere E pr.im. 


1Om.s. thats. P his nizt sleep 1s. 
u Om. B. 3oures. Vtentisis.  tentis 1s. 
> sete that staak in the erthe and maad an hool s. 
eOm.1. fhileits. & the erthe x. 


birthen s marg. 1.Om.1s. ™ the tentis Is. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


@ 3oure tentis 1s. 
x the which 1. 


h the thingis s. 
0 tentis Is. 


XXIII. 12—23. 


thing’. Ifa man is among 30u, which? is 10 
defoulid in ‘sleep of ny3t?, he schal go out 
of ‘the castelst}; and he schal not turne11 
a3en bifore that he be waischun in watir 
at euentid’, and aftir the’ goyng doun of 
the sunne he schal go’ aj3en in to the" 
castels’. Thou schalt haue a place with-12 
out the castels”, to which* thou schalt go 


out to nedeful thingis of kynde; and thou 3 


schalt bereY a litil? stake in the® girdil; 
and whanne thou hast sete’, thon schalt 
digge® ‘bi cumpas‘, and ‘thou schalt® hilef 
with erthe’ thingis" ‘defied out!, where 14 
thou art releuyd*. For thi Lord God goeth 
in the! myddis of castels™, that he dili- 
uere thee, and bitake thin enemyes to thee, 
that thi castels" be hooli, and no thing of 
filthe appere in tho®, lest? he forsake thee. 
Thou schalt not bitake1 a seruaunt to his 1s 
lord{, which" serwaunt fleeth to thee"; he 16 
schal dwelle with thee in the place that 
plesith hym, and he schal reste’ in oon of 
thi citees; and make thou not hym sori”. 
Noon* hooreY schal be of the dou3tris of 17 
Israel, nether a letchour of the sones of 
Israel. Thou schalt not offre? the hire of 18 


‘an hoore hows*, nether the prijs of a 


dogge®, in the hows of thi Lord God, 
what euer thing it is that thou hast 
avowid; for euer eithir® is abhomynacioun 
bifor thi Lord God. Thou schalt not leene 19 
to thi brothir to vsure money, neither 
frnytis, nethir ony othir thing, but to.an20 
alien||. Forsothe? thou schalt leene to thi 
brothir without vsure that that he® nedith, 
that thi Lord God blesse thee in al thi 
werk, in the lond to which thou schalt 
entre to welde. Whanne thou makist’ a-, 
uow to thi Lord God, thou schalt not tarie 
to 3elde®, for thi Lord God schal ‘requyre, 


a Om. BEFH. 


r the euentid rs. *%Om.s. ¢ turne Is. 
Y bere with thees. %Om.c. ? thi. 
¢ digge erthe s. 4 aboute 1. aboute ¢he staak s. 
i that ben defied 1s. * or dischargid of thi kindeli 
ohem 1s. P lest for vnelennesse s. 9 take G. 


‘thatis. * Om. mst sec.m. U tustly for help s marg. Vabide 1s. ¥ sori or heuys. * Nos. Y strum- 


pett 1s. % offre or aecept s. 
treuthe s marg. 
& gelde i 1s. 


8 a strumpetis hous 1s. 
€ that is, siche offring, and siche auowe 1s marg. 


b turninge azen to vome, or berkinge azen 
4 Fors. ¢himis. f iustly s marg. 


t he schal go 
out of the castels 
of the Godhed 
and of Leuytis, 
not out of the 
castels of the 
comyn. peeple. 
Lire here. nc. 


t thou schalt 
not bitake a ser- 
uaunt to his 
tord, that is, 
whanne the 
seruaunt is 
sou3t of his lord 
to be slayn, 
ether to be 
meymed, ether 
to be turmentid 
in other maner 
vnduly: he 
schai dwelle 
with thee, and 
so forth; til the 
ire of his lord 


ceese, an: 
thanne he schal 
be 30ldun to 
his lord, sithen 
he is the thing 
ether catel of 
his lord, as also 
other thingis 
schulen be re- 
storid. Lire 
here. Cc. 

|| bué to an 
alien, this is 
graunting of a 
thing not leue- 
ful, but of a 
thing lesse yuel 
to eschewe a 
more yuel, that 
is, lest they 
wolden greue 
her britheren 
Tewis with 
vsuris. Lire 


here. c. 


Miiesen XIV, 7. 


onus goon out of thi lippis, thow shalt 
kepe wel, and do as thow hast bihoot to 
the Lord thi God, and thur3 propre wil 
2tand thi mouth hast> spokun. Thow‘* 
goon vnto the vyn of thi nei3bour, thow 
shalt eete grapis, as myche as it likith 
to thee; out forsothe ne beer thou with 
25thee. If thow goo into the corn of thi 
freend, thow shalt breek eeris, and with 
the’ hoond brisse; forsothe with kut- 
itynge yren thow shalt not reep. If man 
taak a wijf, and haue hyr, and fynde no 
grace before the eyen of hir, for sum 
filthed®, he shal wryte a libel of forsak- 
ynge, and he shal 3yue in the hoond of 
hyr, and he shal Jeeue hir fro his hows. 
2And whanne she goon out another hous- 
3boond takith, and he forsothe hate hir, 
and 3yue to hir a libel of forsakynge, and 
leeue fro his hows, other’ certeyn were 
4deed, the first housboond shal not mowe 
taak her a3en into wijf, for she is polut, 
and is maad abomynable before the Lord; 
lest thow make to synne thi loond, that 
the Lord thi God to thee hath taak to be 
weeldid. 


CAP. XXIV. 


5 Whanne a man hath taak a wijf laate®, 
he shal not goo forth to bateyl, ne to 
hym eny thing of nede shal be ioyned" 
opynlich, but he shal taak hede with 
outen blame to his hows, that o 3eer he 

6ioye with his wijf. Thow shalt not taak 
in stedde of a wed the nethermore andi 
ouermore grynstoon, for his lijf he putte 

7to thee. Ifa man were taak bisili weyt- 


b hath «. d thin aBpFIl. 


h enjoyned cz. 


¢ Om. £. 
lor ABDFH, 


haxe rs. | that of thee 1s. * that tariynge s. 
that 1. kepe that words. P fulfille it 1s. 
U breke off the 1.—-V eeris of the corn 1. 


hems. #2 haue s. 

ter marg. ©3yue itis. ‘hir honde 1s. & out fro him s. 
hOm.1s.  ichartrers. * Om. plures. 

°Om.1s. © hath jouen rs. P Om. Is. 


8 in settinge hir and his meynee in good reule 8 marg. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


€ filthed of synne c pr.m. 


4 vyne 3erd 1s. 
the corn eeris s. 
@ or unclennesse F marg. filtheheede 1s. 


! hiy a3en Is. 
PP the comyn Is. 


523 


ether axe, that'; and if thou tariest, it* 

schal be arretid! to thee in to synne. If22 

thou ‘nylt bihete™, thou schalt be with out 

synne. Forsothet® thou schalt kepe°, and 23 eee 
‘do that? that 3ede out onys of thi lippis, eat thou hase 
as thou bihi3tist to thi Lord God, and hast Rete Wen 
spoke with thin owne wille and thi mouth. mn 
If thou entrist in to the vynere’ of thi24* 
neiz3bore, ete thou grapis, as myche as 

plesith thee; but bere thou" not* out with 

thee. If thou entrist in to ‘the corn of 25 

thi freend', thou schalt breke" ‘eeris of 

corn’, and frote” togidere with ‘the hond*; 
but thou schalt not repe’ with a sikil. 


CAP. XXIV. 


If a man takith a wijf, and hath? hir,1 
and sche fyndith not grace bifor hise izen 
for sum vilite?, he schal write a ‘libel, 
ethir litil book’, of forsakyng, and he 
schal 3yue® in ‘the hond of hir’, and he 
schal delyuere hir fro his hows. And2 
whanne sche goith out®, and weddith an- 
othir hosebonde, and hef also hatith hir,3 
and 3yneth$ to® hir a ‘litil booke! of for- 
sakyng, and delyuereth hir* fro his hows, 
ethir certis he is deed, the formere hose-4 
bonde schal not mow resseyue hir! in™ to 
wijf, for sche is defoulid, and maad abho- 
mynable bifore the Lord; lest thou make 
thi lond{t to do synne®, which lond® thi 3 thi éond, that 
Lord God 3af*° to? thee to welde. Whannes ingen mien 
a man hath take late a wijf, he schal not“ "* ®° 
go forth to batel, nethir ony thing|| of 
comyn?? nede schal be enioyned to hym, 
but he schal 3yue teut with out blame to 
his hows, that he be glad int o 3eer with eee eee 
his wijf*. Thou schalt not take in the'e perternynge to 
stide of wed" the lowere and the hizere “ere. c. 
queerne stoon of thi brothir, for he put- 


[| nether ony 
thing etc. In 
Ebren it is, ne- 
ther ony thing 
schal be en- 


force. & not ore E pr. m. 


lyekened 1s. ™ wilt not bihoote 1. = For1s. °kepe 
rOm.c. Snoneis. ¢ thi frendis corn 1s. 
w frote hem is. *thin hondisis. Y repe 


v libel cr. litle booke s text. or a char- 
fhe the secounde husbonde s. & he 3yueth 1s. 

m Om. BN. 1% bi ensaumple of thee 8 marg. 
Gneedis s. ° Om. DIKORST sec.m.wx. 
ua wed IKS. 


3X2 


t Om. Is, 


524 


ynge his brother of the sones of Yrael, 
and he solde take the prijs, he shal be 
slayn; and thow shalt do awey yuel fro 
sthe myddil of thee. Bisily kepe wel, lest 
thow renne into plage* of lepre, but thow 
shalt doon alle thingis that the prestis 
of Leuyte kynde han tau3t thee, aftir 
that Y haue comaundid to hem, and ful- 
ofil bisity. Haue 3e mynde what thingis 
the Lord 3oure God dyde to Marye, in 
the weye, whanne 3e wenten out of E- 
1ogipt. Whanne thow shalt a3en aske of 
thi neiz3bour eny thing that he owith to 
thee, thow shalt not goon into the hows 
110f hym for to taak wed; but thow shalt 
stoond with out, and he to thee shal 
12 brynge forth that he hath. Forsothe if 
he is pore, the wed anentis thee shal not 
13a] ny3t dwelle, but anoon thow shalt 3eeld 
to hym before the goynge down of the 
sunne, that he, slepynge in his clothinge, 
blesse to thee, and thow haue ry3twisnes 
14 before the Lord thi God. Thou shalt not 
denye the! mede of the nedi, and of the pore 
thi brother, or of comlynge that dwellith 
with thee in thi loond, and with ynne 
15 thi 3atis is; but the same day thow shalt 
3eeld to hym the prijs of his traueyl, be- 
fore the sunne goynge down, for he is 
pore, and of it susteyneth his lijf; lest 
he crye a3ens thee to the Lord, and be 
igrettid to thee into synne. Fadrys shulen 
not be slayn for the sones, ne sones for 
the fadris, but echon™ for his own synne 
i7shal dye. Thow shalt not peruert the 
doom of the comlyng, and faderles child ; 
ne thow shalt taak awey in stede of a 
iswed the clooth of the widewe. Haue® 
mynde that thow hast serued in Egipt, 
and the Lord thi God hath delyuered 
thee thens; therfor I comaunde to thee 


K the plage pcpEFH. 
plag 


Vv hath put 1. hath thanne put s. 
himis. 72 thusthouis. thee x. thou thee s. 
maunde 1s. 4 fulfille thou its. © to N. 
kAndis. I!his1s. ™Mabide 1. ® anentis 1. 
meed for thi riztwisnesse s marg. 4 Om. 1s. 
" the with holding of werkmennes hire s marg. 
® Om.1s. > turne or messedemes. © or IS. 
wed Ks, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


10m. 4. 


w lijf or his ly flode 8. 
b this goostly and unshamefast synne s marg. 
f that rs. 
© 3elde it 1. 3elde his wed s. 
the susteyneth 1s. § of the hire of traueil s. 
Vv Om. ts. 

4 the fadirles 1s. 


XXIV, 8—18. 


tide’ his lijf¥ to thee. Ifa man is takun,7 
‘that is, conuyct in doom*, bisili aspiynge 
to stele his brothir of the sones of Israel, 
and whanne he hath seeld hym, takithy 
priys, he schal be slayn; and thou? schalt 
do awey yuel fro the myddis of thee. 
Kepe thou? diligentli, lest thou renne ins 
to the sijknesse of lepre>, but thou schalt 
do what euer thingis the preestis of the 
kyn of Leuy techen thee, bi that that Y 
comaundide® to hem, and ‘fille thou? dili- 
gentli. Haue 3e mynde what thingis 3oure9 
Lord God dide to Marie, in the weie, 
whanne 3e 3ede ‘out of ° Egipt. Whanne1o 
thou schalt axe of thi nei3ebore ony thing 
which! he owith to thee, thou schalt not 
entre in to his hows, that thou takes awei® 
awed; but thou schalt stonde with outi1 
forth, and he schal brynge forth! that that 
he hath. Sotheli* if he is pore, the! wed 12 
schal not dwelle™ bi ny3t at" thee, but1s 
anoon thou sclialt 3elde° to hym bifor the 
goyng doun of the sunne, that he slepe in 
his cloth, and blesse thee, and thou haue 
ri3tfulnesseP bifor thi Lord God. -‘Thou14 
schalt not denye the hire of thi brother 
nedi and pore, ethir of the comelyng that 
dwellith with thee in thi lond, and is with 
yune thi 3atis; but in the same dai thou 1s 
schalt 3elde to hym the prijs of his trauel, 
bifor the’ goyng doun of the sunne, for 
he is pore, and susteyneth' therof* his lijf; 
lest he crye ajens thee to the Lord, and it 
be arettidt to thee into synne*. The’ fa-16 
dris schulen not be slayn for the” sones, 
nether the* sones forY the? fadris, but ech 
man schal die for hys owne synne. Thou17 
schalt not ‘peruerte, ethir* waiwardh 
turne”, the doom of the comelyng, and® 
of fadirles’ ethir modirles**; nethir thou 
schalt take awei in the® stide of wed‘ the 


mechec. a4. © Hac. 


x Om. I. or conuict iustly s. ¥ he takith for 
© co- 
hOm.s.  ! forth ¢o thee s. 
P riztwisnesse 1s fext. that is, 
t rikened 1s. 
z her cis. 
eOm.is. fa 


& take fro him ts. 


wherts. *Om.1s.  Y ofp. 
dd modirles child 1s. 


XXIV. 19-—-XXYV. 5. 


19that thow doo this thing. Whanne thow 
repist corn in thi feeld, and a for3etun 
handful thow leeuest, thow shalt not 
turn ajen for to taak it, but the com- 
lynge, and faderles child, and widewe 
thow shalt suffre to bere a wey, that the 
Lord thi God blesse to thee in al the 

20 werk of thin hoondis. If thou gedrest? 
fruytis of olyues, what euere? leeue in 
the trees, thow shalt not turn ajen for 
to gedre, but thow shalt leeue to the 

21 comlynge, faderles child, and widewe. If 
thou kuttist thi vyn from’ grapis to wyn, 
thou shalt not gedre the leeuynge rey- 
sens, but thei shulen falle into the vse of 

' the comlynge, faderles child, and widewe. 

22 Haue’ mynde that thow seruedistt in E- 
gipt, and therfor Y comaunde to thee, 
that thow doo this thing. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 If there were a cause bitwex" eny 
men, and han askid’ iugis, whom thei 
biholden to be ry3twyse, to hym the 
palme of ri3twisnes thei shulen 3yue, 
whom wickid”, thei shulen condempne 
20f wickidnes*. Forsothe if hym that 
hath synned thei seen worthi, thei shulen 
throw doun with scourgis, and before 
hem thei shulen make to be betun; for 
the mesure of synne shal be andy the 
3maner of scourgyngis, so oonlich, that 
the fourtith noumbre thei ouer passe not, 
lest foulich rent before thin eyen thi bro- 
4ther go awey. Thow shalt not bynde the 
mouth of the oxe tredinge thi fruytis in 


DEUTERONOMY. 


525 


cloth of a widewe. Have thou mynde, 18 
thats thon seruedist in Egipt, and thi 
Lord God delyuerede thee fro thennus ; 
therfor Y comaunde to thee that thou do 
this thing. Whanne thou repist corn" in 19 
the! feeld, and for3etist*, and leeuest a 
repe, thou schalt not turne ajen to take it, 
but thou schalt suffre that a comelyng, 
and fadirles!, ethir modirles™, and a" wi- 
dewe take® awei, that thi Lord God blesse 
thee in al the werk of thin hondis. If20 
thou gaderist fruytis? of olynes, what 
euer thing leeueth in trees!, thou schalt 
not turne ajen to gadere™, but thou schalt 
leeue® to a comelyng, fadirles*, ether" mo- 
dirles’, and to a” widewe. If thou ga-21 
derist grapis of the* vynerY, thou schalt 
not gadere raisyns’? that leeuen, but tho 
schulen falle in to the® vsis of the comel- 
yng, of the fadirles, ethir> modirles‘, and 
of the wydewe. Haue thou mynde that 22 
also thou seruedist in Egipt, and therfor 
Y comaunde to thee, that thou do this 
thing. 
CAP. XXV. 

If cause’ is bitwixe ony men, and thei1 
axen iugis®, thei schulen 3yue the victorie 
of ri3tfulnessef to him, whom thei per- 
seyuen to be inst, thei? schulen condempne 
hym of wickidnesse, whom thei perseyuen 
to be wickid. Sotheli® if thei seen hym2 
that synnede', worthi of betyngis, thei 
schulen caste Aim* doun, andk* make! to be 
betun bifor hem; also! the maner of bet- 
yngis™ schal] be for the™™ mesure of synne”, 
so oneli that tho" passe not the noumbre3 
of fourti®, lest thi brother be to-rent 
viliche®? bifore thin izen, and go? awei. 
Thou schalt not bynde?? the ‘mouth of the 
oxei tredynge’ thi fruytis in the corn floor. 


sthe flore. Whanne bretheren dwellen to- | Whanne britheren dwellen to gidere, ands 
Pgederec. err. TOm.4. 8Hac. thast serued scpern, bytwene scDEFH.  ¥ inter- 
peled gE prim. W wicke c. * wickenesse c. Yin ABDFH. 
£Om.s. 'thicorns. ithise. * thou forgetist 1s. 1 fadirles pts. ™a modirles p. modirles 
child 1s. "Om. plures. © take ita pr.m.s.  P the frnytisis. the trees 1. the olyue trees s. * ga- 
dere it 1s. ®leeue itis. ta fadirles B. to the fadirles1s. Uandis. VY modirles child1s. © the is. 
XthiBis, Yvyneis. 72 theraisynsis., ®QOm.s. bandis. © modirles childis. 4 a cause 1s. 


© thinges K sec.m. f riztwisnesse 1s. 
kk and schulen BcpFGkMNo. and thei schul 1s. 
™ the betyngis s. ™™Qm.1. ® the synne s. 


betinge s marg. P go thanne 1. go sos. PP tye 8. 


g and thei 1s. 

1 make him 1s. 
an thou A pr.m.c. thei 1s. © fourti strokis s. °° bi violent 
4 oxe mouth Is. 


h Andis. ihath synnedeis. * Om. plures, 


land pikorst sec.m. also and wx. 


r threshynge 1s. tretynge o. 
yng yng 


526 


gidre, and oon of hem with outen free 
children? were deed, the wijf of the deed 
shal not wedde to another, but shal taak 
hir his brother, and he shal arere* the 
6seed of his brother. And the fyrst goten 
sone of hyr he shal clepe bi the name of 
hym, that the name of hym be not doon 
zawey fro Yrael. Forsothe if he wol not 
taak the wijf of his brother, that to hym 
bi the lawe is owid», the womman shal 
goo to the 3ate of the cyte; and she shal 
aske® the more men thur3 birth, and shal 
seye, The brother of my man wol not 
arere seed‘ of his brother in Yrael, ne me 
sinto wedlok taak. And anoon thei shulen 
maak hym to be clepid, and thei shulen 
aske. If he answere, I wol not taak hir 
9to wijf; the womman shal come ny3 to 
hym, before the aldre® men‘, and she shal 
taak the sho of his foot, and spit in his 
face, and seye, Thus it shal be doo to a 
man, that wol not bilde vp the hows of 
10his brother; and shal be clepid the 
name of hym in Yrael, The hows of the 
livnshod. If there han two men bytwix® 
hem self chidynge, and oon a3ens that? 
other bigynneth to iangle, and wilnynge 
the wijf of ‘that other! to delyuer hir 
man fro the hoond of the strenger, and 
hath put the hoond, and takun the sham- 
12fast* membris of hym, thow shalt kut of 
the hoond of hir, ne be bowid on! hyr 
13with eny mercy. Thow shalt not haue 
in sak dyuerse wei3tis, more and _lasse, 
14ne there shal be in thin hows a busshel 
ismore and lasse. Wei3t thow shalt haue 
inst and verrey, and euen busshel and 
verrey shal be to thee, that myche tyme 
thou lyue vpon erthe that the Lord thi 
16God shal 3yue to thee. The Lord for- 


Z childer c. 
& bytwene BCDEFH. 


arerec. » aztec. 


hthec. ithe tother c. 


t he schal 1s. 
aOnm. 1s. 


8 brothir that is deed s. 
y Om.is. 2his 1s. 
& seie to hem 1s, 
wil. he wole s. J axe him 1s. 
fro his foot 1s. * sche schal 1s. 
to OsT sec. m.w. the R. 
prinee is. 2 Om. 1s. 4 off 1s. 
to bigge with 1s. & lesse to sille with 15. 


s Thus 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Centerpele £ prim. 
kK priueigagys E pro. 


u the seed 1. 
bOm.1. that is deed s. 

h Mi husbondus brother wil not 1. My husbond brother nyle s. 
m answere and seie s. 
t his brotheris hous 1s. 
W sche puttith forth 1s. 
> hir hond 1s. the hondis x. 
ha esse Is. 


XXV. 6—16. 


oon of hem is deed with out fre children, 
the wijf of the deed brother schal not be 
weddid to anothir man, but his brothir® 
schal take hir, and schal* reise seed" of 
his brother’. And he schal clepe the” firste ¢ 
gendrid® sone ‘of hirY bi the’ name ‘of 
hym*, ‘that is, of the deed brothir>, that 
his name be not don awei fro Israel. For-7 
sothe® if he nyle’ take the wijf of his bro- 
ther, which® is due to hym bi lawe‘, the 
womman schal go to the 3ate of the citee ; 
and sche schal axe the grettere men in 
birthe, and sche schal seie’, ‘The brother 
of myn hosebonde nyle® reise seed‘ of his 
brother in Israel, nethir wole* take me in 
to mariage. And anoon thei schulen make s 
hym to be clepid, and thei schulen axel. 
If he answerith™, Y nyle" take hir to wijf; 
the womman schal go to hym bifor theo 
eldre men of Israel, and sche schal take 
awei° the? schoo4, and sche schal spete in 
to his face, and schal* seie, So* it schal be 
doon to the man, that bildith not ‘the 
hows of his brother‘; and ‘the name of 10 
hym" schal be clepid in Israel, The hows 
of the man vnschood. If twei men hanu 
strijf bitwixe hem silf, and oon bigymneth 
to stryue ajens another, and the wijf of 
‘the tother’ man wole delyuere hir hose- 
bonde fro the hond of the strongere man, 
and puttith” hond*, and ‘takith the schame- 
fast’ membris ‘of hym?, thou schalt kitte 12 
awei* ‘the hond? of hir*, nether thou schalt 
be bowid on hir bid ony mercy. Thou13 
schalt not haue in the® bagge dyuerse 
wei3tis, a gretteref and a lesse®, nether ais 
buyschel more and lesse® schal be in thin 
hows. Thou schalt haue a iust wei3te and 15 
trewe', and an euene buyschel ‘and trewe* 
schal be to thee, that thou lyue in myche 


4the seed x. e@alther pr. fmen of Irael £ pr.m. 


l vpon BCDEFH. 


v deed brothir s. 
c¢Andis. 4 wil not 1. 


whiris.  * bigetun 1. 
ethat1. f the lawe 1s. 

ithe seedis. he 

phis is. 4 schoo off 
V that oo 1LP. the 
x the hond c. hir hond 1s. Y holdith him bi his 
¢Om.1s. 4withis. ¢thiss. f gretter 
iatrewe 1s. kK Om. 1. and a trewe s. 


° Om. Is. 
u his name 1s. 


n wil nat 1. 


XXV. 17—XKVI. 6. 


sothe shal wlaat hym that doth thes 
thingis, and withstooudith™ alle vnri3t- 

17 wisnesses®. Haue® mynde what thingis 
dide to thee Amalech in the weye, whanne 

isthow wentist out of Egipt; what maner 
wise he a3en cam to thee, and the eendis 
of thi felawship, that wery abeden, slew3, 
whanne thow were defoulid with hungre 

1g9and traueil, and dredde not God. Ther- 
for whanne the Lord thi God hath 3yue 
to thee rest, and maad sugettis? alle na- 
ciouns bi enuyroun, in the loond that he 
hath bihoot to thee, thow shalt doo a wey 
his name vndre heuene; be war lest thow 
for3ete. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 Whanne thow comyst into the loond 
that the Lord thi God is to 3yue to thee 
to be weeldid, and holdist it4, and dwellist 

2in it, thow shalt taak of alle thi fruytis 
the cheef, and put in a leep; and thow 
shalt goo to the place that the Lord thi 
God hath chosun, that there be inwardly 

3clepid the name of hym. And thow shalt 
goon to the preest that were in thot 
days, and seye to hym, I knowleche to 
day before the Lord thi God, that Y am 
comen into the loond, for the’ which he 
hath swore to oure fadris, that he shulde 
43yue it'to vs. And the preest takynge 
the leep of thin hoond, shal put before 

5 the auter of the Lord thi God. And thow 
shalt speke in the si3t of the Lord thi 
God, Sirus pursuede my fader, that de- 
scendide into Egipt, and there pilgrim- 
agide in moost fewe noumbre; and he 
growide into a greet folk of kynde, and 
strong, and of multitude with out ende. 

6 And the Egipciens greuowsly traueilyden 
vs, and pursueden, puttynge on moost 


DEUTERONOMY. 


527 


tyme on! the lond which™ thi Lord God 
schal 3yue to thee. For the Lord schali¢ 
haue hym abhomynable that doith these 
thiugis, and he wlatith®, ‘ethir cursith°, al 
vnri3tfulnesse?, Hate thou’ mynde what 17 
thingis Amalech dide to thee in the weie, 
whanne thou 3edist out of Egipt; hou he 1s 
cam to thee, and killide the laste men of 
thin oost, that’ saten’ wery, whanne thou 
were** disesid with hungur and trauel, and 
he dredde not God. Therfor whanne thii9 
Lord God hath 3oue reste to thee, and 
hath maad suget* alle naciouns ‘bi cum- 
pas", in the lond which’ he bihi3te to thee, 
thou schalt do awei ‘the name of hym¥ 
vndur heuene; be thou war lest thou for- 
3ete*. 
CAP. XXVI. 

And whanne thou hast entrid in to the1 
lond whichY thi Lord God schal 3yue to 
thee to welde, and thou hast gete it, and 
hast dwellid therynne, thou schalt takee 
the firste fruytis of alle thi fruytis, and 
thou schalt putte? in a panyere*; and thou 
schalt go to the place which” thi Lord 
God chees*, that his name be inwardly 
clepid there. And thou schalt go to thes 
preest, that schal be in tho daies, and thou 
schalt seie to hym, Y knowleche to dai bi- 
for thi Lord God, that Y entride¢ in to 
the Iond, for® which he swoor to oure fa- 
dris, that he schulde 3yue it to vs. And4 
the preest schal take the panyere’ of thin 
hond, and schalé sette’ bifor the auter of 
thi Lord God. And thou schalt speke' ins 
the si3t of thi Lord God, Sirus pursuede 
my fadir, ‘which fadir* 5ede! doun in to 
Egipt, and was a pilgrym there in feweste™ 
noumbre; and he" encreesside iu to a greet 
folk, and strong®, and of multitude with- 
out noumbre. And Egipcians? turment-« 
iden vs, and pursueden?, and’ puttiden’ 


m withstont BcDEFN. ™ vnrizjtwisnes E. © Hake. Psogetce. Winitc. that ppru. §* Om.c, 
tOm. a. 

lypon is. ™that1s. "is aduersarie tors. °Om.1s. Pvnrijtwisnesse 1s. @Om.1. the whiche 1, 
8 saten bihkinde s. *Swass. tsuget tothee 1s. Uaboute 1. bi /kicumpas s. VY thats. w Amalechus 
name fro1s. *for3ete this1s. Ythatis. % putte kimis. ®basketrs. > that 1s. © hath chosen is. 
dhane entrid 1s. © Om.s. f basket rs. & he schalis., 4 sette itis. iseyis. thatis. 1 wente x. 


ma ful litle 1. thi leste s. 
thei s. 


n my fadir s. 
8 puttiden vpon vs s. 


° a strong Is. 


P men of Hgipt 1s. 4 pursueden vs 1s. ¥ and 


528 


7greuows birthens. 
the Lord God of oure faders, that hath 
herde vs, and bihold oure mekenes, and 
straueyl, and anguysses; and he hath lad 
ys out of Egipt in a my3ti hoond, and in 
an arme strei3t out, in greet drede", in 
9toknes, and wondres, and brou3te into 
this place ; and hath taak to vs the loond 
1omylk and hony flowynge. And therfor 
nowe Y offre to thee the cheef of the 
fruytis of the erthe that the Lord hath 
3ene to me. And thow shalt leeue hem 
in the si3t of the Lord thiGod. And the 
11 Lord thi God honourd, thow shalt eete 
in alle goodis that the Lord thi God 
hath jeune to thee and to thin hows, 
thow, and Leuytis, and comlyng, that is 
12with thee. Whanne thow hast fulfillid 
the tithe of alle thi fruytis, the 3eer of 
tithis’ the thridde, thow shalt 3eue to Le- 
uyte, and comlynge, and faderles child, 
and widewe, that thei eten ‘with ynnev 
i3thi 3atis, and ben fulfillid. And thou 
shalt speke in the si3t of the Lord thi 
God, Y haue brou3t that is halowid fro* 
niyn hows, and haue 3yue it to Leuyte, 
and comlynge, andy faderles child, and 
widewe, as thow hast comaundid to me; 
I haue not passid biside thin heestis, ne 
iMhane forjet thi maundement?. Y haue 
not eete of hem in my sorwe, ne haue 
seuerd hem in eche vnelennes, ne haue 
spendid of hem eny thing in thing of 
deed coors. Y haue obeishid to the voyce 
of the Lord my God, and haue doo alle 
thingis that* thow hast comaundid to me. 
is Bihold fro thi sanctuary, fro the hije 
dwellynge place of heuens, and blesse 
thow to thi puple Yrael, and to the loond 


that thow hast 3yue to vs, as thow hast - 


swore to oure fadres, to the loond mylk and 


DEUTERONOMY. 


And we crieden to ~ 


XXVI. 7—15. 


greuousestet birthuns®. And we crieden7 
to the Lord God of oure fadris, which’ 
herde” vs, and bihelde* oure mekenesse, 
and trauel’, and angwischis?; and he leddes 
vs out of Egipt in my3ti* hond, and? arm® 
holdun? forthe, in grete drede, inf myraclis, 
and grete’ wondris, and ledde" vs' in too 
this place; and 3af* to vs a lond flowynge 
with mylk and hony.’ And therfor Y offre 10 
now to thee! the fyrste fruytis of the 
fruitis of the lond!.which™ the Lord 3af 
to me. And thou schalt leeue tho" in the 
si3t of thi Lord God. And whamne :thi 
Lord God° is worchipid, thou schalt ete11 
in alle the goodis whiche thi Lord God 
3af to thee and to? thin hows, thou, and 
the dekene, and the comelyng which? is 
with thee’. Whanne thou hast fillid’ thet 12 
tithe of alle thi fruytis, in the thridde 3eer 
of tithis", thou schalt 3yue to the dekene, 
and to the comelyng, and to the fadirles, 
ether inodirles’ child, and to widewe’", that 
thei ete with ynne thi jatis, and be fillid*. 
And thou schalt speke in the si3t of thiis 
Lord God**, Y haue take awai’f that that 
is halewid of myn hows, and Y 3af it to 
the dekene, and to the comelyng, to* the 


+ Y haue take 
awey, that is, Y 
haue departid 
fro othere 


thingis that 
fadirles, ethir modirles child, and to the ee to 
widewe, as thon comaundidist to me; Y Lire here.c. 


passide not thi comaundementis*, Y for- 
jat not thin heest®. Y ete not of tho14 
thingis in my morenyng{, nether Y. de- 
partide tho® in ony vnelennesse, nethir Y 
spendide of tho ony thing in biriyng of 
deed body, ‘that is, 1n® makynge fcestis 

therof! in biryynge® of deed men, Y _ thingis in myn 
obeiede to the vois of my Lord God, and it 
Y dide alle thingis as thou comaundidist 

to me. Bihold thou fro thi seyntuarie, fro is 
the hi3 dwellyng place of heuene, and 
blesse thou thi puple Israel, and the lond 


t ¥ eet not of 
tho thingis in 
my morenyng ; 
that is, in the 
tyme of my 
nede; Y wast- 
ide not siche 


ufere ncpEFn. Vthetithisce. W bysydys e pr.m. *in gE prom. YOm.cpeFr. % coomaunde- 
ment c. 4 as E. 

* moost greuous Is.  ™°burthunsonvvs1.  Vthe whiche1. Wherev. he bihelders. Youre 
trauel Is. % oure angwischis 1. oure anguische s. 8a my3ti1s, Pbandinis. Canarms. 4 stre3t is. 
€outis. fandinis, in greters. bheledder. i Om. plures. hen ™. * he hath j3ouen 1s. ! thee, 
prestis. ™thatis. ® hem 1. tho fraytiss. °Om.B. POm.s. . @thatis. 1 thee, skulen ete these s. 


8 fulfillid is. t 52 this maner the s. 
x fulfillid 1s. ** God, and sey, 1s. Y Om. a. 
bbidding 1s. ¢hemis. 4a deed 1s. 


‘t the gloss omitted in 1. 


e€ Om. BL. 


u thi tithis Is. 


Zand to A pr.m. C pr.m. DEFIKLOPQRSTW. 
f Om. s. 


Vv the moderles s. W the widewe BcG:KLPsx sec. m. 
8 heestis Is. 


& biryyngis coFMNoPQRTWxX. the biryynge s. 


XXVI. 16—XXVII. 6. 


whony flowynge. To day the Lord thi 
God hath comaundid to thee, that thow 
doo thes maundementis and domys, that 
thow kepe and fulfil of al thin hert, and 

izof al thi soule. The Lord thow hast 
chosun to day, that he be to thee God, 
and thow goo in the weies of hym, and 
keep his cerymoyns, and heestis, and 
domys, and obeish to his maundement. 

1s Loo! the Lord hath chosen thee to day, 
that thow be to hym a special puple, as 
he hath spoken to thee, and thow keep 

19 alle the heestis of hym; and he shal 
maak thee hijer than alle the folkis, that 
he hath’ maad of nou3t, into preysynge, 
and name, and his glorye; that thow be 
an holy puple of the Lord thi God, as he 
hath spokun. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 Moyses forsothe hath comaundid, and 
the eldren‘, to the puple of Yrael, sei- 
ynge, Keep 3e eche manndement that I 

2zcomaunde to 3ow to day. Whanne 3e 
han passid ouere Jordan, into the loond 
that the Lord thi God shal 3yue to thee, 
thow shalt arere’ greet stonus, and with 

3plastre® thow shalt dawbef hem, that 
thow mowe’ wryte in hem alle the wordis 
of this lawe, Jordan ouergoon, that thow 
goo into the lond that the Lord thi God 
shal 3yue to thee, the loond mylk and 
hony flowynge, as he hath swore to thi 
4fadres. Whanne thanne thow shalt ouer- 
pas’® Jordan, arere® the stonus that Y to 
day comaunde to thee, in the mownt of 
Hebal ; and thow shalt dawbe' hem with 
5plastre*¥, And thow shalt bild there up 
an auter to the Lord thi God, of stonus 
6whom yrun hath not towchid, and of 
stonus vnfourmed and vnpolishid; and 


d rere c. 
i plane E pr.m. 


bOm.c.  ¢ elderes c. 
8 ouerput E pr.m. 4» rere c. 


i that 1s. 
thou rs. 4 that thou 1s. + Om. 1. 
Ww hath spoken 1s. _* heestis 1s. 
©to1s. “hath spoken is. ¢ And Is. 
vpis. Jhemis. ™mayr. 1 hems. 
whiche 1. : 


f of Is. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


¢ chalke gE pr.m. 
k chalke & pr. m. 


k stidefastly bihiz3t 1s. } dai Zsrael 1s. 
8 his heestis 1s. 
Y in grace 8 marg. 
& thei seiden 1s. 
© that 1s. 


529 


whichi thou hast 3oue to vs, as thou ‘hast 
swoore* to oure fadris; the lond flowynge 
with mylk and hony. To dai! thi Lord 16 
God comaundide to thee, that thou do 
these comaundementis™ and domes, that 
thou kepe and fille" of® al thin herte, 
and of al thi soule. Thou hast chose the 17 
Lord to day, that he be God to thee, and 
thou? go in hise weies, and thou! kepe 
hise cerymonyes, and" heestis*, and domes', 
and obeie to his comaundement". Lo! thes 
Lord chees’ thee to day, that thou be a 
special puplef to hym, as he spak” to 
thee, and that thou kepe alle hise co- 
maundementis*; and he schal make thee 19 yf" 
hizereY than alle folkis, whiche he made? 

in to his preisyng, and name’, and glorie®; 

that thou be an holi puple of* thi Lord 

God, as he spak® to thee. 


+ @ special pu- 
ple; that is, 
loued singu- 


CAP, XXVII. 


Forsothe® Moyses comaundide, and thei 
eldre men, tof the puple of Israel, and 
seiden’, Kepe 3e ech ‘comaundement which" 
Y comaunde to 3ou to dai. And whannee 
3e han passid Jordan, in to the lond which! 
thi Lord God schal 3yue to thee, thou 
schalt reyse* grete stoonus, and thou schalt 
make tho! pleyn with chalk, that thous 
mow™ write in tho" alle the wordis of this 
lawe, whanne Jordan is passid, that thou 
entre in to the lond which® thi Lord God 
schal 3yue to thee, the lond flowynge with 
mylke and hony, as he swoor? to thi fa- 
dris. Therfor whanne thou hast passid4 
Jordan, reise thou! the stonus whiche Y 
comaunde to dai to thee, in the hil of He- 
bal; and thou schalt make tho" pleyn with 
chalk. And there thou schalt bilde ans 
auter to thi Lord God, of stoonys whiclie* 
yrun touchide not, and of stonys vnform-6 
ed and vnpolischid; and thou schalt offre 


fplanezE prim. & mayest p. mey BEFI. 


m heestis 1s. ™fulfillers. © hem of 1ks. P that 
this domes 1s. 4 biddyng 1s. V hath chosen 1s. 
zhath made is. his namers. >» his glorie 1s. 
h heest, that 1s. ithatis. rere 


P bihizte 1s. thou vpis. Themis. § the 


3 Y 


530 


thow shalt offre vpon it brent sacrificis 
7to the Lord thi God; and thow shalt offre 
pesible oostis, and thow shalt eete there, 
and ‘make metship! before the Lord thi 
sGod. And thow shalt wryte vpon the 
stonus alle the wordis of this lawe, 
gpleynly and cleerli. And Moyses and 
the preestis of Leuyte kynde seiden to al 
Yrael, Tak hede, and here thow, Yrael; 
to day thow art maad the puple of the 
10 Lord thi God; thow shalt here the voice 
of hym, and do the heestis, and ry3twis- 
1lnesses, that I comaunde to thee. And 
Moyses comaundide to the puple in that 
12 day, seiynge, Thes shulen stoond to blesse 
the Lord vpon the hil of Garysyin, Jor- 
dan put ouer; Symeon, Leuy, Judas, Ysa- 
i3char, Joseph, and Beniamyn. ‘And forn 
a3ens™ thes shulen stoond to curse in the 
hil of Hebal, Ruben, Gad, and Aser, Za- 
14bulon, Dan, and Neptalym. And the Le- 
uytes shulen pronounce, and seye to alle 
1smen of Irael, with an hije voice, Cursid 
be? the man that makith grauen thing 
and 3otun, abomynacioun of the Lord, the 
werk of the hoondis of crafti men, and 
shal put it in hidils®; and al the puple 
1éshal answer, and seye, Amen! Cnursid 
that honoureth not his fader and moder; 
and al the puple shal seye?, Amen! 
17 Cursid that ouerberith the teermes of his 
nei;bore; and al the puple shal seye, 
183Amen! Cursid that makith to erre the 
blynde in the weye; and al the puple 
19shal seye, Amen! Cursid that peruertith 
doom of comlynge, faderles child, and 
widewe; and al tlie puple shal seye, A- 
20men! Cursid that slepith with the wijf 
of his fader, and opneth the couerynge 
of his bed; and al the puple shal seie, 
21Amen! Cursid that slepith with eny 
beest ; and al the puple shal seye, Amen! 


1 thou shalt ete £ pr.m. 
P segge E. 


‘ther vpon is. offre theres. ¥ vpon Is. 
2 thou, Israel s. ®tak heede 1. take s. 
f that is to shewe him blesful s marg. 


3otun Bis. 
schal 1s. 
x Om. os. 


2 Om. DIKMO sec. m, RST $C. m. WX. 
Sa priuey 1ks.  € Om. 1s. 


y his fadir wyf s. 2 preuytee 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


m and fro the region E pr.m. Om. sec.m. 


W tho IKs. 

b Om. s. 
€ thei had ouer passed 1. thei han ouer passed s. 
i schewe thoo with hie voice 1. schewe these thingis with hie voice s. 
° is the s. 
4 ouerberith or fordoith 1s. 


XXVIII. 7——21. 


theront brent sacrifices to thi Lord God ; 

and thou schalt offre" pesible sacrifices, 7 

and thou schalt ete there, and thou schalt 

make feeste bifor thi Lord God. Ands 

thou schalt write pleynli and clereli on’ 

the’ stoonys alle the wordis of this lawe. 

And Moises and the* preestis of the kyndeY 9 

of Leuy seiden to al Israel, Israel’, per- 

seyue* thou’, and here; to day thou art 

maad the puple of thi Lord God; thoui0 

schalt here his vois, and thou schalt do 

‘the comaundementis®, and ri3tfulnessis?, 

whiche Y comaunde to thee to dai. Andi 

Moises comaundide to the puple in that 

day, and seide, These men schulen stonde 12 

on® the hil of Garizym to blesse the Lord', 

whanne Jordan ‘is passid®; Symeon, Leuy, 

Judas, Isachar, Joseph, and Benjamyn. 

And euene a3ens these men schulen stonde 13 

in the® hil of Hebal to curse, Ruben, Gad, 

and Aser, Zabulon, Dan, and Neptalym. 

And the dekenes schulen pronounce’, and 14 

schulen® seie ‘with hi3 vois! to alle the 

men of Israel, Cursid is the man thatis 

makith a grauun ymage and 3otun™ togi- 

dere", abhomynacioun of the Lord, the® 

werk of P ‘hondis of ecrafti men$, and schal* 

sette it in priuey® place; and al the puple 

schal answere, and schal* seie, Amen! 

He is cursid that onoureth not his fadir ts 

and modirf; and al the puple schal scie, 4 shat onourith 
Amen! Cursid is he that ‘berith ouer® the 177% (e4ign | 
termes of his neijbore{; and al the puple i is,that dis- 
schal seie, Amen ! Cursid is he that makith is dir. c. 

a blynde man to erre in the weie; and al’ hitlome 
the puple schal seie, Amen! He is cursid 19 men atant 
that peruertith’ the doom of a comelyng, 703%" than 
of aW fadirles, ethir modirles child, and of ide tohim s. 
a widewe; and al the puple schal seie, 

Amen! Cursid is he* that slepith with 20 

‘the wijf of his fadirY, and schewith the 

hiling? of his bed; and al the puple schal 


2 Om. BEFH. © hudlys £. 


x Om. Q. 


y kynrede pFGIKMNOQRSTWX., 
¢ his heestus 1s. 


dhis riztwisnessis is. © ¥pon ts. 

h Om. Exp. 
1Om.1s. Ma 
(crafty meu hondis s. * he 
Vv turneth yniustly 1s. Om. ceo. 


k thei schnlen 1. 
P of the cr. 


XAVII, 22—XXVIII. 9. 


22Cursid that slepith with his sister, dou3- 
ter of his fader, or of his moder; and al 

23the puple shal seye, Amen! Cursid that 
slepith with hist wyues moder; and al 

24the puple shal seie, Amen! Cursid that 
priuely smytith his nei3bour; and al the 

25puple shal seye, Amen! Cursid that 
slepith with the wijf of his neiz3bour; 

26and al the puple shal seye, Amen! Cursid 
that takith 3iftis, that he smyte the soule 
of the innocent blood; and al the puple 

27shal seye, Amen! Cursid that dwellith 
not in the wordis of this lawe, ne hem in 
deede fulfillith; and al the puple shal 
seye, Amen! 


CAP. XXVIII. 
1 If forsothe thow herist the voyce of 


the Lord thi God, that thow doo and . 


kepe alle the heestis" of hym, that Y co- 
maunde to thee to day, the Lord thi God 
shal make the hizer than alle the® folkis 
2of kynde, that dwellen in erthe. And 
there shulen come vpon thee alle thes 
blissyngis, and shulen taak thee; if neuer- 
thelatert the heestis of hym thow herist. 
3 Blessid thow in the" citee, and blessid in 
4the feeld; blessid the fruyt of thi wombe, 
and the fruyt of thin erthe, and the fruyt 
of thi beestis, the flockis of thi droues, 
sand the fooldis of thi sheep; blissid thi 
6beernes, and blessyd thi relikis; blessid 
thow shalt be ingoynge, and out goynge. 
7The Lord shal 3yue thin enemyes, that 
rysen ajens thee, fallynge in thin si3t 5 bi 
o weye thei shulen come a3ens thee, and 
bi seuen thei shulen flee fro thi face. 
8 The Lord shal seend out blessynge vpon 
thi celers, and vpon alle the werkis of 
thin hoondis; and he shal blesse to thee 
9in the loond that thow shalt taak. The 


q Om. E pr.m. 
later e. 4 Om. c. 


athe man rs. > gendrith 1s. ¢a43s. 4 his neiz3boris wijf 3s. © the innocent 1s. 
k Sothely 1s. 


hlawe of God x. i fulfillith hem 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


¥ maundementus c. comaundemens pri. maundemens E. 


531 


seie, Amen! Cursid is he* that slepith?2: 
with ony® beeste; and al the puple schal 
seie, Amen! Cursid is he that slepith with 22 
his sistir, the dou3tir of his fadir, ethir of 
his modir; and al the puple schal seie, 
Amen! Cursid is he that slepith with his 23 
wyues modir; and al the puple schal seye, 
Amen! Cursid is he that sleeth pryueli2s 
his neiz3bore; and al the puple schal scie, 
Amen! Cursid is he that slepith with ‘the 2s 
wijf of his neizbore’; and al the puple 
schal seie, Amen! Cursid is he that takith 26 
3iftis, that he smyte the lijf of innocent® 
blood ; and al the puple schal seie, Amen ! 
Cursid is he that dwellithf not in the27 
wordis of this? lawe®, nethir ‘parfourmeth 
thoi in werk; and al the puple schal seie, 
Amen! 
CAP. XXVIII. 

Forsothe® if thou herist the vois of thii 
Lord God, that thou do and kepe alle hise 
comaundementis!, whiche Y comaunde™ to 
thee to dai, thi Lord God schal make the 
hizere" than alle folkis that lyuen in erthe. 
And alle these blessyngis schulen come on®2 
thee, and? schulen take thee; if netheles 
thou herist hise comaundementis?. Thous 
schali be blessid in citee, and blessid™ in 
feeld’; blessid schal be the fruyt of this 
wombe, and the fruyt of thi lond, and the 
fruit of thi beestis; ‘blesstd schulen bet 
the flockis of thi grete beestis, and the 
fooldis of thi scheep; blessid schulen bes 
thi bernes, and ‘blessid schulen be" ‘thi 
relifs’; thou schalt be blessid entrynge”, ¢ 
and goynge out. The Lord schal 3yue7 
thin enemyes fallynge* in thi si3t, thatY 
schulen rise ajens thee; bi o weie thei 
schulen come a3ens thee, and by seuene 
weies thei schulen fle fro thi face. Thes 
Lord schal sende out blessyng on? thi cele- 
ris, and on® alle the werkis of thin hondis ; 
and he schal blesse thee in the lond which? 


*Om. sepernu. tt nerthe- 


fabidith 1 & the Kx. 


Theestis is. ™comaundide a pr.m. EFKLOPWX. 


Nin graces marg. °vponis. Pand theirs. 4 heestus is. thou schalt be blessid ts. § the 
feeld iksx. tOm.1. tOm.1.  Ythin othere thingis 1s,  entrynge yn Ks. * to fallets, Y the 
whiche 1. 2 vpon1s. ®vpon 1s. © that rs. 


3 Y 2 


532 


Lord shal rere thee to hym into an hooli 
puple, as he hath swore to thee, if thou 
kepyst the heestis of the Lord thi God, 
ioand gost in the weies of hym. And alle 
the puples of erthes shulen seey3en”, that 
the name of the Lord be inwardly clepid 
vpon thee, and thei.shulen drede thee. 
n To be plenteuous in alle goodis the Lord 
shal make thee, in fruytis* of thi wombe, 
and fruyt of thi beestys, fruyt of thi 
loond, that the Lord hath swore to thi 
12 fadres, forY to 3yue to thee. The Lord 
shal opne his best tresour, heuene, that 
he 3yue reyn to thi? loond in his tyme; 
he* shal blesse to alle the werkys of thin 
hoondis; and thow shalt okyr to many 
folkis®, and thi self shal not borwe to 
130ker of eny man. The Lord thi God shal 
sett thee into heed, and not into tayl, 
and thow shalt be euere more aboue, and 
not vndur; if nenerthelater® thow here 
the maundementis of the Lord thi God, 
that Y comaunde to thee to day, and 
1akepist, and dost, and bowist not aside fro 
hem, ue to the ri3t, ne to the left, ne hast 
not folwid alien goddis, ne heried hem. 
is And if thou wolt not here the vois of 
the Lord thi God, that thow keep and 
doo alle the maundementis of hym, and 
cerymoyns, that Y comaunde to thee to 
day, shulen come vpon thee alle thes 
ismalysouns, and holde thee. Cursid thow 
17shalt be in citee, cursed in feeld; cursid 
isthi bern, and cursid thi relikis; cursid 
the fruyt of thi wombe, and the fruyt of 
thin erthe, the droues of thin oxen, and 
ithe flockis of thi sheep. Cursid thow 
shalt be ingoynge, and cursid out goynge. 
20'The Lord shal sende vpon thee hungre 
inward, and hungre outward, and blam- 
yng into alle thi werkis that thow shalt 
do, to the tyme that he trede thee doun, 


Vv kepe c. y Om. c. 


latere c. 


Wseye 4. * fruyt cE. 


¢ schalt A sec. m. Is. 
iynly 1. k vpon is. 
“heed an hiz s.  * tail bihynde s. 
xOm.is. Ynex. 2 wilt not 1. 


4 thee vp is. © bihijte 1s. 


8 neuer Is, 
@ vpon Is. 


k he shall putte blamynge s. ! the B. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


I the frnyt 1s. ™ the fruyt cr. 
t heestis 18. 

> thei schulen 1. 

his wille s marg. “and cursid 1s. © Om.1. foother goodis is. 


XXVIII. ro—20. 


thou hast® take. The Lord schal reises 
thee’ to hy silf in to an hooli puple, as 
he swoor® to thee, if thou kepist the 
heestis of thi Lord God, and goist in his 
weies. And alle the puples’ of € londis* to 
schulen se, that the name of the Lord is 
inwardli' clepid on* thee, and thei schulen 
drede thee. The Lord schal make thee to 11 
be plenteuouse in alle goodis, in fruyt! of 
thi wombe, and in fruyt™ of thi beestis, 
in the fruyt of thi lond, which" the Lord 
swoor to thi fadris, that he schulde® 3yue 
to thee. The Lord schal opene his beste 12 
tresour, heuene, that he 3yue reyn to thi 
lond in his tyme; and he schal blesse 
alle the werkis of thin hondis; and thou 
schalt leene to many folkis, and of no man 
thou schalt take borewyng. The? Lord 1s 
God?? schal sette thee in to the heed‘, and 
not in to the tail", and evere thou schalt be 
aboue, and not’ bynethe; if netheles thou 
herist the comaundementist of thi Lord 
God, whiche Y comaunde to thee to day, 
and kepist, and doist", and bowist not awey 14 
fro tho’, nether to the ri3t side nether™ to 
the lefte side*, nether suest alien goddis, 
nethirY worschipist hem. That if thouwis 
nylt* here the vois of thi Lord God, that 
thou kepe and do alle hise heestis, and 
cerymonyes, whiche Y comaunde to thee 
to day, alle these cursyngis schulen come 
on® thee, and schulen> take thee. Thon ic 
schalt be cursid in citee, cursid4 in feeld. 
Cursid ‘schad be® thi berne, and cursid 17 
schulen be thi relifs’. Cursid schal be is 
the fruit of thi wombe, and the fruyt of 
thi lond ; ‘cursid schulen be’ the drooues 
of thin oxun, and the flockis of thi scheep. 
Thou schalt be cursid goynge in, and ‘¢how 19 
schalé be» cursid goynge out. The Lord 20 
schal sende on! thee hungur, and thurst, 
and blamyng* in to alle thi! werkis whiche 


this eprom ®andhece. folk c. ¢nerthe. 


f puple a p.m. 8 of vothere 1. 4 londis aboute s. 
nthatis. °wolder. PThise. PP Om. a sec.m. 
udoist hen is. Vhemis. Wnes. 
© as a prisoner is taken and led a3en 


§ Om. 1. cursid i. Om. 1. i vpon ts. 


XXVIII. 21—31. 


and lese swiftly, for thi moost yuel fynd- 
yngis, in the’ whiche thow hast forsakun 
2ime. Joyn to thee the Lord pestilence, 
to the tyme that he waast thee fro the 
erthe, to the which thow shalt .goon in 
22to be weeldyd. Smyit thee the Lord 
with nede, feuer, and coold, and bren- 
nynge,.aud heet, and corrupt eyre, and 
rust; and pursue he to the tyme that 
23 thou peryshe. Be heuene that is aboue 
thee braasny; and the lond that thou 
24 tredist yrony®. 3yue the Lord the wedre 
of thin erthe powdre, and fro heuene 
come down vpon thee askis, to the tyme 
25that thow be al to-powned’. Tak thee 
the Lord fallynge down before thin ene- 
myes; bi o weye go thow% out a3ens 
hem, and bi seuen fle thow, and be thou 
scatered thur3 out alle the rewmes of the" 
aserthe; and be thi careyn into meete to 
alle the foulis of henene, and beestis of 
the erthe, and be there nooni that driue 
azaweye. Smyit thee the Lord with the 
byil of Egipt, and the paart of the bodi bi 
the which toordis ben slieten out, with scab 
forsothe and itchynge, so that thow may* 
28not be helid. Smyit thee the Lord with 
madnes!, and blyndnes, and with wood- 
zones of thou3t; and thow shalt graasp™ 
in mydday,.as is woned a blynd man to 
graasp™ in derknissis; and make he not 
redi thi weyes; and alle tymes" wrong 
chalenge suffre thou, and be thow born 
down with vyolence, ne haue thow that 
30delyuer thee. A wijf tak thow, and an- 
other man sleep with hyr ; ‘an hows bild 
thow, and dwel thow not in yt°; plaunt 
thow a vyn, and kut thow not the grapis 
310f it. Thin ox be slaynP before thee, and 
eete thow not of it; thin asse be can3t 


dOm.c. ¢ Om. 4, 
k mawe £ pr.m. |! woodnes & pr. in. 
thou shalt not dwelle in hit £ pr. m. 


f taspoyned E pr. m. 


™m leese thee EILPs. ® ful wickid 1. 


brennynge 1s. 
whe it 1s. * that rs. 
Chifore 1s. 4 thou fro hem 1s. 
k mowe dryue s. | Om. plures. 
P hyndir part 1s. “thi bodits. * wherby thi 1s. 
filthheed is defied out ts.  ¢ Om. 1. 
xwiths. Ybeits. 7 be it ts. 


Y tredist on 18, 
e€ Om. pv. 


& thou shalt go z pr.m. 


m grappe E. 
P offred £ pr.m. 


© shal ioyne s. 
8 myldew kx. ether rust K marg. 
z be it 15. 
f Om. x. 
™ botche or vengeaunce Is. 
S toordis ben difyed out a pr.m. BCDFEKLMNOPQRWX. 
Vichynge DIL. izeching kK. 


DEUTERONOMY. 533 


thou schalt do, til he al to-breke thee, and 

leese™ swiftli, for thi werste" fyndyngist, + si worste 
: . 5 Syndingis, that 
in whiche thou hast forsake me. The Lord 2) %g synnes that 
joyne® pestilence to thee, til he waaste seas oe 
thee fro the lond, to which thou schalt ee ae 
entre to welde. The Lord smyte? thee 22 
with nedynesse{, feuyr’, and coold, bren- 
nynge’, and heete, and with corrupt eir, 

and rust*; and pursue’ ¢hee® til thou pe- 7 70 
rische. Heuene which’ is aboue thee be 23 pial gw 
brasun; and the erthe which* thou tredistY —ieunce many 
be? yrun*. The Lord 3yue dust for reyn 24 Be aan 
to thi lond, and aysche come doun fro he- mene 
uene on? thee, til thou be al to-brokun. 

The Lord 3yue thee fallynge bifor thin 2s 
enemyes ; bi o weie go thou ajens° hem, 

and bi seuene weies fle thou‘, and be thou® 

scaterid bi alle the rewmes of erthe ; and 26 

thi deed bodi beé in to mete to alle vola- 

tils" of heuene, and to beestis of erthe', and 

noon be that dryue* hem! awai. The Lord 27 

smyte thee with the botche™ of Egipt*, 

and ‘the Lord smyte® the part? of bodi4 

wherbi® ‘ordures ben voyded’; also ‘the 

Lord smyte thee‘ with scabbe, and 3icch- 

yng", so that thou mayst not be curid. 

The Lord smyte thee with madnesse, and 28 
blyndnesse, and woodnesse’ of thou3t; and 29 

grope thou in mydday, as a blynd man is 

wont to grope in derknessis ; and dresse he 

not thi weies ; in al tyme suffre thou fals” 

chaleng, and be thon oppressid bi* vio- 

lence, nethir haue thou ony that schal de- 

lyuere thee. Take thou a wijf, and an-30 

othir man sleepe with hir; bilde thou an 

hows, and dwelle thou not ther ynne; 

plaunte thou a vyner, and gadere thou 

not grapis therof. Thin oxe be offrid bifor 31 

thee, and ete thou not therof; thin asse 

beY rauyschid in thi si3t, and be? not 


t and sith mul- 
titude of chil. 
dren makith 


h Om. c. i not BCDEFH. 


Ntynie ecern. © a hous thou shalt bilde vp, and 


a with feuyr is.  * with 
t he schal pursue ts. Om. plures, — ¥ that Is. 
a of yrun BCDFGLMNOPQRTW. ? to DMX. vpon Is, 
Ebeitis. hthe briddusis. ithe erthe 1s. 
n that is induracioun 8 inarg. © Om. 1 


» shal smyte s. 


v with woodnesse 18. ¥ blameful 1s. 


534 


in thi sijt, and be it not 30ldun to thee ; 
thi sheep be thei 3ouen to thin enemyes, 
32and be there noon’ that thee help. Thi 
sones and thi dou3tren™ be thei takun to 
another puple, seynge thin eyen, and de- 
faylynge at the sijt of hem al day; and 
33 be there not strength in thin hoond. The 
fruyt of thin erthe, and alle thi traueyls 
eete the puple that thow knowist not; 
and be thow euer more wronge chalengis 
susteininge, and born down alle days, 
3iand stonyed at the drede® of tho thingis 
35that thin eyen shulen seen. Smyit thee 
the Lord with the moost yuel biel in 
knees, and in sparlyuers'; and mow thow 
not be helid fro the sool of the foot vnto 
36the" nol. And the Lord shal leede thee, 
and™ thi kyng, whom thow hast ordeynd 
‘vpon thee’, into a folk that knowist not, 
thow, and thi fadris; and thow shalt 
serue there to alien goddys, tree, and 
37stone. And thow shalt be lost into pro- 
ueerb, and fable to alle puplis, to the” 
38 Whiche the Lord shal inleede thee. Myche 
seed thow shalt throw ‘in to* the Joond, 
and litil thou shalt gedre; for locustis 
39 shulen deuowre alle thingis. A vyn thow 
shalt plaunt, and delue, and wyn thow 
shalt not drynke, ne gedre of it eny 
thing; for it shal be wastyd with wormes. 
49Olyues thow shalt haue in alle thi 
teermes, and thow shalt not be anoynt 
with oyle; for thei shulen falle awey, and 
4. perishen. Sones and dou3tresY thow shalt 
geete, and thow shalt not vse hem; for 
42thei shulen be lad into chaytifte. Alle 
thi trees and fruytis of thi loond rust 
43shal waast. A comlynge, that dwellith 
with thee in the loond, shal stey up vpon 
thee, and shal be hiz3er; forsothe thow 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XXVIII. 32-—43- 


3oldun* to thee; thi scheep be 3ouun to 
thin enemyes, and noon be» that helpe 
thee®. Thi sones and thi dou3tris be 3ouun"s2 
to another® puplef, ‘while thin ijen seeng, 
and failen> at the si3t of hem! al day; and 
no strengthe be in thin hond*. A pupless 
whom! thou knowist not ete the fruytis 
of thi lond, and alle thi trauels™; and 
euere be thou suffrynge fals" calengis®, and 
be thou oppressid in alle daies?, and‘ won- 34 
drynge™ at the ferdfulnesse’ of tho thingis 
whiche thin ijen schulen se. The Lord3s 
smyte thee with thet worste botche in the 
kneest, and in the hyndere partes of the +4 
iy stijf to obeie to 
leg ; and thou mow not be heelid fro the his wit, and 
sole of the" foot ‘til to’ the” top*. And the 36777 mig ae 
Lord schal lede thee, and thi kyng, whom 
thou schalt ordeyne on’ thee, in to a folc 
which? thou knowist not, thou’, and thi 
fadris; and> thou schalt sernue there to 
alien goddis, to a° tre, and stoon®. And37 
thou schalt be lost¢ in to prouerbe', and 
fable® to alle puplis, to whiche" the Lord 
schal brynge thee yn. Thou schalt caste 3s 
myche seed in to the erthe, and thou 
schalt gadere! litil; for locustis schulen 
deuoure* alle thingis!. Thou schalt plaunte, 39 
and schalt™ digge a vyner”, and thou schalt 
not drynke wyn®, nether thou schalt ga- 
dere therof ony thing; for it schal be 
wastid with wormes. Thou schalt haue 4o 
olyue trees in alle thi termes?, and thou 
schalt not be anoyntid with oile4; for tho" 
schulen falle doun, and schulen’ perische. 
Thou schalt gendret sones and doustris, 41 
and thou schalt not vse hem; for thei 
schulen be led in to caitifte. Rust" scha}42 
waaste alle thi trees and fruytis’ of thi 
lond. A comelyng, that dwellith with thee 43 
in the lond, schal stie on” thee, and he 


t that thei be 


not Bcpern. ° do3trisc. Sferde scpErH. tsparlurisc. Uthic. wana. VOm. a. ¥ Om.c. 
Xin ap. Y dou3tryn £. 

agoldun ajen ts. > be ther1. ¢¢o rekeuere hems marg. ‘takenis. a Ep. f straunge puples. 
€ in seynge of thin izen 1s.» failen thin igen 1s. for sorewe s marg. i thi caitif childrens. * hond to 
helpe hem is. \that ts. ™ trauels waaste its. "blamfnlis. © chalenge 1s. P tyme is. 4 and be 
thou s. ¥ without coumforl s marg. & feerfulnesse 1s. tOm.s. Uthiw. Vvnto 1s. W thi cpemoarw. 
¥nollts. Yvponis. 2whomi. thats. ®Om.s. © neitherand1. ¢Om.1. 4 tostoont. toa 
stoon s. © lost or forzete 1 leat. s marg. a prouerbe1s. in toafable1s. »whomis. i gadere 
azen is. Kwaaste s. 1 thi fruytiss. ™Om.10s. %vyne1. © the wyn1. the wyn of ifs. Pcoostis 1s. 


T thei 1s. 
W yp vpon Is. 


doile of hem 1. oile therof's. 
rust K marg. ¥ the fruytis 1s. 


8 Om. DGIMN see. nt. OS. 


t gete 1. umyldew xx. ether 
g ) 


XXVIII. 44—53. 


4ishalt goo doun, and be lower. He shal 
oker? to thee, and thow shalt not oker 
to hym; he shal be into heed, and thow 
4sshalt be into tayl. And there shulen 
come vpon thee alle thes malisouns, and 
pursuynge shulen holde thee, to the tyme 
that thow dye; for thow hast not herd 
the voyce of the Lord thi God, ne hast 
kept the maundementis of hym, and cery- 
moyns, that he hath comaundid to thee. 
46 And there shulen be in thee sygnes, and 
wondres, and in thi seed, vnto with outen 
aj7ende; forthi that thow hast not serued 
to the Lord thi God in ioy of herte and 
gladnes, for plenteuowsnes of alle thingis. 
48 Thou shalt serue to thin enemye, that 
God shal send into thee, in hungre, and 
threst, and nakidnes, and scaarsnes of alle 
thingis ; and he shal put on an yren 30k 
vpon thi scol, to the tyme that he haue 
49a] to-treede thee. The Lord shal brynge 
vpon thee a folk fro aferre, and fro the 
yttermoost? coostis of the? erthe, into 
liknes of a fleynge egle with feersnes, 
whos tonge thow mayst not vnderstond ; 
somoost gredi folk, that shal not spaar to 
the old, ne haue mercy of the litil child. 
siAnd he shal deuowr the fruyt of thi 
beestis, and fruytis of thin erthe, to the 
tyme that thow dye, and leeue he not to 
thee corn’, wyn, and oyle, droues of oxen, 
and flockis of sheep, to the tyime that he 
52scatre thee, and al to-treede thee! in alle 
thi citees; and thi fast wallis and hije 
shulen be destruyed, in the® whiche thow 
haddist trust in al thi loond. Thow shalt 
be ensegid, with ynne thi jatis in al thi 
loond, that the Lord thi God shal 3yue to 
s3thee. And thow shalt ete the fruyt of 
thi woombe, and the flesh of thi sones, 
and of thi dou3tren’, that the Lord thi 


DEUTERONOMY. 


535 


schal be the* hijereY; forsothe? thou schalt 
go doun, and schalt* be the? lowere®. He 44 
schal leene to thee, and thou schalt not 
leene to hym; he schal be in to the heed, 
and thou schalt be in to the tail. And alle 4s 
these cursyngis schulen come on4 thee, and 
schulen® pursue’, aud schulen® take thee", 
til thou perische!; for thou herdist not the 
vois of thi Lord God‘, nether kepist! hise 
comaundementis™ and cerymonyes", whiche 
he® comaundide to thee. And signes?, and 46 
grete wondris schulen be in thee, and in 
thi seed, til in to withouten ende; for thou 47 
seruedist not thi Lord God in the’ ioye 
and gladnesse of herte, for the abundaunce 
of alle thingis". Thou schalt serue thin 4s 
enemye, whom God schal sende to thee 
in hungur, and thirst, and nakidnesse‘, 
and in pouert of alle thingis; and het schal 
putte an yrun 30k on" thi nol, til he al to- 
breke thee. The Lord schal brynge on" 49 
thee a folk fro fer place, and fro the laste 
endis of erthe, in to the lienesse of an 
egle fleynge with bire, of which’ fole thou 
maist not vnderstonde the” langage; aso 
folk moost greedi axere*, that” schal not 
3yue reverence to an elde man, nethir 
haue mercy on? a litil child. And schal*s1 
deuoure the fruyt® of thi beestis, and the 
fruytis of thi lond, til thou perischist*, 
and schal4 not leeue to thee wheete, wyn, 
and oile, droues® of oxun, and flockis of 
scheep, tilf he leese thee, and al to-breke$ 52 
in alle thi citees, and tili thi sadde and 
hizje wallis be distried, in whiche thou 
haddist trust in al thi lond. Thou schalt 
be bisegid withynne thi 3atis in al thi 
lond, which* thi Lord God schal 3yue to 
thee. And thou schalt ete the fruyt of thiss 
wombe, and the fleischis! of thi sones, and 
of thi dou3tris, whiche thi Lord God schal 


Zz gauyl p. a ytmost c. otemost £. b Om. c. © wete EB pr.m. 4 Om. acern. e Om. c. 
f do3tris c. 

x thint. Om.s. Y hijere than thou s. 2 foris. ® thou schalt 1s, % Om.10s.  ¢ lowere than he 1s. 
4ypon 1s. ¢ thei schulen ss. ‘ pursue thee 1s. § Om. MN sec.m. os. © Om. 1s. perischist pcpEF 


cimorsx. * Om. pv. | keptist nEILPsx sec.m. ™ heestus 1s. "his cerymonyes ss. °IT1s. P tokenes Is. 


q Om. plures. 1 that God sente thee 8 marg. 
whiche 1, Where 1s. * axere this shal be s. 
(this puple schal 1. this folk schal s, © ne droues s. 
that 1s. k thatis. | fleishe 1s, 


8 in nakidnesse Is. 
Yit Is, 


tthe Lord rs. Uvponis. Vv the 
ait schal rs, >fruytis c. © perishe 1. 


Z2vpon Is, 1e I 
& to-breke thee 1s. 4 Om. 1s. i til 


f til that 3. 


536 


God hath 3eue to thee, in angwish and 
wastete, with the’ which thin enemye 
s4shal oppresse thee. A man delicate of 
lijf, and leccherous myche, sha] enuye to 
his brother, and to the wijf that sittith 
55in his bosum, that he 3yue not to hem of 
the flesh of his sones, the whiche he shal 
eete; forthi that no thing other he haue 
in the segynge and scaarsenes, that thin 
enemyes han wastid thee with ynne alle 
s6thi 3atis. A tendre womman and ab deli- 
cate, ‘the which! vpon the* erthe my3te 
“not go, ne fitch the stap of the foot, for 
softnes and moost tendrenes, shal enuye 
to hir man that restith in the bosum of 
hir, vpon the sone and dou3tres flesh, 
s7and the filth of the lity] fellis, that goon 
out fro the myddil of the hippis of hyr, 
and vpon the free children! that ben born 
in the same our. Thei shulen ete hem 
priuely, for the scaarsnesse of alle thingis 
in the seege and waastete, bi the which 
thin enemy shal oppresse thee with ynne 
s8thi 3atis. But if thow keep and doo alle 
the wordis of this lawe, that ben wryten 
in this volym, and drede the name of 
him gloriows and feerful™, that is the 
59 Lord thi God, the Lord shal encrees thi 
veniaunces, and veniauncis of thi seed; 
greet veniaunces and stedfast, infirmytees 
60moost yuel and euerelastynge. And he 
shal turn into thee alle the turmentyngis 
of Egipt, that thow hast dredde, and thei 
61shulen cleue to thee. Forthermore and 
alle the Jangouris and veniauncis, ‘the 
whiche" ben not wryten in the volym of 
this lawe, the Lord shal brynge vpon 
thee, to the tyme that he haue al to- 
62trode thee. And 3e shulen leeue fewe in 
noumbre, that weren before as sterrys of 
heuene for multitude; for thow herdist 


g Om. c. 


hOm.ce. i that c. 


™ jn the distriyng rs. 
4 gretli to Is. 
seging Is. 


2 enemyes Is. 
Tto his wijfis. — lijth 1. 

Whis pouert 1s. * a delicat 1s. 
departing s. © hir sone 1s. 4 filthi 1s. 
hipiss. 4 vponis. ithe freis. Om. 1s. 
© her bisegyng 1s. Penemyesis, 4 Om. Is, 
v feerful is. W ellis the s. 


mentis inns. ¢vponis. 4 book 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


*Om.c. | childer c. 


9 alle these yuelis shulen come to the s marg. 
t fleshe 1s. 

Y vpon Is. 
e€Om.1s. £ modir wombe ts. 
lhem 1. 

tT but 3if xs. 
X woundis or tourmentis 1s. 


XXVIII. 54—62. 


3yue to thee, in the angwisch and .dis- 
triyng™, bi which thin enemye" schal op- 
presse thee. A°® man delicat of lijf, and 54 
‘ful letcherouse?, schal haue ennye to‘ his 
brother, and wijf that liggith’ in his bo- 
sum, lest he 3yue to hem of the fleischistss 
of hise sones whiche he schal ete; for he 
hath noon other thing" in biseging® and 
pouert’, bi which thin enemyes schulen 
waaste thee with ynne alle thi jatis. A356 
tendur womman and delicat*, that my3te 
not go ony the erthe, nether set a step of 
foot, for most? softnesse and tendirnesse, 
schal haue enuye to hir hosebonde that 
liggith® in hir bosum, on the fleischis” of 
sone® and dou3ter, and on the filthe’ of °57 
skynnes, wherynne the child is wlappid 
in the wombe', that gon out of the myddis 
of hir ‘scharis, ethir hipe bonys®, and on} 
frei children that ben borun ink the same 
our. Thei schulen ete ‘tho ehildren! pri- 
ueli, for the scarsete™ of alle thingis® in 
bisegyng® and distriyng, bi which thin 
enemy? schal oppresse thee with ynne thi 
3atis. Nod but’ thou schalt* kepe andss 
do alle the wordis of this lawe, that ben 
writun in this volym, ‘ether bookt, and 
schalt" drede his gloriouse name and ferd- 
ful’, that is thi Lord God, the” Lord schal 59 
encreese thi woundis*, and the woundis of 
thi seed; grete woundis and contynuel, 
sikenessisY worste and euerlestinge. And 60 
he* schal turne in to thee alle the® tur- 
mentyngis> of Egipt, whiche thou dred- 
dist, and tho schulen cleue to thee. Fer- 61 
thermore the Lord schal brynge on® thee 
also alle the sorewis and woundis, that 
ben not writun in the volym® of this 
lawe®, til he al to-breke thee. And 3e62 
schulen dwelle fewe in noumbre, that 
weren bifore as the sterris of henene for 


m ferdfull pcpeFH. % that c. 


P a letcheroure ts. 
u to be releeued bi 1 marg. s text. Vv his bi- 
Zhir mostis. lijth1. > fleish 1. fleshe 
& hipe bonys c. leendis 1. werie 

2 thingis that shal be to hems. 
tQm.1. 4 but thou schalt 1s. 
2the Lord is. *thoc. » tour. 


™ scarsenesse IS. 
8 wilt 1. 
y sikenesse c. 


© for the grete orribilite of hem s marg. 


XXVIII. 63-——XXIX. 2. 


63not the voice of the Lord thi God. And 
as before thee the Lord gladdide vpon 


3ow, wel doynge to 30w, and 30w® multi-- 


pliynge; so he shal be glad, 30w scater- 
ynge and vndurturnynge, that 3e ben doon 
awey fro the loond, to the which thow 
eishalt go in to be weeldid. The Lord 
shal scater thee into alle puplis, fro the 
hijte of the erthe vnto the teermes of it; 
and thou shalt serue there to alien goddis, 
‘the whiche? thow knowist not, and thi 
65 fadris, to trees and stonus. In tho folkis 
forsothe thow shalt not rest, ne shal be 
rest to the stap of thi foot. Forsothe the 
Lord shal 3yue to thee there a dreedful 
herte, and faylynge eyen, and a sowle 
66 wastid with priue sorwe. And thi lijf 
shal be as hongynge before thee; thow 
shalt drede ny3t and day, and thow shalt 
6j7not trowe to thi lijf. Kerli thow shalt 
seye, Who 3yueth to me euen? and at 
euen, Who 3yueth to me eerlich? for the 
drede’ of thin herte, bi the which thow 
shalt be agast, and for tho thingis that 
68 thow shalt se with thin eyen. And the 
Lord shal brynge thee a3en with multi- 
tude of shippis into Egipt, bi the weye 
of the which he seide to thee, that yt 
thow shuldist se no more. There thow 
shalt be sold to thin enemyes, into 
thrallis and thrallessis; and there shal 
not be that bigge’. 


GAP XXIX. 


1 Thes ben the wordis of the couenaunt 
of pees, that the Lord hath comaundid 
to Moyses, that he should smyte with 
the sones of Yrael in the loond of Moab, 
biside that boond of pees, that with hem 

2he couenauntide in Oreb. And Moyses 


oOm.c. P that c. 


fvponis. tors. 4} leese 30u 1s. 
erthe 1s. © vnto Is. Pcoostus1s. 4nes, 
ufeerful 1s. Vv fro weping and heuynesse 8 marg. 
serowe 2. 
iOm.1. * that 1. 
to him and kept his hestis s marg. 
hand maidens xk. 
Uthe ELP. VY that 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


q ferd BCDEFH. 


i to distrie s. 
T fadris neither and 1. 
Wa soule 1. thi lijfs. 
2 shameful and noyouse to Lyne eny while s marg. 
l thou shalt werie with thi lif's marg. 
© there now s. 
rT Om. plures. thee, or bigge you from thraldom s, 


537 


multitude, for thou herdist not the .vois 
of thi Lord God. And as the Lord wases 
glad bifore on’ 30u, and dide wel to 3ou, 
and multipliede 30u; so he schal be glad, 
‘and schalé leese*, and distrie! 30u, that 3e 
be takun awei fro the lond, to which thou 
schalt entre to welde*. The Lord schal 64 
leese! thee in to alle puplis, fro the™ hi3- 
nesse of erthe" ‘til to° the termes? therof ; 
and thou schalt serue there to alien goddis, 
whiche thou knowist not, and4 thi fadris™ 
‘knowen’ not', to trees and stoonys. Also 6s 
thou schalt not reste in tho folkis, nether 
rest schal be to the step of thi foot. For 
the Lord schal 3yue to thee there a ferd- 
ful herte, and i3en failynge’, and lijf 
waastyd* with morenyng®. And thi lijfes 
schal be as hangynge bifore thee”; thou 
schalt drede in’ ny3t and dai, and thou 
schal not bileue® to thi lijf. In the mo-67 
rewtid thou schalt seie, Who schal 3yue 
the euentid to me"? and in the euentid 
‘thou schalt seie', Who schal 3yue the 
morewtid to me? for the drede of thin 
herte, bi which thou schalt be maad aferd, 
and for tho thingis whiche* thon schalt 
see with thin ijen'. The Lord schal lede 68 
thee a3en bi schipis in to Egipt, by the 
weie of which he seide to thee, that™ thou 
schuldist no more se it". There® thou schalt 
be seeld to thin enemyes, in to seruauntisP 
and ‘hand maidis1; and noon schal be that 
schal delyuere thee’. 


CAP. XXIX. 


These ben the wordis of boond® of pees, 1 
which the Lord comaundide to Moyses, 
that he schulde smytet with the sones of 
Israel in the lond of Moab, outakun that" 
bond of pees, which’ he conenauntide with 
hem in Oreb. And Moises clepid al Is-2 


T bie c. 


mOm.1s. ™ the 
8 knewen cm. Om.1. * Om. 1. 
x he shal waaste s. Y priuey 
fOm.1s. & trowers. 4 me éo abide s. 
™Om. 1. 1 3if feithfulli thou haddist bilewid 
Pb men seruauntis 1s. 4 wymmen seruauntis Is. 
8 the boond 1xks. t make rs. 


k welde if 1s. ! seatere 1. 


32 


538 


clepide’ al Yrael, and seide to hem, 3e 
han seen alle thingis that the Lord hath 
doo before 30w in the loond of Egipt, 
to Pharao, and alle the seruauntis of 
3hym, and to al the loond of hym; greet 
temptaciouns, that thin eyen seen, thilk' 
asygnes, and greet wondres. And the 
Lord 3af not to 30w an vndurstondynge 
herte, and seynge eyen, and eeris that 
mi3ten here, vnto the day that is nowe. 
5He ladde 30w fourti 3eer bi deseert ; 
3oure clothes ben not apeyred, ne the 
shoon of 3oure feet for eeld ben not” 
6wastid; breed 3e eeten not, wyn and 
sidre 3e dronken not, that 3e shulden 
knowe for he is the’ Lord 3oure God. 
7And je ben comen to this place; and 
Seon, the kyng of Esebon, went out, and 
Og, the kyng of Basan, a3en comynge to 
s3ow to fi3t. And we smyten hem, and 
token the loond of hem, and 3auen to be 
weeld to Ruben, and Gad, and to the 
ghalf lynage of Manasse. Keep 3e ther- 
for the wordis of this couenaunt, and ful- 
filX hem, that 3e vndurstonden alle thingis 
wthat 3e shulden doo. 3e stonden to day 
alle before the Lord 3oure God, 3oure 
princes, and lynagis, and the more thur3 
birth, and doctours, al the puple of Irael, 
u free children’, 3our wyues, and comlyngis 
that with thee dwellen in tentes, ont taak 
the hewers of trees, and hem that beren 
12 watris; that thow passe in the couenaunt 
of the Lord thi God, and in the ooth that 
13the Lord thi God smytith with thee, that 
he arere thee to hym into a puple, and 
he be the Lord thi God, as he hath 
spokun to thee, and as he hath sworn to 
thi fadres Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob. 
14 Ne to 30w alone I this coucnaunt sinyte, 
isand thes oothes conferme, but to alle pre- 


8 cleepe BEF. t thoo c. u Om. BCDEFH. 


y childer c. 


wie seide 1s. *han seen is. Y hath do 1s. 


DEU TERONOMY. 


2 to alle 1s. 


XXIX. 3—15. 


rael, and seide* to hem, 3e sien* alle 
thingis whiche the Lord dide’ bifor 30u 
in the lond of Egipt, to Farao and alle” 
hise seruauntis, and to al his lond; thes 
greet temptaciouns whiche thin izen sien®, 
‘tho signes>, and grete® wondris. And4 
the Lord 3af not to’ 3ou an herte vndur- 
stondynge, and i3en seynge, and eeris that® 
moun here, til in to present! daig. Hes 
ledde" 30u bi' fourti 3eer thoru3* deseert ; 
joure clothis weren not brokun!, nether 
the schoon of 3oure feet weren waastid bi 
eldnesse ; 3e eettin not breed”, 3e" drunken 6 
not® wyn and sidur, that 3e schulden wite 
that he is 3oure Lord God. And 3e camen7 
to this place; and Seon, the kyng of Ese- 
bon 3ede out, and Og, the kyng of Basan, 
and camen? to us to batel. And we han‘ 
smyte™ hem, and we token awey the’ londs 
‘of hem', and we 3auen ‘the lond® to pos- 
sessioun, to Ruben, and to Gad, and to 
the half lynage of Manasses. Therfors 
kepe 3e the wordis of this couenaunt, and 
filley 3e tho’, that 3e vndirstonde all 
thingis whiche 3e schulen do. Alle 3e10 
stonden to day bifor 3oure Lord God, 
joure princes, aud lynagis, and the gret- 
tere men in birthe, and techeris*, al the 
puple of Israel, fre’ children, and 3oure11 
wyues, and comelyngis* that dwellen with 
thee in castels*, outakun the heweris of 
stonus?, and outakun hem® that beren wa- 
tris’; that thou go in® the boond of pees 12 
of thi Lord God, and in the ooth whichf 
thi Lord God* smytith with thee, that he1s 
reise thee in' to a puple to hym silf, and 
that he be thi Lord God, as he spak to 
thee, and as he swoor! to thi fadris, to* 
Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob!. And not to1s 
30u aloone Y smyte™ this loond of pees, 
and conferme these othis", but to alle men, 15 


v¥ Ou. 4. Ww weeldyd BcDEFH. x folfulleth £. 


ahan seen 1s. the tokenes1s. ©¢ the 


grete 1s. 4Om.1s. ¢whiches, f this presents. & dai for 30ure wnfeithfulnesse 1s.» hath ledde s. 
iOm.1 © birs. Ito rent 1s. ™ of goure owne traueile s. neither 3¢ 1. ne3es. © Om.1s. P thei 
camenis. @Om.3. ‘"smoteni. Sheris. tOm.1. frohems. itis. Vfulfillers. hems. 
* 30ure doctours 1s. Y30ure freis. 2 the comelyngis1s. the tentis 1. tentis s. > trees A see. m. 
etheirs. 4watir1, ¢intos, fthatis. 8 Om.iprms. 4 vpinis. 1 hath swoor 1. stidfastly 
bihigte ss k Om. 1. 1 to Jacobs. ™ make is. ® biheestis 1s. 


XXIX. 16—725. 


iésent and absent. Forsotle 3e han knowe 
what maner wise we dwelten in the loond 
of Egipt, and what maner wise we pass- 
iden bi the myddil of naciouns; the whiche 
i7passynge, 3e seen abomynaciouns, and 
filthis, that is, mawmettis of hem, tree 
and stoon, siluer and gold, that thei 
isheryeden. Lest peranenture there be a- 
mong 30w man or womman, meyne or 
lynage, whos herte is turned awey to 
day fro the Lord 3oure God, that he goo, 
and serue to goddis of other gentils ; and 
be among 30w a rote burionynge gal and 
i9 bitternes ; and whanne he hadde herd 
the wordis of this ooth, he blesse to hym 
in his herte, seiynge, Pees shal be to me, 
and Y shal go in the” shrewidnes of myn 
herte; and a dronken take the thristi, 
z0and the Lord for3yue not to hym, but 
thanne moost the woodnes of hym shal 
wax feers, and gelows* a3ens that man, 
and sitten vpon hym alle the cursid 
thingis that ben wryten in this volym; 
and he doo awey the name of hym vnder 
21 heuene, and waast hym into the? lost 
fro alle lynagis of Yrael, after the mali- 
souns that in the book of this lawe and 
22¢ouenaunt ben conteyned. And the ge- 
neracioun folowynge shal seye, and the 
sones that -shulen be born therafter, and 
pilgrymys, and fro aferre comen, seynge 
the veniauncis of that loond, and the in- 
firmytees, with the whiche the Lord 
23 tourmentid it, with brimstoon, and bren- 
nynge with heet of the sunne, so that 
forthermore it be not sowed, ne eny 
thing green burioun, into ensaumple of 
the vndurturnynge of Sodom and Go- 
mor, Adame and Soboym, the whiche 
the Lord vndurturned in wreth, and 
24in his. woodnes. And al folk shulen 
seye, Whi thus the Lord hath doon to 
this loond? What is this greet wrath 
25 with outen mesure of his woodnes? and 
thei shulen answere, For thei han for- 


DEUTERONOMY. 


539 


present and absent. For 3e witen hou we i6 
dwelliden in the lond of Egipt, and how 
we passiden bi the myddis of naciouns ; 
whiche 3e passiden, and si3jen abhomyna-17 
ciouns and filthis, that is, idols®° ‘of hem?, 
tre’ and stoon, siluer and gold, whiche 
thei worschipiden. Lest perauentiure a-is 
mong 30u be man ether womman, meyne 
ether lynage, whos herte is turned away 
to dai fro joure Lord God, that he go, 
and serue the goddis of tho folkis; and a 
roote+ buriounnynge galle and bitternesse 
be among 3ou; and whanne he hath herdi9 
the’ wordis of this ooth, he blesse hym 
silf*{ in his herte, and seie, Pees schal be 
to me, and Y schal go in the schrewid- 
nesse of myn herte; and Jest the drunkun 
take the thirsti, and the Lord forgyue not 20 
to hym, but thanne ful greetli his strong 
veniaunce be feers, and the feruour" a3ens 
that man, and alle the cursis that ben 
writun in this book ‘sitte on’ hym; and 
‘the Lord™ do away his name vndur* he- 
uene, and waaste hym in to perdicionn’ 21 
fro alle the lynagis of Israel, bi the cursis 
that ben conteyned in the book of this 
lawe and of boond? of pees. And the ge-22 
neracioun suynge* schal seie, and the sones 
that schulen be borun aftirward, and pil- 
grimys that schulen come fro fer, seynge 
the veniauncis of that lond, and the sike- 
nessis bi whiche the Lord turmentide that 
lond, brennynge ‘that lond» with brym-23 
ston and heete of the sunne, so that it be 
no more sowun, nether bringe forth ony 
grene thing, in to ensaumple of destriyng 
of Sodom and of *» Gommorre, of Adama 
and of Seboym, whiche the Lord destriede 
in his ire® and stronge veniaunce. And 2s 
alle folkis schuljen seie, Whi dide the Lord 
so to this lond ? What? is the greet ire® of 
his’ stronge veniaunce? and thei schulen 25 
answere, For thei forsoken the couenaunt 
of the Lord, whiche® he couenauntide with 
her fadris, whanne he ledde hem out of 


zOm. 4. ®gelouste scorru, » Om. Bepern. 
© the idols r. her idolss. POm.s. dandtres. ‘thor. 8 hym silf stabli purposinge s. this is. 
« feruour berst outs. V reste vponrs. Wher, *frovndurs. Ylosinges. 2 the boondis. ® Om. s. 


bitas. bbOm. ins. ¢ wraththe rs. 


d What or hou grete s. 


e wraththe 1s. fthis 1. § that 1s. 


3Z2 


+ a roote, etc. 
that is, ony 
man corrupt bi 
idolatrie that 
corrum 

othere men bi 
his wickid 
tising. BC. 

t he blesse him 
silf ; that is, 
biheete for- 
3yuenesse to 
him silf, and 
so breke more 
tristily Goddis 
awe. Lire 
here. Cc. 


540 


sake the couenaunt of the Lord, that he 
couenauntide with the faders of hem, 
whanne he lad hem out of the loond of 
26 Egipt, and serueden to alien goddis, and 
honoureden hem whom thei knewen not, 
and to whom thei weren not taken to; 
27therfor wraththed the woodnes of the 
Lord a3ens this* loond, that he brou3t in 
vpon it alle the cursid thingis that in 
28this volym ben wryten; and he keste 
hem out fro his loond in wraththe, in 
woodnes, and in moost indignacyoun; and 
he keste aferre in to an alyen loond, as to 
29day is preued. Hid® thingis of the Lord 
oure® God ben, that ben open to vs, and 
to oure sones vnto with outen ende, that 
we doon alle thingis of this lawe. 


CAP. XXX. 


1 Whanne therfor were comen vpon thee 
alle thes wordes, blessynge or malysoun, 
that I haue purposid in thi si3t, and 
brou3t thur3 forthenkyng of thin herte 
in alle folkis of kynde, into the’ whiche 
the Lord thi God hath scatred thee, and 

2were turned ajen to hym, and obey- 
shidest to the heestis of him, as Y to day 
comaunde to thee, with thi sones, in al 

3thin herte and in al thi soule, and the 
Lord thi God shal bryng thee ajen fro 
thi chaytifte, and shal hane mercy of 
thee, and eft shal gedre thee fro alle pu- 
plis, into the whiche thee before he sca- 
atride; if to the eendis of henene thow 
were scatryd, thens shal aj3en drawe thee 
sthe Lord thi God; and shal taak, and 
brynge® into the loond that weldiden 
thi fadris; and thow shalt holde it, and 
blessynge to thee, of more noumbre he 
shall make thee to be than weren thi fa- 
6dris. The Lord thi God shal cireumcyde 
thin herte, and the herte of thi seed, that 
thow loue the Lord thi God in al thin 


¢thi 4. 4 These been the hud z pr.m. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XXIX. 26—XXX. 6. 


the lond of Egipt, and thei serueden alien 26 

goddis, and worschipiden hem, whiche thei 

knewen not, and to whiche thei weren not 

jouun>; therfor the strong veniaunce of 27 

the Lord was wrooth ajens this lond, that 

he brou3te yn on! it alle the cursis that 

ben writun in this book; and he castide* 28 

hem out of her lond, in ire! and strong 

veniaunce, and in gretteste™ indignacioun ; 

and he castide® forth in to an alien lond, 

as it is preued to dai. Thingis® ben hid? 29 + singis ben 
of oure Lord God, ‘that is, in his bifor- Toca cee 
knowing', whiche™ thingis* ben schewid  };, ete fan 
to us, and tot oure sones with outen ende, 


hid fro God ben 
reserued to 
that we do" alle the wordis of this lawe. 


dampnacioun ; 
whiche ben 
schewid to vs, 
that is, ben 
punyschid by 
mannns doom. 
Lire here. c. 


CAP. XXX. 


Therfor’ whanne alle these wordis”1 
comen on* thee, blessyng ether cursing, 
which Y settideY forth in thi si3t, and 
thou? art led* bi repentaunce of thin herte 
among alle folkis, in to whiche thi Lord 
God hath scaterid thee, and turnest® a3en2 
to hym, and obeiest to hise comaunde- 
mentis®, as Y comaundide! to thee to dai, 
with thi sones, in al thin herte and in al 
thi soule, thi Lord God schal lede thees 
a3en fro thi caitifte, and schal® haue mercy 
on thee, and eft he schal gadre thee from 
alle puplis, in to whiche he scateride’ the 
bifore. If thou art scaterid to the endis{4 
of heuene, fro thennus thi Lord God schal 
withdrawe& thee; and he schal take® ands 
schal' bringe ¢hee in to the lond which* 
thi fadris weldiden; and thou schalt holde 
it!, and he schal blesse thee, and schal™ 
make thee to be of more noumbre than 
thi fadris weren. Thi Lord God schals¢ 
circumcide thin herte, and the herte of 
thi seed, that thou loue thi Lord God in" 
al thin herte and in al thi soule, and 


t the endis etc. 
that is, to the 
ferthereste 
partis of erthe. 
Lire here. c. 


€ 3oure FE pr.m. £Om.c. & inbrynge ez. 
L yng 


h taken to is. ivpon ts. & hath cast is. Jwrath rs. ™ ful gret 1. "hath throwen hem 1s. ° Dyuers 


thingis s. P hid or preuy 8. 
v Wherfor 1. ¥ Om.1. 
furnest s. © heestis Is. 
thee 1s. 1 Om. 1s. 


q Om. is. 

X vpon Is. 
¢ haue comaundid ts. 
K that 1. lit welsumli 1s. 


t the whiche 1. 
y haue sett is. 
€ he schal 1s. 
m he schal ts. 


s$Om.1s.  tshulen bentos.  fulfille 1s. 
aOm.s. » thou turnest 1. 3if thou 
fhath scaterid is. & draweis. 1) take 
n of s, 


z 3if thou s. 


XXX. 7—17. 


herte and in al thi soule, and thow may 
7lyue. Forsothe alle thes malisouns the 
Lord shal turn vpon thin enemyes, and 
hem that haten thee thei shulen pursue. 
8 Forsothe ¢how shalt turne a3en, and here 
the voice of the Lord thi God, and thow 
shalt doo alle the maundementis that I 
9comaunde to thee to day; and the Lord 
thi God shal make thee to be plenteuous 
in alle the werkis of thin hoondis, in the 
progeny of thi woomb, and in the fruyt 
of thi beestis, in plenteuowste of thin 
erthe, and in largyte of alle thingis. 
Forsothe the Lord shal turne ajen, that 
he ioye on thee in alle goodis, as he 
loioyede in thi fadres; if neuerthelater! 
thow herest the voyce of the Lord thi 
God, and kepist the heestis of hym, and 
cerymoyns, that in this lawe ben writen, 
and turn aj3en to the* Lord thi God, in 
11 al thin herte, and in al thi soule. This 
heest that I comaunde to thee to day, is 
igznot aboue thee, ne ferre put, ne in he- 
uene set, that thow maist seye, Who of 
vs may to heuene sty vp, that he brynge 
it to vs, and we heren it, and fulfillen 
13in dede? ne bij3ond see! set, that thow 
pleyn, and seye, Who of vs may passe 
ouer the see, and it to vs hidir brynge, 
that we mowen here, and doon that that 
14is comaundid? But ri3t ny3 thee is the 
word, in thi mouth and in thin herte, 
15that thow doo it. Bihold that to day I 
haue purposid in thi si3t lijf and good, 
isand a3jenward deth and yuel; that thow 
loue the Lord thi God, and goo in the 
weies of hym, and keep the heestis of 
hym, and cerymoyns, and domes; and 
thow lyne, and he multiplie thee, and 
blesse to thee, in the loond to the™ which 
17to be weeldid thow shalt goon yn. For- 
sothe if thin herte were turned awey, 


h Om. ecperi. i nerthelater ce. 
© thou maist 1s. P For thanne 1s. 4 vpon 1s. 

schalt 1s. Vthatis. wOm.s. * and in IK. 

- Cheesters. 4thatis. € it is 1s. 

k into kx. | thennes Goddis heest s. 
‘a Om, A pr. m. CEFGLNPQT pr. m. X. 


thou kepes. %Om.s. V Aés cerymonyes Is. 
Lord s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


r haten thee Is. 
Y vpon Is. 
f fer fro thee 18. 

m here if Is. 
r Om. A. hidir Is. 
w his domes Is. 


541 


maist® liuet. Forsothe? the Lord schal7 t Love therfore 
jour enemyes 


turne alle these cursyngis on4 thin ene- — rertily and 
eieth for hem. 
myes, and on hem that haten’ and pur- ee ce ‘ 


suen thee. Sotheli thon schalt turne ajen’, s 
and schaltt here the vois of thi Lord God, 
and schalt" do alle the heestis whiche’ Y 
comaunde to thee to dai; and thi Lord9 
God schal make thee to be plenteuouse, in 
alle the workis of thin hondis, in the chil- 
dren of thi wombe, and” in the fruyt of 
thi beestis, in* abundaunce of thi lond, and 
in largenesse of alle thingis. For the Lord 
schal turne a3en, that he haue ioye on’ thee 
in alle goodis, as he ioyede in thi fadris ; 
if netheles thon herist the voys of thiio 
Lord God, and kepist hise heestis and 
cerymonys’, that ben writun in this® lawe, 
and thou” turne aj3en to thi Lord God in 
al thin herte, and in al thi soule. This1 
comaundement® whiche’ Y comaunde to 
thee to day, is not aboue thee, nethir is* 12 
set ferf, nethir is® set in henene, that thou 
maist" seie, Who of vs may stie! tok he- 
nene, that he brynge it' to vs, and we 
here™, and fille* in werk ? nether 7° 7s set 13 
-bizende the see, ‘that thou pleyne?, and 
seye, Who of vs may passe ouer the see’, 
and brynge it til" to vs, that we moun 
here and do that that is comaundid’? Butt 
the word is ful ny3 thee, in thi mouth and 
in thin herte, that thou do it. Biholde1s 
thou, that to day Y haue set forth in thi 
si3t lijf and good, and a3enward deeth and 
yuel; that thou loue thi Lord God, and 16 
go in hise weies, and kepet hise heestis, 
and" cerymonyes’, and domes; and that 
thon lyue, and he multiplie thee, and blesse 
thee in the lond to which thou schalt 
entre to welde. But if thin herte is turned 17 
awey, and thou nylt* here’, and thou art 
disseyued bi errour, and worschipist alien 
goddis, and seruest hem, Y biforseie to thee 18 


k thee the 4. 'theseec. ™ Om. c. 


u thou 
b 37f thou Is. 
i vp to 1s. 

P pleyne thee 1s, 
‘that thou kepe 1. 
y here him 1. here thi 


$Om.1s. t thou schalt 1s. 
zhis cerymonys 1s. 4 the 1. 
& it is 18. h Om. rkogrstwx. 
n fulfille ct1s. © this heest s. 
8 comaundid fo vs s. 
x wilt not I. 


542 


and woldist not here, and bi errour dis- 
seyued honourist alyen goddis, and seruest 
ishem, I before seye to thee to day, that 
thow perishe, and litil tyme thow shalt 
dwelle in the loond, to the which Jordan 
ouer put thow shalt goon yn, that it be 
19 weeldid. Wytnesses Y inwardly clepe 
heuene and erthe to day, that Y haue 
purposid to 3ow lijf and deth, good and 
yuel, blessynge and cursynge; chees ther- 
for lijf, that and® thow lyue and thi 
20seed, and thow lone the Lord thi God, 
and thow obeysh to his voyce, and to 
hyin thow drawe to; forsothe he is thi 
lijf, and the lengthe of thi days; that 
thow dwelle in the loond, for the® which 
the Lord hath swore to thi fadris Abra- 
ham, Ysaac?, and Jacob, that he 3eue it 
to hem. 
CAP. XXXI. 
1 And so Moyses 3ede%, and spak alle 
2thes wordes to al Yrael, and seide to 
hem, Of an hundrid and twenti 3eer Y 
am to day, Y may namore goon out and 
come yn, namelich whanne and the Lord 
hath seide to me, Thow shalt not passe 
3this Jordan. Therfor the Lord thi God 
shall passe before thee; he shal doo a wey 
alle thes gentils in thi si3t, and thow shalt 
weeld hem; and this Josue shal passe be- 
4fore thee, as the Lord hath spoken. And 
the Lord shal doo to hem as he dide to 
Seon, and to Og, the kyng of Amorreis, 
and to the loond of hem; and he shal do 
shem awey. Whanne thanne and thes he 
shal taak to 30w, lijk maner 3e shulen 
doo to hem, as I haue comaundid to 3ow. 
6 Manlich do je, and ‘be 3e" coumfortid ; 
wole 3e not be feerd, ne dred at the si3t 
of hem, for the Lord thi God he ys thi 
leder, and he shal not leeue, ne forsaak 
7thee. And Moises clepide’ Josne, and 
seide to hym before al the inultitude of 
the sones of Yrael, Tak coumfort, and be 
thow strong ; forsothe thow shal lede in 
P and Ysaac £. 


2 Om. BF prem. ° Om. c. 


Z thow schalt 1s. 4 to witnesse A pr. m. 18. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


4 3ede awey £ pr.m. 


bOm. o. 


SEX, 1G kaa. 


to dai, that thou schalt perische, and 
schalt? dwelle litil tyme in the lond to 
which thou schalt entre to welde, whanne 
thou schalt passe Jordan. Y clepe to day 19 
heuene and erthe witnesses*, that ts, aun- 
gels and men, that Y haue set forth to 
3ou lijf and deeth, good and yuel, blessyng 
and cursyng; therfor chese thou lijf, that 
bothe thou lyue and thi seed, and that20 
thou loue thi Lord God, and obeie to his 
vois, and cleue to hym, for he is thi lijf, 
and the lengthe of thi daies; that thou 
dwelle in the lond, for which the Lord 
swoor to thi fadris, to® Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob‘, that’ he schulde® 3yue it to 
hem. 


CAP. XXXI. 

And so Moises 3ede, and spak alle these 1 
wordis to al Israel, and seide to hem, Y2 
am to dai of an hundrid and twenti 3eer, 
Y may no ferthere go out and go yn, 
moost! sithen also the Lord seide to me, 
Thou schalt not passe this Jordan. Ther-s 
for? thi Lord God schal passe bifore thee ; 
he schal do awei these folkis in thi si3t, 
and thou schalt welde hem ; and this Josue 
schal go bifor thee, as the Lord spak. Anda 
the Lord schal do to hem as he dide to 
Seon, and Og" kyngi of Ammorreis, and 
to ‘the lond of hem‘; and he schal do hem 
awey. Therfor whanne the Lord hath bi-s 
take to 30u also hem, 3e schulen do in lijk 
maner to hem, as Y comaundide! to 3o0u. 
Do 3e manli, and be 3e coumfortid ; nyle 3e6 
drede in herte, nethir drede 3e at the si3t 
of hem, for thi Lord God hym silf is thi 
ledere, and he schal not Jeeue™, nether 
schal" forsake thee. And Moyses clepid7 
Josue, and seide® to hym bifor al the mul- 
titude of the sones of Israel, Be thou coum- 
fortid, and be thou strong; for thou schalt 
lede this puple in to the lond which? the 


Theth c. § cleep er. 


© to Jacobs. 40Om.1. © wolder. f namely 1s. 


§ therfor Israels. » to Og 1s. ithe kyngis Br. kyngis crs sec.m. * her londis rs. 1 haue comaundid 1s. 


m leeve thee 1s, 2 Om.1. © he seide 1s. 


P that 1s, 


XXXII. 8—1i16. 


this puple into the loond that the Lord 
hath sworn hym to 3euynge‘ to the faders 
of hem; and thow shalt it dyuyde bi lot. 
And the Lord that is 3our leder, he shal 
be with thee, ne shal leeue" ne forsaak 
thee; wole thow not drede, ne be feerd. 
9 And so Moyses wroot this lawe, and took 
it to the preestis, the sones of Leuy, that 
beren the ark of the boond of pees of the 
Lord, and to alle the aldren’ of Yrael. 
ioAnd he comaundide to hem, seiynge, 
After seuen 3eer the 3eer of remyssioun, 
in the solempnytees of the tabernaclis, 
uialle men of Yrael comynge togidre, that 
thei aperen in the sijt of the Lord her 
God, in the place that the Lord hath 
chosun, thow shalt rede the wordis of this 
12lawe before al Yrael, hem herynge, and 
in oon al thi puple gedrid, as wel men as 
wymmen, litil children’, and comlyngis 
that ben with ynne thi 3aatis; that her- 
ynge thei lernen, and dreden the Lord 
oure God, and keep and fulfille alle the 
iswordis of this lawe; forsothe the sones 
of hem that now vnknowen, that thei 
mowen here, and thei dredden the Lord 
her God alle days in the* whiche thei 
dwellen in erthe to the which, Jordan 
ouer put, 3e shulen goon that it be had. 
14 And the Lerd seide to Moyses, Loo! ny3 
ben the days of thi deeth; cleep Josue, 
and stoond 3e in the tabernacle of wit- 
nessynge, that Y comaunde to hym. 
Therfor Moyses and Josue 3eden, and 
stoden in the tabernacle of witnessynge ; 
isand the Lord aperide there in a pelere of 
a clowde, that stood in the entre of the 
ig tabernacle. And the Lord seide to Moyses, 
Loo! thow shalt sleepe with thi fadris, 
and this puple arysyngeY shall doo forny- 
cacioun after alien goddis, in the loond to 
the which he shal goon yn, and dwelle in 
it; there he shal forsaak me and make 


tsiue c. 3euyn £ sec.m. ™ leeue thee c. 


Gshulde x. Y° her fadris 1s. § that rs. 
xOm.1. YOm.1ts. 2 the tabernaclis 1s. 
kepe is. ¢fulfillers. f Om. c sec. am. 

l thei stooden 1s. ™the 31s. 4 a cloude is. 
or ydolatrie, goynge 8s. § into 1s, * Om. 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Vv elders c. 


t Om. ts. 
a that her 1s. 

& here the lawe s. 

othe a prim. 

U it schal 1s. 


543 


Lord swoor that he schal4 3yue tothe 
fadris of hem"; and thou schalt departe it 
bi lot. And the Lord hym silf whiche’ iss 
3oure ledere, schal be with thee, he schal 
not leeue, nether schal' forsake thee; nyle 
thou drede", nether drede thou zz herte. 
Therfor Moyses wroot this lawe, and bi-9 
took it to’ the preestis, sones" of Leuy, that 
baren the arke of the* bond of pees of the 
Lord, and to alle the eldere men of Israel. 
And Moyses comaundide to hem, and seide, 10 
Aftir seuen jeer, in the 3eer of remyssioun, 
in theY solempnete of tabernaclis?, whanne 11 
alle men of Israel schulen come togidere, 
that thei appere in the si3t of her Lord 
God, in the place ‘which the* Lord chees, 
thou schalt rede the wordis of this lawe 
bifor al Israel, while thei heren, and while 12 
al the puple is gaderid togidere, as wel to 
men, as to wymmen, to litle children, and 
comelyngis® that ben with ynne thi 3atis ; 
that thei here, and lerne, and® drede 3oure 
Lord God, and kepe* and fille® allef the 
wordis of this lawe; also that the sones 13 
of hem, that now knowen not, moun here®, 
and that thei drede her Lord God in alle 
daies in whiche thei lyuen in the lond to 
whiche 3e> schulen go to gete, whanne 
Jordan is passid. And the Lord seide to14 
Moises, Lo! the daies of thi deeth beni 
ny3; clepe thou Josue, and stonde 3e in 
the tabernacle of witnessyng, that Y co- 
maunde to hym. Therfor Moises and 
Josue 3eden*, and stooden! in the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng; and the Lord ap-is 
peride there in a™ pilere of cloude”, that 
stood in the entryng of the tabernacle. 
And the Lord seide to Moises, Lo! thou 16 
schalt slepe with thi fadris, and this? pu- 
ple schal riseP, and schal‘ do fornycacioun™ 
aftir alien goddis in the lond, to* which 
lond' it schal entre, that it dwelle ther 
ynne; there it schal forsake me, and schal" 


wchilder c. * Om, c. Y risende c. 


u drede oulwaard 1s. VOm.1s. W the sones Is. 
b to comelyngis 1s. ¢tocG.  ¢ that thei 

htheia. ibuth xv.  & 3eden forth 1s. 
Prise vp ts, it schalis. T° fornyeacioun 


544 


at nou3t the couenaunt of pees, that Y 
17couenauntid with hym. And my woodnes 
shal wraththe ajens hym in that day, and 
Y shal forsaak hym, and hiyde my face 
fro hym, and he shal be into deuowr- 
ynge; and alle ynels and turmentyngis 
shulen fynde hym, so that he seie in that 
day, Forsothe for God is not with me, 
isthes yuels han foundun me. Forsothe Y 
shal hide, and hile my face in that day, 
for alle the yuels that he hath doo, for 
i9he hath? folwid* alien goddis. And so 
now wryte 3e to 30w this songe, and 
teche 3e the sones of Yrael, that mynd- 
fulli® thei hoolden, and with mouth synge; 
and this dyte be to me for witnessinge 
20among the sones of Yrael. Forsothe I 
shal leede hym into the loond, for the° 
which I haue sworn to the fadris of hym, 
mylk and hony flowynge; and whaune 
thei hadden eete, and weren fillid, and 
fat, thei shulen turn to alien goddis, and 
serue to hem; and myssey4 to me, and 
thei shulen make at nou3t my couenaunt. 
21 After that many yuels and tourment- 
yngis han founden hym, this songe shal 
answere to hym for witnessynge, that no 
for3etynge shal doo awey fro the mouth 
of thi seed. I knowe forsothe the thow3tis 
of hym, what thingis he be to doo, to day 
or’ Y lede hym into the loond that I haue 
22 bihoot to hym. Thanne Moyses wroot a 
23songe, and tau3te the sones of Yrael. And 
the Lord comaundide to Josue, the sone 
of Nun, and seith, Tak coumfort, and be 
stronge ; forsothe thou shal brynge yn 
the sones of Yrael into the loond that I 
haue bihoot, and I shal be with thee. 
2 After thanne that Moises wroot the 
wordes of this lawe in a volym, and ful- 
25fillide, he comaundide to the Leuytis 
that beren the arke of the boond of pees 


DEUTERONOMY. 


XO. 17s. 


make void the boond of pees, whichY Y 
couenauntide with it. And my strong 17 
veniaunce schal be wrooth a3ens that pu- 
ple in that dai, and Y schal forsake it, 
and Y schal hide my face fro it, and it 
schal be in to deuouryng; alle yuels and 
turmentyngis schulen fynde it, so that it 
seie in that dai, VeriliY for the Lord is 
not with me, these yuelis han founde me. 
Forsothe* Y schal hideY, and schal? hile is 
‘my face* in that dai, for alle the yuels 
‘whiche it dide>, for it suede® alien goddis. 
Now therfor write 3e to 30u this song, and 19 
‘teche 3e4 the sones of Israel, that thei 
holde z¢° in mynde, and synge bif mouth; 
and that this song be to me for a& wit- 
nessyng among the sones of Israel. For 20 
Y schal lede hym in to the lond, for which 
Y swoor to hise fadris, flowynge with 
mylk and hony; and whanne thei han ete, 
and ben fillid*, and ben maad fat, thei 
schulen turne! to alien goddis, and thei 
schulen* serue hem; and thei schulen bac- 
bite me, and schulen! make voide my ¢o- 
uenaunt. Aftir that many yuels and tur-21 
mentyngis™ han founde" hym®, this song 
schal answere hyin? for witnessing, which? 
song no forjetyng schal do awey fro the 
mouth of thi seed. For Y knowe the 
thou3tis therof to day, what thingis it 
schal do, bifore that Y bringe it in to 
the lond which" Y bihizte to it. Therfor 22 
Moises wroot the song, and tau3te’ the 
sones of Israel. And the Lord comaundide 23 
to Josue, the sone of Nun, and seide, Be 
thou coumfortid, and be thou strong; for 
thou schalt lede the sones of Israel in to 
the lond whicht Y bihi3te", and Y schal 
be with thee. Therfor aftir that Moises 24 
wroot’ the wordis of this lawe in a book, 
and fillide*, he comaundide to Leuytis*f 2% ede 
that baren the ark of boond’ of pees of _ prestis of the 


lynage of Leuy. 
Lire here. c. 


2Om.u. suede pcerH. P myndefulc. ¢Om.c. 4 myssygge BDEFH. © er CE. 


Vv that 1s. W Forsothe 1. * Sotheli 1s. 
don 1. whiche this peple hath do s. 
h fullfillid 1s. i turne hem s. 
iti. fsraels. — P to hym 1s. 
hems. Vv had writen 1s, 


boond 1. 


k Om. 1. 
4 the whieh 1. 
w fulfillide hem 1. 


y hide my face ts. 
© hath suede ts. 
Il thei sehulen 1s. 
r that 1s. 

fulfillide the Lordis heest s. 


7 Om.1. itis. » that this puple hath 
dtecheth 1. © Om. plures. fitinis. & Om. 1s. 
mtourmentus 1. 1taken 1s. © hemc. 

She tanzte itto1s. tthatis. 4 bihizte 


x the Leuytis1s. _¥ the 


XXXI. 26——-XXXII. 7. 


26 of the Lord, seiynge, Take 3e this book, 
and puttith it in the side of the arke of 
the boond of pees of the Lord 3oure God, 
that it be there a3ens thee into witness- 

e7ynge. Forsothe Y knowe thi stryuynge, 
and thi moost hard nol; 3it lyuynge me, 
and goynge yn with 3owe, euermore stry- 
uyngly 3e diden a3ens the Lord; myche 

»gmore whanne I shal bef deed. Gedre 3e 
to me alle the more thur3 birth, bi joure 
lynages, and doctours, and I shal speke 
hem, herynge thes wordes, and I shal in- 
wardly clepe a3ens hem heuene and erthe. 

29 Forsothe I haue knowun, that after my 
deeth wickidlich® 3e shulen doo, and 3e 
shulen bowe aside soon fro the wey that 
I haue comaundide to 30w; and there 
shulen come azens to 30u yuels in the 
last tyme, whanne 3e han doon yuel in 
the si3t of the Lord, that 3e terren hym 

30 bi the werkys of 3oure hoondis. Thanne 
Moyses spak, herynge al the company of 
Yrael, the wordis of this dite, and® vntoi 
the eende fulfillid. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 Here 3e, heuens, thingis that Y speke ; 
here the erthe the wordis of my mouth. 
2To gidre sprynge in reyn my loore; 
flowe as dewe my speche, as wedre* vpon 
3erbe, and as dropes vpon cornes!. For 
the name of the Lord J shal inwardly 
cleep; 3eueth huge doynge to oure God. 
4Of God perfit ben the werkys, aud alle 
his weyes domes ; a trewe God, and with 
outen eny wickidnes™, ry3twis and euen. 
5Thei han synned to hym, and not his 
sones in filthis; shrewid kynred, and 
é6mysturnyd. Thes thingis a3enward 3eeld- 
ist thow not" to the Lord, O fole puple 
and vawise? Whether is he not thi fader, 
that hath weeldid thee, and maad, and 
7fourmed thee of nou3t? Haue mynde of 


fwere g prom. €wickelic. b Om. a. 


2 Om. E prim. 


2the boond 1. 8 moost hard 1. 
Om.1. & wrath s. 2 he fulfillide if 1s, 
Xvpon 1s. ° or buriownyngis kK marg. P vpon 1s. 
Om. 1s. % Om. DGKN pr.m. QRTX. 
fourmed 1 pr.m. hath made s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


ito B prem. 


b wole 3¢ strive s marg. 
' vnto 1s. 

dhe rs. * Thei that mysbileeueden 1s. § the filthis 1s. 
¥ that thou doist to ydelis 3 marg. 
y Om. preixmMnNogrstw. and fonrmyd x marg. 


545 


the Lord, and seide, Take 3e this book, 2c 
and putte 3e it in the side of the arke of 
boond? of pees of 30ure Lord God, that it 
be there ajens thee in to witnessyng. For 27 
Y knowe thi stryuyng, and thin hardest* 
nol; 3it while Y lyuede and entride with 
3ou, 3e diden euere stryuyngli a3ens the 
Lord; hou myche more> whanne Y schal 
be deed. Gadere 3e to me all the grettere 28 
men in birthe, and techeris, bi 3oure lynagis, 
and Y schal speke to hem, herynge these 
wordis, and Y schal clepe a3ens hem he- 
uene and erthe. For Y knowe, that aftir29 
my deeth 3e schulen do wickidli, and schu- 
len® bowe awei soone fro the weie which* 
Y comaundide to 30u; and yuels schulen 
come to 3ou in the laste tyme, whanne 3e 
‘han do® yuel in thef si3t of the Lord, that 
3e terre hym to ire® bi the werkis of 3oure 
hondis. Therfor while al the cumpeny of 30 
the sones of Israel herde, Moises spak the 
wordis of this song, and fillide" ‘til to‘ the 
ende. 


CAP. XXXII. 


3e heuenes, here what thingis Y schal1 
speke; the erthe here the wordis of -my 
mouth. My techyng wexe togidere ‘as2 
reyn; my speche flete* out as dew!, as 
lytil™ reyn on™ eerbe, and as dropis°® onP 
gras. For Y schal inwardli clepe thes 
name of the Lord; 3yue 3e glorie to oure 
God. The werkis of God ben perfit, and 4 
alle hise weies ben domes; God is feithful, 
and without ony wickidnesse; God4 is 
iust and ri3tful. hei" synneden ajenss 
hym, and not hise sones in filthis‘, ‘¢hat 
ist, of ® idolatrie; schrewid and waiward 
generacioun. Whether thou 3eldist these 
thingis’ to the Lord, thou fonned puple 
and vnwijs? Whither he is not thi fadir, 
that weldide” thee, and imade*, ‘and madeY 


kK reyn £ pr.m. corners p. ™ wickenesse c. 


dthat is. © hadden don g. 
lon erthe K marg. —_™ softe 18. 


¢ 3e schulen 1s, 
k flowe 1s. 


w hath weldide 1s. * hath 


4A 


546 


olde days, and thenk eche generaciouns ; 
aske thi fader, and he shal telle to thee, 
thi more, and thei shulen seie to thee. 
sWhanne deuydide the hijest folkis of 
kynde, whanne he seuerde the sones of 
Adam, he sette the teermys of puplis 
after the noumbre of the sones of Yrael. 
9 Part forsothe of the Lord the puple of 
hym; Jacob the litil corde of his hery- 
lotage. He foond hym® in a deseert loond, 
in place? of orrour’, and of waast wilder- 
nes; he ladde hym aboute, and tau3te, 
liand kept as the apple of his eye. As 
an egle forthclepynge his bryddis to flee, 
and on’ hem houynge, he sprade™ out his 
weengis, and took to hym, and beer in 
12his shuldres. The Lord’ alone was the 
leder of hym, and was not with hym an 
isalien God. He sette hym on an_ hije 
erthe, that he my3te ete thet fruytis of 
feeldes, that he my3te sowke" hony of 
the” stoon, and oyle of the moost hard 
i1stone; butre of the drove, and mylk of 
sheep, with the talw3 of loombs and of 
wethers, of the sones of Basan; and 
goot’ with margh* of whete, and blood 
15 0f grapisy my3te drynk moost cleer. Ful 
fat maad is the loued, and ajen wynsed ; 
fulfattid?, fulgresid*, outlargid; he laft 
God? his maker, and 3eed abak fro God‘, 
iGhis 3yuer of heelth. Thei eggiden him 
in alyen goddis, and? in abomynaciouns 
17to wraththe arereden®. hei offriden to 
deuels, and not to God, to goddis the 
whiche thei knewen not; newe and 
fresshe camen, ‘the whiche’ heryeden not 


ohem .t. Paplace c. 4 errour 4. 


a folgrecy ge prom.» the Lord £ pr.m. 


f that c. 


z knowe what mercy God hath do to thee s marg. 
fin the proud making of the tour of Babiloyne s marg. 
1s. lout s. 
t he kepte him rs. 

4 wyngis of mercy Ss. 
x for thi that he oonly shulde be dred and loucd s marg. 


€ seueryde 1. sundride s. 
i after rs. 


siouns 8. } or sones K marg. 

P Om. 1s. 9 Om. plures. hym vertue s. 
a shepherd a lomb s marg. * aboue ts. 
hem is. 


cioun and loue 1s. 8 the Is. 
€ roche, Crist 1s. f the scheep B. 
flour 1s. 1 he schulde 1s. ™ blood or myne 1s. 
rand maad m. and is unmaad a. 
w he 3ede 18. V Godis c. 


% goddis that thei herieden s, ® Om. 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Fopon E£ pr.m. 
vete Eprem. VYacr. Wgotus ce. * the merzjw zc. Y the grapis spru. the grape ce. 2 folfatty © pr.m. 
© the God g pr.m. 


k and 


b stoon, that is, his lawe 18. 
g Om. IMs. 
nthe grape s. © derelinge s. 
8 withinne G. bi aboundaunce of temporal goodis s marg. 
Ww sauyour pv. help 3iuere 1. helthe 3euer s. 
> stiriden him 1s. 


XXXIL. 8-17. 


thee of nou3t? Hane thou minde of elde7 

daies, thenke thou alle generaciouns?; axe 

thi fadir, and he schal telle to thee*, are» 

thi® grettere men, and thei schulen seie to 

thee. Whanne the hijeste* departide folkis, s 

whanne he departide® the sones of Adam‘, 

he ordeynede the termes of puplis" bil 

the noumbre of the sones of Israel}. For-9 v of ie 
sothe* the part of the Lord is his puple; Re 
Jacob is the litil part of his eritage. The 10 the sones of 
Lord foond hym in a deseert lond, ‘that sEesbos 

is, priued' of Goddis refigioun™, in the” 

place of orrour® ‘ethir hidousnesse?, and 

of wast wildirnesse; the Lord ledde hym 

aboute, and tau3te Ayn, and kepte™ as the 

apple of his ize’. As an egle stirynge his 1 

briddis to fle, and fleynge ont hem, he 

spredde forth his wyngis", and took hem’, 

and barW in hise schuldris*. The Lord tz 

aloone was his ledere, and noon alien god 

was with hym. The Lord ordeynede hym13 

onY an hij lond, that he schulde ete the 

fruytis of feeldis, that he schulde souke 

hony? of a® stoon®, and oile® of the hard- 

este’ roche®; botere} of the drone, and 14 t tuire geten 
mylke of scheep', with the fatnesse of Hite te ae 
lambren and& of rammes, of the sones of 


sile, sweet milk 
is lowe that 
Basan; and that» he schulde ete kydis 


nurschith vertu, 
Sfatnesse is good 


with thei merowe* of wheete, and schulde!  e»saumple flow- 
inge charitabli 
drynke the cleereste blood™ of grape".  tather.s. 


The lonede® puple was ‘maad fat?, ands 


kikide’ a3en||; maad" fat withoutforth’, || it wynside, ic 
< G was maad fatt. 
maad fat with ynne, and alargid'; he for- fut gretia ana’ 


out Jargid 1. 
fat, and it wyn- 
Thei terriden hym* to 1¢ %#e #en_ God 
bi gruechinge 
and unfeithful- 
nesse; it was 
inaad fat with 
onte forth, it 
was maad fat 
with inne forth, 
and alargid bi 
good fame. s. 


sook God his makere, and 3ede" awei fro 
‘God his helthe’. 
ire’ in alien goddis’, and* thei excitiden? 


tt sprarde 4. 8 God £ prom. t Om. ecpern. 


d Om. 1. e arreden BFH. rereden c. 


bOm.1 ¢thers. 4 hizeste God ts. 
8 termes or posses- 
‘mQOm.1. ars. © hidoustee 1s. 
8 as a louinge nurische berith hir child, or 
Vv hem into his proteccioun 1s. W he bar 

y Israel vpon 1s. 2 hony or sawet deuo- 
Coile of mercy 1s. 4 harderste a. ful hard 1. 
bh that Jsrael s. i Om. 1s. k merowe or tried 
P fattid 1. dspurnedeg. 
t largid Nn. 
¥ wraththe 1s. 


a Om. 1. 


Xx God 1s, 


XXXII. 18—30. 


isthe faders of hem. God that thee gat 
thow hast forsaak, and hast for3et thes 
19Lord thi shaper. The Lord saw3, and 
to wraththe was rerid; for eggiden hym 
20 his sones and dou3tres. And he seith, Y 
schal hyde my faee fro hem, and I shal 
behold the last thinges of hem; genera- 
eioun® forsothe mysturned it is, and vn- 
21trewe sones. Thei han eggid me in hym 
that was not God, and hau terred! in her 
vanytees; and I shal egge hem in hym 
that is no* puple, and in fole folk of 
22kynde I shal terre hem. Fier is vndur- 
tent in my woodnes, and it shal brenne 
vnto the last thingis of helle ; and it shal 
deuowre the loond with his buriownynge, 
‘and of hillis the foundementis shulen 
23brenne. I shal gedre vpon hem yuels, 
and myn arewis I shal fulfil in~ hem. 
21Thei shulen be wastid with hungir, and 
briddis shulen devour hem in biting 
moost bitter; teeth! of bestis™ I shal sende 
in hem, with woodnes of hem drawinge 
250n erthe, and erepinge. With out forth 
shal waast hem swerd, and with yn forth 
dreed ; the 3ong togidre and mayden, the 
26 sowkynge with the old man. And I seide, 
Where forsothe ben thei? to ceese Y shal 
27maak fro men the mynde of hem. But 
for the wrath of enemyes I lafte for 
a while, lest perauenture wolden wexe 
prowde the enemyes of hem, and seye, 
Oure hi3e hoond, and not the Lord, hath 
28doon alle thes thingis. Folk with out 
counseil it is, and with out wisdom; 
29wolde God thei saverden, and vndur- 
30 stoden, and last thingis purueyden. What 
maner wise oon pursuede a thowsand, 
and two my3ten dryue ten thowsand? 


Bofthe scperu. ba! my generacioun E£ pr.m. 


m priddis a. 
Cin her 1s. 4 that is her owne findingis 15 marg. 
& her fadris1s. 5 bigaat 1. 1 for3zete of s. 
nesses. ™he wasis. .hym do veniaunces. © hile a. 


laste thingis 1s. this s. 8 sones ¢hei ben s. 
w han moued me to vengiaunce 1s. * veyn ydolis 1s. 
> hym that is alien folk tomes. © 3itt a chosin 1s, 
4 fonnend 1. 1 folk to Air demynge s. 
® fruyt, that is, unfeithful men and her werkis s. 
saumple 1 marg.s text. P togidre hir yuels rs. 
hems. *%Om.1. tvponis.  ¥ ynne forth 1s, 
Z tariede 1. delayede or tariede s. 4 wrath s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


k the Lord thi maker 1s. 


t han terrid 1s. 


547 


to wrathfulnesse in¢ abhomynaciouns*. 
Thei offriden to feendis®, and not to God, 17 
to goddis whiche thei knewen not, newe 
goddis, and freisehe eamen‘, whiche ‘the 
fadris of hem® worschipiden not. Thou 1s 
hast forsake God that gendride® thee, and 
thou hast for3etei ‘thi Lord creatour*. The 19 
Lord si3!, and was™ stirid to wrathfulnesse; 
for hise sones and dou3tris terriden hym®. 
And the Lord seide, Y sehal hyde° my 20 
face fro hem?, and Y schal biholde ‘the 
laste thingis of hem4; for it™ is a waiward 
generacioun, and vnfeithful sones’. Thei2! 
terrident me" in hym’ that was not God, 
and thei ‘terriden to ire* in her vanytees*; 
and YY sehal terre? hem in* hym?, that is 
not a° puple, and? Y sehal terre® hem! ‘to 
yre® in a fonned? folki, Fier, that is, peyne 22 
maad redi to hem*, is kyndlid in my 
stronge veniaunce, and it schal brenne ‘til 
to! the laste thingis of helle; and it schal 
deuoure™ the lond with his fruyt", and it 
sehal brenne the foundementis of hillis®. 
Y schal gadere ‘yuels on hem?, and Y sehal 23 
fille myn arewis in hem. Thei schulen be 24 
waastid with hungur, and briddis sehulen 
deuoure hem with bitteriste1 bityng; Y 
sehal sende in to hem the teeth of beestis*, 
with the woodnesse of wormes* drawynge 
on! erthe, and of serpentis. Swerd with 25 
outforth and drede with ynne" sehal waaste 
hem ; a 3ong man aud a virgyn togidre, a‘ 
soukynge child with an elde man. And 26 
Y seide, Where ben thei”? Y schal make 
the mynde of hem to* eeesse of men’. But 27 
Y delayede’ for the yre* of enemyes, lest 
perauenture ‘the enemyes of hem” shulden 
be proude, and seie, Oure hi3 hond, and 
not the Lord, dide alle these thingis. It* 22 
K not c. 


i terred me & pr. m. I tethes £ pr.m. 


e denelis 1s. f camen vp bi her fyndyngis 18. 
1 saw3 that 1. saw3 thin vnkinde- 
P withdraning fro hem my help s marg. her 
ume to wrath 1s, Y worshipinge hym s. 

Zterre or wraththe s. 4 in takinge 1s. 


€ wraththe 1. f Israelis. &§ Om. 1s. 


y Om. 1s. 
d Om. s. 


k ydolatouris 3. gloss om. in 3. !ynto 1s. ™ deuoure or waaste s. 
o hellis G. that is hem of whom othere taken yuel en- 
@ moost bittir 1s. 
Vand a. 
b her enemyes 1s. 


T beestis, that is, tirauntis oppressing 
wthei now1s. *Om.G. Y alle men. 
¢ Israel is. 


4A 2 


548 


Whether not therfore" for her God solde 
3ihem, and: the Lord closide hem? For- 
sothe owre God is not as the goddis of 
s2hem, and oure enemyes ben iugis. Of 
the vyn of Sodoms’ the vyn of hem, and 
of the subaarbis of Gomor; the graap of 
hem graap of gal, and the cluster moost 
33 bittre. Gal of dragouns the wyne° of 
hem, and venym of eddres vneurable. 
34 Whether ben not thes thingis hid anentis 
35me, and merkid in my tresours? Myn is 
veniaunce, and Y shal 3eeld to hem in 
tyme, that the foot of hem slyde; ny3 is 
the day of perdicioun, and to be? ny3 
séhizen the tymes. ‘The Lord shal deme 
his puple, and in his seruauntis he shal 
have mercy; he shal se that feble be the 
hoond, and closid forsothe han faylid, and 
37 the lafte ben wastid. And thei shulen seye, 
Where ben the goddis of hem, in whiche 
38 thei hadden trust? Of whos slayn sacri- 
fice! thei eten the fatnesse™, and drunken 
the wyn of the offryngis of licours, 
arise’, and helpe thei to 30w, and in nede 
so30w defendet. Seeth that Y am alone, 
and there is noon other God saue me; I 
shal slee, and I shal maak to lyue; Y shal 
smyte, and I shal heel; and there is not 
4othat fro myn hoond may" delyuer. I 
shal heue vp to heuene myn hoond, and 
41 Y shal seye, I lyne with outen eende. If 
I whette as leit my swerd, and myn 
hoond taak doom, Y shal 3eeld vengynge 
to myn enemyes, and to hem that hatiden 
4gme, I shal quite. I shal drenche myn 
arewis in blood, and my swerd shal de- 
uour flesh of the blood of slayn, and of 
the chaytifte of the’ nakid heed of ene- 
sg3inyes. Preyse 3e, gentils, the puple of 
hym, for the blood of his seruauntis he 
shal wreek, and veniaunce he shal quyte 


nQOm. 4. 


Ovyn au.  P come £ pr.m. 
risyN E see. m. 


t thei defendyn r pr. m. 


d warnesse 18, 
l two men Is. 


€Om.1.  f wolde God 1s. 
m drouen 1. dreuen s. 


elosid 1s. togidere in here enemyes hondis 18. 

wOm.Gis. *airs. Yanentisis. 2 thei ben 1s. 

4Om.s. © remnaunt puple or left 1. or the remenaunt peple s. 
cnmyess. & her goddisis.  »} the fatnessis n. 

stonde s, ™ God alee s. 2 Om. Rt. 


8 aquyte Is. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


q sacrifices cE. 
“Om. E pr. m. 


& Om. s. 
n herfore B. 
S not vniust 18. 


i thei drunkun 1s. 
and Y DGKNQRTX. 


MXXIT. 31—436 


is a folk with ont counsel, and with out 
prudence*; Y* woldef that® thei saueriden, 29 

and ‘ynderstoden, and" purueiden the! laste 

thingis. How pursuede oon* of enemyes a30 
thousynde of Jewis, and tweyne! dryuen™ 

awey ten thousynde? Whether not ther- 

fore" for her God selde° hem?, and the 

Lord closide! hem togidere™? For oure3i 

God is not* as the goddis of hem, and 

oure enemyes" ben iugis. The: vyner of32 

hem 7s of" the vyner of Sodom, and of 

the subarbis of Gomorre; the grape of 

hein zs the* grape of galle, and the clustre 

is most bittir. The galle of dragouns is33 

the wyn of hem, and the venym of eddris, 

that may not be heelid. Whether these 34 

thingis ben not hid atY me, and ben’ seelid 

in myn tresouris?? Veniaunce is myn, and 35 

Y schal 3elde to hem in tyme, that the 

foot of hem slide; the dai of perdicioun is 

ny3, and tymes® hasten to be present. The3é 

Lord schal deme his puple, and he schal 

do merci in hise seruauntis; the puple 

schal se that the hond of ji3/eres is sijk¢, 

and also men closid failiden, and the re- 

sidues® ben waastid. And theift schulen OT ee 
seie, Where ben ‘the goddis of hem®, in i 
whiche thei hadden trust ? Of whos sacri-3s 
fices thei eeten fatnessis*, and drunkuni 
the wyn of fletynge sacrifices, rise thei 
and helpe 3ou, and defende thei jou* in 
nede. Se! 3e that Y am aloone™, and noon 39 
other God is outakun me; Y schal sle, 
and Y" schal make to lyue; Y° schal 
smyte, and Y schal make hool; and noon 
is that may delyuere fro myn hond. And? 4o 
Y schal reise? myn hond to heuene, and 
Y schal seie, Y lyue with outen ende. If Y 41 
schal whette my swerd as leit, and myn 
hond schal take doom, Y schal 3elde ven- 
iaunce to myn enemyes, and Y schal quyte* 


men hie the 
Jewis. BC. 


r fattenesses BCDEFN. 8 rise thei c. 


v¥ Om. c. 


h Om. xs. 
© had sold rs. 


ifor the pcrr. * oo man ts. 
Phem, forsakinge hems. 4 had 
them bens. Yenmys. VY Om. s. 
b the tymes is. © sijk or feble 1s. 

f here enmyes 1 marg. thei, that is, her 
k Om. F seem. 1 Se or undir- 
POm. nc. reise vpis. til to w. 


& tresories A. 


XXMRIL 44—s2.- 


into the enemyes of hem; and he shal 
be merciful to the erthe of his puple. 
44 Thanne Moyses cam, and spak alle the’ 
wordis of this songe in the eris of the 
puple; and he and Josue, the sone of 
45Nun. And he fulfillide alle thes wordis, 
46spekynge to al Yrael; and seide to hem, 
Put 3e 30ure hertis into alle the wordys 
that I witnesse to 30w to day, that 3e 
comaunden lem to 3oure sones to keep, 
and to doo, and to fulfille alle thingis 
47that ben wryten of this lawe; for not in 
veyn thei ben comaundid to 3ow, but that 
echon* in hem shulde lyue; the which 
doynge long tyme 3e abiden in the loond, 
to the which to be weeldid, Jordan ouer- 
48put, 3e shulen goon yn. And the Lord 
spak to Moises in the same day, seiynge, 
49Sty vp into this hil Abarym, that is, 
passynge, into the hil Nebo, that is in the 
loond of Moab, a3ens Jeryco; and se the 
loond of Chanaan, that to be hold I shal 
taak to the sones of Yrael, and dye thow 
50in the hil. The which stiynge vp, thow 
shalt be ioyned. to thi puplis, as died 
Aaron, thi brother, in the hil of Hor, 
5land was put to his puples. For 3e han 
trespassid a3ens me, in the myddil of the 
sones of Yrael, at the Watris of A3en- 
seiynge’, in Cades of the deseert of Syn; 
and 3e halwide not me amonge the sones 
s2of Yrael. Aj3enward thow shalt se the 
loond, and shalt not goon into it, that I 
shal 3yue to the sones of Irael. 


w Om. c. 


t han hatid 1. hatiden s. 4 fnlfille 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


x eehe c. 


vOm. p. ¥ tho s. Om. cart. 


549 


to hem that hatent me. Y sehal fille" 42 
myu arewis with blood, and my swerd 
schal deuoure fleischist of the blood of 
hem that ben slayn, and of the caitifte of 
the heed of enenyes maad nakidt. Folkis, 43 
preise 3eY the” puplis* of liymY, for he 
schal venie the blood of hise seruauntis, 
and he schal 3elde veniaunce in? to the* 
enemyes of hem; and he schal be merciful 
to the lond of his puple. Therfor Moises 44 
cam, and spak alle the wordis of this song 
in the eeris® of the puple; bothe he and 
Josue, the sone of Nun. And ‘he fillide® 45 
alle these wordis, and spak to alle Israel, 
and seide to hem, Putte 3e 3oure hertis in 46 
to alle the wordis whiche Y witnesse to 
3ou to day, that 3e comaunde’ to 30ure 
sones, to® kepef, and do’ tho, and to ful- 
fillei alle thingis that ben writun in the 
book of this lawe; for not in veyn thok 4; 
ben comaundid to 3ou, but that alle men 
schulden lyue in! tho™; whiche® eordis® 
3eP schulen do!, and schulen contynue in™ 
long tyme in the lond, to which 3e schulen 
entre to welde, whanne Jordan is* passid*. 
And the Lord spak to Moises in the same 4s 
day, and seide", Stie thou’ in to this hil.9 
Abirym, that is, passyng, in to the hil of 
Nebo, which” is in the lond of Moab, 
a3ens Jerico; and se thou the lond of Ca- 
naan, which* Y schal] 3yue to the sones of 
Israel to holde, and die thouY in the# hil. 
In to which /i/* thou schalt stie>, and so 
schalt® be ioyned to thi puplis, as Aaron, 
thi brother, was deed in the hil of Hor, 
and® was put to his puplis. For 3e° tres-s1 
passidenf ajens me, in the’ myddis of the 
sones of Israel, at the Watris of A5en- 
seiyng, in Cades of deseert® of Syn; and 
3e halewiden not me among! the sones of 
Israel. Ajenward thou schalt se the lond, s2 
and schalt* not entre in to it, which! Y 
schal 3yue to the sones of Israel. 


y Azen-seiyngus c. 


* puple BCPFGKLMNOPQRSTWX. 


Y God 1s. z Om. ™. a Om. B. b heerynge ts. ¢ Moyses fulfillide 1s. 4 comaunde thees 18. 
fond AEFGLPQx.Om.o. fkepe hems. &todo1, bhems. ifille plures. ‘these thingis s. !in doynge ts, 
™ tho thingis 1s. "the whiehes. ©°Om.1. P3if3eis. 4 do éhanne 3e schul abide 1. and 3e shulen 
abide s. r Om. Imnogst sec.m. %3chans. touerpassidis. seide fohims. thou vp ts. 
Wthatis. *thatis. ythou deres. 2 thiss. ®Om.1. »% weendevpt. stievps. © thou schalt rs. 
4Om.1. © thou Moises and Aarons. fhan trespassid1. g Om.1s. the desertis. 1! in shewynge 
my hoolynesse among s. * thou sehalt mx. 1! that 1. 


t that is, hem 
that lyuen after 
the fieshe. s. 


t of the blood 
of hem that ben 
slain here 
thur; deedly 
synne, and of 
the caitiftee of 
auntecrist her 
heed, maud 
nakiad of Goddis 
help, Crist shat 
take veniannce, 
and distrie hein 
alle with his 
word. 5, 


550 


CAP. XXXIII. 


1 This is the blissynge, with the which 
Moyses, man of God, blissede the sones 
2o0f Irael before his deeth; and seith, The 
Lord fro Syna cam, and fro Seir is 
sprongun to vs?; he aperide fro the hil 
of Pharan, and with hym thousandis of 
seyntis; in the ri3t hoond of hym firy 
3lawe. He louede puples; alle seyntis in 
the hoond of hym ben, and that neijen to 
the feet of hym, shulen taak of the loor 
4of hym. Lawe comaundide to vs Moyses, 
the erytage of the multitude of Jacob. 
5 And there shal be anentis the moost ri3t 
a kyng, the princis of the puple gedrid 
6 with the lynagis of Yrael. Lyue Ruben, 
and dye he not, and be he litil in noum- 
7bre. This is of Jude the blessynge; here, 
Lord, the voyce of Jude, and to his puple 
with ynne leede hym; his hoondis* shu- 
len fiz3t for it, and helper of it he shal be 
sa3ens the aduersaryes? of it. Forsothe to 
Leny he seith, Thi perfeccioun and thi 
leor fro thin hooli man, whom thow hast 
preued in temptacioun, and hast demed 
sat the Watris of A3enseiynge; the which 
hath seide to his fader and to his moder, 
I knowe jow not, and to his britheren, I 
vnknowe hem; and thei knewen not her 
sones. hes kepten thi speech, and thi 
19 couenaunt ; heelden thi domys, O!* Jacob, 
and thi lawe, O! Yrael; thei shulen put 
maad? encense in thi woodnes, and brent 
11 sacrifice on thin auter. Blesse, Lord, the® 
strength of lym, and the werkis of the 
hoondis of hym tak; smyit the backis of 
the enemyes of hym, and that haten hym, 
igarysef thei not. And to Beniamyn he 
seith, Moost loued of the Lord shal dwelle 
tristili in hym; as in a chaumbre al day 
he shal dwelle, and betwix® the shuldres 
130f hym he shal rest. Forsothe to Joseph 


2 30w EB pr.m. 


8 hocnde g. hondyn DEF. 
€tothe a. frisec. 


g bytween BCDEFI. 


mM with1. "4a thonsend c. 
lawes. 8 Om. s. 
x Moyses 1s. 
seide 18s. 
£Om.c. 4 Om. is. 
m™ hem c. Leuy 1s, 


o Om. G. 
t the eritage Is. 
y hast preued 1s. 


i lawe, O! Israel ts. 


4 rise thei 1s. © Moyses 1s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


P the 1s. 
u he comaundide to be departid euenly s marg. 
z hast demed 1s. demedist it F sec. m. 
€ thei knewen 1xs. thei, that is, her after comers, knewen s, 
k encense, or hooly preter s. 
00 Om. IMs. 


X93. 


CAP. XXXII. 


This is the blessing, bi™ which Moises, 1 
the man of God, blesside the sones of Is- 
rael bifor his deeth; and seide, The Lorde 
cam fro Syna, and he roos to us fro Seir ; 
he apperide fro the hil of Pharan, and 
thousandis® of ° seyntis with hym; a? lawe 
of fier in? his rijthond. He louede puplis; 3 
alle*seyntis ben in his hond, and thei that 
neizen to hise feet schulen take of his doc- 
tryn. Moisis comaundide lawe’ ‘to vs‘, eri- 4 
tage'{ of the multitude of Jacob". And thes 
king schal be at the moost ri3tful, whanne 
princes of the puple schulen’ be gaderid 
togidere with the lynagis of Israel. Ru-6 
ben lyue, and® die not, and be he litil in ee 
noumbre. This is the blessyng of Juda;7 c. 
Lord, here thou the vois of Juda, and 
brynge in hym to his puple; hise hondis 
schulen fi3te for hym, and the helpere of 
hym schal be a3ens hise aduersaries. Alsos 
he* seide to Leuy, Thi perfeccioun and thi 
techyng is of an hooly man, whom thou 
preuedistY in temptacioun, and demedist? 
at the Watris of Ajenseiynge; which #9 
Leuy seide to his fadir and to his modir, 

Y knowe not 30u, and to hise britheren®, 

Y knowe not hem; and knewen® not her 
sones. These kepten thi speche, and these 
kepten® thi conuenaunt; A!f Jacob, thei1o 
kepten thi domes, and ‘thou, Israel, thet 
kepten* thi lawe'; thei schulen putte en- 
cense* in thi strong veniaunce}, and brent ! 
sacrifice on! thin auter. Lord, blesse thou ane 
the strengthe of hym™, and resseyue thou cane ete 
the werkis of his hondis; smyte thou the plage ee 
backis of hise enemyes, and thei that haten ere. c. 
hym, rise" not. And he® seide to Benja-12 

myn, The moost loued of the Lord schal 

dwelle tristili in hym, ‘that is, in the 

Lord °°; he schal dwelle al day as in a 

chaumbur, and he schal reste bitwixe the 


+ eritage, for 
eritage is a 
thing vnmou- 
able. So the 
lawe was 3ounn 
to Jewis, that it 
schulde be kept 
of hem vnmou- 


} pulte encense 


baduersarye 4 pr.mu. Cofa, 40m. £ prim. 


G was andis ins. * the lawe 1. to vs to kepe the 
vOm.i. Whes. 

athe which 1. » britheren, he 
dhis xu. Chan holders. fO1s. 


! thet sehul putie vpon 1s. 


KR. 14—-26. 


he seith, Of the blessynge of the Lord 
the loond of hym; of the applis of he- 
uene, and of the dewe, and. of the see 
14 vnderligging'; of applis of the fruyt of 


1ssunne, and of mone; andj of the cop of 


the* oold mounteyns, and of applis of 
ic euerlastynge hillis; and of fruytis of the 
erthe, and plente of it. Blessynge of hym 
that aperyde in the busshe come vpon 
the leed of Joseph, and vpon the fortop 
170f Nazarey among his britheren. As of 
the first goten bool the feirnes of hym ; 
hornes of an vnicorn the hornes of hym ; 
in hem he shal wyndowe! gentilys, vnto 
the teermes of the erthe. Thes ben the 
multitudys of Effraym, and thes thou- 
issandis of Manasse. And to Zabulon he 
seith, Glad thow, Zabulon, in thi goynge 
1gout, and, Ysachar, in thi tabernaclis. Pu- 
plis at the hil thei shulen cleep, and there 
thei shulen offre slayn sacrifices of ry3t- 
wysnesse ; the whiche the flowynge of the 
see as mylk shal sowke, and hid tresours 
200f graueils. And to Gad he seith, Blessid 
in breede Gad; as a lioun he restide, and 
21he took arme and fortop. And he saw3 
his prynsehod, that in his paart a doc- 
tour he was seid vp; the which was with 
princis of puple, and dide rijtwisnesses of 
22the Lord, and hys doom with Yrael. To 
Dan forsothe he seith, Dan, keetlyng of 
23a lyon, shal flowe laargly fro Basan. And 
to Neptalym he seide, Neptalym plen- 
teuownesse™ shal ful vse, and ful shal be 
with blessyngis of the Lord; eerly and 
24mydday he shal weeld. ‘To Aser forsothe 
he seith, Blessid in sones Aser, be he 
plesynge to his bretheren ; weet he in oyle 
25 his foot. Yrun and bras the shoynge of 
lym; as days of thi 3ongth so and thin 
26eelde. There is noon other God as the 
moost rijt God; the stier of heuen ‘thin 
J Om. BcpEFn. 


h seee 4. i ynderliende c. 


Pp the Lord ts. @ Moises rs. 
fruytis Gis. VY Om.1s. W vpon is. 
b Joseph 1s. ¢ Om. 1. 
sephs. 6 wynwe 1KL. wyndewe or elense s. 
wynwid s marg. ™ Moyses1s. © Om. s. 

4 riztwisnesse rs. fas of B. ' grauelis A see. m. 
VYhe 1s. kept or ordeyned s. 


bhe dideis. ¢ riz3tfulnesse cs. 4 the Lordis s. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


k Om. pcpEFn. 


t the lond of Joseph 1. Joseph Jond s. 
x fortopp 1. cop or hei3th s. 
4 hornes, that is, lhe strengthis s. 
i vnto Is. 
© glade thou in s. 
8 Moises s. 
xa techer in 1s. %* part or peples. ¥ the which 1. 27Qm. 1. 
e€ Moises s. 


551 


schuldris of hym?. Also he seide to Jo- 15 
seph, ‘His lond" zs of the Lordis blessyug ; 
of the applis of heuene, aud of thes dewe, 
and‘ of watir liggynge bynethe; of the 14 
applis of fruytis" of the sunne and moone ; 
of the coppe of elde munteyns, and of the 1s 
applis of enerlastynge litle hillis; and of 16 
the’ fruytis of the lond, and of the ful- 
nesse therof. The blessyng of hym that 
apperide in the busch come on™ the heed 
of Joseph, and on the cop* of Y Nazarey’, 
‘that ts, hoolt*, among hise britheren. As 17 
the first gendrid of a bole is the feirnesse 
of hym?; the hornes of an vnicorn ben® 
the hornes’ of hym*; in tho! he’ schal 
wyndewe® folkis, ‘til to’ the termes* of 
erthe. These! ben the multitudis of Ef- 
fraym, and these ben the thousyndis of 
Manasses. And he™ seide to Zabulon,1s 
Zabulon, be" thou glad in thi goyng out, 
and, Ysacar, in® thi tabernaclis. hei? 19 
schulen clepe puplis to the hil, there thei 
schulen offre sacrifices of ri3tfulnesse4; 
whiche schulen souke the flowing of the 
see as mylk, and hid tresours of" grauel'’, 
And he’ seide to Gad, Gad zs blessid' in 20 
broodnesse; he restide as a lioun, and he 
took" the arm and the nol. Aud he si321 
his prinshed, that ‘the techere’ was kept” 
in* his part**; whichY Gad? was with 
the® princes of the puple, and dide® the 
ri3tfulnesses® of the Lord, and hist doom 
with Israel. Also he® seide to Dan, Dan, 22 
af whelp of a liown, schal flowe largeli fro 
Basan. And he seide to Neptalyin, Nep-os 
talym schal vse abundaunce, and he schal 
be fulé with blessyngis of the Lord; and 

he schal welde the seet and the south. +20 schel wetle 
Also he seide to Aser, Aser, be blessid in 24 (i <0 cs" 
sones, and plese he hise britheren ; dippe Ba eee 
he his foot in oile. 


Yrun and bras the 25% ee uy the 
i ‘ jot of Nepta- 
scho of hym; as the dai of thi 3outhe so lym. Lire 


here. ¢. 

1 wynewe cr. ™ plenteucusnesses (es 

t Om. caw. 4 the 

Yofthe 1. 2the Nazarey s. 20m. 1. 
e Joseph is.  f tho strengthisis. § Jo- 

kK coostis 1s. | Vnelene seedis thal shulen be 
P thei, hal is, Zabulon and Ysachar s. 

t plesid g. ¥ took fro his aduersarie 1s. 


2 Om, 18. 
& fulfillid s. 


5 Om. BIS, 


fthe in. dhat is, as. 


552 


helper"; thur3 the hidows doynge of 
hym to and fro rennen® the clowdes. 

27 The dwellynge place of hym aboue, and 
vndurnethe euerlastynge aarmys; he shal 
cast out fro thi face the enemye, and he 

23shal seye, Be thow to-trode. Yrael shal 
dwelle trustilych, and aloone; the eye of 
Jacob in the loond of whete, and of wyn; 
and heuens shulen wexe derk thur3 dewe. 

29 Blessid art thow, Yrael; who? lijk of 
thee, thou puple that art saued in the 
Lord? Sheeld of thin help and swerd of 
thi glorye thi God; thin enemyes shulen 
denye thee, aud thow shal treed neckis 
of hem. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 Ascended thanne Moyses fro the wijide 
feeldys of Moab, vpon the hil of Nebo, 
in to the cop of Phasga, a3ens Jericho. 
And the Lord shewide to hym al the loond 

20f Galaad vnto Dan, and al Neptalym, 
and ‘the loond of’ Effraym and Manasse, 
and al the loond of Juda, vnto the last 

ssee; and the sowth paart, and the breede 
of the feeld of Jericho, cyte’ of Palmys 
avnto Seor. And the Lord seide to hym, 
This is the loond for the which Y swore 
to Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob, seiynge, 
To thi seed I shal 3yne it; thow hast 
seen it with thin eyen, and thow shalt 
snot passe to it. And thanne Moyses, the 
seruaunt of the Lord, dyed there, in the 
loond of Moab, comaundynge the Lord. 

6 And he biryede hyin in the valey of thet 
loond of Moab, a3ens Phegor; and no 
man knewe the sepulcre of hym vnto the 

7day that is now. Moyses of an hundrid 
and twenty 3eeris" was whanne he diede ; 
the ey3eY of hym daswed not, ne the 


© rennende c. 
U 3er c. 


« the helpere of hym £ pr.m. 
8 the cyte x pron. tin E prim, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


P who is E pr.m. 
Yeyen A. 


XXXII. 27—-XXXIV. 7. 


and thin eelde®, Noon other god is as26 

the God of the moost ri3tful, that is, ‘as 

the’ God ‘of the puple' of Israel, gouern- 

ed* bi! moost riz3tful lawe™; the stiere™ 

of heuene is® thin helpere?; cloudist ren- + c/oudis.. In 
. ¥ - Ebrew it is, 

nen aboute bi the glorie of hym. His27heuenes and 

dwellynge place is aboue, and armes! ener- aaa es Hie 

lastynge ben bynethe; he schal caste out 

fro thi face the enemy, and he schal seie’, 

Be thou al to-brokun. Israel schal dwelle 28 

trustili and aloone; the i3e of Jacob in’ 

the lond of whete, and of wyn; and he- 

uenes schulen be derk with dew. Blessed 29 

art thou, Israel; thou puple that art saued 

in the Lord, who is lijk theet? The scheld 

of thin help and the swerd of thi glone 

is thi God; thin enemyes schulen denye 

thee, and thou schalt trede her neckis. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


Therfor Moyses stiede" fro the feeldi} 
places of Moab on’ the hil of Nebo, in to 
the cop of Fasga, ajens Gerico. And the 
Lord schewide to hym al the lond of Ga- 
laad ‘til to’ Dan, and al Neptalym, and2 
the lond of Effraym and of Manasses, and 
al the lond of Juda, ‘til to” the laste* see; 
and the south part, and the breede of the’ 
feeld of Jerico, of the citee of Palmes ‘til 
toY Segor. And the Lord seide to hym’,4 
This is the lond for which Y swoor to 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob*; and Y seide», 
Y schal 3yue it to thi seed; thou hast seyn 
it with thin i3en, and thou schalt not passe 
‘to it". And Moyses, the seruaunt of thes 
Lord; was deed there, in the lond of Moab, 
‘for the Lord comaundide’. And the Lordé 
biriede hym{ in a valey of the lond of 
Moab, ajens Fegor, and no man knewe 
his sepulcre ‘til in to present day®. Moises7 
was of an hundrid and twenti jeer whanne 
he diede; his i3e dasewide not, nethir hise 
teeth weren stiridf. And the sones of8 


t vivicde him, 
by the seruyce 
of aungels. 
Lire here. c. 


dAscendede ce. ‘al £ pr.m. 


heelde, Azers. iOm.s. & that is, governed s. ‘bithes. ™ gloss omitted ini. ™ stiere vp rs. 
°Om.1. Phelpere, dzers. his armests. ‘'seiefohimis. iss. 'ttotheers. 4 stiede vp ts. 
Y vpon 1s, W ynto 1s. * laste or ferrest 1. laste or fertherest s. Yinto 1s. %Moyses1s. 4 to Jacob s. 


> seide to Moises s. © therto 1. 
this day 1. vnto the day that is now s. 


d at the Lordis maundement 1. at the Lordis comaundement s. 
f moued 1s. 


€& ynto 


XXXIV. 8—12. 


steeth of hym ben meued. And the chil- 
dren” of Irael wepten hym in the wijlde 
feeldis of Moab thretti dais; and fulfillyd 
ben the dais of mournynge of hem wey]- 
synge Moises. Forsothe Josue, the sone 
of Nun, is fulfillid with the spyryt of 
wisdom, for Moyses putte on hym his 
hoondis; and to him obeishiden the sones 
of Yrael, and diden as the Lord co- 

1omaundide to Moyses. And there roos 
not a prophete ferthermore in Yrael as 
Moyses, whom the Lord knewe face to 

iiface, in* alle sygnes and wondres, ‘the 
whicheY bi hym he sente’, that he shulde 
doo in the loond of Egipte to Pharao, 
and to alle the seruauntis of hym, and to 

wal the loond of hym; and al* strong 
hoond, and greet merueyls, that Moises 
dide before al Irael. 


Here endith the book of Deutronomi, and 
nowe bigyneth the prolog of Josue and 
of Judieum and of Ruth”. 


wehilderc. *and appru.  Y that c. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


z sende E. 


553 


Israel biwepten hym thretti daies in the 

feeldi places of Moab; and the daies of 

weilyng of men ‘bymorenynge® Moises 

weren fillid’. Forsothe! Josue, the sone of 9 

Nun, was fillid' with ‘the spyrit of! wis- 

dom, for Moises settide™ hise hondis on" 

hym; and the sones of Israel obeieden to 

Josue, and diden® as the Lord comaundide 

to Moises. And ‘a profeteP roos no more 10 

in Israel ‘as Moises’t, whom the Lord  ¢ 4 Moyses, 
, 5 that is, euene 

knewe face to face, in alle myraclis", and !1 to him. Lire 

grete wondris, whiche the Lord sente* bi re 

hym, that he schulde do in the lond of 

Egipt to Farao, and allet hise seruauntis, 

and to al the" lond ‘of hym’, and all2 

strong* hondY, and the ‘grete merueylis, 

whiche* Moyses dide bifor al® Israel*. 


Here endith Deutronomy, and here bi- 
gynneth the book of Josue. 


atoals. » Here endith Deutronomy, and here 


bigynneth Josue. p. Explicit liber Deutronomii. Incipit prologus Josue. x. No final rubric in Bcru. 


8 biweilinge 1. © fulfillid 1s. ' Sothely 1s. 


diden 1s. P profit a pr.m. sich a profete as Moyses was 1s. 4 Om. 1s. 
’ God was with him and s. 


ttoalleis. “his 1s. YOm. 1s. 


zOm.qrr. a.myraclis, that 1. meruels, that s. >the al s. 


k fulfillid 1s. !}Om.1. ™ had put 1s. 


ypon is. © thei 
Tthe myraclisis. % sente or dide s. 
x the strong a sec.m. Yhond or power s. 
Israel, the Lord knewe hem, and dide hem s. 


4 Here eendith the book of Deutronomij, and here bigynneth the book of Josue. n. Here endith Dentronomye, 
and here bigynneth Josue.cw. Here endith Deutronomye, and bigynneth a prolog on Josue. G. Heere endith 


the book of Deutronomie, and bigynnith the book of Josue. in. 


Feere eendeth Pentateucon, se now the 


prolog of Josue. K. Here endith the book of Deutronomye, and here biginneth a prologe on the book of Josue. 


Amen. m. Here enden the fyue bookis of Moyses, and bigynneth the prolog on the boot of Josue. o. 


Here 


endith Deutro. and biginneth Josue.qs. Here enden the bookis of Moises, and bigynneth the booe of Jasue. x, 


No fina] rubric in DEFLPRT. 


JOSHUA. 


[ Prologue on the book of Joshua’. | 


Tus book of Josue makith mynde, how the Lord spak to Josue aftir the deeth of 
Moises, and seide, Ech step which 3oure foot schal trede, Y schal 3yue to 3ou. Be 
thou comfortid, and be thou strong, for thou schalt lede yn the sones of Israel 
in to the lond, for which Y swoor to her fadris Abraham, Ysaac, and Jacob. And 
whanne the prestis that baren the arke of God hadden set her feet on the ryuer 
of Jordan, the watir departide and 3af weie, til al the peple of Israel were passid 
ouer; and the wallis of Jerico fellen doun, withouten mannes hondis. Also Josue 
faust with alle the kingis of that lond, and onercam hem, and made the princes 
of the oost to trede on the neckis of hem, and hangide hem in iebatis, as the Lord 
comaundide. And whanne enemyes fledden, the children of Israel pursuweden; and 
the Lord sente hail fro heuene, and killide mo with stones of hail thanne the sones of 
Israel my3ten take with swerd. And at the preier of Josue the sunne and mone 
stoden in the firmament, ouer his cours in the space of a dai, til the peple of God 
vengide it self of hise enemyes. And Josue departide the lond to the sones of Israel 
bi lot, by her lynages and meynees, with coordis ; and Israel seruede the Lord in alle 
the daies of Josue. 

Sage 


The prolog of Josue*. 


AT the last endid” the fyue bokis of 
Moises, as of greet boond delyuered, to 
Josue», the sone of Naue, we putten® 
hoond, whom Ebrews clepen®¢ Josue Ben 
Nun, that is, Josue, the sone of Nun; 
and to the book of Jugis, whom thei 
clepen®* Sophyn; and to Ruth, and to 
Hester, the whiche with the same names 
thei tellen out. And we moneishen? the 
reder, that the wode of Ebrew names, 
and distyncciouns bi membris dyuydid 
the bisy wryter keep wel, lest and oure 
traueyl and the studie of hym peryshe; 
and that in the fyrst, that oft Y haue 
witnessid, wite he me not in to® repre- 


@ From se. Prologus Josue c. 
ce callen sy. 4 moneste c. © the a. 


& This Prologue is from Mm. 


No initial rubric in AEF. 


[Prologue to Joshua”.] 


AT the laste whanne the fyue bookes of 
Moyses weren endid, we, deliuerid as of 
a gret boond, putten to the hond to Josue, 
the sone of Naue, whom Ebrewe clepen 
Josue Ben Nun, that is, Josue, the sone of 
Nun; and also we setten hond to the 
booke of Juges, which thei clepen Sophyn; 
and to the book of Ruth, and the booke of 
Hester, whiche thei tellen out with the 
same names. And we amonesten the re- 
dere, and the bisie writere awaite wel 
the silablis of names of Ebrews, and dis- 
tyncciouus departid bi membris, lest bothe 
oure traueyle and the studie of him pe- 
rische; and that he knowe in the bygyn- 


bender. >>Jesu ern. © putteth c. 


> This Prologue is from o. 


JOSHUA. 555 


uynge of oold men newe thingis to sti- 
thief, as my freendis putten blame; but 
for foul® paart to offres& of my tonge, to 
men, whoin® neuerthelater! oure saum- 
pleers delyten, that for the sixe saum- 
pleers of Greekis, the whiche and neden 
cost and moost traueil, haue thei oure 
makynge. And 3ife* where euere thei 
dowten in redynge of oold volyms, thei 
togidre berynge thes to** thilk', fynden 
that thei sechen; moost sith anentys La- 
tyns so feele ben saumpleers, how feele 
bokis, and echon™ after his doom other® 
addide or withdrewe, that is seen to hyin; 
and forsothe it may not be sooth that 
discordith®. Wherfor the scorpioun ceese 
to ful ryse a3ens vs with crokid wounde, 
and leeue he® of hooli werk to reproue 
with venymyd tonge, or takynge if it 
plese, or dispisynge if it displese; and 
haue he mynde of tho? verse, Thi mouth 
aboundide with malice, and thi tonge 
wrou3te trecheries; sittynge ajens thi 
brother thow speek, and a3ens the sone 
of thi moder thou puttist?P sclaundre ; 
thes thingis thow didist, and Y heelde 
my pees; thou eymedist wickidli4, that 
Y shal be of the lijk ; Y shal vndurnyme 
thee, and sette thee a3ens thi face. For- 
sothe what: profit is of the herer, or of 
the reeder, vs to sweete in traueilynge, 
and to traueile in bacbytynge? other to 
soru’ the Jewis, that of chalengynge of * 
hein and of scornynge Cristen be ‘doon 
awey' occasioun, and men of the chirche 
it to dispise, also and to tere, wherof ad- 
uersaries ben tourmentid? And if the oold 
oonliche interpretacioun plese to hem, the 
which and to me‘ displesith not, and no 
thing thei" with out wenen to be taak ; 
whi tho thingis that vndur signes of a 
sterre’, and vndur signes of an arowe, or 
ben addyd, or kut awey, thei reden, and 
dispisen? Whi Danyel after the transla- 
cioun of Theodosiun chirchis han res- 
seyued ? Whi Origen thei merueilen, and 


nynge, as I ofte haue witnessid, that I 
hane not forged newe thingis in repreef 
of olde translatours, as my frendis putten 
blame on me; but for my foule parte I 
knowleche me to offre to men of my Ian- 
gage, the whiche oure ensaumpleris de- 
liten, that thei haue oure makynge for the 
sixe saumpleris of Grekes, which han nede 
to cost and ful greet traueile. And if thei 
douten euere owther in the redynge of 
olde volyms, if thei bringen these to gider 
to thilke, thei moun fynden that that thei 
sechen; moost sithen anentis Latin men 
ther ben as many sampleris as bookes, and 
ech man aftir his owne dom he addide to, 
or with drowe that that semede to be do; 
and forsothe it may not be sooth that dis- 
cordith. Wherfor now the scorpioun ceesse 
to ryse ajens vs with his crokide wounde, 
and stynte he to repreue an hooly werk 
with his venemouse tunge, ethir accept- 
ynge oure writyng if it plese, ethir dis- 
pisynge if it displese ; and haue he mynde 
of these versis, Thi mouth aboundide 
with malice, and thi tunge wrou3te tri- 
cheries; sittynge aj3ens thi brothir thou 
speeke, and ajens the sone of thi modir 
thou puttidist sclaundir; these thingis 
thou didist, and I held my pees; thou 
gessydist wickidly, that I schal be lijk thee; 
I schal vndirnyme thee, and make ordy- 
naunce a3ens thi face. For what profit is 
it of the herere, or of the redere, vs to 
sweete in trauelynge, and to othere men 
to trauaile in bacbytynge? ethir Jewis to 
be sory, that occasioun be don awey of 
chalengyng of hem, or of scornynge Cris- 
tene men, and men of Cristen chirche to 
dispise it, and also to tere with wordes, 
wherebi aduersaries ben turmentid? And 
if oonly the olde translacioun plese to heim, 
which displesith not me, and thei wenen 
that no thing schulde be acceptid with out 
that; whi thanne dispisen thei suche thingis 
that thei reden, to be addid to, ethir to be 
koruen awey vndur the signe of a sterre, 


f studye uw. §& mannys £ prima vice, liz3te sec. vice; foul alia man. & office 1.» the whiche £ pr.m, 
inerthelatere c. * 3ife thei ansec.m. kk tills. lthooc. their. M™echec. "orcxe. ° myssoun- 
eth £ pr.m. °° Om.i. P thesis. PP puttidest 1. 4 wickelic. "scorn 4. *toce, + offered & pr.m. 
ttmen 1. Om. £ prom. that 1. V storye 4. 


432 


556 


Eusebe of © Pamphili, alle makyngis also 
expownynge*? Other’ what foli was, after 
that thei seiden sooth thingis, to brynge 
forth tho that ben fals? Where of forsothe 
in the Newe Testament thei mowen 
preue” the taken” witnessyngis, ‘the 
whiche® in oold bokis ben not had ? 
These thingis we seyn, lest we ben seen 
vtterli to be stil to wrongful chalengers. 
Ferthermore after the deeth of ‘the holi 
womman® Paule, whos lijf is saumple° 
of vertue, and thes® bokis,‘the whiche® to 
the mayden of Crist, Eustochie, Y my3te 
not denye, we han demed, while the 
spiryt shal gouern thes lymes, to sitten 
to the explanacioun of the! prophetis, 
and to ‘turnen ajen to the now® long laft 
werk, as bi a maner turnynge a3en after 
outlawynge; nameli sith Pawmachie, an 
hooli man and merueilows, this same thing 
askith bi lettres, and we, hiynge to the 
contre®, owen to ouerpasse with a deefi 
eer the ‘deth berynge* songis of mer- 
mynns. 


Here eendith the prolog of Josue and 
Judicum and of Ruth, and nowe bigyn- 
neth the book of Josue**. 


JOSHUA. 


ethir vndir the signe of an arowe ? 
whi han chirchis resseyued Danyel aftir 
the translacioun of Theodocion? Whi mer- 
ueylen thei Origen, and also Eusebie of 


I. 1-—2. 


And 


Pamphilie, expouninge alle translaciouns ? 
Or what folie was that, that aftir tyme 
thei hadden seid trewe thingis, to brynge 


forth thoo that ben false? And wher of 


mowe thei preue witnessyugis that ben 


resseyned in the Newe Testament, the 
which ben not had in olde bookes ? 
seyn these thingis, lest we be seen vtterly 
to be still to wrongful calengers. Ferther- 


We 


more aftir the deth of the hooly womman 
Paula, whos lijf is ensaumple of vertu, 


and aftir makynge of these bookis, whiche 
I mi3te not denye to Eustochie, the maiden 
of Crist, we han purposid ys to sitte to 
expownynge of the prophetis, al the while 


the spirit schal gouerne these lymes, and 


aftir to turne ajen to that werk that longe 
hath be left bi hinde, as by a maner of 
turnynge ajen aftir outlawynge; namely 
sith? Pawmachie, the hooly man and mer- 
uelouse, askith this saine thing bi lettris, 


and we, hei3ynge to the cuntre of heuen, 
owen to passe ouer with a deeff eere the 
dedliche songis of meremaydens, and of 
othir that bacbiten ethir counselen othir 
weies than thei schulden. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth 
the book. 


———————_—— 


Josue ', 


CAP ot 


1 AND it is doon after the deth of 
Moyses, the seruaunt of the Lord, that 
the Lord spak to Josue, the sone of Nun, 
the seruaunt of Moyses, and seide to hym, 

2 Moyses, my sertiaunt, is deed; rise, and 


W and of c. x disputynge EF prim. 
€ seynt E prem. Ca saumple 1. 


Yorc. 
4 after thes £ pr.m. 


Here bigynneth the book of Josue. 


CAP le 


AND it was doon aftir the deeth of1 
Moyses, seruaunt? of the Lord, that the 
Lord spak to Josue, sone® of Nun, the 
mynystre’ of Moyses, and seide to hym, 
Moises, my seruaunt, is deed; rise thon, ? 


2 not preue c. @ takynge E pr. m. b that c. 
ethatc. fOm.c.  & turne ajen to the newe 4. 


torne ajeyn E prima vice. to repete as with a manere of ajeyn tornynge the nowe sec. vice. torne ajeyn 
to the nowe alia man. Om. 1. } contrairie 4 pr.m. ‘doumbe £ pr.m. *dedely ge pr.m. ‘kk Here endeth 
the prolog, se now the book of Josue. 1. No rubric in ceri. 1 From z. No initial rubricin acern, hut 
only running title. 

> the seruaunt 1Kx. 


aa From up. Joste Lu. No initial rubrie in the other mss. 


4 seruaunt 1. 


a Om. o pr.m. 
¢ the sone 1. 


I. 3-——13. 


passe ouer this Jordan, thow, and al the 
puple with thee, into the loond that Y 
3shal 3yue to the sones of Yrael. Eche 
place that the stap of 3oure foot shal 
treed, to 30w Y shal taak, as Y spak to 
4Moyses, fro ‘deseert and Libane and™ 
vnto the greet flood of Effrates; al the 
loond of Etheus, vito the greet see a3ens 
the sunne goynge doun, shal be 3oure 
5teerme. Noon shal mowe to 30w to ajen- 
stoond alle the dais of thi lijf; as Y was 
with Moyses, so Y shal be with thee; 
6Y shal not leeue, ne forsaak thee. Tak 
coumfort, and be strong; forsothe thow 
shalt dyuyde bi lot to this puple the 
loond, for the" which Y haue swore to 
7thi faders, that Y take it to hem. Take 
coumfort therfor, and be ful strong, that 
thow keep, and doo al the lawe, that 
Moyses, my seruaunt, hath comaundid to 
thee; ne bowe thow aside fro it to the 
ry3t or to the left, that thow vnderstoond 
salle thingis that thow dost. The volyin 
of this law goo not awey fro thi mouth, 
but thow shalt deuowtly think in it days 
and ny3tis, that thow kepe and do alle® 


thingis that ben wryten in it; thanne © 


thow shalt make redi thi weie, and vn- 
gderstoond it. I comaunde to thee; tak 
coumfort, and be strong; wole thow not 
drede, and wole thow not be feerd; for 
with thee is the Lord thi God in alle 
thingis, to what euere thingis thow shalt 
10 goo. And Josue comaundide to the pryncis 
of the puple, seiynge, Goo 3e bi the myddil 
of the tentis; and comaunde 3e to the pu- 
uple, and seye 3e, Make 3e redi to 3ou 
meetis, for after the thridde day 3e shulen 
passse ouer Jordan, and goo into the loond 
to be weeldid, that the Lord 3oure God 
izis to 3yue to 30w. Forsothe to Rubenytis, 
and Gaddytis, and to the half lynage of 
13 Manasse he seith, Haue? mynde of the 
word that comaundide to 30w Moises, 
the seruaunt of the Lord, seiynge, ‘The 
Lord 3o0ure God hath 3yue to 30w rest and4 


m Libane desert £ prim. 2 Om.c. 
dd that 1. efro Libani. fvntor. & that 1. 
10m.1 ™ Om.1. %3e tothe pepler. © that 1. 


JOSHUA. 


otho £ pr.m. 


h in ny3tis 1. 
P Josue 1. 


557 


and passe this Jordan, thou, and al: the 
puple with thee, in to the lond which™ 
Y schal 3yue to the sones of Israel. Y3 
schal 3yue to 30u ech place which the step 
of 30ure foot schal trede, as Y spak to 
Moyses, fro the deseert and Liban? til to4 
the greet flood Eufrates; al the lond of 
Etheis, ‘til tof the greet see ajens the 
goyng doun of the sunne, schal be 3oure 
terme. Noon schal mow ajenstonde 30u5 
in alle the daies of thi lijf; as Y was with 
Moises, so Y schal be with thee; Y schal 
not leeue, nether Y schal forsake thee. Beé 
thou coumfortid, and be thou strong; for 
thou schalt departe bi lot to this puple 
the lond, for which Y swoor to thi fadris, 
that Y schulde 3yue it to hem. Therfor7 
be thou coumfortid, and be thou ful strong, 
that thou kepe and do al the lawe, which® 
Moyses, my seruaunt, comaundide to thee; 
bowe thou not fro it to the ri3t side, ether 
to the left side, that thou vndirstonde alle 
thingis whiche thou doist. ‘The book ofs 
this lawe departe not fro thi mouth, but 
thou schalt thenke therynne in daies and 
ny3tis*, that thou kepe and do alle thingis 
that ben writun therynne; thanne thou 
schalt dresse thi weie, and schalti vndir- 
stonde it. Lo! Y comaunde to thee; be» 
thou coumfortid, and be thou strong; nyle 
thou drede ‘withoutforth, and nyle thou 
drede withynne*; for thi Lord God is 
with thee in alle thingis, to whiche thou 
goost. And Josue comaundide to the! 
princis of the puple, and seide, Passe 3e 
thoru3 the! myddis of the castels; and 
comaunde ‘3e to the puple™, and seie 5e", 
Make 3e redi metis to 30u, for after thei 
thridde dai 3e schulen passe Jordan, and 
3e schulen entre to welde the lond, which? 
3oure Lord God schal 3yue to 30u. Also 12 
heP seide to men of Ruben, and ‘to meni 
of Gad, and to the half lynage of Manasses, 
Haue 3e mynde of the word which" Moises, 13 
the ‘seruaunt of the Lord’, comaundide to 
jou, and seide, 3oure Lord God hath 3oue 


P HWanith cz. Gin a. 


K ne be thou afeerd 1. 
8 Lordis seruaunt 1. 


i thou schalt 1. 
qaOm.1. ‘that 1. 


558 


14al the loond ; 3oure wyues and 3oure chil- 
dren and beestis shulen dwelle in the 
loond that Moyses hath taak to 30w bi- 
3onde Jordan; 3e forsothe passith armed 
before 3oure bretheren, alle the stronge 

1smen in hoond; and fi3te 3e for hem, to 
the tyme that the Lord 3yue rest to 3oure 
britheren, as and to 30w he hath 3eue; 
and that thei forsothe weelden the loond 
that the Lord joure God is to 3yue to 
hem ; and so 3e shulen turn a3en into the 
loond of 3oure possessyoun, and 3e shulen 
dwelle in it, that to 30w hath 3euen Moi- 
ses, the seruaunt of the Lord, bi3ond Jor- 

igdan, a3ens the risynge of the sunne. And 
thei answerden to Josue, and seiden, Alle 
thingis that thow hast comaundid to vs 
we shulen doo, and whidir euer™ thow 

17seendist, we shulen goo; as we han 
obeishid in alle thingis to Moises, so and 
we shulen obeyshe to thee; oneli the 
Lord thi God be with thee, as he was 

igwith Moyses. Who a3en seith to thi 
mouth, and obeishith not to alle the’ 
wordis, ‘the whichet thow hast comaundid 
to hym, dye he; thou oonly tak coum- 
fort, and do mantych. 


CAP. II. 


1 Sente thanne Josue, the sone of Nun, 
fro Sechym two men, aspies in hidlis, 
and seide to hem, Gooth, and biholdith 
the loond, and the cyte of Jerycho. The 
whiche goynge 3eden into an hows of a 
womman strumpet, Raab bi name, and 
2thei restiden anentis hir. And it is told 
to the kyng of Jerycho, and seid, Loo! 
men ben goon yn hythir" bi ny3t, of the 
sones of Yrael, for’ to aspye the loond. 
3'And the kyng of Jericho sente* to 
Raab the* strumpet, seiynge, Bryng out 
the men, that camen to thee, and ben 
comen into thin hows; forsothe aspies 


rere. § thi cen. 
x Om. E prim. 


t soure beestis 1. 4 that 1. 
yOm.1. 2 he hath 3ouen to 1. 
Lordis seruannt 1 f Om. 1. 
Kk word 1. 1 biddingis 1. 
Qwith1. © Om.1. 


& bigonde 1. 
m The whiche 1. 
8 han entrid 1. 


JOSHUA. 


Vv alle 3e stronge men in hond, passe 1. 
4 also til the tyme that 1. 
h sunne rising I. 

2 strumpett I. 
t strumpett 1. 


I. 14——-11. 3. 


to 30u reste and al the lond; 3oure wyues 14 
and 30ure sones and beestist schulen dwelle 
in the lond which" Moises 3af to 30u bi- 
3ende Jordan; but passe’ 3e armed, ‘alle 
strong in hond*, bifor 3oure britheren ; 
and fiz3te 3e for hem, til the* Lord 3yue1s 
reste to 30ure britheren, as ‘he 3afY also 
to” 30u, and ‘til also* thei welden the lond 
which? 3oure Lord God schal 3yue to hem; 
and so turne® 3e ajen in to the lond of 
joure possessioun, and 3e schulen dwelle 
in that dond which* Moises, ‘seruaunt of 
the Lord®, 3af tof 3ou overs Jordan, a3ens 
the ‘rysyng of the sunne®, And thei an-16 
sweriden to Josue, and seiden, We schulen 
do alle thingis whiche thou comaundidist! 
to vs, and we schulen go, whidir euer thou 
sendist vs; as we obeieden in alle thingis 17 
to Moises, so we schulen obeie also to 
thee; oneli thi Lord God be with thee, as 
he was with Moyses. Die he that ajen-is 
seith thi mouth", and obeieth not to alle 
thi wordis!, whiche thou comaundist to 
hym; oneli be thou coumfortid, and do 
thou manli. 


CAP. II. 


Therfor Josue, the sone of Nun, sente1 
fro Sethym twei men, aspieris in hiddlis, 
and seide to hem, Go 3e, and biholde 3e 
the lond, and the citee of Jerico. Whiche™ 
jeden, and entriden into the hous of a 
womman hoore", ‘Raab bi name, and 
restiden? at? hir. And it was teld, ‘and2 
seid’ to the kyng of Jerico, Lo! men of 
the sones of Israel entriden* hidir bi ny3t, 
to aspie the lond. Therfor the kyng ofs 
Jerico sente to Raab the hoore*, and seide, 
Brynge out the men, that camen to thee, 
and entriden" in to thin hous; for thei 
ben aspieris, and thei camen to biholde al 


‘that c pr.m. “to hir 4. VOm.c. WSente therfore the kyng of Jericho £ pr.o. 


wOm.1.  * éyme that the 1. 
© thanne turner. 4 thati. ¢the 
i comaundist pkasw. hast comaundid 1. 

© that hizt Raab. _—_—P thei restiden 1. 
u that entriden 1. 


b that 1. 


II. 4——~14. 


thei ben, and al the loond to bihold thei 
acomen. And the womman takynge the 
men hidde, and seith, Y knowleche, that 
thei camen to me, but Y knewe not 
sWhens thei weren; and whanne the jate 
was closid in derknessis, and thei togidrys 
jeden out, Y note whidir thei wenten ; 
pursue 3e anoon, and 3e shulen atake hem. 
6Forsothe she made the men to stye yp 
into the soler of hir hows, and couerde 
hem with stuble of flaxe, that was there. 
7 Forsothe thei, that weren sent, folweden 
hem bi the weye that ledith to the foordis 
of Jordan; and hem goon out, anoon the 
s3ate was closid. And not 3it thei haddeu 
slept, that weren hid, and loo! the wom- 
gman styede vp to hem, and seith, Y haue 
knowe that the Lord shal taak to 30w 
the loond ; forsothe 3oure gastnes is faln 
into vs, and alle the dwellers of the loond 
1oben abasshidY. We han herd, that the 
Lord hath dryed vp the watres of the 
Reed See at 30ure incomynge, whanune 3e 
weren goon out of Egipte; and what 3e 
han doon to the two kyngis of Amorreis, 
that weren bijonde Jordan, Seon and 
11 Og, ‘the whiche’ 3e han slayn; and thes 
thingis herynge we dredden, and oure 
herte basshede, ne spiryt bood in vs at 
3oure yncomynge; forsothe the Lord 3oure 
God he is God in henene aboue, and in 
ierthe bynethe. Nowe therfor swere 3e to 
me bi the Lord 3oure* God, that what 
maner wise Y mercy haue doo with 3ow, 
so and 3e doo with the hows of my fader; 
sand 3ife 3¢ to me a verrey tokne, that 3e 
sauen my fader and moder, and brother, 
and my sisters, and alle that of hem ben, 
and 3e delyueren oure> soulis fro deth. 
1a The whiche answerden ‘to hirt,Oure soule 
be for 3ou into deth, if neuerthelater4 
thow® bitraye vs not; and whanne the 
Lord hath taak to vs the’ loond, we shu- 


Y baschid pceru. 2 that c. 
E passim. ©3e E pr.m. f this a. 
vAnd Raabi. © Om. plures.  * that their. 
bAnd1. ©goup1. 4 sche hilide 1. 
fallen 1. 
4 ne the 1, and the k. 
whiche 1. * with 1. y Thanne 1. 


JOSHUA. 


a Om. aceru. » 3oure Eg prem. 


y ne wot 1s. not DOK. 
© stobil or schyueres 1. 
k ben abaishid 1. |! han herd i. ™ hath dried up 1. "the twei 1. © the whiche 1. p baishide 1. 
t spirit of coumfort 1. § Om.1. ttokene 1. %my modir 1. VY 3e j3oure1. W The 


559 


the lond. And’ the womman took ‘the4 
men, and hidde hem’, and seide, Y know- 
leche, thei* camen to me, but Y wiste not 
of whenus thei weren; and whanne thes 
3ate was closid in derknessis, and thei 
3eden out togidire, Y nootY whidur thei 
jeden; pursue 3e”% soone, and 3e schulen 
take? hem. Forsothe> sche made the inené 
to stie® in to the soler of hir hows, and 
hilide’ hem with stobil® of flex, that was 
there. Sothelif thei, that weren sent,7 
sueden hem bi the weie that ledith to the 
fordis of Jordan; and whanne thei weren 
goon out, anoon the 3ate was closid. Theis 
that weren hid, slepten not 3it, and lo! 
the womman stiede$ to hem, and seide, 
Y knowe that the Lord hath bitake to 30u9 
this" lond; for 3oure feerdfulnesse felde! in 
to vs, and alle the dwelleris of the lond 
‘weren sikek. We herden!, that the Lord 1o 
driede™ the watris of the Reed See at 3oure 
entryng, whanne 3e 3eden out of Egipt; 
and what thingis 3e diden to twei" kyngis 
of Ammorreis, that weren bi3ende Jordan, 
to Seon and Og, whiche® 3e killiden; andi1 
we herden these thingis, and we dredden, 
and oure herte ‘was sike?, and4 spirit™ 
dwellide not’ in vs at 3oure entryng; for 
3oure Lord God hym silf is God in heuene 
aboue, and in erthe bynethe. Now ther-12 
for swere 3e to me bi the Lord God, that 
as Y dide merci with 3ou, so and 3e do 
with the hows of my fadir; and 3yue 3e 
to me a veri signe’, that 3e saue my fadiris 
and modir", and my britheren and sistris, 
and alle thingis that ben herne, and dily- 
uere oure’ lyues fro deeth. Whiche” an- 14 
sweriden to hir, Oure hjf be for 30u in to 
deeth, if netheles thou bitraiest not vs; 
and whanne the Lord hath bitake to vs 
the lond, we schulen do mercy and treuthe 
m* thee. TherforY sche let hem doun fro1s 
the wyndow bi a corde; for hir hows cle- 


¢ Om. £ pr.m. 4nerthelater c passim. 


& ouertake 1. 
hthes. lis 


% 3e hem 1. 


fAnd1. §& wente up I. 


560 


islen do in thee merci and treuth. She 
thanne lafte’ hem bi a coord out of a 
wyndowe; forsothe the hows of hir cle- 
1suede to the wal. And she seide to hem, 
To the mounteyns stye® 3e, lest perauen- 
ture thei turnynge aj3ens ajens comen to 
sow; there be 3e hid thre days, to the 
tyme that thei turnen a3en; and so 3e 
17shulen goo bi 3oure weye. The whiche 
seiden to hyr, Gyltles we shulen be fro 
this ooth, with the which thow hast with 
isooth boundun ys, yf, we comynge into 
the loond, this reed litil coord were not 
a tokne, and thow byndist it in the win- 
dowe, bi the! which thow hast late vs go; 
and thi fader and moder, bretheren and 
al thi kynne thow gederist in thin hows; 
ighe that the dore of thin hows were goon 
out, the blood of hym shal be into his 
heed, and we shulen be alien; forsothe 
the blood of alle that with thee weren in 
the hows, shal rebound into oure heed, if 
20hem eny man towehith. And if vs thou 
wolt bitraye, and this word brynge forth 
into the’ mydil, we shulen be clene fro 
this ooth, with the! which thou hast made 
zpvs swere™, And she answerde, As 3e 
han" spokun, so be it doon. And letynge 
hem that thei wente forth, she hongide® 
22a litil reed coord in hir wyndowe. For- 
sothe thei goynge camen to the moun- 
teyns, and dwellyden there thre dais, to 
the tyme that thei weren comen ajen 
that? pursueden ; forsothe sechynge bi al 
a3the weie, thei fonden hem not. The 
whiche comynge? into the cyte, ben comen 
a3en, and the spies" descendiden fro the 
hil; and ouerpassid Jordan thei camen to 
24 Josue, the sone of Nun; and thei tolden 
to’ hym alle thingis that fellen to hem, 
and seiden, The Lord hath taken al this 
loond into oure hoondis, and thur3 drede 
ben throwe down alle the dwellers of it. 


& leet c. k Om, RcEFH. 


that E pr.m. 


h styjeth x. i Om. c. 
dcomen ce, * aspyes BCEFH. 


JOSHUA. 


II. 15-——24. 


uyde? to the wal*. And sche seide to hem, 16 
Stie 3e° to the hilli places, lest perauenture 
men¢ turnynge a3en meete 30u; and be 3e 
hidde there three daies, til thei comen 
ajen; and so 3e schulen got bi 3oure weie. 
Whichet seiden to hir, We schulen be17 
giltles of this ooth, bi which thou hast 
chargid vs, if, whanne we entren in to thes 
lond, this reed corde is notf a signe’, and 
thou byndist it not in the wyndow, bi 
which thou lettist* vs doun; and thou! 
gaderist not in to thi hows thi fadir and 
modir, and britheren, and al thi kynrede ; 
the blood of hym schal be on* his heed, 19 
that goith out at the dore of thin hows, 
and we schulen be alien’, that is™, giltles® ; 
forsothe® the blood of alle men that ben 
in the hows with thee, schal turne in to 
oureP heed, if ony man touchith hem. 
‘That if4 thou wolt betraie vs, and brynge 20 
forth in to the’ myddis this word, we 
schulen be cleene of this ooth, bi which 
thou hast chargid vs. And sche*® answer-21 
ide, As 3e han spoke, so be it doon, And 
sche lefte hem, that thei schulden got, and 
sche hangide a" reed corde in her wyndow. 
SotheliY thei 3eden”, and camen to* thee 
hilli places,and dwelliden’ there three daies, 
til thei turneden ajen that pursueden’; for 
thei sou3ten* bi ech weie, and founden not 
hem. And whanne the sekeris entriden23 
in to the citee, the spieris turneden a3en, 
and camen doun fro the hille; and whanne 
thei hadde passid Jordan>», thei camen to 
Josue, the sone of Nun; and thei telden 24 
to hym alle thingis that bifelden® to hem, 
and seiden, The Lord hath bitake al the 
lond in to oure hondis, and alle the dwell- 
eris thereof ben casten doun bi drede. 


10m.c. ™toswerec, Mhac. © heenge. P that 


s Om. BCEFH. 


2 was ioyned 1. 4 foun wali, %3eup1. © the men 1. 4 go sureli 1. ¢ The whiche 1. f not schenid 
owl i. &tokene1. hhastletex ii?fthour. kK uponi. 1}Om.cx. ™ Om. cox. ® Om. 0. © sotheli1. 
P 3oure CEFLPU pr.m. 4 But if that1. ™Om.s. § Raabi. go forth1. 4% the 1. vAnd 1, W 3eden 


forth 1. into 1. Y thei dwelliden 1. 2 pursueden hem 1. ®sou3ten hem. » citee azen1. bb Om. a pr.m. 


¢ hadden bifalle 1. 4 Om. 1. 


i. 1-12. 


(pede, 200b 


1 Therfor Josue, fro ny3t arysynge*, me- 
uede the tentis; and thei goynge fro Se- 
chym camen to Jordan, he and alle the 
sones of Yrael, and dwelten there bi thre 

2dais. The which ouerpassid, wenten be- 

3dels bi the mydil of the tentis, and bi- 
gunnen to crye, Whanne 3e seen the ark 
of the boond of pees of the Lord oure 
God, and prestis of the lynage of Leuy 
berynge it, forsothe 3e togidre riseth, 
sand folwe 3e the forgoers"; and’ be 
there betwixe” 3ou and the ark a space 
of cubitis two thowsand, that aferre 3e 
mowen ‘se, and knowe bi what weye 3e 
goon, for bifore 3e han not goon bi it; 
and be war, that 3e nejen not to the ark. 

5 And Josue seide to the puple, Be 3e hal- 
wid; forsothe to morwe the Lord shal do 

6amonge 30w merteyls. And he seith to 
the prestis, Takith the ark of the boond 
of pees of the Lord, and gooth before the 
puple. The whiche the heestis fulfillynge 

7token, and wenten before hem. And the 
Lord seide to Josue, To day Y shal bi- 
gynne to enhaunce thee before all Yrael, 
that thei knowen, that as I was with 

8 Moyses, so and I am with thee. For- 
sothe thow comaund to the preestis, that 
beren* the ark of the boond of pees, and 
sey thou to hem, Whanne 3e weren goon 
in a paart of the watre of Jordan, stoond- 

gith in it. And Josue seide to the sones 
of Yrael, Cometh hidre, and herith the 

ioword of the Lord oure God. And eft, 
In this, he seith, 3e shulen wyte that the 
Lord God lyuynge in the mydil of 30w 
is; and he shal scatre in 3oure si3t Cha- 
nane, Ethe, Euee, and Pherese, Gergese 

11 forsothe, and Jebuse, and Amorre. Loo! 
the arke of the boond of pees of the Lord 
of al erthe shal goo before 3ow thur3 

12Jordan. Makith redy twelue men of 


t risende c, ™ forgers B pr, m. FH. 


f thei dwelliden 1. 
™M sue 3e DFIQ. " which 1. 
t fulfilliden 1. 


€ thens the tentis 1. 
! 3e togidre A sec. m. 
of the Lord s. § the whiche 1. 
* the peplet. ¥ Buti. # the preestis 1, 


Vv Om. E pr.m. 


& bedelis 1. 

© han not gon 1. 
u heestis of Josne 1. 
@ the boond 1. 


JOSHUA, 561 


CAP 


Therfor Josue roos bi ny3t, and mouede | 
tentis®; and thei 3eden out of Sechym, aud 
camen to Jordan, he and alle the sones of 
Israel, and dwellidenf there thre daies. 
And whanne tho daies weren passid,2 
crieris§ 3eden thorou3 the? myddis of 
tentis', and bigunnen to crie, Whanne 3e3 
seen the arke of boond of pees of 3oure 
Lord God, and the preestis of the genera- 
cioun of Leuy berynge it, also* rise 3e!, and 
sue™ the biforgoeris ; and a space of twey4 
thousynde cubitis be bitwixe 3ou and the 
arke, that 3e moun se fer, and knowe bi 
what" weie 3e schulen entre, for 3e ‘3eden 
not® bifore bi it; and be 3e war, that 3e 
neize not to the arke. And Josue seides 
to the puple, Be 3e halewid, for to morew 
the Lord schal make merueilis among 
jou. And Josue seide to the preestis,¢ 
Take 3e the arke of the? boond of pees 
‘of the Lord4, and go 3e bifor the puple’. 
Whiche fillident the heestis", and tooken’ 
the arke, and 3eden™ bifor hem*. And7 
the Lord seide to Josue, To dai Y schal 
bigynne to enhaunse thee bifor al Israel, 
that thei wite, that as Y was with Moises, 
so Y am also with thee. ForsotheY co-8 
maunde thou to preestis’, that beren the 
arke of bond of pees, and seie thou to 
hem, Whanne 3e han entrid in to a part 
of the watir of Jordan, stonde 3e ther- 
ynne. And Josue seide to the sones of9 
Israel, Nei3e 3e hidur, and here 3e the 
word of 3oure Lord God. And eft helo 
seide, In this 3e schulen wite that the 
Lord God lyuynge is in the myddis of 
jou; and he schal distrye in 3oure si3t 
Cananey, Ethei, Euey, and Feresei, and 
Gergesei, and Jebusei, and Amorrei. Lo!1 
the arke of boond* of pees of the Lord of 
al erthe schal go bifor 3ou thorou3 Jordan. 
Make 3e redi twelue men of the twelue !2 


w bytwene peri, betwec, * thei beren c, 


k also thanne 1. 
4 Om. s. * puple 
w 3eden forth a. 


I the tentis 4. 
P Om. plures. 
v thei tooken 1. 


hOm.1. 


4c 


562 JOSHUA. (hagas 


twelue lynagis ofY Irael, eche bi eche 
13lynagis. And whanne han put the steppis 
of her feet the preestis, that beren the 
arke of the boond of pees of the Lord 
God of al erthe, in the watres of Jordan, 
the watres that ben nethermore shulen 
renne, and fayle’; forsothe tho that camen 
fro aboue shulen stoond togidre in o 
1aglob. Thanne wente out the puple fro her 
tabernaclis”, that thei passen ouer Jor- 
dan; aud the preestis that beren the arke 
of the boond of pees 3eden before hym. 
is Aud hem goon into Jordan, and the feet 
of hem wet yn paart of the water; Jor- 
dan forsothe fulfillide the brenkis of his 
16trow3 in tyme of heruest; the watris 
dessendynge stoden in o place, and at 
liknes of an hil mych swellynge thei 
apereden ferre fro the cyte that was 
clepid Edom, vuto the place Sarthan; 
forsothe thoo that weren nethermore, 
into the see of wildernes, that now is 
clepid deed, dessendiden, forto thei vt- 
17terly failiden. Forsothe the puple wente 
a3en Jordan; and the preestis, that beren 
the arke of the boond of pees of the Lord, 
stoden gyrd vpon* the drye erthe in the 
middil of Jordan, and al the puple pass- 
ide ouere thur3 the drye trow3. 


CAP. IV. 


1 The which ouergoon, the Lord seide 
2to Josue, Chees twelue men, eche bi eche 
3lynagis, and comaund to hem, that thei 
taken fro the mydil of Jordans trow3, 
where stoden the feet of the** preestis, 
twelue hardest stonus; the whiche 3e 
shulen set in the place of tentis, where 3e 
4this ny3t fitchen tentis. And Josue cle- 
pide twelue men, whom he chees of the 
ssones of Irael, eche of eche lynagis; and 
seith to hem, Gooth bifore the arke of 
the Lord 30ure God to the mydil of Jor- 
dan, and bere® 3e thens* eche eche stonus 


lynagis of Israel, bi ech lynage o> man. 
And whanne the preestis, that beren the13 
arke of boond of pees of the Lord God of 
al erthe, han set the steppis of her feet in 
the watris of Jordan, the watris that ben 
lowere schulen renne doun, and schulen 
faile; forsothe* the watris that comen fro 
aboue schulen stonde togidere in o gobet*. 
Therfor the puple 3ede out of her taber-14 
naclis to® passef Jordan; and the preestis 
that baren the arke of boond of pees 3eden 
bifor the puple. And whanne the preestis 15 
entriden in to Jordan, and her feet weren — 
dippid in the’ part of watir!; forsothe* 
Jordan ‘hadde fillid! the brynkis of his 
trow™ in the" tyme of ‘ripe corn®; the is 
watris 3eden doun, and stoden in o place, 
and wexiden? grete at the licnesse of an 
hil, and apperiden’ fer fro the citee that 
was clepid Edom, ‘til to" the place of Sar- 
than; sothelis the watris that weren low- 
ere 3eden doun in to the see of wildir- 
nesse, Which' is now clepid the deed see, 
‘til the" watris failiden outirli. Forsothe’ 17 
the puple* 3ede thorou3 Jordan; and the 
preestis, that baren the arke of the boond 
of pees of the Lord, stoden gird on* theY 
drie erthe in the myddis of Jordan, and al 
the puple passide thorou3 the drie trow?. 


CAP. 


And whanne thei weren passid ouer?,1 
the Lord seide to Josue, Chese thou twelue2 
men, by ech lynage o man, and comaunde3 
thou to® hem, that thei take fro the myddis 
of the trow® of Jordan, where the ‘feet of 
preestis¢ stoden, twelue hardiste stoonys ; 
whiche® thou schalt sette in thef place of 
castels®, where 3e schulen sette tentis in 
this ny3t. And Josue clepide twelue men, 4 
whiche he hadde chose of the sones of 
Israel, of ech lynage o man; and he seides 
to hem, Go 3e bifore the arke of 3oure 
Lord God to the myddis of Jordan, and - 


yby 8. 2 fallec prim. 22 tabenaclis 4. ®vp vpon ce. 98®Om.£. »cleep er. ¢berethc. 4 Om. Hn. 


: bai. ¢sothlin ¢ gaderyng or a certeyn placet. ¢forto1. fpasseouer1. €Om.1. bal. 
iJordani. ‘thannes. } fulfillide1. ™ holouznesse 1. ® Om.1. © corn heruest 1. P thei wexiden 1. 


4thei apperideni. tvnto1. Sbuti1. ¢ that 1. 


uyuto1 Y Buti. W puple of Israeli. * vpon 1. 


y Om. ts, Z holownesse 1. 2Z the sones of Israel1. ®%ouer Jordani1. »% Om. 1. ¢ holownesse i. 
4 preestis feet 1. © the whiche 1. fOm.i.  & the tentis 1. 


lv. 6—17. 


in 3oure shuldres, after the noumbre of 
6the sones of Irael, that it be a tokne bi- 
twixe® 3ow. And whanne tlie sones of 
Irael asken 30w to morwe, seiyuge, What 
7to hem wolen thes stonus ? 3e shulen an- 
swere to hem, The watrys of Jordan han 
failid before the arke of the boond of 
pees of the Lord, whanne he passide it; 
therfor thes stonus ben set into thef 
mynd® of the sones of Yrael, vnto with 
souten ende. ‘Thanne the sones of Yrael 
diden as Josue comaundide to hem, ber- 
ynge fro the mydil of Jordanus trow3 
twelue stonus, as to hym the Lord co- 
maundide, after the noumbre of the sones 
of Yrael, vnto the place in the® which 
thei setten tentis; and there thei put- 
9tiden' hem. Forsothe other twelue stonus 
putte Josue in the mydil of Jordans 
trow3, where stoden preestis, that beren 
the ark of the boond of pees of the Lord ; 
and ben there vnto the day that is nowe. 
10 Forsothe the preestis, that beren the arke, 
stoden in the mydil of Jordan, to the 
tyme that alle thingis weren fulfillid, 
that the Lord comaundide to Josue, for 
he shulde speke to the puple, as Moises 
had seide to hym. And the puple hyede, 
jiand passide forth. And whanne alle 
weren goon ouere, 3ede ouere and the arke 
of the Lord, and the preestis wenten be- 
1zfore the puple. Forsothe the sones of 
Ruben, and Gad, and half the lynage of 
Manasse, aarmed wenten before the sones 
of Irael, as to hem comaundide Moyses. 
13 And fourti thowsand of fi3tynge men bi 
companyes and oostis wenten vpon the 
pleyn and wijld feeldis of the cyte of 
i4Jericho. In that day the Lord magny- 
fiede Josue before al Yrael, for thei sliul- 
den drede hym, as thei dredden Moyses, 
153it while he lyuede. And he seide to 
16 hym, Comaund to the preestis that beren 
the arke of the boond of pees, that thei 
i7styen vp fro Jordan. The which co- 


JOSHUA. 


563 


bere 3e fro thennus in 3oure schuldris ech 
man o stoon, bi the noumbre of the sones 
of Israel, that it be a signe bitwixe 30u.6 
And whanne 3oure sones schulen axe jou 
to morewe, that is, in tyme ‘to’ comynge*, 
and schulen seie, What wolen these stonus! 
‘to hem silf™? 3e schulen answere to hem,7 
The watris of Jordan failiden bifor the 
arke of boond of pees of the Lord, whanne 
the arke passide Jordan"; therfor these 
stoonus ben set in to mynde of the sones 
of Israel, til in to withouten ende}. Ther-s 
for the sones of Israel diden as Josue co- 
maundide to hem, and baren® fro the 
myddis of the trow? of Jordan twelue 
stoonys, as the Lord comaundide to hem, 
bi the noumbre of the sones of Israel, ‘til 
to1 the place in which thei settiden tentis; 
and there thei puttiden tho stonys. Alsoo 
Josue puttide othire twelue stoonys in the" 
myddis of the trow’ of Jordan, where the 
preestis stoden, that baren the arke of 
boond of pees of the Lord; and tho stoonys 
ben there ‘til in tot present dai. Forsothe" 10 
the preestis, that baren the arke, stoden 
in the’ myddis of Jordan, til alle thingis 
weren fillid’, whiche the Lord comaund- 
ide, that Josue schulde speke to the puple, 
as Moises hadde seide to hym. And the 
puple hastide, and passideX, And whanne1ll 
alle men hadden passid, also the arke of 
the Lord passide, and the preestis 3eden 
bifor the puple. Also the sones of Ruben, 12 
and of Gad, and half theY lynage of Ma- 
nasse, 3eden armed bifor the sones of Is- 
rael, as Moyses comaundide to hem. Andis 
fourti thousynde of fi3ters 3eden bi her 
cumpanyes and gaderyngis’* on the pleyn 
and feeldi places of the citee of Jerico. 
In that day the Lord magnyfiede* Josue 14 
bifor al Israel, that thei schulden drede 
hym, as thei dreden Moises, while he 
lyuede 3it. And the Lord seide to Josue, 1s 
Comaunde thou to the preestis that beren 16 
the arke of boond of pees, that thei stie> 


* bytwene aceru. fOm.r. &mydil 4 prem, bh Om. c. i putte ce. 

htokene 1. { Om. row. ‘* aftir 1. lilke stonys1. ™ by mene x. ™ouer Jordans. © thei baren z. 

P holouz3nesse 1. Gvntor. *Om.1. 8 holoujnesser. tvntothist. "Andr. YOm.1 W fulfillid 1. 
x passide ouer Jordant. YOm.s. #7 bi her gaderyngis 1. ® made gret 1. > stie vp 1. 


4c 


+ with outen 
ende, that is, 
in long tyme 
and vndeter- 
mynd. Lire 
here. Cc 


564 


maundide to hem, seynge, Stye* vp fro 
isJordan. And whanne thei weren goon 
vp, berynge the arke of the boond of pees 
of the Lord, and the drye erthe hadden 
bigunne to treed, the watris ben turned 
into his trow3, and floweden, as bifore 
19thei weren woned. Forsothe the puple 
fro Jordan stiede the tenthe day of the 
firste moneth, and settiden! tentis in Gal- 
galis, a3ens the este coost of the cyte of 
20 Jericho, Forsothe the twelue stonus, ‘the 
whiche™ thei token fro Jordans trow3, 
21 Josue putte in Galgalis ; and seide to the 
sones of Irael, Whanne 3joure sones asken 
to morwe her fadres, and seyn to hem, 
22 What to hem wolen thes stonns ? 3e shu- 
len teche hem, and seye, Bi the drye 
23 trow3 we passiden this Jordan, the Lord 
oure God driynge the watris of it in oure 
sist, to the tyme that we weren ouer- 
24 passid, as he dide bifore in the Reed See, 
‘the which" he dryede to the tyme that 
25 Wwe weren ouerpassed, that alle the pu- 
plis of loondis leeren® the moost strong 
hoond of the Lord, and that 3e dreden 
the Lord 3oure God al tyme. 


CAP. V. 


1 After thanne that alle the kyngis of 
Amorreis, that dwelten bi3onde Jordan 
at the west coost, and alle the kyngis of 
Chanaan, that the ni3 places weeldiden 
of the greet see, herden, that the Lord 
hadde dryed the flodis of Jordan before 
the sones of Yrael, to the tyme that thei 
weren goon ouere, the herte of hem is 
discoumfortid?, and abood4 not in hem 
spiryte of hem, dredynge the entre of the 

2sones of Yrael. That tyme seith the 
Lord to Josue, Maak to thee stonen 
knynes, and circumcide the secounde 
3tyme’ the sones of Yrael. He dide that 
the Lord comaundide, and circumcydide 


k Stegeth ce. Isette cu. ™ that c. 
dyn sec. vice, discoumfortid sec. m. 


k whan Josne s. l3evp1. ™gon vp 1. 
rAndr. §stiede vp1. ¢ depnesse r. 
2 ouer passiden it 1. 4 erthe 1. 
the kyngist. hOm.s. ithe ny3 1. 


the spirit of trist 1. the spirit kK. © Om. 1. 


JOSHUA. 


u that c. 
4 there abood E£ pr.m. 


© lerne ce. leern FH. 


nypon I. 
u by mene 1. 
b lurne or knowe 1. 


k flowynge flodis 1. 


Iv. 18—V. 3. 


fro Jordan. And Josue* comaundide to17 
hem, and seide, Stie 3e! fro Jordan. Andis 
whanne thei hadden stied™, berynge the 
arke of boond of pees of the Lord, and 
hadde bigunne to trede on" the drie erthe, 
the watris turneden a3en in to her trowe®, 
and flowiden?, as tho4 weren wont before, 
Forsothe’ the puple stiede*’ fro Jordan in ig 
the tenthe dai of the firste monethe, and 
thei settiden tentis in Galgalis, a3ens the 
eest coost of the citee of Jerico. Also20 
Josue puttide in Galgalis the twelne 
stonys, whiche thei hadden take fro the 
trowt of Jordan. And he seide to the21 
sones of Israel, Whanne 3oure sones schu- 
len axe to morewe her fadris, and schulen 
seie to hem, What wolen these stoonys ‘to 
hem silf*? 3e schulen teche hem, and 3e% 22 
schulen™” seie, We passiden this Jordan bi 
the drie botme, for oure Lord* God driede23 
the watris therof in oure si3t, tilY we 
passiden’*, as he dide bifore in the Reed 24 
See, which he driede while we passiden, 
that alle the puplis of londis* lurne? the 25 
strongeste® hond¢ of the Lord, that® alsof 
3e drede 3oure Lord God in al tyme. 


CARS Y. 


Therfor aftir that alle kyngis* of Am-1 
morreys herden, that dwelliden oner Jor- 
dan at the west coost, and alle the> kyngis 
of Canaan, that weldiden ny3! places of 
the greet see, that the Lord hadden dried 
the flowyngis* of Jordan bifor the sones 
of Israel, til thei passiden', the herte of 
hem was™ failid, and spirit" dwellide not 
in hem, dredynge the entring of the sones 
of Israel. In that tyme the Lord seide toz 
Josue, Make to thee knyuest of stoon, and = + knyvess in 
a y fy Lreu it is, 
circumside thou the sones of Israel, in®  rasours. c. 
the secunde tyne. Josue dide tho thingis3 
whiche the Lord comaundide, and he cir- 
cumside? the sones of Israel in the ‘hil of 


P ynlosed £ pr.vice, vnboun- 
' Om. E prim. 


© depniesse 1, P flowiden agen c prim. 4 thei 1K. 
v Om. plures.§ WOm.t * Om. 1. ¥ til that 1. 
¢ ful strong 1. my3tr. ¢andthati. fOm.1. 
! passiden ouer 1. ™ Om. GIKMNsx. 


P circumcidide plures. 


V. 4—I4. 


the sones of Yrael in the hil of mens 
a3erdis. Forsothe this is the cause of the 
secounde cireumeicioun; al the puple that 
wente out of Egipte of maal kynde, alle 
the men fiz3ters, ben deed in deseert bi 
smooste longe enuyrounyngis of weye, the 
whiche alle weren circumcidid. Forsothe 

6 the puple that is bore™ in deseert bi fourti 
jeer, in the weye of moost wyde wilder- 
nesse, were’ yncireumcidid to the tyme 
that thei weren wastid, that han not herd 
the voyce of the Lord, and to whom be- 
foret he swore, that he wold shewe hem 
7the loond flowynge mylk and hony. Of 
thes the sones camen after into stede of 
the faders, and ben circumsidid of Josue ; 
the whiche, as thei weren born, weren in 
hoolnes of her 3erdes, ne hem in the weie 
seny man cireumeidide. Forsothe~ after 
that alle ben cireumcidid, thei dwelten in 
the same place of her tentis, to the tyme 
gthat thei weren helid. And the Lord 
seide to Josue, To day I haue taak aweye 
the reproof of Egipt fro 30we't. And the 
name of that place is clepid Galgala, vnto 
io the day that is nowe. And the sones of 
Yrael dwelten in Galgalis, and diden pask 
the fourtenthe day of the moneth at euen, 
iin the wilde feeldys of Jerycho; and thei 
eeten of the fruytis of the erthe that" 
other day, therf looues, and corn powned 
10f the same 3eer. And manna faylide 
after that thei eeten of the fruitis of the 
erthe; ne the sones of Yrael vseden na 
more that meet, but eten of the fruytis 
of the present 3eer of the loond of Cha- 
isnaan. Forsothe whanne Josue were in 
the feeld of the cytee of Jerycho, he 
reryde the eyen, and saw3 a man a3ens 
hym stondynge, and holdynge a drawen 
out swerd; and he wente to hym, and 
seith, Oure thou art, or of the aduersa- 
isries? ‘The which’ answerde, Nay, but 
tr hoor 4. 


Swas ne. t Om. apr. 


Y ouer part of her jerdis 1. * And 1, 


Ww the whiche 1. * But 1.  ¥ other puple 1. 
¢ Lordis vois 1. 4 placis1. © her fadris 1. 
tentis1. kthes. 1! vnto this 1. m thei maden 1. 


JOSHUA. 


tt nowe 4. 


8 the men Is. 
2 the ful brod 1. 
f hoolnesse of her 3erdis 1. 


565 


prepucies?. Sotheli® this is the cause of4 
the seeunde cireumcisioun; al the puple 
of inale kynde, that 3ede out of Egipt, alle® 
men fijteris, werent deed in deseert bi the 
lengeste" cumpassis of weie’, whiche™ 5 
alle weren cireumsidid. Sotheli* the pu- 
pley that was borun in deseert bi fourtié 
3eer, in the weie of broddeste’ wildirnesse, 
was vncireumsidid? til? thei weren waastid, 
that herden not the ‘vois of the Lord’, and 
to whiche he swoor bifore, that he schulde 
schewe to hem the lond flowynge with 
mylk and hony. The sones of hem eamen7 
aftirward in to the place of fadris*, and 
thei weren circumsidid of Josue; whiche, 
as thei weren borun, weren in prepucief, 
nether ony man hadde eireumsidid hem in 
the weie. Forsothe® aftir that alle’ werens 
circumsidid, thei dwelliden in the same 
place’ of tentis', til thei weren heelid. And» 
the Lord seide to Josue, To dai Y haue 
take awei fro 30u the schenschip of Kgipt. 
And the name of that place was clepid 
Galgala, ‘til in to present! dai. And the1o0 
sones of Israel dwelliden in Galgalis, and 
maden™ pask in the fourtenthe dai of the 
monethe at euentide, in the feeldi places of 
Jerico; and ‘thei eten of the" fruytis of1 
the lond ‘in the tothir day, therf looues, 
and potage® of the same jeer, ‘ether cornys 
seengid and frotid in the hond?. Andiz 
manna failide aftir that thei eten of the 
fruytis of the lond; and the sones of Is- 
rael vsiden no more that mete, but thei 
eten of the fruytis of present’ 3eer of the 
lond of Canaan. Sothely’ whanne Josue 1s 
was in the feeld of the cite of Jerico, he 
reiside the® izen, and si3t a man} stond- 
ynge ajens hym, and holdynge a drawun 
swerd; and Josue 3ede out" to hym, and 
seide, Art thou oure’, ethir ‘of* aduersa- 
ries*? To whom he answeride, Nay, but 14 
Yam prince of the ‘hoost of the Lordy, 


uthe c. Yto whom z pr.m. 


tof hem werent. fullonge1. Y weies kK. 
a vncircumside c. _» til the tyme 1. 
eAnds. Btheialler iher 


nin the tcther day thei eeten therff looues, and 


potage of ther. ©Om.1. POm. 1x. 4 that present x. FAndi. Sup his 1. the siz 1. %Om. a see.m. 


Y with us. W oure Eine. Om. F pr.m. 


‘* aduersarie EFIKLOP pr.m. $ prem. 


Y Lordis hoost 1. 


+ @ man, that 
is, an aungel 
in the licnesse 
ofaman. Lire 
here. BCK. 


566 


I am prince of the oost of the Lord, and 
1snowe Y come. Josue felle redi into the 
erthe, and onowrynge, seith, What thing 
ismy Lord spekith to his seruaunt? Lowse, 
he seith, the sho fro thi feet ; forsothe the 
place, in the” which thow stondist, is 
hooli. And Josue dide, as to hym was 
comaundid. 
CAP. VI. 
1 Jericho forsothe was closid and waardid, 
for drede of the sones of Irael, and no 
2man dorst goo in, or goo out. And the 
Lord seide to Josue, Loo, Y haue 3eue 
into thin hoondis Jericho, and the kyng 
3of it, and alle the stronge men. Gooth 
about the cytee, alle 3e* fiz3ters, to gidre 
4bi the day; so 3e shulen do six days. For- 
sothe the seuenthe day the prestis shu- 
len taak seuen trompes, whos vse is in 
the iubile; and go thei before the arke 
of the boond of pees; and seuen sithisY 
je shulen goo about the cyte, and the 
prestis shulen ecrye with the trompes. 
sAnd whanne the voyce of the trompe 
lenger and thicker? ful sowneth, and in 
3oure eeris braggith, al the puple shal 
crye with moost* out crye; and the wallis 
of the cyte shulen fuldoun falle, and eche 
shal goon in bi the place, a3ens the which 
6thei stoden. Josue thanne, the sone of 
Nun, clepide® the prestis, and seide to 
hem, Taak 3e the arke of the boond of 
pees, and seuen other prestis taak thei 
seuen trompes of the iubilees, and goo 
7thei before the arke of the Lord. For- 
sothe to the puple he seith, Gooth, and 
enuyrowneth the cite, aarmed goynge be- 
8fore the arke of the Lord. And whanne 
Josue hadde eendid the® wordis, and seuen 
preestis with seuen trompes crieden be- 
fore the arke of the boond of pees of the 
9 Lord, and al the puple aarmed wente be- 


JOSHUA. 


V.15-——VI. 9. 


and now Y come’. Josue felde® lowe totis 
erthe, and worschipide, and seide, What 
spekith my Lord to his seruaumt? Hes 
seide, Vnlace" thi schoo’ fro thi feet, for 
the place, in which thou stondist, is hooli. 
And Josue dide, as it was comaundid to 
hym. 


CAP. VI. 


Forsothe Jerico was closid and wardid,! 
for the drede of the sones of Israel, and 
no man durste entre”, ethir go out®%. And2 
the Lord seide to Josue, Lo! Y 3afY in to 
thin hondis Jerico, and the king therof, 
and alle strong? men*. Alle 3e fizteris,3 
cumpasse? the citee onys bi the day; so 
3e schulen do in® sixe daies. Forsothe* ina 
the senenthe dai the preestis schulen take 
seuene clariouns, of © whiche ‘the vss is‘ in 
iubiles; and thei schulen go bifor the 
arke of boond of pees; and seuen sithes 3e 
schulen cumpasse’ the citee, and the 
preestis schulen trumpe with clariounsi, 
And whanne the vois of the trumpe schals 
sowne lengere*, and more! bi whiles, and™ 
schal" sowne® in 3oure eeris, al the puple 
schal crie togidere with gretteste? cry; 
and the’ wallis of the citee schulen falle 
alle doun, and alle men schulen entre’ bi 
the place, a3ens which thei stonden. Ther-« 
for Josue, the sone of Nun, clepide preestis’, 
and seide to hem, Take 3e the ark of 
boond' of pees, and seuene othere preestis 
take seuene" clariouns of iubileY 3eeris, 
and go thei bifor the arke of the Lord. 
Also Josue seide to the puple, Go 3e, and7 
cumpasse 3e the citee, and go 3e armed 
bifor the arke of the Lord. And whannes 
Josue hadde endid the’Y wordis, and se- 
uene” preestis trumpiden with seuen cla- 
riouns* bifor the arke of boond’ of pees of 
the Lord, and al the puple armed 3ede bi-9 


fore, the left comouns folowid the arke, fore, the’ tothir comyn puple{ of ji3teris 
wOm.c. thes. Ysithe arn. %more braggynge Epr.m. ®amoost ce. cleep Er. © thes 4. 
Teame1. §feldedounr1. ¢ ynto the 1. to the pKo pr.m. into w. ULonse1. Y schoyng1. ¥ go 
yni. * out therof'1. Yhaue 3ouenr, 2 the strong1. ®men oft1. bcnmpasseth 1, ¢ biz. 4 And 1. 
eOm.1. fbenvsidi. £§ the inbilee:. bgoaboute1. ithe clariouns1. * longetymer. !Om.1 
m™Om.1. "the voice schal1. © sowne thicke 1. P moost gret1. allethe1z. ‘entre ynt. § the 
preestis 1, tthe boond 1. ¥¢het senener. Vtheiubiler, ‘these 1. Wthe seuener. ~* trumpis 1. 


y the boond 1. 2 and the 1. 


tcomyn peple ; 
in Ebreu it is, 
the tother ga- 
dering to gi- 
dere. Cc. 


VI. 10-——20. 


and with trompes alle thingis thei sown- 
loeden. Forsothe Josue comaundide to the 
puple, seiynge, 3e shulen not crye, ne 
shal be herd 3oure voyce, ne eny word 
of 30ure mouth shal goon out, to the tyme 
that the day come, in the’ which Y schal 
seye to 3ow, Crieth, and with an out 
i1voyce crieth. Thanne the arke of the 
Lord ennyrounde ‘the cyte® onys bi day, 
and turned a3en into the tentis dwellide 
12there. Thanne Josue rysynge fro! ny3t, 
the preestys token the arke of the Lord; 
13and seuen of hem seuen trompes, of the 
whiche vse is in the iubilee; and thei 
wenten before the arke of the Lord, go- 
ynge and trompynge; and the puple 
armed wente before hem. Forsothe that 
other comouns folwide the arke, and with 
14trompis sownede. And thei wenten aboute 
the citee the secounde day onys, and 
turneden ajzen into the tentis; so thei 
is diden sixe days. Forsothe the seuenthe 
day eerly rysynge wenten about the cytee, 
l6as it was disposid, seuen sithes®. And 
whanne the seuenthe goynge about the 
prestis cryeden with trompes, Josue seyde 
to al Yrael, With an out voice crie 3e; 
forsothe the Lord hath taak to vs the 
i7citee; and be this cyte cursid, and alle 
thingis that‘in it ben to the Lord. Alone 
Raab the strompet lyue, with alle that 
with hir in hows ben; forsothe she hidde 
messangeris ® ‘the whiche! we senten. 
18 3e forsothe beth war, lest of thes thingis 
that ben comaundid eny thing 3e towchen, 
and ben gilti of trespasse; and alle the 
tentes of Yrael be vndur synne, and dis- 
i9tourblid. Forsothe what euer thing of 
gold and of siluer were, and of brasen 
vesselis, and of yren, to the Lord be it 
halowid, put vp in the tresours of hym. 
20Thanne al the puple criynge out, and 
criynge the trumpis, after that into the 


JOSHUA. 


567 


sucde the arke, and alle thingis sowneden 
with clariouns*. Sotheli> Josue comaund-10 
ide to the puple, and seide, 3e schulen not 
crye, nethir 3oure vois schal be herd, ne- 
thir ony word schal go out of 3oure mouth, 
til the dai come, in which Y schal seie to 
30u, Crye 3e°, and make 3e noyse. Ther-11 
for’ the arke of the Lord cumpasside the 
citee onys hi day®, and turnedef a3en in to 
the castels®, and dwellide there. Therfor" i2 
while! Josue roos bi ny3tT, preestis* tooken — + i nystes in 


reu it is, 


the arke of the Lord; and seuene of the 13 eerly, for he 


preestis foken seuen clariouns, of! whiche Beene 
‘the vss is™ in iubilee", and 3eden° bifor ary 
the arke of the Lord, ‘and 3eden?, and eras pay 
trumpiden; and the puple 3ede armed bi- _ ener either. 
Lire here. ¢. 


for hem. Sothelid the tother comyn puple 
suede the arke, and sownede with clari- 
ouns’. And thei cumpassiden the citee in 14 
the secunde dai onys, and turneden a3en 
in to the castels*; so thei dyden in* sixe 
daies. Sotheli® in the seuenthe dai theiis 
risiden’ eerli, and cumpassiden the citee, 
as it was disposid”, seuen sithis. And 16 
whanne in the seuenthe cumpas* preestis” 
sowneden with clariouns, Josue seide to al 
Israel, Crie 3e, for the Lord hath bitake 
the citee to vs; and this citee be cursidf, 17 ¢ te cursia; 
ethir distried, and alle thingis that ben ee 
therynne be halewid to the Lord. Raab [ein bothetis- 
the hoor aloone lyue, with alle men®* that ae ne 2 
ben with hir in the hows; for sche hidde dwelleris weren 
the messangeris whiche we Senten. Foret cna die tres 
sothe be 3e war, lest 3e touchen ony thing ie: 
of these that ben comaundid® to jou, and pee peers 
3e' ben gilti of trespassyng; and alle the Lire here. c. 
castels® of Israel bef vndur synne, and be 

troblid. Sothelis what euer thing is of 19 

gold, and of siluer, and of brasun vessels, 

and of yrun, be halewid to the Lord, and 

be* kept in hise tresoris. Therfor' while 20 

al the puple criede, and the trumpis sown- 

eden, aftir that the sowne sownede in the 


dQOm.c. €Om. 4. fatzpr.m. & sithe ru. } mansongers £. i that c. 
athe trumpist. >» Andr. ¢Om.s. 4 Thannet. €the day 1x. fitturneder. 8 tentis 1. 
h Thannet. i whiles that1. the preestis1. 1Om.1. ™weren vsidi. "the jubilee1. © the 
prestis 3eden1. POm.1s. G Andi. ‘trumpist. $tentis1. *Om.1. Andi. Yrisen 1.  or- 
deyned 1. *goyng aboute 1. Ythe preestis1. 7 strumpetr. @the meni. > Andi. © forboden 1. 
4Om.x. ¢tentis1. {be therfore1. & Fort. Om.s. 4 beitr. i Thanne 1. 


568 


eeris of the multitude the sown braggide, 
the wallis anoon fellen down; and echon 
styeden vp bi the place that a3ens hem 
2iwas. And thei token the cytee, and 
slewen alle that weren in it, fro man 
vnto womiman, fro 3onge vnto oold; for- 
sothe oxen, and sheep, and assis, in mouth 
220f the* swerd thei smyten. To the two 
men forsothe, that aspiers weren seute, 
seide Josue, Gooth into the hows of the 
womman stronipet, and brynge! hir forth, 
and alle that ben of hir, as to hir bi ooth 
233e han stedefastly seide. And the 3onge™ 
goon yn, ladden out Raab, and hir eldris, 
bretheren forsothe, and al purtenaunce to 
houshold, and al the kynrede of hir; and 
out of the tentis of Yrael thei maden to 
24dwelle. Forsothe the cyte, and al that 
were foundun" in it, thei brenten, with 
outen the gold, and siluer, and brasen 
vessels, and yren, ‘the whiche® into the 
25 tresory of the Lord thei sacriden. For- 
sothe Raab strompet, and the hows of 
hir fader, and al that she hadde, Josue 
made to lyue; and thei dwelten in the 
myddil of Irael, vnto the present day ; 
forthi that she hidde the messangers, ‘the 
whiche? he hadde sent for to aspie Jery- 
cho. In that tyme Josue curside4, sei- 
26 ynge, Cursid the man before the Lord, 
that rerith vp or bildith Jericho cyte! In 
his first goten ligge" he the foundementis 
of it, and in the’ last of the free children 
27 putte he the 3atis of it. Was thanne the 
Lord with Josue, and the name of hym 
is pupplishid in al the loond. 


CAP. Vid. 


1 The sones forsothe of Yrael han ouer- 
passid the maundement, and han mys- 
takun of the curse; for Achor, the sone 


kOm.c. | bringeth c. 
preyde E pr.m. 


I thei killiden 1. ™ vnto 1. 
s Andi. tthetwor. sent to ber. 
aentriden yn. > thei ledden 1. 
fand al kx prom. € Om.1. 2 Om. 
n outtake 1. © Lordis treserie 1. 
vp 1. “his frer v Thanne 1. 


k stiede up 1. 


P strumpet I. 


JOSHUA. 


M 3onge men B sec. m. 
Tleie c. leeche E pr.m. legge sec.m. ® his E pr.m. 


na jong I. 
¥ strumpet I. 

¢ alle here britheren 1. 
ithei maden hem 1. 
4 hir faders hows 1. 


W Goddis heste 1. * thei mystoken 1. 


VI, 21—VII. 1. 


eeris of the multitude, the walles felden 
doun anoon; and ech man stiede* bi the 
place that was a3ens hym. And thei token 
the citee, and killiden! alle thingis that 21 
weren therynne, fro man ‘til to™ womman, 
fro 30ng" child ‘til to° eld man; also thei 
smytiden? bi the4 scharpnesse of swerd, 
oxun, and’ scheep, and assis. Forsothe® 22 
Josue seide to tweit men, that weren sent¥ 
aspieris, Entre 3e in to the hows of the 
womman hoore’, and brynge 3e forth hir, 
and alle thingis that ben herne’, as 3e 
maden* stedfastY to hir bi an’ coth. And23 
the 3onge men entriden*, and ledden® out 
Raab, and her fadir, and modir, and bri- 
theren®, and al the’ purtenaunce of hous- 
hold*, and’ thes kynrede ‘of hir'; and 
maden to dwelle without the castels* of 
Israel. Sotheli! thei™ brenten the citee, 24 
and alle thingis that weren foundun ther- 
ynne, without" gold, and siluer, and bra- 
sun vesselis, and yrun, which thei halew- 
ideu in to the ‘treserie of the Lord®. So-2s 
theli Josue made Raab the hoore? to lyue, 
and ‘the hows of hir fadir4, and alle thingis 
that sche hadde; and thei dwelliden in the 
myddis of Israel, ‘til in to™ present dai ; 
for sche hidde the messangeris, whiche he 
sente to asspie Jerico. In that tyme Josue 
preiede hertli, and seide, Cursid bifor the 26 
Lord be the man, that reisitht and bildith 
the citee of Jerico! Leie he the founde- 
meutis therof in his firste gendrid sone, 
and putte he the 3atis therof in the laste 
of fre" children. Therfor’ the Lord was 27 
with Josue, and his name was pupplischid 
in ech lond. 


CAP. VII. 


Forsothe the sones of Israel braken ‘the1 
comaundement”, and mystoken* of the 
halewid thing; forY Achar, the son of 


1Om. Eprom, Othatc. Pthatc. 4 ajeyns 


oyntoanr. Pkillidens. @Om.1. TOm.1. 

whirst. * bihijt1.  ¥ stidefastly 1. 2 Om. 1. 

€QOm.c.  ©¢hir houshold o sec. m. hir 1. 

kK tentis 1. 1] And. ™ the men of Israel 1. 

Tynto thist. sJosuer. ¢ reisith 
Y for thi 1. 


, 


VII. 2—10. 


of Charmy, sone* of Zabdi, sone’ of Zare, 
of the lynage of Juda, took sum what of 
the curse; and wrooth is the Lord a3ens 
2the sones of Yrael. And whanne Josue 
wolde send fro Jericho men ajens Hay, 
that is biside Bethauen, at the eest coost 
of the bur3 town Bethel, he seide to hem, 
Stieth vp, and aspye 3e the loond. The 
whiche fulfillynge the heestis, aspieden 
3Hay; and turned ajen thei seiden to 
hym, Stye not vp al the puple, but two 
thowsandis' or thre of men goon, and 
doon a wey the cytee; whi al the puple 
in veyn is traueyld ajens moost fewe 
4enemyes? Styeden thanne vp thre thow- 
sand of .fizjtynge men, the whiche anoon 
sturnynge backis, ben smyten of the men 
of the eytee of Hay; and fellen down of 
hem thretti and sixe men; and the ad- 
uersaryes pursueden hem fro the 3ate 
vnto Sabarym; and thei fellen bi lowe 
and short weyes fleynge. And the herte 
of the puple myche dredde, and at the 
6lickenesse of water is molten. Forsothe 
Josue kitte his clothis, and redi felle doun 
into the erthe before the arke of the Lord, 
vnto euen, as wel he as alle the aldren of 
Yrael; and thei putten powdre vpon her 
i7heedes. And Josue seide, Alas! alas! 
Lord God, what woldist thow this puple 
brynge ouer Jordan flood, for to taak vs 
in the hoond of Amorrei, and for to leese? 
Wolde God, as we bigunnen, we hadden 
sdwellid bi3onde Jordan. My Lord God, 
what shal Y seye, seynge Yrael to his 
genemyes backis turnynge? Chananees 
shulen here, and alle the dwellers of the 
loond and togidre gedryd thei shulen 
enuyroun vs, and doon awey oure naine 
fro the loond; and what shal thou doo 
1oto thi greet name? And the Lord seide 
to Josue, Ryse, whi hjst thow bowid" in 


8 the sone E pr.m. 


Zthe soner. ® token a pr.m. 


JOSHUA. 


t thousend c. 


bcursid a see.m. marg. 1 marg. © wrooth herfore 1. 


569 


Charmy, sone” of Zabdi, sone of Zare, of 
the lynage of Juda, toke* sum thing of 
the halewid” thing; and the Lord was 
wrooth® a3ens the sones of-Israel. And2 
whanne Josue sente men fro Jerico a3ens4 
Hai, which® is bisidis Bethauen, at the 
eest coost of the citce Bethel’, he seide to 
hem, Stie 3e%, and aspie 3e the lond. 
Whiche' filliden* ‘the comaundementis!, 
aud™ aspieden Hay; and thei turnedens 
ajen, and seiden to hym, ‘Not al the pu- 
ple" stie°, but twey ether thre thousynde 
of men go, and do awei the citee; whi 
schal al the puple be trauelid in veyn 
a3ens fewesteP enemnyes? ‘Therfor4 thre4 
thousynde of fijteris' stieden’, whichet 
turneden the" backis anoon, and werens 
smytun of the men of Hay; and sixe and 
thretti men of hem ‘felden doun”; and 
aduersaries* pursneden hem fro the 3ate 
til toY Saberym; and thei felden doun 
fleynge bi lowe places. And the herte of 
the puple dredde’*, and was* maad vnstide- 
fast at the licnesse of watir. Sotheli’e 
Josue torente hise clothis, and felde* lowe 
to the’ erthe bifor the arke of the Lord, 
‘til to® euentid, as wel he, as alle the eldef 
men of Israel; and thei castiden powdir 
on& her heedis. And Josue seide, Alas!7 
alas! Lord God, what woldist thou lede 
this puple ouer the flood Jordan, that thou 
schuldist bitake vs in the hond of Am- 
morrey, and schulde! leese vsi? Y wolde, 
that‘ as we bygunnen, we! hadden dwellid 
bi3jondis Jordan. My Lord God, whats 
schal Y seie, seynge Israel turnynge the 
backis to hise enemyes? Cananeys, and9 
alle dwelleris™ of the lond schulen here", 
and thei schulen be gaderid togidere, and 
schulen® cumpas? vs, and schulen® do awei 
oure name fro erthe; and what schalt 
thou do to thi grete name? And the Lord 10 


uredy £ prim. 


4 to figte agens 1. 


€that1. fof Bethelis. €3e up1. Om. plures. ithe whicher. kfulfillinge 1. lhis hestis 1. ™Om. 1. 


1 stie up 1. © al the puple stie not vp thidere 1. 
vp 1. tthe whiche 1. here 1. 
8 it was 1. band 1. ¢ he fel doun 1. 

bh schuldist ncrimnw. ' Om. plures. & Om. 1. 
schulen 1. P enuyroune 1. 


P ful fewe 1. 
W weren slayn 1. 
d Om. emsx. 

I that we 1. 


qThanne 1. * fiz3tynge men 1. & stieden 
x the aduersaries 1. Yvntor 2 drede myche 1. 

e ynto the 1. f eldre 1. & upon 1. 
m the dwelleris 1. here this 1. © thei 


4D 


570 


ithe erthe? Yrael hath synned, and hath 
broken my couenaunt; and thei han taak 
of the corse, and han stoln, and lized, 
1zaud han hidde among her vessels. Ne 
Yrael shal mowe stoond before her ene- 
myes, and hem he shal flee, for he is 
polut with the curs; I shal not be more 
with jou, to the tyme that 3e han alto 
troden hym that is gilti of that hidows 
istrespas. Ryse, halwe the puple, and sey 
to hem, Be 3e halwid a3en to morwe ; for- 
sothe thes thingis seith the Lord God of 
Yrael, Cursynge is in the mydil of thee, 
Irael; thow shalt not mowe stoond be- 
fore thin enemyes, to the tyme that he 
be doon awey fro thee, that is defoulid 
uwith this hidows gilt. And 3e shulen 
come eerly eche bi j3oure lynagis; and 
what euer lynage the lot fynde, he shal 
come bi his kynredis, and kyurede bi 
1s howsis, and hows bi men. And so’ euer” 
he in that gilt were taak, he shal be brent 
with fier with al his substaunce, for he 
hath brokun the couenaunt of the Lord, 
igand* hath do sacrilege in Yrael. And 
so Josue rysynge eerly, sette Irael bi her 
lynagis; and it is founden the lynage of 
17Juda; which’, whanne after his meynees 
was offred, it is founden the? meynee of 
Zare; forsothe thilk* bi men offrynge he 
isfoonde Zabdi; whos hows in sondry” 
men dyuydyng, he foonde Achor, the sone 
of Charmy, sone® of Zabdi, sone® of Zare, 
19 of the lynage of Juda. And he seide* to 
Achor, My sone, 3if glorye to the Lord 
God of Yrael, auld knowlech, and shewe 
to me, what thow hast doon; ne hyde 
gothou. And Achor answerde to Josue, 
and seide to hym, Trewly, Y haue synned 
before the Lord God of Yrael, and thus 
ziand thus Y haue do; Y saw3 forsothe 
among the spuylis a ful good reed mantil, 


JOSHUA. 


VII, 1}——_21. 


seide to Josue, Rise thou; whi liggist' 
thou low in the erthe? Israel synnede’,11 
and brakt my couenaunt; and" thei token’ 
of the halewid” thing, and thei han stole*, 
and lieden, and hidden among her vessels. 
Andy Israel may not stonde bifore hise12 
enemyes, and Israel? schal fle hem, for it 
is defoulid with cursyng ; Y schal no more 
be with 30u, til 3e% al to breke® hym which 
is gilti of this trespas. Rise thou, halewe® 13 
the puple, and seie thou to hem, Be 3e ha- 
lewid ajens to morewe; for the Lord God 
of Israel seith these thingis, A®! Israel! 
cursyng is in the myddis of thee; thou 
schalt not mowe stonde bifor thin enemyes, 
til he that is defoulyd bi this trespas, be 
doon awei fro thee. And 3e schulen come 14 
eerli, alle men bi 30ure lynagis ; and what- 
euer lynage the lot schal fynde, it schal 
come bi hise meynees‘; and the’ meynee® 
schal come bi housis', and the* hous! schal 
come bi men. And whoever schal be takun 1s 
with this trespas, he schal be brent bi™ 
fier with al his cate], for he brak the coue- 
naunt of the Lord, and dide vnleueful 
thing in Israel. Therfor Josue roos eerly, 16 
and settide" in ordre Israel, bi hise ly- 
nagis; and the lynage of Juda was 
foundun®; and whanne that lynage was17 
brou3t forth bi hise meynees, the meyne 
of Zare was foundun. And Josue brou3te 
forth it? bi men, ethir housis, and‘ foond 
Zabdi'; whos hows’ het departide in to1s 
alle’ men bi hemsilf; and he foond’ Achar, 
the sone of Charmy, sone of Zabdi, sone 
of Zare, of the lynage of Juda. And he” 19 
seide to Achar, My sone, 3yue thou glorie 
to the Lord God of Israel, and knowleche 
thou, and schew to me what thou hast do; 
hide thou not*. And Achar answeryde to20 
Josue, and seide to hym, Verily, Y syn- 
nedeY bifor the Lord God of Israel, and 


v whoso ce. Werce. *for he z pr.m. Ythe which peru. *in the 4. 4thooc. » sondrynge zsFru. 


sunder c. ¢the sone E prim. 4 seith cE. 

athon upr. Ff lijst1. * hath synneder. t hath brak 1. tOm.3. Vhan taker, Weursid 1. * stole 
of iti. Yand therforer. hex. 4thatje1. Pdestrier, ¢thatr. dhalewethow1s. © O thon 1. 
fkynredes1. gthatx. bkynrede1. imeynees1. Kthat1. !housis a prom. meynee1. ™ with 1. 
she setter. © foundun gilfi1. Pthat meyneer. @Om.1. 1 he foond Zabdi gilti1. §& housholde 
meynee 1. *Josue1. dyuerser. Y foond gilfti1. WJosner. *itnotr. Y hane synnede 1. 


VII. 22——VIII,. 2. 


and two hundreth sieclis of siluer, and a 
goldun rewle of fifti siclis; and coueyt- 
ynge took awey, and hidde in the erthe, 
a3ens the myddil of my tabernacle; for- 
sothe the siluer Y couerde with the dol- 
22uen erthe. Sente thanne Josue seruauntis, 
the whiche rennynge to the tabernacle of 
hym, thei founden alle thingis hid in the 
23same place, and the siluer togidre; and 
thei takynge awey fro the tent token 
the® thingis to Josue, and to alle the 
sones of Yrael; and threwen forth before 
24the Lord. And so Josue takynge Achor, 
the sone of Zare, and the siluer, and the 
mantil, and the golden rewle, and sones 
and dou3tres of hym, oxen, and asses, and 
sheep, and thilkf tabernacle, and al the 
purtenaunce, and al Yrael with hym, lad- 
25den hem to the valey of Achor; where 
seide Josue, For thow hast disturblid vs, 
out stourbe thee the Lord in this day. 
And al Irael stonede hym; and alle 
thingis, that his weren, ben wastid with 
26fier. And thei gedreden vpon hym a 
greet heep of stonus, the which abidiths 
stil vnto the day that is nowe. And the 
wodenesse of the Lord is turned awey 
fro hem; and the name of the place is 
clepid unto this day the valey of Achor. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Seyde forsothe the Lord vnto" Josue, 
Ne drede thow, ne be feerd; tak with 
thee al the multitude of fizters, and ris- 
ynge sty vp into the burgh toun of Hay; 
loo, Y haue taak into! thin hoond his 
kyng, and puple, and cytee, and loond. 

2And thou shalt do to the citee of Hay 
and to his kyng, as thow didist to Jeri- 
cho, and to the kyng of it; the pray for- 


ethooc. fthatc. & abytte 


Zhaue dor, ® thus and thus 1. 
f seruauntis 1. 
mcastiden hemi. 4 Thanner. © Ats oxun I. 
Zabiden there 1. 4 stille 1. Om. x. 


hOm.1. ine be thou not aferd 1. 


whiche 1. 
& And1. 


JOSHUA. 


BCEFII. 


b coneytide tho 1. 
& the whyche 1. - } these thingis 1. i token these thingis 1. 
P his self 1. 
thim a pr.m. e¢ plures. “seide to him. V hast distourblid 1. W ful ont distourble 1. 
b this 1. 


k fiztynge men 1. 


571 


Y dide* ‘so and so*; for among the spuylis 21 
Y siz a reed mentil ful good, and two hun- 
drid siclis of siluer, and a goldun reule of 
fifti siclis; and Y eoueytide®, and took 
awei, and hidde® in the erthe, ajens the 
myddis of my tabernacle; and Y hilide 
the siluer with erthe’ doluun. Therfor®22 
Josue sente mynystris’, whyche$ runnen to 
his tabernacle, and foundun alle thingis® 
hid in the same place, and the siluer to- 
gidere; and thei token‘ awei fro the tente, 23 
and brou3ten* ‘tho thingis! to Josue, and 
to alle the sones of Israel; and thei cast- 
iden™ forth bifor the Lord. Therfor® Jo-24 
sue took Achar, the sone of Zare, and the 
siluer, and the mentil, and the goldun 
reule, and hise sones, and dou3tris, oxun®, 
assis, and seheep, and the? tabernacle ‘it 
silf4, and al the purtenaunce of household’, 
and al Israel with Josue; and thei® ledden 
hem to the valei of Achar; where Josue 2s 
seide", For thou disturblidist’ vs, the Lord 
schal disturble” thee in this dai. And al 
Israel stonyde hym7; and alle thingis that 
weren hise, weren wastid bi fier. Aud thei 26 
gaderiden on* hym a greet heep of stoonys, 
whicheY dwellen? til? in to present® day. 
And the strong veniaunce of the Lord was 
turned awei fro hem‘; and the name of 
that place was clepid the valey of Achar 
‘til to® day’. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe® the Lord seide to Josue, Ne-1 
ther drede thou‘ withoutforth", nether drede 
thou withynne'; take with thee al the mul- 
titude of fiz3teris‘, and rise thou, and stie! 
in to the citee of Hay; lo, Y haue bitake 
in™ thin hond the king therof, and the 
puple, and the citee, and the lond. And2 
thou schalt do to the eitee of Hay, and to 
the king therof, as thou didist to Gerico, 


i 


hto spceu. ‘in pcern. 


eT hidde tho. ‘4 theerthe rc. € Thanne 1. 

k thei brou3ten 1. | hem 1. 
this household 1. & Om. 1. 
Xuponr. Y the 


f this day 1. 


aq Om. 1. 


€ ynto I. 
™ into 1. 


CIsrael x1. dis 1. 
1 stie up 1. 


4p 2 


+ and al Israet 
stonyde him. 
Achar synnede 
in double ma- 
ner, that is, in 
the synne of 
sacrilegie, in 
stelinge an ha- 
lewid thing, 
and he synnede 
in defouling of 
the sabat, for 
he dide that 
thefte in the 
day of sabat, 
and therfor he 
was punysched 
bi donble peyne; 
that is, of ston- 
yng for the 
breking of sa- 
bat, and this 
peyne is or- 
deyned for 
breking of the 
sabat in xv c°. 
of Numery ; 
the ij. tyme he 
was punysched 
bi the peyno of 
brennyng with 
hise purte- 
nanneces, as God 
comaundide in 
this c°. Lire 
here. C. 


572 JOSHUA. 


sothe and alle the lyuynge* beestis 3e 
shulen taak to 3ow; put busshementis! 
3to the cyte bihynde™ it. And Josue roos, 
and al the oost of fi3ters with hym, for to 
stye vp into Hay; and he sente the ny3t 
thretti thowsand chosen of stronge men ; 
aand he comaundide™ to hem, seiynge, 
Putte 3e busshementis" bihynde the cytee, 
ne ferther goo 3e awey ; and 3e shulen be 
sal redi; forsothe Y and that® other mul- 
titude that is with me, ‘fro forn a3ensP 
we shulen come a3jens the cite; and 
whanne thei weren gon out a3ens vs, as 
wel diden before, we shulen flee, and 
6turne backis, to the tyme that thei pur- 
suwynge more along fro the cyte ben 
drawen a ferre; forsothe thei shulen wene 
z7vs to flee as before. Vs thanne fleynge 
and hem pursuynge, 3e shulen ryse" fro 
the busshement, and 3e shulen waast the 
cytee; and the Lord 3oure God shal taak 
git into 3oure hoondis. And whanne 3e 
han taak it, sette 3e it a fier; so alle 
thingis 3e shulen doo, as Y haue co- 
gmaundide. And he lefte hem, and thei 
wenten to the place of the busshement, 
and thei seten betwixe* Bethel and Hay, 
at the west coost of the cytee of Hay. 
Forsothe Josue that ny3t dwellide in the 
1omydil of the puple. And rysynge eerly 
he tolde felawis, and he styede with the 
eldrent in the frownt of the oost, biset 
with help of fi3ters. And whanne thei 
weren comen, and hadden styed vp fro 
a3ens of the citee, and thei stoden at the 
north coost of the cytee, bitwix" the 
12 Whiche and hein was a mydil valey. For- 
sothe fyue thousand men he chees, and 
putte in the busshement bitwix’ Batha- 
uen® and Hay, fro the west paart of the 


k Om. £ prim. laspyes E pr.m. 
P fro ageyns E pr.m. forn a3eyns CE sec. m. 
u bytwene Bern. betwe c passim. 


m after E prim. 
q thei 4. 
Vv bytwene BEFH. 


VIIT. 3—22. 


and to the king therof"; sotheli® 3e schu- 
len take to 30u the prey, and alle lyuyngeP 
beestis; sette thou ‘aspies, ethir buysche- 
mentis", to the citee bihynde it. And Jo-3 
sue roos, and al the oost of fiz3teris’ with 
hym, tot stie* in to Hay; and bi ny3te he 
sente thretti chosen thousynde of stronge 
men; and comaundide’ to hem, and seide,4 
Sette 3e buyscheinentis bihynde the citee, 
and go 3e not ferthere ; and alle 3e schulen 
be redi; forsothe® Y, and the tothir mul-5 
titude which* is with me, schulen come 
ony the contrarie side a3ens the citee; and 
whanne thei schulen go out a3ens vs, as 
we diden bifore, we? schulen fle, and turne 
the? backis, til thei pursuen>, and bene 
drawun away ferthir fro the citee; for 
thei schulen gesse, that we schulen fle° as 
bifore’. Therfor® while we schulen fle, and7 
theif pursue, 3e schulen ryse fro the buysch- 
ementis, and schulen" waste thei citee; 
and 30ure Lord God* schal bitake it in to 
joure hondis. And whanne 3e han takes 
it', ‘brenne je™ it; ‘so 3e schulen do" alle 
thingis, as Y comaundide®’. And Josue9 
lefte hem, and thei 3eden to the place of 
buyschementis, and satenP bitwixe Bethel 
and Hay, at the west coost of the citee of 
Hay. Forsothe4 Josue dwellide ‘in that 
ny3t? in thes myddis of the puple. And 10 
he roos eerli, and noumbride felowis‘, and 
stiede" with the eldere’ in the frount of 
the oost, and was” cumpassid with the* 
helpe of fijterisy, And whanne thei had-1 
den come, and hadden stied* ajens the 
citee, thei stoden at the north coost of the 
citee, bitwixe which® citee and hem the? 
valei was in the myddis. ‘Sotheli he® hadde 12 
chose fyue thousynde men, and hadde® 
sette® in buyschementis bitwixe Bethauen 


© the c. 
t elders c. 


mm comaunde B. 4 aspyes E pr.m. 
Taryse BEFH. & betwec. between H. 
W Bethel £ pr.m. 


Nofitr. Obut 1. Pthe luyynger. Taspies1. buyschementisc. §fiztynge menr. tfor tor. Ustie up 1. 


vhe comaundide 1. Wforr. * that 1. 
c flehem1. 4 we diden biforer. © Thanne 1. 
kOm.1. 1 Om. plures. ™ brenneth 1. 
that nigtr, 7 Om.1, § Om.1. 
xOm.1.  ¥ figtynge men 1. 


2 stied up I. 
€ sette hem 1. 


Y upon t. 
f while thei 1. 
n do 3e I. 
t his felowis 1. 
a the whiche 1. 


Zthanne while wer. ®ourer. » pursuen us 1. 
h3e schulen 1. i her 1. 

P thet saten1. 4 And 
Vv eldere men IK. w he was 1. 


¢ And Josuex. 4 he haddex. 


& arise 1. 

© haue comaundid to 3ou 1. 
u he stiede vp 1. 
Cal 


VIII. 13-——22. 


i3same cyte. Forsothe al ‘that other* oost 
at the north made redi the poynt, so that 
the last of the multitude atteyneden the 
west coost of the cytee. Josue thanne 
wente that ny3t, and stood in the mydil 
140f the valey; that whanne the kyng of 
Hay had seen, he hiede eerli, and wente 
out with al the oost of the cyte, and he 
dresside the poynt a3ens the deseert, vn- 
knowynge that bihynde the bak werenY 
ishid busshementis. Forsothe Josue and 
al the multitude of Yrael 3auen steede 
to the place, feynynge dreed, and fleynge 
16 bi the weie of wildirnesse; and thei cri- 
ynge out togidre, and hem self togidre 
gladly clepynge pursueden hem. And 
whanne thei weren goo fro the cytee, 
i7and not oon forsothe in the cytee of Hay 
and Bethauen was laft, that pursuwede 
not Yrael, as thei breken out leeuynge 
isthe borgh towns open, the Lord seide to 
Josue, Heue vp ‘the sheeld? that is in 
thin hoond, aj3ens the cyte of Hay; for 
19to thee Y shal taak it. And whanne he 
hadde houen vp the sheld? fro a3ens the> 
citee, the busshementis that weren hid, 
rysen anoon, and goynge to the cytee 
20token®, and sett it afier. Forsothe the 
men of the citee, that pursuweden Josue, 
beholdynge and seynge the smook of the 
cite vnto heuene stie vp, thei my3ten no 
more hidir and thidir fleynge’ atwynne, 
namelich whanne thei that feyneden fli3t®, 
and wenten to wildirnesse, ajens the pur- 
suwers moost my3tili hadde with stonden. 
21 And seynge Josue and al Yrael, that the 
citee was takun, and smook of the citee 
stiedef vp, turned ajen smoot the men’ of 
22 Hay. Forsothe and thei that token, and 
hadden sett the cytee a fier, goon out fro 
the citee ajens her mydlis of enemyes, 
thei bigunnen to smyit; and whanne on 


x the tother c. Y weren not £ pr.m. 


JOSHUA. 


2 thy swerd E pr.m. 


573 


and Hay, in the west part of the same 
citee. Sothelif al the tothir oost dresside 13 
scheltrounS to the north, so that" the 
laste men of the multitude touchiden' the 
west coost of the citee. Therfor* Josue 
jede in that ny3t, and stood in the! myddis 
of the valei; and whanne the kyng of Hails 
had seyn that™, he hastide eerli, and jede 
out with al the oost of the" citee, and he 
dresside scheltrun® aj3ens the deseert; and 
wisteP not that buyschementis weren hid 
bihinde thei bak. Forsothe' Josue and alis 
the multitude ‘of Israel’ 3auen place, feyn- 
ynge drede, and fleynge bi the weie of wil- 
dirnesse ; and thei‘ crieden togidere, and 16 
excitiden" hem silf togidere, and’ pursu- 
eden hem®. And whanne thei hadden go 
awey fro the citee, and sothely not oon*17 
hadde left in the citee of Hai and Beth- 
auenY, that ‘pursuede not? Israel, and 
thei leften the citees opyn, as thei hadden 


’ broke out, the Lord seide to Josue, ‘Reise 18 


thou* the scheeld which” is in thin hond, 
a3ens the citee of Hay; for Y schal 3yue 
it to thee. And whanne he® hadde reisid‘ 19 
the scheld® a3ens the citee, buyschementis*, 
that weren hid, riseden& anoon; and thei 
jeden to the citee, and token, and brenten 
it. Forsothe" the men of the citee, that 20 
pursueden Josue, bihelden, and siz3en the 
smoke of the citee stie ‘til to! heuene; and 
thei my3ten no more fle hidur and* thi- 
dur; most! sithen thei™ that hadden feyned 
fli3t", and 3eden to wildirnesse, withstoden 
stronglieste® ‘ajens the? pursueris. And 21 
Josue si3, and al Israel, that the citee was 
takun, and the’ smoke of the citee stiede’; 
and he turnede a3en, and smoot* the men 
of Hay. Sothelit also thei" that hadden 22 
take and brent the citee, 3eden out of the 
cytee a3ens her men’, and bigunnen™ to 
smyte the myddil men of enemyes*; and 


aswerd ze pr.m. ofthe cz, ©¢ token 


itc. dfleen cz. ¢ fley3 anu. f was stiede 2 pr.m. §& sones of men E pr. m. 
fAndi. & the scheltrounr. 4 Om.1. irechidentox1 kThannex. 1]0Om.1. thats. ™ this 1. 
nhisi. © his scheltruns. Phewister Ghist 'For1, *Om.1. tthe meni. % with gladnesse 


stireden 1, Vand their. 
@ Reise up 1. > that 1. 


W the men of Israel 1. 
¢ Josue 1. 4 reisid up 1. 


up1 bAndt HIvpuntor Kner J namely 1. 
Pherr, 4thatther ‘stiedeupr.  § killide rs. 
bigunnen 1. * her enmyes 1. 


Xx oo man I, 


Yin Bethauen 1. 2 ne he pursuede 1. 


e his baner 1. f of Hai the buyschementis 1. & risen 
m that thei a. hem to fle 1. © moost strongli 1. 
tAnd:. thomenz, Yenmyesrt. thei 


574 


eithir partye’ aduersaries weren slayn, 
so that no man of so myche a multitude 
23 were saaf, forsothe the kyng of Hay thei 
token lyuynge, and offerden to Josue. 
24 Thanne alle slayn that Yrael to deseert 
goynge pursuweden, and in the same 
place bi swerd fallynge, the sones of 
Yrael turneden a3en smyten to! the cytee. 
25 Forsothe there weren that in the same 
dai dieden, fro man vnto womman, twelue 
thowsand of men, of al the cyte of Hay. 
26 Forsothe Josue withdrewe not the hoond, 
that in hiz3th he putte vp holdynge the 
sheeld, to the tyme that alle the dwellers 
27 of Hay weren slayn. Forsothe the beestis 
and the praye of the cytee the sones of 
Yrael dyuydeden to hem silf, as the Lord 
28hadde comaundid to Josue; the which 
brente the cytee, and made it an euer- 
29lastynge toumbe. Forsothe the kyng of 
it he hongid* in a gybet, vnto euen and 
the sunne goynge doun. And Josue co- 
maundide, and thei putten doun the ca- 
reyn of hym fro the cros; and thei threwen 
in that entre of the cytee, throwen togidre 
vpon hym a greet heep of stonus, the 
which abidith stil vnto the day that is 
sonowe. Thanne Josue bilde vp an auter 
to the Lord God of Yrael in the hil of 
31 Hebal, as Moyses, the seruaunt of the 
Lord, hadde comaundid to the sones of 
Irael, and it was wryten in the volym 
of the lawe of Moyses, an auter of stonus 
vnhewid!, the whiche yren hath not 
towchid. And he offerde vpon it brent 
sacrifice to the Lord, and he offrede pe- 
32 Sible slayn sacrifices ; and wroot vpon the 
stonus short declaracioun of the lawe of 
Moyses, that he tolde before the sones of 
33 Yrael. Forsothe al the puple, and the 
more thur3 birth, and duykis, and ingis 
stoden on either paart of the arke, in the 


h paarte Ez. 


z her aduersaries 1. 
f hadden falle 1. 
aller 2 Om. 1. 
Uthat ir. YVvnto1. 
Cuponi. the which 1. ¢ abijdith there 1. 
kthatr. lhath touchid 1 ™ Josue 1 
tT declaratioun 1. 
jugis s. W upon 1. 


& destrieden 1. 


°Qm.is. P For1. 


x euery A. eithir c. 


JOSHUA. 


iOm. ce. kheeng c. 
®bihynde and bifore 1. > thei bron3ten 1. 
h citee of Hai 1. 
q his 1. 
Wto the 1. * putten 1. ¥threwen if out1. Zther. @thilke 1. » thei gaderiden1. 
f ynto 1. 
. therupon 1. 
$ that Moises hadde dyuersely told 1. 


VIII. 23—-33.- 


whanne aduersaries* weren slayn ‘on ever 
ethir part*, so that no man of so greet 
multitude was sauyd, thei tokun also the23 
kyng of Hay lyuynge, and brou3ten? to* 
Josue. 'Therfor, whanne alle men® weren 24 
slayn, that pursueden Israel goynge® to 
deseert, and felden’ bi swerd in the same 
place, the sones of Israel turneden ajen, 
and smytiden® the citee". Forsothe! thei 25 
that ‘felden doun* in the same dai, fro man 
‘til to! womman, weren™ twelue thousynde 
of men, alle" men® of the citee of Hay. 
Sotheli? Josue withdrow not the% hond, 26 
which he hadde dressid an hi3 holdynge 
‘the scheld, til’ alle the dwelleris of Hay 
weren slayn. Forsothe* the sones of Israel 27 
departiden to hem silf the werk beestis, 
and the preye of the citee, as the Lord 
comaundide to Josue; whicht brente the" 2g 
citee, and made it an euerlastynge biriel. 
And he hangide the king therof in a iebat, 29 
‘til to the’ euentid and the” goynge doun 
of the sunne. And Josue comaundide, and 
thei puttiden* doun his deed bodi fro the 
cros; and thei ‘castiden forth Aimy in thilke? 
entryng of the* citee, and gaderiden” on® 
hym a greet heep of stoonus, which’ heep 
dwellith® ‘til in tof present’ dai. Thanne 30 
Josue bildide an auter to the Lord God of 
Israel in the hil of Hebal, as Moises, thes) 
‘seruaunt of the Lord, comaundide to the 
sones of Israel, and it is writun in the 
book of Moises lawe, an auter of stoonys 
vnpolischidi, whiche* yrun touchide! not. 
And he™ offride theron" brent sacri- 
fice®° to the Lord, and he offride? pesible 
sacrifices; and he wroot on’ the stoonys 32 


the Deutronomye't of Moises lawe,‘which  +Deutronomye, 


he hadde declarid® bifor the sones of Is- 
rael. Sothelit al the puple, and the gret- 
tere men in birthe, and the" duykis, and 
iugisY stoden on” ‘euer either*® side of the 


1 ynhewen c. 


Chimto1K. (the mens. ¢fleynge 1. 
i Andi. werensleyn1. Junto1. ™ weren 
rup his baner tilthat 1. ‘andr.  tand Josue 1. 


&this1. 4 Lordis seruaunt 1. i vnpulshed t. 
° sacrifices K.P offride also 1. 4 upon 1. 
t And 1. Forsothe plures. %Om.1.  ¥ the 


33 Lire here. C. 


VIII. 34——1X. 6. 


sy3t of prestis and Leuytis™, that beren 
the arke of the boond of pees of the 
Lord; as the comlynge, so and the withyn 
goten; the half paart of hem biside the 
hil of Garysym, and half biside the hil 
of Hebal, as Moyses comaundide, the ser- 
uaunt of the Lord. And first forsothe he 

34 blessede to the puple of Yrael. After 
thes thingis he radde alle the wordis of 
blessynge, and cursynge, and alle that 
weren wryten in the volyin of the lawe. 

35 No thing of thes thingis, that Moyses co- 
maundide, he left vntowchyd; but alle 
thingis he openyde before al the multi- 
tude of Yrael, the wymmen, and litil chil- 
dren, and comlyngis, that among hem 
dwelliden. 


CAPS IX. 


i The whiche thingis herd, alle the kyngis 
biz3ond Jordan, that dwelten in mountens, 
and in the" wilde feeldis, and in the see 
sydes, and in the brenke of the greet see, 
and thes that dwelten biside Liban, Ethe, 
and Amorre, Chanane, and Phareze, and 

2Euee, and Jebuse, ben gedryd togidre 
for® to fiz3t ajens Josue and Irael, ‘with 
oon inwit?, and with ‘the same‘ accord. 

3 And thei that dwelten in Gabaon, herynge 
alle thingis that Josue hadde doo to Je- 

4rycho and to Hay, and fellich thenkynge, 
token to hem meetis, olde sackis to the 
assis on puttynge, and rent wyn botels 

sand sowed, and ful olde shoon, ‘the 
whiche™ to the doom of oldnes ben sowid 
with patchis; thei clothiden* with oold 
clothes; forsothe the looues, that thei 
beeren for lyuelood ‘bi the weye', weren 
shard and in gobetis broken. And thei 
wenten to Josue, that thanne dwellide in 
the tentis of Galgale, and seiden to hym, 
and to al Yrael togidre, Fro a long loond 
we han comen, pees coueytynge to make 


m deeknys £ prom. "Om. peeFH. 9° Om. c. 


t Om. £ prem. 


y of dekenes 1. 2 the boond 1. 


JOSHUA. 


P oo jeer E prem. 


8 of Garisym kK. 


575 


arke, in the si3t of preestis and dekenes’, 
that baren the arke of boond* of pees of 
the Lord; as a comeling, so and a man 
borun in the lond; the mydil part of hem 
stood bisidis the hil Garasym*, and the 
myddil part” stood bisidis the hil Hebal¢, 
as Moises, the ‘seruaunt of the Lord4, co- 
maundide. And first® ‘sotheli hef blesside 
the puple of Israel. Aftir® these thingis 34 
he redde alle the wordis of blessyng and 
of cursyng, and alle thingis that weren 
writun in the book of lawe. He? leftess 
no thing vntouchid of these thingis that 
Moises comaundide; but he declaride alle 
thingis bifor al the multitude of Israel, 
to wymmen, and litle! children, and to 
comelyngis that dwelliden among hem. 


CAP. IX. 


And whanne these thingis weren herd, 1 
alle the kyngis bizende Jordan, that lyued- 
enk in the! hilly places, and in ‘the feeldi™ 
places, in the" coostis of the see, and in 
the brynke of the greet see, and thei that 
dwellen® bisidis Liban, Ethei, and Ammor- 
rei, Cananei, and Feresey, Euey, and Je- 
busey, weren gaderid togidere to fi3te ajens 2 
Josue and Israel, with o wille, and the? 
same sentence?. And thei that dwelten’s 
in Gabaon, herden alle thingis* whichet 
Josue hadde do to Jerico, and to Hay; 
and thei thou3ten felli, and token" to hem4 
silf’ metis, and puttyden™ elde sackis on 
assis, and wyn botels brokun and sewid*, 
and ful elde schoon, whicheY weren sewid 5 
togidere with patchis’, to ‘the schewyng of 
eldenesse?; and thei® weren clothid with 
elde® clothis; also looues’, whiche thei 
baren for lijflode in the weie, weren harde 
and brokun in to® gobetis. And thei jeden 6 
to Josue, that dwellide thanne in tentis 
in Galgala; and thei seiden to hym, and 
to al Israel togidere, We comenf fro a fer 


doerpr.vice. ™thatc. clad c. 


bpart ofhem1. © of Hebal c prom. K. 4 Lordis 


seruaunt 1. ¢ Josue first 1. fOm.1. g And aftir parkmNosqx. » Josuer. ito litle ro.  dwelten 1. 
1Om.1. ™playnr. oOm.1. °dwelten3. pwithther. Gacoord:. 'dwellen azritnr. § the 
thingis 1. tthat1. "thei token 1. VYOm.1. W thei puttiden 1. “peg 1. Ythe whiche 1. 2 oolde 
patchis kK. ® schewe her oldenesse 1. » these meni. ¢fulolder. ‘the looues1. ¢Om.c. fcament. 


576 


with 3ow. And the men of Irael an- 
7swerden ‘to hem", and seiden, Lest pera- 
uenture in the loond, that to vs is owed’ 
bi lot, 3e dwellen, and we mowen not 
smake boond of pees with 30ow. And thei 
to Josue, Thi seruauntis, thei seyn, we 
ben. To whom Josue forsothe, Who”, 
he seith, ben 3e, and whens ben 3e 
ycomen ? Thei answerden, Fro a ful ferre 
cuntre thi* seruauntis ben comen in the 
name of the Lord thi God, we han herd 
the loos of his power, alle thingis that 
1ohe hath doo in Egipt, and to the two 
kyngis of Ammorreis biz3onde Jordan; to 
Seon the kyng of Esebon, and to Og the 
kyng of Basan, that weren in Astaroth. 
11 And seiden to vs the elders and alle the 
dwellers of oure loond, Takith in 3oure 
hoondis meetis for the moost long weye ; 
and a3en come 3e” to hem, and seie 3e, 
3oure seruauntis we ben; boond of pees 
12make 3e with vs. And loo#! the looues, 
whanne we wenten out of oure howsis for® 
to come to 3ow, we token hoote**, nowe 
thei ben maad drye, and of greet eeld to 
13 breek ; the botels of wyn newe we ful- 
filliden, nowe thei ben brooke and loosid ; 
clothis and shoon, with the whiche we 
ben clothid®, and ‘the whiche® we han in 
feet, for the length of lenger weye ben to 
14troden, and almeest? wered. Thei token 
thanne of the meetis of hem, and the 
15 mouth of the Lord thei askeden not. And 
Josue with hem made pees. And the boond 
‘of pees® goon yn he bihi3te, that theif 
shulden not be slayn ; forsothe the princes 
160f the multitude sworen to hem. For- 
sothe after three daies of the goon yn 
couenaunt, thei herden, that in ny3 thei 
dwelten, and thei weren to comen? among 
i7hem. And the sones of Yrael meueden 
tentis, and camen into the citees* of hem 
the thridde day, of the whiche thes ben 

u Om. c. 


vaztc. W What £ pr. vice. 


JOSHUA. 


x we thi £ prim. 


IX. 7—-17. 


lond, and coueyten® to make pees with 
jou. And the men of Israel answeriden 
to hem, and seiden", Lest perauenture 3e7 
dwellen in the lond, whichi is due to vs bi 
eritage, and we moun not make bond of 
pees with 3ou. And thei seiden to Josue,s 
We ben thi seruauntis. To whiche* Josue 
seide, What men ben 3e, and fro whennus 
camen 3e¢? hei answeriden, Thi ser-9 
uauntis camen fro a ful fer lond in the 
name of thi Lord God, for we herden! the 
fame of his power, alle™ thingis whiche 
he dide in Egipt, and to twei"-kyngis of 10 
Ammorreis biz3endis Jordan; to Seon king® 
of Esebon, and to Og kyng? of Basan, that 
weren in Astroth. And the eldere meni 
and alle the dwelleris of oure lond seiden 
to vs, Take 3e metis in 3oure hondis, for 
lengeste1 weie; and go 3e to hem, and 
seie 3e, We ben 3oure seruauntis; make 3e 
boond of pees with vs. And we token 12 
hoote looues, whanne we 3eden out of oure 
housis to come to 3ou ; now tho" ben maad 
drye and brokun, for greet eldenesse*; we 13 
filliden newe botels of wyn; now thot ben 
brokun and vndoon"; the clothis and 
schoon, with whiche we ben clothid, and 
whiche we han ‘in the’ feet, ben brokun” 
and almost* wastid, fro the lengthe of 
lengereY weie. Therfor? ‘the sones of Is-14 
rael* token of the> metis of hem‘, and thei 
axiden not ‘the mouth? of the Lord. Andis 
Josue made pees with hem. And whanne 
the boond of pees was maad, he® bihi3te, 
that thei schulden not be slayn; and the 
princes of the multitude sworen to hem. 
Forsothef aftir thre daies of the boond of 16 
pees maad, thei® herden, that thei" dwell- 
iden in ny3 place, and that thei schulden 
bei among hem*. And the sones of Israel 17 
mouyden tentis', and camen™ in the thridde 
dai in to the citees of hem", of whiche 
citees these ben the names; Gabaon, and 
a Om. c. 


yOm.cpr.m, 2Om. £ pr.m. 


aahoole 4. becladc. ¢thatc. 4 folly eprom. ¢Om. xs. fhe £ pr.vice. & comynge £ pr.m. 4 citee 4. 


& we coueyten 1, 4 seiden fokemec. ithatr. kK whom: Jhanherd1. ™Mandallers. "the twor 
the king 1. Pthe kyng1. 4the fullong1. 'thei1. Seelder. tthei1, Utvnsewid 1. Yon oure1. 
Wto broke 1, *welny31. Ylongr. 7 Thanner, ®theit, %Om.cr. ¢these mens. 4 counseil 1. 
eJosuer. fAndi. &the menofIsrael1. 4! thomenz. ibesoonr. kthomenr. ! her tentis 1. 


m thei camen 1, 3 tho men t. 


IX. 18—27. 


the names, Gabaon, and Saphyra, and 
18 Beroth, and Charyathiarym. And thei 
smyten not hem, forthi that the princis 
of the multitude hadden sworn to hem in 
the name of the Lord God of Yrael. And 
so grutchide al the comoun ajens the 
lo princis; the whiche answerden to hem, 
We han sworn to hem in name of the 
Lord God of Yrael, and therfor we mowen 
20not hem towche; but this we shulen doo 
to hem, be thei reserued forsothe that 
thei lyuen, lest agens vs the wraththe of 
the Lord be styrid, if we forsweren vs to 
2them; but so lyue thei, that in to the 
yses of al the multitude, trees thei kutten, 
and watris thei beren. The whiche spek- 
22ynge thes thingis, Josue clepide Ga- 
bonytis, and seide to hem, Whi wolden 3e 
disseyue vs bi gijl, for! to seie, Ful ferre 
we dwellen fro 30w, sith in the mydilj of 
23vs 3e ben? And so vnder cursynge 3e 
shulen be, and there shal not fayl of 3our 
lynage, kyttynge trees, and watris ber- 
24 ynge, in to the hows of my God. The 
whiche answerden, It is told to vs thi 
seruauntis, that the Lord thi God hadde 
bihoot to Moyses, his seruaunt, that he 
shulde taak to 30w al the loond, and 
scatre alle the dwellers of it; we therfor 
moyche dredden, and purueiden to oure 
lyues, constreyned with joure dreed*, and 
25 this counseil we maden. Forsothe nowe 
in thin hoond we ben; that to thee ry3t 
26and good is seen, do thow to vs. Than 
Josue dide, as he seide, and delyuerde 
hem fro the ‘hoondis of the! sones of 
27 Irael, that thei weren not slayn. Aud 
Josue demyde in that day hem to be into 
seruyse of al the puple, and of the auter 
of the Lord, kuttynge trees and watres 
berynge, vnto the tyme that is nowe, in 
the place that the Lord hath™ chosun. 


i Om. c pr.m. Jj myldil a. 


°©Om.1. P Israel 1. 4 destriede 1. 


W forsweren us DGIKMNOQSX. 


JOSHUA. 


k ferde BEFU. 


rt puple EFGMNOPUX. 
x the men of Gabaon. 


577 


-Caphira, and°® Beroth, and Cariathiarym. 


And thei? smytiden? not hem, for theis 
princis of the multitude hadden swore to 
hem in the name of the Lord God of Is- 
rael. Therfor al the comyn puple grutch- 
ide ajens the princis® of Israel; whiche*i9 
answeriden to hem, We sworen to hem in 
the name of the Lord God of Israel, and 
therfor we moun not touche hem; but we 20 
schulen do this thing to hem, sothelit be 
thei reserued" that thei lyue, lest the ire 
of the Lord be stirid ajens vs, if we for- 
sweren” to hem; but so lyue thei, that 21 
thei hewe trees, and bere watris, in to the 
vsis of al the multitude. And while thei 
spaken these thingis, Josue clepide Ga-22 
bonytis*, and seide to hem, Whi wolden 
3e disseyne vs bi fraude, ‘that 3e seiden’, 
We dwellen ful fer fro 30u, sithen 3e ben” 
in the myddis of vs? Therfor 3e schulen23 
be ‘vndur cursyng*, and noon schal faile 
of 3oure generacioun”, hewynge trees and 
berynge watris, in to the hows of my God. 
Whiche® answeryden, It was told to vs thi24 
seruauntis, that thi Lord God bihi3te to 
Moises, his seruaunt, that he schulde bi- 
take to 30u al the lond, and schulde® leese 
alle the dwelleris therof; therfor we dred- 
den greetli, and purueiden to oure lyues, 
and weren® compellid bi 3oure drede, and 
we token this counsel. ‘Now forsothef wees 
ben in ‘thin hond®; do thou to vs that, 
that semeth ri3tful and good to thee. 
Therfor' Josue dide, as he seide', and de-26 
lyuerede* hem fro the hondis of the sones 
of Israel, that thei schulden not be slayn. 
And in that dai Josue demyde hem to be27 
in to the! seruyce of al the puple™, and of 
the auter of the Lord, and to hewe trees, 
and to bere watris, ‘til in to present tyme”, 
in the® place which the Lord hadde? chose. 


1Om. 4. ™ hadde ce. 


Sand the princist. tOm.1. kept 1. 
y for to sey 1. 2 ben dwellinge 1. ® in thraldom 1. 


blynage 1. ¢The whicher. ‘that he schulde 1. we weren i. ‘And nowr. gthi power x,  Thanne 1. 


i bihizste hem 1. 1Om. s. 


k he delyuerede 1. 
© that 1. 


P hath 1. 


m puple of Israel 1. 


n yn to the tyme that is now 1. 


4E 


578 JOSHUA. xiao 


CAPs xX. 


1 The whiche thingis, whanne hadde herd 
Adonysedech, kyng of Jerusalem, that is, 
that Josue hadde taak Hay, and hadde 
vndurturned it; forsothe as he dide to 
Jericho and to the kyng of it, so he dide 
to Hay and to the kyng of it; and that 
Gabonytis weren ouerflowen® to Irael, 

2and weren hounden in pees with hem, he 
dradde greetly ; forsothe a greet cite was 
Gabaon, and oon of the kyngis citees, 
and more than the burgh toun Hay, and 
alle the® fi3ters of it moost stronge. 

3 Thanne sente Adonysedech, kyng of Je- 
rusalem, to Ocham, kyng of Ebron, and 
to Pharam, kyng of Herymoth, and to 
Japhye, kyng of Lachis, and to Addabir, 

iking of Eglon, seiynge, Stye 3e vp to me, 
and bryngeth help, and out fiz3te we Ga- 
baon, for he is ouerflowen to Josue, and 

sto the sones of Yrael. Thanne thei gedrid 
styeden vp, fyue kyngys of Amorreis, 
kyng of Jerusalem, kyng of Ebron, kyng 
of Herymoth, kyng of Lachis, kyng of 
Eglon, togidre with her hoostis; and 
thei settiden? tentis about Gabaon a3en- 
6fi3tynge it. Forsothe the dwellers of the 
citee of Gabaon bisegid, senten to Josue, 
that thanne dwellide in tentis at Galga- 
lam, and seide to hym, Ne with drawe 
thou thin hoond® fro the help of thi ser- 
uauntis; sty vp anoon, and delyuer vs, 
and bryng help; forsothe there ben comen 
to gidre ajens vs alle the kyngis of Am- 
7morreis, that dwellen in mounteyns™. And 
Josue stiede vp fro Galgalis, and al the 
oost of fizters with hym, moost stronge 
8men. And the Lord seide to Josue, 
Drede: thow not hem, forsothe into thin 
hoondis Y haue taken hem; noon of hem 
9to thee shal mowe ajenstoond. And so 


4. ouerflowynge bru. °Om.c.  P sette c. 
8 Keep £ pr.m. 


CAP. X. 


And whanne Adonysedech, kyng of Je-1 
rusalem, hadde herde these thingis, that is, 
that Josue hadde take Hai, and hadde de- 
stried it; for as Josue hadde do to Jerico 
and to the kyng therof, so he dide to Hay, 
and to the kyng therof; and that Gabaon- 
ytis4 hadden fled to Israel, and weren 
boundun in pees with hem, Adonysedech 2 
dredde greetli; for Gabaon was a greet 
citee, and oon of the kyngis citees, and 
grettere’ than the citee of Hai, and alle the 
fizteris therof weren most’ stronge'. Ther-3 
for Adonysedech, kyng of Jerusalem, sente 
to Ocham, kyng of Ebron, and to Pharam, 
kyng of Herymoth, and to Japhie, kyng of 
Lachis, and to Dabir, kyng of Eglon, and 
seide, Stie 3e to me, and helpe 3e", that we4 
fi3te azens Gabaon, for it was’ 3oldun to 
Josue, and to the sones of Israel. Ther-s 
for” fyue kyngis of Ammorreis, the kyng 
of Jerusalem, the kyng of Ebron, the kyng 
of Herymoth, the kyng of Lachis, the* 
kyng of Eglon, weren gaderid’, and sti- 
eden? togidere with her oostis; and set- 
tiden* tentis a3ens Gabaon, and fou3ten® 
ajens it. Sotheli® the dwelleris of the4s 
citee of Gabaon, ‘that weren® bisegid’, 
sentens to Josue, that dwellide than in 
tentis at Galgala, and seide® to hym, With- 
drawe not thin hondis fro the help of thi 
seruauntis ; ‘stie thou’ soone, and delyuere 
vs, and helpe thou*; for alle the kyngis of 
Amorreis, that dwelliden in the hilli places, 
camen togidere a3ens vs. And Josue sti-7 
ede! fro Galgala, and al the oost of fiz3ters™, 
‘the strengeste™ men, ‘with hym®. Ands 
the Lord seide to Josue, Drede thou not 
hem, for Y 3af? hem im to thin hondis; 
noon? of hem schal mow a3enstonde thee. 
Therfor' Josue felde sodenli on* hem, and» 


a hoondes nceFru. the mounteyns zB sec.m. CEFH, 


4 men of Gabaon x. it was morer. §fulr. tstronge meni. Umer. Visi. W Thanner. * and 


the 1. Ygaderid togidre1. 7% thei stieden I. 


sor upon rt, 


athei settiden 1. © thei fou3ten1. ¢ And whanne 1. 
4Qm.u. ¢€ Om. plures. fOm. rs. § thei senten 1. 
upt. ™ figters with him r. 5 moost stronge 1. 


htheiseideni. istieup1. *Om.s. 1! stiede 


©Om.1. Phaue3ouen3. 4dandnoonr. Tf And 


—~T 


X. 10——19. 


Josue felle on hem feerlich, al ny3t stiynge 
1ovp fro Galgalis; and the Lord distour- 
bide hem fro the face of Yrael, and de- 
fowlide bi a greet veniaunce in Gabaon; 
and pursuede hem bi weye of the stiynge 
vp of Betheron, and smoot vnto Azecha 
11and Maceda**. And whanne thei flowen 
the sones of Yrael, and weren in the go- 
ynge doun of Bethoron, God sente vpon 
hem greet stonus fro heuene,ynto Azecha ; 
and ben deed manye mo with stoonus of 
hawl, thant whom with swerd had smytun 
12the sones of Yrael. Thanne Josue spak 
to the Lord, in the day that he took 
Ammorre in the si3t of the sones of 
Yrael; and seide before hem, Sunne, a3ens 
Gabaon be thow not meued, and mone, 
13a3ens the valey of Haylon. And the 
sunne and the mone stoden, to the tyme 
that the folk vengide hem self of her ene- 
myes. Is not this wryten in the book of 
rijtwise men? And so stood the sunne in 
the mydil of heuene, and hyede not to 
14goo doun the space of o day; there was 
not before ne" afterward so loong a day; 
obeishynge the Lord to the voyce of man, 
isand fi3tynge for Yrael. And Josue turn- 
ede ajen, with al Yrael, into the tentis of 
16Galgala. Forsothe fyue kyngis flowen, 
and hidden-hem in the spelunk of the 
17 citee of Maceda. And it is told to Josue, 
that there weren foundun fyue kyngis 
lurkinge in the spelunk of the cite of 
18 Maceda. The which comaundide to fe- 
lawis, and seith, Ouerturne 3e greet 
stoonus at the mouth of the spelonk, and 
putte 3e redi men, that kepen hem closid; 
193e forsothe wole 3e not stoond, but pur- 
sue je enemyes, and al the eendis of hem 
fleynge sleeth; ne lette 3e hem goon into 
the socours of 3oure citees, ‘the whiche’ 
the Lord 3oure God hath taak into 3oure 


JOSHUA. 


579 


stiede’ in" al the’ ny3t fro Galgala; and™ 10 
the Lord ‘disturblide hem* fro the face of 
Israel’, and al to-brak? with greet veni- 
aunce in* Gabaon. And Josue pursuede 
hem bi the weie of the stiyng of Bethe- 
ron, and smoot® ‘til tod Azecha and Ma- 
ceda. And whanne thei fledden the sones 11 
of Israel, and weren in the goyng doun of 
Betheron, the* Lord sente grete stoonus 
onf hem fro heuene, tilf to Azecha; and 
many mo weren deed bi the ‘stoonys of 
hail", than thei whiche the sones of Israel 
‘smytiden bi' swerd. Thanne Josue spak 12 
to the Lord, in the dai in which he bitook 
Amorrey* in the si3t of the sones of Is- 
rael; and Josue seide bifore hem!, Sunne, 
be thon not mouyd ajens Gabaon, and 
the moone a3ens™ the valei of Hailon. 
And the sunne and the moone stoden, til" 13 
the® fole of God vengide? it’ silf of hise® 
enemyes. Whether this is not writun in 
the book of iust men? And so the sunne 
stood in the myddis of heuene, and hast- 
ide* not to go doun in the space of of dai; 
so long a dai was not bifore and aftir-14 
ward ; for the Lord obeiede to the vois of 
man", and fau3t’ for Israel. And Josue ts 
turnede aj3en{, with al Israel, in to the 
tentis of Galgala. Forsothe” fyue* kyngis 16 

fledden, and hidden hem silf in the denne in& Pr 
of the citee of Maceda. And it was teld 1770 icone 
to Josue, that fyne kyngis weren foundun eee fe 
hid in the denne of the citee of Maceda. ben tretid in 
WhichY Josue comaundide to felowis, and 18° “4” 
seide, Walewe 3e grete stoonus to the 

‘mouth of the denne’, and putte* 3e witti 

men, that schulen kepe the closid kyngis ; 

sotheli> nyle 3e stonde’, but pursue 3e the 19 

enemyes, and slee 3e alle the laste’ of 

fleeris®; and suffre 3e not heim entref in to 

the strengthis of her citees, whiche® ene- 

myes 30ure Lord God bitook" in to! 30ure 


t Josue turn- 
ede ajen; this 
is seid bifor- 


88 Mareda a. tthat re pr.m. “and ecery.  V that c. 

twenteupr UtOm.1. Vthatr. Wandher. *made hem agastr. YmenofIsrael1. 7 brak 
hemi. @heini. >Pupoft. ¢hesmoothemt. ‘4yvntohecamtor ¢andthe a. fuponr § til 
thei camen. 4 hail stoonys 1. !killiden with 1. & the men of Amorrey 1. ! the peple 1. ™ be it not 
moued ajensz7. "vntothetvmer. Otothen. Phadvengidt. hems. Therr. § it hastide.. 
tacerkex. “amani. Vhe fauj3tr. WForther. *thefyner. Yandi. 2dennys mouth r. 4 or- 
deyner. bandi, ¢Cabide1. 4lastemeni. ©¢the fleerist. ftoentre1, & the whicher. » hath 
bitake 1. 1} Om. 1. 


(9) 


ow 


45 


580 


20hoondis. Slayn thanne the aduersaries 
with a greet veniaunce, and vnto the 
deeth almest* consumpt, thilk* that fro” 
Irael my3ten flee, wenten into the? 
2istrengthid® citees. And al the oost 
turnede ajen to Josue, in Maceda, where 
thanne weren the tentis, thei hoole and 
in hoole noumbre; and no man ajens the 
sones of Yrael was hardy to grucche. 


JOSHUA. 


X. 20——28. 


hondis. Therfor* whanne the aduersaries 20 
weren betun with greet veniaunce, and 
weren almost wastid ‘til to! deeth, thei 
that my3ten fle Israel, entriden in to the! 
strengthid citees. And al the oost™ turn-21 
ede ajen hoole, and in hoole noumbre to 
Josue, in to Maceda, where the tentis" 
weren thanne; and no man was hardi to 
grutche, ‘ether to make priuy notse°, azens 


22And Josue comaundyde, seiynge, Opyn? 
the mouth of the spelonk, and bryngith 
to me fyue kyngis that in it lorken. 
23 And the seruauntis diden, as to hem was 


the sones of Israelf. And Josue comaund-22 + grucche 
ide?, and seide, Opene 3e the ‘mouth of the Gf fsrach 
denne‘, and brynge' forth to me the fyue aftirwend thet 
kyngis that ben hid therynne. And the 23 ¢iden. Lire 
ere. Co 


comaundid; and thei brou3ten to hym 
fyue kyngis fro the spelonk; the kyng of 
Jerusalem, the kyng of Ebron, the kyng 
of Hermoth, the kyng of Lachis, the kyng 
24o0f Egion. And whanne thei weren brou3t 
out to hym, he clepide® alle the men of 
Yrael, and seith to the pryncis of the 
oost, that with? hym weren, Goth, and 
puttith 3oure feet vpon the neckis of thes 
kyngis. The which whanne thei hadden 
goon, and troden the neckis of hem suget 
25 with the feet, eft he seith to hem, Wole 
3e not drede, ne be 3e afeerd, take 3e 
coumfort, and be 3e stronge; forsothe so 
the Lord shal doo to alle 3oure enemyes, 
2¢a3ens whom 3e shulen fi3t. And Josue 
smoot, and slew3 hem, and hongide® ypon 
fyue stokkis; and thei weren hongid vnto 
27the euen. And whanne the sunne cam 
down, he comaundide to felows, that thei 
doon hem doun fro the gibetis; the whiche 
doon doun, theif threwen hem into the 
spelonk, in the which thei lorkiden ; and 
thei puttidenS ypon the mouth of it greet 
stoonus, that abiden stil to™ the tyme 
agthat is nowe. Forsothe the same day 
Josue took Maceda, and smoot in mouth 
of swerd; and the kyng of it, and alle 


W folly E pr.m. x thoo c. Y Om. brn. 


© cleepe per. 4 Om. a4. © heng c. 


2 Om. BCEFH. 
f Om. BCE sec. m. FH. 


mynystris® diden, as it was comaundid to 
hem; and thei brou3ten forth to Josue 
fyuet kyngis fro the denne; the kyng of 
Jerusalem, the" kyng of Ebron, the kyng 
of Herymoth, the kyng of Lachis, the’ 
kyng of Eglon. And whanne thei weren 24 
led out to Josue, he clepide alle the men 
of Israel, and seide* to the* princes of the 
oost, that weren with hym, Go 3e, and 
sette 3oure feet onY the neckis of these 
kyngis. And whanne thei hadden go, and 
trediden’” the® neckis of ‘the kyngis” suget® 
‘to her feet, eft Josue seide to hem®, Nyle 25 
3e drede, nethir ‘drede 3e with ynne‘, be 
3e coumfortid, and be 3e stronge; for® the 
Lord schal do so" to alle 3oure enemyes, 
a3ens whiche je schulen fijte. And Josue 26 
smooti, and killide hem, and hangide* on! 
fyue trees; and thei weren hangid ‘til to™ 
euentid™". And whanne the sunne 3ede27 
doun, he comaundide to® felowis, that thei 
schulden put hem doun fro the iebatis; 
and whanne thei weren put doun, thei 
‘castiden forth? hem4 in to the denne, in 
which thei weren hid; and thei puttiden 
grete stoonus on‘ the mouth therof, whiche* 
stoonus dwellent ‘til to" present’ tyme. 
In’ the same dai Josue took also* Maceda, 28 
» Opyn 3e Ez. 


a smale E pr.m. 
€ putte cE pr.m. » vnto FE. 


k Thanne 1. !vntothe 1. 20m,asec.m. ™ oost of Israel 1. = tentis of Israel1. ©Om,1mx. P comaunde 1. 


4 dennys mouth 1. ' bryngith 1. § seruauntis 1. 


wand ther, Vandther. Ww he seide 1, 


t the fyue 1. 
xOm.1.  Y upony. 
mader. 4QOm.1. 
hangide G1kmNosx. 
4 hem out 1. 
Ww Also ini. 


Ztroden Fr, traden ELP. tredeng. with her feetthe 1. hemi. © suget 
eIsrael1. {begjeaferdr. & forsor1. bOm.1. ‘smoot tho kingis1, he 
lhem on x. hemupont. ™vyntor, 2 the eventid 1x. °Om.1.  P threwent. 

ruponi. §the whiche 1. + abijden there stille 1. 4 into plures, ynto1. —_-Y this 1. 
x Om. 1. 


X. 29—40. 


his dwellers he slew3; and he lefte not in 
it, nameli, litil relikis; and he dide to the 
king of Maceda as he dide to the kyng 
290f Jericho. He wente with al Yrael fro 
Maceda into Lebna, and he fau3t a3ens 
30it, the which the Lord took, with his 
kyng, in the hoond of Irael; and thei 
smyten the cite in the mouth of swerd, 
and alle the dwellers of it, and thei leften 
not in it eny relikis; and thei diden to 
the kyng of Lebna as thei diden to the 
3ikyng of Jericho. Fro Lebna he passide 
into Lachis, with al Yrael; and the oost 
32 disposid bi enuyroun, a3enfau3t it. And 
the Lord took Lachis in the hoond of the 
sones of Yrael; and he took it that other 
day, and smoot in mouth of swerd, and 
eche lijf that was in it, as he dide to 
33Lebna. That tyme stiede vp Yram, the 
kyng of Gazer, for! to helpe Lachis ; 
whom Josue smoot with al his puple vnto 
34 the deth. And wente fro Lachis vnto Eg- 
35lon, and enuyrounde, and out fau3t it the 
same day; and smoot in mouth of swerd 
alle the lyues that weren in it, after alle 
36thingis that he dide to Lachis. Forsothe 
he stiede with al Yrael fro Eglon vnto 
37 Ebron, and fau3t a3ens it, and took, and 
smoot in mouth of swerd*; the kyng for- 
sothe of it, and alle the burgh touns of 
that regioun, and alle the lyues that 
dwelliden in it; he lafte not in it eny 


relikis; as he dide to Eglon so he dide — 


to! Ebron, al thingis that in it he foond 
38 wastynge with swerd. Thens turned ajen 
ssinto Dabyr, he took it, and waastid; the 
kyng forsothe of it, and alle the bur3 
towns bi enuyroun he smoot in mouth 
of swerd; he lafte not in it eny relikis ; 
as he dide to Ebron, and Lebna, and to 
the kyngis of hem, so he dide to Dabir 
4oand to the kyng of it. And so Josue 


JOSHUA. 


581 


and smootY bi the scharpnesse of swerd, 
and killide? the kyng therof, and alle the 
dwelleris therof*; he> lefte not therynne’, 
nameli4, litle® relikis'; and he dide to the 
kyng of Maceda as he hadde do® to the 
kyng of Jerico. Forsothe' Josue passide 29 
with al Israel fro Maceda in to Lempna, 
and fau3t! ajens it, which* the Lord bi-30 
took, with the kyng therof, in the hond of 
Israel; and thei! smytiden™ the" citee bi 
the scharpnesse of swerd, and alle the 
dwelleris therof, and leften® not ony? re- 
likist therynne’; and thei diden to the 
kyng of Lempna as thei hadden do to the 
kyng of Jerico. Fro Lempna he’ passide3i 
with al Israel in to Lachis; and whanne 
the oost was disposid‘ bi cumpas, he fau3t 
ajens it. And the Lord bitook Lachis in32 
the hond of the sones of Israel; and he® 
took it’ in the tothir’ dai, and smoot* bi 
the scharpnesse of swerd, andY ech man?, 
that was therynne, as he hadde do to 
Lempna. In that time Yram, kyng? of33 
Gazar, stiede to helpe Lachis; whom 
Josue smoot’, with al his puple, til? to 
deeth.- And he® passide fro Lachis in to34 
Eglon, and cumpasside', and ouercam it3s 
in the same dai; and he smoot bi the 
scharpnesse of swerd alle men that weren 
therynne, bi alle thingis whiche® he hadde 
do to Lachis. Also he! stiede* with al Is-3¢ 
rael fro Eglon in to Ebron, and faust! 
ajens it™, and took", and smoot® bi the37 
scharpnesse®® of swerd; and the kyng 
therof, aud alle citees? of that cuntrey, and 
alle men that dwelliden therynne; he lefte 
not ony relikis! therynne; as he hadde do 
to Eglon so he dide also to Ebron, and 
wastide bi swerd alle thingis that weren 
therynne. Fro thennus he" turnyde in tose 
Dabir, and took it’, and wastide'; and he 39 
smoot bi the" scharpnesse of swerd the kyng 


iOm.c. the swerdc. J and to ce. 
yYhesmooti. #hekillidex of iti. bJosuer Cinitr. ¢3he1 ¢smale1. f relyues plures. 
or ou3t of valu 1. @didex. b And. ihe fau3t1. k which cifee1. 1 men of Israel1. ™ smoten 1. 


nthat 1. © theileftenz. Poonlip. Om.1. 4relyues n. relifsp. Om. 1. © therynne ony thing of 
valu 1 feat; or relikist marg. % Josue1. tordeyned1. "Josue1. VY Lachis1. W secoundei. *he 
smoot it1. Yheslow31. Zlijf1. athe kyngr. buptor1 ¢Om.1. 4smotex. ¢ Josuer. feum- 
passide it1. €Om.1. bthataz. iJosuer. Kstiede up1. lhe faujtr. ™Ebroni. ™ he took 1. 
° smoot it 1. © scharnesse A. P the citees1, 4thingis of values. relijkes. 'Josuer *Om. 1, 
twastide it 1, UOm.1. 


582 


smoot al the mounteyn loond, and south, 
and feeldi, and Assedoch with his kyngis; 
and he lafte not in it eny relikys, but 
alle that my3ten breeth he slow3, as the 
Lord God of Yrael comaundide to hym ; 

ai fro Cades Barne vnto Gazam, and al the 

42loond of Josson vnto Gabaon, alle the 
kyngis and regiouns of hem, with o feers- 
nes he took, and wastide; forsothe the 

43 Lord God of Israel fau3t for him. And 
he turnede a3en with al Yrael to the place 
of the tentis in Galgala. 


CAP. XI. 


1 The whiche thingis whanne herd™ Ja- 
byn, the kyng of Asor, he sente to Jodab, 
kyng of Madiam, and to the kyng of Se- 

2meron, and to the kyng of™" Acsaph, and 
to the kyngs of the north, that dwelten 
in mounteyns, and in the pleyn a3ens the 
south of Seneroth, and in the wijld feeldis, 

3and regiouns of Dor, bisidis the see, and 
to Chanane fro the eest and west, and 
Ammiorre, and Ethee, and Phereze, and 
Jebuse in the mounteyns, and Euee, that 
dwelt in® the rotis of Hermon, in the 
4loond of Maspha. And alle wenten out 
with her companyes, ful myche puple, as 
the grauel that is in the brenk of the 
see, and hors, and chaaris, of multitude 
swith outen noumbre. And alle thes 
kyngis camen to gydre in oon at the 
watris of Meron, for® to fi3t a3ens Yrael. 
6And the Lord seide to Josue, Ne drede 
thow hem, to morwe forsothe this same 
our Y schal taak hem alle to be woundid 
in the si3t of Yrael ; the hors of hem thow 
shalt kut of the synewis at the knees, 


m hadde herd £. 


x and he 1. 
¢ Om. 1. 
Eyntor hher. 


Vv the townes ct. W aboute it 1. 
destriede 1. » mounteyn lond 1. 
or relikis, marg. * Om, 1, 


JOSHUA. 


mm Om, 4. 


4 the playn lond 1. 
i her 1. 


X. 41-—XI. 6. 


therof, and alle tounnes’ ‘bi cumpas”; he* 

lefte not ony relikisY therynne; as he 

hadde do to Ebron, and to Lempna, and 

to ‘the kyngis of tho’, so he dide to Dabir, 

and to the kyng therof. And so Josue4o 

smoot? al the ‘lond of the hillis*, and of¢ 

the south, and ‘of the feeld‘, and Asedoch 

with her kyngis; he lefte not therynne 

ony relikis®, but he killide al thing that 

my3te brethet, as the Lord God of Israel iss a at ; 
comaundide tof hym; fro Cades Barne ‘til 41 drethe; this is 
to’ Gazan, and al the lond of Jesson, ‘til ae 
to Gabaon Josue" took, and wastide with 42 peryane for 
o fersnessef alle the! kyngis, and ‘cuntreis Nowe 
of hem*; for the Lord God of Israel fau3t of fisteris. Lire 
for hym. And he! turnede azen with al4sz with o fers. 
Israel to the place of tentis in Galgala. eee 
Josue fau3te in 


myche tyme, as 
in xi. c°. Lire 


CAPA XL 
And whanne Jabyn, kyng™ of Asor,1 ‘a 
hadde herd these thingis, he sente to Jo- 
bab, kyng™ of Madian, and to the kyng 
of Semeron, and to the kyng of Acsaph ; 
forsothe® to the kyngis of the north, that2 
dwelliden in the hilli® places”, and in the 
pleyn a3ens the south of Seneroth, and in 
the feeldi places, and cuntreis? of Dor, bi- 
sidis the see, and4 ‘to Cananei’ fro the eest3 
and’ west*, and to Ammorrey, and Ethei®, 
and Feresei*, and’ Jebusei®, in the ‘hilli 
places*, and to Euey, that dwellide at the 
rootisY of Hermon, in the lond of Maspha. 
And alle? 3eden out with her cumpanyes, 4 
a ful myche puple, as the grauel which* 
is in the ‘brynk of the see”, and horsis‘, 
and charis, of greet multitude. And alles 
these kyngis camen togidere at the watris 
of Meron, to fi3te a3ens Israel. And theé 
Lord seyde to Josue, Drede thou not hem, 
for to morewe, in this same our, Y schal 
bitake alle these men to be woundid in 
the si3t of Israel; thou schalt hoxe ‘the 
horsis of hem‘, and thou® schalt brenne ‘the 


Dat peru. © Om. c. 


¥ thingis of valui. 2 her kyngis 1. a smoot and 
€ relifs Bpo. thingis aftir him 1 fezt. 


kK her cuntreis1, 1Josue1. ™ the kyng 1. 


sand 1. © mounteyns 1. 00 place s. Pin the cuntreis 1. Gand he sente1. *Om.13. Stothe rx. twest, 


uto Etheis. ¥ to Feresei cr. 
athat 1. > see brynk 1. 


to Cananey 1. 
Z thei 1. 


W to Jebusei 1. 
¢ ther 3eden out horsis 1. 


x mounteines 1. 


¥ of the hil marg. 
4 her horsis 1. 


€ her charis thou 1. 


XI. 7—17. 


and the chaaris thow shalt brenne with 
7fier. And Josue cam, and al his oost 
with hym, ajens hem, at the watris of 
Meron sodeynlich, and felle vpon hem. 
8And the Lord took hem into the hoondis 
of Yrael; the whiche smyten hem, and 
pursuden ynto greet Sydon, and to wa- 
tris of Maserephoh, and? to the feeld of 
Masphe, that is at the est part of it. So 
he smoot alle, that noon of hem relikis 
9he lefte; and he dide as the Lord co- 
maundide to hym; the hors of hem he 
kuttidei the sinewis at" the knee, and the 
iocharys he brente. And turned ajen anoon 
he took Asor, and the kyng of it he 
smoot with swerd ; forsothe Asor bi oold 
tyme among alle these rewmes heelde the 
11 princehod. And he smoot alle lyues that 
there dwelten, he lefte not in it eny re- 
likis, but vnto the deeth alle thingis he 
waastide; and that cytee he destruyede 
12 with brennynge. And alle the citees bi 
enuyroun and the kyngis of hem he 
took, and smoot, and dide awey, as 
Moyses, the seruaunt of the Lord, co- 
ismaundide to hym, with out the citees 
that weren in the hillis, and in the’ hil- 
lokist set; and the other Yrael brente vp; 
oon onelich, the ‘moost strengthid", Azor, 
14flawme brente vp. And al the praye of 
thes citees, and beestis, the sones of Yrael 
dyuydeden to hem self, alle the enemyes 
isslayn. As the Lord comaundide to his 
seruaunt Moyses, so Moyses comaundide 
to Josne, and he alle thingis fulfillide ; 
and he passide not biside of’ alle the 
maundementis, forsothe ne o word, that 
isthe Lord comaundide to Moyses. And 
so Josue took al the mounteyn loond, and 
the south loond, and Gosen, and the pleyn, 
and the west coost, and the hil of Yrael, 
17and the wijld feeldis of it; and a paart 


JOSHUA. 


583 


charis biS fier. And Josue cam, aud al7 
his oost with hym, a3ens hem sodenli, at" 
the watris of Meron, ‘and felden on heim. 
And the Lord bitook hem in to the hondiss 
of Israel ; whiche* smytiden! hem, ‘that 7s, 
the hethen kyngis and her oostes™, and 
pursueden™ ‘til to® grete Sidon, and the? 
watris of Maserophoth, and to4 the feeld 
of Maspha, which™ is at the eest part 
therof. Josue® smoot so alle ment, that 
he lefte no relikis" of hem; and he dideg 
as the Lord comaundide to hym; he hox- 
ide ‘the horsis of hem, and brente the* 
charis. And he turnede ajen anoon, and lo 
took Asor, and ‘smoot biY swerd the kyng 
therof?; for Asor helde bi eld tyme the 
prinsehed among alle these rewmes. Andi 
‘he smoot* alle persoones® that dwelliden 
there, he lefte not ony relikys* therynne, 
but he wastide alle thingis ‘til to deeth ; 
also he distriede thilke citee bi brennyng. 
And he took alle ‘citees bi cumpas®, and 12 
‘the kyngis of hem‘, and smoot, and dide 
awei», as Moises, the ‘seruaunt of the 
Lord', comaundide to* hym, without ci-13 
tees! that weren set in the™ grete hillis®, 
and in litle hillis; and Israel brente the 
othere® citees; flawme wastide? oneli o 
citee, Asor, the strongeste. And the sones 14 
of Israel departiden to hem silf al the prei, 
and werk‘ beestis of these citces, whanne 
alle men® weren slayn. As the Lord co-15 
maundide to his seruaunt Moises, so Moises 
comaundide to Josue, and ‘he fillide® alle 
thingis; he' passide not" of alle comaunde- 
mentis’, ‘nether o word sotheli”, which* 
the Lord comaundide to Moises. And so 16 
Josue took al the ‘lond of the hillisY, and 
of? the south, the* lond of Gosen, and the 
pleyn>, and the west coost, and the® hil of 
Israel, and the feeldi places therof; and 17 
the’ part of the hil that stieth® to Seir 


POm. 4. deutt acern. Tanda. *Om.ce. 'tombys ze prim. ®leste e pr.m. Y Om. c. 
fOm.1. 8 with 1 band he fel upon hem atr. !Om.1. ‘and Josue and his oost 1. ! smyten 1. 
m™QOm.s. "thei pursueden hem. Ovntor, Pvntothe1. 4vutor, rthati. § And Josne 1. 
themr. Uthingis1. Wwherhorsist. X*herrt. Yhekillide with. Zofit1. 4 Josue killide 1. 
b the persoones 1. ¢thingis1. 4vnto the 1. ¢€ the citees aboute 1. fher kyngis1. & he killide hem 1. 
bhem aweirt. i Lordis seruaunti. k Om.1. ! the citees1. ™ Om. A sec.m, ELP. ™ mounteyns I. 
°tothere kK. Pbrenteupr. dthe werk 1. 'themenofhemr. § Josue fulfilide1. + neither sotheli 


Ww Om. 1. 
d Om. 1. 


¥ the hestis 1. 
© he toke the 1. 


™ 9 word I. 


» pleyn lond 1. 


he 1. 
the 1. 


x that 1. 
e streechith up 1. 


ymounteyn lond 1. 2 the lond ofr. 4 and 


584 


of the hil that steieth vp to Seyr vnto 
Baalgath, bi the pleyn of Libany vndur 
the hil of Hermon; alle the kyngis of 
hem he took, and smoot, and slew3. 
1sMyche tyme fau3t Josue ajens_ thes 
l9kyngis; there was noW cyte, that took 
hym not to the sones of Yrael, saue Euee 
that dwellid in Gabaon; alle with fiztynge 
20he took. Forsothe the sentence of the 
Lord it was, that the hertis of hem weren 
ful hardid, and shuide fizte a3ens Yrael, 
and falle, and thei shulde not disserne 
eny mercy, but shulden perisshe, as the 
21 Lord hadde comaundid to Moyses. In 
that tyme Josue cam, and slew3 Ena- 
chym, fro the mownteyns of Ebron, and 
Dabir, and Anab, and of al the hil of 
Juda, and of Yrael, and the cytees of 
22hem he dide awey. He lefte not eny of 
the stok of Enachym in the loond of the 
sones of Yrael, out taak the cytees of 
Gaza, and Geth,and Azoto,in the* whiche 
23aloon thei ben left. Thanne Josue took 
al the loond, as the Lord spak to Moyses, 
and took it into possessioun to the sones 
of Yrael, after paarties and herY lynagis; 
and the loond restyde fro bateil?. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Thes ben the kyngis whom the sones 
of Yrael smyten, and weeldiden the loond 
of hem, by3ond Jordan, at the sonne* 
arisynge, fro the streem of Arnon vnto 
the hil of Hermon, and al the est coost 

athat biholdith the wildernes. Seon, kyng 
of Amorreis, that dwellid in Esebon, hadde 
lordship fro Aroer, that is set vpon the 
brenk of the streem of Arnon, and of the 
mydil paart in the valey, and of half Ga- 
laad, vnto the streem of Jaboch, that is 

3the teerme of the sones of Amon, and fro 
the wildernes vnto the see of Cenoroth, 
ajens the est, and vnto the see of deseert, 
that is the moost salt see, at the est coost, 


JOSHUA. 


XI, 1S SSx 11.38 


‘til tof Baalgath, bi the pleyn of Liban 
vndur the hil of Hermon; Josue took, and 
smoot, and killide alle the kyngis of thot 
places. Josue fau3t myche tyme ajens 18 
these kyngis ; ‘no citee was", which bitook 19 
not it silf to the sones of Israel, out takun 
Euey that dwellide in Gabaon; he took 
alle’ bi batel. For it was the sentence of20 
the Lord, that ‘the hertis of hem* schulde 
be maad hard, and that thei schulden 
fizte azens Israel, and schulden! falle, and. 
schulden™ not disserue ony mercy, and 
schulden® perische,as the Lord comaundide 
to Moises. Josue cam in that tyme, and 2! 
killide? Enachym, that is, giauntis, fro the 
‘hilli placis? of Ebron, and of Dabir, and 
of Anab, and fro al4 the hil of Juda, and 
of Israel, and dide™ awei ‘the citees of 
hem‘. He lefte not ony man of the gene-22 
racioun of Enachim' in the lond of the 
sones of Israel, without" the’ citees of 
Gasa, and Geth, and Azotus, in whiche 
aloone thei” weren left. Therfor* Josue 23 
took al the lond, as the Lord spak to 
Moyses, and he 3af it in to possessioun 
to the sones of Israel, bi her partis and 
lynagis; and the lond restide fro batels. 


CAP. XII. 


These ben the kyngis whiche the sones1 
of Israel han smyte, and weldiden ‘the 
lond of hemY, bi3ende Jordan, at the ‘ris- 
yng of the sunne’, fro the stronde of Ar- 
non ‘til to? the hil of Hermon, and al the 
eest coost that biholdith the wildirnesse. 
Seon, the kyng of Amorreis, that dwellide2 
in Esebon, was lord fro Aroer, which? is 
set on the brenke of the stronde of Arnon, 
and of the myddil part in the valey, and 
of half Galaad, til® to the stronde of Ja- 
both, which is the terme of the sones of 
Amon, and fro the wildirnesse ‘til to’ the 
see of Ceneroth, ajens the eest, and ‘til toes 
the see of deseert, which! is the saltist see 


wnot a4. *Om.c. Yhis ze prem. 2 batails pceru. ® south apcru. » risynge c. 
fyntox. f&theser. htherwasnocitee1. iallemen:r. her hertis:. 1! that thei schuiden 1. 
™ thei schulden 1. “that thei schuldeni. © he killide x.  P mountaynes1. 4 Om. x sec.m. 1 he 
dide 1, ‘Sher citeess. tgeauntis1, Uontaker, Vinther geauntis 1. * Thanner.  Y¥ her 
londis 1. Zeest 1. @vnto1. bthatr. Cand: dvntor ¢vntor f thatr. 


XII. 4-——22. 


bi the weye that ledith to Bethessymoth, 
and fro the south paart that vnderlieth 
4to Assedoch, vnto Phasga. The teerme 
of Og, kyng*® of Basan, of the relikis of 
Raphaym, that dwelten in Astaroth and 
in Edram, and he hadde lordship in the 
hil of Hermon, and in Salacha, and in al 
5 Basan, vnto the teermes of Gessury and 
Machati, and of® the half paart of Ga- 
laad, and the teerme of Seon, kyng® of 
6Esebon. Moyses, the seruaunt of the 
Lord, and the sones of Yrael smyten 
hem; and Moyses took the loond of hem 
into possessioun to Rubenytis and to Gad- 
itis and tof the half lynage of Manasse. 
7 Thes ben the kyngis of the loond, whom 
Josue smoot and the sones of Yrael bi- 
3ond Jordan, at the west coost, fro Algad® 
in the feeld of Liban, vnto the hil whos 
paart steieth> into Seyr; and ‘Josue took 
iti into possessyonn to the lynagis of 
8 Yrael, to eche her paartis, as wel in 
mounteyns, as in pleyn* and wiljld feeldis; 
in Asseroth, and in the wildernes, and in 
the south was Ethee, and Ainmorree, Ca- 
nanee, and Phereze, Euee, and Jebusee. 
9 The kynge of Jericho, oon; the kyng of 
Hay, oon, that is of the side of Betel; 
1othe kyng of Jerusalem, oon; the kyng 
i1of Ebron, oon; the! kyng of Herymoth, 
iz00on; the kyng of Lachis, oon; king of 
13 Eglon, oon; king of Gazer, oon; king 
i10f Dabir, oon; kyng of Gader, oon ; kyng 
of Herma, oon; kyng of Hedreth, oon; 
iskyng of Lebna, oon; kyng of ™ Odollam, 
ig¢00n; kyng of Maceda, oon; kyng of Be- 
i, tel, oon; kyng of Thaphua, oon; kyng 
of Affer, oon; kyng of Affeth, oon; kyng 
igof Saron, oon; kyng of Madan, oon; 
20kyng of Azor, oon; kyng of Sameron, 
2100n; kyng of Axaph, oon; kyng of The- 
22nach, oon; kyng of Maggedo, oon; kyng 


¢the kyng sceru. to £ prim 


Sinz. 6 he was lord fro1. i lijth 1. 
weren. stronge geauntis 1 marg. ™ the whiche 1. 
t Lordis seruaunt 1. ¥ killiden these kyngis 1. 
x of the lynage of Gad1. YOm.1. 2% whom t. 
upi. ¢thatlondi. — f ech lynage 1. 
‘the which Hay 1. oon wast. 10m. 1. 
PP Masceda A. @2Om.1. Foon wast. &Om. 1 


JOSHUA. 


© the kyng peru. 
h stieth up aceru. ithe Lord took hit to Josue £ pr.m. * pleinesc. ! Om. acer. 


l relikis or of the left partis 1. 
© Og. 
v her Jondis 1. 
® han smyten 3. 
& the hilli places plures. the mounteyns 1. 

™ oon was I. 
t oon was 1. 


k ynto 1. 


585 


at the eest coost, bif the weie that ledith 
to Bethessymoth, and fro® the south part 
that liggithi vndur Assedoch, til to* Phasga. 
The terme of Og, kyng of Basan, of the4 
relikis! of Raphaym, ‘that is, giauntis™, 
that" dwelliden in Astoroth and in E- 
draym, and he® was lord in the hil? of 
Hermon, and in Salacha, and in al Basan, 
‘til tot the termes™ of Gessuri and Machati, 5 
and of the half part of Galaad, and to the 
terme® of Seon, kyng of Esebon. Moyses,6 
the ‘seruaunt of the Lord', and the sones 
of Israel ‘smytiden hem"; and Moises 3af 
‘the lond of hem’ in to possessioun to Ru- 
benytis” and ‘to Gadditis* and to half the 
lynage of Manaasses. These ben the’ kyngis7 
of the lond, whiche? Josue and the sones 
of Israel smytiden* bi3ende Jordan, at the 
west coost, fro Algad in the feeld of Liban, 
‘til to® the hil€ whos part stieth® in to 
Seir; and Josue 3af it® in to possessioun 
to the lynagis of Israel, to echf his owne 
part, as wel in ‘hilli placis$ as in pleyns 
and feeldi placis; in Asseroth, and in wil- 
dirnesse, and in the south was Ethei, and 
Ammorrei, Cananei, and Pheresei, Euey, 
and Jebusei. The kyng of Jerico oon ;9 
the kyng of Hai, which' is at the side of 
Bethel, oon; the kyng of Jerusalem, oon*; 10 
the! kyng of Ebron, oon; the kyng of He-11 
rymoth, oon; the kyng of Lachis, oon™; 
the" kyng of Eglon, oon; the kyng of !2 
Gazer, oon; the kyng of Dabir, oon®; tlie 13 
kyng of Gader, oon; the kyng of Herma, 4 
oon; the kyng of Hedreth, oon; the kyng1s 
of Lempna, oon; the kyng of Odollam, 
oon?; the kyng of Maceda??, oon; thed kyng 16 
of Bethel, oon; the’ kyng of Thaphua, i7 
oon’; thes kyng of Affer, oon; the’ kyng 18 
of Affeth, oon; the’ kyng of Saron, oon ; 
the’ kyng of Madon, oon’; the" king of 19 
Asor, oon; the" kyng of Semeron, oon ; 20 


fOm. 4. & Galaad & pr.m. Asgad sec. m. 


m Om. ABF. 


mQOm.18. in whiche 
Pmounts. 4vntor. ' coostis 3. § coost 1. 
w the men of the lynage of Ruben 1. 
byntor ¢mountr. 4 strecchith 
h was oon, oon. 

P oon was 1. 


nOm.1r © oon was 1. 


uOm.1. 
4 FP 


586 


of Cetes, oon; kyng of Jachanaen of Car- 
23mel, oon; kyng of Dor and of the pro- 
uynce of Dor, oon; kyng of the Gentils 
210f Galaad, oon; kyng of Thersa, oon; 
alle the kyngis, oon and thretti. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Josue was old and of greet age; and 
the Lord seyde to hym, Thow hast 
eeldid, and art of loong age; and the 
moost wide" loond is left, that not 3it is 

2dyuydid bi lot; that is, al Galile Philis- 

3tiym, and al Gessury, fro the trubli flood 
that weetith Egipt, vnto the teermys of 
Accharon a3ens the north; the loond of 
Chanaan, that in fyue litil kyngis of Phi- 
listiym is dyuydid, Gazeus, and Azotyus, 
Ascalonytes, Getheus, and Accharonytes. 
4At the south forsothe ben Euees, al the 
loond of Chanaan, and fro Mara of Sy- 
donys, vnto Affecha, and the teermes of 
sAmmortrei, and his ni3 coostis; forsothe 
the regioun of Liban ajens the est, fro 
Baalgat, vndur the hil of Hermon, to the 
styme that thou goo into Emath, of alle 
that dwelliden in the hil, fro Liban vnto 
the watris of Masserephoth, and al Sy- 
donys; Y am, that shal doon awey hem 
fro the face of the sones of Yrael; come 
it thaune in to the paart of the herytage 
of Yrael, as Y haue comaundid to thee. 

7 And nowe diuyde® the loond into posses- 
sioun to nyne lynagis, and to the half 

slynage of Manasse, with the which Ru- 
ben and Gad weeldiden the loond, that 
Moyses, the seruaunt of the Lord, bi3ond 
the flodis of Jordan took to hem, at the 

gest coost; fro Aroer, that is set in the 
brenk of the streeme of Ernon, in the 
mydil of the valey, and al the wijld 
iofeeldis of Medaba, vuto Dibon, and alle 


JOSHUA. 


XII. 23-——XIII. to. 


the kyng of Axaph, oon; the® kyng of21 
Thenach, oon; the" kyng of Magedo, oon’; 
the’ kyng of Cetes, oon; the” kyng of Ja- 22 
chanaem of Carmele, oon; the kyng of2s 
Dor and of the prouince of Dor, oon; the 
kyng of folkis of Galgal, oon; the kyng 2s 
of Thersa, oon; alle the kyngis, oon and 
thretti. 
CAP. XIII. 

Josue was eld and of greet age; and1 
the Lord seide to him, Thou hast woxe 
eld, and art* of long tyme; and largesteY 
lond is left, which’ is not 3it departid bi 
lot; that is, al Galile}, Filistiym, and al2 4a Gable; in 
Gessuri, fro the troblid flood that moistith3 the termes of 
Egipt, ‘til to* the termes of Acaron ajenus  “t™ & 
the north; the lond of¢ Chanaan, which? is 
departid ‘in to® fyue litle kyngis of Filis- 
tym, off Gaza, and of Azotus, of Asco- 
lon, of Geth, and of" Accaron. Forsothe'4 
at the south ben Eueis, al the lond* of Ca- 
naan, and Maara! of ™ Sidonyes®, ‘til to® 
Affetha, and to the termes? of Amorrei, 
and the’ coostis’ of hym’; and the cuntreis 
of Liban a3ens the eest, fro Baalgath, vn- 
dur the hil of Hermon, til‘ thou entrist 
into Emath, of" alle men that dwelliden’ ¢ 
in the hil, fro the* Liban ‘til toY the wa- 
tris of Masserephoth, and alle? men of 
Sidon*; Y am", that schal do awei hem fro 
the face® of the sones of Israel; therfor4 
come it® in to the part of eritage® of Is- 
rael, as Y" comaundide to thee. And thou7 
now departe the lond in to possessioun to 
the nyne lynagis, and to the half lynage of 
Manasses, with which lynage Ruben ands 
Gad weldiden the lond, whichi lond Moises, 
the ‘seruaunt of the Lord*, 3af to hem bi- 
3ende the flowyngis of Jordan, at the eest 
coost; fro Aroer, which! is set in the9 
brynke of the stronde of Arnon, in the™ 
middis of the yalei, and alle the feeldi 
places of Medaba, ‘til to" Dibon, and alle 10 


nwylde es. © dinydid 4 sup. ras. 


ofy. (thats. ¢ amongr. 
also1. lof Maara. 
Siti. t til that 1. 

2 alle the 1. 


eritage 1. 


mand cp. and of 1. 
u that is the cuntrey of 1. 
aSidonye rx. >it amy. 


€ sizt 1. 
h Y haner. ithe which 1. 


8 Sydony 1. 

v dwellen 1. 
a thanne 1. 
k Lordis sernaunt 1. 


uOm.1. Yoon was1 ¥Om.1. *thou art 1. ythe moost larger. Zthat 1. @vntor. btermer. Calso 
f that is the king of 1. 


& the king of 1. } the king of t.  iand 1. 
©ynto1. Pcostis1. 4% to ther. 
Wmountr. * Om. p@1Kmogsux. 
€ this possessioun 1. f Om. 1. 
\thatr, ™Om.i. 4 ynto 1. 


k Jond 
r termes I. 
¥ vnto 1. 

& the 


XIII. 11-23. 


the citees of Seon, the? kyng of Amorreis, 
that fau3t in Esebon, vnto the teermes of 
ithe sones of Amon, and Galaad, and to 
the teermys of Gessnri and Machati, and 
al the hil of Hermon, and al Basan vnto 
12 Selecha; al the kyngdom of Og in Basan, 
that regnede in Astaroth, and in Edraym; 
and he was of the relikis of Raphaym ; 
and Moyses smoot hem, and dyde hem 
wawey. And the sones of Yrael wolden 
not destruye Gessery and Machati; and4 
dwelliden in the mydil of Yrael vnto the 
uday that" is nowe. Forsothe to the ly- 
nage of Leny he 3aue no possessioun, but 
the sacryfices’, and the slayn offryngis of 
the Lord God of Yrael; that is his hery- 
15 tage, as he hath spokun to hym. Thanne 
Moyses 3af possessioun to the ‘linage of 
thet sones of Ruben, after her kynredis ; 
igand the teerme of hem was fro Aroer, 
that is set in the brenk of the streeme of 
Arnon, and in the mydil valey of the 
same streeme, al the pleyn that ledith to 
17 Medaba and Esebon, and alle the litil 
towns of hem, that ben in the wijld 
feeldis; forsothe Dibon, and Baal Ba- 
moth, and the burgh toun of Baal Meon, 
igand Gesa, and Sedymoch, and Mephe, 
i9and Caryathaym, and Sabama, and Sara- 
20 thaphar, in the hil of the valey of Bethe- 
roeth, and Assedoch, Phascha, and Betha- 
ziissymoth; alle the feeldi citees, and alle 
the rewmes of Seon, kyng" of ’ Ammor- 
rei, that regnede in Esebon, whom Moy- 
ses smoot, with his princis, Madian, Euee, 
and Recten, and Sur, and Hur, and Re- 
bee, dukys of Seon, dwellers of the loond. 
22 And Balaam, the sone of Beor, dyuynour, 
the” sones of Yrael slewen with swerd 
23 With other slayn. And the teerme of the 
sones of Ruben is maad the flood of Jor- 
dan; this is the possessioun* of Ruben- 


JOSHUA. 


587 


the citees of Seon, kyng® of Amorreis, that 
regnyde in Esebon, ‘til to? the termes’ of 
the sones of Amon, and of Galaad, and toi 
the termes4 of Gessuri, and of Machati, 
and al the hil” of Hermon, and al Basan, 
‘til to’ Salecha; al the rewme of Og in12 
Basan, that regnede in Astoroth, and in 
Edraym; ‘he was‘ of the relikis® of Ra- 
faym, ‘that ts, of giauntisy; and Moises 
smoot’ hem and dide* awey hemyY. Andi3 
the sones of Israel nolden” destrye Gessurri 
and Machati; and thei dwelliden® in the 
myddis of Israel, ‘til in to present dai. 
Sotheli® he 3af not possessioun to the ly-14 
nage of Leuy, but® sacrifices®, and slayn 
sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel; thatf 
is ‘his eritage®, as God» spak' to hym*. 
Therfor! Moises 3af™ possessioun to the1s 
lynage of the sones of Ruben, bi her kyn- 
redis; and ‘the term of hem" was fro. 
Aroer, which? is set? in the brenke of the 
stronde of Arnon, and in the myddil valei 
of the same stronde, al the pleyn that4 
Jedith to Medaba, and Esebon', and alle 17 
the townes of tho’, that ben in thet feeldi 
places ;' and Dibon, and Baal Bamoth, and 
the citee of Baal Meon, and Gesa, and Se- 1s 
dymoth, and Mephe, and Cariathaym, and 19 
Sabana, and Sarathaphar, in® the hil of 
the valey of Betheroeth, and of Asedoch, 20 
Phasca, and Bethaissymoth; alle the’ feeldi 21 
citees, and alle the rewmes of Seon, kyng” 
of Amorrey, that regnede in Esebon, whom 
Moyses smoot, with hise princes, Madian, 
Euey* and Recten, and Sur’, and Hur, 
and Rebee, duykis? of Seon, enhabiters* 
of the lond. And the sones of Israel kill- 22 
iden bi swerd Balaam, the” fals diuynour, 
the sone of Beor, with othere men slayn®. 
And the terme! of the sones of Ruben was 23 
maad the flood of Jordan; this is the pos- 
sessioun of Rubenytis® bi her kynredis of 


POm.c. @Om. anrH. bot Epr.m. Om. 2. Ssacryficen, tOm. 4. the kyng £ prem. 
¥ Om. £. W the whiche the z pr.im. * possessiouns ABE pr. m. FH. 

othe kyng1. Pvnto1. 4@coostis1. ‘mounteyne1. Svntor. tthiswasi1. "peple left 1. Vv that 
be geauntis 1 marg. Om. s.  Wkillide1. *didehemix. YOm.plures. 2% wolden not 1. 4 han 
dwellid 1. vnto the day that isnow1. ¢Andr1. 4 but fo hem he 3af1. © wilful offringist. f the 
which lynage 1. & the eritage of the Lord 1. the Lord: iseide1. k Moisest. !1Om.1. ™ jaf 
thanne1, ™hertermr. thatr. POm.1. Galdsothati. ‘to Esebon1. Shem1. ¢t Om.1. 
wand k. vOm.1. — ¥ the kyng 1. x also Euey 1. y Assurc. 4% the duykis1, and duykis x. 


a dwellers 1. b Om. plures. ¢ slayn there 1. 


4 termes a pr. m. 


€ men of Ruben 1. 


4F 2 


588 


ytis bi her kynredis of citees and litil 
24touns. And Moyses 3af to the lynage of 
Gad, and to his sones, bi her kynredis, 
possessioun, of the which the dyuysioun 
2sis this; the teermys of Jaser, and alle 
the citees of Galaad, and half paart of the 
loond of the sones of Amon, vuto Aroer 
26that is ajens Tabba; and fro Esebon vnto 
Ramoth Masphe, and Bethamyn, and Ma- 
27nayn, vnto the teermys of Dabir; in the 
valey alsoY of Betharan and Bethnenar, 
and Sochoth, and Saphan, that other 
paart of the kingdom of Seon, kyng’ of 
Esebon ; forsothe of this* eend of Jordan 
is’ the vttermost® part of the see of Ce- 
nereth bi3ond Jordan, at the eest coost. 
28 This is the possessyoun of the sones of 
Gad, bi her meynees, citees and towns 
200f hem. ‘And he 3af to the half lynage 
of Manasse, and to his sones, after her 
30kynredis, possessioun, of the which this 
is the bigynnynge; Ammyneym, and al 
Basan, and alle the kyngdoms of Og, thet 
kyng of Basan, and alle the touns of 
Jayr, that ben in Basan, sexti bur3 touns; 
siand half part of Galaad, and Ascharoth, 
and Edrai, citees of the kingdom of Og, 
kyng of® Basan; to the sones of Machir 
and! to the sones of Manasse, and to the 
half paart of the sones of Machir, after 
32 her kynredis. This possessioun dyuydede’ 
Moyses, in the wijld feeldis of Moab bi- 
3ond Jordan, a3ens Jericho, at the est 
33plage. Forsothe to the lynage of Leny 
he 3af no possessioun ; for the Lord God 
of Yrael he is the possessioun of lym, as 
he hath spokun to hym. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 This is that the sones of Yrael weeld- 
iden in the loond of Chanaan, the whiclie 
jeuen to hym Eleazar the preest, and 
Josue, the sone of Nun, and princis of 


¥Y forsothe z pr. m. 


Zthe kyng £ pr.m. 
f Om. BCEFH. 


8 dyuyde a. 


JOSHUA. 


SILI. 2qceeix Ia 


citees and of‘ townes. And Moises 3af* to 24 
the lynage of Gad, and to the! sones ther- 
of™, bi her® kynredis, possessioun®, of 
which? this is departyng4; he 3af the2s 
termes of Jazer, and alle the citees of Ga- 
laad, and the half part of the lond of the 
sones of Amon, ‘til to" Aroer which® is 
ajens Tabba; and fro Esebon ‘til tot Ra-26 
moth of Masphe, and Bethamyn, and Ma- 
nayn, ‘til to" the termes of Dabir ; and in 27 
the valei he 3af'¥ Betharan, and Bethneuar, 
and Socoth, and Saphan, the tother part 
of the rewme of Seon, kyng* of Esebon ; 
and the ende of thisY is Jordan, ‘til to? the 
laste part of the see of Cenereth oner Jor- 
dan, at the eest coost. This is the pos-28 
sessioun of the sones of Gad, bi her 
meynees, the citees and townes* of tho’. 
He® 3af also possessioun to the half ly-29 
nage of Manasses, and to hise sones, bi her 
kynredis, of which possessioun this is the 30 
bigynnyng ; he° 34f Ammayi, and al Ba- 
san, and alle the rewmes of Og, kyng@ of 
Basan, and alle the townes of Jair, that 
ben in Basan, sixti® citees; and! half thesi 
part of Galaad, and Astoroth, and Edray8, 
the citees of the rewme of Og, kyng of} 
Basan; to! the sones of Machir, sones* of 
Manasses, and to half the part of the 
sones of Machir, bi her kynredis. Moises 32 
departide this possessioun in the feeldi 
placis of Moab ouer Jordan, a3ens Jericho, 
at the eest coost. Forsothe he! 3af not™33 
possessioun to the lynage of Leuy; for the 
Lord God himself of Israel is the posses- 
sioun of Leuy", as the Lord spak° to 
hym. 


CAP. XIV. 


This ‘thing it? is, which’ the sones of1 
Israel weldiden in the lond of Canaan, 
which" lond Eleazar the preest, and Jo- 
sue, the sone of Nun, and the princes of 


athe z pr.m. Listo e. © otemost ze. ¢Om.c. ¢ in BEFH. 


iOm.1. & gafa possessioun 1. Lhis1, ™Om.1. ®hise a pr.m. et plures. 0Om.1. P the which possessioun 1. 


Sthatz. tyntor. 
Z ynto I. 
falsor. 8 of Edray 1. 


0 the kynrede of Leuy 1. 


4 the departyng 1. ° vnto 1. 
kyng 1. Y that terme 1. 
whiche ben sixti 1. 
1 Moises1, ™ nor 
which 1. 


uUynto I. 
& the townes 1. 
h in BCFKMNLOQRSUX. 
© seide 1. 


W that was the 1. * the 
4thekyng1. © the 
ihe zafto1. * the sones 1. 


4 the possessioun that 1. ¥ the 


Vv 3af to hem 1. 
bhemi. © Moises 1. 


P Om. 1. 


XIV. 2—l11. 


2the meynees bi the lynagis of Yrael, bi 
lot alle thingis dyuydynge, as the Lord 
comaundide in the hoond of Moyses, to 
snyne lynagis and to an half lynage. For- 
sothe Moyses 3af to the two lynages and 
to the half lynage bizjond Jordan posses- 
sioun; with outen the Leuytis, that no 
thing of erthe token among her bri- 
4theren; but into the place of hem camen 
the sones of Joseph, into two lynagis dy- 
uydid, Manasse, and Effraym. And Le- 
uytis token noon other paart in the 
loond, but cytees to dwelle yn, and sub- 
urbis of hem to howsbeestis and his" 
5feeld beestis to be fed. As the Lord co- 
maundide to Moyses, so the sones of 
Yrael diden, and dyuydeden the Joond. 
6And so the sones of Juda wenten to 
Josue in Galgalis; and Caleph, the sone 
of Jephone Cenezeus, spak to hym, Thou 
hast knowun, what the Lord hath spokun 
to Moyses the man of God of! me and 
70f thee in Cades Barne. Of fourti 3eer 
Y was, whanne Moyses, the seruaunt of 
the Lord, sente* me fro Cades Barne forto 
bihold the loond, and I toolde to hym, 
sthat me semed sooth. Forsothe my bre- 
theren, that stieden vp with me, dis- 
coumfortiden!' the herte of the puple, and 
neuerthelater™ Y folwide the Lord my 
9God. And Moyses swore in that day, 
seiynge, The loond, that thi foot shal 
treed, shal be thi possessioun, and of thi 
sones with out eend; for thou hast folwid 
iothe Lord thi God. Forsothe the Lord 
hath grauntid to me lijf, as he hath bi- 
hoot vnto the day that is nowe. Fyue and 
fourti 3eer ben, sith the Lord spak this 
word to Moyses, whanne Yrael wente 
thur3 wildimnes. To day Y am of fyue 
iland ei3ti jeer, so my3ti, as that tyme Y 
was my3ti, whanne Y was sent to aspie ; 
h her c. 


l for g pr.m. * sende e. 


8 the meynees I. tof1. tho plures. 


JOSHUA. 


I myslosedyn & pr. m. 


Vv these departiden 1. 


589 


meynees* bit the" lynagis of Israel 3aten 
to hem, and departiden’ alle thingis bi lot, 2 
as the Lord comatndide in the hond of 
Moises, to nyne’Y lynagis and the” half 
lynage. For Moises‘ hadde 3oueY to ‘the3 
twey” lynagis and to the® half lynage 
‘possessioun ouer Jordan’; without the 
Leunytis’, that token no thing of the lond 
among her britheren; but the sones of4 
Joseph weren departid in to twei lynagis, 
of Manasses and of Effraym, and ‘weren 
eiris' in to the place of hem*®. And ‘the 
Leuytis‘ token noon other part in the lond, 
no but citees to dwelle®, and the subarbis 
of tho to werke® beestis and her scheep 
to be fedi. As the Lord comaundide tos 
Moises, so the sones of Israel] diden, and 
departiden* the lond. And so the sones6 
of Juda neiziden! to Josue in Galgalis; 
and Caleph, the sone of Jephone, of Ce- 
neth, spak to him™, Thou knowist, what 
the Lord spak to Moises, the man of God, 
of me and of thee in Cades Barne. Y® was7 
of fourti jeer, whanne Moises, ‘seruaunt of 
the Lord®, sente me fro Cades Barne, that 
Y schulde biholde the lond, and Y teelde 
to hym that, that semyde soth to me. 
Forsothe? my britheren, thats tieden4 withs 
me, discoumfortiden the herte of the puple, 
and neuertheles" Y suede my Lord God. 
And Moises swoor in that dai, and seide,9 
The lond, which’ thi foot trad, sclial be 
thi possessioun, and of thi sones with- 
outen ende; for thou suedist thi Lord 
God. Sotheli" the Lord grauntide lijf to 10 
me, as he bihi3te, ‘til in to present dai’. 
Fourti 3eer and fyue ben, sithen the Lord 
spak this word to Moises, whanne Israel 
3ede bi* theY wildimnesse. To dai Y? am 
of ‘foure scoor 3eer and fyue*, and Y am 11 
as my3ti, as Y was my3ti® in that time, 
whanne Y was sent to aspie®; the strengthe 


m nerthelatere cE. 


vv the nyne Nn. Ww toantr. to 
Mi 


the DEFGKLMNOPQRsUWX. * bizgonde Jordan Moises 1. Y 3one possessionn 1. 2%twol. ij Lo. Sant. 
bOm.1. ¢dekensi. ¢ these by successioun camen 1. ¢ Lewyéis, and weren eirisr. f their. & dwelle 
yoner. 4b her werke x. ifed ynner. * thei departidenr1. !wentent. ™ Josue 1. ® Caleph 1 marg. 
° the sernaunt of the Lord scrinp pr.m. the Lordis seruaunt 1. the man of God gc. Pand1. 4 3eden 
upi. ‘nertheleg1 Sthatr. thathtroden:1. Andr. V into the day that is nowe ri. W wente 1. 
*thoronyr yOm.1. 2 Y Calephi. ®fyue and ei3ti jeer kK. > Om.1. © biholde the lond 1. 


590 
the strength of that tyme in me vnto 
to" day abydith stil, as wel to fizt, as to 
i2goo. 3yf thanne to me this hil, the 
which® the Lord hath bihoot to me, thee 
forsothe herynge, in the which ben Ena- 
chym, and greet citees and strengthid? ; 
if perauenture the Lord be with me, and 


shal mowe doo aweye hem, as he hath 


13bihoot to me. And Josue blisside to 
hym, and took to hym Ebron into pos- 

l4sessyon. And fro that tyme Ebron was 
to Caleph, the sone of Jephone Ceneze, 
vnto the present day; for he folwide the 

15 Lord God of Yrael. The name of Ebron 
before was clepid Caryatharbe. Adam 
moost greet there in the loond of Ena- 
chym was set; and the loond ceesside fro 
bataylis. 

CAPR XY. 

1 Thanne the lot of the sones of Juda, 
bi her kynredis, was this; fro the teerme 
of Edom vnto the deseert of Syn ajens 
the south, and vnto the last paart of the 

2south coost, the bigynnynge of it fro the 
hei3t of the moost salt see, and fro the 
tonge of it, that biholdith to the south. 

3And ‘it gooth’ out ajens the stiynge vp 
of Scorpion, and passith into Syna; and 
stiede vp into Cades Barne, and cometh 
into Efron, stiynge vp to™ Daran, and 
aenuyrounynge Cariacaa, and thens pass- 
ynge into Asemona, and comynge to the 
streeme of Egipt; and the teermes of it 
shulen be the greet se*; this shal be the 
seend of the south coost. Fro the est 
the bigynnynge forsothe shal be the salt 
see, vnto the eendis of Jordan, and tho 
thingis, that biholden the north, fro the 
tonge of the see vnto the same flood of 
eJordan. And the terme stiede into 
Bethaegla, and gooth fro the north inio 
Betharaba, stiynge vp to the stoon of 
© that c. 


1 Om. Br. P litul g pr.m. 


4 Om. 1. 
lber, 


e€ vnto this 1. 
m schal mowe 1. © the Lord 1. 
tOm.1. 'moost 1. ¥Y Adam was 1. 

% ynto 1. b the deseert 1s. 
f it passith forth 1. 


f Josue, 3yue 1. 
w that 1. 


& stieth up 1. 


JOSHUA. 


A 


dhe shal goon £ pr. m. 


x Thanne 1. 
¢ it duride unto I. 
h it cometh 1. 


XIV. 12——XV. 6. 


of that tyme dwellith stabli in me ‘til to® 
dai, as wel to fi3te, as to go. Therfor 3yuefi2 
thou to me this hil, which® the Lord bi- 
hijte to me, while also thou herdist®, in 
which! hil ben Enachym, and grete ‘citees, 
and strengthid*; if in hap the Lord is! 
with me, and Y mai™ do hem awei, as he™ 
bihi3te to me. And Josue blesside hym®, 13 
and 3af? to hym Ebron in to possessioun. 
And fro that tyme Ebron was to4 Caleph, 14 
sone’ of Jephone, of Cenez, ‘til in to* pre- 
sent dai; for he suede the Lord God of 
Israel. The name of Ebron was clepid 15 
bifore Cariatharbe. Adamt, the gretteste", 
was’ set there in the lond of Enachym; 
and the* lond ceesside fro batels. 


CARA XY, 

Therfor* this was the part of the sones1 
of Juda, bi her kynredis; froY the terme? 
of Edom ‘til to* deseert® of Syn ajens the 
south, and ‘til to® the laste part of the 
south coost, the bigynnyng therof fro the2 
hiznesse? of the saltist see, and fro the 
arm therof, that biholdith®4 to the south. 
And it goith out ajens the stiyng of3 
Scorpioun®, and passith‘ in to Syna; and it 
stieth® in to Cades Barne, and cometh! in 
to Ephron, and it stiethi to Daran, and 
cumpassith* Cariacaa; and fro thennus it 4 
passith' in to Asemona, and cometh™ to 
the stronde of Egipt; and the termes 
therof schulen be the greet see; this schal 
be the ende of the south coost. Sotheli®s 
fro the eest the bigynnyng schal be the 
saltiste see, ‘til to° the laste partis of Jor- 
dan, and tho partis, that biholden the 
north, fro the arm of the see ‘til toP the 
same flood of Jordan. And the terme%s 
stieth’ in to Bethaegla, and passith’ fro 
the north in to Betharaba; and it stietht 


tT froapr.m. $ cyte A. 


&that1. hherdist it1. ithe whichr. * strengthid citees 1. 
° Caleph 1. 


Phesafi. ofr. 'thesoner, * vnto this 1. 
y the whiche part lastide fro 1. 2 coost 1. 

dheister, 4 bihodith a.  € the scorpioun 1K. 
istieth up 1. it cumpassith 1. ! passith forth 1. 


Mitcometh1. 2 Andi. Svntol. Pyntor. terme ofiti1, ‘stiethupr1. * i passith 1. +t stieth 


up i. 


+ kynredis, that 
is, meynees. 
Lire here. c. 


XV. 7—16. 


7Roen, the sone of Ruben, and strecch- 
ynge vnto the termys of Debara, fro the 
valey of Achor a3ens the north, biholdynge 
Galgala, that is fornt a3ens of the stiynge 
vp of Adomyn, fro the south part of the 
streem, and passith the watris, that ben 
clepid the welle of the sunne; and shulen 
ben the goyngis out of it to the welle of 
8 Rogel. And it stieth vp bi the valey of the 
sone of Ennon, fro the side of Jebusei, to the 
south; this is Jerusalem; and fro thennus 
hym self arerynge" to the cop of the hil, 
that is a3ens Jehennon at tlie west, in the 
hei3t of the valey of Raphaym, a3ens the 
gnorth; and passith fro the cop of the hil 
vnto the welle of the water of Nepthoa, 
and cometh vnto the touns of the hil of 
Ephron; and is bowid into Bala, that 
is Caryathiarym, that is of the cyte of 
10 wodis; and gooth about fro Baala a3ens 
the west, vn to the hil of Seir, and passith 
bisidis the side of the hil of Jarym to the 
nortli into Selbon, and gooth down into 
Bethsamys, and passith into Thanna; 
j1and cometh a3en the north partis of Ac- 
charon fro the side, and is bowid to 
Sechrona, and passith the hil of Baala, 
and cometh into Gebnel, and of the greet 
see a3ens the west in the eend it is closid 
izto gidrys. Thes ben the teermes of the 
sones of Juda, bi enuyroun in her kynredis. 
13 To Caleph’, the sone of Jephone, he hath 
3ouun part in the mydil of the sones of 
Juda, as the Lord comaundyde to hym, 
Caryatharbe, of the fader of Enach ; it is 
14 bron. And Caleph dide awey fro it thre 
sones of Enach, Sysay, Achyman, and Tol- 
15 may, of the stok of Enach. And fro thens 
comynge doun he cam to the dwellers of 
Dabir, that before was clepid Caryath- 
issepher, that is, citee of lettrys. And 
Caleph seide, Whoso smytith Caryath- 
sepher’’, and takith it, Y shal 3yue to hym 


tOm. x pr.m. “rerende c. 


¥ that is, of the sone 1. Vit goith 1. 
upr. Pupreisith 1,  ¢ that 1. 
ivntor. tils. * that 1. 
4 Andi. © the sone 1. 
whecani, x Om.1. 


Wvnto I. 
4 heizte 1. 
1 vnto 1. 
5 the sones of Jude 1. 


JOSHUA. 


Vv Caleph forsothe z. 


x that 1. 
¢ forth fro 1. 
™ it goith 1. 
t this part hizt Cariatharbe 1. 


591 


to the stoon of Boen, sone" of Ruben, and7 
goith” ‘til to¥ the termes of Debera, fro 
the valei of Achar a3ens the north; and it 
biholdith Galgala, which* is ‘on the con- 
trarie part ofY the stiyng of Adomyn, 
fro the south part of the stronde; and it 
passith the watris, that ben clepid the 
welle of the sunne; and the outgoyngis 
therof schulen be to* the welle of Rogel. 
And it stieth® bi the valei of the sone ofs 
Ennon, bi the side of Jebusei, at the 
south ; this is Jerusalem; and fro thennus 
it reisith> it silf to the cop of the hil, 
which is a3ens Jehennon at the west, in 
the hignesse’ of the valei of Raphaym, 
a3ens the north; and it passith fro® thes 
‘cop of the hilf tils to the wel of the watir 
Nepthoa, and cometh? ‘til to the tonnes 
of the hil of Ephron; and it is bowid in 
to Baala, which* is Cariathiarym, that is, 
the citee of woodis; and it cumpassith fro 10 
Baala azens the west, ‘til to! the hil of 
Seir, and it passith bi the side of the hil 
Jarym to the north in Selbon, and goith™ 
doun in to Bethsamys; and it passith” in 
to Thanna, and cometh® ajens the partis11 
of the north bi the side of Accaron; and 
it is bowid to Secrona, and passith? the hil 
of Baala; and it cometh in to Gebneel, and 
it is closid with the ende of the grete see, 
a3ens the west. These ben the termes of 12 
the sones of Juda, bi cumpas in her mey- 
nees. Sothelit Josue 3af to Caleph, sone* i3 
of Jephone, part in the myddis of the 
sones of Juda’, as the Lord comaundide 
to hym,Cariatharbe'’, of the fadir of Enach; 
thilke is Ebron. And Caleph dide aweii4 
fro it" thre sones of Enach, Sisai, and 
Achyman, and Tholmai, of the genera- 
cioun of Enach. And Caleph stiede’ fro 1s 
thennus, and cam” to the dwelleris of Da- 
bir, that was clepid bifore Cariathsepher, 
that is, the* citee of lettris. And Caleph 16 


w Caryatsephe 4. 


® stieth 
h it cometh 1. 
P it passith 1. 
uthennns 1. VY stiede up 1. 


y forn ajens 1. 
f Om. 4. 
n passith forth 1. 


z lastynge to 1. 
& Om. plures. 
° it cometh 1. 


592 


17 Axam, my dou3ter, wijf. And Othonyel, 
the sone of Zeneth, the brother of Ca- 
leph, the 3onger™, took it; and he 3af to 

ishym Axam, his dou3ter, wijf. The which, 
whanne she wente togidres, hir man 
meuede to hir for* to axe of hir fader 
a feeld; and she si3ide, as she sat in the 
asse; to whom Caleph, What hast thow, 

ighe seith? And she answerd, 3if to me 
a blessynge; the south loond and drye 
thou hast 3yue to me; ioyn and a waterY 
loond. And Caleph 3af to hir ‘a watry 
20loond’, aboue and bynethe. This is the 
possessioun of the lynage of the sones of 

21 Juda, bi her kynredis. And her citees 
weren fro the last parties of the sones of 
Juda, biside the teermes of Edom, fro the 
south of Capsahel, and Edel, and Jagur ; 

22 Eccyna, and Dymona, Edada, and Cades, 

g4and Alor, and Jethnan, and Ypheth, and 

23 Thelem, and Balaoth, and Asor, Nobua, 

ag and Caryoth, Effron ; this is Assoromam ; 

27 Same, and Molida, and Aser, Gabda’*, and 

vg Assemoth, Bethfeleth, and Acertual, and 

29 Bersabee, and Bainhia, and Baala, and 

30 Hymesen, and Betholad, and Exil, and 

31 Herma, and Sichelech, and Meacdemena, 

32Sensena, Lebioth, and Selymetem Rem- 
moth; alle the citees nyyn and thretti, 

33and the touns of hem. Forsothe in tlie 
feeldis of Eschoal, and Saraa, and Asena, 
34and Azanoe, and Eugannem, and Thaph- 
35ua, and Enaym, and Jesemoth, Adulam, 
Socco, and Azecha,‘and Sarym, Aditaim, 
3¢and Gedam, and Giderothaim®; the cy- 

37 tees fourteen, and the touns of hem; Sa- 

38 nam, and Eseba, and‘ Magdalgad, Delen, 

39and Melcha, Betel, Lachis, and Baschath, 

40 and Eglon, Esbon, and Leemas, and Ceth- 

4llis, and Gideroth, and Bethdagon, and 
Nenna, and Maceda; cytees sexteen, and 

42the townes of hem; Jambane, and Ether, 
and Asam, Jepta, and Jesua, and Nesib, 


W lasse c pr.m. E prem. x Om. c. 
a Om. 4. Om. 4. © Rothaim a. 


Zhe schalz. 4 the sone 1. 
fseide to her1. 8 thon in thi mynde 1. 
nOm.1. © south weren these citees 1. 


$ thretti citees 1. therr u Om 1. 


Y destrie 1. 


v Andi. 


JOSHUA. 


Y watri ce. moyst dongy FE pr.m. 
ce Magdalgaddelen a. 


b the 1. 
h Axal, 

P and Gabda np. 

w her townes 1. 


XV. 17—~42. 


seide, Y schal 3yue Axa, my dou3ter, wijf 

to hym that schal smyteY Cariathsepher, 

and schal* take it. And Othynyel, sone*17 

of Ceneth, the 3ongere brother of Caleph, 

took that citee; and Caleph 3af Axa, his 

doustir, wijf to hym. And whanne ‘sche 1s 

3ede togidere®, hir hosebonde counseilide 

hir, that sche schulde axe of hir fadir a 

feeld ; and sche si33ide, as sche sat on‘ the 

asse; ‘to whom® Caleph seidef, What hast 19 

thous? And sche answeride, 3yue thou 

blessyng' to me; thou hast 3oue to me the 

south lond and drye*; ioyne thou also the! 

moist lond. And Caleph 3af to hir the™ 

moist lond, aboue and bynethe. This is 20 

the possessioun of the lynage of the sones 

of Juda, bi her meynees. And the citees21 

weren” fro the laste partis of the sones of 

Juda, bisidis the termes of Edom, fro the 

south®; Capsahel, and Edel, and Jagur, 

Ectyna, and Dymona, Edada, and Cades, 3? 

and Alor, and Jethnan, and Ipheth, and 24 

Thelon, and Balaoth, and Asor, Nobua, 25 

and Cariath, Effron; this is Asseromam ; 26 

Same, and Molida, and Aser, GabdaP, and 27 
Assemoth, Bethfelech, and Asertual, and 28 
Bersabee, and Baiohia, and Baala, and 29 
Hymesen, and Betholad, and Exul, and 40 

Herma, and Sichelech, and Meacdemana, 31 

and Sensena, Lebeoth, and Selymetem 22 
Remmoth4; alle ‘the citees', nyn and 

threttist, and thet townes ‘of tho". So-33t alle the cites 
theli’ in the feeldi places, Escoal, and hen twos 
Sama, and Asena, and Azanoe, and En-34 {°° 82° 
gannem, and Taphua, and Enaym, and 3s leften wit 
Jecemoth, Adulam, Socco, and Azecha, ae. 
and Sarym, Adytaym, and Gedam, and 36 ben oner this 
Giderothaym ; fourtene citees, and ‘the ouigued Tae 
townes of tho”; Sanam, and Aseba, and 37 Taare 
Magdalgad, Delen, and Melcha, Bethel, 3s™°" * 
Lachis, and Baschat, and Esglon, Esbon, 3° 

and Leemas, and Cethlis, and Gideroth, 41 

and Bethdagon, and Neuma, and Maceda; 


2 moyst dongy E pr. m. 


dupon zi. € and 1. 
Ithertoar M™ar. 
r these ben 1. 


© thei 3eden 1kx sup. ras. 
ia blessyngi. a drye 1. 
a4 and Remmoth pé1kMNoQsx. 


Sev. 2. 


asand Ceyla, and Asib, and Maresa, cytees 
asnyne, and the towns of hem; Accharon 
46 With towns and his villagis; from Accaron 
vnto the see, alle that drawen to Azaot, 
47and the villagis of it; Azaoth with touns 
and his villagis; Gaza with towns and 
his villagis, vnto the streeme of Egipt; 
4sand the greet see the teerme of it; and 
in the hil of Samyr, and Jecther, and 
49Socco, and Edenna, Charyath Senna ; 
sothis is Dabir; Anab, and Yschemo, and 
51 Ammygosen, and Olom, and Gilo, citees 
szenlenen, and the towns of hem; Arab, 
s3and Roma, and Esaam, and Ammin, and 
54 Bethfasua, and Aphecha, and Anymacha, 
Caryatharbe; that is Ebron; and Sior, 
s5citees nyne, and towns’ of hem; Maon, 
soand Hermen, and Ziph, and Jothae, Ze- 
s7rahel, and Zachadamer, and Anoe, and 
Chaym, Gabaa, Canna, citees ten, and the 
sstowns of hem; Alul, and Bethsur, and 
59 Jodor, Mareth, and Bethanoth, and Beth- 
ecen, citees sixe, and the touns of hem; 
60 Caryathbaal ; that is Caryathiarym, citee 
of wodis; and Rebda, citees two, and the 
61touns of hem; in the deseert of Bethara- 
62ba, Medyn, and Cyriacha, and Nebsan, 
and the citee of salt, and Engadi, citees 
six, and the touns of hem; thei weren 
63togidre an hundryd and fifteen. For- 
sothe Jebuse®, the dweller of Jerusalem, 
my3te not the sones of Juda doon a wey; 
and Jebuse® dwelt with the sones of 
‘Juda inf Jerusalem vnto the day that is 
now. 


CAP. XVI. 

1 And the lot of the sones of Joseph 
felle fro Jordan a3ens Jericho, and to the 
watrys of it, fro the est; the wildirnes 
that stieth vp fro Jericho to the hil of 

2 Bethel, and goth out fro Bethel Luzan, 
and passith the teerme of Architaroth, 


JOSHUA. 


593 


sixtene® citees, and ‘the townes of thoY; 
‘Jambane, and Ether, and Asam, Jepta, 2 
and Jesua, and Nesib, and Ceila, and Azib, 44 
and Mareza’’, nyn’ citees, and ‘the townes 
of tho*; ‘Accaron with hise townes and 45 
vilagis; fro Accaron til to the see, alle 46 
thingis that gon to Azotus, and the townes 
therof; Azotus with hise townes and vi-47 
lagis; Gaza with hise townes and villagis, 
til to the stronde of Egipt; and the grete 
see is the terme therof; and in the hil, 43 
Samyr*4, and Jeccher, and Socco, and Ede- 49 
ma, Cariath Senna; this is Dabir; Anab, 50 
and Ischemo, and Ammygosen, and Olom, 51 
and Gilo», enleuene”® ‘citees, and the townes 
of tho®; ‘Arab, and Roma, and Esaam, and os 
Amum, and Bethfasua, and Afecha, Am- 54 
macha, and Cariatharbe; this is Ebron; 
and Sior®*, nyn@ citees, and ‘the townes of 
thot; ‘Maon, and Hermen, and Ziph, and 55 
Jothae, Zerahel, and Zocadamer, and Anoe, 56 
and Chaym, Gabaa, andf Kanna®, ten8 ci-57 
tees, and ‘the citees of tho"; ‘Alul, and 52 
Bethsur, and Jodor, Mareth, and Betha-59 
noth, and Bethecen, sixe citees, and the 
townes of tho®*; Cariathbaal; this is Ca- 60 
riathiarym, the citee of woodis; and Reb- 
da, twei citees, and ‘the townes of tho!; in61 
deseert, ‘Betharaba, Medyn, and Siriacha, 
Nepsan, and the citee of salt, and Engad- 62 
dikk, sixe! citees, and ‘the townes of tho™ ; 
‘the citees" weren togidere an hundrid and 
fiftene. Sotheli the sones of Juda my3ten 63 
not do awei Jebusei, the dwellere of Je- 
rusalem; and Jebusei dwellide with the 
sones' of Juda in Jerusalem ‘til in to° pre- 
sent day. 
CAP. XVI. 

And the lot?, ‘ethir part, of the sones! 
of Joseph felde fro Jordan a3ens Jerico, 
and at™ the watris therof, fro the eest; is 
the wildirnesse, that stieth’ fro Jerico to 
the hil of Bethel, and it goith out’ fro2 
Bethel ‘in to" Luzan, and passithY the 


4 the towns ce. © Jesube 4. £ Om. 4. 

x and sixtene 1. Y her townes, bi name1. YY Om.1. #andnyni. “her townes1. ® of Samyr x. 
‘b Om.1. >> and ther weren enlenene 1. © citees, with townes and vilagis therof'1. ¢¢Om.1. 4 and 
nynt. ¢€hertownes1. fOm. poses. ‘ffOm.1. Sandtenr. lhertownest. 4h Om.1. i her 
townes 1. the deseertr. kk Om.i. |! weren sixe1. ™hertownesr. "these rx © vnto this 1. 
Plondg. 4Om.cisx. ‘tor §$stieth up1. ¢ forthi. "vutor. Vit passith 1. 


4G 


594 


3and cometh doun to the west biside the 
teerine of Jefleti, vnto the teermes of the 
nethermore® Betheron, and of Gazar; and 
the regiouns of it ben endid in" the greet 
4see, that weeldiden the sones of Joseph, 
5 Manasses and Effraym. And the teerme 
of the sones of Effraym, bi her kynredis, 
is maad, and the possessioun of hem a3ens 
the est, Acharothaddar vnto the ouermore! 
6 Betheron. And goon out the side coostis 
into the see; forsothe Mathmethath bi- 
holdith the north, and enuyrouneth the 
teermys ajens the est in Thanarselo, and 
7passith fro the streme of Janoe; and goth 
doun fro Janoe into Atharoth and Noa- 
thara, and cometh into Jericho; and goth 
sout to Jordan fro Thaphua, and passith 
a3ens the see in to the valey ful of reedis; 
and the goyngis out of it ben to the 
moost salt see. This is the possessioun of 
the lynage of the sones of Effraym, bi her 
9meynees; and the citees ben seuerd to the 
sones of Effraym in the mydil of the 
possessioun of the sones of Manasse, and 
l0the towns of hem. And the sones of 
Effraym slewen not Chanane, that dwelt 
in Gaser; and Chanane dwellid in the 
inydil of Effraym vuto this day tribi- 
tarye. 


CAP. XVII. 

i And the lot felle to the lynage of Ma- 
nasse, forsothe he is the first goten of 
Joseph ; to Machir, the first goten of Ma- 
nasses, the fader of Galaad, that was a 
man. fi3ter, and hadde the possessioun of 

2Galaad and Basan; and to the relikis of 
the sones of Manasse, after her meynees; 
to the sones of Abieserj, and to the sones 
of Heleph, and to the sones of Hesryel, 
and to the sones of Sichem, and to the 
sones of Epher, and to the sones of Se- 
myda; thes ben the sones of Manasse, 
sone* of Joseph, maalis, bi her kynredis. 


€netherec. 1b to cz. 


Ww the whiche 2. 
Addar pkox. Zvutor. ® for 1. 
TOmxK. ¢Om.c.  b yntoi. 
© Andther P Om. ze. 
W the sone 1. 


vv ynto 1. 


i the citees 1. 
Qbigoten 1. Tit 1. 


JOSHUA. 


ww her possessionn 1. 
b it cumpassith 1, 


8 bigoten 1. 


XVI. 3-—XVIE. 2. 


terme of Architaroth, and it goith douns 
to the west, bisidis the terme of Jefleti, 
‘til to’ the termes of the lowere Bethoron, 
and of Gazer; and the cuntrees therof 
ben endid with the greet see, whiche”4 
cuntreis Manasses and Effraym, the sones 
of Joseph, weldiden. And the terme ofs 
the sones of Effraym, bi her meynees, and 
‘the possessioun of hem” was maad ajens 
the eest*, Accarothaddar’ ‘til to” the hijere 
Bethoron. And the coostis goon out in toc 
the see; sotheli? Mathmetath biholdith the 
north, and cumpassith> the termes a3ens 
the eest in Tharnarselo, and passith® fro7 
the stronde of Janee; and it goith doun 
fro Janee in to Atharoth and Noathara‘, 
and cometh® in to Jerico; and it goith out 
to Jordan fro Taphua, and passith a3enss 
the see in tof the valey of ‘the place of® 
rehedis; and the goyngis out therof ben 
to the salteste see. This is the posses- 
sioun of the sones of Effraym, bi her 
meynees ; and citees! and the townes of9 
tho* ben departid to the sones of Effraym, 
in the myddis of the! possessioun of the 
sones of Manasses. And the sones of Ef-10 
fraym killiden™ not Cananey, that dwellide 
in Gazer; and Cananey dwellide tributarie 
in the myddis of Effraym til in" to this 
day. 
CAP. XVII. 

Forsothe® lot felde in? to the lynage of! 
Manasse, for he is the firste gendrid4 sone 
of Joseph ; dot™ felde to Machir, the firste 
gendrid’ sone of Manasses, to the fadir of 
Galaad, that was a werriour, and he hadde 
possessiount Galaad and Basan. And /of2 
Jelde to the othere® of’ the sones of 
Manasses, bi her meynees; to the sones 
of Abiezer, and to the sones of Heleth, 
and to the sones of Hesriel, and to the 
sones of Sichen, and to the sones of Epher, 
and to the sones of Semyda; these ben the 
sones of Manasse, sone’ of Joseph, the 


iouere ce. Jj Abieses 4. 


X eest the whiche terme was 1. 
€ it passith 1. 4 into Noathara 1. 
K tho coostus 1. his 1. 
t to possessionn 1. 


y Accaroth and 

© it cometh 1. 
mslowen?. Om. 1. 
Utother 1K. VY Om.1. 


XVIL, 3—11. 


3To Salphat forsothe, the sone of Epher, 
sone* of Galaad, sone* of Machir, sone* 
of Manasse, were no sones, but oonli 
doujtres; of the whiche thes ben the 
names, Maala, and Noa, and Negla, and 
4Melcha, and Tersa. And thei camen in 
the si3t of Eliazar, preest!, and of Josue 
sone™ of Nun, and of the princis, sei- 
ynge, The Lord hath comaundid bi the 
hoond of Moyses, that possessioun were 
jouun to vs" in the mydil of oure® bri- 
theren. And he 3af to hem, after the heest 
of the Lord, possessioun in the mydil of 
5the britheren of the fader of hem. And 
the litil cordis fellen to Manasse ten, with 
out the loond of Galaad and Basan bi- 
630nd Jordan; forsothe the dou3tres? of 
Manasse hadden herytage in the mydil 
of the sones of hym. Forsothe the loond 
of Galaad felle into the lot of the sones 
7of Manasse, that weren left. And the 
teerme of Manasse was fro Aser Machy- 
nathat, that biholdith Sichem, and gooth 
out to the ri3t biside the dwellers of the 
8welle of Taphue. And forsothe in the 
lot of Manasse felle the loond of Taphue, 
that is biside the teermes of Manasse, 
9and of the sones of Effraym. And the 
teerme of the valey ful of reedis cometh 
doun in the south of the streeme of the 
cytees of Effraym, that ben in the mydil 
of the cytees of Manasse. The teerme of 
Manasse fro the north of the streem, and 
10the goynge out of it gooth to the see; so 
that the possessioun of Effraym’ be fro 
the south, and fro the north of Manasse, 
and either closith the see; and thei ben 
ioyned to hein self in the lynage of Aser 
fro the north, and in the lynage of Ysa- 
lichar fro the est. And the herytage of 
Manasse was in Ysachar and in Aser, 
Versan and the litil touns of it, and Jeb- 
laan with his litil touns, and the dwellers 


k the sone gE pr.m. the preest E pr.m. 
P douztren BEFH. 49 hit £ pr.m. 


JOSHUA. 


m the sone E pr.m. 


595 


male children, bi her meynees. Sotheli*s 
to Salphaat, the sone of Epher, sone of 
Galaad, sone of Machir, sone of Manasses, 
werenY not sones, but dou3tris aloone; of 
whiche? these ben the names, Maala, and 
Noa, and Eegla, and Melcha, and Thersa. 
And thei* camen in the si3t of Eleazar, 4 
preest>, and of Josue, sone® of Nun, and 
of the princes, and seiden*, The Lord co- 
maundide bi the hond of Moises, that 
possessioun should be 3o1un to vs in the 
myddis of oure britheren. And® Josue 3af 
to hem possessioun, bi comaundement! of 
the Lord, in the myddis of the britheren 
of her fadir. And ten cordis, ‘that is,5 
londis mesurid bi ten cordis®, felden to 
Manasses, without the lond of Galaad and 
of Basan bizende Jordan; for the dou3-¢ 
tris of Manassest weldiden eritage in the 
myddis of the sones of hym. Sotheli' the 
lond of Galaad felde in to the part of the 
sones of Manasses, that weren residue. 
And the terme of Manasses was fro Azer7 
Machynathath, that biholdeth Sichem, and 
goith' out™ to® the ri3t side, bisidis the 
dwelleris of the welle Taphue; for thes 
lond of Thaphue, which® is bisidis the 
terme? of Manasses, and of the sones of 
Effraym, felde in the lot of Manasses. 
And the terme of the valey of place of9 
rehedis goith doun in the south of the 
stronde of the citees of Effraym, that ben 
in the myddis of the citees of’ Manasses. 
The terme of Manasses is fro the north 
of the stronde, and the goyng out therof 
goith to the see; so that the possessionn 10 
of Effrayin is fro the south, and the pos- 
sessioun of Manasses fro’ the north, and 
the see closith euer either; and thot ben 
ioyned to hem silf in the linage of Aser 
fro the north, and in the lynage of Isa- 
char fro the ecst. And the eritage of11 
Manasses was in Isachar and in. Aser, 


+ of Manasses, 
that is of Sal- 
phaath, that 
weren of the 
lynage of Ma- 
nasses. Lire 
here. c. 


A 3oW E pr.m. ° 3oure E pr.m. 


x Butr. ytherwerenr. 2the whiche1. ®these1. >the preest 1. ¢the soner. 4 thei seiden i. 
e And bi heeste of the Lord 1. f the comanndement c. & that ben londis ymeete bi cordis 1. Om. sx. 
iFor1. left alywe1. Ji goithi, ™forthi. "of. Othat3.  P termes DEFGIKLMOPQRSUWX. 
athe placer, "Om. A. *is fro1. ¢ tho possessiouns 1. 


462 


596 


of Dor, with her borgh touns; forsothe 
the dwellers of Endor, with her litil touns, 
and also the dwellers of Thanath, with 
her litil touns, and the dwellers of Ma- 
gedo, with her litil touns, and the thridde 
izpart of the cytee of Nophet. Ne the 
sones of Manasse my3ten these cytees 
vndurturn, but Chanane bygan to dwelle 
i3in this loond. Forsothe after that the 
children of Yrael weren recouerd", thet 
sugetiden the Chananeis, and maden tri- 
butaryes to hem, and slewen hem not. 
i4 And the sones of Joseph speken to Josue, 
and seiden, Whi hast thow 3eue to me 
loond into possessioun of lot and of o litil 
coord, sith Y am of so myche multitude, 
isand the Lord hath blessid me? To whom 
Josue seith, If ‘thow art a myche puple’, 
sty into the wode, aud hew to thee spacis 
in the loond of Pherezei, and Raphaym ; 
for streyt is to thee the possessioun of 
i6the hil of Effraym. To whom answerden 
the sones of Joseph, We shulen not. mowe 
stie vp to the mounteyns, sith yren cha- 
rys vsen the Chananees, that dwellen in 
the feeldi loond; in the which ben set 
Bersan, with lis litil touns, and Jerazel 
izhanynge the mydil valey. And Josue 
seide to the hous of Joseph, ‘that is", 
Effraym and Manasse, Thow art a myche 
puple, and of greet strengthe ; thow shalt 
isnot haue o soort, but thow shalt passe to 
the hil, and hew to thee, and purge spacis’ 
to dwelle. And thow shalt mowe forther- 
more goo forth, whanne thow hast vndur 
turned Chananee, whom thow seist yren 
charis to han, and to be moost strong. 


r keuered = pr.m. 


u And 1. 
mesure I. 
© thou up 1. 
1 meynee I. 


v hadden wexe 1. 
aa multitude 1. 

f kitte thou 1. 
m thee trees I. 


ff Raphym a. 
1 dwelle ynne 1. 


JOSHUA. 


8 thy peple is moche F pr. m. 


w thei maden hem 1. 

D that is, in encresing of children 1. Om. sx. 
& out tor. 
° strong men I. 


XVID. 12-—18. 


Bersan, and the townes therof, and Jeb- 
laan, with hise townes, and the dwellers 
of Dor, with her citees; and the dwelleris 
of Endor, with her townes, and also the 
dwelleris of Thanath, with her townes, and 
the dwelleris of Maiedo, with her townes, - 
and the thridde part of the citee Nophet. 
And the sones of Manasses mi3ten noti2 
distrie these citees, but Cananei bigan to 


dwelle in this lond. Sotheli® aftir that13 


the sones of Israel weren’ stronge, thei 
maden suget Cananeis, and madenW tribu- 
taries to hem silf, and killiden* not Cana- 
neisy. And the sones of Joseph spaken to14 
Josue, and seiden, Whi hast thou 30ue to 
me lond in to possessioun of o lott and 
part’, sithen Y am of so greet multitude’, 
and the Lord hath blesside me, ‘that is, 
hath alargid me in children”? To whiche® 1s 
Josue seide, If thou art myche? puple, stie 
thou® into the wode, and kittef doun to 
thee spaces in the lond of Feresei, and of 
Raphaym*, for the possessioun of the hil of 
Effraym is streijt to thee. To whom the 16 
sones of Joseph answerden, We moun not 
stie" to the hilli places, sithen Cananeis, 
that dwellen in the ‘lond of the feeldi, 
ysen ironne charis; in which* lond Ber- 
san, with hise townes, and Jesrael, weld- 
ynge the myddil valey, ben set. And17 
Josue seide to the hows! of Joseph, and 
of Effraym, and of Manasses, Thou art 
myche puple, and of greet strengthe; thou 
schalt not haue o lot{, but thou schalt1s 
passe to the hil, and thou schalt kitte doun 
to thee™; and thou schalt clense spaces to 
dwelle’. And thou schalt mow go forth 
ferthere, whanne thou hast distried Ca- 
nanei, whom thou seist to haue irone 
charis, and to be moost strong®. 


tsones apru. Uand of x prem. VY placis 4. 


z of o litil 
da myche 1. 
k the which 1. 


y Om. 
¢ whom 1. 


i feldy lond 1. 


x thei killiden hem 1. 


h wende up 1. 


+ of o lot; that 
is, lytil in com. 
parisoun of my 
multitude. 

Lire here. c. 


t thou schalt 
not haue o loi; 
it is not to vn- 
durstonde that 
ony lynage 
hadde many 
lottis, but this 
that is seid 
here, thou schalt 
not haue o lot, 
schal be vndir- 
stondun thus, 
thon schalt not 
be apayed with 
the lond getun 
in thi lot, but 
thou schalt gete 
the residue in 
ouercomynge 
with Goddis 
help thyn ad- 
uersaries 3 and 
whanne thei 
ben ouercomun, 
thon maist kitte 
doun wodis, and 
inake large 
spacis to dwelle. 
Lire here. c. 


XVIII. 1-10. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 And alle” the sones of Yrael ben ge- 
dryd in Sylo, and there thei pizten the 
tabernacle of witnessynge; and the loond 

2 was suget tohem. Forsothe there dwelten 
of the sones of Yrael seuen lynagis, that 

33it not hadden taak her possessiouns. To 
whom seith Josue, How long ‘welewen 3e* 
with slewth, and 3e goonY not into the 
loond to be weeldid, that the Lord God 

4of 30ure faders hath 3yue to 30u ? Chesith 
of eche lynagis thre men, that Y sende 
hem, and thei goon, and enuyroun the 
loond, and diseryue it after the noumbre 
of eche multitude, and thei tellen to me, 
5that thei han discryued. Dyuyde 3e to 
jou the loond into seuen partis; Judas 
be in hys teermes at the south coost, and 
6the hows of Joseph fro the north; the 
mydil loond bitwix” thes discryue 3e into 
seuen partise; and thanne 3e shulen come 
to me, that before the Lord oure God I 
z7sende to 30w her lot; for there is not 
a mong 30u paart of Leuytis, but preest- 
hod of the Lord, this is the herytage of 
hem. Forsothe Gad, and Ruben, and the 
half lynage of Manasse now han taak 
her possessiouns biz3ond Jordan, at the est 
coost, the whiche Moyses, the seruaunt of 

8 the Lord, hath 3eue to hem. And whanne 
the meu weren rysen for® to goon, to dis- 
cryue the loond, Josue commaundide to 
hem, seiynge, Gooth aboute the loond, 
and discryue 3e it, and torneth a3en to 
me, that here bifore the Lord 3oure God 

gin Sylo Y sende to 30u lot. And so thei 
wenten, aud goynge about it in seuen 
parties dyuydeden, wrytynge in volym; 
and thei turneden a3en to Josue, into the 

1otentis of Sylo. The whiche leide lottis 
before the Lord God in Silo, and dy- 
uydede the loond to the sones of Yrael, 


w Om. £ pr.m. * 3¢e waxe dry3e £ pr.m. 


P pizten 1. GAnd x. * dwelten there 1. 
Om. sx. v hath 3ouen 1. 
adekens1. >ofthes. c¢herr. 4Om.1. 
whiche 1 * Om. egrkmsx. ! Lordis seruaunt 1. 


4 thei departiden 1. rit into mk. 8 writynge it 1. 


JOSHUA. 


¥ gooth peru. 


8 the whiche 1. 
w what the lond is 1. 
e For x. 
™ rise up I. 

t tentis 1. 


597 
CAP. XVIII. 


And alle the sones of Israel weren ga-1 
derid in Silo, and there thei ‘settiden faste? 
the tabernacle of witnessing ; and the lond 
was suget to hem. Sotheli1 seuene linagis 2 
of the sones of Israel dwelliden', that had- 
den not 3it takun her possessiouns. To3 
whiche’ Josue seide, Hou longe faden je 
‘bi cowardise', ‘ethir slouthe", and entren 
not to welde the lond, which the Lord 
God of 30ure fadris 3af” to 30? Chese 3e4 
of ech lynage thre men, that Y sende hem, 
and thei go, and cumpasse the lond; and 
that thei discryue ‘the lond’ bi the noum- 
bre of ech multitude, and brynge* to me 
that, that 3e han discriued. Departe 3e5 
the lond to 3ou in to seuene partis; Ju- 
das be in hise termes at the south coost, 
and ‘the howsY of Joseph at the north; 
diseryue 3e ‘the myddil* lond bitwixe heme 
in to seuene partis; and thanne 3e schulen 
come to me, that Y sende lot to 30u here 
bifor 3oure Lord God; for the part of Le-7 
uytis’ is not among 3o0u, but the preesthod 
of the Lord, this is the® eritage ‘of hem‘. 
Forsothe® Gad, and Ruben, and the half 
lynage of Manasses hadden take now her 
possessiouns® ouer" Jordan, at the cest 
coost, whiche! possessiouns* Moises, the 
‘seruaunt of the Lord!, 3af to hem. Ands 
whanne the men hadden rise™ to go, to 
diseryue the lond, Josue comaundide to 
hem, and seide, Cumpasse 3e the lond, and 
discryue it", and turne® a3en to me, that 
Y sende lot to 3ou here in Silo, bifore 
joure Lord God. And so thei 3eden?, and 9 
cumpassiden that lond, and departiden4 ‘in 
to" seuene partis, writynge® in a book; 
and thei turneden ajen to Josue, in to the 
castelst in Silo. Which" Josue sente lottis 10 
bifor the Lord God in Silo, and departideY 
the lond to the sones of Israel, iu to seuene 


z bytwene rerun. betwe c. ®Om.c prim. 


t or welowen 1. Om. sx. 
x brynge 3e 1. Ybethe meynee x. 2 half the 1, 
fhani. & possessioun 1. 4 bizgondex. the 
A3e ity. turneth x. P 3eden forth 1. 
u Andi. Vv he departide 1. 


« thorou3 slouthe 1. 


598 


ninto seuen parties. And stiede vp the 
first lot of the sones of Beniamyn, by her 
meynees, that thei weelden the loond bi- 
twix? the sones of Juda and the sones of 
12 Joseph. And the teerme of hem was a3ens 
the north fro Jordan, goynge bisyde the 
side of Jerycho of the north coost; and 
fro thens ajens the west to the mounteyn 
stiynge, and comynge to the wildirnes of 
Bethanen, and passynge biside Luzan to 
isthe south; that is Bethel; and he cam 
doun into Astaroth of Adar, into the hil 
that is at the south of the nether Beth- 
ueron; and is bowid goynge about ajens 
the see, to the south of the hil that bi- 
holdith Betheron a3ens Affrijk ; and the 
goyngis out of it ben Scaryathabaal, and¢ 
the whiche is clepid Caryathiarym4, the 
cytee® of the sones of Juda; this is the 
greet coost ajens the see, to the west. 
15 Forsothe fro the south, of the part of 
Caryathiarym, gooth out the teerme ajens 
the see, and cometh vnto the welle of 
16 watris of Nepthoa; and comith doun into 
the paart of the hil that biholdith the 
valey of the sones of Ennon, and is a3ens 
the north coost, in the vttermoost’ paart 
of the valey of Raphaym; and Gehennon, 
that is, the valey of Ennon, ‘cometh doun® 
by side the side of Jebusei, to the south, 
17and cometh to the welle of Rogel, pass- 
ynge to the north, and goynge out to 
Empsemes, that is, the welle of the sunne, 
wand passith vnto the litil hillis that ben 
‘forn a3ens” of the stiynge vp of Adomyn; 
and cometh doun to Thabem Boen, that is, 
the stoon of Boen, sone! of Ruben, and 
passith fro the side of the north to the 
wijld feeldis; and cometh doun into the 
19 pleyn, and gooth biside a3ens the north 
of Bethagalam; and the goyngis out of it 
ben a3ens the tong of the saltest see, fro 


b bytwene neFH. betwec. ¢ that z prem. 


JOSHUA. 


XVIII. 11:—19. 


partis. And the firste lot of the sones of11 
Beniamyn, bi her meynees, stiede*, that 
thei schulden welde the lond bitwixe the 
sones of Juda and the sones of Joseph. 
And the terme of hem was a3ens the north 12 
fro Jordan, and passide? bi the side of Je- 
rico of* the north coost; and it stiede” 
fro thennus ajens the west to the® hilli 
places, and it cam to the’ wildirnesse of 
Bethauen; and it passide bisidis Luza to 13 
the south; thilke® is Bethel; and it goith 
doun in to Astoroth Adar, in to the hil 
which! is at the south of lowere? Beth- 
eron; and is® bowid, and cumpassith! a3ens 14 
the see, at the south of the hil that bi- 
holdith Betheron ajens the north; and the 
outgoyngis therof ben in to Cariathbaal, 
which* is clepid also Cariathiarym, the 
citee of the sones of Juda; this is the 
greet coost a3ens the see, at the west. 
Sotheli! fro the south, bi the part of Ca-1s 
riathiarym, the terme goith out a3ens the 
see, and cometh™ til to the wel of watris® 
of Nepthoa; and it goith doun in to thei 
part of the hil that biholdith the valei of 
the sones of Ennon, and is® a3ens the north 
coost, in the laste part of the valey of Ra- 
phaym ; and Jehennon, that is, the valei 
of Ennon, goith doun bi the side of Jebu- 
sei, at the south, and cometh? to the welle 
of Rogel, and passith4 to the north, and17 
goith™ out to Emsemes, that is, the welle 
of the sunne, and passith® tot the litle 1s 
hillis that ben ajens the stiyng" of Ado- 
myn; and it goith doun to Taben Boen, 
that is, the stoon of Boen, sone’ of Ruben, 
and passide” bi the side of the north to 
the feeldi places; and it goith down in to 
the pleyn, and passith* forth ajens the19 
north to Bethagala; and the outgoyngis 
therof ben ajens the arm of the salteste 
see, fro the north, inY the ende of Jordan 


dand Caryathiarym £ pr.m. © cytees apru. ‘vtmost cE. 


¢Om.£ prim. 4 fro the region z pr.m. ithe sone £ pr.m. 


* stiede up 1. Y the sones of Beniamin 1. 
€thatr. fthatz.  & the lowere 1. 
nthe watris tit is 1. 
tO DEFGKLMNOPQRUWX. 


hit is 3. 
P it cometh 1. 
¥ stiyng up 1. 


2 it passide r. 
1 it eumpassith 1. 

@ it passith 3. 
v the sone f. 


vlastide1. © Om. s. 
Kthat1. lJ Ands 
Tit goith 1. 8 it passith x. 
W it passide forth r. * it passith 1. 


®at x d Om. a. 
m it cometh 1. 
tynto x. til 


Yandr. 


XVITI, 20—XIX. 10. 


the north, in the eend of Jordan to the 
20south coost, that is the teerme of it fro 
the est. This is the possessioun of the 
sones of Beniamyn, bi her teermys in en- 
2) uyroun, and her meynees ; and his citees 
weren Jericho, and Bethegla, and the 
22valey* of Casis, Betharacha, and Saima- 
23raym, and Bethel, and Anym, and Affara, 
21and Offyra, the toun Hesmonal, and Of- 
fym, and Gabee, cytees twelue, and the 
zgstouns of hem; Gabaon, and Rama, and 
26 Beroth, and Mesphe, Chaphera, and Any- 
27mosa, and Recen, Jerephel, and Tharela, 
2sand Sela, and Heleph, and Jebus, that is 
Jerusalem, Gabaath, and Curiath, citees 
fourteen, and the touns of hem; this is 
the possessioun of the sones of Beniamyn, 
aftir her meyneis. 


CA Te. XTX. 


1 And the secounde lot of the sones of 
Symeon is goon ont, bi his™ kynredis ; 
gand was the herytage of hem in the 
mydil of the possessioun of the sones of 
Juda, Bersabee, and Sabee, and Melada, 
sand Asersualbala, and Asem, and Beltho- 
4laad, and Bethularma, and Sicelech, and 
+ Bethmarthaboth, and Asersua, and Beth- 
elaboth, and Saroem, cytees thretteen, 
zand the touns of hem; Aym, and Rem- 
mon, and Athar, and Asam, citees foure, 
gand the touns of hem; alle the ltil touns 
bi enuyroun of thes citees, vnto Balath 
Brameth, az3ens the south coost, were 
cytees seuenteen. This is the herytage 
of the sones of Symeon, after" her kyn- 
gredis, im the possessioun and litil coord 
of the sones of Juda, for he was more; 
and therfor the sones of Symeon hadden 
possessionn in the mydil of the herytage 
loof hym. And the thridde lot felle of the 
sones of Zabulon, bi her kynredis; and 
the teerme of the possessioun of the 
soues of Zabulon is maad vnto Sarith, 


kK valeis ancru. 


Zigatir 4thatz. » these ben the twelue 1. 
fthat 3. & these ben fouretene 1. 
mand Bethularma r. © her townes 1. 
®Om.1. tof Judar. “%vntor VY stieth up r. 


JOSHUA. 


1 of Hesmona £ pr.m. 


¢ citees theroff 1. 
h citees therof 1. 
o her townes 1. 
w fro Medala 1. 


599 


at? the south coost, which? is the terme 20 
therof fro the eest. This is the possessioun 
of the sones of Beniamyn, bi lier termes 
in cumpas, and bi her meynees; and thea 
citees therof weren Jerico, and Bethagla, 
and the valei of Casis, Betharacha, and 22 
Samaraym, and Bethel, and Anym, andes 
Affara, and Offira, the toun of Hesmona, 24 
and Offym, and Gabee, twelue? citees®, 
and ‘the townes of tho’; Gabaon, andes 
Rama, and Beroth, and Mesphe, and® Ca-26 
phera, and Ammosa, and Recem, Jarephel, 27 
and Tharela, and Sela, Heleph, and Jebus, 28 
whichf is Jerusalem, Gabaath, and Cariath, 
fouretene® citees and ‘the townes of tho'; 
this is the possessioun of the sones of Ben- 
iamyn, bi her meynees. 


CAP. XIX. 


And the secounde lot of the sones of1 
Symeon 3ede out, bi her meynees; and the 
eritage of hem, in the myddis of posses-2 
sioun* of the sones of Juda, was Bersa- 
bee, and Sabee, and Melada, and Asersua, 3 
Bala!, and Asem, and Beltholaad, Bethu-4 
larma™, and Siceleth, and Bethmarchaboth, 5 
and Asersua, and Bethelebaoth, and Saro- 6 
em, threéttene citees, and ‘the townes of 
tho"; Aym, and Remmon, and Athar, and 7 
Asam, foure citees, and ‘the townes of tho®; 
alle the townes bi cumpas of these citees, s 
‘til to? Balath Brameth, a3ens the south 
coost, weren seuentene citees. This is the 
eritage of the sones of Symeon, bi her 
meynees, in the possessioun and part’ of9 
the sones of Juda, for it was more; and 
therfor the sones of Symeon hadden pos- 
sessioun™ in the’ myddis of the eritage 
therof*. And the thridde lot of the sones 10 
of Zabulon felde, bi her meynees; and the 
terme of possessioun of the sones of Zabu- 
lon was maad “til to" Sarith ; and it stieth’ 1 
fro the see, and Medala”; and it cometh 


mherc. % bisidys & pr.m. 


dher townesr. © Om. plures. 
k the possessioun 1. } and Bala 1. 
¥ her possessioun 1. 


i her townes I. 
Pvntor 4 in the part 1. 


600 JOSHUA. 


i1and stiede® vp fro the see, and Medala, 
aud cometh in to Debbaseth, vnto the 
i2streem that is ajens Jesenam; and turneth 
fro Saryth, a3ens the est, into the eendis 
of Secelech Thabor; and gooth out to Da- 
izbereth; and stieth vp ajens Jasie; and 
thens passith to the est coost, Gethepher, 
and Thachasym; and geeth out into Rem- 
1amon, Amphar, and Noa; and gooth about 
to the north, and Nachon; and the goynge 
is out of it ben of the valey of Jeptael, and 
Cathel, and Neamay, and Semrom, and 
Jedaba, and Bethleem, citees twelue, and 
isthe touns of hem. This is the herytage 
of the lynage of the sones of Zabulon, bi 
her kynredis, and citees, and touns of 
izhem. Of Ysachar wente out the feerth 
islot, bi his kynredis; and his heritage was 
19 Jezrael, and Cathsaloth, and Symeon, and 
20 Effraym, and Seon, and Anaarath, and 
21Cabith, and Cesyon, Hames, and Ra- 
mech, and Enganym, and Enadda, and 
22 Bethfeses. And the teerme of it cometh 
vuto Thabor, and Seesyma, and Heth- 
semes; and the goyngis out of it weren 
of Jordan, cytees sexteen, and the touns 
230f hem. This is the possessioun of the 
sones of Ysachar, bi her kynredis, cytees, 
24and litil touns of hem. And felle the 
fifthe lot to the lynage of the sones of 
25 Aser, bi her kynredis; and the teermes of 
hem was Alchat, and Acly, and Bethen, 
26and Mesaph, and Elmelech, and Amaad, 
and Messal; and cometh unto Carmy] of 
27the see, and Syor, and Labanath; and 
tornith ajens the est of Bethdagan, and 
passith vnto Zabulon, and the valey of 
Jeptael, a3ens the north, into Bethemeth, 
and Neiel; and gooth out to the left of 
28 Cabul, and Acram, and Roab, and Omy- 
zg9non, and Chane, vnto greet Sydon; and 
turneth a3en into Horma, vuto the ‘moost 
strengthid? cytee Tyrum, and vnto Osam; 


© stezeth cE. 


XIX. 11—29. 


in to Debbaseth, ‘til to* the stronde which’ 
is ajens Jecenam ; and it turneth ajen fro 12 
Sarith, ajens the eest, in to the coostis of 
Sechelech Tabor; and goith? out to Da- 
berth ; and it stieth* aj3ens Jasie; and fro13 
thennus it passith> to the eest coost to 
Gethefer, and Thacasym®; and it goith 
out in to Remmon, Amphar4, and Noa; 
and cumpassith® to the north, and Na-1 
chon; and the goyngis out therof ben the 
valei of Jeptael, and Cathel, and Neamai, 15 
and Semrom, and Jedaba, and Bethleem, , 
twelue citees, and ‘the townes of tho®. 
This is the eritage of the lynage of thei 
sones of Zabulon, bi her meynees, and® 
the citees and ‘townes of tho’. The fourthe 17 
lot 3ede out to Isacar, bi hise meynees ; 
and the eritage therof was Jezrael, and 1s 
Casseloth, and Symen, and Affraym, and 19 
Seon, and Anaarath, and Cabith, and Ce-20 
sion, Hames, and Ramech, and Enganym, 21 
and Enadda, and Bethfeses. And the terme 22 
therof cometh ‘til to Tabor, and Seesymal, 
and Hethsemes™; and the outgoyngis ther- 
of weren Jordan, sixtene citees, and ‘the 
townes of tho". This is the possessioun 23 
of the sones of Ysachar, bi her meynees, 
the®" citees and the townes of tho. And 24 
the fiuethe lot felde to the lynage of the 
sones of Aser, by her meynees; and the2s 
terme of hem was Alchat, and Adi, and 
Bethen, and Mesaph, and Elinelech, and 26 
Amaad, and Messal; and it cometh ‘til to° 
Carmel of? the see, and Sior, and Laba- 
nath"; and it turneth ajen, ajens the eest, 27 
to Bethdagan; and passith’ ‘til tot Zabu- 
lon, and to the valei of Jeptael, a3ens the 
north, in Bethemeth, and Neyel; and it 
goith out to the left side to Gabul, and 2s 
Acran", and Roob, and Omynon’, and 
Chane, ‘til to” grete Sidon; and it turneth 29 
ajen in to Horma, ‘til to” the strongeste 
citee Tire, and ‘til to* Ossam; and the 


P leste E pr.m. 


Xyntor.  yY that 1. Z it goith 1. a stieth up 1. b passith forth 1. €to Thacasym 1. 4 into 


Amphar 1. © it cumpassith 1. f to Nachon 1. 


€ her townes1. hand these ben 1. i her townes and 


vilagisr, k vuto 1. |to Seesymar. ™to Hethsemes:. "her townes 1. 2" and these ben the 1. 
© vuto tr. P that is a mount of 1. 4Om.1. ‘to Labanath 1. § it passith1, tyntor. to Acran 1. 


¥to Omynon 1. ¥ vnto 1. 


XIX. 30-—48. 


and the goyngis out of it shulen be into 
30the see, fro the litil coord Aczima, and 
Affeth, and Roab; cytees two and twenti, 
3iand the touns of hem. This is the pos- 
sessioun of the sones of Aser, bi her kyn- 
32 redis, citees, and the! touns of hem. Of 
the sones of Neptalym the sext lot fel, bi 
33 her meynees; and bigunne the teerme fro 
Heleth, and Helon, and Sannayra, and 
Adarny, that is Neseb, and Jebnael, vnto 
Letun ; and the goynge out of hem unto 
34 Jordan; and cometh azen the teerme, a3ens 
the west, in Arnoth Thabor; and thens 
gooth out in to Hucota, and passith into 
Zabulon, a3ens the south, and into Asor, 
ajens the west, and into Juda, at Jordan, 
35a3ens the rysyng of the sunne; of the 
‘moost strengthid’ cites’ Assedyn, Ser, and 
36 Amraath, and Rechath, and Cenereth, and 
37 Edema, and Arama, Asor, and Cedes, 
33and Edray, and Nason, and Jeron, and 
Magdael, Horem, and Bethanath, and 
Bethsemes; citees nynteen, and the touns 
390f hem. ‘This is the possessyoun of the 
lynage of the sones of Neptalym, bi her 
kynredis, citees, and the litil touns of 
4ohem. To the lynage of the sones of Dan, 
bi her meynees, wente out the seuenthe 
41 lot; and was the teerme of his possessioun 
Saraa, and Aschahol, and Darsemes, that 
42is, the cytee of the sunne, Selenym, and 
43 Haylon, and Jethela, and Helom, and 
44 Thenna, and Acrom, and Hethesem, and 
45 Jebtom, and Baalath, Lud, and Beneba- 
46rach, and Jethremmon, and Yharchon, 
and Arechon, with the teerme that bi- 
47holdith Joppen, and with that eend is 
closid. And the sones of Dan stieden vp, 
and fou3ten ajens Lesem, and token it, 
and smyten it in mouth of swerd, and 
weeldiden, and dwelten in it, clepynge 
the name of Lesan Dan, of the name of 
48 Dan, his fader. This is the possessioun 
of the lynage of the sones of Dan, bi her 


q Om. «4. 


yof Roobr. 2 her townes 1. 
€ that is clepid 1. 


m of this lynage 1. 


x of Affeth 1. 
Cherr. 4 fro a sup.ras. 
kand herr. ! tho citees 1. 
up 1 P Lesem 1. 4 thei smoten 1. 


JOSHUA. 


t leste E prim 


a and her 1. 
f ynto 1. 

2 Jeth, Remmon a. Jeth and Remmon 1, 
® thei hadden it 1. 


601 


outgoyngis therof schulen be in to the see, 
fro the part of Aczyma, and Affeth*, and 30 
Roob’; two and twenti citees, and ‘the 
townes of tho%. This is the possessioun 3) 
of the sones of Aser, bi her meynees, ‘the? 
citees, and ‘townes of tho». The sixte lot32 
of the sones of Neptalym felde, bi her 
meynees; and the® terme bigan of 4 He-33 
leth, and Helon, and Sannaira, and Adarny, 
‘which is* Neceb, and Jebnael, ‘til tof Le- 
tum; and the outgoyng of hem til® to 
Jordan ; and the terme turneth a3en, azens 34 
the west, in to Arnoth of Thabor; and 
fro thennus it goith out in to Hucota, and 
passith" in to Zabulon, ajens the south, 
and in to Agor, a3jens the west, and in to 
Juda, at Jordan, ajens the risyng of the 
sunne; of the strongeste citee Assydym, Ser, 35 
and Amraath, and Rechath, Cenereth, and 36 
Edema, and Arama, Asor, and Cedes, and 37 
Edrai, Nason, and Jeron, and Magdael, 3s 
Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethsemes ; 
nyntene citees, and ‘the townes of tho! 
This is the possessioun of the lynage of'39 
the sones of Neptalym, bi her meynees, 
the* citees, and the townes of tho. The4o 
seuenthe lot 3ede out to the lynage of the 
sones of Dan, bi her meynees; and the41 
terme of the possessioun therof™ was Sa- 
raa, and Ascahol, and Darsemes, that is, 
the citee of the sunne, Selenym, and Hai- 42 
lon, and Jethala, Helom, and 'Thenna, and 43 
Acrom, Helthecem, Jebtom, and Baalath, 44 
Lud, and Benebarach, and ‘Jethremmon”, 45 
and Jhercon, and Arecon, with the terme 46 
that biholdith Joppen, and is closid with 47 
that ende. And the sones of Dan stieden®, 
and fou3ten aj3ens Lesem; and thei token 
itP, and smytiden’ it bi the scharpnes of 
swerd, and hadden™ in possessioun, and 
dwelliden therynne ; and thei clepiden the 
name therof Lesan Dant, by the name of 
Dan, her fadir. This is the possessioun 48 
of the lynage of Dan, bi her meynees, the‘ 


8 Om. «BF. 


b her townes 1. the townes of tho Kb. 
hit passith 1. i her townes 1. 
° wenten 


& lastith 1. 


8 and her 1. 
4 


t+ Lesan Dan; 
in Ebreu it is 
Lesem Dan, 
that is, that that 
was clepid Le- 
sem bifore, thei 
clepeden Dan. 
Lire here. c. 


602 


kynredys, cytecs, and litil touns of hem. 
a9 And whanne he hadde fulfillid bi lot the 
loond to dyuyde to eche bi his‘ lynagis, 
3euen the sones of Yrael possessioun to 
Josue, the sone of Nun, in her" mydil, 
s0 after the heest of the Lord, the citee that 
he askide, Thannath Sara, in the hil of 
Effraym ; and he bildide’ the cytee, and 
51 dwellide in it. Thes ben the possessiouns 
that bi lot dyuydeden Eleazar’’, the 
preest, and Josue, the sone of Nun, and the 
princes of the meynees, and of the lynagis 
of the sones of Yrael, in Silo, before the 
Lord, at the dore of the tabernacle of 
witnessynge, and partiden the loond. 


CAP. XX. 


1 And the Lord spak to Josue, seiynge, 
Spek to the sones of Yrael, and sey to 
2hem, Seuer 3e the cytees of fugityues, of 
whiche I spake to 30u bi the hond of 
3 Moises, that® fle3e to hem*, whoso euerY 
a lijf hath smytun vnawitynge’; that 
he mowe ascaap the wrath of the nei3- 
4hore, that is wreker of the blood, whanne 
to oon of these cytees he fleeth. And he 
shal stoond before the 3atis of the citee, 
and he shal speke to the aldren* of that 
citee tho thingis that hym silf preuen 
innocent; and so thei shulen take hym, 
sand 3yue hym a place to dwelle. And 
whanne the blood wreker hym pursue, 
thei shulen not take hym in to his hoondis; 
for vnwitynge he smoot the nei3bore of 
hym, ne before two dayes or thre daies he 
6shal be prened the enemye of hym. And 
he shal dwelle in that citee to the tyme 
that he stoond before dom, cause 3eeldynge 
of his deede®. And abide he stille that hath 
slayn, to the tyme that the greet preest dye, 
that were in that tyme; thanne shal the 
mansleer turne a3en, and go into the citee 
t her a. 


whis e pr.m. Vbilde scru. 


JOSHUA. 


wy Aleazar a. 


XIX. 49—XX. 6. 


citees, and townes* of tho. And whanne4y 
thei hadden fillid" to departe the lond bi 
lot to alle men bi her lynagis, the’ sones 
of Israel 3auen possessioun to Josue, sone” 
of Nun, in the myddis of hem, bi theso 
comaundement* of the Lord, the citee 
whichY he axide, Thannath Sara, in the 
hil of Effraym; and he? bildide the* citee, 
and dwellide therynne. These ben thes 
possessiouns whiche Eleazar, preest>, and 
Josue, sone® of Nun, and the princis of 
meynees’, and of the lynagis of the sones 
of Israel, departiden bi lot in Silo, bifor 
the Lord, at the dore of tabernacle® of 
witnessing, and departidenf the lond. 


CAP. XX. 


And the Lord spak to Josue, and seide, 1 
Spek thou to the sones of Israel, and seie 
thou to hem, Departe 3e the citees of fu-2 
gytyuess, ‘ether of men exilid for vnwil- 
Jul schedyng of blood", of whiche' citees 
Y spak to 30u bi the hond of Moises, that's 
whoeuer sleeth vnwytyngli a man, fle! to 
tho™ citees; that" whanne he hath fled to4 
oon of these citees, he may ascape the ire® 
of the neiz3bore, which? is veniere of blood‘. 
And he schal stonde bifor the jatis of the 
citee, and het schal speke to the eldre men 
of that citee tho thingis that schulen preue 
hym innocent’; and so thei schulen res- 
seyue hym, and schulen* 3yue to hym 
placet to dwelle*. And whanne the ven-5 
gere of blood’ pursueth hym, thei schulen 
not bitake hym in to the hondis* of the 
vengere; for vnwityngli he killide his 
neizbore, and isY not preued his enemy 
bifor the secounde dai* ethir the thridde 
dai. And he schal dwelle in that citee, til 
he stonde bifor the doom, and 3elde* cause 
of his dede. And he that killide a¢ man, 
dwelle ‘in that citee*, til* the grete preest 


+ that slewe the 
man unteit- 
tingly. 1 marg. 


wOm. 4. 


x hem that 4. Yer £. 2 vnwitynge 

he flee to hem a. @elderesc. > purswueth c. ¢deeth a. : 
tthe townes rb. 4 fulfillid 1. Vthannethe1. Wthesoner. *heest1. Ythewhichi. 2 Josuer. 
“that 1. > the preestr. ¢the sone 1. 4 the meyneesx. ¢the tabernacle grko.  f thei departiden 1. 
& exiled meni. 4 Om.isx. ithe whiche1. * Om. x. 'flehez thes. Dandi. © wrath 7. 
Pthatr. thedeth i. ‘giltleestherof1. $theischulenz. taplacer, dwelle ynner. the 
blood 1, W thei of that citee 1, X power I. Yheist. 2Om. kx. ®3elde or schewet. » the 


cause plures, ¢thet. 4 therei. © til that 1. 


XK. 7—XXI. 5. 


7and his hows, fro the which he flei3. And 
thei seuerden® Cedes in® Galile, of the 
hil of Neptalim, and Sichem in the hil of 
Effraym, and Caryatarbe, that is Ebron, 

sin the hil of Juda. And bi3jond Jordan, 
a3ens the est coost ‘of Jericho’, thei or- 
deynden Bozor, that is set in the feeldy? 
wildirnes of the lynage of Ruben, and 
Ramoch in Galaad, of the lynage of Gad, 
and Gaulon in Basan, of the linage of 

9Manasse. Thes ben the citees ordeynd 
to the sones of Irael, and to comlyngis 
that dwellen among hem, that ‘heb flee3e 
to tho, the whiche vnwitynge a lijf hath 
smyten; and he die not in the hoond of 
the neizbour, coueytynge to wreek the 
shad blood, to the tyme that he to ex- 
pounen' his cause, stoond before the 
puple. 


CAPA XL 


1 And the princes of the meynees of 
Leuy camen to Eleazar, the preest, and 
to Josue, the sone of Nun, and to the 
dukys of the kynredis, bi eche lynagis of 

2the sones of Yrael; and thei speken to 
hem in Silo, of the loond of Chanaan, 
and seiden, The Lord comaundide bi the 
hoond of Moyses, that there shulden be 
3eue to vs cytees to dwel*, and suburbis 

30f hem to beestis to be fed. And the 
sones of Irael 3auen of! her possessiouns, 
after the heest of the Lord, citees and 
asuburbs of hem. And the lot wente out 
in to the meynee of Chaat, of the sones 
of Aaron, preest, of the lynage of Juda, 
and of Symeon, and of™ Beniamyn, citees 
sthretteen; and to ‘that other" of the 
sones of Chaath, that is, to the Leuytis 
that weren ouer, of the lynagis of Ef- 
fraym, and of Dan, and of half the lynage 


eand apcru. {Om. a. 


m Om. 4. 


4 demedyn E pr. m. 
kK dwelina. Om. 1. 


f the which 1. 
mof1. ™ the comelyngis 1. 
sone1. t Om, Gkmsxb. ¥ the kynredis 1. 
“for ouret. fed ynnex. » Om.1. 
© the preest 1. f lynage A pr.m. EILMP. 


h that 1. 
© the neizbore 1. 


& into his hows 1. 


JOSHUA. 


& feeldli a. 
n the tothere c. 


i fledde fro 1. 
P til that 1. 
Vv thei 1. 
¢ the comanndement 1. 
& tothere K. 


603 


die, which’ is in that tyme; thanne the 

mansleere schal turne a3en, and he schal 

entre in to his -citee and hows8,‘fro which 

he fleddei. And thei ordeyneden Cedesi!7 
in* Galilee, of the hil of Neptalym, and Si- 

chem in the hil of Effraym, and Cariath- 

arbe, thilke is Ebron, in the hil of Juda. 

And bizende Jordan, a3ens the eest coosts 
of Jerico, thei ordeyneden Bosor, which! 

is set in the feeldi wildirnesse of the ly- 

nage of Ruben, and Ramoth in™ Galaad, 

of the lynage of Gad, and Gaulon in Ba- 

san, of the lynage of Manasses. These9 
citees weren ordeyned to alle the sones of 
Israel, and to comelyngis® that dwellen 

among hem, that he that killide ynwit- 

yngli a man, schulde fle to tho citees; 

and he schulde not die in the hond of 
neiz3bore®, coueitynge to venge the blood 

sched out, til? he stood bifor the puple, to 

declare his cause. 


CAP. XXI. 


And the princes of meynees1 of Leuy 1 
neiziden to Eleazar, preest", and to Josue, 
sone® of Nun, and to thet duykis of kyn- 
redis", bi alle the lynagis of the sones of 
Israel; and the LeuytisY spaken to heme 
in Sylo”, of the lond of Canaan, and seid- 
en*®, The Lord comaundide bi the honde 
of Moises, that citees schulden be 3ouun 
toY vs to dwelle ynne, and the subarbis of 
tho toz werk beestis to be fed*. And thes 
sones of Israel] 3auen ‘of her possessiouns?, bi 
comaundement® of the Lord, citees and the 
subarbis of tho’. And the lot 3ede out in4 
to the meynee of Caath, of the sones of 
Aaron, preest®, of the lynages’ of Juda, 
and of Symeon, and of Beniamyn, thret- 
tene citees ; and to the othere® of the sones5 
of Caath, that is, to dekenes* that weren 
left, of the lynagis of Effraym, and of 
Dan, and of the half lynage of Manasse, 


hthei ze prom. i expounynge & pr.m. 


k a@citeein1i. | thatx. 

t the preest 1. 5 the 
x thei seidenz, YOm.s. 
4 tho to the possessiouns of dekens 1. 
h ¢<he dekenes 1. 


4H 2 


fi citees c. 
4 the meynees 1. 
W Sylo, a citee 1. 


604 


sof Manasse, cytees ten. Forthermore to 
‘the sones of Gerson wente out lot, that 
thei taken of the lynagis of Ysachar, and 
Aser, and Neptalym, and of the half 
lynage of Manasse in Basan, cytees in 
jynoumbre thretteen; and to the sones of 
Merary, bi her kynredis, of the lynagis 
of Ruben, and of Gad, and of Zabulon, 
seitees twelue. And the sones of Yrael 
3auen to the Leuytis citees, and suburbs 
of hem, as the Lord comaundide bi the 
hoond of Moyses, eche bi lot 3yuynge. 
9Of the lynagis of the sones of Juda, and 
of Symeon, Josue 3af citees, of the® whiche 
iothes ben the names; to the sones of 
Aaron, bi the meynees of Chaath, of 
Leuy? kynde; forsothe the fyrst lot goon 
11out to hem is; Caryatharbe, of the fader 
of Enach, that is clepid Ebron, in the hil 
of Juda, and the suburbs of it bi enuy- 
1zroun; forsothe feeldis and the touns of it 
‘he 3af to Caleph‘, the sone of Jephone, 
13to weeld. He jaf thanne to the sones of 
Aaron, preest', Ebron, the citee of fli3t, 
and the suburbs of it, and Lebna with 
ishis suburbs, and Gether, and Yschymon, 
i2and Elon, and Dabyr, and Aym, and 
Lethan, and Bethsames with his sub- 
urbs ; citees nyne, of the lynagis, as it 
i7is seid, of two*; forsothe of the lynage 
of the sones of Beniamyn, Gabaon, and 
isGabae, and Anathot, and Almon with 
1i9his suburbs ; citees foure. Alle togidre 
the citees of the sones of Aaron, preest, 
20 thretteen, with her suburbis. Forsothe 
to that' other of Leuyte kynde, bi the 
meynees of the sones of Caath, this" the 
2130uen possessioun ; of the lynage of Ef- 
frayin, the cytee of fli3t, Sichem, with hys 
suburbs, in the hil of Effraym, and Ga- 
22ser, and Cebseyn, and Bethoron with his 


© Om. c. 
0 this is cE. 


P Leuite BcEFH. 


i weren 3ouen tent. & And 1. 
twelue 1. P the dekenes 1. 4 her 1. Om. K. 
dekeus bis. ° possessiouns of 1. Vv the whiche r. 
2thati. @ofthei. >» Om. 1. 
€the townes1. fthesoner. & the preest 1. 
™ subarbis of it 1. 1 hise a pr.m. e¢ plures. 


r the preest 1. Sbutz. ¢ the tother plures. 
citees 1. 


JOSHUA. 


4 Caleph 3af to & pr.m. 


I take in the cuntre of Basan 1. 
rOm.1. of hem n. 
Wand t. 
¢ he 3af GKNOS sec.m.x. he 3af to the dekens 1. 
h to beat. 
© Andi. 
u Om. pernrsxb. 


XXI, 6—~22. 


ten' citees. Sotheli* lot jede out to thee 
sones of Gerson, that thei schulden take! 
of the lynagis™ of Isachar, and of Aser, 
and of Neptalym, and of the half lynage 
of Manasses ‘in Basan", threttene citees 
in noumbre ; and to the sones of Merari,7 
bi her meynees, of the lynagis of Ruben, 
and of Gad, and of Zabulon, twelue® citees. 
And the sones of Israel 3auen to dekenes?P 8 
cytees, and the! subarbis ‘of tho", as the 
Lord comaundide bi the hond of Moises; 
and alle’ 3auen bit lot. Of" the lynagis9 
of the sones of Juda, and of Symeon, 
Josue 3af citees ; to the sones of Aaron, bi 10 
the meynees of Caath, of the kyn of Leuy, 
of whiche’ citees these ben the names; 
for” the firste lot 3ede* out to hem; Ca-11 
riatharbeY, of the fadir of Enach, which? 
is clepid Ebron, in the hil of Juda, and 
the* subarbis therof bi cumpas; sotheli® 12 
he hadde 3oue® the’ feeldis and townes® 
therof to Caleph, sonef of Jephone, to haue 
in possessioun. Therfor Josue 3af to the 13 
sones of Aaron, preest*, Ebron, a® citee of 
refuyt, and the subarbis ‘of iti, and Leb- 
nam* with hise! subarbis™, and Jether, and 14 
Yschymon, and Elon, and Dabir, and Ayn, 1 
and Lethan, and Bethsames, with her® sub- 
arbis ; nyne citees, of twei lynagis, as it is 
seid. Sotheli® of the lynage of the sones 17 
of Beniamyn, he 3af? Gabaon, and Gabee, 
and Anatoth, and Almon, with her sub-1is 
arbis; ‘foure citees4. Alle the citees to-19 
gidere of the sones of Aaron, preest', weren 
threttene, with her subarbis. Forsothe’ to 20 
‘the othere', bi the" meynees of the sones 
of Caath, of the kyn of Leuy, this pos- 
sessioun was 3o0uun; of the lynage of21 
Effraym, the citee of refuyt, Sichen’, with 
hise subarbis, in the hil of Effraym, and® 
Gazer, and Sebsam, and Bethoron, with 22 
t the c. 


tthe preest E prim. § tweine cE. 


mlynager. 28 Om. 1. ° were 30uen 
8 alle the sones of Israel1. * to the 
xthat yede x. Y was Cariatharbe, a cilee 1. 
4 and he jaf the 1, 

itherofr. k he jaf Lebnam1. ! the 1. 
P 3af to the dekens foure citees1. 4 Om. 1. 
v was Sichen 1. W and foure ofhere 


sie — a. 


23suburbs; citees foure; and of the lynage 
210f Dan, Helthece, Gebethon, and Hay- 
halon, and Gethremmon with his suburbs; 
25 cytees foure; forsothe of the half lynage 
of Manasse, Thanach, and Gethremon, 
26 with his suburbs, citees two. Alle the ten 
cytees and suburbs of hem ben 3eue to 
the sones of Caath, of the lower degree. 
27 Forsothe to the sones of Gerson, of Le- 
uyte kynde, he hath 3ouun, of the half 
lynage of Manasse, citees of fli3t, Gaulon 
in Basan, and Bosram, with his suburbis; 
28 citees two; forsothe of the lynage of Ysa- 
29 char, Thesion, Dabireth, and Geromoth, 
and Enganym with his suburbs; citees 
30foure; of the lynage of Azer, Masal, and 
31 Abdon, and Elechat, and Roob with his 
32suburbs; cytees foure; and of the lynage 
of Neptalym, citee of fli3t, Cedes in™ Ga- 
lile, and Ainodor, and Carthan with his 
33 suburbs; cytees three. Alle the citees of 
the meynees of Gerson, thretteen, with 
3this’ suburbs. Forsothe to the sones of 
Merary, Leuytis of the lower degre, bi 
her meynees, is 30uun, of the lynage of 
35 Zabulon, Getheron, and Carcha, and Dem- 
na, and Nalol; cytees foure, with her 
36suburbs ; of the lynage of Gad, the cytee 
of fliz3t, Ramoth in Galaad, and Manahym, 
and Esebon, and Jazer; citees foure, with 
37her suburbs; and of the lynage of Ru- 
ben, bijond Jordan, a3ens Jericlio, citee 
of refuyt, Bozor in the wildernes of My- 
sor, and Jazer, and Jecson, and Maspha; 
38 citees foure, with her” suburbs. Alle the 
cytees of the sones of Merary, bi meynees 
39and her kynredis, twelue. And so alle 
the citees of Leuytis, in the mydil of the 
possessioun of the sones of Yrael, weren 
40 ei3t and fourti, with her suburbs, eche 
41bi meynees delid. And the Lord God 
hath 3ouun to Yrael al the loond that he 


weand «4. 


xhise a pr.m. ef plures. Y Om. 1. 


JOSHUA. 


v her c. 


2, Dan he 3af hem foure eitees 1. 


605 


her* subarbis; ‘foure citeesY; also of the 23 
lynage of Dan’, Helthece, and Gebethon, 
and Haialon, and Gethremmon, with her 24 
subarbis ; ‘foure citees*; sotheli> of the 2s 
half lynage of Manasses, Thanach‘, and 
Gethremon, with her subarbis; ‘twei citees®. 
Alle the citees ten‘, and the$ subarbis ‘of 26 
tho" weren 3ouun to the sones of Caath, 
of the lowere degree. Also to! the sones 27 
of Gerson, of the kyn of Leuy, Josue 3af 
of the half lynage of Manasses, citees* 
of refuyt, Gaulon in Basan, and Bosra, 
with her subarbis, ‘twei citees!. Forsothe™ 28 
of the lynage of Isachar, he 3af" Cesion, 
and Daberath, and Jerimoth, and Engan-29 
nym, with her subarbis ; ‘foure citees®. Of 30 
the lynage of Aser, he 3af? Masal, and 
Abdon, and Elecath, and Roob, with her 3: 
subarbis ; ‘foure citees1. Also of the ly-32 
nage of Neptalym, ‘he 3af" the citee’ of 
refuyt, Cedes in Galile, and Amodor, and 
Carthan, with her subarbis; ‘thre citeest*. 
Alle the citees of the meynees of Gerson 33 
weren threttene, with her subarbis. So-34 
theli® to the’ sones of Merary, dekenes” 
of the lowere degree, bi her meynees, was* 
3ouuny Getheran, of the linage of Zabulon, 
and Charcha, and Demna, and Nalol; ‘foure 35 
citees*, with her subarbis. And? of the36 
lynage of Gad, he 3af°¢ the citee’ of re- 
fuyt, Ramoth in Galaad, and Manaym, 
and Esebon, and Jaser; ‘foure citees*, with 
her subarbis. And of the lynage of Ru-37 
ben, bi3ende Jordan, a3ens Jerico, he 3af 
‘the citeef of refuyt, Bosor in® the wildir- 
nesse of Mysor, and Jazer, and Jecson, 
and Maspha; ‘foure citees", with her sub- 
arbis. Alle the citees of! Merary, biss 
her meynees and kynredis, weren twelue. 
And so alle the citees of Leuytis*, in the! so 
myddis of possessioun™ of the sones of Is- 
rael, weren ei3te and fourti, with her sub- 40 


W his £ pr.m. 


bAndz. ¢ Om. ts. 


a Om. 1. 


4 he 3af to hem two eitees Thanach 1. ©Om,1. fweren ten. Sherr. Bthat 1. iOm.s. * two citees 1. 


10m1. ™Andi. % 3af to hem foure citees1. © Om.1.  P 3af to hem foure eitees1, 4 Om. 1. 
rOm.1. § three citees1. tOm.1. tAndi. Vthe dekens of ther, WOm.1. * wereni. Y3ouun 
foure eitees1. 7Om.1. 2Om.1. > Josuer. ¢3aftohemi. 4 foure eitees1. © Om.1. flo hem 
four eitees 1. & thatisin1. bOm.1. i 30uen to the sonesof1. the dekensi. |!Om.1. ™the 


possessioun 1. 


606 


swore hym self to seue to faders of hem, 
and thei weeldiden it, and dwelten in it. 

42 And of hym is 30uun pees in alle na- 
ciouns bi enuyroun; and noon of the ene- 
myes is hardi to withstoond hem, but alle 

43 ben brou3t into the lordship of hem. For- 
sothe ne o word that to hem he bihi3te 
hym self to be to 3eue*, was maad in 
veyn, but in dedys alle thingis ben ful- 
fillyd. 


CAP. AX, 
1 The same tyme Josue’ elepide? Ruben- 
ytis, and Gadditis, and half the* lynage of 
2 Manasse, and seide to hem, 3e han doo 
alle thingis that to 30u comaundide 
Moyses, the seruaunt of the Lord, and to 
3me in alle thingis 3e han obeishid ; ne 3e 
han left youre britheren long tyme vnto 
the present day, kepynge the heest of the 
4Lord 3oure God. For thanne the Lord 
jour God hath 3eue to 3oure britheren 
rest and pees, as he» hath bihoot, turne 
3e ajen, and gooth yn to 30ur tabernaelis, 
into the loond of 3oure possessioun, that 
took to 30w Moyses, the sernaunt of the 
5Lord, bizjond Jordan; so oonli that 3e 
kepen attentifly, and in dede fulfil, and 
the maundement and the lawe, that co- 
maundide to 3ow Moyses, the seruaunt 
of the Lord ; that 3e louen the Lord 3oure 
God, and goon in alle his weies, and kepe 
wel the heestis of hym, and drawe to 
hym, and serue in al herte, and in alle 
s30ure soule. And Josue blesside to hem, 
and Jafte hem, the whiehe ben turned 
7a3en into her tabernaclis. And Moyses 
3af to the half lynage of Manasse posses- 
sioun in Basan; and therfor to the half 
that lefte ouere, Josue 3af lot among his* 
other britheren bi3ond Jordan, at the west 


* 3euynge E pr.m. exp.sec. Y Jesu EF. 
*tho 1. 44 that 1. 
alle men 1. 4 her 1. 
P he seide 1. 

t heest 1. u hath 3oue 1. 
of DEFLMNoPaRsuXb. 2Z that 1. 


bherr. ¢ Om. 1. 


iOm.1. &K that 1. 


v the which 1. 


JOSHUA. 


Z cleep BEF. 


ce the Lord 1. 
1 Israel 1. 
4 the Lordis seruaunt 1. the seruaunt of the Lord Gx. 

w Lordis seruaunt I. 
4 Lordis seruaunt 1. 


XRT geo 


arbis; and alle citees* weren departid by 
meynees. And-the Lord 3af to Israel al4i 
the lond{ which** he swoor hym silf to + #2 the dona, 


5 2 that is, as 
3yue to the? fadris ‘of hem®, and thei had- myche lond es 
sae : ° thei 
den it in possessioun, and dwelliden ther- tonne ane 


ynne. And pees was 3ouun of hym®? in42 wih pple and 
to alle naciouns ‘by cumpas*; and noon of “ere. c. 
enemyes was® hardi to withstonde hem‘, 
but alle? weren dryuen in to the? lord- 
schip ‘of hem'. Forsothe nether o word, 43 
which* he bihizte him silf to 3yue to hem!, 
was voide, but alle wordis™ weren fillid® 
in werkis. 
CAP. XXII. 

In the same tyme Josue elepide men? of1 
Ruben, and men® of Gad, and half the 
lynage of Manasses, and seide? to hem,2 
3e han do alle thingis whiehe Moises, ‘ser- 
uaunt of the Lord4, comaundide to jou, 
also 3e obeieden to me in alle thingis;3 
nether 3e han lefte 3oure britheren in myeh 
tyme til in to present’ dai, and 3e kepten’ 
the comaundementt of 3oure Lord God. 
Therfor for 3oure Lord God jaf" reste 
and pees to 3oure britheren, as he bihi3te, 
turne 3e a3en, and go 3e in to 3oure taber- 
naelis, and in to the loond of 3oure pos- 
sessioun, which’ fond Moyses, the ‘ser- 
uaunt of the Lord’, 3af to 30u bizende 
Jordan; so onely that 3e kepe bisili, ands 
filles in werk the comaundement and lawe, 


‘which lawe? Moises, the ‘seruaunt of the 


Lord’, comaundide to 30u; that 3e loue 
3oure Lord God, and go in alle hise weies, 
and kepe hise heestis, and cleue to hym 
and serue /zm in al 30ure herte, and in al 
joure soule. And Josue blesside hem, and 6 
lefte hem, whiche® turneden a3en in to her 
tabernaelis. Sothelit Moyses hadde 30ue7 
possessioun in Basan to the half lynage of 
Manasses ; and therfor to the half dynage 
that lefte Josue 3af part ainong her othere 
britheren bijendis Jordan, at the west 


a Om. peru. > Om. B. 


¢ Om. £ pr.m. 


@ aboute 1. €werenr. f the sones of Israel 1. 
m™his wordis1. \® fulfillid1. © the men 1. 
r this present 1. Shan kept 1. 

x fulfille 1. Y of the 1K. 


b Om. plures. ©the whiche1. 4 For 1. 


XXII. 8—17. 


coost. And whanne he shulde leeue hem 
into her tabernaclis, and hadde blessid 
shem, he seide to bem, In myche sub- 
staunce and rytches® turne 3e a3en to 
joure seetis; with siluer, and gold, and 
bras, and yren, and manyfold clothinge ; 
deuyde 3e the praye of enemyes’ with 
930ure britheren. And the sones of Ru- 
ben, and the sones of Gad, and the half 
lynage of Manasse turneden ajen, and 
- wenten fro the sones of Yrael fro Silo, 
that is set in Chanaan, that thei goon 
into Galaad, the loond of her possessioun, 
that thei hadden after the heest of the 
ioLord in the hoond of Moyses. And 
whanne thei weren comen to the mynde® 
hyllis of Jordan, into the loond of Cha- 
naan, thei bildiden biside Jordan an au- 
uiter of mychilnes with out mesure. The 
which whanne the sones of Yrael hadden 
herd, and to hem certeyn messangeris 
hadden toold, the sones of Ruben, and of 
Gad, and the half lynage of Manasse to 
haue bilde an auter in the loond of Cha- 
naan, vpon Jordans" myndei hillis, a3ens 
12 the sones of Yrael, alle thei camen togidre 
in Cylo, that thei stien vp, and fi3ten 
i3a3ens hem. And ‘in the mene tyme thei 
senten! to hem into the loond of Galaad, 
Phynees, the sone of Eleazar, preest™, 
1gand ten princes with hym; eche of eche 
islynages. The whiche camen to the sones 
of Ruben, and of Gad, and of the half 
lynage™ of Manasse, vnto the loond of 
16 Galaad, and seiden to hem, Thes thingis 
sendith al the puple of the Lord; What 
is this -transgressioun ? Whi han 3e for- 
sakun the Lord God of Yrael, bildynge a 
sacrilege auter, aud fro the heriynge of 
izhym goynge awey? Whether litil it is 
to jou that 3e synneden in Belphegor, 
and vnto the day that is nowe the spot 
of this hidows gilt in 30u dwellith, and 


€ richysses E. 


f the enemyes £. 
I sendyn E. 


™m the preest E pr.m. 


ewith mycher. fthehalf1. 6 that1. 
M stie up 1. the preest 1. © prestis 1. 
t sendith fv 3001. tOm.s. YOm.1. ¥ Om.1. 


iannce for her mawmetrie 1. 9 day that is nowe 1. 


JOSHUA. 


@ litul x prem. 
« the lynage E pr. m. 


h the Lordis heest 1. 
P the whiche 1. 


607 


coost therof. And whanne Josue leet hem 

go in to her tabernaclis, and hadde blessid 

hem, he seyde to hem, With myche catel s 

and richessis turne 3e a3en to 30ure seetis ; 

with siluer and gold, and bras, and yrun, 

and myche® clothing ; departe je the prey 

of enemyes with joure britheren. And they 

sones of Ruben, and the sones of Gad, and 

‘half the lynage of Manasses turneden a3en, 

and 3eden fro the sones of Israel fro Silo, 

which? is set in the lond of Canaan, that 

thei schulden entre in to Galaad, the lond 

of her possessioun, which® thei gaten bi 

‘comaundement of the Lord’ in the hond 

of Moises. And whanne thei hadden come 10 

to the litle hillist of Jordan, in to the lond — + # the litle 

of Cauaan, thei bildiden bisidis Jordan an ae ae 

auter of greetnesse{ ouer comyn mesure. {rms of Jor 

And whanne the sones of Israel haddeni fone ta 

herd this, and certeyn messangeris hadden — Ebren itis, an 

teld to hem, that the sones of Ruben, and ee 

of Gad, and the half lynage of Manasses 

hadden bildid an auter in the lond of Ca- 

naan, on! the heepis of Jordan, a3eus the 

sones of Israel, alle camen togidir in Silo, 12 

that! thei schulden stie™, and fi3te a3ens 

hem. And in the meene tyme thei senten 13 

to hem in to the Iond of Galaad, Fyuees, 

preest", the sone of Eleazar, and tenis 

princes® with hym; of ech lynage o prince. 

Whiche? camen to tlie sones of Ruben, and 1s 

of Gad, and of the" half lynage of Ma- 

nasses, in to the lond of Galaad, and 

seiden’ to hem, Al the puple of the Lord 16 

sendith' these thingis; What is this" tres- 

passyng ? Whi han 3e forsake the Lord 

God of Israel, and han’ bildid a cursid 

auter, and han go awei fro the” worschip- 

ing of hym? Whether* it is litil to 30u17 

that 3e synneden|| in Belfegor, and the 

wem of this trespas dwellith in 30u til in 

to presentY dai, and many of the puple pag 

felden doun?? And to day* 3e han forsake 18 a 
to 30u, of which 
we ben not 


k eft & prim. cleene til to this 
day. c. 


W Wher it is 
litil to 30u, that 
3e synneden, 


h Jordand 4. ilitul g prem. 


land s. 
8 thei seiden 1. 
2 doun bi ven- 


k alle thei 1. 
rOm. cr. 
y this present 1. 


! npon 1. 
4 to GIKMNOXb. 
x Wher plures. 


608 


ismany of the puple han faln doun? And 
3e to day han forsakun the Lord, and to 
morwe in to al Israel the wrath of hym 
ig9shal wexe wood. And if 3e° wenen the 
loond of 3oure possessioun to be vnclene, 
gooth to the loond, in the which is the 
tabernacle of the Lord, and dwelle 3e 
among vs, oonly that fro the Lord 3e 
goon not awei, and fro oure felawship, 
an auter bilden vp biside the auter of the 
20 Lord oure God. Whether not Achor, the 
sone of Zare, passide biside the heest of 
the Lord, and vpon al the puple of Yrael 
the wrath of hym felle?? And he was 
o man; and wolde God he alone hadde 
2iperishid in his hidows gilt. And the 
sones of Ruben, and of Gad, and of the 
half lynage of Manasse, answerden to the 
2zprinces of the message of Yrael, The 
moost strong Lord God of Israel he hath 
knowun, and Yrael togidre shal vndur- 
stoond; if bi inwit of trespassynge this 
auter we han maad vp, keep he vs not, 
23 but punyshe nowe; and if bi that mynde 
we han doon, that brent sacrifices, and 
sacrifice, and pesible slayn offryngis vpon 
24it we han put, he seche, and deme; and 
not more bi that thenkynge and treet 
that we shulen say, To morwe shulen seye 
3oure sones to1 oure sones, What to 3ow 
asand to the Lord God of Yrael? The 
Lord hath put a teerme bitwix" vs and 
30w, O sones of Ruben and sones of Gad, 
Jordan flood; and therfor 3e han no part 
in the Lord; and bi this occasioun 3oure 
sones shulen turne awey oure sones fro 
the dreed of the Lord. And so we trow- 
26eden better, and seiden, Make we out to 
vs an auter, not iuto brent sacrifices, ne 
27to slayn offryngis to be offrid, but into 
witnessynge bitwix’ vs and 30w, and 
3oure children and progenye and oure, 
P felle on cE. 


owe A, q with £ pr.m. 


JOSHUA. 


XXH. 18—27. 


the Lord, and to morewe, that is, in tyme 

to> comynge®, the ire of hym4 schal be feers 

a3ens® al Israel. That if 3e gessen, that 19 

the lond of 3oure possessionn is vneleene, 

passef to the lond, ‘in which’ the taber- 

nacle of the Lord is, and dwelle 3e among 

vs, oneli that 3e go uot awei fro the Lord, 

and fro oure felouschipe, bi an auter 

bildid' outakun the auter of oure Lord 

God. Whether not Achar, the sone of 20 

Zare, passide the comaundement! of the 

Lord, and his™ ire felde on” al the puple 

of Israel? And he was 0 man; and we 

wolden that he aloone hadde perischid in 

his trespas. And the sones of Ruben, and 21 

of Gad, and of half the lynage of Ma- 

nasses, answeriden to the princes of the 

message of Israel, The strongeste Lord 22 

God hym silf of Israel knowith, and Israel 

schal vndirstonde togidere; if we bildiden 

this auter for entent of trespassyng, ‘that 

as, of ° ydolatrye?, he’ kepe not vs, but 

punysche in’ present time; and if we diden 23 

bi that mynde, that we schulden putte 

theronne® brent sacrifice, and sacrifice‘, 

and pesible sacrifices, he seke, and deme; 

and not more ‘bi that thou3t" and tretyng 24 

that we seiden’, 3oure sones” schulen seie 

‘to morew* to oure sonest, What is to jou 

and to the Lord God of IsraelY? 3e? thei schulen 
sones of Ruben, and 3e sones of Gad, the 2s Pas? Jordan to 
Lord hath set a terme, the flood Jordan?, RE a his 
bitwixe vs and 30u; and therfor 3e han epee 
not® part in the Lord; and? bi this occa- thats, 3e han 
sioun joure sones schulen turne awei oure 727 nO 
sones fro the® drede of the Lord. Therfor 

we gessiden betere, and seiden‘, Bilde we 26 

an auter to vs, not in to brent sacrifices, 

nethir to sacrifices? to be offrid, but in to27 
witnessyug bitwixe vs and 3o0u, and bi- 

twixe oure children and 3oure genera- 

cioun, that we serue the Lord, and that 


+ to oure sones, 
that is, whanne 


Y bytwene BcEFH. & bytwene BCEFH. 


bOm.19. © Gloss omitted in sx. ¢the Lord 1. ¢ ajens to a pr.m. soruw. f passe 3e plures. & that 1. 


i to 30u for 3oure fantasie 1 marg. 


h is ynne r. 
P Gloss omitted ini. 4 the Lord 1, 


°Om. Ks. 
of preier 1. 
x Om. 1. 


© no DEFGIKLMNOPERSWXxb. 4 and 3e, Israel 1. 


k Wher plures. 
t he us in this 1. 
U rather we diden it with this thinkyng 1. 

yor What clayme 3e to be of his puple 1 marg. 
€ Om. IKs, 


m™ the Lordis 1. 2 upon 1. 
t sacrifice of 3ifte or 

Vv schulden sey thus 1. W sones herafter 1. 
2 O3e perkmngsx. of Jordanr. » Om. s. 
fwe seiden 1. & slayn sacrifices i. 


1 heest 1. 
8 therupon I. 


XXI1. 28—34. 


that we seruen to the Lord, and of oure 
rijt ben to offre brent sacrificis, and slayn 
offringis, and pesible oostis; and 3oure 
sones seyn not to morwe to oure sones, 
There is not paart to 30n in the Lord. 
23 And if thei wolen seye, thei shulen an- 
swere to hem, Loo! the auter of the 
Lord, that madent oure fadres, not into 
brent sacrificis, ne into sacrifices", but 
into oure and 3o0ure witnessynge ener- 
alastynge. God shilde fro vs this hidows 
gilt, that we goon aweye fro the Lord, 
and his steppis we forsaken, an auter 
made out to brent sacrificis, and sacri- 
ficis, and slayn offryngis to ben offred, 
biside the auter of the Lord oure God, 
that is maad out before the tabernacle of 
3ohym. The whiche thingis herd, Phinees, 
the preest, and princis’ of the message of 
Yrael, that weren with hym, ben plesid ; 
and the wordis of the sones of Ruben, 
and of Gad, and of half lynage of Ma- 
sinasse gladli thei token. And Phynees, 
the sone of Eleazar, preest, seide to 
hei, Now we witen, that with 30u is the 
Lord; for alien 5e ben fro this trespas, 
and 3e han delyuerd the sones of Yrael 
sefro the hoond of the Lord. And he 
turned a3en with the princis fro the sones 
of Ruben’ and of Gad, fro the loond of 
Galaad of* the coostisY of Chanaan, to 
the sones of Yrael; and tolde to hem. 
33 And the word pleside to alle men her- 
ynge; and the sones of Yrael preysiden 
God, and seiden, that no more thei shulden 
goo vp a3ens hem, and fi3te, and do aweie 
31 the loond of the possessioun of hem. And 
the sones of Ruben and the sones of Gad 
clepen? the auter, that thei hadden maad, 
Oure Witnessynge, that the Lord he be 
God. 


thath made £ pr.m. ¥ sacrifise F. 
coost E pr.m. % clepeden c. 


h sacrifice 1. i sleyn offryngis 1. * That 1. } thei: 


JOSHUA. 


V the princis c. 


609 


it be of oure ri3t to offre brent sacri- 
fices*, and sacrifices‘, and pesible sacri- 
fices; and that 30ure sones seie not to 
morewe to oure sones, No part in the 
Lord is to 3ou. Andk if ‘j3oure sones! wolen 28 
seie this, ‘ouwre sones™ schulen answere 
hein, Lo! the auter of the Lord, which" 
oure fadris maden®, not in to brent sacri- 
fices, nether? in to sacrifice’, but in to 
oure and 3our witnessing euerlastingef. 
Fer be this trespas fro vs, that we go awei 29 
fro the Lord, and forsake hise steppis, bi 
an auter bildid to brent sacrifices, and sa- 
crifices', and sacrifices of preisyng to be 
offrids, outakun the auter of ouret ‘Lord 
God*®, which’ is bildid bifore his taber- 
nacle. And whanne these thingis weren 30 
herd, Fynees, preest, and the” princes of 
message* of Israel, that weren with hym, 
weren plesyd; and thei resseyueden gladli 
the wordis of the sones of Ruben, and of 
Gad, and of the half lynage of Manasses. 
And Finees, preest’, the sone of Eleazar, 31 
seide to hem, Now we wyten, that the 
Lord is with 30u; for 3e ben alien” fro 
this trespassyng, and 3e han delyuered the 
sones of Israel fro the hond, ‘that is, 
punyschyng*, of the Lord. And Fynees 32 
turnede az3en with the princes fro the 
sones of Ruben and of Gad, fro the lond 
of Galaad to the coost of Canaan, to the 
sones of Israel; and he telde® to hem. 
And the word pleside to alle men her-33 
ynge°; and the sones of Israel preisiden 
God, and seiden, that no? more ‘thei 
schulden® stie ajens hem, and fiz3te, and do 
awei the lond of her possessioun. And 3, 
the sones of Ruben and the sones of Gad 
clepiden the auter, which’ thei hadden 
bildid, Oure Witnessyng, that the Lord 
hym silf is God. 


W the preest E prom. ate prem YY ny3 


mMmerz. "thatr. © madenié1. Pner 4 sleyn 


sacrifices 1, * slayn sacrifices1. § offrid theron 1. t Om.1, Uthe Lord oure God 1. V that x. .W Om. 1, 
x the message I. Ythe preest 1. alien or giltlees 1. *® or punyschyng 1. Om.s. » tolde these thingis 1. 
cherynge it 1. 4 thei wolden nor. © Om.1. f that 1, 


41 


tT in to oure 
and 30ure wit- 
nessing, that we 

an rizt to come 
and offre in the 
place of Goddis 
tabernacle, and 
in lo 30ure wit. 
nessing, that 3e 
han not power 
to putte us 
awey. Lire 
here. Cc. 


t that the Lord 
him silfis God; 
that is, that the 
rd is oure 
God, as and of 
the Ebrews that 
dwellen in the 
lond of Canaan, 
ether of biheest. 
Lire here. ¢. 


610 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 Ouerturned forsothe myche tyme after 
that the Lord hadde 3eue pees to Irael, 
sugettid alle naciouns in enuyroun; and 
Josue now of long lijf, and of ful old age, 

2 Josue clepid® al Yrael, and the more thur3 
birth, and princis, and dukys, and mays- 
tris, and seide to hem, I haue eeldid, and 

3am of more goon forth age; and 3e bi- 
holden alle thingis that the Lord 3oure 
God hath doon to alle naciouns bi enny- 
roun, what maner wise for 3ou he hath 

4fou3ten. And nowe for he hath dyuydid 
to 30u bi lot al the loond, fro the est paart 
of Jordan vnto the greet see, and manye 
53it naciouns ouerleeuen, the Lord 3oure 

God shal scater hem, and doo awey fro 
joure face; and 3e shulen weeld the loond, 

6as he hath bihoot to 30w. Oonly takith 
comfort, and beth bisy, that 3e kepen alle 
thingis that ben writun in the volym of 
the lawe of Moyses, and that 3e bowen 
not aside fro hem, ne to the ri3t ne to the 

7left, lest after that 3e goon into the gen- 
tylis, that among 30u ben to come, 3e 
sweren in the name of the goddis of hem, 
sand serue to hem, and honoure hem. But 
clene 3e to the Lord 3oure God, the which 
9thing 3e han doon vnto this day; and 
thanne the Lord God* shal doo awey 
in 3oure si3t greet gentilis, and moost 
stronge ; and no man shal? withstoond to 
1030w. Oon of 30u shal pursne a thousand 
men of enemyes, for the Lord 3oure God 
for 3ou he shal fi3t, as he hath bihoot. 
11 This oonli moost bisily be 3e war before, 
12that 3e louen the Lord joure God. And 
if that® 3e wolen drawe! to the errours 
of thes gentilis that among 30u dwellen, 
and with hem mengith? maryagis, and 
13frenships cowple, nowe thanne wite je, 


acleepe BEF. » comynge E pr.m 


JOSHUA. 


© thi God E pr.m. 


XXII. 1—13. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Forsothe& whanne myche tyme was} 
passid after that the Lord had 3oue pees 
to Israel, for" alle naciouns ‘in cumpasi 
weren snget*; and whanne Josue was 
thanne! of long lijf, and ‘of ful™ eld age, 
Josue clepide al Israel, and the grettere2 
men in birthe, and the princes, and dukis, 
and maistris, and seide" to hem, Y ‘wexide 
elde°, and Y am of grettere’ age; and 3e3 
seen’ alle thingis whiche 3oure Lord God 
hath do to alle naciouns ‘bi cumpas’, hou 
he fau3t* for 3on. And now for he de-4 
partide"® to 3ou bi lot al the lond, fro the 
eest part of Jordan ‘til to” the grete see, 
and many naciouns ben left 3it, 3oures 
Lord God ‘schal distrie hem}, and schal* 
take’ awei fro 3oure face; and 3e schulen 
welde the? lond, as he bihi3te to 3ou. Onelic 
be 3e coumfortid, and be 3e bisy, that 3e 
kepe alle thingis that ben writun in the 
book of Moises lawe, and bowe* not awei 
fro tho, nether to the ri3t side nether to 
the left side, lest aftir that 3e han entrid7 
to the® hethene men, that schulen be among 
jou, 3e swere in the name of ‘the goddis of 
hem", and 3e® serue tho goddis, and wor- 
schipe hem. But cleue 3e to 3oure Lords 
God, which’ thing 3e han do “til in to8 
this dai; and thanne" the Lord God schal 9 
do awei in 3oure si3t grete folkis, and} 
strongeste*; and noon schal mow a3en- 
stonde jou. Oon of 3ou schal pursue aio 
thousynde men! of enemyes™, for 3oure 
Lord God schal fi3te for 3ou, as he bihi3te". 
Be 3e war bifore moost diligentli of this 1 
thing oneli, that 3e loue 3oure Lord God. 
That if 3e wolen cleue to the errouris of 12 
these folkis® that dwellen among 30u, and 
wolen medle mariagis with hem, and _cou- 
ple frenschipis, wite 3e ri3t now, that ‘3oure 13 
f of 


a shal moun c. shal mowe zk. ¢ Om. £. 


drawe E pr.m. & meng CE. 

& Andi. handwhanner. iabouter. * sugectid i. sungetide ¢xmo. |!nowsz. ™ ful of plures. 
“he seide x, oOhaneeldidi. greet pn. ful gret 1. ‘biholdenr. ‘*aboute1. hath fougten 1. 
“hath departidi. Yvntor Xheschalr Ytakehemz. Zher1. *®bowe3e1. > tho thingis 1, 
© Om. cixmnsoxb. 4 her goddist. © Om.1. fthe which r. 8 vnto1, 2 Om.s. iQm.1. * moost 
stronge 1. 10m. caw. ™30ur enemyes K. ® hath bihiz3t 1. ° unfeithful folkis 1. 


+ schal distrie 
hem if 3e wor- 
schipen him 
feithfuly and 
deuoutly. Lire 
here. c. 


XXIII. 14—XXIV. 4. 


that the Lord 3oure God do hem not 
awey bifore 3oure face, but to 3ow thei 
shulen be in to a diche, and greue, and 
hurtynge of 3oure side, and a staak in 
joure eyen, to the tyme that he doo 3ou 
a wey, and scater fro this best loond, that 
ithe hath taak to 3ou. Loo! I to day goo 
into the weie of al erthe; and with al 
inwit 3e shulen knowe, that of alle the 
wordis ‘the whiche" ‘the Lord! hath bi- 
hoot hym self to be to* doo! to 3ou, 
he hath not passid biside oon in veyn. 
15 Thanne as he hath fulfillid in dede that 
he hath bihoot, and welsumli alle thingis 
ben comen, so he shal brynge vpon 3ow 
what thing of yuels he hath thrett, to 
the tyme that he do 3ow awey, and 
seater fro this best loond, that he hath 
i6taak to 30u. Forthi that 3e han biside 
passid the couenaunt of the Lord 3oure 
God, that he hath couenauntid with 3ow, 
and 3e han serued to alien goddis, and 
honourde hem, soone and swifth shal 
aryse in 30w the woodnes of the Lord; 
and 3e shulen be takun awey fro this 
best loond, that he hath taak to 3ow. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 And Josue gedride al the lynages!! of 
Yrael in Sechym; and clepide™ the more 
thur3 birth, and princes, and iugis, and 
maystris ; and stoden in the si3t of the 
2Lord. And tothe puple thus he spak, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God of Yrael, 
Bizond the flood dwelten oure fadres fro 
the bigynnynge, Thare, the fader of Abra- 
ham, and Nachor, and serueden to alien 
sgoddis. I haue taak 3oure fader Abra- 
ham fro the eendis of Mesopotanye, and 
haue brou3t hym in to the loond of Cha- 
4naan; Y haue multiplied his seed, and 3af 
to hym Ysaac; and to hym eft I 3af 
Jacob and Esau; of the whiche to Esau 


hthatc. ihe xz prem. k Om, F. 


JOSHUA. 


1 doynge £ pr. im. 


611 


Lord God? schal not do awei hem 'bifor 
joure face, but thei schulen be to 3ou in to 
a dich, and a4 snare, and in to hirtyng of 
3oure side}, and in to stakis in 3oure i3en, 
til 3oure Lord God take awei 30u, and dis- 

trie’ fro this beste loond, which* he 3af to) sche ot 
jou. Lo! Y entre to dai in tot the weye 11 is, ne peeleen 
of al erthe"; and 3e schulen knowe ‘with _ pruyutes to 
al soule’, that of al wordis® whiche the Cue 
Lord bihi3te hym silf to* 3yueY to 30n, not hie ee 
oon passide in veyn. Therfor as he fillide? 1s 

in werk that, that he bihi3te*, and alle 

thingis bifelden> ‘bi prosperite‘, so he schal 

brynge on® 30u whateuer thing of yuelis 

he manaasside®, til he take awei 30u, and 

distrief fro this beste Jond, which® he 3af 

to" 30u. For 3e brakeni the couenaunt of 16 

‘30ure Lord God‘, which! he made with 

jou, and serueden™ alien goddis, and wor- 

schipeden® hem, sone® and swiftli? the 

strong veniaunce of the Lord schal rise ‘on 

to? 3ou; and 3e schulen be takun awei fro 

this beste lond, which" he 3af to 3o0u. 


+ in to hirling 
of 3oure side ; 
in Ebreu it is, 


CAP. XXIV. 


And Josue gaderide alle the lynagis of1 
Israel in to Sechem; and he clepide the 
grettere men in birthe, and the princes, 
and iugis, and maistris; and thei stoden 
in the sijt of the Lord. And he‘ spak2 
thus to the puple, The Lord God of Israel 
seith these thingis, Joure fadris dwelliden 
at the bigynnyng bizende the flood Mu- 
Jrates, Thare, the fadir of Abraham, and 
Nachor, and thei serueden alien goddis. 
Therfor Y took joure fadir Abraham fro3 
the coostis of Mesopotanye, and Y brou3te 
hym in to the lond of Canaan; and Y 
multipliede ‘the seed of hym', and Y 3af4 
Isaac to hym; and eft Y 3af to Isaac, 


U}ynage 4. ™ cleepe BEF. 


P the Lord 30ure God 1. ‘intoai. 'distrie30u 1. §that1. tOm.s. for soone I schal die, as ech 


man shal 1 marg. V of al 30ure ynwitte 1. W the wordis 1. 
¢ welsumly fo 30u 1. 
k the Lord 3oure God 1. 
q ajens 1. 


a hath bihizt 1. b han bifalle 3. 
Sthatr. 4 Om.1. {han broken 1. 
worschipid 1. © therfore sone 1. P hastily 1. 


Zhath fulfillid.1. 
f distrie 30u 1. 
o han 


Y do Gkmnosxb. 
e hath manaassid 1. 
‘that 1.  ™ 3e han serued 1. 
8 Josue 1. ¢ his seede 1. 


Xto be 1. 
4 upon 1. 


v that 1. 


412 


612 


Y 3af the hil of Seyr to weeld; Jacob" 
forsothe and his sones descendiden into 
5Egipt. And Y sente® Moyses and Aaron, 
and smoot Egipt bi manye signes and 
6 wondris, and ladde out 30u and 3oure fa- 
dres froP Egipt. And 3e camen to the 
see, and Egipciens pursueden 3oure fa- 
dris with charis, and rydynge, vnto the 
7Reed See. And the sones of Yrael cry- 
eden to the Lord, the which putte derk- 
nes? bitwix™ 3ow and the Egipciens, and 
brou3te vpon hem the see, and couerde 
hem. jJoure eyen han seen alle thingis, 
that Y haue doo in Egipt. And 3e han 
sdwelt in wildirnes myche tyme. And 
‘I haue® brou3t 30w in to the loond of 
Amorrey, that dwellid by3ond Jordan ; 
and whanne thei shulden fy3t a3ens 50u, 
Y took hem into 3oure hoondis, and 3e 
weldiden the loond of hem, and slewen 
yhem. Forsothe Balac, the sone of Se- 
phor, thet kyng of Moab, roos, and fau3t 
a3ens" Irael; and he sente, and clepide 
Balaam, the sone of Beor, for he shulde 
10curse to 30u. And I wolde not here 
hym, but a3enward bi hym I blesside’ 
to 3ou, and delynerde’ 3ow fro his 
uhoondis. And 3e passiden ouer Jordan, 
and camen to Jericho; and men* of that 
citee faujten azens 30ow, Amorre, and 
Phereze, and Chanane, Ethee, and Ger- 
gese, and Euee, and Jebuse; and I took 
izhem into 30ure hoondis. And I sente 
before jou hors flee3zis, and IY keste hem 
out fro her placis, the two kyngis of 
Amorreis, not i swerd and in thi bowe. 
13 And? Y haue 3yue to 30u the loond, in 
the® which 3e han not trauayld, and ci- 
tees ‘the whiche® 3e han not bild, that 3e 
shulen dwelle in hem, vynes and olyues, 
14‘the whiche” 3e han not plauntid. Nowe 
thanne drede 3e the Lord, and serue 3e 


nand Jacob 4. © sende gE. 


JOSHUA. 


cer Vue 1 4 


Jacob, and Esau, of whichet Y jaf to 
Esau the hil of Seir, to ‘haue in posses- 
sioun’; forsothe*® Jacob and hise sones 
jeden doun in to Egipt. And Y sentes 
Moises and Aaron, and Y smoot Egipt 
with many signes* and wondris, and Y6 
ledde 30u and 3oure fadris out of Egipt. 
And 3e camen to the see, and EgipciansyY 
pursueden 3oure fadris with charis, and 
multitude of kny3tis, ‘til to? the Reed See. 
Forsothe* the sones of Israel crieden to7 
the Lord, and he scettide® derknessis bi- 
twixe 30u and Egipcians; and he brou3te 
the see on® hem", and hilide hem. j3oure 
izen sien® alle thingis, whiche Y dide in 
Egipt. And 3e dwelliden in wildirnesse inf 
myche tyme. Aud Y brou3te jou in to thes 
lond of Ammorrei, that dwellide bizende 
Jordan; and whanne thei? fou3ten a3ens 
jou, Y bitook lem in to 3oure hondis, and 
3e hadden* in possessioun ‘the lond of hem’, 
and 3e killiden hem. Sotheli* Balach, thes 
sone of Sephor, the king of Moab, roos, 
and fau3t a3ens Israel; and he! sente, and 
clepide Balaam, the sone of Beor, that he 
schulde curse 30u. And ¥ nolde™ here hym, 10 
but ajenward bi hym" Y blesside 3ou, and 
delyuerede® 30u fro hise? hondis?, And 3e11 
passiden Jordan, and camen to Jerico; and 
men of that citee fou3ten a3ens 30u, Am- 
motrei, and Feresei, and Cananei, Ethei, 
and Gergesei, and' Euei, and Jebusei; and 
Y bitook hem in to* 30ure hondis. And 12 
Y sente flies with venemouse tongis' bifor 
3ou, and Y castide" hem out of her places; 
Y kyllide twei kyngis of Ammorreis, not 
in thi’ swerd and¥ bowe. And Y 3af to13 
jou the lond in which 3e traueiliden not, 
and citees whiche* 3e bildiden not, that 3e 
schulden dwelle in tho, and vyneris, and 
places of olyue trees, whicheY 3e plauntiden 
not. Now therfor drede 3e the Lord, and 14 


Pof re pr.m. 4derknesses cx. tbytwene nari. betwe c. * Om. £ pr. ia. 
tOm.e pr.m. with prim.  Vblysse x. —-¥ lyuerede peri. xthemen £E prem Y Om. 4H. 
*Om.p. ®Om.c. that c. 

uthe whiche sonest. Vwelder Wands. *tokensr. YmenofEgipti. Zvntor And. 
b putter. ¢uponi. 4 the Epis 1. ¢hanseeni. fOm.1. & men of Ammorey 1. > hadden her 
lond 1. iOm.1. * Andi.) Balach1. ™wolde not, "Balaamr1. © delyuereder. ?P thet. 


4 hondis of Balaach 1. tOm.1. $ Om. 1s. +t that ben bredde of dede careyns K sec.m. marg. ™ threwe 1. 


Vv Om. k sec.m. Wne inthis. * the whiche 1. 


¥ the whiche 1. 


XXIV. 15-—24. 


to him with perfit herte and moost trewe; 
and doth awey goddis, to the whiche 
joure faders serueden in Mesopotanye 
and in Egipt; and serue 3e to the Lord. 
15 Forsothe if yuel it semeth® to 30u, that 
je seruen to the Lord, choys is 3ouun to 
jou; chese 3e to day to 30u, that plesith, 
to whom moost cheefly 3e owen to serue ; 
whether to goddis, to the’ whiche han 
serued 30ure faders in Mesopotanye, or 
to the goddis of Amorreys, in whos loond 
je dwellen; forsothe I and myn hows 
isshulen serue to the Lord. And al the 
puple answerith and seith, Awey be fro 
vs that we forsaken the Lord, and seruen 
17to alien goddis. The Lord oure God he* 
ladde vs out and oure fadris fro the loond 
of Egipt, fro the hows of seruage, and vs 
seynge dide greet toknes; and kepte vs in 
al the weie, bi thef which we wenten, and 
in alle puplis, bi thef whiche we passiden; 
igand keste out alle gentils, Amorre, the 
dweller of the loond, that we ben comen 
yn. We shulen therfor serue to the Lord, 
i9for he is thef Lord oure God. And Josue 
seide to the puple, 3e shulen not mowe 
serue to the Lord; God forsothe is holi, 
and a strong louer, ne for3yueth to 3oure 
20 hidows synnes and giltis. If 3e leue the 
Lord, and seruen to alien goddis, he shal 
turne hymself, and tourment jou, and 
turne vpsedoun, after that he hath 3eue 
2ito 30w good thingis, And the puple 
seide to Josue, It shal not be so, as thou 
spekist, but to the Lord we shulen serue. 
22 And Josue" to the puple, Witnessis, he 
seith, 3e ben, that 30u self han choosun 
to 30u the Lord, that 3e seruen to hym. 
23 And thei answerden, Witnessis. Now 
thanne, he seith, do 3e awey alien goddis 
fro the myddil of 3ou, and bowe 3oure 
24hertis to the Lord God of Yrael. And 
the puple seide to Josue, To the Lord 


¢gsemec. ¢Om.c. ¢ hath a. 


a han serued 1. 
€to whom 1. 4 either 1. 

© wondris 1. P the whiche 1. 

¥ the Lord oure God 1. 


2 the whiche 1. 
goddis 1. 
dide 1. 

u to the 1. 


i meynee 1. 


& 30ure synnes 1. > hymsilf fro 30u 1. ¢ he schal 1. 
k witnessis of this sentence 1. 


h witnessis fo 3oure silf1. + for 1s, 


JOSHUA. 


f Om. c. 


bynel or greuous 1. 
k to the 1. 

q threwe I. 
Ww Lord but in holynesse 1. 
4 Om. 1. 


613 


serue 3e hym with perfite herte and moost 

trewe; and do 3e awei the goddis, to 

whiche? 3oure fadris seruyden* in Meso- 

potanye, and in Egipt; and serue 3e the 

Lord. But if it semeth yuel® to 30u, ‘that 15 

3e° serue the Lord, chesyng* is 30uun to 

3ou; chese 3e to 3ou to dai that, that 

plesith®, whom 3e owen most to serue; 

whether to goddis', whiehe’ 3oure fadris 

serueden in Mesopotanye, whether" to the 

goddis of Ammorreis, in whose lond 3e 

dwellen; forsothe Y, and myn hows! schu- 

len serue thek Lord. And al the pupleis 
answeride and seide, Fer be it! fro vs 

that we forsake the Lord, and serue alien 

goddis. ‘Oure Lord God™ hym silf ledde17 

vs and oure fadris out of the lond of 

Egipt, fro the hows of seruage, and dide" 

grete signes® in oure sij3t; and he kepte 

vs in al the weie, bi which we jeden, and 

in alle puplis, bi whiche? we passiden; 

and he castide4 out alle folkis, Ammorrei’, 12 

the dwellere® of the lond, in to which we 

entriden'. ‘Therfor we schulen serue the" 

Lord, for he is ‘oure Lord God’. Andi 

Josue seide to the puple, 3e moun not 

serue the Lord’}; for God is hooli, and a* 

strong feruent” louyere, and he” for3yueth far Boa 
not 3oure trespassis and synnes*. If 3e for- 20 2. rUy for 
saken the Lord, and seruen alien goddis, $004 thing and 


+ 3€ moun mot 


hard, Lire 
the Lord schal turne ‘hym silf, and schal¢  4ere. ¢. 
turment 30u4, and schal¢ distrie‘, after that 
he hath 3oue goodis® to 3ou. And the2i 


puple seide to Josue, It schal not be so, 
as thou spekist, but we schulen serue the 
Lord. And Josue seide to the puple, 3e 22 
ben witnessis!, that’ 3e han chose the Lord 
to 30u, that 3e serue him. And thei an- 
sweriden, Ve ben witnessis*. Therfor, he! 23 
seide, Now do 3e awei alien goddis fro the 
myddis of 30n, and bowe 3e 3o0ure hertis 
to the Lord God of Israel. Aud the puple 2: 
seide to Josue, We schulen serue ‘oure 


¢ Om. ce. » Josue seide 4. 


Cto1 Ichois1. © plesith to 30u 1 f tho 
\that 1. ™ The Lord onre God 1. 4 he 
‘the men of Ammorcy 1. § dwellers1. ¢ entren 1. 

xOm.1. Yanda feruentr. 2Om.1. 
€Om. 1. fdistrie 3ou 1. & gode thingis 1. 
1 Josue 3. 


614 


oure God we shulen serue, and obeish- 
ynge we shulen be to the heestis of hym. 
25Thanne Josue smoot boond of pees in 
that day, and purposide to the puple 
2¢heestis and domys in Sichem. And he 
wroot alle thes wordis in the volym of 
the lawe of God. And he took a ful greet 
stoon, and putte it vndur an ook, that was 
27in the seyntuarye of the Lord. And he 
seide to al the puple, Loo! this stoon shal 
be to 30w into witnessynge, that je han 
herd alle the wordis of the Lord, ‘the 
whichei he hath spokun to 3ou, lest per- 
auenture afterward 3e wolden denye, and 
2sleiz3e to the Lord 3oure God. And he 
lefte the puple, eche into his possessioun. 
29 And after thes thingis dyede Josue, the 
sone of Nun, the seruannt of the Lord, 
300f an hundryd and of ten 3eer. And thei 
biryeden him in the eendis of his posses- 
sioun, in Thanathsare, that is set in the 
hil of Effraym, fro the north part of the 
athil of Gaas. And Yrael sernede to the 
Lord alle the days of Josue, and of the 
eldren*, that long tyme lyueden after 
Josue, and ‘the which’ knewe alle the 
werkis of the Lord, that he dide in 
32Trael. Forsothe the boones of Joseph, 
‘the whiche™ the sones of Yrael token 
fro Egipt, thei birieden in Sichem, in a” 
paart of the feeld that Jacob bou3te of 
the sones of Emor, fader® of Sychem, for 
an hundrid 3onge sheep ; and it was into 
33 possessionn of the sones of Joseph. For- 
sothe Eleazar, the sone of Aaron, preest?, 
diede; and Phynees and his sones birieden 
him in Gabaa, that is 3yue to hym in the 
mount of Effraym. 


Here endith Josue, and now bigynneth 


JOSHUA. 


XXIV. 25—-33.- 


Lord God™, and we schulen be obedient 

to hise heestis. Therfor Josue smoot a25 

boond of pees in that dai, and settide® 

forth to the puple comaundementis® and 

domes? in Sichen. And he wroot alle2s 

these wordis in the book of Goddis lawe. 

And he took a greet stoon, and puttide? 

it vndur an ook}, that was in the seyn-  +¢enduranook; 
Ebrews seien 


tuarie of the Lord. And he seide to al27ynaura lyntel, 
the puple, Lo! this stoon schal be to 30u the Ebrew 
i ; ; word here sig- 
in to witnessing, that 3e herden’ alle the 
ook and lyn- 
tel, and no tre 
owith to be bi- 
3ou, lest perauenture 3e wolden denye™  fitis the auter 
oe ” of the Lord, as 
aftirward, and lye to 3oure Lord God. Moynat Ieee 
And he¥ lefte the puple, ech man in tog seith; netheles 
his possessioun. And after these thingis 29 may be seid 
ere a Syndae 
Josue, the sone of Nun, the ‘seruaunt of  goge, not the 
Josue dide 
and ten. And thei birieden hym in the 30 these thingis 
p : 4 , in Sichen; and 
costis of his possessioun, in Thannath of 
A 7 ‘ wel be seid vn- 
Sare, which’ is set in the hil of Effraym, | dur an ook, bi 
onre transla- 
Israel seruede the Lord in alle the daies Wie ase 
% 
of Josue, and of the eldre men, that whidur Jewis 


nefieth bothe 
wordis of the Lord, whiche’ he spak* to 

sidis the auter 

the seyntuarie 
the Lord”, diede, an* hundride jeer eld Fbemade, for 

therfor it may 
fro the north part of the hil Gaas. And 331 gion, for a tre 

camen to preye, 


lyueden in? long tyme aftir Josne, and and to here 
fi . Goddis word. 
whiche* eldre men knewen alle the werkis Lire here. c. 


of the Lord, whiche he hadde do in Israel. 
Also’ the sones of Israel birieden** the boonys 32 
of Joseph, whiche> thei® baren fro Egipt 
in® Sichen, in the® part of the feeld, which‘ 
feeld Jacob bou3te of the sones of Emor, 
fadir’ of Sichen, for an hundrid 3o0nge" 
scheep; and iti was in to possessioun of 
the sones of Joseph. Also Eliazar, sone‘ 33 
of Aaron, preest!, diede; and Fynees and 
hise sones biryden hym in Gabaa, which™ 
Was 30uun to hym” in the hil of Ef- 
raym. 


Here eendith Josue, and here bigyn- 


Judicums, neth the book of Judicum?. 
ithatc. Kelderesc. Ithatc. ™thatc. the epr.m. othe fader £ pr.m. P the preest £ pr. m. 
4 Explicit ber Josue. Incipit liber Judicum. e. Here endith the bok of Josue. r. No final rubric in Bcu. 
m the Lord oure God 1. "he puttide 1. © hestisr. P dome a. he puttide 1. "han herd1. §$ the 
whiche 1. thath spoken. tdenye it 1. VY Josue i. W Lordis seruaunt 1. * of an Gikunsxb. Y the 
which 1. 2Om. GikmNosxb. 4 the whiche 1 24 Om.1. » the whiche x. ¢ the soues of Israel 1. 4 thei 


birieden ini. € a1. fthe which 1. &the fadir 1. Dof 30nge1. ‘that feeld 1. K the soner. ! the preest 1. 


m that 1. n Eleazar 1. 


° From s. Here endith Josue, and here bigynneth Judicum. cproquw. Here 


endith Josue, and here bigynneth a prolog on Judicum. G. Heere endith the book of Josue. 1. Heere endeth 
Josue, se now the book of doomes. x. Here endith the book of Josue, and here biginneth a prologe on the 
book of Judicum. m. Heere cendith the book of Josue, and heere bigynneth the book of Judicum. nrx. Here 
eendith Josue, and bigynneth Judicum.s. Here endith Josue, and bigynneth the bool: of Judicum. b. No 


final rubric in AELP. 


JUDGES. 


[Prologue on the book of Judges. | 


Tus book of Judicum makith mencioun, how the sones of Israel braken the boond 
of the Lord, and serueden aliene goddis, after the deeth of Josue, and of elder men 
that lyueden long tyme after the deeth of Josue, whiche hadden seyn the merueilis 
and grete dedis of the Lord, and othere men risen aftirward, whiche herden the 


comaundementis and domes of the Lord and diden alle thingis contrarie. 


Wherfore 


the Lord bitook hem in to the hondis of her eneniyes, and weren maad tributaries to 
hem, and serueden hem; and whanne thei weren turmentid and angwischid greetli, 
thei crieden to the Lord ; and he herde hem, and sente iugis, that is, domesmen, whiche 
delyuereden hem for a tyme, til thei eftsone hadden for3ete the Lord. And therfore 
the Lord lefte enemyes to hem, whiche thei my3ten not distrie, to punsche hem, 
whanne thei wenten awei fro the Lord, and fro hise comaundementis®. 


Here bigynneth the bok of Judicum?. 


CAP I. 


1 AFTIR the deeth of Josue the sones 
of Irael counseilden the Lord, seyynge, 
Who shal stye vp bifore vs a3ens Cha- 
2nane, and be duk of bateil? And the 
Lord seide, Judas shal stie vp; loo! I 
3haue taak the loond in his hoond. And 
Juda seith to Symeon, his brothir, Sty vp 
with me in my lot, and fi3t ajens Cha- 
nane, that I goo with thee in thi lot. 
4And Symeon wente with hym; and Juda 
stiede vp. And the Lord took Chanane 
and Phereze in to the hoondis of hem, 
and thei smyten in Bezech ten thousand 
sof men. And thei foonden Adonybezech 
in Besech, and thei fou3ten ajens hym, 
sand smyten Chanane, and Phereze. Ado- 
nybezech? forsothe flei3, whom pursnynge 


a From r. Judicum. xn. 


8 This Prologne is from a. 
in the other mss. © couuseliden with 1. 
upt. b thou upi. ! stiede up i. 


No initial rubrie in acen. 


b From ari. Here bigynneth the book of Judicum. im. 
d thei seiden 1. 


k her hondis 1. *K the a, 


' Here bigynneth Judicum”. 
CAP. I. 


AFTIR the deeth of Josue the sones of! 
Israel counseliden® the Lord, and seiden®, 
Who schal stie® bifor vs ajens Cananeif, 
and schal be duik of the batel? And thee 
Lord seide, Judas schal stie’; lo! Y haue 
3oue the lond in to hise hondis. Aud Ju-3 
das seide to Symeon, his brother, Stie 
thou with me in my lot, and fijte thou 
a3ens Cananei, that Y go with thee in thi 
lot. And Symeon 3ede with hym; and4 
Judas stiede’. And the Lord bitook Ca- 
naney and Feresei in to ‘the hondis of 
hem*, and thei** killiden in Besech ten 
thousynde of! men. And thei foundens 
Adonybozech in Besech, and thei fou3ten 
aj3ens hym, and smytiden™ Cananei, and 
Feresey. Forsothe®? Adonybozech fledde, ¢ 


b Adonybech a. 


No initial rubrie 
fthe men of Cananei1. §& stie 


€ stie up 1. 
m thei ouercamen 1. ™ And r, 


1Om.1. 


616 JUDGES. igor 


thei, token, kit of the ouermost partis of 
7the hoondis of hym, and of feet. And 
Adonybezech seide, Seuenti kyngis, kut 
of the ouermore paartis of hoondis and 
of feet, gedreden vndur my bord relyues 
of meetis; as I haue doo, so the Lord 
hath doo to me. And thei brou3ten 
hym into Jerusalem, and there he died. 
8Thanne the sones of Juda onercomynge 
Jerusalem token it, and smyten in mouth 
of swerd, takynge al the citee to bren- 
gnynge. And afterward descendynge thei 
fou3ten azens Chanane, that dwellyd in 
the mounteyns, and at the south, in the 
lowijld feeldis. And Judas goynge ajens 
Chanane, that dwellid in Ebron, whos‘¢ 
name was bi old tyme Caryatharbe, 
smoot Sisay, and Achyman, and Tholo- 
umay. And thens goon, wenten to the 
dwellers of Dabir, whos name was old 
Cariathsepher, that is, the citee of lettris. 
12 And Caleph seide, Who smytith Caryth- 
sepher, and wastith it, I shal 3yue to 
ishym a wijf, Axam, my dou3ter. And 
whanne Othonyel, the sone of Senech, 
the lasse brother of Caleph, hadde taak 
it, he 3af to hym a wijf, Axam, hys dou3- 
ister. The which goynge in the weie, hir 
man monestide’, that she shulde axe hir 
fader a feeld; the which whanne she 
hadde si3id, sittynge in an asse, Caleph 
isseide to hir, What hast thou? And she 
answerde, 3if to me a blessynge, for a dry 
erthe thou hast 3yue to me; 3if and a 
moyst with watris. And Caleph 3af to 
hir moyst abone, and moyst bynethe. 
16 Forsothe the sones of Cyney, cosyn® to 
Moises, stieden vp fro the citee of palmes 
with the sones of Juda, into the deseert 
of his lot, that is at the south of Arach ; 
17and thei dwelliden with him. And Ju- 
das wente with Symeon, his brother; and 
thei smyten to gidre Chananee, that 


bOm. 4. ¢30lde cE sec.m. ce whas 4. 


whom thei pursueden, and token, and kit- 
tiden® the endis of hise hondis and feet?. 
And Adonybozech seide, Seuenti kyngis,7 
whanne the endis of hondis4 and feet™ 
weren kit awey, gaderiden relifs of metis 
vndur my bord; as Y dide’, so God hath 
3olde tome. And thei brou3ten hym in 
to Jerusalem, and there he diede. Ther-s 
fort the’ sones of Juda fou3ten a3ens Jeru- 
salem, and token" it, and smytiden’ bi the 
scharpnesse of swerd, and bitoken® al the 
cytee to brennyng. And aftirward thei9 
3eden doun, and fou3ten ajens Cananey, 
that dwellide in the hilli places, and at 
the south, in ‘feeldi places*. And Judas 10 
3ede ajens Cananei, that dwellide in Ebron, 
whos name was bi eld tyme Cariatharbe ; 
and Judas killide Sisay, and Achyman, 
and Tholmai. And fro thennus he 3ede11 
forth, and 3edeY to the? dwelleris of Dabir, 
whos eld name was Cariathsepher, that is, 
the citee of lettris. And Caleph seide, Y 12 
schal 3yue Axa, my dou3ter, wijf to hym 
that schal smyte Cariathsepher, and schal 
waste it. And whanne Othonyel, sone* of 13 
Seneth, the lesse? brother of Caleph, hadde 
take it*, Caleph 3af Axa, his dou3ter, wijf 
to hym. And hir hosebonde stiride hir, 14 
goynge in the weie, that sche schulde axe 
of hir fadir a feeld; and whanne sche 
hadde si3id, sittynge on* the® asse, Caleph 
seide to hir, What hast thou? And sche 1s 
ausweride, 3iuef thou blessyng® to me, for 
thou hast 3oue a® drye lond to me; 3yue 
thou also! a moyst lond with watris. And 
Caleph* jaf to hir the moist lond aboue, 
and the! moist™ lond bynethe. Forsothe®™ 16 
the sones of Cyney, ‘alye of Moyses°f, 
stieden? fro the citee of palmes with the 
sones of Juda, in to the desert of his lot, 
which? desert is at the south of Arath; 
and dwelliden® with hym’. Sothelit Judas 17 
3ede with Symeon, his brother; and thei 


d monyschid pr. © cosyns 4 sec. m. 


° thei kitten off 1. P of his feeti. 4 her hondis1. tof her feet1. *hanedor tt Thanner. 2 thei 
token 1. V thei smoten itr. W thei bitokenr. * wijlde feeldis s. Yhe camer. 2 Om.s. ® the sone r. 


bgonger 1. ¢thatcyteer dupont ¢ hert. 


f Fadir, 3iuer. 8a blessyng1t. 4Om.1. ito me 


also 1. Kher fadir 1. lar. ™moistis. = And whanner. © Moyses alije1. P stieden npr. 4 the 
which 1. thei dwellidenr. 8 Judas ro marg, t Andt. 


1, 18—30. 


dwellid in Sephat, and thei slewen hym ; 


and the name of the cytee was clepid . 


18 Horma, that is, cursynge. And Judas 
took Gazam with his eendis, and Asca- 
lonem, and Accharon with his teermys. 

19 And the Lord was with Judas, and the 
mounteyns he weeldide; and he my3te 
not doo awey the dwellers of the valei, 
for thei aboundiden in chaarys ful of 

20 weepnes in maner of sithis. And thei 
jyuen to Caleph Ebron, as Moises seide, 
the which dide awey fro it thre sones of 

21Enach. Jebuse forsothe, the dweller of 
Jerusalem, the sones of Beniamyn, diden 
not awey; and Jebuse dwelt with thef 
sones of Beniamyn in Jerusalem vnto the 

22 day$ that is nowe. Forsothe the hows of 
Joseph stiede in to Bethel, and the Lord 

23was with hem. For whanne thei sege- 
dyn? the cite, that before was clepid Luza, 

aithei seey3in' a man goynge out of the 
cytee, and thei seiden to hym, Shewe to 
vs the entre of the cytee, and we shulen 
25do with thee merci. The which whanne 
he hadde shewid to hem, thei smyten the 
citee in mouth of the swerd; forsothe 
thilk man and a] his kynrede thei leften. 

26 The which left wente into the loond of 
Sechym, and bilde there a citee, and clepide 
it Luzam; ‘the which is clepid so vnto 

27the day that is nowe. Forsothe Manasses 
dide not awey Bethsan, and Thanael with 
his lytyl touns, and the dwellers of En- 
dor, and Geblaam, and Magedo with his 
litil touns; and Chanane bigan to dwel 

23 with hem. Forsothe after that Yrael is 
comfourtyd, he made hem tributaryes, 

29and doon awey wold he not. Forsothe 
Effraym slewe not Cananee that dwellid 

xoin Gazer, but dwellid with hym. Zabu- 
lon dide not a wey the dwellers of Cethrou 
and of Naalon; but Chananee dwelt in 
the mydil of hym, and is maad to hym 


f Om. £ pr.m. 


asmoten sr. » thei killiden 1. 


JUDGES. 


& tyme E pr. m. 


617 


smytiden* togidere Cananei, that dwellide 
in Sephar, and killiden®t hym; and the 
name of that citee was clepid Horma, that 
is, cursyng, ‘ether perfit® distriyng, for 
thilke citee was distried outerly’, Andis 
Judas took Gaza with hise coostis, and 
Ascolon, and Accaron with hise termes. 
And the Lord was with Judas, and he1g 
‘hadde in® possessioun‘ the hilli places; 
and he& my3te not do awey the dwelleris 
of the valei, for thei weren plenteuouse in 
‘yrun charis", scharpe as sithis. And ‘the 20 
sones of} Israel 3auen Ebron to Caleph, 
as Moises hadde seid‘, which! Caleph dide 
awei fro it thre sones of Enach. For-21 
sothe™ the® sones of Beniamyn diden not 
awei Jebusei, the dwellere of Jerusalem ; 
and Jebusei dwellide with the sones of 
Beniamyn in Jerusalem ‘til in to® present? 
dai. Also the hows’ of Joseph stiede™ ine 
to Bethel, and the Lord was with hem. 
For whanne thei bisegiden the citee, that 23 
was clepid Lusa bifore, thei sien a man 24 
goynge out of the citee, and thei seiden to 
hym, Schewe thou to vs the entrynge of 


the cytee}, and we schulen do mercy with + schewe thou 
to us the en- 


thee. And whanne he hadde schewid t0 25 tring of the 
hem, thei smytidens the citee bi scharpnes pay ao 
of swerd; sothelit thei delyueriden that 4 soyng out 
: vndur the 
man and al his kynrede. And he" was 2¢erthe, vnknow- 
un to stran- 


delyuerede, and’ 3ede in to the lond of geris. Lire 
Sethym, and bildideY there a citee, and “"“ 
clepid it Luzam; which is clepid so til in 

to present* dai. Also Manasses dide not 27 
awei Bethsan and Thanael with her 
townes, and the dwelleris of Endor, and 
Geblaam and Magedo with her townes; 

and Cananei bigan to dwelle with hem. 
Sotheli after that Israel was coumfortid, 28 

he made hem tributaries, ‘ethir to paye 
tributey, and nolde* do awey hen. Sotheli 29 
Effraym killide not Cananei that dwellyde 

in Gaser, but dwellide with hym. Zabu-30 


hsugettiden 4. iseynge 4. 


€ Om. kw. “4 that is, cursinge either destriynge GMNQb. gloss omitted 


in sx. €Om. a pr.m. RFK LOPsb. ‘fweeldide 1. ¢ Judas 1. } charis ful of wepnes 1. 1 Om. 1. k boden 1. 


landi. ™ Butr. © Om.c. © vntot. 
tand1. 4 whanne he arkmnsxh. 
y Om. 1sx. 2 wolde not 1, 4% Om. plures. 


P this present 1. 
Vv and he o. he gikmsxb. Om. N. 


dmeyneet. 'stiedeup1. % smoten 1. 
Whe bildide 1. * ¢his present 1. 


4k 


618 


31 tributarie. Forsothe Aser dide not aweye 
the dwellers of Cho, and of Sidon, Alab, 
and Azenbusij, and Alba, and Aphe, Cha- 

32 aloa, and Pha, and Roab; and lie dwellid 
in the mydil of Chananei*, the dweller of 

33 the! lond, ne he slew3 him. Neptalim dide 
not awei the dwellers of Bethsames, and 
of Bethanach; and he dwellide among 
Chanane, the dweller of the lond; and 
Bethsamytes and Bethanites weren to 

34 him tributaries. And Amorre artide the 
sones of Dan in the hil, ne he 3af to hem 
place that to the pleyner thei my3ten 

35 descende; and he dwelte in the hil of 
Hares, that is to seye, Witnessinge, in 
Hailon, and Salabym. And the hond™ 
of the hous of Joseph is agreggid a3ens 
Amorre, and he is maad to hym tribu- 

36tarie. Forsothe the terme of Amorre was 
fro the stiynge vp of Scorpioun, and Pe- 
tra, and the heizer places. 


CAP. II. 


1 And the aungel of the Lord stiede vp 
fro Galgala to the place of wepers, and 
seith, I haue ladde 30u out of Egipt, and 
brou3t into the loond, for® the which Y 
swore to 3oure faders, and haue bihoot, 
that Y shulde not maak in veyn my co- 
uenaunt with 3ow into with outen eend ; 

280 oonly that 3e smyten no boond of pees 
with the dwellers of this loond, and that 
3e turnen vpsedoun the auters of hem; 
and 3e wolden not here my vois. Why 

3thes thingis han 3e doon? ‘Whether for® 
Y wolde not do awey hem fro 3oure face, 
that 3e han enemyes, and the goddis of 

4hem ben to 30u into fallynge. And 
whanne the aungel of the Lord hadde 
spoken thes wordis to alle the sones of 


j Azazibus z&. * Chanaan 4. | that £. 


> of Aphech 1. 
h that Kk. 


4 the dwellere t. 
Khe 3jafi. 1 Dan. 
t up of the 1. 
x that 3e 1. 

4 her goddis 1. 


© Azer 1. 
i Neptalym 1. 

P Joseph 1. 4 Amorey 1. 

vv that 1. ™ swoor fore 1. 

b wolde not 1. © haue hem 1. 


JUDGES. 


e Azer killide 1. 


8 fro the 1. 
y her auteris 1. 
€ Lordis aungel 1. 


I. 31—II. 4. 


lon dide not awey the dwelleris of Cethron, 
and of Naalon; but Cananei dwellide in the 
myddis of hym, and was maad tributarie 
to him. Also Aser dide not awey thes 
dwelleris of Acho, and of Sidon, of Alab, 
and of Azazib, and of Alba, and Aphech®, 
and of Aloa, and of Pha, and of Roob; 
and he® dwellide in the myddis of Ca-32 
naney, dwellere’ of that lond, and killide® 
not hym. Neptalym dide not awei thes3 
dwelleris of Bethsames, and of Bethanach ; 
and hef dwellide among Cananey, dwellere® 
of the lond; and Bethsamytis and Beth- 
anytis weren tributarie to hym‘. And34 
Ammorrey helde streit the sones of Dan 
in the hil, and 3af* not place to hem to go 
doun to pleynere places; and he! dwellide3s 
in the hil of Hares, ‘which is interpretid™, 
Witnessyng, in Hailon, and in Salabym. 
And the hond of the hows" of Joseph was 
maad heuy®, and he? was maad tributarie 
to hym4. And the terme of Ainmorrei was 36 
fro the stiyng of* Scorpioun, and the‘ 
stoon, and hi3ere places. 


CARE 


And the aungel of the Lord stiedet fro1 
Galgala to the place of weperis, and seide", 
Y ledde 3ou out of Egipt, and Y brou3te 
jou” in to the lond, ‘for which’Y Y swoor’ 
to 3oure fadris, and bihizte, that Y schulde 
not make void my couenaunt with 30u in 
to with outen ende; so oneli that 3e schulde2 
not smyte boond of pees with the dwelleris 
of this lond, and schulden* distrie ‘the 
auteris of hem’; and 3e nolden? here my 
vois. Whi diden 3e these thingis? Wher-s 
fore’ Y nolde> do hem awei fro 3o0ure face, 
that 3e haue* enemyes, and that ‘the goddis 
of hem’ be to 3o0u in to fallyng. And 4 
whanne the ‘aungel of the Lord® spak‘ 
these wordis to alle the sones? of Israel, 
thei reisiden her vois, and wepten; and 


mlond a. ® fro 4. © Wher fore gE. 


& the dwellere 1. 
nmeynee I. © heny or dl. 
tstiede upx. Utheseider. Vv Om. plures. 

Zwolden not 1. For the whiche thing 1. 
fhad spoke 1. & peple 1. 


f Neptalim 1. 
m that is to sey I. 


Il, 5—=17. 


Yrael, thei rereden vp her vois, and 
swepten ; and the name of that place is 
clepid, of wepers, or of terys; and thei 
cofferden her oostis to the Lord. Josue 
thanne lefte the puple; and the sones of 
Yrael wenten a wey, echoon into his pos- 
7sessioun, that thei holden it. And thei 
serueden to the Lord alle the days of 
Josue, and of the eldren that loong tyme 
after hym lyueden, and knewe alle the 
greet werkis of the Lord, the whiche he 
sdide with? Yrael. And Josue, the ser- 
uaunt of the Lord, the sone of Nun, of 
gan hundrid and ten 3eer died; and thei 
birieden hym in the eendis of his pos- 
sessioun, in Thanathsare, in the hil of 
Effraym, fro the north coost of the hil of 
10Gaas. And al that generacioun is ge- 
drid to her fadris; and other risen, that4 
knewen not the Lord, and the werkis that 
ithe dide with Yrael. And the sones of 
Yrael diden yuel in the si3t of the Lord, 
and serueden to Baalym, and Astaroth ; 
izand laften the Lord God of her fadris, 
that ladde hem out of the loond of Egipt, 
and folweden alien goddis, goddis of the 
puple* that dwelten in ‘the viroun’ of 
hem; and thei honourden hem, and to 
iswrath stiriden the Lord, leuynge hym, 
and seruynge to Baal and to Astaroth. 
14And the Lord, wrooth ajens Irael, took 
hem into the hoondis of destruyers, the 
whyche token hem, and solden to ene- 
myes, that dwelten bi enuyroun; ne thei 
ismy3ten az3enstoond her aduersaries; but 
whidir eueret thei wolden goo, the hoond 
of the Lord was vpon hem, as he spak 
and swore to hem; and hugely thei ben 
istourmentid. And the Lord areride iugis, 
that shulden delyuer hem fro the hoondis 
of wasters, but and hem thei® wolden not 
17 here, doynge fornycacioun with alien god- 


Pto «a. Wand aBFru. 


hther. ithe place of 1, * Thanne 1. 


sone rx. © the Lordis seruaunt 1. 


JUDGES. 


t peplis BEFH. 


| the eldere Gig. 
POm.1. 4 ten, diede 1. * generacioun of Israel 1. § men of Israel 1. 


619 


the name of that" place was clepid, of 's 
weperis, ether of teeris; and thei of- 
friden there sacrifices to the Lord. Ther-6 
fork Josue lefte the puple; and the sones 
of Israel wenten forth, ech man in to his 
possessioun, that thei schulden gete it. 
And thei serueden the Lord in alle the7 
daies of Josue, and of eldere! men that 
lyueden aftir hym in™ long tyme, and 
knewen alle the grete werkis of the Lord, 
whiche he hadde do with Israel. For-s 
sothe® Josue, sone™ of Nun, ‘seruaunt of 
the Lord®, ‘was deed? of an hundrid 3eer 
and ten?; and thei birieden hym in theo 
endis of his possessioun, in Thannath of 
Sare, in the hil of Effraym, at the north 
coost of the hil Gaas. And al that gene- 10 
racioun’ was gaderid to her fadris; and 
othere men riseden', that knewen not the 
Lord, and the werkis whiche he ‘hadde 
do" with Israel. And the sones of Israel 11 
diden yuel in the si3t of the Lord, and 
thei serneden Baalym and Astaroth; and 12 
forsoken’ the Lord God of her fadris, that 
ledden hem out of the lond of Egipt ; and 
thei sueden alien goddis, the goddis of 
puplis”, that dwelliden in ‘the cumpasse 
of hem*, and worschipedenY tho2 goddis, 
and excitiden* the Lord to greet wraththe, 
and forsoken? hym, and serueden Baal¢1a 
and Astoroth*. And the Lord was wrooth 14 
aj3ens Israel, and bitook® hem in to the 
hondis of rauyscheris, whiche’ rauyscheris? 
token hem, and seelden" to enemyes, that 
dwelliden ‘bi cumpas!; and thei my3ten 
not a3enstonde her aduersaries; but whi-15 
dir euer thei! wolden go, the hond™ of the 
Lord was on" hem, as he spak and swoor 
to hem; and thei weren turmentid greetli. 
And the Lord reiside® iugist, that ‘dely-16 
ueriden? hem fro the hondis of destrieris4, 
but thei" nolden’ here hemt, and thei diden 17 
ter x. 


8 enuyron £. uhe £ prem. 


mOm. paikmnogsxb. " Andi. ®" the 


tresen up1. "'dider. v thei forsoken 1. tho puplis1. * her cumpasse 1. Y¥ thei worschipiden 1. 
2thilke 1. @thei stiriden 1. »> ¢hei forsoken i. ¢to Baali. 4to Astoroth1, ¢he bitook1. fthe 
whiche r, €Om.1. 4soldenhems. iabouter. ‘Israeli, !Israeli. ™ wrath r.  ® upon 1. 


°reiside up 1 P and delyueride 1. 


q the destrieris 1. 


t Israeli. 8% wolde not 1. 


4K 2 


t her ingis 1. 


+ was on hem; 
that is, to tur- 
mente hem, as 
bifor the tres- 
passing it was 
on hem, to 
helpe hem. c. 
t And the Lord 
reiside iugis ; 
whanne the 
sones of Israel 
weren set in 
turment, thei 
runnen to the 
Lord, for disese 
3yueth vndur- 
stonding, and 
thanne God 3af 
remedi to hem 
bi iugis, whiche 
he reiside; bnt 
aftirwarde thei 
turneden a3en 
to her spewing, 
and therfor 
punysching 
turnede a3en, 
and eft reising 
in maner bifor- 
seid, as it is 
opyn in chapi- 
tris suynge. 
Lire here. c. 


620 


dis, and honourynge hem. Soone thei 
forsoken the wey, bi the which the faders 
of hem wenten; and herynge the heestis 
of the Lord, alle thingis thei diden con- 
igtrarie. And whanne the Lord hadde 
reryd iugys in the dais of hem, he was 
bowid bi mercy’, and he herde the weil- 
yngis of the tourmentid’, and he dely- 
ueride hem fro the deeth of wasters. 
19Forsothe after that the inge was deed, 
thei turneden a3en, and manye thingis 
diden more than diden the faders of hem, 
folwynge alien goddis, and seruynge to 
hem, and honourynge hem; thei laften 
not her fyndyngis, and the moost hard 
weye bi the which thei weren wonyd to 
20goo. And the woodnes of the Lord is 
wrooth a3ens Irael, and seith, For this 
folk hath maad at nou3t my couenaunt 
that Y couenauntide with the faders of 
hem, and my vois he dispyside to here; 
aiand Y shal not doo awey the Gentilis, 
22the whiche Josue lafte, and is deed; that 
in hem Y have knoulechynge of Yrael, 
whethir thei kepen the weie of the Lord, 
and goon in it, as kepten the faders of 
23hem, or noon. Thanne the Lord lafte alle 
these naciouns, and wold not anoou ouer- 
turne, ne took into the hoondis of Josue. 


WAP. II. 


1 Thes ben the Gentilis, that the Lord 
lafte, for to lerne Irael in hem, and alle 
that knewen not the bateils of Cha- 

2gnanees; and afterward the sones of hem 
shulden lerne to stryue with enemies, and 

3to haue vsage of fijtynge in batayl. The 
fyue princes* of Philistynys, and al Cha- 
nane, and Sydon, and Euee the whiche 
dwelten in Liban hil, fro the hil of Baal 
of Hermon vnto the entre of Emath. 


Y more mercy 4. 


JUDGES. 


W tormentyngys E pr. m. 


II, 18—III. 3. 


fornycacioun, that ts, idolatrie", with alien” 
goddis, and worschipiden* hem. Soone 
thei forsoken the weie, bi which ‘the fa- 
dris of hemY entriden; and thei herden 
the ‘comaundementis of the Lord’, and 
diden® alle thingis contrarie. And whanne 18 
the Lord reiside> iugis in ‘the daies of 
hem’, he was bowid bi mercy, and he 
herde the weilyngis of hem turmentid?, 
and he delyuerede hem fro the sleyng of 
wasteris®. Sothelif aftir that the® iuge1s9 
was deed, thei turneden ajen, and diden 
many thingis grettere ‘7 yuel® than her 
fadris diden; and thei sueden alien goddis, 
and serueden hem, and worschipiden hem; 
thei leften not her owne fyndyngis, and 
the hardeste! weie ‘bi which* thei weren 
wont! to go™. And the strong veniannce 20 
of the Lord was wrooth a3ens Israel, and 
he seide, For this puple hath maad voide 
my couenaunt which" Y conenauntide with 
her fadris, and dispiside® to here my vois; 
also? Y schal not do awey folkis1, whichet 21 
Josue ‘lefte, and was deed’; that in hem 22 
Y¥ asaiet Israel, whether thei kepent the 
weie of the Lord, and goen ther ynne, as 
her fadris kepten’, ether nay”. Therfor 23 
the Lord lefte* alle these naciouns, and 
noldeY destrie soone’, nethir bitook® in to 
the hondis® of Josue. 


CAP. III. 


These ben the folkis whiche the Lord1 
lefte’, that in hem he schulde teche Israel, 
and alle men that knewen not the batels 
of Cananeis; and that aftirward ‘the sones2 
of hem? schulden lerne to fi3te with ene- 
myes, and to haue custom? of batelf. He3 
lefte fyue princes of Filistees’, and al Ca- 
nanei, and the puple of Sidon, and Euey 
that dwelliden in the hil Liban, fro the 
hil Baal' Hermon‘ ‘til to! the entryng of 


x satrapis E pr. m. 


u Om. sx. Wstraunge 1. * thei worschipiden 1. y her fadris1. 2 Lordis hestis1. ® thei diden 1. 
breiside up1.  ¢her daies1 ¢ that weren turmentid 1. © her destrieris 1.  f But 1. & here r. 
bhOm.1 ifulhardr. Ethatr. Jwoned1. ™go bir. 2that1. © han dispisid 1. Pand Gisrnsxb. 
athe folkis1. tthe whiche 1.  § that is deed, lefter. tkepteno. vkepteni#1. Wnor. ~* lefte 


alijue1. Y he wolde not 1. 
e the vse I. 


f fisting 1. & the Filistees 1. 
lynto 1. 


2hem sooner. @ he hitook hem 1. > hondt. © lefte alyue 1. 
h that hiz3te Liban r. of Liban s. 


@ her sones 1. 


iof Baal 1. & of Hermon 1. 


+ that in hem 
Fasaye; asayng 
is maad, that a 
thing vnknow- 
un be knowun, 
and therfor God 
asayeth not a 
thing herto that 
it be knowun 
to him, sithen 
no thing is hid 
ro him; but he 
is seid to asaye 
a thing, that 
herhi summe 
thingis be 
knowun to 
othere men, 
that weren vn- 
knowun to 
hem. And in 
this maner God 
asayede the 
sones of Israel 
in the forseid 
hethen men, 
for as longe as 
they serueden 
the Lord, they 

adden maistri 
ouer hethen 
men; sotheli 
whanne thei 
forsoken the 
Lord, thei 
weren maad 
suget to hethen 
men; and herbi 
the obedience 
and vnobedi- 
ence of the 
sones of Israel 
was knowen of 
men. Lire 
here. C. 


III. 4——15. 


4And he lafte hem, that in hem he my3te 
haue experiens of Yrael, whether thei 
wolen here the heestis of the Lord, the 
which hath comaundid to the faders of 
hem by the hoondis of Moyses, or noon. 
5 And so the sones of Yrael dwelten in the 
mydil of Chananeei, Ethei, and Amor- 
rei, and Pherezei, and Euei, and Jebusei. 
c¢And wyues thei token dou3tres of hem, 
and theiY token her dou3tris? to the sones 
of hem, and serneden to the* goddis of 
7hem. And thei diden yuel in the si3t of 
the Lord, and for3eten of the Lord her 
God, seruynge to Baalym, and to Asta- 
sroth. And the Lord, wrooth a3ens Yrael, 
took hem into the hoondis of Chusanra- 
sathaym, kyng of Mesopothanye, and thei 
9serueden to him ei3t 3eer. And thei cri- 
eden to the Lord, the which areryde to 
hem a saueour, and delyuerde hem, that 
is, Othonyel, the sone of Cenez, the lasse 
10brother of Caleph. And the spiryt of 
the Lord was in hym, and he demyde 
Irael. And he wente out to fi3t, and the 
Lord took into the hoondys of hym Chu- 
sanrasathaym, the kyng of Syrie, and 
1oppresside hym. And the loond restid 
fourti 3eer; and Othonyel, the sone of 
12 Cenez, died. Forsothe the sones of Yrael 
addiden to’ doon yuel in the si3t of the 
Lord; the which coumfortide a3ens hem 
Eglo, the kyng of Moab, for thei diden 
isyuel in the siz3t of the Lord. And he 
cowplid to hem the sones of Amon and 
of Amalech; and he wente, and smoot 
Yrael, and he weeldide the citee of 
14Palmys. And the sones of Yrael ser- 
ueden to Eglon, the kyng of Moab, 
15 ei3teen 3eer. And aftirward thei cryeden 
to the Lord; the which reryde to hem a 
saueour, Aod bi name, the sone of Gera, 
sone? of Gemyny, the which either hoond 
vside for the ri3t. And the sones of 


y Om. 4. 4 dou3tren rH. 
m the Lord 1. al Israel 1. © Lordis heestis r. 
ttherk. ‘*hersonesr. + thei serueden to 1. 


sone 1. 


e Andi. — f Lordis sizt 1. 
1 Eglon 1. 


™he hadde x. ® the kyng x. 


JUDGES. 


a Om. 4. 


P witnesse 1 tert. or hond marg. 
u her goddis 1. 
Xther kK. Yhe bitook 1. 2thesone1. and the jounger1. » hond 1 pr.m. 
& Israel dide 1. i 
© the which 1. 


621 


Emath. And he®™ lefte hem, that in hems 
he schulde asaie Israel", whethir thei wolden 
here the ‘heestis of the Lord®, whiche he 
comaundide to her fadris bi the hond? of 
Moises, ethir nai. And so the sones of5 
Israel dwelliden in the myddis of Cananei, 
of Ethei, and of Ammorrei, and of Feresei, 
and of Eney, and of Jebusey, and wed-6 
diden? wyues, the dou3tris of hem; and 
the sones of Israel 3auen her’ dou3tris to 
‘the sones of hem’, and seruedent ‘the 
goddis of hem". And the sones of Israel 7 
diden yuel in the ‘si3t of the Lord’, and 
for3aten” her* Lord God, and serueden 
Baalym, and Astaroth. And the Lords 
was wrooth aj3ens Israel, and bitookY hem 
in to the hondis of Cusanrasathaym, kyng 
of Mesopotanye, and thei serueden hym 
eijte 3eer. And thei crieden to the Lord,9 
and he reiside to hem a sauyour, and de- 
lyuerede hem, that is, Othonyel, sone? of 
Ceneth, ‘the lesse* brothir of Caleph. And 10 
the spirit of the Lord was in hym, and he 
demyde Israel. And he 3ede out to batel, 
and the Lord bitook in to hise hondis> 
Cusanrathaym, kyng of Sirie; and Otho- 
nyel oppresside hym. And the lond restide® 11 
fourti 3eer; and Othonyel, sone’ of Ceneth, 
diede. Forsothe® the sones of Israel ad-12 
diden to do yuel in the ‘si3t of the Lordf; 
and he coumfortide a3ens hem Egion, the 
kyng of Moab, for ‘thei diden® yuel in the 
‘si3t of the Lord». And the Lord couplide 13 
to hym! the sones of Amon and Ama- 
lech*; and he! 3ede, and smoot Israel, and 
hadde™ in possessioun the citee of Palmes. 
And the sones of Israel serueden Egion, 14 
kyng”" of Moab, eiztene 3eer. And aftir-1s 
ward thei crieden to the Lord; and he 
reiside to hem a sauyour, Aioth bi name, 
the sone of Gera, sone of Gemyny, which? 
Aioth vside euer either hond for the ri3t 
hond. And the sones of Israel senten? bi 


bthe sone £ pr.m. 


4 thei weddiden 1. 
W thei forjaten 1, 
C restide im pes 1. 4 the 
iEglon1. of Amalech 1. 


Vv Lordis si3t 1. 


h Lordis si3t 1. 
P senden 1. 


622 


Yrael senden bi hym 3iftis to Eglon, the 
is kyng of Moab; the which maade to hym 
a swerd bitynge in eche side, hanynge in 
the mydil a pomel of lengthe of the palm 
of an hoond; and he is gird with it 
vndur the coot armure, in the ri3t hipe. 
17 And he offerde 3iftis to Eglon, the kyng 
of Moab; forsothe Eglon was myche fat. 
isAnd whanne he hadde offerd to hym 
3iftis, he folwide felawis that with hym 
igcamen; and turned ajen fro Galgalis, 
where weren the mawmettis, seide to the 
kyng, A prete word Y haue to thee, 
O kyng. And he comaundide silence. 
And alle men goon out, that weren about 
20hym, Aod wente into hym; forsothe he 
sat in the somer sowpyngeé place alone. 
And he seide, The word of God Y haue 
to thee. The which anoon roos fro the 
2itroon. And ‘Aod strau3te out® the left 
hoond, and he took the swerd fro his 
ri3t hipe; and he pi3te® into his wombe 
2280 strongly, that the pomel folwide the 
yren in the wound, and that with moost 
fat grees it was streyned; ne he drewe 
out the swerd, but so as he smoot, he 
lafte in the bodi; and anoon bi the pry- 
uetees of kynde the tordis of the wombe 
23 bursten out. Forsothe Aod, closyde moostf 
bisilich the doris of the sowpynge place, 
zvand fastnyd with lok, wente out bi the 
postern. And the seruauntis of the kyng 
goon yn, sey3en® the 3atis of the sowp- 
inge place closid, and seiden, Perauenture 
he purgith the wombe in the somer sowp- 
25ynge place. And abidynge long, to the 
tyme that thei weren ashamyd, and se- 
ynge that no man opnyde, thei token the 
keye, and opnynge thei foonden her lord 
26liggynge deed in the erthe. Forsothe 
Aod, while thei weren disturbid, flow3 
awey, and he passide the place of maw- 


© he streizte out to Aod & pr.m. 


q Om. sx. "the which ri. Sad. 


JUDGES. 


4 the £ pr.m. 


t on the ri3t hipe undir 1. 


Ill. 16—26. 


him 3iftis, ‘that is, tribute’, to Eglon, kyng 
of Moab; which" Aioth made to hym ais 
swerd keruynge on euer either side, hau- 
ynge in the myddis a pomelt of the lengthe 
of the’ pawm of an hond; and he was 
gird therwith vndirt ‘the sai®, ‘that ts, a 
kny3tts mentil’, ‘in the riz3t hipe*. And 17 
he brou3te 3iftis to Eglon, the* kyng of 
Moab; forsothey Eglon was ful fat. And 18 


t this that 
sueth, hauynge 
in the myddis 
a pomel, is not 
in Ebreu. c. 


whanne he hadde 3oue 3iftis to the kyng, 
he pursuede? felowis that camen with hym; 
and he turnede a3en fro Galgalis{, where 19? ere ie . 
idolis weren, and he seide to the kyng, _ the idols whiche 
A* kyng, Y haue a priuei word to thee. gi. ae 
And he comaundide silence. And whanne ious 3 Fhe 
alle men weren goon out, that weren aboute Elon been 
hym‘, Aioth entride to hym; forsothe he®20 in "dispit ofthe 
sat aloone in a somer parlour. And Aioth Warll Atbeh wis 
seide, Y haue the word of God to thee, S74 '0 hme 
Which' roos anoon fro the® trone. And 21 j'slon. Lire 
Aioth helde forth the" left hond, and took 

the! swerd fro his ri3t hype; and he 

fastnede* in to the ‘wombe of the kyng!22 

so strongli, that the pomel, ‘ether hilte™, 

suede the yrun in the wounde, and was® 

holdun streite ‘in the thickeste® fatnesse 

with ynneP; and hei drow not out the 

swerd, but so as he hadde smyte", he leftes 

in thet bodi; and anoon bi the priuetees 

of kynde the tordis" of the wombe braste 

out. Forsothe’ whanne the doris of thes 
parlour weren closid moost diligentli*, and 
fastned with lok, Aioth 3ede out bi agi 


posterne ||. And the ‘seruauntis of the || 4i a posterne, 
. ¥ . x in Ebreu it is. 
king* entriden, vot inY the parlour, but tnY 4 porche.c. 


the porche, and thei sien the doris of the 
parlour closid, and seiden*, In hap he?* 
purgith the wombe im the somer parlour. 
And thei abididen® longe, til thei weren2s 
aschamed; and thei sien that no man 
openede®, and thei token the keie, and 
thei openyden, and founden? her lord lig- 


e putte april. f Om. & prim. & seynge ABFH. 


Ya coote armure I. Y Om. sx prem. 


wv Ou.1. * Om. pceGimparx. Yandr. 2 suede forth aflirhist. 201. >the king. © the 
kyng1. dandi. ¢thekyng1. fThewhichr. ¢hist bhis1. ihis1. & putteitr. | kyngis 
womb 1. ™ Om. cpeikmMNogsxb. " it was. © with moost 1. P ynne the wombe 1. 4 Aioth 1. * smyte 


Eglon i. § lefte iti. t his i. 
2 thei seiden 1, 4 the kyng 1. 


® orduris 1. 
b abaden so 1. 


v And. 
© openede the dore 1. 


x kyngis seruauntis 1. Y into plures. 


Ww bisily 1. 
4 thei founden 1. 


III, 27—IV. 6. 


mettis, whens he turnede ajen; and he 
27cam into Seyrath. And anoon he sown- 
ede with tromp in the hil of Effraym ; 
and the sones of Yrael dessendiden® with 
eshym, hym goynge in the frount. The 
which seide to hem, Folwe 3e me, for- 
sothe the Lord hath taak oure enemyes, 
Moabitis, into oure hoondis. And thei 
wenten doun after hym, and thei occupy- 
eden the foordis of Jordan, that ouer- 
e9 Senden! in to Moab. And thei sufferden 
not eny man to passe ouere, but thei 
smyten Moabites that tyme about ten 
thowsand, alle my3ti and stronge men; 
30 noon of hem my3te ascaape. And Moab 
is mekid that day vndur the hows of 
Yrael, and the loond* restide foure scoor 
313eer. After this was Sangar, the sone of 
Anath, that smoot of Philistiym six hun- 
drid men with a shaar; and he forsothe 
defendide Irael. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And the sones of Yrael addeden to doo 
yuel in the si3t of the Lord, after the 
2deeth of Aod. And the Lord took hem 
in to the hoondis of Jabyn, kyng! of Cha- 
naan, that regnede in Asor, and hadde a 
duk of his oost, Siseram bi name; and 
3he dwellyd in Aroseth of Gentilis. And 
the sones of Yrael crieden to the Lord ; 
forsothe he hadde nyne hundred chaaris, 
ful of wepenes, the maner of sithis, and 
bi twenti 3eer greetli he oppresside hem. 
4¥orsothe Delbora was a prophetesse, wijf 
of Laphidoth, that demyde the puple in 
sthat tyme; and she sat vndur the palm 
tree, ‘the which™ bi name of hir was 
clepid, bitwix" Rame and Bethel, in the 
mount of Effraym; and the sones of 
Yrael stieden vp to hir into al doom. 
6 The whiche sente, and clepide Barach, 


JUDGES. 


623 


gynge deed in® the erthe. Sothelif while 2 
thei weren disturblid, Aioth fledde out, 
and passide& the place of idols, fro 
whennus he turnede a3en; and he cam in" 
to Seirath. And anoon he sownede with a27 
clarioun in the hil of Effraym; and the 
sones of Israel camen doun with hym, and 
he 3ede in the frount. Whichi seide to hem, 28 
Sue 3e me, for the Lord hath bitake oure 
enemyes, Moabitis, in to oure hondis. And 
thei camen doun after hym, and* ocupi- 
eden the forthis! of Jordan, that ledde ouer 
in to Moab. And thei suffriden not ony 29 
man to passe, but thei smytiden™ Moab- 
itis" in that tyme aboute ten thousande®, 
alle my3ti men and stronge; no man of 
hem my3te ascape. And Moab was maad 30 
low in that dai vndur the hond of Israel, 
and the lond restide? fourescoor4 3eer. 
Aftir hym* was Samgar, the sone of31 
Anath, that’ smoot of Filisteis sixe hun- 
drid men with a schar{; and he also de- 
fendidet Israel. 


fT with a schar, 
in Ebrew it is, 
with a goode 
of oxe. C. 


CAP. IV. 


And the sones of Israel addiden to do1 
yuel in the ‘si3t of the Lord", aftir the 
deeth’ of Aioth. And the Lord bitook heme 
in to the hondis of Jabyn, kyng of Canaan, 
that regnede in Asor; and he hadde a 
duyk of his oost, Sisara bi name; and he” 
dwellide in Aroseth of* hethene men. And3 
the sones of Israel crieden to the Lord; 
for heY hadde nyn hundrid yrone charis, 
keruynge”? as sithis, and twenti 3eer he 
oppresside hem* greetli. Forsothe® Del-4 
bora was-a prophetesse, the wijf{ of Lapi- 
doth, which® Delbora demyde the puple* 
in that tyme; and sche sat vndur a palins 
tree, that was clepid bi her name, bitwixe 
Rama and Bethel, in the hil of Effraym ; 
and the sones of Israel stieden® to hir at 
ech dom. And sche sente, and clepide 
Barach, the sone of Abynoen, of Cedes of 


t the wiyf, in 
Ebreu it is, a 
womman 

chaundeler. c. 


h dessendiden doun £ pr.m. thei ouersenden x pr.m. *hond x. ‘the kyng e prem. ™ that c. 
1 betwe c. 

eon f Andis. She passider Bin a. i The which 1. Kand their. !foordisixr. ™ smeten 1. 
1 Qm.1. © thousande Moabitis 1. P restide in pes 1. 4 ei3ti KamNsx. seuenti w. *Om.1. § iuge the 
whiche 1. tdefende a. ¥ Lordis siz3t 1. vlijfi1. wJabyn 1. *acileeofi. YJabyni. 2 ful of 


mepnessis scharpe 1. ® Israel 1. > And 1. 


© the which 1. 


4 puple of Israel i. © stieden up 1. 


624 


the sone of Abynoen, of Cedes of Nepta- 
lym, and she seide to hym, The Lord 
God of Yrael hath comaundide to thee, 
Go, leed the oost into the hil of Thabor, 
and tak with thee ten thousand of fi3t- 
ynge men of the sones of Neptalym and 
zo0f the sones of Zabulon. Forsothe J shal 
brynge to thee, in the place of the streem 
of Cyson, Sisaram, prince of the oost of 
Jabyn, and the chaaris of hym, and al 
the multitude; and Y shal taak hem in 
8thin hoond. And Barach seide to hyr, 
If thow comest with me, Y shal goo; if 
thow wolt not come with me, Y shal not 
9goo. The which seide to hym, Forsothe 
Y shal goo with thee; but in this while 
victory shal not be witid to thee; for in 
the hoond of a womman Sisara shal be 
taak. And so Delbora roos, and wente 
10with Barach in to Cedes. The which, 
clepid Zabulon and Nepthalym, stiede vp 
with ten thonsand of fy3tynge men, hau- 
i1ynge Delbora in his felawship. Forsothe 
Aber Cynee wente awey sumtyme fro 
other Cynees his britheren, the sones of 
Obbab, cosyn of Moyses; and he strei3te 
tabernaclys vnto the valey, that is clepid 
12Sennym, and was biside Cedes. And it 
is told to Cysare, that Barach, the sone 
of Abynoem, hadde stied vp into the hil 
isof Thabor. And he gedryd nyn hundryd 
chaaris, ful of wepenys, maner of sithis, 
and al the oost fro Aroseth of gentilis to 
14 the streein of Cyson. And Delbora seide 
to Barach, Rise, this is forsothe the day, 
in the® which the Lord hath taak Sysa- 
ram into thin hoondys; loo! he is thi 
leder. And so Barach descendide fro the 
hil of Thabor, and ten thowsand of fi3t- 
isynge men with hym. And the Lord 
feeryde Sisaram, and alle the chaaris of 
hym, and al the multytude, in the mouth 
of swerd, at the sijt of Barach, in so 


JUDGES. 


IV. 7——I5. 


Neptalym, and sche seide to hym, The 
Lord God of Israel comaundide to thee, 
Go thon, and lede an oost in to the hil of 
Thabor, and thou schalt take with thee 
ten thousande ‘of fizteris' of the sones of 
Neptalym and of the sones of Zabulon. 
Sothelié Y schal brynge to thee, in the7 
place of the stronde of Cison, Sisara, 
prince' of ‘the oost of Jabyn', and his 
charis, and al the multitude; and Y schal 
bitake hem in thin hond. And Barachs 
seide to hir, If thou comest with me, Y 
schal go; if thou nylt* come with me, 
Y schal not go. And sche seyde to hym,9 
Sotheli! Y schal go with thee; but in this 
tyme the victorie schal not be arettide to 
thee; for Sisara schal be bitakun in™ the 
hond of a womman. Therfor® Delbora 
roos, and 3ede with Barach in to°® Cedes. 
And whanne Zabulon and Neptalym weren 10 
clepid, he? stiede with ten thousynde of 
fi3teris, and hadde Delbora in his felou- 
schipe. Forsothe’ Aber of Cyneth haddei 
departid sum tyme fro othere Cyneys' hise 


britheren, sones’ of Obab, ‘alie of Moises‘t ; 1 of Moises, 
5 6 in Ebreu it is, 
and he hadde set forth tabernaclis ‘til to" the fadir of 


the valei, which’ is clepid Semym, and “wi 


was” bisidis Cedes. And it was teld tole 
Sisara, that Barach, sone* of Abynoen, 
hadde stiedeY in to the hil of Thabor. And 13 
he? gaderide nyn hundrid yronne charis?, 
keruynge as sithis, and al the oost fro? 
Aroseth of hethene men to the stronde 
of Cison. Aud Delbora seide to Barach, 14 
Rise thou’, for this is the day, in which 
the Lord bitook? Sisara in to thin hondis; 
lo! the Lord is thi ledere. And so Barach 
cam doun fro the hil of Thabor, and ten 
thousynde of fy3teris with hym. And thes 
Lord made aferd Sisara, and alle ‘the charis 
of hym®, and al the multitude, bi the 
scharpnesse of swerd, at the sij3t of Ba- 
rach, in so myche that Sisara lippide douu 


myche that Sisara of the chaar lepynge of the chare, and fledde ‘a foote’. And 
°o Om. c. 
ffiztinge ment. & Andy, } the prince1, iJabyns oosti. kwiltnotr, JAnd1. ™ in tot. 
» Andso1. °Om.1. P Barach 1. @ Andi. Sotheli kro. ‘men of Cyney 1. § the sones1. * Moyses 
alie1, vnto1, Vthatr. Whewasr. *thesoner. Ystiedeupr. 7 Sisarar. 2 charis ful of 
wepnest. Pofks. ¢thouups. 4 hath bitake 1. ¢ his charis 1. § on foote DEIKL sec. m. MNP. 


IV. 16—23. 


igdoun on his feet, fliz3. And Barach pur- 
suede the fleynge chaaris and the oost 
vnto the see vito Aroseth of Gentilis ; 
and al the multitude of enemyes fellen 
i7doun? vnto the’ deeth. Sisara forsothe 
fleynge cam to the tent of Jahel, wijf* of 
Aber Cynei; forsothe there was pees bi- 
twix Jabyn, the kyng of Asor, and the 
ishows of Aber Cynei. Jahel thanne goon 
out in to a3jen comynge of Sisare, seide 
to hym, Com into me, my lord; ne drede 
thow. The which goon into the taber- 
nacle of hyr, and couerd of hir with a 
i9mantel, he seide to hir, 3if to me, Y bi- 
seche, a litil of water, for Y thriste 
myche. The which openyde a botel of 
mylk, and 3af to hym to drynk, and 
20couerde hym. And Sisara seide to hir, 
Stoond before the dore of the tabernacle, 
and whanne there cometh eny man, ask- 
inge thee, and seiynge, Whether here is 
eny man? thou shalt answere, Noon is, 
21And so Jahel, the wijf of Aber, took a 
neyl"* of the tabernacle, takynge* there 
with an hamer; and she goon out priue- 
lich, and with silence putte vpon the 
templis of his heed a neyl%s, and smyten 
with an hamer pi3t doun into the brayn 
vnto the erthe; the whych, felawshipynge 
22sleep to deeth, faylide, and died. And lo! 
Barach' folwynge Sisaram cam; and Jahel, 
goon into a3en comynge of hym, seide to 
hym, Com, and Y shal shewe to thee a 
man, whom thow sechist. The whych, 
whanne he hadde goo in to hir, he saw3 
Sisaram liggynge" deed, and a neyl" pi3t 
23into his templis. God therfor lowide in 
that day Jabyn, the kyng of Chanaan, 
bifore the sones of Yrael; the whiche 
woxen eche day, and with strong hoond 
beren doun Jabyn, the kyng of Chanaan, 
to the tyme that thei hadden doo hym 
awey. 


P Om. BcrH. 


qOm. 4. * the wijf £ pr.m. 
t Balach a. 


tt lyjinge peru. " veyl aBru. 
y3ing y 


gvntor hyntor !Ands  * for sz. 


JUDGES. 


™ vey] 4BFH. 


1 wente per KMNOQSXb. 


625 


Barach pursuede the charis fleynge and 
the oost ‘til to® Aroseth of hethene men; 
and al the multitude of enemyes felde doun 
‘til too deeth. Sotheli Sisara fledde, and 17 
cam to the tente of Jahel, the wijf of Aber 
Cyney ; forsothe® pees waas bitwixe Jabyn, 
kyng of Asor, and bitwixe the hows of 
Aber Cyney. Therfor Jahel 3ede! out inis 
to the comyng of Sisara, and seide™ to hym, 
My lord, entre thou to me, entre thou to 
me; drede thou not. And he entride in 
to ‘the tabernacle of hir", and was? hilid of 
hir with a mentil. And he seide to hir,19 
Y biseche?, 3yue ‘thou toPP me a litil of 9 
watir, for Y thirste greetli. And sche 
openyde a ‘botel of mylk', and 3af to® hym 
to drynke, and hilidet hym. And Sisara2o 
seide to hir, Stonde thou bifor the dore 
of the tabernacle, and whanne ony man 
cometh, and axith thee, and seith, Whe- 
ther ony man is here? thon schalt an- 
swere, No man is here. And so Jahel, 21 
the wijf of Aber, took a nay] of the taber- 
nacle, and sche took also an hamer; and 
sche entride pryueli, and puttide" with 
silence the’ nail on” the temple of his 
heed, and sche fastnede the nail smytun 
with thes hamer in to the’ brayn, ‘til to? 
the erthe; and he slepte, and diede to 
gidere, and failide*, and was deed. And 22 
lo! Barach suede” Sisara, ‘and cam*; and 
Jahel 3ede out in to his comyng, and seide 
to hym, Come, and Y schal schewe to thee 
the man, whom! thou sekist. And whanne 
he hadde entrid to hir, he si3 Sisara lig- 
gynge deed, and a nail fastnede in to hise 
templis. Therfor in that day God ‘made23 
low® Jabyn, the kyng of Canaan, bifor the 
sones of Israel; whichef encresiden ech dai, 
aud with strong hond oppressiden®’ Jabyn, 
the kyng of Canaan, til thei diden hym 
awey. 


Sand takynge £ pr.m. 88 veyi ABFH. 


m sche seide 1. © her tabernacle 4. 


he was 1. P biseche thee 1. PP thou Fr. Om. x. 4Om.q@IkNsx. tmylke botel 1, 8Om.1. tsche hilide 1. 


u pizchide K. picchide osx. put MF. Om. 1. 
zvnto1. he failide lijft. 
& thei oppressiden 1. 


¥ sche putte the 1. 
b came and suede 1. 


Y his 1. 
f the whiche 1. 


x Om. ca. 


W upon tr. 
e lowide 1, 


e©Om.1. 4 that 4 


AL 


626 


CAP. V; 


1 And Delbora and Barach, the sone of 
2 Benoem, songen in that day, seiynge, 3e 
that wilfully offerden of Yrael 5oure lyues 
3to peryl, blissith to the Lord. Here, 3e 
kyngis; perseyue, 3e princes, with eeris ; 
Yam, Y am, ‘the whiche’ to the Lord 
shal synge, and seye salm to the* God of 
4Yrael. Lord, whanne thow wentist out 
fro Seyr, and passidist bi the regiouns of 
Edom, the erthe is meted, and heuens 
5and clowdis droppeden with watris ; hillis 
floweden fro the face of the Lord, and 
Synai fro the face of the Lord God of 
6Israel. In the dais of Sangar, soneY of 
Anath, in the dais of Jahel, restiden the 
paththis, and tho that wenten in bi hem 
3eden a wey bi streyt beryd? paththis out 
70f the weye. Stronge men seseden in 
Yrael, and restiden, to the tyme that 
8Delbora roos, moder in Yrael. Newe 
bataylis hath chosun the Lord, and the 
3atis of enemyes he ouerturnede; swerd 
and speer aperyde not in fourti thowsand 
gof Yrael. Myn herte shal loue the princis 
of Yrael ; 3e that bi propre wil han offrid 
10 30u to peryl, blissith to the Lord; 3e 
that stien* vp vpon shynynge? assis, and 
sittith® aboue? in doom, and goon in the 
11 weye, spekith. Where the chaaris ben 
hurtlid, and the oost of the enemyes is 
queynt, there the rijtwisnessis of the 
Lord ben told, and mercy into the 
stroonge men of Yrael; thanne the puple 
of the Lord cam doun to the 3atis, and 
1zhadde the prynshod. Ryse, ryse, Del- 
bora, ryse, and spek the dyte of songe ; 
ryse, Barach, and thou, sone of Abynoem, 
istak thi chaytyues. The relyues of the 
puple ben saued; the Lord in stronge men 
i4hath fou3ten. Fro Effraym he hath doon 
hem awey into Amalech, and after hym 


wthatc. * Om. # sec. m. 
E pr. vice, semynge scc.v. shynynge scc. m. 


i han wilfuli offrid 1. 
© fro Synai 1. 
v hurlid 1. 
b the prinsehod 1. 


h the sone 1. 
n Lordis face 1. 
u wey, speke 3e 1. 
@ Lordis puple 1. 


P the sone 1. 


¢ relifis 1. 


JUDGES. 


Y the sone E pr. m. 
¢ sitten c. 


k blesse 3e 1. 
q thei 3eden 1. 
w Lordis riztwisnesse 1. 

4 fro 1. 


V. I—14. 


CAP. V. 


And Delbora and Barach, sone” of Aby-1 
noen, sungen in that dai, and seiden, 3e2 
men of Israel, that ‘offriden wilfuli' 3oure 
lyues to perel, blesse* the Lord. 3e kingis, 3 
here, 3e! princes, perceyueth™ with eeris ; 
Yam, Y am the womman, that schal synge 
to the Lord; Y schal synge to the Lord 
God of Israel. Lord, whanne thou 3edist 4 
out fro Seirf, and passidist bi the cuntrees 
of Edom, the erthe was moued, and he- 
uenes and cloudis droppiden with watris ; 
hillis flowiden fro the ‘face of the Lord®,5 
and Synai°t fro the face of the Lord God 
of Israel. In the daies of Sangar, sone? c 
of Anach, in the daies of Jahel, paththis 
restiden, and thei that entriden bi tho 
3eden? bi paththis out of the weie. Stronge7 
men in Israel cessiden, and restiden, til 
Delbora roos, a modir in Israel. The's 
Lord chees newe batels, and he destriede 
the 3atis of enemyes; scheeld and spere ap- 
periden not in fourti thousynde of § Israel ||. 
Myn herte loueth the princes of Israel ;9 
3e that offriden 30u to perel bi 3oure owyn 
wille, blesse 3e the Lord; speket 3e, that 10 
stien on schynynge assis, and sitten aboue 
in doom§, and goen in the wey”. Where! 
the charis weren hurtlid’ doun to gidere, 
and the oost of enemyes was straunglid, 
there the ‘rijtfulnessis of the Lord” be 
teld*, and mercyY among the stronge’ of 
Israel; thanne the ‘puple of the Lord? 
cam doun to the 3atis, and gat prinseliod?. 


+ Lord, whanne 
thou 3edist out 
Fro Seir, in for- 
sakinge that 
puple in her 
errours, bi thi 
just dom. Lire 
here. C 
t and Synay; 
and here is set 
for that is, for 
this word and, 
ig not in Ebreu. 
Lire here. c. 
\| of Israel; in 
Ebreu it is in 
Israel, so that 

is word xl. 
thousinde is 
not ioyned with 
Israel, for in 
fiij c°. it is seid, 
that Barach 
3ede with x. 
thousinde 
onely, therfor 
it is ta fille, 
whanne the 
oost of aduer- 
saries was in 
xl. thousinde, 
that is, in the 
noumbre of 

- thousinde of 
armed men 3 
also it may be 
seid bi oure 
translacioun 
in x}. thousinde 
of Israel, for 
thou; first 
weren x. thou- 
sinde with Ba- 
rach, in the 


Rise, rise thou, Delbora, rise thou, and 12°¢e veren 


speke a song; rise thou, Barach, and thou, 


xl. thonsinde 
with him. Lire 
her 


ere. 
sone of Abynoen, take thi prisoneris. The 13§ in doom, that 


relikis® of the puple ben sauyd; the Lord 


is, for doom. c. 


fau3t ajens stronge men of 4 Effraym. Hels 


dide awei hem in® Amalech, and aftir hym 
of f Beniamyn in to thi puplis, thou Ama- 
lech. Princes of Machir and off Zabulon 


Zbeest E pr.m. han sty3ed z pr.m. > stronge 


d aboun Br. abouen E. 


10m.1.  ™ perceyue plures. perceyue 3e I. 

rAndther %menofi +t Om.1. 

xteld out i. Y dis mercy 1. 2 stronge men 1. 
€ in to gikmnoxb. f fro 1. 


V. 15-—26. 


fro Beniamyn in to thi puplis, O Ama- 
lech. Fro Machir princis descendiden, 
and fro Zabulon, that oost shulden lede 
15to fi3t. Dukis of Ysachar weren with 
Delbora, and the steppis of Barach thei 
folweden, the whiche, as into heuedi® fall- 
yuge and helle, he 3af hym silf to peryl. 
Ruben ajens hym diuydide, of greet willi 
is men is foundun stryuynge. Whi dwellist 
thow bitwixf two% teermys, that thow 
here the noysis of flockis? Ruben ajens 
hym dyuydide, of greet willi men is 
17foundun a® strijfi. Gad bi3onde Jordan 
restide, and Dan tentide to shippis. Aser 
dwellid in the brenk of the see, and in 
ishauens abood. Forsothe Zabulon and 
Neptalym offerden her* lyues to deeth, 
19in the! regioun of Moreme. Kyngis 
camen, and fou3ten; fou3ten the kyngis 
of Chanaan in Thanath, biside the watris 
of Magedan ; and neuerthelater™ no thing 
20token the praytakers. Fro heuene it is 
fou3ten a3ens hem; sterrys dwellynge in 
ordre and in her course a3ens Sysaram 
21fou3ten. The streem of Syson drow3 the 
careyns of hem, the streem of Cadunym, 
streem of Cyson. Treed thou, my soule, 
22stronge men. Cleas of hors fullen hem 
fleynge with feerse, and bi heedlynge™™ 
fallinge" the moost stroonge men of ene- 
azmyes. Curse 3e to the loond of Meroth, 
seide the aungel of the Lord, curse 3e to 
the dwellers of it, for thei camen not to 
the help of the Lord, in to the help of 
24the moost stronge men of hym. Blessid 
among wymmen Jahel, the wijf of Aber 
Cynei; be she blessid in hir tabernacle. 
25 To the askynge water sche 3af mylk, and 
in the viole of pryncis she brou3te forth 
26 butter. The left hoond she putte to the 
nayl, and the ri3t to the hamers of 
smythis; and she smoot Cisaram, sech- 


e hedi c. hedy z. 
i striuynge £ pr. im. 


f betwe c. among E pr.m. 


& the oost rk. 1 that 1. 
noyse 1. "see brenke rt. © he dwellide 1. 
5 Om. 1sx pr.m. + it was fou3ten 1. 
the GIKMN sec. m. 0 sec.m. Qsxb. - ** Om. 1. 
bOm.1. ¢neinto1. 4 moost stronge I. 
Therr. & Om, zs. 


i dich hedly 1. 


JUDGES. 


k foundun or perceyued 1. 
P And 1. 
u in her cours 1. 
Y fellen awey 1. 
e the, that is, Sisara 1. 
1 smythes hameris 1. hamer of smy3this N. 


627 


jeden doun, that ledden oost# to fi3te. Theis 
duykis of Isachar weren with Delbora, and 
sueden the steppis of Barach, which! jaf 
hym silf to perel, as in to a dichi, and in 
to helle. While Ruben was departid a3ens 
hym silf; the strijf of greet hertyd men 
was foundun*. Whi dwellist thou bitwixe 16 
‘tweyne endis', that thou here the hiss- 
yngis™ of flockis? While Ruben was de- 
partid a3ens hym silf, the strijf of greet 
hertid men was foundun. Gad restide bi-17 
3endis Jordan, and Dan 3af tent to schippis. 
Aser dwellide in the ‘brenke of the see", 
and dwellide® in hauenes. Forsothe? Za- 18 
bulon and Neptalym offriden her lyues to 
deeth4, in the cuntre of Morema’, ‘that 
ts interpretid, hi3*. Kyngis camen, and 19 
fou3ten; kyngis of Canaan fou3ten in 
Thanath, bisidis the watris of Magedon ; 
and netheles thei token no thing bi prey. 
Fro heuene ‘me fau3t' ajens hem;  sterris 20 
dwelliden in her ordre and cours", and 
fou3ten’ a3ens Sisara. The stronde of21 
Cyson drow ‘the deed bodies of hem”, the 
stronde of Cadymyn, the* stronde of Cy- 
son.’ My soule, to-trede thou  stronge 
ment. The** hors howis felden’, while 22 
the strongeste of enemyes fledden with 
bire, and felden heedli. Curse 3e the lond 23 
of Meroth, seide the ‘aungel of the Lord’, 
curse 3e ‘the dwelleris of hym*, for thei 
camen not to the’ help of the Lord, ‘in 
to® the help of the strongeste’ of hym. 
Blessyd among wymmen be Jahel, the 21 
wijf of Aber Cyney; blessid be sche in 
hir tabernacle. Zo Sisara® axynge watir 25 
sche 3af mylk, and in a viol{ of princes 
sche 3af‘ botere. 
hond to ab nail, and the! 1i3t hond to the* 
‘haineris of smy3this’; and sche smoot Si- 
sara, and sou3te in the™ heed a place of 
wounde, and perside” strongli the°® temple. 


Sthy epr.m. > Om. £ prim, the BCE sec.m. FH. 


k Om. £ prom. 1Om. £ prem. ™ nerthelater cz. ™™ heuedlynge B. » fallige a. 


ltwo termes 1, —-™ priuey 
4the deeth 1. = Roma plures. Morome 1. 
Vv thei fou3ten 1. W her deed bodies 1.  * and 
2 Lordis aungel 1. ® his dwelleris 1. 
fsafhims. & putter. >} thes. 
mhis1. "sche perside 1. © his 1. 


4L2% 


tT slronge men, 
that is, Sisara, 
and hise fi3t- 
eris, that trist- 
iden in her 
strengthe, and 
wolden do 
awey the puple 
of the Lord. 
Lire here. C. 


tina viol, 


Ebrews seyen 


Sche puttide® the left 26 in a basyn. 


628 


ynge in the heed the place of the wound, 
27 and the temple my3tilich thrillynge™. Bi- 
twix the feet of hir he felle, failid, and 
dyede; and he was wrappid bifore the 
feet of hir, and he lay out of lijf, and 
28 wretchidful. Bi the wyndow biholdynge 
jollide the moder of hym; and fro the 
sowpynge place she spak, Whi tarieth to 
turne ajen the chaar of hym? Whi tary- 
eden the feet of the foure whelid cartis 
290f hym? ‘Oon wiser than that® other 
wijfis of hym to the moder in lawe thes 
30 wordis answerde, Perauenture now he 
dyuydith spuylis, and the moost feyr of 
wymmen is chosun to lym; clothis of 
dyuers colours to Sysare ben taak into 
praye, and dyuerse portenaunce to neckis 
31to be anourned is born to gidre. So 
perischen alle thin enemyes, thou Lord ; 
forsothe thoo that louen thee, as the 
suune in his rysynge shyneth, so glit- 
szteren thei. And the loond restide bi 
fourti 3eer?. 


CAP. VI. 


1 The sones forsothe of Yrael diden yuel 
in the si3t of the Lord, the which took 
hem in the hoond of Madian seuen jeer. 

2And thei ben oppressid greetli of hem; 
and thei maden to hem caaues, and spe- 
lunkis in hillis, and moost defensable 

splacis to withstonden. And whanne Irael 
wex feers, ‘Madian stiede vp%, and Aina- 
4lech, and other of the est naciouns; and 
anentis hem pitchinge tentis, as thei weren 
in grasse, alle thingis thei wastiden vnto 
the entre of Gaze, and uo thing per- 
teynynge to the lijf vtterli thei laften in 

5 Yrael, ne sheep, ne oxe", ne asses. For- 
sothe thei and alle the flockis of hem 
camen with her tabernaclis, and at the 
licknes of locustis alle placis’ fulfillide 


JUDGES. 


V. 27——VI. 5. 


He felde bitwixe ‘the feet of hir?, he27 
failide, and diede; he was waltryd bifor 
hir feet, and he lay with out soule4, and 
wretchidful. His modir bihelde bi a wyn-2s 
dow, and 3ellide; and sche spak fro the 
soler, Whi tarieth his chaar to™ come a3en? 
Whi tarieden‘ the feet of his foure horsid 
cartis ? Oon wisere than ‘othere wyues of 29 
hymt answeride these wordis to the modir 
of hir hosebonde, In hap now he departith 30 
spuylis, and the faireste of wymmen is 
chosun to hym; clothis of dyuerse colouris 
ben 3ouun to Sisara in to prey, and dy- 
uerse aray of houshold is gaderid to ourne® 
neckis. Lord, alle thin enemyes perische 31 
so; sotheli’, thei that louen thee, schyne* 
so, as the sunne schyneth in his risyngf. 
And the lond restideY fourti 3eer. 


+ in his rising, 
in Ebreu it is, 

32 in his strengthe 
(oh 


CAP. VI. 


Forsothe’ the sones of Israel diden yuel1 
in the ‘si3t of the Lord*, and he bitook 
hem in the’ hond of Madian seuene 3eer. 
Aud thei® weren‘ oppressid of hem greetly; 2 
and ‘thei maden® dichis, and dennes to hem 
silf in hillis, and strongeste! places to fizte 
ajens. And whanne Israel hadde sowe,3 
Madian stiede*, and Amalech, and othere 
of the ‘naciouns of the eesti; and thei set-4 
tiden tentis' at™ the sones of Israel, and 
wastiden” alle thingis ‘as tho weren’ in 
eerbis, ethir? grene corn, ‘til to’ the en- 
tryng of Gaza, and outirli thei leften not 
in Israel ony thing perteynynge to lif, 
not’ scheep, not oxun, not assis. For theis 
and alle her flockis camen with her taber- 
naclis, and at the licnesse of locustus thei 


sn thirlende c. © Thec. Pwynter 8. 4% he styede opp to Madyan & pr.m. ‘oxynce. 8 thyngys 
thei x» prom. 

Dher feet1. Gijfr. 'forto1 Starienr. tan other of his wyues1. 'ourne withi. Vand1. 
*schyne thei 1. ¥ restide fro batel1. 2 Andi. 8 Lordis si3t1. btothe1. ¢Israel1. 4 was 1. 
© Israel made 2. f mnoost stronge 1. Sazen Madian1. 4 stiede up t. ieest naciouns1. | her 
teutis 1. ™ bisidis1, thei wastidenr. © that weren K. as thei weren x. P other su. 4 vnto 1. 


Pine ly 


VI. 6—16, 


the vnnoumbrable multitude of men and 
of camels, and wastynge what euere thing 
6 thei touchiden. And Yrael is mekid grectli 
7in the siz3t of Madian. And he cryede to 
the Lord, askynge help a3ens Madianytis; 
8the which sentet to hem a man prophete, 
and spak, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God of Yrael, Y haue maad 30u to come 
doun fro Egipt, and hane brou3t 30u out 
9fro the hous of seruage, and delyuerd fro 
the hoond of Egipciens, and of alle the® 
enemyes that tourmentiden 30ow; and 
haue throwun hem out atY 3oure entree, 
and haue taak to 3ow the loond of hem; 
ioand seide, I the Lord 3oure God; ne 
drede 3e the goddis of Amorreis, in whos 
loond 3e dwellen ; and 3e wolden not here 
lumy vois. Forsothe the aungel of the 
Lord cam, and sat vndur the ook, that 
was in Effra, and perteynede to Joas, the 
fader of the meyne of Ezry. And whanne 
Gedeon, the sone of hym, shockide out, 
and purgide whetis in the pressynge 
12 place, that he flei3 Madian, the aungel of 
the Lord apperide to hym, and seith, The 
Lord with* thee, moost stroong of men. 
is And Gedion seide to hym, Y biseche, my 
lord, if the Lord is with vs, whi thanne 
han taak vs alle thes yuels? Where ben 
the merueyls of hym, the whiche oure 
faders tolden, and seiden, The Lord hath 
lad ys ont of Egipt? Now forsothe he 
hath forsakun vs, and takun in the hoond 
t4of Madian. And the Lord bihelde to 
hym, and seith, Go in this thi strength, 
and thou shalt delyuer Yrael fro the 
hoond of Madian; wite thow, that Y 
1shaue sent thee. The which auswerynge 
seith, My lord, Y biseche, in what shal 
Y delyuer Yrael? Loo! my meyne is 
lowest in Manasse, and Y leest in the 
i6hows of my fader. And the Lord seide 
to hym, I shal be with thee, and thow 


JUDGES. 629 


filliden’ alle thingis, and a multitude of 
men and of camels was with out noumbre, 
and wastiden' what euer thing thei touch- 
iden. And Israel was ‘maad low" greetlié 
in the si3t of Madian. And Israel’ criede7 
to the Lord,‘and axyde” help a3ens Ma- 
dianytis; and he sente to hem a man, a8 
profete, and he spak*, The Lord God of 
Israel seith these thingis, Y made 30u to 
stie froY Egipt, and Y ledde 30u out of the 
hows of seruage, and Y delyueride 302? fro9 
the hond of Egipcians, and of alle ene- 
myes* that turmentiden 30u; and Y cast- 
ide> hem out at 3oure entryng*, and Y 3af 
to 30u ‘the lond of hem‘; and Y seide, 10 
Y am ‘30ure Lord God*; drede 3e not 
the goddis of Ammorreis, in whose lond 
3e dwellen; and 3e nolden' here my vois. 
Forsothe® an aungel of the Lord cam, and 
sat undur an ook, that was in Effra, and 
perteynede to Joas, fadir', of the meinee 
of Ezri. And whanne Gedeon, ‘his sone*, 

threischide out}, and purgide wheetis™ in Bene Tok 


a pressour, that he schulde fle Madian, an 12 be 3¥#s mysty, 
and more prin- 


+ and perteyn- 
ede to Joas fu- 
dir, not bi re- 


aungel of the Lord apperide to hymn, and «palin sat 
. ° meynee. re 
seide, The Lord be with thee, thou strong- ee 


este of men. And Gedeon seide to hym,13 
My lord, Y biseche, if the Lord is with 
vs, whi therfor" han alle these yuels take 
vs? Where ben the merueils of hym?, 
whiche oure fadris telden, and seiden, The 
Lord ledde? vs out of Egipt? ‘Now for- 
sothe! he hath forsake vs, and hath bitake 
vs" in’ the hond of Madian. And the14 
Lord bihelde to hym, and seide, Go thou 
in this strengthe of thee, and thou schalt 
delyuere Israel fro the hond of Madian; 
wite thou, that Y sentet thee. Which®1s 
Gedeon answeride, and seide, My lord, 
Y biseche, in what thing schal Y delyucre 
Israel? Lo! my meynee is the loweste 
in Manasses’, and Y am the leeste in the 
hows of my fadir. And the Lord seide 16 


tsende z. “3oure E prom. Vofa. Wshekede z. * be with & pr.m. 
Sfulfilliden:. tthei wastident. tlowed1. Vher. Waxynger. *spak tohemi. Yup fror. 
2 Om. plures. the enemyes1. threwer Centreer. @herlonds.  ¢ the Lord 3oure God 1. 


f wolden not 1. & Andi. it perteynede x. ‘the fadir1. the sone of Joas1. 1 Om.1. ™ whete 1. 
othanner. © the Lord. Phathledder, 4 Fornows. 1 Om. plures. *intoK.  haue sente 1 
wAnds. ¥ the lynage of Manasses 1. 


630 


17shalt smyte Madian aso man. And he, 
If Y haue foundun, he seith, grace be- 
fore thee, 3if to me a tokne, that thou 
18 be, ‘the which’ spekist with? me; ne goo 
thou hens, to the tyme that I turne a3en 
to thee, bryngynge sacrifice, and offrynge 
to thee. The which answerde, Y shal 
igabide thi comynge. And so Gedeon 
wente in, and sethide a kydde, and of a 
busshel of flour therf looues, and fleish 
puttynge in the leep; and the flesh 
broththe puttynge in to the pot, he took 
alle thingis vndur the ook, and offerde 
z0to hym. 'To whom seide the aungel of 
the Lord, Tak the flesh, and the therf 
looues, and putte vpon the* stoon, and the 
broththe heelde there vpon. And whanne 
21 he hadde doo so, the aungel of the Lord 
strei3te out the vttermost part of the 
3eerde that he heelde in hoond, and he 
touchid the flesh, and the therf looues; 
and fier stiede up fro the stoon, and con- 
sumede the flesh, and the therf looues. 
Forsothe the aungel of the Lord va- 
nysshide awey fro the eyen of hym. 
22 And Gedeon seynge that it was the aun- 
gel of the Lord seith, Wo me, Lord God, 
for Y haue seen the aungel of the Lord 
23 face to face. And the Lord seide to hym, 
Pees with thee; ne drede thow, thou 
24shalt not dye. Thanne Gedeon bilde there 
an auter to the Lord, and he clepide* it 
the Pees of the Lord, vuto the day that is 
now. And whanne 3it he hadde be in 
25 Effra, that is the meyne of Ezry, that 
ny3t the Lord seide to hym, Tak the bole 
of thi fader, and another bole of seuen 
3eer, and thou shalt distruye the auter of 
Baal, that is of thi fader, and the wode, 
26that is about the auter, hew doun; and 
thou shalt bilde an auter to the Lord thi 
God in the ouermost4 of this stoon, vpon 
the which thou puttist before sacrifice ; 


Ythatc. Ztoer. 


W smyte or skunfite 1. * tokene 1. 
yni. ¢seethez. 4 fleish 1. 
kthe1. loffride thor. ™ fleshe 1. 
S3erdusende1. tthati. “his1. Vv fleshe 1. 
a Andi. > the Lordis aungel 1. ¢ he seide1. 
b thi fadris bole x. bole of thi fadir s. i that 1. 


© putte 1. 


JUDGES. 


a that BcE sec. viee, FH. this E pr.v. 


Yand go 1. 
f the fleshe 1. 
n the therf 1. 
W stied up 1. 
d Thanne 1. 
k upon the 1. 


VI. 17-—726. 


to hym, Y schal be with thee, and thou 

schalt smyte* Madian as o man. And17 

Gedeon seide, If Y haue foundun grace 

bifor thee, 3yue to me a signe*, that thou, 

that spekist to me, art sente of Goddis 

part; go’ thou not ‘awei fro? hennus, til18 

Y turne ajen to thee, and brynge sacrifice, 

and offre to thee. Whiche* answeride, Y ee Posie 


schal abide thi comyng. And so Gedeon 19 “ees not that 
Gedeon wolde 


entride®, and sethide® a kide, and took that the sacri 
therf looues of a buyschel of mell, and fimitnrae” 


peride to him, 
for it is to offre 
to God aloone, 
sithen Gedeon 


fleischis? in a panyere; and he sente® the 
broth of fleischis‘ in§ a pot, and bar" alle 

thingis' vndur an* ook, and offride!' to ried 
hym]. To whom the aungel of the Lord his monn cited an 
seide, Take thou the fleischis™, and therf™ 22eel sent of 


God; but Ge. 
looues, and putte® on that stoon, and ‘on wolde, 

asaye bi a signe 
schede? the! broth aboue. And whaune 300 of God 


in accepting of 
he’ hadde do so, the aungel of the Lord 21 the sacrifice bi 


helde forth the ‘ende of the 3erde* whicht pm je3t fl 


peride to him 
he helde in the" hond, and he touchide }2.° bs 
the fleischis’, and the therf looues; and ert ee 

fier stiede’ fro the stoon, and wastide* the — synnede not in 
fleischisY, and therf? looues. Forsothe® the ad Uae 
aungel of the Lord vanyschide fro hise pig ae ce 


izsen. And Gedeon si3 that he was ‘an 22S#rifice tohim, 
: bué that the 
aungel of the Lord, and seide*, Lord God, _ sacrifice schuide 
‘ be offrid to God 
alas to me, for Y si3 the aungel of the bi him. Lire 


Lord face to face. And the Lord seide to23”* * 
hym, Pees be with thee; drede thou not, 
thou schalt not die. Therfor’ Gedeon 21 
bildide|| there an auter to the Lord, and 
he clepide it the Pees of the Lord, ‘til in 
to® present dai. And whanne hef was 3it 
in Effra, which® is of the meynee of Ezri, _ but aftir Goddis 
the Lord seide to hym in that ny3t, Take2s ere tng 


ll Gedeon bild. 
tde, &c. This 
is seid bi anti- 
cipacioun, for 
he bildide not 
the auter, no 


thou ‘the bole of thy fadir®, and anothir pene 
bole of seviene 3eer, and thou schalt distrie “ve. c. 


the auter of Baal, which! is thi fadris, 
and kitte thou doun the wode, which is 
aboute the auter; and thou schalt bilde2ze 
an auter to thi Lord God in the hi3znesse 
of this stoon, on* which thou puttidist 
d ouemost E. 


> vtmost ce. ¢ cleepe BEF. 


Z Om. DGIK pr.m. Nogsx. 4 The Lord 1. 
€ into plures. he bar 1. 
o putte hem. P helde 1. 
x deuowride 1. 
€ vnto this 1. 


» sede 
i these thingis 1. 

gOm.s. * Gedeon 1. 
Y fleshe 1. 2 the therf 1. 
f Gedeon 1. & the which 1. 


VI. 27—36. 


and thou shalt take the secounde bole, 
and offer brent sacrifice vpon the hepe of 
wode, that thow hast kut of¢ the wode. 
27 Thann Gedeon taken to ten men of his 
seruauntis, dide as the Lord comaundide 
to hym. Forsothe dredynge the hows of 
his fader, and the men of that cytee, by 
day he wold not doon, but alle thingis 
asthe ny3t he fulfilde. And whanne the 
men of his burgh tounf erly weren rysen, 
thei seen the auter of Baal destruyed, 
and the ‘mawmet woode® hewun doun, 
and another bole set vpon the auter, that 
29thanne was bild vp. And thei seiden 
to gidre, Who hath doon this? And 
whanne thei sou3ten the doer of the dede, 
it is seide, Gedeon, the sone of Joas, dide 
zoalle these thingis. And thei seiden to 
Joas, Bryng forth thi sone hider, that he 
be deed, for he hath destruyed the auter 
310f Baal, and hewen doun the wode. ‘T'o 
whom he answerde, Whether 3e ben 
wrechers of Baal, that 3e fi3ten for hym ? 
who is the aduersarye of hym, dye he, 
before the morwetide li3t come ; if he is 
God, venge he hymsilf of hym that hath 
s2deluen vp the auter of hym. Fro that 
day Gedeon ‘is clepid Jeroboal, forthi that 
Joas seide, Baal take veniaunce of hym 
that hath doluen down the auter of hym. 
33 Therfor al Madian, and Amelech, and the 
este puplis ben gedrid to gidre, and pass- 
ynge ouer Jordan settiden® tentis in the 
34 valey of Jezrael. Forsothe the spyryt of 
the Lord clothide Gedeon; the which 
criynge with tromp clepide to gidre the 
hows of Abiezer, for he shulde folwe 
ashym. And he sente messangers into al 
Manassen, the which and he folwide 
hym; and other messangers into Aser, 
and Zabulon, and Neptalym, the whiche 
36a3en camen to hym. And Gedeon seide 
to the Lord, If thow makist saaf bi myn 


€ fro EB pr. vice, of sec.v. f touns 4. 


™ the whiche1. % he dide 1. 
t hath kit 1. 


upon 1. 
$ hath distried 1. 
% morowe 1i3t 1. 
amen ouer I. 

Om. 1. ™ meynee 1. 


f thei settiden 1. 
Dn Om. G. 


JUDGES. 


o Andi. 
u wode aboute it 1. 
a hath east 1. > for thi Grknx sup. ras. b. 
& or fulfillide 1 marg. 
© to Zabulon parkmNogsxb. 


631 


sacrifice bifore; and thou schalt take the 
secounde bole, and thou schalt offre brent 
sacrifice on! the heep of trees, whiche™ 
thou kittidist doun of the wode. Therfore 27 
Gedeon took ten men of hise seruauntis, 
and dide” as the Lord comaundide to hym. 
Sotheli® Gedeon dredde the hows of his 
fadir, and the men of that citee, and noldeP 
do bi dai, but fillide’ alle thingis bi ny3t. 
And whanne men of that citee hadde rise 28 
eerly, thei sien the auter of Baal distried, 
and the wode kit doun, and the tothir bole 
put on" the auter, that was bildid thanne. 
And thei seiden to gidere, Who hath do this? 29 
And whanne thei enqueriden the doer of 
the deed, it was seid, Gedeon, the sone of 
Joas, dide alle these thingis. And thei30 
seiden to Joas, Brynge forth thi sone 
hidur, that he die, for he distriede* the 
auter of Baal, and kittidet doun the wode®. 
To whiche’ he answeride, Whether 3e ben 31 
the venieris of Baal, that 3e fi3te for hym ? 
he that is aduersarie of hym, die*, bifor 
thatY the ‘li3t of the morew dai* come; 
if he is God, venge he hym silf of hym 
that castide* doun his auter. Fro that dai32 
Gedeon was clepid Gerobaalt, for? Joas¢ 
hadde seid, Baal take veniaunce of hym 

that castide’ doun his auter. Therfor alss Cher smoneere. 
Madian, and Amalech, and the puplis of |” % 

the eest weren gadirid to gidere, and pass- 

iden® Jordan, and settiden' tentis in the 

valey of Jezrael. Forsothe the spirit of the 1 

Lord clothides Gedeon ; ‘and he" sownede! 

with a clarioun‘, and! clepide to gidere the 

hows™ of Abiezer, that it schulde sue hym. 

Aud he sente messangeris in to al Ma-3s 

nasses, and he suede Gedeon ; and he sente 

othere” messangeris in to Aser, and Zabu- 

lon®, and Neptalym?, whiche4 camen to 

hym. And Gedeon seide to the Lord, If3« 

thou makist saaf Israel bi myu hond, as 

thou hast spoke, Y schal putte this flees 37 


+ Gerobaal, 
that is, strong 
a3enus Baal, 


Sherynge place z pr.m. 4 setten c. 


P he wolde not 1. 4 he fulfillide 1. 
vwhomr Joasi1. *dieher yY Om.1. 

¢ that Joas Giknsxb. 4 hath east 1. © thei 
hthe whiche 1. isownyngei.  trumpe 1. 


P to Neptalym o. 4 and thei 1. 


r upon 1. 


632 


hoond ‘the puple of! Irael, as thow hast 
37spokun, Y shal put this fleese of wul in 
the floore; if dewe in the fleese alone 
were, and in al the erthe drou3th, Y shal 
wyte, that bi myn hoond, as thou hast 
38 spokun, thow shalt delyuer Yrael. ‘And 
itis doo so. And fro the ni3t risynge, 
thrust out of the fleese, he fulfillede an 
39 holw3 vessel with dew; and eft he seide 
to the Lord, Ne wexe not wrooth thi! 
woodnes a3ens me, if 3it oues Y tempte 
a tokne sechynge in the fleese; Y preye, 
that oonli the fleese be drye, and al the 
soerthe with dew™ moyst. And the Lord 
dide that ny3t, as he axide; and there 
was drou3th in the" fleese alone’, and 
41dewe in al the erthe. Thanne Jeroboal, 
the which and Gedeon, fro ny3t rysynge, 
and al the puple with hym, cam to the 
wel that is clepid Arad. Forsothe the 
tentis of Madian weren in the valey, at 
the north coost of the hije hil. 


CAP: Vil. 


2 And the Lord seide to Gedeon, Myche 
is the puple with thee, and lest Yrael 
glorie a3ens me, Madian shal not be taak 
into the hoondis of hym, and lest he seye, 

3Bi my strengthis I am delynerd. Spek 
to the puple, and alle herynge, preche, 
Who is feerful and dredy, turne he ajen. 
And there wenten ajen fro the hil of 
Galaad, and ben turned a3en of the pu- 
ple two and twenti thowsand of men; 

sand onely ten thowsand beden stil. And 
the Lord seide to Gedeon, 3it there is 
myche puple; lede hem to the watris, 
and there I shal preue hem, and of whom 
Y shal seye to thee, that goo with thee, 
he goo; whom I shal defende to goo, 
she turne ajen. And whanne the puple 
was goon doon to the watris, the Lord 
seide to Gedeon, Thilk? that with hoond 
and with tonge lapen the watris, as 
lin p, 


iOm. £ pr.m k Om. cz. 


JUDGES. 


m the dew Berit. 


VI. 37—VII. 5. 


of wolle in the corn’ floor; if dew’ is in 
the flees aloone, and drynesse is in al the 
erthe, Y schal wite, that thou schalt dely- 
uere Israel bi myn hond, as thou hast 
spoke. And it was don so. And he" roos3s 
bi ny3t, and whanne the flees was wrongun 
out, he fillide a pot? with deew; and hesg 
seide eft to the Lord, Thi strong veniaunce 
be not wrooth a3ens me, if Y asaie, ‘that 
is,axe a signe’, 3it onys, and seke a signe” 
in the flees; Y preye, that the flees aloone 
be drie, and al* the erthe be moist with 
deew. And the Lord dide in that ny3t, 40 
as Gedeon axide; and drynesse was in 
the flees aloone, and deew was in al the 
erthe’. 


CAP. VII. 


Therfor? Jerobaal, which also* Gedeon, 1 
roos bi ny3t, and al the puple with hym, 
and cam? to the welle which® is clepid 
Arad. Sotheli4 the tentis of Madian weren 
in the valey, at the north coost of the hi3 
hil. And the Lord seide to Gedeon, Myche2 
puple is with thee, and Madian schal not 
be bitakun in to the hondis ‘ther of ©, lest 
Israel hauef glorie a3ens me, and seie, Y 
am delyuerid bi my strengthis. Speke3 
thou to the puple, and preche thou, while 
alle men heren, He that is ferdful ‘in 
herte®, and dredeful ‘with outforth*, turne 
ajen. And thei! 3eden awei fro the hil of 
Galaad, and two and twenti thousynde of 
men turniden ajen fro the* puple; and oneli 
ten thousynde dwelliden!. And the Lord4 
seide to Gedeon, jet the puple is myche; 
Jede thou hem to the watris, and there 
Y schal preue hem, and he go™, of whom 
Y schal seye, that he go; turne" he a3en, 
whom Y schal forbede to go. And whannes 
the puple hadde go doun to watris®, the 
Lord seide to Gedeon, Thou schalt departe 
hem bi hem silf, that lapen watris with 
hond and tunge, as doggis? ben wont to 
P Thoo c. 


nalthe g pr.m. ° Om. £ prem 


+ a pot, in 
E 


breu it is, a 


bacyn. c. 


drier. 8 the dew1. ™ Gedeon 1. 
@ also is c sec.m. also wast. bhecami. ©¢ that 1. 
i the sones of Israel 1. k that GIKMNO sec. m. Qxb. 
° the watris 1. P houndis 1. 


vOm. rx. Wtokene1. * that ali1. Ydrie florer. 2% Thannet. 
dAndr ¢ofitr. fOm1. ¢Omr & Om. 1. 


labiden 1. ™gowith thee1, 4% and turner. 





VII. 6—13. JUDGES. 633 


houndis ben woned‘ to lape, thou shalt 
senere hem’ aside; forsothe thilk’, that 
bowiden the knees drynkynge, in that 
6other paart shulen be. And so was the 
noumbre of liem, that with hoond throw- 
ynge to the mouth watris hadden lapid, 
thre hundrid men; forsothe al ‘that othert 
7multitude the" knee bowid dronke. And 
the Lord seith to Gedeon, In three hun- 
drid men, that lapiden watris, Y shal 
delyuer 3o0u, and taak Madian in thin 
hoond ; forsothe a] ‘that other’ multitude 
sbe turned a3en into his place. And so 
metis taken for the noumbre, and trom- 
pis, al ‘that othirY multitude he co- 
maundide to goon to her tabernaclis; and 
he, with thre hundrid men, 3af hym silf 
to the bateil. Forsothe the tentis of Ma- 
gdian weren vndur in the valey. The 
same ny3t the Lord seide to hym, Rise, 
and go doun into the tentis, for Y haue 
19 taak hem in thin hoond ; forsothe if alone 
thou dredist to goo, go doun with thee 
11 Phara, thi child. And whanne thou herist 
what thei speken, thanne thin hoondis 
shulen be coumfortid, and sikerer thou 
shalt goo doun to the tentis of the ene- 
myes. Thanne descendide he, and Phara, 
his child, into a paart of the tentis, where 
12 weren the watchis of armed men. For- 
sothe Madian, and Amalech, and alle the 
este puplis shed layen in the valey, as 
multitude of locustis; forsothe camels vn- 
noumbrable there weren, as grauel that 
13 lieth in the brenk of the see. And whanne 
Gedeon was comen, a man tolde a sweuen 
to his neijbore, and in this maner he 
toolde that he saw3, Y saw3 a sweuen, 
and it seemed to me, as a loof of barlich 
imaad vndir asshen to be trendlid, and 
into the tentis of Madyan to goo doun; 
and whanne it were comyn to* the taber- 
nacle, it smoot it, and turnede vpsedoun, 


lape; sothelid theit, that drynken with 
knees’ bowid', schulen be in the tothir 
part. And so the noumbre of hem, thate 
lapiden watris bi hond*" castynge to the 
mouth, was thre hundrid men; forsothe’ 
al the tothir multitude drank knelynge. 
And the Lord seide to Gedeon, In thre7 
hundrid men, that lapiden watris, Y schal 
delyuere 30u, and Y schal bitake Madian 
in thin hond; but al the tothir multi- 
tude turne a3en in to her place. Ands8 
so* whanne thei hadden take meetis and 
trumpis for the noumbreY, he comaundide 
al the tothir multitude to go to her taber- 
naclis; and he’, with thre hundrid men, 
3af hym silf to batel. Sothely* the tentis 
of Madian weren bynethe in the valey. 
In the same ny3t the Lord seyde to hymn, 
Ryse thou, and go doun in to ‘the castels 
of Madian*, for Y haue bitake hem in 
thin hond; sotheli‘ if thou dredist to go10 
aloon, Phara, thi child, go doun with thee. 
And whanne thou schalt here what thei¢1u 
speken', thanne thin hondis schulen be 
coumfortid, and thou schalt do down si- 
kerere to the tentis of enemyes*. Therfor" 
he! 3ede doun, and Phara, his child, in to 
the’ part of tentis!, where the watchis of 
armed men weren. Forsothe™ Madian, and 12 
Amalech, and alle the puplis of the eest 
layen spred® in the valey, as the multitude 
of locustis ; sotheli® the camelis weren vn- 
noumbrable, as grauel that liggith? in the 


- ‘brenke of the seel. And whanne Gedeon 13 


hadde come’, a man tolde a dreem to his 
nei3bore, and telde* bi this maner that, 
that he hadde seyn, I si3 a dreem, and it 
semyde to me, that as ‘o loof of barlyt 
bakun vndur the" aischis was walewid, 
and cam’ doun in to the tentis of Madian ; 
and whanne it hadde come to a tabernacle, 
it smoot” and distriede ‘that tabernacle*, 
and madeY euene outirly to the erthe. 


Qwontern. 'Om.ceprm Sthooc. tthetotherc. that 4. Vthetotherc. W thin a. 


x into 4. 


qandr. ‘thor. Sthe kneesx. t foolden r. 


uthe hond cork pr.m. Yandi1. Wand1, * Om. 1. 


Ynoumbre of hem 1. 2 Gedeonr. @And1. > Gedeonr. ¢ her tentis1. 2 And1. ¢ the Madianytis 1. 


f schul speke 1. & the enemyes 1. 4 Thanne 1. 
abrodr. andr. P lijth 1. q see brenke 1. 


iGedeon rt. Karz. ! the tentis1, ™ And. .® spred 


¥ come doun 1. 8 he telde 1. ta barly loof 1. 


u Om. Ginsxb. Vit cami. WY smoot iti. * the tabernacle c. it1. Y made it 1. 


4M 


634 


i4and al doun to the erthe euenede. He, 
to whom he spak, answerde, This is noon 
othere thing, but the swerd of Gedeon, 
sone’ of Joas, a man of Irael; forsothe 
the Lord hath takun into the hoondis of 
hym Madian and alle the tentis of it. 
1s And whanne Gedeon hadde herd the 
sweuen, and the remenynge of it, he 
heryede, and, turned a3en to the tentis of 
Yrael, seith?, Ryse 3e; forsothe the Lord 
hath takun into oure hoondis the tentis 
of Madian. And he dyuydide the thre 
hundrid men in thre parties, and he 3af 
trompis in the hoondis of hem, and voyd 
wyn pottys, and laumpis in the myddis 
1zof the pottis. And he seide to hem, 
What 3e seen me doon*, that doo 3e; Y 
shall goo into a paart of the tentis, and 
1s what Y shal doo, folwith. Whanne the 
trompe fulsowneth in myn hoond, for- 
sothe 3e bi the enuyroun of the tentis 


trompith, and crieth to gidre, To the Lord ° 


igand to Gedeon. And Gedeon wente in, 
and thre hundred men that weren with 
hym, into a part of the tentis, bigyn- 
nynge the watchis of the mydny3t; and, 
the kepers reryd, thei bigunnen with 
trompis to cryen, and clappen togidre 
20 bitwix® hem seluen the wyn pottis. And 
whanne bi enuyroun of the tentis in thre 
placis thei fulsowneden, and the stenys 
hadden broken, thei heelden with the 
left hoondis the laumpis, and with the 
ri3t the sownynge trompis; and thei cri- 
eden, The swerd of the Lord and of 
21 Gedeon ; stondynge eche in his place, by 
enuyroun of the enemyes tentis. And 
so alle the tentis ben disturblid®; and 
22criynge out and 3ellynge, flowen; and 
neuerthelater? the thre hundryd men 
stoden to stedfastli, sownynge with trom- 
pis. And the Lord sente yn swerd in alle 


y the sone E pr.m. 
later ¢ passim. 


z he seith E pr.m. 


z And thatr. ® Om. 1. © Joas sone 1. 
€ofiti. 8thethrer. !Om.s. 
aboute the 1. 


k 3af hem 1. 


JUDGES. 


2 to do cE. 


¢ forsothe 1. 
1 empty 1. 
P And whanne the mydny3t wacchis bigunnen 1. 


VII. 14——22. 


That? man answeride, to whom he spak,14 | 
This is noon other thing, no* but the 
swerd of Gedeon, ‘sone of Joas*, a man of 


Israel; for® the Lord4 hath bitake Madian 

and alle ‘tentis therof® in to the hondis of 

the dreem, and ‘the interpretyng‘ therof, 

he worschypide ¢he Lord, and turnede 

Ryse 3e; for the Lord hath bitake in to 

oure hondis the tentis of Madian. And 16 

partis, and he! 3af* trumpis in her hondis, 

and voyde! pottis, and laumpis™{ in the jae eee 
And he seide to 17 nynge brondis, 

hem, Do 3e this thing which" 3e seen me Haste 

do; Yschal entre in to a part of the tentis, et acai Ere 

trumpe in myn hond schal sowne, sowne 

3e also ‘bi the cumpas of° tentis, and crye 

And? Gedeon entride’, and thre" hundrid 19 

men that weren with hym, ‘in to a part 

ny3t bigunnen’; and whanne the keperis' 

weren reysid, thei" bigunnen to sowne 

pottis among hem silf. And whanne thei 20 

sowneden in thre places bi cumpas, and 

laumpis in the” left hondis, and sownynge 

trumpis in the” ri3t hondis; and thei cri- 

deon; and stoden* alle in her place, ‘bi21 

the cumpas ofY the tentis of enemyes’. 

and thei crieden‘, and 3elliden, and fled- 

den?; and neuertheles® the thre hundrid 22 

And the Lord sente swerd in alle the 

castelsf, and thei killiden hem silf bi deeth 


Gedeon. And whanne Gedeon had herd1s 

azen to the tentis of Israel, and seide, 

he departide thre’ hundrid men in to thre 

myddis of the pottis. vrbe tall 
that my3ten 

and sue 3e that, that Y do. Whanne the1s*re © 

3e togidere, To the Lord and to Gedeon. 

of the tentis, whanne the watchis of myd- 

with trumpis, and to bete togidere the 

haddeu broke’ the pottis, thei helden 

eden, The swerd of the Lord and of Ge- 

And so alle ‘the tentis? weren troblid>; 

men contynueden, sownynge with trumpis. 

ech other; and thei fledden ‘til to’ Beth-23 


> bytwen acern, ¢ disturbid c. 4 nerthe- 


4 Lord God x. ¢hertentis1. f remeenyng I. 
™ laumpis brennynge 1. "%that1. © al 
4 entride into a part of her tentis 1. 


‘the thre1, SOm.1.  ' keperis of her wacchis 1. “Gideon and hise 1. v broke togidre 1. w her 1. 
thei stoden 31, Yabouter. 2herenemyes1. ®their. btroblidin her tentis1. ¢ crieden out 1. 
4 fledden awey 1. ¢netheles1. ftentis 1. ¢ into 1. 


VII. 23—VIILI. 4. 


the tentis, and thei kutten of hem seluen 

23 bi sleynge echon other, fleynge into Beth- 
saka, and bi the cop of the brenke, fro 
Elmonla into Thebbath. The men of 
Irael forsothe criynge togidre, of Nepta- 
lym, and Aser, and al° Manasse, ‘pur- 
sueden Madian?; and the Lord 3af to 
the puple of Yrael victory in that day. 

21 And Gedeon sente messangers into al the 
hil of Effraym, seiynge, Comith doun 
into a3jen metynge of Madian, and occu- 
pieth the watres vnto Bethhem! and Jor- 
dan. And al Effraym criede, and forn 
occupiede the watres and Jordan vnto 

25Bethhara. And two men of Madian 
takun, Oreb and Zeb, he slow3; Oreb in 
the stoon of Oreb, forsothe Zeb in the 
pressynge place of Zeb; and thei pur- 
sueden Madian, the heedys of Oreb and 
of Zeb berynge to Gedeon, ouer the 
floodis of Jordan. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 And the men of Effraym seiden to 
hym, What is this that thou woldest doo, 
that thou clepedist not vs, whanne thou 
shuldist go to fi3t’ a3ens Madian ? 
chidynge stronglich and almest violence 

2brynggynge yn. To whom he answerde, 
What siche thing forsothe my3te Y doo, 
what 3e han doon? Whether is not be- 
tere the graape of Effraym than the 

3vendage of Abiether? Into 3oure hoondis 
the Lord hath takun the princis of Ma- 
dian, Oreb and Zeb. What siche thing 
mi3te Y doo*, what thing 3e han doo? 
The which thing whanne he hadde 
spoken, the spyryt of hem took rest, bi 
thet which thei bolneden ajens hym. 
4And whanne Gedeon was comyn to Jor- 
dan, he passide it with thre hundrid 
men, that weren with hym; and for 
werynes, fleynge thei my3ten not pursue. 


JUDGES. 


635 


secha, and bi the" side, fro' Elmonla in to 
Thebbath. Sotheli* men of Israel crieden 
togidere, of Neptalym, and of Aser, and 
of alle Manasses, and pursueden! Madian ; 
and the Lord jaf victorie to the puple of 
Israel in that day. And Gedeon sente 24 
messangeris in to al the hil of Effraym, 
and seide™, Come 3e doun ajens the com- 
yng of Madian, and ocupie 3e the" watris 
‘til to®° Bethbera and Jordan. And al 
Effraym criede, and? bifore ocupide the 
watris and’ Jordan ‘til to" Bethbera. And 25 
LE ffraym killide twei men’ of Madian, Oreb 
and Zeb; he killide Oreb in the ston of 
Oreb, forsothet ‘he killide" Zeb in the pres- 
sour of Zeb; and ‘thei pursueden’ Madian, 
and baren” the heedis of Oreb and of Zeb 
to Gedeon, ouer the flodis of Jordan. 


CAP. VIII. 


And the men of Effraym seiden tol 
hym*, What is this thing, whichY thou 
woldist do, that thou clepidist not vs, 
whanne thou 3edist to batel az3ens Ma- 
dian? And thei chidden’ strongli, and 
almest* diden® violence. To whiche® he2 
answeride, What sotheli4 siche thing my3te 
Y do®, what maner thing 3e didenf? Whe- 
thir a reisyn of Effraym is not betere 
than the vindagis of Abiezer? And the% 
Lord bitooké in to 3oure houdis the princes 
of Madian, Oreb and Zeb. What sich 
thing my3te Y do", what maner thing 3e 
dideni? And whanne he* hadde spoke 
this thing, the spirit of hem! restide, bi 
which thei bolIneden a3jens hym. And4 
whaune Gedeon hadde come to Jordan, 
he passide it with thre hundrid men, that 
weren with hym; and for weerynesse thei 
my3ten not pursue hem that fledden. And5 


° of £ pr.m. P Madyan was pursuwed £ prim. 4 Bethhara g prim. * the fiz3t cz. 8Om.r. t Ome. 
ha priuei 1. ‘thei wenten fror kAndr. thei pursuedenr. ™heseide1 % Om.1. © vitor. 
Pand their. dofx. 'vntor Scheeftmarg. taundi. %Om.1.  V Effraym pursuede 1.  W thei 
baren 1. * Gedeoni. Ythat1. 2% chidden with him. ® wel ny31. © thei diden to kimi, © whom 1. 
4 And what1. ¢hanedor. fhandor. hath bitaker. bhauedor ihandor * Gedeonr. 
1 Effraym 1. 


4M 2 


636 


5And he seide to the men of Socchoth, 
Y biseche, 3yueth looues to the puple, 
that is with me; for greetlich thei de- 
fauten, that we mowen pursue Zebee 
sand Salmana, kyngis of Madian. The 
princis of Soccoth answerden, Perauen- 
ture the palmes of the hoondis of Zebee 
and of Salmana ben in thin hoond, and 
therfor thow askist, that we 3euen to 
7thin oost looues. To whom he seith, 
Whanne therfor the Lord shal taak into 
myn hoondis Zebee and Salmana, and 
whanne Y were turned a3en ouercomer 
in pees, Y shal to-teren 3onre flesh with 
éthornes and breris of deseert. And thens 
goynge he cam into Phanuel; and he 
spak to the men of that place lijk thingis, 
and to whom thei answerden, as an- 
9swerden the men of Soccoth. And to 
hem he seide also, Whanne Y were turn- 
ed ajen ouercomer in pees, Y shall de- 
lostruy this tour. Zebee forsothe and Sal- 
mana restiden with al her oost; forsothe 
fifteen thowsand men abiden stil of alle 
the cumpanyes of the est" puplis, sleyn 
an hundryd and twenty thousandis’ of 
11fizters and of drawers out swerd. And 
Gedeon stiynge vp bi the weye of hem 
that dwelliden in tabernaclis at the eest 
coost of Nobee and Lecaa, he smoot the 
tentis of the enemyes, that weren siker, 
and no thing of aduersyte ortroweden. 
122And Zebee and Salmana flowen, whom 
pursuynge Gedeon took, disturblid al the 
i300st of hem. And he turnynge ajen fro 
14 the bateyl before the sunne rysynge, he 
took a child of the men of Soccoth; and 
he askyde hym the names of the pryncis, 
and of the eldren of Soccoth ; and he dis- 
criuyde seuenty and seuen men bi noum- 
isbre. And he eam to Socoth, and seide to 
hem, Loo Zebee and Salmana! vpon the 
whiche 3ee mysseyden to me, seiynge, 


u Om. ABFH. 


m Gedeon 1. 
t Gedeon 1. 
> Gedeon 1. 
smoot I. 
took 1. 


nbred 1. © that 1. 
ufleshe 1. V¥Om.1. 
cAndr andi. ¢ eest puplis 1. 

k enemyes tentis 1. ™ whom 1. 

r of the eldere 1. §% Gedeon 1. 


w the deseert 1. 


JUDGES. 


v thousend c. 


P thanne pursue t. 
x Gedeon 1. 

f figtynge men 1. 

n her oost 1. 

t Salinana ben taken 1. 


VIIL. 5—15. 


he™ seide to the men of Socoth, Y biseche, 
3yue 3e looues" to the puple, which® is 
with me; for thei failiden greetli, that we 
moun pursue? Zebee and Salmana, kyngis 
of Madian. The princes of Socoth an-6 
sweriden zz scorne, In hap the pawmes of 
the hondis of Zebee and of Salmana ben 
in thin hond’, and therfor thou axist, that 
we 3yue looues to thin oost. To whiche’7 
het seide, Therfor, whanne the Lord schal 
bitake Zebee and Salmana in to myn 
hondis, and whanne Y schal turne aj3en 
ouercomere in pees, Y schal to-reende 3oure 
fleischis" with the’ thornes and breris of 
deseert’. And he* stiedeY fro thennus, 8 
and cam? in to Phanuel; and he spak lijk 
thingis to men of that place, to whom also 
thei answeriden, as the men of Socoth 
hadden answerid. And so? he seide to9 
hem, Whanne Y schal turne a3en ouer- 
comere in pees, Y schal distrie this tour. 
Forsothe® Zebee and Salmana_ restiden 10 
with al her oost; for fiftene thousynde 
men leften of alle the cumpenyes of the 


‘puplis of the eest®, whanne an hundrid 


and twenti thousynde of ‘fiz3teris and of 
menf drawynges out swerd weren slayn. 
And Gedeon stiede® bi the weye of hem 
that dwelliden in tabernaclis at the eest 
coost of Nobe and of Lethoa, and smoot 
the ‘tentis of enemyes*, that weren sikur, 
and supposiden not ony thing of aduersite. 
And Zebee and Salmana fledden, whiche™ 12 


Gedeon pursuede and took, whanne al ‘the 
oost of hem™ was disturblid. And he°13 
turnede a3en fro batel bifor the ‘risyng of 
the sunne}?, and took4 a child of the men 14 + sifor the 
. ising of the 
of Socoth; and he axide hym the names 77% 1M 
of the princes and eldere™ men of Socoth; re" its, fro 
3 9 the hizgnesse of 
and he* descryuede seuene and senenti men the sunne, that 
: is, bifor the 
in noumbre. And he cam to Socoth, and 15 goyng donn of 
° th hil 
seide to hem, Lo Zebee and Salmanat! of the sunne was. 
. : ‘ 3it an hi3, as 
whiche 3e vpbreideden me, and seiden, In}, 25. 
pownen. Lire 
here. C. 


Ww Om. E sec. m. 


8 whom 1. 
a Om. plures. 
ihe 
qa he 


r hondis 1. 
Z 3ede s. 
& ledinge s. » stiede up 1. 
© Gedeon 1. P sunne risyng I. 


qa And the 1. 
Y stiede up 1. 


VIII. 16—26. 


Perauenture the hoondys of Zebee and* 
Salmana in thin hoondis ben, and therfor 
thou askist, that we 3euen to the men, 
that ben wery and han defautid, looues. 
16 He took thanne the eldre of the cyte, 
and thornes of deseert and breris, and to- 
rente with hem, and distruyede the men 
170f Socoth; forsothe the tour of Phanuel 
he turnede vpsedoun, slayn the dwellers 
isof the cyte. And he seide to Zebee and 
to Salmana, What weren the men, whom 
3e slowen in Thabor? The whiche an- 
swerden, Lijk thee, and oon of hem as 
i9the sone of a kyng. To whom he, My 
britheren thei weren, the sones of my 
moder; God lyueth, if 3e hadden kepte 
20hem, Y wolde not haue slayn 3ow. And 
he seide to Jepter, his fyrst gotun, Ryse, 
and sle hem. The which drewe not out 
the swerd; forsothe he dredde, for a 
2ichild he was 3it. And Zebee and Sal- 
mana seyden, Thow ryse, and fal into vs; 
for after age and strength thow art of a 
man. Gedeon roos, and slewe Zebee and 
Salmana, and took the ournementis, and 
billis, with the whiche the neckis of kyngis 
22chamels ben wonyd to be anourned. And 
alle the men of Yrael seiden to Gedeon, 
Haue lordship of vs, thow, and thi sone, 
and the sone of thi sone; for thow hast 
23 delyuerd vs fro the hoond of Madian. To 
whom he seith, I shal not haue lordship 
of 30u, ne my sone shal haue lordship in 
24 30u, but the Lord shal haue lordship. And 
he seide to hem, Oon askynge Y aske of 
30w, 3eueth to me the eere ryngys of 
joure praye; forsothe Ysmaelitis weren 
25woned to han golden eereryngis. The 
whiche answerden, Moost glaadly we 
shulen 3eue. And spredynge abrood vpon 
the erthe a mantil, thei threwen forth in 
26it the eere ryngis of the praye; and the 
wei3t of the askid eereryngis was a thou- 
sand and seuenti siclis of gold, with outen 


JUDGES. 


637 


hap the hondis of Zebee and of Salmana 
ben in thin hondis, and therfor thou axist, 
that we 3yue looues to men, that ben weeri 
and failiden. ‘Therfor Gedeon took the 16 
eldere men of the citee, and thornes" and 
breris of deseert, and he’ to-rente with 
tho, and al to-brak the men of Socoth; 
also he’ destriede the tour of Phanuel, 17 
whanne the dwelleris of the citee weren 
slayn. And he seide to Zebee and Salma-1s 
na*, What maner men weren thei, whicheY 
3e killiden in Thabor? Whiche? answer- 
iden, Zhet weren lijk thee, and oon of 
hem was as the sone of a kyng. To19 
whiche* he? seide, Thei weren my bri- 
theren, the sones of my modir; the Lord 
lyueth, if 3e hadden saued hem, Y ‘nolde 
slee 30u. And het® seide to Jepther, his 20 
firste gendrid® sone, Rise thou, and sle hem. 
Which‘ drow not swerd®; for he dredde, 
for he was 3it a child. And Zebee and 2i 
Salmana seiden", Ryse thou, and falle oni 
vs; for thou art bi the age and strengthe 
of man. Gedeon roos, and killide Zebee 
and Salmana, and took* the ournementis, 
and bellis!, with™ whiche the neckis of 
kyngis" camels ben wont to be maad fair. 
And alle the®° men of Israel seiden to Ge-22 
deon, Be thou lord of vs, thou, and thi 
sone, and the sone of thi sone; for thou 
deliueridist? vs fro the hond4 of Madian. 
To whiche' he seide, Y schal not be lord 23 
of 30u, nethir my sone schal be lord on 
jou, but the Lord schal be lord’. And het 21 
seide to hem, Y axe oon axyng of 3ou, 
3yue 3e to me the eere ryngis of 3oure 
prey; for Ismaelitis weren wont to hane 
goldun eere ryngis. Whiche" answeriden, 25 
We schulen 3yue moost’ gladli. And thei 
spredden forth’Y a mentil on” the erthe, 
and castiden* forth therynneY ‘eere ryngis* 
of the prey; and the wei3te of ‘eere ryngis” 26 
axid* was a thousynde and seuene hun- 
drid siclis of gold, with out ournementis 


x and of E. 


u also thornes 1. ¥YOm.s. ‘W Gedeon 1. 
b Gedeon 1. © wolde not haue slawe I. 
h seiden fo Gedeon1. ‘intor. he took 1. 


P hast delyuered 1. Gpower1. whom. 


x to Salmana 1. 
4 Gedeon 1. 
the bellis 1. 

8 Jord on 30u 5. 


Ythatr. 2 Thewhicher. ® whom 1. 
€goten1.  f And Jepther 1. & his swerd 1. 
m bir. -2the kyngist. 9 Om. plures. 

t Gedeon 1. = The whiche 1. Vv thee 


these fulr. vv fora. “upon 1. *therupon thei castiden 1. YOm.1. 2theeere ryngis 1. *that he axid1. 


638 JUDGES. 


the ournementis andY brochis and purpur 
elooth, the? which the kyngis of Madian 
weren wont to vse, and biside the goldun 
27 bee3is* of chamels. And Gedeon maad of 
it a coop, and putte it in Effra his citee; 
and al Yrael dide fornycacioun in it; and 
it was maad to Gedeon and to alle the 
28hows of hym into fallynge. Forsothe 
Madian is mekid before the sones of 
Yrael, ne thei my3ten more ouer reer vp 
the nollis ; but the loond restide bi fourty 
3eer, in the which Gedeon was in dig- 
zonyte. And so Joroboal, the sone of Joas, 
303ede, and dwelte in his hows; and he 
hadde seuenti sones, that camen out of 
the hype of hym, forthi that he hadde 
31many wyues. Forsothe the secoundarye 
wijf of hym, that he had in Sichem, gat 
3zhym a sone, Abymalech bi name. And 
Gedeon, the sone of Joas, is deed in a 
good age, and biryed in the sepnlere of 
Joas his fader, in Efra, of the meyne of 
33 Ezry. Forsothe after that Gedeon is deed, 
the sones of Jrael ben turned awey, and 
han doo fornycacioun with Baalym; and 
thei smyten with Baal eouenaunt of pees, 
sithat he were to hem into God, ne thei 
reeordiden of the Lord her God, ‘the 
which® delyuerde hem fro the hoond of 
35alle her enemyes bi enuyroun; ne thei 
diden merey with the hows of Jeroboal 
Gedeon, after alle the good thingys that 
he dide to Yrael. 


CA PicEX; 


1 Abyialech, the sone of Jeroboal, 3eed 
forsothe? into Sichem to the britheren of 
his moder; and he spak to hem, and to 
al the kynrede of the hows of his modir, 
seiynge, Spek to alle the men of Sychem, 

2 Whether is it betere to 3ou, that senenti 


VIII, 27-—-IX. 2. 


and brochis and cloth of purpur, whiche 

the kyngis of Madian weren wont to vse, 

and outakun goldun bies of camels. And 27 

Gedeon made therof ephot”, that is, a 

preestis cloth,\and promr® cloth® of the 

hizeste preest*, and he puttide’ it in his 

eitee Ephra; and al Israel diden forny- 

cacioun, ‘that is ydolatrye®, ther ynne; 

and it was maad to Gedeon and to al his 

hows" in to fallyng}. Forsothe! Madian 20 ¢ in to falling, 
. for he synnede 

was maad low bifor the sones of Israel,  therynne, and 

and thei my3ten no more reise nollis*;  fherfor bis 

but! the lond -restide fourti jeer, in whiche a eee ie ee 

Gedeon was souereyn. And so Jerobaal, Se lt 

sone™ of Joas, 3ede", and: dwellide in his ae 

hows; and he hadde seuenti sones, that 30 

3eden out of his thi3, for® he hadde many 

wyues. Forsothe? a concubyn, ‘that ts, 31 

secoundarie wijf%, of hym, whom he 

hadde in Sichem, gendride to hym a sone, 

Abymelech bi name. And Gedeon, sone’ 32 

of Joas, diede in good elde, and was biried 

in the sepulere of Joas, his fadir, in Ephra, 

of the meynee of Ezri. Forsothe® aftir33 

that Gedeon was deed, the sones of Israel 

turneden awey ‘fro Goddis religioun', and 

diden" fornycacioun, ‘that is, idolatrie’, 

with Baalym; and thei smytiden” boond 

of pees with Baal, that he schulde be to 

hem in to God, nether thei* hadden mynde 34 

of her Lord God, that delyueredeY hem 

fro the hond of alle her enemyes ‘bi cum- 

pas*?; nether thei diden merci with*® the 3s 

hous” of Gerobaal Gedeon‘, bi alle the 

goodis® whichef he ‘hadde do to Israel. 


CA PelXx. 


Forsothe Abymelech, the sone of Gero-1 
baal, 3ede in to Sichem to the britheren of 
his modir; and he spak to hem, and to al 
the kynrede of ‘the hows of his modir, 
and seide, Speke 3e to alle the! men of2 
Sichem, What is betere to 30u, that seuenti 


Yofa. “withthe £ pr.m. 4 beeyze x. P gattoc. ¢thatc. 4 forth «. 
» a prestis coope 1. ¢ purpur N. ‘d Om. w. € bigsshop K. gloss omitted in BIx. f putte 1. 
& Om. pix. hmeyneer iButr & up her nollist. land1. ™thesoner. ".wentesr. © for thi 
thatr. P Andi. @Onm.8. ‘thesoner. s Andi, tOm.1. thei dident. YOm.xr. W smoten i. 
“Israeli. y hadde delyuered 1. Zabouter. ator » meyneer. ‘thatis,Gedeon1. 4 aftir 1. 
© gode thingis 1. fthat 1. & dider. bhis modir hous 1. 1 Om, 1xsogsb. 


Seta 


men, alle® the sones of Jeroboal, han 
lordship of 3ow, other‘ o man be lord to 
jow? and togidre bihold 3e, for joure 
3boon and 3oure flesh Y am. And the 
britheren of his moder speken of hym to 
alle the men of Sichem alle thes wordes ; 
and thei boweden the herte of hem after 
Abymalech, seyinge, Oure brother he is. 
1And thei 3auen to hym seuenti pownde 
of siluer of the hethen temple of Baal 
Berith; the which hiride to hym of it 
nedi men and vagaunt, and thei folweden 
shym. And he cam into the hows of his 
fader in Ephra, and he slew3 his bri- 
theren the sones of Jeroboal, seuenti men, 
vpon o& stoon. And Joatham, the sone 
of Jeroboal, the leest, abood stil, and is 
chid. And alle the men of Sichem, and 
al the meynee of the cite of Mello, ben 
gedred to gidre, and wenten, and ordeyn- 
eden hem a kyng, Abymalech, biside the 
700k that stood in Sichem. The which, 
whanne was told to Joatham, he 3ede, and 
stood in the cop of the hil of Garysym, 
and, arerid vp the voice, cryede, and 
seyde, Here 3e me, men of Sichem, so 
sthat God here 3ou. Treese wenten for 
to anoynte vpon hem a kyng; and thei 
seiden to the olyue, Comaund thou to vs. 
9The whiche answerde, Whethir may Y 
forsake my fatnes, the whiche and Goddis 
vsen and men, and come, that bitwixi 
10 trees Y be auaunsid? And the trees seiden 
to the fige tree, Com thou, and tak kyng- 
11dom vpon vs. The which answerde to 
hem, Whether may Y forsake ny swetnes 
and moost swete fruytis, and goo that 
12 bitwix! other trees Y be auaunsid? And 
13the trees speken to the viyn, Com, and 
comaunde to vs. The which answerde, 
Whether may Y forsake my wyn, that 
gladith God and men, and bitwix! other 
i4trees be auaunsid? And alle the trees 
seiden to the thorn, Com, and comaund 


Cofe prem. fore. 


1 that Kx. 
4 seuenti men, hise 1. 
w thei maden 1. 
€ the which 1. 
m the whiche 1. 


k bihold je plures. 
a stoon he killide 1. 
uOm1. V Andi. 
€ the whiche 1. 4 upon1. 
k or Eve. or the 1. } upon 1. 


JUDGES. 


Sac. hb rerid c. 


™ Abymalechus 1. 
rOm.1. 


*he cried 1. 
f my ful swete t. 


639 


men, alle the sones of Gerobaal, be lordis 
of 30u, whether that o man be lord to 30u? 
and also biholde*, for! Y am 3oure boon, 
and 3oure fleisch. And the britheren of3 
his™ inodir spaken of hym alle these wordis 
to alle the men of Sichem; and bowiden" 
her hertis aftir Abymelech, and seiden, 
He is oure brother. And thei 3auen to4 
hym seuenti wei3tis of siluer} of the tein- 
ple of Baal Berith; and he hiride to hym 
therof men pore and hauynge} no certeyn 
dwellynge, and thei sueden hym. Ands 
he cam in to ‘the hows of his fadir® in 
Ephra, and killideP hise1 britheren the 
sones of Gerobaal, ‘seuenti men, on o 
stoon’. And Joathan, the leste’ sone of 
Gerobaal, leftet, and was" hid. Forsothe’ 6é 
alle the men of Sichem, and alle the 
meynees of the citee of Mello, weren 
gadirid to gydere, and thei 3eden, and 
maden” Abymelech kyng, bysidis the ook 
that stood in Sichem. And whanne this7 
thing was teld to Joathan, he 3ede, and 
stood in the cop of the hil Garisym, and 
cried* with ‘vois reisid’, and seide, 3e men 
of Sichem, here? me, so that God here 3ou. 
Trees jeden to anoynte a kyng on* hem; xs 
and tho® seiden to the olyue tre, Comaunde 
thou to vs. Whiche® answeride, Whether » 
Y may forsake my fatnesse, which® bothe 
Goddis and men vsen, and come, that Y 
be auaunsid among trees? And the trees io 
seiden to the fige tree, Come thou, and 
take the rewme on‘ vs. Which® answeride 11 
to hem, Whether Y may forsake my swet- 
nesse and swetteste’ fruytis, and go that 
Y be auaunsid among othere trees? Also 12 
‘the trees spaken to the vyne, Come thou, 
and comaunde to vs. Which answeride, 13 
Whether Y may forsake my wyn, that 
gladith God and men, and be auaunsid 
among othere trees? And alle trees! seiden 14 
to the ramne, ether* theue thorn, Come 
thou, and be lord on! vs. Whiche™ an-15 


i bytwene ncern. 


1 thei bowiden 1. © his fadir hous 1. P upon 
S3ungist 1.  ¢ was lefte 1 éext. vnslayn marg. 
yhige voist. 7hereth 1, ®upon1. b thei 1. 
Stheir. the whichi. ithe trees 1. 


t dvr. weizlis 
of silver. Un 
Ebreu it is, 
Ixx. platis of 
silver. c. 

+ and hauynye. 
In Ebren it is, 
and vnbolde, 
ether eowardis. 
c. 


640 


isthow vpon vs. The whiche answerde to 
hem, If verreily me kyng 3e han or- 
deynde to 30u, cometh, and vnder my 
shadewe restith ; forsothe if 3e wolen not, 
go out fier fro the thorn, and deuowre 
\6the seedis of Liban. Nowe thanue if 
ri3tly and withouten synne 3e han or- 
deynde vpon 30u a kyng, Abymalech, 
and wel han doo with Jeroboal, and with 
the hows of hym, and han 3olden while 
to his benfeetis, the which fau3t for 30u, 
izand his lijf 3af to peryls, for) to delyuer 
is30u fro the hoond of Madian; the whiche 
3e nowe han rysyn ajens the hows of my 
fader, and han slayn his sones, seueuti 
men, upon o stoon, and han ordeynde a 
kyng, Abymalech, the sone of the werk 
womman of hym, vpon the dwellers of 
Sichem, forthi that 3oure brother he be; 
19if thanne ri3tly and with outen vice 3e 
han doo with Jeroboal and the hows of 
hym, to day glade 3e in Abymalech, and 
20he glade in 30u; forsothe if shrewidli, 
fier goo out of hym, and waast the 
dwellers of Sichem, and the bur3 toun of 
Mello; and go out fier fro the men of 
Sichem, and fro the burgh toun of Mello, 
21and deucwre Abymalech. The whiche 
thingis whanne he hadde seid, he flei3, 


JUDGES. 


IX. 15——25. 


sweride to hem, If 3e maken me verili 
kyng to 30u, come 3e", and reste® vndur 
my schadewe; sotheli?, if 3e nylen, fier 
go out of the ramne, and deuoure the ce- 
dris of the’ Liban. Now therfor if ri3t-16 
fulis and without synne ‘je hant maad 
Abymelech kyng on" 30u, and 3e” han do 
wel with Jerobaal, and with his hows, and 
3e" han 3olde while to the benefices* of 
hym, that fau3t for 30u, and jaf his lijf to¥ 17 
perelis, that he schulde? delyuere 3ou fro 
the hond of Madian; and 3e* han? rise 1s 
now a3ens the hows of my fadir, and han® 
slayn hyse sones, seuenti men, on‘ 0 stoon, 
and ‘han maad® Abymelech, sone’ of his 
handmayde’, kyng® on‘ the dwelleris of 
Sichem, for he is 3oure brother; therfor*19 
if 3e han do ri3tfuli, and with out synne 
with Gerobaal and his hows, to dai be 3e 
glad in Abymelech, and be he glad in 30u; 
but if 3e han do weiwardli, fier go out ‘of20 
hym!, and waste the dwelleris of Sichem, 
and the citee of. Mello; and fier go out 
of ™ the men of Sichem, and of" the citee 
of Mello, and deuonre Abymelech. And 21 
whanne he® hadde seide these thingis, he 
fledde, and 3ede in to Berara, and dwellide? 
there, for drede of Abymelech, his brother. 
And Abymelech regnede on‘ Israel thre 22 


and wente into Bereram, and dwelte there, 
for drede of Abymalech*, his brothir. 


seer. And the Lord sentef the worste 23 +theLordsente, 


oe ee hat, is suffri 
spirit bitwixe Abymelech and the dwell- ihe een 


rit, that is, dis- 


22 And Abymalech regnede vpon Yrael thre 
233eer. And God sente the worst spiryte 
bitwix! Abymalech and the dwellers of 
Sichem, the whiche bigunne to wlaat 
aihym, and the hidows gilt of the slau3ter 
of the seuenti sones of Jeroboal, and the 
shedynge of blod of hem, to 3eelde into 
Abymalech, his brothir, and into the 
tother princis of Sichemytis™, that hym 
25helpeden®. And thei puttiden°® aspies 
a3ens hym in the cop of hillis; and while 


JOm.c. & Abymach a. 


P and 1. 
Vv if 3e DGIKMNOQXD. 


nQOm.eLP. © reste 3e K. resteth 1. 
t Om. 1. “upon I. 
y for DKLMNopeRsxb. 2 wolde 1. 
fthe sone 1. & concubyne prKmogsxb. 
Abymalech 1. fro him moxb. from him xs. 
phe dwellide 1. 4 upon. * the king 1. 
helpins. Ymen of Sichem31. setten 1. 
comyng 1. > therforth 1. 


Y bytwene pceru. ™ Sychemys Bceru. 


Gwole not 1. 


a if 3e pDGKMNOQSXD. 
h 3e han maad kyng 1. 
the fier b. ™ fro prmogsxb. from K. 
8 the seuenti 1. 
* the king 1. 


eris of Sichem, whiche bigyunen to holde 
hym' abomynable, and to arette the felony 2 dis 
of sleyng of seuenti® sones of Gerobaal, 
and the schedyng out of her blood, in to 
Abymelech her brother, and tot othere 
princes of Sichem, that hadden helpid® 
hym. And thei’ settiden” buyschementis 25 
a3ens hym* in the hijnesse of hillis; and 
the’ while thei abidedenz ‘the comyng of 
hym’, thei hauntiden theftis, and token 
preies of men passynge forth>; and it was 


holpen c. © puttyn £. 


rOm. DGIKMNogsxb. § 3e han ri3tfuli 1. 
W 31f 3e DGIKMNOQXb. x manifold wel doyngis 1. 
bhauer ¢3ehani. duponr ¢ Om.1. 
iuponi. * And therfor x. ! fro 
Dfror. %Joathan 1, 
u holpen 1xxb. helpen q. 
& his 


t into prKogsb. 
y Om. 1. Z aboden 1. abiden m. 


sencione ethir 


at to be 
bi the 
eka spirit 
bitwive Aby. 
and so forth, 
that bi her 
wickidnessis 
disseruinge 
thei schulden 
= Mer ihe to 
dere. Lire 
ee c 


LX, 26—36. 


thei biden the comynge of hym, thei 
hawntiden theftis, takynge prayes of the 
goers byside; and it is told to Abyma- 
2élech. Forsothe Gaal, the sone of Obed, 
with his bretheren cam, and passide into 
Siccymam ; at whos comynge reryd the 
27 dwellers of Sichem, wenten out into 
feeldisP, wastynge vynes, and grapis tred- 
ynge; and the querys maad of syngers 
thei wenten into the temple of her God, 
and bytwix4 meetis and drynkis thei curs- 
zseden’4 to Abymalech, criynge Gaal, the 
sone of Obed, Who is this Abymalech ? 
And what is Sichem, that we seruen to 
hym? Whether is not he the sone of Jero- 
boal, and set a prince, Zebul his seruaunt, 
vpon the men of Emor, the’ fader of Si- 
chem? Whi thanne shulen we serue to 
29hym? Wolde God eny man 3eue this 
puple vnder myn hoond, and I shulde 
doo awey fro the mydil Abymalech. And 
it is seid to Abymalech, Gedre a multi- 
30 tude of cost, and com. Forsothe Zebul, 
the prince of the cytee, herd the wordis 
of Gaal, the sone of Obed, is ful wrooth ; 
31and sente preueli to Abymalech messa- 
gers, seiynge, Loo! Gaal, the sone of 
Obed, cam into Siccymam with his bri- 
theren, ‘and ajen fi3tith* the citee a3ens 
3zthee; aryse also the ny3t with the puple, 
that is with thee, and lurk in the feeld; 
a3 and first eerli rysynge the sunne, fal vpon 
the cite; forsothe hym goynge out a3ens 
thee with his puple, do to hym that thow 
3simayst. And so Abymalech with al his 
oost roos the ny3t, and sette bushementis 
35 biside Siccymam, in foure placis. And 
Gaal, the sone of Obed, wente out, and 
stood in the entre of the jate of the cytee. 
Forsothe Abymalech roos, and al the oost 
with hym, fro the place of the busshe- 
36mentis. And whanne Gaal hadde seen 
the puple, he seide to Zebul, Loo! fro 


P the feeldis cz. 1 bitwene peru. betwe c. 


comyn E pr.m. 


¢ Andi. Obed soner. ¢he cam 1. 


i her goddis temple 1. k etyngis 1. 1 drynkyngis 1. 


aq burseden an. 


f togidre with Gaal into the 1. 
m her kyng 1. 


JUDGES. 641 


teld to Abymelech. Forsothe® Gaal, ‘the2 
sone of Obed’, cam® with his britheren, 
and passide in to Siccima; at whos en- 
tryng the dwelleris of Sichem weren reisid, 
and 3eden out ‘in tof feeldis, and wastiden 27 
vyneris, and ‘to-traden® grapis; and with 
cumpeneys of syngeris aad" thei entriden 
in to ‘the temple of her God’, and among 
metis* and drynkis! thei cursiden Abyma- 
lech™, while" Gaal, the® sone of Obed; 23 
criede, Who is this? Abymelech? And 
what is Sichem, that we serue hym? 
Whether he is not the sone of Jerobaal, 
and made’ Zebul his seruaunt prince on™ 
the men of Emor, fadir® of Sichem? Whi 
therfor schulen we serne hym? ‘Y wolde*, 29 
that" sum man 3af¥ this puple vndur myn 
hond, that” Y schulde take* awei Abime- 
lech fro the myddisY. And it was seid to 
Abymelech, Gadere thou the multitude of 
oost?, and come thou’. For whanne the3o0 
wordis of Gaal, sone? of Obed, weren herd, 
Zebul, the prynce of the citee, was ful 
wrooth ; and he sente prineli messangeris 31 
to Abymelech, and seide®, Lo! Gaal, sone4 
of Obed, cam® in to Siccymam, with hise 
britheren, and he excitith the citee to fizte 
ajens thee; therfor rise thou bi nij3t withs2 
the puple, which’ is with thee, and be 
thon hid in the feeld; and first® in thess 
morewtid, whanne the sunne rysith, falle 
on! the citee; forsothe* whanne he! goth 
out with his puple ajens thee, do thou to 
hym that that thou maist. Therfor" A byme- a1 
lech roos with al his oost bi ny3t, and set- 
tide™ buyschementis bisidis Siccimam, in 
foure placis. And Gaal, the sone of Obed, 35 
3ede out, and stood in the entryng of ‘the 
jate of the citee". Forsothe? Abymelech 
and al the oost with hym roos fro the 
place of buyschementis. And whanne Gaal 36 
hadde seyn the puple, lie seide to Zebul?, 
Lo! a multitude cometh doun fro the 


t Om. E scc.m. §& begynneth to ouyr- 


Sal to-traden rb ymaad 7. 
n while that 1. ° Om. plures. P he 
u Om. 1. 


this1. @hehath maadr. ‘uponr. the fadir1. ¢t Wolde God 1. v wolde 3ine 1. 
wand pikogs. *dor. Ymyddis of Sickem1. 2anoost1. thou ajens Gaal1. >the soner. © he 
seide 1. (the soner. @iscomer. fthat1. & the firstc. bintoo. ithouuponr Kandi. ! Gaal 1. 
N And sor. ™setteim. "citee gatexr. © Andi. P his priuee enmy 1 marg. 


4N 


642 


the hillis a multitude descendith. To 
whom he answerde, The shadewis of hillis 
thow seest as mennus heedis, and by this 
37errour thou art desseyued. And eft Gaal 
seith, Loo! the puple fro the nouel of the 
erthe cometh doun, and o cumpanye com- 
meth bi the weye that biholdith' the ook. 
33 To whom seide Zebul, Where is nowe 
thi mowth, bi the which thou speek, Who 
is Abymalech, that we seruen to hym? 
Whether is not this the puple, whom 
thow despisedist ? Go out, and fizt a3ens 
sohym. Gaal thanne wente, abydynge the 
puple of Sichemys, and fau3te a3ens Aby- 
somalech. The which pursuede hym fle- 
ynge, and in the cytee threste; and there 
fellen of the parti of hym many vuto the 
413ate of the cyte. And Abymalech sat in 
Ranatt; Zebul forsothe Gaal and his fe- 
laws he" putte out of the cyte, ne in it 
azhe suffrede to dwelle. Thanne the day 
folowynge the puple 3ede out into the 
feeld; the which whanne it was toold to 
43 Abymalech, he took his oost, and dy- 
uydide in thre companyes, settynge 
busshementis in the feeldis; and seynge 
that the puple wente out of the cytee, he 
44roos, and felle into hem with his cost, 
ajenfiz3tynge” and biseegynge the cytee. 
Forsothe two companyes, opynly ren- 
nynge hidir and thidir bi the feeld, the 
4saduersaryes pursueden. Forsothe Aby- 
malech al that day ouercam the cytee, 
the which he took, slayn the dwellers of 
it, and it destruyede, so that salt in it 
sche sprengide. The which thing, whanne 
hadden herd thei that dwelten in the 
tour of Sychemys, wenten into the temple 
of her god Beryth, where a boond of pees 
with hym thei couenauntiden; and of it 
the place took name, the which was 
a7 grectli strengthid. And Abymalech her- 


t bihodith 4. tt Bana un. 


q Zebul 1 © mennus heedis1. & multitude a. 
boost 1. * he this Abymelech1. Yy Thanne 1. 
ouercame Gaali. Candi. ‘him. 
ivnto1. Kand1. 1 pntte rm. 
4 puple of Gaalt. "upon. 
wAndi1. *thatr. Y Om.1. 


: & the which 1. 
€ bi avowis makyng thei 1. 


f that ydole 1, 


JUDGES. 


uQOm. c. 


t the erthe crv. 
Z 3ede out 1. 
© constreynede him 1k. 

m citee of Sichem 1. 
8 ensegide hem 1. 
b dwelleris therof 1. 
& Om. c. 


IX. 37-—47- 


hillis. To whom he. answeride, Thou 
seest the schadewis of hillis as the ‘heedis 
of men’, and thou art disseyued bi this 
errour. And eft Gaal seide, Lo! a puple*37 
cometh doun fro the myddis of erthet, ‘that 
is, fro the hiznesse of hillis*, and o cumpeny 
cometh bi the weie that biholdith the ook. 
To whom Zebul seide, Where is now thi’ se 
mouth”, bi which thou spekist, Who is 
Abymelech*, that we serue hym ? Whether 
this is not the puple, whom thou dis- 
pisidist? Go thou out, and fi3te a3ens hym. 
TherforY Gaal 5ede*, while the puple of39 
Sichen abood*; and he fau3t ajens Aby- 
melech®, Which pursuede Gaal‘ fleynge, 40 
and constreynede® fo go‘ in to the citee; 
and ful many of his® part felde doun ‘til 
to! the sate of the citee. And Abymelech it 
sat in Ranna; sotheli* Zebul puttide! Gaal 
and hise felowis out of the citee™, and suf- 
fride" not to dwelle ther ynne. Therfor 42 
in the dai suynge the puple 3ede out in to 
the feeld; and whanne this thing was teld 
to Abymelech, he took his oost, and de-43 
partide ‘in to® thre cumpenyes, and settide? 
buyschementis in the feeldis; and he si3 
that the puple4 3ede out of the citee, and 
he roos, and felde on™ hem with his cum-41 
peny, and enpugnyde*® and bisegide' the 
citee. Sothely" twei cumpenyes 3eden 
aboute opymli bi the feeld, and pursueden 
aduersaries’. Certis~ Abymelech fau3t 45 
a3ens the* citee inY al that dai, which® 
he took, whanne the dwelleris® weren 
slayn, and that citee was destried, so that 
he® spreynte? abrood salt ther ynne. And 46 
whanne thei, that dwelliden in the tour of 
Sichem, hadde herd this, thei entriden in 
to the temple of her god Berith, where 
thei® hadden maad boond of pees with 
hym; and of thatf thes place took name>, 
which' place was ful strong. And Aby-47 


¥ ouyrcomynge E pr. m. 


uQm.1. Vthe x. WY mouth of 
a abood in the citee 1. > Abymelech that 
fflet. ther. » partie of Gaal 1. 
no he suffride hemi. Oitini. Phe sette x. 
t fauste ajens 1. =U And r. v her aduersaries 1. 
¢ Abymalech 1. 4 sprengid Kx. 


h the namer. ithe which x. 


IX. 48—5 7. 


ynge the men of the tour of Sichemys 
togidre gedred” in 0 glob, ‘or company*, 
48stiede vp into the hil of Selmon with al 
his puple; and takun to an axe he kytte 
of a braunche of a tree, and putte on the 
shuldir berynge, he seide to felawis, That 
je seen me doo, that anoon doo 3e. 
49 Thanne stryuyngly ofY the trees kut- 
tynge of brannchis thei foleweden the 
duyk; the whiche enuyrounynge the 
place of socour, brenten? vp; and so is 
doon, that thur3 smook and fier a thow- 
sand men weren slayn, men togidre and 
wymmen, of the dwellers of the tour of 
50Sichem. Forsothe Abyimalech thens go- 
ynge cam to the burgh toun Thebes, the 
which enuyrounnynge bisegide with oost. 
51 Forsothe the tour was hijze in the mydil 
cytee, to the which flowen togidre men 
and wymmen, and alle the princis of the 
cytee, closid moost fastly the 3ate; and 


vpon the roof of the tour stondynge by . 


s2the pynnaclis. And Abymalech comynge 
ny3 biside the tour fau3t strongli, and 
nei3ynge to the dore, he was about to 

53 put vndir fyre; and, loo! a womman the 
brekynge of a mylnstoon from aboue 
throwynge hurtlide to the heed of Aby- 

s4malech, and brak his brayn. The which 
clepide anoon his squyer, and seith to 
hym, Drawe out thi swerd, and smyte 
me, lest perauenture it be seid, that of 
a womman I am slayn. The which, ful- 

s5fillynge the heest*, slew3 him; and him 
slayn, alle that with hym weren of Yrael 

56ben turned ajen to her seetis. And God 
jeeldide the yuel that Abymalech dide 
ajens his fader, slayn his seuenti bre- 

s7theren. And to the Sichemys is 30ldun 
that thei wrou3ten, and is comen vpon 
hem the cursynge of Joatham, sone? of 
Jeroboal. 


wgedre a. * Om. Bcern. 


sone E pr. m. 


JUDGES. 


y to ben beforn of & pr. m. 


643 


melech herde the‘ men of the tour of Si- 

chem gaderid! togidere, and he stiede™ in 4s 

to the hil Selmon® with al his puple; and 

with an axe takun he kittide® doun? a 

boow of a tre, and he bar it, put on4 the? 
schuldur, and seide* to felowis', Do 3e"% 

this thing, which” 3e seen me do. Ther-49 

for* withyY strijf thei kittiden doun’ bowis 

of the* trees, and sueden the duyk; whiche? 
cumpassiden® and brenten ‘the tour’; and 

so it was doon, that with smooke and fier 

a thousynde of® men weren slayn, men 
togideref and wymmen®, of the dwelleris 

of the tour of Sichem. Forsothe® Aby- so 
melech wente forth fro thennus, and cam 

to the citee! of Thebes, whichk he cum- 
passide, and bisegide with an oost. For-51 
sothe! the tour was hi3 in the myddis of 

the citee, to which™ men togidere" and 
wyimmen fledden®, and alle the princes of 

the citee, while the 3ate was closid strong- 
lieste?; and thei? stoden on‘ the roof of the 

tour bi toretis. And Abymelech cam bi-52 
sidis the tour, and fau3t strongli’, and he 
nei3ede to! the dore, and enforside" to putte 

fier vndur’; and lo! ov” womman castide’ 53 

fro aboue a gobet of a mylnestoon*, and 
hurtlideY to ‘the heed of Abymelech?, and 

brak* his braynt. And he clepide soone? 54 + his brayn; in 
his squyer, and seide to hym, Drawe out sok, edt the 
thi swerd®, and sle me, lest perauenture it 1" nae 
be seid, that Y am slan of a womman, _ Dade be deed 
Which! performede® ‘the comaundementisf, “ere. c. 
and ‘killide Abymelech$; and whanne hess 

was deed, alle nen of Israel that weren 

with hym turneden ajen to her seetis’, 

And God 3eldide to Abymelech the yuelsé 

that he dide a3ens his fadir, for he killide 

hise seuenti britheren. Also that thing" 57 

was 30ldun to mea of Sichem, which™ thei 
wrou3ten, and the curs of Joathan, sone" 

of Jerobaal, cam on® hem. 


z brenden ce. ®hestis pcernu. » the 


k that 1. 1 weren gaderidi. ™stiedeup1. ‘of Selmon aixmnosx. © kitter. P adoun Kx. 
GVuponr. t‘his1. Sheseide1 this felowist, 4 3e anoon 1. wthati. * Thanner Yat. 
zadouni. ®Om.1. >the whicher. ¢cumpassidenthe tour1. ‘itupi1, ¢Om.1 fOm.1. 
&wymmen togidrer. hb And: iciteesmox. ‘kthe whichr FAndr ™whomr ”Om.1. 
© fledden togidre 1. Pp ful strongly 1. 4meni. "upon. §& strongli ajens it1. ‘ny31. 4 enforside 
him. Vynduriti. ‘aplures. Wthrewedount. *mylle stoonr. Y¥ she hurlide itt. 2% Abyme- 


lech heed 1. 
3 slew3 him 1. 


ait brak 1. » anoon1. 
h Abymalech 1. { placis 1. 


© swerd anoon I. 
Kk ynel 1. 


e fulfillide 1. f his hestis 1. 


© upon I. 


d The which 1. 
mthat 1. © the sone I. 


4Nn~ 2 


644 


CAP. X. 


1 Aftir Abymalech roos a duyk in Yrael, 
Thola, the sone of Phua, the faders bro- 
thir of Abymalech, a man of Ysachar, 
that dwellide in Sanyr, of the hil of Ef- 

2fraym; and he demyde Irael thre and 
twenti 3eer, and he is deed, and biried in 

3Sanyr. To whom cam after Jayr Galad- 
ites, that demede Irae] bi two and twenti 
43eer; hauynge thretti sones, sittynge vpon 
thretti coltis of assis, and princis of thretti 
cytees, the whiche of the name of hym 
ben clepid Anochiayr, that is, the burghis 
of Jayr, vnto the day that is nowe, in the 
sloond of Galaad. And Jayr is deed, and 
biryed in the place to the which is the 
c6name Camon. Forsothe the sones of Yrael 
to oold synnes ioynynge newe, diden yuels 
in the si3t of the Lord, and serueden to 
mawmettis, Baalym and Astaroth, and to 
goddis of Syrye, and of Sidon, and of 
Moab, and of the sones of Amon, and of 
Philistiym®; and thei laften the Lord, 
7and heryeden not hyn. A3ens whom the 
Lord wexe wrooth, and took hem into 
the hoondis of Philistiym*, and of the 
gsones of Amon. And thei ben tour- 
mentid, and hidonsly oppressid bi ei3teen 
jeer, alle that dwelliden bijonde Jordan 
in the loond of Ammorre, that is in Ga- 

g laad, in® so mych, that the sones of Amon, 
Jordan ouerpassid, wastiden Judam and 
Beniamyn and Effraym; and Yrael is 

io tormentid’ wel myche. And criynge to 
the Lord thei seiden, We han synned to 
thee, for we han forsakun oure God, and 
11Serueden to Baalym. To whom the Lord 
spak, Whether not the Egipciens, and 
Amorreis, and the sones of Amon, and of 
12 Philistiym®, Sidoneus forsothe, and Ama- 
lech, and Chanaan oppressiden 3ou, and 
3e han cried to me, and Y haue dely- 


¢ Filisteis c. ¢¢ and ag. 


P the brother 1. 4 Abymalechus fadir 1. 
twenti KMNX. xxiij. BCGLOPQRSU sec. m. 
whiche 1. @ her fadir name 1. b ynto 1. 
8 Certis1. 4 yuelc. 1 Lordis sizt 1. 


JUDGES. 


4 turned 4BFH. 


r diede 1. 
vupon 1. 

¢ this present 1. 
k thei serueden I. 


W schie 1, 


XX. le12. 


CAP x 


Aftir Abymelech roos a duyk in Israel,1 
Thola, the sone of Phuat, brother? of ‘the 
fadir of Abymelech1; Zhola was a man of 
Ysachar, that dwelliden in Sanyr, of the 
hil of Effraym ; and he demyde Israel thre2 
and twenti 3eer, and he ‘was deed", and 
biriede’ in Sanyr. His successour was3 
Jair, a man of Galaad, that demyde Israel 
bit two and twenti" 3eer; and he haddea 
thretti sones, sittynge aboue’ thretti coltis{ 
of femal* assis, and thretti* princes of 
citeesY, whiche” ben clepid bi ‘his name’, 
Anoth Jair, that is, the citees of Jair, ‘til 
in to> present® day, in the lond of Galaad. 
And Jair ‘was deed‘, and biriede® in as 
place ‘to which the name isf Camon. For-6 
sothe® the sones of Israel ioyneden newe 
synnes to elde synnes, and diden yuels in 
the ‘si3t of the Lordi, and serueden* to the! 
idols of Baalym, and of ™ Astoroth, and to 
the goddis of Sirie, and of Sidon, and of 
Moab, and of the sones of Amon, and of 
Filistiym; and thei leften the Lord, and 
worschipiden not hym. And the Lord was7 
wrooth a3ens hem, and he" bitook hem in 
to the hondis of Filistiym, and of the sones 
of Amon. And alle that? dwelliden ouer? s 
Jordan in the lond of Ammorrey, which4 
is in Galaad, weren turmentid and op- 
pressid greetli bi eiztene jeer, in so myche9 
that the sones of Amon, whanne thei had- 
den passid Jordan’, wastiden Juda and 
Benjamyn and Effraym; and Israel was 
turmentid greetli. And thei crieden to 10 
the Lord, and seiden, We han synned to 
thee, for we forsoken oure God, and ser- 
uyden Baalym. To whiche’ the Lord spak*, 11 
Whether not Egipcians", and Ammorreis, 
and the sones of Amon, and of Filistiym, 
and Sidonyes, and Amalech, and Canaan, 12 
oppressiden” jou, and 3e crieden to me, 


e Filisteis c. 


t Om. ciKNRX. 4 thre and 

X thei weren 1. Y thritti citees 1. 2 the 
ddieder. ¢was biried 3. that higte 1. 
1QOm.1. ™to1. ® Om. plures. © the sones 


$ was biried 1. 


of Israel that 1. P bizonde1. dthat 1. Om. A pr.m, et plures. 8’ whom1. t seide 1. the Egipcians 1. 


vOn.1. W han oppressid 1. 


+ Phua; where 
oure transla- 
cioun bath of 
Phua, brother 
of the fadir of 
Abymelech, in 
Ebreu it is of 
Phua, sone of 
Dodo. Dodo 
here bi E- 
brews is the 
name of the 
fadir of Phua. 
Lire here. c. 


t Coltis, that is 
on mulis, bi 
oure transla- 
cioun; in Ebreu 
it is coltis onely, 
and by coltis 

ei yndur- 
stonden 3onge 

orsis and 
chosun. Lire 
here. Cc. 


X. 13——XI. 5. 


i3ueryd 30u fro the hoondis of hem? And 
neuerthelaterf 3e han forsake me, and 
heried alien goddis; therfor I shal not 
adde, that eny more I delyuer 3o0u. 

14Gooth, and inwardli clepith the goddis 
‘the whicheS 3e han chosen; delyuer thei 

1530u in the’ tyme of angwish. And the 
sones of Yrael seiden to the Lord, We 
han synned ; 3eeld thow to vs what euere 
thing plesith to thee; oneli nowe delyuer 

16vs. The whiche ledynge alle thingis fro 
her coostis, threwen out the mawmettis 
of alien goddis, and serueden to the 
Lord; the which sorewide vpon the 

17 wrecchidnes of hem. And so" the sones 
of Amon criynge togidre in Galaad 
piz3ten tentis, ajens whom the sones of 
Yrael gedryd in Masphat setten tentis. 

18 And the princis of Galaad seiden eche to 
his nei3bors, He, that first of 3ou a3en the 
sones of Amon bigynneth to fi3t, shal be 
the duyk of the puple of Galaad. 


Crea. 


1 There was also in that tyme Jeptee 
Galadites, a man moost strong and fy3ter, 
the sone of a womman stronipet, that is 

2born of Galaad. Forsothe Galaad hadde 
a wijf, of whom he took sones, the 
whiche aftirward that thei weren waxen, 
kesten out Jeptee, seiynge, Eyre in the 
hows of oure fader thou shalt not mowe 
be, for of avowtresse modir thou art 

3born. Whom he fleynge and shonnynge 
dwellide in the loond of Tob; and there 
ben gedrid to hym nedi men and ste- 
4lynge, and as prince thei sueden. In 
thoo* days fou3ten the sones of Amon 
sazens Yrael; the whiche sharpli instoond- 
ynge, the more thur3 birth wenten fro 


JUDGES. 


645 


and Y delyuerede 30u fro ‘the hondis of 


hem*? And netheles 3e forsokenY me, and 13 


worschipiden? alien goddis; therfor Y schal 


not adde*{, that Y delyuere 30u more. Go 4 + therfor ¥ 


3e, and clepe® goddis whiche* 3e han 
chose’; delyuere thei 3ou in the® tyme of 


angwisch. And the sones of Israel seiden 15 


to the Lord, We han synned; 3elde thou 
to vs what euer thing plesith thee’; oneli 


delyuere vs now. And thei seiden’ these 16 


thingis, and} castiden forth fro her coostis 
alle the idols of alien goddis, and serueden 
the Lord; which: hadde ‘rewthe, ether 
compassioun*, on! the™ ‘wretchidnessis of 
hem?. 
togidere, that ts, clepyden hem silf togidere® 
to batel, and excitiden a3ens Israel?, and 
settiden’ tentis in Galaad, ‘a3ens whiche™ 
the sones of Israel weren gaderid’, and 
settiden tentis in Masphat. 
princes of Galaad seiden ech to hise nei3- 
boris, He, that bigynneth first of vs to 
fi3te azens the sones of Amon, schal be 
duyk of the puple of Galaad. 


CAP. XI. 


And so in that tyme Jepte, a man of} 
Galaad{, was a ful strong man, and fi3tere’, 
the sone of a womman hoore", which’ 
Jepte was borun of Galaad. Forsothe’ 2 
Galaad hadde a wijf, of which* he hadde 
sones, whiche’ aftir that’ thei encressiden?, 
castiden out Jepte, and seiden, Thou maist 
not» be eir in the hows of oure fadir, for 
thou art born of a modir auoutresse]]. 
‘Whiche britheren® he fledde’, and eschew-3 
ide®, and dwellidef in the lond of Tob; 
and pore men and ‘doynge thefte®] weren 
gaderid to hym, and sueden" as a prince. 
In tho daies the sones of Amon fou3ten4 
aj3ens Israel; and whanne thei contynu-5 
eden scharpli', the grettere men in birthe 


fneuerlater x. §thatc. ¢¢ Om.c. 2Om. a4. itweia. * that peru. 

x her hondis 1. Y han forsake 1. 2 han worschipid 1. 8adde tor. Dclepe thor. ¢that1. 4 chose 
tojour ©€Om.1 Fftotheer. &seiynger, 4Om.1. ithe which 1. * compassion n feat, ether 
ruthe marg. rewthe 1. Juponi. ™hert.  % wrecchidnesse of hem G. wrecchidnesse 1. © Om. c. 
P Gloss. om. in 1 feat. ech mouynge oother to batel azens Israel 1 marg. 4 thei settiden 1. rand 1. 
* gaderid ajenshem1., ta fizterer. Ustrompetr. the which1. WAnd1. *whomi.  ¥ the 
whicher. 2 Om.1.  ®weren woxe1. > Om.s. ¢ Andi. 4 fledde his britheren 1. ¢ ethchewide 
hem. fhe dwellide 1, &theues 1. hsneden him '! her enmytees 1 marg. 


And so the sones of Amon crieden 17 


And theis 


schal not adde ; 
siche denyn- 
yngis of Goddis 
help schulen be 
vndurstondun 
vndur a condi- 
cioun, if thei 
that ben set in 
tribulacioun 
doen not pe- 
naunce verily, 
as it is opyn 

hi thingis su- 
ynge. Lire 
here. €. 


t Galaad is 
name of a lond, 
and name of 

a cite therynne, 
and name of 

a man, and in 
all these thre 
manerys Jepte 
was of Galaad. 
Lire here. ¢. 


ll of @ modir 
auoutresse; in 
Ebreu and in 
bokis correctid 
it is had of an- 
othir modir. 
Lire here. c. 

§ This word and 
doinge thefte is 
not in Ebren, 
for it is bilene- 
ful that thei 
diden prey 
onely of aduer- 
saries of the 
sones of Israel, 
as Dauyd and 
hise men diden, 
as it is had in 
i. book of 
Kyngis. xxvij- 
c°. Lire here. c. 


646 


Galaad for to take into her help Jeptee 
tof the loond of Tob; and thei seiden to 
hym, Com, and be oure prince, and fi3t 
ja3ens the sones of Amon. To whom he 
answerde, Ben not 3e, that hatiden me, 
and kesten out fro the hows of my fader, 
and nowe 3e ben comen to me thur3 nede 
8constreyned ? And the princis of Galaad 
seiden to Jepte, For this cause thanne 
nowe to thee we ben comen, that thou 
goo with vs, and fi3t a3ens the sones of 
Amon, and be duyk of alle that dwellen 
9in Galaad. Forsothe Jeptee seide to hem, 
If vereyli 3e ben comen to me, that I fi3te 
for 30w a3en the sones of Amon, and the 
Lord take hem into myn hoondis, shal 
19Y be 3oure prynce? The whiche an- 
swerden to hym, The Lord, that thes 
thingis herith, he meene and witnes is, 
ilthat oure biheestis we shulen doo. And 
so Jeptee 3ede with the princis of Ga- 
laad, and the puple made hym their** 
prince; and Jeptee spak alle his wordis 
i2before the Lord in Maspha. And he 
sente messagers to the kyng of the sones 
of Amon, ‘the which! of his persone shulde 
seye, What to me and to thee is, for thou 
art comun ajens me, that thou waste™ 
ismy loond? To whom he answerde, For 
Yrael took my loond, whanne he stiede 
vp fro Egipt, fro the coostis of Arnon 
ynto Jaboth and Jordan, nowe thanne 
14 With pees 3eeld to me it. Bi whom eft 
Jeptee sente, and comaundide to hem, that 
thei shulden seye to the kyng of Amon, 
is Thes thingis seith Jeptee, Yrael took not 
the loond of Moab, ne the loond of the 
issones of Amon; but whanne fro Egipt 
thei styeden, he 3ede bi wildernes vnto 
17 the Reed See, aud cam into Cades; and 
he sente messagers to the kyng of Edom, 
seiynge, Let me, that I passe bi thi loond; 
the which wold not assente to his preiers. 


kk there 4. | that c. 


JUDGES. 


XI. 6—17. 


of Galaad, 3eden to take in to ‘the help of 
hem silf* Jepte fro the lond of Tob; andé 
thei seiden to hym, Come thou, and be 
oure prince, and fi3te! a3ens the sones of 
Amon. To whiche™ he answeride, Whe-7 
thir not 3e it ben, that haten™ me, and 
castiden® me out of the hows of mi fadir, 
and now 3e camen? to me, and weren com~ 
pellid bi nede? Aud the princes of Galaads 
seiden to Jepte, Therfor’ for this cause 
we’ camen now to thee, that thou go with 
ys, and fijt ajens the sones of Amon; and 
that thou be the duyk of alle men that 
dwellen in Galaad. And Jepte seide too 
hem, Whether 3e camen veriliS to me, that 
Y fi3te for 30u asens the sones of Amon, 
and if the Lord schal bitake hem‘ in to 
myn hondis, schal Y be 3oure prince? 
Whiche" answeriden to hym, The Lord 10 
hym silf, that herith these thingis, is me- 
diatour and witnesse, that we schulen do’ 
oure biheestis”¥. And so* Jepte wenteYj1 
with the princes of Galaad, and al the 
puple made hym her prince; and Jepte 
spak alle hise’ wordis bifor the Lord in 
Maspha. And he sente messangeris to12 
the kyng of the sones of Amon, whiche* 
messangeris schulden seie ‘of his persoone?, 
What is to me and to thee, for thou hast 
colne ‘a3ens me® to waaste my lond? To13 
whiche’ the kyng answeride, For Israel 
whanne he stiede fro Egipt took awei my 
lond, fro the coostis of Arnon ‘til to® Ja- 
boch and to Jordan, now therfor 3eelde it 
to mef with pees. Bi whiche’ massangeris 14 
Jepte sente eft!, and comaundide to hem, 
that thei schulden®" seie to the kyng of 
Amon, Jepte seith these thingis, Israel 1s 
took not the lond of Moab, nether the 
lond of the sones of Amon; but whanneis 
thei stieden' fro Egipt, ‘he 3ede* bi the 
wildirnesse ‘til to** the Reed See, and cam 
in to Cades; and he sente messangeris to 17 


m wastest 4 pr. am. 


k her owne help 1. | figte thou 1. ™the whiche i. ™ hatiden 1. ©threwen 1. Phancomer 40m. 1. 


r thanne we I. 


® withoute fraude 1 marge. 
thee 1. 


x thanne 1. Ywente forth 1. 2 hers. 


t Amon 1. 


u The whiche 1. 
® the whiche 1. 


V fulfille 1. biheestis ¢o 
b to the kyngis owne persoone 1. 


¢ Om. 1. the whiche messangeris 1. € vnto 1. fme ajen1. & the whiche 1. eft ajen 1. bb schuden a. 


izeden up 1. * Israel wente 1. kk ynto 1. 


XI. 18—27. 


And he sente to the kyng of Moab, the 
which and he dispiside to 3yue passynge ; 
1sand so he abood in Cades, and enuy- 
rounde aside the loond of Edom, and the 
loond of Moab; and he cam to the eest 
coost of the loond of Moab, and he sette 
tentis bizonde Arnon, and he wold not 
entre the teermys of Moab; forsothe Ar- 
non is ni3 coost to the loond of Moab. 
19And so Yrael sente messagers to Seon, 
the kyng of Ammorreis, that dwellide in 
Esebon; and seide to hym, Leete me, that 
20 Y passe bi thi loond vnto the flood. The 
which and he, dispisynge the wordis of 
Yrael, leete hym not passe bi his teermys, 
but a multitude with outen eend gedrid 
wente out a3jens hym into Gessa, and 
aistrongli withstood. And the Lord took 
hym into the hoondis of Yrael with al 
his oost; the which smoot hym, and 
weeldide al the loond of Ammorree, the 
22 dweller of that regioun, and al the costus" 
of it fro Arnon vnto Jaboch, and fro the 
23 wildernes vnto Jordan. The Lord than 
God of Yrael turnede® vpsedoun Amorre, 
fi3tynge az3ens hym to his puple Yrael. 
And thou nowe wolt weelde the loond? 
240f hym? Whether not thoo thingis, ‘the 
whiche weeldith’ Camos, thi god, to thee 
thur3 ri3t ben owid*? Forsothe thingis 
that the Lord oure God ouercomer heelde, 
25in oure possessioun shulen falle; but per- 
auenture thow be betere than Baalach, 
the sone of Sephor, kyng of Moab, othere* 
thou mayst teche, that he stroue aj3ens 
26 Yrael, and fau3te a3ens Lym, whanne he 
dwelte in Esebon, and in the litil touns 
of it, and in Aroer and hys litil touns, 
and in alle the" cytees bejonde Jordan, 
by thre hundred jeer. Whi so mych 
tyme no thing vpon this askynge thou 
a7asaydist 2? Therfor I synne not in thee, 
but thou a3ens me dost yuel, bryngynge 
P boond z. 


"coost ABFH. © turnynge 4. 


'the which r. ™ wolde not 1. ™ the 1. 
r Israeli. 8 hesettide1. tthe kyng 1. 
him I. y Esebon 1. zher athe dwellere 1. 


€Qm.1. fthe whiche 1.  ¢ Sothely 1. 


JUDGES. 


4 that c prim. 
© preyeris of Israel 1. 
u the messangers I. 


h the Lord our God 1. 
made no chalenge of the lond that God toke fro him 1 marg. 


647 


the kyng of Edom, and seide, Suffre thon 
me, that Y go thoru3 thi lond; which! 
kyng nolde™ assente to his" preyeres®. 
Also Israel sente to the kyng of Moab, 
and he dispiside to 3yue? passage; and so 18 
Israel dwellyde in Cades, and cumpasside! 
bi the side the lond of Edom, and the lond 
of Moab; and he" cam to the cest coost 
of the lond of Moab, and settide®’ tentis 
bizende Arnon, nether he wolde entre in 
to the termes of Moab; for Arnon is the 
ende of the lond of Moab. And so Israel 19 
sente messangeris to Seon, kyng' of Am- 
morreis, that dwellide in Esebon; and 
thei’ seiden to hym, Suffre thou, that Y 
passe thorou3 thi lond ‘til to” the ryuer. 
And he dispiside the wordis of Israel, and 20 
suffride not hym passe bi hise termes, but 
with a multitude with out noumbre ga- 
derid to gidere he” 3ede out ajens Israel, 
and ajenstood* strongli. And the Lord2! 
bitook hym’ with al his oost in to the 
hondis of Israel; and Israel? smoot hym, 
and hadde in possessioun al the lond of 
Ammorrey, dwellere* of that cuntrey, and 22 
al the’coostis therof fro Arnon ‘til to® Ja~ 
boch, and fro the wildirnesse ‘til to> Jordan. 
Therfor® the Lord God of Israel distriede 23 
Ammorrey, fi3tynge ajens hym for his 
puple Israel. And wolt thou now haue? 
in possessioun ‘his lond®? Whether not 
tho thingis whichef Chamos, thi god, 
hadde in possessiotun, ben due to thee bi 
ri3t ? Forsothe$ tho thingis whiche ‘oure 24 
Lord God" ouercomere gati, schulen falle 
in to oure possessioun; no* but in hapes 
thoi art betere than Balach, the sone of 
Sephor, kyug of Moab!, ether thou maist 
preue™, that he™ stryuede ajens Israel, 
and fau3t a3ens hym, whanne he® dwellide 26 
in Esebou, and in townes therof, and in 
Aroer, and in townes therof, and in alle 
citees bi3jende Jordan, bi thre hundrid 


tweeldis ar. Saztc. torc. YOmc 


P 3yue Israel 1. 4 he cumpasside 1. 
Yynto1. Ww Esebonr. ¥* ajenstood 
¢ Andthanne 1. 4 haue this lond 1. 
ihath goten tr. k Om. imsx.  ! that 
msey 1, ® Balachr. © Israel 1. 


b ynto I. 


648 


into me bataylys not ry3twise; deme the 
Lord, domysman of this day, bitwexe’ 
23 Yrael and the sones of Amon. And the 
kyng of the sones of Amon wold not 
assente to the wordis of Jeptee, ‘the 
29 whiche” bi messagers he sente. Thanne 
is doon vpon Jeptee the spyrit of the 
Lord, and he enuyrounnynge Galaad and 
Manasse, Maspha and Galaad, and thens 
30passynge to* the sones of Amon, he 
vowede avowe to the Lord, seiynge, If 
thou takist’ the sones of Amon into myn 
31 hoondis, who so euere first were gon out 
fro the 3atis of myn hous, and ajen 
cometh to me turnynge a3en with pees 
fro the sones of Amon, I shal offre hym 
32brent sacrifice to the Lord. And Jeptee 
passide forth to the sones of Amon, for? 
to fi3te asens hem, whom the Lord took 
33into the hoondis of hym; and he smoot 
fro Aroer for to that thou come into 
Mennyth, twenti citees, and vnto Abel, 
that is with vynes set, with a wel greet 
veniaunce; and the sones of Amon ben 
31mekid of the sones of Yrael. Forsothe 
to Jeptee turnynge ajens into Maspha, 
his hous, ajencam”* to hym his oonli 
goten dou3ter* with tymbrys and chorys; 
forsothe he hadde> noon other free chil- 
35dren. The whiche seen, he kitte his 
clothis, and seith, Allas! dou3ter myn, 
thou hast disseyued me, and thi self art 
desseyued ; forsothe Y haue openyd my 
mouth to the Lord, and I shal not mowe 
36doo other thing. To whom she an- 
swerde, Fader myn, if thou hast openyd 
thi mouth to the Lord, do to me what 
euere thing thou hast bihoot, grauntid to 
thee veniaunce and victorye of thin ene- 
s7myes. And she seide to the fader, This 
oonli 3if to me, that I praye; leete me, 
that two monthis Y enuyroun the hillis, 
and weyle my maydenhod with my fe- 
s8lawis. To whom he answerde, Go. And 


Vv bytwene peFH. betwec. W that c. 


& doustris apru. > hath apru. 
Piustinger. dwoldenoti. T thoc. 
fices ACDEFKLMNOPQSUX. 
com §. til that he came Go. 
daunsynge 1. 


xX ynto 1. 
dhe saw3e hir 1. © certis 1. 


JUDGES. 


X into 4 sec. m. 


8 the messangeris 1. 
W smoot or overcame I. 
Y that 1. 
f Lord, vowynge a vow3 I. 


XI. 28—38. 


jeer. Whi in so myche time assaieden je 
no thing on this axyng a3jen? Therfor not 27 
Y do synne a3ens thee, but thou doist yuel 
a3ens me, and bryngist in batels not iust 
to me; the Lord, iuge? of this dai, deme 
bitwixe the sones of Israel and bitwixe 
the sones of Amon. And the kyng of thees 
sones of Amon nolde4 assente to the’ 
wordis of Jepte, whiche he sente bi mes- 
sangeris*. Therfor the spirit} of the Lord 29 Lee Lp 


le and 


was maad ont Jepte, and he cumpasside _ hardynesse to 
fizte for the 


Galaad and Manasses, Maspha and Ga- _puple, in the 
laad; and he passide fro thennus to the jap ryc"" 


sones of Amon, and made" a vow to the30/«re. ¢. 
Lord, and seide, If thou schalt bitake the 
sones of Amon in to myn hondis, who3i 
euer goith out first of the dores of myn 
hows, and cometh a3ens me turnynge ajen 
with pees fro the sones of Amon, Y schal 
offre hym brent sacrifice’ to the Lord. 
And Jepte 3ede to the sones of Amon, to32 
fi3te ajens hem, whiche the Lord bitook 
in to hise hondis; and he smoot” fro33 
Aroer ‘til to thou comest* in to Mennyth, 
twenti citees, and ‘til to** Abel, which’ is 
set aboute with vyneris, with ful greet 
veniaunce; and the sones of Amon weren 
maad low of the sones of Israel. For-34 
sothe? whanne Jepte turnede a3en in to 
Maspha, his hows, his oon gendrid? dou3- 
ter cam to hym> with tympanys and 
croudis®; for he hadde not othere fre chil- 
dren. And whanne ‘sche was seyn‘, hess 
to-rente his clothis, and seide, Allas! my 
doustir, thou hast disseyned me}, and thou 
art disseyned; for® Y openyde my mouth 

to the Lord‘, and Y may do noon other fi thiq ve Sa 
thing. To whom sche answeride, My fa-sg tho art dis- 
dir, if thou openydist thi mouth to% the 

Lord, do to me what euer thing thou bi- 

hi;tist, while veniaunce and victorie of 

thin enemyes is grauntid to thee. And37 

sche seide to the? fadir, 3yue thou to me 

oneli this thing, which! Y biseche ; suffre 


= thou hast 
disseyued me ; 
in Ebreu it is, 


Ytakec. 2Om.c. 7% a3encamen arn. 


tuponr. 'hemader  ¥ sacri- 

x til to that he came DFIKLMNoPRsx. vnto that he 
z Andi. 4hbigotun1. > meete hymt. © croudis 
Esoto1. bhirs ithati. 


XI. 39—XII. 5. 


he lafte hir two monthis. And whanne 
she was goon with felawis and hir com- 
peers, she wepte hyr maydenhod in the 
39hillis. And fulfillid two monthis, she is 
turned a3en to hir fader, and he dyde to 
hire, as he anowide®; the which knewe 
not man. Therfor maner spronge in 
40 Yrael, and vsage is kept, that after the 
sercle of o 3eer the dou3tris of Yrael 
comen to gidre in oon, and weylen the 
dou3ter of Jeptee Galadyte foure dayes. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Loo! forsothe in Effraym is sprongun 
a debate; forsothe the goers ajen the 
north seiden to Jeptee, Whi goynge to 
the fist ajens the sones of Amon thou 
woldist not clepe vs, that we wenten 
with thee? Therfor we shulen brenne 
2thin hows. To whom he answerde, An 
hydows debate was to me and my pu- 
ple ajen the sones of Amon, and 30w Y 
clepyde, for 3e shulden 3yue help to me, 
sand 3e wolden not doon. The which 
biholdynge Y putte in myn hondis my 
lijf*; and Y passide to the sones of Amon, 
and the Lord took hem into myn hoondis; 
what haue Y disserued, that a3ens me 3e 
4rysen into® batayl? And so clepid to him 
alle the men of Galaad, he fau3t ajens 
Effraym; and the men of Galaad smyten 
Effraym; for he seide, Fugitine is Galaad 
fro Effraym, and dwellith in mydilf of 
5Effraym and Manasse. And Galadites 
men occupiden the forthis of Jordan, bi 
whiclies Effrayin was for" to turne a3en. 
And whanne a man of the noumbre of 
Effraym fleynge was comyn to tho! 


JUDGES. 


649 


thon me that in two monethis Y cumpasse 
hillis, and biweile my maidynhed with my 
felowis. To whom he* answeride, Go thou. 38 
And he snfferide hir in! two monethis. And 
whanne sche hadde go™ with hir felowis 
and pleiferis", sche biwepte hir maydyn- 
hed in the® hillis.s And whanne twey 39 
monethis weren fillid?, sche turnede a3en 
to hir fadir, and he dide to hir as he 
avowide; and sche knew not’ fleischli at 
man’. Fro thennus’ a® custom cam in 
Israel, and the’ custom is kept, that aftir 40 
the ‘ende of the 3eer” the* dou3tris of Is- 
rael come togidere, and biweileY ‘the dou3- 
tir of Jepte” of Galaad ‘foure daies*. 


CAP. XII. 


‘Lo! forsothe> discencioun roos in Ef-1 
fraym; for whi thei, that? passiden a3ens* 
the north, seidenf to Jepte, Whi 3edist thou 
to batel azens the sones of Amon, and 
noldist® clepe vs, that we schulden go 
with thee? Therfor we sclulen brenne 
thin hows. Tio whiche he answeride,2 
Greet strijf was to me and to my puple 
a3jens the sones of Amon, and Y clepide 
3on, that 3e schulden ‘3yue help to" me, 
and 3e nolden' do. ‘Which thing! Y si3™,3 
and" puttide my lijf in myn hondist; and 
Y passide® to the sones of Amon, and ‘the 
Lord? bitook hem in to myn hondis; what 
haue Y disseruyd, that 3e ryse togidere 
ajens me in to batel? Therfor whanne4 
alle the men of Galaad weren clepid to 
hym4, he fan3t a3ens Effraym; and the* 
men of Galaad smytiden® Effraym; for he 
seide, Galaad is ‘fugitif ethert eaxild fro 
Effraym, and dwellith{" in the myddis” of 
Effraym and of Manasses. And the mens 
of Galaad ocupieden the forthis” of Jor- 
dan, bi whiche* Effraym schulden turne 
ajen. Aud whanne a man fleynge of the 


cuowidec. 4 sowle £ pr.m. € to BE prem. f the mydil cz. § the which ez. h Om. c. 
ithe ar. 

k hir fadir 1. bir. ™ go forth 1, ™ her pleiferis1. °Om,.imsxb sec.m. P fulfillid 1. 4 no man 1, 
'Om. 1kxb. *Om.1. tthattymer “thes. Vthat1 W3erisendex. *Om.1. Y bi foure daics 
thei biweilen 1. 2 Jepteus danjter 1. ®Om.1. > And, lor. ¢ Om. plures. Om. r.  & toward 1. 
fand seiden ncEFLPRUW. & woldist not. 4 haue holpen:. iwoldennotr. Kdoso1. 1! Andi. 
m seynge thatr. 2 Om.1. © passide forth1. PGod1. QJepter TOm,1. *%smoteni. ¢Om. 1 


« 3i¢ he dwellith 1. v myddil 1. W foordis rx. * the whiche 1. 


40 


+ and puttide 
my lyif ; that 
is, bi nede oft 
thinynge Y 
puttide my liyf 
to perel in fizt- 
inge with fewe 
men a3en the 
sones of Amon. 
Lire here. c. 


t dwellith ; this 
word dwellith 
is not in Ebreu. 
G: 


650 


fordisj, and hadde seyde, Y preye, that 
3e leten me passe; Galaaditis seiden to 
hym, Whether art thon an Effrate? The 
6which seiynge, Y am not, thei askiden 
hym, Seye thanne Sebolech*, that is to 
mene, an eere. The which answerde, 
Shebolech, bi the same lettre an eere not 
my3ti to bryngen out. And anoon takyn 
thei kyttiden! his throot in that goynge 
ouer Jordan; and there fellen in that 
tyme of Effraym two and fourti thow- 
7sandis™. And so Jeptee demyde Galaad- 
ites of Yrael sexe 3eer; and he is deed, 
sand biryed in his citee of Galaad. After 
this demyde Yrael Abethsan of Beth- 
9leem, that hadde thretti sones, and so 
feele dou3tris, the whiche sendynge out 
to housbondis he 3af, and of the same 
noumbre to his sones he took wyues, 
bryngynge yn to his hows; the which 
loseuen 3eer demyde Yrael, deed, and by- 
1iryed in Bethlem. To whom cam aftir 
Degelon Zabulonyt, and demyde Yrael 
i2ten 3eer, and is deed, and byried in Zabu- 
lon. After hym demyde Yrael Abdom, 
14the sone of Elel, Pharatonyt® ; the which 
hadde fourty sones, and thretti of hem 
sones sones, stiynge vp" vpon senenti 
coltis of assis, and he demyde Yrael ei3t 
153eer; and he is deed, and biried in Pha- 
raton, the loond of Effraym, in the hil of 
Amalech. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 And eft the sones of Yrael diden yuel 
in the sizjt of the Lord, the which took 
hem in to the hoondis of the Philisteyns 

2fourti 3eer. And there was a maner man 
of Saraa, and of the lynage of Dan, 
Manue bi name, hanynge a wijf bareyn. 

3To whom aperyde the aungel of the 
Lord, and seide to hyre, Bareyn thou art, 


J forthis pcen. * Sobolech a. 


JUDGES. 


l cutten ce. ™ thousend c. 


XII. 6—XIIL. 3. 


noumbre of Effraym hadde come to thoY 
forthis?, and hadde®* seid, Y biseche, that 
thouc suffre me passe; men? of Galaad 
seiden to hym, Whether thou art a man 
of Effraym? And whanne he seide*, Y 
am not, thei axiden hym, Seie thou ther-¢ 
for Sebolech, ‘whiche is interpretid‘, ‘an 
eert of corn’. Which? answeride', Thebo- 
lech, and my3te* not brynge forth an eer 


t an eer; this 
word, which is 
interpretid an 
eer, is not in 


of corn bi the same lettre. And anoon  Ebten: Ebrews 
thei strangeliden! hym takun™ in thilke ‘¥en ‘pat Se- 
passyng of Jordan; and two and fourti Se vont 
thousynde® of Effraym felden doun in that  fersnesse of 


watre. Lire 


tyme. And so Jepte, ‘a man® of Galaad,7 here. c. 
demyde Israel sixe 3eer; and he ‘was 

deed?, and biried’ in his citee Galaad. 

Abethsan of Bethleem, that hadde thretti? 

sones, and so many dou3tris, demyde Israel 

aftir Jepte; whiche" dou3tris he sente out, 

and 3af to’ hosebondis, and he took wyues 

to hise sones of the same noumbre, and 

brou3te' in to hys hows; which” demyde 

Israel seuene 3eer; and he ‘was deed’, and 10 

biried* in Bethleem. Whos successour was 1! 

Hailon of Zabulon; and he demyde Israel 

ten 3eer; and he was deed, and biried in 12 
Zabulon. Aftir hym Abdon, the sone of 13 

Ellel, of Pharaton, demyde Israel ; which* 14 

Abdon hadde fourti sones, and of hem 

threttiY sones, stiynge on’ seuenti coltis of 

femal* assis}, ‘that is, mulis®, and he‘ : diario is 
demyde Israel eijte jeer; and he ‘was 15and bicoltis’ 
deed’, and biried® in Pharaton, in the poet 


stodun jonge 
loond of Effraym, inf the hilof Amalech. —b™s'* sttenge 


and chosun. 
Lire here. c. 


CAP, Xi. 


And eft the sones of Israel diden yuel! 
in the ‘si3t of the Lords, which" bitook 
hem in to! the hondis of Filisteis fourti 
jeer. Forsothe* a man was of Saraa, and!2 
of the kynrede of Dan, ‘Manue bi name”, 
and he hadde a bareyn wijf. To ‘which3 
wijf" an° aungel of the Lord apperide, 


a Pharatonyk «4. 2 Om. cE. 


y the rikmxb.Om. x. 2 fordis K. 4Om.1. > biseche 30u 1. ¢3e 1KMOx sec.m.b. the ment. ¢ hadde 


seidc. fthatistosey1. &acormeer1. 4 The whichr. i answeride and seide1. * he my3te r. 
! token and strangeliden 1. ™Om.1. "thousynde ment. © Om.1. Pdiede 1. 4 was biried 1. * the 
whiche 1. Shemto1. the brou3te kent. “and Abechsani. Vdiede1. W was biried 1. * the 
which 1, ¥ weren thretti1. #uponi. @sche1. > Om.1Kmogsxb. ¢ Abdon1. 4dieder. & was 
hiried 1. fandin1. 8 Lordis si3tt bandher iOm.1 -k And 10m. cpw. ™ that hizte 
Manuer Yhirr © thet. 


XUI. 4—13. 


and with out free children; but thou shalt 
4 conseyue, and bere a sone. Be war thanne, 
lest thou drynke wyn and sither, ne eny 
5thing vneclene thou eete; for thou shalt 
conseyue, and bere a sone, whos heed 
shal no rasure towche; forsothe he shal 
be a Nazare of God from his childhod, and 
fro the wombe of the moder; and he shal 
bygynne to delyuer Yrael fro the hoond 
6of the Philistiens. The which, whanne 
she was comen to® hire housbond, seide 
to hym, A man of God cam to me, hau- 
ynge an aungelis chere, feerful wel myche; 
whom whanne Y hadde askid, who he 
was, and whennus he was comen, and 
what name he were clepid, he wolde not 
7to me seye; but thus he answerde, Loo! 
thou shalt conseyue, and bere a sone; 
be war that thou drynke no wyn ne 
sither, ne eete eny thing vncelene; for- 
sothe he shal be a Nazare child of the 
Lord, fro his 3on3th and fro the wombe 
of the moder into the day of his deeth. 
sAnd so Manue preyede the Lord, and 
seith, Y biseche, Lord, that the man of 
God, ‘the whiche? thou sentist, com eft, 
and teche vs, what we owen to doo of 
9the child, that is to be born. And the 
Lord herde Manue preiynge; and eft 
aperide the -aungel of the Lord to his 
wijf sittynge in the feeld; forsothe 
Manue hir housboond was not with hir. 
The which, whanne she hadde seen the 
io aungel, hiede, and ranne to hir man, and 
tolde to hym, seiynge, Loo! the man 
laperide to me, whom before I saw3. The 
which roos, and folewide his wijf; and 
comynge to the man he seide to hyin, 
Art thow the which? spak to the wom- 
izman? And he answerde, Y am. To 
whom Manue, Whanne, he seith, thi 
word were fulfillid, what wolt thou, that 
the child doo, or fro what thing shal he 
13kepe hym silf? And the aungel of the 


° in to 4. 


, 


JUDGES. 


651 


and seide to hir, Thou art bareyn, and 
with out fre children; but thou schalt 
conseyue, and schalt? bere a sone. Ther-4 
for be thou war, lest thou drynke wyn, 
and sydur, nethir ete thou ony vnelene 
thing ; for thou schalt conceyue and schalt? 5 
bere a sone, whos heed a rasour schal not 
towche; for he schal be a Nazarei? of 
God' fro his 3ong age, and fro the modris 
wombe; and he schal bigynne to dely- 
uere Israel fro the hond of Filisteis. And 6 
whanne sche hadde come to hir hosebonde, 
sche seide to hym, The’ man of God cam 
to me, and hadde* an" aungel’ cheer, and 
he was ful ferdful, ‘that ts, worschipful* 
‘and reuerent*; and whanne Y hadde axide 
hym, who he was, and fro whaunus he 
cam, and bi what name he was clepid, he 
noldeY seie to me; but he answeride this’, 7 
Lo! thou schalt conseyue, and schalt* bere 
a sone; be thou war, that thou drynke 
not** wyn ne? sidur, nether ete® ony vn- 
cleene thing; for the child schal be a Na- 
zarey, ‘that ts, hooli4 of the Lord, fro his 
3onge age® and fro the modrisf wombe 
‘til to8 the dai of his deeth. Therfors 
Manue preide the Lord, and seide, Lord, 
Y biseche, that the man of God, whom 
thou sentist, come eft, and teche vs, what 
we owen! to do of the child, that schal 
be borun. And the Lord herde Manueg 
preiynge; and the aungel of the Lord ap- 
peride eft to his wijf sittynge in the feeld; 
forsothek Manue, hir hosebonde, was not 
with hir. And whanne sche hadde seyu 
the aungel, sche hastide, and ran to hiro 
hosebonde, and telde to hym, and seide, 
Lo! the man whom Y si3 bifore, apperide 
to me. Which! roos, and suede his wijf; 11 
and he cam to the man, and seide to 
hym, Art thou he, that hast™ spoke to 
the" womman? And he answeride, Y am’. 
To whom Manue seide, Whanne thi word 12 
schal be fillid?, what wolt thou, that the 


P that c. 


POm.1. 4 that is, holik marg. p text. ' the Lord rp. *A1. the hadder. "Om.s. Vangelis plures. 


x Om. BGrKMNOQsxb. 
© ete thou 1. 
n this 1. 


w Om. BGINX. 
> nether BDEFIMNPRSUWXD. 
kand:. 1 The whichi. ™ Om. 1, 


y wolde not 1. 
d Om. 1. 
Sam het. 


2 thus p¢G1kKLMNoPasxb. #®Om. 1. 88 nok. 
¢QOm.s. fmodir1. & vnto1, 1 Om.1. iowys. 
P fulfillid 1. 


402 


652 


Lord seide to Manue, Fro alle thingis 
that Y spak to thi wijf, absteine he hym. 
u4 And what euer thing growith of the vyn 
eete he not, wyn and sithir drynk he 
not, noon vnclene thing eete he; and that 
Y haue comaundid to hym, fulfille he and 
15kepe. And so Manue seide to the aungel 
of the Lord, Y biseche thee, that thou 
assente to my preiers, and we make to 
16 thee a kidde of tlie she geet. To whom 
answerde the aungel, If thou me con- 
streynest, Y shal not eete thi looues; 
forsothe if thou wolt doo brent sacrifice, 
offre thou that to the Lord. And Manue 
wist not, that it was the aungel of the 
17 Lord. And he seide to hym, What is 
name to thee, that if thi word were ful- 
fillid, we doon worship to thee? To 
18 whom he answerde, Whi askist thou my 
igname, that is merueylows? And so Ma- 
nue took a kidde of the geet, and sacri- 
fices of licours, and putte vpon the stoon, 
offrynge to the Lord that doth mer- 
ueylows thingis. Forsothe he and the 
20 wijf of hym biheelden. And whanne the 
flawme of the auter stiede into heuene, 
the aungel of the Lord togidre in the 
flawme stiede’ vp. The which thing 
whanne Manue hadde seen and his wijf, 
airedi thei fellen into the erthe. And na 
more to hyni aperide the aungel of the 
Lord. And anoon Manue vndurstood to 
22be the aungel of the Lord. And he seide 
to hys wijf, Bi deeth die we, for we han 
a3seen the Lord. To whom answerde the 
womman, If the Lord wold slee vs, of 
oure hoondis brent sacrifice and offryngis 
of licours he wold not haue take; but 
alle thes thingis he wold not haue shewid 
to vs, ne tho thingis that™ ben to’ com 
24haue seid. And so she beere a child, 
and clepide the name of him Sampson ; 
and the child wexe, and the Lord bless- 


JUDGES. 


XIII. 14—24. 


child do, ethir fro what thing schal he 
kepe hym silf? And the ‘aungel of the13 
Lord‘ seide to Manue, Absteyne he hym 
silf fro alle thingis which Y spak to thi 
wijf. And ete he not what euer thing i4 
cometh forth of the vyner, drynke he not 


wyn, and sidur, ete he not ony vncleene 
thing and fille’ he; and kepe that, that 
Y comaundide’ tot hym. Therfor Manueis 
seide to the ‘aungel of the Lord*, Y bi- 
seche’, that thou assente to my preieris, 
and we arayt to thee a‘kide of the geet”. + oan 
is, make red 
To whom the aungel”" of the Lord an- 16 to mete. pons 
sweride, Thou3 thou constreynest me*, Y ee 
schal not ete thi loouesY; forsothe? if thou 2 ae 
wolt make brent sacrifice, offre thou it? to ethir unknow- 
A A Wc. 
the Lord. And Manue wiste not, that it 4 saz doin 
ndurful 
was ‘an aungel of the Lord’. And Manue17 ee E- 
. . bren it is, and 
seide to hym, What name is to thee, that pT omiaees 
if thi word be fillid®, we onoure’ thee? the the Loa Bnd 
é wondur- 
To whom he answeride, Whi axist thou isfal ethir hid to 
do; for Manue 
my name, which* is wondurfi{!? Therfor 19 was not of the 
Rs kyn of preistis, 
Manue took a ‘kide of the geet®, and and therfor it 
fletynge sacrifices, and puttide® on! the*  perteynede not 
é to him to offre 
stoon, and offryde! to the Lord that doith sacri roeiba 
fs 5 4 “ e offride mater 
wondirful thingis||.. Forsothe™ he and his of sacrifice to 
ees him th 
wijf bihelden. And whanne the flawme20jo 40%, 2%, 
of the auter stiede in to henene, the aun- oe a 
= ° ° ‘2 
gel of the Lord stiede" togidere in the that his pany 
was woundur. 
flawme. And whanne Manue and his wijf fal ethir priuy, 
that of that 
hadden seyn this, thei felden lowe to ertlie®. mater he - 
: schulde make 
And the aungel of the Lord apperide no2i sicrifice to God 
more to hem. And anoon Manue vndur- profetis 
spekinge in the 
stood, that he was anP aungel of the se of the 
» my3zten 
Lord. And he seide to his wijf, We 22 oltre bi Bie: 
f hi 
schulen die bi deeth, for we sien’ the jreisti, sits 
Lord. To whom the womman answeride, 23 92¥? of Eile in 
If the Lord wolde sle vs, he scliulde™ not aes xa o, 
7 e orsothe anue 
haue take of oure hondis brent sacrifices, _ bileuyde that 
és : he that ap- 
and moiste sacrifices, but nether he scliulde* _ peride, ae 
haue schewid alle thingis‘ to vs, nether ‘he frst es 
schulde" haue seid’ tho thingis, that schu- he was more 
; 2 than a profete, 
en come”, 


Therfor* sche childide a sone, 24 for he was an 
aungel. Lire 


here. C. 
Gsteizc. TOm. BFH. § Om. H. 
4 Lordis aungel 1, * fulfille. S haue comaundid 1. tOm.xx. 4% Lordis aungel 1. ¥ biseche 
thee r. Wgeet kider. WWaunge a. *constreyner. Ybreed 1. 2 buty3. that 1. » the Lordis aungel 1. 
© fulfillid 1. 4 honoure 1. ¢ that 1. the which x. { merueilous1. & geet kider. 4 he putter. putte m. 
Tuponi. Kaz. !he offride hemi. ™ Andi. stiedeup1. ©theerther Pthes. 4 han seen yz. 
rwolde 1. S$ wolder. t these thingist. Om. i. Vv seid tous1. ben to comynge 1, * And so1. 


XII. 25-—XIV. 9. 


25ide to hym. And the spyrit of the Lord 
began to be with hym in the tentis of 
Dan, bitwixt Saraa and Eskahol. 


CAR. XLV. 


1 Sampson thanne dessendide in" Than- 
natha, and seynge there a womman of 
athe dou3tris of Philistien’, stiede vp, and 
tolde to his fader and his moder, seiynge, 
Y saw3 a womman in Thannatha of the 
dou3tris of Philistiens’, whom, Y biseche, 
3that thou take to me wijf. To whom 
seiden the fader and his moder, Whether 
is there no womman in the dou3tres” of 
thi britheren and in al thi puple, for 
thou wolt take a wijf of Philistien’, that 
ben vncircumcidid ? And Sampson seide 
to his fader, This tak to me, for she 
apleside to myn eyen. His fader and 
moder wisten not, that the thing shulde 
be doo of the Lord; and he shulde seche 
occasioun azens the Philistien’; forsothe 
that tyme Philistien’ lordshipide to Yrael. 
5 And so Sampson dessendide with his fa- 
der and moder in to Thannatha; and 
whanne thei weren comen to the vynes 
of the bour3 toun, and there aperide a 
feers whelp of a lyoun and rorynge, and 
6azen cam to hym. The spyrit of the 
Lord forsothe felle into Sampson, and he 
taar the lioun, as he shulde to-teer out 
a kide, into gobetis, no thing vtterli hau- 
ynge in hoond; and that to fader and 
z7moder he wold not shewe. And he 
dessendide, and spak to the womman, 
sthat pleside to his eyen. And after a 
fewe days turnynge a3en for* to take hir, 
he wente aside for to se the careyn of the 
lioun; and loo! a swarm of beese was in 
the mouth of the lioun, and an hony 


JUDGES. 


653 


and clepide his name Sampson; and the 
child encreessideY, and the Lord blesside 
hym. And the spirit of the Lord bigan 2s 
to be with hym in the castels? of Dan, 
bitwixe Saraa and Escahol. 


CAP. XIV. 


Therfor* Sampson 3ede doun in to Than-1 
natha, and he si3 there a womman of ‘the 
dou3tris of Filisteis®; and he stiede‘, ande 
telde? to his fadir and ‘to his® modir, and 
seide, Y siz a womman in Thannatha of 
the ‘dou3tris of Filistees‘, and Y biseche, 
that 3e take hir a® wijf to me. To whom3 
his fadir and modir seiden, Whether no 
womman is! among the dou;tris of thi 
britheren and in al my puple, for thou 
wolt take a wijf of Filisteis', that ben 
vneircumcidid ? And Sampson seide to his 
fadir, Take thou this wjf to me, for sche 
pleside! myn ij3en. Forsothe™ his fadir4 
and modir wisten not, that the" thing was 
don of the Lord ; and that he® sou3te occa- 
siouns ajens Filisteis?; for in that tyme 
Filisteis weren lordis of Israel. Therfors 
Sampson 3ede down with his fadir and 
modir in to Thannatha; and whanne thei 
hadden come to the vyneris of the citee, 
a fers and rorynge’ ‘whelp of a lioun™ ap- 
peride, and ran to Sampson. Forsothe*« 
the spirit of the Lord felde in to Samp- 
son, and he to-rente the liount, as if he 
‘to-rendide" a kide ‘in to gobetis’, and 
outerli he hadde no thing in the” hond*; 
and he noldeY schewe this to the? fadir 
and modir. And he 3ede doun, and spak7 
to the womman, that pleside hise ijen. 
And aftir summe daies he turnede ajen*s 
to take hir ‘tx to matrimonye”; and he 
‘bowide awey* to se the ‘careyn of the 
liount; and lo! a gaderyng® of bees was 
in the ‘mouth of the lioun’, and ‘a coomb 


t the spirit; 
that is, the spi- 
rit of strengthe, 
that was 30uun 
frely of the Lord 
to him. Lire 
here. C. 


9coombe. ‘The which whanne he hadde of hony’. And whanne he" hadde take itis 
tbytwen pceru. Yintoa. V Filisteis c. W dou3tren peru. * Om. c. 

Ywexide 1. Z%tentus1. @ Thanne x. » Philistees dou3tris 1. © stiedeup1. 4toldethis1. ¢Om, 1. 
f Filistees dou3ztris r. € Om.1. therisnor iOm.1. * the Filisteis 1. hath plesid 1. ™ But 1. 
“this1. ° Sampson r. P the Filisteis 1. 4a rorynge cnginb. ' liouns whelpz. § Andi. + lionn into 
gobetis 1. 4 torentide pNexb. torente Gmw. hadde torente1. VY Om.1. Whisz, *hondis c. Y wolde 
notr. Zhisi, ®Om.1see.m. bOm.1. © wente aside1. 4 liouns careyn 1. ¢swarmi. f liouns 
mouth 1. an honycombe 1. » Sampson 1. | the combe 1. 


654 


takun in hoondis, he ete in the weye; 
and comynge to his fader and moder, he 
jaf to hem part, the which and thei 
eeten; and neuerthelater he wolde not 
shewe to hem, that the hony he took of 
10the mouth of the lioun. And so his fader 
dessendide to the womman, and made to 
his sone Sampson a feest; forsothe so 
1130ng men weren wont to doo. Whanne 
thanne the cyteseyns of that place hadden 
seen him, thei 3onen to him bord felawis 
thretti, the whicheY shulden be with hym. 
12To whom spak Sampson, Y shal purpose 
to 3ow a dowtous word, the which if 3e 
soylen to me with ynne seuen dais of the 
feest, Y shal 3yue to 3ou thretti lynnen 
13¢clothis, and so fele cootis; forsothe if 3e 
mowen not assoyle, 3e shulen 3yue to me 
thretty lynnen clothis, and of the same 
noumbre cootis. The whiche answerden 
to hym, Purpos the probleine, that we 
l4heren. And he seide to hem, Of the 
eter 3ede ont meete, and of the strong 
wente out swetnes. And thei mi3ten not 
15 bi thre days soylen the proposicioun. And 
whanne the senenthe day was ny3, thei 
seiden to the wijf of Sampson, Faage to 
thi man, and meue hym, that he shewe 
to thee what bitokeneth the probleme. 
The which thing if thou wold not doo, 
we shwen brenne thee and the hows of 
thi fader. Whether therfor 3e han clepid 
16vs to the brydale for to robben? The 
which shedde anentis Sampson teeris, and 
pleynede, seiynge, Thow hatidist ine, and 
not louest, and therfor the redels, that 
thow hast purposid to the sones of my 
puple, thou wolt not to me expowne. He 
answerde, To my fadir and moder I wold 
not seye, and to the shal I mowe shewe? 
17 Therfor seuen days of the feest she wepte 
anentis hym, at the last the seuenthe dai 


JUDGES. 


XIV. 10—17. 


in hondis*, he eet! in the weie; and he 

cam to his fadir and modir, and 3af™ part 

‘to hem", and thei eeten ; netheles he nolde® 

schewe to hem, that he hadde take hony? 

of the ‘mouth of the lioun’. And so his 10 

fadir 3ede doun to the womman, and made 

a feestet to his sone Sampson; for™ 3onge + a feeste, for 
men weren wont to do so’ Therforl ie Hae 
whanne the citeseyns of that place had- “7 "7% 
den seyn hym!, thei 3auen to hym thretti 

felowis, whiche" schulen be with hym. 

To whiche’ Sampson spak, Y schal putte 12 

forth to you a probleme, ‘that is, a dou3te- 

Jul word and priuy”, and if 3e ‘asoilen 

it* to me’ with ynne seuen daies of the? 

feeste, Y schal 3yue to 30u thretti lynnun 

clothis, and cootis* ‘of the same noumbre>; 

sotheli® if 3e moun? not soyle®, 3e schulen 13 

3yue tof me thretti lynnun clothis, and 

cootis ‘of the same nouimbre’. Whiche? 
answeriden to hym, Sette! forth the pro- 

bleme*, that we here 7#. And he seide to14 

hem, Mete 3ede out of the etere, and swet- 

nesse 3ede out of the stronge. And bi thre 

daies thei my3ten not assoile the ‘propo- 

sicioun, that is, the™ resoun set” forth°. 

And whanne the seuenthe dai camt, thei? 15 ¢ the seuenthe 
seiden to ‘the wijf of Sampson‘, Glose™ thin of tated 
hosebonde, and counseile’ hym, that he (Mi Teser™ 
schewe to thee what the probleme! signy- ‘fe #4. dey of | 
fieth". That if thou nyltY do¥, we schulen “ere. c. 
brenne thee and ‘the hous of thi fadir*. 

Whether herforY 3e clepiden vs to wed- 

dyngis, that 3e schulden robbe vs? And 16é 

sche schedde* teerys at Sampson, and 

pleynede’*, and seide, Thou hatist me, and 

louest not’, therfor thou nylt® expowne! 

to me the probleme®, which‘ thou settidist® 

forth to the sones of my puple. And he? 

answeride, Y nolde! seie* to my fadir and 

modir, and schal Y mow schewe! to thee ? 

Therfor bi seuene dayes of the feest sche 17 


y that c. 


K his hondis 1. leet it 1. ™ gaf hem 1. 


a therof1. ° wolde not 1. P that hony 1. 4 liouns mouth 1. 


Tforso1. SOm.1. t Sampson 1. tthe which 1. VY whomi. ora priuy douteful word 1. * tellen 1. 


¥ me the vndirstonding therof 1. Z this 1. 


4 as many cootis I. 


b Om. 1. Cand 1 @ cunnen I. 


¢ assoile itr. fOm.1, & as many cootis1, 4 The which 1. i Put 1. * thi sotil axyng 1. 1 Om. plures. 
m™Om.1. 2 put3. © forth of Sampson 1. P these meni. 4 Sampsons wijf 1. * Fager. $ moue 1. 
tsutel axyng1. Ymenethi. vwilt not1. Wdoit1s. *thifadrishous1. Y therfore 1. 2 schedde 
out 1. ®complaynede 1. > menotr. ‘¢woltnot1. 4Gvudor. ¢€sutelaxyng1. fthat1 8 hast 


put yr. 


h Sampson 1. i wolde not 1. 


k seie this thing 1. 


1 schewe it 1. 


XIV. 18—XV. 5. 


whanne she was heuy to hym, he ex- 
pownede. The which anoon tolde to hir 
18citeseyns. And thei seiden to him the 
seuenthe day before the sunne goynge 
doun, What is swetter than hony, and 
what is stronger than a” lyoun? The 
which seide to hem, If 3e hadden not 
erid* in my she calf, 3e shulden not? 
19haue founden my proposicionn. And so 
the spyryt of the Lord felle into hym; 
and he wente doun to Aschalonen, and 
he smoot there thretti men, of whom the 
takun clothis he 3af to hem that the 
redilis soileden ; and wrooth® wel’ myche 
he stiede vp into the hows of his fader. 
20 Forsothe the wijf of hym took an hous- 
boond, oon of hir® freendis and wowers. 


CAP TAY. 


1 Afftir a litil forsothe of tyme, whanne 
the dais of whete ripynge stooden yn, 
cam Sampson wilnyngef to se his wijf, 
and he brou3te to hir a kide of the she 
geet; and whanne he wold goo into the 
bedde of hir, as he was wont, the fadir 

2of hir defendide hym, seiynge, Y wende 
that thou haddist hatid hyr, and therfor 
Y took hir to thi freend; but she hath 
a sister, that is 3onger and feyrer than 

3she, be she to thee for hir a wijf. To 
whom Sampson answerde, Fro this day 
blame shal not be in me ajens the Philis- 
tiens*, Y shal do to 30w forsothe" yuels. 
4And he jede, and took thre hundryd 
foxys, and the taylis of hem he ioynede 
to the taylis, and broondis he boond in 
s‘the myddil', the whiche tecudynge with 
fier he lafte, and* hidir and thidir thei 


JUDGES. 


655 


wepte at™ hym; at® the laste ‘he ‘ex- 
pownede® in the seuenthe dai?, whanne 
sche was diseseful to hym. And anoon 
sche telde’ to hir citeseyns. And theits 
seiden to hym*™ in the seuenthe dai bifor 
the goyng doun of the sunne, What is 
swettere than hony, and what is strengere 
than a lioun? And he® seide to hem, If 
3e hadden not erid‘ in my cow calf, ‘that 7s, 
my wif", 3e hadden not founde my pro- 
posicioun. Therfor the spirit of the Lord 19 
felde in to hym’; and he 3ede doun to’ 
Ascalon, and killyde there thretti men*, 
whose clothis he took awey, and heY 3af 
to hem that soiliden? the probleme*; and 
he was ful wrooth, and stiede® in to ‘the 
hows of his fadir’. Forsothe® his wijf20 
took an hosebonde, oon of :thef frendis& 
and keperis? ‘of hir'. 


CAPS. 


‘Forsothe aftir sum del of tyme‘, whanne 1 
the daies of wheete heruest neiz3iden, Samp- 
son cam, and wolde visite his wijf, and 
he brou3te to hir a ‘kide of geet!; and 
when he wolde entre in to hir bed bi cus- 
tom, ‘the fadir of hir™ forbeed hym, and 
seide, Y gesside that thou haddist hatid2 
hir, and therfor Y 3af hir® to thi freend ; 
but sche hath a sistir, which® is 3ongere 
and fairere than sche, be sche ‘wijf to 
thee? for hir. To whom Sampson an-3 
sweride, Fro this day‘ no blame schal be 
in me ajens Filistees, for Y schal do yuels 
to 30u. And he 3ede, and took thre hun-4 
drid foxis, and ioynede" ‘the tailis of hems 
to tailis, and boond* brondis’ in the’ 
myddis*, whicheY he kyndlid with fier, s 
and leet? hem?, that thei schulden renne 
aboute® hidur and thidur; ‘which jeden‘ 


% the ce. aerryd 4. bnoc, © wroot A. 4 ful c. ¢ his ce, f willende c. willyng cu. 
& Filisteis c passim. b Om. 4. 1 myddesc. * that z. 

Muponr. "andatr. °Om.1.  Pdathe tolde it tohir clerly1  4toldeit1. | Sampson 1. 
8 Sampson 3. ¢ or bisied 30u 1 marg. or nijf1. ¥ Sampson 1. Win to K. * of Goddis enmyes 1 marg. 
y¥ Om. plures. assoilident. 2hisresounit. > Sampsoni1. ‘stiedeup1. 4 his fadris hous 1. 
e Andi, £ hirs. & frendis of hiro. & of hir priuey keperis perknqsxb. priuei keperis mo. 
1 Om. vikogsxb. * But a litil tyme aftir1. |! geet kide 1. ™hir fadir1. 4 hir wijf1. othata. P the 
wijf 1. day forth 1. * he ioynede togidere 1. 8 her tailist. he boond 1. Yfiry brondis 1, W Om. 1. 


* myddil of the tailes 1. 
¢ the which runnen 1. 


y the which brondis 1. % made the foxes to1. 20m. plures. Yaboue n et alibi. 


656 


runnen; the whiche anoon wenten into 
the cornys of the Philistiens, the whiche 
sette a fier, and the fruytis, now brou3t 
to gidre, and the 3it stoondynge in the 
stobil, ben brent, in so mych that vynes 
sand olyues the flawm wastide. And the 
Philistiens seiden, Who hath doon this 
thing? To whom it is seide, Sampson, 
the sone in lawe of Thannath, for he 
took his wijf, and 3af to another, thes 
thingis he hath wrou3t. And the Phi- 
listiens stieden vp and brenten as wel the 
7womman as hir fader. To whom seith 
Sampson, Al be it that thes thingis 3e 
han doon, neuerthelater 3it of 3ou Y shal 
aske a! veniaunce, and thanne Y shal 
sreste. And he smoot hem with a greet 
veniaunce, so that astonyinge thei putten 
on the calf of the leg to the hipe; and 
he dessendynge dwellide in the spelunk 
9of the stoon of Ethan. Than Philistiens 
stiynge vp into the loond of Juda setten 
tentis in the place, ‘the which™ afterward 
is clepid Lethi, that is, a cheek boon, 
10Where the oost of hem is hellid®. And 
thei of the lynage of Juda seiden to hem, 
Whi han 3e stied vp ajens vs? The 
whiche answerden, That we bynden 
Sampson we ben comen, and we 3eelden 
to hym that in vs he hath wrou3t. 
u Thanne thre thousand of men of Juda 
dessendiden to the den of the flynt of 
Ethan; and thei seiden to Sampson, Wost 
thou not, that the® Philistiens comaunden? 
to vs? Whi this thing woldist thou doo? 
To whom he seith, As thei diden to me, 
12Y dide to hem. To bynden thee, thei 
seyn, we ben comen, and to take into the 
hoondis of Philistiens. To whom an- 
swerde Sampson, Swerith, and bihotith 


1Om.c. ™ that c. 


€corns. ¢ the Filisteis 1. 
borun 1. * that weren 3it 1. | her vyneris 1. 
P the hasebonde 1. 4 Thannatheis dou3tir 1. 
upt. W the whiche Philisteis 1. 
ba greet 1, © veniaunee 1. 
thei fledden and 1. 
lher oost 1. 
on us 1 marg. 
hondis 1. 


f with the 1. 


x this thing 1. 


f Sampson 1, 
m han 3e stied up 1. 
4 thing tohem 1. T whom 1. 
x whom. Y bihoteth 1. 


gs Thanne 1. 


JUDGES. 


nheld ce. 


& which brondis 1. 
m the placis of her 1. 
rhis 1. 
¥ axe and fake 1. 
ce hindere Kx. ‘4 thei smoten the thijze with the calf of the leg 1. 
h the Philisteis 1. 
n The which 5. 

Sso Y 1. 


XV. 6—r:2. 


anoon in to the cornes? of Filisteis®, bif 
whiche® kyndlid, bothe cornes® ‘borun now! 
to gidere, and 3it* stondynge in the stobil, 
weren brent, in so myche that the flawme 
wastide vyneris', and ‘places of™ olyue 
trees. And Filisteis" seiden, Who didee 
this thing? To whiche® it was seid, Samp- 
son, hosebonde? of the ‘dou3tir of Than- 
nathei1, for he took awey Sampsonest 
wijf, and 3af* to another man, ‘wrou3te 
this thing. And Filisteis" stieden’, and 
brenten bothe the womman and hir fadir. 
To whiche’ Sampson seide, Thou3 3e han7 
do this*, netheles 3it Y schal axeY ven- 
iaunce of 3ou, and than Y schal reste. 
And he? smoot hem® with greet” wounde‘, 8 
so that thei wondriden, and ‘puttiden the 
hyndrere® part of the hipe on the thi34; 
and® he 3ede doun, and dwellide in the 
denne of the stoon of Ethan. Therfors9 
Filisteis" stieden' in to the lond of Juda, 
and settiden* tentis in the place, that was 
clepid aftirward Lethi, that is, a cheke, 
wher ‘the oost of hem! was spred abrood. 
And men of the lynage of Juda seiden to10 
hem, Whi ‘stieden 3e™ ajens vs? Whiche® 
answeriden, We comen that we bynde 
Sampson, and 3elde to hym tho thingis 
whiche® he wrou3te in? vs. Therfor thren 
thousynde of men of Juda 3eden doun to 
the denne of the flynt of Ethan; and thei 
seiden to Sampson, Woost thou not, that 
Filisteis comaunden to vs??? Why woldist 
thou do this thing4? To whiche' he seide, 
As thei diden to me, Y® dide to hem. Thei12 
seien, We comen to bynde thee, and to! 
bitake" ¢hee’ in to the ‘hondis of Filisteis™. 
To whiche* Sampson answeride, Swere 3e, 
and ‘biheete 3eY to ine, that 3e sle not me. 
And thei seiden, We schulen not sle thee, 13 


© Om. 4. P comanndiden n. 


i that weren now 
n the Filisteis 1. © whom 1. 

u the Filisteis 1. ¥ stieden 
z Sampson 1. 4 the Philistees 1. 
e€ so faste 
istieden up 1. * thei settiden 1. 
Pajgens 1. PP thei han lordschip 
utake 1. VY Om, plures. © Philistees 


h the cornes plures. 


Sgafhir1. t Om. 1. 


© the which 1. 
t Om. eG. 


XV. 13-20. 


13to me, that 3e shulen not slee me. And 
thei seiden, We shulen not slee thee, 
but bounden we shulen 3yue. And thei 
bounden hym with two newe coordis, 
and token hym fro the stoon of Ethan. 
14The which whanne was comen to the 
place of the cheek boon, and Philistiens 
criynge out weren a3en comen to hym, 
the spiryt of the Lord felle into him, and 
as ben wont at the smelle of fier trees to 
be waastid, so and the boondis, with the 
whiche he was bounden, ben scaterid and 
1sloosid. And takynge a foundun cheek 
boon, that is, the cheeklap of an asse, 
that lay, he slew3 with it a thousand 
146men; and seith, In the cheek boon of 
an asse, that is, in the iow of the colt 
of assis, I haue doon hem awey, and 
i7smyten a thousand men. And whanne 
thes wordis syngynge he hadde fulfillid, 
he threwe awey the iow fro the hoond; 
and he clepide the name of that place 
Ramathlei, that is to mene, the heuynge 
isvp of the cheek boon. And threstynge 
wel? mych he criede to the Lord, and 
seith, Thou hast 3euen in the hoond of 
thi seruaunt this moost helthe and vic- 
torie; and loo! for threst I dye, and I 
shal falle into the hoondis of the vncir- 
19cumcidid. And so the Lord opnede a 
woong tooth in the cheek boon of the 
asse, and watris wenten out of it, the 
whiche drunkun he fedde the spiryt, and 
strengthis took ajen; and therfor is™ 
clepid the name of that place a Welle of 
the inwardli clepynge fro the cheek boon 
zovnto this day that is nowe. And he 
demyde Yrael in the dais of the Philis- 
tiens twenti jeer. 


JUDGES. 


657 


but we schulen bitake thee boundun’. 
And thei bounden him with twei?? newe 
cordis, and token? fro> the stoon of E- 
than. And whanne thei hadden come to14 
the place of cheke, and Filisteis4 cri- 
ynge® hadden runne to hym, the spirit of 
the Lord felde in to hym, and as stikis 
ben wont to be wastid at the odour of 
fier, so and the bondis, with whiche he& 
was boundun, weren scaterid and vn- 
boundun®, Andi he took* a cheke found- 5 
un!, that is, the lowere™ cheke boon of an 
asse, that lay®,‘and he® killyde ‘with itP 
a thousinde mem; and seide!, With the 16 
cheke of an asse, that is, with the lowere™ 
cheke of a colt of femal* assis, Y dide* 
hem" awey’, and Y killide” a thousynde 
men. And whanne he songe* these wordis, 17 
and ‘hadde fillid’, he castide? forth? fro 
the’ hond the lowere® cheke’; and he® 
clepide the name of that place Ramath 
Lethi, ‘which is interpretid‘, the reisyng 
of a cheke’. And he® thristide greetly, 18 
and criede! to the Lord, and seide, Thou* 
hast 3oue in! the hond of thi seruaunt this 
grettest helthe and victory ; aud lo! Y die 
for thyrst", and Y schal falle in to the 
hondis of vncircumcidid men. Therfor the 19 
Lord openyde a wang tooth in the cheke 
boon of the asse, and watris 3eden out 
therof, bi whiche™ drunkun he refreischide 
the" spirit, and resseuede strengthis ; ther- 
for the name of that place was clepid the 
Welle of the® clepere? of the cheke‘ ‘til tot 
present dai. And he*® demyde Israel in20 
the daies of Filistiym twenti jeer. 


afulc. the 4. this np. 

2 boundun to hem 1. 2Z two J. @ thei token 1. > him fro plures. ¢ that is clepid1. - 4 the 
Philisteis 1. ¢ criynge hije 1. comynge b. { hoot tastyng 1. & Sampson 1. } lowsid 1. And whanne 1. 
k had foundunr JOm.1. M™nether1. 4% there lay1. Ohetoke it,and1.  Ptherwithi. dhe 
seide 1. ‘'netheri. Sschex. thaue dons. UOm.1. VY awey Philistees 1. W haue killide therwith 1. 
* had hije cried 1. Y fully eendid hem 1. %threwe1. ®awey 1. Phis1. ¢nether1. 4 cheke bon 1. 
e€Om.s. fthatistosey 1. &cheke bon1. » Sampsonr. ihecrieder. * Thou Lordi. !in ton. 
Uthyst a. ™and whanne he hadder. ohis1, ° Om. p. P ynwardly clepere 1. 4cheke boon1. © til 


in to plures. vnto this 1. § Sampson 1. 


4p 


658 


CAP. XVI. 


1 He 3ede forsothe into Gazam, and there 
he saw3 a womman strompet, and wente 
2yn to hir. The which thing whanne 
Philistiens hadden seen, and was pup- 
plishid anentis hem, Sampson to haue 
comen into the citee, thei segeden hym 
about, kepers put in the jatis of the citee; 
and there al ny3t with silence abidynge, 
that the morwetide comen him goynge 
3out thei my3ten slee. Forsothe Sampson 
slept vnto mydny3t; and thens rysynge 
he took both leeues of the 3ate’, with her 
postes and lok; and put on the shuldres 
he beer to the cop of the hil that bihold- 
4ith Ebron. After thes thingis he louede 
a woman that dwellide in the valey of 
5Soreth, and she was clepid Dalida. And 
there camen to hyr princis of Philistiens, 
and seiden, Bigijl hym, and lern of hym, 
in what he hath so myche strength, and 
int what maner wise hym we mowen 
ouercome, and bounden tourmente; the 
which thing if thon dost", we shulen 3yue 
to thee ech a thousand hundrid’ platis” 
6of siluer. Thanne Dalyda’ spak toSamp- 
son, Sey to me, I biseche, in what is* 
thi moost strength, and what thing beY 
with the which boundun thou maist not 
7breek ? To whom answerde Sampson, If 
with seuen senewy coordis not 3it dried 
and 3it moyst Y were boundun, Y shal 
sbe feble as other men. And the princis? 
of the Philistiens brou3ten to hir senen 
coordis, as she seide; with the whiche 
ashe bounden hym, lurkynge anentis hir 
busshementis, and in the bed place abid- 
ynge the ende* of the thing. And she 
eriede to him, Philistien® vpon thee, 


tOm. ez. Udoc. 
Z wise maistres E pr. m. 


$ 3atis 4. 


Vv Om. £ pr.m. 
be a4. 


8 eendynge BEFH. 


t strompet 1. U the Filisteis 1. ¥ among 1. 
Philistees 1. > abidinge 1. ¢ that ny3t 1. 
to go thenns 1. i he took 1. 
othe lok 1. Pyatis1. GOm.1. ‘upont. 
boundun 1. W the whiche thing 1. * Thanne 1. 
maist 1. ¢ moist senewis t. 49 Om.1.  € lethi 1. 
buyschementis of Philistees 1. * anentis 1. 


JUDGES. 


W cicles E pr.m. 


w had entride 1. 

priuely 1. 

k Om. A. see. m. 

8 his 1. 

¥ biseche thee 1. 
f Om. 1. 


XVI. I—9. 


CAP. XVI. 


Also Sampson 3ede in to Gazam, andi 
he si3 there a womman hoore', and he en- 
tride to hir. And whanne Filisteis* had-2 
den seyn this, and it was pupplischid at’ 
hem, that Sampson entride” in to the 
citee, thei cumpassiden hym, whanne* 
keperis werenY set in the 3ate” of the 
citee; and thei® abididen® there al ny3t¢ 
‘with silence’, that in the morewtid thei 
sehulen kille Sampson goynge out. For-3 
sothe® Sampson slepte til to ‘the myddis of 
the ny3t'; and ‘fro thennus® he roos", and 
took bothe the* closyngis, ethir! leeues™, 
of the 3ate, with hise" postis and lok®; 
and he bar tho leeues?, put’ on™ the® schul- 
dris, to the cop of the hil that biholdith 
Ebron. After these thingis Sampson lonyde 4 
a womman that dwellide in the valey of 
Soreth, and sche was clepid Dalida. Ands 
the princes of Filisteist camen to hir, and 
seiden, Disseyne thou hym", and lerne 
thou of hym, in what thing he hath so 
greet strengthe, and how we mowen ouer- 
come hym, and turmente kym boundun’; 
that” if thou doist, we schulen 3yue to 
thee ech man a thousynde and an hundrid 
platis of siluer. Therfor* Dalida spak toc 
Sampson, Y biseche’, seie thou to me, wher 
ynne is thi gretteste” strengthe, and what 
is that thing, with which thou* boundun 
maist® not breke? To whom Sampson an-7 
sweride, If Y be boundun with seuene 
coordis of senewis® not 3it drye ‘and 3it 
moiste’, Y schal be feble® as othere men. 
And the princis of Filisteis broujten ‘tos 
hirf seuene coordis, as® he hadde seide; 
with whiche® sche boond him, whiles 
buyschementis' weren hid at* hir, and 


ww Dalyla 4. * be aceEFu. Y may 


b Philisteym c. 


xther, YOm.1. 2 3atis1. the 

e Andi. fmydny3t1. &Om.1. » roos up 
lor the 1. other vu. m the leeues v. n ther. 
tthe Philisteis 1. % Sampson 1. ¥ whanne he is 
Zmoost1. 2 if thou were 1. © thon 
& to Dalida, as1. 4 the whiche 1. i the 


XVI. 10-17. 


Sampson! The which brak the boondis, in 
what maner wise a man wold breeke the 
threed of a top of flexe, that is sponnen 
with spotel, whanne the smelle of fier it 
hath takun; and it is not knowun in 
10 what thing his strength was. And Da- 
lida seide to hym, Loo! thow hast bigilid 
me, and fals thou hast spokyn; namely 
nowe shewe to me, with what thing 
ithow owist to be boundun. To whom 
he answerde, If I were boundun with 
newe coordis, ‘the whiche® weren not 3it 
in? werk, I shal be feble, and of other 
1g2men lijk. With the® which eft Dalida 
boond him, and criede, Philistien’ vpon 
thee, Sampson! in the bed place busshe- 
mentis maad redi. The which so brak 
isthe boondis as thredis of webbis. And 
Dalida eft seide to hym, Howe loug shalt 
thou bigile me, and fals thow shalt speek? 
Shewe where with thon owist to be 
boundun. To whom answerde Sampson, 
he seith, If seuen heerys of myn heed 
with warp threed thou plattist, and a 
nayl with hem about bouuden to the 
iserthe thow ficchist, I shal be feble. The 
which thing whanne Dalida hadde doo, 
she seide to hym, Philistien vpon thee, 
Sampson! The which arysynge fro sleep, 
drow; out the nayl, with heeris and warp. 
is And Dalida seide to hym, What maner 
wise thou seist, that thou Iouest me, 
whanne thin ynwit is not with me? Bi 
thre sithis thou hast lowen to me, and 
thou woldist not seye to me, in what 
isthing is thi moost strength. And 
whanne she was heny to hym, and bi 
manye dais to hym bisili cleuede, space 
to resten not 3yuynge, hyre lijf failide, 
i7and vuto the deeth is feblid. Thanne 
openynge the trewth of the thing, he 
seide to hir, Yren neuer wente vpon myn 


JUDGES. 


659 


abididen! in a closet™ the ende of the" 

thing. And sche criede to hym, Sampson, 

Filisteis° ben on? thee! Which‘ brak thet 

boondis, as if* a man brekith a threed of 

herdis, writhunt with spotle, whanne it . 

hath take® the odour’ of fier; and it was 

not¥ knowun wher ynne his strengthe 

was. And Dalida seide to hym*, Lo!10 

thou hast scorned me, and thou hast spok 

fals; nameliY now schewe thou to me, 

with what thing thou schuldist be bound- 

un. To whom he answeride, If Y bei 
boundun with newe coordis, that weren 

not 3it in werk, I schal be feble?, and lijk 

othere men. With whiche*® Dalida boond 12 

him eft, and criede®, Sampson, Filistees¢ 

ben on@ thee! the® while buyschementis 

weren maad redi in a closet‘. Which’ brak 

‘so the® boondis as thredis of webbis. And 13 

Dalida seide eft to hym, Hou long schalt 

thou disseyue me, and schalt"" speke fals ? 

Schew thou to me, with what thing thou 

schalt be boundun. To whom Sampson 
answeryde, he seide, If thou plattist 

seuene heeris{ of myn heed with a strong Seg on 
boond, and fastnest to the erthe a naile be bear 
boundun a boute with these*, Y schal be per iorie 
feble!. And whanne Dalida hadde do this, 14 ie pe bi 
sche seide to hym, Sampson, Filisteis™ Lire here. c. 
ben on" thee! And he roos fro sleep, and 

drow® out the nail, with the heeris and 

strong? boond’. And Dalida seide to hym, 15 

Hou seist thou, that thou Iouest me, sithen 

thi soule" is not, with me? Bi thre tymes 

thou liedist® to me, and noldist* seie to 

me, wher ynue is thi moost strengthe. 

And whanne sche was diseseful to hym, ic 

and cleuyde to hym contynueli bi many 

daies, and 3af" not’ space to reste, his lijf 

failide, and-was maad wery ‘til to” deeth*. 

Thanne he openyde the treuthe of the17 

thing, and seide to hir, Yrun stiedeY ne- 


ethatc. 4Om.4. ©Om.c. f Pilisteimc. § be acrH. 
1 thei abooden 1. ™priuy placex.  thist, the Filisteist. Pup oni. 4@ Andheri thot. 
8 Om. p6Kmogsxb. ¢tthrowen 1. wonenw. “touchid1. Vheeter, W not3it1. * Sampson 1. 
Ynetheles 1. 2lethiz. ®@the whicher. sche criedex. ¢the Filisteis1. ‘¢uponi. ¢ Om. 1. 
f priny placer. & And Sampsonr. bhis1, Om. 1, / plattist togidre 1, * these heeris 1. ! lethi 1. 
m the Philisteis 1. "uponr. he drowr. Pastrong1. 4 boond fied therto 1. * inward affeccioun 1. 


shast lied 1. t woldist not 1. %to him jaf. 


¥Yno.. 


Wuntor. %*thedeethi. Y camer. 


4pQ 


660 


heed, for thi Nazare, that is, sacrid to the 
Lord, Y am fro the wombe of my moder; 
if myn heed were shauen, my strength 
shal goon awey fro me, and shal fayl, 
isand be as other men. And she seynge 
that he hadde knowlechid to hir al his 
inwit, she> sente to the princis of Philis- 
tiens, and badde, Stye 3e vp 3yt oons, for 
nowe to me he hath openyd his herte. 
The whiche stieden vp, takun to the 
19money that thei bihijten. And she made 
hym sleep vpon hir knees, and in her 
bosum to leyn the heed; and she clepide 
the barbour, and he shoofe seuen heeris 
of hym; and she biganne to throwe hym 
awey, and fro hir to putte; forsothe 
20anoon strength fro hym wente. And she 
seide, Philistiens!' vpon thee, Sampson! 
The which fro sleep rysynge, seide in his 
inwit, I shal goo out, as I dide before, 
and me I shal shaake out; vnknowinge 
that the Lord was goon awey fro hym. 
21 Whom whanne Philistiens hadden cau3t, 
anoon thei drewen out his eyen, and lad- 
den hym* boundun with cheyns to Ga- 
zam, and closid in prisoun thei maden to 
zegrynde. And nowe his heeris bigunnen 
23to growe a3en; and the princis of Philis- 
tiens camen to gidre in oon, for to offre 
oostis of greet worship to Dagon, her 
god, and for! to eete, seyinge, Oure god 
hath takun oure enemye Sampson into 
24oure hoondis. The which also the puple 
seynge preyseden her god, and the same 
thing seiden, Oure god hath taken into 
oure hoondis oure adversarie, ‘the which™ 
hath doon a wey oure loond, and slayn 
2smany. And thei ioiynge bi feestis, nowe 
taken meetis, thei comaundiden, that 
Sampson shulde be clepid, and biforn 
hem pleye; the which lad out fro the 


JUDGES. 


XVI. 18—25. 


uere? on? myn heed, for Y am a Nazarei, 

that is, halewid to the Lord, fro ‘the wombe 

of my modir>; if myn heed be schauun, 

my strengthe schal go awei fro me, and 

Y schal faile*, and Y schal be as othere 

men. And sche? si3 that he® knowlechidef is 

to hir al his wille, ‘ether herteé ; and sche! 

sente to the princes of Filisteis, and co- 

maundide*, Stie 3e! 3it onys, for now he 

openyde™ his herte to me. Whiche" sti- 

eden°®, with? the money takun®? which’ 

thei bihijten. And sche made hym slepe‘19 

ont hir knees, and ‘bowe the" heed in hir 

bosum; and sche clepide a barbour, and 

schauede’ seuene heeris} of hym; and sche + tii. heeris. 
7 In Ebreu it is, 

bigan to caste” hym awei, and to put* fro vii, gobetis, 

hir; for anoon the strengthe 3ede awei alii leer 

fro him. And sche seide, Sampson, Hitigg ht 

listeisy ben on? thee! And he roos fro here. c. 

sleep, and seide to" his soule, Y schal go 

out, as and Y dide bifore, and Y schal 

schake me,fro boondis*; and he wiste not, 

that the Lord hadde goon awei fro hym. 

Aud whanne Filisteis® hadden take hym,2i 

anoon thei didenf out hise ijen, and led- 

den’ Aym boundun with chaynes to Gaza, 

and ‘maden Aym closid' in prisoun to! 

grynde. And nowk hise heeris bigunnen 22 

to growe ajen; and the! princes of Filis-23 

teis camen togidere to offre grete sacrifices 

to Dagon, her god, and ‘to ete™, seiynge, 

Oure god hath bitake oure” enemy Samp- 

son® in to oure hondis. And the puple2s 

seynge also this thing preiside her god, 

and seide the same thingis, Our god hath 

bitake oure aduersarie in to oure hondis, 

which? dide awey oure lond, and killide 

ful many men. And thei weren glad bi2s 

feestis1, for’ thei hadden ete thanne; and’ 

thei comaundiden, that Sampson schulde 

be clepid, and schulde' pleie® bifor hem ; 


hOm.c. i Philisteimc. &k Om. scern. 10m.c. ™ that c. 
z neuere ziti. upon. > my modir womber. © faile strengthe1. 4 Dalidax. ¢ Sampson 1. 
f had knowlechid 1, €Om.1, »Om.1. iQm.w. * comaundid hemi. }3e up1. ™ hath openyd 1. 
a The which 7. O wentenuprt. POm.1. 4 takun with hemi. ‘tthatr. Stoslepei1. tuponi. 4% to 
leie his 1. bowide the b. Vheschaned1. Wschyuert. *puthimr. Ythe Philistees1.  *% upon 1. 
ain plures. > ynwitti. © Om. 1K pr.m. LpRb. 4 these boondis1. © the Philistees 1. f putten 1. 


h thei closiden him 1. 
« Sampson, oure 1. 
t On. mxmogsxb. 


& thei Jedden 1. 
_festis and eten 1. 
whanner § Om. 1 


i and maden him to 1. 
° Om. 1. 
u bepleie p. 


m thet maden 
r and thanne 


kthanne1. 1!Om.1. 


Pthat1. 4 making of feestis 1. 


XVI. 26—XVII. 3. 


prisoun pleyde beforn hem; and thei 
maden hym stoond bitwen two pileers. 
26 The whiche seide to the child gonern- 
ynge his goyngis, Leet me, that I towche 
the pileers on the whiche stoondith" al 
the hows, that Y lene vpon hem, and a 
27]itil while reste. Forsothe the hows was 
ful of men and of wymmen, and there 
weren the princis of Philistiens, and of 
the roof and soleer aboute thre thowsand 
of either kynde, bidynge Sampson plei- 
asynge. And he seith, the® Lord inwardli 
clepid, Lord, my God, haue mynde of 
me, and 3eeld to me nowe the fornhad 
strength, my God, that I wreche me on 
myn enemyes, and for the lesynge of two 
29 li3tis o veniaunce I take. And catch- 
ynge the twey pileers, to the whiche al 
the hows stood, and the tother of hem 
with the ri3t,and the tother with the left 
tha seith, Die my lijf with Philis- 
tien! And the pileers strongly smyten 
to gidere, the hows felle vpon alle the 
princis, and the tothir multitude, that 
there was; and many mo he slew3 di- 
31 ynge, than beforn he slew3 on lyne. And 
his bretheren? comynge doun, and al his 
kynrede, token hys bodi, and byrieden it 
bitwix4 Saraa and Escahol, in the birielis 
of his fader Manue; and he demyde 
Yrael twenti 3eer. 


CAP. XVII 


1 A maner man there was in that tyme 
of the hil of Effraym, Mychas bi -name. 
2 The which seide to his moder, The thou- 
sand hundryd platis of siluer, the whiche4%4 
thow seueredist to thee, and vpon the 
whiche me herynge thou swore, loo! Y 
haue, and anentis me ben. 'T'o whom she 
answerde, Blessid my sone to the Lord. 
3Thanne he 3eeldide™ hem to his moder; 


2 stont BcE sec. m, Fu. leneth £ pr.m. 
¥ 3eld ce. 


v the which 1. 
bAnd1. ¢ Om. plures. 4 Om. xx. 
hOm.1. !andseider. * upon 1. 
dqhist Thisr. § he seide 1. 
yAndi. hist. 4 thei birieden it 1. 
hij3t Mycas1. g Om. Gikngx. 1} upon the 1. 


w Sampsen 1. 


I take 1. 


JUDGES. 


to the 4 sec.m. 


x child that gouernyde 1. 
€ men and of wymmen 1. 
m my two I. 

t the Philistees 1. 

b of Manue 7. 
i while that 1, 


661 


which’ was led out of prisoun, and pleiede 
bifor hem; and thei maden hym stonde - 
bitwixe twei pileris. And he seide to2s 
the ‘child gouernynge* hise steppis, Suffre 
thou me, that Y touche the pilers on 
whicheY al the hows stondith?, that Y be 
bowid on? tho, and reste a litil. Sotheli?27 
the hows was ful of men and of wymmen, 
and the princes of the® Filisteis weren 
there, and‘ aboute thre thousynde of ‘ener 
either kynde*, biholdynge fro the roof and 
the' soler Sampson pleynge. And whanne§® 28 
the Lord ‘was inwardli clepid, he" seide', 
My Lord God, haue mynde on* me, and, 
my God, 3elde thou now to me the formere 
strengthe, that Y venge me of myn ene- 
myes, and that Y resseyue! o veniaunce 
for the los of tweyne™ i3en. And he took 29 
bothe pilers", on° whiche the hows stood, 
and he helde the oon? of tho in the! ri3t- 
hond, and the tother in the™ left hond; 
and seide’, My lijf die with Filesteis'!3o 
And whanne the pileris weren schakun 
togidere strongli, the hows felde on" alle 
the princes, and on" the tother’ multitude, 
that was there; and he diynge killide 
many moo, than he quyk* hadde slayn 
bifore. ForsotheY hise britheren and alsi 
the? kinrede camen doun, and token his 
bodi, and birieden® bitwixe Saraa and Es- 
cahol, in the sepulcre of his fadir Ma- 
nue’; and het demyde? Israel twenti 3eer. 


CAP. XVII. 


In that tymet was a man, ‘Mycas bi1 
name‘, of the hil of Effraym. And hee 
seide to his modir, Lo! Y haue a thou- 
synde ‘and an® hundrid platis of siluer, 
whiche thou departidist to thee, and on" 
whiche thou sworist{, while! Y herde, and 
tho ben atk me. ‘To whom sche answeride, 
Blessid be my sone of the Lord. Therefor'3 
he 3eldide™ tho to his modir; and sche 


qq that c. 


Pbrether nr. bytwene BcEFH. 


ythe whiche 1. 2 stondith upon. ®uponr. 
ffrothe1. & he clepide ynwardly 1. 

n the pilers1. © upon the 1. P toon kK, 
vOm. 1 W Sampsoni.  * alyue 1. 

d Sampson 1. ¢ had demyd1. f that 
k anentis 1. Thanne 1. ™ bitoke 1. 


U upon I. 
¢ Om. 1. 


+ in that tyme; 
that is, in the 
bigynnyng of 
hugis. Lire 
here. c. 


t thou sworist; 
that is, bihistist 
bi auow and 
ooth, bi oure 
expositours. 

In Ebreu it is, 
thou cursidist ; 
that is, him that 
took awey the 
money. Lire 
here. C. 


662 


the which seide to hym, I haue sacrid 
and auowid this siluer to the Lord, that 
of myn hoond my sone tak, and mak a 
grauen thing and a 3otun; and now I take 
4it to thee. Thanne he 3eeld to his moder; 
the which took two hundrid platis of sil- 
uer, and 3af hem to the siluer smith, that 
he make of hem a grauen thing and 
a 30tun, the which was in the hows of 
5Mychee. The which a litil hows forsothe 
in it to God seuerde; and made a coope, 
and theraphyn, that is, the prestis clooth, 
and mawmettis; and he fulfillid the hoond 
of oon of his sones, and he is maad to 
shym a preest. In tho dais was no kyng 
in Irael, but echon, what semyd to hym 
7713t, that he dide. And there was an- 
other 3onglynge of Bethlem of Juda, of 
the kynrede of him, and he was a Le- 
suyte, and dwellide there. And gon out 
ofs the cytee of Bethlem pilgrimage he 
wold, where euere he founde profijt to 
hym. And whanne he was comen in to 
the hil of Effraym, and weye makynge 
hadde bowid doun a litil in to the hows of 
9 Myche, he is askid of hym, Whens comest 
thou? The which answerde, A Leuyte 
Y am of Bethlem of Juda, and I goo, 
that I dwelle where I shal mowe, and 
10 biholde to be profitable to me. Dwel, he 
seith, anentis me, and be to me fader and 
preest; and I shal 3yue to thee bi eche 
3eer ten platis of siluer, and dowble cloth- 
inge, and what thingis ben necessarye to 
ulijflod. And he asentide, and dwellyde 
anentis the man; and was to hym as oon 
w20f the sones. And Mycha fulfillid the 
hoond of hym, and hadde a child preest 
izsanentis hym, seiynge, Nowe I woot, that 
God wol doo wel to me, hauynge a preest 
of Leuytist kynde. 


rr those B. 


© take it 1. 
Vv and a 30ten ymage 1. 


n haue halewid 3, 
u modir ajen 1. 


JUDGES. 


8 fro BCEFU. 


P make therof 1. 
w Mycheas hons 1. 


XVII. 4—13. 


seide to hym, Y halewide® and avowide 
this siluer to the Lord, that my sone res- 
seyue’ of myn hond, and make? a grauun 
ymage1 and a 3o0tun ymage; and now I 
“3yue it’ to thee. Therfor* he 3eldide't to4 
his modir"; and sche took twei hundryd 
platis of siluer, and 3af tho to a werk man 
of siluer, that he schulde make of tho a 
grauun ‘ymage and 3otun’, that was in 
‘the hows of Mycas*. Which* departides 
alsoY a litil hous? ther ynne to God; and 
made* ephod®, and theraphym®, that is, a 
preestis cloth}, and ydols; and he fillide4 
the hond of oon of his sones, and he® was 
maad a preest to hym. In tho daies was¢é 
no kyng in Israel, but ech man dide this‘, 
that semyde ri3tful to hym silf. Also7 
another 3onge wexynge man was of Beth- 
leem of Juda, of* the kynrede therof||, that 
is, of Juda*, and he was a dekene, and 
dwellide there!. And he 3ede out of thes 
citee of Bethleem, and wolde be a pilgrim, 
where euere he foond profitable to hym 
silf. And whanne he made™ iourney, and 
‘hadde come” in to the hil of Effraym, and 
hadde bowid a litil® in to ‘the hows of 
Mycha?, ‘he was4 axid of* hym, Frog 
whennus comest thou? Which‘ answeride, 
Y am a dekene of Bethleem of Juda, and 
Y go, that Y dwelle where Y may, and 
set that it is profitable to me. Micha™10 
seide, Dwelle thou at’ me, and be thon” 
fadir and preest ‘to me*; and Y schal 3yue 
to thee bi ech 3eer ten platis of siluer, and 
double’ cloth’, and tho thingis that® ben 
nedeful to lijflode. He assentide, and 11 
dwellide ‘at thee man; and he was to the 
man as oon of sones®. And Mycha fillidef 12 
his hond’, and hadde* the child preest at! 
hym, and seide*, Now Y woot, that God 13 
schal do wel to me, hauynge a preest of 
the kyn of Leuy. 


t Lenite c. 
qQOm.1. 'takethis1. 8 Andi. ttoke it 1. 
x And Myche also1. yYOm.1. Zoran 


oraloric1 marg. ®hemadeinthat1. banephodi. Catheraphym1. 4 fulfillide with richesse 1. 
€that sone1. fthatr. 4 and ofr. i of it 1. k Om. rw. 1 in Bethleem 1. m had made 1, 
Neamer. © litilaside x. =P Mycheas hous 1. a Mychee 1. 7 Om. 1. s The which 1.  t where 
Iser. tAnd Mychet. Ywith1. Wthoutomeat *Om.1. Yadoublex. 4clothing1, 20m. a. 
Dnecessariz. with thati. 4thatr. ¢hissonesr. f fulfillide 1. 8 hond with goodis1. "he 
hadde 1. iwith 1. * he seide 1. 


t he 3eldide; 
that is, bihiste 
to 3elde; for of 
j3eldding in 
dede, it is seid 
aftirward. Lire 
here. c. 


t This word, 
@ preestis cloth 
and ydols, is 
not in Ebreu, 
but it is addid 
of oure transla- 
tour. Lire 

e. C. 


Il the kynrede 
therof; in E- 
breu it is, of 
the kynrede of 
Juda. Lire 
here. c. 


XVII. 1—9. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 In tho" days was no kyng in Yrael; 
and the lynage of Dan sou3te possessioun 
to hym, that he my3te dwelle in it; for- 
sothe vnto that day amonge othere ly- 

znagis he hadde takun no lot. Thanne 
senten the sones of Dannys stok, and of 
his meyne, fyue moost stronge men fro 
Saraa and Escahol, that thei aspien the 
loond, and bisily biholden. And _ thei 
seiden to hem, Gooth, and biholdith the 
loond. The whiche, whanne goynge thei 
weren comen into the hil of Effraym, 
and weren goon into the hows of Myche, 

3thei restiden there. And knowynge the 
voys of the 3onglynge Leuyte, and vsynge 
the restynge place of hym, thei seiden to 
hym, Who brou3te the hidir? What here 
dost thow ? For what cause hidir come 
4thou woldist? The which answerde to 
hem, Thes thingis and thes thingis My- 
chas hath 3euen to me, and me bi meed 
hath hyrid, that I be to hym a preest. 
5And thei preiden hym, that he shulde 
counseyl the Lord, and wite thei my3ten, 
whethir welsum weye thei shulden goo, 
6and the thing shulde han effecte. The 
which answerde to hem, Gooth with pees, 
the Lord hath biholden 3oure weye, and 
7the gaat that 3e goon. And so goynge 
the fyue men camen to Lachis; and thei 
seen the puple dwellinge in it withouten 
eny drede, after the vsage of Sydonyes, 
sikir and in rest, no man to hem vtterli 
withstondynge, and of greet ritchessis, 
and fer fro Sidon, and fro alle men se- 
suerd. And thei turneden ajen to her 
britheren in Saraa and Eschahol; and 
what thei hadden doo to hem askynge, 
othei answerden, Rysith, and stie we vp 
to hem; forsothe we han seen the loond 


JUDGES. 


663 


CAP. XVIII. 


In tho daies was no kyng in Israel ;1 
and the'lynage of Dan sou3te possessioun 
to it silf, to! dwelle ther ynne; for ‘til to™ 
that dai it? hadde not take eritage among 
other lynagis. Therfor® the sones of Dan2 
senten fyne the strongesteP men of her 
generacioun? and meynee™ fro Saraa and 
Escahol, that thei schulden aspie the lond, 
and biholde® diligentlit. And thei" seiden 
to hem, Go 3e, and biholde the lond. And 
whanne thei goyngeY hadden come in to 
the hil of Effraym, and hadden entrid in 
to the hows of Mycha, thei restiden there. 
And thei knewen the voys of the j3ong3 
wexynge dekene ; and thei restiden in ‘the 
yn of hym”, and seiden to hym, Who 
brou3te thee hidur? What doist thou here? 
For what cause woldist thou come hidur? 
Which* answeride ‘to hemY, Mychas 3af?4 
to me these* and these thingis®, and hiride® 
me for meede, that Y be preest to hym. 
Forsothe’ thei preieden hym, that hes 
schulde counsele® the Lord, and theif 
my3ten wite, whether thei 3eden in weie® 
of prosperite, and the® thing! schulde hane 
effect. Which" answeride to hem, Go 3e6 
with pees, the Lord biholdith 3oure weie, 
and the iourney whidur 3e goon. Therfor!7 
the™ fyue men 3eden", and camen to La- 
chys°; and thei siz3en the puple dwellynge 
ther ynne with outen ony drede, bi the 
custom of Sidonyis, sikur and resteful, for 
no man outirli a3enstood hem, and ‘of 
grete richessis?, and ferd fro Sidon, and 
departid' fro alle men. And thei turn-s 
eden ajen to her britheren in Saraa and 
Escahol; and thei answeriden fo ‘britheren 
axynge' what thei hadden do", Rise 3e,9 
and stie we’ to hem’, for we sijen* the 
lond ful riche and plenteuous; nyle 3e be 


U these m1. 


n Dani. © Thanne 1. 
u Dan 1. 


b Om. 1. 


J fortor ™unto1. 
8 hiholde it 1. t bisily 1. 
j3oue 1. 4 these thinges 1. 
& the weie cinwx. 
. 3eden forth 1. 
¥ weren departid 1. 


8 these fyue 1. 
Lachis 1. 


x han seen 1. 


P mooste stronge 1. 
Y goynge forth 1. 
¢ he hath hirid 1. 
h that the r. i thing of her purpos 1. 
o Lays A pr.m. EGNPUX. Lais rarw. 
t hem enqueringe 1. 


q lynage 1. 
Whis place 1. * The which 1. Y Om. 1. 
4And1. ¢€eounsele with 1.  f that thei i. 
k The which dekene 1. 1 Thanner. ™ thor, 
P thei weren ful riche 1. G divelliden fer 1. 
udo, and seideni. Vweupr. W hem of 


Y of her meynee 1. 
z hath 


664 


ful riche and plenteuous; wolith not 
leeue, woleth not ceese, goo we, and weeld 
10 we it; no traueyle it shal be; we shulen 
goo into the sikyr, in to the regyoun 
moost brood; and the Lord shal taak to 
vs the place, in which is scarsnesse of no 
thing of hem that ben goten in the erthe. 
11 Thanne wenten’ of the kynrede of Dan, 
that is, of Saraa and Escahol, six hundrid 
12men gird with armes of werre. And thei 
stiynge vp dwelliden in Cariathiarym of 
Jude, the which place fro that tyme took 
name of the Tentis of Dan, and is bihynde 
i3the bak of Kyriathiarym. Thens thei 
passiden into the hil of Effraym; and 
whanne thei weren comen to the hows 
140f Myche, seiden the fyue men, that be- 
fore hoond weren sent to the loond of 
Lachis to ben biholden, to her other bri- 
theren, Knowe 3e, that in thes howsis 
be ephot, and theraphyn, and grauen thing 
and 30ten; seeth what plesithY to 3ou. 
15 And whanne a litil thei hadden bowid 
doun, thei wenten into the hows of the 
3onglynge Leuyte, that was in the hows 
of Myche, and thei salutiden hym with 
is pesible wordis. Forsothe sixe hundrid 
men, so as thei weren armed, stoden be- 
17fore the dore. And thei, the whiche 
weren goon into the hous of the jong 
man, the grauen thing and 3oten, and 
ephot, and theraphyn thei enforsiden to 
taak; and the preest stood before the dore, 
the sixe himdrid men moost stronge not 
isferre abidynge. Thanne ‘tho ilk* that 
entriden token the grauen thing, ephot, 
and the mawmettis, and the 3oten; to 
whom seide the preest, What doon 3e ? 
19To whom thei answerden, WhistY, and 
put fynger vpon thi mouth, and com 
with vs, that we han theeYY fader and 
preest. Whether is it beter to thee, that 


JUDGES. 


XVIII. 10—19. 


necgligent, nil 3e ceesse, go weY, and haue? 
it in* possessioun ; no trauel schal be®; we 10 
schulen entre to sikir men‘, in to a largeste? 
cuntrey ; and the Lord schal bitake to vs 
a place, wher ynne is not pouert of ony 
thing of tho® that ben brou3t forth in 
erthe. Therfor' sixe® hundrid men gird! 
with armeris of batel 3eden forth ‘of the 
kynrede of Dan, that is, fro Saraa and 
Escahol. And thei stieden', and dwell-1i2 
iden in Cariathiarym of Juda, which* 
place took fro that tyme the name of 
Castels! of Dan, and is™ bihyndis the bak 
of Cariathiarym. Fro thennus thei" pass-13 
iden® in to the hil of Effraym; and whanne 
thei hadden come to? the hows of Mychas, 
the fyue men, that weren sent bifore to14 
biholde the lond of Lachis4, seiden to her 
other britheren, ‘3e knowen'{, that ephod’, 
and theraphyn‘, and a grauun ymage” and 
jotun’ is in these housis; se 3e what 
plesith 3ou". And whanne thei hadden15 
bowid a litil*, thei entriden in to the hows 
of the 3ong dekene, that was in the hows 
of Mychas, and thei gretten hym with 
pesible wordis. ForsotheY sixe hundrid 16 
men stoden bifore the dore, so as thei 
weren armed. And thei, that entriden in 
to the ‘hows of the 3ong man’, enforsiden* 
to take awey the grauun ymage®, and the° 
ephod*, and theraphin®, and the 3otun 
ymagef; and the preest stood bifore the 
dore, while sixe hundrid strongeste® men 17 
abideden’ not fer‘. Therfor* thei that1s 
eutriden token the grauun ymage, ephod!, 
and idols, and the 3otun ymage; to whiche™ 
the preest seide, What doen 3e ? To whom 19 
thei answeriden, Be thou stille, and putte 
the® fyngur on thi mouth, and come with 
ys, that we haue thee fadir and preest. 
What is betere to thee, that thou be preest 
in the hows of o man, whether® in oP 


v thei wenten E pr.m. Wit pleseth & pr.m. *thilk p. tho c. Y Whisht c. Whischt = pr.m. Yy the 4. 


Yweforthr. *Zhauewer *fintor 
fThanne1. & of the kynrede of Dan sixe 1. 
Mitis1. "Dani. © passiden forth 1, 
Sacoope1. ta prestiscloth1. 4 ydol 1. 
Z 3ounge mannes hows 1. 4 enforsiden hem 1. 
fmawmet 1. & ful stronger. 1» aboden 1, 
athi kEIKRxX, Ootheril. Pat 


b be fo us 1. 
h Om. 1. 
P into c. 
Vv a 3otun ymage 1. 

b ydol 1. 

i fer thenns 1. 


dfullarger. © tho thingis 1. 

k the which 1. ! Tentis 1. 

q Lais A pr.m. EFPsx. Lays w. * Knowe 3e 1k. 
Pp ysw. | 3 

wtojour. *litilasider. Y And 1. 

fai. decoper. © the prestis cloth 1. 

k Thannex. !the copex. ™ whom 1. 


¢ placis s. 
i stieden up 1. 


XVIII. 20-—30. 


thou be a preest in the hows of 07% man, 
othir in o lynage and meyne in Yrael? 
20 The which thing whanne he hadde herd, 
he assentyde to the wordis of hem, and 
took ephot, and the grauen thing, and 
21mawmettis, and with hem wente. The 
whiche whanne weren goon, and before 
hem hadden maad children and beestis 
22to goon, and al that was precious, and 
now whanne fro the hows of Myche thei 
weren ferre, the men that dwelliden in 
the howses of Myche, to gidre criynge 
23folweden, and after the bak bigunne to 
crien. The whiche whanne thei hadden 
24 beholdun, thei seiden to Myche, What to 
thee wolt thow? whi criest thow? The 
whiche answerde, My goddis that I 
made to me, 3e han takun, and a preest, 
and alle thingis that Y haue; and 3e seyn, 
25 What is to thee? And the sones of Dan 
seiden to hym, Be war, lest eny more 
thou speke to vs, and men styred with 
corage comen to thee, and thou thi silf 
2¢with al thin hows perishe. And so the 
bigunne weie thei wenten. Forsothe My- 
cha seynge, that thei weren strenger than 
him self, he turnyde ajen into his hows. 
27Forsothe sixe hundrid men token the 
preest and that we aboue seiden, and 
camen into Lachis to the puple restynge 
and* siker; and thei smyten hem in 
mouth of swerd, and the cite with bren- 
2snynge thei token, no man vtterly berynge 
sokour, forthi that ferre thei dwelten fro 
Sydon, and with noon of men thei had- 
den eny thing of felawship and of erand. 
Forsothe the citee was set in the regioun 
of Roob; the which eft makynge out 
29 dwelliden in it; the name of the citee is” 
clepid Dan after the name of his fader, 
whom Irael gat, ‘the which® before La- 
30chis was seid. And thei putten to hem 


JUDGES. 


665 


lynage aud meynee in4 Israel? And 20 

whanne he hadde herd this, he assentide 

to ‘the wordis of hem’, and he took the 

ephod’, and ydols, and the grauun ymage, 

and 3ede forth with hem. And whanneg 

thei 3eden", and hadden maad the’ litle 

children, and werk” beestis, and al thing 

that was preciouse, to go bifor hem; and 22 

whanne thei weren now fer fro ‘the hows 

of Mychas*, men that dwelliden in the 

housisY of Mychas, crieden togidere, and 

sueden, and bigunnun to crye ‘aftir the23 

bak?. Whiche* whanne thei hadden bi- 

holde, seiden® to Mychas, What wolt thou 

to® thee? whi criest thou? Which* an-24 

sweride, 3e han take awey my goddis 

whiche Y made to me, and the® preest, 

and alle thingis whiche' Y haue{; ands feat ales 

je seien, Whiat is to thee? And the sones 25 Te Ta 
of Dan seiden to hym, Be war, lest thou Pe it}s 
speke® more to vs, and men styrid in soule! 2 mrs oe 
come to thee, and thou perische with al] _ thingis which 

thin hows. And so thei* 3eden! forth in Sverre. 
the iourney bigunnun. Forsothe™ Mychas Get tine: 

siz3, that the! weren strongere than he, Bel pais ea" 


rist nou3t bi 
and turnede a3en in to his hows. For-27 nae for 
sothe™ sixe" hundrid men token the preest, awey noon 
othir good of 


and the thingis whiche we biforseiden, 
and camen® in to Lachis? to the puple 
restynge! and sikur™; and thei smytidens 

hem bit the scharpuesse of swerd, and bi- re a ie 
token't the" citee to brennyng, while no 28 here. c. 
man outirli jaf help’, for thei dwelliden 

fer fro Sydon, and hadden™ not ony* thing 

of felouschipe and causeY with ony of? 

men. Forsothe* the? citee was set in the 

cuntrei of Roob; which® citee thei? bild- 

iden eft, and dwelliden ther ynne; while®29 

the name of the’ citee was clepid Dau, bi 

the name of her fadir, whom Israel hadde 

gendrid®, which> citee was seid‘ Lachis* 

bifore. And ‘thei settideu' there the30 


his, outakun 
tho that per- 
teyneden to 
religioun of 
idols, and they 


Zoon gE. ®inc. % Om. ncErH. © thatc. 
4 of 1, r her wordis 1. 8 cope I. u zeden forth 1. Vv hers. wher werk 1. x Mycheis 
hows 1. Yhousix. 2 bihindeher1. ® Whomr. ? thei seidens. ¢be dotor The which 1. ¢ my 1. 


fthat1. & and 3i1. » speke thus 1. 
camen 1. P Lais a pr.m. Epsxb. 
bitoken 1. “heri. V help éo hem 1. 
gec.m.osxb. Andi. ? that1. 

& bigatter. the which s. # clepid 1. 


i corage 1. 


4 that restiden here 1. 
w thei hadden 1. 
¢the which 1. 

k Lais a prom. EmMPsxXb. 


k Dans. !wenter. ™Andi. "the sixer. © thei 
r weren sikur1. Sslewenr. ting. tt thei 
Xdoony1. Yofnedet. % manere 1. Om. KN. 


dDans. and perknesxb. Om. mo. 


1 Dan settide 1. 


f that 3. 


4Q 


666 


a grauen thing, and Jonathan, the sone 
of Gerson, sone’ of Moysy, and the sones 
of lym, prestis in the lynage of Dan, 

31 vnto the day of his chetifte. And there 
dwellide anentis hem the mawmet of 
Myche, al the tyme that the hows of 
God was in Sylo. In® tho’ days was no 
kyng in Yrael. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Amaner man Leuyte was dwellinge 
in the side of the hil of Effraym, the 
which took a wijf in® Bethlem Juda. 
2The which lafte hym, and is turned ajen 
into hir fader® hows of Bethlem, and she 
dwellide anentis hym foure monethis. 
3And hir man folwede hyr, wolnynge! to 
be recounseild to hir, and to softli treten, 
and to brynge aj3en with hym; hauynge 
in ledynge a child, and two assis. The 
which took hym, and brou3te hym into 
the hows of hyr fader; that whanne his 
fader in lawe hadde herd him, and seen, 
glad he aj3ens cam to hym, and clepide 
4the man. And the sone in lawe dwellide 
in the hows of the fader in lawe thre 
days, etynge and drynkynge with hym 
shomeli. Forsothe the ferthe day fro ny3t 
rysynge wold goo forth; whom with 
heelde the fader in lawe, and seith to 
hym, Tast rather a litil of breed, and 
coinfort the stomak, and so thow shalt 
«goo. And thei seten, and eten to gidir, 
and dronken. And the fader of the wom- 
man seide to his sone in lawe, Y biseche 
thee, that this day here thou dwelle, and 
7to gider we gladen. And he rysyn ganne* 
to wiln to goo forth; and neuerthelater 
the fader in lawe bisily heelde hym a3en, 
and anentis hym he made hym! to dwelle. 
8 Forsothe erely bigunne the Leuyte made 
redi the weye; to whom the fader in lawe 
eft, I biseche, he seith, that a litil of 


e And in a. 
k began cru. 


d the sone £ pr.m. 
i willende c. wilynge £. 


JUDGES. 


f thos er. these c. that £ pr. m. thes 1. 
1Om. c. 


XVIII. 31-——XIX. 8. 


grauun ymage, and Jonathas, sone™ of 
Jerson, sone of Moises, and ‘Jonathas 
sones*, preestis®, in the lynage of Dan, til 
in to the dai of her caitifte. And thes: 
idol of Mychas dwellide at? hem, in al 
thed tyme ‘in which? the hows of God 
was in Silo. In tho daies was no kyng in 
Israel. 


CAP. XIX. 


A man was a dekene dwellinge in the! 
side of the hil of Effraym, which’ dekene* 
took a wijf of Bethleem of Juda. And2 
sche lefte hym{, and turnede a3en in to 
the hows of hir fadir in Bethleem, and 
sche dwellide at hym't foure monethis. 
And hir hosebonde suede hir, and wolde®3 
be recounselid to hir, and speke’ faire, 
and lede* hivY a3en with him; and he 
hadde in cumpany? a child, and tweyne . 
assis. And sche resseyuede hym, aud brou3te 
him in to ‘the hows of hir fadir?; and 
whanne hise wyues fadir hadde herd this, 
and ‘hadde seyn> hym, he ran gladli to 
hym, and kisside® the man. And theé 
hosebonde of the dou3tir dwellide in ‘the 
hows of his wyues fadiré in® three daies, 
and eetf and drank hoomli with hym. . 
Sothelié in* the fourthe dai he! roos bis 
ny3t, and wolde gok forth; whom ‘the 
fadir of his wijf! helde, and seide to hym; 
Taaste thou first a litil of ™ breed, and 
coumforte thi stomak, and so thou schalt 
go forth. And thei saten togidere, andé 
eeten, and drunkun. And the fadir of the 
damysele seide to ‘the hosebonde of his 
dou3ter", Y beseche thee, that thou dwelle 
here to dai, and that we be glad togidere. 
And he roos, and bigan to wilne to go37 
and neuertlieles® ‘the fadir of his wijf? 
helde hym? mekeli, and made to" dwelle 
at’ hym. Forsothet whanne the" morewtid s 
was maad, the dekene made’ redi weie”; 


Sof geru. 2» fadris c. 


™mthe sone 1. "the sones of Jonathas fo be 1. °the preestis 1. Pwith 1. 4Om.1. that 1. § the which 1. 


tOm.1. tt hir fadir1. °% he wolde 1. 
Z his cumpany 1. a hir fadir hous 1. 


Vv to speke 1. 
b sawge I. 


Ww faire with hir 1. 


¢ biclippide 1. 


Xtoleder yY Om. plures. 
4 his wyues fadris hous 1. 


€ Om. perkmnorgsxb. fheeeti. g Andi. 4Om.1. ithedeken 1. &haue gon. 1! his wijfs 
fadir 1. ™ Om. Gikgb. a his dou3tris hosebonde 1. 9 netheles 1x. nertheles ELP. P wyues fadir 1. 
dhymajen1. Shimtor Swithr, tAndr. %Om.c. Ymadehim1. W to go his weie 1. 


XTX. g—17. 


meet thou take, and strengthis nomen to 
the tyme that ful sprynge the day, and 
after go thow forth. Thei eten thanne to 
ogider. And the 3onglynge roos for™ to 
goo with his wijf and child; to whom eft 
spak the fader in lawe, Behoold, that the 
day is more bowid to the sumne goynge 
doun, and neijeth to the euen; dwel 
anentis me also this day, and lede a 
myrye day, and to morwe thou shalt goo 
10 forth, that thou goo into thin hows. The 
sone ‘in lawe" wolde not assente to his 
wordis ; but anoon wente, and cam ajens 
Jebuse, that bi another name is clepid 
Jerusalem, ledynge with hym two assis 
uchargid, and a secoundarie wijf. And 
nowe thei camen ny3 biside Jebus, and 
the day was turned into ny3t. And the 
child seide to his lord, Com, I biseche, 
and bowe we down to the citee of Jebu- 
12sees, and dwelle we in it. To whom an- 
swerde the lord, I shal not goo into the 
burgh toun of an alien folk, that is not 
of the sones of Yrael, but I shal passe to 
13Gaba; and whanne thider I shal come, 
we shulen dwelle in it, othir certeyn in 
14the citee of Rama. Thanne thei passiden 
Jebus, and the bigunnen weie thei wenten. 
And the sunne wente doun to hem biside 
Gaba, that is in the lynage of Beniamyn ; 
isand thei turneden biside to it, that thei 
my3ten dwelle there. Whider whanne thei 
entreden, thei seeten in the strete of the 
cytee, and no man hem? wold resseyue in 
i¢hows. And, loo! an oold man aperyde 
to hem turnynge ajen fro the feeld, and 
fro his werk at euen, the which and he 
was of the hil of Effraym, and a pil- 
grime dwellide in Gaba. Forsothe the 
men of that regioun weren the sones of 
17Gemyny. And areryd? vp the eyen, the 
oold man saw3 a man sittynge with his 
litil chargis in the strete of the cytee, 


JUDGES. 


667 


to whom ‘the fadir of his wijf* seide eft, 
Y biseche’, that thow take a litil of? mete, 
and make thee strong til* the dai encreesse, 
and aftirward go forth’. Therfor® thei 
eten togidere. And the 3ong man roos too 
go" with his wijf and child®; to whom the 
fadir of his wijf spak eft, Biholde thou, 
that the dai is ‘lowere to! the goynge doun, 
and it neizeth to euentid?; dwelle thou ath 
me also to dai, and lede! a glad dai, and to 
morewe thou schalt go forth, that thou go 
in to thin hows. The ‘hosebonde of the 10 
dou3tir* nolde! assente to hise wordis; but he 
3ede forth anoon, and cam™ a3ens Jebus, 
which" bi another name is clepid Jerusa- 
lem; and he ledde with hym twei assis 
chargid, and the® wijf. And now thei weren 11 
bisidis Jebus, and the day was chaungid 
in to ny3t. And the child seide to his lord, 
Come thou, Y biseche?, bowe we to the 


- citee of Jebus, and dwelle we therynne. 


To whom the’ lord answeride, Y schal not 12 
entre in to the citee of an alien folc, which" 
is not of the sones of Israel, but Y schal 
passe ‘til to’ Gabaa; and whanne Y schalis 
come thidur, we schulen dwelle therynne, 
‘ether certis* in the citee of Rama. Ther-14 
for" thei passiden Jebus, and token the 
weie bigunnun’. And the sunne 3ede doun 
to hem bisidis Gabaa, which” is in the 
lynage of Beniamyn*; and thei turneden 1s 
to it’, that thei schulden? dwelle there. 
Whidur whanne thei hadden entrid, thei 
saten in the street of the citee, and no 
man wolde resseyue hem to herbore*. And 16 
lo! an eld nan turnede ajen fro the feeld, 
and fro his werk in the euentid, and ap- 
peride” to hem, which® also hym silf was 
of the hil of Effraym, and he dwellide a 
pilgrym in Gabaa. Therfor’ men of that 
cuntrey weren the® sones of Gemyny. And 7 
whanne the eld man reisidef his iz3en, he 
si3 a man sittynge with hise fardels in the 


m™Om.c. 2Om.B. Shyma. Prerydc. 

x his wyues fadir1. yYbisechethee1. 2%Om.3. ®ynto1. thou forth kx. ¢ Thanner. 4 go 
forth 1. ¢with the child1. f fer forth gon toward1. &theeuentid:. b with1. i lede thou wth 
me1. dou3tris hosebonde 1. lwolde notr. ™hecamr "2thati. hiss,  P biseche thee 1. 
q his 1. © the which 1. 8 forth in to 1. to s. t or ellis 1. u Thanne 1. Vv that thei bigunnen 1. 

.Wthat1. the sones of Beniamyni. YGabaar. Zwoldens. ® herborou3 1x. herburghe b. » he 
apperide 1. ¢ the which 1. 4 Forsothe plures. Andi. © of the 1. £ reiside up 1. 


4Q2 


668 JUDGES. 


and seide to hym, Whens comest thow ? 
isand whidre gost thow? The which an- 
swerde to hym, We ben comen fro Beth- 
lem Juda, and we goon to oure place, 
that is in the side of the hil of Effraim, 
fro whennus! we 3eden to Bethlem; and 
nowe we goon to the hows of God, and 
19no man vndur his roof resseyue vs, hau- 
ynge chaf and hay into the fodre of assis, 
and breed and wyn into myn, and of thin 
handmaydenys ysis, aud of the child that 
is with me; no thing we neden, but 
20hows. To whom answerde the oold man, 
Pees be with thee; I shal inake redi alle 
thingis, that ben necessarye; oonli, I bi- 
21seche, ne bide’ thow in the strete. And 
he brou3te hym into his hows, and fodre 
to assis he jaf; and after that thei 
wesshen her feet, he took hem into met- 
2eship. Hem etynge, and after the traueyl 
of the weye with meet and drynke fill- 
inge the bodies, camen men of that cytee, 
the sones of Belial, that is, with onten 
3ok, and enuyrownyuge the hows of the 
oold man thei bigunnen to knoke the 
3atis; criynge to the lord of the hows, 
and seiynge, Bryng out the man that is 
goon into thin hows, that we mysvsen 
2zhym. And the oold man wente oute to 
hem, and seith, Wolith not, bretheren, 
wolith not doon this yuel; for a man is 
goo into myn hows; and cees 3e fro this 
aifoly. I haue a dou3ter mayden, and this 
man hath a secoundarie wijf; I shal 
brynge hem out to 30w, that 3¢ lowen 
hem, aud 3o0ure lust 3e fulfil; oonh, I 
byseche, ne this hidows gilt a3ens kynde 
253e worchen in the man. Thei wolden 
not assente to his wordis; the which 
thing biholdynge the man broute out to 
hem his secoundarie wijf, and to hem 
he took hir to be scorned. The which 
whanne al ny3t thei hadden mysusid, 
26 thei laften hir eerly. And the womman, 


whenne E. 


XIX. 18—26. 


street of the citee; and he seide to ‘that 
man&, Fro whennus comest thou? and 
whidur goist thou®? Which! answeride1s 
to hym, We 3eden forth fro Bethleem of 
Juda, and we gon to oure place, which 
is in the side of the hil of Effraym, fro 
whennus we 3eden to Bethleem ; and now 
we gon to the hows of God, and no man 
wole resseyue vs vndur his roof, and we 19 
han prouendre and hey in to mete! of 
assis, and breed and wyn in to myn ysis, 
and of thin handmayde, and of the child 
which" is with me; we han no nede to 
ony thing, no® but to herbore?. To whom 20 
the eld man answeride, Pees be with thee; 
Y schal 3yue! alle ‘thingis, that ben nede- 
ful’; oneli, Y biseche’, dwelle thou not in 
the street. And he brou3te hym in to his21 
hows, and 3af ‘mete to the assist; and after 
that thei waischiden" her feet, he ressey- 


. uedeY hem ‘in to feeste”. While thei ecten, 22 


and refreischiden the* bodies with mete 
and drynk after the trauel of weieY, men 
of that citee camen, the sones of Belial, 
that is, with out 30k, and thei cumpassiden 
the ‘hows of the elde man’, and bigunnun 
to knocke the® doris; and thei crieden to 
the lord of the hows, and seiden, Lede out 
the man that entride in to thin hows, that 
we mysuse him. And the elde man 3ede23 
out to hem, and seide, Nyle 3e, britheren, 
nyle 3e do this yuel; for the man entride> 
in to myn herbore; and ceesse 3e of this 
foli. Y haue a dou3ter virgyn, and this24 
man hath a wijf; Y° schal lede? out hem 
to 30n, that 3e make lowe hem, and fille® 
3oure lust; oneli, Y biseche’, that 3e worche 
not this cursidnesse ajens kynde ‘ajens the® 
man. Thei nolden® assente to hise wordis; 25 
which! thing the man si3*, and! ledde out 
his wijf to hem, and bitook™ to hem hir 
to be defoulid. And whanne thei hadden 
misusid hir al ni;t, thei leften hir in the 
morewtid. And whanne the derknessis®26 


tT abyde BCEFII. 


ehimr bOm.r. i The whichr. -kthat1. 1 the mete cpEFGKLMNOPQSUWxb. ™ oure assis I. 
that 1. °Om.1. Pherborw x. herburghe b. q3yue tothee1r. ‘nedeful thingis1. ‘biseche thee 1. this 


assis mete 1, “had weishen1. VYtoke 1. Wtomete1. *herr. Yherweier. 2 olde mannes hows t. 
®onther. > hathentridi1. Cand Yr. 4brynger. ¢fulfille1. fbiseche 30u 1.  & anentis this 1. 
hwolden not 1. ithe which 1. * seynger. Jher. ™ he bitook 1. ® derknessis of xi3t 1. 


XIX. 27-——XX, 4. 


goynge aweie the derknessis, came to 
the dore of the hows, where dwellide hir 
ezlord, and there she felle down. The 
morwe tide doou, the man roos, and 
openede the dore for to fulfil the bigunne 
weye; and, loo! his secoundarie wijf lay 
at the dore, spred the hoondis in the 
2g threswold’. To whom he wenynge hir 
to reste*s spak, Ryse, and goo we. The 
which no thing answerynge, vndurstond- 
ynge that she was deed, took hir, and 
putte on the asse; and he is turnyd a3en 
sginto his hows. The which whanne he 
was goon yn, he cau3te a swerd, and the 
careyn of the wijf with hir bonys in 
twelue parties and gobetis hewynge, he 
39 Sente into alle the teermys of Yrael. The 
which thing whanne alle thei hadden 
seen, thei crieden to gidre, Neuer siche 
thing is don in Israel, fro that dai that 
oure faders stieden vp fro Egipt vuto the 
tyme that is nowe; 3yueth sentens, and 
in comoun deme 3e, what is nede to the 
deed. 


CAPD XX. 


, And the sones of Yrael wenten out, 
and to gidre gedreden as o man, fro Dan 
vnto Bersabee, and fro the loond of Ga- 

glaad to the hows of Maspha; and alle 
the corneres of puplis, and alle the ly- 
nages of Yrael camen to gidre into the 
chirche of the puple of God, foure hun- 
dryd thowsandist of foot men _ fi3ters. 

3 And it was not vnknowun to the sones 
of Beniamyn, that the sones of Yrael 
hadden stied vp into Maspha. And a 
Leuyte, the housboond of the slayn wom- 
man, askid, what maner wyse so myche 

shidows gilt were doon, he answerde, I 


8 threshold cz. threschwolde r. threschfolde mu. 


9° And whanne 1. 
whom 1. Y spake gessynge 1. 
answeringe 1. @Om.1. > putte hir 1. putte m. 
Scau3ter1. 4 he hewide 1. 1 careyn 1. 
n coostig 1. ° The whiche thing 1.  P thei alle 1. 
* Was neuerer. *Om.1. tOm.1.  V that 1. 
Z3iue 1. ®3e herof1.  » doon for this dede 1, 
f hem togidere 1. & vnto J. 
™ fiztinge footmen 1. ™ vnknowen to 1. 
manere wise so myche an hidous gilt were don 1. 


JUDGES. 


P for to go forth his journey 1. 
w that sche had restid hir 1. 
Cant. 
k his 1. 

q vndirstoden 1. 
Ww stieden up 1. 

e And1. 
h the peplis in aller. i Om. 1, 
© stied up 1. 
s Om. pikmMo0gxb. 


669 


departiden, the womman cam to the dore 
of the hows, where hir lord dwellide, and 
there sche felde doun. Whanne® the mo-27 
rewtid was maad, the man roos, and 
openyde the dore, ‘that he schulde fille 
the weie bigunnun?; and lo! his wijf lay 
bifort the dore, with" hondis spred* int 
the threischfold. And" he gesside’ ‘hir to 28 
reste’, ‘and spak to hir*, Rise thou’, and 
go we. ‘And whanne sche answeride no 


_ thing’, he vndirstode that sche was deed ; 


and he took hir*, and puttide> on the 
asse, and turnede ajen in to his hows. 
And whanne he entride® in ‘to that hows’, 29 
he took’ a swerd, and departide" in to 
twelue partis and gobetis the deed body! 
of the’ wijf!, and sente™ in to alle the 
termes" of Israel. And® whanne alle? ‘men 30 
hadden herde this4, thei crieden™, Neuere® 
siche at thing was" don in Israel, fro that 
dai ‘in which’ oure fadris stieden” fro 
Egipt ‘til in to* ‘present tyme’; seie” 3e 
sentence, and deme 3e* in comyn, what is 
nede to be doon?. 


CAP. XX. 


Therfor® alle the sones of Israel 3eden4, ; 
and weren® gaderid togideref as o man, 
fro Dan ‘til tos Bersabee, and fro the lond 
of Galaad to the Lord in Maspha; and 
alle thei ‘corneris of puplis* ; and alle thee 
lynagis of Israel camen to gidere in to the 
chirche of ‘the puple of God', foure hun- 
drid thousynde of ‘foot men fijters™. And3 
it was not ‘hid fro™ the sones of Benia- 
myn, that the sones of Israel hadden stied°® 
in to Maspha. And the? dekene, hosebonde 
of the ‘wijf that was4 slayn, was axid, 
‘how so greet felonye was doon™; and’ hea 
answeride, Y cam with my wijf in to Ga- 


88 riste 4. t thousend c passim. 


qati. hirt. ‘*spredabrod:. tonx. "To 
xOm.1. YOm.1. 2 The whiche nothing 
dhetnrnedei1, ¢wasentrid1. f Om.1. 
1 wijf with hir boones 1. ™ he sente these 1. 
t seiden togidre with hize voice 1. 
Xvnto I. Y the tyme that is now 1. 
4 3eden out plures. wenten1. € Om. 1. 
k corneris of the lond 1. 1 Goddis peple 1. 
P whanne the 1, 4 woman plures. © in what 


670 


cam into Gabaa of Beniamyn with my 
s wijf, and thidre I turnede. And loo! the 
men of that cytee enuyrounden at ny3t 
the hows, in the" which Y dwelte, will- 
ynge to slee me, and iny wijf traueyl- 
ynge with vntrowable woodnes of lust, 
sand therfor she is deed. The which 
taken Y hew3 into gobetis, and I sente 
partis into alle the teermys of 3oure pos- 
sessioun ; for neuer so myche felony and 
so myche’ trespas worthi to be punysshid 
zis doon in Irael. 3e ben ny3 to alle the 
sones of Yrael; demeth, what 3e owen 
sto doon. And stondynge al the puple as 
with word of o man answerd, We shulen 
not goon a3en into oure tabernaclis, ne 
geny man shal goo into his hows; but 
this a3ens Gabaa in comoun we shulen 
10 doo. Ten men ben chosun of an hundrid, 
of alle the lynagis of Yrael, and an hun- 
drid of a thowsand, and a thousand of 
ten thowsandis, that thei beren to the 
oost metis, and we fi3tynge mowen a3zens 
Gabaa of Beniamyn 3eelden to hym for 
11 the hidows gilt, that he deserueth. And 
al Yrael cam to gidre to the citee, as 
o’ man, in the same thou3t and with o* 
i12counseil. And thei senten messageris to 
al the linage of Beniamyn, ‘the whicheY 


shulden seye, Whi so myche felonye is . 


13foundun in 3ou? Takith the men of Ga- 
baa, that this trespasse han doo, that thei 
dyen, and yuel be doo awey fro Yrael. 
The whiche wolden not here the mawnde- 
ment of the sones of Yrael, her britheren, 
14 but of alle the cytees, that weren of her 
lot, camen togidre in Gabaa, that to hem 
thei my3ten bere helpe, and a3ens al the 
ispuple of Yrael fisten. And there ben 
founden fyue and twenti thowsandis of 
Beniamyn, of men drawynge out swerd, 


uQOm.c. Y grete BCEFH. 


tOm.1. the ny3t1. Vv that x. 
Z traueliden plures. han traucilid 1, 
hirr. ‘fgret1. & Nowaller1 4 to doixmo. 
"this thing 1. © Be there ten men 1. 
t that thing 1. 
sente 1. Zand their. @ han dor. 


b the yuel 1. 
f the part of Benjamin 1. 


8 of the lynage of 1. 


JUDGES. 


Woon BEFI. 


w Om. plures. 
a yneredible 1. 
i the word 1. 
P hundrid men 1. 
u hath disserued for this trespass 1. 
¢ But Beniamin wolde not 1. 


XX. 5—15- 


baa of Beniamyn, and Y* turnede thidur. 
And lo! men of that citee cumpassiden ins 
ny3t" the’ hows, in” which* Y dwellide**, 
and thei wolden sleY met, and thei bitra- 
ueliden? my wijf with vnbileneful* wood- 
nesse of letcherie; at> the Jast{ sche was 
deed. And Y took, and Y° kittide’ hire 
in to gobetis, and Y sente partis® in to alle 
the termes of 3oure possessionn; for so 
greet felonye and so greuousef synne was 
neuere doon in Israel. Alle® 3e sones of7 
Israel ben present ; deme 3e, what 3e owen 
do", And al the puple stood, and answer-8 
ide as bi word! of o man, ‘that is acord- 
yngli, with out azenseiyng and with out 
delay*, We schulen not go awei! in to 
oure tabernaclis, nethir ony man™ schal 
entre in to his hows; but we schulen do9 
this" in comyn ajens Gabaa. 
be® chosun of an hundrid, of alle the ly- 
nagis of Israel, and an hundrid? of a thou- 
synde, and a thousynde! of ten thousynde, 
that thei bere metis to the oost, and that* 
we, fijtynge a3ens Gabaa of Beniamyn, 
moun 3elde to it ‘for the trespas* that? 
that it deserueth®. And al the puple,‘as1 
o man’, cam togidere to the citee bi the. 
same thou3t and” o* counsel. And ‘thei12 
sentenY messangeris to al the lynage of 
Beniamyn, ‘whiche messangeris’ seiden, 
Whi so greet felony is foundun in 30u? 
Bitake 3e the men of Gabaa, that diden*13 
this wickidnesse, that thei die, and yuel> 
be doon awey fro Israel. ‘Whiche nolden® 
here the comaundement® of her britheren, 
the sones of Israel, but of€ alle the citees, 14 
that weren of ‘her part, thei’ camen togi- 
dere in to Gabaa, to helpe hem, and to 
fi3te ajens al the puple of Israel. And fyue 15 
and twenti thousyndel|| weren foundun of® 
Beniamyn, of men drawynge out swerd, 


Xoone. Ythatc. 


x that 1. 


xx dwellide ynne 1K. Y haue slawe 1. 
> and at 1. 


¢QOm.ix. ‘kitter. © tho partis of 

k Om. 1. lhennsi. M™of ust. 
ad thousynde meni. 'Om.1.  § Om.1. 
Vv Om. 1. wand bi1. *Om.cpm.  Y Israel 
dheest 1. © men of I. 


+ and they 
wolden sle me, 
no but Y wolde 
bitake my wiyf 
to hem, as Jo- 
sefus seith, 
ethir they wol- 
den sle me, in 
turmentinge 
me bi fleisly 
knowing and 
uuleueful, as 
other men 
seyen. Lire 
here. C. 

tat the last; the 
dekene preuyde 
his seiyng bi 
witnessis, bi his 
seruaunte, and 
bi the elde man 
and his meynee, 
for thei schul- 
den not go to 
batel azenes 
men of Gabaa, 
for his word 


‘Ten men l0aloone. Lire 


here. c. 


|| In Ebreu it 


is, twenti six 
thousinde. c. 


XX. 16—25. 


16 biside the dwellers of Gabaa, that weren 
seuen hundryd moost my3ti men, so with 
the lift as with the riz3t fi3tynge, and so 
with slyngis stones at certeyn throw- 
ynge, that an heer forsothe thei my3ten 
smyte, and in to noon other partie the 
strook of the stoon shulde be born aweye. 

17 Forsothe of the men of Yrael, with outen 
the sones of Beniamyn, ben foundun foure 
hundrid thowsandis of men drawynge out 

isthe swerd and redi to the* fijt. The 
whiche rysynge camen into the hows of 
God, that is in Silo; and thei counseyl- 
den hym, and seiden, Who shal be in 
oure oost prince of the strijf a3ens Ben- 
iamyn? To whom the Lord answerde, 

19 Judas be he 3oure duyk. And anoon the 
sones of Yrael rysynge eerly setten tentis 

20a3ens Gabaa. And thens goynge forth to 
the fi3t azens Beniamyn, thei bigunnen to 

21fi3t ajens the cytee. And the sones of 
Beniamyn goon out fro Gabaa, slowen of 
the sones of Irael that day two and 
22twenti thowsandis of men. And eft the 
sones of Yrael and in strength and in 
noumbre trustynge, in the same place in 
which rather thei stryuen, thei dresseden 
23the sheltroun®; so neuerthelater that be- 
fore thei stieden, and wepten before the 
Lord ynto the ny3t, and counseilden hym, 
and seiden, Shal I more goon forth to 
fiz3ten ajens the sones of Beniamyn, my 
bretheren, or nay? To whom he an- 
swerde, Stieth vp to hem, and goth into 
aithe strijf And whanne the sones of 
Yrael the tother day a3ens Beniamyn to 
25the batayl weren goon, the sones of Ben- 
iamyn breken out fro the 3atis of Ga- 
baa, and a3en comynge to hem, so mych 
slau3ter thei mich wexen wood in hem, 


JUDGES. 


671 


outakun" the dwelleris' of* Gabaa, whiche! 16 
weren seuen™ hundrid strongeste" men, 
fiztynge so with the lefthond as with the 
rij3thond, and castynge so° stoonus with 
slyngis at a certeyn thing, that thei my3ten 
smyte also an heer, and the strook of the 
stoon schulde not be borun? in to ‘the 
totherd part". Also of the nen of Israel, 17 
: 5 3 + twenti two 
with out the sones of Beniamin, weren  thousynde of 
foundun foure hundrid thousynd ‘of men’ 72"... 
drawynget swerd and redi to batel. Whiche" 18 !srd hadden 
° : inst batel, ne- 
riseden’ and camen in to the hows of 
God, that is in Silo; and thei counceliden — myche in ber 
4 » ‘ multitnd d 
God”, and seiden, Who schal be prince in sera he 
therfor the 
Lord suffride 
sweride, Judas be 30ure duyk. And anoon 19 in the bigyn- 
eine . nyng, that thei 
the sones of Israel risidenY eerli, and set- 
maad meke and 
rene to the 
thei 3eden forth* to batel a3ens Beniamyn, 
and bigunnen? to fijte a3ens ‘the citee®. virtu than of 
her owne. E- 


theles they 
tristiden ouer 
strengthe ; 
oure oost of the batel a3ens the sones of 
Beniamyn? To whiche* the Lord an- bem tobeouer- 
comun twyes 
schulden be 
tiden” tentis ajens Gabaa. And fro thennus 20 
Lord, and triste 
more of Goddis 
And the sones of Beniamyn jeden out of 21 brews seyen, 
that this bifelde 


Gabaa, and killiden‘ of the sones of Israel to hem, for 
: as * i e they weren 
in that dai two and twenti thousynde of® client to 


ment. And eft the sones ofIsrael tristiden 22 punysche ido- 
in strengthef and’ noumbre®, and dress- hows of Myeas 
: . : : 3 and in the ly. 
iden! schiltrnn, in the same place in which nage of the 
thei fou3ten bifore; so netheles that thei 23 

stieden* bifore!, and wepten™ bifor™ the 


sones of Dan, 
which dede hi- 
felde nexthifor 
j : this, as Ebrews 
Lord ‘til to® ny3t, and counseliden? hym4, eae os 
‘ idolatre 
and seiden, Owe’ Y go forth more to fi3te was opyn and 
. e as greuouse 
a3ens the sones of Beniamyn, my britheren, and greuousere 
. . » than this; ther- 
ether nay? To whiche* he answeride, Stie for it may ae 
3e to hem, and bigynne 3e batelt, And 24 sd rewonably, 
whanne the sones of Israel hadden go _ these thingis 
: , bifor seid, was 
forth to batel in the tother dai azens cause of the 
; 0 f 
Beniamyn, the sones of Beniamyn braken 25 the peple of. 
out of" the 3ates of Gabaa, and camen to Mabie 
hem’; and the sones of Beniamyn weren pe me a 
. yn 7, and 
wood a3ens hem’ bi so greet sleyug*, that so the firste 


synne schulde 


that ei3t and twenti thousandis of men thei castidenY doun ci;tene thousynde of” _ be punyschid 

bifor the se- 

counde. Lire 

aQm.r. P of ai. © schetrome E. here. C. 

h withoute1. iimendwellinger ‘ini. | the whiche1, ™ vj. cogh. sixe EFGKLPRSUX. % ful 
stronge I. ° of K see. m. P borun awei 1. 4 noon other 1. r partie or asijde 1. 8 Om. I. 
t drawynge out I. u the whiche 1. Vv arisen up 1. risen M. resin P. w with God 1. x whom 1. 
Yarisen up 1. risen M. resin vp. 7 theisettidens. @out1. > Israel biganner. ¢Gabaar. 4 thei 
killiden:r. ¢ Om.1. f the strengthe po. her owne strengthe 1. & of N. h in noumbre of peple 1. 
{thei dressiden 1. stiedenupr. !éo the hous t marg, thei weptent. "to fore1. © vn to1. 
P thei counseliden 1. 4 with him 1. rSchal1 8% whomr. +t the batel 1. 0 fro 1. v Israel 1. 


wIsrael 1. * ferssleyng1. Ythrewent. 2% Om. 1. 


672 


drawynge out swerdis thei threwen doun. 
26For what thing alle the sones of Yrael 
camen into the hows of God, and sit- 
tynge thei wepten before the Lord, and 
thei fastiden that day vnto euen®; and 
thei offreden to him‘ brent sacrifices and 
27 pesible sleyn sacrificis, and vpon her 
staat thei askiden. That tyme was there 
the arke of the boond of pees of God in 
28Sylo; and Phynees, the sone of Eliazar, 
sone’ of Aaron, was prouost of the hows. 
‘Thanne theif counseilden the Lord, and 
seiden, Shulen we more goon ont to the 
fij3t ajens the sones of Beniamyn oure 
bretheren, othir resten ? To whom seith$ 
the Lord, Stieth vp, forsothe to morwe 
29 I shal taak hem into 3oure hoondis. And 
the sones of Yrael putten busshementis 
bi the enuyroun of the cytee of Gabaa ; 
3oand the thridde sithe as oons and twyes 
a3ens Beniamyn the oost brou3te forth. 
31 But and the sones of Beniamyn hardili 
breken out of the cytee, and the aduer- 
saryes fleynge lenger thei pursueden, so 
that thei woundiden of hem, as the first 
day and the secounde, and slowen bi two 
pathis the turninge backis; of the whiche 
oon beer into Bethel, and the tothir into 
Gabaa. And thei threwen doun aboute 
32 thretti men; forsothe thei wenden in the 
wont maner to sleen hem; the whiche 
feynynge fli3t at the bigynnynge, wenten 
in counseil for to drawe hem awey fro the 
eytee, and as fleynge to bryngen to the 
33forseide pathis. And so alle the sones of 
Yrael rysynge fro her seetis tijten shil- 
tron in the place that is clepid Baaltha- 
mar. Forsothe the busshementis, thati 
about the cytee weren, ‘litil melome* hem 
34seluen bigunnen to opne, and fro the 


¢ the enen ce. Shem a. 
k g liti] and a litil y. 


amen of Israel 1. > drawynge out 1. 
Lord1, &theboond:. the Lord 1. 
n schul we reste 1. © whom 1. 
oost 1. Uthanne the 1. VY fro r. 
a Israel 1. > the whiche 1. ¢ streiz3t out 1. 
idestrie1. &Jsrael1. 1s thei diden bifore 1. 
hem to fle 1. @ Beniamin 1. 


Vfrorx. YOm.1. Wthatr. *a litils. 


JUDGES. 


ethe sone g pr.m.¥. fThei a prim. & seyde H. 


¢ thei saten 1. 
ithe sone 1. 

P 3e up ajens hem 1. 
W thei pursneden 1. 

4 and the 1. 

m and 1. 

¥ brynge forth Beniamin 1. 


XX. 26—34. 


men® drawynge> swerd. Wherfor alle the 26 

sones of Israel camen in to the hows of 

God, and saten*, and wepten bifore the 

Lord, and thei fastiden in that dai ‘til to 

euentid®; and thei offeriden to the Lord 

brent sacrifices and pesible sacrifices, and 27 

axidenf of her staat. In that tyme the 

arke of boond’ of pees of God" was there 

in Silof; and Fynees, the sone of Elea- 28 + This word 
zar, sone’ of Aaron, was souereyn of the 7 pice it 
hows*. Therfor! thei counseliden the Lord, “is yn4u- 
and seiden, Owen™ we go out more to ‘Silo, ifthe 
batel aj3ens the sones of Beniamyn, oure benow 
britheren, ethir reste"? To whiche® the here. c. 
Lord seide, Stie 3e”, for to morewe Y schal 

bytake hem‘ in to 3oure hondis. And the 29 

sones of Israel settiden buyschementis bi 

the’ cumpas of the citee of Gabaa; and the 30 

thridde tyme as onys and tweis* thei 

brou3ten forth oostt ajens Beniamyn. But31 

also the” sones of Beniamyn braken out 

of’ the citee booldli, and pursueden” fer- 

there the aduersaryes fleynge, so that thei 
woundiden of hem*, as inY the firste dai 

and the secounde, and killiden® bi twey 

paththis ‘the aduersaries* turnynge backis; 

of whiche? paththis oon was borun® in to 

Bethel, the’ tother in to Gabaa. And theif 

castiden§ doun aboute thretti men; for 32 

thei gessiden to slei hem* ‘bi customable 

maner!; whiche™ ‘feyneden fli3t" bi craft, 

and°® token counsel’, that thei scluiden 

drawe hem‘ fro the citee, and that thei 

as fleynge schulden brynge” to the for- 

seid paththis. Therfor’ alle the sones of33 

Israel risident of" her seetis, and’ settiden 

schiltrun in the place which” is clepid 
Baalthamar. And the buschementis, that 

weren aboute the citee, bigunnen to opene 

hem silf litil* and litil*, and to go forth 34 


bhOm.c. ithat weren «. 


dynto1. ¢€ the enentid kK. 
k Tordis hows1. 1 Thanner ™ Schult. 
4 Beniamin 1 'TOm.1. 8 tweis bifore 1. t the 
x Israel 1. Ytheidideniny. 2 thet killiden 1. 
f Beniamin 1. & threwe 1. 4 men of Israel 1. 
nOm.1. © Israel x. P counsel, feyninge 
s Thanne 1. t risynge up 1. resin P. 


f thei axiden the 


XX. 35—41. 


west parti of the citee to goon forth. 
But and othere ten thousandis of men 
of Yrael' dwellers of the cytee terreden 
to stryues; and the bateil is agreggid 
aj3ens the sones of Beniamyn, and thei 
vndurstoden not, that on alle sidis to hem 
35Stood yn deeth. And the Lord smoot 
hem in the sijt of the sones of Yrael, 
‘and thei slowen of hem in that day 
fyue and twenti thowsandis and an hun- 
drid men, alle fi3ters and drawinge out 
3cswerd. Forsothe the sones of Beniamyn, 
whanne thei hadden seen hem self to be 
the nethermore, thei bigunne to flee. 
The which thing biholdynge the sones 
of Yrael, 3euen to hem place to flee, that 
thei mi3ten come to the maad redi 
busshementis, ‘the whiche™ bisyde the 
37¢eytee thei setten. The whiche whanne 
hadden® ryse sodeynly fro the hidilis, 
and Beniamyn 3af backis to the sleers, 
thei wenten into the cytee, and smyten 
33 it in mouth of swerd. Forsothe the sones 
of Yrael hadden jeuen a tokne to hem 
that weren sett in busshementis, that 
after that thei hadden take the cytce, 
fier thei shulden teend, and the smook 
stiynge vp into hei3t, thei shulden shewe 
sothe cytee takun. The which thing 
whanne the sones of Yrael put in that 
strijf shulden biholde ; forsothe the sones 
of Beniamyn wenden hem to fleen, and 
more bisily folweden, sleyn of the oost 
4oof hem thretti men; and thei seen as a 
piler of smook fro the citee to stien vp; 
forsothe Beniamyn biholdynge bihynde, 
whanne he saw3 the cytee takun, and the 
4iflawmis to be born into hei3t, the whiche 
beforehond feyneden fliz3t, turnede the 
face strongly? withstoden. The which 
thing whanne the sones of Beniamyn 


lal Yrael ce. © that c. 


yOm.1. 2 stiriden Beniamin. & that 1. 


JUDGES. 


9 thei hadden' x pr. m. 


b Beniamin 1. 


673 


fro the west part of the citee. But also 
othere ten thousynde of men of al Israel 
excitiden? the dwelleris of the® cite to 
batels; and the batel was maad greuous 
ajens the sones of Beniamyn, and thei 
vndurstoden not, that perisching nei3ede 
to hem on eche part. And the Lord smoot 3s 
hem? in the si3t of the sones of Israel, and 
‘thei killiden® of hem in that dai fyue and 
twenti thousynde and an hundrid men‘, 
alle® thef werryours and drawynge" swerd. 
Sothelis the sones of Beniamyn bigunnen" 36 
to fle, ‘whanne thei sien, that thei weren 
the lowere!, And the sones of Israel sien 
this, and ‘3auen to hem place to fle, that 
thei schulden come to the buyschementis 
maad redi, whiche! thei™ hadden set bi- 
sidis the citee. And whanne thei" hadden 37 
rise® sudenli fro hid places, and Beniamyn 
3af backis to the sleeris, thei entriden in 
to the citee, and smytiden? it by the 
scharpnesse of swerd. Sotheli® the sones 33 
of Israel hadden 30ue a signe*’ to hem 
whichet thei hadden set in buysehementis", 
that aftir that’ thei hadden take the citee, 
thei schulden kyndle fier’, and that bi 
smook stiynge* an hi3, thei schulden 
schewe the citee takunY. And whanne?39 
the sones of Israel set in thilke* batel 
sien? this®; for the sones of Beniamyn 
gessiden hem® to fle, and thei sueden® bi- 
silieref, whanne thretti men of her’ oost 
weren slayn; and ‘the sones of Israel 40 
sien as a piler of smoke stie' fro the 
citee ; also‘ Beniamyn bihelde** bihynde, 
whanne he si3 the! citee takun, and 
flawmes™ borun® an hie, thei that feyu-41 
eden fli3t° bifore, ‘a3enstoden strongliere 
with face turned?, And4 whanne the sones 
of Beniamyn hadden seyn this", thei weren 
turned in to fli3t, and thei bigunnen to go 42 


P strengereli cern. 


¢ Israel killider. dof menc. © and alle 1. 


f these werent. ff men drawynge out 1. And whanne 1, 4 hadden seen hem silf to be the lower part, thei 


bigunnen 1. !Om,1. & thei jauen 1. 
P thei smoten 1. 
fier}. * stiynge up 1. 
© pursueden hem.  bisiloker 1. 
This1. ™ the flawines 1. " be borun 1. 


Y to be takun 1. 
8 Israel 1. 


l the whiche 1. 
q4Om.1. TAnd 1. *tokene 1. * thatr. 4 the buyschementis 1. 
Z that 1. 
h thei 1. 
© to fle 1. 
him more strongly 1. a3enstoden strongli with face turnide b. 


m Israel 1. ™ these bushementis 1. © rise up 1. 
vOm. 1. Wtherynue 
athat 1. bschuldenser ¢thati. 4 Israel 1. 
Ustieup1. & And also1. &k biholdinge 1. 
P turneden her face to Beniamyn, and withstoden 


4Om.c. ' this thing 1. 
4k 


674 
hadden seen, thei ben turned in‘ fli3t, 
szand to the weye of deseert thei bigunne 
to goon ; forsothe thider hem aduersaryes 
pursuynge, but and thes, that setten the 
43 toun on fier, ajen comynge™ to hem, And 
so it is doon, that on either parti thei 
ben slayn of enemyes, ne there was eny 
reste of men dyynge; and thei fellen, and 
ben throwen down at the eest coost of 
41 the cytee of Gabaa. Forsothe there weren, 
that in the same place ben slayn, ei3teen 
thousandis of men, al moost stronge fizters. 
45The which thing whanne hadden seen 
that leften of Beniamyn, thei flowen 
into wildirnes, and wenten to the stoon, 
whos name is Remmon. Forsothe in that 
fli3t opynli hidir and thider rennynge 
and into dyuerse placis goynge thei 
slowen fyue thowsandis of men; and 
whanne ferther thei wenten, thei pur- 
sueden hem, and slewen also othere two 
ssthowsandis. And so is doo, that alle 
that fellen of Beniamyn in dyuerse placis, 
weren fyue and twenti thowsandis, fiz3ters 
azat batayls moost redy. And so there 
laften of al the noumbre of Beniamyn, 
that my3ten scape’, and fleen into wilder- 
nesse, sixe hundred men; and thei setten 
in the stoon of Remmon foure monethis. 
4s Forsothe the sones of Yrael goon out, 
smyten with swerd al the relif of the 
cyte, fro man vnto beest"; and alle the 
citees and lytil touns of Beniamyn de- 
uowrynge flawm waastide. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 The sones forsothe of Yrael hadden 
sworn in Maspha, and seiden, Noon of ys 
shal 3yue to the sones of Beniamyn of 

2his dou3tris a wijf. And alle thei camen 
to the hows of God in Sylo, and in the 
si3t of hym sittynge vnto euen thei rere- 


q into c. ' camen c. comyn EF. 


Vv was I. 


8QOm.1. therr, °% Beniamyn 3. 
> leften alijue 1. 


a ful stronge fiztinge men 1. 


JUDGES. 


S ascapyn EFI. 


Ww ther was ony 1. 
© opynli aftir 3. 


to® the weie of deseert ; while also aduer- 
saries pursueden hem there, but also thei, 
that hadden brent thet citee, camen a3ens 


hem. And so it was doon, that thei" 43 


weren’ slayn of enemyes on ech part, ne- 
ther ony” reste of men diynge was*; and 
thei felden, and weren cast doun at the 
eest coost of the citee of Gabaa. 
sotheY thei, that weren slayn in the same 
place, weren’ ei3tene thousynde of ‘men, 


alle strongeste fiz3teris*. And whanne thei 45 


that leften’ of Beniamyn hadden seyn 
this, thei fledden in to wildirnesse, and 
thei 3eden to the stoon, whos name is 
Remmon. And in that fli3t the sones of 
Israel 3eden opynli*, ‘and 3eden’ in to 
dyuerse places, and killiden® fyue thou- 
synde men; and whanne theif 3eden® fer- 
ther", thei pursueden hem, and killiden 


also! othere twei thousynde*. And so it was 46 


doon, that alle! that felden doun™ of Ben- 
iamyn in dinerse places, weren fyue and 
twenti thousynde,t ‘fizterys moost” redi to 
batels. 
of al the noumbre of Beniamyn, that 
my3ten ascape, and fle in to wildirnesse ; 
and thei® saten in the stoon of Remmon 
foure monethis. 
Israel 3eden out, and smytiden4 with 
swerd alle the remenauntis of the citee, 
fro men ‘til to" werk beestis; and de- 
uourynges flawme wastide alle the citees 
and townest of Beniamyn. 


CAP. XXI. 


Also" the sones of Israel sworen in Mas-! 
pha, and seiden, Noon of vs schal 3yue to 
the sones of Beniamyn a wijf of his dou3- 
tris. And ‘alle camen’ to the hows of God2 
in Silo, and thei saten in the ‘si3t of hym” 
‘til to* euentid’, and thei reisiden? the? 


tmenc. ¥ bestus c. 


xOm.1. 
4 Om. 1. 


yAndi 2 wasce. 
€ ther killiden of hem 1. 


f Beniamyni. & fledde 1. » forth there crcKmNogusxb. ialso of hem 1. k thousynde men x. alle the 


meni. ™dounslaynit, menfulri. otheses. P Andi. 4 thei smoten 1. smetin Pp. ° vntor. 
Sbrennynge 1. ¢ the litle townesr. 4 Certes1. Val Israel camex. W Lordis sist 1. *vnto1 Y the 
euentid 1. 2reridenups. her 1. 


XX. 42-——-XXI. 2. ° 


For- 44 


And so sixe hundrid men leften 47 


++ weren xxv. 
thousynde ; 

bi the trenthe 
of Ebreu, of 
the sones of 
Beniamyn 
weren twenti 
six thonsynde, 
and with this, 


YorsotheP the sones of 48 vii. hundrid 


of Gabaa, and 
so a thonsinde 
men and an 
hnndrid failen. 
Ebrews seyen 
that these fled- 
den in to othere 
citees of Benia- 
myn, and weren 
slayn aftirward 
in the citees, 
with wymmen 
and othere 
beestis. Lire 
here. c. 


XXI. 3—14. 


den a voys, and with greet 3eelynge bi- 
3gunnen to wepe, seiynge, Whi, Lord God 
of Yrael, this yuel ys doo in thi puple, 
that this day oY lynage be doon awei fro 
avs? Forsothe the tothir day eerli rysynge 
thei maden vp an auter, and offreden 
there brent sacrificis and pesible sleyn 
5 Offryngis, and seiden, Who stiede not vp 
in the oost of the Lord of alle the lynagis 
of Yrael? Forsothe with greet ooth thei 
bounden hem seluen, whanne thei weren 
in Maspha, hem to be slayn that thennus 
6weren. And lad by othenkynge the sones 
of Yrael vpon her brother Beniamyn, thei 
bigunnen to seyn, There is doon awey 
70” lynage fro Irael; whens shulen thei 
taake wyues ? forsothe alle in comyn we 
han sworn ys not to 3yue oure dou3tresY 
sto hem. And therfor thei seiden, Who 
is of alle the lynagis of Irael, that stiede? 
not vp to the Lord in to Maspha? And 
loo! there ben foundun dwellers of Jabis 
9Galaad not haue ben in that oost. For- 
sothe that tyme, whanne thei weren in 
10 Sylo, noon of hem is foundun there. And 
so thei senten ten thousand moost stronge 
men, and comaundiden to hem, Goth, and 
smitith the dwellers of Jabis Galaad in 
mouth of swerd, as wel wymmen as the* 
ulitil children of hem. And this shal be, 
that 3e shulen kepe wel, alle of maal 
kynde and wymmen, that han knowun 
izmen, sleeth; maydens kepe 3e. And 
there ben foundun of Jabis Galaad foure 
hundryd maydens, that knewen not the 
bed of man; and thei brou3ten hem to 
the tentis in Silo, in to the loond of Cha- 
isnaan. And thei senten messagers to the 
sones of Beniamyn, that weren in the 
stoon of Remmon; and thei comaundiden 
to hem, that thei shulden take hem in 
14pees. And the sones of Beniainyn camen 


JUDGES. 


675 


vois, and bigunnen” to wepe with greet 
3ellyng, and seiden, Lord God of Israel,» 
whi is this yuel don in thi puple, that 
to dai o lynage be takun awey of¢ vs? 
Sotheli in the tother4 day thei risiden4 
eerli, and bildyden an auter, and offriden 
there brent sacrifices and pesible sacri- 
fices, and seiden, Who of alle the lynagiss 
of Israel stiede not? inf to’ the oost of the 
Lord? For whanne thei weren in Mas- 
pha, thei ‘hadden bounde" hem silf with 
a greuouse! ooth, that thei that failiden* 
schulden be slayn™. And the sones of Israel ¢ 
weren led bi penaunce on" her brother Ben- 
iamyn, and bigunnen?® to seie, O lynage of 
Israel is takun awey ; wherof schulen thei7 
take wyues? for? alle we sworen4 in comyn, 
that we schulen not 3yue oure dou3tris to 
hem. Therfor' thei seiden, Who is® of alles 


. the lynagis of Israel, that stiede not' to 


the Lord in Maspha? And lo! the dwell- 
eris of Jabes of Galaad weren foundun, 
that thei weren not in the’ oost*. Alsog 
in that tyme, whanne thei* weren’ in Silo, 
noon of hem’ was foundun there. Ther- 10 
for? thei® senten ten thousynde strong- 
este men, and’ comaundiden to hem, Go 
3e, and smyte® the dwelleris of Jabes off 
Galaad bi the® scharpnesse of swerd, as 
wel the wyues as ‘the litle children of 
hem’, And this thing schal be‘, which!1! 
je ‘owen to™ kepe, sle je alle of male 
kynde, and the wyimmen, that knewen" 
men fleischli; reserue® 3e the virgyns?. 
And foure hundrid virgyns, that knewen 12 
not the bed of man, weren foundun of 
Jabes of 1 Galaad ; and thei brou3ten hen: 
to the castels' in Silo, in to the lond of 
Chanaan. And ‘thei senten® messangeris ! 
to the sones of Beniamyn, that weren in 
the stoon of Remmon; and thei comaund- 
iden to hem, that thei schulden resseyue 


Yoon BEFH. Woon peru. * thei ap prem. ru. Ydou3ztren pro. 7 stejeth £. 8 Om. c. 


b thei bigunnenr. ¢froc. 4oother1, ¢notupr. fOm.cs. & Om, BDEFG sec. m. KLNOPQRUX. 
b bounden kx. iful gretr. « failiden thennst1. ™deed1. 2 uponi. ©%the biguiment. P certes 1. 
Ghanswornr. *Thannex. Sisitr. tnotupx. Y¥ that BcEFGxLMNoparsuwx. W Lordis oost 1. 
x Israel it. Y wast. 2 Jabes meynee 1. a Thanne 1. b the sones of Israel. © ful stronge 1. 
dandtheir. ¢smytezer fandofi. &Om.1.  bhers. ‘her 3goungechildrens. be to 
jour. Ithatx, mschulx. han knowei. © but kepex. Pmaidensi. andofr.  * tentis 1. 


8 Israel sente 1. 


ARQ 


676 


in that tyme, and ben 3enen to hem 
wyues of the dou3tres? of Jabis Galaad ; 
forsothe other thei founden, ‘the whiche® 
15lijk maner thei shulden take. And al 
Yrael greetli sorowide, and dide othenk- 
ynge vpon the slau3ter of of lynage of 
16 Yrael. And the more thurth birth seiden, 
What shulen we doo to the tother, that 
han take no wyues? Alle the wymmen in 
17 Beniamyn fellen togidre, and with greet 
bisynes to vs and myche stodye it is to 
puruey, lest o¢ lynage be doon awey fro 
1s Yrael. QOure dou3tres we mowen uot 
jyue to hem, bounden bi ooth and curs- 
ynge, in the which we han seide, Cursid 
that shal 3yue of his dou3tris a wijf to 
19 Beniamyn. And thei token counseil, and 
seiden, Loo, the solempnete of the Lord 
is in Silo, torn® aboute bi the 3eer, that 
is set at the north of the cytee of Bethel, 
and at the eest coost of the weye that 
goth fro Bethel to Siccymam, and to the 
20 south of the bur3 toun of Lebona. And 
thei comaundiden to the sones of Benia- 
myn, and seiden, Goth, and lurkith in 
2ithe vynes; and whan 3e seen the dou3- 
tris of Sylo at the dauncis to be lad aftir 
the maner to goo forth, goth’ out so- 
deynly out of the’ vines, and takith hem, 
eche sondry® wyues, and goth into the 
22loond of Beniamyn. And whanne the 
faders of hem and britheren comen, and 
a3ens 30u bigynnen to pleyne and chiden, 
we shulen seye to hem, Hath mercy on 
hem; forsothe thei rauysheden not hem 
bi lawe of figters and of ouercomers ; but 
to hem preyinge, that thei my3ten take, 
3e han not 3euen; and on 3oure parti is 
23the synne. And the sones of Beniamyn 
diden as to hem was comaundid, and 
after her noumbre thei rauyssheden to 
hem, of hem that ladden dauncis, sondry® 


b douztren ari. © that c. 


d oon BEFH. 


tOm. 3. tyme to Israeli. Vand of 1. 
aa gettere A. > the lynage of Beniamyn 1. 
f studie 1, § Om.1. bh Beniamyn 1. 
3eris turnyng aboute, that 1. © north coost 1. 
TF comaundide 1. ' seide xr. Sand be x, 
¥tho wymmen zx. 2 schul bigynne 1. 
e for thi that 3e 1. 


JUDGES. 


w for 1. 
© han falle 1. fellen x. 
i with cursyng 1. 
P ether burgh toun x marg. 
tOm 1 

a to plete 1. 

f han not jouen 3oure dou3iris 1. 


Des oi eae 


tho wymmen in peest. And the sones of 14 
Beniamyn camen in‘ that tyme", and the. 
dou3tris of Jabes of  Galaad weren 3ouun 
to hem to wyues; forsothe’ thei founden 
not* othere wymmen, whiche thei schulden 
3yueY in lijk maner. And al Israel sorewide 15 
greetly, and dide penaunce on? the sleyng 
of o* lynage of Israel. And the grettere** 16 
men in birthe seiden, What schulen we 
do to the othere men, that han not take 
wyues? Alle the wymmen in Beniamyn? 
felden® doun, and it? ‘is to® vs to puruey!i7 
‘with greet cure and greet studie®, that o 
lynage be not don awey fro Israel. Weis 
moun not 3yue oure dou3tris to hem}, for 
we ben boundun with an ooth and curs- 
yng’, bi which* we seiden, Be he cursid 
that 3yueth of hise dou3tris a wijf to Ben- 
iamyn. And thei token a! counsel, and 19 
seiden, Lo! annyuersarie™ solempnyte of 
the Lord is in Silo, whych® is set at the 
north® of the citee of Bethel, and at the 
eest coost of the weie that goith from 
Bethel to Siccyma, and at the south of 
the citeeP of? Lebona. And thei%4 co- 
maundiden’ to the sones of Beniamyn, and 
seiden'', Go 3e, be® 3e hid in the’ vyneris ; 
and whanne 3e seen dou3tris® of Silo go’ 
forth bi custom to lede daunsis, go 3e out 
of the vyneris sudeynli, and rauysche 3e 
hem, eche man o* wijf, and go 3e in to the 
lond of Beniamyn. And whanne the fa-22 
dris and britheren of hemY schulen come, 
and bigynne’ to pleyne and plete* ajens 
jou, we schulen seie to hem, Haue 3e> 
mercy of hem}; for thei rauyschiden® not 
hem!® bi ri3t of fizteris and ouercomeris, 
but® 3e ‘3anen not’ to hem preiynge that 
thei schulden take§; and the synne is of 
3oure part{. And the sones of Beniamyn 23 
diden as it was comaundid to hem, and bi 
her noumbre thei rauyschiden wyues to 


20 


21 


etumed ce. fgon. & Om. H. 2 sunder c. 


Xnoner. Y3yuefohem 1. Zofr. @thator. 
d with gret charge it 1. © fallith 1. 
10m. rx. ™ther ®the 
q Om. m. aq Israel 1, 
Athe douztris1. Yto gor. Woutthanner. *ar. 
bOm.3. © han not rauyshed 1. d tho wymmen 1. 
& take hem to wyues I. 


k the which 1. 


+ In Ebreu it 
is, Thei co- 
maundiden, 
that thei schul- 
den resseyue 
tho men in 
pees; and ever 
either was soth, 
for it was co- 
maundid to the 
sones of Benia- 
myn, that they 
schulden res- 
seyue tho vir- 
gyns in to 
wyuys, and it 
was comaundid 
to the virgyns 
that they schul- 
den consente 
in this. Lire 
here. c. 

} In Ebreu it 
is thns, Haue 3¢ 
mersy of hem, 
for we token 
not fro a man 
his wiyf in 
batel, nether 3e 
3auen to hem, 
whi 3e schulen 
be blamed in 
tyme. Ebrews 
expownen thus 
this lettre, have 
3e mersi of hem, 
that thei moun 
reparele the 
lynage bi gene- 
racioun ; for we 
token not fro a 
man his wiyf, 
that is, to ech 
man a wiyf to 
be couplid to 
him ; in batel 
a3enus the men 
of Jabes, but 

ii. hundrid 
men failen of 
wyues 5 nether 
3e 3auen to hem, 
whi 3e schulen 
be blamed in 
tyme, that is, 
blame of brek- 
ing of 3oure 
ooth may not 
be pnt to 3ou, 
for 3e janen 
not to hem, and 
3e sworen no 
more, no bnt 
that 3e schul- 
den not 3yue, 
ajenus which 
ooth 3e diden 
not, for they 
resseyueden 
not hem of 
joure wille. 
Lire here.c. 

t the synne is 
of 30ure part, 
for 3e kepten 
not diligently 
3oure dou3tris. 
Lire here. c. 


XXI. 24. 


wyues. And thei wenten into her pos- 
sessioun, bildynge vp cytees, and dwell- 

21ynge in hem. Forsothe the sones of 
Yrae] turneden a3en, bi lynagis and mey- 
nees, into her tabernaclis. In tho days 
was no kyng in Yrael, but ech on! that 
to hym semyde ry3t, that dide he. 


JUDGES. 


677 


hem, ech man o wijf, of hem that ledden 
daunsis. And thei jeden in to her posses- 
sioun, and bildiden citees, and dwelliden 
in tho. And the sones of Israel turneden 24 
a3en, bi lynagis! and meynees, in to her 
tabernaclis. In tho dayes was no kyng in 
Israel, but ech man dide this‘, that semyde 


ry3tful to hym silf. 
Here endith the book of Judicum, 


and nowe bigynneth the book of Ruth. Here endith Judicum, and here bigyn- 


neth Ruth’. 


iOm.c. Om. nceru. | Here endith the booc of Judicum, and bygynneth the storie of Ruth. g. 
Here endith the bok of Judicum. r. No final rubric in scx. 


h thei bildiden 7. i her lynagis 1. k that thing 1. 1 From acrosuw. Here eendith the book of 
Judicum, and bigynneth the book of Ruth. pinx. Here endith Judicum, and bygynneth Ruth. vab. Heere 
eendith Judicum, and bigynneth a prologe on Ruth. c. Here endeth the book of Doomes, se now the booc 
of Ruth. x. Here endith the book of Judicum, and here bigynneth a prologe on the book of Ruth. m. Here 
eendith the book of Judicum, and next suyng bigynneth the book of Ruth. x. No final rubric in evp. 


RU T H. 


[Prologue on the book of Ruth. | 


Tus book of Ruth schewith the feithfulnesse and stidefast loue of this wuamman 
Ruth to the moder of her hosebonde, after the deeth of her hosebonde and sones, 
turnynge a3en fro the lond of Moab in to Bethleem of Juda; wherfor God dide merci 
to Ruth, and sche was weddid to Booz, a wurthi man of Bethleem, and is rekened in 


the genologie of Dauith and of Crist*. 


Here bigynneth the bok of Ruth. 
CAP. I. 


1 IN the days of oon” iuge, whanne the 
ingis weren before in power, there is 
maad greet hungre in the erthe; and o° 
man of Bethlem Juda wente for‘ to pil- 
grimage in the regioun of Moabitide, 
with his wijf and his two free children®. 

2 And he was clepid Elemalech, and the 
wijf of hym Noemye, and the two sones, 
the toon Maalon, and the tother Chelion, 
Effratee of Bethlem Juda; and thei goon 
into the regioun of Moabitide, dwelliden 

3there. And Elemalech‘, the housboond of 
Noemie, is deed, and she lafte with the 

4sones; the whiche token Moabyte wyues, 
of whom oon was clepid Orpha, and the 
tother Ruth. And thei dwelliden ten 3eer 
sthere, and both been deed, Maalon that 
is, and’ Chelyon; and the womman laft 
prined two free children* and housboond. 

«And she roos for to goo into the cuntre 
with hir either dou3ter in lawe fro 
Moabitis regioun; forsothe she hadde 


a ¥rom r. No initial rubric in ascen. 
lech 4. & Om. a. 2} childer c. 


bac 


a This prologue is from m. 


© oon BFH. 4 CE. 


Here bigyuneth Ruth». 
CAP I. 


In the daies of o ingef, whanne iugis1 
weren souereynes®, hungur was maad in 
the loud; and a man of Bethleem of Juda 
jede to be a pylgrym in the cuntrei of 
Moab, with his wijf and twey4 fre sones. 
He was clepid Elymelech, and his wijf2 
Noemy, and the® twey sones, ‘the oonf 
was clepid Maalon, and the tother Che- 
lion, Effrateis of Bethleem of Juda; and 
thei entriden in to the cuntrey of Moab, 
and dwelliden® there. And Elymelech,3 
the hosebonde of Noemy, diede, and sche 
lefte with the> sones; and thei tokens 
wyues of Moab, of whiche* wyues oon! 
was clepid Orpha, the tother Ruth. And 
the™ sones dwelliden there ten 3eer, ands 
bothe® dieden, that is, Maalon and Che- 
lion; and the? womman lefte?, and was 
maad bare of twey4 fre sones, and hose- 
bonde’. And sche roos to go with euere 
eithir wijf of hir sones in to hir cuntrey 
fro the cuntrey of Moab; for sche hadde 


€QOm.c. ¢childerc. f Lema- 


>From 6. Here bigynneth the book of Ruth. ume. No initial rubric in the 


other mss. © sonereynes in Israel1. with histwot ¢hisi.  f the toon 1k. oon ELP. & thei 
dwelliden 1% Dbhirn ithe cuntrey of Moab1. the whiche 1. the toon x. ™thilker. ® bothe 
thei. Othis1. P Neomy was lefte 1, %hirtwo1. * hir hosebonde 1. 


+ 00 tuge, the 
Maistre of Sto- 
ries and summe 
othere seyen, 
that this iuge 
was Eli, but 
this is not soth, 
therfor Ebrews 
seien betere, 
that this iuge 
was Abessan. 
Lire here. c. 


I. 7—17. 


herd, that the Lord hadde biholden hir 
7puple, and hadde 3ouun hem! metis. And 
so she wente out fro the place of hir pyl- 
grimage with either dou;ter in lawe; and 
nowe in the weie set of turnynge ajen 
sinto the loond of Juda, she seide to hem, 
Goth in to the hows of 3oure moder; the 
Lord do with 3ou mercy, as 3e han do 
9with the deed, and with me; 3if he to 
3ow to fynde rest in the howses of the 
men, ‘the whiche* 3e ben to take. And 
10she kisside hem. The whiche with arerid 
vois bigunne to wepe, and seyn, With 
uthee we shulen goo to thi puple. To 
whom she answerde, Turneth ajen, my 
dou3tren!, whi coien 3e with me? Y 
haue no™ mo sonys in my wombe, that 
12men of me 3e mowen hope; turneth 
a3en, my Moabitis dou3tren", and goth; 
forsothe nowe I am waastid bi eeld, ne 
able to the boond of matrymonye; also 
if Y my3t this ny3t conceyue, and bere 
13sones, thou3 3e wolden abide to the tyme 
that thei wexen, and fulfillen the 3eeris 
of mannus age, before that 3e wedden 3e 
shulen be oold wymmen ; wolith not, Y 
biseche, my dou3tren", for 3oure angwish 
greuith me more, and the hoond of the 
14Lord is goon out ajens° me. Thanne 
arerid? the voice, eft thei bigunne to 
wepe. Orpha kisside her moder in lawe, 
and turnede a3en, Ruth cleuede to hir 
1smoder in lawe. To whom seide Noemye, 
Loo! thi cosyn is turned ajen to hir pu- 
ple, and to hir goddis; go thou with hir. 
16 The which answerde, Ne contrarye thou 
me, that Y forsake thee, and goo a wey ; 
whidir euere thou gost, I shal goo, and 
where thow abidist, and I togidre shal 
abyde; thi puple my puple, and thi God 
izmy God; what erthe the takith diynge, 


RUTH. 


679 


herd, that the Lord hadde biholde his pu- 
ple, and hadde® 30ue ‘metis to hem‘. Ther-7 
for" sche 3ede out of’ the place of hir 
pilgrymage with euer cither wijf of hir 
sones; and now sclie* was set in the 
weie of turnyng ajen in to the lond of 
Juda, and* sche seide to hem, Go 3eY in tos 
‘the hows of 30ure modir?; the Lord do 
mercy with 30u, as 3e* diden> with the 
deed men®, and with me; the Lord 3yuets 
to 30u to fynde reste in the howsis of hose- 
bondis®, whichef 3e schulen take. And sche 
kistes hem. Whiche® bigunnen to wepe 
with ‘vois reisid', and to seie, We schulen io 
go with thee to thi puple. To whiche*1 
sche answeride, My dou3tris!, turne 3e 
a3en, whi comen 3e with me? Y haue no 
more™ sones in my wombe, that 3e moun 
hope hosebondis of me; my dou3tris of 
Moab, turne 3e ajen, and go"; for now lz 
Y am maad eeld, and Y am not able to 
boond® of mariage ; 3he, thou3 Y my3te 
conseyue in this ny3t, and bere sones, if? 13 
je wolen abide til4 thei wexen, and fillen™ 
the 3eris of mariage, ‘3e schulen sunner 
be eld wymmen than 3e schulen be wed- 
did‘; I biseche, ‘nyle je", my dou3tris’, 
for 3oure angwische oppressith me more”, 
and the hond of the Lord 3ede* out ajzens 
me. Therfor, whanne the vois was reisidY, 14 
eft thei bigunnen to wepe. Orpha’ kisside 
‘the modir of hir husebonde®, aud turnede 
ajen, and Ruth ‘cleuyde to> ‘the modir of 
hir hosebonde®. To whom Noemy? seide, 15 
Lo! thi kyneswomman® turnedef ajen to 
hir puple, and to hir goddis; go thou 
with hir. And sche® answeride, Be thou 16 
not ‘aduersarye to" me, that Y forsake 
thee, and go awei; whidur euer thou schalt 
go, Y schal go, and where thou schalt 
dwelle, and‘ Y schal dwelle togidere; thi 


itohem zc. Kthatc. !dojtriscru. ™napru. 4 dojtrisc. Sana. Prerid c. 


8 that he hadde 1. 
7 30ure modir hous 1. 
husbandis housis 1. 
tren 1, dou3tir s. 
fillen 1. 
mourne 3e not 1. W the more 1. 
with 1. ¢ hir modir in lawe 1. 
hazens1. 1 Om. 1. 


t hem metis 1. 
ahec. » han dor. 
f the whiche 1. 
™moce. % goeth 1. 


X is go 1. 


u And so 1. 
¢ husbondis 1. 
h And thei 1. 
9° the boond 1. 
t 3it bifore that 3e weren wedded, 3e schullen be olde wymmen 1. 
y rerid 1. 
4 that is, stidefast K marg. 


& kisside 1. 


w whanne sche 1. 
4 graunte 1, 


V fro 1. xOm. 1. Y 3¢ ajen 1. 
© hows of hosebondis a pr. m. 
ihize vois1. whom. !dou3- 
P thou3 EGimNPQRsxb. vntor. °F ful- 
u Om. 1. V dou3tris, 
* hir modir in lawe 1. > abode 


z And Orpha r. 
fisturned:. 8 Ruthi. 


© cosyn IJ. 


680 


in it I shal die, and there I shal take 
place of biriynge; thes thingis God do 
to me, and thes thingis adde, if not oonly 
isdeth me and thee seuere. Seynge thanne 
Noemye, that with stedfast inwit Ruth 
hadde demed to goo with hir, wold not 
contrarye, nel more mouynge the turn- 
19 ynge ajen to hyrs". And thei wenten forth 
to gidre, and thei camen into Bethlem ; 
the whiche goon into the cytee, swift loos 
anentis alle men wex opyn, and the wym- 
20men seiden, This is ‘the ilk‘ Noemy. To 
whom she seith, Ne clepe 3e me Noemy, 
that is to seye, fayr, but clepith me Mara, 
that is, bittir; for with bitternes mych 
21 the Almy3ti hath fulfillid me. Ful I wente 
out, and voyd the Lord hath brou3t me 
agen; whi thanne clepe 3e me Noemy, 
whom the Lord hath mekyd, and the 
22 Almity hath tourmentid? Thanne cam 
Noemy with Ruth Moabite, hir dou3ter 
in lawe, fro the loond of hir pilgrim- 
age, and is turned a3en into Bethleem, 
whanne first men repident barly. 


CAP. II. 


1 There was forsothe a man, cosyn of 
Elymelech, a my3ti man and of greet 
2rytches, Booz bi name. And Ruth Mo- 
abite seide to hir moder in lawe, If thow 
comaunde, Y shal goo in to the feeld 
and gedre eeris that fleen the hoondis 
of repers, where euere Y shal] fynde grace 
of an housholder® mercyable in me. 
To whom she answerde, Goo, my dou3- 
ster. And so she 3ede, and gedride eeris 
after the backis of reperis. It felle for- 
sothe, that thilk”Y feeld hadde a lord, 
Booz bi name, that was of the kynrede 


GQnaBryH. thira. § that c, 


k ynnealso1. ladde her. ™ thingis to 1. 


RUTH. 


t ropeu c. 


n Thanne r. 


eed ee 


puple is my puple, and thi God is my 
God; what lond schal resseyue thee di-17 
ynge, Y schal die ther ynne*, and there 
Y schal take place of biriyng; God do to 
me these thingis, and adde! these thingis™, 
if deeth aloone schal not departe me and 
thee. Therfor™ Noemy si3, that Ruth 1s 
hadde demyde® with stidefast souleP to go 
with hir, and sche nolde4 be a3ens hir, 
nether counseile™ ferthere’ turnynge a3en 
‘to her cuntret ment. And thei 3eden19 
forth togidere, and camen in to Bethleem; 
and whanne thei entriden in to the citee, 
swift" fame roos’ anentis alle men, and 
wymmen seiden, This is thilke Noemy~. 
To whiche* sche seide, Clepe 3e not mezo 
Noemy, that is, fair, but ‘clepe 3eY me 
Mara, that is, bittere; for Almy3ti God 
hath fillid me greetli with bitternesse. 
Y 3ede out ful, and the Lord ledde* me2i 
a3en voide; whi therfor clepen 3e me 
Noemy, whom the Lord hath ‘maad low®, 
and Aliny3ti® God hath turmentid? Ther- 22 
fore Noemy cam with Ruth of Moab, ‘the 
wijf of hir sone‘, fro the.lond of hir pil- 
grimage, and turnede® ajen in to Beth- 
leem, whanne barli was ropun first. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothef a my3ti man’ and a> man ‘of 
grete richessis!,‘ Booz bi name*,‘was kynys- 
man of Elymelech'. And Ruth of Moabe 
seide to hir modir in lawe, If thou co- 
maundist™, Y schal go in to the feeld, and 
Y" schal gadere eeris of corn that fleen 
the® hondis of reperis, where euer Y schal 
fynde grace of an hosebonde man merci- 
ful in me. To whom sche answeride, Go, 
my dou3ter. Therfor? ‘sche 3ede1, and ga-3 
deride eeris of corn after the backis of 
reperis. Forsothe’ it bifelde, that ‘thilke 
feeld hadde a lord, Booz bi name’, that 


uhousoder a. VY that a the ilke x. 


© purposid;. Pwilli. 4 wolde not 1. 


Tmoue 3. § ferthermore to hirthe 1. ¢Om.r1r. Utanhasty 1. Varose1. that is, stidefast K marg. 
xwhomi. Yclepeth 1. # hath led 1. @lowid 1. > whom the Almy3ti1. © Thanner. 4 hir sones 
wijft. ¢scheturnider. f Ther was1. 8 man, the cosyn of Elymelech 1, > this 1. i was my3ti and 
riche 1. k and his name was Booz 1. !1Om.1. ™ biddist 1. 8 Om.1. © frothe 1. P Thanner. 4 3ede 


Ruth 1. = t And 1, 


8 Booz was lord of that feeld 1. 


II. 4-——13. 


1of Elymelech. And loo! he cam fro Beth- 
lem. And he seide to his repers, The Lord 
with 3ou. The whiche answerde to hym, 
5Thé Lord blesse to thee. And Booz 
seide to the 3ong man that was before 
in rewlynge to the repers, Whos is this 
echild womman? The which answerde, 
This is a Moabite, that cam with Noemy 
1fro Moabites regioun; and she preyede, 
that she mi3te gedre eeris leeuynge, fol- 
wewynge the steppis of the repers; and 
fro eerly vnto nowe she stondith” in the 
feeld, ne forsothe at o* moment she turn- 
sede aj3en to the hows. And Booz seith 
to Ruth, Here, dou3ter; ne goo thou into 
annother feeld to gedre, ne goo a wey fro 
this place, but be thou ioyned to my 
9 childrenY wymmen, and where thei repen, 
folwe’; forsothe Y haue comaundid to my 
childrenY, that noon be heuy to thee; but 
if also thou thrustist’, go to the litil cos- 
trils*, and drynk watris, of the whiche 
1omy children drenken. The which fall- 
ynge into hir face and lowtynge on erthe 
seide to hym, Whens to me this, that I 
fynde grace before thin eizen, that thou 
deyn to knowe me a pilgryme womman ? 
11 To whom he answerde, Alle thingis ben 
toold to me, that thou didist to thi moder 
in lawe after the deth of thi man, and 
that thou forsokist® thi fader and thi 
moder, and the loond in the® which thou 
ert born, and cam4 to the puple, whom 
12 before thou knewe not. The Lord 3elde 
to thee for thi werk, and fulle mede res- 
seyue thou of the Lord God of Yrael, to 
whom thou art comen, and vndre whos 
is weenges thou hast flowen. The which 
seith, Y haue founde grace before thin 
eyen, my lord, ‘the which® hast coum- 
fortid me, and spoken to the herte of 


Ww stont RFH. stant CE. Xakz, Om. c. 


y childer s. childre £1. 


RUTH. 681 


was of the kynrede of Elymelech. And4 
lo! het cam fro Bethleem. And he seide 
to’ the" reperis, The Lord be with 3ou. 
Whiche’ answeriden to hym, The Lord 
blesse thee. And Booz seide to the 3ong5 
man that was souereyn™ to* the reperis, 
Who’ is this damysel ? Whiche’ answer- 6 
ide, This is the womman of Moab, that 
cam with Noemy fro the cuntrey of Moab; 
and sche preiede, that sche schulde gedere7 
eeris* of corn leeuynge” bihynde, and sue® 
the ‘steppis of reperis’; and fro the mo- 
rewtid til now sche stondith® in the feeld, 
and sothelif nethir at a moment’ sche 
turnede a3en" hoom. And Booz seide tos 
Ruth, Dou3tir, here thou; go thou not 
in to anothir feelde' to gadere*, nether. go! 
awei fro this place, but be thou ioyned to 
my dameselis, and sue thou where thei9 
repen; for Y comaundide™ to my chil- 
dren, that ‘no man" be diseseful® to thee; 
but also if thou thirstist, go? to the far- 
delst, and drynke ‘watris, of whiche™ my 
children drynken. And sche felde on’ hir 10 
face, and worschipide ont the erthe; and 
seide" to hym, Wherof is this to me, 
that Y schulde fynde grace bifor thin ijen, 
that thou woldist knowe me a straunge 
womman? To whom he’ answeride, Alle 
thingis ben teld to me, whiche’ thou 
didist* to thi modir in lawe after the 
deeth of thin hosebonde, and that thou 
hast forsake thi fadir and modir’, and the 
lond ‘in which? thou were borun®, and 
hast” come to a puple, whom thou ‘know- 
ist not’ bifore. The Lord 3elde to thee for 12 
thi werk, and resseyue thou ful mede of 
the Lord God of Israel, to whom thou 
camest®, and vndir whose wengis thou 
fleddist. And sche seide, My lord, Y hane 1:3 
founde grace bifor thin izen, which‘ hast 


Z thriste ce. thrust BFH. 


4 costretis ce. » forsoke acer. forsake w. ©Om.c. come x. & that c. 

t Booz:. thisx. v And their. W cheefr. * ouerr. Y Whos a sec.m. #And hex. ® the eeris 1. 
bthat leuenr. ¢ that sche schulde sue x. ‘4 reperis steppis1. ‘hath abidenr. fcertes1, & Om.1. 
h not ajen o while to gor. imanns feelder. * gadere eeris1. 1 gothour. ™ haue comaundid 1. 
®noon of hemi. disesy 1. Pgothour. 4 fadirles o. * thou of the watris that1. Suponi. ‘him 
lowe upon. Usche seider. VY Booz1. Wthatr. *hastdor Ythemodirr, *thatr. 8 borun 
ynner. bthouartr. ¢that 1. 4 hast not knowen 1, €comest cr. f and thou 1. 


4s 


682 


thin hoond womman, ‘the which® am not 
lijk of oon of thi childrenf wymmen. 
11 And Booz seide to hir, Whanne our of 
etynge shal be, com hidre, and eet breed, 
and weet thi morsel® in eysel. And so 
she sat at the side of the repers, and 
made to hir potage, and she eet, and is 
15 fild, and took the relifes. And thens she 
roos, and after the maner she gedride! 
eeris. Forsothe Booz comaundide to his 
children, seiynge, Also if with 30w she 
16 wol repe, defende 3e hir not, and of 3oure 
forsothe hoondfuls throwith o purpose, 
and suffre 3e to abide stil, that with out 
shame she gedre; and gedrynge no man 
i7vndirnymime. Than she gedride in the 
feeld vnto euen; and that she gedrede 
with a 3eerde betynge and shakynge out, 
she foond of barli as the mesure of ephi, 
isthat is, thre busshels. The whiche ber- 
ynge she turnede a3en into the citee, and 
shewide to hir moder in lawe; also she 
brou3te forth, and 3af to hir the relif of 
hir meet, with the’ which she was fild. 
i9 And the moder in lawe seide to hir, 
Where to day hast thou gadrid, and 
where hast thou doo werk? Be he 
blessid, that hadde mercy of thee. And 
she shewide to hir, anentis whom she 
wron3te; and the name of the man she 
zoseide, that Booz he! was clepid. To 
whom answerde Noemy, Blessid be he 
of the Lord, for the same grace that he 
hath seuen to men o lyue, he hath kept 
and to the deed. And eft she seith, Oure 
21ny3 kyn is the man. And Ruth, For- 
sothe this he seith and comaundide to 
me, that so long I shulde be ioyned to 
the repers of hym, to the tyme that alle 
22the cornys ben ropen™. ‘Io whom seide 
the moder in lawe, Letere it is, dou3ter 


RUTH. 


Tl. 14-——22. 


coumfortid me, and hast® spoke to the herte 
of thin handmaide, which® am not lijk oon 


of thi dameselst. And Booz seide to hir, 14 + which am 


Whanne the our of etyng is, come thou 
hidur, and ete breed, and wete thi mussel! 
in vynegre. Therfor* sche sat at! the ‘side 
of reperis™; and he" dresside to® hir pot- 
age, and scheP eet, and was fillid; and 
sche took‘ the relifs. 
thennus to gadere eeris’ of corn bi cus- 
tom. Forsothe®’ Booz comaundide to hise 
children, and seide, Also if sche wole repe 


with 30u, forbede 3e not hir, and also ‘of16 


joure haudfulst caste 3e forth" of purpos, 
and suffre 3eY to abide, that sche gadere” 
with out schame; and no man repreue hir 


gaderynge*. TherforY sche gaderide in the 17 


feeld ‘til to? euentid; and sche beet? with 
a 3erde, and schook out tho thingis® that 
sche hadde gaderid; and sche foond of 
barly as the* mesure of ephi, that is, thre 


And sche roos fro1s 


not like oon of 
thi damesels ; 
in Ebreu it is, 
of thyn hand- 
maides, as if 
sche seide, ¥ 
am not of so 
greet valu, as 
thi leeste hand- 
maide, and 
therfor sche 
foond more 
grace anentis 
him. Lire here. 
Cc: 


buschels{. Which* sche bar, and turnede 18% This wore, 


a3en in to the citee, and schewide to hir 
modir in lawe; ferthermore sche® brou3tef 
forth, ‘and 3af to hir® the relifs of hir 
mete, with which mete! sche was fillid*. 
And the! modir in lawe seide to hir, 
Where ‘gaderidist thou™ to dai, and 
where ‘didist thou" werk ? Blessid be he, 
that hadde mercy on thee. And sche? telde 
to? hir4, at" whom sche wrou3te ; and sche 
seide the’ name ‘of the man, that het was 
clepid Booz. 
ide, Blessid be he of the Lord, for he 
kepte’ also to deed men the same grace, 
which” he 3af to the* quikey. And eft 


sche? seide, He is oure kynysman®. And2i 


Ruth seide, Also he comaundide this* to 
me, that so longe Y schulde be ioyned to 
hise reperis, til alle the® cornes weren 


repid?, To whom hir modir in lawe seide, 22 


To whom Noemy” answer- 20 


that is, thre 
buyschels, is 
not in Ebreu, 
but in the stide 
therof it is had 
thus, and of 
huyschels sche 
foond ephi of 


19 barly in this 


that sche hadde 
gaderid. Lire 
here. c. 


e that c. f chyldre neru. & mussel ce. h that eri. i gedere ern. k Om. c. 1Om. c. 
nM) repel BF. 

@ thon hast r. hthe which 1. ‘morsel ix. Kand1. ! bir. ™reperisside1. ™ Boozr. ° Om. 1. 
PRuthr Gtookup1. ‘*theeeriss, SAnd1. tOm.i1, * forth to hir handfuls 1. VY 3e thor. 


w gadere tho 1. * gaderynge hem. Y Thanne 1. 2 vnto thes. @threshide 1. Pcornes1. Car. 4 the 


which 1, and sche, ‘toker. § Om.1. bleuyngisr. ' Om.1. & fillid, and sche 3aue tho to hir 
modiri. lhirr.  ™ hast thon gedrid ‘hist. "hast thou donthis1. © Ruthr POm.s. @hir 
modir 3. Tanentisi, §thatthe mannesi. ¢Om.1. 4% that is stidefast K marg. hath kept 1. 
“that1. *Om.1. Yquike mens. *Neomy 1. @cosyni. ?thisthing:. ¢his1. 4 reper. 


If, 23——III. 9. 


myn, that with the childre wymmen of 
hym thou goo out to repe, lest in an- 
other feeld eny man withstoonde to thee. 

23 And so she is ioyned to the childre wym- 
men of Booz; and as long with hem she 
repide, to the tyme that the barli and the 
whete weren® leid in the beerns. 


CAPAIL: 


1 Aftyr forsothe that she was turned 
a3en to hir moder in lawe, she herde of 
hir, Dow3ter myn, Y shal seche to thee 
rest, and Y shal purney that it wel be 
2to thee. This Booz, to whos wymmen 
children thou art ioyned in the feeld, is 
oure ny3 kyn, and in this ny3t he wyn- 
snewith the flore of his barli. Be wasshen 
thanne, and anoynt, and clothid with the 
more worshipful clothis, and go doun 
into the flore; se thee no man, to the 
tyme that etynge and drynkynge he 
4haue eendid. Forsothe whanne he goth 
to sleepe, mark the place in the which 
he sleepith; and thou shalt com and 
discouere the mantil, with whych he is 
couerd, fro the parti of the feet, and thou 
shalt throwe thee doun, and there ligge®. 
Forsothe he shal seye to thee, what thou 
sowist to doo. The which answerde, 
What euere thing thou shalt comaunde, 
6I shal doo. And she wente doun into 
the floor, and dide alle thingis that the 
7moder in lawe comaundide to? hir. And 
whanne Booz hadde eten and dronken, 
and was maad gladder cheryd, and was 
goon to sleepe biside the heep of hand- 
fullis, she cam, and hidde hir; and dis- 
couerd the mantil fro his feet, she threwe 
shir self doun. And loo! nowe at myd- 
ny3t dradde the man, and is disturblid4; 
and he saw3 a womman liggynge" at his 
ofeet, and seith to hir, What art thou? 


nwasceru. © linc. 


RUTH. 


P Om. BcEFH. 


683 


My dou3ter, it is betere that thou go ‘out 
to® repe with hise damysels, lest in an- 
other feeld ony man ajenstonde thee. 
‘Therfor sche was ioyned to the damesels 23 
of Booz; and so longe sche rap’ with 
hem, til bothe’ barli' and wheete* weren 
closid in the bernys. 


CAP. III. 


Forsothe! aftir that Ruth turnede™ ajen" 1 
to hir modir in lawe, Ruth® herde of hir, 
My dou3tir, Y schal seke reste to theet, 
and Y schal purueye that it be wel to 
thee. This Booz, to whose damesels thoue 
were ioyned in the feeld, is oure kynes- 
man, and in? this nijt he wyndewith4 
the’ corn floor of barli. Therfor be thous 
waischun, and anoyntid, and be thon 
clothid with onestere® clothis, and got doun 
in to the corn floor; the man, ‘that is, 
Boox*, se not thee, til he haue endid the’ 
mete and drynke’. Forsothe* whanne he4 
goth to slepe, marke thou the place ‘in 
which’ he slepith?; and thou schalt come 
and vnhile® the cloth, ‘with which? he is 
hilid, fro the part of the feet, and thou 
schalt caste thee doun, and thou schalt 
ly there. Forsothe’ he schal® seie to 
thee, what thou ‘owist tof do. Which’ an-s 
sweride, What euer thing thon comaund- 
ist”, Y schal do. And sche! 3ede doun iné 
to the corn floor, and dide* alle thingis 
whiche! hir modir in lawe comaundide to 
hir. And whanne Booz hadde ete and7 
drunke, and was maad gladere™, and 
hadde go to slepe bisidis the ‘heep of 
handfuls", sche® cam, and hidde hir silf; 
and whanne the cloth was vnhilid fro 
‘hise feet?, sche castide’! doun hir silf. And s 
lo! now’ at mydny3t ‘the man’ dredde, 
and wast troblid; and he si3 a womman} Em ae 
lyggynge at hise feet; and he seide tos pe 

he my3te not 


knowe bi sist. 
Lire here. c. 


+ reste lo thee, 
that is, a good 
mariage, so 
that it bihoue 
not thee single 
for liyf lode. 
Lire here. ¢. 


4 disturbid c. ° lyinge BEFu. 


€forthand:1. fAndso Ruth1, €repider, htoxK., ‘them. -kthe wheeter !Andr. ™ had 
turned1. 5 Om.1. scher. POm.1. 4elensith:, 'his1.  §% more honester.  ¢ go thon 1. 
uQm.1. Ytoeter “todrynker, *Andr. Ythatr1. 2 slepith ynnet. 2 thou schalt vnhile 1. 
bthatr. ¢bower. And. ¢wilr. fsehalt 1. ¢ And Ruthi, 8 comaundist tomer. i Ruths. 
k sche dide 1. lthat 1. =™ more glad 1. n mowe of scheues I. © Ruth i.  P the feet of Booz 1. 
dlay1. 'thannez. % Booz1. the was 1. 


482 


684 


She answerde, I am Ruth, thin hoond 
womman; spreed thi mantil vpon thi 
ioseruaunt, for thou art ny3. And he, 
Blessid, he seith, thou art .of the Lord, 
dou3tre, and the rather mercy bi the 
aftirmore thou hast ouerpassid; for thou 
hast not folwid 3onge pore men other 
iviche. Wol thon not thanne drede, but 
what euere thing thou seist to me, I shal 
doo to thee; forsothe al the puple woot, 
that dwellith with ynne the 3atis of my 
12: cytee, thee to be a womman of vertue. 
Ne I denye me to be ny3, but there is an- 
isother nerre than Y; rest this ny3t, and 
morwetide doon, if he wole take thee bi 
ri3t of affynyte, the thing is wel doo; 
forsothe if he wol not, I with out eny 
dowt shal take thee, the Lord lyueth ; 
14sleep vnto the morwetide. And so she 
slept at his feet vnto the goynge awey 
of the ni3t, and so she roos before that 
men knewen hem self to gidre. And 
Booz seide, Bewar, lest eny man knowe, 
ithat hidir thou art comen. And eft, 
Spreed, he seith, thi mantil, with which 
thou art couerd, and hold with ethir 
hoond. The which spredynge and hold- 
yuge he mesuride sixe bushels of barli, 
and put vpon hir; the which berynge 
iswente into the cyte, and cam to hir 
moder in lawe. The which seide to hir, 
What hast thow doon, dou3ter? And 
she toolde to hyr alle thingis, that the 
17man dide to hir; and seith, Loo! sexe 
bushels of barly he hath 3euen to me; 
aud seith, Y wol not thee to turne ajen 
is void to thi moder in lawe. And Noemy 
seide, Abide, don3ter, to the tyme that 
we seen what yssu the thing wol han; 
forsothe ne the man shal ceese, but he 
fulfille that he hath spoken. 


u upon I. 


v to Elimelech 1 marg. 
Zand Y kK. 


adoiti. bneerkyn1. ¢herer. 


RUTH. 


Ww Booz 1. 
¢ the man 1. 


Ill. 1o——18. 


hir, Who art thou? Sche answeride, Y am 
Ruth, thin handmayde; stretche forth thi 
cloth on" thi seruauntesse, for thou art 
ny3 of kyn’. And he” seide, Dou3tir, 10 
thou art blessid of the Lord, and thou 
hast ouercome the formere mercy with 
the lattere; for thou ‘suedist not* 3onge 
men, pore ethir riche. Therfor ‘nyle thou}! 
dredeY, but what euer thing thou schalt 
seie to me, Y” schal do* to thee; for al 
the puple that dwellith with ynne the 
jatis of my cytee woot, that thou art .a 
womman of vertu. And Y forsake not, !2 
that Y am of ny3 kyn, but another man 
is neer” than Y; reste thon in® this ny3t, 3 
and whanne the morewtid is maad, if he@ 
wole holde thee® bi ri3t of ny3 kyn, the 
thing is wel doon; forsothe’ if he nyle®, 
Y schal take thee with outen ony doute, 
the Lord lyueth, ‘that is, bi the Lord 
lyuynge*; slepe thou til the morewtid. 
Therfore' sche* slepte at ‘hise feet! til!! to !4 
the goyng awey of ny3t™, and so" sche 
roos bifor that men knewen°® ‘hem silf 
togidereP, And Booz seide to hir, Be 
thou war lest ony man knowe, that thou 
camest4 hidir. And eft he scide, Stretche™ 15 
forth thi mentil ‘with which* thou ‘art 
hilid', and holde thou" with ener either 
hond. And while sche stretchide forth’ 
and helde’, he mete* sixe buyschelsf of 
barly, and ‘puttide onY hir; and sche bar’, 
and entride in to the citee, and cam® toc 
hir modir in lawe. Which? seide to Ruth‘, 
What hast thou do, doujter? And? Ruth 
telde to hir® alle thingis, whychef ‘the 
man hadde do to hir. And Ruth® seide, 17 
Lo! he 3af! to me sixe buyschels of barly; 
and he* seide, Y nyle' that thon turne 
a3en voide to thi modir in lawe. Andis 
Noemy seide, Abide, dou3tir, til we sien™ 
what issu the thing schal haue; for the 
man schal not ceesse, no" but he fille? tho 
thingis whiche? he spak4. 


x hast not sued to take 1. 
e thee to wijf 1. 


y drede thou not 1. 
fand1. & wil not 1. 


hOm.1. i Thanne x, k Ruthy. I the feet of Booz 1. Uvntil1. ™ the ny3t1. 2 thanne 1. © schulden 


knowe 1. Peche otherer. Qcame1. 'Spreder. ‘Sthatr. thaston3. “it forthi. ¥ forth the 
mantel 1, W helde it 1. * mette mo. maat Lp. metide rk. Yheleide upons. 2 bar it forth. she 
cami. > The whicha. Chir1, €Om.a. ¢hiralsor. fthat1. & Boozrt. hOm.1. ihath goue 1. 
kK Om.1. lwolenot1. ™seenrt. 2 Om.1. ©schal fulfilex. Pthat1. 4 hath spoken 1. 


+ size buysch- 
elis; in Ebreu 
it is sixe me- 
suris, and it 
semeth that tho 
weren litle me- 
suris, for sche 
par al in hir 
mentel, and on 
hir heed, to the 
citee and to the 
hows of Noemy- 
Lire here. c. 


IV. 1-7. 


CAP. dy. 


1 Booz thanne wente vp to the jate, 
and sat there; and whanne he hadde seen 
the ny3 kyn passe biside, of the whieh 
before word is had, he seide to hym, 
Bowe aside a litil, andsit here, elepynge 
hym bi his name. The which turnede 
2a side, and sat. Forsothe Booz takynge 
ten men of the eldre of the citee seide to 
3hem, Sittith here. The which sittynge, 
he spak to the ny3 kyn, Noemy soolde a 
partis’ of the feeld of oure brother Ely- 
malech, the which is turnyd a3en fro 
4 Moabitis regyon, the which thing Y wold 
thee to here, and to thee seyn before al 
men sittynge and the more men thur3 
birth of my puple. If thou wolt weeld 
the feeld bi ry3t of ni3 kynrede, bye and 
weeld ; forsothe if it to thee displese, that 
same thing shewe to me, that I wite 
what I owe to do; forsothe no man is 
ny3 kyn, out taak thee that art formere, 
and me that am secounde. And he an- 
5 swerde, I the feelde shal bye. To whom 
seide Booz, Whanne thow biest the feeld 
of the hoond of the womman, forsothe 
Ruth Moabite, that was the wijf of the 
deed, thou owist to take, that thow rere 
the name of thi ny3 kyn in his erytage. 
¢ The which answerde, I leeue the ri3t of 
my ny3 kynrede; forsothe ne Y owe to 
doon aweie the after comynge of my 
meyne; thou my priuelege vse, the whicht 
7Y knowleche me gladly to want. For- 
sothe this was the manere in oold tyme 
in Yrael bitwixe" ny3 kyn, that if eny 
tyme oon to anothere lafte his ri3t, that 
the grauntynge were stable, the man 
looside his sho, and 3af to his ny3 kyn; 
that was witnessynge of the leuynge in 


Spartc. t that c. 


rThanner. ‘§stiedeupr. the sat 1. 
Yturnede himi. 2satedounr. ®And 1. 
fast kK marg. f hath sold 1. solde EKLP. 
!Om.1.  ™ the grettere men 1. 
‘rweldeitr. Sandi.  tthis thing 1. 
zthatr. 2Om. ap. bthe mans. >> bizege x. 
fAndhet. &mynowner. 4 the which 1. 
vniase 1. 


Sai. 


RUTH. 


u ther forth 1. 
bOm.1. 

h the which 1. 

n puple here sittinge 1. 

u displese 1. 

¢ wommans hond 1. 

1 Om. 131 pr.m. 8. 


685 


CAP. IV. 


Therfor’ Booz stiede* to the 3ate, and1 
sat' there; and whanne he hadde seyn the 
kynesman passe forth", of whom the word 
was had, Booz seide to hym, Bowe thou’ 
a litil, and sitte here; and he clepide 
hym bi his name. And he* turnede’, and 
sat”. Forsothe* Booz took ten ‘men of2 
the® eldere men of the citee, and seide® to 
hem, Sitte 3e¢ here. And while thei saten, 3 
Booz spak to the kynesman, Noemy’*, that 
turnede a3en fro the cuntrey of Moab, 
seeldetf the part of the® feeld of oure bro- + seclde, that 
ther Elymelech, which" thing Y wolde that 4 A sille, frit 
thou! here; and Y wolde seie* to thee bi- 3s," 3* 
for alle ‘men syttynge and! grettere™ in 
birthe of my puple®. If thou wolt haue in 
possessioun the feeld bi ri3t of ny3° kyn, 
bye thou?, and ‘haue thou’ in? posses- 
sioun; sothelis if it‘ displesith" thee, 
schewe thou this same thing to me, that 
Y wyte what Y ‘owe to’ do; for noon” 
is ni3 in kyn{, ontakun thee which* art 
the formereY, and outakun me which* 
am the* secunde. And he? answeride, Y (h™e, | 


schal bie> the feeld. To whom Booz seide, 5 *yarete for 
noon was neer 


seeld. Lire 
here. c. 


+ for noon ts 
ny3 in kyn, 
not that noone 


Whanne thou hast bou3te the feeld of than these 
‘ ee a tweyne. Lire 
the ‘hond of the womman‘, thou owist ‘to here. c. 


take also’ Ruth of Moab, that was the 
wijf of the deed man, that thou reise the 
name of thi kynesman in‘ his eritage. 
Which! answeride, Y forsake the ry3t ofe 
ny3 kyn; for Y owe not to do awei the 
eritage of my meynee; vse thou my pri- 
uelegie, which' priwelegic' Y knowleche 
me to wante gladli. Forsothe* this was7 
the custom bi eld tyme in Israel among 
kynesmen, that if a man jaf his ri3t to 
anothir man, that the grauntyng were 
stidefast, the man vnlaase! his scho, and 


U bytwene aru. betwen £. betwe c. 


vthou hidre1. WOm.1. *%the mant. 
che seide 1. 3edouni. ©¢ that is, stide- 
I thou woldist 1. seie this thing 1. 
° nexte 1. Pthou iti. 4 Om. plures. 
v schal 1. Wnomani. Xthati. — ¥ first 1, 
4 also to take to wijf1. © to 1. 


k For 1. lvnlaasede a sec.m. schulde 


686 


8Yrael. Thanne seide Booz to his ny3 
kyn, Tak thi sho to me; the which 
ganoon he looside* fro his foot. And he 
to the more thur3 birth and to al the 
puple, Witnessis 3e ben, he seith, to day, 
that Y owe to weelde alle that weren of 
Elymalech, and Chelyon, and Maalon, 
10 3ynynge Noemy; and Y shulde take Ruth 
Moabite, the wijf of Maalon, into wed- 
dynge, that I rere the name of the deed 
in his erytage; lest the name of hym 
fro his meynee and bretheren* and puple 
be doon a wey. Forsothe 3e of this thing 
1) ben witnessis. Al the puple answerde, 
that was in the 3ate, and the more thur3 
birth, We ben witnessis; the Lord make 
this womman, that goth into thin hows, 
as Rachel and Lya, that edifiden the 
hows of Yrael, that she be exsaumple 
of vertu in Effirata, and she haue a so- 
12lempne name in Bethlem; and thin hons 
be maad as the hous of Phares, whom 
Thamar beere to Jnda, of the seed that 
the Lord shal 3eue to thee of this child 
i3womman. And so Booz took Ruth, and 
took hir to wijf; and he wente yn to 
her, and the Lord 3af to hir, andY she 
is conseynede, and beer a child. And wym- 
men seide to Noemy, Blissid the Lord, 
which? hath not suffrid, that the succes- 
sour of thi meyne shulde fail, and his 
isuame shulde be clepid in Irael; and 
thon have that cownfort thi lijf, and 
norishe thin eeld. Forsothe of thi dou3- 
ter in lawe is born, that shal loue thee, 
and mych betere is to thee, than thou3# 
igthou haddist seuen sones. And Noemy 
putte the takun child in hir bosum; and 
vside the office of norshe>, and of berer. 
17 Forsothe the wymmen neizbours togidre 
thankynge to hir, and seiynge, The sone 
of Noemy is born, clepeden his name 
Obeth. This is the fader of Ysay, fader¢ 


RUTH. 


IV. 8—17. 


jaf™ to his kynesman; this" was the® wit- 
nessyng of the? 3ift in Israel. Therfor4s 
Booz seide to his kynesman, Take™ the* 
scho fro thee; ‘which schot he vniaside"® 
anoon fro his foot. And Booz seide too 
the grettere men in birthe and to al the 
puple, 3e ben witnessis to dai, that Y haue 
take in possessionn alle thingis that weren 
of Elymelech, and of Chelion, and of Maa- 
lon, bi the 3ifte of Noemy; and that Y10 
haue take in to wedlok Ruth of Moab, 
the wijf of Maalon, that Y reise’ the name 
of the deed man in his erytage; lest his 
naine be doon awey fro his meynee and 
britheren” and puple*. 3e, he seide, ben 
witnessis of this thing. Al the puple, that 11 
was in the 3ate, answeride, and the gret- 
tere men in birthe answeridenY, We ben 
witnessis; the Lord make this womman, 
that entrith in to thin hows, as Rachel 
and Lia, that bildiden the hows of Israel, 
that sche be ensaumple of vertu in Ef- 
frata, and haue a solempne name in Beth- 
leem; and thin hows be maad as the hows 12 
of Fares, whom Thamar childide to Judas, 
of the seed which the Lord schal 3yue to 
thee of this damesel. Therfor? Booz took® 1s 
Ruth, and> took hir to wijf; and he en- 
tride to hir, and the Lord jaf to hir, that 
sche conseyuede, ‘and childide® a sone. 
And wymmen seiden to Noemy, Blessid 1s 
be the Lord, which? ‘suffride not®, that an 
eir failide to thi meynee, and’ his name 
wereS clepid in Israel; and that thou hanes 
‘a man*, that schal coumforte thi soule, 
and nursche elde' age. For a child is 
borun of thi dou3tir in lawe, ‘which child* 
schal loue thee, and he is myche! betere to 
thee, than if thou haddist seuene sones. 
And Noemy puttide the child resseyued™ i¢ 
in hir bosum; and sche dide the office of 
a nurische®, and of a berere®. Forsothe? 17 
wymmen nei3boris thankiden hir4, and 


w loosnede x. *bretherec. Ythatcr. 2thatc. ®Om.4. > nurse x. © the fader & pr. m. 
m3iue itt. this thing 1. °Om.1 Pat. qa Thanne 1. tTToke offi. Sthir. tandr. 
u vnlaside it 1. V reise up 1. W fro lis britheren 1. x his puple 1. y Om. 1. 2 Thanne 1. 
® coucitide K sup.ras. bandhe1 ¢Om.1. 4thatr. ¢ hath not suffridt. fandthat1. & schulde 
ber, hOm.1. ithineldet. that. 10Om.1. ™ whom sche resseyued 1. % norse Ku. © berere 
aboute 1. P And. 4 or toteden togidere with hir 1 marg. 


IV. 18—22. 


180f Dauyd. Thes ben the generaciouns of 
19 Phares; Phares gat Esrom; Esrom gat 
20oAram; Aram gat Amynadab; Amyna- 

dab gat Naason; Naason gat Salmon ; 
21Salmon gat Booz; Booz gat Obeth; 
22QObeth gat Ysay; Ysay gat Dauyd the 


kyng. 
Here eendith Ruth®. 


RUTH. 687 


seiden, A sone is borun to Noemy, and 
clepide’ his name Obeth. This is the fadir 
of Ysay, fadirs of Dauid. These ben the 18 
generaciouns of Fares; Fares gendride* 
Esrom; Esrom geudride* Aram; Aram 19 
gendride*® Amynadab; Amynadab gen- 20 
dride* Naason; Naason gendride" Salmon; 
Salmon gendride" Booz; Booz gendride" 21 
Obeth; Obeth gendride" Isay; Isay gen-22 
dride® Dauid the kyng. 


Here endith Ruth, and here bigynneth 
the firste book of Kyngis’. 


d Here endith the storie of Ruth, and bigynneth a prolog on the bookis of Kingis. £. Here endith the 


bok of Ruth. r. No fiual rubric in acu. 


t thei clepiden 1x. ‘the fadiri.  bigate 1. 


U gate I. 


V Here eendith the book of Ruth, and here 


bigynneth the first book of Kyngis. Bx. Here endith Ruth, and bigynneth a prologe on the jfirste book of 


Kyngis. c. Heere endith the book of Ruth, and bigynneth the jfirste book of Kyngis. 1N. 


Here endeth 


the booc of Ruth, se now the prolog of the foure bokis of Kyngis. x. Here endith Ruth, and here bigynneth 


a prologe upon the firste book of Kyngis, mt. 


No final rubric in AELP. 


ae) 














J 


-)_ = 


aie 


ve 





i ee 
















































“ ae r ' ' t 
it ' f a 
, ae nase ‘ PAs 
Peciah ee ne see palate ae tit . 
PER AAeD ca. Woe Dey yas elie i te 
ee EUS EAE a? (a ) Tei , i 
5 i f PA a 
i s and h 3 i ee 
ee tiie ; “" 
Sie ter 
ise ar 4 ite 
Se Manton aye ‘ 


Spee 
38 sia 
eae o 





A . 2 
nyt a oe 
5, -- 





pide {9 


wh 
THE HOLY BIBLE, 


fw 
Bom 
— 


CONTAINING 


THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS, 


WITH THE APOCRYPHAL BOOKS, 


IN THE EARLIEST ENGLISH VERSIONS 


JOHN WYCLIFFE AND HIS FOLLOWERS; 


EDITED BY 
THE REV. JOSIAH FORSHALL, F.R.S. erc. 
LATE FELLOW OF EXETER COLLEGE, 
AND 


SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H. F.R.S.. erc. 


KEEPER OF THE MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 


VOLUME II. 


OXFORD, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


M.DCCC.L. 


Lig ) 
LIBRARY = 


ape 





I. KINGS. 


| Prologue on the First book of Kings*.] 


IN this book of Kingis the first is contened, how Anna, the wijf of Helchana, that 
was longe tyme bareyn, axide of God to haue a sone, and God 3af to her axing; which 
sone Anna 3af in to the seruyse of the Lord, in the tabernacle of boond of pees, vudur 
Heli the heizeste prest. And God chees Samuel, and spak to him alle thingis, and 
forsook Heli and hise sones, for wickidnesse that the sones diden, wherfore thei 
perischiden alle in o dai. And Samuel anoyntide Saul in to king on Israel; and 
whanne Saul fulfillide not the hestis of God, God forsook him; and Samuel anoyntide 
Dauith in to king, whanne he kepte hise fadris scheep; wherfor Saul hatide Dauith, 
and pursuwide him, til to the dai of veniaunce of the Lord cam; and Sau! perischide, 


and hise sones, and al his hous. 





’ Here bigynneth the prolog of the foure 


bokis of Kyngis*. 


THE tunge forsothe of Syrus, and of 
Caldeis, witnessith to ben anentis the? 
Ebrewis two and twenti lettris, the 
whiche of a° greet parti? ni3 coosticth 
to Ebrew; for and thei two and twenti 
elementis han in the same sown, but in 
dyuerse printis. Samarytans also the 
fyue® bokis of Moyses wryten in as 
feele lettris, oonli in figuris and printis 
dyuersynge; and it is certeyn Esdras, 
the seribe and the doctour of the lawe, 
after Jerusalem takun, and the restorynge 
of the temple vndur Zorobabel, to han 
foundun other lettris, the whiche we nowe 
vsen; whanne vnto that tyme weren the 
same printis of Samarytanys and of E- 
brews. Forsothe in the book of Noum- 
bris this same noumbryngef vnder the 
noumbre of Leuitis and prestis mistili is 


a The prolog of Kyngis. p. A prolog. 1. No initial rubric in crm, 
e€ 


Om. 1. f noumbre 1. 


a This prologue is from 1. 


VOL. II. 


[Prologue to the four books 
of Kings>.] 


THE langage of men Sirus, and of Cal- 
deis also, witnessith that there ben two an 
twenty lettris, the which of a greet partie 
is acordynge to Ebrew; for also thei han 
two and twenti elementis in the same sown, 
and in dyuerse pryntis. Also Samaritans 
writen the fyne bookis of Moyses with 
so many lettris, oonly dyuersynge in the 
figuris and prentis ; and it is certeyn, that 
Esdras, the scribe and a doctour of the 
lawe, foond other lettris, which we vsen 
now, aftir that Jerusalem was taken, and 
aftir restorynge of the temple vndur Zoro- 
babel; for vnto that tyme weren the same 
lettris and fyguris of Samarytans and of 
Ebrews vsid. Also in book of Numeri 
the same noumbrynge is mistily schewid 
vndir the noumbre of dekenes and prestis ; 
and we han founden the hie name of the 


¢ Om. 1. 00 H. 


b Om. 1. d part c. 


b This prologue is from o. 


B 


2 I. KINGS. 


shewid; and the name of the Lord Tetra- 
gramatou in summe Grece volyms vnto 
this day we han founden with oold let- 
tris expressyd. But and the Salmys sixe 
and threttis, and the hundrid tenthe, aud 
the hundryd enleueth, and the hundrid 
eij3tenth®, and the hundrid foure and 
fourtithe, albeit that thei ben wryten 
with dyuerse metre, neuerthelater thei 
ben weuyd! with* the abece of the same 
noumbre; and the Lamentaciouns of Je- 
remye, and the Preier of hym, and for- 
sothe the Prouerbis of Salomon, in the 
eend, fro that place in whiche he seith, 
A strong womman who shal fynde, with 
the same abicees or markyngis ben 
noumbrid. Forsothe fyue dowble lettrys 
ben anentis the Ebrewis, Caph, Men, 
Nun, Phe, Sade; forsothe other wise thei 
writen bi thes the bigynningis and the 
mydils of wordis, other wise the eendis. 
Wherfore and fyue bokis, Samuel, Ma- 
lachym, Dabreiamyn, Esdras, Jeremye 
with Cynoth, that is, his Lamentaciouns, 
ben eymyd of sum men dowble bookis. 
What maner wise therfor two and twenti 
elymentis ben, bi the whiche we wryten 
Ebrewly al that we speken, and mannus 
voyce with the bigynnyngis of hem is 
takun, so two and twenti volyms ben 
noumbrid, bi the whiche as bi lettris and 
bigynnyngis the tendre and the 3it sowk- 
ynge childhod of the ri3twise man is 
tau3t in the doctrine of God. The first 
book anentis hem is clepid! Bresith, 
which we Genesis seyn; the secounde, 
Ellesmoth, the which™ Exodus is clepid®; 
the thridde is Vagetra, that is Leuytik ; 
the ferth, Vagedaber, ‘the which® we cle- 
pen? Noumbre; the fifthe Abdabarym, 
‘the which® is before notid Deutronomy. 
Thes ben the fyue bokis of Moyses, ‘the 
whiche® thei clepen4 proprely Thorath, 
that is, the lawe. The secounde ordre of 
the prophetis thei maken, and bigyn- 
nen fro Jesu', the sone of Naue, ‘the 
which’ anentis hem is seid Josue Bennun. 


& threttithe cur, 
Pealr. 4 callen 1. 


i wouen c. 
8 that c. 


h eigtene 1. 
t Josue 4. 


kK of 1. 


Lord Tetragrainaton in summe bookes of 
Grew expressid with olde lettris vnto this 
day. But also the salines of the Sauter, 
as the xxxvj. salm, and the hundrid and 
x. salm, and the hundrid and aleuene salm, 
and the hundrid and xviij. salm, and the 
hundrid and xlitij. salm, al be it that thei 
ben writen with dyuerse metre, netheles 
thei ben writen and wouen to gideris with 
the abece of the same noumbre; and the 
Lamentaciouns of Jeremye, and the Preier 
of him, and also the Prouerbis of Sala- 
mon, in the ende, fro that place in which 
he seith, Who shal fynde a strong wom- 
man, be noumbryd with the same abeces 
of merkyngis. Forsothe the fyue double 
lettris anentis the Ebrews ben thes, Caph, 
Men, Num, Phe, Sade; for bi these lettris 
thei writen other while the bygynnyngis 
and the myddes of wordes, and in an- 
othir maner the endis. Wherfor these fyue 
bookes, Samuel, Malachim, Dabre Jamyn, 
Esdras, and Jeremye with Cynnoth, that 
is, his Lamentaciouns, ben gissid of sum 
men to be dowble bookes. Therfor as 
there ben xxij. lettris, by which we writen 
in manere of Ebrews alle thingis that we 
speken, and mannes vois taken with the 
bigynnynges of hem, so xxij. volyms ben 
noumbrid, by the whiche as by lettris 
and byginnynges the 3onge tendre and 3it 
soukyuge childhod of the ri3twise man is 
enformed in the doctryne of God. The 
first book anentis hem is clepid Bresith, 
whiche we clepen Genesis; the secounde, 
Elesmoch, which is clepid Exodi; the 
thridde, Vagetra, that is, the book of 
Leuyticy; the fourthe, Vagetaber, which 
we clepen Noumbre; the fyfte, Adda- 
barim, the which is bifore notid Deutro- 
nomye. These ben the fyue bookes of 
Moyses, the whiche thei clepen propurly 
Thorath, what is to seie, the lawe. 
Thanne thei maken the secunde ordre of 
profetis, and bygynnen at Jhesu, the sone 
of Naue, that anentis hem is seid Josue 
Benum. Fro thennus thei ioyneden yn 


leallid cer, ™ that c. neald x. © that c. 


I.. KINGS. 3 


Fro thens thei vndurweuydent Sophym, 
that is, the book of Jugis; and into" the 
same thei putten’ in Ruth, for in the 
days of Jugis don is toold hir storye. 
The thridde folowith Samuel, the which 
we seyn the Firste and the Secounde of 
Rewmys; the ferthe, Malachim, that is, 
of Kyngis, the which is conteyned in the 
thridde and the ferthe volym of Rewmys ; 
and mych betere it is to seye Malachym, 
that is, of Kyngis, thanne Malathot, that 
is, of Rewmes ; forsothe not of many folk 
he discriueth rewmes, but of oon Yrael 
puple, that is conteyned in twelue ly- 
nagis. The fifthe is Ysay; the sixt Je- 
remye; the seuenthe Ezechiel; the” 
ei3tith the book of the twelue prophetis, 
‘the which? anentis hem is clepid’ Thari- 
asra. The thridde ordre weeldith Agio- 
gropha, that ben holi wryten ensaumplis’. 
And the first book bigynneth fro Job; 
the secounde fro Dauyd, the which men 
holden in fyue dyuysiouns, and in o 
volym of Psalmys; the thridde is of Sa- 
lomon, hauynge thre bokis, Prouerbis, 
that thei clepen* Parablis, that is, Mas- 
loth; the ferthe Ecclesiasten, that is, 
Coelech ; the fifthe is Soonge of Songis, 
whom thei> before noten bi title Syras- 
syrym; the sixte is Danyel; the se- 
uenthe® Dabreiamyn, that is, the wordis 
of days, the whiche more nameli we 
mowen clepe’ the® Cronycle of al Goddis 
story, the which book anentis vs is 
wryten Paralypomynonf the First and the 
Secounde; the ei3tthe Esdras, the which 
and he® lijk maner, anentis Grekis and 
Latyns, in two bokis is dyuydid; the 
nynthe Ester. And so ben maad togidre 
the bokis of the oold lawe two and 
twenti, that is, of Moyses fyue, of Pro- 
phetis eiz3te, of Agiografis, that ben ex- 
presse exsaumplis to holynesse, nyne; 
al be it that summe writen Ruth and 
Synoth among the Agiographis, and thes 
bookis in her noumbre thei wenen to be 
to" noumbrid, and bi that to ben of the 


t ynderwouen c. 


ting.  V puttiden 1. 
Scallenrz. bwes 


¢ sevuenthe is 1. 4 calle 7. 


w and the 1. 
€ Om. 1. fin Paralypomynon cz. &thez Om. c. 


Sophim, that is, the book of Juges; and 
in to the same thei putten in Ruth, for in 
the dayes of Juges her storie is teeld to be 
fulfillid. The thridde book folewith, that 
is clepid Samuel, which we seyn the Firste 
and the Secounde book of Kynges. The 
fourthe is Malachim, that is, of Kyngis, 
which is conteyned in the thridde and the 
ilij. volym of Rewmes; and myche betere 
it is to seie Malachym, that is, of Kynges, 
than Maletoch, that is, of rewmes; for he 
discryueth not the rewmes of many folkis, 
but the rewme of o puple of Israel, that 
is conteyned in xij. lynagis. The fifte is 
Isaie; the sixte Jeromye; the seuenthe 
Ezechiel; the eiz3te in the book of xij. 
profetis, that anentis hem is clepid Thari- 
asrai. The thridde ordre weldith Agio- 
grafa, that ben hooly writen ensaumplis ; 
and the firste book bygynneth fro Job; 
the secounde fro Dauith, which men holden 
in fyue dyuysiouns, and in o volym of 
Salmes; the thridde is of Salomon, hau- 
ynge iij. bookes, as Prouerbis or Parablis, 
that is clepid Maloth; the iiij. Ecclesi- 
asten, that is clepid Coelech; the fyfethe 
is the Song of Songis, whom thei biforen 
seien bi title Sirassirym; the sixte is Da- 
niel; the seuenthe Debraiamyn, that is to 
seie, the wordis of daies, the which more 
kouthly may be clepid the Cronycle of 
Goddis stories; the which book anentis vs 
is writen Paralipomenon the Firste and the 
Secounde; the ei3tithe book is Esdras, the 
which also in lijk maner, bothe anentis 
Grekis and Latynes, is departid in to twey 
bookis ; the nynthe is the book of Ester. 
And that is to seie, fyue booke of Moyses, 
and ei3te bookes of the profitis, and neyne 
of Agiogrofis, that is to seie, of expresse 
ensaumplis of holynesse; al be it that sum 
men writun Ruth and Synoth among the 
Agiografis, and thei weenen that thes 
bookes shulden be rekened in her noum- 
bre, and be that to ben xxiiij. bookes of 
olde lawe; which the Apocalips of Joon 
bryngeth yn, vndur the noumbre of xxiiij. 
¥ eald 1, 


x that c. Z exsaumplis ce. 


B2 


4 I. KINGS. 


oold lawe foure and twenti bookis; the 
whiche vndre noumbre of foure and 
twenti eldris the Apocalips' of Joon 
bryngith yn, honourynge the loomb, and 
offrynge her crownes, the cheerys born 
doun, hem. stondynge before the foure 
beestis eyed before and behynde, that is, 
biholdynge into that that is passid, and 
into that that is to comen, and criynge 
with contynuel voyce, Holy, Holy, Holi, 
Lord God Almy3ti, that was, and that is, 
and that is to comen! This prologe of * 
Scripturis as an helmyd bigynnynge to al 
the bokis ‘the whiche! fro Ebrewe we 
han turned into Latyn, may acoorde, that 
we mowen knowe that what euere thing 
out of thes is, it is to be put among the 
Apographase, that is, among tho thingis 
whos autor is not knowun of al holi 
chirch. Therfore Sapiens, that comounli 
is wryten in of Salomon, and of Jesu, the 
sone of Syrak, and the book of Judith, 
and Toby, and Pastor, ben not in the 
canoun. I foond the Fyrst book of Ma- 
chabeis Ebrewe; the Secounde is Greke, 
that may be proued of that settynge. 
The whiche thingis whanne thei so han 
hem, thou reder, Y biseche thee, ne eyme 
thou my traueyle the repreuynge of oold 
men. In the tabernacle of God ech man 
offreth that he may; other men gold, and 
siluer, and precious stones; other men 
bise, and purpur, and cocko™ offren, and 
jacynet. With vs is wel doon, if we 
offren skynnys and heeris of she geet; 
and neuerthelater® the Apostle oure 
more® contemptible thingis shewith more 
nedeful. Wherfor and al the? fayrnesse 
of the tabernacle, and the distinccioun of 
the present, and of the chirche to comen, 
bi eche spicis is couered with skynnys, 
and with herys; tho that ben fowler 
thingis letten the brennynge of the sunne, 
and the harme of wederis. Thanne rede 
thow first Samuel, and myn? Malachym, 
myn forsothe, myn"; what euere thing 
forsothe ofter’ turnynge and in amend- 


l that c. 
rOm. 4. 


K tor 
q Om. £ pr.m. 


i Apocalipsis x. 
P that BCEFHI. 


™ cocce E. cok c. 
8 ouer I, 


eldris onourynge the lomb, and offrynge 
her crownes, with her cheris cast doun, 
and stondynge bifor the foure beestis that 
weren ized bifore and bihynde, that is to 
seie, biholdynge in to the tyme that is 
passid, and in to the tyme that is to come, 
and criynge with contynuel vois, without 
feyntise, Hooly, Holi, Holy, Lord God 
Almy3ti, that was, and that is, and that 
is to comen! This prologe of Scripturis 
as an helmed princeple mai acorde to alle 
the bookes which we han turned fro Ebrew 
in to Latyn, that we moun knowun that 
what euere writynge is out of these, is 
to be put amonge the Apocrifas, that is, 
amonge thilke wrytynges whos auctours 
ben vnknowe of alle hooly chirche. Ther- 
fore the book of Sapience, that comynly is 
writen to be the book of Salomon, and the 
book of Jhesu, the sone of Sirak, and the 
book of Judith, and Thobie, and Pastor, 
be not in the canoun. I found the Firste 
book of Makabeus of Ebrews langage ; the 
Secounde book is Grew, that nay be preued 
of the sittinge and of the speche. The 
which thingis, siththe thei han in sich 
manere, thou reder, I byseche thee, deeme 
thou not my trauayle to be maad in re- 
preuynge of old men. For ech man offrith 
in to the tabernacle of God that he mai, 
aftir his power; sum men offren gold, 
and siluer, and precious stoonys; othere 
men offren biys, and purpur, and scarled, 
and iacynt. With vs it is weel, if we offren 
skynnes, and the heeris of geet; and ne- 
theles the Postle schewith opynly, that 
oure foule thingis and contemptible ben 
more needful than sum faire thingis. 
Wherfore al the fairnesse of the taber- 
nacle, that was distinccioun and figure of 
hooly chirche that is now, and that is 
aftir to comynge, by alle her semelynesses 
is kyuerid with skynnes, and with heeris ; 
and tho thingis that ben foulere letten 
the brennynge of the sunne, and the dis- 
pitousnesse of reynes and stormes. Thanne 
rede thou first Samuel, and my book Ma- 


cocke 1. 4 nerthelatere c. © moste 1. 


I. KINGS. 5 


ynge more bisili and we han lernyd, and 
we holden, oure is, oure is. And whanne 
thou vndurstoondist that bifore hoond 
thou knewe not, or eyme thou me a 
remenour, if thou art kynde, or a leeyer 
bisiden, if thow art vnkynde; al be it 
that Y haue no conscience to myself, me 
to haue chaungid eny thing fro Ebrews 
trewth. Certeyne, if thow ertt of hard 
bileue, rede Greke" bokis and Latyns, 
and ley” togidre with thes litil werkis, 
‘the whiche* aboue we han outY toold; 
and where euere thow see bitwix? hem- 
self to* discorde, ask eny of the Ebrews, 
to whom more thou owist to 3eue feith, 
and if oure thingis he stable, I trowe 
that thou shalt not eyme hym a lyer, 
for in the same place with me lijk maner 
he dyuyne. But and 30w, wymmen ser- 
uauntis of Crist, Y preye, the whiche 
anoynten the heed of the Lord, doun syt- 
tynge with the? moost precyous myrre 
of bileue, the whiche sechen not the Sa- 
ueour in sepulcre®, for? whom nowe Crist 
hath stied vp to the fader, that a3ens the 
berkynge houndis that a3ens me with 
wood mouth waxen cruel, and goon about 
the cytee, and in that demen hem self 
wyse, if to other they bacbiten, that 3e 
a3en putten the targetis of 30ure preyers. 
I, knowynge my lownes, of that sentence 
euere more Y shal recorde, I seyde, I shal 
kepe my weyes, that I trespasse not in 
my tunge; Y haue put to my mouth 
warde, whanne the synful stood ajens 
me; Y bicam dowmbe, and¢ am lowid, 
and heeldef my pees fro good thingis. 


Here endith the prolog of the foure 
bokis of Kyngis, and nowe bygynneth 
the first books. 


tbe xz. 4 Grekis cr. 
bOm.1. © the sepulere 1. 
and bigynneth the firste book of Kingis. E. 
No final rubric in acrii. 


wleye hemi, * that c. 
d fro & prem. from 1. 


¥Y ou3te mW. not I. 


lachim, 3he, myn forsothe, myn; fore what 
euere we han lerned in ofte turnynge of 
bookes, and in more bisily amendyuge, if 
we holden it in oure hertis, it is ouris, it 
is ouris. And whanne thou vndurstondist 
that biforn hond thou knewe not, thanne 
or deme thou me to be a trewe drawere 
out of hooly writ, if thou art kynde, or 
ellis a false spekere, if thou art vnkynde; 
al be it that I haue no conscience to my 
silf, me to haue chaungid ony thing fro 
Ebrews treuthe. Certis, if thou art hard 
of byleeue, rede the bookis of Grew and 
of Latyn, and leie hem to gideris with 
these litil werkes, whiche we han teld 
aboue; and where euer thou seest hem dis- 
corde bitwixe hem silf, axe thou ony mon 
of the Ebrewis, to whom thou shuldist 
3yue more feith to, and if he confermeth 
oure writyngis, I trowe thou shalt not 
deeme him a coniecture of lesyngis, that 
he hath dyuyned in the same place in lijk 
manere with me. But also I preye 3ou, 
Paula and Eustochie, seruauntis of Crist, 
which anoynten the heed of the Lord, 
sittinge doun with the moost preciouse 
myrre of bileeue, the whiche seken not 
oure Sauyour in the sepulcre, to whos 
bileeue Crist hath stied vp to his fadir, 
I preie 30u, that 3e putte the scheeldis of 
joure good preieris ajens the berkynge 
houndis that wexen cruel ajens me with 
wood mouth, and gon aboute the citee, 
and in that demen hem to be wise, whanne 
thei bacbiten othir men. Therfor I, know- 
ynge my lownesse, shal euermore haue 
myude of that sentence, [I] seid, I shal kepe 
my weies that I trespasse not [in] my tonge; 
I haue ordeyned a warde to my mouth, 
whan the synful trespasour stood azenus 
me; ] bicame doumbe, and was lawid, and 
held my pees fro good thingis. 


Z betwe c. bytwen perH. 4Om. 1. 


eandI 1 fheuldi. & Here endith the prolog 


Here endeth the prolog, se now the firste book of Kingis. 1. 


6 I. KINGS. 


The firste of Kyngis*. 


CAPT. 


1 THERE was a man of Ramathaym of 
Sophym, of the hil of Effraym, and the 
name of hym Elchana, the sone of Jero- 
boam, sone? of Elyuth, sone of Thau, 

2sone of Suph, Eufrate. And he hadde 
two wyues; name to the toon Anna, and 
name to the secounde Phenenna; and 
there weren of Phenenne sonys ; forsothe 
of Anne there weren noon free children. 

3 And that man stiede fro his cytee vp the 
ordeynd days, for to honour and sacrifie 
to the Lord of oostis in Sylo. Forsothe 
there weren the two sonys of Hely, 
Ophny and Phynees, preestis of the Lord. 

4 The day thanne cam, and Elchana offerde, 
and 3af to Phenenne his wijf, and to alle 

‘his children and dou3tren® parties; for- 
sothe to Anne he 3af o party drerye, for 
he louede Anne; forsothe the Lord hadde 

6closid hir wombe. Forsothe hir enemye 
tourmentide hir, and hugely angwishide, 
in so mych that she putte to reproue, that 

7the Lord hadde closid hir wombe. And 
so she dyde bi ech 3eer, whanne, turn- 
ynge ajen the tyme, thei styeden vp into 
the hows of the Lord; and she so terryde 
hyr. Forsothe she wepte, and took no 
smeete. Thanne seide to hyr Helchana, 
hir man, Anna, whi wepist thow, and 
whi etist thow nou3t, and for what cause 
is tourmentid thin herte? Whether am 
Y not betere to thee than ten sones? 
9Forsothe Anna roos, after that she hadde 
eetyn in Silo and dronken. And Hely 
the preest sittynge vpon a litil seete, be- 
fore the postis of the hows of the Lord, 
10whanne Anna was in bitter’ inwit, she 


a From zs. Here bygynneth the first bok of Kyngis. y. No initial rubric in acen. 


¢ do3tris ce. 4 betere a. 


4 From mp. No initial rubric in the other mss. 
4 of that oon 1. to the toon K. e Om. DKM. 
hadde noner. !}Om.1. *& that 1. 
Pp Ofny 1. Ophny pb. 4 Thanne 1. 
hir 1. * vpbreidide hir 1. 
e¢ Andi. 4 thanne sche 1. 
upon his sete 1. 


T he jaf 1. 

y Fenenna tr. 
enol, 
i Lordis hows 1. 


f name to the plures, Om. 1. 
' stiede up 1. 
Sand 1. 
2 eche 3eer I. 

£Om.1. ff Wher ceteri passim. ¢ Anna forsothe 1. 4 Hely sittinge 
K and whanne 1. 


I, 1-10. 


Here biginnith the firste book of 
Kingis*. 


CAP. 


‘A man was? of ‘Ramathym of¢ So-1 
phym, of the hil of Effraym, and his name 
was Elchana, the sone of Jeroboam, sone 
of Elyud, sone of Than, sone of Suph, of 
Effraymt. And Helchana hadde twei2 
wyues ; the name ‘to oon? was Anna, and 
the® ‘name of thef secounde was Fenenna; 
and sones weren to Feuenna; forsothe® 
fre children ‘weren not to Anna‘, And3 
thilke* man styede! fro his citee in daies™ 
ordeyned, to worschipe and offre® sacrifice 
to the Lord of oostis in Silo. Forsothe® 
twei sones of Heli weren there, OphymP 
and Fynees, preestis of the Lord. Ther-4 
for’ the dai cam, and Helcana offride, 
and 3af" partis to Fenenna, his wijf, and 
to alle hise sones and dou3tris; forsothe®s 
he 3af soreufuly{ o part to Anna, for he 
louyde Anna; forsothet the Lord hadde 
closid hir wombe. And hir™ enemy tur-6 
mentide ‘hir, and angwischide" greetly, in 
so myche that sche vpbreidide*, that the 
Lord hadde closid hir wombe. And so7 
scheY dide ‘bi alle 3eeris’, whanne ‘in tyme 
comynge a3en*, thei stieden® in to the 
hows of the Lord; and so sche terride 
Anna. Forsothe® Anna‘ wepte, and took 
not® mete||. Therfor Helcana, hir hose-s 
bonde, seide to hir, Anna, whi wepist 
thou, and whi etist thouf not, and whi 
is thin herte turmentid ? Whether Y am 
not betere to thee than ben ten sones? 
‘Sotheli Anna§ roos, aftir that sche haddeg 
ete and drunke in Silo. ‘And the while 
Hely was on his greet seete, bifor> the 


postis of the ‘hows of the Lord', whanne* 10 


Anna! was in bittere soule™, sche preyede 
b the sone E pr.m, 


b Ther was a man 1. © Ramatha in parkMNogxb. 

Ehiztex. % but Anna 
m the daies that werent. “®tooffrer © Andi. 
tands.  Fenenna hir:r. Wand noiede 
.8the tyme came that x. » stieden up 1. 


Ische 1x. ™ serome of soule 1. 


+ Effraym ; for 
he dwellide in 
the hil of Ef. 
fraym, not for 
he was of the 
lynage of Ef- 
fraym, for he 
was a dekene 
of the sones of 
Chore, as it is 
had in thre 
book of Paral. 
vi.c®. Lire 
here. C 


t he 3af soreu- 
fuly; Helcana 
Was not soreu- 
ful of the 3yu- 
g, but for he 
adde not fre 
children of 
Anna, to 
whiche chil- 
dren partis 
schulden be 
jouun. In E. 
breu it is had 
@ part ethir 
double, of which 
the resoun 
sneth, for he 
louyde Anna; 
and in this he 
wolde onoure 
hir. Lire 
here. €. 
|| mete, that is, 
took litil of 
mete. Lire 
here. C. 


I, 11—20. 


1 preiede the Lord, wepynge largeli; and 
a vowe she vowide, seiynge, Lord God of 
oostis, if biholdynge thow see the tour- 
mentynge of thi seruaunt, and were re- 
cordid of me, ne for3etist® thin hoond- 
maydyn, and 3yuest to thi seruaunt maal 
kynde, I shal 3yue hym to the Lord alle 
the days of his lijf, and rasour shal not 

12stie vpon his heed. Forsothe it is doon, 
that whanne she multipliede preiers be- 
fore the Lord, that Heli weytide hir 

13mouth. Forsothe Anna spak in hir 
herte, and oonli the lippis of hir weren 
meued, and the vois of hire was not fulli 
herd. Heli therfor eymyde hir dronken, 
isand seide to hyr, Howe long shalt thou 
be dronken? Defye a litil wi3t the wyn, 

15 bi the which thou art dronken. Anna 
answerynge, Nay, she seith, my lord, for 
a womman wel mych wretcheful Y am; 
for wyn and al that may make dronken 
Y dranke not, but I haue held out my 

1é6soule in the si3t of the Lord; ne hoold 
thou thin handwomman as oon of the 
dou3tres of Belial, for of the multitude 
of sorwe and of my mournynge Y haue 

17spokun vnto nowe. Thanne Heli seith 
to hir, Go in pees, and God of Yrael 
3eue to thee the askynge that thou hast 
ispreied hym. And she seide, Wolde God 
thin handwoman fynde grace in thin 
eyen. And the womman 3ede into hir 
weye, and eete; and the cheeris off hir 
ben not more ouere into dyuerse thingis 
i9chaungid. And thei arysen eerly, and 
anowreden§& before the Lord; and ben 
turned a3en, and camen into her hows 
in Ramatha. Forsothe Helchana knewe 
Anne his wijf; and the Lord is re- 
20cordid of hir. And doon it is after the 
cercle of dais, Anna conceyuede, and beer 
a child, and clepide his name Samuel; 


€ forjeten BCEFI. 


5 sche made 1. © vow to the Lord 1. 
tthe daiest. Ycomeupr. WAnd1. 
b Hely the prest 1. ¢ and a lijtil the r. 
h haue not drunken 1. / nether ony thing 1. 
© haue spoken 1. © ynto thisr. P that 1. 
u Helcana and his meyne arisen up 1. 


fin B pr.m. 


P if thou hast 1. 
x whanne it c. 

4 that 1. 
k hane helde 1. 
q hast preied r. 


vand their. Ww Andi. 


I. KINGS. 7 


the Lord, and wepte largeli; and made® all 

vow, and seide, Lord God of oostis, if 

thou biholdist, and seest the turment of 

thi seruauntesse, and hast? mynde of me, 

and for3etist not thin handmayde, and 

3yuest’ to’ thi seruauntesse ‘a male kynde’, 

Y schal 3yue hym to the Lord int alle 

daies" of his lijf, and a rasour schal not 

stie’ on his heed. Forsothe’ it* was doon, !2 

whanne sche multipliede preierisY bifor 

the Lord, that Ely” aspiede hir mouth. 
Forsothe? Anna spak in hir herte, and13 

oneli hir lippis weren mouyd, and outerly 

hir vois was not herd. Therfor Hely” 

gesside hir drunkun, and he seide to hyr, 14 

Hou longe schalt thou be drunkun? Difye 

thou a litil the® wyn, ‘bi which? thou art 

moist*. Anna answeride, and seide, Nay, sopra sat 
my lord, for Y am ‘a wretchidf womman  dmnkun. c. 
greetlig; Y ‘drank not" wyn ‘and al thing! 

that may make drunkun, but Y schedde* 

out my soule in the ‘sijt of the Lord’; 

gesse thou not thin handmaide as oon of 16 

the dou3tris of Belyal, for of the multi- 

tude of my sorewe and morenyng™ Y 

spak® ‘til in to® present tyme. Thanne 17 

Hely seide to hir, Go thou in pees, and 

God of Israel 3yue{ to thee the axyng te oe 
which? thou preiedisti hym. And sche" 18syne. c. 
seide, ‘Y wolde’ that thin hondmayde fynde 

grace in thin izen. And the womman 3edet 

in to hir weie, and eet; and hir cheris 

weren no more chaungid dyuersly. And 19 

‘thei ryseden" eerly, and’ worschipiden bi- 

fore the Lord; and thei turneden a3en, 

and camen in to hir hows in Ramatha. 
Forsothe’ Helchana knew jfleischli* Anna, 

his wijf; and the Lord thou3te on hir. 

And it was doon after the cumpas of daies, 20 

Anna conseyuede, and childide a sone, and 

scheY clepide his name Samuel||; for sche {| Samuet is in- 
terpretid axid 


hadde axid hym of the Lord. Forsothe? 21 of Goa. Lire 
here. c. 


& honouredyn £c. 


rasonetor, ®*Om.1. ¢Om.1. 
z Ely the prest 1. ® Sotheli 1. 
€ maad moist with 1. fanvnhappy1. § Om. 1. 
1 Lordis si3t 1. ™ of my morenyng. 
s Wolde God 1. + 3ede forth 1. 
yOm.s, # And 1. 


q 3yue c. 
¥ hir preieris 1. 


r Anna I. 
x Om. 1Ko. 


8 I. KINGS. 


forthi that she hadde askid hym of the 
21 Lord. Forsothe bir man Helchana stiede 


I, 21——II. 2. 


hir hosebonde Heleana stiede®, and al his 
hows», to offre a solempne sacrifice, and his 


vp, and al his hows, for to offre to the 
Lord a solempne oost, and his vowe. 
22 And Anna assendide not; forsothe she 
seide to hir man, ¥ shal not goo, to the 
tyme that the child be wened, and I 
brynge hym, and he apere" before the 
si3t of the Lord, and dwelle there con- 
23tynuely. And Helchana, hir man, seith 
to hir, Do that is seen to thee good, and 


avow to the Lord. And Anna stiede not®, 22 

for sche hadde seid to hir hosebonde, Y 

schal not go, til the 3onge child be wenyd, 

and til Y lede hym4, and he appere bifor 

the ‘si3t of the Lord*, and dwelle there 
contynuelit. And Helcana, hir hosebonde, 23 + contynuely: 
seide to hir, Do thou that that semeth  {h Eee ker 
good to thee, and dwelle thouf til thou 


world, that is, 
til to the fiftithe 
weneS hym; and Y biseche, that the Lord 


seer. Lire 
here. c. 


dwel to the tyme that thow wene hym ; 
and I preye, that the Lord fulfille his 
word. Thanne the woman abood, and 
jaf hir sone mylk, to the tyme that he 
shulde mete hym awey fro the mylk. 
24 And she brou3te hyin with hir, after that 
she hadde wened hym, with thre calues, 
and thre bushelis of meele, and a vessel 
of wyn; and she browte him to the 
hows of the Lord in Sylo. Forsothe the 
2child 3it was a lytil faunt. And thei 
slewen a calf, and offreden the child to 
26Hely. And Anna seith, I biseche, my 
lord, thi soule lyneth; Y am that wom- 
man, that stood before thee here, prey- 
azinge to the Lord; for this child I 
preyede, and the Lord hath 3euen to me 
2sthe askynge that I askyde hym; therfor 
and I haue lent hym to the Lord alle 
the dais, in the whiche he were lent to 
the Lord. And there thei honourden the 
Lord. And Anna hononrde, and seith, 


CAP. I. 


1 Gladid out is' myn herte in the Lord, 
and areryd* is myn horn in my God; 
maad large is my mouth vpon myn ene- 
myes, for Y am glade in thin! 3yuer of 

2heelth. There is noon holy as is the 
Lord; forsothe ne there is other with 
out thee, and there is not strong as our 


h aperide 4. 


@ stiede npr. > meynee 1. 
stille 1. & hane wened 1. 
mesure r. an amfore K. 

t thi FemNpasb. 


h falfille x. 
° Om. I. 
u Om. c. 


p Andi. 
v Ont. pemnpaxb. 


i Om. ercn. 


¢ not up éo that solempnytee 1. 
i abode 1. 
4 sacrifisiden plures. 

W the whole gloss omitted in 1. 


fille’ his word. Therfor the womman 
dwellide', and 3af mylk to hir sone, til* 
sche remouyde hym fro' mylk. And sche™ 24 
brou3te hym with hir, aftir that sche 
hadde wened hym, with thre caluys, and 
thre buyschelis of inele, and amfore", ‘ether 
a pot°, of wyn; and sche brou3te hym to 
the hows of the Lord in Silo. Forsothe? 
the child was 3it ful 3onge. And theis 
sacrifieden? a calf, and thei offriden the 
child to Hely. And Anna seide, My lord, 26 
Y biseche’, that ts’, that thist child be thi» 
‘disciple and’ seruaunt™, thi soule lyueth; 
Y am that* womman, that stood bifor 
thee here, and preiede the Lord; for this 27 
child YY preiede, and the Lord 3af to 
me myn axyng which? Y axide -hym; 
therfor* Y haue 3oue hym to the Lord ‘in 28 
alle? daies, in whiche he is 3ouun to the 
Lord. And thei worschypiden there the 
Lord. 


CARI 


And Anna worschipide, and pede Myni 
herte fulli ioiede in the Lord, and myn 
horn is reisid in my God; my mouth is 
alargid on® myn enemyes, for Y was‘ glad 
in thin helthe®. Noon is hooli as the Lord 2 
is; ‘for noon other is, outakunf thee, and 
noon is strong as® oure God. Nyle 3e3 


Krerid c. 1 the g pr.m. 


f thon 
mAnnar a 
8 On. EGKLMO. 
Xther. Yand Y a. 


dhym thidere 1. © Lordis sizt 1. 
ktilthe tyme. 1 fro the 1. 
T biseche thee 1. 


* that 1. ® therfor and BckFGKLMNrgrsuwxb. Palle the 1. ¢ upon1. Gamay. ¢helthe giuer 1. f neither 


certis ther is an other withoute 1. @ as is 1. 


Il. 3—14. I. KINGS. 9 


3God. Wole 3e not multiplie to speke 
heije thingis, gloriynge; go there awey 
oold thingis fro 3oure mouthe; for the God 
of sciencis! Lord is, and to hym ben be- 
4fore maad redi thou3tis. The boowe of 
stronge men is ouercomen, and feble™ 
sben gird with strength. The fillid be- 
fore for looues han leyd hem self, and 
the hungri ben fulfillid; to the tyme that 
the bareyn bere wel many, and she that 
6many sones hadde, is feblid. The Lord 
mortifieth, and quykeneth; bryngith doun 
7to hellis, and a3en bryngith. ‘The Lord 
makith pore, and richeth; and® mekith, 
gand vndurrerith. He bryngith vp fro 
powdre the nedye, and fro dryt he heneth 
vp the pore, that he sitte with princis, 
and the seet of glorie he holde; of the 
Lord forsothe ben the vttermoost parties 
of the erthe, and he hath put vpon hem 
gthe world. The feet of his halowis he 
shal kepe, and vnpyteuous men in derk- 
nessis shulen waxe stille; for in his owne 
strength shal not be strengthid a man. 
10 The Lord shulen drede the aduersaries 
of hym, and vpon hem in heuenes he 
shal thondre; the Lord shal deme the 
eendis of erthe®, and he shal 3yue em- 
pyre to his kyng, and he shal hie3 the 
uhorn of his Crist. And Helchana wente 
in Ramatha, into his hows; forsothe the 
child was seruatnt in the si3t of the 
Lord before the face of Hely the preest. 
12 Forsothe the sones of Hely the sones of 
13 Belial, not knowynge the Lord, ne the 
office of preestis to the puple; but who 
so euere hadde offerd the slayn sacrifyce, 
the child of the preest cam, while the 
flesh were sothen, and hadde a flesh hook 
l4thre tothid in his hoond; and he putte 
it into the leede, or into the cawdroun, 
or into the pot, or into the greet panne ; 
and al that the fleshook reryde, the preest 


I siencis 4. ™ feble men x pr.m. 


multiplie to speke hiz3e thingis, and haue 
glorie’; elde thingis go awey fro 3oure 
mouth; for God is Lord of kunnyngis, 
and thou3tis ben maad redi to hym. The4 
bouwe of strong men is ouercomun, and 
sijki men ben gird with strengthe. Mens 
fillid‘ bifore settiden hem silf to hire for 
looues, and hungri men ben fillid; while! 
the bareyn womman childide™ ful manye, 
and sche that hadde many sones, was 
sijke". The Lord sleeth, and quikeneth ; 6 
he® ledith forth to hellis°, and bryngith 
a3en. The Lord makith pore, and? makith7 
riche; he makith low, and? reisith4. Hes 
reisith' a nedi man fro poudur, and ‘he 
reisith’ a pore man fro dryt, that he sitte 
with princes, and holde the seete of glorie ; 
for the endis of erthet ben of the Lord, 
and he hath set the world on" tho. Hes 
schal kepe ‘the feet of hise seyntis’, and 
wickid men schulen be stille to gidere in 
derknessis; for a man schal not be maad 
strong in his owne strengthe. Aduersa-10 
ries of the Lord schulen drede hym, and 
in” heuenes he schal thundre on* hem; 
the Lord schal deme the endis of erthe, 
and he schal 3yue lordschip to his kyng, 
and he schal enhaunse the horn, ‘that zs, 
power, of his Crist. And Helcana 3ede11 
in to Ramatha, in to his hows; forsothe* 
the child was seruant in the si3t of the 
Lord bifor the face of Ely the preest. 
Forsothe the sones of Hely eweren sones* 12 
of Belial, and knewen® not the Lord, ne-13 
ther the office of preestis to the puple; but 
who ener hadde offrid sacrifice, the child 
of the preest cam, while the fleischis weren 
in sething, and he hadde a fleischhook with 
thre teeth in his hond; and he sente® it14 
in to the ‘grete vessel of stoon’, ethir in to 
the caudrun, etbir in to the pot, ethir® in 
to thef panne; and what euer tling® the 
fleischhook* reiside!, the preest took* to 


nhe ec. © the erthe BEFH. 


h glorie theryn 1. ifeble 1. * fulfillid. 1 til scpreuaNnorensuwxb. vnto 1. to EL. ™ childe agr. 
a maad sijk 1. Cand a. Oohillis a. Pand het. reisith up. ' upreisith 1. § upreisith 1. tthe erthe 1. 


unpon 1. V hise seyntis fect 1. Wfro1. * upon 1. 


yOm. x prom. Zandi. 4 the sones 1. b thei 


knewen 1. © putte c scc.m. m. puttide 1. 4 stonen vessel1. Corr. fOm.cno.ak. 8 flesh 1. 


hhook 1. lcauzte x. took that 1. 
VOL. II. 


Cc 


10 I. KINGS. 


took to hym self; so thei diden to al 
15 Irael of men comynge in Silo. Also or? 
that thei brenten the fat, the child of the 
preest cam, and seide to the offrere, 3if 
to me flesh, that I seethe to the preest; 
I shal not take forsothe sothen flesh, but 
igrawe. And the offrere seide to hym, Be 
brent first after the maner to day the 
talw3, and tak to thee as mych as thi 
soule desireth. The which answerynge 
seide to hym, Nay, forsothe nowe thow 
shalt 3yue; ellis I shal tak bi forse. 
17 Therfor the synne of the children was 
greet wel mych before the Lord; for thei 
drowen awey men fro the sacrifice of 
isthe Lord. Forsothe Samuel seruede be- 
fore the face of the Lord, a child gird 
ig With a surplesse. And a litil coote his 
moder made to hym, the which she 
brou3t the ordeyned days, stiynge vp 
with hir man for to offre a solempne 
2000st, and hir vowe. And Hely blesside 
to Elchana and to his wijf; and he seide 
to hym, The Lord 3eelde to thee seed of 
this womman, for the encrees that thou 
hast lent to the Lord. And thei wenten 
21into her place. Thanne the Lord visitide 
Anne, and she conseyuede, and bare thre 
sones and two dou3tren’. And the child 
Samuel is magnyfied anentis the Lord. 
22Forsothe Hely was wel oold, and he 
herde alle thingis that his sones diden 
in al Yrael, and what maner wise thei 
slepten with wymmen, the whiche weyt- 
23eden at the dore of the tabernacle. And 
he seide to hern, Whi doon 3e siche maner 
thingis, the which I here werst thingis of 
24a] the puple? Wole 3e not, my sones ; it is 
not good loos that Y here, that 3e maken 
25to trespas the puple of the Lord. If a 
man synneth in a man, God may be plesid 
to him; forsothe if in to the Lord a man 


II. 15——25. 


hym silf!; so thei™ diden to al Israel of 
men comynge in to Silo. 3he bifor that 1s 
‘the sones of Hely™ brenten the ynnere 
fatnesse, the ‘child of the preest® cam, and 
seyde to the offerere, 3yue ‘thou fleisch to 
me?, that Y sethe4 to the preest; for Y 
schal not take of thee sodun fleisch, but 
raw. And ‘the offrere™ seide to hym, The‘ 16 
ynnere fatnesse bet brent first" to day bi’ 
the custom, and take thou to’ thee hou 
myche euer thi soule desirith. Whiche* 
answeride, and seide to hym, Nay, forY 
thou schalt 3yue’ now ; ellis? Y schal take 
bi violence. Therfor the synne of the chil-17 
dren® was ful greuouse bifor the Lord ; for 
thei withdrowen men fro the ‘sacrifice of 
the Lord4. ‘Forsothe Samuel, a child®ie6 
gird with a lynnun clooth, mynystride‘ 
bifor the face of the Lord. And his moder 19 
made to hym a litil coote, which® sche 
brouzte ini daies ordeyned*, and stiede! 
with hir hosebonde, that he schulde™ offre 
a solempne offryng, and his auow. And 20 
Heli blesside Helcana and his wijf; and 
Heli" seide ‘to hym", The Lord 3elde to 
thee seed of this womman, for the 3ifte 
which® thou hast 30ue to the Lord. And 
thei 3eden in to her place?. Therfor the 21 
Lord visitide Anna, and sche conseyuede, 
and childide thre sones and twei dou3tris. 
And the child Samuel was ‘magnyfied at4 
the Lord. Forsothe’ Hely was ful eld, 22 
and he herde alle ‘thingis whiche’ hise 
sones diden in al Israel, and hou thei 
slepten with wymmen, that awaitident at 
the dore of the tabernacle. And he" seide23 
to hem’, Whi doen 3e siche thingis, the 
worste thingis whiche” Y here of al the 
puple*? Nyle 3e, my sones’; it is not good? 24 
fame, which? Y here, that 3e make the 
‘puple of the Lord” to do trespas. If a25 
man synneth a3ens a man, God may be 


Per BCEFH. 4 do3tris ce. 

10m.i. ™the prestist. "their. © prestis child 1. P tome the fleisch 1, 4seke itr. * he that 
offride 1. § Be first ther. tOm.i. tOm.1. Vaftir1. Withanneto1. %*the whicher. Y but 1. 
z3yvueitr. forellist. take it1. ¢sones of Hely prestis1. 4% Lordis sacrifice1. ¢ Certis the 
child Samuel 1. fseruydei1. & the whichi. bher. ito himinthe1.  ordeyned to yffrer. | sche 
stiede up 1. ™wolder. 2 Om.1. © that 1. P place e3en1. 4maad wondirful gret anentis 1. * And 1. 
8 the thingis that 1. ¢waitiden1, 'Hely1. Vhissones1. Wthat 1. * puple of Israeli. Y sones, 
do soi. 2agoodr, @thatx. b Lordis puple 1. 


Il. 26—34. 


synneth, who shal preye for hym? And 
thei herden not the voyce of her fader, 
26for God wold sleen hem. Forsothe Sa- 
muel the child profitide, and wexe; and 
27 he pleside both to God and to men. For- 
sothe there cam a man of God to Heli, 
and seith to hym, Thes thingis seith the 
Lord, Whether not apertly Y am shewid 
to the hows of thi fader, whanne thei 
weren in Egipt, in the hows of Pharao? 
2s And I cheese him of alle the lynagis of 
Yrael to me in to preest, that he shulde 
stie vp to myn anter, and brenne to me 
encense, and beer before me ephot; and 
I haue 3ouen to the hows of thi fader 
alle thingis of the sacrifices of the sones 
egof Yrael. Whi with the heele 3e han 
throwen awey my slayn sacrifice, and 
my 3iftis, that I haue comaundid to be 
offred in the temple; and more thou 
hast honourede thi sones than me4, that 
je my3ten eete the cheefe thingis of al 
30 the sacrifice of Yrael, my puple? Ther- 
for seith the Lord God of Yrael, Spekynge 
I haue spoken, that thin hows and the 
hows of thi fader serue in my si3t into™ 
with out ende; forsothe nowe seith the 
Lord, Awey be that fro me; but who so 
euere honourith me, Y shal glorifie hym ; 
forsothe who dispisen me, shulen be vn- 
zinoble. Loo! the dais comen, and I shal 
kut of thin arme, and the arme of the 
hows of thi fadre, that there be not an 
3200ld man in thin hows. And thou shalt 
see thin enemye in the temple, in alle the 
welsum thingis of Yrael; and there shal 
not be an oold man in thin hous alle dais. 
33 Neuerthelater I shal not doo awey fulli 
fro thee a man fro myn auter, but that 
thin eyen faylen, and thi lijf fayle; and a 
greet parti of thin hows shal die, whanne 
34to mannus age it shal come. Forsothe 
this shal be the tokne, that is to come to 


I. KINGS. 11 


plesid to him{; forsothe® if a man syn- +86 plesia to 

neth azens the Lord, who schal preye for “i” >i Prayeris 

hym{? And thei? herden not the vois of © 

her fadir, for God wolde sle hem. Wor-20 sacks fin; 

sothe the child Samuel profitide, and en- pict ees 

creessyde, and pleside bothe God and men. him bi siche 
thingis, nethe. 

Sotheli® a man of God cam to Hely, and 27 ee ne 

seide to hym, The Lord seith these thingis, iere.c. | 

Whether Y was not schewid apertli to the 

hows of thi fadir, whanne he was in E- 

gipt, in the hows of Farao? And Y chees 28 

hym of alle lynagis of Israel ‘in to® preest 

to me, that he schulde stie to myn auter, 

and schulde brenne encense to me, and 

that he schulde bere bifor me _ preestis! 

cloth; and Y 3af to ‘the hows of thi fadir* 

alle thingis|] of the! sacrifices of the sones alle thingis 

of Israel. Whi hast thou cast awey with29 fen cia. 

the™ heele my sacrifice", and my 3 iftis, gen atin 

whiche® Y comaundide to be offrid in the (mde ithe 

temple; and thou onouridst? more thi eee 

sones than me, that 3e eeten the principal 

partis of ech sacrifice of ‘Israel, my puple%? 

Therfor the Lord God of Israel seith these 30 

thingis, Y spekynge spak, that thin hows 

and ‘the hows of thi fadir™ schulde my- 

nystre’ in my si3t til in to with outen 

ende ; ‘now forsothe' the Lord seith, Fer 

be this fro me; but who euere onourith 

me, Y schal glorifie hym; forsothe" thei 

that dispisen me, schulen be vnnoble. Lo!31 

daies comen, and Y schal kitte awei thin 

arm’, and the arm of the hows of thi 

fadir, that an eld man’ be not in thin 

hows. And thou schalt se thin enemy* in 32 

the temple, in alle prosperiteesY of Israel ; 

and an eld man schal not be in thin hows 

in alle daies. Netheles Y schal not outerli33 

take awei of thee a man fro myn auter, 

but that thin izen faile, and thi soule? 

faile’; and greet> part of thin hows schal 

die, whanne it schal come to mannus age. 

Forsothe® this schal be signe’, that schal s4 


Qmen 4. * vnto BCEFH. 
cbut1. 4hissones1. ©Certis1, fthelynagist. &tobear. hstieupr. iapreestis1. * thi 
fadris hous 1. !1Oim.1, thin. "sacrifices1. the whicher. P hast honourid 1. 4 my puple of 
Israel 1. + thi fadrishous1. §& haue mynystrid 1. ‘tcertisnowi. Ucertis1. Y arm or thi power 1. 


W prest or wijse. x enemyes K. 


ba preet 1. ¢Certis1. 4 the tokene 1. 


y the prosperitees 1. 


Zlijf 1 text. or soule marg. a langwishe 1. 


Cre 


12 


thi two sonys, Ophny and Phynees, in 

350 day thei shulen die bothe. And I shal 
rere to me a trewe preest, that after myn 
herte and soule shal doo; and I sha) bilde 
to hym a trewe hows, and he shal goo 

36 before my Crist alle days. Forsothe it 
is to come, that who so euere abidith’ stil 
in thin hows, he come that it be preyed 
for hym, and he offre a silueren peny, 
and a round kaak of breed, and seye, 
Lete me, Y biseche, to o preeste’ paarte, 
that I eete a morsel" of breed. 


CAP. III. 


1 Child forsothe Samuel mynystrede to 
the Lord before Hely, and the sermoun 
of the Lord was precious; in tho dais 

2was noon opyn visioun. It was maad 
thann on a day, Heli leye in his place, 
and his eyen daswiden, and he my3te not 
see the lanterne of God, before it were 

squenchid. Forsoth Samuel slepte in the 
temple of the Lord, where was the arke 
4of God. And the Lord clepide Samuel; 
the which answerynge seith, Loo! I. 

5 And he ranne to Hely, and seide to hym, 
Loo! Y; thou hast clepid forsothe me. 
The which seide, I haue not clepid thee ; 
turn a3en and sleep. And he 3ede and 

6slept. And the Lord eft leyde to to’ clepe 
Samuel; and Samuel rysynge 3ede to 
Heli, and seide, Loo! Y; for thou hast 
clepid me. The which answeryde, Y 
haue not clepid thee, sone myn; turn 

7a3en and sleep. Forsothe Samuel 3it not 
knewe the Lord, ne the sermoun of the 
8Lord was openyd to hym. And the 

Lord leide to, and 3it clepide Samuel the 
thridde tyme; the which rysynge 3ede 

9to Hely, and seith, Loo! Y; for thou 
hast clepid me. Thanne Hely vndur- 
stood, that the Lord clepide the child; 
and he seith to Samuel, Go and sleep; 


8 abytt BrH. abit Ec. 


e Ofni EP. f bothe thei 1. 
preie p¢mNorarsux. it be preied 1. 
rYamredii. § Andi. 
word 1. Y he clepide 1. 
f Go thou 1. 


& aftir 1. 


Z the which 1. 


I. KINGS. 


t prestis Ec. 


h Om. k. 
™ prestis part I. 
t Om. DGIKMNOW sec.m. 

® roos up I. 


If. 35—III. 9. 


come to thi twei sones Ophym® and Fy- 
nees, bothef schulen die in o dai. And 35 
Y schal reise to me a feithful preest, that 
schal do bi myn herte and my soule; and 
Y schal bilde to hym a feithful hows, and 
he schal go bifore my Crist in alle daies. 
Forsothe! it schal come, that who euer36 
dwellith* in thin hows, he comet that ‘me 
preie! for him, and that he offre a peny of 
siluer, and a cake of breed, and seie, Y 
biseche, suffre thou me to o ‘part of the 
preest™, that Y ete a mussel" of breed. 


CAP. III. 


Forsothe the child Samuel ‘mynystride1: 
to® the Lord bifor Heli, and the word of 
the Lord was preciouse} ; in tho daies was 
noon opyn reuelacioun. Therfor? it was2 
doon in a dai, Heli lay in his bed, and 
hise izjen dasewiden, and he my3te not se 
the lanterne of God||, bifor that it was 
quenchid. Forsothe! Samuel slepte in thes 
temple of the Lord, where the ark of 
God was. And the Lord clepide Samuel ; 4 
and he answeride and seide, Lo! Y*. Ands 
he ran to Hely, and seide to hym, Lo! Y; 
for thou clepidist me. Which’ Hely seide, 
Y clepide not thee; turne thou’ ajen and. 
slepe. And he" 3ede and slepte. And thes 
Lord addide eft to clepe Samuel; and Sa- 
muel roos, and 3ede to Hely, and seide, 
Lo! Y’; for thon clepidist me. And Heli 
answeride, Y clepide not thee, my sone; 
turne thou asen and slepe. Forsothe*,; 
Samuel knew not 3it the Lord{t, nether 
the ‘word of the Lord* was shewid to 
hym. And the Lord addide, and clepideY g 
3it Samuel the thridde tyme;.‘which Sa- 
muel* roos* and 3ede> to Heli, and seide, 9 
Lo! Y; for thou clepidist me. Therfor® 
Heli vndirstood, that the Lord clepide 
the child; and Heli® seide to Samuel, Gof 
and slepe; and if he clepith thee aftir- 


Umussel ce. VY Om. BE. 
i Sothly 1. k schal dwelle 1. 1 men 
2 morsel 1. © sernydet. P Thanne1. 4@ And1. 
u Samuel1. VY herer. WSothly 1. * Lordis 
bwente 1, ¢ Thanner. 4hadclepid1. ¢ he 1. 


+ he come. In 
Ebreu it is, tho 
he come to bow 
for him silf, in 
an halpeny of 
siluer; Ebrews 
expownen tho, 
that preestis 
dwellinge of 
the genera- 
cioun of Hely, 
ou3ten to meke 
hem silf bifor 
the hijeste 
preest, and to 
praye, that 
they my3ten 
serue in the 
temple for the 
priys of an 
halpeny of 
siluer, and of 
a cake of breed 
in the day, and 
the lettre that 
sueth, semeth 
acorde, whanne 
it sueth, and 
he seye, and 

so ferth. Lire 
here. c. 

} was preciouse. 
In Ebreu it is, 
was forbedun 
ethir maad 
derk. c. 

It the lanterne 
of God. Comyn 
Latyn biblis 
han thus, and 
hise tzen dase- 
widen, and he 
my3le not se the 
lanterne of God, 
bifor that it 
was quenchid, 
but certis this 
lettre is cor- 
rupt, as the 
Maistre of 
Stories and 
Lire here 
witnessen, and 
the book of 
Ebreu ques- 
tiouns; therfor 
in Ebreu it is 
had thus, and 
hise t3en dase- 
widen, and he 
my3te not se; 
the lanterne of 
the Lord was 
not 3if quench- 
id. He my3te 
not se the lan- 
terne of God, 
bifor that it 
was quenchid. 


Cb 

§ slepte in the 
temple; that is, 
in a chaumbir 
hisidis the 
temple, where 
dekenes weren 
that kepten the 
temple. Lire 
here. C. 

t+ knewe not 
3tt the Lord ; 
that is, the 
maner of spek- 
ing of the Lord 
with profetis. 
Lire here. c. 


III. 1ro—-20. 


and if herafter he clepe” thee, thou shalt 


seye, Spek, Lord, for thi seruaunt herith.- 


Thanne Samuel wente and slept in his 
toplace. And the Lord cam, and stood, 
and clepide as he clepide the secounde 
tyme, Samuel, Samuel. And Samuel 
seith, Spek, Lord, for thi seruaunt herith. 
11And the Lord seide to Samuel, Loo! Y 
doo a word in Yrael, the which who so 
euere herith, bothe his eeris shulen tyn- 
izclen. In that day I shal arere* a3ens 
Hely alle thingis, the whiche I hane 
spokun vpon the hows of hym; Y shal 
isbigynne, and fulfille. Forsothe I seide 
before to hym, that I was to deme his 
hows without ende for wickidnes ; for thi 
that he knewe his sonys vnworthili to 
14doon, and vndurnam hem not. Therfore 
Y swore to the hows of Hely, that the 
wickidnes of hys hows shal not be doon 
a seeth before’ with slayn sacrifices and 
153iftis ynto with. out. ende. Forsothe 
Samuel slept vnto the morwe, and he 
openyde the dorys of the hows of the 
Lord ; and Samuel dredde to shewe the 
1evisyoun to Hely. Thanne Hely clepide 
Samuel, and seide, Samuel, my sone. The 
17 which answerynge seith, Yam redy. And 
he askide hym, What is the word that 
the Lord hath spoken to thee? Y preye 
thee, ne hele thou fro me; thes thingis 
do to thee God, and thes thingis adde, if 
thou hidist fro me a word of alle the 
is wordis that ben seyd to thee. And Sa- 
muel shewide to hyin alle the wordis, 
and hidde not fro hym. And he an- 
swerde, A Lord he is; that good is in his 
igeyen, do he. Forsothe Samuel wexe, and 
the Lord was with hym, and there felle 
not into the erthe of alle the wordis of 
zohym. And alle Yrael knew3* fro Dan 
vnto Bersabee, that Samuel was the feith- 


Welepeth cz. * reren c. 


y fore BCEFU. 


I. KINGS. 13 


ward, thou schalt seie, Speke thou, Lord, 

for thi seruaunt herith. Therfor? Samuel 

jede and slepte in his place. And theo 

Lord cam, and stood, and clepide as he 

hadde clepid the secunde tyme, Samuel, 

Samuel. And Samuel seide, Speke thou, 

Lord, for thi seruaunt herith. And theu 

Lord seide to Samuel, Lo! Y make a 

wordt in® Israel, which! word who euer +a word; 

schal here, bothe hise eeris schulen rynge*{.  ‘%a.si7e se 
In that dai Y schal reise! ajens Heli alle12 © 4 

thingis, whiche™ Y spak® on his hows; se heeenal ue 
Y schal bigynne, and Y schal ende. For 13 vundiv and 

Y biforseide to hym, that Y schulde deme 78°” 

his hows with outen ende for wickid- 

nesse° ; for he? knew, that lise sones diden 

vnworthili, and he chastiside not hem. 

Therfor Y swoor4 to the hows of Heli, 14 
that the wickidnesse of his fows™ schal 

not be clensid|| bis sacrifices and 3iftis til 

in to with outen ende. 


+ a word; that 


Il schal not be 
clensid, as to 
Forsothet Samuel 15 peyne ordeyn. 


; ‘ d, thous i 

slepte til the morewtid, and he openyde S703... 

the doris of the hows of the Lord; and Rc 

Sainuel dredde to schewe the reuelacionn peyne, en 
at repent- 


to Heli. Therfor Heli clepide Sainuel, 1¢ iden verily. 
and seide, Samuel, my sone. And he an- NEES 
sweride and seide, Y am redi. And Helii7 

axide hym, What is the word which" the 

Lord spak’ to thee? Y preye thee, hide 

thon” not fro me; God do to thee ‘these 
thingis*,.and encreesseY these thingis, if 

thou hidist fro me a word of alle wordis? 

that ben seid to thee. And Samuel schew- 1 

ide to hym* alle the wordis, and ‘hidde 

not® fro hym. And Heli answeride, He is 

the® Lord ; do he that‘, that is good in hise 

izen. Forsothe® Samuel encreeside, and the 19 

Lord was with hym, and noon of alle lise‘ 

wordis feldeé in to erthe§. And al Israel 20 § ix #0 erthe; 
fro Dan to Bersabee knew, that feithful a 
Samuel was a profete of the Lord. Andai jay 2” 
the Lord addide ‘that he schulde appere 


here. C. 


Zknee 4. kne c pr.m. F. 


& Thanne 1. to be Anowen in 1. ithe which1. Ktynelex. !reiseupx. ™that 1. ™ haue spoken 
up. © the wickidnesse theroff 1. P Hely 1. 4 hane swore 1. * meynee or hows 1, 8 with1. * And 
thanne 1. U that 1. Vv hath spoke 1. Witt. x alle these ywelis 1. y encresse he 1. 2 the 
wordis 1, @Hely 1. %hehidde noontr. COm.1. 4Om.c. ¢Certisi. fther.  & felle voide 1. 


htor, 


14 I. KINGS. 


21 ful? prophet of the Lord. And the Lord 
addide that he shulde apere in Sylo, for 
the Lord was shewid to Samuel in Sylo 
after the word of the Lord; and the word 
of Samuel felle ‘into® al Yrael. 


CAP." EV. 


1 And it is doon in tho days Philistien 
camen togidre into fiz3t; forsothe and 
Yrael wente out into batayl to meet 
Phylistien, and he sette tentis bisyde 
the stoon of help. Forsothe Philistien 
2camen into Aphet, and maden shiltroun® 
azens Yrael. Forsothe, the strijf bigun4, 
Yrael turnede backis to the* Philistiens®; 
and there ben slayn in that strijf pas- 
mele bi feeldis as foure thowsandys of 
3men; and the puple is turnede a3en to 
the tentis. And the more thur3 birth of 
Yrael seyden, Whi nath the Lord smyten 
vs to day before Philistien ? Brynge we 
forth to vs fro Sylo the arke of the boond 
of pees of the Lord, and come it in the 
myddil of vs, that it saue vs fro the 
4hoond of oure enemyes. Thanne the 
puple senten into Sylo, and token thens 
the arke of the boond of pees of the 
Lord of oostis, sittynge vpon cherubym. 
And the two sones of Hely, Ophny and 
Phynees, weren with the arke of the 
5 boond of pees of the Lord. And whanne 
the arke of the boond of pees of the 
Lord was comen into the tentis, al Yrael 
cryede out with a greet crye, and the 
6erth thur3 sownede. And Philistien 
herden the voys of the crye, and seiden, 
Forsothe what is this vois of greet crye 
in the tentis of Ebrewis? And _ thei 
knewen, that the arke of the boond of 
pees of the Lord was comen into the 
7tentis. And Philistien dredden, seiynge, 


atrewe E pr.m. to BCEH. 
P 


f Filisteis c passim. 


ieftin 1. * Lordis word 1. 1! forsothe 1. 
athe backisr. Yasar. * Om1. 
x the Filisteis 1. Y the boond 1. 


two1. the boond1. e€tentis1.  f for joie criede 1. 
k And what 1. (tentisi1. ™ the castels cpELPQSUWX. 
tentis 1. P the Philistees 1. 


¢ schetrome E passim. 


m the Filisteis 1. 
t men of Israel 1. 
Z the boond 1. 


Ili. 21-—1V. 7. 


ini Silo, for the Lord was schewid to Sa- 
muel in Silo bi the ‘word of the Lord‘; 
and the word of Samuel cam to al Israel. 


CAP. IV. 


And it was doon in tho daies Filisteis1 
camen to gidere in to batel; for! Israel 
3ede out ajens Filisteis™ in to batel, and 
settiden” tentis bisidis the stoon of help. 
Forsothe® Filisteis camen in to Aphet, 
and maden redi scheltrun ajens Israel. 
Sotheli? whanne the batel was bigunnun, 
Israel turned backis4 to Filisteis; and as? 
foure thousynde of* ment weren slayn in 
that batel ‘euery where" bi feeldis’; and 
the puple of Israel turnede ajen to 
tentis”. And the grettere men in birthe 
of Israel seiden, Whi hath the Lord smyte 
vs to dai bifore Filisteis*? Brynge we to 
vs fro Silo the arke of boondY of pees of 
the Lord, and come it in to the myddis 
of vs, that it saue vs fro the hond of oure 
enemyes. Therfor the puple sente in to4 
Silo, and thei token fro thennus the arke 
of boond? of pees of the Lord of oostis, 
‘that sat on® cherubyn. And Ophym? and 
Fynees, twei® sones of Heli, weren with 
the arke of boond’ of pees of the Lord. 
And whanne the arke of boond of pees ofs 
the Lord hadde come in to the castels®, al 
Israel criede’ with grete cry, and the erthe 
sownede. And Filisteis® herden the vois of 6 
cry, and seiden', What* is this vois of 
greet cry in the castels! of Ebrews? And 
thei knewen, that the arke of boond of 
pees of the Lord hadde come in to cas- 
tels™. And Filisteis® dredden, and seiden, 7 
God is come in to ‘the castels°; and theiP 
weiliden, and seiden, Wo to vs! for sos 


4 gon in £ pr.m. begunnen sec.m. ¢ Om. cE. 


1 Israel sette 1. ©And the 1. P And 1. 
uouerali, the feeldis1. W her tentis 1. 
a sittinge upon. > Ophny pixsec.m. PE. ¢ the 
& the Filisteis1. 2 hercry1. thei seiden 1. 
the tentis of Israel, the Filisteis 1. © her 


Iv. 8—18. 


God is comen into the tentis; and in- 
swardly thei weiliden, seiynge, Woo to 
vs! forsothe there was not so mych 
gladynge 3isterday®, ne before 3istirday® ; 
woo to vs! who shal kepe vs fro the 
hvondis® of thes hei3e goddis? thes ben 
the goddis that smyten Egipt bi al ven- 
9iaunce in deseert. Takith coumfort, and 
‘be 3e! men of Philistien, ne serue 3e to 
Ebrewis, as thei serueden to vs; takith 
10coumfort, and fi3tith. Thanne Philystien 
fou3ten, and Yrael is hewen down, and 
echon flee3* into his tabernacle; and there 
is doon a wel greet veniaunce, and there 
fellen of Yrael thretti thowsandis of foot 
ivmen. And the arke of God is taken, and 
the two sones of Hely ben deed, Ophny 
yzand Phynees. Forsothe rennynge a man 
of Beniamyn fro the sheltroun cam into 
Sylo in that day, rent the clooth, and 
i3sspreynt! with powdre the heed; and 
whan he was comen, Hely sat vpon 
the litil seet ajens the weye abidynge; 
forsothe his herte was dredynge for the 
arke of the Lord. Forsothe that man 
after that he is goon yn, toolde to the 
lacytee, and al the cytee 3ellide. And 
Hely herde the sown of the crye, and 
seide, What is this sown of this noyse ? 
And he hiede, and cam, and toold to 
is Hely. Forsothe Hely was of nynty and 
ei3t 3eer, and his eyen dasweden, and he 
iginy3t not se. And he seyde to Hely, Y 
am that am comen fro the batayl, and 
Y that haue flowen fro the shiltroun to 
day. To whom he seith, What is doon, 
17sone myn? Answerynge forsothe he that 
toold, seith, Yrael hath flowen before the 
Philistiens, and a greet fallynge is doo 
in the puple; also and thi two sones been 
deed, Ophny and Phynees, and the arke 
isof God is takun. And whanne he hadde 


I. KINGS. 15 


greet ful4 ioiyng was not* 3istirdai, and 
the thridde day passid; wo to vs! who 
schal kepe vs fro the hond’ of ‘these hi3et 
goddis? these ben the goddis, that smyt- 
iden" Egipt with al veniauncet in deseert. + with al ven- 
Filisteis’, be 3e coumfortid, and be 3e men, 9 eee 
serue 3e not” Ebrews, as thei serueden* {e804 
vs’; be 3e coumfortid, and fizte 3e7. Ther- 10 Pea 
for? Filisteis® fou3ten, and Israel wag moun not now 
slayn’, and ech man flei? in to his taber-  jerec. mA 
nacle; and a ful greet veniaunce was maad, 

and thretti thousynde of foot men of Israel] 

felden doun. And the arke of God was11 
takun ; and, twei® sones of Heli, Ophym‘ 
and Fynees, weren deed. Sotheli€ a man 12 
of Benismyn ran fro the scheltrnn, and 
cam in to Silo in that dai, with his cloth 
torent and his? heed bispreynt with dust; 
and whanne he was comen, Heli sat ‘on ani 13 
hize* seete, ‘and bihelde! aj3ens the™ weie; 
for his herte was dredyng for the arke of 
the Lord. Sotheli® aftir that thilke man 
entride®, he telde to the? citee, and al the 
citee 3ellide. And Heli herde the soun of 14 
ery‘, and seide', What is this* sown of 
this noise? And het hastide, and cam, and 
telde to Heli. Forsothe"® Heli was of foure 15 
score 3eer and ei3tene, and hise izen dasi- 
widen’, and he my3te not se. And he 16 
seide to Heli, Y am* that cam fro bately, 
and Y am? that flei* to dai fro the schel- 
trun. To whom Ely seide, My sone, what 
is doon>? Forsothe® he that telde an-17 
sweride, and seide, Israel flei4 bifor Fi- 
listeis*, and a greet fal! is maad in the 
puples; ferthermore and thi twey sones, 
Ophym® and Fynees, ben deed, and the 
arke of God is takun. And whanne he1s 
hadde! nemyd* the arke of God, Hely felde 
fro ‘the hize! seete baeward bisidis the 
dore, and ‘was deed; for the nollis{™ 
weren brokun". For he was an eld man, 


t for the nollis. 
In Ebreu it is, 
for his necke 

was brokun. c. 


8 3istai c. 3istay e. bhonde sceru. ibethce. * fleth ze. 1! sprengd cz. 

Qouti. tnottherer, ‘hondisk. tthen Usmyteni. Vv and it was seid, Filisteis 1. W not 
tother. *hansernedr. Yto3our. 7 3¢ azens Isracel1. &Thanner. » the Filisteis 1. ¢ oner. 
comenr. ‘4 fledder. ¢ the two 1. f Ophny E1Px see. m. ¢And1. 4} with his 1. t on his c. 
uponar, kOm.1. labidynger ™ Om. qr seem. 2 Andi. ©hadde entrid1. P men of the 1. 
Qthecryr. theseider ‘ther, tthemanzr. tAndr. Vderkedent. Wthe mani. *am het. 
Ythe batel1. 2Zamher. % fledder. b ther don 1. ce Andi. ‘hath fledr.  ¢ the Filisteis 1. 
Ffallyng1. & puple of Israel1. 4 Ophny eipx secem. 4Om.1.  * nempned ceitmpuw. namid Rr. 


lhis 1. ™ his skulles 1. 


2 broke and he was deed 1. 


16 I. KINGS. 


nemnyd the arke, he felle fro the litil 
seet backward biside the dore, and the 
scullis brokun, he is deed. Forsothe an 
oold man he was, and of greet age; and 
19he demyde Yrael fourti! 3eer. His dou3- 
tre in lawe forsothe, the wijf of Phynees, 
was with child, and ny3 to the berynge ; 
and the messager herde that the arke 
of God was takun, and hir fader in lawe 
deed, and hir man, she bowide hir self, 
and bare child; forsothe there fellen in 
20 hir sodeyn sorwis. Forsothe in that mo- 
ment of her deeth seiden to hir, that 
stoden about hir, Ne drede thow, for a 
sone thow hast born. The which an- 
swerde not to hem, forsothe ne took hede. 
21 And she clepide the child Hicaboth, sei- 
yuge, Translatid is the glorye of the Lord 
fro Irael, for takun is the ark of God; 
and for hir fader in lawe and for hir 
gzmiman she seith, Translatid is the glorie 
of God fro Yrael; forthi that the arke 
of God was takun. 


CAP. V:; 


1 Philistien forsothe token the arke of 
God, and‘ beren it fro the stoon of help 
2into Azoth. And Philistien token the 
arke of God, and brou3ten it into the 
temple of Dagon, and setten it beside 
3Dagon. And whanne Azothis weren 
rysen eerli the tother day, loo! Dagon 
lay redi in the eerth before the ark of 
the Lord. And thei token Dagon, and 
4setten it ajen in his place. And eft, 
eerly the tother day rysynge, thei fonden 
Dagon liynge vpon his face in the erthe 
before the arke of the Lord. Forsothe 
the heed of Dagon, and the two palmys 
of his hoondis weren kut awey vpon the 
5thresshwold ; forsothe the stok of Dagon 
aloone lafte in his place. For this cause 
the preestis of Dagon, and alle that goon 
into his temple, treden not vpon the 
thresshwold of Dagon in Azoth ynto the 


IV. 19——V. 5. 


and of greet age; and he demyde Israel 

bi? fourti 3eer. Forsothe? his dou3ter in19 

lawe, ‘the wijf of Finees‘, was with childe, 

and ni3 the child bering ; and whanne ‘the 

message was herd" that the arke of God 

was takun, and that hir fadir in lawe was 

deed, and hir hosebonde, sche bowide hir 

silf’, and childide; for sodeyn sorewis 

felden in to hir. Sothelit in that moment 20 

of hir deeth, wymmen" that stoden aboute 

hir, seiden to hir, Drede thou not, for thou 

hast childid a sone. And sche answeride 

not to hem, for’ nether ‘sche perseyuede”. 

And sche clepide the child Ichabotht, and 21 ft Toctth aa 
seide, The glorie of the Lord is translatid — glorie. Lire 
fro Israel, for the arke of God is takun®; ““* “ 
and for hir fadir in lawe and for hir hose- 

bonde sche seide, The glorie of God is22 
translatidY fro Israel, for the arke of God 

is* takun. 


CAP. V. 


Forsothe* Filisteis token the arke of! 
God, and baren> awey it fro the stoon of 
help in to Azotus. And Filisteis* tokun 2 
the arke of God, and brou3ten it to4 the 
temple of Dagon, and settiden it bisidis 
Dagon. And whanne men of Azotus had-3 
den rise eerli in® the todir dai, lo! Dagon 
lay low in the erthe bifor the arke of the 
Lord. And thei token Dagon, and re- 
storiden hym inf his place. And eft thei4 
risiden$ eerli in the tothir day, and found- 
en" Dagon liggynge on his face on! the 
erthe bifor-the arke of the Lord. For- 
sothe* the heed of Dagon, and twei! 
pawmes of his hondis weren kit™ of" on® 
the threisfold; certis? the stok aloone ofs 
Dagon lefte in his place. For this cause 
the preestis of Dagon, and alle that entren 
in to his temple, treden not on‘ the threis- 
fold’ of Dagon in Azotus til’ in tot this 


! forurti a. 


°Om.1. PAnd1. 4 Finees wijf 1. 
Uthei1. vVOm.1. Wtoke heede 1. 
b baren it1. © the Filisteis 1. 
iupont.  Andt. 
r threxhold 1. 


1 the two 1. 
8 Om.1. t ynto 1. 


‘ sche herde bi the messangere 1. 
Xx taken awei 1. 
d into DEFGIKLMNOPX. 

m broken 1. kutte K. 


ssilfdouny. t And. 
Zwas plures. 8 And ther. 
S risen 1. » thet founden 1. 
Supont, Pandi. upon. 


Y taken awel 1. 
eintoo. fintor 
" off 1. 


V. 6-——12. 


éday that is nowe. Forsothe the hoond 
of the Lord is greggid vpon the Azothis, 
and he wastide hem, and he smoot A- 
zothe and his coostis in the more priue 
party of the arsis; and the towns and 
feeldis booyleden out in the mydil of that™ 
regioun, and myis ben born; and there is 
doon a greet confusioun of deeth in the 
zeytee. Men forsothe of Azoth seynge 
siche a maner veniaunce seiden, Dwel 
not the arke of God of Yrael anentis vs; 
for hard is his hoond vpon vs, and vpon 
8Dagon oure god. And seendynge thei 
gedreden to hem self alle the maystris of 
Philistiens, and seiden, What shulen we 
doo of the arke of God of Yrael? And 
Gethey answerden, The arke of God of 
Yrael be turned about; and thei turn- 
eden about the arke of God of Yrael. 
9Forsothe hem turnynge it about, the 
hoond of the Lord of a greet slau3ter wel 
mych was doon vpon alle the cytees; 
and he smoot the men of ech cytee fro 
litil ynto more, and the arsroppis of hem 
goynge out stonken; and Gethey wenten 
into counseil, and maden to hem lJetheren 
loseetis. Thanne thei senten the arke of 
the Lord into Acharon. And whanne 
the arke of the Lord was comen into 
Acharon, Acharonytis cryeden out, sei- 
ynge, Thei han brou3t to vs the arke of 
God of Yrael, that he sle vs and oure 
upuple. Thei senten thanne, and gedriden 
togidre alle the maystrys of Philistiens ; 
the which seiden, Leeue 3e the arke of 
God of Yrael, and be it turned a3en into 
his place, and sle it not vs with oure 
izpuple. Forsothe dreed of deth was maad 
in alle the cytees, and moost greuous was 
greetli the hoond of the Lord. Forsothe the 
men, that weren not deed, weren smyten 
in the priuyer party of the arsis, and the 
3ellynge of ech cytee stiede vp into heuene. 


I. KINGS. 


17 


dai. Forsothe the hond of the Lord was6é 
maad greuouse on" men of Azotus, and 
he¥ distriede hem, and he smoot Azotust 
and the coostis therof in the priuyere” 
part of buttokis*; and townes’{ and feeldis 
in the? myddis of that cuntrey buyliden 
out®, and myis camen forth; and greet 
confusioun of deth was maad in the citee. 
Sotheli® men of Azotus sien siche a ven-7 
iaunce, and seiden*, The arke of God of 
Israel dwelle not at’ vs; for his® hond! is 
hard on’ vs, and on Dagon oure god. Ands 
thei senten, and gaderiden® alle the wise 
men, ‘ether princes’, of Filisteis ‘to hem‘, 
and seiden, What schulen we do of the 
arke of God of Israel? And men! of Geth 
answeriden, The arke of God of Israel be 
led aboute; and thei ledden aboute the 
arke of God of Israel. Forsothe™ whiles 
thei ledden it aboute, the hond of the 
Lord ‘of ful greet sleyng” was maad on® 
alle citees?; and he smoot men of ech 
citee fro a litil man til’ to ‘the more’, and 
the loweret entraylis ‘of hem" wexiden 
rotun, and camen forth; and men of Geth 
token counsel, and maden’ to hem” seetis 
of skynnes, ethir cuyschuns. Therfor thei 1o 
senten the arke of the Lord in to Acco- 
ron. And whanne the arke of the Lord 
hadde come in to Accoron, men of Acco- 
ron crieden, and seiden, Thei han brought 
to vs the arke of God of Israel, that he sle 
vs and oure puple. Therfor* thei senten, 11 
and gaderidenY alle the wise men, ‘ethir 
princes’, of Filisteis; whiche* seiden, De- 
lynere 3e the arke of God of Israel, and 
turne it a3en in to his place, and sle not? 
vs with oure puple. For dreed of deeth 12 
was maad in alle.citees, and the hond of 
the Lord was ‘greuouse greetli*. Also* the 
men, that weren not deed, weren smytun 
in the priuy® part! of buttokis’, and the 
3elling of ech citee stiede" in to heuene. 


m the 4, 

tupon1. Vthe Lord1. more priueer. * her taileendis1. Ythetownes1. 2Om.1. ? out 
myist. > Andi. ¢ thei seident. 4anentis1. ¢therx. ‘hond of God1. upon. >} gaderiden to 
hem 1. 10m. cpermnosx pr.m. * Om.1. !the meni, ™ Andi. 2 Om.1, Supony.  P the citees 
aboute of ful gret slauztere 1. dchild1. tOm.1. %amore mani. ther priuey nether}, Om. 1. 
Y thei maden 1, whem self1. * Thanne 1. Y gaderiden togidere 1. 2 Om. pGrmNnogsx pr.m. 8 the 
whiche 1. >notthe Lordi. ¢fulgreuouser. 4 Andy. ©€ prinyer Bow. f parties 1.  & her but- 
tokis 1.) stiede up 1. 

VOL. I. D 


+ he smoot 
Azotus, that is, 
men dwelling 
there. c. 

tand townes ; al 
this vers is not 
in Ebrew, til 
thidur, Sothely 
men of Axotus, 
Lire here. c. 


18 I. KINGS. VI. 1—9. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Was thanne the arke of the Lord in 
the regioun of the Philistiens seuen 


2monethes; and after thes thingis Phi- 


listiens clepiden the preestis and dyuyn- 
ours, seiynge, What shal we doon with 
the arke of God? Shewe 3e vs, what 
maner wyse we shulen sende it a3en ‘in 
3to" his place. The whiche seiden, If 3e 
senden az3en the arke of God of Yrael, 
wole 3e not leeue it voyde, but that 3e 
owen, 3eldeth to hym for the synne; and 
thanne 3e shulen be heelid, and 3e shulen 
knowe, whi that his hoond goth not a wey 
4fro 30w. The whiche seiden, What is 
that for the trespasse we owen to 3eeld to 
sit? And thei answerden®, After noumbre 
of prouyncis of Philistiens fyue golden 
arsis 3e shulen make, and fyue golden 
myis; for o plage was to 3ow alle and 
to 30ure maistris. And 3e shulen make 
a lienesse of 3oure arsis, and a licnesse of 
the myis that han wastid the loond; and 
3e shulen 3yue to the God of Yrael 
glorye, if? perauenture he releue his 
hoond fro 3ou, and fro 30ure goddis, and 
6fro 3oure loond. Whi agreggen 3e 30ure 
hertis, as Egipt agreggide, and Pharao 
his hert? Whether not after he is 
smyten, thanne he lafte hem, and thei 
73eden awey? Nowe thanne takith, and 
makith a newe weyn, and ioyneth two 
kyen that han calued late, in the weyn, 
to whom is not put on 30k; and reclosith 
sher calues at home. And 3e shulen take 
the arke of the Lord, and putte in the 
weyn; and the goldun vessels that 3e han 
payed out to it for the trespas, 3e shulen 
put in a litle cofre at the side of it; and 
9leeue 3e it, that it goo. Aud 3e shulen 
biholden, forsothe and if bi the weye of 
her coostis it stie vp a3en Bethsames, it 


CAP. VI. 


Therfor the arke of the Lord was in! 
the cuntrei of Filisteis bi! seuene monethis; 
and aftir these thingis Filisteis* clepiden!2 
preestis and false dynynours, and seiden, 
What schulen we do of the arke of God ? 
Shewe 3e to vs, hou we schulen sende it™ 
in to his place". Whiche® seiden, If 3e3 
senden aj3en the arke of God of Israel, 
nyle 3e delyuere it voide, but 3elde 3e to 
hym that?, that 3e owen for synne; and 
thanne 3e schulen be heelid, and‘ 3e schu- 
len wite, whi ‘his hond? goith not awei 
fro 3ou. And thei seiden, Whats is it, that 4 
we owen to 3elde to hym' for trespas®? 
And thei answeriden to hem, Bi thes 
noumbre of prouynces’ of Filisteis 3e 
schulen make fyue goldun ersis, and fyue 
goldun myis; for o veniaunce was to alle 
3ou and to 30ure ‘wise men, ether princes. 
And 3e schulen make the licnesse of 3o0ure 
ersis, and the licnesse of myis that dis- 
triede 3oure lond; and 3e schulen 3yue 
glorie to God of Israel, if in hap he with- 
drawe his hond* fro 30u, and fro 3oure 
goddis, and fro youre lond. Whi makené 
3e heuy 3oure hertis, as Egipt, and Farao 
‘made heuy’Y his” herte ? Whether not after 
that he was smytun, thanne he delyuerede 
hem*, and thei 3eden forth? Now ther-7 
for take 3e, and make? o° newe wayn, and 
ioyne 3e4 twei kien hauynge caluys, on® 
whiche kyen no 30k was put; and close 
3e her calues at hoome. And 3e schuleng 
take the arke of the Lord, and 3e schulen 
sette in the wayn; and 3e schulen put in 
a panyeref at the side therof® the goldun 
vessels, whiche 3e" payeden' to hym* for 
trespas'; and delyuere 3e the arke, that 
it go™. And 3e schulen biholde", and so-9 
theli if it stieth® ajens Bethsames? bi the 
weie of ‘hise coostis’, ‘he dide™ to 3ou this 


Ato E. ° answerden to them £ pr.v.  P lest E pr.m. 


iOm.1. the Filisteis1. | clepiden ¢ogidere1. ™itagen1. place of itr. © The whiche 1. 


P that thing 1. Gand sor. © the hond of God 1, 
provynces 1. princes c. wise men DGMNOQX. 


s What thing 1. *God1. ouretrespas1. ¥ the 
xwrath 1. Ygreuyder Zherr. & Goddis peple 1. 


b make 3e a. maketh 1. Carr. 43etherynr. uponther. ‘litilecoffrer. — & of the ark 1, 
hthei eLpru. ‘han paied perkmnogsxb. the Lord 1. 1 30ure trespas 1. ™ go forth 1. ® biholde 
i##1, © gothup1. P Bethasames a. thor, * the Lord hath thanne do 1. 


VI. 10——18. 


hath doo to 30u this greet yuel; forsothe 
if not, we shulen wyte that the hoond 
of it hath not towchid vs, but by hap it 
10 hath fallun. Thanne thei diden this wise; 
and takynge two kyen that 3auen calues 
sowke, thei ioyneden to the wayn; for- 
sothe the calues of hem thei closiden at 
iihome. And thei putten the arke of God 
vpon the wayn, and the litle coofre that 
hadde the golden myis, and the licnes of 
izarsis. Forsothe the kyen 3eden euen ry3t 
bi the weye that ledith to Bethsames ; 
and in o weye thei wenten goynge and 
loowynge, and thei boweden not asyde 
ne to the ry3t ne to the left; but and 
the maystris of Philistyens folweden ynto 
i3the teermys of Bethsames. Forsothe 
Bethsamytis repiden whete in the valey, 
and rerynge vp the eyen thei seen the 
arke, and thei ioyeden, whanne thei had- 
i4den seen. And the wayn cam into the 
feeld of Josue Bethsamyte, and stood 
there. Forsothe a greet stoon was there; 
and thei heweden! the trees of the wayn, 
and the kien thei putten vpon, the brent 
issacrifice to the Lord. Forsothe Leuytis 
putten down the arke of God, and the 
litil coofre that was biside it, in the 
which weren the golden vessels; and thei 
putten vpon the greet stoon. Forsothe 
Bethsamytis men offreden brent sacrifice, 
and slewen sacrifices in that day to the 
16Lord. And the fyue maystris of Phi- 
listiens seen, and ben turned a3en into 
17 Acharon in that day. Forsothe thes ben 
the golden arsis, the whiche Philistiens 
for the trespas 3olden to the Lord; Ajot 
oon, Gaza oon, Ashalon oon, Geth oon, 
18 Acharon oon; and goldun myis after the 
noumbre of Philistiens cytees, of the fyue 
prouyncis, fro wallid cytee vnto toun that 
was with outen wal, and ynto greet Abel, 


I. KINGS. 


19 


greet yuel; but if nay’, we schulen wite 
‘for hist hond® touchide not vs, but ‘if it 
bifelde’y bi hap. Therfor’ thei diden into 
this manere; and thei token twei kien 
that 3auen mylk to caluys*, and ioynedenY 
to the wayn; and thei closiden her calnys 
at hoome. And thei puttiden’ the arke of 11 
God on? the wayn, and ‘thei puttiden the 
panyere®, that hadde the goldun myis, and 
the lienesse of ersis ‘on the wayn*, Sotheli®i2 
the kien 3eden strei3tli bi the weie that 
ledith to Bethsames ; and thiof 3eden’ in o 
weie goynge and lowynge, and bowiden" 
not nether to the ri3t side nether! to the 
left side; but also the wise men of Filis- 
teis sueden ‘til to‘ the termes! of Beth- 
sames. Forsothe™ men of Bethsames rep-13 
iden whete in the" valey, and thei reisiden® 
the? ijen, and sien the arke, and thei weren 
ioyful, whanne thei hadden sien ‘the arke4. 
And the wayn cam in to the feelde of 14 
Josue of Bethsames, and stood’ there’. 
Forsothe' a greet stoon was there; and 
thei® kittiden’ ‘the trees of ¥ the wayn, 
and puttiden® theY kien ‘on tho trees’, a 
brent sacrifice to the Lord. Sotheli* de-1s 
kenes® token doun the arke of God, and 
the panyere’, that was bisidis it, where 
ynne the goldun vessels weren; and thei 
settiden? on® the greet stoon. Forsothef 
the men of Bethsames offriden brent sacri- 
fices, and offriden’ slayn sacrifices in that 
dai ‘to the Lord®. Aud fyue! princes* of is 
Filisteis sien, and turneden! a3en in to 
Accoron in that dai. Sotheli™ these ben 7 
the goldun™ ersis, whiche the Filisteis 
3eldiden to the Lord for trespas°; Azotus 
3eldide oon; Gaza 3eldide? oon; Ascolon 
3eldide?, oon; Geth 3eldide? oon; Acca- 
ron 3eldide? oon; and Flisteis’ 3eldidens 
golden myis bi‘ the noumbre of ‘citees of 
Filisteis* of fyue prouynces, fro a wallid 


@ hewyn cE. 


Sit go not thider1. that the 1. 


a hond of the Lord 1. 


vif it fel x. it bifelde p. this thing hath 


fallen to us1. W Thanner. *her caluys1. Y thei ioyneden hemi. 2 puttens. @upont. > Om.1. 
© jitil coffer. ¢Om.1. ¢ Andy. fthilke kijnt. 8 wentens. thei bowidenr. ‘nex * vntot. 
1coostis1. ™ Andi. "ar. Olifteupr. Pherrt. itr. Titstood1. $Sthere stiller. t And 1. 
umen of Bethsames 1. Vhewiden1. WOm.1. * upon that wode thei puttideni. Ythor, 2 Om. 1. 
aAnd1. » the dekenes1. ¢ itil coffrer. 4 puttidenthor. Cuponr. fAndr. 8 Om.1. 4 Om. 1. 
ithe fyner. ksatrapis1. 1! thei turneden 1. m And 1. 2 mennus goldun 1. © her trespas I. 
POm.1. 4 the Filisteis 1. ' aftiri. § her citees 1. 


D 2 


20 


vpon the which he putte the ark of the 
Lord, that was vnto that day in the 
19 feeld of Josue Bethsamyte. Forsothe he 
smoot of the men of Bethsamyte, for that 
thei hadden seen the arke of the Lord, 
and he smoot of the puple seuenti men, 
and fifti thowsandis of the raskeyl. And 
the puple weyliden, whanne the Lord 
hadde smyten with a greet veniaunce the 
20comoun puple. And the men of Beth- 
samyte seiden, Who shal mowe stoond 
in the si3t of this holy Lord God, and 
21to whom shal he stye vp fro vs? And 
thei senten messagerys to the dwellers of 
Caryathyarym, seiynge, Philistiens han 
brou3t ajen" the arke of the Lord; com- 
eth doun, and bryngeth it aj3en to 3ow. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Thanne the men of Caryathyarym 
camen, and brou3ten ajen the arke of 
the Lord, and beren it into the hows of 
Amynadab in Gabaa. And thei halweden 
Eleazer his sone, for he shulde kepe the 

zarke of the Lord. And it is doon, fro 
what day the arke of the Lord dwellide in 
Caryathiarym, multiplied ben the days ; 
forsothe nowe was the twentithe 3eer ; 
and al the hows of Yrael restide after 

3the Lord. Forsothe Sammel seith to al 
the hows of Yrael, seiynge, If in al 3oure 
herte 3e turnen to the Lord, doth awey 
alien goddis fro the mydil of 30w, Ba- 
alym and Astaroth; and makith redi 
joure hertis to the Lord, and serueth to 
hym alone; and he shal delyuere 3ow 
4fro the hond’ of Philistyens. Thanne the 
sones of Yrael token awey Baalym and 
Astaroth, and serueden to the Lord alone. 

5 Forsothe Samuel} seide, Gederith al Yrael 
in to Masphat, that Y preye the Lord for 
630u. And thei cainen togidre in Masphat, 


T ajens 4. Om. 2B. 


tynto 1. an vnwalled town 1. VY vnto 1. 
Y the which ston 1. 
dledeth 1. ¢thei bronztenz. £f And 1x. 

10Om.p. ™thannex. 4 restide zm pes I. 


s Andi. t3e togidere x. "the peple of Israel 1. 


I. KINGS. 


W ston that hizte Abel 1. tabel K sec. m. 

Zynto1 tilinto K pr.m.xXsec.m. in to E. 

& that 1. 
o And i. 


VI. 19 —VILI. 6. 


citee ‘til to‘ ‘a town that was with out 
wal", and ‘til to’ the greet Abel+¥, ‘on 
which* thei puttiden the arke of the Lord, 
thatY was there ‘til in? that dai in the 
feeld of Josue of Bethsames. 
the Lord smoot of the men of Bethsames, 
for thei hadden seyn the arke of the Lord, 
and he smoot of the puple seuenti men{, 
and fifty thousynde of the porail. And 
the puple morenyde, for the Lord hadde 
smyte ‘the puple* with greet veniaunce. 
And men of Bethsames seiden, Who 
now stonde in the si3t of the Lord God 
of this hooli thing, and to whom schal it 


t+ greet Abel, 
that is, a stoon, 
and is inter- 
pretid mo- 
renyng. Lire 


Forsothe 19 “re. ¢. 


+ and he smoot 
of the peple 
seuenti men 3 
for foure cansis 
the Lord smoot 
the peple; for 
vnresonahle 
gladnesse, that 
cam of the 
liztnesse of 
heed, and not 
of du reuve- 


schal 20 rence; and for 


brent sacrifice 
offrid ynduly 
of kyn, for 
femalis schuld- 


stie> fro vs? And thei senten messan-g1 en not be of- 


geris to the dwelleris of Cariathiarym, 
and seiden, Filisteis® han brou3t ajen the 
arke of the Lord; come 3e doun, and lede* 
it a3en to 3ou. 


CAP. VII. 


Therfor men of Cariathiarym camen,} 
and ledden a3en the arke of the Lord, and 
brou3ten® it in to the hows of Amynadab 
in Gabaa. Sothelif thei halewiden Eleazar 
his sone, that he schulde kepe the ark of 
the Lord. And it was doon, fro which$2 
dai ‘the arke of the Lord! dwellide in 
Caryathiarym, daies' weren multiplied || ; 
for* the twentithe 3eer was! now", after 
that Samuel bigan to teche the puple ; 
and al Israel restide® aftir the Lord. For-3 
sothe® Samuel spak to al the hows of Is- 
rael, and seide, If in al 3oure herte 3e 
turnen a3en to the Lord, do 3e awei alien 
goddis, Balym and Astaroth, fro the myddis 
of 30u; and make 3e redi 3oure hertis to 
the Lord, and serue 3e hym aloone; and 
he schal delyuere 30u fro the hond of Fi- 
listeis?, Therfor the sones of Israel diden 4 
awey Baalym and Astoroth, and serueden4 
the’ Lord aloone. Forsothe*’ Samuel seide, 5 
Gadere 3e al Israel" in to Masphat, that 
Y preie the Lord for jou. And thei camené 


S hoondis 4. 


X pon whom i. 
€ the Filisteis 1. 

k and 1. 
r to the 1. 


aiti. » stie ups. 
h that the Lordis arke 1x. ! the daies 1. 
P the Filisteis 1. 4 thei serneden 1. 


frid in to brent 
sacrifice to the 
Lord, as it is 
seid in i. c°. of 
Leuyt.; and 
for they weren 
sGrid bi curi- 
ouste to se the 
nakid arke, 
whiche thing 
is forbodun 
undur the 
peyne of deth 
in foure c°. of 
Numeri; and 
for they suf- 
friden the arke 
to dwelle out 
of hows, and 
with out list 
and du reli- 
gioun. Ebrews 
undurstonden 
thus the noum- 
bre of men 
slayn here ; 
they seyen that 
onely seuenti 
men weren 
smytun, whiche 
weren of so 
greet reputa- 
eioun, that 
they weren 
comparisound 


-to one thou- 


sinde of the 
comyn peple ; 
for therfor the 
principal men 
of the peple 
weren smytun, 
for they ou3ten 
ordeyne the 
peple, and bi- 
fore be war of 
the forseid of- 
fensis. Lire 
here. C. 

|| daies were 
multiplied, in 
whiche Samuel 
excitide the 
puple to good. 
Lire here. c. 


VIL. 7-—14. 


and thei drewen water, and heelden out 
in the si3t of the Lord ; and thei fastiden 
in that day, and seiden, To thee we han 
synned, Lord. And Samuel demyde the 
7sones of Yrael in Masphat. And Phi- 
listiens herden that the sones of Yrael 
weren gedryd in Masphat; and the sa- 
trapis of Philistiens stieden vp to Yrael. 
The which thing whanne the sones of 
Yrael hadden herd, thei dredden fro the 
gface of Philistiens. And thei seiden to 
Samuel, Ne ceese thow for vs to crye 
to the Lord oure God, that he sane vs 
9fro the hond' of Philistyens. Forsothe 
Samuel took o sowkynge loomb, and of- 
frede it into hool brent sacrifice to the 
Lord. And Samuel criede to the Lord 
for Yrael; and the Lord herde hym. 
10 Forsothe it is doon, whanne Samuel of- 
frede brent sacryfice, Philistiens to-goon 
into batayl a3ens Yrael. Forsothe the 
Lord thundryde with greet crakkynge in 
that day vpon the Philistiens, and he 
feeride hem; and thei ben slayn fro the 
uface of Yrael. And the sones of Yrael 
goon out fro Masphat, pursueden Phi- 
listiens, and smyten hem ynto the place 
igthat was vndur Bethaar. Forsothe Sa- 
muel took a" stoon, and putte it betwix’ 
Masphat and betwix” Sen; and he clep- 
ide the name of that place The stoon of 
help. And he seide, Hidir to the Lord 
ishath holpen to vs. And Philistiens ben 
mekid, and no more ouer thei leiden to 
that thei camen into the teermys of 
Yrael. And so is doon the hoond of the 
Lord vpon Philistyens alle the days of 
14Samuel. And the cytees that the Phi- 
listiens token fro Yrael, ben 3olden ajen 
to Yrael, fro Accharon vuto Geth and his 
teermys ; and he delyueride Yrael fro the 
hoond of Philistyens; and pees was bi- 


1 


I. KINGS. o1 


togidere in to Masphat, and thei’ drowen 
watir, and shedden” out in the ‘si3t of the 
Lord*; and thei fastiden in that day, and 
seiden, Lord, we synnedenY to thee. And 
Samuel demyde the sones’” of Israel in 
Masphat. And Filisteis* herden that the7 
sones of Israel weren gaderid® in Mas- 
phat; and the princes of Filisteis stieden® 
to Israel. And whanne the sones of Is- 
rael hadden herd this, thei dredden of the 
face of Filisteis. And ‘thei seiden® to Sa-8 
muel, Ceesse thou not to crye for vs to oure 
Lord God, that he saue vs fro the ‘hoond 
of Filisteis®. Forsothef Samuel took o9 
soukynge lomb, and offride that® hool in 
to brent sacrifice to the Lord. And Sa- 
muel criede to the Lord for Israel; and 
the Lord herde hym. Forsothe® it was 10 
doon, whanne Samuel offryde brenti sacri- 
fice, that* Filisteis! bigunnen batel ajens 
Israel. Sotheli™ the Lord thundride with 
greet thundur® in that dai on® Filisteis, 
and madeP hem aferd; and thei weren 
slayn of the sones of Israel. And then 
sones of Israel 3eden4 out of* Masphat, 
and pursueden Filisteis*, and smytident 
hem ‘til to" the place that was vndur 
Bethachar. Forsothe’ Samuel took o stoon, 12 
and puttide¥ it bitwixe Masphat, and bi- 
twixe* Sen; and he clepide the name of 
that place The stoon of help. And he 
seide, Hidir to the Lord helpideY vs. And 13 
Filisteis? weren maad low, and addiden® 
no more to come in to the termes of Is- 
rael. And so the ‘hond of the Lord» was 
maad on¢ Filisteis in alle the daies of Sa- 
muel. And the citees whiche’ the Filis- 14 
teis token’ fro Israel, weren 3oldunf to 
Israel, fro Accaron ‘til to® Geth and ‘hise 
termes; and the Lord delyuerede Israel 
fro the hond of Filisteis; and pees was 
bitwixe Israel and Ammorreyf. Alsoi1s pet ad 


ueden to Israel 
vndur tribut. 


thoondis 4. toon pe. oo mn. Y bytwene ar. betwen £. betwec. W bytwene pry. betwen ce. Lire here. . 
¥Om. pk. Wheldenit 1. * Lordis si3t 1. yYhansynnedi. 2hous1. the Filisteis1. > gaderid 
to gidere 1. ¢stieden upr. 4 Israel criede 1. ¢ Philisteeshoond 1. fAnd1. itz. » And. # the 
brent 1. * Om. pexmnogsxb. ! the Filisteisr. ™And1. ‘%thundring Kx. ©uponther. Phe 
made 1. dwenten1. ‘frox. § the Filisteis1, tsmoteni. Uvntor Vv Andi. W putter, x Om.1. 
y hath helpid 1. z the Filisteis1. thei addidens. »Lordishond:. ¢uponthes, 4 that1. 
© hadden take 1. f3oldunajeni1. & vnto1 4 the coostis of Geth1. 4 And. 


22 I. KINGS. 


1twix* Yrael and Ammorre. Forsothe 
Samuel demyde Yrael alle the days of 

his lijf; and wente bi eche jeer enuy- 
rounynge Bethel, and Galgal, and Mas- 
phat, and he demyde Yrael in the forseid 

I7placis; and turned aj3en in to Ramatha, 
forsothe there was his hows; and there 
he demyde Yrael, and he bildide vp there 
also an anter to the Lord. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Forsothe it is doon whanne Samuel 
wexe oold, he putte his sones domesmen 
2of Yrael. And the name of his first 
geten sone was Joel, the name of the 
secounde Abya, domysmen in Bersabe. 
3And the sones of hym wenten not in his 
weyes, but boweden aside after aueryce, 
and thei token 3iftis, and thei peruert- 
4iden doom. Thann alle the more thur3 
birth of Yrael gedrid, camen to Samuel 
sin Ramatha. And thei seiden to hym, 
Loo! thou art waxen oold, and thi sones 
goon not in thi weyes; ordeyn to vs a 
kyng, that he deme vs, and as alle na- 
ecyouns han. And the word displeside in 
the eyen of Samuel, forthi that thei had- 
den seid, 3if to vs a kyng, that he deme 
ys. And Samuel preide to the Lord. 
7 Forsothe the Lord seide to Samuel, Here 
the voys of the puple in alle thingis that 
thei speken to thee; forsothe thei han 
not throwun awey thee, but me, lest Y 
sregne vpon hem. Aftir alle her werkis 
that thei han doo, fro the day that Y 
ladde hem out of Egipt vnto this day, as 
thei forsoken me, and serueden to alien 
9 goddis, so thei doon also to thee. Nowe 
thanne here the voyce of hem; neuer- 
thelater take hem togidre to witnesse ; 
aud sey before to hem the ri3t of a kyng, 


VII. 15—VIII. 9. 


Samuel demyde Israel in‘ alle the daies 

of his lijft, that ts, ‘til to! the ordeynyng +4 ate 
and confermyng™ of Saul"; and he 3ede°t 16 the ordeynyng 
bi ‘alle 3eeris?, and cumpasside Bethel, and —jng of Saul. c. 
Galgal, and Masphat, and he demyde Is- dea obi oa 
rael in the forseid places. And he turnede 17 trauelandcostis 
ajen in to Ramatha, for his hows was __ peple in couen- 
there; and he demyde Israel there, and he 


able places, as 
it seid in xii. c°. 
bildide there also an auter to the Lord. 


Lire here. c. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe1 it was don, whanne Samuel) 
hhadde™ wexide® eld, he settidet hise sones 
iugis® on’ Israel. And the name of hiseg 
firste gendrid” sone was Johel, and the 
name of the secounde was* Abia, iugisY 
in Bersabee. And hise sones 3eden? not in3 
‘the weies of hym?, but thei bowiden after 
aneryce, and thei token 3iftis, and per- 
uertiden® doom. Therfor alle the grettere4 
men in birthe of Israel weren gaderid°, 
and camen to Samuel in to Ramatha. Ands5 
thei seiden to hym‘, Lo! thou hast wexid¢ 
eld, and thi sones goen not in thi weies; 
ordeyne thou a kyng to vs, ‘that he deme 
vs‘, as also alle naciouns? han. And thee 
word displeside in the izjen" of Samuel, for 
thei hadden seid, 3yue thou to vs a kyng, 
that he deme vs. And Samuel preiede to 
the Lord. Forsothe: the Lord seide to7 
Samuel, Here thou the vois of the puple 
in alle thingis whiche thei speken to thee; 
for! thei han not caste awey thee™, but 
me, that Y regne not on™ hem. Bi alle her®s 
werkis whiche? thei diden4, fro the day 
in whiche Y ledde hem out of Egipt ‘til 
to this dai, as thei forsoken* me, and 
seruyden‘ alien goddis, so thei doon also 
to thee. Now therfor here thou her vois;9 
netheles*t witnesse" thou to’ hem"; bifor- 
seie* thou to hem’ the ri3t of? the kyng, 


x bytwene Bri. betwen Er. betwe c. 


kOm.1. infor, ™Om.N. 2 gloss omitted in crqsx pr.m.b. © wente 1. Pech 3eer1. GAnd 1. 
rOm.1 Swaxen EKL. 'setter. to beingist. Vof pErKLMOX. Wgoten1. *Om.1. Y that 
weren iugis 1. 2wentent. 4 his weies 1. b misturneden 1. ¢ gaderid togidere 1. d Samuel 1. 
ewexer. !Om. xk. § othere naciouns1. }si3tt. i Andi. Kthat 3. J forsothe 1. ™ thee fro hem 1, 
ouponr ther Pthatr dhandor. ‘'‘vnto1 Shan forsaker. ‘thei han serned1. tt and 
netheles b. take 1. vOm. 1. w hem togidere and witnesse thou to hem 1. x and biforseie IL. 


y hem and witnesse thou to hem Kx. 2 on K. 


VIII. 1o—22. 


10 the which is to regne vpon hem. And so 
Samuel seide alle the wordis of the Lord 
to the puple, that askiden of him a kyng ; 

liand seith, This shal be the ri3t of a kyng, 
that is to comaunde to 30u; 30ure sonys 
he shal take, and putte in his charys; and 
he shal make to hym ryders, and before 

1zrenners of his long cartis; and he shal 
ordeyn to hym rewlers of thowsandis, 
and rewlers of hundridis, and ereres of 
his feeldis, and repers of cornys, and 
smythis of aarmys, and of his charis. 

13 Forsothe 3oure dou3tres he shal make to 
him oynement makers, and fier makers, 

i4and clothmakers. Forsothe 3oure feeldis 
and vynes and olyues, the best he shal 

istake, and 3yne to his sernauntis. But 
and 3oure cornys, and the rentis of vynes 
he shal tithe, that he 3yue to geldyngis 
igand to his seruauntis. Forsothe 3oure 
seruauntis and hoondwymmen, and the 
best 3onge men and assis he shal take 
izawey, and putte in his werk. Forsothe 
3oure flockis he shal tithe, and 3e shulen 
isbe to him seruauntis. And 3e shulen 
crye in that day fro the face of 3oure 
kyng, whom 3e han chosun to 30w; and 
the Lord shal not here 30u in that day, 

19 for 3e han askid to 30u a kyng. Forsothe 
the puple wolden not here the vois of 
Samuel, but seiden, Nay, forsothe a kyng 

20 shal be vpon vs; and we forsothe shulen 
be as other folk of kynde, and oure kyng 
shal deme vs, and he shal go out before 
vs, and he shal fi3t oure batayl for vs. 

21 And Samuel herde alle the wordis of the 
puple, and spak hem in the eeris of the 

22 Lord. Forsothe the Lord seide to Sa- 
muel, Here thow the voys of hem, and 
set vpon hem a kyng. And Sainuel seith 
to the men of Yrael, Goo ech man into 
his cytee. 


I. KINGS. 23 


that schal regne on* hem. Therfor® Sa-10 + This schal le 
. . the rizt of th 
muel seide alle the wordis of the Lord to Whar ie 
Oe he ° ‘ .  thingis teld 
the puple, that hadde axid of him a king; j278"+ Samuel 
and he seide, This schal be the ‘rizt of the 11’ of the rist 
of rewme and 
kyng°f, that schal comaunde to 30n; he eee ae ll 
nede tor com 
schal take 3oure sones, and schal® sette® good af the . 
ey, : : for i 
in hise charis; and he schal make hem 12 sich a cans alle 
‘to hym silf rideris, and biforegoeris of 
hise cartis; and he schal ordeyne to hym 


goodis of the 
rewme ben the 
tribunes, ‘that is, souereyns of a thou- 


kingis, netheles 
tho schuJen be 
sct forth and 


: . spendid for 
synd®, and centuriouns, ‘that is, soue- aan profit 
* th ee ee and good. If 
reyns of an hundrid™, and eereris' of the Sect the 
hise feeldis, and reperis of cornes*, and ing is takun 
in an other 


smythis of hise armeris, and charis!,  maner out of 
5 5 nede, so ful 
Also he schal make jo0ure dou3tris makeris 13 many thingis 
P ‘ ij ben expressid 
of ‘oynementis to hym silf™, and fueris®, Gr samuel, that 
190 . perteynen not 
and bakeris*. And he schal take 3oure 14 Pyne Or 
feeldis and vyneris? and the beste places DR baile 
Z o thingis th 
of olyues, and schal4 3yue™ to hise ser- male Oat 
° le suget ser- 
uauntis. But also he schal take the is hylechir thal, 
ie * *.s and whiche 
tenthe part of 3oure cornes, and rentis® fhingis bihold- 
rTgt u is ~ en not comyn 
of vyneris‘, that he 3yue to his chaum So eae 
berleyns and seruauntis. Sotheli” he schal 16 the splioar a 
+ singiuer man 
take awey 3oure seruauntis and” hand- set in the 
a e rewme;: and 
maydes*, and besteY 3ong men, and assis*,  sarmnel bifor 
a b 3 G 6 » seide siche 
and schal* sette® in his werk. Also he 17 thingis tabeat 
schal take the tenthe part of 3oure flockis, % withdrawe 
: ‘ hern that they 
and 3e schulen be ‘seruauntis to hym*. achulden not 
* * axe a kyng, for 
And 3e schulen crye in that dai fro the iit was not” 
spedeful 
face of 3oure kyng, whom 3e han chose je). 
to 30u; and the Lord schal not here 3ou Et, 
in that dai; for 3e axiden a kyng to 30u. _ in totirauntrie, 
4 . for greetnesse 
Sotheli? the puple nolde® here the vois of 19 of pawer 
‘ auntid to 
Samuel, but thei seiden, Nay}, for’ a kyng tae hating 
‘ h it sueth and 3e 
schal be on® vs; and we also" schulen be20V pre eee 
ist . uauntis to him. 
as alle folkis', and oure kyng schal deme 4» ae 
vs, and he schal go ont* bifor vs, and he gouernal is 
turn in to 
schal fi3te oure batel! for vs. And Samuel 2) tirauntrie, 
. hiche thing i 
herde alle the wordis of the puple, and Yoon tity. 


‘ m: . 4 »_ 99 nameli in parti 
spak tho™ in the eeris of the Lord. For-22;a" a 
sothe" the Lord seide to Samuel, Here fone ot eee 

‘ ing. erfor 
thou ‘the vois of hem®, and ordeyne thou 
a kyng on? hem. And Sainuel seide to the 


in xvij. c°. of 
Deut’. a king 
men of Israel, Ech man go in to his citee. 


is comanndid 
ta kepe him silf 
fro pride, co- 
etyse and ty- 
rauntrie. Lire 


supont. > Thannex. ¢kyngisriz3tr. heschalr. ¢settehems. 1Om.1. 8 or sovereyns on bei an 
thousindis 1. Om. x pr.m. » Om. 1x prim. itilieris 1. & his cornes 1. of his charis 1. ™ his oyne- i nee Pa 
mentis 1. ™ his fire makers 1, © his makers of bred 1. P 30ure vyneris1. Qheschali. "3yne thot. chal not fore 
‘the rentis 1. t3oure vynerist. "3yue thor. Vandi. Wand jowrer. * handmaydens per. Y 30ure sake to here vs, 
beste 1. %30ure assis. @heschals. » sette these r. ¢ his seruauntis, 4 Andi. ¢€ wolde not 1. ifwe hana 
fcertis1. Suponr. hOm.1x. i folkis ben 3. * forth1. J batels scrw. ™hespakhem1, ® And 1. ibd ia 


© her voices 1. P upon 1, 


24 


CAP. IX. 


1 And there was a man of Beniamyn, 
Cys bi name, the sone of Abyel, soneY 
of Seor, soneY of Bethor, soneY of Aphya, 
soneY of the man of Gemyny, stronge bi 

zstrength. And ther was to hym a sone, 
Saul bi name, chosyn and good; and there 
was not a man of the sones of Israel 
betere than he; fro the shuldre and aboue 

3he peeryde aboue al the puple. For- 
sothe the shee assys of Cys, fadre” of 
Saul, weren lost. And Cys seide to Saul 
his sone, Tak with thee oon of the chil- 
dren, and rysynge go, and seche the she 
assis. The which whanne thei hadden 
apassid bi the mount of Effraym, and bi 
the loond of Saliza, and thei hadden not 
foundun, thei passiden also bi the loond 
of Salym, and there was noon; bot and 
by the loond of Gemyny, and thei founden 
snot. Forsothe whanne thei weren comen 
into the loond of Suph, and hadden not 
foundun, Saul seide to his chijld that was 
with hym, Come, and turne we a3en; lest 
perauenture my fadre leeue the she assis, 
sand be bysie for vs. The which seith to 
hym, Loo! the man of God is in this 
cytee, a noble man; al that he spekith, 
with out dout it cometh. Now thanne 
goo we thidre, if perauenture he shewe 
to vs of oure weye, for the which we ben 
z7comen. And Saul seyde to his child, 
Loo! we shulen go; what shulen we 
brynge to the man of God? Breed faylith 
in oure sackis, and a lepe we han not, that 
we 3yuen to the man of God, ne eny other 
8thing. Eft the child answerde to Saul, 
and seith, Loo! there is founden in myn 
hoond the feerth part of a sicle of siluer ; 
and 3yue we to the man of God, that he 
9shewe to vs oure weye. Sumtyme in 


¥ the sone E pr.v. 


4 ther was a man 1. 
hi3t Gemyny 1. 
b Om. 1. 


' that higte Cys 1. 
va strong man I. 
Csche1. 4 gon forth 1. 


I. KINGS. 


8 the sone I. 
w upward 1. 
€ thei hadden 1. 


IX. 1—9. 


CAP. IX. 


And ‘a man was? of Beniamyn, ‘Cys bi1 
name’, the sone of Abiel, sone® of Seor, 
sone® of Bethor, sone’ of Aphia, sone’ of 
thet man Gemyny’*, strong’ in bodili my3t. 
And to hym was a sone, Saul bi name,2 
chosun and good{; and no manj of the 
sones of Israel was betere than he; fro 
the schuldur and aboue’ he apperide ouer 
al¥ the puple. Sotheliy the femal? assis of3 
Cys, the fadir of Saul, perischyden*||. And 
Cys seide to Saul his sone, Take with thee 
oon of the children, and rise thou, and go, 
and> seke the femal® assis. And whanne 
thei hadden go? bi the hil of Effraym, and4 
bi the lond of Salisa, and hadden® not 
foundun’, thei passiden® also bi the lond 
of Salym, and tho weren not there; but 
also ‘thet passideni bi the lond of Gemyny, 
and founden* not. Sotheli! whanne theis 
hadden come in to the lond of Suph, and 
hadden™ not founde, Saul seide to his 
child that was with hym, Come thou, 
and turne we ajen; lest perauenture my 
fadir hath" lefte® the? femal9 assis, and is 
bisy’ for vs. Which’ child seide to hym,6¢ 
Lo! thet man of God is in this citee, a 
noble man; al thing that he spekith, cometh 
with out doute. Now therfor go we thidir, 
if perauenture he schewe to vs" of oure 
weie, for which we camen. And Saul7 
seide to his child, Lo! we schulen go; what 
schulen we bere to the man of God? Breede 
failide’ in oure scrippis, and we han no 
present”, that we 3yue to the man of God, 
‘nether ony othir thing*%. Eft the childs 
answeride to Saul, and seide, Lo! the 
fourthe part of ‘a stater, that is, a cicle, of 
siluerY is foundun in myn hond; 3yue we? 
to the man of God, that he schewe to vs 
oure weie*. Sumtyme in Israel ech mang 


% the fadre E pr. v. 


tarz Om. N. 
x Om. 1. y And 1. 
f foundun hem 1. 


a of Gemyny cx pr.m. that 
Zsche1. 4 weren lost 1. 
& passiden forth 1, } thei 1. 


iOm.1. * 3it thei founden 1. 1} Forsothe plures. And1. ™ thei haddeni. ® hauer. © lefte fo charge 1. 


P thes E. his kK. Om. yu. 9Om. 1. 
v hath failid 1. 


a wher we schul go ferther or no 1 marg. 


; ¥ bisy in herte or careful 1. 
W present monei neither ony other thing 1. 


8 And ther. 


x Om. 1. 


tar Dvys the cause 1. 
Yasiluern sicler1, 2 we it1. 


+ chosun and 
good, with out 
notable wem of 
vices; good, bi 
resoun of goode 
maueris and of 
vertues. C. 
tno man,and so 
forth, not onely 
he was good, 
but also of ex- 
cellent good- 
nesse. Lire 
here. C. 

Il perischiden, 
that is, stray- 
eden, for tho 
perisechiden not 
outirly, that 
weren fonndun 
aftirward. Lire 
here. C. 


IX. 10—I19. 


Yrael thus spak echon goynge to coun- 
seyle God, Cometh, and goo we to the 
seer; forsothe he, that to day is seid a 
10 prophet, sumtyme was clepid seer. And 
Saul seide to his child, Altherbest is thi 
word; com, go* we. And thei wenten 
into the cyte,in the which was the man 
110f God. And whanne thei stieden vp the 
hil of the citee, thei founden children 
wymmen goynge out to drawe watir, and 
thei seiden to hem, Whether here is the 
igseer? The which answerynge seiden to 
hem, Here he is, loo! before thee; hye 
nowe, forsothe to day he cam into the 
cytee ; for to day is sacrifice of the puple 
i3in the hei3e. Goynge into the cyte anoon 
3e shulen fynde hym, or he stie vp into 
the hize for to eete; forsothe ne the pu- 
ple is to eete to the tyne that he come, 
for he shal blesse to the oost, and there 
after shulen eete that ben clepid. Nowe 
thanne stieth vp, for to day 3e shulen 
i4fynde hym. And thei stieden vp into the 
cytee. And whanne thei wenten in” the 
mydil of the cyte, Samuel aperyde go- 
yuge out metynge to hem, that he stye 
isvp into the hei3. Forsothe the Lord 
hadde toold the litil eer of Samuel before 
160 day, that Saul cam, seiynge, This same 
our that nowe is to morwe, Y shal seende 
to thee a man of the loond of Beniamyn, 
and thow shalt anoynt hym duyk vpon 
my puple Yrael, and he shal saue my 
puple fro the hoond of Philistyens; for 
I haue biholden my puple, forsothe the 
izerye of hem is comen to me. And 
whanne Samuel hadde beholden Saul, the 
Lord seide® to hym, Loo! the man that 
I seide to thee; this shal lordship to my4 
ispuple. Forsothe Saul neizede to Samuel 
in the mydil of the 3ate, and seith, Shewe 
to me, Y preye, where is the hows of the 
ig9seer ? And Samuel answerde to Saul, sei- 


I. KINGS. 25 


goynge to counsel God’ spak thus, Come 
je, and go we to the seere; for he, that 
is seid ‘to dai® a profete, was clepid sum- 
tyme a seere. And Saul seide to his child, io 
‘Thi word is the beste’; come thou, go 
wee. And thei 3eden in to the citee, ‘in 
whichf the man of God was®. And whanne11 
thei stieden” in to the hijnesse of the citee, 
thei founden damesels goynge out to drawe 
watir, and thei seiden to the dameselis, 
Whether the seere is here? Whiche! dame- 12 
selis answeriden, and seiden to hem, He is 
here; lo! he is bifor thee; ‘haste thou* 
now!, for to day he cam in to the citee; 
for to dai is sacrifice of the puple in the 
hi3 place. 3e schulen entre™ in to the1s 
citee, and anoon 3e schulen fynde hym, 
bifor that he stie" in to the hi3 place to 
ete; for the puple schal not ete til® he 
come, for he schal blesse the sacrifice, 
and afterward thei schulen ete that ben 
clepid. Now therfor stie 3e?, for to day 
3e schulen fynde hym. And thei stieden414 
in to the citee. And whanne thei 3eden in™ 
the’ myddis of the citee, Samuel apperide 
goynge out ajens hem, that he schulde 
stiet in to the hi3 place. Forsothe® the1s 
Lord ‘hadde maad’ reuelacioun in the eere 
of Samuel ‘bifor o dai, that Saul cam, 
and seide, In this same our which* is now 16 
to morewe, Y schal sende to thee a man of 
the lond of Beniamyn, and thou schalt 
anoynte hym duyk onY my puple Israel, 
and he schal saue my puple fro the hond 
of Filisteis; for Y haue biholde my puplef, + ¥ Aaue ti- 
for? ‘the cry of hem? cam” to me. And 17 oni ac 
whanne Samuel hadde biholde Saul, the 22%,” 
Lord seide to Samuel, Lo! the man, whom 
Y seide to thee; this man schal be lord of 
my puple. Forsothe® Saul neijede to Sa-1s 
muel in the myddis of the 3ate, and seide, 
Y preye’, schewe thou to me, where is 
the hows of the seere? And Samuel an-19 


aand goce. into a. ¢seith ce. 4 the x pr.m. 

b with God1. ¢nowr 4 Ful good is thi word 1. © we fo him. fthat 1. 8 was ynnet. 4 stieden 
up1, i Andther. and haste c. haste thee p. haste 30u E. hie thee 1. 10m. cq. forsothe 1. ™entre 
fortht. ®wendeupt. otilthat1. Py3eupr1. Gwentenups. Tintoapr.m. *Om.EIL. ¢stie 
up i. ® And the dai before that Saulcame 1. Ymade1. WOm.1. *thatrt. Yupon1. 7 forsothe 1. 
ahercry. hath comer. ¢ Andi. 4 preye thee 1. 


VOL. II. 


26 I. KINGS. 


ynge, Y am the seer; sty vp before me 
into the hei3, that thou eete with me to 
day, and Y shal leene thee the morwe- 
tide, and alle thingis that ben in thin 
20herte Y shal shewe to thee. And of the 
assis ‘the which® thre days hens thou 
lostist, ne be thow bysy, for thei ben 
foundun; and of whom shulen be alle 
the best thingis of Yrael, whether not to 
thee, and to al the hows of thi fader? 
21 Forsothe Saul answerynge seith, Whe- 
ther not the sone of Gemyny Y am, of 
the leest lynage of Yrael, and my kyn- 
rede the last among alle the meynees of 
the lynage of Beniamyn? Whi thanne 
hast thou spoken to me thes’ wordis# ? 
22 And so Samuel takynge Saul, and hys 
child, brou3te hem into the hows of thre 
benchis, and he 3af to hem a place in 
the cheefe" of hem that weren bodeni to 
meet; forsothe there weren as thretti 
23men. And Samuel seide to the cook, 3if 
thow the part that I 3af to thee, and co- 
maundide, that thow shulde lay aside 
2tanentis thee. And the cook reryde the 
shuldre, and putte before Saul. And Sa- 
muel seide, Loo! that is laft, put before 
thee, and ete; for of purpos it is kept to 
thee, whanne Y clepide the puple. And 
25 Saul eet with Samuel in that day. And 
thei wenten down fro the hei3 into the 
bur3 town; and he spak with Saul in the 
solere, and he beddide Saul in the solere, 
ggand he sleptej. And whanne eerly thei 
weren rysen, and nowe the day wexe 1i3t, 
Samuel clepide Saul into the solere, sey- 
ynge, Ryse, that’ Y leeue! thee. And 
Saul roos, and bothe thei wenten oute, 
oz7he, that is, and Samuel. And whanne 
thei weren goo down in the vttermost 
parti of the cytee, Samuel seide to Saul, 
Sey™ to the child, that he goo before vs, 


1X. 20——27. 


sweride to Saul, and seide, Y am the 

seere; stie thou® bifor me in to the hi3 

place, that thou ete with me to dai, and 

Y schal delyuere thee in the morewtid, 

and Y schal schewe to thee alle thingis 

that ben in thin herte. And be thou not 20 

bisy of the femal‘ assis, whiche thou 

lostist the+ thridde dai agoon, for thoi 

ben foundun; and whose schulen be alle 

the beste thingis of Israel, whether not 

to thee, and to al the hows of thi fader}? — t.'e He hous 
of thy fadir; 


Sotheli* Saul answeride, and seide, Whe- 21 for Saul was 
kyng, and alle 


ther Y am not a! sone of Gemyny, of the the beste 
leeste lynage of Israel, and my kynrede is — no 
the laste among alle the meynees of the  ‘ingis in nede, 
< and Abner, 
lynage of Beniamyn? Whi therfor hast _ prince of the 
kny3[t)hod,and 


thou spoke to me this word? 'Therfor™ 22 othere mysty 


Samuel took Saul, and his child, and ledde" hows of Saul 
i oO “ari adden the 
hem in to the? chaumbur of thre ordris?, jx chiral 


of the rewme ; 
and so schulden 
her eyris haue 


and he 3af to hem a place in the bigyn- 
nyng of hem that weren clepid4; for" : 
thei weren as thretti® ment. And Samuel 23 pa 
seide to the cook, 3yue thou" the part, in bis sved- 
which’ Y 3af to thee, and comaundide, 7 © 
that thou schuldist kepe bi it silf anentis 

thee. Sotheli” the cook reiside* theYos 
schuldir, and settide? bifor Saul. And 

Samuel seide, Lo! that, that lefte?, ‘sette 

thou” bifor thee, and ete; for of purpos it 

was kept to thee, whanne Y clepide the 

puple*, And Saul eect with Samuel in4 

that dai. And thei camen doun fro the25 

hi3 place in to the citee; and Samuel 

spak with Saul in the® soler, and Saul 

‘araiede a bed in the solerf, and slepte. 

Aud whanne thei hadden rise eerli, and 26 

‘now it bigan to be cleer, Samuel clepide 

Saul in to the" soler, and seide, Rise thou’, 

that Y delyuere thee. And Saul roosk, 

and bothe jeden out, that is, he, and Sa- 

muel. And whanne thei 3eden doun in27 

the laste part of the citee, Samuel seide 


@that cpr.m. fthis cen. & worde B. woord ce. word FH. }heuyd £. i byden scr. bedyn en. 
jshepte 4. * thou gE prim. !schal leeue £ pr.m. exp. s.m. ™ Seide a. 

ethouup1. fOm.1. gwhomi. inther itheix k Andi. IJther mAndsoxr "he 
leddet. Sat Pseetist. Ghodentothe mete1. ‘andr Sathrettir. t men at mefe1. thou 
himi. Vthatr. WaAndr *tokeupt Yar. Zhesetteit1. hath left1. taker. ©¢ puple 
hideret. TOm.1. €at. fbeddide him therer. @theday1. bar. ithouupt *roos up. 


xX. 1—6. 


and passe forth; forsothe thow stoond 
stil a litil, while that Y shewe to thee the 
word of the Lord. 


CAPS X. 


1 Samuel forsothe took a ‘litil brytil® 
vessel of oyle, and heelde out on his heed, 
and he kisside hym, and seith, Loo! the 
Lord hath anoyntide thee vp on his ery- 
tage into a prince; and thow shalt de- 
lyuer his puple fro the hoondis of her 
enemyes, ‘the which® ben in enuyrounP 
of it. And this to thee a tokne, for the 
Lord hath anoyntide thee into a prince ; 

2whanne thow gost to dai fro me, thow 
shalt fynde two men byside the sepulcre 
of Rachel, in the coostis of Beniamyn, in 
the mydday4, feermynge™ greet dichis ; 
and thei shulen seye to thee, The she 
assis ben foundun, to the whiche to be 
sou3t thou wentist; and thi fader, the 
meen while the assis laft, is bisy for 3ow, 
and seith, What shal Y do of my sone? 

3And whanne thou gost thens, and fer- 
ther passist, and comest to the ook of 
Thabor, thre men shulen fynde thee 
there, stiynge vp to God into Bethel, 
oon’ berynge thre kyddis, and another 
berynge thre‘ kakis of breed, and another 
4berynge a galoun of wyn. And whanne 
thei saluten thee, thei shulen 3yue to thee 
two loones, and thow shalt take of" the 
5hoond of hem. After thes thingis thou 
shalt come into the hil of the Lord, 
where is the stacioun of Phylistynes ; 
and whanne thow were goon into the 
cytee, there thow shalt haue metynge a 
floe’ of prophetis comynge doun fro the 
hee3, and before hem a sawtrye, and a 
tymbre, and a trompe, and an harp, and 
G6hem propheciynge. And the Spyrit of 


"Om. £ pr.m. © that c pr.m. 


I. KINGS. 


P the enuyronn cE. 


27 


to Saul, Seie thou to the! child, that he 
go bifor vs, and passe™; forsothe™ stonde 
thou® a itil, that Y schewé to thee the 
word of the Lord. 


CAP. X. 


Forsothe Samuel took ‘a vessel of oyle?, i 
and schedde‘ out on the heed of Saul, and 
kisside™ hym, and seide, Lo!t the Lord 
hath anoyntid thee in to prince* on hys 
eritage; and thou schalt delyuere his pu- 
ple fro the hond of his enemyes, that ben 
‘in his cumpas'. And this® a tokene to thee, 
that the Lord hath anoyntid thee in to 
prince’; whanne thou schalt go fro me to2 
day, thou schalt fynde twei men bisidis 
‘the sepulcre of Rachel”, in ‘the endis of 
Beniamyn*, in myddai’, clensynge grete 
dichis} ; and thei schulen seie to thee, The 
femel? assis ben foundun, whiche*® thou 
3edist to seke; and while® the assis ben® 
lefte, thi fadir is bisy for 30u, and seith*, 
What schal Y do of my sone? And whannes 
thou hast go fro thennus, and hast passid 
ferthere®, and hast come to the ook of 
Tabor, thre men, stiynge’ to God in to 
Bethel, schulen fynde thee there, o man? 
berynge thre kydis, and another man 
berynge thre kakis of breed, and an other 
man berynge a galoun of wyn. And4 
whanne thei han gret thee, thei schulen 
3yue to thee twei loues, and thou schalt 
take" of ‘the hond of hem‘. After theses 
thingis thou schalt come in to the ‘hil of 
the Lordi, where is the stondyng*, that ts, 
Jorselet', of Filisteis; and whanne thou 
schalt entre in to the citee, there thou 
schalt haue metynge thee the™ flok” of 
prophetis|| comynge doun fro the hi3 place, 
and a sautree, and tympane®, and pipe’, and 
harpe’ bifor hem, and hem prophesiynge. 
And the Spirit of the Lord schal skippe's 


dsouth £ pr.m. * lepynge E pr.m. 8 oon be a. 


Om. 4a. *fro ge prem. VY folk a. 

Mthir. ™ passe forth 1. "andi. © thon séille1. Pan oile vessel 1. 4 he helde it 1. ‘he kisside 1. 
Saprincer. taboute hem1. 4 be this1. thisis K. ¥aprincer. W Rachels biriel 1. * Beniamyns 
coostis 1. Ythe myddai1. 2#scher. ®whoms. bOm.1. ¢Om.1. ‘he seiths, ¢ fertheremore 1. 
fstiynge npr. &manofhemi. 4 take thor. take hem x. therhonds. iLordishilr.  stondyng 
place 1. | the forselet wx sec.m. gloss omitted in 1x pr.m. ™a1. % flok or a cumpanyet1. © a tym- 


pane. Pa piper. 4 an harpe1. 


T anoon falle 1. 


EQ 


+Fro this 

word /o til thi- 
dur in to prince 
is not in Ebreu. 
Lire here. c. 


t This word 
clensyng gretc 
dichis, is not 
in Ebreu, ne- 
ther in bokis 
amendid. 
Lire here. c. 


\l profetis ; pro- 
fetis ben clepid. 
here deuout 
men and reli- 
giouse, whiche 
Samuel gader- 
ide to preise 
God; and with 
this they had- 
den spirit of 
profesie, 
namely summe 
of hem. Lire 
here. C. 


28 I. KINGS. 


the Lord shal leep into thee, and thow 
shalt prophecye with hem, and thow shalt 
7be chaungid into another man. Whanne 
thanue alle thes toknes comen to thee, do 
what euere thingis fyndith thin hoond, 
sfor the Lord is with thee. And thow 
shalt goo doun before me in Galgala; for- 
sothe Y shal come down to thee, that 
thow offre an offrynge, and offre pesible 
slayn sacrificis; senen days thow shalt 
abide, to the tyme that Y come to thee, 
9and shewe to thee what thow doo. And 
so whanne he hadde turned his shuldre, 
that he 3ede fro Samuel, God with ynne 
chaungide to hym another herte, and alle 
10 thes toknes camen in that day. And thei 
camen to the forseyd hil, and loo! a com- 
panye of prophetis metynge to hym; and 
the Spyryt of the Lord leepe yn vpon 
hym, and he propheciede in the mydil of 
them. Forsothe seynge alle, that knewen 
hym 3istyrday and the thridde day hens, 
that he was with prophetis, and prophe- 
cide, seiden togidre, What nowe thing 
fallith to the sone of Cys? Whether and 
12Saul among the prophetis ? And another 
answerde to the tothir, selynge, And who 
is the fadre of hym? Therfor it is turnyd 
into a prouerbe, Whether and Saul ainong 
13the prophetis? Forsothe he ceside to pro- 
14 phecie, and cam to the hei3. And the 
brother of the fader of Saul saide to 
hym, and to his child, Whidre ‘wenten 
jes? The whiche answerde, To seche the 
she assis ; the whiche whanne we hadden 
isnot founde, we camen to Samuel. And 
his fader brother seide to him, Shewe to 
icme what Samuel seide to thee. And Saul 
seith to his faderY brothir, He shewide 
to vs, for the she assis weren founden. 
Forsothe of the word of the kyngdam he 
shewide not to hym, the which Samuel 
i7spak to hym. And Samuel clepide to- 
gidre the puple to the Lord in Masphat ; 


xX. 7—~17. 


in to thee, and thou schalt prophecie with 
hem, and thou schalt be chaungid in to 
another man. Therfor whanne alle thesse7 
signes* bifallen to thee, do thou, what euer 
thingis thin hond fyndith, ‘that is, dispose 
thee to regne comelili' and my3tily, for 
the Lord is with thee. And thou schalts 
go doun bifor me in to Galgala; for Y schal 


+ that thou 
come doun to thee, that thou offref an offre; in E- 
6 . - breu it is ¢ 
offryng, and offre’ pesible sacrifices; bi orange: 
0 a ‘ ° fring, that is. 
seuene daies thou schalt abide, til J come Vis? ne for’ 


thyn helthe ; 
and thus oure 
translacioun is 
expowned of 
oure doctours, 
that thou offre 
aud make sacri- 
fice, not bi thee 
but by me, as 
And theiY camen to the forseid hil, 10 the peple of- 

fride bi the 
preestis. Live 
here. c. 


to thee, and shewe to” thee what thou 
schal do. Therfor whanne Saul haddeg 
turnede awei his schuldre to go fro Sa- 
muel, God chaungide another herte to 
Saul, and alle these signes* camen in that 
dai. 
and lo! a cumpeny of prophetis metynge* 
hym; and the Spirit of the Lord ‘scippide 
on hym®, and he propheciede in the myddis 
of hem». Sotheli® alle men, that knewen11 
hymé 3isterdai and the thrid dai ago, sien 
that he was with the prophetis, and that 
he prophesiede, and thei seiden togidere, 
What thing bifelde® to the sone of Cys? 
Whether also Saul is among‘ prophetis ? 
And o man answeride to another man§, 12 
and seide, And who is ‘his fadir"{? Ther- 

for it was turned in to a prouerbe, Whe- ni ee 
ther also Saul is among prophetisi? For- 13 fudir of em, 
sothe* Saul ceside to prophesie, and he 


t who is his fa- 


prafete as if 


he seide, pro- 
can to an hi3 place. And the brothir of fe eae 
‘ . f fa- 
the fadir of Saul! seide to hym, and to ial 


his child, Whidur 3eden™ 3e? And thei 374th Profesie 


ausweriden, To seke the" femal° assis; 
and whanne we? founden ‘not thoo!, we 
camen to Samuel. And the brother of his" 15 
fadir seide to hym, Schewe thou to me 
what Samuel seide to thee. And Saulis 
seide to ‘the brother of hys fadirs, Het 
schewide to vs, that the femal" assis weren 
foundun. SotheliY Saul” schewide not to 
hym<* of the word of rewmeY,’ which word? 
Samuel spak to hym. And Samuel cle-17 


bi his grace, to 
whom he wole. 
Lire here. c. 


Ww gistai c. gistay x. * hast thou gon £ pr.m.  ¥ fadris ce. 

Sthingis 1. t comeli cg. ‘" gloss omitted in 1x pr.m. Y sacrifie1, WOm.1. * tokensr. Y Saul and 
his child 1, 2 weren metynge with 1. 4 felle anoon upon Saul x. » the prophetis1. ¢And1. 4Saul 1. 
hath bifalle 1. fehosen among the1. & Om.1. 4} the fadir of Sanl 1. ‘the prophetis 1. * And 1. 
1 Saulis fadir 1. ™wenten 1. 2 Om.1. Oscherxr. Ptheia. Ghemnotix. *Saulsz. § his uncle tr, 
tSamuelr. %schex. VY Butt. Wher. *hisuncler. ytherewmes. #2 that 1. 


xX. 18—27. 


igand seith to the sones of Yrael, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God of Yrael, Y 
haue ladde out Yrael fro Egipt, and Y? 
haue delyuerde 3ow fro the hoond of 
Egipciens, and fro the hoond of alle 
19 kyngis that tourmentiden 3ow. Forsothe 
3e to day han throwun awey 3oure God, 
the which alone saueth 3ow fro alle 
yuels, and 3oure tribulaciouns; and 3e 
han seiden, Nay, but a kyng ordeyn 
vpon vs. Nowe thanne stondith before 
the Lord bi 3oure lynagis, and by mey- 
zonees. And Samuel appliede alle the ly- 
nagis of Yrael, and the lot felle vpon the 
zilynage of Beniamyn. And he apliede 
the lynage of Beniamyn, and the kyn- 
redis of hym; and lot felle vpon the kyn- 
rede of Metry, and cam vnto Saul, the 
sone of Cys. Thanne thei sou3ten hym, 
geand he is not founden there. And thei 
counseilden after thes thingis the Lord, 
forsothe* whether he were to come thidre. 
And the Lord answerde, Loo! he is hidde 
ggat home. And so thei runnen, and token 
hym thens; and he stood in the mydil of 
the puple, and he was hei3er than al the 
24puple fro the shuldres and aboue. And 
Samuel seith to al the puple, Certis 3e 
seen whom the Lord hath chosun; for 
there is noon lijk to hym in al the puple. 
And al the puple criede, and seith, Lyue 
25 the kyng! Forsothe Samuel spak to the 
puple the lawe of the rewme, and wroot 
in the book, and leyde vp before the 
Lord. And Samuel laft al the puple, eche 
gsinto her hows; but and Saul wente into 
his hows in Gabaath; and wente with 
hym a paart of the oost, of whom God 
27 hadde towchid the hertis. -Forsothe the 
sones of Belial seiden, Whether this shal 
mowe saue vs? And thei dispysiden 
hym, and brou3ten not to hym 3iftis; 
forsothe he feynde, as thou3 he herde 
not. , 


2 Om. BCEFH. 


athekyngis1. bAnd1. ¢the which 1. dupont. 


I. KINGS. 


29 


pide togidere the puple to the Lord in 

Masphat; and he seide to the sones of Is-18 

rael, The Lord God of Israel seith these 

thingis, Y ledde Israel out of the lond of 

Egipt, and Y delyuerede 30u fro the hond 

of Egipcians, and fro the hond of alle 

kyngis* that turmentiden jou. Forsothe? 19 

to day 3e han caste awei 3oure Lord God, 

which aloone sauyde 3ou fro alle 30ure 

yuelis and tribulaciouns; and 3e seiden, 

Nay, but ordeyne thou a kyng on® ys. 

Now therfor stonde 3e bifor the Lord bi 

joure lynagis, and bi® meynees. And Sa-20 

muel settide’ to gidere alle the lynages* 

of Israel, and lot felde on® the lynage of 
Beniamyn. And he settide® togidere the21 

lynage of Beniamyn, and the meynces 

therof; and lot felde oni the meynees* of 

Mathrit{, and it cam ‘til to! Saul, the son ae idler, 
of Cys. Therfor™ thei sou3ten hym", and _ archeris schet- 
he was not foundun there. And aftira2 72, pee” 
these thingis thei counseliden the? Lord, 

whether Saul schulde come thidur. And 

the Lord answeride, Lo! he? is hid at 

hoom{. Therfor thei runnen, and token 23% he is ia a 


‘f hoome ; not in 

hym fro thennus; and he‘ stood in the™ — Gabaa, but in 
: : the hows i 

myddils of the puple, and wast hizere than Yhich he was 
ynned. In 


al the puple fro the schulder and ‘aboue", yjne*, | 

4 : Ebreu it is, he 
And Samuel seide to al the puple, Certis 24 is hid among 

vessels, that is, 

3e seen’ whom the Lord hath chose; for armeris, cther 
noon in al-the puple is lijk hym. And al ‘yatoue: 
the puple cryede, and seide, Lyue the kyng! nua ee 
Forsothe’ Samuel spak to the puple thes ee Lire 
lawe of rewme*, and wrootY in a book, ak 
and puttideYY vp bifor the Lord. And Sa- 
inuel? dilyuerede al the puple, ech man in 
to his hows; but also Saul 3ede in to his*26 
hous in to Gabaath; and the® part of the 
oost 3ede with hym, whose hertis God 
hadde touchid. Forsothe’ the sones of 27 
Belyal seiden, Whether this man may saue 
vs? And thei dispisiden hym, and brou3ten® 
not 3iftis, ‘that is, preisyngis®, to him; for- 
sothe® he ‘dissymelide hym to here?. 


othere vessels 


® now E pr. m. 


€Om.1. f setter. ff lynage a. Supont. bsette 1. 


tuponi. Kmeynee1. ‘Jynto rm, ™Thanner. %Sauli1. withthe: PSaulr. 4 Saul1. 
rOm.1. § myddis1. the wast. Uupwardr. Vhanseenr. W And1. *the rewme EIKLX.  Y¥ he 
wroot it. y¥ putteitr. zher @Om.a. bOm.1 Car 4 And1. ¢ thei brouzten 1. £ that is, 


presentis BNw. Om. c1x pr.m. Sands. 4 lete as thou3 he herde not t. 


30 


CAP. XI. 


1 And it is doon as after a moneth, Naas 
Amonite stiede vp, and bigan to fi3t 
ajens Jabes Galaath. And alle the men 
of Jabes seiden to Naas, Haue thow vs 
boundun in pees, and we shulen sertte to 

athee. And Naas Amonyte answerde to 
hem, In this I shal smyte with 3ou boond 
of pees, that I drawe out the ry3t eyen 
of 30w alle, and Y put 30u reprone in al 

3Yrael. And the eldres of Jabes seiden 
to hym, Graunt to vs seuen days, that 
we senden messagers to alle the teermes 
of Yrael; and if there weren not the 
which defende vs, we shulen goon out to 
athee. Thanne messagers camen into Ga- 
baath of Saul, and speken the wordis, 
herynge the puple; and al the puple 
sreryde her® voys, and wepte. And, loo! 
San] cam, folowynge the oxen fro the 
feeld; and seith, What hath the puple, 
that he wepith? And thei toolden to 
hym the wordis of the men of Jabes. 

6 And the Spyrit of the Lord leepe into 
Saul, whanne he hadde herd thes wordis, 
and the woodnesse of hym wraththid wel 

zmych. And takynge to either oxe he 
hew3 into gobetis, and sente into alle the 
teermys of Yrael, bi the hoond of the 
messageers, seiynge, Who so euere goth 
not out, and hath not folwid Saul and 
Samuel, thus shal be doo to the oxen of 
hym. Thanne the dreed of the Lord 
cau3te the puple, and thei wenten out as 

so man. And he noumbrede hem in Be- 
seth’; and of the sones of Yrael weren 
thre hindrid thowsandis; of the men for- 
gsothe of Juda thretti thowsandis. And 
thei seiden to the messagers that camen, 
So 3e shulen seie to the men that ben in 
Jabes of Galaath, To morwe shal be to 
sow helth, whanne the sume hetith. 
Thanne the messagerys camen, and 


b Om. ez. 
k stiede up 1. 


jas if were 1. 1 he bigan 1. 


I. KINGS. 


¢ his EB pr.m. 


m the citee Jabes 1. 


XI. I—9. 


CAPRI, 


And it was don as} aftir a monethe,1 
Naas of Amon stiede*, and bigan! to fizte 
a3ens Jabes of Galaad. And alle the men 
of Jabes™ seiden to Naas, Haue thou vs 
boundun in pees, and we schulen serue 
thee. And Naas of Amon answeride toz 
hem, In this" Y schal smyte boond of pees 
with 30u, that Y putte ont the rijt izen of 
alle 30u, and that Y sette® 30u schenschip? 
in al Israel. And the eldere men of Jabes3 
seiden to him, Graunte thou to vs seuene 
daies, that we senden messangeris to alle 
the termes’ of Israel; and if noon be that 
defende vs, we schulen go out to thee. 
Therfor™ messangeris camen in to Gabaad 4 
of Saul, and spaken these wordis, ‘while*® 
the puple herde‘; and al the puple reiside 
her vois, and wepte. And lo! Saul cam,s 
‘and suede oxis" fro the feeld’; and he 
seide, What hath the puple, for it wepith ? 
And thei telden to hym the wordis of 
men” of Jabes. And the Spirit of thee 
Lordt skippide* in to Saul, whanne he 
hadde herd these wordis, and his wood- 
nesseY was ‘wrooth greetli7. And he took7 
euer either oxe, and kittide* in to gobetis, 
and sente® in to alle the termes® of Israel, 
bi the hondis of messangeris; and seide4, 
Who euer goith not out, and sueth not 
Saul and Samuel, so it schal be don to 
hise oxun. Therfor the drede of the Lord 
asailide® the puple, and thei 3eden out as 
o man. And hef noumbride hem in Be-e 
sech ; and thre hundrid thousynd weren® 
of the sones of Israel; forsothe" of the 
men of Juda weren thretti thousynde. 
And thei seiden to the messangeris thato 
camen, Thus 3e schulen seie to the men 
that ben in Jabes of Galaad, To morew{ 
schal be helthe to jou, whanne the sunne 
is hoot. Therfor' the messangeris camen, 
and telden to the* men of Jabes; whiche! 


d Reseth a. 
P to be 


4‘ this thing 1. © putte 1. 


reproffr. 4 coostis1. *Thanner. § which c. ‘t heringe the puple1. tOm.1. VY feild and he suede 
oxeni. Wthemenr *felanooni. Y feerswrath1. 72 greetlistirid1. ahekitte hemi. » he 
sente thor. © coostis I. 4 he seide 1. € wente into 1. f Sanl 1. 8 weren there1. andi. 


iThanne1. k Om. plures. 


l the whiche 1. whiche men K. 


tthe Spirit of the 
Lord, etc. ; that 

is, the stiring 

of strengthe ( 
and of stide- 
fastnesse, to 
delyuere the 

peple bisegid. 

Lire here. c. 


+ to morewe; 

that is, in tyme 

to comynge of 
next. Lire ‘ 
here. c. 


XI. 10—XII. 4. I. KINGS. 31 


toolden to the men of Jabes; the whiche 
10weren glad, and seiden, To morwe we 
shulen goo out to 30w, and 3e shulen doo 
11to vs al that shal plese to 30w. And it 
is doon, whanne the morwe was comen, 


weren glad, and seiden™, Eerli we schulen 1 
go out to 30u, and 3e schulen do to vst al Beg int 
that plesith 3ou". And it was don, whanne 11 they seiden this 
the morewe dai? cam, Saul ordeynede the thei wise te 


thei wisten that 
puple in to thre partis; and he? entride Delp shal come 


to hem in the 
Saul sette the puple in thre parties; and in to the myddil tentis1 ‘in the wakyng morewe. Lire 


he wente into the mydil tentis in the 
morwetide watche, and he smoot Amon 
‘vnto the tyme® that the day hetide; for- 


of the morewtid', and he smoot Ainon til 
the dai ‘was hoot’; ‘forsothe the residues' 
weren scaterid, so that tweyne" togidere 


sothe the tother ben scatrid, so that there 
weren not laft in hem tweyn togidre. 
i2And the puple seith to Samuel, Who is 
he this, that seide, Saulf shal not regne 
vpon vs? 3if 3e the men, and we shulen 
isslee hem. And Sanl seith, There shal 


weren not left in hem. And the puple1z 
seide to Samuel, Who is this, that seide, 
Saul schal not regne on’ vs? 3yue 3e the” 
men*, and we schulen sle hem. And Saulis 
seide, No man schal be slayn in this dai, 
for to dai the Lord madeY helthe in Israel. 


not be slayn eny man in this day, for to 
day the Lord hath doon helth in Yrael. 

14Forsothe Samuel seide to the puple, 
Cometh, and goo we into Galgala, and 

1srenewe we there the rewme. And al the 
puple 3ede to Galgala, and thei maden 
there Saul a kyng before the Lord in 
Galgala; and thei offreden pesyble slayn 
sacrifice to the Lord. And Saul gladdide 
there, and alle the men of Yrael wel 
mych. 


CAP. ANT. 


1 Forsothe Samuel seide to alle Yrael, 
Loo! I haue herd joure voys aftir alle 
thingis that 3e han spokun to me, and I 

2 haue ordeynd vpon 3ou akyng; and nowe 
the kyng goth before 30w. Forsothe Y 
haue eeldid, and waxen hoor; forsothe 
my sones ben with 30w; also conuer- 
saunt before 30u fro my 30ngth vnto this 

3day. Loo! Y am redi; spek 3e to me 
before the Lord, and before the crist of 
hym; whether oxe of eny man Y took, 

or asse; if eny man Y chalengide; if Y 
oppresside eny man; if of the hoond of 
eny man Y took 3ift; and Y shal dispise 

ait to day, and restore to 30w. And thei 


€ al the while z pr.m. 


Forsothe? Samuel seide to the puple, Come 14 


3e, and go we in to Galgala, and renule® we 


there’ the rewme. And al¢ the puple 3ede 15 


in to Galgala, and there thei maden Saui 
kyng bifor the Lord ‘in Galgala’; and 
thei offriden® pesible sacrifices bifor the 
Lord. And Saul was glad there, and alle 
the men of Israel greetli. 


CAP. XII. 


Forsothe Samuel seide to al Israel, Lo!1 


Y herde 3oure vois bi alle thingis whiche 


3e spaken ‘to me, and Y ordeynede a kyng 
onf 30u; and now the king goith bifor2 


3ou. Sothelis Y wexide® eld and hoor ; 
forsothe! my sones ben with 30u; therfor* 
Y lyuyde! bifor 3ou fro my 3ong wexynge 


age ‘til to™ this dai. And lo! Y am redi;s 


speke 3e to me bifor the Lord, and bifor 
‘the crist of hym"; whether Y took® ‘the 
oxe of ony»manP, ether the1 asse; if Y 
falsly" chalengide ony mon; yf Y oppress- 
ide’ ony man; if Y tookt 3iftet of ‘the hond 
of ony man"; and’ Y schial ‘dispise it” to 


dai, and Y schal restore to 30u. And thei4 


f the puple «. 


mseiden fo Amon i. to30u1. ° tijd 1. Pin the morewe tijd wacche Saul1. 41 teutis of Amon 1. 
’Om.31. Swexider. and thei that weren left alijue 1. Utwomeni. Yuponi. Wthor * men 
hiderei. Yhathmaad1. 2 Andi. *yenel rv. » there therinne x. ¢ Om. c. Om.1.  ¢ offriden 
theret. fuponi. & Andi. hhauewexer iandi. Kalsor. Ihauelyueds. ™vnto1. ® his 
anoyntid or kyngi1. Ohane taker. Pony mansoxer. 4hisi1. 'haue falsly 1. * haue oppressid 1. 


thaue take 1 ony mans hond1. vYOm. plures. 


W be despised x. 


tif 1" tuok 
3ifte,ete.; of this 
it is opin, that bi 
hise owne costis 
and trauels, he 
fillide the office 
of iuge, as it 
was seid in vii. 
c°. Lire here. ¢. 


32 


seiden, Thow hast not chalengid vs, ne 
oppressid, ne takyn eny thing of the 
shoond of eny man. And he seide to 
hem, Witnesse is the Lord aj3ens 30w, 
and witnesse the crist of hym in this 
day; for 3e han not founden in myn 
hoond eny thing. And thei seiden, Wit- 
suesse. And Samuel seith to the puple, 
The Lord, that made Moysen and Aaron, 
and ladde 3oure fadres fro the loond of 
7 Egipt, is ny3; now thanne stondith, that 
in doom I stryue ajens 30w before the 
Lord, of alle the mercyes of the Lord, 
that he hath done with 3ow, and with 
s3oure fadres. What maner wise Jacob 
wente into Egipt, and 3oure fadres cri- 
eden to the Lord; and the Lord sente 
Moyses and Aaron, and ladde 3oure fa- 
dres out of Egipt, and sette hem in this 
yplace. The whiche for3eten of the Lord, 
her God; and he took hem in the hoond 
of Cysar’, mayster" of the kny3thod of 
Asor, and in the hoond of Philistiens, 
and in the hond of the king of Moab; 
wand thei fou3ten ajens hem. Forsothe 
aftyrward thei cryeden to the Lord, and 
seiden, We han syuned, for we han for- 
sakun the Lord, and serueden to Baalym 
and Astaroth; nowe thanne delyuer vs 
fro the hoond of oure enemyes, and we 
11 shulen serue to thee. And the Lord sente 
Jeroboal, and Bedan, and Barach, and 
Jepte, and Samuel; and he delyuerde 
sow fro the hoond of 5oure enemyes bi 
enuyroun; and 3e han dwellid trustily. 
12 Forsothe seynge that Naas, the kyng of 
the sones of Aion, was comen a3ens 30w, 
3e seiden to me, Nay, but the kyng shal 
. comaunde to vs; whanne the Lord 3our 
13 God shulde regne in 3ow. Nowe thanne 
joure kyng is redi, whom 3e han chosen 
and askid; loo! the Lord hath 3euen to 
1430w akyng. If 3e dreden the Lord, and 


I. KINGS. 


XII. 5—14. 


seiden, Thou hast not falsly chalengid vs, 
nether hast* oppressid vsy, nether hast? 
take ony thing of ‘the hond of ony man*. 
And he? seide to hem, The Lord is wit-5 
nesse ajens 30u, and his crist® is witnesse 
in this day; for 3e han not founde ony 
thing in myn hond. And thei seident, 
Witnesse’. And Samuel seide to thee 
puple, The Lord, that made Moises and 
Aaron, and ledde® 3oure fadris out of the 
lond of Egipt, is present; now therfor7 
stonde 3e', that Y stryue bi doom ajens 
3ou bifor the Lord, of alle the mercyes of 
the Lord, whiche’ he dide" with 3ou, and 
with 3oure fadris. Hou' Jacob entride ins 
to Egipt, and 3oure fadris crieden to the 
Lord; and the Lord sente Moises and 
Aaron, and ledde 3oure fadris out of 
Egipt, and settide* hem in this place. 
Whiche! forjaten™ her Lord God; and hes 
bitook hem in® the hond of Sisara, mays- 
tir? of the chyualrie of Asor, and in the 
hond of Filisteis, and in the hond of the? 
kyng of Moab; and thei fou3ten a3ens 


hem. Sotheli® afterward’ theit crieden to 10 


the Lord, and seiden, We synneden", for 
we forsoken the Lord, and seruyden Baa- 
lym and Astroth; now therfor delyuere 
thou vs fro ‘the hond of oure enemyes’, 


and we schulen serue thee. And the Lord 1; 


sente Gerobaal’, and ‘Bedan, that is*, 
Sampson, *and Barach, and Jepte, and 
Samuel, and delyueredeY 30u fro the hond 
of 30ure enemyes bi cumpass; and 3e” 


dwelliden tristili?. Forsothe> 3e sien, that 12 


Naas, kyng® of the sones of Amon, cam 
a3ens 30u; and 3e seiden to me, counseil- 
ynge to axe noon other kyng than God, 
Nay, but a kyng schal comaunde to vs; 
whanne ‘3o0ure Lord God® regnedef in 30n. 


Now therfor 3oure kyng is redi, whom 3e 13 


han chose and axid; lo! the Lord 3afs 
to 30u a kyng. 


& Syzare x. the mayster E pr.m. 

x thou hast giz. Y Om. plures. 2 thou hast nin, ®ony manshondr. bSamuely. © crist or 
king 1. 4 He is witnesse 1. ¢thatledder. f3e forth1. thats. bhath dor, iHouthatr. hath 
sett 1. 1The whicher. ™han forjeter. into. othe maystir1. POm.prKoxb. 4 these r. 
rAndi. Saftirthis1. t3oure faders1. "han synnedi. Your enemyeshond1. W Gerobaal, that 
is Gedeon B teat. c marg. *Om.c. Yhe delyuerede1. 2thanne3e1. 4sikirlyx. > Andr, ©¢ the 


kyng1. 4 counseilinge 30u 1. 


€ the Lord 3oure God 1. 


f schulde regne x. & hath 3one 1. 


If 3e dreden the Lord, 14 


t+ and thei 
seiden 3 in 
Ebreu it is, 
and he seide, 
Witnesse. E- 
brews expown- 
en thus, that 
aftir the wit- 
nessing of the 
puple declar- 
inge the inno- 
cence of Sa- 
muel, he axide 
herwith Goddis 
witnessing, and 
seide, the Lord 
is witnesse, that 
is, Y preye 
that he be wit- 
nesse; and 
thanne a voys 
cam sent fro 
the Lord, and 
seide, Witnesse, 
in witnessinge 
the innocence 
of Samuel. 
Lire here. c. 


am, ee ee 


XM, 15—25. 


serueth to hym, and herith the voys of 
hym, and whettith not the mouth of the 
Lord; and 3e shulen ben, and the kyng 
that comaundith to 3ow, folowynge the 
15 Lord 30ure God. Forsothe if 3e heren 
not the voys of the Lord, but whettith' 
out the word of hym, the hoond of the 
Lord shal be vpon 3ow, and vpon 3oure 
16fadres. But nowe stondith, and seeth 
this greet thing that the Lord is to doo 
17in 30ure si3t. Whether not repynge tyme 
of whete is to day? Y shal inwardly 
clepe the Lord, and he shal 3yue voicis, 
and reynes; and 3e shulen wite, and seen, 
for greet yuel 3e han doo to 3ow in the 
si3t of the Lord, askynge vpon 3ow a 
iskyng. And Samuel criede to the Lord, 
and the Lord 3af voicis and reynes in 
wthat day. And al the puple dredde wel 
mych the Lord and Samuel; and al the 
puple seide to Samuel, Prey for thi ser- 
uauntis to the Lord thi God, that we 
dyen not; forsothe we han addid to alle 
oure synnes yuel, that we asken to vs a 
20kyng. Forsothe Samuel seide to the pu- 
ple, Wole 3e not drede; 3e han doon alle 
this yuel ; neuerthelater) wole 3e not goo 
awey fro. the bak of the Lord, but 
serueth to the Lord in al 3oure herte; 
2iand wole 3e not bowe aside after veyn 
thingis, that shulen not profyt 30u, ne 
shulen delyuer 30u ; for veyn thingis thei 
22ben. And the Lord shal not forsake his 
puple for his greet name; for the Lord 
hath sworn to make 3ow to hym a puple. 
23 Forsothe God sheelde the synne fro me 
in the Lord, that I ceese to prey for 30w ; 
and I shal teche 30w a ri3t weye and 
21good. Therfor dredith the Lord, and 
serueth to hym in treuth, and of al 3oure 
herte; forsothe 3e han seen the greet 
dedis, ‘the whiche* he hath doon in 30w; 
25and if 3e ben stedfast in malice, and 3e 
and 3oure kyng to gidre shulen perishe. 


LASNIGS. 33 


and seruen hym, and heren his vois, and 

wraththen not the ‘mouth of the Lordy; 

je and 3oure kyng, that comaundith to 

jou, schulen sue 30ure Lord God. For-15 

sothe' if 3e heren not the vois of ‘the 

Lord‘, but wraththen his word, the hond 

of the Lord schal be on 3o0uf, and on 3oure 

fadris. But also now stonde 3e, and Ben edie iin 

this gret thing which! the Lord schal fee tie 
make"™ in 30ure si3t. Whether heruest® of 17 fadris in tyme 

whete is not ‘to dai?? I schal inwardli hehe: a 

clepe ‘the Lord, and he schal 3yue voices, 

‘that is, thundris?, and yreynes; and 3e 

schulen wite, and schulen% se, for™ 3e 

axynge a kyng on‘ 30u han' do greuouse 

yuel to 30u" in the si3t of the Lord. Andis 

Samuel criede to the Lord, and the Lord 

3af voices’ and reynes in that dai. Andis 

al the puple dredde greetli the Lord and 

Samuel; and al the puple seide to Sa- 

muel, Preye thou for thi seruauntis to 

thi Lord God, that we die not; for” we 

addiden* yuel to alle oure synnes, that 

we axiden a kyng to vs. ForsotheY Sa-20 

muel seide to the puple, ‘Nyle 3e drede’; 

3e han do al this yuel; netheles ‘nyle 3e 

go* awey fro the bak of the Lord, but 

serue 3e the Lord in al 3oure herte; and 21 

nyle 3e bowe aftir veyn thingis||, that 

schulen not profite to® 3ou, nether schulen® 

delyuere 30u; for tho ben veyn thingis. ues 

And? the Lord schal not forsake his puple 22 ae 

for his grete name; for the Lord swoor® 

to make 30u a puple to hym silf. For-23 

sothef this synne be fer fro me in’ the 

Lord, that Y ceesse to preye for 3ou; and 

Y schal teche 30u a ri3tful weie and good". 

Therfor drede 3e the Lord, and ‘serue 3e!24 

hym in treuthe, and of al 3oure herte; for 

3e sien tho grete thingis, whiche* he ‘dide 

in! 30u; that if 3e contynuen in malice, 25 

bothe 3¢ and 3oure kyng schulen perische 

to gidere. 


+ that is, the 
trewe speker of 
his word. 1. 


t on jou; that 


ll veyn thingis ; 
that is, idols in 
worschipinge 


iwhetten c. Jjnerthelatere c passim. * that c. 
h Lordis mouth 1. iAndi. k3o0ureLord God. ‘that1. ™dor. “the hernest 1. 9° now 1. 
P or thundris 1s. Om. X pr. m. 4 Om. L. that Nx. 8 upon I. t 3e han 1. u 30u silf 1. 
VYthundres 1. W forsothe 1. ¥*hanecchidr, y Andi. %Dredejenotr. #go3enot1. >» Om.1. 
© thei schulen:, 4 And thanne.t. ¢hathsworer, fAndr1. 8ajensi. bagoodi. 3 serueth 1. 
k that1. | hath do to 1. 
VOL. I. F 


34 


CAP. XIII. 


1 A sone of o 3eer was Saul whanne he 
began to regne; forsothe two 3eer he 
2regnede vpon Irael. And Saul chees to 
hym thre thowsandis of Yrael, and there 
weren ‘in Machynas! with Saul two thow- 
sandis!!, in the hil of Bethel; forsothe a 
thowsand with Jonatha in Gabaa Benia- 
myn; forsothe the tother puple he sente 
3a3en echon into her tabernaclis. And Jo- 
nathas smoot the stacioun of Philistiens, 
that was in Gabaa. The which thing 
whanne Philistyens hadden herd, Saul 
criede with a trompe in al the loond, 
4seiynge, Heren the Ebrewis. And al 
Yrael herde siche a maner loos, Saul 
hath smyten the stacioun of Philistiens ; 
and Yrael areride him ajens the Philis- 
tiens; thanne the puple criede after Saul 
sin Galgala. And Philistiens ben gedrid 
to fi3t ajens Yrael; thretti thousandis of 
charys, and sexe thousandis of horsmen, 
and the tother comoun, as mych grauel 
that is in brenk of the see; and thei 
stiynge vp setten tentis ‘in Machynas®, at 
6the este of Bethauen. The which thing 
whanne the men of Yrael hadden seen, 
hem seluen in streit set, forsothe the puple 
was tourmentid, and thei hidden™™ hem 
self in dennys, and in hidils, in stonys 
forsothe, and in dichis, and in cysternes. 
7 Forsothe Hebrewis passiden Jordan", the 
loond of Gad, and of Galaad. And whanne 
3it Saul was in Galgala, al the puple is 
sfeerd that™ folwide hym. And he abood 
Samuel seuen days ‘after the couenaunt?, 
and Samuel cam not in Galgala; and the? 
9puple is slyden fro hym. Thanne seith 
Saul, Bryngith to me brent sacrifice and 


1 thousende c. 
© aftyr Samuel plesid £ pr. m. 


lin to engines E pr. m. 
na and ABFII. 


Dandi. 
u Om. pv. 


m sone I. 


° upon I, 
t Saul x. 


I. KINGS. 


m in to engines E pr. 7m. 
Pal the g£ pr.m. 


P thousynde men K. 


v his tabernacle K sec.m, EL. W standart 1. 


XITI. 1-9. 


CAP. XIII. 


Saul was a child™ of o 3eer{ whanne he1 
bigan to regne; forsothe® he regnede on® 
Israel _twei 3eerf{. And Saul chees to2 
hym thre thousynde? of Israel, and twei 
thousynde weren with Saul in Machynas, 
in the hil of Bethel; forsothe™ a thou- 
synde weren with Jonathas in Gabaath of 
Beniamyn; sothelis het sente ajen the 
tother puple ech man in to" ‘hise taber- 
naclis’. And Jonathas smoot the stacioun™ || 3 
of Filisteis, that was in Gabaa. And 
whanne Filisteis* hadden herd this’, Saul 
sownede with a clarioun in al the lond, and 
seide, Ebreys? here*. And al Israel herde4 
siche a fame, Saul smoot® the stacioun® 
of Filisteis; and Israel reiside’ hym silf 
a3ens Filisteis®; therfor‘ the puple criede 
after Saul in Galgala. And Filisteis?s 
weren gaderid" to fiste a3ens Israel; ‘of 
Flisteis weren' thretti thousynde§ of cha- 
risi, and sixe thousynde* of kny3tis!, and 
the tother comyn puple, as™ grauel" ‘which 
is fule myche in the brynke of the see; 
and thei stieden?, and settiden tentis? in 
Machynas, at the eest’ of Bethauen. Ande 
whanne men of Israel hadden seyn this’, 
that thei weren set in strei3tnesse', for® 
the puple was turmentid, thei hidden hem 
silf in dennes, and in priuey places, and 
in stonys, and in dychis, and in cisternes. 
SotheliY Ebreis” passiden* Jordan in to7 
the lond of Gad and of Galaad. And 
whanne Saul was 3it in Galgala, al the 
puple was aferd that suede hym. And 8 
seuene daies heY abood Samuel bi coue- 
naunt, and Samuel cam not in to Galgala; 
and the puple 3ede awei fro Saul. Therfor 9 
Saul seide, Brynge 3e to me brent sacri- 


mm ]jadden 2. 


n Sic codd. omnes. 


§ and I. 
2 3e men 


rand 1. 
y that 1. 


q thousynde of hem 1. 
x the Filisteis 1. 


of Ebrewe 1. @here jer. > hath smytens. ¢standart 1. ‘4reisideups. ¢ the Filisteis1. f thanne 1. 


g the Filisteis 1. h gaderid to gidre 1. 


i Om. 1. 


J charis, that is, of men fiztinge in charis B. 


k hundrid thousynde 1. | horsmen 1. ™ wasasthes. ® grauel of the see1. ° Om.1. P stieden up J. 
Gher tentis1. ¥eest coost1. %Om.3. tthe streigtnessec. and thatx. Vv Andaz. W the men of 
Ebrew 1. * passiden ouer 1. Y Saul 1. 


+ a child of o 
jeer; that is, 
so innocent and 
cleene of synne 
[as] a child of 
0 3eer. C. 

+ regnede on 
Israel by ti. 
3eer 3 that is, in 
his goodnesse 
and innocence, 
thou3 he regn- 
ede in mo 3eris 
while he was 
in malice ; 
ether aftir ii. 
seer of Saul, 
Danyth was 
chosun of God 
in to kyng, and 
anoyntyd of 
Samuel, as it is 
had in xvi. c°., 
and fro that 
tyme Saul 
regnede not bi 
rizt, but onely 
bi tyrauntrie, 
and therfor the 
3eris suyng ben 
kit awey here 
fro his rewme. 
Lire here. c. 

|| stacioun, that 
is, forselet, 
ether strong 
hold. c. 

§xxx. thousinde, 
that is, of men 
fi3tinge in cha- 
ris. Lire here. 
c 


XIE, 1o—17. 


pesible1; and he offrede brent sacrifice. 
10 And whanne offrynge he hadde fulfillid 
the brent sacrifice, loo! Samuel cam ; 
and Saul wente out to mete hym, for to 
usalute hym. And Samuel spak to hym, 
What hast thou doon? Saul answerde, 
For I saw3 that the puple shulde 
slyde awey fro me, and thou cam not 
after the couenauntid' dais; forsothe the 
Philistyens weren gedryd into Machy- 
inas’; Y seide, Nowe Philistiens shulen 
come to me in Galgala, and the face of 
the Lord I haue not plesid; thur3 nede 
constreined Y haue offrid‘ brent sacry- 
13 fice to the Lord. And Samuel seide to 
Saul, Folily thow hast doon, ne thou 
hast kept the heestis of the Lord thi God, 
the whiche he hath comaundid to thee; 
the which thing if thou haddist not 
doon, ri3t nowe the Lord hadde maad 
redi thi kyngdom vpon Yrael into with- 
14outen ende; but thi kyngdom shal no 
more ryse togidre. Thanne the Lord 
sou3te a man after his herte; and the 
Lord hath comaundid to hym, that he 
were a duyk vpon his puple, forthi that 
thou hast not kept the thingis that the 
15 Lord comaundide. Forsothe Samuel roos, 
and stiede vp fro Galgalis in Gabaa of 
Beniamyn; and the tother puple stieden 
vp after Saul, metynge to the puple that 
ouercamen hem ; comynge fro Galgala in 
Gabaa, in the hil of Beniamyn. And 
Saul noumbrede the puple, that weren 
foundun with hym as sixe hundryd men. 
isAnd Saul, and Jonathas his sone, and 
the puple that was foundun with hem, 
was in Gabaa of Beniamyn; forsothe 
Philistiens seeten togidre ‘into aspijs", for 
i7to fizten. And there wenten out for to 
fiz3te fro the tentys of Philistiens thre 
cumpanyes ; 0 cumpanye wente ajens the 
weye of Effraym to the loond of Saul; 


I. KINGS. 


35 


fice, and pesible sacrifices? ; and he offride 
brent sacrifice. And whanne he hadde 10 
endid offrynge brent* sacrifice, lo! Samuel 
cam; and Saul 3ede out ajens hym?, to 
greete Samuel®. And Samuel spak? tou 
hym*’, What hast thon do? Saul an- 
sweride, For‘ Y sij that the puple 3ede 
awei fro me, and thou camest not bi the 
daies of couenaunt; certis$ Filisteis weren 
gaderid" in Machynas; Y seide, Now Fi- 12 
listeis schulen come dotn to me in to Gal- 
gala, and Y haue not plesyd the face of 
the Lord; Y was compellid bi nede, and 
Y offryde brent sacrifice to the Lord. And 13 
Samuel seide to Saul, Thou hast do folili, 
and thou ‘keptist not! the heestis of thi 
Lord God, whiche he comaundide to thee ; 
and if thou haddist not do this thing, rizt 
now the Lord hadde maad redi thi rewme 
on* Israel with outen ende+; but thi 
rewme schal not rise! ferthere™. The Lord 
hath sou3t a man to hym silf after his 
herte; and the Lord comaundide" to hym, 
that he schulde be duyk on his puple, for 
thou keptist not tho thingis whiche the 
Lord comaundide. Forsothe® Samuel roos, 15 
and stiede? fro Galgala in to Gabaa of 
Beniamyn; and the ‘residue puplis‘ sti- 
eden’ after Saul ajens the puple which 
foujten a3jens hem; and thei camen fro 
Galgala in to Gabaa, in the hil of Benia- 
myn. And Saul noumbride the puple, 
that weren foundun with hym as sixe’ 
hundrid men. 
his sone, and the puple that was foundun 
with hem, was in Gabaa of Beniamyn; 
forsothe" Filisteis’ saten togidere in Ma- 
chynas. And thre cumpanyes 3eden out 17 
of the ‘castels of Filisteis” to take prey ; 
o cumpany 3ede a3ens the weie of Effraymt 
to the lond of Saul; sothely* an other 1s 
cumpeny entride bi the weie of Bethoron ; 
forsotheY the thridde cumpenye turnede it 


4 pesible thyngus £ pr.m. ‘'desirid ze prim. 8 figtys u prem. +tOm.4. 4 into aspies £ prim. 
in Maehinas sec. m. correxit eadem manus in to aspies. 

2 offringis 1. ®the brent 1. > Samuel. Chimr. 4seidex. ¢ Sault. f Lo! forr. and ther. 
b gaderid to gidre 1. ihast not kept1. kuponr. ‘rise to gidre 1, ™ ferthermore with thee, for thou 
hast lost iust tijile1. ™ hath comaundid 1. © Andi, Pstiede npr. 4 peple that lefte 1. * wenten 
upi. Sthatx, tasixer, tandi. VY the Filisteis1. W Filisteis tentist. * andi. Yand1, 


F2 


And Saul, and Jonathas ie 


+ with ouien 
ende; that is, 
if thou haddist 
not do ajenus 
Goddis heest, 
and haddist 
stonde in the 
goodnesse in 
which thou 
were, whanne 
thou biganst to 
regne, thou 
were disposid, 
that the rewme 
schulde be con- 
fermed to thee 
and to thi 
sones 3 netheles 
this conferm- 
yng schal be 
vndurstedun 
vndur a condi- 
cioun, if San! 
and hise eiris 
stoden in good- 
nesse, which is 
chaungeable. 
Lire here. c. 


t of Effraym; 
in Ebreu it is, 
a3enus the weye 
of Etffrata to 
the lond of 
Saul. c. 


36 I. KINGS. 


i8forsothe another wente bi the weye of 
Betheron; forsothe the thridde turnede 
hem to the weye of the teerme in’ the 
loond of Saba, ‘stondynge ny3 to the” 

19 valey of Seboym ajens the deseert. For- 
sothe there was not an yren smith 
foundun in al the loond of Yrael; for- 
sothe Philistiens shunneden, lest perauen- 
ture the Hebrews maden swerd or speer. 

20 Thanne al Yrael descendide to Philistiym, 
that echon sharpe his shaar, and diggyng 

2lyren, and axe, and purgyng hook; for 
eggys of the sharis, and of diggynge* 
yrens, and of forkis, and of the axis 

22 weren blunt, vnto a prik to menden. And 
whanne the day of the batayl was comen, 
there is not founden swerd and speer 
in hoond of the’ puple that was with 
Saul and Jonatha, ont takun Saul, and 

23 Jonatha hys sone. Forsothie the stacioun 
of Philistym* wente out, for to stye ouer 
into aspijs to fizt. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 And it felle ou a day, that Jonathas, 
the sone of Saul, seide to the 3ong man 
lis squyer, Com, and goo we to the sta- 
cioun of Philistyens, that is bizonde that 
place; to his fader forsothe that same 

2thing he shewide not. Forsothe Saul 
dwellide in the vttermoost parti of Ga- 
baa, vudur a poomgarnet tree, that was 
in ‘the feeld of Gabaa®; and there was a 
puple with hym as of sexe hundred men. 

3And Achias, the sone of Achitob, the 
brother of Ychabod, the sone of Phynees, 
that was comen of Hely, the preest of thie 
Lord in Silo, beere the prestis coope ; but 
and the puple knewe not whider Jona- 
4thas was goon. Forsothe there weren 
bytwixe® the stiyngis vp, bi the whiche 


XIE. 28 —Xivee 


silf to the weie of the terme in the lond 
of Sabaa; and that? terme nei3eth’ to the 
valey of Seboym a3ens the deseert. For-19 
sothe? ‘no smy3th of yrun® was foundun 
in al the lond of Israel; for Filisteis® 
‘weren war, ether® eschewiden, lest per- 
auenture Ebreis’ maden a% swerd ether ab 
spere. Therfor al Israel 3ede doun to Fi-20 
listeis', that ech man schulde scharpe his 
schar, and picoise*, and ax', ‘and sarpe™; 
‘and so" alle egis® weren bluntid? ‘of21 
scharris!, and of picoisis", and of ‘forkis 
of thre teeth’, and of axis, ‘til tot a pricke 
to be amendid. And whanne the dai of22 
batel cain, no swerd and" spere was 
foundin in the hond of al the puple 
that was with Saul and Jonathas, outakun 
Saul’, and Jonathas his sone. Forsothe 23 
the stacioun* of FilisteisY 3ede out, that it 
schulde passe in to Machynas. 


CAP. XIV. 


And it bifelde in a day, that Jonathas,1 
the sone of Saul, seide to his squyer, a 
3ong man, Come thou, and passe we’ to 
the staciouns® of the Filisteis, which? is 
bizende that place; ‘sotheli he* schewide 
not this same thing to his fadir. Sothelit2 
Saul dwellide in the laste part of Gabaa, 
vndur a pumgarnarde tre, that was in the 
feeld of Gabaa; and the puple as of sixe® 
hundrid men was with‘ hym. And Achias, 3 
sone$ of Achitob, brother of Icaboth, sone 
of Fynees, that was gendrid of Ely, preest* 
of the Lord in Silo, bar ephod', ‘thaé is‘, 
the’ preestis cloth™; but also the puple 
wiste not whidur Jonathas hadde" go. 
Sotheli® bitwixe the stiyngis?, bi whiche%4 
Jonathas enforside to passe to the sta- 


Yofre prom. W of the heje 2 pr.m, * the diggynge ce. Yalthe cz. 2 Filisteys c. @ Magron £ pr.m. 


b bytween Bru. between Ee. betwe c. pass. 


zthe anc. neizeder. noiyed i. > Andi. ¢noon yrensmithr. 4 the Filisteisi, © Om.1. 
fthe Ebreis1. § Om. vikoxb. b Om. perKuopsx. the Filisteis 1. -* his picoise 1. his ax 1. 
m Om. pGKMNosxb. and his kuttinge hook 1. n for I. ° the egis of her scharris 1. P blunt 1. 
4 Om. 1. ther picoises 1. —§ her thre tothid forkis 1. t ynto 1. Une CEIO pr. m. v Sauls 1. 
waAnd1 *Xstandart:. Ythe Filisteis1. 7% weforth1. @standartry. >that1. © and Jonathas 1. 
4And1 ¢asixer. there with 1. &thesone1, the preest 1. ithe ephodr. Kor1, !Om.m. 
™ cope 1. the whole gloss omitted in x. = wast. © Andr. Pstiyngis up 1. 4 the whiche 1. 


ev, pare 


Jonathas enforside to goo to the sta- 


cyouns of Philistiens, hei3e stonys on 
either side, and as in maner of teeth litle 
rochis hens and thens before brokun ; 
name to the oon Boosez, and to the 
5tother the name Sene; o litil roche ful 
hee3 at the north a3ens Machynas‘* to 
fiz3ten, and another at the south ajens 
6Gabaa. Jonathas forsothe seide to the 
jong man his squyer, Come, and passe 
we to the stacioun of thes vncercumci- 
dide, if perauenture the Lord do for vs; 
for it is not to the Lord hard to saue, or 
7in many or in fewe. And his squyer 
seide to hyin, Do alle thingis that plesen 
to thin inwit; go whider thow coueytist, 
I shal be with thee where euere thou 
swolt. And Jonathan seith, Loo! we goon 
to thes men; ‘and whamne we aperen to 
ghem, if this maner thei speken to vs, 
Dwel 3e, to the tyme that we comen to 
30u ; stonde’ we® in ouref place, ne stye 
1owe vp to hem. . Forsothe if thei seyn, 
Stye 3e vp to vs; stye we vp, for the Lord 
hath takun hem in oure hoondis; this 
shal be to vs a tokne. And so either® 
aperide to the stacioun of Philistiens ; 
and Philistiens seiden, Loo! the He- 
brewis goon out fro the caues, in the 
12Whiche thei weren hid. And the men 
speken fro the stacioun to Jonathan and 
to his squyer, and seiden, Stieth vp to vs, 
and we shulen shewe 3ou a thing. And 
Jonathas seith to his squier, Stie we, 
folwe me; forsothe the Lord hath taken 
13hem into the hoondis of Yrael. Forsothe 
Jonathas styede crepynge with hoondis 
and feet, and his squyer after hym; and 
whanne thei hadden seen the face of 
Jonathan, other fellen before Jonathan, 
other his squyer slow3, folowynge hym. 
14And the first veniaunce is doon, the 
which smoot Jonathas and the squyer of 


I. KINGS. 37 


cioun of Filisteis, weren stonys stond- 
ynge forth on euer either side, and scarris 
brokun bifore bi the maner of teeth on 
ech syde; naime to oon’ was Boses, and 
name to ‘the tothers’ was Sene; o scarres 
was stondynge forth to the north a3ens 
Machynas, and the tother scarre to the 
south a3ens Gabaa. Forsothe' Jonathase 
seide to his 3ong squyer, Come thou, passe 
we to the stacioun of these vncircumcisid 
men, if in hap the Lord do for vs; for it 
is not hard to the Lord to saue, ethir in 
manye ethir in fewe. And his squyer7 
seide to hym, Do thou alle thingis that 
plesen’ thi soule; go whidur thou co- 
ueitist, Y schal be with thee, where euer 
thou wolt. And Jonathas seide, Lo! wee 
passen to these men; and whanne we ap- 
peren to hem, if thei speken thus to vs, 9 
Dwelle 3e", til we comen to 30u; stonde 
we in oure place, and stie we not to* 
hem. SotheliY if thei seien, Stye 3e” to vs ; 10 
stie we*, for the Lord hath bitake hem in? 
oure hondis; this schal be a signe® to vs. 
‘Therfor euer® either apperide to the sta-11 
cioun® of Filisteis®; and Filisteis® seiden, 
Lo! Ebreis‘ goen out of caues, in whiche 
thei weren hid. And men of the stacioun® 12 
spaken to Jonathas and to his squyer, and 
seiden, Stie 3e" to vs, and we schulen 
schewe to 3ou a thing. And Jonathas 
seide to his squyer, ‘Stie we', sue thou 
me; for the Lord hath bitake hem in to 
the hondis of Israel. Forsothe* Jonathas 13 
stiede! crepynge on hondis and feet, and 
his squyer after hym; aud whanne thei™ 
hadden seyn the face of Jonathas, summe 
felden doun bifor Jonathas, his" squier 
killed othere, and suede? hym. And the1s 
firste wounde? was maad4, which" Jonathas 
and his squyer smoot’, as of twenti’ men", 
in ‘the myddil part of lond which’ a peire 
of oxun was wont to ere in the” dai. Andis 


© the aspies x pr.m. and stonde & prm. &3¢ Eprom. ‘f30ure rn prem. & he £ pr.m. 
that oon 1. the toon kK. 8 that other 1, t And 1. a this c. v plesith a. W 3e 
stiller. xuptoi. yAnd1, *3eupr1. %weuptohems. PintoK. ¢token1. ¢¢And sor. 
Therfor x. ‘standartr. © the Filisteis1. the Ebreis1. & stacioun of Philistees 1. — 3e up 1. 
i Wende we up fohem1. k Andi. '!stiedeup1, ™ the Philisteest. ‘andhis1. © he suede 1. 


4dont.  * the which 1. 
Vv epace of the erthe thatr. Wor. 


P veniaunce I. 
Om, «a. 


8 killide 1. 


tOm.c, 4% thousynd men p pr. m. 1kKMNOQxb. 


38 


hym as of twenti thousand" men, in the 
half party of an akir that a peyre of 
150xen in a day is wont to ere. And a 
myracle is doon in the tentis, bi the 
feeldys, but and al the puple of the sta- 
cioun of hem that weren at robbynge, 
wexe astonyed, and the tentis ben dis- 
turblid; and it felle as a myracle fro 
16God. And the weyters of Saul, that 
weren in Gabaa of Beniamyn, bihelden, 
and, loo! a multitude throwun doun, and 
i7hidir and thider down fleynge. And 
Saul seith to the puple that weren with 
hym, Enserchith, and lokith, who 3ede 
awey fro vs. And whanne thei hadden 
sou3t, it is founden not! to be nec3 Jona- 
isthas and his squyer. And Saul seith to 
Achyam, Applye the arke of ‘the Lord ; 
forsothe the arke of God was there in 
1i9that day with the sonys of Israel. And 
whanne Saul spak to the preest, greet 
noyse is out sprongen in the tentis of 
Philistyen ; and it wexe litilmele, and 
cleerliker it sownyde. And Saul seith 
to the preest, Withdrawe thin hoond. 
20Thanne Saul and the puple that was 
with hym criede togidre; and_ thei 
camen to the place of the strijf, and, 
loo! the swerd of echon was turned to 
his nei3bour, and a greet slau3ter wel 
21mych. But and the Hebrewis_ that 
weren with Philistiens 3istirday! and bi- 
fore 3isterdai, and™ stieden vp with hem 
in the tentis, ben turned for to ben with 
Yrael, that weren with San] and Jonatha. 
22 Forsothe alle the™™ Iraelitis, the whiche 
hadden hid hem silf in the hil of Effraym, 
herynge that Phihstiens weren flowen, 
felawshipten hem seluen with hem" in 
the batayl, and weren with Saul as twenti 
23thousandis of men. And the Lord sanyde 
Irael in® that day. Forsothe the fi3t camen 


h Om. B sec. m. i Om. 4aRru. k God a. 
9 and in E. 
x Philistees tentist. Yheri. 2 Om. eeb. 


4 bihelden this doyng 1. 


Filisteis 1. k jt sownede I. 1 more clerly 1. 


Pmannes I. 4 slan3tere ther 1. ° the Ebreis 1. 
Israel 1. Wthe menci. * the Filisteis 1. 
meni. ¢€socied i. Wand, ¢€ ynto 1. into EL. 


I. KINGS. 


a Philistees stacioun 1. 
© of Philistees was cast 1. 


S stied up I. 
Yaten1. twenti Kxoq. 
f the euentid 1. enetide E. 


SL Venice sag 


a myracle was don in the castels*, and bi 
theY feeldis, but also al the puple of the’ 
‘stacioun of hem* that 3eden out to take 
prey, dredde, and ‘the castelsb weren dis- 
turblid ; and it bifelde as a myracle of 
God. 
that weren in Gabaa of Beniamyn, and 
lo! a multitude cast® doun, and fleynge 
awei hidur and thidur. 
to the puple that weren with hym, Seke 
3e, and se 3e, who 3ede awei fro vs. And 
whanne thei hadden sou3t, it was foundun, 
that Jonathas and his squyer weren not 
present. 
Bryngef the arke of the Lord; for the 
arke of God was there in that daié with 


And aspyeris® of Saul bihelden4, 16 


And Saul seide 17 


+ Saul swoor. 
San] synned in 
this ooth in 
double maner; 
for he swor 


And Saul seide to Achias, 18 yuele, and for 


he wolde fille 
worse; sothely 
he swoor here 
with out nede 


the sones of Israel. And whanne Saul toad du cireum- 


spak to the preest, a grete noise roos in 
the castelis of Filisteis!; and it encresside 
litil and litil, and sownedek cleerliere!. And 
Saul seide to the preest, Withdraw thin 


taunces, and 
for he outook 
not the caas of 
nede, which is 
ontakun in ech 
comaundement 
and lawe. Also 
hise ooth turn- 


hond. Therfor™ Saul criede, and al the 20 ede to a worse 


puple® that was with hym; and thei 
camen ‘til to° the place of batel, and, lo! 
the swerd of ech man? was turned to his 
nei3bore, and a ful grete sleynge! was. 


issu, for the pu- 
ple, maad feynt 
for it, my3te 
not pursue her 
enemyes, and 
ooth was occa- 
sioun of synne 
to al the puple. 


But also Ebreis’ that weren with Filisteis 21 The ij. tyme 


3istirday and the thridde dai ago, and 
hadde stied’ with hem int castels®, turn- 
eden a3en to be with Israel’, that weren 
with Saul and Jonathas. 
of Israel, that hadden hid hem silf in the 
hil of Effraym, herden that Filisteis* had- 
den fled; and thei felouschipiden hem silf 
with her men in batel, and as tenY thou- 
synde of men weren with Saul. 
Lord sauyde Israel in that day. Sotheli? 


the batel cam til* to Bethauen. And men? 24 


of Israel weren felouschipid® to hem silf 
in that dai; forsothe’ Saul swoorf to the 
puple, and seide, Cursid be the man, that 
etith breed ‘til to® euentid‘, tilg‘Y venge 


1 sistai ce. m thei 4. mm Om. 4. 0 theiris c. 


v her tentis 1. 
& tyme I. 

0 multitude 1. 

tinto K. 


¢ the aspyeris 1. 
htentis1. ithe 
© ynto I, into EL. 
uher tentis 1. the men of 
z And 1. aineEL. ? the 
& til the tyme that 1. 


f Bryng hidere 1. 
m Thanne 1. 


anl synnede, 
in fillinge wick- 
idly his ooth as 
myche as was 
in him, for he 
wol sle Jona- 


Also alle men’ 22 thas innocent, 


aud reherside 
an other foly 
ooth on this. 
Jonathas syn- 
nede not in 
etinge hony, for 
he herde not 
the comaunde- 


And the 23 ment of his fa- 


dir, and for he 
cet in nede. 
Jonathas was 
taknn bi lot, 
that he schulde 
declare his in- 
nocence bifor 
alle men, and 
that, as inno- 
cent, he schnld 
be delyuerid bi 
the puple. Lir 
here. ¢. 


XLV. 24—33. 


24vnto Bethauen. And men of Yrael ben 
felawshipt to hem seluen in that day; 
forsothe Saul swore to the puple, sey- 
ynge,Cursid be? the man that etith breed 
vnto euen, to the tyme that I be vengid 
250f myn enemyes. And al the puple eete 
no breed. And alle the comouns of the 
loond camen into a1 wast wody place, 
in the which was hony on the face of 
aethe feeld. And so al the puple wente 
into the place of heize trees, and there 
apperide flowyng hony; and no man 
appliede the hond' to his mouth; for- 
27s0the the puple dredde the ooth. For- 
sothe Jonathas herde not, whanne his 
fadre swore to the puple; and he strau3t 
out the cop of the 3eerde, that he hadde 
in the hoond, and he wette into the hony 
combe; and he turnede his hoond to his 
mouth, and the eyen of hym ben 1i3tned. 
28 And answerynge oon of the puple seith, 
Thi fader hath constreynyd the puple 
with ooth, seiynge, Cursid be® the man 
that etith breed to day. Forsothe the 
29 puple faylide. And Jonathas seide, My 
father hath disturblid the loond; 3oure 
self han seen, for myn eyen ben li3tned, 
forthi that Y taastide a litil of this hony ; 
30myche more if the puple hadde eeten of 
the preizje of her enemyes, that thei 
foonden; whether not more veniaunce 
31 hadde be doo in Philisteest? Thanne thei 
smyten in that day the Philistees‘t fro 
32the place of engynes vnto Hailon. Doun 
weried is the puple wel miche; and 
turned to the praye, took sheep, and oxen, 
and calues, and slewen in the lond; and 
33the puple eete with blood. And thei 
toolden to Saul, seiynge, that the puple 
hadde synned to the Lord, etynge with 
blood. The which seith, 3e han tres- 
passide ; turneth to me ry3t nowe a greet 


P Om. spceFH. 4Om. 4BFu. 


thony april. 


8 Om. BCEFH. 


I. KINGS. 39 


me! of myn enemyes. And al the puple2s 
ete not! breed*, And al the comyn puple 
of the lond cam in to a forest, in which 
was hony! on the ‘face of ™ erthe. And 26 
so the puple entride in to the forest, and 
flowynge® hony apperideP; and no man 
puttide! hond® to his mouth’, for the pu- 
ple dredde the ooth. Forsothet Jonathas 2; 
herde not, whanne his fadir swoor" to the 
puple; and heY helde forth the ende of a 
litil 3erde, whiche” he hadde* in theY hond, 
and dippide? in to ‘a coomb of hony*; and 
he turnede his hond to his mouth, and 
hise i3jen weren li3tned. And oon of the 2s 
puple answeride, and seide, Thi fader boond 
the puple with an ooth, and seide, Cursid 
be the man that etith breed to dai. For- 
sotheb the puple was feynt. And Jonathas 29 
seide, My fadir hath* disturblid the lond ; 
je sien, that myn ijen ben li3tned, for Y 
tastide a litil of this hony; hou myche3o 
more if the puple hadde ete the’ prey of 
hise® enemyes, which‘ ‘prey its foond; 
whether not gretter veniaunce hadde be 
maad in Filisteis? Therfore thei smyt-31 
iden Filisteis in that dai fro Machynas 
‘til in to! Hailon. Forsothe* the puple was 
maad ful wery; and the puple turnede3z 
to prey!, and took™ scheep and oxun, and 
calues; and thei killiden in™ the erthe; 
and the puple eet® with blood. And thei? ss 
telden to Saul, and seiden, that the puple 
etynge with blood hadde synned to the 
Lord. And Saul seide, 3e han trespassid ; 
walewe 3e1 to me ‘ri3t now’ a greet stoon. 
And Saul seyde, ‘Be 3e spred* abroad in to34 
the comyn puple, and seie 3e to hem, that 
ech man brynge to me his oxe and ram‘; 
and sle 3e on" this stoon, and ete 3e’, and 
3e schulen not do synne to the Lord, ‘and 
ete” with blood. Therfor* al the puple 
brou3te ech man an oxe in his hond ‘til 


t the Philistees scern. tt Phistees 4. 


h Y be vengid i. i no ELO pr.m. k breed til that tyme 1. 1 hony aboue 1. m Om. 1. 
°Om.1. Papperide there flowynge 1. 4 putter. This hond 1. § mouth theroft. t And, “forbede 
this 1. YJonathas1. Wthatr. *heeldex. Yhis1. #he dippideit 1. ®%anhonycomber. » Andt. 
¢ bi this heest hath 1. 4 of the paikmnogswxb. Cherri. fthatr. & their. 4 smytyn c. smeten LP. 
smitten &. ivntor. inton, k Andi. ‘take prey3. ™ittook1. 1 these bestis upont. © eet the 
fleishe1. Pment. 3eanoont. *Om.1. *Go3eforthr. this wethert. 4thouponr. Y3e 
hemi. Wetyngehemr. * And soy, 


40 


34stoon. And Saul seide, Beth 3e scatered 
into the comouns, and seye" 3e to hem, 
that echon brynge to me his oxe and 
wether ; and sleeth vpon it, and etith, 
and 3e shulen not synne to the Lord, 
etynge with blood. And so al the puple 
brou3te echon an oxe in his hoond vnto 
sony3t, and thei slowen there. And Saul 
bildide vp an auter to the Lord; and 
thanne first he bigan to bilde an auter 
36to the Lord. And Saul seide, Falle we 
vpon the Philistyens bi ny3t, aud waste 
we hem vnto the morwetide li3t; ne 
leeue we of hem aman. And the puple 
seide, Al that good is seen to thee in 
thin eyen, do. And the preest seith, 
37 Nei3 we hider to God. And Saul coun- 
seylide the Lord, seiynge, Whether shal 
Y pursue Philistiym, if thou taake hem 
into the hoondis of Yrael? And he an- 
ssswerde not to hym in that day. And 
Saul seide, Aplieth hidir alle the corners 
of the puple, and witith, and seeth, bi 
39whom fallith this synne to day. The 
Lord the saueour of Yrael lyueth; for 
if bi Jonathan my sone it is doon, with 
out a3en drawynge he sha) die. To the 
which no man a3en seide to hym of al 
4othe puple. Aud he seide to al Yrael, Be 
je seuerd into o parti, and Y with Jona- 
- than my sone shal be in o parti. And 
the puple answerde to Saul, That good 
4tis seen in thin eyen, do. And Saul seide 
to the Lord God of Irael, Lord God of 
Yrael, 3yue dom, what is, that thou an- 
swerst not to thi seruaunt to day? If 


in me, or in Jonathan my sone, is this’ 


wickidnes, 3yf shewynge; and if this 
wickidnes is in thi puple, 3if holynes. 
And Jonathas and Saul ben’ taken; for- 
42s0the the puple 3ede out. And Saul seith, 
Leyeth lot betwix” me and Jonathan iny 
4z3sone. And Jonathas is taken. Forsothe 


U seith BEFH. 


I. KINGS. 


Vis BCEFH. 


XIV. 34—43- 


toY ny3t, aud thei killiden2 there. Sotheli*35 
Saul bildide® an auter to the Lord; and 
thanne firste he bigan to bilde an auter to 
the Lord. And Saul seide, Falle we on°36 
the Filisteis in the ny3t, and waste! we 
hem til the morewtid schyne; and leeue 
we not of hem a man. . And the puple 
seide, Do thou al thing that semeth good 
to thee in thin ijen. And the preest seide, 
Neiz3e we hidur to God. And Saul coun-37 
selidee the Lord, and seide, Whether Y 
schal pursue Filisteisf? whether thou schalt 
bitake hem in to the hondis of Israel ? 
And the Lord answeride not to him in 
that dai. And Saul seide, Brynge 3e38 
hidur alle the corneris® of the puple, and 
wite 3e, and se®, bi whom this synne 
bifelde' to dai. The Lord sauyour* of Is- 39 
rae] lyueth; for if ‘it is! don bi Jonathas 
my sone, he schal die with out a3en draw- 
yng. At which™ oofh no man of al the 
puple a3enseide hym"™. And he seide to al 40 
Israel, Be 3e departid in to 0 part, and Y 
with my sone Jonathas schal be in the 
tothir part. And the puple answeride to 
Saul, Do thou that, that semeth good in 
thin izen. And Saul seide to the Lord4! 
God of Israel, Lord God of Israel, 3yue 
thou doom, what is°, that thou answerist 
not to dai to thi seruaunt}? If this wickid- 
ness is in me, ether? in Jonathas my 
sone, 3yue! thou schewyng"; ether if this 
wickidnesse is in thi® puple, 3yue thou 
hoolynesse. . And Jonathas was takun, 
and Saul‘; forsothe® the puple 3ede out. 
And Saule seide, Sende 3e lot bitwixe me 42 
and Jonathas my sone. And Jonathas 
was takun ‘bz lot’. 
to Jonathas, Schewe thou to me, what 
thou didist. And Jonathas schewide to 
hym, and seide, Y tastynge tastide a litil 
of* hony ‘in the ende of the 3erde, that 


Forsothe¥ Saul seide 43 


+ Fro this 
word, to thi 
seruaunt, al 
that sueth til 
aftir this word, 
3yue thou hooly- 
nesse, is not in 


| 
: 
| 


Ebreu, nether 
is of the text. 
Lire here. c. 


‘ 
7 


was in myn hond; and lo! Y die}. And 44t% ¥die; with 


Ww betwen Bern. betwe c. 


y vnto the 1. into EL. zkiliden hemr. Andy. 4 bildide there 1. Cuponr. 4 destrie 1. 
€ counselide with 1. {the Filisteis1.  & corneris, or the vitermeste parties 1.  se3e piKo. ‘hath 
fallen 1. the sanyour1. ‘!this synne bez. ™the whichx1 "Saulr. Oisita.  P other EL. 
‘makez. 'schewyng theroft. Sthea. ¢tSaul di loti andi. vYOm.1 wWAndr *Om.1. 


¥ with my 3erdis eende 1. 


out resonable 
cause. Lire 
here, C. 


XIV. 44-—52. 


Saul seide to Jonathan, Shewe to me 
what thow hast doon. And Jonathas 
shewide to hym, and seith, Taastynge 
Y tastide in the cop of the 3eerd that 
was in myn hoond a litil of hony, and 
4tloo! Y dye. And Saul seith, Thes thingis 
do to me God, and thes thingis adde, for 
45 bi deeth thou shalt dye, Jonathas. And 
the puple seide to Saul, Thanne whether 
Jonathas shulde dye, that hath doo this 
greet helth in Yrael? that is felony; the 
Lord lyueth, oon heer of the heed of 
hym shal not fal into the erthe, for with 
God he hath wrou3t to day. Thanne the 
puple delyuerd Jonathan, that he diede 
acnot. And Saul wente a wey, and pur- 
suede not Philistiym ; forsothe Philisteis 
47 wenten a wey into her placis. And, the 
rewme stablid vpon Yrael, Saul fau3t bi 
enuyroun a3ens alle his enemyes, a3ens 
Moab, and the sones of Amon, and Edom, 
and the kyngis of Saba, and the Philis- 
teis; and whidir ever” he turnede hym silf, 
4she venkusede. And, the oost gedrid, he 
smoot Amalech, and he* delynerde Yrael 
a9fro the hoond of his wastours. Ther** 
weren forsothe the sones of Saul, Jonathas, 
and Jesuy, and Melchisona; names of his 
twoY dou3ters’, name of the first goten 
Merob, and name of the lasse Mycol. 
50And name of the wijf of Saul Achy- 
noem, the dou3ter of Achymaas ; and the 
name of the prince of his chiualrye Ab- 
ner, the sone of Ner, cosyn germeyn of 
51Saul. Forsothe Cys was the fader of 
Saul, and Ner, the fader of Abner, the 
52 sone of Abyel. Forsothe there was strong 
batail ajens Philisties alle the days of 
Saul; wherfor whom euere Saul saw} a 
strong man and able to bateil, he felaw- 
shipide him to him silf. 


Weue sz. * Om. ce. 


aifi, eb Om.1. 
h perishe 1. i Om. 1. 
© the Filisteis 1. 
Vhis1. W gaderid togidere 1. 
@hisc. » the name 1. 
i the brothir 1. 


Z this to 1. € die not 1. 
& for no 1. 
np he pursuede 1. 
u the Filisteis 1. 
Z the name 1. 
wijf 1. 5 the sone 1. 
Pint. Ghex. 


VOL. II. 


P and 1. 


k And r. 


xx that 4. 


d Wher thanne t.. 
k the erthe xm. 
4 the Filisteis 1. 
x he delyuerede 1. 
€ to his c. 
ithe fadir 1. 


I. KINGS. 41. 


Saul seide, God do to me these thingis, 

and adde ‘these thingis’, for* thou, Jona- 

thas, schalt> die® bi deeth. And the puple 4s 

seide to Saul, ‘Therfor whcthir’ Jonathas 

schal die, that dide this greet helthe in 

Israel? this® is vnleueful'; the Lord lyueth; 

noon’ heer of his heed schal falle" in toi 

erthe*; for he wrou3te! with God to dai. 

Therfor™ the puple delyuerede™ Jonathas, 

that he diede not. And Saul 3ede awey, 46 

and pursuede™ not Filisteis®; sotheli? Fi- 

listeys1 3eden in to her places, And Saul, 47 

whanne the’ rewme was ‘confermyd on 

Israel, fau3tt bi cumpas a3ens alle hise 

enemyes, a3jens Moab, and the sones of 

Amon, and Edom, and ajens the kyngis 

of Soba, and a3ens Filisteis"; and whidur 

euer he turnede hym, he ouercamt. And 48t he ouercam. 
6 In Ebreu it is 

whanne the” oost was gaderid”, he smoot thus, dide vn- 

Amalech; and delyuerede* Israel fro the yas vnfeithful ; 


feithfully, ether 
} ved ciaass y and the lettre 
hond of hise distrieris. Forsothe the 49 viynge Sg 


sones of Saul weren Jonathas, and Jesuy, pe hae a 
i é i ‘augte asenus 
and Melchisua; the names of hise twei  Amalech. Lire 


Te. Ce 


dou3tris’Y, name’ of the? firste gendrid 
dou3ter was Merob, and name> ‘of the® 
lesse’ doujter® was Mycol. And namef of s0 
‘the wijf of Sauls was Achynoem, the 
dou3tir of Achymaas; and the name of 
the prince of his chyualrye was Abner, 
sone! of Ner, brother! of the fadir of Saul. 
Forsothe* Cys was the fadir of Saul; and si 
Ner, the sone of Abiel, was fadir! of Ab- 
ner. Sotheli™ my3ti? batel was ajens Fi- se 
listeis® in alle the daies of Saul; for whom 
euere Saul si3 a strong man and schaphi 
to? batel, Sault felouschipide to him silf 
that man. 


yOm. 4. # dou3tren err. 


eit1 f-vuleueful that he dye 1. 
lhath wrou3t 1. ™ Thauner. ® deluyede a. 
This, $s stablid upont. the fau3t 1. 
yAndt. YY dou3tris ben these 1. 
4zoungerr. © Om.1. fthenamer. 6 Sauls 
m Andry. ®strong1. © the Filisteis 1. 


G 


42 I. KINGS. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And Samuel seide to Saul, The Lord 
sente me, that I anoynte thee into kyng 
vpon his puple Yrael; nowe thanne here 

2the voys of the Lord. Thes thingis seith 
the Lord of oostis, I haue remembrid alle 
thingis that Amalech dide to Yrael; what 
maner wyse he withstood to hym in the 
weye, whanne he shulde stye vp fro Egipt. 

3 Nowe thanne go, and smyte Amalech, and 
destruy alle the thingis of hyn; ne spare 
thou to hym, ne coueyt thou eny thing 
of his* thingis; but sle fro man vnto 
womman, and litil child, and soukynge, 

4oxe, and sheep, and camel, and asse. And 
so Saul comaundide to the puple, and 
noumbrede hem as loombs two hundrid 
thousandis of foot men, and ten thow- 

5sandis of the men of Juda. And whanne 
Saul was comen vnto the cyte of Ama- 
lech, he leyde out aspies in the streem. 
6And Saul seide to Cynee, Goth hens, 
goth awey, and departith fro Amalech, 
lest perauenture I enwrappe thee with 
hem; forsothe thou didist mercy with 
alle the sones of Yrael, whanne thei sti- 
eden vp fro Egipt. And, Cynee wente 
zawey fro the mydil of Amalech. Aud 
Saul smoot Amalech fro Euila, to the 
tyme that he cam to Sur, that is fro the 
sregioun of Egipt. And he took Agage, 
the kyng of Amalech, on lyue; forsothe 
a] the comoun he slew3 in the mouth of 
g9swerd. And Saul sparide, and the puple, 
to Agag, and to the best flockis of sheep, 
and of drouys, and to clothis, and to 
wetheris, and to alle thingis that weren 
fayre; ne thei wolden scatere hem; for- 
sothe what thing was foul and reprouable 
10that thei destruyden. Forsothe the word 
of the Lord is doon to Samuel, seiynge, 


XV. I—lo. 


CAP. XV. 


And Samuel seide to Saul, The Lordi 
sente me, that Y schulde anoynte thee in 
to ‘kyng on™ his puple Israel; now therfor 
here thou the vois ‘of the Lord’. Thee 
Lord of oostis seith thes thingis, Y haue 
rikenyd' what euer thingis Amalech dide" 
to Israel; hou Amalech a3enstood Israel 
in the weie, whanne he’ stiede’ from E- 
gipt. Now therfor go thou, and sle Ama-s 
lech, and distruye thou alle ‘thingis of 
hym*; spare thou not hym, and¥ coneyte 
thou not? ony thing of hise thingis; but 
sle thou fro man ‘til to* womman, and a? 
litil child, and soukynge, an® oxe, and 
scheep, and camel, and asse. Therfor’4 
Saul comaundide to® the puple‘, and he 
noumbride hem as lambren twei hundrid 
thousynde of foot men, and ten thousynde 
of men of Juda. And whanne Saul cam5 
to the citee of Amalech, he made redi 
buyschementis in the stronde. And Saulé 
seide to Cyney®{, Go 3e, departe je’, and 
go 3e awei* fro Amalech, lest perauen- 
ture Y wlappe thee in with hem; for 
thou didist mercy with alle the sones of 
Israel, whanne thei stieden' fro Egipt. 
And Cyney departide fro the myddis of 
Amalech. And Saul smoot Amalech fro7 
Euila, til™ thou" come? to Sur?, which is 
ajensi Egipt. And he" took Agag quyke’,s 
the kyng of Amalech; sothelit he killide 
bi the" scharpnesse of swerd alle the comyn 
puple. And Saul and the” puple sparide9 
Agag, and the’ beste flockis of scheep, and 
of grete beestis, and clothis, and rammes, 
and alle thingis that weren faire; and thei 
nolden” destrie tho; sothelit what euer 
thing was vijl, and repreuable, thei dis- 
trieden this’. Forsothe? the word of the 10 
Lord was maad to Samuel, and seide, It 11 


+ Saul seide 

to Cyney, that 
is, to hem that 
camen of Jetro, 
and weren with 
the sones of 
Israel. Lire 
here. Cc. 


@ this B. 


Takynguponi. §* Om.1. 


 brou3t to mynde 1, 


*hath dor. VJsrael1. W stiede up 1. x his 


thingis1. Yner. 2Om.1, *vnto EL. Om. F see. vice. EIPXb. © Om. F sec. vice. DEIPxb. 4 And so 1. 


€Om.1. fF puple fo be gadrid togidre 1. 
Istieden up1. ™ tox. thot. 
EGKLNFQRDX sec. mi. 
notr. * but. 


@ euen ajens 1. T Saul 1. 


Y that thing 1. it Ex. 


8 the peple of Cyney 1. 


n he A sec.m. X sec.m. EIPb. 


% Sothly 1. 


h3ehenns1. i3e awey 1. & forth 1. 
©came lI. cam Pp. P Assur F sec. m. 
Saliyuei tandz1, tOm.1. Vhis1. Wwolden 


XV. II——20. 


uIt othinkith me, that I haue ordeyned 
Saul a kyng; for he hath forsokyn me, 
and my wordis he hath not fulfillid in 
dede. And Samuel is sory, and cryede 
12to0 the Lord al ny3t. And whanne fro 
ni;3t Samuel was rysen that he go to Saul 
eerli, it is toold to Samuel, for Saul was 
comen into Carmeel, and hadde arerid to 
hym an out shynynge tokne of victory in 
maner of a bow, and turned was passid, 
and goon doun into Galgala. Thanne 
Samuel cam to Saul, and Saul offred 
brent sacrifice to the Lord of the cheef 
of the preiys, that he brou3te fro Ama- 
13lech. And while Samuel was comen to 
Saul, Saul seide to hym, Thou blessid of> 
the Lord, Y haue® fulfillid the word of 
14the Lord. And Samuel seide, And what 
is this voys of flockis that rengith in 
myn eeris, and of droves that I here? 
15 And Saul seith, Fro Amalecli men han 
brou3t thes thingis, forsothe the puple 
sparede to the betre sheep and drouys, 
for thei shulden be offrid to the Lord 
thi God; the tother forsothe we slewen. 
16 And Samuel seide to Saul, Suffre me, and 
I shal shewe to thee what thingis the 
Lord hath spoken to-me to ny3t. And 
17he seid to hym, Spek. And Samuel seith, 
Whether not, whanne thou were a Hitil 
child in thin owne® eyen, and thou art 
maad heed in the lynage of Yrael, and 
the Lord anoyntide thee into kyng vpon 
18 Yrael; and the Lord sente thee into the 
weye, and seith, Go, and sle the synful 
men of Amalech, and thou shalt fi3t 
19a3ens hem vnto the slau3ter of hem. Whi 
thanne hast thow not herd the voys of 
the Lord, but turnedist to the preye, and 
didist yuel in the eyen of the Lord? 
20And Saul seith to Samuel, If I haue 
herd the voys of the Lord, and haue 


I. KINGS. 43 


t+ It repentith 
me. Repent- 
ing, whanne it 
berith chaunge- 
ablete, may 


repentith met, that Y made Saul kyng*; 
for he forsook» me, and fillide® not my 
wordis in werk. And Samuel was sory, 
and he criede to the Lord in al the’ ny3t. not be in bod, 
And whanne Samuel hadde rise® bi ny3t 123s seid to re- 
to go eerly to Saul, it was teld to Samuel: feck at 
that Saul hadde come in to Carmel, and as ee 
hadde reisid‘ to hym a signe of victorye; jn: “panne 
and that® he hadde turned ajen?, and that tthe 
hadde passidi, and hadde go down in to in this poynt, 
Galgala. Therfor* Samuel cam to Saul, ee a 
and Saul offride brent sacrifice to the Lord 

of the cheef thingis of preies, whiche he fri panes. 
hadde brou3t fro Amalech. And the while 13 ablete, is onely 
Samuel cam to Saul, Saul seide to hym, eoaaULSi: 
Blessid be thou of the Lord, Y haue fillid! a aE 
the ‘word of the Lord™. And Samuel 14 Pe ae 
seide, And" what is the® vois of flockis, “ere. ¢. 
that sowneth in myn eeris, and of grete 

beestis, whiche Y here? And Saul seide, 15 

Thei? brou3ten tho fro Amalech, for the 

puple sparide the betere1 scheep and grete 

beestis, that tho schulden be offrid to thit 

Lord God ; sotheli’ we killiden the tothere 

beestis. Forsothet Samuel seide to Saul, 1¢ 

Suffre thou me, and Y schal schewe to 

thee what thingis the Lord spak" to me 

in the’ ny3t. And he” seide to Samuel, 

Speke thou. And Samuel seide, Whether 17 

not, whanne thou were litil in thin* i3en, 

thou were maade heed in the lynages of 

Israel, and the Lord anoyntide thee in to 

kyngY on? Israel; and the Lord sente*1s 

thee in to the weie, and seide, Go thou, 

and sle the synneris of Ainalech, and thou 

schalt fi3te ajens hem ‘til to sleyng* of 

hem. Whi therfor herdist thou not the1s 

vois of the Lord, but thou were turned to 

prey’, and didist yuel in the ‘i3en of the 

Lorde? And Saul seide to Samuel, 3hisf, 20 

Y herde® the ‘vois of the Lord», and Y 

sede! in the weie, bi which the Lord sente* 


Saul to be cass 
awey, whoin 
he reiside hi- 


bbigprm. Chac. ¢e ownth ez. 
2akyngc pr.m. hath forsa&ken:. ¢hath not fulfillid1. 4that1. eriseupr. _ freisid up 1. 
gOm.c. "azen fro Amalech 1. 1 passid forth1. —* Thanne 1. }fulfilid 1. = ™ Lordis word 1. 
1 Om. pF pr.m. GMNQwx. © this Bcl P Mens. 4 beste. * the a primi. Sandi tAnds. «hath 
spoker. Vthis1, WSaul1. *thinowner. Yakyng1. Zupont. @sender. > vyntot. into EL. 
ethe sleyng plures. ‘the prey1. ¢Lordissi3t1. fThisei. €haueherd1.  ? Lordis vois 1. 
ihaue gor. & sende 1. 


GQ 


44 I. KINGS. 


goon in the weye bi the which the Lord 
sente me, and haue brou3t Agag, the 
kyng of Amalech, and Amalech Y slewe. 
21Forsothe the puple took of the praye, 
sheep and oxen, the cheef of hem that 
ben slayn, that thei offren to the Lord 
22her God in Galgalis. And Samuel seith, 
Whether wole the Lord brent sacrifices 
or slayn offryngis, and not more that it 
be obeishid to the voice of the Lord? 
Forsothe betre is obeishaunce than slayn 
sacrificis, and to take heed more than to 
23 offre the fatnes of wetheris; for as synne 
of denyynge bi deuelis is to repugne, and 
as hidows trespas of mawmetrye to wiln 
not assent. Forthi thanne that thow hast 
throwen awcye the word of the Lord, 
the Lord hath throwen awey thee, that 
21thow be not kyng. And Saul seide to 
Samuel, Y haue synned, for’ I haue 
broken the word of the Lord, and thi 
wordis, dredynge the puple and obeish- 
25ynge to the voyce of hem; but nowe, Y 
biseche, bere my syune, and turne ajen 
26 with me, that I honoure the Lord. And 
Samuel seith to Saul, Y shal not turne 
ajen with thee, for thow hast throwen 
awey the word of the Lord, and the 
Lord hath throwen awey thee, that thow 
27be not kyng vpon Irael. And Samuel 
turnede forto goo awey; forsothe he 
cau3te the cop of the mautil of hym, the 
28 Which also is rent. And Samuel seide to 
hym, The Lord hath kyt the kyngdam 
of Yrael fro thee to day, and hath takyn 
zit to thi neiz3bore beter than thow; for- 
sothe to the ouercomer in Yrael he shal 
not spare, and thnur3 athenkynge he shal 
not be bowid; forsothe ne a man he is 
3othat he do othenkynge. And he seith, 
Y hane synned; bot nowe honour me® 
before the eldren of my puple, and be- 


4 and zB. 


Yhaue killid 1 ™ And: 1 hath take 1. 
tohim1. take heede to his 1. 
uconsente toit1. thir. Ww hast throwen 1. 
a dredinge 1. Y dredde k. © obeiynge 1. 
cast I. Supons 4 turnede hima. tand1, 
° spare hem that wil not cheie to him 1. P for c. 


© cheef 1. 
* repugne the word of God 1. fizte azens Goddis heestis x. 
* hath throwe 1. 
¢ her vois 1, 
k hemme 1. 
@ wil 1, 


XV. 21—30, 


me, and Y haue brou3t Agag, the kyng of 
Amalech, and Y killide! Amalech. For-21 
sothe™ the puple took" of the prey, scheep 
and oxun, the firste® fruytis of tho thingis, 
that. ben slayn, that thei make sacrifice to 
her Lord God in Galgalis. And Saimnel 22 
seide, Whether the Lord wole brent sacri- 
fices, ethir slayn sacrifices, and not moreP 
that me obeie to the vois of the Lord? 
For4 obedience’ is betere than sacrifices, and 
to ‘herkene Goddis word is more than to 
offre the ynnere fatnesse of rammes ; for 23 
it is as the syne of mawmetrie to ‘fi3te 
ajens Goddis heest*t, and it is as the 
wickidnesse of ydolatrie to nyle* ‘ascente 
to Goddis heest®*. Therfor for that’, that 
thou castidist™ awey the word of the Lord, 
the Lord castide* thee awei, that thon be 
not kyng. And Saul seide to Samuel, Y 24 
synnede’, for Y brak? the word of the 
Lord, and thi wordis ; ‘and Y dredde*® the 
puple, ‘and obeiede® to ‘the vois of hem‘; 
but now, Y biseche*, bere thou my synne, 25 
and turne thou ajen with me, that Y wor- 
schipe the Lord. And Samuel seide to26 
Saul, Y schal not turne ajen with thee, 
for thou castidist® awey the word of the 
Lord, and the Lord castidef awei thee, 
that thon be not king on® Israel. And 27 ; 
Samuel turnede’ to go awey; sothelii 

Saul took the ende* of the mentil of Sa- 

iuel, which! also was to-rent. And Sa-28 

muel seide to hym™, The Lord hath kit 

the rewme of Israel fro thee to dai, and 

3af" it to thi neiz3bore betere than thou ; 

certis the ouercomere in Israel] schal not29 

spare°’, and? he schal4 not be bowid bi re- 

pentaunce; for he is not man", ‘that ts, 
chaungeable*, that he do repentaunce. 

And Saul seide, Y synnedet; but now 30 

onoure thou me bifor the eldere men of 

my puple, and bifor Israel, and turne thou 


t ajenus Goddis 
heest, whanne 
a man defend- 
ith his owne 
synne. Lire 
here. Cc. 


€ Om. 4. 


obedience 
t nat 1. 
z haue broke 1. 


P more rather 1. 9 forsothe 1. 
y haue synned 1. 
d biseche thee 1. ¢ hast throwens. f hath 
I the which 1. ™ Saulrz. 1 he hath 3o0uen 1. 
Tamani. $Om.1. thaue synned L 


XV. 31-——-XVI. 5. 


fore Yrael; turne ajen with me, that I 
3ihonour the Lord thi God. Thanne Sa- 
muel, turned a3en, folwide Saul, and Saul 
32 honourede the Lord. And Samuel seide, 
Bringith to me Agag, the king of Ania- 
lech. And offrid is to him Agag alther- 
fattest tremblynge. And Agag seide, So 
33 whether ‘not seuereth bitter deth ? And 
Samnel seith, As thi swerd hath maad 
wymmen withouten free children, so thi 
moder shal be with out free children 
among wymmen. And Samuel hewide® 
hym into gobbetis before the Lord in 
34Galgalis. Forsothe Samuel 3ede into Ra- 
matha; forsothe Saul stiede vp into his 
33hows in Gabaa. And Saul saw3 no more 
Samuel vnto the day of his deth; neuer- 
thelater Samuel weilide Saul, for it 
othou3t8% the Lord, that he hadde or- 
deynyd Saul. kyng vpon Irael. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 And the Lord seide to Samuel, How 
long thow weilist Saul, whanne Y haue 
throwun hym aferre, that he regne not 
vpon Irael; fil thin horn with oyle, and 
come, that Y sende thee to Ysaye Beth- 
lamyte; forsothe Y haue purueyd in the 

2sonys of hym a kyng to me. And Sa- 
mmnel seith, Howe shal Y goo? forsothe 
Saul shal here, and he shal slee me. 
And the Lord seith, A calf of the droue 
thow shalt take in thin hoond, and sey, 

3To offre to the Lord Y am comen. And 
thou shalt clepe Ysaye to the slayn sacri- 
fice, and I shal shewe to thee what thou 
doo; and thou shalt anoynt whom euer 
4Y shal shewe to thee. Thanne Samuel 
dide, as the Lord spak to hym; and he 
cam into Bethleem, and the eldrys of the 
cytee ajen comynge to hym wondriden, 
and seiden, Whether pesible is thin yn- 
scomynge? And he seith, Pesible ; to offre 
to the Lord Y ain comen; be 3e halowid, 
and cometh with me, that I offre. Thanne 


f ne seuere E pr.m. 


u the moost fat man 1. 
aandi. > wente up 1. 
i certis 1. K here therof 1. 
a Samuel 1. 


© in to plures. 
1'Thanne 1. 


I. KINGS. 


v departe E. departid L. 
d ynto 1. into L. 
m ther camen 1. 


45 


a3en with me, that Y worschipe thi Lord 
God. Therfor Samuel turnede ajen{, and 31 
suede Saul, and Saul worschipide the Lord. 
And Samuel seide, Brynge 3e to me Agag, 32 
the kyng of Amalech. And Agag ‘moost 
fat" tremblynge was brou3t to hym. And 
Agag seide, Whether thus departith” bitter 
deeth? And Samuel seide, As thi swerd 33 
made* wymmen with out fre children, so 
thi modir schal be with out fre children 
among wymmen. And Samuel kittide* 
hymY in to gobetis bifor the Lord in Gal- 
galis. Forsothe? Samuel 3ede in to Ra-34 
matha; sotheli? Saul stiede? in to his hows 
in® Gabaa. And Samuel si3 no more Saul{3s 
‘til to’ the dai of his deeth; netheles Sa- 
muel biweilide Saulj|, for it repentide the 
Lord, that he hadde ordeyned Saul kyng 
on? Israel. 


CAP OXVI: 


And the Lord seide to Samuel, Hout 
long biweilist thou Saul, sithen' Y castide® 
hym awey, that he regne not on" Israel ; 
fille thin horn with oile, and come, that 
Y sende thee to Ysay of Bethleem; for 
among hise sones Y haue purneide a king 
to me. And Samuel seide, Hou sehal Y2 
go? for’ Saul schal here*, and he schal 
sle me. And the Lord seide, Thou schalt 
take a calf of the droue in thi hond, and 
thou schalt seye, Y cam to make sacrifice 
to the Lord. And thou schalt clepe Ysay 3 
to the sacrifice, and Y schal schewe to 
thee, what thou schalt do; and thou schalt 
anoyute, whom euere Y schal schewe to 
thee. Therfor' Samuel dide, as the Lord 4 
spak to hym; and he cam in to Bethleem, 
and the eldere men of the citee wondriden, 
and camen™ to hym, and seiden, Whether 
thin entryng" is® pesible? And he seide, 5 
It is pesible; Y cam to make sacrifice to 
the Lord ; be 3e halewid, and come 3e with 
me, that Y make sacrifice. Therfor? he4 


Shew3 £. 88 othor3t 4. 
whath made1. * hewider. yAgagi. # Andt. 
Cuponi. fsith1. § haue cast I. h upon 1. 
D entree I. ober. Pp Thanne t. 


t Samuel turn. 
ede ajen; he 
wolde do wor- 
schip to Saul, 
as long as he 
was suffrid of 
God in the 
rewme, and that 


he schulde sle 


Agag, that wax 
kept 3it quyk. 
Lire here. c. 


t Samuel siz 
no more Saul, 
in the kingis 
cloth and 
comyn staat. 
Lire here. c. 

|| Samuel Li. 
weilide Saul, 
not that the 
sentence of the 
Lord schulde 
be chaungid 
ajenus him, but 
Samuel hadde 
compassioun 
of his soule, 
lest it were 
dampned with- 
outen ende, 
and Samuel 
dredde, lest the 
puple of Israel] 
schulde be 
punyschid for 
the synnes of 
Saul. Lire 
here. c. 


46 


he halowid Ysaye, and hys sones, and 
6clepide hem to the sacrifice. And whanne 
thei weren comen yn, he saw3 Elyab, 
and seith, Nowe before the Lord is the 
7erist of hym. And the Lord seide to 
Samuel, Ne behold thou the cheere of 
hym, ne the hei3te of his stature; for Y 
haue throwun hym aweye, ne aftir the 
lokynge of men Y deme; forsothe a man 
seeth tho thingis that ben opyn, forsothe 
sthe Lord lokith the herte. And Ysaye 
clepide Amynadab, and brou3te hym be- 
fore Samuel; the which seide, Ne this 
othe Lord hath chosun. Forsothe Ysaye 
brou3te forth Sama; of whom he seith, 
Also this the Lord hath ‘not chosun. 
io And so Ysaye brou3te forth his seuen 
sones before Samuel; and Samuel seith 
to Ysaye, The Lord hath not chosen of 
iithes. And Samuel seide to Ysaye, Whe- 
ther nowe fulfillid ben the sones? The 
which answerde, 3it another there is, a 
litil child, and fedith sheep. And Samuel 
seith to Ysaye, Send, and bryng forth 
hym; forsothe ne we shiulen sitte, before 
wthat he come hidir. Thanne he sente, 
and brou3te hymn forth; forsothe he was 
rodi®, and fayr in si3t, and sembli' in 
face. And the Lord seith, Rise, and 
izanoynt* hym; forsothe he it is. Thanne 
Samuel took an horn of oyle, and an- 
oyntide hym in the myddis of the bri- 
theren of hym; and the Spirit of the 
Lord is ful seut into Dauyd fro that 
day and therafter. And Samuel rysynge 
14 wente into Ramatha. And so the Spyrit 
of the Lord wente awey fro Saul, and 
the shrewid spyrit fro the Lord ‘shook 
1shym!, And the seruauntis of Saul seiden 
to hym, Loo! the yuel spiryt of the Lord 
16shakith™ thee; comaunde the lord oure 
kyng, and thi seruauntis that before thee 
ben, sechen a man kunnynge to pleye 


h brown £ pr.m. isemely cen. * anoyntide a. 


The clepide 1. * Samuel 1. 


W the hignesse rgikLNorgnsuw, * hane cast 1. 


I. KINGS. 


lwaggide hym out £ pr.m. 


t Eliab @ sone of Ysai 1. 
y deme r. 


XVI. 6—16. 


halewide Ysai, and hise sones, and elepide’ 
hem to the sacrifice. And whanne theis 
hadden entrid, he’ si3 Eliab‘, and seide"}, 
Whether bifor the Lord is his crist’? And7 
the Lord seide to Samuel, Biholde thou 
not his cheer, nethir hijnesse of his sta- 
ture; for Y castide* hym aweif, and Y 
demydeY not bi ‘the si3t of man’; for a® 
man seeth tho thingis that ben opyn, but 
the Lord biholdith the herte. 
clepide Amynadab, and brou3te hym bifor 
Samuel; which? seide, Nether the Lord 
hath chose this. Forsothe* Isay brou3te4 9 
Samma; of whom Samuel seide, Also the 
Lord hath not chose this. 
brou3tef hise senene sones bifor Samuel ; 
and Samuel seide to Ysai, The Lord hath 
‘not chose of these. 
Isai, Whether thi sones ben now fillid® ? 
And Isai answeride, 3it ‘another is, a! litil 
child, and lisewith* scheep. And Samuel 
seide to Isai, Sende thou!, and brynge 
hym™; for we schulen not sitte to mete, 


sente, and brou3te hym; sotheli he was 
rodi, and fair in si3t, and of semely face. 
And the Lord seide, Rise thou, and 
anoynte hym; for? it is he. Therfor Sa-1 
mnel took the horn of oyle, and anoyntid 
hym in the myddis of his britheren; and 
the Spirit of the Lordt was dressid in to 
Dauid fro that day ‘and afterward’. And 
Samuel roos?, and 3ede™ in to Ramatha. 


And Ysais 


Therfor® Isai 10 


And Samuel seide ton 


t+ and seide, in 
his herte. Lire 
here. C. 


t for Y castide 
him awey, that — 
he regne not. 
Lire here. c. 


wilfuly, to fizte 
ajenus the Fi- 
listey. Sothely 
Jerom seith, 


3 that fro that 


day the spirit 
of profesie was 
in Dauyth, and 
fro that tyme 
he began to 
singe salmes, 
and this ac- 
cordith to the 
seiyng of hem, 
whiche seyen 


And so the Spirit of the Lord 3ede® awei 14 that he made 


fro Saul, and at wickid spirit of the Lord 


trauelide Saul. And the seruauntis of Saul is 


seiden to hym, Lo! an‘yuel spirit{ of the 
Lord traueilith thee; oure lord the kyng1 
comaunde, and thi seruauntis that ben 
bifore thee, schulen seke a man, that kan 
synge with an harpe, that? whanne the 
yuel spirit of the Lord takith thee, he’ 
harpe with his hond, and thou bere esi- 


™ out waggeth E pr. m. 


u he seide 1. 
2 mans si3t 1. 


V crist whom I anoynte 1. 
aOm.1. and her. 


¢ Andi. 4 bron3te forth1. ¢@ Andsor f brougte forth 1.  &chose noonr. 4 fulfillid1. ‘ther is 
anothir 1. he pasturith1. J3e1 m hym hidere1. 2 Thanner. © forsothe1. Pforthr. 4 roos 
upi. Fwenter. Swenter ¢tther. Utande. ¥ the many. 


|| the Spirit of 
the Lord; that 
is, the spirit of 
strengthe and 
of stidefast- 
nesse, to dely- 
uere the puple; 
wherfor it is 
z > seid in xvii. ¢° 

bifor that he come hidur. Therfor™ Ysai 12 that Dauid vn. 
armed 3ede 
stidefastly and 


that salm, Do- 
minus illumi- 
nacio mea, in 
his anoynting. 
Lire here. c. 
§ Lo an yuel 


G spirit ; the 


spirit of the 
Lord, for the 
good kynde of 
hym is of God 
bi creacioun 
ether making o 
nou3t, but he 
was maad yuel 
bi his owne 
pride. Lire 
here. ¢. 


- 
fend is seid the 


XVI, 17-—XVIE. 4. 


with harpe, that whanne the yuel spyrit 
of the Lord takith® thee, he pleye with 
his hoond, and li3ter® thou bere. And 
Saul seith to his seruauntis, Purueieth 
to me sum man wel harpynge, and 
18 bryngith hym to me. And answerynge 
oon of the children seith, Loo! I saw3 
the sone of Ysaye Bethlemyte, kunnynge 
to harpe, and moost my3ti bi strength, 
a man curaiows in batayl, and wyse? in 
wordis, and a fayre man; and the Lord 
19is with hym. Thanne Saul sente mes- 
sagers to Ysaye, seiynge, Send to me 
Dauith thi sone, the which is in the 
20lesewis. And so Ysay took an asse ful 
of loouys, and a galoun of wyn, and o 
kyd of the she geet; and he sente bi the 
21hoond of Dauid his sone to Saul. And 
Dauid cam to Saul, and stood before 
hym; and he louyde hym ful mych, and 
22is made a squyer of hym. And Saul 
sente to Ysaye, seiynge, Stoond Dauyd 
in my si3t, forsothe he hath foundun 
23grace in myn eyen. Thanne whanne 
euere the yuel spyrit of the Lord cau3te 
Saul, Danid took arf harp, and smoot 
with hys hoond, and Saul was refourmyd, 
and li3ter he hadde; forsothe the yuel 
spiryt wente awey fro hym. 


CAL Vv IT 


1 Forsothe Philisteis gedrynge her cum- 
panyes into batayl camen togidre in 
Socoth of Judee, and thei setten tentis 
betwix’ Socoth and Azecha, in the coostis 

20f Domyn. Forsothe Saul and the men 
of Yrael gedrid camen in the valey of 
Therebynt, and dressiden sheltroun to 

3fizt ajzens the Phylisteis. And Philisteis 
stoden vpon the hil on this partye, and 
Irael stood vpon an hil, and on the tother 
4perty a valey that was bitwixs hem. And 


« take EFH. © liztliere ce. 
* bytwene peFrH. betwe c. 


Wit moreesely1, *hisi. Yau. 
bestes1. ¢ Andso1. 4 chargid with 1, 
Isquyer of Sauls. hath founde 1. 
4 liztiliere plures. it more liztly 1. * yuel 1. 
vthei camen ir. Wintos. * thei settiden 1 
dressiden 1. ¢ the Filisteis 1. 


Pa wyse E orig. 


2 moost strong man 1. 
€ geet kyde 1. 
) Thanne 1. 
5 wente 1. 


y And 1. 


I. KINGS. 47 


liere*. And Saul seide to hise seruauntis, 17 
Puruey 3e to me sum man syngynge wel, 
and brynge 3e hym to me. And oon of18 
the* children answeride and seide, Lo! Y 
si3 they sone of Ysai of Bethleem, kun- 
nynge to synge, and ‘strongeste in my3t’, 
and ‘a man able* to batel, and prudent in 
wordis, and a feir man; and the Lord is 
with hym. Therfor Saul sente messan-i9 
geris to Ysay, and seide, Sende thou to 
me Dauid thi sone,‘which is in the le- 
sewis», Therfor® Isai took an asse ‘ful of4 20 


loouesf, and a galoun of wyn, and a ‘kyde tages Jebel 
5 ‘ looues, that is. 
of geet®; and sente‘ bi the hond of Dauid  chargid with ’ 
looues. Lire 


his sone to Saul. And Dauid cam to Saul, 21 jere, ¢. 
and stood bifor hym; and Saul louyde 
hym greetlif, and he® was maad ‘his 
squyer, And Saul sente to Isay, and22 
seide, Dauid stonde in my si3t, for he 
foond* grace in myn izen. Therfor!23 
whanne euer the wickid™ spirit of the 
Lord took® Saul, Dauid took the® harpe, 
and smoot? with his hond, and Saul was 
coumfortid, and he hadde li3tere1; for the 
wickid’ spirit 3ede’ awey fro hym. 


CAP. XVII. 


Forsothe' Filisteis gaderiden® her cum-1 
penyes in to batel, and camen’ togidere 
in” Socoth of Juda, and settiden* tentis 
bitwixe Socoth and Azecha, in the coostis 
of Domyn. SotheliY Saul and the mene 
of Israel weren gaderid’, and camen* in to 
the valey of Terebynte, and dressiden® 
scheltrun to fi3te ajens Filisteis. And Fi-3 
listeis® stoden aboue the hil on this part, 
and Israel stood on the hil on the tother 
part of the valey, that was bitwixe hem. 


r bitwene pri. betwen x. betwe c. in £ pr.m. 


b that is kepinge thi 
fhe sente thoi. &mycher, 5 Dauid1. 
myuelr. "traueilide1. ©hisi. P harpide 1. 
t Sotheli the 1. 4 gaderiden to gidere r. 
z gaderid to gidre 1. ®theicamen1. > thei 


@ an able man 1. 


48 I. 


a bastard man wente out fro the tentis 
of Philistiens, Goliath of Geth bi name, 
sin heiste of sexe cubitis and a span; and 
a stelyn heli vpon his heed; and he was 
clothid with a maylid hawberioun ; for- 
sothe the wei3t of his hawberioun was of 
6fyue thousand siclys of steel; and stelyn 
legharncis he hadde in the hipis, and 
a stelyn shecld couerde the shuldris of 
whym. The shaft of his speer was as the 
beem of websters; forsothe that yren of 
his speer hadde sexe hundrid siclis of 
yren; and his squyer wente before him. 
s And stondinge he criede a3enst the cum- 
panyes of Israel, and he seide to hem, 
Whi ben 3e comyn redi to batail ? Whe- 
ther Y am not a Philistee, and 3e the 
seruauntis of Saul? Chesith of 3ou a 
inan, and come he doun to a synguler 
ostrijf; if he may fi3t with me, and 
smytith me, we shulen be to 3ou ser- 
uauntis; forsothe if Y shal hane the 
maystrye, and smyte hym, 3e shulen be 
wseruauntis, and serue to vs. And the 
Philistee seide, I haue 3ene reproof to 
the cumpanyes of Yrael to day; 3yueth 
to me a man, and go he yn with me a 
uisynguler strijf. Forsothe Saul herynge 
and alle the Yraelitis the wordis of this 
maner Philistee, thei weren stonyed, and 
i2dradden ful mych. Forsothe Dauyd was 
the sone of an Effratee man, of the 
which it is aboue seid, of Bethlem Juda, 
to whom the name was Ysaye, the 
which hadde e13t sonys; and he was a 
man in the days of Saul olde, and of 
isgreet age amonge men. Forsothe the 
thre more sonys of hym wenten after 
Saul into batayl; and the names of the 
thre sonys of hym, that wenten to 
batayl, Heliab, the first goten, and the 
secounde, Amynadab, forsothe the thridde, 


4 bastard man G1KNob. man bastard moqswx. 
‘h Filisteis tentis 1. J of a. 
" sichis A. © on his thies brasen bootis 1. 
schaft1. twebsters1. Utandr. VY the. 
aasyngulere 1. bsle EL. © 30ure sernauntis 1. 
hsende1. imantomers ii to fizte 1. 
°QOm.1 P Andi. 4a maunes sone I. 
Ysay was au olde man 1. 


yhisi. 2 bigoten i. 4 secounde hi3te x. 


KINGS. 


e Gloss omitted in perkogswxb. 

ii closid b. k a mailed haburioun 1. 

P brasen scheld 1. 
W weiede 1. 


k me aloone 1. 
v seid bifore 1. 
v And the 1. Sotheli the x. 


XVIL 4—13. 


And a man‘, ‘sone of a widewet, whos 
fadir was vncerteyn®, 3ede' out of the 
‘castels of& Filisteis*, Goliath bi name of 
Geth, of sixe cubitis hei3’and a spanne; 
and a brasun basynet on! his heed; ands 
he was clothid'' with ‘an haburioun 
hokid*, ether mailid'; forsothe™ the wei3te 
of his haburioun was fyue thousynde si- 
clis" of bras; and he hadde ‘bootis of bras 6 
in the hipis®, and a‘scheld of bras? hilide4 
hise schuldris. Forsothe’ ‘the schaft of his7 
spere’ was as the beem of webbist; for- 
sothe" thilkeY yrun of his spere hadde” 
sixe hundrid siclis of yrun; and his squier 
3ede bifor hym. And he* stood, and cried 8 
aj3ens the cumpenyes’ of armed men of 
Israel, and seide? to hem, Why camen 3e 
redi to batel? Whether Y am not a Fi- 
listei, and 3e ben the seruauntis of Saul ? 
Chese 3e a man of 30u, and come he doun 
to syngulere* batel; if he may fiz3te with 9 
me, and sleeth® me, we schulen be ‘ser- 
uauntis to 30u°; forsothe’ if Y haue the 
maystry, and sle hym, 3e schulen be 
boonde, and ‘3e schulen® serue vs. And 10 
‘the Filister seide, ¥Y haue ‘seyd schen- 
schip® to dai to the cumpenyes of Israel ; 
3yue" 3e a mani, and bigynne he ‘synguler 
batel#i with me*. Sotheli Saul and alle! 
men! of Israel herden™ siche wordis of 
‘the Filistey", and°® thei weren astonyed, 
and dredden greetli. Forsothe? Dauid was 12 
‘the sone of a man? of Effrata, of whom 
it is ‘biforseid', of Bethleem of Juda, to 
‘which man’ the name was Isay, which 
hadde ei3te sones; and ‘the man was eld 
in the daies of Saul", and of greet age 
ainong men. Sotheli’ thre grettere” sones 13 
of Ysai 3eden after Saul in to batel; and 
the names of hise thre sones, that 3eden¥¥ 
to batel, Heliab*, theY firste gendryd?, and 
the secounde*, Amynadab, and the thridde, 


fwente 1. & Om.1. 
1 nailed b. gloss omitted in 1. ™ and 1, 
qd hilide withe. tAndzt.  § his spere 
* Goliath 1. Ycumpanyes. 7 he seide 1. 
©Om.1. {Goliath 1, & put repreef 1, 
Ithe men3. M™herynger. ® Goliath 1. 
Swhom1. tandher. in the daies of Saul 
W eldeste 1. WW wentens. * weren Heliab 1. 


d and 1. 


+ and a man 
sone of a widue. 
Ebrews seyen, 
a man in the 
myddis, that is 
a strong man, 
and hardy that 
goith bifor the 
oost, and is 
redy to fizte 
a3enus oon of 
the enemyes in 
singuler batel. 
Lire here. c. 


XVII. 14——25. 


14Samma. Forsothe Dauyd was the leest. 
Thanne the thre more folwynge Saul, 
15 Dauyd wente, and turnede a3en fro Saul, 
for to fede the flok of his fadre in Beth- 
igleem. Forsothe the Philistee cam forth 
eerli, and at euen ‘stondynge repreuyde 
17 the childrent of Yrael" fourti days. For- 
sothe Ysaye seide to Dauyd his sone, 
Tak to thi bretheren powned corn, of the 
mesure of ephi, and thes ten loouys, and 
renne into the tentis to thi britheren ; 
isand ten chesis thes thou shalt bere to 


I. KINGS. 49 


Samma. Forsothe® Dauid was the leeste®. 14 
Therfor‘ while thre® grettere® sueden Saul, 
Dauid 3ede, and turnede a3en fro Saul, that 15 
he schulde® kepe the floc of his fadir in 
Bethleem. Forsothe® the Filistey cami ts 
forth in the morewtid, and euentid; and 
stood ‘bi fourti daies*. Sotheli! Ysai seide 17 
to Dauid his sone, Take thou to thi bri- 
theren meete maad of meele, the™ mesure 
of ephi®, and these ten looues, and renne 
thou in to the castels® to thi britheren; 
and thou schalt bere to the tribune these is 


ten ‘litilt formes of cheseP?; and thon = + ten iitie, eve. 


the tribune ; and thi britheren thou shalt a litle, « 
schalt visite thi britheren, whether thei {haus fame! 


visite, if thei ry3t doon, and with whom chesis formed. 


Lire here. 


i9thei ben ordeynyd, lern. Forsothe Saul, 
and thei, and alle the sonys of Yrael in 
the valey of Therebynt fou3ten ajens 
20 Philisteis. And so Dauid roos eerli, and 
commendide the flok to the keper, and 
chargyd 3eed, as Ysay comaundide to 
hym; and cam to the place of Magala, 
and to the oost, that, goon out to fi3t, 
2icriede out in the strijf. Forsothe Irael 
hadde dressid sheltroun; but and a3ens 
22hem Philisteis weren redy. Thanne 
Dauid leuynge the vessels, the whiche 
he brou3te, vndre the hoond of a keper 
at the fardels, he ran to the place of the 
strijf, and he askide, if alle thingis ri3t 
23 weren doon anentys his britheren. And 
whanne 3it he spak to hem, aperyde 
that’ bastard man, Goliath bi name, Phi- 
listee of Geth, stiynge fro the tentis of 
Philisteis; and hym spekynge thes same 
24 wordis, Dauyd herde. Forsothe alle the 
Ysraelitis whanne thei hadden seen the 
man, thei flowen fro his face, dredynge 
25hym greetli. And echon of Irael seide to 
other, Whether thou hast seen this man 
that styeth vp? forsothe to 3yue reprofe 
to Yrael he stieth vp; therfor the man 


t childre cr. 


b Therfor a. And 1. ¢ 3oungist 1. 
b And bi fourti daies 1. 1 3ede 1. 
© tentis 1. P smale cheeses 1. 
v Andso1z. And therfor x. 
Magala 1. 
& the Filisteis 1. 
P he wente up1. 
W seide to oother 1. 


VOL. II. 


q iustly 1. 
w he bitook 1. 


bh Om. pib. 
q tentis 1. 
* hath stied up 1. 


also 1. 
® the Filisteis r. 


‘t and stood £ pr. m. 


d Thanne 1. 
K into repreef of Israel 1. 
r knowe 1. 

Xat. 
bthe which 1. © fiztx. it criede x. 44 figtyng 1. © ordeyned 1. f and even ajens hem 1. 
k Thanne 1. 
8 him spekynge 1. 
¥ forsothe 1. 


doon ri3tli4, and lurne® thou, with whiche® 
men thei ben ordeyned. Forsothet Saul, 19 
and thei, and alle the sones of Israel in 
the valei of Terebynte fou3ten a3ens Fi- 
listeis". Therfor’ Dauid roos eerli, and 20 
bitook” the floc to the* kepere, and he 
3edeY chargid, as Ysai ‘hadde comaundid 
to? hym; and he cam to the place Ma- 
gala*, and to the oost, which? oost 3ede 
out to the batel‘, and criede® in ‘the batel4. 
For Israel hadde dressid® scheltrun ; ‘but 21 
alsof Filisteis§ weren maad" redi ‘euen 
a3ens'. Therfor* Dauid lefte the vessels, 22 
whiche! he hadde brou3t, vndur the hond 
of a kepere ‘at the™ fardels, and he ran to 
the place of batel, and he axyde, if alle 
thingis weren ‘doon ri3tli7 anentis hise 
britheren. And whanne he spak 3it to23 
hem, thilke bastard apperide, Goliath bi 
name, a° Filistei of Geth, and stiede? fro 
the castelsi of Filisteis'; and ‘while he 
spak* these same wordis, Dauid herde. 
And whanne alle men‘ of Israel hadden 24 
seyn ‘the man", thei fledden fro his face’, 
and dredden hym greetli. And ech man 25 
of Israel] seide*, Whether thou hast seyn 
this man that stiede*? forY he stiede? to 


¥ the ilke & pr.m. the F. 


f eldist sones 1. 8 wolde 1. 
m™atthe1. 2 thre bushels 1. 
t Certis1. 4 the Filisteis 1. 
Z comaundide 1. a of 


© the thre rx. the o. 
lAnd st. 

$s what 1. 

y 3ede forth 1. 


ninstly doon1. © ther. 
u Goliath 1. ¥ sizt 1. 


™ atte EL. 
t the men mm. 


1 that 1. 


% 3ede up I. 


50 I. KINGS. 


that smytith hym, the kyng shal make 
riche with greet ricchessis ; and his dou3- 
ter he shal 3yue to hym, and the hows 
of his fadre he shal make with out tri- 
26 bute in Yrael. And Dauid seide™ to the 
men that stoden with hyin, sciynge, 
What shal it be 3ouun* to the man that 
smytith this Philistee, and bereth awey 
reprofe fro Irael? forsothe who is he 
this Philistee vncireumcidid, the which 
reproueth the shiltrouns of the God lyu- 
27ynge? Forsothe the puple toolde to hym 
the same word, seiynge, Thes thingis 
shulen be 3eue to the man that smitith 
eshym. The which thing whanne Heliab, 
his more brother, hadde herd, hym spek- 
ynge with other, is wrooth a3ens Dauid, 
and seith, Whi art thou comen, and whi 
hast thow forsaken thes? fewe sheep in 
deseert ? I haue knowen thi pride, and 
the shrewidnesse of thin herte; for that 
thou my3tist se the bateil, thou art comen 
eg9doun. Aud Danid seith’, What haue I 
30doon ? Whether is it not a word? And 
he bowide a syde a litil fro hym to an 
other; and he seide the same word, and 
the puple answerde to hyin word as bi- 
3ifore. Forsothe the wordis that Dauid 
spak, ben herd, and toold in the si3t of 
32Saul. To whom whanne he was brou3t, 
he spak to hym, Ne falle” not doun the 
herte of eny man in hym, and thi ser- 
uaunt shal goo, and fi3t a3en the Philistee. 
33 And Saul seith to Dauid, Thou mayst 
not withstoond to this Philistee, ne fizte 
a3ens hym, for a child thou art; for- 
sothe this man is a fi3ter fro his 3ongth. 
34 And Dauid seide to Saul, Thi seruaunt 
fedde the flok of his fader, and there 
cam a lioun or a beere, and took a wether 
35fro the mydil of the. flok; I pursuede 
hem, and smoot, and delyuerde fro the 


W seith BCEFH. 


X 3eue BH. 3iuec. 3iuen £. 
a seide cE. 


db falle thou zB. 


arepreefi, % make that mani. ¢ Om. 1. 
Sisher. Mdispisithi, 'Andiz. k Dauid st 
© thou hidere 1. P hast thou lefte 1. 
biforer. v Andi. Wther * that. 


¢Om.1 ¢2Om.1. 'bhutr. ™ his fadirs floc 1. 
4 myddil 1. 


4 mysdo 1. 


y Om, a. 


4 in Israel he schal r. 
1 Goliath 1. 


y thei weren 1. 
n also 1. other x. 


XVII. 26—35. 


seie schenship* to Israel; therfor the kyng 
schal make? riche with greet richessis ‘the 
man¢ that sleeth thilke Filistei; and the 
kyng schal 3yne his dou3ter to that man, 
and schal4 make the hows of his fader 
with out ‘tribut in Israel®. And Dauyd 2s 
spak to the men that stoden with hym, 
and seide, What schal be 3ounn to the 
man that sleeth this Filistei, and doith 
awei schenschip fro Israel? forf who is® 
this Filistei vncircumcidid, that dispiside® 
the scheltruns of God lyuynge? Forsothe! 27 
the puple tolde to hym* the same word, 
and seide, These thingis schulen be 3ouun 
to the man that sleeth hym!. And whanne 28 
Heliab, ‘his more brother™, had herd this, 
while he" spak with othere meu, he was 
wrooth a3ens Dauid, and seide, Whi camest 
thou®, and whi ‘leftist thou? tho fewe 
scheep in deseert? Y knowe thi pride, 
and the wewardnesse of thin herte; for 
thou camest doun to se the batel. And29 
Dauid seide, What haue Y do4? Whether 
it is not a* word? And Dauid bowide* a30 
litil fro hym to another man; and Dauid 
seide the same word, and the puple an- 
sweride to hym al* word as bifore’. For-31 
sothe’ these” wordis weren herd, whiche* 
Dauid spak, and werenY teld ‘in the si3t 
of? Saul. And whanne Dauyd was brou3t32 
to Saul, Dauyd spak to hym’, The herte 
of ony mau falle not doun® for ‘that Fi- 
listeit, Y thi seruannt schal go, and ‘Y 
schal* fi3te a3ens the Filistei. And Sauls3 
seide to Dauid, Thou maist not a3enstonde 
this Filistei, nether fi3te ajens hym, for 
thou art a child; forsothe! this man is a 
werriour fro his 3ong wexynge age. And 34 
Dauid seide to Saul, Thi seruaunt kepte 
‘the floc of his fadir™, and a lioun cam, 
ether" a bere, and took® awei? a ram fro 
the myddis1 of the floc; Y pursuede, and 35 


2 thos B. thoo ce sec. m. thulke £. pr. m. 


€ paiyng of tribut 1. 
m the eldre brother of Dauid 1. 

Thutat. S3edethenns1. tthe, * thei diden 
zbifore 1. @hym thus1. » down in him 1. 
© tooken A. see.m. 1. P Om. EL. 


fond 5. 
n Dauid 1. 


XVIT. 36.— 44. 


mouth of hem; and thei rysen ajens me, 
and I caujte the chaul of hem, and 
36Straunglide, and slow; hem. Forsothe 
and a lioun and a beere slewe Y thi ser- 
uaunt; therfore shal be and this Philistee 
vneireumcidid as oon of thes. Now Y 
shal goo, and take awey the shenship of 
the puple; for who is this Philistee 
vneircumcidid, that is hardy to myssey 
37to the oost of the lyuynge God? And 
Dauid seith, The Lord that hath dely- 
uerd me fro the mouth of the lioun, and 
fro the hoond of the beere, he shal de- 
lyuer me fro the hoond of this Philistee. 
Forsothe Saul seide to Danid, Go, and 
asthe Lord be with thee. And Saul 
clothide Dauid with his clothis, and 
putte on a stelen helm vpon his heed, 
and clothide hym with an hawberioun. 
39 Thanne Dauid gyrd with his swerd vpon 
his clothinge, began to asaye if armyd 
he my3te goo; forsothe he hadde not the 
custome. And Danid seide to Saul, I 
may not thus goo, for and° vse I haue 
not. And he putte doun tho thingis, 
aoand he took his staf, that euermore he 
hadde in hondis. And he cheese to hym 
fyue moost cleer stonus of the streem; 
and he putte hem into the sheepherdis 
scrip that he hadde with hym; and he 
took a slynge in hoond, and 3eed forth 
4la3ens the Philystee. Forsothe the Phi- 
listee 3eed, comynge and neizjynge a3ens 
42 Dauyd; and his squyer before hym. And 
whanne the Philistee hadde inwardly be- 
holden hym, and seen Dauyd, he de- 
spiside hym; forsothe he was a 3ong 
43man, rodi?, and fayre in si3t. And the 
Philistee seide to Dauyd, Whethir I am“ 
a dog, that thou comest to me with a 
staf? And the Philistee curside Dauid in 
4this goddis; and seide to Dauyd, Com to 
me, and Y shal 3eue thi flesh to the 


cin B. 


¥ IT killide 1. 
w Om. I. 
€ he sette 1. 


8 I ravyschide it 1. 
x Certis1. Y ther. 

fThanner. 8 a1. 
ussofif1. "putter, Othatr. Phis1. 
tthatr. tar, Vhisx. whejeder * Andi, 
ni3 ajens Dauid 1. ¢ Goliath1. 4 Om. 1. 


Z repreef I. 
h he bigan 1. 


4 broun E pr.m. 


t her mouth 1. 
a And eft 1. 
i forsothe 1. 

4 ful clere rounde 1. 

y 3ede forth 1. 

€ and 1. 


I. KINGS. 51 


killide™’ hem, and rauyschide® fro ‘the 

mouth of hem‘; and thei risiden" a3ens 

me, and I took the’ nether chaule ‘of 

hem", and Y stranglide, and killide hem. 

For* Y thi seruaunt killide bothe aY lioun 36 

and aY bere; therfor and this Filistei vn- 
circumcidid schal be as oon of hem. Now 

Y schal go, and Y schal do awey the 
schenschip* of the puple; for who is this 

Filistei vncircumcidid, that was hardi to 

curse the oost of God lyuynge? And*37 

Dauid seide, The Lord that delyuerede me 

fro the ‘mouth of the lioun®, and fro the 

‘hond, that is*, power, of the bere, he schal 

delyuere me fro the hond of this Filistei. 

Forsothet Saul seide to Dauid, Go thou, 

and the Lord be with theet. And Saulss t the Lord be 
clothide Dauid with hise clothis, and put- lair, 
tide® a brasun basynet on his heed, and 


seyen, that Saul 
, hadde revela- 
clothide hym with an haburioun. Therfor‘ 39 %"™,*»#* 
Dauith schulde 


Dauid was gird with his? swerd on his  cuercome the 
* 1 sn oe Filistey, for 

cloth, and bigan" to asaie if he my3te go — Goddis renela- 
: ciouns ben 


armed ; for' he hadde not custom*, And 
Dauid seide to Saul, Y may not go sol, 
for Y haue not vss™. And Dauid puttide” 
awei tho, and he took his staaf, which°® he 40 
hadde euere in the? hondis. And he chees 
to hym fyue clereste4 stonys, that is, harde, 
pleyn, and rounde, of the stronde; aud he 
sente’ tho in to the’ schepherdis scrippe, 
whicht he hadde with hym; and he took 
the" slynge in the’ hond, and 3ede forth 
aj3ens the Filistei. Sothelix the Filistei41 
3edeY, ‘goynge and nei3yng ajens Dauid? ; 
and his squyer 3ede* bifor hym®. And 42 
whanne ‘the Filistei® hadde biholde Dauid, 
and haddet seyn hym, he dispiside Dauid ; 
forsothe® Dauid was a 3ong wexynge man, 
rodi, and feir in si3t. And ‘the Filisteif, 43 
seide to Dauid, Whether Y am a dogge, 
for thou comest to me with a staf? And 
‘the Filisteié curside Dauid in hise goddis ; 
and he seide to Dauid, Come thou to me, 44 


maad sumtyme 
3he to yuele 
men, for comyn 
good. Lire 
here. Cc. 


dd ham 4. 


urisen ELP. reriden hem upr. V her 1. Om. ex. 
bliouns mouth 1. ©Om.1 4 And tr. 
k the custom therof'1. \thus1, ™ the 

rputteim. §8his1. ax. Om. 5. 
zOm.1. *Om.1. > hym, comynge 


f Goliath 1. 8 Goliath 1. 


H2 


52 I. KINGS. 


fowlis of henene, and to the beestis of 
4sthe erthe. Forsothe Dauid seide to the 
Philistee, Thou comest to me with swerd, 
speer, and sheeld; forsothe Y come to 
thee in the name of the Lord God of 
oostis, God of the cumpanyes of Irael, 
to whom thou hast reprouyd to day. 
46And the Lord shal 3eute thee in myn 
hoond, and I shal smyte thee, and take 
awey thin heed fro thee; and I shal 3yue 
the careyns of the tentis of Philisteis to 
day to the fowlis of heuene, and to the 
beestis of the erthe; that al the erthe 
47 wyte, for the Lord God is in Yrael, and 
al this chirche knewe, for not in swerd 
ne in speer saueth the Lord; forsothe of 
hym is the batayl, and he shal take 30u 
asin to oure hoondis, Thanne whanne the 
Philistee was rysen, and cam, and neijede 
a3ens Dauid, Dauid hyede, and a3en cam 
to the fi3t forn ajens of the Philistee. 
49 And he putte his hoond into the scrip, 
and took a stoon, and leyde in the slynge, 
and, berynge it about, he smoot hym in 
the foreheed ; and the stoon is pi3t in the 
forhed of hym, and he felle into his face 
s0vpon the erthe. And Danid hadde the 
maystrie a3ens the Philistee in slynge 
and stoon, and the smyten Philistee he 
slew3. And whanneDauid hadde no swerd 
51in the hoond, he ran, and stood vpon the 
Philistee, and took his swerd, and drew3 
it out of his sheeth; and he slew3 hym, 
and girde of his heed. Forsothe seynge 
the Philisteis that the strengest of hem 
52 was deed, thei flowen. And rysynge the 
men of Yrael, and of Juda criden out, and 
pursueden the Philisteis, for to the while 
that thei camen into the valey, and vnto 
the 3ate of Acharon. And there fellen 
woundid of the Philisteis, in the weye of 
Sarym, and vnto Geth, and vnto Acha- 


h fleishe 1. 


XVIL. 45—52. 


and Y schal 3yue thi fleischis' to the ‘vo- 
latilis of heuene!, and to the* beestis of 
erthe!. Sotheli™ Dauid seide to ‘the Fi-45. 
listei", Thou comest to me with swerd®, 
and? spere, and scheeld{ ; but Y come to 
thee in the? name of the Lord God'{ of 
oostis, ofS God of thet cumpanyes of Is- 
rael, to whiche" thou seidist’ schenschip* 


t and scheeld ; 
that is, tristinge 
in thyn armeris 
and virtu. Lire 
here. c. 

t of the Lord 
God, ete. ; 


to dai. And the Lord schal 3yuel] thee in dee er 
myn hond, and Y schal sle thee, and Y eed 
schal take awey* thin heed fro thee; andY 4 the Lord 
I schal 3yue the deed bodies of the castels* Dauyitsetd this 


bi Goddis rene- 
Jacioun, for he 
bifor tellith cer- 
tenly thing to 


of Filisteis ‘to day* to the volatils® of he- 
uene, and to the beestis of erthe®; that al 
the’ erthe wite, that the Lord God is in  comynge, vn- 
Israel, and that al this chirche knowe, 47 mraneus EEO 
that the Lord saueth not in swerd nether '™& “47%” 
in spere ; for® the batel is his, and he schal 

bitake 3ou in to oure hondis. Therfor' ss 

whanne the Filistei hadde rise’, and cam, 

and neizede a3eus Dauid, Dauid hastide, 

and ran to batel* agens ‘the Filistei?. And 49 

Dauid putte* his hond ‘in to! his™ scrippe, 

and he took" 0° stoon, and he? castide! 

with" the’ slynge‘, ‘and ledde aboute", and 

smoot’ ‘the Filistei” in the forheed; and 

the stoon was fastned in his* forheed, and 

heY felde doun in to his face on? the erthe?. 

And Dauid hadde the maistrie a3ens ‘the 50 

Filistei> ‘in a slyng and stoon*, and he 

killide ‘the Filisteit smytun®. And whanne 

Danid hadde no swerd in thef hond, hes 

ran, and stood on& ‘the Filistei®, and took 

his swerd ; and Dauid drow out the! swerd 

of his* schethe, and ‘killide him', and kit- 

tide™ awei" his heed. Forsothe® the Fi- 

listeis sien, that the strongesteP of hem 

was deed, and thei fledden. And the sones 52 

of Israel and of Juda risiden’ to gidere, 

and crieden', and pursueden Filisteis’, ‘til 

the whilet thei camen in to the valei, and 

‘til to" the 3ate of Accaron. And woundid’ 


i foulis of the eir1. kOm.1. !theerthe:r. ™Andr. 1%Goliath1. ©%aswerd £. 
POm.1K, @Om EP. 'Omr $%SOm.1. tOm. EL, Uwhomr. Vhast seid i. W repreff 1. 
xOm.purxb. Yandtodai1. 2tentisr. @Om.1. > foulis 1. ¢the ertheb. 4 Om. plures. 
€sothely1. f Thanner. frisenupr. 4 figter. iGolier *puttideerb. Jinp. ™ the plures. 
took out En. Sart, PDauidi. 4 whirlide 1. castideitun. ™Om.1. * his Ex. ¢ slynge aboute 1. 
u and keste out therof a stoon 1. Vv he smoot 1. W Golie 1. x the pi. Om. E. ¥ Golie 1. 
Znponr. 4erthe, in aslynge anda stoonr. »Golier Cina slyng and a stoon KL. Om. 1. 4 Golie 1. 
€ whanne he hadde smytun him dounz. fhisx1.  € npon1. Golier. ‘his a. that1. ther. 
lhe killide therwith Golier. ™ kitte 1. 4 off1. ° Andi. P strengeste mani. 4 resen up i. risen ELP, 


t thei crieden 1. & the Filisteis 1. 


t til the tyme 1. vuto that EL. 


Uvnto 1. into EL. Vthe woundid 1. 


XVII. 53-—XVIII. 5. 


ssron. And the sonis of Yrael turnynge 
a3en, after that thei hadden pursued the 
Philisteis, thei asseilden the tentis of 

s4hem. Forsothe Dauyd takynge the heed 
of the Philistee, brou3te it into Jerusa- 
lem ; forsothe the armys of hym he putte 

55in his tabernacle. Forsothe that tyme 
that Saul saw3 Dauyd goynge out a3ens 
the Philistee, he seith to Abner, the 
prynce of his chyualrie, Abner, of what 
stok descendide this 3ong man? And 
Abner seide, Lyueth thi soule, kyng, I 

s6knew3 not. And the kyng seith, Ask 

s7thou, whos sone is® this child. And 
whaune Dauyd was comen a3en, the 
Philistee smyten, Abner took hym, and 
brou3te hym yn before Saul, hanynge in 

58the hoond the heed of the Philistee. And 
Saul seith to hym, Of what progenye art 
thou, O thou 3ong man? And Dauid 
seide, The sone of thi seruaunt, Ysaye 
Bethlemyte, Y am. 


CAP. XVHI. 


1 And itis doon, whanne he hadde endid 
to speke to Saul, the soule of Jonathas is 
glewid to gidre to the soul of Dauid, and 
Jonathas louyde hym as his owne lijf. 

2And Saul took hym in that day, and 
grauntide not to hym, that he turne a3en 

3into the hows of his fadre. Forsothe 
Jonathas and Dauid wenten into thef 
couenaunt of pees; forsothe he louyde 
4hym as his lijf; forwhi Jonathas spuylide 
hym self the coote, that he was clothid, 
and 3af it to Dauid, and his other clothis, 
vnto® his ‘bowe and swerd®, and vnto the 
skny3tis girdil. Forsothe Dauyd wente 
out to alle thingis, what euere Saul sente 


@be saceru. f Om. aceru. 


W the Filisteis 1. * fellen doun 1. fellen exp. 


& into A. 


Y vnto 1. into EL. 


I. KINGS. 53 


men of Filisteis” felden* in the weye of 

Sarym, and ‘til toY Geth, and ‘til toY Acca- 

ron. And the sones of Israel turnedensa 

ajen, aftir that thei hadden pursuede Fi- 

listeis’, and thei assailiden ‘the tentis of 

hem*. Forsothe® Dauid took the heed of 51 

‘the Filistei*, and brou3te it in to Jerusa- 

lem; sotheli’ he® puttide hise‘ armeris% in 

the ‘tabernacle of the Lord’. Forsothe' inss 

that tyme in which Saul si3 Dauid goynge 

out a3ens ‘the Filistei*, he seide to Abner, 

prince! of his chiualrie™, Abner, of what 
generacioun ‘cam forth" this 3ong wax- 

ynge®° man? And Abner seide, Kyng, thi 

soule lyueth, I knowe? not. And the kyng ss + sti sou 
seide, Axe thou, whos sone this child is. "5 ‘hs 


a maner of 
And whanne Dauid hadde1 come agen, 57 Sverings and 
een é Si I- 

whanne ‘the Filisteié was slayn, Abner’ _ tence, as it is 


° : soth, that Y 
took Dauid, and brou3te' hym in", hauynge desire thi liyt, 


in the’ hond the heed of ‘the Filistei¥, ‘bi- °°? Vier 
for Saul*. And Saul seide to hymY, Ofss net him; and 
what generacioun art thou, 3ong waxynge’ 
man? And Dauid seide, Y am the sone 


if is takun for 
not ether nay. 
of thi seruaunt, Isai of Bethleem. 


Lire here. c. 


CAP. XVIII. 


And it was doon, whanne Dauid ‘hadde1 
endid* to speke to Saul, the soule of Jona- 
thas** was glued} togidre to the soule of 4 Jonathas 
Dauid, and Jonathas louyde hym? as his fae sonca’ 
owne soule. And Saul took® Dauid ine ee eee 
that dai, and grauntide’ not ‘to hym®, that may not 
‘that he schuldef turneS ajen in to ‘the pac eae 
hows of his fadir‘. Forsothe! Jonathass 
and Dauid maden boond* of pees, ‘that is', 
swerynge euerlastynge™ frenschip”; for 
Jonathas louyde Dauid as his owne soule® ; 
for whi Jonathas dispuylide? him silf fro4 
the coote ‘in which’ he was clothid', and 
3af* it to Dauid, and hise othere clothis, 
‘til tot his swerd and bouwe", and ‘til to‘ 


b swerd and his bowe & pr. m. 


2 the Filisteis r. 4 her tentis 1. 


bAndr. ¢Golier dandr. ¢ Dauidi. fther. &armerisofGolie1. 4 Lordis tabernacle 1. 
iAnd1. kGolie1. Ithe prince1. ™ chiualrie, seiynger. Dist. O° Om.1. Pwotr wast 
‘Golier. §%and Abner: the brougter in bifore Saulr. vhis1. w Filistei plures. Golie 1. 
xOm.1. yDauidr. 7 Om.1. ent ny. haddeend p. a4 Jonathanas a. > Dauid 1. ‘© took to him tr. 
dhe grauntider. ¢leeuetoDauid1. fOm.1. &toturner, 4 his faders hows1. 1 And1. ka 
boond 1, Jlinthat p. ™ofeuerlastynge pL. ‘2 The whole gloss omitted in 1. © lijf1. P vnclothide 1. 
(that. ‘clothidynner. ‘%he3af1. tvntor. into ny, 4% his bouwe 1 


54 


him, and wiseli he gouernde’ hym self * ; 
and Saul putte hym vpon men of batayl, 
and he was acceptid in the eyen of al the 
puple, and moost in the si3t of the ser- 
suauntis of Saul. Forsothe whanne Dauid 
turnede ajen, the Philistee smyten, and 
beer the heed of hym into Jerusalem, the 
wymmen wenten out fro alle the cytees 
of Yrael, syngynge, and dauncis ledynge, 
into ajencomynge of Saul the kyng, in 
7 tymbers of gladnes, and in trumpis. And 
the wymmen songen before, pleiynge, and 
seyynge, Saul hath smyten a thousand, 
gand Dauyd ten thowsandis. And Saul 
is wrooth ful mych, and this word dis- 
pleside in the eyen of hym; and seide, 
Thei han 30uun to Dauid ten thousandis, 
and to me a thonsand thei han 3ouun; 
what to hym is more ouere but oneli the 
grewme? Thanne not with ri3t eyen Saul 
bihelde Dauid, fro that day and therafter. 
10 Forsothe after the tother day the yuel 
spiryt of God aseilide Saul, and he 
straungeli spak in the myddis of his 
hows. Forsothe Dauid harpide with his 
hoond, as bi eche days; and Saul heelde 
lla speer, and kest it, wenynge that he 
my3t pitche to gidre Dauid with the wal ; 
and Dauyd bowide a side fro the face 
izof hym the secounde tyme. And Saul 
dredde Dauid, forthi that the Lord was 
with hym, and fro hym goon awey. 
13 Thanne Saul moued hym a wey fro hym, 
and made hym a leder vpon a thousand 
men; and he wente out and cam yn in 
i4the si3t of the puple. Forsothe in alle 
his weyes Dauid wiseli dide, and the 
is Lord was with hym; and so San] saw3 
that he was wel mych wiys, and began 
isto shunne hym. Forsothe al Yrael and 


I. KINGS. 


XVIII. 6—16. 


the’ girdil. Also” Dauid 3ede out* to alles 
thingis, to what euer thingis Saul ‘hadde 
sentY hym, and he gouernede hym silf 
prudentli; and Saul settide* hym ouer the 
men of batel*, and ‘he was? acceptid®, ‘ether 
plesaunt4, in the izen® of alf the pupleé, 
and moost in the si3t of ‘the seruauntis of 
Saul", Forsothei whanne Danid turnedeé 
a3en, whannek ‘the Filistei! was slayn, and 
bar the heed of ‘the Filistei™ in to Jeru- 
salem, wymmen 3eden out of alle the 
citees of Israel, and sungen®, and ledden 
queris®, a3ens the comyng of king Saul, in 
tympans of? gladnesse, and in‘ trumpis. 
And the wymmen sungen, pleiynge’, and? 
seiynge, San] smoot* a thousynde, and 
Dauid smoot‘ ten thousynde. Saul" was8 
wrooth greetli, and this word displeside 
‘in his ijen’; and he seide, Thei 3auen” 
ten thousynde to Dauid, and ‘thei 3auen 
a* thousynde to me; what leeueth to hym’, 
no but the rewme aloone? Therfor? Saul9 
bihelde Dauid not with ‘rijtful izen*, ‘fro 
that dai and afterward». Sotheli¢ aftir 10 
the tother dai a‘ wickid® spirit of God 
asailide Saul, and he propheciedet in the 
myddis of his hows’. Forsothe? Dauid!! 
harpide with his hond, as bi alle daies® ; 
and Saul helde a spere, and caste! it, and* 
gesside that he my3te prene! Dauid with™ 
the wal, that ts, perse with the spere, so 
that it schulde passe® til® to the wal? ; and 
Dauid bowide ‘fro his facei the secounde 
tyme. And Saul dredde Dauid, for the 12 
Lord was with hym', and hadde go awei 
fro him silf*. Therfort Saul remouide 13 
Dauid fro hym silf, and made hym tri- 
bune"} on’ a thousynde men; and Dauid 
jede’ out and entride* in ‘the si3t ofY the 
puple. And Dauid dide warli? in alle hise 14 


Juda louyde Dauyd; forsothe he 3ede  weies, and the Lord was with hym; and15 
idide ze prim.  * sel g sec. m. 

vhisi. WAndr. *forthi.. ysenter, setter  ‘®hisbatelr, > Om.1. © accept plures. 
Om.i. 20Om.cr. ¢si3tr. fOm.e. & puple Dauid was alowid 1. 4 Sauls sernauntis1, i And 1. 
kand1. !Golie1, ™Golie1. ® wymmensungen1r. © daunces A sec.m. squeris L. P and K sec.m. 
4Om.1. 7 pleynge A sec.m. fleyng peeuMNorarsuwb. ‘shathsley1. ¢Om.1. And Sault. 
¥ bifore him i. Whan jouen1. *butox. yY Dauith heroff1. 7 Thanne fro that dai forth1. ® blythe 
cherexr. >Om.1. ¢ Andi. dther ¢ une) 1. fmeyneer. § And. h daies difore1. i he threwe 1. 
castide a. sente peKLorxb. < for he 1 haue perschid 1. ™thorou3to1. "prenec. Sinz. P The 
whole gloss omitted incr. (aside fro Saul1. *Dauid1. 8’ Om.pib. ¢Thanner. " chefteyn 1. 


Yuponrt. W“wenter. Xhecamei. Y bifore 1. 


Zwisely 1. 


t profesiede ; 
not propirly, 
but he spak 
alien thingis, 
as a man tra- 
uelid of a fend. 
Lire here. ¢. 





t and made him 
tribune, ete.; 
Saul dide this, 
not for the 
onour of Da. 


go out to batels, 
and schulde be 
slayn; but the 
Lord turnede 
this in to the 
good of Dauy: 
as it is opin 
of the lettre 
suynge. Lire 
here. C. 


XVIII. 17—26. 


i7yn and 3ede out before hem. And Saul 
seide to Dauid, Loo! my more dou3ter 
Merob, hir Y shal 3eue to thee a wijf; 
oneli be a strong man, and fi3t the bateils 
of the Lord. Forsothe Saul trowide, sei- 
ynge, Be not myn hoond in hym, but be 
isvpon hym the hoond of Philisteis. For- 
sothe Dauyd seide to Saul, Who am Y, 
or what is my lijf, or the kynrede of my 
fadre in Irael, that Y be maad the sone 
i9in lawe of the kyng? It is doon forsothe 
the tyme whanne Merob, the dou3ter of 
Saul, shulde be 3euen to Dauid, 3euen is 
20 Hadriel Molatite wijf. Forsothe Dauyd 
louyd Mychol, the tother dou3ter of Saul ; 
and it is toold to Saul, and it pleside to 
2thym. And Saul seide, Y shal 3yue hir 
to hym, that it be maad to hym into 
sclaundre, and be vpon hym the hoond 
of Philisteis. Thanne seide Saul to 
Dauyd, In two thingis thow shalt be my 
gesone in lawe to day. And Saul co- 
maundide to his seruauntis, Spek 3e to 
Dauith' pryuely fro me, seiynge, Loo! 
thou plesist to the kyng, and alle the 
seruauntis of hym louen thee; now 
thanne be thow the sone in lawe of 
23the kyng. And the seruauntis of Saul 
speken in the eeris of Dauid alle thes 
wordis. And Dauid seith, Whether litil 
it seme to 30w to be the™ sone in lawe 
of the kyng? Forsothe Y am a pore 
24man, and a thinne. And the seruauntis 
of Saul toolden a3en, seiynge, Sich maner 
25 wordis spak Dauid. Forsothe Saul seide, 
Thus spekith to Dauid, The kyng neditb 
no" sposeilis, but oonli an hundrid tersis 
of Philisteis, that veniaunce be doon of 
the enemyes of the kyng. Forsothe Saul 
thou3te to betray Dauid into the hoondis 
280f Philisteis. And whanne his seruauntis 
hadden a3en toold to Dauid the wordis 
that Saul hadde seid, the word pleside 


I. KINGS. 


55 


so Saul si3 that Dauid was ful prudent’, 
and he bigan to be war of Dauid. For-16 
sothe® al Israel and Juda louyden Dauid ; 
for he entride® and 3ede’ out bifor hem. 
And Saul seide to Dauid, Lo! ‘my more®17 
dou3tir Merob, Y schal 3iue her wijf to 
thee; oneli be thou a strong man, and 
fiz3te thou the ‘batels of the Lord’. For- 
sotheS Saul ‘arettide, and seidei, Myn 
hond be not in hym*, but the hond of 
Filisteis be on hym. Sotheli! Dauid seide is 
to Saul, Who am Y, ether what is my lijf, 
ether the™ meynee® of my fadir in Israel, 
that Y be maad the ‘sone in lawe of the 
kyng°? Forsothe? the tyme ‘was maad41s 
whanne’ Merob, the dou3ter of Saul, ‘ou3te 
to’ be 3ouun' to Dauid, sche was 3ouun 
wijf to Hadriel Molatite. Forsothe" Dauid 20 
lonide Mychol, the dou3tir of Saul; and it 
was teld to Saul, and it pleside hym. And21 
Saul seide, Y schal 3yue hir to hym, that 
it be to hym in to sclaundir, and the hond 
of Filisteis be on’ hym. Therfor’ Saul 
seide to Dauid, In ‘twei dou3tris*{ thou atest 
schalt be my sone in lawe to dai. And 22itisaddia — 
Saul comaundide to hise sernauntis, Speke eee 
3eY to Dauid, while? it ‘is hid fro me*, and nether its of 
seie 3e, Lo! thou plesist the king, and "7% 

alle hise seruauntis louen thee; now ther- 

for be thou hosebonde of the ‘doutir of 

the kyng’. And the sernauntis of Saul 23 
spaken alle these wordis in the eeris of Da- 
uid. And Dauid seide, Whether it semeth® 
litil to 30u ‘to be sone in lawe of the 
kyng'? Forsothe? Y am a pore man, and 

a feble. And the seruauntis telden to Saul, 24 
and seiden, Dauid spak siche wordis. So- 25 
theli® Saul seide, Thus speke 3e to Dauid, 
The kyng hath no nede to 3iftis for spow- 
sailst, no! but onely to an hundrid pre- 
pucies®, ‘that ts, mennus 3erdis vncircum- 
cidid}, ‘of Filisteis™, that veniaunce be 
maad of the kyngis enemyes. Certis Saul 


+ douztris; in 


+ spousails ; 
that is, pre- 
ciouse 3iftis of 
gold ether of 
siluer, that ben 
wont to be 
jonun to 
kingis, whanne 
thei 3yuen her 


Iday 4. ™Om. 3. "not £ sup.ras. eee 
Lire here. c. 
awijst. bAnd1. ¢gedeyni1. 2Om.1. e@myneldrer. f Lordis batels1. ¢ Andi. 4 Om, 1. 
i seide withynne him self1. * David1. 1! Andi. ™whatisther. “kynrede1. © kyngis sone in 
lawe 1. P And whanner. dcamei1. ‘that 1. 8 schulde hauei. t3o0uun wijf1. 'Certisz. Yuponi. 
~ Thannet. <*Xtwothingis1. Y 3e priuely 1. Zasifi. were me vnwitinge 1. —) 3e to him 1. 
© kingis dou3tir . 4 heringe 1. ©semei. f me to be the kyngis sone in lawe1. & Sothlir, » And 1. 
iOm.1, *Om.1. 10m.1. ™ Filisteis prepucies 1. 


56 . I. KINGS. 


in the eyen of Dauyd, that he were maad 
27the sone in lawe of the kyng. And after 
a fewe days Dauyd rysynge wente into 
Acharon, with the men that with hym 
weren, and smoot of the Philisteis two 
hundrid men; and brou3te the 3erdis of 
hem, and noumbride hem to the kyng, 
that he were the sone in lawe of the 
kyng. And so Saul 3af to hym Mychol, 
zshis dou3ter, wijf. And Saul saw3, and 
vndurstood, that the Lord was with 
29Dauid. Forsothe Mychol, the dou3ter of 
Saul, louid hym, and Saul began more to 
drede Dauyd ; and Saul is maad the ene- 
somye of Dauyd alle days. And the princis 
of Philisteis wenten out; forsothe fro the 
bigynnynge of the goynge out of hem 
Dauyd wiselyer beer hym self than alle 
the men of Saul; and solempne is maad 
the name of hym ful myche. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Saul spak to Jonathan, his sone, and 
to alle his seruauntis, that thei shulden 
slee Dauid; forsothe Jonathas, the sone 

20f Saul, louid Dauyd mych. Jonathas 
shewide to Dauid, seiynge, Saul, my 
fader, sechith to slee thee, wherfor keep 
the wel; Y biseche®, dwel; and thou shalt 

sdwel priueli, and be hyd. Forsothe Y 
goynge out shal stoond biside my fadre 
in the feeld, where euer he were; and I 
shal spek of thee to my fadre, and what 
euere thing Y shal see, Y shal telle to 

4thee. Thanne Jonathas spak good thingis 
of Dauid to Saul, his fader, and seide to 
hym, Ne synne thou, kyng, into thi ser- 
uaunt Dauid, for he hath not synned to 
thee, and the werkis of hym ben goode 

5to thee mych; and he hath put his lijf 


XVIII. 27——XIX. 5. 


thou3te to bitake Dauid in to the hondis 
of Filisteis". And whanne the seruauntis 26 
of Saul hadden teld to Dauid the wordis, 
whiche® Saul hadde seid, the word pleside 
‘in the izen of? Dauid, that he schulde be 
inaad the kyngis son in lawe. And aftir27 
a fewe daies Dauid roos’, and 3ede in to 
Acharon, with the’ men that weren with 
hym, and he killide of Filisteis twei hun- 
drid men; and brou3te® ‘the prepucies of 
hem, and noumbride"® tho to the kyng, 
that he schulde be the kyngis sone in 
lawe. And so Saul 3af Mycol, his dou3ter, 
wiif to hym’. And Saul si3, and vndir- 28 
stood, that the Lord was with Dauid. 
Forsothe” Mychol, ‘the dou3ter of Saul*, 29 
louide Dauid, and Saul bigan more to drede 
Dauid ; and Saul was maad enemye to 
Dauid in alle daies. And the princes of30 
Filisteis 3eden out’; forsothe’ fro the bi- 
gynnyng of her goyng out Dauyd bar 
hym silf more warli* than alle the? men 
of Saul; and the name of Dauid was 
maad ful solempne. 


CAP. XIX. 


Forsothe® Saul spak to Jonathas, his1 
sone, and to alle hise sernauntis, that thei 
schulden sle Dauid; certis Jonathas, the 
sone of Saul, louyde Dauid greetli. Ande 
Jonathas schewide to Danid, and seide, 
Saul, my fadir, sekith to sle thee, wherfor, 
Y biseche, kepe ‘thou thee? eerli¢; and 
thou schalt dwelle priueli‘, and thou schalt 
be hid. Sotheli€ Y schal go out, and3 
stonde bisidis my fadir in the feeld, where 
euer he schal be; and Y schal speke of 
thee to my fadir, and what euer thing Y 
shal se", Y schal telle toi thee. Therfor*4 
Jonathas spak good thingis of Dauid to 
Saul, his fadir, and seide to hym, Kyng, 
do thou not synne ajens thi seruaunt 
Dauid, for he ‘synnede not! to thee, and 
hise werkis ben ful good to thee; and hes 


© biseche thee £ pr.m. 


1 the Filisteis 1. 


that 1. Pbiforer. droosupr. TOm.1. § Dauith brou3te 1. t her prepucies 1. 


«he noumbride 1. VY Dauid1. Ww Certis1. * Sauls dou3tir1. ¥ out fo ff i 

: I. 3 : ster. 2buti1. 4 wisely 1. 
>Om.m. ¢Sothelir. dthiself1. © to morowe eerly 1. priueli in the feeldr. &€ Andi, 1b vit. 
stonde of him1. iOm.1, & Thanne x. 1! hath not synned 1. 


XIA. 6—14. 


in thin hoond, and smoot the Philistee. 
And the Lord hath doo greet helth? to 
a] Yrael; thou hast seen and gladidist ; 
whi thanne synnest thou in the giltles 
blood, sleynge Dauyd, that is with out 
6blame? The which thing whanne Saul 
hadde herd, pleside bi the voys of Jo- 
nathe, swore, The Lord lyueth, for he 
7shal not be slayn. And so Jonathas cle- 
pide Dauid, and shewide to hym alle thes 
wordis. And Jonathas brou3te yn Danid 
to Saul, and he was before hym, as he 
was 3istirday and the thridde day before. 
8 Forsothe eft is moued batayl; and Dauyd 
goon out fau3t a3ens1 Philisteis™, and he 
smoot hem bi a greet veniaunce, and thei 
9 flowen fro the face of hym. And the yuel 
spirit of the Lord is doon in Saul; forsothe 
he sat in his hows, and helde a spere; for- 
10 sothe Dauid harpid in his hoond. And Saul 
enforside to fitche to gidre with a spere 
Dauid in’ the wal; and Dauid bowide a 
side fro the face of Saul; forsothe the 
speer, the wound pryued, is born into the 
wal; and Dauid fleje, and is saued that 
iny3t. Thanne Saul sente his cruel ser- 
uauntis the ny3t into the hows of Dauid, 
that thei my3ten kepe hym, and sleen in 
the morwe. The which thing whanne 
Mychol, his wijf, hadde toold to Dauide, 
seiynge, But if thou saue thee this ny3t, 
12to morwe thou shalt die; she putte hym 
down bi the wyndowe. Forsothe he 3ede 
13a wey, and fleize, and is sauid. Forsothe 
Michol took an ymage, and putte it vpon 
the bed, and an heery skyn of the she 
geet she putte vpon the heed of it, and 
i4couerde it with clothis. Forsothe Saul 
sente seruauntis that shulden taak Dauyd, 
and it is answerd, that he was sike. 


P li3t & prom. 


mhath putt. Othini, © And so1. 
twiltsler. Uthati. ¥ spekyng 1. 
bSaul1. ¢ he was wont bifore1. 4 Certis 1. 


I. KINGS. 


4 ajens the DEF. 


P hath maad 1. 
w he swoor 1. 
€ the Filisteis 1. 


57 


puttide™ his lijff in his® hond, and he 
killide the Filistei. And° the Lord made? 
greet heelthe? to al Israel; thou si3’, and 
were’ glad ; whi therfor synnest thou in 
giltles blood, and sleestt Dauid, which" is 
with out gilt? And whanne Saul hadde6é 
herd this, he was plesid with the vois’ of 
Jonathas, and swoor”, ‘The Lord lyueth*, 
‘that is’, bi the Lord Iyuynge?, for Dauid 
schal not be slayn. Therfor* Jonathas7 
clepide Dauid, and schewide to hym alle 
these wordis. And Jonathas brou3te in 
Dauid to Saul, and he was bifor hym® as 
‘3istirdai and the thridde dai ago*. For- 
sothe’ batel was moued eft; and Dauyd 
3ede out, and fau3t azens Filisteis*, and he 
smoot hem with af greet wounde®, aud 
thei fledden fro his face. And the yuel9 
spirit of the Lord was maad on Saul; 
sothelii he sat in his hows, and helde a 
spere; certis Dauid harpide in* his hond. 
And Saul enforside! to prene™ with the 10 
spere® Dauid in the wal; and Danid 
bowide® fro ‘the face of Saul; forsothe4 
the spere ‘with voide wounde' was borun* 
in to the wal; and Dauid fledde, and‘ was 
saued in that ni3t. Therfor’ Saul sentel 
hise kny3tis’ in the” ny3t in to the hows 
of Dauid, that thei schulden kepe hym, 
and that he ‘schulde be* slayn in the 
morewtide.. And whanneY Mychol, the 
wijf of Dauid, hadde teld this to Dauid, 
and seide, If thou sauest not thee in this 
ny3t, thou schalt die to morew; sche712 
puttide? hym doun bi a wyndow. For- 
sothe® he® 3ede, and fledde’, and was® 
sauyd. Sothelif Mychol took an ymage, |3 
and puttide® it on the bed, and puttide! 
‘an heeri skyn of geet* at the heed therof, 
and hilide it with clothis. Forsothe! Saul 4 


r Philistee ce. 8 and a. 


8 thou were 1. 
a And so 1. 


h upon 1. 


T saujst this 1. 
z Om. c. 
& feersnesse I. 


4 helpe Ex. 
xOm.1.  Y Om. cr. 
f Om.1. 


iand1. k with1. lenforside hym1. ™ prenede v. that is, peerse K marg. ® spere to stike togidre 1. 
© bowide awey 1. P Sauls si3t1. Gand1. ¥ with oute hurt of Dauid1. % fiechid1. t and so het. 
u Thanne 1. VY cruel servauntis1. Wthatr. *werer. YOm.1. Zandsche1. ®leter. > Andi. 
© Danid1. 4 fiedde thenns 1. fAnd1. leider, 4 bed of Dauid1. ‘sche putte 1. 


e he was I. 
k a rou3 geet skin 3. | And. p 


VOL. II. 


i 


+ he puttide 
his liyfs that 
is, puttide forth 
his liyf to perel, 
as myche as it 
semyde to 
mannus doom ; 
for he 3ede 
vnarmed to 
fi3te ajenus the 
Filistey, as it 
is seide in xvii. 
ce. Lire here. 
Cc: 


58 I. KINGS. 


is And eft Saul sete messagers, that thei 
seen Dauid, seiynge, Brynge** 3e hym to 
1éme in the bed, that he be slayn. And 
whanne the messagers weren comen, it is 
foundun a simulacre vpon the bed, and 
skynnys of she geet at the heed of it. 
17And Saul seide to Mychol, Whi hast 
thou thus bigilid me, and hast laft myn 
enemye, that he flee? And Mychol an- 
swerde to Saul, For he spak to me, sei- 
ynge, Let me goon, ellis Y shal slee thee. 
is Forsothe Dauid fleynge is sanyd; and 
he cam to Samuel in Ramatha, and he 
toolde to hym alle thingis that Saul dide 
to hym; and he and Samuel wenten 
19a wey, and dwelten in Naioth. Forsothe 
it is toold to Saul of seieres, Loo! Dauyd 
20in Naioth in Ramatha. Thanne Saul 
sente catchepollis forto take Dauid; the 
whiche whanne thei hadden seen the 
companye of prophetis propheciynge, and 
Samuel stondynge vpon hem, the Spirit 
of the Lord is doon in hem, and also 
21 thei bigunnen to prophecien. The whiche 
whanne was toold to Saul, he sente and 
other messagers ; also thei propheciden. 
And eft Saul sente the thridde messa- 
gerist, the whiche and thei propheciden. 
22And Saul, wrooth with wrathfulnes, he 
3ede also into Ramatha; and he cam vnto 
the greet cistern that is in Sochoth, and 
askide, and seide, In what place ben Sa- 
muel and Dauid? And it is seyd to hym, 
Loo! in Naioth thei ben in Ramatha. 
23 And he 3ede into Naioth in Ramatha; 
and“ is doon also vpon hym the Spirit of 
the Lord; and goynge yn he wente, and 
propheciede, for to he cam in Naioth in 
24Ramatha. And also he spuylide hym 
self his clothis, and propheciede with 
other before Samuel, and he propheciede 


XYEX. 15—-24. 


sente sergeauntis™, ‘that schulden® rauysche 

Dauid®, and it was answeride?, that he4 

was sijk. And eft Saul sente messangeris, 15 

that thei schulden se’ Dauid, and he seide, 

Brynge 3e hym* to me" in the’ bed, that 
he be slayn. And whanne the messangeris 16 

hadden come”, ‘a symylacre* was foundun 

on theY bed, and ‘skynnes of geet” at* the ; 
heed therof. And Saul seide to Mychol, 17 

Whi scornedist® thou me so, and ‘dely- 

ueredist® myn enemy, that he fledde?? 

And Mychol answeride to Saul, For he® 

spak to me, and seide, Delyuere thou me, 


ellis Y schal slee thee. Forsothe' Dauid 1s be 
fledde, and was sauyd; and he cam to 
Samuel in to Ramatha, aud telde$ to hym 

alle thingis which" Saul hadde do to hym; : 


and he! and Samuel 3eden, and dwelliden 

in Naioth. Forsothe* it was teld to Saulis “ 
of men, seiynge!, Lo! Dauid is in Naioth 
in Ramatha. Therfor Saul sente™ sleeris, 20 
that thei schulden rauysche" Dauid; and 
whanne thei hadden seyn the® cumpeny of 
profetist profeciynge, and Samuel stond- 
ynge ouer hem, the Spirit of the Lord, 
‘that is, the spirit of deuocioun?, was 
maad in hem, and thei also bigunnen to 
prophecief. And whanue this was teld 21 + to profieles 
to Saul, he sente also othere messangeris ; mower God, and 
‘sotheli and‘ thei profesieden. And eft ceessiden to 


pursue Dauith. 


Saul sente the thridde messangeris, and = /#7¢/ere. c. | 


+ profetis ; that 
is, the felou- 
schipe of reli- 
giouse men 
preisinge God. 
Lire here. c. 


thei prophecieden. And‘ Saul was wrooth 
‘with irefulnesse*; and he also 3ede in to 22 
Ramatha, and he cam ‘til tot the" greet 
cisterne, which’ is in Socoth, and he axide, 
and seide, In what place ben Samuel and 
Dauid? And it was seid to hym, Lo! 
thei ben in Naioth in Ramatha. And he¥?s 
jede in ‘to Naioth* inY Ramatha; and the . 
Spirit of the Lord was maad also on him; ' 
and he* ‘3ede, and* entride®, and prophe- 


88 bryngith s. tmassageris 4. tt and it a. c 
4 
m his sernauntis 1. 1 to 1. © Dauid thenns 1. P answeride fo Saul 1. a Danid 1. ‘sleek F 
sSaulr. tOm.1. me Dauid1. Vhis1. Wcometo Danid1. * an ymage lijk to Dauid 1. Y his 1. , 
Z geet skynnes1. ®on1. 4scornestr. © hast delyuered 1. dfleawey 1. ¢ Davidi. — f Certis 1. ' 
&hetelder, »thatr. iDauid1. k And1. !seiynge to him1. ™sente meni. ® rauysche dhenns 1. 
Sar POm.1. Gand certis1. * And with wrathfulnesse 1. %Om.1. tintor. vntoEL. Yar. : 
Ythat1. WSaultn * Om. Rr. Yintoasr. 2Saulr. ® goynge yn1. » wente1. 


XX. 1—7- 


nakid al that day and ny3t. Wherof 3ede 
out a prouerbe, Whether and Saul among 
the prophetis ? 


GAP aX. 


1 Forsothe Dauid flei3 fro Naioth, that 
is in Ramatha, and comynge spak before 
Jonatha, What haue I doon, what haue 
I doon? what is my wickidnes, and what 
my synne into thi fader, for he sechith 

2my lijf? The which seide to hym, A wey 
be it fro thee, thou shalt not die, forsothe 
ne my fader shal" do eny thing greet or 
litil, but before he shewe to me; thanne 
this word oonli my fader hath heelid fro 

3me, forsothe this shal not be. Aud eft 
he swore to Dauid. And he seith, Sotheli 
thi fadre woot, that I haue foundun grace 
in thin eyen, and he shal seye, Jonathas 
wite not this, lest perauenture he be 
sory; but also the Lord lyueth, and 
lyueth thi soule, for in o degree oonli, 
that I so seye, Y and deeth ben dyuydid. 
4And Jonathas seith to Dauid, What 
euere thing thi soule seith to me, I shal 
sdoo to thee. And Dauid seide to Jona- 
than, Loo! kalendis ben to morwe, and 
I of maner am wont to sitte biside the 
kyng to eete; leete me thanne, that I be 
hid in the feeld vnto the euen of the 
éthridde day. And if biholdynge thi fader 
aske me, thou shalt answere to hym, 
Dauid preide me for to goo swiftly into 
Bethlem, his citee, for solempne slayn 
sacrifices ben there to alle the men of his 
7lynage. And if he seye, Wel, pees shal 
be to thi seruaunt; forsothe if he were 
wrooth, wite thou, that fulfillid is the 


I. KINGS. 


59 


ciede, ‘til the while® he cam ‘in to¢ Naioth 


+ dispuylide ; 
not that he 


in® Ramatha. And ‘he alsof dispuylide%} 24 lefte nakid, tue 


him silf of hise clothis, andi propheciede 
with othere men bifor Samuel, and he 
profeciede nakid in‘ al that dai and ny3t. 
Wherfor ‘a prouerbe, that is', a comyn 
word™, 3ede out, Whether and Saul" 
among prophetis{ ? 


CAP. XX. 


Forsothe® Dauid fledde fro Naioth, 
which? is in Ramatha, and cam4 and spak 
bifor Jonathas, What haue Y do? what 
is my wickidnesse, and what is my synne 
a3ens thi fadir, for he sekith™ my lijf? 
And Jonathas seide to hym’, Fer be it froz 
thee, thou schalt not die, for my fadir 
schal not do ony thing greet ether litil, 
‘no butt he schewe firste to me; therfor 
my fadir" kepte’ preny fro me this word 
oneli’, forsothe* it schal not be. And eft3 
heY swoor to Dauid. And Dauid seide, 
Treuli? thifadir woot, that Y hane founde 
grace ‘in thin ij3en*, and’ he schal¢ seie, 
Jonathas wite not this, lest perauenture 
he be sory; certis the Lord lyueth, ‘and 
thi soule lyueth4, for®, that Y seie so, Y 
and deeth ben departid oneli bi o degree. 
And Jonathas seide to Dauid, What euer4 
thing thi soule schal seie to me, Y schal 
dof to thee. And Danid seide to Jonathas, s 
Lot! calendis ben to morewe, and bi cus- 
tom Y am wont to sitte bi the kyng to 
ete; therfor suffre thou me, ‘that Y£ be 
hid in the feeld ‘til to" enentid of the 
thridde dai. If‘ thi fadir biholdith, ands 
axith me*, thou schalt answere to hym, 
Dauid preiede me, that he schulde! go 
swiftli™ into Bethleem, his citee, for so- 
lempne sacrifices ben" there to alle the® 
men of his lynage. If he? seith?, Wel, pees7 
schal be to thi seruaunt; forsothe’ if he 
is wrooth, wite thou, that his malice is 


« schulde ez. 


¢ unto the while £. forto 1. to a. 


¢in to ADEF. 


fSaul alsor. gvnelothider. 4Om.1. jiand he1. 


kOm.1. 10m.1. ™seiynge 1. "Saul ber. °Certis1. Pthat1. Ghecami. ‘sekith toleser. * Danid 1. 


tbntif1. 4 fadir oonlir. Vhath keptr. W Om.1. %certis1. YJonathas1. %Sothelii. 4 bifore 
thee1. and therfor1. Cwilt, 4Om.1. ¢forthiz, fdoitr. Stor hvntor. ‘and ift. 
k after mer. Jmy3te1, ™anooni. "ben xower. © Om.1, Pthifadiri. dsey1. Tand1. 


12 


for he dide 
awey the 
ournementis 
of kyng, that 
he schulde take 
clothis liyk re- 
ligiouse men, 
preisinge God, 
as Dauyth 
dide bifor the 
arke. Lire 
here. c. 

t wher and 
Saul among 
profetis ; this 
is seide of him, 
in whom sum 
deuocioun ap- 
perith sudeynly 
at an our, as 
whanne a man 
of dissolute 
liyf schewith 
ony signe of 
deuocionn, it 
is seid of him, 
Bernard is 
maad a munk, 
so and thanne 
it was seid of 
siche men, 
wher and Saul 
among profetis, 
as if he seide 
thilke deuo- 
cioun is tran- 
sitorie and at 
an our, and is 
not stidefast. 
Lire here. c. 


+ Lo! calen- 
dis; that is, 
the feeste of 
newe moone. 
Lire here. c. 


60 I. KINGS. 


sinalice of hym. Do thanne mercy vnto 
thi seruaunt, for thow hast maad me thi 
seruaunt to goo in couenannt of pees of 
the Lord with thee; forsothe if in me is 
eny wickidnes, thou sle me, and ne lede 
9thou me into thi fader. And Jonathas 
seith, God sheelde this fro me, forsothe 
ne it may be doon, that if certeynli I 
knowe to be fulfillid the malice of my 
fadre azens thee, Y telle not to thee. 
10 And Dauid answerde to Jonathas, Who 
shal telle a3en to me, if eny thing per- 
auenture thi fader shal answere to thee 
uhard of me? And Jonathas seide’ to 
Dauid, Come, and goo we out into the 
feelde. And whanne bothe weren goon 
12into the feelde, Jonathas seith to Dauid, 
Lord God of Yrael, if I serche* the sen- 
tence of my fader to morwe, or other 
morwe, and eny thing of good were vpon 
Dauid, and anoon sende not to thee, and 
i3make knowun to thee, this God doo to 
Jonatha, and thes thingis adde. For- 
sothe if the malice of my fader dwelle 
stedfastly a3ens thee, Y shal telle thin 
eer, and leete thee, that thou go in pees ; 
and the Lord be with thee, as he was 
14 with my fader. And if Y shal lyue, thon 
do to me the mercies of the Lord; for- 
issothe if I shal dye, thou shalt not do 
awey thi mercy fro myn hows vnto 
with outen eende; othere if I shal not 
doo, whanne the Lord shal drawe out bi 
the rotis the enemyes of Dauid, echon 
fro the erthe, do he awey Jonathan fro 
his hows, and seche the Lord fro* the 
16 hoond of the enemnyes ‘of Dauid’. Thanne 
Jonathas couenauntide a couenaunt of 
pees with the hows of Dauid, and the 
Lord sou3te? fro the hoond of the ene- 
i7myes ‘of Dauid*. And Jonathas addide to 
inyche bynde Dauid bi ooth, forthi that 


Vv seith ce. 
a Om. E pr.m. 


W aserche £. enserche c. 


x Danyd fro & pr.m. 


XX. 8—17. 


fillid. Therfor do thon mercy in to this 
sernuaunt, for thou madist’ me thi seruaunt 
to make with thee thet boond of pees of 
the Lord; sotheli® if ony wickidnesse is 
in me, sle thou me, and brynge thou not 
in me to thi fadir. And Jonathas seide, 9 
Fer be this fro me, for’ it mai not be 
doon, that Y telle not to thee, if Y knowe 
certeynli, that the malice of my fadir is 
fillid a3ens thee. And Dauid answeride to 10 
Jonathas, Who schal telle to® me, if in 
caas thi fadir answerith? harde ony thing* 
of me? And Jonathas seide to Dauid,u 
Come thou, and go we forth in to the 
feeld. And whanne’ bothe hadden go in 
to the feeld, Jonathas seide to Dauid,12 
Lord§ God of Israel, if Y enquere the 
sentence of my fadir to morewe, ether in 
the nexte dai aftir, and ony ‘thing of good" 
isi of Danid*, and Y sende not anoon to 
thee, and make! knowun to thee, God do™ 13 
these thingis to Jonathas, and ‘adde these 
thingis". Forsothe® if the malice of my 
fadir contynueth? ajens thee, Y schal 
schewe! to thin eere, and Y schal delyuere 
thee, that thou go in pees; and the Lord 
be with thee, as he was with my fadir. 
And if Y lyne', do thou the mercies of the 14 
Lord to me; forsothe’ if Y amt deed, ‘thou 15 
schalt not take" awei thi mercy fro myn 
hows ‘til in to’ with outen ende; ‘and 3if 
Y do it not’, whanne the Lord schal drawe 
out bi the roote the enemyes of Dauid, ech 
man fro the lond*, take he awei Jonathas 
fro his hows, and seke the Lord of the 
hond of the enemyes of Dauid. Therfor is 
Jonathas made boond of pees with the 
hows of Dauid, and the Lord sou3teY of 
the hond of enemyes? of Dauid. And Jo-17 
nathas addide to swere stedfastli to Dauid, 
for he louyde Dauid*; for he louyde so 
Dauid, as his owne soule’. And Jonathas 18 


yOm. £ pr.m. % sou3te Dauyd z pr.m. 


Shast maad1. Om.1. 'butr. VYecertist. ¢©Om.1. answerer. ¢€thingis1. f whanne thei z. 
g thon, Lordi. good thing 1. ibe seid1. kthee1. %Imake itr. ™ do ellis1. ®do he mo yuel 
thingistomer. © Andt Pcontynue i. 4scheweiti1. ‘schallyner. Sand1. tber take 


thou not 1. Vv ynto I. into E. 


¥ sou3te out wreeche 1. 2 the enemyes 1. 


: y w Om. a pr.m. EFPb. either if I schal not do to thee as I haue bihi3t 1. 
forsothe Dauid seide, if I do not k sup.ras. ether if Ido not pomsw. or if I do not x. 
a him 1. 


x erthe I. 
b lijf rt. 


XX. 18—29. 


he lonide hym ; forsothe as his lijf, so he 
is lonyde hym. And Jonathas seide to hym, 
19T’o morwe ben kalendis, and thou shalt 
ben askid after; forsothe thi syttynge 
schal be askid after vnto after to morwe. 
Thanne thou shalt come doun hastily, 
and come into the place, where thou art 
to be hid in the day, whanne it is leueful 
to worche; and thou shalt sitte biside 
20the stoon, to whom name is Ezel. And 
Y shal sende thre arowis biside it, and 
shal throwe as hauntynge me to a prik. 
21 Forsothe and Y shal sende a child, sei- 
ynge to hym, Go, and bryng to me the 
22arowis. If I seye to the child, Loo! the 
arowis ben with ynne thee, tak hem; 
com thou to me, for pees is to thee, and 
no thing is of yuel, lyueth the Lord. 
Forsothe if thus Y shal speke to the 
child, Loo! the arowis ben be3onde thee ; 
goo in pees, for the Lord hath laft thee. 
23 Of the word forsothe that we han spokun, 
Y and thou, the Lord be bitwix® me and 
24thee vnto with outen eende. Thanne 
Dauid is hid in the feelde; and the ka- 
lendis camen, and the kyng sat to eete 
25 breed. And whanne the kyng hadde sit- 
ten vpon his chayer after the consuetude, 
that was beside the wal, Jonathas roos, 
and sat, and Abner on the side of Saul, 
and voyde aperyde the place of Dauid. 
26 And Saul spak not eny thing in that day ; 
forsothe he thou3te, that perauenture was 
commen to hyn, that he was not cleen ne 
27 purified. And whanne the.secounde day 
after the kalendis hadde li3tid, eft aperide 
void the place of Dauid. And Saul seide 
to Jonathas his sone, Why cometh not 
the sone of Ysaye, ne 3isterday4, ne ‘to 
asday for® to eete? And Jonathas an- 
swerde to Saul, He preide me enteerly, 
29that he my3te goo into Bethleem; and 


b Om. abn. 


¢ Dauid rt. 4 Om.1. 
other. ‘ax. that hiz3tr. | schete 1. 
amarker POm.1. 4thoz. ‘ schal seie 1. 
thanne forth1. W hath delyuered 1. * certis 1. 
¢ solempne feest came 1. 4 sett him 1. 
Dauid 1. * Saul1. 1! perauenture 1. 
her custom was 1. 1 firste solempne dai 1. 


% 


© bytwene urn. betwen £. betwe c. 


© morewe is the first day of the monthe, that is solempne 1. 
m thee kK. 
* on this side 1. 
Y that 1. 

© upon 1. 
m hadde bifalle 1. 
¥ comen I. 


I. KINGS. 61 


seide to hym’, ‘Calendis ben* to morewe’, 

and thou schalt be sou3t; forf thi sittyng 1s 

schal be sou3t® til after to" morewe. Ther- 

for thou schalt go doun hastili, and thou 

schalt come in to the! place, where thon 

schalt be hid in the day, whanne it is 

leueful to worche; and thou schalt sitte 

bisidis the stoon, ‘to which the name is* 

Ezelt. And Y schal sende! thre™ arowis20 + is Heel ; that 
bisidis that stoon, and Y schal caste" as 1%, wukin® 
‘excercisynge ether pleiynge me at a 

signe’. Y schal sende also and my? child, 21 

and Y schal seie to hym, Go thou, and 

brynge to me the? arewis. If Y seie™ toz2 

the child, Lo! the arewis ben ‘with ynne* 

thee, take thou tho; comet thou to me, 

for pees is to thee, and no thing is of yuel, 

the Lord lyueth. Sotheli" if Y speke thus 

to the child, Lo! the arowis ben bizende 

thee; go thou’ in pees, for the Lord de- 

liuerede’ thee. Forsothe* of the word {, 231 of the word, 
whichY thou and Y han? spoke, the Lord Fate ees 
be* bitwixe me and thee til? in to with {Pee Ditwhe 
outen ende. Therfor Dauid was hid in 24 os ie 
the feeld; and the ‘calendis camen‘, and 

the kyng sat io ete breed. And whanne2s 

the kyng hadde seete’ on® his chaier bi 

custom, ‘which chaierf was% bisidis the 

wal, Jonathas roos, and sat ‘aftir Abner”, 

and Abner sat at the side of Saul, and the 

place of Dauid apperide voide. And Saul 2 

spak not ony thing in that dai}; for he 

thou3te, that ‘in hap! it bifelde™ to hym”, 

that he was not clene ‘nether purified?. 

And whanne the secounde dai aftir the27 
calendis! hadde schyned’, eft the place of 

Dauid apperide voide. And Saul seide to 

Jonathas his sone, Whi cometh‘ not the 

sone of Isai, nether 3isterdai, nethert to dai 

to ete? And Jonathas answeride to Saul, 2s 

He preiede me mekeli, that he schulde go 

in to Bethleem ; and he seide, Suffre thou 29 


4 3istai ce. © for to day az. to day c. 


fand1. § axid 1. 
© it were vsynge me to throwe at 
tthanne comer. Buti. VY thou 
Zhauer. be witnesse1, » Om. EL. 
‘that. 8 wasstondynge1. 5 Om.1. 3 dai of 
n Dauid1. ned. ether kK. P purified as 
Scamet. tner. 


D caste tho 1. 


62 I. KINGS. 


seith, Lete me, for solempne sacrifice is 
yu my citee; oon of my britheren hathf 
clepid me; nowe thanne if Y haue 
foundun grace in thin eyen, Y shal goo 
soone, aud se my britheren; for this 
cause he cam not to the bord of the 
30kyng. Forsothe Saul, wrooth ajens Jona- 
than, seide to hym, Thou sone of a wom- 
man wilfuli catchinge a man, whether I 
knowe not, that thou louest the sone of 
Ysay into this confusioun, and into the 
31confusyoun of thi shenful moder? For- 
sothe alle the days in whiche the sone of 
Ysay shal lyue vpon the erthe, shal not 
be stable thou ne thi rewme; and so 
nowe send, and bryng hym to me, for 
32the sone of deeth he is. Forsothe Jona- 
thas answerynge to Saul his fader seith, 
Whi shal he dye? what hath he doon? 
33 And Saul cau3te a speer forto sniyte 
hym, and Jonathas vndurstood, that it 
was fulli termyned of his fader, that 
34Dauyd shulde be slayn. Thanne Jona- 
thas roos fro the bord in wraththe of 
woodnes, and eete not breed in the se- 
counde day of kalendis; forsothe he 
sorowide vpon Dauid, forthi that his 
35fader hadde shent hym. And whanne 
the morwetide hadde li;tid, Jonathas cam 
into the feeld, after the couenaunt" of 
36 Dauid, and a litil child with him. And 
he seith to his child, Go, and bryng to 
me the arowis that I threwe. And 
whanne the child hadde riunnen, he 
threwe an other arowe ouer the child. 
37 And so the child cam to the place of the 
dartis! that Jonathas sente; and Jonathas 
criede bilrynde the bak of the child, and 
seith, Loo! there is not the arowe, but 
38bijonde thee. And Jonathas criede eft 
bihynde the bak of the child, seiynge, 
Hise swiftli, ne stoond thou. Thanne 
the child of Jonathas gedride the arowis, 


fhan agri. 


u therfor he sede 1. ¥ haue founde 1. 
akyngistabler, > Andi, ¢ thex. 
‘ purposid fullir. & Thanne 1. 
Pmaad of 1. 4 that 1. 1 haue schotte 1. 
W schott 1. * childis bak x. y bihynde 1. 


& thyn owne £ pr.m. 


W bifore thee 1. 

4 wilfully ranyschynge 1. 

1 ful feers wraththe 1. 

§ runne forth 1. 
2Om.1. 4Sothely 1. > gaderide up 1. © brou3te hem 1. 


XX. 30—38, 


me, for solempne sacrifice is in my citee ; 
oon of my britheren clepide me; now 
therfor" if Y foond’ grace ‘in thin ijen”, 
Y schal go soone*, and ‘Y schalY se my 
britheren; for this cause he’ cometh not 
to the ‘table of the kyng*. Forsothe’ Saul so 
was wrooth a3ens Jonathas, and seide to 
hym, Thou sone of a* womman ‘rauysch- 
ynge at her owne wille’ a man, whether 
Y woot not, that thou louest the sone of 
Ysay in to thi confusioun, and in to the 
confusioun of thi schendful modir? Fors: 
in alle the daies in whiche the sone of 
Isai lyueth on erthe, thou schalt not be 
stablischid, nether thi rewme ; therfor ‘ri3t 
now® sende thou, and brynge hym to me, 
for he is the sone of deeth. Sothelif Jona- 32 
thas answeride to Saul his fadir, and seide, 
Whi schal he® die? what hath he do? 
And Saul took the spere, that he schulde 33 
smyte hym, and Jonathas vndirstood, that 
it was determyndi of his fadir, that Dauid 
schulde be slayn. Therfor* Jonathas roos 34 
fro the table in ‘the ire of woodnesse!, and 
he ete not breed in the secounde dai of 
calendis™; for he was sori on" Dauid, for 
his fadir hadde schent him. And whanne35 
the morewtid ‘hadde schyned°, Jonathas 
cam in to the feeld, and a litil child with 
hym, bi the couenaunt of? Dauid. And36 
Jonathas seide to his child, Go thou, and 
brynge to me the arowis whiche’ Y caste’. 
And whanne the child hadde runne’, he 
castidet another arowe bij3ende the child. 
Therfor® the child cam to the place of the37 
arowe which’ Jonathas hadde sent”; and 
Jonathas criede bihynde the ‘bak of the 
child*, and seide, Lo! the arowe is not 
there, certis it is bizendeY thee. And Jo-38 
nathas criede eft bihynde the bak of the 
child, ‘and seide”, Haste thou swiftli, stonde 
thou not. Therfor* the child gaderide” 
the arowis of Jonathas, and brou3te® to his 


hdesyr £E pr.m. i darte cr. 


2 Dauid 1. 
&Dauidi. bar. 
nforr. © wexe cler 1. 
u And so whanne sx. V that 1. 


xX soone thidere 1. Y Om. 1. 

€anoonr. f Andi. 
™ that solempnytee 1. 
t schotte 1. 


XX. 39-—-XXL. 5. 


39and brou3te to his lord, and what shulde 
be doo vtterly he knewe not; forsothe 
oonli Jonathas and Dauyd knewen the 

40thing. Thanne Jonathas 3af his aarmis 
to the child, and seyde to hym, Go, and 

4lbere into the cytee. And whanne the 
child was goon, Dauid roos fro the place 
that bowith to the south; and fallynge 
redi into the erthe, honourde the thridde 
tyme, and kissynge hem seluen either 
othir, thei wepten togidre; forsothe Dauid 

azmore largeli. Thanne Jonathas seide to 
Dauid, Go in pees; what euer thing we 
han sworn bothe in the name of the 
Lord, seiynge, The Lord be bitwix* me 
and thee, and bitwix* my seed and thi 

43seed vnto with outen eende. And Dauid 
roos, and wente a wey, but and Jonathas 
wente into the cytee. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Dauid forsothe cam into Nobe to Achy- 
malech the preest; and Achymalech was 
astonyed, forthi that Dauid was comen ; 
and he roos a3ens hym’, and seide to 
hym, Whi thou alone, and no man is 

2with thee? And Dauid seith to Achy- 
malech the preest, The kyng comaundide 
to me a word, and seide, No man knowe 
the thing, for the whych thou art sent 
fro me, and what maner heestis I haue 
jouen™ to thee; for and to the children 
I haue ordeynd also ‘into that" and that 

3place; nowe thanne if eny thing thou 
hast at hoond, or fyue looues, 3if to me, or 

4 What euer thou fyndist. And answerynge 
the preest to Dauid seith to hym, I haue 
not leeuyd loouys at hoond, but oonli 
hooli breed; if cleen be the children®, 

smoost fro wymmen, eete thei. And 
Dauyd answerde to the preest, and seide 
to hym, Forsothe and if of wymmen it is 


I. KINGS. 


63 


lord, and outerli he’ wiste not what was39 
doon; for oonli Jonathas and Dauid 
knewen the thing. Therfor® Jonathas 3af40 
hise armeris® to the child, and scide to 
hym, Go thou, bere’ in to the citee. And 41 
whanne the child hadde go", Dauid roos' 
fro the place that ‘3ede to‘ the south ; and 
he felde low ‘in to! the™ erthe, and wor- 
schipide" the thridde tyme, and thei kiss- 
iden hem silf togidere, and ‘wepten to 
gidere®; forsothe? Dauid wepte more. 
Therfor’ Jonathas seide to Dauid, Go 
thou in pees; what euer thingis we bothe 
han swoore in' the ‘name of the Lord’,‘and 
seident, ‘The Lord be" bitwixe me and 
thee, and bitwixe my seed and thi seed 
til’ in to with outen ende, ‘be stidfast”. 
And Dauid roos*, and 3ede’, but also? 43 
Jonathas entride? in to the citee. 


CAP. XXI. 


Forsothe Dauid cam in to Nobe to1 
Achimelech preest®; and Achymelech won- 
drid, for Dauid ‘hadde come*; and*¢ he 
seide to Dauid, Whi art thou aloone, and 
no man is with theet? And Dauid seide2 
to Achymelech preest*, The kyng co- 
maundide® to me a word, and seide, No 
man wite the thing, for which thou art 
sent fro me, and what maner comaunde- 
mentis' Y 3af8 to thee; for Y seide also 
to children", that thei schulden go in to 
that ‘and thati place; now* therfor if thous 
hast ony thing! at hond, ether fyue looues, 
3yue thou™ to me, ether what euer thing 
thou fyndist". And the preest answeride 4 
to Dauid, and seide to hym, Y haue ‘not 
lewid’, ‘that is, comyn, looues at hoond?, 
but oneli hooli breed ; whether?? the chil- 
dren ben clene{, and moost4 of wymmen’ ? 
And Dauid answeride to the preest, and5 
seide to hym, And sotheli if it is doon of 


k bytwene Bru. betwe c. betwen er, 10m. £ prom. ™3ifyn ez. Ohymepr.m. © childre pern. 
childer c. 

the child1. © Thanne1. { bowe and arowis1. & bere these 1. 4 go thenns1. iroosupi. * was 
towardist. ‘'uponi. ™ Om. plures. ®% he worschipide himi. © euer either weptent. P but 1. 
q Thanne 1. ‘and seidinz. 8% Lordisnamer. tOm.1i. » Be the Lord witnesse theroff1. Y¥ Om. EL. 
wOm.1. *roosup1. Y3ede forth1. Zand1. ®3ede1. » the preest1. ¢camethiderer. ¢¢ also 
and m. the preest1. ¢€hath comaundid1. fheestis1. & hauejoue1. my childreni, ‘Om. 1. 
kand that now 1. !thing to eter. ™ thon it 1. 5 fyndist of mete 1. © not redy lewid brede 1. P that 
ts, bred for lewid ment marg. PPift. GInamely 1. T wymmen, ete thei . 


+ and no man 
is with thee ; 
sum men 
weren in his 
cumpeny, as it 
is seid with 
ynne, but few 
in comparisoun 
of hem that 
weren wont to 
go with him. 
Lire here. c. 


twher the chil- 
dren ben clene ; 
as if he seide, 


tho looues 


moun be 3a1un 
to hem in nede. 
Lire here. c. 


64 


askid, we han conteyned vs fro 3isterday? 
and before 3isterday?, whanne we wenten 
out, and the vessels of the children? 
weren holy; forsothe™ this weye is po- 
lute, but and it to day shal be halowid 
6in the vessels. Thanne the preest 3af to 
hym halwid breed, forsothe ne there was 
breed, but oonly loouys of proposicioun, 
the whiche weren born awey fro the 
face’ of the Lord, that there ben set hoot 
zloouys. Forsothe there was ther‘ a maner 
man of the seruauntis of Saul in that day 
with ynne in the tabernacle of the Lord ; 
this fedde the mulis of Saul; and the 
name of hym Doech Ydume, moost my3ti 
sof the sheepherdis of Saul. Forsothe 
Dauyd seide to Achymalech, If thou hast 
here at hoond speer, or swerd, 3if to me; 
for my swerd and myn aarmys Y took 
not with me; forsothe the word of the 
9kyng constreynede me. And the preest 
seyde, Loo! heere the swerd of Goliath 
Philistee, whom thou smoot" in the valey 
of Therebynt, it is wrappid with a pal 
after the preestis coope; if this thou wolt 
take, tak ; forsothe ue here is othere with 
outen it. And Dauid seith, There is not 
10 another lijk to this, 3if to me it. And so 
Dauid roos, and flei3 in that day fro the 
face of Saul, and cam to Achis, the kyng 
uof Geth. And the seruauntis of Achis 
seiden to hym, whanne thei seen Dauid, 
Whether not this is Dauid, kyng’ of the 
loond? Whether not to this sungen bi 
dauncys seiynge, Saul smoot o thousand, 
wand Dauid ten thousandis? Forsothe 
Dauid putte thes wordis in his herte, 
and dredde ful mych fro the face of 
13Achis, the kyng of Geth. And he 
chaungyde hys mouth before Achis, and 
he hurlide hidir and thider bitwix” the 
hoondis of hem, and he a3en* put into 


P 3istai cx. 
v the kyng £ pr.m. 


tOm 1 4 Om. 1. 
¢ set forth 1. 


s han absteyned 1. 
aDauidr >» Om. 1. 
hheerdes1. itOm. 1, 
1And1.  ™ redy here 1. 
haaste1. 8 Om.1. t wrapp 
cam 1. 4 lond of Israel 1. 
ftor 


D 3yne it 1. 
id k. 4 neat after 1. 
bwymmen 1, 


I. KINGS. 


dchildre peru. childer c. ° if forsothe ge pr.m. 8 place B sec. m. 
W bytwene aru. betwen E. betwe c. 


Vv cleene therof 1. 
d And 1. 
k Saul, and he kepte the mulis of Saul 11. Saul, he fedde the mules of Saul z. 
© neither 1. 
Vit 3. 
Cearouls DEF sec. m. GIKLMNOPQRSWXb. 


XXI. 6—13. 


wymmen, we absteyneden’ vs fro 3istirdai 
and the thridde dai ago, whanne we 3eden 
out, and‘ the ‘vessels, that is", bodies, of 
the children weren cleene’ ; forsothe” this 
weie is defoulyd*, but also* that” schal be 
halewid to dai in the vessels. Therfor?6 
the preest 3af to hym* halewid breed, for 
noon other breed was there, no but? oneli 
looues of settyng forth, that weren takun 
awey fro the face of the Lord, that hoote 
looues schulen be set®. Forsothe? sum*7 
man of the seruauntis of Saul was there 
with ynne in the tabernacle} of the Lord ; 
and his name was Doech of Ydumee}, the 
my3tiest’ of the scheepherdis, ‘that is, 
iugis', of Saul*. Forsothe! Dauid seide tos 
Achymelech, If thou hast ‘here at hond™ 
spere, ether swerd, 3yue° to me; for Y 
took not with me my swerd and® myn 
armeris; for? the ‘word of the kyng‘ con- 
streynede me’. And the preest seide, Lo!9 
here’ the swerd of Goliath Filistei, whom 
thou killidst in the valey of Terebynte, is 
wlappid' in a cloth aftir® ephoth ; if thou 
wolt take this, take thou’; for here is 
noon other outakun that. And Dauid 
seide, Noon other is lijk this, 3yue thou 
it to me. 
fleddeY in that dai fro the face of Saul, 
and cam? to Achis, the kyng of Geth. 


And the seruauntis of Achis seiden tou 


hym, whanne thei hadden seyn Dauid, 
Whether this is not Dauid, kyng of the 
lond?? Whether thei® sungen not to hym 
bi queeris*, and seiden, Saul smoot a thou- 
synde, and Dauid smoot ten thousynde ? 


Sothelid Dauid puttide® these wordis ‘in 12 


his‘ herte, and he dredde greetli of the 
face of Achis, kyng of Geth. 
chaungide his mouth bifor Achis, and 
felde doun bitwixe her hondis, and he 
hurtlide ajens the doris) of the 3ate, and 


tOm. 4. %smyte ce. 


x ajeynst B. azenst E. 


Yitiu. 4 Thanne 1. 
& my3tiest man 1b. 


Weertis1. *andt. 
Car. f there that dai 1. 
P for why 1. 

w And so 1. 


akyngis word 1. 1 me to go in 
xroosupi1. YOm.1. Zhe 
dAndi. ©€ toke 1. 


And Dauid 13 éide asenus the 


drawe vnclen- 
nesse in the 
weye; but also 
that schal be 
halewid in the 
vessels; that is, 
siche vnclen- 
nesse schal be 
excusid in vs 
for the con- 
tynence fro 
wymmen. 
Ether thus, thes 
weye is de- 
Soulid ; that is, 
this proces is 
unleueful of 
comyn cours, 
that halewid 
breed be souun 
to lewid men, 
but it schal be 
excusid for 
oure nede. 
Lire here. c. 
+ in the taber. 
nacle ; that is, ‘ 
in the cumpas 
of the taber- 
nacle, where ‘ 
lewid men 
weren res- , 


* this weye ts 
defoulid ; that 
is, we my3ten 


seyued for 
offryng ether 
preyer. Lire 
here. c. 

t and his name 
was Doech of 7 


Therfor~ Dauid roos*, ‘and 10 Ydume; this 


that sueth in “ 
summe bokis, 
and he kepte 

the mulis of : 
Saul, is not in 
Ebreu, nether 
is of the text. ‘ 
Lire here. c. . 


§ and he hurt- 


ris; in Ebreu 
it is, and he 
peyntide on the 
doris, in mak~ — 
ing there : 
summe figuris, 
as foolis ben 4 
wont to make. 
Lire here. c. 


XXI. 14-——KAII. 7. 


the doris of the 3ate, and his spotils 
i4floweden doun into the beerd. And 
Achis seith to his seruauntis, Han 3e 
seen a woode man? whi han 3e brou3t 
hym to me? whether faylen to 30u woode 
men? whi han 3e brou3t hym yn, that 
he wexe woode, me present ? Letith hym 
goon hens, lest he goo into myn hows. 


Cre XAT. 


1 Danid thanne 3eed thens, and flei3 into 
the spelunk of Odallam ; the which thing 
whanne the britheren of hym hadden 
herd, and. al the hows of his fadre, thei 

2camen doun to hym thidir. And camen 
to gidre to hym alle that weren in 
angwish set, and oppressid for other 
mennus monee, and for bitter inwit ; and 
he is maad the prince of hem, and there 
weren with hym as foure hundrid men. 

3And Dauid wente thens into Masphat, 
that is of Moab ; and seide to the kyng of 
Moab, Dwelle, Y preye, my fader and 
my moder with 3ow, to the tyme that 
4Y wite what God doo to me. And he 
laft hem before the face of the kyng of 
Moab; and thei dwelten anentis hym alle 
days, in the whiche Dauid was in strong 
ssocour. And Gad, the prophet, seide to 
Dauid, Wole thow not dwelle in the 
place of strong socour; weend forth, and 
goo into the loond of Juda. And Dauid 
wente, and cam into the wijlde wode of 

«6 Areth. And Saul herde, that Dauyd ap- 
peryde, and men that with hym weren. 
Forsothe Saul whanne he dwelt in Gabaa, 
and was in the wode that is in Rama, 
a speer in hoond holdynge, and alle his 

7seruauntis stoden about hym, he seith to 
his seruauntis that stoden ny3 to hym, 
Herith me nowe, the sones of Gemyny ; 
whethir to alle 30u the sone of Ysay 
shal 3yue feeldis and vynes, and alle 3ou 
shal make lederys of thousandis and 


I, KINGS. 65 


his drauelis, ‘that is, spotelis?, flowiden 
doun in to the beerd. And Achis seide 14 
to hise seruauntis, Seen 3e the wood man ? 
why brou3ten 3e hym to me? whether 
wood men failen to vs? whi han 3e brou3t 
in hym, that he schulde be wood, while 
Y am present? Delyuere 3e hym fro 
hennus, lest he entre in to myn hows. 


CAP. XXII. 


Therfor Dauid 3ede fro thennus, and1 
fledde® in to the denne of Odollam; and 
whanne hise britheren, and al the hows 
of his fadir hadden herd this, thei camen 
doun thidur to hym. And alle men that? 
weren set in angwisch, and oppressid 
with! othere mennus* dette!, and in bittir 
soule™, camen togidere to hym®; and he 
was imaad the® prince ‘of hem?, and as 
foure? hundrid men weren with hym. 
And Dauid 3ede forth fro thennus in tos 
Masphat, which" is of’ Moab; and he seide 
to the kyng of Moab, Y preye, dwelle my 
fadir and my modir with 3ou, til Y wite 
what thing God schal do to me. And he4 
lefte hem' bifor the face of the kyng of 
Moab; and thei dwelliden at hym in alle 
daies", in whiche’ Dauid was in ‘the forselet, 
ether“ stronghold. And Gad, the profete, s 
seide to Danid, Nyle thou dwelle* in ‘the 
forseletY ; go thou forth, and go’ in to the 
lond of Juda. And Danid 3ede forth, and 
cam® in to the forest of Areth. And Sauls 
herde, that Dauid apperide, and the men 
that weren with hym. Forsothe> whanne 
Saul dwellide in Gabaa, and was in the 
wode which? is in Rama, and® ‘helde a 
speref in thes hond, and alle hise ser- 
uauntis stoden aboute hym, he seide to7 
hise seruauntis that stoden ny3 hym, The" 
sones of Gemyny', here* me now ; whether 
the sone of Ysai schal 3yue to alle jou 
feeldis and vyneris, and schal' make alle 
30u tribunes™ and centuriouns"? For alles 


&Om.1. he fleddet. i with the dett of 1. kmen1. !Om.1. ™sorowe of herte 1. © Dauid 1. 
Ohers. POm.1. Gafourer, 'thati. Sin3. thimtherer. Uthedaies1. Vthat1. W Om. 1. 
x dwelle still 1. yoo strong hold1. #wender. @hecams1. bAndi. Car. 4thatr. © and her. 
fled a preste x. helid a preste x. Shis1. h3eat. 1 that is, 3e that be my britheren1 marg. here 
ge. lheschal1, ™ chefteyns upon thousyndis 1. ® upon hundridis of men 1. 

VOL. II. K. 


66 I. KINGS. 


sleders of hundredis? For je alle han 
sworn togidre ajens me, and there is not 
that a3en telle to me; moost whanne and 
my sone hath joyned couenaunt of pees 
with the sone of Ysay; there is not that 
sorwith my while of 3ou, ne that telle to 
me, forthi that my sone hath reride my 
seruaunt ajensY me, weytynge to me vnto 
gto” day. Forsothe answerynge Doech 
Ydume, that stood ny3, and was the fyrst 
amonge the seruauntis of Saul, I saw3, 
he seith, the sone of Ysay in Nobe, at 
Achimalech, the sone of Achitob, the 
10 preest; the which counseilede the Lord 
for hym, and 3af meetis to hym, but and 
the swerd of Goliath Philistee he 3af to 
uhym. Thanne the kyng sente to cleepe 
Achymalech, the sone of Achitob, the 
preest, and al the hows of his fader, of 
the prestys that waren in Nobe; the 
whiche alle to the kyng ben comen. 
12And Saul seith to Achymalech, Here, 
thou sone of Achitob. The which an- 
13swerde, I am_ prest*, lord. And Saul 
seide to hym, Whi han 3e sworn togidre 
ajens, me, thou, and the sone of Ysay, 
and thou hast 3euen to hym loouys and 
a swerd, and thou hast counseild for hym 
the Lord, that he ryse a3ens me, dwel- 
islynge a spye vnto to day ? And Achyma- 
lech answerynge to the kyng seith, And 
who in alle thi seruauntis trewe as Danid, 
and the sone in lawe of the kyng, and 
goynge at thin heest, and gloryous in 
15 thin hows ? Whether to day I haue begun 
for hym to counseil the Lord? A wey be 
that fro me, ne trowe the kyng a3ens his 
seruaunt sich a maner thing in al the 
hows of my fader; forsothe thi sernaunt 
wiste not eny thing vpon this nede, othere 
is litil or greet. And the kyng seide, Bi 
deth shal dye, Achymalech, thou, and al 


XXII. 8—16. 


3e han swore, ether conspirid?, togidere 
ajens me, and noon is that tellith to me; 
moost sithen also my sone hath ioyned 
boond of pees with the sone of Ysai; noon 
is of 30u, that sorewith ‘for my stide4, 
nether that tellith to me, for my sone hath 
reisid my seruaunt ajens me, settynge tre- 
soun to me ‘til to® dais. Sothelit Doech of» 
Ydumye answeride, that stood ny3, and 
was the firste’ among ‘the seruauntis of 
Saul’, and seide, Y siz ‘the sone of Ysai¥ 
in Nobe, at Achymelech, preest*, the sone 
of Achitob; which’ counseilide* the Lord |o 
for Dauid, and 3af* meetis ‘to hym, but 
also he 3af to Dauid the swerd of Goliath¢ 
Filistei. Therfor’ the kyng sente to clepe 11 
Achymelech, the preest, ‘the sone of Achi- 
tob®, and al the hows! of his fadir, of 
preestis that weren mm Nobe; whiche® alle 
camen to the kyng. And Saul seide toiz 
Achymelech, Here®, thou sone of Achitob. 
Whichi answeride, Lord, Y am redi. Andis 
Saul seide to hym, Whi hast thou con- 
spirid ajens me, thou, and the sone of 
Ysai, and 3auest* loones and a swerd to 
hym, and councelidist! the Lord for hym, 
that he schulde rise ajens me, and he 
dwellith a tretour ‘til to™ dai? And Achy- 14 
melech answeride to the kyng, and seide, 
And® who among alle thi seruauntis is° as 
Dauid feithful?, and the’ soue in lawe ‘of 
the kyng’, and goynge at this comaunde- 
mentt, and gloriouse in® thin hows? Whe-1s 
ther Y bigan to dai to counsele the Lord 
for hym’? Fer be this fro me; suppose 
not the kyng™ ajens his seruaunt ‘siche a 
thing* in al ‘the hows of my fadirY; for 
thi seruaunt knew not ony thing, ether litil 
ethir greet, of this cause. And the kyngis 
seide, Achymelech, thou schalt die bi 
deeth, thou, and al? the hows of thi fadir. 
And the kyng seide to men able to bei7 


Y ajeynst BH. ajenc. 2 Om. am. 2 preest a. 
°Om.1. 9 Om.cr POm.c. Gmy whiler. ‘vntor. ‘this dai. t Butx. ucheefs. v Sauls 
seruauntis 1, WYsais sone 1. * the preest 1. yand Achimelech 1. 2 counseilide with 1. 2 gaf him 1. 
bOm.1. ¢ Golier 4@Thanner. ¢ Achitobs sone1. f meynee 1. the whiehe 1. 4 Here me 1. 
‘The which 1 hast 3oue 1. 1 hast counseilid with 1. ™ vntcthis1. ' "Om.1. © is so feithful 1. 
POm.1. Gheis thir, 'Om.1. 8 Om.en. the x. thin. theesti, tinali. vDauid1. kyng 
sich thing 1, * or azens ony other 1. Ymy fadir hous1. 2 Om.c. 


MSeM 17S NIL. 3. 


17the hows of thi fader. And the kyng 
seith to the outgoers in his nedis, that 
stooden about hym, Turneth, and sleeth 
the preestis of the Lord, for the hoond 
of hem is with Dauid; wytynge that he 
was flowen, and thei sheweden not to 
me. Forsothe the seruauntis of the kyng 
wolden not strecche out her hoond into 
isthe preestis of the Lord. And the kyng 
seith to Doech, Turn thou, and fal into 
the preestis of the Lord. And Doech 
Ydume turnede, felle’ into the preestis, 
and hew3 doun fyne and ei3tith?* men in 
igthat day, clothid with surplees. Also he 
smoot Nobee, the citee of preestis, in 
mouth of swerd, men and wymmen, litil 
children and sowkynge, and oxe, and 
20 asse, and sheep, in mouth of swerd. For- 
sothe oon ascapynge, sone of Achyma- 
lech, the sone of Achitob, whos name 
21 was Abiathar, flee3 to Dauid, and toolde 
to hym, that Saul hadde slayn the prestis 
20f the Lord. And Dauid seith to Abia- 
thar, Forsothe I wist in that day, that 
whanne there was Doech Ydume, with 
out_.dout he wold telle to Saul; I am 
23 gilti of alle the soulis of thi fader. Dwel 
with me, ne drede thou; if eny man 
sechith> my lijf, shal seche and thi lijf, 
and with me thou shalt be kept. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 And men toolden to Danid, seiynge, 
Loo! Phylisteis fijten az3ens Seyla, and 
astruyen the floris of cornys. Thanne 
Dauid counseilde the Lord, seiynge, Whe- 
ther I shal goo, and smyte thes Philisteis ? 
And the Lord seith to Dauid, Go, and thou 
shalt smyte Philisteis, and>» saue Seylam. 
3 And men seiden, that weren with Daunid, 
to hym, Loo! we here beynge in Juda 
dreden; myche more if we goon into 


I. KINGS. 


67 


sent out, that stoden aboute hym, Turne 
3e, and sle the preestis of the Lord, for 
the hond of hem is with Danid; and thei 
wisten that he fledde, and thei schewiden 
not tome. Sotheli the sernauntis of the 
kyng nolden* holde forth her hondf in to 
the preestis of the Lord. And the kyng is 
seide to Doech, Turne thou, and hurle®* 
*in to the preestis of the Lord. And Doech 
of Ydumee turnede, and hurlide” in to the 
preestis, and stranglide in that dai foure 
score and fyue men, clothid with ‘ephoth{ 
of lynnun cloth®. Forsothe’ he® smoot! 19 
Nobe, the citee of preestis®, by the scharp- 
nesse of swerd, men and wymmen, litle 
children and soukynge, and oxe, and asse, 
and sheep, bi? the scharpnesse of swerd. 
Forsothe' o sone of Achymelech, sone‘ of 20 
Achitob, ascapide, of which sone the name 
was Abiathar; and he fledde to Dauid, 
and telde to! hym that Saul hadde slayn2i 
the preestis of the Lord. And Danid 22 
seide to Abiathar, Sotheli™ Y wiste, ‘that 
is, Y coniectide, ether dredde", in that 
dai, that whanne Doech of Ydumee was 
there, he wolde telle with out doute to 
Saul; Y am gilti of alle the lyues°® of thi 
fadir?. Dwelle thou with me, drede thou23 
not; if ony man sekith thi lijf, he schal 
seke also my lijf, and thou schalt be kept 
with me. 


CAP. XXIII. 


And thei? telden|| to Dauid, and seiden, i 
Lo! Filisteis™ fi3ten azens Seila, and ra- 
uyschen’ the corn floris. Therfor' Danid 2 
councelide" the Lord, and seide, Whether 
Y schal go’, and smyte Filisteis”? And 
the Lord seide to Danid, Go thou*, and 
thou schalt smyte FilisteisY, and thou schalt 
saue Seila. And men, that weren withs 
Dauid, seiden to him, Lo! we ben heere 
in Judee, and dredden?; hou myche more, 


aa eigtety ce. >. shal seche 4. »b Om. Bu. 

& wolden not 1. aa hurtle x. b hurtlid pLX sec. m. ¢ lynnun prestes copis 1. 4 Certis 1. 
€Doecht. {destrieder. & the preestis1. bheslew3e hii. i Buty. k the sone I. i Om. I. 
™ Certis 1. ® Om.cr. © lynes that be sleyn 1. P fadirhous1. ment the Filisteis 1. § strien 1. 
t Thanne 1. *counselide with 1. ‘goout1. W¥ these Filisteis nc. the Filisteis 1. * forth 1. y the 
Filisteis 1. 2 han dred 1. - 


K 2 


+ the ser- 
uauntis of the 
kyng nolden 
holde forth her 
hond; these 
men able to be 
sent out, weren 
Abner and 
Amasa, that 
weren sent out 
to the nedis of 
the rewme, 
they nolden 

sle the prestis 
of the Lord, 
for they wisten 
that i¢ was not 
to obeye to the 
king, in tho 
thingis that 
ben a3enus God; 
and they token 
this of that 
word in i. e°. 
of Josue, us we 
obeyeden in 
alle thingis to 
Moyses, so we 
schulen obeie 
also to thee, 
onely thi Lord 
God be with 
thee; that is, 
in tho thingis 
in whiche is 
acordinge 

with Goddis 
wille, we schu- 
len obeye, and 
in noon othere. 
Lire here. c. 

t clothid with 
ephoth; for 
they camen to 
the king in 
the clothis in 
whiche they 
mynistriden 
bifor God, that 
thei schulden 
bowe more his 
wraththid soule 
to pitee. Lire 
here. c. 

|| ¢elden, that 
is, men of Seila 
telden perel 
neijinge to 
hem. Lire 
here. c. 


68 I. KINGS. 


Seilam a3ens the companyes of Philisteis. 
4Eft thanne Dauid counseilde the Lord ; 
the which answerynge seith to hym, 
Ryse, and go into Seilam; forsothe I shal 
5 take the Philisteis in thin hoond. Thanne 
wente Dauid and his men into Seilam, 
aud faujt aj3ens the Philisteis; and 
drone a wey the beestis of hem, and 
smoot hem with a greet veniaunce; and 
Dauid sauyde the dwellers of Seilam. 
« Forsothe that tyme, the which Abiathar, 
the sone of Achymalech, flee3, he de- 
scendide to Dauid into Seylam, hauynge 
7 with hym the preestis coope. Forsothe 
it is toold to Saul, that Dauid was comen 
into Seylam; and Saul seith, The Lord 
hath taken hym into myn hoondis, and 
closid is goon into the cytee, in the whieh 
sben 3atis and lockis. And Saul comaund- 
ide to al the puple, that to the fijt thei 
shulden descende to Seilam, and bisege 
sDauid and his men. The which thing 
whanne Dauid ajen knewe, for Saul made 
redy to hym priueli yuel, he seide to 
Abiathar, the preest, Clothe thee the>> 
iopreestis coope. And Danid seith, Lord 
God of Yrael, thi seruaunt hath herd the 
fame, that Saul hath disposid to come to 
Seyla, that he turne vpsedoun for me the 
\icyte; if the men of Seyla shulen take me 
into his hoondis, and if Saul shal come 
doun, as thi seruaunt hath herd, Lord 
God of Yrael, shewe to thi seruaunt? And 
12the Lord seith, He shal come doun. And 
Dauid eft seyde, If the men of Seila shu- 
len take me, and the men that ben with 
me, into the hoondis of Saul? And the 
13 Lord seide, The: shulen take. Thanne 
Dauid roos, and his men, as sex hundrid; 
and, goon out fro Seyla, hidir and thi- 
der weren vagaunt vneerteyn. And it is 
toold to Saul, that Dauid hadde flowen 
fro Seila, and was sauid; for what skyl 


XMM. 4a 


if we schulen go in to Seila ajens the 
cumpanyes of Filisteis. Therfor eft Dauid 4 
councelide* the Lord; which answeride, 
and seide to Dauid, Rise thou‘, and go ‘in 
to’ Seila; for Y schal bitake Filisteis® in‘ 
thin hond. Therfors’ Dauid 3ede", and hise 5 
men, in to Seila, and fau3t ajens Filisteis! ; 
and he* droof awey her werk beestis, and | 
: 


[_ T+.—l r=. 


smoot hem with greet wounde; and Dauid 

sauyde the dwelleris of Seila. Forsothe!s 

in that tyme,‘wher ynne™ Abiathar, sone” 

of Achymelech®, fledde to Dauid in to 

Seile, he? cam doun‘, and hadde™ with 

hym ‘ephoth, that is’, the cloth' of the . 
| 


hizeste preest'*}, Forsothe" it was teld7 t prest; wher- 
yine was the 
racional of 
doom, in 
whiche the an- 
swering of the 
Lord apperide. 
Live here. c. 


to Saul, that Dauid hadde come in to 
Seila; and Saul seide, The Lord hath 
take hym in to myn hondis, and he ‘is 
closid, and” entride in to a* citee, inY 
which? ben 3atis and lockis. And Sauls 
comaundide to al the puple, that it schulde 
go doun to batel in to Seila, and bisege* 
Dauid and hise men. And whanne Dauid9 
pereeyuede, that Saul made redi yuel 
priueli to hym, he seide to Abiathar, 
preest?, Brynge hidur ephoth‘*{. And 10 
Dauid seide, Lord God of Israel, thi ser- with ephoth, to 
uaunt ‘herde fame‘, that Saul disposith to Coaaee ; 
come to Seila, that he distrie the eitee for“ © 
ine; if the men of Seila sehulen bitake me!) : 
| 
‘ 


in to hise hondis, and if Saul schal come 
doun, as thi seruaunt herde®, thou Lord 
God of Israel schewef to thi seruaunt ? 
And the Lord seide, He schal come doun||. | ke sclial aaa 
And Dauid seide eft, Whether the men of 12 if thou dwellist 


: ; in the citee, h 
Seila sehulen bitake me, and the men that fchalcome . 
ben with me, in to the hondis of Saul? dom re 


here. ¢. 


And the Lord seide, Thei schulen bitake, 
‘that is, tf thou dwellist in the citee, and 
Saul come" thidurs. Therfor Dauid roos, 13 
and hise men, as* sixe hundrid; and thei 
3eden out of Seila, and wandriden vucer- 
teyn hidur and thidur. And it was telde 


“he laft to goon out. Forsothe Dauid to Saul, that Dauid hadde fledde fro Seila, , 
( 
bb with the 4 pr. nm. ( 

@ councelide with 1, % the which 1. Cthonupy. dina. ¢ the Filisteist. finto ex. & Thanne 1. 


h wente 1. ‘the Filisteis 1.  & Dauid 1. 
P Abiathar 1. 4 down thidere 1. * he haddei. 
uAndr. WOm. 1. * ther. 
¢ the prestis coope 1. 4 hath herd sey 1. 


Saul, if thou abijdist him there 1. % as at. 


1 And 1 
8 Om. 1. 
¥ is closid with ynne in 1. 
e hath herd 1. 


min whiche rt. "thesonei. © Abimelech Exp. 
teoope 1. tt The whole gloss omitted in x. 
Zthe which 1. ®bisege 3¢ 1. © the preest 1. 
f schewe it 1. ff comith c. ‘€ Om. x. thee io 


XXII. 15——~24. 


dwellide in deseert, in moost defensable 
placis, and abood¢ in the hil of wildirnes 
of Ziph, in the derk* hil; neuerthelater® 
Saul sou3te hym alle days, and the Lord 
took hym not into the hoondis of hym. 
1s And Dauid saw3, that Saul was goon out, 
for to seche his lijf. Forsothe Dauid was 
igin the deseert of Ziph, in a wode. And 
Jonathas, the sone of Saul, roos, and 
weite to Dauid into the wode, and coum- 
fourtide the hoondis of hym in God. 
i7And he seide to hym, Ne drede thou; 
forsothe ne the hoond of Saul my fader 
shal fynde thee, and thou shalt regne 
vpon Yrael, and I shal be to thee the 
secounde; but and Saul my fader woot 
isthis. Thanne either smoot couenaunt of 
pees before the Lord. And Dauid aboodf 
in the wode; forsothe Jonathas turnede 
iga3en$ into his hows. Forsothe Zipheis 
stieden vp to Saul in Gabaa, seiynge, 
Loo! whether not Dauid lurkith anentis 
vs in moost siker placys of a wode, in 
the hil of Achille, that is at the ri3t party 
200f deseert? Nowe thanne, as thi soule 
hath desyrid for to come doun, com doun; 
forsothe ‘our shal be", that we taken hym 
2linto the hoondis of the kyng. And Saul 
seide, Blessid be! 3e of the Lord, for 3e 
2zhan sorewid my while. Goth thanne, I 
praye, and more bisily makith redy be- 
forn, and slelyer doth, and weitith swiftly 
the place, where be the foot of hym, or 
who saw3 hym there, where 3e han seid ; 
forsothe he a3en thenkith of me, that I 
23felli aspye hym. Biholdith, and seeth 
alle the hidils of hym, in whiche he is 
hid, and turneth to me at certeyn thing, 
that I goo with 30u; that if also into the 
erthe he hide hym self, I shal thur3 
serche hym in alle the thousandis of 
2iJuda. And thei rysynge wenten into 
Ziph before Saul. Forsothe Dauid and 


© bode arn. bod c. boid z. 4 thicke £ pr.m. 
& a3een c. aeen £, b he schal ben onre £ pr.m. 


€ nerthelater ¢ passim. 
i Om. pceFri. 


I. KINGS. 69 


and was saued ; wherfor Saul dissymylide! 
to go out. Forsothe* Dauid dwellide ini 
the! deseert, in strongeste™ places, and he 
dwellide in the hil of wildirnesse of Ziph, 
in a derk hil"; netheles Saul soujte hym 
in alle daies, and the Lord bitook not 
hym in to the hondis of Saul. And Dauid 1s 
si3, that Saul 3ede out, that he schulde® 
seke his lijf. Forsothe? Dauid was in the‘ 
deseert of Ziph, in a wode. And Jonathas, 16 
the sone of Saul, roos', and sede to Dauid 
in to the wode, and coumfortide® hise hondis 
in God. And he seide to Dauid, Drede17 
thou not; for the hond of Saul my fadir 
schal not fynde thee, and thou schalt regne 
on Israel, and Y schal be the secounde to 
thee; but also Saul my father woot this. 
Therfor euer eithir smoot boond of pees is 
bifor the Lord. And Dauid dwellide in 
the wode; forsothe' Jonathas turnede a3en 
in to his hows. Forsothe® men of Ziph is 
stieden’ to Saul in Gabaa, and seiden, Lo! 
whether not® Dauid is hid at* vs in the 
sikiresteY places of? the wode*, in the hille 
of Achille, which” is at the ri3t syde of 
deseert ? Now therfor come thou doun, 20 
as thi soule desiride, that thou schuldist 
come doun; forsothe it schal be oure®, that 
we bitake hym® in to the hondis of the 
kyng. And Saul seide, Blessid be 3e of21 
the Lord, for 3e sorewiden® ‘for my stidef. 
Therfor, Y preie%, go 3e, and make" redi 22 
more diligentli, and do 3e more curiousli 
ether intentifli, and biholde 3e swiftly, 
where his foot is, ethir who si; hym there, 
where 3e seiden; for he thenkith on me, 
that felli Y aspie hym. Biholde 3e, and 23 
sei alle his hidyng places, in whiche he is 
hid, and* turne 3e ajen to me at a certeyn 
thing, that Y go with 3ou; that if he 
closith' hym silf 3he in to™ erthe, Y schal 
seke hym with® alle the thousyndis of 
Juda. And thei risiden®, and jeden in to 24 


f boode pr. bod c. bood en. 


ifeyneder. & Buty. 1Om. ern. ™fulstronger hilofwoder. wolder, P Andi. 
4Om. rn, ‘roosupt. % he coumfortider tandy. \Certis1. ¥ stieden up. W Om, D. now EL. 
Xin p. anentisr. Yfulsiker1. 2in1. 4thicke woder. thats. © oure doyng1. 4 Dauid1. 


© han serewid 1. {my while 1. 
mthe 1, Om. pkmosb. "in 1, 


& preie 30u 1. 


h makith 1. 
o resen up 1. risen ELP. 


iseger. Kandthannes. | schal close 1. 


70 


his men weren in the deseert of Maon, 
in the wijld feeldis, at the riz3t side of 
25 Jesymith. Thanne Saul wente and his 
felawis to seehe hym, and it is toold to 
Dauid; and anoon he wente doun to a 
stoon, and abood in the deseert of Maon ; 
the whiehe thinge whanne Saul had 
herde, he pursuede Dauith in the de- 
26serte of Maon. And Saul wente and his 
men at the side of the hil on the o par- 
tye; forsothe Dauid and his men weren 
in the side of the hil on the tother party; 
wherfor Dauid dispeyryde hym self to 
mowe askaap fro the face of Saul. And 
so Sanl and his men in maner of a eoroun 
girdiden Dauid and his men, for to take 
27 hem. Anda messager eam to Saul, seiynge, 
Hy3e, and eome, for the Philisteis han 
26 held hem selnen vpon the loond. Thanne 
Saul turnede a3en, eesynge to pursue Da- 
uid; and he wente into the a3en ecomynge 
of the Philisteis. For that thei elepen that 
place the Dynydynge Stoone. 


CAP, XIV, 


1 Thanne Dauid stiede vp thens, and 
dwelte in moost siker placis of Engaddi. 
2 And whanne Saul was turned ajen, after 
that he hadde pursued the Philisteis, thei 
toolden to hym, seiynge, Loo! Dauid is 
3in the deseert of Engaddi. Thanne Saul, 
takynge to thre thousandis of chosen 
men of al Yrael, wente to aserche Dauid 
and his men, vpon moost hei3 rochis, that 
oneli to wijlde eapretis ben thur3 weyes. 
4And he cam to the fooldys of sheep, the 
whieh offrede hemself to the weye goer. 
And a spelunk* was there, the which 
Saul wente yn, that he purge the wombe ; 
forsothe Dauid and his men lurkeden in 
the innere! parti of the denne. And the 
seruauntis of Dauyd seiden to hym, Loo! 


k spelunk or denne a pr.m. 


PAnd: 4 Om.1K. 1° Dauid 1. 


I. KINGS. 


5 the too kK. 


XX[Llege MS, 


Ziph bifor Saul. Forsothe? Dauid and 
hise men weren in the deseert of Maon, in 
the’ feldi places, at the rizt half of Jesy- 
myth. Therfor Saul 3ede and hise felowis 25 
to seke Dauid, and it was teld to Dauid ; 
and anoon he" 3ede doun to the stoon, and 
lyuyde in the deseert of Maon; and whanne 
Saul hadde herd this, he pursuede Dauid 
in the deseert of Maon. And Saul 3ede 26 
and hise men at the side of the hil ‘on oS 
part ; forsothet Dauid and hise men weren" 
in’ the side of the hil on the tother part; 
sotheli* Dauid dispeiridet, that he my3te 
ascape fro the face of Saul. And so Saul 
and hise men eumpassiden bi the maner 
of a eoroun*® Dauid and hise men, that 
thei schulden take hem. And a messanger 27 
eam to Saul, and seide, Haste thou, and 
eome, for Filisteisy han spred hem silf on 
the lond. Therfor Saul turnede a3en, and 28 
ceesside to pursue Dauid; and 3ede” a3ens 
the comyng of Filisteis. For this thingy} 
thei clepen*? that place the Stoon De- 
partynge?. 


CAP. XXIV. 


Therfor Dauid stiede® fro thennus, and 1 
dwellide in the sykireste’ places of En- 
gaddi. And whanne® Saul turnede ajen,2 
aftir that he pursuede Filisteis’, theis 
telden to hym, and seiden, Lo! Dauid is 
in the" deseert of Engaddi. Therfor Sauls 
took three thousinde of! chosun inen of al 
Israel, and 3ede* to seke Dauid and hise 
men, 3he on! moost brokun rochis, that™ 
ben ‘able to weie™ to wield geet aloone. 
And he® eam to the fooldis of scheep, that? 
offriden? hem silf to the wei goere. And 
there was a denne’, in to which’ denne 
Saul entride, that he schulde" purge the’ 
wombe; forsothe*¥ Dauid and hise men 
weren hid in the ynnere part of the* 
denne.’ And the seruauntis of Dauids 


Vny3 aBFH. 


tandr. ‘wentenr. Vatr. © forsothe ze. 
x coroun round aboute1, _¥ the Filisteis1. 2he3ede1. @clepiden pErGrkLMNoPpgqrsuWxb. > of 
Departyng E1px.  C¢stiedeupr. 4 most sikir1. ¢whannethatr.  f the Filisteis1. 8 meu 2. 
bOm.rn. iOm.1.  khegedex.  luponther. ™ the whiche 1. n weies DK sec. m. X sec. m. 
thorou3 weies 1. able weie Mx pr.m. able to weies o. © Saul 1. P the whiche 1. 4 profreden 1. 
Teaaue 1, § the whiche x. t Om. pikuxb. Uwoldex. Vhig1. Wcertisi. * that 1. 


+ Dauyth dis. 
peiride; Da- 
uyth dispeiride 
not to ascape 
in his owne 
persoone, for 
he was certeyn 
of the filling of 
Goddis biheest, 
that he schulde 
be kyng aftir 
Saul, but he 
despeiride to 
ascape with out 
batel with Saul, 
of which batel 
he hadde hi- 
donsnesse and 
dredde, for the 
deth of hise 
men, aud of 
summen that 
weren with 
San], and su- 
eden him more 
a3enus her wille, 
than wilfuly. 
Lire here. c. 

t for this thing; 
that is, for the 
oost of Saul 
was departid 
there, fro the 
pursuyng of 
Dauyth. Lire 
here. c. 


XXIV. 6—12. I. KINGS. 71 


the day of which the Lord spak to thee, 
I shal take to thee thin enemy, that 
thou doo to hym as it plesith in thin 
eyen. Thanne Dauid roos, and kyttide™ 
of the hemme of the mantil of Saul 
cstilly". After thes thingis the herte of 
Dauid smoot hym, forthi that he hadde 
kut a wey the hemme of the mantil of 
7Saul. And he seide to his men, Merciful 
be to me the Lord, that I doo not this 
thing to my lord, the crist of the Lord, 
that I putte myn hoond into hym, for 
the crist of the Lord he is. The Lord 
lyueth, for but the Lord smyte hym, 
other the day of hym come, that he dye, 
other comynge doun into batayl perish, 
merciful be to me the Lord, that I putte 
not myn hoond into the crist of the 
sLord. And Dauid brak togidre his men 


with thes wordis, and suffrede hem not, . 


that thei rysen into Saul; forsothe Saul 
rysynge fro the denne, wente in the weye 
obegun. Forsothe Dauid roos after hym, 
and wente out of the denne, and criede 
after the bak of Saul, seiynge, My lord 
kyng! And Saul beheelde bihynde hym ; 
and Dauyd bowynge hym self redi into 
1othe erthe honourede. And he seide to 
Saul, Whi herist thou wordis of men 
spekynge, Dauid sechith yuel a3ens thee ? 
11Loo! to dai thin eyen seen, that the 
Lord took thee in myn hoond in the 
denne, and I thou3t for to slee thee, but 
myn eye sparide to thee ; forsothe I seide, 
I shal not stretche out myn hoond in my 
lord, ‘for the® crist of the Lord he is. 
12 But more ouere, fader myn, se, and know 
the hemme of thi mantil in myn hoond, 
for whanne I kut the coope? of thi man- 
til, I wold not stretch out myn hoond 
into thee; inwardly tak hede, and se, for 
there is not in myn hoond euel-ne wick- 
idnes, ne I have synned in theé; forsothe 


seiden to hym, Lo! the dai of which the 
Lord spak to the, Y schal bitake to thee 
thin enemy, that thou do to hym as it 
plesith in thin i3en. Therfor Dauid roos’, 
and kittide the hemme of the mentil of 


Saul priuely. Aftir these thingis Danids 


smoot his herte’{, for he hadde kit awei 


‘fh smoot hes 
herte; that is, 


the hemme of the mentil of Saul. And7_ his consience 


Dauid seide to hise men, The Lord be 
merciful to me, lest-Y do this thing to 
my lord, the crist* of the Lord, that Y 
sende® myn hond ‘in to’ hym, for he is 
the erist of the Lord. The Lord lyueth, 
for no® but the Lord smyte hym*, ether his 
dai come, that he die, ether he go doun 
in to batel and perische®, the Lord be 
merciful to me, that Y sende" noti myn 


repreuyde him. 
Live here. c. 


hond in to the erist* of the Lordt. For-s + crist of ue 


sothe! Saul roos out of the denne, and 3ede 


in the weie bigunnun. Sotheli™ Dauid roos" 9 


aftir hym, and he 3ede out of the denne, 
and criede aftir the bak of Saul, and seide, 
My lord, the? kyng! And Saul bihelde 
bihinde him silf?; and Dauid bowide hym 
silf lowe to the erthe, and worschipide’. 


Lord ; in 
summe bokis 
it sueth, and 
Dauyth brak 
his men li siche 
wordis, and 
suffride not 
hem, that they 
risiden ajenus 
Saul, but this 
lettre is not in 
breu, nether 
in bokis 


And he® seide to Saul, Whi herist thou 10 amendid. Lire 


the wordis of men spekynge, Dauid sekith 


yuel a3ens thee? Lo! to dai thin izen sizen, 11 


that the Lord bitook thee in myn hond 
in the denne, and Y thou3te that Y wolde 
sles thee, but myn i3et sparide thee; for Y 
seide, Y schal not holde forth myn hond 
in to my lord, which” is{ the crist’, ‘that 


is, anoyntid*, of the Lord. But rathere, my 12 


fadir, se thou, and knowe the hemme of 
thi mentil in myn hond, for whanne Y 
kittide aweie the hemme of thi mentil, 
Y noldeY holde forth myn hond in’ thee; 
perseyue thou, and see, for nether yuel 
nether wickidnesse is in myn hond, nether 
Y synnede* ajens thee; but thou aspiest 


iny lijf, that thou do it awei. The Lord 13 


deme bitwixe me and thee, and the Lord 


mkytt aru. kitte x. cuttec. stillelice. Othatisepr.m. P cope. 


Yroosup1. 2 herte, or repentide him. *®anoyntid 1. crist, that is, anoyntid K. and that a pr.m. 
CEGKLMNoPQnsuwxb. or that 1. Cputte mw. donr. ¢Om.1. fSaul1. & perische sor  putte mu. 
iOm.1. Kanoyntidr. ! Andi. ™ Andi. ®roosup1. °Om.1. POm.1. 4 worschipide him 1. 
tDauid 1. s haueslawer. tigen nc. 4% for her. Wanoyntid 1. * Om. myx. Ywolde not 1. 7a3ens 1. 


a haue synned 1. 


nerve. Co 


t which is the 
erisd; that is, 
anoyntid. c. 


72 I. KINGS. 


thou aspyist my lijf, that thou doo it 
izawey. The Lord deme bitwixd me and 
thee, and the Lord wreke me on thee; 
11forsothe inyn hoond be not in thee, as 
in the oold prouerbe it is seid, Fro vn- 
pitenous men goth out vnpitenousnesse ; 
myn hoond forsothe be not in _ thee. 
1s Whom pursuyst thou, kyng of Yrael ? 
whom pursuist thou? A deed dog thou 
i6pursuist, and a quyk fly3e. The Lord 
be domesinan, and the Lord deme bitwix 
me and thee, and see, and deme my 
cause, and delyuere me fro thin hoond. 
17 Forsothe whanne Dauid hadde ful eendid 
spekynge siche maner wordis to Saul, 
Saul seide, Whether this is thi voys, sone 
myn Danyd? And Saul reryde vp a voys, 
isand wepte. And to Dauid he seide, More 
ri3twise thou art than Y; forsothe thou 
hast 30ldun to me gode thingis ; forsothe 
I haue 3oldun ajen to tliee yuel thingis. 
19 And thow hast shewid to me to day, 
what goode thingis thou hast doo to me, 
what maner wise the Lord took me in 
20 thin hoond, and thou slew3 not me. For- 
sothe who, whanne he fyndith his enemy, 
leeueth hym in a good weie? But the 
Lord 3eelde to thee this while, for that, 
21that to day thou hast wrou3t in me. And 
‘now, fort I knowe, that moost certeynli 
thou art to regne, and to haue in thin 
22hoond the kyngdom of Yrael, swere to 
me 1 the Lord, that thou do not a wey 
my seed after me, ne doo a wey my name 
23fro the hows of my fader. And Dauid 
swore to Saul. Thanne Saul wente into 
his hows, and Dauid and his men stiedeu 
vp to more sykyr placis. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Samuel forsothe diede; and al Yrael 
is gaderid, and biweilide’ hymt ful myche, 
and biryeden hym in his hows in Ra- 
matha. And Dauid risynge wente doun 


4 bytwene BrH passim. betwen E-passim. betwe c passim. 


weiledyn ce. t Om. acrern. 


bagensi, ¢ Om. 1. 
maner 1. * reiside up 1. 
Vhisenmy 1. ‘in toK. 
W stieden up 3. * sikerer BCKO. 


dagens 1. ¢ Om. 1. 
1 gode thingis 1. 


Y roos up kL. 


8 weie, whanne he fyndith him 1. 


XXIV. 13-—-XXYV. 1. 


venge me of thee; but myn hond be not 
in? thee, as it is seid also® in eld pronerbe, 14 
Wickidnesse schal go out of wickid men ; 
therfor myn hond be not in‘ thee. ‘Whomis =~ 
pursuest® thou, kyng of Israel, whom pur- 
suest thou ? Thou pursuest a deed hound, 
and a quyk fle. The Lord be iuge, and ié 
the Lord deme bitwixe ine and thee, and 
se, and deme my cause, and delyuere’ me 
fro thin hond. Sotheli? whanne Dauid hadde 17 
fillid’ spekynge siche' wordis to Saul, Saul 
seide, Whether this is thi vois, my sone 
Danid? And Saul reiside* his vois, and 
wepte. And he seide to Dauid, Thou art 18 
more iust than Y; for thou 3auest goodis! 
to me; forsothe™ Y 3eldide" yuelis to thee. 
And thou schewidist® to me to dai, whats 
goodis thou hast do to me, how the Lord 
bitook me in thin hond, and thou killidist 
not me. For who, ‘whanne he fyndith 20 
his enemy?, schal delyuere hym4 in’ good 
weie’? But the Lord 3elde to thee this while, 
for that, thatt thou wrou3tist" to dai in 
me. And now, for Y woot, that thoua2i 
schalt regne moost’ certeynli, and schalt 
haue in thin hond the rewme of Israel, 
swere thou to me in the Lord, that thou 22 
do not a wei my seed aftir me, nether take 

a wey my name fro the hows of my fadir. 
And Dauid swoor to Saul. Therfor Saul 2s 
jede in to his hows, and Dauid and hise 
men stieden™ to sikire* placis, 


CAP. XV. 

Forsothe Samuel was deed; and al Israel: - 
was gaderid to gidere, and thei biweiliden 
hym greetly, and birieden hym in his 
hows in Ramatha. And Dauid roos’, and 


‘ these thyngis x pr.m. 8 weylden Bru. 


fdelyuerehex. & Andx. 4 fillid er endid1. 3 siche 
mbut 1. "haue3zoldeni. © hast schewid1. P Om.1. 
t Om. 1. hast wrou3t tr. ¥ ful 3. 


XXV. 210. 


2into the deseert of Pharan. Forsothe 
there was a maner man in the wilder- 
nesse of Maon, and the possessioun of 
hym was" in Carmele, and that man ful 
myche greet, and there weren to hym 
sheep thre thousandis, and a thousand 
goot ; and it felle that his flok shulde be 
3clippid in Carmele. Forsothe the name 
of that man was Naabal, and the name 
of his wijf Abigail; and that womman 
was moost wyis and feyr, forsothe hir 
man hard and werst and malicious; for- 
sothe he was of the kynrede of Caleph. 
4Whanne thanne Dauid in deseert hadde 
5herd, that Naabal clippide his flok, he 
sente ten 30nge men, and seide to hem, 
Stieth vp into Carmele, and 3e shulen 
come to Naabal, and 3e shulen salute 
chym in my name pesibly; and thus 3e 
shulen seye, Pees be to my britheren 
and to thee, and pees to thin’ hows, and 
to alle, what euere thingis thou hast, be 
pees; of many 3eeris be thou maad saaf, 
7thou, and thin hows, and alle thin. J 
haue herd that thi sheepherdis clippiden 
thi flockis, that weren with vs in deseert ; 
neuere to hem we weren heuy, ne eny 
tyme faylide to hem eny thing of the 
flok, al the tyme that thei weren with vs 
sin Carmele; ask thi children”, and thei 
shulen shewe to thee. Nowe thanne 
fynden thi children” grace in thin eyen ; 
in a good day forsothe we ben comen to 
thee; what euere thing thin hoond fynd- 
ith*, 3if to thi seruauntis, and to thi sone 
9Dauid. And whanne the childrenY of 
Dauid weren comen, thei speken to Naa- 
bal alle thes wordis in the name of 
10Dauid, and helden her pees. Forsothe 
Naabal, answerynge to the children? of 
Dauid, seith, Who is Dauid? and who is 


u Om. BCEFH. vher 4. 
2 childre z. childer c. 


Zwente 1. ®the deseert1, » And 1. 
Maon tb marg. ther was a man, and 1. 
Ischore 1. ™Andr. 2 buti. ©and1. P3e upt. 
hast ¢. thingis whateuer thou hast n. 
godes, Y. A sec. m. 1b sec. m. 8 hane herd 1. 
vwefynder. Wbencomeni. comen plures. 
Nabalr. @hims. » Certis 1. 


VOL. II. L 


w childre peru. childer c. 


¢€ sum BCDEFGKLNOPQRSUXD. Om. 1. 
& that 1. 


L KINGS. 9g 


jede? doun in to deseert* of Faran. For-2 
sothe> a° ‘man was‘ in Maon°t, and! his 
possessioun was in Carmele, and thilke® 
man was ful greet, and thre thousynde 
scheep and a thousynde geet! ‘weren to 
hym*; and it bifelde that his flocke was Tete Bee 
clippid! in Carmele. Forsothe™ the name 3_ book of Ebreu 
of that man was Nabal, and the name of deena th & 
his wijf was Abigail; and thilke womman fit hise beectis 
was moost prudent and fair; forsothe" hir Weyer jn, Cer 
hosebond was hard and ful wickid and “ere. ¢. 
malicious; sotheli® he was of the kyn of 

Caleph. Therfor whanne Dauid hadde4 

herde in deseert, that Nabal clippide his 

floc, he sente ten 3onge men, and seide tos 

hem, Stie 3e? in to Carmele, and 3e schulen 

come to Nabal, and 3e schulen grete hym 

of my name pesibli; and 3e schulen seiec 

thus, Pees be to my britheren and to thee, 

and pees be to thin hows, and pees be to 

alle thingis, ‘what euer thingis thou hast‘. 

Y™ herde’ that thi scheepherdis, that weren7 

with vs in deseert, clippiden' thi flockis ; 

we weren neuere diseseful to hem, nether 

ony tyme ony thing of the floc failide to 

hem, in al time" in which thei weren with 

vs in Carmele; axe thi children, and thei, 

schulen schewe to thee. Now therfor thi 

children fynde’ grace in thin izen; for in 

a good dai we camen™ to thee; what euer 

thing thin hond fyndith*, 3yueY to thi ser- 

uauntis, and to thi sone Dauid. Andg 

whanne the children of Dauid hadden 

come’, thei spaken to Nabal* alle these 

wordis in the name of Dauid, and helden 5 ell ates 
pees. Forsoth Nabal answeride to the jo if he seye, ¥ 
children of Dauid, and seide, Who is and Bans 
Dauith? and who is the sone of Isai? To Pee ae 
dai seruauntis encreesiden® that fleen? her 

lords. Therfor schal Y take my loouest11 
and my watris, and the fleischis® of beestis, 


+ in Maon; in 
summe bokis is 
in the wildir- 
nesse of Muon, 
but this word 
wildirnesse, is 
not in Ebren, 
nether is of the 


ofte in scrip- 
ture, ech drynk 
is vndurstodun 
bi the name of 
water, as bi the 
name of breed 
is understond- 
un ech mete. 


ychildre c. childerc. je here. c. 


* fynde BcEFH. 


4d Om. 1. 
i of geet 1. 


e the desert of 


h ther weren to him thre 1. k Om. 1. 


4 whatener thou hast prkogsxb. thingis whiche thou 
t which manic 3eres hath maad sauf thi sernauntes and alle thi 
t han schore 1. 
x fyndith or plesith to thee 1. 
¢ han encressid 1. 


u the time BCEFGIKLMNOPQRSUWXb. 
Y3yue wr. 2 come to 


ahan fled: © fleishe 1. 


74 


the sone of Ysay? To day han sprungun 
yn seruauntis that fleen her lordis. Shal 
I thanne take my loouys, and my watris, 
and flesh of beestis, that I haue slayn to 
my clippers, and 3ife to men, whom I 
iz2knowe not whennus thei ben? And so 
the children* of Dauid wenten a3en bi her 
weye; and a3en turned thei camen a3en, 
and toolden to hym alle the wordis that 
13 Naabal hadde seid. Thanne Dauid seith 


I. KINGS. 


XXV. 11——20. 


whichef Y haue slayn to my schereris, 
and schal Y 3yue to men, whiche® Y knowe 
not of whennus thei ben? Therfor the 12 
children of Dauid 3eden a3en bi her weie ; 
and thei turneden a3en, and camen, and 
telden to hym® alle wordis' whiche* Nabal 
hadde seid'. Thanne Dauid seide to hise 1s 
children, Ech man be gird with his swerd. 
And alle men weren gird with her swerdis, 
and Dauid also was gird with his swerd; 


and as foure™ hundrid men sueden Dauid, 

forsothe" two hundrid leften at the fardels. 

Forsothe® oon of hiseP children telde to14 

Abigail, wijf4 of Nabal, and seide, Lo! . . 
Dauid sente’ messangeris fro deseert, that 

thei schulden blesse oure lord+’, and he i Wess owe 
turnedet hem awey; these men weren 15 ynge hyd cur- 
good ynow, and not diseseful to vs, and (ay; o"g 


axinge mekly 
no thing" perischide ‘in ony tyme’ in al 


to his children, Echon be gyrd with his 
swerd. And echon ben gird with her 
swerdis, and Dauid is gird with his 
swerd; and there folweden Dauid as 
foure hundrid men, forsothe two hun- 
11dryd abiden stil at the fardels. Forsothe 
to Abigail, the wijf of Naabal, oon of 
hir children toold, seyynge, Loo! Dauid 


sente messagers fro deseert, for thei wol- his benefice, 


Lire here. c. 


den blesse to oure lord, and he with 
isstoode hem; these men weren good 
ynow? ‘to vs°, and not heuy, ne eny thing 
that eny tyme perishid al the tyme we! 
ighan dwellid with hem in deseert; for a 
wal thei weren to vs, as wel in ny3t as 
in day, alle days the whiche we fedden 
17flockis anentis hem. Wherfor behold, 
and bithenk, what thou doo; for deter- 
myned is the malice a3ens thi man, and 
a3ens thin hows; and he is the sone of 
Belial, so that no man may speke to him. 
is Thanne Abigail hijede, and took two 
hundryd loouys, and two botels of wyn, 
and fyue wetheris sothen, and fyue bus- 
shellis of brayid corn, and an hundrid 
busshellis of dryed grape, and two hun- 
drid peyse of dryed figis; and she putte 
19 vpon the assis, and seide to hir children, 
Gooth before me; loo! after the bak Y 
shal folwe 3ou. To Naabal forsothe hir 
20man she shewide it not. Whanne thane 
she was goon vpon the asse, and cam 


@ childre £. childer c. 


5 a now3 cE. 


the tyme in which we lyueden” with hem 
in deseert; thei weren to vs for a wal, 16 
bothe in ni3t and in* dai, inY alle daies? 
in whiche we lesewiden flockis at? hem. 
Wherfor biholde thou, and thenke, what 17 
thou schalt do; for inalice is fillid> azens 
thin hosebonde, and ajens ‘thin hows‘; and 
he! is the sone of Belial, so that no man 
may speke to him. Therfor Abigail hast- 18 
ide, and took two hundrid looues, and two 
vessels of wyn, and fyue whetheris sodun, 
and seuene buyschelis and an half of flour, 
and an hundrid bundles of dried grape’, 
and two hundrid gobetis' of dried figus ; 
and puttideS on" assis, and seide to hir1g 
children, Go 3e bifor me; lo! Y schal sue 
30u ‘aftir the! bak. Forsothe* sche schew- 
ide not! to hir hosebonde Nabal. Therfor 20 
whanne sche hadde stied™ on the” asse, 
and cam doun ‘at the roote® of the hil, 
and? Dauid and hise men camen doun in 
to the! comyng ‘of hir™; whiche* alsot sche 
mette. And Dauid seide, Verili in veyn21 


¢QOm. 4. 4 that we z sec. m. 


f the whiche 1. & that 1. h Dauid 1 i the wordis 1. k that 1. l seid to hem 1. 
mafourer. "fort, And: Pther 4 the wijf1. hath senti. 8 lord Nabalx. +t hath 
turned 1. Uthing of ourer. ¥Om.1. Wwerens. * Om. plures. Yand L. 2 the daies1. ®anentis 1. 
> fulfillid 1. ¢ thi meynee 1. 4 Nabal 1. © grapes ELM. grapis or reisynns 1. fpeisi.  § sche putte 1. 
hal this upont. ibihynde3zourer, * And1. lnot thst. ™ stied upi. ani. ® to the foot 1. 
POm.1. qGhirt, tOm.1. § the whicher. t Om. 1. 


AXV. 21-——29. 


doun at the roote of the hil, Dauid and 
his men camen down into a3en metynge 
of hyre; to whom and she a3en cam. 
21 And Dauid seith, Verreili in veyn I haue 
kept alle thingis that of this man weren 
in deseert, and there perishid not eny 
thing of alle thingis that to hym per- 
teyneden®, and he hath 30ldun to me 
azyuel for good. Thes thingis do the 
Lord to the enemyes of Dauid, and thes 
thingis adde, if Y shal leeue of alle 
thingis that to hym pertenen vnto the 
23 morwe tide a pisser to the wal. Forsothe 
whanne Abigail hadde seen Dauid, she 
hiz3ede, and wente doun of the asse, and 
felle doun before Dauid vpon hir face, 
21and honourde vpon the erthe. And she 
felle at the feet of hym, and seyde, My 
lord, in me be this wickidnes; speke, Y 
biseche, thin hoondseruaunt in thin eeris, 
25 and here the wordis of thi seruaunt; ne 
put, Y preye, my lord kyng, his herte 
vpon this‘ wickid? man Naabal, for after 
his name he is a fool, and foli is with 
hym; forsothe I, thin hoond womman, 
saw3 not thi children", whom, my lord, 
26thou sentist. Now thann, my lord, lyueth 
the Lord and lyueth thi soule, that hath 
defendid thee, that thou cam not into 
blood, and hath sauyd thin hoond to 
thee; and now as Naabal thin enemyes 
ben maad, and that sechen to my lord 
27yuel. Wherfor tak this blessynge, that 
thin hoond womman hath brou3t to thee, 
my lord, and 3yue to the children that 
28folowen thee, my lord. Do awey the 
wickydnes of thi seruaunt; forsothe the 
Lord makynge shal make to thee, my 
lord, a trewe hows, for the batayls of 
the Lord, my lord, thou fiztist ; malice 
thanne be there not founden in thee alle 
29the days of thi lijf. Forsothe if there 
arise any tyme a man pursuynge thee, 


I. KINGS. 75 


Y haue kept alle thingis" that weren of 
this Nabal in the’ deseert, and no thing 
perischide of alle thingis that perteyneden 
to hym, and he hath 3olde to me yuel for 
good. The Lord do these thingis, and 22 
addew these thingis to the enemyes of 
Dauid, if Y schal leeue* of alle thingis 
that perteynen to him til they morewe a 
pisser to the? wal. Sotheli? whanne Abi-23 
gail si3 Dauid, sche hastide, and 3ede doun 
of the asse; and sche fel doun bifor Dauid 
on hir face, and worschipide> on the erthe. 
And sche felde doun to hise feet, and seide, 24 
My lord the® kyng, this wickydnesse be 
intme; Y biseche®, speke thin handmaydenf 
in thin eeris, and here thou the wordis of 
thi seruauntesse; Y preie, my lord the%25 
kyng, sette not his herte oni this wickid 
man Nabal, for bi his name he is a fool, 
and foli is with hym; but, my lord, Y 
thin handmayde si3 not thi children, whiche 
thou sentist*. Now therfor, my lord, the 26 
Lord lyueth}, and thi soule lyueth, which! 
Lord forbeed™ thee, lest® thou schuldist 
come in to blood, and he® sauede thi sowle?P 
to thee{; and now thin enemyes, and thei 

that seken ynel to? my lord, be™ maad as {ues soit is 


Nabal. Wherfor resseyue thou this bless-27 ™"sy> that ¥ 
cam a3enus thee 


+ the Lord 
lyueth ; as if 
sche seide, as 
it is soth, that 
the Lord lyu- 
eth, and thon 


yng, which’ thin handmaide brou3te' to ae 
or sche 
thee, my lord, and 3yue" thou’ to the chil- come 05 


blood, that is, 
dren that suen thee, my lord. Do thouw28 to cchede ous 


awey the wickidnesse’’ of thi seruauntesse; loot. Hire 
for the Lord makynge schal make a feith- + he 
ful hows to thee, my lord, for thou, my Lire here. c. 
lord, fi3tist the batels of the Lord; therfor 

malice be not foundun in thee in alle dais” 
of thi lijf. For if a man risith ony tyme, 29 
and pursueth thee, and sekith thi lijf, the 
lijf of my lord schal be kept|| as in a 
bundel of lyuynge ¢rees, at thi Lord God ; 


I schal be 
kepte, ete. ; 
that is, schal 


forsothe* the soule of thin enemyes schal _ be defendid 
E 3 ajenus alle tre. 
be hurlid round aboute as in feersnesse,  souns of yuel 


en. Lire 


m 
and sercle of a slynge. ‘Therfor whanne 30 here. c. 


€pertenenc. fhisaru. 8 wickec. childre neru passim. childer c passim. 
u these thingis K, Y Om. ernNPx. Waddehes. * leene vndestried1. Ytor Zar ®Andt. 
b worschipide him 1. ©Om.1. ati. © biseche thee 1. fhandmaider. & Om.1. >} that he sette 1. 
iupont. sentist fohim1. the which1. ™hath forboden1. ™thatr. the Lordy. P lijfr. 
4 to thee ibsec.m. ‘betheis. ‘that. thath brouj3t1, "3yuei##1. "Om.1. YY wickenesse 5. 
W the daies 1. * but 1. 


2 


76 


and sechynge thi lijf, the lijf of my lord 
shal be kept, as in a litil knytche of lyu- 
ynge men, anentis the Lord thi God; 
forsothe the lijf of thin enemyes shal be 
turned about as in the birre, and the 
3ocercle of a slynge. Whanne thanne! the 
Lord shal do to thee, my lord, alle thes 
gode thingis, that he hath spokyn of 
thee, and settith thee a duyk vpon Yrael, 
31this shal not be to thee, my lord, into 
3oxynge and into scripil of herte, that 
thou hast shed giltlesse blood, or thi self 
thou hast vengid. And whanne the Lord 
shal wel doo to thee, my lord, thow shalt 
recorde of thin hoond womman, and thou 
seshalt wel doo to hir. And Dauid seide 
to Abigayl, Blissid be* the Lord God of 
Yrael, that sente thee to day into myn 
ajencomynge, and blessid thi! speche; 
33and blessid thou art™, that hast defendid 
me, that I 3ede not to day to the blood, 
34and vengide me bi myn hoond; ellis the 
Lord God of Yrael lyueth, that hath de- 
fendide me, that Y dide not yuel to thee, 
but soone thow haddist comen into a3en- 
comynge to me, there shulde not" han 
laft to Naabal vnto the morwetide li3t a 
35pisser to the wal. Thanne Dauid took 
of the hoond of hir alle thingis that she 
brou3te to hym; and he seide to hir, Go 
in pees into thin hows; loo! I haue herd 
36thi voys, and honourde thi face. For- 
sothe Abigail cam to Naabal; and loo! 
there was to hym a feest in his hows, as 
a feest of a kyng; and the herte of Naa- 
bal myri, forsothe he was drunken ful 
myche; and she shewide not to hym 
37 word litil or greet vnto the morwe. For- 
sothe eerli, whanne Naabal°® hadde defied 
the wyn, his wijf shewide to him thes 
wordis; and the herte of hym with yn 
forth is deed?, and he is maad as a stoone. 
38 And whanne ten days weren passid, the 


'Om. 4. §k Om. scery. | the aprn. 


deadid z. dedid x. 


Yhath spoker. %uponz. 4 thi silff x. 


I. KINGS. 


m Om. BCEFH. 


b of 1. 


XXV. 30-—-38. 


the Lord hath do to thee, my lord, alle 
these goode thingis, whiche he spakY of 
thee, and hath ordeyned thee duyk on’ 
Israel, this schal not be in to sizyngt and 31 
in to doute of herte to thee, my lord, that 
thou hast sched out giltles blood, ether 
that thou hast vengid thee*, And whanne 
the Lord hath do wel to thee, my lord, 
thou schalt haue mynde on? thin hand- 
maide, and thou schalt do wel to hir. 
And Dauid seide to Abigail, Blessid be 32 
thee Lord God of Israel, that sente’ thee 
to dai in to my comyng, and blessid be 
thi speche; and blessid be thou, that hast 33 
forbede® me, lest Y 3edef to blood, and 
vengides me with myn hond; ellis thes 
Lord God of Israel lyueth, which" forbeedi 
me, ‘lest Y dide* yuel to thee, if thou 
haddist not soone come in to ‘metyng to 
mel, a pissere to the wal schulde not haue 
left to Nabal til to the™ morewe 1:3t. 
Therfor Dauid resseyuede of bir hond3s 
alle thingis whiche sche hadde brou3t to 
hym®" ; and he seide to hir, Go thou in pees 
in to thin hows; lo! Y herde® thi vois, 
and Y onouride thi face. Forsothe Abi-3¢ 
gail cam to Nabal; and, lo! a feeste was 
to him in his hows, as the feeste of a 
kyng; and the herte of Nabal was 
iocounde?, fori he was ‘drunkun greetlit ; 
and sche schewide not to hym a word 
litil ether’ greet til the morewe. Forsothe's7 
in the morewtid, whanne Nabal hadde 
defied the wiyn, his wijf schewide to hym 
alle these wordis; and his herte was almest 
deed with ynne, and he was maad as a 
stoon. And whanne ten daies haddense 
passid, the Lord smoot Nabal, and he was 
deed. Which" thing whanne Dauid hadde39 
herd, Nabal deed’, he seide, Blessid be the 
Lord God, that vengide’ the cause of my 
schenschip of the hond of Nabal, and 
kepte* his seruaunt fro yuel, and the 


1 Om. aru. he Eorig. P deadyd Br. 


¢Om.c. ‘hath sent1. ¢forbodexv. f 3ide 


to day 1. & had vengid 1. that 1. ‘hath forboden 1. * Y schulde not dor. !my metyng1. ™Om. i. 


n Dauid 1. 
which 1. 


© haue herd 1. 


Pp merye t. 
Vv to be deed 1. 


w hath vengid 1. 


r ful drunkun 1. 
x hath kept 1. 


q certis 1. 


SneeL. or P. t Buti. The 


tin to siz3yng ; 


that is, in to 
morenyng of 


soule and in to 
remors of con- 


sience. Lire 
here. c, 


X XV. 39—-XXVI. 5. 


39 Lord smoot Naabal, and he is deed. The 
which thing whanne Dauid hadde herd, 
Naabal deed, he seith, Blissid is4 the 
Lord, that hath vengid the cause of my 
reproof fro the hoond of Naabal, and his 
seruaunt hath kept fro yuel, and the 
malice of Naabal the Lord hath 3o0lden 
into his heed. Than Dauid sente, and 
spak to Abigail, that he take hir to hym 

4ointo wijf. And the children of Dauid 
camen to Abigail into Carmele, and 
speken to hir, seilynge, Dauid sente vs 
to thee, that he take thee into wijf to 

4thym. The which arysynge honourde 
redi into the erthe, and seith, Loo! thi 
seruaunt be in to an hond womman, that 
she wasshe the feet of the seruauntis of 
42my lord. And Abigail hizede, and roos, 
and stiede vpon the asse; and fyue child- 
wymmen, hir feet folowers, wenten with 
hir, and she folowide the messagers of 

43 Dauid, and is maad to hyma wijf. But 
and Dauid took Achynoem fro Jezrael, 

44and either was the wijf of hym; forsothe 
Saul 3af Mychol his dou3ter, the wijf of 
Dauid, to Phalti, the sone of Lays, that 
was of Gallym. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 And Ziphei camen to Saul in Gabaa, 
seiynge, Loo! Dauid is hid in the hil of 
Achille, the which is fro ajens of the 

2wildernesse. And Saul roos, and cam 
doun into the deseert of Ziph, and with 
hym thre thousandis of men of the chosun 
of Yrael, that he seche Dauid in the de- 

3seert of Ziph. And Saul sette tentis in 
Gabaa of Achille, that was fro a3ens of 
the wildernesse in the weye. Forsothe 
Dauid dwellide in deseert. Forsothe 
seynge that Saul was comen after hym 
4into deseert, he sente aspies, and lernyde 
moost certeynli, that thidre he was 
scomyn. And Dauyd roos pryueli, and 


I. KINGS. 


17 


Lord 3eldideY the malice of Nabal in to 
the heed of hym. Therfor Dauid sente, 
and spak to Abigail, that he wolde take 
hir wijf to hym. And the children of 40 
Dauid camen to Abigail in to Carmele, 
and spaken to hir, and seiden, Dauid sente 
vs to thee, that he take thee in to wijf to 
hym. And sche roos’, and worschipide 4! 
lowe to erthe*, and seide, Lo! thi ser- 
uauntesse be in to an handmayde, that 
sche waische the feet of the seruauntis of 
my lord. And Abigail hastide®, and roos*, 42 
and stiede® on anf asse; and fyue damesels, 
sueris of hir feet, 3eden$ with hir, and sche" 
suede the messangeris of Dauid, and was! 
maad wijf tohym. But also Dauid took 43 
Achynoem of Jezrael, and ever eithir was 
wijf to hym; forsothe* Saul 3af Mycol his 44 
dou3tir, wijf of Dauid, to Phalti{, the sone 
of Lais, that was of Gallym. 


CAP. XXVI. 


And Zipheis! camen to Saul in to Ga- 
baa, and seiden, Lo! Dauid is hidde in the 
hille of Achille, which™ is ‘euene ajens" 
the wildirnesse. And Saul roos®, and 3ede2 
doun in to deseert? of Ziph, and with hym 
thre thousynde of men of the chosun of 
Israel, that he schulde seke Dauid in the 
desert of Ziph. And Saul settide tentisis 
in Gabaa of Achille, that was euen aj3ens 
the wildirnesse in the weie. Sotheli* 
Dauid dwellide in deseert’. Forsothe Da- 
uid sij3{ that Saul hadde come aftir hym 
in to deseert; and Dauid' sente aspicris, 4 
and lernede" moost certeynli, that Saul 
hadde come thidur. And Dauid roos’s 


q Om. 2CEFH. 


yhath goulde x1. Zroosup1. ®theerther. >bescher Chastidehir:1. ‘4roosupr. €sche 
stiedeup1. {the cpEFeKLMNorarsuwxb. & 3eden forth 1. » Abigail1. i sche was 1. k and 1. 
I1men of Zepheit, ™thatr. anentisr. Croosup1. Pthedeseert1. ‘his tentisr. 1 Andi. 
8 the deseert crx. the. he lernede 1. VY roos up 1. 


+ to Phalti ; 
Ebreys seyen, 
that this Phalti 
was a doctour 
of the lawe, 
and therfor 
thou3 he took 
Mychol, to 
obeye to Saul, 
and that he 
schulde be 
onourid as the 
hosebonde of 
the kingis 
dou3ter, nethe- 
les he knew 
not hir fleisly, 
for he wiste 
that sche was 
the veri wiyf 
of Dauyth, for 
he hadde not 
forsake hir, 
and therfor 
Dauyth res- 
seyuede hir 
aftirward, and 
netheles he 
hadde not take 
hir aftirward, 
if sche hadde 
be knowun 
fleisly of Phalti, 
as he entride 
no more to hise 
wynes, whiche 
Absolon knew, 
as it is had in 
ii, book xx. c°. 
Lire here. c. 
tT Dauyth si3, 
that is, knew 
bi a messanger. 
ire here. c. 


78 I. KINGS. 


cam to’ the place where Saul was. And 
whanne he hadde seen the place, in the 
whiche Saul slepte, and Abner, the sone 
of Ner, prince of his chiualrye, and Saul 
slepynge in the tent, and the tother 
écomouns bi the enuyroun of hym, Dauid 
seith to Achymalech, Ethee, and to Abi- 
say, the sone of Saruye, the brother of 
Joab, seiynge, Who shal come doun with 
nie to Saul into the tentis? And Abisai 
7seide, Y shal goo doun with thee. Thanne 
Dauid and Abisai camen to the puple the 
ny3t, and founden Saul liynge, and slep- 
ynge in the tent, and a speer pi3t at his 
heed in the erthe; forsothe Abner and 
the puple slepynge in the enuyroun of 
shym. And Abisai seide to Dauid, God 
hath closid to dai thin enemye into thin 
hoondis; now thanne I shal stike hym 
with a speer in the erthe oonys, and the 
ssecounde shal be no nede. And Dauid 
seide to Abisai, Thou shalt not sle hym, 
forsothe who shal stretche his hoond into 
the crist of the Lord, and shal be inno- 
1ocent ? And Dauid seide, The Lord lynith, 
for but the Lord smyte hym, other the 
day of hym come that he die, other into 
1] batail comynge doun he perisshe; merci- 
ful be to me the Lord, that I stretche 
not out myn hoond into the crist of the 
Lord ; now thanne tak the speer, that is 
at his heed, and the cup of water, and go 
izwee. Dauid took the speer, and the cup 
of water, that was at the heed of Saul, 
aud thei wenten awey, and there was not 
eny man that saw3, aud vndurstood, and 
awook, but alle thei slepten; for the 
13Sleep of the Lord felle vpon hem. And 
whanne Dauid was goon fro ajens, and 
stood in the cop of the hil fro a fer, and 
there was a greet myddil valey bitwixs 
i4hem, Danid criede to the puple, and to 
Abner, the sone of Ner, seiynge, Whe- 
ther, Abner, thou shalt not answere? 


Tinto E prom. 


Ww his 1. * the sone 1. 
eOm.1, fSaulr. ¢Om.1. 4} that 1 
hadde falle exp. ™ passid forth 1. 


i Om. 1. 


® ouer ajens hem 1. 


XXXVI. 6—14. 


priueli, and cam to the place where Saul 
was. And whanne Danid hadde seyn the 
place, wher ynne Saul slepte, and Abner, 
the sone of Ner, the prince of his chyual- 
rye, and Saul slepynge in the’ tente, and 
the tother comyn puple bi his cumpas, 
Dauid seide to Achymelech, Ethey, and to6 
Abisai, sone* of Saruye, the brother of Joab, 
‘and seideY, Who schal go doun with me to 
Saul in to ‘the castels?? And Abisai seide, 
Y schal go doun with thee. Therfor Da-7 
uid and Abisai camen to the puple in the 
ny3t, and thei founden Saul lyggynge and 
slepynge in ‘the tente*, and a spere sette 
faste in the erthe at his heed; ‘forsothe 
thei founden» Abner and the puple slep- 
ynge in his cumpas. And Abisay seides 
to Dauid, God hath closid to dai thin 
enemy in to thin hondis ; now therfor Y 
schal peerse hym with a° spere onys in 
the erthe, and ‘no nede® schal be the 
secounde tyme. And Dauid seide to Aby-9 


sai, Sle thou not hym, for who schal holde 
forth his hond into the crist of the Lord, 

and schal be innocent ? And Dauid seide, 10 ‘ 
The Lord lyueth, for no* but the Lord 
smyte hym‘, ether his dai come that he , 


die, ether he go doun in to batel and 

perische; the Lord be merciful to me, 

that Y holde not forth myn hond in to 

the crist of the Lord; nowé® therfor take 

thou the spere, which" is at his heed, and 

‘take thou! the cuppe of watir, and go we 

awei. Dauid* took the spere, and the 12+ te steep of 
cuppe of watir, that was at the heed of aye 
Saul, and thei 3eden forth, and no man pee ite 
was that si3, and vndirstood, and wakide, ie OB lag? 
but alle men slepten; for the sleep of the — schulde go ” 
Lord ‘hadde feld' on hem. And whanne13 05g, sna that 
Dauid hadde passid™ euene ajens®, and Ce 
hadde stonde on° the cop of the? hil afer, fesse} of water, 
and a greet space was bitwixe hem, Dauid 14 clare his inno- 
criede to the puple, and to Abner, the sone Saul, anda 


Saul, and 
° 5 di ‘a 
of Ner, and seide, Abner, whether thou ee she 
ateynte him of 
wickidnesse. 


Lire here. c. 


8 bytwene pr. betwen £. betwe c. 


Y seijng Kk. 7 his tentis1. his tentis1. band alsor. ¢the 1. 4 mouyd ze. 


lwas fallen 1. hadde fallen v. 
q Om. 1. 


k Thanne Danid 1. 


Oafer uponi, Pani. 


XXXVI 15—23. 


And Abner answerynge seith, Who art 
thou that criest, and vurestist the kyng ? 
15 And Dauid seith to Abner, Whether ert 
thou not a man, and who other lik 
thee in Yrael? whi thanne hast thou not 
kept thi lord the kyng? Forsothe there 
wente yn a man of the folk, for he wolde 
16sleye thit lord the" kyng ; it is not good, 
this that thou hast doo; the Lord lyuith, 
for sonys of deeth 3e ben, for 3e han not 
kept 30ure lord, crist of the Lord. Now 
thanne se, where be the speer of the 
kyng, and where be the cup of water, that 
i7weren at the heed of hym. Forsothe 
Saul knewe the voys of Dauid, and seide, 
Whether is this thi vois, my sone Dauid? 
And Dauid seith, My vois, my lord kyng. 
isAnd he seith, For what cause pursueth 
my lord his sernaunt ? What haue I doo, 
i90r what yuel is in myn hoond? Nowe 
thanne here, I preye, my lord kyng, 
wordis of thi seruaunt; if the Lord 
stirith thee a3ens me, sacrifice be smellid ; 
forsothe if the sones of men, cursid be 
thei in the si3t of the Lord, that han 
throwun me out to day, that I dwelle 
not in the heritage of the Lord, seiynge, 
20Go, and serue to alien goddis. And now 
be not shed out my blood in the erthe 
before the Lord; for the kyng of Yrael 
is goon out that he seche a quyk flize, 
21as a partritch is pursued in hillis. And 
Saul seith, Y haue synned; turne a3en, 
my sone Dauid, namore forsothe I shal 
mysdoo to thee, forthi that my lijf was 
precious in thin eyen to day; forsothe 
it semeth that folili I haue doo, and 
many thingis to myche I haue vnknowen. 
22 And Dauid answerynge seith, Loo! the 
speer of the kyng, go oon of the chil- 
dren’ of the kyng, and take it; forsothe 
the Lord shal 3eeld to ech man after his 
23rij3twisnes and feith; forsothe the Lord 


tthe agrn. "the aBrH. 


¥ wolt 1. 
£QOm.1. 


8 hast thou not kept 1. 
aandr. bnowrs. © ou3te L. 
hlorde. tOm.1 
dom. 1 haue unknowe 1. 
5 certis 1. 


Vv childre peru passim. childer c passim. 


t Certis aI. 
d hath gon 1. 
k apperith BcpFEHKLMNOPQRSUWD. . 
© kyngis children 1. 


I. KINGS. a0 


schalt™ not answere? And Abner an- 

sweride, and seide, Who art thou, that 

criest, and disesist the kyng? And Dauith is 

seide to Abner, Whether thou art not a 

man, and what other man is lijk thee in 

Israel? whi therfor ‘kepist thou not® thi 

lord the kyng? ‘For ot man of the cum- 

panye entride, that he schulde sle thi lord 

the kyng; this that thou hast doon, is not 16 

good; the Lord lyueth, for 3e ben sones 

of deeth, that kepten not 3oure lord, the 

crist" of the Lord. Now therfor se thou, 

where is the spere of the kyng, and where 

is the cuppe of watir, that weren™ at his 

heed. Forsothe Saul knew the vois of 17 + the sacrifice 
Dauid, and seide, Whether this vois is a a aster 
thin, my sone Dauid? And Dauid seide, 


in this pursu- 
My lord the* kyng, i vid bite 
ord the* kyng, it is my vois. 1g ceptid bifor 

y yng, y vois. And Cheer 


Dauid seideY, For what cause pursueth  offrede brent 
5 sacrifice at his 
my lord his seruaunt? What haue Y do, ster. ue 
sones of men, 


ether what yuel is in myn hond? Now  tringe thee 
‘ herto, as Doecl 
therfor, my lord the? kyng, ¥ paeye, here iso 
the wordis of thi seruaunt; if the Lord _ lowis doen. 
cake 2 thei ben cursid, 
stirith thee ajens me, the sacrifice be — whiche han cust 
. * « é 
smellid{ ; forsothe? if sones of men stiren Bees, Ane 
thee, thei ben cursid in the si3t of the 
Lord, whiche han cast me out ‘to dai, ete; that is, 
: that Y dwelle 
that Y dwelle not in the erytage of the _ not pesibly in 


sent tyme. that 
Y dwelle not, 
; 2 the Iond of 
Lord, and seien, Go thou, serue thou alien _ biheste, where 


goddis. And now my blood be not sched 20 See 
out® in the erthe bifor the Lord; for the yk) that Y 
my3te go thi- 


ng of Israel 3ede’ out, that he seke a dur, and offre 
k f Israel 3ede’ out, that he sek HS Ae 
. . ° fa ue sacrifices. 
quike fle, as a partrich is pursuede in and seyen, in 
ene . dede. go thou. 
hillis. And Saul seide, Y synnede®; turnef2) ovo ‘hou 
ajen, my sone Dauid, for$ Y schal no more =<", 9oddis, 


for persecu- 
Y dide™ folili, and Y vnknew" ful many 
trie, be set 


an for thei that 

do yuel to thee, for my lijf was precious ben compellid 

to day in thin izeu; for! it semeth*, that! — cioun, to entre 
in to a lond 
suget to idola- 

thingis. And Dauid answeride and seide, 225°}, 5 the 

t synne of idola- 

Lo! the spere of the kyng, oon of the GC Poliay 


‘children of the kyng® passe?, and take it; they any 
erto 
forsothe the Lord schal 3elde to ech man ob Maeainaiies, 


. . . . and 
bid his ri3tfulnesse and feith'; for’ the 23 they ben om. 


pellid bi vio- 
lence of peyne. 
Lire here. c. 


uanoyntid 1, Wwasi *Om.4r  Y¥seide eft 1. 
€haue synned rr. fturnethou1. & forsothe 1. 
1 forsothe that 1. m haue don x. die Nn. 
P passe ouer hidere 1. Gaftir 1. his feith 1. 


80 


hath takun thee to day into myn hoond, 
and I wold not stretche out myn hoond 
24in the crist of the Lord; and as thi lijf 
is maad greet to day in myn eyen, so 
my lijf be maad greet in the eyen of the 
Lord, and delyuer he me fro al angwish. 
25 Thanne Saul seith to Dauid, Blessid thou, 
sone myn Dauid; forsothe and doynge 
thou shalt doo, and my3ti thou shalt 
mowe. Thanne Dauid wente into his 
weye, and Saul turnede a3en into his 
place. 
CAP. XXVII. 
: And Dauid seith in his herte, Sum- 
tyme on a day I shal falle in the hoond 
of Saul; whether is it not beter, that I 
flee, and be sanid in the lond” of Phi- 
listeis, that Saul dispeire, and ceese to 
seche me in alle the coostis of Yrael; 
2thanne flee we the hoondis of hym. And 
Dautid roos, and wente, he and sexe* hun- 
dryd men with hym, to Achis, the sone 
30f Maoth, the kyng of Geth. And Dauid 
dwellide with Achis in Geth, he, and his 
men, and his hows; Dauid, and his two 
wyues, Achynoem Jezralite, and Abigail, 
athe wijf of Naabal Carmele. And it is 
toold to Saul, that Dauid was flowen into 
Geth; and he addide no more for to seche 
shym. Forsothe Dauid seide to Achis, If 
I haue fonnden grace in thin eyen, a 
place be 3ouun to me in oon of the citees 
of this regioun, that I dwelle there; for- 
sothe whi thi seruaunt dwellith in the 
écitee of the kyng with thee? And so 
Achis 3af to hyin in that day Sichelech, 
for the which cause Sichelech is maad of 
ithe kyngis of Juda vnto this day. For- 
sothe the noumbre of the dais, in the 
whiche Dauid dwellide in the regioun of 
8 Philisteis, was of foure monethis. And 
Dauid stiede vp, and his men, and 
brou3ten prayes of Gethsury, and of 
Gethry, and of Amalachitis; forsothe 


w hoond as. 


u Lord God 1. Vv Thanne 1. 
b Saul i. © addide to 1. 
K stiede up 1. | thei token 1. 


t wolde not 1. 
a that is, Dauid 1. 
i And. 


I. KINGS. 


w 3ede forth 1. 
4 for to 1. 


XXVI. 24——XXVII. 8. 


Lord bitook thee to dai in to myn hond, 
and Y nolde' holde forth myn hond in to 
the crist of the Lord; and as thi lijf is 24 
magnified to dai in myn izen, so my lijf 
be magnyfied in the izjen of the Lord*, 
and delyuere he me fro al angwisch. 


Therfor Saul seide to Danid, Blessid be2s - 


thou, my sone Dauid; and sotheli thou 
doynge schalt do, and thou my3ti schalt 
be my3ti. Therfor’ Dauid 3ede in to his 
weie, and Saul turnede ajen in to his 
place. 

CAP. XXVII. 

And Dauid seide in his herte, Sumtyme ! 
Y schal falle in o dai in the hond of Saul; 
whether it is not* betere, that Y fle, and 
be sauyd in the lond of Filisteis, that Saul 
dispeirey, and cesse to seke me in alle the 
endis of Israel; therfor fle we hise hondis. 
And Dauid roosY, and 3ede’, he and sixe2 
hundrid men with hym, to Achis, the sone 
of Maoth, kyng of Geth. And Dauids 
dwellide with Achis in Geth, he, and hise 
nien, and his hows; Dauid*, and hise twei 
wyues, Achynoem of Jezrael, and Abigail, 
the wijf of Nabal of Carmele. And it was4 
teld to Saul, that Dauid fledde in to Geth ; 
and he® addide® no more ‘that he schulde® 
seke Dauid. Forsothe Dauid seide tos 
Achis, If Y haue founden grace in thin 
ijen, a place be 3ouun to me in oon of the 
citees of this cuntrey, that Y dwelle there; 
for whi dwellith thi seruaunt in the citee 
of the kyng with thee? Therfor Achisé 
jaf to® hym Sichelech in that dai, for 
whichf cause Sichelech was inaad in to 
thes possessioun of the kyngis of Juda ‘til 
in to this dai. Forsothe' the noumbre of7 
daies, in whiche Dauid dwellide in the 
cuntrei of Filisteis, was of foure monethis{. 
And Dauid stiede*, and hise men, ands 
token! preies of Gethsuri, and of Gethri, 
and of men of Amalech ; for these townes 
weren enhabitid bi eld tyme in the lond, 


xX the sexe BCEFH. 


xOm.c. Y roos up 1. 


2 3ede forth 1. 
eOm.1. f the which 1. 


€Om.1. 4 yntor. 


+ that Saul 
dispeire; that 
is, of my 
taking. Lire 
here. C. 


f 
' 
« 
t was foure 
monethis ; in 
Ebreu it is, 
dayes and foure 
monethis, a 
seer ether 
so it schal be 
takun here, as 
- 
‘ 


3eeris moun be 

it semeth. | 
« 
| 


vndurstondun 
by dayes, and 
Lire here. c. 


XXVIII. 9-——-XXVIUI. 4. 


thes hethen dwelliden in the loond bi 
oold tyme citees of Sur, vnto the loond 
sof Egipt. And Dauid smoot al the loond 
of hem, and he lafte not a lyuynge man 
and womman; and takynge sheep, and 
oxen, and assis, and camelis, and clothis, 
-10he turnede a3en, and cam to Achis. For- 
sothe Achis seide to hym, In whem felle 
thou on to dai? Dauid answerde, A3ens 
the south of Jude, and ajens the south 
of Yranyel, and aj3ens the south of Ceny. 
11Man and womman Dauid lafte not on 
lyue, ne brou3te into Geth, seiynge, Lest 
perauenture thei speken ajens vs. These 
thingis dide Dauid, and this was the 
dom of hym, alle theY dais ‘the whiche? 
he dwellide in the regioun of Philisteis. 
12 Thanne Achis leuyde to Dauid, seiynge, 
Forsothe manye yuels he hath wrou3te 
a3ens his puple Yrael, therfor a seruaunt 
he shal be to me for euere more. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 In tho dais forsothe it is doon, Phi- 
listeis gadreden her companyes, that thei 
weren redi before ajens Yrael at batail. 
And Achis seide to Dauid, Witynge now 
wite thou, for with me thou shalt goon 

2 out in the tentis, thou and thi men. And 
Dauid seide to Achis, Now thou shalt 
knowe what thi seruaunt is to doo. And 
Achis seith to Dauid, And IJ shal putte 

3thee keper of myn heed alle dais. For- 
sothe Samuel is deed, and al Yrael bi- 
weilide? hym, and biryede hym in Ra- 
matha, his® cytee. And Saul took awey 
the dyuynours and clepers of deuels fro 
the loond, and slew3 hem that hadden 

4chaarmers® of deuels in the wombe. And 
Philisteis ben gadrid, and camen, and 
setten tentis in Siccymam; forsothe and 
Saul gadrede al Yrael, aud cam into 


y Om. scern. 7 that. 


™m ynto I. 
t han je hurlid 1. 


0 he lefte 1. 9° ne womman lyuynge 1. 
a And Dauid c. 


-moret, the Filisteis1. & gaderiden to gidre 1. 


I. KINGS. 


a weylyde eH. weilede £. weylyden F. 


VY not in these 1. 
a Certis 1. > we a pr. om. c pr.m. EGKLMNOPQRSU pr.m. Wxb. 
" schalt knowe 1. 


$1 


to men goynge to Sur, ‘til to™ the lond of 


. Egipt. And Dauid smoot al the lond of9 


hem, and lefte" not man ‘lyuynge and 
womman®; and he took scheep, and oxun, 
and assis, and camels, and clothis, and 
turnedeP a3en, and cam to Achis. Sothelit 10 
Achis seide to hym, ‘In to’ whom ‘hurliden 
3e‘ to dai? Dauid" answeride, A3ens the 
south of Juda, and ajens the south of 
Hiramel, and a3ens the south of Ceney. 
Dauid left not’ quik man and* womman, 11 
nether brou3te ‘in to* GethY, and*se ide, 
Lest perauenture thei speken ajens vs. 
Dauid dide these thingis, and this was his 
doom, in alle daies in whiche he dwellide 
in the cuntrei of Filisteis. Therfor Achis 12 
bileuyde to Dauid, and seide, Forsothe* 
he> wrou3te® many yuelis a3ens his puple 
Israel, therfor he schal be euerlastynge? 
seruaunt to me®. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Forsothe it was doon in tho daies,1 
Filisteis' gaderiden? her cumpenyes, that 
thei schulden be maad redi a3ens Israel to 
batel. And Achis seide to Dauid, Thou 
witynge ‘wite now?, for thou schalt go out 
with me ini castels*, thou and thi men. 
And Dauid seide to Achis, Now thoue 
schalt wyte what thingis thi seruaunt 
schal do. And Achis seide to Dauid, And 
Y schal sette thee kepere of myn heed in 
alle dayes. Forsothe! Samuel was deed,3 
and al Israel biweilide hym, and _ thei 
birieden hym in Ramatha, his citee. And 
Saul dide awey fro the lond witchis and 
fals dyuynours{, ‘and he slou3 hem that 
hadden™ ‘charmers of" deuelis® ‘in her 
wombe?. And Filisteis weren gaderid, 4 
and camen, and settiden tentis in Sunam ; 
sotheli and Saul gaderide al Israel, and 


+ false dy- 
rynours ; this 
that sueth, and 
he killide hem 
that hadden 
JSendis spesinge 
in the wombe, 
is not in Ebreu, 
nether js of the 
text. Lire 
here. C. 


bin his B prim. © chaarmes 4. 


8 Azens 1. 
z but he 1. 
© me for euer- 
1 Certis 1. 
° Om. A pr. 2m, 


q turneden a. he turneder. * Andt. 
Whel *in A. y Gethony 1. 

¢hath wrou3t1. dar. 

ijinto x. * tentis1. 


m Om. a prom, BCEFLNPRU. 9 Om. A pr. m. BCDEFGIKLMNOPQRSUWX. charmers and b. 
BCEFLNPIU. fendis spekinge pikMoswx. Pin the wombe pgkmogswXx. Om. A pr. mt. BCEFLNPRU. 


VOI. FT. M 


82 


5Gelboe. And Saul saw3 the teutis of 
Philisteis, and dradde, and his herte 
squauyde! ful myche. And he counseilde 
the Lord; and he answerde hym not, ne 
bi prestis, ne bi sweuens®, ne bi pro- 
7phetis. And Saul seide to his seruauntis, 
Sechith to me a womman hauynge a 
charmynge goost; and I shal goo to hir, 
and .aske bi hir. And his seruauntis 
seiden to hym, There is a womman 
hauynge a dyuynynge spirite in Endore. 
sThanne he chaungide his abite, and is 
clothid with othere clothis; and he 3ede, 
and two men with hym; and thei camen 
to the womman bi ny3t. And he seith, 
Dyuyne to me in a chaarmynge spyrite, 
and rere to me whom Y shal seye to 
9thee. And the womman seith to hym, 
Loo! thou hast knowen how greet 
thingis Saul dide, and what maner wyse 
he hath putte out dyuynours, and clepers 
of deuels fro the loond; whi thanne 
weytist thou to my lijf, that I be slayn ? 
1oAnd Saul swore to hyre in the Lord, 
seiynge, The Lord lyuith; for there shal 
not come to thee eny thing of yuel for: 
ithis thing. And the womman seide to 
him, Whom shal I rere to thee? The 
i2which seith, Rere to me Samuel. For- 
sothe whanne the womman hadde seen 
Samuel, she cryede with a greet voys, 
and seide to Saul, Whi hast thou putte 
this to me? forsothe thou ert Saul. 
13And the kyng seide to hyr, Wole thou 
not drede; what hast thou seen? And 
the womman seith to Saul, I saw3 goddis 
l4stiynge vp fro the erthe. And he seith 
to hir, What maner is the fourm of hym ? 
The which seith, An oold man stiede vp, 
and he is clothid with a mantil. And 
Saul vndurstood that it was Samuel; 
and he bowide hym self vpon his face in 
isthe erthe, and honourde. TF orsothe Sa- 
muel seide to Saul, Whi hast thou vn- 


d quakide #, & swenes c. 
Qne Emp. 'Om.1. ®enquerer. +t 3ede forth 1. 
Yreiseupr. 2ZSauli. upto. » certis 1. 


f And 1. 


I. KINGS. 


XXVIIL. 5—15. 


cam in to Gelboe. And Saul si3 the cas-5 
tels of Filisteis, and he dredde, and his 
herte dredde greetli. And he counselide¢ 
the Lord; and the Lord answeride not to 
hym, nether bi preestis, nether? bi dremes, 
nether’ bi profetis. And Saul seide to hise7 
seruauntis, Seke 3e to me a womman hau- 
ynge a feend spekynge in the’ wombe; 
and Y schal go to hir, and Y scha] axe* bi 
hir. And hise seruauntis seiden to hym, 
A womman hanynge a feend spekynge in 
the wombe is in Endor. Therfor Sauls 
chaungide his clothing, and he was clothid 
with othere clothis ; and he 3ede‘, and twei 
men with hym; and thei camen to the 
womman in the ny3t. And he" seyde, Dy- 
uyne thou to me in’ a fend spekynge in 
the wombe, and reise thou to¥ me whom 
Y schal seie to thee. And the womman9s 
seide to hym, Lo! thou woost hou grete 
thingis Saul hath do, and hou he dide* 
awei fro the lond witchis, and fals dyuyn- 
ours; whi therfor settist thou tresoun to 
my lijf, that Y be slayn ? And Saul swoor 10 
to hir in the Lord,. and seide, The Lord 
lyueth ; for no thing of yuel schal come to 
thee for this thing. And the wommanii 
seide to hym, Whom schal Y reise’ to thee? 
Aud he?® seide, Reise thou Samuel to? me. 
Sotheli whanne the womman hadde seyn ie 
Samuel, sche criede with greet vois, and 
seide to Saul, Whi hast thou disseyued 
me? for thou art Saul. And the kyngis 
seide to hir, Nyl thou drede; what hast 
thou seyn? And the womman seide to 
Saul, Y si3 goddis stiynge* fro erthe’. Andis 
Saul seide to hir, What maner forme is of 
hym? And sche seide, An eld man stieth®, 
and he is clothid with a mentil. And 
Saul vndirstood that it. was Samuelf ; and 
Saul bowide hym silf on his face to 
the erthe, and worschiipide. 
muel seide to Saul, Whi hast thou disesid 
me, that Y schulde be reisid? And Saul 


f myche £ pr.m. 


"Saulr. VYOm.c. up tor 
¢ stiynge up 1. 4 the erthe 1. 


x hath do 1. 
€ stieth up 1. 


Sothelif Sa- 15 licnesse it 


+ Saul vndur- 
stood that it 
was Samuel. 
Seynt Austin 
in his Pistle to 
Simplycian, 
rehersith 
tweyne opyny- 
ouns; oon 
seith, that 
Samuel ap- 
peride verili in 
sonle bi Goddis 
ordenaunce, to 
tele to Saul 
his deth and 
the scateryng 
of the puple of 
Israels the 
tother opyny- 
oun seith, that 
the deuel ap- 
peride in the 
licnesse of 
Samuel ; and 
Austyn enclyn- 
eth more to 
this opynyoun, 
as it is teld in 
Decrees, in xxvie 
cause, V. ques- 
tioun, c°. nee 
myrum. Forth 
deuel trans- 
figurith him- 
silf in to an 
aungel of list, 
as Poul seith, 
and bi the 
maner of spek 
ing of scrip- 
ture, a licnesse 
takith the 
name of a 
thing, whos 








berith, and 
the euydensis 
for the con- 
trarie part 
moun liztly be 
asoilid. Lire 
here. Cc. 


XXVIII. 16—24. 


restid me, that I be rerid? And Saul 
seith, I am artid to myche; forsothe 
Philisteis fizten ajens me, and God is 
goon awey fro me, and wol not here 
me, ne bi the hoond of prophetis, ne bi 
sweuens ; therfor I haue clepid thee, that 
16thou shewe to me what I shal doo. And 
Samuel seith, What askist thon me, sith 
God hath goon a wey fro thee, and goon 
17to thin enemye? Forsothe the Lord shal 
doo to thee as he spak in myn hoond, 
and he shal kut thi kyngdam fro thin 
hoond, and 3yue.it to thi neijbor Dauid ; 
igfor thou hast not obeishid to the vois of 
the Lord, ne thou didist the wraththe 
of his woodnes in Amalech. Therfor that 
that thou suffrist the Lord hath doo to 
igthee to day; and the Lord also shal 
3eue Irael with thee in the hoond of 
Philisteis. Forsothe to morwe thou and 
thi sones shal be with me; but and the 
Lord shal take the tentis of Yrael in the 
20 hoond of Philisteis. And Saw anoon felle 
stra3t into the erthe; he dradde forsothe 
the wordis of Samuel, and mi3t was not 
in hym, for he hadde not eten breed al 
21 that dai and al ni3t. And so that wom- 
man wente yn to Saul, and saith; forsothe 
he was disturblid greetli; and she seide 
to hym, Loo! thin hoond womman hath 
obeishid to thi vois, and ] haue put my 
lijf in myn hoond, and I haue herd thi 
22 wordis, that thou speek to me. Now 
thanne here thou the vois of thin hoond 
womman, and I shal putte before thee 
a morsel’ of breed, and etynge thou wexe 
23hool, and mowe goon the weye. The 
which forsoke, and seith, I shal not ete. 
Forsothe his seruauntis and the womman 
constreyneden; and at the last, the vois 
of hem herd, he roos fro the erthe, and 
24sat vpon the bedde. Forsothe that wom- 
“man hadde a foddred calf in the hows, 
and she hijede, and slew3 it; and takynge 


I. KINGS. 83 


seide, Y am constreyned greetli; for Fi- 

listeis® fi3ten az3ens me, and God 3ede" 

awei fro me, and he nolde! here me, nether 

bi the hond of profetis*, nether! bi dreines ; 

therfor Y clepide thee, that thou schuldist 

schewe to™ me what Y schal do. Andy¢ 

Samuel seide, What axist thou me, whanne 

God hath go awei fro thee", and passide™ 

to thin enemy? For°® the Lord schal do17 

to thee as he spak? in myn hond, and he 

schal kitte awey thi rewme fro thin hond, 

and he schal 3yue it to Dauid, thi nei3- 

bore; for thou obeiedist not to4 the vois 3 

of the Lord, nether didist’ the ‘ire of hys 

strong veniaunce’ in Amalech. Therfor the 

Lord hath do to thee to day that that 

thou snffrist; and the Lord schal 3yue19 

also Israel with thee in the hond of Fi- 

listeis. Forsothe to morewe thou and thi 

sones schulen be with me; but also the 

Lord schal bitake the castels of Israel in 

the hond of Filistiym’. And anoon Saul2o 

felde" stretchid’ forth to’ erthe; for he 

dredde the wordis of Samuel, and strengthe 

was not in hym, for he hadde not ete breed 

in al that dai and al” ny3t. Therfor thilke 21 
womman entride to Saul, and seide; for he 

was disturblid greetli; and sche seide to 

hym, Lo! thin handmayde obeiede* to thi 

vois, and Y haue put my lijf in myn’ 

hondt, and Y herde thi wordis, whiclhie feat 
thou spakist to me. Now®* therfor and*22y dide at thyn 
thou here the vois of thin handmaide, and "2°. "err 
Y schal sette a mussel? of breed bifor thee, yee 
and that® thou etynge wexe strong, and «re. c. 
maist do the’ iourney. And he forsook®, 23 

and seide, Y schal not ete. Sothely' hise 

seruauntis and the womman compelliden 

hym{; and at the laste, whanne the vois 

of hem was herd, he roos® fro the erthe, _ bi bisi preyeris; 
and sat on the bed. Sothelii thilke wom-o4 2njcmraa ie 


+ compelliden 
him; that is, 


; ty, and 
man hadde a fat calf in the* hows, and Prva, 
‘sche hastide!, and killide hym™; and sche sete ee 


took mele, and meddlide it", and made 


& mussel e. 


& the Filisteis 1. h hath gon 1. 
Ine ELP. ™Om.1. "the a. ®® hath passid 1. 
8 feers wraththe of the Lord 1. t Philistees 1. 
walthat i. * hath obeied 1. 
4thir. ¢ forsook itr. f But 1. 


§ roos up I. 
Mit 1. it togidre 1. 


l wolde not 1. 
© Sothh 1. 
u felle doun 1. 
Y thin oKxX sup. ras. 
har 


k prestys ELP. dyuynours 1 sed expunsit sec. me 
Phath spoke 1. @Om.1. * thou didist 1. 
v and was stretchid 1. VY upon the 1. 
z And nowr. ®Om.1 ?morseli1. © Om. c. 

iAnds. kKhiri. hee hastide 5. hee castid 1. 


M2 


S4 


floure she mengide it, and boke® therf 

2sloones; and putte before Saul and his 
seruauntis, the which whanne thei had- 
den eten, risen, and wenten thur3 out al 
that! ny3t. ; 


CAP. XXIX. 


i Thanne alle the companyes of Phi- 
listeis ben gadred in Aphech, but and 
Trael sette tentis vpon the welle that was 
2in Jezrael. Forsothe and the maistris of 
Philisteis wenten in hundredis and thou- 
sandis; forsothe Danid and his men 
weren in the last companye with Achis. 
3sAnd the princis of Philisteis seiden to 
Achis, What to hem self wolen thes 
Ebrews? And Achis seith to the princys 
of Philisteis, Whether knowe 3e not Da- 
uid, that was seruaunt to Saul, kyng of 
Trae]? and is anentis me manye days or 
3eeris, and I founde not in hym eny 
thing, fro the dai that he ouer flei3 to 
4me vnto this dai. Forsothe the princis 
of Philisteis ben wrooth a3ens hym, and 
seiden to hym, The man turne a3en, and 
sitt in his place, in the which I haue sett 
hym, and dessende he not with vs into 
batail, lest he be maad to vs aduersarye, 
whanne we bigynnen to fi3te; forsothe 
what maner wise other wise he shal 
mowe plese his lord, but in oure heedis? 
s Whether is not this Dauid, to whom 
thei syngen in dauncis, seiynge, Saul 
hath smyten in his thousandis, and Dauid 
sin his ten thousandis? Thanne Achis 
clepide Dauid, and seide to hym, The 
Lord lyueth ; for ri3t thou ert, and good 
in my si3t, and thi goynge out and thin 
incomynge with me is in the tentis, and 
I haue not founden in thee eny thing of 
yuel, fro the dai that thon cam to me 
vuto this dai; but to the maistris thou 
7plesist not. Turn thanne a3en, and go in 
pees, and offend thou not the eyen of the 


h booe £. boc c. 


I. KINGS. 


XXVIII. 25—XXIX. 7. 


therf breed; and settide® bifor Saul and 25 


bifor hise seruauntis, and whanne thei 
hadden ete, thei risiden?, and walkiden 
bid al that™ ny3t. 


CAP. XXIX. 


Therfor alle the cumpenyes of Filisteis*1 
weren gaderid int Aphec, but also Israel 
settide tentis aboue the welle that was in 
Jezrael. And sotheli the princis of Fi-2 
listeis" 3eden in cumpenyes of an hundrid, 
and in thousyndis; forsothe’ Dauid and 
hise men weren in the laste cumpenye 
with Achis. And the princes of Filisteis3 
seiden to Achis, What wolen these Ebreis 
to hem silf? And Achis seide to the 
princes of Filisteis, Whether 3e knowen 
not Dauid, that was the seruaunt of Saul, 
kyng of Israel? and he was with me in¥ 
many daies, ‘ether 3eeris*, and Y foond not 
in hym ony thingt, fro the dai, in which 
he fledde to ie ‘til toY this dai. Sotheli?4 
the princes of Filisteis weren wrooth a3ens 
hym®, and seiden® to hym, The man turne 
a3en, and sitte® in his place, in which thou 
hast ordened hym, and come he not down 
with vs in to batel, lest he be maad aduer- 
sarie to vs, whanne we han bigunne to 
fiz3te; for hou mai he plese his lord in 
other maner, no® but in oure heedis? 
Whether this is not Dauid, to whom theis 
sungen in daunsis, and seiden, Saul smoot 
in thousyndis, and Dauid smoot in hise 
ten thousyndis? Therfor Achis clepidee 
Dauid, and seide to hym, The Lord 
lyueth ; for thou art ri3tful, and good in 
my si3t, and thi goyng out and ‘thin 
entryng' is with me in castels%, and Y 
‘foond not in thee ony thing of yuel, fro 
the day: in which thou camest to me 
til to this dai; but thou plesist not the 
princis*. Therfor turne thou ajen, and7 
go in pees, and offende thou not the ijzen 


ithe ac pr.m. 


° sche sette forth 1. P resin EP. resen up I. Gini. T the r. 8 the Filisteis 1. tin tor. 
u Philistee I. Vbutr. wOm.1. *Om.c. Yvnto1 % Certis 1. a Achis 1. b thei seiden 1. 
Cabidehe1. © Om.1. fthicomyngyniz. &tentis1. 4 haue not foundenr. i tyme a. * princis 


or satrapis 1. 


t ony thing ; 
of ymagynyng 
to yuel, which 
schulde be per- 
seyued in so 
long tyme, if it 
hadde be verily 
in him. Lire 
here. c. 


XXIX. 8—XXX. 6. 


smaistris of Philisteis. And Dauid seid 
to Achis, Forsothe what haue J doo, and 
what hast thou founden in me thi ser- 
uaunt, fro the dai that I was in thi si3t 
vnto this dai, that I come not, and* fi3t 
a3ens the enemyes of my lord the kyng ? 
9 Forsothe Achis answerynge spak to Da- 
uid, I woot for thou art good, and in myn 
eyen as the aungel of God; but the princis 
of Philisteis seiden, He shal not stie vp 
io with vs into batail. Therfor rise eerli, 
thou, and thi seruauntis that camen with 
thee; and whanne fro ni3t 3e shulen rise, 
aud it bigynneth to ‘liz3te day!, gooth. 
11 And so Dauid roos fro ni3t, he and his 
men, that he mi3t goo forth eerli to the 
loond of Philisteis, and turne ajen; for- 
sothe Philisteis stieden vp into Jezrael. 


Cah Pt Oo 


1 Whanne Dauid and his men weren 
comen into Sichelech the thridde dai, 
Amalechites maden a bure fro the south 
partie into Sichelech; and thei smyten 
Sichelech, and thei brenten it with fier. 
2 And caitifis thei ladden wymmen fro it, 
fro the leest ynto the greet; and thei 
slewen not eny man, but ladden with 
3shem, and wenten her weye. Thanne 
whanne Dauid was comen, and his men, 
to the citee, and thei founden it brent 
with fier, and her wyues, and her sonys, 
aand dou3tris™ to be ladde caitifes", Da- 
uid and the puple that was with hym 
rereden vp her voices, and weiliden, to 
the tyme that teeris faileden in hem. 
5Forsothe and the two wyues of Dauid 
weren ladde caitife, Achynoem Jezraelite, 
and Abigail, the wijf of Naabal of Car- 
smele. And Dauid sorowide greetli; for- 
sothe al the puple wold stoone hym, for 
bitter was the lyif of eche man vpon her 
sones and dou3tres. Forsothe Dauid is 


kin apru. | dai ligten ce. 


1 the princis cer. the satrapis 1. 
‘stienpr. ®thouupy. tt cleer day 1. 
Yina. 7frot. of Be. ajens 1, Om. EL. 
€with rt. ftil a. vnto 1. to o sec. m. 
'menns1. ™ led awey1. ™ thanne Dauid 1. 
‘certis1. thane stoned 1, *% Dauid 1. 


I. KINGS. 


m the Filisteis 1. 
u 3e forth 1. 


& moost 1. 
© the teeris 1. 


85 


of princis! of Filisteis™. And Dauid seides 
to Achis, Forsothe" what ‘dide Y°, and 
what hast thou founde in me thi seruaunt, 
fro the dai in which Y was in thi si3t til 
in to this dai, that Y come not, and fi3te 
a3ens the enemyes of my lord the kyng ? 
Forsothe? Achis answeride, and spak tos 
Dauid, Y woot that thou art good, and as 
the aungel of God in my izen; but the 
princes of Filisteis seyden, He4 sclial not 
stie’ with vs in to batel. Therfor rise thous io 
eerli, thou, and thi seruauntis that camen 
with thee ; and whanne 3e han ryse bi ny3t, 
and it bigynneth to be cleert, go 3e". 
Therfor Dauid roos’ bi ny3t, he and hise 11 
men, that thei schulden go forth eerli, and 
turne a3en to the lond of Fylisteis; sotheli¥ 
Filisteis stieden* in to Jezrael. 


CAP Xe 


And whanne Dauid and hise men hadden 1 
come ‘in toY Sichelech in the thridde dai, 
men of Amalech hadden maad asau3t on® 
the south part in? Sichelech; and thei? 
smytiden® Sichelech, and brenten‘ it bi¢ 
fier. And thei ledden the wymmen pri-2 
soneris fro thennus, fro the leeste ‘til tof 
the grete® ; and thei hadden not slayn ony, 
but thei ledden” with hem, and 3edeni in 
her weie. Therfor whanne Dauid and3 
hise men hadde come to the citce, aud 
hadden founde it brent bi* fier, and that 
her! wyues, and her sones, and dou3tris 
weren led™ prisoneris, Dauid" and thes 
puple that was with hym reisiden her 
voices, and weiliden, til teeris® fatliden in 
hem. Forsothe? also tweit wyues of Dauids 
weren led’ prisoneris, Achynoem of Jez- 
rael, and Abigail, the wijf of Nabal of 
Carmele. And Dauid was ful sori; for-6 
sothe’ al the puple wold stonet hym®, for 
the soule of ech man was bittir on her 
sones and dou3tris. Forsothe Dauid was 


™dou3tren BFH.  ® caytyfe rn. 


nAndr1 Ohauer. dor PAndi. 4 Dauidy. 
Yroosupi. Wbutther  *stieden up1. 
¢ smoten I. smeten 1. smetyn Ep. 4 thei brenten 1. 

4 ledden hem forth 1. itheigsedenz. with 1. 
PAnd1. 4thetwor. "led awey 1. 


86 I. KINGS. 


zcoumfortid in the Lord his God. And 
he seith to Abiathar, the preest, the sone 
of Achimalech, Aplie to me the preestis 
coope. And Abiathar apliede to Dauid 
sthe preestis coope; and Dauid counseilde 
the Lord, seiynge, Shal I pursue, or naye, 
these thenes, and take hem? And the 
Lord seide to hym, Pursue; forsothe out 
of dout thou shalt take hem, and shake 
9out the praye. Thanne Dauid wente, he 
and sexe hundred men that weren with 
hym, and camen to the streem of Besor ; 
ioand summe wery stoden stille. Forsothe 
Dauid pursuede, he and foure hundrid 
men; for there stoden stille two hun- 
dred, that weri my3ten not goon ouere 
lithe streem of Besor. And thei founden 
an Egipcien man in the feeld, and thei 
brou3ten hym to Dauid; and thei 3euen 
hym breed for to eete, and drynke water ; 
12 but and the relif of a wei3t of dried figis, 
and two bundels of dried grapis. The 
whiche thingis whanne he hadde eten, 
the spiryt of hym is turned a3jen, and he 
is refresshid ; forsothe he hadde not eten 
breed, ne drunken water thre dais and 
isthre nijtes. And so Dauid seide to hym, 
Whos ert thou, or whens and whidir 
gost thou? The which seith, An Egip- 
cien child I am, and the sernaunt of an 
Amalechite man; forsothe my lord laft 
me, for I bigan to sikynyn® the thridde 
i4dai hens. Forsothe we wenten out of 
the south coost of Cerethi, and ajens 
Judam, and to the south of Caleph, and 
15 Sichilich we han brent vp with fier. And 
Dauid seide to hym, Maist thou lede me 
to this cumpanye? The which seith, 
Sweer to me bi God, that thou shalt not 
slee me, and not take me into the hoondis 
of my lord; and I shal lede thee to this 
companye. And Danid swore to hym. 
16 The which whanne he hadde ladde hym, 


XXX. 7—16. 


coumfortid in his Lord God. And he, 
seide to Abiathar, preest’, the sone of 
Achymelech, Bringe thou” ephoth* to me. 
And Abiathar brou3te ephothY to Dauid; 
and Dauid councelide” the Lord, and seide, g 
Schal Y pursue*, ether nay», ‘these 
theues®? and schal Y take hem? And 
the Lord seide to hym4, Pursue thou; for 
with out doute thou schalt take hem, and 
thou schalt take awey the® prey. Therforg 
Dauid 3ede‘, he and sixe hundrid men that 
weren with hym, and thei camen ‘til tos 
the stronde of Besor; and sotheli* the 
wery meni abididen*. Forsothe! Dauid pur- jo 
suede™, he and foure hundrid men; for 
twei hundrid abididen", that weren weeri, 
and my3ten not passe the stronde of Besor. 
And thei founden a man of Egipte in thei: 
feeld, and thei brou3ten hym to Dauid; 
and thei 3auen ‘breed to hym®, that he 
schulde ete, and ‘schulde drynke watir? ; 
but also thei 3auen to hym a gobet of a%i2 
bundel of drye" figis, and twei byndyngis® 
of dried grapis. And whanne het hadde 
ete tho, his spirit turnede a3en", and he 
was coumfortid; for he hadde not ete breed, 
nether hadde’ drunk watir in thre daies 
and thre ny3tis. Therfor” Dauid seide 13 
to hym, Whos maz art thou, ethir fro 
whennus and whidur goist thou? And 
he seide, Y am a child of Egipt, the 
seruaunt of a man of Amalech; forsothe* 
my lord forsook me, for Y bigan to be 
sijk the thridde dai ago. SotheliY we i, 
braken out to? the south coost of Cerethi, 
and a3ens Juda, and to* the south of 
Caleb, and we brenten Sichelech bi? fier. 
And Dauid seide to hym, Maist thou lede js; 
me to this cumpeny ? Which‘ seide, Swere 
thou to me bi God, that thou schalt not 
sle me, and schalt* not bitake me in to the 
hondis of my lord; and Y schal lede thee 
to this cumpeny. And Dauid swoor to 


° seeke 4. seeken BEF. syken H. 


¥ the preest 1. 
ephoth s. Z councelide with 1. 
hem hers. —_f 3ede forth 1. 
abiden bihynde 1. 1And1. 
4 Om. plures. 1 dried 1. 
xbutr. y Fora. Zatz. 


w thou the prestis coope or 1. 
& vnto 1, 


5 clustris 1. 
aati. > witht. 


x ephoth, that is, the cloth of the hizest prest x. 
@ pursue these theues 1. 


h there 1. 
™ pursuede forth 1. 

t the man 1. 
¢ The which 1. 


y the 
bnox1 ¢Om.1. €Dauid1. © fro 

i men of the oost of Dauid1.  abiden ceipu. 
Nabiden EI. Ohym bred 1.  P watir to drinke 1. 
wazen fohim1. Vhehadder. W Thannex. 
4 that thou schalt 1. 


XXX. 17-24. 


loo! thei seeten vpon the face of al the 
erthe, etinge and drinkynge, and as ha- 
lowynge a feest dai, for al the pray and 
spoilis that thei token fro the loond of 
Philisteis, and fro the loond of Juda. 
17And Dauid smoot hem fro even ‘unto 
euen? of the tother dai, and there scap- 
ide not of hLm eny man, but foure hun- 
drid 3onge men, that stieden vp? camelis, 
1sand flowen. Forsothe Dauid delyuerde 
alle thingis that Amalachitis token, and 
19his two wyues he dilyuerde; ne there 
failide eny man fro litil vnto miche, as 
wel of sonys as of dou3tris', and of 
spoilys ; and what eure thingis thei had- 
20den robbid, alle Dauid brou3te ajen; and 
took all the flockis and drouys, and droue 
before his face. And thei seiden, This 
2iis the praye of Dauid. Forsothe Dauid 
cam to the two hundrid men, that wery 
stoden stille, and my3ten not folowe 
Dauid; and he hadde comaundid hem to 
sitte stille biside the streem of Besor; 
the whiche wenten out to mete Dauid, 
and the puple that was with hym. For- 
sothe Dauyd comynge ny3 to the puple, 
22salutede hem pesibli. And o man an- 
swerynge, werst and wickid of the men 
that weren with Dauid, seide, For thei 
camen not with vs, we shulen not 3yue 
to hem eny thing of the praye, that we 
han delyuerde, but suffice to echon his 
wijf and sonis ; the whiche whanne thei 
23han takun, goo thei aweye. Forsothe 
Dauid seide, Not so 3e shulen doo, bri- 
theren myn, of these thingis that the 
Lord hath taken to vs, and hath kepte 
vs, and hath* 3euen the theuys, that 
breken out a3ens vs, into oure hoondis, 
21ne eny man shal here vs vpon this word. 
Forsothe euen part shal be of the goynge 
down to batail, and of the abidynge stille 
at the fardels ; and lijk maner thei shulen 


I. KINGS. 87 


hym. And whanne the child hadde ledde 1¢ 
hymé, lo! thei saten at the mete, onf the 
face of al the erthe, etynge and drynkynge, 
and as halewynge a feesteS, for al the prey 
and spuylis whiche thei hadden take of 
the lond of Filisteis, and of the lond of 
Juda. And Dauid smoot hem fro euentid? 17 
‘til to! euentid of the tothir dai, and not 
ony* of hem escapide, no! but foure hun- 
drid 3onge™ men, that stieden on” camels, 
and fledden. Forsothe Dauid delyuerede 18 
alle thingis whiche the men of Amalech 
token, and he delyuerede hise twei wyues ; 
nether ony® of hem failide fro litil? ‘til to4 19 
greet’, as wel of sones as of dou3tris, and 
of spuylis; and what euer thingis thei 
hadden rauyschid, Dauid ledde a3en alle* 
thingis ; and he took alle flockist and grete 20 
beestis, and droof" bifor his face. And thei’ 
seiden, This is the prey of Dauid. For-21 
sothe Dauid cam to twei* hundrid men, | 
that weren weeri, and abididen*, and 
my3ten not sue Dauid; and he haddey 
comaundid hem to sitte in? the stronde 
of Besor; whiche® jeden out a3ens Dauid, 
and the? puple that was with hym. For- 
sothe® Dauid neizede to the puple, and 
grette it pesibli. And o man, the werste® oz 
and vniust' of the men that weren with 
Dauid, answeride, and seide, For thei 
camen not with vs, we schulen not 3yue 
to hem ony thing of the prey, which? we 
rauyschiden*, buti his wijf and children* 
‘suffice to ech man!; and whanne thei han 
take hem, go thei awei. Forsothe™ Dauid2s 
seide, My britheren, 3e schulen not do so” 
of these thingis, whiche the Lord 3af° to 
vs, and kepte? vs, and jaf the theues, 
that braken out ajens vs, in to oure 
hondis ; nether ony mant schal here vs on‘ 24 
this word. For euene part schal be of him 
that goith doun to batel, and of hym that 
dwellith at the fardelis; and in lijk maner 


POm. 4. Qbia. *doujtren BrH. $ Om. cEFH. 


®hym thidere 1. ‘upon 1. 
1Om.1.  ™ of 3onge 1. 
t the flockis 1. 
Zatr. *the whiche 1. 
gthats. b han rauischid 1. 
as 3e speken 1. 


" upon f. 
udroof hem 1 Ymenz 
b agens the 1. 


© hath jouen 1. P he hath kept 1. 


& feeste day plures. 
° ony man I. 
w his two 1. 
© Certis 1. 

i but suffice it to eche man 1. 
4 hath 3ouen 1. 


k ony thing L. 
8 Om. G. 
y Om. 1. 


h the euentid 1. { vnto the 1. 
P the litilr. dvntor.  * the greet 1. 

x abidin ep. abididen bihynde 1. 
The grett 1. ¢werstemani.  f wickid 1. 

k his childrens. !Om.1. ™ And1. ®s0 
Om. 1. § séryue on 1. 


88 I. KINGS. 


25departe. And this is maad fro that day, 
and there aftir a statute, and a decree, 
and as a lawe in Yrael vnto this day. 
26Thanne Dauid cam into Sichelech, and 
sente 3iftis of the praye to the eldris of 
Juda, his neizbours, seiynge, Takith bless- 
yuge of the praye of the enemyes of the 
27 Lord; to hem that weren in Bethel, and 
that in Ramoth, at the south, and that in 
28Gether, and that in Aroer, and that in 
29Sephamoth, and that in Eschama, and 
that in Rethala, and that in the citees of 
Hierameli, and that in the citees of Ceny, 
30and that in Arama, and that in Lautua- 
31saam, and that in Athech, and that in 
Ebron, and to other, that weren in thes 
places, in the whiche Dauid hadde dwellid 
and his men. 


CAP. XXXL. 


1 Forsothe Philisteis foujten ajens Irael, 
and the men of Yrael flowen before the 
face of Philisteis, and thei slayn fellen in 

2the hyl of Gelboe. And Philisteis fallen 
into Saul, and intot the sonys of hym, 
and thei smyten Jonathan, and Amy- 
nadab, and Melchisue, the sonys of Saul. 

3 And al the charge of the batayl is turned 
into Saul; and there folweden hym men 
sheters, and he is woundid hydowsly of 

4the archers. And Saul seide to his 
squyer, Drawe out thi swerd, and smyit 
me, lest perauenture thes vneircumcidid 
men" comen, and sleen me, scornynge to 
me. And his squier wolde not; forsothe 
he was agaist with to mych gaistnes; 
and so Saul cau3te his swerd, and felle 

svpon it. The which thing whanne his 
squyer hadde seen, that is, that Saul was 
deed, also he felle on his swerd, and is 
sdeed with hym. Thanne Saul is deed, 
and his three sonys, and his squyer, and 


t Om. E pr.m. 


' t departe the preiex. Uadoomt. 

z the Filisteis 1. 4 thei fellen doun 1. 
smyten EFL. smetin p. f charge 1. 
m Om. ao pr.m., "2 uponi, ™ And so1. 


v Thanne 1. 

b the Filisteis 1. 
& the batel 1. 
o Andi. 


b a3ens 1. 


XXX: oe=— xen ias 


thei schulen departet. And this was maad 25 
a constitucioun and doom" fro that dai 
and afterwardt, and as a lawe in Israel til. 
in to this dai. 
Sichelech, and sente” 3iftis of the prey to 

the eldere men of Juda, hise neizboris, and clea 
seide, Take 3e blessyng of the prey of  fastliere bi — 
enemyes of the Lord; to* hem that weren 27 a pile a ae 
in Bethel, and that weren in Ramoth, at pee ae 
the south, and that weren in Jether, and “bai a 4 
that weren in Aroer, and that weren in __ cutirly. Lire 
Sephamoth, and that weren in Escama, a 

and that weren in Rethala, and that weren 29 

in the citees of Jeramel, and that weren in 

the citees of Ceny, and that werenY in 30 

Arama, and that weren in Lautuasam, and 

that weren in Athec, and that weren in3) 

Ebron, and to othere men, that weren in 

these places, in whiche Dauid dwellide and 


hise men. 


+ fro that day 
aftirward ; 
in Ebreu it is, 
- , in that day and 
Therfor’ Dauid cam in to 26 fro bifore. that 


is, fro the tyme 
of Abraham ; 


CAP. XXXI. 


Forsothe Filisteis? fou3ten azens Israel, 1 
and the men of Israel fledden bifor the 
face of Filisteis, and felden® slayn in the 
hil of Gelboe. And Filisteis> hurliden on 2 
Saul, and ou® hise sones, and smytiden® 
Jonathas, and Amynadab, and Melchisua, 
sones of Saul. And al the weiste! of batel&3 
was turned ‘in to" Saul; and men archeris 
pursueden hym', and he was woundid 
greetli of the archeris. And Saul seide to« 
his squyer, Drawe out thi swerd, and sle 
me, lest perauenture these vneircumcidid 
men come, and sle me, and scorne me. 
And his squyer nolde*, for he was aferd bi 
ful grete drede; therfor Saul took his 
swerd, and felde theronne). And whannes 
his squyer hadde seyn this, ‘that is™, that 
Saul was deed, also he felde on" his swerd 
and was deed with hym. Therfor™ Saule 
was deed, and hise thre sones, and his 
squyer, and alle his men in that dai to- 
gidere. Forsothe® the sones of Israel, that 7 


u Om. cEFH. 


y weren éo hem 1. 
© thei killiden 1. 
! therupon 1. 


x he senie to 1. 
4 into 1. 
k wolde not 1. 


W he sente 1. 
¢ feersly into 1. 
i Saul 1. 


XXXL 7—13. 


zalle his men in that dai togidir. For- 
sothe seynge the sonys of Yrael, that 
weren bijonde the valey, and bezonde 
Jordan, that the men of Yrael hadden 
flowen, and that Saul was deed, and his 
sones’, thei laften her citees, and flowen ; 
and Philisteis camen, and dwelliden there. 
8Forsothe the tother dai doon, Philisteis 
camen for to spoyl out the slayn men, 
and thei fonden Saul, and his thre sones, 
liggynge™ in the hil of Gelboe; and thei 
girden of the heed of Saul, and thei 
spoileden hym out of the aarmys. And 
thei senten into the loond of Philisteis bi 
enuyroun, that it were toold in-the temple 

loof mawmettis, and in puplis. And thei 
setten his aarmys in the temple of As- 
charoth ; forsothe the bodi of hym thei 

ithengen in the wal of Bethsan. The 
which thing whanne the dwellers of 
Jabes Galaad hadden herd, alle thingis 

i2that Philisteis hadden doo to Saul, alle 
the moost stronge men rysen, and wenten 
al ny3t, and token the careyns of Saul, 
and the careyns of his sonis fro the wal 
of Bethsan; and the men of Jabes Ga- 
laad camen, and brenten hem with fier. 

13 And thei token the boonys of hem, and 
biryeden in the wode of Jabes, and fast- 
iden seuen days. 


Here endith the first book of Kyngis, 
and now bigynneth the secounde*. 


Ysone 4HCEF. W liynge EFH. liende c. 


I. KINGS. 89 


weren bijendis? the valei, and bizendis 
Jordan, sien that the’ men of Israel hadden 
fled, and that Saul was deed, and hise 
sones, and thei leften her citees and fledden; 
and Filisteis' camen, and dwelliden there. 
Forsothe’ int ‘the tother dai maad®, Filisteis s 
camen, that thei schulden’ dispuyle the 
slayn men, and thei founden Saul, and hise 
thre sones, liggynge in the hil of Gelboe; 
and thei kittiden awei the heed of Saul,» 
and dispuyliden hym of armeris‘; and 
senten* in to the lond of Filisteis bi cum- 
pas, that it schulde be teld in the temple” 
of idols, and in the puplis. And thei put-10 
tiden hise armeris in the temple of Asto- 
roth; sotheli* thei hangiden his bodi in 
the wal of Bethsan. And whanne the 
dwellers of Jabes of* Galaad hadden herd 
this, what® euer thingis® Filisteist hadden 
do to Saul, alle® the strongeste' men ri-12 
siden’, and 3eden® in! al that ny3t, and 
token* the deed bodi of Saul, and the deed 
bodies of hise sones fro the wal of Bethsan; 
and the! men of Jabes of Galaad camen, 
and brenten tho deed bodies bi™ fier. 
And thei token the boonus of hem, and 13 
birieden® in the wode of Jabes, and fast- 
iden® bi seuene daies. 


Here endith the firste book of Kyngis, 
and here bigynneth the secounde?. 


x Here eendith the first boke of Kyngus, and bigynneth the 


secounde. B. Explicit liber primus Regum. Here endith the firste book of Kingis, and bigynneth the 


secounde. E. No final rubric in cu. 


P bizjonde1. @Om.1. the Filisteis1. S&S Andi. ‘Om.1. Uaftirthe1. ‘Ywoldent. his 
armeris 1. * thei senten1. Ytemplisc. %buti. 20Om.a. band what1. ¢ Om. a. thing. 4 the 
Filisteis 1. Cand allei1. fmooste stronger. &risiden up1. risen EP. » 3eden forth1. ‘'Om,1. 


ktheitoken1. 1Om. kK sec.m. ™ with1. 


n birieden hem 1. 


° thei fastiden 1. P Here endith the 


firste book of Kyngis, and here byginneth the secounde book. poquwb. Here endith the firste book, and 


here bygynneth the secounde book of Kyngis. F. 
a prolog on the ij. book. «. 
Kinges ; see now the seconde. K. 
the secounde. M. 


of Kyngis, and bigynneth the secounde book of Kyngis. sxc. 


VOL. IL. 


Here endith the firste book of Kyngis, and bigynneth 
Heere endith the firste book of Kyngis. 1. Here endeth the firste book of 
Here endith the firste book of Kingis, and here bigynneth a prologe on 
Heere eendith the firste of Kinges and bigynneth the j¢. x. Here eendith the firste book 


No final rubric in Exp. 


lk. KINGS. 





[Prologue on the Second book of Kings*.| 


THs secounde book of Kingis makith mencioun of the coronacioun of Dauith, first 
in Ebron bi the men of Juda, and aftirward in Jerusalem of a] the peple of Israel ; 
and of his werres; and how the Lord punischide Dauith with grete angwischis and 
disesis for the deeth of Vrie his sernaunt, and for the rauyschinge of Bersabee, the 
wijf of Vrie, and seide to him bi the profete, that werris scholden not ceese fro him in 


alle hise daies. 
hise enemyes. 


The secounde boke of Kynges*. 


CAP. I. 


1 Forsothe it is doon, after that Saul is 
deed, that Dauid is turned a3en fro the 
slau3ter of Amalech, and dwellide in Si- 

2chelech two days. Forsothe in the tliridde 
day aperide a 3ong man, of the tentis of 
Saul, with to-rent clooth, and sprengid 
the heed with powdre; and as* he came 
to Dauid, he’ felle vpon his face, and 

3lowtide. And Dauid seide to hym, Whens 
comyst thou? The which seith to Dauid, 
4¥Fro the tentis of Yrael I flei3. And Da- 
uid seide to hym, What is the word that 
is doon; shewe to me. The which scith, 
The puple flei3 fro the batail, and many 
fallynge of the puple ben deed; but and 
Saul, aud Jonathas, his sone, han died. 
sAnd Danid seide to the 3ong man, that 
toolde to hym, Wherbi wost thou, that 
6Saul is deed, and Jonathas, luis sone? And 


a From u. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


@ This Prologue is from mM. 
book. o. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
g€uponi. 4 worschipide him. i And he 1. 
© puple of Israel 1. P hath fled 1. 4 fledden rov. 


Neuertheles the Lord louede Dauith, and 3af victorie to him of alle 


Heere bigynnith the secunde book of 
Kyngis?. 


CAP: 


Forsothe® it was doon, after that Saul1 
was deed, that Dauid turnede a3en fro the 
sleyng of Amalech, and dwellide’ twei 
daies in Sichelech. Forsothe® in the thridde 2 
dai a man apperide, comynge fro ‘the 
castelsf of Saul with the? cloth to-rent, and 
his heed spreynt with dust; and as he 
cam to Dauid, he felde on&® his face, and 
worschipide’, And Danid seide to hym,3 
Fro whennus comest thou? Whichi seide to 
Dauid, Y fledde fro the castels* of Israel. 
And Dauid seide to hym, What is thes 
word which! is doon™ ; schewe thou" to me. 
And he seide, The puple® fledde? fro the 
batel, and many of the puple felden‘, and 
ben deed ; but also Saul, and Jonathas, his 
sonne, perischyden’. And Dauid seide tos 
the 3ong man, that telde to hym’, Wherof 
woost thou, that Saul is deed, and Jo- 


bwasce. ¢Om.£ prom. Vand x pr.m. 


b From m1. The secounde of Kinges. uy. Here bigynneth the secunde 
¢ Andi. 
k tentis 1. 
* han perischid 1. 


4 he dwellide 1. 
1 that 1. 


e Andi. ftentis1. fat. 
mdoon there 1. 1 thou it 1. 
s hym this 1. 


I. 7—18, 


the 3ong man seith, that toolde to hym, 
Bi hap I cam into the hil of Gelboe, and 
Saul lenyde vpon his speer; forsothe 
7chaaris and horsis nei3eden to® hym; and 
turned bihynde his rigge, and seynge 
clepide me. To whom whanne I hadde an- 
aswerde, I am ni3; he seide to me, For- 
sothe who art thou? And I seidef to 
9hym, Amalechite Iam. And he spak to 
me, Stoond vpon me, and sle me; for 
anguyshis holden me, and 3it al my soule 
iois in me. And stondynge vpon hym I 
slew3 hym; forsothe I wiste that he 
my3te not lyue after the fallynge; and I 
took the diademe that was in his heed, 
and the bee3 fro his arm, and I haue 
11 brou3te it" to thee, my lord, hidyr. For- 
sothe Dauid takynge his clothis kitte, 
and alle the men that weren with hym; 
izand thei weileden, and wepten, and fast- 
iden vnto the! euen, vpon Saul, and Jona- 
than, his sone, and vpon the puple of the 
Lord, and vpon the hows of Irael, forthi 
i3that thei weren faln with swerd. And 
Dauid seide to the 3onge man, that toolde 
to hym, Whens ert thou? The which 
answerde, I am the sone of an Amalechit 
i4man comlynge. And Dauid seith to hym, 
Whi draddist thou not to putte thin hoond 
isfor to slee the crist of the Lord? And 
Dauid clepynge oon of his children* seith, 
Goynge ny3 fal into hym. The which 
ig6smoot hym, and he is deed. And Dauid 
seith to hym, Thi blood vpon thin heed; 
forsothe thi month hath spoken ajens 
thee, seiynge, I slew3 the crist of the 
17 Lord. Forsothe Dauyd weilide this maner 
a weilynge vpon Saul, and vpon Jonathas, 
ishis sone. And he comaundide, that thei 
techen the sones of Juda weilynge, as it 
is writen in the Book of Ri3twise Men; 
and seith, Bihold, Irae], for, thes that ben 
deed, vpon thin heize thingis woundide ; 


€ vnto E pr.m. 


f sey BF. seie cE. 
childer c passim. 


fupony. ‘andr. Vv horse ment. 
aon1. > haue brou3t hemi. ¢ Certis 1. 
fallezLM. _& putte c see. m.m. putte forth, 
omen. P the weilyng1. Gwasa. *Om.1, 


& Om. acer. 


Ww yturned 1. 
f and eke 1. 
1 And he 1. 

8 ben woundid 1. 


II. KINGS. 91 


nathas, his sonne? And the jong mane 
seide, that telde to hym, Bi hap Y cam in 
to the hil of Gelboe, and Saul lenyde ont 
his spere; forsothe" charis and kny3tis’ 
neiziden to hym ; and he turnede’ bihynde7 
his bak, ‘and si3 me, and* clepide. To whom 
whanne Y hadde answeride, Y am present ; 
he seide to me, Who art thou? And Ys 
seide to hym, Y am a man of Amalech. 
And he spak to me, Stonde thou on me,» 
and sle me; for angwischis holden me, and 
jit al my lijf is in me. And Y stood ony 10 
hym, and Y killide* hym; for Y wiste that 
he my3te not lyue aftir the fallyng ; and Y 
took the diademe, that. was in* his heed, 
and the bye fro his arm, and Y bron3te 
hidur to thee, my lord. Forsothe® Dauid 11 
took and to-rente hise clothis, and‘ the men 
that weren with hym; and thei weiliden, 12 
and wepten, and fastiden ‘til to? euentid®, on 
Saul, and Jonathas, his sone, and on the 
puple of the Lord, and on the hows of 
Israel, for thei hadden feld' bi swerd. 
And Dauid seide to the 3ong man, that 13 
telde to him, Of whennus art thon? And 
he answeride, Y am the sone of a man 
comelyng, of a man of Amalech. And14 
Dauid seide to him, Whi dreddist thou not 
to sende* thine hond, that thou schuldist 
sle the crist of the Lord? And Dauidis 
clepide oon of hise children, and seide, Go 
thou, and falle on hym. Which! smoot that 
jong man, and he was deed. And Danidié 
seide to hy, Thi blood be on thin heed ; 
for thi mouth spak ajens thee, and seide, 
Y killide the crist™ of the Lord. For-17 
sooth Dauid biweilide sych a weilyng on 
Saul, and on Jonathas, his sone; andis 
comaundide*, that thei® schulden teche the 


sones of Juda weilyng}?, as it ist writun — + weiling; in 


é . El it is, 
in the Book of Just Men. And Danid jharthe 
' Q r _ schulden teche 
seyde, Israel, biholde thou, for these men™ {70.6n te 
Juda the 


that ben deed, woundid* on thin hize israel 


is, the craft of 
scheting ; thus 
itis in Ebren, 
and in bokis 
amendid. Zire 
here. c. 


hOm. sceru. iOm.£. childre ser. passim. 


xand seynge mer. Y upon Lae slowe r. 
Syntor 4 the euentidrx. / falle doun 1. 
™ anoyntid 1. 4 he comaundide 1. 


N2 


92 II. KINGS. 


19the noble men of Yrael vpon thin hillis 
ben slayn. What maner wise fellen the 
20 strengthful ? woleth! 3e not telle in Geth, 
ne telle 3e in the gedryngis togidre of the 
many, weyes of Aschalon; lest perauen- 
ture the dou3tres of Philisteis gladen, ne 
ioyen the dou3tris of the vncircumcidid. 
21 Hillis of Gelboe, ne dewe ne reyn come 
vpon 3ow, ne be thei feeldis of first 
fruytis; for there is throwen a wey 
the sheelde of stronge men, the sheelde 
of Saul, as thou3 he hadde not ben 
22 anoyntid with oyle. Fro™ the blood of 
the slayn, fro the talw3 of stronge men, 
the arowe of Jonathas neuer turnede a3eu 
baeward, and the swerd of Saul is not 
23turned a3en in ydel. Saul and Jonatlas 
loueli, and feyr in her lyif, forsothe in 
. deeth thei ben not deuydide ; swifter than 
24 eglis, stronger than liouns. Dou3tris of 
Yrael, vpon Saul wepith, the which cloth- 
ide 30u with reed in delicis, the which 
3af golden ournementis to 3oure wor- 
2sshipynge. What maner fellen strong 
men in batayl? Jonathas in thin hei3 
2éthingis is slayn. I sorwe vpon thee, 
brother myn Jonatha, ful myche feir, 
and loueli ouere the loue of wymmen ; as 
a moder louith hir® oneli sone, so Y 
27louede thee. What maner wise fellen 
stronge men, and pershiden aarmes to 
fizten with in batayl ? 


CAP. TE 


1 Therfor after thes thingis Dauid coun- 
seilde the Lord, seiynge, Whether I shal 
goon vp into oon of the cytees of Juda ? 
And the Lord seith to hym, Go vp. And 
Dauid seide to hym, Whedir shal I go 
vp? And he answerde to hym, Into 

2Ebron. Thanne Dauid 3ede vp,and his two 
wyues, Achynoem Jezraelite, and Abigail, 

3the wijf of Naabal of Carmele. But and 


I. 19-——II. 3. 
placis ; the noble men of Israel ben slayn 19 
on‘ thin hillis. Hou felden" stronge ment ? 20 * how felden 
f i stronge men; 
nyle 3e telley in Geth, nether telle 3e in as if he seide, 
. . it semeth not 
the weilottis of Ascolon ; lest perauenture — imanmus victo- 
eG 18408 rie, but Goddis 
the dou3tris of Filisteis be glad, lest the  yehisunce, for 
dou3tris of vncireumcidid men “be glad*. the synnes of. 
s s 
Hillis of Gelboe, neither dew nethir reyn21 flowin ane 
. therfor it is 
come onY you, nether the? feeldis of firste to eschewe 
‘ ly fi 
fruytis be*; for the scheeld of stronge men fiche ymes. 
was cast awey there, the scheeld of Saul, 727 3 fee 
as ‘if he were not anoyntid® with oilef. ba 
my3te be tha 
Of the blood of slayn men, of¢ the fatnesse 22 it were not 
fa 1 teld, Y wolde 
of strong men, the arewe of Jonathas 3ede that bial the 
desir of soule. 
neuer abak, and the swerd of Saul turnede Lire here. c. 
not a3en void. Saul and Jonathas amy-23 4 wih oile, 
eee es that is, of con- 
able, and fair in her lijf, weren not de- era of 
i : : é the king bi 
partid also in deeth*; thei weren swiftere  Samud. Lire 
i : . 0 heres €. 
than eglis, strongere than liouns. Doustris 24°" © 
of Israel, wepe 3e on Saul, that clothidel] 4 closhide sou, 
ts ‘ 6 68 ete.; that i 
30u with fyn reed colourid® inf delicis, that —Vith colourid 
" ° “i Py and preciouse 
jaf eolum ournementis to 30ure atyre.  conis, takun 
Hou ‘felden doun stronge men® in batel? 2s o the prey of 
i ; enemyes. Lire 
Jonathas was slayn in the" hize places. Y 26 here.'c. 
make sorewe on! thee, my brother Jonathas, 
ful fair, ‘and amyable more than the* loue 
of wymmen; asa niodir loueth oon! aloone™ 
sone, so Y louyde thee. Hou _ therfor 27 
‘felden doun stronge men”, and armeris of 
batel perischide® ? 


CAP. IE. 


Therfor aftir these thingis Dauid coun-t 
seilide? the Lord, and seide, Whether Y 


Achal stiel in to oon of the citees of Juda? 


And the Lord seide to hym, Stie thou’. 
And Dauid seide to the Lord, Whidur 
schal Y stie’? And the Lord answeride 
to hym, In to Ebron. Therfor Dauid2 
stiede, and hise twei wyues, Achynoem of 
Jezrael, and Abigail, the wijf of Nabal of 


the men that weren with hym, Dauid Carmele. But also Dauid ledde the men3 
Iwile ce. ™ Fora, ® Om. £ pr.m. 
tupon 1. than faller. Vtelle this1. WOm.c. *Xioyenr. Yupont. 2be thei ther. 2 Om. 1. 
b if he hadde not ben anoynted 1. It were not anoynted x. Candofr1. 4herdeeth ei. ¢ Om. Bc. 
colourid clothing 1. fand in a pr.m.cErLMprsvu. & han stronge men falle dount. bOm.1. i upon 1. 
kouer ther. Thir1, ™only1. ® han stronge men falle doun1. © han perischid1. =P counseilide 
with 1. (stieup1. "thon upi. §stie upt. 


II, 4—I4. 


ladde echon with her hows; and thei 
dwelliden in the bur3 touns of Ebron. 
4 And the men of Juda camen, and anoynt- 
iden there Dauid, for he shulde regne 
vpon the hows of Juda. And it is toold 
to Dauid, that the men of Jabes Galaad 
shadden biryede Saul. Thanne Dauid 
sente messageris to the men of Jabes 
Galaad, and he seide to hem, Blessid be® 3e 
of the Lord, the whiche diden this mercy 
with 3oure lord Saul, and biryeden hym. 
6 Forsotlie and nowe the Lord shal 3eelde 
to 30u merci and treuth, but and Y shal 
jeelde grace, forthi that 3e diden this 
7word. Be 30ure hoondis coumfortid, and 
be 3e sones of strength; forsothe thou3 
3oure lord Saul be deed, neuerthelater the 
hows of Juda hath anoyntid me into a 
skyng to hem. Abner forsothe, the sone 
of Ner, prince of the oost of Saul, took 
Hisbosech, the sone of Saul, and ladde 
ahym about bi the tentis, and sette hym 
kyng vpon Galaad, and vpon Jethsuri, 
and vpon Jezrael, and vpon Effraym, and 
1ovpon Beniamyn, and vpon al Yrael. Of 
fourti 3eer was Hisboseth, the sone of 
Saul, whanne he bigan to regne vpon 
Irael; and two 3eer he regnede. For- 
sothe oneli the hows of Juda folwide 
i1Dauid. And the noumbre of dais, the 
which Dauid dwellide comaundynge in 
Ebron vpon the hows of Juda, was of 
12Seuen 3eris and of sexe? monethis. And 
Abner, the sone of Ner, wente out, and the 
children of Hisboseth, the? sone of Saul, 
isfro the tentis into Gabaon. Forsothe 
Joab, the sone of Saruye, and the chil- 
dren of Dauid wenten out, and a3en 
camen to hem biside the fishpoond in 
Gabaon. And whanne thei weren comen 
‘togidir in oon forn a3ens" other, these 
seeten on the too’ parti of the fish poond, 
14and thei on the tother. And Abner seide 
to Joab, Rise children, and pleye thei 


°QOm. ceri. P seuene £ pr.m. 


II. KINGS. 


qOm. cE see. m. 


93 


that weren with hym, ech man with his 
hows ; and thei dwelliden in the townes of 
Ebron. And the men of Juda camen, and 4 
anoyntident there Dauid, that he schulde 
regne on‘ the hows of Juda. And it was 
teld to Dauid, that men of Jabes of Ga- 
laad hadden biried Saul. Therfor Dauids 
sente messangeris to the men of Jabes of 
Galaad, and seide to hem, Blessid be 3e of 
the Lord, that diden this mercy with 3ourtt 
lord Saul, and birieden hym. And nowe 
sotheli the Lord schal jelde to 30n merci 
and treuthe, but also Y schal 3elde thank- 
yng, for 3e diden this word. 3oure hondis7 
be coumfortid, and be 3e sones of strengthe; 
for thou3 3oure lord Saul is’ deed, netheles 
the hows of Juda anoyntide” me kyng to 
‘hym silf*. ForsotheY Abner, the sone of 
Ner, prince of the oost of Saul, took 
Isbosech, the sone of Saul, and ledde? hym 
aboute bi the* castels, and made him¢s 
kyng on Galaad, and on Gethsury, and on 
Jezrael, and on Effraym, and on Ben- 
iamyn, and on al Israel. Isbosech, the410 
sone of Saul, was of fourti seer, whanne 
he began to regne on® Israel; and he 
regnede twei 3eer. Sothelif the hous aloone 
of Juda suede Danid. And the noumbre i 
of daies, bi whiche Dauid dwellide regnynge 
in Ebron on the hows of Juda, was of 
seuene 3eer and sixe monethis. And Ab-12 
ner, the sone of Ner, jede out, and the 
children of Isbosech, sone® of Saul, fro the 
castels in? Gabaon. Forsothe' Joab, thei; 
sone of Saruye, and the children of Dauid 
3eden out, and camen* to hem bisidis the 
cisterne in! Gabaon. And whanne thei 
hadden come togidere in to o place euene 
a3ens™, these saten on o part of the cis- 
terne, and thei on the" tother. And Abner 14 
seide to Joab, “The children rise®, and 
plei? befor ust. And Joab answeride, Rise 
thei4. Therfor™ thei risiden’, and passident is 
twelue in noumbre of Beniamyn, of the 


tT in oon fro the regiown E pr.m. SoC. ton E. 


tin A.upon1. ttzoua. Uthe sonesz. Yber. Whath anoyntid 1. *hymr, YCertis1. he ledde 1. 


8 Om. 1. 
t And 1. 
thei 1. 


he made 1. ¢ Om. plures. 
k thei camenr. Toft. 


4theiupi. * Thanne sx. * resen up I. 


4 Om. Kx. 
m a3ens either other 1. 
t passiden forth 1. 


eupont. f Andi. §thesoner. » of a. Om. p. 
o that 1. © Rise these children up 1. P plei 


+ and anoynt- 
iden there Da- 
uyth; Dauyth 
was anoyutid 
thries ; first in 
the hows, in 
the firste book 
of Kingis xvi. 
c°.s the ii. tyme 
here of the 
hows of Juda; 
the thridde 
tyme on al 
Israel, in v. c°. 5 
in signe that 

a man owith 
to haue anoynt- 
ing of the Hooly 
Goost, in herte 
bi veri feith, 

in mouth bi 
knouleching 
therof, and in 
the hond bi 
good worching. 
Lire here. c. 


3 pleye bifer 
vs; that is, 
schewe her 
Strengthe and 
nobley; and 
here pleie is set 
for sle ethir 
fizste. Lire 
here. Cc. 


94 TISRUNGS: 


before vs. And Joab answerde, Risen. 
1s Thanne rysen and wenten twelue bi 
noumbre of Beniamyn, of the parti of 
Hysboseth, the sone of Saul; and twelue 
is of the children of Dauid. And taken of 
echon the heed of his peere, he pi3te doun 
a swerd in the side of the contrarie; and 
thei fellen doun to gidre. And the name 
of that place is clepid The Feelde of 
17stronge men in Gabaon. And there is 
sprongen an hard’ batail ynow3 in that 
day ; and Abner is dryuen, and the men 
isof Yrael, of the children of Dauid. For- 
sothe there weren there the thre sones of 
Sarnye, Joab, and Abisay, and Asahel ; 
ceertis Asahel was a moost swift renner, 
as oon of the caprettis that dwellen in 
19 wodis. Forsothe Asahel pursuede Abner, 
and bowide not aside, ne fro the 113t ne 
fro the left, leeuynge to pursue Abner. 
20 And so Abner bihelde bihynde his bak, 
and seith, Whether art thou not Asahel ? 
21 The which answerde, Y am. And Abner 
seide to hym, Go to the ri3t, or to the 
left; and tak oon of the 3onge men, and 
tak to thee thet spoilis of hym. Forsothe 
Asahel wolde not leene, but he con- 
22streynede hym. And eft Abner spak to 
Asahel, Go awey, and wole thou not 
sue me, lest I be constreyned to stike 
thee into the erthe, and I shal not mowe 
23rere my face to Joab, thi brother. The 
whieh dispiside to here, and wolde not 
bowe aside. Thanne Abner, the speer 
turned a wey, smoot hym in the sheer, 
and stikide hym thur3, and he is deed in 
the same place; and alle that wenten bi 
the place, in the which Asahel hadde 
a4fallen, and was deed, biden stille. For- 
sothe Joab and Abisay pursuynge Abner 
fleynge, the sunne wente doun; and thei 
camen to the hil of the water kundit, 


It. 15—24. 


part of Isbosech, sone" of Saul; and twelue 
of the children’ of Dauid. And ech man, 16 
whanne ‘the heed of his felowe was takun”, 
fastnede* the’ swerde in to the side of ‘the 
contrarye’; and thei felden doun togidere. 
And the name of that place was clepid 
The Feeld of stronge men} in Gabaon. And 17 ¢ the feeld of 
‘patel hard ynow? roos in that dai; and pb Lh 
Abner and the sones of Israel ‘weren ‘eft of 
dryuune of the children? of Dauid. For-18;sidere. Hive 
sothe thre sones of Saruye weren there, 

Joab, and Abisai, and Asahel; forsothe® 
Asahel was a ‘rennere moost swift’, as oon 
of the capretis that dwellen in woodis. 
Forsothes Asahel pursuede Abner, and 19 
bowide® not’, nether to the ri3t side nether* 
to the left side, eeessynge to pursue Abner. 
Therfor Abner bihelde bihynde his bac, 20 
and seide, Whether thou art Asahel ? 
Whieh! answeride, Y am. And Abner2ai 
seide to hym, Go™ to the ri3tside, ether to 
the lefte side; and take oon of the 3onge 
men, and take to thee hise spuylis. Sotheli® 
Asahel nolde® ceesse, that ne he? pursuede 
hym’. And eft Abner spak to Asahel, Go22 
thou awei; nyle thou pursue me, lest Y be 
compellid to peerse™ thee in to erthe’, and 
Y schal not mowe reiset my face to Joab, 
thi brother. And Asahel dispiside to here, 23 
and nolde"® bowe awey. Therfor’ Abner 
smoot him ‘with the spere turned awei"{ 
in the schar, and roof* thorou3, and he 
was deed in the same place; and alle men 


¥ durned awey ; 
that is, turned 
ajenus him. in 
the schar; in 


Ebreu it is, 
that passiden bi the place, in whieh place” smoot him bi- 

hinde the 
Asahel felde doun, and was deed, stoden* mawe in the 


stille. Forsothe? while Joab and Abisai 24 endur which 
pursueden Abner fleynge, the sunne 3ede pen ye 
doun; and thei camen til¢ to the litil hil of 477 © 
the’ water cundiyt, which® is euene ajens 

the valey, and the weie of deseert in Ga- 

baon. And the sones of Beniamyn weren 25 


gaderid‘ to Abner, and thei weren gaderid 


Sherd 4. t Om. zB. 
u the sone 1. ¥ seuauntis 1. w he hadde take his felowe bi the heede 1. x ficchide 1. -¥ his 1. 
z his aduersarie 1, @ ful harde batel 1. & Abner was dryuen awei1. © Om.1. 4seuauntis1. ¢€ and 1. 
f ful swifte rennere 1. & Sotheli plures. And1. 4he bowide1, 1Om.1. kK ne xn. 1! The which 1. 
mGothour. 2 Bnt1. © woldenotr. POm.a. qAbnerr. Tstike1z. ‘Stheerthe x. +t reise 
thanne 1. "he wolde not 1. Y therfor the spere of Azahel yturned awey 1. WOm.1. *stikide him 1. 
roof him x sec.m. Ythat1i 2Om.1. @abidenr. >And; ¢ Om. EILX.inm. Gar €thati. 


‘ gaderid togidre r. 


II. 25-——IIT. 3. 


that is fro a3ens of the valey, and of the 
25 weye of deseert in Gabaon. And the 
sones of Beniamyn ben gederid to Abner, 
and clustrid togidir in o eumpanye thei 
26stoden in the cop of a litil hil. And 
Abner criede to Joab, and seith, Whether 
vnto slau3ter thi swerd shal be cruel? 
Whether knowist thou not, that perilous 
be despeir ? How long thom seist not to 
the puple, that he leene to pursue his 
27britheren? And Joab seith, The Lord 
lyueth, for if thou haddist spoken eerli, 
the puple pursuynge his britheren hadde 
2sgoon awey. ‘Thanne Joab fulsownede 
with the trompe, and al the oost stood ; 
and nomore thei pursueden Yrael, ne 
29wenten in strijf. Forsothe Abner and 
his men wenten awey bi the wijlde 
feeldis of Moab al that ni3t, and thei 
wenten ouer Jordan; and, passid alle 
30 Bethoron, thei canien to the tentis. But 
Joab turned a3en, Abner laft, gederide al 
the puple; and there failiden of the chil- 
dren of Dauid ten and nyn men, out 
3itaken Asahel. Forsothe the seruauntis 
of Dauid smyten of Beniamyn, and of the 
men that weren with Abner, thre hundred 
32and sexti, and the whiche ben deed. And 
thei token Asahel, and biryeden hym in 
the biriels of his fader in Bethleem. And 
Joab, and the men that weren with hym, 
wenten al ni3t, and in that bigynnynge 
of day thei camen into Ebron. 


CAP. III. 


i “There is maad thanne a longe stryu- 
ynge togidre bitwixe" the hows of Dauid 
and the hows of Saul; Dauid profitynge 
and’ euermore strenger than hym self, 
forsothe the hows of Saul decresynge 

geche dai. And there ben born sones of 
Dauid in Ebron; and his first geten was 

3Amon, of Achinoem Jezraelite; and after 
hym jeliab, of Abigail, the” wijf of 
Naabal Carmeel; forsothe the thridde*, 


II. KINGS. 95 


togidere in to o cumpeny, and stoden in 
the hijznesse! of oon* heep of erthe. And 2¢ 
Abner criede to Joab, and seide, Whether 
thi swerd schal be feers ‘til to! sleyng? 


Whether thon knowist not, that dispeirt + “4t¢sveir, 


f ‘ ele. of fizt 

is perelouse ? Hou longe seist thou not to whine ie 
2 a or D1 S1¢. 

the puple, that it ceesse to pursue hise  maner ech 


britheren? And Joab seyde, The Lord 27}, ee 
lyneth, for if thou haddist spoke™ cerli, "7 “ 
the puple pursuynge his brother hadde 
go awey. And Joab sownede with a ela-28 
rioun, and al the oost stood®; and thei 
pursueden no ferthere Israel, nether bi- 
gunnen batel. Forsothe® Abner and hise29 
men 3eden? by the feeldi places of Moab 
in al that ny3t, and passiden’ Jordan ; 
and whanne al Bethoron was compassid, 
thei camen to the ecastels. Sotheli" whanne 30 
Abner was left, Joab turnede a3en, and 
gaderide togidere al the’ puple; and ten 
men and nyne, outakun‘ Asahel, failiden 
of the children" of Dauid. Forsothe the3i 
seruauntis of Danid smytiden’ of Benia- 
myn, and of the men that weren with 
Abner, thre hundrid men and sixti, whiche” 
also weren deed. And thei token Asahel, 32 
and birieden hym in the sepulcre of his 
fadir in Bethleem. And Joab, and the 
men that weren with hym, 3eden in al 
that ny3t, and in thilke morewtid thei 
eamen in,to Ebron. 


e 


CAP. ITI. 


Therfor loug* strijf was maad bitwixe1 
the hows of Dauid and ‘bitwixeY the hows 
of Saul; and Dauid profitide and ecuere 
was strongere than hym silf{, forsothe’ the — : san him 
hows of Saul decreesside ech dai. And2 ee 


bs 5 s G e « tyme passid 

sones weren borne to Dauid in Ebron; 27),) power 
and his firste gendrid* sone was Amon, of  encreesside 
euere. Lire 


Achynoem of Jezrael; and aftir hym was3 tere. c. 
Celeab, of Abigail, wijf’ of Nabal of Car- 
mele; sotheli® the thrydde was Absolon, 


u bytwene Bru. betwen £. betwec. YOm. ar. WY Om. ce sec.m. * thridde day 4. 
b thei stodenr. ihiztter. Kan. !ynto1. ™ spoke thus 1. ™ stood stille1, © Andy.  P 3eden 
thenns 1. 4 thei passiden1. * Andi. Shis1. twithoute1. seruauntis1. Ysmeten FIL. W the 
which rt: *Xalong1. yYOm.en. %but1. @bigoten:. the wyf1t. © andi. forsothe x. 


96 II. KINGS. 


Absolon, the sone of Maacha, the’ dou3ter 
sof Tholomay, the? kyng Jethsure*; for- 
sothe the feerthe, Adonyas, the sone of 
Agith; and the fifthe, Saphacias, the sone 
5of Abital; forsothe the sexte, Jethraam 
of Egla, the wijf of Dauid. ‘Thes ben 
6 born to Dauid in Ebron. Thanne whanne 
there was a** batail bytwixe the hows of 
Saul and the hows of Dauid, Abner, the 
sone of Ner, gouernde the hows of Saul. 
7 Forsothe there was to Saul a secoundarie 
wijf, Respha bi name, the do3ter of 
Achay ; and Abner wente into hir. And 
s Hisboseth seide to Abner, Whi wentist® 
thou in to the secoundarie wijf of my 
fader? The which, ful miche wrooth for 
the wordis of Hisboseth, seith, Whether 
the heed of a dog Y am a3ens Juda to 
day, the which haue doon merci vpon the 
hows of Saul, thi fadre, and vpon bri- 
theren, aud the next kyn of hym, and I 
haue not takyn thee into the hondis of 
Dauid, and thou hast a3en son3t in me 
that thou vndurnyme for a womman to 
gday? Thes thingis doo God to Abner, and 
thes thingis adde to hym, but what maner 
wise the Lord hath swore to Dauid, so 
1oshal J doo with hym, that the kyngdom 
be ouerborn fro the hows of Saul, and the 
trone of Dauid be rerid vpon Irael and 
ivpon Juda, fro Dan vnto Bersabe. And 
he my3te not answere to hym eny thing, 
12for he dradde hym. Thanne Abner sente 
messageris to Dauid for hym self, seiynge, 
Whos is the loond? and for thei shulden 
speke, Mak with me frenships, and myn 
hoond shal be with thee, and I shal 
13 brynge a3en to thee al¢ Irael. The which 
seith, Altherbest I shal doo with thee 
frenships, but o thing I aske of thee, 
seiynge, Thou shalt not se my face, before 
that thou brynge Mychol, the dou3ter of 
Saul, and so thou shalt come, and se me. 
34 Thanne Danuid sente messagers to His- 


y Om, cE sec.m. 2 Om. CE sec. m. 


_ of Dauid be reisid on™ Israel and on Juda, 


4 of Jessure c. 


Ill. g—14. 


the sone of Maacha, dou3tir’ of Tholomay, 

kyng of Gessur; forsothe® the fourthe was 4 

Adonyas, the sone of Agith; and the 

fyuethe was Saphacias, the sone of Abi- 

tail; and! the sixte was Gethraam of Eglat,5 + of “via, that 
f ; was the dou3ter 

the wijf of Dauid. These weren borne to 


of Saul, and 
eae sche was clepid 
Dauid in Ebron. Therfor whanne batelé speciali the : 


: wiyf of Da- 
was bytwixe the hows of Saul and the uyth, forwille 
hows of Dauid, Abner, the sone of Ner, as first _ 

weddid. Lire 


gouernyde the hows of Saul. Sotheli§ ab7 here. c. 
concubyn, that is, ai secoundarie wif, 

Respha bi name, the dou3tir of Achia, ‘was 

to Saulk; and Abner entride to hir. Ands 
Isbosech seide to Abner, Whi ‘entridist 

thou! to the concubyn of my fadir? 

Which™ was wrooth greetli for the wordis 

of Isbosech, and seide®, Whether Y am® 

the heed of a dogge az3ens Juda to dai, 

and Y have do merci on the hous of Saul, 

thi fadir, and on hise britheren, and nei3- 

boris, and Y bitook not thee in to the 

hondis of David, and thon hast sou3t in 

me that, that thou schuldist repreue meP 

for a womman to dai? God do these thingis 9 

to Abner, and adde these thingis to hymf, 

no? but as‘ the Lord swoor to Dauid’,‘so him; that is, 
Y do with hymt, that the rewme be trans- 10 yan’ ues 


‘ t he, 
latid fro the hous of Saul, and the trone vobus Y fille 


the word of the 
, Lord, that thi 
fro Dan ‘til to’ Bersabee. And Isbosech 1) rewme be 


my3te not answere ony thing to Abner, Dead ae 
for he dredde Abner. Therfor Abner sente 12" © 
messangeris to Dauid, and thei seiden ‘for 

hym”, Whos is the lond? and that the 

messangeris schulden speke*%, Make thou 

frenschipis with me, and myn hond schal 

be with thee, and Y schal brynge al Israel 

to thee. And Dauid seide, BestY Y schal 13 4 therfor Da- 
make frenschipis* with thee, but Y axe of #/“,seniesete.s 


{£ and adde 
these thingis to 


‘ for Abner 
thee o thing, and seie?, Thou schalt not bead cae 
> anyth, that 
se my face, bifore that thou brynge® Mycol, he myste not 
bringe Mychol, 


the dou3ter of Saul, and so thou schalt no hut of the 
come, and schalt se me. Therfor Dauid ee 


; ther, and ther- 
sente|| messangeris to Isbosech, the sone jf; Dauyth 


axide hir of 
Isbosech. Lire 


here. Cc. 


aaQm. BE. > wentisx. ¢ to al £ pr.m. 


4the douzter1. ¢andi. fOm.enp. g Andi. btoSaulwasar. iOm.cr. * Om. 1. 
! hast thou entrid:. ™ And Abneri. “heseider, °amnotc. be EL. P Om. plures. YOm.1. 
rif I do so wth Dauid, asi. Shimi. tOm.i. 2 upon I. Vtil Ao sec.m. to EIL. Wto hym a pr.m. 
for Abner 1. *speke thus 1. YOm.1. 2 ful gode frenschipis 1. @Iseiex. © brynge to me 1. 


TI. 15-——25. 


boseth, the sone of Saul, seiynge, 3eeld 
my wijf Mychol, that I weddide to me for 
15an hundrid tersis® of Philisteis. Thanne 
Hisbotseth seute, and took hir ‘fro birt 
i6man, Faltiel, the sone of Lais; and hir 
man folwide hir wepynge vnto Bahurym. 
And Abner seide to hym, Go and turn 
W7azjen; the: which turnede ajen. For- 
sothe Abner brou3te in a word to the 
eldris of Irael, seiynge, Both 3isterday® 
and the thridde dai hens 3e sou3ten 
18 Danyd, that he regne vpon 30u. Nowe 
thanne doth ; for the Lord spak to Dauid, 
seiynge, In the hoond of my seruaunt 
Dauid I shal saue my puple Yrael fro 
the hoond of Philisteis, and of alle his 
igenemyes. Forsothe Abner spak also to 
Beniamyn, and wente, for to speke to 
Dauid, in Ebron, alle thingis that plesiden 
20to Irael and to al Beniamyn. And he 
cam to Dauid, in Ebron, with twenti men. 
And Dauid made to Abner, and tof his 
2imen that camen with hym, a feest. And 
Abner seide to Dauid, Y shal ryse, that I 
gedre to thee, my lord kyng, al Yrael, 
and I goo in with the boond of pees, and 
thou comaunde to al, as thi soule de- 
sirith. Thanne whanne Dauid hadde 
ladde out Abner, and he was goon in 
22 pees, anone the children of Dauid and of 
Joab camen, the theuis slayn, with ful 
miche greet pray; forsothe Abner was 
not with Dauid, in Ebron, for nowe he 
hadde laft hym, and he was goon forth 
23in pees. And Joab, and the oost that 
was with hym, aftirward camen; and so 
it is toold to Joab of tellers, Abner, the 
sone of Ner, cam to the kyng, and he 
lafte hym, and he wente awey in pees. 
24And Joab wente yn to the kyng, and 
seith, What hast thou doon? Loo! Ab- 
ner cam to thee; whi hast thou laft hym, 
25and he 3ede, and wente awey? Knowist 
thou not Abner, the sone of Ner, for to 


II. KINGS. 


97 


of Saul, and seide, 3elde thou my wijf 
Mycol’, whom Y spouside to me for an 
hundryd prepucies of Filisteis. Therfor 1s 
Isboseeh sente, and took hir fro hir hose- 
bondef, Faltiel, son’ of Lais ; and hir hose- 16 
bonde suede hir and wepte®{ til’e Bahu- 
rym. And Abner seide to hym, Go thou, 
and turne ajen; and hef turnede ajen. 
Also Abner brou3te in a word to the17 
eldere men of Israel, and seide, Bothe 
3istirdai and the thridde dai ago 3e 
sou3ten Dauid, that he schulde regne on® 
jou. Now therfor do 3e; 
spak to Dauid, and seide, In the hond of 
my seruaunt Dauid Y sehalsaue my puple 
Israel fro the hond of Filisteis, and of alle 
his enemyes. Forsothe* Abner spak also! 19 
to Beniamyn, and he 3ede, that he schulde 
speke to* Dauid, in Ebron, alle thingis that 
plesiden Israel and al Beniamin. And he2o 
cam to Dauid in Ebron with twenti men. 
And Dauid made a feeste to Abner, and 
to the! men that camen with hym. And21 
Abner seide to Dauid, Y schal rise™, that 
Y gadere al Israel to thee, my lord the 
kyng, and that Y make boond of pees 
with thee, and that thou regne on alle, as 
thi soule desirith. Therfor whanne Dauid 
hadde ledde forth Abner, and he® hadde 
go in pees, anoon the children of Dauid22 
and Joab camen with a ful grete prey, 
whanne theues® weren slayn; sotheli? Ab- 
ner was not! with Dauid, in Ebron, for 
Dauid hadde left hym, and he 3ede forth 
in pees. And Joab, and the oostis that 23 
weren with hyn, camen aftirward ; ther- 
for it was teld to Joab of telleris, Abner, 
the sone of Ner, cam to the kyng, and the 
kyng lefte hym, and he 3ede" in pees. And 24 
Joab entride to the kyng, and seide, What 
hast thou do? Lo! Abner cam to thee; 
whi leftist’ thon hym, and‘ he 3ede, and 
departide' ? Knowist thou’ not Abner, 25 
the sone of Ner, for herto he eam to thee, 


© prepucies £ sup. ras. 4Om. 4. © 3istaicz. f Om. Bcern. 
©Mycoltomer. 4dthesonr. ¢ wentec. ¢€tiltouKuapx. fLaisr. § upon t. h And also 1. 
iOm.1 Kwith rn. 1Om.ck. ™riseupr. 4. Abnerr. othe theuesi. P andi. 4 not thanne 1. 
r3ede forth. §leetist1. tthat 1. ™ departide fro thee 1. ¥ Om. 4. 


VOL. II. oO 


+ therfor Isbo- 
sech sente, and 
took hir fro hir 
hosebonde ; he 
was not hir 
hosebonde in 
truthe, but in 
gessing of the 
peple, for in 
truthe, sche 
was the wiyf of 
Dauyth, and it 
was neuere 
leueful to a 


for the Lord 18 Yeoman, to 


haue tweyne 
hosebondis to 
idere. c. 
< wepte; our 
doctouris seyen 
comynly that 
he wepte for 
ioye, for sche 
was brou3t a3en 
to hir hose- 
bonde, and he 
touchide not 
hir fleisly, but 
kepte hir as a 
sister 5 summe 
Ebrew doc- 
tours seyen that 
he wepte for 
sorewe, for 
excercise of 
greet perfec- 
cioun 3ede 
awey fro him, 
for he arettide 
excercise of 
greet perfec- 
cioun to kepe 
siche a ladi so 
fair and noble, 
as a sistir, with 
out fieisly con- 
pling. Lire 
here. c. 


98 


that he cam to thee, that he desseyue 
thee, and knowe thin outgoynge and thin 
incomynge, and he shal knowe alle thingis 
asthat thou dost? And so Joab, goon out 
fro Dauid, sente messageris after Abner ; 
and brou3te hym ajen fro the cistern of 
27 Cyra, vnknowynge Dauid. And whanne 
Abner was turned ajen into Ebron, Joab 
ladde hym aside to the mydil of the 3aat, 
that he speke to hym in trecherye; and 
he smoot hym there in the sheer, and he 
is deed, into wreche of the blood of his 
asbrother Asahel. That whanne Dauid 
hadde herd the thing doon, seith, Clene 
I am and my kyngdam anentis God vnto 
with outen ende fro the blood of Abner, 
20the sone of Ner; and come it vpon the 
heed of Joab, and vpon al the hows of 
his fader; ne fail there fro the hows of 
Joab oon suffrynge flux of seed, and a 
leprous, holdynge a spyndle, and a fall- 
ynge with swerd, and a nedi breed. 
30 Therfor Joab, and Abisay, his brother, 
slewen Abner, forthi that he hadde slayn 
Asahel, the brother of hem, in Gabaon, in 
31 the batail. And Dauid seide to Joab, and 
to al the puple that was with hym, Kit- 
tith joure clothis, and beth gird with 
sackis, and weileth before the exequies of 
Abner. Forsothe Dauid folwide the 
32 beere. And whanne thei hadden biryden 
Abner in Ebron, kyng Dauyd reride 
his voys, and wepte vpon the toumbe of 
Abner; forsothe and al the puple wepte. 
33 And the kyng, weilynge and mournynge 
Abner, seith, Not as slow men ben went 
34to dye, thou diedist, Abner. Thin hoondis 
ben not boundun, and thi feet ben not 
greued with fettris, but as men ben wont 
to fal before the sonys of wickidnes thou 
felle. And doublynge togidre al the pu- 
35 ple wepte vpon hym. And whanne al the 
multitude was comen to taak meet with 
Dauid, 3it cleer day, Dauid swore, sei- 


II. KINGS. 


Ill. 26—-35. 


that he schulde disseyue thee, and that he 

schulde knowe thi going out and thin 

entryng”, and schulde* knowe alle thingis 

whicheY thou doist? Therfor Joab 3ede26 

out fro Dauid, and sente messangeris aftir 

Abner; and ‘ledde hym? a3en fro the cis- 

terne of Cyrie}, ‘while Danid knew not®, tire the ois. 
And whanne Abner hadde come ajen in tne ae Oem 
to Ebron, Joab ledde hym asidis half to ae eee 
‘the myddil” of the 3ate, that he schulde ae 
speke to hym in gile; and he® smoot Ab- ‘ward Sirie, 
ner there in the schar, and he was deed, fa al 
in to thet veniaunce of the blood of his fro the sisterne 
brother Asahel. ‘That whanne Dauid hadde 28 ae Oe 
herd the® thing doon, he seide, Y am clene peak 
and my rewme anentis God tilf in to with ve. « 
outen ende fro® the blood of Abner, sone 

of Ner; and come it on the heed of Joab, 29 

and oni al the hows of his fadir; a* man 

suffrynge flux! of seed, and a leprouse 

man, holdynge spyndil™, and fallynge”™ bi 

swerd, and hauynge nede to® breed, ‘that ts, 

suffrynge hungur’, ‘faile not of the hows | 

of Joab1. Therfor Joab, and Abisay, his 30 

brother, killiden Abner, for he hadde slayn 

Asahel, her brother, in Gabaon, in batel. 

Forsothe’ Dauid seide to Joab, and to al31 

the puple that was with hym, To rende 

3e 30ur clothis, and be 3e gird with sackis, 

and biweile’ 3e bifor the heersis, ‘ether 

dirige’, of Abner. Forsothe" kyng Dauid 

suede the beere. And whanne thei hadden 32 

biried Abner in Ebron, kyng Dauid reiside 

his vois, and wepte’ on the biriel of 

Abner ; ‘forsothe and al the puple wepte. 

And the kyng biweilide, and bymoren-33 

yde Abner, and seide, Abner, thou diedist 

not as dredeful men, ‘ethir cowardis*, ben 

wont to die. Thin hondis weren not34 

boundun, and thi feet weren not greuyd 

with stockis, but thou feldistY doun, as 

men ben wont to falle bifor the sones of 
wickidnesse. And al the puple doublide 

togidere, and wepte on? hym*. And whanne 35 


Weoyng yni, *thathe schulder Ythat1. 2 Joab bron3te Abner 1. @ vnwitinge Dauid 1. 
bmyddis1. ¢Joabi1. GOm.1. ethis1 fOm.1. of1. bhthesonez fuponr. * and faile ther 
not fro the hous of Joabai. !flowyngi1. ™aspyndilix. aman fallinger. 0 of en. P Om. BI. 
GOm.1r tT Andi. sweile plures. tOm.1. %Certis1. Yhe wepte1 Wand certis1. * Om. cz, 


y hast falle 1. 


“upon i. & Abner 1. 


Ill. .36—IV. 5. 


ynge, Thes thingis doo to me God, and 
thes thingis adde, if before the sunne 
goynge doun I shal taast breed or eny 
s¢6other thing. And al the puple herde; 
and alle thingis plesiden to hem that the 
kyng dide in the si3t of al the puple; 
37and al the comoun knewe, and al Irael in 
that dai, for it was not doon of the kyng, 
that Abner, the sone of Ner, were slayn. 
3s And the kyng seide to his seruauntis, 
Whether 3e knowen not, for a prince 
and the moost to dai in Irae] hath fall- 
39en? Forsothe I 3it delicate and anoyntid 
kyng; greetli thes men, sonis of Saruye, 
ben hard to me; the Lord 3eeld to the 
doynge yuel after his malice. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Forsothe Hisboseth, the sone of Saul, 
herde that Abner hadde faln in Ebron; 
and the hondis of hym ben feblid, and al 


2Trael is disturblid. Forsothe two men, - 


princis of theuys, weren to the sone of 
Saul; name to the toon Baana, and name 
to the tothir Reechab, the sones of Rem- 
mon Berothit, of the sonys of Beniamyn ; 
forsothe and Beroth is told into Benia- 
3myn. And Berothitis flowen into Je- 
thaym; and thei weren there comelingis 
4into that tyme. Forsothe there was to 
Jonathe, the sone of Saul, a sone feble in 
feete®; forsothe he was fyue 3eer oolde, 
whaune a messager cam fro Saul and 
Jonatha, of Jezrael. And so his nurish 
takynge hym flei3; and whanne she hiede 
for to flee, he felle, and igs maad halt; and 
she hadde name Myphibosech. Comynge 
thanne the sones of Reminon Berothit, 
Reechab and Baana, wenten in, the bren- 
nynge dai, the hows of Hisboseth, that 


Il. KINGS. 99 


al the multitude cam to take mete with 

Dauid, while the dai was 3it cleer, Dauid 

swoor, and seide, God do to me these 

thingis, and adde these thingis”, if Y schal 

taast breed ethir ony othir thing bifor the 

going doun of the sune. And al the puplese 

herde*; and alle thingis which the kyng 

dide in the si3t of al the puple plesiden 

hem; and al the comyn puple aud al Israel 37 

knewe in that day, that it was not doon of 

the kyng, that Abner, the sone of Ner, 

was slayn. Also the kyng seide to hisess 
seruauntis, Whether 3e witen not, that the 

prince and gretteste’ felde® doun to dai in 

Israel? Forsothef Y am ‘delicat}, ether 39+ ¥ an deli. 
tendirg, 3it% and anoyntid kyng; sotheli' i eee 
these sones of Saruye ben hard to me; the 

Lord 3elde to hym that doith ynel bi* his 

malice. 


CAL, Ive 


Forsothe! Ishosech, the sone of Saul, 
herde that Abner hadde falde™ doun in 
Ebron; and ‘hise hondis" weren disecoum- 
fortid, and al Israel was disturblid®. For-2 
sothe? twei men, princes of theues{, weren of theuys; 
tod the sone" of Saul; name" to oon® was of Bes 
Baana, and name to the tother was Rechab, “ 
the sones of Remmon Berothite, of the 
sones of Beniamyn; for also Beroth is 
arettid' in® Beniamyn. And men of Be-3 
roth fledden in to Gethaym; and thei 
weren comelyngis there ‘til to’ that tyme. 
Forsothe’ a sone feble in feet* was toa 
Jonathas, the soue of Saul; forsotheY he 
was fyue 3eer eld, whanne the messanger 
cam fro Saul and Jonathas’, fro Jezrael*. 
Therfor his nurse took hym, and fledde ; 
and whanne sche hastide to fle, sche felde 
doun, and the child was maad lame; and 
‘he hadde a name> Myphibosech. Therfor s 
Rechab and Baana, sones* of Remmon of 
Beroth, camen, and entriden in tlie* hoot 


+ of theuys; 


& fizt 4. 


b thingis to1. ¢ herde this 1. 
iand1. kK after1. ! And1. 
rgonesr. the namer. the toon kK. 
feetr. Yandi1. 2 fro Jonathas 1. 
wast. C¢thesonesr. dat, 


m falle 1. 


€ hath fallen 1. 

n the hondis of Isbosech 1. 
t rikened 1. 
a Jezrael, (ellinge that thet weren dede 1. 


4 the gretteste 1. 


fAnd1. & Om.1. 1 3it tendre 1. 
©troublid 1. P Andi. 4 with 1. 
u in the lynage of 1. VY vuto1. W Andi. & his 
b the name of the child 


On, 


100 


slepte vpon his bed the myddai; and the 
womman that kepte the doris of the 
shows purgynge whete, slepte fast. For- 
sothe thei wenten into the hows vnwit- 
yngly, takynge eeris of whete; and 
Reechab, and Bana, his brother, smyten 
7 hym in the sheer, and flowen%%. Forsothe 
whanne thei weren goon into the hows, 
he slepte vpon his bed in the priue 
chaumbre; and smytynge thei slewen 
hym; and his heed .taken of, thei wenten 
sbi the weie of deseert al ny3t. And thei 
brou3ten the heed of Hisboseth to Dauid, 
in Ebron, and thei seiden to the kyng, 
Loo! the heed of Hisboseth, the sone of 
Saul, thin enemye, that sou3te thi hjf; 
and the Lord hath 3yuen to oure lord the 
kyng veniaunce to dai of Saul and of his 
gseed. Forsothe Dauid answerynge to 
Reechab, and Bana, his brothir, sones of 
Remmon Berothei, seide to hem, The 
Lord lyueth, that hath delyuerd my soule 
10 fro al angwissh ; for hym that toolde to 
me and seide, Deed is Saul, the whych 
wende hym self welsum thingis to telle, 
T heelde, and slew3 hym in Sichelech, to 
whom it hadde behouid me to 3eue mede 
ufor the message; miche more nowe, 
whanne wickid men han slayn a giltles 
man in his hows vpon his bed, now I 
shal seche his blood fro 3oure hoond, and 
12d00 awey 3ou fro the erthe. And so 
Dauid comaundide to his children, and 
thei slewen hem; and kyttynge of the 
hoondis and the feet of hem, thei hong- 
eden hem ouer the fish poond in Ebron. 
Forsothe the heed of Hisboseth thei 
token, and biryeden it in Ebron, in the 
sepulere of Abner. 


CAP Y. 


1 And alle the lynagis of Irael camen to 
Dauid, in Ebron, seiynge, Loo! we ben 


II. KINGS. 


Iv. 6—V. 1. 


dai in to the hows of Isbosech, that slepte 
on® his bed inf myd daif,‘and the womman 
oischers of the hous clensynge" wheete, 
slepte! strongli*. Forsothe! thei entridene 
into the hows pryueli, and token™ eeris of 
whete; and Rechab, and Baana, his bro- 
ther, smytiden” Isbosech in the schar, and 
fledden®. Sotheli? whanne thei hadden7 
entrid in to the hous, he’ slepte on™ his 


. bedde in a closet; and thei smytiden® and 


killiden hym; and whanne ‘his heed was 
takun', thei 3eden bi the weie of deseert in 
a] the" ny3t. And thei broujten the heed s 
of Isbosech to Dauid, inY Ebron, and thei 
seiden to the kyng, Lo! the heed of Is- 
bosech, sone’ of Saul, thin enemy, that 
sou3te thi lijf; and the Lord 3af* to dai 
to oure Jord theY kyng veniaunce of Saul 
and of his seed. Forsothe? Dauid an-9 
sweride to Rechab, and Baana, his brother, 
the sones of Remmon of Beroth, and seide® 
to hem, The Lord lyueth, that delyueride> 


my lijf fro al angwisch; for Y helde hym 10 


that telde to me, and seide, Saul is deed, 
which man gesside hyin silf to telle® 
prosperitees*, and® Y killide hym in Siche- 
lech, to whom it bihoftet me 3yuef meede 


+ in mydday ; 
this that eneth, 
and the wom- 
man kepere of 
the dore of the 
hows purgide 
wheete and 
slepte, is not 
in Ebren. For- 
sothe they en- 
triden; in E~ 
breu it is, and 
thei camen til 
to the myddis 
of the hows, 
and token 
whete. c. 


tit bihofte, 
ete.; that is, 


for messageS; hou myche more now, 11 bi gessing of 


whanne wickid men han slayn a giltles 
man in his hows on? his bed, sechal I not 
seke his blood of 3oure hond, and schali 


Y do awey 3o0u fro erthe* ? Therfor Dauid 12 


comaundide to his children, and thei kill- 
iden hem; and thei kittiden™ awei® the° 
hondis and “feet of hem?, and hangiden‘ 
hem ouer the™ cisterne in Ebron. For- 
sothes thei token the heed of Isbosech, 
and biriedent in the sepulere of Abner, 
in Ebron. 


CAP. V. 


And® alle the lynagis of Israel camen1 
to Dauid, in’ Ebron, and seiden, Lo! we 


eg slowen 4aBH. 


euponi fattr. 


& seruaunt Gc. that kepte the doris 1. 


h makynge cleene Gq. purgynge1. ‘i The 


whole passage is omitted in arFLNPRUD pr.m. k Om. AnFGLNPQrub pr. m. faste tbsec.m. 1And1. ™ thei 


token1. ®smoten 1. smeten ELP. smyten F. 
8 smoten 1. smeten ELP. smyten F. 
sone 1. * hath jone 1. yOm. 1. 
4 prosperitees to himselff 1. © but 1. 
k the erthe 1! seruauntist. ™ kitten 1. 
* Andi. t thei birieden it 1. ¥ Forsothe 1. 


2 And 1, 


© thei fledden 1. 
t thei hadden take his heed 1. 


f to haue joue 1. 
n off 1. 
Vv into 1, 


P Bot1. dGIsbosech 1. ft upont. 

uthat EIKLM. Vintor. W the 
b hath delyuered 1. ¢ hane told 1. 
&Shis messager. buponi. ischal not 1. 
Cheri. Pher feet 1. 4 thei hangiden i. fat. 


a he seide 1. 


the puple. Lire 
here. ¢. 


Ve. 212, 


2thi boon and thi flesh. But and 3istirdai* 
and before 3isterdai®, whanne Saul was 
kyng vpon vs, thou were ledynge out 
and bryngynge a3en Yrael; forsothe the 
Lord seide to thee, Thou shalt fede my 
puple Irael, and thou shalt be duyk vpon 
3Irael. Forsothe and the eldris of Irael 
camen to the kyng, in Ebron ; and kyng 
Dauid smoot with hem couenaunt of pees 
in Ebron, before the Lord; and thei 
anoyntiden Dauid into kyng vpon Irael. 
4A sone of thretti 3eer was Dauid, whanne 
he bigan to regne, and fourti 3eer he 
sregnede in Ebron ; he regnyde vpon Juda 
seuen 3eer and sixe moncthis; forsothe 
in Jerusalem he regnede thretti and three 
63eer, vpon al Irael and Juda. And the 
kyng 3eede, and al the men that weren 
with hym, into Jerusalem, to Jebuse, 
dweller of the loond. And it is seid to 
Dauid of hem, Thou shalt not go in 
hidre, but if thou take a wey the blynde 
and the halt, seiynge, Dauid shal not goo 
zyn hidre. Forsothe Dauid took the tote! 
8hil Syon; that is the citee of Dauid. For- 
sothe he purposide in that dai mede to 
hym that smoot Jebuse, and touchide the 
goters of the ‘hows eues*, and took a wey 
the halt and the blynde, hatynge the lijf 
of Dauid. Therfore it is seid in prouerbe, 
The blynde and the halt shulen not goon 
ginto the temple. Forsothe Dauid dwell- 
ide in the tote! hil, and clepide it the 
citee of Dauid; and he bieldide bi enuy- 
10roun fro Mello, and with in forth. And 
he wente profitynge and vndre grow- 
ynge; and the Lord God of oost was 
uwith hym. Forsothe Yram, the kyng of 
Tiry, sente messagers to Dauid, and ce- 
dre trees, and ‘crafty men™ of trees, and 
crafti men of stonys to the wallys; and 
12thei beeldiden the hows of Dauid: And 
Dauid knewe, for the Lord hadde con- 
fermyd hym kyng vpon Irael, and for 


II. KINGS. 


101 


ben thi boon and thi fleisch. But also2 
3istirdai and the thridde day ago, whanne 
Saul was kyng on’ vs, thou leddist out, 
and leddist aj3en Israel; forsothe* the 
Lord seide to thee, Thou schalt fede my 
puple Israel, and thou schalt be duyk on 
Israel. Also and the eldere inen of Israels 
camen to the kyng, in¢ Ebron; and kyng 
Dauid smoot with hem boond of pees in 
Ebron, bifor the Lord; and thei anoynt- 
iden Dauid in to kyng on‘ Israel. Dauid4 
was a sone of thretti 3eer, whanne he 
bigan to regne, and he regnyde fourti 
3eer in Ebron; he regnede on® Judas 
seuene 3eer and sixe monethis; forsothef 
in Jerusalem he regnede thretti® and thre 
3eer, on” al Israel and Juda. And thee 
kyng 3ede, and alle men that weren with 
hym, in to Jerusalem, to Jebusey, dweller! 
of the lond. And it was seide of hem to 
Dauid, Thou schalt not entre hidur, no* 
but thou do awei blynde men and lame, 
seiynge', Dauid schal not entre hydur. 
Forsothe™ Dauid took the tour of Syon;7 
this is the citee of Dauid. For Dauids 
hadde ‘sette forth meede® in that dai to° 
hym, that hadde smyte Jebusei, and 
haddeP touchid the goteris of roouys‘, and 
hadde‘ take awey lame men and blynde, 
hatynge the lijf of Dauid. Therfor it is 
seid in prouerbe’, A blynde man and lamet 
schulen not entre in to the temple. For-y 
sothe® Dauid dwellide in, the tour, and 
clepide’ it the citee of Dauid; and he 
bildide bi cumpas fro Mellof, and with 


+ Mello was a 


swolew that 


ynne. And he entride profitynge and en- 10 was bifor that 


creessynge; and the Lord God of oostis 
was with hym. Also Hyram, kyng” of 
Tire, sent messangeris to Dauid, and 
cedre trees, and crafti men of trees, and 
crafti men of stoonus to wallis; and thei 
bildiden the hows of Dauid. And Dauid 12 
knew, that the Lord hadde confermed 
hymn kyng on* Israel, and that he hadde 


h 3istai c passim. £ passim. i toot ce. tute rH. * houses scerm. | toot cz. tute ru. ™ craftis men ce. 


Zuponi. certiss. Pbupons Cintor, duponr eupont. fands.  & thretti 3eer 1. 
buponi ithe dweller1. *Om.1. IJthatseiden1. ™Certist. % purposid1. © to haue 3oue 
mede to1. Pthat haddei. the hous roouys1. ‘thathadde1. ‘*comoun spechert. a lame 1K. 
uAnd1. Vheclepider. wthe kyng1. * upon. of kK. 


tour. Lire 
here. C. 


102 


he hadde arerid out his kyngdam vpon 
13his puple Yrael. Thanne Dauid took 3it 
secundarye wyues, and wyues of Jeru- 
salem, after that he was comyn fro 
Ebron; and there ben born to Dauid 
ijand" other sones and dou3tris. And 
thes the names of hem that ben born to 
hym in Jerusalem; Samua, and Sobab, 
and Nathan, and Salomon, and Jobaar, 
16and Elisua, and Repheg, and Japhia, and 
Elizama, and Helida, and Heliphelech. 
17 Thanne Philisteis herden, that thei had- 
den anoyntid Dauid kyng vpon Yrael, 
and thei alle stieden vp for to seche 
Dauid. The which thing whanne Dauid 
hadde herd, wente doun in to a strength. 
18 Forsothe Philisteis comynge ben heeld 
igout in the® valey of Raphayin. And 
Dauid counseilde the Lord, seiynge, If 
I shal stie vp to Philisteis, and if thou 
shalt 3yue hem in myn hoond? And the 
Lord seide to Dauid, Sty, for takyng I 
shal 3yue Philisteis in thin hoond. 
20 Thanne Dauid cam in Baal Pharasym, 
aud smoot hem there, and seide, The 
Lord hath dyuidid myn enemyes before 
ine, as watris ben dyuidid. Therfor 
the name of that place is clepid Baal 
21Pharasym. And thei laften there her 
grauen thingis, the whiche Dauid took, 
g2and his men. And 3it the Philisteis 
addiden for to stie vp, and thei? ben held 
230ut in the valey of Raphaym. Forsothe 
Dauid counseilde the Lord, seiynge, If 
I shal stye ajens the Philisteis, and if 
thou shalt take hem into myn hoondis ? 
The which answerde, Thou shalt not 
stye vp a3ens hem, but goo about bihynde 
the bak of hem, and comynge to hem fro 
gsa3ens of the peer trees. And whaine 
thou herist noise of cry goynge in the 
cop of the peer trees, thanne thou shalt 


n On. 4. 


II. KINGS. 


° Om. B. 


V. 13——24. 4 
Therfor Dauid took 3it concubyns, and 13 
wyuest of Jerusalem, after that he cam fro — + and wyzes; 
this word and 
Ebron; and also othere sones and dou3- 
that is, for tho 
weren verily 
ben the names of hem that weren borun bse wyves 
to hym in Jerusalem ; Samua, and Sobab, ait 
un 9 
and Nathan, and Salomon, and Jobaar, 15 they weren 
and Helisua, and Repheg, and Japhia, 16 wyues, and not 
and Helysama, and Holida, and Heliphe- pryncpel Lire 
lech. Therfor? Filisteis* herden, that thei17 
and alle Wilisteis® stieden‘ to seke Dauid. 
And whanne Dauid hadde herd this, he 
3ede® doun into a strong hold. Forsothef 18 
in the valet of Raphaym. And Danid!9 
counseilide! the Lord, and seide, Whether 
Y schal stie* to Filisties, and whether 
the Lord seide to Dauid, Stie thou’, for 
Y schal bitake™, and Y schal 3yue Filisteis” 
in thin hond. Therfor Dauid cam in to 20 
seide, The Lord departide1 myn enemyes 
bifor me, as watris ben departid. Therfor 
the name of that place was clepid Baal 
‘i . ¢ ( ; that is, 
sculptilss, whiche Dauid took{, and hise the faeld etter 
men. And Filisteist addiden" 3it, that 227 etn fe 
thei schulden’ stie”, and thei weren spred Dee ee 
Dauid councelideY the Lord, and seide, 
Whether Y schal stie? agens Filisties*, and 
whether thou schalt bitake hem in to myn 
not stieC a3jens hem, but cumpasse thou 
bihynde her bak, and thou schalt come to \ 
hem on the contrarie side of the pere 


enhaunsid his rewme on’ his puple Israel. 
is set here for 
tris weren borun to Dauid. And these14 
but thei ben 
secundarie 
hadden anoyntid Danid kyng on? Israel, 
Filisteis$ camen, aud weren® spred abrood 
thou schalt 3yue hem in myn hond? And 
Baal Farasym, and smoot® hem? there, and 
Farasym}. And theit leften there her211 Beal Fara- 
parting. Lire 
abrood in the valey of Raphaym. Sotheli* 23 in Ebreu it is 
hrente. c. 
hondis? Which answeride, Thou schalt 
trees. And whaune thou schalt here the 24 


sown of ery® goynge in’ the cop of ‘pere _ |i pere trees; 
aes this was a 
treess||, thanne thou schalt biginne batel ; igaeoteume 


gels comynge 
in to the belp 
of Dauyth to 
fizte ajenes ad- 
uersaries. Lire 
here. C. 


P to E prem. 


Yuponi. 2Thanner. @the Philistees1, buponr. ¢the Philisteest. jeden upr. ewente 1. f And1. 


the Philstees 1.  b thei weren 1. 
Philisteesr. ™ hemt. ° he smoot 1. 
8 granen ymagis 1. ¢ the Philistees 1. 


i counseilide with 1. 
P the Philistees 1. 
u addiden to 1. 


m bitake the 
r the Philistees r. 
x Andi. Y coun- 


K stie up 1. 1 thou up 1. 
4 hath departid 1. 
Vv wolden 1. WW wende up 1. 


-selide with 1. 2stie up 1. @the Philistees1. 4 And the Lord 1. ¢stieup1. thou hemr. © a crier 1. 


finto 1. £& the pere trees 1. 


V. 25—VI. 10. 


goo into batail ; for thanne the Lord shal 
goo out before thi face, that he smyte the 

25 tentis of Philisteis, And so Dauid dide 
as the Lord comaundide to hym; and he 
smoot Philisteis fro Gabaa vnto thou 
come to Jezer. 


CAaP.. VI. 


1 Forsothe Dauid eft gedrede alle the 
chosen men of Ivrael, thretti thousandis. 
2And Dauid roos, and wente, and al the 
puple that was with him of the men of 
Juda, for to brynge the arke of God, 
vpon the which is inwardli clepid the 
name of the Lord of oostis, sittynge in 
3cherubyn vpon it. And thei puttiden4 
the arke of God vpon a newe wayn, and 
thei token it fro the hows of Amynadab, 
that was in Gabaa. Forsothe Oza and 
Hayon, the sones of Amynadab, dryuen 
4the newe wayn. And whanne thei had- 
den taken it fro the hows of Amynadab, 
that was in Gabaa, Hayon kepynge the 
sarke of God, wente before the arke. For- 
sothe Dauid and al Yrael pleiden before 
the Lord, in alle forgid trees, and harpis, 
and syngynge instrumentis, and tymbris, 
sand trumpis, and cymbalis. Forsothe 
after that thei camen to the corn flore of 
Nachor, Oza strau3te out the hoond to 
the arke of God, and heelde it, for™ the 
z7oxen wynseden, aud boweden it. And 
the Lord is wrooth bi indignacioun a3ens 
Ozam, and he smoot hym vpon the fool 
hardynes ; the which is there deed biside 
sthe arke of God. Forsothe Dauid sorw- 
ide, forthi that the Lord hadde smyten 
Ozam; and the name of that place is 
clepid the Smytynge of Oze into this dai. 
9And Dauid dradde the Lord in that dai, 
seiynge, What maner wise shal goon into 
iome the arke of the Lord? And he wolde 
not’ turne aside to hym the arke of the 


II. KINGS. 


103 


for thanne the Lord schal go out befor 
thi face, that he smyte the castels of 
Filisteis. Therfor Dauid dide as the Lord 25 
comaundide to hym; and he smoot Fi- 
listeys! fro Gabaa til ‘the whilej thei 
camen to Jezer. 


CAP. VI. 


Forsothe Dauid gaderide eft alle the 
chosun men of Israel, thritti thousynde. 
And Dauid roos*, and 3ede, and al thez 
puple that was with hym of the men of 
Juda, to brynge the arke of God, on! 
which™ the name of the Lord of oostis, 
sittynge in cherubyn on® that® arke, was 
clepid?, And thei puttiden the arke of3 
God on a newe wayn, and thei token it 
fro the hows of Amynadab, that was in 
Gabaa. Forsothet Oza and Haio, the 
sons of Amynadab, dryueden' the newe 
wayn. And whanne thei hadden take it4 
fro the hows of Amynadab, that was in 
Gabaa, and’ kepte the arke of God‘, Haio 
3ede bifor the arke. Forsothe" Dauid ands 
al Israel pleieden{ byfor the Lord, in alle 
‘trees maad craftiliY, and harpis”, and 
sitols, and tympans, and trumpis, and 
cymbalis. Forsothe* after that thei camen’ 6 
to the corn floor of Nachor, Oza helde 
forth the? hond to the arke of God, and 
helde it, for the oxun kikiden*, and bow- 
iden ith, And the Lord was wrooth bi7 
indignacioun a3ens Oza}, and smoot* hym 
ont ‘the foli®; and he was deed there 
bisidis the arke of God‘. Forsothes Dauid s 
was sori||, for the Lord hadde smyte" 
Oza; and the name of that place was 
clepid the Smytyng of Oza ‘til in to! this 
dai. And Dauid dredde the Lord in that*9 
dai, and seide!, Hou schal the arke of the 
Lord entre to me? And he nolde™ turne 106 
the arke of the Lord to hym silf in to the 
citee of Dauid, but he turnede it in to 


4 putten pc. puttyn e. "the whiche x pr.m.  §% Om. ar, 
htentis 1. ithe Philisteest. JOm.1. -roosupr. Juponi. ™the which 1 5 upons. © ther. 
P inwardly clepids. 9% And1. 'dreuenr. drywen £. dreuin pr. § that 1. tthe Lord 1. *% And 1. 


Vv treen instrumentis of melodie 1. 
b the arke aside 1. © he smoot 1. 


: 4 upon 1. 
ivntor. al that en. 


lhe seide 1. 


win harpis 1. ¢ * Butt. 
e his fool hardynesse 1. fthe Lord 1. gAnd1. 4 sleyn 3. 
m wolde not 1. 


yhadden comet. 7 his1. 4 wynsiden 1. 


ft pleieden ; not 
bi pley of dis- 
solucioun, but 
of denociown. 
Lire here. c. 
$ Oza was 
smytun, for 

he ordeynede 
the arke to be 
put on vire- 
sonable beestis 
in the wayn, 
for it schulde 
be borun on 
the schuldris of 
dekenes, as it 
is seid in vii. c°. 
of Numeri and 
in many mo 
places; and 
Oza knew this, 
ether on3te to 
knowe this ; 
netheles he 
was smytun, 
whanne he 
touchide the 
arke bowid, for 
thanne it was 
opin, that it 
sehulde not be 
borun so, but 
in the sehuldris 
of resonable 
men. Lire 
here. c. 

ll Dauyth was 
sori; not of 
Goddis riztful- 
nesse, but more 
of the offence 
of Oza, for 
which he dis- 
seruede to be 
smytun; and 
of this dede 
Dauyth dredde, 
lest he were 
vnworthi to 
bringe the arke 
to his hows. c. 


104 


Lord in the cite of Dauid, but he turn- 
ede it aside into the hows of Obethedon 
11 Jethei. And the arke of the Lord dwellid 
in the hows of Obethedon Jethei thre 
monethis; and the Lord blesside Obeth- 
12edon', and al his hows. And it is toold 
te the kyng Dauid, that the Lord hadde 
blessid Obethedon, and alle thingis of 
hym, for the arke of God. And Dauid 
seide, I shal goo, and brynge a3en with 
blessynge into myn hows. Thanne Dauid 
wente, and brou3te the arke of God fro 
the hows of Obethedon into" the cytee 
of Dauid with ioy; and there weren 
with Dauid seuen holi companyes, and 
13the slayn sacrifice of a calf. And whanne 
_ thei hadden stied ouer, that baren the 
arke of the Lord, sexe paas’, thei offreden 
an oxe and a wether. And Dauid smoot 
14in orgayus bounden to the shuldres; and 
he lepe with al his strength before the 
Lord; forsothe Dauid is gird with a 
issurplees. And Dauid, and al the hows 
of Irael, brou3ten the arke of the testa- 
nient of the Lord in ioy, and in sown of 
16trompe. And whanne the arke of the 
Lord was comen into the eite of Dauid, 
Mychol, the dou3ter of Saul, biholdynge 
bi the wyndow, saw3 the kyng vndur- 
goyuge and lepynge before the Lord ; 
i7and she dispyside hym in bir herte. And 
thei brou3ten in the arke of the Lord, 
and thei puttiden” it in his place, in the 
myddis of the tabernacle, that Dauid 
hadde strau3t out to hym; and Dauid 
offrede brent sacrifice and pesible before 
Wthe Lord. And whanne offryuge brent 
sacrifice and pesible he hadde ful endid 
hem, he blesside to the puple in the 
iwname of the Lord of oostis. And he 
partide to al the multitude of Yrael, as 
wel to man as to womman, to echon o 
kaake of breed, and o rostid gobet of oxe 
flesh, and tried floure fried with oyle; 


t to Obethedon E pr.m. 


"his thingis 1. 9° mesures b sec. m. 
Pstied up i. Apaas1. fastned 1. 5 his 1. 
Shertily 1. 3% Om. a. Y forth at 1. 
© the tabernacle B1x sec.m. f the which 1. 


II. KINGS. 


win £ prom. 


© offrid b. 

the dannside 1. 
2 hoppinge 1. 
§ therfore EL. 


VI. 11—19. 


the hows of Obethedom of Geth. Andi 

the arke of the Lord dwellide in the hows 

of Obethedomt of Geth thre monethis; and — t 0% oe 

the Lord blessid Obethedom, and al his kenes, as it is 
: 4 ; seid in 3 book of 

hows. And it was teld to kyng Dauid, 12 Paralipamenon, 

that the Lord hadde blessid Obethedom, ¢£3,8"¢ 

and alle ‘thingis of hym®, for the arke of [et fa he 

God. And Dauid seide, Y schal go, and ne cae 

brynge the arke with blessyng in to myn Lire here. c. 

hows. 'Therfor Dauid 3ede, and brou3te 

the arke of God fro the hows of Obeth- 

edom in to the citee of Dauid with ioye; 

and ther weren with Dauid seuen cum- 

panyes"™, and the slain® sacrifice of a 

calffee, And whanne thei, that baren the 13 

arke of the Lord, hadden stiedP six paaces4, 

thei offriden an oxe and a ram. And Dauid 

sinoot in organs boundun™ to the® arm ; 

and daunsidet with alle strengthis" bifor 14 

the Lord ; sotheliY Dauid was clothid with 

a lynnun surplis. And Dauid, and al thes 

hows of Israel, ledden forth the arke of 

testament’ of the Lord in hertli* song, 

and in sown of trumpe. And whanne the 16 

arke of the Lord hadde** entride in to the 

citee of Dauid, Mychol, the dou;tir of ~ 

Saul, bihelde bif a wyndow, and sche si3 

the kyng skippynge? and daunsynge bi- 

for the Lord; and sche dispiside hym in 

hir herte. And thei brou3ten in the arke17 

of the Lord, and settiden it in his* place>, 

in thee myddis¢ of tabernacle*, which‘ 

tabernacle Dauid hadde maad ‘redy ther- 

to$; and Dauid offride brent sacrifices 

and pesible bifor the Lord. And whanne1is 

Dauid hadde endid tho, and hadde offrid 

brent sacrifices and pesible, he blesside the 

puple in the name of the Lord of oostis. 

And he 3af to al the multitude of Israel, 19 

as wel to man as to womman, to ech ‘o 

thinne loof, and o part rostid of bugle 

fleisch, and flour of wheete fried with oile ; 

and al the puple 3ede', ech man* in to his 

And Dauid turnede a3en to blesse 29 


+ Obethedom 


hows. 


Vv paththis 4. putten ace. 


‘oo This passage is omitted in AEFGLNPWDH. pr. m. 
u his strengthis 1. Vand 1. ¥ witnessyng 1. 

» place theroff1. ¢Om.1. 4 myddil1. 
i sede forth 1. kOm. 1. 


athe. 
ha kake of bred 1, 


VI. 20-——VII. 7. 


and al the puple wente echon into his 
2hows. And Dauid turned a3en, that he 
blesse to his hows, and Mychol, the 
dou3ter of Saul, goon out into a3en com- 
ynge of Dauid, seith, How glorious was 
the kyng of Irael to dai discouerynge 
hym self before the hoond wymmen of 
his seruauntis, and is maad nakid as if* 
21 were maad nakid oon of the knauys? And 

Dauid seide to Mychol, The Lord lyueth, 
for I shal pleye before the Lord, that 
hath chosen me rather than thi fader, 
and than al the hows of hym, and he 
hath comaundid to me, that Y were a 
ledere vpon the puple of the Lord of 

22Irael; and I shal pleye, and fowlere Y 
shal be maad more than I am maad, and 
I shal be meke in myn eyen, and with 
‘hoond wymmen’, of the whiche thou 
hast spoken, more glorious Y shal apere. 

23 Therfor to Mychol, the dou;ter of Saul, 
is not born a sone vnto the day of hir 
deeth. 

CAP. VII. 

1 Forsothe it is doon, whanne the kyng 
hadde seeten in his hows, and the Lord 
hadde 3euen to hym rest on al side fro 

zalle his enemyes, he seide to Nathan the 
prophete, Seest thou not, that I dwelle in 
a cedre hows, and the ark of God is put 

3in the mydil of skynnes? And Nathan 
seide to the kyng, Al that is in thin 
herte goo and do, for the Lord is with 
sthee. Forsothe it is doon in that ny3t, 
and? loo! the word of the Lord to Na- 

5 than, seiynge, Go, and spek to my ser- 
uaunt Dauid, Thes thingis seith the 
Lord, Whether thou shalt bilde to me 

éan hows to dwelle yn? Forsothe ne in 
an hows I haue dwellid fro the day that 
I ladde out the sones of Yrael fro the 
loond of Egipt vnto this dai ; but I wente 

7in tabernacle and in tente, thur3 out alle 


Xit AFH. 


mhathr. © be tor. 
S rather than 1. the hath comaundid 1. 
z more glorious 1. thor. » handmaidensr. 
f or kyuered with lethir 1 marg. & that 1. 
™haue gor. ® a tabernacle 1. 

VOL. II. ° 


I sche seide 1. 


Il. KINGS. 


y the hoondwymmen sce. 


© handmaidyns 1. 
DB upon I. 
¢ hast spoke 1. 
bh And 1. 


105 


his hows, and Mychol, the dou3tir of Saul, 
3ede out in to the comyng of Dauid, and 
seide!, Hou glorious was the kyng of 
Israel to? day vnhilynge hym silf bifor 
the handmaidis® of hise sernauntis, and he 
was maad nakid, as if oon of the harlotis? 
be? maad nakid ? And Dauid seide to My-21 
chol, The Lord lyueth, for Y schal pley 
bifor the Lord, that chees' me rathere 
than thi fadir, and than® al the hows of 
hym, and comaundidet to me, that Y 
schulde be duyk on" the’ puple ‘of the 
Lord of * Israel; and Y schal pleie, and 22 
Y schal be maad ‘vilere more* than Y 
amy maad, and Y schal be meke in myn 
ijen, and Y schal appere gloriousere? with 
the? handmaydys>, of whiche thou spak- 
ist*. Therfor a sone was not borun to2% 
Mychol, the dou;tir of Saul, til in to the 
dai of hir deeth. 


CAP. VII. 

Forsothe it was doon, whanne® the®! 
kyng Dauid hadde sete in his hows, and 
the Lord hadde joue reste to hym on ech 
side fro alle hise enemyes, he seyde toz 
Nathan the prophete, Seest thou not, that 
Y dwelle in an hows of cedre, and the 
arke of God is put in the myddis of 


skynnys'? And Nathan seide+ to thes sc ape 
kyng, Go thou, and do al thing which8 _ spirit of pro- 
fesie, but bi 


is in thin herte, for the Lord is with thee. spirit of man, 
Forsothe® it was don in that nist, and lo!s 3/35 
the word of the Lord, seiynge! to Nathan, 

Go thou, and speke to my servaunt Dauid, 5 

The Lord seith these thingis, Whether 

thou schalt bilde to me an hows to dwelle 

ynne? For* Y ‘dwellide not! in an hows¢ 

fro the dai in which Y ledde the sones of 

Israel out of the lond of Egipt til in to 

this dai; but Y 3ede™ in tabernacle” and 


here. c. 


2 Om. £ pr.v, 


qhad ber. ¥F hath chose t. 
z more vile1. Yam 3if 1. 

e Om. IK sec. m. 
1 haue not dwellid 1. 


P knaues 1. 
w Om. 1. 

d that whanne 1. 
k Sothly 1. 


v his 1. 


i was maad 1. 


106 


placis, to the whiche I passide with alle 
the sones of Irael? Whether spekynge 
I haue spokyn to oon of the lynagis of 
Irae], to whom I have comaundid, that 
he fede my puple Irael, seiynge, Whi 
hast thou not bildid* to me a cedre 
shows? And now thes thingis thow shalt 
seye to my seruaunt Dauid, Thes thingis 
seith the Lord of oostis, I took thee fro 
the lesews folwynge flockis, that thou 
g9were a duyk vpon my puple Irael, and 
I was with thee ‘in alle thingis>, whidir 
euere thou wentist, and I slew3 alle thin 
enemyes fro thi face, and I made to thee 
a greet name after the name of greet 
10men that ben in erthe; and Y shal putt 
a place to my puple Irael, and I shal 
plaunte hym, and I shal dwelle with 
hym, and he shal namore be disturblid, 
ne the sones of wickidnes shulen adde 
uthat thei tourmenten hym as before, fro 
the day that I ordeynede iugis vpon my 
puple Irael; and I shal 3yue rest to thee 
fro alle thin enemyes. And the Lord 
before seith to thee, that the Lord shal 
1z2make to thee an hows; and whanne thi 
dais weren ful endyd, and thou slepist 
with thi fadris, Y shal rere thi seed after 
thee, that shal go out of thi woinbe, and° 
13Y shal fastne the kyngdom of hym, And 
he shal beelde an hows to my name, and 
Y shal stable the troon of his rewme vnto 
14eueremore ; I shal be to hym into a fader, 
and he shal be to me into a sone; the 
which if eny thing wickidli shal doo, I 
shal vndirnymme hym in the 3eerd of 
men, and in the veniaunces of the sonys 
1sof men. Forsothe my mercy I shal not 
take a weye fro hym, as I took a weye 
fro Saul, whom I menyde a weye fro my 
16face. And thin hows shal be feithful, 
and thi kyngdam vnto with outen eende 
before my face, and thi troon shal be 


4 bilde ac. 


© Om. c. 
lesewis 1. 
b upon 1. 
iOm.1. 


Patent3. 4 haue spoke 1. 

¥ upon 1. w haue be r. 
che. ¢ fulfillid 1. © reyse up 1. 
Jdide itz.  haue remoued 1. 


Il. KINGS. 


‘stidfast his rewmes. 


b Om. E pr. m. 


tT seide 1. 
x hast go J, 
f the which 1. 
1Om. a. 


VIL. 8—16. 


in® tent’, bi alle places, to whiche Y7 

passyde with alle the sones of Israel ? 

Whether Y spekynge spak‘ to oon of the 

lynagis of Israel, to whom Y comaundyde, 

that he schulde feede my puple Israel, and 

seide’, Whi ‘bildidist thou not* an hows 

of cedre to me? And now thou schalt seies 

these thingis to my seruaunt Dauid, The 

Lord of oostis seith these thingis, Y took’ 

thee fro lesewis" suynge flockis, that thou 

schuldist be duyk on’ my puple Israel, 

and Y was’ with thee in alle thingis,9 

where euere thou 3edist*, and Y killideY 

alle thin enemyes fro thi face, and Y 

made? to thee a greet name bi the name 

of grete men that ben in erthe; and Y10 

schall sette a place to my puple Israel, 

and Y schal plaunte hym, and Y schal 

dwelle with hym, and he schal no more 

be troblid, and the sones of wickidnesse 

schulen not adde*#, that thei turmente 

hym as bifor, fro the dai in which Y or-11 

denede ingis on’ my puple Israel; and 

Y schal 3yue reste to thee fro alle thin 

enemyes. And the Lord biforseith to thee, 

that ‘the Lord® schal mak an hows to 

thee; and whanne thi daies be fillid¢, and 12 

thou hast slept with thi fadris, Y schal 

reyse® thi seed aftir thee, which‘ schal go 

out of thi wombe, and Y schal make 

He schal bilde anis 

hows to my name, and Y schal make 

stable the troone of his rewme til in to 

with outen endef; Y schal be to hym in 14+ with outen 
to fadir®, and he schal be to me in to a tn lel as 
sone; and if he schal do ony thing wick- 27035")... 
idli, Y schal chastise hym in the! 3erde of 

men, and in the woundis of the sones of the ree a 


ben seid ener- 
lastinge, for 
men. Forsothe Y schal not do awey my-15 ide, in the 


ae : ifte of Ba- 

mercy fro hym, as Y dide) awei fro Saul, ilyne, eR 
, k nameli in the 

whom Y remouede* fro my face. Andie dayaieies 


rotide, that 
was an alien, 
Lire here. c. 


thin hows schad be feithful, and thi rewme 
schal be til! in to with outen ende bifor 


© Om. a. 


S hast thou not bildid 1. 
y haue killid 1. 


thaue take x. tthe 
Zhaue made x. 4 adde to1. 
& his rewme stable 1. } a fadir 1x sec. m. 


VII. 17——27. 


i7stedefast contynuli. After alle thes 
wordis, and after al this visioun, thus 
isspak Nathan to Dauid. Forsothe Dauid 
the kyng wente in, and sat before the 
Lord, and seide, Who am I, Lord God, 
and what myn hows, for thou hast 
19brou3t me hidir to? But and this litil 
is seen in thi si3t, Lord my God; ‘that 
hast louyd me‘, but thou speke also of 
the hows of thi seruaunt into ferre hens, 
Forsothe this is lawe fro Adam, Lord 
20God ; what thanne 3it Dauid shal mowe 
adde, that he speke to thee? Forsothe 
thow knowist thi seruaunt, Lord God; 
21for thi word, and aftir thin herte, thou 
hast doon alle thes greet thingis, so that 
thou shuldist make knowen to thi ser- 
z2uaunt. Therfor thou art magnified, 
Lord God, for there is not lijk® of thee, 
ne there is God with out thee, in alle 
thingis ‘the whiche®® we han herd with 
23 oure eeris. Forsothe what is there folk 
of kynde as the puple of Irael in the 
loond, forf the which God wente, that he 
bie it to hym into a puple, and sette to 
hym a name, and make to hym greet 
thingis, and orrible vpon the® erthe, fro 
the face of thi puple, whom thou hast 
bou3t to thee fro Egipt folk and the god 
21of it ? And thow hast fastned to thee thi 
puple Irael into a puple evermore, and 
thou, Lord, art maad to hem into a God. 
23 Nowe thanne, Lord God, the word that 
thou hast spoken vpon thi seruaunt and 
vpon his hows, rere vnto euermore, and 
26do as thou hast spoken; and thi name 
be magnyfied vnto evermore, and be it 
seid, Lord of oostis God vpon Irael; and 
the hows of thi seruaunt Dauid shal be 
27 stablid before the Lord; for thou, Lord 
of oostis, God of Irael, hast openyd the 
eer of thi seruaunt, seiynge, An hows I 
shal bilde to thee; therfor thi seruaunt 


“Om. £ prom. © the lijk «. 


2 entride in to the tabernacle 1. 
uOm, I. 


tm thus 1. 
t Therfor rg1kLNogrsvuw. herfor P. 
Z ajenbizgge x. that he schulde 1. 
€ folkis E. folk of kyndex. ‘of g. 


fermyd 1. Il reise up1. ™Om.1. ® upon t. 


IJ. KINGS. 


ee that c pr.m. 


b his puple 1. 
& her goddis 1. 
° upon I. 


107 


my face, and thi trone schal be stidfast 
contynueli. By alle these wordys, and bi17 
al this reuelacioun, som Nathan spak to 
Dauid. Forsothe Dauid the kyng entride®, 18 
and satt® bifor the Lord, and seide, Who 
am Y, my? Lord God, and what is myn 
hows, that thou brou3tist1 me hidur to? 
But also this is seyn litil in thi sij3t, my 19 
Lord God; no but thou schuldist speke 
also of the hows of thi seruaunt in to 
long tyme. Forsothe® this is the lawe of 
Adam, Lord God; what therfor may 20 
Dauid adde® 3it, that he speke to thee? 
Fort thou, Lord God, knowist thi 
seruaunt; thou hast do alle these grete® 
thingis, for thi word, and bi’ thin herte, 21 
so that thou madist” knowun to thi ser- 
uaunt. Herfor, Lord God, thou art mag-22 
nyfied*, for noon is lijk thee, ne there is 
no God outakun thee, in alle thingis 
whiche we herden’ with oure eeris. Sotheli 23 
what folk in erthe is as the puple of Is- 
rael, for which{ the Lord God 3ede, that 
he schulde ajenbie? it to him in to a 
puple, and schulde* sette to hym silf a 
name, and schulde do to it® grete thingis, 
and orible on® erthe, iz° castinge out 
therof@ the folk® and‘ ‘goddis therof*® fro 
the face of thi puple, which® thou ‘a3en 
boustisti to thee fro Egipt? And thous 
confermidist* to thee thi puple Israel in 
to a puple euerlastynge, and thou, Lord, 
art maad in to God to hem. Now ther-25 
for, Lord God, reise! thou™ withouten 
ende the word that thou hast spoke on® 
thi seruaunt and on? his hows, and do as 
thou hast spoke; and thy name be mag-26 
nyfied? tild in to withouten ende, and be 
it seid, The Lord of oostis is God on* Is- 
rael; and the hows of thi seruaunt Dauid 
schal be stablischid byfor the Lord; for 27 
thou, Lord of oostis, God of Israel, hast 
maad reuelacioun to the eere of thi ser- 


ffroa. & Om. 4. 


ohe sattr. POm.1. 4 hast brougt1. fort. § adde tor. 
Vaftir 1. 


x maad greet 1. Y han herd 1. 
Cuponr. cCandb. 4 Om. sec.m. therfore EL. 

h the which 1. i hast ajen bou3t 1. * hast con- 
P maad greet 1. 4Om.1. F upon. 


P 2 


w madist tho 1. 


t+ lawe of A- 
dam; that ech 
man be bisy 
and desiringe 
the prosperite 
of hise eiris. 
Lire here. ¢. 


t for which, 
ete.; in Ebreu 
it is, for which 
Goddis jeden, 
that is, thre 
persoones in 
the Trinyte, 
that ben o God 
in substaunce, 
therfor it sueth 
in singuler 
noumbre, that 
he schulde ayen 
bie it to him 
silf. Lire here. 
c. 


108 


hath founden’ his herte, that he preye 

28thee bi this preyer. Now thanne, Lord 
God, thou ert verrey God, and thi wordis 
shulen be sooth; forsothe thou hast spokyn 

20to thi seruaunt these good thingis; bi- 
gyn therfor, and blesse to the hows of thi 
seruaunt, that it be! before thee into 
euermore; for thou, Lord God, spakist‘ 
thes thingis, and bi! thi blessynge the 
hows of thi seruaunt shal be blessid into 
euermore. . 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Forsothe it is doon after thes thingis, 
Dauid smoot Philisteis, and mekide hem; 
and Dauid took a bridil of tribut of 

2the hoond of Philisteis. And he smoot 
Moab, and he metide™ hem with a Htil 
coord euenynge to the erthe; forsothe 
he metid two litil coordis, oon to slee, 
and another to quykne. And Moab is 
maad to Dauid sernynge vndir tribute. 

3And Dauid smoot Adadezer, the sone of 
Roob, the kyng of Soba, whanne he 
wente forth that he take" lordship vpon 
4the flood of Effraten. And take to Dauyd 
ou his partye a thousand and seuene 
huudrid horsmen, and twenti thousand 

of feet men, kut of bi the knee alle the ° 
jockis of charis; forsothe he lafte of 

5hem an hundrid charis. Forsothe Ciria 
of Damasc cam to bere socour to Adad- 
ezer, the kyng of Soba; and Dauid smoot 
of Ciria two and twenti thousand of men. 

6And Dauid putte a strength in Cirya of 

Damask, and Cirya is maad to Dauid 
seruynge vndir tribute. And the Lord 
kepte Dauid in alle thingis, to what euere 

7thingis he wente forth. And Dauid took 
goldun aarmys and bee3is, that hadden the 
seruauntis of Adadezer, and brou3te hem 

ainto Jerusalem. And Dauid the kyng 
took fro Bethe, and fro Beroth, citees 
b Om. &. 


iOm. 4.  speeke pcern. 


8 hath fonnden bi 5. 
Y he metide 1. 
€ the sone 1. 
citees 1. 


t gode thingis 1. 
2 litil coorde 1. 
f horse men 1. 


2 he made hem r. 


II. KINGS. 


u be in tor. 
b Danid metide hem bi 1. 
g kitte the hoxes of 1. 


VII. 28—VIII. 8. 


naunt, and seidist, Y schal bilde an hows 
to thee; therfor thi seruaunt foond®’ his 
herte, that he schulde preie thee bi this 
preier. 
veri God, and thi wordis schulen be trewe ; 
for thou hast spoke these goodis‘ to thi 


seruaunt ; therfor bigynne thou, and blesse 29 


the hows of thi seruaunt, that it be" with- 
outen ende bifor thee ; for thou, Lord God, 
hast spoke these thingis, and bi’ thi bless- 
yng the hows of thi seruaunt schal be 
blessid withouten ende. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe” it was doon aftir these! 
thingis, Dauid smoot Filisteis*, and made 
low hem; and Dauid took awei the bridil 
of tribute fro the hond of Filisteist. And2 
Dauid smoot Moab, and mat’ hem with 
a coorde*, and made® euene to the erthe; 
forsothe ‘he mat? twey® cordis, oon to 
sle, and oon4 to quikene. And Moab 
seruyde Dauid vndur tribute. And Dauid3 
smoot Adadezer, sone® of Roob, kyng of 
Soba, whanne he 3ede forth to be lord 
ouer the flood Eufrates. And whanne a4 
thousynde and seuene hundrid knistis’ of 
his part weren takun, and twenti thou- 
synde of foot men, Dauid hoxide’ alle 
‘drawynge beestis in charis; but Dauid 
lefte of tho an hundrid charis, that ts, the 
horsis of an hundrid charis. Also Siries 
of Damask cam, that it’ schulde bere help 
to Adadezer, kyng of Soba; and Dauid 
smoot of Sirie two and twenti thousynde 
of men. And Dauid settide strengthe} ine 
Sirie of Damask, and Sirie was maad 
seruynge Dauid vndur tribute. Aud the 
Lord kepte Dauid in alle thingis, to what 
euer thingis he 3ede forth. And Dauid7 
took goldun armeris and bies, whiche the 
seruauntis of Adadezer hadden, and he 
brou3te tho in to Jerusalem. And of8 
Bethe, and of Beroth, citees* of Adadezer, 
n Om. CEFH. 


lbe xr. ™ mat BCEFH. 


Vthoronzr, WW Andr. ~*~ the Filisteis 1. 
© two litil1. 4 another 1. 


h the beestis drawynge 1. the.. K the 


Now therfor, Lord God, thou art 28 


+ fro the hond 
of Filisteis; for 
first Filisteis 
token tribute 
of Ebreis, and 
weren Jordis of 
hem, but aftir- 
ward Filisteys 
serueden Da- 
uyth vndur 
tribute. Lire 
here. c. 


t settide 
strengthe; that 
is, werriours 

in a strong 
hold, that men 
of Sirie schul- 
den beboldun 
sikirliere vndur 
tribute. Lire 
here. Cc. 


V1IT. g—18. 


of Adadezer, ful myche brasse; of the 
which Salomon made alle the brasen 
vessels in the temple, and the brasen see, 
gand pilers, and auter. Forsothe Thou, 
the kyng of Emath, herde that Danid 
hadde smyten al the strength of Adad- 
wezer. And Thou sente Joram, his sone, 
to kyng Dauid, that he salute hym, 
thankynge to gidre, and be doo gracis, 
forthi that he hath ouercomen Adadezer, 
and smyten hym; forsothe Thou was 
enemye to Adadezer ; and in his hoond 
weren silueren vessels, and golden vessels, 
1, and brasen vessels. The whiche and thoo 
halwide kyng Dauid to the Lord, with 
the siluer and gold, ‘the whiche™ he 
hadde halwid of alle the gentils, the 
12whiche he hadde dreuen out of Cyrie, 
and Moab, and the sones of Amon, and 
of Philisteis, and Amalech, and of the 
spoylis of Adadezer, the® sone of Roob, 
iskyng? of Soba. Forsothe Dauid made to 
hym a name, whanne he turnyde ajen, 
Cirye taken, in the valey of wodis slayn 
ei3teen thousandis, and in Jebelem, at4 
14thre and twenti thousand. And he putte 
in Ydume kepers, and sette a strength, 
and al Ydume is maad seruynge to Dauid ; 
and the Lord kept Dauid in alle thingis, 
to what euer thingis he wente forth. 
is And Dauid regnyd vpon al Yrael, and 
Dauid dide dome, and ri3twysnes to al 
i6the’ puple. Forsothe Joab, the sone of 
Saruye, was vpon the oost; aftirward 
Josaphat, the sone of Achilud, was chaun- 
17seleer; and Sadoch, the sone of Achitob, 
and Achimalech, the sone of Abiathar, 
ig weren prestis ; and Saraias a scribe. For- 
sothe Banaias, the sone of Joiade, was 
vpon archeris and alblasters, ‘that ben 
clepid Cerethi and Pherethis; forsothe 
the sones of Dauid weren prestes. 


Il. KINGS. ' 109 


Dauith the! kyng took ful myche metal™ ; 

‘of the" whiche Salomon made alle the® 

brasen vessels in the temple, and? the 

brasen see, and the pilers, and the auter'. 

Forsothes Thou, kyngt of Emath, herdes 

that Dauid hadde smyte al the strengthe 

of Adadezer. And Thou sente Joram, his jo 

sone, to ‘kyng Dauid", that he schulde 

grete hym, and thanke, and do thank- 

yngis, for he hadde overcome Adadezer, 

and hadde smyte’ hym; for Thou was 

enemy to” Adadeser; and vessels of sil- 

ver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of 

bras weren in his hond. And the sameli 

vessels kyng Dauid halewid ‘to the Lord, 

with the siluer and gold, whiche he 

hadde* halewidY of alle hethene men, 

whiche ‘hethene men” he made* suget 

of Sirye, and Moab®, and the* sones 12 

of Amon, and Filisteis4, and Amalech®, 

and of the spuylis of Adadezer, sone’ of 

Roob, kyng of Soba. Also Dauid made !3 

to hym a name, whanne he turnede ajen, 

whanne Sirie was takun, for ei3tene thon- 

synde& weren slayn in the valey, where 

salt is* maad, and in Gebelem, to thre 

and twenti thonsynde. And hei settide*! 

keperis in Ydumee, and ordeinede strong 

hold, and al Ydumee was maad seruynge 

to Dauid; and the Lord kepte Dauid in 

alle thingis, to whateuer thingis he 3ede 

forth. And Dauid regnede on! al Israel, 1s 

and Dauid dide doom, and ri3tfulnesse™ to + Eine 8 
al his puple. Forsothe" Joab, the sone of 16recordour. c.’ 
Saruy, was ouer the oost®; sotheli? Josa- ee a 
phat, sone’! of Achilud, was chaunceler f ; La aes 
and Sadoch, sone’ of Achitob, and Achy-17 Wilat Tetras 
melech, sone’ of Abiathar, weren preestis ; to onours; for 
and Saraye was scryuyn’. Forsothet Ba-18 seid that thet 
nanye, sone" of Joiada, was ouer Cerethi 

and Pherethi, that 7s, ower archeris and 


weren prestis 
propirly, 
arblasteris’ ; sotheli* the sones of Dauid 


mynystringe 
in the taber- 
nacle, for thei 
weren not of 


weren prestis{. the kyn of 
Aaron. Lire 
here. C. 
a that c prom. °Om.c. Pthekynge prev. Ganda. 'hisce., § Ein marg. 
10m.1. ™bras1. Om. aswhce. © Om. pqswxbe, P Om. Kx. @Om.Qxb °F The whole 

passage from the word of omitted in arnpru. * Andi. tthe kyng1. 4 Dauid the kyng i. ¥ sleyn 1- 

Wofit. xOm.a. yYOm.at. %Om.1. Ahad maad1. >of Moabi. c¢ofther 4 of Filisteis I. 

€ of Amalech 1. f the sone 1. &% thousynde meni. 5 was1. i Dauid1. setter. luponr ™ rijt- 

wisnesse 1. = Andi. © oost of Dauvidi. Pand1. ‘thesoner, ‘thesoner. Sa scribe 1. * But 1. 

athe sone1. Yarowblasters ELP. W and 1. 


110 


CAP. IX. 


1 And Dauid seide, Whether wenist thou 
that there be eny man, that is laft of the 
hows of Saul, that I do with hym mercy 

2for Jonatha? Forsothe there was of the 
hows of Saul a seruaunt, Cyba bi name; 
whom whanne the kyng hadde clepid to 
hym silf, seide to hym, Ert thon not 
Cyba? And he answerde, Y am thi ser- 

3uaunt. And the kyng seith, Whether is 
there on lyue eny man of the hows of 
Saul, that I doo with hym mercit of 
God? And Ciba seide to the kyng, The 
sone of Jonatha is on lyue, feble the feet. 

4 Where, he seith, is he ? And Ciba seide® 
to the kyng, Loo! he seith, he is in the 
hows of Machir, the sone of Amyel, in 

sLodobar. Thanne kyng Dauid sente, 
and took hym fro the hows of Machir, 

6 the sone of Amyel, fro Lodobar. For- 
sothe whanne Myphibosech, the sone of 
Jonathan, the sone of Saul, was comen 
to Danid, he felle into his face, and 
lowtide. And Dauid seide, Myphibosech ! 
The which answerde, I am ny3, thi ser- 

zuaunt. And Dauid seith to hym, Ne 
dreed thow, for doynge I shal do with 
thee merci for Jonathan, thi fader; and 
I shal restore to thee alle the feeldis of 
Saul, thi fader, and thou shalt eete breed 

8in my bord euermore. The which honour- 
inge him seith, Who am I, thi seruaunt, 
whom thou hast biholdyn vpon a deed 

?hownd hjk of me? And so the king 
clepide Cibam, the child of Saul; and 
seide to hym, Alle thingis, what euere 
weren of Saul and al his hous, I haue 

loseuen to the sone of thi lord; wyrk 
thanne the erthe to hym, thou, and thi 
sones, and thi seruauntis, and thou shalt 
brynge yn meetis to the sone of thi lord, 
that he be nurshid; Myphibosech for- 
sothe, the sone of thi lord, shal eete 
euermore breed vpon my bord. Forsothe 


t the merci BCEH. 


II. KINGS. 


1X, I—Io. 


CAT size 


And Dauid seide, Whether ony man is, 
that lefte of the hows of Saul, that Y do 
mercy with hym for Jonathas? Forsothe* 2 
a seruaunt, Siba bi name, was’ of the hous 
of Saul; whom whanne the kyng hadde 
clepid to hym silf, ‘the kyng” seide to hym, 
Whethir thon art not Siba? And he an- 
sweride, Y am thi seruaunt. And thes 
kyng seide, Whether ony man lyueth of 
the hows of Saul, that Y do with hym 
the mercy of God? And Siba seide to the 
kyng, A sone of Jonathas lyueth, feble* 
in the feet. The? kyng seide, Where is4 
he? And Siba seide to the kyng, Lo! he 
is in the hows of Machir, sone® of Amyel, 
in Lodabar. Therfor ‘Dauid the kyng¢s 
sente, and took hym® fro the hows of 
Machir, sone’ of Amyel, fro Lodobar. 
Forsothe’ whanne Myphibosech, the sones 
of Jonathas, sone of Saul, hadde come to 
Dauid, he felde in to his face, and wor- 
schipides’, And Dauid seide, Myphibosech ! 
Which® answeride, Y am present, thi ser- 
uaunt. And Danid seide to hym, Drede7 
thou uot, for Y doynge schal do mersi to 
thee for Jonathas, thi fadir; and Y schal 
restore to thee alle the! feeldis of Saul, thi 
fadir, and thou schalt ete breed in my 
boord* euere. Which! worschipide him, ands 
seide, Who am Y, thi seruaunt, for thou 
hast biholde on™ a deed dogge" lijk me? 
Therfor the kyng clepide Siba, the child 9 
of Sanl; and seide to hym, Y haue 3oue 
to the sone of thi lord alle thingis, which 
euer weren of Saul, and al the hows of 
hym; therfor worche thou the lond to 10 
hym, thou, and thi sones, and thi ser- 
uauntis, and thou schalt brynge in meetis 
to the sonet of thi lord, that he be fed; 
forsothe® Myphibosech, sone? of thi lord, 
schal ete euer breed on‘ my bord. Sothelit 
fiftene sones and twenti seruauntis weren 
to Siba. And Siba seyde to the kyng, As11 


u Om. ceH. 


x And ther wast. yYOm.1. Zhe1. the whiche is sijk1. > Andthex c¢thesoner, 4kyng 
Dauid1. ¢ Jonathas sone1. fthesonex. & And1. 8&8 worschipe a. » Andhe1. 1Om.1. table 1. 
'The which 1. ™uponi. "houndi. obutr. Pthesoner, ofr. * Andt. 


+ to the sone, 
ete.; that is, to 
Myca, sone of 
Myphiboseth, 
who is now thi 
lord. Lire 
here. c. 


IX. 11—X. 6, 


there weren of Ciba fifteen sonys and 

11twenti seruauntis. And Ciba seide to 
the kyng, As thou hast comaundid, my 
lord kyng, to thi seruaunt, so thi ser- 
uaunt shal doo; and Myphibosech shal 
eete vpon thi bord, as oon of the sonys 

120f the kyng. Forsothe Myphibosech 
hadde a litil sone, Mycha bi name; for- 
sothe al the kynrede of the hows of Ciba 

13Seruede to Myphibosech. But Myphibo- 
sech dwellide in Jerusalem; for of the 
bord of the kyng contynueli he eete, and 
he was halt either foot. 


CARL XS 


1. Forsothe it is doon after thes thingis, 
that Naas, the kyng of the sonys of 
Amon, diede; and Anon, his sone, regn- 

2zede for hym. And Dauid seide, I shal 
doo mercy with Anon, the sone of Naas, 
as his fader dide merci with me. Thanne 
sente Dauid comfortynge hym bi his ser- 
uauntis vpon the fader deth. Forsothe 
whanne the seruauntis of Dauid weren 
comen into the loond of the sonis of 

3Amon, the princis of the sones of Amon 
seiden to Anon, her lord, Wenyst thou 
that for the worship of thi fader Dauid 
hath sente to thee coumfortours; and 
not therfor that he aspie, and serche the 
citee, and turne it vpsedoun, Dauid hath 
asente his seruauntis to thee? And so 
Anon took the seruauntis of Dauid, and 
shooue the half part of the beerd of 
hem, and he kittide’ of the mydil clothis 
of hem vnto the arsis; and he lafte hem. 

5 The which whanne was toold to Danid, 
he sente into ajen comynge of hem, for- 
sothe thei weren men ful foul confoundid. 
And Dauid sente to hem, Dwellith in 
Jericho, to the tyme that 3oure beerd 

6growe, and thanne turneth ajen. For- 
sothe the sones of Amon, seynge that 
thei hadden doo wronge to Dauid, thei 
senten, and hireden bi mede Cyrie of 


II. KINGS. 


111 


thou, my lord kyng, hast comaundid to 
thi seruaunt, so thi seruaunt schal do; 
and Myphibosech, as oon of the sones of 
the kyng, schal ete on’ thi boord. For-12 
sothet Myphibosech hadde a litil sone, 
Mycha bi name ; sotheli" al the meyne of 
the hows of Siba sernyde Myphibosech. 
Forsothe’ Myphibosech dwellide in Jeru-13 
salem; for he eet contynueli of the kingis 
boord, and was” crokid* on either foot. 


CAR. Xe 


Forsothe it was doon aftir these thingis, 1 
that Naas, kyng of the sones of Amon, diede; 
and Anoon, his sone, regnede for hym. And 
Dauid seide, Y schal do mercy with Anon, 2 
the sone of Naas, as his fadir dide mercy 
with me. Therfor Dauid sente coumfort- 
ynge hym by hise seruauntis onY the deeth 
of the fadir. Sotheliz whanne the ser- 
uauntis of Dauid hadden come in to the 
lond of the sones of Amon, princes* of thes 
sones of Amon seiden to Anon, her lord, 
Gessist thou that for the onour of thi fadir 
Dauid sente” coumfortouris to thee; and 
not® herfor David sente hise seruauntis to 
thee, that he schulde aspie, and enserche 
the citee, and distrie it? Therfor Anoon, 
took the seruauntis of Dauid, and scha- 
uyde’ half the part of ‘the beerd of hem*, and 
he kittidef awey the myddil clothis of hem 
‘til tos the buttokis"; andi lefte hem. Ands 
whanne this was teld to Dauid, he sente 
in to the comyng of hem, for the men 
weren schent ful vilensly. And Dauid co- 
maundide to hem, Dwelle 3e in Jerico, til 
joure beerd wexe, and thanne turne je a3en. 
Sotheli* the sones of Amon sien}, thats 
thei hadden do wrong to Dauid, and thei 
senten, and hiriden bi! meede Roob™ of 
Sirye, and Soba" of Sirie, twenti thou- 
synde of foot men, and of kyng Maacha, a 


v kutt gcern. 
Supont. tAndr, tAnd1, v Andi. Whe wast. *halti. Yuponi. #And1. & the princis 1. 
bhath sent 1. © not rather1. he schauyder. ¢herbeerd:. fkitter, vntor bhipes1. iand 
sor, k Andy. !withr. ™of Roob1. "of Sobatr. 


+ the sones of 
Amon sien; for 
thei knewen 
that not bi 
fraude, but of 
veri frenschip, 
Dauyth sente 
messangeris 5 
and nethelcs 
thei knonlech- 
iden not gilt, 
nether axiden 
forz3yuenesse, 
but thei maden 
hem redi to 
defende her 
foli, in clepinge 
othere men inte 
her help a3enus 
Dauyth, and 
this doyng 
agreggide 
notably ether 
gretly her gilt. 
Lire here. c. 


112 


Roob, and Cirye of Soba, twenty thou- 
sandis of foot men, and of the kyng 
of Maacha a thousand men, and of 
zIstob twelue thousandis of men. The 
which thing whanne Dauid hadde herd, 
he sente Joab and al the oost of fi3ters. 
8 Thanne the sonys of Amon wenten out, 
and dressiden sheltrun before hym in the 
entree of the 3ate. Forsothe Cire of 
Soba, and Roob, and Istob, and Maacha 
9weren aside in the feeld. Thanne Joab 
seynge that a batail was maad redi a3ens 
hym, and fro a3ens and biliynde the bac, 
he cheese to hym of alle the chosen of Irael, 
io and ordeynde sheltrun a3ens Cyre. For- 
sothe the tother partye of the puple he 
fook to Abisai, his brothir, the which 
dresside sheltrun azens the sones of 
uAmon. And Joab seith, If Cyres han 
the ouerhoond ajens me, thou shalt be to 
me into help; forsothe if the sones of 
Amon han the ouerhoond a3ens thee, I 
12shal help to thee; be thou a strong man, 
and fi3te we for oure puple, and for the 
citee of oure God ; forsothe the Lord shal 
13do that is good in his si3t- And so Joab 
wente yn, and his puple that was with 
hym, strijf ajens Cyres, the whiche anoon 
14flowen fro the face of hym. Forsothe 
the sones of Amon, seynge that the Cyres 
weren flowen, and thei flowen fro the 
face of Abisai, and wenten into the citee; 
and Joab is turned a3en fro the sonis of 
1s Amon, and cam into Jerusalem. For- 
sothe seynge the Cires that thei hadden 
fallen before Irael, ben gadrid togidre”. 
ic And Adidazer sente, and brou3te out the 
Cirys that weren be3onde the flood, and 
brou3te forth the oost of hem; forsothe 
Sabath, the maistre of chyualrye* of 
17 Adadezer, was the prince of hem. And 
whanne it was toold to Dauid, he drew3 
togidre al Irael, and passide ouere Jor- 
dan, and cam into Helama. And the 


w Om. £ pr. m. 


II. KINGS. 


X. 7-17. 


thousynde men, and of Istob twelue thou- 
synde of men. And whanne Daunid hadde7z 
herd this, he sent® Joab and al the oost 
of fi3teris. Therfor the sones of Amons 
3eden out, and dressiden scheltrun bifor 
hem in the entryng of the 3ate. For- 
sothe? Soba, and Roob of Sirie, and Istob, 
and Maacha weren asidis half in the feeld. 
Therfor Joab si3, that batel1 was maad9 
redi a3ens hym, bothe euene a3ens' and 
bihynde the® bak ; and he chees to hym silf 
of alle the chosun men of Israel, and 
ordeynedet scheltrun a3ens Sirus". For-10 
sothe’ he* bitook to Abisai, his brothir, 
the tother part of the puple, which* dres- 
side scheltrun a3ens the sones of Amon. 
And Joab seide, If men of Sirie han thei 
maistrie ajens me, thou’ schalt be to me 
in to help; sotheli* if the sones of Amon 
han the maistrie a3ens thee, Y schal helpe 
thee ; be thou a strong man, and fi3te we 12 
for oure puple, and for the citee of oure 
God; forsothe* the Lord schal do that, 
that is good in his si3t. Therfor Joabis 
and his puple that was with hym, bigan 
batel a3ens men of Sirie, whiche® fledden 
anoon fro his face. Forsothe’ the sones14 
of Amon sien, that men of Sirie hadden 
fled ; and thei fledden also fro the face of 
Abisai, and entriden® in to the citee; and 
Joab turnede a3en fro the sones of Amon, 
and cam in to Jerusalem. Forsothef men# 15 
of Sirye sien that thei hadden feld" bifor 
Israel, and thei weren gaderid togidere. 
And Adadezer sente, and ledde out men of 16 
Sirie that weren bi3ende the flood, and he 
brou3te! the oost of hem; sothelik Sobach, 
mayster of the chyualrie of Adadezer, was 
the prince of hem. And whanne this17 
was teld to Dauid, he drow togidere al 
Israel, and passide! Jordan, and cam in 
to Helama. And men of Sirie dressiden 
scheltrun aj3ens Dauid, and fou3ten a3ens 
hym. And Sireis fledden fro the face of 1s 


* the chyualrye cr. 


° sente forth 1. Pandr. 4 the batel1. ‘azenshymi. $his1. t he ordeyneder. ®Sirier. v Andr. 


w Joab1. the which 1. y thou, Abisay 1. 
€ thei entridenr. fAndr. & the men Ga. 
kand1. 1! he passide ouer 5. 


2 and 1. 
b fled FKos sup. ras. w. falle EILMP. 


afor1. Uther. ¢the whicher. 4 And x1. 


i brou3te forth 1. 


X. 18-—XI. 8. 


Cires dresseden sheltrun fro ajens Dauid, 

iand fousten ajens hym. And Cyres 
flowen fro the face of Irael; and Dauid 
slow3 of Cires seuen hundrid chares, and 
fourti thousandisY of horsmen: and he 
smoot Sobach, the prynce of chyualrye, 

19the which anoon is deed. Forsothe 
seynge alle the kyngis, that weren in the 
strength of Adadezer, hem to be ven- 
cusshid of Yrael, maden pees with Irael, 
and serueden to hem; and Cires dradden 
to 3eue help to the sones of Amon. 


CAP. XI. 


1 Forsothe it is doon, turnynge the 3eer 
that tyme the which kyngis ben wont to 
goo forth to batails, Dauid sente? Joab, 
and with hym his seruauntis, and al Irael; 
and thei wastiden the sones of Amon, and 
bisegeden Raba; forsothe Dauid abood 

*stille in Jerusalem. While these thingis 
weren doo, it felle, that Dauid roos on a 
dai fro his bed aftir mydday, and wente 
in the solere of the kyngis hows ; and he 
saw3 a womman wasshynge hir fro ajens 
vpon hir solere; forsothe she was a ful 

3feyr womman. Than Dauid sente, and 
aserchede, what was the womman ; and it 
is toold to hym, that she was Bersabee, 
the dou3ter of Elyam, the* wijf of Vrye 

4Ethei. And so Dauid sente messagers, 
and> took hir; the which whanne she 
was goon in to hym, he slepte with hir, 
and anoon she is halwid fro hir vn- 
5clennes. And she turnede a3en to hir hows, 
the fruyt of hir wombe conseyued ; and 
she sendynge toold to Dauid, and seith, 

61 haue conseyued. Forsothe Dauid sente 
to Joab, seiynge, Send to me Vrie Ethee; 

zand Joab sente Vrye to Dauid. And 
Vrye cam to Dauid; and Dauid askide, 
how ri3t dide Joab and the puple, and 
what maner wise the batail was serued®. 

8And Dauid seide to Vrye, Go into thin 


Y thousand sceri. % sente to E prim. 


m the Sireis 1. © horsmen 1. 
tthe Sireis1. Andi. Yin whiche 1. 
auponr. bands. ¢ sche was I. 
&schewide 1. 4 Andi. + what maner wise 1. 


VOL, II. 


II. KINGS. 


° the chyualrie 1. 
w sente forth 1. : i 
dThanner. ¢ bareyn wymmen weren seid vnclene 1.marg, fa child 1. 


k serued 1, 


113 


Israel ; and Dauid killide of Sireis™ senene 
hundrid charis, and fourti thousynde of 
kny3tis"; and he smoot Sobach, the prince 
of chyualrie®, which? was deed anoon. 
Forsothe? alle kyngis', that weren in the’19 
help of Adadezer, sizen that thei weren 
ouercomun of Israel, and thei maden pees 
with Israel, and serueden hem; and Sireist 
dredden to 3yue help to the sones of 
Amon. 


CAT. XI. 


Forsothe" it was doon, whanne the 3eer 1 
turnede azen in that tyme wherynne’ 
kyngis ben wont to go forth to batels, 
Dauid sente” Joab, and with hym hise 
seruauntis, and al Israel; and thei dis- 
trieden the sones of Amon, and bisegiden 
Rabath ; forsothe* Dauid dwellide in 
Jerusalem?. While these thingis weren2 
doon, it befelde, that Dauid roos in a dai 
fro his bed after mydday, and walkidey 
in the soler of the kyngis hows; and he 
si3 a womman{ waischynge hir silf euen 
ajens” on* hir soler ; sotheli> the womman 
was ful fair. Therfor the kyng sente,3 
and enqueride, what womman it was; and 
it was teld to hym, that sche was Bersabee, 
the dou3tir of Heliam, and was* the wijf 
of Vrye Ethei. Therfor’ bi messangeris 4 
sent Dauid took hir; and whanne sclie 
entride to lym, he slepte with hir, and 
anoon sche was halewid fro hir vn- 
clenesse®||. And sche turnede a3en in tos 
hir hows, with child‘ conseyued ; and sche 
sente, and teldeS to Dauid, and seide, Y 
haue comseyued. Forsothe® Dauid sentes 
to Joab, and seide, Sende thou Vrye Ethei 
to me; and Joab sente Vrye to Dauid. 
And Vrie cam to Dauid; and Dauid axide,7 
hou ri3tfuli Joab dide and the puple, and 


hou' the batel was mynystrid*. Ands 
2Om. £ prm. > Om, sceri. © seuerd 4, 
P the which r. Q@And1, * the kyngiss. § Om. 1. 


xandi. Yhewalkider 7 ajons him 1 


Q 


+ Dauythdwell. 
ide in Jerusa- 
lem ; whanne 
othere men jeden 
forth to batel, 
Danyth dwell- 
ide as idil in 
Jerusalem, and 
therfor he was 
drawun to do 
auoutrie; wher- 
for the poete 
seith, If thou 
takist awey 
idilnessis, the 
craftis of couei- 
tise, that is, of 
leccherie, pe- 
rischiden ; and 
in xxxiii. c°. 
Ecci, ydilnesse 
tauj3te myche 
malice. c. 

t And he si3 

@ womman ; 
vnchast si3t is 
ful perelouse, 
for Danyth 
that was so 
hooly and good, 
was drawun 
herbi to anow- 
trie, and aftir- 
ward to procure 
niansleyng bi 
tresoun, and at 
the laste to par- 
forme it in 
werk. Lire 
here. c. 

|| halewid fro 
hirvnclennesse ; 
that is, fro flux 
of vncleene 
blood that 
schulde come til 
to the child 
bering, for sche 
conseyuede in 
that ligging bi, 
and vneleene 
blood renneth 
no more aftir 
conseyuyng of 
child, for thilko 
blood goith in to 
the formyng 
and mete of the 
child. Lire 
here. c. 


114 


hows, and wassh thi feet. And Vrye 
wente out of the kyngis hows, and hym 
9 folwide the kyngis meet. Forsothe Vrye 
slepte before the 3ate of the kyngis hows 
with othere seruauntis of his lord, aud 
10 he wente not down to his hows. And it 
is toold to Dauid of seieris, Vrye wente 
not to his hows. And Dauid seith to 
Vrye, Whether not fro ‘a ferret weye 
thou cam? whi desendist® thou‘ not into 
thin hows? And Vrie seith to Dauid, 
The arke of God, and® Yrael and Juda 
dwellen in tentis, and my lord Joab, and 
the seruauntis of my lord biden vpon 
the face of the erthe, and I shal go" ‘in 
to' myn hous, that I ete, and drinke, and 
slepe with my wijf? Bi thin helth, and 
bi the helth of thi soule, I shal not doo 
12this thing. Thanne Dauid seith to Vrie, 
Bijd here also to dai, and to morwe Y shal 
leeue thee. Vrye bode in Jerusalem that 
13day and the tothere. And Dauyd clepide 
hym, that he eete before hym and drynk, 
and he made hym drunke; the which goon 
out at euen, slepte in his bedde with the 
sernauntis of his lord ; and he desendide 
14not into his hows. And it is doon thanne 
eerli, and Dauid wroot a lettre to Joab, 
sand sente bi the hoond of Vrye, wryt- 
ynge in the lettre, Puttith Vrie fro 
a3ens of the batail, where the batail is 
moost strong, and forsakith hym, that he 
16smyten die. Thanne whanne Joab bi- 
segide the citee, he putte Vrye in the 
place where he wiste moost stronge men 
17to ben. And the men gon out fro the 
cite, fou3ten a3en Joab, and thei slewen 
of the puple of! the seruauntis of Dauid, 
Wand also Vrie Ethee is deed.” And so 
Joab sente, and toolde alle thes wordis of 
i9the batail; and comaundide to the mes- 
sageer, seiynge, Whanne thou hast ful 
endid alle the wordis of the batail to the 
20kyng, if thou seest hym to han indig- 
f Om. zg. 


(the & pr.m. © descendedest c. 


1 forth 1. 
F npon 1. 


sente it 1. 
4 enmyes 1. 


mAndr. he sede 1. 
Sthe erthe 1. t he 3ede 1. 
whe wroot 1.  * epistle cx. 


€ the sernauntis Bcimuc. 


II. KINGS. 


8 of & prim. 


° hath not go 1. 
u Therfor whanne A sec. m. Thanune tr. 
Y Putte 1. 
f deed there 1. 


XI. 9-—20. 


Dauid seide to Vrye, Go in to thin hows, 
and waische thi feet. Vrye 3ede out! fro 
the hows of the kyng, and the kyngis 
mete suede hym. Sotheli™ Vrye slepte» 
bifor the 3ate of the kyngis hows with 
othere seruauntis of his lord, and 3ede" not 
doun to his hows. And it was teld to1o 
Dauid of men, seiynge, Vrye ‘3ede not° to 
his hows. And Dauid seide to Vrye, 
Whether? thou camest not fro the weye? 
whi 3edist thou not doun in to thin hows ? 
And Vrie seide to Danid, The arke of11 
God, Israel4 and Juda dwellen in tentis, 
and my lord Joab, and the seruauntis of 
my lord dwellen on™ the face of erthe’, 
and schal Y go in to myn hows, to ete 
and drynke, aud slepe with my wijf? Bi 
thin helthe, and bi the helthe of thi soule, 
Y schal not do this thing. Therfor Dauid 12 
seide to Vrye, Dwelle thou here also to 
dai, and to morewe Y schal delyuere thee. 
Vrie dwellide in Jerusalem in that day 
and the tothir. And Dauid clepide hym, 13 
that he schulde ete and drynke bifor hym, 


and Dauid made drunkun Vryet; and he t+ Dauyth 
0 a A _ made drunkun 
3ede out in the euentid, and slepte in his Pie; that is, 
‘ 6 made to e 
bed with the seruauntes of his lord; and  tohim peel 
t . . wyn able to 
3edet not doun in to his hows. Therfor® 14 S73). drunie 


the morewtid was maad, and" Dauid wroot 2nd bileuyde 
; 2 that he schulde 

epistle to Joab, and sente’ bi the hond of _ herby forsete 

3 3 the arke and 

Vrye, and wroot” iu the pistle*, Sette” 3e 15 the oost, and 


that so h 
Vrye euene aj3ens the batel, where the icnalde Ra 
‘ ‘ . hoot of wyn 
batel is strongeste, ‘that is, where the Roto ny» 


slepe with his 


aduersaries ben stronge’, and forsake* 3e se i 
wiyf; and 3it 
netheles Vrie 


hym, that he be smitun and _perische. é 
Therfor whanne Joab bisegide the citee, 16 seyued. tire 
he settide> Vrie in thet place where he "7% 
wiste that strongeste men? weren. And 17 

men 3eden out of the citee, and fou;ten 

az3ens Joab, and thei killiden of the puple 

of seruauntis® of Dauid, and also Vrye 

Ethei was deed‘. Therfor’ Joab sente, and 18 

telde alle the wordis of the batel ; and he 19 
comaundyde to the messanger, and seide, 

k Om. 4. 


hgo out 4. fin arn. 10m. 4. 


P Foren. 4 of Israel 1 prim. w sup. ras. 
uu Om. a sec.m. VY he 
aleene 1. setter. ¢ that 1. 


h these 1. o 


z Om. Berx. 
& And so I. 


XI. 21—XII. 3. 


nacioun, and seye, Whi ne3eden 3e to the 
wal for to fi3te ? whether knewen 3e not, 
that aboue fro the wal ben sent manye 
21 dartis ? who smoot Achymalech, the sone 
of Jeroboal ? whether not a womman 
sente vpon hym a gobet of a myln stoon 
fro the wal, and slew3 hym in Thebes? 
whi biside the wal 3e wenten to? thow 
shalt seye, Also thi seruaunt, Vrye Ethee, 
22is slayn. Thanne the messager wente, 
and cam, and toolde to Dauid alle thingis 
23 that Joab comaundide to hym. And the 
messager seide to Dauid, The men hadden 
the ouer hoond a3ens vs, and thei wenten 
out to vs into the feeld ; forsothe we, the 
bure made, pursueden hem vnto the 3ate 
a40f the citee. And the sheeters dresseden 
dartis to thi sernauntis fro the wal aboue, 
and there ben deed of the seruauntis of 
the kyng; but also Vrie Ethee, thi seru- 
2,aunt, is deed. And Dauid seide to the 
messager, T'hes thingis thou shalt seye 
to Joab, This thing breke thee not ; for- 
sothe dyuerse is the hap of batail, and 
now this, now hym wastith the swerd ; 
coumfort thi fizters a3ens the cytee, that 
26 thou distroye it, and enhurte hem. For- 
sothe the wijf of Vrye herde, that Vrie 
her houseboond was deed, and she wei- 
27lide hym. And the weilynge ouere doon, 
Dauid sente, and brou3te hir into his 
hows; and she is maad wijf to hym, 
and she bare to hym a sone. And the 
word that Dauid dide displeside before 
the Lord. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Thanne the Lord sente Nathan to 
Dauid; the which whanne he was 
comen to hym, seide to hym, Answere 
to me doom; two men weren in o eytee; 
20on ryche, and another pore. The riche 
3hadde sheep and oxen ful manye; for- 


k fulfillid 1. 1 the wordis 1x sec.m.c. ™ sent out 1. 


II. KINGS. 


115 

Whanne thou hast fillid* alle wordis! of eae 
the batel to the kyng, if thou seest, that 20 oneli bi feyn- 
he is wrooth, and ‘seith, Whi neiziden 3e ee 
to the wal to fizte ? whether 3e wisten not, i sadn 
that many dartis ben sent™ ‘fro aboue fro poe eran 
the wal"? who smoot Abymelech, sone? 21 fonyng; and 
of Gerobaal? whether not a womman _ wiyf of the 
senteP on? hym a gobet of a mylnestoon ap aaa 


fro the™ wal‘, and killidet hym in Thebes ? Degrade Ge 
whi neiziden 3e bisidis the wal? thou  hosebendis 
A ; x eth. Lire 
sehalt seie", Also thi seruaunt, Vrye Ethei, ere. c. 
t The riche 


diede’. Therfor” the messanger 3edeX, 22 man; this riche 
man is vndur- 


and telde to Dauid alle thingis whiche © stondun Dauyth, 
Joab hadde comaundid to hym. And the 23 Be eae 
messanger seide to Dauid, ‘Men haddenY eal Mag 

the maistri ajens us, and thei jeden out  thathaddeonely 
to vs in to the feeld; sotheli* bi* ‘fers- eet ae 
nesse maad® we pursueden hem ‘til to® the HOE 

3ate of the citee. And archeris’ senten® 24nd whom he é 
dartis to thi seruauntis fro the wal fer he took hir 
aboue, and summe of the ‘kyngis ser- Sche ect of his 
uauntis’ ben deed; forsothes also thi eben 
seruaunt, Vrye Ethei, is deed. And Dawid 25 bY in mete 
seide to the messanger, Thou schalt seie Te ee: 
these thingis to Joab, This thing breke man, isthe | 

not thee; for the bifallyng® of batel is alent (eRe 
dyuerse, and swerd wastith' now this Reneal eee 

man, now that man; coumforte thi fizteris es id s 

ajens the citee, that thou distrye it, and ques rome! 
excite* thon hem’. Forsothe™ the wijfee uyth made a 

of Vrye herde, that Vrye hir hosebond in ony 
was deed, and sche biweilide hym{. And 27j2),"40seyn8 
whanne the morenyng was passid, Dauid — {) dele for the 
sente, and brou3te hir in to his hows; ine eamiaer 
and sche was maad wijf to hym, and sche ie schal selde’ 

childide a sone to hym. And this word pee one 
which" Dauid hadde do displeside bifor ae 
the Lord. ee 

for the deeth of 


CAP. XII. Vrie; the firste, 
the sone of 
B 
Therfor the Lord sente Nathan to1 Ane oe 
Dauid; and whanne he hadde come to iii, Absvlon, the 
ili, Adonye. 


And Dauyth 

seide, bi herte 
and mouth, 1” 
haue synned to 


Dauid, he seide to Dauid®, Answere thou 

doom? to me ; twei men weren in 0! eitee 5 

of man was riche, and the tother was* the Lord; he 
dcfendide not 


pore. The riche man{ hadde ful many? ;;, Ae hast 
knoulechede 


2 fro the walaboue 1. ° the sone. P lete fuller. 


Quponi. tat. § walanhizet. t sche killide 1, 4 seie thanne 1. v wassleyni. © Thanne rt. * 3ede 


forthi. Y Enmyeshan hadi. 2 andi. & with 1, 
outr1. fseruauntis of the kyng1. 8 and 1. 
mAnd:. ®thatz. Ohimz, Padooms. Tat. 


b gret fersnesse I. 
h happe 1. 
T the oo 1. the too K. 


d scheters1. & senten 
lhem therto 1. 


€ yvnto 1. 
k stire 1. 
8 Om. 1. 


i fordoith 1. 


Q2 


116 


sothe the pore hadde no thing vtterly, 
saaf o litil sheep, the which he bou3te™, 
and norshide, and the which wexe 
anentis hym with his sonys, togidre of 
his breed etinge, and of his cup drynk- 
ynge, and in his bosum slepynge; and 
4it was to hym as a dou3ter. Forsothe 
whanne a maner pylgrym was comen to 
the riche man, he sparynge to take of 
the sheep and of his oxen, that he 3eue 
a meetshipe to that pilgrym, that eam to 
hym, took the sheep of the pore man, 
and maade redi meetis to the man that 
scam to hym. Forsothe Dauid wrooth 
ful myehe bi indignacioun a3ens that 
man, seide to Nathan, The Lord lyueth, 
for the sone of deeth is the man, the 
«whieh dide that; the sheep he shal 
3eelde into foure foold, forthi that he 
hath doo this word, and hath not sparyd. 
7Forsothe Nathan seide to Dauid, Thou 
ert thilk man, that didist this thing. 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God of 
Trael, I haue anoyntid thee into kyng 
vpon Irael, and I haue delyuerde thee fro 
sthe hoond of Saul, and 3eue to thee the 
hows of thi lord, and the wyues of thi 
lord in thi bosum, and 3euen to thee the 
hows of Irael, and of Juda; and if thes 
thingis ben litil, I shulde adde to thee 
ginyche more. Whi thanne hast thou 
dispisid the word of the Lord, that thou 
doo yuel thingis in my si3t? Vrye Ethei 
thou hast smyten with swerd, and the 
wijf of hym thou hast takyn to thee into 
wijf, and thou hast slayn hym bi the 
1oswerd of the sones of Amon. For what 
thing swerd of thin hows shal not goo 
awey fro thee vnto with outen ende; 
forthi that thou hast dispised me, and 
took the wijf of Vrie Ethei, that she 
in were thi wijf. And so thes thingis seith 
the Lord, Loo! I shal rere vpon thee 
yuel of thin hows, and I shal taak awey 


II. KINGS. 


XII. 4—11. 


scheep, and oxun; sothelit the pore man3 
hadde yttirli no thing, outakun o litil 
scheep, which" he hadde bou3t, and 
nurschid, and which’ ‘hadde wexid” at* 
hym with hise sones, and eet togidere’ of 
his breed, and drank of his cuppe, and 
slepte in his bosum; and it was as a 
dou3ter to hym. Forsothe? whanne aa 
pilgrym ‘hadde come* to the? riche man, 
he sparide to take of hise® scheep and 
oxun, that he sehulde make a feeste to 
that pilgrym, that cam to hym; and he 
took the scheep of the pore man, and ‘made 
redi? metis to the man that cam to hym. 
Forsothe® Dauid was ful wrooth withs 
indignaciown a3ens that man, and seide’ 
to Nathan, The Lord lyueth, for the man 
that dide this is the sone of deetht; hee 
schal 3elde the scheep in to foure folde, for 
he dide this word, and sparide not. For-7 
sothe Nathan seide to Dauid, Thou art 
thilke' man, that hast do this thing. 
The Lord God of Israel seith these 
thingis, Y anoyntide* thee ‘in to! kyng 
on™ Israel, and Y delyuerede thee fro the 
hond of Saul, and Y jaf to thee the howss 
of thi lord, and the wyues of thi lord in 
thi bosum, and Y 3af to thee the hows 
of Israel, aud of Juda; and if these 
thingis ben litil, Y sehal" adde® to thee 
myehe grettere thingis. Whi therfor hast 9 
thou dispisid the word of the Lord, that 
thou didist yuels in my si3t? Thou hast 
smyteP by swerd Vrye Ethei, and thou 
hast take his wijf in to wijf to thee, and 
thou hast slayn hym with the swerd of 
the sones of Amon. 
schal not go awey fro thin hows? til in 
to with outen ende; for thou dispysidist* 
me, and tokist* the wijf of Vrye Ethei, 
that sche schulde be thi wiff. 
the Lord seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
reise on' thee yuel® of thin hows, and Y 
schal take thi wyues in ‘thin i3en’, and Y 


m brou3te 4. 
tand1. Uthe whichr. the which i. W wexide1. *anentis1. Y bother. 2 Bnti. camer. 
bthist. c¢hisowner. 4 greithider. ¢Certis1. fheseider. & this thing 1. » Andi. ‘that en. 
kK hane ¢ anoyntid 1 !Om.1 ™ upon, "schulder pr. m. 9° thanne dot. qa swerd kK. 


"hast dispisid 1. 8 hast take 1. t upon 1. 


4 the yuel 1. 


P killid 1. 
Y thi sizt 1. ‘ 


mekely, wher- 
for it sueth, also 
the Lord hath 
turaed awey thi 
synne, as to the 
gilt, in for- 
3yuynge it for 
thi penaunce, 
and as to the 
peyne, in teni- 
peringe it; for 
thou3 thou art 
a manquellere 
and worthi the 
deth, netheles 
thou schalt not 
die in thi propir 
persoone, but 
in thi sone 
bornn. Of 
whiche the 
cause sueth, for 
thou hast maad 
the enemyes to 
blasfeme the 
name of the 

rd; for yuele 
men and vn- 
kunnynge blas- 
femeden bi this 
the priuy domes 
of God, and 
seiden, "that he 
dide vniustly in 
repreuynge 
Saul, and in 
chesinge Da- 
uyth, that 
dide synnes 
more worse 
than Saul 
hadde do. Lire 
here. c 
+ ts the sone of 
deeth ; that is, 
worthi of deth, 
for the hidous- 
nesse of the 
dede. Lire 

Te. Co 


Wherfor swerd410? 3 fro thin hows, 


3 forthe ~ 
brother killide 
the brother, as 
Absolon killide 
Amon, in xiii, 
c*., and Salo- 


Therfor 11 mon killide 


donye, in iif. 
book ii. c°., and 
Absolon roos 
azenus Dauyth 
his fadir, in this 
book xv.c®. c. 


XII. 12—21. 


thi wyues in thin eyen, and 3yue to thin 
neijbour, and he shal sleepe with thi 
l2wyues in the eyen of this sunne. For- 
sothe thou didist hidyngli; forsothe I 
shal doo this word in si3t of al Irael, 
13and in the sij3t of this sunne. And Danid 
seide to Nathan, I haue synned to the 
Lord. And Nathan seide to Dauid, 
Forsothe the Lord hath ouerborn thi 
14synne; thou shalt not die. Neuerthelater 
for thou hast maad the enemyes to blas- 
pheme the name of the Lord, for that 
word the sone that is born to thee bi 
15deeth shal die. And Nathan is turned 
ajen into his hows. And the Lord 
smoot the litil child, whom the wijf of 
Vrye bare to Dauid, and he is dispeyrid. 
16 And Dauid preyde the Lord for the litil 
child; and Dauid fastide with fastyuge, 
and wente in aside, and" laye vpon the 
i7erthe. Forsothe the eldris of his hows 
camen, constreynynge hym that he shulde 
ryse fro the erthe; the whiche wolde 
18not, and eete not with hem meete. For- 
sothe it felle the seuenthe dai, that the 
child diede ; and the seruauntis of Dauid 
dradden to telle to hym, that the child 
was deed; thei seiden forsothe, Loo! 
whanne the lityl child lyuede, we 
speken to hym, and he herde not oure 
voys; how mych more if we seyn the 
child is deed, he shal turment hym 
wself? Whanne thanne Dauid hadde herd 
his sernauntis musyuge, he vndirstood 
that the lytyl faunt was deed; and he 
seide to his seruauntis, Whether the 
child is deed? The whiche answerden 
20vnto™= hym, He is deed. ‘Thanne Dauid 
roos fro the erthe, and he is wasshid®, and 
anoynt ; and whanne he hadde chaungid 
clothinge, he wente into the hows of the 
Lord, and honourde, and cain into his 
hows ; and he askyde, that thei shulden 
2lsette to hym breed, and he eete. For- 


n Om. E. 


~ 3yue hem 1. 
made i. ¢that1. 4 Dauid 1. 
tuponit. k Andi. 10m.1, 
Stospeke1, tOm.a. % Om. EPRu. 


™ rise up I. 


II. KINGS. 


nn to BCEFI,. 


* Gloss omitted in 1. chapitre bifore K. 
e dispeiride of the lijf of it 1. 
n wolde not 1. 
v The whiche 1. 


117 


schal 3yue” to thi nei3bore, and he schal 

slepe with thi wyues in the izen of this 

sunne, ‘that is, opynli bifor alle men, as 

in xv. chapitre*. For thou hast do priueli ; 12 
forsothe? Y schal do this word in the si3t 

of al Israel, and in the si3t of this sunne. 

And Dauid seide to Nathan, Y haue1s 

synned to the Lord. And Nathan seide 

to Dauid, Also* the Lord hath turned 

awei thi synne; thou schalt not die. 

Netheles for thou madist® enemyes to14 
blasfeme the name of the Lord, for this 

word the child which* is borun to thee 

schal die bi deeth. And Nathan turnede 15 

ajen in to his hows. And the Lord sinoot 

the litil child, whom the wijf of Vrye 

childide to Dauid, and he“ dispeiride’t. +, deere 
And Dauid preiede the Lord for the litil 16 aispeiride of 
child ; and Dauid fastide bi fastyng, and ie hb 
entride® asidis half, and lai® oni the erthe. or eee 
Sothelis the eldere men 


of his hows 172"4 therfor he 
ow preyede, tor he 
camen, and constreyneden hym ‘bz meke 


wiste not, wher 


. ‘ God spak bi 
preieris', that he schulde rise™ fro the — determyna- 
. ioun, ether bi 
erthe; and he nolde", nethir he eet mete tinasine. 


with hem. Forsothe® it bifelde in the te Ziv’ « 
seuenthe dai, that the 3ong child diede ; 
and the seruauntis of Dauid dredde to 
telle to hym, that the litil child was 
deed; for thei seiden, Lo! whanneP the 
litil child lyuede 3it, we spaken to hym, 
and he herde not oure vois; hou myche 
more, if we seien the child is deed, he 
schal turment himsilf? Therfore whanne 19 
Dauid hadde herd his seruauntis’ spek- 
ynge® priueli, ‘ether moterynge', he un- 
derstood that the 30ng child was deed; 
‘and he seyde to his seruauntis, Whether 
the child is deed"? Whiche’ answeriden 
to hym, He is deed. Therfor Dauid 20 
roos” fro the erthe, and was waischid*, 
and anoyutid; and whanne he hadde 
chaungid cloth’, he entride in to the 
hows of the Lord, and worschipide, and 
cam in to his hows; and he axide, that 


© wasshen c. 


Zeertis1. @Certis1. >» hast 
&he3ede3x, bhe lais. 
dseeni. T children., 


Y his clothis 1. 


y haue 1. 
f preiede to c. 

0 Andi. P while. 
Wyoos up 1. * weischen 1. 


118 


sothe his seruauntys seiden to hym, 
What is the word that thon hast doon ? 
For the litil faunt, whanne he 3it lyuede, 
thou fastidist and weptist; forsothe the 
child deed, thou roos and eete breed ? 
22'The which seith, For the faunt whanne 
he 3it lyuede I fastide and wepte; for- 
sothe I seide, Who woot, if perauenture 
the Lord 3yue hym to me, and the faunt 
23lyue? Forsothe now for he is deed, whi 
fast I? whether shal I mowe more ouer 
clepe hym a3en? I shal more goo to 
hym, forsothe he shal not turne ajen to 
21me. And Dauid coumfortide Bersabe, his 
wijf, and wente into hir, and slepte with 
hir. The which gat a sone, and clepide 
the name of hym Salomon; and the 
25 Lord louyde hym. And he sente hym 
in the hoond of Nathan, the prophet ; and 
he clepide the name of hym Loueli to 
the Lord, forthi that the Lord shulde 
26loue hym. Thanne Joab fau3t ajens 
Rabath, kyng of the sones of Amon, 
and he hath ouercomen the kyngis citee. 
27And Joab sente messagers to Dauid, 
selynge, I haue fou3ten a3ens Rabath, 
and the citee of watres is to be taken. 
28 Now thanne gadre the tother parti of 
the puple, and bisege the citee, and tak 
it, lest whanne the citee were wastid of 
me, to my name the victorie be ascriued. 
20 And so Dauid gadride al the puple, and 
wente forth a3ens Rabath; and whanne 
sohe hadde fou3ten, he took it. And he 
took the diademe fro the mawmet, that is 
clepid the kyng of hem, fro his heed, in 
wei3t of gold a talent, hauynge moost 
precious gemmys; and it is put vpon the 
heed of Dauid; but and ful myche praye 
sof the cyte he bare out. And bryngynge 
forth sawede® the puple of it, and ladde 
about vpon hem boostful yren carris, and 
he dyuydide with sharys, and he pi3t 


II. KINGS. 


XIT, 22——31. 


thei schulden sette breed to hym, and he 

eet. Sothely” his seruauntis seiden to hym, 21 

What is the word which* thou hast do ? 

Thou fastidist®, and weptist® for the 3ong 

child, whanne* he lyuede 3it; sotheli¢ 

whanne the child was deed, thou risidistf 

aud etist breed ? And Dauid seide, Y fast- 22 

ide and wepte for the 3ong child, whanne 

he lynyde 3it; for Y seidet, Who woot, if i a 
perauenture the Lord 3yue hym to me, Himite a myn 
and the 3ong child lyue? ‘Now forsothe® 23 here c. 
for he is deed, whi ‘fast Y*? whether Y 

schal mow a3en clepe hym more? Y schal 


‘go more to! hym, but he schal not turne* 


a3en tome. And Danid coumfortid Ber-24 
sabee, his wijf; and he entride to hir, 
and slepte! with hir. And sche gendride 

a sone, and Dauid clepide his name Sa- prsile 
lomont ; and the Lord louyde hym. And 25 for it was ” 
he sente Salomon™ in the hond of Nathan, me 


t Salomon is 
interpretid pe- 
sible; and this 


Danyth, that 
the prophete; and he clepide his name acide 
Amyable® to the Lord, for the Lord louyde — aftr him, and _ 
hym. Therfor® Joab fau3t aj3ens Rabath{§, 26 lyue in s0 greet 


pees, that he 

of P the sones of Amon, and he fau3t azens __ ichulde bilde 
‘ ° a temple to th 

the ‘kyngis citeet. And Joab sente mes-27 Lor, 8 oy 
8 G . Tr rd bihizte 
sangeris to Dauid, and seide, Y fau3te to Denypan 
ajens Rabath, and the citee of watris vii. c°. bifore. 
ire here. c. 

schal be takun. Now therfor gadere thou 28§ Rabath; that 
5 was th in- 

the tother part of the puple, and bisege  cipat cite atl 

e : the kingis 

thou the citee, and take thou it, lest Gitte aed ther. 
whanne the citee is* wastid of me, the ‘or the king 


i : i and hise wer- 
victorie be arettid to my name. Therfor 29 riours put- 


Dauid gaderidet al the puple, and he 3ede oe re 
forth a3ens Rabath ; and whanne he hadde i diadome of 
fou3te", he took it. And he’ took the dia-30 paren 
deme of the kyng|| of hem’ fro his heed, of hem, which 
: ; is clepid Mel- 
bi weizte* a talent of gold, hauynge pre- chon, that is 
ciousesteY peerlis; and it was put on? the Ling on Ren 
heed of Dauid, ‘that ts*, aftir that it was Eve here. ¢. 
weldid® and purgid bi fier*; but also 
Dauid bar awey ful myche prey of the ple, ut onely 
citee. Also* he ledde forth the puple ther-31 councel, than 


{| the puple, 
etc.; that is, 
of], and sawide‘, and ‘dide aboute® hem ‘spit schulde 


not al the pu- 


be doon to hise 
thur3 in the shap of the sidis; thus he ‘yrun instrumentis of turment", and de- pee cs 
© sauede a. 
*Andr, @thati. > hast fastidr. ¢wept1. 4@whiler. ¢ butr. fhast risen up1. £ But now 1. 
h schal I faste for him1. imore rathirgotor. kcomer. !heslepter, ™him1.  ® Louely 1. 
°Thanner Pthekyngofr1. 4citeeofthekyngr1. 'hane fouz3ter. *ber. + gaderide to gidre 1. 


Vv Dauid 1. 


u fougte azens that citee 1. 


w Amon I. 


* the weizte of 1. Y preciouse apb. 2 upon 1. 


2 Om. kx. » wellid coerGKLMNopgrsuwxbe. ‘¢Gloss omitted in r. dthat r. ¢Ands. fhe sawide it 1. 


& cumpasside 1. 4 with iren bounde cartis 1. 


a ———— a <<< aa ——<=—_ = 


xIu. 1—8. 


dide to alle the citees of the sonys of 
Amon. And Dauid is turned a3en, and 
alle the oost of hym, into Jerusalem. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Forsothe it is doon after thes thingis, 
that Amon, the sone of Dauid, louede 
the sister of Absolon, the sone of Da- 

2uid, moost fayre, Thamar by name; and 

‘peyrede for? hir ful myche, so that for 
the loue of hir he wexe sijk. The which 
for she was a mayde, hard to hym it 
semede, that eny thing vnhonestly he 

3shulde do with hir. Forsothe there was 
to Amon a freende, Jonadab bi name, the 
sone of Semaa, brother’ of Dauid, a ful 

4slei3. man. The which seide to hym, 

Whi thus ert thou waastid bi leenesse, 
thou sone of the kyng, bi ech dai? whi 
shewist thou not to me? And Amon 
seide to hym, I Joue Thamar, the sister 

sof my brother Absolon. To whom an- 
swerde Jonadab, Ly vpon thi bedde, 
and feyn sijknes; and whanne thi fader 
cometh, that he visite thee, sey to hym, 
Come’, I preye, Thamar’, my sister*, that 
she 3yue to me meet, and make sowil®, 

6that I eete of hyr hoond. And so Amon 
laye doun, as thou3 he wexe sijk. And 
whanne the kyng was comen to visite 
hym, Amon seith to the kyng, Come, 
I preye, Thamar, my sister, that she 
make in myn eyen two maner of potagis, 
and the’ meet maad redi I take of hir 
zhoond. Thanne Dauid sente to the hous 
of Thamar, seiynge, Go in to the hows 

.of Amon, thi brothir, and mak to hym 

spotage. And Thamar cam into the 
hows of Amon, hir brothir. Forsothe he 
laye; the which takynge meele mengide 


P spillede in to £ pr. m. 
% sowfful vw. Y Om. 4. me 2. 


1 he departide hem 1. 


II. KINGS. 


9 the brothir £ pr.m. 


k in the schapp of her sidis he stikide hem thorou3 1. 


119 


partide' with knyues, and ‘ledde ouer bi 
the licnesse of tijl stoonus* ; so! he dide 
to alle the citees of the sones of Amon. 
And Dauid turnede a3en, and al his oost, 
in to Jerusalem. 


CAP. XIII. 


Forsothe™ it was doon aftir these! 
thingis, that Amon, the sone of Dauid, 
louyde the faireste™ sistir, Thamar bi 
name, of Absolon, sone® of Dauid. And2 
Amon perischide? greetli for hir, so that 
he was sijk for ‘the loue of hirt. For 
whanne’ she was a virgyn, it semyde hard 
to hym, that he schulde do ony thing 
vnonestli with hir. Forsothe’ a freend',s 
Jonadab bi name, sone" of Semmaa, bro- 
ther’ of Dauid, ‘was to Amon’ ; Jonadab* 
was a ful prudent man. WhichY seide to4 
Amon, Sone of the kyng, whi art thou 
maad feble so bi leenesse bi alle daies? 
whi schewist thou not to me?? And 
Amon seide to him, Y loue Thamar, the 
sister of my brother Absolon. And Jona-s 
dab answeride to hym, Li thou on* thi 
bed, and feyne thou sikenesse; and whanne 
thi fadir cometh, that he visyte thee, seie 
thou to hym, Y preye®, come Thamar, my 
sister, that sche 3yue mete to me, and 
make>> a seew, that Y ete¢ of hir hond. 
Therfort Amon lay doun, and ‘bigan as®« 
to be sijk. And whanne the kyng hadde 
come to visite him, Amon seide to the 
kyng, Y biseche, come Thamar, my sistir, 
that sche make tweif soupyngis bifor my 
i3en, and that Y take of hir hond meete® 
maad redi. Therfor Dauid sente to the7 
hows of Thamar, and seide, Come thou 
in to the hows of Amon, thi brother, and 
make thou! seewi to hym. And Thamars 
cam in to the hows of Amon‘, hir brother. 
Sotheli! he lai; and sche took mele, and 


r Om. 4. 8 that Thamar 4. t sister come 4. 


Ithusi1. ™Andi. © ful 


fair 1. © the sone coIKMowxg. P peiride 1. Ghir loue1. ‘sith 1. ‘But therwas1. + freend to Amon 1. 


wOm. 1. 
© ete iti. 
k Om. 1. 


uthe sone z. VY the brothir 1. 
b biseeche 1. > make sche 1. 
meeter, 8 Om. a. iaseew1. 


xand Jonadab 1, 
d Thanne 1. 
1 And i. 


Z me thin herte 1. 
f two maner 1. two L. 


y The which 1. 
€ feynede 1. 
m Jai doun I. 


4 upon 1. 
g the 


120 II. KINGS. 


togidir, and meltynge in his eyen she 
asethide” the supettis; and takynge that 
she hadde sothen, she helte out, and sette 
before hym, and he wolde not eete. And 
Amon seide, Doo 3e* a wey alle men fro 
me. And whanne alle weren doon awey, 
1oAmon seide to Thamar, Beer yn the 
meet in the priue chaumbre, that I eete 
of thin hoond. Thanne Thamar took the 

» sewis that she hadde maad, and brou3te 
to Amon, hir brother, in the prine chaum- 

i bre. And whanne she hadde brou3te hym 
meet, he cau3te hir, and seith, Come, ly 
with ‘me, my sister. The which answerde 
to hym, Wole thou not, my brother, wole 
thou not oppresse me, ne forsothe it is 
leeueful in Irael; wole thou not doo this 
13foli. Forsothe I shal not mowe bere my 
reproof, and thou shalt be as oon of the 
ynwise men in Irael; but rather spek 
to the kyng, and he shal not denye me 
14to thee. Forsothe he wolde not assent to 
the preyers of hir, but more my3ti bi 
strengthis oppresside hir, and laye with 
hir. And ful haatsum Amon hadde hir 
with to myche greet haate, so that the 
haat was more, that he hatide hir, thanne 
the loue that he louede hir before. And 
16 Amon seide to hir, Ryse, and goo. The 
whych answerde to hym, This yuel is 
more that thou now dost a3ens me, cast- 
ynge me out, ‘than that? thou didist be- 
17 fore. And he wolde not here hir; but 
the child clepide, that seruede to hym, he 
seide, Throw out this fro me, and close 
isthe dore after hir. The which was 
clothid with a coote doun to the heele; 
forsothe sich maner clothis vseden the 
dou3tris of the kyng maydens. And so 
his seruaunt putte hyre out, and closide 
19the dore after hire. The which spryng- 
ynge asshen* to hire heed, the heele coot 


wseth ec. * Om. £ prom. 


4 medlide to gidre 1. © sche made it 1. 
iti. sette &, * wolde not 1. 

2 this thing 1. 8 Forsothe 1. 
hatred Amon hatide hir 1. 


1 seruaunt 1. ™ putte 1x. 


« soupynge mete 1. 
b But 1. 

f go henns 1. 

” forth 1. 


y Om. E pr.m. 


P sche sethide 1. 
Vv that 1. 
© wolde not 1. 
& that 1. 
° asken EL, aijsshis k. 


XII. 9— 19. 


medlide", and made® moist bifor hise i3en, 

and sethideP soupyngis1; and sche tooks 

that, that sche hadde sode, and helde’ out, 

and settide’ byfor hym, and he noldet ete. 

And Amon seide, Putte 3e out alle men 

fro me. And whanne thei hadden put out 

alle men, Amon seide to Thamar, Bere theo 

mete in to the closet, that Y ete of thin 

hond. Therfor Thamar took the soup- 

ingis" whicheY sche hadde maad, and 

brou3te in to Amon, hir brother, in the 

closet. And whanne sche hadde proferid 1 

mete* to hym, he took hir, and seide, 

Come thon, my sistir, lit thou with me. 

And sche answeride to hym, My brother, j2 

nyle thou, nyle thou oppresse me, forY this” 

is not leueful in Israel; nyle thou do this 

foli. For* Y schal not mow bere my schen-}3 

schip, and thou schalt be as oon of the 

vnwise men in: Israel; but rather speke 

thou to the kyng, and he schal not denyef + he sehal not 
seith, that sche 

iny3tis, and oppresside* hir, and lay with Gf Dauyth, for 
ie hir modir, 


denye, etc. 
me to thee. Sotheli> he nolde® assente 4 Rabi Salomon 
to hir preieris; but he was strengere in — was not the 
kyndly dou3ter 
hir. And ‘Amon hadde hir hateful bi ful a ieee ia 
grete haterede*®, so that the hatrede was 
sche was with 


gretter, bi which he hatide hir, than the  childe bi hir 
a , * . fi e hose- 

loue bi which he louyde hir bifor. And‘ jonde, and 
aftirward Da- 


. ° s f 
Amon seide to hir, Rise thou, and go’. nyth wedi 
And sche answeride to hym, This yuel is 161, bi licence 


of the lawe, 

more which® thou doist now a3ens me, thetfo: Thai 

. be w - 

and puttist me out, than that, that thon aid to to Amon. 
Lire here. c. 


didist bifore. And he nolde" here hir; 
but whanne the child was clepide, that17 
mynystride! to hym, he seide, Putte thou 
out this womman fro me, and close thou 
the dore aftir hir. And sche was clothid 18 
with a coote doun to the heele; for the 
kyngis dou3tris virgyns vsiden  siche 
clothis. Therfor* the mynystre! of Amon 
puttide™ hir out", and closide the dore 
aftir hir. And sche spreynte aische® to19 


2 than 4. and than aru. ® askes BCEFH. 


Gsoupinge metis 1. heelde if 1. 
Ww the mete 1. * and lie a pr. m,1. 

4 he oppresside 1. 
h wolde not 1. 


S sette 

Y certis 1. 
€ thanne with ful grete 

i seruide 1. k Thanne 1. 


XIIL, 20-—28. 


kyt, and® the hoondis put on hire heed, 
20she 3ede goynge yn and criynge. For- 
sothe Absolon, hir brother, seide to hyre, 
Whether Amon, thi brother, hath lyen 
with thee? And now, sister, hold thi 
pees; thi brothir he is, ne turment thin 
herte for this thing. And sot Thamar 
aboode’ languysshynge there with ynne 
21the hows of Absolon, hir brothir. For- 
sothe whanne Dauid hadde herd thes 
wordis, he greetli sorwide, and he wolde 
not make sori the spirite of Amon, his 
sone; for he louide hym, for he was the 
22 firste goten of © hym. Forsothe Absolon 
spak not to Amon, ne yuel ne good; but 
Absolon hatide Amon, forthi that he 
23 hadde defoulid Thamar, his sister. For- 
sothe it is doon after the tyme of two 
jeer, that the sheep of Absolon weren 
clippid in Baalassor, that is biside Ef- 
fraym. And Absolon clepide alle the 
eisonys of the kyng. And he cam to the 
kyng, and seith to hym, Loo! the sheep 
of thi seruaunt ben clippid; come, I 
preye, the kyng with his seruauntis to 
2ahis seruaunt. And the kyng seide to 
Absolon,Wole thou not, sone myn, preye, 
wole thou not, that we comen alle, and 
greuen thee. Forsothe whanne he con- 
streynede him, and wolde not come, he 
26blesside to hym. And Absolon seith to 
Dauid, If thou wolt not come, come algate 
with vs, I biseche, Amon, my brother. 
And the kyng seide to hym, It is no 
e7nede, that he goo with thee. And so 
Absolon constreynede hym; and he lafte 
with hym Amon, and alle the sones of 
the kyng. And Absolon made a feest as 
2sthe feest of a kyng. Forsothe Absolon 
hadde comaundid to his children, sei- 
ynge, Weitith wel, whanne Amon were 


II. KINGS. 


121 


hir heed, whanne the coote to ‘the heeler 
was to-rent, and whanne4 the® hondis 
weren® put on hir heed, and sche 3ede 
entrynge and criynge. Forsothe" Absolon, 20 
hir brother, seide to hir, Whether Amon, 
thi brothir, hath leyn with thee? But 


“now, sister, be stille’; he is thi brother, 


and turmente” not thin herte for this 
thing. Therfor Thamar dwellide moren- 

ynge in the hows of Absolon, hir brothir. 

Forsothe* whamne ‘kyng DauidY hadde2! 

herd these wordis, he was ful sori, and 

he nolde’ make sore the spyrit of Amonf, + %e nolde 
his sone; for he lonyde Amon, for he was irs ot eal 
the® firste gendrid® ‘to hym*. Forsothe! 22 orn 
Absolon spak not to Amon, nether yuel [vie sii and 
nether® good; for Absolon hatide Amon, ete: but he 
for he hadde defoulid Thamar, his sistir. ae 
Forsothef it was doon aftir the tyme Bi esinuet and he 
twei 3eer, that the scheep of Absolon ‘“uidenet 
weren shorun in Baalasor, which? is bi- oe s 
sidis Effraym. And Absolon clepide alle ee tae 
the sones of the kyng. And he cam to2¢not ‘Amon to 
the kyng, and seide to hym, Lo! the atfeaw ed 
scheep of thi seruaunt ben schorun; Y  {r,trede of 
preye, come the king with hise seruauntis 7. ¢- 

to his seruaunt. And the kyng seide to2s 

Absolon, Nyle thou, my sone, nyle thou 

preye, that alle we come, and greeue® thee. 

Forsothe' whanne he constreynedet Dauid, — ? he constreyn- 
and he nolde* go, he blesside Absolon. Pp al 
And Absolon seide to Dauid, If thou nylt! 26 eee 
come, Y byseche™, come nameli Amon, my 7” © 
brother, with vs. And the kyng seide to 

hym, It is no nede, that he go with thee. 

Therfor Absolon constreynede hym®; and 27 

he delyuerede with him Amon, and alle 

the sones of the kyng. And Absolon 

hadde maad a feeste as the feeste of a 

kyng. Sotheli® Absolon comaundide to2s 

hise children, and seide, Aspie 3e, whanne 


dronken with wyn, and I shal seye to Amon is drunkun of wyn, and YP seie to § ¥ am shat 
jou, Smitith hym, and sleeth. Wole 3e — 30u, Smyte 3e, and slei hym. Nyle3edrede, {frewade 
not drede, forsothe I am that comaunde for Y am that comaunde{ to 30u; be je tke the dede 
Y schal de. 
fende zou. 
bOm. 4. ¢loo ser. ‘bod c. boid z. boode pru. & to BCEFH. SSS: 
Phir long cooter. @Om.1. ‘hirtr, *Om.1 tOm.r And. thou now stille, sistir 1. 
wturmente thou1. * Andy. Ythe kyng Danid 1. 2wolde not1. ®his1. b bygoten sone1. ¢ Om. 1, 
@Andi1. ¢nermp. fAndr. thats. -Achargei. iAnd1. ‘kwoldenot1. ! wilt not 1. 
m byseche thee 1. 2 Danid1. ° And1. Pwhanne Y1. (sleeth 1. ; 


VOL. IT. 


R 


122 


_ to 30u; be 3e maad stronge, and beth 
29stronge mien. Thanne the children’ of 
Absolon diden a3ens Amon, as Absolon 
hadde comaundid to hem; and alle the 
sones of the kyng rysynge, eche styede 
30 vpon her mulis, and flowen. And whanne 
3it' thei wenten in the weye, fame cam 
fulli to Dauyd, seiynge, Absolon hath 
smytyn alle the sones of the kyng, and 
3ithere lafte not of hem nameli oone. And 
so the kyng roos, and kytte his clothis, 
and felle vpon the erthe; and alle his 
seruauntis that stoden ny3 to hym, cut- 
3eten her clothis. Forsothe Jonadab, the 
sone of Semmaa, brother® of Dauid, an- 
swerynge seide, Ne eyme, my lord the 
kyng, that alle the children, sones of the 
kyng, ben deed ; Amon alone is deed, for 
in haat Absolon was sett, fro the day that 
33he oppresside Thamar, his sister. Now 
thanne, my lord kyng, sette not on his 
herte this word, seiynge, Alle the sones 
of the kyng ben slayn; for Amon aloon 
34is deed. Forsothe Absolon flei3. And 
the child weyter heuede vp his eyen, and 
bihelde, and loo! myche puple cam bi 
the out weye fro the side of the hil. 
x5And Jonadab seide to the kyng, Loo! 
the sones of the kyng ben ny3; after the 
36 word of thi seruaunt, so it is doon. And 
whamne he hadde ceside to speke, ‘aper- 
iden and the sones of the kyng"; and 
comynge yn thei rereden her vois, and 
wepten; but and the kyng and alle his 
seruauntis wepten with ful myche greet 
sz7wepynge. Forsothe Absolom fleynge 
wente to Tholamay, sone of Amyur, 
kyng of Gethsur. Thanne Dauid weyl- 
38ide Amon, his sone, manye dais. For- 
sothe Absolon, whanne he was flowen, 
and comen into Gethsur, he was there 
39thre 3eer. And kyng Dauid cesede to 
pursue Absolon, forthi that he was 
coumfortid vpon the deeth of Amon. 


f childer ce, & the brother x pr.m. 


T resen up I. resen E. § upon. 
nameli oon tT. *roosupi. Y upon t. 
*sether. fuponi. & Certis 1. 
™reisiden up1. Owithx © And1. 
“upon 1. 


z Butt. 


II. KINGS. 


t cam therof 1. 
8 the sone 1. 
h spiere a pr.m. DIMPX sec.m. bg. ireisideup1. Kant. laftir rt. 
P he 3ede 1. 


XIN. 29—39. 


strengthid, and be 3e stronge men. Ther-29 
for the children of Absolon diden a3ens 
Amon, as Absolon hadde comaundide to 
hem; and alle the sones of the kyng 
risiden', and stieden ech on® his mule, 
and fledden. And whanne thei 3eden 3it 30 
in the weie, fame cam to the kyng, and 
seide*, Absolon hath kild’ alle the sones 
of the king, and ‘nameli not oon lefte” of 
hem. Therfor the kyng roos*, and to-31 
rente hise clothis, and felde doun ony the 
erthe; and alle hise seruauntis that stoden 
ny3 to hym, to-renten her clothis. Sotheli? 32 
Jonadab, sone* of Semmaa, brother of Da- 
uid, answeride and seide, My lord the? 
kyng, gesse® not, that alle the children, and 
sones of the kyng, ben slayn ; Amon aloone 
is deed, for he was set in hatrede to Ab- 
solon, fro the day in which he oppresside 
Thamar, his sistir. Now therfor, my lord 33 
the’ kyng, set® not this word on‘ his 
herte, and seie, Alle the sones of the 
kyng ben slayn; for Amon aloone is deed. 
Forsothe? Absolon fledde. And a child 34 
aspiere® reiside! lise izen, and bihelde, and 
lo! myche puple cam bi a weye out of the 
comyn weie bi the side of the* hil. Andss 
Jonadab seide to the kyng, Lo! the sones 
of the kyng comen; bi! the word of thi 
seruaunt, so it is doon. And whanne he3e 
hadde ceessid to speke, also the sones of 
the kyng apperiden; and thei entriden, 
and reisiden™ her vois, and wepten; but 
also the kyng and alle lis sernauntis 
wepten bi® ful greet wepyng. Forsothe®°3; 
Absolon fledde, and 3ede? to Tholmai, 
soned of Amyur, the kyng of Gessur. 
Therfor Dauid biweilide his sone Amon 
in many daies. Forsothe’ Absolon, whanne 38 
he hadde fled, and hadde come in to’ Ges- 
sur, wast there thre jeer. And Dauids9 
ceesside to pursue Absolon, for he was 
coumfortid on" the deeth of Amon. 


h the sones of the kyng aperiden 4. 


w he hath not left 


uit was seid 1. Vv sleyn 1. 
4 Om. 1. 


bOm.1. © gesse thou 1. 


athe soner, tAndz. $%Om.1. +t he wast. 


XIV. I—11. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Forsothe Joab, the sone of Saruy, 


vndurstondynge, that the herte of the 


zkyng was turned to Absolon, he sente 
to Thekuam, and took thens a wise 
womman, and he seide to hir, Feyne 
thee to weil, and be clothid with the 
weilynge clooth, and be thou not anoynt 
with oyle, that thou be as a womman 
now myche tyme weilynge the deed. 
3And thou shalt goo in to the kyng, and 
thou shalt speek to hym thes maner 
wordis. Forsothe Joab putte the wordis 
4in hire mouth. And so whanne the Thek- 
uyd womman was goon out to the kyng, 
she felle before hym vpon the erthe, and 
lowtide, and seide, Keep me, thou king. 
sAnd the kyng seide to hire, What hast 
thou of cause? The which answerde, 
Alas! a womman widowe I am, forsothe 
eémy man is deed; and of thin hoond 
womman weren two sones, the whiche 
wraththeden a3ens hem self in the feeld, 
and no man was that hem my3te de- 
fende, and the toon! smoot the tother, 
zand slow3 hym. And loo! al the kyn- 
rede risynge aj3ens thin hoond womman 
seith, Tak hym that hath smytyn his 
brothir, that we sleen hym for the lijf 
of his brother whom he slow3, and the 
eyr doo we a wey; and thei sechen to 
quench my spark that is laft, that there 
be not laft name to my man, and relikis 
svpon erthe. And the kyng seith to the 
womman, Go into thin hows, and I shal 
gordeyn for thee. And the Thekuyt 
womman seide to the kyng, In me, my 
lord kyng, be this wickidnes, and into 
the hows of my fader ; forsothe the kyng 
loand his trone be innocent. And thie 
king seith, Who so* ajen seith! thee, 
bryng hym to me, and he shal no more 
’ nadde that he touche thee. The which 
seith, The kyng recoorde of the Lord 


II. KINGS. 


123 


CAP. XIV. 


Forsothe Joab, the sone of Saruye,1 
vndirstood, that the herte of the kyng 
was turned to Absolon; and he sente toz 
Thecua, and took’ fro thennus a_ wise 
womman, and he seide to hir, Feyne thee 
to morene, and be thou clothid with clooth” 
of duyl*, and be thou anoyntid™ with oile, 
that thou beY as a womman by moren- 
ynge” ‘now in* ful myche tyme a deed 
man. And thou schalt entre to the kyng,s 
and thou schalt speke to hym_ siche> 
wordis. Sothelit Joab puttide? the wordis 
in hir mouth. Therfor whanne the wom-4 
man of Thecua hadde entrid to the kyng, 
sche felde bifor hym on the erthe, and 
worschipide, and seide, A®! kyng, kepef me. 
And the kyng seide to hir, What hasts 
thou of% cause? And sche answeride, 
Alas! Y am a womman widewe, for myn 
hosebonde is deed; and tweyne sonese 
weren of! thin handmayde, whiche* de- 
batiden a3ens hem silf in the feeld, and 
‘noon was! that my3te forbede hem, and 
oon™ smoot ‘the tother", and killide hym. 
And lo! al the kynrede risith a3ens thin7 
handmayde, and seith, 3yue thou hym? 
that killide his brothir, that we sle hym 
for the lijf of his brother whom he killide, 
and that we do awei the eir; and thei 
seken to quenche my sparcle whych? is 
lefte, that name‘ dwelle not to myn hose- 
bonde, and relikis', ‘ethir remenauntis®, be 
not to him on erthe. And the kyng seide® 
to the womman, Go in to thin hows, and 
Y schal comaunde for thee. And theo 
womman of Thecua seide to the kyng, 
My lord the kyng, this wickidnesse be on 
met, and on the hows of my fadir; for- 
sothe the kyng and his trone be innocent*. 
And the kyng seide, Brynge thou hym to10 
me, that ajenseith thee, and he schal no 
more adde" that he touche thee. Andi 
sche seide, The kyng haue mynde on’ his 


itother scerH. k Om. sceru. | seith to c. 
vhe took 1. Waclooth1. *deyl K. deol x. doel a. deel =. ** not anoyntid c see.m. Y¥ be now 1. 
2 mournynge 1. 4Om.1. Ysiche manere1. ¢ Andi. 4 putter. ©O1 fkepethour & Om. 1. 
hCertis1. itor. the whichet. Itherwasnomani. ™the oon1.thetoonk. ™ that other 1. 


°hym/éous1. Pthat1. Qthe name1, ‘that remenauntis 1. *Om. 1. tthei gitlees 1. vadde tor, Vof 1. 


R2 


t this wickid- 
nesse be on me ; 
Ebrews seyen 
thus, and wel 
as it semeth, 
My lord the 
king, for many 
causis and 
harde, thou 
mayst forzete 
this cause, and 
thanne this 
wickidnesse 
schal be in me 
and in myn 
hows, and my 
sone schal be 
slayn of men 
sekinge his 
blood, and thou 
schalt be inno- 
cent, for this 
schal be doon 
with out thyn 
entent; as if she 
seide, Plese it 
more to thee to 
conferme this 
with an ooth, 
and to make 
sikur me and 
my sone, ther- 
for the kyng 
seide at the 
laste, the Lord 
lyueth, that is, 
Y swere to thee 
bi the Lord 
lyuynge for 
noon of the 
heeris, etc. 
Lire here c. 


124 


his God, and be there not multiplied 
‘the kyn™ of the blood to  wreche, 
and thei shulen not sle my sone. The 
which seith, The Lord lyueth, for there 
shal not falle of the erys of thi sone 
12vpon the erthe. Thanne the womman 
seyde, Spek thin hoond womiman to my 
lord kyng a word. And he seith, Spek. 
13 And the womman seide, Whi hast thou 
thou3t siche a maner thing a3ens the puple 
of God? and the kyng hath spoken this 
word, that he synne, and that he brynge 
14not ajen his easten out? Alle we dyen, 
and as watres we sliden into the erthe, 
that shulen not be turned a3en ; and God 
wole not perishe the lijf, but withdraw- 
ith, thenkynge lest fulli he perishe, that 
isis cast" awey. Now thann come, that 
I spek to my lord kyng this word, pre- 
sent the puple; and thin hondwomman 
seide, I shal speke to the kyng, if eny 
maner the kyng doo the word of his 
ishoond womman. And the kyng herde 
‘the word°, that he delyuer his hond- 
womman fro the hoond of alle, that 
wolden fro the erytage of the Lord doo 
17me awey, and my sone togidre. Sey 
thanne thin hondwomman, that the word 
of my lord the kyng be maad as sacri- 
fice ; forsothe as the aungel of the Lord, 
so is my lord kyng?, that nether bi 
blessynge ne bi cursynge he be meuyd. 
Wherfor and the Lord thi God is with 
isthee. And the kyng answerynge seide 
to the womman, Ne hijd thou fro me 
the word that I aske. And the wom- 
man seide to hym, Spek, my lord kyng. 
i9 And the kyng seith, Whether the hoond 
of Joab is with thee in alle these? The 
womman answerde, and seith, Bi the 
helth of thi sonle, my lord kyng, ne at 
the left ne at the rijt he is of alle thes 
thingis, the whiche my lord kyng? hath 
spoken. Forsothe thi seruaunt Joab he 
comaundide to me, and he putte in the 


II. KINGS. 


XIV. 12-——19. 


Lord God, and the nexte men of blood to 
take veniaunce be” not multiplied, and 
‘thei schulen not sleY my sone. And the 
kyng seide, The Lord lyueth, for noon of 
the heeris of thi sone schal falle on? the? 
erthe. Therfor the womman seide, Thin 12 
handmayde speke a word to> my lord 
the’ kyng. And the kyng seide, Speke 
thou. And the womman seide, Whil3 
‘thon3tist thou’ sich a thing ajens the 
puple of God? and the® kyng spak* this 
word, that he do synne, and brynge not 
a3en his sone cast? out? Alle we dyen,14 
and as watris that schulen not turne a3en, 
we sliden in to erthe"; and God nyl! that 
a soule perische, but he withdrawith, and 
thenkith lest he perische outirly, which* 
is cast awey. Now therfor come thou, 1s 
that Y speke to my lord the! kyng this 


word, while the puple is presentt; and + while the pu- 


le is present ; 


thin handmaide seide, Y schal speke to  thatis, that the © 


. « sentence jonun 
the kyng, if in ony maner the kyng do for me and for 


the word of his handmayde. And _ the 16 77% Sone which 
o . ; thyn ooth, be 

kyng herde the wordis, that he schulde peppiochta Ti 

delyuere his handmayde fro the hondis of for the puyle, 

a and that it hane 
alle men, that wolden do awei me, and __ the same effect, 
my sone togidere™, fro the eritage of the 77, 2e0s"d is 
Lord. 


thi sone. Lire 
Therfor thin hand mayde seie,17”* ° 

that the word of my lord the kyng be 

maad as sacrifice, ‘that is, that the sen- 

tence 30uun of hym be plesaunt to God, 

as sacrifice plesith” God°; for as an 
aungel of the Lord, so is my lord the 

kyng, that he be not mouyd bi blessyng 

nether bi cursyng. Wherfor and thi 

Lord God is with thee. And the kyngie 
answeride, and seide to the womman, 

Hide thou not fro me the word which Y 

axe thee. And the womman seide to 

hym, Speke thou, my lord the? kyng. 

And the kyng seide, Whether the hond ig 

of Joab is with thee in alle these thingis ? 

The womman answeride, and seide, Bi 

the helthe of thi soule, my lord the kyng, 

nether to the left side nether to the ri3t 


™ nejebores E pr. m. "pasta. ° Om. Ez prom. P the kyng cz. 
Ww betheit. yYsletheinot1. 2 upont, @Om.xKxpr.m. »totheer, ¢Om.1. 4 hast thou thou3t 1. 
e whi hath ther. fspoke1. &throwenr. btheerther. iwilnotr. *that1. 1Om.1. ™ bothe 1. 


2 plesith to cab. ‘° Gloss omitted in 1. P Om. 1. 


XIV. 20—30. 


mouth of thin hoond womman alle thes 


20wordis, that I turne the figure of this ’ 


word; forsothe thi seruaunt Joab co- 
maundide this. .Forsothe thou, my lord 
kyng, ert wise, as the aungel of God 
hath wisdom, that thou vndirstonde alle 
21thingis vpon erthe. And the kyng seith 
to Joab, Loo! plesid I haue doo thi 
word; go thanne, and cleep a3en the 
22child Absolon. And Joab fallynge vpon 
his face into the erthe, honourde, and 
blisside to the kyng ; and Joab seide, To 
dai hath thi seruaunt vudurstonde, for I 
hane foundun grace in thin eyen, my 
lord kyng ; forsothe thou hast doon the 
23word of thi seruaunt. Thanne Joab 
roos, and wente into Gethsur, and 
21brou3te Absolon into Jerusalem. For- 
sothe the kyng seide, Turne he a3en into 
25his hows, and se he not my face. And 
so Absolon is turned a3en into his hows, 
and the face of the kyng he saw3 not. 
Forsothe there was not a man as feyr 
as Absolon in al Irae], and ful miche 
semeli; fro the stap of the foot vuto the 
top, there was not in hym eny spot; 
26and the more that he doddide the heeris, 
so mych more thei wexen; forsothe 
onys in the 3eer he was doddid, for the 
heere heuyde hym. He weiede the heeris 
of his heed with two hundred siclis bi 
27 the comoun wei3t. Forsothe there been 
born to Absolon thre sones, aud o dou3- 
ter, Thamar bi name, of sembli slap. 
28 And Absolon dwellide in Jerusalem two 
3eer, and saw3 not the face of the kyng. 
29 And so he sente" to Joab, that he shulde 
sende hym to the kyng; the which 
wolde not come to hym. And whanne 
the secounde he hadde sent, and he wold 
30not come, he seide to his seruauntis, 3e 
knowen the feelde of Joab biside my 
feelde hauynge barli corn ; gooth thanne, 
and brenneth it vp with fier. Thanne 


II. KINGS. 


125 


side is ony thing of alle these thingis, 
whiche my lord the kyng spak?. For thi 
sernaunt Joab hym silf comaundide to me, 
and he puttide’ alle these wordis in to the 
mouth of thin handmaide, that Y schulde 20 
turne the figure of this word; for thi 
seruaunt Joab comaundide this thing’. 
Forsothet thou, my lord the" kyng, art 
Wijs, as an aungel of God hath’ wisdom, 
that thou vnderstonde alle thingis onY 
erthe. And the kyng seide to Joab, Lo !21 
Y am plesid, and Y haue do thi word; 
therfor go thou, and a3en clepe thou the 
child Absolon. And Joab felde on* his22 
face to ertheY, and worschipide*, and 
blesside the kyng; and Joab seide, Thi 
seruauut hath vndirstonde to dai, that 
Y foond* grace in thin izen, my lord the 
kyng, for thou hast do the word of thi 
seruaunt. Therfor Joab roos*, and 3ede23 
in to Gessur, and brou3te Absolon in to 
Jerusalem. Forsothe’ the kyng_ seide, 24 
Turne he ajen in to his hows, and se not 
he my face. Therfor Absolon turnedees 
a3en in to his hows, and si3 not the face 
of the kyng. Sotheli no man in al Israel 
was so fair as Absolon, and ful comeli; fro 
the step of the foot ‘til to® the top, ‘no 
wem was‘ in hym ; and in as myche as ‘he 26 
clippide? more the" heeris, bi so mychei 
theik wexiden more!; forsothe™ he was 
clippid onys in the 3eer{, for the™ heer 
greuede him. And whanne he clippide 
the heeris®, he weijide ‘the heeris of his 
heed? bil twei hundrid siclis with" comyn 
wei3te. Forsothe* thre sones, and a dou3-27 
ter, Thamar bi name, of ‘excellent formet 
weren borun to Absolon. And Absolones 
dwellide in Jerusalem twei 3eer, and he 
si3 not the face of the kyng. Therfor he29 
sente to Joab, that he schulde sende 
hym to the kyng; which" Joab nolde’ 
come to hym. And whanne he hadde 
sent the secounde tyme, and Joab nolde* 


¥ wente B. 


dhath spoke 1. * hath put to 1. 
Xupont. ytheerthe xr. 7 he worschipide 1. 
€yvntor. f ther was no wem I. 
mbuti. hiss. © heeris of his heed 1. 
tandi. Ywolde not 1. W Absolon 1. 


8 thing fo me 1. 
a haue founden 1. 
& thei clippiden ca. 
Phem 1. 
x wolde not 1. 


q with 1. 


v that hath 1. 
bOm.1. ¢roosupr. 4 And 1. 
imyche the more 1. * tho pc. !Om.1. 
Thi ax prm. $Ands, tsemely schap1. 


t Certis1. Om. 1. W upon I. 


h his 1. 


+ onys in the 
3eer, in Ebreu 
it is, in tyme 
determynd. c. 


126 


the seruauntis of Absolon brenten the 
corn with fier. And the sernauntis of 
Joab comynge, her clothis kut, seiden, 
The seruauntis of Absolon han brent vpa 

31 partie of the feelde with fier. And Joab 
roos, and eam to Absolon into his hows, 
and seide, Whi han thi seruauntis brente 

32vp my corn with fier? And Absolon 
auswerde to Joab, I haue sente to thee, 
preiynge that thou come to me, and I 
sende thee to the kyng, that thou seie 
to hym, Whi cam I fro Gethsur ? Betere 
it was to me to be there; I biseche 
thanne, that I see the face of the kyng, 
that if he haue mynde of my shrewidnes, 

33he slee me. Joab goon yn to the kyng 
tolde to hym. And Absolon clepid 
wente yn to the kyng, and he lowtide 
upon the face of the erthe before hym, 
and the kyng kisside Absolon. 


CAP. XV. 


1 Thanne after thes thingis Absolon 
made to hym a chaar, and horsmen, 
and fifti men that shulden goo before 
zhym’. And eerli risynge Absolon stood 
biside the entre of the 3ate in the weye ; 
and eche man, that hadde a neede that 
he com to the dom of the kyng, Absolon 
clepide to hym self, and seide, Of what 
citee ert thou? The which answer- 
ynge seide, Of at lynage of Yrael I am, 
3thi seruaunt. And Absolon answerde 
to hym, To me thi wordis semen good 
and iust, but there is not ‘the which" ‘thee 
heere ordeyned’ of the kyng. And Abso- 
4lon seide, Who ordeyneth me domesman 
vpon the loond, that to me comen alle 
that han neede, and ri3twisly Y deme? 
5 But whanne a man nei3ede to hym for to 
salute hym, he strau3te out his hoond, 
sand takynge he kisside¥ hym; and that 


II. KINGS. 


MIV: gia vaGe 


come, Absolon seide to hise seruauntis, 3e 30 


knowen the feeld of Joab bisidis my feeld 
hauynge ripe barli; therfor go 3e, and 
brenne 3e it with fier. Therfor the ser- 
uauntis} of Absolon brenten the corn with 
fier. And the seruauntis of Joab camen 
with her clothis to-rent, and seiden, The ser- 


+: and the seru- 
auntis, ele. ; 
this vers til 
thidur and Joab 
roos, is not in 


uauntis of Absolon han brent theY part of31 Ere. ¢- 


feeld2 bi? fier. And Joab roos®, and cam to 
Absolon in to his hows, and seide, Whi 


han thi seruauntis brent my corn bi fier ? 32 


And Absolon answeride to Joab, Y sente 
to thee, and bisou3te that thou schuldist 
come to me, and that Y schulde sende 
thee to the kyng, that thou schuldist 
seie to hym, Whi cam Y fro Gessur? 
It was betere to me to be’ there; therfor 
Y biseche, that Y se the face of the kyng, 
that if he is myndeful of my wickidnesse, 
sle he me. 
and telde to hym. And Absolon was 
clepid, and entryde® to the kyng, and 
worschipidef on the face of erthe® bifor 
hym, and the kyng kisside Absolon. 


CAP. XV. 


Therfor aftir these thingis Absolon; 
made a chaar to hym, and kny3tis, and 
fifti men, that schulden go bifor hym. 
And Absolon roos eerli, and stood bisidis2 
the entryng of the 3ate in the weie; and 
Absolon clepide to hym ech man, that 
hadde a cause that he schulde come to. 


the doom of the kyng, and Absolon seide, 
Of what" citee art thou ? Which answer- ° 


ide, and seide, Of o! lynage of Israel Y 
am, thi seruaunt. And Absolon answer-3 
ide to hym, Thi wordis semen to me good 
and iust, but noon is ordeyned of the 
kyng to here thee. And Absolon seide, 
Who schal ordeyne me iuge on the lond, 4 
that alle men that han cause come to me, 
and Y deme iustly? But whanne a man cams 
to Absolon to greete hym, he helde forth 


thek hond, and took, and kisside that ~ 


man; and Absolon dide this to al Israel, ¢ 


*Om. 8. toon BEF.oc. one H. "that c pr.m. VY ordeyn thee heere 4. ¥ kiste £. 
yar Zthe feeldc. thifeeld1. @withr. Proosupx. ¢withr. dhaueber. ¢€ heentrydex. 
ft he worschipide 1. the erthe 1. ®whicha. tai. * his 1. 


Joab entride to the kyng,33 


xv. 7—18. 


he dide to al Yrael, the which cam to 
dom that he were herd of the king; and 
he biside the hertis of the men of Yrael. 
7Forsothe aftir fourti 3eer Absolon seide 
to kyng Dauid, I shal go, and 3eelde my 
yowis, that I vowide to the Lord in 
sEbron; forsothe vowynge thi seruaunt 
vowide, whanne he was in Gethsur of 
Syrie, seiynge, If the Lord brynge me 
ajen into Jerusalem, J shal sacrifie* to 
9the Lord. And the kyng seide to hym, 
Goo in pees. And he roos, and wente 
lointo Ebron. Forsothe Absolon sente a- 
spies into alle the lynagis of Yrael, 
seiynge, Anoon’ that 3e heren the noyse 
of the trumpe, seith, Absolon shal regne 
11in Ebron. Forsothe with Absolon wenten 
two hundred men clepid of Jerusalem’, 
goynge with symple herte, and the cause 
i2fulli vnknowynge. Forsothe Absolon 
clepide Achitophel Gilonyte, the coun- 
selour of Dauid, fro his cite Gilo. And 
whanne he hadde offrid slayn sacrifice, 
there is maad a strong coniurysoun, and 
the puple. rennynge togidre encreside 
13 with Absolon. Thanne cam a messager 
to Dauid, seiynge, With al the herte al 
14 Yrael folowith Absolon. And Dauid 
seith to his seruauntis that weren with 
hym in Jerusalem, Risith, and flee we; 
forsothe ne there shal be to vs fli3t fro 
the face of Absolon ; hieth to goon out, lest 
perauenture he comynge ocupie vs, and 
fulfille vpon vs fallynge, and smyte the 
iscite in mouth? of swerd*. And the ser- 
uauntis of the kyng seiden to hym, Alle 
thingis, what euere comaundith oure 
lord the kyng, gladli we folowen out, 
i¢thi seruauntis. Thanne the kynge wente 
out, and al hys hows, on her feet; and 
the kyng lafte ten secoundarie wyues to 
17the hows to be kept. And the kyng 
goon out, and al Yrael, on her feet, stoode 
isafer fro the hows. And alle his ser- 
uauntis wenten biside hym, and the 


Il. KINGS. 


127 


that cam to doom to be herd of the kyng ; + drow avi, 
ete.; in Ebreu 


and Absolon drow! aweit™ the hertis of ici sul ce 
men of Israel. Forsothe® aftir foure 3eert 7 He, oe 
Absolon seide to kyng Dauid, Y schal go, ers many 
and Y° schal 3elde my vowis, whiche Y han here, afler 
vowide to the Lord in Ebron§; for this tnibedtaive: 
seruaunt vowynge vowide, whanne he ey os 


was in Gessur of Sirie, and seide?, If the @/47 2. seer + 
A 1d in 
Lord bryngith a3en me in to Jerusalem, _ the book of 


a a Ebreu ques- 
Y schal make sacrifice to the Lord. And tiouns, that 


the kyng’ seide to hym, Go thou in pees. prvcars ther 
And Absolon roosi, and 3ede in to Ebron. 


tyme, wherynne 
: Saul killide 
Forsothe’ Absolon sente aspieris in to al 10 the prestis of 
the Lord, and 


the lynage of Israel, and seide, Anoon as __ these xl. seer 
“ ny en endid in 
3e heren the sown of clarioun, seye 3e, the conspiring 


of Absolon 


Absolon schal regne in Ebron. Forsothe® )) g3enus his fadir. 


twei hundrid men clepid of Jerusalem ee, ie 
3eden t with Absolon, and 3ede with sym- that is, to be 

: oe 4 offrid in Ebron. 
ple herte, and outirli thei knewen not the Lire here. c. 


. : rise 3¢ and 
cause. Also Absolon clepide Achitofel 12 Ms aetna 
. is * Dauyth was 
of Gilo, the councelour of Dauid, fro his asayedand most 
citee Gilo. And whanne he" offride” sacri- bai in batels, 
nd was in 
fices” a strong swerynge togidere was __ the strongeste 
F place, and hadde 
maad, and the puple rennynge togidere  withhimmanye 
. 9 d st te 
was encreessid with Absolon. Therfor 13 Verriours, he 
0 . departide not 
a messanger cam to Dauid, and seide, ; Puen noe 
With al herte al Israel sueth Absolon. ae pee of 
: 5 s 5 solon princi- 
And Danid seide to hise seruauntis that 14 paly, but for the 
‘ ‘ . de of God 
weren with hym in Jerusalem, Rise 3e*, whom hewie 
5 5 . that he hadde 
and flee we||; for noon ascaping schal be  gfendia bitore, 
to us fro the face of Absolon{] ; therforyY 2nd for this bi 
haste 3e to go out, lest he come, and Gos, this yuel 
i x a b cam on him; as 
ocupie vs, and fille? on® vs fallynge®, and Nathan thepro- 
: ‘ fete seid 
smyte the citee bic the’ scharpnesse of jim biforinxi. 
swerd. And the seruauntis of the kyng15@», the era. 


seiden to hym, We thi seruauntis schulen siaareln Y 
e és ‘ schal reise on 
performe gladli alle thingis, what euer _ thee yuel of 


thyn hows, and 


thingis® oure lord thef kyng schal com-  therfor to plese 
the ire of God, 


aunde. Therfors the kyng 3ede out, and 16 po vin wolde 
5 4 ‘ bifor God, that 

lefte ten‘ wymmen concubyns*, ‘that is!, _herde the prey- 
secundarie wyues™, to kepe the™ hous.  men;andthilke 
mekenesse ap- 

schameful going 

feet, and the kyng stood fer fro the? hous. Ane Oe, 


al his hous, on> her feet; and the king  meke him silf 
eris of meke 

And the king 3ede out, and al Israel, on® her 17 periae in the 

And alle hise seruauntis 3eden bisidis18 whale it is 


Jie we and 
so forth. Lire 
here. c. 
x sacrificen pcru. Y Anoon forsothe £ pr.v. Y¥ the Jerusalem 4. 2% the mouth nH. 4 the swerd x. I fro the face 
1iohim1. ™Om.1. © Butr. °Om. zc. PIseider. droosupr. *And1. *And1. *3eden 
forth 1. tAbsolon1. v had offrid:. Wsacrificer. *3e up1. Ysothely1. 7 fulfiller. 4 Om. A. upont. 
b his fallynge 1. ¢withr. 4Om.1. €Om.1, fOm.1. & Thanner. }upons. ihistenz, * Om.1. 
10m. exex. ™Om. Erx. "®hisi upon. P hiss. 


128 


legiouns Cerethi and Pherethi, and al 
Gethei stronge fizters, the sexe hundrid 
men, that hadden folwid hym fro Geth 
190n foot, wenten before the kyng. For- 
sothe the kyng seide to Ethei Gethee, 
Whi comyst thou with vs? Turn ajen, 
and dwel with the kyng for a pilgrime 
thou art, and wentist out fro thi place. 
20 3isterday” thou cam, and to day thou ert 
compellid to goo out with vs. Forsothe I 
shal goo, whider I am to goo; turn a3en, 
and leede a3en with thee thi britheren, 
and the Lord doo with thee merci and 
trewth, for thou hast shewid grace and 
aifeith. And Ethei answerde to the kyng, 
seiynge, The Lord lyueth, and my lord 
the kyng lyueth, for in what euere place 
thon were, my lord kyng, other in deeth 
or in lijf, there shal be thi seruaunt. 
92 And Danid seith to Ethai, Come, and 
passe forth. And Ethei Gethee passide 
forth, and the kyng, and alle the men 
that with hym weren, and the tother 
a3multitude. And alle thet wepten with 
a greet voys, and al the puple passide 
forth; the kyng forsothe wente ouer the 
streem of Cedron, and al the puple wente 
ajens the weye of the olyue, that bihold- 
24ith to deseert. And Sadoch the preest 
cam, and alle the Leuytis with hym, 
berynge the arke of the boond of pees of 
God, and thei setten doun the arke of 
God ; and Abiathar stiede vp, to the tyme 
that alle the puple weren® ful comen that 
25was goon out fro the citee. And the 
kyng seide to Sadoch, Beer a3en the arke 
of God into the citee; if I shal fynde 
grace in the eyen of the Lord, he shal 
leede me a3en, and shewe to me it and 
26his tabernacle. Forsothe if he shal seye, 
Thou plesist not to me;- prest I am, do 
27he that is good before hym. And the 
kyug seide to Sadoch the preest, O seere?, 
turne ajen into the cite in pees, and 


b gistai c ef E passim. 


Garchers1. Om. caxb. § alblasters 1. 
Xcertis 1. Y hast schewid tv mer. 7 Om.1. 
d the deseert 1. ¢ Certisr. cam forth 1. 


k passid forth 1. 1 schal sey 1. ™ Om. pv. 


II. KINGS. 


C was 4, 


t the stronge fijtinge men r. 

a passe forth 1. 
& baren forth with hem 1. 
the preest 1. 


XV. 19——27. 


him, and the legiouns of Cerethi and of 
Ferethi’, and alle ment of Geth ‘strong 
fizters", sixe hundrid men, that sueden 
him fro Geth, 3eden on foote bifor the 
kyngt. Forsothey the kyng seide to19 
Ethai of Geth, Whi comest thou with 
vs? Turne thon a3en, and dwelle with the 
kyng, for thou art a pilgrym, and thou” 


of Absolon ; not 
for the vertu of 
him, but of God, 
whose scourge 
he was, to the 
punysching of 
Dauyth. Lire 
here. c. 

+ bifor the king ; 
Dauyth made 
al his puple to 
go bifor him, 
that he schulde 
putte him silf 


3edist out fro thi place. Thou camest 3is-20 in the gretter 


tirdai, and to dai thou art compellid to 
go out with vs. Sotheli* Y schal go, whi- 
dur Y schal go; turne ajen, and lede ajen 
thi britheren with thee, and the Lord do 
merey and treuthe with thee, for thou 
schewidistY grace and feith. And Ethai2t 
answeride to the kyng, and seide, The 
Lord lyueth, and my lord the kyng lyueth, 
for in what euer place thon sehalt be, my 
lord the? kyng, ether in deeth ethir in lijf, 
there thi seruaunt schal be. And Danid 22 
seide to Ethay, Come thou, and _ passe’. 
And Ethai of Geth passide’, and the 
kyng, and alle men that weren with hym, 
and the tother multitude. And alle mene23 
wepten with greet vois, and al the: puple 
passide®; and the kyng 3ede ouer the 
strond of Cedron, and al the puple 3ede 
a3ens the weie of the olyue tree, that bi- 
holdith to deseert’. Forsothe® and Sadoch 24 
the preest cam‘, and alle the dekenes with 
hym, and thei baren® the arke of boond 
of pees of God, and thei diden® doun the - 
arke of God; and Abiathar stiede’, til al 
the puple was passid* that 3ede out of the 
citee. And the kyng seide to Sadoeh, 25 
Bere ajen the arke of God in to the citee; 
if Y schal fynde grace in the ijen of the 
Lord, he schal lede me a3en, and he schal 
schewe to me that arke and his taber- 
nacle. 
plesist not me™; Y am redif, do he that, 


that is good bifor hym silf. And the27 


kyng seide to Sadoch, preest®, A°! thou 
seere, ‘that is, profete?, turne ajen in to 


d sire 4. seare c. sere FH. 


vAnd1. WOm.1. 

¢ passide forth 1. 
4 settiden 1. 1 stiede up 1. 
P Om. 1. that is, a profele k. 


u Om. 1. 
b passide forth r. 


°O1 


Sotheli if the Lord seith', Thoues 


perel, if Abso- 
Jon pursuede 
him ; he dide 
this, for he was 
in synne, and 
othere men 
suffriden not, 
no but for him. 
Lire here. c. 


+ Yam redi; 
that is, to 
resseyue fleing, 
exiling and 
deth, that the 
good plesaunce 
of God be fillid. 
Lire here. c. 


XV. 28—37. 


Achymaas, thi sone, and Jonathan, the 
sone of Abiathar, 3oure two sonys, be thei 
28 with 3ou. Loo! I shal be hid in the 
wijlde feeldis of deseert, to the tyme that 
the word come from 3ou, shewynge to me. 
29 Thanne Sadoch and Abiathar beren a3en 
the arke of God into Jerusalem, and 
s0dwelliden there. But Danid stiede vp 
the hil of olynes, stiynge and wepynge, 
the heede conerde, and the feet nakid 
goynge; but and al the puple that was 
with hym, the heed couerde, stieden vp 
3twepynge. Forsothe it is toold to Dauid, 
that Achitophel was in the coniurynge 
with Absolon; and Dauid seide, Lord, 
I biseche, nak foli the counseil of Achi- 
32tophel. And whanne Dauid stiede vp the 
cop of the hil, in the which he was to 
preye the Lord, loo! Cusy Arachites a3en 
cam to hym, the clothing kut, and the 
33heed ful of erthe. And Dauid seide to 
hym, If thou comyst with me, thou shalt 
34 be to me to® chargynge‘; forsothe if thou 
turnest ajen into the citee, and seist to 
Absolon, Thi seruaunt I am, kyng, suf- 
fre me to lyne; as I was the seruaunt of 
thi fadre, so I shal be thi seruaunt; thou 
shalt scatyr the counseyl of Achitophel. 
35Forsothe thou hast with thee Sadoch 
and Abiathar, preestis; and eche word, 
what euere thou herist in the hows of 
the kyng, thou shalt shewe to the 
36prestis, Sadoch and Abiathar.  For- 
sothe there ben with hem her two sonys, 
Achymaas, the sone of Sadoch, and Jo- 
nathan, the sone of Abiathar; and 3e 
shulen seende bi hem to me al the word 
37that 3e shulen here. Thanne comynge 
Chusa, the freend of Dauid, into the 
citee, forsothe Absolon is comen imto 
Jerusalem. 


€ Om. c. 


II. KINGS. 


f charge BEF. 


129 


the citee, with pees; and Achymaas, thi 
sone, and Jonathas, the sone of Abiathar, 
3oure twei sones, be with 3ou. Lo! Y2s 
schal be hid in the’ feeldi places of de- 
seert’, til word come fro 30u, and schewe 
to me. Therfor Sadoch and Abiathar29 
baren azen the arke of God in to Jeru- 
salem, and dwellident there. Forsothe 30 
Dauid stiede on" the hil of olyue trees, 
stiynge’ and wepynge, with the” heed 
hilyd, and ‘goynge with nakid feet’; but 
also* al the puple® that was with hym, 
stiede> with the® heed hilid, and wepte. 
Forsothe’ it was teld to Danid, that31 
Achitofel was in the sweryng togidere 
with Absolon; and Danid seide, Lord, Y 
byseche, make thou fonned the counsel of 
Achitofel. And whanne Dauid stiede® inz 
to the’ hijenesse of the hil, in which he 
schulde worschipe the Lord, lo! Cusi of 
Arath, with the® cloth to-rent, and with 
the heed ful of erthe, cam to hym®. And33 
Dauid seide to hym, If thou comest with 
me, thou schalt be to me to! charge; 
sotheli if thou turnest a3en in* to the citee, 34 
and seist to Absolon, Y am thi seruaunt, 
kyng!, suffre thon me to lyue; as Y was 
the seruaunt of thi fadir, so Y schal be not to 

thi seruaunt}; thou schalt distrye the poner 
counsel of Achitofel. Forsothe™ thou hast 35 en 
with thee Sadoch and Abiathar, preestis® ; that no leesing 
and ‘thou schalt schewe ech word’, what 


+ so ¥ schal be 
thi seruaunt; 
thong it nedith 
not to excuse 


was there; for 
he serueth a 
man, that doith 


euer word thou schalt here in the hows and purposith 
of the kyng?, tot Sadoch and Abiathar, Sea ak 


tor +S 1 ‘ t uaeman. Forsothe 
preestis". Sothelis twei sones ‘of hem’ ben® 36°. | ee 
with hem, Achymaas, sone’ of Sadoch, Sipe noes 
e were letti 
and Jonathan, sone of Abiathar; and 3e of his worste 
° entent, and 
schulen sende bi hem to me ech word were bitakun 
which* 3e schulen here. Therfor whanne 37 
Chusi, freend of Dauid, cam in to the 
citee, also Absolon entryde in to Jeru- 


to his fadir; 
most for his 
salem. 


fadir nolde sle 
him, but more 
kepe to the 
amending of 
him, as it is 
opyn of these 
‘ thingis, that 
ben had in 
xix.c®. Lire 
here. Cc. 


Om.1. * the deseert1. ttheidwelliden 1. "up upon. Vgoyngeup1. Whis1. ¥ with bare 
feet passynge forth1. Zandi. 4puplealsor. >stiedeup1. Cherr. @ Andi. °@stiede upt. 
fOm.1. ghist. %Dauidr. iOm.1 kOm.1. !Okyngr. ™ Andi. 4 the preestis 1. 
°Qm.1. P kyng, thou schalt schewe it to the prestist. 9Om.1. 'Om.1. %Andhert. ' Om. 1. 
"beeth 1. Vthesoner. Wthesone1. * that 1, 

VOL. Ii. 8 


130 


CAP. XVI. 


1 And whanne Danid hadde goon a litil 
the cop of the hil, Ciba, the child of 
Myphibosech, aperide into ajen com- 
ynge of hym, with two assis, that weren 
chargid with two hundrid loouys, and 
an hundred bundels of dried grapis, and 
an hundred peysis of fijgis® pressid, and 

2with two botels of wyn. And the kyng 
seide to Cyba, What to hem wolen thes 
thingys? And Ciba answerde, My lord 
kyng, the assis, that the hoomli men of 
the kyng sitten on; the loouis and the 
fijgis, to thi children for to eete; forsothe 
the wyn, that he drynke, who so failith in 

sdeseert. And the kyng seith, Where is 
the sone of thi lord? And Ciba an- 
swerde to the kyng, He abood" stille in 
Jerusalem, seiynge, T'o day shal the ‘hows 
of Yrael restore to ne! the kyngdam of 
dmy fader. And the kyng seith to Cyba, 
Alle thingis* that weren of Miphibosech 
ben thin. And Cyba seide, I preye, 
fynde I grace before thee, my lord kyng. 

5 Thanne kyng Dauid cam into Bahurym, 
and loo! there wente out a man thens of 
the kynrede of the hows of Saul, Semei 
bi name, the sone of Gera; he wente 

éforth goynge out, and cursyde. And he 
sente stonus ajens Dauid, and a3ens alle 
the seruauntis of king Dauid ; forsothe 
al the puple, and alle the fiz3ters fro the 
ri3t and fro the left side of the kyng 

7wenten. Forsothe thus spak Semei, 
whanne he curside to the kyng, Go out, 
go out, thou man of bloodis, and man of 

8 Belial! The Lord hath 3oldyn to thee al 
the blood of the hows of Saul, for thou 
hast reued the kyngdam fro! hym; and 
the Lord hath 3owin the kyngdam in 
the hoond of Absolon, thi sone; and loo! 
thin euels beren thee doun, for a man 


& dried figgis e pr.m. 4 bood Bern. bod. c. 


k Om. ceru. | for Bcer. 


yant. 2Om.A, ®peisist. > sitte on hem 1. 
f dwellide stille 1. ¢ seyynger. 8 Om.1, ? Thanne 1. 
« the fiztinge meni. © Andi. P thus 7. 


II. KINGS. 


q hast rauischid 1. 


XVI. 1—8. 


CA Roel 


And whanne Dauid hadde passid a litil 1 
the cop of the’ hil, Siba, the child of 
Mysphobosech, apperide in to his comyng, 
with tweyne assis, that weren chargid 
with twei hundrid looues, and with? an 
hundrid bundels of dried grapis, and with 
an hundrid gobetis* of pressid figus, and 
with twei vessels of wyn. And the kynge 
seide to Siba, What wolen these thingis 
to hem silf? And Siba answeride, My 
lord the kyng, the assis ben to the mey- 
neals of the kyng, that thei sitte>; the° 


looues and ‘figis pressid? ben to thi chil- 

dren to ete; forsothe® the wyn is, that if 

ony man faile in deseert, he drynke. And3 

the kyng seide, Where is the sone of thi 

lord? And Siba answeride to the kyng, 

He dwellidef in Jerusalem, ‘and seide®, To 

dai the Lord of the hows of Israel schal 

restore to me the rewme of my fadir. 

And the kyng seide to Siba, Alle thingist 4 + 2% Ming 
that weren of Mysphibosech ben thine. _ seid yuele, vn- 
And Siba seide, Y preye, fynde Y grace viva 
bifor thee, my lord the" kyng. Therfor‘s ria 
kyng Dauid cam ‘til to Bahurym, and lo! © 

a man of the meynee of the hows of Saul, 

Semey bi name, sone of Gera, 3ede out fro 

thennus; he 3ede forth goynge out, and 

curside. And he sente stoonys aj3ens Da-6 

uid, and a3ens alle seruauntis! of kyng 

Dauid ; forsothe™ al the puple, and alle 

fizteris" 3eden at the rijtside and at the 

left side of the king. Sotheli® Semey spak 7 

so?, whanne he curside the kyng, Go out, 

go out, thou man of bloodis{, and man of tmanof _ 
Belial! The Lord hath j3olde to thee als chee 
the blood of the hows of Saul, for thou eae stele 
rauyschedist the rewme fro%4 hym; and "7 © 

the Lord 3af™ the rewme in to the hond 

of Absolon, thi sone; and lo! thin yuels 
oppressen thee, for thou art a man of 


i Lord restoren to me the housis of Israel and £ pr.m. 


€ certis x. 
M and 1. 
tT hath gouen 1. 


Cand ther. 4 the pressid figis x. 
k ynto 1. toev. ! the seruauntis 1. 
99 for DEMPX sec. m. be. 


XVI. 9—21. 


9of blodis thou art. Forsothe Abisai, the 
sone of Seruye, seide to the kyng, Whi 
cursith this dog to diynge™ to my lord 
kyng”? I shal goo, and girde of his 
heed. And the kyng seith, What is to 
me and to 3ou, 3e sonys of Saruye? 
Letith hym, that he curse; forsothe the 
Lord comaundide to hym that he curse 
Dauid; and who is that dar secie, Whi 
ithus he doth? And the kyng seith to 
Abisai, and to alle his seruauntis, Loo! 
my sone, that is goon out fro my wombe, 
sechith my lif; mych more now this 
sone of Geminy ‘cursith to me®? Letith 
hym, that he curse after the heest of the 
12Lord; if perauenture the Lord beholde 
my tourmentynge, and 3eelde to me good 
13for this cursynge to dai. And so Dauid 
wente, and his felawis, bi the weie with 
hym; forsothe Semei wente cursynge 
a3ens hym bi the cop? of the hil aside, 
and? sendynge stoonus ajens hym, and 
14the erthe sprengynge. And so kyng 
Dauid cam, and al the puple with hym 
15 wery, and there thei ben refreshid. For- 
sothe Absolon, and al the puple of Irael 
wenten into Jerusalem, but and Achi- 
16tophel with hym. Forsothe whaun Cusay 
Arachites14, the freend of Dauid, was comen 
to Absolon, he spak to hym, Heil, kyng™! 
heil, kyng! To whom Absolon, This is, 
he seith, thi grace to thi freend ; whi hast 
18thou not goo with thi freend ? And Cusai 
answerde to Absolon, Nay, for of hym 
I shal be, whom the Lord chesith, and 
al this puple, and al Yrael; and with 
i9hym Y shal dwelle. ‘But and this I shal 
brynge* yn, to whom am J to serue ? whe- 
ther not to the sone of the kyng? as I 
obeysshide to thi fadir, so and J shal 
20 obeishe to thee. Forsothe Absolon seide 
to Achithophel, Goo 3e into counseyl, what 
21 we owen to doon. And Achithophel seith 
to Absolon, Go into the secundarye wyues 


II. KINGS. 


131 


blodis. Forsothes Abisay, the sone of9 
Saruye, seide to the kyng, Whi cursith 
this dogge, that schal die, my lord the 
kyng? Y schal go, and Y schal girde of 
his heed. 
of Saruye, what is to me and to 3ou? 
Suffre ye hym, that he curse; fort the 
Lord comaundide" to hymt, that he 
schulde curse Dauid; and who is he that 
dare seie, Whi dide he so? And the kyng 11 
seide to Abysay, and to alle hise ser- 
uauntis, Lo! my sone, that 3ede out of 
my wombe, sekith my lijf; hou myche 
more now this sone of Gemyny? Suffre 
3e hym, that he curse bi comaundement 


of the Lord; if in hap the Lord biholde 12 


my turmentyug, and 3elde good to me for 
this ‘cursyng of this dai’. 
3ede”, and hise felowis, bi the weie with 
hym ; forsothe* Semey 3edeY bi the slade 
of the hil ‘bi the side? a3ens hym*; and 
curside’, and sente® stoonus a3ens him, 
and spreynte erthe. 
king? cam, and al the puple weery with 
hym, and thei weren refreischid there. 


Forsothe® Absolon, and al the puple of15 


Israel entriden in to Jerusalem, but also 
Achitofel with hym‘ 
Chusi of Arath, the frend of Dauid, hadde 
come to Absolon, he spak' to Absoloni, 
Heil, kyng! heil, kyng! 
solon seide, This is thi grace to thi 
freend*; whi 3edist thou not! with thi 


+ for the Lord 
comaundide to 
him; Semey 
synnede in this 
cursing, for he 
curside [bi 
wickid] wille. 


And the kyng seide, 3e sones 10 Dauyth sis that 


Semey, aloone 
and vnarmed, 
dide wrong to 
Dauyth stide- 
fastly and with 
out drede, and 
opinly bifor 
many wer- 
riours, mest 
stronge and 
most hardy, 
and mest redi 
to venge the 
wrong doon to 
the king; and 
Dauyth per- 
seyuede that 
this was not of 
thilke Semey 
onely, but of 
God doinge 
there specialy ; 


Therfor Dauid 13 224 Dayth 


clepide this the 
comaundement 
of God; nethe- 
less God is net 
autour nether 

cause of synne, 
in as myche as 
itis synne. God 


And so ‘Dauid the 143s autour of the 


power, bi which 
me synneth 5 
this power is 
fre wille. Also 
God is auteur 
of the stiring 
of fre wille in 
to consent te 


Sothelif whanne 16stire poweris of 


exeeucioun, but 
God is not au- 
tour of defor- 

myte ether de- 


Tor whiont Ab-17 “ene 


in vnri3[t)ful 
dede ; and this 
defante ef rist- 
fulnesse mak- 
ith synne. So 


freend ? And Chusi answeride to AbSo-18 here'the stide- 


lon, Nay], for Y shal be seruaunt™ of 
hym, whom the Lord hath chose, and al 
this puple, and al Israel; and Y schal 
dwelle with him. 
this, to whom schal Y serue? whethir 
not to the sone of tlie kyng ? as Y obeiede 
to thi fadir, so" Y schal obeie to thee. 


fastnesse and 
hardynesse of 
Semey in asail- 
inge Dauyth, 
and the sub- 
staunce of the 


But that Y seie also 19 doyng, was of 


God, that Da- 
uyth were 
punyschid 
herby, and his 
pacience were 
reued, hut the 


: H P 
Forsothe® Absolon seide to Achitofel, Take 20 defaute, that 


3e counsel, what we owen to do, And2l 
Achytofel seide to Absolon, Entre thou 


mdienc. "the kyngc. ©Om. xz pr.m. Pjok Epr.m. GVandhe E pr.m, 494 Archites 4. ' Om. H. 
8 That and these thingus I brynge £ pr. m. 

s Andi. ¢forsothe 1. "hath comaundid1. v daies cursyng1. © 3ede forth1. * but 1. ¥ 3ede 
aside 1. 2Om.1. ®Dauidr. » curside Dauid3. ¢threwet. ¢kyng David 1. ¢& Andi. ! Absolon 1. 
g Andi, +} seyde1. ihim 1. k freend Dauid1. ‘not forth. ™ the seruaunt 1. so andt. 
© And 1. 


$2 


is, that he dide 
this bi wickid 
wille, was net 
ef God, but in 
the defaute 
ether errour of 
fre wille. Lire 
here. c. 

t nay; that is, 
Y ou3te not 
go with Da- 
uyth. Lire 
here. Cc. 


132 


of thi fadre, ‘the whichet he hath laft at 
the hows to be kept; that whanne al 
Yrael herith, that thou hast defoulid thi 
fader, the hoondis of hem ben strengthid 

2: with thee. Thanne thei strau3ten out to 
Absolon a tabernacle in the solere, and 
he wente into the secundarye wyues of 

o3his fader before al Irael. Forsothe the 
counseil that Achithophel jaf in thoo dais, 
as if a man counseilde God ; so was al the 
counseil of Achithophel, and whanne he 
was with Dauid, and whanne he was 
with Absolon. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 Thanne seide Achitophel to Absolon, 
I shal chese to me twelue thousandis of 
men, and rysynge I shal pursue Dauid 
2this niz3t. And fallynge forsothe vpon 
hym that is wery, and the hoondis fe- 
blid, I shal smyte hym; and whanne al 
the puple fleeth that is with hym, I shal 
ssmyte the kyng desolate. And I shal 
brynge a3en al the puple, what maner o 
man is wont to be turned a3en ; forsothe 
o man thou sechist, and al the puple shal 
4ben in pees. And his word pleside to 
Absolon, and to alle the more thur3 birth 
5of Yrael. Forsothe Absolon seith, Clepe 
3e and Cusai Arachite, and here we what 
salso he seith. And whan Cusai was 
comen to Absolon, Absolon seith to hym, 
Siche a maner word spak Achitophel ; 
shul we doo, or nay ? what counseil 3yuest 
7thou? And Cusay seide to Absolon, It 
is not good this counseil, that Achithophel 
Shath 3ouun at this tyme. And eft Cusay 
brou3te yn, Thou hast knowen thi fader, 
and the men that with hym ben, to ben 
moost stronge, and in bitter wil, as if a 
she bere wexe feers in the wijlde wode, 
rauysshid the whelpis; but and thi fader 
is a man fizter, and he shal not dwelle 
ywith the puple. Perauenture now he 


II. KINGS. 


XVI. 22—XVII. 9g. 


to the concubyns? of thi fadir, whiche he 
lefte1 to kepe thet hows; that whanne al 
Israel herith, that thou hast defoulid thi 
fadir’, the hondis of hem be strengthid 
with thee. Therfor thei tildedent Abso-22 
lon a tabernacle in the soler, and he en- 
tride to the concubyns of his fadir bifor 
al Israel. Sotheli® the counsel of Achito-23 
fel, which’ he 3af in tho daies, was as if 
a man counselide” God; so* was al the 
counsel of Achitofel, bothe whanne he ‘was 
with Dauid, and whanne he was with 
Absolon. 


CAP. XVII. 


TherforY Achitofel seide to Absolon, Y1 
schal chese? twelue thousynde of men ‘to 
me*, and Y schal rise, and pursue Dauid 
in this ny3t. And Y scbal falle on hym,2 
for he is wery, and with vnboundun hondis 
Y schal smyte hym. And whanne al the 
puple fleeth which is with hym, Y schal 
smyte the kyng‘desolat, ether‘ left aloone. 
And Y schal lede ajen al the puple, as 03 
man is wont to turne® aj3en; for! thou 
sekist o man, and al the puple schal be in 
pees. And the word of him® plesyde Ab-4 
solon, and alle the grete" men in birthe of 
Israel. Forsothe! Absolon seide, Clepe 3e5 
also Chusy of Arath, and here we what 
also he seith. And whanne Chusi haddes 
come to Absolon, Absolon seide to hym, 
Achitofel spak* siche a word; owen we 
do!, ethir nay ? what counsel 3yuest thou ? 
And Chusi seide to Absolon, This is not7 
good counsel, which™ Achitofel 3af* in this 
tyme. And eft Chusi seide, Thou knowist, 8 
that thi fadir, and the men that ben with 
him, ben moost® stronge, and in bitter 
soule?, as if a femal? bere is fers in the™ 
forest, whanne the® whelpis ben rauyschid'; 
but also thi fader is a man werriour, and 
he schal not dwelle with the puple. Ing 
hap now he is hid" in the’ dichis, ethir in 


t that c pr.m. 
¥ secundarie wyues 1. 4 hath left 1. This 3. Ss fadir bed 1. ‘ streigten out 1. u And 1. 
‘that 1. W had counseilid with 1. *andso1 yYhanner 2chesetomer. @Om.1. Prise up. 
cthat1. 4Om.1. ¢ beturneds. ffor Absolon:. € Achitofel1. grettere Be. iAnd1. & hath 
spoke 1. 1dotheraftir1, mthati. “hathjouer, Ofulr Pwillr. 4schuer Tar 8 Airs. 


t rauyschid fro hir 1. 


4 ether lurketh X sec.m. marg. 


¥ Om. plures. 


XVII. 10—17. 


lurkith in dichis, or in a® place where he 
wole ; and whanne oon fallith, eehe in the 
bigynnynge shal here, who so euere herith, 
and shal seye, There is maad veniaunce 
19 in the puple that pursuede Absolon. And 
eche moost strong, whos is the herte as 
of a lioun, shal be feblid for drede; 
forsothe al the puple of Yrael woot thi 
fader to be strong, and alle stronge, that 
11 with hym ben. But this semeth to me to 
be ri3t counseil; be gedrid to thee a] the 
puple, fro Dan ynto Bersabe, vnnoum- 
brable as the grauel of the see; and thou 
12shalt be in the myddis of hem. And we 
shulen falle vpon him, in what euer place 
he were foundun, and we shulen couer 
hym, as dewe is wont to falle on the 
erthe; and we shulen not leeue of the 
men that with hym ben, forsothe not 
i30one. And if he were goon in eny citee, 
al Yrael shal wyynde aboute that citee 
coordis, and we shulen drawe it into the 
streem, that there be not foundun for- 
i4sothe of it not a litil stoon. And 
Absolon seide, and alle the men of Irael, 
Betere is the counseil of Cusai Arachite 
thanne the counseil of Achithophel ; for- 
sothe thur3” the wil of the Lord is 
scaterid the* profitable counseil of Achi- 
thophel, that the Lord brynge yn yuel 
isvpon Absolon. And Cusay seith to the 
preestys, Sadoch and Abiathar, This and 
this maner Achithophel 3af counseil to 
Absolon, and to the eldres of Yrael, 
iéand I 3af sich counsei]l and sich. Now 
thanne sendith soone, and tellith to 
Dauid, seiynge, Ne abide thou this ni3t 
in the wijlde feeldis of deseert, but with 


out tariynge weende ouer; lest perauen- — 


ture the kyng be soopen awey, and al 
i7the puple that is with hym. Forsothe 
Jonathan and Achymas stoden biside the 
welle of Rogel; an hondwomman 3ede, 


Uoon BEF. oC. one H. 


wwole hide him:. xhereit1. ¥ Om. 1 
bful strong1. ¢Om.1. 4 the ment. 
k and sothely 1. !oonof1. ™ Dauid 1. 
founden therof1. 8and1.  t the preestis 1. 
Ytariyngr. Zthatr. ® Andy. > and ant. 


II. KINGS. 


% Veniaunce 1. ether vengeaunce X sec.m. marg. 

¢ynto 1. til z. 

a Om. 1. 
uv in this c. 

¢ 3ede forth 1. 


138 


o place, in which he wole*; and whanne 
ony man fallith in the bigynnyng, who 
euer schal here*, he schal here, and schalY 
seie, Wounde’ is maad* in the puple that 
suede Absolon. And ech strongeste’ man, 10 
whos herte is as ‘the herte® of a lioun, 
schal be discouimnfortid for drede; for al the 
puple of Israel knowith, that thi fadir 
is strong, and that alle men’ ben stronge, 
that ben with him. But this semeth to mei 
to be ri3tful counsel ; al Israel be gaderid 
to thee, fro Dan ‘til to® Bersabee, vnnoum- 
brable as the soond’ of the see; and thou 
schalt be in the myddis of hem. And wel2 
schulen falle on* hym, in what euer place 
he is foundun, and we schulen hile hym, 
as dew is wont to falle on the’ erthe; and* 
we schulen not leeue of! the men that ben 
with hym”™, ‘sotheli not oon®, ‘That if13 
he® entrith in to ony eitee, al Israel schal 
cumpasse that citee{ with roopis, and we 
schulen drawe it in to the stronde, thatP 3 Chi 
no thing be foundun, sotheli4 not a litil Pacer 
stoon theroft. And Absolon seide, and \epeteboa 
alle the men of Israel, The counsel of a ee 
Chusi of Arath is betere than the counsel 1 
of Aehitofel; sotheli’ the profitable counsel{ a 
for in Ebreu 
that the Lord schulde brynge in yuel on : Sait at 
Absolon. And Chusi seide to Sadoch and 15 schipis of armed 


tal Israel schal 
cumpasse that 
citee ; Chusi 


citee, that noon 
of Achitofel was destried bi Goddis wille, 3%. haa thus, 


5 ‘ 5 4 men aboute 
to Abiathar, preestis', Achitofel 3af coun- that citee, to 
distrie al. Li 

sel to Absolon, and to the eldere men of jeec 


. S . * the profitable 
Israel in this and this maner, and Y 3af Panel toacth 


sich and sich counsel. Now _ therfor 16 spedeful for the 
entent of Ab- 


sende 3e soone, and telle 3e to Danid, and sie ‘ 
* . ° t . 
seie 3e, Dwelle thou not this® ny3t in the’ Te te 


uyth be sopun 
vp bi the coun- 
cel of Achitofel, 
parformed of 


feeldi places of deseert”, but passe thou* 
with out delay’; lest perauenture the kyng 
be destried||, and al the puple which’ ee nee 
is with hym. Forsothe? Jonathas and 17 and therfor in 
Achymaas stoden bisidis the welle of pee 
Rogel ; an> handmaide 3ede*, and telde to 


celid ta the king, 
that is, to Ab- 
hem, and thei jeden forth to telle the 


solon, that he 
do the councel 
of Achitofel. 
Lire here. c 


wthour 4. *to xn. 


adont. 
hupont, iOm. Kx. 

P3he thatr. @Om.1. be 
w the deseertr. * thou forth 1. 


fOm.1. § soonta. 
o And if he that 1. 
vOm.1. 


134 


and toolde to hem, and thei wenten forth, 
that thei tellen to kyng’ Dauid the mes- 
sage; forsothe thei my3ten not be seen, 
isor go” into the cytec. Forsothe a maner 
child saw3 hem, and toolde to Absolon ; 
forsothe thei wenten in a swift paase in* 
the hows of a maner man in Bahurym, 
that hadde a pit in his vestiarye, and 
1athei descendiden into? it. Forsothe a 
womman took, and strau3te out a couer- 
ynge vpon the mouth of the pit, as 
driynge pild barli, and so the thing is 
eohid. And whanue the seruauntis of Ab- 
solon were comen into the hows, thei 
seiden to the womman, Where is Achy- 
mas and Jonathan? And the womman 
answerde to hem, Thei wenten hiyngli, 
a litil wist water taastid. And thes 
that sou3ten, whanne thei founden not, 
2ithei turneden ajen into Jerusalem. And 
whanne thei weren goon, they sticden 
vp fro the pit; and goynge toolden to 
kyng Dauid, and seiden, Ryseth, and 
soone goth ouer the flood, for sich maner 
22 counseil 3af Achithophel ajens3ou. Thanne 
Dauid roos, and al the puple that was 
with hym, and thei passiden Jordan, to 
the tyme that the dai ‘were li;tid’, or 
the word were puplishid ; and not oone 
forsothe was laft, that passide not the 
23 flood. Forsothe Achitophel seynge, that 
his counseil was not doon, made redi his 
asse, and roos, and weite into hys hows, 
and into his citee ; and his hows disposid, 
he diede bi hoongynge, and is biried in 
asthe sepulere of his fader. Forsothe 
Dauid cam into stronge placis, and Ab- 
solon passide ouer Jordan, he and alle 
25the men of Yrael with hym. Forsothe 
Absolon sette Amasan for Joab vpon 
the oost ; forsothe Amasan was the sone 
of a man that was clepid Gethra of 
Jezreli, that wente into Abigayl, the 


ythe kyng x pr.m. 2 to go £ pr.m. 


barli 1. a And thei x. © passidin forth 1. 
'Om.1. 8 go forth 1, t stieden up i. 
ynehe passider. 2 And 1, 


II. KINGS. 


8 Om. ceFH. 


deertiss. ¢ Andi. fschewide #1. Sandt. Bamanim. i puttr. k And. Jouerd. 
P thei hadden taasted a liti] watir 1. 
vee up and passeth 1. 
; / 4roosupt. » hangyng him selff 1. 
gupont, bhist. iand1. the whichy. 1 the doustir I. 


XVII. 18—25. 


message to kyng Dauid ; for’ thei my3ten 
not be seyn, nether entre in to the citee. 
Forsothe® a child si3 hem, and he schew-18 
idef to Absolon ; sotheli® thei entriden with 
swift goyng in to the hows of ‘sum man? in 
Bahurym, that hadde a pit! in his place, 
and thei 3eden doun in to that pit. For-19 
sothek a womman took, and spred abrood 
an hilyng of! the mouth of the pit as 
driynge ‘barli with the pile takun a wey™, 
aud so the thing was hid. And whanne20 
the seruauntis of Absolon hadde come in 
to the hows, thei seiden to the womman, 
Where is Achymaas and Jonathas ? And 
the womman answeride to hem, Thei® 
passiden® hastily, whanne ‘watir} was 
tastid a itil, And whanne thei that 
sou3ten hem hadden not founde’, thei 
turneden ajen in to Jerusalem. And21 
whanne thei ‘that sou3ten™ hadden go’, 
thei stiedent fro the pit; and thei 3eden, 
and telden to kyng Dauid, and seiden, 
Rise ‘3e, passe 3e" soone the flood, for 
Achitofel 3afY sich counsel ajens 3ou. 
Therfor Dauid roos*, and al the puple22 
that was with hym, and thei passiden 
Jordan, til it was cleer dai, bifor that the 
word was pupplischid; and sotheli not 
oon* was left, that ‘passide notY the flood. 
Forsothe? Achitofel siz, that his counsel 23 
was not doon, and he sadlide his asse, and 
roos*, and 3ede in to his hows, and in to 
his citee; and whanne his hows was dis- 
posid, he perischide bi hangyng®t, and he 
was biried in the sepulcre of his fadir. 
Sotlieli¢ Danid cam in to the? castels, 
Absolon passide Jordan, he and alle the® 


+ whanne 
watir, eic., in 
Ebren it is, 
they passiden 
the ryuer of 
watris, that is, 
Jordan, as 
Ebrews seyen. 
Lire here. c. 


t bi hangyng; 
by him silf he 
hangide him 
silf for indigna- 
cionn, that his 
councel was 
not doon, and 
for by the foly 
of Absalon and 
of his puple, he 
perseyuede and 
helde for cer- 
teyn, that Da- 


and 24 nyth schulde 


haue the mais- 
try, and turne 
ajen in to the 


men of Israel with hym. Forsothef Ab-25 rewme; wher- 


solon ordeynede Amasan for Joab on$ 
the> oost ; forsothei Amasan was the sone 
of a man that was clepid Jethra of 
Je3rael, which* entride to Abigail, dou3- 
ter! of Naas, the sistir of Saruye, that was 


bin £ pr.m. © liz3tede cr. 


m pild 
q founde hem 1. 
Wroos up i. * oo man I. 
€Om.1. eOm.1. f Andt. 


v hath 3oue 1. 
© Andi. 


for he dredde 
to be slayn of 
him bi foul deth 
and peyneful, 
and therfor he 
wolde haste his 
deth hi an other 
weye. Lire 
here. c. 


XVII. 26—XVIII. 4. 


dou3ter of Naas, sister of Saruye, that 
ea¢was the moder of Joab. And Irael 
sette? tentis with Absolon in the loond 
270f Galaad. And whanne Dauid was 
comen into the defensable placis, Sobi, 
the sone of Naas of Rabath“4, of the sonys 
of Amon, and Machir, the sone of Amyel, 
of Lodobar, and Berzellay Galadite, of 
28 Rogelym, offreden to hym couerynge 
clothis, and tapetis, and erthen vessels, 
whete, and barli, and meele, and powned 
corn, and benen, and potage, and fryed 
‘gederynge of corns, that is clepid cycer®, 
2gand hony, and bottre, and sheep, and 
fatte calues. And thei 3yuen to Dauid, 
and to the puple that was with hym, for 
to ete; forsothe thei ouertroweden the 
puple to be feyntidf in the% deseert bi 
hungre and threst. 


CAP. XVIII. 


, Dauid thanne, his’ puple biholden ', 
ordeynde vpon hem leders of thousandis, 
2and leders of hundridis. And he jaf the 
thridde parti of the puple vndir the 
hoond of Joab; and the thridde vndur 
the hoond of Abisai, the sone of Seruye, 
the brothir of Joab; and the thridde 
vndur the hoond of Ethay, that was of 
Geth. And the kyng seide to the puple, 
3And I shal goon out with jou. And the 
puple answerde, Thou shalt not goo out ; 
forsothe whether we fleen, it shal not 
perteyne to hem in greet forse of vs; or 
the half partie falle fro vs, thei shulen 
not retche) anow, for thou oone for ten 
thousandis ert* countyd; beter it is 
thanne, that thou be to vs in the cytee to 
ssocour. To whom seith the kyng, That 
to jou semeth ri3t, that I shal doo. 
Thanne the kyng stoode biside the 3aate, 
and the puple wente out bi her cum- 
panyes, bi! hundredis and thousandis. 


d gente 4. 


yngen. jrecche cu. * schalt ben £ pr.m. 


™ the castels r. 2 Danid 1. © beddyng 1. 
he had biholde his 1. 
% the brothir 1. 


h that 3. 


u Om. 1. 
afoors1. > faller. ¢mycher. 


Il. KINGS. 


P and wheete x. 
fried chichis, that is, gadering of cornys that is clepid cicer x sec.m. marg. 
Vv chefteyns of thousyndis 1. 
4 thou oon 1. 


135 


the modir of Joab. And Israel settide 2¢ 
tentis with Absolon in the lond of Galaad. 
And whanne Dauid hadde come in to cas- 27 
tels™, Sobi, the sone of Naas of Rabath, 
of the sones of Amon, and Machir, the 
sone of Amyel, of Lodobar, and Berzellai, 
of Galaad, of Rogelym, brou3ten to hym® 2s 
beddyngis®, and tapitis, and erthun vessels, 
wheete?, and barli, and mele, and flour, 
and benys, and lente4, and fried chichis", 
and hony, and botere, and scheep, and 29 
fatte calues. And thei 3auen’ to Dauid, and 
to the puple that weren with hym, to ete; 
for thei supposiden the puple to be maad 
feynt for hungur and thirst in deseert. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Therfor Dauid, whanne thet puple ‘was! 
biholdun", ordeynede tribunes’ and centu- 
riouns” on* hem. And he jaf the thridde2 
part of the puple vndur the hond of Joab ; 
and the thridde part vndur the hond of 
Abisai, soneY of Saruye, brother? of Joab ; 
and the thridde part vndur the hond of 
Ethai, that was of Geth. And the kyng 
seide to the puple, Also Y schal go outt 
with jou. And the puple answeride,3 
Thou schalt not go out; for whether we 
fleen, it schal not perteyne to hem bi 
greet werk? of vs; whether half the part 
fallith® doun of vs, thei schulen not recke 
ynow’, for thou’ art rekynyd for ten 
thousynde; therfor it is betere, that thou 
be to vs in the citee in stronge hold*. ‘To4 
whichef the kyng seide’, Y schal do this}, 
that semeth ri3tful to 3ou. Therfor the 
kyng stood bisidis the 3ate, and the puple 
3ede out bi her cumpenyes, bi hundridis 
and bi thousyndis. And the king co-5 


dd Babath anu. € chichis x pr.m. fweri x prom. €Om.ceru. bthe £ pr.m. | byhold- 
10m. pcern. 


4 fetchis 1. * thing that is clepid cycer r. 
s3auen thor. this a sec. m. 
Ww of hundridus 1. * uponi. Y the sone tr. 


€socourr. fAndr. §& seidetohemr. 


+ ¥ schal go 
out, ete., for he 
wolde be of the 
firste to trauel 
in perel. Lire 
here. C. 


136 
sAnd the kyng comaundide to Joab, and 
Abisai, and Ethay, seiynge, Kepith to 
ie the child Absolon. And al the puple 
herde the kyng eomaundynge to alle the 
eprineis for Absolon. And so the puple 
wente into the feelde ajens Yrael; and 
a batail is doon in the wijld wode of 
7Effraym. And the puple of Iracl is 
there hewen doun of the cost of Dauid, 
and there is doon a greet slau3ter in that 
sday of twenti thousand. Forsothe there 
was the batail sparpoild vpon the face of 
al the loond, and manye mo weren whom 
the wijlde wode waastide of the puple, 
than thei whom the swerd deuowrede™ 
gin that day. Forsothe it felle, that Ab- 
solon a3encam to the seruauntis of Dauid, 
sittynge vpon™ a muyl; and whanne the 
inuyle wente yn vndur a thik ook, and a 
greet, the heed of hym eleuyde to the 
ook; and hym hongid bitwix heuene and 
erthe, the muyle, to the which he satte in, 
10passide forth. Forsothe a maner man 
saw3 that, and toolde to Joab, seiynge, 
I saw3 Absolon hongynge fro an ook. 
11And Joab seith to the man that toolde 
hym, If thou saw3, whi stikist thou not 
hym with the erthe, and I shulde haue 
3yue to thee ten eielis of siluer, and a 
i2kny3tis girdil? The which seide to Joab, 
If thou peysedist in myn hoondis a thou- 
sand silueren platis, I shulde not putte 
myn hoond into the sone of the kyng; 
forsothe herynge vs, the kyng comaund- 
ide to thee, and to Abisai, and to Ethai, 
seiynge, Kepith to me the ehild Absolon. 
13 But and if I hadde doon a3ens my soul 
foolhardili, that my3te not the kyng vn- 
knowe, and thou shuldist stoond forn 
idajens. And Joab seith, Not as thou 
wolt, but I shal goo to hym before thee. 
Thanne Joab took three speris in his 
hoond, and pij3te hem in the herte of 
Absolon. And whanne 3it he qwappide 


Il. KINGS. 


XVI. 5-——14. 


maundide to Joab, and to Abisai, and 
Ethaii, and seyde, Kepe 3e to me the ehild 
Absolon. And al the puple herde the kyng 
comaundinge to alle the princes for Ab- 
solon. ‘Therfor the puple 3ede out in toe 
the feeld a3ens Israel; and the batel was 
maad in the forest of Effraym. And the7 
puple of Israel was slayn there of the cost 
of Danid, and a greet sleyng! of twenti 
thousynde was maad in that dai. For-s 
sothe™ the" batel was seaterid™" there on°® 
the face of al erthe?, and many mo weren 
of the puple whiche the forest wastide, 
than thei whiehe the swerd deuourid in 
that dai. Sotheli it bifeld, that Absalon 9 
sittinge ond a mule, cam ajens the ser- 
uauntis of Dauid; and whanne the mule 
hadde entrid vndur a thicke ook, and greet’, 
the heed of Absolon cleuyde to the ook; 
and whanne he was hangid bitwixe 
heuene and erthe, the mule, on’ whieht he 
sat, passide’. Sotheli” ‘sum man” si3 this, 10 
and telde* to Joab, and seide, Y si3 Ab- 
solon hange on an ook. And Joab seide1 
to the man that ‘hadde teldeY to hym, If 
thou si3est”, whi persidist® thou not hym> 
to the erthe, and Y sehulde haue 3oue ‘to 
thee® ten siclis of siluer, and a girdil ? 
And he seide to Joab, Thou3 thou paiedist 12 
in myn hondis a thousynde platis of siluer, 
Y nolde’ sende myn hond in to the sone 
of the king; for the® while we herden, 
the kyng comaundide to thee, and to 
Abisai, and to Ethai, and seide, Kepe 3e 
to me the ehild Absolon. But and iff Ys 
hadde doé a3ens my lijf hardili", this my3te 
not be! hid fro the kyng, and thou woldist 
stonde on the contrarye side. And Joab is 
seide, Not as thou wolt*, “Absolon schal 
be kept'!, but Y schal asaile hym_ bifor 
thee. Therfore Joab took thre speris in his 
hond, and fitchide™ tho in the herte of 
Absolon. And whanne he spraulide, 3it 
eleuynge in the ook, ten 3onge squieris of 15 


™ vowrede CEFH. on zg, 


ito Ethairn kad, 


IMslauzter1,. ™ Andi. "Om.c. 25 i 
. . m. Cc. parpuylid 1. nponi. P the loond 1. 
: mie ay a aie i 8 upon 1. poe 1. passide forthr. vAnd1 Wa Dae m™. * tolde it 1. 
: sije kimi. 8 perschidist 1. =b hym thorou31, ¢O a : 
fthouz 1. & do fool hardily 1 4 Om.1. i hane ee 3 Ge Tne eee "ae 


k woldest Ex. 10Om.1. ™ he fitchide 1 


XVIEL. 15—25. 


15 cleuynge iu the ook, ten 3onge squyers of 
Joab runnen, and smytynge slowen hym. 
16 Forsothe Joab sownede with the trumpe, 
and with heelde the puple, that he pur- 
suede not Irael fleynge, wylnynge to 
17spare to the multitude. And thei token 
Absolon, and casten hym in the wijld 
wode in to a greet diche, and thei beren 
togidir vpon hym a greet heep of stoonus 
ful myche ; forsothe al Irael flee; into her 
18tabernaclis. Forsothe Absolon hadde. 
arerede vp to hym, whanne he 3it lyuede, 
a title, that is in the valey of the kyng ; 
he seide forsothe, I haue not a sone, and 
this shal be in° mynde of my name; and 
he clepide the title bi his name, and it is 
clepid the Hoond of Absolon into this 
igday. Forsothe Achymas, the sone of 
Sadoch, seith, I shal renne and telle to 
the kyng, for the Lord dide doom to 
hym fro the hoond of the enemyes of 
20hym. To whom Joab seide, Thou shalt 
not be messager in this dai, but thou 
shalt telle in the tother ; to day I wole not 
thee to telle, forsothe the sone of the 
2tkyng is deed. And Joab seith to Cusi, 
Go, and tel to the kyng what thou hast 
22seen. Cusi lowtide to Joah, and ranne. 
Eft Achymas, the sone of Sadoch, seide 
to Joab, What lettith, if I also renne 
after Cusi? And Joab seide to hym, 
What wolt thou renne, sone myn? Come 
hidir, thou shalt not be berer of good 
a3message. The which answerde, What 
forsothe if I shal renne? And he seith 
to hym, Renn. Thanne Achymaas ren- 
nynge bi the weye of the good short weye 
24ouerpasside Cusai. Danid forsothe sat 
bitwix two 3atis; the weyter forsothe, 
that was in the hei3t of the 3ate vpon 
the walle, rerynge vp the eyen, saw3 a 
2sman aloone rennynge; and cryinge out 
shewide to the kyng. And the kyng 
seide to hym, If he is aloone, gode mes- 


II. KINGS. 


137 


Joab runnen, and smytiden®, and killiden 
hym. Sotheli® Joab sownede? with ais 
clarioun, and withhelde’ the puple, lest it 
pursuede Israel fleynge, and he wolde 
spare the multitude. And theit token 17 
Absolon, and castiden® forth him in to a 
greet dich in the forest, and barent to- 
gidere a ful greet heep of stoonys on" 
hym ; forsothe’ al Israel fledde in to his¥ 
tabernaclis. Forsothe* Absolon, while1s 
he lyuyde 3it, hadde reisid to hym a me- 
morial, whichY is in the valey of the 
kyng; for he seide, Y haue no sone, and 
this schal be the mynde of my name ; and 
he clepide ‘the memorial? bi his name, and 
it is clepid the Hond, ‘that zs, werk®, of Ab- 
solon ‘til to> this dai. Forsothe® Achy-19 
maas, sone? of Sadoch, seide, Y schal 
renne, and Y schal telle to the kyng, that 
the Lord hath maad doom to hym of the 
hond of hise enemyes. To whom Joab 20 
seide, Thou schalt not be messanger® in 
this dai, but thou schalt tellef in another 
dai ; I nyleS that thou telle" to dai, for the 
sone of the kyng is deed. And Joab seide21 
to Chusi}, Go thou, and telle to the kyug 
tho thingis that thou hast seyn. Chusi  Chusy was a 
worschypide Joab, and ran. Eft' Achy-22 Pudi hiepeedl 


maas, sone* of Sadoch, seide to Joab, sc ae alae 


+ Joab seide 
to Chusi; this 


What lettith, if also Y renne aftir Chusi ? ac? ie - 
And Joab seide to hym, What wolt thou  Danyth, of 


i whom it is seid 
renne, my sone? Come thon hidur, thou 


schalt not be a berere of good message. 
Which! answeride, ‘What sotheli if™ Yo23 
schal renne? And Joab seide to hym, 
Renn thou. Therfor Achymaas ran bi 
the weie of schortnesse, ‘and sped", and 
passide® Chusi. Forsothe? Dauid sat bi-2+ 
twixe twei 3atis ; sotheli4 the spiere’, that 
was in the hijnesse of the 3ate on the 
wal, reiside’ the’ ijen, and si3" a man 
aloone rennynge; and the spiere’ criede, 25 
and schewide to the kyng. And the kyng 
seide to hym, If he is aloone, good mes- 


in xv. and xvii. 
ce. Lirehere.c. 


0 the ce. 
nsmoten 1. smiten Ee. © Andr. Ptroumpiders. dhelde with him1. ‘meny. & threwen 1. t thei 
bareni. 4uponi. Vandr, Wherr. *Andr. Ythatr. 2thattokenofmynder. 2 Om. 1. 
byntor ¢ Andi. 4thesoner. ¢amessanger A sec.m. ftelle this1. & wil not 1. h telle this 1. 
i forth. And eft. the soner. ! The which 1. ™ But whatr. = Om.1. © he passide rx. P And tr. 
qandz. ‘waiter1, *reiside up. this1. he sawje1. VY biholder 1. 


T 


138 


26 sage is in the mouth of hym. Forsothe 
hym goynge and nei3ynge nerre, the 
wayter saw3 anothir man rennynge; 
and criynge out in the cop seith, There 

to me another man rennynge 
aloone. And the kyng seide to hym, 

27 And this is a good messager. Forsothe 
the weyter seith, I biholde the rennynge 
of the former, as the rennynge of Achy- 
maas, the sone of Sadoch. And the kyng 
seith, A good man he is, and cometh 

2sberynge good mesage. Forsothe Achy- 
maas cryinge, seide to the kyng, Hail 
kyng! And lowtynge the kyng before 
hym bowide into the erthe, seith, Blessid 
be? the Lord thi God, that hath con- 
cludid the men, that rereden her hoondis 

ega3ens my lord the kyng. And the kyng 
seith, Is there not pees to the child Ab- 
solon? And Achymaas seide, I saw3 a 
greet towmbe, whanne Joab thi seruaunt 
sente me, O kyng, thi seruaunt; other 
30thing I knowe not. To whom the kyng, 
Passe, he seith, and stoond here. And 

31 Whanne he was passid, and stoade, Cusi 
aperide ; and comynge seith, I brynge 
good message, my lord king; forsothe 
the Lord liath demyde for thee to day 
fro the hoond ‘of alle’ that risen ajens 

szthee. The kyng forsothe seide to Cusi, 
Is there not pees to the child Absolon ? 
To whom answerynge Cusi, Be thei 
maad, he seith, as the child, the enemyes 
of my lord the’ kyng, and alle that risen 

33a3ens hym into yuel. And so the kyng 
cau3t with sorwe, stiede vp to the sowp- 
yuge place of the 3aate, and wepte, and 
thus he spak goynge, Sone myn, Abso- 
lon! Absolon, sone myn! who to me 
3yueth, that I dye for thee ? Absolon, sone 
myn! sone myn, Absolon! 


semeth 


P Om. pcerH. 4 Om. 4. 


~ Buti. * waiter an hije 1. 
1Om.i, e@ Andi. ftheerther. ¢ the a. 
a gret biriel a sec, m. marg. saw3e a biriel 1 
P knowe 1. douerr Om. 1. § certis , 
risen kr. X*betheirz. Y stiede up I. 


II. KINGS. 


Y come relnynge 1. 
h hath closid 1. 
1Om. 1. 


t risen &. han risen 1. 
7 he wepte 1, 


XVI. 26—33. 


sage is in his mouth. Sotheli” while heee 
hastide, and neizede neer, the spiere* si3 
another man rennynge’; and the spiere 
criede ‘in the hijnesse*, and seide, Another 
man rennynge aloone apperith to me. 
And the kyng seide to hym, And this man 
is a good messanger. Sotheli® the spiere® 27 
seide, Y biholde the rennyng of the for- 
mere, as the rennyng of Achymaas, sone® 
of Sadoch. And the kyng seide, He 
is a good man, and he cometh bryngynge 
a? good message. 
criede, and seide to the kyng, Heil kyng! 
And he worschipide the kyng lowli bifor 
hym to erthef. and seide, Blessid be this 
Lord God, that closide® togidere the men, 
that reisydeni her hondis aj3ens my lord 


the] kyng. And the kyng seide, Whe-29 


ther pees is to the child Absolon? And 
Achymaas seide, Y si3*, ‘that is, Y herde, 
a great noise!, whanne Joab, thi seruaunt, 
thou™ kyng, sente” me thi sernaunt®; Y 


kan? noon othir thing. To whom the3o0 


kyng seide, Passe thou‘, and stonde here. 
And whanne he hadde passid, and stood, 


Chusi apperide; and he cam and seide,s1 


My lord the’ kyng, Y brynge good mes- 
sage ; for’ the Lord hath demed to dai for 
thee of the hond of alle men that risident 
ajgens thee. 
Chusi, Whether pees is to the child Abso- 
lon ? To whom Chusi answeride, and seide, 
The enemyes of my lord the’ kyng, and 
alle men that risiden® a3ens hym in to 


yuel, be* maad as the child. Therfor thess 


kyng was sory, and stiedeY in to the soler 
of the 3ate, and wepte’, and spak thus 
goynget, My sone, Absolon! Absolon, my 
sone! who 3yueth to me, that Y die for 
thee? Absolon{, my sone! my sone, Ab- 
solon! 


r Om. aru. § Om. BceFH. 


_8Andi. > waiter 1. ¢ the sone 1. 
Hreisiden to gidrer. JOm.1.  * siz 
™ 00 1. nN sendez. © sernaunt fo thee 1. 
uAndr. YQOm.1. ¥ resen 1up. 


2 an hize 1. 


Forsothe® Achymaas 28 goostly deth of 


Forsothe" the kyng seide to 32 snack Dauyth 




















+ and wepie, 
and spak thus 
goyng; Dauith 
biwailide the 


Absalon, for 
he diede in 
dedly synne, 
in pursuynge 
in dede his 
fadir 3 and ther- 
for this word 
Absolon my 
sone, is set 

six sithis here, 
and in xix. ¢”. 
for vi. condi- 
ciouns of the 
peyne of helle; 
for peyne of 
harm, that is, 
of wanting of 
blis, and the 
peyne of feel- 
ing is there, 
gnasting of 
teth and wep- 
ing, outermere 
derknessis, and 
during with 
outen ende, ben 
in helle. Lire 
here. C. 

+ Absolon; 
goostly: Abso- 
on that pur- 


and hise men, 
signefieth a 
tiraunt op- 
pressere of sim- 
ple men; wh 
heed cleueth 
to an ook, in 
desiringe hize 
thingis of the 
world ; he is 
persid with iii. 
speris, in as- 
sentinge to 
thre maner 
coueitise; hei 
cast forth in 
to a dich, in 
goinge doun to 
helle. Lire 
here. c. 


XIX. I-—9. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Forsothe it is toold to Joab, that the 
2kyng wept, and weilide his sone; and the 
victorye is turned in that dai into weil- 
ynge to al the puple; forsothe the puple 
herde in that day to be seid, The kyng 
3sorwith vpon his sone. And the puple 
bowide aside in that dai to goo in to the 
citee, what maner wise a puple turnede 
and fleynge fro the batail is wont to 
4bowe aside. Forsothe the kyng couerde 
his heed, and criede with a greet vois, 
Sone myn, Absolon! Absolon, sone myn! 
5Thanne goon yn Joab to the kyng into 
the hows, seide, Thou hast confoundid 
to day the cheeris of alle thi seruauntis, 
and that han maad saaf thi lijf, and the 
lijf of thi sonys and of thi dou3tris, and’ 
the lijf of thi wyues, and the lijf of thi 
esecoundarye wyues. Thou louest the 
hatynge thee, and thou hast in‘ haate 
the louynge thee; and thou hast shewid 
to day, for thou reckist not of thi leeders 
and of thi seruauntis; and verreily I 
haue knowen now, that if Absolon lyu- 
ede, and alle we hadden diede, thanne it 
7shulde plese to thee. Now than ryse, and 
go forth, and spekynge do" aseethe to 
thi seruauntis; forsothe I swere to thee 
bi the Lord, that if thow gost not out, 
that oon forsothe be not to abidynge still 
with thee this ny3t; and werse shal be 
to thee this, than alle the yuels that 
camen vpon thee fro thi 3ongth’ vnto 
8the tyme that is now. Thanne the kyng 
roos, and satte in the 3ate; and to al 
the puple it is toold, that the king satte 
in the 3ate, and al the multitude cam 
9before the king. Forsothe Irael flee3 into 
her tabernaclis. And al the puple stroof 
in” alle the lynagis of Irael, seiynge, The 
kyng hath delyuerd vs fro the hoond of 
oure enemyes, and he hath saued vs fro 


tto pceFri. %todo E pr.v. 


@ ethchewide 1. 


b the batel a pr.m. ¢ Andt. 
& for plures. 


hryseupr. i Om. 1. 


II. KINGS. 139 


CAP. XIX. 


Forsothe it was teld to Joab, that the! 
kyng wepte, and biweilide his sone; and2 
the victorie in that dai was turned in to 
morenyng to al the puple; for the puple 
herde, that it was seid in that dai, The 
kyng makith sorewe on his sone. And3 
the puple eschewide* to entre in to the 
citee in that dai, as the puple turned and 
fleynge fro batel’ is wont to bowe awey. 
Sotheli® the kyng hilide his heed, and4 
criede with greet vois, My sone, Absolon ! 
Absolon, my sone! Therfor Joab entrides 
to the kyng in to the hows, and sceide, 
Thou hast schent to dai the cheris? of alle 
thi seruauntis, that han maad saaf thi lijf, 
and the lijf of thi sones and of thi dou3- 
tris, and the lijf of thi wyues, and the 
lijf of thi® secoundarie wyues. Thou louestc 
hem that haten thee, and thou hatist hem 
that louen thee; and thou schewidist to 
dai that thou reckist not of thi duykis 
and of thi seruauntis; and verily Y haue 
knowe now, that® if Absolon lyuede, and 
alle we hadden be deed, thanne it schulde 
plese thee. Now therfor ryse thoui, and7 
go forth, and speke thou, and make satis- 
faccioun to this eruauntis; for Y swere to 
thee bi the Lord, that if thou schalt not 
go out}, sotheli™ not o man schal dwelle 
with thee in this ny3t; and this schal be 
worse to thee, than alle yuels" that camen 
on thee fro thi 3ong wexynge age til in to 
present® tyme. Therfor the kyng roos?,s 
and sat in the 3ate; and it was teld to al 
the puple, that the kyng sat in the 3ate, 


“and al the multitude cam bifor the kyng. 


Forsothe Israel?? fledde in to hise4 taber- 
naclis. And al the puple stryuede in alo 
the lynagis of Israel, and seide, The kyng 
delyuerede’ vs fro the hond of alle oure 
enemyes, and he sauide vs fro the hond of 
Filisteis; and now ‘he fleeth’ fro the londt 


v30uthe cern, Wand abu. 


d cheer Kx. cheereo. ¢ the apm. £ hast schewid 1. 
Kk go thou 1. 
present 1K. Proosup1. PP al Israel e. 4 her EL. 


lforth 1. Mandi. Othe yuels1. © this 
thath delyuered 1. * hath fled r. 
Tad, 


+ he fleeth fro 
the lond; that 
is, fro the 
kingis citee, as 
if they seiden, 
it is vnworthi, 
that the king 
fle for Absolon. 
Lire here. c. 


140 


the hoond of Philisteis ; and now he flee3 
io fro the loond for Absolon. Forsothe Ab- 
solon, whom we anoyntiden kyng vpon 
vs, is deed in batail; how long be 3e 
stille, and 3e brengen not a3en the kyng? 
And the counseil of al Irael cam to the 
uking. Forsothe kyng Dauid sente to Sa- 
doch and to Abiathar, preestis, selynge, 
Speke 3e to the more thur3 birth of Juda, 
seiynge, Whi ben 3e comen last to brynge 
ajen the kyng into his hows? Forsothe 
the word of al Irael is ful comen to the 
kyng, that thei brengen hym a3en into 
his hows. For the kyng seide, Thes 
i2thingis 3e shulen seye to the puple, My 
britheren 3e, my boon and my flesh 3e; 
13 whi last brengen 3e a3en the kyng? And 
to Amasa seye 3ee, Whether ert thou not 
my boon and my flesh ? Thes thingis God 
do to me, and thes thingis adde, if thou 
were not maister of chiualrye after Joab 
14 before me al tyme. And he bowide the 
herte of alle the men of Juda as of o 
man; and thei senten to the king, sei- 
ynge, Turn a3en, thou and alle thi ser- 
isuauntis, And the kyng turnede a3en, 
aud cam vnto Jordan; and al Juda cam 
forth into Galgala, that he a3en come to 
the kyng, and thei shulden brynge hym 
ygouer Jordan. Forsothe Semei, the sone 
of Gera, the sone of Gemyny, of Bahu- 
rym, hizede, and cam doun with the men 
of Juda into ajen comynge of kyng Da- 
17 uid, with a thousand men of Beniamyn ; 
and child Ciba of the hows of Saul, and 
his fifteen sonys, and twenti seruantis 
weren with hym; and brekynge Jordan 
isbefore the kyng, passeden the forthis, 
that” thei brengen ouer the hows of the 
kyng, and doon after his comaundynge. 
Forsothe Semei, the sone of Gera, faln 
doun before the kyng, whanne now he 
i9hadde passid Jordan, seide to hymx, My 


II. KINGS. 


XIX. 10o—19. 


for Absolon. Forsothe' Absolon, whom we 1o 


anoyntiden on" vs, is deed in batel; hou 
longe ben 3e stille, ‘that is’, fro’ know- 
lechyng of synne, and fro axyng of 
Sorzyuenesse*, and bryngen not a3en the 
kyng? And the counsel of al Israel cam 


to the kyng. ForsotheY kyng Dauid sente11 


to Sadoch and to? Abiathar, preestis*, and 
seide, Speke 3e to the grettere men in 
birthe of Juda, and seie 3e, Whi camen 3e 
the’ laste to brynge a3en the kyng in to 
his hows? Sotheli® the word of al Israel 
cam to the kyng, that thei wolden brynge 
hym a3en in to his hows. For the kyng 
seide, 3e schulen seie these thingis to the 


puple, 3e ben my britherent, 3e ben my 12 


boon and my fleisch; whi the laste bryngen 


t+ 3¢ ben my 
britheren ; 
Dauyth sente 
to the men of 
Juda, that 
weren with 
Absolon, that 
they schulden 
be of the firste 
to lede him 
a3en, for of this 
that thei weren 
of Juda, they 


3e azens the kyng? And seie 3e to Amasa, 13 weren ascham- 


Whether thou art not my boon and my 
fleisch ? God do these thingis to me, and 
adde these thingis*{, if thou schalt not be 
maistir of chyualrye bifore me in al tyme 


to appere in 
his si3t, for 
they hadden 
forfetid azenus 
him more than 
straungeris 5 
and therfor 
h per- 


; D 
aftir Joab||. And Dauid bowide® the herte 14 ayaa this, 


of alle men of Juda as of o man; and thei 
senten to the kyng, and seiden, Turne 
thou ajen, and alle thi seruauntis. 
the kyng turnede ajen, and cam ‘til tof 
Jordan ; and al Juda cam til in to Galgala 
to mete the kyng, and lede® hym ouer 
Jordan. 
Gera, sone’ of Gemyny, of Bahurym, hast- 
ide, and cam doun with the men of Juda 


in to the metyng of kyng Dauid, with a17 


thousynde men of Beniamyn; and Siba, 
ak child of the hows of Saul, and fiftene 
sones of hym, and twenti seruauntis weren 
with hym; and thei braken in to Jordan, 


Forsothe' Semei, the sone of is 


and sente for 
hem, that they 
schulden come 
sikirly, for he 


And 15 Was redy to 


for3yue. Lire 
here. c. 

t adde these 
thingis ; that is, 
grettere yuels 
than Y suffride 
in the persecu- 
cioun of Abso- 
lon. Lire here. 


com 

Wl aftir Joab; 
summe bokis 
han aftir Joab; 
that is, vndur 
Joab, for the 
Ebreu word 
here, is set 
sum tyme for 
vndur, and 
sum tyme it 
signefieth for ; 


bifor the kyng, and passide! the forthis™, 18 327 Che cane 


that thei schulden lede ouer the hows of 
the kyng, and schulden" do bi the co- 
maundement® of the kyng. SotheliP Se- 
mei, the sone of Gera, knelide bifor the 
king, whanne he hadde passid now Jor- 


wthat and 4. * the kyng a. 
r oe 8 unge 1. VY Om. pkmsxe. a ink. Om. Ks. * Gloss omitted ini. y Andi. 2Om.c. 
: ie preestis 1. R Om. 1. % And 1. 4 thingis to 1. ¢ bowide to him. ‘vntor. &toleder. © But 1. 
the sone 1. ther. 1 thei passide 1. ™ foordis 1kR. fordes u. 1 Om. DIKMXxc¢. © heest 1. 


P Certis 1. 


sentence is, for 
Dauyth pur- ~ 
poside not to 
remoue Joab 
fro his office, 
but that Amasa 
schulde fille 
his while in 
tyme and 
places where it 
semyde spede- 
ful. Lire here. 
c. 


XIX. 20—28. 


lord, ne wiyt thou to me the wickidnes, 
ne haue thou mynde of the wrongis of 
thi seruaunt in the dai, the which thou 
wentist out, my lord kyng, fro Jerusa- 
lem, ne set thou, kyng, in thin herte ; 
20 forsothe I thi seruaunt knowe my synne; 
and therfor to dai first I cam of al the 
hows of Joseph, and cam doun into ajen- 
21comynge of my lord the kyng. Forsothe 
answerynge Abisai, the sone of Saruye, 
seide, Whether for thes wordis Semei 
shal not be slayn, that curside to the 
2ecrist of the Lord? And Dauid seith, 
What to me and to 3ou, 3e sonys of Sa- 
ruye? Whi ben 3e maad to me to day 
into Sathan ? 
shal not be slayn a man in Irael? Whe- 
ther I knowe not me to day maad kyng 
23vpon Jrael? And the kyng seith to Se- 
mei, Thou shalt not die; and he swore 
24to hym. Forsothe Myphibosech, the sone 
of Jonathan, the sone of Saul, cam doun 
into they ajencomynge of the kyng, the 
feet vnwasshen, and the beerd vnshauen. 
And his clothis he hadde not washen, fro 
the day that the kyng wente out vnto 
the day of his turnynge a3en in pees. 
25 And whanne he hadde a3en comen to the 
kyng, the kyng seide to hym, Whi cam 
a¢thou not with me, Myphibosech? And 
answerynge he seith, My lord kyng, my 
seruaunt dispiside me; and I thi ser- 
uaunt seide to hym, that he shulde make 
to me redi an asse, and stiynge vp I my3te 
goo with the kyng; forsothe I thi ser- 
27uaunt am halt. Also and he accuside me, 
thi seruaunt, to thee, my lord kyng; for- 
sothe thou, my lord kyng, ert as the 
aungel of God; do that is plesynge to 
2gthee. Forsothe ne the hows of mi fader 
was but gilti to the deth to my lord 
kyng; forsothe thou puttist me thi ser- 
uaunt among thi meetfelawis of thi bord ; 
what thanne haue I of ry3twise playnt, 
or what may I more be spoken of to the 


II. KINGS. 


Thanne whether to dai. 


141 


dan, and seide to the kyng, My lord the419 
kyng, arette thou not wickidnesse to me, 
nether haue thou mynde of the wrongis of 
thi seruaunt in the dai, in which thou, my 
lord the’ kyng, 3edist out of Jerusalem, 
nether sette thou, kyng, in’ thin herte; 
for Y thi seruaunt knoleche my synne 320 
and therfor to dai Y cam the firste of al 
the hows of Joseph, and Y cam doun in 
to the meetyng of my lord the* kyng. 
Forsothet Abisai, the sone of Saruye, an- 2) 
sweride and seide, Whether Semei, that 
curside the crist of the Lord, schal not be 
slayn for these wordis? And Dauid seide, 22 
What is to me and to 30u, 3e" sones of 
Saruye? Whi ben 3e maad to me to dai 
in to Sathant?. Therfor whether a man 
schal be slayn to dai in Israel? Whether 
Y knowe not me maad kyng to dai on’ 
Israel? And the kyng seide to Semey,23 

Thou schalt not die{; and the kyng swoor = thou schalt 
to hym. Also Myphibosech, sone” of Jo-24 Dany ae 
nathas, sone” of Saul||, cam doun with eee 
vnwaischun feet, and with berd* vnclip- 


t in to Sathan; 
that is, aduer- 
sarie. C. 


anoon, othere 
men that weren 


pid, in to the comyng of the kyng. And __ with Absolon 

Mysphibosech hadde not waische hise Tansee bled 

clothis, fro the dai in which the kyng ened 
thei that had- 


3ede out of Jerusalem til to the dai of his 

‘ en not come 
turnyngY a3en in pees. And whanne atas3it es 
Jerusalem he hadde come to the kyng, aici 
the kyng seide to him, Myphibosech, whi  jiaaden rial 
camest thou not? with me? And he an-2¢ thane, wolden 


hadden come 
‘ 3 haue go awey 
sweride and seide, My lord the* kyng, my _ priuelys and so 


seruaunt dispiside me; and Y thi sernaunt Pee oe 
seide to hym, that he schulde sadle? the* cr oe 
asse to me, and Y schulde stie4, and Y core 

schulde® go with the king; for Y thi ser- yd Ae 


More ouer and he27here.c 

|| sone of Saul ; 
summe bokis 
han here, the 
sone of Joua- 


uaunt am crokid’. 
accuside me, thi seruaunt, to thee, my 
lord the" kyng; forsothe! thou, my lord 

‘the kyng*, art as the aungel of God; do Ha ae 
thou that, that is plesaunt to thee. Forlag gruthe of Shee 
the hows of my fadir was not™ no but amendid, han 
gilti of" deeth to my lord the kyng; so- i se 
theli® thou hast set me thi seruaunt among 


y Om. BCEFH. 


4QOm.1, ttho wrongisint. *Om.1. tAndi, Uther, Vine. upons. Wthesoner, ~* his 
berd 1. Ycomyng:1. 2 not forthr. ®Om.1, bhauesadiids. ¢anz. dhauestied up. ¢ haue 1. 
fOm.1. Shaltr. bOm.r ibut1 kOm.1. 1 Certisnether1. ™Om.1. "tor. “and. 


142 


2akyng? Forsothe the kyng seith to hym, 
What more shalt thou speke? stedefast 
it is that I hane spoken; thou and Siba, 
sodyuyde 5e possessiouns. And Myphibo- 
sech answerde to the kyng, Also al take 
he, aftir that my lord the kyng is turned 
3iajen pesibli? into his hows. Forsothe 
Berzellay Galadite, a* ful olde man, com- 
yuge down fro Rogelym, ladde the kyng 
ouer Jordan, redi also for to folwe hym 
s2bisjonde the flood. Forsothe Berzellai 
Galadite was ful ooolde, that is, of fonr- 
score 3eer, and he 3af food to the kyng, 
whanne he dwellid in the defensable 
placis ; forsothe he was a ful mych riche 
s3man. And so the kyng seide to Berzellai, 
Come with me, that thou reste sikir with 
3ime in Jerusalem. And Berzellai seith to 
the kyng, How feele ben the dayes of the 
3eeris of my lijf, that I stye vp with the 
33 kyng to Jerusalem? Of foure scoore 3eer 
Iam to dai; whether my wittis thryuen 
to deme swote or bittir, or meet and 
drynk may delite thi seruaunt, or I may 
here forthermore the vois of men syngers 
and of wymmen syngers? Whi thi ser- 
uaunt be to charge to my lord kyng? 
36 A litil I shal goo forth thi seruaunt fro 
Jordan with thee, ne I nede this while 
373eeldynge ; but I biseche, that I turne 
ajen thi seruaunt, and die in my citee, 
and be biried bisyde the sepulcre of my 
fader and of my moder; forsothe there 
is thi seruaunt Chamaan; he go with 
thee, my lord kyng, and do to hym that 
sasemeth to thee good. And so the kyng 
seide to hym, Chamaan goo with me; 
and I shal doo to hym what euer thing 
shal pleese to thee, and al that thou 
svaskist of me, thou shalt geete. And 
whanne al the puple, and the kyng was 
passid ouer Jordan, he resteiede>; and 
the king kisside Berzellai, and blesside 
to hym; and he turnede ajen into his 
soplace. Thanne the kyng wente into Gal- 


2 pesibleli x. 


Ptabler. @ And. 


II. KINGS. 


a Om. £ pr. m. 


XIX. 29——40. 


the gestis of thi boord?; what therfor 
haue Y of iust pleynt, ether what may Y 
more crye to the kyng? 
kyng seide to hym, What spekist thou 
more ? that that Y haue spoke is stide- 
fast ; thou and Siba depart possessyouns't. 


Sothelia the 29 


+ thou and 
Ciba, departe 


possessiouns ; 


here Dauyth 
grauntide 
yniustly to the 
seruannt of 
Myphibosech, 
the half of the 
eritage of My- 
hibesech, 


And Myphibosech answeride to the kyng, 30 wherfor the 


3he, take he alle thingis, aftir that my 
lord the’ kyng turnedet ajen pesibli in 
to his hows. 
a ful eld man, cam doun fro Rogelym, 
and ledde the kyng ouer Jordan, redi also 
to sue hym ouer" the flood. 
Berzellai of Galaad was ful eld, that is, of 
foure score 3eer, and he 3af metis to the 
kyng, whanne the kyng dwellyde in cas- 
tels; for Berzellai was a ful riche man. 


rewme was 
departid aftir- 
ward, in the 
tyme of Ro- 


Also Berzellai of Galaad, 31 hoam sone of 


is sone, as it 
was seide 
pleynliere in 
1. book xx. c°. 


Forsothe¥ 32 ae it is to 


erseyue, hou 
myche flater- 
eris and bac- 
biteris ben 
perelouse to 
princes, for 
Dauyth so 
hooly and iust, 


Therfor* the kyng seide to Berzellai, 33 ¥38 takun and 


Come thou with me, that thou reste si- 
kirli with me in Jerusalem. And Ber- 
zellai seide to the kyng, Hou manye ben 
the daies{ of 3eeres of my lijf, that Y stieY 


with the kyng in to Jerusalem? Y am3s 


of foure score 3eer to dai; whether my 
wittis ben quike to deme swete thing 
ethir bittir, ether mete? and drynk may 
delite thi seruaunt, ether may Y here 
more the vois of syngeris ether of syng- 
sters? Whi is thi seruaunt to charge to 


my lord the* kyng? Y thi seruaunt schal 36 


go forth a litil fro Jordan with thee, Y 


sseyned bi 
the wordis of 
Ciba, flaterere 


34 and hacbitere, 


that he graunt- 
ide to Siba the 
eritage of My- 
phibosech his 
lord, in the 
absence of My- 
phibosech, and 
while he herde 
not; and that 
is worse, aftir 
that he herde 
Myphibosech, 
verily excus- 
inge him silf, 
he withdrow 
not al his 
vniust seiyng, 
but he made 
the worste ser- 
uaunt euene 


haue no nede to this 3eldyng; but Y bicanes his lord, 


seche>, that Y thi seruaunt turne a3en, 
and die in my citee, and be biried bisidis 
the sepulcre of my fadir and of my modir ; 
forsothe® Chamaam is‘ thi seruaunt, my 
lord the® kyng, go he with thee, and do 
thou to hym that that semeth good to 
thee. Therfor the kyng seide to hym¢e 
Chamaam passe‘ with me; and Y schal 
do to hym what ever thing plesith thee, 
and thou schalt gete al thing, which thou 
axist of me. 
and the kyng hadden passid Jordan, the 
kyng abood; and ‘the kyng" kisside Ber- 


b restegede ce. restide z. 


J ‘ the possessyouns 1. 8 Om.1. tisturned 1. bizonde 1. W And. * And 
Sot. Ystleup 1. 2 wher meter. &Om.1. Db biseche thee tr. © but 1 4Om.1. ¢€Om.1. € Bar- 
zellay 1. go forth 1, that 1. b Om. Ex, 


And whanne al the puples9 


nd netheles 
he ou3te to 
haue hanged 
thilke ser- 
uaunt, for the 
fals accusing 
of his lord of 
tresoun a3enus 
the kingis 
mageste. Lire 
here. c. = 

t+ hou many 


2 38 ben the dayes, 


etc.; as if he 
seyde, it is 
tyme that Y 
thenke of deth, 
not of onours 
ether of delices, 
and this is 
ajenns elde 
now that 
preessen forth 
hem silf to the 
courtis of grete 
men. Lire 
here. C. 


XIX. 41—XX. 3- 


galan, and Chamaan with hym. Forsothe 
al the puple of Juda brou3te ouer the 
kyng, and of the puple of Irael oonli the 

4thalf parti was at. And so alle the men 
of Irael rennynge to the kyng, seiden to 
hym, Whi oure britheren, the men of 
Juda, han stoln thee, and han brou3t oner 
Jordan the kyng and his hows, and alle 

42the men of Dauid with hym? And alle 
the men of Juda answerden to the men 
of Irael, For to me nerre is the kyng; 
whi wraththist thou vpon this thing? 
Whether we han eten eny thing of the 

43 kyng, or 3iftis to vs ben 3euen? And the 
man of Irael answerde to the men of 
Juda, and seith, Bi ten parties more I 
am anentis the kyng, and more to me 
perteneth Dauid than to thee; whi hast 
thou doo to me wronge, and it is not 
toold to me former, that I brynge ajen 
my kyng? Forsothe harder answerden the 
men of Juda than the men of Irael. 


CA OX. 


1 It felle forsothe, that there was a man 
of Belial, Syba bi name, the sone of 
Botry, a ‘man of Gemyny‘; and he songe 
with a trumpe, and seith, There is not 
to vs paart in Dauid, ne heritage in the 
sone of Isay; turn a3en into thi taber- 

2naclis¢, Irael. And al Irael ys seuered 
fro Dauid, and folwide Ciba, the sone of 
Botri; the men forsothe of Juda cleueden 
to her kyng, fro Jordan vnto Jerusalem. 

3And whanne the kyng was comen into 
his hows into Jerusalem, he took the 
wymmen, and his ten secoundarie wyues, 
the whiche he hadde laft to the hows to 
be kept, and he took hem into waard, 
3yuynge foodis to hem; and he wente not 
into hem, but thei weren closid vnto the 
dai of her® deth, lyuynge in widewheed. 


II. KINGS. 


143 


zellai, and blesside hym; and he turnede 
a3en in to his place. Therfor' the kyng 40 
passide* in to Galgala, and Chamaam with 
hym. Sotheli! al the puple of Juda hadde 
ledde the kyng ouer, and the half part 
oneli of the puple of Israel was present. 
Therfor alle the men of Isracl camen to-41 
gidere to the king, and seiden to hym, 
Whi han oure britheren, the men of Juda, 
stole thee, and han led™ the kyng and his 
hows ouer Jordan, and alle the men of 
Dauid with hym? And ech man of Juda 42 
answeride to the men of Israel, For the 
kyng is neer to me; whi art thou wrooth 
on” this thing ? Whether we han ete ony 
thing of the kyng, ether 3iftis ben 3ouun 
to vs? And aman of Israel answeride to 43 
the men of Juda, and seide, Y am grettere 
bi ten partis at° the kyng, and Dauith 
perteyneth more to me than to thee; whi 
hast thou do wrong to me, and ‘it was? not 
teld1 to ‘me the formere’, that Y schulde 
brynge a3jen my kyng? Forsothe’ the 
men of Juda answeryden hardere to the 
men of Israel. 


CAP. XX. 


Also it bifelde, that a man of Belial: 
was there, Siba bi name, the sone of 
Bothri, a man of the generacioun of Ge- 
myny; and he sownede with a clariount, 
and seide, No part is to vs in Danid, 
nether eritage in the sone of Ysai; thon, 
Israel, turne ajen in to thi tabernaclis. 
And al Israel was departid fro Danid},2 + and Jsraei 
and suede Siba, the sone of Bothri; for- fe Dilgihs 
sothe" the men of Juda cleuyden to her Hehe oa 
kyng, fro Jordan ‘til tov Jerusalem. Ands punyschid so; 
whanne the kyng hadde come in to his asenus Urie, 
hows in Jerusalem, he took ten wymmen, chen 
hise secundarie wyues, whiche he hadde ete ete 
left to kepe the* hous, and he bitookY hem =”: ©: 
in to keping, and 3af mete to hem; and he? 
entride not to hem; but thei weren closid 
‘til to* the dai of her deeth, and lyueden 


€ double man & pr.m. ‘tabernacle 4. © his E pr. m. 


1 And 1. 
s Andt. 


§ Thanne 1. 
q schewid 1. 


Z Dauid 1. 


k passide forth 1. 
? me that I am formere 1. 
@ vnto I, 


m Jed forth 1. 
t trumpe I. 


P whi was it 1. 
Xhist. Y took a. 


1 upon 1. 9 tor, 
uandi. W ynto1. 


144 


4Forsothe the kyng seide to Amase, Cleep 
to me alle the men of Juda into the 
thridde dai, and thou be to present. 
5 Thanne Amasa wente for to elepe Juda ; 
and he dwelte out of the couenaunt! tyme 
sthat the kyng ordeynde to hym. For- 
sothe Dauid seith to Abisai, Now more 
Siba, the sone of Botri, is to tourment vs 
than Absolon ; tak therfor the seruauntys 
of thi lord, and pursue hym, lest perauen- 
ture he fynde the citee strengthid, and 
7flee awey fro vs. Thanne wente out 
with hym the men of Joab, Cerethi for- 
sothe and Pherethi, and alle the stroonge 
men wenten out of Jerusalem to pursue 
aSiba, the sone of Botri. And whanne 
thei weren biside the greet stoon, that is 
in Gabaon, Amasa comynge a3en cam to 
hem; forsothe Joab was clothid with a 
strait coote at the mesure of his shap, 
and there aboue gird with a knyif hong- 
ynge vnto the reyn gottys in the sheethe, 
the which forgid with lijt meuynge my3t 
9goon out, and smyte. And so Joab seide 
to Amasan, Heyl, my brother! And he 
heelde with the rijt hoond the chyn of 
wo Amase, as kyssynge hym. Forsothe Ama- 
sa weytide not wel the knyif that Joab 
hadde, the which smoot hym in the side, 
and shedde out the gottis of hym into 
the erthe, and is deed; ne the secounde 
wounde he putte to. Forsothe Joab and 
Abisay, his brother, pursueden Siba, the 
isone of Botry. There among sum men of 
the children of Dauid, whanne thei had- 
den ‘seen and" stonden biside the careyn 
of Amase, of the felawis of Joab, seiden, 
Loo! that wolde be for Joab, leder of 
12Dauid. Forsothe Amasa spreyndé with 
blood laye in the myddil weye. That 
saw3 a man, that al the puple stood stille 
to seen hym, and meuede a wey Amasa 
fro the weye into the feelde, and couerde 
hym with a clooth, lest the goers shulden 


f plesid £ pr.m. couenauntid cz sec. m. 


bAndx. © 3ede forth 1. 


Il. KINGS. 


XX. 4—12. 


in widewehed. Forsothe Dauid seide to4 
Amasa, Clepe thou to gidere to me alle 
the men of Juda in to the thridde dai, and 
be thou present. Therfor Amasa 3ede°,5 
that he clepe togidere the puple of Ju- 
da; and he dwellide ouer the couenaunt?, 
which® the kyng hadde set to hym. So-6 
thelif Dauid seide to Abisai, Now Siba, . 
the sone of Botri, schal turmente vs more 
than Absolon dide® ; therfor take> the ser- 
uauntis of! thi lord, and pursue hym, lest . 
in hap he fynde strengthid citees, and 
ascape vs. Therfor the men of Joab7 
3eden*f out with Abisai, and Cerethi and 
Ferethi', and alle stronge™ men 3eden out 
of Jerusalem to pursue Siba, the sone of 
Bochry. And whanne thei weren bisidiss 
the greet stoon, which" is in Gabaon, 
Amasa cam, and ran to hem; forsothe® 
Joab was clothid with a streit coote at 
the mesure of his abit?, and was gird 
aboue with a swerd, ‘ether dagger*, hang- 
ynge doun‘til to’ the entrayls in a schethe, 
‘which swerd" maad ‘eraftily my3te go 
out’t bi 1i3t touchyng, and smyte”. Ther- 
for* Joab seide to Amasa, Heil, my bro-g 
ther! And he helde with the? rijt hond 
the chyn of Amasa, as kissinge him. For-10 
sothe* Amasa took not> kepe of® the 
swerd4, ‘which swerd® Joab hadde, and 
Joab smoot Amasa in the side, and schedde 
out his entrailis in to the erthe, and Ama- 
sa was deed; and Joab addide not ‘the se- 
coundef wounde. Forsothe Joab and Abi- 
sai, his brother, pursueden Siba, the sone 
of Bochri. In the meene tyme whanne1 


, ‘sun men? of the children of Dauid, of the 


felowis of Joab, haddeni stonde bisidis the 
deed bodi of Amasa, thei seiden, Lo! he 
that wolde* be the felowe of Dauid for 
Joab. Forsothe! Amasa was bispreynt12 
with blood, and lay in the myddil of the 
weie. Sum™ man si3 this, that al the pu- . 
ple abood to se Amasa, and he remouyde 


ff Om. E pr.m. 6 sprengd cr. 


4couenaunt tyme 1. ¢thatr. f And: €Om.1. btakethour iof 

Joab 1. k wenten 1, 1 arblasters and archers 1 marg. m the stronge c. © that 1. Oand 1. 

z schap1. dhe was1. + Om.ixx. Svyntor ¢ his1. and it was 1. which swerd ether dagger x. 

to drawe out 1. “to smyter. x Andso1. YJoabr. Zhist. ® And. bnor tor. 4 knyif 1. 
‘that rt. ftoanotherr. € And1. bsummex. ihadde k wolde hauex } Andry mAxd, 


t+ men of Joab 
jeden, ete.; 
that is, that 
weren wont to 
go out with 
Joab, and 
obeye to him. 
Lire here. c. 


tmyste go out; 
in Ebreu it is, 
and it 3ede out, 
and felde doun; 
Raby Salomon 
seith, that Joab 
disposide so of 
purpos, that it 
felde doun to 
the erthe fro 
the schethe, 
that Amasa 
schulde bileue 
so, that Joab 
reisede the 
swerd fro erthe 
to putte ajen 
in the schethe, 
and not to 
smyte him ; 
therfor it sueth, 
forsothe Amasa 
kepte not the 
swerd, that is, 
kepte not him 
silf, for smyt- 
ing of the 
swerd. Lire 
here. c. 


XX. 13——22. 


13 abide stille for hym. Thanne hym meued 
fro the weie, eche man folowynge Joab 
wente to pursue Siba, the sone of Botri. 

14 But he passide thur3 out alle the lynagis 
of Yrael vnto Hebelam, and into Beth- 
macha; and alle the chosen men weren 

1sgedrid to hym. And so thei camen, and 
setten ajens hym in Habela, and in Beth- 
macha, and enuyrounden the citee with 
strengthis ; and the citee is bisegid. For- 
sothe al the puple, that was with Joab, 

isenforside to destrie the wallis. And a 
wyse womman criede out fro the citee, 
Herith! herith! seith' to Joab, Nei; 

17 hidir, and I shal speke with thee. The 
whych whanne he hadde nei3id to hire, 
she seide to hym, Thou ert Joab? And 
he answerde, I. To whom thus she 
spake, Here the wordis of thin hoond 
womman. The which answerde, I here. 

is And eft she, A word, she seith, was seide 
in olde prouerbe, Who aske, asken thei 

19in Habela ; and so thei profiteden*. Whe- 
ther I am not, the which answere the 
trewthe of Yrael? and thou sechist to 
turne vpsedoun the citee, and to doon 
awey the moder of citees in Irael ? whi 
berist thou doun the herytage of the 

2 Lord? And Joab answerynge seith, 
Aweie be, aweie be this fro me; I bere 

2inot doun, ne destrie. Not so the thing 
hath hym; but a man of the hil of Ef- 
fraym, bi name Siba, the sone of Botri, 
reride his hoond a3ens kyng Dauid; 
takith hym alone, and we shulen goo 
awey fro the citee. And the womman 
seith to Joab, Loo! his heed shal be sente 

22to thee bi the walle. Thanne she wente 
into al the puple, and spak to hem wiseli ; 
the which the gird of heed of Siba, the 
sone of Botri, casten forth to Joab. And 
he songe with the trompe, and thei 
wenten awey fro the citee, echon into her 
tabernaclis ; forsothe Joab turnyde a;en 


bh she seith «. 


for Bc. © passide forth 1. 
tAnd:1. on K. a EL. 
= destrie not the citee 1. 
fand their. 4b threwen 1. 


P Certis 1. 
Vv word ce. 
b waste it 1. 
i the sone 1. 


VOL. II. U 


II. KINGS. 


i Whoso £ pr. m. 


4 the chosun1. 
Ww Om. 1. 
¢ the sone 1. 


145 


Amasa fro the weie in to the feeld, and 
he hilide Amasa with a cloth, lest men 
passynge schulden abide for hym. Therfor 13 
whanne he was remouyd fro" the weie, 
ech man passide® suynge Joab to pursue 
Siba, the sone of Bochri. Forsothe? Siba14 
hadde passide bi alle the lynagist of Israel 
til in to Habela, and in to Bethmacha ; and 
alle chosun? men weren gaderid to hym. 
Therfor thei’ camen, and fou;ten a;ens 1s 
hyms in Habela, and in Bethmacha, and 
cumpassiden the citee with strengthingis ; 
and the citee was bisegid. Sothelit al the 
cumpany, that was with Joab, enforside 
to distrie the wallis. And a wijs wom-16 
man of the citee criede an" hi;, Here je! 
here 5e! seie 3e to Joab, Nei;e thou hidur, 
and Y schal speke with thee. And whanne1; 
he hadde neized to hir, sche seide to hym, 
Art thou Joab? And he answeride, Y am. 
To whom sche spak thus, Here thou the 
wordis* of thin handmayde. Which” Joab 
ausweride, Y here. And eft sche seide. 1s 
«AV word was seid in eld prouerbe, Thei 
that axen, axe in Habela; and so thei pro- 
fitiden. Whethir Y amt not, that answere t9 
treuthe to Israel? and sekist thou to dis- 
trie a citee, and to distrie® a modir citee 
in Israel}? whi castidist? thou doun the 
eritage of the Lord? And Joab answeride, 20 
and seide, Fer be’, fer be this fro me; Y 
‘caste not doun’, nether Y distrye>. The2 
thing hath not so it silf; but a man of 
the hil of Effrayin, Siba, sone of Bochri, 
bi surname, reiside his hond a3ens kyng 
Dauid; bitake 3e him aloone’, and we 
schulen go awei fro the citee. And the 
womman seide to Joab, Lo! his heed schal 
be sent to thee bi the wal. Therfore the 22 
womman entridef to al the puple, and sche 
spak to hem wiseli; whiche$ ‘castiden forth® 
to Joab the heed of Siba, sone! of Bochri, 
gird of. And Joab sownede with a trumpe. 
and thei departiden fro the citee, ech man 


k wentyn forth £. 


t the oost of Joab marg. —§ Siba t. 
Ythrowist 1. #% be this fro me 1. 


= do awey I. 
¢ Thanner. f wente yn 1. 


d aloone fo us 1. 


+ lialle the 
lynagis ; and 


+ wher Yam; 


helde euere 
truthe and 
feith to the 
king; and ther- 
for in Ebreu 

it is thus, Y 
am oon of pe- 
sible and trewe, 
that is, oon of 
the noumbre of 
Citees pesible 
and trewe to 
the kyng. Lire 
here. c. 


> @ modir citee 
in Israel; for 
ech citee is mo- 
dir of the pu- 
ple borun and 
nurschid there. 
In sum bokis 
it is set in, of 
citres, but it is 
not of the text; 
for nether it is 
in Ebreu, ne- 
ther in bokis 
amendid. Lire 
here. Cc. 


146 


o3to Jerusalem to the kyng. Thanne Joab 
was vpon al the oost of Irael ; forsothe 
Bananyas, the sone of Joiade, ypon Cere- 

aitheis and Pheretheis ; Adhuram forsothe 
ypon the tributis ; but Josaphat, the 

essone of Achilud, the chaunselere ; Siba 
forsothe a scribe; forsothesSadoch and 

2¢ Abiathar prestis; forsothe Hira Hiracte 
was the preest of Dauid. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Forsothe there is doon hungre in the 
dais of Dauid, thre 3eer contynueli. And 
Dauid counseilde the heuenli answere of 
the Lord; and the Lord seide, For Saul, 
and the hows of hym, and the blood, for 

zhe slew3 Gabanytes. Thanne the Gaban- 
ytis clepid, the kyng seide to hem; for- 
sotle Gabanytis ben not of the sonys of 
Irael, but the relikis of Ammoreis ; for- 
sothe the sonys of Yrae]l hadden sworn 
to hem, that thei shulen not slee hem, 
and Saul wolde smyte hem bi enuye, 
as for the sonys of Irael and of Juda; 

athanne Dauid seide to Gabanitis, What 
shal I doo to 30u, and what shal be 3oure 
amendys, that 3e blissen to the heritage 
sof the Lord? And Gabanytis seiden to 
hym, There is no questioun to vs vpou 
gold and siluer, but a3ens Saul, and the 
hows of hym; and we wolen not, that 
there be slayn a man of Irael. To whom 
the kyng seith, What thanne wolen 3e, 
5that I doo to 30w? The whiche seiden to 
the kyng, The man that hath defowlid 
vs, and oppressid wickidli, so we owen 
to doon awey, ne oon forsothe be laft of 
the lynage of hym in alle the coostis of 
6Yrael. Be there 3ouun to vs seuen men 
of the sonys of hem, that we crucifien 


II]. KINGS. 


XX. 23—-XXI. 6. 


in to hise tabernaclis; forsothe* Joab 
turnede ajen to Jerusalem to the kyng. 


Therfor' Joab was on™ al the vost of Is-23 


rael; forsothe” Benanye, sone® of Joiada, 


was on? Cerethi? and Ferethi'; forsothe’ 24 


Adhuram was ont tributis"; forsothe’ Jo- 
saphat, sone” of Achilud, was chaunceler ; 


forsothe* Siba was scryueyn; forsotheY 25 


Sadoch and Abiathar weren preestis{ ; 


+ prestis of 
Dauyth; that 


forsothe? Hira of Hiarith was preest* of 263s, a grect man 


Dauid. 
CAP. XXI. 


Also> hungur was maad iz the lond of 
Israel in the daies of Dauid{, bi thre 3eer 
contynueli. And Dauid counselide the an- 
swere of the Lord®; and the Lord seide, 
For? Saul, and his® hows, and blood‘, for he 
killide men® of Gabaon. 
Gabaonytis weren clepid, the kyng seide 
to hem; sotheli Gabaonytis! ben not of the 
sones of Israel, but‘ thet ben the relikys! 
of Ammorreis™; and the sones of Israel 
hadden swore to hem, ‘that is", that thet 
schulden not ‘be slayn°§, and Saul wolde 
smyte hem for feruent loue, as for the 
sones of Israel and of Juda; therfor Da-3 
uid seide to Gabaonytis?, What schal Y do 
to 3ou, and what schal be 30ure amendis, 
that 3e blesse the eritage of the Lord? 
And’ Gabaonytis seiden to hym, No ques-4 
tioun is to vs on™ gold and siluer, but 
ajens Saul, and ajens his hows; nether® we 
wolen, that a man of Israel be slayn. To 
whichet the kyng seide, What therfor 
wolen 3e, that Y do to 30u? Whiche"s 
seiden to the king, We owen’ to do awei 
so the man, that ‘al to brak* ethir¥ de- 
Joulide? vs*, and oppresside> wickidli, that 
not oon sotheli be residue* of his genera- 
cioun in alle the coostis of Israel. Seuenes 
men of hise sones be 30uun to vs, that we 


hem to the Lord in Gabaa of Saul, sum- —‘crucifie hem4 to the Lord|| in Gabaa of 
Kandi. J !Andso1 M™upont andi. othesoner P uponr. 4scheeters1. 'u 
arblasters1. Sandi. tuponi, thetributis:. Vandy. Wthesonex andr. y buti. 
: oe be : the be b Had c. © that is, axide counsel of the Lord in the answering place K marg. 
ieee ee or his 1. for blood. &themeni. men ofGabony1. ‘men of Gabony t. 
F 1 yngist. ™Ammorey1. "Om.cr. © sle hemi. P the men of Gabonyer. 40m. c. 
upon t. Sand nethir xk, ¢whomr. © Andtheir, Yowensor. WOm.1. *Om.1. y¥ Om. cr. 


7Om.c. @0Om.1, Poppresside us 1. ¢left1. 4 do hem on crosse 1. 


Therfor whanne2 i 


among iugis 
and princes 
auentis Da- 
uyth. Lire 

here. C. 


t in the daies 
of Dauyth; 

for he was 
necligent to 
punysche the 
opyn synne of 
Saul, that kill- 
ide Gabaonytis 
‘or couetise of 
her critage, 
a3enus the ooth 
of Josue, and 
of the princes 
of Israel. Live 
here. c. 


§ that they 
schulden not be 
slayn; samme 
bokis han here, 
that they 
schulden not 
punysche ether 
not sle hem, 
but this is not 
in Ebren, ne- 
ther in bokis 
amendid, ne- 
theles it is 
vndurstondun ; 
wherfor sum 
man settide it 
first hi the 
maner of a 
glos, and aftir- 
ward it was 
set in the text 
bi the ignor- 
aunce of wri- 
teres. Lire 

€. Co 


Wl fo the Lord; 
that is, to the 
declaring of 
Goddis ri3tful- 
nesse. Lire 
here. 


XXII. 7-—14. 


tyme the chosen of the Lord. And the 
ikyng seith, I shal 3ene. And the kyng 
sparide to Myphibosech, the sone of 
Jonathan, the sone of Saul, for the ooth 
of the Lord, that was betwix Dauid and 
8 Jonathan, the sone of Saul. And so the 
kyng took two sonys of Respha, the 
dow3ter of Ahia, whom she bare to Saul, 
Armoony, and Myphibosech; and ‘of 
Mychol fyue sones, of the! dou3ter of 
Saul, whom she gat to Adriel, the sone 
9of Berzellay, that was of Demolati. And 
he 3af hem into the hoondis of Gaban- 
ytis, the which crncifieden hem in the 
hil before the Lord; and thes seuen 
slayn togidir fellen in the dais of the 
fyrst rijp, begynnynge the repynge of 
lobarli. Forsothe takynge Respha, the 
dou3ter of Ahia, spradde abrood an 
heyre to hire on a stoon, fro the bigyn- 
nynge of the ryp to the tyme that watir 
droppide vpon hem fro heuene; and she 
suffride not breddis to teren hem bi the 
11 day, ne beestis™ bi the ny3t. And these 
thingis ben toold to Dauid, the whiche 
dide Respha, the dou3ter of Ahia, the 
12secoundarye wijf of Saul. And Dauid 
3ede, and took the boonus of Sanl, and 
the boonus of Jonathan, his sone, of" the 
men of Jabes Galaad ; ‘the which°® hadden 
stoln hem fro the streete of Bethsan, in 
_the which Philisteis hadden hongid hem, 
13 whanne thei slewen Saul in Gelboe. And 
bare a wey thens the boonus of Saul, 
and the boonus of Jonathan, his sone; 
and thei gederynge togidir the boonus of 
hem that weren pi3t?, birieden hem with 
the boonus of Saul and Jonathan, his 
sone, in the loond of Beniamyn, in the 
side in the sepulcre of Cys, his fader. 
14And thei diden alle thingis, that the 
kyng comaundide; and the Lord dide 
mercy a3en to the loond after thes 


\ the fine sones of Michol, the £ pr. m. 
to E pr.m. 


II. KINGS. 


m the beestis 4. 


147 


Saul, sum tyme the chosun man of the 
Lord. And the kyng seide, Y schal 3yuet. 
And the kyng sparide Myphibosech, sone'7 
of Jonathas, sone! of Saul, for the ooth of 
the Lord, that was bitwixe Dauid and bi- 
twixe® Jonathas, sone" of Saul. Therforis 
the kyng took twei sones of Respha, dou3- 
ter) of Ahira, whiche sche childide to Saul, 
Armony, and Mysphibosech; and he took 


fyue sonest of Mychol, dou3ter* of Saul, t fyve sores; 
. : . these weren the 
whiche sche gendride to Adriel, sone! of — kyndly sones 


of Merob, sisee: 
of Mychol, 

but Mychol 
nurschide hew, 
and pnrchaside 
in to sones at- 
tirward, for 


Berzellai, that was of Molaty. And he™s 
3af hem in to the hondis of Gabaonytis®, 


whiche® crucifieden? tho sones4 in’ the’ hil 

bifor the Lord; and these seuene feldent 

slayn togidere in the daies of the firste oan es: 

rep", whanne the repyng of barli bigan. ie 

Forsothe Respha, dou3tir’ of Ahia, took” io %nd by this, 

an heire, and ‘araiede to hir silf a place bane gendrid 
. to Adriel, not 

aboue the* stoon, fro the bigynnyng of for sche was 

heruest tilY watir droppide ‘on hem? fro}: ee 

henene; and sche suffride not briddis to ee eee 

tere hem bi dai, nether beestis bi ny3t. And 11/7. ¢- 

tho thingis whiche Respha, secoundarie* 

wijf of Saul, dou3tir® of Ahia, hadde do, 

weren teld to Dauid. And Dauid 3ede, and 12 

took the boonys of Saul, and the boonys 

of Jonathas, his sone, of ° the men of Jabes 

of Galaad; that’ hadden stole tho boonys 

fro the street of Bethsan, in which street® 

the‘ Filisteis hadden hangid hem, whanne 

thei hadden slayn Saul in Gelboe. And13 

Daunid bar out fro thennus the boonys of 

Saul, and the boonys of Jonathas, his sone ; 

and thei gaderiden" the boonys of hem 

that weren crucified, and biriedeni' tho 

with the boonys of Saul and of Jonathas, 

his sone, in the lond of Beniamyn, in the 

side of the sepulcre of Cys, fadir* of Saul. 

And thei diden al thingis, what euer14 

thingis! the kyng comaundide™; and the 

Lord dide mercy to the lond aftir these 

thingis. Forsothe batel of Filisteis" was 1s 

P pizt 


" fro BCEFH, o that ¢ pr. m. 


© 3yue hem to 3ou1- fthe sonex. €Om.3. bthe sonex. {And sox. ithe dou3ter cz. * the dou3ter 1s. 


m Dauid 1. 
Sanr.  t fellen doun 1. 
uponar. Ytilthatr. 2 Om. 1. 
fOm. £1. &slawe 1. 4 gaderiden to gidre 1. 
hem1. ™ the Philistees 1. 


0 the men of Gabonye 1. 
Uripp I. 


' the sone 1. 
crosse in 1. 


v the doustir 1. 
athe secoundarie 1. 
i thei birieden 1. 


pdidenr. 4scuen sones3. ' upon 
wtook to hir1. ¥* Jeide it vndir hir 
¢fror. 4 whicher. € Om.1. 


1Om.1. ™ comaundide 


© and thei 1. 


b the dou3tir 1. 
k the fadir 1. 


u@Q 


148 


isthingis. Forsothe there is doon eft 
bateil of the Philisteis ajens Irael; and 
Dauid cam doun, and his seruauntis 
with hym, and thei fau3ten a3ens Phi- 
islisteis. Forsothe Dauid failynge, Jesbi- 
denob, that was of the kynrede of 
Arapha, whose yren of the specre peiside 
thre hundrid vnneis, and he was gird 
with a newe swerd, ‘enforside’ to smyte 
i7Dauid. And Abisay, the sone of Saruye, 
was to hym a™ socour ; and the Philistee 
smyten he slew3. Thanne the men 
sworen to Dauid, seiynge, Now thow 
shalt not goo out with vs in to bateil, 
lest thou quenche the lanterne of Yrael. 
1s The secounde bateil forsothes was in 
Gob ajens Philisteist; thanne he smoot 
Soboehai of Huzachizaph, of the lynage 
of Arapha, of the kynrede of geauntis. 
19 The thridde bateil forsothe was in Gob 
ajens the Philisteis ; in the which Adeo- 
datis, the sone of the wijlde wode, leyer 
of dyuerse colours, Bethlamyte, smoot 
Goliath Gethee, whos shaft of the speere 
20was as a beem of websters. ‘The ferthe 
bateyl was in Geth; in the which was an 
hee3" man, that hadde sexe fyngris in the 
hoondis and feet, that is, foure and twenti; 
ziand he was of the kyn of Arapha; and he 
blasphemyde in’ Yrael; forsothe Jona- 
than, the sone of Samaa, the brother of 
22Dauid, smoot hym. These foure ben 
born of Arapha in Jeth, and thei fellen 
in the hoond of Dauid, and of his ser- 
nauntis. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Forsothe Dauid spak to the Lord the 
wordis of this ditee, in the day in the 
which the Lord delyuerde him fro the 
hoond of alle his enemyes, and fro the 

zhoond of Saul. And seith, The Lord 
my stoon, and my strength, and my 

3saueour; my God, my strong, and” I 

8 Om. 4. 


1 he is seen & pr.m. ' to BCEFH. 


w Om. £ prom. 


the Philistees 1. 
he feilide 1. the sone x. ¥ Now, Dauid 1. 
e in his feet1. candi. 4 the sone 1. 
‘stronge helper 1. strengthe exb. 


II. KINGS. 


XXI. fo——* x eee 


maad eft ajens Israel; and Dauid 3ede 
doun, and hise seruauntis with hym, and 
fou3ten ajen Filisteis". Sotheli® whanne 16 


Dauid failide, Jesbydenobt, that was of + Jesbedenov ; 


i d a . this is al o 
the kyn of Arapha, that is, of? giauntiss, word bi the 
and the yrun of his’ spere peiside thre pe 
hundrid ouncis, and he was gird with a 
newe swerdi, enforside’ to smyte Dauid'. sapere ae 

1s Wo 


And Abisai, sone" of Saruye, was in help 17 swerd, is not 
to Dauid; and he smoot and killide the thuitivin 
Filistei. Than the men of Dauid sworen, (ar 373¢ the 
and seiden, Now’ thou schalt not go out oe Bose 
with vs in to batel, lest thou quenche the en, in that day 
lanterne of Israel. Also the secounde batel 18 Ee aoe 
was in Gob a3ens Filisteis; thanne Sobo- 74" © 
thai of Osothai smoot Zephi, of the gene- 

racioun of Arapha, of the kyn of giauntis. 

Also the thridde batel was in Gob ajens 19 

Filisteis; in which batel a man 3ouun of 
God||, the sone of forest”, a* broiderer, a 
man of Bethleem, smoot Golyath of Geth, 
whos ‘schaft of spereY was as a? beem of 


|| @ man 30uun 
of God ; that is, 
Danyth, that 
was chosun of 


God, and 3ouun 
webbis. The fourthe batel was in Geth ; 20 voit ofoke a ? 
where ynne was an hi3 man, that hadde ple, asin 1. 

5 ks ‘ OOK XVI. Coo 
sixe fyngris in the* hondis and feet”, that the sone of fo- 
s fi Be rest; for he 
is, foure and twenti; and he was of the  dwellide longe 

. in wodis fle- 
kyn of Arapha; and he blasfemyde Is-2) yi tro the 
face of Saul. 


rael; sotheli® Jonathan, sone’ of Samaa, a iroideer til 
brother® of Dauid, killide hym. These 22 for be cam of 
foure' weren borun of Arapha in Geth, Tana 
and thei felden doun in the hond of Dauid, 


was principal 
in the werk of 
and of hise seruauntis. 


broiderie of the 
tabernacle. The 
firste batel here 
teld, was the 
laste, and the 
iii. batel was 
the firste. Lire 
here. C. 


CAP. XXII. 


Forsothe Dauid spak to the Lord the1 
wordis of this song, in the dai in which 
the Lord delyuerede hym fro the” hond 
of alle hise enemyes, and fro the hond 
of Saul. And Dauid seide, The Lord2 
is my stoon, and my strengthe, and my 
sauyour; my God, my stronge', I schals 
Vv to CE. 


tthe Philisteis scern. u heis 4. 


°Forsothec. POm.c. the giaunlis EL. *whost. %enforside him 1. t David, whanne 
Wa forest 1. 
€ the brother 1. 


Xandak. Yspere schaftr. 2thec. his 1. 
f foure geauntis 1. §Sothely1. »bOm.c. 


XXIL 4——20. 


shal hoop in hym; my sheeld, and the 
horn of myn heelth, my rerer, and my 
refute ; my saueour, fro wickidnes thou 
4shalt delyner me. I shal inwardli clepe 
the preysable Lord; and fro myn ene- 
5myes I shal be saaf. For there han 
enuyround me the defoulyngis of deeth ; 
6the stremys of Belial fereden me. The 
coordis of helle enuryrounden me; there 
wenten before me the gnaris"” of deeth, 
7In tribulacioun I shal inwardli clepe the 
Lord, and to my God I shal crye; and he 
herde fro his hooli temple my vois, and 
8my crye shal come to his eeris. The 
erthe is togidir meued, and tremblide ; 
the fonndementis of hillis ben togidir 
smyten and.squat, for he wraththide to 
9hem. Smook stiede vp fro the neesth- 
rillis of hym, and fier fro his mouth shal 
deuowre; the colis ben brent vp of it. 
1o And he bowide heuenes, and cam doun; 
iand mystynes* vndur his feet. And he 
stiedeY vpon cherubyn, and flow3; and 
slood? vypon the pennys of ‘the wynd?*. 
12He putte derknessis an hidlis in ‘his 
enuyroun», wynnowynge watris of the 
13cloudis of henenes; for the li3tynge in 
the si3t of hym ben brent vp the coolis 
14of fier. The Lord shal thundre fro 
heuene; and the Hei3 shal 3eue his voys. 
15 He sente his arowis, and scatrede hem; 
isleytis, and waastid hem. And there 
apperide the out heeldyngis of the see, 
and ben opened the foundementis of the 
world; fro the blamynge of the Lord, 
fro the inbrethinge of the spiryt of his 
i7woodnes. He sente fro an hei3, and took 
me; and drou3 out me fro manye watris. 
18 He delyuerde me fro myn enemye moost 
my3ti, and fro hem that hatiden me; 
19for thei weren stronger than I. Thei 
camen before me in the day of my tour- 
mentynge; and the Lord is maad my 
20fastnynge. And he ladde me out into 


fads grynnys Ii sec. m. 


x derknesse E pr.m. 
> enuyroun of hym c. 


k myn upreiser 1. 
clepe 1. 


U nesethirles c. 
@ derknesse E, 


l han cumpassed 1. 


Yuponi. W Om. L sec.m. 


ban hidyng 1. 


II. KINGS. 


m han maad 1. 
q that is, I haue clepid w marg. Om. 1. 
x federys EL. 
© he hath wynewid 1. 


149 


hope in to hym; my selheeld, and the 
horn of myn helthe, ‘my reisere*, and my 
reftryt ; my sauyour, thou schalt delyuere 
me fro wickidnesset. Y sclal inwardly 4 


clepe the Lord worthi to be preisid; and 
Y schal be saaf fro myn enemyes. Fors 
the sorewis of deeth cumpasside! me; the 


strondis of Belial} maden™ me aferd. Theé 
coordis of helle§ cumpassiden" me; the 
snaris of deeth camen°® bifor me. In7 
tribulacionn Y schal clepe?, ‘that ts, Y 
clepide’ thee", Lord, and Y schal crie to 
my God; and he herds fro his holi temple 
my vois, and my crye schal come to hise 
eeris. The erthe was mouyd, and trem-s 
blide; the foundementis of hillis weren 
smytun and schakun togidere, for the 
Lord was wrooth to hem. Smoke stiede‘s 
fro hise nosethirlis", and fier of his mouthi|| 
schal deuoure ; colis weren kyndlid of it. 


And he bowide heuenes, and cam doun ; 10$ 7 


and myist vndur hise feet. And he stiede 11 
on’ cherubyn, and fli3 ; and he slood on 
the” pennys* of wynd’. He _ puttide’i2 
derknessis* hidyng” place in his cumpas, 
and riddlide® watris fro the cloudis of 
heuenes ; for briz3tnesse in his si3t colis of 13 
fier weren kyndelid. The Lord schal 14 
thundur fro heuene; and hi3 God schal 
jyne his vois. He sente hise arowis, and 15 
scateride hem ; /e4 sente leitis, and wast- 
ide hem. And the schedyngis out of the 16 
see apperiden, and the foundementis of the 
world weren schewid; fro® the blamyng 
of the Lord, fro the brething of the spirit 
of his strong veniaunce. He sente fro17 
heuene, and took me; and drow me out of 
manye watris. He delyuerede me fro my 18 
my3tiestf enemy, and fro hem that hatid- 
en me; for thei weren strongere than Y. 
Thei camen bifore me ‘in the dai of my i9 
turmentyng; and the Lord was maad my 
stidfastnesse. And he ledde me out in to 20 
largenesse, and he delyuerede me; for Y 


Y sty3id vp F. Zz flow3 4. awyndis 4. wynde 1. 


nhan enuyround1. han gor P ynwardly 
tthe 1K sec.m. b. Shath herd 1. ¢ stiede up 1. 
ythe wynd1. 7 hath put 1. putte pz. 


dandi. ¢@forc. f ful my3ti 1- 


t+ thou schalt 
delyuere me fro 
wickidnesse ; 
that is, hast de- 
lyuerid. Wick- 
idnesse of Da- 
uyth is clepid 
here, in the 
doynge of Ber- 
sabee, fro 
whiehe wickid- 
nesse he was 
delyuerid, as to 
gilt, bi veri 
contrieioun and 
knowleching, 
and as to peyne, 
bi Goddis ven- 
iaunce. Lire 
here. C. 
t the strondis of 
Belial ; that is, 
the fersnessis of 
persecucionn 
of Saul, that 
was with out 
30k of chastis- 
ing, and of God- 
dis lawe. Lire 
here. c. 
§ the eordis of 
elle; in Ebreu 
it is, the felon- 
schipis of helle, 
that is, fendis 
excitinge Saul 
to pursne me. 
Lire here. c. 
Il fyer of his 
mouth ; that is, 
siche punysch- 
ing was maad 
of his wille and 
comaundement. 
Lire here. c. 


150 
widnes, and delyuerde me; for I pleside 
21to hym. ‘The Lord shal 3eelde to me 
after my rijtwisnes; and after the 
clennesse of myn hoondis he shal quyit 
eto me. For I haue kept the weyes of 
the Lord; and I dide not vnpiteuousli fro 
asmy God. Forsothe alle the domys of 
hym in my siz3t; and his heestis I mouede 
2anot awey frome. And J shal be parfijt 
with hym; and I shal kepe me fro my 
25 wickidnes. And the Lord shal restore 
to me after my ri3twisnes; and after the 
clennesse of myn hoondis® in the si3t of 
2shis eyen. With the hooli hooli thou 
shalt be, and with the stronge parfite ; 
27and with the chosun chosun thou shalt 
be, and with the peruertid thou shalt be 
zgperuertid. And the pore puple thou 
shalt make saaf; and to thin eyen hei3 
29 thou shalt make ineke. For thou, Lord, 
my lantern, and thou, Lord, shalt liztne 
somy derkenessis. Into thee forsothe I 
shall renne, gird vp; and in my God J 
3tshal ouerleep the wal. God, the weye 
of hym vndefoulid; the speche of the 
Lord examynyd bi fier, a shelde is of alle 
32the hopers in hym. For who is a God, 
saaf the Lord; and who strong saaf 
ssoure Lord? God, that girdide me with 
strength, and planede perfyte’ my wey ; 
31euenynge my feet to hertis, and vpon my 
35 hei3 thingis settynge me; techynge myn 
hoondis to bateil, and settynge togider as 
36a brasen boow myn armys. Thou jaf 
to me a target of thin helth; and myn 
37hoomlynes multipliede me. Thou shalt 
enlaarge® my goyngis vndur me; and 
ssmyn heelis' shulen not fayle. I shal 
pursue inyn enemyes, and treden; and I 
shal not® turne a3en, to the tyme that I 
39waast hem. I shal waast hem, and 
breek togidir, that thei togidre risen not ; 
sothei shulen falle vndur my feet. Thon 
girdist me with strengthe to batail; thow 


¢hoond 4. 4 perfijtli 4. 


pals kee aftir b. aftir rin, h ri3twisnesse r. iaftir KN. —-K or up K. ether vpe N. Om. iRW. 
; iri, mrigtwisnesse EL. aftir1, ©Om.1, POm.1. ding. 1 wickednesse E. The whole 
ee a ae e ss derknesse x,t Om. 1. ‘tor ¥Om.1. W ouerpasse 1. * The weie 
. Y yndefoulid1. witht. 8 Om.re. > purid eb. ‘¢ Gloss omitted incr. 4 hath maad1. 


hath settr. fuponx. ff hath taujt x. € he hath maad x. h hath multiplied 1. 


II. KINGS. 


© laargen BCEFH. 


XXII. 21—~40. 


pleside hym. The Lord schal 3elde to me21 

vp® my rij3tfulnesse"; and he schal 3elde 

to me vp', ‘ethir aftir*, the clennesse of 

myn hondis. For Y kepte the weies of22 

the Lord; and Y dide not wickidli fro my 

God. For alle hise domes weren in my 23 

si3t; and Y dide not awei fro me hise 

heestis. And Y schal be perfit with hym ; 24 

and Y schal kepe me fro my wickidnesse. { Pevits in 
And the Lord schal restore to me vpel2s him grace to 


suffre aduersi- 


my ri3tfulnesse™ ; and vp" the clennesse of tes, bothe , 
myn hondis in the si3t of hise igen. With 26 foytaly,as mar- 
















: : . * tris ioyeden in 
the hooli thou schalt be hooli, and with passvans, Lire 
‘ s ; ee Ce 
the stronge, that is, to suffre aduersitees : pean 
pacientli®, thou schalt be perfitt; and27 nee 
: 3 ns, with a 
with a chosun man ‘fo blis? thou schalt be — weiward man 
" iy thou schalt be 
chosun, and with a weiward man thou maiad wera 
* ‘ se i his errour ; 
schalt be a wwe that ts, i 3eld- fot 
oe 7 7, ym vpel his wei-~ Weyward men 
ynge iustls peyne to hym vp ei ey ahs. 
wardnesse™{. And thou schalt make saaf28 ponyschid of 
A e ° the 
a pore puple; and with thin izen thou seyen thea 
: oith weiward- 
schalt make lowe hem that ben hi3e. ly with bem il 
3 § ly3ine m 
For thou, Lord, art my lanterne, and 29 istewaht 
thou, Lord’, schalt li3tne my derknessis**§. that is, ect 
. ° e Werkis 
For Y gird, ‘that is, maad redi to batel', 39 quenchid bi 
: ‘ sine . ,  dedly synne 
schal renne in" thee, ‘that is, in thi vertu’; comynge aboadl 
. y So ace Ww at ben quyk. 
and o my God Y schal ps: ouer™ the ova and a 
wal. ‘God his weie* is ‘with out wemY 331 ny bi gee 
3 . yuerid. Lire 
the speche of the Lord is examynyd bi? tere. c. 
flere sh ‘ on gee "4 || and made 
er, that 18, ts pure and ciené as meta Hinge ee 
b? . . in Ebreu it is 
preuyd in the furneys¢; he is a scheeld and a basin 
1 Owe Was 
of alle men hopynge in hym. For Who 92 rrajunda to 
is God, outakun the Lord; and who is myn ae 
a iomon 
strong, outakun oure God? God, that33 welds thd bente 
5 : li3tl 
hath gird me with strengthe, and hath pow. = 
maad pleyn my perfit weie ; and he made*s1 Bee , 
euene my feet with hertis, and settide® ne tite in 
aes reu it is. 
onf myn hije thingis; and he tau3te myn 35 thi myldenesse 
multipliede me, 


hondis to batel, and made? myn armes|| as _ that is, of God- 
a brasun bouwe. Thou hast 3oue to me 36 on eee ene 
merit, multi- 


the sheeld of thin heelthe ; and my mylde- merit, mulu- 
riage pliyng in chil- 
nesse‘i multipliede" me. Thou schalt alarge 37 dren, in tempo. 
S A ral goodis and 
my steppis vndur me; and myn heelis 


goostly, cam to 
schulen not faile. me. Lire here. 


Y schal pursue myn3s,, 


f heelthis 4. & no EB. 


XXII. 41-——XXIITI. 3. 


fulli bowedist the ajenstondynge to me 
4:vndur me. Myn enemyes thou jaf to 
me the bak, hatynge me; and I shal 
s2scatere hem. Theishulen crye, and there 
shal not be that saue; to the Lord, and 
4zhe shal not here hem. I shal do hem 
awey as powdre of the erthe; and as 
cleye of streetis I shal breek hem, and 
44 to-flappe. Thou shalt saue me fro the 
ajenseiyngis of my puple; thou shalt 
kepe me into the heed of folkis! of 
kynde; the puple, whom I knowe* not, 
45shal serue to me. Alyen sones shulen 
with stoonde to me; in herynge of the 
ageer thei shulen obeishe to me. Alien 
sones floweden doun; and thei shulen be 
47drawen togidre in her angwishe. The 
Lord lyueth, and blesside my God; and 
the strong God of myn heelth shal be 
asenhaunsid. God, that 3enest veniaunces 
to me; and threwe doun puplis vndur 
agme. The which ledist out me fro myn 
enemyes, and fro the withstoondynge to 
me arerist! me; fro a wickid™ mau thou 
soshalt delyuer me. Therfor I shal know- 
lech to thee in folk of kynde, Lord ; and 
sito thi name I shal synge. Magnifiynge 
heelthis of his kyng ; and doynge mercies 
to his crist Dauid, and into” his seed 
euermore®. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1  Forsothe thes ben the last wordis, that 
Dauid, the sone of Ysay, seide. A man 
seide, to‘ whom there? is ordeynd of the 
Crist of God of Jacob, a solempne salm 

amaker of Yrael; The spirite of the Lord 
is spokyn bi me, and his word bi my 

3tonge. He seyde, God of Yrael to me 


}folk sceru. * knewe a. ! rerist c. 


P thee E pr. m. 


i breke hem 1. 10m. 1. 


k stoden ajens K. 
°dohemt. P fenner. 


q That 1. 


II. KINGS. 


™ wyke BcEFH. 


¥ maketh greet 1. 


151 


enemyes, and Y schal al to-breke hem ; and 
Y schal not turne ajen, til Y waste hem. 
Y schal waste hem, and Y schal breke!,39 
that thei rise not; thei schulen falle 
vndur my feet. Thou hast gird me with 40 
strengthe to batel ; thou hast bowid vnder 
me hem that a3enstoden* me. Thou hast41 
joue myn enemyes abac to me, men hat- 
ynge me; and Y schal distrie hem. Thei42 
schulen crye, ‘that is, to ydols ether to 
mennus help’, and noon schal be that 
schal saue™; ‘thet schulen®™ crie to the 
Lord, and he schal not here hem. Y schal 43 
do awei hem as the dust of erthe; Y schal 


‘powne hem", and Y schal do® awei as the 


clei? of stretis. Thou schalt saue me fro 44 
a3enselyngis of my puple; thou schalt kepe 
me in to the heed of folkis; the puple, 
whom Y knowe not, schal serue me. Alien 4s 
sones schulen a3enstonde me; bi heryng 
of eere thei schulen obeie to me. Alien 46 
sones fletiden awei; and thei schulen be 
drawun togidere in her angwischist. 
The Lord lyueth, and my God is blessid ; 47 
and the stronge God of myn helthe schal 
be enhaunsid. God, that 3yuest veniauncis 48 
to me; and hast cast doun puplis vudur 
me. Which ledist me out fro myn ene-49 
myes, and reisist me fro men a3enstond- 
inge mie; thou schalt delinere me fro the 
wickid man. Therfor, Lord, Y schal know- 50 
leche to thee in hethene men; and Y schal 
synge to thiname. And‘ he magnyficth's1 
the helthis of his kyng ; and doith mercyes® 
to his crist Dauid, and to his seed til in to 
withouten endef. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Forsothe these ben the laste wordis,1 
whiche Dauid, the sone of Ysai, seide. The 
man seide, to whom it is ordeyned of 
Crist, of thet God of Jacob, the noble salm 
makere of Israel; The spiryt of the Lord2 
spak bi me, and his word bi my tunge. 
Dauid" seide, God of Israel spak to me,3 


n ynto BFU. to CE. ® ynto euermore c. 


1 Om.1.  ™ do hem to gidre 1. 
tOm.1. ¥% Om.1. 


m gaue hem I. 
S mercy El. 


+ inher an- 
gwischis 3 in 
Ebreu it is, in 
her closingis. c. 


tT til in to with 
outen ende ; for 
the sones of 
Danythregned- 
en til to the 
caitifteof Baby- 
Joyne; and aftir 
the turning 
a3zen fro Babi- 
loyne, Zoroba- 
bel, that cam 
doun of Da- 
uyth, hadde the 
duchee, ether 
leding, on the 
puple, and othere 
men suyngly 
of the lynage of 
Dauyth, til to 
croude, an ali. 
en,yndur whom 
Crist was borun 
of the seed of 
Danyth, bi 
fleisch, of which 
Crist the rewme 
dwellith, in to 
worldis of 
worldis. Lire 
here. C. 


152 


hath spokyn, the strong of Yrael, the 
lordshipper of men, the rijtwise lord- 
shipper in the dreed of God. As 1i3t of 
morwtide, springinge the sunne eerli 
with out clowdis, gliterith; and as bi 
reynes buriouneth the eerbe of the erthe. 
sAnd not so mych is myn hows auentis 
God, that euerlastynge conenaunt he 
shulde goo yn with me, stable in alle 
thingis and warnysshit ; forsothe al myn 
heelth and al wil, ne there is eny thing 
sof it, that ne buriowneth. Brekers of 
the lawe forsothe! as thornys shulen be 
pullid vp alle, the whiche ben not takyn 
;with" hoondis. And" if eny man wolde 
touche hem, he shal be aarmyd with 
yren, and speer tree; and with fier tend 
vp, thei shulen be brent vnto nou3t. 
8Thes the names of the stronge men of 
Dauid. Dauid sittynge’ in the chayer, 
moost wise prynce among three; he is as 
a moost tendre litil werme of a tree, the 
which ei3t hundrid slew3 with a bure. 
9 Aftir this Eliazar, the sone of his yncle* 
Abohy ; among the three stronge, that 
weren with Dauid, whaune thei re- 
proueden to Philisteym, and thei ben 
io gederid thidir iuto bateil. And whanne 
the men of Yrael hadden stiede vp, he 
stood, and smoot the Philisteis, to the 
tyme that his hoond failide, and wexe 
heuy with the swerd. And the Lord 
dide greet heelth in that day; and the 
puple that flei3 is turned ajen to the 
spoilis of the sleyn men to be with- 
''drawen. After this Semma, the sone of 
Age, of Arary. And Philisteis ben gedrid 
in the stacioun ; forsothe there was there" 
a feelde ful of corn; and whanne the 
puple hadde flowen fro the face of Phi- 
'2}isteis, he stood in the mydil of the feeld, 
and rescuwid it; and he smoot the Phi- 
listeis, and the Lord made a greet heelth. 
13 Also and before wenten doun the three, 


Tore prem.  fand with z pr.m. 
of Eprm UwOm. a. 


 stronge help 1. W lordschipere 1, 


IJ. KINGS. 


Om. £ prom. 


XXILL. 4——13. 


the stronge’ of Israel, the ‘iust Lord of 
men, ‘zs Lord*® in the drede of God. As4 
the liz3t of the morewtid, whanne the 
sunne risith eerli, is bri3t with out cloudis ; 
and as an erbe cometh forth of the erthe 
bi reynes. And myn hows is not so greets 
anentis God, that he schulde make with 
me euerlastynge couenaunt, stidefast and 
maad strong in alle thingis; for al myn 
helthe hangithY of* him, and al the* wille 
‘that is, al my desir, goith in to hym*, and 
no thing is therof, that makith not fruytf. 
Forsothe alle trespassouris schulen bee 
drawuu out as thornes, that ben not takun 
with hondis. And if ony man wole touche7 
tho, he schal be armed with irun, and 
with tre° formed in to spere’; and the® 
thornes schulen be kyndlid, and schulen 
be brent ‘til tof nou3t. These ben thes 
names of the stronge men of Dauid. 
Dauid sittith in the chaier, the wiseste 
prince among tlire ; he is as a moost tendir 
worm of tree®{, that killide ei3te hundrid 
with o fersnesse. Aftir hym was Eleazar, 9 
the sone of his fadirs" brother Abohi; 
among thre stronge men, that weren with 
Dauid, whanne thei seiden schenschip to 
Filisteis', and weren gaderid thidir in to 
batel. 
hadden stied*, he! stood, and smoot 
Filisties™, til" his hond failide, and was 
starke with the swerd. And the Lord 
made greet helthe in that dai; and the 
puple that fledde turnede ajen to drawe 
awei the spuylis of slayn men. 
hym° was Semima, the sone of Age, of 
Arari. And Filisteis weren gaderid in the 
stacioun; forsothe? there was a feeld ful 
of lente1; and whanne the puple™ fledde 


fro the face of Filisteis, he* stood in the» 


inyddis of the feeld, and bihelde it|]; and 
he smoot Filisteist, and the Lord made 
greet” helthe. 
doun bifore, that’ weren princes among 
* the sone 


8 sitt E pr.m. SS gem E pr. m. 


* the rijstwise lordschiper 1. Y ist. ZonEKL. 4 myrt. bOm.1. 


we 1. da spere Leet tho 1. f ynto 1. Gatreer. 4b fadir1. ithe Philisteesr. stied up 1. 
fi nar I. ™ the Philistees Hea 28 tilthat i. oEleazar1. Pandy. 4 lentes or fetchis 1. * puple of 
sraelt. $Semmar. tthe Philistees 1. u there greet 1. ¥ whiche 1. 


And whanne the men of Israel 4 


And aftiri1 


Also and thre men 3eden13 


tT that makith 
not fruyt ; and 
this is doon, 
whanneal thing 
that cometh 
forth of the 
wille, ether of 
auysement, is 
doon yn to the 
glorie of God. 
Lire here. c. 


t heisasa 
moost tendir 
worm of tre; 
for thou; this 
worm in him 
silf is most 
tendir, netheles 
he persith the 
harde tre; so 
Dauyth most 
benygne and 
most mylde, 
was most strong 
ajenns enemyes 
rebellinge, ether 
as most tendir 
worm, that is, 
ful swete and 
amyable anen- 
tis hise men, 
aud hard ajenus 
adnersaries. 
Lire here. c. 


§ he stood, etc.; 
in batel,whanne 
hise felowis 
3eden abak. 
Lire here.c. 


|| and bihelde 
it; for he de- 
fendide the 
feeld. Lire 
here. C. 





XXII. 14—23. 


that weren princis amonge thretti, and 
camen in tyme of rijp to Dauid into the 
spelunk of Odollam. Forsothe the tentis 
of Philisteis weren sett in the valey of 
14geauntis. And Dauid was in the strength; 
forsothe the stacioun’ of Philistees thanne 
iswas in Bethlem. Dauid desiride thanne 
the watir of the laak, and seith, If eny 
man wolde 3yue to me drynke of the 
watir of the systern, that is in Bethleem, 
igbiside the 3aat. ‘Thanne breken out 
three stronge men the tentis of Philisteis, 
and drewen water of the sistern of 
Bethleem, that was biside the 3aat, and 
brou3ten to Dauid; and he wolde not 
drynke, but offride it to the Lord, 
i7seiynge, Merciful be to’ me the Lord, 
lest Y doo this; whether the blood of 
thes men, that ben goon forth, and the 
perile of lyues I shal drynke ? Thanne 
he wolde not drynke. Thes thingis 
isdiden the three moost stronge. For- 
sothe Abisay, the brother of Joab, the 
sone of Saruye, was prince of the three ; 
he is that reride his spere ajens thre 
hundrid, whom he slew3, nemned in the 
i9three, and amonge the three the nobler, 
and he was the prince of hem; but vnto 
20 the three first men he ful cam not. And 
Banayas, the sone of Joiade, man moost 
strong of greet werkes, of Capseel, he 
smoot the two lyouns of Moab; and he 
cam doun, and smoot a lioun in the 
21mydil cistern in the dais of snow3. For- 
sothe he slew3 an Egipecian man worthi 
beholdynge, hauynge in the hoond a 
spere; and so whanne he was comyn 
doun to hym in a 3erd, bi foree he pul- 
lide out the spere fro the hoond of the 
Egipeien, and he slew3 hym with his” 
2zspeere. Thes thingis dide Banayas, the 
23sone of Joiade; and he namyd among 
the three stronge, that weren amonge 


VY staciouns 4 pr.m. 


W thretti men 1. * thei camen 1. 
€that1. ‘tentis1. £ is K. 
stronge1. the brother1, © the thre ment. 
K. nemmed ut. ¢t¢éhothre 1. he was1. 
hardi kny3tis « marg. y Banaye 1. 
strengthis s. ry3t strong D. ni3t ELPD. 


VOL. IT. 


4 wrong L. 


II. KINGS. 


1 wolde not 1. 


153 


thretti*, and camen*® to Dauid in the tyme 
of reepY in to the denne of Odollam. For- 


sothe? the eastels* of Filisteis weren set 
in the valei of giauntis. And Dauid was1s 
in a strong hold; sotheli® the stacioun of 
Filisteis was thanne in Bethleem. Ther-15 
for® Dauid desiride water of the lake, and 
seide, If ony man wolde 3yue tome drynk} = + Youy won 

: jf i jes wolde 3yue to 
of watir’ of the ecisterne, which® is in medrynke,cic.; 
Bethleem, bisidis the 3ate. Therfor thre 16 me care 
stronge men braken in to the castels! of Queeye® ie 
Filisteis, and drowen watir of the cisterne are ae ah 
of Bethleem, that was® bisidis the 3ate, of hem; and 
and brou3ten* to Dauid; and he noldei Daten 
drinke, but offride it to the Lord, and 17 sprite ta the 
seide, The Lord be mereiful to ine, that Peta 
Y do not this; whether Y schal drynke _ pe the seth 
the blood of these men, that 3eden forth, _ to perels asenus 
and the perel of soulis*? Therfor he erie al 
nolde! drynke. Thre strongeste™ men diden  23sh"" ee 
thes thingis. Also Abisay, brother" of 1%’ © 
Joab, the sone of Saruye, was prince of 
thre® ; he it is that reiside his schaft? ajens. 
thre hundrid men, whieche® he killide ; ‘he 
was’ nemid’ among thre‘, and was" the19 
noblere among thre’, and he was the 
prinee of hein; but he cam not to the thre 
firste men. And Banaye, the sone of 
Joiada, strongeste” man of grete werkis, 
of Capseel, he sinoot twei liouns of Moab, 
‘that is, tei kny3tis hardi as liouns* ; and 
he 3ede doun, and smoot a lioun in the 
myddil cisterne in the daies of snow. 
Also heY killide a man of Egipt, a manai 
worthi of spectacle’, hauynge a spere in 
the? hond; therfor® whanne he hadde 
come doun with a 3erde to that man, bi 
mi3t® he wrooth* out the spere fro the 
hond of the man of Egipt, and killide 
hym with his owne spere. Banaye, sone‘ 22 
of Joiada, dide these thingis ; and he was 23 
nemyed among thre stronge men, that 
weren among the thretti noblere men ; 


w the 2. 


Yripp1. 2 And1, ®tentisi. bAnd1. ¢ Thanner. 4 the watir1. 
h thei brou3ten it 1. 
P spere 1. 
v hem thre 1. 
Z biholdyng 1. 


lwolde not 1. ™ ful 
8 nempnydi. named 
x thal is, two stronge 
¢ strengthe KMOX. ri3t 


k her lyues 1. 
athe whicher. * Om.1. 
w the strongeste 1. 
ahis1. % and so1. 


e the sone 1. 


X 


154 
the thretti nobler; neuerthelater vnto 
the three he ful cam not. And Dauid 
made hym* to hym a secretarie of 
2ipryuete. Asahel, the brother of Joab, 
among the thretti; Elianan, the sone of 
25 his eem’, of Bethleem ; Seruma, of Arary ; 
26 Elka, of Arodi; Helias, of Phelu; Hyra, 
27the sone of Aches, of Thekua; Abiazer, 
28of Anathoth ; Nobanay, of Vsathi; Selmon 
29 Acothes?; Macharoy Nethophatites; E- 
led, the sone of Baana, and he Netho- 
phatite; Hitai, the sone of Rabai, of Je- 
30 beeth, of the sonis of Beniamyn; Banai 
Affrotonyte; Heddai, of the streem of 
31 Gaas; Albiabon Arbachite; Asmanech, of 
32 Berromy; Elyala, of Sobony; the sones of 
33 Jonathan, and Jeson ; Semma, of Horadi ; 
31 Hayam, the sone of Saray, Saratite; Eli- 
pheleth, the sone of Saasbai, the sonys 
of Maachati; Heliam, the sone of Achi- 
35 tophel, Gilonyte ; Esrai, of Carmeel; Pha- 
sérai, of Arbi; Igaal, the sone of Natha, 
37 of4 Soba; Bony, of Gaddi; Selech, of Am- 
mony; Naamy Berothite, the squyer of 
3sJoab, the sone of Sarnye; Ira Yatrite ; 
39 Gareb, and he Yatrite; Vrie Ethcc; alle, 
seuen and thretti. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 And the woodnes of the Lord addide 
to be wrooth a3ens Irael, and stiride Da- 
uid in hem, seiynge to Joab, Go, and 
2noumbre Yrael and Juda. And the kyng 
seide to Joab, prince? of his oost, Go thur3 
alle the lynagis of Irael fro Dan vnto 
Bersabe, and noumbreth¢ tlic puple, that 
31 knowe the noumbre of it. And Joab 
seide to the kyng, The Lord thi God 
ecche to thi puple, as myche as it is now, 
and eft encrees it to the hundred so 
myche in the si3t of my lord the kyng ; 
but? what to hym wole my lord the kyng 
4in siche a maner thing? Forsothe the 
word of the kyng hadde the ouer hoond 
asens the wordis of Joab, and of the 


x Om. a. 


Ygem. £. 2 of Acothes nr. 
4 Om. 2. 
fOm.1. 8 firste thre 1. h prince 1. 
D alle these 1. ®ajensi.  P the lynagis 2. 
uOm.1 ¥ Bute. 


II. KINGS. 


a Om, a. 


i the thretti 1. 
4 vnto 1. 


XXII. 24—XXIV. 4. 


netheles he cam not tilf to the thre’. And 
Dauid made hym a counselour of priuyte" 


to hym silf. Asahel, the brother of Joab, 24 


was among threttii men; Eleanan, the 
sone of his fadris brother, of Bethleem ; 


+ and the 
strong ven- 
iaunce of the 
Lord addide 

to be wrooth 
a3enus Israel ; 
of this that the 
Lord wolde 


95 punysche the 


Semma, of Arari; Elcha, of Arodi; Helas, 5¢ puple, he suf- 


of Phelti; Hira, sone of Aches, of Thecua; 


Abiezer, of Amatoth ; Mobannoy, of Co-27 


tride Dauyth 
to be reisid 

bi pride to the 
noumbring of 


sathi; Selmon, of Achotes; Macharai, of 28 the puples 


wherfor the 


Nethophath; Heled, the sone of Baana, 29 gloss of Gregre 


and he was of Netophath ; Hiray, sone! of 
Rabai, of Gebeeth, of the sones of Benia- 


myn; Banay, of Effrata; Hedday, of the so 
stronde of Gaas; Abiabon, of Arbath; As-31 


on this place 
seith thus, The 
dedis of go- 
vernours ben 
disposid for the 
maneris of su- 
getis, that ofte 
for the ynel of 


maneth, of Berromy; Eliaba, of Sabony ; 32 the floc, the 


sones™ of Assen, Jonathan, and Jasan ; 


Semma, of Herodi; Hayam, sone! of Sa-33 


liyf she of a 
good schep- 
parde tres- 
passith, for 


rai, of Zaroth ; Eliphelech, sone! of Saal-34 Dauyth was 


bai, the sone of Maachati; Heliam, sone! 


preisid bi God 
witnesse, and 
e was blowun 


of Achitofel, of Gilo; Esrai, of Carmele ; 35 with the bol- 


Pharai, of Arbi; Ygaal, sone! of Nathan, 36 


of Soba; Bonny, of Gaddi; Silech, of Am- 
mony; Naarai, of Beroth, the squyer of 


nyng of sudeyn 
pride, and 
synnede in 


37 noumbrin 


puple, and the 
puple resseyu- 


Joab, the sone of Saruye; Haray, of Jethri; 38 ede peyne; for 


the hertis of 


Gareb, and he was of Gethri; Vrye, of E-39 gouernours ben 


thei; alle" weren scuene and thretti men. 


CAP. XXIV. 


And the strong veniaunce of the Lordi 
addide to be wrooth ajens Israel}, and he 
stiride in® hem Dauid, seiynge to Joab, 
Go thou, and noumbre thou Israel and 
Juda. And the kyng seide to Joab, thee 
prince of his oost, Go thou bi alle lynagis? 
of Israel fro Dan ‘til to? Bersabee, and 
noumbre thon the puple, that Y wite the 
noumbre therof. And Joab seide to thes 
kyng, Thi Lord God encresse to this" pu- 
ple, ‘hou greets it is now, and eft multiplie 
he‘ an hundrid fold in the si3t of my lord 
the kyng; but what wole my lord the" 
kyng to hym silf in sich a thing ? Sotheli’ 4 
the word of the kyng ouer cam the wordis 
of Joab, and of the princes of the oost; 


» the prince E pr. m. © nowmbre ce pr.m. 


1 the sone 1. 
S$ as myche as 1. 


K the sone 1. 


: ™ the sones 1. 
r thir, 


tye a. he it 1, 


disposid, vp the 
meritis of the 
puplis. The 
synne of the 
puple for which 
it was punysch- 
id, is not ex- 
pressid in the 
text, but in the 
book of Ebreu 
questiouns it is 
seid, that this 
was herfor, for 
the puple a3en 
stood not Da- 
uyth as it ou3te, 
in the dede of 
Vrie, but for 
this dede was 
priny til it was 
al doon; the 
puple my3te not 
withstonde Da- 
uyth in the 
synne to be 
lettid, and aftir 
that this synne 
cam in to the 
knowing of the 
puple, the pu- 
ple ouste nat to 
punysche it, 
for the peyne 
was determynd 
thanne of God, 
as it is opin in 
xii. c°. bi the 


XXIV. 5——~14. 


princis of the oost; and Joab wente 
out, and the princis of kny3tis, fro the 
face of the kyng; ‘and thei noum- 
sbren® the puple ‘of Yraelf. Whanne thei 
hadden passid ouer Jordan, thei camen 
into Aroer, at the ri3t half of the citee 
sthat is in the valey of Gad; and bi Jaser 
thei passiden into Galaad, and into the 
nether loond of Odsi, and camen into the 
wodi placis of Dan; and goynge about 
7 beside Sidon thei passiden ny3 the walles 
of Tyri, and al the loond of Euey, and 
of Chananei; and thei camen into¥ the 
ssowth of Juda, into Bersabe. And passid 
al the loond, thei weren after nyne 
monethis and twenty dais comen into 
g9Jerusalem. Thanne Joab 3af the noum- 
bre of the discryuynge of the puple to 
the kyng. And there ben founden of 
Yrael nyn hundrid thousandis of stronge 
men, ‘the whiche* my3ten drawe out 
swerd; and of Juda fyue hundrid thou- 
yosandis of fi3tynge men. Forsothe the 
herte of Dauid smoot hym, aftir that the 
puple is noumbred; Dauid seide to the 
Lord, I haue synned greetli in this deede ; 
but I preye, Lord, that thou bere ouer 
the wickidnes of thi seruaunt, for foleli 
iI haue doo to myche. And so Dauid 
roos eerli, and the word of the Lord is 
maad to Gad, the prophete and seear, 
12seiynge, Go, and spek to Dauid, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord, Of three thingis 
to thee is 3ouun choys; chees oon, that 
thou wolt of thes, that I doo to thee. 
13 And whanne Gad was comen to Dauid, 
he toold to hym, seiynge, Outher seuen 
3eer Shal come to thee hungre in thi loond; 
or three monethis thou shalt flee thin ad- 
uersaries, and thei shulen pursue thee ; 
or certeyn three days pestilence shal be 
in thi loond; now thanne delyuer, and 
see, what word I shal answere to hym 
isthat sente me. Forsothe Danid scide to 


cand thei nowmbriden £ pr.m. that thei noumbren cE sec.m. 


h that c prom. 


w Om. plures.  *thatr. — ¥ passiden forth 1. 
eAndsor ¢And1. ©Om.1. ‘have synned 1. 
thou B marg. Om.t. * And 1. 


II. KINGS. 


& hane dot. 


155 


and Joab 3ede out, and the princes of the’ 
kny3tis, fro the face of the kyng, that thei 
schulden noumbre the puple of Israel. And5 
whanne thei hadden passid Jordan, thei 
camen in to Aroer, to the ri3t side of the 
citee which* is in the valei of Gad; and 6 
thei passiden’ bi Jazer in to Galaad, and 
in to the lowere lond of Odsi, and camen? 
in to the wodi places of Dan; and thei 
cunipassiden*? bisidis Sidon, and passiden7 
ny3 the wallis of Tire, and ny3 al the lond 
of Enei, and of Chananei; and thei camen 
to> the south of Juda, in Bersabee. And 8 
whanne al the lond was cumpassid, thei 
camen aftix nyne monethis and twenti 
daies in to Jerusalem. Therfor® Joab 3afy 
the noumbre of discriuyng of the puple 
to the kyng. And of Israel weren foundun 
nyne hundryd thousynd{ of stronge men, 
that drewen out swerd; and of Juda fyue 
hundrid' thousynde of fi3teris. 
the herte of Dauid smoot hym, ‘that is, 
his concience reprenyde hym®, aftir that 
the puple was noumbrid ; and Dauid seide 
to the Lord, Y synnede greetli{ in this 
dede; but, Lord, Y preye that thou turne 
awei the wickidnesse of thi seruaunt, for 
Y dides ful folili. 
eerli, and the word of the Lord was maad 
to Gad, the prophete and seere, and seide, 


wordis of Na- 
than, therfor 

it is seid betere, 
that the syune 
of the puple, 
was the rebelte 
therof ajenus 
Dauyth in 
suynge Siba, 
sone of Bothry, 
that was the 
worste man 
and ful of dis- 
sencioun, and 
Siba aloone 
was punysehid 
for this rebelte. 
Lire here. c. 


t+ ix. hundrid 
thousynde, in 
1. book of Pa- 


Forsotheé 10 flip. xxi. e°. 


is a thousinde 
thousinde, and 
an hundrid 
thousindes here 
is set the lesse 
nonumbre, and 
there the gret- 
ter noumbre, 
and of Jnda is 
set there the 
lesse noumbre, 
and here the 


Therfor Dauid roos 1 gretter. Lire 


here. c. 

pad i synnede 
greetly; in 
pride, and in 


Go thou, and speke to Dauid, The Lord !2 breking of 


seith these thingis, The chesyng" of thre 
thingis is 30m to thee; chese thou oon, 
which thou wolt of these, that Y do to 
thee. 
Dauid, he telde to Dauid', and seide, Ether 
hungur schal come to thee in thi lond se- 
uene 3eer; ethir thre monethis thou schalt 
fle thin aduersaries, and thei schulen pur- 
sue thee; ether certis thre daies pestilence 
schal be in thi lond; now therfor de- 
lyuere thou, ‘ether auyse thoui, and se, 
what word Y schal answere to hym that 
sente me. 


fOm. £ prem. & to BCEFH, 


@3eden abouter. > in to x. 
ihims. J ether exramyne 


2 thei camen 1. 
h chois 1, 


x2 


Forsothe* Dauid seide to Gad, !4 


Goddis heest, 
for in xxxi. e°. 
of Exody, 
whanne the 
sones of Israel 
weren nowm- 


And whanne Gad hadde come to 13 brid, eeh man 


schulde [offre] 
to the Lord half 
a sicle, and this 
was not doon 
bere. c. 


156 


Gad, I am constreyned ful myche ‘on alle 
sidesi; but* beter it is that I falle into 
the hoondis of the Lord, forsothe manye 
ben the mercies of hym, than in the 
ishoondis of men. And the Lord sente yn 
pestilence into Irael fro cerli vnto the set 
tyme; and there ben deed of the puple 
fro Dan vuto Bersabee seueuti thou- 
issandis of men. And whanne the aungel 
of the Lord hadde strau3t out his hoond 
vpon Jerusalem, that he scater it, the 
Lord hadde rewth vpon the tourment- 
ynge; and he seith to the aungel simyt- 
ynge the puple, Yt suffisith now; with- 
hoold thin hoond. Forsothe the aungel 
of the Lord was beside the corn flore of 
i; Arewna of Jebusei. And Dauid seide! 
to the Lord, whanne he hadde seen the 
aungel sleynge the puple, I am that haue 
synnede, and I wykidli dide; thes that 
ben sheep, what diden thei? I biseche, 
be thin hoond turned a3ens me, and a3ens 
isthe hows of my fader. Forsothe Gad, 
the prophete, cam to Dauid in that day, 
and seide to hym, Stye vp, and ordeyn 
an auter to the Lord in the corn flore of 
is Arewna of Jebusei. And Dauid stiede 
vp, after the word of Gad, the which the 
20 Lord hadde comaundide to hym. And 
beholdynge Arewne vudurstoode the kyng 
and his seruauntis to comen ouer to hym ; 
ziand, goon out, he honourde the kyng, 
bowid the cheere into the erthe; and 
seith, What of cause is, that my lord the 
kyng cometh to his seruannt? To whom 
Dauid seith, That I bye of thee the corn 
flore, and bilde an anter to the Lord, and 
cees the slau3ter, that is ful plenteuous in 
22the puple. And Arewna seith to Dauid, 
Tak, and offre my lord kyng, as it plesith 
to him; hast thou oxen into brent sacri- 
fice, and a wayn, and 3o0ckis of oxen into 
23 the vse of trees? Arewna jaf alle thingis 
to the king. And Arewna seide to the 


II. KINGS. 


s 


XMXIV. 15—~-23. 


Y am constreyned on ech side greetli; but 
it is betere that Y falle in to the hondis 
of the Lord}, for his emercies ben manye, _ + in to the 
oa) k . hondis of the 
than in' the’ hondis of men. And the 15 76,0, if Da- 
Lord sente pestilence in to Israel fro the cienctteee 
morewtid ‘til to! the tyme ordeynedt{; and ona a he 
Tk 
seventi thousynde of men weren deed of  wolden haus 
the puple fro Dan ‘til to™ Bersabee. And 16 hem silf a 
whanne the aungel of the Lord hadde pl et 
holde® forth his hond ouer Jerusalem, that schulden haue 
he schulde distrie it, the Lord hadde inercy 
on the turmentyng ; and seide® to the aun- 
gel smytynge the puple, It sufficith now; 
withholde thin hond. _Forsothe? the aun- Wee 
gel of the Lord was bisidis the corn floor and pore men 
; slayn, therfor 
of Areuna Jebusey. And Dauid seide to17 he chees pesti 
the Lord, whanne he hadde seyn the aun-  peyne to alle, 
gel sleynge the puple, Y am‘ et that ‘hane jo" fe fistide 
synned’, and Y dide* wickidli; what han meri. Lire 
these do, that ben scheep? Y biseche, thin 
hond be turned ajens me, and a3jens the 


be turmentid 
gretly ; and if 
he hadde chose 
flizt bifor ene- 
myes, he and 
my3ty men 
schuiden haue 


here. C. 
t to the tyme 
ordeyned ; that 
is, til to the f 

hows of my fadir. Forsothe’ Gad, the pro-1s of cuenta ge 
phete, cam to Danid in that dai, and seide a 
to hym, Stie thou”, and ordeyne an auter — weren seid bi 

: manassing, and 
to the Lord in the corn floor of Areuna _ weren releessid 
Jebusei. And Dauid stiede, vpe* the word 19 ee 
of Gad, which the Lord hadde comanundid OS a 
to hym. And Areuna bihelde, and per-20 
seyuede’, that the kyng and hise sernauntis 
passiden? to hym; and he 3ede out, and 21 
worschipide the kyng bi® low cheer to the 
erthe ; and seide, What ‘cause is, that my 
lord the’ kyng cometh to his seruaunt ? 
To whom Dauid seide, That Y bie of thee 
the corn floor, and bilde an auter to the 
Lord, and the sleynge ceesse, which‘ is 
cruel in the puple. And Areuna seide to22 
Dauid, My lord the® kyng take, and offre, 
as it plesith hymf;. thou hast oxis’ in to 
brent sacrifice, and a wayn and 3ockis of 
oxis' in to vss' of wode. Arenna 3af alleges 
thingis|| to the king. And Areuna seide 
to the king, Thi Lord God reseyue thi 9% "wis 
vow. To whom the king answeride, and 24 Wolde syue. 


Nl dreuna 3af 


Lire here. c. 
iOm.z prom. & Om. 8. | seith p. 
iintorkb. kOm.x. Jynto1.  ™ yntor. n helde 1. ° he seide 1 P Audi. Vit am I. 
"Om. plures. Ssynneder thauedor. VCertisx1. W thou upi. up,.aftir 1. Y vndirstode 1. 
2 passiden oner 1. with 1. bis the cause1. ¢Om.1. dthatr. ¢€ Om. ftohymr. §& oxen ie, 


h oxun amb. ithe vss 1. 


XXIV. 24—25. II. KINGS. 157 


king, The Lord thi God take thi vowe.  seide, Not as thou wolt, but Y schal bie* 
21To whom answeringe the king seith, of thee for prijs, and Y schal not offre to 
Not as thou wolt, but I shal bye bi prijs ‘my Lord' God brent sacrifices 3ouun freli. 
of thee, and I shal not offre to the Lord Therfor Dauid bou3te the corn floor}, and — tse the 


i 4 : 6 eee e corn floor; fur 
my God brent sacrifice freeli 3euen. Than ‘he bou3zte™ oxis™ for fifti siclis of siluer. vi. hundria 


Dauid bou3te the corn flore for sexe hun- And Danid bildide there an auter to the2s fis tee. 
drid siclis of gold, and the oxen for fifti | Lord, and offride brent sacrifices and pe- Sane” 
a5siclis of siluer. And Dauid bilde there sible sacrifices; and the Lord dide merci ""* ° 
an auter to the Lord, and he offride brent to the lond, and the veniaunce was re- 
sacrifices and pesible; and the Lord is _ freyned fro Israel. 
plesid ajen to the loond, and the ven- 
iaunce is forfendyd fro™ Yrael. Here endith the secounde book of 
Kyngis, and here bigynneth the thridde?. 

Here endith the secounde book of 

Kingis, and bigynneth the  thridde 


book”. 


mofnp. "From x. Here endith the secounde bok of Kyngis, and here bygynneth the thrid bok. Fr. 
No final rubric in agcH. 


k bie #1. Ithe Lordmy1 ™Om.1. "the oxenr. © Here endith the secounde book of Kyngis, 
and bigynneth a prolog on the iii. book of Kynges. G. Here endith the secounde book of Kyngis, und 
bigynneth the thridde. 19. Here endith the secounde book of Kingis, se now the thridde. x. Here endith 
the secounde book of Kingis, and here bigynneth a prologe on the thridde.m. Here eendith the secunde book 
of Kyngis, and bygynneth the thridde book of Kyngis. Nrsx. Here endith the secounde book of Kingis, and 
here bigynneth the thridde. 0. Here endeth the secounde book, and bigynneth the thridde.b. Here endith 
the secunde book of Kyngis.¢. No final rubric in Exp. 


Ill KINGS. 





[Prologue on the Third book of Kings*.] 


In this thridde book of Kingis is contened the ending of Dauith, and the coro- 
nacioun of Salomon, 3it lyaynge Dauith ; and how the Lord magnyfied Salomon with 
wisdom, and richessis, and in al prosperite, for the loue of Dauith his fadir, aboue alle 
kingis that weren bifor him and after, and 3af to hym pees on ech side. Also how 
the rewme was departid in the daies of Roboam, sone of Salomon, in to tweie kyng- 
doms, but the Lord reseruede the kyngdom of Juda to the generacioun of Dauith, for 
the merit of Dauith; and of alle kingis that weren afterward on Juda and on Israel, 


in to the transmygracioun of Babiloyne. 


i 


Here bigynneth the thridde book of 
Kyngis*. 


CAPR. 1 


1 Awnp kyng Dauid hadde eeldid, and he 
hadde of age manye dais ; and whanne he 
was couerd with clothis, he was not inaad 

zhoot. Thanne his seruauntis seiden to 
hym, Seche we to oure lord® kyng¢ a 
jong wexen’ mayden; and stonde she 
before the kyng, and fede she hym, and 
sleep in his bosum, and make she hoot 

soure lord kyng®. Thanne thei sou3ten 
a fayre 3ong womman in alle the coostis 
of Irael; and thei founden Abisaag 
Sunamytem, and brou3ten hir to the 
4kyng. Forsothe she was a child wom- 
man fayr ful mych, and she slepte with 
the kyng, and seruede tof hym ; forsothe 
sthe kyng knewe hyre not. Forsothe 
Adonyas, the sone of Agith, was reryd 
vp, seilynge, I shal regne. And he made 
to hym a chaar, and horsmen, and fifti 


a From 4. 
d wexe H. 


The thridde of Kyngis rn. 
€ the kyng ce pr.m.u. fOm. 8. 
4 This Prologue is from m. 
rubric in the other Mss. 
&Om,1. b Sunamyes, 


b From am. 


iAnds. JOmu. 


No initial rubric in crx. 


The thridde of Kynges u. The iii. of Kinges v. 
© wexide 1, waxide EKLb. 
k Andi, !the sonex. ™ reisid up 1. 


Here beginneth the thridde book of 
Kyngis’. 


CAP AI. 


Anp kyng Dauid wax® eld*, and hadde) 
ful many daies of age; and? whanne he 
was hilid with clothis, he was not maad 
hoott. Therfor hise seruauntis seiden toe 
hym, Seke we to oure lord thet kyng a 
jong wexynge virgyn; and stonde sche 
bifor the kyng, and nursche sche hym, and 
slepe in his bosum, and make hoot oure 
lord the’ kyng. Therfor thei sou3ten a3 
jong wexyng virgyn, fair in alle the 
coostis of Israel; and thei founden Abisag 
of Sunam*, and thei brou3ten hir to the 
kyng. Forsothe' the damysel was ful, 
fair, and sche slepte with the kyng{, and 
mynystride to hym; forsothe the king 
knew not hir fleischlij. Sotheli* Adonye, 5 
sone! of Agith, was reisid™, and seide, Y 
schal regne. And he made to hym a 
chare, and kny3tis", and fifti men, that 


bOm v.  ¢ the kyng ce pr. m. 


No initial 
f sche hoot 1. 
2 ordeynede kni3ztis 1. 


ce fuloldt. @Om.s. © Om. 


tT he was not 
made hoot ; for 
he was a wer- 
riour fro his 
jong age, and 
for he was 
hugely agast in 
the si;t of the 
aungel. Lire 
here. c. 


1 sche slepte 
with the king ; 
Abisag was 
weddid to 
Dauyth. Lire 
here. ¢. 


I. 6—17. 


men, that before him shulden  renne. 
6And his fadir vndurnam not hym eny 
tyme, seiynge, Whi thus diddist thou ? 
Forsothe and he was ful fayr, the se- 
z7cound born after Absolon ; and the word 
of hym with Joab, the sone of Saruye, 
and with Abiathar, preest, that helpiden 
gthe parties of Adonye. Forsothe Sa- 
doch, the preest, and Banayas, the sone 
of Joiade, and Nathan, the prophete, and 
Semei, and Cerethi, and Pherethi, and al 
the strength of the oost of Dauid, was 
9not with Adonye. Thanne wethers, and 
calues, and alle the fat offrid biside the 
stoon of Zoelech, that was ny3 to the 
welle of Rogel, Adonyas clepede alle his 
britheren, the sones of the kyng, and alle 
the men of Juda, seruauntis of the kyng. 
10 Forsothe Nathan, the prophet, and Ba- 
naye, and alle the stronge men, and Salo- 
11mon, his brother, he clepide not. And 
so Nathan seide to Bersabe, the modir 
of Salomon, Whether hast thou herd, 
that Adonyas, the sone of Agith, ‘hath 
regnyds, and oure lord Dauid thes 
i2thingis vnknowith ? Now thanne come, 
and tak counseil of me, and saue thi lijf, 
isand of thi sone Salomon. Go, and weend 
in to kyng Dauid, and sey to him, Whe- 
ther not thou, lord, my kyng, swore to 
me thin hoond womman, seiynge, that 
Salomon thi sone shal regne aftir me, 
and he shal sitte in my see? Whi thanne 
i4regneth Adonyas? And 3it there thee 
spekynge with the kyng, I shal come 
15 after thee, and fulfil thi wordis. And so 
Bersabe is goon yn to the kyng in the 
bedplace’; forsothe the kyng hadde eeldid 
ful myche, and Abisaag Sunamyte seru- 
ede to him. Bersabe bowid hir, and 
honourede the king ; to whom the king, 
ijhe seith, What wolt thou to thee? The 
which answerynge seith, My lord kyng, 


Ill. KINGS. 


159 


runnen bifor hym. Nether® his fadir re-¢ 
preuyde hym ony tyme, and? seide, Whi 

‘didist thou’ this? Forsothe’ also he was 

ful fair, the secounde child aftir Absolon ; 

and his word was with Joab, sonet of7 
Saruye, and with ‘Abiathar, preest", that’ 

helpiden the partis of Adonye. Sothelivs 
Sadoch, the preest, and Banaie, sone* of 
Joiada, and Nathan, the prophete, and 

Semey, and Cerethi, and Ferethi, and al 

the strengthe of the oost of Dauid, weren 

not with Adonye. Therfor whanneg 
rammes weren offrid, and caluys, and alle 

fatte thingis, bisidis the stoon Zoelecht, 

that was ny3 the welle of Rogel, Adonye 

clepide alle hise britheren, sonesY of the 

kyng, and alle the? men of Juda, ser- aeeaten ane 

uauntis of the kyng. Sotheli**he clepide 10 S6"fineye he 
not» Nathan, the profete, and Banaie, and ees 

alle stronge men, and Salomon, his bro-  fulere. Lire 
thir. Therfor? Nathan seide to Bersa-1 

bee, modir® of Salomon, Whether thou 

herdist, that Adonye, sone& of Agith, 

regnede, and oure lord Dauid knoweth 

not this? Now therfor come thou, take 12 

thou counsel of me, and saue thi lijf, and 

of Salomon thi sone. Go thou, and entre 13 

to kyng Dauid, and seie thou to hym, 

Whether not thou, my lord the kyng, 

hast swore to me, thin handmaide, and 

seidist, that Salomon thi sone schal regne 

aftir me, and he schal sitte in my trone ? 

Whi therfor regneth Adonye? And 3it14 

while thou schalt speke there with the 

kyng, Y schal come aftir thee, and ‘Y 

schal fille thi wordis. Therfor Bersabee 15 

entride to the kyng in the closet*; for- 

sothe! the kyng was ful eeld, and Abisag 

of Sunam ‘mynystride™ to hym. Ber-16 

sabee" bowide hir silf, and worschipide 

the kyng ; to whom the kyng seide, What 

wolt thou to thee? And sche answeride, 17 

and seide, My lord the? kyng, thou hast 


+ bisidis the 
stoon Zoeleth ; 
Ebreys seyen, 
the stoon 
drawun, for 


thou swore bi the Lord thi God to thin swore to thin handmaide bi thi Lord 
& schal regnen £ pr.m. 4 bed & pr.m. 

‘ONethir Dawid 1. Pner hast thou do1. 8 Buti. tthe soner. the preest Abiathar 1. 
vwhiche 1. ~ But1. *thesoner. Ythesonest. 2 Om.1. ® Butr. >» Om.1. © brothir he clepide 
not1. 4 And sor. ¢ the modir1. f wher ceteri passim. fi hast herd1. & thesone1. » hath regnydt. 
ifulfiller. bed placer. Jand1. ™seruyder. ™ And Bersabee 1. © Om. 1. 


160 


hoond womman, Salomon thi sone shal 
regne after me, and shal sitte in my see ; 
isand loo! now Adonye hath regned, thee, 
igmy lord kyng, vnknowynge; he hath 
slayn oxen, and alle the fatte, and manye 
wethers ; and clepide alle the sones of the 
kyng, and Abiathar, the preest, and 
Joab, the prince of the chyualrie ; for- 
sothe Salomon, thi seruaunt", he clepide 
2onot. Neuerthelater', my lord kyng, in 
thee the eyen of al Yrael beholden, that 
thou deme to hem, who owith to sit in 
2ithi see, my lord kyng, aftir thee; and 
it shal be, whanne my lord kyng shal 
sleep with his faders, I and my sone 
22Salomon shulen be synful. 3it she spek- 
ynge with the kyng, Nathan, the pro- 
23phete, cam. And men toolden to the 
kyng, seiynge, Nathan, the prophete, 
is ny3. And whanne he was comen in the 
si3t of the kyng, and hadde honourde 
2thym redi into the erthe, Nathan seide, 
My lord kyng, hast thow seide, Adonye 
regne after me, and he sitte vpon my 
astrone? For he cam doun to day, and 
offride oxen, and fatte thingis, and 
manye wethers; and clepide alle the 
sonys of the kyng, and the prince of the 
oost, and Abiathar, the preest; and hem 
etynge, and drynkynge before hym, and 
26 seiynge, Lyue the kyng Adonye, ime, thi 
sernaunt, and Sadoch, the preest, and 
Benanye, the sone of Joiade, and Salo- 
27mon, thi sone, he clepide not. Whether 
of my lord the kyng wente out this 
word, and to me, thi sernaunt, thou 
shewedist not, who shulde be to sitte 
vpon the trone of my lord kyng after 
2hym? And kyng Dauid answerde, sei- 
ynge, Clepith to me Bersabe. The 
which whanne was goon in before the 
kyng, and hadde stoonden before hym, 
eg9the king swore, and seith, The Lord 
lyueth, that hath delyuerd my soule fro 


II. KINGS. 


I. 18—29. 


God, Salomon thy? sone schal regne aftir 

me, and he schal sitte in my trone; and 1s 

lo! Adonye hath regnede now, ‘while 

thou, my lord the kyng, knowist not?; he19 

hath slayn oxis', and alle fatte thingis, 

and ful many rammes; and he clepide* 

alle thet sones of the king, also‘ Abiathar 

preest", and Joab, the prince of chyualri’ ; 

but he clepide not Salomon, thi seruaunt. 

Netheles, my lord the” kyng, the izen of20 

al Israel biholden in to thee, that thon 

schewe to hem, who owith to sitte in thi 

trone, my lord the* kyng, aftir thee ; and 21 

it schal be, whanne my lord theY kyng 

hath slepte with hise fadris, Y and my 

sone Salomon schulen be synnerisf. + ¥ and my 
‘While sche spak? 3it with the king, Na-22 ve 
than, the prophete, cam. sprees 


And thei telden 235, Adunye 
to the kyng, and seiden, Nathan, the pro-  Scb#! pntte on 


vs crymes, to 


phete, is present. And whanne he hadde ee ae : 
entrid in the si3t of the kyng, and hadde tere. cx. 


worschipide hym lowli to* erthe®, Nathan 24 
seide, My lord the kyng, seidist thou, 
Adonye regne® aftir me, and sitte he on 
my trone? For he cam? doun to dai, and 25 
offride oxis*, and fatte thingis, and ful 
many wetheris; and he clepide alle the 
sones of the kyng, also’ Abiathar, preest ; 
and whanne thei eten, and drunken bifor 
hym, and seiden, Kyng Adonye lyue; he2e 
clepide not me, thi seruaunt, and Sadoch, 
preest®, and Banaie, sone of Joiada, and 
Salomon, thi sone. Whether this word 27 
3ede out fro my lord the! kyng, and thou 
schewidist not to me, thi seruaunt, who 
schulde sitte on* the trone of my lord the! 
king after hym? And kyng Dauid an-28 
sweride, and seide, Clepe 3e Bersabee to 
me. And whanne sche hadde entrid bifor 
the kyng, and hadde stonde bifor hym, 
the kyng swoor, and seide, The Lord 29 
lyueth, that delyneryde™ my lijf fro al an- 
gwisch ; for as Y swore to thee bi the3o 
Lord God of Israel, and seide, Salomon, 


hsone a. ' Nerthelatere c passim. 


P thy a sec, m. 
Peet Abiathar 1. 

the erthe EIKLP. 
i Om. 1. 


¥ the chyualri1. W Om.1. 


¢ regne he 1. 


sone I, kK upon 1. in 1, 


1Om. 1. 


4 thee my lord kyng, vnwitynge 1. 
x Om. 1. 
4 hath come 1. 
m hath delyuered 1. 


Toxent. Shathelepidi. tOm.s. 1% the 
yOm.1. 2 Bersabee spekynge1. 4 in to 1. 
eoxent. fandalso1. & the preest1, the 


I, 30-——40. 


30a] angwish ; for as I swore to thee bi the 
Lord God of Irael, seiynge, Salomon, thi 
sone, shal regne after me, and he shal 
sitte vpon my see after me, so I shal do 
sito day. And Bersabe, the cheere put 
doun into the erthe, honourde the kyng, 
seiynge, Lyue my lord kyng Dauid 
s2with outen eende. And kyng Dauid 
seide, Clepith to me Sadoch, the preest, 
and Nathan, the prophete, and Ba- 
nayam, the sone of Joiade. The whiche 
whanne thei weren comyn yn before 
33the kyng, the king seide to hem, Takith 
with 3ou the seruauntis of 3oure lord, 
and puttith my sone Salomon vpon my 
3imule, and ledith hym into Gion. And 
anoynte hym there Sadoch, the preest, 
and Nathan, the prophete, into kyng 
-vpon Yrael ‘and Juda!; and 3e shulen 
synge with trompe, and seye, Lyue the 
35king Salomon! And 3e shulen stye vp 
after hym, and come to Jerusalem; and 
he shal sitte vpon my see, and he shal 
regne for me; and to hym I shal com- 
aunde, that he be duyk vpon Irael and 
ssupon Juda. And Banayas, the sone of 
Joiade, answerde to the kyng, seiynge, 
Amen; thus speke the Lord God of my 
3jlord the kyng. What maner wise the 
Lord was with my lord the kyng, so be 
he with Salomon, and heijer make he 
the see of hym fro the see of my lord 
3skyng Dauid. Thanne Sadoch, ‘the preest, 
wente doun, and Nathan, the prophete, 
and Banayas, the sone of Joyade, and 
Cerethi, and Pherethi; and putten Salo- 
mon vpon the mule of Dauid, the kyng, 
39and brou3ten hym into Gion. And Sa- 
doch, the preest, took an horn.of oyle fro 
the tabernacle, and anoyntide Salomon ; 
and thei sungen with the trompe; and 
al the puple seide, Lyne the kyng Salo- 
somon! And al the multitude steyede vp 
after hym, and the puple of men syng- 


III.- KINGS. 


161 


thi sone, schal regne after me, and he schal 
sitte on my trone for me, so Y schal do to 
dai. And Bersabee, witli the" cheer cast® 3: 
doun in to erthe?, worschipide the kyng, 
and .seide, My lord the! kyng Dauid lyue 
with outen endef. And kyng Dauid 32+ with outen 
seide, Clepe 3e Sadoch, the preest, to me, fn tat link 
and Nathan, the prophete, and. Banaie, eae Pie 
sone of Joiada. And whanne thei hadden “ere. ¢- 
entrid bifor the kyng, the kyng seide to33 
hem, Take with 3ou the seruauntis of 
3oure lord, and putte 3e my sone Salomon 
on’ my mule, and lede 3e hym in to Gyon. 
And Sadoch, the preest, and Nathan, the 34 
profete, anoyntet hym in to kyng on" 
Israel and Juda; and 3e schulen synge 
with a clarioun’, and 3e schulen seie, Lyue 
kyng Salomon! 3e schulen stie” aftir hym, 35 
and 3e schulen come to Jerusalem; and he 
schal sitte on* my trone, and he schal regne 
for me; and Y schal comaunde to hym, ° 
that he be duyk onY Israel and on’ Juda. 
And Banaie, sone® of Joiada, answeride 36 
to the kyng, and seide, Amen, ‘that is, so 
be it, ether® verili, ether feithfuli4 ; so 
speke the Lord God of my lord the kyng. 
As the Lord was with my lord the® kyng, 37 
so be he with Salomon, and make he the 
trone of Salomon heizere than the trone 
of my .lord thef kyng Dauid. Ther-38 
for? Sadoch, the preest, 3ede doun, and 
Nathan, the prophete, and Banaie, sone 
of Joiada, and Cerethi, and Ferethi; and 
thei puttiden Salomon on‘ the mule of 
Dauid, the kyng, and thei brou3ten hym 
in to Gion. And Sadoch, the preest, took 39 
an horn of oile of the tabernacle, and 
anoyntide Salomon; and thei sungen with 

a clarioun; and al the puple seide, Lyue 
kyng Salomon! And al the multitude 4o 
stiede* after hym, and the puple of men 
syngynge with pipis, and ‘of men! beynge 
glad with greet ioye, ‘stiede aftir hym™ ; 
and the erthe sownede of the cry of hem. 


10m. E prim. 
nhirr. © bowidi. Ptheerthe1, @Om.cr. "the sones. Supons. tanoynte thei1, upon 1. 
‘trumpe!. Wstieupi. *uponi. Yupont. 2Om.3. 4thesoner. | b it doon B. € Om. cs. 
“d The gloss omitted inci. © Om.1. fOm.1. & Thannes. the sone1. ‘upon 1d. k stiede up 1. 
1QOm,.1. ™ Om. 1. 
VOL. II. Y 


162 


ynge with trompis, and ‘of gladynge 
with™ greet ioye; and the erthe ‘with 
41 ynne" sownede of the crye of hem. For- 
sothe Adonyas herde, and alle that weren 
beden ‘to mete® of hym; and now the 
feest was eendid. But and Joab, the 
voys herd of the trompe, seith, What to 
hym wole the crye of the citee makynge 
a2noys ? 3it hym spekynge, Jonathan, the 
sone of Abiathar, the preest, cam; to 
whom seide Adonyas, Go yn, for a 
strong man thou ert, and good thingis 
43tellynge. And Jonathan answerde to 
Adonye, Nay; forsothe the lord oure 
kyng Dauid hath ordeyned Salomon 
askyng; and sente with hym Sadoch, the 
preest, and Nathan, the prophete, and 
Banayam, the sone of Joyade, and Cere- 
thi, and Pherethi; and putten hym vpon 
45the mule of the kyng. And Sadoch, the 
preest, and Nathan, the prophet, anoynt- 
iden hym kyng in Gion; and gladynge 
thei stieden thens, and the cite with 
ynne sownede; this is the voys that 3e 
4sherden. But and Salomon sitte vpon 
47the see of the rewme; and the ser- 
uauntis of the kyng goon yn, blessiden 
to oure lord kyng Dauid, seiynge, God 
more large the name of Salomon vpon 
thi name, and magnifie the trone of 
hym vpon thi trone. And kyng Dauid 
48honourde? in his bed; and ferthermore 
thes thingis spak4, Blessid the’ Lord God 
of Yrael, that 3af to day a sitter in my 
49see, seynge myn eyen. Thanne thei ben 
agaist, and alle risen, that weren bodyn 
‘to meete’ of Adonye, and echon 3eede 
s0into his weie. Forsothe Adonyas, dred- 
ynge Salomon, roos, and 3eed into the 
tabernacle of the Lord, and heelde the 
sthorn of the auter. And thei toolden to 
Salomon seyynge, Loo! Adonyas dredynge 
kyng Salomon, holdith' the horn of the 


m verne glad and maden B recens manus. 
4 spak, and the kyng seid B rec. m. * be a. 


II. KINGS. 


n Om. B rec. m. 
8 Om. E pr.m. 


I. 4151. 


Forsothe" Adonye herde, and alle that. 
weren clepid of hym to feeste®; and 
thanne the feeste was endid. But also 
Joab seide, whanne the vois of trumpe? 
was herd, What wole it’ to it silf the ery 
of the citeei1 makynge noise? 3it thet42 
while he spak, Jonathan, sone’ of Abia- 
thar, the preest, cam; to whom Adonye 
seide, Entre thou, for thou art a strong 
man, and tellynge goode thingis. And 43 
Jonathant answeride to Adonye, Nay; 
for oure lord the® kyng Dauid hath or- 
deyned Salomon kyng; and Danid sente’ 44 
with Salomon Sadoch, the preest, and Na- 
than, the prophete, and Banaie, sone of 
Joiada, and Cerethi, and Ferethi; and 
thei puttiden* Salomon onY the mule of 
the kyng. And Sadoch, the preest, and 45 
Nathan, the prophete, anoyntiden? hym 
kyng in Gion; and thei camen doun fro 
thennus beynge glad, and the citee sown- 
ede; this is the vois which* 3e herden. 
But also Salomon sittith on> the trone of 46 
rewme°; and the seruauntis of the kyng47 
entriden‘, and blessidenf oure lord thes 
kyng Dauid, and seiden, God make large 
the name of Salomon aboue thi name, and 
magnyfye" his trone aboue thi trone. And 
kyng Dauid worschipide in his bed; and 48 
ferthermore he spak these thingis, Blessid 
be the Lord God of Israel, that 3af* to 
dai a sittere in my trone, while myn ijen 
seen', Therfor alle, that weren clepid of49 
Adonye to feeste™, weren aferd, and ris- 
iden", and ech man 3ede in to his weie. 
Sothelio Adonye dredde Salomon, ands0 
roos?, and 3ede in to the tabernacle of the 
Lord, and helde4 the horn of the auter. 
And thei telden to Salomon, and seiden, 51 
Lo! Adonye dredith the kyng Salomon, 
and holdith’ the horn‘ of the auter, and 
seith, Kyng Salomon swere to me to dai, 
that he schal not sle his seruaunt bi" swerd. 


© Om. £ prim. 
t halt pcern. 


P smellede £ pr. m. 


nAndi. Othe feesterka. Pthetrampe kK. 9Om.asce.m. 92Om.s. 'Om.1. Sthesoner. * Jona- 


thas1. 4Om.1. Y hath sent1. ~¥ the sone r. 
buponi. ¢therewmer. 4 han entrid 1. 
lseynge it 1. ™the feeste 1xLP. 


Yr horn or cornert. She holdithr, + cornere 1. 


* han putt 1. 
f han blessid 1. 

0 risen E. resen up I. resen P. 
u with 1. 


Yuponr. #hananoyntid 1. 4 that 1. 
¢Om.1. bmake greetr. * hath jouer. 
oAndi. Proosup1. 4% he helde r. 


I. 52—II. 7. 


auter, seilynge, Swere to me to dai kyng 

Salomon, that he shal not sle his ser- 

. 52uaunt bi swerd. And Salomon seide, If 
he were a good man, there shal not falle 
forsothe an heere of hym in to the erthe; 
forsothe if yuel were foundun in hym, he 

s3shal die. Thanne kyng Salomon sente, 
and brou3te hym out fro the auter; and 
goon yn, he honourde king Salomon; 
and Salomon seide to hym, Go into thin 
hows. 


CAP .U: 


i Forsothe the days of Dauid nei3iden 
that he shulde die; and he comaundide 
2to Salomon, his sone, seiynge, Loo! I 
weende into the weye of al erthe; tak 
scoumfort, and be a strong man". And’ 
keep wel the waardis and the heestis of 
the Lord thi God, that thon goo in the 
weyes of hym, and kepe the cerymonyes 
of hym, and the heestis of hym, and 
domys, and witnessyngis, as it is writyn 
in the lawe of Moyses; that thou vndur- 
stonde al that thou dost, and whidir euer 
4thou turne thee. That the Lord conferme 
his wordis, ‘the whiche’’ the Lord spak 
of me, selynge, If thi sonys kepen my 
weyes”, and goon before me in treuth, 
and in al her hert, and in al her soule, 
there shal not be doon awey to thee a 
sman fro the kyngis seete* of Israel. For- 
sothe thou hast knowun what thingis’ 
Joab, the sone of Saruye, dide to me; 
what he dide to the? two princis of the 
oost of Irael, to Abner, the soue of Ner, 
and to Amasi, the sone of Gether, whom 
he slew3, and shadde the blood of the 
batayl in pees; and putte the blood of the 
batail in his girdyl, that was about his 
leendis, and in his shoo, that was in his 
éfeet. Thanne thou shalt do after thi 
wisdam, and thou shalt not brynge doun 
7the hoornes of hym pesibli to hellis. But 
and to the sones of Berzellay Galadite 


III. KINGS. 


163 


And Salomon seide, If he is a good man‘, 52 + if he is @ 


sotheli not oon’ heer of hym schal falle in 
to erthe ; but if yuel be foundun in hym, 


good man 3 not 


sekinge aftir. 
ward ymagy- 


nacionns, to 


he schal die. Therfor kyng Salomon sente, 53 pp the rewme. 


and ledde ‘hym out* fro the auter; and 
he entride, and worschipide kyng Salo- 
mon; and Salomon seide to hym, Go in 
to thin hows. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothe the daies of Dauid nei3iden, | 
that he schulde die; and he comaundide 
to Salomon, his sone, and seide, Lo! Ye 
entre in to the weie of al ertheY’; be thou 
coumfortid, and be thou a strong man. 
And kepe thou the kepyngis and heestis?3 
of thi Lord God, that thou go in hise 
weies, and kepe hise cerymonyes, and hise 
heestis, and hise domes, and witnessyngis, 
as it is writun in the lawe of Moises; 
that thou vndurstonde alle thingis whiche 
thou doist, and whidur euer thou schalt 
turne thee. That the Lord conferme hise4 
wordis, whiche the Lord spak of me, and 
seide, If thi sones kepen my weies, and 
goen bifor me in treuthe, in al her herte, 
and in al her soule, a man schal not be 
takun awei of thee fro the trone of Israel. 
Also thou knowist what thingis Joab,s 
the sone of Sarnye, dide* to me{; what 
thingis he dide to twey princis of the 
oost of Israel, to Abner, sone” of Ner, and 
to Amasa, sone” of Jether, whiche he 
killide, and schedde the blood of batel§ in 
pees; and puttide® the blood of batel in 
his girdil, that was aboute hise leendis, 
and in® his scho®, that was in hise feet. 
Therfor thou schalt do by thi wisdom, 6 
and thou schalt not lede forth his hoor- 
nesse pesibli to hellis||. But also thou7 
schalt 3elde grace to the sones of Bersellai 
of Galaad, and thei schulen be eetynge 


>Om.F. YOm. apn. ‘Wthatcpr.m. Whestese prem. Xciteea. Ythingz. 4 Om. a. 
Yani. Wtheerthe 1 *out Adonyer. Y erthe, éhat is, todeth1. % the heestis1. hath do I. 
bthesone 1. ¢he hath puttr. ¢4Om.1. © schoyngt. 


Y2 


here. c, 


t dide ta me; 
Rabi Salomon 
seith, that Joab 
schewide to 
othere men the 
priuy lettris of 
Danyth to sle 
Vrie. Lire 
her 


CC. 

§ the blood of 
batel ; that is, 
he schedde out 
in the tyme of 
pees mannus 
blood, that owith 
not to be sched 
out no but in 
batel. Lire 
here. C. 

\| 2o ellis ; 
Ebreys seyen, 
to a dich, ether 
sepulere, for 
Dauyth pur- 
poside not, that 
Joab schulde go 
doun to the 
helle of damp- 
ned men ; ther- 
for that was o 
cause whi Da- 
nyth wolde, that 
he were pu- 
nyschid here, 
lest he were 
punyschid in 
helle, as Rabi 
Salomon seith ; 
as it was seid 
of Achar in 
vii. c°. of Josue. 
Lire here. c. 


° 


164 


thou shalt 3eelde grace, and thei shulen 
be etynge in thi bord; forsothe thei 
camen ajen to me, whanne I flei3 fro the 
sface of Absolon, thi brother. And thou 
hast anentis thee Semei, the sone of Gera, 
the sone of Gemyny, of Bahurym, that 
curside to me bi the werst cursynge, 
whanne I wente to the defensable placys ; 
but for he cam doun to me into a3en 
comynge, whanne I shulde passe Jordan, 
and I swore to hym bi the Lord, seiynge, 
9I shal not sle thee bi swerd, thou wole 
not suffre hym to be harmles; forsothe 
a wise man thou art, and thou shalt 
knowe what thou shalt doo to hym, and 
thou shalt lede doun his hoor heeris with 
10blood to helle. Forsothe Dauyd slepte 
with his faders, and is biried in the citee 
liof Dauid. Forsothe the days, in the 
whiche Dauid regnede vpon Yrael, ben 
fourti 3eer; in Ebron he regnede seuen 
jeer, and in Jerusalem three and thretti. 
12Salomon forsothe sat vpon the troone of 
Dauid, his fader, and the rewme of hym 
13is fastned ful mych. And Adonyas, the 
sone of Agith, 3eede into Bersabe, the 
moder of Salomon; the which seide to 
hym, Whether pesible thin yncomynge? 
14 The which answerde, Pesible. And he 
addide, A word to me is to thee. To 
15whom she seith, Spek. And he, Thou, 
he seith, knewe® for the rewme was with 
me, and al Irael purposide to make me 
into a kyng to hym; but the rewme is 
translatid, and is maad of my brother; 
of the Lord forsothe it is ordeynd to 
ishym. Now thanne oon askyng Y preye 
of thee ; ne confounde thou my face. The 
17 Which seide to hym, Spek. And he seith, 
Y preye that thou seye to Salomon the 
kyng; forsothe ne to thee he may eny 
thing denye; that he 3yue to me Abi- 
issaag Sunamyte wijf. And Bersabe seith, 
Wel, Y shal speke for thee to the kyng. 


III. KINGS. 


II. 8——18. 


in thi boord; for thei metten me, whanne 
Y fledde fro the face of Absolon, thi bro- 
ther. Also thou hast anentis thee Semey, 
sonef of Gera, sonef of Gemyny, of Bahu- 
rym, which’ Semei curside me bi the 
worste cursyng, whanne Y 3ede to ‘the 
castels’; but fori he cam doun to me in to 
metyng*, whanne Y passide Jordan, and 
Y swoor to him bi the Lord, and seide, Y 
schal not slee thee bi! swerd, nyle thoug 
suffre hym to be vnpunyschid ; forsothe 
thou art a wise man, and thou schalt wite 
what thou schalt do to hym, and thou 
schalt lede forth hise hoor heeris with 
blood to hellis. Sotheli™ Dauid slepte io 
with hise fadris, and was biriede in the 
citee of Dauid. Forsothe® the daies, ini 
whiche Dauid regnede on® Israel, ben 
fourti 3eer; in Ebron he regned seuene 
3eer, inP Jerusalem‘ thre and thretti 3eer. 
Forsothe Salomon sat on%4 the trone of te 
Dauid, his fadir, and his rewme was maad 
stidfast greetli. And Adonye, sone" of 13 
Agith, entride to Bersabee, modir® of 
Salomon ; and sche seide to hym, Whether 
thin entryng is pesible? And he answer- 
ide, It is pesible. And he addide*, A word 14 
of me is to thee. ‘To whom" sche seide, 
Speke thou. And he seide, Thou knowist 15 
that’ the rewme was myn, and al Israel 
purposide to make me in to king to hem; 
but the rewme is translatid, and is maad 
iny brotheris ; for” of the Lord it is or- 
deyned to hym. Now therfor Y preye of 16 
the oon axyng; schende* thou not my 
face. And sche seide to hym, Speke thou. 
And he seide, Y preie, that thou seie to17 
Salomon the king; for he may not denye 
ony thing to thee; that he 3yue to’ me 
Abisag of Sunam wijf?. And Bersabee1s 
seide, Wel, Y schal speke for thee to the 
kyng. Therfor Bersabee cam to kyng*19 
Salomon, to speke to hym for Adonye ; 
and the kyng roos a3ens the comyng of 


a knowe 4. 
‘i t 
fthe sone 1. & the whichi. 5 defensable placis1. {for thii. k my metyngr. Jwithi. ™ And 1. 
nAndi. Suponi, Pandincr Israel x. G4 upon1. ‘tthe soner. § the modir1. ¢ addide to 1. 
wAndi. Vfor pc. W for whit *confounder. y Om.1. 2 to wijft. % the kyng 1. 


HI. 19¢—28. 


i9 Thanne Bersabe cam to kyng Salomon, 
that she speke to hym for Adonye; and 
the kyng roos into the’ a3encomynge of 
hire, and he® honourde hire, and he satte 
vpon his troone; and there is sett a 
troone to the moder of the kyng, the 
20 which sat at the ri3t side of hym. And 
sche seide to hym, Oon litil askynge I 
preye of thee; ne confounde thou my 
face. And the kyng seide to hire, Ask, 
moder myn; forsothe ne leeueful it is 
2ithat I turne awey thi face. The which 
seith, Abisaag Sunamyte be 3ouen to 
22 Adonye, thi brother, a wijf. And kyng 
Salomon answerde, and seide to his mo- 
der, Whi askist thou Abisaag Sunamyte 
to Adonye? Ask ‘to hymé and the kyng- 
dam; forsothe he is my brother more 
than I, and hath Abiathar, the preest, 
23and Joab, the sone of Saruye. And so 
kyng Salomon swore bi the Lord, sei- 
ynge, These thingis do to me God, and 
thes thingis adde, for az3ens his lijf Ado- 
24nye hath spoken this word. And now 
lyueth the Lord, that confermyde me, 
and sette me vpon the see of Dauid, my 
fader, and that made to me an hows, as 
he spak, for to day Adonye shal be 
2sslayn. And kyng Salomon sente bi the 
hoond of Banaye, the sone of Joiade ; 
26the which slew3 hym, and is deed. For- 
sothe the kyng seide to Abiathar, the 
preest, Go into Anathot, to thi feelde; 
and forsothe a man of deeth thou art; 
but to day I shal not sle thee, for thou 
bere the arke of the Lord God before 
Dauid, my fader, and thou susteynedist 
traueyle in alle thingis, in the whiche 
27traneilde my fader. Thanne Salomon 
made Abiathar, that he was not the? 
preest of the Lord, that the word of the 
Lord were fulfillid, the which he spak 
28 vpon the hows of Hely, in Silo. Forsothe 
there cam a messager to Salomon, that 


Ill. KINGS. 


165 


hir’, and worschipide hir, and ‘sat on his eaal) of 
unam ; sche 


trone ; and a trone was set to the modir of was wijf of Da- 
the kyng, and sche sat at his ri3t side. And a0 tha goon af 
sche seide to hym, Y preie of thee o litil ee ae 

axyng ; schende® thou not my face. And ae 

the kyng seide to hir, My modir, axe  belpofJoab and 
thou ; for® it is not leueful that Y turne of othere men 

awei thif face. And sche scide, Abisag 21 And Soman 
of Sunam{ be 3ouun wijf to Adonye, thi vee a 

brother. And kyng Salomon answeride, 22th” his modir, 
and seide to his modir, Whi axist thou nd answeride, 
Abisag of Sunam to Adonye? Axe thou The dire 
to hym also the rewme; foré he is ‘my eee 
gretter" brothir, and he hath Abiathar, }psithtocometo 
preest, and Joab, sone! of Saruye. Ther-23 ome spake 


perseyuede this, 
hy this he pur- 
his word azenus 


for kyng Salomon swoor bi the Lord, and _ 4is divs, for he 
* ‘ ‘ m: ede 
seide, God do to me these thingis, and ant tees 


adde these thinges*, for Adonie spak! this 37" Reeue 


word a3ens his lijf. And now the Lord 24 jdt asenus the 
lyueth, that confermede™ me, and hath 


3 to thi feeld ; 
spak, for Adonye schal be slayn to dai. shade lawlitcs 


e°. of Leuyticy. 

. Lire here. c. 

set me on" the trone of my fadir, and 
that is, to tl 

that hath maad to me an hows, as he vlncotepet i 

possessioun ; for 

And kyng Salomon sente bi the hond fas Ae eae 

. : 3 7 i welling 

Banaie, sone® of Joiada; which? Banaie in xxxv. ¢. of 


killidet Adonye, and he was deed. Also ar ae 
the kyng seide to Abiathar, preest', Go Pht 


§ in Silo ; that 
he schulde be 
cast out fro 
presthod, as in 
1. book ii. ¢° 
Lire here, 
Aaron was 
maad hiszeste 
prest bi Goddis 


thou in to Anatot, to thi feeld{; and‘ 
sotheli thou art a man of deeth, ‘that is, 
worthi thet deeth, for conspiryng azens 
me, and the ordynaunce of God, and of 
my fadir" ; but to dai Y schal not sle thee, 


for thou barist” the arke of the Lord God ea 

° . ° «7° 7.0 
bifor Dauid, my fadir, and thou suffridist  Exodi and in 
tranele in alle thingis, in whiche my fadir Sewer 


he hadde ii. 
sones, Eliazar 
and Ythamar, 
that dwelliden, 
whaune ii. 
othere weren 


trauelide. Therfor Salomon puttide out 27 
Abiathar, that he schulde not be preest’ 
of the Lord, that the word of the Lord 

were fillid*, whichY he spak on? the hows deed bifor the 
of Heli, in Silo§. Forsothe* a messager 2s yeni: ca 
cam to Salomon, that» Joab hadde bowid en en 
aftir Adonye, and that he hadde not _ presthod pass. 
bowid after Salomon. Therfor Joab fledde 


ide to Eleazar 
and hise sones, 
in to the tabernacle of the Lord, and took 


in xx. e°. of 
Numeri ; of 


bOm.£. ¢Om.ce. 4 forsothe E pr.m. ¢ Om. 4. 
bhis modirr. ¢hesatuponr. 4confounder. ¢forsothe1. fmyr1. 8 certist. myn eldir 1. 
Ithe sone1. kthingis tor. !hath spoker. ™ hath confermed 1. ™upon1. © the soner.  P and t. 
Gslew3e1. ‘the preestr. *Om. a. ttoEn. ‘Y that is, worthi of deth, for conspiring azens me and 


Dauid'my fadir t marg. _¥ hast bore 1. 
aAndr. > and seide that 1. 


w the preest A sec. m. 1. 


x fulfillid 1.  Y that 4. 


2 upon 4. 


166 


Joab was bowid doun after Adonye, and 
after Salomon hadde not bowid. Thanne 
Joab flei3 into the tabernacle of the Lord, 
29and cau3te the horn of the auter. And 
it is toold to kyng Salomon, that Joab 
hadde flowen into the tabernacle of the 
Lord, and was biside the auter ; and Sa- 
lomon sente Banaye, the sone of Joiade, 
30seiynge, Go, and sle hym. And Banaye 
cam to the tabernacle of the Lord, and 
seide to hym, Thes thingis seith the 
kyng, Go out. The which seith, I shal 
not goo out, but here I shal die. Ba- 
nayas toolde a3en to the kyng the word, 
seiynge, Thes thingis spak Joab, and thes 
sithingis answerde he to me. And the 
kyng seide to hym, Do as he spak, and 
sle hym, and birye; and thou shalt doo 
awey the innocent blood, that is shad of 
Joab, fro me, and fro the hows of my 
s2fader. And the Lord 3eelde vpon his 
heed the blood of hym, for he slew3 two 
ri3twise men betere than hym self, and 
he killide hem bi swerd, Dauid, my fa- 
der, vnknowynge, Abner, the sone of 
Ner, the prince of the chyualrie of Irael, 
and Amasam, the sone of Gether, prince 
s3o0f the oost of Juda. And the blood of 
hem shal turne ajen into the heed of Joab, 
and into the heed of the seed of him in 
to euermore; forsothe to Dauid, and to 
his seed, and to thef hows ‘of hym®, and 
to the troone of hym be pees of the Lord 
a4into withouten eende. And so Banaye, 
the sone of Joiade, steied vp, and wente 
to, and slew3 hym; and he is biryed in 
35his hows in desert. And the kyng or- 
deynede for hym Banaye, the sone of 
Joiade, vpon the oost; and Sadoch he 
36sette preest for Abiathar. Forsothe the 
kyng sente, and clepide Semei, and seide 
to hym, Bild vp to thee howsis in Jeru- 
salem, and dwel there, and thou shalt 
s7not goo out thens hidir and thider; for- 


f Om. cz. 


© the sone 1. 
m Om. 1. 
Joab 1. 
b for 1, 


4 Joab 1. ¢ hath spoke 1. 
n ynwiting if 1. © the sone. 


uthimi. VYthesoner. W upont. 


III. KINGS. 


§ Om. E pr.m. 


f Om. 1s. 
P Om. 1. 
«x Joab 1. 


II. 29-—37. 


the horn of the auter. And it was teld to29 ne a 
kyng Salomon, that Joab hadde fledde in n don, 


cam doun. So- 


theli Heli cam 
to the tabernacle of the Lord, and was — donn of Ytha- 
sie ae *s mar; and 
hisidis the auter ; and Salomon sente Whasne Hel 
Banaie, sone® of Joiada, and seide, Go  wasivge of the 


. puple, he took 
thou, and sle hym. And Banaie cam to the 30to him the 


tabernacle of the Lord, and seide to Joab, Pee 
The kyng seith these thingis, Go thou out. foes. wee 
And he’ seide, Yschal not go out,but Yschal him cam doun 
7 is Abiathar, 
die here. Banaie teldethe word to the kyng, — whom Salomon 
and seide, Joab spak thes thingis, and an- _ puttinge Sa- 
sweride these thingis tome. And the kyng31 noe are 
seide to Banaie, Do thou as he spake}, *%% & 


+ Do thou as he 


and sle thou hym, and birie him‘; and thou ps seiynge, 
ae 


castide out, in 


schalt remoue the innocent blood, that for he was 
drawun awey 
was® sched out of Joab, fro me, and fro violently fro 


the hows of my fadir. And the Lord 32,3)‘ ana 
3elde ont his! heed his blood, for he killide 3 ints 
twei iust men, and‘ betere than hym silf, Eee): Lire 
and he killide hem bi! swerd, while™ a 
Dauid, my fadir, ‘wiste not®, Abner, the 

sone of Ner, the prince of the chyualrie 

of Israel, and Amasa, sone® of Jether, the? 

prince of the oost of Juda. And the blood as 

of hem schal turne a3en in to the heed of 

Joab, and in to the heed of his seed with 

outen ende; forsothe’ pees be of the Lord 

til in to with outen ende to Dauid, and to 

his seed, and to the hous and trone of 

hym. Therfor Banaie, sone" of Joiada, 34 

stiede’, and asailide', and killide Joab"; 

and Joab was biried in his hows in de- 


seert{. And the kyng ordeynede Banaie, 35 1 Joab was 
sone’ of Joiada, on” the oost for hym*; Pee bese y 
and the kyng puttide’ Sadoch preest* for 3} “har ke 
Abiathar. Also the kyng sente, and cle- 36 made in desert 
pide Semey, and seide to hym, Bilde to pore men 
thee an hows in Jerusalem, and dvwelle Rie Aesen 
thou there, and thou schalt not go out fro re 
thennus* hidur and thidur; sotheli> in3i jan eee 
what euer dai thou goist out, and passist comin tall 
the stronde of Cedron, wite thou thee  synnes. Lire 
worthi to be slayn; thi blood schal be on gee 
thin heed. And Semei seide to the kyng, 3s 


h Om. aBrn. 


fist. 
q bunt 1. 


k Om.1. 
8 stiede up 1. 
z the preest 1. 


1 with 1. 
t asailide 
a Jerusalem 1. 


huponi. i Joabs 1. 
r the sone 1. 
Y putte 1. 


Il. 38—TIII. 1. 


sothe whateuere day thou were goon 
out, and passist ouer the streem of Ce- 
dron, wite thou thee to be slayn; thi 

38 blood shal be vpon thin heed. And Se- 
mei seide to the king, Good is the word 
of the kyng; as my lord kyng hath 

spokyn, so thi seruaunt shal doo. And so 
Semei dwellide in Jerusalem manye dais. 
39It is doon forsothe after three 3eer, that 
the seruauntis of Semei flowen to Achis, 
the sone of Macha, the kyng of Geth; 
and it is toold to Semei, that his ser- 
4ouauntis weren goon in to Geth. And 
Semei roos, and greithide his asse', and 
wente to Achis, into Geth, to his ser- 
uauntis to be sou3t; and he brou3te hem 
4,a3en fro Geth. It is toold forsothe to 
kyng Salomon, that Semei was goon to 
Geth fro Jerusalem, and was turned a3en. 
42 And sendynge he clepide hym, and seide 
to hym, Whether Y witnesside not to 
thee bi the Lord, and before seide to 
thee, What euer dai thou were goon out 
hidir and thidir, wite thou thee to be to 
43die; and thou answerdist to me, Good is 
the word that I herde? Whi thanne 
kepist* thou not the ooth of the Lord, 
and the heest that I comaundide to thee? 

44 And the kyng seide to Semei, Thou hast 
knowun al the yuel, of the which thin 
herte is gilti to thee, the which thou did- 

dist to Dauid, my fader; the Lord hath 
4530lden thi malice into thin heed. And 
kyng Salomon blisside ; and the troone of 
Dauid shal be stable before the Lord 
46vnto euermore. And so the kyng co- 
maundide to Banaye, the sone of Joiade ; 
the which stert to, smoot hym, and he is 
deed. ‘ 

CAP. III. 

1 Thanne the rewme is confermyd into 
the hoondis of Salomon; and bi affynyte 
he is joyned to Pharao, the kyng of 
Egipt; forsothe he took his dou3ter, and 


iI. KINGS. 


167 


The word of the kyng is good; as my 
lord the® kyng spak, so thi seruaunt schal 
do. Therfort Semey dwellide in Jeru- 
salem in® many daies. Forsothe’ it was39 
doon after thre 3eer, that the seruauntis 
of Semei fledden to Achis, sone® of Maa- 
cha, the" kyng of Geth; and it was teld 
to Semey, that hise seruauntis haddeni go 
in to Geth. And Semey roos*, and sadlide 40 
his asse, and 3ede to Achis, in to Geth, to 
seke hise seruauntis; and brou3te! hem 
a3en fro Geth. Forsothe™ it was teld to4) 
kyng Salomon, that Semey hadde go" to 
Geth fro Jerusalem, and hadde come ajen. 
And Salomon sente, and clepide hym, and 42 
seide to hym, Whether Y witnessede not 
to thee bi the Lord, and bifor seide to 
thee, In what euer dai thou schalt go out 
hidur and thidur, wite thou that thou 
schalt die; and thou answeridist to me, 
The word is good, which® Y herdeP? Whi43 
therfor keptist thou not the ooth of the 
Lord, and the comaundement’ which’ Y 
comaundide to thee? And the kyng seide 44 
to Semei, Thou knowist al the yuel, of 
which’ thin herte is gilti to thee', which 
yuel thou didist® to my fadir; the Lord 
hath 3olde thi malice in to thin heed. And 45 
kyng Salomon schal be blessid; and the 
trone of Dauid schal be stable bifor the 
Lord til in to with outen ende. Therfor 46 
the kyng comaundide’ to Banaie, sone’ of 
Joiada; and he assailide*, and smoot 
SemeyY, and he was deed. 


CAP. III. 

Therfor the rewme was confermyd in! 
to the hondis of Salomon ; and bi affynyte, 
‘ether aliaunce*, he was ioyned to Pharao, 
kyng of Egipt; for he* took’ the dou3ter 


iassis 4, keptist cr. 
cQOm.1 ¢@Andsor. ¢Om.1 f Butz. &thesoner bOm.1. iwerenr. Kroosupr. lhe 
brou3ter, ™ Andi. "goonout1. Othat1. Phaue herd of thee1. heesti. ‘"thatr. § the 
which 1, ¢tthiselff1. “hastdo1r. Ycomaunde a. Wthe sone 1s. *assailede Semey1. Y him 1. 
2Om.cr. ®Salomon1. » took fo nijf't. 


168 


brou3te into the cite of Dauid, to the 
tyme that he hadde fulfillid beeldynge 
his hows, and the hows of the Lord, 
and the wal of Jerusalem bi enuyroun. 
2 Neuerthelater the puple offride in hei3 
placis; forsothe the temple was not 
beildid to the name of the Lord vnto 
3that dai. Forsothe Salomon louede the 
Lord, goynge in the heestis of Dauid, 
his fader, out taak that in hei3 placis he 
offrede, and tende vp the maad encense. 
4And so Salomon wente into Gabaon, that 
he offre there; forsothe that was the 
moost hei3 place. Salomon offride a thou- 
sand oostis into brent sacrifice vpon that 
sauter in Gabaon. Forsothe the Lord 
aperide to Salomon bi! sleepe the™ ny3t, 
seiynge, Ask that thou wolt, that I 3yue 
gto thee. And Salomon seith, Thou didist 
with thi seruaunt, my fader Dauid, greet 
mercy, as he wente in thi si3t, in treuth 
and in ri3twisnes, and in rijt herte with 
thee; thou hast kept to hym thi greet 
merci, and hast 3euen to hym a sone, 
sittynge vpon his troone, as it is to dai. 
7 And now, Lord God, thou hast maad thi 
seruaunt to regne for Dauid, my fader; 
forsothe I am a litil child, and vnknow- 
ynge the goynge out and myn yncom- 
gynge. And thiseruaunt is in the mydil 
of the puple, whom thou hast chosun, of 
a puple with out eende, that may not be 
noumbred and gessid, for multitude. 
9 Thaune thou shalt 3yue to thi seruaunt 
an able herte to lore, that he may deme 
thi puple, aud knowe betwix good and 
yuel; forsothe who may deme this puple, 
10 thi puple thus myche ? Thanne the word 
pleside before the Lord, that Salomon 
nhadde askid siche a maner thing. And 
the Lord seide to Salomon, For thou 
askedist this word, and askidist not to 
thee mauye dais, ne ritchessis, othere” 


lin B rec. m. 


III. KINGS. 


m bi B rec. m. 


Ill. 2—t11. 


of Farao{, and brou3te® in to the citee of 
Dauid, til’ he ‘fillide bildynge® his hows, 
and the hows of the Lord, and the® wal 
of Jerusalem bi cumpas. Netheles the2 
puplef offride®. in hize places; for® the 
temple was not bildid to! the name of the 
Lord til in to that dai. Forsothe* Salo-3 
mon louyde the Lord, and 3ede in the 
comaundementis! of Dauid, his fadir, out 
takun that Salomon offride in hije placisf, 
and brente encense ‘é2 hi3e places™. Ther-4 
for® Salomon 3ede® in to Gabaon, to offre 
there; for? thilke4 was the moost hi3 
placej. Salomon offride on™ that auter 
in Gabaon a thousynde offryngis in to 
brent sacrifice. Sotheli the Lord apperides 
to Salomon bi sleep in the ny3t, and seide, 
Axe thou ‘that, that’ thou wolt, that Y 
3yuet to thee. And Salomon seide, Thous 
hast do greet merci with thi seruaunt Da- 
uid, my fadir, as he 3ede in thi si3t, in 
treuthe, and ri3tfulnesse®, and ri3tful’ herte 
with thee; thou hast kepte to hym thi 
greet merci, and hast 3ouun to hym a 
sone, sittynge on” his trone, as it is to 
dai. And now, Lord God, thou hast maad 7 
thi seruaunt to regne for Dauid, my fadir ; 
forsothe Y am a litil child, and not know- 
yhge myn outgoynge and entryng’. Andg 
thi seruaunt is in the myddis of the pu- 
ple, which thou hast chose, of puple with 
outen noumbre, that may not be noumbrid 
and rikened, for multitude. ‘Therfor thous 
schalt 3yue to thi seruaunt an herte able 
to be tau3t, ‘that is, liz3tned of thee’, that 
he may deme thet puple, and iuge" bitwixe 
good and yuel; for who may deme this 
puple, thi puple, this’ miche puple||? 


+ the dou3ter 

of Farao; Sa- 
lomon synnede 
not in this, for 
this womman 
forsook hethen- 
esse, and was 
conuertid to 
the feith of 

0 veri God. 
Lire here. c. 


t offride in hize 
places; this 
was leueful 
thanne, nethe- 
les it was lesse 
good than to 
offre in the 
place, where 
the arke of God 
was. Bifor the 
bilding of the 
temple, whanne 
the arke hadde 
not stable abid- 
ing, it was 
leueful to offre 
in othere places 
than bifor the 
arke ; but aftir 
the bilding of 
the temple, this 
was not leue- 
ful, no but [bi] 
special stiring 
of God, as Elie 
dide, in 111.bo0ok 
of Kingis, xviii. 
c°. Lire here. c. 
§ hize place ; 
not in greet- 
nesse of erthe, 
but of reue- 
rence and 
onour ; for the 
tabernacle and 
the auter of 
brent sacrifice, 
whiche Moyses 
made, weren 
there; in 1. book 
of Paral. xxi. 
c°. Lire here. c. 


|| this myche 


Therfor the word pleside bifore the Lord, 10 jechagessl o 


that Salomon” hadde axid sich a thing. 


And the Lord seide to Salomon, For thou 


axidist this word, and axidist not to thee 
many daies, nether richessis, nether the 


0 neither B rec. m. 


¢ brou3te hir 1. 4 til that 1. € bildynge hadde fulfillid 1. ¢¢ Om. s. f puple of the citee K. 
§ offride 3itk. 'forsothe1. jini. & Sothely1. ‘Jheestis1. ™Om.1. "Andso1. © wente1. 
Peertist, that ern. 'uponi. ‘what that £. that what L. t3yuei1. Uriztwisnesser. Vin 
riztful 1. "upon. "myn yncomyngi. §Om.1. ‘thir. "'discryuer. Vthuss. Whe 1. 


li3tnyng. Lire 
here. c. 


I. 12—22. 


the® lyues of thin enemyes, but thou 
askedist to thee wisdam to knowe doom, 
12loo! I haue doon to thee after thi wordis, 
and 3euen to thee a wise herte and an 
vndurstondynge, in so myche that noon 
before thee were? lijk thee, ne aftir thee 
isben to ryse. But and4 thes thingis, ‘the 
whiche’ thou askydist not, I hane 3euen 
to thee, that is, ritchessis, and glorie, that 
noon were lijk to thee in kyngis alle 
dais after. Forsothe if thou gost in my 
weies, and kepist, myn heestis, and my 
comaundementis", as wente thi fader, long 
15I shal make thi dais. Thanne Salomon 
wook vp, and vndurstood that it was a 
sweven. And whanne he was comen to 
Jerusalem, he stood before the arke of 
the boond of pees of the Lord, and offride 
brent sacrifices, and made slayn pesible 
sacrifices, and a greet feste to alle his 
ig seruauntis. Thanne camen two wymmen 
strompettis to the kyng, and stoden be- 
izfore hym; of the whiche oon seith, I 
biseche, my lord, I and this womman 
dwelliden in oon hows, and J bare child’ 
iganentis hire in the bed. The thridde for- 
sothe day after that I bare, baret and” 
this; and we’ weren togidir, and noon 
othere in the hows with vs, out takun vs 
ig9two. Forsothe the sone of this wominan 
is deed to ny3t, for slepynge she ouerlaye 
2ohym; and risynge with silence of the 
vukouenable ni3t, she took my sone fro 
myn syde, of thin hond womman slep- 
inge, and leide it in hir bosum; hir sone 
forsothe, that was deed, she put in to my 
21bosum. And whan I was risyn eerli, for 
to 3yue milk to my sone, lie seniyde deed ; 
whom bisier” lokinge bi the cleer li;t, I 
perseyuede not be myn, whom Y gat. 
22 The tother womman answerde, It is not 
so as thon seist, but thi sone is deed; 


q Om. nu. 
a and she 4. 


°Om. F.  P was B rec. m. 
t bare child B rec. m. 


x aftir 1. 
4 sacrifice 1. 
and: ™ that 1. 
Sandi. ¢ putte x. 


VOL. II. 


Yan vndirstondynge 1. 2 Om. c. 
e€he made. f strumpetis 1. 
o Andi. © ouerlay 1. 


III. KINGS. 


F that c. 
vY 2B rec. m. 


a myn heestis 1. 
& the whiche 1. 
P roos up 1. 

4 diligentli a. more diligently 1. 


169 


lyues of thin enemyes, but thou axidist to 
thee wisdom to deme doom, lo! Y hane1e2 
do to thee vpe* thi wordis, and Y hane 
3oue to thee a wyse herte aud vndirstond- 
ynge’, in so myche that no mant bifor 
thee was lijk thee”, nether schal rise aftir 
thee. But also Y haue 3o0ue to thee these 13 
thingis, whiche thou axidist not, that is, 
richessis, and glorie, that no man be lijk 
thee in kyngis in alle tymes aftirward. 
Forsothe if thou goist in my weies, and 14 
kepist my biddyngis and comaundementis*, 
as thi fadir 3ede>, Y schal make thi daies 
long. Therfor Salomon wakide, and vn-15 
dirstood*{ what the sweuen was, And 
whanne he hadde come to Jerusalem, he 
stood bifor the arke of boond of pees of 
the Lord, and he offride brent sacrifices‘, 
and made® pesible sacrifices, and a greet 
feeste to alle hise meynees. Thanne twei 16 
wymimen hoorisf camen to the kyng, and 
stoden bifor hym; of whiche® oon seide, 17 
My lord, Y biseclie, Y and this womman 
dwelliden in oon" hows, and Y childide at 
hir in a couche. Sotheli' in the thridde 1s 
dai aftir that Y childide*, also! this wom- 
man childide; and we weren togidere in 
the hows, and noon other was with vs in 
the™ hows, outakun vs tweyne. Forsothe" 19 
the sone of this womman was deed in the 
ny3t, for sche slepte, and oppresside® 
hym; and sche roos? in the fourthe part 20 
of the ny3t in silence, and took! my sone 
fro the side of me, thin handmaide slep- 
ynge, and settide’ in hir bosum; forsothe® 
sche puttidet in my bosuin hir sone, that 
was deed. And whanne Y hadde ryse21 
eerli, to 3yue mylk to my sone, he ap- 
peride deed ; whom Y bihelde diligentlier" 
bi cleer 1i3t, and Y perseyuede, that he 
was not myn, whom Y hadde gendrid. 
The tother womman answeride, It is not22 


'r maundementis £. 8 Om, £ pr.m. a child yu. 


W bisilyer scern. 


b sede in hem1. © he vndirstood 1. 
hanx iAndz. * had childid1. ! also 
asche took 1. * sche leide it 1. sette Ev. 


Zz 


+ that no man; 
this is vndur- 
stondun, in 
comparisoun of 
kingis that 
weren bifor 
him and aftir, 
for bothe Adam 
maad in the 
fulnesse of knn- 
ning in iii. ¢°. 
of Genesis, and 
Moises that 
spak to God, 
face to face, 

in xxxill. c°. of 
Exodi, weren 
wisere than 
Salomon, and 
the postlis 
weren more 
listned, than 
ony othere in 
the elde testa- 
ment. in kingis ; 
this schal be 
vndurstondun 
in these thre to 
gidere, that is, 
wisdom, glorie, 
and riches, for 
grete Alisaun- 
dre and em- 
perours of 
Rome, weren 
my3tiere and 
gloriousere 
than Salomon, 
and summe 
weren richere, 
as Octouyan, 
netheles thei 
failiden in wis- 
dom, in which 
they weren not 
liyk Salomon. 
Lire here. c. 

t vndurstood, 
ete. ; therfor it 
was propirly 

a reuelacioun 
of God which 
is maad ofte in 
sleep. Lire 
here. C. 


170 


forsothe myn lyneth. And ajenward 
she seide, Thou lie3st; forsothe my sone 
lyueth, and thi sone is deed. And so in 
this maner thei stryuen before the kyng. 
23 Thanne the kyng seith, This seith, My 
sone lyueth, and thi sone is deed; and 
she answerde, Nay, but thi sone is deed ; 
24.‘myn forsothe* lyueth. Thanne the kyng 
seide, Bryngith to me a swerd. And 
whanne thei hadden brou3t a swerd be- 
2sfore the kyng, Deuydith, he seith, the 
quyk child in two parties, and 3yueth the 
half part to the toon, and the half part’ 
zeto the tothir. Forsothe? the womman, 
whos was the quyk child, seith to the 
kyng; for the bowels of her ben stiryd 
vpon hire sone; Lord, I biseche, 3ife* to 
hir the quyk child, and wolith not sle 
hym. Ajenward she seide, Ne to me, ne 
27 to thee be he, but be he deuydide. The 
kyng answerde, and seith, 3yueth to this 
womman? the quik child, and be he not 
28slayn; forsothe this is his modir. And 
so al Yrael herde the dome, that he hadde 
demyde; and thei dradden the kyng, se- 
ynge the wisdam of God to ben in hym, 
‘to do® doom. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Forsothe kyng Salomon was regnynge 
2vpon al Yrael. And thes ben the princis 
that he hadde; Azarias, the sone of Sa- 
3 doch, the preest; Elyoreb, and Ahia, sones 
of Sila, scribe; Josaphat, the sone of 
4 Achilnd, chaunselere ; Banayas, the sone 
of Joiade, vpon the oost ; forsothe Sadoch 
sand Abiathar, preestis; Azarias, the sone 
of Nathan, vpon hem that stoden ny3 to 
the kyng; Zabul, the sone of Nathan, a 
6 preest, freend of the kyng; Ahiazar, pro- 
uost of the hows; and Adonyrain, the 
zsone of Adda, vpon the tributis. For- 


x and myn B rec. m. Y partie £ 
this B rec. m. 

Vand 1. Ww myn i, 
bOm.1. ¢ Andt. 
Salomon sothly 1 
4 the sone 1. 


4 the child 1. 
k upon 1, 
¥ prince upon 1. 


I the sone 1. 
$ and 1. 


IH. KINGS. 


z But B rec. m. 


* streuen EIL. streuyn P. 
¢ Om. EILP. 
™m the preest 1. 
‘ the sone 1. 


Ill. 23—IV. 7. 


so as thou seist, but thi sone is deed; for- 
sothe’ ‘my sone” lyueth. A3enward sche 
seide, Thou liest ; for my sone lyueth, and 
thi sone is deed. And bi this maner thei 
stryueden* bifore the kyng. Thanne the23 
kyng seide, This womman seith, My sone 
lyueth, and thi sone is deed; and this 
womman answerith, Nay, but thi sone is 
deed ; forsotheY my sone lyueth. Therfor 24 
the kyng seide, Brynge 3e to me a swerd. 
And whanne thei hadden brou3t a swerd 
bifor the kyng, he seide, Departe 3e the 2s 
quyk 30ng child in to’ twei partis, and 
3yue 3e the half part to oon*, and the? 
half part to the tother. Forsothe® the26 
womman, whos sone was quik, seide to 
the kyng; for her entrailis weren monyd 
on hir sone; Lord, Y biseche, 3yue 3e to 
hir the quik child, and nyle 3e sle hym. 
Ajenward sche seide, Be he* nethir to me, 
nether® to thee, but be he departid. The27 
kyng answeride, and seide, 3yue 3e to this 
womman the 3ong child quyk, and be he 
not slayn; forsothe' this is ‘his modir$. 
Therfor al Israel herde the doom, which" 2s 
the kyng hadde demyd ; and thei dredden 
the kyng, and sien, that the wisdom of 
God} was in hym, to make doom. 


CAP. IV. 


‘Forsothe kyng Salomon was regnynge} 
on* al Israel. And these weren the princes 2 
which he hadde; Azarie, sone! of Sadoch, 
preest™{; Helioreb, and Haia, sones" of3 
Sila, ‘weren scryueyns®; Josophat, soneP 
of Achilud, was chaunseler; Banaie, sone’ 4 
of Joiada, was on™ the oost; forsothes Sa- 
doch and Abiathar§ weren preestis; Azarie, 5 
sone! of Nathan, was on™ hem that stoden 
ni3 the kyng; Zabul, the sone of Nathan, 
was preest, ‘that is, greet and worschip- 
Jul’, a freend of the kyng; and Ahiasar6é 
was stiward of the hows; and Adonyram, 

¢ for 


@3euyth scerH. » Om. BCEFH. 


z2 Om. 1. athe toon 1. the oon k. 
& the modir of him1. bthatr. i Kyng 
nthesoner. °%the writer1. P the sone 1. 
vuponi. VY Om. 1. 


Yand 1. 
f for 1. 


+ wisdom of 
God; that is, 
3ouun to him 
of God; was in 
him; aboue the 
maner of othere 
men, and ther- 
for they dred- 
den him, more 
than bifore. 
Lire here. c. 

+ prest; in 
Ebreu it is, 
was undur his 
Jadir, that was 
the hizeste 
prest. Lire 
here. Cc. 

§ and Abia- 
thar ; Salomon 
clepide him 
ajen in to the 
temple, that he 
schulde lyue of 
the auter, ne- 
theles not to 
the hijeste 
presthod. Lire 
here. ¢C. 


IV. 8—22. 


sothe Salomon hadde twelue ouerseers 
vpon al Yrael, that 3euen corn to the 


kyng, and to his hows; forsothe bi the 


monethis arowe in the 3eer, thei arowe 
smynystreden necessarijs. And thes the 
names of hem; Benhur, in the mount of 
9 Effraym; Bendekar, in Mactes, and in 
Salebbym, and in Bethsames, and in He- 
10lon, and in Bethanan; Benesech, and in 
Araboth; of hym forsothe was Socco, 
iland al the loond of Eefer; Benabidanab, 
of whom al Neptad; Dorthafaed, the4 
dou3ter of Salomon, he hadde to® wijf. 
12 Bena, the sone of Achilud, gouernede 
Thaneth, Amageddo, and al Bethsan, that 
is beside Sarthana, vndur Jezmel, fro 
Bethsan vnto Abelmeula, ‘forn a3ens‘ Sel- 
i3maan. Bengaber in Ramoth Galaad hadde 
Anothiair, of the sone of Manasse, in Ga- 
laad ; he gouernede in al the regioun of 
Argob, that is in Basan, to sexti greet 
_ citees and wallid, that hadden brasen 
14lockis. Achymadab, the sone of Addo, 
15 rewlide in Manahym; Achymaas, in Nep- 
talym, but and he hadde Bachsemath, the 
isdou;ter of Salomon, in mariage; Bena, 
the sone of Husi, in Aser, and in Balod ; 
17Josaphat, the sone of Pharue, in® Ysa- 
ischar; Semei, the sone of Hela, in Benia- 
19myn; Gaber, the sone of Sury, in the 
loond of Galaad, and in the loond of 
Seon, kyng of Amorrey, and of Og, the 
kyng of Basan, vpon alle thingis® that 
20weren in that loond. 
ben vnnoumbrable, as the grauel of the 
see in multitude, etynge, and drynkynge, 
2iand gladynge. Forsothe Salomon was in 
his power, hauynge alle the rewmes, as 
fro the flood of the loond of Philisteis 
vnto the eende of Egipt, of men offryng 
to hym 3iftis, and of seruynge to hym 
egalle the days of his lijf. Forsothe the 
meet of Salomon was bi eche day, thretti 
choris of tried flonre, and sexti choris of 


€4 Om. 8, ¢ Om. BEFH. 


wthesonez *uponi. YOm.1. 
dandr. ©& the dou3ter of Salonion 1. 
Ithe sone 1. ™ the dou3tir 1. ® the sone 1. 
sone ‘Om.1. Uandupons. VY the rewmes 1. 


Juda and Yrael — 


f fro the regioun of E pr. m. 


Z maistris 1. 
f the sone I. 
° Om. I. 
W vito 1. 


Ul. KINGS: 171 


sone” of Adda, was on* the tributis. For-7 
sothe Salomon hadde twelue ‘prefeetis, 
ether’ cheef minystrys*, on® al Israel, 
that® 3auen lijflode to the kyng, and to 
his hows; sotheli bi ech monethe bi it 
silf in the 3eer, ech prefect® bi hyin silf 
mynystride necessaries. And these bens 
the names of hem; Benhur, in the hil of 
Effraym ; Bendechar, in Macces, and ing 
Salebbym, and in Bethsames, and in He- 
lon, and in Bethanan; Beneseth, in Ara-10 
both ; forsothe’ Socco, and al the lond of 
Epher was his; Benabidanab, whos was 11 
al Neptad, hadde Dortaphaed, ‘Solomons 
dou3ter®, to wijf. Bena, sonef of Achilud, 12 
gouernyde Thaneth, and M ageddo, and al 
Bethsan, which is bisidis Sarthana, vndur 
Jezrael, fro Bethsan ‘til to" Abelmeula, 
euene a3ens Zelinaan. Bengaber in Ra-is 
moth of Galaad hadde Anothiair, of the 
sone of Manasses, in Galaad; he was 
souereyn in al the cuntrey of Argob, 
whichi is in Basan, to sixti greet citees 
and wallid, that* hadden brasun lockis. 
Achymadab, sone! of Addo, was souereyn 14 
in Manaym; Achymaas was in Neptalym, 15 
but also he hadde Bachsemath, don3ter™ 
of Salomon, in wedloc; Banaa, sone® of i¢ 
Husy, was° in Aser, and in Balod; Jose-17 
phat, sone? of Pharue, was in Ysachar ; 
Semey, sone‘ of Hela, wast in Beniamyn 318 
Gaber, sone’ of Sury, was‘ in the lond of19 
Galaad, and in the lond of Seon, kyng of 
Amorrey, and of Og, kyng of Basan, on” 
alle thingis, that weren in that lond. Juda 20 
and Israel weren vnnoumbrable, as the 
soond of the see in multitude, etynge, 
and drynkynge, and beynge glad. For-21 
sothe Solomon was in his lordschip, and 
hadde alle rewmes’, as fro the flood of 
the lond of Filisteis ‘til to” the laste 
part of Egipt, of men offrynge 3iftist to + sists; tac 
hym, and seruynge to hym, in alle the ye &, 
daies of his lijf. Forsothe the mete of22 


gandina. 54 Om. g pr.m. 


¢ cheef maister 1. 
k the whiche 1. 
rQm.1.  § the 


b the whiche 1. 
hyntor ‘ithatr. 
q the sone 1. 


® upon I. 
& that 1. 
P the sone I. 


Zz 


172 


23meele, ten fatte oxen, twenti ‘lesewed 
oxen’, and an hundrid wetheris, ‘out 
taak* huntynge of hertis, and of goot, 
2tand of buglis, and of fed foulis. For- 
sothe he helde al the regioun that was 
bejonde the flood, as fro Capsa vnto 
Gasan, and alle the kingis of that re- 
gioun; and he hadde pees on al side in 
genuyroun. And Juda dwellide and! 
Yrael with outen eny drede, echon vndur 
his vyn, and vndur his fiyg tree, fro Dan 
vnto Bersabee, alle the dais of Salomon. 
26And Salomon hadde fourti thousand 
cratchis of chaare hors, and twelue thou- 
sand of ridynge hors; and the forseid 
ouerseers of the kyng norisheden hem. 
27But and the necessarijs of kyng Salo- 
mon™ bord thei 3auen with greet bisynes 
28in her® tyme; forsothe barli, and chaf of 
hors, and of beestis thei brou3ten into 
the place, where the kyng was, aftir the 
29settynge to hem. Forsothe God jaf 
wisdam to Salomon, and myche pru- 
dence ful greetli, and laargenesse of herte, 
as grauel that is in the brenk of the see. 
30 And the wisdam of Salomon wente be- 
fore the wisdam of alle the eest men, and 
310f Egipciens®; and he was wiser than 
alle men; wiser than Ethan Esrayte, 
and than Eman, and than Cacal, and 
than Dorda, the sones of Maol; and he 
was nemned in alle the? gentylis bi 
szenuyroun. And Salomon spak thre 
thousand parablis, and the ditees of hym 
33 weren fyue thousand; and he disputide 
vypon the?? trees, froi the cedar that is 
in Liban, vnto the ysoop that goth out 
of the wal ; and he tretyde of the beestis, 
and foulis, and of crepynge beestis, and 
310f fisshis. And there camen of alle pu- 
plis to the wysdam of Salomon to be 
herde, and of alle kyngis of erthe’, the 
whiche herden the wisdam of hym. 


i foddrid scheep 4 pr.m. BCUFH. 


III. KINGS. 


k without B rec. m. 


IV. 23-——34. 


Salomon was bi ech day, thritti chorus* of * Chorus coun. 
teyneth thretti 


clene flour of whete, and sixti chorus of _ buschelis. Lire 
mele, ten fatte oxis*, and twenti oxis* of 23 peta i 
leseweY, and an hundrid wetheris, ou- 
takun huntyng of hertys, of geet, and of 
buglis, and of briddis maad fat. For he 2s 
helde al the cuntrei that was biz3ende the 

flood, as fro Caphsa ‘til to? Gasa, and alle 

the kyngis of tho* cuntreis ; and he hadde 

pees bi ech part in cumpas. And Judazs 
and Israel dwelliden withouten ony drede, 

ech man vndur his vyne, and vndur his 

fige tree, fro Dan ‘til to” Bersabe, in alle 

the daies of Salomon. And Salomonee 


hadde fourty thousynd ecratchis{ of horsis + bi Ebreysa 


cracche istakun 


for charis, and twelue thousynde of roode® _ here for a place 
F . ‘od departid for ech 
horsis; and the forseid prefectis* nur- hors bi him silf, 


shiden tho horsis. But also with greet 27%?" © 


bisynesse thei j3auen necessaries to the 

boord of kyng Salomon in her tyme ; also 28 

thei brou3ten barli, and forage of horsis 

and werk® beestis, in to the place where 

the king was, ‘bi ordenauncef to hem. 

Also God 3af to Salomon wisdom, and 29 
prudence ful inyche, and largenesset of 

herte, as the soond whieh" is in the mi ne greet 
brenke of the see. And the wisdom of30yoship Lire 
Solomon passide the wisdom of alle eest 

men, and Egipcians; and he was wisere31 

than alle men ; he’ was wisere than Ethan 

Esraite, and than Eman, and than Cacal, 

and than Dorda, the sones of Maol; and 

he was named! among alle folkis bi cum- 

pas. And Salomon spak thre thousynde 32 

parablis, and hise songis weren fyue thou- 

synde||; and he disputide of trees fro a 33 |) fyue thou- 
cedre which" is in the? Lyban, ‘til toP iea/itts a 
the ysope that goith out of the wal; he ‘ousindeand 
disputide of werk beestis, and _briddis, 

and crepynge’ beestis, and fischis". And 34 

thei camen fro alle puplis to here the 

wisdom of Salomon, and fro alle kyngis* 

of erthe, that herden his wisdom. 


t largenesse of 


lin arH, ™Salomonys cen. \% his E pr.m. 


© the Egipciens pceru. POm.u. PP Om.c. dofs. the erthe £ pr.v. 

Xoxeu rt. Ythe lesewer. Zvntor. &the a pr.m.cEGLMpgRsubs. bvnto1. © rode D. rood Pp. 
reed n. reede mb. reade q. rede F pr.m. w. 4 cheef maistris of the kyng 1. ¢ of werk 1.  f aftir that 
it was ordeyned 1. 4thatr. jiandhepxkux. * Salomont. Jlosidi. ™that1, © Om, exunosbe. 


Pvynto1. Gofcrepynger. T° of fischis 1. 


8S men I. 


t the kyngis 1. 


CAP. NY, 


1 Forsothe Iram, the kyng of Tiry, 
sente his seruauntis to Salomon; for- 
sothe he herde that men hadden anoynt- 
id hym kyng for his fader; for Yram 

2was freend’ of Dauid al tyme. Forsothe 
and Salomon sente to Yram, sciynge, 

3Thou wost the wil of my fader Dauidt, 
and for he my3te not bilde vp an hows 
to the name of his God, for the batailis 
oncomynge bi enuyroun, to the tyme 
that the Lord 3af hem vndur the step of 
4his feet. Forsothe now the Lord my 
God hath 3ouen rest to me bi enuyroun, 
and there is not Sathan, ne yuel a3en- 
scomynge; for what thing I thenke to 
beeld a temple to the name of the Lord 
my God, as God spak to my fader, sei- 
ynge, Thi sone, whom J shal 3yue to thee 
for thee vpon thi seete, he shal beelde to 
6my name an hows. Thanne comaund, 
that thei hewen to me cedrys of Liban; 
and my seruauntis ben with thi ser- 
uauntis ; forsothe the mede of thi ser- 
uauntis I shal 3yue to thee, what ener 
thou askist"; forsothe thou wost that 
there is not in my puple a man, that 
7kan hewe trees, as’ Sidonys*”. Whanne 
thanne Iram hadde herd the wordis of 
Salomon, he gladide greetli, and seith, 
. Blessid be* the Lord God to day, that 
3af to Dauid a moost wise sone vpon this 
smycheY puple. And Yram sente to Sa- 
lomon, seiynge, I haue herd alle thingis 
that thou sentist to me; I shal doo al 
thi wil, in cedre trees, and in firris. 

9 My sernauntis shulen doo hem down fro 
the wode to the see, and ¥ shal‘ make 
hem togidre in shippis in the see, vnto 
the place the which thou shalt signyfye 
to me; and I shal leye hem to thee, 
that thou take hem ; and thou shalt 3yue 
necessaryes to me, that meete be 3ouen 


Sthe freend ce. ¢ Om. £ pr.m. Uaske BCEFH. 


mychel ceH. 

v Israel 1. w And t. 
d Om. 1. 
m beeche 1. "ther. 
t cedre trees 1. 


u the kyng 1. 
buponi ¢andt. 
k thing 1. l hast sent 1. 
F necessaries. ® And sor. 


III. KINGS. 


x his batels 1. 
€ men of Sydonye 1. 


173 


CAs. 


Also Hiram, kyng" of Tire, sente hise) 
seruauntis to Salomon ; for he herde that 
thei’ hadden anoyntide hym kyng for his 
fadir ; for Hiram was frend of Dauid in al 
time. Sotheli¥ also Salomon sente toe 
Hiram, and seide, Thou knowist the wille3 
of Dauid, my fadir, and for he mi3te not 
bilde an hows to the name of his God, for 
batels* nei3ynge bi cumpas, til the Lord 
3af hem vndur the step of hise fect. Nowy 
forsothe? ny Lord God 3af* reste to me 
bi cumpas, and noon aduersarie is, nethir 
yuel asailyng; wherfor Y thenke tos 
buylde a temple to the name of my Lord 
God, as God spak to Dauid, my fadir, and 
seide, Thi sone, whom Y schal 3yue to 
thee for thee on? thi trone, he schal bilde 
an hows tomy name. Therfor comaundes 
thou, that ¢i seruauntis hewe doun to me 
cedris of the Liban; and my seruauntis 
be with thi seruauntis; sotheli¢ Y schal 
3yue to thee the meede of thi seruauntis, 
what euere mcede* thou schalt axe; for 
thou woost, that in my puple is not a man 
that kan hewe trees, as Sidonyes® kunnen’, 
Therfor whanne Hiram hadde herde the7 
wordis of Salomon, he was ful glad, and 
seide, Blessid be the Lord God to dai, 
that 3af€ to Dauid a sone moost wijs on‘ 
this puple ful inyche. And Hiram sentes 
to Salomon, and seide, Y haue herde what f 
euer thingis* thou sentist! to me; Y schal 
do al thi wille, in trees of cedres, and of 


beechis™t. My seruauntis schulen putteg t of deeckis; 
i. Ebreys seyn, int 
doun tho" trees fro the Liban® to the see, trees of box, 
os oom where oure 
and Y schal araye tho trees in schippis  ¢ansiacioun 


in the see, ‘til to? the place which? thou  bahofberchis. 


schalt signyfie to me; and Y schal dresse 
tho there, that thou take tho; and thou 
schalt 3yue necessaries’ to me, that mete 
be 30uun to myn hows. Therfors Hiram io 
3af to Salomon ‘trees of cedres*, and ‘trees 
x Om. cerH. Y mychil p. 


vof a. W Sidoyns 4. 


zOm.1.  ® hath jouen 1. 
hther iupont. 
4 that 1. where L. 


y But now 1. 
fOm.1. §& hath jouer. 
© fil of Liban 1. P vito 1. 


174 


1oto myn hows. And so Yram jaf to 
Salomon cedre trees and firre trees, after 
lial the wil of hym; forsothe Salomon 3af 
to Yram twenti thousand choris of whete 
into mete to his hows, and twenti choris 
of moost pure oyle; thes thingis Salo- 
izmon 3af to Yram bi ech 3eer. And the 
Lord 3af wisdam to Salomon, as he. spak 
to hym; and there was betwix Iram and 
Salomon pees, and bothe smyten cone- 
isnant of pees. And king Salomon chees 
werkmen of alY Israel ; and? the moustre 
14 was thretti thousandis of men. And he 
sente hem into the wode, ten thousand? 
bi eche moneth whilmele, so that two 
monethis whilmele thei weren in her 
howsis; and Adonyram was vpon siche 
isa maner gedrynge of men. And so to 
Salomon weren seuenti thousandis of hem, 
that beren birthens, and ei3ti thousandis 
1s6of masouns in the hyl, with outen the 
prouostis, that reuliden® to alle the 
werkis, in noumbre of thre thousand and 
thre hundrid, comaundinge to the puple, 
izand to hem that dyden werke®. And 
the kyng comaundide, that thei shulden 
take the greet stoonus, and the precious 
stoonus, in to the foundement of the 
temple, and thei shulden square hem ; 
18the whiche the masouns of Salomon, and 
the masouns of Yram, han ouerscorchide’. 
Forsothe the cyteseynys of Biblis maden 
redi the trees and stonus, to the hows to 
be beeldid. 


CAP. VI. 


1 It is doo forsothe the fonre hundrid 
and ei3ti® 3eer of the goynge out of the 
sones of Irael fro the loond of Egipt, in 
the ferth 3eer, the moneth Zio; he is the 
secounde moneth of the regne of Salo- 
mon ypon Irael; he began to beelde an 

2hows to the Lord. Forsothe the hows 
that kyng Salomon beeldide to the Lord, 


yOm. a. 7Om. 4. 3 thousandis ez. 


BF. eiztetithe z. 


u beeche trees 1. Vand. 


III. KINGS. 


> reuliden hem 4. 


Ww into A pr.m. DEIMSbg. 


V. io—VI. a 


of beechis", bi al his wille; forsothe’1 
Salomon 3af to Hiram twenti thousynde 
chorus of wheete, in to meete to his 
hows, and twenti chorus of pureste* oile; 
Salomon 3af these thingis to Hiram bi 
alle 3eeris. Also the Lord 3af wisdom to 12 
Salomon, as he spak to hym; and pees 
was bitwixe Hiram and Salomon, and 
botheY smytiden? boond of pees. 
kyng Salomon chees werk men of al 
Israel; and the summe was thretti thou- 
synde of men. And ‘Salomon sente hem 14 
in to the Liban*, ten thousynde? bi ech 
monethe bi whilis, so that in twei monethis 
bi whilis thei weren in her howsis; and 
Adonyram was on sich a summe. Ther- 1s 
for’ seuenti thousynde of hem°*, that baren 
burthuns, weren to Salomon, and foure 
score thousynde of masouns in the hil, 
with out the souereyns, that weren mais-16 
tris of alle werkis*, bi the noumbre of thre 
thousynde and thre hundrid, comaundynge 
to the puple, and to hem that maden 


And 13 


+ precious 
stonys ; Ebreys 
seyen heuye 
stonys, for siche 
stonys ben able 
for the founde- 
ment. Lire 
here. C. 

+ Moises gouer- 
nede the puple 
bi xl. 3eer, in 
xvi. c°. of 
Exodi, Josue bi 
xl. 3eer in iij. 
c*. of Judicum, 
Othonyel bi xl. 
3eer, in iij.c*. 
of Judicum, 
Aioth bi xl. 
jeer, in ij. c®. 
of Judicum,Del- 
bora bi x). 3eer, 
in v. c°. of Judi- 
cura, Gedeon bi 
xl. 3eer, in viij. 
c°. of Judicum, 
Abymelech bi 
iij. jeer, in ix. 
c°. of Judicum, 
Thola bi xxiij. 
3eer, in x. c°. of 
Judicum, Jair 
bi xxij. 3eer, in 
x. e° of Judi- 
cum, with out 
domesman bi 
xviii., in x. ¢° 
of Judicum, 
Jepte bi sixe 
jeer, in xij. c°. 
of Judicum, 


werk. And the kyng comaundide, that 17 Svessan bi vij. 


thei schulden take greete stonys, ‘and pre- 
ciouse stonys‘t, in to® the foundement of 
the temple, and that thei schulden*make 
tho square; whiche stoonys the masouns is 
of Salomon, and the masouns of Hyram, 
hewiden. Forsothe Bibliesi maden redi 
trees and stonus, to the hows toj be bildid. 


CAE. Ve 


Forsothe it was doon in the fourthe*1 
hundrid and fourescore 3eer{ of the goynge 
out of the sones of Israel fro the lond of 
Egipt, in the fourthe 3eer§, in the monethe 
Zio; thilke! is the secounde monethe|| of 
the rewme of Salomon on™ Israel; he 
bigan to bilde an hows" to the Lord. For-2 
sothe® the hows which? kyng Salomon 
4 slascht £ pr. vice. 


¢ werkis 4. © eiztith 


X moost purer. Ybothe their. %smoten 


togidre 1, smiten EL. into Liban Salamon sente 1. >thousynde men 1, Cupon tr. ink. ¢¢hors A rec.m. 


d And so 1. 
1 that 1. 


€ the werkis 1 f Om. k. 


mM upon t. 


& Om. x. 
2 the Lemple of Salamon Kk marg. 


i men of Biblies1. 3 Om.s. * foure 1. 


P that 1. 


h And 1. 
o And 1. 


eer, in xij. c° 
of Judicum, 
Abiton bi x. 
3eer, in xii. c°, 
of Judicum, 
Abdon bi viij. 
3eer, in xij. c°. 
of Judicum, 
Sampson bi. xx. 
3eer, in xvi. c°. 
of Judicum, 
Hely bi xl. 3eer, 
in 1. book of 
Samuel and 
Saul bi xl. 3eer, 
in xiij. c°. of 
Dedis, Danyth 
bi xl. 3eer, in 
111. book of 
Kingis ti. c®., 
Salomon bi iij. 
3eer, here in 
this text; thus 
the noumbre 
teld bere, is 
proued bi Scrip- 
ture. Lire 
here. C. 

§ in the fourthe 
3eer, of the 
rewme of Salo- 
mon. Lire 
here. c. 

{| thilke is the 
secounde 
monethe, of the 
iiij. seer of the 
rewme of Sa- 
lomon. Lire 
here. Cc. 


VI. 3—14. 


hadde sexti cubitis in length, and twenti 
in brede, and thretti cubitis in heist. 
3 And a 3aat hows was before the temple of 
twenti cubitys in length, aftir the mesure 
of the brede of the temple ; and hadde ten 
cubitis of brede before the face of the 
4temple. And he made in the temple 
sside wyndows. And he bildide pon 
the wal of the temple table beeldyngis 
bi ennyroun, in the wallis of the hows, 
bi ennyroun of the temple, and of God- 
dis answerynge place; and he made the 
6sidis in enuyroun. The table beeld- 
ynge, that was aboue, hadde fyue cubitis 
of brede; and the mydil table beeldynge 
of sexe cubitis of brede; and the thridde 
table beeldynge hauing seuen cubitis of 
brede. Forsothe beemys he putte in the 
hows bi enuyronn with outforth, that‘ 
thei shulden not cleue to the wallis of 


7the temple. Forsothe the hows, whanne* 


it shulde be beeldid vp, is beeldid of 
stonus ouer scorchid and parfite; and 
hamer, and axe, and al yren, ben not 
herd in the hows, whanne it was beeldid. 
8 The door of the mydil side in the wal 
was of the hows of the rit side; and bi 
a vyce thei stieden vp into the mydil 
sowpynge place, and fro the mydil into 
gthe thridde. And he beeldide vp the 
1ohows, and endide it. And he made the 
hows with cedre couplis, and bildide a 
table beeldynge vpon al the hows bi fyue 
cubitis of hei3t, and couerde the hows 
11 with cedre trees. And the word of the 
12 Lord is maad to Salomon, seyynge, This 
hows that thon beeldist ; if thou gost in 
myn hestis, and dost my domys, and 
kepist alle my comanndementis’, goynge 
bi hem, I shal fastne my word to thee, 
that I haue spoken to Dauid, thi fader ; 
izand I shal dwelle in the mydil of the 
sonys of Yrael, and I shal not forsaak 
uumy puple Yrael. Thanne Salomon 
beeldide vp the hows, and eendide it; 


IIL KINGS. 


175 


bildide to the Lord, hadde sexti cubitis in 
lengthe, and twenti cubitis? in breede, 
and thretti cubitis in hei3the. And as 
porche was bifor the temple of twenti 
cubitis of lengthe, by the mesure of the 
breed of the temple; and the porch 
hadde ten cubitis of breede, bifor the face 
of the temple. And Salomon made ins 
the temple ‘wyndows streytel without- 
forth, and large with ynne. And he bild-5 
ide on™ the wal of the temple bildyngis of 
tablis bi cumpas, in the wallis of the hows, 
‘bi cumpas of’ the temple, and oft Goddis 
answeryng place; and he made sidis in 
the cnmpas. The bildyng of tablis, that 6 
was vndur, hadde fyue cubitis of breede ; 
and the myddil bildyng of tablis was of 
sixe cubits of breede; and the thridde 
bildyng of tablis was hanynge sencne 
cubitis of breede. Sotheli* he puttide’ 
beemys in the hous bi cumpas with out- 
forth, that tho cleniden not} to the wallis 
of the temple. Forsothe” whanne the7 
hows was bildid, it was bildid* of ‘stoonys 
hewid and perfity; and an? hamer, and 
ax, and al thing maad of yrun, weren not 
herd in the hows, while it was in bildyng. 
The doré of the myddil side was in thes 
wal of the ri3thalf hows*; and bi a vijs 
thei» stieden® in to the myddil soler, and 
fro the myddil soler in to the thridde 
soler. And Salomon bildide the hows,9 
and endide it. Alsot Salomon hilide the 
hows with couplis of cedre®, and bildidef io 
a bildyng of tablis ouer al the hows, bi 
fyue cnbitis of heizthe, and hilide® the 
hows with ‘trees of cedre*. And the word !! 
of the Lord was maad to Salomon, and 
seide, This is the hows, which! thou !? 
bildist* ; if thou gost in myn heestis, and 
dost my domes, and kepist alle my com- 
aundementis, and goist bi tho, Y schal 
make stidefast my word to thee, ‘which 
word! Y spak to Dauid, thi fadir; and Y's 
schal dwelle in the myddis of the sones of 


fand «a. & maundementis sceEFH. 
POm.1. narowe wyndowsr. ‘uponr. Sabouter. tOm.1. © Andi. VY putter. © ne I. 
Xbild1. Y perfit hewyn stoonysr. 27Om.1. ofthe hows1. Pment. © stieden up 1. And 
pKx. ¢cedre trees. fhe bildide 1. g he hilide 1. b cedre trees 1. ithat 1. * bildidist x. 'that 1. 


t tho clyucden 
not, etc. 3 that 
is, the closingis 
in of the aleris. 
Lire here. c. 


176 


13and beeldide vp the wallis of the hows 
with ynforth with cedre table beeldyngis, 
fro the pawment of the hows vnto the 
heizest of the wal, and vnto the cowplis ; 
and he couerde with cedre trees with 
inforth ; and he couerde the pawment of 
16the hows with firre bordis. And he 
beeldide vp cedre table beeldingis of 
twenti cubitis at the hynder more parti 
of the temple, fro the pawment vnte the 
ouer parties ; and he made an innermore 
hows of the heuenli answerynge place, 
17into the holy of halewis'. Forsothe of 
fourti cubitis was that! temple before 
the 3atis of Goddis answerynge place. 
18And with cedre al the hows with yn- 
forth was clothid, hauynge his turnours, 
and his iuncturis! forgid, and grauyngis 
ouerbeynge; alle with cedre tablis thei 
weren clothid, ne algatis a stoone my3te 
igapere in the wal. Goddis answerynge 
place forsothe he made in the mydil of 
the hows, in the inner more partie, that 
he putte there the arke of the boond of 
20pees of the Lord. Forsothe Goddis 
auswerynge place hadde twenti cubitis 
of length, and twenti cubitis of brede, 
and twenti cubitis of heiz3t; and he 
couerde it, and clothide with moost pure 
gold; but and the auter he clothide with 
aicedre. Forsothe the hows before Goddis 
answerynge place he couerde with moost 
pure gold, and naylide platis to with 
2golden nailis. No thing was in the 
temple that was not couerde with gold ; 
but and al the auter of Goddis answer- 
23ynge place he couerde with gold; and 
made in Goddis answerynge place two 
cherubyn of the trees of olyues, of ten 
aicubitis of heist; the too weenge of che- 
rub of fyue cubitis, and the™ tother 
weenge of cherub of fyue cubitis, that is, 
hauyng ten cubitis, fro the cop of the 
wenge vnto the cop of the tother weenge. 
25 Forsothe of ten cubitis was the secounde 


h holowis 4. ithe Fr. 


mvyntor. "he hilide hem. © hyndiry E1nx¢. hindere kK. P vnto 1. 
Ssemynge1. tbordis1. %And1. VY And, W moost pure 1. 
1marg. he fastnyde the1, 4that1. 5 the oracle 1. 


Om. ¢. 


II. KINGS. 


k for £ pr.m. 


VIL 15-25. 


Israel, and Y schal not forsake my puple 
Israel. Therfor Salomon bildide the14 
hows, and endide it; and he bildide the1s 
wallis of the hows with ynne with tablis 
of cedre, fro the pawment of the hows ‘til 
to™ the heiz3nesse of the wal, and ‘til to™ 
the couplis; and hilide" with trees of 
cedre with ynne; and he hilide the paw- 
ment of the hows with tablis of beeche. 
And he bildide a wal of tablis of cedre of 16 
twenti cubitis at the hyndrere® part of the 
temple, fro the pawment ‘til toP the hizere 
partis; and he made the ynnere hows of 
Goddis answeryng place, in to the hooli 
of hooli thingis. Sothelit thilke™ temple 17 
bifor the doris of Goddis answering 
place was of*fourti cubitis. And al the1s 
hows with ynne was clothid with cedre, 
and hadde hise smethenessis, and hise 
joynyngis maad suteli, and grauyngis ap- 
perynge®’ abone ; alle thingis weren clothid 
with tablist of cedre, and outirli a stoon 
mi3te not appere in the wal. Forsothe" 19 
Salomon made Goddis answeryng place 
in the myddis of the hows, in the ynnere 
part, that he schulde sette there the arke 
of boond of pees of the Lord. Sotheli¥20 
Goddis answeryng place hadde twenti 
cubitis of lengthe, and twenti cubitis of 
breede, and twenti cubitis of hizte; and 
he hilide, and clothide it with pureste’ 
gold; but also he clothide the auter with 
cedre. Also he hilide* with puresteei 
gold the** hows bifor ‘Goddis answeryng 
place’, and fastnyde? platis with goldun 
nailis. No thing was in the temple, 22 


‘which thing* was not hilid with gold; 


but also he hilid with gold al the auter of 
Goddis answeryng place. And he made23 
in ‘Goddis answeryng place® twey cheru- 
byns of the® trees of olyues, of ten cubits 
of hei3te; o wynge of cherub was of fyue2s 
cubitis, and the tother wynge of cherub 
was of fyue cubitis, that is, hauynge ten 
cubitis, fro the heijnesse of ‘the of wynge 


lvynctours 4. ™ Om. a. 

a Andr. Forsothe EL. * that EL. 
x hilide it 1. ** an p.  Y or the oracle 
¢Om.c. 4 that oons. the too x. the DEMxb. 


VI. 26—37. 


cherub in the same mesure; and o werk 
26 was in the two cherubyn, that is, o che- 
rub hadde hei3t of ten cubitis, and lijk 
27maner the secounde cherub. And he 
putte the cherubyn in the mydil of the 
inner temple; forsothe the cherubyn 
stran3ten out her weengis, and the too 
weenge towchide the wal, and the weenge 
of the secounde cherub touchyde the 
tothere wal ; forsothe the tothere weenges 
in the mydyl® part of the temple towch- 
2seden hem self to gidre. And he couerde 
zacherubyn with gold, and alle the wallis 
of the temple bi enuyroun; and grauyde 
with dyuerse grauyngis and turnynge; 
and made in- hem cherubyn, and palmes, 
and dyuerse peynturis, as ferre stond- 
30 ynge® fro the wal in goynge out. But 
and the pawment of the hows he couerde 
with gold, with inforth and with outforth. 
31 And in the goynge yn of Goddis answer- 
ynge place he made two litil dorys of the 
trees of olyues; and fyue postis of the 
3zcorners, and the two dorys of the trees 
of olyues; and he grauede in hem peyn- 
ture of cherubyn, and? the lickenes of 
palmes, and the onermore grauyngis ful 
fer stoondynge? out; and couerde hem 
with gold; and both he couerde cheru- 
byn, and the palmes, and other with gold. 
33 And he made in the entre of the temple 
postis of the trees of olyues foure cor- 
34nerd; and the two doris of firre trees, 
either to other; and either dore was dow- 
ble, and holdynge hem self togidre was 
3sopnyde. And he grauyde cherubyn, and 
the palmys, and granyngis myche sem- 
ynge ont; and alle he couerde with 
goldyn platis, with squaryd werk at 
36rewle. And he bildide the porch with 
ynforth, with three ordres of polshid 
stonus, and with oon ordre of the trees 


HI. KINGS. 


W77 


‘til to® the hijnesse of the tother wynge. 
And the secunde cherub was of ten cubitis 25 
in euene mesure; and o werk was in the 
twey cherubyns, that is, o cherub hadde 2s 
the hijthe of ten cubitis, and in lijk maner 
the tother cherub. And he! settidet che-27 
rubyns* in the myddis of the ynnere tem- 
ple; forsothe! the cherubyns helden forth 
her wyngis, and 0 wenge tonchide the 
walk, and the wynge of the secunde che- 
rub touchide the tother wal; forsothe! the 
othere™ wyngis in the middil part of the 
temple touchiden hem silf togidere. And 2s 
he hilide the cherubyns with gold, and 29 
alle the wallis of the temple ‘bi cumpas" ; 
and granyde® with dynerse grauyngis and 
smethenesse; and he made in tho zallys 
cherubyns, and palmes, and dyuerse peyn- 
turis, as stondinge forth and goynge out 
of the wal. But also he hilide with gold 30 
the pawment of the hows, withynne? and 
with outforthe. And in the entryng of3t 
‘Goddis answering place’ he made twei 
litil doris of the" trees of olyues; and he 
made postis of fyue corneris, and twei32 
doris of the trees of olyues; and grauyde* 
in tho the peynture of cherubyns, and the 
licnessis of palmes, and grauyngis aboue 
stondynge forth gretli; and he hilide tho 
with gold; and he hilide as wel the che- 
rubyns, as palines, and othere thingis with 
gold. And in the entring of the temples: 
he made postis foure cornerid of thet trees 


of olyues ; and he made twei doris of thets4 + of becch; 


trees of beech}, ech a3ens other; and euer 
either dore was double, and it was openyd 
holdynge it silf togidere. And he grauyde3s 
cherubyns, and palines, and grauyngis ap- 
perynge greetli; and he hilide alle thingis 
with goldun platis, bi square werk at reule. 
And he bildide a large street" with ynne, 36 
bi thre ordris of stoonys maad fair, and bi 


oon ordre of trees of cedre. The hows of 37 pe wen 
. e 


the Lord was foundid in the fourthe 3eer{, — rewme of Salo- 
mon. Lire 
here. c 


370f cedre. The firthe 3eer the hows of the 
Lord is foundid, in the moneth of Zio; 


Pin al. 4 seemynge £ pr.m. 


nQm. £ pr.m. © semynge £ pr.m. 


evntor. fSalomon1. &sette Ein. ‘the chernbyns1. iand1. * oon walr land1. ™ — 
EKL¢. "abouter. °he grauyde hem 1. ? with ynne forth 1. 4 the oracler. *Om.1. §% he grauyde 1. 
tOm.1. street, or an alure t. 


VOL. II. Aa 


178 


3sand in the enleueth 3eer, the moneth of 
Ebul; he is the ei3t moneth ; the hows is 
perfourmed in al his werk, and in alle 
his necessaries; and he bildide it vp in 
seuen 3eer. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Forsothe Salomon beeldide his hows 
- in thretene 3eer, and vnto parfite brou3te 
2forth. And he bildide the hows of the 
wijld wode of Liban, of an hundrid cu- 
bitis of length, and of fifti cubitis of 
brede, and of thretti cubitis of hei3t ; and 
foure aluris betwixe the cedre pilers ; for- 
sothe the cedre trees he hew3 into pilers. 
3And he clothide al the chaumbre with 
cedre table beeldyngis ; the which chaum- 
bre was born vp with fyue and fourti 
pilers. The too ordre forsothe hadde 
4fifteen pilers, sette togidre aj3ens hem 
sself, and ‘for ajen™ hem self beholdynge, 
with euen space betwixe the pilerys; 
and vpon the pilers foure cornerd trees, 
cin alle thingis euen. And the chaunbre 
of pilers he made of fifti cubitis of 
length, and of thretti cubitis of brede; 
and another chaumbre into the face of 
the more chaumbre; and pilers, and the 
7heedis vpon the pilers he made. For- 
sothe the chaumbre of the see, in the 
which is the chayer of dom, he made; 
and couerde with cedre trees, fro the 
spawment vnto the cop. And the litil 
hows, in the which he sat to deme, was 
in the mydil chaumbre, ljk maner werk. 
Forsothe he made an hows to the dou3- 
ter of Pharao, whom Salomon weddide, 
9siche maner werk as this chaumbre. Alle 
thingis with precious stoonus, ‘the whiche® 
at a maner rewle and mesure, both with 
ynforth and with outforth, weren loken, 
fro the foundement vnto the cop of the 


t fro the regioun £ pr.m. forn ajen E sec. . 


¥ perfit or eendid 1. Ww alle his 1. 
2 Om. DEGLMNPhg. 
eborn up. f Andi. 


a whiche porche was 1. 


& silf eche 1. 


©Om.1. P Om. kK. 


III. KINGS. 


x purlynaunce W.° 
8 perfeccioun or perfit eend 1. 

b other bi 1. 
q hilide it 1. 


VI. 38—VII. gy. 


in the monethe Zio; and the hows was38 
maad perfit” in al his werk, and in alle¥ 
vessels, ether ‘purtenauncis*, in the ele- 
uenthe 3eer, in the monethe Zebul ; thilke** 
is‘the ei3the monethe ; and he bildide that 
hows in seuene 3eer. 


CAP. VII. 


Forsothe Salomon bildide his owne hows} 
in thritteneY 3eer, and brou3te 27 til to 
perfeccioun*. He bildide an hows of the2 
forest of Liban, of an hundrid cubitis of 
lengthe, and of fifti cubitis of breede, and 
of thretti cubitis of hijthe; and he bildide 
foure aleis bitwixe the pilers of cedre; for 
he hadde hewe doun trees of cedres in to 
pilers. And he clothide al the chaumbirs 
with wallis® of cedris®; which? chaumbir 
was susteyned® with fyue and fourti pi- 
leris. Sothelif oon ordre hadde fiftene pi- 
leris, set a3jens hem silf togidere, and bi-5 
holdynge hem silf& euene a3ens, bi? euene 
space bitwixe the pilers; and on! the 
pilers werenk foure square trees, euene in 
alle thingis. And he made a porche ofe 
pilers of fifti cubitis of lengthe, and of 
thritti cubitis of breede; and ‘he made! an 
other porche in the face of the gretter 
porche; and he made pileris, and pomels 
on the pileris. Also he™ maad a porche7 
of the kyngis seete, in which" the seete of 
doom was°’; and he? hilide1 with trees of 
cedre, fro the pawment ‘til to" the hi3- 
nesse. And a litil hows, in whicli he’ sats 
to deme, was in the myddil porche, bi lijk 
werk. Also Salomon made an hows to 
the dou3ter of Farao, whom he hadde 
weddid, bi sich werk, bi what maner werk 
he made and this porche. He made alles 
thingis of preciouse stoonys, that weren 
sawid at sum‘ reule and mesure, bothe 
with ynne and with outforth, fro the 
foundement ‘til to" the hijnesse of wallis, 


Sthat c pr.m. 


XX that EL. 
> tablis a sec. m. b. 
iupont, * Om. 1. 
r vnto I. 


y the threttenethe x. 

ecedre x. ‘the which 1. 

1QOm.1. ™ Salomon 1. 
s Salomon :r. tar. U ynto1. 


VII. 10——20. 


wallis, and with ynforth and vnto the 
iomore halle. The foundementist forsothe 
of precious stoonus, the greet stoonus of 
titen, or of ei3t cubitis; and there abone 
precious stoonus of euen mesure weren 
12hewen"; and™ lijk maner of cedre. And 
the more halle rownd, of thre ordres of 
hewen stonus, and of oon ordre of planed 
cedre; also and in’ the innermore porche 
of the hows of the Lord, and in the 3aat 
shows of the hows of the Lord. And 
iukyng Salomon sente, and took Yram, the 
sone of the widowe womman, fro Tyro, 
of the lynage of Neptalym, fader of the 
cuntre of Tyre, a crafti man of metal, 
and ful of wisdom, and yndurstondynge, 
and of lore, to doo al werk of metal. 
Which whanne he was comen to kyng 
Salomon, he made al the werk of hym; 
isand made two brasen pilers, of ei3teen 
eubitis of hei3t o piler; and a liyn 
of twelue cubitis wente” about either 
igpiler. And two heed coueryngys he 
made, that shulden be putte vpon the 
heedis of the pilers, 30ten of bras; of 
fyue cubitis of hei3t oon heed couerynge, 
and of fyue cubitis of hei3t another heed 
17couerynge; and as in maner of a nette, 
and of cheynys wouyn togidre to hem 
self, in o werk. And either heed couer- 
ynge of the pilers was 3oten; seuen litil 
nettis of verse in the toon heed couer- 
ynge, and seuen lytil nettis in the tothir 
isheed couerynge. And he fulfillide the 
pilers, and the two ordris bi enuyroun 
of alle the litil nettis, that thei coueren 
the heed coueryngis, that weren vpon the 
cop of the powmgarnettis ; and the same 
wise he made to the secounde heed couer- 
igynge. Forsothe the heed coueryngis, that 
weren vpon the heedis of the pilers, as in 
werk of a lilye weren forgid, in the 3aat- 
20 hows, of foure cubitis; and eft other heed 


coueryngis in the cop of the pilers aboue, 


t foundement 4. 4 dyuydid & pr.m. 


Xynto1. Ygrettk. wAnd1. *of grete 1. 


Ill. KINGS. 


uu Om. 4. 


yOm. 1 


179 


and with ynne and ‘til to" the gretter’ 
street, ethir court. Sotheli¥ the founde- 10 
mentis weren of preciouse stoonys, grete* 
stoonys of ten, ethir of Y ei3te cubitis; andi 
preciouse stoonys hewun of euene mesure 
weren aboue; in lijk maner and of cedre. 
And the gretter court, ‘ethir veide spacez, 12 
was round, of thre ordris of hewun stonus, 
and of oon ordre of hewun cedre*; also 
and in the** ynnere large strete of the 
hows of the Lord, and in the porche of 
the hows of the Lord. Also kyng Salo-13 
mon sente, and brou3te fro Tire Hiram, 
the sone of a womman widewe, of thelt 
lynage of Neptalym, of the fadir a? mau 
of Tyre, Hiram®, a crafty man of brasse, 
and ful of wisdom, and vndirstondynge4, 
and doctryn®, to make al werk of bras. 
And whanne he hadde come to kyng Sa- 
lomon, he made al hys werk’. And hes 
made twey pilers of bras, o piler of ei3tene 
cubitis of hij3the; and a lyne of twelue 
cubitis cumpasside euer either piler. Also 16 
he& made twei pomels, 3otun of bras, that 
weren set on the heedis of the pilers; o 
pomel of fyue cubitis of hizthe, and the 
tothir pomel of fyue cubitis of hei3the ; 
and bi the maner of a net, and of chaynes 17 
knyt to gidere to hemi, bi wonderful werk. 
Euer either pomel of the pilers was 3otun ; 
seuen werkis lijk nettis of orders weren 
in o pomel, and seuen werkis lijk nettis 
weren* in the tother pomel. And he made 18 
perfitli the pilers, and twei ordris ‘bi cum- 
pas of! alle werkis™ lijk nettis, that tho 
schulden hile the pomels, that" weren on® 
the hijnesse of pumgarnadis; in the same 
maner he dide also to the secounde pomel. 
Sotheli? the pomels, that weren on‘ the 19 
heedis of the pilers in the porche, weren 
maad as bi the" werk of lilye, of foure 
cubitis; and eft othere pomels in the 20 
hiznesse of pilers aboue, bi the mesure of 
the piler, ajens* the werkis lijk nettis ; 


vy Om. aru. Wand wente 4. 


zOm.1. 8cedretrees3. 28 Om.s. Yofal. 


¢Om.1. 4of yndirstondynge 1. ¢ of techyng1. f brasen werk 1. & Hiram1. 5 whicher. i hem self 1. 


kOm.1. |! aboute 1. ™ the werkis 1. 


§ sett azens I. 


n whiche 1. 


°upont, PAndi. Wuponr ° Om. 1. 


Aad 


180 


aftir the mesure of the piler a3ens the 
litil nettis; forsothe two hundryd ordres 
of powmgarnettis weren in enuyroun of 
2ithe secounde heed couerynge. And he 
sette two pilers in the 3aat hows of the 
temple; and whanne he hadde sette the 
ri3t piler, he clepide it bi name Jachym ; 
lijk maner he reride the secounde piler, 
zzand clepide the name of it Booz. And 
vpon the heedis of the pilers he sette a 
werk in maner of a lilye; and fulfillid is 
23the werke of the pilers. He made for- 
sothe the 3oten see, of ten cubitis fro 
lippe vnto lippe, rounde in enuyroun ; 
the hei3t of hym of fyue cubitis; and 
the littil nette of thretti cubitis girdide 
24it* by enuyroun. And the grauynge 
vudur the lippe wente about it bi ten 
cubitis, goynge about the see; two ordris 
2,0f storye grauyngis weren 3o0ten, and 
stoden vpon twelue oxen ; of the whiche 
three beheelden to the north, and three 
to the weste, and* three to the south, and 
thre to the este; and the see was there 
aboue vpon hem, whos alle the hyndir- 
26more parties lurkiden with ynforth. The 
greetnes forsothe of the watyr vessel was 
of three ouncis, and the lippe of itY as 
the lippe of a chalice, and as a leef of a 
lilye to be ‘a3en bowid*; it? conteynede 
two thousand mesuris of thre quartis, 
thre thousand mesuris nee3 of a potel. 
27 And he made ten brasen feet, eche foot 
of foure cubitis of length, and of foure 
cubitis of brede, and of foure cubitis of 
2shei3t. And that werk of the feet was 
betwix grauyngis playn; and grauyugis 
29betwix the ioynturis. And betwix the 
litil crownes and wyndyngis, liouus, and 
oxen, and cherubin; and in the ioynturis 
lijk maner aboue®; and vndur the lyouns 
and oxen as bridils of brasse hongynge. 
30 And foure whelis bi eche feet, and brasen 


wOm. £ prom. * Om. a. 


II. KINGS. 


Yhym £ pr.m. % aparailid £ pr.m. 


VII. 21-30. 


forsothet twey hundrid ordris of pumgar- 
nadis weren in the cumpas of the secounde 
pomel. And he settide" the twey pilers in21 
the porche of the temple; and whanne he 
hadde set the ri3thalf pilere, he clepide it 
bi name Jachym’; in lijk maner he reis- 
ide* the secounde pilere, and he clepide 
the name therof Booz*. And he settideY 22 
on? the heedis of the pilers a? werk bi 
the> maner of a lilie; and the werk of the 
pilers was maad perfit°. Also he’ madee23 


a 30tun see, that is, a waisching vessel + thre ounces; 
in Ebreu it is 


for preestis, round in cumpas, of ten cu- here of iifj. 

bitis fro brynke til® to the’ brinke; the j'iieiea, 
hei3nesse therof was of fyue cubitis ; and Toca 
a corde of thretti cubitis 3ede aboute it bi fingris. Lire 


cumpas. And grauyng® vndir the brynke 24 pee isa 
cumpasside it, and cumpasside® the see bi fusonend ant 
ten cubitis; tweyne ordris of grauyngis [eins com 
conteynynge summe stories weren 3otun, Fe anes an 
and stoden oni twelue oxis*; of whiche 25 § this word 
oxis* thre bihelden to the north, and thre wee 
to the west, and thre to the south, and  j} Ptrem, ne 
three to the eest; and the see was aboue paces 
on! tho oxis™, of whiche® alle the hyndere™ gos to schewe 
thingis weren hid ‘with ynne®. 

the thicknesse of the see was of thre 

ounces}, and the brynke therof was as the 


gEore 
Sothieli? 26 fied bi bashus, 
brynke of a cuppe, and as the leef of a 


and aftirward 
bi ignoraunce 
of writeris, it 
was set in the 


teyneth ij. 
lilie crokid a3en; the see took’ twei thou- quarts and an 
synde bathust, thre’§ thousynde metretis4]. this ee 


conteynede xi. 
tunnes and an 
half, and iij. 
sextaries. Bi 


And he made ten brasun foundementes, 27 
ech foundement of foure cubites of lengthe, 
and of foure cubitis of brede, and of thre Isidore the see 
OND . “11-48 conteynede Ixy. 
cubitis of lij3nes. And thilke’ werk of 28 tnnnes and x. 
8 . . e taries. 
foundementis' was rasid® bitwixe; and Sexes. 4 
1 itwixe’ 1 “J a chopyn of 
SCAU: soo bitwixe the loys Pariys bic 
And bitwixe’ the litil corouns and serclis® 29 Jengthe pe 
3 s “variyng of me- 
weren liouns, oxis*, and cherubyns; and _ suris in tymes 
5 i 5 aS and cuntreys 
in the ioynturis in lijk maner aboue; and a 
vndir the lyouns and oxisY weren as 


we han no cer 
reynes of bridels of bras hangynge doun. 


teynte of E- 
brew mesnris. 
And bi 


Lire here. c. 
| a metrete 
ech foundement weren foure 30 conteyneth twei 
guartis and an 
half. Lire here. 


Cc. e¢ plures. 


aandit ar. > Om. an. 


tand1. ‘settez. Vv Jachym, that is, stidefastnesse c marg.K. Wreisideup1. * Booz, that is, 
strengthe c marg. K. Ysetter1. Zuponi. @thec. »Om. EL. Cup fullyp1. ¢ Hiram. ¢ Om. rx. 
fOm. Kxg. & the grauyng 1. bit came abouter. ‘nponr. Koxen3. !uponr. ™oxenr. ® whiche 


oxen. ®0 hyndrere a sec.m. © withynne the seer. P And 1. 
w the serclis 1. 


t the foundementis 1, “raasid 1. ¥ bitwene 1. 


4 conteynede 1. ‘and thre kK. that EL. 
xX oxen. Y the oxen 1. 


text. Ametrete —~ 


VH. 31—40. 


axtrees ; and bi foure partyes as litil shul- 
dres vndur the water vessel 3oten, a3ens 
3ihem self beholdynge. And the mouth 
of the watir vessel with ynforth was in 
the cop of the heed, and that, that with 
outforth aperide, was of o cubite, and alle 
round, and togidre hadde o cubite and an 
half; in® the corners forsothe of the pilers® 
weren dyuers grauyngis, and the mene 
pilers® betwix squaar‘, and not round. 
32 Forsothe the foure whelis, that weren bi 
the foure corners of the foot, cleueden to- 
gidre to hem self vndir the foot; o whele 
33 hadde of hei3t a cubite and an half. For- 
sothe the whelis weren siche, as ben wont 
to be maad in a chaar; and the axtre& 
of hem, and the spokys, and the felijs}, 
3aand the naue, alle 30ten. For thoo ilkei 
foure* }itil shuldres, bi alle the corners 
of o foot, fro that foot weren 30ten, and 
3sioyned. In the cop forsothe of the foot 
was a maner roundnes, of a cubite and a 
half, so forgid, that the watir vessel my3te 
be sette there aboue, hauynge his dy- 
uerse endentyngis, and grauyngis of hym! 
acself, Forsothe he grauede iu the table 
beeldyngis, that weren of brasse, and in 
the corners, cherubyn, and liouns, and 
palmys, as into the™ lickenesse of a man 
stondynge, that thei shulen be seen uot 
37grauen, but leid to bi enuyroun. And 
in this maner he made ten feet, bi o 3et- 
ynge and mesure, and with lijk maner 
3sgrauynge. Forsothe he made ten brasen 


water vessels ; o water vessel heelde fourti — 


mesuris of thre quaartis, and was of foure 
cubitis; and alle the water vessels he 
putte vpon alle the feet, that is, vpon ten 
39 feet. And he ordeynde the" ten feet, fyue 
at the ry3t partie of the temple, and fyue 
at the left ; forsothe the see he putte at 
the ri3t parti of the temple, a3ens the este 
4oat the sonth. And Jram made caw- 
drones, and fier pannys, and wyn violis ; 
and he parformede al the werk of kyng 


II. KINGS. 


181 


wheelis, and brasun extrees; and bi foure 
partis weren as litle schuldryngis vndir 
the waischyng vessel, ‘the schuldryngis*+ 
3otun, and biholdynge a3ens hemsilf to- 
gidere. And the mouth of the waischyngs 
vessel with ynne was in the hijuesse of 
the heed{, and that, that apperide with 
outforth, was of o cubit, and it was al 
round, and hadde togidere o cubit and an 
half; sotheli® dyuerse grauyngis weren iu 
the corneris of pilers, and the mydil piler 


tschuldryngis ; 
that is, scharte 
pileris to sus- 
teyne the 
waschyng ves. 
sel. Lire here. 


(e, 

3 of the heed ; 
this word heed, 
is not In E- 
breu, but for 
al this lettre 

i¢ is had thus 
in Ebreu, ard 
the mouth ther- 
of was round 


° . 9 
bitwixe> was square, not round. And 32 aboue, bi 0 eu- 


the foure wheelis, that® weren bi foure 
corneris of the foundement, cleuydeu to- 
gidere to hem silf vndir the foundement ; 
o wheele hadde o cubit and an half of 
hi3the. Sothelid the wheelis weren siche, 33 
whiche maner wheelis ben wont to be 
maad in a chare; and the extrees, and 
the ‘naue stockis®, and the spokis, and‘ 
dowlis® of tho wheelis, alle thingis 
weren 30tun. For also the foure litless 
schuldryngis, bi alle the corners of o 
foundement, weren ioyned to gidere, and 
3otun§ of that foundement. Sotheli> inss 
the hiz3nesse of the foundement was sumi 
roundenesse, of o cubite and an half, so 
maad craftili, that the waisclhyng vessel 
my3te be set aboue, hauynge his purtrei- 
yngis, and dyuerse grauyngis of it silf. 
Also he* grauyde in tho wallis', thats« 
weren of bras, and in the corneris, cheru- 
byns, and liouns, and palmes, as bi the 
licnesse of a man stondynge, that tho 
semeden not grauun, but put to bi cum- 
pas. Bi this maner he made ten founde-37 
mentis, bi o 3etyng and mesure”, and lijk 
grauyng. Also he made ten waischyng3s 
vessels of bras; 0 waischyng vessel took 
fourti bathus, and it was of foure cubitis ; 
and he puttide” ech waischyug vessel bi 
it silf bi ech foundement bi it silf, that is, 
ten. And he made ten foundementis, fyue ss 
at the ri3t half of the temple, and fyue at 
the left half; sotheli® he settide? the see 


candin au. 4 piler £ sec.m. © piler £ sec.m. ‘ quarre BC pr.m.F. Baxtrees CK. b felys E sup. ras. 


i Om. ce sec.m. & Om. prm. ‘hem a. 


2Om.1. 2andt, > bitwener. bband not s. 


Sfeliest. bAnds. iar. & Hiram t. 


tm Om, AFH. 


€ whiche t. 
I tablis c. 


n tho 4. 


f and the Kox. 
P sette t. 


e nauelstockis L. 
a pntte 1. ° and f. 


dAndt. 


™ oo mesure f. 


bit ; for on the 
hiznesse that 
was of n cubit, 
was a sercle 
that was clepid 
the mouth, 
hauynge half 
a cubit in 
heisthe. Lire 
here. &. 


§ and j0tun; 
that is, weren 
jotun to gidere 
with that foun- 
dement, and 
maden o body. 
“Lire here. c. 


182 
41Salomon in the temple of the Lord. Two 
pilers, and two lytil cordis of the heed 
coueryngis vpon the heedis of the pilers, 
and two litil nettis, that thei coueren the 
two litil coordis, that weren vpon the 
42heedis of the pilers. And foure hundrid 
powmegarnettis in the two litil nettis; 
two vers of powmgarnettis in" eche litil 
nettis, to the litil coordis to be couerd of 
the heed coueryngis, that weren vpon the 
43heedis of the pilers. And the ten feet, 
and the ten water vessels vpon the feet ; 
44and oon see, and twelue oxen vndir the 
45see; and cawdrones, and fijr pannys, and 
wyn vyolis. Alle the vessels, that ram 
made to kyng Salomon in the hows of 
46the Lord, weren of latoun. And in the 
wijld feeldy regioun of Jordan the kyng 
3etide hem, in the cleyye™ erthe, betwix 
47Socoht and Sarcham. And Salomon 
putte alle the vessels in the hows; for the 
mych multitude forsothe there was no 
48 wei3t of the brasse. And Salomon made 
alle the vessels in the hows of the Lord ; 
forsothe a golden auter, and a golden 
bord, on® the? which shulden be leyd the 
49looues of proposicioun ; and fyue golden 
candelstickis at the ri3t side, and fyne at 
the left, a3ens Goddis answerynge place, 
of moost pure gold; and as flouris of 
lie, and golden lanterns there aboue, 
soand golden snytters; and stenys, and 
flesh hookis, and vyolis, and morters, 
and censerys, of moost pure gold ; and the 
heengis of doris of the ynnermore hows 
of the holy of halowis, and of the dorys 
of the hows of the temple, weren of gold. 
51 And he parfourmede al the werk, that 
Salomon made in the hows of the Lord; 
and he brou3te in the thingis that Dauid, 
his fader, hadde halowid; siluer, and 
gold, and vessels; and he leide vp in the 
tresours of the hows of the Lord. 


Ill. KINGS. 


sels in the feeldi cuntrey of Jordan, in 


VII. 41—51. 


at the rijt half of the temple, a3ens the 
eest, at the south’. Also Hiram made40 
cawdrouns, and pannes, and wyn vessels ; 
and he made perfitli al the werk of kyng 
Salomon in the temple of the Lord. Hea 


. : : cordis ; that 
made twey pilers, and twei cordist of i 


is, serclis cum- 


: inge th 

pomels’ on’ the pomels of pilerst, and  fomels at the 
: na ie . _  maner of cordis. 

twei werkis lijk nettis, that tho schulden 770 for 


hile twey" cordis, that weren on’ the 
heedis of pileris¥. And ‘he made* pum-42 
garnadis foure hundrid in twey werkis 
lijk nettis; ‘he made* tweyneY ordris of 
pumgarnadis in” ech werk® lijk a net, 
to hile the cordis of the pomels, that weren 
on the heedis of pilers. And he made ten43 
foundementis, and ten waischyng vessels 
on the foundementis ; and o se, ‘that 7s, 44 
a waischyng vessel for preestis’, and 
twelue oxis’ vndur the see ; and ‘he made® 45 
eawdruns, and pannys, and wyn vessels. 
Alle vessels‘, whiche Hiram made to kyng 
Salomon} in the hows of the Lord, weren 
of latoun. 


+ Salomon ; for 
‘ he made siche 
And the kyng 3etide tho ves- 46 thingis to be 
maad; ether the 
kyng, that is, 


c sights és Tliram,that was 
eleyi lond, bitwixe Sochot and Sarcham. seid bingki 


And Salomon settide® alle the vessels! ; 47 rafty men, for 
% F the excellence 

forsothe! for greet* multitude no weizte of craft. Lire 

was of bras!, ‘that is, it passide al comyn oe 

wei3te™. And Salomon made alle vessels® 48 

in the hows of the Lord ; sotheli® he made 

the golden auter, ‘that is, the auter of 

encense, that was with ynne the temple®, 

and the goldun boord, ond whych the 

loouys of settynge forth weren set; and 49 

he made" goldun candilstikis, fyue at the 

ri3t half, and fyue at the left half, azens 

Goddis answerynge place, ‘of purest gold’; 

and he made as the flouris of a lilie, and* 

goldun lanterns aboue, and goldun tongis ; 

and pottis, and hokis, and violis, and so 

morteris, and censeris of pureste gold; and 

the herris, ether heengis, of the doris of the 

ynnere hows of the hooli of hooli thingis, 

and of the doris of the hows of the temple 


tand aur. %cleye 48. % vpon BEFcu. P Om.c. 

4 south coost 1. "the pomelsi. Suponi. tthe pilers1. the twos. Vuponi. w the pileris 1. 
xOm.1. Yandtwo1. Zone. 4a werk B. Dupont. ©Om.cr. doxeni. ¢ Om.1. f the vessels. 
& setter, b vessels in a houst1. ibutr. <Kthegreetr. ‘the brast1. ™Om.1. the vessels 1. 
ocertis1. POm.1. Guponi. * made of moost pure golde 1. §Om.1. 88 Om. 1. 


VILL, i—9, 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Thanne alle the more thur3 birth of 
Yrael ben gadryd, with the princis of 
lynagis, and the duykis of the meynees of 
the sones of Yrael, to king Salomon, in 
to Jerusalem, that thei bryngen the arke of 
the boond of pees of the Lord fro the cite 

2of Dauid, that is,fro Syon. And al Irael 
cam togidre to kyng Salomon, in the 
moneth of Bethanym, in a solempne 

3day; he is the seuenth moneth. And 
alle the eldris of Irael camen; and 
4preestis token the arke, and beren the 
arke of the Lord, and the tabernacle 
of the couenaunt of pees, and alle the 
vessels of the seyntuarie, that weren in 
the tabernacle ; and preestis and Leuytis 
sberen hem. Forsothe kyng Salomon, 
and al the multitude of Yrael, that was 
comen to hym, wenten with hym before 
the arke, and offreden sheep and oxen, 
swith out eymynge and noumbre. And 
the preestis brou3ten yn the arke of the 
boond of pees of the Lord into his place, 
into Goddis answerynge place of the 
temple, into the holi of halowis, vnder 
zthe weengis of cherubyn.  Forsothe 
cherubyn spradden out the weengis 
vpon the place of the arke; and thei 
couerden the ark, and his clothis ther 
saboue. And whanne the berynge stauys 
semeden out, and the heizest of hem 
apereden with out the seyntuarie, before 
Goddis answerynge place, thei apereden 
no more with out forth ; and the whiche 
weren there vnto the day that is now. 
9Forsothe in the arke was noon othere 


t that 1. v Whanne a. 
meynees I. 
e And 1. 

m hignesses KX. 


whiche 1. 4 vnto 1. 


u kepte thoo 1. 
® of Bethanym c. 
foxen 1. & the cherubyns 1. 


‘ this present 1. ® And 1. 


III. KINGS. 


w Om. 1. 
b which EL. 
h Andi. 
the oracle 1 tert. that is, Goddis answerynge place 1 marg. 
t was I. 


183 


weren of gold. And Salomon performyde si 
al the werk, whicht he made in the hows 
of the Lord; and he brou3te ynne the 
thingis, whiche Dauid, his fadir, hadde 
halewid; siluer, and gold, and vessels; 
and he kepte" in the tresours of the hows 
of the Lord. 


CAP. VIII. 


Thanne’ alle the gretter men in birthe 
in Israel, with the” princes of lynagis*, 
and the’ duykis of meynees? of the sones 
of Israel, weren gaderid to kyng Salomon, 
in to Jerusalem, that thei schulden bere 
the arke of boond of pees of the Lord fro 
the citee of Dauid, that is, fro Syon. And2 
al Israel cam to gidere in the moneth 
Bethanym+®, in the solempne dai ; thilke? 
is the seuenthe moneth. And alle thes 
elde men of Israel camen; and the preestis 
token the arke, and baren® the arke of the*¢4 
Lord, and the tabernacle of boond of pees, 
and alle vessels’ of the seyntuarye, that 
weren in the tabernacle ; and the preestis 
and dekenes baren tho. Sothelit kyngs 
Salomon, and al the multitude of Israel, 
that camen togidere to hym, 3ede with 
hym bifor the arke; and thei offriden 
scheep and oxis', with out gessyng{ and 
noumbre. And prestis brou;ten the arkee 
of boond of pees of the Lord in to his 
place, in to Goddis answerynge place of 
the temple, in to the hooli of hooli thingis, 
vndur the wengis of cherubyns’. For-7 
sothe' cherubyns! spredden forth wengis* 
ouer the place of the arke; and _hiliden! 
the arke, and the harris therof aboue. 
And whanne the barris stoden forth, ands 
the hi3nesse™ of tho apperiden with out 
the seyntuarye, bifor ‘Goddis answerynge 
place", tho® apperyden no ferther with out- 
forth ; whiche? barris also weren there ‘ti 
in tol present" day. Forsothe’ in theo 
arke ist noon other thing), no but twei 
tablis of stoon, whiche tablis" Moyses in 


y with 1. z the 
d the vessels 1. 
1 thei hiliden 1. 
P the 


x the Sass 

m. A. 
k her wengis 1. 
© tho barrus 1. 


¢ thei baren 1. 
i the chernbyns 1. 


u Om. 1. 


+ that is, Sep- 
tembre. Lire 
here. c. et 
plures, 

+ with out gess- 
ing ; this is 
seid bi figuratif 
speche, clepid 
iperbole, to sig- 
nefie the multi- 
tude of sacri- 
fices. Lire here. 


Gn 

§ in the arke 

is noon other 
thing ; the con- 
trarie of this 
semeth in ix. 
ce°. to Ebreys, 
where Pou 
seith thus, that 
the 3erde of 
Aaron, and a 
goldun vessel 
hauynge man- 
fa, weren there 
with the tablis. 
This is soilid in 
donble maner, 
first thus, that 
the tablis a- 
loone weren 
there princi- 
paly, for herfor 
the arke was 
maad. The3erde 
of Aaron was 
there hi occa- 
sioun, to putte 
awey rebellioun 
of presthod ; 
and the goldun 
vessel with 
manna was 
there, to the 
mynde of meete 
3ouun fro heu- 
ene. In the se- 
counde maner 
thus, that the 
jerde of Aaron 
and the goldun 
vessel weren not 
withynne the 
arke, but with- 
outforth ina 
cofere maad 
thertu, and 

put in the side 
of the arke. 
Lire here. ¢. 


184 II. KINGS. 


thing but the two stonen tablis, the 
whiche Moyses hadde sette in it in Oreb, 
whanne the Lord couenauntide coue- 
naunt of pees with the sones of Irael, 
whanne thei shulden goo out of the 
woloond of Egipt. It is doon forsothe 
whanne the preestis weren goon out of 
the seyntuarie, a litil clowde fulfillide 
11the hous of the Lord; and the preestis 
my3ten not stoond and mynystre, for the 
litil clowde; forsothe the glorie of the 
Lord hadde fulfillid the hous of the 
12 Lord. Thanne seith Salomon, The Lord 
seide, that he shulde dwelle in a litil 
13clowde. Beeldynge I haue beeldid an 
hows in to thi ‘dwellynge place’, thi 
14moost fast see into euermore. And 
the kyng turnede his face, and blisside 
to al the chirch in Irael ; forsothe al the 
ischirch of Irael stood. And Salomon 
seith, Blessid is' the Lord God of Irael, 
that spak in his mouth to Dauid, my 
fader, and in the hondis* of hymn per- 
16fourmyde, seiynge, Fro the day that I 
ladde out my puple Irae] fro Egipt, I 
chees not a citee of alle the lynagis of 
Iracl, that an hows shulde be beeldid 
vp, and my name were there ; but Dauid 
I chees, that he were vpon my puple 
i7Irael. And Dauid, my fader, wolde 
beeld vp an hows to the name of the 
18 Lord God of Yrael. Aud the Lord seith 
to Dauid, my fader, That thou thou;tist 
in thin herte to beelde vp an hows to my 
name, thou didist wel, that same thing 
1ig9tretynge in mynde; neuerthelater thou 
shalt not beelde to me an hows, but thi 
sone, that shal goon out of thi reynes, 
he shal beelde an hows to my name. 
20 The Lord hath confermyd his word, that 
he spak ; and I stood for Dauid, my fader, 
and satte upon the trone of Irael, as the 
Lord spak ; and J haue beeldt an hows 
to the name of the Lord God of Yrael. 
21And I haue sette there a place of the 
arke, in the which is the couenaunt of 


4 tabernacle £ pr.m. 


u And 1. 
b And. 


¥ stood there1.  W haue bildid 1. 


tr Om. cEFH. 


x thi soule 1. 


VIII. 1o-——21. 


Oreb hadde put in the ark, whanne the 
Lord made boond of pees with the sones 
of Israel, whanne thei 3eden out of the 
loond of Egipt. Forsothe" it was doon 10 
whanue the preestis hadden go out of the 
seyntuarie, a cloude fillide the hows of 
the Lord; and the preestis my3ten not1 
stonde and mynystre, for the cloude; for 
whi the glorye of the Lord hadde fillid 
the hows of the Lord. Thanne Salomon 12 
seide, The Lord seide, that he wolde 


dwelle in a cloudet. Y bildynge hanes i cloude s 


bildid an hows in to thi dwelling place, i @ myist and 
in to thi moost stidefast trone with outen book: of Paralip 
vi.c®. Lire 


ende. And the kyng turnede his face, 14 here. c. 
and blesside al the chirche in Israel; for 

al the chirche of Israel stood’. And Sa-15 

lomon seide, Blessid be the Lord God of 

Israel, that spak with his mouth to Dauid, 

my fadir, and performyde in hise hondis, 

and seide, Fro the dai in which Y ledde16 

my puple Israel out of Egipt, Y chees not 

a citee of alle the lynagis of Israel, that 

an hows schulde be bildid, and my name 

schulde be there; but Y chees Dauid, that 

he schulde be ouer my puple Israel. And 17 

Dauid, my fadir, wolde bilde¥ an hows 

to the name of the Lord God of Israel. 

And the Lord seide to Dauid, my fadir, 18 

That thou thou3tist in thin herte to bilde 

an hows to my name, thou didist wel, 

tretynge this same thing in soule*; nethe-19 

les thou schalt not bilde an hows to me, 

but thi sone, that schal go out of thi 

reynes, he schal bilde an hows to my 

name. The Lord hathY confermyd his20 

word, which? he spak; and Y stood for 

Dauid, my fadir, and Y sat on* the trone 

of Israel, as the Lord spak; and Y haue 

bildid an hows to the name of the Lord 

God of Israel. And Y haue ordeyned2i , . 
there a place of the arke, in which arke — stood bifore the 
the boond of pees of the Lord is, which er E ce 
he smoot with oure fadris, whanne thei  Prests aloone | 
3eden out of the lond of Egipt. Forsotheb 22 auter of en- 
Salomon stood bifoor the auter{ of the 


shows aru. ¢ beeldide aru. 


Yhath nowy. 2 that1. 


® upon 1. 


VIIT. 22——30. 


pees of the Lord, the whiche he smoot 
with oure faders, whanne thei wenten 
20ut of the loond of Egipt. Forsothe 
Salomon stood before the auter of the 
Lord, in the si3t of the chyrch of Yrael ; 
and he spradde out his hoondis into 


23heuene, and seith, Lord God of Yvrael, - 


there is not lijk of" thee, God in heuene 
aboue, and upon erthe beneeth, the which 
kepist couenaunt and mercy to thi ser- 
uauntis, that goon before thee in al her 
2therte; the which keptist to Dauid, my 
fader, thi seruaunt, that thou speke to 
hym; with mouth thou speke, and with 
hoondis thon hast fulfillid, as this dai 
25proueth. Now thanne, Lord God of 
Irael, kepe to thi seruaunt Dauid, my 
fader, that thou speke to hym, seiynge, 
There shal not be doon awey a man 
before me of thee, that sitte vpon the 
trone of Irael, so neuerthelater if thi 
sonis kepen thi weye, that thei goon be- 
fore me, as thou wentist in my si3t. 
26 And now, Lord God of Irael, thi wordis 
ben thei fastned, that thou speke to thi 
e7seruaunt Dauid, my fader. Thanne 
whethir it is to trowe, that vereli God 
dwelle vpon erthe; forsothe if heuene, 
and heuenes of henens mowen not take 
thee, myche more this hows, that I haue 
28 beeldid to thee. But behold to the ori- 
soun of thi seruaunt, and to the preiers 
of hym, Lord my God ; here the ympne, 
and the orysoun, that thi seruaunt 
z9preieth before thee to day; that thin 
eyen ben openyd vpon this hows ni3t 
and day, vpon the hows, of the which 
thou seydyst, My name shal be there; 
that thou here the orisoun, that thi ser- 
30uaunt preieth to thee in this place; that 
thou here the preier of thi seruaunt, and 
of thi puple Irael, what euere thing he 
shal preye in this place, and thou here 
in the stede of thi dwellynge place in 
heuene ; and whanne thou herist, thou 


III. KINGS. 


185 


Lord, in the siz3t of the chirch of Israel ; 
and he helde forth hise hondis a3ens 
heuene, and seide, Lord God of Israel, no2) 
God in heuene aboue, nether® on@ erthe 
bynethe, is lijk thee, which kepist coue- 
naunt and mercy to thi seruauntis, that 
goon bifor thee in al her herte; and thow24 


. : t thi wordis, 
kepist to Dauid, my fadir, thi seruaunt, ee 
ged : Berries 

tho thingis whiche thou hast spoke to ness is signe- 
" é , fied herbi in 
him; bi mouth thou hast spoke, and bi — God, but in 


. . . shi 
hondis thou hast fillid*, as this day preu- he geo pete 


eth. Now therfor, Lord God of Israel, 25 od ben bihis 
kepe thou to thi seruaunt Danid, my 


sent Dis they 
i 2 . 2 : vere wei he 
fadir, tho thingis whiche thou spakist to f 


silf; therfor this 
is the sentence, 


hym, and seidist, A man of thee schal not thi wordie Len 
be taken awei bifor me, whieh man schal Bie ‘ 
4 f ; thou to me and 
sitte on‘ the trone of Israel, so netheles if toxittaectays 
thi sones kepen thi weye, that thei go of Dauyth, 


stidefastnesse 


bifor me, as thou 3edist in my sizt. And 26of soulein goo 


: ‘ biding, th 
now, Lord God of Israel, thi wordis} be ilerintoe ; 
maad stidfast, whiche thou spakist to thi {ytd fo 


seruaunt Dauid, my fadir. Therfor whe-27 “iv “re. © 
ther it is to gesse, that God dwellith verily + gz Goa 
ons erthe{; for if heuene, and heuene of  @ellith verily 
on erthe ; bi 
heuenes moun not take thee, how myche eas exelud- 
e ° esha ierenie ith the errour 
more this hows, which" Y bildid' to thee, 


of hem, that 
a asiden that 
‘mai not take thee*. But, my Lord God, 28 fia ti the. 


ait + can  Godhed hath 
biholde thou to the preiere§ of thi ser- maniss forme, 
uaunt, and to the bisechyngis of hym; pile Se 
here thou the ‘ympne, ether! preysing, and to the preier, 
ymp 4 etc., as if he 
preiere™, which” thi seruaunt preieth bifor  scide, this hows 
is not bildid, 


thee to day; that thin i3en be openyd on® 29 7) ian 
this hows bi niz3t and dai, on® the hows, dvello ther, as 
of? which thou seidist, My name schal een 
be there; that thou here the preier, which’ — eris maad there 
thi seruaunt preieth to thee in this place; (eye a hon 
that thou here the bisechyng of thi SET = a ae ene 
uaunt, and of thi puple Israel, what euer excercise of 
thing he preieth™ in this place, and here achiping. Lire 
thous’ iu the place of thi dwellyng in mo 
heuene ; and whanne thou hast herd, thou 

schalt be mereyful. If a man synneth3i 

ajens a man, and hath ony ooth, bi which 

he is holdun boundun, and cometh for the 

ooth in to thin hows, bifor thin auter, 


uOm. £ prom. V kepist acern. 


cnet. upon in xxix, ¢ fulfillid 1. fupons, guponr Bthat, ‘haue bildid 1. | © Om. «. 
1 Om. 1. m the preiere lL n that 1. ° upon I. P Om. c. q that 1. r preie KX. thou ¢té i. 
t he come 1. 
Bb 


VOL, I. 


186 


si shalt be merciful. 
into his neijbour, and haue eny ooth, bi 
‘the which streyned he be holdyn, and 
come for the ooth before thi auter, into 
32 thin hows, thou shalt here in heuen, and 
doon, and thou shalt deme thi seruauntis ; 
condempnynge the wickid, and 3eeldynge 
his weye vpon his heed, iustifiynge the 
rijtwise, and 3eeldynge to hymn after his 
a3riztwisnes, If thi puple Irael shul flee 
his enemyes, for he is to synne to thee, 
and doynge penaunce, and knowlechynge 
to thi greet name, comen, and honouren, 
3iand preyen thee in this hows, here thou 
in heuene, and for3if the synne of thi 
puple Irael; and thou shalt lede hem 
ajen into the loond, that thon 3af to the 
ssfadres of hem. If heuene were closid, 
and shal not reyne for the synnes of 
hem, and preiynge in this place, penaunce 
doon to thi name, and fro her* synnes 
36 weren conuertid for her affliccioun, here 
thou hem in heuene, and for3if the synnes 
of thi seruauntis, and of thi puple Irael, 
and shew to hem a good weye, bi the 
which thei goon, and 3if reyne vpon the 
loond, that thou hast 3ouun to thi puple 
37in to possessioun. ‘If that hungreY were 
growen ‘vp on” the erthe, or were pesti- 
lence, or corrupt eyr, or fretynge, or 
locust, or rust, and turmentith hym, and 
his enemy besegynge the 3atis, al ven- 
ssiaunce, al infirmyte, al cursynge, and 
wisshynge, that shall falle to eny man of 
thi puple Yrael, if a man knowe the 
wounde of his herte, and stretche out his 
39hoondis in this hows, thou shalt here in 
heuene, in the place of thi dwellynge, and 
thou shalt be aj3en plesid, and thou shalt 
doo that thou 3yue to echon after alle 
her weyes, as thou shalt seen the* herte 
of hym ; for thou alone hast knowun the 
40herte of alle the sonys of men, that thei 
dreden thee alle days in the which thei 


Wthe arn. * Om. £ pr.m. 


III. KINGS.” 


If a man synneth — 


y hungir if yt ce. 


VILE, 3140? 


thou schalt here® in heuene, and thous 
schalt do’, and thou schalt deme thi ser- 
uauntis; and thou schalt condempne the 
wickid man, and schalt 3elde his weie 
on* his heed, and thou schalt iustifie the 
just man, and schalt¥ 3elde to hym vp? 
his rijtfulnesse®. 
hise enemmyes, for he schal do synne to 
thee +, and thei doen penaunce”, and 
knoulechen to thi greet name, and comen, 
and worschipen, and bisechen thee in this 
hows, here thou in heuene, and for3yuess 
thou the synne of thi puple; and thou 
schalt lede hem ajen in to the lond, which 
thou hast 3oue to the fadris of hem. If3s5 
heuene is closid, and reyneth not for the 
synnes of hem‘, and thei preyen in this 
place, and doen penaunce to thi name, 
and ben conuertid® fro her synnes for ‘her 
turment, here thou hem in heuene, and 36 
for3yue thou the synnes of thi seruauntis, 
and of thi puple Israel, and schewe thou 
to hem goodf weie, bi which thei schulen 
go, and 3yue thou reyn to hem on® the 
lond, which thou hast 3oue to hem in 
to possessioun. If hungur risith in the37 
lond, ether pestilence is, ether corrupt eyr 
is, ether rust, ether locuste!, ether myldew, 
and his* enemy turmentith hym, and bi- 
segith the 3atis!, al™ wounde", al sike- 


nesse®, al cursyng, and wichyng? of yuel, 38° 


that bifallith to ech man of thi puple 
Israel, if€ ony man knowith the wounde- 
of his herte, and holdith forth hise hondis. 


in this hows, thou schalt here™ in heuene, 39 


in the place of thi dwellyng, and thou 
schalt do mercy, and thou schalt do that 
thou 3yue to ech man vpes alle hise weies, 
as thou seest his herte; for thou aloone 
knowist the herte of alle the sones of ‘men, 
that thei drede thee in alle daies in4o 
whiche thei lyuen ont the face of the lond, 
which" thou hast 3oue to oure fadrys. 
Ferthermore and whanne an alien, which’ 41 


Zypince. @in 4. 


If thi puple Israel fleeth 33 


+ do synne to 
thee ; that is, 
the synne to 


comynge, schal 


be cause of 
flist suynge. 
Lire here. c. 


Y thou schalt 1. 2 aftir 1. 
e altogidre turned 1. 
D veniaunce I. 
U that 1. 


where himi. vv do tusily 1. 
b penaunce, or forthinken her syne 1. . 
hthat 1. ialocuste a. k if his 1. 
jngu. Pal wischyngr. 4 andif41. 


w thou schalt 1. * upon 1. 
Cthatr. dIment. 
1 3atis of him 1. ™ and al 1. 

Thereit 1. Saftir1. upon 1. 


4 rijtwisnesse 1. 
fagood1. & upon. 
© sikenesse, al deuour. 

¥ that t. : 


VITT. 41—¥49. 


lyuen vpon the face of the erthe, that thou 
4thast 3euen to oure fadris. Forthermore 
and an alyen, that is not of thi puple 
Irael, whanne he cometh fro a ferre loond 
for thi name; forsothe thi greet name 
shal be herd, and thi strong hoond, and 
42thi strau3t out arme ouer al; whanne 
thanne he shal come, and preye in this 
43place, thou shalt here in heuene, in the 
firmament of thi dwellynge place, and 
thou shalt doo alle thingis, for the whiche 
the alien hath inwardli clepid thee, that 
alle puplis of erthis Jernen to drede thi? 
name, as thi puple Yrael, and proue thei, 
for thi name is inwardly clepid vpon this 
sihows, that I haue beeldid. If thi puple 
were goon out to batail ajens his ene- 
myes, bi the weye whidir euere thou 
shalt seende hem, thei shulen preye thee 
a3en the weye of the citee that thon hast 
chosun, and aj3ens the hows that I haue 
45 beeldid to thi name, and thou shalt here 
in heuene the orysouns of hem, and the 
preyers of hem, and doon the doom of 
sshem. That yf thei synnen to thee, there 
is not a man that synneth not, and 
wrooth thou shalt take hem to her ene- 
myes, and eaytife were lad into the loond 
4jof enemyes, ferre or ni3, and doon pe- 
naunce in her herte, in the place of ecai- 
tifte, and turned han preyed in her cay- 
tifte, seilynge, We han synned, wickidly 
we han doon, vnpitously we han born 
4svs; and weren turned to thee in al her 
herte, and in al her soule, in the loond 
of her enemyes, to the which catife thei 
weren lad, and preyen thee ajens the 
weie of her loond that thou hast 3ouen 
to the faders of hem, and of the citee 
that thou hast chosun, and of the temple 
49that I haue beeldid to thi name, thou 
shalt here in heuen, in the firmament of 
thi see, and the orysouns of hem, and 
the preiers of hem, and thou shalt* doon 


» the a. 


¥ forsothe 1. 
€uponr. 4 that 1. 
k hond a. | her prisonyng 1. 
q forn ajens1. 'that1. $ ajenst. 
y han trespassid 1. 


x streizt out 1. = and in Kx. 
© haue bildid 1. 


t that 1, 


II. KINGS. 


2 the whiche 1. 
f forn ajens 1. 
m al to gidre turned 1. 
D ajens I. 


187 
is not of thi puple Israel, cometh fro a fer 
lond for thi name; for’ thi grete name, 
and thi strong hond, and thin arm ‘holdun «2 
forth* schal be herd euery where; ther- 
for whanne he cometh, and preieth in 
this place, thou schalt here in heuene, in 43 
the firmament of thi dwellyng place, and 
thou schalt do alle thingis, for whiche’ the 
alien clepith thee, that alle puplis of londis 
lerne to drede thi name, as thi puple Is- 
rael doith, aud preue*, that thi name is 
elepid® on® this hows, which4 Y bildide®. 
If thi puple goith out to batel ajens hise +4 
enemyes, bi the weie whidir euer thou 
sendist hem, thei schulen preye thee a3ens 
the weie of the citee which thou hast 
chose, and a3ens the hows which’ Y bild- 
ide" to thi name, and thou sehalt here in4s 
heuene the preyeris of hem, and the bi- 
sechyngis of hem, and thou schalt make 
the doom of hem. That if thei synnen to 46 
thee, for no man is that synneth not, and 
thou art wrooth, andi bitakist hem to her 
enemyes, and thei ben led prisoneris in to 
the lond* of enemyes, fer ether ny3, and thei 47 
doon penaunce in her herte in the place of 
prisonyng!, and ben conuertid™, and _bi- 
sechen in her prisonyng, and seien, We 
han® synned, we han" do wickidli, we 
han® do vnfeithfuli; and®™ thei turnen 48 
ajen to thee in al her herte and al? her 
soule, in the lond of her enemyes, to which? 
thei ben led prisoneris, and thei preyen 
thee ajsens' the weie of her lond which" 
thou hast 30ue to her fadris, and of$ the 
citee whicht thou hast chose, and of" the 
temple which’ Y bildide* to thi name, 
thou schalt here in heuene, in the firma-49 
ment of thi seete, the preiers of hem, and 
the bisechingis of hem, and thou shalt 
make the doom of hem; and thou schalt 50 
be merciful to thi puple, that synnede* 
to thee, and to alle the wickidnessis, bi 
whiche thei trespassiden’ ajens thee; and 


© shal a. 


a preue thei 1. b inwardly clepid 1, 
gthata. DP haue bildid1. | therfore and 1. 
no andifs. °inalrz. P the which 1. 
w haue bildid 1. * hath synned 1. 


n hane 1. 
v that 1. 


Bb2 


188° 


50the doom of hem; and thou shalt haue 
merci to thi puple, that hath synned to 
thee, and to alle the wickidnesses bi the 
whiche thei han trespassid in thee; and 
thou shalt 3yue merci before hem, that 
hadden hem caitife, that thei doon merci 
sito hem. Forsothe thi puple he is, and 
thin heritage, whom thou hast brought 
out of the loond of Egipte, fro the mydil 
s2of the yren furneis; that thin eyen ben 
opened to the preyer of thi seruaunt, and 
of thi puple Yrael; and thou shalt here 
hem in alle thingis, for the whiche thei 
ssinwardly shulen clepe thee. Forsothe 
thou hast seuerde hem to thee in to 
herytage of alle puplis of the® erthe, as 
thou speke bit Moysen, thi seruaunt, 
whanne thou laddist out oure fadris fro 
34 Egipt, Lord God. It is doon forsothe, 
whanne Salomon hadde ful eendid, prei- 
ynge the Lord al the orysoun, and this 
preier, he aroos® fro the si3t of the auter 
of the Lord; forsothe either knee he 
hadde pi3t into the erthe, and the 
hoondys he hadde sprad out to heuene. 
53 Thanne he stood, and blesside to al the 
chirche ‘of Yraelf with a greet voys, sey- 
s6ynge, Blessid is* the Lord God, that 3af 
rest to his puple Irael, after alle thingis 
that he spak; there felle not of > a word, 
forsothe not oon, of alle the wordis that 
a7he spak bi Moyses, his seruaunt. Be the 
Lord oure God with vs, as he was with 
oure faders, not forsakynge vs, ne throw- 
ssynge a ferre; but bowe he oure hertis to 
hym, that we goon in alle the weys of 
hym, and kepe the maundements of hym, 
and cerymonyes, and domes, what euere 
59 he comaundide to oure fadres. And ben 
thes myn wordis, in the whiche I haue 
preied before the Lord, nei3zynge to thee 
Lord oure God day and ny3t, that he do 
doom to his seruaunt, and to his puple 
60 Irael bi eche days; and witen alle pu- 


II. KINGS. 


VIII. 502—6o," 


thou schalt do merci bifor tho men, that’ 
hadden hem prisoneris, that tho men do 
mercy to hem. For it is thi puple, andi 
thin erytage, whiche thou leddist out of 
the lond of Egipt, fro the myddis of yrone? 
furneist ; that thin y3en be opyn to thes2 + ivone sur- 
. ‘ : neis ; that is. 
bisechyng of thi seruaunt, and of thi pu- hard at the. 
ple Israel; and thou schalt here hem in~ 7276; otirun 
alle thingis, for whiche* thei clepen? thee. 
For thou hast departid hem to thee in toss 
heritage fro alle the puplis of erthe, as 
thou spakist bi Moyses, thi sernaunt, 
whanne thon, Lord God, leddist oure fa- 
dris out of Egipt. Forsothe it was don, 51 
whanne Salomon, preiynge the Lord, hadde 
fillid al this preier and bisechyng, he roos® 
fro the’ sijt of the auter of the Lord; for® 
he hadde set fast euer either kne to the 
erthe, and haddef holde forth the® hondis 
to heuene. Therfor he stood, and bless-ss 
ide al the chirche of Israel, and seide with 
greet vois, Blessid be the Lord God of Is-5e 
rael, that 3af" reste to his puple Israel, 
bi alle thingis whiche he spak; a word 
felde not doun, sotheli nether' oon*, of alle 
goodis! whiche he spak bi Moises, his ser- 
uaunt. Oure Lord God be with vs, as he 57 
was with oure fadris, and forsake not vs, 
nether caste™ awey; but bowe he ouress 
hertis. to hyin silf, that we go in alle hise 
weies, and kepe hise comaundementis", and 
cerymonyes, and domes, whiche euere he 
comaundide® to oure fadris. And thesesy 
wordis of me, bi whiche Y preiede? bifor 
the Lord, be? nei3ynget to oure Lord God 
bi dai and ni3t, that he make doom to™ 
his seruauut, and to his puple Israel bi 
alle daies; and alle the puplis of erthe co 
wite, that the Lord hym silf is God, and 
noon’ ‘is ouert ‘with out® hym. Also oure 61 
herte be perfit with oure Lord God, that 
we go in hise domes, and kepe hise co- 
maundementis", as and” to dai. Therfor 62 
the kyng, and al Israel with hym, offriden 


} be neizynge, 
etc.; that is, 
worthi to be 
herd bifor God. 
Lire here. c. 


¢Qm.ac. ¢tourn. erosescerH. fOm.£ prim. & Om. cern. » Om. au. 


zthe yronet. the whiche 1. 


fhehadde1 hist. bhath30ue1 'Om.1, 
o hestis 1. © hath comaundid 1. P haue preied 1. 
tOm.cem, UOm.1. Vhestis1. W also 1. 


b schulen clepe Kx pr.m. 


q be thei 1. 


froosup1. 40Om.1.  &sothely 1. 
1 the gode thingis 1. ™ caste us 1. 

g g 
Ttomei. Snoon other cr pr. m. Ging. 


k Om. cl. 


VIL1, 61—IX. 3. 


plis of the erthe, for the Lord he is! 
God*, and there is noon more with out 
6\hym. Forsothe be oure herte parfite 
with the Lord oure God, ‘that we goon! 
in the domys of hym, and kepen™ the 
62heestis of hym, as and to day. Thanne 
the kyng, and al Yrael with hym, of- 
freden slayn sacrifices before the Lord. 
63 And Salomon slew3 pesible oostis, that 
he offrede to the Lord; two and twenti 
thousand” of oxen, and an hundryd and 
twenti thousand" of sheep; and the kyng 
and the sones of Yrael halweden the 
sitemple of the Lord. In that day the 
kyng halwide the mydil of the porche, 
that was before the hows of the Lord; 
forsothe he dide brent offryngis there, 
and sacrifice, and the talw3 of the pesible 
thingis; for the brasen auter that was 
before the Lord was to litil, and my3te 
not take the brent offrynge, and the sa- 
erifice, and the talw3 of pesible thingis. 
65Thanne Salomon made in that tyme a 
solempne feest day, and al Irael with 
hym, a greet multitude, fro the entre of 
Emath vnto the ryuer of Egipt, before 
the Lord oure God, seuen days and seuen 
66 dais, that is, fourteen dais. And in the 
ei3t° day he lafte the puple, the which 
blessynge to the kyng wente into her 
tabernaclis, gladynge and with myrye 
herte vpon alle the goodis that God 
hadde doon to Dauid, his seruaunt, and 
to Irael, his puple. 


CAP. IX. 


1 It is doon forsothe, whanne Salomon 
hadde perfourmed the beeldynge of the 
hows of the Lord, and the beeldynge of 
the kyng, and al that he desyryde, and 

2wolde make, the Lord aperide to hym 
the secounde tyme, as he aperyde to hym 

3in Gabaon. And the Lord seide to hym, 
I haue herd thin orisoun, and thi preyer, 
that thou preiedist before me; I haue 

k a God cz. 


' Om. £ prom. 1 go we E pr.m. 


Y oxen 1. z he offride two I. 
fthe whicher. & thei weren cI. 
© hast bisou3t 1. 


x slew3 1. 
¢ Salomon 1. 
D that 1. 


Ill. KINGS. 


189 


sacrifices bifor the Lord. And Saloiones 
killide* pesible sacrifices, whiche he of- 
fride to the Lord; of oxisY two? and 
twenti thousynde, and of scheep sixe seore 
thousynde; and the king and the sones of 
Israel halewiden the temple of the Lord. 
In that dai the kyng halewidet the yddil 61+ he king 
‘ halewide; that 

of the greet street, that was bifor the hows _ js, made to be 
of the Lord; for he made there brent sa-  D\ewid. «v4 
crifice, and sacrifice’, and the innere fat- ‘ety, that sa- 

5 eat crifices shulden 
nesse of pesible thingis; for the brasun 
auter that was bifor the Lord, was to 
litil, and my3te’ not take the brent sacri- 


be brent there, 
that my3ten 
fice, and the sacrifice’, and the ynnere 


not be brent 
on the auter: 
this halewing 
was muad bi 
the bischop, 


fatnesse of pesible thingis. Therfor Salo-6s he Rte 
mon made in that tyme a solempne feeste, = peer ee 
and al Israel with hym, a grete multi- at the stiring 
tude, fro the entryng of math ‘til to’ the pg es 
stronde of Egipt, bifor oure Lord God, in 340 have 
seuene daies and seuene daies, that is, “ere. © 


fourtene daies. And in the ci3the day he 6 
delyueryde the puplis, whiche‘ blessiden 
the kyng, and 3eden forth in to her taber- 
naclis, and weren& glade and of ioyful 
herte on™ alle the goodis whiche! God 
hadde do to Dauid, his seruaunt, and to 
Israel, his puple. 


CAP. IX. 


Forsothe* it was doon, whanne Salo-1 
mon had perfourmed the bildyng of the 
hows of the Lord, and the bildyng of the 
kyng, and al thing that he coueitide, and 
wolde make, the Lord apperide to Salo-2 
mon! the secunde tyme, as he apperide to 
hym™ in Gabaon. And the Lord seide to3 
hym, Y haue herd thi preier, and thi bi- 
sechyng, which" thou bisou3tist® bifor 
© eiztetlie cE. 


m kepe we x pr.m, ™ thousendis E. 


¢ offryng t. 4 ynto 1. 


bv it my3t 1. 
Thym a. ™ Salomon a. 


a offryng 1. 
ae k Andi. 


hof1. i that 1. 


190 


halwid this hows, that thou hast beeld?, 
that I putte my name there into ener- 
more; and myn eyen and myn herte 
4shulen be there alle days. Forsothe thou, 
if thou gost before me, as thi fader 3ede, 
in symplenes of herte, and euennesse, and 
dost alle thingis that I haue comaundid 
to thee, and my domys, and my lawful 
sthingis kepest, I shal sette the trone of 
thi rewme ypon Irae] in to euermore, as I 
spak to Dauid, thi fader, seiynge, There 
shal not be doon awey a man of thi kyn- 
«rede fro the see of Irae). Forsothe if bi 
turnynge awey 3¢ and 3o0ure sonys weren 
turned aweye, not folwynge me, ne kep- 
yuge myn heestis and cerymonyns, that 
I purposide to 30w, but 3e goon awey, 
and herein alyen goddis, and honouren 
7hem, I shal doo awey Irael fro the vtter- 
moost of the erthe that I hane 3euen to 
hem; and the temple that I hane halwid 
to my naine, I shal throwe awey fro my 
si3t ; and Irael shal be into prouerhbe 
gand into fable%, to alle puplis. And this 
hows shal be into exsanmple; alle that 
passen bi it, shulen wondre, and whistlen, 
and seyn, Whi dide the Lord thus to 
y this" Joond, and to this hows? And thei 
shulen answere, For thei forsoken the 
Lord her God, that ladde out the faders 
of hem fro the loond of Egipt; and thei 
folweden alien goddis, and herieden hem, 
and honourden hem; therfor the Lord 
10 brou3te yn vpon hem al this yuel. For- 
sothe fulfillid twenti 3eer, after that Salo- 
mon hadde beeldid two howsis, that is, 
the hows of the Lord, and the hows of 
ithe kyng, Iram, the kyng of Tire, 3eu- 
ynge to kyng Salomon cedre and firre 
trees, and gold, after al that he hadde 
nede ; thanne Salomon jaf to [ram twenti 
12bur3 touns in the loond of Galilee. And 
Yram wente out fro Tyro for to se the 
bur3 touns, that Salomon hadde 3euen to 
ishym, and thei plesiden not to hym; and 
he seith, Whether thes ben the citees that 


P bildide peru. 


P that 1. 
¥ Om. 1. 


q hast bildid 1. 


Wihati1, meni. ¥ hath brou3t 1. 


Ii]. KINGS. 


@ fablis «a. 


r haue comaundid 1. 
2 upon I. 


IX. 4—13. 


me; Y haue halewid this hows, which? 
thou bildidist4, that Y schulde sette there 
my name with outen ende; and myn i3en 
and myn herte schulen be there in alle 
daies. Also if thou goist bifore me, as4 
thi fadir 3ede, in simplenesse of herte, and 
in equite, and doist alle thingis whiche Y 
comaundide’ to thee, and kepist my domes, 
and my lawful thingis, Y schal sette thes 
trone of thi rewme on‘ Israel with outen 
ende, as Y spak to Dauid, thi fadir, and 
seide, A man of thi kyn schal not be takun 
awei fro the trone of Israel. Forsothe ifs 
bi turnyng awei 3e and 3oure sones turnen 
awey, and suen not me, and kepen “not 
myn hestis and cerynionyes, whiche Y set- 
tidet forth to 3ou, but 3e goen, and wor- 
schipen alien goddis, and onouren hem ‘bi 
outward" reuerence’, Y schal do awei Is-7 
rael fro the face of the lond which” Y 3aue 
to hem; and Y schal caste awei fro my 
si3t the temple}, which Y halewid to my 
name; and Israel schal be in to a pro- 
uerbe and in to a fable, to alle puplis. Ands 
this hows schal be in to ensaumple of 
Goddis offence; ech man that schal passe 
bi it, schal wondre, and schal hisse, and 
schal seye, Whi hath the Lord do thus to 
this lond, and to this hows? And thei*9 
schulen answere, For thei forsoken her 
Lord God, that ladde the fadris of hem 
out of Egipt; and thei sueden alien god- 
dis, and worschipiden hem, and onouriden 
hem; therfor the Lord brou3teY in on? 
hem al this yuel. Sotheli whanne twenti 10 
3eer weren fillid’, aftir that Salomon hadde 
bildid tweyne housis, that is, the hows of 
the Lord, and the hows of the kyng, 
while Hiram, kyng of Tire, 3af to Salo-1 
mon trees of cedre, and of beech, and 
gold, bi al thing that he hadde nedeful ; 
thanne Salomon 3af to Hiram twenti citees 
in the lond of Galile. And Hiram 3ede 12 
out of Tyre that he schulde se the citees, 
whiche Salomon hadde 3oue to hym, and 
tho plesiden not hym; and he seide, Whe-13 


t+ the lemple ; 
in distriynge it, 
as it was doon 
bi Nabugodo- 
nosor. Lire 
here. Cc. 


tr thi arn. 


Suponi. thaue sett 1. sette EL. 


U vilirward K. 
® fulfillid 1. © firr 1. : 


IX. 14—-25.°>° 


thou hast 3euen to me, brother? And he 
elepide hem the loond of Chabul, vnto this 
isday. Forsothe Iram sente to kyng Salo- 
mon an hundrid and twenti talentis of 
isgold. This is the summe of the expensis, 
that kyng Salomon offrede to beelde the 
hows of the Lord, and his hows of Mello, 
and the wal of Jerusalem, and Ezer, and 
16 Magedo, and Gazer. Pharao, the kyng 
of Egipt, stiede vp, and took Gazer, and 
brente it vp with fier; and Chanane that 
dwellide in the citee he slew3, and 3af it 
into dower to his dou3ter, Salomons wijf. 
17 Thanne Salomon beeldide vp Gazer, and 
isthe nethir Bethron, and Balaad, and Pal- 


i9myram in the loond of wildirnes, and alle - 


the touns that to hym perteyneden, and 
weren withouten wal; and he made sikir 
the eitees of eharis‘, and the eytees of 
horsmen, and what euere thing to hym 
pleside for to beelde in Jerusalem, and in 
Liban, and in al the loond of his power. 
20 Al the puple that abood stylle of Amor- 
reis, Ethees, and Pherezeis, Euees, and 
Jebuseis, that ben not of the sones of 
2t Irael, of thes the sones that abiden stille 
in the loond, that is, whom the sones of 
Irael my3ten not throwe out, Salomon 
2zmade tributaries into this day. Of the 
sones forsothe of Irael kyng Salomon 
ordeynde not eny man to serue, but thei 
weren men fiz3ters, and the seruauntis of 
hym, and princis, and duykis, and pre- 
23feetis of charis and of hors. Forsothe 
thei weren prineis vpon alle the werkis 
of Salomon, prouostis fyue hundrid and 
fifti, that hadden the puple subiect, and 
24 to the ordeynd werkis comaundiden. The 
dou3ter forsothe of Pharao stiede vp fro 
the citee of Dauid in to hir hows, that 
Salomon hadde beeldid to hire; thanne 
23he bieldide Mello. Forsothe Salomon 
offride three sithes bi eche 3eer brent sa- 


III. KINGS: 19} 


thir thes ben the citees, whiche thou, bro- 

ther, hast 3oue to me? And he elepide 

tho citees the lond of Chabulf, ‘til in tof + lowl of Cha- 
this dai. Also Hiram sente to king Sa-14 ot date 
lomon sixe score talentis of gold. This is ee te 
the sumine of ‘costis{, whieh summe Salo- es the 
mon the kyng 3af% to bilde the hows of smmey | 
the Lord, and his house Mello, and the ne E. this 
wal of Jerusalem, and Ezer, and Mag- 


is the rente, 
geddo, and Gazer. Farao!, kyug of Egipt, 16 


which Salomon 
reiside ; and 
this is not re- 


stiede*, and took Gazer, and brente! it bi ae 
a ae : lettre goynge 
fier; and he killide Chananei, that dwell- next bifore, 


but to this that 
sueth aftirward 


ide in the citee, and 3af™ it in to dower? 

to? his doustir, the wijf of Salomon, Ther-17 {ens hie 
for Salomon bildide Gazer, and the lower Yiutries | 
Bethoron, and Balaath, and Palmyra in1s 

the lond of wildirnesse; and he made1s 
strong alle the townes, that’ perteyneden 
to hym, and weren with out wal, and the 
citees of chaaris, and the eitees of kny3tis, 
and what euer thing pleside hym to bilde 
in Jerusalem, and in the’ Liban, and in al 
the lond of his power. Salomon made tri-20 
butaries ‘til to’ this dai al the puple, that 
lefte of Ammorreis, Etheis, and Fereseis, 
and Eueys, and Jebuseys, that' ben not of 
the sones of Israel, the" sones of these2! 
hethen men, that® dwelliden in. the lond, 
that is, whiche* the sones of Israel my3ten 
not’ distrye. Sotheli kyng Salomon or-22 
deynede not ony man of the sones of Israel 
to sernej, but thei weren men werriours’, 
and mynystris? of him, and prinees, and 
dukis, and prefeetis* of his chares and 
horsis. Sotheli® fyue hundrid and _ fifti2s 
‘souereynes weren prinees® ouer alle the 
werkis of Salomon, whiehe’ prinees had- 
den the puple suget®, and comanididen to 
werkis ordeyned. Sothelif the dou3ter of 24 
Farao stiede’ fro the eitee of Dauid in to 
hir hows, ‘which hows Salomon hadde 
bildidi to hir; thanne he bildide Mello. 
Also Salomon offride in thre tymes bi 25 


§ to serue; 
that is, in vile 
werkis, and of 
the feeldis. 
Lire here. c. 


S tourys © pr.m. 


4 Hiram: © Chabul, éhat is, displesing K. 
b his owne 1. i And Farao 1. 
© the dower A pr.m. DEFILMOsbG. 


t whiche 1. wand the 1. w whiche 1. 
uauntis 1. @maistris1. ~> And 1. : 
fAndr. &stiedeupt. bthatx. i bildid it s. 


f ynto 1. 
K stiede up 1. 
P of DEFtKLMOxbe. 
the whiche sones 1. 

¢ princes weren souereyns I. 


# the expencis that kyng Salomon offride I 
m Farao jaf t. » that citee 1. 

r Om. 1. $ ynto 1. into s. 
y of werre 1. Zz ser- 
e suget do hem 1. 


1 to-brente c. 

q whiche 1. 

x Om.» 
d the whiche 1. 


192 


crifices ‘and pesible slayn' sacrifices", vpon 
the auter that he hadde beeldid to the 
Lord; and he brente the maad encense’ 
before the Lord, and perfite is the temple. 

26 Forsothe kyng Salomon made a nauee in 
Aziongaber, that is besyde Haylam, in 
the brenk of the Reed see, in Ydume 

27loond. And Yram sente in that nauee 
his seruauntis, shipmen, and wise of the 

28 see, with the” sernauntis of Salomon ; the 
whiche whanne thei weren comen in to 
Oofer, thens the taken gold of foure hun- 
drid and twenti talentis thei brou3ten to 
kyng Salomon. 


CAP. X% 


1 But and queen Sabaa, the loos of Salo- 
mon herd in the name of the Lord, she 
2cam to asaye hyn in derk sentensis. And 
she goon out with greet companye to 
Jerusalem, and ritchessis, and chamels 


berynge swote spices*, aud gold vnnoum- 


brid ful myche, and precious iemmys, 
cam to kyng Salomon, and spak to hym 
alle thingis that she hadde in hire herte. 
3And Salomon tan3te hire alle the wordis 
that she purposyde’; and there was not 
a word that my3te be vuknowun fro the 
kyng, and that he answerde not to hire. 
4Forsothe queen Sabaa seynge al the wis- 
dam of Salomon, and the hows that he 
shadde beeldid vp, and the metis of his 
bord, and the dwellynge placis of the 
seruauntis, and the ordris of the seruy- 
tours, and the clothis of hem, and the 
botelers, and the brent sacrificis the 
whiche he offride in the hows of the 
6 Lord, she hadde no more spirite. And 
she seide to the kyng, Sooth is the word 
7 that I herde in my loond, vpon thi wordis, 
and vpon thi wisdam; and I trowide not 
to the tellers to me, to the tyme that I 
my self cam; and I haue seen with myn 
eyen, and proued that the half partye 
8was not toold to me; more is thi wis- 


III. KINGS. 


IX. 26—xX. 8. 


alle 3eeris brent sacrifices and pesible sa- 

crifices, oni the auter which* he hadde 

bildid to the Lord; and he brente en- 

cense{ bifor the Lord, and the temple was tte brente 
performed. Also king Salomon made ‘o 26 him silt at 2 
schip! in Asiongaber, which™ is bisidis [i the bischors 
Haila, in the brenke of the Reed sea, and" ie penerg 
in the lond of Idumee. And Iram sente 27 

in that schip® hise seruauntis, schipmen, 

and kunnynge of the see, with the ser- 

uauntis of Salomon; and whanne thei 2s 

hadden come in to Ophir, thei brou3ten 

fro thennus gold of foure hundrid and 

twenti talentis to kyng Salomon. 


CAPT 


But also the queen of Saba, whanne1 
the fame of Salomon was herd, cam in the 
name of the Lord{ to tempte? hym in derk 


t cam in the 


and douti questiouns. And sche entride2 peat 

with myche felouschipe and richessis in perehe S 
to Jerusalem, and with camels berynge  Shivide him, 
swete smellynge thingis, and gold greetli  kepte not 


Moyses lawe, 
for sche was 

not boundun 
therto. Lire 

here. c. 


with out noumbre, and preciouse stoonys ; 
and sche cam to king Salomon, and spak 
to hym alle thingis whiche scbe hadde in 
hir herte. And Salomon tau3te hir alles 
wordis whiche sche hadde put forth; no 
word was, that my3te be hid fro the kyng, 
and which he answeryde not to hir. For-4 
sothe! the queen of Saba si3 al the wisdom 
of Salomon, and the hows which" he hadde 
bildid, and the metis of his table, and thes 
dwellyng places of hise seruauntis, and 
the ordris of mynystris*, and the clothis 
of hem, and the boteleris, and the brent 
sacrifices whiche he offride in the hows 
of the Lord; and sche hadde no more 
spirite. And sche seide to the kyng, Thee 
word is trewe, which' Y herde in my lond, 
of thi wordis, and of thi wisdom; and Y7 
bileuyde not to men tellynge to me, til Y*® 
my silf cam, and si3’ with myn ijen, and 
preuede that the half part was not teld 
to me; thi wisdom is more and thi werkis, 


dam and thi werkis, than the loos that than the tale’ which* Y herde. Thi mens 
Om. Fr. %Om.£ pr.m.r. Yeenser. WOm.4. * oynementis £ pr.m. 
a 
* fupons. Kthat1. Janauey Ep sup.ras. ™thatr. ™Om.1s. naueye ELP.  P assaye I. 
4 And3. ¥that1, ®the men sernynge him. tthatr. 0 Om.m. VY sizc. Wfamex. * that 1. 


xX. O—~17. 


IT haue herd. Blessid benY thi men, and 
blessid benY thi seruauntis, thes that 
stonden’Y before thee euermore, and heren 
9thi wisdam. The Lord thi God be blessid, 
to whom thou hast plesid, and hath putte 
thee vpon the troone of Yrael ; forthi that 
the Lord shal loue Yrael into euermore, 
and he hath sette thee a kyng, that thou 
10doo doom and ry3twisnes. Thanne she 
3af to the. kyng an hundrid and twenti 
talentis of gold, and many swote spicis* 
ful myche, and precious iemmys; there 
ben no more brou3t spicis? so manye, 
as* thoo ‘the whiche® queen Sabaa 3af to 
‘ikyng Salomon. But and the nauee of 
Yram, ‘the which® bare gold of Oofer, 
brou3te to’ of Oofer manye tyyn® trees 
12ful myche, and precious iemmys. And 
the kyng made of the tyme* trees beddis, 
and of the hous of the Lord, and of the 
kyngis hows, and harpis, and syngynge 
instrumentis to syngers; there ben not 
brou3t syche maner tyme® trees ne seen, 
isvnto the day that is now. Forsothe 
kyng Salomon 3af to the queen Sabaa 
alle thingis that she wold, and axed‘ of 
hym, out take thes thingis the whiche 
freeli he 3af to hire in the kyngis 3ift ; 
the which is turned a3en, and wente into 
ithire loond with hire seruauntis. For- 
sothe the peyse of gold, that was offrid 
to Salomon bi eche 3eer, was of sex hun- 
drid and sexe and sexti talentis of gold, 
1sout take that men offreden, that weren 
vpon tollis, and marchaundis, and alle the 
sellynge sheeldis, and alle kyngis of Ara- 
is bye, and duykis of the loond. And kyng 
Salomon made two hundrid sheeldis of 
moost pure gold; sexe hundrid ouncis of 
17 gold he 3af in’ a plate of o sheeld; and 
thre hundrid bokelers of moost proued 
gold; thre hundrid pound of gold clo- 
theden o bokelere. And the kyng putte 
hem in the hows of the wijlde wode of 


II. KINGS. : 193 


beu blessid, and thi seruauntis ben blessid, 
these that stonden bifor thee euere, and 
heren thi wisdom. Blessid be thi Lords 
God, whom thou plesedist, and hath set 
thee on the trone of Israel; for the Lord 
louyde Israel with outen ende, and hath 
ordeynyd thee kyng, that thou schuldist 
do doom and ri3tfulnesse. Therfor sche 10 
3af to the kyng sixe score talentis of gold, 
and ful many swete smellynge thingis, 
and precious stoonus; so many swete 
smellynge thingis weren no more brou3t, 
as tho which the queen of Saba 3af to 
kyng Salomon. But also the schip of Hi- 1! 
ram, that brou3te gold fro Ophir, brou3te 
fro Ophir ful many trees of tyme, and 
preciouse stoonys. And kyng Salomon 12 
made of the trees of tyme vndir set- 
tyngist of the hows of the Lord, and of Pe ae 


the kyngis hows, and harpis, and sitols Salomon seith, 
i that he made 


to syngeris; siche trees of tyme weren _ therof grees, 
not brou3t nether seyn, til in to present yin ie 


dai. Sotheli kyng Salomon jaf to the 13i to the hows 


age i of the Lord, 
queen of Saba alle thingis whiche sche  andin the 
5 sidis weren 
wolde’, and axide of hym, outakun these _ siche trees, 
‘ » . 5 . that men 
thingis whiche he hadde 3o0ue to hir bi schulden lene 
ots . on ‘ hei there. 
the kyngis 3ifte wilfuli; and sche turnede Fo here c. 


az3en, and 3ede in to hir lond with hir 
seruauntis. Forsothe* the we3te of gold, 14 

that was offrid to Salomon bi ech jeer, was 

of sixe hundrid and sixe and sixti talentis 

of gold, outakun® that which men* that® is 

weren onf the talagis, ‘that ts, rentis for 

thingis borun aboute in the lond®, and 
marchauntis', and alle men_ sillynge 
scheeldys, and alle! the kyngis of Arabie, 

and dukis* of erthe! 3auen. And kyng16¢ 
Salomon made two hundrid scheeldis of 

pureste™ gold {; he 3af sixe hundrid siclis 

of gold in to the" platis of oo scheeld ; eat 
and he made thre hundrid of° bokeleris 17 weren of other 
of prened gold; thre hundrid talentis of a ig 
gold clothiden? o bokeler. And the kyng 

puttide’ tho" in the hows of the forest of 


t of pureste 
gold ; without 


yOm.acern. y¥stoden 4. %oynementis x pr.m. @than £ pr.m. thate prim. © that c. 
4tohem £ pr.m. ¢tyyn ap. faxeapr.m. & to AFH. 
y this present 1. 7 wolde haue 1. ®Certis 1. > withoute 1. ¢ that 1. 4 the men plures. ¢whiche 1. 


h that marchauntis 1. 


Fuponi. 8 Om. 1. 
P hiliden 1. 


1Om.1. ° Om. perKNnoxc. 
VO!I,. IT. 


ithat alle 1. 
4 putte I. 


Ithe lond 1. ™ moost pure 1. 


k the dukis 1, 
© tho bokelers 1. 


Ce 


194 


18 Liban. Also kyng Salomon made a greet 
trone of yuer, and he clothide it with ful 
iymyche 3alow3 gold; the which hadde 
sexe grees ; and the cop of the trone was 
round in the hyndermore" partie’; and 
two hoondis hens and thens, holdynge 
the sittynge place, and two liouns stoden 
20 beside eche hondis; and twelue litil liouns 
stoondynge vpon the sexe grees hens and 
thens; there is not maad siche a werk 
211in alle rewmes. But and alle the vessels, 
of the whiche kyng Salomon drank, weren 
golden, and al the necessarie of the hows 
of the wijlde wode of Liban of moost 
pure gold; and* there was not silner, ne 
of eny prijs was holden in the dais of 
22Salomon. For the nauee of the kyng bi 
the see with the nauee of Yram onys bi 
thre 3eer wente into Tharsis, bryngynge 
thens gold, and siluer, and olefauntis 
asteeth, and apis, and pokokis. 'Thanne 
kyng Salomon is inagnified vpon alle the 
kyngis of erthe! in richesses™ and wis- 
2aidam. And al erthe desiride’ to se the 
cheer of Salomon, that it here the wis- 
dam of hym, that God hadde® 3euen in his 
25 herte. And alle thei brou3ten to him 3iftis, 
golden vessels, and silueren, clothis, and 
batay] aarmys, swote spicis® forsothe, and 
2¢hors, and mulis, bi alle 3eeris. And Salo- 
mon gedride charis, and horsmen; and 
there ben maad to hym a thousand and 
foure hundrid charis, and twelue thon- 
sand of horsmen; and he disposide hem 
bi the strengthid citees, and with the 
27 king in Jerusalem. And he made, that 
there was as myche plente of siluer in 
Jerusalem, as of stoonus; and he 3af the 
multitude of cedres as mulberie trees, 
2sthat growen in wijld feeldis. And the 
hors of Salomon weren brou3t out of 
Egipt, and of Choa; forsothe mar- 
chauntis of the kyng bou3ten of Choa, 


h innermore AFH. 
mentis E pr.m, 


$ he hilide 1. t and the 1. 
ytoa. Salomon. 4 3ede 1. 
h horsmen 1. 
to him for 1. 


bint. 


Ill. KINGS. 3K) 


ipartc. K nes. 1 the erthe # pr. m. 


uhinder exLx. hyndir 1. 
© pecokis t. 
{Salomon 1. & sicomoris trees1. 1 the whicher. ™QOm.1. ™ bou3ten hemr. © hem 


18—28. 


Lyban. Also kyng Salomon made a greet 18 
trone of yuer, and clothide® it with ful 
fyn gold; which‘ trone hadde sixe grees ; 19 
and the hijnesse of the trone was round 
in the hynderere" part ; and tweine hondis 
on’ this side and on that side, holdynge 
the seete, and twei lyouns stoden bisidis 
ech hond; and twelue litil liouns stond-20 
ynge on’ sixe* grees on this side and on 
that side; siche a werk was not maad in 
alle rewmes. But also alle the vessels, 21 
of which kyng Salomon drank, weren of 
gold, and alle the purtenaunce of the hows 
of the forest of Liban was of pureste gold ; 
siluer was not, nether it was arettid of Y 
ony prijst in the daies of Salomon. 
the schip of ‘the kyng? wente* onys bi? 
thre 3eer with the schip of Hiram in to 
Tharsis, and bron3te fro thennus gold, 
and siluer, and teeth of olifauntis, and 
apis, and pokokis*. Therfor kyng Salo-23 
mon was magnified aboue alle kyngis of 
erthe in richessis and wisdom. And al24 
erthe! desiride to se the cheer of Salomon, 
to® here the wisdom of him, which wiés- 
dom God hadde 3o0ue in‘ his herte. And25 
alle men brou3ten 3iftis to hym, vessels of 
gold, and of siluer, clothis, and armeris of 
batel, and swete smellynge thingis, and 
horsis, and mulis, bi ech 3eer. And Salo- 26 
mon gaderide togidere charis, and kny3tis’; 
and a thonsinde and foure hundrid charis 
weren maad to hym, and twelue thou- 
synde ‘of kny3tis*; and he disposide hem 
bi strengthid citees, and with the kyng in 
Jerusalem. And he! made, that so greet 27 
aboundaunce of siluer was in Jerusalem, 
how greet was also of stoonys; and he 
3af the multitude of cedris as sicomoris*, 
that! growen in feeldy places. And the 28 
horsis of Salomon weren led out of Egipt, 
and of Coa; for the™ marchauntis of the 
kyng bou3ten" of Coa, and brou3ten for? 


™ ritchesse aBFu. hath apy. © oyne- 
Vv weren on I. W upon i. x the sixe 1. 
dmeni. €andtor finto1  g horsmen1. 


For 22 + of ony priys ; 


X. 29——XI. 9. 


2vand the prijs set, brou3ten. Forsothe 
there was bou3t a foure whelid cart of 

‘ Egipt for sexe hundrid ouncis of siluer, 
and an hors an hundrid and fifti; and 
in this maner alle the kyngis of Ethees 
and of Cyrye soolden hors. 


CAP ext. 


1 Forsothe kyng Salomon to bren- 
nyngly louede many hethen wymmen, 
the doujter forsothe of Pharao, and 
Moabitis, and Amonytis, and Ydumees, 

2and Cidonees, and Ethees; of the gentils, 
on the whiche the Lord seide to the 
sones of Yrael, 3e shulen not goon into 
hem, ne of hem shulen goon out to 3ou; 
moost certeynli forsothe thei shulen turne 
aweie 30ure hertis, that 3e folwen the 
goddis of hem. And so to thes is couplid 
kyng Salomon, bi moost brennynge loue. 

3And there weren to hym wiues as 
queens senen hundrid, and secoundarie 
wiues thre hundrid; and wymmen turn- 
4eden awey the herte of hym. And whanne 
now he was oold, the herte of hym is 
beshrewid bi wymmen, that he folwide 
alien goddis; and the herte of hym was 
not parfit with the Lord his God, as the 
sherte of Dauid, his fadre. But Salomon 
heryede Astertem, the goddesse of Sydo- 
nyes, and Chamos, the god of Moabitis, 
and Moloch, the mawmet of Amonytees ; 
sand Salomon dide that was not plesynge 
before? the Lord, and he fulfillide not 
that he folwe the Lord, as Dauid, his 
7fader. Thanne Salomon becldide’ vp the 
temple of Chamos to the mawmet of 
Moab, in the hil that is ajens Jerusalem, 
and to Moloch, the mawmet of the sones 
sof Amon. And in this maner he dide to 
alle his heythen wyues, that brenden en- 
gcense, and offreden to her goddis. Ther- 
for the Lord wraththid tot Salomon, for- 
thi that his mynde was turned aweie fro 
the Lord God of Irael; the which aper- 


III. KINGS. 


195 


prijs ordeyned. Forsothe? a charet 3ede29 + 0 ehare; that 


out of Egipt for sixe hundrid sielis of sil- 
uer, and an hors for an hundrid and fifti4 
siclis'; and bi this maner alle the kyngis 
of Etheis and of Sirye seelden horsis. 


CAP. XI, 


Forsothe kyng Salomon louyde bren-1 
nynglis many alien wymmen, and‘ the 
dou3tir of Pharao, and wymmen of Moab, 
and Amonytis", and Ydumeis’, and Sydo- 
neis*, and Etheis*; of the folkis of whichez 
the Lord seide to the sones of Israel, 3e 
schulen not entre to tho folkis, nether ony 
of hem schulen entre to 30u; for most cer- 
teynli thei schulen turne awei 3oure hertis, 
that 3e sue the goddis of hem. Therfory 
kyng Salomon was couplid to these wym- 
men, bi moost brennyng loue. And wyues3 
as queenys weren seuene hundrid to hym, 
and thre hundrid secundarie wyues; and 
the wymmen turneden awey{ his herte. 
And whanne he was thanne eld, his herte 4 
was bischrewid bi wymmen, that he suede 
alien goddis; and his herte was not perfit 
with his Lord God, as the herte of Dauid, 
his fadir, ‘was pezfit?.. But Salomon wor-s 
schipide Astartes§, the goddesse of Sido- 
neis, and Chamos, the god of Moabitis, 
and Moloch, the idol of Amonytis; andé 
Salomon dide that, that pleside not bifor 
the Lord, and he fillide? not that he suede 
the Lord, as Dauid, his fadir, dide>. 
Thanne Salomon bildide a temple to Cha-7 
mos, the idol of Moab, in the* hill] which 
is ajens® Jerusalem, and to Moloch, the 
idol of the sones of Amon. And bi thiss 
maner he dide to alle hise alien wyues, 
that brenten encencis, and offriden to her 
goddis. Therfor the Lord was wrooth too 
Salomon, for his soule was turned awei 
fro the Lord God of Israel; that apperide 


Is, filj. horsis 
of a chare. c. 
sede outs that 
is, was boujt. 
Lire here. c. 


t turneden 
awey, ele., fro 
the loue of 
God, and fro 
keping of his 
heestis. Lire 
here. Ce 


§ Salomon 
worschipide 
Astartes, ete.; 
Salomon was 
not so fonned, 
that he bi- 
leuyde ony 
thing of God- 
hed to be in 
the idols, but 
he worschipide 
idols, for he 
nolde offende 
hise wyues. So 
Adam eet of 
the tre for- 
bedun at the 
tising of his 
wiyf, lest he 
schulde make 
her sory, as 
Austyn seith. 
For xs Poul 
seith in 1 DPistle 
to Tymo. ii. c°. 
Adam was not 
disseyued, that 
he bilenyde, 
that by eting 
of that tre he 


to Salomon’ the secounde tyme, and co- 10 schulde haue 


maundide of this’ word, that he schulde 


Ptoforn ze. abildec. * Om. 2. 
i u of Amon 1. 
PForr. ,4sixti x. ‘siclis of siluer kMx prim. § ful myche1. * also he louyde I. oO 
Vof Ydumee 1. WofSidonyer, Xof Ethey1. Y And so eee Om.1. 2 fulfillide 1. > Om. 14. 
Cany. dthat1. ¢forn ajens1. fthe whicher. & him: bhis 1. 


ce 3 


kunnyng of 
good and of 
yuel, as ae 
serpent bihijte. 
Tire here. c. 

|| in the hil; 

that is, of 
Olyuete. Lire 
here. c. 


196 


lide to hym the secounde, and hadde co- 
maundid of this word, that he shulde not 
folwe alyen goddis; and he kepte not that, 
11 that the Lord comaundyde to hym. And 
so the Lord seide to Salomon, For thou 
haddist this anentis thee, and keptist not 
my couenant, and myn heestis, the whiche 
I comaundide to thee, brekynge I shal 
kitte thi rewme, and 3euen it to thi ser- 
iuant. Neuerthelater in thi days I shal 
not doon, for Dauid, thi fader; fro the 
13 hoond of thi sone I shal kutte it; and al 
the rewme I shal not doon awey, but o 
lynage I shal 3yue to thi sone, for Dauid, 
my seruaunt, and Jerusalem, that I haue 
1ichosen. The Lord forsothe reride an ad- 
uersary to Salomon, Adad Ydume, of the 
is kyngis seed, that was in Edom. Forsothe 
whanne Dauid was in Ydume, and Joab, 
the prince of chyualrie, hadde styed vp 
to byrye hem that weren slayn, and 
i¢hadde slayn al maal in Ydume; forsothe 
sexe monethis there dwellide Joab, and 
al Irael, to the tyme that thei hadden 
17Slayn al maal in Ydume; he Adad fleei3, 
and Ydume men, of the seruauntis of his 
fadir, with hym, that he goo into Egipt ; 
1sforsothe Adad was a liti] child. And 
whanne thei hadden rysen fro Madian, 
thei camen into Pharan; and thei token 
with hem men of Pharan, and wenten 
into Egipt, to Pharao, the kyng of Egipt ; 
the which 3af to hym an hows, and or- 
deynde meetis, and a loond asignede. 
19And Adad foonde grace before Pharao 
ful myche, in so myche that he 3af to 
hym a wijf, the sister germayn of his 
20 wiif Taphnes, the queen. And the sister 
of Taphnes gat to hym Jenebath, a sone ; 
and Taphnes norishide hyin in the hows 
of Pharao; and Jenebath was dwellynge 
21 before Pharao, with his sones. And 
whanne Adad hadde herd in Egipt, Da- 
uid to haue slept with his fadris, and 


III. KINGS. 


XI, 10—-21- 


not sue alien goddis; and he kepte not 
tho thingis, whiche the Lord comaundide 
to hym. Therfor the Lord seide to Salo-1i 
mon, For thou haddist this thing anentis 
thee, and keptist not my couenaunt, and 
myn heestis, whiche Y comaundide to thee, 
Y schal breke, and Y schal departe thi 
rewme, and Y schal 3yue it to thi ser- 
uaunt. Netheles Y schal not do in* thi1z 
daies, for Dauid, thi fadir; Y schal kitte 
it fro the hond of thi sone; nether Y schali3 
do awey al the rewme, but Y schal 3yue 
o lynage to thi sone, for Dauid, my ser- 
uaunt, and for Jerusalem, whicli! Y chees™. 
Forsothe the Lord reiside to Solomon ani 
aduersarie, Adad Ydumey, of the kyngis 
seed, that was in Edom. For whanneis 
Dauid was in Ydumee, and Joab, the 
prince of chyualrie", hadde sticd° to birie 
hem that weren slayn, and he hadde slayn 
ech male kynde in Ydumee; for Joab, and 16 
al Israel dwelliden there bi sixe? monethis, 
til thei killident ech male kynde in Ydu- 
mee; Adad hym silf fledde, and men of 17 
Ydumee, of" ‘the seruauntis of his fadir’, 
with hym, that he schulde entre in to 
Egipt; sothelit Adad was a litil child. 
And whanne thei hadden rise fro Madian, 18 
thei camen in to Faran; and thei token 
with hem men of Faran, and entriden in 
to Egipt, to Pharao, kyng of Egipt ; 
which" Farao 3af an hows to hym, and 
ordeynede’ metis, and assignede” lond. 
And Adad foond grace bifor Farao greetli, 19 
in so myche that Farao 3af to hym a wifjf, 
the sister of his wijf, sister* of the** queen, 
of Taphnes. And the sistir of Taphnes 20 
gendrid to hyinY a sone, Genebath; and 
Taphnes nurschide hym in the hows of 
Farao; and Genebath dwellide bifor Farao, 
with hise? sones?. And whanne Adad2i 
hadde herd in Egipt, that Dauid sleptet 
with hise fadris, and that Joab, the prince 
of chyualrie®, was deedt, he scide to Farao, 


T the a. 
k bi Ex. 1 whom 1. m haue chosen 1. 0 his chyualrie 1. © stied up I. stie s. P six- 
-tene En, hadden killid1. ‘and menof1. 8 his fadris seruauntis1. tandr. Yand1. VY ordeynede 
tohims., Wassignede tohim1. ‘*the sistirkx. **hisx. yAdadi. 2ther. ®sones of Farao1. 


> Dauid chyualrie 1. 


+ slepte; for 
he diede bi 
kindly deth. 
Lire here. c. 
t was deed ; 
for he was 
slayn bi swerd. 
Lire here. c. 


XI. 22-—32. 


Joab, prynce of chyualrie, to be deed, he 
seide to Pharao, Lete me, that I goo into 
2zzmy loond. And Pharao seide to hym, 
What thing forsothe anentis me nedist 
thow, that thou seche to goo to thi 
loond? And he answerde, Noon; but I 
23 preye thee, that thou lete me. Forsothe 
God reryde to hym an aduersarie, Rason, 
sone of Efiadan, that flei3 Adadezer, kyng 
240f Soba, his lord; and he gadride a3ens 
hym men, and he is maad prince of 
theues, whanne Dauid shulde haue slayn 
hem; and thei wenten to Damasch, and 
dwelliden there; and thei ordeyneden 
25hym a kyng in Damasch. And he was 
an aduersarie to Irae] alle the days of 
Salomon ; and this is the yuel of Adad, 
and haat ajen Yrael; and he regnede in 
26Cyrye. Forsothe Jeroboam, the sone of 
Nabath, Eufrate of Seredera, seruaunt of 
Salomon, whos moder was a womman 
widwe, Serua bi name; and he reride 
27the hoond ajens the kyng. And this the 
cause of the rebellioun ajens hym; for 
Salomon beeldide Mello,.and cuenede the 
swelw3 of the citee of Dauid, his fader. 
28 Forsothe Jeroboam was a my3ti man, and 
a strong; and Salomon seynge the 3onge 
waxynge man of good witte, and able to 
be tau3t, he made hym a prefect vpon 
the tributis® of al the hows of Joseph. 
29 It is doon thanne in that tyme, that Jero- 
boam shulde goon out fro Jerusalem; 
and Ahyas Silonyte, prophete, foonde him 
in the weye, conerde with a newe man- 
til; forsothe thei two weren alone in the 
30feelde. And Ahyas takynge hys newe 
mantil, with the which he was couerde, 
3ikitte into twelue parties. And he seith 
to Jeroboam, Tak to thee ten kyttyngis ; 
thes thingis forsothe seith the Lord God 
of Yrael, Loo! I shal kitte the rewme 
fro the hoond of Salomon, and I shal 
323yue to thee ten lynagis; but o lynage 


III. KINGS. 


197 


Suffre thou me, that Y go in to my lond. 
And Farao seide to hym, For® of what22 
thing hast thou nede at? ime, that thon 
sekist to go to thi lond? And he an- 
sweride, Of no thing; but Y biseche thee, 
that thou ‘delyuere me®. Also God reiside 23 
anf aducrsaric to Salomon, Rason, sone’ 
of Eliadam, that fledde Adadezer, kyng 
of Soba, his lord; and gaderide men a3ens2! 
hym, and was maad the prince of theuys, 
whanne Dauid killide hem; and thei 3eden 
to Damask, and dwelliden there ; and thei 
maden hym® kyng in Damask. And he 2s 
was aduersarie} of Israel in alle the daies 
of Salomon; and this is the yuel of Adad, 

and the! hatrede ajens Israel; and he eee ae 


regnede in Sirie. Also Jeroboam, sone of 26 noyele not 
myche to Israel 


+ was aduer- 
sarie s thou3 he 
was aduersarie 


Nabath, of Effraym of Saredera, the ser- — w lette the 

: pes of the 

uaunt of Salomon, of which! Jeroboai, a pie Lire 
here. c. 


womman widewe, Serua bi name, was 
modir, reisyde™ -hond" a3ens the kyng. 
And this was cause of rebelte a3ens the27 
kyng; for Salomon bildide Mello, and 
made euene the swolowe of the citee of 
Dauid, his fadir. Forsothe® Jeroboam 28 
was a mi3ti man and strong?; and Salo- 
mon si3 the 3ong:wexynge man of good 
kynrede, and witti in thingis to be doon, 
and Salomon made hyin4 ‘prefect, ether" 
souereyn, on® the tributis of al the hows 
of Joseph. Therfor it was doon in that29 
tyme, that Jeroboam 3ede out of Jerusa- 
lem; and Ahias of Sylo, a profete, hilid 
with a newe mentil, foond hym‘ in the 
weie; sotheli" thei tweyne weren oneli’ 
in the feeld. And Ahias took his newe30 
mentil, with which he was hilid, and kit- 
tide” in to twelue partis; and seide to31 
Jeroboam, Take to thee ten kyttyngis* ; 
for the Lord God of Israel seith these 
thingis, Lo! Y schal kytte the rewme fro 
the hond of Salomon, and Y schal 3yue to 
thee ten lynagis; forsotheY o lynage schal 32 
dwelle to hym, for Dauid, my seruaunt, 


8 lynagis £ pr.m. 


¢ Andy. danentis1. elete me go1. fan other1. & the sone1. » Razon 1. ihis1. & isae 1 
I the which 1. m he reisyde 1. «his hond 1Kmosx sec.m. © And. Pa strong 2 q Jero oie 
rOm.1. Supons. ingen. Jeroboam1. andi. Valoone1. © he kitte i¢ 1. kyttyngis of the 


mantels, y but 1. 


198 


shal leene to hym, for my seruaunt Da- 
uid, and Jerusalem, the citee that I haue 


33 chosen of alle the lynagis of Irael; forthi ~ 


that he forsook me, and honourde Astar- 
tem, goddesse of Sydonees, and Chamos, 
god of Moab, and Moloch, god of the 
sonys of Amon; and he wente not in my 
weyes, that he dide ri3twisnesse before 
me, and my heestis, and my domys, as 
31Dauid, his fader. Ne I shal not doo 
aweye al the rewme fro his hoond, but 
I shal putte hym a duyk alle the days of 
his lijf, for Dauid, my seruaunt, whom I 
chees, the which kepte myn heestis, and 


ssmy maundementis. I shal doo aweye. 


forsothe the rewme fro the hoond of his 
sone, I shal 3yue to thee the ten lynagys ; 
36 to his sone forsothe I shal 3yue o lynage, 
that there abyde stille a lantern to Da- 
uid, my seruaunt, alle dais before me in 
Jerusalem, citee that I chees, that there 
37 were my name. Forsothe thee I shall 
take, and thou shalt regne vpon alle 
thingis that thi soule desyrith, and thou 
3sshalt be kyng vpon Yrael. If thanne 
thou herist alle thingis that I shal co- 
maunde to thee, and gost in my weies, 
and dost that is ri3t before me, kepynge 
my maundementis, and myn heestis, as 
Dauid, my seruaunt, dide, I shal be with 
thee, and beelde to thee a trewe hows, 
what maner wise I beeldide to Dauid an 
hows, and I shal take to thee Yrael; 
39and I shal tourmente the seed of Dauid 
vpon this, neuerthelater not alle dais. 
10 Thanne Salomon wolde slee Jeroboam, the 
whiche roos, and flei3 into Egipt, to Su- 
saach, the kyng of Egipt; and he was 
in Egipt vnto the deeth of Salomon. 
41 Forsothe the remnaunt of the wordis of 
Salomon, and alle thingis that he dide, 
and the wisdom of him, loo! alle thei 
ben writyn in the boke of the wordis of 
42the dais of Salomon. Forsothe the dais 
the whyche Salomon regnede in Jerusa- 


8 kittyng of the rewme 1. t the goddesse 1. 


II. KINGS. 


XI. 33——42. 


and for Jerusalem, the citee which Y chees 
of alle the lynagis of Israel; this hittyng*33 
schal be; for Salomon forsook me, and 
worschipide Astartes, goddesset of Sido- 
neis*, and Chamos, the god of Moab, and 
Moloch, the god of the sones of Amon; 
and 3edeY not in my weies, that he dide 
rij3twisnesse” bifor me, and* myn heestis, 
and my domes, as Dauid, his fadir, didey. 
And Y schal not take awey al the rewme 34 
fro ‘his hond*, but Y schal putte hym 
duyk in alle the daies of his lijf, for 
Dauid, my seruaunt, whom Y chees, which 
Dauid? kepte myn heestis, and my co- 
maundementis. Sotheli® Y schal take awey 35 
the rewme fro the hond of ‘his sone®, and 
Y schal 3yue ten lynagis to thee’; for-s¢ 
sothe® Y schal 3yue o lynage to ‘his sone’, 
that a lanterne dwelle to Dauid, my ser- 
naunt, in alle daies bifor me in Jerusalem, 
the citee which Y chees, that my name 
schulde be there. Forsothe® Y schal take 37 
thee’, and thou schalt regne onk alle thingis 
whiche thi soule desirith, and thou schalt 
be kyng on! Israel. Therfor if thou schalt 38 
here alle thingis whiche Y schal comaunde 
to thee, and if thou schalt go in my weies, 
and if thou schalt do thgt, that is ri3tful 
bifore me, and if thou schalt kepe my 
comaundementis, and myn heestis, as Da- 
uid, my seruaunt, dide, Y schal be with 
thee, and Y schal bilde a feithful hows to 
thee, as Y bildide an hows to Dauid, and 
Y schal 3yue Israel to thee; and Y schal 39 
turmente the seed of Dauid on this thing, 
netheles not in alle daies. Therfor Salo-40 
mon wolde sle™ Jeroboam, which" roos, 
and fledde in to Egipt, to Susach, kyng of 
Egipt; and he was in Egipt ‘til to° the 
deeth of Salomon. Forsothe the residue 41 
of the wordis of Salomon, and alle thingis 
whiche he dide, and his wisdom, lo! alle 
thingis? ben writun in the book of wordis 
of daies of Salomon. Sotheli4 the daies bi‘ 42 
whiche Salomon regnede in Jerusalem on‘ 

u Sydonye 1. 


Vv for he 3ede 1. W ri3tful- 


nesse plures, Xint. YOm.1. %the hond of Salomon 1. 20m.1. » Butz. ©¢ the sone of Salomon 1. 
4 thee, Jeroboam1. ands. f the sone of Salomon 1. ethatr. b And. i thee, Jeroboam 1. 
Kupont. lupont. M™hauesleie1. the whichi. oOvnto1, Pthothingis:. @Andi. vind 


S upoll I. 


XL. 43——_XII. 10. 


43lem vpon al Yrael, ben fourti 3eer. And 
Salomon slept with his faders, and is 
biried in the citee of Dauid, his fader; 
and Roboam, his sone, regnede for him. 


CAR: 


1 Roboam forsothe cam into Sichym; 
thider forsothe was gedrid al Irael to 
2ordeyn hymakyng. Forsothe but Jero- 
boam, the sone of Nabath, whanne 3it he 
was in Egipt, ferre flowen fro the face 
of Salomon the kyng, the deeth of hym 
3herd, he turnede ajen fro Egipt; and 
thei senten, and clepeden hym. Thanne 
Jeroboam and al the multitude of Irael 
cam, and thei speken to Roboam', sei- 
synge, Thi fader putte to vs moost hard 
30k, and so thou now mak lasse a lytil 
of the heest of thi fader moost hard, and 
of the" moost greuous 30k that he hath 
putte on to vs, and we shulen serue to 
5thee. The which seith to hem, Gooth 
vnto the thridde day, and turneth a3en 
6to me. And whanne the puple was goon, 
kyng Roboam’ wente in counseil with 
the eldris, that stoden ny3 before Salo- 
mon, his fader, whil that he 3it lyuede ; 
and seith, What counseil 3euen 3e to me, 
7that I answere to the puple? The whiche 
seiden to hym, If thou obesshe to this 
puple to dai, and seruest to this puple, 
and to the askynge of hem 3euest stede, 
and spekist to hem li3t wordis, thei shu- 
alen be to thee seruauntis alle dais. The 
which forsook the counseil of the oold 
men, that thei 3auen to hym, and he 
took to hym the 3onge men, that weren 
norishid with hym, and stoden ny3 to 
ghym; and he seide to hem, What coun- 
seil 3euen 3e to me, that Y answere to 
this puple, that seiden to me, Mak li3ter 
the 30k that thi fader putte vpon vs? 
10 And the 3onge men seiden to hym, that 
weren norishid with hym, Thus spek to 
this puple, that speken to thee, seiynge, 


III. KINGS. 


199. 


al Israel, ben fourti jeer. And Salomonas 
slepte with hise fadris, and was biriede 
in the citee of Dauid, his fadir; and Ro- 
boam, his sone, regnede for hym. 


CAR. XU 


Forsothet Roboam cam in to Sichem 31 
for al Israel was gaderid thidur to make 
hym kyng. ‘And sotheli® Jeroboam, sone’ 2 
of Nabath, whanne he was 3it in Egipt, 
and fledde fro the face of kyng Salomon, 
turnede a3en fro Egipt, for the deeth of 
Salomon was herd; and thei” senten, ands 
clepiden hym. Therfor Jeroboam cam, and 
al the multitude of Israel, and thei spaken 
to Roboam, and seiden, Thi fadir puttide4 
hardeste* 30k on’ vs, therfor abate thou a 
litil now of the hardest comaundement of 
thi fadir, and of the greuousiste? 30k which* 
he puttide> on vs, and we schulen serue 
to thee. Which’ Roboam seide to hem,5 
Go 3e ‘til to® the thridde dai, and turne 3e 
a3en to me. And whanne the puple hadde« 
go, kyngf Roboam took counsel with the 
eldere men, that stoden bifor Salomon, 
his fadir, while he lyuyde 3it; and Ro- 
boam seide, What counsel 3yue 3e to me, 
that Y answere to the puple? Whiche'7 
seiden to hym, If thou obeiest to dai to 
this puple, and seruest this puple, and 
3yuest stide to her axyng, and spekist to 
hem 1li3te' wordis, thei schulen be ser- 
uauntis to thee in alle daies. Which* Ro-s 
boam forsook the counsel of elde men, 
which! thei 3auen to hym, and took™ 
3onget men, that weren nurschid with 
hym, and stoden ny3 him; and he seides 
to hem, What counsel 3yue 3e to me, that 
Y answere to this puple, that seiden to 
me, Make thou esyere the 30k which” thi 
fadir puttide® on vs? And the 3onge men, lo 
that weren nurschid with hym, seiden to 
hym, Thus speke thou to this puple, that 
spaken to thee, and seiden, Thi fadir made 
greuouse oure 30k, releeue thouP vs ; thus 


t Jeroboam 4, %Om.4. Vv Jeroboam a. 
tSothely1.  Butandz. ‘thesone1, men of Israel 1. x the most hard 1. Y upon t. 
Z greuouste pKobs. ful grenous1. @that 1. » hath puts. Cupont. dAnd1, ¢vntor ‘the kyng 1. 
gthe whicher. The whiche1, ‘esiex. k Andi. ‘that1. ™hetook1. ®thatx. © hath put 


up1, P thus a. 


+ 30nge; more 
songe in ver- 
tues and kun- 
nyng, than in 


age. Lire 
here. Cc. 


200 


Thi fader agregide oure 30k, thou re- 
leue vs; thus thou shalt speke to hem ; 
My leest fyngre is gretter than the bak 
iof iny fader; and now my fader putte 
vpon 30w a greuous 30k, forsothe I shal 
adde vpon 30ure 30k; my fader bette 
30w with scourgis, forsothe I shal bete 
1230u with scorpiouns. ‘Thanne Jeroboam 
cam, and al the puple, to Roboam the 
thridde day, as the kyng spak, seiynge, 
Turneth ajen to me the thridde dai. 
i3And the kyng answerde to the puple 
hard, forsakid the counseil of the eldres, 
14that thei hadden 3euen to hym; and he 
spak to hem aftir the counseil of the 
3onge men, sciynge, My fader agregide 
3oure 50k, and I forsothe shal adde to 
joure 30k; my fader bette 30u with 
scourgis, Y shal bete 3o0u with scor- 
ispiouns. And the kyng assentide not to 
the puple, for the Lord was a3ens hym, 
that he rere his word, that the Lord 
spak in the hoond of Ahye Silonyte to 
16 Jeroboam, sone’ of Nabath. And so the 
puple seynge, that the kyng wolde not 
here hem, answerde* to hym, seiynge, 
What to vs part in Dauid, or what heri- 
tage in the sone of Ysaye? Turne a3en 
into thi tabernaclis, Irael; now se thin 
hows, Dauid. And Yrael wente into her 
17tabernaclis. Vpon the sonys forsothe of 
Trae], whiche euere dwelliden in the citees 
‘sof Juda, regnede Roboam. Thanne kyng 
Roboam sente to Vram, that was vpon 
the tributis; and al the puple stoneden 
ishym, and he is deed. Forsothe kyng 
Roboam hastijf steiede vp in a chare, and 
flei3 into Jerusalem; and Irael wente 
a wey fro the hows of Dauid, vnto the 
20day that is now. It is doon forsothe 
whanne al Irael hadde seenY that Jero- 
boam was? turned ajen, thei senten, and 
clepeden hym, the oost gadryd, and thei 
ordeyneden hym kyng vpon al the rewme 


III. KINGS. 


XI. r1—20. 


thou schalt speke to hem, My leest fyngur 
is gretteret than the bak of my fader; tis gretieres 
and now my fadir puttide on? 30u a grC- 11 myche my3- 
uouse 30k, forsothe Y schal adde’ on™ 30ure ere Live 

30k; my fadir beet’ 3ou with scourgis, 

forsothet Y schal bete 30u with scor- 


piouns{. Therfor Jeroboam, and al the 12% ¢ scorpioun 
here is seide a 


puple, cam to Roboam, in the thridde dai, —kynde of bard- 
. este scourge, 
as the kyng spak, seilynge, Turne 3e a3en that hath 


And the kyng 13 knttis of lede 


ether of irnn 
in the ende of 
is. Lire 
is cet 
plures. 


to me in the thridde dai. 
answeride harde thingis to the puple, 
while the counsel of eldere men was for- 
sakun, which" thei hadden 3oue to hym; 
and he spak to hem bi the counsel of14 
3onge men, and seide, My fadir made 
greuouse 3oure 30k, forsothe’ Y schal adde” 
to 30ure 30k; my fadir beet jou with 
scourgis, forsothe* Y schal bete 3ou with 
scorpiouns. And the kyng assentide not 15 
to the puple’, for the Lord hadde turned 
awey, ‘ether hadde wlatid® hym», that 
the Lord schulde reise® his word, which 
he hadde spoke in the hond of Ahias® of 
Silo to Jeroboam, sonef of Nabath. Ther-16 
for$ the puple si3, that the kyng nolde® 
here hem; and the puple answeride to the 


‘kyng, and seide, What part is to vs in 


Dauid, ether what eritage in the sone of 
Ysay? Israel, turne thou a3en in to thi 
tabernaclis; now, Dauid, se thou thin 
. . b = 
hows. Aud Israel 3ede in to hise taber- pb andioele 
naclis. Forsothe Roboam regnede oni the 17 ‘ht thilke 
: : word of Ro- 
sones of Israel, whiche* euere** dwelliden ies bi te 
. 5 iztly seid, an 
in the citees of Juda. Therfore kyng Ro-1¢ they ousten 
t 
boam sente Adhuram§, that was on the fro heen 
a Sere é. for this. And 
tributis ; aud al the puple of Israel stonyde 7", puple of 
hym, and he was deed. Forsothe kyng 19 /srae! stonyde 


§ Roboum 
sente Adhuram; 
that he schulde 


fro the kyng 
him ; for dispit 


Roboam stiede! hastili on™ the" chare, and a his lord, ; 
° or e puple 
fledde in to Jerusalem; and Israel depart- hadde bin. 


. : ‘ tele suspect, lest he 
ide fro the hows of Dauid, til in to pre-  jadde be in the 


sent? dai. Forsothe it was doon, whanne 201 Gora coat 
king in answer- 

al Israel hadde herd that Jeroboam turn- 

ede ajen, thei senten, and clepiden hym, 

whanne the cumpany was gaderid togi- 


inge so to hem, 
for they that 
ben on tributis, 
ben wonnt te 


councele of 
encreessing of 
tho. Lire 
here. C. 
“the sone £ pr.m. *heanswerde cE pr.m. YOm. a. 2 hadde a. 
P upon 1. 4 ley to more 1. T npon 1. 8 betide 1. beot Kk. tbuti. thatr.  ¥ bute. 

Wleye tor. *butr -¥ puplist. 2 turned him1. @®Om. sr bOm.1. reise up1, 4thatr. © the 

prophete Ahiast. {the soner. & Thanner. 4 woldenot1. iuponiz. * the whiche 1, kk Om. 1s. 

'stiede up. "upon. "his1. © this present 1. 


XII. 21—32. 


of Ysrael ; ne eny man folwide the hous 
of Dauid, saue the lynage of Juda alone. 
21 Forsothe Roboam cam to Jerusalem, and 
he gadride al the hows of Juda, and the 
-lynage of Beniamyn, an hundrid and 
four score thousand of chosen men and* 
fizters, that thei fizten azens the hows of 
Trael, and brynge a3en the rewme to Ro- 
22boam, the sone. of Salomon. Forsothe 
the word of the Lord is don to Semeyam, 
23a man of God, seiynge, Spek to Roboam, 
the sone of Salomon, kyng of Juda, and 
to al the hous of Juda and of Beniamyn, 
and to the tothere of the puple, seiynge, 
24 Thes thingis seith the Lord, 3e shulen 
not stie up, ne fi3t ajens 3oure bretheren, 
the sones of Irael; turne a3en a man into 
his hows, of me forsothe is doon this 
word. Thei herden the word of the 
Lord, and thei ben turned ajen fro the 
weye, as the Lord comaundide to hem. 
25 Forsothe Jeroboam beeldide® vp Sichem, 
in-the hil of Effraym, and dwellide there ; 
and goon out thens, he beeldide® vp Pha- 
2cénuel. And Jeroboam seide in his herte, 
Now the kyngdam shal turne ajen to the 
27 hows of Danid, if this puple stie vp, that 
he doo sacrifices in the hows of the Lord 
in Jerusalem ; and the herte of this puple 
shal be turned to her lord, Roboam, kyng 
of Juda; and thei shulen slee me, and 
2asturnen aj3en to hym. And the counseil 
out thon3t, he made two golden calues, 
and seide to hem, Wole 3e no more stye 
vp in to Jerusalem; loo! thi goddis, 
Irael, that ladden thee out of the loond 
290f Egipt. And he putte oon in Bethel, 
3oand another’ in Dan. 
word to Irael into synne; forsothe the 
puple wente to honoure the calf, into Dan. 
33 And he maade templis in hei3tis, and 
preestis.of the eendis of the puple, that 
32 weren not of the sones of Leny. . And 
he ordeyned a solempne dai in the ei3tithe 


II. KINGS. 


And doon is this 


201 


dere, and thei maden hym kyng on4 al 
Israel; and no man suede the hows of 
Dauid, outakun the lynage aloone of Juda. 
Forsothe' Roboam cam to J erusalem, and 21 
gaderide* al the hows of Juda, and the 
lynage of Beniamyn, an hundrid and 
fourescore thousynde of chosun men and 
weriours, that thei schulden fi3te ajens 
the hows of Israel, and schulden brynge 
a3en the rewine to Roboam, sonet of Solo- 
mon. Forsothe the word of God was22 
made to Semeia, the man of God, and 
seide, Speke thou to Roboam, sone" of Sa-23 
lomon, the’ kyng of Juda, and to al the 
hows of Juda and of Beniamyn, and to 
the residue of the puple, and seie thou, 
The Lord seith thes thingis, 3e schulen 2: 
not stie’, nether 3e schulen fizte ajens 
3oure britheren, the sones of Israel; ‘a 
man* turne’ a3en in to his hows, for this 
word is doon of me. Thei herden the 
word of the Lord, and thei turneden a3en 
fro the iurney, as the Lord comaundide to 
hem. Forsothe? Jeroboam bildide Sichem, 25 
in the hil of Effraym, and dwellide there ; 
and he 3ede out fro thennus, and bildide 
Phanuel. And Jeroboam seide in his herte, 26 
Now the: rewime schal turne a3en to the 
hows of Dauid, if this puple stieth® to27 
Jerusalem, that it make sacrifices® in the 
hows of the Lord in Jerusalem; and the 
herte of this puple schal turne4 to her 
lord, Roboam, kyng of Juda; and thei 
schulen sle me, and schulen turne ajen to 
hym. And by connsel thou3t out, hee 28 
made tweyne goldun ealuys, and seidef to 
hem&, Nyle 3e stie" more in to Jerusalem ; 
Israel, lo! thi goddis, that! ledden thee 
out of the lond of Egipt. And he* set-29 
tide! oon™ in ‘Bethel, and the tother in 
Dan. And this word was maad to Israel 30 
in to synne; for the puple 3ede til’ in to 
Dan, to worschipe the calf. And Jero-31 
boam made templis in hije placis, and ‘re 


20Om.s. » bilde c passim. ¢ bilde ce. 
auponr. Ff Andi. *gaderide togidrer. tthe soner. Uthesoner. ¥ Om.1.  ® stie up 1. 
»Om.1. Yturne echemani. 7ZAnd1. ®schalstieup1. > sacrifice1. ¢thanne the 1. 4 turne 
agent. ¢Jeroboamr. fheseider. & the peple 1. wendeup1. iwhiche1. & Jeroboam 1. 


Isette nit. ™oocalff'r. ® Om. 1. 


VOL. II. 


pd 


202 


moneth, the fiftenthe dai of the moneth, 
into the liknes of the solempnete‘ that is 
halwid in Juda. And stiynge vp, lijk 
maner he made an auter in Bethel, that 
he offre to the calues, the whiche he 
hadde forgid; and he sette in Bethel 
preestis of the hei; thingis, that he hadde 

s3maad. And he stiede vp vpon the auter, 
that he hadde maad in Bethel, the fif- 
teenthe day of‘ the ei3tithe® moneth, the 
which he feynede of his owne herte; and 
he made a solempnete to the sonys of 
Yrael, and he stiede vp vpon the auter, 
that he brenne encense. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 And loo! a man of God cam fro Juda, 
in the word of the Lord, into Bethel, Je- 
roboam stoondynge vpon the auter, and 

2leiynge encense. And he criede out a3ens 
the auter, in the word of the Lord, and 
seith, Auter! auter! thes thingis seith 
the Lord, Loo! a sone shal be born to 
the hows of Dauid, Jozias bi name; and 
he shal offre vpon thee the preestis of 
hei3 thingis, ‘the whichef now in thee 
encensis brennen vp, and the boonys of 

3men vpon thee he shal brenne. And he 
jaf in that day a tokne, seiynge, This 
shal be the tokne that the Lord spak, 
Loo! the duter shal be kyt, and the askis 
4Shulen be shed out, that in hym is. And 
whanne the kyng hadde herde the word 
of the man of God, that criede ajens the 
auter in Bethel, he strau3te out his hoond 
fro the auter, seilynge, Takith him. And 
his hoond, that he strau3te out ajens 
hym, wex drye, and he my3te not drawe 
sit a3jen to hym self. The auter forsothe 
is kit, and the askis ben shed out of the 


¢ solempte a. 


II. KINGS. 


4 Om. £ pr.m. 


XII. 33——XIIl. 5. 


made® preestis of the laste ment of the 
puple, that? weren not of the sones of 


+ of the laste 

men ; that is, 

of ech lynage 
t dif- 


with ou! 
Leuy. And he‘ ordeynede a solempne dai 32 fereliee! a the 


in the ei3the monethe, in the fiftenthe dai 
of the monethe, bi the licnesse of so- 
lempnyte* whicht was halewid in Juda. 
And he" stiede’, and made in lijk maner 
an auter in Bethel, that he schulde offre 
to the calues, whiche he hadde maad; and 
he ordeynede in Bethel preestis of the” 


hize places, whiche he hadde maad. And33 


he styede on* the auter, which’ he hadde 
bildid in Bethel, in the fiftenthe day of 
the eij3the monethe, which he* hadde feyn- 


ed of his herte; and he made solempnyte*, 


to the sones of Israel, and he stiede on” 
the auter, that he schulde brenne en- 
cence}. 


CAP. XIII. 


And lo! a man of God cam fro Juda,1 
bi the word of the Lord, in to Bethel, 
while Jeroboam stood on® the auter, ‘and 
castide? encence. And ‘the man of God®2 
criede a3ens the auter, bi the word of the 
Lord, and seide, Auter! auter! the Lord 
seith these thingis, Lo! a sone, Josias by 
name, shal be borun tof the hows of Da- 
uid; and he schal offre on® thee the 
preestis§ of hize thingis, that" brennen 
now encensis' yn thee, and he schal brenne 
the bonys of men on™ thee. And he jafs 
a signe! in that dai,‘and seide™, This schal 
be ‘the signe" that the Lord spak, Lo! 
the anter schal be kit, and the aische 
which? is ‘there ynne?, schal be sched out. 
And whanne the kyng hadde herd thes 
word of the man of God, which word‘ he 
hadde cried a3ens the auter in Bethel, the 
kyng helde forth his hond fro the auter, 
and seide, Take 3e hym. And his hond 
driede, which’ he hadde holde forth, and 
he my3te not drawe it a3en to hym silf. 
Also the auter was kit, and the aische wass 


€ey3te Br. f that c pr.m. 


°Om.1. Pthewhicher, Qdthekyng1 'Om.1. 5 the ens 1. tthatz the kings. 
Ywenteup!. WOm.c. ‘*upupon:r Ythati. 2 the kyngs aa solempnyte1. 4 upon 4. 
fupont. 4castinger, eher fof. &npont. bthe whichex. } “encense 1. k upon i. I! token 1. 
™ seiynge I. 29 token toj3ous. °thatz. Pin the auter1. 9Om.1. * that 1. 


kynrede of 
Leuy nolde as- 
sente to him. 
Lire here. C. 


t brenne en- 
cence 3 so he 
mystook to 
him preesthod. 
Lire here. c. 


§ offre on thee 
the prestis, 
etc.; for abho- 
mynacioun of 
idolatrie, and 
this was accept, 
ether plesaunt, 
to God, as sa- 
crifice. Lire 
here. C. 


XI. 6—16. 


auter, after the tokne that the man of 
God hadde seid before, in the word of the 
6Lord. And the kyng seith to the man 
of God, Besech the face of the Lord thi 
God, and preye for me, that myn hoond 
be restorid to me. And the man of God 
preiede the face of God; and the hoond 
of the kyng is turned a3en to hym, and 
7is maad as it was before. Forsothe the 
kyng spak to the man of God, Cumme 
with me hoom, that thou eete, and I 
ashal 3yue to thee 3iftis. And the man 
of God seide to the kyng, If thou shuldist 
3yue to me the half parti of thin hows, 
I shal not come with thee, and I shal 
not eete breed, ne drynke water in this 
9place; forsothe so it is comaundid to me 
in the word of the Lord, comaundynge, 
Thou shalt not eete breed, ne drynke 
water, ne thou shalt turne a3en bi the 
10 waye that thou cam. Thanne he wente 
bi another weye, and he is not turned 
a3en bi the weie, bi the which he cam in 
ito Bethel. A maner prophete forsothe, 
an oold man, dwellide in Bethel, to whom 
camen his sonys, and toolden to hym alle 
the werkis that the man of God hadde 
doon in that day in Bethel; and the 
wordis that he hadde spoken to the kyng 
12thei toolden to her fader. And her fader 
seide to hem, Bi what weie wente he? 
His sones sheweden to hym the weye, bi 
the which the man of God hadde goon, 
i3that cam fro Juda. And he seith to his 
sones, Makith redi to me an asse. ‘The 
which whanne thei hadden maad redi, he 
l4stiede vp, and wente aftir the man of 
God, and he foonde hym sittynge vndir 
a therebynt. And-he seith to hym, Whe- 
ther thou art the man ‘of God’, that cam 
fro Juda? He answerde to hym, I am. 
isAnd he seide to hym, Come with me 
i¢hoom, that thou eete breed. The which 
seith, I may not turne ajen, ne come 
with thee, and I shal not eete breed, ne 


III. KINGS. 


203 


sched out of the auter, bi the signe* whicht 
the man of God bifor seide, in the word 
of the Lord. And the kyng seide to thee 
man of God, Biseche thou the face of thi" 
Lord God’, and preie thou for me, that 
myn hond be restorid to me. And the 
man of God preiede the face of God”; 
and the hond of the king turnede ajen to 
hym, and it was maad as it was bifore. 
Sotheli* the kyng spak to the man of God,7 
Come thou hoom with me, that thou ete, 
and Y schal 3yue 3iftis to thee. And thes 
man of God seide to the kyng, Thou; 
thou schalt 3yue to me the half part of 
thin hows, Y schal not come with thee, 
nether Y schal ete breed, wether Y schal 
drynke watir in this place; ‘for soY it is*» 
comaundid* to me bi the word of the 
Lord, comaundinge®, Thou schalt not ete 
breed, nether thou schalt drynke watert, Mise een 
nether thou schalt turne ajen bi the weie  trours in this 
bi which thou camest. Therfor he sede 102 

bi another weie, and turnede not a3en bi 
the weie, bi which he cam in to Bethel. 
Forsothe sum® elde profete dwellide? inu 
Bethel, to whom hise sones camen, and 
telden to hym alle the werkis whiche the 
man of God hadde do in that dai in Beth- 
el; and thei telden to her fader the wordis 
whiche he® spak to the kyng. And tlie 12 
fadir of hem seide to hem, Bi what weie 
sede he? Hise sones schewiden to hym 
the weie, bi which the man of God 3ede, 
that cam fro Juda. And he seide to hise 13 
sones, Sadle 3e an asse to me. And whanne 
thei hadden sadlid‘, he stiede*, and 3ede14 
after the man{ of God, and foond hym sit- 


+ drynke walir ; 


Yaftir the man, 


3 eles: that he 
tyng vndur a terebynte. And he scide to schulie dis- 
piue h and 
the man of God, Whether thou art the fiiecatide, 
that herbi he 


man of God, that camest fro Juda? He caiice pe 
answeride, Y am‘. And he seide to hym, js bis profisie 
Come thou with me hoom, that thou ete tere. c. 
breed. And he seide, Y may not turnei¢ 

ajen, nether come with thee, nether Y schal 

ete breed, nether Y schal drynke water in 


& Om. £ pr. m. 


® token 1. tthati, ther v thi God 1. w the Lord a sec. m. x And 1, y for- 
sother. ZwasK. ®bodenx. biddynger. canz. 4 dwellidethannet. © the man of God 1. 
f sadlid the asse 1. & stiede up x. » answeride to hym plures. answeride hym E. ‘it am I. 


pd2Z 


204 III. KINGS. XII. 17-26. 


17drynke water in this place; for the Lord 
spak to me in the word of the Lord, 
seiynge, Thow shalt not ete breed, and 
thou shalt not drynke watir there*, ne 
thou shalt turne a3en bi the weye that 
18thou wentist. The which seith to hym, 
And I am a prophete lijk thee; and the 
aungel spak to me in the word of the 
Lord, seiynge, Bryng hym aj3en with 
- thee into thin hous, that he eete breed, 
and drynke water. He? bigyilde hym, 
igand brou3te a3jen with hym. Thanne he 
eete breed in his hous, and drank water. 
20 And whanne he satte at the bord, the 
word of the Lord is doon to the prophete 
2ithat brou3te hym aj3en; and he criede 
out to the man of God that cam fro 
Juda, seiynge, Thes thingis seith the 
Lord, For thou were not obeishynge” to 
the mouth of the Lord, and keptist not 
the maundement that the Lord thi God 
22comaundide to thee, and turnedest a3en, 
and eete breed, and dranke water in the 
place in the which I comaundide to thee, 
that thou shuldist not eete breed, ue 
drynke water, thi careyn shal not be 
born into the sepulcre of thi faders. 
23 And whanne he hadde eeten and drunken, 
the prophete, whom he hadde brou3t a3en, 
24made redi his asse. The which whanne 
he was goon, a lioun foond hym in the 
weye, and slew3*. And the careyn of 
hym was throwun forth in the weye; 
forsothe the asse stood biside hym, and 
25the lionn stood biside the careyn. And 
loo! men goynge seen the careyn throwen 
in the weie, and a lioun stoondynge be- 
side the careyn; and thei camen, and 
openeden into the citee, in the which 
26that ilke olde prophete dwellide. The 
which thing whanne the prophete hadde 
herd, that ladde him a3en fro the weye, 
seith, The man of God he is, that was 
vnobeshynge? to the mouth of God; 


aQOm. 8. » Andhe «. >» obeyschaunt scerH. 


ithe whiche s. * 3edist thidre1. 1 And he 1. 


bitake 1. *%a1. Y hath broken 1. 2 Om. 1. 


this place ; for the Lord spak to me in the 17 

word of the Lord, and seide, Thou schalt 

not ete breed, and thou schalt not drynke 

water there, nether thou schalt turne a3en 

bi the weie bi which) thou 3edist*. Which! 1s 

seide to hym, And Y am a profete lijk 

thee; and an aungel spak to me bi the 

word of the Lord, and seide, Lede a3en 

hym in to thin hows, that he ete breed, 

and drynke watir. He disseyuede the 

man of God, and bron3te Azm™ a3zen with 19 

hym. Therfor he ete breed in his hows, 

and drank watir. And whanne he sat at20 

the table, the word of the Lord was maad 

to the prophetet that brou3te hym ajen; tS ee 
and he eriede to the man of God that cam 21‘cioun of pro. 
fro Juda, and seide, The Lord seith these **¢! frees 
thingis, For thou obeidist not tothe mouth ude men, as 


5 to Balaam, in 
of the Lord, and keptist not the comaunde- ii, c*. of Nu- 


ment which" thie Lord God comaundide fene. 
to thee, and thou turnedist a3en, and etist 22 

breed, and drankist watir in the place in 

which Y comaundide to thee, that thou 

schuldist not ete breed, nether schuldist? 

drynke watir, thi deed bodi schal not be 

borun in to the sepulcre of thi fadris. And 23 

whanne he hadde ete and drunke, the pro- 

phete, whom he hadde brou3t a3en, sadlide 

his asse. And whanne he hadde go, a24 

lioun foond hym in the weye, and killidet 2 and kitlide ; 
hym'. And his deed bodi was cast forth — schal ( Cal pa 
in the weie; sotheli the’ asse stood bisydis ek 


greuouse 


hym, and the liount stood bisidis the deed syunes of Wick- 


bodi. And lo! men passynge sien the 2s bene 
deed bodi cast forth in the weye, and the or an ody 
lyoun stondynge bisidis the deed bodi; ‘ire eae 
and thei camen, and pupplischiden® in.the 

citee,in which thilke’ eeld prophete dwell- 

ide. And whanne thilke prophete, that 26 

brou3te hym a3en fro the weye, hadde herd 

this, he seide, It is the man of God, that 

was vnobedient to the month of God; and 

the Lord bitook¥ hym .to the* lioun, that 


brakY hym, and killide hym?, bi the word 


*slew3 hym a. ¢Cthat ce. 4 vnobeschaunt BcerH. 


m Om. plures. that1. the rR. P thou schuldist 1. 
4 go forth r. ° Om. plures. Shis1.  ¢ lioun also 1. 


u pupplischiden it 1. ther. that EL. - W hath 


XIII. 27—XIV. 2. 


and the Lord took hym to a lyoun, that 
brusside hym, and slew3 hym, after the 
word of the Lord that he’ spak to hym. 
27 And he seide to hys sonys, Makith redi 
to me an asse. The which whanne thei 
2shadden maad redi, and he is goon, he 
foond the careyn of hym throwun forth 
in the weye, and an asse and a Hioun 
stondynge beside the careyn; and the 
lyoun eete not of the careyn, ne hurte 
29not the asse. ‘Thanne the prophete took 
the careyn of the man of God, and putte 
it vpon the asse; and turned a3en, he 
brou3te it in to the citee of the oold pro- 
30 phete, that he weyle hym. And he putte 
the careyn of hym in his sepulere, and 
thei weileden hym, Allas! allas! my bro- 
3ithere! And whanne thei hadden weilid 
hym, he seide to hys sonys, Whanne I 
shal be deed, birieth me in the sepulcre, 
in the which the man of God is biried; 
beside the bonys of hym putte 3e my 
szbonys. For forsothe the word shal come, 
that he before seide in the word of the 
Lord, ajens the auter that is in Bethel, 
and a3ens alle® the temples‘ of the’ hei3 
thingis8’, that ben in the citees of Sa- 
marye. Aftir thes wordis Jeroboam ys 
not turned awey fro his werst weye, but 
ajenward he made of the last puplis 
preestis of hei3 thingis®®; who so euer 
wolde, fulfillid® his hoond, and was maad 
33a preest of hei3 thingis. And for this 
cause the hows of Jeroboam synnede, 
and is turned vpsedoun, and doon awei 
fro the vttermoost of the erthe. 


- CAP. XIV. 


1 In that tyme Abya, the sone of Jero- 
2boam, wexe sijke. And Jeroboam seide 
to his wijf, Ryse, and chaunge abijt, that 
thou be not knowun, that thow be the 
wijf of Jeroboam; and go in to Silo, 
where Ahya, the prophet, is, the which 
¢ al ArH. 


4Om, FH. f temple aru. 


a that 1. 
ithatar. | that 1. 


bAndthanne1. a1. 4 putte Ex. 
k whiche 1. 


PP the erthe 1k. 4 thon up J. 


II. KINGS. 


£Om. cE sec. m. 


© upon I. 
l awey IKLMosx. e 
IKMNogswho. ° fille azupb. fille ful p. he fillide 1. fulfille xsg. fulfilide m. °° the kyngis 1. 
t the clothing DIKMOX sec. m. ¢. 


205 


of the Lord which* he spak to hym. And>27 


he seide to hise sones, Sadle 3e an asse to 
me. 
he hadde go, he foond his deed bodi cast 
forth in the weie, and the asse and the* 
lioun stondinge bisidis the deed bodi; and 
the lioun eet not} the deed bodi, nether 


And whanne thei hadden sadlid, and 28 


+ eet not, elc.; 
bl this it ap- 


hirtide the assc. Therfor the profete took 29 perith, that he 


the deed bodi of the man of God, and put- 
tide’ it on® the asse ; and he turnede ajen, 
and brou3te it in to the cyte of the eeld 
prophete, that he schulde biweile hym. 
And he puttidef his deed bodi in his 
pulere, and thei biweiliden him, Alas! 


was sanyd, for 
he acceptide 
Goddis sen- 
tence, and 
purgide the 
synne of vn- 
obedience by 
bodily deth. 


SC- 30 Lire here. c. 


t Jeroboam 
turnede not 


alas! my brother! And whanne thei had- 3; 3% 5 f 


den biweilid hym, he seide to hise sones, 
Whanne Y schal be deed, birie 3eh me in 
the sepulcre, in which the man of God is 
biried ; putte 3e my bonys bisidis hise 
bonys. 
which! he bifor seide in the word of the 
Lord, ajens the auter whichj is in Bethel, 
and a3ens alle the templis of hi3 placis, 
that* ben in the citees of Samarie. After 
these wordis Jeroboam turnede not a3en'{ 
fro his werste™ weie, but aj3enward of the 
laste puplis® he made preestis of hije 
places; who euer wolde, fillide® his°° 
hond§, and? he was maad preest of hi3 
placis. 
Jeroboam synnede, and it was distried, 
and doon awey fro the face of erthe??. 


CAP. XIV. 

In that tyme Abia, sone of Jeroboam, ; 
was sijk. And Jeroboam seide to his wijf, 2 
Rise thous, and chaunge clothing", that 
thou be not knowun, that thou art the 
wijf of Jeroboam; and go thou in to Silo, 
where Ahia, the prophete, is, which* spak 


eg Om, & prem. 4% he fulfillid & pr.o. 


and seiden, Alast. 4 Om. 8. 
1 of the puple A sec.m. men DFG 
P Om. vb. 


f putte 1. 
m fu) wickid 1. 


$ that 1. 


thou; Jero- 
boam si3 the 
forseid signes 
in tbe auter 
kit, and in his 
hond dried, 
netheles he 
jede not awey 


For sotheli the word schal come, 32? bis malice. 


Josephus 
touchith the 
cause therof, 
and seith, that 
the false pro- 
fete tau3te Jero- 
boam, that the 
forseid signes 
schewiden not 
Goddis vertu, 
for he that 3af 
the signe, was 
slayn of a 
oun, a fals 
spekere; also 
he seide that 
the auter was 


And for this cause the hows of 33 brokun, for the 


irthun of sa- 
crifices put 
theronne, and 
that the kyngis 
hond was dry- 
ed, for the 
trauel of of- 
fring ; and 
whanne he 
restide fro that 
trauel, his hond 
turnede agen 
to the formere 
staat, bi the 
vertu of kynde. 
Lire here. c. 
§ fille his hond ; 
in offringe a 
solempne sacri- 
fice, as Aaron 
dide, and bi 
this he was 
maad prest $ 
ether this is 
referrid to Je- 
roboam, that 
selde presthod, 
and therfor he 
that 3af more 
prijs to Jero- 
boam, gat the 
presthod. 
Lire here. ¢. 


206 


spak to me, that I was to regne vpon this 
3puple. Tak forsothe in thin hoond ten 
looues, and a litil kake, and a vessel of 
hony, and go to hym; forsothe he shal 
shewe to thee, what ben to come to this 
schild. The wijf dide as Jeroboam seide, 
and arysynge she wente into Silo, and 
cam into the hows of Ahye; and he my3te 
not se, for the eyen of hym hadden da- 
5sewide for eeld. Forsothe the Lord seide 
to Ahyam, Loo! the wijf of Jeroboam is 
comen in, that she counsele thee vpon 
hire sone, that is sijk; thes thingys and 
thes thou shalt speke to hire. Thanne 
whanne she was comen yn, and hadde 
vnlikned hire self to be that she was, 
6 Ahias herde the soun of the feet of hire 
comynge in bi the dore, and seith, Cum 
in, wijf of Jeroboam; whi anothir thow 
feynest thee to be? Forsothe I am sent to 
7thee an hard messagere. Go, and sey to 
Jeroboam, These thingis seith the Lord 
God of Irael, For I haue enliaunsid thee 
fro the myddis of the puple, and 3af thee 
sduyk vpon my puple Irael, and kytte the 
rewme of the hows of Dauid, and jaf it 
to thee, and thow was not as my ser- 
uaunt Dauid, that kepte myn _heestis, 
and folwide me in al his herte, doynge 
ythat was plesynge in my si3t; but thou 
hast wrou3t euil, ouere alle that weren 
before thee, and thou hast maad alien 
goddis to thee, and joten, that thou 
terre me to wraththe, forsothe thou hast 
1othrowen me behynde thi bak. Therfor 
loo! I shal brynge yn yuels vpon the 
hows of Jeroboam, and I shal smyte fro 
Jeroboam vuto a pissere at the wal, and 
closide, and last in Yrael; and I shal 
clense the relikis of the hows of Jero- 
boam, as is wont to be clensid muk vnto 
11 the pure; forsothe thoo that weren deed 
of Jeroboam in the citee, houndis shulen 
eete hem ; forsothe thoo that weren deed 
in the feeld, briddes of henene shulen de- 


Ill. KINGS. 


XIV. 3-——~12. 


to me, that Y schulde regne ont this puple. 
Also take thou in the" hond ten looues,3 
and a cake, and a vessil of hony, and go 
thou to hym; for he schal schewe to thee, 
what schal bifalle to this child. The wijf4 
of Jeroboam dide as he seide, and sche 
roos’, and 3ede in to Silo, and cam in to 
the hows of Ahia; and he’ mi3te not se, 
for hise ijen dasewiden for eelde. For-5 
sothe the Lord seide to Ahia, Lo! the 
wijf of Jeroboam entrith, that sche coun- 
sele thee* onY hir sone, which? is sijk; 
thou schalt speke these and these thingis 
to hir. Therfur whanne sche hadde en- 
trid, and hadde feyned hir silf to be that 
‘womman which* sche was not, Ahia herdee 
the soune of the feet of hir entrynge bi 
the dore, and he seide, Entre thou, the 
wijf of Jeroboam; whi feynest thou thee 
to bee an other womman’? Forsothe Y 
am sent an hard messangert to thee. Go7 
thou, and seie to Jeroboam, The Lord 


. God of Israel seith these thingis, For Y 


enhaunside® thee fro the myddis of the 
puple, and Y 3af thee duyk on? my puple 


+ hard messan- 
ger; that is, 
tellinge harde 
thingis. Lire 
here. C. 

t wrou3lest 
yuel, ete. ; in 
governail of 
the puple. Lire 


Israel, and Y kittide® the rewme of theg fer 


hows of Dauid, and Y 3af it to thee, and 
thou were not as my seruaunt Dauid, that 
kepte myn heestis, and suede me in al his 
herte, and dide that that was plesaunt in 
my si3t; but thou wrou;tist’ yuel{, ouers 
alle men that weren bifore thee, and 
madist to thee alien goddis, and wellid’ 
to gidere, that thou schuldist excite" me 
to wrathfulnesse, sotheli thou hast cast 
forth me bihyndis thi! bak. Therfor lo! 
Y schal brynge in yuels on* the hows of 
Jeroboam, and Y schal smyte of! Jero- 
boain ‘til to™ a pissere§ to the wal, and 
prisoned", and the laste in Israel; and Y 
schal clense the relikis® of the hows of 
Jeroboam, as dung|| is wont to be clensid 


e. Ce 
§ FY schal smyte 
of Jeroboam til 
to @ pissere, 
etc.; that is, 
if a dogge is 
smytun, ether 
a feble man, 
that ou3te to be 
sparid, myche 
more othere 
men of the 
hous of Jero- 
hoam schulen 
be distried. 
Lire here. c. 
|| as dung; 
ung is not 


10 clensid in it 


silf, but the 
place in which 
the dung is, is 
clensid, whanne 
the dung is 
cast out; and 
bi this it is 
vndurstondun, 
that they of 
the hows of 
Jeroboam 


‘til toP the? purete, ‘ether clennesse™; so- 1 scbulden not 


theli doggis schulen ete hem, that schulen 
die of the hows of Jeroboam in citee®; 


1zuowre hem; for the Lord spak. Thou  forsothe' briddis of the eyr schulen de- 
tuponi. Uthinr. VYroosupr1. WAhiax. Xwiththeer yofr. %that1r 2Om.1. % Om.1. 
¢haue enhaunsid 1. duponr. ¢hauekitt1. fhast wroujt1. §& wellid thoor. bstire 1. ithe cn. 
kupon1. I the hous of1. ™vntor. ® vnto him that is prisoned 1. © relikis or releffis 1. P vnto 1. 
4QOm.ir. tOm.1. s the citee cr tand1. 


be clensid in 
hem silf, but 
the rewme of 
Israel schulde 
be clensid, bi 
the casting 
out and distri- 
yng of hem. 
Lire here. c. 


Ill. KI 


XIV. 13——21. 


therfor ryse, and go into thin hows; and 
in that goynge in of thi feet in to the 
_ i3cytee the child shal dye. And al Yrael 
shal beweile hym, aud berye; forsothe 
he alone shal be brou3t yn of Jeroboam 
in to the sepulere, for there is founden 
vpon hym a good word of the Lord God 
140f Yrael, in the hows of Jeroboam. The 
Lord forsothe shal ordeyne to hym a 
kyng vpon Irael, that smyte the hows of 
Jeroboam, in this day and in this tyme; 
isand the Lord God of Irael shal smyit, as 
a reede in water is wont to be moued; 
and he shal pulle vp Irael fro this good 
loond, that he 3af to the faders of hem, 
and he shal wyndowe hem be3onde the 
flood, for thei maden to hem mawmet 
16 wodis', that thei terren the Lord. And 
the Lord God shal take Irael ‘to her ene- 
myes*, for the synnes! of Jeroboam, the 
which synnede, and made Irael to synne. 
17And so the wijf of Jeroboam roos, and 
wente, and cam into Tharsa; and whanne 
she wente in the threshwold of the hows, 
isthe child dyede. And thei birieden hym; 
and al Irael weylide hym, aftir the word 
of the Lord, the which he spak in the 
hoond of his seruaunt, Ahye the prophete. 
19 The remenaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Jeroboam, how he fau3t, and how he 
regnede, loo! thei ben writen in the book 
of the wordis of the dais of the kyngis of 
20 Yrael. The dais forsothe, in™ ‘the whiche® 
regnede Jeroboam, ben two and° twenti 
jeer; and Jeroboam slepte with his fa- 
dres, and Naadab, his sone, regnede for 
zihym. Forsothe Roboam, the sone of Sa- 
lomon, regnede in Juda ; of oon and fourti 
3eer was Roboam whanne he began to 
regne, and seuenteen? 3eer he regnede 
vpon Jerusalem, the citee that the Lord 
chees, that he putte his name there, of 
alle the lynagis of Irael. The name 
forsothe of his moder, Naama Amanyte. 


= 


NGS. 207 


uoure hem, that schulen die in the feeld; 

for the Lord spak. Therfor rise thou, 12 

and go in to thin hows; and in thilke en- 

tryng of thi feet in to the citce the child 

schal die. And al Israel schal biweile 13 

him, and schal birie’; for this child aloone 

of Jeroboam schal be borun in to sepul- 

cre“, for a good word is foundun on* 

hym of the Lord God of Israel, in the 

hows of Jeroboam. Forsothe the Lord 14 

schal ordeyne to hym a kyng ony Israel, 

that schal smyte the hows of Jeroboam, 

in this dai and in this tymet; and thes t in this ¢yme; 
Lord God of Israel schal smyte, as a reed tien ie 
in the water is wont to be mouyd; and 

he schal drawe out Israel fro this good 

lond, which? he 3af to her fadris, and he 

schal wyndewe* hem ouer the flood, for 

thei maden to hem woodis>{, that thei specu orm 
schulden terre the Lord to ire. And the 164diden idolatrie 
Lord God schal bitake Israel to* hise4 Se Tas a 
enemyes®, for the synuesf of Jeroboam, "© 
that synnede, and made Israel to do 

synne. Therfor the wijf of Jeroboam17 

roos, and 3ede, and cam in to Thersa; 

whanne® sche entride in to the thresch- 

fold of the hows, the child was deed. And 1s 


thei» birieden hym; and al Israel biweilide 


hym, bi the word of the Lord, which! he 
spak in the hoond of his seruaunt, Ahia 
the prophet. Forsothe, lo! the residue of 19 
wordis* of Jeroboam, how he fau3t, and 
how he regnede, ben writun in the book 
of wordis of the daies of kyngis of Israel. 
Forsothe the daies, in whiche Jeroboam 20 
regnede, ben two and twenti 3cer; and 
Jeroboam slepte with hise fadris, and 
Nadab, his sone, regnede for hym. For-21 
sothe Roboam, the sone of Salomon, regnede 
in Juda; Roboam was of oon and fourti 
3eer, whanne he: bigan to regne, and he 
regnede seuentene 3eer in' Jerusalem, the 
citee which™ the Lord chees of alle the 
lynagis of Israel, that he schulde sette his 


itemplis e pr.m. * Om. x prom. Usynne anrH. ™ Om. BCEFH. ® thatc. ©° Om. 5.  P eizte- 
tene E pr.m. 

u Om, A. v birie him a. Wasepulerer. the sepulerekob. *upont. rage its z that 1. 
a winewe 1. b manwmet woodis1. © Om. ncer pr.m. 4 Om. BCEFOP pr.m. m. BCEP pr. mm, 


fsynne xb. & and whanne 1x. ‘ment | that 1. 


k the wordis 1. 


lwhanne ins. ™ that 1. 


208 


22And Juda dide yuel before the Lord, 
and thei terreden hym vpon alle thingis, 
that the faders of him diden in her 
23 synnes, that thei synneden. Forsothe and 
thei beeldiden? vp to hem self auterys, 
and ymagis, and mawmet wodis?, vpon 
al hei3 hil, and vndur eche tree ful of 
24 braunchis. But men maad wommanlich’ 
weren in the loond, and thei diden alle 
the abhomynaciouns of hethen* men, the 
whiche the Lord al to-trade before the 
25face of the sonys of Irael. Forsothe in 
the fifthe 3eer of the regne of Roboam, 
Sesac, the kyng of Egipt, stiede vp into 
26 Jerusalem; and he took the tresours of 
the hous of the Lord, and the kyngis 
tresours, and alle thingis he brak in‘ two, 
and the golden sheeldis that Salomon 
ajmade. For the whiche kyng Roboam 
made brasen sheeldis, and took hem in 
the hoond of the duykis sheeldberers, 
and of hem that watchiden before the 
egdoore of the hows of the kyng. And 
whanne the kyng wente into the hows 
of the Lord, thei beeren hem, that hadden 


the office of goynge before, and afterward - 
thei brou3ten a3en to the armerye place - 


29 of the sheeldberers. The remnaunt for- 
sothe of the wordis of Roboam, and alle 
thingis that he dide, loo! ben writen in 
the book of the wordis of the dais of the 

s0kyngis of Juda. 
bitwix Roboam and Jeroboam alle dais. 

31 And Roboam slepte with his faders, and 
is biried with hem® in the citee of Da- 
uid. Forsothe name of his moder, Naama 
Amanyte; and Abya, his sone, regnede 
for hym. 


CAP. XV. 


1 Thanne in the ei3tetenthe’ 3eer of the 
regne of Jeroboam, the sone of Naabath, 
zregnede Abya vpon Judam. Thre jeer 
he regnede in Jerusalem; name of his 


III. KINGS. 


And there batayl was - 


XIV. 22——XV. 2, : 


name there. Sotheli™. the name of his 

moder was Naama Amanyte. And Juda22 

dide yuel bifor the Lord, and thei terriden 

hym to ire on alle thingis, whiche her 

fadris diden in her synnes, bi whiche thei 

synneden. ‘For also thei bildiden to hem 23 

silf auters, and ymagis{, and wodis, on + euteris and 
eche hi3 hil, and vndur ech tree ful of aan 


< Fi ‘ here. c. 
bowis. But also ‘men of wymmens COM= 24 7 wodis, ete. ; 


~diciouns"{ weren in the lond, and thei a 

js ° . TS uu 
diden alle abhominaciouns® ‘of hethene _ the places of 
idolis, to vse 


men, whiche ‘the Lord al to-brak bifor  jeccherie there. 
Lire here. c. 


the face of the sones of Israel. Forsothe 25 ¢1hon of wym- 
in the fifthe 3eer of the rewme of Roboam,’ - see 4 
Sesach, the kyng of Egipt, styedeP? in to pre 
Jerusalem; and he took the tresouris of 26 feble, that 
the hows of the Lord, and the kyngis (yinprcy 
tresouris, and he rauischided alle thingis ; an 
also ‘he rauischide’ the goldun ‘scheeldis, sm men 

c i seyen. Sothely 
whiche* Salomon made. For whichet kyng 27 the Ebren 
Roboam made brasun scheeldis, and 3af" Bs 
tho in the hondis of duykis of scheeld fe 
makeris, and of hem that wakiden’ bifor eae a 
the dore of the hows of the Lord. And 28ciouns semen 
whanne the kyng entride in to the hows ota 
of the Lord, thei that hadden office to go inhvorehonsis, 
bifore, baren tho, and baren® a3en to the % bannte the 


, : synne of So- 
place of armer of scheeld makeris. For- 29 dom, as in 11. 
s hook of Ma- 
sothe, lo! the residue of wordis* of Ro-  chab. iiij. ¢* 
Jason settide 


boam, and alle thingis whiche he dide,  jonge men in 
hoore housis, 


ben writun in the book of wordis of daies oar" Hea 
of kyngis of Juda. And batel was bitwixe 30 ter. Lire 
Roboam and Jeroboam, in alle daies. And31 

Roboam slepte with hise fadris, and was 

biried with hem in the citee of Dauid. 

ForsotheY the name of his modir was 

Naama Amanyte; and Abia, his sone, 

regnede for hym. 


CAP. XV. 


Therfor in the eiz3tenthe jeer of: the} 
rewme of Jeroboam, sone? of Nabath, 
Abia regnede on* Juda. Thre 3eer hee 
regnede in Jerusalem; the name of his 


Pbeelden 4. ° @templis x pr.m. t'wommannysch eceru.: the hethen BE pr.m.u.  tonce. 
u Om. £ pr.m. Y nynteethe 4, nynteenth Bru. 

m Andi. "men of wymmen condiciouns 4. wommanysche meni. ©the abhomynaciouns 1. P styede 
up 1. 4 rauischide thenns 1. *Om.1. also the whiche 1. ¢ the whiche 1. he jaf1. Vv walkiden Kb: 


makeden L. W thei baren thoo 1. 


x the wordis 1. ‘Y And 1. 


2 the sone 1, % upon. 


XV. 3—!5. 


moder Macha, the dou3ter of Abessalon. 
3And he wente in alle the synnes of his 
fader, the whiche he hadde doon before 
hym; ne the herte of hym was parfite 
with the Lord his God, as the herte of 
4Dauid, his fader. But for Dauid the 
Lord his God 3af to hym a lanterne in 
Jerusalem, that he rere his sone aftyr 
shym, and stoonde in" Jerusalem; for thi 
that Dauid hadde doo ri3t in the eyen of 
the Lord, and hadde not bowid awey fro 
alle thingis that he hadde comaundide to 
hym, alle days of his lijf, out taak the 
sword of Vrie Ethei. Neuerthelater there 
was batail betwix Abyam and Jeroboam, 
zal tyme of his lijf. The remnaunt for- 
sothe of the wordis of Abye, and alle 
thingis that he dide, whethir not thes 
ben writen in the book of the wordis of 
the days of the kyngis of Juda? And 
there was batail betwix Abyam and Jero- 
sboam. And Abya slepte with his faders ; 
and thei biryden hym in the cite of Da- 
uid; and Asa, his sone, regnede for hym. 
9Forsothe in the twentithe 3eer of Jero- 
boam, kyng of Irael, regnede Asa, kyng 
1i00f Juda; and oon and fourti 3eer he 
regnede in Jerusalem. Name of his mo- 
der, Macha, the dou3ter of Abessalon. 
1:And Asa dide ri3t in the si3t of the 
12 Lord, as Dauid, his fader; and he took 
awey the wommannysh maad men of the 
loond, and he purgide alle the’ filthis of 
the mawmettis, ‘the whiche’’ his fadris 
13maden. Ferthermore and his moder Ma- 
cham he ‘putte awey”, that she were not 
prince in the heriyng thingis of the 
mawmet of mannus 3eerde, and in* his 
‘mawmet wodeY that she hadde halowide ; 
and he turnede vpsodoun the den of hym, 
and he to-brak the foulest lienes, and 
14 brente in the steem of Cedron; forsothe 
the hei3 thingis he dide not awey ; neuer- 
thelater the herte of Asa was perfijt with 
isthe Lord his God, alle his dais. And he 


Vat Eprom. VY Om, c prim. 


d rijtwisnesse I. 
™ riztwisnesse I. 
8 that I. 


b the douzter 1. © Om. 1. 
kOm.c. 1 the dou3ter 1. 
4 brente it1. 1 the hij 1. 


VOL. Il. 


III. KINGS. 


vv that ¢ prem. 


e that 1. 
1 the ydol Priapus 1. 
t and siluer 1. 


209 


modir was Maacha, dou;ter? of Abessalon. 
And he 3ede in alle the synnes of his fadir, 3 
which he dide bifor hym; and his herte 
was not perfit with his Lord God, as the 
herte of Dauid, his fadir, ‘was perfit*. But 
for Dauid his Lord God 3af to hym a lan- 
terne in Jerusalem, that he schulde reise 
his sone after hym, and that he schulde 
stonde in Jerusalem; for Dauid hadde dos 
ri3tfulnesset in the isen of the Lord, and 
hadde not bowid fro alle thingis whiche® 
the Lord hadde comaundid to him, in alle 
the daies of his lijf, outakun the word of 
Urie Etheift. Netheles batel was bitwixs 


_Abia and Jeroboam, in al the tyme of his 


lijf. Sotheli the residue of‘ wordis* of7 
Abia, and alle thinges whiche" he dide, 
whether these ben not writun in the book 
of wordis of daies of the kyngys of Juda? 
And batel was bitwixe Abia and Jero- 
boam. And Abia slepte with his fadris;s 
and thei birieden hym in the citee of 
Dauid; and Asa, his sone, regnede for 
hym. Sotheli! Asa, king of Jude, regnede9 
in the twentithe jeer of Jeroboam, kyng 


t the word of 
Vrie Ethei; 
Dauyth syn- 
nede in the 
noumbring of 
the puple, and 
in sentence 
3ouun ajenus 
Myphiboseth, 
as it is teld in 
ij. book, but 
these synnes 
weren ful litle, 
in comparisoun 
of the synne in 
the dede of 
Vrie, and ther- 
for these ben 
not arettid ; for 
a litil thing is 
arettid as no- 


of Israel; and Asa regnede oon and fourti 10 thins as the 


3eer in Jerusalem. The* name of his modir 


Filosofore seith 
in ij. book of 
Fisikis. Lire 


was Maacha, dou3ter’ of Abessalon. And 11 here. c. 


Asa dide ri;tfulnesse™ in the si3t of the 


Lord, as Dauid, his fadir, dide; and he12 


took awey fro the loond men of wymmens 
condiciouns, and he purgide alle the filthis 
of idols, whiche his fadris maden. 
thermore and he remouyde Maacha, his 
modir, that sche schulde not be princesse 
in the solempne thingis of Priapus"{, and 
in his wode® which? sche hadde halewid ; 
and he distriede the denne§ of hym, and 
he brak the foulest symylacre, and brente® 


t Priapus ; 
that is, an idol 
liyk a m: 


Fer- 13 with outra- 


giouse membre 
of man. c e¢ 
plures. 
§ he distriede 
the den; in 
which the 
wymmen 
hauntiden lec- 
cherie, for the 
worschipe of 
the idol. Lire 
CG 


< > . here. 
in the stronde of Cedron ; sotheli he dide 14 | jise thingis; 


not awei hi3" thingis||; netheles the herte 
of Asa was perfit with hys Lord God, in 
alle hise daies. 
hous of the Lord tho thingis, whiche* his 
fadir hadde halewid and auowid, siluer*, 


x Om. 4. Y temple e. 


W amonestede E pr. m. 


iAnd tr. 
P that 1. 


g the wordis pr. } that 1. 
© mawmett wode 1. 


f Om. c. 


Ee 


that is, hi3e 
places, in 
whiche the 
sones of Israel 


And he brou;te in to the 15 maden sacritice 


God, hifor 
that the temple 
was hildid ; 
and for that 
tyme it was 
leeueful, not 
aftirward. Lire 
here. C 


210 
brou3te in tho thingis, the whiche his fa- 
der hadde halowid aud vowede, into the 
hows of the Lord, siluer, and gold, and 
ig vessels. Forsothe batayl there was be- 
twix Asa and Baasa, kyng of Irael, alle 
17the dais of hem. Forsothe Baasa, the? 
kyng of Yrael, stiede vp into Juda, and 
he beeldide Rama, that no man my3te 
‘goon out, or goon yn, fro the parti of 
18 Asa, kyng of Juda. And so Asa takinge 
al the siluer aud gold, that lafte in the 
tresours’ of the hows of the Lord, and 
in the tresours of the kyngis hows, 3af 
into the hoondis of his seruauntis; and 
sente to Benadab, the sone of Trabem- 
non, the sone of Osyon, kyng of Cyrye, 
19 that dwellide in Damasch, seiynge, Coue- 
naunt of pees is betwix me and thee, 
and betwix my fader and thi fader, and 
therfor to thee I haue sent 3iftis, gold, 
and siluer; and I aske, that thou come, 
and make at nou3t the boond of pees, that 
thou hast with Baasa, the kyng of Irael, 
20and he goo awey fro me. Assentynge 
Benadab to kyng Asa, sente® the princis 
of his oost into the citees of Yrael; and 
thei smiten Ahion, and Dayr, and Abel, 
and the hows of Maacha, and al Sene- 
roth, that is, al the loond of Neptalym. 
21The which thing, whanne Baasa hadde 
herd, he lafte to beelde vp Rama, and 
22he turnede ajen into Tharsa. Forsothe 
kyng Asa sente a inessager into al Juda, 
seiynge, No man be excusid. And thei 
token the stoonus of Rama, and the trees 
of it, with the whiche Baasa hadde 
beeldid; and kyng Asa made out of the 
same Gabaa of Beniamyn, and Maspha. 
23 The remnaunt forsothe of alle the wordis 
of Asa, aud of al his® strength, and alle 
thingis that he dide, and the citees that 
he made vp, whethir not thes ben writen 
in the book of tlhe wordis of the days of 
the kyngis of Juda? Neuerthelater in 
the tyme of his eelde he akide the feet. 


ZOm. 4.  tresories cE. 


uvessels 1. Ywente ups. Wandc. 
¢ smeten EI. smiten L. and the 1. 


x Om, 1, 
€ thingis 1. 


III. KINGS. 


XV. 16—23. 


and gold, and vessel". Forsothe batel was 16 
bitwixe Asa and Baasa, kyng of Israel, 
in alle the daies of hem. And Baasa,17 
kyng of Israel, stiedeY in to Juda, and 
bildide Rama, that” no man of the part 
of Aza, kyng of Juda, my3te go out, ether 
go* yu. Therfor Asa took al the silueris 
and gold, that lefte in the tresouris of the 
hows of the Lord, and in the tresouris of 
the kyngis hows, and jaf it in to the 
hondis of hise seruauntis; and senteY to 
Benadab, sone? of Tabrennon, sone of Ozi- 
on, the kyng of Sirie, that dwellide in Da- 
mask, and seide, Boond® of pees is bitwixe 19 


. me and thee, and bitwixe my fadir and 


thi fadir, and therfor Y sente to thee 3iftis, 
gold, and siluer; and Y axe, that thou 
come, and make voide the boond of pees, 
which thou hast with Baasa, kyng of Is- 
rael, and that he go awey fro me. Bena-20 
dab assentide to kyng Asa, and sente the 
princes of his oost in to the citees of Is- 
rael; and thei smytiden® Ahion, and Dan, 
and Abel, the’ hows of Maacha, and al 
Cenoroth, that is, al the lond of Neptalym. 
And whanne Baasa hadde herd this thing, 21 
he lefte to bilde Rama, and turnede ajen 
in to Thersa. Forsothe kyng Asa sente 22 
message in to al Juda, and seide, No man 
be excusid. And thei token the stoonys of 
Rama, and the trees therof, bi whiche 
Baasa hadde bildid ; and kyng Asa bildide 
of the same ‘stoonys and trees® Gabaa of 
Beniamyn, and Maspha. Sotheli the re-23 
sidue of alle wordis' of Asa, and of al his 
strengthe, and alle thingis whiche® he 
dide, and the citees whiche he bildide, 
whether these beu not writun in the book 
of wordis of daies of kingis of Juda? 
Netheles Asa hadde ache in feet™t, in the [ope 


: : Ra 
tyme of his eelde. And Asa slepte with 2478 106 Pro. 


t+ Asa hadde 
ache in feet ;- 


hise fadris, and he was biried with hem int Scag 
: . 0 at repreuyde 
in the citee of Dauid, his fader; and Joso- him, for he 


: : tristid 
phat, his sone, regnede for him. Forsothe 25; men then in 


7 > i God, as it is 
Nadab, the sone of Jeroboam, regnede on! 73" ae 
of Paralip, 
xvi.c’. Lire 
here. c. 
Che sente epr.m. Om. 4. ¢ the aru. 
yhe sente iti. 2thesoner. &Aboond:. ?that 1. 
fthe wordis 1. &that1. 6 Ais feet1. i upon 1. 


XV. 24-—34. 


24And Asa slepte with his faders, and is 
biryed with hem in the citee of Dauid his 
fader; and Josaphath, his sone, regnede 
25for hym. Nadab forsothe, the sone of 
Jeroboam, regnede vpon Irael, the se- 
counde 3eer of Asa, the kyng of Juda; 
and he regnede vpon’ Yrae] two 3eer. 
26 And he dide that is yuel in the si3t of 
the Lord, and wente in the weies of his 
fader, and in the synnes of hym, in the 
27whiche he made Irael to synne. For- 
sothe Baasa, the sone of Ahia, of the 
hows of Ysachar, weytide to hym, and 
smoot hym in Jebethon, that is the citee 
of Philisteis; forsothe Naadab and al 
28 Yrael besegiden Jebothon. Thanne Baasa 
slew; hym, in the thridde 3eer of Asa, 
the kyng of Juda, and regnede for hym. 
209 And whanne he hadde regned, he smoot 
al the hows of Jeroboam; and he laft not 
forsothe not oon lijf of his seed, to the 
tyme that he dide awey hym, after the 
word. of the Lord, that he spak in the 
hoond of his seruaunt, Ahye Silonyte, 
30 prophete, for the synnes of Jeroboam, 
the whiche he hadde synned, and with 
whiche he haddef made Irael to synnen, 
and for the trespas, in the which he 
hadde terred the Lord God of Yrael. 
31 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Naadab, and alle thingis that he wrou3te, 
whether not thes ben wrytyn in the book 
of the wordis of the dais of the kyngis 
32of Yrael? And there was batail betwixe 
Asa and Baasa, king of Yrael, alle the 
33dais of hem. The thridde 3eer of Asa, 
kyng of Juda, regnede Baasa, the sone 
of Ahia, vpon al Yrael, in Tharsa, foure 
3iand twenti 3eer. And he dide yuel be- 
fore the Lord, and he wente in the 
weyes’ of Jeroboam, and in the synnes 


of hym, in the whiche he made Trael to 


III.. KINGS. 


211 


Israel, ink the secunde 3eer of Asa, king! 
of Juda; and he regnede on Israel two 
3eer. And he dide that, that was yuel in2e 
the si3t of the Lord, and he 3ede in the 
weies of his fadir, and in the synnes of 
hym, in whiche he made Israel to do 
synne. JF orsothe™ Baasa, the sone of 27 
Ahia, of the hows of Ysachar, settide tre-. 
soun to hym, and smoot" him in Gebe- 


thon t, which® is a citee of Filisteis; +t in Getethon; 
i if this was a citee 
sothelyP Nadab and al Israel bisegiden in the lynage 


ae f Ds 
Therfor Baasa killide hym4, 23 Fijisteis ae 


Gebethon. 

in the thridde 3eer of Asa, king" of Juda,. Leste Te 

and regnede for hym. And whanne he 29 Nadab sede to 
rekeuere it. 

hadde regnede, he smoot al the hows of Lire here. c. 

Jeroboam; het lefte not" sotheli” not o man 

of his seed, til he dide awei hym, bi the 

word of the Lord, which” he spak in the 

hond of his seruaunt, Ahia of Silo, a pro- 

fete, for the synnes of Jeroboam whiche*30 

he synnede, and in whiche he made Israel. 

to doY synne, and for the trespas, bi which 

he wraththide the Lord God of Israel. 

Sotheli the residue of wordis? of Nadab,31 

and alle thingis whiche he wrou3te, whe- 

ther these ben not writun in the book of 

wordis of daies of the kyngis of Israel? 

And batel was bitwixe Asa and Baasa, 32 

kyng of Israel, in al the daies of hem. 

In the thridde 3eer of Asa, kyng of Juda, 33 

Baasa, sone* of Ahia, regnede on? al Is- 

rael, in Thersa, foure and twenti 3eer. 

And he dide yuel bifor the Lord, and he34 

3ede in the weies of Jeroboam, and in hise 

synnes, bi whiche he made Israel to do 


synne. 


synne. 
£Om. 4. & weye 4. 
kOm.c. ‘theking1. ™And1. "hesmootr. Othat1. Pandr 4 Nadab 1. * the king 1. 
s Baosat. tandhexswxg¢. ando. Om, pikmosxg¢. YOm.oswe that 1. * the whichet. 
yOm.1. 2 the wordis1. the sone ci. % upont. 


EeQ 


212 


CAP, XVI. 


1 Forsothe the word of the Lord is doon 
to Yau, the sone of Anany, a3ens Baasa, 
2seiynge, Forthi that I haue enhaunsid thee 
fro powdre, and’ sette thee duyk vpon 
Yrael, my puple; forsothe thow hast 
goon in the weie of Jeroboam, and hast 
maad my puple Irael to synne, that thow 
3terre me in the synnes of hem; and lo! 
I shal kitte of the hyndirmore of Baasa, 
and the hyndirmores of the hows of hym, 
and I shal make thin hows as the hows 
4of Jeroboam, the sone of Naabath. Who 
were deed of Baasa in" the citee, houndis 
shulen eete hym, and who were deed of 
hym in the regioun, the foulis of heuen 
sshulen eete hym. Forsothe the remnaunt 
of the wordis of Baasa, and what euer 
thingis he dide, and the batayls of hym, 
whether not thes ben writyn in the bokis 
of the wordis of the dais of the kyngis of 
6Irael? Thanne Baasa slepte with his fa- 
ders, and is biryed in Tharsa; and Hela 
7his sone, regnede for hym. Forsothe 
whanne in the hondi of Yau, the sone of 
Anany, the prophete, the word of the 
Lord was maad ajens Baasa, and a3ens 
the hows of hym, and ajens al the yuel 
that he hadde doon before the Lord, to 
terren hym in the werkis of his hondis, 
that he were maad as the hows of Jero- 
boam, for this cause he slew3 hym, that 
is, Yan, the sone of Anany, the prophete. 
8The sixe and twentithe 3eer of Asa, the 
kyng of Juda, regnede Hela, the sone of 
Baasa, vpon Yrael, in Tharsa, two 3eer. 
9 And a3ens hym rebellid Zamry, his ser- 
uaunt, duyk of the half partie of the 
horsmen ; forsothe Hela was in Tharsa, 
drynkynge and drunken in the hows of 
10 Arsa, prefect of Tharsa. Thanne Zamry 
fallinge on smoot, and slew3 hym, the 
seuen and twentith 3eer of Asa, kyng of 


Ill. KINGS. 


XVI. I—I0. 


CAP. XVI. 


Forsothe the. word of the Lord was 
maad to Hieu, sone of Anany, a3ens Baasa, 
and seide, For that that Y reiside’ theee 
fro dust, and settide® thee duyk onf Israel, 
my puple; sotheli thou 3edist in the weie 
of Jeroboam, and madist® my puple Israel 
to do synne, that thou schuldist terre me 
to ire, in the synnes of hem; lo"! Y schals 
kitte awey the hyndrere thingis of Baasa, 
and the hyndrere thingis of ‘his hows’, 
and Y schal make thin hows as the hows 
of Jeroboam, sone* of Nabath. Doggis!4 
schulen ete that man of Baasa, that schal 
be deed in citee™, and briddis of the eyr 
schulen ete that man of Baasa, that schal 
die in the feeld. Sotheli the residue ofs 
wordis" of Baasa, and what euer thingis 
he dide, and hise batels, whether these 
ben not writun in the book of wordis of 
daies of the kynges of Israel? Therfor’s 
Baasa slepte with hise fadris, and he 
was biried in Thersa; and Hela, his sone, 
regnede for hym. Forsothe whanne the7 
word of the Lord was maad in the hond 
of Hieu, sone? of Anany, ajens Baasa, 
and a3ens his hows, and a3ens al yuel4 
which he dide bifor the Lord, to terre 
hym to ire in the werkis of hise hondis, 
that he schulde be as the hows of Jero- 
boam, for this cause he" killide hym, that 
is, Hien}, the prophete, the sone of Anany. + shat is, Hieu, | 
In the sixe and twentithe 3eer of Aza,s pe ke 
kyng of Juda, Hela, the sone of Baasa, for"; eh, 
regnyde on* Israel, in Thersa, twei 3eer. 


it is, and for 
es - i he killide Na- 

And Zamry, ‘his seruauntt, duyk of the9 dab, his lord, 
bi tresoun, as 


half part of kny3tis", rebellide a3ens hym; Rabi Salomon 
sotheli Hela was in Thersa, and drank, 2/4” 


and was drunkun in the hows of Arsa, 
prefect’ of Thersa. Therfor Zamri felde 10 
in, and smoot”, and killide hym, in the 
seuene and twentithe 3eer of Asa, kyng of 
Juda; and regnede for hym. And whanne11 


h into £ sec.m. i! loond aprn. 
ethesone1. 4haue upreisidi. setter fuponi. thou hast mader. 1 lo herforet. ithe 
hows of himi. Kthesoner. !houndis1. ™ the citeecKL. acitee1. the wordis1. © And so1. 
Pthe sone1. ‘the ynel1, * Baasar. Supons. tthe sernaunt of Helar. 4 his knijztis 1. Va cheef 


officer 1. WW smoot Hela 1. 


XVI. ti——21. 


Jude; and he regnyde for hym. And 
whanne he hadde regned, and sitten ypon 
his see, he smoot al the hows of Baasa, 
and he lafte not of yt a pisser to the wal, 
and ‘the kynne, and the freendis* of hym. 

12 And Zamri dide aweye al the hows of 
Baasa, after the word of the Lord, that 
he hadde spoken to Baasa, in the hoond 

i30f Yau, the prophete, for alle the synnes 
of Baasa, and the synnes of Hela, his 
sone, the whiche synneden, and maden 
Israel to synne, terrynge the Lord God 

140f Israel in her vanitees. ‘The remenaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Hela, and alle 
thingis that he dide, whether not thes 
ben writin in the boke of the wordis of 
isthe dais of the kyngis of Israel? The 
seuen and twentithe 3eer of Asa, kyng 
of Juda, regnede Zamri seuen dais in 
Tharsa; forsothe an oost besegide Je- 
16bethon, the citee of Philistees. And 
whanne it hadde herde Zamri to han 
rebellid, and to! han sleyn the king, al 
Israel made to hem a kyng Aunry, that 
was prince of the chyualri vpon Israel, in 
i7that dai, in the tentis. Thanne Amri 
stiede vp, and al Israel with him, fro 
is Jebethon, and segiden Tharsa. Forsothe 
Zamri seynge, that the cite was to be 
ouercomen, he wente in to the paleis, 
and brende vp him self with the kingis 
i9hous; and is deed in his synnes that he 
synnede, doynge yuel before the Lord, 
and goynge in the weye of Jeroboam, 
and in the synnes of hym, by the whiche 
20he made Yrael to synne. ‘The remnaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Zamry, and of 
the spies of him, and of the tyraundise, 
whethir thes ben not writyn in the book 
of the wordis of the dais of the kyngys 
21of Yrael? Thanne the puple of Irael is 
deuydid™ in two parties ; the half partye 
of the puple folwide Thebny, the sone of 


k the nee3 freendis £ pr. m. 


xZamryt. YOm.1. Zuponr. 22 Om.c. 
€ gost of Israel 1. fthe Philistees1. 8 the oost 3. 
upt ™And1, in goynget. © the wordis 1. 


t the maystry 1. 


III. KINGS. 


213 


he* hadde regned, and haddeY setun on* his 
trone, he smoot al the hows of Baasa, and 
he” lefte not therof a pissere to the wal, 
and hise kynnesmen, and frendis. And®1!2 
Zamri dide awey al the hows of Baasa, 
bi the word of the Lord, which he spak 
to Baasa, in the hond of Hieu, the pro- 
phete, for alle the synnes of Baasa, and1s 
for the synnes of Hela, his sone, whiche® 
synneden, and maden Israel to do® synne, 
and wraththiden the Lord God of Israel 
in her vanytees. Sotheli the residue of 14 
the wordis of Hela, and alle thingis whiche 
he dide, whether these ben not writun in 
the book of wordis of daies of the kyngis 
of Israel? In the seuene and twentithe 15 
jeer of Aza, kyng of Juda, Zamri regnede 
seuene daies in Tharsa ; forsothe the oost® 
bisegide Gebethon, the citee of Philisteis. 
And whanne it? hadde herd, that Zamri is 
hadde rebellid, and hadde slayn the kyng, 
al Israel made Amry kyng to hemé, that 
was prince of* the chyualrye, oni Israel, 
in that dai, in ‘the castels*. Therfor Amry 17 
stiede!, and al Israel with hym, fro Gebe- 
thon, and bisegide Thersa. Sothely™ Zamri is 
si3, that the citee schulde be ouercomun, 
and he entride in to the palis, and brente 
hym silf with the kyngis hows; and he ts 
was deed in hise synnes whiche he syn- 
nede, doynge yuel bifor the Lord, and 
goynge" in the weie of Jeroboam, and in 
hise synnes, bi whiche he made Israel to 
do synne. Sotheli the residue of wordis® 20 
of Zamri, and of his tresouns, and tyraun- 
trie, whether these ben not writun in the 
book of wordis of daies of the kyngis of 
Israel? Thanne the puple of Israel was2i 
departid in to twei partis; the half part 
of the? puple suede Thebny, sone4 of Ge- 
neth, to make hym kyng, and the half? 
part suede Amry. Sotheli* the puple that 22 
was with Amry, hadde maystry‘ ouer the 


10m. 4. ™ deuyd 4. 
® Alsoand1. »thatr. ¢thewhicher. 4 Om. I. 
hon A. i upon 1. k her tentis 1.  stiede 
POm.1. dthesoner. ‘ootherhalfx. $ And t. 


214 


Jeneth, that he ordeyne hym kyng, and 
2zthe half parti Amry. Forsothe the pu-' 
ple that was with Amry hadde the 
ouerhoond ouer the puple that folwide 
Thebny, the sone of Jeneth; and Thebny 
231s deed, and Amry regnede. The oon 
and thretty" 3eer of Asa, kyng of Juda, 
regnede Amry vpon Yrael, twelue 3eer ; 
21in Tharsa he regnede sixe jeer. And he 
bou3te the hille of Samarye of Somer for 
two talentis of siluer, and he beeldide® 
it; and he clepide the name of the citee, 
that he bieldide® vp, by the name of 
Somer, that is, the lil of the Lord, or 
25 the hil of Samarye. Forsothe Amry dide 
yuel in the sijt of the Lord, and he 
wro3te wickidly, ouer alle that weren 
26before hym. And he wente in al the 
weye of Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, 
and in the synnes of hym, bi the whiche 
he made Irael to synne, that he terre the 
27 Lord God of Irael in his vanitees. The 
remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of Amry, 
and the batailis of hym, that he dide, 
whether not thes ben wryten in the book 
of the wordis of the dais of the kyngis 
28of Irae]? And Amry slepte with his 
faders, and is biried in Samarye; and 
29 Achab, his sone, regnede for hym. Achab 
forsothe, the sone of Amry, regnede on 
Irae] the ei3t and threttithe jeer of Asa, 
kyng of Juda; and Achab, the sone of 
Amry, regnede vpon Iracl, in Samarie, 
30two and twenti jeer. And Achab, the 
sone of Amry, dide yuel in tle si3t 
of the Lord, ouer alle that weren before 
sthym; ne it suffiside to hym that he 3ede 
in the synnes of Jeroboam, the sone of 
Naaboth, but ‘more ouere®® he weddide 
a wijf, Jezabel, the dou3ter of Methaal, 
kyng of Sydonyes; and he wente, and 
32 seruede to Baal, and honourde hym. And 
he sette an auter of Baal in the temple 
of Baal, that he hadde beeldid? vp in Sa- 


n thrittithe pcern. © bilde c passim. 


II. KINGS. 


XVI. 22—32. 


puple that suede Thebny, the sone of Ge- 
neth; and Thebny was deed, and Amri- 
regnede. In the oon and thrittithe 3eer 23 
of Aza, kyng of Juda, Amri regnede on" 
Israel, twelue 3eer; in Thersa he regnede 
sixe 3eer. And he bou3te of Soomeer, for 24 
twei talentis of siluer, the hil of Samarie, 
and ‘bildide that /7Z’; and he clepide the 
name of the citee, which” he hadde bildid, 
bi the name of Soomer, lord of the hil of 
Samarie. Forsothe Amry dide yuel in2 
the si3t of the Lord, and wrou3te wei- 
wardlix, ouerY alle men that weren bifor 
hym. And he 3ede in al the weie of Jero-26 
boam, sone? of Nabath, and in hise symnes, 
bi whiclie he made Israel to do synne, 
that he schulde terre to ire, in his vany- 
tees, the Lord God of Israel. Forsothe 27 
the residue of wordis* of Amry, and hise 
batels, whicli he dide, whether these ben 
not writun in the book of wordis of daies 
of the kyngis of Israel ? And Amry slepte 28 
with hise fadris, and was biried in Sama- 
rie; and Achab, his sone, regnede for hym. 
Forsothe Achab, the soue of Amry, regn-29 
ede on? Israel, in the ‘eijte and thrittithe 
3eer® of Asa, kyng of Juda; and Achab, 
sone’ of Amry, regnede on® Israel, in Sa- 
marie, two and twenti 3eer. And Achab, 30 
sonef of Amry, dide yuel in the si3te of 
the Lord, ouer alle men that weren bifor 
hym; and it suffiside not to hym that he31 
3ede in the synnes of Jeroboam, sune® of 
Nabath, ferthermore and he weddide a 
wijf, Jezabel, the dou3ter of Methaal, kyng 
of Sydoneis; and he" 3ede, and seruyde 
Baal, and worschipide hym. And he set-32 
tidei an auter to Baal in the temple of 
Baal, which* he hadde bildid in Samarie; 
and he plauntide a wode! ; and Achab add-33 
ide™ in his werk, and terride to ire the 
~Lord God of Israel, more thanne alle 
kyngis® of Israel that weren bifor hym. 
Forsothe in hise daies Ahiel of Bethel 31 


°0 oueremore BEF. P bild c passim. 


uuponi. Vhe bildide itr. Wthat1. ¥*wickidly 1. Ybiforer. 2thesoner. ® the wordis Ber. 
>upon i. Ceizthe and thretti xk. 4dthesoner. ¢upont. fthesone1, gthesonex. 6 Achabr. 
‘setteupi. Kthatr, | mawmet woder. ™addidetor. “ouerr. the kyngis 1. 


XVI. 33——XVII. 11. 


33marye, and he plauntide a maumet 
wode; and Achab addide- in his werke, 
terrynge the Lord God of Yrael, ouer 
alle the kyngis of Irael that weren before 

3thym. In the dais forsothe of hym Ahiel 
of Bethel beeldide vp Jericho; in Abiram, 
his fyrst goten, he foundide it, and in 
Segub, his last, he sette the 3atis of it, 
after the word of the Lord, that he hadde 
spokyn in the hoond of Josue, the sone 
of Nun. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 And Helias Tesbites, of the dwellers 
of Galaad, seide to Achab, The Lord God 
of Yrael lyueth, in whos si3t Y stond‘, 
if there shal be thes jeeris dewe and 
reyn, but after the wordis of my mouth. 

2And the word of the Lord is maad to 

3shym, seynge, Go aweye hens, and go 
a3ens the est, and be hidde in the streem 
4of Carith, that is a3ens Jordan, and there 
thou shalt drynke of the streem; and to 
the crowis I haue comaundide, that thei 
sfeden thee there. Thanne he wente, and 
dide after the word of the Lord; and 
whanne he hadde gon, he sat in the 
streem of Carith, that is a3ens Jordan. 
¢And the crowis brou3ten to hym breed 
and flesh erly; also at euen; and he 
7dranke of the streem. Forsothe after 
summe days the streem is dryed; for- 
sothe it hadde not reyned vpon erthe’. 
8Thanne the word of the Lord is do to 
9hym, seiynge, Ryis, and go ‘into™ Sarept 
of Sidonyes, and thow shalt dwelle there ; 
forsothe I haue comaundid there to a 
womiman widowe, that she fede thee. 
io And he roos, and wente into Serept of 
Sydonyes ; and whanne he was comyn to 
the 3ate of the citee, a womman widowe 
aperide to hym gederynge stickis; and 
he clepide hire, and seide to® hir, 3if to 
me a litil of water in a vessel, that I 
1drynke. And whanne she wente, that 


q stood 4. 


© and A pr. m. DEFGLMNPQRSUWXb¢. 
gatis 1. t that 1. a the sone 1. 
ZHely1. athat1. % and ini. 
bringe him watir x. 


e And t. 


II. KINGS. 


' the erthe peru. 


P to his K scc.m. 
v Thesbithes 1. 
4 Hely 1. 


215 


bildide Jerico; in® Abiram, his? firste 
sone}, he foundide it, in’ Segub, his" laste 
sone, he settide 3atis* therof, bi the word 
of the Lord, whicht he hadde spoke in the 
hond of Josue, sone® of Nun. 


CAP. XVII. 


And Elie ‘of Thesbi’, of the dwelleris1 
of Galaad, seide to Achab, The Lord God 
of Israel lyueth, in whos si3t Y stonde, 
deeu and reyn schal not be in these 3ceris, 
no but bi the wordis of my mouth. Ande 
the word of the Lord was maad to hym”, 
and seide, Go thou awey fro hennus{, and 3 
go a3ens the eest, and be thou hid in the 
stronde of Carith, which* is a3ens Jor- 
dan, and there thou schalt drynke of thes 
stronde; and Y comaundideY to crowis, 
that thei feede thee there. Therfor he7s 
3ede, and dide bi the word of the Lord; 
and whanne he hadde go, he sat in the 
stronde of Carith, which* is aseus Jordan. 
And crowis baren to hym breed and fleisch ¢ 
eerli; in® ijk maner in the cuentid; and 
he drank of the stronde. Forsothe® after 7 
summe daies the stronde was dried ; for it 
hadde not reynede on the erthe. Therfors 
the word of the Lord was maad to hym‘, 
and seide, Rise thou, and go in to Sereptag 
of Sydoneis, and thou schalt dwelle there ; 
for Y comaundide® to a womman, widewe 
there, that sche feede thee. Hef roos, 10 


"and 3ede in to Sarepta of Sidoneis; and 


whanne he hadde come to the j5ate of 
the citee, a womman widewe gaderynge 
stickis apperide to hym; and he clepide 
hir, and seide to hir, 3yue thou to me a 
litil of water in a vessel, that Y drynke. 
And whanne sche 3ede to bringe®, het 


Tin £ prem. § Om. 4. 
q and cGrk. r to his K sec. m. 3 the 
w Hely 1. x that 1. y hane eomaundid 1. 


& bringe it 1. 


ehane comanndid 1. f Hely 1. 


+ in Abicam 
hia firste sone ; 
that is, whanne 
he settide the 
foundementis, 
Abjram, his 
firste gendrid 
sone, diede, 
and whanne he 
gede forth in 
bildinge, hise 
sones dieden 
ech aftir other, 
til to the inate 
sone, that was 
deed in the 
filling of the 
werk. Lire 
here. c. 


2 go thou atwei 
Sro hennes; fro 
the face of 
Achab and of 
Jezabel; and 
herbi it is lene- 
fol to hooli 
men, to fle per- 
secucioun of 
her persoones. 
Lire here. c. 


216 


she brynge to, he eriede bihynde the bak 
of hir, seiynge, Bryng to me, J beseche, 
and a morsel of breed in thin hoond. 
12 The which answerde, The Lord thy God 
lyueth, for I haue not breed, but as myche 
as an handful may take of mele in a 
stene, and a litil of oyle in an oyle ves- 
sel; loo! I gedre stikkis, that I goo yn, 
and make it to me, and to my sone, that 
13we eten and dien. To whom seith He- 
lias, Wole thou not drede, but go, and 
do as thow hast seid; neuerthelater to 
me first make of that liti] mele a litil loof, 
baken vndre thet asshen", and bryng to 
me; forsothe to thee and to thi sone 
14thon shalt make afterward. Thes thingis 
forsothe seith the Lord God of Ivael, 
The stene of mele shal no3t fayle, ne the 
vessel of oyle shal not be mynushid, vnto 
the day in the which the Lord is to 3yue 
isreyn vpon the face of the erthe. ‘The 
which wente, and dide after the word of 
Helye; and he ete, and she, and hir’ 
ishows. And fro that dai the steen of mele 
failide not, and the vessel of oile is not 
mynushid, after the word of the Lord, 
that he hadde spokyn in the hoond of 
17Helye. It is doon forsothe after thes 
wordis, the sone of an huswijf womman 
wexe sijk, and the langour was moost 
strong, so that there lafte not in hym 
isbreeth. ‘Thanne she seide to Helias, 
What to me and to thee, thou man of 
God? Thou wentist into me, that my 
wickidnesses shulden be remembrid, and 
19 thou shuldist slee my sone. And Helias 
seith to hire, 3if to me thi sone. And 
he took him fro hir bosum, and bare 
in to the sowping place, where he dwell- 
ide; and putte hym vpon his litil bed, 
20 And he criede to the Lord, and seide, 
Lord, my God, also whether the widowe, 
anentis whom Y 3it am susteyned, thou 
hast tourmentid, that thow slee the sone 
2i0f hire? And he sprade out hym self, 


tOm. cern. Uaskes c. 
hand1i. iOm.pGrKanoqwbe. J aisshen ec. 
°fult. P the breeth 1. 9 Hast thou entrid 1. 


wanentis 1. v Hely 1. 


I. KINGS. 


W was metid up I. maat L. 


XVII, 12—21-. 


criede bihynde hir bac, and seide, Y bi- 
seche, bringe thou to me also a mussel of 
breed in thin hond. And sche answeride, 12 
Thi Lord God lyueth, for Y haue no 
breed, no but as myche of mele in a pot, 
as a fist may take, and a litil of oile in a 
vessel; lo! Y gadere twei stickis, that Y 
entre, and make it to me, and to my sone, 
that we ete and die. And Elie seide to1s 
hir, Nyle thou drede, but go, and make 
as thou seidist; netheles make thou firste 
to me of that litil mele a litil loof, bakun 
vndur the’ aischisi, and brynge thou to 
me; sotheli thou schalt make afterward 
to thee and to thi sone. Forsothe thet 
Lord God of Israel seith thes thingis, 
The pot of mele schal not faile, and the 
vessel of oile schal not be abatid, til to 
the dai in which the Lord schal 3yue reyn 
on the face of erthe!. And sche 3ede, and 1s 
dide bi the word of Elie; and he™ eet, 
and sche, and hir hows. And fro that dai ie 
the pot of mele failide not, and the vessel 
of oile was not abatid, bi the word of the 
Lord, which" he hadde spoke in the hond 
of Elie. Forsothe it was doon aftir these 17 
wordis, the sone of a womman hosewijf 
was sijk, and the sijknesse was moost°® 
strong, so that breethP dwellide not in 
hym. Therfor sche seide to Elie, What 1s 
to me and to thee, thon man of God? 
Entridist? thou to me, that my wickid- 
nessis#1 schulden be remembrid, and that 
thou schuldist sle my sone? And Elie1s 
seide to hir, 3yue thi sone to me. And 
he took ‘that sone" fro hir bosum, and bar’ 
in to the soler, where he dwellide; and he 
puttidet hym on his bed. And he criede 20 
to the Lord, and seide, My Lord God, 
whether thou hast turmentid also the wi- 
dewe, at" whom Y am susteyned in al 
maner, that thou killidist hir sone? He’ 2 
sprad abrood hym silf, and mat” on the 
child bi thre tymes; and he eryede to the 
Lord, and seide, My Lord God, Y biseche, 


vhis 4. Wlest gE prim. - 
Kk thou #1. Jtheerther, ™Hely1. ®thatr. 
qq wickidnesse ch. ‘itr. ‘®bariti. putter. 


XVII 22——XVIIEL 8. 


and mesurede vpon the child thre sithis, 
and criede to the Lord, and seith, Lord 
my God, the soule of this child, Y be- 
seche, be turned a3en into the bowels of 

22hym. And the Lord herde the voys of 
Helias, and the soule of the child is 
turned a3en with ynne hym, and he a3en 

23quikenyde. And Helias took the child, 
and putte it doun fro the sowpyng place 
in to the nedre hows, and took to his 
moder; and he seith to hire, Lo! thi 

24sone lyueth. And the womman seide to 
Helias, Now in this Y haue knowe, for 
the man of God thow ert, and the word 
of God in thi mouth is sothe. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Aftir manye dais the word of the Lord 
is doo to Helias, in the thridde 3eer, sei- 
ynge, Go, and shewe thee to Achab, that 
I 3eue reyn vpon the face of the erthe. 

2Thanne Helias wente that he shewe hym 
to Achab; forsothe there was hidows 

3hungre in Samarye. And Achab clepide 
Abdiam, the stiward of his hows; for- 
sothe Abdias dradde the Lord God of 
4Yrael myche. For whanne Jesabel shulde 
slee the prophetis of the Lord, he took 
an hundrid prophetis, and hidde hem, 
fifti and fifti, in dennys, and he fedde 
shem with breed and water. Thanne 
Achab seide to Abdias, Go in to the 
loond, to alle the welles of watris, and 
into alle valeis, if peradventure we mowen 
fynde herbe, and saue hors and mulis; 
sand the beestis fulli dien not. And thei 
deuydeden the regiouns to* hem self, 
that thei goon about hem; Achab wente 
bi o weye, and Abdias bi another, aside. 

; And whanne Abdias was in the weie, 
Helias a3jen cam to hym; the whieh 
whanne he hadde knowen hym, he felle 
vpon his face, and seith, Whethir thou 

sart my lord Helias? To whom he an- 
swerde, Y. And he seide, Go, and sey 


III. KINGS. 


217 


the soule of this child turne a3en in to the 
entrailis of hyin. The Lord herde the22 
vois of Elic, and the soule of the child 
turnede a3en with ynne hym, and he 
lyuede ajen. And Elie took the child,23 
and puttide* hym doun of the soler in to 
the lower hows, and bitook himY to his 
modir; and he seide to hir, Lo! thi sone 
lyueth. And the womman seide to Elie, 24 
Now in this Y haue knowe, that thou art 
the? man of God, and the word of God* 
is soth in thi mouth. 


CAP. VILE 


Aftir many daies the word of the Lordi 
was maad to Elie, in the thridde 3eert, 
and seide, Go, and schewe thee to Acliab, 
that Y 3yue reyn on” the face of erthe®. 
Therfor Elie 3ede to schewe hym silf4 toe 
Achab; forsothe® greet! hungur was in 
Samarie. And Achab clepide Abdie, dis-3 
pendere®, ether stiward, of his hows; for- 
sothe Abdie dredde greetli the Lord God 
of Israel. For whanne Jezabel killide the 4 
prophetis of the Lord, he took an hundrid 
prophetis, and hidde hem, bi fifties and 
fifties, in dennes, and fedde hem with 
breed and watir. Therfor' Achab seides 
to Abdie, Go thou in to the lond, to alle 
wellis* of watris, and in to alle valeis, if 
in hap we moun fynde gras, and saue 
horsis and mulis; and werk beestis pe- 
rische not outirli. Therfor! thei depart-« 
iden the cuntreis to hem silf, that thei 
schulden cumpasse tho; Achab 3ede bi 0 
weye, and Abdie 3ede bi another weie, ‘bi 
hym silf™. And whanne Abdie was in7 
the weie, Elie mette hym; and whanne 
he hadde knowe Elie, he felde on his face, 
and seide, Whethir thou art my lord Elie ? 
To whom he answeride, Y am. And Elie’ 
seide, Go thou, and seie to thi lord, Elie 


X of A. 

x putte 1.  y Om. plures. “zai, ‘the Lorda. > upon tI, ¢ the gene d Om. cures 
€certis1. fagreet x. & the dispenderer. Om.c. bOm.c. i Thanne 1. the wellis 1. nd 1. 
m aside halff 1. 

Ff 


VOL. Tf. 


tin the thridde 
3eer; this tyme 
is rekenyd fro 
the goyng ont 
of Elie fro the 
lond of Israel ; 
and fro the 
forbeding of 
reyn, til to his 
goyng ont, 
passiden vi. 
monethis and 
more; for he 
was hid longe 
in the stronde 
of Sarith, so 
that of the 
drienesse of 
tyme the 
stronde was 
dried, bifor 
that he jede 
awey, as it is 
seid in xvij. c°. 
bifore. For 
James seith 

in v. c® that 
Elie preiede, 
and it reyn- 
ede not hi iii. 
jeer and vi. 
monethis. Lire 
here. c. 


218 


gto thi lord, Helias is nee3. And he, 
What haue I synned, he seith, for thou 
takist me, thi sernaunt, in the hoond of 
10 Achab, that he slee me? The Lord thi 
God lyueth, for there is not folk or 
rewme, in the whiche my lord hath not 
sent, sechynge thee; and alle men answer- 
ynge, He is not here, he hath adiurid alle 
rewmes ‘and folkis’, for thi that thou art 
unot foundun; and now thou seist to me, 
Go, and sey to thi lord, Helie is nei3. 
12 And whanne I shal goo aweye fro thee, 
the Spiryt of the Lord shal bere thee 
aweye into a” place that I knowe not; 
and Y goon yn, shal telle to Achab, and 
not fyndynge thee, he shal slee me; thi 
seruaunt forsothe dredith the Lord fro 
his 3ongth. Whethir is it?? not shewid 
to thee, my lord, what I haue doon, 
whanne Jesabel shulde slee the prophetis 
of the Lord, that I hidde of the prophetis 
of the Lord an hundrid men, fifti and 
fifti, in dennys, and fedde hem with breed 
i4and water? And now thow seist, Go, 
and sey to thi lord, Helye is nei3, that 
she slee me. And Helyas seide, The 
Lord of oostis lyueth, before whos cheer 
I stonde, for to day Y shal apere to hym. 
is Thanne Abdias wente into the® ajen 
comynge of > Achab, and shewide to hym ; 
and Achab cam into the® a3en comynge 
i7to Helye. And whanne he hadde seen 
hym, seith, Whether art thou not he, that 
isdisturblist Irael? And he seith, I haue 
not disturblid Trael, but thow, and the 
hows of thi fader, that hast forsakyn the 
hestis’ of the Lord, and 3e han folowid 
19 Baalym. Neuerthelater now send, and 
gadre to me al Yrael, in the hil of Car- 
mele, and the prophetis of Baal foure 
hundrid and fifti, and the prophetis of 


III. KINGS. 


XVIII. 9—21. 


is present. And Abdie seide, What ‘syn-9 

nede Y®, for thou bitakist me in the hond 

of Achab, that he sle me? Thi Lord God 10 

lyueth, for no folk ethir rewme is, whidur 

my lord, sekynge thee, sente not; and 

whanne alle men answeriden, He is not 

here, he° chargide? greetli alle rewmest  t al! rewmes ; 

and folkis, for thou were not foundun; sone ae 

and now thou seist to me, Go4, and seie to 11 him and Achab 


thi lord, Elie is present". And whanne 12 “apie hem 
gretly, that if 
¥ schal departe fro thee, the Spirit of the Elie were 


foundun in the 
lond, he schulde 
be takun, and 
sent to him. 
Lire here. c. 


Lord schal bere thee awey in to a place 
which’ Y knowe not; and Y schal entre, 
and ‘Y schalt telle to Achab, and he sehal 
not fynde thee, and he schal sle me; for- 
sothe" thi seruaunt dredith the Lord fro 
his 3o0ng childhod. Whether it is noti3 
schewid to thee, my lord, what Y dide, 
whanne Jesabel killide the prophetis of 
the Lord, that Y hidde of the" prophetis 
of the Lord an hundrid men, bi fifty and 
bi’ fifti, in dennes, and Y fedde hem with 
breed and watir? And now thou seist, 14 
Go, and seie to thi lord, Elie is present’, 
that he sle me. And Elie seide, The Lord 1s 
of oostis lyueth, bifor whos si3t Y stonde, 
for to dai Y schal appere to hym*. Ther-16 
for Abdie 3ede in to the metyng of Achab, 
and schewideY to hym; and Achab cam 
in to the meetyng of Elie. And whanne17 
he hadde seyn Elie, he seide, Whether 
thou art he, that disturblist Israel? And 18 
he? seide, Not Y disturble Israel, but thou, 
and the hows of thi fadirt, whiche* han 
forsake the comaundementis of the Lord, 

and sueden” Baalym, ‘disturbliden Isracl*. eaent a 
Netheles now sende thou, and gadere to 19 0 ee : 
me al Israel, in? the hil of Carmele, and ‘ 
foure® hundrid and fifti prophetis of Baal, 

and foure hundrid prophetis of woodis'{,  § profetis of 


that eten of the table of Jezabel. -Achab20 Bee i 


+ thou and the 
hows of thi fa- 
dir ; for the 


mawmet wodis foure hundrid, that eten _sente to alle the sones of Israel, and ga- ows: Lire 
20 0f the bord of Jezebel. Achab sente to deride prophetis in the hil of Carmele. 
alle the sonys of Yrael, and gaderide the = Forsothe Elie neiz3ede to al the puple of21 
21 prophetis in the hil of Carmele. For- Israel, and seide, Hou long halten je in 
yOm.epr.m thes. 220m. 2. 2Om.ce. btoce. ¢Om.acern. 4 hest apr. ‘ 
ohaue Isynned1. Othe kyng1. P hath chargid1. 4 Go thou C.F ny31. §thatz. ¢Om.1. 
Ucertist. Wthog, VOm.1korux. Wny31. *Achabr. Yschewide itr. 2Hely1. the 
whiche 1. >suenr, ¢€Om.1. ‘into1. ¢ the foure1. f mawmet woodis1. & togidre the prophetis 1. 


XVIII. 22—29. 


sothe Helie comynge ny3 to al the puple 
of Yrael, seith, How long halt 3e into 
two parties? If the Lord is God, folwith 
hym; forsothe if Baal, folwith hym. 
And the puple answerde not to hym a 
2z2word. And eft Elias seith to the puple, 
Iam laft a prophet of the Lord alone; 
the prophetis forsothe of Baal foure hun- 
dryd and fifti, and the prophetis of maw- 
23mete wodis ben foure hundrid. Be there 
30uen to vs two oxen; and chese thei oon 
oxe, and hewynge in gobetis thei shulen 
leye vpon trees, forsothe fier vndurputen 
thei not; and Y shal make anothir oxe, 
and putten vpon trees, and fier I shal 
2inot putte vndur. Inwardly clepe 3e the 
name of 3owre goddis, and I shal inwardly 
clepe the name of my God ; and God that 
herith bi the fier, he be God. Al the 
puple answerynge seith, Best the propo- 
25 sicioun, that Helias spac. Thanne Helias 
seide to the prophetis of Baal, Chesith 
to 30u an oxe, and doth first, for 3e ben 
moo; and inwardli clepith the namys of 
joure goddis, and puttith not vndir fier. 
26 The whiche whanne thei hadden take 
the oxe, that he 3af hem, thei diden, and 
inwardli clepiden the name of Baal, fro 
erly vnto myddai, seiynge, Baal, here vs! 
And there was not voys that shulde an- 
swere; and thei skipten ouer the auter, 
27 that thei maden. Aud whanne now was 
myddai, Helye scornyde to hem, seiynge, 
Crieth with a more voys, forsothe 3oure 
god is®, and perauenture with another he 
spekith, or in a turnynge in place, or in 
the weye, or certis he slepith, that he be 
23 wakid. Thanne thei crieden with a greet 
voys, and thei cuttiden hem self, after 
her rijt, with sheeris and litil launcis, to 
the tyme that thei weren alle beshed 
29with blood. Forsothe aftir that mydday 
was passid, and hem propheciynge, the 


: II. KINGS. 


219 


to twey partis? Ifthe Lord is Godt, sue 
3e hym; forsothe® if Baal ts God, sue je 
hym. And the puple answeride not o 


word tohym. And Elie seide eft to the 22 that God 
raei is vi 


puple, Y dwellidef aloone a prophete of 
the Lord; sotheli® the prophetis of Baal 
ben foure hundrid and fifti, and the pro- 
phetis of woodis' ben foure hundrid men. 


t Uf the Lord 
ts God; that 
is, if it Is preued 
to 300 by a 
visible inyracle, 
of Is- 
eri 
God, and not 
Baal. Sue je 
him; in wor- 
schipinge hlm, 
and noon other. 
Lire here. c. 


Tweyne oxis be 3ouun to us; and chese23 


thei oon oxe, and thei schulen kitte in to 
gobetis, and schulen' putte* on trees!, but 
putte thei not fier vndur; and Y schal 
make the tother oxe én fo sacrifice, aud Y 
schal putte™ on" the trees, and Y schal 


1 bt fier; youun 
fro heuene, to 
waste the sacri- 
fice, Lire here. 
c 


§ ‘and whanne 
thei hadden 


not putte fier vnder. Clepe 3e? the namePP 24 take the ore; 


of 3oure goddis, and Y schal clepe the 
name of my God ; and the God that herith 
bi fiert{, be he God. And al the puple 
answeride, and seide, The resoun is best, 
‘which resoun® Elie spak’. 
seide to the prophetis of Baal, Chese 3e 
oont oxe to 30u, and make 3e first", for 3e 
ben the mo; and clepe 3e the names of 
joure goddis, and putte 3e not fier ynder. 


the false pro- 
fetis token the 
setting forth 
of Elye, for 
thei weren 
compellid of 
the puple to do 
this, which ap- 


Therfor Elie 25 preueden the 


resoun set forth 
ef Elie, and for 
they tristiden 
in the power 
of the feend, 
which may do 
siche thingis, 
whanne he is 


And whanne thei’ hadden take the oxe§, 26 suftrid of God. 


whom* Elie 3af to hem||, thei maden sacr7- 
Jice, and clepiden* the name of Baal, fro 
the morewtid ‘til toY myddai’, and seiden, 
Baal, here vs! And no vois was, nether 
ony that answerd*; and thei” skippiden 
ouer the auter, which® thei hadden maad. 


Wherfor and in 
the tyme of 
auntecrist, he 
schal make fier 
to come doun 
fro hevene, as 
it is had in 
xiii. c°. of 
Apoc., and in 
hap at the 
cleping of hem, 


And whanne it was thanne myddai, Elie 97 ths fend dide 


scornede hem, and seide, Crie 3e with 
gretter vois, fort Baal is 3oure god, and 
in hap he spekith with an other, ethir he 
is in a herborgerie, ether in weie®, ether 


: ; ee eee eed 
certis he slepith, that he be reisid'. Ther-2s Eee 


for thei crieden with greet vois, and thei 
kerueden® hem silf with knyues and laun- 
cetis, bib her custom, til thei weren bisched 
with blood. Sotheli' after that mydday 2 
passide, and while thei prophesieden‘, the 
tyme cam, in which the sacrifice is wont 


© is besye A. 


g and t. 
P 3¢ éhanne 1. 


eand1. fhaue dwellid 1. 
™ putte itr. 2 upon. © wode1. 
spoken 1. ‘ani. 4 first 3oure sacrifice 1. 
2the mydday 1. herde a pr. m. Bev. 
upt. &kitten1. bafter1, ? But 1. 


h the mawmet woodis 1. 


v the prophetis 1. 
b the prophetis 1. 
k prophesieden, or preieden 1. 


iOm.m. * putteitr. |! wode 1. 
PPnames1. 4 fier fallinge doun 1. ‘thatr. * hath 
wthat 1. * ynwardly clepiden 1, Y vnto 1. 


cthat1, 4forsothe1. ¢the weie1. ‘ reisid 


rf2 


liyk thing in 
another tyme. 
Lire here. c. 

[| whom Elie 3af 
to hem ; for 

the oxe chosun 
for the prestis 
of Baal, fledde 


dur the mentel 
of Elie, for the 
wlating of 
idolatrie; and 
thanne Elie 
jaf to hem, to 
conuycting of 
falsenesse of 
idolatrie, and 
to schewing 

of truthe of 
Goddis wor- 
schiping. Lire 
here. C. 


220 


tyme wasf comen, the which is wont 
sacrifice to be offrid, and vois is not herd, 
ne eny mau answerde, ne took heed to 
30the praiynge. And Helye seide to al® the 
puple, Cometh to me. And the puple 
neizynge to hym, he curede the auter of 
31the Lord, that was destruyed. And he 
took twelue stonus, after the noumbre of 
the lynagis of the sonys of Jacob, to 
whom the word of the Lord is maad, 
s2seiynge, Yrael shal be thi name. And 
he beeldide vp an auter of stonus, in 
name of the Lord, and he made a water 
cundid, as by two litil forwis in enuy- 
asroun of the auter. And he putte togidre 
the wode, and he deuydide bi membris 
34the oxe, and leide vpon the wode, and 
seith, Fillith foure stenys with water, 
and heeldith vpon the brent sacrifice, 
and vpon the wode. And eft he seide, 
Also the secounde doth this. The which 
whanne thei hadden doo the secounde, 
he seith, Also the thridde that same 
thing doth; and thei diden the thridde. 
35 And the watris runnen aboute the auter, 
and the dijch of the water cundid is 
36fillid. And whanne now was tyme, that 
brent sacrifice shulde be offred", the pro- 
phete Helias comynge ny3 seith, Lord 
God of Abraham, and of Ysaac, and of 
Yrael, to day shew for thow art God of 
Yrael, and Y thi seruaunt, and after thin 
37 heest haue! doon alle thes wordis. Here 
me, Lord; here me, Lord; that this pu- 
ple lerne, for thou art Lord God, and 
thou hast conuertid the herte of hem eft- 
sssonys. Forsothe the* fijr of the Lord 
felle, and deuowride! the brent sacrifice, 
and the wode, and the stonus, forsothe 
the powdre, and the water that was in 
39the water cundid lickynge. The which 
thing whanne al the puple hadde seen, 


II. KINGS. 


XVIII. 30——39. 


to be offrid, nether vois was herd ‘of her 

goddis', nether ony answeride, nether per- 

ceyuede hem preiynge. Elie seide to also 

the puple, Come 3e tome. And whanne 

the puple cam to him, he arrayede the 

auter of the Lord, that was distried. And3i 

he took twelue stonys, bi the noumbre 

of™ lynagis of sones" of Jacob®, to which? 

Jacob the word of the Lord was maad, 

and seide, Israel schal be thi name. And 32 

he? bildide an auter of stonys", in the 

name of the Lord, and he made a ledyng 

to® of watir, ‘ether a dich, as biX twei 

litle dichis’} in the cumpas of the auter. 1h a 
And he dresside trees’, and he departide 33 ibreu itis 
the oxe bi membris, and puttide* on” the eee 
trees’, and seide, Fille 3e foure pottis with 34 pi ee 
watir, and schede‘ 3e° onf the brent sacri-  % myche seed 


‘ my3te be sowun 
fice, and on® the trees". And eft he seide, withynne the 


cumpas of the 


Also the secounde tyme do 3e this. ‘And _ forow, as Rabi 
thei dideni the secounde tyme. And* he  Svomon seith. 


seide, Do 3e the same thing! the thridde 
tyme; and thei diden the thridde tyme. 
And the watris runnen aboute the auter, 35 
and the dich™ of ledyng to" ‘of watir® was 
fillid. And whanne the tyme was thanne, 36 
that the brent sacrifice schulde be offrid, 
Elye the prophete neijede, and seide, Lord 
God of Abraham}, of Isaac, and of Israel, 
schewe thou to dai that thou art God of 
Israel, and that Y am thi seruaunt, and 

onour of God, 


t Lord God of 
Abraham, ete.; 
me bileneth 
that Elie made 
this preyer an 
hi3, that the 
puple my3te 
here, to the 


haue do alle these wordis bi thi comaunde- ang to the con- 

ment. Lord, here thou me; Lord, here s7 ocr 
thou me; that this puple lerne, that thou comatindements 
ringe in 

art the Lord God, and that? thou hast _hise placis with 
dmerenihe I - _ out Jerusalem, 
conuertid eft the herte of hem. Sotheli38 aftir the pila- 
H * ing of the 

fier of the Lord felde doun?, and deuouride temple; which 
brent™ sacrifice, and’ trees‘, and stonus®, ‘hing was vn- 
leueful, no but 


and lickideY vp also the poudre, and the of special dis. 
s ‘ " pensacioun of 
water that was in the leding of water’. God, which 


. thing E} 
And whanne al the puple hadde seyn this, 39 jn ths Hoe 


six Q : * and the Lord 
it* felde in to his face, and scide, The Lord ochetridaaitel 
bi fier comynge 
doun on the 


fisa. £Om.4. bbrent a. i Yhaue ec prom. * Om. a. | vowrede ce. brent sacrifice 
of him. Lire 
here. c. 

10Om.1. ™and a. ofthe1. =the sonesceikiemb. © Israel a. Pthe which1. 4 Hely 1. * thilke 
stonys1. $Om.AEO pr.m. WW Om.1. *Om.1. _ ¥ forowist. dikis s. zwoder. ® putte it 1. 
bupont, ¢wode1. dheelder ¢3e7f1. f upon1t. Supont. 4 woder. i Whiche whanne thei 
hadden dor. kOm.1. I thing alsoi. ™ridde1. "Om. anu. ° Om. cikgb. P Om. AELP. 4 doun 
thannet. tthe brentr. sOm.1. tthe woder. tthe stonusr. Vit lickide1.  watir ridde 1. 


X the peple 1 marg. 


XVIII. 40—XIX. 4. 


he felle in to his face, and seith, The 
Lord he is God; the Lord he is God. 
40 And Helias seide to hem, Takith the™ 
prophetys of Baal; ne oon forsothe flee 
aweye of hem. Whom whanne thei had- 
den cau3t, Helie ladde hem to the streem 
4iof Syson, and slow3 hem there. And 
Helie seith to Achab, Sty vp, and eet, 
and drynk, for sown of myche reyn is. 
42 Achab stiede up, that he eete and drynke; 
Helyas® forsothe stye3ede up into the hil 
of Carmel, and bowede into the erthe, 
43putte his face betwixe his knees. And 
he seide to hys child, Stye vp, and behold 
aj3ens the see. The whiche whanne he 
hadde styed vp, and lokid, seith, Ther 
is no thing. And eft he seith to hym, 
44Turn a3en seuen sithis. Forsothe in the 
seuenthe sijth, loo! a litil clowde as the 
step of a man stiede vp fro the see. The 
which seith, Sty vp, and sey to Acliab, 
Toyn thi chare, and cum down, lest reyn 
45before ocupye thee. And whanne thei 
hadden turned hem self hidir and thidir, 
loo! heuenes ben derkid, and clowde, and 
wynde, and there is maad a greet reyn. 
And so Achab stiynge vp wente into 
46 Jezrael; and the hoond of the Lord was 
vpon Helias, and the reynys gird, he 
ranne before Achab, to the tyme that he 
cam into Jezrael. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 <Achab forsothe toolde to Jezabel alle 
thingis that Helias hadde doon, and what 
maner wise he hadde slayn alle the pro- 

2phetis of Baal bi swerd. And Jezabel 
sente a messager to Helias, seiynge, Thes 
thingis doon to me goddis, and thes® 
adden, but this our to morwe I shal putte 

3thi lijf as the lijf of oon of hem. Thanne 
Helias dradde, and risynge wente whidir 
euer the wil bare hym; and he cam into 
Bersabe of Juda, and lafte his child 
4there; and weute into desert, the weye 


m alle the £ pr.m. 


8 3ede up I. 


¥ thon up, and 1. 
iQm.). 


thou 1. & stied up 1. 
turned 1. P hemselff 1. 
tor. * his wille 1. 


Z is nY3 1. 
h Om. 1. 
qa cloud 1. 


a and Helyas a sce. m. 


b but 1. 
k And 1. 
r stiede up 1. 


III. KINGS. 221 


he is God; the Lord he is God. And 40 
Elie seide to hem, Take 3e the prophetis 


of Baalt; not oon sotheli ascape of hem. ¢ take xe the 
And whanne thei hadden take hem, Elie eyo ais 
ledde hem to the stronde of Cison, and ‘pe vurle fe 
killide hem there. And Elie seide to 41 our of God, 

for the reue- 


Achab, Stie thouY, ete, and drynke, for — rence of my- 
the sown of myche reyn is’. Achab sticde® 42 therfor he 


cans de h 
to ete and drynke; forsothe Elie stiede® the deth of the 
1 1 | restis, that 
in to the hil of Cariele, and he settide? fit, St 


lowli his face to the erthe, bitwixe hise ‘he Le i ere 
Jezabel schuide 


knees; and seide to his child, Stie thou’, 43 induse the 
yng, hir hose- 


and biholdef ajens the see. And whanne _ bond, and the 
he hadde stieds, and hadde® biholde, he {i 24R0"" 
seide, No thing is. And eft Elie seide [pforhem 


to hym,Turne thou a3en bi! seuene tymes. 
Sotheli* in the seuenthe tyme, lo! a litil 44 
cloude as the step of a man stiede! fro the 
see. And Elie seide, Stie thou™, and scie 
to Achab, Ioyne thi chare, and go doun, 
lest the reyn byfor ocupie thee. And 45 
whanne thei® turneden® hem? hidur and 
thidur, lo! heuenes weren maad derk, and 
cloud’, and wynd, and greet reyn was 
maad. Therfor Achab stiede’, and jede 
in to Jezrael; and the hond of the Lord 46 
was maad ou’ Elie, and whanne the‘ 
leendis weren gird, he ran bifor Achab, 
til he cam in to Jezrael. 


CAP. XIX. 


Forsothe Achab telde to Jezabel alle 
thingis whiche® Elie hadde do, and how 
he hadde slayn by’ swerd alle the pro- 
phetis of Baal. And Jezabel sente a mes-2 
sanger to Elie, and seide, Goddis do these 
thingis to ine, and adde these thingis”, 110 
but to morewe in this our Y schal putte 
thi lijf as the lijf of oon of hem. Therfors 


Elie dredde{, and roos, and 3ede whidur + ZU dredde ; 


‘ God suffride 
euer willeX bar hym; and he cam im to ue 
e t e@, by 
Bersabe of Juda, and he lefte there his annus treeke, 


‘ : ° lest he were 
child; and 3ede in to deseert, the weie of4 Sis oner 

myche, of the 

stidefastnesse 


© thes thingis B pr. m. Nee goinge. 

ire Réré. C. 
csedeupt. 4 setter. ¢ thou up I. f biholde 
Istiede up1. ™thouupt. ® ment. o hadden 
supont, thisi. % that 1. Ywith 1. W thingis 


222 


of o day. And whanne he was comen, 
and satte vndir an yue tree, he askide to 
his soule, that he die; and seith, Lord, it 
suffisith to me, tak awey my lijf; for- 
sothe ne I am betere than my faders. 
5 And he threwe hym self doun, and slepte 
in the shadew of the yue tree. And loo! 
the aungel of the Lord touchide hym, 
6and seide to hym, Rijs, and eet. He 
biheelde, and loo! at his heed a loof 
bakyn vndur asshen, and a vessel of 
water. Thanne he ete, and drank, and 
zeft he slepte. And the aungel of the 
Lord is turned a3en the secounde, and 
touchide hym; and he? seide to hym, 
Rijs, and eet; forsothe a greet weye 
sfallith to thee. The which whanne he 
hadde rysen, ete, and drank; and he 
wente in the strength of that meete 
fourti days and fourti ny3tis4, vnto the 
9hil of God, Oreb. And whanne he was 
comen thidir, he dwellide in the denne; 
and loo! the word of the Lord to hym, 
and seide to hym, What dost thow here, 
10 Helyas? And he answerde, Bi loue I 
haue loued, for the Lord God of oostis; 
for the sonys of Yrael han forsaken the 
couenaunt of the Lord; thin auters thei 
han distruyed, and thi prophetis thei han 
slayn bi swerd; and I am laft alone, and 
thei sechen my lijf, that thei doon it 
naweye. And he seith to hym, Go out, 
and stoond in the hil, before the Lord. 
And loo! the Lord passith, and a greet 
wynde, and a’ stroong, and turnynge vpse- 
doun hillis, and togidre broosynge stonus 
before the Lord; not in the wynde the 
Lord. Also after the wynde quauynge ; 
i2not in the quauyng the Lord. And aftir 
the quauynge fijr; not in the fier the 
Lord. And after the fier whistlynge of 
i3a thinne blast; there the Lord. The 
which thing whanne Helias hadde herd, 
he couerde his cheer with a mantil, and 
goon out, he stode in the dore of the 


HI. KINGS. 


XIX. 5—13. 


o dai. And whanne he cam, andY sat 

vndir o iunypere tre, he axide to his 

soule, that he schulde die; and he seide, 

Lord, it suffisith to me, take my soule; 

for? Y am not betere than my fadris. Ands 

he castide forth hym silf, and slepte in the 

schadewe of the iunypere treet. And lo! uny) 
the aungel of the Lord touchide hym, and ee 
seide to hym, Rise thou, and ete. Hee im, {ter whos 
bihelde, and, lo! at his heed was a loof Pivnew ects 
bakun vndur aischis*, and a vessel of Lire here.c. 
watir. Therfor he” ete, and drank, and 

slepte eft. And the aungel of the Lord7 

turnede a3en the secounde tyme, and touch- 
ide hym; and ‘the aungel* seide to hym, 
Rise thou, and ete; for a greet weie is to 
thee. And whanne he hadde rise, he ete,8 
and drank; and he? 3ede in the strengthe 
of that mete bi® fourti dayes and fourti 
ny3tis, ‘til tof Oreb, the hil of God. Ando 
whanne he hadde come thidur, he dwell- 
ide in a denne; and lo! the word of the 
Lord ‘was maadé to him, and seide to 
hym, Elie, what doist thou here? And io 
he answeride, Bi feruent loue{ Y louede 
feruentli, for the Lord God of oostis; for 
the sones of Israel forsoken' the couenaunt 
of the Lord; thei destrieden'{ thin auters, 
and killiden! bi swerd thi prophetis; and 
Y am left aloone, and thei seken my lijf, 
that thei do it awei. And he® seide toi 
Elie, Go thou out, and stonde in the hil, 
bifor the Lord. And lo! the Lord passith, 
and a greet wynde, and strong®, turnynge 
vpsodoun hillis, and al to brekinge stonys 
bifor? the Lord; not in the wynde ys 
the Lord. And aftir the wynd is a stir- 
ynge; not in the stiryng is the Lord. 
And?? aftir the stiryng is fier4; not in the t2 
fier is the Lord. And aftir the fier is thet 
issyng of thinne wynds; there is the Lord. 
And whanne Elie hadde herd this, heis 
hilide his face with. a mentil, and he 3ede 
out, and stood in the dore of the denne. 
And a vois spak to hym, and seide, Elie, 


+ the itunypere 


I feruent loue; 
that is, of al 
the herte. Lire 
here. c. 


POm. 4. Qny3tce. * Om. cEFH. 
Yher. Zeertiss. Aaskyst. > Hely1. ¢he1. @Hely 1. ¢€ Om. parkmnogswhe.  f vnto 1. 
£ Om. plures. » haue loued1. ihan forsake 1. k han destried 1. I!killidi. ™ with 1. % the Lord 1. 
°astrong1. P blowith before1. PPOm.s. 4a fier1. Tani. § wynd, or brethinge sofily 1. 


XIX. 14—21. 


denne. And a vois seith to hym, seiynge, 
14 What dost thou here, Helias? And he 
answerde, Bi loue I haue loned, for the 
Lord God of oostis; for the sonys of 
Yrael han forsakyn thi couenaunt ; thin 
auters thei han distruyed, and thi pro- 
phetis thei han slayn with swerd; and 
Y am lafte alone, and thei sechen my 
15lijf, that thei don it awey. And the 
Lord seith to hym, Go, and turn a3en in 
to thi weye, bi deseert, into Damasch ; 
and whanne thou comest thidre, thow 
shalt anoynte Azael kyng vpon Syrye; 
isand Hieu, the sone of Nampsy, thou 
shalt anoynt kyng vpon Yrael; Helisee 
forsothe, the sone of Saphat, that is of 
Abel Mewla, thow shalt anoynte® prophete 
17for thee. And it shal be, who so euere 
fleeth the swerd of Azael, Hyeu shal 
sle hym; and who so euere shal flee the 
swerd of Hieu, Helisee shal slee hym. 
isAnd I shal leeue to me in Yrael seuen 
thousand of men, of whom the knees ben 
not bowid before Baal, and al mouth 
that hatht not honourde hym, kyssynge 
i9the hoond. Thanne Helias goon forth 
thens, foonde Helisee, the sone of Saphath, 
erynge in twelue® 3ockis of oxen; and he 
in the twelue 3ockis of oxen erynge was 
oon. And whanne Helias was comen to 
20hyin, he putte his mantil vpon him. The 
which anoon, the oxen laft, ranne aftir 
Helias, and seith, Kysse Y, I preye thee, 
my fader and my moder, and so J shal 
folwe thee. And he seide to hym, Go, 
and turn ajen; forsothe that that was 
21myn J hane doon to thee. And turned 
a3en forsothe fro hym, he took a peyr 
oxen, aud slew3 it; and in the plow3 of 
oxen he sethide flesh, and jaf to the 
puple, and thei eten; and rysynge he 
wente, and folwide Helyas, and seruede 
to hym. 


III. KINGS. 


228 


what doist thou here? And he answeride, 14 

Bit feruent lone Y loucde" feruentli, for 

the Lord God of oostis; for the sones of 

Israel forsoken’ thi couenaunt; thei dis- 

trieden” thin auteris, and thei killiden* 

biY swerd thi prophetis; and Y am left 

aloone, and thei seken my lijf, that thei 

do it awey. And the Lord seide to hym, 1s 

Go, and turne a3en in to thi weie, bi the 

deseert, in to Damask; and whanne thou 

schalt come thidur, thou schalt anoynte 

Asahel kyng on? Sirie; and thou schalt 16 
anoynte kyng on® Israel Hieu, the sone of 

Namsi; sotheli> thon schalt. anoynte pro- 

phete® for thee, Elise, sone’ of Saphat, 

which® is of Abelmeula. And it schaliz 

be, who euer schal fle the swerd of Asa- 

hel, Hieu schal sle hym; and who euer 

schal fle the swerd of Hieu, Elise schal 

sle hym. And Y schal leeue to me ints 

Israel seuene thousynde of men, of whiche 

the knees ben not bowid bifor Baal, and 

ech mouth that worschipide not hym, and + kisside hond; 
kisside hond't. Therfor Elie 3ede forth 19 yacl, 1 seve 
fro thennus, and foond Elise, sone? of Sa- ne theref, 


: ; . ether his owne 
phat, erynge in twelue 30ckis of oxis®; and _ hond, as Job 


2 ‘ . — seith, IF Y 

he was oon in the twelue 30ckis of oxys', _ kisside myn 
6 hond, which 

erynge. ‘And whanne Elie hadde come to _ is the moste 
: ° ° ° wickiduesse, 
hym, Elie castide his mentil on* hym. thir is idole. 


Which! ran anoon after Elie, whanne the got". Fire 
oxis™ weren left, and seide, Y preie thee, 
kysse Y my fadir and my modir, and so 
Y schal sue thee. And Elie seide to hym, 
Go thou, and turne ajen, for” Y haue do 
to thee that that was myn. ‘Sotheli he®2! 
turnede a3en fro Elie, and took tweine? 
oxis3, and killide hem{; and with the 
plow of oxis" he sethide the fleischis*, and 
saft to the puple, and thei eeten; and he" 
roos’, and 3ede, and suede Elie, and ‘iny- 
nystride to¥ hym. 


t HMelizee slewe 
hise oxen, and 
Sedde pore men 
of that that he 
hadde, that he 
were not lett bi 
worldli hauing 
ta sue the pro- 
phet. Ambrose. 
t 


Snoyntyn &. than, "the twelue anru. 
t With x. "haueJoued 1. Y han forsake 1. W han destried 1. * han killid r. ¥ with 1. e upon I. 
aupont, band1. ©apropheter. 4the sone cr. ¢thatr. ‘not his hond 1. & the sone 1. ent. 
ioxent. Kupon1. !Andher. ™oxens. ®certis1, © And Ieliseer. P the two 4 oxen IK. 


tthe oxen 1. oxen K. §$ fleish 1. * 3af hem 1. 


u Helisee 1. 


Yroosupt. © seruyde 1. 


224 


CAP. XX. 


1 Benadab forsothe, kyng of Cyrye, ge- 
deride al his oost, and two and thretti 
kyngis with him, and hors, and charris ; 
and stiynge vp aj3ens Samarye fau3t, and 

2besegide it. And sendynge messageris to 
Achab, kyng of Yrael, in to the citee, 

3seith, Thes thingis seith Benadab, Thi 
siluer and thi gold is myyn, and thi 
wyues, and thi sones altherbest ben 
4myyn. And the kyng of Irael answerde, 
Aftir thi word, my lord kyng, I am 
5thin, and alle miyn. And the messagers 
turnynge ajen seiden, Thes thingis seith 
Benadab, that sente vs to thee, Thi siluer, 
and thi gold, and thi wyues, and thi 
ssonys thou shalt 3yue to me. To morwe 
thanne, this same hour, I shal sende my 
seruauntis to thee, and thei shulen 
aserchen thin hows, and the hows of 
thi seruauntis; and al thing that to 
hein shal plese, thei shulen putte in her 
7hoondis, and taken aweye. The kyng 
of Yrael forsothe clepide alle the eldrys 
of the loond, and seith, Takith hede, and 
seeth, for he aspicth to vs; forsothe he 
sente to me for my wyues, and sonys, 
and for siluer, and gold, aud I forsooke 
snot. And alle the more thur3 birth seid- 
en, and al the puple to hym, Here thou 
9not, ne assent thou to hym. And he 
answerde to the messageris of Benadab, 

Seith to my lord the kyng, Alle thingis 
for the whiche thou hast sent to me, thi 
seruaunt, in the bigynnynge I shal do; 

10 forsothe this thing I may not doo. And 
the messagers turned ajen, tolden alle 
thingis to hym. The which sente ajen, 
and’ seith, Thes thingis doon to me goddis, 
and thes thingis adden thei, if the pow- 
dre of Samarye suffisith to the handfulles 

of al the puple that folwith me. And 
answerynge the kyng of Yrael_seith, 
Seith to hym, Ne glorye euenly the gird 
i2as the vngird. It is doo forsothe, whanne 
Benadab hadde herd this word, he drank, 


III. KINGS. 


XX. I-12, 


CAP. XxX. 


Forsothe* Benadab, kyng of Sirye, ga-1 
derideY al his oost, and two and thritti 
kyngis with hym, and horsis, and charis ; 
and he stiede? ajens Samarie, and fau3t, 
and bisegide it. And he sente messan-2 
gerist to Achab, kyng of Israel, in to owe 
the® citee, and seide, Benadab seith these3 first messan- 


iB * ee j ey is to Bena- 

thingis, Thi siluer and thi gold is myn, Aes cae 
: ° pees, and he 

and thi wyues, and thi beste sones ben PEt} ter Mt 


myn. And the kyng of Israel answeride, 4 ompies” 
Bi thi word, my lord the® kyng, Y am 
thin, and alle my thingis ‘ben thine®. 
And the messangeris turneden a3en, and5 
seiden, Benadab, that sente vs to thee,, 
seith these thingis, Thou schalt 3yue to 
me thi siluer, and thi gold, and thi wyues, 
and thi sones. Therfor to morewe, in this6 
same our, Y schal sende my seruauntis to 
thee, and thei schulen seke thin hows, and 
the hows of thi sernauntis; and thei schulen 
putte in her hondis, and take awey al thing 
that schal plese hem. Forsothe the kyng 7 
of Israel clepide alle the eldere men of the? 
lond, and seide, Perseyue 3e, and se, that 
he settith tresoun to vs; for he sente to 
me for my wyues, and sones, and“ for 
siluer, and gold, and Y forsook not. Ands 
alle the gretter men in birthe, and al the 
puple seiden to hym, Here thou not, ne- 
ther assente thou to hym. And he® an-9 
sweride to the messangeris of Benadab, 
Seie 3e to my lord the! kyng, Y schal do 
alle thingis, for whiche thou sentist in the 
bigynnyng to me, thi sernaunt; forsothe’ 

Y may not do this thing. And the mes-1o 
sangeris turneden ajen, and telden alle 
thingis to hym. Which sente a3en, and 
seide, Goddis do these thingis to me, and 
adde these thingis', if the dust of Samarie 
schal suffice to the fistis of al the puple 
that sueth me. And the kyng of Israel11 
answeride, and seide, Seie 3e to hym, A 
gird man, ‘that is, he that goith to batel*, ; 
haue not glorie euenli as a man vngirdt. 1 ee 
Forsothe! it was doon, whanne Benadab 12" 24 hath 


t ongird ; that 


put of hise 
armeris. Lire 
Vv Om. «4. here. ¢. 
*Certis 1. Y gaderide togidere 1. %stiedeupi. @hisr >%Om.1. ¢COm.1. dthatr, 44 Om, 1. 
eAchabi. fOm.1. & buts. » The which 1. ithingisto1 -Om.1 1! Andi. 


XX. 13-23. 


and the kyngis, in hiletis; and he seith 
to his seruauntis, Enuyrounith the citee. 
13And thei enuyrounden it. And loo! a 
prophet comynge ny3 to Achab, kyng of 
Yrael, seith to hym, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, Certis thow hast seen al 
this multitude ful myche; loo! I shal 
take it into thin hoond to day, that thow 
14 wite for I am a Lord. ‘And Achab seith, 
Bi whom? And he seide to hym, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord, Bi the foot folow- 
ers of the pryncis of pronyncis. And he 
seith, Who shal bigynne to fi3te. And 
ishe seide, Thow. Thanne he noumbride 
the children of the princis of’ pro- 
uyneis, and he founde the noumbre of 
two hundryd and two and thretti; and 
he toolde after hem the puple, alle the 
issones of Yrael, seuen thousand. And 
thei wenten out at mydday. Benadab 
forsothe drank drunken in his hilet, and 
kyngis two and thretti with hym, ‘the 
whiche” weren comen to the help of hym. 
i7 Forsothe the children of the princis of 
prouyncis ben goon out in the first 
frount. And so Benadab sente, the which 
toolden to hym, sciynge, Men ben goon 
1sout fro Samarye. And he seith, Whe- 
ther for pees thei comen, nymmeth hem 
on lyue; whethir that thei fijten, takith 
19hem on lyue. Thanne the chiidren of 
the pryneis of prouyncis wenten out, and 
20 the tother oost folwide ; and echon* smoot 
the man that ajens hym cam. And Cyris 
floowen, and Irael pursuede hem; Bena- 
dab forsothe, kyng of Cyrye, flei3 in hors 
ziwith his horsmen. Also the kyng of 
Irael goon out smoot hors and chaarys, 
and smoot Cyrye with a ful mych greet 
22veniaunce. Forsothe a prophete nei3ynge 
to the kyng of Irael, seide to hym, Go, 
and tak coumfort, and wite, and se, what 
thow dost; forsothe the 3ecr folowynge 
the kyng of Cyrye shal stey3e vp ajens 
e3thee. The seruauntis forsothe of the 


v of the 4BFI. 


m and also 1. n Om. pgikMNogswx sec. m. b. 
4 the princes 1. 


U neizede ny3 I. 
VOL. II. 


v be thou k. ¥® weende up 1. 


II. KINGS. 


Ww that ¢ prom. 


t to wile who these weren the whiche 1. 


225 


hadde herd this word, he drank, and™ the 

kyngis, in schadewyng places ; and he seide 

to hise seruauntis, Cumpasse 3e the citee. 

And thei cumpassiden it. And lo! 0 pro-13 

phete neizede to Acab, kyng of Israel, and 

seide to hym, The Lord God seith these 

thingis, Certis thou hast seyn al this mul- 

titude ful greet; lo! Y schal bitake it in 

to thin hond to dai, that thou wite that 

Yam the" Lord+. And Achab seide, Bilt the Lord, 


and that thou 


whom? And he seide to Achab, The turne awey fro 

Lord seith these thingis, Bi the squyeris® lines: pass 

of the princes{ of prouynces. And Achab pa To 
| 6, 


seide, Who schal bigynne to fiz3te? And princes; that 
the prophete scide, Thou. Therfor he 15 oy ofeeime 


noumbryde the children of the princes of rae emer 


prouynees, and he foond the noumbre of ¢xpowned 
i i é comynly. Rabi 
twei hundrid and two and thretti; and Selostog, lth 
° . that herbi ben 
aftir hem he? noumbride the puple, alle vndurstondun 


the sones of Israel, seuene thousynde. And 6 timer no 


thei 3eden out in myddai. Forsothe Be-  ‘eren not of 


: ; the sones of 

nadab drank,. and was drunkun in his _ Isreel, but 
.  Weren jounn 

schadewyng place, and two and thretti  ostachis to 


Achab; wherfor 
in Ebreu it is 
Sotheli? the children of princes417 4 Vay 
princes of pro- 
uynces. Lire 
here. c. 


kyngis with hym, that camen to the help 
of hym. 
of prouynees jeden out in the firste frount. 
Therfor Benadab sente men, whichet telden 
to hym, and seide, Men 3eden out of Sa- 
marie. And he scide, Whether thei comen ts 
for pees, take 3e hem quyke; whether to 
fiz3te, take je hem quyke. Therfor thet 
children of prynces’ of prouynces jeden 
out, and the residue oost suede; and echo 
smoot the man that cam ajens hym. And 
men of Sirie fledden, and Israel** pursucde 
hem; also Benadab, kyng* of Sirie, fledde 
on an hors with his kni3tis. Also thee! 
king of Israel 3ede out, and smoot horsis 
and charis, and he smoot Sirie with a 
ful greet veniaunce. Forsothe a prophete 22 
neijede" to the kyng of Israel, and seide, 


: be tid; 
Go thou, and be’ coumfortid§, and wyte, He monica 
and se, what thou schalt do; for the kyng eee ~ 
of Sirie schal stie” ajens thee in the jeer  batel to com- 


. . page. Lire 
suynge. Sotheli the servauntis of thee3}ee'. 


x eche c. 


00 Om.s. P Andt. 


© squyeris, or the foolmen I. 
ae A t the kyng r. 


8the prynces1. §§ al Israel x. 


oe 


226 


kyng of Cyrye seiden to hym, The 
Goddis of hillis ben theY Goddis of hem, 
therfor thei han ouercomen vs; but be- 
tere it is that we fi3ten a3ens hem in the 
wijlde feeldis, and we shulen weelde hem. 
24 Thow thanne do this word; remeue alle 
the kyngis fro thin oost, and put princis 
25for hem; and restore the noumbre of 
kny3tis, that fellen of thin, and the hors 
‘aftir the hors before hadde, and the 
chaaris after the chaarys that thou had- 
dist before; and we shulen fizte ajens 
hem in the wilde feeldis, and thou shalt 
' seen, that we shulen weelde hem. He 
trowide to the counseil of hem, and dide 
2680. Thanne after that 3eer was _passid, 
Benadab noumbride Cyros, and stie3ede 
vp in to Affeth, that he fi3te ajens Yrael. 
27Forsothe the sones of Yrael ben noum- 
brid; and metis takyn, wenten forth euen 
ajens, and thei setten tentis a3ens hem, 
as two litil flockis of geet. Ciries for- 
28 Sothe fulfilliden the erthe. And nei3ynge 
oo man of God seide to the kyng of 
Yrael, Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
For Cyries seiden, God of hillis is the 
Lord of hem, and he is not God of 
valeys, I shal 3yue al this greet multi- 
tude in thin hoond, and 3e shulen wite 
zofor Tama Lord. Dresseden seuen days 
forn a3ens thes and thei sheltruns; for- 
sothe the seuenthe day the batail is doon, 
and the sones of Yrael smyten of Cyryes 
an hundrid thousand of foot inen in o day. 
30 Forsothe tho that laften flowen in to Af- 
feth into the citee, and the wal felle vpon 
seuen and twenti thousand of men that 
laften. Forsothe Benadab fleynge wente 
in to the citee, into the cowch that was 
31 beside the bed place; and his seruauntis 
seiden to hym, Loo! we han herd that 
the kyngis of the hous of Yrael ben 
inercyable, and so putte we sackis in oure 
reens, and litil coordis in oure heedis, 


Ill. KINGS. 


XX. 24——31. 


kyng of Sirie seiden to hym, The Goddis 
of hillis ben the Goddis of the sones of 
Israel, therfor thei ouercamen vs; but it 
is betere that we fi3te ajens hem in feeldi 
placis, and we schulen geet hem*. Ther- 24 
for do thou this word’; remoue thou alle 
kyngis fro thin oost, and sette thou princis 
for hem; and restore thou the noumbre2s 
of kny3tis, that felden? of thine, and 
horsis? bi? the formere® horsis, and restore 
thou’ charis, bi the charis whiche® thon 
haddist bifore; and we schulen fi3te a3ens 
hem in feeldy places, and thou schalt se, 
that we schulen gete hem. Hef bileuyde 
to the counsel of hem, and dide so. Ther-26 
for after that the 3eer hadde passid, Be- 
nadab noumbride men of Sirie, and he 
stiedeS in to Affech, to fiz3te a3ens Israel. 
Forsothe the sones of Israel weren noum- 27 
brid; and whanne meetis weren takun, 
thei 3eden" forth euene ajens, and thei, as 
twey litle flockis of geet, settiden tentis 
a3ens men of Sirie. Forsothe men of Si- 
rie filliden the erthe’. And o prophete of 28 
God neijedet, and seide to the kyng of 
Israel, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
For men of Sirie seiden, God of hillis is 
the Lord of hem, and he is not God of 


t+ And o profete 
of God neizide ; 
thou3 this pro- 
fete is not 
nemyd here, 
doctours bothe 


s F : Latyns and 
valeis, Y schal 3yue al this greet multi- Eee seyen, 
. . £5 that he was 
tude in thin hond, and 3e schulen wite  Mycheas, sone 


: { Romuia. 
that Y am the* Lord. In! seuene daies29 God of hillis, 


these and thei dressiden scheltruns euene @@.3 men of 


_ Sirie weren 
a3ens™; forsothe" in the seueuthe dai the co eal a 
i lasfem. 
batel was joyned togidere, and the sones eden God, and 
. : e profete 
of Israel smytiden® of men? of Syrie an a 


° @ +  Achab schulde 
hundrid thousynde of 4 foot men in 0 dal. 6 spare Ber 


Forsothe’ thei that leften fledden in to the Bente ine 
citee of Affech, and the wal felde doun on‘ hea, for 
seuene and twenti thousynde of men that God. Lire 
leften. Forsothe Benadab fledde, and en- "* * 
tride in to the citee, in to a closet that was 

with ynne a closet; and hise seruauntis31 

seiden to him, We herdent that the kyngis 

of the hows of Israel ben merciful, therfor 


y Om. 2. 


xhem there 1. Y word or counseil 1. 
¢ forme pEGmMNesw. forme of o. 4 ther. 
k Om. cikunbo. 1 And 1. 


4Om.a. © Andi, S upon, than herd 1. 


z felden or weren sleyn 1. 
€ that 1. 
m azens ech oother 1. 


b aftir 1. be s. 
ilond 1. 
P the men 1. 


a the horsis c. 
& stiede up 1. = wenten 1. 
° smoten 1. smeten EL. 


f Benadab 1. 
Mand 1. 


XX. 32—39. 


and goo we out to the kyng of Yrael; 
perauenture he shal saue oure lyues. 
32 Thei girdeden her reenes with sackis, 
and puttiden litil coordis in her heedis, 
and thei camen to the kyng of Yrael, 
and seiden to hym, Thi sernaunt Bena- 
dab seith, I preye thee, lyue my lijf. 
And he seith, If 3it he lyue’, my brother 
33he is. The which the men token for the 
happi good word, and hastily thei ra- 
uyshiden the word of his mouth, and 
seiden, Thi brothir Benadab lyueth. And 
he seide to hem, Goth, and bryngith hym 
to me. Thanne Benadab wente out to 
hym, and he* reryde hym into his chaare. 
34 The which seide to hym, The citees that 
my fader took fro thi fader I shal 3eeld, 
and streetis make to thee in Damask, as 
my fader made in Samarye; and I 
boundun to pees shal goo aweye fro thee. 
Thanne he couenauntide a boond of pees, 
35and lafte hym. Thanne a maner man of 
the sones of prophetis seide to his felawe, 
in the word of the Lord, Smyit me. And 
36he wolde not smyte. To whom he seith, 
For thow woldist not here the voys of 
the Lord, loo! thon shalt goon aweye 
fro me, and a lioun shal smyte thee. And 
whanne he was goon aweye a litil fro 
hym, a lioun foond hym, and smoot hym?. 
37 But and another man fyndynge he seide 
to hym, Smyit me. The which smoot 
ashym, and woundide. Thanne the pro- 
phete wente, and a3en cam to the kyng 
in the weye; and he chaungide, bi spreng- 
ynge of powdre, the mouth and his eyen. 
39 And whanne the king was passid, he 
eriede to the kyng, and seith, Thi ser- 
uaunt wente out ‘fro ny3° to fi3te, and 
whanne o man was flowen, a maner man 
brou;3te hym to me, and seith, Keep this 
man; the which if were slyden aweye, 
thi lijf shal be for the lijf of hym, or a 


Z}yueth cer. 
vice. 


a Om. E prim. 


u Thanne theit. V girden c. 
 Achabi1. ® The whieh 1.» seiyng 1. 
& Achabr. 4 Achabi.  # pees wath him t. 
© woldist not 1. P the prophet 1. 
VYkyng Achabt. W his izjen 1. * sprengyng 1. 


III. KINGS. 


b Om. BcEFit. 


W putten L. puttend £. 
¢ Om. EI. 

kat 
4 Om. plures. 
Yat. 


227 


putte we sackis in oure leendis, and cordis 

in oure heedis, and go we out to the kyng 

of Israel; in hap he schal saue oure lyues. 

Thei" girdiden’ her leendis with sackis, 32 

and puttiden” coordis in her heedis, and 

thei camen to the kyng of Isracl, and 

seiden to hym, Thi seruaunt Benadab 

seith, Y preye thee, /efe* ‘my soule lyuey. 

And he?’ seide, If Benadab lyueth 3it, he 

is my brother}. Which* thing” the menss + '< is my bro- 
of Sirie token for a graciouse word, and _ Y wole make 
rauyschiden‘ hastily the word of his mouth, lone ao 
and seiden, Thi brother Benadab lyueth. 

And <Achab seide to hem, Go 3e, and 

brynge 3e hym to me. Therfor Benadab 

3ede out to hym, and he reiside® Benadab 

in to his chare. ‘Which Benadab! seidess 

to hym®, Y schal 3elde the citees whiche 

my fadir took fro thi fadir, and make 

thou stretis to thee in Damask, as my 

fadir made in Samarie; and Y schal be 

boundun to pees, and Y sclial departe fro 

thee. Therfor he® made boond, of pees’, 

and delyuerede hym. Thanne sum" man3s 

of the sones of prophetis seide to his fe- 

lowe, in the word of the Lord, Smyte thou 

me. And he nolde! smyte. To ‘whiche3e 
Jelowe™ he” seide, For thou noldist® here 

the vois of the Lord, lo! thou schalt go 

fro me, and a lioun schal smyte thee. And 

whanne le hadde go a litil fro hym?, a 

lioun foond hym, and slow3 hym$. But37 

also the prophete foond another man, and 

he seide to that man, Smyte thou me. 

Which’ smoot him, and woundide /im:. 

Therfor the prophete 3ede‘, and mette the" 38 

kyng’ in the weie; and he chaungide his 

mouth and ijen”, by sprynging™ of dust{. oi sprynging 
And whanne the kyng hadde passid, he 30 eee" in he 
criede to the kyng, and seide, Thi ser- peo ae ae 
uaunt 3ede out to fizte anoon, and whanne pains 2 1 
o man hadde fledde, sumY man_ bron}3te 

hyin to me, and seide, Kepe thou this 


here. C 


© in comun E pr. m. afer see.m. fro nee} sec. 


x Om. plures. that EL. ¥ lyue my lijf 1. 

ereiside up 1. f And het. 
mwhomt  % the prophet r. 
twente 1. u Om. 1. 


4 thei rauyschiden 1. 
1 wolde not 1. 
rAndher. 8 Om. plures. 


Gg2 


228 


4otalent of siluer thou shalt jeelde. For- 
sothe while Y disturblid hidir and thidyr 
turnede me, feerly he aperide not. And 
the kyng of Yrael seith to hym, This is 

41 thi dome that thi self hast demyd. And 
he anoon wipide aweye the powdre fro 
his face, and the kyng of Iracl knewe 

42him, that he was of the prophetis. The 
whiche seith to hym, Thes thingis scith 
the Lord, For thou hast laft a man wor- 
thi the decth fro thin hoond, thi hjf shal 
be for the lijf of hym, and thi puple for 

4shis puple. Thanne the kyng of Iract 
turnede ajen ‘in to® his hows, dispisynge 
to here, and ful of woodnes cam in to 
Samarie. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Aftir thes wordis forsothe, in that 
tyme, there was a vyn tof Naboth Jez- 
raelite, that was in Jezrael, biside the 
paleys of Achab, kyng of Samarye. 
2Thanne spak Achab to Naboth, seiynge, 
3if to me thi vyn 3erd, that I make to me 
a wort jerd, for it is ni3, and® biside myn 
hows; and I shal 3yue to thee for it a 
betere vyn jerd; or if more profitable 
thow wenyst to thee, of siluer the prijs 
3as myche as it is worth, I shal 3ene. To 
whom answerde Naboth, Merciful be to 
me the Lord, that I 3yue not the heri- 
4tage of my fadres to thee. Thanne 
Achab cai into his hows, endeynynge, 
and» grutchynge vpon the word that 
Naboth Jezraelite hadde spoken to hym, 
seiynge, I shal not 3yue to thee the heri- 
tage of my faders; and throwynge hym 
self into his bed turnede aweye his face 
5to the wal, and eete not breed. Forsothe 
Jezabel, his wijf, wente into hym, and 
seide to hyin, What is that, wherof thi 
soule is drery? and whi etist thou not 
6breed? The which answerde to hire, I 
spak to Naboth Jezraclite, and seide to 


dof a. €toa. 


2 ascapith awey 1. 4 that 1. 
wordt. €Shecami. bOm.1. 
thee 1. °thatr1. P Andt. 


i thi 1K. 
a The which 1. 


II. KINGS. 


fin aBFH. 


b wipte DEKLusxbe. 
k vynjeerd I. vyne D. 


XX. 40-—XXI. 6. 


man; and if he aschapith’, thi lijf schal be 
for his lijf*, ether thou schalt paye a 


* thi liyf schal 
be for his liyf, 


talent of siluere. Sotheli while Y was tro- 40 ana Y resser- 


blid, and turnede me hidur and thidur, 
sodeynly he apperide not. And the kyng 
of Israel seide to hym, This is thi doom 


which® thou hast demed. And anoon he4i 


wipide® aweyft the dust fro his face, and 
the kyng of Israel knew him, that he was 


of the prophetis. Which‘ seide to the kyng, 42 


The Lord seith these thingis, For thou 
deliueridist fro thin hond a man worthi 
the deeth, thi lijf-schal be for his lijf, and 


thi puple ‘schad be® for his puple. Therfor 43 


the kyng of Israel turnede ajen in to his 
hows, and dispiside to ‘here‘, and cam& 
wod in to Samarief. ‘ad 


CAP. ok 


Forsothe after these wordis, in that! 
tyme, the vyner of Naboth of Jezrael, 
‘that was in Jezrael", was bisidis the pa- 
leis of Achab, kyng of Samarye. Therfor2 
Achab spak to Naboth, and seide, 3yue 
thou to ine the! vyner*, that Y make to 
me! a gardyn of wortis, for it is ny3, 
and ny3 myn hows; and Y schal 3yue to 
thee a betere vyner for it; ethir if thou 
gessist it more profitable to thee, Y schall 
3yue" the prijs of siluer, as myche as it is 
worth. To whom Naboth answeride, The3 
Lord be merciful to me, that Y 3yue not 
to thee the eritage of my fadris). Ther-4 
for Acab cain in to his hows, hauynge 
indignacioun, and gnastyng on the word 
which® Naboth of Jezrael hadde spoke to 
him, and seide, Y schal not jyue to thee 
the eritage of my fadirs. And Achab 
castide doun him silf in to his bed|}, and 
turnede awei his face to the wal, and ete 
not breed. Forsothe? Jezabel, his wijf,s 
entride to hym, and seide to hym, What 
is this thing, wherof thi soule 1s maad 
sory? and whi etist thou not breed ? 
Which’ answeride to hir, Y spak to Na-6 


£Om.a. 4h the «. 


f here Goddis 
B jyue 


eO m. 1, 
™ ny3 fo me 1. 


¢ The which 1. 4Om. 1. 
Ime ¢heroff 1. 


ede higting in this 
condicioun. 
Lire here. ¢. 


t+ and anoon he 
wo ipte awey, 
ete.; in Ebreu 
it is, remouyde 
the cloth, ether 
oo fro his 
face. Lire 
here. C. 


tand cam 

wood in to Sa- 

marie; Jose- 

phus seith, that 

he killide the 

ope Lire 
here. C. 


§ the eritage 
of my Jadris ; ; 
for priys, ether 
for other eri- 
tage, for the 
lond of Israel 
was propirly 
Goddis himasilf, 
and it my3te 
not be seeld 
for euere, but 
onely til to the 
iubile in xxy. 
c°. of Leuitici; 
and therfor 
nether that was 
grauntid in the 
lawe, no but 
in nede, but 
Naboth was 
riche, and ther- 
for he was not 
compellid to 
sille his eritage; 
forsothe the 
king wolde 
haue it, for 
everlastinge 
pe Lire 
here. c. 
Il in to his bed; 
for indigna- 
cioun and vn- 
pacience, and 
bi this it is 
opin, that the 
kyng my3te not 
take for his 
wille, the 
feeldis of hise 
sugetis. Lire 
here. c. 


XXI. 7-16. 


hym, 3if to me thi vyn 3erd, the inonee 
takyn, or if to thee it plese, I shal 3yue 
to thee a betere vyn 3erd for it. Aud he 
seith, I shal not 3yue to thee my vyn 
73erd. Thanne Jesabel, his wijf, seide to 
hym, Of greet autoryte thou art, and 
wel thou gouernyst the rewme of Yrael; 
rijs, and eet breed, and in’ euen ynwit be 
thow ; I shal 3yue to thee the vyn 3erd of 
8Naboth Jezraelite. And so she wroot 
lettris of the name of Achab, and signede 
hem with his rynge; and sente to the 
more thur3 birth, and to the best, that 
weren in his cytee, that dwelliden with 
9Naboth. Of the lettris forsothe this was 
the sentence; Preche 3e fastynge, and 
makith Naboth to sitte among the first 
100f the puple; and vndirleye 3ee two men, 
sonys of Belial, a3ens hym, and fals wit- 
nes seye thei, Naboth hath blessid God 
and the kyng; and ledith hym out, and 
11 stonith, and so dye he. Thanne his cite- 
seens more thur3 birth, and the best that 
dwelliden with hym in the citee, diden 
as Jesabel hadde comaundid to hem, and 
as it was writen in the lettris, that she 
12sente to hem. Thei prechiden fastynge, 
and maden Naboth to sitte among the 
13 first of the puple; and two men brou3ten 
forth, sonys of the deuel, thei maden hem 
to sitte a3jens hym, and thei, that is, as 
deuels men, seiden a3ens hym witnes be- 
fore al the multitude, Naboth blesside 
God and the kyng; for what thing thei 
ledden hym out of the citee, and with 
isstonus slowen*. And thei senten to Je- 
sabel, seiynge, Naboth is stoned, and is 
isdeed. It is doo forsothe, whanne Jesabel 
hadde herd Naboth stoned and deed, she 
spak to Achab, Rijs, weeld the vyn 3erd 
of Naboth Jezraelite, that wold not to 
thee assente, and 3yue it, the monee 
taken; forsothe Naboth lyueth not, but 
he is deed. The which thing whanne 


i Om. £ pr.m. 


r vyngjerd 1. 8 vynjerd I. tan 
v Jezabel 1. W Naboth 1. * him 1. Lome 
© Om. plurcs. Athat1. ¢ Naboth 1, Fis ¢o wite 1. 


III. KINGS. 


229 


both of Jezrael, and Y seide to hym, 3yue 
thi vyner™ to me for money takun, ethir 
if it plesith thee, Y schal 3yue to thee a 
betere vyner for it. And he seide, Y schal 
not 3yue to thee my vyner*. Therfor Je-7 
zabel, his wijf, seide to hym, Thou art oft 
greet auctorite, and thou gouernest wel Is- 
rael; rise thou, and ete breed, and be 
thou ‘pacient, ethir coumfortid"; Y schal 
3yue to thee the vyner of Naboth of Jez- 
rael. Therfor sche” wroot lettrist in thes + sche troot 


a : ttris, ete. 3 bh 
name of Achab, and seelide tho with the tho wille ad. 
ryng of hym; and sche sente to the gret- tates 

here. c. 


tere men in birthe, and to the beste men, 
that weren in the citee of hym’, and 
dwelliden with Naboth*. SotheliY thiso 
was the sentence of the lettre; Preche 3e 
fastyng, and make 3e Naboth to sitte 
among the firste men of the puple; and 10 
sende 3e priueli twei men, the sones of 
Belial, a3jens hym, and sey thei fals wit- 
nessyng, Naboth blesside* God and the - 
kyng*}; and lede 3e out hym, and> stoon ; etalon: 


3e him’, aud die he so. Therfor hise cite- 11 the king; that 
is, curside, as 


seyns, the grettere men in birthe, and the 3, ji, ¢. of 
‘ ‘ : Job, Bles 
beste men that dwelliden with hym in the 4) Goa ana 
die thou ; for 


citee, diden as Jezabel hadde comaundid, 
the orrour of 
cursing, Jewis 


and as it was writun in the lettris, whiche? a 
sche hadde sent to hem. Thei prechiden ia fare Gaaeiiie 
fastyng, and maden Naboth to sitte among eae 
the firste men of the puple; and whanne13 

twey men, sones of the deuel, weren brou3t, 

thei maden hem to sitte ajens hym®, and 

thei, that is‘, as men of the deuel, seiden 
witnessyng ajens him bifor al the multi- 

tude, Naboth blesside God and the kyng; 

for which thing thei ledden hym with out 

the citee, and killiden Azm® with stoonys. 

And thei senten to Jezabel, and seiden, 14 
Naboth is stoonyd, and is deed. Forsothe ts 

it was doon, whanne Jezabel hadde herd 

Naboth stonyd and deed, sche spak to 

Achab, Rise thou, take thou" in posses- 

sioun the vyner of Naboth of Jezrael, 


k slowen hym . 


« coumfortid ether pactent crmw. pacient or of even ynwilt 1. 
y Andi. Zhath blessid 1. @ kyng, that is, hath cursid 1. »%Om.c. 


& Om. plures. » Om. 1. 


230 


Achab hadde herd, that Naboth! is deed, 
he roos, and cam doun into the vyn 3erd 
of Naboth Jezraelite, that he weelde it. 
17 Thanne the word of the Lord is doon to 
18 Helias Thesbites, seiynge, Rijs, and come 
down into ajen comynge to Achab, kyng 
of Irael, that is in Samarye; loo! to the 
vyn 3erd of Naboth he dessendide, that he 
19 weelde it. And thou shalt speke to hym, 
seiynge, Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Thow hast slayn, and furthermore™ thou 
hast weeldid ; and after thes thingis thow 
shalt adde, Thes thingis seith the Lord, 
In this place, in the which houndis lick- 
iden the blood of Naboth, shulen lick and 
20thi blood. And Achab seith to Helyas, 
Whether thow hast foundun me thin 
enemy ? The which seide, J haue found- 
en, forthi that thou be solde that thou 
21doo yuel in the si3t of the Lord. Ther- 
for thes thingis seith the Lord, Loo! ‘J 
shal brynge yn yuel vpon thee, and I 
shal hewe of thin hyndirmoris, and slee 
fro Achab a pisser to the wal, and the 
22closid, and the last in Irael; and I shal 
3yue thin hows as the hows of Jeroboam, 
the sone of Nabath, and as the hows of 
Baasa, the sone of Achia; for thou hast 
doon that thou terre me to wrath, and 
23thou hast maad Irael to synne. But and 
of Jesabel the Lord hath spokyn, seiynge, 
Houndis shulen eete Jezabel in the feelde 
aiof Jezrael; if Achab were deed in the 
citee, houndis shulen ete hym; forsothe 
if he were dced in the feelde, foulis of 
2heuene shulen ete hym. Therfor there 
was non other siche as Achab, that is 
sold that he do yuel in the si3t of the 
Lord; forsothe Jezabel, his wijf, stiryde 
2shym; and abomynable is maad, inso- 
miche that he folwide the mawmettis 
that Amorreis maden, whom the Lord 
destruyde fro the face of the sonis of 


1 Naboth Jezraelite £ pr. m. 


III. KINGS. 


XXI. 17—26. 


whichi nolde assente to thee, and 3yue it 

for money takun; for Naboth lyueth not, 

but is deed. And whanne Achab haddele 

herd this, that is, Naboth deed’, he roos, 

and 3ede doun in to the vyner of Naboth 

of Jezrael, to haue itt in™ possessioun. + 0 haue it, 
Therfor the word of the Lord was maad i colin en 
to Elie of Thesbi, and seide, Rise cnaie 
go doun in to the comyng of Achab, kyng re 
of Israel, which" is in Samarie; lo! he 
goith doun to the vyner of Naboth, that 
he haue it in possessioun. And thou1s 
schalt speke to hym, and ‘thou schalt® seie, 
The Lord God? seith these thingis, Thou 
hast slayn‘{, ferthermore and thou hast 
take’ in possessioun; and aftir these 
thingis thou schalt adde’, In this place, 
wherynne doggis lickiden the blood of 
Naboth, thei schulen licke also thi blood. 
And Achab seyde to Elie, Whether thou2o 
hast founde me thin enemy ? Whicht Elie" 
seide, Y haue founde’, for thou art seeld”§ 

that thou schuldist do yuel in the si3t of tae 


t thou hast 
slayn ; for the 
lettris of the 
deth of Naboth 
weren maad 
aud sent bi the 
knowing and 
will of Achab. 
Lire here. c. 


§ for thou art 


the Lord. Therfor the Lord seith these2i releaeants 
thingis, Lo! Y schal brynge yn* on’ thee rrr 
yuel, and Y schal kitte awey thin’’ hyn- preset 
drere* thingis, and Y schal sle of Achab and seruynge 
a pissere to the wal, and prisoned*, and pie © i as 
the laste in Israel; and Y schal 3yue thin 22 eine 


hows as> the hows of Jeroboam, sone® of — worschiping of 
: caluys,as othere 
Naboth, and as the hows of Baasa, sone’ _ kyngis bifor 
goyng diden, 


of Ahia; for thou didist® to excite me to _ but also in the 
worschiping of 


wrathfulnesse, and madist Israel to do jpn pire 
synne. But also the Lord spak of Jeza-23 re © 
bel, and seide, Doggis schulen ete Jezabel 

in the feeld of Jesrael; if Achab schal 24 

die in the citee, doggis schulen ete hym; 

sotheli if he schal die in the feeld, briddis 

of the eyr schulen ete hym. Therfor noon 2s 


other was sich as Achab||, that was seeld or ven 
3 e chao; that ts. 
to do yuel in the si;5t of the Lord; for _ in kingis bifor’ 


Jezabel his wijf excitide hym*; and Hecke ae 


for he brouzte 
was maad abhomynable, in so myche that im {bis rewme 


the worschip- 

ing of Baal, at 
exciting of his 
wiyf. Lire 


m therfor 4BFH. here. C. 


lthatx. k wolde notr. lio bedeed1, ™intocopr.m Othatr. 9 Om.1. P Om. cen. 4 slayn 
Naboth 1. * take his vynjerd i. 8 adde to mo yuelis1. t Andi. "Om.c. Y founde thee sor. W sold 
to the dewel 1. *Om.c. Yuponr. Yythep. 2hyndererxc. the prisoned1, » fo beast. © the 
sone I. the sone 1. ¢ didist yuel 1. ftor. & hym therto 1. 


XXI. 27-——XXII. 8. 


27 Yrael. And so whanne Achab hadde 
herd thes wordis, he kitte his clooth, and 
couerde his flesh with an heire, and he 
fastide, and slepte in a sak, and wente, 

28the heed leyd doun. And the word of 
the Lord is maad to Helye’ Thesbite, 
seiynge, Whether hast thou not seen 
Achab mekyd before me? Thanne for 
he is mekid bi chesoun of me, I shal not 
brynge yn the yuel in the days of hym, 
but in the dais of his sone J shal brynge 
yn the yuel to the hows of hym. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Three 3eer thanne passiden ouer with 
outen batail bitwixe Cirye and _ Irael. 
2Forsothe in the thridde 3eer Josaphat, 
kyng of Juda, cam doun to the kyng of 
3Irael. And the kyng of Irael seyde to 
his seruauntis, Vnknowe 3e, that Ramoth 
Galaad™ is" oure, and we ben negligent 
to take it fro the hoond of the kyng of 
1Cyrye? And he seith to Josaphath, Shalt 
thou not come with me to fi3t in Ramoth 
5Galaad? And Josaphath seide to the 
kyng of Irael, As Y am, so and thow; 
my puple and thi puple ben oon, and mi 
horsmen and thi horsmen. And Josa- 
phath seide to the kyng of Irael, Seche, 
I praye thee, the word of the Lord to 
éday. Thanne the kyng of Irael gaderide 
the prophetis about foure hundrid men, 
and seith to hem, Shal I goo into Ramoth 
Galaad to fiz3te, or reste? The whiche 
answerden, Sty vp, and the Lord shal 
73eue it in the hoond of the kyng. Josa- 
phath forsothe seide, Is there not here 
eny man a prophete of the Lord, that 
swe asken bi hym? And the kyng of 
Irael seith to Josaphat, There is laft o 
man, bi the which we mowen aske the 
Lord; but and I haue hatid hym, for he 


Ill. KINGS. 


231 


he suede the ydols that Ammorreis" maden, 
which Ammorreis! the Lord wastide fro 
the face of the sones of Israel. 
whaune Achab hadde herd these wordis, 
he to-rente his cloth, and hilide his fleisch 
with an hayre, and he fastide, and slepte 
in a sak, and 3ede with the heed cast 
doun. 
to Elie of Thesbi, and seide, Whethir thou 
hast not seyn Achab maad low bifor me? 
Therfor for he is maad lowt for the 
cause of me, Y schal not brynge yn yuel 
in hise daies, but in the daies of his sone 
Y schal bryng yn yuel to his hows. 


CAP. XXII. 


Therfor thre 3eeris! passiden with out! 
batel bitwixe Sirie and Israel. Forsothe™2 
in the thridde 3eer Josephat, king of Juda, 
3ede doun to the kyng of Israel. And thes 
kyng of Israel seide to hise sernauntis, 
Witen 3e not, that Ramoth of Galaad is 
oure, and we ben necgligent to take it fro 
the hoond of the kyng of Sirie? And he™4 
seide to Josaphat®, Whether thou sclialt 
come with me to fi3te in to Ramoth of 
Galaad? And Josophat seide to the kyngs 
of Israel, As Y am, so and thou; my puple 
and thi puple ben oon ; and my kny3tis and 
thy kny3tis ‘bez oon?. And Josephat seide 
to the kyng of Israel, Y preie thee, axe thou 
to dai the word of the Lord. Therfor‘ thes 
kyng of Israel gaderide’ prophetis aboute 
foure hundrid men, and he seide to hein, 
Owe Y to go in to Ramoth of Galaad to 
fiz3te, ethir to* reste ? Whichet answeriden, 
Stie thou", and the Lord schal 3yue it im 
the hond of the kyng’. Forsothe Jose-7 
phat seide, Is” not here ony profete of 
the Lord, that we axe bi hym? And thes 
kyng of Israel seide to Josephat, O man, 
Mychee*, soneY of Hiemla, is left, bi whom 
we moun axe the Lord; but Y hate hym, 
for he prophesieth not good? to me, but 


m of Galaad 4 pr.m. ® be BcEFH. 
‘men of Ammorey1. iment. jAndther. kOm.1. l3eers, jer EL. ™ Andi 2 ee I. 
 Johasaphat, hing of Judat. POm.1. 4 And pKmg. TF gaderide to gidre 1. * owe I tol. The 
whiche 1. v kyng of Israels. “Is ther1. * Mychee bi name. *thesoner. 7 good 


uthou np ft. 
thing 1. 


Therfor 27 


Thej word of the Lord was maad 2s 


+t he is maad 
fow; this pe- 
naunce was for 
drede of deth, 
as it is seid 
comynly, and 
therfor it dis- 
seruede nat 
grace and 
anoiding of 
euerlastinge 
peyne, thon it 
disseruede di- 
laiyng of tein- 
peral peyne 
othere men 
seyen, that this 
was veri pe- 
naunce onely at 
an our, for he 
turnede ajen 
to yuele passid. 
Lire here. ¢. 


232 


prophesieth not to me good, but yuel, 
Mycheas, the sone of Hyemla. To whom 
Josaphath seith, Spek thou not so, kyng. 
9Thanne the kyng of Irael clepide® a 
maner geldyng, and seide to hym, Hy 
to brynge to Mychie, the sone of Hyemla. 
10The kyng of Irael forsothe, and Josa- 
phath, kyng of Juda, seeten, echon in her 
see, clothid with kyngis? ournynge, in 
the corn floore biside the dore of the 3aat 
of Samarie; and alle the prophetis pro- 
uphecieden in the si3t of hem. Forsothe 
Sedechias, the sone of Chanaan, maade 


to hym yren horns, and seith, Thes . 


thingis seith the Lord God, With thes 
thou shalt wyndowe Cyrye, to the tyme 
i2that thou doo it aweye. And alle the 
prophetis lije maner prophecieden, sei- 
ynge, Sty vp into Ramoth Galaad, and 
goo welsumli; the Lord shal take in 
the hoond of the kyng thin enemyes. 
13The messager forsothe, that was goon 
for to clepe Mychie, spak to hym, seiynge, 
Loo! the wordis of the prophetis with 
oon mouth to the kyng good thinges 
prechen; thanne be thi word lije of4 
uhem, and speke good thingis. To whom 
Mychie seith, The Lord lyueth, for what 
euer thing the Lord seye to me, that I 
1s shal speke. And so he cam to the kyng. 
And the kyng seith to hym, Mychie, 
shulen we goo in to Ramoth Galaad to 
fizte, or ceese? To whom he answerde, 
Sty, and go welsumli; and the Lord shal 
igtake it in the hoond of the kyng. For- 
sothe the kyng seide to hym, Eft and eft 
I adiure thee, that thou speke not to me, 
but that is soth in name of the Lord. 
17 And he seith, I saw3 al Irael to scaterde 
in hillis, as sheep not hauynge sheep- 
herd; and the Lord seith, Thes han not 
a lord, echon turn a3en into his hows im 
ispees. Thanne the kyng of Irael seide to 
Josaphat, Whether I seide no3t to thee, 
for he prophecyede not to me good, but 


© callede cr. 


aa. > chaumburleyn of his 1. 
h the prophetis caino. i the sone 1. 
go Evbc. © in BC sec. m. 


III. KINGS. 


P dyuerse E pr. m. 


¢ thou thee 1. 
k these hornes 1. 


XXIL 9—18. 


yuel. To whome Josephat seide, Kyng, 
spek thou not so. Therfor the kyng of9 
Israel clepide summe* chaumburleyn®, and 
seide to hym, Haste thou® to brynge My- 
chee, sone’ of Hiemla. Forsothe the kyng 10 
of Israel, and Josephat, kyng of Juda, 
saten, ech in his trone, clothid with kyngis 
ournement®, in the! large hows bisidis the 
doreS of the 3ate of Samarie; and alle 
prophetis" prophecieden in the si3t of hem. 
Also Sedechie, sone! of Chanaan, made tol) 
hym silf hornes of yrun, and seide, The 
Lord God seith these thingis, With these 
thou schalt scatere! Sirye, til thou do awei 
it. And alle prophetis prophecieden in 12 
lijk maner, and seiden, Stye thou in to 
Ramoth of Galaad, and go thou with | 
prosperite ; and the Lord schal bitake thin 
enemyes in the hond of the kyng. So-13 
theli the messanger, that 3ede to clepe 
Mychee, spak to hym, and seide, Lo! the 
wordis of prophetis™ with o mouth prechen 
goodis to the kyng; therfor thi word be 
lijk hem, and speke thou goodis. Tous 
whom Mychee seide, The Lord lyueth, 
for what ever thing the Lord schal seie 
to me, Y schal speke this. Therfor he ts 
cam to the kyng. And the kyng seide to 
hym, Mychee, owen we go" in to Ramoth 
of Galaad to fi3te, ether ceesse ? To which 
kyng he answeride, Stie thou, and go in 


prosperitet ; and the Lord schal bitake it — + go in pros- 
‘in to®° the hond of the kyng. Forsothe the ignore 
kyng seide to hym, Eft and eft Y coniure five ined 
thee, that thou speke not to me, no but eel a 
that that is soth in the name of the Lord.  kyng per-_ 
And he seide, Y si3 al Israel scaterid ina7 bodes ae 
the hillis, as scheep not hauynge a scheep- ee ee 
herde; and the Lord seide, These han no pas 
lord, ech man turne a3en in to his hows 

in pees. Therfor the kyng of Israel seide 18 

to Josaphat, Whethir Y seide not to thee, 

that he prophecieth not good to me, but 

euere yuel? Sotheli thilke Mychee addide, 19 

and seide, Therefore here thou the word 


q to ABFH. 


far 8 wikett 1. 
m the prophetis EL. ® to 


€ ourment 4. 
1 scatere abrood 1. 


4 the sone 1. 


XXII. 19-31. 


igeuermore enyl? Forsothe he addynge 
seith, Therfor here the word of the Lord; 
I saw3 the Lord vpon his see sittynge, 
and al the oost of heuene stondynge nee3 
290 to hym, fro the ri3t and fro the left. And 
the Lord seith, Who shal desseyue Achab, 
kyng of Yrael, that he stie vp, and falle 
in Ramoth Galaad ? And oon seide siche 
maner wordis, and another otherwise. 
21 Forsothe a spirit wente out, and stood 
before the Lord, and seith, I shal des- 
seyue hym. To whom the Lord spak, 
22In what? And he seith, I shal goon 
out, and I shal be a spirit lee3er in the 
mouth of alle the prophetis of hym. And 
the Lord seide, Thou shalt desseyue, and 
haue the ouerhoond; go out, and do so. 
23 Now thanne, loo! the Lord hath 3enen 
a spirit of lesynge in the mouth of alle 
thi prophetis that here ben; and the Lord 
24Spak a3ens thee yuel. Forsothe Sedechias, 
the sone of Chanaan, cam ny3, and smoot 
Mychie in to the cheeke, and seith, Whe- 
thir thanne the Spirite of the Lord hath 
zslaft me, and spoken to thee? And My- 
chie seith, Thou art to seen in that day, 
whanne thou shalt goon into the bed 
place with ynne the bedde, that thou be 
2ghidde. And the kyng of Irael seith, 
Takith Mychie, and dwel he anentis 
Amon, the prynce of the citee, and 
27anentis Joas, the sone of Amalech; and 
seith to hem, Thes thingis seith the 
kyng, Puttith this man into prisoun, and 
susteyneth hym with breed of tribula- 
cioun, and with water of angwishe, to 
2g the tyme that’ I turne a3en in pees. And 
Mychie seide, If thow turne ajen in pees, 
the Lord hath not spoken in me. And 
29he seith, Here 3e, alle puplis. And so 
the kyng of Irael stieth vp, and Josa- 
phath, kyng of Juda, into Ramoth Ga- 
30laad. And so the king of Yrael seide to 
Josaphath, Tak aarmys, and goo into 
batail, and be thou clothid® with thi 
clothis. But the kyng of Irael chaungide 


Ill. KINGS. 


233 


of the Lord; Y si3 the Lord sittynge on 
his trone, and Y sz3 al the oost of heuene 
stondynge ny3 hym, on the ri3t side and 
on the left side. And the Lord seide, 20 
Who schal disseyue Achab, kyng of Is- 
rael, that he stye, and falle in Ramoth of 
Galaad? And oon seide siche wordis, and 
another in anothir maner. Sotheli a spi-21 
rit 3ede out, and stood bifor the Lord, and 
seide, Y schal disseyue hym. To whom 
the Lord spak, In what thing? And he2z 
seide, Y schal go out, and Y schal be a 
spirit of leesyng in the mouth of alle hise 
prophetis. And the Lord seide, Thou 
+ thou schalt 


schalt disseyuet, and schalt haue the may- 
stry; go thou out, and do so. Now ther-23 ha Toe el 
for, lo! the Lord 3af a spirit of leesyng in cae iat 
the mouth of alle prophetis that ben here ; ae 
and the Lord spak yuel ajens thee. YF or-24 Ee pean 
sothe Sedechie, sone of Canaan, eizede, doom, that 
and smoot Mychee on the cheke, and seide, tee e 
Whether the Spirit of the Lord forsook Heo 
me, and spak to thee? And Mychee seide, 25 aby ans 
Thou schalt se in that dai, whanne thou sats: Lire 
schalt go in to closet" with ynne closet, nds 
that thou be hid. And the kyng of Israel 26 

seide, Take 3e° Mychee, and dwelle he at 

Amon, prince of the citee, and at Joas, 

theP sone of Amalech ; and seie 3e¢ to hem, 27 

The kyng seith these thingis, Sende je 

this man in to prisoun, and susteyne je 

hym with breed of tribulacioun, and with 

watir of angwisch, til Y turne aj3en in 

pees. And Mychee seide, If thou schalt 2s 

turne a3en in pees, the Lord spak not in 

me. And he seide, Here 3e, alle puplis. 

Therfor the kyng of Israel stiede, and 29 
Josaphat, kyng of Juda, in to Ramoth of 

Galaad. Therfor the kyng of Israel seide3o 

to Josephat, Take thou armeris, and entre 

thou in to batel, and be thou clothid in 

thi clothis, that is, noble. signes of the 

kyng. Certis the kyng of Israel chaung- 

ide hise clothingt, and entride in to batel. ce ag 
Sotheli the kyng of Sirie hadde comaundid 31 of king. Lire 
to two and thritti princes of charis, and woo 


- 3this habite, and wente into batayl. The  seide, 3e schulen not fizte ajens ony man 
rOm.ce. ‘clad scern. 
na closet cw. the closet K. °Om.s. POm.s. 4 in noble plures. 
VOL. 11. nh 


234 


kyng forsothe of Cirye comaundide to 
the princis of the chaaris, two and 
thretti, seilynge, 3e shulen not fi3te azens 
the lasse, and aj3ens anyt more, but oonli 
32a5ens the kyng of Irael. Whanne thanne 
the pryncis hadden seen the chaar of 
Josaphath, thei ouertroweden" that he 
hadde ben kyng of Irael, and the birre 
maad thei fou3ten a3jens hym. And Jo- 
33 saphath cried out; and the princis of the 
charis vndirstoden, that it was not the 
kyng of Irael, and thei ceseden fro hym. 
31 A maner man bente a boowe, into vncer- 
teyn dressynge an arowe, and bi hap he 
smoot the kyng of Irae! bytwixe the 
lunge and the stomak. And he seide to 
hys charyeter, Turn thin hond, and cast 
out me fro the oost, for greuousli Y am 
35 woundid. Thanne the batail is don in 
that dai, and the kyng of Irael stood in 
his chaar ajens Cyryes, and is deed at 
euen. Forsothe the blood of the wound 
flowide in to the bosum of the chaar. 
36 And the bedel fulsouned in al the oost, 
before the sunne wente doun, seiynge, 
Echon turne a3en into the citee, and into 
37his loond. The kyng forsothe is deed, 
and is born into Samarye; and thei biry- 
3seden the kyng in Samarie. And thei 
wasshen his chaar in the fish poond of 
Samarye, and houndis lickeden his blood, 
and thei lickeden the bridils, after the 
word of the Lord that was spokyn. 
39 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Achab, and al that he dide, and the yuer 
hows that he beeldide’, and of al the 
citees that he made vp, whether not thes 
ben wryten in the book of the wordis of 
io the days of the kyngis of Yrael ? Thanne 
Achab slept with his faders, and Ocho- 
41) Zias, his sone, regnede for hym. Josa- 
phat forsothe, the sone of Asa, began to 
regne vpon Juda, the ferth 3eer of Achab, 
sgkyng of Yrael. Of fyue and thretti 3eer 
he was, whanne he began to regne, and 
fyue and twenti 3eer he regnede in Jeru- 
salem; the name of his moder Azuba, 


tthe apr. 


P Om. c. 


Ill. KINGS. 


U ortroweden c. 


q Om, a. 


XX. 32—42. 


lesse, ethir more, noP but a3ens the kyng 

of Israel oonli. Therfor whanne the32 

princes of charis hadden seyn Josephat, 

thei suposiden that he was king of Israel, 

and bi feersnesse maad thei fou3ten ajens 

hym. And Josephat criedef; and the 33+ Josephath 


criede ; cleping 


princis of charis vndurstoden, that it was Goddis help, 
: . . d declari 
not the king of Israel, and thei ceessiden jis taner. 


frohym. Sotheli sum man bente a bowe, 34 476" © 
and dresside an arowe in to vneerteyn, 

and bi hap he smoot the kyng of Israel 

bitwixe the lunge and the stomak. And 

the kyng seide to his charietere, Turne 

thin hond, and cast me out of the oost{, eid ig de! of 
for Y am woundid greuousli. Therfor 35 fully, but he 
batel was ioyned in that dai, and the rma ebate 
kyng of Israel stood in his chare ajens {fire ba 
men of Sirie, and he was deed at euentid. 

Forsothe the blood of the wounde fletide 

doun in to the bothome of the chare. And 36 

a criere sownede in al the oost, before that4 

the sunne 3ede doun, and seide, Ech man 

turne a3en in to his citee, and in to his 

lond. Forsothe the kyng was deed, and 37 

was borun in to Samarie; and thei birieden 

the kyng in Samarie. And thei waisch- 38 

iden his chare in the cisterne of Samarie, 

and doggis lickiden his blood, and thei 
wayschiden the reynes}, bi the word of the Sine 
Lord whiche he hadde spoke. Sotheli 39 raynes; in 
the residue of wordis of Achab, and alle eee 


thus, and thei 
thingis whiche he dide, and the hows of waisciiden ihe 


armeris, fro 


v Wi 2] the blood of 
yuer which he bildide, and of alle citees (6 
whiche he bildide, whether these ben not oe be the 
° . e e OTA, Cb. § 
writun in the book of wordis of daies of that is, hisidis 


: ’ the pl: vher- 
the kyngis of Israel? Therfor Achab 40 sine Naboth 
y s s * g was stonyd, 
slepte with hise fadris, and Ocozie, his Mise 
sone, regnede for hym. Forsothe Jose- 41 the ford al 
5 i Elie, for 
phat, sone of Asa, bigan to regne on Juda eh La 
° the hows of 
in the fourthe jeer of Achab, kyng of Is- his armer in 
. ¢ , Jezrael, and 
rael. Josephat was of fyue and thretti42 thoor’hise 
jeer, whanne he bigan to regne, and he 2 ersin 
yas, 
regnede fyue and twenti 3eer in Jerusa- wound 
. O rou3t thidur, 
lem; the name of his modir wast Azuba, and waschun’ 
dou;ter of Salai. And he 3ede in al thes3¢r‘auep, ant 
ou3ter of Salai. And he 3ede in al the 43 o¢ Achab, and 
weye of Asa, his fadir, and bowide not fro pescumae 
it; and he dide that, that was ri3tful in Place, where 
Naboth was 
slayn. Lire 
here. c. 


Vv bilde ce. 


rOm. s. 


XXII. 43—54. 


43the dou3ter of Salai. And he wente in 
al the weye of Asa, his fader, and he 
bowide not aside fro it; and he dide that 
44is rizjt in the si3t of the Lord. Neuer- 
thelater the heizje thingis he dyde not 
aweye, 3it forsothe the puple sacrifiede, 
4sand brente encense in he3tis. And Josa- 
phath hadde pees with the kyng of Irael. 
46 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Josaphath, and his werkis that he dide, 
and batails, whether not thes ben wryten 
in the book of the wordis of the days of 
47‘the kyngis of ¥ Juda? But and the re- 
likis of the wommannysh maad men, that 
laften in days of Asa, his fader, he dide 
4saweye fro the loond. And there was not 
49thanne a kyng ordeynyd in Edom. For- 
sothe kyng Josaphath made nauees in the 
see, ‘the whiche* saileden in to Oofer for 
gold, and thei my3ten not goon, for thei 
50 ben broken in Aziongober. Thanne Ocho- 
zias, the sone of Achab, seith to Josa- 
phath, My seruauntis goon with thi ser- 
uauntis in shippis. And Josaphat wold 
sinot. And Josaphath slepte with his fa- 
ders, and is biried with hem in the citee 
of Dauid, his fader; and Joram, hys sone, 
s2regnede for hym. Forsothe Ochozias, the 
sone of Achab, began to regne vpon Yrael, 
in Samarye, the seuentyntheY 3eer of Jo- 
saphath, kyng of Juda; and he regnede 
s3vpon Yrael two 3eer. And he dide yuel 
in the sist of the Lord, and he wente in 
the weye of his fader, and of his moder, 
and in the weye of Jeroboam, sone’ of 
54 Nabath, that made Irae] to synne. For- 
sothe he seruede to Baal, and honourde 
hym, and he terrede the Lord God of Irael, 
aftir alle thingis that his fader dide. 


Here 
Kyngis, 
Sourthe*. 


and now bigynneth the 


wOm. ABFH, 


Il. KINGS. 


eendith the thridde book of 


Y seuentythe z. 


235 


the si3t of the Lord. Netheles he dide not 4s 
awey hi3 thingis, for 3it the puple made 
sacrifice, and brente encense in hi3 places. 
And Josephat hadde pees with the king 4s 
of Israel. Sotheli the residue of wordis4¢ 
of Josephat, and the werkis and _batels, 
whiche he dide, whethir these ben not 
writun in the book of wordis of daies of 
the kyngis of Juda? But also he took47 
awey fro the loond the relikis of men 
turned in to wymmens condiciouns, that 
leften in the daies of Aza, his fadir. Ne- 4s 
thir a kyng was ordeyned thanne in Edoin. 
Forsothe’ king Josephat made schippis in 49 
the see, that schulden seile in to Ophir 
for gold, and tho my3ten not go, for thei 
weren brokun{ in Asiongaber. 
Ocozie, sone of Achab, seide to Josephat, 

My seruauntis go with thine in schippis. dee 
And Josephat nolde}. And Josephat slepte 1 2nd felouschipe 


with Ocozie, 


Thanne 50 + tho weren 
brokun; Di 
Goddis doom, 


with hise fadris, and was biried with hem Bee areca 
: : : : . in ij. book o 
in the citee of Dauid, his fadir; and Jo- Paral. xx. «°. 


. Lire here. c. 
ram, his sone, regnede for hym. Forsothe 52 +'pnd Josephat 


Ocozie, sone of Achab, bigan to regne on 225 that is, 


$ Siege be assossied 
Israel, in Samarie, in the seuenetenthe 3eer ue him the 
ij. tyme in 
of Josephat, kyng of Juda; and Ocozie navey. Lire 
ere. Ceo 


regnede on Israel twei jeer. And he didess 
yuel in the si3t of the Lord, and 3ede in 
the wey of his fadir, and of his modir, 
and in the weie of Jeroboam, sone of Na- 
bath, that made Israel to do synne. And 54 
he seruyde Baal, and worschipide hym, 
and wraththide the Lord God of Israel, bi 
alle thingis whiche his fadir hadde do. 


Here endith the thridde book of 
Kyngis, and here  bigynneth the 
_fourthe. 


zthe sonecr. # Here eendith the thrydde boke of 


x that c pr. m. y G 
Kyngis, and bigyaneth i ounih boke of Kyngis.n. Explicit tertius liber Regum. . Here endith the thrid 


bok of Kyngis, and here bigynneth the fourth bok. ¥. 


t Sotheli rekLNoparsuws. 


No final rubric in cu. 


8 Here endith the thridde book of Kyngis, and bigynneth the fourthe 


hook. png. Here endith the thridde book of Kyngis, and bygynnethe the fourthe book of Kyngis. csx. Here 
endith the thridde book of Kyngis, and bigynnith a prolog on the iv. book. GM. Heere endeth the thridde book 
of Kinges, se now the fourthe. k. Heere eendith the iije. book, and bigynneth the wije. book of Kynges. R. 
Here eendith the thrydde book of Kyngis. ¢. No final rubric in ELP. 


Hhg 


IV. 


KINGS. 


[Prologue on the Fourth book of Kings*.| 


Tuis Fourthe book of Kingis makith mencioun of alle the kingis of Israel, and of 
Juda, from Ocozie, sone of Achab, in to Sedechie, king of Juda, that was in the 
secounde transmygracioun of the men of Juda and of Jerusalem, whanne the cite of 
Jerusalem was taken and brent, with the temple of the Lord, and maad desolat, either 
forlete, bi seuenti 3eer, after the wordis of Jeremye, profete. 


The fourthe of Kingus*. 


CAP. I. 


1 Moan forsothe trespasside in Yrael, 
z2aftir that Acab was deed. And Ochosias 
felle thoru3 the wyndowes of his sonp- 
ynge place, that he hade in Samarye, 
aud he wexe seeke; and he sente mes- 
sangers, seiynge to hem, Gooth, and 
counselith Belzabub, the god of Accha- 
ron, whether I may lyne fro this myn 
sinfrmyte. The aungel forsothe of the 
Lord spak to Helias Thesbytes, seyinge, 
Riys, and go doun in to the a3ein com- 
mynge of the messagers of the kynge of 
Samarie; and thou schalt seye to hem, 
Whether God is not in Yrael, that 3e 
goon to counseylen Belzabub, the god of 
4 Accharon? Wherfore these thingis seith 
the Lord, Fro the bed, upon the whiche 
thou stey3idist up, thou schalt not goo 
doun, bot bi deth thou schalt dyen. And 
sHelias went. And the messagers ben 
turned aj3eyn to Ochosias. ‘The whiche 
seyde to hem, Why ben 3e turned ajeyn ? 
«6 And thei answerden to hym, A man 


Here biginneth the ferthe book of 
Kingis>. 


CAP ar 


Forsotne Moab trespasside a3ens Is-1 
rael{, after that Achab was deed. And2 
Ocozie felde thorow the aleris of his soler, 
which he hadde in Samarie, and was sijk ; 
and he sente messangeris, and seide to 
hem, Go 3e, and councele Belzebub, god 
of Acharon, whether Y may lyue after 
this sijknesse of me. Forsothe the aungel 3 
of the Lord spak to Elye of Thesbi, and 
seide, Rise thou, aud go down into the 
metynge of the messangeris of the kyng 
of Samarie; and thou schalt seie to hem, 
Whether God is not in Israel, that 3e go 
to counsel Belzebub, god of Acharon ? For 4 
which thingt the Lord seith these thingis, 
Thou schalt not go doun of the bed, on 
which thou stiedist. And Elie 3ede. Ands 
the messangeris turneden a3en to Ocozie. 
And he seide to hem, Whi turneden 3e 
ajen? And thei answeriden to hym, A& 
man mette vs, and seide to vs, Go 3e, turne 
je azen to the kyng, that sente 3ou; and 
3e schulen seie to him, The Lord seith 


a Here bigynneth the fourthe book of Kyngis x. No initial rubric in acru. From the commencement of 


IV’. Kings to the end of II. Chronicles the text is taken from a. 


a This prologue is from m. 


> that E pr.m. 


b From ug. The itij. of Kinges. p. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


+ Moab tres. 
passide a3enus 
Israel; for the 
king of Moab 
swoor for him 
and his rewme, 
to serue the 
king of Israel 
vndur tribute, 
and he rebell- 
ide, and brak 
this ooth. Lire 
here. C 


+ for which 
thing; that is, 
for vnfeithful- 
nesse. Lire 
here. c. 


1. 7—15 


a3ein came to us, and seyde to us, Gooth, 
and turneth a3ein to the kynge, that 
sente 30u; and 3e schuln to hym seyn, 
These thingis seith the Lord, Whether 
for there was not God in Yrael, thou 
sentist, that Belzabub be counseyled, the 
god of Aacharon®? Therfore fro the bed 
upon the whiche thon stei3edist up, thou 
schalt not goo doun, bot by deth thou 
7schalt dye. The whiche seyde to hem, 
Of what fygure and habyte is that man, 
that a3eyn came to 30u, and spake to 3ou 
8these wordis? And thei seyden, A row3 
man, and with an hery gyrdyl gyrd to 
the reenys. The whiche seith, Helyas 
9Thesbytes it is. And he sente to hym 
the prince of fyftye, and the fyfty men 
that with hym weren. The whiche stei3- 
iden up to hym, and to hym syttynge in 
the cop of the hill seith, Man of God, the 
kynge comaundid, that thou come doun. 
10And Helyas answerynge seith to the 
quynquagenarye, 3if the man of God I 
am, come doun fijr fro heuen, and de- 
uoure thee and thi fyfty men. Than 
fijr came doun fro henen, and denouride 
hym, and the fyfty that weren with hym. 
1tEft he sente to hym another prynce of 
fyfty, and fyfty with hym, the whiche 
spac to hym, Man of God, these thinges 
W2seth the kynge, Hy3e, come doun. An- 
swerynge Helyas seith, 3if the man of 
God I am, come doun fijr fro heuen, and 
deuoure thee and thi fyfty. Than the 
fijr of God came doun fro heuen, and de- 
13 uouride hym and his fyfty. Eft soonys he 
sente the thridd prynce of fyfty, and the 
fyfty that weren with hym. The whiche 
whan was commen, bowed the knee3is 
ajeins Hely, and preyede him, and seith, 
Man of God, wylle thou not dispijse my 
lijf, and the lijues of thi seruauntis that 
l4ben with me. Loo! fijre came doun fro 
heuen, and deuourede the two first princis 
of fyfty, and the fyftees that weren with 
hem; and now, I beseche, that thou haue 
ismercye to my lijf. The aungel forsothe 


5 IV. KINGS. 


237 


these thingis, Whether for God was not 

in Israel, thou sendist, that Belzebub, god 

of Acharon, be counselid ? Therfor thou 

schalt not go doun of the bed, on which 

thou stiedist, but thou schalt die bi decth. 

Which Ocozie seide to hem, Of what7 

figure and abite is that man, that mette 

jou, and spak to 30u these wordis? Ands 

thei seiden, An heeri man, and gird with 

a girdil of skynt in the reynes. Which +o skye; in 

seide to hem, It is Elie of Thesbi. Ando hee 3 

he sente to Elie a prince of fifti, and fifti 

men that weren vndur hym. Which prince 

stiede to hym, and seide to hym, sittynge 

in the cop of the hil, Man of God, the 

kyng comaundith, that thou come doun. oe ve i 

And Elie answeride, and seide to theo verily and not 

prince of fifti men, If Y am the man of Feral, 

God}, fier come doun fro heuene, and de- Hee ad 

uoure thee and thi fifti men. Therfor fier pe 

cam doun fro heuene, and deuouride hym, Wie a ieee 

and the fifti men that weren with hym. _ that he con- 

Eft he sente to Elie another prince of fifti, 11 eae 

and fifti men with hym, which spak to eta 

Helye, Man of God, the kyng seith these met ae 

thingis, Haste thou, come thou doun. Elie 12 diden thei that 
weren with the 


answeride, and seide, If Y am the man of prince; and 
é herfor b 

God, fier come doun fro heuene, and de-  Goaais oon 

uoure thee and thi fiftimen. Therfor the ‘™% they 


weren worthi 


fier of God cam doun fro heuene, and de- __ %o be punysch- 
id; wherfor 


uouride hym and hise fifti men. 2ft he 13 Elie pronouns. 


r ; . ide Goddis sen- 
sente the thridde prince) of fifti men, and tence, and seide, 


o . ; hh 
fifti men that weren with hym. And “¥ of God, 
whanne this prynce hadde come, he bow-  ¢#:; and soit 
a “ é is of the ij. 
ide the knees ajens Elie, and preiede hym, _ prince, and 

4 ooaale hise fifti men. 
and seide, Man of God, nyle thou dispise Lire here. c. 
my lijf, and the lyues of thi seruauntis  § he sente the 
‘ thridde prince, 


that ben with me. 

heuene, and deuouride tweyne, the firste 

princis of fifti inen, and the fifti men that 

weren with hem; but now, Y biseche, that tours seyen 
te comynly, and 

thou haue mercy on my lijf. Forsothe® 15 abdie dredde 


Lo! fier cam doun fro 14 ge. this 
thridde prince 
was Abdie, as 
Ebreis and 
Cristen doc- 


the aungel of the Lord spak to Helie of nar 
Thesbi, and seide, Go thou doun with — ‘insis, xviii 


c*., and therfor 


3 a rfor Elie roos, he mekide him 
hym; drede® thou not. The 5 dee Be 


and cam doun with hym to the kyng ; and 16 and Elie his 


he spak to the kyng, The Lord seith thes jee co.” dine 


¢ Nacharon BFH. 


¢ Forsothe lo a. 


d and drede x. 


238 


of the Lord spak to Helyas Thesbytes, 
seyinge, Comme doun with hym; ne 
drede thou. Thanne he roose and came 

16doun with hym to the kynge; and spac 
to hym, These thingis seith the Lord, 
For thou sentist messagers to counseylen 
Belzabub, god of Accharon, as ther were 
not God in Yrael, of the whiche thou 
mijtist not asken a worde; therfore fro 
thi bed, upon the whiche thou stey3idist 
up, thou schalt not goo doun, bot by deth 

17thou schalt dye. Thanne he is deed aftir 
the word of the Lord, that Helye spac; 
and Joram, his brothir, regnede for hym, 
the seconde 3eer of Joram, the sone of 
Josaphath, kyng of Jude; forsothe he 

ishade not a sone. The remnaunt forsothe 
of the wordis of Ochosie, ‘the whiche® he 
wrou3t, whethir thei® ben not writen in 
the boke of the wordis of the days of the 
kyngis of Yrael ? 


CAP. II. 


1 Done it is forsoth, whan the Lord 
wolde reren Helyas by a whyrlwynd in 
to heuen, Helyas and Helyse wenten fro 

2Galgalis. And Helyas to Helyse seide, 
Sytt here, for the Lord hath sent me 
vuto Bethel. To whom seith Helese, the 
Lord liueth and thi soule lueth, for I 
schal not forsake thee. And whanne thei 

3weren goo doun fro Bethel, the sonys of 
prophetis, that weren in Bethel, wenten 
out to Helysee, and seyden to hym, 
Whether thou hast knowe, for the Lord 
to day schal taken thi lord fro thee? 
The whiche answerde, And I haue 
4knowen; beeth style. Helyas forscthe 
seide to Helise, Sytt heere, for the Lord 
hath sente me into Jericho. And he seith, 
The Lord lineth and thy soule liueth, 
for I schal not forsake thee. And when 

5 thei weren commen to Jericho, the sonys 
of prophetis, that weren in Jericho, ney3- 
iden to Helyse, and seyden to hym, Whe- 
ther thou hast knowen, that the Lord 
schal taken to day thi lord fro thee? 


d that ¢ pr. m. 


e Om, x. 


IV. KINGS. 


fin to cx. 


{. 16—=1, 


thingis, For thou sentist messangeris to 
counsele Belzebub, god of Acharon, as if 
no God were in Israel, of whom thow 
my3tist axe a word; therfor thou schalt 
not go doun of the bed, on which thou 
stiedist, but thou schalt die bi deeth. 
Therfor he was deed bi the word of the17 
Lord, which word Elie spak; and Joram, 
hys brothir, regnyde for hym, in the se- 
counde 3eer of Joramt, the® sone of Jose- 
phat, kyng of Juda; for Ocozie hadde 


+ the ij. 3eer of 
Joram; in 
which he regn- 
ede with his 


no sone. Sotheli the residue of wordis of 18 fagir, for he 


Ocozie, whiche he wrou3te, whether these 
ben not writun in the book of wordis of 
daies of the kyngis of Israel ? 


CAP. 1. 


Forsothe it was don, whanne the Lord 
wolde reise Elie bi a whirlewynd in to 
heuene, Elie and Elisee 3eden fro Galgalis. 
And Elie seide to Elisee, Sitte thou here, 2 
for the Lord sente me til into Bethel. To 
whom Elisee seide, The Lord lyueth and 
thi soule lyueth, for Y schal not forsake 
thee. And whanne thei hadden come doun 
tof Bethel, the sones of prophetis, thats 
weren in Bethel, 3eden out to Elisee, and 
seiden to hym, Whether thou knowist, 
that the Lord schal take awey thi lord to 
dai fro thee? Which answeride, And I 
knowe’ ; be 3e stille. Forsothe Elie seides 
to Elisee, Sitte thou here, for the Lord 
sente me into Jerico. And he seide, The 
Lord lyueth and thi soule lyueth, for Y 
schal not forsake thee. And whanne thei 
hadden come to Jerico, the sones of pro-5 
phetis, that weren in Jerico, neiz3iden to 
Elisee, and seiden to hym, Whether thou 
knowist, that the Lord schal take awei 
thi lord to dai fro thee? And he seide, 
Y knowe; be 3e stille. Forsothe Elie seide¢ 


e these ce. 


& knowede s. 


regnede viij. 
3eer with his 
fadir, for fro 
that tyme that 
Josophath was 
in perel of deth 
in Ramoth of 
Galaad, he or- 
deynede Joram, 
his sone, king, 
lest striyf weren 
among hise 
sones for the 
rewme, aftir 
his deth. Lire 
here. ¢. 


Il. 6—15. 


And he seith, I haue knowen ; beeth styll. 
6 Helyas forsothe seyde to hym, Sytt here, 
for the Lord hath‘ sente me vuto Jordan. 
The whiche seith, The Lord liveth and 
thi soule lyueth, for I schal not forsake 
thee. Thanne both thei wenten to gydre ; 
z7and fyfty men of the sonys of prophetis 
foloweden, the whiche and stoden forn 
ajeynst aferre; thei forsothe stoden both 
supon Jordane. And Helyas tooke his 
mantyll, and inwrappyde it, and smote 
the watirs; the whiche ben deuydid in 
to eithir partye, and thei wenten both 
9thor3 the drye. And whanne thei weren 
goon ouer, Helyas seyde to Helise, Aske 
that thou wilt, that I doo to thee, er I 
be taken awey fro thee. And Helise 
seyde, I beseche, that ther be doo thi 
iospirite double in me. The whiche an- 
swerde, An hard thing thou hast askede ; 
neuer the later 3if thou seest me, whanne 
I schal be taken fro thee, it schal be that 
thou hast askyde; 3if forsothe thou seest 
1 not, it schal not be. And whanne thei 
wenten, and goynge speke wordis, loo! 
the fijren chaare and the fijren hors de- 
uyden euer either; and Helyas stey3ide 
up by ‘the whirlwyndeS in to heuen. 
12 Helise forsothe sawe, and criede, Fader 
myn! fader myn! the chaar of Yrael, and 
charieter® of it. And he saw3 hym no 
more. And he toke his clothis, and kutt 
ishem in to two partyes. And he rerede 
the mantyll of Helye, that ladde fallen 
to hym; and, turned! ajein, stode upon 
i4the brynke of Jordan. And with the 
mantyll of Helye, that hadde fallen to 
hym, he smote the waters, and thei ben 
not deuydid. And he seide, Where is 
the God of Helye also nowe? And he 
smote the watirs, and thei ben dyuydid 
hidre and thidre; and Helisee passede 
isouer. Forsothe the sonys of the pro- 
phetis that weren in Jericho, seeinge, 
a3einward seyden, The spirite of Helye 
hath restyde upon Helisee. And thei 


IV. KINGS. 


239 


to Elisee, Sitte thou here, for the Lord 
sente me ‘til to Jordan. Which seide, 
The Lord lyueth and thi soule lyueth, for 
Y scha] not forsake thee. Therfor bothe 
3eden togidere; and fifti men of the sones7 
of prophetis sneden, which also stoden fer 
enen a3ens; sothely thei bothe stoden ouer 
Jordan. And Elie took his mentil, ands 
wlappide it, and smoot the watris + ; 
whiche weren departid ‘into" euer ethir 
part, and bothe 3eden bi the’ drie. Ando 
whanne thei hadden passid, Elie seide to 
Elisee, Axe thou that, that thou wolt that 
Y do to thee, bifor that Y be takun awey 
fro thee. And Elisee seide, Y biseche, that 


T smoot the 
watris s the 
watris weren 
departid, not 
bi ony vertu 
that was in the 
mentil, but bi 
Goddis vertu 
bi which he 
wolde schewe 
the merit of 
Elie. Lire 
eres Cy 
t that thi dou- 
ble spirit ; 
Elisee axide 
not the spirit 
in double pro- 
porcionn in 
comparisoun of 
Elie, that he 
schulde be set 
so bifor Elie, 
bnt he axide 
that the double 
grace that was 
in Elie, that is 


thi double spiritt be ‘maad in* me. Which 10 the grace of 


Elie answeride, Thou axist an hard thing ; 
netheles if thou schalt se me, whanne Y 
schal be takun awei fro thee, that that 
thou axidist schal be; sotheli, if thon 


myraclis, and 
the grace of 
profesie,schulde 
be in him, that 
so he schulde 
be maad liyk 
the maister. 

ire here. c. 


schalt not se, it schal not be. And whanne 11 § in to heuene; 


thei 3eden, aud spaken goynge, lo! a chare 
of fier and horsys of fier departiden euer 
either; and Elie stiede bi a whirlewynd 


not in to he- 
uene of sterris, 
nether of bri3t- 
nesse in blis, 
but in to he- 
uene of the 


in to heunene§. Forsothe Elise si3, and 12eir; and bi the 


criede, My fadir! my fadir! the chare of 
Israel||, and the charietere therof. And 
he si3 no more Elie. And he took hise 
clothis, and to-rente tho in to twei partis. 


eir Elie was 
bornn in to 
erthely para- 
diys, whidur 
Enok was 
translatid bi- 
fore; and 
abonte the ende 


And he reiside the mentil of Elie, that 13 of the world 


felde doun to hym; and he turnede ajen, 
and stood ouer the ryuer of Jordan. 
with the mentil of Elie, that felde doun 
to hym, he smoot the watris, whiche weren 
not departid4]. And he seide, Where is 
God of Elie also now? And he smoot the 
watris, and tho weren departid hidur and 


bothe sehulen 
come forth 


And 14 from thennus, 


to preeche 
ajenus the fals- 
nesse of Aunte- 
crist. Lire 
here. c. 

|| the chare of 
Israel ; a chare 
berith up, and 
a cbarietere 
rulith, so Elie 


thidur; and Elisee passide. Sotheli the 15 ber Up the pu- 


sones of prophetis, that weren in Jerico 
euene a3ens, sizen, and seiden, The spirit 
of Elie restide on Elisee. And thei camen 
in to the meetyng of hym, and worschip- 
iden hym lowli to erthe. 
to hym, Lo! with thi seruauntis ben fifti 
stronge men, that moun go, and seke thi 
lord, lest perauenture the Spirit of the 


fOm. £ pr.m. & whirlwynde n. the wirlynge wynde H. 4 the charieter 4. { he turned 4. 


f til in to ELY. to x. 


& Om. s. 


hinc. 1 Om. EL. * with En. 


of Israel, in 
fillinge ether 
amendinge de- 
fautis, as in 
111. book, 
xviii. e°., in the 
getinge of wa- 
tir to the puple 


And thei seiden 16 beinge in perel ; 


also Elie rulide 
the pnple, and 
hron3te it asen 
to the veri feith 
of 9 God, by 
geting of fier 
fro heuene on 
his brent sacri- 
fice, to de- 
elaringe of veri 
Godhed, wher- 
for the puple 


240 


commynge in to ajein commynge of hym, 
honoureden hym redye in to the erth. 
is And thei seyden to hym, Loo! with thi 
seruauntis ben fyfty stronge men, that 
mown goon, and seechen thi lord, lest 
perauenture the Spirite of the Lord 
haue taken hym, and throwen hym in 
oon of the hillis, or in oon of the valeys. 
The whiche seithe, Wylle 3e not senden. 
17 And they constreyniden hym, to tyme that 
he assentide to hem, and seyde, Sendith. 
And thei senten fyfty men; whiche 
whanne hadden sou3t three days, founden 
isnot. And thei turneden a3eyn to hym ; 
and he dwellyde in Jericho. And he 
seyde to hem, Whether I seyde not to 
19 30, Willith not senden? Than the men 
of the cytee seyden to Helyse, Lo! the 
dwellynge of this cytee is best, as thou 
thi silf, lord, byholdist ; bot and the watirs 
20 ben werst, and the erth bareyn. And he 
seith, Bringith to me a newe vessel, and 
puttith in it salt. The whiche whan 
2ithey hadden brou3te, goon oute to the 
welle of watirs, he putte in to it salt, 
and seith, These thingis seith the Lord, 
I haue heelide these watirs, and there 
schal be no more in hem deth, ne ba- 
gzreynte. Thanne the watirs ben helyde 
into this day, aftir the word of Helise, 
23that he spac. Forsothe Helise stey3ide 
up thens in to Bethel; and whanne he 
schulde stey up by the weye, lytyl chil- 
dren wenten out fro the cyte, and scorn- 
eden to hym seyinge, Stey up, ballard! 
24stey up, ballard! The whiche whan he 
byheld, saw3e hem, and cursed to hem 
in name of the Lord. And two beris 
wente oute fro the wyild wode, and to- 
tereden* of hem two and fourty chyl- 
25dren. Forsothe he wente thens in to the 
hill of Carmele, and thens turnede a3ein 
in to Samarye. 


IV. KINGS. 


Il. 16—25. 


Lord hath take hym, and hath cast forth 
hym in oon of the hillis, ethir in oon of 


criede thanne, 

the Lord him 

oe is God. In 
breu i¢ is 


the valeys. Which! seide, ‘Nyle 3e sende™. 17 Te the chare 


And thei constreyneden hym, til he as- 
sentide to hem, and seide, Sende 3e. And 
thei senten fifti men; and whanne thei 
hadden sou3t" bi thre daies, thei founden® 
not. 
and he dwelide in Jerico. And he seide 
to hem, Whether Y seide not to 30u, Nyle- 


of Israel, and 
the chads 
therof, that is, 
my3tiere to de- 
fence of Israel, 
than chyualry 
with charis of 
hatel, as Rabi 


And thei turneden ajen to hym?P 5 18 satomon ex- 


powneth. Lire 
here. C. 

{| which weren 
not departid ; 


3e sende? Therfor the! men of the citee 19 this was doon 


seiden to Elisee, Lo! the dwellyngy of 
this cite is ful good, as thou thi silf, lord, 
seest; but the watris ben ful’ yuele, and 


of God, that 
Elisee schulde 
not he reisid 
ouer myche, of 
the geting of 
the spirit of 


the lond is bareyn. And he‘ seide, Brynge 20 Fie. Where is 


je to me a newe vessel, and sendet 3e salt 
in to it. And whanne thei hadden brou3t 
it", he 3ede out to the welle of watris, and 21 
sente’ salt in to it’’, and seide, The Lord 
seith these thingis, Y haue helid these’ 
watris, and nethir deeth, nether* bareyn- 
esse, schal be more in thoy. 
watris weren heelid til?-in to this dai, bi 


Therfor the 22 


God af Elie 2 
at this criying 
the watris 
weren departid, 
that i¢ were 
schewid, that 
he gat grace 
and kunning 
to profesie and 
to do myraclis, 
not of hise 
owne meritis, 
but of Goddis 
fre 3ifte, and of 
the meritis of 


the word of Elisee, which* he spak. For-23 Bee Lire 


sothe Elisee stiede® fro thennus in to 
Bethel; and whanne he stiede® bi the 
weie, litle children 3eden out of the citee, 
and scorneden hym, and seiden, Stie*, thou 
ballard! stie’, thou ballard! And whanne 24 
he hadde biholde, he si3 hem, and curside 
hem{ in the name of the Lord. And 
twey beeris 3eden® out of the forest, and 
to-rente fourti children of hem. Sothelif2s 
Elisee wente fro thennus in to the hil of 
Carmele, and fro thennus he turnede ‘a3en 
tos Samarie. 


k to-teeren ce pr. m. 


1 And Helizee 1. ™ Sendé 3e not 1. = sou3t him1. 9% foundenhims. P Helizeer. 4 Om. 1. 
‘moost 1. 8 Helizee1. tputtex. UYittohinnr v putter. the welle1. Wther. *ne ELP. 
Yhemr. 2Om.1. *thatz. %wenteup1. © wente upt. 4 Stieupr. © wenten 1. f Certis 1. 


€ a3en into DI. to ELP. 


t the “cities 
etc.; that is, 
the setting of 
the citee was 
best for pro- 
fetis, for it 
was couenable 
to contempla- 
cioun; aud the 
erthe was not 
bareyn, not but 
for malice of 
the watir. Lire 
here. c. 
t and curside 
em; these 
children weren 
tau3t and stirid 
of her fadris 
and modris, 
idolatrouris, to 
scorne the pro- 
fete of the 
Lord, and ther- 
for he curside 
hem, that her 
fadris and mo- 
dris schulden 
be punyschid, 
and that the 
children schul- 
den no more 
he stirid, to the 
inalice of fadris 
and modris 3 
for he wiste bi 
God schewinge, 
that her deth 
ou3te to come 
sone aftir his 
cursing, which 
he brou3te forth 
bi the sentence 
of Goddis ri3t- 
fulnesse. Lire 
here. C. 


III. t—t. 


CAPM: 


1 Joram forsoth, the sone of Acab, regn- 
ede upon Yrael, in Samarie, the ei3teenth 
jeer of Josaphath, kyng of Juda. And 

zhe regnyde twelue 3eer, and dyde yuel 


bifore the Lord, bot not as his fadir . 


3and modir; forsothe he toke aweye the 
ymagis of Baal, that his fadir hadde 
maade, neuer the latir he cleeuyde in 
the synnys of Jeroboam, the sone of Na- 
bath, that made. Yrael to synnen; and 
4he wente. not aweye fro hem. Forsothe 
Mesa, the kyng of Moab, nuryschede 
many beestis, and payed to the kyng of 
Yrael an hundreth thousand of lombis, 
and an hundreth thousand of! wetheris, 
swith their fleeses™. And whann Acab 
was deed, he brake the bonde of pese 
that he hade with the kyng of Yrael. 
6Thann kyng Joram wente out in that 
day fro Samarie, and noumbrede alle 
7Yrael. And he sente to Josaphath, kyng 
of Juda, seyinge, Kynge Moab is goon 
aweye fro me; comme with me a3eynst 
hym to batayl. The whiche answerde, 
I schal steyen up; he that is myn, is 
thyne; my puple thi puple, and myn 
shors thin hors. And he seyde, By what 
weye sehuln we stey3en up? And he an- 
gswerde, By the desert of Ydume. Thann 
the kyng of Yrael, and the kyng of Juda, 
and the kyng of Edom, wenten, and 
3eeden aboute by the weye of seuene 
days; and ther was not watir to the 
hoost, and to the beestis, that foleweden 
iohem. And the kyng of Yrael seide, 
Allas! allas! allas! the Lord hath ga- 
derd us three kyngis, that he take" in 
ilthe hond of Moab. And Josaphath seith, 
Is there not a prophete of the Lord, that 
we preyen the Lord by hym? And oon 
answerde of the seruauntis of the? kynge 
of Yrael, There is here Helisee, the sone 


10m. 43. ™ flees cE. 


hCertis1. ithe soner. Jj upont. 
° he eleuyde to 1. 
flees for tribute 1. 
thee 1. © Josophat r. 


h Om. plures. ‘ helde 1. 
VOL. Il. 


w Mesar. ~*~ that 1. 
4 wende up 1. 
k pon t. 


IV. KINGS. 


n take vs A. 


k Om. DEMPGC. 
Pthe soner. @Om.1. © he 3ede 1. 
y he noumbride 1. 
e Joram 1. 


241, 


CAP. III. 


Forsothe" Joram, sone! of Achab, regn-1 
ede on) Israel, in Samarie, in the eiz3tenthe 
3eer of Josephat, kyng of Juda. And he 

regnede twelue 3eer, and he dide yuel bi-2 

for the Lord, but not as his* fader and 

modir'} ; for™ he took" awei the ymagis3 + not as his 
of Baal, whiche his fadir hadde maad, ee an 
netheles in® the synnes of Jeroboam, sone? sec rae 
of Nabath, that made Israel to do synue, fee ais 
‘he clenyde’, and 3ede’ not awei fro tho’, Joram re- 
Forsothe Mesa, kyng of Moab, nursehides bedyalilein 
many beestis, and paiedet to the kyng of tie celies, 
Israel an hundrid thousynde of lambren, yee’. 20°" 
and an hundrid thousynde of" wetheris, “' /" “ 
with her fleesis’%, And whanne Achab wass 

deed, he” brak the boond of pees, which* 

he hadde with the kyng of Israel. Therfor¢ 

kyng Joram 3ede out of Samarie in that 

dai, and noumbrideY al Israel. And he7 

sente to Josephat, kyng of Juda, and seide, 

The kyng of Moab 3ede* awei fro me; 

come thou with me a3ens him to batel. 

Which? Josephat answeride, Y sehal stie? ; 

he that is myn, is thin; my puple is thi 

puple; and myn horsis ben thin horsis. 

And he® seide, Bi what weie sehulen wes 

stiel? And he® answeride, Bi the deseert 

of Ydumee. Therfor the kyng of Israel,9 

and the kyng of Juda, and the kyng of 

Edom, 3eden forth, and eumpassiden bi 

the weie of seuene daies; and ‘watir was 

not to the oost, and to the beestis, that 

sueden hem. And the kyng of Israel1o 

seide, Alas! alas! alas! the Lord hath 

gaderide€ vs thre kyngis to bitake vs" in 

the hond of Moab. And Josephat seide, 11 
Whether ony prophete of the Lord is 

here, that we biseche the Lord bi hym ? 

And oon of the seruauntis of the kyng of 

Israel answeride, Elisee, the sone of Sa- 

phat, is here, that schedde! watir on* the 

hondis of Elie. And Josephat seide, Is.12 


© Om. ABF. 


lhis modir ey. ™forsothe 1. 1% didet. 
the paiede 1. ¥ Om. 1. Y flees ELPb. 
a Andi. > stie up with 
& gaderide to gidre 1, 


Shem 1. 
2 hath gon 1. 
f ther was not watir I. 


Ii 


242 


of Saphath, that heelde watir vpon the 
izhondis of Helye. And Josaphath seith, 
Is ther anentis hym the worde of the 
Lord? And the kyng of Yrael came 
doun to hym, and Josaphath, kyng of 
13 Juda, and the kyng of Edom. Forsothe 
Helisee seyde to the kyng of Yrael, What 
is tome and to thee? Goo to the pro- 
phetis of thi fadir and thi? modir. And 
the kyng of Yrael seith to hym, Why the 
Lord hath gaderde these three kyngis, 
that he take hem in to the hondis of 
14Moab? And Helyse seyde to hym, The 
Lord of hoostis liueth, in whose si3t I 
stonde, that 3if not the cheer of Josa- 
phath, kyng of Juda, I schamyde, forsoth 
I schulde not haue taken hede to thee, ne 
i5haue byholden. Now forsothe bryngith 
to me an sawtrer. And whanne the 
sawtrer songe, the honde of the Lord is 
isdon upon hym, and he seith, These 
thingis seith the Lord, Makith the 
wombe of this streme dychis and dychis. 
\7 Forsothe these thingis seith the Lord, 3e 
schuln not seen wynde, ne reyn, and this 
wombe schal ben fulfilled with watirs, 
and drynke schuln 3e, and 3oure meyne, 
isand 3oure beestis. Lytyll is this in the 
si3t of the Lord. Ferthermore also he 
19 Schal taken Moab in to 3oure hondis; and 
3e schul smyten alle streyngthid4 cytee, 
and alle chosen cyte, and 3e schuln hewen 
doun eche tree berynge fruyt, and alle 
the wellis of watirs 3e schuln stoppen, 
and alle noble feeld 3e schuln coueren 
zowith stonys. It is doo than erly, whann 
sacrifice is wont to be offerd, and, loo! 
watirs camen by the weye of Edom; 
21and the erth is fulfillid with watirs. Alle 
forsothe Moabitis herynge, that kyngis 
hadden stey3iden up, that thei fizten 
a3eynus hem, thei clepiden to gydre alle 
that weren gird abowen with kny3tis 
gyrdill, and thei stoden in the termys. 
22 And first erly rijsynge, and nowe the 


P of thi ce. Om. 2. 


1seruaunts. ™3her Andi, 
>Om.ELP. tthe depthe:. 4 Hitil thing 1. 
x sum men of Moab c. and thei 1. 


b resen 1. risen ELP, ¢ ajens hem 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


o thee, an ydolatour 1. 
Vv the men x see. m. 
y Om. DEFGKLIOPQRSWxbg. 


TI, 12—22. 


the word! of the Lord at hym? Whiche 

seiden, ‘It is“. And the kyng of Israel, 

and Josephat, kyng of Juda, and the kyng 

of Edom, 3eden doun to hym. Fersothe"™ 13 

Elise seide to the kyng of Israel, What is 

to me and to thee°? Go thou to the pro- 

phetis of thi fadir and of thi modir. And 

the kyng of Israel seide to hym, Whi hath 

the Lord gaderid? these thre kyngis, to bi- 

take hem into the hondis of Moab? And 14 

Elisee seide to hym, The Lord of oostis 

lyueth, in whos si3t Y stonde, if Y were 

not aschamedy of the cheer of Josephat, Mey ee 
king of Juda, treuli Y hadde not per- axing to him, 
seyned, nethir Y hadde biholde thee. New 15 greene 
forsothe brynge 3e to me a sautrere. And  {cuout. Lire 
whanne the sautrere song, the hond of the 

Lord was maad on’ hym’, and he seide, 
The Lord seith these thingis, Make 3e16 
thes wombe, ether depthe', of this stronde 
dichis and dichis. For the Lord seith17 
these thingis, 3e schulen not se wynd, 
nethir reyn, and this depthe schal be fillid 
with watris, and 3e schulen drynke, and 
3oure meynees, and 3o0ure beestis. And 18 
this is litil" in the si3t of the Lord. Fer- 
thermore also he schal bitake Moab in to 
3oure hondis; and 3e schulen smyte ech 19 
strengthid citee, and ech chosun citee, and 
3e schulen kitte doun ech tref beryuge 
fruyt, and 3e schulen stoppe alle the wellis 

of watris, and 3e schulen hile with stonys bot ee 


an ‘] on Puple of Moab, 
ech noble feeld. Therfor it was doon cerli; 20 iter this myste 


+ aschamed ; 


t kitte doun 
ech tre, ete.; 
this is specialy 


whanne sacrifice is wont to be offrid, and, ts eee 
lo! watris camen bi the weie of Edom, _lond of biheest. 
Lire here. c. 


and the lond was fillid with watris. So-21 
theli alle men’ of Moab herden, that 
kyngis"’ hadden stied™ to fi3te ajens hem ; 
‘and men of Moab* clepiden togidereY alle 
men, that weren gird with girdil* aboue, 
and thei stoden in the* termes. And men 22 
of Moab risiden’ ful eerli, and whanne 
the sunne was risun thanne euen ajens 
the watris, thei sien the watris reed as 
blood euene ajens®. And thei seiden, It 2s 


4 the strengthid a. 


P gaderid to gidre zr. upon. 1 Helizee :. 
W these kyngis 1. © stied up 1. 
2a kny3tis girdil 1. a girdil rR. a her 1. 


Ill. 23-—1V. 3. 


sunne sprungen forn a3einst of the wa- 
tirs, Moabitis seen a3enward rede watirs 
23as blode. And thei seiden, Blood of 
swerde it is; the kyngis han fou3ten 
ajeynst hem seluen, and thei ben slayn 
to gidre; nowe, Moab, goo to the praye. 
21And thei wenten in to the tentis of 
Yrael; forsothe Yrael ryisynge smote 
Moab, and thei flowen byfore hem. 
Thanne camen thei that ouercomen, and 
25 smyten Moab, and distruyden the cytees ; 
and alle the best feelde thei fulfilliden, 
eche seendynge stoonys; and alle the 
wellis of watirs thei stoppyden, and alle 
the treese berynge fruyt thei heweden 
doun, so that oonly the wallis made with 
erthe laften ; and the cyte is enuyround 
of slyngers,; and of grete partye smyten. 
2s And whanne kyng Moab hadde seen, that 
is, the enemyes to han the ouerhond, he 
tooke with him seuen hundreth men 
drawynge oute swerdis, that thei breken 
oute to king Edom; and thei my3ten 
a7not. And takynge his first goten sone, 
that was to regnen for hym, he offerd 
brent sacrifice upon the wall; and greet 
indignacioun is made in Yrael; and 
anoon thei wenten aweye fro hym, and 
turneden a3eyn into their lond. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Forsothe amanerwomman ofthe wiyuys 
of prophetis cryede to Helise, seyinge, 
Thy seruaunt, my man, is deed, and thou 
hast knowen for thy sernaunt was dreed- 
ynge God; and loo! a creaunsure came, 
that he take my two sonys to seruen to 

a2hym. To whom seyde Helisee, What wilt 
thou that I doo to” thee ? sey to me, what 
hast thou in thin hous? And sche an- 
swerde, I thi seruaunt haue not eny 
thinge in my hous, bot a lytill of oyle, 

sby the whiche I be anoyntid. ‘To whome 
he seith, Goo, and aske by borwynge of 


IV. KINGS. 


243 


is the’ blood of swerd, ‘that is, sched out 
bi swerd*; kyngis fou3ten! ajens hem silf, 
and thei ben slayn togider ; now go thou, 
Moab, to the prey. And thei 3eden in tos 
the castels of Israel; forsothe Israel roos, 
and smoot Moab, and thei fledden bifor 
men® of Israel. Therfor" thei that hadden 
ouercome, camen!, and smytiden) Moab, 
and destrieden cytees*; and alle men send-25 
ynge stoonys filliden ech beste fecld, and 
stoppiden alle the wellis of watris, and 
kittiden! doun alle trees™ berynge fruyt, 
so that oneli ‘wallis maad of erthe” weren 
left; and the citee was cumpassid of men 
settinge engynes, and was? smytun bi greet 
part’. And whanne the kyng of Moab26 
hadde seyn this, that is, that thet enemyes 
hadden the maistrie, he took with hym 
selene hundrid men drawynge’ swerdis, 
that thei shulden breke in to the kyng of 
Edom ; and thei my3ten not. And he took 27 
his firste gendrid sone, that schulde regne 
for hym, and offride* brent sacrifice on the 
wal; and greet indignacioun wast maad in 
Israelt ; and anoon thei 3eden awei fro 
hym, and turneden a3en in to her lond. 


CAP. IV. 


Forsothe" sum’ wommanj of the wyues 1 
of prophetys criede to Elisee, and seide, 
Thi seruaunt, myn hosebonde, is deed, and 
thou knowist that thi seruaunt dredde 
God; and lo! the’ creaunser, ‘that is, he 
to whom the* dette is owidY, cometh to 
take my two’? sones to serue hym. To2 
whom Elisee seide, What wolt thou that 
Y do to thee? seie thou to me, what hast 
thon in thin hows? And she answeride, 
Y thin handmayde haue not ony thing in 
myn hows, no but a litil of oile, bi* which 
Y schal be anoyntidj. To whom he seide, 3 
Go thou, and axe bi borewyng of alle thi 


alle thi ney3bours voyd vessellis not fewe. 
z Om, BF. 
40m. em. e€Om.cr. fhanfouztens. §themeni. &Thanner, {Om.4. J smeten Frip. 
kher cytees1. 'kitten1. the trees1. "eerthen wallis1, it was1.  P part therof1. his 1. 
r drawynge out 1. *offride himar. tofthe Lord wast. “Sothely1. Yar. Yar * Om. cp 


FGKLMNoFsxbg. ‘Y Gloss omitted in 1. 


zOm. Q. 


a with 1. 


Pig 


t greet indiy- 
nacioun was 
maad in I's- 
rael; in Ebreu 
it is, greet ire 
was maad on 
Israel, that is, 
of God offendid 
ajenns the sones 
of Israel, for 
thanne her 
wickidnesses 
weren remem- 
brid bifore God, 
bi the aungel 
that was prince 
of Moabitis ; 
that is, that 
the sones of 
Israel hadden 
do as grete 
ynels ether 
worse, in of- 
fringe her sones 
and don3tris 

to fendis, wher- 
for thanne for 
the veniaunce 
of this yuel, 
pestilence felde 
in the oost of 
Israel, and so 
thei weren 
compellid to go 
awey fro the 
sege, for her 
synnes passid. 
Lire here. c. 

t sum wom- 
man; bi Ebreys 
and Latyn doe- 
tours, this 
womman was 
the wiyf of 
Ahdie, that 
was in dette, 
for the feeding 
of profetis, in 
the tyme of 
persecucioun of 
Jezabel. Lire 
here. ¢. 

§ anoyntid ; 
that is, schal 

be refreischid 

a litil to the 
sauering of 
potage. Lire 
here. C. 


244 IV. KINGS. “IV. 4——14. 


4 And goo in, and close thi dore, whanne 
thou and thi sonys weren with inne forth ; 
and putte therof in to alle these vessellis ; 
and whanne thei weren ful, thou schalt 

stake. And so the woman wente, and 
closede the dore vpon hir silf and vpon 
hir children, thei offerden -vesselis, and 

esche heelde in. And whanne the ves- 
selis weren fulle, sche seyde to hire sone, 
Brynge to me 3it‘a vessel. And he an- 
swerde, I haue not. And the oyle stode. 
7Sche forsothe came, and schewide to the 
man of God; and he, Goo, he seith, sylle 
the oyle, and 3eelde to thi creaunser ; 
thou forsothe and thi sonys liuith of the 
sremnaunt. Forsothe a maner day is done, 
and Helisee passed thor3 Suna cyte; for- 
sothe ther was there a grete womman, 
that heelde hym, that he ete brede. And 
whann oft sithes he passede thens, he 
turnede asyde to hyre, that he ete brede. 
9The whiche seyde to hyre man, I per- 
ceyue that this is an holy man, that oft 
1osithis passith bi us; thanne make we to 
hym a litill soupynge place, and putte 
we in it to hym a lityll bed, and a borde, 
and a lytyll seete, and a candilstyke ; that 
whanne he comith to us, he dwelle ther. 
i1Thann a maner day is done, and com- 
mynge he turnede asyde in to the soup- 
12yuge place, and restyde there. And he 
seide to Gyazi, his child, Clepe this Suna- 
myte. The whiche whanne hade clepyd 
hyre, and sche hadde stonden beforn hym, 
13he seide to his childe, Speke to hire, Lo! 
bisily in alle thingis thou hast serued to 
us; what wilt thou that I do to thee? 
Whethir hast thou a nede, and wilt that 

I speke to the kyng, or to the prince of 
chyualrye? The whiche answerd, In the 
uumydil of my peple I dwelle. And he 
seith, What thanne sche wille that I do 
to hyre? And Giazi seide to hym, Ne 


neiz3boris voide vessels not fewe>. -And4 
entre, and close thi dore, whanne thou art 
with ynne, thou and thi sones; and putte 
3e therof in to alle these vessels; and 
whanne tho schulen be ful, thou schalt 
take awei®. Therfor the womman 3ede,5 
and closide the dore on® hir silf and’ on® 
hir sones, thei brou3ten vessels‘, and sche 
‘heldide ing. And whanne the vessels weren 6 
fulle, sche seide to hir sone, Brynge thou? 
3it’a vessel tome. And he answeride, Y 
haue not'. And* the oyle stood!, For-7 
sothe sche cam, and schewide™ to the man 
of God; and he seide, Go thou, sil thou" 
the oile, and 3elde to thi creauncer; for- 
sothe® thou and thi children lyue? of the 
residuei. Forsothe sum™ day was maad,s 
and Elisee passide bi a citee, Sunam’; 
sotheli' a greet womman was there, which 
helde hymf, that he schulde ete breed. 
And whanne he passide ofte therbi, ‘he 
turnede to hir, that he schulde ete breed". 
‘Which womman’ seide to hir hosebonde,9 
Y perseyue that this is an hooli man of 
God, that passith ofte bi vs; therfor make 10 
we a litil soler to hym, and putte we ther- 
ynne a litil bed to hym, and a boord, and 
a chaier, and a candilstike; that whanne 
he cometh to vs, he dwelle there. Ther-1 
for sum” dai was maad, and he* cam, and 
turnede in to the soler, and restide there. 
And he seide to Giezi, his child, Clepe 12 
thou this SunamyteY. And whanne he 
hadde clepid hir, and sche hadde stonde? 
bifor hym, he seide to his child, Spekeis 
thou to hir, Lo! thou hast mynystride* to 
vs bisili in alle thingis; what wolt thou 
that Y do to thee? Whether thou hast a 
cause, and wolt that Y speke to the kyng, 
ether to the prince of the chyualrye? And 
sche answeride, I dwelle in the myddis of 
my puple. And he? seide®, What therfor® 14 
wole sche that Y do to hir? Giezi seide 


f this seruaunt B. sec. m. 


ba fewe 1. ¢awei thin hoond1. uponi. ¢Om.1. ‘the vessels x. & 3otte in nc. 3ettide in x. 
helde in pre1kmNogswhbg. helde in tho R. Om. Exvu. 4Om. Ex. inoonz. k And thanner. | stood, 


encreesinge no more 1. ™ schewide itr. 2 Om. 1. 


Candi. Plynejeis. remenaunti. ‘fal. 


‘that hist Sunam 1. tand1. u that he wolde ete breed with hir1. Vv Andschert. War. x Helizee 1. 


Ywomman of Sunamr, Zcomeups. 4 seruyd 1. 


b Helizee 1. ¢seidetohimi. 4 thanne 1. 


+ which helde 
him; that is, 
bisily preyede 
to mete. Lire 
here. C. 


IV. 15—26. 


aske thou, forsothe sche hath no sone, 
isand hyre man is olde. And so he co- 
maundid, that he clepe hyre. The whiche 
whanne was clepid, and hade stonden by- 
16fore the doore, he seyde to hyre, In this 
tyme and in this same houre, 3if the liyf 
were leder, thou schalt haue a sone. in 
thy wombe. And sche answerde, Wyle 
thou not, I beseche, my lord, man of God, 
wylle thou not ly3en to thin hond wom- 
i7man. And the womman conceynede, and 
bare a chijlde in tyme, and in the same 
18 houre, that Helise hadde seyde. Forsothe 
the child wexe; and whan ther was a 
maner day, and he was gon oute to his 
19fadir, and to the repers, he seith to his 
fadir, Myn hened ‘I aake®, my heued ‘I 
aakes. And he seyde to a childe, Take, 
20and leed hym to his modir. The whiche 
whanne he hadde taken, and lade to his 
modir, sche putte hym upon hir knees 
21 vnto the mydday, and he is deed. For- 
sothe sche steizede up, and leyde hym 
vpon the bed of the man of God, and 
closede the dore. And sche gon oute, 
22clepyde hyre man, and seith, Sende with 
me, I bisech, oon of the childre, and a 
sche asse, and I schal rennen oute vnto 
23the man of God, and turnen a3ein. The 
whiche seith to hyre, For what cause 
gost thou to him? to day ben not kalen- 
dis, ne sabot. The whiche answerde, I 
21schal goon. And sche greythede the sche 
asse, and comaundid to the chijlde, Driyf, 
and go forth; ne make thou to me abijd- 
ynge in goynge, and that doo that I co- 
25 maunde to thee. Than sche wente forthe, 
and came to the man of God, in to the 
hill of Carmele. And whan the man of 
God hade seen hyre forn a3eynst, he seith 
to Giazi, his chijld, Lo! that Sunamyte ; 
26go than in to ajein commynge of hyre, 
and seye to hyre, Whethir ri3t it is don 
aboute thee, and thi man, and thi chylde ? 


IV. KINGS. 


245 


to hym, Axe thon not, forf she hath no 
sone, and hir hosebonde is eeld. Therfor 1s 
Elisee comaundide, that he& schulde clepe 
hir. And whanne sche was clepid, and 
stood bifor the dore, he” seide to hir, Ini 


this tymet and in this same our, if lijf tin dis tyme; 


4 : in Ebreu it i 
schal' be felow*, thou schalt haue a sone ums, cree 
. 1 : tyme as in 
in the! wombe. And sche answeride, Nyle inne or ive 

thou schalt 


thou, my lord, the man of God, Y biseche, vale 
A 7 u ne, 
nyle thou lye{ to thin hondmaide. And 17 that is, nae 
Dai jeer turn 
the womman conseyuede, and childide a aboute thou 
‘ ° schalt lyue hool 
Bony in the tyme, and in the same our, 1M ag now, and 
which Elisee hadde seid. Sotheli the child 18 ee 
encreeside ; and whanne sum™ day was, ‘ee eh on 
% thanne, as Khabi 
and the child was goon out, and 3ede to Salgnon sein 
' ‘ . x Lire here. c. 
his fadir, and to the repers, he seide to his 19 ¢ nyle thou 
fadir, Myn heed akith, myn heed akith. beg A 
And he seide to a child°’, Take, and lede ene 
hym to his modir. And whanne he hadde2o ee fe ee 
& _ rew wor 
take, and hadde brou3t hym to his modir, _ set here, signe- 
0 5 fieth bothe é 
sche settide? hym on‘ hir knees ‘til to™ eH ‘jaile; aad 
7 i 8 st this is the sen- 
myddai, and he was eee ; Sotheli she 21 sence, as Rabi 
stiede", and leide hym on” the litil bed of Salomon seith; 
1 thou axidis! 
the man of God, and closide the dore. of Goda sone 
5 ‘ to me, that 
And sche 3ede out, and clepide hir hose-22 schal die soone, 
. Oe, it were not 
bonde, and seide, Y biseche, sende thou jnatir of ioye 
with me oon of the children, and an asse, ee of 
and Y schal renne out ‘til to the man of and therfor Y 
4 preye, that thi 
God, and Y schal turne ajen. And he seide 23 word faile not, 


3 , so that tbe 
to hir, For what cause goist thon to hym ? © sone that schal 
F oare he 
5 Zz jouun to 
to dai ben* not calendisy, nether sabat?. Tanda 


And she answeride, Y schal go. And sche 24 ive ere. c. 
sadlide® the? asse, and comaundide to the 
child®, Dryue thou, and haaste’; make 
thou not® tariyng to me in goyng, and 
do thou this thing whichf Y comaunde 
to thee. Therfor’ sche 3ede forth, and 25 
cam to the man of God, in to the hil of 
Carmele. And whanne the man of God 
hadde seyn hir euene a3en", he seide to 
Giezi, his child, Lo! thilke Sunamyte'; 
go thou therfor in to the metyng of hir, 26 
and seie thou to hir, Whether it is doon 
ri3tfuli aboute thee, and aboute thin hose- 


& akith a. 


‘for whit. & Giezy 1. » Helizee1. iOm.1. * felow,or if I lyuet, } thir. Mar ® his fadir 1. 


°seruaunt 1. Psette1, Guponi. * vnto}. 
Wvnto1. Xther beni. Y solempnytees 1. 
dhaaste thee1, nor. fthat1. gs Thanne 1. 


8 deed thanne 1. 
Zhaly day 1. 
h azens him 1. 


tCertis1. 4 stiede upi. VY upon 1. 
a greythide 1, bani. © child or seruaunt 1. 
i womman of Sunam 1. 


246 


27 The whiche answerde, Ri3t. And whann 
sche was commen to the man of God, in 
to the hyl, sche cau;te his feete; and 
Giazi wente ni3, for to meuen hyre aweye. 
And the man of God seith, Lete hyr; 
forsothe the liyf of hyre is in bytter- 
nesse, and the Lord hath hillid fro me, 

28 and hath not schewed to me. The whiche 
seyde to hym, Whethir I askide my sone 
of my lord? Whethir I seyde not to 

29 thee, Ne begijle thou me? And he seith 
to Giazy, Gyrde thi reenys, and take my 
staf in thin hond, and goo; 3if eny! man 
a3ein comme to thee, ne salute thou hym; 
and 3if eny man salutith thee, answere 
thou not to hym; and putte my staf 

z0vpon the face of the chylde. Bot the 
moder of the chyld seith, The Lord 
lyueth and thi soule lyueth, I schal not 
leue thee. Thanne he roos, and folowed 

3Lhyre. Giazi forsothe wente before hem, 
and putt the staf upon the face of the 
chyld; and ther was not voice, ne witte. 
And he turned ajein in to ‘ajein com- 
mynge) of hym; and he tolde to hym, 
32seyinge, The child hath not rysen. Than 
Helisee wente in to the hous, and Jo! 
the child laye deed in the bed of hym. 

33 And goon in he closede the dore vpon 
hym, and vpon the chyld; and he preyed 

34the Lord. And he stei3ide up, and laye 
vypon the chyld; and he putte his mouth 
vpon the mouth of hym, and his eejen 
vpon the ee3en of hym, and his hondis 
vpon the hondis of hym. And he bowede 
hym silf vpon hym; and made hoote is 

35the flesche of the chyld. And he eft 
‘turnede ajein* in the hous oonys hydre 
and thidre; and he steiz3ide vp, and laye 
vpon hym, and the chyld brethed seuen 
36sithes, and opnede the eejen. And he 
clepide Giazi, and seyde to hym, Clepe 
this Sunamyte. The whiche clepid wente 
in to hym. The whiche seith, Take thi 


la ACEFH. 


k it is don rizstfulit. © hir awey 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


i the ajen comyng 4. 


m hath holde it 1. 


IV. 27—36. 


bonde, and aboute thi sone? And sche. 
answeride, Ri3tfulix. And whanne sche27 
hadde come to the man of God, in to the 
hil, sche took his feet; and Giezi nei3ede, 
that he schulde remoue hir'. And the 
man of God seide, Suffre thou hir; for 
hir soule is in bitternesse, and the Lord 
helde™ priuy fro me, and schewide" not to 
me. And sche seide to hym, Whether J 2s 
axide my°® sone of my? lord? Whether 
Y seide not to thee, Scorne thou not me? 
And he seide to Giezi, Girde thi leendis, 29 
and take my staf im thin hond??, and go; 
if1 a man metith%4 thee, grete thou not 
hym7; and if ony man gretith thee, an- 
swere thou not hym; and putte thou my 
staf on’ the face of the child. Forsothe’30 
the ‘modir of the child‘ seide, The Lord 
lyueth and thi soule lyueth, Y schal not 
leeue, ‘ether forsake", thee. Therfor’ he 
roos, and suede hir. SotheliY Giezi 3edes1 
bifor hem, and puttide the staaf on* the 
face of the child; and ‘vois was not’, ne- 
ther wit. And Giezi turnede ajen to’ the 
meetyng of hym; and telde to him, and 
seyde, The child ‘roos not*. Therfor Elisee 32 
entride in to the hows, and, lo! the deed 
child lai in his bed. And he? entride, and 33 
closide the dore® on hym silf, and on® the 
child; and preiede to the Lord. And he®34 
stiedef, and lay on® the child; and he put- 
tide his month on" the mouth of the child, 
and hise i3en on® the izen of the child, 
and hise hondis on the hondis of the 
child. And he bouwide hym silf on" the 
child; and the fleisch of the child was 
maad hoot. And he’ turnede ajen, and 3s 
walkide in the hows onys hidur and 
thidur; and* Elisee stiede!, and lai on™ 
the child, and the child 30xide seuene 
sithis, and openyde the izjen. And he®s6 
clepide Giezi, and seide to hym, Clepe 
thon this Sunamyte®, And sche was 
clepid, and entride to hym. And he seide, 


k wente e prom. 


n gchewide it 1. ig P thee my 1. 


PPhondis u, Gand if en, mete L. Tuponr 8 Andy, t childs modir 1. % Om. cpgrnogsx sec. m. bg. 
v Thanne 1. w And 1. Xx upon I. y ther was not vois in him 1. Zin to L. a hath not risen 1. 
> Helizeer, cupons. upons. © Helizeerx.  f stiede upI. Suponz, hnupons. i Ielizee s. 
Kand eft n ! jede up rt. ™ ups. ™ Helizee rs, 9° womman of Sunam 1. 


+ greete thou 
not hym ; that 
is, meddle thou 
not with hym, 
wordis lettinge 
thee fro the 
weye, and bi 
sich maner 
Crist spekith 
in x. c°. of 
Luk to dissi- 
plis sent to 
preche, Grete 
3e no man bi 
the weye. Lire 
ere. C. 


IV. 37-——V. 1. 


37sone. Sche came, and felle at hys feet, 
and honourede vpon the erthe; and sche 
38toke hyre sone, and wente oute. And 
Helisee turnede a3ein in to Galgala. For- 
sothe ther was hunger in the lond, and 
the sonys of prophetis dwelliden before 
hym. And Helisee seyde to oon of his 
childre, Sete a grete potte, and seethe 
39potage to the sonis of prophetes. And 
oon wente oute in to the feelde, that he 
gedre wijld herbis; and he foond as a 
wijld vyne, and he gederde of it wijid 
gourdis of the feeld. And he fulfillide 
his mantylle, and turnede a3ein, and! 
hewede™ to gydre in to the pott of pot- 
age; he wyst not forsothe what it was. 
40 Thanne they helden in to felawis, that 
thei my3ten eten; and whanne thei haden 
tastyden of the seethinge, thei crieden 
oute, seyinge, Deth in the pott! deth in 
the pott! man of God. And thei my3ten 
snot eeten. And he, Bryngith to, he seith, 
mele. And whanne thei haden brou3t, he 
putt in to the pott, and seith, Heeldith 
in to the puple, that thei eten; and there 
was no more eny thing of bytternesse in 
42the pott. Forsothe a maner man came 
fro Balsalisa, bryngynge to the man of 
God loouys of first fruytes, and tenne 
barly loouys, and newe whete, in his 
bagge. And he seide, Zeue to the puple, 
43that it ete. And his seruaunt answerde 
to hym, Howe myche is this, that I putt 
before an hundreth men? Eft he seith, 
3eue to the puple, that it ete; these 
thingis forsothe seith the Lord, Thei 
schul eten, and ther schal leuen over. 
s1And so he sette before hem, the whiche 
eeten; and ther laft ouer, aftir the worde 
of the Lorde. 


Ciak. Vs 


1 Naaman, the prince of chyualrye of the 
kyng of Cyrye, was a grete man anentis 


IV. KINGS. 


247 


Take thi sone. She cam, and felde doun37 

to his feet, and worschipide on erthe?; 

and sche took hir sone, and 3ede out. And 3s 

Elisee turnede a3en in to Galgala. For- 

sothe hungur was in the lond, and the 

sones of prophetis dwelliden bifor hym. 

And Elisee seide to oon of his children, 

Set thou a greet pot, and sethe thou pot- 

age to the sones of prophetist. And oons9 mv - the sones 


Ofetis ; 


3ede! out in to the feeld to gadere eerbis _ that is, dissi- 
: lis of h 

of the feeld; and he foond as a* wilde farituty [eis 

: : ‘ eden religi- 

vyne, and he gaderide therof gourdis of (iy pire 
here. C. 


the feeld. And he fillide his mentil, and 
he turnede a3en, and schredde’ in to the 
pot of potage; fort he wiste not what it 
was. Therfor thei helden yn" to felowis 40 
to ete; and wharne thei hadden taastid 
of the sething, thei crieden out, and seiden, 
Deth’ in the pot! deeth’ in the pot! thou 
man of God. And thei mi3ten not ete’. 
And he* seide, Brynge 3e meele. And 41 
whanne thei hadden brou3t, he puttidey 
in to the pot, and seide, Helde 3e%” to the 
cumpany, that thei ete; and ony thing of Be ok oy 


bitternesse was? nomore in the pot. For-42 pleyn, ether 
cuntrey, and 


t Salisa ; Baal 
Salisa, is twey 
wordis in E- 


sothe? sum’ man cam fro the pleyn of  Salisa is the 
Ione . propir name 
Salisac}, and bar to the man of God fein 
looues of: the firste fruytis), ten looues of that cuntrey. 
2 2 Lire here. c. 
barli, and newe wheete, in his scrippe. te of the 
. rste fruytis 
And the man of God seide, 3yue thou to ‘ten not penn 


here siche, as 


the puple, that it ete. And his mynystre® 43 weren offrid in 
answeridef to hym, ‘Hou myche® is this, the temple of 


? J the Lord, but 

that Y sette bifor an hundrid men? Eft — tho ben seid 
3 looues of the 
Elisee seide, 3yue thou to the puple, that fre: fruytis, 
it ete; for" the Lord seith these thingis, ofthe frste 


° oa fruytis of that 
1 - y 0. al 
Thei schulen ete, and it! shal leeue. Ther-44 007 "Somme 


for‘ he puttide! bifor hem, whiche™ eeten ; — bekis lian, and 


ji “ wer. looues of 
and it® lefte°, bi? the word of the Lord. barly, but this 


word and, is 
not in Ebreu, 
nether it is of 
the text, and 
newe wheete 
in Ebreu it is, 
thing maad of 


CAP. V. 
cornes, for the 


Naaman, prince of the chyualrye of the1 cornes of 
A wheete weren 
kyng of Syrie, was a greet man, and Wor- not fully ripe, 
but tho my3ten 
be sengid and 


1Om. ce. ™ heew3 ce. etun so. Lire 
. 4 here. C. 
Ptheerthe 1. dwenter. Fit wereat. %schredde thor. tforsothe 1. yn therofft. ¥ Deth is 1. 
Weteifx. *Helizeer. Y putte i 1. putte ex. puttide i K. YY 3eout1 7 ther wast. 4 Certis he 
Therfor Kis. ba IMw. € Balsalisa a sec. m. d thou of tho looues 1. © seruaunt 1. f seide EL. 
&What1. 5 forsothe 1. itherr. kThanner. ! putter. ™ the whicher. © ther 1. © lefte mete 1. 


P aftir 1. 


248 


his lord, and a wirschipide ; by hym for- 
sothe the Lord jaue helth to Cyrye; 
forsothe he was a stronge man and riche, 
2but mesell. Forsothe fro Cyrye wenten 
out lytyll theeues, and thei haden brou3t 
fro the lond of Yrael a lytill chyld wom- 
man caytife, that was in the seruyce of 
sthe wiyf of Naaman. The whiche seith 
to hir lady, Wolde God, my lord were 
at a prophete that is in Samarye; for- 
sothe he schulde han helyde hym fro the 
4lepre that he hath. And so Naaman 
wente in to his lord, and tolde to hym, 
seyinge, Thus and thus spake the chyld 
swomman of the lond of Yrael. And so 
the kyng of Cyrye seyde to hym, Go, 
and I schal sende letters to the kyng of 
Yrael. The whiche whann was gon, 
and hade take with hym tenn talentis of 
syluer, and sexe thousand platis of gold, 
and tenn chaungynge maner of clothis, 
she tooke to the kyng of Yrael lettris in 
to these wordis ; Whanne thon takist this 
lettre, wyte thon, that I haue sente to 
thee Naaman my seruaunt, that thou 
jhele hym fro his lepre. And whanne 
the kyng of Yrael hade red the letters, 
he kutte his clothis, and seith, Whethir 
a god I am, that I mow slen and quyck- 
en, for he hath sente to me, that I hele 
a man fro his lepre? Takith heed and 
seeth, that occasionns he sechith a3eyns 
sme. The whiche whanne Helisee, the 
man of God, hadde herde, that is, the 
kyng of Yrael to han kutte his clothis, 
he sente to hym, seyinge, Why hast thou 
kutte thy clothis? come he to me, and 
9wyte a prophete to be in Yrael. Thanne 
Naaman came with hors and chaaris, and 
stood at the dore of the hous of Helisee. 
io Aud Helisee sente to hym a messanger, 
seyinge, Goo, and be waschen senen 
sithis in Jordan; and thi flesche schal 
receyuen helth, and thou schalt be 
i1clensed. Naaman wroth wente aweye, 


Gariche 1. ' he was leprouse 1. S$ Om. 1. 
Godi1. *thatr. ywolder 4 Om.1. 
mNogswhe. e& these same 1. f these 1. 


1Thanne 1, ™Om.t. 2 weische 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


t dam 
@ that 1. 
ff Y may cc. 

© clensid so 1. 


Ve. 2—II. 


schipid anentis his lord; for bi hym the 
Lord 3af helthe to Sirie; sotheli he was. 
a strong man and riche, but leprouse’. 
Forsothe theues 3ede out of Sirie, and led-2 
den prisonere’ fro the lond of Israel a litil 
damysele', that was in the" seruyce of the 
wijf of Naaman. ‘Which damysele’ seidea 
to hir ladi, ‘Y wolde”, that my lord hadde 
be at the prophete which* is in Samarie; 
sotheli the prophete schuldeY haue curid 
hym of the? lepre which? he hath. Ther-4 
for Naaman euntride to his Jord, and telde 
to hym, and seide, A damysel of the lond 
of Israel spak® so and so. Therfor thes 
kyng of Syrie seide to hym, Go thou, and 
Y schal sende lettris to the kyng of Israel. 
And whanne he‘ hadde go forth, and hadde 
take with hym ten talentis of siluer, and 
sixe thousynde goldun platis, ‘ether jlo- 
reyns4, and ten chaungyngis of clothis, 
he brou3te lettris to the kyng of Israele 
bi these® wordis; Whanmne thou hast take 
this pistle, wite thou, that Y haue sent to 
thee Naaman, my seruaunt, that thou cure 
hym of his lepre. And whanne the kyng7 
of Israel hadde red thef lettris, he to-rente 
his clothis, and seide, Whether Y am God, 
that may sle and quykene, for this kyng 
sente to me, that Y cure a man of his 
lepre? Perseyue 3e, and se%, that he sekith 
occasiouns a3jeus me. And whanne Elisee, g 
the man of God, hadde herd this, that is, 
that the kyng of Israel hadde to-rente hise 
clothis, he sente to the kyng, and seide, 
Whi to-rentist thou thi clothis? come he 
to me, and wite he, that ai prophete is* in 
Israel. Therfor!' Naaman cam with horsis9 
and charis, and stood at the dore of the 
hows of Elisee. And Elisee sente to hym 10 
a messanger, and seide, Go thou™, and be 
thou waischun® seuensithis in Jordan; and 
thi fleisch shal resseyue helthe, and thou 
schalt be clensid®. Naaman was wrooth,11 
and 3ede awei, and seide, Y gesside, that 
he schulde? go% out to me, and that he 


eee prisoner 1. tOm.1. VYAnd scher. ® Wolde 
haath spoke 1. ¢ Naaman. @ Om. paix prem. 

&seeth 1. b Naamani. itherisar. k Om. 1. 
P wolde 1. 4 haue gon ik. 


V. 12—18. 


seyinge, I wende that he schulde goon 
oute to me, and stondynge schulde in- 
wardly clepen the name of his God, and 
touche with his hond the place of the 
i2lepre, and helen me. Whethir not beter 
ben Abana and Pharphar, the floodis of 
Damask, thanne alle the waters of Yrael, 
that I be waschen in hem, and be clens- 
isede? Whann thann he hadde turnyde 
hyimsilf, and goon aweye endeynynge, 
wenten to hym his seruauntis, and speken 
to hym, Fader, and 3if a grete thinge the 
prophete hadde seide to thee, certis thou 
owedist to done; myche more for nowe 
he seyde to thee, Be wasched, and thou 
14schalt be clansede. He wente doun, and 
wasche in Jordane seuen sithis, aftir the 
worde of the man of God; and the flesche 
of hym is restorid as the flesche of a litil 
ischyld, and he is clensed. And turned 
ajein to the man of God with alle his 
felawschip came, and stood before hym; 
and seith, Vereyly I woot, that ther is 
noon other God in all erth?, bot oonly 
the God of Yrael; also, I beseche, that 
thou take a blissynge of thi seruaunt. 
16And he answerde, The Lord lyueth be- 
fore whom I stonde, for J schal not taken. 
And whanne forsynge he made, vtturly 
17he assentyde not. And so Naaman seide, 
As thou wilt; bot, I beseche, graunte to 
me, thi seruaunt, that I take two bur- 
downs charge fro the lond; forsothe thi 
seruaunt schal no more make brent sacri- 
fice, or slayn sacrifice, to alyen goddis, bot 
18to the Lord. This forsothe oonly is, of 
the whiche thou preye the Lord for thi 
seruaunt, whanne my lord goth in to the 
temple of Remmon, that he honoure, and 
hym lenynge vpon myr hond, 3if I ho- 
noure in the temple of Remmon, he ho- 
nouryng in the saine place, that the Lord 
for3zeue to me, thi seruaunt, for this thing. 


IV. KINGS. 


249 


schulde™ stonde’, and clepet the name of 
‘the Lord" his God, and that he schulde 
touche’ with his hond the place of lepre”, 
and schulde cure* meY. Whether Abana 12 
and Pharphar, floodis’ of Damask, ben not 
betere than alle the watris of Israel, that 
Y be waischun in tho*, and be clensid ? 
Therfor whanne he hadde turned hym13 
silf, and 3ede* awei, hauynge indigna- 
cioun, hise seruauntis neiziden to hym, 
and spaken to hym, Fadir, thou3 the pro- 
phete hadde seid to thee a greet thing, 
certis thou owist? to do®; hon myche 
more for now he seide to thee, Be thou 
waischun, and thou sehalt be clensid. He 14 
3ede" doun, and waischide ym seuensithis 


in Jordan, bii the word of the man of God; fv", 
and his fleisch was restored as the fleisch pete 
of a litil child, and he was clensid. And Med a 
he turnede a3en with al his felouschipe to o the ‘ond, 
the man of God, and cam, and stood bifor ieee sik: 


cioun of Naa- 
man, thou3 he 
were not 

boundun ther- 


hym; and seide, Verili Y knowe, that noon 
other God is in al erthe, no but oneli God 

of Israel; therfor, Y biseche, that thou to, ant ie 
take blessyng*t of thi seruaunt. And he! i6an suver to 


answeride, The Lord lyueth bifor whom a hans ae 
Y stonde, for Y schal not take™ And coe 
whanne hé made ‘strengthe, that ts, greet ye oe 
preicr®, Elisee assentide not outirli. Ther-17 me - 


for® Naaman seide, As thou wolt; but, I ¢ surdones be 
biseche, graunte thou to me, thi seruaunt, _Destis gendrid 
that Y take of ‘the lond?{ the birthun’ of femal ase, as 


a mule is gen- 
drid ajenward 


twei burdonesj; for’ thi seruaunt schal 
of a mere and 


no more make brent sacrifice, éther slayn a male ase. 
sacrifice, to alien goddis, no but to the Wr wore 
Lord. Forsothe® this thing is‘ oneli, of 18 i ae 
which thou schalt preie the Lord for thi on; Elisee 


declaride, that 


seruaunt, whanne my lord shal entre into _ this was leeue- 


ful to him, and 
the temple of Remmon, that he wor- to worschipe 
: . God 
schipe", and while’ he ‘schal lene® on* Jer jee doon 
with out the 


myn hond, if Y worschipe in the temple 
of Remmon||, whileY he worschipith? in 
the same place, that the Lord for3yue to* 


temple of an 
ydol, as with 
ynue. Lire 
here. C. 


P the erthe £ pr. m. 


¥ wolde 1. 8 hane stonde 1. 
v haue touchid x, W the lepre x1. * hane curid 1. 
¢wente x. 4 ou3tist BCDEFGIKLMNOPQRSUWX¢. 


i aftir 1. 
© Thanne 1. 


h wente 1. 


therto 1. P this eerthe 1. 


t ynwardly haue clepid 1. shulde clepe n. 
Y me sot. 

e do it ern. 
k blessyng, that is, a 3ift 1. 
q charge 1. 


uOm. A pr.m. et plures. 
ahemi. » Naaman 1. 

& Thanue Naaman 1. 
n greet foors 
« worschipe 


2 the floodis 1. 
f more rather 1. 
™ take it of thee 1. 
8 Sothely 1. ¢ if is 1. 


1 Helizee 1. 
t forsothe 1. 


cee a Fi 
the ydolet, vOm.1. ¥ worschipinge lene 1. * upon1, yOm.1. % wurschipinge 1. * to me. 


VOL. II. 


Kk 


250 


19 The whiche seide to hym, Goo in pese. 
Thann he 3eede fro hym the chosen tyme 
200f the lond. And Giazi, the childe of the 
man of God, seide, My lord hath sparede 
to this Naaman Cyro, that he take not of 
hym that he brou3te; the Lord liueth, 
for I schal rennen aftir hym, and I schal 
21 taken of hym sumwhate. And Giazi fo- 
lowede aftir the bac of Naaman; whom 
whan he hade seen rennynge to hym, he 
‘leep doun’ of the chaar in to a3ein com- 
mynge of hym; and seith, Whether ri3t 
22ben alle thingis? And he seith, Rit; 
my lord sente me to thee, seyinge, Nowe 
ben commen to me two yonge men fro 
the hyll of Effraym, of the sonys of pro- 
phetes; 3eue to hem a talent of syluer, 
zsand double chaungynge clothis. And 
Naaman seyde, Beter it is that thou take 
two talentis. And he constreyned hym ; 
and he boond two talentis of syluer in 
two baggis, and double clothis, and putte 
to his two chylder, the whiche and bern 
24 before hym. And whanne he was com- 
myn nowe at euen, he tooke fro the hond 
of hem, and leyde up in the house; and 
he laft the men, and they wenten aweye. 
25 He forsothe goon in stode bifore his lord. 
And Helisee seyde, Whenns comyst thou, 
Giezi? The whiche answerde, Thi ser- 
26 uaunt 3eede not o whydre. And he seith, 
Whether myn hert was not in present, 
whanne the man turnede ajein fro his 
chaar in to a3ein commynge of thee? 
Nowe thanne thou hast taken syluer, 
and taken clothes, that thou bye olyuis, 
and vinis, and scheep, and oxen, and ser- 
27 uauntis, and hond wymmen ; bot and the 
leepre of Naaman schal cleue to thee, 
and to thi seede in to evermore. And 
he wente out from hymn mesell as snowe. 


IV. KINGS. 


Vv. 190—27. 


thi. seruaunt for this thing. Which Elisee 19 
seide to hym, Go thou in pees. ‘Therfor 
he® 3ede fro Elisee in a chosun tyme of 
the lond. And Giezi, the child of the20 
man of God, seide’, My lord sparide® this 
Naamanf of Syrie, that he took not of 
hym that, that he broujte; the Lord 
lyueth, for Y schal renne aftir hym, and 
Y schal take of hym sum thing. And21 
Giezi suede aftir the bak of Naaman; 
and whanne Naaman hadde seyn Giezi 
rennynge to hym, he skippide doun’ of 
the chare in to the metyng of Giezi; and 
seide, Whether alle thingis ben ri3tfuli® ? 
Andi he seide, Ri3tfuli*; my lord sente me 22 
to thee, and seide, wey 3onge men of the 
hille of Effraym, of the sones of prophetis, 
camen now to me; 3yue thou to hem a 
talent of siluer, and double chaungyng 
clothis. And Naaman seide, It is betere 23 
that thou take twei talentis}. And Naa- 
man constreynede hym; and Naaman 
boond twei! talentis of siluer in twei 
sackis™, and double" clothis, and puttide® 
on? his twey children, ‘that is, ser- 
uauntis’, whiche’ also baren’ bifor Giezi. 
And whanne he* hadde come thanne in 24 
the euentid, he took fro the hond of hem, 
and leide" vp in the hows; and he dely- 
uerede the men, and thei 3eden’. For-25 
sothe* Giezi entride, and stood bifor his 
lord. And Elise seide, Giezi, fro whennus 
comest thou? Which* answeride, Thi ser- 
uaunt 3ede not to ony place. And Elise 26 
seide, Whether myn herte was not inY pre- 
sent’, whanne the man turnede a3en fro 
his chare in to the metyng of thee? Now 
therfor thou hast take siluer, and thou 
hast take clothis, that thou bie* places of > 
olyues, and vyneris, and scheep, and oxis°, 
and seruauntis, and handmaydis®; but also 27 
the lepre of Naaman schal cleue to thee, 
and to thi seed withouten ende. And Giezi 
jede® leprouse as snow, ‘fro hym*. 


4 stood doun stille z pr.m. wente doun stille £ sec. vice. leep doun £ tertia vice. 


b Andi. ¢ And so Naaman 1. 
ful 1. doon riztfuli x sec. m. i Om. 1. 
double r. ° he putte r. P tho upon 1. 
t took it1. ™leide iti. Vv 3eden forth 1. 
presence ELP. 8 bie ¢hermith1. » and 1. 


4d seide in his herte 1. 
k Thei ben rizt riztfuli 1. 
90m. 1. 

w And thanne 1. 
© oxen 1, 


& adoun r. 
\thetwor. ™baggis1. ™ the 
t the whiche 1. Sharen itt. 88 Giezy 1. 
x The which 1. yOm.1. 2 present there 1. 
4 handmaydens 1. ¢ 3ede out fro him 1. fOm.1. 


© hath sparid1. £ man1. 


h rizt- 


+ it is betere 
that thou take 
twei talentis ; 
in Ebreu it is 
thus, swere 
thou, and take 
thou twey ta- 
lentis, swere 
thou, that is, 
Elisee sente 
thee, and bi 
this he dide 
periurie. Lire 
here. c. 


VI. I—I2. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Seyden forsothe the sonys of prophetis 
to’ Helisee, Loo! the place in the whiche 
we dwellen before thee, is streyt to us; 

2goo we vnto Jordan, and taken eche fro 
the wood sundrye matteers, that we 

 beelden to us there a place to dwellen. 
3The whiche seide, Gooth. And oon of 
hem seith, Comme thanne and thou with 
thi seruauntis. He answerde, I schal 
4commen. And he wente with hem. And 
whanne thei weren commen to Jordan, 
sthey hewen treese. It fell forsothe, that 
whanne oon had hewen a mateer, felle 
the yren of the axe in to the watir; and 
he criede oute, and seith, Allas! allas! 
allas! my lord, and that same I tooke of 
s6borowynge. Forsothe the man of God 
seyde, Where felle it? And he schewyde 
to hym the place. Thanne he hewede of 
a tree, and putte thidir; and the yren 
zswam. And he saith, Take. The whiche 
gstrau3t out the hoond, and took it. The 
kyng forsothe of Cyrye fau3te a3eynst 
Yrael; and wente in counseil with his 
seruauntis, seilynge, In this place and 
9that sette we buschementis. And so the 
man of God sente to the kynge of Yrael, 
seyinge, Be war, lest thou passe to that 
place, for ther ben Cyris in busche- 
iomentis. And so the kyng of Yrael sente 
to that place, ‘the whiche™ the man of 
God hade spoken to hym, and he before 
occupiede it, and he weytyde hym there 
llnot oonys, ne twyes. And the herte of 
the kyng of Cyrye is distourbled for 
this thing; and, the seruauntis clepid to 
gydre, seith, Whi han 3e not schewed to 
me, who be my traitour anentis the kyng 
120f Yrael? And oon of the seruauntis of 
hym seyde, Nay, my lord kyng, bot 
Helisee, the prophete, that is in Yrael, 


r that c. 


& Sothely 1. } noyous 1. 
therint. ° And 1. 
mode 1. ¥ Lord God Ga. 
athou i1. > The which 1. 
bifor 1. b twies, but eft 1. 


i we therfore 1. 


w Helizee 1. 
¢ Om. 1. 
1Om.. & that 1. 


jto1 
Pcome thou also 1. GAndthannet. ‘cameni. *Andr. ta manofhem1. “mater or 

x sente id I. 
din that 1. 


IV. KINGS. 951 


CAVPONVI: 


Forsothe® the sones of prophetis seiden i 
to Elisee, Lo! the place in which we 
dwellen bifor thee, is strei3t" to vs; goe 
we! ‘til toj Jordan, and ech man take* of 
the! wode ‘a mater™{ for hym silf, that ” 
we bild to vs here a place to dwelle®. md ea rater 
Which? Elisee seide, Go 3e. And oon of3 (init vir 
hem seide, Therfor ‘and thou come? with “r¢: © 
thi seruauntis. He answeride, Y schal 
come. And‘ he 3ede with hem. Andi 
whanne thei ‘hadden come’ to Jordan, thei 
hewiden trees. Sotheli® it bifelde, thats 
whanne ‘o mant hadde kit doun mater", 
the yrun of the axe felde in to the watir ; 
and he criede, and seide, Alas! alas! alas! 
my lord’, and Y hadde take this same 
thing bi borewing. Sotheli the man of God ¢ 
seide, Where felde it? And he schewide 
to hym the place. Therfor he kittide 
doun a tree, and sente* thidurY; and the 
yrun fletide. And he? seide, Take thou*.7 
Which? helde forth the hond, and took it. 
Forsothe the® kyng of Syrie fau3te a3enss 
Israel; and he took counseil with hise 
seruauntis, and seide, Sette we busche- 
mentis in this place and that’. Therfor®s 
the man of God sente to the kyng of 
Israel, and seide, Be war, lest thou passe 
to that place, for men of Sirie ben there 
in buschementis. Therfor the kyng of 10 
Israel sente to the place, which’ the man 
of God hadde seid to him, and bifor® ocu- 
piede{ it, and kepte hym silf there not 


+t a mater; 


t bifor oceupi- 


de ; in taki 
onys, nether twiesbj. And the herte of 11 the ne 
the kyng of Sirie was disturblid for this 7270. ¢. sg 


§ nether twies ; 


thing; and whanne hise seruauntis weren Joa stonde 
thon onely but 


clepide togidere, he seide, Whi schewen 3e thon mely but 
not to me, who is my tretour anentis the c. 

kyng of Israel? And oon of hise ser-12 

uauntis seide, Nay, my lord the! kyng, 

but Elisee, the prophete, which* is in 


8 be B. 


k take a porsion1. 'Om.1. ™Om.1. ® dwelle 


y thidur where the iren wasi. 7 Helizee 1. 


e And therfor a. fthat1. & the hing of Israel 


Kk2 


252 


schewith to the kyng alle wordis, what- 
euer thou hast spoken in thy priue 
i3chaumbre. And he seyde to hym, Gooth, 
and seeth, wher he be, that I sende, and 
take hym. And thei tolden to hym, sey- 
l4inge, Loo! in Dotaym he dwellith. And 
he sente thidre hors, and chaaris, and 
the strengthe of the oost; the whiche, 
when thei weren commen at ny3t, they 
Isenuyrounden the cyte. The seruaunt 
forsothe of the man of God rysynge erly 
wente oute, and he sawe the hoost in 
enuyroun of the cyte, and hors, and 
chaaris. And he tolde to hym, seyinge, 
Allas! allas! allas! my lord, what schal 
is6we done? And he answerde, Wylle thou 
not dreede ; forsothe mo ben with us than 
17with hem. And whanne Helise hade 
preyede, he seith, Lurd, opyn the eejen 
of this chylde, that he see. And the 
Lord opnede the eezen of the chijld, and 
he saw3. And loo! an hyll ful of hors, 
and of fyren chaaris, in enuyroun of He- 
islisee. Forsothe the enmyes camen doun 
to hym ; bot Helisee preyede to the Lord, 
seyinge, Smyit, I beseche, this fole with 
blyndnesse. And the Lord smoot hem, 
lest thei seejen, after the worde of Helisee. 
19 Forsothe Helisee seyde to hem, This is 
not the weye, ne this is not‘ the cyte; 
folowith me, and I schal schewe to 30u 
the man, whom 3e" seeken. And he ladde 
2hem in to Samarye. And whan thei 
weren commen in to Samarie, Helisee 
seyde, Lord, opne the ee3jen of these, that 
thei seen. And the Lord opnede the ee3en 
of bem, and thei seen hem selfen to ben 
21in the mydill of Samarye. And the kynge 
of Yrael seide to Helisee, whanne he 
hadde seen hem, Whether I schal smyten 
22hem, fader myne? And he seith, Thou 
schalt not smyten hem, ne forsoth thou 
hast taken hem with swerde’, and with 
thi bowe, that thou smyte; bot putte 


1 Om. cz. 


IV. KINGS. 


u thou E pr.v. 3ee sec. v. 


VI. 13—22. 


Israel, schewith to the kyng of Israel alle 
thingis, what euer thingis thou spekist in 
thi closet. And the kyng seide to hem, 13 
‘Go 3e!, and se™, where he is, that Y sende, 
and take hym. And thei telden to him, 
and seiden, Lo! he dwellith in Dothaym. 
And the kyng sente thidur horsis, and 14 
charis, and the strengthe of the oost; 
whiche", whanne thei hadden come bi 
ny3t, cumpassiden the citee. Sotheli the1s 
mynystre of the man of God roos eerli, 
and 3ede out, and he si3 an oost in the 
cumpas of the citee, and horsis, and charis. 
And he telde to the man of God, and 
seide, Alas! alas! alas! my lord, what 
schulen we do? And he® answeride, Nile 16 
thou drede; for? mo ben with vs than 
with hem. And whanne Elisee hadde17 
preied, he seide, Lord, opene thou the 


izent of this child, that he se. And the } opm ee 
Lord openyde the izen of the? child, and" oe is, syne 
. ° ° thou 
he si3. And, lo! the hil’ ful of horsis, vert oll 
thingis, that 


and of charis of fier, in the cumpas of  jroun vot be 


Elisee. Sothelit the enemyes camen doun 1 $Y" of him bi 
ynde. Lire 


to hym; forsothe" Elisee preiede to the “ere. c. 
Lord, and seide, Y biseche’, smyte thou” 

this fole with blyndenesset. And” the + dyndnesse 
Lord smoot hem, that thei sien not, bi the pees 


; : t di 
word of Elisee. Forsothe Elisee seide to 19 cioun, ether 


hem, This is not the weie, nether this is* ‘2°vings and 
the citeeY ; sue 3e me, and Y schal schewe es Kao 
to” 30u the man, whom 3e seken. And he  Loth, weren_ 
ledde hem into Samarie. And whanne2oono. rs 
thei hadden entrid into Samarie, Elisee ”** 
seide, Lord, opene thou* the iz3en of these 

men, that thei seeb, And the Lord open- 

yde her izen, and thei sijen, that thei 

weren in the’ myddis of Samarie. And21 

the kyng of Israel, whanne he hadde seyn 

hem, seide to Elisee, My fadir, whether 

Y schal smyte hem? And he seide, Thou 22 

schalt not smyte hem, for thou hast not 

take hem bi thi? swerd and bouwe, that 

thou smyte hem; but sette thou breed 


Sodomytis that 


v the swerde £. 


1Goth 1. ™se3e1. the whicher. © Helizee1. Pforsothe1r. 4thiscpEmpb. and thanne 1. 
S hil appeeride 1. tAnd1. buts. vYbiseche thee 1. *¥Om.1. WW And thannet. *is not EL. ¥ citee 
where Helizee dwellith:. 2Om.1. 2 Om.1. >see nomi. ©Om.1. 4 Om.1. thes. 


VI. 23-—32. 


brede and watir before hem, that thei 
eten and drynken, and goon to their lord. 
23 And there is putte to hem grete greith- 
inge of metis ; and thei eeten, and drunk- 
‘en. And he laft hem, and thei wenten 
to their lord; and no more camen the 
theeuis of Cyrye in to the lond of Yrael. 
21It is done forsothe aftir these thingis, 
Benadab, kyng of Cyrye, gaderde alle 
his hoost, and stey3ede vp, and beseegyde 
25Samarye. And there is maad grete hun- 
gre in Samarye; and so long it is be- 
seegide”, to the tyme that the heued of 
an asse were sold for foure scoor* platis 
of syluer, and the ferth parte of a me- 
sure of the dryt of culuers for fyue 
26 platis of syluer. And whanne the kyng 
of Yrae] passed by the wall, a maner 
womman criede to hym, seiynge, Saue 
27me, my lord kyng. The whiche seith, 
Nay, saue thee the Lord; wherof may 
I sane thee? of the corn flore, or of the 
presse? And the kyng seide to hire, 
What wylt thon to thee? The whiche 
28answerde, Thys womman seide to me, 
3eue thi sone, that we eten hym to day ; : 
and my sone we schal eten to morwe. 
29 Thanne we seetheden my sone, and eeten. 
And I seide to hire the tother day, 3eue 
thi sone, that we eten hym; the which 
30 hyde hyre sone. The which thing whanne 
the kyng hade herde, he kutt his clothis, 
and passede by the wall; and alle the 
puple sawe an hayre, with whicheY the 
kyng was clothid’ at the flesch with in 
31forthe. And the kynge seith, Thes 
thingis do to me God, and thes thingis 
adde, 3if the hened of Helisee, the sone 
of Saphath, schulde stonden vpon hym 
32to day. Helisee forsothe satt in his hous, 
and olde men seeten with hym; and so 
he sente beforn a man, and er the mes- 
sager came, he seide to the old men, 
Whether 3e knowen, that the sone of a 


W to be seegide z. 


f myche greything r. 
citeer, “aim. !Om.1. ™The which 1. 
@ passide forth thens 1. 7 that 1. 
the kyng 1. ¥ man to Helizee 1. 


© lord a3en 1. 


x hundrid £ pr. v. score sec. v. 


& Israel in the daies of Helizee 1. 
n And eft 1. 
8 clothid with 1. 
x Benadab the 1. 


IV. KINGS. 253 


and watir bifor hem, that thei ete and 

drynke, and go to her lord*. And ‘greet 2s 
makyng redif of metis was set forth to 

hem; and thei eten, and drunken. And 

the kyng lefte hem, and thei 3eden to her 

lord; and theues of Sirie camen no more 

in to the lond of Israel®. Forsothe it wases 

don after these thingis, Benadab, king of 

Sirie, gaderide alle his oost, and stiede?, 

and bisegide Samarie. And greet hungur es 

was maad in Samarie; and so long it was 

bisegid, til the heed of an asse were seeld 

for fourescore platis of silner, and the 

fourthe part of a mesure clepid cabus of 

the crawet of culueris was seeld for fyne 

platis of siluer. And whanne the kyng of 26 oie prea 
Israel passide bi the wal’, sum* womman (uperss but 


t erawe; in 


drit is not 
criede to hym, and seide, My lord the! a et 
kyng, saue thou me. Which™ seide, Nai, 27 vnpropirly for 
the Lord saue thee; wherof may Y saue ee 
thee? of cornfloor, ethir of pressour? And® tater 


derid, and cokis 


the kyng seide to hir, What wolt thou to “& 
0 riche men 
thee? And sche answeride, This womiman 28 Hen these 


cornes to the 
seide to me, 3yue thi sone, that we ete _ peple, for hun. 


hym to dai, and we schulen ete my sone ae eae: 
to morewe. Therfor we setheden my sone, 29 
and eten Aim?. And Y seide to hir in?? the 
tother day, 3yne thi sone, that we ete 
hym; and she hidde hir sone. And30 - 
whanue the kyng hadde herd this, he 
to-rente hise clothis, and passide4 bi the 
wal; and al the puple si3 the heire, ‘with 
which’ the kyng was clothid® at thet 

fleisch with ynne. And the kyng seide, 31 hale oe 


Lif the heed of 
Elisee; the 


EL for he 

God do to me these thingis, and adde these siden wey 
: ” : . it bi hi * 
thingis", if the heed of Elise, sone" of one pee 


So- 32 kyng hilde the 
preyeris of Eli. 
see spedeful, 
ether my3tier 
anentis God, to 
gete this; ne- 


Saphat, schal stonde on hym to dai. 
theli Elisee sat in his hows, and elde men 
saten with hym; ‘therfor he’ biforsente a 


man”, and bifor that thilke messanger  thetes Elise 
, ° .  abood herto 
cam, Elisee seide to the elde men, Whe-  * 0" iv" 


tyme, bi the 
ordenaunce of 
Goddis wille, 
which he knew 
bi the Hooly 
Goost. Lire 
here. c. 


ther 3e witen, that the* sone of manquel- 
lereY sente? hidur, that myn heed be gird 
of? Therfor se 3e, whanne the messanger 


ythe whiche x prim. ? clad c. 


i wal of the 
PP in to o. 
¥ thanne 


h stiede up 1. 

P Om. plures. 
a the sone I. 
2 hath sent 1. 


v that I do to 1. 
thisr. ¢t thingis to 1. 
y Achab a manquellere 1. 


254 


man sleere hath sente hithir, that myn 
heued be gyrd off? See3ith than, whanne 
the messager commith, closeth the dore, 
and suffreth hym not to commen in; lo! 
forsothe the soun of the feet of his lord 

33is bihynde hym. And 3it hym spekynge 
to hem,apeeride the messager, that came 
to hym; and seith, Loo! so myche yuel 
of the Lord is; what more schal I abyden 
of the Lord ? 


CAP. VII. 


1 Helisee forsothe seide, Here 3e the 
word of the Lord; these thingis seith 
the Lord, In this tyme to morwe a 
buschell of tryid floure schal be at ‘half 
an ounce of monee*, and two buschels of 
barly for half an ounce of monee, in the 
23ate of Samarye. Answerynge forsothe 
oon of the duykis, vpon whose hond the 
kyng lenyde, to the man of God, seide, 
3if the Lord make also the goters in 
heuen to be opnyde, whether it schal 
mow ben that thou spekist ? The whiche 
seith, Thou schalt seen with thin ee3en, 
3and therof thou schalt not eten. Than 
foure leprouse nien weren byside the en- 
tree of the 3ate, the whiche seyden to 
gydre, What wil we be here, to the tyme 
4that we dyen? Whether we wyln goon 
in to the cyte, by hungre we schul dyen; 
whethir we schuln dwellen here, to dyen 
it is to us. Commith thann, and fleeje 
we ouer to the tentis of Cyrie; 3if thei 
sparen to us, we schul lyuen; ‘3if for- 
sothe’ thei wiln slen, neuer the later we 
sschul dyen. Thanne they rysen at euen, 
that thei comen to the tentis of Cirie; 
and whanne thei weren commen to the 
bigynnynge of the tentis of Cyrye, no 
6man there thei founden. Forsothe the 
Lord hadde made® to heren a soun in 
the tentis of Cyrye of charis, and of hors, 


4 thre schillyngis E pr. m. 


agchette 1. > suffreth 1. 
€ be soold 1.  stater, that is, v. pens 1 marg. 
also perkKLMPSxbe. k Andi, ™seit1 
q7Om.ELY. ‘tentis1. ‘sle us 1. 
for hungre1. ¥ Thanne 1. 
> men of Sirie 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


» for 3if a. 


© hym to lette that dede 1. 
& buschel 1. 
0 citees gate I. 

t neuerthelesse pcpGKMNoQRsUWxbe. nertheles ELP. 
W resin ELP. resen up I. 


VI. 33—VII. 6. 


cometh, close* 3e the dore, and ‘suffre 3e” 

not hym to entre; for, lo! the sown of 

the ee his lord} is bihynde hym*. ue 

And 3it ‘while he spak4 to hem, the mes-33 aftir the going 
. of the messan- 

sanger that cam to hym apperide; and the ger, Joram re- 

kyng seide, Lo! so greet yuel is of the 


pentide, and 
therfor he 
Lord; sotheli what more schal Y abide 


suede the mes- 
sanger to ajen 


of the Lord ? clepe the co- 
maundement. 
Lire here. c. 

CAP. VII. 
Forsothe Elisee seide, Here 3e the word 1 

of the Lord; the Lord seith these thingis, 

In this tyme to morewe a buschel of flour 

schal be*{ for a stater‘, and twei buschels& + sehal be ; 


that is, schal 


of barli for a stater, in the 3ate of Samarie. te jounn. Lire 


And oon of the duykis, oni whos hond2 “© 

the kyng lenyde, answeride to the man of 

God, and seide, Thou3 ‘also the Lord makej 

the goteris of heuene to be openyd, whe- 

ther that, that thou spekist, mai be?  § may te; as if 
Which* Elisee seide, Thou schalt se™ with 4,5 may- 


thin izen, and thou schalt not ete therof. 
Therfor foure leprouse men weren bisidis3 
the entryng of the 3ate", whiche® seiden 
togidere, What wolen we be here, til we 
dien ? Whether we? wolen entre in to the4 
citee, we schulen die for hungur; whether 
we dwellen? here, we schulen die. Ther- 
for come 3e, and fle we ouer to%4 the cas- 
tels' of Sirie; if thei schulen spare vs, we 
schulen lyne; sotheli if thei wolen sle’, 
nethelest we schulen die". Therfor’ theis 
risiden*® in the euentide to come to the 
castels* of Sirie; and whanne thei hadden . 
come to the bigynnyng of the castels’ of 
Sirie, thei founden not ony man there. 
Forsothe the Lord hadde maad a sown of6 
charis, and of horsis, and of ful? myche 
oost to be herd in the eastels? of Sirie; 
and thei® seiden togidere, Lo! the kyng 
of Israel hath hirid bi meede a3ens vs the 


Cmade hem 4. 4 suchac. 


4 whanne he spak s. Helizee spekinge thus 1. 
hOm.s. ‘iuponr. J the Lord make 
othe whiche 1. Pthat wer. 4 abiden 1. 
u die ellis 
Zafulr. 4 tentis 3. 


Xtentis 1. Y tentis 1. 


VII. 7-——13 


and of a® mych hoost; and thei seyden 
to gydre, Loo! by meede the kyng of 
Yrael hath hyred ajeynst us the kyngis 
of Etheis and of Egipciens; and thei 
7 ben commen vpon us. Thanne thei risen, 
and flowen in dercnessis, and laften their 
tentis, and hors, and mulis, and asses, in 
the tentis; and thei flowen, their lyuis 
8 oonly coueitynge to sauen. Thann whanne 
thoof mesels weren cominen to the bigyn- 
nynge of the tentis, thei wenten in to 
oon tabernacle, and eten, and drunken; 
and token thenns syluer, and gold, and 
clothis; and thei wenten aweye, and 
hydden; and eft thei ben turned a3eyn 
to another tabernacle, and thenns lyc 
g9maner beerynge aweye, hydden. And 
they seyden to gidir, We do not ri3t, this 
is forsothe a day of good message; 3if 
we holden oure pese, and wyln not tellen 
vnto the morowe, we schul be vndernum- 
men of hydous gylt; commith, and goo 
we, and tellen in the halle of the kyng. 
io And whanne thei weren commen to the 
jate of the cytee, thei tolden to hem, 
seyinge, We wenten to the tentis of Sy- 
rie, and no man ther we founden, bot 
hors and assis bounden, and the pi3t 
iltentis. Thanne the porteris 3eden, and 
tolden in the paleys of the kyng with- 
12inne forth. The whiche rose at ny3t, 
and seith to his seruauntis, I sey to 3o0u, 
what to us Cyryes han done; thei wyten, 
for? with hungre we traueylen, and ther- 
fore they ben goon oute of the tentis, and 
lurken in the feeldis, seyinge, Whanne 
thei weren goon oute of the cyte, we 
schuln taken hem on lyue, and thann we 
13schuln mowe goon in to the cytee. For- 
soth oon of his seruauntis answerde, 
Take we the fyue hors, that ben laft in 
the cytee; for thei oonly ben in alle the 
multitude of Yrael, the tother forsothe 
ben wastyde; and seendynge we schuln 


e Om. E pr.m. 


¢king £. 4camen sodeynly 1. © upont. 
iher horsis 1. jor tentis 1 marg. Kat. 
noti. @inalr. Ttelle #1. & kingis halle 1. 
ther. Wroosup1. *han gor. Yhert 
sendynge 1. © tentis1. {the men 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


f thoo ilke £ pr.m. 


f resin ELP. resen up I. 
1 wenten 1. 
ss Om. 1. 
z men of Israel 1. 
& se if thet ben go. 


255 


kyngis* of Etheis and of Egipcians; and 
thei camen? on® vs. Therfor thei risiden',7 
and fledden® in derknessis*, and leften 
her tentis, and horsis', and mulis, and 
assis, in the castels; and thei fledden, 
couetynge to saue her lyues oonli. Ther-« 
for whanne thilke leprouse men hadden 
come to the bigynnyng of the castelsi, thei 
entriden into o* tabernacle, and eetun, 
and drunken; and thei token fro thennus 
siluer, and gold, and clothis; and 3eden!, 
and hidden™; and eft thei turneden a3en 
to anothir tabernacle, and in lijk maner 
thei token awei fro thennus, and hidden. 
And thei seiden togidere, We doen not9 
riztfuli, for" this is a dai of good message ; 
if we holden® stille, and nylen? telle til4 
the morewtid, we schulen be repreued of 
trespassyng ; come 3e, go we, and telle™ in 
the ‘halle of the kyng*. And whanne thei1o 
hadden come to the 3ate of the citee, thei 
telden to hem, and seiden, We 3eden to 
the castels of Sirie, and we founden not 
ony man there, no but horsis and assis 
tied, and tentis fastned. Therfort the por-11 
teris 3eden, and telden" in the paleis of 
the kyng with ynne. Which’ king roos” 12 
bi ni3t, and seide to hise seruauntis, Y seie 
to 30u, what the men of Sirie han do to 
vs; thei witen, that we trauelen with 
hungur, therfor thei 3eden* out of the» 
castels, and ben hid in the feeldis, and 
seien, Whanne thei” schulen go out of the 
citee, we schulen take hem quyk, and 
thanne we schulen mowe entre in to the 
citee. Forsothe* oon of his seruauntis an-13 
sweride, Take we fyue horsis, that leften 
in the citee; for tho ben? oonli in al the 
multitude of Israel, for othere orsis® 
ben wastid; and we sendynge’ moun 
aspie. Therfor thei brou3ten forth twei!4 
horsis; and the kyng sente in to the cas- 
tels® of menf of Sirie, and seide, Go 3e, 
and se. Whiche" 3eden after hem ‘til to!!s 


8 therfor E pr. m. 


& fledden awey 1. 4 dernesse L. 
ncertis 1. © holden if 1. P woln 
t And sox. 4 telden these thingis 1. VY And 

a Andi. » ben deft1. ©Om.1. 4 thus 
h The whiche 1. i vnto 1. 


m hidden té 1. 


256 


l4mowe aspyen. Thanne thei brou3ten 
forthe two hors; and the kyng sente in 
to the tentis of Cyries, seyinge, Goth, 
isand seeth. The whiche wenten aftre 
hem vnto Jordan; and, lo! al the wey 
was ful of clothis, and of} vesselis, that 
the Cyryes hadden throwen aweye, 
whanne thei weren distourblid. And the 
messagers turnede ajeyn, scheweden to 
16the kyng. And the puple goon oute, to- 
brast the tentis of Cyrye; and a buschel 
of floure is maad at ‘half an ounce of 
monee’, and two buschels of barly for 
half an ounce of monee, aftir the word 
170f the Lord. Forsothe the kynge that 
duyk, in whose hond he hade lenyd, he 
sett at the 3ate; whom the puple alto- 
trade in the entre of the 3ate, and is 
deed, aftir that, that the man of God hadde 
spoken, whanne the kyng came doun to 
ishym. And it is done aftir the word of 
the man of God, the whiche he hade 
seide to the kyng, whanne he seith, Two 
buschels of barly schuln ben at one half 
ounce of monee, and oon buschell of 
flour for oon half ounce of monee, this 
same tyme to morwe in the 3ate of Sa- 
igmarie; whanne the* duyk hadde an- 
swerde to the man of God, and hadde 
seyde, Also 3if the Lord make the goters 
in heuen to be opnede, whether it schal 
mow! be done that thou spekist? and he 
seid, Thou schalt seen with thin ee3en, 
20and therof thou schalt not eten. Thanne 
it felle to hym, as it was seyde beforn; 
and the puple to-trade him ‘in the 3ate™, 
and he is deed”. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Helisee forsothe® spac to the womman, 
whose sone he made to lyue, seyinge, 
Rijs, goo, and thou and thin hous, in pil- 
grymage, wherever thou schalt fynde; 
the Lord forsothe schal clepen hungre, 


hOm. 3. ithre schillyngis z pr.m.  * that cr. 


© Om. E pr.m. 


IV. KINGS. 


VI. 14-—VIII. 1. 


Jordan; lo! forsothe al the weie was ful 
of clothis, and of vessels, whiche the men 
of Sirie castiden forth, whanne thei weren 
disturblid. And the messangeris turneden 
ajen, and schewiden* to the kyng. And 16 
the puple 3ede out, and rauyschide the 
castels of Sirie; and a buyschel of flour! 
was maad™ for o®” statert, and twei 
buyschels of barli for o® stater, bi® the 
word of the Lord. Forsothe? the kyng17 
ordeynede at the 3ate4 that duyk, in whos 
hond the kyng lenyde; whom the cum- 
peny to-trad with her" feet, and he was 
deed, bi the word, which* the man of God 
spak, whanne the kyng cam doun to hym. 
And it was doon' bi the word of the man is 
of God, which" he seide to the kyng, 
whanne he seide, T'wei buyschels of barli 
shulen be’ for a¥ statir, and a buyschel 
of wheete* flour for a® stater, in thisY 
same tyme to morewe in the 3ate of Sa- 
marie; whanne thilke duyk answeride to is 
the man of God, and seide, 3he, thou3 the 
Lord scha] make the goteris in heuene to 
be openyd, whether this that thou spekist 
may be? and the man of God seide, Thou 
schalt se? with thin izen, and thou schalt 
not ete therof. Therfore it bifelde to hym, 20 
as it was biforseid; and the puple to-trad 
hym with feet* in the 3ate, and he was 
deed. 


t ether oon 
half ounce of 
money. X. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe Elisee spak to the womman, 1 
whose sone he made to lyue, and he? seide, 
Rise thou, and go, bothe thou and thin 
hows, and ‘go in® pilgrimage, where euer 
thou schalt fynde’; for the Lord schal 
1 deed in the 3ate cz. 


‘not 4. ™ Om. cE pr.m. 


* schewiden it 1. tried flour1. ™maad sold1. ar. Oaftir1. pPCertis1. 4 3ate of the citee 1. 
* Om. BcDEFGIKLMNopRsxbg. *thati. tdoonsor. that1. ‘be sooldi. Wo plures, * tried 
wheete 1. Ythec. %seitt. her feet1. >bOm.1. ¢maker. 4 fynde it best 1. 


VIII. 210. 


and it schal commen vpon the lond seuen 


23eer.. The whiche rose, and dyde aftir 
the word of the man of God; and goo- 


ynge with hyre hous pylgrymagid in. 


3the lond of Phylisteis many dayes. And 
whanne seuen 3eer weren fynyschid, the 
womman is.turnede a3ein fro the lond 
of Philisteis; and sche wente oute, that 
sche preye the kyng for hyre hous, and 
4for hir feeldis. The kynge forsothe spak 
with Giezi, the chijld of the man of God, 
seyinge, Telle to me alle the grete thingis 
sthat Helisee dide. And whanne he tolde 
to the kynge, what maner wijse he hade 
rered the deed, the womman apeeride, 
whose sone he hade quyckenede, criynge 
to the kyng for hyre hous, and for hyre 
feeldis. And Giezi seide, My lord kyng, 
this is the womman, and this is the sone 
eof hyre, that Helisee rerede. And the 
kynge askyde the womman, the whiche 
tolde to hym tho thingis to be soth. And 
the kyng 3aue to hyre an geldynge, sei- 
ynge, Restore to hyre alle thingis that 
ben hyres, and alle the rentes of feeldis, 
fro the day that sche laft the lond vnto 
7the tyme that is nowe. Forsothe He- 
lisee cam to Damask, and Benadab, kyng 


of Cyrye, wexe seeke; and thei tolden * 


to hym, seyinge, The man of God is com- 
men hydre. And the kyng seith to Asael, 
Take with thee 3iftis, and goo in to a3ein 
-commynge of the man of God, and coun- 
seyle by hym the Lord, seyinge, 3if I 
schal mow ascapen of this myn enfir- 
g9myte? Than? Asael wente in to a3ein 
commynge of hym, hauynge with hym 
3iftis, and alle the4 goodis of Damaske, 
fourty chamel’ chaargis. And whanne he 
hade stonden before hym, seith, Thi sone, 
Benadab, kyng of Syrie, sente me to thee, 
seyinge, 3if I schal mowe be heelid of 
iothis myn enfirmyte? And Helisee seide, 
Goo, seye tohym, Thou schalt ben hoole ; 


P And than a sec. m. 


€uponr fOm.1.  & aftir1. 
kAnd1. IJthechild1, ™that1. % Om. 1. 
the amux pr.m. & vnto this 1. til into this kK. 
wofthe rLp. W my sikenesse 1. * 3ede forth 1. 


VOL. II. 


IV. KINGS. 


q Om. B. 


h pilgrimage or fro hoome 1. 

° saf or assignyde 1. 
t the kyng 1. 
y Helizee 1. 


257 


clepe hungur, and it schal come on* the 
lond bif seuene 3eer.°. And sche roos, and2 
dide bis the word of the man of God; and 
sche 3ede with hir hows, and was in pil-. 
grimage" in the lond of Philistym' many 
daies. And whanne seuene 3eer weren3 
endid, the womman turnede a3en fro the 
lond of Philisteis; and sche 3ede out, to 
axe the kyng for her hows, and hirj 
feeldis. Sothelik the kyng spak witha 
Giezi, child! of the man of God, and 
seide, Telle thou to me alle the grete 
dedis whiche™ Elisee dide. And whannes 
he telde to the kyng, hou Elisee. hadde 
reiside a deed man, the womman apperide, 
whos sone he hadde maad to lyue, and 
sche criede to the kyng for hir hows, and 
for hir feeldis. And Giesi seide, My lord 
the" king, this is the womman, and this 
is hir sone, whom Elisee reiside. Andsc 
the kyng axide the womman, and sche 
tolde to hym, that the thingis weren 
sothe. And the kyng 3af° to hir oP? 
chaumburleyn, and seide, Restore thou 
toPP hir alle thingis that ben hern4, and 
alle fruytis of the feeldis, fro the dai in 
which she’ left the lond ‘til to’ present 
tyme. Also Elisee cam to Damask, and7 
Benadab, kyng*t of Sirie, was sijk; and 
thei" telden to hym, and seiden, The man 
of God cam hidur. And the kyng seides 
to Azael, Take with thee 3iftis, and go 
thou in to the meetyng of the man of 
God, and ‘counsele thou’ bi hym .the’Y 
Lord, and seie thou, Whether Y may 
ascape fro this ‘sikenesse of me” ? Therfor9 
Azael 3ede* in to the meetyng of hym’, 
and hadde with hym silf? 3iftis, and alle 
the goodis of Damask, the burthuns of 
fourti camels. And whanne he _ hadde 
stonde bifor Elisee, he seide, Thi sone, 
Benadab, kyng of Sirie, sente me to thee, 
and seide, Whether Y may be helid of this 
‘sikenesse of me*? And Elisee seide, Go 10 


r chamels a. 


i Philistees 1. J Om. s. sec. m. 

Par. PpPOm.xk. 4 herst. 

umeniz. Vaxe thou counsel ELP. 
zOm.1s. 4 my sikenesse r. 


L] 


258 


bot the Lord hath schewide to me for by 
uideth he schal dye. And he stode with 
hym, and is distourbled, vnto the sched- 
ynge doun of the cheere; and the man 
120f:God wepte. To whom Asael seith, 
Why: my lord weepith? And he an- 
swerde, For I wote what thou be to doo 
to the sonis of Yrael euyls; the strength- 
ide cytees of hem thou schalt brenne up 
with fijr, and the 3onge men of hem thou 


schalt slee with swerde, and the lytyll 


chyldre of hem thou schalt hurtlyn, and 
the wymmen with chijlde thou schalt 
isdeuyde. And Asael seyde, What for- 
sothe am I, thi seruaunt, an hound, that 
I doo this grete thinge? And Helisee 
seith, The Lord hath schewide to me 
14thee to be kyng of Cyrye. The which 
whanne hade goon aweye fro Helisee, 
came to his lord; the which seith to 
hym, What seide Helisee to thee? And 
he answerde, He seide to me, Thou schalt 
1sresseyue helth. And whanne the tother 
day. was commen, he toke an couerlyte, 
and helte in with watir, and spradde 
vpon his face; the whiche deed, Asael 
isregnede for hym. The fyft 3eer of Joram, 
the sone of Acab, kyng of Yrael, regnede 
Joram, the sone of Josaphath, king of 
17Juda. Of two and thritty 3eer he was 
whanne he beganne to regnen, and ei3te 
183ere he regnyde in Jerusalem. And he 
wente in the weyes of the kyngis of 
Yrael, as wente the hous of Acabh; the 
dou3ter forsothe of Acab was his wiyf; 
and he dydde that, that is yuel in the 
19813t of the Lord. And the Lord wolde 
not scateren Juda, for Dauid, his ser- 
naunt, as he hadde behoten to hym, that 
he schulde 3eue to hym a lanterne, and 
20to his sones* alle days. In tho days 
wente aweye Edom, that thei weren not 
vndur Juda; and he sette to hym a kyng. 


IV. KINGS. 


VII, 11——20. 


thou, and seye to hym, Thou schalt be 
heelid; forsothe® the Lord schewide to 
me that he schal die bi deth. And heen 
stood with hym‘, and he was disturblid, 
‘til to® the castyng doun of cheer; and 
the man of God wepte. ‘To whom’ Azael12 
seide, Whi wepith my lord? And he an- 
sweride, For Y woot what yuelis thou 
schalt do to the sones of Israel; thou 
schalt brenne bi fier the strengthid citees 
of ‘hem, and thou schalt sle bi swerd the 
3onge men of hem, and thon schalt hurtle 
doun the litle children of hem, and thon 
schalt departe the women with? childe. 
And Azael seide, What sotheli am Y, thii3 
seruaunt, a dogge, that Y do this grete 
thing ? And Elisee seide, The Lord schew- 
ide! to me that thou schalt be kyng of 
Sirie. And whanne he* hadde departid 14 
fro Elisee, he cam to his lord; which! 
seide to Azael, What.seide Elisee to thee ? 
And he answeride, Elisee seide to me, 
Thou schalt resseyue helthe. And whanne1s 
‘the tother™ day hadde come, Azael took 
the cloth on" the bed°, and bischeddeP 
with watir, and spredde .abrood on™ the 
face of hym’; and whanne he was deed, 
Azael regnede for hym. In the fyuethe ic 
3eer of Joram, sone of Achab,. kyng of 
Israel, and of Josephat, kyng of Juda, 
Joram, sone' of Josephat, kyng of Juda, 
regnede. He" was of two and thretti17 
jeer whanne he bigan to regne, and he 
regnede ei3te 3eer in Jerusalem. And hes 
3ede in the weies of the kyngis’ of Israel, 
as the hows of Achab hadde go; for the 
dou3ter of Achab was his wijf; and he 
dide that, that is” yuel in the si3t of the 
Lord. Forsothe the Lord nolde* distrie 19 
Juda, for Dauid, his seruaunt, as he ‘hadde 
bihi3tY to Dauid, that he schulde 3yue to 
hym a lanterne, and to hise sones. in alle 
daies2. In tho daies Edom, ‘that 1s,20 


8 sone ABFH. 


Deertis1. ¢ Azael1. 4 Helizee i. 
ihath schewid 1. k Azahel 1. ! the which 1. 
P he bischedde it. 
Vv king ELP. 
his trone 1. 


wwasi. * wolde not 1. 


€ ynto I. 
m that oother 1. 
q spredede x. he spredde it 1. ‘upon. *Benedab.1. tthe sone 1. This Joram 1. 
¥ bihigjte pixsxb. hadde hizt Ex. 


fhischeerr. 8 And1. 
a that lay on. 


h grete with A sec. m. 
° bed of Benedab 1. 


2 daies, kepinge his seed upon 


VII. 21—IX. 1. 


21And Joram came to Seyr, and alle the 
charis with hym; and he roose the ny3t, 
and smote Ydumes, that hym hadden 
enuyround, and the princis of the chaaris; 
the puple forsothe fleey3 in to their taber- 
zanaclis. Than went Edom, that he were 
not vndur Juda vnto this day; thanne 
wente aweye. Lobna and _in ‘that tyme. 
23 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Joram, and alle thingis that he dyde, 
whether not these ben writen in the 
booke of the wordis of the days of thet 
24kyngis of Juda? And Joram slepte with 
his faders, and:is byryed with hem in 
the cytee of Dauid; and Ochosias, his 
25sone, regnede for hym. The twelfith 3eer 
of Joram, the sone of kyng Achab, regn- 
ede Ochosias, the sone of kyng Joram, of 
26 Jude. Of two and twenty 3eer was Ocho- 
sias, the sone of Joram, whanne he be- 
ganne to regnen, and oon 3eer he regned 
in Jerusalem; the name of his modir 
Athalia, the dou3ter of Amry, kyng of 
27 Yrael. And he wente in the weyes of 
the hous of Achab, and dydde that, that 
is yuel before the Lord, as the hous of 
Acab; forsothe the sone in lawe of the 
28hous of Acab he was. Forsothe he wente 
with Joram, the sone of Acab, to fiz3ten 
a3eyn Azael, kyng of Cyrie, in to Ra- 
moth Galaad ; and Cyries woundeden Jo- 
agram. The whiche is turned a3eyn, that 
he were helyd in Jezrael; for Cyries 
woundeden hym in Ramoth, fi3tynge 
a3eynst Azael, kynge of Cyrie. For- 
sothe Ochozias, the sone of Joram, kyng 
of Juda, came doun to visyten Joram, the 
sone of Achab, in Jezrael, the whiche 
seekened there. 


CAP..LX:. 


1 Forsothe Helisee, the" prophete, clepide 
oon of the sonys of prophetis, and seith 
to hym, Gyrde thi reenys, and take this 


IV. KINGS. 


259 


Ydumee*, 3ede awei, that it schulde not 
be vndur Juda; and made a kyng to it 
silf. And Joram cam to Seira, and alle2i 
the> charis with» hym; and he roos bi 
ny3t, and smoot Ydumeis®, that cumpass- 
iden hym, and the princis of charis’; so- 
theli¢ the puple fledde in to her taber- 
naclis. Therfor Edom 3ede awei, that it22 
was not vndur! Juda ‘til to® this day; 
thanne also Lobna 3ede awey in that 
tyme, Forsothe! the residues* of wordis! 23 
of Joram, and alle thingis whiche he dide, 
whether these ben not writun in the book 
of wordis of daies of the kingis of Juda? 
And Joram slepte with hise fadris, and 24 
was biried with hem in the citee of Dauid ; 
and Ocozie, his sone, regnede for hym. 
In the tweluethe 3eer of Joram, sone™ of 25 
Achab, kyng of Israel, Ocozie, sone™ of 
Joram, kyng of Juda, regnede. Ocozie, 26 
the sone of Joram, was of two and twenti 
jeer whanne he bigan to regne, and he 
regnede o 3eer in Jerusalem; the name 
of his moder was Athalia, the dou3ter of 
Amry, kyng of Israel. And he 3ede in27 
the" waies of the hows of Achab, and dide 
that, that is yuel, bifor® the Lord, as the 
hows of Achab dide; for? he was hose- 
bonde of a dou3ter of the hows of Achab. 
Also he 3ede with Joram, sone? of Achab, 28 
to fist ajens Azael, kyng of Sirie, in Ra- 
moth of Galaad ; and men of Sirie wound- 
iden Joram. Which" turnede a3en, to be29 
heelid in Jezrael ; for men of Sirie wound- 
iden hym in Ramoth, fiztynge ajens Azael, 
kyng of Sirye. Forsothe* Ocozie, sone‘ of 
Jorain, the kyng of Juda, cam doun to se 
Joram, sone" of Achab, in to Jezrael, that 
was sijk there. 


CAP. IX. 


Forsothe Elisee, the prophete, clepide! 
oon of the sones of prophetis, and seide 
to hym, Girde thi leendis, and take this 


tOm. zp. U Om. BF. 
® that is, men of Ydumee x marg. Om.c. »hise1. >to EL, ¢ the men of Edom 1. 4 her charis 1. 
and 1. f ¢ributarie vnder1. & vntor, htyme fro Judar. i Certis 1. k residue I. the yes Ts 
Mthe soner, 4 Om. a. O in siz3t of 1, —P forsothe 1. q the sone 1. r The which 1. And 1. 
tthe sone ri. the sone 1. 


L12 


260 


oynment vessel of oyle in thin hond, and 
2goo in to Ramoth Galaad. And whanne 
thou commyst thidre, thou schalt seen 
Hieu, the sone of Josaphath, the sone of 
Nampsy ; and goon in thou schalt reren 
hym fro the mydill of his bretheren, and 
thou schalt bryngen hym with inforth 
3in to the’ inner more bed place. And 
holdinge an oynment vessel of oyle thou* 
schalt heelden vpon his heued, and seye, 
These thingis seith the Lord, I haue 
anoyntyde thee in to kynge vpon Yrael; 
and thou schalt opne the dore, and flee3en, 
sand there thou schalt not abyden. Thanne 
3eede a 3onge waxen child of the profete 
5in to Ramoth Galaad, and wente in 
thidir. Lo! forsothe the princis of the 
- hoostis seeten ; and he seith, A worde to 
me anentis thee, O! prince. And Hieu 
seide, To whom of us alle? And he 
sseide, To thee, O! prince. And he roos, 
and wente in to the bede place. And 
he helde oyle vpon his heuede, and 
seith, These thingis seith the Lord God 
of Ysrael, I haue anoyntyde thee in to 
kyng vpon the puple of the Lord of 
7 Yrael; and thou schalt smyten the hous 
of Achab, thi lord, that I venge the blode 
of my seruauntis prophetis, and the blode 
of alle the seruauntis of the Lord, fro the 
shond of Jezabel. And I schal distruy alle 
the hons of Achab, and slen fro the hous 
of Achab a pysser to the walle, and 
gclosed, and the last in Yrael. And I 
schal 3eue the hous of Achab as the hous 
of Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, and as 
the hous of Basaa, the sone of Ahia. 
1wdJezabel forsothe houndis schulen eten 
in the feeldeY of Jezrael; and there 
schal not ben that byrye hyre. And he 
1,0pnede the dore, and fley3. Hieu for- 
sothe wente oute to the seruauntis of his 
lord, the whiche seyden to hym, Whether 


IV. KINGS. 


IX. Qi. 


vessel of oile in thin hond, and go in to 

Ramoth of Galaad. And whanne thou2 

schalt come thidur, thou schalt se Hieu, 

sone’ of Josephat, sone’ of Namsi; and 

thou schalt entre, and schalt” reise: hym 

fro the myddis of hise britheren, and thou 

schalt lede hym in to the* ynnere closet. 

And thou schalt holde the vessel of oile,3 

and schalt’ schede? on his heed, and schalt® 

seie, The Lord seith these thingis, I haue 

anoyntid thee in to kyng on? Israel ; and° 

thou schalt opene the dore, and. schalt 

flee’, and schalt® not abide there. Ther-4 

for the 3ong wexynge man, the child of 

the prophete, 3ede in to Ramoth of Ga- 

laad, and entride thidur. Lo! sotheli thes 

princes of the oost saten‘; and he seide, 

A&! prince, Y haue a word to thee. And 

Hieu seide, To whom of alle vs? And he 

seide, To thee, thou prince. And he" roos,6 

and entride into the! closet. ‘ And thilk 

child schedde* oile on’ the heed of hym, 

and seide, The Lord God of Israel seith- 

these thingis, Y haue anointid thee in to 

kyng on™ the puple of the Lord of Israel ; 

and thou schalt smyte the hows of Achab,7 

thi lord, that Y venge the blood of my 
seruauntis prophetis, and the blood of alle 

the" seruauntis of the Lord, of the hond 

of Jezabel. And Y schal lese al the howss 

of Achab, and Y schal sle of the hows of 

Achab a pissere to the wal, and closid°t, alg 
and the laste in IsraelP. And Y schal 3yue9 here. c. * 
the hows of Achab1 as the hows of Jero- 

boam, sone’ of Nabat, and as the hous of 

Baasa, sone’ of Ahia. Also doggis schu-10 5 wood man; 
len ete Jezabel in the feeld of Jezrael;  Profetls weren 
and ‘noon schal be* that schal birie hir. ree a 
And ‘the child‘ openyde the dore, and goad of this 
fledde. Forsothe® Hieu 3ede out to the yu cae 
seruauntis of his lord; whiche seiden to 

hym, Whether alle thingis ben’ ri3tfuli¥ ? 


thei spaken 
ofte siche 
What cam this wood manf{ to thee? Which* 


thingis, that 
semyden alien 
to othere men. 
Lire here. cs 


vOm. 7. WOm. £ prem * Om. Hu. Y feeldis «4. 
vthe sone z. Wthouschalt1, *ani. Ythouschalt1. 7 helde i{1. thou schalt1. > upon1. 
Cand thanne1. 4 flee thenns1. © thou schalt1. f saten there1. SO!1. LbHieut iaz Kheldet. 
Tnponi, ™uponi. ®Om. en. © the closid in prisoun 1. P Israel of his hous 1. 4% Achab in to 
repreffi. ‘the soner. 8 ther schal be noon 1. t whanne he hadde seid these thingis he 1. ™ Aud 1. 
VYbeu donut. W riztful ex. * The which 1 


Ie 12——19. 


ri3t ben alle thingis? What came this 
wood man to thee? The whiche seith to 
hem, 3e han knowen the man, and what 
12he hath spoken. And thet answerden, It 
is fals; but more telle thou to us. The 
whiche seith to hem, These thingis and 
these thingis he spac to me, and seith, 
These thingis seith the Lord, I haue 
izanoyntide thee kynge vpon Ysrael. And 
so thei hy3eden, and echone, takynge his 
mantylle, putten vndur his feet in lyck- 
nesse of a kyngis chayer. And they 
sungen with trumpe, and seyden, Hieu 
14schal regnen. Thanne Hieu, the sone of 
Josaphath, the sone of Nampsy, coniured 
a3eynst Joram. Forsothe Joram hadde 
byseegyd Ramoth Galaad, he and alle 
Yrael, ajeynst Azael, kyng’ of Cyrye. 
15 And he was turned ajeyn, that he were 
helyd in Jezrael for the woundis ; for Cy- 
ries hadden smyten hym fijtynge ajeynst 
Azael, kyng of Cyrie. And Hieu seide, 
3if it plese to 30u, no man goo oute fugy- 
tyue fro the cyte, lest he go, and tell in 
16 Jezrael. And he stey3ide vp, and wente 
forth into Jezrael; Joram forsothe laye 
seeke there, and Ochosias, kyng of Ju- 
da, hadde goon doun to vysyte Joram. 
17 Thanne the wayte, that stode vpon the 
toure of Jezrael, see the glub of Hieu 
commynge, and seith, I see a glub. And 
Joram seide, Take the chare, and sende 
in to ajeyn commynge of hem; and the 
gooer sey, Whether ri3t ben alle thingis ? 
18 Thanne jeede, that stey3ide up the chaare, 
in to ajeyn commynge of hym, and seith, 
Thes thingis seith the kyng, Apayid ben 
alle thiugis? And Hieu seyde to hym, 
What to thee and to pese? Go, and 
folow me. The weyt forsothe tolde, sey- 
inge, The messager cam to hem, and he 
i9is not turned ajeyn. Also he sent the 
secounde chaar of hors, and he came to 


IV. KINGS. 


261 


seide to hem, 3e knowen the man, and 
what he spak. And thei answeriden, It is 12 
fals; but more’ telle thou to? vs*. Which? 
seide to hem, He spak these® and these 
thingist to me, and scide, The Lord seith 
these thingis, Y haue anoyntid thee kyng 
on® Israel. Therfor thei hastiden, and ech 13 
man took his' mentil, and puttide vndir 
hise feet bi the licnesse of a trone. And 
thei sungen with a trumpe, and seiden, 
Hieu schal regne. Therfor Hieu, sone? i 
of Josephat, sone$ of Namsi, swoor® to 
gidere{ a3ens Joram. Forsothe! Joram 
hadde bisegid Ramoth of Galaad, he and 
al Israel, azens Azael, kyng of Sirie. And 1s 
he* turnede a3jen to be heelid in Jezrael 
for woundis!; for men of Sirie hadden 
smyte hym fiztynge azens Azael, kyng of 
Sirie. And Hieu seide, If it plesith™ 3o0u, 
no man go out fleynge fro the citee, lest 
he go, and telle in Jezrael. And he™16 
stiede®, and 3ede forth in to Jezrael; for 
Joram was sijk there, and Ocozie, kyng 
of Juda, cam doun to visite Joram. Ther-17 
for a spiere?, that stood aboue a tour of 
Jezrael, si3 the multitude of Hieu com- 
ynge, and he seide, Y se a multitude. And 
Joram seide, Take thou a chare, and sende! 
in to the metyng of hem; and seie the 
goere’, Whether alle thingis ben ri3tfuli* ? 
Therfort he, that stiede* on’ the chare, 18 
3ede in to the meetyng of hym*, and seide, 
The kyng seith these thingis, Whether alle 
thingis ben peesid? And Hieu seide to 
hym, What to thee and to pees? Passe 
thou’, and sue me. And the aspiere” telde*, 
and seide, the messanger cam to hem, and 
he? turneth not a3en. Also the kyng sente 19 
the secounde chare of horsis, and he cam 
to hem, and seide, The kyng seith these 
thingis, Whether pees is‘? And Hieu 
seide, What to thee and to pees? Passe 
thou‘, and sue me"4, Sotheli® the aspiere 2° 


2 the kyng £ pr.m. 


Y more rather1. %Om.1. vs what he seidex. » The which 1. ¢ these thingis 1. dOm.1. ¢oft 


h swoor with oothere 1. 
© stiede up I. 

u 3ede 1. 
b Om. c. 


fai. & the sone 1. 
m plese 1. © Iieu 1. 
- don iustly 1. t Thanne r. 
2 waitere1. ®telde to Joram 1. 


i Certis 1. 
P waitere 1. 

Vupon I. 
Cis with 30u 1. 


1 woundis that he hadde t. 
r goere thus 1. § rijtful EL. 
y thou fro Joram 1. 
e And 1. 


k Joram 1. 

4 sende if 1. go L. 
Ww wente I. x Hieu 1. 

d thou forth 1. 44 Om. EL. 


T swoore lo gi- 

ere; with the 
prynces beynge 
with him, that 
thei schulden 
fille feithfully 
Goddis heeste, 
of the hows of 
Achab to be 
distried. Lire 
here. C. 


262 


hem, and seith, These thingis seith the 
kyng, Where is there pese? And Hieu 
seith, What to thee and to pese? Passe, 
20and folowe me. Forsothe the weyt tolde, 
seyinge, He came vito hem, and he turn- 
ith not a3ein; forsothe the goynge is as 
the goynge of Hieu, the sone of Nampsy; 
21 ‘ful swyftlyche* forsothe he? goth. And 
Joram seith, Ioynith the chaar. And 
they ioyneden his chaar. And Joram, the 
kyng of Yrael, wente oute, and Ochosias, 
kyng of Juda, ech in their chaaris; and 
thei wenten oute into ajeyncommynge 
of Hieu, and thei founden hym in the 
22feeld of Nabath Jezraelyte. And whanne 
Joram hadde seen Hieu, he seide, Pese is 
there, Hien? And he answerde, What 
pese? 3it the fornycaciouns of Jezabel, thi 
modir,andhyr many venymyngis thrijuen. 
23Forsothe Joram turnede his hond, and 
fleesinge seith to Ochosie, Busschementis ! 
24 busschementis ! Ochosie. Bot Hieu bente 
the bowe with the honde, and smote Jo- 
ram bytwene the schulders, and the 
arewe is sent out thoru3 his hert; and 
25anoon he felle in his chaare. And Hieu 
seith to duyke Badachar, Take, throwe 
hym in the feelde of Naboth Jezraelite ; 
I haue mynde forsothe, when I and thow 
syttynge in the chaar foloweden Achab, 
his fadir, for the Lord hadde rerede out 
26 this’ charge® upon hym, seyinge, Whe- 
ther not for the blode of Naboth, and for 
the blode of the sonys of hym, the whiche 
I sawe 3isterday*‘, seith the Lord, I schal 
3elden to thee in this feeld, seith the Lord. 
Nowe thanne take hym, and throwe hym 
in the feeld, aftir the word of the Lord. 
27 Ochosias forsothe, kyng of Juda, secinge 
this, flee; by the weye of the hous of the 
gardyn; and Hieu folewede hym, and 
seith, Also this smytith in his chare. 


aa prince E pr.m. > Om.£ prim. 


ftelde fo Joram1. & vnto 1. 
m™Om.1. Js ther pees with thee 1. © Hien 1. 
thorn3 ELP. bir. them. VY the duyk 1. 
a bi Helie upon 1. bAchabi. © Wher 1. 
§Joram1 bar imenn 


° Ocozie1, Pupont. 4 Om. plures. 


IV. KINGS. 


d his 4. 


h goyng of the duyk 1. 
P venymyngis I. 
Wawei Joram I. 
4 the which 1. 
k smoten 1. smiten EL. smetin rv. 


IX. 20———27. 


teldef, and seide, He cam ‘til tof hem, and 
he turneth not ajen; forsothe the goyng* 
is as the goyng of Hieu, sone of Namsi; 
sothely' he goith faste. And Joram seide, 21 
Ioyn je a chare. And thei ioyneden his 
chare. And Joram, kyng of Israel, 3ede 
out, and Ocozie, kyng of Juda‘, 3ede out, 
ech in his chare; and thei 3eden out! in 
to the meetyng of Hieu, and thei founden 
hym in the feeld of Naboth of Jezrael. 
And whanne Joram hadde seyn Hieu, he22 
seide, Hieu™, ‘is pees"? And he® answer- 


ide, What pees? 3it the fornycaciounst of prates 
Jezabel, thi modir, and-‘many poisenyngis? _ is, idolatries, 


“ ; whiche Jezabel 
of hir ben in strengthe. Forsothe? Joram 23 thi modir, 


turnede his hond, and fledde, and seide to pioesd ven 


Ocozie, Tresouns! tresouns! Ocozie. For-24 ysis: for sche 


poysonyde 
sothe’ Hieu bente a bouwe with the* hond, gooetl ead 
. . . ertor goo 
and smoot Joram bitwixe the schuldris, pees ner ae 
. be i 
and the arowe 3ede out thoru3¢ his" herte; 5 age 


and anoon he felde doun in his chare. And 25 ee 
Hieu seide to Badacher duyk’, Take thou Aire here. c. 
awei*, cast* forth hym in the feeld of Na- 
both of Jezrael; forY Y haue mynde,whanne 
Y and thou saten in the chare, and suede 
Achab, the fadir of hym?, that the Lord 
reiside on* hym? this birthun, and seide, 
If¢ not for the blood of Naboth, and for 26 
the blood of hise sones, which* Y si3 3is- 
tirdai®, seith the Lord, Y schal 3eeld to 
thee in this feeld, seith the Lord. Now 
therfor dof awei him’, and cast forth him 
in the feeld, bi the word of the Lord. For-27 
sothe Ocozie, king of Juda, si3 this, and 
fledde bi the weie of the hows of the" 
gardyn; and Hieu pursuede hym, and 
seide, Also smyte 3e this man in his chare. 
And thei! smytiden* hym! in the stiyng™ 
of Gaber, which" is bisidis Jeblaam; and 
he® fledde into Mageddo, and was deed 
there. And hise seruauntis puttiden hym 28 
onP his chare, and brou3ten hym4 in to 


€ chaare Fu. f 3istai c ef EB passim. 


1 forth 1. 
Shis1. tund 
Z this Joram 1. 

f do thou 1. 
™ stiyng up i. that 1. 


icertis1. k Juda with him 1. 
q Andi. *' Certis 1. 
x and cast 1. Y for whit. 

€ 3istirdai sched out 1. 
1 Ocozie 1. 


1X. 28-—37. 


And thei smyten hym in the steyinge up 
of Gaber, that is besyde Jeblaam; the 
whiche fley3 in to Magedo, and is deed 
28there. And his seruauntis putten hym 
vpon his chaar, and token in to Jerusa- 
lem; and biriden hym ‘in. the sepulcre 


with his fadirs, in the cytee of Dauith. . 


29The elleuenth 3eer of Joram, the sone of 
Achab, the kyng of Yrael, regnede Ocho- 
30sias vpon' Judam. And Hieu came in 
to Jezrael. Forsothe Jezabel, his entree 
herde, peyntyde hyre ee3en with strum- 
pettis oynment, and sche anournede hyre 
heued ; and sche byhelde thoru3 the wyn- 
3idowe Hieu commynge in by the jate, 
and seith, Whether pese may be to Zamry, 
32that hath slayn his lord? And Hieu 


rerede up his face to the wyndowe, and: 


seith, What is sche this? And there 
boweden hem to hym two or thre gel- 
dingis, and seyden to hym, This is sche, 
33that’ Jezabel. And he seyde to hem, 
Tumblith hyre doun. And thei tum- 
bliden hyre; and the wall is sprengid 
with the blod, and the hors houes, that 
34 treden hyre. And when he was goon in, 
that he ete and drynke, he seith, Gooth, 
and seeth that cursed, and burieth hyre, 
35 for the dou3ter of a kyng sche is. And 
when thei weren gon, that they biryen 
hyre, thei founden not, no’ bot the scul, 
and the feet, and gobitis of the hond; 
3sand they turned ajein, tolden to hym. 
And Hieu seith, The word of the Lord 
it is, the whiche he spak by his seruaunt 
Helye Thesbyten, seyinge, In the feeld 
of Jezrael houndis schulen eten the flesche 
370f Jezabel; and the flesche of Jezabel 
schul be as drytt vpon the face of the 
erthe in the feeld of Jezrael, so that men 
passynge bysydis seyn, Whether sche this 
is not that Jezabel ? 


IV. KINGS. 


263 


Jerusalem; and thei birieden hym in a 
sepulcre with hise fadris, in the citee of 
Dauid. In the eleuenthe 3eer of Joram, 29 
sone’ of Achab, kyng of Israel, Ocozie 
regnede on’ Juda. And Hieu cam in to30 
Jezrael. Forsothe whanne his entryng 
was herd, Jezabel peyntide hir ijen with 
oynement of wymment, and: ournede hir 
heed ; and sche bihelde bi a wyndow Hieu:1 
entrynge bi the 3ate, and sche seide, Whe- 
ther pees may be to Zamrif, that kyllide" + wher pees 
his lord? And Hieu reiside’ his face Mee Sccie 
the wyndow, and seide, What womman {octouris ex- 
is this? And tweyne ether thre chaum- 

birleyns bowiden hem silf to hym”, and ag sae 
seiden to hym, This is thilke Jezabel. And 33 so nether thou 
he seide to hem, Caste je hir doun*. And ‘ot pare 
thei ‘castiden doun hirY; and the wal was 


bispreynt with? blood, and the howues ‘be 
x , goinge, therfor 
of. horsis, that ‘to tredden® hir. And 34 Ebreis En 
ownen thus 
whanne he? hadde entrid to ete and toher pees may 
: be, that is, Y 
drynke, he seide, Go 3e, and se® thilke jrove, thar thou 
cursid womman, and birie 3e hir, for sche Mere ie 
ist a kyngis dou3ter. And whanne thei® 35 killide his lord; 
= f cai . ° as if sche seide, 
hadden gof to birie hir, thei founden not, _ this is not 
that th 
no but the sculle, and the feet, and the  kitiait Joram. 
4 sche g 5 thi lord, for 
eudis of hondis"; and thei turneden ajen, 3677 yy hide in 
and telden to hym!. And Hieu seide, [tk liyk maner, 
is the word of the Lord, which! he spak  Achat,his sone, 
regnyde in pees 


pownen this 
comynly bi 
negacioun 


pees ; but this 
exposicioun 
acordith not to 
the lettre hifor 


liyk maner, 


bi his seruaunt, Elie ‘of Thesbi™, and seide, _ aftir hym; so 
Doggis schulen ete the fleisch of Jezabel ,m*¥,'e" 


in the feeld of Jezrael; and the fleischis 377" © 
of Jezabel schulen be as ‘a toord® on° the 

face of erthe? in the feeld of Jezrael, so 

that men passynge forth’ seie, Lo! this 

is thilke Jezabel. 


£ Om. AceFH. 


‘thesone1. Suponi. ¢t lecherouse wymment. slewet. Vreisideupr1. ~ Hieur. * doun 
heedling 1. Y puttiden hir doun heedling1, ofhir1. ®tredideni. > Hieur. ¢seje1. ¢ wast. 
€ment. fgon forth1. 8 not of kirt. hhirhondist. 1 Hieuw1. * This1. ! that 1. ™ Thesbiten 1. 


odunge 1. Ouponi., Ptheerthe 1. 4 forth therby 1. 


264. 


CAP. X. 


1 Of Achab forsoth weren seuenty sonis 
in Samary. Than Hieu wrote lettris, and 
sente in to Samarye to the best of the 
cytee, and to the more thoru3 birth, and 

2to the nurischis of Achab, seyinge, Anoon 
as 3e taken thes lettres, 3e that haue the 
sonis of 3oure lord, and chaaris, and hors, 

3and stronge cytees, and aarmys, chesith 
the beter, and hym that to 30u schal 
plesen of the sonis of 3our lord, and put- 
tith hym vpon the see of his fadir, and 
4fiztith for the hous of 3oure lord. And 
thei dredden hugelye, and seyden, Loo! 
two kyngis my3ten not stonden beforn 
hym, and what maner wijse schuln we 
smowen to withstonden hym? Thanne 
the prouostis of the hous senten, and the 
prefect of the cyte, and the more thorn3 
birthe, and the nurischis to Hieu, sey- 
inge, Thi seruauntis we ben; what euer 
thingis thou schalt comaunde, we schul 

done, and we schul not ordeyne to us a 
kynge; what euer thinge to thee plesith, 

6do. Forsothe he wrote ajein lettris to 
hem the secounde tyme, seyinge, 3if myn 
3e ben, and obeschen to me, takith the 
heuedis of the sonis of 3oure lord, and 
commith to me this same houre to morowe 
in to Jezrael. Forsothe the sonis of the 
kyng, seuenty men, anentis the best of 

;the cytee weren nurischide. And when 
lettris weren commen to hem, thei token 
the sonis of the kyng, and slewen the 
seuenty men, and putten the heuedis of 
hem in cofynes; and senten to hym in 

sto Jezrael. Forsothe a messagere came 
to hym, and schewede to hym, seyinge, 
Thei han brou3t the heuedis of the sonys 
of the kyng. The whiche answerde, Put- 
tith hem at the two stone hepis, besydis 
the entre of the 3ate, vnto to morowe. 

g And when the day hadde li3ted, he wente 
out, and stondynge seide to alle the pu- 
ple, Ri3twyse 3e ben; 3if I haue coniured 


IV. KINGS. 


xX. I-—9g. 


CAF aX, 


Forsothe seuenti sones in Samarie weren 1 
to Achab. Therfor Hieu wroot lettris, and 
sente in to Samarie to the beste men of 
the citee, and to the gretter men in hirthe, 
and to alle the nurschis of Achaby, and 
seide, Anoon as 3e han take these lettris, 3e2 
that han the sones of 3oure lord, and the 
charis, and horsis, and stronge citees, and 
armeris, chese" the beste, and hym thats 
plesith to 3ou of the sones of 3oure lord®, 
and sette 3e? him on? the trone of his’ 
fadir, and fijte 3e for the hows of 3oure 
lord. And thei™ dredden greetli, and4 
seiden, Lo! twei kyngis my3ten not 
stonde bifor hym, and how schulen we 
mowe ajenstonde hym? Therfor thes 
souereyns of the hows, and the prefect* 
of the citee, and the grettere men in 
birthe, and the nurschis senten to Hieu, 
and seiden, We ben thi seruauntis; what 
euer thingis thou comaundist, we schulen 
do, and we schulen not make a kyng to 
vs; do thou what euer thing plesith thee. 
Forsothe he wroot a3en to hem lettris theé 
secunde tyme, and seide, If 3e ben myne, 
and obeien to me, take 3e the heedis of 
the sones of 30ure lord, and come 3e to me 
in this same our to morewe in to Jezrael. 
Sothelit the sones of the kyng, seuenti 
men, weren nurschid at the beste men of 
the citee. And whanne the lettris hadden7 
come to hem, thei token the sones of the 
kyng, and killiden seuenti"® men, and put- 
tiden’ the heedis of hem in coffyns; and 
senten” to hym* in to Jezrael. Forsothe’s 
a messanger cam to hym, and sclewide 
to hym, and seide, Thei? han brou3t the 
heedis of the sones of the king. Which? 
answeride, Putte 3e tho> heedis to tweyne 
hepis, bisidis the entring® of the 3ate, til4 
the® morewtid. And whanne it was cleer g 
dai, hef 3ede out, and stood, and seide to 
al the puple®, 3e ben iust men; if Y con- 
spiride a3ens my lord, and killide hym, 


" chese 3e 1. lord Achabi1. POm.c. dupont. the meni. § provoustis or bailies 1. * And 1. 
* tho seuentir. thei puttiden 1. W senten thor. *Hieur. yAnd3. 2Men1, # The which n. 
bther. Centrisa. vntor tilton. €Om.n. fHieur. & puple of Samarie 1. 


t+ nursis of 
Achab; that 
is, of the sones 

‘of Achab. Lire 
here. C. 


X. lo—I19. 


ajeynus my lord, and slayn hym; who 
1osmoot alle these ? Seeth thann nowe, for 
there hath not fallen of the wordis of the 
Lord in the erthe, the whiche the Lord 
spac vpon the hous of Achab; and the 
Lord dydde that he spak in the hond 
u0f Helye, his seruaunt. Thanne® Hieu 
smoot alle that weren laft of the hous of 
Achab in Jezrael, and alle the best of 
hym, and knowen, and prestis, to the 
tyme that ther laft not of hym relykys. 
iz And he roos, and came in to Samerye; 
and when thei weren commen to the 
13¢haumbre of scheperdis in the weye, he 
fonde the bretheren of Ochosie, kyng of 
Juda; and he seide to hem, Who for- 
sothe ben 3e? And thei answerden, The 
bretheren of Ochosie we ben, and we ben 
commen doun to saluten the sonis of the 
ukyng and the sonys of the qween. The 
whiche seith, Takith hem on lyue. Whom 
when thei hadden taken alyue, thei 
throtyden hem in the cystern, besyde 
the chaumbre, two and fourty men; and 
15he laft not of hem eny man. And when 
he was goon thens, he foond Jonadab, 
the sone of Reechab, in to aj3ein com- 
mynge to hym, and blessede to hym. 
And Hieu seith to hym, Whether is thin 
hert ri3t with myne herte, as myn hert 
with thin hert? And Jonadab seith, It 
is. 3if it is, he seith, 3eue me thin honde. 
The whiche 3aue to hym his hond; and 
he rerede hym to hym in to the chaar. 
is And he seyde to hym, Comme with me, 
and see my loue for the Lord. And 
i7hym sett in his chaar, he ladde in to Sa- 
marye. And he smote alle that weren 
taft of Achab in Samarye vnto oon, after 
the word of the Lord, that he spac by 
1s Helye. Than Hieu gaderd alle the pu- 
ple, and seide to hem, Achab heryide 
Baal a lytyl, I forsothe schal herye hym 
igmore. Nowe than alle the prophetis of 


IV. KINGS. 


265 


who killide alle these? Therfor se 3e10 
nowt, that noon of the wordis of the 
Lord felde* doun in to the erthe, whiche 
the Lord spak on the hows of Achab; 

and the Lord hath do that, that he spak Ea 
in the hond of his seruaunt, Elie. Therfor 11 biameful, but 


more just and 
Hieu smoot alle that weren residue‘ of _ preisable, for it 


is doon bi the 


+ therfor se 3e 
now; as if he 
seide, nether 
Y in comaund- 
inge, nether 3¢ 


the hows of Achab in Jezrael, and alle — witl and co- 
k 1 maundement 
the beste men‘ of hym', and knowun™ ofthe Lord, as 
toD ft] oS it was bifor. 
men, and preestis”, til no relikis of hym {5 by Elie, 
leften. And he® roos?, and cam in to Sa- 12and was en- 
‘ ioyned to me 
marie; and whanne he hadde come to the __ bi his dissiple. 


; neni : Lire here. c. 
chaumbir of schepherdis? in the weie, he 13°" © 
fooud' the britheren{ of Ocozie, kyng of $ brtheren 
, that is es- 
Juda; and he seide to hem, Who ben 3e? mea, for they 
And thei answeriden, We ben the britheren (oon 
of Ocozie, and we comen doun to grete 1: book of 
Paralip. xxi. c°. 
Lire here. c. 


the sones of the kyng and the sones of 
the queen. Which’ Hiveu seide, Take 3e 14 
hem quyke. And whanne thei hadden 
take hem quyke, thei strangliden hem in 
thet cisterne, bisidis the chaumbre, two and 
fourti men; aud he lefte not ony of hem. 
And whanne he" hadde go fro thennus, he 15 
foond Jonadab, the sone of Rechab, in to 
meetyng of Y hym; and he blesside hym. 
And Hieu seide to hym, Whether thin 
herte is ri3tful with myn herte, as myn 
herte is with thin herte? And Jonadab 
seide, It is. Hieu* seide, If ‘it is’, 3yue? 
thin hond. Which* 3af his hond to hym; 
and he? reiside hym® to hym silf4 in to 
the® chare. And hef seide to hym, Come 16 
thou with me, and se my feruent loue for 
the Lord. And he ledde hym, put in hys 17 
chare, in to Samarie. And he& killide alle 
men that weren residue of Achab in Sa- 
marie ‘til to! oon, bi the word of the Lord, 
which* he spak bi Elie. Therfor Hieu 18 
gaderide to gidere alle the puple, and seide 
to hem, Achab worschipide Baal a litil, 
but Y schal! worschipe hym more. Now19 
therfor clepe 3e to me alle the prophetis 
of Baal, and alle hise seruauntis, and alle 


b Om. an pr.m. FH. 


hhath faller. ileftr. kKmenalsor, J Achabr. ™hbisknowun1.  %his preestis1. © Hieu 1. 
Proosup1. 4the schepherdis1. 1 foond there1, SAnd1t tar. Hieur, Yto DEIKLMPxbe. 
w Jonadabi. * And Hieu 1s. y thin herte is rijtful 1. Z3yuemer 4 The which 1. > Hien 1. 
chymupr. 4Om.1, ¢hist. ‘Hient. § Hieus. left x. ivntox * thatr. 1Om.c. 

VOL. TI. Mm 


266 IV. KINGS. X. 20—27. 


Baal, and alle his seruauntis, and alle 
the prestis of hem clepith to me; noon 
be that cumme not, forsothe grete sacri- 
fice is to me to Baal; who so euer be 
aweye, he schal not lyuen. Forsothe 
Hieu dydde this aspyingly, that he dis- 
20 truye alle the heryeris of Baal. And he 
seyde, Halowith a solempne day to Baal. 
21 And he clepid, and sente in to al the 
termes of Yrael; and ther camen alle 
the seruauntis of Baal, and ther was 
not lafte not oone forsothe that came 
not. And thei wenten in to the temple 
of Baal; and the hous of Baal is fulfillid, 
22 from the hee3ist to the hee3ist. And he 
seide to hem that haden maistrye vpon 
the clothes, Bryngith forth the vesty- 
mentis to alle the seruauntis of Baal; 
and thei brou3tyn to hym the clothis. 
23 And Hieu wente in, and Jonadab, the 
sone of Reechab, in to the temple of 
Baal. And he seith to the herieris of 
Baal, Enserchith, and seeth, lest eny man 
perauenture be with 30u of the seruauntis 
of the Lord; bot that aloon ben the ser- 
24uauntis of Baal. Thanne thei wenten in, 
that thei done slayne offryngis, and brent 
sacrifices’, Hieu made redy forsothe with 
oute forthe foure score men, and hadde 
seyde to hem, Who so euer flee3ith of 
alle these, ‘the whiche* I schal brynge 
in to 30ure hondis, his lijf schal ben for 
25the lijf of hym. It is do forsothe, when 
the brent sacrifice was fulfillid, Hieu co- 
maundide to the kny3tis and to his 
duykis, Gooth in, and smytith hem, that 
noon ascaape. And the kny3tis and the 
duykis smyten hem in the mouthe of 


hise preestis; ‘noon be™ that come not, 
for" grete sacrifice is of me to Baal; who 
ever schal faile®, he schal not lyue. For- 
sothe Hieu dide this bi tresoun,'that he 
schulde? distrie alle the worschipers of 
Baal. And he seide1, Halewe 3e a .so-20 
lempne day to Baal. And he’ clepide, and 21 
sente in to alle the termes of Israel; and 
alle the seruauntis of Baal camen', ‘noon 
was residuet, and sotheli ‘not oon was® 
that cam not. And thei entriden in to 
the temple of Baal; and the hows of Baal 
was fillid, fro oon’ ende ‘til to’ ‘the to- 
thir*. And heY seide to hem that weren 22 
souereyns ouer the clothis*, Bringe 3e* 
forth clothis® to alle the seruauntis of 
Baal; and thei brou3ten forth clothis* to 
hem. And Hieu entride,.and Jonadab, 23 
the sone of Rechab, in to the temple of 
Baal. And Hieu seide to the worschiperis 
of Baal, Enquere 3e, and se, lest perauen- 
ture ony of the seruauntis of the Lord be 
with 30u ; but that the seruauntis be aloone 
of Baal. Therfor’ thei entriden, to make 24 
slayn sacrifices, and brent sacrifices. So- 
theli® Hieu hadde maad redi to hym with 
outforth foure scoore men, and hadde seid 
to hem, Who euer schal fle® of alle these, 
whiche Y schal brynge in to 3oure hondis, 
the lijf of hym schal bef for the lif of 
hym that ascapith. Forsothe it was don, 25 
whanne the brent sacrifice was fillid’, Hieu 
comaundide ‘to hise kny3tis and duykis, 
Entre 3e, and sle hem, that noon ascape. 
And the kny3tis and duykis smytiden! 
‘hem bi the scharpnesse of swerd, and 
castiden' forth. And ‘thei 3eden™ into 
the citee of the temple of Baal, and thei 26 


+ the liyf of 


him schal be, 


etc.; that suf- 


frith ony 
ascape, C. 


the! swerd, and threwen aweye. Andthei _brou3ten forth the ymage" fro the temple 


: é t maden pri- 
wenten in to the cyte of the temple of of Baal, and brenten i°, and al to braken 27 tics; for abho- 


26 Baal, and thei brou3ten forthe the ymage it. Also thei destrieden the hows of Baal, 7ypsciun of 
fro the temple of Baal, and thei brenden, and maden priuyest{ for it ‘til in to? this ‘st thilke 


: ° ° eee ‘ _ : place schulde 
27and distruyden it. Forsotle thei dis- dai. Therfor’ Hieu dide awei Baal fro 28 serue the co- 
mynte in this 
nede. Lire 
i sacrifice asru. that c pr.m. 1 Om. ac pr.m. aa 


m be ther noon 1, ® forsothe 1. © faile fo come 1. P woldex. Gseidetohemr. * Hienr, 8%camen 
thiderex. + and noon was left rx. ther was noon left thenns 1. noon was left p. © ther was not oon 1. 
VYthat cont. Wto1. *thatoather1. yYHien1i. 2 prestis clothist. @Om.x.  » thi clothis c. 
vestmentis 1. ¢ vestmentis I. 4Thannex, ¢Certisr. ffleaweyr. & fulfillidr. » sleeth 1. 
* smiten EL passim. smyten F passim. smeten 1. smetin p passim. k with 1. lcasten FI. ™3eid asup.ras. 
n ymage of Baaly. © Om. erkLapsxbe. P vnto x. 4 Thanne 1. 


X. 28——XI. 2. 


troyeden the hous of Baal, and thei 
maaden for it waardropis vnto this day. 
2s And so Hieu dyde aweye Baal from Yrael; 


2gneuerthelatre fro the synnes..of Jero-' 


boam, the sone of: Naboth, that maad 


Yrael to .synne, he 3eede not aweye, ne: 


dyde aweye the golden caluis, that weren 


30in Bethel and in Dan. - The Lord :for-: 


sothe seyde to. Hieu,.For wysely thou 
hast done that that was ri3t, and -it 


pleside in myn ee3en, and alle thingis’ 
that weren in ‘myne herte thou dyddist: 
a3eynst the hous of™ Achab, thi sonys vnto: 


the ferth generacioun schuln sytten vpon 
31 the trone of Yrael. Bot Hieu kepte not, 
that he wente in the lawe of the Lord 
God of Yrael in al his herte; forsothe 
he wente not fro the synnes of Jeroba- 
szham, that maad Yrael to synnen. In 
tho days the Lord beganne to noy3en 
vpon Yrael; and Azael smote hem in® 
s3alle the coostis of Yrael, fro Jordane 
ajeyns the este coost, alle the lond of 
Galaad, and Gad, and Ruben, and Ma- 
nasse, fro Aroer that is vpon the streme 
310f Arnon, and Galaad, and Basan. The 
remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of Hieu, 
and alle thingis that he dide, and his 
strengthe, whether not thes ben writen 
in the boke of the wordis of the days of 
3sthe kyngis of Yrael? And Hieu slepte 
with his fadirs; and thei birteden hym 
in Samarie; and Joacath, his sone, regn- 
ssede for hym. The days forsothe, ‘the 
whiche® Hieu regned vpon Yrael in Sa- 
marye, ben ei3t and twenty 3eer. 


. 


Che P ceils 


1 Athalia forsothe, the modir of Ochosie, 
seezinge hyre sone deed, roos, and slew} 
z2alle the kyngis seede. Forsothe Jozaba, 
the dou3tir of kyng Joram, the sister of 
Ochosie, takynge Joas, the sone of Ocho- 
sie, staal hym fro the myddis of the sonis 
of the kyng, that weren slayn; and his 


m Om. BF sec. m. 


IV. KINGS. 


Dand 4B, 


267 


Israel; netheles he 3ede not awei fro the 29 
synnes of Jeroboam, sone’ of Nabath, that 
made Israel to do synne, nether he for- 
sook the goldun caluys, that weren in 
Bethel and in Dan. Forsothe the Lord 30 
seide to Hien, For thou didist bisili that 
that was ri3tful, and pleside’ in myn y3en, 
and hast do a3ens the hows of Achab alle 
thingis that weren in myn herte, thi sones 
‘til tot the fourthe generacioun schulen 
sitte on" the trone of Israel: Forsothe’ 31 
Hieu kepte not, that he 3ede in the lawe 
of the Lord God of Israel in al his herte; 
for he 3ede’ not awei fro the synnes of 
Jeroboam, that made Israel to do symne. 
In tho daies the Lord bigan to be anoyedf 32 #3 ‘e fuss 
on’ Israel; and Asahel smoot hem® in alle 


anoied ; that 
. is, to hi 
the coostis of Israel’, fro Jordan azens the 33 svhomyna 


abbomynacionn 


eest coost, al the lond of Galaad, and of ¢fh« tedis 
Gad, and of Ruben, and of Manasses, fro alee a 

1 ie 
Aroer which’ is on? the stronde of Arnon, — darid louge 


anne, and 


and Galaad, and Baasan. Forsothe® the 31 many othere 
residue of wordis® of Hieu, and alle thingis PF Ch"... 
whiche* he dide, and his strengthe, whe- ‘nd therfor 
4 2 at rewme 

ther these ben not writun in the book of _ was suffrid to 

. . 3 be turmentid 
wordis of daies of the kyngis of Israel? ti Asael in 
And Hieu slepte with hise fadris; and35 Fire here c. 
thei birieden hym in Samarie; and Joa- 
chaz, his sone, regnyde for hym. For-36 
sothe® the daies, in whiche Hieu regnede 
onf Israel in Samarie, ben ei3te and twenti 
jeer. 


CA ReeXt, 


Forsothe Athalie, modir® of Ocozie, si31 
hir sone deed, and sche roos*, and killide 
al the seed of the kyng'. Sotheli* Josaba, 2 
dou3ter! of kyng Joram, the sistir of Oco- 
zie, took Joas, sone™ of Ocozie, and stal 
him fro the myddis of the sones of the 
kyng, that weren slayn; and sche took 


that c pr.m. 


‘the sone 1. 8 plesidest z. that pleside 1. t therfore vnto 1. tupon i. VY Fora. YV wente 1. Yupon 1. 


x Israel 1. yY hem 1. 
& the modir 1. 


2 that 1. 


8 upon I. 
} roos up 1. 


ikyng of Juda 1. 


b And 1. 
k Andi. 


Mim 2 


 Certis 1. 
m the sone I. 


4 that 1. 
1 the dou3ter 1. 


¢ the wordis 1. f upon 1. 


268 


nurische fro the chaumbre of three bed- 
dis; and sche hydde hym fro the face of 
3 Athalie, that he were not slayne. And 
he was with hyre in the hous of the 
Lord priuely sex jeer. Forsothe Athalie 
4regnede vpon the lond sex 3eer. The se- 
uenth forsothe 3eer Joiada sente, and tak- 
ynge rewlers of hundrethis, and kny3tis, 
and brou3te in to hym in to the temple 
of the Lord; and he couenauntyde with 
hem a couenaunt of pese, and, adiurynge 
hem in the temple of the Lord, schewide 
sto hem the sone of the kynge. And he 
comaundide? to hem, seyinge, This is the 
«word, the whiche 3e owe to done; the 
thrydde partye of 3ou go in the saboth, 
and keep he wele the watchis of the hous 
of the kyng; the thrydde forsothe party 
be at the 3ate of Seir; and the thridde 
party be at the 3ate that is bihynde the 
dwellynge place of the scheld bereris4; 
and 3e schulen kepen the watchis of the 
z7hous of Messa. Two forsothe partyes of 
30u alle goynge oute the saboth, keepen 
thei the watchis of the hous of the Lord 
saboute the kynge. And 3ee schul ‘setten 
hym! aboute, hauynge aarmys in 3oure 
hondis ; and 3if eny man comme with in 
the purseynt of the temple, be he slayn; 
and 3e schul ben with the kynge com- 
gmynge in aud goynge out. And the 
keepers of hundrethis dyden aftir alle 
thingis that Joiada, the prest, hadde co- 
maundide to hem; and ech takynge their 
men that wenten in to the saboth, with hem 
that wenten out fro the saboth, camen to 
10 Joiada, the prest. The whiche 3aue to hein 
the speris, and the armys of kyng Dauid, 
that weren in the hous of the Lord. 
1And eche stoden hauynge aarmys in 
their hond, fro the riz3t partye of the 
temple vnto the left paartye of the auter 
izand of the hous, aboute the kynge. And 


P couenauntide 4. 4 berer az. 


IV. KINGS. 


XI. 3—12. 


the nursche of hym fro the hows of thre 
stagis; and sche hidde hym fro the face 
of Athalie, that he were not slayn. And3 
he was with hir in the hows of the Lord 
priueli sixe 3eer. Forsothe Athalia. regn- 
ede on® the lond sixe 3eer. Forsothe® in4 
the seuenthe 3eer Joiada? sente, and took 
centuriouns!, and kny3tis, and brou3te" tos 
hym in to the temple of the Lord; and 
couenauntide with hem boond* of pees, 
and he made hem to sweref in the temple 
of the Lord, and schewide to hem the 
sone of the kyng. And he" comaundides 
to hem, and seide, This is the word, which’ 
je owen to do; the thridde part of 30u6 
entre in the sabat’, and kepe the* wak- 
yngis’ of the ‘hows of the kyng?; sothely* 
the thridde part be at the 3ate of Seir; 
and the thridde part be at the 3ate which 
is bihynde the dwellyng place®* of the 
makeris of scheeldis; and 3e schulen kepe 
the wakyngis of the hows of Messa. For-7 
sothe twei partis of 30n alle goynge out in 
the sabat, kepe 3e4 the wakyngis of the 
hows of the Lord aboute the kyng. Ands 
3e schulen cumpasse hym®, and 3e schulen 
haue armeris in 3oure hondis; forsothef 
if ony man entrith® in to the closyng of 
the temple, be he slayn; and 3e schulen 
be with the kyng goynge in and goynge 
out. And the centuriouns® diden bi alles 
thingis whiche! Joiada, the preest, hadde 
comaundid to hem; and alle takynge her 
men that entriden to! the sabat™, with 
hem that 3eden out fro the sabat™, camen 
to Joiada, the preest. Which" 3af to hemo 
speris, and armeris of kyng Dauid, that 
weren in the hows of the Lord. And alle1 
stoden hauynge armeris in her hond, fro 
the ri3t side of the temple ‘til to° the left 
side of the auter and of the hows, aboute 
the kyng. And he? brou3te forth the sone 12 
of the kyng, and puttide? on™ hym® a dia- 


T besetten c. behooldyn £ pr. m. 


"upon. © Butr. P Joiada the prest 1. 4chefteyns upon hundridis 1, the brou3te hem 1. 8Om.™. 


u Joiada 1. 
¢ that 1. 


t a boond 1. 


Y that 1. W sabat day 1. 
> another 1. 


ce placis s. 


* 3e AI. 
4 thei 1. Om. s. 


Y the watchis 1. 


Zkyngis hows1, ®and1. 
€ the kyng 1. 


fandr. fentrer. 4 chefteyns 


upon hundridis 1. i thats. ‘thei aller, linto a. ™sabat day1. 2 The which 1. °vntor. PJoiadaz. 


q putte 1, Tuponi. §& his heed 1. 


+ swere; that 
thei schulden 
helpe him 
feithfuly, in 
the ordeynyng 
of the du king, 
which thing 
thei diden 
gladly in parti; 
for ech man 
kyndeli louyth 
his vere lord, 
in parti, for 
the lordschip 
of a whomman 
displeside him. 
Lire here. c. 


@ 


XI. 13—19. 


he brou3t forthe the sone of the kyng, 
and putte vpon hym a dyademe, and wit- 
nessynge; and thei maden him king, and 
anoynteden; and, ioyinge with the hondis, 
i3seyden, Lyue the kyng! Forsothe Atha- 
lia herde the voice of the puple ren- 
uynge, and goon in to the peplis in to 
ithe temple of the Lord, sche saw3 the 
- kyng stondinge vpon the chayer aftir the 
maner, and syngers, and companyes be- 
sidis hym, and alle the puple of the lond 
- glaadinge, and syngynge with trompis. 
And sche kytt hyre clothis, and cryede, 
15Coniuracioun! coniuracioun! Forsothe 
Joiada comaundide to the rewlers of hun- 
drethis, that weren vpon the hoost, and 
- seith to hem, Leedith hyre out of the 
purseyntis of the temple; and who so 
euer folewith hyre, be he smyten with a 
swerde. Forsothe the prest hadde seyde, 
Be sche not slayn in the temple of the 
16Lord. And thei putten to hyre hondis, 
and stykeden hyre by the weye of the 
entree of the hors besyde the paleys ; and 
17sche is slayn there. Than Joiada coue- 
nauntyde couenaunt of pese bytwen the 
the Lord and the kyng, and bytwene the 
puple, that ther were a puple of the 
Lord; bytwene the king and the puple. 
1s And alle the puple of the lond wente in 
to the temple of Baal; and thei dis- 
truyden his auters, and the ymagis 
broosiden to gydris mi3tily ; Mathan for- 
sothe, the prest of Baal, thei slewen be- 
fore the auter. And the prest sette 
waardis in the hous of the Lord; and 
toke the rewlers of hundrethis, and the’ 
legiouns of Cerethey and Ferethey, and 
19alle the puple of the Jond. And thei 
brou3ten the kyng fro the hous of the 
Lord; and thei camen by the weye of 
the 3aat of the scheeld bereris in to the 
paleys; and he sate vpon the trone of 


IV. KINGS. 


269 


deme, and witnessyng'*; and thei maden or nt 
that is, the 

hym kyng, and anoyntiden ym"; and awe of God, 
: ‘ , in which th 

thei beeten”’ with the hoond, and seiden, hing Galesend 


The kyng lyue! Forsothe Athalia herde 13 0% t stu- 


die, and bi- 

the vois of the puple rennynge, and sche ele aut 

: ; epe it, ani 
entride to the cumpenyes in to the temple make it to be 
kept of othere 


of the Lord, and sche si3 the kyng stond- 4 men. Live 
ynge on” the trone bi custom, and syng- *?* “ 
eris, and cumpenyes ny3 hym, and al the 
puple of the lond beynge glad, and syng- 
ynge with trumpis. And sche to-rente 
hir clothis, and criede,‘Swerynge togidere! 
swerynge togidere*! ether tresoun. For-15 
sotheY Joiada comaundide to the centu- 
riouns”, that weren on®* the oost, and seide 
to hem, Lede 3e hir out of the closyngis 
of the temple; and who euer suetht hir, 
be> smytun with swerd. Forsothe® the 
preest seide, Be sche not slayn in the 
temple of the Lord. And thei? puttiden 16 
hondis on® hir, and hurliden’ hir bi the 
weie of the entryng of horsis bisidis the 
paleis; and sche was slayn there. Ther-17 
for Joiada made boond of pees bitwixe 


+ sueth ; to 
fanere hir, 
Lire here. c. 


the Lord and the kyngt, and bitwixe the aire 
puple, that it schulde be the puple of the techie te 
awe of the 
Lord§; and bitwixe the kyng and the Lord. 
puple’||. Al the puple of the lond Bie 18 recat 
tride in to the temple of Baal; and thei ey 
distrieden the auteris of hym, and al to- ae Ge 
braken strongli the ymagis; and thei kill- puples that 
t 
iden bifore the auter Mathan, the preest Saas he 


feithful to the 


of Baal. kyng, and that 


And" the preest settide! kep- 


yngis in the hows of the Lord; and he the kyng | 
took centuriouns*, and the! legiouns of Ce- _ feithfuly tho 
thingis, that 


rethi" and Pherethi", and al the puple 
of the lond. And thei ledden forth the 19 crineeeo 
kyng fro the hows of the Lord; and thei Lire here. c. 
camen bi the weie of the 3ate of makeris° ieemead dis. 
of scheldis in to the paleis; aud he? sat Phclethiis in. 
on’ the trone of kyngis. And al the puple 20 antfal tooo 
of the lond was glad, and the citee restide. Ce 


Forsothe’ Athalia was slayn bi swerd in  Katholicon 


weren for the 


q Cerethi is 


s Om. 2. 


tthe witnessyng 1. Om. plures. ¥ clappiden 1. Wuponr. * Coniuracioun, coniuracioun 1. 
¥Certis 1. %chefteynes1. @uponr. bbehex c¢Andi. dmenr. ¢uponi. thei hurliden 1. 
& puple he made pees 1. h and Joiada 1. i sette 1. k chefteyns upon hundredis 1. 1Om. 1 
™ archers 1. © alblastersi. © the makeris1. P Joas3, dupons. * Certis 1. 


270 


20kyngist. And alle the puple of the lond 
glaadid", and alle the cytee restide in 
oon. Athalia forsothe is slayn with 

2iswerde in the hous of the kyng. And 
of seuen 3eer was Joas, when he beganne 
to regne. 


CAP. XII. 


1 The seuenth 3eer of Hieu . regnede 
Joas; fourty 3eer he regnede in Jerusa- 
lem; the name of his modir Sebia of 
2Bersabe. And Joas dyde ri3t beforn the 
Lord alle days, the whiche tau3te hyin 
3Joiada, the prest. Neuerthelater hee3e 
thingis he dide not aweye; 3it forsothe 
the puple offride, and brente encense in 
4hei3tis. And Joias seide to the prestis, 
Al the monee of seyntis’, ‘the whiche¥ 
were brou3t in to the temple of the Lord 
of men passynge, ‘the whiche™ is offred 
for the synne of the soule, and the whiche 
thei bryngen in wilfully, and by dome of 


their herte, in to the temple of the Lord, 


the prestis taken thei it aftir their ordre. 
And enstoore thei the coueryngis of the 
hous, 3if eny thinge thei seen necessarye 
sin the restorynge. Thanne vnto the 
three and twentithe jeer of kyng Joas, 
the prestis restooreden not the couer- 
zyngis of the temple. And kyng Joas 
clepide Joiada, the bischop, and the 
prestis, seyinge to hem, Why the couer- 
yngis 3e restoren not of the temple? 
Wille 3e than not no more taken the 
monee aftir 3oure ordre, bot to the re- 
sstooringe of the temple 3eldith it. And 
the prestis ben forfendid to eny more 
takyn monee of the puple, and to re- 
9storen the coueryngis of the hous. And 
Joiada, the bischop, toke oon tresoringe 
place, and he opnede an hoole ther 
aboue, and putte it bisyde the auter, at 
the ri3t syde of men commynge in to the 
house of the Lord; and the prestis, that 


IV. KINGS. 


XI. 20—XII. 9: 


the hows of the kyng. And Joas was of21 
seven 3eer, Whanne he bigan to regne. 


CAP. XII 


Joas regnede in the seuenthe 3eer of1 
Hieu; Joas’ regnede fourti 3eer in Jeru- 
salem; the name of his modir was Sebia 
of Bersabee. And Joas dide ri3tfulnesse 2 
bifor the Lord in alle the daies, in whiche 
Joiada, the preest, tau3te hym. . Netheles3 
he dide no3t awey hi3¢ thingis; for jit the 
puple made sacrifice, and brente encense 
in hije thingis: And Joas seide to thea 
preestis, ‘Preestis bi her ordre take" al 
that’ money of hooli thingis, which” is 
brou3t of men passyng forth in to the 
temple of the Lord, ‘which money* is 
offrid for the prijs of soule**, and ‘which 
money theiY bryngen wilfuli, and bi the? 
fredom of her herte, in to the temple of 
the Lord*. And ‘the preestis> repareles 
the hilyngis of the hows, if thei seen ony 
thing nedeful in reparelyng. Therfor® thee 
preestis repareliden not the hilyngis of the 
temple, ‘til to’ the thre and twentithe 3eer 
of kyng Joas. And Joas, the kyng, clepide7 
Joiada, the bischop, and the prestis, and 
seide to hem, Whi han 3e not reparelid 
the hilyngis of the temple? Therfor nyle 
3e more take money bi 3oure ordre, but 
3elde® it to the reparacioun of the temple. 
And the prestis weren forbodun to take 8 
more thef money of the puple, and to re- 
parele the hilyngis of the hows. And9g 
Joiada, the bischop, took a ecofere of ® 
tresorie’, and openyde an hole aboue, and 
settide it bisidis the auter, at the ri;tside 
of men entrynge in to the hows of the 
Lord; and preestis, that kepten the doris, 
senten* in! it al the money that was brou3t 


tthe kyngis 4. UofGalaad 4. V the seyntis 4. W that c. 

Shex. tthehigzx. tQOm.31. Vther. Wthatr. X*andthatxy. **thesoules.  y that ment. 

2 Om.1. 4 Lord, prestis bi her oordre take itr. » Om.1. ¢ Sothly 1. dvntor. © 3elde 3e a sec. m. 
'Om.1. 0 plures. ofthe nm. itresour x. * senten or puttent. Vin tox 


XII. ro—-18. 


kepten the doris, putten in it al the 
monee that was brou3t to the temple of 
10the Lord. And when he sau3 to myche 
monee to be in the tresorye,'a scribe of 
the, kyngis* stey3ide up, and a byschop, 
- and’ thei heelden’ out, and noumbreden 
the monee that was foundun in the hous 
ilof the Lord. :And thei 3euen it aftir the 
noumbre and mesure in the hond of hem, 
that weren before to the masouns of the 
hous of the Lord, the whiche 3euen it in 
carpentaris, and in thes ‘masouns, that 
12 wrou3ten in the hous ‘of the Lord, and 
the coueryngis maaden; and in hem 
thatY hewyden’ stonys; and that schuld- 
en byen treese and stonys, the whiche 
weren hewen out; so that the enstor- 
ynge of the hous of the Lord were ful- 
fillid in alle thingis, ‘the whiche* nededen 
expensis to the hous to be warnyschid. 
13 Neuerthelatre ther weren not maad of 
the same monee the stenys of the temple 
of the Lord, and the fleschookis, and the 
censeris, and the trompis, and all golden 
vessel? and silueren, of the monee that 
was brou3t in to the temple of the Lord. 
14To thes forsothe that maden werk was 
jeuen, that the temple of the Lord were 
isenstooride®. And no reknynge was maad 
to tho men that token the monee, that 
thei delen it to the craftyse men; bot in 
16feith thei tretiden it. The monee for- 
sothe for trespasse, and the monee for 
synnes, thei brou3ten not in to the temple 
170f the Lord, for it was of prestis. Than 
Azael, kyng of Cyrye, stey3ide up, and 
fau3t azeynus Geth; and he took it, and 
he dresside his face, that he stey3e up in 
isto Jerusalem. For what thing Joas, king 
of Juda, took alle the halowed thingis, 
‘the whiche® Josaphath, and Joram, and 
Ochosias, hise faders, kyngis of Juda, 
hadden sacred, and the whiche he hadde 


xkyng ae. Ythei a. 2 heewenc. 
e€ that c pr.m. 
™stieden upr. Oheldeni. 9% Om. plures. 


ters pkMsx¢. crafti men and trees ELP. 
monei 1.  tretiden or spendiden 1. 


b Therfore 1. ¢ the halewid thingis 1. 4 that 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


® that c pr. m. 


P the whiche pixmxc. 
Ss hewen ELP. 
x money offrid 1. 
€ the fadris 1. 


271 


to the temple of the Lord. And whanne1o0 
thei sien that ful myche money was in 
the tresorie, the scryuen of the kyng and 
the bischop stieden™, and schedden® 2¢° out, 
and thei noumbriden the money that was 
founden in the. hous of the Lord. Andu 
thei 3auen_it bi noumbre and mesure in 
the hond of hem, that weren souereyns to 
the masouns of the hows of the Lord, 
whiche? ‘spendiden that money4 in ‘crafti 
men of trees’, and in these masouns, that 
wrou3ten in the hous of the Lord, andiz2 
maden the hilyngis, and in these men that 
hewiden stoonys; and that thei schulden 
bie trees and stoonys, that weren hewids 
doun ; so that the reparacioun of the hows 
of the Lord was fillid in alle thingis, that 
nedident cost to make strong the hows. 
Netheles water pottis of the temple of the 13 
Lord weren not maad of the same money, 
and fleischokis, and censeris, and trumpis ; 
ech vessel of gold and of* siluer weren 
not maad of the money, that was brou3t 
in to the temple of the Lord. For it was 14 
jouun to hein that maden werk", that the 
temple of the Lord schulde be reparelid. 
And rekenyng was not maad to these men 1s 
that token monei’, that thei schulden deele 
it to crafti men; but thei tretiden” it in 
feith. Sotheli thei brou3ten not in to the 16 
temple of the Lord the money* for tres- 
pas, and the money for synnes, for it was 
the preestis. Thannef Asael, kyng of17 tThanne; that 


is, aftir that 


Sirie, stiedeY, and fau3te a3en Geth; and — Joas took to 
, : : him Goddi 
he took it, and dresside his face, that he  ghour, and 


b 1g killide in the 
temple Zacarie, 
the hij prest, 


schulde? stie? in to Jerusalem. Wherfor 
Joas, kyng of Juda, took alle ‘thingis ha- 


r he re. 
lewid’, whiche’ Josephat hadde halewid, preuyde the 
. aes kyng of his 
and Joram, and Ocozie, fadris® of hymn, nie Lire 
here. ¢. 


kyngis of Juda, and whiche thingis he 
hadde offrid, and al the siluer, that my3te 
be foundun in the tresours of the temple 
of the Lord, and in the paleis of the kyng. 
4 crafty men 4. 


b vessels 4. © restoryd 4. 


4 3auen it pkmsx¢.  carpen- 
uthe werk 1. Vv the 
a wende up 1. 


tt Om. EL. 
z wolde 1. 


t neden a. 
Y wente up t. 


272 


offred, and al the syluer and gold, that 
my3t be founden in the tresouries of the 
temple of the Lord, and in paleys® of the 
kyng. And he sente to Azael, the kyng of 
Cyrye, and wente aweye fro Jerusalem. 
19 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Joas, and alle thingis that he dyde, whe- 
ther thes ben not writen in the book of 
the wordis of the days of the kyngis of 
20Juda? Forsothe his seruauntis rysen, 
and coniureden bytwene hemseluen; and 
thei smyten Joas in the hous of Mello, in 
21the goynge doun of Sela. Josafath for- 
sothe, the sone of Semath, and Joiadath, 
the sone of Somer, his seruauntis, smyten 
hym, and he is deed; and thei birieden 
hym with his faders in the cytee of Da- 
uith ; and Amazias, his sone, regnede for 
hym. 
CAP. XIII. 

1 The three and twentithe 3eer of Joas, 
the sone of Ochasie, kyng of Juda, regn- 
ede Joachas, the sone of Hieu, vpon Yrael, 

2inf Samarie seuentene 3eer. And he dyde 
yuel before the Lord, and he folowide the 
synnes of Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, 
that maad Yrael to synne; and he bow- 

side not aweye fro hem. And the wood- 
nesse of the Lord is wroth a3eynst Yrael, 
and he toke hem in to the hondis of 
Azael, kynge of Cyrye, and in the hond 
of Benadab, the sone of Azael, all days. 
4Forsothe Joachaz preyide the face of the 
Lord, and the Lord herde hym; he sawe 
forsothe the angwysche of Yrael, for the 
kyng of Cyrye hadde ‘to trodens hem. 

»And the Lord 3aue a saueour to Yrael, 
and he is delyuerd fro the hond of the 
kyng of Cyrie; and the sonys of Yrael 
dwelliden in their tabernaclis, as jistirday 

cand the thrid day henns. Neuerthelatre 
thei wenten not aweye fro the synnes of 
the hous of Jeroboam, that made Yrael 


€ the paleys ce. 


f Joas1. &sente thesex. e&& the kyng mu. 
mthatr. Andi. ther. 
smetyn ELP. ‘of Mello1s. t Forsothe 1. 
Xuponi, Ythe soner. 2 tho synnus 1. 
of Sirie 1. ¢ thi that the Lord 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


f and p. 


h Om. 1. 

P seruauntis of Joas 1. 
u the sone I. 
® woodnesse or strong 1. 


XII. 19—XII. 6. 


And hef sente® to Asael, kyng8® of Sirie; 19 


and® hei 3ede awei fro Jerusalem. Sotheli 
the residue‘ of wordis! of Joas, and alle 
thingis whiche™ he dide, whether these 
ben not writun in the book of wordis of 


daies of the kyngis of Juda? Forsothe™ 20 


hise® sernauntis? risiden?, and sworen to- 
gidere bitwixe hem silf, and smytiden* 
Joas in the hows Mello’, and in the goyng 


doun of Sela. Fort Jozachat, sone" of Se-21 


math, and Joiadath, sone" of Scomer, hise 
seruauntis, smytiden’ him, and he was 
deed; and thei birieden hym with hise 
fadris in the citee of Dauid; and Amasie, 
his sone, regnyde for hym. 


CAP. XIII. 


In the thre and twentithe 3eer of Joas,1 
sone” of Ocozie, kyng of Juda, Joachaz, 
sone’ of Hieu, regnede on* Israel, in Sa- 
marie seuentene 3eer. And he dide yuel2 
bifor the Lord, and he suede the synnes 
of Jeroboam, soneY of Nabath, that made 
Israel to do synne; and he bowide not 
awei fro tho%. And the strong veniauncey 3 
of the Lord was wrooth a3ens Israel, and 
he bitook hem in to the hondis® of Azael, 
kyng of Sirie, and in® the hond of Bena- 
dab, sone of Asael4, in alle daies. For-4 
sothe Joachaz bisou3te the face of the 
Lord, and the Lord herde hym; for he® 
siz the anguysch of Israel, for the kyng 
of Sirte hadde al to brokun hem. And5 
the Lord 3af a sanyourt to Israel, and he 
was delyuered fro the hond of the kyng 
of Sirie; and the sones of Israel dwell- 
iden in her tabernaclis, as 3istirdai and 
the thridde dai ago. Netheles thei de-6 
partiden not fro the synnes of the hows 
of Jeroboam, that made Israel to do synne; 


& troden pz. 


i Azael 1. EK remenannti. ! the wordis E11. 
Grisen EL. resen I. resin P. T smeten I. 

Vv smoten I. smetin ELP. W the sone I. 
bhoond1, ¢tor 4 Asael, kyng 


t+ veniaunce ; 
in Latyn it is 
seid, the wood- 
nesse of the 
Lord, that is, 
the rigour of 
Goddis riztful- 
nesse, to the 
punysching of 
synne, Lire 
here. C. 

t sauyour ; this 
sauyour was 
the aungel 
souereyn of the 
rewme of Is- 
rael, foraun- . 
gels, sonereyns 
of rewmys, 
procuren the 
good of rewme 
assigned to her 
kepinge, as it 
is had in x. ¢°. 
of Danyel ; 
wherfor this 
aungel lettide, 
bi Goddis or. 
denaunce, ba- 
tels to rise 
a3enus Joachaz, 
fro that tyme; 
so that then3 
he hadde not 
puple and vertu 
to a3enstonde 
aduersaries, 
netheles aduer- 
saries of him 
weren refreyn- 
ed bi vertu of 
the aungel 
priuy to men, 
bi drede sent 
in to hem, 
ether by other 
maner, so that 
thei leften 
Joachaz and 
his puple in 
pees. Lire 
heres C. 


XIN. 7—16. 


to synnen, and in hem thei 3eden ; forsothe 
and ‘the mawmett wode abood stylle in 
7Samarye. And ther ben not laft to Joa- 
chas of the puple, bot, fyue hundreth hors 
men, and ten chaaris, aiid ten thousandis 
of fote men; forsothe the kyng of Cyrye 
hadde slayn hem, and hadde brou3te hem 
doun as powdre in the threschynge of the 
scorn flore. The remnaunt forsothe of the 
wordis of Joachaz, and alle thingis that 
he dyde, bot and his strengthe, whether 
not these thingis ben writen in the boke 
of the wordis of the days of the kyngis 
9of Yrael? And Joachaz slepte with his 
faders, and thei byryeden hym in Sama- 
rye; and Joas, his sone, regned for hym. 
10 The seuenth® and thrittithe! 3eer of Joas, 
kyng of Juda, regnede Joas, the sone of 
Joachaz, vpon Yrael in Samarye sextene 
nijeer. And he dyde that, that is euyl in 
the sist of the Lord; forsothe he bowide 
not doun fro alle the synnes of Jeroboam, 
the sone of Nabath, the whiche maad 
12 Yrael to synne; in hem he wente. The 
reimnaunt forsothe of the wordis of Joas, 
and alle thingis that he dyde, bot and the 
strength of hym, what maner wijse he 
fau3te ajeynst Amaziam, kyng of Juda, 
whether not these ben wryten in the 
boke of the wordis of the days of the 
iskyngis of Yrael? And Joas slepte with 
his fadirs; Jeroboam forsothe, his sone, 
sate vpon his see. Bot Joas is byryed in 
14Samarye with the kyngis of Yrael. He- 
lise forsothe sijkide in sijknesse, by the 
whiche and he is deed; and Joas, the 
kynge of Yrael, came doun to hym, and 
wepte beforn hym, and seyde, Fader 
myne! fadir myne! the chaar of Yrael, 
isand the charieter of it! And Helise 
seith to hym, Brynge forthe a bowe and 
arowis. And whanne he hadde brou3t 
isto hym a bowe and arowis, he seide to 
the kyng of Yrael, Putte thin hond vpon 


h seuene cE. 


f but thei 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


273 


thei‘ eden in tho synnes; sotheli also the 
wode&} dwellide® in Samarie. And to7 
Joacham! weren not left of the puple, nok 
but fyue hundrid kni3tis, and ten charis, 
and ten thousynde of foot men; for the 
kyng of Sirie hadde slayn hem, and hadde 
dryue hem! as in to poudur in the threisch- 
yng of a cornfloor. Forsothe the residue™ s 
of wordis" of Joachaz, and alle thingis 
whiche® he dide, and the strength of hym, 
whether these ben not wrytun in the book 
of wordis of daies of the kyngis of Israel ? 
And Joachaz slepte with hise fadris, and 9 
thei? birieden hym in Samarie; and Joas, 
his sone, regnyde for hym. In the se-10 
uenthe’ and threttithe’4 3eer of Joas, king 
of Juda, Joas, sone® of Joachaz, regnede 
on’ Israel in Samarie sixtene jeer. Andi 
he dide that, that is yuel in thet si3t of. 
the Lord; for he bowide not awei fro alle 
the synnes of Jeroboam, sone" of Nabath, 
that made Israel to do synne; he’ 3ede 
in tho synnes. 
wordis* of Joas, and alle thingis whicheY 
he dide, but also his strengthe, hou he 
fau3t ajens Amasie, kyng of Juda, whe- 
ther these ben not writun in the book of 
wordis of daies? of the kyngis of Israel? 
And Joas slepte with hise fadris ; forsothe 13 
Jeroboam sat on* his trone. Sotheli> Joas 
was biried in Samarie with the kyngis of 
Israel. Forsothe Elisee was sijk in sike-14 
nesse’, bid which and® he was deed; and 
Joas, kyng of Israel, 3ede doun to hym, 
and wepte bifor hym, and seide, My fadir! 
my fadir! the chare of Israel, and the 
charietere therof! And Elisee seide tos 
hym, Brynge thouf a bouwe and arowis. 
And whaune he hadde brou3te to Elisee 
a bouwe and arowis, he’ seide to the kyng 16 
of Israel, Set thin hond on the bouwe. And 
whanne he hadde set his hond, Elisee 
settide! his hondis on* the hondis of the 
kyng, and seide, Opene thou the eest17 


i thretti 4. 


& thicke wode 1. » aboode stille 1. dwellide ful s. 1 Joacham, kyng of Israel 1. * Om.1. 


UOm., plures. ™remenaunt1. "the woordist. Othat1. Pmeni. 4senen BILP. 44 thretti n. 
‘the sone 1. Supont. tOm.1. %thesone1. VY but hes. Wremenaunt 1. *the wordis1. Y that 1. 
Zthedaies1. @uponr1. bAnd1. ¢Casikenesser. 4ins. ¢€Om.a. fthon hidirt. ¢& Helizee 1. 
h set, that is, whanne he had take the bowe in. isette1. * upon1. 


VOL. II. 


Nn 


+ the wode ; 
this was of the 
reliks of the 
worschiping of 
Baal. Nieu dis- 
triede the tem- 
ple of Baal 
that was in 
Samarie, but 
the wode wher 
ynne lecherie 
was hauntid 
lefte stille, 
ajenns the co- 
maundement of 
the lawe. Lire 
here. c. 


Forsothe the residue’ of 12 


274 


the bowe. And whann he hadde putte 
his hond, Helisee putte aboue his hondis 
1j7to the hondis of the kyng, and seith, 
Opyn the eeste wyndowe. And whanne 
he hade opnede, Helise seyde, Kast an 
arowe; and he kest. And Helise seith, 
The arowe of the help of the Lord, and 
the arowe of helthe ajeyns Cyrye; and 
thou schalt smyten Cyrye in to Affeth, 
18to the tyme that thou waast it. And 
he seith, Taak the arowis. The whiche 
whanne he hadde taaken, eft he seyde to 
hym, Smyte with a dart the erth. And 
whanne he hadde smyten thre sithis, and 
i9hadde stonden, the man of God wrath- 
thede ajeyns hym, and seith, 3if thou 
haddist smyten fyue sithis, or sexe sithis, 
or seuen sithis, thou haddist smyten Cy- 
rye vnto the hool waastynge; nowe for- 
sothe thou schalt smyten it three sithis. 
20 Thanne Helise dy3ede, and thei biriedeu 
hym. Forsothe the lityl theeuis of Moab 
21camen in to the lond in that seer. Summe 
forsothe byryinge a man, seejen the lyty] 
theeuis, and kasten the careyn in the se- 
pulcre of Helise; the whiche whanne 
hadde touchid the boonis of Helisee, the 
man quyckened a3eyn, and stode vpon 
22his feet. Thanne Azael, kyng of Cyrie, 
tourmentyde Yrael alle the days of Joa- 
23chaz. And the Lord hadde reuthe of hem, 
and he turnede aj3eyn to hem for his co- 
uenaunt, that he hadde with Abraham, 
Ysaac, and Jacob; and he wolde not sea- 
tren hem, ne fully throwen aweye, into 
24the present tyme. Forsothe Azael, the 
kyng of Cyrye, diede; and Benadab, his 
zssone, regnede for hym. Bot Joas, the 
sone of Joachaz, toke the cytees fro the 
hond of Benadab, the sone of Azael, ‘the 
whiche' he hadde taken fro the hond of 
Joachas, his fadir, thor} ri3t of batey]; 
thre sithis Joas smoot hym, and he jeeld- 
ide the cytees to Yrael. 


IV. KINGS. 


XIII. 17—25. 


wyndow. And whanne he hadde openyd, 
Elisee seide, Schete thou an arewe; and 
he schete!. And Elisee seide, [¢#™ zs an arewe 
of helthe of the Lord, and an arowe of 
helthe a3ens Sirie; and thou schalt smyte 
Sirie in Affeth, til thou waste it. 
Elisee seide, Take awei the arowis. And 
whanne he hadde take awei, Elisee seide 
eft" to him, Smyte thou the erthe with a 
dart. And whanne he® hadde smyte thre 


tymes, and hadde stonde?, the man of God 19 
was wrootht a3ens hym4, and seide, If thou. 


haddist smyte fyue sithis, ether sixe sithis, 
ethir seuen sithis, thou schuldist haue 
smyte Sirie ‘til toé the endyng ; now for- 
sothe thou schalt smyte it thre sithis. 


And 18 


+ the man of 
God was 
wrooth; for it 
was schewid to 
Elisee, that if 
the kyng 
smytide the 
erthe ofte 
without cess- 


Therfor® Elisee was deed, and thei' biri- 20 yng, be schulde 


eden hym. And the" theuys of Moab 
camen in to the lond in that 3eer. For- 
sothe sum men birieden a man, and thei 
sijen the’ theues”, and thei castiden* forth 
the deed bodi inY the sepulcre of Elisee ; 
and whanne it hadde touchid the bonys 
of Elisee, the man lyuede ajen, and stood 
on’Y his feet. 
Sirie, turmentide Israel in alle the daies 
of Joachaz. 


his® couenaunt, which’ he hadde® with 


Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and he noldef 


distrie hem, nether cast® awei outirli, til® 
in to present' tyme. Forsothe* Azael, 
kyng of Sirie, diede; and Benadad, his 


Therfor? Azael, kyng of 22 


And the Lord hadde merci23 
on® hem>, and turnede ajen to hem for 


caste doun Si- 
rie outirly ; 
netheles Elisee 


21 nadde not li- 


cence to seye to 
the king the 
reuelacioun, 
sithis the Hooly 
Goost touchith 
the hertis of 
profetis in that 
maner bi which 
he wole. First 
it was schewid 
to Elisee, that 
if the king 
smoot ofte the 
erthe, he 
schulde do 
awey Sirie ; 
netheles it was 
not schewid 
hou ofte he 
schulde smyte. 
But aftir that 
he smoot 


24 thries and 


ceesside, it was 
schewid to 


sone, regnede for hym. Forsothe! Joas,25 Elise that the 


sone™ of Joachas, took awei citees fro the 
hond of Benadad{, sone" of Asael, which® 
he hadde take bi the ri3t of batel fro the 
hoond of Joachaz, his fadir; Joas smoot 
hym? thre tymes, and he j3eldide the4 
citees to Israel. 


k that c prom. 


I schotte 1. ™ This1, “Om. exp. ° Joas 1. 
‘ment. UOm.1s, YOm.1.  ¥ theues riz 1. 
upon. > the sones of Israel 1. ¢ the 1. 


h Om. 1. 
4 tho 1. 


P stonde séille 1. 


4 that 1. 
ithis present r. k Andi. | Certis1. ™ the soner. "thesones. ©that1. pP Benadabr. 


4the kyng 1. * vato1. $ Thanne 1. 
xcasten I. Yintor Y¥upons. 2 Thanne 1, 
€ hadde maad1. fwolde not 1. & caste hem 1. 


ng schulde 
smyte Sirie 
thre sithis, and 
in particuler 
batails. Lire 
here. c. 
+ Benudad ; 
Jerom seith, 
that this sone 
of Azael schal 
be writun bi 
d in the ende, 
and so it is in 
Ebreu ; but 
Benadab, that 
3ede bifor Aza- 
el, is writun 
bi 4 in the 
ende. Lire 
here. c. 


XIV, I1—r0o, 


CAP. Xin 


1 In the secounde 3eer of Joas, the sone 
of Joachas, kyng of Yrael, regnede Ama- 
2zias, the sone of Joas, kyng of Juda. Of 
fyue and twenty 3eer he was, whanne he 
beganne to regnen; twenty forsothe and 
nyne 3eer he regnede in Jerusalem ; name 
30f his modir, Joaden of Jerusalem. And 
he dyde ri3t before the Lord, neuerthe- 
latre not as Danid, his fadir; aftir alle 
thingis that Joas, his fadir, dyde he dide, 
4 bot that oonly, that hee3e thingis he dydde 
not aweye; 3it forsothe the puple offrede, 
sand brende encense iu hei3tis. And whan 
he hadde weldyde the rewme, he smoote 
his seruauntis, that hadden slayn the 
ckyng, his fadre; the sonys forsothe of 
hem that hadden slayn, he slew3 not; 
after that that is writen in the boke of 
the lawe of Moyses, as the Lord co- 
maundide to Moyses, seyinge, The fadirs 
schuln not dy3en for the sonys, ne the 
sonys for the fadirs, bot echone schal 
7dyen in his synne. He smote Edom in 
the valey of placis of salt, tenn thousandis; 
and he cau3te the place, that hatte Petra, 
in bateyl; and he clepide his name Jeze- 
echel, vnto the day that is nowe. Thanne 
Amazias sente messagers to Joas, the 
sone of Joachas, the sone of Hieu, kyng 
of Yrael, seyinge, Comme, and see we us. 
9 And Joas, kyng of Yrael, sente a3eyn to 
Amazias, kyng of Juda, seyinge, The 
thistill of Lybane sente to the cedre, that 
is in Libane, seyinge, 3eue thi dou3tir 
to my sone wijf; and the beestis of the 
wijlde wode, that ben in Lybane, wenten, 
ioand treden™ the thistill. Aud smytyuge 
thou haddist the ouerhond vpon Edom, 


IV. KINGS. 


275 


CAPT. XIV. 


Yn the secounde 3eer of Joas, sone’ of! 
Joachas, kyng of Israel, Amasie, sone’ of 
Joas, kyng of Juda, regnyde. Amasie2 
was of fyue and twenti 3eer, whanne he 
bigan to regne; forsothe’ he regnyde in 
Jerusalem nyne and twenti 3eer ; the name 
of his modir was Joade of Jerusalem. And: 
he dide ri3tfulnesse bifor the Lord, nethe- 
les not as Dauid, his fadirt; he dide bi 
alle thingis whiche" Joas, his fadir, dide, 
no but this oonlif, that he dide not awei4 + sis onely; 
hi3 thingis; for 3it the puple made sacri- me 
fice, and brent encence in hi3 thingis. Ands sega nest 
whanne he™ hadde gete the rewme, he "is that is 
smoot hise seruauntis, that hadden killid _ ristfulnesse 
the kyng, his fadir; but he killide not thee note thi 
sones of hem that hadden slayn ‘the hyng*, pee hr 
bi that that is writun in the book of the 
lawe of Moyses, as the Lord comaundide 
to Moises, and seide, Fadris schulen not 
die for the” sones, nethir the* sones for 
the’ fadris, but eche man schal die in his _ of teeth, for 
owne synne. HeY smoot Edom in the7 ia th 
valey of makyngis of salt,‘he smoot? ten Pena 
thousynde®, and took ‘the Stoon? in batel* ; — orrour and so- 
and he clepide the name therof Jethel{, ‘til Lire here. c. 
6 8 ; ‘hanne 3 that 
in tot present dai. Thanne§ Amasie sente g is, aftir pride, 
messangeris to Joas, sone® of Joachaz, (the Wane 
sone® of Hieu, kyng of Israel, and seide, BW eel 
Come thou, and se we vs ‘én batel?. Ando seareese 
Joas, kyng of Israel, sente azen to Amasie, y 


seid, he dide 


t Jethel; that 
is, sourenesse 


in 11, book of 


Q Paralip. : 
kyng of Juda, and seide’, The cardue", @. Gol'suf, 
‘ ° >i fride him falle 
that is, a low eerbe, and ful of thornesi, je 3" aos 
of the Liban sente to the cedre, which* is — Presumpcioun, 
3 ; 4 i that he terride 
in the! Liban, and seide, 3yue thi dou3tir —Joas, king of 

Os ‘i Israel, to batel, 
wijf to my sone; and the beestis of the _ that his pride 


: : 5 b 
forest, that ben in the Liban, passiden™, goun so. And 


and tredden® doun the cardue. Thou 10 ‘bis itis that 


is seid here 
and thin herte arered thee; be thou hast smyte®, and haddist the maistri on? icv Get is, 
® * « ° . . ° oie r OFe 
apayid® with thi glorie, and sytt in thi Edom‘, and thin herte hath" reisid thee; seid wickid. 
hous; why stirist thou euyl, that thou be thou apaied with glorie‘, and sitte in ea saa 
here. ¢. 
™ treteden B. ® pagid c. 
Fthesoner. ‘andi. ¢tfadirdider1. Uthatr. v4» Amasier. VY his fadir1. Whert. * Om.1. 
yAmasier. 2Om.1. ® thousynde of meni, »Om.1. © batel the zoble Stoon, a citee of Arabie 1. 
dvntothis1. ¢thesoner. fOm.1. &seide mystily 1. > cardue or thistle1. iOm.1. & that 1. 
1Om.1. ™ passiden forth 1. "trooden1. smyte Edom1. Puponi. iti. * therfore hath 1. 


* this glorie 1. 


Nn2@ 


276 


ilfalle, and Juda with thee? And Ama- 
zias assentyde not; and Joas, the kyng 
of Yrael, stey3ide up, aud thei see3en 
hem silf, he and Amazias, the kyng of 
Juda, in Betlsames, the bour3toun of 
12Jude. And Juda is smyten beforn Yrael ; 
and thei flowen echoue in to their taber- 
isnaclis. Joas, the kyng of Yrael, forsothe 
toke Amazie, the kynge of Juda, the sone 
of Joas, the sone of Ochosie, in Beth- 
sames, and brou3te hym in to Jerusa- 
lem; and he to-brast the walle of Jerusa- 
lem, fro the 3aat of Effraym vnto the 
3aat of the cornere, in foure hundreth 
uucubitis. And he toke al the gold and 
syluer, and alle the vessels, that ben 
foundun in the hous of the Lord, and in 
the tresories of the kyng, and prisoners, 
sand is turnede ajeyn in to Samarye. The 
remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of Joas, 
the whiche he dyde, and his strengthe, 
in the whiche he fanjte ajeynst Amazie, 
kyng of Juda, whether not thes ben 
writen in the boke of the wordis of the 
isdays of the kyngis of Yrael? And Joas 
slepte with his fadirs, and is biryed in 
Samarye with the kyngis of Yrael; and 
Jeroboam, his sone, regnede for hym. 
17Forsothe Amazias, the sone of Joas, 
lyuede kyng of Juda, aftir that Joas, the 
sone of Joachas, kyng of Yrael, dy3ide, 
isfyue and twenty 3eer. The remnaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Amazie, whe- 
ther not thes ben writen in the boke of 
the wordis of the days of the kyngis of 
i9Juda? And there is maad ajeyn hym 
coniuracyonn in Jerusalem, and he fleei3° 
in to Lachis; and thei senten aftir hym 
in to Lachis, and thei slewen hym there. 
20 And brou3ten hym thennus in hors, and 
he is biryide in Jerusalem with his fa- 
2idirs, in the cytee of Dauid. Forsothe 
alle the puple of Jude toke Azaria, 3eeris 
born sixteene; and thei ordeynde hym 


IV. KINGS. 


NIV. 11-21. 


thin hows; whi excitist™ thon yuel, that 

thou. falle, and Juda with thee? Andi 

Amasie assentide not ‘to be in pees*; and 

Joas, kyngY of Israel, stiede’*, and he and 

Amasie, kyng* of Juda, sien hem silf in” 

Bethsames, a citee of Juda. And Judaiz2 

was sinytun bifor® Israel ; and thei fledden 

ech man in to his tabernaclis. Sotheli 13 

Joas, kyng* of Israel, took in Bethsames 

Amasie, kyng’ of Juda, the sone of Joas, 

sone® of Ocozie, and brou3te hym in to 

Jerusalem ; and hef brak the wal of Jeru- 

salem, fro the 3ate of Effraym ‘til to® the 

3ate of the corner, bi foure hundrid cu- 

bitis. And he took al the gold and sil-14 

uer, and alle vessels", that weren fonndun 

in the hows of the Lord, and in the tre- 

sours of the kyng; and he took ostagis'},  - 
and turnede ajen in to Samarie. Sothelik 1s Siemens ‘ 
the resydue of wordis! of Joas, whiche™ eae 


+ ostagis ; that 


my3ten not 
s s 5 Seer rebelle agenus 
he dide, and his strengthe, bi which he jor °;?0 
fau3t ajens Amasie, kyng of Juda, whe-  ?¢7. © 


ther these ben not writun in the book of 
wordis of dayes of the" kyngis of Israel ? 
And Joas slepte with hise fadris, and was 16 
biried in Samarie with the kyngis of Is- 
rael; and Jeroboam, his sone, regnede for 
hym. Forsothe Amasie, sone® of Joas,17 
kyng? of Juda, lyuede fyue and twenti 
jeer, after that Joas, souel of Joachaz, 
kyng of Israel, was deed. Yorsothe the1s 
residue of wordis' of Amasie, whether 
these ben not writun in the book of wordis 
of daies of the kyngis of Juda? And19 


‘sweryngt togidirs in Jerusalem was maad — ¢ swering, etc.; 


. e that is — 
aj3ens hym, and he fledde in to Lachis; splrkete oes 
. : Q * here. c 
and thei senten§ aftir hym in achi 7: 
§ J n to Lac 8; § thei senten, 


and killiden hym there. And thei baren 2ostect multitude 
: : a A of werriours. 

out hym*s in horsis, and he was biried in Lire here. c. 

Jerusalem with hise fadris, in the citee of 

Dauid. Forsothe al the puple of Juda2i 

took Azarie‘, hauynge sixtene 3eer; and 

maden hym king for his fadir Amasie. 

And" he bildide Ahila, and restoride it to 22 


9 fleeth x. 
Wstiristr. *Om.1. Ythekyngi. @stiedeups. athekyng1.  » meetinge in bateil in 1. 
*toforer, dthekyng1. ¢thesoner. {the kyngofJsrael1. &vntox. "the vessels 1.  ostagis, 
that is, 3iftis of the biscegid1, * Certis1. the wordis1. ™that1. "Om.1. othe soner. P the 


kyng a. 4 the sone 1. 


‘ the wordis 1. § conspiracioun 1. 8§Om.s. t Azarie, his sone 1. %Om. plures. 


XIV. 22-——-XV. 3. 


22kyng.for his fadir Amazie. And he 
bylde Ahilam, and restoorride it to Jude, 
-aftir that the kyng hadde slepte with his 
23fadirs. The fyftenth 3eer of Amazias, the 
sone of Joas, kyng of Juda, regned Jero- 
boam, the sone of Joas, kyng of Yrael, in 
21Samarye oon and fourty jeer; and dydde 
that, that is euyl before the Lord; and 
he wente not aweye fro alle the synnys 
of Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, that 
2;maad Yrael to synne. And he restoor- 
ide the termys of Yrael, fro the entree of 
Emath vnto the se of wyldrenesse, aftir 
the word of the Lord God of Yrael, that 
he spak by his seruaunt Jonas, the sone 
of Amathie, prophete, that was of Geth, 
26that is in Oofer. Forsothe the Lord 
sawe the tourmentynge of Yrael to myche 
, bittir, and that thei weren waastid vnto 
the closed of the prisone, and vttirmostis, 
and ther was not the whiche my3t helpen 
27Yrael. And the Lord spac not, that he 
schulde done aweye the name of Yrael 
fro vndir heuen, bot he sauede hem in 
the hond of Jeroboham, the sone of Joas. 
28 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Jeroboam, and alle thingis that he dyde, 
and his strengthe, in the whiche he fau3te, 
and howe he restoride Damask, and E- 
math of Jude, in Yrael, whether not thes 
ben writen in the boke of the wordis of 
29the days of the kyngis of Yrael? And 
Jeroboam slepte with his fadirs, the 
kyngis of Yrael; and Azarias, his sone, 
regnede for hym. 


CAP. XV. 


1 The seuen and twentithe 3eer of Jero- 
boam, kyng of Yrael, regned Azarie, the 
zsone of Amazie, kyng of Juda; of sex- 
tene 3eer he was, whanne he begane to 
regnen, and two and fyfty 3eer he reg- 
nede in Jerusalem; name of his modir, 
3 Jecelia of Jerusalem. And he dyde that, 
that was plesaunt beforn the Lord, aftir 
alle thingis that Amazias, his fadir, hadde 


IV. KINGS. 277 


Juda, after’ that ‘the kyng™ ‘slepte with 
hise fadris. In the fiftenethe 3eer of Ama-23 
sie, sone of Joas, kyng of Juda, Jeroboam, 
sone* of Joas, kyng of Israel, regnyde in 
Samarie oon and fourti 3eer; and dide24 
that, that is yuel bifor the Lord; he jede 
not awei fro alle the synnes of Jeroboam, 
sone of Nabath, that made Israel to do 
synne. He restoride the termes of Israel,2s 
fro the entryng of Emath ‘til toY the see 
of wildirnesse, bi the word of the Lord 
God of Israel, which? he spak bi his ser- 


uaunt Jonas, sone? of Amathi, b: Jonas, 
the prophete, that was of Jetht, ‘which peek Ha 
Jeth” is in Ophir. For the Lord si3 the 26 the laste c’,, it 
ful bittir turment of Israel, and that thei sar ce a 
weren wastid ‘til to® the closid men of or ieee 
prisoun, and the’ laste men, and ‘noon a fs 
was® that helpide Israel. And the Lord 27 soiling is this: 
% ere he is 
spak not, that he schulde do awei Israel  nemya of tieth, 
fro vndur heuene, but he sauyde hem in wae 
the hond of Jeroboam, sone! of Joas. For-28 ge 
sothe the residue of wordis® of Jeroboam, — was biried . 
and alle thingis whiche' he dide, and the oe ae 
strengthe of hym, bi which he fau3t, and hoe 
hou he restoride Damask, and Emath of vanes 
Juda, in Israel, whether these ben not 
wrytun in the book of wordis of daies 
of the ‘kyngis of Israel? And Jeroboam 29 
slepte with hise fadris, the kyngis of Is- 
rael; and Azarieb", his sone, regnede for 
hym. 


CAP. XV. 


In the seuenthe! and twentithej 3eer of! 
Jeroboam, king of Israel, Azarie, sone of 
Amasie, kyng of Juda, regnede; he was2 
of sixtene 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne, 
and he regnede two and fifti 3eer in Jeru- 
salem; the name of his modir was Jecelia 
of Jerusalem. And he dide that, that was3 
plesaunt bifor the Lord, bi alle thingis 
which! Amasie, his fadir, hadde do; ne-4 


vand afters. Ww Azarier. Xthesone1. Yvntor. Zthats. ®thesonez. %thatr. ¢ vntou. 
~! to the 1. ¢€ther wasnoonr. fthesoner. & the wordisr. thats. bh Zacharies. i senen Ev. 
Jtwentirn. kthesoner. ! that 1. 


278 


4done; neuer the latre the hee3e thingis 
he distruyde not; 3it the puple sacri- 
5fiside, and brent encense in hei3tis. The 
Lord forsothe smoote the kyng, and he 
was messel ynto the day of his deth; and 
he dwellede in the hous freely asyde. 
Joathas forsoth, the kyngis sone, go- 
uernde the paleys, and he demyde the 
e6puple of the lond. The remnaunt for- 
sothe of the wordis of Azarie, and alle 
thingis that he dyde, whether not thes 
ben writen in the boke of the wordis of 
7the’ days of kyngis of Juda? And Aza- 
rie slepte with his fadirs; and they biri- 
eden hym with his moris4 in the cytee 
of Dauith; and Joathas, his sone, regnede 
sforhym. The ei3t and thrittithe 3eer of 
Azaria, kyng of Juda, regnede Zacharie, 
the sone of Jeroboam, vpon Yrael in Sa- 
gmarie sexe monethis. And he dyde that, 
that was euyl beforn the Lord, as his 
fadirs dyden; he wente not aweye fro 
the synnes of Jeroboam, the sone of Na- 
10 bath, that maad Yrael to synnen. For- 
sothe Sellum, the sone of Jabes, in Sa- 
marye coniurede a3jenus hym; and he 
smoot hym opynly, and slew3, and regn- 
nede for hym. The remnaunt forsothe of 
the wordis of Zacharie, whether not thes 
ben writen in the boke of the wordis of 
12the days of the’ kyngis of Yrael? This 
is the word of the Lord, that he spake to 
Hieu, seyinge, Thi sonys vnto the ferth 
generacioun schul sytten of thee vpon 
the trone of Ysrael; and it is done so. 
13Sellum, the sone of Jabes, regnede the 
nyne and thrittithe 3eere of Azarie, kyng 
of Juda; he regnede forsothe oon monethe 
14in Samarye. And Manaheu, the sone of 
Gaddy, stey3ide up fro Tharsa, and came 
in to Samarie; and smoot Sellum, the 
sone of Jabes, in Samarye, and slew3 
ishym, and regnede for hym. The rem- 
naunt forsothe of the wordis of Sellum, 


qa Om. c. 


m hut jitr. 2 Om. pcrgkKMNOPQnsUWhe. 
soner. tCertis1. Om. plures. ¥ And 1. 
2 the which 1. 4 Sones of thee 1.» vnto 1. 
fnyner. & styede up1. the sone 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


49 fadris c prem. 


© that 1, 

wOm. G. * Om. BcDEFGKLMNoPsx¢. ¥ That 1. This EL. 
¢ on the trone of thee EL. 
i the wordis 1. 


4 —I15. 


theles he distriede not hi3 thingis; 3it™ 
the puple made sacrifice, and brente en- 
cense in hi3e thingis. Forsothe the Lords 
smoot the kyng, and he was leprouset til 
in to the day of his deeth; and he dwell- 
ide in an hous freli bi hym silf. Sotheli 
Joathas, sone of the kyng, gouernde the 
palis, and demyde the puple of the lond. 
Forsothe the residue of the" wordis ofs 
Azarie, and alle thingis whiche® he dide, 
whether these ben not writun in the book 
of wordis of daies of the? kyngis of Juda? 
And Azarie slepte with hise fadris; and7 
thei birieden hym with hise eldre men in 
the citee of Dauid ; and Joathas, his sone, 
regnede for hym. In the ei3te and thret-s 
tithe 3eer of Azarie, kyng of Juda, Za- 
charie, sone! of Jeroboam, regnede on™ 
Israel in Samarie sixe monethis. And heo 
dide that, that was yuel bifor the Lord, 
as his fadris diden; he departide not fro 
the synnes of Jeroboam, sone* of Nabath, 
that made Israel to do synne. 
Sellum, the sone of Jabes, conspiride a3ens 
hym in Samarie; and Sel/um smoot hym 
opynlif, and killide hym", and regnede for 


hym. SotheliY the residue of ¥ the* wordis 11 


of Zacharie, whethir these ben not writun 
in the book of wordis of daies of the 


Forsothet 10 


t+ was leprouse ; 
for bi pride he 
wolde mystake 
to him the 
office of prest, 
and entride in 
to the temple, 
to offre en- 
cence; and 
whanne the 
prestis seiden, 
that this per- 
teynede not to 
his office, he 
manaasside 
hem, and helde 
the censere ; 
wherfor he was 
smytun su- 
deynly and 
opinli with 
lepre. And 
therfor anoon 
the prestis 
puttiden him 
out of the 
temple, and he 
feelide the ven- 
iaunce of the 
Lord; and he 
3ede out wil- 
fulie, dredinge 
lest it schulde 
bifalle worse to 
him, as it is had 
in 11. book of 
Paralip. xxvi. 
c°. Lire here. c. 
+ opynly ; in 
Ebreu it is bi- 
for the peple, 
and bi this it 
is siguefied, 
that he hadde 
myche part of 
the puple con- 


kyngis of Israel? ThilkeY is the word of 12 sentinge with 


the Lord, which? he spak to Hieu, and 
seide, ‘Thi sones* ‘til to” the fourthe gene- 
racioun schulen sitte ‘of thee on the trone® 
of Israel; and it was doon so. 
sone® of Jabes, regnede in the nynthef 
and thritty 3eer of Azarie, kyng of Juda; 
sotheli he regnyde o monethe in Samarie. 


And Manaheu, the sone of Gaddi, styede$ 14 


fro Thersa, and cam in to Samarie; and 
he smoot Sellum, sone" of Jabes, in Sa- 
marie, and killide hym, and regnede for 


hym. Sotheli the residue of wordis‘ of 1s 


Sellum, and his conspirasie, bi which he 
settide tresouns, whether these ben not 


r Om. cE. 


POm.Et, ‘4thesoner. ‘upontr.  & the 


d And Sellum 1. © the sone 1. 


Sellum4, 13 


ims; for this 
Zacarie was 
ful yuel. Lire 
here. c. 


XV. 16—25. 


and his coniuracyoun, by the whiche he 
bente buschementis, whether not thes ben 
writen in the boke of the wordis of the 
isdays of the kyngis of Yrael? Than 
Manaheu smoot Thersam, and alle that 
weren in it, and his termys fro Thersa ; 
forsothe they wolden not openen to hym ; 
and he slew3 alle the wymmen of it with 
i7childe, and kutte hem. The nyne and 
thrittithe 3eer of Azarie, kyng of Juda, 
regnede Manaheu, the sone of Gaddi, 
isvpon Yrael tenn 3eer in Samarie. And 
he dydde that, that was euyl beforn the 
Lord; and he wente not aweye fro the 
synnes of Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, 
i9that maad Yrael to synnen. Alle the 
days of hym came Phul, the kyng of 
Assiries, in Thersa. And Manaheu gaue 
to Phul a thousand talentis of syluer, 
that he were to hym in to help, and that 
20he fasten his rewme; and Manaheu co- 
maundid syluer vpon Yrael to alle the 
my3ty and to the ryche, that he schulde 
jeue to the kyng of Assiries; fyfty ciclis 
of syluer, thoru3 oute alle 3eeris; and 
the king of Assiries is turned a3ein, and 
zi dwellide not in Therse. The remnaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Manaheu, and 
alle thingis that he dide, whether not 
these ben writen in the boke of the 
wordis of the days of the kyngis of 
22 Yrael? And Manaheun slepte with his 
fadirs; and Phasaya, his sone, regnede for 
23hym. The fyftythe 3eer of Azaria, kyng 
of Juda, regnede Phasaye, the sone of 
Manaheu, vpon Yrael in Samarye two 
2i3eer. And he dyde that, that was euy] 
before the Lord ; and he wente not aweye 
fro the synnes of Jeroboam, the sone of 
25 Nabath, that maad Yrael to synnen. For- 
sothe Phacee, the sone of Romelie, duyk 
of his hoost, coniurede ajeyn hym, and 
smoote hym in Samarye, in the toure of 
the kyngis hous, bisydis Argob, and bi- 
sidis Arib, and with hym fyfty men of 
the sonis of Galaditis ; and he slew3 hyn, 


k smoot the citee 1. | the men 1. 
sone 1. ‘uponi.  § the sone 1. 
Ythat1. 2 the sone 1. 
Galaditis ini. © Om. 1. 


t upon 1, 
athe sone r. » the 1. 
f Phaceia 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


™ wolden not 1. 
4 wolde 1. 

© oost of Phaceia 1. 
& the wordis 1. 


279 


writun in the book of wordis of daies of 
the kyngis of Israel. Thanne Manaheu 1s 
smoot* Capham, and alle men! that weren 
there ynne, and the termes therof froThersa, 
for thei nolden™ opyn® to hym+; and he 
killide alle wymmen therof with child, and _ hi ‘ 
karf° hem. In the nynthe? and thrittithe 17 Lire a 
3eer of Azarie, kyng of Juda, Manaheu, 

sone’ of Gaddi, regnede on" Israel ten 3eer 

in Samarie. And he dide that, that wasis 

yuel bifor the Lord; he departide not fro 

the synnes of Jeroboam, sone* of Nabath, 

that made Israel to do synne. In allef the 19 + Jn alle, ete.; 
daies of hym Phul, the kyng of Assiries, Larmiaielia 
cain in to Thersa. And Manaheu 3af to ea 
Phul a thousynde talentis of siluer, that 7" © 

he schulde be to hym in to help, and 

schulde make stidefast his rewme; and 20 
Manaheu settide taliage of siluer ont Is- 
rae] to alle my3ti men and riche, that he 
schulde" 3yue to the kyng of Assiries; he 
settide’ fifti siclis of siluer bi alle men" § ; 
and the king of Assiries turnede a3en, and 
dwellide not in Thersa. Forsothe the re- 
sidue of wordis* of Manaheu, and alle 
thingis whicheY he dide, whether these 
ben not wrytun in the book of wordis of 
daies of the kyngis of Israel? And Mana-22 

heu slepte with hise fadris; and Phaceia, {enue 
his sone, regnyde for hym. In the fiftithe 23 oe ees 
3eer of Azarie, kyng of Juda, Phaceia, : 


t+ to him; that 
is, resseyne 
him in the 


§ bi alle men; 
that is, riche 
men. In E- 
breu it is to 
219 man ; that 
is, to ech man, 
bi maner of 
spekinge of 
Ebreu ; ther- 
for bokis that 
han here li 
alle 3eris, ben 


not 3eris. Lire 


° eres C. 
sone? of Manaheu, regnede on Israel in 
Saiarie twei 3eer. And he dide that, that 24 
was yuel bifor the Lord; he departide not 
fro the synnes of Jeroboam, sone* of Na- 
bath, that made Israel to do synne. TF or-25 
sothe Phacee, sone* of Romelie, duyk of 4 Aris; that 
: Be is, the pali 
his® oost*, conspiride ajens hym, and smoot = Ras sal. 
hyin in Samarie, in" the tour of the kyngis ™on seith. 
a beta ae Lire here. ¢. 
hous, bisidis Argob, and bisidis Arib|[; 47%: in 
é ‘ ; Ebren it is bi- 
and he smoot hym with fifti men of the _ sidis Aree, that 
signefieth a 


sones of Galaditis®¢; and Phacee killide jisun: fora 
hym‘, and regnede for hym. Sotheli thie'ss Oe iret 
residue of wordis® of Phacee, and alle  bley and 
thingis whiche" he dide, whether these ben 


fairnesse, as 
Rabi Salomon 
not writun in the book of wordis of daies 


seith. Lire 
here. G 


Okernyde r Pnyner. 4 the 
wthoment. * the wordis 1. 
4 with fifty men of the sones of 


® opyn her 3alis 3. 
Vv selle 1. 


h that 1. 


280 


26and regnede for hym. The remnaunt for- 
sothe of the wordis of Phasaye, and alle 
thingis that he dyde, whether thes ben 
not writen in the boke of the wordis of 
21the days of the kyngis of Yrael? The 
two and fyftithe’ 3eer of Azarie, kyng of 
Jude, regnede Phacee, the sone of Rome- 
lie, vpon Yrael in Samarye twenty 3eer. 
28 And dydde that, that was euyl beforn the 
Lord; and he weute not aweye fro the 
synnes of Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, 
29that maad Yrael to synnen. In the days 
of Phacee, kyng of Yrael, came Theglath 
Falasar, the kyng of Assur, and toke 
Ayon, and Aybel, the hous of Maacha, 
and Janoe, and Cedes, and Asor, and Ga- 
laad, and Galilee, and al the lond of 
Neptalym; and translatyde hem in to 
30 Assiries. Forsothe Osee, the sone of 
Hela, coniurede, and bende busschementis 
a3eyns Phacee, the sone of Romelie, and 
smoote hym and slew3; and for hym 
regned, the twentithe 3eer of Jonathan, 
3ithe sone of Osee. The reimnaunt for- 
sothe of the wordis of Phacee, and alle 
thingis that he dyde, whether thes ben 
not writen in the boke of the wordis of 
s2the days of the kyngis of Yrael? The 
secounde 3eer of Phacee, the sone of Ro- 
melye, kyng of Yrael, regnede Joathan, 
33the sone of Osee, kyng of Juda; of fyue 
and twenti 3eer he was, whanne he by- 
ganne to regnen, and sixtene 3eer he 
regned in Jerusalem ; naine of his modir 
34 Cerusa, the dou3tir of Sadoch. And he 
dyde that, that was plesaunt beforn the 
Lord ; aftir alle thingis that hadde done 
35 Oseas, his fadir, he wrou3t ; neuerthelatre 
the hei3tis he dyde not aweye; 3itt the 
puple offred, and brent encense in hei3tis ; 
he bylde up the altherhee3ist 3aat of the 
36hous of the Lord. The remnaunt for- 
sothe of the wordis of Joathan, and alle 
the thingis that he dyde, whether thes 
ben not writen in the boke of the wordis 


s7of the days of the kyngis of Juda? In - 


IV. KINGS. 


XV. 26—37- 


of the kyngis of Israel? In the two and 27 
fiftithe 3eer of Azarie, kyng of Juda, 
Phasee, sone’ of Romelie, regnyde in Sa- 
marie twenti 3eer. And he dide that, that 28 
was yuel bifor the Lord ; and* he departide 
not fro the synnes of Jeroboam, sone! of 
Nabath, that made Israel to do synne. In29 
the daies of Phacee, kyng of Israel, Teglat 
Phalasar, kyng of Assur, cam, and took 
Aion, and Aibel, the hows of Maacha, and 
Janoe, and Cedes, and Asor, and Galaad, 
and Galilee, and al the lond of Neptalym ; 
and translatide hem in to Assiriens. For-30 
sothe Osee, sone! of Hela, conspiride, and 
settide™ tresouns ajens Phasee, sone! of 
Romelie, and smoot hym, and killide hym® ; 
and he regnyde for hym, in the twentithe 
3eer of Joathan, sone® of Ozie. Forsothe 31 
the residue of wordis? of Phacee, and alle 
thingis whiche’ he dide, whether these 
ben not writun in the book of wordis of 
daies of the’ kyngis of Israel? In the32 
secounde 3eer of Phacee, sone’ of Romelie, 
kyng of Israel, Joathan, sone* of Ozie, 
kyng* of Juda, regnyde; he was of fyue3s 
and twenti jeer, whanne he bigan to 
regne, and he regnede sixtene 3eer in Je- 
rusalem; the name of his modir was 
Jerusa, the dou3ter of Sadoch. And he™34 
dide that, that was plesaunt bifor the 


Lord ; he wrou3te bi alle thingist, whiche’ — t “alle 


his fadir Ozie hadde do; netheles he dide 35 cnyaek Wit 
not awey hi3 thingis; 3it the puple made or ane 
sacrifice, and brente incense in hi3 thingis; Yee & 
he bildide the hijeste 3ate of the hows of of Paralip. 


xxvii. c®. Lire 


the Lord. Forsothe the residue*® of wordis’ 36 here. c. 


of Joathan, and alle thingis whiche? he + rasyn; to 
: : : he th 

dide, whether these ben not writun in the Pyaethat 
weren doon 


book of wordis of daies of the kyngis of } 
: : in the rewme 
Juda? In tho daies the Lord bigan to 37 of Juda; for 


F of long tyme 
sende in to Juda Rasyn{, the kyng of _ the puple made 
re : ifice in hi 
Sirie, and Phacee, the sone of Romelie. thinghy CRE 
And Joathan slepte with hise fadris, and 33 725 “mlenefil 


oe ; fro the making 
was biried with hem in the citee of Dauid, ° the temple, 


and dide many 


8 fifti 4. 


i the sone 1. 
© the sone 1. 
w but 3it 1. 


q that 1. 
Y the wordis 1. 


P the wordis 1. 
x remenaunt 1. 


k Om. BcpF sec. m. GIMNOQRSUWXb. 
rOm. £. 
z that 1. 


his fadir; and Achaz, his sone, regnyde  othereyuels, for 

fap the malice of 

or nym. Achaz. Lire 
here. C. 

lthe sone 1. ™sette EL. Om, BcFKLOQRSUWG. 

Sthe soner, tthe kyng1. tJoathan1. v that 1. 


XV. 38—XVI. 9. 


tho days byganne the Lord to senden 
into Judam Rasym, the kyng of Cyrye; 

3sand Phacee, the sone of Romelie. And 
Joathan slepte with his fadirs, and is 
biryed with hem in the cytee of Dauid, 
his fadir; and Achaz, his sone, regnede 
for hym. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 The seuententhet 3eer of Phacee, the 
sone of Romelie, regned Achaz, the sone 
2of Joathan, kyng of Juda. Of twenty 
jeer was Achaz, whan he began to reg- 
nen, and sexteen 3eer he regned in Jeru- 
salem; he dyde not that was plesaunt in 
the si3t of the Lord his God, as Dauith, 
3his fadir, bot 3eede in the weye" of the 
kyngis of Yrael. Forthermore and his 
sone he sacrid, ouer berynge thoru3 fyre, 
aftir the mawmettis of heithen men, the 
whiche the Lord scatered beforn the 
4sonys of Yrael. Forsothe he offred slayn 
sacrifices, and brende encense in hei3tis, 
and in hillis, and vnder ech tree ful of 
sbraunchis. Than Rasyn, kyng of Cyrye, 
stey3ide up, and Phacee, the sone of Ro- 
melie, kyng of Yrael, in to Jerusalem to 
fi3ten ; and whanne thei bysegiden Achaz, 
6they my3ten not ouercomme hymn. In 
that tyme Rasyn, kyng of Cyrye, re- 
storide Ahilam to Cyrye, and kest out 
the Jewis fro Ahyla; and Ydumeis and 
Cyries camen in to Ahilam, and dwelten 
7there vnto this day. Forsothe Achaz 
sente messagers to Teglath Falasar, kyng 
of Assurye, seyinge, Thi seruaunt and 
thi sone I am; stey3e up, and make me 
safe fro the hond of the kyng of Cyrye, 
and fro the hond of the kyng of Yrael, 
sthat han rysen to gyther ajeynus me. And 
whan Achaz hadde gedrede to gydre syl- 
uer and gold, that my3t ben foundun in 
the hous of the Lord, and in the tresuries 
of the kyng, and sente to the kyng of 
9 Assuries 3iftis ; the whiche and assentide 


t seuenth 4. senentithe ni. 


IV. KINGS. 


281 


CAP. XVI. 


In the seuententhe 3eer of Phacee, sone*! 
of Romelie, Achaz, the sone of Joathan, 
kyng of Juda, regnyde. Achaz was of2 
twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne, 
and he regnyde sixtene 3eer in Jerusalem ; 
he dide not that, that was plesaunt in the 
si3t of his® Lord God, as Dauid, his fadir 
dide, but he 3ede in the weie of the kyngis 
of Israel. Ferthermore and he halewides 
his sone, and bar® thorou3 the fier, bi? the 
idols of hethene men, whiche the Lord 
distriede bifore the sones of Israel.’ And4 
he offride sacrifices®, and brente encense 
in hi3 placis, and in hillis, and vndur ech 
tree ful of bowis. Thanne Rasyn, kyngs 
of Sirye, and Phacee, sone of Romelie, 
kyng of Israel, stiede® in to Jerusalem to 
fizte"; and whanne thei bisegide Achaz, 
thei mijten not ouercome hym. In thaté 
tyme Rasyn, kyng of Sirie, restoride Ahila 
to Sirie, and castide out Jewis! fro Ahila ; 
and Ydumeis and men of Sirie camen into* 
Ahila, and dwelliden there til in to this 
dai. Forsothe Achaz sente messangeris7 
to Teglat Phalasar, kyng of Assirieus, and 
seide, Y am thi seruaunt and thi sone; 
stie thou!, and make me saaf fro the hond 
of the kyng of Sirie, and fro the hond of 
the kyng of Israel, that han rise togidere 
a3jens me. And whanne Achaz hadde ga-s 
deride togidere siluer and gold, that my3te 
be foundun in the hows of the Lord, and 
in the tresours of the kyng, he sente 3iftis 
to the kyng of Assiriens; whiche™ as-9 
sentide to his wille. Sotheli the kyng of 
Asseriens stiede® in to Damask, and wast- 


U ways 4. 


4 the sone1. ther, ¢bar or drewe kimi. aftir1. © sacrifice ELP. fthe soner. & stieden up 1. 
h figte with Achaz1. ithe Jewist. Kina. Il thon up1. ™and her. ” jede up t. 
VOL. II. 00 


282 


to the wylle of hym. The kyng forsothe 
of Assuries stey3ide up in to Damasc, and 
waastyde it, and brou3t ouer the dwellers 
of it to’ Cyrynen”; Rasyn forsothe he 
1oslew3. And kyng Achas wente in to 
ajein commyng to Teglath Phalasar, kyng 
of Assirie, in to Damask ; and whanne he 
hadde seen the auter of Damase, kyng 
Achaz sente to Vrias, the prest, the ex- 
saumpler® of it, and the licnesse, aftir al 
llthe werk of it. And Vrias, the prest, 
maad vp the auter aftir alle thingis that 
king Achas hadde comaundide of Da- 
mase, so dyde the prest Vrias, to the 
tyme that kyng Achaz came from Da- 
lzmask. And whanne the kyng schuld 
commen fro Damask, he saw3 the auter, 
and wirschipide it; and he steizid up, 
and offred brent sacrificis, and his sacri- 
13 fice; and he offrede sacrificis of licours, 
and held the blode of pesyble thingis, 
‘the whicheY he? hadde offred vpon the 
l4auter. Forsothe the brasen auter, that 
was beforn the Lord, he bare ouer fro 
the face of the temple, and fro the place 
of the auter, and fro the place of the 
temple of the Lord ; and putte it on syde 
isof the auter at the north. King for- 
sothe Aehaz comaundide to Vrie, the 
prest, seyinge, Vpon the more auter offre 
the morowtyde brent sacrifice, and the 
euentyde sacrifice, and the brent sacri- 
fice of the kyng, and his sacrifice, and 
the brent sacrificis of al the puple of the 
lond, and the sacrificis of hem, and the 
sacrificis of the liconrs of hem; and al 
the blode of the brent sacrifice, and al 
the blood of the slayn sacrifyce, vpon it 
thou schalt heelden ; forsothe the brasen 
auter schal be maad redye at my wylle. 
16 Than Vrias, the prest, dyde aftir alle 
thingis that kyng Achaz hadde comaund- 
izyde tohym. Forsothe kyng Achaz toke 


IV. KINGS. 


XVI. to—r7. 


ide it, and translatide the dwelleris therof 
to Sirenen ; sotheli he killide Rasyn. And 10 
kyng Achaz 3ede in to metyng® to Teglat 
Phalasaar, kyng of Assiriens?; and whanne 
kyng Achaz hadde seyn the auter of Da- 
mask, he sent’ to Vrie, the preest, the 
saumpler and lienesse therof, bi al the 
werk’ therof. And Vrie, the preest, bild-11 
ide an auter bi alle thingis whiche* king 
Achaz hadde comaundid fro Damask, so 
dide the preest Vrie, til kyng Achaz cam 
fro Damask. And whanne the king cam 12 
fro Damask, he si3 the auter*, and wor- 
schipide it; and he stiede", and offride 
brent sacrifices, and his sacrifice; and he 13 
offride moist sacrifices, and he schedde’ 
the blood of pesible thingis, which* he 
hadde offrid on the auter. Forsothe he*14 
dide awei the brasun auter’, that was bifor 
the Lord, fro the face of the temple, and 
fro the place? of the anter, and fro* the 
place of the temple of the Lord; and? set- 
tide® it? on® the side‘ of the? auter ‘at the 
north®, Also kyng Achaz comaundide tos 
Vrie, the preest, and seide, Offre thou on! 
the more auter{ thej brent sacrifice of the 
morewtid, and the sacrifice‘ of euentid!, 
and the brent sacrifice of the king, and 
the sacrifice of hym, and the brent sacri- 
fice of al the puple of the lond, and the 
sacrifices of hem, and the moist sacrifices 
of hem; and thou schalt schede™ out on® 
that® al the blood of brent sacrifice, and al 
the blood of slayn saerifice; sotheli the 
brasun auter schal be redi at my wille. 
Therfor Vrie, the preest, dide bi alle16 
thingis whiche? kyng Achaz hadde co- 
maundid to hym. Forsothe kyng Achaz 17 
took the peyntid foundementis?, and the 
waischyng vessel, that was aboue, and he 
puttides doun the see, that is, the waisch- 
ung vessel ‘for preestis*, fro the brasun 
oxis", that’ susteyneden 7, and he settide* 


Yinto rH. WCyrenen ce. *exsaumple 4. Y that c. 2 Om. apru. 
° the metyng 1. P Assiriens in to Damask 1. 4 sent into Jerusalem. twerkis a. 8 that 1. t-anter 
fair and curious 1. %stiede up. Vhelder. the whichi. * Achazi. Y anter that Moises made 1. 
2 propre place 1. 2 Om. a. Pandhe1. setter. ¢ Goddisauter1. ati. fnorth sider. & his 1. 
»Om. 1. l upon 1. J Om. ernqwxb. k sacrifyses s. brent sacrifice x. the euentid cEinuc. 
mhelder "upons. that meweauter1. Pthatx. 4 foundementis of pileris 1.  * was sett 1. 
® putter, tOm.1. toxens. Vthe whicher. W setter. 


+ the more 
auter; that is, 
on the newe 
auter, which 
he arettide 
more in hooly- 
nesse, thou3 it 
was cursid. 
Lire here. c. 


XVI. 18—-XVII. 7. 


grauen feete, and the watir® vessel, that 
was there aboue, and the se he putte 
doun of the brasen oxen, that susteyn- 
eden it, and he putte vpon the pament 

iggreithid with stoon. Forsothe the place 
where the kingis offrynge was leyd of 
the saboth, that he hadde bylde in the 
temple, and the commynge in of the 
kyng withouten forth, he turnede in to 
the temple of the Lord for the kyng of 

i9 Assiries. The remnaunt forsothe of the 
wordis of Achaz, and alle thingis that 
he dyde, whether not thes ben writen in 
the boke of the wordis of the days of the 

20kyngis of Juda? And Achaz slepte with 
his fadirs, and is biried with hem in the 
cytee of Dauid; and Ezechias, his sone, 
regned for hym. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 The twelfthe 3eer of Achaz, kyng of 
Juda, regnede Osee, the sone of Hela, in 
2Samarie vpon Yrael nyne jeer. And he 
dyde euy] before the Lord, bot not as the 
kyngis of Yrael, that weren beforn hym. 
3 A3eynus this stey3ide up Salmanaser, kyng 
of Assiries, and Osee is maad to hym 
seruaunt, and 3eeldide to hym tributis. 
4And whanne the kyng of Assiries hadde 
perceyued, that Osee enforcede to re- 
bellen, and that he hadde sente messa- 
gers to Sua, kyng of Egipt, lest he 
schulde 3euen tributis to the kyng of 
Assiries, as eche 3eer he was wont, he 
bysegyde hym, and bounden he putte in 
sto prysoun. And he wente thoru3 out 
al the lond, and stey3ynge to Samarie he 
sbysegide it thre 3eer. The nynethe 3eer 
forsoth of Osee, the kyng of Assiries 
toke Samarie, and translatyde Ysrael into 
Assiries; and he sett hem in Hela, and 
in Thabor, besyde the flode of Gozam, 


IV. KINGS. 


283 


on* the pawment araied with stoon. Also 18 
heY turnede the tresorie? of sabat®, which 
he hadde® bildid in the temple, and ‘he 
turnede* the entryng of the kyng with 
outforth, in to the temple of the Lord for 


the® kyngt of Assiriens", Forsothe® the re- 19 t the king; 


sidue of wordis* of Achaz, and alle thingis 
whiche! he dide, whether these ben not 
writun in the book of wordis of daies of 


that the king 
of Assiriens if 
he cam thidir 
schulde se, hou 
he hadde do 
awey the wor- 


the kyngis of Juda? And Achaz slepte 20 shiping of 


with hise fadris, and was biried with hem 
in the citee of Dauid; and Ezechie, his 
sone, regnede for hym. 


CAP. XVII. 


Yn the tweluethe 3eer{ of Achaz, kyng1 
of Juda, Osee, sone‘ of Hela, regnyde in 
Samarie on! Israel nyne 3eer. And he dide2 
yuel bifor the Lord, but not as the™ kyngis 
of Israel, that weren bifor hym, Salma-3 
nasar, kyng of Assiriens, stiede® a3ens this° 
Osee, and Osee was immaad seruaunt to 
hym, and 3ildide tributis to hym. And4 
whanne the kyng of Assiriens hadde per- 
seyued, that Osee he? enforside’ to be" re- 
belle, and hadde sent messangeris to Sua, 
kyng of Egipt, that he schulde not 3yue 
tributis to the kyng of Assiriens, as he 
was wont bi alle 3eeris, ‘the hyng of 
Assiriens® bisegide hym', and sente him" 
boundun in to prisoun. And he’ 3edes 
thoru3 al the lond, and he stiede” to Sa- 
marie, and bisegide it bi* thre 3eer. For-6 
sothe in the nynthe 3eer of Osee, the kyng 
of Assiriens took Samarie, and translatide 
Israel in to Assiriens; and he puttideY 
hem? in Hela, and in Thabor, bisidis the 


7in the cytees of Medis. It is done for- flood Gozam, in the citee* of Medeis. For-7 
8 licour E pr.m. 

Xthoon1. YAchaz1. 2 kyngis tresorier, 8 the sabat 1. b that 1. ¢Om.1. Om. 1. 
€Om. a sec.m. f Assirier. 8 Certis1. 4 the wordisi. ithat1. kK the sone1, Juponr. ™ Om. 
"wenteupr. °Om.1s. ? Om. ce1kmnoswg. hed. 4 enforside him self'1. tOm.w.  * het. 
‘king Ozee1. Om. plures. ‘ Salmanaser1. Wstiedeupi. *Om.1. Yputter 7 Om. EL, 


8 citees 1s. 


002 


God, and that 
Achaz passide 
to the wor- 
schiping ether 
religioun of the 
king of Assi- 
viens. Lire 
here. c. 


t In the xii. 
jeer; Osee 
bigan to regne 
in the fourthe 
seer of Achaz, 
but he hadde 
not the rewme 
in pees, til to 
the xii. 3eer of 
Achaz; therfor 
it is seid that 
he regnede in 
the xii. 3eer of 
Achaz, that is, 
in pees, ether 
in viil. 3eer 
he seruede 
vndur tribute 
to the king of 
Assiriens, and 
in the laste 
seer that was 
the twelfthe 
3eer of Achaz 
he bigan to 
regne fre fro 
tribute. Lire 
here. C. 


284 


sothe, whanne the sonys of Yrael hadden 
synned beforn the Lord their God, that 
ladde hem out fro” the lond of Egipt, 
fro the hond of Pharao, kyng of Egipte, 
sthei heryeden alyen goddis; and wenten 
aftir the custom of heithene, whom the 
Lord hadde waastyde in the si3t of the 
sonys of Yrael, and of the kyngis of 
Yrael, for lijk maner thei hadden done. 
9And the sonys of Yrael offendiden with 
wordis not ri3t the Lord their God, and 
thei bildiden to hem hee3e thingis in alle 
their cytees, fro the toure of kepers vnto 
10the strengthid cytee. And thei maden 
to hem ymagis, and mawmett wodis, in 
all hee3ze hill, and vndir al braunchy° 
lltree; and they brenden there encense 
vpon the auters in maner of heithen, 
whom the Lord hade translatide fro the 
face of hem. And thei diden the warst 
i2wordis, terryng the Lord; and they 
heryeden the vnclennesse’, of the whiche 
the Lord comaundide to hem, that thei 
i3schulden not done that worde. And the 
Lord witnesside in Yrael and in Juda, 
by the hond of alle prophetis, and the 
seezers, seyinge, Turnith a3eyn® fro 3oure 
warst weyes, and kepith myn hestis, and 
my cerymonyes, aftir al the lawe ‘the 
whichef I haue comaundide to 3oure fa- 
dirs, and as I sente to 30u in the hond 
140f my seruauntis prophetis. The whiche 
herden not, bot hardeneden their noll af- 
tir the noll of their fadirs, that wolden 
not obeyschen to the Lord their God. 
15 And thei kasten aweye the lawful thingis 
of hym, and the couenaunt that he coue- 
nauntyde with the fadirs of hem, and the 
witnessingis by the whiche he wytness- 
ede hem£; and thei foloweden vanytes, 
and vaynly the diden; and thei folow- 
eden heithen folec, that weren by the 
enuyroun of hem; vpon the whiche the 
Lord had comaundyde to hem, that thei 


bof. © braunchid u. 


d for as. 
J ful wicked 1. 
t hard nol 1. 
2 Om. Exp. thilke 1. 


Uther. © wenten forth 1. 
h upon 1. i diden or spaken 1. 
P The whiche 1. 4 aftir 1. 
* thingis 1. Y Om, EIL. 


IV. KINGS. 


4 vnclennessis ABcFI. 


€ vnto I. 
k Om. a. 
$ wolden not 1. 


a folk 1. 


XVI. 8—15. 


sothe it was don, whanne the sones of Is- 
rael hadden synned bifor her’ Lord God, 
that ledde hem out of the lond of Egipt, 
fro the hond of Farao, kyng of Egipt, 
thei worschipeden alien goddis ; and 3eden®® 
bi the custom of hethene men, whiche the 
Lord hadde wastid in the si3t of the sones 
of Israel, and of the kyngis of Israel, for 
thei hadden do in lijk maner. And the9 
sones of Israel offendiden her Lord God 
bi wordis not ri3tful, and thei bildiden to 
hem silf hi3 thingis in alle her citees, fro® 
the tourt of opens ‘til toe a strengthid 
citee. 
and wodis‘, in ech hi3 hil, and vndur ech 
tree ful of bowis; and thei® brenten there 11 
encence on! the auteris bi the custom of 
hethene men, whiche the Lord hadde 
translatid fro the face of hem. And thei 
dideni’ werstej wordis{, and thei wrath- 


tie the tour; 
is, fro 


And thei maden to hem ymagis, 108 fondle, in 


which fewe 
men dwelliden ; 
this is the sen- 
tence, fro the 
leeste town til 
to the muste, 
idolatrie hadde 
strengthe in 
alle. Lire 
here. c. 

t that is, worste 
werkis. Lire 


thiden the Lord; and worschipiden vn-12 rae 


clenesses, of whiche the Lord comaundide 
to hem, that thei schulden not do this 
word. And the Lord witnesside in Israel 13 
and in* Juda, bi the hond of alle prophetis 
and seeris, and seide, Turne 3e a3en fro 
3oure werste! weies, and kepe 3e™ my” 
comaundementis, and ceremonyes, bi al the 
lawe whiche® Y comaundide to 30ure fa- 
dris, and as Y sente to 30u in the hond of 
my seruauntis prophetis. Whiche? herden 14 
not, but maden hard her nol bi the nol 
of her fadris, that nolden* obeie to her 
Lord God. And thei castiden awei thes 
lawful thingis} of hym', and the couenaunt 
which" he couenauntide with her fadris, 
and the witnessyngis bi whiche he wit- 
nesside to hem; and thei sueden vanytees, 
‘that is, idols’, and diden veynli; and 
sueden hethene men, that weren ‘bi the 
cumpas of¥ hem; of whiche vanytees* 
the Lord comaundide to hem, that thei 
schulden not do asY also tho? hethene men® 
diden. And thei® forsoken alle the co-16 


eawey 4. fthatc. & to hem £ prim. 


f mawmett wodis 1. & the sones of Israel 1. 
1 ful yuel 1. ™Om.s. %°Om.1. ° that 1. 
tthe Lord 1. uthatr. YOm.1. W about 1. 

b the sones of Israel 1. 


§ the lawful 
thingis; that 
is, cerymo- 
nyes; the co- 
uenaunt ; that 
is, moral 
hestis 3 wit- 
nessingis ; that 
is, iudicial co- 
maundementis, 
ether peynes 
manassid in 
the lawe to 
trespasseris. 
Lire here. c. 


XVIL 16—25. 


schulden not done as and® thei dyden. 
16And thei forsoken alle the hestis of the 
Lord their God, and thei maaden to hem 
two 30ten calues, and mawmette wodis!; 
and thei honoureden alle the kny3thode 
170f heuen; and thei serueden to Baal, and 
thei sacreden to it their sonys and their 
dou3tris thoru3 fyer, and to dyuynynge 
thei inwardly serneden, and to dyuyn- 
ynge in chiterynge of briddis; and thei 
bitau3ten hem seluen that thei done euyl 
byforn the Lord, and thei terreden hym. 
isAnd the Lord is wrothe hydously to 
Yrael; and he toke hem aweye fro his 
si3t, and ther laft not bot the lynage of 
19 Juda aloon. Bot and not he, Juda, kepte 
the hestis of the Lord his God, neuer the 
later he errid, and went in the errours 
of Yrael, the whiche he hadde wrou3t. 
20 And the Lord threwe aweye al the seed 
of Yrael, and tourmentyde hem, and he 
toke hem in the hond of distriers*; to the 
tyme that he cast hem aweye fro his 
2iface, fro that nowe tyme fro the whiche 
Yrael was kutt of fro the hous of Dauid, 
and thei ordeyneden to hem a kyng, Je- 
roboam, the sone of Nabath. Forsothe 
Jeroboam seuerede Yrael fro the Lord, 
and made hem to synnen a grete synne. 
22And the sonys of Yrael wenten in alle 
the! synnes of Jeroboam, ‘the whiche™ he 
hadde done; and thei wenten not aweye 
23fro hem, for to the Lord dyde Yrael 
awey fro his face, as he hadde spoken in 
the hond of alle his seruauntis prophetis ; 
and Yrael is translatyd fro his lond in to 
21 Assiries vnto this day. Forsothe the 
kyng of Assiries brou3t the puple fro 
Babiloyne, and fro Cutha, and fro Hay- 
lath, and fro Emath, and fro Sepharuaym, 
and he sette hem in the cytees of Sama- 
rye for the sonys of Yrael; the whiche 
weeldiden Samarie, and dwelliden in the 
25 cytees of it. And whanne there thei had- 


5 Om. anru. ‘templis £ pr.m. 


© mawmett wodis 1. 4 thei worschipiden 1. 
witchecraft 1. 4 noon of hem 1. 
sonet. ©Om.1. Pthat1. 4 brou3t ouer 1. 
¥ thei dwelliden 1. the whiche:. ~* folk 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


k the destriers april. 


€ heuene or of the frrmament 1. 
{the Lord his God 1. 
® the puple 1. 
Y that 1. 


285 


maundementis of her Lord God, and thei 

maden to hem twei jotun calues, and 

wodis*, and worschipiden® al the kny3t- 

hod of heuene®}; and thei seruyden Baal, i ie 
and halewiden to hym her sones, and her 17 is, sume and 

dou3tris thoru;! fier, and thei seruyden to Aeee on 
fals dyuynyng’, and to dyuynyng bi chi- 7°" “ 

terynge of briddis; and thei 3anen hemt 

silf to do yuel bifor the Lord, and thei sentinge to the 
wraththiden hym. And the Lord was 18 eel ate 

wrooth grectli to Israel; and he took pinsis: “e 

awel hem fro his si3t, and noon® lefte, no 

but the lynage of Juda oneli. But nether 19 

Juda hym silf kepte the heestis of ‘his 

Lord God’, netheles* he erride, and 3ede 

in the errour of Israel, whiche! it wrou3te. 

And the Lord castide awei al the seed of 20 

Israel, and turmentide hem, and bitook 

hem in the hond of rauynouris; til he 

castide™ awei hem fro his face, fro that 2 


t thei 3auen 
hem; in as- 


tyme§ in which Israel was departid fro ae - 
the hous of Dauid, and maden to hem a that tyme Is- 
kyng, Jeroboam, sone” of Nabath. For Je- Reed ain 
roboam departide Israel fro the Lord, and ‘*e47igioe" 
made hem to do a° greet synne. And the 22 thike Jero- 


sones of Israel 3eden in alle the synnes of ere. ¢. 
Jeroboam, whiche? he hadde do; and thei 
departiden not fro tho synnes, til the 23 
Lord dide awei Israel fro his face, as he 
spak in the lond of alle hise seruauntis 
prophetis; and Israel was translatid4 fro 
his lond in to Assiriens til in to this dai. 
Forsothe the kyng of Assiriens brou3te 24 
puple’ fro Babiloyne, and fro Cutha, and 
fro Hailath, and fro Emath, and fro Se- 
pharuaym, and settide’ hem in the citeest 
of Samarie for the sones of Israel ; whiche" 
hadden in possessioun Samarie, and dwell- 
iden’ in the citees therof. And whanne 25 
thei bigunnen to dwelle there, thei dred- 
den not the Lord; and the Lord sente to 
hem liouns, that’ killiden hem. And it 26 
was teld to the kyng of Assiriens, and 
was seid, The folkis* whicheY thou trans- 


10m. 4. ™ that c prim. 


fbir. & dyuynyng or 
m had cast 1. 4 the 
u and these 1. 


I that 1. 
t citee 1. 


k but netheles 1. 
§ sette EIL. 


286 


den begunne to dwellen, thei dredden not 
the Lord; and the Lord sente to hem 
26lyouns, that slewen hem. And it is told 
to the kyng of Assiries, and seide, The 
fole that thou hast translatyde, and maad 
to dwellen in the cytees of Samarye, 
knowen not the lawful thingis of the 
God of the lond; and the Lord sente in 
to liem lyouns, and loo! thei schuln slen 
hem; for thy that thei knowen not the 
ezcustuin of the God of the lond. The® 
kyng forsothe of Assiries comaundyde, 
seyinge, Bringith hidre oon of the prestis, 
‘the whiche® in to caytyfte 3e han brou3t, 
that he goo, and dwelle with hem, and 
teche hem the lawful thingis of God of 
28the lond. Thanne whanne oon of thes 
prestis, that weren ladde caytyfe fro Sa- 
marie, was commen, he dwellide in Bethel, 
and tau3te hem, in what maner wyse thei 
zgschulden herie the Lord. And ech fole 
forgid his god, and putten hem in hee3e 
templis, ‘the whiche® Samaritis maden, 
fole and folc in their cytees, in the whiche 
30 thei dwelliden. Forsothe Babyloynes men 
maden Socoth Benoth ; forsothe Cutheny 
men maaden Vergel; and the men of E- 
31math maaden Asma; bot Euey maaden 
Nabaath and Tharcha; thes forsothe 
that weren of Sepharnaym brenden their 
sonys with fyre to Adramalech and Ara- 
32malech?, goddis of Sepharuaym. And ne- 
uer the latere thei herieden the Lord ; thei 
maaden forsothe to hem prestis of the 
most newe thingis of hee3e thingis, and 
thei putten hem in heeje heithen templis. 
33 And whanne thei schulden heryen God, 
forsothe to their goddis4 thei serueden, 
aftir the vsage of heithen men, fro the 
whiche thei were translatyde to Samarye; 
3avnto the day that is nowe thei folow- 
eden’ the old maner; they dredden not 
the Lord, ne keepen his cerymonyes, and 
domys, and lawe, and maundement, that 


IV. KINGS. 


XVII. 26—34. 


latidistY, and madist to dwelle in the citees 
of Samarie, kunnen not the lawful thingis 
of God of the? lond; and the Lord sente* 
liouns in to hem, and lo! Zouns® sleen 
hem; for thei kunnen not the custom of 
God of the lond. Sotheli the kyng of27 
Assiriens comaundide, and seide, Lede 3e 
thidur oon of the preestis, whiche® 3e 
brou3ten? prisoneris fro thennus, that he 
go, and dwelle with hem, and teche hem 
the lawful thingis of God of the lond. 
Therfor whanne oon of these preestis had®28 
come’, that weren led prisoneris fro Sa- 
marie, he dwellide in Bethel, and tau3te 
hem’, how thei schulden worschipe the 
Lord}. And ech folk" made his god, and 00+ worsens 


S . dy. 8 cans aie he Lord; not 
thei settiden tho goddis in the! hi3 tem- _ perfitly, for he 
: é . f the 
plis, whiche* the! men of Samarie hadden jrestis of Sa- 
maad, folk™ and folk" in her® citees, in "vie and not 


whiche thei dwelliden?. For men of Ba-30 Lire here. c. 
biloyne maden4 Socoth Benoth}; forsothe"  +SochotRenoth: 
men of Cutha maden Vergel*; and men Haag a 
of Emath maden Asyma; forsothet Eueis 31 ae 
maden Nabaath and Tharcha"; sotheli thei /7@ ¢ 
that weren of Sepharuaym brenten her 

sones in fier to Adramelech and Aname- 

lech, goddis’ of Sepharuaym. And ne-32 

theles thei worschipiden the Lord; for- 

sothe of the laste men§ thei maden preestis  § she taste 
of the hise thingis, and settiden hem in "7j that’s 


of vile per- 


hije templis. And whanne thei worschip-33 8% that 
weren not of 


iden God, thei serueden also her goddis, _ prestis kyn, 

: 2 bi the lawe of 
bi the custom of hethene men, fro whiche  Moyses. Lire 
thei weren translatid to Samarie; ‘til insi”" ~ 
to” present dai thei suen* theY eld cus- 
toin; thei dredden not|| the Lord, nethir  tdredden not; 

that is, per- 


thei kepen hise cerymonyes, and domes, 
and lawe, and comaundement, which? the 
Lord comaundide to the sones of Jacob, 
whom he nemyde* Israel; and he” smoot35 
a couenaunt with hem, and comaundide 
to hem, and seide, Nyle 3e drede alien 
goddis, and onoure 3e not outwardli hein, 
nethir worschipe 3e inwardli hem, and 


fitly, as it is 
comaundid in 
the lawe. Lire 
here. C. 


"And the apr. © that c prim. PAmalech zB. 4 goodis x, *¥ folewen 5. 
¥ hast translatid 1. 2 thats. ®@hathsentr. bthoor. cthatr. dladden ex. @hadden a. f come 
thiderer. & ment. bof thov.folk1. 1Om. xn. Kthatr. 'Om.1s.  ™ that folk his god 1. 1 that 
folk hist. Other.  Pdwelten1. 4 maden her godi1. ‘andi. § Vergel her god1. and 1. 
= Tharcha here goddis1. ¥ the goddis1. Wtiltothis1. ¥*suedent. YOm.1. 2 the whiche 1. 
8 clepide 1. > the Lord 1. 


XVII. 35-——XVIII. 4. 


the Lord hadde comaundide to the sonys 
350f Jacob, whome he clepide Yrael; and 
hadde smyten with hem couenaunt, and 
hadde comaundide to hem, seyinge, Wylle 
3e not dreeden alyen goddis, and honour- 
ith not hem, ne herieth hem, and offre 
363e not to hem; bot the Lord 3oure God, 
that ladde 30u out fro the lond of Egipt 
in grete strengthe, and in aarme strau3te 
out, hym dreedith, and hym® honourith, 
37and to him offrith. The cerymonyes for- 
sothe, and the domys, and the lawe, and 
the maundement that he wroote to 30u, 
keepith, that 3e done alle days ; and dreed 
383e not alyen goddis. And the couenaunt 
that he smoote with 3ou, willith not for- 
39 3eten, ne herie 3ee alyen goddis; bot the 
Lord 3oure God dreedith, and he schal 
delyuere 30u fro the hond of alle 3oure 
aoenmyes. Thei forsothe herden not, bot 
aftir their vsage beforn hadde thei diden 
aieuyl. TThanne thes gentylis forsothe 
weren dreedynge God; bot neuer the 
later and‘ to their mawmettis seruynge, 
for and the sonys of hem and the sonys 
sonys so done, as dyden their fadirs, vnto 
the present day. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 The thrid 3eer of Osee, the sone of 
Hela, kyng of Yrael, regned Ezechias, 
2the sone of Achaz, kyng of Juda. Of 
fyue and twenty 3eer he was, whanne he 
beganne to regnen, and twenty and nyne 
3eer he regnede in Jerusalem; name of 
his modir, Abisa, dou3tir of Zacharie. 
3And he dyde that", that was good beforn 
the Lord, aftir alle thingis that Dauith, 
4his fadir, hadde done. And he scatered 
the hee3e thingis, and to-brusede the 
ymagis, and hew3 doun the mawmett 
wodis, and he to-braste the brasen ad- 
dere, that Moyses hadde maad ; forsothe 
vnto that tyme the sonys of Yrael 


8 to hym a. 


Canarmi. 4 stre3it 1. 
I not the Lord 1. 
¥ the sone 1, 
e Ezechie 1. 


© out I. 
™ customes ELP. 
W the douzter 1. * Ezechie 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


t Om. £ pr.m. in 1. 


f the comaundment 1. 
= Therfor sothly 1. 
Y that 1. 


287 


make 3e not sacrifice to hem; but 3oure 36 
Lord God, that ledde 30u out of the lond 
of Egipt in greet strengthe, and in arm¢ 
holdun? forth®, drede 3e hym, and wor- 
schipe 3e hym, and make 3e sacrifice to 
hym. Also kepe 3e the cerymonyes, and 37 
domes, and the lawe, and comaundement*, 
which’ he wroot to 3ou, that 3e do" in alle 
daies ; and drede 3e not alien goddis. And 38 
nyle 3e for3ete the couenaunt, which! he 
smoot with 30u, nether worschipe 3e alien 
goddis; but drede 3e 3oure Lord God, and 39 
he schal delyuere 30u fro the hond of alle 
3oure enemyes. Forsothe thei herden not, 40 
but diden bi her formere custom™. Ther-41 
for® these hethene men dredden sotheli® 
God; but netheles thei serueden also her 
idols, for bothe her sones and the sones of 
sonesP doen so, til in to present4 dai, as 
her fadris diden. 


CAP. XVIII. 


In the thridde 3eer of Osee, sone’ of1 
Hela, kyng of Israel, regnyde Ezechie, 
sone of Achaz, kyng of Juda. He was of2 
fyue and twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan to 
regne, and he regnyde in Jerusalem nyne 
and twenti 3eer; the name of his modir 
was Abisa, dou3ter” of Zacharie. Ands 
he* dide that, that was good bifor the 
Lord, bi alle thingis, whichY Dauid, his 
fadir, hadde do. And he distriede hize4 
places, and al to-brak ymagis, and kit- 
tide* doun wodis, and he brak the brasun 
serpent, whom Moyses hadde maad; for 
‘til to® that tyme the sones of Israel 
brenten encense to it; and he‘ clepide the 


u Om. BFH. 


hdows. ithatr. & the Lord 1. 
Pher sones1. 4 this present 1. 
akitte rz. > vnto1 


8 that 1. 
9 Om. 1. 
Z places of mawmetrie 1. 


288 


brenden to it encense; and he clepide 
sthe name of it Noestam. And in the 
Lord God of Yrael he hoopide; also aftir 
hym was not lijk to hym of alle the 
kyngis of Juda, bot nouther in hem that 
«weren beforn hym. And he cleeuede to 
the Lord, and he wente not aweye fro 
the steppis of hym, and he dyde his 
heestis, the whiche the Lord hadde co- 
z7maundide to Moyses; wherfore and the 
Lord was with hy, and in alle thingis 
to the whiche he went forth, wysely he 
had hym silf. Forsothe he rebellide 
a3eynus the king of Assiries, and therfore 
she serued not to hym; and he smoote 
the Philisteis vnto Gasam, and alle the 
termys of hem, fro the toure of keepers 
yvnto the strengthid cytee. The ferth 
jeer of kyng Ezechie, the whiche was 
the seuenthe jeer of Osee, the sone of 
Hela, kyng of Yrael, Salmanazer, kyng 
of Assirie, steyjide vp to Samarie, and 
loouereame it, and toke’. For aftir three 
jeer, the sext 3eer of Ezechie, that is 
nynthe jeer of Osee, kyng of Yrael, 
iitaken is Samarie; and the kyng of As- 
siries translatyde Yrael in to Assiries, 
and sette hem in Haila, and in Habor, 
flodis of Gosam, in the cytees of Medis; 
12 for thei herden not the voice of the Lord 
their God, bot wenten besyde the conenaunt 
of hym; alle thingis that Moyses, the 
sernaunt of the Lord, hadde comaundide, 
is thei herden not, ne dyden. The fourtenthe 
jeer of kyng Ezekie, stey3ide up Sena- 
cherub, kyng of Assiries, to alle the 
strengthid cytees of Juda, and toke hem. 
14 Than Ezechias, kyng of Juda, sente mes- 
sagers to the kyng of Assiries in Lachis, 
seyinge, J haue synned; go aweye fro 
me, and al that thou puttist on to me, 
I schale beren. And so the kyng of 
Assiries comaundide to Ezechie, kyng 
of Juda, thre" hundreth talentis of syl- 


v toke it 4. 


4 of itz. 
thei. the whiche 1. 
keperis 1. = vnto 1. 
kyngt.  ¥ stiede up 1. 


1 Ezechie 1. 
8 the sone i. 
zhem 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


e Noestam, that is, copir a et plures. 

m him 1, 
t stiede up 
a alle thingis 1. 


n Ezechie tr. 


b that 1. 


XVHI. 5-14. 


name therof4 Noestam¢t. And hef hopides + Noestam; 


that is, copir, 


in the Lord God of Israel; therfor aftir ether of copir; 
hym noon was lijk hym{ of alle the Rite 
Godhed was in 


kyngis of Juda, but ‘and nether" in thoi 74 
. fy y $s symple 
kyngis that weren bifor hym. And he6é men bileayden, 


and weren dis- 


cleuyde to the Lord, and 3ede not awei  seyned hi 
fro hise steppis, and he dide the comaunde-  Gpir was gy 
mentis of the Lord, whiche the Lord co- ae 
maundide to Moises; wherfor and the7 Mae fir igs 
Lord was with hym, and he gouernede _hooliere than 


Dauyth, that 


wiseli hym silf in alle thingis, to whiche™ — was bifor him, 


he 3ede forth. Also he! rebellide( a3ens the ae nots 
oe aftir him ; as 
kyng of Assiriens, and therfor he seruede 3° nee 


not to‘that hyng of Asseriens™; and hens singith of ech 
ee ‘ : confessour, 
smoot Philisteis® ‘til to? Gazam, and alle noon is found- 
6 un liyk him. 
the termes of hem, fro the tour of keperis? ana Fae 
Ng: r ° K sum preroga- 
til to” a citee maad strong. In the fourthes tripe es, 
3eer of kyng Ezechie, that was the se-  celence, which 
is not foundun 
uenthe 3eer of Osee, sone’ of Hela, kyng +0 in othere 
eas men, thou3 he 
of Israel, Salmanazar, kyng of Assiriens, _ faile in many 
stiedet to Samarie, and fan3t ajens it, and 10 ye 
took it". For after thre eer, in the sixte  £ it is seid of 
: eee zeriNe ee 
jeer of Ezechie, that is, in the nynthe «as /iyk him, 
= eic. In parh, 
3eer of Osee, kyng of Israel, Samarie was for he distriede 
ae hize places, and 
takun; and the kyng of Assiriens trans-1 the trasan 
latide Israel in to Assiriens, and settyde’ pati iad . 
hem in Haila, and in Habor, ryueris of thepreya of 
i 4 a : im, an ange. 
Gozam, in the citees” of Medeis; for thei 12 of the Lord 
smoot the oost 


herden not the vois of her Lord God, but of senacherib, 
thei braken his couenaunt ; thei herden not, ate 
nether diden alle thingis, whiche Moises, ‘% lynes, and 


these were ful 


the seruaunt of the Lord, comaundide. In 13 special thingis. 
Lire here. c. 


the fourtenthe 3eer of kyng Ezechie, Sena-  § he rebellide, 
fs . ete.; that i 

cherub, kyng* of Assiryens, stiedeY to alle resseiniedeein 
him as lord, 


the strengthide citees of Juda, and took 3° Menon 
tho’. Thanne Ezechie, kyng of Juda, 14 Oe 
sente messangeris to the kyng of Assi- 

riens in to Lachis, and seide, Y haue syn- 


ned||; go awei fro ine, and Y schal bere iy 
° ° y agenus the 
‘al thing*, which” thou schalt putte to me. — Lord, he aret- 
a ‘ tide the svnne 

Therfor the kyng of Asseriens puttide on® of his fadir, 


and of the pu- 
ple, his synne 
in this. Lire 


Ezechie, kyng of Juda, thre hundrid ta- 
lentis? of siluer, and thretti talentis of 
gold. And Ezechie 3af al the siluer, that 15 


W foure E pr.m. 


f Ezechie 1. bh nether also 1. 
© the Philisteis1. Pvntoi. 4the 
u Om. plures. ‘he setter Weitee 1. * the 


Cupour. 4 of talentis s. 


& Ezechie 1. 


XVIII. 15——24. 


isuer, and thritty talentis of gold. And 
Ezechias 3aue alle the syluer, that was 
founden in the hous of the Lord, and in 
16 the kingis tresouries. In that tyme Eze- 
chias brake the doris of the temple of 
the Lord, and the platis of gold, the 
whiche he hadde affitchide, and he 3aue 
i7hem to the kyng of Assiries. Forsothe 
the kyng of Assiries sente Thercam and 
Rapsacem fro Lachis to kyng Ezechie, 
with stronge hond to Jerusalem; the 
whiche whanne hadden stey3ide up, thei 
camen to Jerusalem, and stoden bysydis 
the kundyte of watir of the ouer fysch 
poond, that is in the weye of the fullers 
18feeld. And thei clepide the kyng; for- 
sothe Eliachym, the sone of Elchie, pro- 
uost of the hous, wente out to hem, and 
Sobna, scribe, and Joache, the sone of 
19 Azaf, chauncelere. And Rapsaces seide 
to hem, Spekith to Ezechie, Thes thingis 
seith the grete kyng, kyng of Assiries, 
What is this trust, in the whiche thou 
20Jeuist ? Perauenture thou hast goon in 
counseil, that thou greithe thee to batayl. 
In what tristist thou, that thou be hardy 
21 to rebellen? Whether hopist thou in the 
reeden staf and broken*, Egipt, vpon 
whiche 3if a man lene, to-broken it schal 
goon in to his hond, and thrillen it? So 
is Pharao, the kyng of Egipt, to alle that 
22trusten in hym. And 3if thou seist to 
me, In the Lord oure God we han trust ; 
whether not he is, of whome Ezechie toke 
aweye the hee3e thingis and the auters, 
and comaundide to Jude and to Jerusalem, 
Beforn this anter 3e schuln honouren in 
23 Jerusalem? Nowe thanne gooth to my 
lord, king of Assiries, and I schal 3eue 
to 30u two thousand of hors, and see3ith, 
whether 3e mown han stey3ers vpon 
24hem? And what maner wijse mowen 
3e with stonden beforn oon prince’ of 


x the broken £ pr.m. 


d tresours EKLMX. 
iOm. xu. J or of toukere Eup. 
° hows of the Lord 1. 


k Om. 1. 
P the scryueyn I. 


IV. KINGS. 


tresories io the kyng of Assiriens 1. 
Lkyng Ezeehie 1. 
q enforsist thee 1. 


289 


was foundun in the hows of the Lord, 
and in the kyngis tresories*’. In that tyme16 
Ezechie brak the 3atist of the temple of 
the Lord, and the platis of gold, whiche® 
he haddef fastned, and he 3af tho to the Lc ir 
kyng of Assiriens. Forsothe the kyng of 17 hadden offend. 
Assiriens sente Thercha and Rabsaces fro ane oe 
Lachis to kyng Ezechie, with strong 


t Esechie brak 
the 3atis; Ese- 
chie wiste, the 
puple suget to 
tee and A- 


and therfor he 
dredde skile- 


hond{ to Jerusalem; and whanne thei ‘ly, lest for 
- veniannce of 
hadden stied®, thei camen to Jerusalem, the formid 
e eae oe els the king 
and stoden bisidis the water cundijt of the poppies 
schulde be 


hijere cisterne, which’ is in the weie of S\sia to come 
i .) ; j on his rewme; 
the! fullere, ‘ethiz toukerei. And thei 1s; ens 
clepiden thes kyng!; sotheli Eliachym, Mone shetcites 
erusalem. 
sone™ of Elchie, the souereyn™ of the where Goddis 
worschip was, 
hows®, and Sobna, scryueyn?, and Joahe, jy, stag, 
chaunseler, the sone of Asaph, 3eden out Bevo 
to hem. And Rabsaces seide to hem, TR eae 
Speke 3e to Ezechie, The grete kyng, the spendide the 
ee e ° ° riches of the 
kyng of Assiriens, seith these thingis, temple and of 
What is this trist, in which thou en- ‘be kine, ss 
: ) “the text here 
forsist1? In hap thou hast take counsel, 20 Sei Brak the 
that thou woldist make thee redi to batel. ones in i 
ae x iche myche 
In whom tristist thou, that thou be hardi gold was fast- 
‘ 0. ee ned bi kingis 
to rebelle' ? Whethir thou hopist in a ‘staf 21 biforgoinge and 
of rehed’ and brokun, Egipt', on® whichY, bi Din te fair- 
if a man lenith, it schal be brokun, and maa bod 
schal¥ entre in to hys hond, and schal compel 
Oo 18, tor he 
peerse it? So is Farao, kyng of Egipt, hadde noon 
: ° ther thi 
to alle men that tristen on* hym. That if22Vherof he” 
G Ned a . my3te paie so 
thou seist to me, We han trist in ‘oure Lord Bn cnt 
God’; whether this is not he, whos hije Of this is had 


an argument 


thingis’Y and auteris’ Ezechie took awei, ether preef, 
° that princes in 

and comaundide to Juda and to Jerusalem, — jedesnoun 

take of the 


3e* schulen worschipe bifor this auter in (eC rr a. 
Jerusalem? Now therfor passe 3e°§ to my 23 chirche, for the 
ne sauyng of the 
lord, the kyng of Assiriens, and Y schal comyn puple. 
e « ive here. Ce 
3yue to® 30u twei thousynde® of horsis, Ambrose and 
‘ ¢ D in X41. 
and se 3e, whether 3e moun haue rideris ounce ii. ques- 
y ict ith 24 tioun, ¢°. au- 
of ‘tho horsis*? And hou moun 3e with-24 Mm oor 


stonde bifor o prince of the leste ser- ashe ee 
uauntis of my lord? Whether thon hast vu. book, xiii. 
trist in Egipt, for charis and kny3tis®? ¢!andix. 


book, xvi. ¢°. 
Y satrape E pr. m. 
ethatr. fOm.1. 


m the sone I, 
Trebelle ajens Senacherib 1. 


Egonupi. }thatr 
n souereyn or bischop 1. 
s reedy staf 1. 


tO! Egyptr. 2 upon 1. Ythe which staff 1. W the splyndre or speel therof schal1. * ins. Ythe Lord 
oure Godi. YY ymagis s. 7 auteris of offence 1.  setyinge, 3e 1. bye forth1, ¢Om.1. ¢¢ thou- 
sendis s. dhem1. © kny3tis ¢herof'1. 

VOL. Il. 


bag 22 


290 


the lest seruauntis of my lord ? Whether 
hast thou trust in Egipt, for the chaaris 
2oand hors men? Whether with oute the 
wille of God I haue stey3ide up to this 
place, that I distruye it ? The Lord seide 
to me, Stey3e 3e” up to this lond, and dis- 
g6truye it. Forsothe Eliachym, the sone 
of Elchie, and Sobna, and Joache, seyden 
to Rapsace, We preyen, that thou speke 
to us, thi seruauntis, Ciriely ; forsothe we 
vndirstonden that tong; and speke thou 
not to us Jewly, heerynge the puple, that 
27is vpon the walle. And Rapsaces an- 
swerde to hym, seyinge, Whether to thi 
lord and to thee sente me my lord, that 
I schulde speken thes wordis, and not 
more to the men that sytten vpon the 
wall, that thei eten their dritt, and 
esdrynken their vryne with 3ou? And so 
Rapsaces stode, and cryede out with a 
grete voyce Jewly, and seith, Heerith the 
wordis of the grete kyng, kyng of As- 
gosiries. Thes thingis seith the kyng, 
‘Disceyue not 30u* Ezechie ; forsothe he 
schal not mowen delyuer 3ou fro myn 
30hond; ne 3yue he trust to 3ou vpon the 
Lord, seying, Delyuerynge schal dely- 
ueren us the Lord, and this cyte schal 
not be taken in the hond of the kyng of 
31 Assiries; wille 3e not heeren Ezechias. 
Thes thingis forsothe seith the kyng of 
Assiries, Dooth with me that to 30u is 
profytable, and comith out to me; and 
ete ech oon of his vijne, and of his fijge 
tree, and 3e schuln drynke watirs of 3oure 
s2cisternys, to the tyme that I come, and 
translate 30u in to the lond that is lijc to 
jour lond, in to the lond berynge fruyt, 
and plenteuows of wijne, the lond of 
brede, and of vynys, the lond of olyues, 
‘and of oyle’, and of hony ; and 3e schulen 
lyuen, and not dy3en. Wylle 3e not heeren 
Ezechie, that 3ou disceyueth, seyinge, 
33 The Lord schal delyueren us. Whether 
delyuerden the goddis of Gentylis their 


2 Om. CEH. 


f stiede up 1. & the wille of my lord 1. » My lord 1. 
P sittinge I. 
* 3ou ouer I. 


mOm. 1s, upon i. 


© seiynge I, 
u takun CEIK pr. m. L. 


v til that 1. ¥ bere 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


a Lede not jou doun £ pr. m. 


XVIIL. 25—33. 


Whether Y stiede£ with outen ‘Goddis 25 cage 


willeS to this place, that Y schulde dis- ng ee 
° ° 2 did e 18 1 
trie it ? ‘The Lord seide to me, ‘Stie thou! ede, as Sis- 
to this lond, and distrie thou it. Forsothe 26;"0". "rook, 
xxvili. c°. Ce 


Eliachym, sone* of Elchie, and Sobna, and maby ae 


Joahe, seiden to Rabsaces, We preien!, that ond; for 
whanne he 


thou speke bi the langage of Sirie to vs, hadde maad 
. : : ° conenaunt, and 
thi seruauntis; for we vndirstondun this take gold, to 
langage; and that™ thou speke not* to vs reve of Fae 
bi the langage of Juwis, while the puple togtin -od 
herith, which is on" the wal. And Rab-27couenaunt 
: ‘ : oO vnfeithfuly, 
saces answeride, ‘and seide®, Whethir my and sente oost 
lord sente me to thi lord and to thee, that {ak¢ ye" 
Y schulde speke these wordis, and not [¢% the pure 
rather to the men ‘that sittenP on4 the sil is 
wal, that thei ete her toordis, and drynke § § passe 3e; in 
reu it is, 


her pisse with 30u? Therfor Rabsaces 28 3yue 3¢ weddis, 
stood, and criede with greet vois bi lan- iT chee ee 

gage of Jewis, and seide, Here 3e the es Lire 
wordis of the greet kyng, the kyng of  * and that thou 
Assiriens. The kyng seith these thingis, 29 cee eke 
Ezechie disceyue not 3ou, for he may not 2erd.of me 
delyuere 30u fro myn hond; nether 3yue 30 faces and for 

he™ trist to 3ou on’ the Lord‘, and seie,  wordis of blas- 
The Lord delyuerynge schal delyuere vs,  wordis. Of this 


femye in his 
lace both 
and this citee shal not be bitakun® in the Trait nil 


hond of the kyng of Assiriens; nyle 3e 31 Crsten doc- 


tours seyen, 


here Ezechie. For the kyng of Assiriens that this Rab- 
° « ° saces Was & 
seith these thingis, Do 3e with me that, Jew of hirthe, 


but he forsook 
the lawe, and 
was peruertid 
to hethennesse. 
Lire here. c 


that is profitable to 30u, and go 3e out to 
me; and eche man schal ete of his vyner, 
and of his fige tree, and 3e schulen drynke 
watris of 3oure cisternes, til’ Y come, and 32 
translate” 30u* in to a lond whichy is lijk 
3oure lond, in to a fruytful lond, and plen- 
teuouse* of wyn, a lond of breed, and of 
vineris, a lond of olyue trees, and of ® oile, 
and of hony; and 3e schulen lyue, and 
3e schulen not die. Nyle 3e here Ezechie, 
that disseyueth 30u, and seith, The Lord 
schal delyuere 3ow. Whether the goddis33 
of hethene men delyueriden her lond fro 
the hond of the kyng of Assiriens ? Where 34 
is god of Eimath, and of Arphat? Where 
is god of Sapharuaym, of Ana, and of 


+ Om. «4. 


1 preien thee 1. 
t Lord God 1. 


a Om. 1. 


i Wende thou up 1. * the sone tr. 
dupont. jer § upon I. 
Ythat 1. 2a plenteuouse 1. 


XVII. 34—XIX. 6, 


lond fro the hond of the kyng of Assi- 
3iries? Where is the god of Emath, and 
Arfath? Where is the god of Saphar- 
uaym, Ana, and Aua?? Whether thei de- 
35lyuerden Samarie fro myn hond? Who 
forsothe ben thes in alle the goddis of 
londis, ‘the whiche> delyuerden their re- 
gyoun fro my hond, that the Lord may 
3¢delyueren Jerusalem fro myn hond? And 
so the puple was styll, and answerde not 
to hym eny thinge; forsothe maunde- 
ment of the kyng thei hadde taken, that 
37 thei schulden not answeren to hym®. And 
Eliachym, the sone of Elchie, the pro- 
uost of the hous, came, and Sobna, scribe, 
and Joache, the sone of Azaf, chaunce- 
lere, to Ezechie, the clothis kutt; and 
thei tolden to hym the wordis of Rap- 
Saces. 
CAP. XIX. 
1° The whiche thingis whanne kyng Eze- 
chie hadde herde, he cutte his clothis, and 
is couerde with a sac; and he wente in to 
2the hous of the Lord. And he sente Elia- 
chym, the prouost of the hous, and‘ Sobna, 
scribe, and the olde men of the prestis, 
couerd with sackis, to Ysay, the prophete, 
3the sone of Amos. The whiche seyden, 
Thes thingis seith Ezechias, Days of tri- 
bulacyoun, and of blamynge, and of blas- 
femye thes days; ther ben commyn sonys 
to the birthe, and strengthis hath not the 
achilde berere. 3if perauenture heere the 
Lord thi God alle the wordis of Rapsaces, 
whom sente the kynge of Assiries, his 
lord, that he repreue the Lord lyuynge, 
and yndernym with wordis, the whiche 
herde the Lord thi God; and make ory- 
soun for thes relikis, that ben founden. 
5 Thanne the seruauntis of kyng Ezechie 
gscamen to Ysay; and Ysay seith to hem, 
Thes thingis seith to 3oure lord, Thes 
thingis seith the® Lord, Wille 3e not 


8 Ayra ABC sec.m. FH. » that c pr.m, 


d Lordus hows 1. 
k The whiche 1. 


> For whi. © the sone 1. 
h the scryueyn 1. {the sone 1. 
trauailinge 1. P strengthe therto 1. 
peple1. + Heere therfor 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


¢ hym any thyng & pr. m. 


€ the scryuen 1. 
1 seiden to him 1. 
pp hath sent 1. 


291 


Aua? Whether thei delyueriden Samarie 

fro myu hond? For> who ben thei in alle 35 

goddis of londis, that delyueriden her cun- 

trey fro myn hond, that the Lord may 

delyuere Jerusalem fro myn _hoond ? 

Therfor the puple was stille, and answer-36 

ide nott ony thing to hym; for thei hadden + and answer- 
take comaundement of the kyng, that thei {42 7013 Bice 


. of the kin 
schulden not answere to hym. And Elia-37 lalate 


chym, sone® of Elchie, the souereyn of the sake |e git 
sele Dias- 
hows‘, and Sobna, scryuen®, and Joahe, _ femyes of God, 
f h seek h if he were an- 
chaunceler‘, the sone o saph, camen  gwerid. Lire 
here. C. 


with to-rent clothis to Ezechie ; and telden 
to hym the wordis of Rabsaces. 


CAP. XIX. 


And whanne kyng Ezechie hadde herd! 
these thingis, he to-rente his clothis{, and —  to-rente his 
was hilid with a sak; and he entride in PCM Lies. 
to the hous of the Lord. And he sente? pe ae ty 
Eliachym, souereyn of the hous®, and Live here. c. 
Sobna, scryueyn*, and elde men of the 
preestis, hilid with sackis, to Ysaie, the 
prophete, sone! of Amos. Whiche* seiden!,3 
Ezechie seith these thingis, This dai is a 
dai of tribulacioun, and of blamyng, and 
of blasfemye; sones camen ‘til to™ the 
childberyng"{, and the ‘traueler of childe®  ¢ critdtering; 
hath not strengthis?. If perauenture thi4 eee 
Lord God here alle the wordis of Rab-  affliccioun asa 
saces, whom the kyng of Assiryens, his _ is set in affiic- 
lord sente??, that he schulde dispise the Reese 
Lord lyuynge, and repreue’ bi wordis, jU@spst, 
whiche’ thi Lord God herde; and make oo 
thou preier for these relikis’, that ben 
foundun. Therfort the seruauntis of kyng5 
Ezechie camen to Isaie; and Isaie seideé 
to hem, Seie 3e these thingis to 3oure lord, 
The Lord seith these thingis, Nyle thou 


4to aBFH. © 3oure 4. 


f the chaunceler 1. & Lordus hous 1. 
mynto1. 1 birthe1. © modir 


qrepreue himi. *that1. * remenauntis of the 


PpaZ 


292 


dreeden fro the face of the wordis that 
je han herde, with the whiche the chil- 
dren of the kyng of Assiries han blas- 
7femyden me. Loo! I schal senden in 
to hym a spirit, and he schal here a mes- 
sager, and he schal ‘be turned‘ a3eyn in 
to his lond; and I schal throwen hym 
sdoun by swerd in his owne lond. Thanue 
Rapsaces is turned a3eyn, and foond the 
kyng of Assiries ouercommynge Lob- 
nam; forsothe he hade herde, that he 
gwas goon aweye fro Lachis. And 
whanne he hade herd of kyng Thea- 
racha of Etheope, messager® seyinge, Lo! 
he is goon out, that he fi3t ajeynus thee; 
that he goo ajeynus hym, he sente mes- 
iosagers to Ezechie, seyinge, Thes thingis 
seyith to Ezekic, kyng of Juda, Leede 
thee not asyde the! Lord thi God, in 
the whiche thou hast trust, ne sey thou, 
Jerusalem schal not be taken in to the 
uthondis of the kyng of Assiries; thou 
forsothe thi silf hast herd what thingis 
the kyngis of Assiries han done in alle* 
londis, what maner thei han waastiden 
hem; whether than aloon thon schalt 
1zmowen ben delyuered? Whether the 
goddis of Gentylis delyuerden alle whom 
my faders waastyden, Gozam, that is, 
and Aran, and Reseph, and the sonys of 
13 Eden, that weren in Thelassar? Wher 
is the kyng of Emath, and the kyng of 
Arfath? and the kyng of the cytee of 
14Cepharnaym, Ana, and Aua? And so 
whanne Ezechias hade taken the lettres 
fro the hond of the messagers, and hadde 
rad hem, he stey3ide up in to the hous 
of the Lord, and he spradde hym out 
15 beforn the Lord ; and preyide in his si3t, 
seyinge, Lord God of Yrael, that syttyst 
vpon cherubyn, thon ert aloon God of 
alle kyngis of the! erth; thou maadist 


fturnyn £ pr.m. & message 4. 


u face or schemyng 1. 
a the king of Assiriens 1. 


v the wordis rt. W® that 1. 


© hath go 1. f the king of Assiriens 1. 
‘han dor. ™hanwastid: %hemxz. © folk 1. 
Gozami. ‘Sof Aranr. tof Reseph t. 


Ystiede up 1. 2 tho lettris 1. upon I. 


IV. KINGS. 


bh doun z pr.m. 


x Thanne 1. 
b men tellinge it of the comynge of Theracha 1. 
& Theracha 1. 


uthe citee of Emath 1. 


XIX. 7-——15. 


drede of the face"} of wordis’ whiche* that i for 
thou herdist, bi whiche the children of the Tire Be! 


kyng of Assiriens blasfemeden me. Lo!7 
Y schal sende to hym a spirit, and he 
schal here a messanger, and he schal turne 
a3jen in to his lond; and Y schal caste 
hym doun bi swerd in his owne lond. 
Therfor* Rabsaces turnede ajenY, ands 
foond the kyng of Assiriens fi3tynge ajens 
Lobna; for he* hadde herd, that the kyng 
hadde go awei fro Lachis. And whanne9s 
he*® hadde herd of Theracha», kyng of 
Ethiope, ‘men seyynge*®, Lo! he? 3ede°’ 
out, that he fijte ajens thee; that hef 
schulde go a3ens ‘that kyngt, he sente 
messangeris to Ezechie, and seide, Seie 3e" 10 
these thingis to Ezechie, kyng of Juda, 
Thi Lord God, in whom thou hast trist, 
disseyue not thee, nether seie thou, Jeru- 
salem schal not be ‘bitakun' in to the 
hondis of the kyng of Assiriens; for thon 11 
thi silf herdist* what thingis the kyngis 
of Assiriens diden! in alle londis, hou thei 
wastiden™ tho®; whether therfor thou 
aloone maist be delyuered ? Whether the 12 
goddis of hethene men® delyueriden? alle 
men? whiche my fadris distrieden, that is, 
Gozam’, and Aran’, and Resepht, and the 
sones of Eden, that weren in Thelassar ? 
Where is the kyng of Emath", and the13 
kyng of Arphat? and the kyng of the 
cytee of Sepharnaym, of Ana, and of 
Aua? Therfor whanne Ezechie hadde 14 
take the lettris fro the hond of messan- 
geris”, and hadde red tho*, he stiedeY in 
to the hows of the Lord, and spredde 
abrood tho’ bifor the Lord; and preiede 15 
in his si3t, and seide, Lord God of Israel, 
that sittist on? cherubym}, thou art God 
aloone of alle kyngis of erthe ; thou madist h 
henene and erthe. Bowe thin eere, and 16 2nee. aie 
here; opyn thin i3en, Lord, and se; and 


{ that is, art 
souereyn of ech 
creature, 3he, of 


ithatu. Kthe zw. 10m. ac. 


¥ azen_ fro Jerusalem 1. 
¢ Om. 1. 


Z Rabsaces 1. 
d Theracha 1. 
itakun CEK pr.m. L. k hast herd 1. 
Phan delyuered1. the meni. ‘* the men of 
w the messangeris BCEIL. * hem 1. 


XIX, 16——25. 


isheuen and erthe. Bowe doun thin ere, 
and here; opyn thin eejen, Lord, and 
see; and here thou alle the wordis of 
‘Senacherub, that sente, that he repreue 
17to us the lyuynge God. Forsothe, Lord, 
the kyngis of Assiries scatirden the Gen- 
istylis, and the londis of alle, and senten 
the goddis of hem in to fyre; forsothe 
they weren not goddis, bot the wercis 
of the hondis of men, of tree and stoon; 
igand thei distruyeden hem. Now than, 
Lord oure God, maake vs saaf fro the 
hond of hem, that alle rewmys of the 
erth knowen for thou ert Lord God 
20aloon. Forsothe Ysayas, the sone of 
Amos, sente to Ezechie, seyinge, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God of Yrael, 
What thingis thou preyedist me vpon 
Senacherub, kyng of Assiries, I haue 
2iherde. This is the word, that the Lord 
hath spoken of hym; He hath dispiside 
thee, and scorned thee, thou meyden 
dou3tir of Syon; aftir thi bac the heued 
he meuede, thou dou3tir of Jerusalem. 
22To whom hast thou repreued, and whom 
hast thou blasfemede? A3eynus whome 
hast thou enhauncid thi voice, and hast 
reride in to heei3 thin eez3en ? Ajenus the 
23hooly of Yrael. By the hond™ of thi 
seruauntes thou hast putte reprofe to 
the Lord, and seidist, In the" multitude 
of my chaaris I steizide up the hei;tis of 
hillis, in the ouermost of Lybane, and I 
hew3 doun the hee3e cedris of it, and the 
chosen firris of it; and I wente in vnto 
the termys of it, and the wijlde wode of 
21the Carmele of it I haue hewen doun; 
and I haue dronken alyen watirs, and 
haue dryed with the steppis of my feet 
2salle the closed watirs. Whether hast 
thou not herde, what I haue done fro the 


m hondis aBFru. 


b the which 1. ¢ hath sent to us 1. 4 wolde 1. 
bh kyng a pr.m. ‘han destried x. * thei han sent 1. 
© fordidenr. Phemr. 4therewmesi. ° Om.1. 


IV. KINGS. 


293 


here alle the wordis of Senacherib, which 
sente*, that he schulde’ dispise ‘to vs* 
‘God lyuynge’. Verili®, Lord, the kynges" 17 
of Assiriens distrieden' hethene men, and 
the londis of alle men, and senten* the1is 
goddis of hem in to fier; for! thei weren 
not goddis, but werkis of ‘hondis of men”, 
of tre and stoon"; and thei losten® ‘tho 
goddis?t. Now therfor, oure Lord God, 19 + not for zee! 
make vs saaf fro the hond of hem, that %,, Te 
alle rewmes? of erthe wite that thon art ‘jv 74° 
the’ Lord God aloone. Forsothe Isaie, 20 
sone’ of Amos, sente to Ezechie, and seide, 
The Lord God of Israel seith these thingis, 
Y haue herd tho thingis, whiche' thou 
preidist me on" Sennacherib, king of As- 
siriens. This is the word, which’ the21 
Lord spak” of hym, Thou virgyn dou3tir* 
of Syont, heY dispiside” thee, and scorn- 
yde thee; thou dou3ter of Jerusalem, he 
mouyde his heed aftir thi bak. Senna- 22 
cherib*, whom ‘dispisidist thou, and whom 
‘blasfemedist thou? A3ens whom hast thou 
reisid thi vois, and hast reisid thin izen there in sum_ 
an? hizje? Ajens the hooli of Israel. Bi23 eer 
the hond of thi seruauntis thou dispisidist® Sov for thet 
the Lord, and seidist, In the multitude of ee a ne 
my charys Y stiedef in to the® hije thingis  citee of Jeru- 
of hillis, in the hiznesse of Liban §, and 
kittide® doun the hize cedris therof', and 

hil of Sion. 


t virgyn, the 
dou3ztir of Sion ; 
that is, Jeru- 
salem, which 
is seid a vir- 
gyn, for the 
hoolnesse of 
feith, that 
dwellide euere 


salem was de- 
fendid of the 
stronge hold, 
that was in the 


the chosyn beechis therof; and Y entride 7 of Sion. | 
‘til tok the termes! therof, and Y kittide 24§ of Litan; 
temple maad 
Y drank alien watris, and Y made drie five "es 
with" the® steppis of ‘the feet of myn?|| ‘alle He ee 
what Y made at the bigynnyng? Fro elde and of beests 
forth; and strengthid citees' of fizteris™ 
schulen be in to fallyng of hillis’y. And 26 


hat is, of th 
doun the forest™ of Carmele therof; and Lana 
Liban. Lire 
watris closid?. Whether thou herdist not, 25 that is, of men 
daies Y made it", aud now Y haue brou3t* pea cde 
thei that sitten meke of * hond in tho*, 


n Om. 4BFII. 


e Om, t. f the lyuynge God. & Trenly 1. 
lforsothe x ™ mennus hondis 1. 1% of stoon 1. 
Sthesonex. ‘tthat1. Ynponr VY thats. 


whath spoke 1. *the doujtir 1. y the king of Assirie 1. 2 hath dispisid 1. ® O! Sennacherib 1. > hast 


thou dispisid 1. © hast thou blasfemed 1. 4 on 1. 
tide ik. iOm.1. * vnto1. 
watris with 1. © Om. GKL. 
the feet 0. see.m. the feet of men vu. 


uhillis a see.m.1. Y figteris A sec. m. 1. 


g Om. 1. 
win. 


€ hast dispisid 1. 
1 termes or uttermost coostis 1. 
P my feet a sec. m. K see.m. X sec.m. feet of mine seruauntis G see. m. Q. 


Omer. 41 kit- 


f went up I. 
n all the closid 


m or the sautre 1. marg. 
t the citees ELP. 


t that thing 1. 8 brou3t i 1. 


X tho eitees 1. 


294 


bigynnynge? Fro? the olde days I haue 
fourmyd it, and nowe I haue brou3t to; 
and the streyngthid cytees schuln ben in 
esto fallynge of the fi3tynge hyllis. And 
thilk that sytten in hem meeke in hond, 
han tremblyd togydre, and ben con- 
foundyd ; thei ben maad as hey of the 
feeld, and as greene herbe of rofys, the 
whiche is maad drye, er it my3t comme 
27to rijpnesse. And thi dwellynge place, 
and thi goynge oute, and thi commynge 
in, and thi weye I knewe beforn, and thi 
28 woodnesse a3eynus me. Thou wexe wood 
in me, and thi pride stey3ide up in to my 
eris; and so I schal putten a cercle in 
thyn noos thrillis, and a bernacle in thi 
lippis, and I schal brynge thee a3eyn by 
29the weye that thou came. To thee for- 
sothe, Ezechie, this schal ben a tokne; 
ete this 3ere that thou fyndist; in the 
secounde forsothe 3ere that freely growen ; 
bot in the thrid 3eer sowith, and repith, 
and plauntith vynes, and etith the fruyt 
300f hem. And what euer were laft of the 
hous of Juda, it schal putten the rote 
31 benethe, and maken fruyt abouen. Fro4 
Jerusalem forsoth schuln goon out re- 
lykis, and that schal ben saued of the 
hyll of Syon; the zeel of the Lord of 
32 hoostis schal done that. For what thing 
thes thinges seith the Lord of the kyng 
of Assiries, He schal not commen in to 
this’ cytee, ne senden arowe in to it, and 
targett schal not ocupien it, and warn- 
33 yschynge schal not enuyroun it. By the 
weye that he came he schal be turned 
a3eyn, and this cytee he schal not comme 
3iin, seith the Lord; and I schal defenden 
this cytee, and sauen it for me, and for 
35 Dauid, my seruaunt. It is done thanne, 
the aungel of the Lord came in that ny3t, 
and smoote in the tentis of Assiries an 
hundreth fourescoore and fyue thousandis. 


P For zB. 


Yar. 7a grener. 


4 the hous riggis 1. 
f goyng in 1. 


Sstiedeupr. b ryng rw. 
plaunte EL. °ete3ex. P left oner 1. 

leftt. tOm.1.  U this thing 1. 
“my selff1, 8 and foure 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


q For 4. 


> the which 1. 
i Om. 1. 
4 the root 1. 
Y citee Jerusalem 1. 


b the bodies x sec.m. © awei thenns 1. 


XIX. 26—35. 


trembliden togidere, and ben schent; thei - 
ben maad as the hei of theY feeld, and as 
grene* eerbe of roouys*, which? is° dried@, 
bifor that it cam to ripenesse. And Y 27 
bifor¢ knew thi dwellyng, and thi goyng 
out, and thin entryng‘, and thi weie, and 
thi woodnesse ajens me. Thou were wood 28 " 
ajens me, and thi pride stide€ in to myn 
eeris; therfor Y schal putte a cercle" in 
thi nosethirlis, and a bernacle in thi lippis, 
and Y schal lede thee a3en in to! the weie 
bi which thou camest. Forsothe, Ezechie, 29 
this‘ schal be a signe! ‘to thee™; ‘ete thou 
in this 3eer that, that thou fyndist ; for- 
sothe in the secounde 3eer tho thingis, that 
growen bi her owne wille; sotheli in the 
thridde 3eer sowe 3e, and repe 3e, plaunte® 
je vyneris, and ete° the fruytis of tho. 
And what euer thing schal be residue? 30 
of the hows of Juda, it schal sende root 
dounward, and schal* make fruyt"™ ypward. 
For relikis® schulen go out of Jerusalem, 31 
and that, that schal be sauyd, ‘schal go 
out* of the hil of Syon; the feruent loue 
of the Lord of oostis schal do this". Wher-32 
for the Lord seith these thingis of the 
kyng of Assiriens, He schal not entre in 
to this citee’, nethir he schal sende an 
arowe in to it, nether scheeld” shal occu- 
pie it, nether strengthing, ethir bisegyng, 
schal cumpasse it. He schal turne ajen33 
bi the weie ‘bi which* he cam’, and he i lea 
schal not entre in to this citee, seith the sae Toe 
Lord; and Y schal defende this citee, and 34 wreeice 


. 6 weren bitwixe, 
Y schal saue it for me’, and for Dauid, my _ put aftir ij. jeer 


Sennacberib 


+ in that ny3t 
the aungel, etc. ; 
not in the next 


seruaunt. Therfor it was don, in that35 7 hoard 

ni3t the aungelt of the Lord cam, and Jerusalem, 

a is whanne his 

smoot in the castels of Assiryens an hun- cost was in 
0 a Nobe, which is 
drid foure* score and fyue thousynde. not ful fer fro 

p ‘ e Ji . 

And whanne Sennacherib hadde rise eerli, 2y's'em: 

i ies> . ny3t the aungel 
he si3_alle bodies® of deed men; and he Beanies | 
departide, and 3ede awei®. And Senna- gg iaunce on his 

00s) tre 


cherib, the’ kyng of Assiriens, turnede here. c. 


tthe an. thi B. 


¢Om.1. 4dried or welewide 1. ¢ Om. 1. 
Ktothee this1. ltokner ™Om.1. and 
Tit schalr. ‘the frnyt1. 8 the relikis or folk 
wscheeld of him1. *that1. Ycam byt 


d Om. 1. 


XIX. 36—XX. 8. 


And whanne erly he hade rysen, he saw3 
alle the bodies of the deed; and a3eyn 

36gooynge wente aweye. And Senacherub, 
‘the’ kyng of Assiries, is turned a3eyn, 

3z7and dwellide in Nynyue. And whanne 
he schulde honouren in the temple of 
Nesarath, his god, Toramelech and Cirasar, 
the sonys of hym, smyten hym with 
swerd; and thei flowen in to the lond 
of Armeneys; and Asseraddon, his sone, 
regnede for hym. 


CAP. XX. 


1 In tho dayes sijknede Ezechias vnto 
the deeth ; and there cam to hym Ysayas, 
the sone of Amos, prophete, and seydes 
to hym, Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Comaunde to thin hous, forsothe thou 

2schalt dyen, and not lyuen. The whiche 
turned his face to the wall, and honourede 

3the Lord, seyinge, I beseche, Lord, haue 
mynde, how J haue goon before thee in 
treuthe, and in perfyte herte, and that is 
plesaunt before thee haue' done. And 
so Ezechias wepte with grete weepynge. 
4And ere Ysay were gon out the half 
partye of the porche, the word of the 
sLord is done to hym, seyinge, Turne 
a3eyn, and sey to Ezechie, the duke of 
my puple, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
of Dauid, thi fadre, I haue herd thi 
preyer, and seen thi tere, and, loo! I have 
helid thee. The thrid day thou schalt 
stey3en up to the temple of the Lord, 
eand J schal adden to thy days fyueteen 
jeer; bot and fro the hond of the kyng 
of Assiries I schal delyueren thee, and 
this cytee, and I schal defenden this cyte 
7for me, and for Dauid, my seruaunt. And 
Ysay seyde, Bryngith to me a masse of 
fijgis. The whiche whan thei hadden 
brou3t to, and putte vpon his botche, he 
sis heelid. Ezechie forsothe seide to Ysay, 
What schal ben the tokne, for the Lord 
schal helyn me, and for the thrid day 


IV. KINGS. 


295 


ajen, and dwellide in Nynyue. 
whanne he worschipide in the temple 
Nestrach his god, Adramelech and Sira- 
sar, his sones{, killide hym with swerd*; 
and -thei fledden in to the lond of Ar- 
menyes; and Asaradon, his sone, regnyde 
for hym. 


CAP. XX. 


In tho daies Ezechie was sijk ‘til tof the1 
deeth; and Isaie, the prophete, sone? of 
Amos, cam to hym, and seide to hym, The 
Lord God seith these thingis, Comaundet 
to thin hows, for thou schalt die, and thou 
schalt not lyue§. Which! Ezechie turnyde2 
his face to the wal, and worschipide the 
Lord, and seide, Y biseche, Lord, haues 
mynde, hou Y 3edej bifor thee in treuthe, 
and in aX parfit herte, and Y dide that, that 
was plesaunt bifor thee. Therfor’ Ezechie 
wepte bi™ greet” wepyng. And bifor that 4 
Ysaie 3ede out half the part of the court, 
the word of the Lord was maad to Isaie, 
and seide, Turne thou a3en, and seie to5 
Ezechie, duyk® of my puple, The Lord 
God of Dauid, thi fadir, seith thes thingis, 
Y herde? thi preiere, and Y si3 thi teer, 
and, lo! Y heelide’ thee. In the thridde 
dai thou schalt stie™ in to the temple of the 
Lord, and Y schal adde® fiftene 3eer to this 
daies ; but also Y schal delyuere thee and 
this citee fro the hond of the kyng of 
Assiriens, and Y schal defende this citee 
for me, and for Dauid, my seruaunt. And7 
Ysaie seide, Brynge 3e to me a gobet of 
figis. And whanne thei hadden brou3te it, 
and hadde puttet on ‘his botche", he was 
heelid. Forsothe’ Ezechie seide to Isaie, 8 
What schal be the signe” ||, that the Lord 
schal heele me, and that* in the thridde 
dai Y schal stieY in to the temple of the 


rOm. 4. ‘seith a. tI hane ac pr.m. 
© a swerd 1. fyntor1. &thesoner. bDisposexr i Andr. Jhaue gor. * Oma prim, 
1Thannet. ™with ein. agreet1. °theduyk1. Phaueherdr. 4@haue heelid 1. "stie up 1, 
sadde tor. ¢ putte it1. tthe bocche of Ezechie1, VY And1, Wtokne1. * also that1. Y stie up 1. 


And 37 


+ hise sones, 
ete.; for he 
wolde haue 
slayn hem in to 
sacrifice to his 
God. Lire 
here. C. 


+ Comaunde ; 
that is, make 
thi testament. 
Lire here.c 

§ schalt not 
lyue ; that is, 
thou maist not 
ascape by weye_ 
of kynde; and 
bi this maner it 
was schewid to 
the profete, 
netheles, bi 
Goddis grace 
abone kynde, 

e my3te be 
heelid, but this 
was schewid 
thanne to the 
profete. Lire 
here. Cc. 


l| Ezechie 
axide not this 
bi vnfeithful- 
nesse, ether 
dispeir, but 
more bi Goddis 
trist, that his 
glorie schulde 
appere, bi the 
wondurful heel- 
ing. Lire 
here. c. 


296 


I am to stey3en up the temple of the 
9Lord? To whom seith Ysay, This schal 
ben the tokne fro the Lord, that the Lord 
be to do the word that he spac; wylt 
thou, that vmbre stey3e up tenn lynys, or 
that it be turned ajeyn as fele grees? 
10And Ezechie seith, It is li3t vmbre to 
cresen tenn lynis, ne this I wylle that be 
done, bot that it be turned a3eyn bac- 
11ward tenn degrees. And so Ysay, the 
prophete, inwardly clepyde the Lord, and 
brou3t ajeyn the vmbre by the lynys, with 
the whiche nowe it hadde goon doun in 
the orloge of Achaz, bacward tenn degrees. 
12In that tyme sente Berodachaladam, the 
sone of Baladam, kyng of Babyloyne, 
lettris and 3iftis to Ezechie; forsothe he 
hadde herd, that Ezechie was sijk, and 
13hadde couerde. And Ezechias gladide in 
the commynge of hem, and schewide to 
hem the hous of swote spycis", and gold, 
and siluer, and dyuerse pymentis, and 
oynementis, and the hous of his vessels, 
and alle thingis that he my3t han in his 
tresouries; ther was not a word, that 
Ezechie schewide not to hem in his hous, 
isand in alle his power. Forsothe Ysay, 
the prophete, came to kynge’ Ezechie, and 
seide to hym, What seyden thes men, or 
whenns camen thei tothee? To whome 
seith Ezechie, Fro a ferre lond thei camen 
15to me, fro Babyloyne. And he answerde, 
What see3en thei in thin hous? Ezechie 
seith, Alle thingis, what euer ben in myn 
hous, thei see3en ; no thing is that I haue 
not schewide to hem in my tresuries. 
1¢6And so Ysay seyde to Ezechie, Heere 
17thou the word of the Lord. Lo! days 
commen, and alle thingis that ben in thi 
hous schuln be taken aweye, and the 
whiche thi fadirs hydden vnto this day, in 
to Babyloyne; ther schal not leuen eny 
18thinge, seith the Lord. Bot and of thi 
sonys, that schul goon out of thee, the 


IV. KINGS. 


XX. o—18. 


Lord? To whom Ysaie seide, This schalg 

be ‘a signe? of the Lord, that the Lord 

schal do the word which® he spak; wolt 

thou, that the schadewe? stie*t by tenlynes, + sties that is, 
ethir turne a3en bi so many degrees? And ionea gs ieee 
Ezechie seide, It is esy* that the schadewe ;2re™. 4” 
encreesse bi ten lynes®, nethir Y wole that 

this be doon, but that it‘ turne ajen bac- 

ward bi ten degrees. ‘Therfor® Ysaie, the 

prophete, clepide inwardli* the Lord, and 

brouste a3en bacward bi ten degrees the 

schadewe bi lynes', bi whiche it hadde 

go doun thanne in the orologie of Achaz. 

In that tyme Beradacbaladan, sone* of 12 
Baladam, the! kyng of Babiloyne, sente 

lettris and 3iftis to Ezechie; for he hadde 

herd that Ezechie was™ sijk, and hadde 

couerid", Forsothe® Ezechie was glad{ in 13% glad; bi vn- 


the comyng of hem, and he schewide to nove aaa 
hem the hows of spyceries, and gold, and pete 
siluer, and dyuerse pymentis, also oyne- come 
mentis, and the hows of hise vessels, and aaa ae 
alle thingis whiche? he my3te haue in here. c. 


hise tresouris; ‘no word was‘, ‘which Eze- 
chie schewide not to hem in his hows, 
and in al his power’. Sotheli Ysaie, the 14 
prophete, cam to thet kyng Ezechie, and 
seide to hym, What seiden these men, 
ether fro whennus camen thei to the? 
To whom Ezecchie seide, Thei camen to 
me fro a fer lond, fro Babiloyne. And he®1s 
answeride, What ‘sien thei’ in thin hows ? 
Ezechie seide, Thei sien” alle thingis, what 
euer thingis ben in myn hows; no thing is 
in my tresouris, which Y schewide not to 
hem. Therfor Isaie seide to Ezechie, 16 
Here thou the word of the Lord. Lo!17 
dayes comen, and alle thingis that ben in 
thin hows, and ‘whiche thingis* thi fadris 
maden til in to this dai, schulen be takun 
awey into Babiloyne ; ‘not ony thing schal 
dwelleY, seith the Lord. But also of thi1s 
sones, that schulen go out of thee, whiche 
thou schalt gendere?, schulen be takun, and 


toynementis £ pr,m. VY the kynge zB. 


Z the tokne 1. 


4 that 1. b schadewe of the sunne 1. 


Cstieupy. 4 ligt or esy1. © lynes or houris 1, 


fthe sunne1. & Thanner. 4h ynly 1. ithe same lynes 1 ‘the sone 1 10m. 1. ™had be 1. 
"rekouerid 1. © Andi. P that 1. 4 ther was not ony word 1 ¢ext. or thing 1 marg. *Om.1. S$ power, 
that Ezechie schewide not tohem1. tOm.1. 4 Ysaiexr. Vhantheiseeni. Whanseiex. * that 1. 


y ther schal not ony thing ¢herof dwelle or abijde1. % bigete 1. 


NORE. 7. 


whiche thou schalt geten schul‘ ben taken 
aweye, and thei schul ben geldyngis in 
the paleys of the kyng of Babyloyne. 
19 Ezechie seide to Ysay, Good is the word 
of the Lord, that he spac; be oonly pees 
20and treuthe in my days. The remnaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Ezechie, and alle 
his streyngthe, and howe he maad the 
fische poond, and the watre cundite, and 
brou3ten in watirs in to the cytee, whether 
not thes ben writen in the boke of the 
wordys of the days of kyngis of Juda? 


CAP. XXI. 


And Ezechie slepte with his fadirs, 
and Manasses, his sone, regnede for hym. 
1Of twelue 3eer was Manasses, whanne he 

beganne to regnen, and fyue and fourty 
jeer he regnede in Jerusalem; the name 
2of his modir, Asiba. And he dide euy] in 
the si3t of the Lord, after the mawmettis 
of Gentils, the whiche the Lord dide aweye 
3fro the face of the sonys of Yrael. And 
he is turned, and bylde” up hee3e thingis, 
the whiche Ezechie, his fadir, scatirde ; 
and he rerede up the auters of Baal, and 
maad mawmett woddis, as dyde Achab, 
kyng of Yrael; and he honourede al the 
4kny3thod of heuen, and heryede it. And 
he maad up autirs in the hous of the Lord, 
of the whiche the Lord seide, In Jeru- 
5salem I schal putten my name. And he 
maad up autirs of alle the kny3thode of 
heuen in* two poorchis of the temple of 
6the Lord ; and he ouerladde his sone thor3 
fijr; and he dyuynede, and he weytide the 
dyuynyuge of chiterynge of briddis; and 
maad enchaunteris, and clepers of deuyls 
he multiplied, that he dide euyl beforn 
7the Lord, and terrede hym. And he 
putte the mawmett of the mawmett 
wodde, that he hadde maad, in to the 
temple of the Lord, vpon the whiche the 
Lord spac to Dauid, and to Salomon, his 


21 


W bieldide a. 


a@ And Ezechie 1s. 


IV. KINGS. 


> is good, that he hath spoke 1. 


297 


thei schulen be geldyngis in the paleis of 
the king of Babiloyne. 
Isaie, The word of the Lord, ‘which he 
spak, is good>+; ooneli pees and treuthe be 
in my daies. 
wordis’ of Ezechie, and al his strengthe, 

and hou he made a cisterne, and a watir 

cundijt, and brou3te watris*,‘in tof the 

citee, whether these ben not writun in the . 
book of wordis of daies of the? kyngis of 

Juda? 


CAC ea. 


Ezechie* seide to19 


Forsothe the residue of 20 


+ The word of 
the Lord, which 
he spak, is 
good; Ezechie 
repentide, and 
so took she 
sentence of the 
Lord on him 
and his rewime, 
wherfor and 
this peyne was 
not brou3t in in 
hise tymes, but 
it was dilayed, 
til to the tyme 
of Joachym and 
Sedechie; and 
whanne this 
was seid bi 


And Ezechie slepte with hise fadris, and 2) !save t him: 


Manasses, his sone, regnyde for hym. 
Manasses was of twelue 3eer, whanne he1 
bigan to regne, and he regnyde fyue and 
fifti 3eer in Jerusalem; the name of his 
modir was Asiba. And he dide yuel in2 
the si3t of the Lord, bi the idols! of hethene 
men, ‘whiche hethene* men the Lord dide 
awei fro the face of the sones of Israel. 
And he! was turned™, and bildide hize3 
thingis, whiche Ezechie, his fadir, distriede; 
and he reiside" auteris of Baal, and he 
made woodis®, as Achab kyng of Israel 
hadde do; and he worschipide ‘with out 
forth? al the kny3thod of heuene’, and 
worschipide™ it iz herte. And he bildides 
auteris{ in the hows of the Lord, of which" 
the Lord seide, Y schal sette my name in 
Jerusalem. And he bildide auteris to als 
the kny3thod of heuene® in thet twei large 
places of the temple of the Lord; and hes 
‘ledde ouer" his sone thorow3’ the fier; and 
he vside false dyuynyngis in auteris, on” 
whiche* sacrifice was maad to feendis, and 
he kepte false dyuynyngis bi chiteryng 
of bryddis; and he made men to haue yuele 
spiritis spekynge in the** wombe’, and he 
multipliede false dyuynours in entraylis? of 
beestis sacrified? to feendis, that he schulde® 
do yuel bifor the Lord, and terre hym to 


Xand 4. 


© yemenaunt 1. 4 the wordis 1. e water 1. 


fandto1. 8 Om.1. hafter1. iyuels1. kthe whiche1, |! Manasses1. ™ turned awei 1. 
oyeiside upI. © mawmett wodis1. POm.1. the firmament 1. ‘loutide 1," which hous 1. 
8 heuene or firmament 1. +t Om. pisxbc. 'drow3e1. Ybixn. Wupon1 *the whicher. ** her 1. 


Y wombis BeprgikLMNoPQRsuWxbg. 2 the entraylis 


VOL. TI. 


i. ®sacrifisid pkmBsxs. » wolde 1. 


Q 4g 


he seide, onely 
pees, etc, Lire 
eres Cs 


t auleris ; to 
do ydolatrie. c. 


298 


sone, In this temple, and in Jerusalem 
that I haue chosen of alle the lynagis of 
Yrael, I schal putte my name vnto euer- 
sinore. And I schal make no more to be 
styred the fote of Yrael fro the lond that 
I 3aue to the fadirs of hem; so neuer 
the later 3if thei kepen in dede alle thingis 
that I bad hem, and al the lawe that 
Moyses, my seruaunt, comaundyde to 
9hem. Thei forsothe herden not, bot ben 
bou3t doun of Manasse, that thei don 
euyl over the Gentilis, the whiche the 
Lord to-trade fro the face of the sonys of 
10 Yrael. And the Lord spac in the hond 
i1of his seruauntis prophetis, seyinge, For 
Manasses, king of Juda, dyde alle thes 
abomynacyouns most euylouer alle thingis 
the whiche dyden Amorreis beforn hym, 
and also he maad Juda to symnen in his 
12 vnelennessis”; therfore thes thingis seith 
the Lord God of Yrael, Lo! I schal bryngen 
in euyls vpon Jerusalem and Judam, that 
who so euer heerith, bothe the eris of hym 
i3schal tynclyn; and I schal stretchen out 
vpon Jerusalem the lytyl coord of Sama- 
rye, and the birthen of the hous of 
Achab, and I schal don aweye Jernsalem, 
as tablis ben wont to ben don aweye; 
doynge aweye I schal turnen, and bryngyn 
l4ofter® the poyntel vpon his face. For- 
sothe I schal leuen the relikis of myn 
herytage®, and scha] taken hem in to the 
hond of his enmyes; and thei schul ben 
in waastite, and in rauyne to alle their 
isaduersaries ; for thi that thei dyden euy] 
beforn ime, and dwelliden stedfast ter- 
rynge me, fro the day that their fadirs 
16 wenten out of Egipt vnto this day. Fer- 
thermore and Manasses schad myche 
gyltlesse blode ouer gretely, to the tyme 
that Jerusalem wer fulfyld vp to the 
mouthe, with oute his synnes in whiche he 


IV. KINGS. 


XXI. 8—17. 


ire. And he settide® an ydol of wode,7 
which? he hadde maad, in® the temple of 
the Lord, ‘of which temple‘ the Lord 
spak& to Dauid, and to Salomon, his sone}, 
Y schal sette my name withouten ende in 
this temple, and in Jerusalem whichi Y 
chees of alle the lynagis of Israel. And Y® 
schal nomore make the foot of Israel to be 
moued fro the lond which* Y 3af to the 
fadris of hem; so netheles if thei kepen in 
werk alle thingis whiche* Y comaundide! 
to hem, and al the lawe whiche™ Moises, 
my seruaunt, comaundide to hem. Sotheli9 
thei" herden not, but weren disseyued of 
Manasses, that thei diden yuel ouer hethene 
men, whiche the Lord al to-brak fro the 
face of the sones of Israel. And the Lord 10 
spak in the hond of his seruauntis pro- 
phetis, and seide, For Manasses, kyng of 11 
Juda, dide these worste abhomynaciouns 
ouer alle thingis which° Ammorreis? diden 
bifor hym, and maden also the puple of 
Juda to do synne in hise vnclennessis!? ; 
therfor the Lord God of Israel seith these 12 
thingis, Lo! Y schal brynge in yuelis on? 
Jerusalem and Juda, that who euer 
herith*, bothe hise eeris tyngle'+; and Y 13 + his ceris 


schal holde forth on" Jerusalem the corde Sete aie 
of Samarie, and the birthun of the hows of ting of the 


greetnesse of 
yuel, that schal 


Achabt, and Y schal do awei Jerusalem, 
come on Jeru- 


as tablis ben wont to be doon awei; and’ salem. Lire 
pal 5 here. c. 
Y schal do awey and turne‘Y 7¢*, and Y sare 
schal lede ful ofte the* poyutel onY the of the hows of 
Achab ; that is, 


face therof. Forsothe Y schal leeue relikis? 14 in the same 


. . . mes i 
of myn eritage, and Y schal bitake hem in the same were 


to* the hond of enemyes therof; and thei *¥ chal pun- 
ysche the 

schul im distriynge, and in raneyn rewme of Juda 

chulen be in distriynge, and it pene rete Ota 


alle her aduersaries; for thei diden yuel 15 punyschide the 
0 f 4 6 S p rewme of 
bifor me, and thei continueden terrynge Israel. as ta- 
me to ire, fro the dai in which her fadris wae 
3eden out of the lond of Egipt ‘til to® this He 
day. Ferthermore also Manasses schedde 16 weren writun, 
so Nabuzardon 


maad Judam to synnen, that he do yuel ful myche ynnocent‘ blood, til he fillide aide awey Je- 
17beforn the Lord. The remnaunt for- Jerusalem ‘til to® the mouth, with outen Haws ii 
housis. Lire 
: here. c. 
z vnclennesse B. 2 efte zB. b eritages E. ; 
‘sette er. dthati. ¢uponr. f that 1. fg spak of. 4 sone, seiynge i. 1 the which citce 1. 
‘that 1, | have comaundid 1. ™ that 1. ™ the sones of Israeli. © that1. P Aethen men of Ammorey 1. 


PP vnelannesse Lx. 
v Om. BcpEIKLuPxbe. 
b in terrynge 1. 


Guponr. Tand 1. 
YY ouer tnrne 1. 
¢ til into EL. vnto 1. to x. 


wOm. KL. 
d giltlees 1. 


Sherith these yuelis1. +ttyncle or ringe 1. u npon rt. 
y ake Pp 
Xa Yuponr. #remenauntis1. 4 Om. 1. 
e€ ynto I. 


XXI. 18—XXII. 2. 


sothe of the wordis of Manasse, and alle 
thingis that he dyde, and his synne that 
he synned, whether thes ben not wryten 
in the boke of the wordis of the days 
180f kyngis of Juda? And Manasses slept 
with his fadirs, and is byryed in the 
gardyne of his hous, in the gardyn of 
Azam; and Amon, his sone, regned for 
ishym. Of two and twenty jeer he was, 
whanne he beganne to regnen; two 
forsothe 3eer he regned in Jerusalem; 
name of his modir, Messalometh, dou3tir 
200f Arus of Jethaba. And he dyde euyl 
in the si3t of the Lord, as dydde Ma- 
21masses, his fadir. And he wente in al 
the weye, by the whiche his fadir wente, 
and he seruede in the vnelennessis® in 
whiche serued his fadir, and honourede 
22hem; and forsoke the Lord God of his 
fadirs, and wente not in the weye of the 
23Lord. And his seruauntis benten to hym 
buschementis, and slewen the kyng in his 
21shous. The’ puple forsothe of the lond 
smoote alle, that coniureden a3einus king 
Amon, and thei setten to hem king, Jo- 
25siam, his sone, for him. The remnaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Amon, that he 
dide, whether not thes ben writen in the 
boke of the wordés of the days of kyngis 
260f Juda? And thei birieden him in his 
sepulcre in the gardyn of Aza; and Josias, 
his sone, regnede for hym. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Of ey3t 3eere was Josias, whann he 
byganne to regnen, and oon and thrytty 
3eer he regnede in Jerusalem; name of 
his modir, Ydida, the dou3tir of Fadaya 

20f Besocath. And he dyde that, that was 
plesaunt beforn the Lord, and he wente 


IV. KINGS. 


299 


hise synnes bi whiche he made Juda to do 
synne, tof do yuel bifor the Lord. Forsothe 17 
the residueS of the" wordis of Manasses, 
and. alle thingis whiche! he dide, and his 
synne whiche* he synnede!, whether these 
ben not writun in the book of wordis of 
daies of the kyngis of Juda? And Ma-1s 
nasses slepte with hise fadris, and was 
biried in the gardyn of his hows, in the 
gardyn of Azam; and Amon, his sone, 
regnyde for hym. He™ was of two and 19 
twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne; 
and he regnede twei 3eer in Jerusalem ; the 
name of his modir was Mesalamech, the 
dou3ter of Arus of Gethela. And he® dide2° 
yuel in the si3t of the Lord, as Manasses, 
his fader, hadde do. And he 3ede in al the 21 
weie, bi which his fader hadde go, and he 


seruide to vnclennessis+, to whiche his fadir — + vnclennessis ; 


hadde seruyd, and he worschipide tho; 
and he forsook the Lord God of hise fadris, 22 
and he 3ede not in the weye of the Lord. 
And hise sernauntis settiden tresouns to23 
hym, and killiden the kyng in hise hows. 
Sothely the puple of the Lord smoot alle?! 
men®, that hadden conspirid a3ens kyng 
Amon, and thei ordeyneden tohem a kyng, 
Josias, ‘his sone?, for hym. Forsotlie425 
the residue of wordis' of Amon, whiche 
he dide, whether these ben not writun in 
the book of wordis of daies of the kyngis 
of Juda? And he slepte with hise fadris, 26 
aud thei birieden hym in his sepulcre in . 
the gardyn of Azam; and Josias, his sone, 
regnede for him. 


CAPS Xa. 


Josias* was of ei3te jeer, whanne hel 
bigan to regne, and he regnyde oon and 
thritti 3eer in Jerusalem; the name of his 
modir was Ydida, the dou3tir of Phadaia 
of Besechath. And he dide that, that2 
was plesaunt bifor the Lord, and he 3ede 


by alle the wayes of Dauid, his fadir,and _ be alle the wayes{ of Dauid, his fadir; he + in_ good, and 
bowede not, neither to the rijt,ne to the  bowide not, nethir to the riztside, nethir® Tire nde. c. 


© ynclennesse 8. 4 And the a. 
fandto1. &remenauntr. 4 Om.1. ithatr. kthatr. %Idede rr. ™Amoni, 2 Amon I. 
Sthe meni. Pthe sone of Amonz. 4Sothly1. © the wordis1. s Josias, hissone peL. + Jozias 1. 
ne EILP. 


Qq 2 


300 


sleft. Forsothe the ey3tenthe 3eer of kyng 
Josie, sente the kyng Safan, the sone of 
Asua, the sone of Mesulam, the scribe of 
the temple of the Lord, seyinge to hym, 
4Goo to Elchiam, the grete preest, that the 
monee, that is brou3t in to the temple of 
the Lord, be blowen to gydre, the whiche 
the porteris of the temple gaderden of 
the puple; and be it 3euen to wri3tis by 
the prouostis of the hous of the Lord; 
the whiche and delen it to hem that 
wirchen in the temple of the Lord, to 
the coueryngis of the temple of the Lord 
6to ben enstorid, that is, to the mayster 
carpenters, and masouns, and to hem 
that maken to gydre the bytwene® broken, 
and that there be bou3t trees and stonys 
of the quarrees, to the enstorynge of the 
7temple of the Lord; neuer the later the 
syluer be not tolde to hem, that thei 
taken, bot in power hauef thei, and in 
sfeith. Forsothe Elchias, the bischop, 
seide to Sapham, scribe, The boke of 
the lawe I haue founden in the hous of 
the Lord. And Elchias 3aue the volym 
to Sapham, scribe, the whiche and radde 
nit. Forsothe Sapham, scribe, came to the 
kyng, and told to hym what thingis he 
hade comaundide, and seith, Thi ser- 
uauntis blewen to gydre the monee, that 
is founden in the hous of the Lord, and 
han 3euen, that it be delid to the wri3tis 
of the prefectis of the werkis of the 
10temple of the Lord. Forsothe Sapham, 
scribe, tolde to the kyng, seyinge, El- 
chias, the prest of God, 3aue to me a 
boke; the whiche whanne Sapham hade 
iiradde before the kyng, and the king had 
herd the wordis of the boke of the lawe 
wof the Lord, he kutte his clothis. And 
he comaundyde to Elchie, the prest, and 
to Aychan, the sone of Saphan, and to 
Achabor, the sone of Mycha, and to Sa- 
pham, scribe, and to Achie, seruaunt of 


€ betwix 4. 


S that 1. 
xx his L. 
@ Andi. 
m Om. 1. 


T the sone 1. 
x hilyngis 1, 

© thei it 1. 
l that 1. 


4 kyng Jozias 1. 
W the which 1. 
b the work men 1. 
k hath youe 1. 


Cal. 
n the sone I. 


IV. KINGS. 


t molten togidere 1. 
y Om. EL. 
f that 1. 


XXII. 3-12. 


of the leftside. Forsothe in the ei3tenthes 
3eer of kyng Josias, the kyng’ sente Sa- 
phan, sone’ of Asua, the sone of Mesu- 
lam, scryueyn, ethir doctour, of the tem- 
ple of the Lord, and seide to him, Go4 
thou to Elchie, the grete preest, that the 
money, which* is borun in to the temple 
of the Lord, be spendid', which" money 
the porteris of the temple han gaderid’ of © 
the puple; and that it be 3ouun to craftis 
men bi the souereyns of the hows of the 
Lord; which” also departide that money 
to hem that worchen in the temple of the 
Lord, to reparele the rooues* of the tem- 
ple of the Lord, that is**, toY carpeuteris, 6 
and to masouns, and to hem that maken 
brokun thingis, and that trees and stoonus 
of quarieris be bou3tY’, to reparele the 
temple of the Lord; netheles siluer’,7 
which? thei® taken, be not rekynyd to 
hem, but haue thei® in power, and in 
feith. Forsothe! Helchie, the ’ bischop, # 
seide to’ Saphan, the scryuen, Y haue 
founde the® book of the lawe in the hows 
of the Lord. And Elchie 3af the book to 
Saphan, the scryuen, which® also redde it. 
Also Saphan, the scryuen, cam to they 
kyng, and telde to hym tho thingis, whiche 
Elchie hadde comaundid, and he seide, 
Thi seruauntis han spendid the monei, 
which* was foundun in the hows of the 
Lord, and 3auen', that it schulde be de- 
partid to crafti men of the souereyns of 
werkis of the temple of the Lord. Also1o 
Saplian, the scriueyn, telde to the kyng, 
and seide, Helchie, the preest of God, 3af* 
to me a book; and whanne Saphan hadde 
red that book bifor the kyng, and the1 
kyng hadde herd the wordis of the! book 
of the™ lawe of the Lord, he to-rente 
hise clothis. And he comaundide to Elchie, 12 
the preest, and to Aicham, sone" of Sa- 
phan, and to Achabor, sone" of Mycha, 
and to Saphan, the scryuen, and to Achia, 


fha eg. 


u the which 1. 
y¥ brou3t a pr.m. 
& the which 1. 


Vv gaderid togidere 1. 
Zthe siluer 1. 4 that 1. 
h that 1. i thei han jouen 1. 


XXII. 13—20. 


iz the kyng, seyinge, Gooth, and counseilith 
the Lord vpon me, and vpon the puple, 
and vpon al Juda, of the wordis of this 
volyme, that is founden; grete forsothe 
wrathe of the Lord is tende up a3eynus 
us, for owre fadirs herden not the wordis 
of this boke, that thei schulde done al 
Hthat is writen to us. And so Elchias, 
the prest, and Aycham, and Achabor, 
and Saphan, and Asia, wenten to Oldam, 
prophetisse, wyf of Sellum, sone of The- 
chue, sone of Aras, keper of the clothes, 
the whiche dwellede in Jerusalem, in 
‘the secounde wallynge® ; and thei speken 
isto hire. And sche answerd to hem, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God of Yrael, 
Seith to the man, that sente 30u to me, 
1¢Thes thingis seith the Lord God of 
Ysrael, Loo! I schal brynge forth euyls 
vpon this place, and vpon the dwellers of 
it, alle the wordis of the lawe, the whiche 
i7the kyng of Juda radde; for thei for- 
soken me, and sacrifiden to alyen goddis, 
terrynge me in alle the werkis of their 
hondis ; and myn indignacioun schal be 
tend up in this place, and schal not ben 
isqweynt. To the kyng forsothe of Juda 
that sente 3ou, that 3e counseylen the 
Lord, thus seith, Thes thingis seith the 
Lord God of Yrael, For thy that thou 
i9herdyst the wordis of the volyme, and 
thi herte is gaastyde, and thou ert 
meeked beforn the Lord, tlie werdis herd 
a3eyn this place and the dwellers of it, 
that is, that schulden ben maad in to 
stoneynge, and into cursidhed, and thou 
kuttist thy clothis, and thou weptist be- 
. forn me, and I herde, seith the Lord; 
20therfore I schal gedere thee to thi fadirs, 
and thou schalt be gadred to thy sepulcre 
in pese; that thin ee3en seen not alle the 
euylis, the whiche I am to brynge in 
vpon this place. 


IV. KINGS. 


301 


seruaunt of the kyng, and seide, Go 3e,15 
and ‘counsele 3e° the Lord? on‘ me, and 
on’ the puple’, and on‘ al Juda, of the® 
wordis of this book, which’ is foundun; 
for” greet ire of the Lord is kyndlid a3ens 
vs, for oure fadris herden not the wordis 
of this book, to do al thing which* is 
writun to vs. Therfor Helchie, the preest, 14 
and Aicham, and Achabor, and Saphan, 
and Asia, 3eden to Olda, the prophetesse, 
the wijf of Sellum, sone’ of Thecue, soneY 
of Aras, kepere of the’ clothis, which? 
Olda dwellide in Jerusalem, in the se- 
counde dwellyng®; and thei spaken to hir. 
And sche answeride to hem, The Lord1s5 
God of Israel seith these thingis, Seie 3e 
to the man, that sente 3ou to me, The l¢ 
Lord God of Israel seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal brynge yuelis on® this place, 
and on® the dwelleris therof, alle’ the 
wordis ‘of the lawe®, whiche the kyng of 
Juda redde; for thei forsoken me, and17 
maden sacrifice to alien goddis, and ter- 
riden me to ire in alle the werkis of her 
hondis; and myn indignacioun schal be 
kyndlid in this place, and schalf not be 
quenchid. Sotheli to the kyng of Juda, is 
that sente 30u, that 3e schulen ‘counsele 
the Lord’, 3e schulen seie thus, The Lord 
God of Israel seith these thingis, For 
thou" herdist the wordis of the book, and 19 
thin herte was aferd, and thou were maad 
meke bifor the Lord, whanne the! wordis 
weren herd ajens this place and aj3ens 
the dwelleris therof, that is, that thei 
schulden be maad in to wondryng, and 
in to cursyng, and thou to-rentist thi 
clothis, and weptist bifor me, and Y herde, 
seith the Lord; herfor Y schal gadere20 
thee to thi fadris, and thou schalt be ga- 
derid to thi sepulcre in pees; that thin 
ijen se not alle the yuelis, whiche Y schal 
brynge yn on this place. 


& welsum fortune £ sec. m. sup. ras. the secounde wallyng éert. m. 


Saxe ELP. P Lord councel ELP, duponz. upon. § puple of this citeer, tuponr. ¥ Om. EL, 
v that 1. Wforsothe1. *that1. y the sonez. 2% Om. pEKLMPxsbe. *the which 1. > enuyronynge 
of the wall1. ¢uponz. and alle exb. and I schal fulfille aller. © Om.1. fit schal1, & axe the 


Lord councel exp. 4 thon, Josias 1%. ‘his 1. 


k npon 1. 


302 IV. KINGS. XXII. 1—6. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 And thei tolden to the kyng that sche 
hadde seide; the whiche sent, and ben 
gadred to hym alle the olde men of Juda, 

2and of Jerusalem. And the kyng stey3ide 
up the temple of the Lord, and alle the 
men of Juda, and alle that dwelliden in 
Jerusalem with hym, prestis, and pro- 
phetis, and alle the puple, fro lytyl vnto 
mychil; and he radde, alle men heer- 
ynge, alle the wordis of the boke of the 
pese couenaunt of the Lord, the whiche 

ais founden in the hous of the Lord. And 
the kyng stood vpon a gree; and he 
smote pese couenaunt before the Lord, 
that thei goon after the Lord, and keepen 
his heestis and witnessyngis and cery- 
moynes in al herte and in al soule, that 
thei reren the wordis of this pese coue- 
naunt, that weren wryten in that boke ; 
and the puple assentyde to the* coue- 
4naunt. And the kyng comaundyde to 
Elchie, the bischop, and to the prestis 
of the secound ordre, and to the 3ate 
kepers, that thei throwen forthe fro the 
temple of the Lord alle the vessels, that 
weren maad to Baal, and in the maw- 
mett wodde', and to al the kny3thod of 
heuen; and he brende hem with outen 
forth Jerusalem, in the valey of Cedron, 
aud he toke the poudre of hem in to 

5 Bethel. And he dyde aweye the deuyl 
clepers, whome the kyngis of Juda had- 
den sett to sacrifien in hei3tis by the 
cytees of Juda, and the* enuyroun of 
Jerusalem, and hem that brenden en- 
cense to Baal, and to the sunne, and to 
the mone, and to the twelue syngnys, 
and to alle the kny3thode of heuen. 

6 And he comaundyde to ben born out the 
mawmett wodde fro the hous of the 
Lord with out forth Jerusalem in the 


CAP. XXIII. 


And thei telden to the kyng that, that 
sche seide; ‘which kyng™ sente, and alle 
the elde men of Juda, and of Jerusalem, 
weren gaderid" to hym. And the kynge 
stiede® in to the temple of the Lord, and 
alle the? men of Juda, and alle men‘ that 
dwelliden in Jerusalem with hym, the 
preestis, and the prophetis, and al the 
puple, fro litil ‘til to™ greet ; and he* redde, 
while alle men herden, alle the wordis of 
the book of boond of pees of the Lord, 
which' book" was foundun in the hows of 
the Lord. And the kyng stood on’ thes 
grees ; and he” smoot boond* of pees bifor 
the Lord, that thei schuldenY go aftir the 
Lord, and kepe hise comaundementis and 
witnessyngis and cerymonyes in al the? 
herte and in al the? soule, that” thei 
schulden reise® the wordis of this boond 
of pees, that weren writun in that book; 
and the puple assentide to the couenaunt. 
And the kyng comaundide to Helchie, the 4 
bischop, and to the preestis of the secounde 
ordre, and to the porteris, that thei schul- 
den caste out of the temple alle the ves- 
selis, that weren maad to Baal, and in the 
wode®, and to al the kny3thod of heuene; 
and hef brente tho vessels with out Jeru- 
salem, in the euene valey of Cedron, and 
he bar the poudir of tho ‘vessels$ in to 
Bethel. And he dide awei false dy-s 
uynours ‘that dyuynyden in the entrailis 
of beestis sacrified! to idols*, whiche the 
kingis of Juda hadden sett to make sacri- 
fice in hi3 thingis bi the citees of Juda, 
and in the cumpas of Jerusalem; and he . 
dide awey hem that brenten encense to 
Baal, and to the sunne, and to the moone, 
and to twelue signes, and to al the kny3t- 
hod of heuene!. And he™ made the wede"é 
to be borun out of the hows of the Lord 


bthat e. iplace ce pr.m. * in the cz. 


mand he 1. ® gaderid togidere 1. © wente up I. 


POm.1. (thement. fvntor, § the kyng 1. 


tthe which 1. tOm.1. VYupon1. © Om.1. *aboond:1. Ywoldenr. Zher1. ®heri. » and 


that 3. ¢ reise up 1. dthat1, © mawmet wode 1. 


ftheking1. €Om.c. 4thekyngs. i sacri- 


fisid pkarxbg. “* Om.1. } heuene or of the firmament 1. ™ the kyngi. ® wode of mawmetrie 1. 


XXIII. 7—13. 


valey of Cedron, aud brende™ it there, 
and brou3t it" in to poudre, and threw3 
forth vpon the sepuleris of the comun. 
7¥Forsothe he distruy3ide the lyty] housis 
of the wommannysch maad men, that 
weren in the hous of the Lord; for the 
whiche wymmen weueden as lytyll houses 
8of the mawmett wodde. And he gadrede 
alle the prestis of the° cytees of Juda, 
and he defoulide the hey3tis, where the 
prestis sacrifieden, fro Gaba vnto Ber- 
sabe ; and he distruyed the auters of the 
jatis in the entree of the dore of Josie, 
prince of the? cytee, that was at the left 
9syde of the 3ate of the cytee. Neuer 
the latre the prestis of the hee3e thingis 
stey3iden not vp to the auter of the Lord 
in Jerusalem, bot oonly eten therfe loouys 
10in the mydill of their bretheren. For- 
sothe he defoulide Topheth, that is in 
the valeye of the sone of Ennon, that 
no man schuld sacryn his sone or his 
1dou3tre thor; fyr to Moloch. Forsothe 
he toke awey the hors, the whiche the 
kingis of Jude hadden 3euen to the sunne, 
in the entree of the temple of the Lord, 
besijdis the chayer of Nathanmylech, 
geldynge, that was in Faturym; the 
chaare forsothe of the sunne he brende 
i2with fijr. And the auters, that weren 
vpon the rooues of the soupynge place 
of Achath, the whiche the kyngis of 
Juda hadden maad, and the auters that 
Manasses hadde maad in the two poorchis 
of the temple of the Lord, the kyng de- 
struyede; and he ran to Jude, and he 
seatrede the askis1 of hem in to the 
isstreme of Cedron. The hee3e thingis 
forsothe, that weren in Jerusalem at the 
ri3t partye of the hyll of the offencyoun, 
the whiche Salomon, kyng of Yrael, 
hadde bylde, and Astaroth, the mawmett 
of Sydonyes, and Camos, of the offency- 
oun of" Moab, and Melchon, the abomy- 
© Om. 4BFH. 


mbrenne zp. 8 Om. ABFH. 


© Om. plures. P upon 1. 
@ weuyden or watledent. ¥ the king 1. 
bthe prince 1. ¢ the which 1. 4 not up 1. 
king. Knponi. !flatt roouys1. ™ Om. 1. 
rhalff1. sthatr. tthe abhominacioun 1. 


Woof 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


4 wommannysche men I. 


€ the kyng r. 
n Om. 1. 


303 


without Jerusalem in the euene valey of 
Cedron, and he brente it there; and he 
droof z¢ in to poudir, and castide 7° forth 
on? the sepulcris of the comyn puple. Also7 
he distriede the litle housis of ‘men turnyd 
into wommens condiciouns4, whiche’ housis 
weren in the hows of the Lord; for whiches 
thet wymmen ‘maden" as litil howsis of 
the wode. And he’ gaderide alle thes 
preestis fro” the citees of Juda, and he 
defoulide the hize thingis, where the* 
preestis maden sacrifice, fro Gabaa ‘til to¥ 
Bersabee; and he distriede the? auters of 
j3atis* in the entryng of the dore of Josie, 
prince> of a citee, which® dore was at the 
lift half of the 3ate of the cytee. Netheles9 
the preestis of hije thingis stieden not? to 
the auter of the Lord in Jerusalem, but 
oneli thei eten therf looues in the myddis 
of her britheren. Also he® defoulide To-10 
phet}, which‘ is in the euene valey of the 
sone of Ennon, that no man schulde ha- 

lewe his sone ether his dou3tir bi fier to eee 
Moloch. Also he dide awei horsis, whiche® !! AS 
the kyngis of Juda hadden 3oue to the 


sown of tym- 
pan, for the 


+ Tophet; that 
is, idolatrie. 
The idol of 


sunne, in the entryng of the temple of the _ prestis of this 
Lord, bisidis the chaumbir of Nathanma- eine 


timpans, lest 
fadris and mo- 
dris schulden 


lech, geldyng", that was in Pharurym ; 
forsothe he’ brente bi fier the charis of the nae 
sunne. Also the kyng distriede the au- 12 of her sones, 
teris, that weren on* the roouys! of the ra aoe bona 
soler of Achaz, whiche auteris™ the kyngis ?f ‘he idols 
of Juda hadden maad; and the kyng dis- XV. ©. bifore,” 
triede the auteris, whiche Manasses hadde 

maad in the" twei grete placis of° the 

temple of the Lord; and he? ran fro 

thennus, and scateride the askis of tho4 
in to the strond of Cedron. Also the13 
kyng defoulide the hize thingis, that weren 
in Jerusalem at the rijt part’ of the hil of 
offencioun{, whiche’ Salomon, kyng of Is- 
rael, hadde bildid to Astroth, the ydol of 
Sidoneis, and to Chamos, the offencioun 
of Moab, and to Melchon, abhominaciount 


of Leuyt. Live 
here. C. 


t offencioun ; 
that is, the hil 
of Olyuete, for 
Salomon of- 
fendide God 
there, in bild- 
inge templis of 
idolis for his 
wyues. Lire 
here. c. 


POm. Bs. ashen 4. and apr. Om. c. 

8 the whiche housis 1. t Om. 1. 

zOm.1. 4 the jatis Em. 
h the geldyng 1. 1 the 

4 tho auters u 


r the whiche 1. 
xOm. EL. Y ynto 1. 
fthat 1. § that 1. 

int.  P the kyng tr. 


304 


nacyouns of the sonys of Amon, the 
iikyng defoulide; and broosede the ymagis, 
and hew3 doun the mawmett woodis, and 
fulfillide the places of hem with the 
15boonis of deed men. Ferthermore and 
the auter that was in Bethel, and the 
hee3e thinge, that Jeroboam, the sone of 
Nabath, hadde maad, the whiche maad 
Yrael to synnen; and that hee3 auter he 
distruyede, and brende, and mynuschede 
in to poudre, and also’ brende up the 
ismawmett woode. And Josias turned, 
sau3 there sepnlcris that weren in the 
hyll; and he sente, and toke the boonys 
fro the sepulcris, and brende hem vpon 
the auter, and putte it aftir the word of 
the Lord, that the man of God spac, the 
whiche hadde before seide these wordis. 
17 And he seith, Whose is this towmbe that 
Isee? And the cyte3eens of that cyte 
answerden to hym, The sepulcre it is of 
the man of God, that came fro Juda, and 
before seide thes wordis, ‘the whichet 
thou hast done vpon the auter of Bethel. 
is And he seith, Lefe hym; no man styrre 
the boonys of hym. And _ vntouchid 
laften" the boonys of hym with the 
boonis of the prophete, that came fro 
i9Samarye. Ferthermore and alle the 
mawmett templis of the hee3e thingis, 
that weren in the cytees of Samarye, the 
whiche the kyngis of Yrael hadden maad 
to terre the Lord, Josias toke aweye; 
and he dyde to hem aftir alle the werkis 
20 that he hadde done in Bethel. And he 
slew3 alle the prestis of the hee3e thingis, 
that weren ther vpon the auteres”, and he 
brende mens boonys vpon thoo*; and he 
2,turnede a3eyn to Jerusalem. And he 
comaundide to alY the puple, seyinge, 
Makith pask to the Lord joure God, aftir 
that is writen in the boke of this pese 


Sala. t whiche «. that c. 


U thei laften 4. 


u the king Jozias 1. 


Vvthe ymagis 1. 
& solempne thing 1. 


bthe sone ib. © Jozias 1. 


IV. KINGS. 


W adoun 1. 
4 autir in Bethel 1. 


XXIII. 14—21. 


of the sones of Amon; and he" al to-brak 14 
ymagis’, and kittide doun” wodis*, and 
fillideY the places of tho with the boonys 
of deed men. Ferthermore also he dis-1s 
triede the auter that was in Bethel, and 
‘he distriede* the hi3e thing*, which Jero- 
boam, sone” of Nabath, hadde maad, that 
made Israel to do synne; and he° distri- 
ede that hi3 autir‘, and brente 2é°, and al 
to brak 2é in to poudir, and kittide’ doun 
also thes wode". And Josias! turnyde, 16 
and si3 there sepulcris that weren* in the 
hil; and he sente, and took the boonys fro! 
the sepulcris, and brente™ tho on" the 
auter®, and defoulide? it? bi the word of 
the Lord, which® word' the man of God 
spak, that biforseide these wordis. And17 
the kyng seide, What is this biriel, which" 
Y se? And the citeseyns of that citee 
answeriden to hym, It is the sepulcre of 
the man of God, that cam fro Juda, and 
biforseide these wordis, whiche thou hast 
doon on’ the auter of Bethel. And theis 
kyng seide, Suffre 3e hym ; no man moue™ 
hise boonys. And* hise boonys dwellidenY 
vntouchid with the boones of the prophete, 
that cam fro Samarie. Ferthermore also ig 
Josias dide awei alle the templis’ of hi3e 
thingis*, that weren in the citees of Sa- 
marie, whiche™ the kyngis of Israel hadden 
maad to terre the Lord to ire; and he 
dide to tho? ¢emplis bi alle thingis whiche 
he hadde do in Bethel. And he killide20 
alle the preestis of hize thingis, that 
weren there on¢ the auteris, and he brente 
mennus boonus on tho auferis’; and he® 
turnede az3en to Jerusalem; and co-21 
maundidef to al the puple, and seide, 
Make 3e pask to ‘3oure Lord God&, vp* 
that, that is writun in the book of this 
boond of pees. Forsothe! sich pask* was 22 
not maad, fro the daies of iugis that 


Wwaters 4BH. “ite prom. Y Om, 4. 


Yhe filider. 2 Om. 1. 
f he kittide 1. 


X mawmett wodis 1. 
e Om. plures. 


fala, €Om.1. hmawmett wode of itz. iher. weren bildid1. lof1. ™he brente x. ™ upon 1. 
Sauter in Bethel t. Phe defoulide 1. qthat autert. ‘aftir1. sthatr tOm.r thatr 
Yuponsz. Wmoueawey1. * And soi. y leften stille 1. 7% mawmett templist. ® solempne thingis 1. 
aathatr. btherL. Cupont. 40Om.1. ¢the king1. fhe comaundider. & the Lord youre God 1. 
haftirs. iCertisr. ka pask x. 


XXIII. 22—3o0. 


220f conenaunt. Ne forsothe ther is maad 
siche a pask fro the days of iugis, that 
demeden Yrael, and of alle the days of 
the kyngis of Yrael, and of the kyngis of 
23 Juda, as in the ei3tenthe 3eer of kyng 
Josie this pasch is maad to the Lord in 
24Jernsalem. Bot and the clepers of de- 
uyls, and deuynours, and the fyguris of 
mawmettis, and the vnelennesses’, and 
abomynacyouns’, that weren in the lond 
of Juda and of Jerusalem, Josias dyde 
aweye, that he make stable the wordis of 
the lawe, that ben writen in the boke, 
that Elchias, the prest, fonde in the temple 
250f the Lord. Lijk hym was not beforn 
hym a kyng, that was turned a3eyn to 
the Lord in al his herte, and in alle his 
soule, and in al his vertue, aftir al the 
lawe of Moyses; ne aftir hym rose lijke 
26to hym. Neuerthelatre the Lord is not 
turned aweye fro the wrath of his grete 
woodnes, in the whiche his wodnes is 
wrothe azeynus Juda, for the terryngis? in 
the whiche Manasses hadde terred hym. 
27And so the Lord seide, Also Judam I 
schal taken aweye fro my face, as I toke 
aweye Yrael; and I schal throwen aweye 
this cytee, that I chees, Jerusalem, and 
the hous of the whiche I seide, My name 
zsschal ben there. The remnaunt forsothe 
of the wordis of Josie, and alle thingis 
that he dyde, whether not thes ben 
writen in the boke of the wordis of the 
29 days of the kyngis of Juda? In his days 
stey3ide up Pharao Nechao, kyng of Egipt, 
a3eynus the kyng of Assiries, at the flode 
of Eufraten; and Josias, kyng of Juda, 
wente in to ajein commynge of hym, 
and is slayn in Magedo, whanne he had 
30seen hym. And his seruauntis beeren 
hym deed fro Magedo, and brou3ten hym 
in to Jerusalem, and: byryeden hyin in 
his sepulere; and the puple of the lond 


IV. KINGS. 


305 


demyden Israel, and of alle daies! of the 
kyngis of Israel and of Juda, as this pask 2s 
was maad to the Lord in Jerusalem in 
the eiz3tenthe 3eer of kyng Josias. But2s 
also Josias dide awei men hanynge fendis 
spekinge in her™ wombis", and? false di- 
uinouris in auteris, and ‘he dide awei? 
the figuris of4 idols, and a//e™ vnclennessis, 
and abhomynaciouns, that weren in the 
lond of Juda and in’ Jerusalem, that he 
schulde do the wordis of the lawe, that 
weren writun in the book, ‘which book* 
Elchie, the preest, foond in the temple of 
the Lord. No kyng bifor him" wases 
lijk hymY, ‘that turnede agen” to the Lord 
in al his herte, and in al his soule, and in 
al his vertu, bi* al the lawe of Moises; 
nether aftir hym roos ony lijkY hym. 
Netheles the Lord was not turned awei2c 
fro the ire of his greet veniaunce, bi which 
his strong veniaunce? was wrooth ajens 
Juda, for the terryngis to* ire by whiche 
Manasses hadde terrid hym to ire’. Ther- 27 
for the Lord seide®, Y schal do awei also 
Juda fro my face, as Y dide awei Israel ; 
and Y schal caste awei this citee’, which® 
Y chees, Jerusalem’, and the hows ‘of 
which’ Y seide*, My name schal be there. 
Forsothée the residue of wordis' of Josias, 28 
and alle thingis whiche* he dide, whether 
these ben not writun in the book of wordis 
of daies of the kyngis of Juda? In thes 
daies of hym! Farao Nechao, kyng™ of 
Egipt, stiede" ajens the kyug of Assiriens, 
to the flood Eufrates; and Josias, kyng 
of Juda, 3ede in to metyng® of hym?, and 
Josias was slayn in Magedo, whanne he 
hadde seyn hym’?. And ‘hise seruauntis™ 39 
baren hym deed fro Magedo, and brou3te 
him in to Jerusalem, and birieden hym in 
his sepulere; and the puple of the lond 
took Joachaz, sone’ of Josias, and anoynt- 
iden hym, and maden hym kyng for his 


y vnclennesse 4n, % the abhomynaciouns c. ® terrynge 4. 


lthe daiest. ™the ELMP. ® wombe m. 
Sofi. tthatr. him zn Juda. 
aof1. UOvwrathther. © seith 1. 
ithe wordis1. & that 1. 1Josias 1. 


VOL. II. 


© and wicchis and m. 
Vv hymselff 1. 
4 citee Jerusalem 1. 
™ the kyng 1. 
to forbede him to passe thorou; Juda t. 4 Pharao1. * the seruauntis of Jozias 1. 


pPOm.1. dint. 
xaftir1. Y lijk to1. 

£Om.1. §& that 1. 
© the metyng EIXLMPXb. 
® the sone I. 


r Om. plures. 
2 woodnesse 1. 

h seide off 1. 
P Pharao, 


w Om. 1. 
e that 1. 
a 3ede up I. 


Rr 


306 


toke Joachas, the sone of Josie, and 
anoyntyden hym, and setten hym kyng 
sifor his fadir. Of three and twenty jeer 
was Joachaz, whanne he hadde begune to 
regnen, and thre monethis he regned m 
Jerusalem ; name of his inodir, Amychael, 
#2dou3ter of Jereinye of Lobna. And he 
dyde euyl beforn the Lord, aftir alle 
thingis that the fadirs of hym hadden 
s3done. And Pharao Nechao bond» hym in 
Reblatha, that is in the lond of Emath, 
that he ‘regne not® in Jerusalem; and he 
putte vpon a multynge to the lond, in an 
hundreth talentis of syluer, and a talent 
3iof gold. And Pharao Nechao ordeynde 
kyng Eliachym, the sone of Josias, for 
Josias, his fadir ; and he turnede his name 
Joachym; forsothe Joachaz’ he toke, 
35and Jadde in to Egipt. Forsothe Joa- 
chym 3aue to Pharao syluer and gold, 
whanne he hadde comaundide to the lond 
by alle 3eeris, that it were brou3t, aftir 
the heest of Pharao; and echon aftir 
their strengthis he askyde bothe syluer 
and gold, of the puple of the lond, that he 
i6my3te 3eue to Pharao Nechao. Of fyue 
and twenty 3eer was Joachym, whanne 
he hadde begunne to regnen, and elleuen 


zeer he regnede in Jerusalem; the name | 


of his modir, Zebida, dou3ter of Fadaya 

370f Ruma. And he dyde euyl before the 
Lord, aftir alle thingis that his fadirs 
haden done. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 In his days of stey3ide up Nabugo- 
donosor, kyng of Babyloyne, and Joa- 
chym is maad to hym seruaunt three 
3eer; and eft he rebellide ajeynus hym. 
2And the Lord sente in to hym lytyll 
theuis of Caldeys, and lytyll thenis of 
Cyrye, and lytyl theuis of Moab, and 
lytil theuis of the sonys of Amon; and 


> enoyntide £ pr.m. 


IV. KINGS. 


© schulde regne E pr. m. 


XXIII. 31—XXIV. 2. 


fadir. Joachaz was of thre and twentis! 
jeer, whanne he bigan to regne, and he 
regnede thre monethis in Jerusalem ; the 
name of his modir was Amychal, dou3ter* 
of Jeremye of Lobna. And he dide yuel 32 
bifor the Lord, bi alle thingis which hise 
fadris hadden do. And Farao Nechaoss 
boond hym® in Reblatha, which’ is in the 
lond of Emath, that he schulde not regne in 
Jerusalem ; and he" settide* ‘peyneY, ether* 
raunsum*, to the lond», in an hundrid 
taleutis of siluer, and in a° talent of gold. 
And Farao Nechao made kyng Eliachim, 34- 
sone? of Josias, for Josias, his fadir; and 
he® turnede the name of hymf Joachymé ; 
forsothe Farao took Joachaz, and ledde 
hym® in to Egipt. Sotheli Joachym 3af3s 
siluer and gold to Farao, whanne he hadde 
comaundid to the lond bi alle 3eeris, that it 
schulde be brou3t, bi! the comaundement* 
of Farao; and he! reiside of ech man bi™ 
hise my3tis" bothe siluer and gold, of the 
puple of the lond®, that he? schulde 3yue4 
to Pharao Nechao. Joachym was of fyue36 
and twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne, 
and he regnede eleuene jeer in Jerusalem; 
the name of his modir was Zcbida, dou3ter" 
of Phadaia of Ruma. And he dide yuel37 
bifor the Lord, bi alle thingis which hise 
fadris hadden do. 


CAP. XXIV. 


In the daies of hym*’ Nabugodonosor, j 
kyng of Babiloyne, stiedet, and Joachym 
was maad seruaunt to hym by thre 3eeris; 
and eft Joachym" rebellide a3ens hym. 
And the Lord’ sente to hym” theuys of 
Caldeis, and theuys of Sirie, and theuys of 
Moab, and theuys of the sones of Amon; 
and he* sente hem ‘in toY Juda, that he 


4d Om. & pr. m. 


‘the dou3tir 1. uhym én prisount, Vthat1. WPharaor %*settex. Ya peynex. ‘% Om.c. 
2 afijni. Plondof Judai. €oo1 the soner. ¢ Pharaor, fHeliachymy. & to Joachym 1. 
h Om. plures. iaftir1. kheestr. 1! Joachim 1. ™ oftir 1. a powerr. © lond of Juda 1. 
POm. nL, 43yue itr. tthe dou3tir1. s Joachim 1. ¢tstiede upintoJudar. thex. Lord God 1. 


w Joachim 1. *the Lordi. Y to EL. 


XXIV. 3— 13. 


he in® sente hem in to Judam, that he 
scatere hym, aftir the word of the Lord, 
that he hadde spoken bi his seruauntis 
3prophetis. This forsothe is done by the 
word of the Lord a3eyns Judam, that he 
do it aweye beforne hym, for the synnes 
of Manasses, and alle thingis that he 
adyde, and for the gyltles blode that he 
schedde; and he fulfillide Jerusalem with 
the blode of innocentis ; and for this thing 
sthe Lord wolde not be plesid. The rem- 
naunt forsothe of the wordis of Joachym, 
and alle thingis that he dyde, whether 
thes ben not writen in the boke of the 
6 wordis of days of kyngis of Juda? And 
Joachym slepte with his fadirs, and 
Joachym, his sone, regned fore hym. 
7And the kyng of Egipt addide no more, 
that he schulde goon out fro his lond; 
forsothe the kynge of Babyloyne hadde 
taken, fro the ryuer of Egipt vnto the 
flode of Eufraten, alle thingis that weren 
sof the kyng of Egipt. Of tenn and ei3t 
jeer was Joachym, whanne he hade be- 
gunne to regnen, and three monethis he 
regned in Jerusalem ; name of his modir, 
Naessa, dou3ter of Elnathan of J: ernsalem. 
9 And he dyde euyl beforn the Lord, aftir 
alle thingis that his fadir hadde done. 
10In that tyme stey3ide up the seruauntis 
of Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babyloyne, in 
to Jerusalem, and the cyte is enuyround 
uwith streyngthingis. And Nabugodo- 
nosor caine, the kyng of Babiloyne, to 
the cyte with his seruauntis, that they 
iz0uercommen it. And Joachym, kyng of 
Juda, wente out to the kyng of Ba- 
biloyne, he, and his modir, and_ his 
seruauntis, and his princis, and his 
geldyngis; and the kyng of Babyloyne 
toke hym, the ei3tithe 3eer of his regne. 
13 And he brou3te thens alle the tresoures 


IV. KINGS. 


307 


schulde destrie it, bi the word of the Lord, 
which? he spak bi’* hise seruauntis pro- 
phetis. Forsothe this was doon bi thes 
word of the Lord ajens Juda, that he® 
schulde® do awei it bifor him silf¢, for the 
synnes of Manasses, and alle‘ thingis 
whiche® he dide, and for the giltles blood 4 
whichf he sched out; and he fillide Jeru- 
salem with the blood of innocentis; and 
for this thing the Lord nolde® do mercy". 
Forsothe the residue! of wordis* of Joa-5 
chim, and alle thingis whiche he dide, 
whether these ben not writun in the book 
of wordis of daies of the kyngis of Juda? 
And Joachym slept with hise fadris, and 6 
Joakyn, his sone, regnyde for him. And7 
the kyng of Egipt addide! no more to go 
out of hys lond; for the kyng of Babiloyne 
hadde take alle thingis that weren the 
kyngis of Egipt, fro the strond of Egipt 
‘til to™ the flood Eufrates. Joakyn wass 
of ei3tene 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne, 
and he regnyde thre monethis in Jeru- 
salem; the name of his modir was Nahesta, 
dou;tix® of Helnathan of Jerusalem. And9 
he® dide yuel bifor the Lord, bi alle thingis 
whiche? hise fadir hadde do. In thatio 
tyme the seruauntis of Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, stieden4 ‘in to" Jeru- 
salem, and the citee was cumpassid with 
bisegyngis. And Nabugodonosor, kyng of 11 
Babiloyne, cam to the citee with hise ser- 
uauntis, that he schulde fizjte ajens it. 
And Joakyn, kyng of Juda, 3ede out)2 
to the king of Babiloyne, he, and his 
modir, and hise seruauntis, and _hise 
princis, and hise chaumburleyns; and 
the king of Babiloyne resseyuede him’, in 
the ei3the jeer of ‘his rewme’. And he"13 
brou3te forth’ fro thens” alle the tresours 
of the ‘hous of the Lord*, and the tresours 
of the kingis hous; and he beetY togider 


€ Om. & pr. m. 


zthati. 2Ztos. the Lords. »> wolde1, ¢Om. perkuxbe sec. m. ‘forallei.  ¢ that 1. 
fthat 1. 8 wolde not1. b mercy to Judar. iremenauntr. * the wordis1. !addide tor. ™ vnto1. 
“the doujtir1. ©Joachim1, Pthats. 4sticde a. wentenupi. ‘ajens1. *Joachimt.  ¢ the 


rewme of Nabugodonosor 1. 


u Nabugodonosor 1. 
Y betide 1. 


v Om. 1. w Jerusalem 1. x Lordus hous 1. 


Rr2 


308 


of the hous of the Lord, and the tre- 
soures of the kingis hous; and he heew3 
to gydre alle the golden vessels, that Sa- 
lomon, kyng of Yrael, hade maad in the 
temple of the Lord, aftir the word of the 
ii1Lord. And he translatide al Jerusalem, 
and alle the princis, and alle the stronge 
men of the hoost, tenn thousand, in to 
caytyfte, and alle craftise men, and en- 
closere; no thinge is laft, out take the 
ispore puple of the lond. Joachym for- 
sothe he translatyde in to Babyloyne, 
and the kyngis modir, and the kyngis 
wijf, and the kyngis geldyngis; and the 
domysmen of the lond he ladde in to 
caytifte fro Jerusalem in to Babiloyne; 
isand alle the stronge men, seuen thou- 
sand; and craftise men and enclosers, a 
thousand ; alle stronge men and fi3ters ; 
and the kynge of Babiloyne ladde hem 
izcaytyfe in to Babyloyne. And he sette 


IV. KINGS. 


XXIV. 14-——XXV. 1. 


alle the’ goldun vessels, whiche Salomon, 
king? of Israel, hadde maad in the temple 
of the Lord, bi the ‘word of the Lord». 
And he translatide al Jerusalem‘, and 14 
alle the princis, and alle the strong men 
of the oost, ten thousynde, in to caitiftee, 
and ech crafti man, and goldsmy3t®; and 
no thing was left‘, outakun the® pore pu- 
plis* of the lond. Also he translatide 1s 
Joakyn in to Babiloyne, and the moder of 
the king, ‘the wyues! of the king, and the 
chaumburleynsj of the king; and he ledde 
the iugis* of the lond** in to caitifte fro 
Jerusalem in to Babiloyne; and alle1s 
stronge! men, seuene thousynde; and 
crafti men and goldsmy3this, a thou- 
synde; alle stronge men and werriouris ; 
and the king of Babiloyne ledde hem pri- 
soners in to Babiloyne. And he ordeyn-17 
ede Mathanye, the brother of his™ fadir, 
for hym; and puttide™ to hym the name 


Mathathiam, his vncle, for hym; and he 
igputte on a name to hym Sedechie. The 


Sedechiet. Sedechie hadde the° oon and 18 + Sedechie, is 


: : interpretid the 
twentitheP 3eer of age, whanne he bigan _ ristfulnesee of 


the Lord. c. 


oon and twentithef 3eer of age hadde 
Sedechias, whanne he hadde begunne to 
regnen, and elleuen 3eer he regnede in 
Jerusalem ; name of his modir was Amy- 

19chal, dou3tir of Jeremye of Lobna. And 
he dyde euyl byfore the Lord, aftir alle 

20thingis that Joachym hadde done. For- 
sothe the Lord wrathede ajeinus Jerusa- 
lem and Judam, to the tyme that he 
threw3 hem aweye fro his face; and 
Sedechie wente aweye fro the kyng of 
Babiloyne. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 It is done forsothe the nynthe 3eer 
of his regne, the tenthe monethe, 
the tenthe day of the monethe, Nabu- 
godonosor, kyng of Babyloyne, came, he, 
and al his hoost, in to Jerusalem; and 


to regne, and he regnyde eleuene 3eer in 
Jerusalem; the name of his modir was 
Amychal, dou3ter’ of Jeremye of Lobna. 
And he® dide yuel bifor the Lord, bi alle19 
thingis which’ Joachym haddet do. For" 20 
the Lord was wrooth ajens Jerusalem, 
and a3ens Juda, til’ he caste” hem awey 
fro his face; and Sedechie 3ede awei fro 
the king of Babiloyne. 


CAP. XXV. 


Forsothe it was don in the nynthe 3eer1 
of his” rewme®*, in the tenthe moneth, in 
the tenthe dai of the moneth, Nabugodo- 
nosor, kyng of Babiloyne, cam, he, and al 
his oost, in to Jerusalem; and thei cum- 


f twenti 4. 


b Lordis word 1. 
£Om.1. 1») peple r. 


7 Om. EL. 4 the king 1. 
f left vntranslatid 1. 


¢ Nabugodonosor 1. 
hh Nabugodonosor 1. 


4 Israel plures. © goldsmy3t, also x. 
iand the wijfs. 4 children s. 


k thingis ex. kk lond of Juda. the stronge 1, ™ Joachym1. “he puttider, ° Om. 1. Ptwentir. 


4 the donjzter 1, + Sedechiex. § that 1. 
ww thei. * rewme of Sedechie 1. 


‘ his fadir hadde 1. 


uForsothe 1. Vtil that1. W castide 1. 


XXYV. 2—12. 


thei enuyrounden it, and maden up in 
2his enuyroun streyngthingis. And the 
cyte is closede, and palid, vnto the elle- 
3uenthe 3eer of kyng Sedechie, the nynthe 
day of the monethe; and hungir wexe 
grete in the cyte, and ther was not brede 
4to the puple of the lond. And the cyte 
is to-broken, and alle men fijters flowen 
the ny3t by the weye of the 3ate, that is 
bytwene the double wall, at the spring- 
ynge of the kyng; forsothe Caldeis be- 
segyden in enuyroun the cyte. And so 
Sedechias flei3 by the weye that ledith 
5to the wijld feeldis of wyldirnesse; and 
the hoost of Caldeis pursueden the kyng, 
and he cau3te hym in the pleyn of Jeri- 
cho; and alle the fiz3ters, that weren with 
hym, ben scaterd, and forsoken hym. 
6Thanne they ladden the taken kyng to 
the kyng of Babyloyne, in Reblatha, the 
7whiche spake with? hym dome. The 
sonys forsothe of Sedechie he slew3 be- 
fore hym, and his ee3en he putte out, and 
boond hym with cheynys, and brou3te 
shym in to Babyloyne. The fyfthe mo- 
neth, the seuenth day of the moneth, it 
is the nyntenthe 3eer of the kyng of 
Babiloyne, came Nabusardam, prince of 
the hoost, the seruaunt of the kyng of 
9 Babyloyne, in to Jerusalem; and brende 
up the hous of the Lord, and the hous of 
the kyng, and the housis of Jerusalem, 
1oand eche hous he brende with fijre; and 
the wallis of Jerusalem in enuyroun de- 
struyede al the hoost of Caldeys, that 
11was with the prince" of kny3tis. The 
tother forsothe partye of the puple, that 
laft in the cyte, and the thor3 fleers, that 
ouerflowen to the kyng of Babiloyn, and 
the laft comoun, Nabusardan, prince of 
12kny3thode, translatyde; and of the pore 
men of the lond he laft wyne! makers, 


IV. KINGS. 


309 


passiden it, and bildiden ‘stronge thingisY 
in the cumpass’ therof. And the citee2 
was closid, and cumpassid, ‘til to*® the 
eleuenthe 3eer of king Sedechie’, in thes 
nynthe day of the monethe; and hungur 
‘hadde maistrie’ in the citee, and ‘breed 
was not® to the® puple of the lond. Anda 
the citee was brokun, and alle men wer- 
riours fledden in the ni3t bi the weie of 
thee 3ate, which is bitwixe the double 
wal, to8 the gardyn of the kyng; sotheli 
Caldeis" bisegiden the citee ‘bi cumpasi. 
Therfor Sedechie fledde* bi the weie that 
ledith to the feeldi placis of the wildir- 
nesse; and the oost of Caldeis pursuedes 
the king, and it! took™ him in the pleyn 
of Jerico; and alle the werriours, that 
weren with him", weren scaterid®, and 
leften him. Therfor thei ledden the king 
takun to the king of Babiloyne, in to Reb- 
latha, which? spak dom with him4, ‘that 
is, with Sedechie™. Sotheli he killide the7 
sones of Sedechie bifor him, and puttides 
out his iz3en, and boond' him with chaynes, 
and ledde Azim" in to Babiloyne. In thes 
fifthe monethe, in the seuenthe dai of the 
monethe, thilke is the nyntenthe 3eer of 
the king of Babiloyne, Nabuzardan, prince 
of the oost, seruaunt of the king of Babi- 
loyne, cam in to Jerusalem ; and he brente9 
the hows of the Lord, and the hows of the 
king, and the housis of Jerusalem, and he 
brente bi fier ech hows’; and al the oost10 
of Caldeis, that was with the prince of 
kny3tis, distriede the wallis of Jerusalem 
‘in cumpas”. Forsothe Nabuzardan, prince 11 
of the chyyualrie, translatide the tother 
part of the puple, that dwellide in the 
citee*, and the fleeris, that hadden fled 
ouer to the king of Babiloyne, and the 
residue’ comyn puple; and he lefte of the 12 
pore men of the lond vyntilieris, and erthe 


&to 4BrH. » princis 4. {viyn 4. 
¥ strengthingis ErkLMpexb. 2cumpasabouter. ®vntor. POnr1. ¢ Ezechie 1. d wexide ouer 
my3t1. ther wasnot bred1. c¢Om.ex., {thats stowarder, hthe Caldeis1. ! in cum. 
pas plures. aboute 1. * fledde fro Jerusalem 1. 10m. apr.m.1. ™token 1. ® Sedechie 1. © scaterid 
abrood 1. P the whichi. 4 Sedechie1. ‘Om.1. She putter. the boond1. Om. plures. V hows 
therof1. Waboute 1. *citee of Jerusalem 1. Y remenaunt ELP. 


310 IV. KINGS. 


isand erthtiliers. Forsothe the brasen py- 
lers, that weren in the temple of the 
Lord, and the feet, and the brasen se, 
that was in the hous of the Lord, Caldeis 
breeken to gydre; and al the brasse thei 
14 beeren ouer in to Babiloyne. And brasen 
‘pottis, trowels, and fleschokis, and cuppis, 
and morters, and alle the brasen* vessels, 
in whiche thei mynystriden, thei token ; 
isalso and encenseeris, and violis. The 
whiche forsothe weren golden, and 
whiche sylueren, toke the prince of the 
iskny3thod, that is, two pylers, oon se, 
and the feet, that Salomon hade maad 
in to the temple of the Lord; and ther 
was not peys of the brasse of alle the 
izvessels. Tenn and ei3t cubitis of hei3t 
hadde oon pyler, and a brasen heued 
couerynge vpon hym of hey3t of thre 
cubitis, and a calle, and poumgarnetis 
vpon the heued couerynge of the pyler, 
all brasen; and lije honourynge hadde 
isthe secound pyler. Forsothie the! prince 
of the kny3thode toke Sarayam, the first 
preste, and Sophonyam, the secound 
19 preste, and the thre porters, and oon 
geldynge of the cyte, that was prefect 
vpon the fiztynge men, and fyue men of 
hem that stoden before the kyng, the 
whiche he foond in the cyte, and So- 
pher, the prince of the hoost, that prouede 
the newe kny3tis of the puple of the lond, 
and sixe men of the comoun, that weren 
20founden in the cyte; the whiche Nabu- 
sardan, prince of the kny3thode, takynge 
ladde to the kyng of Babyloyne, in Reb- 
zilatha. And the kyng of Babiloyne smote 
hem, and slew3 hem in Reblatha, in the 
lond of Emath; and Juda is translatyd 
g2fro his lond. To the puple forsothe 
that was laft in the lond of Juda, the 
whiche Nabugodonosor, kyng of Baby- 


k goldene g pr.m., 


Zmen of Caldey 1. ®baren ouer 1, > men. 
also 1. { tho thingis 1, £ is to wile 1. 
ther was 1. 1 certeyn weizte 1. m Om. 1. 
rOm. a prim. EL. ®*Om.R.  t Nabuzardan 1. 
YOm.1. a the whiche 1, 
which 1, 


¢ mynystriden in the temple 1. 
h foundementis or basis 1. i 

n upon I. 
ucitee of Jerusalem 1. 


b Nabugodonosor 1. ¢ Om. 1. 


RONG cee 


tilieris. Sotheli Caldeis? braken the bra-13 
sun pilers, that weren in the temple, and 
the foundementis, and the see of bras, 
that was in the hous of the Lord; and 
thei translatiden* al the metal in to Babi- 
loyne. And thei token the pottis of bras, 14 
and trullis, and fleisch hokis, and cuppis, 
and morteris, and alle brasun vessels, in 
whiche thei® mynystriden®; also! and cen- 1s 
seris*, and violis. The prince of the chy- 
ualrie took tho that weren of gold, and 
tho that weren of siluer, that is’, twei pi-i6 
leris, 0 see, and the foundementis, whiche 
king Salomon hadde maad ‘in to! the tem- 
ple of the Lord; and* no wei3te! was™ of 
metal of alle the vessels. O piler hadde 17 
ei3ten cubitis of hiz3te, and a brasun pomel 
on” it of the heizte of thre cnbitis, and a 
werk lijk a net, and pomgarnadis on" the 
pomel of the piler, alle thingis of bras ; 
and the secounde piler hadde® lijk ourn- 
yng. Also the prince of the? chyualrie 1s 
took Saraie, the firste preest, and Sophony, 
the secunde prest, and thre porteris, and 19 
oon! onest seruaunt of the citee, that was 
a’ souereyn ouer men werriours, and fyne 
men ‘of hem’ that stoden bifor the king, 
whiche het foond in the citee*; and he 
took Sopher, the’ prince of the oost’, that 
preuide jonge kny3tis, ‘ether men able to 
batelY, of the puple of the lond, and sixe 
men of the comyns, that weren foundyn 
in the citee; whiche* Nabuzardan, prince 20 
of the chyualrie, took, and ledde to the 
king of Babiloyne, in to Reblatha. And a1 
the kyng of Babiloyne smoot lem, and 
killide hem in Reblatha, in the lond of 
Emath; and Juda was translatid fro his 
lond. Sotheli he> made souereyn® Godolie, 22 
sone’ of Aicham, sone‘ of Saphan, to* the 
puple that was left in the loud of Juda; 
which’ puple Nabugodonosor, king of Ba- 


1 of the zB. 


¢ censeris 
itoasec.m.bprom kK and 
P Om. s. Gani. 
W oost of Sedechie 1. 
f the 


d Om. 1. 


© hadde also 1. 
vOm. 1. 


dthe soner. © souereyn to 1. 


XXV. 23-30. 


loyne, hadde laft, he made rewler Godo- 
lyam, the sone of Aycham, the sone of 
23Safan. The whiche thingis whanne alle 
the duykis of kny3tis, they, and alle the 
men that weren with hem haden lhierd, 
that is, that the kyng of Babyloyne 
hadde ordeynd Godolie, camen to Godo- 
lie, in™ Maspha, Ismael, the sone of Na- 
thanye, and Johannan, the sone of Charee, 
and Saraye, the sone of Tenameth Ne- 
thophathite, and Jechonias, the sone of 
Mechati, thei, and Machath, and the fe- 
2tlawis of hem. And Godolias swore to 
hem, and to the felawis of hem, seyinge, 
Wylle 3e not dreden to seruen to the Cal- 
deis ; dwellith in the lond, and seruith to 
the kyng of Babiloyne, and wele it schal 
2be to 30u. It is done forsothe in the 
seuenth moneth, came Ismael, the sone of 
Nathanye, the sone of Elisama, of the 
kyngis seed, and ten men with hym, and 
smyten Godolie, the whiche is deed; bot 
and the Jewis and the Caldeis, that weren 
26 With him in Maspha. And al the puple 
rijsynge to gydre fro litil vnto mychil, 
and the princis of kny3tis, camen in to 
27 Egipt, dreedynge the Caldeis. It is done 
thanne in the seuen and thrittithe 3eer of 
the transmygracioun of Joachym, kyng 
of Jude, the twelfthe monethe, the seuen 
and twentithe day of the monethe, Euil- 
meredoch, kyng of Babiloyne, the 3eer 
that he beganne to regnen, rerede up the 
heued of Joachym, kyng of Juda, fro 
28 prisone, and he spac to hym benyngly; 
and he putte his trone vpon the trone of 
kyngis, that weren with hym in Babi- 
29loyne. And he chaungide his clothis, 
that he hadde in prisoun; and he eet 
breed euermore in his si3t, alle days of 
30his lyfe. 3eer fruyt forsothe he ordeynde 
to hym with oute cesynge; the whiche 


IV. KINGS. 


311 


biloyne, hadde left®. And whanne alle2s 
the duykis of kny3tis* hadde herd these 
thingis, thei', and the men that weren 
with hem, that isk, that the king of Babi- 
loyne hadde ordeyned Godoliel, thei camen™ 
‘to Godolie", in°"" Maspha, Ismael, sone® of 
Nathanye, and Johannan, sone® of Charee, 
and Saraie, sone® of Thenameth of Necho- 
phat, and Jeconye, sone® of Machati, thei, 
and Machat, and? the felowis of hem. 
And Godolie swoor to hem, and to the2: 
felowis of hem, and seide, Nyle 3e drede 
to serue the! Caldeis; dwelle 3e in the 
lond, and serue 3e" the king of Babiloyne, 
and it schal be wel to 30u. Forsothe it 2: 
was don in the seuenthe monethe, ‘¢hat is, 
sithen® Godolie was maad souereyut, His- 
mael, the sone of Natlianye, sone" of Ely- 
saina, of the ‘kyngis seed’, cam, and ten 
men with hym, and thei smytiden” Godo- 
lie, which* diede; but also thei smytidenY 
Jewis and Caldeis, that weren with hym? 
in Maspha. And al the puple roos fro2 
litil® ‘til to greet*, and the prynces of 
kny3tis, and camen® in to Egipt, and 
dredden Caldeis*. Therfor it was doon27 
in®é the seuenthe’ and threttithe 3eer of 
transmigracioun$, ‘ether passyug ouer, of 
Joakyn, kyng of Juda, in the tweluethe 
monethe, in the seuene and twentithe dai 
of the monethe, Euylmeradach, kyng of 
Babiloyne, in the 3eer in which he pigan 
to regne, reiside! the heed of Joakyn, kyng 
of Juda, fro prisoun, and spak to hym2s 
benygneli; and he settide* the trone of 
Joakyn aboue the trone of kyngis, that 
weren with hym in Babilonye. And he!2s 
chaungide ‘hise clothis™, whiche" he hadde 
in prisoun; and he eet breed euer in the 
si3t of Euylmeradach, in alle the daies of 
his lijf. Also Euylmeradach ordeynede 30 
sustenaunce ‘to hym® with out ceessyng ; 


on 


m and zB. 


S left in Jnda1. » kny3tis of Sedechie 1. 
™ camen togidere 1. °QOm.1. ®® into K. 
‘t afler the souereyntee of Godolie 1. ™ the sone 1. 


xthat 1. ¥ smyteni. smetin ELP. 2 Godolie 1. 
or fledden1. ‘the Caldeis1. ©¢¢ Om. x. 
reiside 1. setter. 1 Euylmeradach 1. 


iOm.1. 

© the sone 1. 

v seed of king Sedechie 1. 

a the litil 1. 
f seuen EIKLS. 

m the clothis of Joachin 1. 


k is to wile 1. 
P Om. 1. 


1 Godolie to be souereyn in Judai. 
QtoHILr. ‘3etork. § thai a. 
W smoten I. smeten ELP. 

vntor. ¢the greet1. 4 thei camen 
8 the transmigracioun 1. »Om.3. ? ne 
that. © for Joachin 1. 


312 IV. KINGS. Reve 


and was 3ouen to hym of the kyng by which? sustenaunce also was 3ouun of the 
eche days, alle the days of his lijf. kyng to hym bi alle daies, and‘ in alle 
the daies of his lijf. . 


Here cendith the fourthe boke of Here endith the fourthe book of 
Kingus, and bigynneth the prolog in the _Kingis; and here bigynneth the firste 
Jirst boke of Paralipomenon". book of Paralipomenon, that is, of wordis 

of dates". 


- 0 Here endith the fourth book of Kyngis, and now bigynneth the proloog of twcy bookis of Paralipomenon. a. 
Explicit quartus liber Regum. £. Here endith the fourt bok Kyngis. vr. No final rubric in cn. 


P the which 1. 4Om. rn. " Here endith the fourthe book of Kingis, and here bigynneth the firste book 
of Paralipomynon. cn. Here endith the fourthe book of Kyngis, and begynneth a protog on the firste bok 
of Parlipominon. om. Leere eendith the fourthe book of Kinges, se now the prolog bifore Paralipomenon. K. 
Tere endith the fourthe book of Kyngis, and here bigynneth the prolog on the firste book of Paralipome- 
non. 0. LHeere eendith the fourthe book of Kynges, and bigynneth the firste of Parlipominon. x. Here 
eendith the iiii. book of Kingis, and biginneth the Paralipomynon.s. Here endith the fourthe booc of 
Kingis, and bigynneth the booe of the firste Paralipomynon. x. Here eendith the fourthe book of Kingis, and 
heere bigynneth the secunde book of Paralipomenon. ¢. No final rubric in ELPQWwh. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 





[ Prologue on the First book of Paralipomenon’.| 


Tus book of Paralipomenon, the firste, bigynneth at Adam, rehersynge the ri3t 
lyne of generacioun in to Abraham, and alle the sones of Abraham, and the sones 
of hem, touchinge schortli of Saul king, and afterward of Dauith; rehersinge many 
thingis whiche ben not writen in the book of Kingis before, til to the regne of 
kyng Salomon. Here endith the prologe, and here bigynneth the firste book of 


Paralipomenon. 





The Prolog in the first boke of 
Paralipomenon’. 


31F the makynge of the seuenty re- 
menours abyde styll pure, and as it is 
turned of hem in to Greek, my Chromati, 
holiest and wysest of byschopis, in veyn 
thou schuldist bydden me that I translate 
to thee Ebreu volymes in Latyn word. 
Forsothe that hath ocupied onys the eris 
of men, and hath streynthid the feith 
of the waxynge chirche, ri3twijs was also 
with oure sylence to be apreued. Nowe 
forsothe whan dyuerse saumplers ben 
born for the dyuersite of regyouns, and 
thilk® olde germeyn translacyoun is cor- 
rupt and defoulid, thou wenyst® of oure 
dome to ben, outher to schewen of manye® 
whiche be verrey, outher® a new werk to 
maken in old werk, the Jewis forsothe 
scornynge, that, as it is seid, to fytche to 
gyder eezenf of curluris®. Alisaunder 
and Egipt in their seuenty preysen 
auctour Eusichy; Constantynople vnto 
Antioche apreuith the saumpleris of mar- 
tir Lucyan; ‘the mene prouynces by- 


[Prologue on the first book of Para- 
lipomenon”.] 


IrF the makynge of the seuenti inter- 
pretours dwelle stille cleene, and as it is 
turned of hem in to Greek, than thi silf, 
my Cromat, hoolyeste and wysest of bis- 
schopis, shuldest in veyn bidde me, that I 
shulde translate to thee Ebrew volyms in 
to Latyn word. For it was ri3twise, that 
sich thing that hath occupied ones the 
eeris of men, and hath strengthid the 
feith of the wexynge chirche, shulde be 
appreued with oure silence. Now for- 
sothe sith dyuerse saumpleris ben born 
aboute for diuersite of regiouns, and sith 
thilke old translacioun of german is cor- 
rupt and defoulid, thou trowist that it be 
of oure owne doom, ethir to schewe of 
many draweris of hooly writ which is 
verie and trewe, eithir to make a newe 
werk on the oolde werk, and thou3 the 
Jewis scorne, and, as me semeth, hem to 
ficche to gideris the izen of kurlewis. 
Alisaundre and Egipt among her seuenti 
translatours preisen Eusichie, her auctour; 


8 Prologus Paralipomenon. c. Here 'bigynneth the prolog on Paralipomynon. x. Here bigynneth the 


proloug of Paralipomenon. F. Prologus. u. 
ejyn £. & crowis £ pr.m. 


a This prologue is from m. 


VOL. II. 


that x. 


¢ wentist 1. 4manye workisa. ¢ ork. fajen a, 


b This prologue is from 0. 


ss 


314 


twene’ thes reden Palestynes bokis, the 
whiche out trauayld of Origene, Eusebe 
and Pamphilie pupplischeden ; and al the 
world bytwene! hem selue in this thre 
maner dyuersite fijtith* to gyder. And 
certis Origenes not oonly exsaumplis! 
maad in oon of foure makyngis, ‘forn 
a3eyn™ alle the wordis discryuynge, that 
the oon discordynge, the tother betwene" 
hem silf acordynge, anoon be vnder- 
nomyn; bot, that is of more hardynesse, 
in the makynge of the seuenty he mengide 
the makynge of Theodocioun, that is, 
markynge that weren to lytyl with 
sygnys of a sterre, and that weren seen 
ouermych leid to, with® lityl 3erdis. 3if 
thanne to other it was leful not to holden 
that oons thei hadden taken; and aftir 
seventy lytyll sellis, the whiche with 
outen auctour of the comoun ben boostid, 
thei? opneden alle the sellis, that forsothe 
in the chirche is rad that the seuenty 
knewyn uot; why1 me taken not my 
Latyn men, the whiche han maad so the 
newe with’ the olde makynge vnde- 
foulid, that’ my traueyl I preue with thet 
Ebrewis, and, that is more than these, 
with the Apostlis auctours. I wrote not 
jore a boke of the best maner of re- 
menynge", schewynge’ tho thingis of the 
euangely”, Fro Egipt I haue clepide* myn 
sone, and, That Najare he schal be clepid’, 
and, Thei schul seen in whome thei hau 
pungid;. aud that of the apostle, That ee3e 
hath not seen, ne ere hath herde, ne in to the 
hert of man hath stey3ide up, the whiche 
God hath maad redye before to the 
louynge hym; and other lije to thes, in 
the bokis of Ebrewis to ben founden. 
Certis the apostlis and the euaungelistis 
hadden knowen the seuenty remenours, 
and whenns that.to hem to seyn tho 
thingis that in the seuenty ben not had ? 
Crist, oure God, is maker of either testa- 


nent, in? euangelie aftir Joon, Who?-. 


leuith’, he seith®, in me, as seith the 


i betwixe a. i bitwixe ax. * figten x. 
a bitwixe kK. ° Om. xk. Pthat x. @ with x. 
v the shewinge kK. Waungel x. * cald x, 
seith K. 


lensaumplis x. 
r that x. 
Ycalled x. Zin the Ex. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


Constantynoble vnto Antioche appreueth 
the sampleris of martir Lucian; the 
meene prouencis bytwene these reden Pa- 
lestinys bookes, whiche Eusebie and Pam- 


philie puplichiden, whanne thei hadden 
‘ traueyld it out of Origene; and al the 


world stryuen to gideres withynne hem 
silf in thes thre manere of dyuersitees. 
And certis Origene not oonly made to 
gideres the ensamplis of foure drawyngis 
out of hooly writ, in to oon discriuynge 
alle the wordes of the cuntrey, so that 
oon discordynge be vndurnome, anoon of 
the othir bookis acordynge,to gyderes; 
but that is of more hardynesse, in the 
makynge of seuenty translatouris he med- 
lide the markynge of Theodocion, that is 
to wite, markynge with the signes of a 
sterre siche thingis that weren to litle, and 
siche thingis that weren addid to of 
superfluyte, he markyde with litil 3erdis, 
eithir sygnes of an arowe. Therfor if it 
was leefful to othir not to holden that thei 
hadden onys toke, and aftir the seventy 
selles, which of the selles, which of the 
comynte ben bostid to be, with out auctor 
thei openyde alle the selles, also that. that 
seuenty interpretours knowen not is red 
in chirches; whi thanne my Latyn. men 
accepten not me, sithen I haue maad the 
newe drawynge with the olde makyng 
vudefoulid,: that I preue my trauel with 
the Ebrewis, and also with the Apostlis, 
auctoritees that ben more worthi than 
thei. I wroot a book not ful longe ago, 
mye beste manere of drawyng out. of 
hooly writ, shewynge thes tixtis of the 
gospel folewynge to be in the bookes of 
Ebrewes; as this tixt, Fro Egipt I haue 
clepid my sone; and also this tixt, He 
shal be clepid Nazarey; and also the 
tixt, Thei shulen se into whom thei han 
thour3 persed ; also this tixt of the pistle ; 
That i3e hath not seen, ne eere herd, ne it 
hath not stied vp in to the herte .of inen, 
the whiche God hath maad redy byfore to 


m for ajeyn 4. fro the regiown £ pr. m. 
Swith xk. tOm.x. the remenyng xk. 
awhose x. ?P bilenith 4. ¢he 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


scripture, flodis4 of his wombe schul 
flowen ‘quyke waters®. Forsothe it is 
writen, that the Saueoure witnessith to 
ben writen; where it is writen, the 
settienty han not; the hyd thingis know- 
ith not the chirche. To the Ebrewis than 
it is to turnen.ajeyn, wherof‘ and the Lord 
spekith, and the’ disciplis béforn taken 
exsaumplis. Thes thingis bi pese of olde 
men I speke, and :to my bacbyters oonly 
I answer, the whiche gnawen me witha 
dogge’ tothe, in:opyn bacbytynge, reed- 
ynge in corners, and* acusatours and 
defendours, whann in other men they 
apreuen that in me thei repreuen; as 
vertue and vice ben not in the 'thingis, 
bot with the autour ben chaungid. Bot 
I haue had mynde the makyng of the 
seventy translatours, sumtyme fro Greke 
amendid, me to have 3euen to 3oure!, and 
not enmye of hem owyn to ben eymed, 
whome in the couent of bretheren euer- 
more I schal expownen. And that De- 
bregemyn, that is, the wordis of days, 
I haue remened, therfore I haue don 
that I my3te bryng™ to ri3t the insolible 
lettyngis and the wodis! of namys, the 
whiche, thor3 vice of writers, beu con- 
foundid, and™ the dulnes of wittis, more 
opynly, and by distyncciouns of verse; to 
me my silf and to my wrytynge® aftir 
Hismenyum’, 3if eris of other ben dowmbe. 


4 flodis of quyk watris 4. ¢ Om. 4, 
and cE see.m. Fuk. that is and £ pr.m. '30u x. 
° his meenyng x. 


f wherfore 1. 


315 


hein that louen him. And othir textes 
that ben lijk these, ben fonden in the 
book of Ebrewis. -Certis the apostlis and 
the euangelistis hadden knowe the seuenti 
interpretours, and fro whennus come that 
grace to hem to scie tho thingis that ben 
not had among the senenti interpretours ? 
Crist, our God, maker of enere eithir 
testament, in the gospel aftir Joones 
writynge’seith thus, Who euere byleueth 
in me, as seith hooly scripturis, floodis of 
a quyk watir schulen folewe of his wombe. 
Forsothe that thing that oure Sauyour 
witnessith to be write,. it is sikirliche 
writen; but the seuenti interpretours han 
no mencioun ‘where it is writun; the 
chirche knowith not hid thingis. Therfor it 
is to turne ajen to Ebrews, wher of oure 
Lord spekith, and the disciplis bifor takun 
ensaumplis. I speke thes thingis with 
the pees of olde men, and I answere oonly 
to my bacbiters, which gnawen me with a 
doggi tooth, bagbitynge me in open, red- 
ynge the same in corneris, and also ac- 
cusours and defenderis thei ben, sithen 
thei approuen in othir men that thei re- 
preuen in me; as thou3 vertues and vyces 
ben not in thingis, but ben chaungid with 
the auctoure. Ferthermore I have remem- 
brid me, that I haue-30ue to 3oure scrip- 
turis the makynge of the seuenty transla- 
ture, that was sumtyme amendid fro 
Greek, and therfor I ou3te not to be gessid 
an enemy of hem, which euere more I 
shal expowne to the conent of briththren. 
And that book that is now clepid Debra- 
yamyn, that is, the wordis of dayes, I haue 
translatid; therfor IJ haue doon it that 
I my3te brynge to ri3t thilke betyngis, 
that ben ful hard to be opened, and to 
opene the wordis of names, the which 
thour3 vice of writeris ben confoundid, and 
more opynly by dulnesse of wittis, and by 
destynciouns of uerse; to my silf and to my 
writynge aftir Hismenyum, thou3 the ceris 
of other men be doumb. 


h the same both «. the same 
mink. ® writingis K. 


& doggis 4. 
k bryngynge z. | wordis pr. 


ss Q 


316 


An other Prolog’. 


The boke of Paralipomenon, that‘ is, 
the breggyng of the Olde Testament, 
siche and so myche is", that with outen 
it who so wyll by pride sechen to hym 
the kunnynge of scriptures, scorne he 
hym silf. Forsothe by alle the’ namys 
and iuncturis of wordis, and the laft sto- 
ries in the bokis of Kyngis ben touchid, 
aud ynowmbrable questiouns of the euaun- 
geliest ben soyled. 


Here eendith the prolog in the first 
boke of Paralipomenon, and bygynneth 
the first boke of Paralipomenon. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


I. I—g. 


Another Prolog on the Firste book of 
Paralipomenon. 


The book of Paralipomenon, that is, 
the bregging of the Olde Testament, is 
such and so moche, that withouten it who 
so wole bi pride seche to him the kunnyng 
of scripturis, scorne he him silf. Forsothe 
bi alle the namys of ioynturis of wordis, 
and the laste stories ben touchid in the 
bookis of Kingis, and vnnoumbrable ques- 
tiouns of the euangelies ben soylid. 


Here enden the prologis, and begyn- 
neth the book. 





Here bigyaneth the bok of Paralipo- 
meno’. 


CAP. 


5 Adam, Seth, Enos, Chaynan, Malaleel, 
+ Jared, Enoch, Matusale, Lameth; Noe, 
5Sem, Cham, and Japheth. The sones of 
Japheth; Gomor, Magday, Magog, and 
6Jauan, Tubal, Mosoch, and Tyras. Bot 
the sones of Gomer; Ascenez, and Ry- 
7phat, and Togorma. The sones forsothe 
of Jauan; Helisa, and Tharsis, Cethym, 
sand Dodonym. The sonys of Cham; 
Chus, and Mesraym, Phuth, and Cha- 
gnaan. The sonys forsothe of Chus; Saba, 
and Euila, Sabatha, and Regma, and Sa- 
bathaca. Bot the sonys of Regma; Saba, 


Here bigynneth the firste book of Paroh- 
pominon, that is, of words of daies. 


CAP. I. 


Adam gendride® Seth; Enos‘, Chay- 1} 
nan®, Malaleel*¢, Jared‘, Enoch’, Matus-s 
saleb, Lamethi; Noe" gendride! Sem, 4 
Cham, and Japhet. The sones of Japhats 
weren Gomer, Magog, Magdai, and™ Ja- 
uan, Tubal, Mosoch, and Tiras. Forsothe« 
the sones of Gomer weren Asceneth, and® 
Riphat, and Thogorma. Sotheli® the sones 7 
of Jauan weren Helisa, and Tharsis, Ce- 
thym, and Dodanym. The sones of Cham sy 
weren Chus, and? Mesraym, Phuth, and 
Chanaan. Sotheli4 the sones of Chus weren y 
Saba, and Euila, Sabatha, and Regma, and 


POm. crux. Prologus 4. 10m. x. Titisx. *Om.x. t euangelistis x. Here eendith the proloog of Parra- 
lypomenon, and now bigynneth.the first book. a. Here endeth the prologis, and bigynneth the firste Parali- 
pomynou. E. Heere eendeth the prolog ; se now the firste book of Paralipomenon. x. No final rubric in cri. 


¥ From Fr. No initial rubric in apcen. 


>From & sec.m. Leb. No initial rubric in the other Mss. ¢ bigaat 1. 4and Seth, Enos 1. ¢ and Enos, 


Chaynani. ¢€ and Caynan, Malaleel 1. f and Malaleel, Jared 1. .€ and Jared bigaat Enoch 1. 4 and 
Enok Matusale 1. i and Matusale, Lameth 1. * and Lameth Noe, and Noe1. 1!Om.1. ™Om.1. 
nOm.1 © Andis. POm.1. 4 And 1s. 


I, 10-32. 


loand Adan. Chus forsothe gat Nemroth ; 
this byganne to ben my3ty in the lond. 
1 Mesraym forsothe gat Ludym, and Ana- 
lznym, and Labaym, and Nepthoym, Fe- 
trusym forsothe, and Chasluym, of the 
whiche wenten oute Phylisteis and Cap- 
i3thurym. Chanaan forsothe gat Sydon, 
this first goten, and Ethee, Jebusee® for- 
issothe, and Amorre, and Jergese, Euee, 
igand Arache, and Cyne, Aradyum for- 
17sothe, and Samarie, and Amathe. The 
sonys of Sem; Elam, and Assur, and Ar- 
faxath, and Luth, and Aram. The sonys 
forsothe of Aram; Hus, and Hul, and 
i8Gothor, and Mosoch. Arfaxath forsothe 
gate Sale; the whiche and he gat Heber. 
19 Forsothe to Heber ben born two sonys; 
name to the toon Phaleg, for in his days 
the erth is deuydid ; and the name of his 
20 brother Jectan. Jectan forsothe gat Hel- 
modad, and Salech, and Azelmod, and 
21 Jare, Adoram forsothe, and Vsal, and 
22 Deda, Hebal, and Ameth, and Abymael, 
23 and Saba, also and Oofer, and Euila, and 
Jobab; alle thes the sonys of Jectan. 
ae Sem, Arfaxath, Sale, Heber, Phalech, 
26 Ragau, Seruth, Nachor, Thare, Abram ; 
Bt this forsothe is Abraham. The sonys of 
29 Abraham ; Ysaac and Ysmael. And thes 
the generaciouns of hem; the first goten 
of Ismael Nabaioth, and Cedar, and Ab- 
30dehel, and Mapsam, and Masma, and 
Duma, and Massa, Adad, and Thema, 
* 31Jahur, Naphis, Cedma; thes ben the 
szsonys of Ysmael. The sonys forsothe of 
Cethure, the secoundarie wijf of Abra- 
ham, ‘the whiche® sche gat ; Zamram, Jer- 
san, Madan, Madian, Jesboch, Sue. For- 
sothe the sones of Jersan; Saba, and Da- 
dan. The sones forsothe of Dadan ; Assu- 


band Jebusee 4. 


r Andis. § Andis. ¢ bigaat 1. ¥ And 1s. 
or weren gendrides. Y Andis. 2 bigaat 1. 
eethe namero. f to plures. tothe ce. g§ And 1s. 
dride Arphaxat s. & and Arphaxat, Sale 1s. 
Phalech, Ragau 1s. ° and Ragau, Seruth rs. 
Thare 1s. 8 Om. 1s. 
* goten 1. W was Nabioth 1s. 
yand Cedmais. 2 And 1s. 

e gendride or conceyuyde 1. 


4 Om. c. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


v bigaat 1. 

8 goten I. 
h gaat 1. 
land Sale, Heber 1s. 
P and Seruth, Nacbor 1s. 4 and Nachor, Thare 1s. 
88 Abraham, the greet patriark s. 
X and thanne 1. and after Nabioth he gendride Cedar s. 
b the sones of Cethure 1. 


317 


Sabathaca. Forsothe the sones of Regma 
weren Saba, and Dadan. Sotheli* Chus 10 
gendride’ Nemroth; this Nemroth bigan 
to be my3ti in erthe. Forsothe® Mes-1 
raym gendride’ Ludym, and Ananyn, and 
Labaym, and Neptoym, and Phetrusym, 12 
and Casluym, of whiche’ the Philisteis 
and Capthureis 3eden out*. SotheliY Cha-1s 
naan gendride* Sidon his first gendrid* 
sone, and Ethei, and Jebusei, and Am-i4 
morrei, and Gergesei, and Enei, and Ara-1s j 
chei, and Synei, and Aradye, and Sama- 16 
thei, and Emathei. The sones of Seni17 
weren Elam, and Assur, and Arphaxat, 
and Luth, and Aram. Forsothe® the sones 
of Aram weren Hus, and Hul, and Go- 
thor, and Mosoch. Forsothe® Arphaxat 1s 
gendride’ Sale; which hym silf gendride 
Heber. Sotheli® to Heber weren borun1g 
twei sones ; name‘ off oon was Phaleg, for 
the lond was departid in hise daies; and 
the name of his brother was Jectan. For-20 
sothe® Jectan gendride" Elmodad, and Sa- 
lech, and Aselmod, and Jare, and Adoram, 21 
and Vzal, and Deda, Hebal, and Ameth, 22 
and Abymael, and Saba, also and Ophir, 23 
and Euila, and Jobab; alle these weren 
the sones of Jectan. Sem', Arphaxat*, 24 
Sale!, Heber”, Phalech", Ragau®, Seruth?, Se 
Nachor!, Thare’, Abram; forsothe® this 27 
is Abrallam**. The sones of Abraham 28 
weren Isaac and Ismael. And theset the" 29 
generaciouns of hem; the firste gendrid’ 
of Ismael Nabioth”, and* Cedar, and Ab- 
dahel, and Mapsam, and Masma, and30 
Duma, and Massa, Adad**, and Themar, 
Jahur, Naphis, CedmaY; these ben the3) 
sones of Ismael. Forsothe? the* sones of 32 
Cethure>, secoundarie® wijf of Abraham, 
whiche? sche gendride®, weren Zamram, 


¢ that c pr. m. 


w the whiche sones 1. * out or camen 1. out 
bAndis. ¢ Andis. ‘higaat1. ¢ And is. 
i And Sem gat Arphaxat 1. and Sem gen- 
™ and Heber, Phalech 1s. ® and 
rand 
t these ben pers. these weren x. Om. c. 
xx and Adad s. 


e the secoundarie 1s. 4 the whiche 1. 


318 


asrym, and Latusym, and Laomym. The 
sonys forsothe of Madian;-Epha, Ofer, 
Etnoch, and Abida, and Eldaa. Alle thes 
34the sonis of Cethure. Abraham forsothe 
gat Ysaac; whos sones weren Esau and 
35 Yrael. The sones of Esau; Eliphath, 
Rahuel, Seir®, Jaus, Zelam, and Chore. 
36 The sonys of Eliphath; Theman, Omer, 
Sephi, Gethem, Genez, Cenez, Thanna, 
37 Amalech. The sones of Rahuel; Naab, 
'38Gazera, Samma, Masa. The sonys of 
Seir; Lothan, Sobal, Zebeon, Ana, Dy- 
39son, Eser, Dysan. ‘The sones of Lothan ; 
Horry, Huma; the syster forsothe of 
40 Lothan was Thanna. The sones of So- 
bal; Alian, and Manaath, and Ebal, and 
Cephi, and Onam. The sones of Sebeon ; 
Aia, and Ana. The sones of Ana; Dy- 
a1son, and Oolibama. The sonys of Dyson; 
Amaram, and Hesebam, and Lecram, and 
42Caram. The sonys of Eser; Balaam, and 
Jaban, and Jasan. The sones of Dysan; 
43 Hus, and Aram. Thes ben the kyngis 
that comaundiden in the lond of Edom, 
before that there was kyng vpon the 
sones of Yrael. Baale, the sone of Beor; 
s4and the name of his cytee Denaba. For- 
sothe Bale is deed; and for hym regned 
45 Joab, the sone of Zare, of Bosra. And 
whanne Joab was deed, regned for hym 
46 Husam of the lond of Themanyas. For- 
sothe Husam dyed; and for hym regned 
Adad, the sone of Badad, that smote 
Madyan in the lond of Moab; and the 
ajname of his cyte Abyud. And whan 
Adad was deed, regned for hym Semela 
480f Maseracha. Bot and Semela died, and 
for hym regned Saul of Robooth, the 
49 Whiche bisides Amnem is sett. Forsothe 
Saul deed‘, regned*® for hym Balanan the 
s0sone of Achobor. Bot and this dyed, and 
for hym regnede Adad, of whos cyte the 
name was Phou; and his wijf is clepid 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


I. 335°. 


Jersan, Madan, Madian, Jelboe, Sue’. So- 
thelis the sones of Jersan weren Saba, and 
Dadan. Forsothe® the sones of Dadan 
weren Assurym, and Latusym, and Lao- 
mym. Sotheli! the sones of Madian weren 33 
Epha, Etheij, and* Enoch, and Abdia, 
and 'Heldaa. Alle these weren the sones 
of Cethure. Forsothe Abraham gendride! 34 
Isaac ; whose sones weren Esau and Israel. 
The sones of Esau weren Eliphat, Rahuel, 35 
Semyaus, and Elam, and Chore. The3¢ 
sones of Eliphath weren Theman, Omer, 
Sephi, Gethem, Genez, Cenez, Thanna, 
Amalech™. The sones of Rahuel weren37 
Naab, Gazara, Samma, Masa". The sones3s 
of Seir weren Lothan, Sobal, Sebeon, Ana, 
Dison, Eser, Disan®°. The sones of Lo-39 
than weren Horry, Huma’; sotheli the 
sistir of Lothan was Thanna. The sones4o 
of Sobal weren Alian, and Manaath, and 
Ebal, and Sephi, and Onam. The sones of 
Sebeon weren Ana, and Anna. The4sone of 
Ana was Dison. The sones of Dison weren 41 
Amaram, and Hesabam, and Lecram, and 
Caram. The sones of Eser weren Balaam, 42 
and Jaban, and Jesan. The sones of Di- 
san weren Hus and Aram. These ben43 
the kyngis that regneden in the lond of 
Edom, bifor that a kyng was on the sones 
of Israel. Bale, the sone of Beor; and the 
name of his citee was Danaba. Sotheli® 44 
Bale was deed; and Jobab, sone” of Zare 
of Basra, regnyde for hym. And whanne 4s 
Jobab was deed, Husam of the lond of 
Themayns regnede for hym. And Hu-46 
sam diede; and Adad, sone* of Badad, 
that smoot Madian in the lond of Moab, 
regnyde’ for hym; aud the name of the 
citee of ‘hym, that is, of? Adad, was 
Abyud. And whanne Adad was deed, 47 
Semela of Maserecha, regnede for hym. 
But also Semela was deed, and Saul of 4s 
Robooth’, which is set bisidis the? ryuer, 


¢Sen sp. disdeed 4. & regned and a, 
fand Suez. gandis, Andis. $iAndis. JjandEtheic. kOm.s. !gaats. M™and 
Amalech 1s. ‘and Masais. Oand Disanis. Pand Humais. 4Andthes. * And whanne ts. 


w the sone 1s. x the sone 1s. 


booths. Pats. 


yand regnede s. 


Z2QOm.1s. the citee Robooth 1. the citee of Ro- 


I. gi—Il. 15. 


Methetabel, dou3ter of Mathred, the dou3- 
51 ter of Mesaab. Adad forsothe deed, duykis 


for the kyngis in Edom begunne to ben ;- 


duyk Thanna, duyk- Alia, duyk Jetheth, 
s2duyk Oolibama, duyk Ela, duyk Philion, 
ssduyk Cenez, duyk Theman, duyk Mab- 
stsar, duyk Magdyel, duyk Yran. Thes 
the duykis of Edom. ~ 


CAP. II. 


1 The sones forsothe of Yrael; Ruben, 
Leuy, Semeon, Juda, Isachar, and Zabu- 
zlon, Dan, and‘ Joseph, Beniamyn, Nep- 
3talym, Gad, Aser. The sones of Juda; 
Her, Onam, Sela; thes thre ben born to 
hym of Sue, the dou3tir of § Chananytidis. 
Forsothe Her was the first goten of Juda, 
euyl before the Lord, and he slew; hym. 
4 Thamar forsothe his dou3tir in lawe bare 
to hym Phares and Saram; alle thann 
sthe sonys of Juda, fyue. The sonys for- 
sothe of Phares; Esrom and Thamul. 
¢The sonys forsothe of Zare; Zamry, and 
Ethan, and Eman, and Calchol, and Dar- 
7dam; togydre fyue. The sones of Zamri; 
Achar, that distourblide Yrael, and syn- 
snede in the theft of cursedhode. The 
gsones of Ethan; Azarias. The sonys for- 
sothe of Esrom, that ben born to hym; 
Jeramahel, and Aram, and Chaluby. 
10 Forsothe Aram gat Amynadab. Amyna- 
dab forsothe. gat Naason, prince of the 
11sones of Juda. Naason forsotlie gat Sal- 
12mon; of whom is born Booz. Booz for- 
sothe gat Obeth; the whiche and he gat 
i3Ysay. Ysay forsothe gat the first goten, 
Heliab; the secound, Amynadab; thethrid, 
is Samaa; the ferthe, Nathaneel; the fyft, Sa- 
isday; the sixt, Asom; the seuenth, Dauid ; 


f Om. £. 


© the dou3ter 13. 4 Andis.  ¢ and duyk us. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


ee and Beniamyn s. 


319 


regnyde for hym. Also whanne Saul was 49 
deed, Balanam, the sone of Achabor, regn- 
yde for him. But also he was deed, and 50 
Adad, the name of whos citee was Phou, 
regnede for hym; and his wijf was clepid 
Methesael, the dou3ter of Mathred, dou3- 
ter® of Mezaab. Forsothe’ whanne Adad 51 
was deed, dukis bigunnen to be in Edom 
for kyngis; duyk Thanna, duyk Alia, 
duyk Jetheth, duyk Olibama, duyk Ela, 52 
duyk Phynon, duik Ceneth, duyk Theman, 53 
duyk Mabsar, duyk Magdiel, duyk® Iram. 51 
These weren the duykis of Edom. 


C AP. He 


Forsothe the sones of Israel weren Ru-1 
ben, Symeon, Leuy, Juda, Isachar, and 
Zabulon, Dan, Joseph, Beniamyn®*, Nep- 2° 
talym, Gad, Aser’. The sones of Juda; 
weren Her, Onam, Sela®; these thre weren 
borun to hym of Sue, a® dou3ter of Ca- 
naan. Sotheli! Her, the first gendrid* 
sone of Juda, was yuel bifor the Lord, 
and he! killide hym. Forsothe™ Thamar, 4 
wijf" of the sone of Judas, childide to 
hym® Phares,-and Zaram; therfor? alle 
the sones of Judas weren fyne. Sotheli4s 
the sones of Phares wesen Esrom, and 
Chamul. And the sones of Zare weren 6 
Zamry, and Ethen, and Eman, and Cal- 
chab, and Dardan; fyue togidere. The? 
sone of Charmy was Achar, that distur- 
blide Israel, and synnede in the?4 theft of 
thing halewid to the Lord. The sone of8 
Ethan was Azarie. Sotheli™ the sones of? 
Esrom, that weren borun to hym, weren 
Jeramael, and Aram, and Calubi. For-10 
sothes Aram gendrydet Amynadab. So- 
thelit Amynadab gendride’ Naason, the” 
prince of the sones of Juda. And Naason it 
gendride* Salmon; of whichy Salmon? Booz 
was borun. Sotheli? Booz geudride O-12 
beth; which hym silf gendride? Ysay. 
Forsothe® Ysai gendride* the® firste gen-13 


& of Onan 4. Om. zB. 


fand Aser is. & and Selats. 


hthe rs, i Andis. k goten1. 1 the Lord is. ™ Andis. ® the wijfis. © Judasis. Pandis. 4 And 1. 


r And 1s. 
a And rs. 


8 And 1s. 
b gaat I. 


4q Om. s. 
z Om. 1s. 


t gaat 1. 
c And ts. 


u And 1s. 


d gaat 1. 


Voaati. W Om. is. * gaati1. Y whom is. 


€ his 1s. 


320 


16 whos systers weren Saruya and Abigail. 
The sones of Saruye; Abisay, Joab, and 
17 Asael; thre. Abigail forsothe gat Amasa, 
iswhos fadir was Jether Ysmaelyte. Ca- 
leph forsothe, the sone of Esrom, toke a 
wijf, Azuba by name, of whom he gat 
Jereoth; there weren forsothe sonys of 
19 hym, Jesar, and Sobab, and Ardon. And 
whanne Azuba was deed, he toke a wijf 
of Caleph, Effrata, the whiche bare to 
2ohym Hur. Forsothe Hur gat Hury; 
21Hury gat Beselael. Aftir thes thingis 
Esrom wente in to the dou3tir of Machir, 
the fadir of Galaad, and he toke hire, 
whann sche was of sexty 3eer ; the whiche 
22bare to hym Segub. Bot and Segub gat 
Jair, and weeldide foure and twenty 
23cytees in the lond of Galaad; and he 
toke Jessur, and Arym, the bour3 tounnes 
of Jair, and Canath, and the lytyl townes 
of it, of seuenty cytees. Alle thes the 
21sonys of Machir, fadir of Galaad. Whann 
forsothe Esrom was deed, Caleph wente 
in to Effrata. Esrom forsothe hade a 
wijf Abia, the whiche bare to hym As- 
25sur, fadir of Thecue. Ther ben born 
forsothe sonys of Jezrameel, the first 
goten of Esrom; Ram his first goten, 
and Hyma, and Aran, and Ason, and 
26 Achia. Forsothe Jezramel weddide an- 
other wijf, Athara by name, the whiche 
27 was the modir of Onain. Bot and of 
Onam, the sone of Ram, the first goten 
of Jezramael, weren Molios, and Lamyn, 
2zand Achas. Onam forsothe gat sones, 
Semei, and Juda. The sones forsothe of 
29Semei; Nadal, and Abiser ; name forsothe 
- of the wijf of Abiser, Abigail, that bare 
soto hym Haaobban, and Molid. The 
sonys forsothe of Nadab weren Saled, and 
Apfaym. Forsothe Saled dy3ed with oute 
sifre childre. The sone! forsothe of Ap- 
phaym, Jesi; the whiche Jesii gat Sesan. 


h the u. 


h Andis. 1 And is. 
4 hir to wiff 1s. 
x the fadiris. y And 1s. 
dgotent. ¢ And is. 


fQm.1s. & and the 1s. 
© gaat i. P the fadir 15. 
W the which 1. 


© and thanne 1. f gaat 1. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


isonys FH. 


k the sone 1s. 
T gaat 1. 

2 goten 1. 
& and Is. 


II, 16—31. 


dridef sone, Elyab, the secounde, Amyna- 
dab; the thridde, Samaa; the fourthe, 14 
Nathanael; the fyuethe, Sadai; the sixte, 15 
Asom; the® seuenthe, Dauyd; whose sis-16 
tris weren Saruya, and Abigail. The sones 
of Saruye weren thre, Abisai, Joab, and 
Asahel. Forsothe' Abigail childide Ama-17 
sa, whos fadir was Gether Hismaelite. 
Sothelii Caleph, sone’ of Esrom, took ais 
wijf, Azuba bi name, of whom he gen- 
dride! Jerioth; and hise sones weren Je- 
sar, and Sobab, and Ardon. And whanne is 
Azuba was deed, Caleph took a wijf Ef- 
frata, whiche™ childide Hur to hym. For-20 


“sothe® Hur gendride? Hury; Hury gen- 


dride® Beseleel. After these thingis Esrom 21 

entride to the dou3tir of Machir, fadir? of 

Galaadf, and he took hir?, whanne he was_ + of Gelaad; 
ceed that is, lord of 

of sixti 3eer; and sche childide Segub to — Galaad. c. 

hym. But also Segub gendride™ Jair; and 22 

he hadde in possessioun thre and twenti 

citees in® the lond of Galaad; and he took 23 

Gessur, and Aran, the citees of Jair, and 

Chanath, and the townes therof of t seuenti 

citees. Alle these weren the sones of Ma- 

chir, fadir" of Galaad. Sotheli’ whanne21 


Esrom was deed, Caleph entride{ in to + entride; as 


oe : ir, Effrata; bi 

Effrata. And Esrom hadde a wijf Abia, Srither cane 
. whw Vas : Ore it is Bethleem. 

which” childide to hym Assir, fadir* of 7S (emcees 


Thecue. ForsotheY sones weren borun of 25 
Jezrameel, the firste gendrid* of Esrom ; 
Ram*, the first gendrid® of hym, and¢ 
Aran, and Ason, and Achia. Also .Jez-26 
rameel weddide anothir wijf, Athara bi 
name, that was the modir of Onam. But27 
and the sones of Ram, the firste gendrid? 
of Jezrameel, weren Mohas,,and Jamyn, 
and Achaz. Forsothe’ Onam gendridefes 
sones, Semey, and Juda. Sotheli® the sones 
of Semei weren Nadab, and Abisur; for- 29 
sothe® the name of the wijf of Abisur was 
Abigail, that! childide to hym Haaobban, 
and Molid. SotheliJ the sones of Nadab 30 


j Om. c pr. m. 


lgaat1. ™the whiche 1. ® And ts. 
tOm.ckm. the fadiris. VY And 1s. 
a Ram was is. § goten sone 1. gendrid sone s. 
handis. iandthats. jAnd1s. 


S of 1. 


II. 32—54. 


32 bot Sesan gat Oholi. The sones forsothe 
of Jada, brother of Semei; Jetler and 
Jonathan; bot Jether died without fre 

s3childre; bot Jonatha gat Phales, and 
Cya. Thes ben the sones of Jezramael. 

34 Cesan forsothe hadde no sones, bot dou3- 
ters, and Egipcian seruaunt, Gera by 

35name; and he 3aue to hym his dou3ter 
wijf, the whiche bare to hym Ethei. 

36 Ethei forsothe gat Nathan, and Nathan 

37gat Zadab. Zadab forsothe gat Ophial, 

3sand Ophial gat Obed. Obed gat Hieu, 

39 Hieu gat Azariam, Azarias gat Helles, 

40 Helles gat Elasa, Elasa gat Sesamoi, 

41Sesamoi gat Sellum, Sellum gat Jecho- 

42mya, Jechomya gat Elisama. The sones 
forsothe of Caleph, brother of Jeramael ; 
Mosa his first goten; he is the fadir of 
3iph; and the sonys of Meresa, fadir of 
43Ebron. Forsothe the sonys of Ebron ; 
Chore, and Raphu, Recem, and Samma. 
44Samma forsothe gat Raam, fadir of Jere- 
45haham ; and Recem gat Semei. The sone 
of Semei, Maon ; and Maon, the fadir of 
4¢ Bethsur. Epha forsothe, the secoundarie 
wijf of Caleb, bare Arram, and Musa, 
and Theser; bot Arram gat Jezen. 

47 The sonis of Jadai; Regon, and Jethan, 
and Zesun, and Phales, and Epha, and 

asSaaph. The secoundarie wijf of Caleb, 

49 Maacha, bare Zaber, and Therana. For- 
sothe Saaph, the fadir of Madmenas, gat 
Sue, the fadir of Magbena, and the fadir 
of Gabaa; the dou3ter forsothe of Ca- 

soleph was Axa, hes weren the sones of 
Caleb. The sones of Hur, first goten of 
Effrata ; Sobal,the fadir of Cariathiarym ; 

51 Salma, the fadir of Bethleem ; Ariph, the 

sefadir of Bethgader. Forsothe ther weren 
sonys of Sobal, fadir of Cariathiarym, the 
whiche deuydiden the half of the rest- 

53 yngis; and of the kynrede of Cariathia- 
rym, Jethrei, and Afutei, and Samathei, 
and Macerathei. Of thes wenten out 

54 9araitis and Eschaolitis. The sones of 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


321 


weren Saled and Apphaym ; forsothe Sa- 
led diede without children. Sotheli! thes: 
sone of Apphaym was Jesi, which™ Jesi 
gendride" Sesan; sotheli° Sesan gendride? 
Oholi. Forsothe? the sones of Jada, bro- 32 
ther™ of Semei, weren Jether and Jona- 
than; but Jether diede with ont sones; 
treulis Jonathan gendridet Phalech, and 33 
Ziza. These ben" the sones of Jerameel. 
ForsotheY Sesan hadde not sones, but34 
dou3tris, and a seruaunt of Egipt, Jeraa bi 
name; and he 3af his dou3ter to wijf to3s 
Jeraa, whiche” childide Ethei to hym. 
Forsothe* Ethei gendrideY Nathan, and 36 
Nathan gendride* Zadab. Also Zadab37 
gendride* Ophial, and Ophial gendride” 
Obed. Obed gendride” Yen, Yeu gendride* 38 
Azarie, Azarie gendride* Helles, Helles39 
gendride? Elasa, Elasa gendride” Sesa-40 
moy, Sesamoy* gendride® Sellum, Sellum 41 
gendride>’ Jecamya, Jecamia gendride> 
Elisama. Forsothe® the sones of Caleph, 42 
brothir? of Jerameel, ween Mosa, the 
firste gendrid*® sone of hym; thilke is the 
fadir of Ziph; and® the sones of Maresa, 
the fadir of Hebron. Certis the sones of 13 
Ebron weren Chore, and Raphu, Recem, 
and Samma. Forsothef Samma gendride® 44 
Raam, the fadir of Jerechaam; and Recem 
gendride? Semei. The sone of Semei was 4s 
Maon; and Maon zas the fadir® of Beth- 
sur. Sotheli' Epha, the secundarie wijf 46 
of Caleph, childide Aram, and Musa, and 
Theser; forsothe* Aram gendride! Jezen. 
The sones of Jadai werer™ Regon, and 47 
Jethon, and Zesum, Phalez", and Epha, 
and Saaph. Matha, the secoundarie wijf 4s 
of Caleph, childide Zaber, and Tharana. 
Forsothe® Saaph, the fadir of Madmenas, 49 
gendride? Sue, the fadir of Maghbena, and 
the fader of Gabaa; sotheli the dou3ter of 
Caleph was Axa. These weren the sones 50 
of Caleph. The sones of Hur, the firste 
gendrid® sone of Effrata, weren Sobal, the 
fader of Cariathiarim; Salma, the fader 5; 


kandis. !And1s. ™the whichr. "gaat 1. © certis ncpEFGIKLMNoPqnsuwxb. Pgaat31. 4And 1s. 
‘the brother1s. Sandis. tgaati. %werenis. V Andis. Wthewhicher. *Andis. Y gaat 1. 
2 gaati. ® And Sesamoy 1. » gaat1. ¢ Andis. ¢the brothir 1s. © bigoten1. © Om.s. f And is. 
Sgaat1. bsoner iAndis. kandis. Jgaat1. ™Om.c. and Phalezpevpsw. © Andis. 
Pgaati. GQandis. ¥ goten 1. 

VOL. II. Tt 


322 


Salma, ‘fadir of* Bethlem, and Netho- 
phatite, crownys of the hous of Joab, 

ssand half of the restyng of Saray. The 
kynredis forsothe of scribis, dwellynge in 
Jabes, syngynge, and a3ein sounnynge, 
and in tabernaclis dwellynge togider. 
Thes ben Cynei, the whiche camen of the 
fernour of the hous of the fadir of 
Rechab. 


CAP. III. 


1 Dauith forsothe hadde thes sonis, the 
whiche ben born to hym in Ebron; the 
first goten, Amon, of Achynoen Jezraelite ; 
the seconde, Danyel, of Abigail Carmel- 

zite; the thrid, Absalon, the sone of 
Maacha, dou3ter! of™ Tholomei, kyng of 
Jessur; the ferth, Adonye, the sone of 

3 Agith ; the fyfthe, Saphathie, of Abithal; 

4the sixt, Jethraan, of Egla his wijf. Sixe 
thann ben born to hym in Ebron, where 
he regnede seuen 3eer and sixe inonethis ; 
forsothe thre and thritty 3ere he regned 

sin Jerusalem. Bot in Jerusalem ben 
born to hym sonys, Sama, and Sobab, and 
Nathan, and Salomon, foure, of Bersabee, 
6dou3tir of Amyhel; Jabaar forsothe, and 
7Elizama, and Elipheloch, and Noge, and 

8 Napheth, and Japhee, also and Elizama, 

gand Eliade, and Eliphalech, nyne. Alle 
thes sonys of Dauith, with oute sonis of 
the secoundarie wijfis; and thei hadden 

ina syster, Thamar. The sone forsothe of 
Salomon, Roboam, whos sone Abia gat 
Asa; of this forsothe is born Josaphat, 
iithe fadir of Joram; the whiche Joram 
gat Ochosie, of whome is born Joas. 


k Om, £ prom. 


s Andis, * the fader 1s. 
2 hizt Danyelis. 4 born of 18. 
¢ and ts. f that ben, Sama 1. that is, Sama s. 
secoundarie cm. his secoundarie 1s. —_'! gaat 1, 


u the fadir 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


1 the dou3tir 3. 


¥Om,1s. Wthe restyng 1s. * goten1. 

b the dou3tir ts. 
8 Dauid Is. 

m the which 1. 


II. §5.——HI. 11. 


of Bethleem; Ariph, the fader of Beth- 
gader. Sotheli* the sones of Sobal, fader’ 52 
of Cariatiarim, that sij the myddil of 
restingis, and was of the kynrede of Cary-53 
athiaryin, weren Jethrey, and Aphutei, and 
Samathei, and Maserathei. Of these weren 
borun Sarytis, and Eschaolitis. The sones 54 
of Salma, fadir® of Bethieem, and of Ne- 
tophati, weven the corouns of the hows of 
Joab, and the” half of restyng” of Sarai. 
And the kynredis of scryuens, dwellynge 5s 


in Jabes, syngynge, and sownynge, and 
+ heete ; that 


dwellynge in tabernaclis. These ben Cy- js of the fer- 
neis, that camen of the heetet of the fadir vane es 
of the hows of Rechab. Lire here. c. 


CAP. Il. 


Forsothe Dauid hadde these sones, that 1 
weren borun to hym in Ebron; the firste 
gendrid* sone’, Amon, of Achynoem of 
Jezrael; the secounde sone, Danyel’, of* 
Abigail of Carmele; the thridde, Absolon, 2 
the sone of Maacha, dou3ter® of Tolomei, 
kyng of Gessuri; the fourthe, Adonye, 
sone® of Agith; the fyuethe, Saphacie, of 
Abithal ; the sixte, Jethraan, of°¢ Egla his 
wijf. Therfor sixe sones weren borun to4 
hym* in Ebron, where he regnede seuene 
3eer and sixe monethis; sotheli® he regnyde 
thre and thritti 3eer in Jernsalem. For-5 
sothe foure sones{, Sama‘, and Sobab, and 
Nathan, and Salomon, weren borun of 
Bersabee, the dou3ter of Amyhel, to hym$ one ie : 
in Jerusalem; also Jabaar, and Elisaina,e David bi pur- 


chas of lawe. 


and Eliphalech, and Noge, and Napheth,7 meee 
and Japhie, also and! Elisama, and Eli-s 

ade, and Eliphalech, nyne!. Alle theseo 

weren the sones of David, with out the 

sones of secoundarie* wyues; and thei 

hadden a sistir, Thamar. Sotheli the sone 10 

of Salomon was Roboam, whos sone Abia 

gendride! Asa; and Josephat, the fadir 1! 

of Joram, was borun of this Asa; which™ 


t sones ; thre 
the firste weren 
the kyndeli 


m Onn. p. 


t ¥sone of him was 1s. 
ce Dauid hadde of s. 4 Dauid 1s, 
h Om. 1s. k the 


¢ the sone 1s, 
i nyne sones 1s. 


HI, 12—IV. 5. 


12And of this the sone Amazias gat Aza- 
rie; bot Azarie, the sone of Jonathan, 
13 brou3te forth Achaz, the fadir of Ezechie; 
140f whome is born Manasses. Bot and 
Manasses gat Amon, the fadir of Josie. 
15The sonys forsothe of Josie weren, the 
first goten, Johanuan; the secound, Joa- 
chym; the thrid, Sedechie; the ferth, 
i6Sellum. Of Joachym is born Jechonyas, 
1zand Sedechie. The sonys of Jechonye, 
isweren <Asir, Salathiel, Melchiram, Fa- 
daia, Sennaser, and Jeth, Semai, Sama, 
igand Nadabia. Of Phadaia ben born 
Zorobabel, and Semei. Zorobabel gat 
Mosollam, Ananyam, and Salomyth, the 
20syster of hem; and Asabam, and Ochol, 
and Barachie, and Asadie, Josabesed, 
2ifyne. The sone forsothe of Ananye, 
Faleiar, the fadir of Jeseie, whos sone 
Raphaia. Of this forsothe the sone 
Arnan, of the whiche is born Abdia, 
22whos sone was Sechenya. The sone of 
Sechenye, Semeia, whos sonys, Archus, 
and Jegal, and Baaria, and Naaria, and 
23Saphath; sixe in noumbre. The sonys 
of Naarie; Elioenai, and Ezechiaz, and 
24 Zicram, thre. Sonys of Elioenai; Odyna, 
and Eliazub, and Pheleia, and Acub, 
and Johannan, and Dalaia, and Anani, 
seuen. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Sones of Juda; Phares, and Esrom, and 
2Carmy, and Hur, and Sobal. Reya for- 
sothe, the sone of Sobal, gat Jeth; of 
whom ben born Achymay, and Laed. 
%Thes the kynredis of Sarathy. This 
forsothe the lynage of Ethan; Jesrael, 
Jezema, and Jedeboz; name forsothe of 
4the syster of hem Azalelfuny. Funyel 
forsothe the fadir of Jedor, and Ezer, 
the fadir of Osa; thes ben the sones of 
Hur, first goten of Effrata, the fadir of 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


323 


Joram gendride" Ocozie, of whom™ Joas 
was borun®. And Amasie, the sone of !2 
this Joas, gendride? Azarie; sothelid Aza- 
rie, the’ sone of Joathan, gendride* Achaz, 13 
the fadir of Ezechie ; of whom Manasses 
was borun. But also Manasses gendride* 14 
Amon, the fadir of Josias. Forsothet the is 
sones of Josias weren", the firste gendrid’ 
sone, Johannan™; the secounde,Joachym”"; 
the thridde, Sedechie ; the* fourthe, Sellum. 
Of Joachym was borunY Jechonye, and 16 
Sedechie. ‘The sones of Jechonye weren 1; 
Asir, Salatiel, Melchiram, Phadaie, Sen- 1s 
naser, and Jech, Semma, Sama, and Na- 
dabia. Of Phadaie weren borun Zorobabel, ty 
and Semey. Zorobabel gendryde? Mosolla, 
Ananye, and Salomyth, the sister of hem; 
and Asaba, and Ochol, and Barachie, and 20 
Asadaie, and Josabesed, fyue*. .Forsothe® 21 
the sone of Ananye was Falcias, the fadir 
of Jeseie, whose sone was Raphaie. And 
the sone of him was Arnan, of whom was 
borun Abdia, whos sone was Sechema. 
The sone of Sechema was Semeia, whose 22 
sones weren Archus, and Gegal, and Baa- 
ria, and Naaria, and Saphat, and Sela; 
sixee in noumbre. The sones of Naaria23 
weren thre, Helionai, and Ezechie, and 
Zichram. The sones of Helionai eweren 24 
seuene, Odyna, and Eliasub, and Pheleia, 
and Aceub, and Johannan, and Dalaia, 
and Anani. 
CAP. IV. 

The sones of Juda weren Phares, andi 
Ksrom, and Carmy, and Hur, and Sobal. 
Forsothe! Reaia, the sone of Sobal, gen-2 
dride® Geth ; of whom weren borun Achy- 
mai, and Laed. These weren the kynredis 
of Sarathi. And this is the generacioun 3 
of Ethan; Jesrael, Jezema, and! Jedebos ; 
and the name of the sistir of hem was 
Asaclphumy. Sothelif Phunyel was the 4 
fadirt of Gedor, and Ezer was the fadir of  ¢ fedir: that 


is, fadir of sich 
Osa; these ben the sones of Hur, the firste town, and so 


it is expownyd 


5Bethleem. Of Asur forsothe, fader of  gendrid® sone of Effrata, the fadir of Beth- of Osa. sire 
‘ here. ¢. 
a gaat 1. 29 which s. © borun or gofen 1. born or gendrides. P gaat1. 4 forsothe BCDEFGKLNOPQ 
Rnuw.and1s. 'Om.p. Sgaatr. tAndis,  *weren éheseis. Ygoten1. W was Johannan ts. 
ww was Joachim s. *andther. Y goten1. gendrids. 7% gaati. 4fyue sonests. Andis. ¢ sixe 
sonests. (Andis. © gaati. fOm.c. ff Andis, 8. goten 1. 


Tt? 


324 


Techue, weren two wijues, Hala, and 
6 Naara; forsothe Naara bare to hym 
Chosam, and Epher, and Theman, and 
Aschari; thes ben the sonys of Naara. 
7Forsothe the sones of Hala; Cereth, 
8Ysaar, and Ethan. Chus forsothe gat 
Anob, and Sobaba, and the cognaciouns 
90f Arab, sone of Arym. Jabes forsothe 
was noble beforn alle his" bretheren; 
and his modir clepide the name of hym 
Jabes, seyinge, For I bare hym in so- 
lorow. Forsothe Jabes inwardly clepyde 
the God of Yrael, seyinge, 3if blessynge 
thou schalt blessen to me, and largen 
my termys, and thin hond were with me, 
and makist me not to® ben oppressed of 
malice. And the Lord 3aue to hym that 
ithe preyed. Caleph forsothe, brother of 
Sua, gat Machir, that was the fadir of 
12 Eston; forsothe Eston gat Bechus, Ra- 
pha, aud Phese, and Thena, the fadir of 
the cyte of Naas. Thes ben the men of 
13Recha. The sonys forsothe of Cenes; 
Othonyel, and Saraia. Forsothe the 
Msonys of Othonyel; Othiath, and Mao- 
nathi, the whiche gat Ofra. Saraias for- 
sothe gat Joab, fadir of the valey of 
craftis men; ther forsothe weren craftise 
ismen. Sonys forsothe of Caleph, sone of 
Jephone; Hyn, and Hela, and Nahem. 
16The sonys forsothe of Hela; Jalael, and 
Cenes. The sonys forsothe of Jalael; 
Ceph, and Cipha, and Thiria, and Asra- 
ijyhech. And the sonys of Esra; Jether, 
and Merid, and Epher, and Jason; and 
he gat Mariam, and Semoi, and Jesba, 
isthe fadir of Eschamo. The wijf forsothe 
of hym, Judaia, gat Jared, fadir of Jedor ; 
and Eber, fadir of Socho; and Hieutiel, 
fader of Zanon. These forsothe the sonys 
of Bethie, dou3tir of Pharao, the whiche 
19 Mered toke. And the sonys of the wijf 
of Odoye, syster of Nathan, fadir of 


n Om, ABCFII. 


bh Andis. iandis. And 1s. 
ruwxb. Andis. PAndis, 4 ynly 1. 
Yandis. Wgaat1, * Andis. 
© gaatr. f And is. 


1 And 1s. 
y And 1s. 


‘J. PARALIPOMENON. 


m gaat I. 
a9 thou, Lord s. 
2 gaat 1. 


IV. 6—19. 


leem. Sotheli® Assur, the fadir of Thecue, » 
hadde twei wyues, Haala, and Naara; for-6 
sothe! Naara childide to hym Oozam, and 
Epher, and Theman, and Aschari; these 
ben the sones of Naara. Forsothe* the; 
sones of Haala weren Sereth, Isaar, and 
Ethan. Forsothe! Chus gendride™ Anob, g 
and Sobala, and the kynredis of Arab, 
sone" of Arym. Forsothe® Jabes was noble g 
byfor alle hise britheren; and his modir 
clepide his name Jabes, and seide, For Y 
childide hym in sorewe. Sotheli? Jabes jo 
clepide inwardli1 God of Israel, and seide, 
Yf thou%l blessynge schal™ blesse me, and 
schalt alarge’ my termes, and if thin hond 
schal be with me, and thou schalt make 
me to be not oppressid of malice. And 
God 3af to hym that thing, that he preiede. 
Forsothe! Caleph, the brother of Sua, gen-11 
dride" Machir, that was the fadir of 
Eston; sothelivY Eston gendride’ Beth, 12 
Rapha, and Phese, and Thena, the fadir of 
the citee Naas. These ben the sones of 
Recha. Forsothe* the sones of Cenez 13 
weren Othonyel, and Saraia. SotheliY the 14 
sones of Othonyel weren Athiath, and Mao- 
naththa, that gendride? Opham.  For- 
sothe*® Saraia gendride” Joab, the fadir of 
the valey of crafti men; for there weren 
crafti men. Sotheli® the sones of Caleph, is 
sone! of Jephone, weren Hyn, and Helam, 
and Nahemi. And the sones of Helam 
weren Cenez. Also the sones of Jaleel is 
weren Zeph, and Zipha, Tiria, and Asrael. 
And the sones of Esra weren Chether, and 17 
Merid, and Epher, and Jalon; and he 
gendride® Marie, and Semmai, and Jesba, 
the fadir of Eschamo. Also Judaia, hysis 
wijf, childide Jared, the fadir of Gedor ; 
and Heber, the fadir of Zocho f; and 


+ the fadir of 
oops . -¢  Zocho; thatis 
Hieutihel, the fadir of Janon. Sotheli the fadir of 
these weren the sones of Bethie, the dou3ter sich 4 toun, 
and so of Ja- 


of Pharao, whom Mered took fo wif. And 19 non ag 
ere, Cy 


° Om. 4. 


n the sone 1. 
© schalt 1s. 
a And Is, 


© Sotheli ncDEFGKLMNOPQ 
Senlarge rs, tAndis, “ gaat 1. 
beaatr. ¢ Andis. 4 the sone ts. 


Seila; Garmy, and Escamo, that was of, 


20 Machathi. The sonys forsothe of Symeon, 
Amon, and Rena; the sone of Aman, 
Chilon ; and the sonys of Jeci, Zoeth, and 

21 Benzoeth. The sonys of Cela, sone of 
Juda; Her, fadir of Lecha, and Laada, 
fadir of Marasa; and the kynredis of the 
hous of men wirchynge bijs in the hous 

2of oth; and the whiche maad the sonne 
to stonden, and men of lesynge, and 
syker, and goynge, the whiche weren 
princis in Moab, and the whiche ben 
turned a3eyu in Leem; thes forsothe ben 

23the olde wordis. Thes ben potters dwell- 
ynge in plauntyngis, and in ecratchis, 
anentis kyngis in their werkis; and thei 

24 dwelliden there. The sonys of Symeon ; 
Namyel, and Jamyn, Jarib, Zara, Saul. 

25Sellum, the sone of hym; Mapsan, the 
sone of hym; and? Masma, the sone 

26of hym. The sonys of Masma; Accuel, 
the sone of bym; and Zaccur, the sone of 
27hym; and Semei, the sone of hym. The 
sonys of Semei sixtene, and dou3tris sixe ; 
the bretheren forsothe of hym hadden 
not many sonys, and al the kynrede 
my3te not maken even to the soninme of 
28the sonys of Juda. Forsothe thei dwel- 
liden in Bethsabe, and Molada, and 
29 Asersual, and in Balaa, and in Asometh, 
3zoand in Tholoth, and in Bathuel, and 
31Orma, and in Sichelech, and in Beth, 
and Mathaboth, and in Archasusyn, and 
in Bethberai, and in Saarym; thes the 
secytees of hem, vnto kyng Dauid. The 
touns forsothe of hem; Ethan, and Aen, 
and Remmon, and Techen, and Azan; 
asfyue cytees. And alle the lityll touns 
of hem by enuyroun of thes cytees, vnto 
Baal; this is the dwellynge of hem, and 

34 the delynge of setis. Mosobali forsothe, 
and Jenyleth, and Josa, the sone of Ama- 

35sie, and Joel, and Jeu, the sone of Jo- 
sabie, and the sonys of Saraie, the sone" 


P Om. CEFH. 


i and 1s. 
n And Is. 


& the sister 1s. 4 the sone 1s. 
mQOm. a. ™™ gsumme or noumbre s. 
F citees weren hers 18. % vuto ts. to xX. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


q citees aR. 


J was Amuel s. 


t the tyme of Baal ts. 


325 


the sones of the wijf of Odoie, sister? of 
Nathan, fadir of Ceila, weren Garmy, and 
Escamo, that was of Machati. Also the 20 
sones of Symeon weren Amon and Rena; 
the sone of Anam was Chilon; and the 
sones of Gesi weren Zoeth, and Benzoeth. 
The sones of Cela, sone" of Juda, weren2i 
Her, the fadir of Lecha, and Laada, the 
fadir of Marasa ; and these weren the kyn- 
redis of the hows of men worchyuge biys 
in the hows of an ooth, and which made 22 
the sunne to stonde, and the men of 
leesyng, sikir, and goynge, that weren 
princes in Moab, and that turneden ajen 
in to Bethleem; forsothe! these ben elde 
wordis. hese ben potteris dwellinge in 23 
plauntyngis, and in heggis, anentis kyngis 
in her werkis; and thei dwelliden there. 
The sones of Symeon weren Namyhel, and 24 
Jamyn, Jarib, Zara, Saul. Sellum was his 25 
sone; Mapsan was his sone; Masma was 
his sone. The sones of Masma; Amuels, 26 
his sone ; and Zaccur, his sone; Semey*, his 
sone. The sones of Semey weren sixtene, 27 
and sixe dou3tris; sotheli** hise britheren 
hadden not many sones, and al the kyn- 
rede my3te not be enene! to the™ summe™™" 
of the sones of Juda. Forsothe" thei 2 
dwelliden in Bersabee, and in Molada, and 
in Asarsual, and in Balaa, and im Aason,29 
and in Tholat, and in Bathwel, and in30 
Horma, and in Sicheloch, and in Betmar-s: 
chaboth, and in Archasusym, and in Beth- 
baray, and in Saarym; these weren the 
citees of hem, ‘til to® the? kyng Danid. 
Also the townes of hem weren Ethan, and 32 
Aen, aud Remmon, and Techen, and 
Asan; fyue citees. And alle the vilagis 3: 
of hem bi the’ cumpas of these citees’, ‘til 
to’ Baalt; this is the dwellyug of hem, 
and" the departyng of seetis’. Also Mo-34 
sobaly, and Jemlech, and Josa, the sone 
of Amasie, and Johel, and Jehu, the sones; 
of Josabie, and the sones of Saraie, the 


r sonys H. 


1 eeuened 1s. 


k and Semey s. kk and ts. 
q Om. I 


© vnto 1. vnto the time of ss P Om, 18. 
uings. VY her citees 1s. 


326 


360f Aziel, and Elioneay, and Jamcoba, 
aud Sycua, and Azaia, and Adiel, and 

37 Isemeel, and Banaya; Sisa forsothe, the 
sone of Cephei, the sone of Allon, sone 
of Adaia, sone of Semri, sone of Samaia. 

38 Thes ben the princis nempnyd in their 
kynredis, and in the hous of ther affyny- 

39 tese thei ben multiplied hugely. And thei 
wenten, that thei camen in to Gador, vnto 
the este of the valey, and for to sechen 

40 lesewes to their scheep. And thei founden 
most plenteuows leswes, and ful good, 
and most large lond, and quyete, and 
bryngynge fruyt, in the whiche beforn 
hadden dwellid of’ the lynage of Cam. 

41 Thes than camen, the whiche beforn we 
han diseryued name by name, in the dais 
of Ezechie, kyng of Juda; and thei 
smyten the tabernaclis of hem, and the 
dwellers that ben founden there; and thei 
dyden hem aweye vnto the present day ; 
and thei dwelliden for hem, for most 
plenteuows leswes weren founden there. 

42 Of the sonys forsothe of Symeon wenten 
in to the hil of Seir fyue hundreth men, 
hauynge princis Phalsie, and Nariam, 
and Raphayam, and Osiel, the sonys of 

43 Jesy; and thei smyten the relikis, that 
mi;ten not ascapyn of Amalachytes ; and 
thei dwelliden for hem there vnto this 
day. 

CAP. V. 

1 The sonys forsothe of Ruben, the first 
goten of Yrael; he forsothe was his first 
goten, bot for he hadde defoulid the bed 
of his fadir, the ri3tis of his first getynge 
ben 3euen to the sonys of Joseph, the 
sone of Yrael; and he is not holden in to 

2the first goten. Forsothe Judas, that was 
the strengist amonge his bretheren, of 
his stok princis ben buriounned; the 
ri3tis of the first getyng forsothe ben 

3acountyde to Joseph. ‘Than the sonys 


PARALIPOMENON. 


IV. 36—V. 3. 


sones of Asiel, and Helioneai, and Jacoba, 36 
and Sueua, and Asaia, aud Adihel, and 
Hisemeel, and Banaia; and Ziza, the" sone 37 
of Sephei, the sone of Allon, sone’ of Ab- 
daia, sone’ of Semry, sone’ of Samaia. 
These ben princis” nemyd in her kyn-ss 
redis, and ben multiplied greetli in the 
hows* of her alies. And thei 3eden forth so 
to entre in to Gador, ‘til toY the eest of 
the valei, and to seke pasturis to her 
scheep. And thei fonden pasturis ful4o 
plenteuouse, and ful goode, and a ful large 
lond, and restful’, and plenteuouse, wher- 
ynne men of the generacioun of Cham 
hadden dwellid bifore. Therfor these men, 41 
whiche we diseryueden® bifore ‘bi name*, 
camen in the daies of Ezechie, kyng of 
Juda; and smytiden? the tabernaclis of 
hem, and the dwelleris that weren foundun 
there ; and thei ‘diden awei» hem ‘til in to® 
present! dai; and thei dwelliden for hem, 
for thei founden there ful plenteuouse pas- 
turis. Also fyue hundrid men of the42 
sones of Symeon 3eden in to the hil of 
Seir, and thei hadden princes Faltias, and 
Narias, and Raphaias, and Oziel, the 
sones of Jesi; and thei smytiden® the re-43 
lifs' of Amalechites, that my3ten ascape ; 
and thei dwelliden there for hem ‘til to® 
this day. 


CAR ae 


Also the sones of Ruben, the firste gen-1 
drid® sone of Israel; for he was the first 
gendrid® sone of Israel, but whanne he 
hadde defoulid the bed of his fadir, the 
dignitye of his firste gendryng' was 3ouun 
to the sones of Joseph, the sone of Israel ; 
and Ruben was not arettid in to the firste 
gendrid* sone. Forsothe Judas; that was 
the! strongeste among hise britheren, 
prynces weren gaderid of his genera- 
cioun ; forsothe the ‘ri3t of ™ firste" gen- 


s Om. 4. 


u and the s. v the sone 1s. 
meynee S. Yvnto1s. tox. ful restful c. 
» smitiden or distrueden s. smeten ELP. 
© smeten EILP. f remenauntis x. reliks b. 
k goten 1. 1Om.x. ™ Om. zx, 


w the princis crK sec. m. MS. 
a han discryued 1. haue discriued or toold s. 
bb fordiden 1, ¢vnto1. til to x. 4tbis present 1. the present s. 
€ into CELPU. vnto 1. to x. 
his firste cp pr. m.b. the firste Kx. 


x hows or meynee 1. houce or in the 
aa Om. s, 


hgoten:1. 1 bigetynge 1. 


Vv. 4-—18. 


of Ruben, the firste goten of Yrael; E- 
noch, and Fallu, Esrom, and Charmy. 
4 The sonys of Joel; Samaia, the sone of 
hym ; Gog, the sone of hym; Semei, the 
ssone of hym; Mycha, the sone of hym; 
Rema, the sone of hym; Baal, the sone 
sof hym; Bera, the sone of hym; whome 
caytijf ladde Teglat Falasar, kyng of As- 
siries ; and he was a prince in the lynage 
7of Ruben. The bretheren forsothe of 
hym, and a] the kynrede, whan thei 
weren noumbred by their meines, hadden 
’ gprincis Jeihel, and Zacharie. Forsothe 
Baala, the sone of Achaz, sone of Sama, 
sone of Johel, he dwellide in Aroer vnto 
9Nebo and Beelmeon; a3eynst the eest 
forsothe coost he dwellide, vnto the entre 
of Heremy, and the flode of Eufraten. 
Myche forsothe noumbre of bestis he 
10 weldide in the lond of Galaad. In the 
days forsothe of Saul thei fou3ten a3eynus 
Agarienis, and slewen hem; and dwell- 
iden for hem in their tabernaclis, in al 
the coost that beholdith to the este of 
11Galaad. The sonys forsothe of Gad forn 
a3eynst hem dwelliden in the lond of Ba- 
12San vnto Selcha; Joel in the heued, and 
Sapham the secounde; Janay forsothe and 
i3Sapha in Basan. And the bretheren of 
hem aftir the houses of their kynredis, 
Mychael, and Mosollam, and Sebe, and 
Jore, and Joachan, and Zie, and Heber, 
i4seuen. Thes the sones of Abiel, sone of 
Vri, sone of Jaro, sone of Galaad, sone 
of Michael, sone of Jesesi, sone of Jeddo, 
issone of Bus. The bretheren forsothe of 
the sone of Abdiel, sone of Gummy, 
ig prince of the hous in their meynes. And 
thei dwelliden in Galaad, aid in Baasan, 
and in the lity] tounes of it, in alle the 
17suburbis of Arnon, vnto the termys. Alle 
thes ben noumbred in the days of Joa- 
than, kyng of Juda, and in the days of 
1s Jeroboam, kyng of Yrael. The sonys of 
Ruben, and of Gad, and of the half lynage 
of t Manasse, men fi3ters berynge shccldis 
and swerdis, and bendynge bowe, and 


PARALIPOMENON. 


327 


dryng® was arettid to Joseph. Therfors 
the sones of Ruben, the firste gendrid? 
sone of Israel, weren Enoch, and Phallu, 
Esrom, and Charmy. The sones of Johel4 
weren’ Samaie; his sone, Gog; his sone, 
Semey ; his sone, Mycha; his sone, Rema; 5 
his sone, Baal; his sone, Bera; whom Theg-¢ 
latphalassar, kyng of Assyriens, ledde pri- 
soner; and he was prince in the lynage of 
Ruben. Sotheli hise britheren, and al the7 
kynrede, whanne thei weren noumbrid bi 
her meynees, hadden princes Jehiel, and 
Zacharie. Forsothe Bala, the sone ofs 
Achaz, sone of Sama, sone of Johel, he 
dwellide in Aroer til to Nebo and Beel- 
moon; and™ he dwellide ajens the cestg 
coost, til to the ende® of deseert, ‘and tot 
the flood Eufrates. And he hadde in pos- 
sessioun myche nonmbre of beestis in the 
lond of Galaad. Forsothe in the daies of 10 
Saul the sones of Ruben fou3ten ajens 
Agarenus, and killide hem; and dwelliden 
for hem in the tabernaclis of hem, in al 
the coost that biholdith to the eest of 
Galaad. Sotheli the sones of Gad euenel 
a3ens hem dwelliden in the lond of Basan 
til toSelca; Johel was in the bygynnyng,and 12 
Saphan eas the secounde; also Janahi and 
Saphan weren in Basan. Also her bri-13 
theren bi the housis of her kynredis, My- 
chael, and Mosollam, and Sebe, and Jore, 
and Jachan, and Zie, and Heber, senene. 
These weren the sones of Abiahel, the 14 
sone of Vry, sone of Jaro, sone of Galaad, 
sone of Mychacl, sone of Esesi, sone of 
Jeddo, sone of Buz. Also the britheren 15 
of the sone of Abdiel, sone of Gumy, was 
prince" of the hows in hise meyuees. And 1é 
thei dwelliden in Galaad, and in Basan, 
and iu the townes therof, in alle the sub- 
arbis of Arnon, til to the endis. Alle17 
these weren noumbrid in the daies of 
Joathan, kyng of Juda, and in the daies 
of Jeroboam, kyng of Israel. ‘The sonesis 
of Ruben, and of Gad, and of half the 
lynage of Manasses, weren men werriours, 
berynge scheeldis and swerdis, and beend- 


t Om. a. 


Ogetyng 1. Pgotent. 4Om.1. 


TOm. X see.m. 


tinto1n. " the prinee a. 


$ entring Rew. 


328 


tau3t to batailis, foure and fourety thou- 
sandis seuen hundreth and sixty, goynge 
19forthe to fi3t, fou3ten a3eynus Agariens. 
Ethureis forsothe, and Naphi, and Nadab, 
203euen to hem help; and Agariens ben 
taken in to the hondis of hem, and alle 
that weren with hem; for the Lord thei 


inwardly clepiden, whil thei fou3ten, and - 


he herde hem, forthi that thei hadden 
aileened* in hym. And thei token alle 
thingis that they hadden weldid, of cha- 
mels fyfty thousand, and of scheep two 
hundreth and fyfty thousand, and of 
assis two thousand, and lyues of men an 
22 hundreth thousand ; and many woundid’ 
fellen; forsothe the batayl of the Lord it 
was. Thei dwelliden for hem vnto the 
23 transmygracioun. The sonis forsothe of 
the half lynage of Manasse weldeden the 
lond, fro the coostis of Basan vnto Baal 
Hermon, and Sanyr, and the hyl of Her- 
non; a grete forsothe noumbre ther 
21was. And thes weren the pryncis of the 
hous of the kynrede of hem; Efer, and 
Jesi, and Heliel, and Esriel, and Jere- 
inye, and Odoye, and Jedehel, men most 
strong aud my3ty, and duykis nenmed in 
25 their meynes. Forsothe thei forsoken the 
God of their fadirs, and dyden fornyca- 
cioun aftir goddis of the puplis of the 
lond, the whiche the Lord toke aweye 
26beforn hem. And the Lord God of Yrael 
rered the spirit of Phul, the kyng of As- 
siries, and the spirit of Teglat Falasar, 
kyng of Assur; and translatyde Ruben, 
and Gad, and the half lynage of Manasse, 
and he brou3te hem in to Ale, aud Abor, 
and Aram, and the flode of Gosam, vnto 
ithis day. The sonys of Leuy; Jerson, 
2Caath, and Mereri. The sonis of Caath; 
3 Amram, Isaar, Ebron, and Oziel. The 
sonys of Amram; Aaron, Moyses, and 
Maria. The sonys of Aaron; Nadab, 
gand Abyu, Eliazar, and Ythamar. Elia- 
zar gat Phynees, and Phynees gat Abi- 
ssue; Abisue gat Bocci, and Bocci gat 
6Osy; Osy gat Zaraias, Zaraias gat Me- 


u bilened «. 


vinx. Y bileuyden c. 


PARALIPOMENON. 


W of persones 1. 


V. 19—VI. 6. 


ynge bouwe, and tau3t to" batels, foure 
and fourti thousynde seuene hundrid and 
sixti, and thei 3eden forth to batel, and 19 
fou3ten a3ens Agarenus. Forsothe Ethu- 
reis, and Napheis, and Nadab, 3auen help 2 
to hem; and Agarenus, and alle men that 
weren with hem, weren bitakun in to the 
hondis of Ruben, and Gad, and Manasses ; 
for thei clepiden inwardli the Lord, while 
thei fou3ten, and the Lord herde hem, for 
thei ‘hadden bileuyd’ in to him. And thei2i 
token alle thingis whiche Agarenus had- 
den in possessioun, fifti thousynde of ca- 
mels, and twei hundrid and fifty thou- 
synde of scheep, twei thousynde of assis, 
and an hundrid thousynde persoones” of 
men; for many men weren woundid and 22 
felden down; for it was the batel of the 
Lord. And thei dwelliden for Agarenus 
til to the conquest. Also the sones of the23 
half lynage of Manasses hadden in posses- 
sioun the lond, fro the endis of Basan til 
to Baal Hermon, and Sanyr, and the hil 
of Hermon; for it was a greet noumbre. 
And these weren the princes of the howse4 
of her kynrede; Epher, and Jesi, and He- 
liel, and Esryel, and Jeremye, and Odoie, 
and Jedihel, strongeste* men and my3ti, 
and nemyd duykis in her meynees. For-25 
sothe thei forsoken the God of her fadris, 
and diden fornycacioun after the goddis 
of puplis of the lond, whiche the Lord 
took awei bifor hem. And the Lord God 26 
of Israel reiside the spirit of Phul, kyng 
of Assiriens, and the spiritt of Theglat- 
phalasser, kyng of Assur; and he trans- 
latide Ruben, and Gad, and the half lynage 
of Manasses, and brou3te hem in to Ale, 
and Abor, and Aram, and in to the ryuer 
of Gozam, til to this dai. 


CAP. VI. 


The sones of Leuy weren Gerson, Caath, i 
and Merary. Tie sones of Chaath weren2 
Amram, Isaar, Ebron, and Oziel. Thes 
sones of Amram werenY Aaron, Moyses, 
and Marie. The sones of Aaron wereny 


Vv thousend ru. 


x ful stronge 1. Y Om. 1. 


t the spirit ; 
that is, wille 
to fiz3te azens 
the childryn of 
Israel. Livre 
here. c. 


VI. 7—30. 


7royoth. Forsothe Meroyoth gat Amaryas, 
sAmaryas gat Achytob, Achitob gat Sa- 
9doch, Sadoch gat Achimas, Achimas gat 
10 Azarias, Azarias gat Johannam, Johan- 
nam gat Azarias; he is Azarias, the 
prest of the kynde of Aaron, the which 
vside in the hous presthod, that Salamon 
ilbylde in Jerusalem. Forsothe Azarias 
gat Amarias, and Amarias gat Achitob, 
12 Achitob gat Sadoch, Sadoch gat Sellum, 
13S8ellum gat Elchias, Elchias gat Azari- 
lszam”, AzariasY gat Sarayam, Sarayam 
isgat Josedech. Forsothe Josedech 3ede 
out, whanne the Lord translatyde Judam 
and Jerusalem by the hondis of Nabugo- 
donosor kyng. 


CAP. VI. 


is The sonis than of Leuy ; Jersan, Caath, 
1;and Merery. And thes the namys of the 
is sonys of Jersan ; Lobeni, and Semei. The 
sonys of Caath; Amram, and Ysachar, and 
19 Ebron, and Osiel. The sonys of Merery; 
Mooli, and Musi. Thes forsothe the kyn- 
redis of Leuy aftir the meynees.of hem; 
20 Jersan ; Lobeni, the soneof hym; Jaath, the 
21 sone of hym; Sama, the sone of hym; Joath, 
the sone of hym; Addo, the sone of hym; 
Zara, the sone of hym; Jethrai, the sone 
220f hym. The sonys of Caath; Amynadab, 
the sone of hym ; Chore, the sone of hym ; 
23 Asura, the sone of hym; Elchana, the 
sone of hym; Abiasaf, the sone of hym; 
24 Aser, the sone of hym; Caath, the sone 
of hym; Vriel, the sone of hym; Osias, 
the sone of hym; Saul, the sone of hym. 
25 The sonys of Helechana; Amasay, Achy- 
2smooth, and Helchana. The sonys of Hel- 
chana; Sophai, the sone of hym; Naath, 
27 the sone of hym; Eliab, the sone of hym ; 
Heroan, the sone of hym; Elchana, the 
23sone of hym. The sonys of Samuel ; the 
29 first goten Nasen, and Abiam. The sonys 
forsothe of Mereri; Moli, the sone of 
30hym; Lobeny, the sone of hym; Semey, 
the sone of hym; Osa, the sone of hym; 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 329 


Nadab, and Abyu, Eleazar, and Ythamar. 4 
Hleazar gendride? Phynees, and Phynees 
gendride? Abisue, Abisue gendride? Bocci, 5 
and Bocci gendride’? Ozi, Ozi gendride? 6 
Zaraie, and Zaraie gendride Meraioth. 
Forsothe Meraioth gendride? Amarie, A-7 
marie gendride* Achitob, Achitob gen-s 
dride? Sadoch, Sadoch gendride*? Achy- 
maas, Achymaas gendride’ Azarie, Aza-9 
rie gendride* Johannam, Johannam gen- to 
dride? Azarie; he it is that was set in 
preesthod, in the hows which* Salomon 
bildide in Jerusalem. Forsothe Azariett 
gendride> Amarye, and Amarie gendride® 
Achitob, Achitob gendride’ Sadoch, Sa-12 
doch gendride® Sellum, Sellum gendride? 13 
Helchie, Helchie gendride® Azarie, Azarie 14 
gendride® Saraie, Saraie gendride? Jose- 
dech. Forsothe Josedech 3ede out, whanne 1s 
the Lord translatide Juda and Jerusalem 
bi the hondis of Nabugodonosor kyng®. 
Therfor the sones of Leuy weren Gerson, 16 
Caath, and Merary. And these weren the 17 
names of the sones of Gerson; Lobeni, and 
Semei. The sones of Caath weren Am-1s 
ram, and Isaar, and Ebron, and Oziel. 
The sones of Merari weren Moli, and 19 
Musi. Sotheli these weren the kynredis 
of Leuy bi the meynees of hem; Gerson ; 20 
Lobony, his sone; Jaath, his sone; Zama, his 
sone; Joaith, his sone; Addo,his sone; Zara, 21 
his sone; Jethrai, his sone. The sones of 22 
Caath; Amynadab, his sone; Chore, his 
sone; Azyra, his sone; Helcana, his sone ; 23 
Abiasaph, his sone; Aser, his sone ; Caath, 24 
his sone; Vriel, his sone; Azias, his sone ; 
Saul, his sone. The sones of Helchana2s 
weren Amasay, and Achymoth, and Hel- 
cana. The sones of Helcana; Saphay, his 26 
sone; Naath, his sone; Heliab, his sone; 27 
Heroam, his sone; Helcana, his sone. The 28 
sones of Samuel; the firste gendrid’ Na- 
sen, and Abia. Sotheli the sones of Me-29 
rari; Moli, his sone; Lobeny, his sone; 
Semey, his sone ; Oza, his sone ; Sama, his 30 
sone; Aggias, his sone; Azaya, his sone; 


Ww Zacharias E. 


Zgaat1. Athat1. 


VOL. II. 


b gaat 1. 
uu 


¢the kyng 1. 4 goten 1. 


330 


Samia, the sone of hym; Aggias, the sone 
3iof hym; Azaia, the sone of hym. Thes 
ben the whiche Dauid ordeynde vpon the 
syngers of the hous of the Lord, sithen 
32the arke was brou3t to; and thei myny- 
streden before the tabernacle of witness- 
ynge syngynge, to the tyme that Salo- 
mon hadde byld the hous of the Lord 
in Jerusalem; thei stoden forsothe aftir 
a3 their order in their seruyse. Thes for- 
sothe ben that stoden to with their sonys. 
Of the sonys of Caath; Eman syngere, 
34the sone of Joel, sone of Samuel, sone of 
Elchana, sone of Jeroam, sone of Heliel, 
3ssone of Thou, sone of Suph, sone of E]- 
chana, sone of Meath, sone of Amazi, 
3esone of Elchana, sone of Johel, sone of 
37 Azarie, sone of Sophonie, sone of Caath, 
sone of Aser, sone of Abiesaf, sone of 
33 Chore, sone of Ysaar, sone of Caath, 
z9sone of Leuy, sone of Yrael. And the 
brother of hym, Asaf, that stode on the 
ri3t syde of hym, Asaf, the sone of Bara- 
4ochie, sone of Samaa, sone of Mychael, 
4: sone of Basie, sone of Melchie, sone of 
42 Attay, sone of Zara, sone of Adala, sone 
of Edan, sone of Zama, sone of Semei, 
43sone of Jeth, sone of Jersan, sone of 
44Leuy. The sonys forsothe of Mereri, 
the bretheren of hem, at the left ; Ethan, 
the sone of Cusy, sone of Abdi, sone of 
4s Moloch, sone of Asabie, sone of Amasie, 
agsone of Elchie, sone of Amasai, sone of 
17 Bonny, sone of Somer, sone of Mooly, 
sone of Musy, sone of Merari, sone of 
ig Leuy. The bretheren forsothe of hem, 
Leuytis, that ben ordeynd in to al the 
seruyse of the tabernacle of the hous of 
4g9the Lord. Aaron forsothe and his sonys 
brenden encense vpon the auter of brent 
sacrifices, and vpon the auter of the maad 
encense, in to al the werk of the holy 
of halowes; and that they preyen for 
Yrael, aftir alle thingis that Moyses, the 
50 Seruaunt of God, comaundyde. Thes for- 
sothe ben the sonys of Aaron; Eliazar, 
the sone of hym; Phynees, the sone of 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


VI. 31-——50. 


These it ben whiche® Dauid ordeynede on 31 
the syngeris of the hows of the Lord, 
sithenf the arke of the Lord was set; and 32 
thei mynystriden bifor the tabernacle of 
witnessyng, and sungun, til Salomon bild- 
ide the hows of the Lord in Jerusalem ; 
forsothe thei stoden bi her ordre in ser- 
uyce. Sotheli® thes it ben that stoden ny333 
with her sones. Of the sones of Caath; He- 
man the chauntor, the sone of Joel, sone 
of Samuel, sone of Helcana, sone of Jo-34 
roam, sone of Heliel, sone of Thou, sone3s 
of Suph, sone of Helcana, sone of Mabath, 36 
sone of Amasi, sone of Helcana, sone” of 
Joel, sone of Azarie, sone" of Sophonye, 
sone of Caath, sone of Asyr,’ sone of 37 
Abiasaph, sone of Chore, sone" of Isaar, 38 
sone" of Caath, sone of Leuy, sone" of 
Israel. And hise britheren; Asaph, that 39 
stood at the ri3thalf of hym, Asaph, the 
sone of Barachie, sone’ of Samaa, sone! 40 
of Mychael, sone> of Basye, sone of Mel- 
chie, sone of Atthay, sone of Zara, sone 4, 
of Adala, sone of Edan, sone" of Zama, 4o 
sone! of Semey, sone" of Geth, sone of 43 
Gerson, sone’ of Leuy. Forsothe the 44 
sones of Merary, the britheren of hem, 
weren at the leftside; Ethan, the sone of 
Chusi, sone" of Abdi, sone of Moloch, 
sone of Asabie, sone of Amasie, sone" of 4, 
Helchie, sone" of Amasay, sone" of Bonny; 4g 
sone of Soomer, sone of Moli, sone of 47 
Musi, sone" of Merarie, sone of Leuy. 
And dekenes, the britheren of hem, that 4s 
weren ordeyned in to al the seruyce of 
the tabernacle of the hows of the Lord. 
Forsothe Aaron and hise sones brenten4y 


encense on! the auter of brent sacrifices, 


and oni the auter of encense, in to al the 
werk ‘of the hoolij of * hooli thingis; and 
that thei schulden preie for Israel, by alle 
thingis whiche! Moises, the seruaunt of 
God, comaundide. Sotheli™ these ben the 50 
sones of Aaron; Eleazar, his sone; Phy- 
nes, his sone; Abisue, his sone; Bocei, 51 
his sone; Ogzi, his sone; Zara, his sone; 
Meraioth, his sone; Amarias, his sone 352 


€thatr. fsithr, ¢ Andis. bthe soner. iupons. }Om.1. of holi Israels. k bis. ! bi whiche 1. 


m And1. Om. s. 


VI. 5 1—66. 


slhym; Abisue, the sone of hym; Bocey, 
the sone of hym; Ogzi, the sone of hym; 
52Zara, the sone of hym; Meraioth, the 
sone of hym; Amarias, the sone of hym; 
53 Achitob, the sone of hym; Sadoch, the 
sone of hym; Achymaas, the sone of hym. 
54 And thes the dwellynge placis of hem, by 
tounnes and nee3 coostis, of thilk sones, 
that is, of Aaron, aftir the kynredis of 
Caathitis; to hem forsothe by lott thei 
ssfellen. Thanne thei 3euen to hem Ebron 
in the lond of Juda, and the suburbis of 
agit by enuyroun; the feeldis forsothe of 
the cyte, and the touns, to Caleph, the 
s7sone of Jephone. Forsothe to the sonys 
of Aaron thei 3euen cytees to fleen to; 
Ebron, and Lobna, and the suburbis of 
s8it, Jether forsothe, and Escamo with his 
suburbis, and Helon, and Aber, with their 
59suburbis, Aaron forsothe, and Bethsames, 
coand the suburbis of hem. Of the lynage 
forsothe of Benjamyn, Gabee, and the 
suburbis of it, and Alamath with his 
suburbis, Anathoth forsothe with his 
suburbis ; alle the cytees thrittene with 
61 their suburbis, by their kynredis. To the 
sonys forsothe of Caph, residue of ther* 
kynrede, thei 3euen of the half lynage of 
Manasse in to possessioun tenn cytees. 
62 Forsothe toY the sonys of Jersan bi their 
kynredis, of the lynage of Ysachar, and 
of the lynage of Aser, and of the lynage 
of Neptalym, and of the lynage of Ma- 
63nasse in Basan, fouretene cytees. To the 
sonys forsothe of Merery by their kyn- 
redis, of the lynage of Ruben, of the 
lynage of Gad, of the lynage of Zabulon 
64thei 3euen lottis, twelue cytees. For- 
sothe the sonys of Yrael 3enen to the 
Leuytis cytees and the suburbis of hem; 
6sand thei 3euen by lott, of the lynage of 
the sonys of Juda, and of the lynage of 
the sones of Symeon, and of the lynage 
of the sonys of Benjamyn, thes cytces 
6éthat thei clepen of their namys; and of 
hem that weren of the kynrede of the 


x the B. 
Nandis. the soners. P Andis. 4 And 1s, 
u the residues1. Y Om. x. w Andis. * And 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


331 


Achitob, his sone ; Sadoch, his sone; Achi- 5: 
maas, his sone. And these weren the54 
dwelling places, bi the townes and coostis 
of hem, that is, of the sones of Aaron, bi 
the kynredis of Caathitis; for tho bifelden 
to hem bi lot. Therfor the children of'ss 
Israed 3auen to hem Ebron in the lond 
of Juda, and the subarbis therof bi cum- 
pas; sotheli® thet 3auen the feeldis and se 
townes of the citees to Caleph, sone® of 
Jephone. Forsothe?P thei 3auen citces to57 
the sones of Aaron, Ebron to refuyt ; and 
thei 3aunen Lobna, with hise subarbis, and 58 
Jether, and Escamo, with her subarbis, 
but also Helon, and Dabir, with her sub- 
arbis; also thet 3auen Asan, and Beth-ss 
sames, and the subarbis of tho. Sotheli1co 
of the lynage of Beniamyn thei 3auen 
Gabee, and the subarbis therof, and Ala- 
mach with hise subarbis, Anathot also™ 
with hise subarbis; alle the citees weren 
threttene with her subarbis, bi the kyn- 
redis of hem. Forsothe® tot the sones of 61 
Caath, residues" of her kynrede, thei 3auen 
of the half lynage of Manasses ten citees 
‘in to possessioun’. Sotheli® to the sones 62 
of Gerson bi her kynredis thet 3axen four- 
tene citees in Basan, of the lynage of Ysa- 
car, and of the lynage of Aser, and of the 
lynage of Neptalym, and of the lynage of 
Manasses. Forsothe* to the sones of Me-63 
rary by her kynredis thei 3auen bi lottis 
twelue citees, of the lynage of Ruben, of 
the lynage of Gad, and of the lynage of 
Zabulon. And the sones of Israel 3auen 61 
to dekenes citees and subarbis of tho; and 65 
thei 3auen bi lot, of the sones of the lynage 
of Juda, and of the lynage of the sones of 
Symeon, and of the lynage of the sones of 
Beniamyn, these citees, which the dekenes 
clepiden bi her names; and of hem that 66 
weren of the kynredeY of the sones of 
Caath, and in the termes of hem weren 
the citees of the lynage of Effraym. And 67 
the sones of Israel 3auen to hem citees of 
refuyt ; Sichem with hise subarbis in the 


y of B. 


rOm.x. sAndi1. tOm.1. tohis ands sec. m. 


y kinredis s. 


uUu2g 


332 


sonys of Caath, and there weren cytees 
in the termys of hem of the lynage of 
67 Effraym. And thei 3euen to hem cytees 
to fleen to; Sychym with his suburbis in 
the mount of Effraym, and Gasa with 
68 his suburbis, Hiemaan forsothe with his 
69 suburbis, and Betheron also. Also of the 
lynage of Dan, Ebethe, Jebethor, and 
Heielan, and Helon with his suburbis, 
and Jethremon into the same maner. 
70 Forsothe of the half lynage of Mauasse, 
Aner, and the suburbis of it, Balaham, 
and the suburbis of it; to thes, that is, 
that of the kynrede of the sonys of Caath 
71 weren laft. To the sonys forsothe of Jer- 
son, of the kynrede of the half lynage of 
Manasse, Gawlon in Basan, and the sub- 
urbis of it, and Astaroth with his sub- 
z2urbis. Of the lynage of Ysachar, Cedes, 
and the suburbis of it, and Daberith with 
73his suburbis, Samoth forsothe, and his 
suburbis, and Anen with his suburbis. 
74Of the lynage forsothe of Aser, Masal 
with his suburbis, and Adon lije maner, 
75 Asach forsothe, and the suburbis of it, 
76and Roob with his suburbis. Bot of the 
lynage of Neptalym, Cedes in Galilee, and 
the suburbis of it, Amon with his sub- 
urbis, and Cariathiarym, and the suburbis 
;70f it. To the sonys forsothe of Mereri 
residue, of the lond of Zabulon, Remon, 
and the suburbis of it, and Thabor with 
yhis suburbis. Bejonde Jordan forsothe, 
forn a3eynst Jericho, a3einus the est of 
Jordan; of the lynage of Ruben, Bozor 
in wildirnesse with his suburbis, and 
79Jaza with his suburbis, Cademoth for- 
sothe, and the suburbis of it, and My- 
80 phaath with his suburbis. Also of the 
lynage of Gad, Ramoth in Galaad, and 
the suburbis of it, Manaym with his 
gisuburbis, bot and Esebon with his sub- 
urbis, and Jezer with his suburbis. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Forsothe the sonys of Ysachar ; Thola, 
and Fua, Jazub, and Zameron, foure. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


VI. 67—VII. 2. 


hil of Effraym, and Gazer with hise sub- 
arbis, also Hicmaan with hise subarbis, 6s 
and Betheron also. Also of the lynage of 69 
Dan thet 3auen Ebethe, Gebethor, and 
Heialan, and Helon, with her subarbis, 
and Gethremon bi the same maner. For-7 
sothe” of the half lynage of Manasses thei 
jauen Aner, and the subarbis therof, Ba- 
laam, and the subarbis therof; that is, to 
hem that weren residue* of the kynrede of 
the sones of Caath. Sotheli® to the sones71 
of Gerson thei 3auen of the kynrede of 
half the lynage of Manasses, Gaulon in Ba- 
san, and the subarbis therof, and Astoroth 
with hise subarbis. Of the lynage of Isa-72 
char thet 3auen Cedes, and the subarbis 
therof, and Daberith with hise subarbis; 
also Samoth, and his subarbis, ‘and Anem 73 
with hise subarbis*. Also of the linage 7s 
of Aser thet 3auen Masal with hise sub- 
arbis, and Abdon also, and Asach, and 7s 
the subarbis therof, and Roob with hise 
subarbis. Sotheli’ of the lynage of Nep-76 
talym thet 3auen Cedes in Galilee, and the 
subarbis therof, Amon with hise subarbis, 
and Cariathiarym, and subarbis® therof. 
Sotheli tof the residue® sones of Merary 77 
thet 3auen of" the lynage of Zabulon, Re- 
mon, and subarbis! therof, and Thabor 
with hise subarbis. Also bijende Jordan, 7s 
euene a3ens Jerico, ajens the eest of Jor- 
dan, thet 3auen of the lynage of Ruben, 
Bosor in thej wildirnesse with hise sub- 
arbis, and Jasa with hise subarbis, also79 
Cademoth, and hise subarbis, and My- 
phaat with hise subarbis. Also and* of so 
the lynage of Gad ¢hez 3auen Ramoth in 
Galaath, and the subarbis therof, Manaym 
with hise subarbis, but also Esebon with si 
hise subarbis, and Jezer with hise sub- 
arbis. 


CAP. VII. 


Forsothe the sones of Isachar weren1 
foure; Thola, and Phua, Jasub, and Sa- 


2The sonis of Thola; Ozi, and Raphaya, meron. The sones of Thola weren O2zi,2 
z Andis. 4leftr. % Andis. ¢Om.1 4 Andi. Om.s.  ©¢ the subarbis 1kx sec.m.s. fOm.1. 
€Om.1. 4tors. !the subarbis FKsx. J) Om.1s. k Om. n. 


VIL. 3—15. 


and Jerehel, and Jemay, and Jepsen, aud 
Samuel, princes by the houses of their 
cognaciouns. Of the lynage of Thola, 
most stronge men ben noumbred in the 
days of Dauid, two and twenty thousand 
3and sixe hundreth. The sonis of Ozi, 
Jesraya; of whome ben born Michael, 
and Obadia, and Johel, and Jesay, fyue, 
dalle princes. And with hem by meynees, 
and ther puplis, gird to batail most 
stronge men sixe and thritty thousand ; 
forsothe thei hadden many wijues and 
ssonys. And the bretheren of hem by 
alle the kynredis of Ysachar most stronge 
to fi3ten seuen and ey3ty thousand ben 
snoumbred. The sonys of Benjamyn ; 
7 Bale, and Bochor, and Adiel, thre. The 
sonis of Bale; Esbon, and Ozi, and Osiel, 
and Jerimoth, and Uray, fyue, princis of 
the meynees, to fizten most stronge; the 
noumbre forsothe of hem two and twenty 
sthousand and foure and thritty. Bot the 
sonys of Bochor; Samyra, and Joas, 
and Eliazer, and Elioenay, and Zamry, 
and Jerimoth, and Abia, and Anathot, 
and Anathan; alle thes the sonys of 
9Bochor. There ben noumbred forsothe 
by their meynes princis of kynredis to 
batayls most stronge twenty thousand 
1oand two hundreth. Forsothe the sonys 
of Ledyel, Baalan; the sonys forsothe of 
Baalan, Jheus, and Beniamyn, and Aoth, 
and Canana, and Jotham, and Thassis, 
iand Thasaar. Alle thes the sonys of 
Ledyel, princes of ther? kynredis most 
stronge men, senentene thousand and two 
i2 hundreth, to batayl goynge forthe. Sa- 
phan forsothe and Akham, thes the sonis 
i30f Hyr; and Asyn, the sone of Asir. The 
sonys forsothe of Neptalym; Jasiel, and 
Gumy, and Azer, and Sellum; the sonys 
uof Bale. Forsothe the sone* of Manasse, 
Ezriel; and the secoundary wijf of hym 
Cira gat Machir, the fadir of Galaad. 
1s Machir forsothe toke wijues to his sonys 
Huphyn and Suphyn; and he hadde a 


2 the anru. 


k Oni. s. 
8 And 1s. 


I moost strong 1. ™ Om. Nn. 


t And 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


n strengist I. 


333 


and Raphaia, and* Jerihel, and Jemay, 
and Jepsen, and Samuel, princis bi the 
housis of her kynredis. Of the gene- 
racioun of Thola, weren noumbrid strong- 
este men in the daies of Dauid, two and 
twenti thousynde and sixe hundrid. Thes 
sones of Ozi weren Jezraie; of whom 
weren borun Mychael, and Obadia, and 
Johel, and Jezray, fyue, alle princes. And 4 
with hem weren bi her meynees and 
puplis, sixe and thretti thousynde strong- 
este! men gird to batel; for thei hadden 
many wyues and sones. And her bri-5 
theren by alle the™ kynredis of Isachar 


‘moost stronge™ to fi3te weren noumbrid 


foure scoore and seuene thousynde. Thee 
sones of Beniamyn weren Bale, and Bo- 
thor, and Adiel, thre. The sones of Bale7 
weren Yisbon, and Ozi, and Oziel, and 
Jerymoth, and Vray, fyue, princes of 
meynees, mooste stronge to fi3te; for the 
noumbre of hem was two and twenti 
thousynde and foure and thretti. For-s 
sothe® the sones of Bochor weren Samara, 
and Joas, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and 
Zamri, and Jerimoth, and Abia, and Ana- 
thoth, and Almachan ; alle these weren the 
sones of Bochor. Sotheli? the princes of» 
kynredis weren noumbrid bi her meynees 
twenti thousynde and two hundrid moost 
stronge men to batels. Forsothe’ the 10 
sones of Ledihel weren Balan; sotheli 
the sones of Balan weren’ Jheus, and Ben- 
jamyn, and Aoth, and Camana, and Jo- 
than, and Tharsis, and Thasaar. Allei 
these the sones of Ledihel weren princes 
of her meynees, setentene thousynde and 
two hundrid, strongeste men goynge forth 
to batel. Also Saphan and Apham weren 12 
the sones of Hir; and Basym was the 
sone of Aser. Forsothe’ the sones of13 
Neptalym weren Jasicl, and Guny, and 
Aser, and Sellum; the sones of Bale. 
Sothelit the sone of Manasses was Esriel ; 14 
and Sira his secundarie wijf childide Ma- 
chir, the fadir of Galaad. And Machir ts 


| sonys FH. 


o Andis. P Andis. @Andis. * Om. t. 


334 


syster Maacha by name; and name of 
the secounde sone Salphaath, and there 
16ben born to Salphaath dou3tirs. And 
Maacha, the wijf of Machir, bare a sone, 
and clepide the name of hym Phares; 
forsothe the name of his brother Sares ; 
and the sonis of hym, Viam and Recem. 
17 The sone forsothe of Vlam, Baldan. Thes 
the sonys of Galaad, sone of Machir, sone 
isof Manasse; the syster forsothe of hym 
Regina, a> fayr man sche bare, Abiezer, 
wand Moola. Forsothe ther weren the 
sonys of Semeida; Abym, and Cychym, 
zoahd Liey, and Anynam. The sonys for- 
sothe of Effraym ; Suchaba; Bareth, the 
sone of hym; Caath, the sone of hym; 
Elida, the sone of hym; and Caath, the 
sone of hym ; and of this the sone, Zedaba; 
2, and of this the sone, Suthala; and of this 
the sone, Ezer, and Elad. Forsothe ther 
slewen hem the men of Geth thenns 
goten, for thei camen doun that thei 
22 assailen the possessiouns of hem. Thanne 
weylid Effraym, the fadir of hem, many 
days; aud there camen his britheren, 
93 that thei comforten hym. And he wente 
in to his wijf, the whiche conceyued, and 
bare a sone; and clepyde his name Berya, 
for thi that in the euyls of his hous he 
24was born. The dou3tir forsothe of hym 
was Sara; the whiche bildide up Beth- 
eron, the nether and the ouer, and Ozen, 
a,and Sara. Forsothe the sone of hir, 
Rapha, and Receph, and Thale; of the 
26whiche is born Thaan, the whiche gat 
Laadon; of this forsothe the sone, Amyud, 
27 gat Elizama; of the whiche is born Nun; 
asthe whiche hadde a sone Josue. The 
possessioun forsothe of hem and dwell- 
ynge, Bethel with his dou3tirs, and a3eyns 
the este of Noram; at the west plage of 
Gazer, and the dou3tirs of it, Sychem 
with his dou3tirs, and Aza with his 
29dou3tirs. Besydis forsothe the sonys of 
Manasse, Bethsan, and the dou}tirs of it, 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


VII. 16—29. 


took wyues to hise sones Huphyn and 
Suphyn; and he hadde a sister Maacha bi 
name; and the name of the secounde sone 
was Salphaath, and dou3tris weren borun 
to Salphaath. And* Maacha, the wijf of 16 
Machir, childide a sone, and clepide his 
name Phares; forsothe" the name of his 
brothir was Sares; and hise sones weren 
Vilam and Recem. Sotheli’ the sone of 17 
Viam was Baldan. These weren the 
sones of Galaad, sone of Machir, sone of 
Manasses; forsothe* Regma his sistir 18 
childide a feir man, Abiezer, and Mola. 
Forsothe* the sones of Semyda weren19 
Abym, and Sichem, and Liey, and Amany. 
SotheliY the sones of Effraym weren Su-20 
chaba; Bareth, his sone; Caath, his sone; 
Elda, his sone; and Thaatb, his sone; and 
Zadaba, his sone; and Suthala, his sone; and 21 
Ezer, aud Elad, his sones. Forsothe? men 
of Geth borun in the lond killiden hem, 
for thei 3eden doun to assaile her posses- 
siouns. Therfor Effraym, the fadir of22 
hem, weilide bi many daies; and hise bri- 
theren camen to coumforte hym. And he 23 
entride to his wijf, which* conseyuede, and 
childide a sone; and he clepide his name 
Beria, for he was borun in the yuelis of 
his hows, Sotheli> his doustir was¢ Sara ; 24 
that bildide Betheron, the lowere and the 
hiz3ere, and Ozen, and Sara. Forsothe® 25 
his sone was® Rapha, and Reseph, andf 
Thale; of whom was borun Thaan, that 26 
gendride Laodon; and Amyud, the sone 
of hym, gendride? Elysama; of whom was 27 
borun Nun; that hadde a sone Josue. 
Sotheli® the possessioun and ‘dwellyng es 
place’ of hem was Bethil with hise villagis, 
and a3ens the eest, Noram; at the west 
coost, Gazer, and hise villagis, also Sichem 
with hise villagis, and Aza with hise vil- 
lagis. Also bisidis the sones of Manasses, 29 
Bethsan, and hise townes, Thanach and 
hise townes, Maggeddo, and hise townes, 
Dor, and hise townes ; the} sones of Joseph 


banda 4. 


t Om. s. v And Is. 


u and Is. 


W and Is. 


x Andis. Y Andis. 2 Andis. 4 the which 1. 


b And 1s. ¢ was clepide s, 4 Andis. © Ai3t 1s. f Reph, and a sec.m. § gaat 1. » And ts. i the dwell- 


ing placis s. J and the p. 


Vil. 30—VIII. 9. 


Thanach, and the dou3tirs of it, Magedo, 
and the dou3tirs of it, Dor, and the dou3- 
tirs of it; in thes dwelliden the sonys of 
30 Joseph, sone of Yrael. The sonys of 
Aser; Jerona, and Jesua, and Ysui, and 
31 Baria; and Sara, the syster of hem. The 
sonys forsothe of Baria; Heber, and Mel- 
32chiel; he is the fadir of Barsath. Heber 
forsothe gat Jeflath, and Somer, and 
33 Otham, and Sua, the syster of hem. The 
sonys forsothe of Jeflath ; Phosech, and 
Camaal, and Jasoph; thes the sonys of 
34 Jeflath. Bot the sonys of Somer; Aachi, 
3sand Roaga, and Jaba, and Aram. The 
sonys forsothe of Helem, his brother; 
Supha, and Jemma, and Selles, and 
3sAmal. The sonys of Supha; Sue, Arna- 
pheth, and Sual, and Bery, and Jamra, 
37and Bozor, and Odor, and Sama, and 
3gSalusa, and Jethram, and Beram. The 
sonis of Ether; Jephone, and Phaspha, 
syand Ara. The sonys forsothe of Ollaa; 
4o Areth, and Anyel, and Resya. Alle thes 
the sonys of Azer, princes’ of the kyn- 
redis, chosen and most stronge duykis of 
duykis ; the noumber forsothe, of the age 
of hem that was able to batayl, sixe and 
twenty thousand. 


CAE. Vitt. 


1 Beniamyn forsothe gat Baale his first 
goten, Asbaal the secounde, Othora the 
2thrid, Naua the ferthe, and Rapha the 
3fyft. And the sonys of Baale weren 
4Addoar, and Jera, and Abiud, Abisue 
sforsothe, and Noemany, and Achoe, Zed, 
and Jera, and Sephusam, and Vram. 
6 Thes ben the sonys of Adoth, princis of 
the kynredis dwellyng in Gabaa, the 
7whiche ben translatid in Manath. Naa- 
man forsothe, and Achia, and Jera, he 
translatide hem, and gat Osa, and Abyud; 
sbot Saarym he gat in the regioun of 
Moab, aftir that he laft Vrym and Bara, 
ghis wijues; forsothe he gat of Edes, his 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


335 


sone* of Israel dwelliden in these fownes. 
The sones of Aser weren Sona, and Jesua, 30 
and Isuy, and Baria; and Sara was the 
sister of hem. Sotheli! the sones of Baria 31 
qweren Heber, and Melchiel; he is the fadir 
of Barsath. Sotheli™ Heber gendrides2 
Ephiath, and Soomer, and Otham, and 
Sua, the sister of hem. Forsothe" thess 
sones of Jephiath weren Phosech, and 
Camaal, and Jasoph; these weren the 
sones of Jephiath. Sotheli® the sones of3+ 
Soomer weren Achi, and Roaga, and Jaba, 
and Aram. Sotheli® the sones of Helem,3s 
his brother, weren Supha, and Jema, and 
Selles, and Amal. The sones of Supha3ze 
weren Sue, Arnapheth?, and Sual, and 
Bery, and Jamra, and Bosor, and Ador,37 
and Sama, and Salusa, and Jethram, and 
Beram. The sones of Ether weren Je-3s 
phone, and Phaspha, and Ara. Sotheli?s9 
the sones of Ollaa weren Areth, and Aniel, 
and Resia. Alle these weren the sones of 40 
Aser, princes of kynredis, chosun men and 
strongeste’ duykis of duykis; forsothe* 
the noumbre, of the age of hem that weren' 
abel to" batel, was sixe and twenti thou- 
synde. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe Beniamyn gendride’ Bale his! 
firste gendrid* sone, Asbaal the secounde, 
Othora the thridde, Nana the fourthe, and 2 
Rapha the fyuethe. And the sones of3 
Bale weren Addoar, and Jera, and Abyud, 
and Abisue, and Noemany, and Acte, but 
also Gera, and Sophupham, and Vram. 
These ben the sones of Haoth, princes of 6 
kynredis dwellynge in Gabaa, that weren 
translatid in to Manath. Forsothe* Noa-7 
man, and Achia, and Jera, ‘he translatideY 
hem, and gendride* Oza and Abyud; for-8 
sothe* ‘Saarym gendride® in the cuntrey of 
Moab, aftir that he lefte Vrym and Bara, 
hise wyues; sotheli® he gendride* of Edes, 9 


4 prince aBFn, 


1 


k Om. a et plures. 1 Andis. ™ Andis. ®% Andis, © Andis. Pand Arnapheths. 9 And 1s. 
'ful stronger. Sandis. twas aELs. UYinaprem. Vgaati. Wgoteni. * Andis.  Y¥ trans- 
latiden a sec. m. Zhe gaat1. he gendrides. ®%andis. he gaat 1. he gendrides, © and is. 


a gaat 1. 


336 


wijf, Jobab, and Sebia, and Mosa, and 
10 Molchoin, Jebus forsothe, and Sechia, and 
Marma; thes ben the sonys of hym, 
1 princis in their meynees. Meusym for- 
igsothe gat Achytob, and Elphaal. For- 
sothe the sonys of Elphaal; Eber, and 
Mysaam, and Samaath; this bilde Ono, 
isand Lod, and the dou3tirs of it; Bara 
forsothe and Sama, princis of the kyn- 
redis dwellynge in Haylon; thes dryuen 
i4aweye the dwellers of Geth; and Hayo, 
isand Sesach, and Jerymoth, and Sadabia, 
igand Arod, and Eder, Mychael forsothe, 
and Jespha, and Joaa, the sonys of Ba- 
ij7ria; Sadabia, and Mosollam, and Elethi, 
isand Heber, and Jezamari, and Jesua, 
igand Jobab, sonys of Elphaal; Rachym, 
2oand Zecri, and Zabdi, and Helioenai, and 
21Selectai, and Henelech, and Adaya, and 
Baraza, and Samarath, the sonys of Se- 
2gzmei; Jesfan, and Heber, Esiel, and 
Abyon, and Zechri, and Abdi, and He- 
23 lioenai, and Sarai, and Heliel, and Abdon, 
2tand Zechri, and Chanaan, and Ananya, 
23and Phanuel, the sonys of Sesaach; 
= Sampsari, and Scoria, and Otholia, and 
Jersia, and Helia, and Zechri, the sonys 
280f Jeroam. Thes patriarkis and princis 
of kynredis, that dwelliden in Jerusalem. 
29In Gabaon forsothe dwelliden Abigabaon, 
30and name of his wijf Maacha; the sone 
forsothe of hym, the first goten Abdon, 
and Sur, and Ciz, and Baal, and Ner, 
stand Nadab, Jeddo forsothe, and Hayo, 
szand Zacher, and Machellot. And Ma- 
chellot gat Samaa; and thei dwelliden 
forn ajeins their bretheren in Jerusalem 
s3 with their bretheren. Ner forsothe gat 
Ciz, and Ciz gat Saul. Forsothe Saul 
gat Jonathan, and Melchisue, and Abyna- 
3idab, and Vbaal. The sone forsothe of 
Jonathan, Myphybaal; and Myphibaal 
ssgat Mycham. The sonys of Mycha; 
Phiton, and Meleth, and Thara, and 
36 Achaz. And Achaz gat Joiada; and 
Joiada gat Almoth, and Azymoth, and 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


VIII, 10-——36, 


his wijf, Jodab, and Sebia, and Mosa, and 
Molchon, also Jebus, and Sechia, and Ma-10 
ryna; tho ben the sones of hym, prynces 
in her meynees. Forsothe® Musyn gen-11 
dride® Achitob, and Elphaal. Sotheli® the s2 
sones of Elphaal weren Heber, and Mu- 
saam, and Samaath; he bildide Ono, and 
Lod, and hise villagis ; forsothe’ Bara and 13 
Sama weren princes of kynredis dwell- 
ynge in Hailon; these dryueden' awei the 
dwelleris of Geth; and Haio, and Sesath, 14 
and Jerymoth, and Zadabia, and Arod,15 
and Heder, and Mychael, and Jespha* 16 
helpiden hem ‘a3ens men of Geth'; the 
sones of Abaria, and Zadabia, and Mo-17 
sollam, and Ezethi, and Heber, and Jesa-1s 
mary, and Jezlia, and Jobab helpiden™ ‘in 
this turney a3ens men of Geth®. The 
sones of Elphaal weren Jachym, and 19 
Jechri, and Zabdi, and Helioenay, and 20 
Selettay, and Henelech, and Adaia, and 21 
Barasa, and Samarath; the sones of Semey 
weren Jesphan, and Heber, and Esiel, and A 
Abdon, and Zechry, and Canaan, anda 


_ Anany, and Jalam, and Anathotia, and 


Jephdaia, and Phanuel ; the sones of Sesac 2s 
weren Sampsaray, and Scoria, and Otholia, 25 
and Jersia, and Helia, and Zechri, thee7 
sones of Jeream. These weren patriarkis o3 
and princes of kynredis, that dwelliden in 
Jerusalem. Forsothe® in Gabaon dwelliden 29 
Abigabaon, and Maacha the name of his 
wijf ; and his firste gendrid? sone Abdon, 30 
and Sur, and Cys, and Baal, and Ner, and 
Nadab, and Geddo, and Haio, and Zacher, 31 
and Macelloth. Forsothe’ Marcelloth gen-32 
dride’ Samaa; and thei dwelliden euene 
a3ens her britheren in Jerusalem with her 
britheren. Forsothe’ Ner gendridet Cys, 33 
and Cys gendridet Saul; forsothe" Sau] 
gendrideY Jonathan, and Melchisue, and 
Abynadab, and Isbaal. Sotheli¥ the sone3s 
of Jonathan was Myphibaal; and Myphi- 
baal gendride* Micha. The sones ofs3s 
Micha weren Phiton, and Melech, and 
Thara, and Ahaz. And Ahaz gendrideY 36 


Zamry. Forsothe Zamry gat Mosa; Joiada; and Joiada gendrideY Almoth, and 

e Andis. fgaatx, 8 Andis. b Andis. idreuenr. k Jespha and Joha x seem. !Om.1. 
m helpiden alsor. %Om.1. Andi. Pgotent GdaAndis. ‘gaatr SAndis. + gaat 1. 
uand ais. Vgaati. WAnd1. gaat 1. ¥ gaat 1. 


VIII. 37-——-IX. 9. 


s7and Moosa gat Banaa, whos sone was 
Raphaia, of the whiche is born Elesa, 

asthe whiche gat Esel. Forsothe of Esel 
sixe sonys weren with thes namys, Esri- 
cham, Bocheu, Ismael, Saraia, Abadia, 

39 Aman ; alle thes the sonys of Ezel. The 
sonys forsothe of Aza, brother of hym ; 
Viam, the first goten, and Hus, the 

40secounde, and Eliphales, the thrid. And 
the sonys of Vlam weren most strong 
men, and with grete streyngthe beend- 
ynge bowe, and many sonys hauynge, 
and sonys sones, vnto an hundreth and 
fyfty thousand. Alle thes the sonys of 
Beniamyn. 


CAP. IX. 


1 Thanne alle® Yrael is noumbred, and 
the summe of hem writen in the boke 
of the kyngis of Yrael and of Juda; and 
thei ben translatid in to Babyloyne for 

2their trespasse. Whiche forsothe dwell- 
iden first in their cytees, and in the pos- 
sessiouns of Yrael, and prestis, and Le- 

suytis, and Nacheneis, dwelliden in Jeru- 
salem. Of the sonys of Juda, and of the 
sonys of Beniamyn, of the sonys forsothe 
4of Effraym, and of Manasse; Ose, the 
sone of Ameud, sone of Zemri, sone of 
Omroy, sone of Bonny, of the sonys of 
5Phares, sone of Juda; and of Cilon, 
Josia, the first goten, and the sonys of 
6hym; of the sonis forsothe of Saray, 
Heuel, and the bretheren of hem; sexe 
7hundreth and nynty. Forsothe of the 
sonys of Beniamyn; Salo, the sone of 
Mosollam, sonef of Odoia, sone of Azana, 
sand Jobanya, sone of Jeroam, and Ela, 
the sone of Osy, sone of Mochosy, and 
Mosollam, the sone of Safazie, sone of 
9Rahuel, sone of Jebanye, and the bre- 
theren of hem,bi their meynes; nyne hun- 
dreth and sixe and fyfty. Alle thes the 
princis of their kynredis by the housis of 


¢ Om. £ pr. m. 


z Andis, @gaat1. » goten 1. 
stronge rt. i Om. F sec. m. IKLMSXb. 
kind of peple 1s. |" the sone 1s. 
sOm.1s. tAndis. 4% the sone r. 


VOL. TI. 


© gaat 1. 


v And 1s. 


@ Om, 1. 
k And alle sx. 
© sones A et plures. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 337 


Azimoth, and Zamry. Forsothe? Zamri37 


gendride* Moosa, and Moosa gendride* 
Banaa, whos sone was Raphaia, of whom 
was gendrid> Elesa, that gendride* Asel. 


Sothelit Asel hadde sixe sones bi these3s 


names, Esricham, Bochru, Ismael, Saria, 
Abadia, Aman®; alle these weren the sones 
of Asel. 
brothir, weren Vlam, the firste gendride® 
sone, and Hus, the secounde, and Eliphales, 


the thridde. And the sones of Vlam weren 49 


strongeste men, and beendynge ai bouwe 
with greet strength, and hanynge many 
sones, and sones of sones, til to an hundrid 
and fifti. Alle* these weren the sones of 
Beniamyn. 


CAP. IX. 


Therfor al Israel was noumbrid, andi 
the summe of hem was writun in the book 
of kyngis of Israel and of Juda; and thei 
weren translatid in to Babiloyne for ber 
synne. Sotheli! thei that dwelliden first in 
her citees, and in the possessiouns of Israel, 
and the preestis, and the dekenes, and 
Natyneys™ {, dwelliden in Jernsalem. Ofs 
the sones of Juda, and of the sones of 
Beniamyn, also of the sones of Effraym, 
and of Manasses ; Othi, the sone of Amyud, 4 
sone" of Semry, sone" of Omroy, sone” of 
Bonny, of the sones of Phares, the sone® 
of Juda; and of Sylom, Asia, the firste 5 
gendrid?, and his sones1; sotheli" of thes 
sones of Zaray, Heuel, and hise britheren ; 
sixe hundrid fourescore and ter. For-7 
sothet of the sones of Beniamyn; Salo, the 
sone of Mosollam, the sones of Odoia, the 
sones of Asana, and Jobanya, the sone of s 
Jerobam, and Ela, the sone of Ozi, the 
sones of Mochozi, and Mosollam, the sone 
of Saphacie, sone” of Rahuel, sone of Je- 
banye, and the britheren of hem, bi hery 
meynees; nyne hundrid sixe and fifti. Alle 
these weren princes of her kynredis by 
the housis of her fadris. 


f the sone H. 


eand Amans. f Andis. & gotenz, 4 ful 
1 Andis. ™ Natynes a. Nathinuims, thal is, a 
P goten I. q sone A et plures. rand ts. 


xX X 


Forsothef the sones of Asa, his39 


Forsothe’ of the ie 


+ Natyneys ; 
thes weren men 
of Gabaon, that 
weren con- 
uertid to the 
feith and reli- 
gioun of Jewes, 
and they weren 
ordeyned to 
bere wode and 
water to the 
place of Goddis 
worschiping, as 
itis had in 

ix. c°. of Josue. 
Lire here. c. 


338 


1otheir fadirs. Of the prestis forsothe, 
11 Joiada®, Josarib, and Jachym; Azarias® 
forsothe, the sone of Elchie, sone of Mo- 
sollam, sone of Sadoch, sone of Maraioth, 
sone of Achitob, the bischop of the hous 
of the Lord. Forsothe Adayas, the sone 
of Jeroam, sone of Fasor, sone of Mel- 
chia, and Mazaya, the sone of Adihel, 
sone of Jezra, sone of Mosollam, sone 
130f Mosellamoth, sone of Emyner, the 
bretheren forsothe of hem, princis_ bi 
their meynes, a thousand senen hun- 
drith and seuenty, most stronge inen bi 
streyngth, to don the were of the seruyse 
isin the hous of the Lord. Of the Leuytis 
forsothe, Semeia, the sone of Assub, sone 
of Ezricham, sone of Azebny, of the sonys 
150f Merery; Bathacar forsothe carpenter, 
and Galabeth, and Machama, the sone of 
Mycha, sone! of Zechry, sone of Asaph, 
rsand Obdias, the sone of Semcie, sone of 
Calaal, sone of Ydytym, and Barachia, 
the sone of Asa, sone of Helchana, that 
dwellide in the porchis of Methofatite. 
17The porters forsothe, Sellum, and Acub, 
and Thelmon, and Achymam, and the 
isbretheren of hem; Sellum prince; vuato 
that tyme in the 3ate of the kyng at the 
est, thei kepten by ther whilis of the 
igsonys of Leuy. Sellum forsothe, the 
sone of Chore, sone of Abiasaph, sone of 
Chore, with his britheren, and the hous 
of his fadir; thes ben Choritis vpon the 
werkis of the seruyce, kepers of the 
vestiaryes of the tabernacle, and the 
meynees of hem be whilis kepynge the 
20 entre of the tentis of the Lord. Phynees 
forsothe, the sone of Eliazar, was duyke 
210f heth beforn the Lord. Forsothe Za- 
charye, the sone of Mosollam, portere 
of the 3ate of the tabernacle of witness- 
g2ynge. Alle thes chosen ‘in to‘ vsscheris 
by 3atis two hundrith and twelue, and 
discryued in propre townys, whome or- 
deyneden Dauid and Samuel, seeynge in 


& of Joiada aBcz pr. m. FH. 


Ythesoner. WOm.i1s.  * the sone 1. 
soneis. ©thesoner. Andis. & the sone x. 
kK thei weren 1s. 1 discryued or presentid 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


» and Azarias H. 


¥ ful stronge 1. 
f upon 1. 
m the which: 1. 


IX. 1o—22. 


preestis, Joiada, Jozarib, and Jachym; and it 
Azarie, the sone of Helchie, sone of Mo- 
sollam, sone” of Sadoch, sone’ of Maraioth, 

sone of Achitob, was bischop of the hows 

of the Lord. Forsothe’ Adaias, sone of !2 
Jeroam, sone* of Phasor, sone of Melehia, 

and Masaia, sone of Adihel, sone of Jezra, 

sone* of Mosollam, sone of Mosselamoth, 

sone of Emyner, also her  britheren, 13 
prynces bi her meynees, weren a thousynde 
seuene hundrid and fourescoore, men strong- 

esteY in bodili my3t, to make the werk of 
seruyce in the hows of the Lord. For-14 
sothe* of dekenes*, Semeya, the sone of 
Assub, sone’ of Ezricam, sone” of Asebyn, 

of the sones of Merary; also Balthasar ts 
the carpenter, and Galebeth, and Ma- : 
chama, sone® of Mycha, sone of Zechri, an 
sone of Asaph, and Obdias, sone® of Semey, 16 ROD for 
sone of Calaal, sone® of Idithum, and Ba- pate. | 
rachie, the sone of Asa, sone® of Helcana, oe teenie 
that dwellide in the porchis of Methophati. 
Sotheli? the porteris weren Sellum, and 17 
Achub, and Thelmon, and Achyman, and 

the britheren of hem; Sellum was the 
prince ; til to that tyme thei kepten bi hers 
whilis in the 3ate of the kyng at the eest, 

of the sones of Leuy. Sellum forsothe, 19 
the sone of Chore, sone® of Abiasaph, sone® 

of Chore, with hise britheren, and with the 

hows of his fadir; these ben the sones of 
Chore on‘ the werkis of the seruyce, 
keperis of the porchis of the tabernacle, 

and the meynees of hem kepten bi whilisé 

the entryng of the castelis of the Lord. 
Forsothe’ Phynees, the sone of Eleazar, 20 
was the duyk of hem bifor the Lord. 
Sothelii Zacarie, the sone of Mosollam,21 
was porter of the 3ate of the tabernacle of 
witnessyng. Alle these chosun in to22 
porteris bi 3atis weren twei hundrid and 
twelue, and weren* discryued! in her 

owne townes, which™ dekenes® Dauid and 


T carpenter ; 


«qj 5amuel, the prophete, ordeyneden in her 


feith, both hem and the sones of hem ines 


ithe sone um.  ynto u. 


2 Andis. 4 the dekenesses. 
& whilis or tymes 1. bh And 1s. 
n dekenys or mynestris s. 


b the 
i And 1s. 


IX. 23——37. 


23 his feith, bothe hem and the sonys of hem 
in the dores of the hous of the Lord, and 
in the tabernacle of witnessyng, be their 

21whilis. By foure wyndis weren the 
vsscheris, that is, at the este, and at the 
weste, and at the northe, and at the 

25southe. The bretheren forsothe of hem 
dwellide in lity] townys, and thei camen 
26in their sabotis fro tyme vnto tyme. To 
thes foure Leuytis was bitaken al the 
noumbre of porters, and thei weren kep- 
inge pryue housis, and! the tresours of 
27the hous of the Lord. By ennyroun for- 
sothe of the temple of the Lord thei 
dweliden in their wardis, that whanne 
tyme were, thei erly schulden opynen the 
283atis. And of the kynrede of hem weren 
vpon the vesselis of the seruyse ; at noum- 
bre forsothe the vesselis weren brou3t in, 
29and of hem brou3t out. And the whiche 
hadden be tau3t alle the necessaries of 
the seyntuarye, weren bifore to the tried 
flour, and to the wijne, and to the oyle, 
and to the encense, and to the swote 
30spyces™. The sonys forsothe of prestis 
31maden oynmentis of swote spices. And 
Mathatias Leuyte, the first goten of Sel- 
lum Chorite, was maystir of alle thingis 
that weren fryed in the fryinge panne. 

32 Forsothe of the sonis of Caath, the bre- 
theren of hem, weren vpon the loouys 
of proposicyoun, that euermore newe by 
eche sabot thei schulden maken redy. 

33 Thes ben the princis of syngers by the 
meynes of Leuytis, that dwelliden in 
priue chaumbris, so that day and ny3t 
contynuely thei seruen in ther” seruyse®. 

34 The heuedis of Leuytis bi their meynes, 

35 princis, dwelliden in Jerusalem. In Ga- 
baon forsothe thei dwelliden to gydre; 
the fadir of Gabaon, Rayel?, and the 

36name of his wijf, Macha ; the first goten 
sone of hym Abdon, and Sur, and Ciz, 

37and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab, Jedor 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


339 


the doris of the hows of the Lord, and in 
the tabernacle of witnessyng, bi her whiles. 
Porteris weren bi foure coostis, that is, at 24 
the eest, and? at the west, and® at the 
north, and at the south. Forsothe™ her 2s 
britheren dwelliden in townes, and camen 
in her sabatis fro tyme til to tyme. Al26 
the noumbre of porteris was bitakun to 
these foure dekenes, and thei kepten the 
chaumbris, and the tresours of the hows 
of the Lord. Also thei dwelliden in her 27 
kepyngis bi the cumpas of the temple of 
the Lord, that whanne tyme were, thei 
schulden opene the jatis eerli. Jen of 28 
her kyn weren also on the vessels of ser- 
uyce; for the vessels weren borun in at 
noumbre’, and weren borun out of hem. 
And thei that hadden the vesselis of seyn-29 
tuarie' bitakun to her" kepyng, weren 
souereyns on’ flour, and wyn, and oile, 
and encense, and” swete smellinge spyce- 
ries. Sotheli* the sones of preestis maden 30 
oynementis of swete smellynge spiceries. 
And Mathatias dekene, the firste gendridy 31 
sone of Sellum of the kynrede of Chore, 
was the senereyn of alle thingis that 
weren fried 1n the friyng panne. Sotheli?32 
men® of the sones of Caath, the britheren 
of hem, weren on the looues of settyng 
forth, that thei schulden make redi euere 
newe looues bi ech sabat. ‘These ben the 33 
princis of chauntouris® bi the meynees of 
Leuytis, that dwelliden in chaumbris, so° 
that thei schulden serue contynueli dai 
and ny3t in her seruyce. The heedis of 34 
Leuitis bi her meynees, the princes, dwell- 
iden in Jerusalem. Forsothe4 there dwell- 3s 
iden in Gabaon; Jaiel, the fadir of Gabaon, . 
and the name of his wijf Maacha; Abdon, 36 
his firste gendrid® sone, and Sur, and Cys, 
and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab, and Gedor, 37 
and Ahaio, and Zacharie, and Macelloth ; 
forsothef Macelloth gendride? Semmaa; 38 
these dwelliden euene a3ens her britheren 


lin ry. ™oynementis £ pr.m. the aBFH. © seruysesc. P Israel B. 
4Om.s. * Andis. ¢thenoumbrer. the seyntwaries. UOm. a. Y upon I. of 8. ; Om. s. 
x Andis. Ygotenr1. @ Andis. ®Om.1. DP syngers1. ¢ fort. d Andis. © goten I. and Is. 
& gaat 1. 


x x2 


340 I. PARALIPOMENON. IX. 38—X. 7. 


forsoth, and Hayo, and Zacharias, and 
38 Macelloth ; forsothe Macelloth gat Cem- 
maa; thes dwelliden for ajeynst their 
bretheren in Jerusalem, with their bre- 
39theren. Ner forsothe gat Ciz, and Ciz 
gat Saul, and Saul gat Jonathan, and 
Melchisue, and Abynadab, and Hisbaal. 
40 The sone forsothe of Jonathan, Miribaal, 
4tand Miribaal gat Mycha. Forsothe the 
sonys of Mycha; Phiton, and Maleth4, 
42and Thara; Aaz forsothe gat Jara, and 
Jara gat Alamath, Asmoth, and Zainry ; 
43‘and Zamri" gat Moosa, Moosa gat Baana, 
whos sone Rephaya gat Elesa, of wliome 
44is borne Hezel. Forsothe Hezel hadde 
sixe sonys in thes names, Hezricham, 
Bothru, Hizmael, Saria, Obdia, Anan; 
thes the sonys of Hezel. 


CAP. X. 


1 Philisteis forsothe fou3ten ajeinus Yrael, 
and the sonys of Yrael flowen Palestynes, 
and woundide thei fellen in the hil of 

2Jesboe. And whenn Philisteis hadden 
ney3id pursuynge Saul and his sonys, 
thei smyten Jonathan, and Abynadab, 

3and Melchisue, the sonys of Saul. And 
the batayle is agreggid a3eins Saul; and 
ther founden hym men scheters, and 

4 woundiden with dartis. And Saul seyde 
to his squyer, Draw3e out thi swerd, and 
slee me, lest perauenture the vncircum- 
cidid commen, and scorne to me. For- 
sothe his squyer wolde not: done that, 
by dreed agast; thanne Saul cau3te a 

sswerde, and felle in it. The whiche 
whanne his squyer hadde seen, that is, 
Saul to ben deed, also he felle in to his 

6swerde, and is deed. Thanne Saul died, 
and his thre sonys, and al the hous of 
hym to gydre fel. The whiche thing 
whan the men of Yrael hadden seen, that 
dwelliden in the wijlde feeldis, flowen; 
and Saul and his sonys deed, they for- 


q Amaleth zg. 


in Jerusalem, with her britheren. Sotheli® 39 
Ner gendride' Cys, and Cys gendride* 
Saul, and Saul gendride* Jonathan, and 
Melchisue, and Abynadab, and Hisbaal. 
Forsothe! the sone of Jonathan was Myri- 40 
baal, and Myribaal gendride™ Mycha. 
Sotheli" the sones of Micha were Phiton, 41 
and Malech, and Thara; forsothe* Aaz 42 
gendride? Jara, and Jara gendride? Ala- 
math, and Azmoth, and Zamri; and Zamri 
gendride? Moosa, sotheli1 Moosa gendride’ 43 
Baana, whose sone Raphaia gendride™ Eli- 
sa, of whom Ese] was gendrid’. Forsothet 44 
Esel hadde sixe sones bi these names, 
Ezricam, Bochru, Hismael, Saria, Obdia, 
Anan; these weren the sones of Hesel. 


CAP. X. 


Forsothe Filisteis" fou3ten aj3ens Israel, 1 
and the sones of Israel fledden Palestyns’, 
and felden doun woundid in the hil of 
Gelboe. And whanne Filisteis* haddeez 
neized pursuynge Saul and _ hise -sones, 
thei killiden Jonathan, and Abynadab, and 
Melchisue, the sones of Saul. And thes 
batel was agreggid a3ens Saul; and men 
archeris foundun hym, and woundiden 
hym* with dartis. And Saul seide to his4 
squiere, Drawe out thi swerd, and sle me, 
leste these vncircumcidid men come, and 
scorne me. Sothliy his squyer was aferd 
bi drede, and nolde? do this; therfor Saul 
took a swerd, and felde on? it®. Ands 
whanne his squyer hadde seyn this, that 
is, that Saul was deed, he felde also on 
his swerd, and was deed. Therfor Santé 
perischide, and hise thre sones, and al his 
hows felde doun togidere. And whanne7 
the men of Israel, that dwelliden in feeldi 
places, hadden seyn this, thei fledden ; and 
whanne Saul and hise sones weren deed, 
thei forsoken her citees, and weren sca- 


r Om. 48CFH, 


hAndis. igaati. Kgaat1, lAnd1, mgaatr. Ands. Oandis. Pgaatr. and is. 


gaat 1. Sgotenr. tAnds. 4 the Filisteis 1. 


v the Philistees 1. Fylistyns s. the Philistees 1. 


Om, plures. Y But is. 2% wolde not 1. 8 Saul him silfs. » upon ts. © it, and slowe him silf's. 


X. 8—XI. 3. 


soken their cytees, and® hidir and thidir 
ben scatered; and Philisteis camen, and 
sdwelliden in hem. Thanne the tother 
day the Philisteis drawynge aweye the 
spuylis of the slayn men, founden Saul 
and his sones lyinge in the hil of Jelboe. 
9And whanne thei haden spuylid hym, 
and gird of the heued, and nakenyd' fro 
arinys, thei senten in to their lond, that 
he schuld be born about, and be schewid 
to the templis of mawmetis and peplis; 
10 the armys forsothe of hym thei sacriden 
in the temple of their god, and the leued 
thei fitchiden in the temple of Dagon. 
11 That thing whan the men of Jabes Ga- 
laad hadden herd, that is, alle thingis 
12that the Philisteis dyden vpon Saul, echon 
of the stronge men rysen to gyder, and 
token the careyns of Saul and his sonys, 
and brou3ten hem in to Jabes, and biri- 
eden the bones of hem vndir an ook, that 
was in Jabes; and thei fastiden seuen 
isdays. Thanne Saul is deed for his wick- 
idnessis", for thi that he brake the maunde- 
ment of the Lord, that he hadde co- 
maundide, and kept it not, hot ouermore 
1ialso he councelide a wytche, and hopid 
not in the Lord; and for the whiche 
thing he slew3 hym, and translatyde the 
rewme of hym to Dauid, the sone of 
Ysay. 
CAP. XI. 
1 Thanne al Yrael is gaderid to gider to 
Dauid in Ebron, seyinge, Thi boon and 
2thi flesche we ben; 3isterday’ forsothe 
and the thrid day hennus, whanne 3it 
regned Saul vpon Yrael, thou wer that 
laddist out and brou3tist in Yrael; to 
thee forsothe the Lord thi God seide, 
Thou schal feden my puple Yrael, and 
3thou schalt ben prince vpon it. Thanne 
al the more thoru3 birthe of Yrael camen 
to the kyng in Ebron; and Dauid wente 
in with hem pese conenaunt beforn the 


$Om.u. tnakyd n. 
4 the Philistees1. ¢Om.G. f Om. plures. 
shuld s. Kand1s. !resen ern. ™ token plures. 


8 the Lord thi God 1. t upon 18. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


& the 1s. 


U gretter men Is. 


341 


terid hidur and thidur; and Filisteis camen, 
and dwelliden in tho. Therfor in the to-s8 
ther day Filisteis¢ drowen awei the spuylis 
of slayn men, and founden Saul and hise 
‘sones liggynge in the hil of Gelboe. And9 
whanne thei hadden spuylid hym, and 
hadden gird of the heed, and haddent 
maad hym nakid of  armeris, thei senten® 
in to her lond, that it schnlde be borun 
aboute, and schulde' be schewid in the 
templis of idols and to puplis; forsothe* 10 
thei halewiden his armeris in the temple 
of her god, and thei settiden the heed in 
the temple of Dagon. Whanne men of1! 
Jabes of Galad hadden herd this, that is, 
alle thingis whjche the Filisteis diden on 
Saul, alle stronge men risiden' togidere, 12 
and took™ the deed bodies of Saul and of 
hise sones, and brou3ten tho in to Jabes; 
and thei birieden the boonus of hem vndur 
an ook, that was in Jabes; and thei" fast- 
iden seuene daies. Therfor Saul was deed 13 
for hise wickidnessis, for he brak the co- 
maundement® of the Lord, whiche he 
comaundide, and kepte not it, but ferthir- 
more also he took counsel at a womman 
hauynge a feend spekynge in the wombe, 
and he hopide not in the Lord ; for which 14 
thing both the Lord killide hym, and 
trauslatide his rewme to Dawid, sone? of 
Ysay. 
CAP. XI. 

Therfor al Israel was gaderid to Dauid} 
in Ebron, and seide, We ben thi boon and 
thi fleisch ; also 3isterdai and the thridde2 
dai ago, whanne Saul regnede 3it on4 Is- 
rael, thou it were’ that leddist out and 
leddist in Israel ; for ‘thi Lord God* seide 
to thee, Thou schalt fede my puple Israel, 
and thou schalt be prince on‘ it. Therfor3 
alle the gretter" in birthe of Israel camen 
to the kyng in Ebron; and Dauid maad 
with hem a boond of pees bifor the Lord, 
and thei anoyntiden hym kyng on’ Israel, 


uwickidnes 4. ¥ 3istai ce. 


h senten the heed 1. sente his heed s. i it 
nOm.s. ° heest 1s. POm. A. Tupon is. © was 1. 
Y upon Is. 


342 


Lord; and thei anoyntiden hym king 
vpon Yrael, aftir the word of the Lord, 
that he spac in the hond of Samuel. 
4 Thanne Dauid 3ede, and al Ysrael, in to 
Jerusalem; this is Jebus, where weren 
5Jebuseis dwellers of the lond. And thei 
that dwelliden at Jebus seiden to Dauyd, 
Thou schalt not commen in hydre. For- 
sothe Dauid toke the toure of Syon, that 
6is the cytee of Dauid; and he seide, Eche 
that smytith Jebuse first, schal ben a 
prince and duyke. Thanne Joab, the 
sone of Saruye, stey3ide up first, and is 
7maad a prince. Dauid forsothe dwellid 
in the tour, and therfore it is clepid the 
scytee of Dauid; and he bilde* up a cytee 
in® enuyroun fro Mello vnto Gyrum; Joab 
forsothe the tother partye of the cytee 
gmade out. And Dauith profitide goynge 
and waxynge, and the Lord of hoostis 
io was with hym. Thes the priucis of the 
stronge men of Danid, the whiche help- 
iden hym, that he wer kyng vpon al 
Ysrael, aftir the word of the Lord that 
11he spac to Yrael. And this the noumbre 
of the stronge men of Dauid; Jesbaam, 
the sone of Achamony, prince amonge 
thritty; he rerede his spere vpon thre 
12hundrith woundide oon while. And aftir 
hym Eliazar, the sone of his vncle Ahoi- 
13 tes, that was aniong thie thre? my3ty. This 
was with Dauid in Aphedomyn, whanne 
Philisteis ben gederd to oon place in to 
batail; and ther was a feeld of that 
regyoun full of barly, and the puple flei;2 
14fro the face of Philisteis. This stode in 
the mydil of the feeld, and defendid hym ; 
and whanne he hadde smyten the Phi- 
listeis, the Lord jaue grete helthe to his 
15 puple. There> wenten doun forsothe thre 
of the thritty princis to the petra, in the 
whiche was Dauid, at the denn of Odolla, 
whanne Philisteis hadden sett tentis in 
6the valey of Raphaym. Forsothe Danid 


x bijldide 4. Yand a. 


Wentreins. inthe a. Y first shal smytes. %thesoners. ®& stiede ups. 


din goings. €Om.1. fwhiche rs. 8 upon Is. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


z Om. 4. 


XI. 4—16. 


bi the word of the Lord, which he spak 
in the hond of Samuel. Therfor Dauid4 
jede, and al Israel, in to Jerusalem; this 
Jerusalem is Jebus, where Jebuseis enha- 
biteris of the lond weren. And thei thats 
dwelliden at Jebus seiden to Dauid, Thou 
schalt not entre’ bidur. Forsothe Dauid 
took the hi3 tour of Syon, which is the* 
citee of Dauid; and he seide, Ech mang 
that ‘sleeth first’ Jebusei, schal be prince 
and duyk. Therfor Joab, sone* of Sariiye, 
stiede* first, and was maad prince. So-7 
theli® Dauid dwellide in the hi3 tour, and 
therfor it was clepid the cytee of Dauid; 
and he bildide the citee in cumpas frog 
Mello til to the cumpas; forsothe® Joab 
bildide the tother part of the citee. Andg 
Dauid profitide goynge’ and wexynge, and 
the Lord of oostis was with hym. These 10 
ben the® princes of the stronge men of 
Dauid, that’ helpiden hym, that he schulde 
be kyng on® al Israel, bi the word of the 
Lord which he spak to Israel. And this 
is the noumbre of the stronge men of 
Dauid; Jesbaam, the sone of Achamony, 
was prince among thretti; this reiside® 
his schaft ethir spere on‘ thre hundrid 
woundid men ino tyme. And after hym ie 
was Eleazar, the sone of his fadris brothir, 
and* was ‘a man of Ahoit™, which" Ele- 
axar was among thre mi3ti men. This13 
was with Dauid in Aphesdoriyn, whanne 
Filisteis weren gaderid to o place in to 
batel; and a feeld of that cuntrey was ful 
of barli, and the puple fledde fro the face 
of Filisteis. This® L/eazar stood in the14 
myddis of the feeld, and defendide it ; and 
whanne he hadde slayn Filisteis?, the 
Lord 3af greet helthe to his puple. So-15 
theli thre of4 thritti princes 3eden doun 
to the stoon, wher ynne Dauid was, to the 
denne of Odolla, whanne Filisteis" settiden 
tentis in the valey of Raphaym. Forsothe’ 16 
Dauid was in a strong hold, and the sta- 


8 fleecth w. © And there ancy. 


» And 1s. 
k that 1s. 


€ and 1s. 


hreiside up 1s. 1 upon 1s. 10m. 1. 


™ a cuntrey, or of citee that hizt Ahoit s. =the which1. ° Thanne this 1s. P the Philisteesr. Vand a pr.m. 


cEILNsb, f° the Philistees1. § And 1s. 


XI. 17—28. 


was in the streyngthe, and the staeyoun 
170f Philisteis in Bethlem. Thanne Dauid 
desiride watir, and seide, O! 3if eny wolde 
jeuen to me water of the sisterne of Beth- 
islem, that is in the 3ate. Thanne thes 
thre by the mydil tentis of the Philisteis 
wenten, and drewen watir of the cysterne 
of Bethlem, that was in the 3ate, and 
brou3ten to Dauid, that he sehuld drynk- 
en; the whiche wolde not, bot more 
i9offride it to the Lord, seyinge, God 
scheelde, that in the si3t of my God I do 
this, and the blood of thes men I drynke, 
for in perele of their lijues thei brou3ten 
to me water; and for this eause he wolde 
not drynke. Thes thingus diden the three 
20strengeste. Abisay forsothe, the brother 
of Joab, he was prince of thre, and he 
rerede his spere a3eynus thre hundrith 
woundid ; and he was amonge thre most 
2inemned, and among the°® thre the se- 
eounde, noble, and a prinee of hem; ne- 
uerthelater vnto the thre first he eame 
22not. Banayas, the sone of Joiade, inost 
stronge man, the whiche many werkis 
dyde, of Capseel; he smote two, Aryel, 
Moab; and he descendide, and slow3 a 
lyoun in the mydil cisterne, in tyme of 
23snow3; and he smote an Egipcien man, 
whos stature was of fyue cubitis, and 
hadde a spere as the beem of websters ; 
thanne he came doun to hym with a 
3erde, and eau3te the spere, that he helde 
in hond¢, and slow; hym with his spere. 
24 Thes thingus dyde Bananyas, the sone of 
Joiade, that was amonge the thre stronge 
25most named, and among the thritty the 
first; neuer the later vnto the thre he 
came not; Dauid forsothe putte hym at 
2¢his litil ere. Forsothe the most stronge 
men in the hoost; Azahel, the brother of 
Joab, and Eleanan, the sone of his vnele 
270f Bethlem, Semynoth Arorithes, Helles 
28 Phalonythes, Iras, the sone of Acees The- 


¢ Om. 4. 


t Om. w. 
% wolde not 1. 


u castels or of the oostis 3. 
4 the strongeste I. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


Vv thei drowen 1s. 
bOm. BCDEFGIKLMNOSXb. 


343 


eioun, ‘that is, the oost gaderid', of Filis- 
teis was in Bethleem. Therfor Danid de-17 
siride watir, and seide, Y wolde, that sum 
mau 3af to me water of the cisterne of 
Bethleem, which is in the jate. Therfor 18 
these thre jeden thoru3 the myddil of the 
castelis" of Filisteis, and drowen’ watir 
of the eisterne of Bethleem, that was in 
the 3ate, and thei brou3ten to Dauid, that 
he schulde drynke; and Dauid noldew 
‘drynke it*, but rather he offride it to the 
Lord, and seide, Fer be it, that Y do this 19 
thing in the si3t of my God, and that Y 
drynke the blood of these men, for in the 
perel of her lyues thei brou3ten’ watir to 
me; and for this cause he nolde? drynke. 
Thre strongeste* men diden these thingis. 
Also Abisai, the brother of Joab, he was20 
the prinee of thre® men, and he reiside® 
his schaft® a3ens thre hundrid woundid 
men; and hef was moost named among 
thre, among the secounde thre he was21 
noble, and the prinee of hem; netheles he 
cam not til® to the" firste thre. Banaye, 22 
the sone of Joiada, strongest’ man of Cap- 
sael, that dide many werkis ; he killide two 
stronge men of Moab; and he 3ede doun, 
and killide a lioun in the myddilj of a eis- 
terne, in the tyme of snow; and he killide 23 
a man of Egipt, whos stature was of fyue 
eubitis, and he hadde a spere as the beem 
of webbis; therfor.Banaye 3ede* doun to 
hym with a 3erde, and rauyschide! the 
spere, which” he held" in the° hond, and 
killide hym with his owne spere. Banaye, 24 
the sone of Joiada, dide these thingis, that 
was moost named among thre stronge 
men, and was? the firste among thretti; 25 
netheles he cam not til! to the thre; so- 
thelit Dauid settides hym at his eeret. For- 26 
sothe" the strongeste men ‘in the oost’ 
weren <Asael, the brother of Joab, and 
Eleanan, the sone of his fadris brothir of 
Bethleem, Semynoth Arorites, Helles Phal-?7 


4 his hond a¥F pr.m. 


x Om.1. ¥ han brou3t ts. 
dreiside up 18. © spere!. 


W wolde not 1, 
¢ these thre 1s. 


shaft or speres. fOm.a. § Om.x. 1 Om.s. ithe strongest 1s. j middis s. k wente 1. !rauyschide 
frohimis. ™ thats. .haddeis. ohisc. Phe wasis. 4Om.x. ‘andis. § setter. t eere for 
a good counselour 1s. % Certis1. ¥ Om.1. 


344 


29cuytes, Abieser Anothotites, Sobachai 
30 Sothites, [lay Achoites, Marai Netho- 
phatites, Heles, the sone of Bana, Netho- 
31 phatites, and Hay, the sone of Relay, of 
Gabaoth of the sonys of Beniamyn ; Ba- 
32naya Pharathonytes, men of the strem 
of Gaaz, Abiel Arabathites, Azynoth 
33 Baruanythes, Eliaba Salaonythes, the 
sonys of Assem Jesonythes, Jonathan, 
3tthe sone of Saga, Ararites, Achiam, the 
35sone of Achar, Ararithes, Eliphal, the 
36sone of Vri, Efer Mechurathites, Ahia 
37 Philonytes, Azrai Carmelites, Joamy, the 
sssone of Eyrabay, Joel, the brother of 
Nathan, Mybahur, the sone of Agaray, 
39 Selech Amonytes, Noorai Berothites, the 
aosquyer of Joab, sone of Saruye, Yras 
41 Jethreus, Gareb Jethreus, Vrias Etheus, 
a2Sabab, the sone of Choli, Abyna, the 
sone of Segar Rubenyte, prince of Ru- 
43 benytis, and with hym thritty; Hanan, 
the sone of Macha, and Josephath Ma- 
44 thanytes, Osias Astorothites, Semma, and 
45Rahel, sonys of Otayn Aroerites, Le- 
diel, the sone of Zamry, and Joa, his bro- 
46 ther, Thosaites, Heliel Maanytes, Jeribai 
and Josia, sonys of Elnaen, Jethma Mo- 
abites, Heliel, and Obed, and Jasiel of 
Mosobia. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Thes forsothe camen to Dauid in Siche- 
lech, whanne 3it he flei3 Saul, the sone 
of Ciz; the whiche weren most stronge 

zaud noble. fi3ters, bendynge bowe, and 
with either hond throwynge stones with 
slyngis, and dressynge arewis ; of the bre- 

3theren of Saul of Beniamyn, prynce 
Achieser, and Joas, the sone of Samaa 
Gabatites, and Jasahel, and Phalleg, 
sonys of Asmod, and Barachia, and Jeu 

4 Anothothites ; also Samayas Gabaonytes, 
most stronge among thritty and vpon 
thritty ; Jeremyas, and Jezihel, and Jo- 
shannan, and Zebadga Zerothites, Elusai, 
and Jerymuth, and Baalia, and Samaria, 
6and Saphia Araphites, Helchana, and 
Jesia, and Azrael, and Jeser, and Jes- 

y the whiche 1. 


wand Iras s. * these men s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


2 ful stronge 1. 


<1, 39s 


lonytes, Tras”, the sone of Acces of Thecue, 28 
Abieser of Anathot, Sobochay Sochites, 29 
Ylai Achoytes, Maray Nethophatithes, 30 
Heles, the sone of Banaa, Nethophatithes, 
Ethaa, the sone of Rabai, of Gabaath of 31 
the sones of Beniamyn; Banaye Phara- 
tonythes, men of the stronde Gaas, Abihel 32 
Arabatithes, Azmoth Baruanythes, Eliaba 
Salaonythes, the sones of Assem Gesony- 33 
thes, Jonathan, the sone of Saga, Ararithes, 
Achiam, the sone of Achar, Ararites, Eli- _ 
phal, the sone of Mapher, Mechoratithes, 36 
Ahya Phellonythes, Asrahi Carinelites, 37 
Neoray, the sone of Thasbi, Johel, the bro- 38 
ther of Nathan, Mabar, the sone of Ag- 
garay, Selech Ammonythes, Nooray Bero-39 
thites, the squyer of Joab, sone of Saruye, 
Iras Jetreus, Gareb Jethreus, Vrie Ethei, OH 
Sabab, the sone of Ooli, Adyna, the sone 42 
of Segar Rubenytes, prince of Rubenytis, 
and thritti men with hym; Hanan, the43 
sone of Macha, and Josaphath Mathany- 
thes, Ozias Astarothites, Semma and Ja-44 
hel, the sones of Hotayn Aroerites, Ledi-45 
hel, the sone of Zamri, and Joha, his bro- 
ther, Thosaythes, Hehiel Maanytes, Jery-46 
bay aid Josia, the sones of Helnaen, Jeth- 
ina Moabites, Heliel, and Obed, and Jasi- 
hel of Masobia. 


CAP. Xie an 

Also these* camen to Dauid in Sichelech, 1 
whanne he fledde 3it fro Saul, the sone of 
Cys; whicheY weren strongeste? men and 
noble fizterys, beendynge bouwe, and cast-2 
ynge stoonys with slyngis with euer either 
hond, and dressynge arowis; of the bri- 
theren of Saul of Beniamyn, the princes 
Achieser*, and Joas, the sones of Samaa of ® 
Gabaath, and Jazachel, and Phallech, the 
sones of Azmod, and Barachie, and Jehu 
of Anathot; also Samay of Gabaon was4 
the strongeste among thretti and aboue 
thretti; Jeremy, and Jezihel, and Johan- 
nan, and Zebadga Zerothites, Elusay, and 5 
Jerymoth, and Baalia, and Samaria, and 
Saphia Araphites, Elchana, and Jesia,6 
and Azrahe), and Jezer, and Jesbaam of 


a of Thieser a prom. » and s. 


XIL. 7—-20. I. PARALIPOMENON. 345 


7baam of Tharemy, Joelam forsothe, and 
eSabadia, sonys of Jeroam of Jedor. But 
and of Gaddi ouerflowen to Dauid, whanne 
he lurkide in desert, most® stronge men, 
and best fi3ters, holdynge target and 
spere; the faces of hem as faces of a 
lyoun, and swyft as capretis in hillis; 
9Ozer prince, Obdias the secound, Eliab 
lothe thridde, Masmana the ferth, Hiere- 
limyes the fyfte, Becchi the sixte, Heliel 
i2the seuenth, Johannan the ei3te’, Elzadad 
13 the nynthe, Jeremyas the tenthe, Bachana 
11 the elleuenth; thes of the sonys of Gad, 
princes of the hoost; the last was before 
to an hundrith kny3tis, and the® most to 
15a thousand. Thes ben that passeden 
ouer Jordan the first moneth, whanne it 
was wont to flowen vpon his brynkis; 
and thei dryuen alle that dwelliden in 
the valeys at the este coost and at the 
16 west. Forsothe and there camen of Ben- 
iamyn and of Juda to the strengthe, in 
17the whiche dwellide Dauid. And Dauid 
wente out to meet with hem, aud seith, 
3if pesybly 3e ben commen to me, that 3e 
helpen to me, myn herte be joyned to 
30u; 3if forsothe 3e weyten to me for 
myn aduersaries, whanne I wickidnesse 
haue not in myn hondis, God of oure 
is fadirs see and deme. The spirit forsothe 
clothed Abisay, the prince among thritty, 
and seith, Thine we ben, O Dauid, and 
with thee, the sone" of Ysay; pese, pese 
to thee, and pese to thyn helpers, thee 
forsothe helpith the Lord thi God. Than 
Dauid toke hem, and sette hem princis of 
i9the cumpanye. Forsothe of Manasses 
ouerflowen to Dauid, whanne he came 
with Philisteis to fijten ajenus Saul, and 
he fau3te not with hem, for, the counseil 
goon in, the princis of Philisteis senten 
him a3ein, seyinge, In perele of joure! 
heued be he turned a3eyn to his lord 
20Saul. Whanne thanne) he is turned 
a3ein in to Sichelech, ouerflowen to hym 


€amonge rH. f eizthe c. eizjtethe £. ey3tith nH. 


Taremy, and Joelam, and Sabadia, the7 

sones of Jeroam of Jedor. But also ofs 

Gaddi* strongeste men, and beste fiz3teris, * Gaddi; that 
holdynge scheld and spere, fledden over a Gal Lee 
to Dauid, whanne he was hid in deseert; * 7" 
the faces of hem as the face of a lioun, 

and thei weren swift as capretis iu hillis. 

Ozer was the prince, Obdias the secounde, 9 

Eliab the thridde, Masmana the fourthe, 10 

Jeremye the fyuethe, Becchi the sixte,i1 

Heliel the seuenthe, Johannan the ei3the, 12 
Helzedad the nynthe, Jeremye the tenthe, 13 

Bachana the euleunenthe ; these of the sones 14 

of Gad weren princes of the oostt; the® + after that 
laste{ was souereyn ouer an hundrid Ba haa 
kny3tis, and the moost was souereyn eee nis 
ouer a thousynde. These it ben that pass-15 ¢ the Jast is he 
iden ouer Jordan in the firste monethe, {eye or" 
whanne it was wont to flowe ouer hise 9 * 
brynkis; and thei dryueden’ awei alle 

men? that dwelliden in the valeis at the § men; thes 


s weren hethen 
eest coost and west coost. Sotheli' also 16 men, that ocu- 


A pieden a part of 
men of Beniamyn and of Juda camen to fioicna oe the 

. : sones of Israel. 
the stronge hoold, whereyn Dauid dwellide. 5 tgp eps 
And Dauid 3ede out a3ens hem, and seide, 17 xob. 


If 3e ‘ben comyni pesible to me, for to helpe 
me, myn herte be ioyned to 3ou; for- 
sothe* if 3e setten aspies to me for myn 
aduersaries, sithen! Y haue not wickid- 
nesse in the hondis, God of our fadris se 
and deme. Forsothe™ the spirit || clothide 18 \\ spirit; that 
Amasay 4], the prynce among thritti, and he a ag 
seide, A"! Dauid, we ben thin, and thou, pent Lanter 


sone of Ysai, we schulen be with thee; ae a 
pees, pees to thee, and pees to thin helperis, q In Ebren it 
for thi Lord God helpith thee. Therfor is prot wand 


this was Ama- 
Dauid resseyuede hem, and made® princes 8%,#5 Ebreus 
seien. Lire 
of the cumpeny. Forsothe? men of Ma-19 Here. xob. 
nasses fledden ouer to Dauid, whanne he 
cam with Filisteis to fi3te azens Saul, and 
he fau3te not with hem, for after that the 
princes of Filisteis hadden take counsel, 
thei senten hym% a3en, and seiden, With 
perel of oure heed he schal turne a3en”™ to 
Saul his lord. Therfor whanue* Dauid 20 


¢ Om. Fr. } sonys F pr. m. I. iourec. J Om. 4. 


eandthers. fOm.1. &drenenr. 4 that is, hethen menup. i Andis. jcomenr. * and 1s. 
lsithr. ™ Andi. 201s. he maders. P Andis. 4% Danidis. "Om. x. 8 Oma. 


VOL, II. 


YY 


346 


fro Manasse, Eduas, and Josadab, and 
Jedielech, Mychael, and Naaz, and Joza- 
bath, and Helieu, and Salathy, princis of 
2ikny3tis in Manasse. hes 3euen help to 
Dauid ajeyns the lity] theeues; alle for- 
sothe weren most stronge men, and ben 
22maad princis in the hoost. Bot and by 
eche days thei camen to Dauith, to helpen 
to hym, vuto the time that there were maad 
a grete noumbre as the hoost of God. 
23 This forsothe is the noumbre of the princis 
of the hoost that camen to Dauid, whan 
he was in Ebron, that thei translate‘ 
the rewme of Saul to hym, aftir the word 
240f the Lord; the sonys of Juda, berynge 
target and spere, sexe thousand and ei3t 
25hundrith, redy to batail; of the sonys of 
Symeon, most stronge men to fi3ten, 
ag¢seuen thousand and an hundrith; of the 
sonys of Leuy, foure thousand and sixe 
27hundrith; and Joiada, prince of the stok 
of Aaron, and with hem thre thousand 
2gand seuen hundrith ; Sadoch also, a chijld 
of noble preuynge, and the hous of his 
29fadir, princis two and twenty; of the 
sonys forsothe of Beniamyn, the! bre- 
theren of Saul, thre thousand ; forsothe 
a grete partye of hem 3it folowede the 
3ohous of Saul; but of™ the sonys of 
Effraym, twenty thousand and ei3t hun- 
drith, most stronge in streyngthe, men 
sinamyd in their kynredis; and of the half 
partye of the lynage of Manasse, ei3teene 
thousand; eche bi their names camen, 
sathat thei ordeyn kyng Dauith; of the 
sonys also of Ysachar, men tau;t, that 
knewen alle tymes to comaunden what 
Yrael schuld done, princis two hundreth ; 
al forsothe the tother lynage folowede 
33the counseils of hem; bot of Zabulon 
that wenten out to bateil, and stoden in 
the scheltrun, enfourmed in armys of 
batail, fyfty thousand camen in to help, 
3inot in double hert; and of Neptalym, 
princis of kny3thode, and with hem 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


XII. 21——34. 


turnede a3en in to Sichelech, men of Ma- 
nasses fledden ouer to hym, Eduas, .and 
Jozabad, Jedihel, and Mychael, and Naas, 
and Jozabath, and Helyu, and Salathi, 
princes of kny3tis in Manassest. These 21 
men 3auen help to Dauid ajens theues; 
for alle weren strongeste" men’, and thei¥ 
weren maad prynces in the oost. But also 22 
bi ech dai men camen to Dauid, for to 
helpe hym, til that the noumbre was 
maad greet as the oost of God. Also this 23 
is the noumbre of princes of the oost that 
camen to Dauid, whanne he was in Ebron, 
that thei schulden ‘translate the rewme of 
Saul to hym, bi the* word of the Lord; 
the sones of Juda, berynge scheeld and 24 
spere, sixe thousynde and eiz3te hundrid, 
redi to batel; of .the sones of Simeon, 25 
seuene thousinde and an hundrid, of strong- 
este men to fizte; of the sones of Leuy, 26 
foure thousynde and sixe hundrid; also27 
Joiada, prince of the generacioun of Aaron, 
and thre thousynd and seuene hundrid 
with hym; also Sadoch, a child of nobles 
wit, and the hows of his fadir, twei and 
twenti princes; forsothe’ of the sones of 2g 
Beniamyn, britheren’ of Saul, thre thou- 
synde; for a greet part of hem suede 3it 
the hows of Saul; forsothe* of the sones 30 
of Effraym, twenti thousynde and ei3te 
hundrid, strongeste> men in bodili my3t, 
men named in her meynees; and of thes 
half part of the lynage of Manasses, ei3tene 
thousynde; alle camen bi her names, to 
make Dauid kyng; also of the sones of32 
Ysacar, two hundrid princes, lernd men, 
that knewen ech tyme to comaunde what 
the puple of Israel ou3t to do; sotheli® al 
the residue’ lynage® suede the counseils of 
hem; forsothef of Zabulon camen fiftis; 
thousynde in to helpe®, not in double herte, 
which" 3eden! out to batel, and stoden in 
the scheltrun, and weren maad redi with 
armuris of batel; and of Neptalym ag, 
thousynde prynces, aud with hem camen* 


* translatydex. 'Om.4. ™ Om. FH. 
* Manasses lynage ts. ful stronger. YOm.1. WOm.1. *Om.1. Yand ts, 2 the britheren s. 
aandis. > ful stronger. Candis. 4remenaunt rt. residue or remenaunts.  ° of the lynage is. 
fandis. & his helpe 1. helpe of Dauith s, » the which. 'wentenr. * Om. 1. : 


XI. 35--XII. 5. 


enfourmed in scheelde and spere, seuen 
3sand thritty thousand; of Dan also, redy 
to bateil, ey3t and twenty thousand and 
36sexe hundreth; and of Aser, goynge out" 
to fi3ten in the scheltrun egre, fourty 
37thousand. Be3ond Jordan forsothe, of 


the sonys of Ruben, and of Gad, and of: 


the half lynage of Manasse, enfourmed 
in armes of batel, an hundreth and 
38twenty thousand. Alle thes men fi3ters 
and redy to fizten, with perfijt hert camen 
in to Ebron, that thei’setten Dauid kyng 
vpon al°® Yrael ; bot and al the remnaunt 
of Ysrael weren in oon hert, that Dauith 
39 wer maad kyng vpon alP Yrael. And 
thei weren there anentis Dauith thre 
days, etinge and drynkynge; forsothe 
the bretheren’ of hem hadde beforne 
4omaad redy to hem; bot and thilk that 
weren besidis hem, vnto Ysachar and 
Zabulon and Neptalym, brou3ten looues 
to eten, in assis, and chamoilis,’ and 
mulis, and oxen; mele, and chargis of 
fijgis, and dried grapis, wijne, oyle, oxen, 
and wethers, at al plente; ioye forsothe 
was in Yrael. 
CAP. XIII. 
1 Dauith forsothe wente in to counseil 
with the maystirs of thousandis, and 
maystirs of hundrithes, and with al the 
2princis. And he seith to al the com- 
panye of the sonys of Yrael, 3if it plesith 
to 30u, and of the Lord oure’™ God goth 
out the word that I speke, sende we to 
oure other bretheren in’ alle the regyouns 
of Yrael, and to the prestis and Leuytis 
that dwellen in the suburbis of cytees, 
3that thei ben gedered to us, and we 
bryngen a3eyn the arke of God to us; 
forsothe we sou3ten it not in the days of 
4Saul. And al the multitude answerd, 
that it so schuld be done; forsothe the 
sword pleside to al the puple. Thanne 
Dauide gederide al Ysrael, fro Seor of 


nOm. ru. °Om. Fr. P Om. apcri. 


ltwot pr. m. eizte I sec. m. ™ of men x. 
qtos. Tupon is. ® remenaunt is. ‘ upon Is. 
y forsothe 1s. 2 Sothely 1s. he seide 1. 
remenaunt of oure 1. the remenaunt our s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


2 men maad t. 
u oxen 8. 
b that 1s. 
f to dekenes plures. 


Yy2 


347 


seuene! and thritti thousynde men," arayed 
with scheeld and speere; also of Dan, ei3te 35 
and twenti thousynde and sixe hundrid 
men, maad® redi to batel; and of Aser36 
fourti thousynde men, goynge out to batel, 
and stirynge® to batel in the scheltrun. 
Forsothe? bizende Jordan, of the sones of 37 
Ruben, and of Gad, and of the half part of 
the lynage of Manasses, sixe scoore thou- 
synde men, araied with armuris of! batel. 
Alle these men werriouris and redi to batel 38 
camen with perfit herte in to Ebron, to 
make Danid kyng on” al Israel; but also 
alle the residue’ of Israel weren of oon 
herte, that Dauid schulde be maad king 
ont al Israel. And thei weren ther at39 
Dauid thre daies, and eten and drunken; 
for her britheren hadden maad redi to 
hem ; but also thei that weren ni3 hem, 40 
til to Isacar and Zabulon and Neptalym, 
brou3ten looues on assis, and camelis, and 
mulis, and oxis", for to ete; mele, bundelis 
of pressid figis, dried’ grapis, wyn, oile™, 
oxis* and wetheres, to al plentee ; forY ioy 
was in Israel. 


CAP. XIII. 


Forsothe? Dauid took counsel with tri- 1 
bunes, and centuriouns, and alle princes ; 
and seide* to alle the cumpeny of thee 
sones of Israel, If it plesith 30u, and if the 
word which? Y speke goith out fro oure® 
Lord God4, sende we to ‘oure residue® bri- 
theren to alle the cuntrees of Israel, and to 
preestis and dekenes‘ that dwellen in the 
subarbis of citees, that thei be gaderid to 
vs, and’ that we brynge a3en to vs the arke 3 
of oure God; for* we sou3ten not it in the 
daies of Saul. And al the multitude, 
answeride, that it schulde be don so; for 
the word pleside al the puple. Therfors 
Dauid gaderide togidere al Israel, fro Sior 
of Egipt til thou entre in to Emath, that 
he schulde brynge the arke of God fro 


q brether rn. 8 Om. BcFu. 


F 3oure Hi. 
p And ts. 
X oxen is. 
€ the 


Sof stirynge c. stirid pb. 
wand oile x. 
4 oure God 1s. 

i til that 15. 


v and dried cx. 
¢ the 1s. joure x. 
£Om.s. >» certis rs. 


348 


Egipt vnto the tyme that thou go in to 
Emath, that he brynge the arke of God 
6fro Cariathiarym. And Dauid stey3ide up, 
and alle the men of Yrael, to the hill of 
Cariathiarym, that is in Juda, that he 
brynge the arke of the Lord God syttynge 
vpon chernbyn, wher inwardly is clepid 
7the name of hym. And thei putten the 
arke of the Lord God vpon a newe wayn 
of the hous of Amynadab; Osa forsothe 
and the bretheren of hym dryuen the 
swayne. Bot Dauid and al Ysrael pleyden 
beforn the Lord, in al vertue, in songis, 
and in harpis, and in sawtrees, and in 
tymbris, and in cymbalis, aud in‘ trumpis. 
9 And whanne thei weren commen to the 
cornflore of Chydon, Osa strau3t out his 
hond, that he susteyne the arke ; forsothe 
the oxe pleyinge a litill wi3t bowede it 
10doun. And so the Lord is wroth a3einus 
Osam, and smote hym, forthi that he 
hadde touchid the arke; and he is deed 
iithere beforn the Lord. And Dauid is 
sory, for thi that the Lord hadde deuydid 
Osam; and he clepid that place The 
Deuydynge of Ose vnto the present day. 
12 And he dredde the Lord that tyme, sey- 
inge, What maner wise may I bryngen 
13in to me the ark of the Lord? And 
for this cause he brou3t it not to hym, 
that is, in the cyte of Dauid, bot turnede 
it asyde in to the hous of Obededom 
14Jethei. Thanne the arke of God dwellide 
in the hous of Obededom Jethei thre 
monethis; and the Lord blesside to the 
hous of hym, and to alle thingis that he 
hadde. 
CAP. XIV. 


1 Iram forsothe, kyng of Tyri, sent mes- 
sagers to Dauid, and cedre trees, and 
crafty men of wallis, and of trees, that 

athei bylden to hym™ an hous. And 
Dauid knew3 that the Lord hadde con- 


t Om. ez. 


k stiede up 1s. 
q And 1s. Sotheli kuxb. 
teyne or stables. ® certis 1s. 
athe arke 1s. >’ Om. Is. 
Sintois. 4 al thing s. 


x oxen Is. 
© departid or sleyne s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


lthatis. ™ ynwardly clepid 1s. 


n upon 1s. 
T pleiden or gladedin s. 


8 in tympans s. 
ywilide either pleying for welinesse s. 
4 Dauith s. 
i Om. 1. he sent to him s. 


XILI. 6—XIV. 2. 


Cariathiarim. And Dauid stiede*, andé 
alle the men of Israel, to the hil of Cariath- 
iarym, which! is in Juda, that he schulde 
brynge fro thennus the arke of the Lord 
God sittynge on cherubyn, where his name 
was clepid™. And thei puttiden the arke7 
of the Lord God" on a newe wayn fro the 
hous of Amynadab; forsothe® Oza and 
hise britheren driueden? the wayn. For-s 
sothe? Dauid and al Israel pleieden’ bifor 
the Lord, with al mi3t, in songis, and in 
harpis, and sautries, and tympans ‘, and 
cymbalis‘, and trumpis. Forsothe" whanne 9 
thei hadden come to the cornfloor of Chi- 
don, Oza strechide forth his hond to sus- 
teyne’ the arke; for” the oxe* wexynge 
wieldeY hadde bowid? it* a litil. Therfor to 
the Lord was wrooth a3ens Oza, and 
smoot hym, for he hadde touchide the 
ark; and he was deed there bifor the 
Lord. And Dauid was sori, for the Lord 1! 
hadde departid* Oza; and he? clepide that 
place The Departyng of Oza ‘til in toe 
present! dai. And Dauid dredde the Lord 12 
in that tyme, and seide, How may Y brynge 
in to me the arke of the Lord? And fori3 
this cause he brou3te not it to? hym, that 
is, in to the citee of Dauid, but he turn- 
ede it in to the hows of Obededom of Geth. 
Therfor the arke of God dwellide in the14 
hous of Obededom of Geth thre monethis ; 
and the Lord blessid his hows, and ‘alle 
thiugis® that he hadde. 


CAP. XIV. 


And Iram, the kyng of Tyre, sente mes-! 
sageris to Dauid, and ‘he sente! trees of 
cedre, and werk men of wallis and of trees, 
that thei schulden bilde to hym an hows. 
And Dauid knewe that the Lord hadde2 


"God & pr. m. 


Candi. Om.s. Pdreuen £1. dreuyn Lp. 
tin cymbalis s. 2 Andis. ¥ sns- 
2 bowid asijde 1s. 


© ynto1. into x. ‘this present 1Ks pr. m. 


XIV. 3—16. 


fermed hym in to kyng vpon Yrael; and 
his rewme was putt up vpon Yrael his 
3puple. And Dauid toke other wijues in 
Jerusalem, and gat sonis and dou3tirs. 
4And thes the names of hem that ben 
born to hym in Jerusalem; Sammu, and 
sSobab, and Nathan, and Salomon, Jeber, 
‘and Elisu, and Heeli, and Eliphalech, 
salso Noga, and Napheg, and Japhie, 
zand Elisama, and Baliada, and Eliphe- 
8lech. Forsothe Philisteis heerynge, for 
thi that Dauith was anoynt in to kyng 
vpon al Yrael, thei stey3eden up alle for to 
sechen hym. The whiche thing whanne 
Dauid hadde herd, he wente out to 
omeeten with hem. Bot the Philisteis 
commynge ben held out in the valey of 
i0Raphaym; and Dauith counseilide the 
Lord, seyinge, 3if I schal steyen up to 
the Philisteis ? and 3if thou schalt taken 
hem in to myne hondis? And the Lord 
seide to hym, Stey3e up, and I schal 
utaken hem in thin hond. And whanne 
thei hadden stey3eden up in to Baal 
Farasym, Dauid smote hem there, and 
seide, God hath deuydide myne enemyse 
by myne hond, as watirs ben deuydide. 
And therfore the name of that place is 
i2clepid Baal Pharasym; and there thei 
forsoken their goddis, the whiche Dauith 
13comaundide to be brent. Another while 
forsothe Philisteis fellen on, and ben 
u4helde out in the valey; and eft Dauith 
counseilede the Lord, and the Lord seide 
to hym, Thou schalt not stey3en up aftir 
hem; go thou awey fro hem, and thou 
schalt fynden hem forn a3eynus the pere 
istrees. And whanne thou heerist the 
sown of goynge in the cop of the pere 
trees, thanne thou schalt gon out to 
batail; forsothe God is gon out beforne 
thee, that he smyte the tentis of the’ 
16 Philisteis. Than Dauid dyde as God 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 349 


confermyd hym in to kyng onj Isracl; 
and that his rewme was reisid onj his 
puple Israel. And Dauid took otheres 
wyues in Jerusalem, and gendride* sones 
and dou3tris. And these ben the names 4 
of hem that weren borun to hym in Jeru- 
salem; Sammu, and Sobab, Nathan, and 
Salomon, Jeber, and Elisu, and Heli, ands 
Eliphalech, and Noga, and Napheg, andé 
Japhie, and Elisama, and Baliada, and7 
Eliphelech. Forsothe! the Filisteis herdens 
that Dauid was anoyntid™ ‘in to" kyng on® 
al Israel, and alle? stieden? to seke Dauid’. 
And whanne Dauid hadde herd this thing, 
he 3ede out a3ens hem. Forsothe* Filisteis9 
camen, and weren spred abrood in the 
valey of Raphaym; and Dauid counselide 10 
the Lord‘, and seide, Whether Y schal 
stie" to FilisteisY ? and whether thou schalt 
bitake hem in to myn hondis? And the 
Lord seide to hym”, Stie thou*, and Y schal 
bitake hem inY thin hond. And whanney 
thei? hadden styed* in to Baal Pharasym, 
Dauid smoot hem there, and seide, God hath 
departid myn enemyes bi myn hond, as 
watris ben departid. And therfor the name 
of that place was clepid Baal Pharasym ; 
and thei leften there her goddis, which 12 
Dauid comaundide to be brent. Forsothe‘ 13 
another tyme Filisteis¢ felden in, and 
weren spred abrood in the valei; and eft j4 
Dauid counseilide® the Lord, and the Lord 
seide to hymn, Thou schalt not stie’ aftir 
hem; go awei fro hem, and thou schalt 
come a3ens hem euen ajens the pere trees. 
And whanne thou schalt here the sowun;; 
of a goere in the cop® of the pere trees, 
thanne thou schalt go out to batel; for the 
Lord is go out byfor" thee, to smyte the 
castels' of Filisteis. Therfor Dauid dide1¢ 
as God comaundide to hym, and he smoot 
the castels' of Filisteis fro Gabaon ‘til to* 
Gazara. And the name of Dauid wasi7 


v Om. 4. 


jupon is. he gaat 1. he gendrides. }1 Andis. ™anoynd a. ® Om. G. 
® Dauith to fizt with him. s. 
w Dauid ts. 

¢ And 1s. 
i powers Is. 


4 3eden up I. stieden vp s. 
Lord s, “stie up 1s. VY the Filisteis 1. 
Filisteis s.  ® styed up 1s. > the which 1. 
fstie up ts. & cop or heiz3t s. to fore s. 


© upon is. Palle thei 1s. 
t Lord, that is, he took counsel of the 

y into FKLxb. 2 the Philistees 1. 
e was counselid be s. 


s And Is. 
Xthou up Is. 
the Filisteis 1s. 
k to x. 


350 


hadde comaundide to hym, and he smote 
the tentis of Philisteis fro Gabaon vnto 
17Gazera. And the name of Dauid is 
puplischid in alle regiouns, and the Lord 
3aue the drede of hym vpon alle gentilis. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And he maad houses to hym in the 
cyte of Dauid, and he bilde up the place 
of the ark of God, and he strau3t out to 

2it a tabernacle. Thanne Dauid seide, 
Vnleeful it is, that of eny man be born 
the arke of God bot of Leuytis, whome 
the Lord hath chosen to bern” it, and to 
mynystre to hym vnto with outen eend. 

3 And he gadered al Yrael in to Jerusalem, 
that the arke of God were born in to hys 
place, the whiche he hadde redy before 

4made to it; also and the sonys of Aaron 

sand Leuytes; of the sonys of Caath 
Vriel was prince, and the bretheren of 
shym two hundrith and twenty; of the 
sonys of Merery, Azaia prince, and the 
bretheren of hym two hundrith and 
7thritty; of the sonys of Jersan, Joel 
prince, and the bretheren of hym au hun- 
edrith and thritty; of the sonis of Elisa- 
phan, Semeias prince, and the bretheren 
gof hym two hundrith; of the sonys’ of 
Ebron, Helyel prince, and the bretheren 
100of hym ey3tye*; of the sonys of Osiel, 
Amynadab prince, and the bretheren of 
uhym an hundrith and twelue. And Da- 
uid clepide Sadoch and Abiathar prestis, 
and Leuytis Vriel, Azaia, Johel, Seme- 
i2yam, Eliel, and Amynadab. And he 
seide to hem, 3e that ben princes of Le- 
uytis meynees, be 3e halowed with jour 
bretheren, and bryngith the arke of the 
Lord God of Yrael to the place, the 
i3Wwhiche is maad redy to it; lest, as at 
the bigynnynge, for 3e weren not pre- 
sent, the Lord smote us, so and nowe it 
be done, us doynge eny thinge vnleeful. 


Ww bren Hu. 


linto1s. ™the drede of Danidis. 2 upon I. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


XIV. 17-—XV. 13. 


puplischid in! alle cuntreis, and the on 
3a his drede™ on® alle folkis.” 


CAP. XV. 


And he® made to hym housis in thei 
citee of Dauid, and he bildide ‘a place? to 
the arke of the Lord, and araiede a taber- 
nacle to it. Thanne Dauid seide, It -is2 
vnleueful, that the arke of God be borun4 
of ‘ony thing no" but of the dekenes, 
whiche the Lord chees to bere it, and ‘for 
to mynystre® to hym ‘til in tot with outen 
ende. And he" gaderide togidere al Israel 3 
in to Jerusalem, that the arke of God 
schulde be brou3t in to ‘his place’, which* 
he hadde maad redy to it; also and hea 
gaderide togidere the sones of Aaron, 
and the dekenes; of the sones of Caaths 
Vriel was prince, and hise britheren two 
hundrid and twenti*; of the sones of Me-e 
rari Asaya was prince, and hise britheren 
two hundrid and thritti; of the sones of7 
Gerson the prince was Johel, and hise 
britheren an hundrid and thretti; of thes 
sones of Elisaphan Semei was prynce, 
and hise britheren two hundrid; of thes 
sones of Ebroun Heliel was prince, and: 
hise britheren foure score; of the sones of 10 
Oziel Amynadab was prince, and ‘hise 
britheren an hundrid and twelue. Andi 
Dauid clepide Sadoch and ~ Abiathar: 
preestis, and theY dekenes Vriel, Asaie’, 
Johel?, Semeie’, Eliel, and) Amynadab; 
and seide® to hem, 3e that ben princes of 12+ Glose. It was 
the meynees of Leuy, be’ halewid with emaclie 
3oure britheren, and brynge 3e the arke of {nif rot ching 
the Lord God of Israel to the place, which® geet 
is maad redi to it; lest, asf at the bigyn-13 hem mies 
nyng, for 3e weren not present, the Lord  vnleful thing 
smoot vs, and® now it be don, if we don ae 
ony vuleueful thing}. Therfor the preestis 14 '?°"* * 


* eiste H. 


© Dauid is. Panhousis. 4 borun aboute ts. 


Y oother 1. eny othere nos. § for the mynisterie kK. forte ministre u. t til to 1K pr.m. in tox. ™ Dauid 1s. 


w the which 1. 
d be 3e 18. 


v the place of itis 


Semeie s. © he seide 1s. e that Is. 


X twenti men s. 
f Om. CDEFIKLMPQRSUWXDb. 


aand Johel x. and 


& so and Is. 


yOm.s. Zand Asaie 1s. 


XV. 14——25. 


14 Thanne the prestis ben halowed, and the 
Leuytis, that thei beren the ark of the 
15 Lord God of Yrael. And the sonys of 
Leuy token the arke of God, as Moyses 
hadde comaundide aftir the word of God, 
with their schulderis in berynge staues. 
is And Dauid seide to the pryncis of Le- 
uytis, that thei schulden ordeynen of 
their bretheren syngers inY orgnes of 
musikis, that is, in sawtrees, and syng- 
ynge instrumentis, and cymbalis; that 
the sown of gladnesse sowne a3eyn in 
i7hei3tis. And thei ordeynden Leuytes, 
Heeman, the sone of Joel, and of his 
bretheren, Asaph, the sone of Barachie; 
of the sonis forsothe of Merery, the bre- 
theren of hem, Ethan, the sone of Cha- 
1ssaie, and with hem their bretheren; in 
the secounde ordre, Zacharie, and Ben, 
and Jasiel, and Semmyramoth, and Ja- 
hiel, and Anysey, and Heliab, and Ba- 
nayam, and Elifalu, and Macenyam, and 
19Obededon, and Johiel, porters; forsothe 
the chauntours? Eman, Asaph, and E- 
20than, in brasen cymbalis syngynge; Za- 
charie forsothe, and Osiel, and Semyra- 
moth, and Jayhel, and Ham, and Eliab, 
and Maazias, and Banaias, in orgnys* 
2isungyn priue thingis; forsothe Matha- 
tias, and Eliphalu, and Macenyas, and 
Ebededom, and Jehiel, and Ozasyn, in 
harpis for the ey3tethe sungyn cyny- 
chyon, that is, to the God ouercomer vic- 
22 torie and preysynge ; Chononyas forsothe, 
prynce of the Leuytis, was beforne to the 
prophecie, and to the melodye to be 
sungyn before, he was forsothe fulwijs ; 
z3and Barachias, and Helchana, porters of 
24the arke; bot Sebenyas, and Josaphath, 
and Mathanael, and Amazai, and Zacha- 
rias, and Banayas, and Eliezer, prestis, 
sowneden with trumpis beforne the arke 
of the Lord; and Ebededom, and Achy- 
25maas, weren porters of the arke. Thanne 


Yand in «. and n. 


1 Om. 1. 
D and 1s. 


h upon 1s, 


Kk prince s. 
Aheliab x see. m. 


°oOm.1. 


2 channtour Bz. 


10m. 1. 
P and 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 351 


and dekenes weren halewid, that thei 
schuiden bere the arke of the Lord God 
of Israel. And the sones of Leuy token 1s 
the arke of God with barris on" her 
schuldris, as Moises comaundide bi thei 
word of the Lord. And Dauid seide tois 
the princes* of dekenes, that thei schulden 
ordeyne of her britheren syngeris in or- 
guns of musikis, that is, in giternes, and 
harpis, and symbalis; that the sown of 
gladnesse schulde sowne an hi3. And thei 17 
ordeyneden dekenes, Heman, the sone of 
Johel, and of hise britheren, Asaph, the 
sone of Barachie; sotheli of the sones of 
Merary, britheren of hem, thei ordeyneden 
Ethan, the sone of Casaye, and the bri-18 
theren of hem with hem; in the secunde 
ordre ‘thet ordeyneden! Zacarie, and Ben, 
and Jazihel, and Semyramoth, and Jahiel, 
‘and Am, Heliab™, and Benaye, and Maa- 
sie, and Mathathie, and Eliphalu, and 
Mathenye, and Obededon, and Jehiel, por- 
teris; forsothe" ‘thet ordeyneden® thei 
syngeris Eman, Asaph, and Ethan, sown- 
ynge in brasun cymbalis; sotheli? Zaca-20 
rie, and Oziel, and Semyramoth, and Ja- 
hihel, and Ham, and Eliab, and Maasie, 
and Banaie, sungund pryuetees' in gi- 
ternes ; forsothe’ Mathathie, and Eliphalu, 21 
and Mathenye, and Obededom, and Je- 
hiel, and Ozazym, sungen in harpis for 
the ei3tithe}, and epynychion, ‘that is, + that is, for 
victorie ‘be tot God ouercomere® ; forsothe’ 22 mie 
Chinonye, the prince of dekenes, and of ey aay ak 
profecie, was souereyn to biforsynge me- {hei song. Lire 
lodie, for he was ful wijs; and Barachie, 23 
and Elchana, weren porters of the arke; 
forsothe* Sebenye, and Josaphath, and 24 
Mathanael, and Amasaye, and Zacarie, 
and Banaye, and Eliezer, preestis, sown- 
eden with trumpis bifor the arke of the 
Lord; and Obededom, and Achymaas, 
werenY porteris of the arke. Therfor2s 
Dauid, and’ the* grettere men in birthe 


8 orglis 1. 
g 


mand Am, and Heliab er~msxb. and 


4these snnguns. ‘prynylip. and 1s. t to 


be EFKLMNoxb. ‘" that is, thankingis that owen to be do to God, owercomere and victour 18. “ ouer mere AF 


MNO. euer more DGQb. ouer come L. VY and Is. 


Xand 1. 


y weren also s. 2 and alle sow. ® Om ELx. 


352 


Dauid, and alle the more thoru3 birthe 
of Yrael, and the maystirs of thousandis, 
wenten to the arke of pese” couenaunt of 
the Lord, to ben born fro the hous of 
26 Obededom with® ioye. And whanne God 
hadde holpen the Leuytes that beeren 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


XV, 26 —Saveae 


of Israel, ‘and the tribunes, 3eden to brynge 
the arke of boond of pees of the Lord fro 
the hows of Obededom with gladnesse. 


And whanne God hadde helpid the de-26 


kenes that baren the arke of boond of 
pees of the Lord, seuene bolis and seuene 


rammes weren offrid. Forsothe’ Dauid27 


was clothid with a white stolet, and alle te — 


the ark of the pese couenaunt of the 
Lord, ‘then weren‘ offrid® seuen boolis 


27 and’seuen wethers. Forsothe Dauid was the dekenes that baren the arke, and the ment. s. 
clothed with a bijs stole, and alle the syngeris, and Chononye, the® prince of 
Leuytis that beeren the arke, and the  profecie’ among syngeris, weren clothid 
syngers, and Chononyas, the prince of tu white stolis; forsothe® also Dauid was 
the prophecie amonge the syngers; Da- clothid with a lynun surplijs. And al2s 
uid forsothe also was clothed with a sur- Israel ledden forth the arke of boond of 

28 plees. And al Yrael brou3ten the arke of pees of the Lord, and sownedenf in ioiful 
the pese couenaunt of the Lord in ioye, song, and in sown of clariouns, and in 
and in sowne of trumpe, and in trumpis, _ trumpis, and cymbalis’, and giternis®, and 
and cymbalis, and sawtrees, and harpis, harpis. And whanne the arke of boond 29. 

29to gider syngynge. And whanne the of pees of the Lord hagde come to! the 
arke of the pese couenaunt of the Lord  citee of Dauid, Mychol, the dou3tir of 
was commen vnto the cytee of Dauith, Saul, bihelde forth bi a wyndowe, and 
Mychol, the dou3tir of Saul, beholdynge sche‘ si3 king Dauyd daunsynge and plei- 
thoru3 the wyndowe, saw3 kyng Dauith ynge; and sche dispiside hym in hir herte. 
lepynge and pleyinge; and sche dispisede 
him in her herte. 

CAP. XVI. CAP. XVI. 

1 Thanne thei brou3ten in the arke of Therfor thei brou3ten the arke of God,1 
of God, and setten it in the mydil of the and settiden it in the! myddis of the taber- 
tabernacle, that Dauith hadde strau3te nacle, that Dauid hadde araied™ therto; 
oute to it; and thei offreden brent sacri- and thei offriden brent sacrifices and pe- 

2fices and pesible before the Lord. And __ sible sacrifices bifor the Lord. And whanne2 
whanne Dauid offrynge hadde fulfillide | Dauid offrynge brent sacrifices and pesible 
brent sacrifices and pesible, he blessede sacrifices hadde fillid", he blesside the pu- 

3the puple in name of the Lord; and he ple in the® name of the Lord; and de-3 
deuydide to alle thoru3 oute echone fro _ partide? to alle to ech™ bi hym silf fro a® 
man vnto womman a kake of brede,and a —~—s man tilt to a" womman oY cake of breed, 
partye of roostyd flesche of a bugle, and _and a part of rostid fleisch of a bugle, and 

4tried floure fryed in oyle. And he sette flour fried in oile. And he ordeynede bi-4 
beforn the arke of the Lord, of the Le- for the arke of the Lord, of the Leuytis”{, 1 Leuytis; 

9 that is, de- 
uytis, that schulden mynystren, and re- that schulden mynystre*, and haue mynde _ kenes. c. 


corden of the werkis of hym, and glori- 
fien and preysen the Lord God of Yrael; 
5 Asaph prince, and his secound Zacharie, 


of the werkis of the Lord, and glorifie and 
preyse the Lord God of Israel; ‘he or-5 
deynedeY Asaph the? prince, and Zacharie 


bthe pese x. Cofu. ther brethere aprH. ©¢ offreden 4. 
b Andis. ¢Om.1s. ‘4 the profeciers. @and1. Om.s. for x. f thei sowneden Is.  & in cym- 
balis 1s. h in giternis 1. iintors. kOm.a. 1}Om.1, ™maadis. © fulfillidis. © Om.1. 
P he departide 1s. Galle mens. Tech mans. $Om.is. *Om.isx. tOm.1is. Yais. W dekenes 1s. 


x that is, serue K marg. 


y Om. 1. of these he ordeyneds. 2 he ordeynede to be the 1. to be s. 


XVI. 6—24. 


forsothe Jaihel, and Semyramoth, and 
Jeihel, and Mathatiam, and Eliab, and 
Banaya, and Obededom, and Jeiel, vpon 
orgnys of sawtree, and syngynge instru- 
_ mentis; Asaph forsothe schuld syngyn 
6in cymbalis; Bananyam forsothe and 
Asiel, prestis, sungen in trumpe besily 
beforne the arke of the pese couenaunt 
7of the Lord. In that day Dauith maad 
prince, to knowlachen to the Lord, Asaph, 
sand his britheren. Knowlechith to the 
Lord, and inwardly clepith his name; 
knowen make 3e in puplis the fyndyngis 
90f hym. Syngith to hym, and doth 
psalmes to hym, and tellith alle his mer- 
1oueyls. Preyseth his holy name; ioye the 
i1hert of men sechynge the Lord. Secheth 
the Lord in his vertue; sechith his face 
izeuermore. Recordith of his merueyles 
that he dide; of the syngnes of hym, and 
i30f the domes of his mouth; 3e seed of 
Yrael, his seruaunt; 3ef sones of Jacob, 
ithis chosen. He the Lord oure God; in 
isal erthe the domes of hym. Recordith 
vnto euermore of his couenaunt; of the 
word that he comaundide in to a thou- 
igsand generaciouns. ‘The whiche he co- 
uenauntide with Abraham; and of the 
i700th of hym to Ysaac. And to Jacob 
he sette it in to heste$; and to Yrael in 
isto euere® couenaunt'. Seyinge, To thee 
I schal 3euen the lond of Chanaan; the 
iglytyl cord of 3oure eritage. Whanne thei 
weren fewe in noumbre ; lyty], and* tyly- 
goeris of it.- And thei passeden fro folk 
vnto folk; and fro regne to another pu- 
2iple. He suffrede not eny man to chal- 
lengen hem; bot he blamede for hem 
22kyngis. Wyle 3e not touchen my cristis ; 
and in my prophetis wyle 3e not don 
23malice. Syngith to the Lord, al the 
erth; tellith fro day ‘in to! day the 3euer 
24 0f his helth. Tellith in gentylis his glo- 


fthe 4. & the heste u. ) evermore H. 
a Om. plures. > of Bew. ¢ and 1s. 
preisyng to the Lord, and seying 8. & it glad 1s. 


Godis. ™thatis. 2.2Om.s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


i witnessynge E pr.m. 


d Om. ts, 
hina. 
© The which 1. 


353 


his secounde ; forsothe ‘he ordeynede® Ja- 

hiel, and Semiramoth, and Jahel, and Ma- 

thathie, and Eliab, aud Banaye, and Obed- 

edom, and Jehiel, on the orguns, on” the 

sautrie, and on the harpis; but he ordeyn- 

ede Asaph to sowne with cymbalis; so-¢ 

theli¢ ke ordeynede Banaye and Aziel, 

preestis, bifor the arke of the’ boond of 

pees of the Lord, for to trumpe contynuelit. + contynuely ; 

In that dai Dauid made Asaph prince, and*7 pee 

hise britheren, for to knowleche ‘to the Siurt. ah 

Lord. Knowleche 3e to the Lord, ands ™orewtid and 

i e 5 euentid. Lire 

inwardli clepe 3e his name; make 3e hise “re. c. 

fyndyngist knowun among puplis. Synge9 te ees 

3e to hym, and seie 3e salm to hym, and a wondirful * 

telle 3e alle his merueylis, Preise 3e his 10 vnhends he 

hooli name; the herte of men sekynge the weve Pe 

Lord be gladt. Seke 3e the Lord and® his 11 5 Bsipt. Lire 

vertu; seke 3e euere his face. Haue 3e12 

mynde of hise merueilis whiche! he dide* ; 

of hise signes, and of the domes of his 

mouth. The seed of Israel, his seruaunt, 13 

preise thou God; the sones of Jacob, his 

chosun, preise 3e God. He ts ‘oure Lord 4 

God!; hise domes ben in ech lond. Hauejs 

3e mynde with outen ende of his coue- 

naunt; of the word whiche™ he coue- 

nauntide ‘in to" a thousynde generaciouus. 

Which® word he couenauntide with Abra- 16 

ham; and of his ooth to Ysaac. And hei7 

ordeynede that? to Jacob in to a‘ co- 

maundement; and to Israel in to euer- 

lastynge couenaunt. And seide", To theeis 

Y schal 3yue the lond of Canaan; the 

part of 3oure erytage. Whanne thei weren 19 

fewe in noumbre; litle, and pilgrims ther- 

of’. And thei passiden fro folk in to thet 20 

folk; and fro a rewme to" another puple. puede 

He’ suffride not ony man falseli” chalenge 2 eyatid with 
. the anoynting 

hem; but he blamyde kyngis for hem*. of grace. Lire 

Nyle 3e touche my cristisf; and nyle 3e 22} aerite; 

do wickidli ajens my prophetis. Al erthe]], 23 oe apettize 

singe 3e to the Lord; telle 3e fro dai into in erthe. Zire 


ere. Co 


kin uw. Ivntoc. 


€ of c. 
i that 18. 
P that word 1s. 


f to the Lord, seiyinge 1. 
k hath dors. the Lord oure 
a Om. cpetnes. * he seide 1s. 


8 therof, he behizte hem this lond 8. * Om. ncrikurs. "into x. YGod 1s. W wrongfully 1s. * hem, 


and seide 1s. 
VOL. II. 


ZZ 


354 I. PARALIPOMENON. XVI. 25—~40. 


rie; and in alle puplis his merueylis. 
25 For the Lord grete, and preysable ful 
myche; and horrible vpon alle goddis. 
26 Alle forsothe goddis mawmettis of pu- 
plis; the Lord forsothe heuens maad. 
27 Knowlechynge and grete doynge beforn 
hym; streyngthe and ioye in his place. 
28 Bryngith to the Lord, 3e meynes of pu- 
ples; bryngith to the Lord glorie and 
zvempyre. 3euith glorie to the name of 
hym, rereth sacrifice, and commith in his 
si3t; and honourith the Lord in holy 
30 fairnesse. Be meued fro the si3t of hym 
al erth; he forsothe foundide the world 
3ivnmeuable. Joyen heuens, and the™ erth 
glade; and sey thei in naciouns, The 
32Lord schal regnen. Doone the se, and 
the" plente of it; ioyen the feeldis, and 
33alle thingis that in hem ben. ‘Thann 
schal preysen the trees of the wijlde wood 
before the Lord; for he came to demen 
34the erthe. Knowlechith to the Lord, for 
good® he is; for with oute ende the 
35mercy of hym. And seith, Saue us, God 
oure Saueoure, and gader vs, and delyuer 
fro gentilis ; that we knowlechen to thin 
holy name, aud ioyen in thi dytees. 
36 Blessid? the Lord God of Yrael fro with 
out ende vnto with out ende; and sey 
alle puple, Amen, and an hympne to God. 
37 And so he laft there, beforn the arke of 
the pese couenaunt of the Lord, Asaph 
and his bretheren, that they schulden 
mynystren in the si3t of the arke besily 
38bi alle days and4 ther whilis. Forsothe 
Obededom and his bretheren, ey3t and 
sexty, and Obededom, the sone of Ydi- 
39 tym, and Osa, he ordeynede porters. Sa- 
doch forsothe prest, and the bretheren of 
hym, prestis before the tabernacle of the 
Lord, in the hei3t that was in Gabaon, 
4othat thei offren brent sacrifices to the 


dai his helthey. Telle 3e among hethen 24 
men his glorie; hise* merueylis among 
alle puplis. For the Lord ts greet, and 25 
worthi to be preisid ful myche; and he is 
orible, ‘ethir griseful*, over alle goddis. 
For alle the goddis of puplis ben idols; 26 
but the Lord made> heuenes. Knoulech-27 
yng and greet doyng ben bifor hym; 
strengthe and ioy ben in the place of 
hym. 3e meynees of puplis, ‘bringe 3e°28 
to the Lord; brynge 3e to the Lord glorie 
and empire. 3yue 3e glorie’ to his name, 29 
reise 3e° sacrifice, and come 3e in his si3t; 
and worschipe 3e the Lord in hooli fair- 
nesse. Al erthe be mouyd fro his face; 30 
for he foundidef the world vnmouable. 
Heuenes be® glad, and the erthe ‘ioy3) 
fulli"; and seie thei among naciouns, The 
Lord schal' regne. The see thundre, and 32 
his fulnesse; the feeldis fulli ioye*, and 
alle thingis that ben in tho. Thanne the 33 
trees of the forest schulen preyse bifor the 
Lord ; for he cometh to deme tle erthe. 
Knouleche 3e! to the Lord, for he is good ; 34 
for his mersi 7s withouten ende. And seie3s 
je, Thou God oure™ sauyour, saue vs, and 
gadere vs", and delyuere® vs? fro hethen 
men; that we knowleche to thin hooli 
name, and be fulli glade in thi songis. 
Blessid be the Lord God of Israel fro36 
with oute bigynnyng and tilt‘in to" with 
outen ende; and al the* puple seiet, Amen, 
and seie heriyng to God. Therfor Dauid 37 
lefte there, bifor the arke of boond of pees 
of the Lord, Asaph and hise britheren, for 
to mynystre in the si3t of the arke" con- 
tynueli bi alle daies and® her whilis*. 
ForsotheY he? ordeynede porteris, Obed-38 
edom and hise britheren, eijte and sixti, 
and Obededom, the sone of Idithum, and 
Oza. Sotheli* ‘he ordeynede” Sadoch 39 
preest, and hise britheren, preestis bifor 


m™QOm. 4. "Om. ri. © gode r. God x. P Blessid be 4. Gin an. 


y helthe geue 1. helthe 3euers. 2 and his s. 


4 that is, ferfulis. bhemadex. © bringe plures. 


bringeth Er. ‘the glories. ¢3eupis. fhath foundid is. & be 3e1s. 4 ioy it fulli a see.m. s. 


gladful rL. make ful out ioie K see. m. ioyeful Np. 


iQm. ren. * joye they is. !Om.1s. ™ of oure is. 
y Yi 


o vs togidere 1s. © delyuerethouis. P Om. plures. Om. x. ‘fvutor. vntointos. § Om. 1s. 
t schal seie x. uarke, or bifore the arke 1s. Wand biis. * whilis, that is, now oon and eft anoother 1. 
whilis, that is, oon of hem o while or sesun, and another another while or sesuns. Y Andi. 2 Dauid 1. 


a Andis. » Om.1. 


XVI. 41—XVIL. 7. 


Lord vpon the auter of brent sacrifice 
bisily, erly and at euen, aftir alle thingis 
that ben writen in the lawe of the Lord, 

41 that he comaundide to Yrael. And aftir 
hym Eman, and Iditym, and the tother 
chosen, echon bi his name, to know- 
lachen to the Lord; for with oute ende 

42the mercy of hym. Heman also, and Idi- 
tym, synginge in trumpe, and smytynge 
cymbalis, and alle orgnys of musikis, to 
syngyn to God; the sonis forsothe of 

43 Yditym he made to ben porters. And 
al the puple is turned a3ein in to his 
hous, and Dauid, that also he schuld 
blessen to his hous. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 Whanne forsothe Dauid dwellid in his 
hous, he seyde to Nathan, the prophete, 
Loo! I dwelle in a cedre hous; the arke 
forsothe of the pese couenaunt of the 

2Lord is vndir skynnes. And Nathan 
seith to Dauith, Alle thingis that ben 
in thi hert do, God forsothe is with thee. 

3Than that ny3t is maad the word of the 
4Lord to Nathan, seyinge, Go, and speke 
to Dauith, my seruaunt, Thes thingis 
seith the Lord, Thou schalt not bylde 
5to me an hows to dwellen'; ne forsothe 
I dwellede in hous, fro that tyme that I 
ladde out Yrael fro the lond of Egipt ‘in 
to’ this day, bot was euermore chaung- 
ynge the places‘ of tabernacle, and in 
6tent with al Yrael dwellynge. Whether 
I spake oonly to oon of the iugis of 
Yrael, to whome I hadde comaundid, 
that he schulde feden my puple, and 
seyde, Why hast thou not bildid" up ‘to 
7me’ a cedre hous? Nowe also thus thou 
schalt speken to my seruaunt Dauid, 


r dwelle yn 4. §& vnto E. 


cin as. 4 Sadoch 1s,- € chosene men Is. 
land 1s. 
8 place x. 


W comaunde A. 


that is, ful perdurable s. 
4Om.x. F hane chaungid 1s. 
haue not spoke s. spac not x. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


t place a. 


f And x. 
the tabernacle 1. porters or berers of necessari thingis perteynyng to the tabernacle s. i Om. pis. 
m is hilid 1s. 
t the tabernacle 1s. 

x hast thou not bildid rs. 


rh Vie 


355 


the tabernacle of the Lord, in the hi3 
place that was in Gabaon, for to offre 40 
brent sacrifices to the Lord on® the auter 
of brent sacrifice contynucli, in the morwe- 
tid and euentid, bi alle thingis that ben 
writun in the lawe of the Lord, which he 
comaundide to Israel. And aftir hym®4! 
Dauyd ordeynede Eman, and Idithum, 
and other chosene®, ech man bi his name, 
for to knowleche to the Lord; for his 
mercy is withouten ende. Alsof he or-42 
deynede Eman, and Idithum, trumpynge, 
and schakynge cymbalis, and alle orguns 
of musikis, for to synge to God; forsothes 
he made the sones of Idithum to be por- 
tours}, ‘ether bereris'. And al the puple43 
turnede a3en in to her hows, and Dauid 
turnede a3en, to blesseft also his hows. 


CAP. XVII. 


Forsothe whanne Dauid dwellide in his1 
hows, he seide to Nathan, the prophete, 
Lo! Y dwelle in an hows of cedris*; so- 
theli! the arke of boond of pees of the 
Lord is™ vndur skynnys. And Nathane 
seide to Dauid, Do thou alle thingis that 
ben in thin herte, for God is with thee. 
Therfor in that ny3t the word of the Lords 
was maad to Nathan, and seide, Go thon, 4 
and speke to Dauid, my seruaunt, The 
Lord seith these thingis, Thou schalt not 
bilde to me an hows to dwelle in®; for® Ys 
‘dwellide not? in an hows, fro that tyme 
in which Y ledde Israel out of the lond 
of Egipt til4 to this dai, but euere Y 
chaungide' places* of tabernaclet, and 
dwellide® in a tente with al Israel. Wheres 
I spak’ nameli to oon of the iugis of Is- 
rael, to which J comaundide™ that thei 
schulde fede my puple, and seide, Whi 
‘bildidist thou not* to me an hous of 
cedre? Now therfor thou schalt speke7 
thus to my seruaunt Dauid, The Lord of 


ubild aceru. Y Om, B. 


Sandis. 4 portours of thingis perteynynge to 
K cedris, 
P haue not dwellid 1. 


v haue spoke 1. 


° certis Is. 


1 Om. plures. 
a haue dwellid 1s. 


+ blesse; that 
is, to do good 
to his meynee. 
Lire here. cea. 


356 


Thes thingis seith the Lord of hoostis, 
1 toke thee, when in lesewes thou folow- 
edist the flok, that thou were duyke of 
siny puple Yrael; and I was with thee 
whither ever thou wentist, and I slew3 
alle thin enmyes beforn thee, and I maad 
to thee a name as of oon of the grete 
men that ben oft wirschipid in” the* 
gerthe. And I 3aue a place to my puple 
Yrael; it schal be plauntid, and he schal 
dwelle in it, and no more he schal be 
meued, ne the sonis of wickidnesse schuln 
1oto-tern hem, as fro the begynnynge of 
the days inY whiche I 3aue iuges to my 
puple Yrael; and I haue mekid alle thin 
enmyes. I telle than to thee, that the 
11 Lord be to belden to thee an hous. And 
whanne thou hast fulfillid thy days, that 
thou go to thi fadirs, I schal reren thi 
seed aftir thee, that schal ben of thi 
sonys, and I schal stablen the rewme of 
tzhym; he schal beelde to me an hous, 
and I schal fastnen his see vnto with 
130uten ende. I schal ben to hym in to 
fadir, and he schal ben to me in to sone; 
and my mercy I schal not don awey fro 
hym, as I toke aweye fro hym that was 
ubifore thee; and I schal setten hym in 
my hous and in my regne vnto euer- 
more; and the trone of hym schal be 
ismost fast vnto with oute ende. Aftre 
alle thes wordis, and aftir al this visioun, 
i6thus spak Nathan to Dauid. And whanne 
kyng Dauid was commen, and hadde syt- 
ten before the Lord, he seide, Who am I, 
Lord God, and what my hous, that thou 
17 schuldist 3euen to me syche thingus ? Bot 
and that lityl is seen in thi sizte, and 
therfore thou speke on the hous of thi 
seruaunt, also in to comyn; and thou 
hast maad me hee3 vpon alle men. Lord 
isGod, what more ouer may Dauid adden, 
whanne thus thou hast glorified thi ser- 
iguaunt, and knowen hym? Lord, for thi 


J. PARALIPOMENON. 


XVII. 8—19. 


oostis seith these thingis, Y took thee, 
whanne thou suedist theY floc in the le- 
sewis, that thou schuldist be duyk on? my 
puple Israel ; and Y was with thee whidur s 
euere thou 3edist, and Y killide alle thin 
enemyes bifor thee, and Y made to thee 
an name as of oon of the grete men that 
ben maad worschipful, ether* ‘famouse, in 
erthe’. And Y 3af a place to my puple Is-9 
rae]; it schal be plauntid, and schal¢ dwelle 
there ynne, and it schal no more be moued, 
and the sones of wickydnesse schulen not 
defoule hem, as fro the bigynnyng, fro the 10 
daies in whiche Y 3af iugis to my puple 
Israel; and Y made lowe alle thin ene- 
myes. Therfor Y telle to thee‘, that the 
Lord schal bilde an hows to thee. Andit 
whanne thou hast fillid® thi daies, that 
thou go to thi fadris, Y schal reise’ thi 
seed after thee, that schal be of thi sones, 
and Y schal stablische his rewme ; he schat12 
bilde to me an hows, and Y schal make 
stidefast his seete tilf in to with outen 
ende. Y' schal be to hym in to a fadir,13 
and he schal be to mein to a sone; and 
Y schal not do! my* mersi fro hym, as 
Y took! awei fro hym™ that was bifore 
thee; and Y schal ordeyne hym® in mynua 
hows and in iny rewme til® in to with 
outen ende; and his trone schal be moost 
stidefast with outen ende. Bi alle theses 
wordis, and bi al this reuelacioun, so Na- 
than spak to Dauid. And whanne kyng is 
Dauid hadde come, and hadde sete bifore 
the Lord, he seide, Lord God, who am Y, 
and what is myn hows, that thou schuldist 
3yue siche thingis to me? But also this is17 
seyn litil in thi si3t, and therfor thou 
spakestP on‘ the hows of thi seruaunt, 3he, 
in to tyme to comynge; and hast’ maad 
me worthi to be biholdun’ ouer alle men. 
My Lord God, what' may Danid adde" is 
more, sithen thou hast so glorified thi ser- 
uaunt, and hast knowe hym? Lord, for 19 


Wheere in FH. *Om. ru. Ythe er. Z seed 4. 
Yars. Zupons. @andp. Om.cr. %Om. cr. Cit schals. Israel shals. Y schal w. 4 thee, 
Dauith s. ¢ fulfillidis. freiseupis. § Om.x. » AndIs. idoawey scw. k Om.y. | took it 1s. 


m Saulis. him, that is, thi songs. © Om. x. P hast spoke Is. Gofrs. thou hast rs. §& holden s. 


‘what thing 1s. 4 adde to 1s. 


XVII. 20—XVIII. 3. 


seruaunt aftir thi herte thou hast done 
al this grete doynge, and al thi grete 
woundirs thou woldist to ben knowen. 
20Lord, ther is noon lije thee, and ther 
is noon other God with oute thee, of al 
the whiche we han herd with oure eris. 
21 Who forsothe is an other as thi puple 
Yrael, oon folk of kynde in the lond, to 
the whiche God wente, that he delyuere 
and make a peple to him, and by his 
gretnesse and grysynges he caste out na- 
cyouns fro his face, the whiche he hadde 
22delyuerd fro Egipt? And thou hast 
putte thy puple Ysrael to thee in to a 
puple in to with oute eend, and thou, 
23 Lord, art maad his God. Now thann, 
Lord, the word that thou hast spoken to 
thi seruaunt, and vpon his hous, be con- 
fermed in to with outen eend, and do, as 
24thou hast spoken; and thi name abijde 
stille, and be magnyfied in to euermore ; 
and be it seid, The Lord of hoostis, God 
of Yrael, and the hous of Dauid, his ser- 
25 uaunt, abijdynge stille beforn hym. Thou 
forsothe, Lord my God, hast told opynly 
the lity] ere of thi seruaunt, that thou 
schuldist bilden to hym an hous; and 
therfore thi seruaunt hath founden trust, 
26that he preye before thee. Nowe thanne, 
Lord, thou ert God, and thou hast spoken 
27to thi seruaunt so fele benfetis; and thou 
hast begunnen to blessen to the hous of 
thi seruaunt, that it be euer more before 
thee; thee forsothe blessynge, blessid it 
schal ben in to with outen end. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Done it is forsothe aftir thes thingis, 
that Dauid schuld smijten Philisteis, and 
meeken hem, and taken Geth and the 
dou3tirs of it fro the hond of Philisteis, 

2and smijten Moab; and Moabitis schulden 
ben maad the seruauntis of Dauid, of.- 

3fringe to hym 3iftis. That tyme also 


Vv thou woldist 1s. | han herd 1s. 


8 to make Is. 
spoke BCDFIKLMNOPQRSUWXb. 
outens. intor. ins. 
°Sothely 1s. P the Philistees 18. 
brou3ten is. 


q he took 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


x sich anothir 1. another soche peple s. 
b the which puple 1. which puple s. 

& dwelle worshepful s. 
ltherfor, Lord 1. herfor Kmxb. herfor, Lord s. 
t the vilagis 1s. 


357 


thi seruaunt thou hast do bi thin herte al 
this grete doyng, and woldist* that alle 
grete thingis be knowun. Lord, noon is20 
lijk thee, and noon other God is with oute 
thee, of alle whiche we herden’ with oure 
eeris. For who is anothir® asY thi? puple2z! 
Israel, 0 fole in erthe, to whom God 3ede, 
to delyuere and make* a puple to hym 
silf, and to caste out bi his greetnesse and 
dredis naciouns fro the face therof, which? 
he delyuerede fro Egipt? And thou® hast 22 
set thi puple Israel in to a puple to thee 
til’ in to with outen ende, and thou, Lord, 
art maad the God therof. Now therfor, 23 
Lord, the word which thou hast spoke to 
thi seruaunt, and on his hows, be® con- 
fermed with outen ende, and do, as thou 
spake; and thi name dwelle’, and be2s 
magnefied" ‘with outeni ende; and be it 
seid, The Lord of oostis is God of Israel, 
and the hous of Dauid, his seruaunt, dwell- 
ynge bifor hym. For thou, my Lord God, 25 
hast maad reuelacioun to* the eere of thi 
seruaunt, that thou woldist bilde to hym 
an hous; and therfor! thi seruaunt foond™ 
trist, that he preie bifor thee. Now ther-26 
for, Lord, thou art God, and hast spoke 
to thi seruaunt so grete benefices; and 27 
thou hast bigunne to blesse the hous of 
thi seruaunt, that it be euer bifore thee; 
for®, Lord, for thou blessist, it schal be 
blessid with outen ende. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Forsothe® it was doon aftir these thingis, 1 
that Dauid smoot Filisteis?, and made hem 
lowe, and took’ awey Geth and _ vilagis™ 
therof fro the hond of Filisteis ; and that*2 
he smoot Moab ; and Moabitis weren maad 
seruauntis' of Dauid, and brou3ten® 3iftis 
tohym. In that tyme Dauid smoot alsoz 


Yasisis. thes. 
ethou, Lordis. Om. x. ¢beitis. f hast 

h it maad greet 18. 1 anentis thi seruaunt with- 
m hath founde 1s. ® certis 1s. 


8Om.1s. tthe seruauntis 1s. ¥ thei 


358 


Dauid smote Adadeser, kyng of Soba, of 
the regyoun of Emath, whanne he wente 
for to largen his empyre vnto the flode 
4of Enfraten. Thanne Dauid toke a thou- 
sand foure whelid cartis of hym, and 
seuen thousand of hors men, and twenty 
thousand of fote men; and he kutte the 
knee senewis of alle the hors of the 
chaaris, out taken an hundrith foure 
whelid cartis, the whiche he resernede to 
shym silf. Forsothe and Cyre Damascen 
came ouer, that he 3eue helpe to Adad- 
eser, kyng of Soba, bot and of this Dauid 
6smote twenty thousand of men; and he 
putte kny3tis in Damasc, that Cyrie also* 
schuld seruen to hym, and offre 3iftis. 
And the Lord herde hym in alle thingis 
z7to the whiche he wente. Also Dauid 
toke the golden arewe cases, that the 
seruauntes of Adadezer hadden, and 
sbrou3te hem in to Jerusalem; also and 
fro Thebath and Cum’, cytees of Adad- 
ezer, myche of-brasse, of the® whiche 
Salomon made the brasen se, and pylers, 
gand brasen vessels. The whiche thing 
whanne Thou, kyng of Emath, hadde 
herd, that is, Dauith to han smyten al 
io the hoost of Adadeser, kyng of Soba, he 
sente Aduram, his sone, to kyng Dauid, 
that he aske of 4 hym pese, and thanckide 
to hym, for thi that he hadde ouercom- 
men and smyten Adadezer; forsothe 
kyng Adadezer was aduersarie to Thou. 
11 Bot and alle the golden vesselis, and syl- 
ueren, and brasen kyng Dauid sacride to 
the Lord; and the syluer, and the gold, 
that the kyng hadde taken fro alle gen- 
tiles, as wele of Ydume and Moab, and 
the sonys of Amon, as of the Philisteis 
j2and Amalech. Forsothe Abisai, the sone 
of Saruye, smote Edom in the valey of 
13Salt placis, ten and ey3t thousand. And 
he sett in Edom a streyngthe, that Ydu- 


a Om. H. 
vy Om. s. Wof foure 1s. 
whiche 1. 2Andis. » prince of 1s. ¢ Syrus 18. 
h brou3t ins. iOm.s. 
diuerss. ™Om.s. ® Om.1s. ° of Moab c. 
‘ Abisay s. 4 sette 18. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


b sum ABFH. 


* oxide, that is, he kitte asonder the hou3 senues of s. 


XVHI. 4-13. 


Adadezer, kyng of Soba, of the cuntrey 
of Emath, whanne he 3ede for’ to alarge 
his empire til to the flood Eufrates. Ther-4 
for Dauid took a thousynde foure™ horsid 
cartis of his, and seuene thousynde of 
horsmen, and twenti thousynde of foot 
men: and he hoxide* alle the horsis of 
charisY, outakun an hundrid foure horsid 
cartis, whiche” he kepte to hym silf. For-5 
sothe* also Sirus of > Damask cam aboue, 
to 3yue help to Adadezer, kyng of Soba, 
but Dauid smoot also of hise® two and 
twenti thousynde of men; and het set-6 
tide’ kni3tis in Damask, that Sirie also 
schulde serue hym, and bryngef 3iftis. And 
the Lord helpide hym® in alle thingis to 
whiche he 3ede. And Dauid took goldun7 
arowe caasis, whiche the seruauntis of 
Adadezer hadden, and he brou3te" tho in 
to Jerusalem; also and‘ of Thebath ands 
of Chum, the citees of Adadezer, he took 
ful myche of bras, wherof Salomon made 
the brasun see, ‘that is, waischynge ves- 
sel‘, and pileris, and! brasun vessels. Ando 
whanne Thou, kyng of Emath, hadde 
herd this thing, ‘that is™, that Dauid 
hadde smyte al the oost of Adadezer, 
kyng of Soba, he sente Aduram, his sone, 10 
to Dawid the kyng, for to axe of hym 
pees, and for to thanke hym, for he hadde 
ouercome and hadde® smyte Adadezer ; for 
whi king Adadezer was aduersarie of 
Thou. But also kyng Dauid halewide 1 
to the Lord alle the vessels of gold, and 
of siluer, and of bras; and the siluer, and 
the gold, which the kyng hadde take of 
alle folkis, as wel of Idumee and Moab®, 
and of theP sones of Amon, as of Filisteis 
and Amalech?. Forsothe' Abisai, the sone 12 
of Saruye, smoot Edom in the valei of salt 
pittis, ‘ten and ei3te* thousynde. And het13 
settide" strong hold in Edom, that Ydumei 
schulde serue Dauid. And the Lord sauide 


¢ Om. crn. 


y the charis 1s. 2 the 


4Dauid is. ¢sette 1s. !bryng to hims. & Dauid 1s. 
k Om. 1. that is, wasshing vesselis for vse of the tabernacle s. 
P alle the 1s. 


land othere 


dof Amalech c. * Andis. & eiz3tene 1x. 


XVIII. 14—XIX. 6. 


me schulde seruen to Dauid. And the 
Lord sauede Dauid in alle thingis, to the 
14whiche he wente. Thann Dauid regned 
vpon al Yrael, and dide dome and ri3t- 
15 Wisnesse to al his puple. Bot Joab, the 
sone of Saruye, was vpon the hoost ; and 
Josephath, the sone of Ailuth, chaun- 
isceler; Sadoch forsothe, the sone of 
Achitob, and Achymalech, the sone of 
17 Abither, prestis; and Susa, scribe; Ba- 
nanyas also, the sone of Joiade, vpon the 
legiouns Cerethi and Pherethi; forsothe 
the sonys of Dauid first at the kyngis 
hond. 
CAP. XIX. 

1 It fel forsothe, that Naas, the kynge 
of the sonys of Amon, schulde dyen, and 
his sone regnen for hym. And Dauid 
seide, J schal do mercy with Hanon, the 
sone of Naas; forsothe his fadir 3aue to 

2me mercy. And Dauid sente messagers, 
to coumforten hym vpon the deth of his 
fadir. The whiche whan weren commen 
in to the lond of the sonys of Amon, that 

3 thei coumforten Hanon, the princis of the 
sonys of Amon seiden to Hanon, Thou 
peranenture weenest, that Dauid by che- 
soun® of wirschip vnto thi fadir sente, 
that he coumforten thee; and thou takist 
no heed, that that! thei aspyen, and sechen, 
and enserchen thi lond, ben commen to thee 

4the seruauntis of hym. Therfore Hanon 
maad balled and schoofe® the childre® of 
Dauid, and kutte the kootis of hem fro 
the ers of hem vnto the feet; and he laft 

shem. The whiche when weren gone 
awey, and that hadden sente to Dauid, 
he sente in to ajein commynge of hem; 
forsothe grete despyte thei hadden suf- 
fred ; and he comaundyde, that thei schul- 
den dwellen in Jericho, to the tyme that 
the berd of hem weren sprongen, and 
6thanne they schulden turnen a3eyn. For- 
sothe the sonis of Amon, seeynge that 


€ enchesoun ac. f Om. «a. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


359 


Dauid in alle thingis, to whiche he 3ede. 
Therfor Dauid regnede onv¥ al Israel, and 14 
dide* doom and* rij3twisnesseY to al his 
puple. Forsothe’ Joab, the sone of Saruye, 15 
was* ‘on the? oost ; and Josaphat, the sone 
of Ayluth, was chaunceler®; forsothe’ Sa-1¢ 
doch, the sone of Achitob, and Achyma- 
lech, the sone of Abyathar, weren preestis ; 
and Susa was scribe ; and Banaye, the sone 17 
of Joiada, was on°® the legiouns Cerethi and 
Phelethit ; sotheli the sones of Dauid weren 
the firste at the hond of the kyng. 


CAP. XIX. 

Forsothe it bifelde, that Naas, kyng of1 
the sones of Amon, diede, and his sone 
regnyde for him. And Dauid seide, Ye 
schal do mercy with Anoon, the sone of 
Naas; for his fadir 3af merci to me. And 
Dauid sente messageris, to coumforte hym 
on the deeth of his fadir. And whanne thei 
weren comen in§ to the lond of the sones 
of Amon, for to coumforte Anon, the3 
princes of the sones of Amon seiden to 
Anon, In hap thon gessist, that Dauid for 
cause of onour in to thi fadir sente men, 
that schulden coumforte thee; and thou 
perseyuest not, that hise seruauntis ben 
comen to thee to aspie, and enquere, and 
seche’ thi jond. TTherfor Anoon made4 
ballid and schauyde the children of Dauid, 
and kittide! the cootis of hem fro the but- 
tokis of hem til to the feet ; and lefte* hem. 
And whanne thei hadden go!, and haddens 
sent this™ to Danid, he" sente in to the 
meting of hem; for thei hadden suffrid 
greet dispit ; and he comaundide, that thei 
schulden dwelle in Gerico, til her berde 
wexide, and thanne thei schulden turne 
a3en. Forsothe® the sones of Amon sien, 6¢ 
that thei hadden do wrong to Dauid, bothe 
Anoon and the totherP puple, and thei 
senten a thousynde talentis of siluer, for 


& choof mz. 5 children 4. 


Yupon is. Whe dides. Xin pv. Y riztfulnesse plares. 2 Ands. ®wasdukes. » vpon Dauith s. 
¢ Dauith chaunselers. ‘4ands. ¢€souereyne vpons. fOm.s. & Om. 1s. htoseche 1s. } thei 
kittiden 18. Kk so thei leften 1s. ' go forth 1s. m and shewed this s. n Dauid ts. © And 1s. 


P oother 18. 


+ Glose. Cere- 


thie and Phele- 


thie weren 
moost tau3t 
fizters, and 
thei werin 
kepers of Da- 
uith heed. 


360 


thei hadden con wronge to Dauith, bothe 
Hanon and the tother puple, the senten 
a thousand talentis of sylner, that thei 
hiren to hem fro Mesopotanye and Ciria, 
Maacha and from Soba, charis and hors- 
7men; and thei hyreden two and thritty 
thousand of charis, and the kyng of 
Maacha with his puple. The whiche, 
whan weren commen, setten tentis forn 
a3eynus Medaba; also the sonys of Amon 
gaderd fro their cytees, camen to bateil. 
8The whiche thing whanne Dauid hadde 
herde, he sente Joab, and al the hoost of 
gstronge men. And the sonys of Amon 
gon out, dresseden scheltrun bysidis the 
jate of the cytee; the kyngis forsothe, 
that weren commen to helpe, stoden a- 
lopart in the feld. Than Joab vndirstond- 
ynge the bateil forn a3eynst and behynde 
the bac ajeynst hym to be maad, he 
chees most stronge men of al Yrael, and 
1iwente a3ein Cyrum; the tother forsothe 
part of the puple he 3aue vndir the hond 
of Abisay, his brother; and thei wenten 
12a3ein the sonys of Amon. And he seide, 
3if Cyries ouercommen me, thou schalt 
ben in helpe to me; 3if forsothe the 
sonys of Amon ouercommen thee, I schal 
13ben to thee in to socour; take coumfort, 
and do we manly for oure puple, and for 
the cytees of oure God; the Lord for- 
14sothe, that in his si3t is good, do. Thanne 
Joab, and the puple that was with hym, 
wente ajeyn Cyrus to bateil, and drofe 
ishem. Bot the sonis of Amon seeynge 
that Cyres hadden flowen, thei also 
flowen Abisay, his brother, and wenten 
in to the cytee; and Joab is turned ajeyn 
i¢in to Jerusalem. Seeynge forsothe Cy- 
res, that they hadden falle beforn Yrael, 
senten messagers, and brou3ten forthe 
Cyre, that was bejond the flode; Sophat 
forsothe, prince of the kny3thode of Adad- 
17 ezer, was the duyke of hem. The whiche 


Tand ofs. 8’ Om. cn. 
x sente forth 1s: Y thei dressiden 1. 
ajens him s. ¢ hisis. 4 chese oute s. 
jeden forth s. i seide to Abisay 1s. 
forth rs. PJoabis. 4 And Is. 
W brougten fo him is, * and Is, 


q of Sirie 1s. 


K and 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


t setten s. 

% her scheltrun ts. 

e he 3ede s. 

1 citee s. 
r thei entriden 1s. 

Y gaderide togidere 1s. 


XIX. 7—17. 


to hire to hem charis and horsmen of 
Mesopotanye and Sirie’, of" Maacha and 
of* Soba; and thei hiriden to hem two7 
and thretti thousynde of charis t, and the 
kyng of Maacha with his puple. And 
whanne thei weren comen, thei settident 
tentis" euene ajens Medaba; and the sones 
of Amon weren gaderid’ fro her citees, 
and camen to batel. And whanne Dauids 
‘hadde herd” this, he sente* Joab, and al 
the oost of stronge men. And the sonesg 
of Amon 3eden out, and dressidenY schel- 
trun? bisidis the 3ate of the citee; but the 
kyngis, that weren comen to helpe*, stoden 
asidis half in the feeld. Therfor Joab vn-1o0 
durstood, that batel was inaad a3ens hym 
‘euene ajens? and bihynde the® bak, ahd 
he chees‘ the strongeste men of al Israel, 
and 3ede® ajens Sirus; sotheli' he 3af then 
residue® part of the puple vnder the hond 
of Abisai, his brother; and thei 3eden" 
a3ens the sones of Amon. And Joab seide’, 12 
If Sirus schal ouercome me, thou schalt 
helpe me; sotheli* if the sones of Amon 
schulen ouercome thee, Y schal helpe thee ; 
be thou coumfortid, and do we manli foris 
oure puple, and for the citees! of oure | 
God; forsothe™ the Lord do” that, that is 
good in his si3t. Therfor Joab 3ede°, and 14 
the puple that was with hym, a3ens Sirus 
to batel, and he? droof hem awei. Sotheli415 
the sones of Amon sien, that Sirus hadde 
fled, and thei fledden fro Abisay, his bro- 
ther, and entriden” in to* the’ citee; and 
Joab turnede a3en in to Jerusalem. For-16 
sothe® Sirus si3, that he felde’ doun bi- 
for Israel, and he sente messageris, and 
brou3te” Sirus, that was bijende the flood ; 
sothelix Sophath, the prynce of chyualrie 
of Adadezer, was the duyk of hem. And17 
whanne this was teld to Dauid, he gader- 
ideY a] Israel, and passide? Jordan; and he 
felde in on® hem, and dresside® scheltrun 
euene a3ens hem, fiztynge ajenward. ‘For- 18 


uher tentis 1s. ¥ gaderid togidere ts. W herde 1. 
a helpe him 1. helpe Anons. Om. c. euene 
fandis. &yremenaunt 1s. 4 wenten forth 1. 
mandis. "dohemt. dohes. » 3ede 
8Om.s. thers. Andis. Vv had falle rs. 

% he passide is. ® upon rs. > he dresside 1s. 


+ of charis ; 
that is, xxxii. 
thonsind of 
men fijtinge in 
charis, and of 
footmen ; in the 
secunde book of 
Kingis, x. c°. 
Lire here. cx 
LPpab. 


XIX. 18—XX. 5. 


thing whan was tolde to Dauid, he ga- 
derde al Yrael, and passede Jordan, and 


fel in to hem, and dresside forn’ a3eyns- 


isscheltrun, hem a3eyn fi3tynge’ Forsothe 


Cyres fley3 Yrael, and Dauith slow3 of 
Cyres seuen thousand of charis, and . 


fourty thousand of foote. men, and So- 

19 phat, the prince of the! hoost. Seeynge 
forsothe the seruauntis of Adadezer hem 
silf.of Yrael to be onercommen, ouer- 
flowen to Dauith, and serueden to hym ; 
and* Cyre wolde no more 3euen help to 
the sonys of Amon. 


CAP. XX... 


1 Done it is forsothe aftir the cercle of 
al 3eer, that tyme that kyngis ben wont 
to gon forth to batelis, Joab gaderde the 
hoost, and the streyngthe of kny3thode, 
and waastide the lond of the sonys of 
Amon, and wente, and besegide Rabath ; 
bot Dauid abood in Jerusalem, whan Joab 

zsmote Rabath, and distroyede it. Dauith 
forsothe toke the crowne of Melchon fro 
his heued, and foonde in it a talent of 
gold wei3t, and most precious gemmes, 
and maad therof to hym a dyademe; 
also manye spoylis of the cytee he toke. 

3The puple forsothe that was in it he 
ladde out, and maad vpon hem pestelis, 
and sledis, and prowd yren charis, to gon 
ouer, so that thei weren al to-kut and to- 
brosed alle; thus dide Dauid to alle the 
cytees of the sonys of Amon, and he is™ 
turned a3eyn with alle his puple in to 
aJerusalem. Aftir thes" thingis bateil is 
gon in in Gaser a3einus Philisteis, in the 
whiche smote Sobachai Vsachites Saphai 
of the kynrede of Raphaym, and he 
slowede® hem. Another also bateil is 
don a3eynus the Philisteis, in the whiche 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


361 


sothe® Sirus fledde fro Israel, and Dauid 


killide of. ment of Sirie seuene thousynde heh 
° . x that is, vii. 

of charis{, and fourti thousynde ‘of foot — thousind men 
fiztinge in 


men, and® Sophath, thef prince of the oost. 
Sothelis the seruauntis of Adadezer ‘sijen, 
that. thei weren ouercomun of Israel, and 
thei fledden ouer to Dauid, and seruiden? 
hym; and Sirie wolde no more 3yue helpe 
to the sones of Amon. 


charis, for they 
19 Weren vii. hun- 
“ drid of charis, 
in the secunde 
book of Kingis 
x. c%, and in 
ech chare weren 
x. men, and 
these maken 
vii. thousynd 
men fiztinge in 
charis. Lire 
here. cKLob. 


CAP. XX. 


Forsothe! it was doon after the ende of 1 
ak 3eer, in that tyme wherinne kyngis ben 
wont to go forth to batels, Joab gederide! 
the oost, and the strengthe of chyualrie, 
and he wastide the lond of the sones of 
Amon, and 3ede™, and bisegide Rabath ; 
forsothe" Dauid dwellide in Jerusalem, 
whanne Joab smoot Rabath, and distriede 
it. Forsothe® Dauid took the coroun of2 
Melchon? fro his heed, and foond4 ther- 
ynne the wei3t: of gold a talent, and moost 
precious iemmes, and he made therof a 
diademe to hym silf; also he took ful 
many spuylis of the citee. Sotheli™ hes 
ledde out the puple that was therynne, 
and made® breris, ‘ethir instrumentis bi 
whiche cornes ben brokunt, and sleddis", 
and irone charis, to passe on’ hem”, so 
that alle men weren kit* in to dyuerse’ 
partis, and weren al to-brokun; DauidY 
dide thus to alle the ‘cytees of the’Y sones 
of Amon, and turnede” aj3en with al his 
puple in to Jerusalem. Aftir these thingis 4 
a batel was maad in Gazer a3ens Filisteis, 
wherynne Sobochai Vsachites slow Saphai 


of the kyn of Raphym{, and mekide* hem. — + raphaym; 


Adeodate, the sone of Saltus, Bethlam- Also another batel was don ajens Filisteis®, 5 j23ts of the 
yte, smote the brother of Goliath Je- in which a man 3ouun of God, the® sone pine Bis 
ihise. k Om. 3p. lo4. ™ Om. ap. ther Fr. heru. ° bowide a. 
¢ Andis. dthemens. ¢alsos. fOm.1s. andis. 4 strengtheds. ‘Sothely 1. * 00 1s. 
1 gederide togidere 1s. ™ he 3ede forth 1s. ®"andis. © Andis. P Melchon, and distriede it s. 4 he 
foond is, * Andi. Om.ssec.m. & he made there 1s. ¢ that ben instrumentis with whiche cornes ben 
broke and destried 13, “he made sleddus s. Y vponis. hem for éo waaste 1. hem for to waste hem s. 
x kit doun 1s. Yand Danid c. yy Om. a. 2 he turnede rs. # he mekide rs. © the Filisteis ss. ¢Om. is. 
VOL. II. 3A 


362 


thee, whos spere schaft was as the beme 

cof websters. Bot and another bateil fell 
in Geth, in? the whiche ‘a most’ longe 
man was, hauynge sexe fyngers, that is, 
to gider foure and twenty, the whiche and 
he was of Raphaym lynage goten; this 

7 blasfemede Yrael, and‘ Jonathan, the sone 
of Sama, brother of Dauid, smote hym. 
Thes ben the sonys of Raphaym in Jeth, 
the whiche fellen in the hond of Dauid 
and of the seruauntis of hym. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Sathan forsothe rose a3ein Yrael, and 
2stired Dauith for to noumbre Yrael. And 
Dauid seid to Joab, and to the princes 
of the puple, Goth, and noumbrith Yrael 
fro Bersabe vnto Dan, and bryngith to 
3me the noumbre, that I knowe. And 
Joab answerd, The Lord encrese his pu- 
ple an hundrith fold thannt thei ben; 
whether not, my lord kyng, thi ser- 
uauntis thei ben alle? Why this thing 
sechith my lord, that in to. synne it be 
4rettid® to Yrael? Bot the word of the 
kyng more hadde the maistrie; and Joab 
wente out, and enuyrouned al Yrael, and 
sis turned a3ein in to Jerusalem. Aud he 
3aue to Dauid the noumbre of hem, the 
whiche he hadde enuyrownede; and al 
the noumbre of Yrael is founden a thou- 
sand thousandes, and’ an hundrith thou- 
sand of men, drawynge oute swerd; of 
Juda forsothe thre hundrith and seuenty 
6thousand of fi3tynge men. Forsothe Leuy 
and Beniamyn he noumbride not, for thi 
that constreyned he folowede out the 
ikyngis hest. Forsothe that was co- 
maundid displeside to the Lord, and he 
ssmote Yrael. And Dauid seid to God, 
I haue synned ful myche for to do this; 
I biseche, do awey the wickidnesse of thi 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


XX. 6—XXI. 8. 


of forest’, a man of Bethleem, killide Go- 

liath of Geth, the brother of giauntis, of 

whos schaft® the tre was as the beem of 

webbis. But also another batel bifelde iné 
Geth, in which a ful long man was‘, hau- 

ynge sixe fyngris, that is, togidere® foure 

and twenti, and he was gendrid” of the 

generacioun of Raphaym; he! blasfemyde7 
Israel, and Jonathan, the sone of Samaa, 

brother of Dauid, killide hym. These 

ben the sones of Raphaym in Geth, that 

felden doun in the hond of Dauid and of 

hise seruauntis. 


CAP. XXI. 


Sotheli Sathan roos a3ens Israel, and} 
stiride Dauid for to noumbre Israel. And2 
Dauid seide to Joab, and to the princes 
of the puple, Go 3e, and noumbre Israel* 
fro Bersabe til to Dan, and brynge 3e the 
noumbre to me, that Y witel. And Joab3 
answeride, The Lord encresse his puple 
an hundrid fold more than thei ben; my 
lord the™ kyng, whether alle ben not thi 
seruauntis ? Whi sekith my lord this thing, 
that" schal be arettid in to synne to Israel? 
But the word of the kyng hadde more the4 
maistrie; and Joab 3ede out®, and cum- 
passide al Israel, and turnede? a3en in to 
Jerusalem. And he 3af to’ Dauid thes 
noumbre of hem, which he hadde cum- 
passid ; and al the noumbre of Israel was 
foundun a thousynde thousande, and an 
hundrid thousynde of men, drawynge out 
swerd; forsothe of Juda’ weren thre hun- 
drid thousynde, and seuenti thousynde of * 
werriouris. For’ Joab noumbride not Leuy 6 
and Beniamyn, for a3ens his wille he dide 
tlle comaundement of the kyng. Forsothe7 
that' that was comaundid displeside the 
Lord, and" he smoot Israel. And Dauids 
seide to God, Y synnede’ greetli that Y 
wolde do this”; Y biseche*, do thou awey 
the wickidnesse of thi seruaunt, for Y dide 


Gand BEF. FamongH. $Om.s. t that © prom, » holden £ pr.m, VY Om. aR. 


4the forest 1s. © shafte or spere s. 
kalIsrael a. 1} wite what it is 1. 
linages. 'Om. x. § but ts. 

x biseche the, Lord s. 


m Om. s. 


f that was Is. 
n whiche 1s. 
t that thing Is. 


h goten1. ! and he cEup. 
Pheturnede 1s. 4 Juda 
W this thing 1s. 


& al togidere 1s. 
° forth 1s. 


utherfors. ¥ haue synned ts. 


XXI. 9—17. 


gseruaunt, for vnwijsly I dide. And the 
Lord spac to Gad, seere of Dauid, sey- 
1oinge, Go, and speke to Dauid, and sey to 
hym, Thes thingis seith the Lord, Of 
thre thingis to thee I 3eue chois; oon that 
11 thou wylt, chees, that I doo to thee. And 
whann Gad was commen to Dauid, he 
seide to hym, Thes thingis seith the 
12 Lord, Chees that thou. wilt, or three 
jeer pestilence, or thee thre monethis to 
flee thi enmyes and the swerd of hem 
not to mowen ascapyn, or thre days the 
swerd of the Lord and deth to be turned 
aboute in the lond, and the aungel of the 
Lord to slen in alle the cytees’ of Yrael. 
Nowe thanne see, what I schal answere 
isto hym that sente me. And Dauith 
seid to Gad, On alle sijdes angwyschis 
thresten me doun, bot beter it is to me, 
that I falle in to the hondis of the Lord, 
for many ben the mercyes of hym, thanne 
u4in to the hondis of men. Thanne the 
Lord sente pestilence in to Yrael, and 
ther fellen of Yrael seuenty thousand of 
ismen. And he sente the aungel in to 
Jerusalem, that be smyte it; and whanne 
it schulde ben smyten, the Lord saw3, 
and hadde rewthe vpon the mykilnesse” 


of euyl; and he comaundide to the aun-: 


gel that smote, It sufficith, nowe cese thi 
hond. Forsothe the aungel of the Lord 
stode besides the corn flore of Ornam 
1¢Jebusei. And Dauid, rerynge his ee3en 
up, sawe the aungel of the Lord stond- 
ynge bitwene* heuene and erthe, and a 
drawn swerd in his hond, and turned 
a3einus Jerusalem. And there fellen downe 
as wele he as the more thoru3 birthe, 
clothid with heyris, bowed doun in to 
17the erth. And Dauid seide to the Lord, 
Whether not I am the whiche haue co- 
maundide that the puple be noumbrid ? 
I that haue synned, I the whiche dyde 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


363 


folili. And the Lord spak to Gad, thes 
profete of Dauid, and seide, Go thou, and 10 
speke to Dauid, and seie to him, The Lord 
seith these thingis, Y jeue to thee they 
chesyng of thre thingis; chese thou oon 
which thou wolt, that Y do to thee. And!) 
whanne Gad was comen to Dauid, he 
seide to Dauid, The Lord seith these 
thingis, Chese thou that that thou wolt’, 
ether pestilence thre 3eer?, ether that thre !2 
monethis thou fle thin enemyes and mow 
not ascape her swerd, ether that the swerd 
of the Lord and deeth regne thre daies in 
the lond, and that the aungel of the Lord 
slee> in alle the coostis of Israel. Now 
therfor se thou, what Y schal answere to 
hym that sente me®. And Dauid seide to 13 
Gad, Angwischis oppresse me on ech part, 
but it is betere to me, that Y falle in to 
the hondis of the Lord, for his merciful 
doynges ben manye, than in to the hondis 
of men. Therfor the Lord sente pestilence 14 
in to Israel, and seuenti thousynde of men 
felden doun of Israel. Also he’ sente anis 
aungel in to Jerusalem, that he schulde 
smyte it; and whanne it was smytun, the 
Lord si3, and hadde merci on® the greet- 
nesse of yuel; and comaundidef to the 
aungel that smoot®, It suffisith, now thin 
hond ceesse. Forsothe" the aungel of the 
Lord stood bisidis the cornfloor of Ornam 
Jebusey. And Dauid reiside’ hise i3en,16 
and si3* the anngel of the Lord stondynge - 
bitwixe heuene and erthe, and a! drawun 
swerd in his hond, and™ turnede"™ a3ens 
Jerusalem. And bothe he® and the grettere 
men in birthe weren clothid with heiris, 
and felden? doun lowe‘ on‘ the erthe. And 17 
Dauid seide to the Lord, Whether Y am 
not* that comaundide that the puple schulde 
be noumbrid? Y it am that synnede, Y it 
am that dide yuel; what! disseruid this 
floc? ? My Lord God, Y biseche’, thin 


euyl; this floc what hathy deserued? hond be” turned ‘in to* me, and ‘in to* 
Vv lynagis £ pr.m. Wmychnes 4. * betwixe 4. Y day H. 

y Om. 1s. 2 wolt of these 1s. ®3eer to be in thi rewme s. bsle the peples. ¢metothees. 4 the 
Lord s. ¢€uponis. fhe comaundide 1s. & smoot, seiynge 1. smote and seide s. 4 And1s. / reiside 
upis. Khesig1s. !Om.s. ™Om.1. "he wasturneds. ©the kings. kings. P thei fellen 1s. 
4Om.1s. fuponis. Snotheis. what of yuels. 4% hath this floc descrued 1. hath this folk dis- 
seruid s. VY biseche thee s. W be its. * ajens 1s. 


3A 


364 


Lord ‘my God, be turned, I biseche, thi 
hond in to me, and in to the hous of my 
fadir; thi puple forsothe be not smyten. 
18The aungel forsothe of the Lord co- 
maundide to Gad, that he schuld seyn 
to Dauith, that he schuld stey3e up, and 
maken out an auter to the Lord God in 
19the corne flore of Ornarh Jebuse. Than 
Dauid stey3ide up aftir the word of Gad, 


that.to hym he hadde spoken of the word : 


200f the: Lord. Bot Ornam whanne he 
hadde beholden and seen the aungel, and 
his foure sonys with hym, hidden hem 
silf, for why that tyme ‘he tradde corn 
21in the flore. Thanne whanne Dauid 
came to Ornam, Ornam byheld hym, and 
wente forth to meeten hym fro the flore, 
and honouride hym, bowed in to the 
2erthe. And Dauid seide to hym, 3eue 
to me a place of thy flore, that I bild in 
it an auter to the Lord; so that howe 
myche it is worth of syluer thou take, 
and the veniaunce cese fro the puple. 
23 And Ornam seyde to Dauid, Take, and 
my lord the kyng do what euer thing 
plese? to hym; bot and oxen I 3eue in to 
brent sacrifice, and the pestels in to wode, 
. and the whete in to sacrifice ; alle thingis 
2igladly.I 3eue. “And kyng Dauith seide 
to hym, It schal not ben so, bot syluer 
I schal 3euen as myche as it be* worth; 
ne forsothe I owe to taken awey to thee, 
and so to offren to the Lord free brent 
25 sacrifices. Than Dauid 3aue to Ornam 
for the place ownces of gold of most just 
26 wei3t sixe hundrith. And he bilde there 
an auter to the Lord, and offride brent 
sacrifices and pesible, and inwardly clepid 
God; and he herd hyin in fyre fro heuen 
27 vpon the auter of brent sacrifice. And 
the Lord comaundide to the aungel, and 
he turned the swerd in to the schethe. 


Z pleseth a. 


Ybeits. 2 Andis. thes. 
had seien the aungel s. © Ornam s, 
therfore 1s. “ And 1s. V thou #é1s. Ww Om. 1. 
b stikkis to be brent 1. trees to be brent s. 
fOm.,1. & kyng Dauid1. Dauith s. 
its. Ilkyndely1. ™thatrs. 4 ful rz. 
therupon s. § sacrifices a sec. m. s, 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


b comaundide to c. 
stiede vps. & the which 1s. » Andis. iOm.s. kX Om.1s. 1Om.1. when Ornam s. 
P he 3ede 18. 
x do he 18. 
€ sacrifice to be maad s. 
h 3yue to thee 1s. 
© Dauid rs. 


‘and there s. ¥ upon ts. 


XXI. 18—27. 


the hows of my fadir; but thi puple beY 
not smytun. Forsothe* an* aungel of the1s8 
Lord’ comaundide> Gad, that he schulde 
seie to Dauid, ‘that he schulde® stie4, and¢ 
bilde ‘an auter’ to the Lord God in the 
cornfloor of Ornam Jebusei. ‘Therfor Da-19 
uid stiedef bi the word of Gad, which? he 
spak to hym bi the word of the Lord. 
Forsothe® whanne Ornam hadde ‘biholde, 20 
andi hadde* seyn the aungel, and hise! foure 
sones ‘with hym™ ‘hadde seyn®, thei hid- 
den hem, for in that tyme he® threischide 
whete in the cornfloor. Therfor whanne 21 
Dauid cam to’Ornam, Ornam bihelde Da- 
uid, and 3ede? forth fro the cornfloor ajens 
hym, and worschipide hym, lowli on4 the 
ground. And Dauid seide to hym, 3yue22 
the place of" this cornfloor to ‘me, that Y 
bilde ther ynne an auter to the Lord; so 
that thou taket as myche siluer as it is 
worth, and that the veniaunce ceesse fro 
the puple. Forsothe* Ornam seide to23 
Dauid, Take thou’, and my lord the 
kyng do* what euer’ thing 'plesith hym ; 
but also Y 3yue oxis” in to brent sacrifice, 
and instrumentis of tree, wherbi cornes 
ben throischun, in® to trees’, and wheete 
in to sacrificee; Y 3yue4 alle thingis® wil- 
fully’. And ‘Dauid the kyng® seide to2s 
hym, It schal not be don so, but Y schal 
3yue! siluer' as myche as it is worth; for 
Y owe ‘not take* awei fro thee, and offre 
so to the Lord brent sacrifices freli! 3ouun. 
Therfor Dauid 3af to Ornam for the™ place 25 
sixe ‘hundrid siclis of gold of most" iust 
wei3te. And he® bildide there an? auter 26 
to the Lord, and he’ offride™ brent sacri- 
fice’ and pesible sacrifices, and‘ he inwardli 
clepide God ; and God herde hym in fier fro 
heuene on" the auter of brent sacrifice’. 
And the Lord comaundide to the aungel, 27 
and he turnede his swerd” in to the 


@is 4, 


¢Om.s. dstieupis. ¢Om.s. f wente up 1. 
mOm.s. 20m. 1. 
Sthes. t take 

@ J 3eue hem in s. 
€ these thingis 1s. 
K to take creiLNne@. to take 
Yr offride theron 1. offrid 


W swerd agen 18. 


r Om. AELMb. 
yOm.c. 2 oxen 1s. 
d 3yue gladly 1. 
i therfor siluer s. 
Pthes. 9 Om.1. 
V sacrifices s. 


4 upon Is. 


XXI. 28—XXII. 8. 


28 Thanne Dauid anoon seeynge, that the 
Lord hadde herde hym in the corn flore 
of Ornam Jebusei, he offride there slayne 

29sacrifices. Forsothe the tabernacle of the 
Lord, that Moyses hadde maad in desert, 
and» the auter ‘of brent sacrifices, was in 

30 that tempest in the hei3t of Gabaon ; and 
Dauid my3t not.gon to ‘the auter, that 
there he beseche God, forsothe he was 
with to myche. gastnesse aferd, seeinge 
the swerd of the aungel of the Lord. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 And Dauid seide, This is the hous of 
God‘,'and this the’auter in to brent sacri- 
2fice in Irael. .And he comaundide that 
alle the comlyngis of the lond of Yrael 
schulden be gaderd; and ‘he ordeynede 
of hem masouns to stoonis to ben hewen 
and polischit, that the hous of the Lord 
3be bild up; and myche yren to the naylis 
of the 3atis, and to endentyngis and ioyn- 
yngis Dauid made redy, and wei3t vn- 
4noumbreable of brasse; also cedre trees 
my3ten not ben eymed, the whiche Cy- 
doynes and Tyres brou3ten to Dauid. 
5 And Dauid seid, Salomon, my sone, is a 
lity] child and delicate ; the hous forsothe, 
that I wyll to ben bildid’ to the Lord, 
siche owith to ben, that in alle regyouns 
it ben nemmyd; I schal grethe* than to 
hym necessaryes. And for this cause be- 
forn his death he made. redy alle the 
edispensis. And he clepide Salomon, his 
sone, and he comaundide to hym, that 
he schulde bilden an hous to the Lord 
7God of Yrael. And Dauid seide to Salo- 
mon, My sone, of my’ wille it was, that 
I schuld bilden an hous to the name of 
8the Lord my God; bot'the word of the 
Lord is doné ‘to me, ‘seyinge, Myche 
blode thou hast sched, and many bateils 
thou hast fou3ten ; ‘thou schalt not mownf 


bins. © the Lord gz prim. 


x Thanner. Y And ts. 
takyng s. © with 1s. 
i gaderid togidere 18x. 


POm. 1s. dof s. 
¥ the Lord my God 1. 


z Om. ts. 
4 Lordis aungel 1. 
k Om. x. 

t and he made redy s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


dq bild cz. 


& the s. 
€ sacrifices A. 
\kytte or hewe 1s. 
8 forsothe 1. 


365 ° 


schethe. Therfor* anoon Dauid si3, that 2s 
the Lord hadde herd hym in the corn 
floor of Ornam Jebusey, and he offride 
there slayn sacrifices. ForsotheY the taber- 29 
nacle of the Lord, that Moyses hadde 
maad in the? deseert, and the auter of 
brent sacrifices, was in that*® tempest? in 
the hi3 place of Gabaon; and Dauid 30 
my3te not go to the auter, to biseche God 
there, for he was aferd bi‘ ful greet drede, 
seynge the swerd of the ‘aungel of the 
Lord‘. 
CAP. XO. 

And Dauid seide, This is the hows of1 
God, and this auter is in to brent sacrifice® 
of Israel. And he’ comaundide that alle2 
conuersis® fro hethenesse to the lawe of 
Israel ‘schulden be gaderidi ‘of ‘the lond 
of Israel*; and he ordeynede of hem ma- 
souns for to kytte! stoonys and for™ to 
polische", that® the hows of the Lord 
schulde be bildid; also Dauid made redy3 
ful myche yrun to the? nailes of the 3atis, 
and to the medlyngis and4 ioyntouris, 
and’ ynnoumbrable wei3te of bras; also4 
the trees of cedre my3ten not be gessid, 
whiche the men of Sidonye and the men 
of Tyre brou3ten to Dauid. And Dauids 
seide, Salomon, my sone, is a litil child 
and delicatt ; sothelis the hows, which Y 
wole be bildid to the Lord, owith to be 
sich, that it be named in alle cuntrees; 
therfor Y schal make redi necessaries to 
hym. - And for this cause Dauid bifor his 
deeth made redi alle costist. And het cle-¢ 
pide Salomon, his sone, and comaundide" 
to hym, that he schulde bilde an hows to 
the Lord God of Israel. And Dauid seide7 
to Salomon, My sone, it was my wille to 
bilde an hows to the name of ‘my Lord 
God’; but the word of the Lord was made s 
to me, and seide, Thou hast sched out 
myche blood, and thou hast fou3t ful mauy 


eordeynde 4. fOm. #. 


b tempest of veniaunce 1. tempest of veniaunce 
f Dauid is. & men turned is. 4} weren x. 
mQm.1. ® polische hem 1s. © and that 1s, 
t Dauid 1s. 4 he comaundide a pr. m. 18, 


+ Glos. Salo- 
mon is seide 
delicate for 
tendernesse of 
age, not hav- 
ing vse of ma- 
ners. 8. 


+ Glos. that is, 
sum of al 
coostis, for no 
doute Salemon 
addide to oner 
danty purui- 
aunce many 
coostis. Lire. s. 


366 


bild up an hous to my name, so myche 
oblode schad out before me; the sone that 
schal ben born to thee, schal ben a man 
most quyete, I schal maken forsothe hym 
to resten fro alle his enmyes by enuy- 
roun, and for this cause pesible he schal 
be clepid, and pese and rest I schal 3eue 
1oin Yrael alle the days of hym. He schal 
bilden up an hous to my name; and he 
schal ben to me in to a sone, and J schal 
ben to hym in to a fadir, and I schal 
fastne the see of his regne vpon Yrael 
1ivnto with oute eende. Now thann, my 
sone, the Lord be with thee, and do wel- 
sumly, and bilde up an hous to the Lord 
12thi God, as he hath spoken of thee. Also 
the Lord 3eue to thee prudence and wytt, 
that thou mowe gouerne Yrael, and keep 
i3the lawe of the Lord thi God. Thanne 
forsothe thou schalt mown profyten, 3if 
thou kepist the hestis and domes, the 
whiche the Lord comaundyde to Moyses, 
that he schulde techen Yrael ; take coum- 
fort and do manly, ne drede thou, ne 
iutake fer. Loo! I in my lytyl pornesse 
haue mad redy before the expenses of 
the hous of the Lord; of gold an hun- 
dreth thousand talentis, and of talentis 
of syluer a thousand thousandis; of 
brasse forsothe and of yren there is no 
wei3t, forsothe the noumbre is ouer passed 
by mychilnesse ; trees and stoonis I haue 
maad redye before to alle the expenses. 
15 Thou hast also many craftise men, ma- 
souns, and leyers, and craftisemen of 
trees, and of alle craftis, most wijs to 
i¢don werk, in gold, and syluer, brasse, 
and yren, of the whiche is no noumbre; 
rijs than, and make, and the Lord schal 
17be with thee. And Dauid comaundide 
to alle the princis of Yrael, that thei 
isschulden helpen Salomon, his sone, sey- 
inge, 3e seen, that the Lord oure God is 
with us, and hath 3euen to us rest by 


wins. 
&mewn. 


b the Lord thi God 1s. © heestis rs. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


x the Lord thi God 1. thi Lord thi God s. 
4 do thou s. 


XXII. 9—18. 


batels; thou mayst not bilde an hows to 
my name, for thou hast sched out so 
myche blood bifor me; the sone that schal9 
be borun to thee, schal be a man most 
pesible, for Y schal make hym to haue 
reste of alle hise enemyes bi cumpas, and 
for this cause he schal be clepid pesible, 
and Y schal 3yue pees and reste in Israel 
in alle hise daies. He schal bilde an hows 10 
to my name; he schal be to me in to a 
sone, and Y schal be to hym in to a fadir, 
and Y schal make stidefast the seete of his 
rewme on Israel withouten ende. Now i 
therfor, my. sone, the Lord be with thee, 
and haue thou prosperite, and bilde thou 
an hows to ‘thi Lord God*, as he spaky 
of? thee. And the Lord 3yue to thee12 
prudence and wit, that thou mow gouerne 
Israel, and kepe the lawe of ‘thi Lord 
God». For thanne thou maist profite, if13 
thou kepist the comaundementis® and 
domes, whiche the Lord comaundide to 
Moises, that he schulde teche Israel; be 
thou coumfortid, and do? manli, drede thou 
not ‘with outforth®, nether drede thou 
‘with ynnef. Lo! in my pouert Y haue1 
maad redi the costis of the hows of the 
Lord; an hundrid thousinde talentis of 
gold, and a thousynde thousynde talentis® 
of siluer; sotheli® of bras and irun is no 
wei3te, for the noumbre is ouercomuni bi 
greetnesse*; Y haue maad redi trees and 
stoonys to! alle costis. Also thou hast ful 1s 
many crafti men, masouns, and leggeris 
of stonys, and crafti men of trees, and of 
alle craftis, most prudent to make werk, in i6 
gold, and siluer, and bras™, and in yrun, 
of which is no noumbre; therfor rise 
thou", and make®, and the Lord schal be 
with thee. Also Dauid comaundide to17 
alle the princis of Israel, that thei schul- 
den helpe Salomon, his sone, and seide?, ig 
3e seen, that ‘zoure Lord God? is with 3ou, 
and hath™ 30ue to 30u reste ‘by cumpas’, 


y hath spoke ts. 
€ outward 1. 


Z to CDEFGKLMNOPQRSUXb: 
f with ynne forth 1s. & of 


talentis ncpF sec.m,. nN prom. ouxb. )and 1s. i oner comun wei3t 1s. J with L. * gretenesse thereof s. 


™m in brasse s. 
r he hath 1s. 


latt 


n thou up Is. 
God s. 


8 abowte I. 


© make zt 1. make this houce s. 


P he seide 1s. 4 the Lord 3oure 


XXII. 19——X XIII. 13. 


enuyroun, and hath 3euen alle the’ en- 
myes in oure hond, that the lond be 
suget before the Lord, and beforn his 

igpuple. 3eueth therefore 3oure hertis and 
3oure soules, that 3e sechen the Lord 
3oure God; and rijsith to gidre, and bild- 
ith up a seyntuarye to the Lord 3oure 
God, that the arke of the pese conenaunt 
of the Lord be brou3t in, and the sacrid 
vessels to the Lord in to the hous, that is 
byld to the name of the Lord. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 Thanne Dauid olde and ful of days 
ordeynede Salomon, his sone, king vpon 
2Yrael. And he gaderde alle the princis 
30f Irael, and prestis, and Leuytis; and 
the Leuytis ben noumbred fro twenty 
jeer and aboue, and there ben founde 
4ey3t and thritty thousand of men. Of 
thes ben chosen, delid in to the seruyse 
of the house of the Lord, foure and 
twenty thousand ; of prouostes forsothe, 
sand of domesmen, sixe thousand; bot 
foure thousand porters, and as fele saw- 
trers, syngynge in orgnys, that Dauith 
¢maad to syngyn. And Dauith departyde 
hem by whiles of the sonys of Leuy, that 
zis, Jersan, and Caath, and Merary, and 
sJersam, and Leadan, and Semei. The 
sones of Leadan; prince Jehiel, and E- 
othan, and Joel, thre. The sonys of Se- 
mei; Salomyth, and Osiel, and Aram, 
thre; thes the princes of the meynes of 
10 Leadau. Bot the sonys of Semei; Leeth, 
and Sisa, and Jaus, and Baria, thes the 
11sonys of Semei, foure. Forsothe Leeth 
was the rather, and Sisa the secounde; 
bot® Jaus and Baria hadden no mo 
sonys, and therfore in oon meyne and in 
1200n hous thei ben countid. The sonys 
of Caath; Amram, and Ysaar, Ebron, 
i3and Osiel, foure.. The sonis of Amram ; 


gOm. a. 


t he hath 1s. 
God 1s. 2 in theder s. 
€Om.s. » Om. is. 


uvyndir xX. Y 3yue 3e Is. 
aQm.s. > that 1s. 
iOm.s. * twenti 1 pr.m. s, 


© thousynde seren ordeyned to be in the hous of the Lord 1s. 
8 syng with s, 


that weren porters of jatis and doris s.  * that 1. 


w Andis. *andis, Y and 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


w the Lord 3oure God rs. 
¢ Thanne 1. 


367 


and hath* bitake alle enemyes in” 3oure 
hoond, and the erthe is suget bifor the 
Lord, and bifor his puple. Therfor 3yue" 19 
3oure hertis and 3oure soulis, that 3e seke 


‘joure Lord God"; and rise 3e* togidere, 


and bilde 3e a seyntuarie to ‘3oure Lord 
God, that the arke of boond of pees of 
the Lord be brou3t in’, and that vessels 
halewid to the Lord be brou3t in to* the 
hows, which? is bildid to the name of the 
Lord. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Therfor® Dauid was eld and ful of daies, ! 
and ordeynede’ Salomon, his sone, kyug 
on® Israel. And he‘ gaderide togidere alle2 
the? princes of Israel, and the" preestis, and 
dekenes; and the dekenes weren noum-3 
brid fro twenti 3eer andi aboue, and ei3te 
and thretti* thousynde of men weren 
foundun!. And foure and twenty thou-4 
synde men weren chosun of hem, and 
weren™ departid in to the seruyce of the 
hows of the Lord; sotheli" of souereyns, 
and iugis, sixe thousynde®; forsothe? foure 5 
thousynde ‘porteris weren’, and so many 
syngeris, syngynge to the Lord in orguns, 
whiche’ Dauid hadde maad for to synge’. 
And Danid departide hem' bi the® whilise 
of the sones of Leuy, that is, of Gerson, 
and of ¥ Caath, and Merary. And the sones7 
of Gerson weren Leedan and Semeye. Thes 
sones of Leedan weren thre, the prince 
Jehiel, and Ethan, and Johel. The sonesg 
of Semei weren thre, Salamyth, and Oziel, 
and Aram; these weren the’ princes of 
the meynees of Leedan. Forsothe” the 10 
sones of Semeye weren Leeth, and Ziza, 
and Yaus, and Baria, these foure weren 
the sones of Semei. Sothelix Leeth was11 
the formere, and Ziza the secounde; for- 
sothey Yaus and Baria hadden not ful 
many soues, and therfor thei weren rikenyd 


blo n, 


y the Lord oure 
f Dauid rs. 

n and Is, 
4 porteris 1. 
vOm.s. 


X 3e up Is. 
4 he ordeynede 1. © upon Is. 

1 fonndun of hem 1s. ™ thei weren 1s. 
P and ther weren 1. and s. 
tthese syngers s. “Om. 1s. 


368 


Aaron and Moyses; and Aaron is se- 
uerd, that he mynystre in to the holy of 
halowis, he and the sonys of hym in to 
euermore, and that thei brennen encens 
to the Lord aftir his ri3t, and blessen to! 
14his name vnto* with oute eend. The 
sonis also of Moises, the man of God, 
ben noumbred in the lynage of Leuy. 
15 The sonys of Moysi; Jersan, and Eliazar. 
16 The sonys of Jersan; Sobuel the first. 
17 There weren forsothe sonys of Eliasar, 
Roboia the first, and ther weren not of 
Eliasar other sonys; bot the! sonis of 
isRobie ben multiplied ful myche. The 
igsonys of Ysaar; Salomyth the first. The 
sonis of Ebron; Jeriahu the first, Ama- 
rias the secounde, Jasiel the thrid, Jehe- 
zomehan the firth. The sonis of Osiel; 
21 Mycha the first, Josia the secound. The 
sonis of Mereri; Mooli and Musi. The 
22sonys of Mooly; Eliasar, and Cis. Elia- 
sar forsothe is deed, and hadde no sonis, 
bot dou3ters; and the sonis of Cis token 
23hem, and the bretheren of hem. The 
sonys of Musi; Mooli, and Heder, and 
24 Jeremyth, thre. Thes the sonis of Leuy 
in kynredis, and in™ their meynese, 
princis be whilis, and noumbre of alle 
the heuedis, the whiche dyden the bysy- 
nesse of the seruyse of the hous of the 
25 Lord, fro twenty 3eer and aboue. Dauid 
forsothe seid, The Lord God of Yrael 
hath 3enen rest to his puple, and a dwell- 
ynge in Jerusalem in to with outen eend; 
26ne it schal ben of the office of Leuytis, 
that eny more thei beren the tabernacle, 
and alle the vessels of it to mynystren. 
27And aftir the laste hestis" of Dauith 
there schal ben countid a noumbre of 
the sonys of Leuy fro twenty 3eer and 
28aboue; and thei schul ben vndir the hond 
of the sonys of Aaron, in to heriynge of 
the hous of the Lord, in vestiaries, and 
in chaumbres, and in place of purify- 


ivnto nH. * into a. 


Zinos. ® departid or ordeyned 1s. % Om. 1. 
Subuhel 1s. & And 1s. h and 1s. 
the first rerid s. 1 the firste was Mycha 1s. 

P the noumbre 1s. 4the heedis1. "Om. s. 


Vv heestis 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


1QOm. 4. 


¢ Om. vp. 
i the firste was Salumuth 1s. 
m And 1s. 

s Om. x. 


XXIII. 14—-28. 


in 0 meynee and oon? hows. .The sones1z 
of Caath weren foure, Amram, and Ysaac, 
Ebron, and Oziel. ._The sones of Amram13 
weren Aaron and Moyses; and Aaron: 
was departid’, that he schulde mynystre 
in the hooli thing? of hooli thingis, he and 
hise sones with outen ende, and to brenne 
encense to the Lord bi his custom, and* 
to! blesse his name with outen ende. Also. 
the sones of Moyses, man® of God, weren 
noumbrid in the lynage of Leuy.:. Theis 
sones of Moises weren Gerson and Eli- 
eser. The sones of Gerson; ‘Subuhel the is 
firstef. Sotheli€ the sones of Eliezer weren 17 
Roboya the firste, and othere sones-weren 
not to Eliezer; forsothe> the sones of. 
Roboia weren multipliede ful miche. Theis 
sones of Isaar ; ‘Salumuth the firstei. The to 
sones of Ebron; ‘Jerian the firste*, Ama- 
rias the secounde, Jaziel the thridde, Je- 
thamaan the fourthe. The sones of Oziel ; 20 
‘Mycha the firste!, Jesia the secounde. The2t 
sones of Merari weren Mooli and Musi. 
The sones of Mooli weren Eleazar, and 
Cys. Sothelim Eleazar was deed, and 22 
hadde® not sones, but dou3tris; and the 
sones of Cys, the britherent of hem, wed-_ t #hat is, co- 
diden hem. The sones. of Musi weren23 Lireoxr. 
thre, Mooli, and Heder, and Jerymuth.’ 
These weren the sones of Leuy in her 24 
kynredis and meynees, prynces® bi whilis, 
and noumbre? of alle heedis’, that diden 
the trauel of the sernyce of the hows of 
the Lord, fro twenti 3eer and™ aboue. For 25 
Dauid seide, The Lord God of Israel hath 
3oue reste to his puple, and a dwellyng in 
Jerusalem til’ in to with outen ende; and 26 
it scha] not be the office of dekenes for to 
bere more the tabernacle, and alle vessels* 
therof for to mynystre". Also bi the laste 27 
comaundementis’ of Dauid the noumbre 
of the sones of Leuy schulen be rikened 
fro twenti 3eer and aboue; and thei schu- 28 
len be vndir the hond of the sones of 


mQOm.&.  heste FH. 
ethe manis. f the firste was 
k the firste was Jerian 1. Jerian 
he hadde s, ° and thei weren prynces 18. 
t the vessels 1s. % mynystre therynne 1s. 


d Om.c. 


XXII. 29—XXIV. 5. 


inge, and in the® seyntuarye, and in alle 
werkis of the seruyce of the temple of 
29the Lord. The prestis forsothe vpon the 
looues of proposicioun, and? to the sacri- 
fice of tryed floure, and to the thynne 
kakis, and to the therf looues, and to 
the fryinge panne, and the boylynge 
tryed floure, and to turnen, and vpon 
30 the wei3t and mesure. The Leuytes for- 


sothe, that thei stoden’ erly, to know-. 


lechen and syngen to the Lord, and lije 

3imaner at euen, as wele in offrynge of 
brent sacrifices of the hous of the Lord, 
as in sabotis, and kalendis, and other 
solempnytese, aftir the noumbre and cery- 
monyes of eche thing besily before the 

32 Lord; and kepe thei the obseruauncis 
of the tabernacle of the pese couenaunt, 
and the rijt of the seyntuarye, and the 
obseruauncis of the sonys of Aaron, their 
bretheren, that they mynystren in the 
hows of the Lord. 


CAP: XXIV. 


1 Forsothe to the sonis of Aaron thes 
porciouns schul ben ; the sonis of Aaron, 
Nadab, and Abiud, Eleasar, and Ytha- 
amar; forsothe Nadab and Abiud ben 
deed before their fadir, with oute free 
chyldre, and Eleasar vsede presthode, 
3and Ythamar. And Dauid deuydide hem, 
that is, Sadoch, fro the sonys of Eleasar, 
and Achymalech, fro the sonis of Ytha- 
4mar, aftir their whilis and seruyse; and 
there ben founden manye mo sonys of 
Eleasar in the men princis, thanne the 
sonys of Ythamar. He deuydide forsothe 
to hem, that is, to the sonys of Eleasar, 
princes by meynes sextene; and to the 
sonys of Ythamar by meynes and their 
shouses ey3t. Bot he deuydide either 
meynes between hem selue by lottis ; 


©QOm. 4BFH. Pin «A. 


wOm.s. *Om.1s. Y Andis. 


fofs. &Om.1s. i fadirdieders. ‘Kandy. 
© Dauid 1s. P of Israel s. 4 her meynees is. 
VOL. II. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


t he departid ei3te s. 


369 


Aaron in to the” worschipe of the hows 

of the Lord, in porchis, and in chaumbris, 

and in the place of clensyng, and in the 
seyntuarie, and in alle werkis of the* ser- 

uyce of the temple of the Lord. Forsothey 29 
preestis schulen be ouer the looues of pro- 
posicioun’’, and to the sacrifice of flour, 

and to the? pastis sodun in watir, and to 

the’ therf looues, and friyng* panne, and 

to hoot flour, and to seenge®, and ouer al 

wei3te and mesure. Forsothe* the dekenes 30 
schulen be, that thei stonde eerli, for to 
knowleche and synge to the Lord, and 

lijk? maner at euentide, as wel in the®3! 
offryng of brent sacrifices of the Lord, as 

in sabatis, and kalendis, and othere so- 
lempnytees, bi the noumbre and cerymo- 

nyes of eche thing contynueli bifor the 

Lord}; and that thei kepe the obser-32 + thatis, tothe 
uaunces of the tabernacle of the? boond Ears 
of pees of the Lord, and the custum of ** "°* 
the seyntuarie, and the obseruaunce of the 

sones of Aarou, her britheren, that thei 
mynystre in the hows of the Lord. 


CAP. XXIV. 


Forsothe to the sones of Aaron theset 
porciouns schulen be; the sones of Aaron 
weren Nadab, and Abyud, Eleazar, and 
Ythamar; but Nadab and Abyud weren2 
deed with out fre children bifor her fadiri, 
and Eleazar and Ythamar weren set in 
presthod. And Dauith departide hem,3 
that is, Sadoch, of the sones of Eleazar, 
and Achymelech, of the sones of Ithamar, 
by her whiles and seruyce!; and the sones 4 
of Eleazar weren founden many mo in 
the men princes, than™ the sones of Ytha- 
mar. Forsothe™ he® departide to hem, 
that is, to the sones of P Eleazar, sixtene 
prynces bi meynees!; and to the sones of 
Ythamar ei3te™ prynces bi her meynees 
and howsis. Sotheli’ he departide euers 
eithir meynees among hem silf bi lottis; 


90m. 4BFH. '° stonde c. 


yY proposicioun, that is, settynge forth Koa. proposicioun, ether of 
settynge forth Ns. 7Om. FIKLMQsxb. % to the friyng 1s. 


hseynge s. Andis. ‘in lijk 19. ¢Om. Isx. 
Ther seruyce 1s. ™than weren is. 2% And is. 
s And Is. 


3B 


370 


forsothe there weren princis of the seyn- 
tuarye, and princis of the hous of God, 
as wele of the sonys of Eleasar as of the 
ssonys of Ythamar. Aud Semeyas, the 
sone of Nathanael, Leuyte scribe, dis- 
cryuede hem beforn the kyng and the 
princes, and before Sadoch, the prest, and 
Achymalech, the sone of Abiather, also 
before the princis of the prestis meynes 
and of Leuytis; oon hous, the whiche 
beforn was to the tother, of Eleasar, and 
another hous, the whiche vndir hym silf 
7hadde the tother, of Ythamar. And the 
first lott wente out of Joiarib, the secound 
sof Jedeie, the thrid of Harym, the ferth 
90f Seosym, the fyfthe of Melchia, the 
tosixt of Mayman, the seuenth of Acchos, 
ithe ei3the of Abia, the nynthe of Jesu, 
12the tenthe of Sethema, the elleuenth of 
13 Eliazub, the twelthe of Jacym, the thrit- 
tenthe of Oofa, the™ fouretenthe of Isbaal, 
lathe fyftenthe of Abelgaa, the sixtenthe 
15 0f Emmer, the seuententhe® of Ezir, the 
iseiztenthe of Ahapses, the nyntenthe of 
17 Pheceia, the twentethe of Zechel, the oon 
and twentithe of Joachym, the two and 
istwentethe of Gamul, the thre and twen- 
tethe of Dalayan, the foure and twen- 
19 tithe of Mazian. Thes the whiles of hem 
aftir their seruyse, that thei gon in the 
hous of the Lord, and aftir thert rijt 
vndir the hond of Aaron, their fader, as 
20 the Lord God of Yrael comaundide. For- 
sothe of the sonys of Leuy that weren 
laft, of the sonys of Amrain, Sebahel was 
prynce; and of the sonys of Sebahel, Je- 
21deia; of the sonys of Robie, prince Je- 
22sias. Of Isaaris forsothe Salemoth; also 
23 the sone of Salemoth, Jonadiath ; and the 
sone of hym, Gerueanus the first, Aman 
the secound, Azihel’ the thrid, Jethmoam 
21the ferthe. The sone of Ozihel, Mycha; 
25 the sone of Mycha, Samur ; the brother of 
Mycha, Jezia; and the sone of Jezie, Za- 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXIV. 6—25. 


for there weren princes of the seyntuarye, 
and princes of the hows of God, as wel of 
the sones of Eleazar ast of the sones of 
Ithamar. And Semeye, the sone of Na-s 
thanael, a scribe of the lynage of Leuy, 
discriuede* hem bifore the king and 
pryncis’, and bifor Sadoch, the preest, 
and Achymelech”*, the sone of Ablathar, 
and to the prynces of meynees* of theY 
preestis and of? the dekenes; he discriuyde 
oon hows of Eleazar, that was souereyn 
to othere, and ‘the tother® hows of Itha- 
mar, that hadde othere” yvndir hym. For-7 
sothe® the firste lot 3ede out to Joiarib, the 
secounde to Jedeie, the thridde to Aha-s 
rym, the fourthe to Seorym, the fyuethe» 
to Melchie, the sixte to Maynan, the se-10 
uenthe to Accos, the ei3the to Abia, the11 
nynthe to Hieusu, the tenthe to Sechema, 
the elleuenthe to Eliasib, the tweluethe 12 
to Jacyn, the thrittenthe to Opha, the13 
fourtenthe to Isbaal, the fiftenthe to Abel-14 
ga, the sixtenthe to Emmer, the seuen-1!5 
tenthe to Ezir, the ei3tenthe to Ahapses, 
the nyntenthe to Pheseye, the twentithe 16 
to Jezechel, the oon and twentithe to Ja-17 
chym, the two and twentithe to Gamul, 
the thre and twentithe to Dalayam, the‘18 
foure and twentithe to Mazzian. These 19 
weren the whilis® of hem bi her myny- 
steries‘, that thei entre in to the hows of 
God, and bi her custom® vndur the hond 
of Aaron, her fadir, as the Lord God of 
Israel comaundide. Forsothe Sebahel was 20 
prince of the sones of Leuy that weren 
resydue®, of the sones of Amram; and the 
sone of Sebahel was Jedeie; also Jesie2! 
was prince of the sones of Roobie. Sotheli‘22 
Salomoth was prince of Isaaris; and the 
sone of Salamoth was Janadiath; and his 23 
firste sone was Jeriuans, ‘Amarie the se- 
coundek, Azihel the thridde, ‘Jethmoan 
the fourthe!. The sone of Ozihel was My-24 
cha; the sone of Mycha was Samyr ; the 25 


rand ez. Ssenentith zs. tthe apcry. VY Azihe p. 
tand a. u discryued, ordeyned or presentid s. Vv of princess. bifore Achimalech s.  * the 
meyneesc. YOm.1s. 2Om.s. that other 1. > othere prestis and dekens 1s. ¢Certisis. 4 and 
the 1s. © whilis or tymes 1s. f seruyces 1s. & custom do her office 1. custom vse her offices. } left 1s. 


i Andis. k the secounde sone was Amarie 1s. 


land the fourthe Jethmoan 1. 


XXIV. 26—XXV. 5. 


2echarie. The sonis of Mereri; Mooli and 
27 Musi; the sone of Jozan, Bennon; the 
sone also of Musi; Orian, and Soem, and 
28Saccur, and Ebri. Bot the sone of Mooli, 
29 Eliazar, that hadde no free childre; the 
30 sone forsothe of Ciz, Jeremyel; the sonis 
of Musi; Mooli, Jeremuth. Thes the sonys 
of Leuy, aftir the houses of their meynese. 
31 Leyden also and thei lottis a3eyn their 
bretheren, sonys” of Aaron, before Dauid 
the kyng, and Sadoch, and Achymalech, 
and the princis of the prestis meynese, 
and Leuytis; as wele the more as the 
lasse, alle the lott euenlyche* deuydide. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Dauith than, and the maysterhed of 
the hoost, deseuereden’ in to the seruyce 
the sonys of Asaph, and Eman, and Ydi- 
tym, the whiche schulden prophecien in 
harpis, and sawtrees, and cymbalis, aftir 
their noumbre, seruynge to the office ha- 

2lowed to hem. Of the sonis of Asaph; 
Zacur, and Joseph, and Nathanye, and 
Azarela; the sonis of Asaph vndir the 
hond of Azaph prophecyinge beside the 

3kyng. Forsothe of Yditym the sonis; 
Yditym, Godolias, Soori, Jesias, and Sa- 
baias, and Mathatias, sixe; vudir the 
hond of his fadir Yditym, the whiche 
propheciede in harpe vpon men know- 
4lechyng and preysynge the Lord. Of 
Heman also the sonys; Heman, Buccian, 
Mathania, Ezihel, Subuel, and* Geriy- 
moth, and? Ananya, Anam, Eliatha, Gael- 
dothi, and Romenthi, Ezer, and Jesba- 
schasi, Melothiathir, Mazioth; alle thes 
the sonys of Heman, the seeris of the 
kyng in the wordis of God, that the 
horne he enhaunce*. And God 3af to 
Eman sonis fouretene, and dou3tirs thre. 


the sonys 4. * euenli ace. 


mQOm.imsxb. %® Andis. 
* bifore the 1. bifore s. * the meynees s. 
sawtrees 1s. 7 in cymbalis 1s. 


fand Anan is. g and Mazioth1. } the sones x. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


* y deserneden Fri. 


© the whiche 1. whiche s. 
2 alle thingis 18. 
@ halewid or entoyned 1s. 

i word s. 


3B 


371 


brother of Mycha was Jesia; and™ the 
sone of Jesia was Zacharie. The sones of 26 
Merary weren Mooli and Musi; the sone 
of Josyan was Bennon; and the sone of 27 
Merarie was Ozian, and Soen, and Zac- 
cur, and Hebri. Sotheli® the sone of Moolies 
was Eleazar, that? hadde not fre sones ; 
forsothe? the sone of Cys was Jeremyhel ; 29 
the sones of Musy wesen Mooli, Eder, 30 
Jerymuthi, These weren the sones of Leuy, 
bi the housis of her meynees. Also and 31 
thei senten lottis ajens her britheren, the 
sones of Aaron, bifor Dauid the’ kyng, 
and bifor Sadoch, and Achymelech, and 
the® princes of meyneest of preestis and of 
dekenes; lot departide euenli alle", bothe 
the’ gretter and the’ lesse. 


CAP. XXV. 


Therfor Dauid, and the magestratis of1 
the oost, departiden in“ to the seruyce 
the sones of Asaph, and of Eman, and of 
Idithum, whiche* schulden profecyet in 
harpis, and sawtrees’, and cymbalis’, bi her 
noumbre, and serue the office halewid? to 
hem. Of the sones of Asaph ; Zaccur, and 2 
Joseph, and Nathania, and Asarela; so- 
theli® the sones of Asaph vndir .the hond 
of Asaph profesieden bisidis the kyng. 
Forsothe® the sones of Idithum werens 
these ; Idithum®*, Godolie, Sori, Jesie, and 
Sabaie, and Mathatie, sixe; vndur the 
hond of hir fadir Idithum, that profesiede 
in an harpe on® men knoulechynge and 
preysynge the Lord. Also the sones of, 
Heman weren Heman, Boccia, Mathanya, 
Oziel, Subuhel, and Jerymoth, Ananye, 
Anan‘, Elyatha, Gaeldothi, and Romenthi, 
Ezer, and Jesbacasi, Melothy, Othir, Ma- 
zioth$; alle these sones* of Heman werens 
profetis{ of the kyng in the wordis' of 
God, that he schulde enhaunse the horn*). 
And God 3af to Heman fourtene sones, and 
thre dou3tris. Alle! vndur the hond ofe 


zQm. ascu, # enhaunced B sec. m. 


Pandis, and Jerymuthis. 'Om.s. 
Yto1s. WOm.is. *thewhicher. Y in 
bandis. ¢Andis. 40Om.s. © upon 1s. 


k horn or strengthe 1s. } Al these s. 


ft that is, seien 
profecies, either 
with this thei 
hadden the 
spiryt of pro- 
fecie, as Ebreus 
seien. Lire 
here. GKLPQS. 
t thes weren 
seide profetis, 
for thei sungen 
profecies, ether 
for thei hadden 
the spiritt of 
profecie ; thei 
weren seide the 
profetes of the 
king, for thei 
preieden for 
the king and 
his rewme, 
koas. 

§ that he shulde 
enhaunce the 
horns that is, 
herfore thei 
preiseden God, 
that he shulde 
enhaunce the 
strengthe and 
power of the 
rewme of 
Dauith. Koas. 
that is, 
strengthe and 
power of the 
rewme of Da- 
uith. Lire here. 
LP 


372 


salle vndir the hond of their fadir, to 
syngyn in the temple of the Lord thei 
weren assygned, in cyinbalis, and saw- 
trees, and harpis, in to the’ seruyces® of 
the hous of the Lord besyde the kyng, 
Asaph that is, and Yditym, and Eman. 
7 Forsothe the noumbre of hem with their 
bretheren, that tau3ten the song of the 
Lord, alle doctours, was two hundrith 
sand foure score and ei3t. And thei ley- 
den lottis by their whilis euenly, as wele 
more as lasse, the tan3t and vntau3t® to 
ogyder. And the first lott of Joseph is 
gone out, that was of Asaph; the se- 
counde of Godolie, to hym, and to his 
losonis and to his britheren twelue; the 
thridde of Zaccus, to his sonys and to 
ithis britheren twelue; the ferthe of Ysan, 
to his sonis and to his‘ bretheren twelue ; 
l2the fyfte of Nathanye, to the sonys and 
13his® bretheren twelue; the sixte of Bec- 
cian, to the sonys and his bretheren, 
l4twelue; the seuenthe of Ysraela, to the 
issonys and his bretheren twelne; the 
eisthe of Ysaye, to the sonys and his 
isbretheren twelue; the nynthe of Ma- 
thanye, to the sonys and his bretheren 
i7twelue; the tenthe of Semeie, to the 
issonys and his bretheren twelue; the 
elleuenthe of Esrael, to the sonis and 
ighis bretheren twelue; the twelfthe of 
Asabie, to the sonis and his bretheren 
20twelue; the thrittenthe of Subahul, to 
2ithe sonys and his bretheren twelue; the 
fonretenthe of Mathatie, to the sonis and 
azhis bretheren twelne; the fyftenthe of 
Jerymoth, to the sonis and his bretheren 
a3twelue; the sextenthe of Ananye, to the 
21sonys and his bretheren twelue; the 
seuententhe? of Jesbocase, to the sonys and 
25his bretheren twelue; the ey3tenthe of 
Amyham, to the sonys and his bretheren 
26twelue; the nynteuthe of Mellochu, to 
27the sonys and his bretheren twelue; the 
twentithe of Eliatha, to the sonys and 


b Om. a. 


m™Om.c. © in harpis ts. 
and eizteti N. eizti and eigte mw. 
hiss. * Om. plures. to his s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


© Om. CDEFGIKLMOPQRSUX. 
tan vnwijs I. a vnwise man s. 
Y to hise bretheren 1s. 


XXV. 6—27. 


her fadir weren ‘delid, e¢hir™ asigned, to 
synge in the temple of the Lord, in cym- 
balis, and sawtrees, and harpis®, in to the® 
seruyces? of the hows of the Lord ny3 the 
kyng, that is to seie, Asaph, and Idithum, 
and Heman. Sothelit the noumbre of hem7 
with her britheren, that tan3ten the songe 
of the Lord, alle the techeris, was’ twey 
hundrid ‘foure scoor and ei3te’. And theis 
senten lottis bi her whiles euenli, as wel 
the gretter as the lesse, also a wijs man 
and vnwijst. And the firste lot 3ede outy 
to Joseph, that was of Asaph; the se- 
counde" to Godolie, to hym, and hise’ 
sones and hise” britheren twelue; theo 
thridde to Zaccur, to hise sones and hise¥ 
bretheren twelue; the fourthe to Isary, 11 
to hise sones and hise* britheren twelue ; 
the fyuethe to Nathanye, to hise sonesi2 
and hise britheren twelue; the sixte to13 
Boccian, to hise sones and hise britheren 
twelue; the seuenthe to Israhela, to hise 1.4 
sones and britherenY twelue; the ei3the is 
to Isaie, to his sones and _ britherenY 
twelue; the nynthe to Mathany, to hisie 
sones and britherenY twelue; the tenthe17 
to Semei, to his sones and britherenY 
twelue; the elleuenthe to Ezrahel, tois 
hise sones and britherenY twelue; theio 
tweluethe to Asabie, to his sones and 
britherenY twelue; the thrittenthe too 
Subahel, to hise sones and _ britherenY 
twelue; the fourtenthe to Mathathatie, 21 
to hise sones and britherenY twelue; 
the fiftenthe to Jerymoth, to hise sonesge2 
and britherenY twelne; the sixtenthe to23 
Ananye, to hise sones and britherenY 
twelue; the seuententhe to Jesbocase, 24 
to hise sones and britheren? twelue; thes 
ei3tenthe to Annam, to lise sones and 
britheren? twelue; the nyntenthe to Mol-26 
lothi, to hise sones and britheren” twelue ; 
the twentithe to Eliatha, to hise sones and 27 
britheren? twelue; the oon and twentithe es 
to Othir, to hise sones and britheren? 


€ seruyse u. 4songis 4. ¢ the vntau3t u. ftheceru. & tothe au. top. } seuentethe a. 


q And 1s. 
U secounde lot s. 
Z to his bretheren s. 


P sernyse W. Tweren Is. 8 eiz3te 
Vv to hise 1s. W to 


@ to his bretheren s. 


XXV. 28-——XXVI. 12. 


28 his bretheren twelue; the oon and twen- 
tithe of Other, to the sonys and his bre- 

29theren twelue; the two and twentithe 
of Godoliathi, to the sonis and his bre- 

30theren twelue; the thre and twentithe 
of Masuyth, to the sonys and his bre- 

3itheren twelue; the foure and twentithe 
of Romanathiezer, to the sonys and his 
bretheren twelue. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 Dyuysiouns forsothe of the porters; 
of the Chorites, Mellesemya, the sone of 
2Chory, of the sonys of Asaph. The sonis 
of Mellezemie ; Zacharias the first goten, 
Jodiel the secounde, Sabadias the thrid, 
3Ythamael the ferth, Aylam the fyfthe, 
Johannam the sixte, Elionenai the se- 
4uenthe. The sonis forsothe of Obed- 
edome ; Semeias the first goten, Josadadi 
the secounde, Joacha the thrid, Saccar 
5the ferth, Athanael the fyft, Amyhel the 
sixt, Isachar the seuenth, Pollathi the 
ey3the, for to hym the Lord blessede. 
€To Semei forsothe, his sone, ben born 
sonys, prefectis of their meynes ; forsothe 
7thei weren most stronge men. The sonys 
than of Semei; Othyn, and Raphael, and 
Obedihel, and Zabad; and the bretheren 
of hym most stronge men; Helyu also, 
sand Samachias. Alle thes of the sonys 
of Obededom; thei, and the sonys, and the 
bretheren of hem, most stronge men to 
mynystren, two and sexty of Obededom. 
9Bot of Meellymye the sonis and bre- 
theren, most stronge men and most 
iomy3ty, ei3tene. Of Hosa forsothe, that 
is, of the sonis of Merery, Sechary 
prince; forsothe he hadde not a first 
goten, and therfore his fadir putte hym 
11in to a prynce; Helchias the secounde, 
Thebelias the thrid, Zacharias the ferth ; 
alle thes sonys and bretheren of Hosa, 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


373 


twelue; the two and twentithe to Godo-29 
liathi, to hise sones and britheren® twelue; 
the thre and twentithe to Mazioth, to hise30 
sones and britheren” tweluc; the fouresi 
and twentithe to Romonathiezer, to his 
sones and britheren® twelue. 


CAP XXYVIi- 


Forsothe these weren the departingis\ 
of porteris; of the sones of Chore, Mel- 
lesemye was the sone of Chore, of © the 
sones of Asaph. The sones of Mellesemie2 
weren Zacharie the firste gendrid’, Jedi- 
hel the® secounde, Zabadie the thridde, 
Yathanyel the fourthe, Aylam the fifthe,s 
Johannan the sixte, Helioenay! the se- 
uenthe. Forsothe® the sones of Ebed-4 
edom weren these ; Semey the firste gen- 
drid®, Jozabab the secounde, Joaha the 
thridde, Seccar the fourthe, Nathanael 
the fyuethe, Amyhel the sixte, Isachars 
the seuenthe, Pollathi' the ei3the, for the 
Lord blesside hym*. Forsothe! to Semeye, ¢ 
his sone, weren borun sones, souereyns of 
her meynees; for thei weren ful stronge 
men. Therfor the sones of Semeye weren 7 
Othyn, and Raphael, and Obediel, and 
Zadab; and hise britheren, ful stronge 
men; also Helyu,and Samathie. Alle theses 
weren of the sones of Obededom; thei 
and her sones and britheren™, ful stronge 
men for to serue, two and sixti of" Obed- 
edom. Sotheli® of Mellesemeye?, the’ sones 9 
and britheren’, ful stronge’, ‘weren ei3tene’. 
Forsothe" of Oza, that is, of the sones of 10 
Merarie, Sechri was prince ; for’ he hadde 
noW firste gendrid*}, andY therfor his fadir 
settide? hym in to prince; and Elehias1 
the* secounde, Thebelias® the thridde, Za- 
carie® the fourthe; alle these threttene 


i Josadab c. 


ato hise bretheren is. » to his bretheren s. 
fand Helioenay 1s. g Andis. 4 goten 1. 
™ her britheren 1sx. 2 qeren of 1S. 
britheren c. § stronge men 118. 

x goten sone 1. gendrid sone 8, Y Om. 1s. 
Zacarie 18. 


cand he was souercyn of Is. 

iand Pollathi 1s. 
o And Is. 

t Om. 1s. eijtene mM. 

z ordeynede 18. 


© was the Is. 
1 And 1s. 


4 goten 1. 
k him, that is, encresid him s. 


P Mellesemeye weren eiztene 1s." 4 Om. 1s. ‘the 
u And Is. vandc. and foris. © not G. 
&wastheis. » and Thebeliagsis. © and 


+ that was of 
eny valu either 
reputacioun 5 
therfor he 
made Sechri to 
be prince. Lire 
here. GxaSd. 


374 


i2thrittene. Thes ben deuydid in to the 
porters, that euermore the princis of the 
wardis, as and the bretheren of hem, 
mynystren in the hous of the Lord. 
13Thanne the lottis ben leyd of euen, and 
to the lytyll and to the grete, by their 
14 meynes, in to echone of the 3atis. Thanne 
the este lott fell to Jemelie; forsothe to 
Zachary, the sone of hym, most wijs man 
and tau3t, fel thoru3 lott the northe coost ; 
15 to Obededom forsothe and his sonys at the 
south, in whiche partye of the hous was 
isthe counseil of the! elderis; to Sephyma 
and Chosa at the west, besyde the 3ate 
that ledith to the weye of the stey3inge 
17up, warde ajein warde. At the este for- 
sothe Leuytis sixe, and at the north foure 
bi day; and at the south also in* the! 
day foure; and wher was the counseil, 
igtwo and two. 
of the porters at the west, foure in the 
19 weye, and two by the litill cellis. Thes 
ben the dyuysiouns of porters, of the sonis 
20 of Chory and of Merery. Forsothe Achias 
was vpon the tresoures of the hous of the 
Lord, and the vesselis of the halewis. 
21 The sonis of Leadan, the sonys of Jer- 
sony; of Leadan, prince of the meynes 
220f Leadan, and of Jersan, Jeihely. The 
sonys of Jeihely; Jethan, and Joel, his 
brother, vpon the tresoures of the hous 
230f the Lord, Amyramytis, and Isaaritis, 
ziand Ebronytis, and KEsielitis. Subahul 
forsothe, the sone of Jerson, sone of 
25 Moysi, pronost of the tresoure; and the 
brother of hym, Eliezer; whos sone 
Raabia; and of this the sone Asaias; of 
this the sone Joram; and of this the 
sone Zechri; bot and of this the sone 
26Selemyth. He, Selemyth, and the bre- 
theren of hym, vpon the tresoures of 
hooly thingis, the whiche kyng Dauith 


i Om. zB. 


4Om.1. ¢ the kepyngis 1. f sent or casten s. 
landr. ™tohise rs. 1 Jott fell at 18. 
Ssteyng ups. ' Andis. % eest pari 1s, 
of w. a Om. 1. b west side 1s. ¢ Om. ts. 
hooli 1s, » Om. 1s. ithe meynees cis. 
P Om. a. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


In the lity] cellis forsothe - 


k by H. 


g Om. 1s. 
© southe coosi 15. 
v Om. ts. 


k Om. 1s. 


XXXVI. 12—26. 


weren the sones and britheren of Osa. 
These weren departid in.to porteris, that 12 
euere the’ princes of kepyngis*, as also her 
britheren, schulden mynystre in the hows 
of the Lord. Therfor lottis weren sent 13 
euenly, bothe to the® litle and to thes 
grete, bi her meyneeis, in to ech of the 
3atis. Therfor the lot of the eest® bifelde14 
to Semelie; forsothe! the north coost bi- 
felde bi lot to Zacarie, his sone, a ful pru- 
dent man and lernd*; sotheli! to Obed-15 
edom and hise™ sones at® the southe®, in 
which part of the hows the? counsel of 
the eldre men was?; Sephyma and Thosa 16 
weren at the west’, bisidis the 3ate that 
ledith to the weie of stiyng’, kepyng ajens 
kepyng. Sothelit at the eest" weren sixe17 
dekenes, and at the north weren foure bi 
dai; and at the south also weren foure 
at the’ myddai ; and, where” the counsel 
was, weren tweyne and tweyne. And in18 
the* sellis’, ethir? ‘litle housis*, of porteris 
at the west, weren foure in the weie, and 
tweyne bi the sellis. These weren the19 
departyngis of porteris’, of the sones of 
Chore and of Merary. Forsothe® Achias 20 
was ouer the tresours of the hows of the 
Lord, and ouer thef vessels of hooli® 
thingis. The sones of Leedan, the sone 2! 
of Gerson ; of Leedan weren the* princis 
of meynees! of Leedan, and of Gerson, and 
of Jehiel. The sones of Jehiel weren, Ze-22 
than, and Johel, his brother, over the* tre- 
sours of the hows of the Lord, Amram-23 
ytis, and Isaaritis, and Ebronytis, and 
Ezielitis. Forsothe! Subahel, the sone ofe4 
Gerson, sone of Moises, was souereyn of 
the tresour™; and his brother, Eliezer 325 
whos sone was" Raabia; and his sone was 
Asaye ; his® sone was Joram ; and his sone 
was Zechry ; but and? his sone was Selemith. 
Thilke Selemith, and his britheren, weren 26 


1Om. 4H. 


h eest coost 1s. iand is. 
Pwastheis. 9%Om,.1s. 


k wel lernd 1s. 
¥ west coost Is. 
xOm.1s. YOm.c. 2 Om 1 
e And ts. fOm.is. & the 
nQm. x. © and his 1s. 


w where that 1s. 
d the porteris 1s. 
1And is. ™ tresouris s. 


XXVI. 27——XXVII. 2. 


halowide, and the princis of meynes, and 
the leders of thousandis, and the leders 
270f hundriths, and duykis of the hoost, of 
bateilis, and of the spoilis of bateils, the 
whiche thei sacreden to the restorynge 
and to the necessaries of the temple of 
2sthe Lord. Forsothe alle thes thingis ha- 
lowed Samuel, seer, and® Saul, the sone 
of Ciz, and Abner, the sone of Ner, and 
Joab, the sone of Saruye; and thei alle 
haloweden hem bi the hond of Salomyth 
29and his bretheren. To Ysaarites forsothe 
befor was Chononyas and his sonis, to 
the werkis with out forth vpon Yrael, 
30to techen and to demen hem. ‘Bot of 
Ebronytis®, Asabias, and Sabayas, and his 
britheren, most stronge men, a thousand 
and seuen hundrith, beforn weren to Yrael 
bez3ond Jordan a3ein the west, in alle the 
werkis of the Lord, and in? to the ser- 
3ruyse of the kyng. Of Ebronytis forsothe 
prince was Herias, aftir the meynes and 
kynredis of hem. The fouretithe 3eer of 
kyng Dauid ben noumbred and founden 
semost strong men in Jaser Galaad; and 
the bretheren of hem, of more stronge 
age, two thousand seuen hundrith, princis 
of meynes. Forsothe kyng Dauid beforn 
putte hem to Rubenytis and Gadditis, 
and to the half lynage of Manasse, in to 
alle the seruyce of God and of the kyng. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 The sonis forsothe of Yrael aftir their 
noumbre, princis of meynes, leders of 
thousandis, and leders of hundrithes, and 
the prefectis, that serueden to the kyng 
aftir their companyes, commynge in‘ and 
goynge out bi alle the monethes in the 
jeer, alle before weren to foure and 

2twenty thousand. To the first company 
in the first moneth Isiboam, the sone of 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


375 


ouer the tresours of hooli4 thingis, whiche 
‘Dauid the kyng™ halewide, and the princes 
of meynees, and the tribunes, and the cen- 
turiouns, and the duykis of the oost, of 27 
the’ batels, and of thet spuylis of batels, 
whiche thei halewiden to the reparacioun 
and purtenaunce" of the temple of the 
Lord. ForsotheY Samuel, the prophete, 28 


halewidef alle these thingis, and Saul, the — + Glose: hal- 
wed; that is, 

sone of Cys, and Abner, the sone of Ner, _ presentid or 
offrid. s. 


and Joab, the sone of Saruye; and alle” 
halewiden tho thingis bi the hond of Sale- 
myth, and of his britheren. Sotheli* Cho-29 
nenye was souereyn and hise sones to 
Isaaritis, toY the? werkis with outforth on? 


Israel, to techef and to deme hem. Sotheli? 302 ¢o teche for 
summe of the 


of Ebronytis, Asabie, and Sabie, and hise — dekenes, that 
: kouden the 
britheren, ful stronge men, a thousynde jaye, weren 


and® seuene hundrid, weren souereyns on? ordeyn 


4 : teche the peple 
Israel bizende Jordan ajens the weste, in _ in places fer 
. , fro Jerusalem, 
alle thee werkis of the Lord, and in to and to deter- 
myne doutis, 


thef seruyce of the kyng. Forsothe® Herie31 jn’ whiche sim- 
was prynce of Ebronytis, bi her meynees )¢ en dou 
and kynredis. In the fourtithe 3eer of ‘ve. cxasb. 

the rewme of Dauid there weren noum- 

bred and foundun' ful stronge men in Ja- 

zer Galaad; and hise britheren, of strongere 32 

age, twei thousynde and seuene hundrid, 

princes of meynees. Sotheli* ‘Dauid the 

kyng! made hem souereyns of Rubenytis 

and Gaditis™, and of the" half lynage® of 

Manasses, ‘in toP al the seruyce of God 


and of the kyng. 
CAP. XXVII. 


Forsothe1 the sones of Israel bi her! 
noumbre, the princes of meynees, the tri- 
bunes, and centuriouns, and prefectis, that 
mynystriden to’ the kyng bi her cum- 
penyes§, entrynge® and goynge out bi eeh 


§ cumpenyes ; 
that is, cum. 


monethe in the 3eer, weren souereyns, ech _ penyes of 
‘ ° p kny3tis. Li 
bi hym silf, ont foure and twenti thou- fa ae 


synde. Isiboam, the sone of Zabdihel, 2 
was souereyn of the firste cumpenye in 


2 of ancrn. © Of Ebronytis forsothe 4. P Om.#. 4 Om. F pr.m. H. 
athe holis. tking Dauidis. *Om.1s. ¢Om.s. tothe purtenaunce ts. Andis. Walle 
these 1s. * Andis. Yandtors, 2Om.1s. ®in1s, >b Andis, ¢Om.s. — dupon is. & Om. 1s. 
fOm.1s. & Andis. 5 fourtenthe s. i were founduns. * Andris. | king Dauid 1s. ™ of Gaditis 1s. 
»Om.1. © the lynage 1. Pvnto1s, 4% Sothely 1s. * bifore tos. *entrynge in 1s. * upon 1s. 


376 


Sobdiel was beforn, aud vndir hym foure 
sand twenty thousand; of the sonis~ of 
Phares, prince of alle the princis in the 
4hoost, the first moneth. Of the secounde 
moneth hadde the companye Didi Acho- 
ites, and aftir hym an other, Machilot 
by name, the whiche gouernede a par- 
tye of the hoost of the foure and twenty 
sthousand. Dnuyke also of the thrid com- 
panye in the thrid moneth was Bana- 
nyas, the sone of Joiade, prest, and in 
his diuysioun foure and twenty thou- 
ssand; he is Bananyas, most strong 
among thritty, and vpon thritty ; for- 
sothe Amyzadath, his sone, before was to 
7the companye of hym. The ferth moneth, 
the ferth, Asael, the brother of Joab, and 
Sabadias, his sone, aftir hym, and in" his 
companye foure and twenty thonsand. 
&8The fyfthe, the’ fyfthe moneth, prince 
Samoth Jesraites, and in his companye 
9foure and twenty thousand. The sixte, 
in the sixte moneth, Ira, the sone of 
Acces, Techuytes', and in his companye 
tofoure and twenty thousand. The se- 
uenth, in the seuenth moneth, Helles 
Phalonytes, of the sonis of Effraym, and 
in his companye foure and twenty thou- 
usand. The ey3t, the’ ey3t moneth, Sobo- 
chai Asathites, of the stok of Saray, and 
in his companye foure and twenty thou- 
rgsand. The nynthe, the’ nynthe moneth, 
Abieser Anothotites, of the stok of Ge- 
myny, and in his companye foure and 
istwenty thousand. The tenth, the’ tenth 
moneth, Marai, and he Neophatites, of 
the stok of Saray, and in his companye 
14foure and twenty thousand. The elle- 
uenth, the’ elleuenth moneth, Banas Pha- 
ronytes, of the sones of Effraym, and in 
his companye foure and twenty thousand. 
15 The’ twelfthe, the twelfthe moneth, Hol- 
dia Nethofatites, of the stok of Gotho- 
nyel, and in his companye foure and 
16twenty thousand. Forsothe ther stoden 
beforn to the lynagis of Yrael, to Ru- 


TOm. H. Sin the «4 
uhonces. Yonx. W qweren ints. 
x sec.m.b. © weren in Is. © werin in s. 


-I. PARALIPOMENON. 


* strongest man Is. 


XXVII. 3—16. 


the firste monethe, and vndur hym weren 
foure and twenti thousynde; of the sones®3 
of Fares was the prince of alle princes in 
the oost, in the firste monethe. Dudi4 
Achoites hadde the cumpany of the se- 
counde monethe, and aftir hym silf he 
hadde another man, Macelloth bi name, 
that gouernede a part of the oost of foure 
and twenti thousynde. And Bananye, thes 
sone of Joiada, the preest, was duyl of ¥ 
the thridde cumpenye in the thridde 
monethe, and four and twenti thousynde 
in” his departyng; thilke is Bananye,¢ 
the strongest* among thritti, and aboue 
thritti; forsotheyY Amyzadath, his sone, 
was souereyn of his cumpenye. In the7 
fourthe monethe, the fourthe prince was 
Asahel, the brother of Joab, and Zabadie, 
his sone, aftir hym, and foure and twenti 
thousynde in? his cumpeny. In the fifthes 
monethe, the fifthe przmce was Samoth 
Jezarites, and foure and twenti thousynde 
in? his campenye. In the sixte monethe,o 
the sixte prince was Ira, the sone of Actes, . 
Techuytes, and foure and twenti thou- 
synde in? his cumpeny. In the seuentle 10 
monethe, the seuenthe prince was Helles 
Phallonites, of the sones of Effraym, and® 
foure and twenti thousynde in> his cum- 
peny. In the ei3the monethe, the ei3the 
prince was Sobothai Assothites, of the 
generacioun of Zarai, and foure and twenti 
thousynde in’ his cumpeny. In the nynthe 12 
monethe, the nynthe prince was Abiezer 
Anathotites, of the generacioun of Ge- 
myny, and foure and tweynti thousynde 
in> his cumpeny. In the tenthe monethe, 13 
the tenthe prince was Maray, and he was 
Neophatites, of the generacioun of Zaray, 
and foure and twenti thousynde in? his 
cumpany. In the elleuenthe monethe, the 14 
ellenenthe prince was Banaas Pharonytes, 
of the sones of Effraym, and foure and 
twenti thousynde in® his cumpeny. Inis 
the tweluethe monethe, the tweluethe 
prince was Holdia Nethophatites, of the 


t Om. xu. Vin the «. 


Yand is. 2 weren in Is. a Om. 1FMS 


XAXVIL. 17—29. 


benytis, duyke Eliezer, the sone of Zechry; 
to Symeonitis, duke Saphathias, the sone 
170f Maacha ; to Leuytis, Azabias, the sone 
i8of Chamuel; to Aaronytes, Sadoch; to 
Judaites, Elyu, the brother of Dauith; 
to Ysacharites, Amri, the sone of My- 
19 chael ; to Zabulonytes, Jesmaias, the sone 
of Abdie; to Neptalonytes, Jerymuth, 
20the sone of Oziel; to the sonis of Ef- 
fraym, Osee, the sone of Ozazyn; to the 
half lynage of Manasse, Johel, the sone 
210f Phathae; and to the half lynage of 
Manasse in” Galaad, Jaddo, the sone of 
Zacharie; to Beniamyn forsothe, Zazi- 
22hel, the sone of Abner; to Dan forsothe, 
Ezriel, the sone of Jeroam; thes the 
23princis of the sonis of Israel. Dauith 
forsothe wolde noumbre hem fro twenty 
3eer and benethen, for the Lord hadde 
seide, that he schuld multiplie Yrael as 
24the sterres of heuen. Joab, the sone of 
Saruye, beganne to noumbren, and fulfilde 
not; for vpon that wrath felle doun in to 
Yrael, and therfore the noumber of hem, 
that weren noumbred, is not told in to 
the worthi cronyclis of kyng Dauid. 
25 Vpon the tresoures forsothe of the kyng 
was Azimoth, the sone of Adiel; to thes 
forsothe tresoures, that weren in cytees, 
and im touns, and in toures, Jonathan, 
26the sone of Ozie, satte vpon. To the 
churlische werk forsothe, and to the erth 
tilieris, that wrou3ten the erth, Esri, the 
27sone of Chebul, was vpon; and to the 
vyne tiliers, Semeias Roenatites; to the 
28wijne celeris, Zabdyas Aphonytes ; for- 
sothe vpon the olyues, and the fijge trees, 
that weren in the wijld feeldis, Balanan 
Gadarites ; on the leyinge up places for- 
29sothe of oyle, Joas; bot to the droues, 
that weren fed in Sarona, prouost was 
Cetheray Ceronytes; and vpon the oxen 
in valeys, Saphat, the sone of Abdi; 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


377 


generacioun of Gothonyel, and foure and 
twenti thousynde in® his cumpeny. For-16 
sothe these weren souereyns! of the ly- 
nages of Israel; duyk® Eliezer, sone! of 
Zechri, was souereyn to Rubenytis ; duyk 
Saphacie, sone of Maacha, was souereyn 
to Symeonytis; Asabie, the sone of Cha-17 
muel, was souereyn to Leuytis*; Sadoch 
‘was souereyn' to Aaronytis; Elyu, the 1s 
brothir of Dauid, ‘vas souereyn' to the 
lynage of Juda; Amry, the sone of My- 
chael, ‘was souereyn' to Isacharitis; Jes-19 
maye, the sone of Abdie, was souereyn to 
Zabulonytis ; Jerymuth, the sone of Oziel, 
‘was souereyn' to Neptalitis; Ozee, the 20 
sone of Ozazym, ‘was souereyni to the 
sones of Effraym; Joliel, the sone of Pha- 
tae, was souereyn to the half lynage of 
Manasses ; and Jaddo, the sone of Zacarie, 21 
‘was souereyn' to the half lynage of Ma- 
nasses in Galaad; sothelij Jasihel, the 
sone of Abner, ‘was souereyn* to Benia- 
myn; forsothe! Ezriel, the sone of Je-22 
roam, was souereyn to Dan; these weren 
the princes of the sones of Israel. For-23 
sothe™ Dauid nolde" noumbre hem with°® 
ynne twenti 3eer, for the Lord seide, that 
he wolde multiplie Israel as the sterris of 
heuene?. Joab, the sone of Saruye, bigan 24 
for to noumbre’, and* he fillide® not‘; for 
ire" fel on’ Israel for this thing, and ther- 
for the noumbre of hem, that weren noum- 
brid, was not teld® in to* the bookis of 
cronyclis of kyng Dauid. ForsotheY Azy-25 
moth, the sone of Adihel, was on? the? 
tresouris® of the kyng; but Jonathan, the 
sone of Ozie, was souereyn of © these tre- 
sours, that weren in cytees, and in townes, 
and in touris. Sotheli4 Ezri, the sone of 26 
Chelub, was souereyn on® the werk of 
hosebondrie, and on¢ erthe tiliers, that til- 
iden the lond; and Semeye Ramathites 27 
was souereyu on® tilieris of vyneris; so- 


w Om. B. 


© werenin1. ‘the souereyns 1s. © that is, duyk 1s. fthe sone cis. & the sone 1s. } the Leuites s. 


1Om.r. Jandrs. k Om. 1. lands. 


m And 1s. 


n wolde not 1. © éhat weren with 1s. P the firma- 


ment 1, 4 noumbre Israel 1s. © but 1s. *fulfillide 1s. * not the noumbryng s. " ire of God 1. ire of the 


Lords. Yuponis. WW tolde er mootid 8. 


> priuey tresouris 18. 
VOL. II. 


x Om. IKsx. 
Con BCDGKMNOQRWXbD. to 1s. ouer ELP. Om. FU. 


3c 


a Om. s. 


y Andis. % sowercyn upon Is. 


4 Andis. € upon Is. 


ld 


378 


30vpon the camels forsothe, Ubil Ismaelit ; 
and vpon the assis, Judas Meranathites ; 

31 vpon the scheep also, Jasir Agarene; alle 
thes princis of the substaunce of Dauith 

sethe kyng. Jonathas forsothe, the vncle* 
of Dauid, counseyler, man my3ty, and 
slee3, and lettred; he and Jahiel, the sone 
of Achamony, weren with the sonis of 

33the kyng. Achitofel also the counceylere 
of the king; and Chusi Archites, the 

34freend of the kyng. Aftir Achitofel was 
Joiada, the sone of Banaye, and Abia- 
thar; prince forsothe of the hoost of the 
kyng was Joab. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Dauith thanne clepide to gider alle the 
princis of Israel, duykis of lynagis, and 
prouostis of companyes, the whiche my- 
nystreden to the kyng, also leders of 
thousandis, and leders of hundrithes, and 
that before weren to the substaunce and 
to the possessiouns of the kyng, and her 
sonis, with the geldyngis, and the my3ty, 
and alle the most strong in the hoost of 
2Jerusalem. And whanne the kyng hadde 

rysen, and stonden, he seith, Herith me, 
my bretheren and my puple. I thou3te 
for to maken an hous, in the whiche 
schulde resten the arke of the pese coue- 
naunt of the Lord, and the stole of the 
feet of oure God; and to beelden alle 
3thingis I haue made redy. God forsothe 
seide to me, Thou schalt not bilden an 


1 


xem £ 
fandis. & uponis. of x ® Om. x. + Om. 1. 
uponis. °Om.1. Pandis. @Om.1. © upon ts. 
w the brother 1s. * the fadir of Dauid 1. 
clepide 1s. _» the possessiouns 1s. 


h Jerusalem werin clepid s. + stode up 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


Y lettrid or understondyng s. 
¢ and he clepide 1. and Dauith clepide s. 
gyldyngis, which were chast honest uishers and techers s. 
k haue maad 1s. 


XXVII, 30-——XXVIII. 3. 


thelif Zabdie Aphonytes was sowereyn on® 
thet wyn celeris; for Balanam Gadaritis2s 
was‘ on the olyue placis, and fige* places, 
that weren in the feeldi! places; sotheli™ 
Joas was on™ the schoppis, ‘ether celeris°, 
of oile; forsothe? Cethray Saronytis ‘was 9 
souereyn’ of? the droues, that weren le- 
sewid in Sarena; and Saphat, the sone of 
Abdi, was ouer the oxis’ in valeys ; sothelit so 
Vbil of Ismael was ouer the camelis ; and 
Jadye Meronathites was ouer the assis; 
and Jazir Aggarene was ouer the scheep 331 
alle these weren princes of the" catel of 
kyng Dauid. Forsothe’ Jonathas, brother” 32 
of ‘Dauithis fader*, was a councelour, a 
my3ti man, and prudent, and lettrid’; he 
and Jahiel, the sone of Achamony, weren 
with the sones of the kyng. Also Achito-33 
fel was a counselour of the kyng; and 
Chusi Arachites was a frend of the kyng. 
Aftir Achitofel was Joiada, the sone of31 
Banaye, and Abyathar; but Joab was 
prince of the oost of the kyng. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Therfor Dauid clepide togidere alle the1 
princes of Israel, the duykis of lynagis, 
and the souereyns of cumpenyes, that 
‘mynystriden to? the kyng, also* the tri- 
bunes, and centuriouns, and hem that 
weren souereyns ouer the catel and pos- 
sessiouns’ of the kyng, and¢ hise sones, 
with ‘nurchis}, and techeris*, and alle the 
my3ti® and strongeste' men® in the oost: 
of Jerusalem, And whanne the kynge 
hadde rise, and ‘hadde stonde’, he seide, 
My britheren and my puple, here 3e me. 
Y thou3te for to bilde an hows, wher- 
ynne the arke of boond of pees of the 
Lord, and the stool of the feet of oure 
God schulde reste; and Y made redi alle} 
thingis to bilde!. But God seide to me,3 
Thou schalt not bilde an hows to my 


prem. 
K the figes. lfeeldas. ™Mandis. % souereyn 
onm. Soxenrs. tandis. tOm.s. VY And Is. 


a also Dauid 
d the geldingis 1. the 
€my3timenis. fstrongeisx. & Om. is. 
Vpilde it 1. bilde with this houce s. 


2 serueden Is. 


+ The Latyn 
word here 
eunuchis, is 
propirly geld- 
ingis, but here 
it is takun for 
norscheris and 
techeris, that 
ben seid geld- 
ingis, for they 
weren chast 
and onest. Lire 
here. caab. 


t alle; that is, 
snmme of alle. 
Lire here. cx 
Q 


XXVUL. 4—11. 


hous to my name, for thi that thou beY 
a man fi3ter, and blood thou hast schad. 
4Bot the Lord God of Yrael hath chosen 
me of al the hous of my fadir, that I wer 
kyng vpon Yrael in to euer more; of 
Juda forsothe he chees princis, bot of the 
hous of Juda the hous of my fadir, and 
of the sonis of my fadir it pleside to 
hym, that me he schulde chesen kyng 
svpon al Israel. Bot many sonys the 
Lord 3aue to me; and of my sonis he 
chees Salomon, my sone, that he schulde 
sytten in the trone of the rewme of the 
eLord on Israel. And he seide to me, 
Salomon, thi sone, schal bilde myn hous, 
and myn auters; hym forsothe I haue 
chosen to me in to sone, and I schal be 
7to hym in to fadir; and I schal fastne 
his rewme in to with outen eend, 3if he 
be stedfast to do my domys and myn 
shestis, as and to day. Nowe thanne be- 
forn al the companye of Yrael, heerynge 
my God, kepith and sechith alle the 
maundementis of the Lord oure God, 
that 3e welden a good lond, and Jeuen 
it to 3oure sonis aftir 3ou in to euermore. 
9Thou forsothe, Salomon, my sone, knowe 
thou the God of thi fadir, and serue thou 
to hym in perfijt herte, and with wilful 
inwit; alle forsothe hertis the Lord 
serchith, and alle thou3tis of myndis he 
vndirstondith ; 3if thou sechist hym, thou 
schalt fynden; 3if forsothe thou forsakist 
hym, he schal throwen thee aweye into 
10 with outen eend. Nowe thanne, for the 
Lord chees thee, that thou schuldist 
bilden the hous of the seyntuarie, take 
11 coumfort,‘and perfourme. Forsothe Da- 
uith 3aue to Salomon, his sone, the dis- 
cryuynge of the 3ate hous, and of the 
temple, and of celers’, and of the soup- 
ynge place, and of the bed placis in 
pryue housis beside the auter, and of the 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


379 


name, for thou art a man werriour, and 

hast sched™ blood. But the Lord God of4 

Israel chees" me of al the hows of my 

fadir, that Y schulde be kyng on° Israel 

with outen ende; for of Juda he? chees4 

princes, sotheli of the hows of Juda he 

chees’ the hows of my fadir, and" of the 

sones of my fadir it pleside hym* to chese 

me kyng ont al" Israel. But also of mys 

sones, for the Lord 3af’ to me many 

sones, he chees¥ Salomon, my sone, that 

he schulde sitte in the troone of the rewme 

of the Lord on* Israel. And heY seide toe 

me, Salomon, thi sone, schal bilde myn 

hows, and myn auters ; for Y haue chose 

hym to me in to a sone, and Y schal be 

to hym in to a fadir; and Y schal make7 

stidefast his rewme til* in to with outen 

ende, if he schal contynue to do myn 

heestis and domes, as and* to dai». Nows 

therfor bifor al the cumpeny of Israel, 

‘Y sete these thingis that suen in the® 

heryng of God‘, kepe 3e and seke 3e® alle 

thef comaundementis® of ‘3oure Lord God, 

that 3e haue in possessioun a good lond, 

and that 3e leeue it! to 3oure sones aftir 

jou tilk in to with outen ende. But thou, 9 
Salomon, my sone, knowe the God of thi 

fadir, and serue thou hym with perfit 

herte, and wilful! soule™; for" the Lord 

serchith alle hertis, and vndirstondith® alle 

thou3tis? of soulis; if thou sekist hym, 

thou schalt fynde hym4; forsothe if thou 

forsakist hym, he schal caste thee awei 

with outen ende. Now therfor, for’ the1o 

Lord chees* thee, for to bilde the hows of f%¢rri ‘hat 
seyntuarie, be thou coumfortid, and par- eee a 
formet. Forsothe" Dauid 3af to Salomon, 11 Lge here. ce 
his sone, the discryuyng, ‘ether ensaum- 


E povici : 

cioun; that 

ple’, of the porche, and” of the temple, ofthe hooly of 
hooly thingis, 


and of celeris, and of the solerf, and of ({?” ee 
Pda was. 


closetis in pryuy places, and of the hows 
Lire here. ce 
of propiciaciount, ‘that ts, of merst* ; also 12 Kab. 


Yart 4. % the celers Er. 

m sched out 1s. "hath chose1s. uponis. Pthe Lords. hath choseis. ‘alsox.  § the 
Lords. tuponis. %Om.1. Vhath 3oue 1s. W hath choses, *uponts. Ythe Lords. 7 Om. x. 
aalsor, » dai J witnesse 1s. © Om. 0. ‘4 God heringe, J sey, 1. ¢ Om. BCDEFGIKLNOPRUWD. ‘Om. GQ. 
& heestis 1s. the Lord 3oure God1. ‘it in mawndement to be kept s. * Om. x. I with a wilful 1s. 
m soule or mynde s. ™ forsothe 1. © he vndirstondith is. P the thou3tis 1s. 4 Om. plures. © Om. s. 
8 hath chosun 1s. ¢ performe if 1s, Andis. ¥ Om. 1. either the ensaumples. © Om.s. * Om. 8. 


or of merci doyng 18. 


8c 


380 


izhous of Goddis plesaunce; and also of 
alle the porches, the whiche he hadde 
cast, and of the pryue chaumbris by 
enuyroun, in to the tresoures of the hous 
of the Lord, and in to the tresours of the 

‘ 13hous of hooly* thingis, and of the prestis 
and Lenytis dynysiouns, in to alle the 
werkis of the hous of the Lord, and alle 
the vessels of the seruyse of the temple 
of the Lord. Of gold in weit thoru3 alle 
the vesselis of the seruyse, also of syluer, 
for the dyuerste of vessels, and of werkis ; 
15 bot and to the golden chaundelers, and 
to the lanternes of hem, gold, for the me- 
sure of eche chaundeler and of lanternes ; 
and also in the silueren chaundelers, and 
in the lanternes of hem, for the dyuerste 
160f mesure wei3t of syluer he toke. Also 
gold he 3aue in to the boordis of propo- 
sicioun, for the dyuerste of mesure, and 
also siluer in to othere sylneren boordis ; 
17 also to the fleschokis, and violes, and en- 
censeris of most pure gold; and to golden 
litil lyouns, for the qualite of mesure, 
wei3te he delid in to litil lyoun and litil 
lyoun; and lije maner in to the? silueren 
lyouns dyuerse wei3te of syluer he se- 
isuerede. To the auter forsothe, in the 
whiche was brend encense, most pure 
gold he 3aue, that of it were maad the 
licnesse of the cart of cherubyn, stretch- 
ynge out the weengis, and couerynge the 
arke of the pese conenaunt of the Lord. 
19 Alle thingis, he seith, camen writen by 
the hond of the Lord to me, that I 
schuld vndurstonde alle the werkis of 
20the sanmpler. And Dauith seide to Sa- 
lomon, his sone, Do manly, and take 
coumfort, and make; ne dreed thou, and 
take thou no ferd; the Lord forsothe my 
God schal be with thee, and he schal not 
leue thee, ne forsake thee, to the tyme 
that thou perfourme al the werk of the 


a the hooly E£. 


¥ and he 3aaf him ensaumple 1s. 
f bitook to hem s. 


20m. s. 
& mesure of thos. b Om. 1s. 
viols 1s. "to censeris is. °intos. P Om.s. 
tas. Uhis wingiss. VvOm.s. 
make this thing s. 8 outward 1. 
e departing s. f Om. s, 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


aQOm. I. 
i Om. 1s. 

q And s. 
w And Dauid 1s. 

b withinne forthe s. 


XXVIII. 12—20¢. 


andy of alle thingis whiche he thou3te of 
the large places, and of” chaumbris bi 
cumpas, in to the tresours of the hows of 
the Lord, and ‘in to the tresours of holi 
thingis, and of the departyngis of preestis 13 
and of dekenes, in to alle the werkis of 
the hows of the Lord, and alle vessels of 
the® seruyce of the temple of the Lord. 
Of gold in wei3te bi ech vessel of the® ser-14 
uyce, and of siluer, for dyuersitee of ves- 
sels, and of werkis; but also to goldunis 
candilstikis, and to her lanternes, he 3af 
gold, for the mesure of ech candilstike 
and lanternes'; also and® in silueren can- 
dilstikis, and in her lanternes, he bitookf 
the wei3te of silner, for the dyuersite of 
mesure®&. Also and he 3af gold in to the 16 
bord of settyng forth, for the! dyuersite of 
mesure, also and he 3af siluer in to othere 
siluerne boordis*; also! to fleisch hookis, 17 
and viols™, and censeris" of pureste gold ; 
and to® litle goldun lyouns}{, for the maner 
of mesure, he departide a weijte in to a 
litil lyoun and a litil lioun; also and? in 
to siluerne liouns he departide dyuerse 
wei3te of siluer. Forsothe’ he 3af pureste" 18 
gold to the auter, wherynne’ encense was 
brent, that a lickenesse of thet cart of 
cherubyns, holdinge forth wyngis", and’ 
hilynge the arke of boond of pees of the 
Lord, schulde be maad therof. Dauid¥ 19 
seide, Alle thingis camen writun bi the 
hond of the Lord to me, that Y schulde 
vndirstonde alle the* werkis of the saum- 
plery. And Dauid seide to Salomon, his 20 
sone, Do thou mauli, and be thou coum- 
fortid, and make’; drede thou not ‘with 
outforth*, nether drede thou ‘with ynne"; 
for ‘my Lord God’ schal be with thee, and 
he schal not leeue thee, nether schal¢ for- 
sake thee, til thou performe al the werk 
of the seruyce of the hows of the Lord. 
Lo! the departyngis® of prestis and off de-21 


b Om. 4. 


bOm. s. eQOm. s. 


landc. ™to 


¢QOm. is. 4 of lanternes 1s. 
k boordis fo be maade s. 
T most fynes. 8 wherinne or whervpon s. 
x Om. plures. Y¥ ensaumpler is. 2 make it 1. 
¢the Lord my Godis. 4 he schal 1s. Om. x. 


+ where we 
han litle gold- 
oun lions, in 
Ebren it is, 
goldun 
clensyng ves- 
sels; that is, 
goldun basyns, 
in which the 
blood was 
borun in to 
the hooly of 
hooli thingis, 
in day of 
clensing ; also 
where we han 
in to siluerne 
liouns, in Ebreu 
it is, in to sil- 
uerne clensing 
vessels, that is, 
siluerne ba- 
syns. Lire 
here. CGKLPQb. 


XXVHI. 21—XXIX. 7. 


2iseruyse of the hous of the Lord. Loo! 
the dyuysiouns of prestis and of Leuytis, 
in to al the werk of the seruyse of the 
hous of the Lord, schul stonden nee} to 
thee; and bothe the princis and the puple 
ben redy, and han knowen to don alle 
thin hestis. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 Kyng Danid spac to al the chirche, 
God hath chosen Salomon, my sone, 3it 
child and tendre; forsothe a grete werk 
is, ne to man is greithed® a dwellynge 

zbot to God. I forsothe with alle my 
streyngthes haue maad redy the expensis 
of the hous of my God; gold to the 
golden vessels, and syluer to the sil- 
ueren‘, brasse in to the brasen, yryn in 
to the yryn®, trees in to the treenen, 
onychyne stones, and as cleer whijt, and 
alle precious stone of dyuerse coloures, 
and dyuerse marbil, most plenteuously. 

3And vpon thes thingis gold and syluer 
I 3eue into the temple of my God, the 
whiche I offred in to the hous of my 
God of myn owne tresor, out take thes 
thingis the whiche I made redy in to 
4the hooly hous, thre thousand talentis of 
gold, of the gold of Oofer, and seuen 
thousand of talentis of syluer most fyne, 
to the wallis of the temple, to ben gildid ; 
sand wher euer nede is gold, of gold, 
and wher euer nede is syluer, of syluer, 
the werkis ben maad by the hondis of 
craftise men; and 3if eny man wilfully 
offreth, fulfylle he his hond to day, and 

6 Offre he that he wille to the Lord. And 
so byheeten the princis of the meynes, 
and ‘noble men$ of the lynagis of Israel, 
also the leders of thousandis, and the 
maisters of hundrethis, and the princis 

70f the possessiouns of the kyng; and 
thei 3euen in to the werkis of the hous 
of the Lord, fyue thousand talentis of 


Cordeynd 4. 4 silueren vessels 4. 


h hestis 1. 
© Om. 18. 


& redi fo do her seruice s. 
only 8, ™ Certisis. Om. rsx. 
t haue offrid 1s.  haue maad 1s. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


© yrenen El. 


f grete, that he is ordeyned to do s. 
P and trees 1. 
Vv be the werk maad of 1s. 


381 


kenes, in to al the werk of the seruyce of 
the hows of the Lord, schulen stoude ni3 
thee; and thei ben redit, and bothe the 
princes and the puple kunnen do alle thi 
comaundementis*, 


CAP. XXIX. 


And kyng Dauid spak to al the chirche,1 
God hath chose Salomon, my sone, 3it a 
childt and tendre; forsothe the werk is 
greeti, and a dwellyng is not maad redi* 
to man! but to God. Sotheli™ Y in alle2 
my my3tis haue maad redi the costis of 
the hows of my God; gold to goldun 
vessels, siluer in® to siluerne vessels, bras 
in® to brasun vessels, irun in to irun ves- 
sels, tre? in‘ to trenun’ vessels, onychynt 
stonys, and stonys as of the colour of 
wymmens oynement, and ech precious 
stoon of dyuerse colouris, and marbil of 
dyuerse colouris, most plenteuously. And3 
ouer these thingis Y 3yue gold and siluer 
in to the temple of my God, whiche’ Y 
offride' of my propir catel in to the hows 
of my God, outakun these thingis whiche) 
Y made" redi in to the hooli hows, thre4 
thousynde talentis of gold, of the gold of 
Ophir, and seuene thousynde of talentis of 
siluer most preuyd, to ouergilde the wallis 
of the temple; and werkis be maad bi thes 
hondis of crafti men, where euere gold is 
nedeful, of ¥ gold, and where euere siluer 
is nedeful, of“ siluer; and if ony man 
offrith bi his fre wille, fille‘ he his hond 
to dai’, and offre he that that he wole to 
the Lord. Therfor the princes of meynees, 6 
and the duykis of the lynagis of Israel, 
and the tribunes, and the centuriouns, 
and the princes of the possessiouns of the 
kyng, bilizten?; and thei 3auen in to the7 
werkis of the hows of the Lord, fyue 
thousynde talentis of gold, and ten thou- 


fand 4. & the noblemen 4. 


k redi éherynne 1. |! man 
¥ treen 1msx. § the whiche 1. 
x fulfille 1s. y dai, 


q Om. s. 
w be il maad of s. 


that is, take he now his offring 8. 2 bihizten to 3iue therto 1.. bihizten fo 3ene 3iftis to the temple s. 


+ a child s not 
of xii. 3eer, but 
tendir in com- 
parisoun of so 
greet a werk. 
Lire here. cc 
xab. 


t onychym; 
thei haue the 
licnesse of 
mannus nail. c. 


§ whiche he 
hadde take of 
the preyes of 
enemyes. Lire 
here. GKQS. 


382 


gold, and tenn thousand schillyngis; of 
syluer tenn thousand talentis, and of 
brasse ey3tene thousand talentis, also of 
yren an hundrith thousand of talentis. 
sAnd anentis whom so euer the stonys 
ben founden, thei 3euen in to the tresour 
of the hous of the Lord, by the hond of 
9Johiel Jersonyte. And the puple gladide, 
whanne vowis wilfully thei schulden be- 
hoten, for with al the herte thei offreden 
hem to the Lord. Bot and Dauid the 
lokyng gladide with grete ioye, and bless- 
ide to the Lord beforn al the multitude, 
and seith, Blessed ert thou, Lord God 
of Yrael, oure fadir, fro with oute eend 
11 and in to with oute eend; thin is, Lord, 
grete doynge, and power, and glorie, and 
victorie,and to thee preisynge; alle thingis 
forsothe that ben in heuen and in erth 
ben thine; thin, Lord, kyngdami, and 
12thou ert vpon alle princis; thin ritch- 
esses, and thin is glorie; thou lord- 
schipist of) alle thingis; in thin hond 
vertue, and my3t, and* in! thin hond 
mykilnesse and empyre of alle thingis. 
13 Nowe thanne, oure God, we knowlechen 
to thee, and we preysen thi noble name. 
14 Who I", and who my puple, that we 
mowen to thee alle thes thingis behoten ? 
Thin ben alle thingis, and the whiche of 
thin hond we han taken, we han 3euen 
15to thee. Pilgrymes forsothe we ben be- 
forn thee, and comlyngis, as alle oure 
fadirs ; oure days as schadowe vpon the 
iserth, and ther is no tariynge. Lord 
oure God, al this plente that we han 
maad redy, that an hous schulde ben bild 
up to thi holy name, of thin hond is; 
17and thin ben alle thingis. My God, I 
wote, that thou prouest hertis, and that 
symplenes of herte thou louest; wher- 
fore and J, in symplenesse of myn lherte, 
glaad haue offred alle thes thingis; and 
thi peple, that here is founden, I saw3 


iis the kyngdom 4. 3 vpon 4. 


aand ten corer. Om. Isx. 
h thin, that is, thi doyng is worthi and greet s. 
take is. ™ Forsothe 1. ® fadris weren 1s. 
diuers goodis s. § the which 1. 


v¥Om.s. ¥ Om. 1s. * Om. sb. YI haue ss. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


© presious stones s. 

i Om. plures. 
© upon Is. 
t that thou louest 1s. 
z haue seen I. 


XXIX. 8—17. 


synde schyllyngis ; ten* thousynde talentis 
of siluer, and ei3tene thousynde talentis of 
bras, and an hundrid thousynde of? ta- 
lentis of irun. And at whom eueres 
stoonys® were foundun, thei 3auen in to 
the’ tresour® of the hows of the Lord, bi 
the hond of Jehiel Gersonyte. And theo 
puple was glad, whanne thei bihi3ten 
avowis bi her fre wille, for with al the 
herte thei offriden tho‘ to the Lord. But, 
also kyng Dauid was glad with greet ioye, 
and blesside$ the Lord bifor al the multi-10 
tude, and seide, Lord God of Israel, oure 
fadir, thou art blessid fro with outen bi- 
gynnyng in to with outen ende; Lord, 11 
worthi doyng is thin®, and power, and 
glorie, and victorie, and heriyng is to 
thee; for alle thingis that ben in heuene 
and in erthe ben thine; Lord, the’ rewme 
is thin, and thou art ouer alle princes ; 
ritchessis ben thin, and glorie is thin ;12 
thou art Lord of alle; in thin hond is 
vertu, and power, and in thin hond is 
greetnesse, and lordschipe of alle. Now13 
therfor, oure God, we knoulechen to thee, 
and we herien* thi noble name. Who am14 
Y, and who is my puple, that we moun 
bihete alle these thingis to thee? Alle 
thingis ben thine, and we han 3oue to 
thee tho thingis, whiche we token! of thin 
hond. For™ we ben pilgrimes and come- 15 
lyngis bifor thee, as alle oure fadris®; 
oure daies ben as schadewe on? the? erthe, 
and ‘no dwellyng ist. Oure Lord God, al 16 
this plentee™ which’ we han maad redi, 
that an hows schulde be byldid to thin 
hooli name, is of thin hond; and alle 
thingis ben thin. My God, Y woot, that 17 
thou preuest hertis, and louest* symple- 
nesse" of herte; wherfor and’ Y“, in the* 
symplenesse of myn herte, haue’ offrid 
gladli alle these thingis; and Y si3? with 
greet ioye thi puple, which is foundun 
here, offre* 3iftis to thee. Lord God of 18 


1Om. nH. Mami a, 


kis a, 
4Om.1. ©tresoris. fOm.1. & he blesside 1s, 
k herien, that is, we preisyn 8. han 
POm.1. 4 ther is no tarying1. * plentee of 
u symplenesse, thai is, lownesse or mekenesse 8. 
4 to offre Is. 


XXIX. 18—28. 


with grete ioye to thee offren 3iftis. 
18 Lord God of Abraham, and of Ysaac, and 
Yrael", oure fadirs, in to with oute eend 
keepe this wille of the herte of hem; and 
euermore in to the® worschipynge of thee 
19this mynde abijde stylle. And to Salo- 
mon, my sone, 3eue a perfijt herte, that 
he keepe thin hestis, and? witnessyngis, 
and thi cerymonyes; and that he do alle 
thingis, and bijld an hous, whos expenses 
20 haue maad redy. MDauid forsothe co- 
maundide to al the chirche, Blesse 3e to 
the Lord oure God. And al the chirche 
blessed to the Lord God of their fadirs, 
and thei boweden hem seluen, and ho- 
noureden God, and thanne aftirwarde the 
2ikyng. And thei slowen sacrifises to the 
Lord, and offreden brent sacrifices the 
day folowynge; boolis a thousand, and 
wethers a thousand, and‘ Jombes a thou- 
sand, with their sacrifices of licours’, and 
al the rijt, most plenteuously, in to al 
22 Yrael. And thei eeten and dronken be- 
fore the Lord in that day, in greet glad- 
nesse. And thei anoyntide the secounde, 
Salomon, the sone of Dauid ; thei anoynt- 
eden forsothe to the Lord in to a prince, 
23and Sadoch in to a bischop. And Salo- 
mon satt vpon the see of the Lord in to 
kyng, for Dauid, his fadir; and to alle 
men it pleside, and al Irael obeschide 
24to hym. Bot and alle the princes, and 
my3ty, and alle sonys of kyng Dauid, 
3euen hond, and weren suget to kyng 
25Salomon. Than the Lord magnyfied 
Salomon vpon al Irael, and 3aue to hym 
glorie of the kingdom, what maner no 
kyng of Yrael hadden beforn hym. 
26 Thanne Danid, the sone of Ysay, regned 
27vpon al Irael; and the days the whiche 
he regned vpon Yrael weren fourty 3eer ; 
in Ebron he regned seuen 3eer, and in 
28 Jerusalem thre and thirty. He’ is deed 


tof Yrael ce. © Om. H. 


b Also, Lord s. ¢ thi witnessyngis 1s. ¢ these thingis 1s. 
h the Lord oure God 1. 30ure Lord God sx. 


al the peple gaderid togidre s. 


Pina. @Om. 4. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 383 


Abraham, and of Ysaac, and of Israel, oure 
fadris, kepe thou with outen ende this 
wille of her hertis; and this mynde dwelle 
euere in to the worschipyng of thee. Also 19 
3yne thou to Salomon, my sone, a perfit 
herte, that he kepe thin heestis, and wit- 
nessyngis®, and thi ceremonyes; and do 
alle thingis*, and that he bilde the*® hows, 
whose costis Y haue maad redi. Forsothe‘20 
Dauid comaundide to al the chirche®, 
Blesse 3e ‘oure Lord God*. And al the 
chirche' blesside the Lord God* of her 
fadris, and thei bowiden hem silf, and 
worschipiden God, aftirward!' the™ kyng. 
And thei offriden slayn sacrifices to the21 
Lord, and thei offriden brent sacrifices in 
the dai suynge; a thousynde boolis, and a 
thousynde rammes, and a thousynde lam- 
bren, with her fletynge sacrifices, and al” 
the custom, most plentetously, in to® al 
Israel. And thei eten and drunken bifor22 
the Lord in that dai, with greet gladnesse. 
And thei anoyntiden the secounde tyme 
Salomon, the sone of Dauid; and thei 
anoyntiden hym in to prince to the Lord, 
and Sadoch in? to bischop. And Salomon 23 
sat on‘ the trone of the Lord in™ to kyng, 
for Dauid, his fadir; and it pleside alle 
men, and.al Israel obeiede to hym. But24 
also alle princes, and my3ti men, and alle* 


the sones of kyng Danid, 3anen hond't, eat that 
I Tr 
and weren suget to ‘Salomon the kyng”. feith, either 


_ sworen, that 
Therfor the Lord magnefiede’ Salomon 25 thei schutden 


3 . be suget feith- 
on” al Israel, and jaue* to hym glorie of yt Salo- 
the rewme, what maner glorie no kyng of —™- Lire 

a i : here. cKab. 
Israe] hadde bifor hym. TherforY Dauid, 26 Giose. seule 
* ondls here 
the sone of Ysai, regnede on’ al Israel; shewith swer- 
aes : i tidfast 
and the daies in whiche he regnede on?27}ihotyng to be 
+ os 7 4 feithful and 
Israel weren fourti seer; in Ebron he alges vo the 
regnede seuene 3eer, and in Jerusalein thre — king. Lire. s. 
and thretti 3eer. And he diede in good 28 
eelde, and was ful of daies, aud richessis?, 
and glorie»; and Salomon, his sone, regnede 
s And he £. 


T licour £. 


f Sothely 1s. & chirche, that is, 
i chirch, that is, the peple s. 


e thi b. 


k Om. s. J and aftirward 1s. ™ thei worshepiden thes. "withal1. °Om.b.  P thei anoynteden in s. 
Quponis. 'chosuninis. salsois. ‘ther hondisis, kyng Salomonis.  ¥ magnefied or made 
greets, Wuponis. *he zauex, YAnd1. Therfor ands. #upon 1s. 4 of richessis 1s. b of glorie s. 


384 I. PARALIPOMENON. 


in a good elde, full of days, and rytch- 
esses, and glorie ; and Salomon, his sone, 

zoregnede for hym. Forsothe the rather 
dedis of kyng Dauid, and the last, ben 
writen in the boke of Samuel, seer, and 
in the boke of Nathan, the prophete, and 

30in the volyme of Gad, seere ; and of al his 
rewme, and streyngthe, and tymes, that 
passiden vndur hym, or in‘ Yrael, or in 
alle rewmes of londis. 


Here eendith the first book of Para- 
lipomenon, and now bigynneth the pro- 
loog of the secounde book*. 


XXIX. 29, 30. 


for hym. Forsothe the formere and the29 
laste dedis® of Dauid? ben writun in the 
book of Samuel, the prophete, and in the 
book of Nathan, prophete®, and in the 
book of Gad, thef prophete; and of al his 30 
rewme, and strengthe’, and tymes, that 
passiden vndur hym, ethir in Israel, ethir 
in alle rewmes! of londis. 


Here endith the firste booke of Para- 
lipomenon, and here bigynneth the se- 
counde book of Paralipomenon*. 


tOm.s. 4 From a. Explicit primus liber Paralipomenon &. No final rubric in ecru. 


ce daies s. 4kyng Dauid scw. &the prophete 1xsx. fOm.b. & strengthis x. b whiche 1s. i oothere 
rewmes 1s. * Here endith the firste book of Paralipomenon, and here bigynneth the secounde. FNQsb. Here 
endith the firste book of Paralipominon, aud biginnith a prolog.c. Heere endith the firste book of Parali- 
pomynon. 1. Here endeth the firste book of Paralipomenon, se now the seconde. k. Here endith the firste book 
of Paralipomenon, and bigynneth prolog to the ije. o. Here endith Paralipomenon the firste, and here 
biginneth the secounde.w. Explicit primus liber Paralipomenon ; incipit prologus libri seeundi. z. No final 


rubric in ELP. 


Il PARALIPOMENON. 


Here bigynneth the Prologe in the secounde Paralipomenon’. 


Eusesius, Jerome” senden gretynge to theirs in Crist Jhesu, Domynyon and Roga- 
cian. What maner wijse thei beter vndirstonden the stories of Grekis, the whiche 
han seen Athenas; and the thrid boke of Virgilie, the whiche han seiled fro Troye bi 
Lewchaten, and fro Acroceranya to Cicilie, and thennys to the doris of Tibre; so 
hooly Scripture he schal more clerly beholden, that Jude hath seen with ee3en, and 
the myndis® of olde’ cytees, and placis knowith names, or the same, or chaungid®. 
Wherfore and to us it was fors‘ with the most tau3te men of Ebruys this traueilé to 
vndirgone, that we gon aboute the prouynce, that alle the chirchis of Crist sownen. 
Forsothe, my Domynyon and Rogacian, most dere, I knowleche me neuer in Goddis 
volymes to han 3euen feith to my propre strengthis, ne’ to han had myne opynyoun 
a mayster, bot also tho thingis of the whiche I demede me to kunnen, me wont to 
han asked; myche more of tho thingis, vpon the whiche I was a fowler’. Forsothe 
whanne of me 3e hadden asked sumtyme bi lettris, that to 3ou I schulde translatyn 
Paralipomenon in Latyn sermoun, I toke of Tiberyades sumtyme autour of lawe, 
the* whiche anentis the Ebrewis was had in wondryngis, and I disputed with hym 
fro the top, as thei seyn, vnto the laste nayl; and so confermyd, I am hardy to don 
that 3e comaundiden!, Forsothe frely to 30u I speke; so in Greek and in Latyn bokis, 
this boke of namys is vicious, that not oonly Ebrue namys, but straunge sum and 
addid cast to gider it be to demyn. Ne that to the senenty remenours, the whiche ful 
of the Hooly Goost tho thinges that weren sothe translatiden, bot to the blame of 
wrijters it is to wijten, while of the vnamendid thei wrijten vnamendide thingis; and 
oft sithes thre namys, silables with drawen fro the mydil, thei drijuen in to oon name; 
or a3einward, for™ the brede, thei deuyden® in two or in® thre namys. Bot and thilkP 
nemenyngis, not! men, as many eymen, bot cytees, and regiouns, and wodis, and pro- 
uynces sownen; and aside, vndur the remenynge and the figure of hem, sum stories 
ben told, of the whiche in the boke of Kyngis' it is seyde, Loo! whether not thes ben 
writen in the bokis* of the wordis of thet days of kyngis" of Juda; the whiche for- 
sothe in oure bokis ben not had. This first is to wyten, that anentis the Ebruys 
Paralipomenon be a boke, and anentis hem be elepid Dabregemyn, that is, the wordis 
of days ; the whiche for mychilnesse anentis us is deuydid. The whiche thing sum 
men also in the Brute, dialog’ of Citheron, don, that it” in thre parties thei deuyden, 
whanne oon of his* autour it be maad. Ther aftir also that thei taken heede, that oft 
sithes names sownen not names of men, bot, as I haue seideY, betokenyngis of thingis. 


8 Incipit prologus in librum secundum, z. The proloug of secounde Paralipomenon. r. Prologus. u. No 
initial rubric in ac. >and Jerome 0. ¢ myddis oz. ‘the oldeo. ¢chaungynge auru. f forsothe nH. 
Om.eprm. bOm.o. idefoulero. kOm.o. ‘lcomaundenco. ™froo. 8 deuydiden a. 
°Om.o. Pthooc. ben not ze pr.m. the Kyngis o. * bok acr sec.m.o. *Om.c. 4 the kyngis c. 
vdialos anern. W Om. 0. itso, Y sien o. 


VOL. Il. 3D 


386 II. PARALIPOMENON. I, 1—6. 


At the last, that al lernynge of scripturis in this boke is conteenyd; and the stories 
other that ben laft in their placis, other 1i3tly touched, here by sum maner schort 
sentencis of wordis ben opned. And so I, holpen with help of 30ure preyers, haue 
sente the boke to plesen to wele willid men; neuer the later I doute not, it to ben to 
displesen to enuyous men. Forsothe, as seith Plynye, sum men han leuere alle best 
thingis seen to dispisen, thanne to lernen. 3if eny man in this remenyng wille eny 
thing repreuen, aske he the Ebrues, remembre he his conscience, see he the order and 
the text of the word; and thanne, 3if he may, putte he blame to oure traueil. Than 
wher ener 3e seen asterichos, that is, sterres, to schynen in this volume, there wijte 3e 
of Ebrue added, that in Latyne bokis is not had; wher forsothe obelus ouerturned, 
that is, a 3erde, is sette before, there is betokened what the secuenty remenours 
addeden, or for grace of feyrnesse, or for autorite of the Hooly Goost ; and in Ebrue 


volumes it is not rad. 


Here eendith the prologe in the ij. Paralipomenon, and bigynneth the bok in the 


2}. Paralipomenon’. 





Here bigynneth the secounde bok of 
Paralipominon’. 


CAP. I. 


1 SaLomon thanne, the sone of Dauid, is 
coumfortid in his rewme, and the Lord 
was with hym, and magnyfiede hym in 
2to an hee3. And Salomon comaundyde 
to al Yrael, to leders of thousandis, and 
maystirs of hundrethis, and to domys- 
men, and to the duykis of al Yrael, and 
3to princis of meynes ; and wente with al 
the multitude in to the hei3t of Gabaon, 
where was the tabernacle of the® pese 
couenaunt of the Lord, that Moyses, the 
seruaunt of God, made in wyldirnesse. 
4Dauid forsothe hadde lad the arke of 
God fro Cariathiarym in to the place 
that he hadde made redi to it, and wher 
he hadde pi3t to it a tabernacle, that is, 
5in Jerusalem. Also a brasen auter, the 
whiche Beseleel, the sone of Vri, sone of 
Ur, hadde forgid, there was beforn the 
tabernacle of the Lord; the whiche and 
6Salomon sou3t and al the chirche. And 


2 Here eendith the proloog, and now bigynneth the book A. 
© Om. Brn. 


initial rubric in ascen. » in to 4BFH. 


Heere biginnith the secounde book of 
Paralpomynon. 


CAP. I. 


THERFOR Salomon, the sone of Dauid,: 
was counifortid in his rewme, and the 
Lord was with hym, and magnefiede 
hym an hi3. And Salomon comaundidee 
to al Israel, to tribunes, and centuriouns, 
and to duykis, and domesmen? of al Israel, 
and to the princes of meynees; and he°s3 
jede with al the multitude in to the hi3 
place of Gabaon, where the tabernacle of 
boond of pees of the Lord was, which4 
tabernacle Moyses, the seruaunt of the 
Lord, made in wildirnesse. Forsothe‘ 
Dauid hadde brou3t the arke of God fro 
Cariathiarym in to the place which he 
hadde& maad redy" to it, and where he 
hadde set a tabernacle to it, that is, in to? 
Jerusalem. And the brasun auter, whichs 
Beseleel, the sone of Vri, sone* of Vr, 
hadde maad, was there bifor the taber- 
nacle of the Lord; whiche! also Salomon 
and al the chirche™ sou3te. And Salomon6 


° 


No final rubric in cernz. ® From r. No 


a From cer. The seeounde book of Parolypomynon. t. The seeounde of Paralipominon. p. No initial 


rubric in the other Mss. __» to domis men s. 
g¢Om. x. bOm. a. i Om. cEILNs. 
auter 8. ™ chirche of Israel rns. 


¢ Salomon 1Ns. 
k the sone Ins. 


dthe which i. © Om.1. £ And Ins. 
1 the whiche brasen aufer 1n. which brasyn 


I, 7—15 


Salomon steiz3ede up to the brasen auter, 
before the tabernacle of the pese coue- 
naunt of the Lord,,and offride in it a 
7thousand hoostis. Lo! forsothe in that 
ny3t God apeerid to hym, seyinge, Ask 
athat thou wylt, that I 3eue to thee. And 
Salomon seide to God, Thou didist with 
Dauith, my fadir, grete mercy, and set- 
gtist me kyng for hym. Nowe thanne, 
Lord God, thi word be fulfild, that thou 
bihi3tist to Dauid, my fadir; thou for- 
sothe hast made me kyng vpon thi grete 
puple, the whiche is as vnnoumbreable 
joas the poudre of the erth. 3eue to me 
wysdam and vndirstondynge, that I go in 
and go out beforn thi puple; who for- 
sothe may this thi puple, that is so greet, 
11 worthily deemyn? God forsothe seide to 
Salomon, For this more pleside to thin 
herte, and askidist not rychesses, and 
substaunce, and glorie, ue the lijues of 
hem that hatideu thee, ne many days of 
lijf; but forsothe thou askidist wisdam 
and kunnynge, that thou my3tist deme 
puple’, vpon the whiche I haue sett thee 
igzkyng, wisdom and kunnynge ben 3euen 
to thee; ritchesses forsothe, and sub- 
staunces, and glorie I schal jeuen to 
thee, so that no man in kyngis, ne before 
i3thee ne aftir thee, were lijc thee. Than 
Salomon came fro the hei3t of ° Gabaon 
in to Jerusalem, beforn the tabernacle of 
the pese couenaunt, and regned vpon 
14Yrael. And he gadirde to hym charis 
and hors men, and ther ben maad to 
hym a thousand and foure hundrith 
chaaris, and twelue thousand of horse 
men; and he maad hem to ben in the 
citees of plowes of foure hors, and with 
isthe kyng in Jerusalem. And the kyng 
jaue in to Jerusalem syluer and gold as 
stonys, and cedres as long mulberies‘, that 


€ fro c. 


4 my puple c. 


T stiede up ins. —® the boond rns. 


IJ. PARALIPOMENON. 


t he offrede 1Ns. 


387 


stiede™ to the brasun autir, bifor the taber- 
nacle of boond® of pees of the Lord, and 
offridet in it a thousynde sacrifices. Lo’ !7 
‘forsothe in that ny3t* God apperide to 
hymy, ‘and seide’, Axe that® that thou 
wolt, that Y 3yue? to thee. And Salomons 
seide to God, Thou last do greet mersi 
with Dauid, my fadir, and hast ordeyned 
me kyng for hym. Now therfor, Lords 
God, thi word be fillid®, which thou bi- 
hijtist to Dauid, my fadir; for thou hast 
maad me kyng on! thi greet puple, which¢ 
is so vnnoumbrable as the dust of erthe. 
3iue thou to me wisdom and vundurstond- 10 
yng, that Y go in and go out bifor thi 
puple ; for who may deme worthili this 
thi puple, which is so greet ? Sothelif God 1 
seide to Salomon, For€ this thing pleside 
more thin herte, and thou axidist not 
richessis, and catel, and glorie, nether the 
lyues of them that hatiden® thee, but 
nether ful many daies of lijf'; but thou 
axidist* wisdom and kunnyng, that thou 
maist deme my puple, on! which Y or- 
deynede™ thee kyng, wisdom and kun-12 
nyng ben" 3ouun to thee; forsothe? Y 
schal 3yue to thee richessis, and catel, and 
glorie, so that noon among kyngis, nether 
bifor thee: nethir? aftir thee, be lijk thee. 
Therfor’ Salomon cam fro the hi3 place 13 
of Gabaon in to Jerusalem, bifor the taber- 
nacle of boond" of pees, and he*® regnede 
ont Israel. And he" gaderide’ to hym 14 
chaaris and kny3tis, and a thousynde and 
foure hundrid charis weren maad to hym, 
and twelue thousynde of” kny3tis; and 
he made hem to be in the* citees of cartis, 
and with the kyng in Jerusalem. Andis 
the kyng 3af in Jerusalem gold and siluer 
as stoonys’, and cedris’ as sicomoris, that 
comen forth in feeldi places in greet mul- 
titude. Forsothe* horsis weren brou3t to 16 


f mulberie trees c pr. m. 


wAndlo! ins. *Om.1Ns.  Y hym in 


that nijt my. hym that nizt s. a that thing ins. >3yue if ins. © fulfillid rvs. 4upon is. © the which 1. 


fAndins. & For thi that 1s. For that x. bhatens. i ¢hilijfins. * hast axid ms. | upon is. 
m haue ordeyned 1s. therfore ben 1s. © and ouer thisins, Pneins. 4 Thannet. the boond IN, 
sOm.c, ‘tuponis. Salomon ins. Y gaderide togidere rvs. ¥Om.s. *Om.c.  » stones in 
plentith s. 7 he 3aue cedre trees s. % And 1Ns. 


3D2 


388 


growen in wijld feeldis in myche multi- 

étude. Forsothe ther weren brou;t to 
hymn hors fro Egipt, and fro Ohoa, of the 
marchaundis of the kyng, that wenten 

17and bo3tenf bis prijs, a plow3 of hors for 
sixe hundrith platis of syluer, and an 
hors for an hundrith and fyfty. Lije 
maner of alle the rewmes of Cetheys, 
and of the kyngis of Cirie, the bying 
was solemply don. 


CAP. II. 


1 Forsothe Salomon demed to bilden up 
an hous to the name of the Lord, and a 
2paleys to hym silf. And he noumbrede 
seuenty thousand of men berynge in 
schulderis, and ei3ti® thousand that schul- 
den hewen stones in hillis; and the pro- 
uostes of hem thre thousand and sixe 
shundrith. Also he sente to Yram, kyng 
of Tiry, seyinge, As thou hast don with 
ny fadir Dauid, and hast sente to hym 
cedre trees, that he bilde to hym an hous, 
4in the whiche and he dwellide; so do 
with me, that I bilde an hous to the 
name of the Lord my God, aud that I 
sacre it, to brennen encense beforn hym, 
and to swote thingis to ben out smokid, 
and to the euermore propocicioun of 
looues, and to the brent sacrifices erly 
and at euen, also to the sabotis, and to 
the newe mones', and solempnytes of the 
Lord oure God in to euermore, that ben 
scomaundid to Yrael. The hous forsothe, 
that I coueite to bilden up, is greet; for- 
sothe the Lord oure God is grete vpon 
éalle goddis. Who than schal mowen ben 
my3ty, that he bilde up to hym an worthi 
hous? 3if forsothe ,heuen and heuens of 
heuens mown not taken hym, how myche 
am I, that I may to hym bilden up an 


f brou3ten BH. 


bthe whiche 1. ¢ brouj3ten EL. 4 aftir bi ms. 


horsis 0. & thei bou3ten an Ns. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


& for c. 


© aftir cDEFGLPQRUbg. a charre o. and foure s. 
h fifti platis ns. 


I. 16—II. 6. 


hym fro Egipt, and fro Choa, bi the mar- 
chauntis of the kyng, whiche® 3eden, and 
bou3ten® bit prijs, ‘a foure® ‘horsid carte! 17 
for sixe hundrid platis of siluer, and an’ 
hors for au hundrid and fifti®, In lijk ma- 
ner biyng was maad of alle the rewines of 
citees, and of the kingis of Sirie. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothe Salomon demyde' to bilde an1 
hows to the name of the Lord, and a 
paleis to hym silf. And he noumbride2 
seuenti thousynde of men berynge® in 
schuldris!, and fourescore thousynde™ that 
schulden kitte" stoonys in hillis; and the 
souereyns of hem thre® thousynde and 
sixe hundrid. And he? sente to Jram,3 
kyng1 of Tire, and seide, As thou didist 
with’ my fadir Dauid, and sentist to’ hym 
trees of cedre, that he schulde bilde to hym 
an hows, in which also he dwellide; soa 
do thou witht me, that Y bilde an hows 
to the name of ‘my Lord God", and that 
Y halewe it, to brenne’ encense’ bifor hym, 
and to make* odour of swete smellyngeyY 
spiceries, and to”euerlastynge settynge forth 
of looues, and to® brent sacrifices> in the 
morewtid and euentid, and in sabatis, and 
neomenyes*, and solempnytees* of ‘oure 
Lord God¢ in to with outen ende, thatf 
ben comaundid to Israel. For’ the hows5 
which" Y coueyte! to bilde is greet; for® 
‘oure Lord God! is greet ouer alle goddis. 
Who therfor may have my3t to bilde a6 
worthi hows to hym? For if heuene and 
the™ heuenes of heuenes moun not take" 
hym’, hou greet am Y, that Y may bilde 
‘an hows? to hym, but to this thing4 


hey3t 2. + monethes z. 


f of 


i demede or purposide ns. __* berynge stones rns. 


her schuldris rvs. ™thousynde men rns. "kitte or hewe 1s. hewe x. © weren thre rns. P Salomon ins, 


4the kyng1n. * torn. goodlich to s, 
w incense therynne IN. 
make therynne 1s. Om. N. 
in the bigynnyngis of monethis Gxogb. 
{whiche ns] obseruauncis and halewyngis ins. 
1 the Lord oure God ns. m Om. INs. 

P a couenable houce s. 4 thing or seruise s. 


D sacrifice 1N. 


8 Om. s. 
x make there 1. make therynne s. 
Cin feestis in the bigynnyng of monthis ErLNs. that is, feestis 
4 in solempnitees s. 
& Certis rns. 
n take or holde 1n. 


ttox. the Lord my God s. 


y welle smelling s. 2 to serue to s. 


Vv brenne yne s. 
4 to 


€ the Lord oure God ins. f the whiche 
bh that 1s. icoueytide a. * forsothe 1s. 
© him, or holde the Lord our God s. 


Il. 7-14. 


hous, bot to thes thingis al oonly, that 
,encense be brent beforn hym? Sende 
thann to me an tau3t man, that kann 
wirchen in gold, and siluer, brasse, and 
yren, purpur, cocco, and iacynte; and 
that kanne grauen in craft of grauyng 
with these craftise men,‘the whiche* I 
haue with me in Jewrie and Jerusalem!, 
the whiche Danid, my fadir, made redy 
gbefore. Bot and cedre trees senden to 
me, aud tyne trees, and pyne trees of 
Lyban; I knowe forsothe, that thi ser- 
uauntis kunnen hewen trees of the wode ; 
and my seruauntis schuln ben with thi 
gSeruauntis, that ther ben made redy to 
me many trees; the hous forsothe that 
I coueite to bilden up is ful myche grete, 
ioand ful glorious. Forthermore to werk 
men, that ben to hewen trees, to thi ser- 
uauntis, I schal 3euen in to metis choris 
of whete twenty thousand, and choris of 
barly as fele, and of oyle twenty thou- 
iSand mesures, as of twelue galouns. For- 
sothe Iram, kyng of Tyry, seide bi the 
lettres that he sente to Salomon, For the 
Lord hath louede his puple, therfore thee 
izhe maad regnen vpon it. And he addid, 
seyinge, Blessid the Lord God of Yrael, 
that made heuen and erth, that 3aue to 
kyng Dauid a wijs sone, and tau3t, and 
witty, and slee3, that he bilde up an hous 
to the Lord, and a paleis to hym silf. 
13 Therfore I haue sente to thee a sleei3 
man and most kunnyng, Yram, iny fadir, 
14sone of a womman of the lynage of Dan, 
whos fadir was Tyrus ; the whiche kouthe 
wirchen in gold, and in siluer, brasse, 
and yren, and marbil, and trees, in pur- 
pur also, and jacynct, and bijse, and 
cocko; and that kanne grauen al grau- 
ynge, and fynde slee3ly what euer thing 


k that c pr.m. 


¥ brent éhere 1. brent ¢heryune s. 
siluer 1N. Vv in bras 1N. and in brasse s. 
Yin iacynet ms. 2 in Jerusalem ins. 
¢ hill of Liban 1. mounteyn of Liban ns. 
ithatws. k her w. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


Shym, Y purpose lo make an houce s. 
W in purpur Ns. 
a the whiche men 1. which erafti werkmen s. 

dkitte or hewe s. 
1 sata, that is, xij. galouns Nn. 


389 


oonli, that encense be brent" bifor hyms ? 
Therfor sendet thou to me a lernd man,7 
that can worche in gold, and siluer®, bras’, 
and yrun, purpur”, rede* silke, and ia- 
cynct’; and that can graue in grauyng 
with these crafti men, which Y haue with 
me in Judee and Jerusalem’, whiclie* Da- 
uid, my fadir, made> redi. But also sendes 
thou to me cedre trees, and pyne trees, and 
thyne trees of the Liban‘; for Y woot, that 
thi seruauntis kunnen kitte4 trees of the® 
Liban ; and my seruauntis schulen be with 
thi seruauntis, that’ ful many trees bes9 
maad redi to me; for® the hows whichi 
Y coueyte to bilde is ful greet and noble. 
Ferthermore to thi seruauntis, werk men 10 
that schulen kitte trees, Y schal 3yue in to* 


meetis twenti thousynde chorust of whete, +t chorus con- 


teyneth xxx. 


and so many chorus of barlif, and twenti — buyschels: 
. 6 5 bathus con- 
thousynde mesuris of oile, that ben clepid  teyneth iii. 


; : 4. buyschelis 
sata!, Forsothe™ Iram, king of Tire, seide 1} yor is, a». 


bi lettris whiche he sente to Salomon, (Rae ae 
For" the Lord louyde his puple, therfor oe 

he made® thee to regne on? it. And he412bnyschel and 
addide", seiynge, Blessid be the Lord God {" “°""°"* 
of Israel, that’ made heuene and erthe, 7°01" 


is set in Ebreu 
which 3aft to ‘Dauid the kyng® a wijs  **- thousynde 


mesuris of 


sone, and lernd, and witti, and prudent, — wyn, that is 
5 [ben cx) clepid 

that he schulde bilde an hows to the Lord,  bathus. Zire 

here. caxa. 


and a paleis to hym silf. Therfor’ Y sente™ 13 
to thee a prudent man and moost kun- 
nynge, Iram, my fadir, the sone of a wom-14 
man of the lynage of Dan, whos fadir was 
a man of Tire; whiche* Iram can worche 
in gold, and siluer, brasY, and irun’, and 
marble’, and trees’, also in purpur, and 
iacynet, and bijs, and rede® silke; and 
which Iram can graue al® grauyng, and 
fyndef prndentli, what euer thing is nede- 
ful in werk with thi crafti men, and with 
the crafti men of my lord Dauid, thi fadir. 


lin Jerusalem c. 


t Hiram, sende 1s. Yin 
x and in rede 1. in rede ns. and rede v. 
b bifore made Ns. 
eOm.ns. fandyns. §Om.s. "certis ns. 


m Andins. 1 For that x. Forthi thats. © hath 


maad ns. P npon is. 4 Yram ins. * addide to ins. % which plures. * hoth 3oue rs. ™ kyng Dauid 1Ns. 


w haue sent ins. 


Y Therfor Salomon 1s pr.m. 
© in rede 1Ns, 


marble ins. » in trees 1Ns. 


x the whiche 1. 
@ the which 1, 


yYinbrasins. Zinirun in, 4 in 


ein als. f can fynde s. 


390 


is nedeful in werk with thi craftise men, 
and with the craftise men of my lord 

15 Dauid, thi fadir. Thanne the whete, and 
the barly, and the oyle, and the wijne, 
‘the whiche™, my lord, thou hast behoten, 

issende to thi seruauntis. We forsothe 
hewen the trees from the wode, as fele 
as thou schalt han need; and we schulen 
applyen hem in names bi the se in to 
Joppe; thin forsothe schal ben to leeden 

17hem ouer in to Jerusalem. Than Salo- 
mon noumbride alle the men comlyngis, 
that weren in the lond of Yrael, aftir the 
noumbrynge that Dauid, his fadir, noum- 
bred; and ther ben founden an hun- 
drith and fyfty thousand and thre thou- 

issand and sixe hundrith. And he maad 
of hem seuenty thousand, that schulde 
beren birthens with schuldirs, and ei3ty 
thousand, that stoonys in hillis schulden 
hewen; thre forsothe thousand and sex 
hundrith prouostis of the werkis of the 
puple*. 

CAP. III. 

1 And Salomon beganne to bilden up 
an hous of the Lord in Jerusalem, in the 
hill of Moria, the whiche was schewed to 
Dauid, his fader, in the place that Dauid 
hadde maad redy in the corne flor® of 

2Ornam Jebusei. He beganne forsothe 
to bilden up the secounde moneth, in the 

3ferth jeer of his regne. And thes ben 
the foundementis, ‘the whiche? Salomon 
leide, that he bilde up the hous of God; 
of lengthe cubitis in the first mesure 
4sexty, of brede cubitis twenty. The 3ate 
hous forsothe beforne the frount, the 
whiche was strau3t out in to leyngthe 
aftir mesure of brede of the hous, of cu- 
bitis twenty, bot the heijte was of an 
hundrith and twenty cubitis; and he 
gildide it with in forth with most cleen 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


It, 15—IIl. 4. 


Therfor, my lord, sende thou to thi ser-15 
uauntis the whete, and barli, and oyle, and 
wyn, whiche® thou bihi3tist®, Sotheli! we 16 
schulen kitte trees of the Liban, how 
many euere thou hast nedeful*; and we 
schulen brynge tho! in schippis bi the see 
in to Joppe; forsothe™ it schal be thin® 
to lede tho ouer in to Jerusalem. Ther-17 
for? Salomon noumbride alle men con- 
uertid fro hethenesse, that weren in the 
lond of Israel, aftir the noumbryng which? 
Dauid, his fadir, noumbride?; and an hun- 
drid thousynde and thre and fifti thou- 
synde and sixe hundrid weren foundun’. 
And he madet of hem seuenti thousynde, 18 
that schulden bere birthuns in® schuldris’, 
and ‘foure score” thousynde, that schulden 
kitte* stonys in hillis; sotheliy he made 
thre thousynde and sixe hundrid soue- 
reyus of werkis of the puple. 


CAP. III. 


And Salomon bigan to bilde the hows1 
of the Lord in Jerusalem, in the hil of 
Moriat, that® was schewid to Dauid, his 
fadir, in the place which’ Dauid hadde 
maad redi in the corn floor of Ornam Je- 
busei®. Forsothe’ he® bigan to bilde inz 
the secounde monethef}, in the fourthe 3eer 
of his rewme. And these weren the foun-3 
dementis, whiche Salomon settide, that he 
schulde bilde the hous of God; sixtif cu- 
bitis of lengthe in the firste mesure®, 
twenti> cubitis of breede. Forsothe’ he4 
bildide a porche bifor the frount, that was 
stretchid forth along bisidis the* mesure 
of the breede of the hows, of twenti cu- 
bitis, sotheli! the hi3nesse was of an hun- 
drid and twenti cubitis; and he ouer- 
gilde™ it with inne with clennest gold. 


™ that c pr.m. ® puplis apru. © feeld apru. P that c, 

S thats. } hast bihijt ins. i Andins. k need of 1. !thotreesivs. ™andins. ® thin doyng rns. 
oThannes. Pthatis. of x. 4 had noumbrid ins. 17 founden of hem 1s. 8 Salomonins. +t made or 
ordeyned 1s. “ons. V her schuldris ys. W ei3ti scenw. * hewe rs. Yand ins. 4 the whiche fill 1. 
which x. which hills. >thatiys.  ¢ Jebusei, where he bildide an auter to the Lord 1s. 4 And ins. 
€Salomon ins. fsixn, & mesure 3ouen to him of his fader Dauith ss. and twentiins. i And ins. 
K or at the 1s. land ins. ™ ouergildide s. 


+ Moria; that 
is, of siz3t. Lire 
here. CGIKLN 
opasb. 


+ moneth; in 

breu it is, in 
the ii. day of 
the moneth. 
Lire here. cGk 
oab. 


§ mesure; that 
is, in the mesure 
j3ouun of Da- 
uith to hym. 
CELOPQD. 


I. 5—16. 


sgold. Also the more hous he couerede 
with firre tablis, and he fitchide platis of 
bri3t gold thoru3 out; and he graued in 
it hondis, and as cheynes catchynge hem 
6silf to gydre. And he couerde the paw- 
ment of the temple with most preciouse 
7marble, in myche feyrnesse. Forsothe the 
gold was most fyne, of whos platis he 
couerde the hous, and his bemys, and 
postis, and wallis, and dores; and he 
sgraned cherubyn in the wallis. Also he 
maad an hous to the holies of halowes, 
in leyngthe aftir the brede of the hous, 
of cubitis twenty, and the breed lije 
maner of cubitis twenty; and with golden 
platis couerde it, as with sixe hundrith 
9talentis. Bot and golden naylis he maad, 
so that eche naylis peyseden fyfty ounces; 
also the soupynge place he couerde with 
10gold. And he maad in the hous of holies 
of halowis two cherubyn in ymage werke, 
i1and couerde hem with gold. The weengis 
of cherubyn in twenty cubitis weren 
strau3t out, so that oo wenge hadde cu- 
bitis fyue, and schulde touchen the wall 
of the hous; and the tother wenge hau- 
ynge fyue cubitis touche the wenge of 
12the tother cherub. Lijec maner of the 
tother cherub the wenge hadde fyue cu- 
bitis, and touchid the wall, and his othere 
weeng of fyne cubitis touched the weeng 
13 of the tother cherub. Thanne the weengis 
of either cherub weren sprad and strau3t 
out bi cubitis twenty; thei forsothe 
stoden ri3t up the feet, and the faces of 
hem weren turned to the vttirmore hous. 
14And he maad a veyl of jacinct, and 
purpur, and cocko', and bijs; and thei 
1s weueden to it cherubyn. Before the 3atis 
also of the temple two pylers, ‘the whiches 
thritty and fyue cubitis hadden of hei3t ; 
forsothe the heuedis of hem of fyue cu- 
16 bitis. Also and as litil cheynes in Goddis 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


391 


Also he hilide the gretter hows withs 
tablis of beech, and he fastnede platis of 
gold of beste" colowr al aboute®; and he 
grauyde therynne palintrees, and as smale 
chaynes biclipynge hem silf togidere. And« 
he arayede the pawment of the temple 
with most preciouse marble, inP myche 
fairenesse. Forsothe’ the gold was moost7 
preued, of whose platis he hilide the hows, 
and the beemys therof, and the postis, and 
the wallis, and the doris; and he grauyde 
cherubyns' in the wallis. Also he made‘s 
an hows to the holi of holi thingis, in 
lengthe bi the breede of the hows, of twenti 
cubitis, and the breed alsot of twenti cu- 
bitis; and he hilide it with goldun platis, 
as with sixe hundrid talentis". But’ alsog 
he made goldun nailis, so that ech nail 
peiside fifti siclis ; and he hilide the solers 
with gold. Also he made in the hows of 10 
the hooli of hooli thingis twei cherubyns 
bi the werk of an ymage makere, and 
hilide” hem with gold. The wyngis of11 
cherubyns weren holdun forth bi twenti 
cubitis, so that o wynge hadde fyue cu- 
bitis, and touchide* the wal of the hows; 
and the tother wynge hadde fyue cubitis, 
and touchideY the wynge of the tother? 
cherub. In lijk maner the wynge? of the 12 
tother® cherub hadde fyue cubitis, and 
touchide® the wal, and the tother’ wynge 
therof of © fyue cubitis touchide the wynge 
of the tothir‘ cherub. Therfor the wyngis 13 
of euer eithir cherub weren spred abrood, 
and weren® holdun forth bi twenti cubitis; 
sotheli® thilke cherubyns stoden oni the 
feet reisid!, and her faces weren turned to 
the outermere hows™. Also he made ats 
veil of iacynct and purpur®, of ° reed seelk 
and bijs?; and weuyde? cherubyns" ther- 
ynne. Also bifor the 3ateS of the temples 
he made twei pilers, that' hadden fyue 
and thretti" cubitis of hei3the; forsothe’ 


Tkoec. 8 that c. 
athe beste i. Oaboute its. Pands. 4@Andins. ° eherubyns, that is, aungels s. ce made ther s. 
tOm.1. talentis in valts. vYAndins. Whe hilide rN. x it touchide ins. _‘-Y it touchide ins. 
2 oother Is. ® 00 wyng i. to wyng Ns. » oother 1s. © it touchide vs. 4oother1. © that was of Ns, 


f oother 1s. £ thei weren ins. hand Ns. iuponis. *Om.ins. lreisid up 1N. reised vp or enhanced 


ro the thing thei stoden vpon s. ™ housis n. 
g 1p 


weuyde ins. Ff aungels ns. §& gatis INs. 


4 of purpur INs, 
t the whiche 1. whiche Ns. 


P of bijs ins. = @ he 


¥ aud INs. 


© and of INS. 
" twenti x. 


392 


answerynge place, and he putte hem 
vpon the heuedes of the pilers; also an 
hundrith powngarnettis, the whiche he 

17 putte among to the litil cheynes. And 
thilkt pilers he putte in the vestiarye of 
the temple, oon fro the ri3t, an other fro 
the left; it that was fro the ri3t he cle- 
pide Jachym, and that to the lift he 
clepid Booz. 


CAP.AV: 


1 And he maad a brasen auter of twenty 
cubitis of lengthe, and of twenty cubitis 
of breed, and of tenn cubitis of hei3te ; 

2also a 50ten se of tenn cubitis fro brynke 
vnto brynk, round bi enuyroun ; fyue cu- 
bitis he hadde of hei3te; and a litil coord 
of thritty cubitis enuyrounde the compas 

3of it. And licnesse of oxen was vndur it, 
and in the ten cubitis maner grauyngis 
with oute forth as with two vers wente 
aboute the brynke of the se; the oxen 
4forsothe weren 30ten. And that se was 
put upon the twelue oxen", of the whiche 
thre biheelden to the north, and other 
thre to the west, bot the’ thre other 
the’ south, and the thre that weren laft 
thew este, hauynge the se put aboue; 
the hyndirmore forsothe of the oxen 
5weren with in forth vndur the se. Bot 
the thicnesse of it hadde the mesure of 
a spanne, and the lippe of it was as the 
lippe of a chalice, or as of a lilie a3ein 
crokid, and it toke of mesure thre thou- 

Gsand potels. Also he maad tenn watir 
vessels, and he putte fyue fro the ri3t, 
and fyue fro the lift, that they schulden 
waschen in hem alle thingis that in 


t thoo c. 


¥ tho pilers Is. 
chaynes 1s. hem Nn. 


x cubitis in heijthe Ns. 
© upon Is. 


I]. PARALIPOMENON. 


v of oxen RB. 


y Om. 1s. 
d the whiche 1. 


I, 17—IV. 6. 


the heedis of tho¥ weren of fyue cubitis*. 
Also he made and¥ as? litle chaynes in 16 
Goddis answeryng placet, and puttide* tho? 
on¢ the heedis of the pilers ; also he made 

an hundrid pumgarnadis, whichet he set- {j.0mom.3s 
tide bitwixe the litle chaynes. And he17 et Lire 
settide tho pilers in the porche of the 

temple, oon at the riztside, and the tother® 

at the leftside; he clepide that’ that was 

at the ri3tside Jachymé, and that that was 

at the leftside he" clepide Boozi. 


t answering 
place ; that is, 
in the porche 


CARATV. 


Also* he! made a brasun auter of twenti! 
cubitis of lengthe, and of twenti cubitis of 
breede, and of ten cubitis of heijthe; he2 
made also a 30tun see™} of ten cubitis fro 
brynke til" to brynke, round bi cumpas ; 
it hadde fyue cubitis of hei3the; and a 
coorde of thritti cubitis cumpasside the 
cumpas therof. And the licnesse® of oxis?3 
was vndur it, and bi ten cubitis summe 
grauyngis with outforth cumpassiden the 
brynke of the see as with tweyne ordris ; 
sothelid the oxis’ weren 30tun. And thilke4 
see was set on® twelue oxis‘, of whiche"® 
oxist thre bihelden to the north, and 
othere thre to the west, sotheli’ thre 
othere bihelden* the* south, and thre ‘that 
weren residue’ biheldenz the* eest, and 
hadden" the see set aboue®; but the hyn- 
drere* partis of the oxis® weren with ynnef 
vndur the see. Sotheli® the thicknesses 
therof* hadde the mesure of a‘ pawm of 
the) hond, and the brynke therof was* as 
the brynke of a cuppe, ethir! of a™ lilie 
crokid a3en, and it" took® thre thousynde 
metretis? of mesure. Also hel made tené 
holowe vessels, and settide™ fyue at the 
rijtside, and fyue at the leftside’, that thei‘ 


t see; that is, 
a greet wasch- 
ing vessel for 
prestis. c. 


Ytos. Wtothe a. 


Zasit were 1. asands. he puttide ins. > tho 
€oother1. fthat pilerins.  & that is, a bifore 


ordeynyng 1 marg. Jachym, that is, a bifore ordeyner or before ordeynyng 8 text, Salomon ins. i Booz, 


that is, in whom is strengthe 1. Booz, that is, iu whom is strength of vertu s. 
° licnessis X. 


m see, that is, a weischinge vessel Ins. 2 Om, 1. 
Suponis. toxen ins. the whiche 1. 
zOm.1. ®tothe1. Ythese hadden iN, 
forth ins. & And ins. of the see Ins. 
see 1NS. 


8 leftside of the sees. +t the dekeus ins. 


Vv and INs. 

¢ aboue hem INs. 
i the Ins. 
° heeld n. tooke or heeld s. P that is, mesuris of wijn K marg. 


k And Ins. 
Poxen INS. 4 and INs. 
X to the Ins, 
4 hyndere csx. 
k Om. A. 


1 Salomon Ins. 

T oxen INS. 
Y the remenaunt INs. 
€oxenins. f ynne 
lethir asis. ™Om.c. "the 
9 Salomon ins. the sette Ins. 


w Om, IN. 


Jan INs. 


IV. 7—20. 


brent sacrifices thei weren to offren ; bot 
in the se the prestis weren waschen. 
7Forsothe he maad tenn golden chaun- 
delers aftir the fourme ‘the whiche* he 
hadde comaundide to be maad, and he 
put hem in the temple, fyue fro the ri3t 
sand fyue fro the left; also and tenn 
boordes, and putte hem in the temple, 
fyue fro the ri3t and fyue fro the left; 
gand golden violis an hundrith. And he 
made the porche of prestis, and a greet 
hous, and the dores in the hous, the 
10 whiche he couerde with brasse. But the 
se he putte in the ri3t sijde a3einus the 
ireste at the south. Also Yram made 
caudrowns, and fleschhokis, and violis, 
and he fulfilde al the werk of the kyng 
12in the hous of God, that is, two pilers, 
and heued coueryngis, and heuedes, and 
as maner nettis, the whiche the heuedis 
i3schulden coueryn vpon the heued couer- 
yngis ; also powngarnetis fourty, and two 
callis, so that two ordris of poungarnetis 
to alle the callis schulden ben ioyned, 
the whiche schulden coueren the heued 
coueryngis, and the heuedis of the pilers. 
14 Also feet he maad, and water vessels, the 
1s whiche he putte vpon the feet; oon se, 
1¢6and oxen twelue vndir the se, and caw- 
drouns, and fleschhookis, and viols. Yram, 
his fadir, made alle the vesselis to Salo- 
mon, in the hous of the Lord, of most 
17¢clene brasse. In the regioun of Jordan 
the kyng 3eetide hem, in the cleyY lond 
18 bitween Socoth and Saradatha. Forsothe 
ther was a multitude of vessels vnnoum- 
breable, so that the wei3te of brasse was 
i9vnknowen. And Salomon maad alle the 
vessels of the hous of God, the golden 
auter, and boordis, and vpon hem the 
20looues of proposicioun; and candilstikis 
with their lanternes, that thei 3euen 1i3t 


x that ¢ pr. m. 


u And ins. Vsee, or thei entreden in to the seintuarie 18. 


Cand 1. 
h fulfillide in. 
n the which 1. 


2 tablis Ns. » sette EL. he settide Nsx. 

of the porche ins. 8 south coost 1s. 

made s. ™ tho two 1n. the two s. 

Tupon is. *thors. tains, oxen INS. 

x tho vessels ins. Ycley 1. 2 bitwene 1. 

tablis ins. 4 the loouys 1s. © upon INS. 
VOL. IL. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


a preestis, or for preestis s. 


© the heedis x sec. m. 
Vv necesarie vessels s. the vessels X sec. m. 
® Certis 1Ns. 


393 


schulden waische in tho alle thingis, whiche 

thei schulden offre in to brent sacrifice ; 

sotheli# the preestis weren waischun in 

the see’. Sotheli¥ he made ten goldun7 

candilstikis bi the licknesse which* heY 

hadde comaundid to? be maad, and he set- 

tide tho in the temple, fyue at the ri3tside 

and fyue at the leftsid. And he mades 

also ten boordis*, and settide” tho in the 

temple, fyue at the riztside and fyue at 

the leftside. Also he made an hundrido 

goldun viols. ‘Also he made a large 

place of preestis’, and a greet hows, and 

doris in the greet hows, which he hilide 

with bras. Forsothe® he settide the see in io 

the rijtsydef ajens the eest at the southé. 

Also Iram made cawdruns, and fleischokis, 11 

and violst, and he fillide al the werk of + tiols; in 
is 3 « _ Ebreu it is, 

the kyng in the hows of God, that is, twei! 12 bacyns. c. 

pilers, and pomels*, and heedis, and! as 

summe nettis, that hiliden the heedis aboue 

the pomels; also he made fourti pum-13 

garnadis, and twei werkis lijk nettis, so 

that two™ ordris of pumgarnadis weren 

ioyned to ech werk like nettis, which" 

hiliden the pomels, and heedis® of the 

pilers. He made also foundementis, and 14 

holow vessels, whiche? he settide? on’ the® 

foundementis ; he made o' see, and twelue 15 

oxis" vndur the see, and caudruns, and ie 

fleischookis, and viols. Iram, the fadir{ 

of Salomon, made to hyim alle vessels’ in 

the hows of the Lord of clennest bras. 0 %lence 

The kyng 3etide tho* in the cuntrey of 17" © 

Jordan, in cleiyY lond bitwixe? Soceth and 

Saredata. Forsothe® the multitude of ves-1s 

sels was vnnoumbrable, so that the wei3te 

of bras was not knowun. And Salomonis 

made alle the vessels of Goddis hows», the 

goldun auter,‘and bordis®, and loouys? of 

settyng forth on® tho; and candilstikis of 20 

purest gold, with her lanternes, that tho 


+ fadir; that 
is, for resoun 
of age, ether 


¥ cleiy z. 


wAndins. * that a. yDauid ins. 7 Om. N. 
e Andys. f rijt syde 
k her pomels 1s. ! and he 
P the whiche 1. 4 sette 1Ns. 
w did 3eete ns. 


b hows, thal is, to wite [seies] 1s. © the mete 


i he made twei Ns. 


3E 


394 II. PARALIPOMENON. 


before Goddis answeryng place aftir the 
21rijt, of most pure gold; and sum floures, 
and lanterns, and golden snytters ; alle of 
22most clene gold ben maad ; also the maad 
encense vessels, and censeres, and violis, 
and morters, of most pure gold. And he 
graued the doris of the innermore tem- 
ple, that is, in? the hoolyes of halowes, 
and the doris of the temple without forth 
golden ; and so is fulfild al the werk that 
Salomon made in the hous of the Lord. 


CAP. V. 


i Salomon thanne brou3te in alle thingis, 
that Dauid, his fadir, hadde vowed; syl- 
uer, and gold, and al the vessels, he putte 
in the tresores of the hous of the Lord. 

2 After the® whiche thingis he gadride the 
more thoru3 birthe of Irael, and al the 
princis of lynagis, and the heuedis of 
meynes, of the sonys of Yrael, in to Jeru- 
salem, that thei bryngin the ark of the 
pese couenaunt of the Lord fro the cyte 

30f Dauid, that is Syon. And so camen 
to the kyng alle the men of Yrael, in 
the solempne day of the seuenth moneth. 

4And whanne weren commen alle of the 
elder of Yrael, the Leuytes beren the 
sarke, and brou3ten it in, and al the aray 
of the tabernacle. Bot the vessels of the 
seyntuarye, that weren in the tabernacle, 
the prestis beeren with the Leuytis. 

6 Kyng Salomon forsothe, and al the com- 
panye of Irael, and alle that weren ga- 
dered beforn the arke, offreden wethers 
and oxen with oute eny nouimbre; so 
myche forsothe was the multitude of 

7slayn offryngus. And the prestis brou3ten 
in the arke of the pese couenaunt of the 
Lord in to his place, that is, to Goddis 
answerynge place of the temple, in to the 
holies of halowes, yndre the weengis of 


Zin to CE. 


IV. 21—V. 7. 


schulden schyne bifor Goddis answering 
place bi thef custom ; and he made summe 2} 
werkis lijk flouris, and lanternes, and 
goldun tongis; alle thingis® weren maad 
of clennest gold; also he made pannes for 22 
colis to brenne® encense, and censeris, and 
viols, and morters, of pureste gold. Andi 
he grauyde doris‘ of the ynnere temple, 
that is, in the hooli of hooli thingis, and 
the goldun doris of the temple with out 
forth; and so al the werk was fillid! that 
Salomon made in the hows of the Lord. 


CAP. V. 


Therfor Salomon brou3te in™ alle thingis, 1 
siluer® and gold, whiche Dauid, his fadir, 
hadde avowid; and he puttide alle ves- 
selis® inP the! tresouris of the hows of the 
Lord. After whiche thingis he gaderidee 
togidere alle the grettere men in birthe of 
Israel, and alle the princes of lynagis, and 
the heedis of meynees, of the sones" of Is- 
rael, in to Jerusalem, that thei schulden 
brynge the arke of boond of pees of the 
Lord fro the citee of Dauid, which’ is 
Syon. Therfor alle men of Israel camen3 
to the kyng, in the solempne dai of the 
seuenthe monethe. And whanne alle the4 
eldre men of Israel ‘weren coment, the de- 
kenes baren the arke, and brou3ten" it in’, 5 
and al the aray of the tabernacle’. For- 
sothe* theY preestis with the dekenes baren 
the vessels of seyntuarie’, that weren in 
the tabernacle. Sotheli# kyng Salomon, ¢ 
and alle the cumpenyes of Israel, and alle 


‘ that weren gaderid to gidere, offriden bifor 


the arke wetheris and oxis® with outen 
ony? noumbre; for the multitude of slayn 
sacrifices was ‘so greet®. And preestis7 
brou3ten the arke of boond of pees of the 
Lord in to his‘ place’, that is, to Goddis 
ausweryng place of the temple, in to the 
hooli of hooli thingis, vndur the wyngis of 


2 Om. c. 


fOm.1ns.  & these thingis ins. 4 brenne ynneins. *Om.ax. ‘the dorisrxs. ! fulfillid ins. 
m forth ns. "that is, siluermns. © the vesselisins. Pintons. 99Om.s. fYhousn.  5§thatins. 


tcamen a. " thei brou3ten ins. V Om. 1Ns. 
in to the temple n. x Andins. YOm.1n, 
© oxen INS. 4 Om. ns, 
therof ins. 


W tabernacle in fo the temple of Jerusalem 1s. tabernacle 
2 the seyntuarie ins. 8 And Ins. 
€ so greet that it my3te not be noumbrid rns, f the ins, & place 


Db alle men Ins. 


Vv. 8—14. 


8cherubyn ; so that cherubyn spreden out 
their weengis vpon the place, in the 
whiche the ark was sett, and that arke 
thei schulden coueren with their beryng 
gstaues. Of the berynge staues forsothe, 
with the whiche the ark was born, for a 
litil wijt lengere thei weren, the heuedis 
weren opene beforn Goddis answerynge 
place; 3if forsothe eny a? litil wi3t were 
with out forth, hem he my3te not seen. 
And so the arke was there vnto the pre- 
1osent day ; and noon other thing was in 
the ark, bot the two tablis that Moyses 
hadde putte in Oreb, whanne he j3aue the 
lawe to the sonis of Yrael goyng out fro 
i Egipt. Forsothe the prestis goon out 
fro the seyntuarye, alle forsothe prestis, 
that there my3t ben founden, ben ha- 
lowed, ne 3it in that tyme the whillis, 
and the order of seruyses betwene hem 
izseluen was deuydid; bothe Leuytis and 
syngers, that is, and that vndur Asaph 
weren, and that vndur Eman, and that 
vndir Idythum, sonis and bretheren of 
hem, clothed® with surples, in cymbalis 
and sawtres and harpis suugyn, stond- 
ynge at the eest coost of the auter, and 
with hem prestis an hundrith and twenty, 
i3syngynge with trumpis. Thanne alle to 
gyder, in trumpis, and voice, and cym- 
balis, and orgnys, and of dyuerse kynde 
of musikis, sownynge to gydre, and the 
voice berynge vp an heei3, afer the sown 
was hard, so that whanne the Lord thei 
hadden begunnen to preysen, and seyn, 
Knowlecheth to the Lord, for ‘he is* 
good, for in to the world the mercy of 
hym; the hous of God was fulfillid with 
14a clowde, and the prestis my3ten not 
stonden and mynystren for the derk- 
nessis; forsothe the glorie of the Lord 
hadde fulfild the hous of God. 


b Om. 4aBFu. 


h cherubis rg. 
unhelid 18. 
T the present 1. 


| spredinge ns. 


Sand ther wasi. ¢ Om. 1. 
thisis. Andx., yOm.1. 2 the preestis ins. 
Lords. » whilis, or certeyn tymes s. 
8 with harpis ins. » thei stoden 1ns. 
cymbalis ins. kyndis ns. ° thei reisiden 1. 
endex. ‘®wasthans. ¢ fulfillidins. toa. 
Y fulfillid ins. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


¢ clad c. 


k barynge barris ins. 
© lengere than the streiching of cherubus wyngis 18. 
u Om. 18. 
a halwed, or put in office to mynistre there before the 
© seruyce X. 
i coost or corner 8s. 
P her ins. 

Vv serue in her office 8. 


395 


cherubyns’; so that cherubyns spreddeni8 
forth her wyngis ouer the place, in which 
the arke was put, and hiliden thilke arke 
with hise barris*, Sotheli the heedis!, by™9 
which the arke was borun, weren opyn® 
bifor Goddis answeryng place, for tho 
heedis weren a litil lengere®; but if a 
man hadde be a litil with out forth, he 
my3t not se? tho barrisi. Therfor the 
arke was there til in to present’ dai; and‘ 10 
noon other thing was' in the arke, no" 
but twei tablis, whiche’ Moyses hadde 
put” in Oreb, whanne the Lord 3af the 
lawe to the sones of Israel goynge out of 
Egipt. Forsothe* theY prestis 3eden out 1 
of the seyntuarie, for alle preestis’, that 
my3ten be foundun there, weren halewid’, 
and the whiles®, and the ordre of seruyces® 
among hem‘ was not departid 3it in that 
tyme; bothe® dekenes and syngeris, that 12 
is, bothe thei that weren vndur Asaph, 
and thei that weren vndur Eman, and thei 
that weren vndur Idithum, her sones and 
britheren, clothid with white lynun clothis, 
sownyden with cymbalis and sautrees and 
harpis’, and stoden® at the west coost' of 
the auter, and with hem weren sixe score 
preestis trumpynge. Therfor whanne alle‘ 13 
sungen togidur both with trumpis, and 
vois', and cymbalis™, and orguns, and of 
dyuerse kynde" of musikis, and reisiden® 
theP vois an hi3, the sown was herd fer, 
so that whanne thei hadden bigunne to 
preyse the Lord, and to seie, Knouleche 3e 
to the Lord, for he is good, for’ his mercy 
is in to the world, ‘ether, with outen ende’; 
the hows of God was fiJlid' with a cloude, 
and the preestis mi3ten not stonde and" 14 
serue’ for the derknesse; for* the glorie 
of the Lord hadde fillidY the hows of the 
Lord. 


d Om. £ pr.m. 
lheedis or pomels ins. ™ with 1. ™ opyn or 
P haue seen ins. 4 barynge barris Ns. 
Vthat1. W put therynne ins. * And aftir 


d prestis ins. Cand bothe 1s.  werin clothid s. 
k thei alleins. with voisins. ™ with 
r Om. cin. ether in to withouten 
wOm.n. ~*~ forsothe ins. 


qd and s. 


3E2 


396 


CAP. V1. 


1 Thanne Salomon seith, The Lord be- 
hizte, that he schulde dwellen in the 
2dirkenesse; I forsothe haue bilde up an 
hous to the name of hym, that he schulde 
3dwellen there in to with oute eende. And 
the kyng turnede his face, and blesside 
to al the multitude of Israel; for why al 
the puple stood, inwardly takynge heede ; 
sand he seith, Blessed the Lord God of 
Yrael, for that he spake to Dauid, my 
fadir, in deede he hath fulfillide, sey- 
singe, Fro the day that I ladde my puple 
fro the lond of Egipt, I chees not a cytee 
of alle the lynagis of Yrael, that there 
schulde be bilde up in it an hous to my 
name, ne eny othere man I chees, that he 
6were duyke vpon my puple Yrael; bot I 
chees Jerusalem, that my name be in it, 
and I chees Dauid, that I ordeyn hym 
zvpon my puple Yrael. And whanne it 
was of the wille of Dauid, my fadir, that 
he bilde an hous to the name of the Lord 
3God of Yrael, the Lord seid to hym, For 
this was thi wille, that thou schuldist 
bylden an hous to my name, forsothe 
thou didyst wele, hauynge such a maner 
oWille, bot thou schalt not bylden vp an 
hous to me; neuerthelater® the sone, that 
gooth out of thi reynes, he schal bylden 
joup an hous to my name. Thanne the 
Lord fulfilide his word, that he hadde 
spoken; and I roos for Dauid, my fadir, 
and sat vpon the trone of Ysrael, as the 
Lord spac, aud bilde up an hous to the 
irname of the Lord God of Yrael; and 
putte in it the arke, in the’ whiche is the 
couenaunt of the Lord, that he coue- 
i2nauntide with the sonis of Yrael. Thanne 
he stode before the auter of the Lord forn 
a3eynst of al the multitude of Yrael, and 
13Strau3t out his hondis. Forsothe Salo- 
mon hadde maad the brasyn stondynge, 


e nerthelatere c passin. 


z derknesses c. 8 and INs. 
ententife, that is, taking heed bisili s. 
Yuponis. K that ands. ! tos. 


Troosup ins. Suponis. + haue bildid rs. 
x he hadde 1Ns, 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


b there ynne rvs. 
e Salomon ins. 
m haue bilde rx. 


VI. I—13- 


CAP. VI. 


Thanne Salomon seide, The Lord bi-1 
hijte, that he wolde dwelle in derknesse’ ; 
forsothe? J haue bilde an hows to his2 
name, that he schulde dwelle there> with 
outen ende. And Salomon turnede his; 
face, and blesside® al the multitude of Is- 
rael; for al the cumpeny stood ententif¢; 
and heé® seide, Blessid be the Lord God of 4 
Israel, for he fillide in werk that thing, 
that he spak to Dauid, my fadir, and 
seide, Fro’ the dai in which Y ledde mys 
puple out of the lond of Egipt, Y chees 
not a citee of alle the lynagis" of Israel, 
that an hows schulde be bildid therynne 
to my name, nether Y chees ony other 
man, that he schulde be duyk on! my pu- 
ple Israel; but Y chees Jerusalem, that*6 
my name be theryune, and Y chees Dauid, 
to ordeyne hym on‘ my puple Israel. And7 
whanne it was of the wille of Dauid, my 
fadir, to bilde an hows to the name of the 
Lord God of Israel, the Lord seide to hym, 
For this was thi wille, ‘that thou woldist! 
bilde™ an hows to my name, sotheli thou 
didist wel, hauynge suche a wil, but" thous 
schalt not bilde an hows to me; netheles 
the sone, that schal go out of thi leendis, 
he schal bilde an hows to my name. Ther- 10 
for the Lord hath fillid? his word, which‘ 
he spak ; and Y roos" for Dauid, my fader, 
and Y sat on’ the trone of Israel, as the 
Lord spak, and Y bildidet an hous to the 
name of the Lord God of Israel; and I1! 
haue put therynne the arke, in which is 
the couenaunt of the Lord, which he ‘co- 
uenauntide with" the sones of Israe}]. Ther- 12 
for Salomon stood bifor the auter of the 
Lord euene ajens al the multitude of Is- 
rael, and stretchide’ forth his hondis. For‘ 13 
Salomon hadde maad a brasun founde- 
ment, and hadde* set it in the myddis of 
the greet hows, and it hadde fyue cubitis 


f Om. c. 


¢ he blesside 1s. 4 ententif, or takinge tent 1. 


f hath fulfillid ins. & For ns. h linage s. 
nbut 32 Ns. Cats. Pfulfillid ins. 4 that ins. 
Ucomaundide tos, Vhestretchide iss. Ww And Ins. 


VI. 14——21. 


and hadde putte it in the mydil of the 
grete hous, hauynge fyue cubitis of 
lengthe, and fyue of brede, aud thre cu- 
bitis of hei3t, and he stode vpon it; and 
theraftir the knees bowed a3einus al the 
multitude of Yrael, and the hondis in to 
isheuen rered, seith, Lord God of Yrael, 
ther is not lije thee, God in heuen and 
in erth, ‘the whiche? kepist couenaunt 
and mercy with thi seruauntis, that goon 
15 before thee in al their herte; the whiche 
hast 3euen to Dauid thi seruaunt, my fa- 
dir, whateuer thingis thou haddist spoken 
to hym, and that with mouthe thou by- 
heetist, in deed thou hast fulfylde, as 
icand the present tyme preueth. Now 
thanne, Lord God of Yrael, fulfille to 
thi seruaunt my fadir Dauid, whateuer 
thingis thou hast spoken, seyinge, Ther 
schal not faylen of thee a man beforn 
me, that sytt vpon the trone of Yrael; so 
neuer the later 3if thi sonis kepen my 
weies, and goon in my lawe, as and thou 
17 wentist before me. And nowe, Lord God 
of Yrael, be fastned thi word, that thou 
igspeke to thi seruaunt Dauid. Thanne 
whethir leeuable it be, that the Lord 
dwelle with men vpon erth? 3if heuen 
and heuens of heuens thee taken not, 
how myche more this hous, that I haue 
19 bylde? Bot to this oonly it is maad, that 
thou beholde the orisoun of thi seruaunt, 
and his bisechynge, Lord my God, and 
thou here the preyers, that thi seruaunt 
20heldith out before thee; that thou opene 
thi eejen vpon this hows dais and ny3tis, 
vpon the place in the whiche thou hast 
behoten, that thy name schulde be in- 
21 wardly clepid, and thou schuldist heeren 
the orisoun, that thi seruaunt preieth in 
it. Heere thou the preyers of thi ser- 
uaunt, and of thi puple Yrael; who so 


& that c. 


yhere upon ins. 2 knelide on s. 
oodnesse ss. &2QOm.n. © the which 1. 
‘and Lord 1s. ! fulfillid ins. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


a he reiside up 1Ns. 
f whiche 1xs. 
™ this present Ins. 


397 


of lengthe, and fyue of breede, and thre 
cubitis of hei3the, and he stood therony; 
and fro that tyme he knelide? ajens al the 
multitude of Israel, and reiside* the» hondis 
in to heuene, and seide, Lord God of Is-14 
rael, noon is lijk thee®; ‘thou art! God in 
heuene and in erthe, which® kepist coue- 
naunt and mercy with thi seruauntis, that‘ 
goon bifor thee in al her herte; which815 
hast 3oue to Dauid thi seruaunt, my fadir, 
what euer thingis’ thou hast spoke! to 
hym, and* thow hast fillid! in werk tho 
thingis, whiche thou bihi3tist bi mouth, as 
also present™ tyme preueth. Now therfor, 1¢ 
Lord God of Israel, fille" thou to thi ser- 
uaunt my fadir Dauid, what euer thingis 
thou hast spoke, seiynge, A man of thee 
schal not faile bifor me, that schal sitte 
on® the trone of Israel; so netheles if? thi 
sones kepen my weies, and goon in my 
lawey, as and thou’ hast go bifor me. 


tLo! how God 
ith con- 


s ki 
And now, Lord God of Israel, thi word 17 Geos? 


bet maad stidefast*, which thou spakist to 
thi seruaunt Dauid. Therfor whethert it 1s 
is leueful", that the Lord dwelle with men 
on’ erthe? If heuene and the” heuenes of 
heuenes ‘taken not thee*, how myche more 
this hows, which Y haue bildid? Butis 
herto oneli it is maad, that thou, my Lord 
God, biholdeY the preier of thi seruaunt, 
and the bisechyng of hym, and that thou? 
here the preieris, whiche thi seruaunt 
schedith® bifor thee ; that thou opyne thin 20 
izen on® this hows bi dayes and ny3tis, 
on® the place in which thou bihi3tist, that 
thi name schulde be clepid’, and thata 
thou woldist here the preier, which thi 
seruaunt preieth therynne. Here thou® the 
preieris of thi seruaunt, and of thi puple 
Israel; who euer preieth in this place, 
here thouf fro thi dwellyng place, that is, 
fro heuenes®, and do thou merci®. If ony 22 


h the B. 


¢ thee in power, kunnyng, ne in 
hthing ms.‘ spoke or bihizte s. 
Suponis. P that 1vs. 9 thou, 


» hise ins. 
& thou 1Ns. 
n fulfille ins. 


Dauith ns. © be it ins. 8 stidfast, or fulfillid s. t Om. rx. ¥ bileueful scpueikLmNorguvwx¢. bilecue- 


ful, that is, able or lizt to bileue s. 
¥ biholde there 1. biholde there ine s. 
4 jnclepid 1s. ¢ thou, Lord ins. f thou him 1Ns. 


Vv upon 1s. 


wOm., 1. 
2 thou Lord s. 
& heuene Ns. 


x taken ethir moun not holde thee, Lord ns. 
a heeldith 1. shedith oute s. >the x. 


h merci to him 1NS. 


“upon Is. 


Lire. s. 


398 


euer preye" in this place, here fro thi 
dwellynge place, that is fro heuens, and 
22be thou maad plesed. 3if eny man synnei 
in to his neizbour, and redi comme to 
sweren a3einus hym, and by curse bynde 
23hym before the auter in this hous, thou 
schalt heeren fro heuen, and thou schalt 
do dome of thi seruauntis; so that thou 
3elde to the wickide* his weie in to his 
owne heued, and venge the ri3twijs, and 
3eldynge! to hym aftir his riztwisnesse. 
24 3if thi puple Yrael were ouercomen of 
enmyes, forsothe thei schul synnen to 
thee, and turned done™ penaunce, and 
besechen thi name, and preyen in this 
25 place, thou schalt heeren fro heuen, and 
haue thou mercy to the synne of thi pu- 
ple Yrael, and brynge hem a3ein in to 
the lond, that thou 3eue to hem, and to 
26 their fadirs. 3if, heuen closed, reyn flowe 
not for synne of thi puple, and thei 
preyen thee in this place, and know- 
lechen to thi name, and turned fro their 
synnes, whanne hem thou tormentist, 
27here, Lord, fro heuen, and for3eue the 
synnes to thi seruauntis, and to thi pu- 
ple Yrael, and teche lem a good wei, by 
the" whiche thei goon in, and 3eue reyn 
to the erth, that thou hast 3euen to thi 
2epuple to weelden. 3if hunger were 
sprungyn in the lond, and_ pestilence, 
and rust, and weder rootynge tilth, and 
locust, and werm, and enmyes, the re- 
gyouns wasted, beseegen the 3atis of the 
cytee, and alle veniaunce and infirmyte 
29thrist doun; 3if any of thi puple Irael 
preye, knowynge the veniaunce, and his 
infirmyte, stretche out his hondis in this 
30 hous, thou schalt heeren fro heuen, that 
is, fro thin hee3 dwellynge place, and be 
thou plesed, and 3eeld to eche man aftir 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


VI. 22-—30. 


man synneth a3ens his nei3bore, and cometh 
redi to swere ajens him, and byndith hym 
silf with cursyng bifor the auter in! this 
hows*, thou schalt! here™ fro heuene, and 23 
schalt® do the doom of thi seruawutis®; so 
that thou 3elde to the wickid man his weie 
in to his owne heed, and that thou venge 
the iust man, and 3elde to hym after his 
ri3tfulnesse?. If thi puple Israel is ouer-24 
comen of enemyes, for theid schulen do 
synne a3jens thee, and if thei’ conuertid* 
doen penaunce, and bisechen thi name, 
and preien iu this place, thou schalt' here" 25 
fro heuene, and do thou mercy to the 
synne of thi puple Israel, and brynge hem 
a3en ‘in to’ the lond, which thou hast 30ue 
to hem, and to ‘the fadris of hem”. If26 
whanne heuene is closid, reyn come* not 
doun for the synne of thi puple, and thei 
bisechen thee in this place, and know- 
Jechen to thi name, and ben turned’ fro 
her synnes, whanne thou hast turmentid 
hem, here thou”, Lord*, fro henene, and 27 
for3yue thou synnes? to thi seruauntis, and 
to thi puple Israel, and teche® thou hem 
a good weie, bi which thei schulen entre4, 
and 3yue thou reyn to the lond, which® 
thou hast 3oue to thi puple to haue in 
possessioun. Iff hungur risith in the lond, 28 
and pestilence, and rust, and wynd dis- 
triynge cornes, and a locuste, and bruke® 
comethi, aud if enemyes bisegen the 3atis 
of the citee, aftir that the cuntreis ben 
distried, and* al! veniaunce™ and sikenesse 
oppressith®; if ony of thi puple Israel°29 
bisechith, and knowith his veniaunce? and 
sikenesse, and if he spredith abrood hise 
hondis in this hows, thou’ schalt here™ fro 30 
heuene, that is, fro thin hizje dwellyng 
place, and’ do thou mercy, and 3elde thou 
to ech man aftir hise weies, whiche thou 


hhonoureth £ pr.m. isynneth ce. * wickec. 13elde # prem. ™ schulden don £ pr.m. %Om. c. 


i of ns. 


° sernaunt N.  P riztwisnesse Ns. 


k house, that is, that his quarrel is iust s. \ shalt, Lord s. ™here him 1xs. ° thou schalt rns. 
4 that thi peple ms. 


T thi peple ins. 8 conuertid fro her synne ts. 


tshalt, Lords. there hem ins. Yto ins. Wher fadris 1vs. * cometh a sec.m. Y turned al togidre Ins. 


Z thou hem thanne IN. 
that rns. f If that ws. 
if my. and if al, that is s. 
pressith thi puple 1s. © of Israel ins, 
veniaunce s. 4 Lord, thou 1s. T° here him rns. 


a Lord, hem s. 
& if that a Ins. 


b the synnes 1Ns. 
ha brnke c. 
lony maner 1, al the n. if eny of al the s. 


2 © Lord, teche ns. 4 entre to thee s. 
icomen [comith s] fretynge cornes 1s. * and 
™ veniauncis biforseid s. ™ op- 


P veniaunce, that is, his synne wherfore he hath disserued 
sOm. 8. 


VI. 31—38. 


his weies®, the whiche thou hast knowen 
hym to han in his hert; thou forsothe 
aloone hast knowen the hertis of the 
3isonis of men; that thei dreeden thee, and 
goon in thi weies alle days, ‘the whicheP 
thei lyuen vpon the face of the erth, 
32that thou hast 3euen to oure fadirs. A 
straunger also that is not of thy puple 
Yrael, 3if he come fro a ferre lond for 
thi grete name, and for thi strong hond, 
and for thi strau3t out arme, and honour 
33in this place, thou schalt heeren fro he- 
uen, thi most fast place; and thou schalt 
don alle thingis, for the whiche that pil- 
gryme inwardly clepith thee, that alle 
puplis of erth knowen thi name, and 
dreeden thee, as thi puple Yrael; and 
knowen thei, for thi name is inwardly 
clepide vpon this hous, that I haue bilde 
sito thi name. 3if thi puple weren goon 
out to bataile a3einus ther aduersaries, by 
the weye in to the whiche thou sentist 
hem, thei schuln honouren thee a3einus 
the weye in the! whiche is the cytee 
that thou hast chosen, and the hous that 
35] haue bylde to thi name, that thou here 
fro heuen the preyers of hem and the 
36 besechynge, and thou do veniaunce. 3if 
forsothe thei synnen to thee, and forsothe 
ther is no man that synneth not, and 
thou were wroth to hem, and takist hem 
to the enmyes; and caytijf thei leeden 
hem in to a ferre lond, or certis that is 
37ni3; and turned in al their herte in the 
lond, to the whiche thei weren ladde 
caytijf, done penaunce, and preyen thee 
in the lond of their caytijfte, seyinge, 
We han synned, wickidly" we han 
38 Wrou3t, vnri3twisely we han done; and 
weren torned to thee in al their herte, 
and in al their soule, in the lond of their 


© wele ABFH. 


t Lord, thou s. 
place for 1s. 


u therfore thei Ns. 


Vv upon 1s. 
Zthin arm INs. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


P that c pr.m. 


w Also, Lord ns. 
a strei3t 1. holdinge ns. 


399 


knowist, that he hath in his herte; for 
thou' aloone knowist the hertis of the 
sones of men; that" thei drede thee, and 3! 
go in thi weies in alle daies, in which 
thei lynen on’ the face of erthe, which 
thou hast 30ue to oure fadris. Also” thou 32 
schalt here fro heuene, thi moost stidfast 
dwellyng place, a straunger, which* is not 
of thi puple Israel, if he cometh fro a fer 
lond forY thi greet name, and for thi 
stronge hond, and arm? holdun? forth, ‘and 
preye” in this place®; and4 thou schalt doss 
alle thingis, for which thilke pilgrym ‘in- 
wardli clepith® thee, that‘ alle the? puplis’ 
of erthe knowe! thi name, and drede* thee, 
as thi puple Israel dotth; and that thei 
knowe, that thi name is clepid! on™ this 
hows, which" Y haue bildid to thi name. 
If thi puple goith out to batel a3ens hise 34 
aduersaries®, bi the weie in which thou 
sendist hem, thei schulen worschipe thee 
a3ens the weie in which this citee is?, 
which? thou hast chose, and" the hows 
which? Y bildide* to thi name, that thouss 
here fro heuene her preieris and _ bisech- 
yng‘, and do" veniaunce’. Forsothe” ifse 
thei synnen a3ens thee, for no man is* that 
synneth not, and if thou art wrooth toY 
hem, and bitakist hem to enemyes*; and 
enemyes* leden hem prisoneris in to a fer 
lond, ether certis which lond is ny3; and 37 
if thei ben conuertid in her herte in the 
lond, to® which thei ben led prisoneris, 
and thei don penaunce‘, and bisechen thee 
in the lond of her caitifte, and seien, We 
han synned, we han® do wickidly, we 
diden yniustli; and‘ if thei turnen a3en® 3s 
to thee in al her" herte, and in al her 
soule, in the lond of her* caitifte, to which 
thei ben led, thei! schulen worschipe thee 
a3eus the weie of her lond, which thou 


aQm.c. ° wickeli c. 


x that ins. Y and preieth in this 
b preicth ncpEFGKLMParuvwxbg. here thou 


him s. ¢‘Om.1n. and, Lords. e ynelepith 1n. inwardli clepide s. f and ins. & Om.ns. © peple x. 


i knowe thei rvs. drede thei ns. | ynwardly clepid rvs. ™ upon 1s. 
8 haue bildid ms. 

w And Ins. 
4 vere penaunce 1. 
1 and if thei Ns. 


Pisseféns. that ins. T° a3ens s. 
thoumns. Y veniaunce to her aduersaries s. 
aifenmyesns. >the whicht. Cins. 

h Om. ins. 1Om.n. * Om. s. 


« the which 1. 9% aduersarie Ns. 
t her bisechyng 1N. her bisechingis s. ° do 

xisalyues. Ywiths. 7 her enmyes ns. 
ehaue rs. fand, Lords. & Om. i. 


400 ll. PARALIPOMENON. VI. 39—VIL 5. 


caytyfte, to the whiche thei ben lad, thei 
schuln honouren thee ajeinus the weie of 
their lond, that thou hast 3euen to their 
fadirs, and of the cytee that thou hast 
chosen, and of the hous that J haue bilde 
39to thi name; that thou heere fro heuen, 
that is, fro thi fast dwellynge place, the 
preyers of hem, and do dome, and for- 
40 3yue to thi puple, thof synful; thou ert 
forsothe my God; I biseche, thin ee3en 
ben opened, and thin eeris ben takynge 
heed to the orisoun that is don in this 
4iplace. Nowe thanne, Lord God, arijs® 
in to thi rest, thou and the ark of thi 
strength; thi prestis, Lord God, ben 
clothed' helth, and thin halowes glaaden 
42 thei in goodes. Lord God, ne turne thou 
awey the face of thi crist; haue mynde 
of the mercyes of Dauid thi seruaunt. 
1And whanne Salomon hadde fulfilde 
heeldynge out preyers, fijr came doun 
fro heuen, and deuoured the brent sacri- 
fices, and the slayn offrynges; and the 
mageste of the Lord fulfilde the hous. 
2And the prestis my3ten not goon in to 
the temple of the Lord; forthi that the 
mageste of the Lord hadde fulfilde the 
3temple of the Lord. Bot and alle the 
sonis of Ysrael sawen fijr goyng doun, 
and the glorie of the Lord vpon the hous, 
and fallynge doun bowed in to the erth 
vpon the pament paued with stoon, ho- 
nourden, and preyseden the Lord, For 
‘he is" good, for in to the world the 
4mercy of hym. The kyng forsothe, and 
al the puple offreden slayn offryngis be- 
forn the Lord. 


CAP. Vil. 


5 Kyng Salomon thanne slow3 hoostis of 
oxen two and twenty thousand, of we- 


hast 3oue to the fadris of hem, and™ of® 
the citee which thou hast chose, and°® of 
the hows which? Y bildide to thi name; 
that thou here fro henene, that is, fro thi39 
stidefast dwellyng place, the preieris of 
hem, and that thou make dom, and for- 
3yue to thi puple, thou3 ‘7 be4 synful; 
for™ thou art my God; Y biseche’, be thin 40 
izen openyd, and thin‘ eeris be" ententif 
to the preier which” is maad in this place. 
Now therfor*, Lord God, riseY in to thia1 
reste, thou and the arke of thi strengthe ; 
Lord God, thi preestis be clothid with 
helthe, and thi hooli men be glad in 
goodis*. Lord God’, turne thou not a weie 42 
the face of thi crist®; haue thou mynde 
on¢ the’ mercyes* of Dauid thi seruaunt. 


CAP. VII. 


And whanne Salomon schedynge prey-1 
eris hadde fillid®, fier eam doun fro he- 
uene, and deuouride" brenti sacrifices, and 
slayn* sacrifices; and the maieste! of the 
Lord fillide™ the hows. And _ preestis® 2 
my3ten not entre in to the temple of the 
Lord; for the maieste® of the Lord hadde 
fillid? the temple of the Lord. But alsos 
alle the sones of Israel sien fier comynge 
doun, and the glorie of the Lord on‘ the 
hows, and thei felden down lowe tot the 
erthe on’ the pawment araied* with 
stoon, and thei worschipiden, and _ preis- 
iden the Lord, For he is good, for his 
merci is in to alt the world. Forsothe"4 
the kyng and al the puple offriden slayn 
sacrifices bifor the Lord. Therfor kings 
Salomon killide sacrifices of oxis’ two and 
twenti thousynd, of wetheris sixe score 
thousynde; and the kyng and al the pu- 
ple halewiden the hows of God. Forsothe¥ 6 
the preestis stoden in her offices, and de- 


Stisc. tcladc. "Om. £ prim. 


m and azens the wey 1. and if thei shuln worshepe thee ajens the weis. "Om. Nx. °Om.s. P that Ins, 
4 thei ben EL. thei be p. it haue be 1ns. Om. spcprmogruvwxbe¢. ‘certis rns. § biseche thee 1. biseche 
thee, Lord ns. + be thin ins. U Om. 1nx. Y ententif or takinge tent [heed s.] 1s. Wthat1. * Om. 1Ns. 


Yriseupins. 72 gode thingistns. Om. 5. 


» that is, thi mercy doyng 1. marg. s. tert. © of INSb. 


dthis. ©merci doyngis ns. f schedynge out his 1s. scheding out y. _—‘& ful eendid Aem 1. fulfillid x. 


h it deuouride rxs. i the brent 1. * the slayn rn. 
preestis s. © mizty schynyng rns. PP fulfillid ins. 
paued s. tOm, plures. U And ins. Y oxen INs. 


I mageste or shinyng s. ™fulfillide rns. 9 the 
upon. seien vpons. 'vpons. 8 arayed or 


w And INs. 


VII. 6—14. 


thers an hundreth and twenty thousand ; 
and the kyng bilde up the hous of God, 
eand al the puple. The prestis forsothe 
stooden in their offices, and the Leuytes 
in orgnys of dytees of the Lord, the 
whiche kyng Dauid maad to preysen the 
Lord, For in to world the mercy of hym, 
syngynge the ympnes of Dauid bi their 
hondis; bot the prestis sungyn in trum- 
pis beforne hem, and al the puple of 
7Yrael stood. And Salomon halowed the 
myddil of the porche beforn the temple 
of the Lord; forsothe he hadde offrede 
there brent sacrifices, and talwes of pey- 
sible thingis, for the brasen auter that 
he hadde maad my3te not susteynen the 
brent sacrifices, and sacrifices, and talwes 
sof peysible thingus. Thanne Salamon 
made solempnyte in that tyme seuen 
days, and al Yrael with hym, a ful grete 
chirche, fro the entre of Emath vnto the 
9streme of Egipt. And the ey3the day he 
maad a collect, for thi that he halowed 
the anter seuen dais, and hadde halowede 
10 the solempnyte seven days. Thanne in 
the thre and twentithe day of the seuenth 
moneth he laft the puplis to their taber- 
naclis, ioyinge and gladynge vpon the 
good that God hadde don to Dauid, and 
11 to Salomon, and to his puple Israel. And 
Salomon ful eendid the hous of the Lord, 
and the hous of the kyng, and alle thingus 
that he hadde disposed in his hert, that 
he do in the hous of the Lord and in his 
120wne hous; and he is maad welsum. For- 
sothe the Lord aperde to hym the ny3t, 
and seith, I haue herde thi preier, and 
chosen this place to me in to an hous of 
i3sacrifice. 3if I schal closen heuen, and 
reyn flowe not, and schul senden, and 
comaunden to the locust, that he deuoure 
the lond, and schul sende pestilence in 
14to my puple; forsothe my puple turned, 


x werin ocnpied in s. 
mentis 8s. ®and ins. » stood and herde hem 1s. 
or hold s. & sleyn sacrifices 1. othere sacrifices Ns. 
chirche or ful miche gadering to gidre of peple s. 
P the solempnytee 1Ns. 
uthe ins. VOm.s. W and ins. 
2 the whiche puple 1. whiche peple s. 


VOL. I. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


¥ the whiche orgouns 1. whiche orgons s. 


4 daies, that is, bi the spase of seuen dates 8. * upon Is. 
x conuertide, that ts, al to gidre turned to me fro her vices 8. Yupon Is, 
@ ynwardly clepid rvs. 


3F 


401 


kenes in* orguns of songis of the Lord, 
whicheY kyng Dauid made to preise the 
Lord, For his merci is in to the world; 
and thei sungen the ympnes of Danid bi 
her hondis*; sotheli* the prestis sungen 
with trumpis bifor hem, and al the puple 
of Israel stood», Therfor Salomon halew-7 
ide the myddil of the large‘ place bifor the 
temple of the Lord; for he hadde offrid 
there brent sacrifices, and the ynnere fat- 
nesses! of pesible sacrifices, for the brasun 
auter which® he hadde maad my3te not 
susteyne the brent sacrifices, and sacri- 
fices8, and the innere fatnessis' of pesible 
sacrifices. Therfor Salomon made a so-s8 
lempnyte in that tyme in seuene dayes, 
and al! Israel with hym, a ful greete 
chirche‘, fro the entryng of Emathi ‘til to! 
the stronde of Egipt. And in the ei3thes 
dai he made a gaderyng of money, ‘that 
is™, for necessaries of the temple, for 
he hadde halewid the anter in seuene 
daies, and ‘hadde imaad° solempnytee? in 
seuene daies4. Therfor in the thre and1o 
twentithe dai of the seuenthe monethe he 
lete the puplis go to her tahernaclis, ioi- 
ynge and gladynge on™ the good® that God 
hadde do to Dauid, and to Salomon, and to 
his puple Israel. And Salomon parformyde 11 
the hows of the Lord, and the hows of the 
kyng, and alle thingis which he hadde dis- 
posid in his herte for to do in the hows of 
the Lord and in his owne hows; and he 
hadde prosperite. Forsothe the Lord aper-12 
ide to hym in the ny3t, and seide, Y haue 
herd thi preiere, and Y haue chose this 
place to me in‘ to an hows of sacrifice. Ifis 
Y close heuene, and reyn cometh not doun, 
and if Y sende, and comaunde to a" lo- 
custe, that he deuoure the lond, and if 
Y send pestilence in’ to my puple; for-14 
sothe” if my puple is conuertid*, on” 
whiche? my name is clepid*, and if it 


z hondis in orgons and othere instru- 


egreet ins. 4 fatnesse rns. ¢that ins. f susteyne 
h fatnesse cins. i of x. * chirche or congregacioun 1. 
lyntoins. ™Om.s. ‘2Om.N. © he made ins, 


8 goodnesse 8s. andi. 


402 


vpon whom inwardly clepid is my name, 
me han preyed, and sou3t my face, and 
done penaunce fro their werst weyes, I 
schal lieere fro heuen, and ben mercyable 
to the synnes of hem, and helyn their 
1slond. Also myn ee3en schul ben opened, 
and my eeris rerid up to the horisoun of 
ishym, that in this place schal preie; for- 
sothe I haue chosen, and halowed this 
place, that my name be there in to euer- 
more, and my ee3en and myn herte 
17 abiden stille there alle days. Thou also, 
3if thou go before me, as 3eede Dauid thi 
fadir, and dost aftir alle thingus that I 
haue comaundide to thee, and my ri3t- 
18 wisnesse and domes kepist, I schal areren 
the trone of thi rewme, as I behi;te to 
Dauid thi fadir, seyinge, There schal not 
ben don awei fro thi lynage a man, that 
19 be prince in Ysrael. 3if forsothe 3e” weren 
turned aweiward, and forsaken myn ri3t- 
wisnesses and myn hestis that I haue 
purposed to 30u, and goynge awey 3e 
seruen to alyen goddis, and honouren 
20hem, I schal pullen 30u vp fro my lond, 
that J haue jeuen to 30u, and this hous 
that I haue bilde to my name I schal 
throwen awey fro my face, and taken it 
in to a parable, and in to exsaumple to 
2ialle puplis. And this hous schal ben in 
22to a prouerbe to alle weye goeris; and 
thei schuln seyn, wondrynge, Why thus 
dide the Lord to this lond, and to this 
hous? And thei schuln answeryn, For 
thei forsoken the Lord God of their fa- 
ders, ‘the whiche’ lad hem out fro the 
Jond of Egipt, and han taken alyen god- 
dis, and honoureden hem, and _ hery- 


eden; thzrfor camen vpon them alle thes 
-euels. 


VY thou £ pr.m. 


b ful yuel1. ¢ here Aims. 4 eeris rns. 
iOm.s.  dwelle perfitely ixs. } bi in, 
MNOPQRSUVWxb¢. P my domes INs. 
theestis ins. 4 the whiche 1. 
& forth therby 18. 


V haue sett 1Ns. 
> wondringe in hem silf Ns. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


€ reisid up INs. 
™ tho thingis rN. 
q reise up 1s. 
W if 3e Is. 
© upon Is. 


VIT. 15-22. 


bisechith me, and sekith my face, and 
doith penaunce of hise werste® weies, Y 
schal here® fro heuene, and Y schal be 
merciful to the synnes of hem, and Y 
schal heele the lond of hem. And mynis 
izen schulen be openyd, and myn eeren® 
schulen be reisid® to the preieref of hym, 
that preieth in this place; for Y haue1s 
chose, and halewid this place, that? my 
name be there with outen ende, and that! 
myn ijen and myn herte dwelle* there in! 
alle daies. Also if thou gost bifore me, 17 
as Dauid thi fadir 3ede, and doist bi alle 
thingis™ whiche Y comaundide® to thee, 
and kepist my ri3twisnessis® and domes?, 
Y schal reise1 the trone of thi rewme, as is 
Y bihizte to Dauid thi fadir, and seide, 
A man of thi generacioun schal not be 
takun awei, that schal be prince in? Israel. 
But if 3e turnen awey, and forsake my 19 
ri3twisnessis* and my comaundementis* 
whiche" Y settide’ forth to jou, and 3e” 
goen, and seruen alien goddis, and wor- 
schipen hem, Y schal drawe 30u awey fro 20 
my lond, which* Y 3af¥ to 3ou, and Y schal 
caste awey fro my face this hows which? 
Y haue bildid to my name, and Y schal 
3yue it in to a parable, and in to ensaum- 
ple to alle puplis. And this hows schal2i 
be in to a prouerbe to alle men passynge 
forth*; and thei schulen seie, wondringe?, 
Whi dide the Lord so to this lond, and to 
this hows? And thei schulen answere, 22 
For thei forsoken the Lord God of her 
fadris, that ledde hem out of the lond of 
Egipt, and thei token alieu goddis, and 
worschipiden, and herieden hem; therfor 
alle these yuelis camen on® hem, 


W that c. 


fpreierss. ands. 14 be preisid ns. 
Xcomaunder. ° ri3tfulnessis BCDEFGIKL 
8 rigtfulnessis BCDEFGKLMOPQRUVWxbe. 
xthat1. Y befor 3aues. 7 that rxs. 


Tof a. 


VIII. 1-12. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Fulfild forsothe twenty 3eer, aftir the 
whiche Salomon hadde bilde up the hous 
2of the Lord, and his own hous, and the 
citees, ‘the whiche* Yram 3aue to Salo- 
mon, he bylde up, and made the sonys of 
3Yrael to dwellen there. Also he wente 
4in to Emath Sobba, and weeldide it. And 
he bilde up Palmyram in desert, and 
othere citees most strengthid he bilde up 
sin Emath. And he maad up the oouer 
Betheron and the nether Betheron, citees 
most strengthed, hauynge 3atis and lockis 
sand barres; Balaath also, and al the most 
fast cytees that weren of Salamon, and 
alle the cytees of plowes, and the cytees 
of horsmen; alle whateuer thingus he 
wolde, maad kyng Salamon, and disposede 
he bilde in Jerusalem, and in Lyban, and 
7in alle the lond of his power. Al the pu- 
ple that was laft of Etheis, and Amorreis, 
and Phereseis, and Eueis, and Jebuseis, 
8that weren not of the stoc of Yrael, and 
of their sonis, and of ther after comers, 
‘the whicheY the sonis of Yrael hadde not 
slayn, Salamon vndirjokede into? tribu- 
9tarijs vnto this day. Bot of the sonis 
of Yrael he vndirputte not, that thei 
schulden seruen to the werkis of the 
kyng; thei forsothe weren men fi3ters, 
and the first leders, and princis of plowes, 
loand of the horse men of hym; alle for- 
sothe princes of the hoost of kyng Sala- 
mon weren two hundrith and fyfty, that 
1ltau3ten the puple. The dou3ter forsothe 
of Pharao he translatide fro the cite of 
Dauid in to the hous, that he hadde bilde 
to hyre; forsothe the kyng seide, My 
wijf schal not dwelle in the hous of 
Dauid, kyng of Yrael, forthi that it is 
halowed, for the ark of the Lord wente 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


403 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe whanne twenti 3eer weren! 
fillid4, aftir that Salomon bildide® the hows 
of the Lord, and his owne hows, he bildide2 
the citees‘, whiche® Iram hadde 3oue to 
Salomon; and he made the sones of Israel 
to dwelle there. Also he 3ede in to Emaths 
of Suba, and gat it. And he bildide Pal-4 
myram in deseert, and he bildide othere 


‘eitees maad ful stronge" in Emath. Ands 


he bildide the hizjere Betheron and the 
lowere Betheron, wallid' citees, hauynge 
j3atis and lockis and barris; also he bildides 
Balaath, and alle ‘citees ful stronge* that 
weren of Salomon; and alle the citees of 
cartis, and the citees of kny3tis kyng! Sa- 
lomon bildide, and disposide alle thingis 
whiche euere he wolde, in Jerusalem, and 
in the™ Liban, and in al the lond of his 
power. Salomon" made suget in to tribu-7 
taries til in to this dai al the puple that 
was left of Etheis, and Amorreis, and 
Phereseis, and Eueis, and of® Jebuseis, 
that weren not of the generacioun? of Is- 
rael, and of the sones of hem, and of thes 
aftircomers of hem, whiche the sones of 
Israel hadden not slayn. Sotheli4 of thes 
sones of Israel he settide’ not, that thei 
schulden serue the werkis' of the kyng; 
for thei* weren men werriours, and the 
firste’ duykis, and princes of charis”, and 
of hise kny3tis ; forsothe* alle theY princes 10 
of the oost of kyng Salomon weren two 
hundrid and fifti, that tau3ten? the puple. 
Sotheli* he translatide the® dou3ter of Fa- 11 
rao fro the citee of Dauid in to the! hows, 
which? he hadde bildidf to hir; for the 
kyng seide, My wijf schal not dwelle in 
the hows of Dauid, kyng of Israel, for it 
is halewid, for the arke of the Lord en- 
tride in to that hows. Thanne Salomon 12 


12in to it. Than Salamon offride brent  offride brent sacrifices’ to the Lord on® 
*thatc. Ythatcprm 2%O0Om.c. 

4 fulfillid ins. ¢@ had bildid ins. ‘citeens. &that1. 4 ful stronge citees ins. 1 and made hem 

stronge ins. the stronge citeesins. land kyng x. ™Om.1ns. "And Salomon ins. © Om. cp. 

P generaciouns ins. 4For1ns. *Salomonins.  §& sette sn. sette or ordeined s. ¢ werkis or nedis s. 

™ the sones of Israel s. ¥ firste or cheef'1N. firste of cheefs. W hise charisins. *and ins. Y¥ Om. ns. 

Z tau3ten or ruleden Ns. %Andins. »Salomonins. © his wife, the s. dan INs. e that 1Ns. 


fbildide ins. & sacrifice ry, » upon 18. 


3F2 


404 


sacrifices to the Lord vpon the auter of 
the Lord, that he hadde maad up beforn 
i3the jate hous, that by eche days wer 
offrid in it, aftir the heest of Moises, in 
sabotis, and in kalendis, and in feste dais, 
thries bi the 3er, that is, in the solemp- 
nyte of therfe looues, and in the solemp- 
nyte of wijkis, and in the solempnyte of 
ustabernaclis. And he sette aftir the dis- 
posicioun of Dauid, his fadir, officis of 
prestis in their seruyses, and Leuytis in 
their ordre, that thei preisen and myny- 
stren beforn the prestis aftir the rijt of 
eche day, and the porters in their dyui- 
siouns by 3ate and 3ate. Thus forsothe 
Dauid, the man of God, hadde co- 
1ismaundide; ne thei wenten beside fro 
the maundementis of the kyng, bothe 
prestis and Leuytis, of alle thingus that 
he hadde comaundide. And in the wardis 
1¢0f the* tresoures alle the expensis maad 
redy hadde Salomon, fro that day that 
he foundide the hous of the Lord vnto 
17that day that he perfourmede it. Thanne 
wente Salomon in to Asyongober, and in 
to Hailath, to the mouth of the rede se, 
isthat is in the lond of Edom. Thanne 

Yram sente to hym, by the hondis of his 
seruauntis, schippis, and wijs schipmen 
of the see, and thei wenten with the ser- 
uauntis of Salomon in to Oofer, and thei 
token thennis foure hundrithe and fyfty 
talentis of gold, and brou3ten to kyng 
Salamon. 

CAP. IX. 

1 And the quen of Saba, whanne sche 
hadde herde the loos of Salamon, sche 
cam, that sche tempte hym in dotous 
questiouns in Jerusalem, with grete rych- 
essis, and camels that beren swote spices, 
and myche of gold, and precious gemmes. 
And whanne sche was commen to Sala- 
mon, sche spak to hym whateuer thingis 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


VIII. 13-—IX. 1. 


the auter of the Lord, which! he hadde 
bildid bifor the porche, that bi* alle daies 13 
me! schulde offre™ in®™ it, bi the comaunde- 
ment® of Moises, in sabatis, and in kalen- 
dis, and in feeste daies, thries bi the 3eer, 
that is, in the? solempnyte of the‘ therf- 
looues, and in’ the solempnyte of woukis, 
and in the solempnyte’ of tabernaclis. And 14 
he ordeynede bi the ordynaunce of Dauid, 
his fadir, the officis of preestis in her ser- 
uyces, and the dekenes in her ordre, that 
thei schulden preiset and mynystre bifor 
preestis bi the custom of ech dai; and he 
ordeynede porteris in her departyngis bi 
jate and 3ate. For Dauid, the man of God, 
hadde comaundid so; and bothe preestis 15 
and dekenes passiden not fro the co- 
maundementis" of the kyng of alle thingis 
whiche he hadde comaundid. And Salo-16 
mon hadde alle costisy maad redi in the 
kepingis” of tresouris, fro that dai in 
whiche he foundide the hows of the Lord 
til in to the dai in which he perfourmyde 
it. Thanne Salomon 3ede in to Asion-17 
gaber, and in to Hailath, at the brynke of 
the reed see, which* is in the lond of 
Edom. Therfor Iram sente to hym’, by 18 
the hondis of his seruauntis, schippis, and 
schippe men kunnyng of the see, and thei 
jeden with the seruauntis of Salomon in 
to Ophir, and thei token fro thennus foure 
hundrid and fifti talentis of gold, and 
brou3ten? to kyng Salomon. 


CAPPES 


Also* the queen of Saba, whanne sche! 
hadde herd the fame of Salomon, cam to? 
tempte® hym in derk figuris®} ‘in to Jeru- 
salem®, withf grete ritchessis, and camels®, 
that baren swete smellynge spices, and ful 
myche of gold, and preciouse" iemmes, 
‘ether peerlis', And whanne sche was 
comun to Salomon, sche spak to hym what- 


a Om. ce. 


Kk in as. 
tOm.1.  § solempnytees 1x pr.m. 
W keping ns. X that 1Ns. 
bin to Jerusalem for to mvs. 


i that 1Ns. 
q Om. INs. 
pences s. 
a And b. 
with s. 


1men BELMX. offryng INs. 
t preise the Lord 1s. 

y Salomon s. 
© assaie INS. 
& with camels rns. 4 of preciouse nN. i Om. IN. 


ntos. Oheest ins. P Om. Nn. 

uheest Ins.  coostis or dis- 
Z thei broujten it 1x. thei brou3ten there s. 
€ Om. ins. f she cam 


m be offrid rvs. 


4 figuris or licknessis s. 


+ Figuratyf 
speche is to 
speke oon 
thing, and to 
vndirstonde 
another. Ns. 


IX, 2——1I. 


2weren in hyre herte. And Salamon ex- 
pownede to hyre alle thingus that sche 
purposede, ne eny thing was, that cleer 
3he maad not to hyre. The whiche aftir 
that sche saw3, the wisdam, that is, of 
Salamon, and the hous that he hadde 
4made, also and the meetis of his boord, 
and the dwellyng place of his seruauntis, 
and the office of his mynystris, and the 
clothingis of hem, also the botelers, and 
their clothis, and the slayn sacrifices that 
he offride in the hous of the Lord, ther 
was no more in hyre spyrite for stone- 
synge. And sche seide to the kyng, Sothe 
is the sermoun, that I have herde in my 
slond, of vertues and of thi wijsdam; and 
I trowed not to the tellers, to the tyme 
that I my silf were comen, and myn 
eezen hadden seen, and I hadde preued 
vnneth the half of thi wijsdam to han 
ben told to me; thou hast ouerpassed the 
7los in thi vertues. Blessed thi men, and 
blessed thi seruauntis, and thei that 
stonden nee3 beforn thee in> al tyme, 
sand heeren thi wisdam. The Lord thi 
God be blessid, ‘the whiche® wolde or- 
deynen thee vpon his trone kyng of the 
puple of the Lord thi God; forsothe for 
God loueth Yrael, and wille sauyn it in 
to with outen eend, therfor he putte thee 
kyng vpon it, that thou do domes and 
gri3twisnesse. Forsothe sche 3aue to the 
kyng an hundrith and twenty talentis of 
gold, and many swote spices ful myche, 
and most precyous gemmes; and ther 
weren not siche swote spices, as thes that 
1oqween Saba 3aue to kyng Salamon. Bot 
and the seruauntis of Yram with the ser- 
uauntis of Salamon brou3ten gold fro 
Oofer, and tyne trees, and gemmes most 
iprecious; of the whiche the kyng made, 
that is, of tyne trees, grees in the hous of 


b Om. c. 


k forth to him is. | that rvs. 
gOm.c. ‘ofcEeLpu. § ther 1. 
stondyng 8. Y word or fame s. © Om. 1. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


™ opyn or knowen 1s. 
t more spirit 1. 
x that ins. 


405 


ever thingis weren in hir herte. And2 
Salomon expownede to hir alle thingis 
whiche sche hadde put forth*, and no 
thing was, which! he made not opyn™ to 
hir. And aftir that sche si3 these thingis, 3 
that is, the wisdom of Salomon, and the 
hows which" he hadde bildid, also and the4 
metis of his boord®, and the dwellyng 
places of seruauntis?, and the offices of 
hise? mynystris, and the clothis of hem, 
and the boteleris, and’ her clothis, and the 
sacrifices whiche he offride in the hows of 
the Lord, spirit’ was no more‘ in hir for 
wondryng". And sche seide to the kyng, 5 
The word’ ‘is trewe”, which* YY herde in 
my lond’, of thi vertues and wisdom; Ye 
bileuyde not to telleris, til Y my silf hadde 
come, and myn* y3en hadden seyn», and 
Y¢ hadde preued4 that vnnethis® the half 
of thi wisdom was teld to me; thou hast 
ouercomef the® fame bi thi vertues. Blessid7 
ben thi men, and" blessid ben thi ser- 
uauntis, these that stonden bifor thee in 
al tyme, and heren thi wisdom. Blessids 
be ‘thi Lord Godi, that wolde ordeyne thee 
on* his trone kyng of the puple of ‘thi 
Lord God!'; treuli™ for® God® loueth Is- 
rael, and wole? sane hym with outen ende, 
therfor he hath set thee kyng on‘ hym’, 
that thou do domes and ri3tfulnesse’. For-9 
sothet sche jaf to the kyng sixe scoore 
talentis of gold, and ful many swete smell- 
ynge spices, and moost preciouse iemmes ; 
ther weren not siche swete smellynge 
spices, as these whiche the queen of Saba 
3af‘to kyng’ Salomon. But also the ser-10 
uauntis of Iram with the seruauntis of 
Salomon brou3ten gold fro Ophir, and 
trees of thyne, and most preciouse iemmes; 
of whiche, that is, of the trees of thyne*, 11 
the kyng made grees’ in the hows of the 
Lord, and in the hows of the kyng, ‘harpis 


c that c. 


authat rns. © tablis rns. P hise seruauntis rns. 
u wondryng, for these thingis passeden hir under- 
yisn. Zlondistrewerx. til mynin. » sein, 


that is, til Yhad vndirstonde these thingis of thi self s. ¢til that Y rvs. 4 preued it 1. © vnnethe 1. f ouer- 


come or passid ins. &thiins. 4 Om.s. {the Lord thi God ms. Kuponis. 1 the Lord thi God ins. 
m™Om.1n. “certisins. Othe Lord God x. Phe wole rns. 4Guponis. Israel ins.  § rij3twis- 
nesse ins. * Andins. W Om.Ns. *thyn trees ns. Y greecis Ns. 


406 


the Lord, and in the hous of the kyng, 
also harpis, and sawtrees to syngers; 
neuer ben seen in the lond of Juda siche 
iztrees. Kyng forsothe Salamon 3aue to 
the qween of Saba alle thingus that sche 
wolde, and that sche asked, many mo 
than sche brou3te to hym. The whiche 
turnede ajein wente into hyre lond with 
ishyre seruauntis. Forsothe the wei3t of 
gold, that was offerd to Salamon by ech 
jeer, was sixe hundrith and sixe and 
14sixty talentis of gold, outaken that soum 
that legatis of dyuerse gentylis, and mer- 
chauntis weren wont to ‘bryngen to‘, and 
alle the kyngis of Arabie, and satrapis 
of londis, that brou3ten gold and syluer 
15 to Salamon. Thanne kyng Salamon maad 
two hundrith golden speris of the souin 
of sixe hundrith golde platis, the whiche 
isin alle the speris weren spred abrod ; also 
thre hundrith golden scheldis of thre hun- 
drith gold platis, with the whiche alle 
the scheldis weren couerd ; and the kyng 
putte hem in the armerie place, that was 
17Sett® in the wode. Also kyng Salomon 
made a grete yuere sete, and clothed it 
ig With most clene gold; and sixe grees, in 
the whiche men stey3ede up to the sete, 
and a golden stole, and two lytyll armys, 
either a3einus other, and two lyouns stond- 
ig9ynge besides the litil aarmes, bot and 
other twelue litil lyouns stondynge vpon 
the sixe grees on either party. There 
was not siche a kyngis see in alle rewmes. 
20 And alle the vessels of the kyngis feste 
weren golden, and the vessels of the hous 
of saltus Liban of most pure gold; syl- 
uer forsothe in tho days for nou3t was 
2,countid. Forsothe and the schippis of 
the kyng wenten in Tharsis with the 
seruauntis of Yram oones in thre 3eer, 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


IX, 12——21. 


-also”, and sautrees to syngeris ; siche trees 


weren neuere seyn in the lond of Juda. 
Forsothe* Salomon 3af to the queen of12 
Saba alle thingis whiche sche wolde, and 
whiche sche axide, many moo than sche 
hadde> brou3t to hym. And sche turnede 
a3en, and 3ede in to hir lond with hir ser- 
uauntis. Forsothe® the wei3t of gold, that 13 
was brou3t to Salomon bi ech 3eer, was 
sixe hundrid and sixe and sixti talentis of 
gold, outakun that summe whiche’ the®14 
legatis of dyuerse folkis, and marchauntis 
weren wont to brynge, and! alle the kyngis 
of Arabie, and the princes of londis, thati 
brou3ten togidere gold and siluer to Salo- 
mon. Therfor) kyng Salomon made two1s 


‘ hundrid goldun speris of the summe of 


sixe hundrid ‘floreyns, ether peesis of 
gold*, that! weren spendid in ech spere; 
and he made thre hundrid goldun scheeldis 16 
of thre hundrid floreyns™, with whiche ech 
scheeld" was hilid; and the kyng puttide 
tho® in the armure place, that was set? in 
thel wode. Also the kyng made a greet 17 
seete’ of yuer, and clothide’ it with clen- 
nest' gold; and he made sixe grees", biis 
whiche meY stiede* to* the seete, and aY 
goldun stool, and tweyne armes, oon a3ens 
‘the tother?, and twei liouns stondynge bi- 
sidis the armes; but also he made twelue 19 
othere* litle liouns stondynge on? sixe 
grees on euer either side‘, Siche a seete® 
was not in alle rewmes’. And ‘alle the20 
vessels of the feeste of the kyng weren of 
gold, and the vessels of the hows of the 
forest of the? Liban weren of pureste* 
gold; for siluer in tho daies was arettid 
fori nou;t. For" also the schippis of the21 
kyng 3eden in to Tharsis with the ser- 
uauntis of Iram onys in thre 3eer, and 
brou3ten! fro thennus gold, and siluer, and 


d offren £ pr.m. © planed £ pr.m. f Om.c. 


Z and also he made harpis ins. # And Ns. 


outaken that that 1. 


> Om. s. 
and withouten the summe that s. 


¢ And INs. 
& Om. Ins. 


dthatins. ¢€ Om.rns. fand 
h othere londis 1. diuers londis s. 


i the whiche 1. whiche ns. J For x. * scutis or floryns [ peesis N. floryns or pecis s.] of gold 1xs. Om. cp. 


1 whiche Ins. ™ peesis of gold 1Ns. 
Va INS, T seete or a trone Is. 
Ymen ELS. W stiede upINs. * into K. 


plures. ® upon INs. © greecis Ns. 


0 spere INS. 
seete or frone N. 

Y he made therto a ns. 
4 side of the trone INs. 


© tho speris 1s. 


P ordeyned N. set or ordeyned s, 
8 he hilide 1ns. 


t moost clene 1. __¥ greecis Ns. 
2 that oother 1. 8 Om. 4 pr.m. et 
€trone ins. f rewmes, that is, in noon of 


al the rewmes of the world s, & Om. rns. 4 moost pure ins. i ats. k Om. rns. ! thei brou3ten rs. 





IX. 22——X. 2. 


and thei brou3ten thennus gold, and syl- 
22uer, and yuer, and apis, and poos. Thanne 
Salamon is magnified vpon alle the kyngis 
a30f erth for rychesse and glorie. And 
alle the kyngis of londis desireden to seen 
the face of Salamon, that thei heeren the 
wijsdam that God hadde 3euen in the 
2sherte of hym; and thei brou3ten to hym 
3iftes, sylueren vessels and golden, clothes 
and armes, and spices, hors and mulis, 
25 by alle 3eeris. And Salamon hadde fourty 
thousand of hors in his stallis, and of 
charis and of horsmen twelue thousand ; 
and he sette hem in the cytees of ‘foure 
horsid carris®, and where the kyng was 
26in Jerusalem. Forsothe he enhauntide 
power vpon alle the kyngis, fro the flode 
of Eufrate vnto the lond of Philisteis, and 
27 vnto the termes of Egipt. And so myche 
plente of syluer he 3aue in Jerusalem, as 
of stoones, and of cedres so myche mul- 
titude, as of wijlde mulberye trees that 
28 ben sprungyn in wijld feeldis. Forsothe 
ther weren brou3t hors fro Egipt, and 
29 of alle regyouns. The remnaunt forsothe 
of the rather werkis of Salamon and of 
the last ben wrijten in the wordis of Na- 
than, the prophete, and in the wordis of 
Achie Sylonyte, and in the visioun of 
Addo, sear, a3eins Jeroboam, the sone of 
30Nabath. Salamon forsothe regnede in 
Jerusalem ypon al Yrael fourety 3ere, 
and he slepte with his fadirs; and thei 
birieden hym in the cytee of Dauid, and 
Roboam, his sone, regued for hym. 


CAP. X. 


1 Roboam forsothe wente in to Sychem ; 
thidre forsothe al Yrael was comen to 
egydre that thei setten hym kyng. The 
whiche thing whan Jeroboam, the sone 
of Nabath, that was in Egypt, hadde 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


407 


yuer™, and® apis, and pokokis®. Therfor? 22 
kyng Salomon was magnyfied ouer alle 
kyngis of erthe? for richessis’ and glorie. 
And alle the kyngis of londis desireden to 23 
se the face of Salomon, for to here the wis- 
dom which* God hadde 3o0ue in his herte; 
and thei brou3ten to hym 3iftis, vessels of 24 
siluer and of gold, clothis and armuris, 
and swete smellynge spices, horsis and 
mulis, bi ech 3eer. Also‘ Salomon hadde2s 
fourti thousynde of horsis in stablis", and 
twelue thousynde of charis and of¥ 
kny3tis; and ‘he ordeynede’ hem* in the 
citees of charis, and where’ the kyng was 
in Jerusalem. Forsothe* he* vside power 26 
on? alle the kyngis®, fro the flood Eufrates@ 
‘til to® the lond of Filisteis, and ‘til to‘ the 
termes’ of Egipt. And he 3af so greet 27 
plente of siluer in Jerusalem, as of stoonys, 
and so greet multitude of cedris", asi of 
sycomoris that growen in feeldi places. 
Forsothe* horsis weren brou3t! fro Egipt, 28 
and fro alle cuntreis. Sotheli the residue™ 29 
of the formere werkis and the" laste of 
Salomon ben writun in the wordis of Na- 
than, the prophete, and in the wordis® of 
Achie of Silo, and in the visioun, ‘ether 
prophesie?, of Addo, the prophete’4, a3ens 
Jeroboam, sone’ of Nabath. Sotheli’ Sa-30 
lomon regnede in Jerusalem ont al Israel 
fourti 3eer, and he slepte with his fadris ; 
and thei birieden hym in the citee of Da- 
uid, and Roboam, his sone, regnyde for 
hym. 


CAP. X. 


Forsothe Roboam 3ede forth in to Si-1 
chem; for al Israel came togidere thidur to 
make hym kyng. And whanne Jeroboam, 2 
the" sone of Nabath, that was in Egipt”, 
‘for hex fledde thidur’ bifor Salomon, hadde 


herd; forsothe he hadde flowen thidre herd this’, he turnyde a3jen anoon. And3 
& ploowes £. 
™Qm.s. 2Om.1s. °pekokisins. PAndins. (theerthes. ' hise richessis ins. § that 1Ns. 
t Andins, Uhis stabliss. vOm.s. Wordeyne x. * hem fo dwelle 1. tho kni3ztis to dwelle s. Y there 
where x. 2Andins. 2Salomonins.  » upon is. ¢kny3tis v. dof Eufrates ins. © vito IN. 
f ynto Ins. & termes or coostis s. % cedre trees 1N. there was of cedre treess. imwasas1. * And ins, 


1 brou3t to Salomon s, ™remenaunt rys. "of the ins. words. POm.1N. 4 prophete propheciynge 1s. 


‘the soner. § Certisins.  * upon Ins. 


u Om, nx. 


w Egipt, had herd this rvs. * the whiche 1. 


whiche xs. Yin to Egipt rns. 2 the deeth of Salamon 1. Salamon diede x. Salomon deiyng s. 


408 


beforn Salomon; anoon he is turned 
sa3eyn. And thei clepiden hym, and he 
came with al Ysrael, and thei speeken to 
4Roboam, seiynge, Thi fadir with most 
harde 30k oppressed us; thou comaunde 
lizter than thi fadir, ‘the whiche’ putte 
to us a grete seruage; and a litil wi3t of 
the charge put off, that we seruen to thee. 
5 The whiche seith, Aftir thre days turneth 
a3ein to me. And whan the puple was 
sgone aweie, he wente in counseil with 
the olde men, that stoden beforn his fadir 
Salamon, while 3it he lyuede, seyinge, 
What 3eue 3e of counseil, that I answer 
7to the puple? The whiche seyden to 
hym, 3if thou plese to this puple, and 
soften hem with mercyable wordis, thei 
sschulen seruen to thee al tyme. And he 
laft the counceil of olde men, and with 
3onge men beganne to treeten, that with 
hym were nurischid, and weren in the 
9felawschip of hym. And he seide to hem, 
What to 3ou semeth? or what schal I an- 
sweren to this puple, that seide to me, 
Heue of the 30k, that thi fader putte vnto 
ious? And thei answerden, as 3onge men 
and nurschid with hym in delices, and 
seiden, Thus thou schalt answeren to the 
puple that seide to thee, Thi fadir ag- 
gregide oure 30k, thou putte off; thus 
thou schalt answeren to hem, My lest 
fynger is gretter than the reynes of my 
ifadir; my fadir putte to 30u a grete 30k, 
and I schal putten to a more wei3te ; my 
fader beet 30u with scourgis, I forsothe 
12Schal beten 30u with scorpiouns. Thamne 
Jeroboam caine and al the puple the 
thidde day to Roboam, as he hadde co- 
ismaundide to hem. And the kyng an- 
swerde hard thingus, the counseil laft of 
iithe eldre', spokyn aftir the will of jong 


h that c, 


aq ful ins. 
© sette x. bath sett Ns. f vpon 1s. 
boam ins. k of s. 1 whiche rns. 
P Roboam ins. 41 this s. 
trete a consels. the whiche 1. whiche ns. 
putt rs. 2uponis. > Om.s. 
Shath putt. puts. bvpons. i betider. 
™ And ins. “with rvs. °Om.1Ns. 
answeride hard thingis to the peple Ns. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


» thingis on us 1. thingis to be don to vs s. 

& seruage or charge s. 
m™ he seide ns. 
t the elde nceEFLMoRVWb. the eldere Pp. 
w what thing rvs. 
© thei seiden 1Ns. 
k but ns. 
P the kyng Ins, 


X. 3—14. 


thei clepiden hym, and he cam with al 
Israel, and thei spaken to Roboam, and 
seiden, Thi fadir oppresside vs with ful*4 
hard 3ok; comaunde thou 1liztere thingis® 
than thi fader‘, that’ settide® onf vs a 
greuouse seruage® ; and releese thou a litil 
of ‘the birthun", that we serue thee. And 
he! seide, After thre daies turne 3e ajens 
tome. And whanne the puple was goon, 
he took counsel with* elde men, thatle 
stoden bifor his fadir Salomon, while he 
lyuyde 3it, and seide™, What counsel 
3yuen 3e, that Y answere to the puple? 
And thei seiden to hym, If thou plesist7 
this puple, and makist hem softe"™ bi meke 
wordis, thei schulen serue thee in al tyme. 
And? he? forsook the? counsel of elde™ me, 8 
and bigan® to trete' with 3onge men, that" 
weren nurischid with hym, and weren in 
his cumpenye. And he seide to hem,9 
What semeth to 3ou? ether what” owe Y 
answere* to this puple, that seide to me, 
Releese thou the 30k, whichY thi fadir 
puttide? on? vs? And thei answeriden, as 10 
jonge men? and nurschyd with hym in 
delicis, and seiden®, ‘hus thou schalt speke 
to the puple that seide to thee, Thi fadir 
made greuouse oure 30k, releese thou®; 
and thus‘ thou schalt answere to hem, My 
leeste fyngur is gretter than the leendis of 
my fader; my fadir puttides on’ jou all 
greuouse 30k, and Y schal leie to a gretter 
birthun ; my fadir beet! 30u with scourgis, 
forsothe* Y schal bete 30u with ‘scor- 
piouns, that is'!, hard knottid roopis". 
Therfor™ Jeroboam and" al the puple cam 12 
to Roboam in the thridde dai, as he hadde 
comaundid to hem. And ‘the kyng an-13 
sweride harde thingis®, after that he? hadde 
forsake the counsel of the’ eldere men, and* 14 
he spak bi the wille of the’ 3onge men’, 


i elders c. 


© fadir dides. &the whiche 1. which ns. 
h oure charge 1. oure burthun ns. i Ro- 
n softe or esye 1. softe or quietest hems. © Om.s. 
She bigan n. t trete and councele n. 
*toansweres. Ythatins. 2 hath 
dhath maad ix, ¢thou itin. fOm. EFKLMNsxbe. 
10Om.1y. 1 roopis, that ben Scorpiouns I. 
4 Om. nsx. ©QOm.s. § Om. ins. t men, he 


X. 1§5—XI. 3. 


men; My fadir putte an heuy 30k to 3ou, 
and IJ schal maken heuyar; my fadir beet 
3ou with scourgis, I forsothe schal beeten 
1530u with scorpiouns. And he assentide 
not to the preyers of the puple; for- 
sothe the wille of God was, that his word 
schuld ben fulfild, that he hadde spoken 
by the hond of Achie Sylonyte to Jero- 
i¢boam, the sone of Nabath. Al the puple 
forsothe, the kyng seyinge harder thingus, 
thus spak to hym, There is not to us 
part in Dauid, ne heritage in the sone of 
Ysay; turne a3ein in to thi tabernaclis, 
Yrael, thou forsothe feed thin hous, 
Dauith. And Yrael wente in to their 
17tabernaclis. Vpon forsothe the sonis of 
Yrael, that dwelleden in the cytees of 
isJuda, regnede Roboam*. And kyng 
Roboam sente Aduram, that stode vpon 
the tributis; and the sones of Yrael 
stooneden hym, and he is deed. Bot 
kyng Roboam hee3ede to stey3en up the 
igchaar, and flei3 in to Jerusalem. And 
Yrael wente awey fro the hous of Da- 
uid vnto this day. It is done forsothe, 
whanne al Yrael hadde herd, that Jero- 
boam was turned a3ein, thei senten, and 
clepeden hym, the companye gederd, and 
setten kyng vpon al Yrael; ne any man 
folowed the hous of Dauid, saue the 
lynage of Juda and Beniamyn allon. 


CAPaeX!. 


1 Roboam forsothe came into Jerusalem, 
and clepide al the hous of Juda and of 
Beniamyn, vnto an hundrith and ei3ty 
thousand of chosen fiz3tynge men, that he 
fizte azjeynus Ysrael, and turne to hym his 

zrewme. And the word of the Lord is 
maad to! Semyam, the man of God, sey- 

3inge, Speke to Roboam, the sone of Sala- 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


409 


My" fadir puttideY on” 3ou a greuouse 
3ok, which Y schal make greuousere ; my 
fadir beet* 30u with scourgis’, sotheli? Y 
schal bete 30u with scorpiouns*. And he>1s 
assentide not to the® preieris of the puple ; 
for’ it was the wille of God, that his word 
schulde be fillid®, which’ he hadde spoke 
bi the hond of Ahie of 8 Silo to Jeroboam, 
sone" of Nabath. Sotheli’ whanne the kyng 16 
seide* hardere! thingis, al the puple spak 
thus to hym, No part is™ to vs in Dauid?, 
nether eritage in the sone of Isai°; Israel, 
turne thou a3en in to thi tabernaclis, so- 
theli? thou, Dauid, feede thin’ hows". And 
Israel 3ede in to hise tabernaclis. For-17 
sothes Roboam regnede ont the sones of 
Israel, that" dwelliden in the citees of 
Juda. And kyng’ Roboam sente Adhu-18 
ram, that was souereyn ouer" the tributis ; 
and the sones of Israel stonyden hym, 
and he was deed. Certis* kyngY Roboam 
hastide? to stie? in to the’ chare, and 
fledde® in to Jerusalem. And Israel 3ede19 
awei fro the hows of Dauid ‘til to this 
dai. Forsothe®} it was doon, whanne al 
Israe] hadde herd, that Jeroboam turnede 
a3en, thei senten, and clepiden hym, whanne 
the cumpeny was gaderid‘, and thei or- 
deyneden him king on® al Israel; and nob 


+ Forsothe ; 
fro this place 
tu the ende of 
this chapitre 

it is not of the 
text, for it is not 
in Ebreu, ne- 
ther in bokis 
amendid, but 


man, outakun the lynage! of Juda* aloone, _ it is takun of 
ie theth ¢ Dani! the thridde 
suede the hows of Dauid'. book of Kyngis, 
xii. c°. Lire 
here. c. 


GAP... XI. 


Forsothe™ Roboam cam in to Jerusalem, 1 
and clepide® togidere al the hows? of Juda 
and of Beniamyn, ‘til to? nyne scoore 
thousynde of chosen meu and‘ werriouris, 
for to fi3te a3ens Israel, and for to turne™ 
his rewme to hym. And the word of thee 
Lord was maad to Semeye, the man of 
God, and seide, Speke thou to Roboam,3 


k Jeroboam B pr.m. 1 Om. B. 
uand seide, My ns. _¥ hath putt ins. W upon Is. x betide 1. y pleyn scourgis s. 2 but 1Ns. 
4 plumbid cordis ins. > Roboam ins. ¢Om.wns. 4 certis ins. ¢ fulfillid rvs. ‘fthatins. g and s. 


h the sone iunsbg. i And ins. had seid ins. 


Dauid 1. Dauith linage s. 


1 these hardere 1s. 
° Ysay be among vs s. 


m Om. 1. be Ns. 
q thin owen INS. 


n the lynage of 


P and Ins. F meynee INS. 


*Andins. tuponis. the whiche1. whiche ns. Vthekyngi. Wofs. *Andins. Y the 
kyngi. 2hastidehimis. ®stieupis. >hisins. ¢he fleddeivs. 4 vntoins. tox. © And ns, 
f gaderid togidre ins. $ uponis. 4eueris. {linagiss. * Juda and of Benjamyn x sec.m. 1 hym s. 


™ Sothely ins. 
VOL. II. 


1 he clepide rns. © meynee Ins. 


P vnto INS. to X. 
3G 


qOm. 8. * turne a3en INs. 


410 


mon, kyng of Juda, and to al Yrael, that 
4is in Juda and Beniamyn; Thes thingis 
seith the Lord, 3e schul not stey3en up, 
ne fiz3ten ajeyn 3oure bretheren; turne 
a3ein ech oon™ in to his hous, for this is 
doou by my wille. The whiche whan 
hadden herd the word of the Lord, ben 
torned a3ein, ne thei wenten ajeinus kyng 
5Jeroboam. Roboam forsothe dwellide in 
Jerusalem, and he bilde up wallid cytees 
6in Juda; and he maad ont Bethleem, and 
7Ethan, and Thecue, and Bethsur; also 
sand Sochot, and Odollam; also and Jeth, 
gand Mareza, and Ciph; but and Huram, 
10and Lachis, and Arecha; Saraa also, and 
Haylon, and Ebron, that weren in Juda 
and Beniamyn, cytees most strengthed. 
u.And whanne he hadde closed hem with 
wallis, he putte in hem princes of metis, 
and bernes, that is, of oyle and of wijne. 
12 Bot and to alle the cytees he maad ar- 
mour places of scheeldis, and of speris, 
and he fastnede hem with most diligence, 
and comaundide vpon Judam, and vpon 
13 Benjamin. The prestis forsothe and Le- 
uytis, that weren in al Ysrael, camen to 
i4hym fro al their seetis, forsakyng sub- 
urbis and their possessiouns, and goynge 
ouer to Juda and to® Jerusalem; forthi 
that Jeroboam hadde cast hem awey, and 
his aftir comers, that thei vsen not the 
is presthood of the Lord; the whiche or- 
deynede to hym silf prestis of heeze 
thingis, and of denyls, and of calues, ‘the 
16Whiche® he hadde made. Bot and of al 
the lynagis of Yrael, whiche euer hadde 
3euen their herte that thei sechen the 
Lord God of Yrael, came to Jerusalem to 
ofiryn their slayn sacrificis before the 
17Lord God of their faders. And thei 
strengtheden the kyngdam of Juda, and 
to gither strengtheden Roboam, the sone 
of Salamon bi thre 3eer; forsothe thei 
wenten in the weies of Dauid, and of 


m Om. c. 
« shuln not s. 


Sthat ins. ¢ stie up INs. 


& which s. 
4 the presthood s. 


e And ins. £ the dekenes s. 


sessiouns Ins. ™ in tos. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


D Om. 4cEF. in H. 


Vv Om. s. 
2 he bildide Huram rns,  whiche ins. > sette rns, © princes in hem 1. 
h Roboam ns, i 
© the which 1. 


XI. 4-——17. 


the sone of Salomon, kyng of Juda, and to 
al: Israel, which® is in Juda and Benia- 
myn; The Lord seith these thingis, 3e4 
schulen not stie‘, nethir 3e schulen" fizte 
a3ens 30ure britheren ; ech man turne ajen 
in’ to his hows, for this thing is doon bi 
my wille. And whanne thei hadden herd 
the word of the Lord, thei turneden ajen, 
and 3eden not azens kyng” Jeroboam. 
Forsothe* Roboam dwellide in Jerusalem, s 
and he bildide wallid citees in Juda; ands 
bildideY Bethleem, and Ethan, and Thecue, 
and Bethsur; and Sochot, and Odollam 37 
also and Jeth, and Maresa, and Ziph; but 8 
also Huram?, and Lachis, and Azecha ; and 10 
Saraa, and Hailon, and Ebron, that® weren 
in Juda and Beniamyn, ful strong citees. 
And whanne he hadde closid tho with 
wallis, he settide® ‘in tho citees princes*, 
and® bernes of metis, that is, of oile, and 
of wyn. But also in ech citee he made 12 
placis of armuris of scheeldis, and speris, 
and he made tho strong with most dili- 
gence; and he regnyde on Juda and Ben- 
iamyn. Sotheli® the preestis and dekenes*, 13 
that’ weren in al Israel, camen to hym> 
fro alle her seetis!, and forsoken* her sub-14 
arbis and possessiouns!, and thei passiden 
to™ Juda and to Jerusalem; for Jeroboam 
and hise aftir comeris hadden cast hem 
awey, that thei schulden not be set in 
preesthod" of the Lord; which® Jeroboam 1s 
made to hym preestis of hize places, and 
of feendis, and of caluys, which he hadde 
maad. But also of alle the linagis of Is-16 
rael, whiche ever 3auen her herte to seke 
the Lord God of Israel, thei camen to Je- 
rusalem for to offre her sacrifices bifor the 
Lord God of her fadris. And thei strength-17 
iden the rewme of Juda, and strength- 
idenP Roboam, the sone of Salomon, bi thre 
3eer ; for thei 3eden in the weies of Dauid, 
and of Salomon, oneli bi thre 3eer. For-12 
sothe Roboam weddide a wijf Malaoth, 


© that c pr. m. 


x And ins. J he bildide rns. 

d and he ordeyned in hem s. 

k thei forsoken rns. | her pos- 
P thei strengthiden 1Ns., 


W the kyng 1. 


i citees N. 


See. 5. 


isSalomon, aloonly thre 3eer. Forsothe 
Roboam weddide a wijf Malaoth, the 
dou3ter of Jerymuth, sone of Dauid, and 
Abiail, the dou3ter of Heliab, sone of 

19 Ysaye; the whiche bare to hym sonis, 

20 Jeus, and Somoriam, and Jereum. And 
aftir this he toke Maacham, the dou3tir 
of Absalon, that bare to hym Abia, and 

21 Thai, and Sisa, and Salomyth. Forsothe 
Roboam louede Maacham, the dou3ter of 
Absalon, ouer alle his wijues and secun- 
daries. Forsothe ei3tene wijues he wed- 
dide, secundarie wijues forsothe sixty ; 
and he gate ei3te and twenty sonis, and 

22sixty dou3ters. Forsothe he sette in the 
heued Abiam, the sone of Maacha, duke 
ouer alle his bretheren; he thou3te for- 

23sothe to makyn hymn kyng, for wijser 
and my3tyer ouer alle his sonis, and in 
alle the coostis of Juda and of Beniamyn, 
and in alle the walled cytees; and he 
3aue to hem many metis, and he hadde 
many wijues. 


CAP. IL 


1 And whanne the rewme of Roboam 
was strengthed and confermed, he for- 
soke the lawe of the Lord, and al Yrael 
2with hym. The fyfthe 3eer forsothe of 
the regne of Roboain stey3ede up Sesach, 
the kyng of Egypt, in to Jerusalem, for 
3thei hadden synned to the Lord; with a 
thousand and two huudrith chaaris, and 
sixty thousand horsmen, and ther was 
no noumbre of the comoun, that came 
with hym fro Egipt, Libies, that is, and 
4Erogodite, and Ethiopes. And he tok 
the most strengthed cytees in Juda, and 
5came vnto Jerusalem. Semeias forsothe, 
the prophete, wente in to Roboam, and 
the princes of Juda, that weren gadered 
in to Jerusalem, fleezyyng Sesach. And 
he seide to hem, Thes thinges seith the 
Lord, 3e han forsaken me, and I haue 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


411 


the dou3tir of Jerymuth, sone? of Dauid, 
and’ Abiail, the dou3tir of Heliab, sone’ of 
Ysaye; and sche childide to hym sones, 19 
Yeus, and Somorie, and Zerei. Also after 20 
this wijf he took Maacha, the dou3ter of 
Abissalon, and sche childide to hym Abia, 
and Thai, and Ziza, and Salomyth. For-2a1 
sothet Roboam louyde Maacha, the dou3tir 
of Abissalon, aboue alle hise wyues and 
secundarie* wyues. Forsothe’ he hadde 
weddid ei3tene wyues, sotheli” sixti secun- 
darie wyues; and he gendride* ei3te and 
twenti sones, and sixti dou3tris. SotheliY 22 
he ordeynede Abia, the sone of Maacha, in? 
the heed, duyk ouer? alle hise britheren ; 
for> he thou3te to make Abia kyng, for he 23 
was wisere and my3tiere ouer alle hise 
sones, and in alle the coostis of Juda and 
of Beniamyn, and in alle wallid® citees*; 
and he 3af to hem ful many metis®, and 
he hads many" wyues. 


CAP. XII. 


And whanne the rewme of Roboam was 
maad strong and coumfortid, he forsook 
the lawe of the Lord, and al Israel with 
hym. Sothelii in the fyuethe 3eer of thee 
rewme of Roboam Sesach, the’ kyng of 
Egipt, stiede' in to Jerusalem, for thei™ 
synneden ajens the Lord; and he® stiede°s 
with a thousynde and two hundrid charys, 
and with? sixti thousynde of4 horse men, 
and no noumbre was of the comyn puple, 
that cam with hym fro Egipt, that is, 
Libiens, and Trogoditis, and Ethiopiens. 
And he® took ful stronge citees in Juda, 4 
and he cam ‘til to’ Jerusalem. Forsothe's 
Semei, the prophete, entride to Roboam, 
and to the princes of Juda, whiche" fleynge 
fro Sesach weren gaderid togidere ‘in to’ 
Jerusalem. And he seide to hem, The 
Lord seith these thingis, 3e han forsake 


{the sonex1. TOm.N. *the soneins. t Andins. t hise secoundarie 1xs. VYandins. W and he 
hadde ins. * gaat1. yAndins. 2Om.s. among ouers. >andins. ¢ the wallids. 4 citees he 
sette his sones 1. citees Roboam ordeined his soness. ©Om.ns. fOm. a. & hadden 1s. took to hem ns. 
hfulmany cer. 'Andiys. Om.ins. !stiedeupixs. ™ thei, that is, the men of Jerusalem s. 
= Sesach 1ns. © stiede up 1. stiede up thidir ns. P Om. -per@Kumoreruxbe. Om. w. * Sesach ins. 
8 ynto IN. intos. tox. t Andins. "the whicher Vin Ns. 


3G 2 


412 


6 forsaken 30u in the hond of Sesach. And 
the princis of Yrael and the kyng aferd 
7seyden, Ri3twijs is the Lord. And 
whanne the Lord hadde seen that thei 
weren meked, the word of the Lord is 
doon to Semeiam, seyinge, For thei ben 
meekid, I schal not leesen hem, and I 
schal 3enen to hem a lytyll of help, and 
my woodnesse schal not droppen upon 
8Jerusalein by the hond of Sesach. Neuer 
the later thei schul serne to hym, that 
thei knowen the distaunce of ny seruyce 
and of the seruyse of the rewme of londis. 
9And so Sesach, kyng of Egipt, wente 
awei fro Jerusalem, the tresoures taken 
awei of the hous of the Lord, and of the 
hous of the kyng; and alle thingis he 
toke with hym, and the golden tergetis 
10‘the whiche? Salamon hadde maad, for 
the whiche the kyng made brasen, and 
toke hem to the princis of the tergeteris, 
‘the whiche’ kepten the vestiarie of the 
upaleis. And whanne the kyng schulde 
goone in to the house of the Lord, the 
tergeters camen, and token hem, and eft 
beeren hem azein to his armorie place. 
12 Neuer the later for thei ben meekid, the 
wrath of the Lord is torned awey fro 
hem, and thei ben not don awei al oute; 
forsothe and in Juda ben founden good 
i3werkis. Thanne Roboam is coumfortid 
in Jerusalem, and regnede. Forsothe of 
oon and fourty 3eer he was, whanne he 
beganne to regnen, and ei3tene 3eer he 
regnede in Jerusalem, the citee that the 
Lord chees that he conferme his name 
there, of alle the lynagis of Yrael. The 
name forsothe of his moder Naama 
14Amanyte. And he dide euyl, and he 
greithede not his herte for™ to sechen 
1»God. The werkis forsothe of Roboam, 
the first and the last, ben writen in the 
bokis of Semei the prophete, and of 


P that c pr.m, 


wdistriew. | *in ELP. upon ins. Om. w. 
scheeldis ns. ®Om.ns. » king Roboam ns. 
brasun sheeldis s. _ € thei brou3ten Ins. 


} regnede there ins. ™ And ins, 2 that ins, 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


4 that c. 


¥ Israel a pr.m. 

¢ he bitoke ins. 
& hem In. 
© And ins. 


Mh 6— 1 


me, and Y haue forsake 30u in the hond 
of Sesach. And the princes of Israel andé 
the kyng weren astonyed, and seiden, The 
Lord is iust. And whanne the Lord hadde7 
seyn that thei weren mekid, the word of the 
Lord was maad to Semey, and seide, For 
thei ben mekid, Y schal not distrie hem, 
and Y schal 3yue to hem a Hitil help, and 
my stronge veniaunce schal not droppe” 
on* JerusalemY bi the hond of Sesach. 
Netheles thei schulen serue hym, that theis 
knowe the dyuersitee of my seruyce and 
of the seruyce of the rewme of londis. 
Therfor Sesach, the kyng of Egipt, 3ede9 
awey fro Jerusalem, aftir that he hadde 
take awei the tresouris of the hows of the 
Lord, and of the kyngis hows; and he 
took alle thingis with hym, and the goldun 
scheeldis whiche Salomon hadde maad, for 10 
whiche? the kyng> made brasun scheeldis, 
and took® tho to the princes of scheeld 
makeris, that kepten the porche of the 
paleis. And’ whanne the kyng entride1 
in to the hows of the Lord, the scheeld- 
makeris camen, and token tho®, and eft 
brou3ten’ thos to" hisi armure place. Ne-12 
theles for thei weren mekid, the ire of the 
Lord was turned awei fro hem, and thei 
weren not don awei outirli; for good 
werkis weren foundyn also in Juda. Ther-13 
for kyng* Roboam was coumfortid in Je- 
rusalem, and regnedel. Forsothe™ he was 
of oon and fourti 3eer, whanne he bigan 
to regne, and he regnyde seuentene 3eer 
in Jerusalem, the citee which" the Lord 
chees of alle the lynagis of Israel, that he 
schulde conferme his name there. For- 
sothe® the name of his modir was Naama 
Amanytis. And he? dide yuel, and he 
made not redi his herte to seke God. So-15 
thelii the firste and the laste werkis of 
Roboam ben writun, and diligentli de- 
clarid in the bookis of Semei the profete, 


rOm.c. 


% whiche scheldis 1. whiche goldun 
40QOm.s. © tho scheldus 1. tho 

i the kyngis ns. 
P Roboam ins. 9 And 1ns. 


h azen to INS, ® the kyng 1. 


XI. 16—XIU. 9. 


is Abdo sear, and besily expownede. And 
Roboam and Jeroboam fou3ten a3einus 
hem seluen alle days. And Roboam 
slepte with his fadirs, and is biried in 
the cyte of Dauid; and Abia, his sone, 
regnede for hym. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 The eiztene’ 3eer of kyng Jeroboam 
2regnede Abia vpon Judam ; thre 3eer he 
regnede in Jerusalem; and name of his 
modir Machaia, the dou3ter of Vriel of 
Gabaa. And ther was bataile betwenet 
3Abiam and Jeroboam. And whanne Abia 
hadde gon in strijf, and hadde most best 
fi3tynge men, and of chosen foure hun- 
drith thousand, Jeroboam ordeynde a3ein- 
ward scheltrun of ei3t hundrith thousand 
of men, the whiche and thei weren chosen 
4and to batails inost strouge. Thann Abia 
stood vpon the hil of Semeron, that was 
in Effram, and seith, Heere, Jeroboam 
sand al Yrael; whether 3e knowe not, that 
the Lord God of Yrael 3aue the rewme 
to Dauid vpon Yrael in to euermore, to 
hym and to his sonis into couenaunt of 
6salte’? And Jeroboam, the sone of Na- 
bath, the seruaunt of Salamon, sone of 
Dauith, ros, and rebellide a3einus his lord. 
7And ther ben gaderd to hym most vein 
men and the sonis of Belial, and thei 
hadden the ouer hond a3einus Roboam, 
the sone of Salamon. Bot Roboam was 
rude, and with ferde herte, and my3t not 
sa3einstonden to hem. Now thann 3e 
sayn, that 3e schul mown withstonde to 
the rewme of the Lord, that he weldith 
by the sonis of Dauid; and 3e han a gret 
multitude of puple, and golden calues, 
‘the whiche’ Jeroboam hath made to 3ou 
9in to goddis. And 3e han throwen awei 
the prestis of the Lord, the sonys of 
Aaron, and Leuytis, and han maad to 


* eijtenthe 4cEFH. 


rhe was ins. ‘uponins. tandhec. 
x Andins. Yuponins, 2 he seide ins. 8 of ns. 
€the sonex. fhath risen up ins. 
k Om. in. ethir formed mw. or vntau3t 8. 
P the whiche tr. 4 hath maad ins. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


t betwe c passim, ™ Salti aru. 


uhadde with him 1Ns, 


& he rebellide 1. hath rebellid s. 
Ihe my3te rns, 
T awey fro 30u Ns. 


413 


and of Abdo the profete. And Roboam ié 
and Jeroboam fou3ten in alle daies a3ens 
hem silf. And Roboam slepte with hise 
fadris, and was" biried in the citee of 
Dauid; and Abia, his sone, regnede for 
hym. 


CAP. XIII. 


Yn the eiztenthe 3eer of kyng Jeroboam 1 
Abia regnede on’ Juda; he‘ regnede thre 2 
3eer in Jerusalem; and the name of hise 
modir was Mychaie, the dou3ter-of Vriel 
of Gabaa. And batel was bitwixe Abia 
and Jeroboam. And whanne Abia hadde3 
bigunne batel, and hadde" most chyual- 
rouse men, and four hundrid thousynde of 
chosun men, Jeroboam arayede a3enward 
the scheltroun with ei3te hundrid thou- 
synde of men, and thei weren chosun men 
and most stronge’ to batels”. Therfor*4 
Abia stood onY the hil Semeron, that was 
in Effraym, and seide*, Here thou, Jero- 
boam and al Israel; whether 3e knowen5 
not, that the Lord God of Israel 3af to 
Dauid the rewme on? Israel with outen 
ende, to hym and to hise sones in to the? 
couenaunt of salt, ‘that ts, stidefast and 
stable®? And‘ Jeroboam, the sone of Na-6 
bath, the seruaunt of Salomon, sone® of 
Dauid, roos‘, and rebellide® ajens his lord. 
And most veyn men and} the sones of7 
Belial weren gaderid' to hym, and thei 
hadden my3t ajens Roboam, the sone of 
Salomon. Certis Roboam was buystuouse, 
‘ether fonne*, and of feerdful herte, and 
my3te! not a3enstonde hem. Now therfor 8 
je seien, that 3e moun a3enstonde the 
rewme of the Lord, which™ he holdith in 
possessioun bi the sones of Dauid; and 3e 
han" a greet multitude of puple, and° 
goldun caluys, whiche? Jeroboam made! 
in to goddis to 3ou. And 3e han castes 
awei' the preestis of the Lord, the sones 


Vv that c. 


Vv stronge men ins. _'¥ batel s. 
© that is, stidefast N. d And now s, 

h Om. ins.‘ gaderid togidre 1Ns, 
mthatins, ®hauern. © and 3e hans. 


b Om. ins. 


414 


3ou prestes, as alle the puplis of londis; 
whosoever commith and sacrith his hond 
in bool, in oxen and in seuen wethers, 
anoon he is maad the preste of hem that 
ioben not goddis. Our forsothe Lord is 
God, whom we han not forsaken ; and the 
prestis mynistriden* to the Lord of the 
sonis of Aaron, and Leuytis ben in their 
nordre; also brent sacrifices thei offren to 
the Lord by ech days, erly and at euen, 
and the encense maad aftir the hestis of 
the lawe ; and there ben leid forth looues 
in the most clene borde; and there is 
anentis us a golden chaundeler, and the 
lantern of it, that it be tend euermore at 
euen; we forsothe kepen the hestis of 
12 0ure God, whom 3e han forsaken. Thanne 
duke in oure hoost is God, and the prestis 
of hym, that crien in trumpis and sownen 
a3eins 30u; 3e sonis of Yrael, willith not 
fizten a3einus the Lord God of oure fadirs, 
13for it spedith not to 30u. Thes thingis 
hym spekyng, Jeroboam bihynde kaste 
buschementis; and whanne he schulde 
stonden forn ajeinus of the hoostis, he 
enuyrounde with his hoost Judam vn- 
uknowynge. And Juda biholdynge saw3 
to stonden in bataile forn a3einst, and bi- 
hynde the bac; and he criede to the 
Lord, and the prestis with trumpis be- 
isgunnen to syngen. And alle the men of 
Juda crieden out, and loo! hem criynge 
out, God ferid Jeroboam and al Ysrael, 
that stood forn aj3eynst Juda and Abia. 
16 And the men of Yrael flowen Judam, and 
the Lord tok hem in to the hondis of hem. 
17 Than smote hem Abia and his puple in 
a grete veniaunce, and ther fellen of 
hem woundid fyue hundrithY thousand 
isof stronge men. And the sonis of Yrael 
ben mekid in that tyme, and the sonis 


w Om. ABFH. 


t the dekenes s. U prestis EFKLMNsxbg¢. 
maad 1. Om. ns. * Om. rns. Y and who s. 


offringe hem to hym ns. 4 whiche ys. 
1Om. 1. 


© lanterne therof ins. 


e Om.N. 


Pands. 4 tend n. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


* mynystren c. 


k and also 1. and thei offriden x. and thei offren s. 
T and INs. 


XIU, ro—18. 


of Aaron, and-dekenest, and 3e han maad 
preestis to 30u, as alle the puplis" of 
londis’ han’ preestis® ; whoY euer cometh 
and halewith his* hond in a bole, in oxis*, 
and? in seuene wetheris®, anoon he is maad 
preest of hem that? ben not*® goddis‘. But 10 
oure Lord is'God, whom we forsaken not; 
and preestis of the sones of Aaron mynys- 
tren® to the Lord, and dekenes ben in 
her ordre; and thei offren® brent sacrifices 11 
to the Lord bi' ech dai in the morewtid 
and euentid, and* encense maad bi co- 
maundementis of the lawe ; and loues ben! 
set forth in a moost™ clene boord; and at 
vs is the goldun candilstik and his" lan- 
terne’, that? it be teendid4 euere at euen- 
tid; forsothe’ we kepen the comaunde- 
mentis’ of our God, whom 3e han forsake. 
Therfor God is duyk in oure oost, and 12 
hiset preestis, that" trumpen and sownen 
ajens 30u; nyle 3e, sones of Israel, fizte 
azens the Lord God of 3oure fadris, for it 
spedith not to 3ou. While heY spak these 13 
thingis, Jeroboam made redi tresouns bi- 
hynde’; and whanne he* stood euene ajens 
theY enemyes, he cumpasside with his oost 
Juda vnwitynge. And Juda bihelde, and 14 
si3? batel nei3 enene a3ens*, and> bihynde 
thet bak; and he criede to the Lord, and 
preestis bigunnen for’ to trumpe. Andis 
alle the men of Juda crieden®, and, lo! 
while thei crieden‘, God made aferd Jero- 
boam and al Israel, that$ stood euen" a3ens 
Juda and Abia. And the! men of Israel ic 
fledden fro Juda, and God bitook hem in 
to the hondis of men‘ of! Juda. Therfor 17 
Abia and his puple smoot™ hem" with a 
greet wounde, and there felden doun of 
hem fyue hundrid thousynde of stronge 
men woundid. And the sones of Israels 
weren maad lowe in that tyme, and the 


y Om. £ pr. m. 


V londis, that is, after custune of other londis s. w han 
2 the kyngis 1ns. oxen ins. Dor1Ns. ¢ wetheris, 
f of goddis s. & mynystriden Aruxbg. } offriden 1. 
lben theres. ™ ful x. the INS, 


Sheestis ins. * thet ben hise 1. 


u whiche ns. 


v Abia rvs. wbehynde forth rvs. * Jeroboam rns. yhise ns. he si3 Ns. 2 a3zens bifore 1s. » hem and s. 


d Om. n. 
k the men c. Om. s. 


© her ins. 


i Om. a. 1Om. s. 


€ crieden out 1. crieden an hi3 ns. 
m smeten 1. 


f crieden an hig 1. 
2 Israel 1ns. 


& whiche ns. 5 Om. INs. 


XIII. 19—XIV. 7. 


of Juda most hugely coumfortid, forthi 
that thei hadden hopide in the Lord God 
ivof their fadirs. Forsothe Abia pursued 
Jeroboam fleezinge, and toke citees of 
him, Bethel and the dou3tirs of it, and 
Jesana with his don3tirs, Efron also and 
20the dou;tirs of it; and mi3t no more 
withstonde Jeroboam in the days of Abia, 
21 whome the Lord smote, and is deed. Than 
Abia, comfortid his empyre, toke foure- 
tene wijues and gat two and twenty sonis, 
22and sixtene dou3ters. And? the remnaunt 
of the wordis of Abia and of the weies 
and of his werkis, ben writen most bisily 
in the boke of Abdo, prophete. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Forsothe Abia slepte* with his fadirs, 
and thei birieden hym in the cytee of 
Dauith ; and Aza, his sone, regnede for 
hym. In whos days restide the londe 

2tenn 3eer. And Aza dide that good and 
plesaunt was in the si3te of his God, and 
he turned vpsadoun the auters of straunge 

3heryinge, and the hee3 thingis, and to- 
brac the ymagis, and the mawmet woodis 
4hew3 doun; and he comaundide to Jude, 
that he schulde sechen the Lord God of 
their fadirs, and done the lawe, and alle 
5the maundementis. And he toke awei 
fro alle the cytees of Juda auters and 
mawmet templis, and regned in pese. 
6Also he bylde up strengthed cytees in 
Juda; for quyete he was, and noon in his 
tyme batails risen, the Lord grauntynge 
z7pese. Forsothe he seide to Jude, Bilde 
we up thes cytees, and enuyrown we with 
wallis, and strengthe we with touris and 
jatis and lockis, the whilis fro batails alle 
thingis ben quyete; forthi that we han 
sou3t the Lord God of oure fadirs, and 
he hath 3euen to us pese by enuyrown. 


z Om. c, 


© forthi thatrx. P Andins. 4 he took ins. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


t that is, Bethel 1s. 


415 


sones of Juda weren coumfortid ful greetli, 
for® thei hadden hopid in the Lord God of 
her fadris. Forsothe? Abia pursuede Je-19 
roboam fleynge, and took‘ hise cytees, 
Bethel’ and hise vilagis, and Jesana with 
hise vilagis, and* Ephron and hise vilagis ; 
and Jeroboam mi3te no more a3enstondet 20 
in the daies of Abia, whom" the Lord 


smoot}, and he was deed. Therfor Abia, 21 + smoot; for he 
dide idolatrie, 


whanne his empire was coumforted, took _ in the thridde 
° book of Kingis 
\4 @ 
fourtene wyues, and he gendride’ two and yye pine 
twenti sones, and sixtene dou3tris. The22’rec 


residue” of wordis* of Abia and of his 
weyes and werkis’, ben writun ful dili- 
gentli in the book of Abdo, the profete. 


CAP. XIV. 


Forsothe? Abia slepte with hise fadris, 1 
and thei birieden hym in the citee of Da- 
uid; and Asa, his sone, regnede for hym. 
In whos daies the lond restide* ten 3eer. 
And Asa dide that”, that was good and2 
plesaunt in the si3t of his God, and he 
destriede the auteris of straunge worschip- 
yng{, and ‘ke destriede® hi3* places, and 3 S conminita 
brak® ymagis, and kittidef doun woodis® ; _ atrieshizeplacis 
and he comaundide Juda to seke the Lord 4 a a 
God of her fadris, and to do the lawe and ee: zie 
alle comaundementis". And he! took aweis 
fro alle the citees of Juda auteris* and 
templis of idols, and he regnede in pees. 
And he bildide stronge cytees in Juda ; fore 
he was in reste, and no batels risiden! in 
his tymes, for the Lord 3af™ pees. For-7 
sothe" he® seide to Juda, Bilde we these 
cytees, and cumpasse we? with wallis, and 
strengthe we? with touris and 3atis and 
lockis, as longe as alle thingis ben restful 
fro’ batel*?; for we han sou3te the Lord 
God of oure fadris, and he hath 3oue to 
vs pees* bi cumpas. Therfor thei bildiden’, 
and no" lettyng was’ in bildyng”. So-, 


a sleep c. 


8 Om. CDEFGKLMOPQRUXbG¢. 


t withstonde Juda 1s. withstonde x. "the whiche Jeroboam 1. which nN. which Jeroboam s. V gaat 1. ¥ reme- 


naunt ins. * the wordis rns. Y hise werkis 1Ns. 


z And rng. 


a restide in pees ins. __» that thing rvs, 


¢Om.1. 4 the hiz1. © brake togidre the 1. brake togidere ns. f he hewide 1. he kettide s. & mawmet 


woodis INs. 
m 3aue him s, 
her citees ns. 


n And xs. © Asa Ins, 
u there was nor. VY Om, 1. 


bh the heestis mv. the hestis thereof s. 
P we hem 1s. 
w the bildyng rv. the bijlding of hem s. 


lrisen rs. 


t bildiden 


k the auteris INs. 
S rest Ss. 


i the kyng ins. 
qa for w. * batels BcKow. 


416 


Thanne thei beelden up, and no lettynge 
8was in the out makynge. Aza forsothe 
hadde in his enuyrown of bereris scheeldis 
and speris of Juda thre hundrith thou- 
sand, of Beniamyn forsothe of scheld 
berers and archers two hundrith and se- 
uenty thousand; alle thes most stronge 
gmen. Forsothe a3einus hem went out, 
Zara Ethiope with his hoost tenn hun- 
drith thousand, and with chaaris thre 
hundrith, and he came vnto Mazara. 
10 Forsothe Aza wente to mete with hym, 
and maad a scheltrun to bataile in the 
valei of Sophata, that is beside Mazera. 
And he inwardly clepide the Lord God, 
iland seith, Lord, ther is not anentis thee 
eny distaunce, whether in fewe thou help- 
ist, or in many; help us, Lord oure God, 
in thee forsothe and in thi name hauynge 
trust we ben comen a3einus this multitude; 
Lord, oure God thou ert, haue not the 
wouerhand ajeins thee a man. And so 
the Lord fered Ethiopis beforn Asa and 
13Juda, and Ethiopis flowen; and Asa 
pursued hem, and the peple that was with 
hym, vnto Jerare. And Ethiopis fellyn 
vynto deth, for the Lord smijtynge thei 
ben to-hewen, and with the hoost of hym 
fy3tyng. Thanne thei token many spoylis, 
14and smijten alle the cytees by enuyrown 
of Jerare; forsothe a grete fere assayl- 
ede alle. And thei to-brosten cytees, and 
1s beren aweie mych preye; bot and the 
foldis of scheep distruynge token of beestis 
a multitude withoute eende, and of ca- 
mels, and ben torned ajein in to Jeru- 
salem. 
CAP. XV. 
1 Azarias forsothe, the sone of Obed, 
2the spirite of God maad in hym, wente 
out in to asein comynge of Aza ; and seide 
to hym, Heere, 3e me, Aza and al Juda 
and Beniamyn ; the Lord with 3ou, for 3e 
weren with hym ; 3if 3e sechen hym, 3e 


x And ins. 
© he araiede 1ns. 
K ajens s. 
° the men of Ethiopie rns. P vnto ins. 
hem s. t Thanne 1. 
x aboute 1. bi cumpas Ns. 
citees ins. Cand ins. 4 thei token 1Ns. 


Yand ins. 2 Ethiope rns. 


u men of Juda ns. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


a Om. 1. 
f the scheltrun r. his scheltrun ns. 
| therfore camen 1. we camen N. forthi we camen s. 
4 the men of Ethiopie 1ns. 
Vv and thei 1ns. 
Y men aduersaries to Juda s. 
€ thei turneden rns. 


XIV. 8—XvV. 2. 


theli* Asa hadde in his oost thre hundrid 
thousynde of men of Juda berynge scheldis 
and speris, sotheliY of Beniamyn he hadde 
two hundrid thousynde and fourscoore 
thousynde of scheeld beeris and of arch- 
eris; alle these weren ful stronge inen. 
Forsothe Zara of Ethiop’ 3ede out a3ens9 
hem with his oost ten ‘sithis an? hundrid 
thousynde, and with thre hundrid charis, 
aud cam? ‘til to° Masera. Certis Aza 3ede10 
azens hem, and araiede® scheltrunf to batel 
in the valei Sephata’, which® is bisidis 
Masera. And he! inwardli clepide the Lord 
God, and seide, Lord, no dyuersitee is11 
anentis* thee, whether thou helpe in fewe, 
ethir in manye; oure Lord God, helpe 
thou vs, for we han trist in thee and in 
thi name, and camen! a3ens this multi- 
tude; Lord, thou art oure God, a man 
haue not the™ maistrye a3ens thee. Ther-12 
for the Lord made aferd Ethiopens" bifor 
Asa and Juda, and Ethiopens® fledden; 
and Asa and his puple, that was withis 
hym, pursuede hem ‘til to? Gerare. And 
Ethiopens’ felden doun ‘til to" deeth, for 
thei weren al to-brokun bi the Lord sle- 
ynge, and bi his oost fijtynges. Therfort 
thei" token many spuylis, and’ smitiden 14 
alle the citees ‘bi the cumpas of * Gerare ; 
for greet drede hadde assailid alle meny. 
And thei? rifliden* cytees*,and baren aweye 
myche prey; but® also thei destrieden1s 
the fooldis of scheep, and token? multi- 
tude without noumbre of scheep and of 
camels, and turneden® ajen in to Jeru- 
salem. 


CAP. XV. 


Forsothe Azarie, the sone of Obeth,) 
whanne the spirit of the Lord was comyn 
in to hym, 3ede out® in to the metyng of2 
Asa ; and seide* to hym, Asa and al Juda 
and Beniamyn, here 3e me; the Lord zs 
with jou, for 3e weren with hym; if 3e 


bhecams. ¢vntorns. 4 3ede forth rvs. 
8 of Sephata c pr.m. imns. ) that ins. i Asains. 
m™ Om. ns. ® the men of Ethiope 1ns. 
Tynto Ins. to x. § fy3ting ajens 
Ww smeten 3. smiteden or distreyeden s. 
men of Judas. ®spuyliden1. © the 
fhe jede s, €Om. x. 1 he seide ins. 


XV. 3-—13. 


schul fynden; 3if forsothe 3e forsaken 
3hym, he schal forsaken 30u. Forsothe 
ther schul passen many days in Yrael 
with oute verre God, and with oute prest, 
and with out doctour, and with oute lawe. 
4And whanne thei weren turned ajein in 
their anguysch, and schul crien to the 
Lord God of Yrael, and sechen hym, thei 
sschul fynden hym. In that tyme ther 
schal not ben pese of goyng out and com- 
mynge in, bot feris on al sijde in alle 
édwellers of londis. Forsothe fole schal 
fi3ten ajeinus folc, and cyte ajeinus cytee, 
for the Lord schal distourblen hem in al 
vanguysch ; 3e forsothe takith comfort, 
and 3oure hondis ben not febled ; forsothe 
smeed schal ben to 3oure werk. The 
whiche thing whann Aza hadde herd, 
that is, the wordis and the prophecie of 
Azarie, sone of Obed, prophete, is com- 
fortid, and toke aweie alle the mawmetis 
of a] the lond of Juda and of Beniamyn, 
and of the cytees that he hadd taken of 
the hill of Effraym. And he halowede 
an auter of the Lord, that was before the 
93ate hous of the hous of the Lord. And 
he gadride al Juda and Beniamyn, and 
the comlyngis with hem of Effraym, and 
of Manasse, and of Symeon; forsothe 
many hadde flowen to hym of Ysrael, 
seeynge that the Lord God of hym was 
1owith hym. And whanne ‘thei weren? 
commen in to Jerusalem, the thrid moneth, 
the fiftenthe 3eer of the regne of Aza, 
11 thei offreden to the Lord in that day, and 
of the hondis and pray, that thei hadden 
brou3t, oxen seuen hundrith, and wethers 
lzseuen thousand. And he wente in of 
maner to strengthen the pese couenaunt, 
that thei schulden seche the Lord God of 
their fadirs in al herte, and in al their 
i3soule. 3if any forsothe sechith not, he 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


417 


seken hym, 3e schulen fynde hym'; so- 
theli‘ if 3e forsaken hym, he schal forsake 
jou. Forsothe many daies schulen passe3 
in Israel with outen veri God, and with- 
out preest, and without techere, and with- 
out lawe. And whanne thei! turnen ajen4 
in her angwisch, and crien to the Lord 
God of Israel, and seken hym, thei schulen 
fynde hym. In that tyme schal not bes 
pees to go out and to go in, but dredis™ 
on al" side on® alle the dwelleris of londis. 
For a? folk schal fiz3te azens folk4, and a™é 
citee a3ens a citee, for the Lord schal 
disturble hem in al anguyschs; but be 3e7 
coumfortid', and 3oure hondis be" not 
slakid’ ; for mede schal be to 3oure werk. 
And” whanne Asa hadde herd this thing, 
that is, the wordis and profesye of Asarie, 
the sone of Obed, the profete, he was 
coumfortid, and he dide a wei alle the 
idols fro al* the lond of Juda and of Ben- 
iamyn, and froY the citees whiche” he 
hadde take of the hil of Effraym. And he 
halewide the auter of the Lord, that was 
bifor the porche of the hows of the Lord. 
And he*® gaderide togidere al Juda and9 
Beniamyn, and with hem the comelyngis 
of Effraym, and of Manasses, and of Sy- 
meon; for manye® of Israel, seynge tlrat 
his® Lord God was with hym*, fledden 
ouer to hym. And whanne thei® hadden 10 
comunf in to Jerusalem, in the thridde 
monethe, in the fiftenthe 3eer of the rewme 
of Asa, thei® offriden ‘to the Lord® in that 1! 
dai, bothe of the spuylis and of the prey, 
which thei hadden brou3t, seuene! hundrid 
oxis*, and seuene thousynde wetheris. And 12 
Asa entride! bi custom to” make strong 
the boond of pees, that thei" schulden seke 
the Lord God of her fadris in al her herte, 
and in al her soule. Sotheli® he? seide, If 13 
ony man sekith not the Lord God of Is- 


b he was & pr.m. 


i Om. plures. 


neche 1. © in EIKLNO. and ins. P Om. rns. 
*thatr. %the kyng ins. ‘> manye men INS, 
f comen ajenes. & he and his peple s. 


the peple s. ™ among the peple, for to 1. for to N. 
VOL. If. 


k and ins. | thei, that is, there foreseid lawe.... 8. 
qa folk x sec. m. 
t coumfortid in jour soulis.s. “be thei ns. V slakid fro gode werkis 1s. 
¢ the Ns. 
bh Om. w. 
" his peple s. 
3H 


m dredis schul be 18. dredis be n. 
rQm.Nn. § angnishe, for her synne s. 
wOm.s. *Om.cns. Y of s. 
€ Asa and his oost N. his oost s. 

k oxen ins. ! entride among 
P the kyng ns. 


d hym Asa s. 
i that ts, seuene s. 
o And INS. 


418 


seith, the Lord God of Yrael, be he 
deed, fro the leste vnto® the most, fro 
14man vnto womman. And thei sworen 
to the Lord with a grete voice, in ioye, 
and in crie of trumpe, and in sown of 
15 clariowns, alle that weren in Jewrye, with 
execracioun; in alle forsothe their herte 
thei sworen, and in alle wil thei sou3ten 
hym, and founden; and the Lord 3aue to 
ishem reste by enuyroun. Bot and Maa- 
cha, the modir of kyng Aza, he put doun 
of hyre anguyschynge empyre, forthi 
that sche had maad a symulacre of a 
mans jeerde in the mawmet wode; the 
whiche al he distroyede, and in to gobetis 
munysehynge, he brent in to the streem 
izof Cedron. Forsothe the hee3e thingis 
ben laft’ style in Yrael; neuer the later 
the herte of Aza was perfijt alle the days 
isof hym. Tho thingis that his fadir hadde 
avowed and he brou3t in to the hous of 
the Lord, syluer and gold, and of vessels 
i9dyuerse purtenauncis ; bataile forsothe 
was not vnto the thrittithe jeer of the 
regne of Aza. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 The sixe and thrittithe 3eer forsothe of 
his regne Baza, kyng of Yrael, steizide 
up in to Judam, and with a wal he en- 
uyrounde Rama, that no man sikirly 
my3te gon oute or comme in fro the 
2rewme of Aza. Forsothe Aza brou3t 
forth gold and syluer fro the tresories of 
the hous of the Lord, and fro the kyngis 
tresories ; and sente to Benadab, kyng of 
Cyrie, that dwellid in Damasch, seyinge, 
3Couenaunt of pese is betwene me and 
thee, forsothe my fadir and thi fader 
hadden acord; for what thing I haue 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


KV. T4— =v 


rael, die he, fro the leeste ‘til to the mooste, 

fro man ‘til to" womman’. And alle‘ that™14 

weren in Juda sworen’ with cursyng’ t Mince 
to the Lord’, with greet vois, in? hertli hem siif to 
song, aud? in sown of trumpe, and in renee aa 
sown of clarionns®; for® thei sworen in al 15 ae 
her herte, and in al the? wille thei sou3ten ive here. ¢. 
hymn’, and founden hym; and the Lord 

3af to hem reste bi cumpas. But also he16 

puttides doun Maacha, the modir of ‘Asa 

the kyng, fro! the streit empire, for sche 

hadde made in a wode the* symylacre, 

‘ether licnesse', of a mannus 3erde; and he 

al to-hbrak al™ ‘that symylacre®, and pown- 

ede 7@° in to gobetis, and? ‘brente it4 in™ the 

stronde of Cedron. But’ hi3 placest weren 17 

left in Israel; netheles the herte of Asa 

was ri3tful in alle hise daies. And heis 

brou3te in to the hows of the Lord tho 

thingis that" his fadir avowide’, siluer ‘ 
and gold, and dyuerse purtenaunce of ves- 

sels; sotheli¥ batel was not ‘til to* the1g 


threttithe} 3eer of the rewme of Asa. + thrittithe ; i 


Ebreu is is, til 
to the xxxv. 
3eere. Lire 
here. c. 


CAP. XVI. 


ForsotheY in the sixe and thrittithe 3eer 1 
of his rewme Baasa, the* kyng of Israel, 
stiede* in to Juda, and cumpasside® Rama 
with a wal,-that no man of the rewme of 
Asa my3te go out ether‘ entre! sikirli. So-2 
theli® Asa brou3te forth gold and siluer 
fro the tresours of the hows of the Lord, 
and fro the kyngis tresonris ; and sentef to 
Benadab, kyng of Sirie, that dwellide in 
Damask, and seide8, Boond of pees is" bi-3 
twixe me and thee, and my fadir and thi 
fadir hadden acordyng'; wherfor Y sente) 
to thee siluer and gold, that whanne thou 


to aBru. 4 forsaken £ pr. im. 

4 vnto IN. to sx prm. Tvnto ins. 8 woman, be noon spared s. alle thei 1. al men and qwemen s. 
uwhiche ns. YOm.1Ns.  W cursynge, that is, bindinge hem with curs 1s. | * sworento1ns. Y Lord 
God ns. 2Om.n. 8 Om.c.  ? clariouns fo obeie herto ins. © certisixs. herins. & the Lord ns. 
£Om. plures. & putter. 4 the kyng Asai. king Asa xs. i that is, his owen moder fro ins. * a rvs. 
lor a licnesse 1. Om. x. ™Om.s. itt, 9° Om. plures. Pandher. 4 it brent x. brentes. * and 
threme it into 1. and he threw into ns. —§ But 3it 1s. ‘ places of manmetrie 1s. u whiche ins. 
V avoued iustlis. Wand Ins. *vnto Ins. Y Sothely ins. 2 Om.1ns. 4 stiedeupins. » he cum- 
passide ins. Cand a, dentreynins. ¢€ And ins. fhe sente thoins. & seide fo him 1s. » Om. s. 


accord togidre 1. concoord togidre ns. j haue sent 1ns. 


XVI. 4—12. II. PARALIPOMENON. 419 


seute to thee syluer and gold, that the 
pese couenaunt broken, that thou hast 


with Baza, kyng of Yrael, thou make: 


4hym gon awey fro me. The whiche 
thing founden, Benadab sente the princis‘ 
of his hoostis to the cytees of Yrael, the 
whiche smyten Achyon, and Dan, and 
Abelmaym, and alle the walled cytees of 
5Neptalym. The whiche thing whanne 
Baaza hadde herd, he cesede to bylden 
eup Rama, and he laft of his werk. Bot 
kyng Aza toke al Judam, and thei token 
the stoones of Rama, and the trees, that 
Baaza had maad redy to bildyng®; and 
he bilde up of hem Gaba, and Maspha. 
7In that tyme came Ananye, the prophete, 
to Aza, kyng of Juda, and seide to hym, 
For thou haddist trust in the kyng of 
Cyrye, and not in the Lord thi God, 
therfore the hoost of the kyng of Cyrie 
sis scapid fro thin hond. Whether Ethi- 
opes and Libies weren not many mo 
‘with carris of foure hors*, and the hors- 
men, and the ful grete multitude; the 
whiche whanne thou haddist trowed to 
9the Lord, he toke in to thin hondis ? The 
eejen forsothe of the Lord beholden al 
the erth, and 3euen strengthe to hem, 
that in perfijte herte bileenen ‘in toi 
hym. Folily thanne thou didist, and for 
that also in the present tyme a3eins thee 
10 batailes schul rijsen. And Aza is wroth 
a3einus the sear, and comaundide hym to 
be putt in the stockis. Forsothe myche 
vpon that was the Lord stered to indig- 
nacioun, and he slew3 of* the puple in 
ilthat tyme manye. The werkis forsothe 
of Aza, the first and the last, ben writen 
in the boke of the kyngis of Juda and of 
12 Yrael. Forsothe Aza was seeke the nyne 
and thrittithe 3eer of his regne, most hi- 


hast broke the boond of pees, which* thou 
hast with Baasa, king of Israel, thou make 
hym to go awei fro me. And whanne4 
this! was™ foundun", Benadab sente princes°® 
of hise oostis to? the citees of Israel, whiche4 
smytiden” Ahion, and Dan, and Abelmaym, 
and alle the wallid citees of Neptalym. 
And whanne Baasa hadde herd this, hes 
ceesside to bilde Rama, and left® his werk. 
Forsothet kyng Asa took al Juda, andé 
thei token fro Rama the" stonys and trees, 
whiche’ Baasa hadde maad redi to hild- 
yng; and he bildide of tho Gabaa, and 
Maspha. In that tyme Anany, the pro-7 
fete, cam to Asa, kyng of Juda, and seide 
to hym, For* thou haddist trist in the 
kyng of Sirie, and not in ‘thi Lord God’, 
herfor the oost of ‘the kyng of% Sirie 
aschapide? fro thin hond. Whether ‘Ethio-s 
piens and Libiens® weren not many mo* 
in charis, and‘ kny3tis, and fulf greet mul- 
titude; whiche’ whanne thou haddist bi- 
leuyd to the Lord, he bitook in to thin 
hondis? For the i3en' of the Lord biholden 9» 
al thei erthe, and 3yuen™ strengthe to hem, 
that with perfit herte bilenen in to hym. 
Therfor thou hast do folili, and! for this™, 
jhe, in present® tyme batels schulen rise 
a3ens thee. And Asa was wrooth ajens 10 
the prophete, and comaundide hym? to be 
sent in to stockis?. Forsothe the Lord4 
hadde indignacioun greetli on' this thing, 
and killide’ ful many of thet puple in that 
tyme. Sotheli the firste and the laste1 
werkis of Asa ben writun in the book of 
kyngis of Juda and of Israel. Forsothe" 12 
Asa was sijk ful gretli in the’ akynge of 
feet”, in the nyne and thrittithe 3eer of his 
rewme; and nether in his sikenesse* he 
sou3te the Lord, but tristideY more in the 
craft of lechis. And Asa slepte with hise 13 


f prince acu. & the bilding c. 4 than the ploowes Eprom. ito apru. * Om, 4BFu. 


« that ins. | this thing pcpeEFG1KLMNoPoRUWxbe. these thingiss. ™werins, " foundun sooth 1s. 
© the princes ins. Pintos. 4the whiche1. which oostess. * smetyn E1L. smiteden or distroyeden s. 
She leftein, t Andins. Uallethe ins, Ythe whiche1.  Azas. * Forthithat ins. Y the Lord 
thi Goadins, 2Om.ns. 4 ascapide, that is, [the oost of Sirie s] made the king of Israel to ascape ns. 
b the men of [or the oost of 8} Ethiope and [of x] Libie ins. ¢ mo than Israels. ‘inins. © Om Nn, 
fin ful ins. 8 the whiche 1. whiche greet oost and mullitude 8. bitook hems. i ize x. J Om. 1N8, 
k syueth c. thei 3yuen ins, !1Om.s. ™ this ¢rist in meni. this thi mistrusting in the Lords, ® this 
present ins. °tohim xg. P the stockis cnos. 4 Lord God ns. ft uponins. $he killide ins. ¢ hist. 
Azaisn. Azas. And ins. VY Om.1. W his feet ins. * sikenessis s. Y he tristide 1Ns. 


3H2 


420 


dously in sorowe of feet; and nether in 
the infirmyte he sou3te the Lord, bot 
more in the craft of lechis he trustide. 

13 And Aza slepte' with his fadirs, and is 
deed the oon and fouretithe 3eer of his 

isregne. And thei birieden hym in his 
sepulcre, that he hadde maad to hym in 
the cytee of Dauith; and thei putten hym 
vpon his bed ful of swote spices and 
strumpetis oynementis, that weren maad 
by the craft of pyment makers, and thei 
brenden vpon hym in a ful myche mou- 
ynge to lust. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 Josaphath forsothe, his sone, regnede 
for hym; and he wexe stronge a3einus 
2Yrael. And he sette noumbris of kny3tis 
in alle the cytees of Juda, that weren 
ennyrounde with wallis, and he disposede 
strengthes in the lond of Juda, and in 
the eytees of Effraym, that Aza, his fadir, 
3hadde taken. And the Lord was with 
Josaphath, the whiche wente in the weies 
of Dauith, his fadir, in the first ; he hoop- 
4ide not in Baalym, bot in the Lord God 
of Dauid, his fadir, and he wente in the 
heestis of hym, and not aftir the synnes 
sof Yrael. And the Lord confermede the 
rewme in his hond, and al Juda 3aue 
3iftis to Josaphath, and with oute noum- 
ber rychessis ben maad to hym, and 
smyche glorie. And whanne his herte 
hadde taken hardynesse for the weies of 
the Lord, also hee3 thingis and mawmete 
7 wodus he toke awei fro Juda. The thrid 
forsothe 3eer of his regne™ he sente of 
his" princis Banayl, and Abdyam, and 
Zachyam, and Nathanael, and Mychiam, 
that thei schulden techen in the cytees 
sof Juda; and with hem Leuytis, Semey- 
am, and Nathanyam, and Zabadyam, 
Azahil also, and Semyramoth, and Jona- 


I sleep c. 


ZOm. ns. *@thatins. > putten 1. 
f strnmpetis ins. § the whiche 1. whiche Ns. 

\sette 1. ™noumbre n. in noumbres. of s. 
8 he hopide inis. theestisins. ¥ aftir 1. 


thanne rs. ¥ the hi3 1. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


Mrewme E pr. m. 


¢ him, or leiden him s. 

h al togidre maad 1Ns. 
© whiclie rns. 

Vv was EFGIKLMNSxbe. 

Z wodis of mamwmetrie INS. 

dekenes, that is s. 4 that is to wite, Semeye 1. ¢ Om. c. 


XVI. 13-—XVI. 8. 


fadris, and he? was deed in the oon and 
fourtithe 3eer of his rewme. And theil4 
birieden him in his sepulcre, which? he 
hadde maad to hym silf in the cytee of 
Dauid ; and thei puttiden® hym® on‘ his 
bed ful of swete smellynge spices and 
oynementis® of hooris‘, that’ weren ‘maad 
togidere bi the craft of oynement makeris, 
and thei brenten on‘ hym with ful greet 
cost. 


CAP. XVII. 


Forsothe* Josaphat, his sone, regnyde1 
for hym; and he hadde the maistrye a3ens 
Israel. And he settide! noumbris™ of2 
kny3tis in" alle the citees of Juda, that® 
weren cumpassid with wallis, and he dis- 
poside strong holdis in the lond of Juda, 
and in the citees of Effraym, whiche? Asa, 
his fadir, hadde take. And the Lord was3 
with Josaphat, whiche’ 3ede in the firste™ 
weies of Dauid, his fadir; he hopide not 
in Baalym, but in* the Lord God of Dauid, 4 
his fadir, and he 3ede in the comaunde- 
mentis' of God, and not bi" the synnes of 
Israel. And the Lord confermyde thes 
rewme in his hond; and al Juda 3af 
3iftis to Josaphat, and ritchessis with 
outen noumbre, and myche glorie weren’ 
maad to hym. And whanne his hertee 
hadde take hardynesse for the weies” of 
the Lord, lie took* awei also hi3¥ placis 
and wodis’ fro Juda. Forsothe* in the7 
thridde 3eer of his rewme he sente of hise 
princes Benail, and Abdie, and Zacarie, 
and Nathanael, and Mychee, that thei 
schulden teche in the citees of Juda; ands 
with hem he sente dekenes* Semeye’, and® 
Nathanye, and Zabadie, and Azahel, and 
Semyramoth, and Jonathan, and Adonye, 


othe £ prom. 


dupon ins.  ¢ of oynementis IN. 

‘ these upon ins. Certis 1s. 
Pthati1. that rns. 1° first or best s. 
Ww weies which he kepte s. * took 


aAndins. © Juda Goddis lawe ns. ¢ nyne 


XVII. 9—19. 


than, and Adonyam, and Tobiam, and 
Abadonyam, Leuytis; and with hem 
9Elizama and Joram, prestis; and they 
tau3ten the puple in Juda, hauynge the 
boke of the lawe of the Lord; and thei 
_ enuyrouneden alle the cytees of Juda, 
1oand tau3ten al the puple. And so the 
ferd of the Lord is maad vpon alle 
rewmes of londis, that weren by enuy- 
roun of Juda; and thei weren not hardy 
uto fijten a3ein Josaphath. Bot and the 
Philisteis brou3ten 3iftis to Josaphath, 
and tribute of syluer; also Arabes 
brou3ten beestis, of wethers seuen thou- 
sand and seuen hundrith, and geet as 
wzfeele. Than Josaphath wexe, and is 
magnyfied ynto in heiz3te, and bilde up 
in Juda houses at licnesse of touris, and 
i3strengthed cytees; and many werkis 
made redy in the cytees of Juda. And 
men fizters and strong weren in Jerusa- 
lem; of whome this is the noumbre, by 
houses and meynes of echone. In Juda 
prince of the hoost, duyk Eduas, and 
with hym most stronge men thre hun- 
isdrith thousand. After this Johannan 
prynce, and with hym two hundrith and 
iei3tye thousand. Aftir hym also Ama- 
zias, the sone of Zeclhiri, sacrid to the 
Lord, and with hym two hundrith thou- 
i7sand of stronge men. This folowede a 
stronge man to batails, Eliada, and with 
hym of holdynge bowe and terget two 
ishundrith thousand. Aftir hym also Josa- 
bath, and with hym an hundrith and 
iv ei3tye thousand of al redy kny3tis. Alle 
thes weren at the hond of the kyng, 
outake othere, ‘the whiche® he hadde 
sette forth in wallid citees and in al 
Juda. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 42] 


and Thobie, and Abadonye, dekenes ; and 
with hem ‘he sente’ Elisama and Joram, 
preestis ; and thei tau3ten the puple ing 
Juda, and hadden’ the book of the lawe 
of the Lord; and thei cumpassiden alle 
the citees of Juda, and taujten" al the 
puple. Therfor the drede of the Lord 10 
was maad oni al the rewmes* of londis, 
that weren ‘bi cumpas of! Juda; and tho 
dursten not fijte a3ens Josaphat. Buti 
also Filisteis brou3ten 3iftis to Josaphat, 
and tol™ of siluer; and men of Arabie 
brou3ten" scheep seuene thousynde, and 
seuene hundrid of® wetheris, and so 
many buckis of geet. Therfor? Josaphat 12 
encreesside, and was’ magnified ‘til in to® 
an’ hi3'; and he bildide in Juda housis at 
the licnesse of touris, and stronge” citees ; 
and he made redi many werkis in thei3 
citees of Juda. Also men werriouris and 
stronge men weren in Jerusalem; of 14 
whiche’ this is the noumbre, ‘bi the’ 
housis and meynees of alle* in Juda’. 
Duyk Eduas was prince of the oost, and 
with hym weren thre hundrid thousynde 
ful stronge men. Aftir? hym was Johan- 1s 
nan prince, and with hym weren two 
hundrid thousynde and foure scoore thou- 
synde*, After this also Amasye, the sone 16 
of Zechri, was halewid to the Lord, and 
with hym weren two hundrid thousynde 
of stronge men. KEliada my3ti> to batels17 
suede this Amasie, and with hym weren 
two hundrid thousynde of men holdynge 
bouwe and scheeld. Aftir this® was also1s 
Josaphat, and with hym weren an hun- 
drid thousynde and foure scoore thou- 
synde of redi kny3tis. Alle these weren1y9 
at the hond of the kyng, outakun othere, 
whiche he hadde put in wallid cytees and? 
in al Juda. 


9 that ¢ pr. m. 


£Om.N. sentes.  & thei hadden ins. 
cumpas of BCDEFGKLMNOPQRSUWxbe. aboute 1. 
P Thanner. 4 he was in. 
stronge s. ¥ whiche men Ins. 
Judains. 2 And after s. 


W of 5. 
4 thousand men Ns. 


h thei taujten ins. 
Mm tribute 1Nns. 
r ynto 1. til to Nb. unto into s. 
X alle men in. alle men that there werin s. 
ba my3ti man INS. 


krewme EKL. ! bi the 

» brou3ten fo ham s. o Om. INs. 
Sfulins. thij wirschipeins. 4% ful 
¥ the meynee of 
4 Om. s. 


i upon ins. 


¢ Khada ns. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Josaphath thanne was ryche and myche 
glorious’, and in affynite ioyned is‘ to 
2Achab. And he wente donn aftir 3eeris 
to hym in to Samarie; at whos com- 
mynge Achab slew3 wethers and many 
oxen, and made to hym a feeste, and to 
the puple that was commen with hym ; 
and he mouede to hym that he schulde 
ssteijze up in to Ramoth-galaad. And 


Achab, kyng of Yrael, seid to Josaphath, . 


kyng of Juda, Comme with me in to Ra- 
moth-galaad. To whoine he answerde, 
As I, and thon; as thi puple, so and my 
puple; and with thee we schul ben in 
4bataile. And Josaphath seide to the kyng 
of Yrael, Counseile, I beseche, now the 
sword of the Lord. Than the kyng of 
Yrael gadrede of prophetis four hundrith 
men, and seide to hem, In Ramoth-galaad 
to fi3ten schul we gon, or cesen? And thei, 
Steiz3ith up, thei seyn, and God schal take 
6hem in the hond of the kyng. And Josa- 
phath seide, Whether is ther™ not heere 
a prophete of the Lord, that of hym also 
z7we asken? And the kyng of Yrael seith 
to Josaphath, Ther is oon man, of the 
which we mown asken the wille of the 
Lord, bot and IJ hatide hym, for he pro- 
phecieth not to me good, bot enyl al 
tyme; he is forsothe Mychias, the sone 
of Jemla’, And Josaphath seide to hym, 
8 Ne speke thou, kyng, this maner. Thanne 
the kyng of Yrael clepide oon of his geld- 
yngis, and seide to hym, Clepet anoon 
9 Mychyam, the sone of Jemla*. Bot the 
kyng of Yrael and Josaphath, kyng of 


P glorious of kny3tis 2 pr. m. 


4 Om. E pr. m. 
u Jebla gE. 


e€ Forsothe rns. f ful riche 1Ns. 
1 Achab ins. ™ oxen INs. 
stie vp with hims. 4QOm.s, 
shepe 8. t so and thou ns. 
w peple is my peple s. — * also 1. 


thee 1s. » this present 1s. © Thanne tr. 
reste and cum not theres. & the prophctis rns. 


a 4Achab ns, 
r Om. Ns. 


kintors. 1lbeis. ™ may also axe 1. axe this also s. 
moun wite Ns. 9 Om.1s.  ° good thing 1n. good thing to my lykyng s. 
yuel thing s. tandins.  Thaunex. VY hise ins. 


uauntis Ns. * anoon IN. fo me anoon Ss, 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


t Om. 4BFH. 


& Om. ins. 
© Josaphat ins. 

8 am ioyned to thee 1. am bi affinyte ioyned to the in fren- 
wart also to me 1. art lo mes. 

Y peple is thi peple s. 
4 Om. c. 
b 3e up thidere 1. 3e vp N. up thidere s. 


y And Ns. 


XVIII. 1—9. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Therfor® Josaphat was riche’ and ful$! 
noble, and bi affynyte, ‘ethir alie", he was 
ioyned to Achab. And aftir 3eerisi! he*2 
cam doun to hym! in to Samarie; at whos 
comyng Achab killide ful many wetheris 
and oxis™, and to the puple that cam with 
hym; and he" counseilide hym® to stie? 
in to Ramoth of Galaad. And4 Achab,3 
the’ kyng of Israel, seide to Josaphat, kyng 
of Juda, Come thou with me in to Ramoth 
of Galaad. To whom he answeride, As 
and Y ain’, thou! art"; as” thi puple”, so 
and* my pupleY; and we schulen be with 
thee in batel. And? Josaphat seide to the4 
kyng of Israel, Y biseche*, counsele thou 
in present> tyme the word of the Lord. 
Therfor® the kyng of Israel gaderide togi-5 
dere foure hundrid ‘men of 4 prophetis, and 
seide® to hem, Owen we to go in to Ra- 
math of Galaad for to fiz3te, ethir ‘take 
restef? And thei§ seiden, Stie 3e4, and God 
schal bitake' in* the hond of the king. 
And Josaphat seide, Whether no profetes 
of the Lord is! here, that we ‘axe also™ of 
hym? And the kyng of Israel seide to7 
Josaphat, O man is", of whom we ‘moun 
axe? the wille of the Lord, but anda Y 
hate hym, for he prophecieth not good’, 
but yuel® to me in al tyme; sothely' it is 
Mychee, the sone of Jebla. And Josaphat 
seide to hym, Kyng, speke thou not in this 
maner. Therfor" the kyng of Israel cle-s 
pide oon of the’ geldyngis”, and seide to 
hym, Clepe thou soone* Mychee, the sone 
of Jebla. ForsotheY the kyng of Israel 
and Josaphat, the? kyng of Juda, saten* 


8 Jebla E pr.m. tClepeto me & prim. 


hOm. in. i certeyn 3eeris ins. Josaphat 1s. 


P wende up with him 1. stie with him N. 


Vand as 1n. and as bi our affinyte s. 
z And eft 1. And over this s. a biseche 
e he seide ins. f reste at hoom 1. shuln we take 
ibitake ¢ rns. 
P may wite 1. 
8 yuel thing 1n. he profecieth 
Ww geldingis or chast seruauntis 1. chaast ser- 
zOm. ins. 4 saten thanne 1, saten this tyme s. 


n ther is 1. is 273 here s. 


XVIII. 1o—17. 


Juda, either seeten in their see, clothed’ 
with kyngis honournyng™”; forsothe thei 
seeten in the corn flore bysidis the 3ate 
of Samarye; and alle the prophetis pro- 
10phecieden beforn hem. Sedechias for- 
sothe, the sone of Chanane, made to hym 
yren hornes, and seith, Thes thingus 
seith the Lord, With thes thou schalt 
wynewen Cyrie, to the tyme that thou 
11 ‘to-trede*® it. And alle the prophetis pro- 
phecieden lije maner, and seiden, Steize 
up in to Ramoth-galaad, and thou schalt 
welsumly done; and the Lord schal take 
12hem in to the hondis of the kyng. The 
messager forsothe, that wente to clepen 
Mychie, seith to hym, Lo! the wordis of 
alle theY prophetis with oon mouthe good 
thingus tellen to the kyng; thanne, I be- 
seche thee, that thi word fro hem dis- 
sente not, and speke thou welsum thingis. 
13To whome answerd Mychias, The Lord 
liuith, for what euer thingis my Lord 
schal seyn, thes I schal speken. Thanne 
14he came to the kyng. To whom the king 
seith, Mychie, schul we gon into Ramoth- 
galaad to fizten, or resten ? To whom he 
answerde, Steizith up, alle thingus for- 
sothe welsum schul fallen, and the en- 
myes schul ben taken into 30ure hondis. 
is And the kyng seide, Eft and eft I adiure 
thee, that thou speke not to me bot that? 
16is sothe in the name of the Lord. And 
he seith, I sawe al Yrael scatered in 
hyllis, as scheep with oute schepherde. 
And the Lord seid, Thes han not lordis ; 
be turned ajein ech man in to his house 
17in pees. The kyng of Yrael seith to Jo- 
saphath, Whether I seide not to thee, that 
this schulde not prophecien to me eny 


VY clad c. ¥ onourynge 1. 


> thei weren rns. ¢ sotheli ncpEFGKLMoPQRUWxbg. and INs. 


seyntuarie in. f hingis profetis s. 
Achab 1. he seide to king Achab s. 
Sirie ins. ™ that loond 1s. hem n. 
thei seiden x. P thou up INs. 
dissent or discord s. 
Xthor. y And Ins. 
4 3e up thider 1xs. 
whom 3e bileuen, profecien to 30u 8. 
abrood Ins. ™ Om. Ns. 


q And 1s. 


2 Mychee 1ns. 


2 a scheepherde 18. 


’ 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


x trede B. 


© man therfor 1s, 


423 


euer eithir in his seete, and weren clothid 
in kyngis aray ; forsothe® thei saten in the 
cornfloor, ‘ether large hows", bisidis the 
jate of Samarie*; and alle the prophetis‘ 
profesieden bifor hem. Forsothe® Sede- io 
chie, the sone of Cananee, made to hym 
yrone hornes, aud seide", The Lord seith 
these thingis, With these! thou schalt wyn- 
dewek Siriel, til thou al to-brake it™. Andi 
alle prophetis" profesieden in lijk maner, 
and seiden®, Stie thou? in to Ramoth of 
Galaad, and thou schalt haue prosperite ; 
and the Lord schal bitake hem in to the 
hondis of the kyng. Forsothe4 the mes- iz 
sanger, that 3ede to clepe Mychee, seide 
to hym, Lo! the wordis of alle prophetis* 
tellen with o mouth goodis’ to the kyng; 
therfor, Y preye thee, that thi word di- 
sentet not fro hem, and that thou speke 
prosperitees". To whom Mychee answer-13 
ide, The Lord lyueth, for what euer thingis 
my Lord’ spekith to me, Y schal speke 
these* thingis. TherforY he* cam to the 
kyng. To whom the kyng seide, Mychee, 14 
owen we go in to Ramoth of Galaad to 
fizte, ether take* reste?? Tio whom het 
answeride, Stie 3e4, for alle prosperitees 
schulen come*, and enemyes schulen be bi- 
takunf in to 3oure hondis®. And the kyng 15 
seide®, Eft.and eft Y charge thee, that thou 
speke not to me no but that! that is soth 
in the name of the Lord. And he* seide, i¢ 
Y si3 al Israel scaterid! in the™ hillis, as 
scheep with out scheepherde®. And the 
Lord seide, These men han not lordis; 
ech man® turne ajen in to his hows in 
pees. The kyng of Israel seide to Josa-17 
phat, Whether Y seide not to? thee, that 
he profesiede not ony good’ to me, but 


y Om, aprn, 2 the thing that c. 


4Om. 1n. ether in a large house s. ¢the 


& Oon of hems. And n. And 00 greet profeel of hems. 4 he seide to 

i these hornes 1s. 
. the prophetis rv. the kingis profeetis s. 
rT the prophetis rs. 
u prosperitees fo him 1. prosperite to the king s. 
@ to take ins. 
© come fo 30u 1. come there to 30u NS. 
h seide fo him s. 


k wyndewe or scatere abrood 1s. | the men of 
9 thei seiden to Achab 1s. 
8 goode thingis ins. _ t discorde 1. 
Vv Lord Ged Ins. ® sey 3Ns. 
b reste, and not to go thidere ins. © Mychee rns. 
ftakun nsx. 8 hondis, as jour profetis to 
i that thing ins. * Mychee ins. | scaterid 
P.Om.s. 4 good thing ns. 


424 


thing of good, bot tho thingis that ben 
iseuy]? And he therfore seith, Herith the 
word of the Lord. I saw3 the Lord syt- 
tynge in his seete, and al the hoost of 
heuen stondynge nee3 to hym fro the 
19 ri3t and fro the left. And the Lord seide, 
Who sehal deceyuen Achab, kyng of 
Yrael, that he steije up, and falle in Ra- 
moth-galaad ? And whanne oon seide in 
20this maner, and another in* another, a> 
spirite went forth, and stood before the 
Lord, and seith, I schal deeeynen hym. 
To whome the Lord, Jn what thanne, he 
21 seith, thou sehalt deceyuen ? And he an- 
swerd, I sehal goon out, and I schal ben 
a® spirite lier in the month of alle the 
prophetis of hym. And the Lord seide, 
Thou sehalt deceyuen, and han the oouer 
22hond; go out, and do so. Nowe thanne, 
lo! the Lord 3aue a spirite of lesynge in 
the mouthe of alle thi‘ prophetis, and the 
23 Lord spae of thee euy] thingis. Forsothe 
Sedeehias, the sone of Chanane, wente to, 
and smote the elieek boon of Myehie, 
and seith, Bi what weie passede ouer the 
Spirite of the Lord fro me, that he schulde 
2a speke to thee? And Myehias seide, Thou 
thi silf schal seen in that day, whanne 
thou schalt gon in the bed fro the bed, 
25that thou be hid. Forsothe the kyng of 
Yrael comaundide, seyinge, Takith Myche, 
and Jedith hym to Amon, the prince of 
the eyte, and to Joas, the sone of Ama- 
26leeh; and 3e sehul seyn, Thes thingis 
seith the kyng, Puttith this in to prisone, 
and 3euith to hym a litill of brede, and a 
lityll of water, to the tyme that I be 
27 turned ajeyn in pese. And Myehias seide, 
3if thou schal be torned a3ein in peese, 
the Lord hath not spoken in me. And 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XVIII. 18——27. 


tho thingis that ben yuele? And therfor' 18 
Mychee seide, Here 3e the word of the 
Lord. Y- si3 the Lord sittynge in his 
trone, and al the oost® of henene stond- 
ynge ny3 him at the rij3tside and* ‘left- 
side®. And the Lord seide, Who sehal io 
disseyne Achab, the’ kyng of Israel, that , 
he stie’, and falle doun* in Ramoth of 
Galaad? And whanne oon seide in’ this 
maner, and another seide inY another ma- 
ner, a spirit eam forth, and stood bifor 20 
the Lord, and seide, Y sehal disseyue hym?. 
To whom the Lord seide, ‘Wherynne, 
therfor® sehalt thou disseyue>? And he2i 
answeride, Y schal* go out, and Y schal 
be a ‘fals spirit’ in the mouth of alle hise 
profetis. And the Lord seide®, Thou schalt 
disseyue', and thou sehalt haue the may- 
stri; go thou out, and do so. Nowé® ther-22 
for, lo! the Lord hath 3oue a spirit of 
leesyng in the month of alle thi prophetis, 
and the Lord spak" yuels' of thee’. For-23 
sothe! Sedeehie™, the sone of Chananee, 
neizide", and smoot® ‘the cheke of Myehee?, 
and seide, Bi what weye passide‘ the Spirit 
of the Lord™ fro me to speke to’ thee? 
And Myehee' seide", Thou thi silf sehalt 24 
se in that dai, whanne thou sehalt entre 
fro closet in to eloset, that thou be hid’. 
Sotheli* the kyng of Israel comaundide, 25 
seilynge, Take 3e Myehee, and lede 3e hym 
to Amon, prinee of the citee, and to Joas, 
the sone of Amaleeh ; and 3e sehulen seie*, 26 
The kyng seith these thingis, Sende 3eY 
this man in to prisoun, and 3yue 3e to? 
hym a litil of breed, and a litil of * watir, 
til’ Y turne ajen in pees. And Mychee27 
seide, If thou turnest ajen in pees, the 
Lord spak not int me’. And® hef seide, 
Alle ‘puplis here 3e%. Therfor' the kyng 2s 


aOm.c. boan.oorn. ¢ Om.c. 4 the apru. 
Tthanne 1. § oost or cumpanys. ‘and atihe1ns. Uleft ns. ¥Om.1Ns. Wstie up ins. * doun 
hideths. ¥ he shuld dissetue himins. % Aehab ins. ® Wherynne B. And wherynne ins. disseyue 


him 1s. © shal, he seith s. ¢ly3inge spirit N. spirit lezinge s. © seide fo him ns.  disseyue him 1. disseyne 


Achab ns. €Om.wns.  »} hath spoken 1ns. 


i yuel thingis rs. 


k thee do come 1. thee, that is, he hath 


seid yuel thingis to come to thees. 1Andin. ™ Sedechie, the kingis propheet 1s. © neizede ny3 Ns. ° he 


smoot rns. P Mychee upon the cheeke rns. 
propheet 1. Mychee, the prophete of God s. 

disseiued the king bi lesyng s. ® And Ins. 
b til that 1. til the tyme that s. 


that beu here present, here 3e, that ts, understonde 3¢, these thingis that ben seid s. 


q hath rns. 
u seide fo him s. 


t Lord passid ins. 8 with 1 t Mychee, the 
Vv hid for drede 1. hid, that thou hast 


x seie fo hem Ns. Y 3e or puf3es. *Om.ns. @Om. k. 
cto nsx. 4 me these thingiss. ¢ And eft1. £ Myches. & peplis, 
b Thanne 1. 


XVIII. 283—XIX. 2. 


2she seith, Herith, alle puplis. Thanne 
steizeden up the kyng of Yrael, and Jo- 
saphath, kyng of Juda, in to Ramoth- 
29galaad. And the kyng of Yrael seide to 
Josaphath, I schal chaungen habite, and 
so I schal gone to fizten; thou forsothe 
be clothed® with thi clothes. And, the 
habite chaungid, the kyng of Yrael came 
30to bataile. The kyng forsothe of Cyrie 
hadde comaundid to the dukis of his 
chyualrye, seyinge, Fi3tith not ajeyn 
the lest, or ajein the moste; bot ajeins 
staloone the kyng of Yrael. And so 
whanne the princes of the chyualrye 
hadden seen Josaphath, thei seiden, Kyng 
of Yrael is this; and thei enuyrouneden 
hym, fiztynge. And he cried to the Lord ; 
and he ‘helpide tof hym, and he torned 
sz2hem awei fro hym. And whanne the 
duykis of the chyualrye hadden herd, 
that it was not the kyng of Yrael, thei 
33laften hym. It felle forsothe, that oon of 
the puple in to vncerteyn kast an arowe, 
and smote the kyng of Yrael betwen the 
hatreel and the schulders. And he to his 
chariotere seith, Turne thin hond, and 
leede out me fro the scheltrun; for I am 
34woundid. And the fijt is eendid in that 
day. Bot the kyng of Yrael stode in his 
chaar a3einus Cyries vnto euen, and is 
deed, the sone goynge doun. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Josaphath, the kyng of Juda, is turn- 
ed ajein pesibly in to his house in to 
2Jerusalem. To whome Hieu, the sone 
of Ananye, sear, a3ein came, and seith to 
hym, To the vnpiteuous man thou 3euist 
helpe, and to hem that haten the Lord 
by frenschip thou ert ioyned; and ther- 
fore the wrath forsothe of the Lord thou 


e clad c. 


t stieden up ins. chaunge or do of 's. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


fhalp c. 


1 my clothing 1. my kingis clothes s. 


425 


of Israel, and Josaphat, the kyng of Juda, 
stieden' in to Ramoth of Galaad. And the 29 
kyng of Israel seide to Josaphat, Y schal 
chaunge* clothing', and so Y schal go to 
fiz3te; but be thou clothid in thi clothis™. 
Therfor™ whanne the kyng of Israel hadde 
chaungid clothing®, he cam? to batel. For-30 
sothed the kyng of Sirie comaundide to the 
duykis of his' multitude of kny3tis’, and 
seide’, Fi3te 3e not ajens the leeste, nether" 
a3ens the mooste; nov but ajens the kyng 
aloone of Israel. Therfor whanne thesi 
princes of the multitude of kny3tis hadden 
seyn Josaphat", thei seiden, This is the 
kyng of Israel; and thei cumpassiden hym, 
and fou3ten*. And heY criede to the Lord ; 
and the Lord helpide hym, and turnede 
hem? awey fro hym. Sotheli* whanne the 32 
duykis of the multitude of kny3tis hadden 
herd>, that it was not the kyng of Israel, 
thei leften hym. Forsothe® it bifelde’, that 33 
oon’ of the puplef schette an arewe in to 
vncerteyn£, and smoot! the! kyng of Israel 
bitwixe the necke and the schuldris. And 
hek seide to his charietere, Turne thin 
hond, and lede me out of the scheltrun; 
for Y am woundid. And the batel wassai 
endid in that dai. Certis the! kyng of 
Israel stood’ in his chare a3ens™ men of 
Sirye ‘til to” euentid®, and he diede, whanne 
the sunne 3ede doun. 


CAP. XIX. 


Forsothe Josaphat, kyng of Juda, turn-i 
ede a3en pesibli in to his hows in to Jeru- 
salem. Whom the profete Hieu, the sone2 
of Ananye, mette, and seide? to hym, Thou 
3yuest help to a wickid man, and thou art 
ioyned bi frendschip to hem that haten 
the Lord; and therfor sotheli thou de- 
seruedist4 the wraththe of the Lord; buts 


& Om. ABFH. 


m clothis, that is, in 


thi kingis aray xs. ™ And ins. ° his clothing ins. P cam forth rns. 4% Andins. ‘the Ns. § his 
kny3tis ns. tseide to hems. “nes. YOm.1. W Josaphat, kyng of Juda is.  * fouzten azens him ts. 
y Josaphat 1ns. % hem that feersly assayled hims. ® Andins. » herd or vndirstonde 1s. © And Ins. 
d hifelle thanne 1. bifille ther thannes. ©amanz. oo man ns. f puple of Sirie1s. & vncerteyn or to 
gesse 1. vncerteynte amonge the oost of Israels. he smoot ins. i Achab the 1s. * Achab ws. |! Achab 
the n. Achab s. ™ forn ajens the oost of ine. % vnto ins. © the euentid ns. Phe seide ins. 4 hast 
disserued 1Ns. 
VOL. TT. 31 


426 


shaddist déserned; bot good werkis ben 
founden in thee, for thi that thou toke 
awey the mawmete wodis fro the lond of 
Juda, and haddist maad redy thin hert, 
that thon seche ajein the Lord God of 
4thi fadirs. Than Josaphath dwellide in 
Jerusalem; and eft he wente out to the 
puple fro Bersabee vnto the hill of Ef- 
fraym, and he clepide hem a3ein to 
sthe Lord God of their fadirs. And he 
sette domesmen of the lond in alle the 
strengthed citees of Juda, by alle placis. 
¢ And comaundyng to the iugis, Seeith, 
he seith, what 3e done; forsothe 3e en- 
haunten not dome of man, bot of the 
Lord; and what euer 3e schul demyn, 
7in to 30u it schal redoundyn; be the 
drede of the Lord with 30u, and with 
diligence alle thingus doith; forsothe 
ther is not anentis the Lord oure God 
wyckidnesse", ne acceptynge of persones, 
8ne couetise of 3iftis. And Josapbath in 
Jerusalemi sette Leuytis, and prestis, and 
princes of the ineynees of Yrael, that 
dome and the cause of the Lord thei 
schulden deemyn to the dwellers of it. 
9And he comaundide to hem, seyinge, 
Thus 3e schul doon in drede of the Lord, 
10feithfully and in perfijte herte. Al cause 
that comith to 3ou of joure bretheren, 
that dwellen in their* cytees, bitwen kyn- 
rede and kynrede, wher euer questioun is 
of the lawe, of the maundement, of cery- 
monyes, of! justyfyingis, scheweth to hem, 
that thei synnen not in to the Lord, and 
wrath come not vpon 30u and on 3o0ure 
faders. So thanne doynge 3e schul not 
lisynnen. Amarias forsothe, preste and 
joure bischop, in thes thingis that to 
God pertenen, schal sytten vpon. Bot Za- 
badias, the sone of Ysmael, ‘the whiche™ 


h wickenesse c. 1 Irael c. 

8 mawmet wodis INs. 
w seide fo hem 1Ns. 
¢ Om. s. 


r hast don 1s. 
place or cuntre n. 
aitschal1, » agens 1. agen Ns. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


k 30ure & pr.m. 


t and also 1s. 
x 3e, that is, be 3e ware s. 
d diligens, that is, with discrecioun s. 


XIX, 3——11. 


good werkis ben foundyn in thee, for 
thou didist" awey wodis’ fro the lond of 
Juda, and thou hast maad redi thin herte, 
for to seke the Lord God of thi fadris. 
Therfor Josaphat dwellide in Jerusalem ; 4 
and eft he 3ede out to the puple fro Ber- 
sabee til” to the hil of Effraym, and he 
clepide hem a3en to the Lord God of her 
fadris. And he ordeynede iugis of thes 
lond in alle the strengthid citees of Juda, 
bi ech place’. And he comaundide to thee 
iugis, and seide*, Se 3e%, what 3e doen; 
for 3e vsen not the doom of man, buty of 
the Lord ; and what euere thing 3e demen?, 
schal* turne ‘in to® 3ou; the drede of the7 
Lord be with 30u, and do 3e° alle thingis 
with diligence’; for® anentis ‘joure Lord 
God‘ is 10 wickidnesse, nether® takynge® 
of persoones, nether! coueitise of 3iftis*. 
Also! in Jerusalem Josaphat ordeynedes 
dekenes, and preestis, and the princes of 
meynees™ of Israel, that thei schulden 
deine the doom and cause" of the Lord to 
the dwellers of it®°. And he comaundides 
to hem, and seide, Thus 3e schulen: do in 
the drede of the Lord, feithfuli and in per- 
fite herte. Ech cause that cometh to 3ou10 
ofP 3oure britheren, that’ dwellen in her 
citees, bitwixe kynrede and kynrede, where 
euere is questioun of the lawe, of * ‘the co- 
maundement’, of t cerymonyes, ether sacri- 
Jices", of ¥ iustifyingis, schewe 3e to hem’, 
that thei do not synne a3ens the Lord, and 
that wraththe* com not onY 3ou and on’ 
3oure britheren. Therfor 3e doynge’ thus* 
schulen not do synne. Forsothe? Amarie, 11 
joure preest and bischop, schal be souereyn 
in these thingis, that perteynen to God. 
Sotheli® Zabadie, the sone of Ismael, which® 
is duyk in the hows of Juda, schal be on® 
thof werkis that perteynen to the office of 


land B. ™ that c. 

uOm,. nsx. VY place or cuntrey therof ts. 
Y but dome s. 2 demen vniustly ins. 
€ forsothe ns. f the 


Lord 3oure God ns. &nes. } he is a taker 1. he is acceptinge n. he is taking or accepling s. ine is. 


k siftis ower cometh him xs. | And also s. 
Pfro a. 4whiche ns. ‘orofwns. 8 heest ins. 
or xs. W hem the trewthe s. 
demynge xs. ® thus iustly us. 
f the 1nosxb. 


b And ixs. 


m the meynees Ns. 
t or of INS. 

x wraththe of the Lord 1s. his wraththe n. 
¢ And Ins. 


nthe cause rns. © Jerusalem rns. 
uQOm. 1n. or of sacrifices s. Yor of 1, 
Yupon ins. 2 doynge or 


(that ins. © sowereyn upon 1s. vpon N. 


XX. 1—9. 


is duyk in the hous of Juda, schal ben 
vpon tho" werkis that pertenen to the 
office of the kyng; and 3e han maistris 
and Leuytis before 30u; takith coumfort, 
and doith diligently, and the Lord schal 
ben with 30u in goodis. 


CAsPinkat, 


i Aftir these thinges ben gedered the 
sonis of Moab, and the sonis of Amon, and 
with hem of the Ydumes, to Josaphath, 

2that thei fiz3ten a3einus hym. And mes- 
sagers camen, and scheweden to Josa-- 
phath, seying, Ther is comen a3eins thee 
a grete multitude fro thes places that ben 
bez3onde the see, and of Cyrie; and, lo! 
thei ben in Azozonthamar, that is of 

3Engaddi. Josaphath forsothe, for drede 
agast, al 3af hym self to preyen the Lord, 
4and prechide fastyng to al Juda. And 
Juda is gadered to preye the Lord, bot 
and alle of their cytees camen to be- 
ssechen hym. And whanne Josaphath 
hadde stonden in the mydil company of 
Jude and Jerusalem, in the hous of the 

6 Lord, before the newe porche, and seith, 
Lord God of oure fadirs, thou art God 
in heuen, and thou lordschipist to alle 
rewmes of gentilis; in thin hond is 
strengthe and my3t, ne eny man may to 

7thee a3eyn stonden. Whether not thou, 
oure God, hast slayn alle the dwellers of 
this lond before thi puple Irael, and 
hast 3euen it to the seed of Abraham, thi 

sfrende, in to euermore? And thei dwell- 
iden in it, and maden out in it a seyn- 
gtuarie to thi name, seyinge, 3if euyls 
commen vpon us, swerde of dome, of 
pestilence, and hungur, we schul stonden 
before this hous in to euermore in thi 
sijte, in the® whiche is inwardly clepid 
thi name, and we schul crien to thee 


1 to the 4. the zB. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


427 


the kyng, and 3e han maistris® dekenes 
bifor 30u ; be 3e coumfortid, and do 3e dili- 
gentli®, and the Lord schal be with 3ou in 
goodisi. 


CAP. XX. 


Aftir these thingis the sones of Moab,1! 
and the sones of Amon, and with hem of * 
Idumeis', weren gaderid togidere to™ Josa- 
phat, for to fi3te ajens hym. And mes-2 
sangeris camen, and schewiden™ to Josa- 
phat, and seiden, A greet multitude of tho 
placis that® ben bizondis the see, and? of 
Sirie, is comun ajens thee; and, lo! thei 
stonden? in Asasonthamar, which’ is En- 
gaddi’. Forsothet Josaphat was aferd by3 
drede, and ‘3af hym silf al for® to preye 
‘the Lord’, and prechide’ fastynge to al 
Juda. And Juda ‘was gaderid togidere*4 
for to preye the Lord, but’ also alle men 
camen fro her citees for to biseche hym?. 
And whanne Josaphat hadde stonde in thes 
myddis of the cumpeny of Juda and of Je- 
rusalem, in? the hows of the Lord, bifor 
the newe large place”, he seide, Lord God 6 
of oure fadris, thou art God in heuene, 
and thou art lord of alle rewmes of folkis; 
strengthe and power ben in thin hond, 
‘and noon® may ajenstonde thee. Whe-7 
ther not thou, oure God, hast slayn alle 
the dwelleris of this lond bifor thi puple 
Israel, and hast’ 30ue it to the seed of 
Abraham, thi freend, withouten ende ? Ands 
thei® dwellidenf therynne, and bildidens 
therinne a seyntuarie to thi name, and 
seiden, If yuelis comen on! vs, the! swerd 9 
of doom, pestilence, and* hungur, we 
schulen stonde bifor this hows withouten 
ende in thi si3t, in which hows thi name 
is clepid', and we™ schulen crie" to thee 


© Om. c pr.m. 


& maistir vs. 4 diligentli, that is, studiousli or bisilis. |‘ gode thingisins. kOm.crn. | men of 
Ydumee iss. ™ and thet camento1ns.  %schewiden this1s. © whichens. POm.s. 4 stonden 
togidre ins. that ins. * clepid Engaddi ins. ¢ Andins. al him selff he 3af ins. ¥ to the Lord 
of help s. Whe prechide 1. he prechide, that is, he comaundid s. *Om.1xs. Yand ins. 7 hym of 
helps. ®andina. 4 place of the temple ns. ¢ne ony thing ins. ‘thon hast ns. © thei, that is, 
the after comers of Abrahams. f han dwellidins. _& thei bildiden 1Ns. h to 1Ns. i or the INs, 
Koris. !ynclepidin. © Om. a. ® crie there 18. 


312 


428 


in oure tribulaciouns; and thou schalt 
10heeren us, and maken us saaf. Nowe 
thanne see, sonus of Amon and of Moab 
and the hil of Seyr, by whome thou 
grauntidist not to the sonus of Irael that. 
thei schulden passe, whann they wenten 
out fro Egipt, bot thei boweden aside fro 
1lhem, and thei slowen hem not, aj3ein- 
ward thei don, and enforsen to kasten us 
120ut fro the possessyoun?, that thou, oure 
God, hast taken to us; thanne schalt thou 
not demen hem? In us forsothe is not so 
myche strengthe, that we mown to this 
multitude with stonden, that fallith vpon 
us; bot whanne we vnknowen what we 
owen to don, that oonly we han of resi- 
due, that oure ee3jen we dressen up to 
13thee. Al forsothe Juda stood before the 
Lord, with litil childre and wijues and 
litheir free childre. Forsothe there was 
Yaziel, the sone of Sacharie, sone of Ana- 
nye, sone of Hieyel, sone of Machanye, 
Leuyte, and of the sonus of Asaph, vpon 
whome is maad the Spirit of the Lord in 
ismydil of the puple, and seith, Takith 
heede, al Juda, and that dwellen in Jeru- 
salem, and thou, kyng Josaphath, thes 
thingus seith the Lord to 3ou, Willith not 
dreeden this multitude, ne taken ferd, it 
isis not forsothe jour fist, bot of God. To 
morowe 3e schul stey3en up ajeinus hem; 
forsothe thei ben to stei3en up bi the 
pich hil, Cis by name, and 3e schul 
fynden hem in the ouermest of the 
streme, that is a3einus the wildernesse of 
17Jheruel. Forsothe 3e schul not ben, the 
whiche schul fijten; bot onely tristely 
stondith, and 3e schul seen the help of 
the Lord vpon 30u. O Juda and Jerusa- 
lem, willith not dreeden, ne takith ferd ; 
to morowe 3e schul goon out aj3eynus hem, 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


XX. 10—-17, 


in oure tribulaciouns; and thou schalt here 
ys, and schalt° make vs saaf. Now ther- 1 
for? lo! the sones of Amon and of 4 Moab 
and the hil of Seir, bi whiche™ thou graunt- 
idist not to the sones of Israel for to passe, 
whanne thei 3eden out of Egipt, but thei 
bowiden awei fro hem, and killiden’ not 
hem, theit doon" a3enward, and enforsen’ 11 
to caste vs out of the possessioun, which” 
thou, oure God, hast 30ue to vs; therfor 12 
whether thou* schalt not deme hemyY? 
Treuli in vs is not so greet strengthe, that 
we moun ajenstonde this multitude, that 
felde? yn on* vs; but sithen> we witen 
not what® we owen to do, we ‘han oneli 
this residue‘, that we dresse oure ijen to 
thee’. Sothelif al Juda stood bifor the’ 13 
Lord, with her litle children and wyues? 
and fre! children. Forsothe* Hiaziel, the 14 
sone of Zacarie, sone! of Ananye, sone! of 
Hieyel, sone! of Machanye, was a dekene, 
and of™ the sones of Asaph, on® whom 
the Spirit of the Lord was maad in the® 
myddis of the cumpeny?, and he’ seide, 15 
Al Juda, and je that dwellen in Jerusalem, 
and thou, king Josaphat, perseyue je", the 
Lord seith these thingis to 30u, Nyle 3e 
drede, nether be 3e aferd of this multitude, 
for it is not 3oure batel, but Goddis batel. 
To morewe 3e schulen stie® ‘a3ens hem ; for 16 
thei schulen' stie" bi the side of the hil, ‘bi; 
name Seys’, and 3e schulen fynde hem in 
the hi3nesse” of the stronde, which* is 
azsens the wildirnesse of Jheruhel. For? 17 
it schulen® not be 3e, that schulen fizte ; 
but oneli stonde 3e trustili, and 3e schulen 
se the help of the Lord on* jou. A>! Juda 
and Jerusalem, nyle 3e drede, nether be 3e 
aferd ; to morewe 3e schulen go out ajens 
hem, and the Lord schal be with 3ou. 
Therfor Josaphat, and Juda, and alle the 18 


P possyoun B. 


°©Om. Ns. P therfor Lord 1ns. 
t Om. a. but thei 1. Lord, thei s. 
wthat 3s. * thou, Lord 1s. 
b> sith Ins, ¢ that what s. 


or the remenauntis, of the peple han this trust oonli in the s. 
k And Ins. 
¥ 3e or taketh heede 1s. 
W heizthe ns. 


hher wyues rns. i with her fre rs. 
° Om. 1x. P cumpeny of Judais. 4 Om.1. 
vp Ns. Om.3. —V elepid Sey bi name ins. 
auponis. > Orns. alo. 


q the sones of 8. 
u doon yuel for good s. 
y hem gilti of greet trispace s. 

4 the peple that is left han cause 1. the residue han this oonly n. the residue, 


© whom 1. whiche peplis s. 5 thei killiden ins. 
Vv thei enforsen hem 1. thei enforsen Ns. 
Z fallith 1. fallenn, ® upon 1. now vpon s. 


e bifor thee p. fAndins.  & thee 

™ he was of Is. © upon INS. 
Ssti3e vp ns. tOm. 1. 4 stize 
*thatins. Y Certisins. 2 schial ry. 


1 the sone 1Ns. 


XX. 18—25. 


isand the Lord schal ben with 30u. Josa-° 


phath thanne, and Juda, and alle the 
dwellers of Jerusalem, fellen bowed in to 
the erth before the Lord, and honoureden 
ighym. Bot the Leuytis of the sonus of 
Caath, and of the sonus of Chore, preys- 
eden the Lord God of Yrael with a grete 
20 voice in to hei3t. And whann erly thei 
hadden risen, they wenten out by the de- 
sert of Thecue; and, hem goon forth, Jo- 
saphath stonding in the mydil of hem, 
seide, Heerith me, Juda and alle the 
dwellers of Jerusalem; beleeuith in the 
Lord 3oure God, and 3e schul ben syker ; 
leeuith to the prophetis of hym, and alle 
21 thingus schul commen welsum. And he 
3af counsei] to the puple, and he sette 
the syngers of the Lord, that they schul- 
den preysen hym in their companyes, and 
that thei schulden gon before the hoost, 
and with cordaunt voice thei schulden 
seyn, Knowlecheth‘ to the Lord for good"; 
for in to the world the mercy of hym. 
22 And whanne thei hadden begunne preys- 
yngis to syngyn, the Lord turned the 
buschementis of hem in to hem silf, of 
the sonus, that is, of Amon and Moab and 
of the hil of Seyr, the whiche wenten out 
to fizten a3einus Judam, and ben smyten. 
23 Forsothe the sonus of Amon and of Moab 
rysen to gydre a3einus the dwellers of the 
hy] of Seyr, that they schulden slen, and 
done awey hein ; and whanne that in dede 
thei hadden fulfild, also in to hem selue 
turned thei smyten to gider in woundes 
2deither in other. Bot whanne Juda was 
commen to the denn, that beholdith wil- 
dernesse, he saw} aferre al the regyoun 
abrood ful of careyns, ne to ben ouer laft 
eny man, ‘the whiche* hadde mou3t* tou 
25 scapen the deth. Thanne Josaphath came, 
and al the puple with hym, to the spoylis 
of the’ deed to ben drawen awey, and 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


429 


dwelleris of Jerusalem, felden® lowli on 
the erthe bifor the Lord, and worschy piden 
hym. Forsothe® the dekenes of the sones 19 
of Caath, and of the sones of Chore, heri- 
eden the Lord God of Israel with greet 
vois an hi3. And whannef thei hadden2o 
rise eerli, thei 3eden not bi the deseert of 
Thecue; and whanne thei ‘hadden gon® 
forth, Josaphat" stood in the myddis of 
hem, and seide, Juda and alle the dwell- 
eris of Jerusalem, here 3e me; bileue 3e in 
‘joure Lord Godi, and 3e schulen be sikur ; 
bileue 3e to hise prophetis, and alle pro- 
speritees schulen come‘. And he! 3af coun-2) 
sel to the puple, and he ordeynede the 
syngeris of the Lord, that thei schulden 
herye hym™ in her cumpanyes, and that® 
thei schulden go bifor the oost, and scie 
with acordynge vois, Knouleche 3e to the 
Lord, for he is good ; for his merci is ‘in 
to the world®. And whanne thei bigun-22 
nen to synge heriyngis, the Lord turnede 
the buyschementis of hem ‘in to? hem silf, 
that is, of the sones of Amon and of Moab 
and of4 the hil of Seir, that 3eden out to 
fizte a3ens Juda; and thei weren slayn’. 
For whi the sones of Amon and of Moab23 
risiden' togidere a3ens the dwelleris of the 
hil of Seir, to" sle, and to’ do awey hem ; 
and whanne thei hadden do this¥ in werk, 
thei weren ‘turned also* ‘in toY hem silf, 
and felden? doun togidere bi woundis ech 
of* othere. Certis whanne Juda was comun 24 
to the denne, that biholdith® the wildir- 
nesse, he si3 afer al the large cuntrei® ful 
of deed bodies, and that noon was left, 
that mijte ascape deeth. Therfor Josa-25 
phat cam, and al the puple with hym, to 
drawe awey the spuylis of deed men, and 
thei founden among the deed bodies dy- 
uerse purtenaunce of houshold, and clothis, 
and ful4 preciouse vessels; and thei ra- 
uyischiden® in dyuerse maneres, so that 


4 Knowleche x, fheis good 4. Sthatc. tnotu. 4Om.c. VYOm, B. 

-¢ fellen 1. felden doun ns. 4uponts. ¢ Andins. f whanne vpon the morewe s. & weren go INS. 
h king Josaphat xs. ithe Lord 3oure God 1ns. * come to jou ns. | the kyngivs. ™ the Lord tvs. 
2Om.s. © withouten eend s. P ajens ins. 4 of men of 1. of the men of s. 1 the whiche 1. whiche Ns. 
8 slayn eche of oother1ns. risen uFIL. Uandtos. VOm.c. Wthisthingins.  * thanne also 
turned ts. Yagen ins. 7 fellens. thei fellen ns. sleiynge ins. __» hiholdith or ts forn ajens 18. 
© place s. 4 ful of s. ©rauyschiden or toke tho thingis awey 18. 


430 


thei founden” betwene the careynes dy- 
uerse necessarie, and clothes, and vessels 
most precious ; and thei breeken on two, 
so that alle they mi3ten not beren, ne bi 
thre days the spoyles taken awey, for the 
26mychilnesse of the preye. The ferth for- 
sothe day thei ben gadered in the valey 
of Blessynge ; forsothe for ther thei bliss- 
iden to the Lord, thei clepiden that place 
the valey of Blessynge in to the present 
27day. And eche man of Juda is turned 
ajein, and the dwellers of Jerusalem, and 
Josaphath beforn hem, in to Jerusalem 
with grete ioye; forthi that the Lord 
hadde 3euen to hem ioye of their enmyes. 
28 And thei wenten in to Jerusalem with 
sawtrees, and harpis, and trumpis, in to 
29the hous of the Lord. Forsothe inward 
ferd of the Lord fel vpon alle the rewmes 
of londis, whanne thei hadden herd, that 
the Lord hadde fou3ten a3einus the enmyes 
300f Irael. And the rewme of Josaphath 
hadde reste; and the Lord 3aue to hym 
31 pese by enuyroun. Thanne Josaphath 
regnede vpon Judain ; and he was of fyue 
and thritty 3eer, whanne he beganne to 
regnen; forsothe twenty and fyue jeer 
he regned in Jerusalem; and name of 
his modir Azuba, the dou3ter of Selathy. 
32 And he wente in the wey of his fadir 
Aza, and he bowide not fro it, doynge 
what euer thingus weren plesaunt before 
33the Lord. Neuer the later the hee3e 
thingus he dide not awey; 3it the puple 
hadden not dressid their hert to the Lord 
34God of their fadirs. The remnaunt for- 
sothe of the deedis of Josaphath, of the 
rather and of the last, ben writen in the 
bokis of Hieu, the* sone of Anany, the 
whiche he discrined in the boke of theY 


Ww ben founden z. 


f thanne bere thens s. & my3ten not c. 
for thi that 1. for therfore that n. for forthi s. 
phat 3ede ins. P turneden ajen ins. 
u restide fro werre INS. Vv him pees s. 
Zandins. 8 Om.c. > Josaphat 1s. 
uwxbe. mawmett placis 1. and 3it is. 
qruwxb. k Om. c 
© the kyngis cis. the king n. 
parcener in wille and werke s. 


P moost INs. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


x Om. c. 


h Om. Ns. 
™ ynto 1. into N. vnto into s, ™this present 1s. © Josa- 
4 goynge in 1. Om. ns. 
Ww al aboute I. 
¢ he bowide Ins. 
& And Ins. 
1 the whiche deedis 1. whiche dedis ns. 
4 Josaphat s. 
Sand N. so that s. 


XX. 26—34. 


thei my3ten not bere‘ alle thingis, nether 
thei my3ten® take awei the spuylis bi thre 
daies, for the> greetnesse of prey. Sothelii2s 
in the fourthe dai thei weren gaderid to- 
gidere in the valey of Blessyng; ‘forsothe 
for! thei blessiden the Lord there, thei 
clepiden that place the valei of Blessyng 
‘til in to™ present™ dai. And ech man of27 
Juda turnede ajen, and the dwelleris of 
Jerusalem, and Josaphat® bifor hem, in to 
Jerusalem with greet gladnesse; for the 
Lord God hadde 3oue to hem ioye of her 
enemyes. And thei entriden? in to Jeru-28 
salem with sawtrees, and harpis, and trum- 
pis, in’ to the hows of the Lord. Forsothe 29 
the’ drede of the Lord felde on’ alle the 
rewmes of londis, whanne thei hadden 
herd, that' the Lord hadde fou3te a3ens 
the enemies of Israel. And the rewme of 30 
Josaphat restide"; and the Lord 3af ‘pees 
to hym’ ‘bi cumpas”. Therfor* Josaphat 31 
regnede onY Juda; and he was of fyue 
and thritti 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne; 
sotheli? he regnede fyue and twenti 3eer in 
Jerusalem ; and the name of his modir was 
Azuba, the* dou3tir of Selathi. And he?32 
jede in the weie of Asa his fadir, and 
bowide® not fro it, and he dide what euer 
thingis weren plesaunt bifor the Lord. 
Netheles he dide not awei hi34 thingis*t 3 33 + hise place; 
3itf the puple hadde not dressid her herte the Scripture 


the Scripture 
to the Lord God of her fadris. spekith of a 


Forsothe® 34 pisces, in 


the residue" of the formere and the! laste “Ride mam 
dedis of Josaphat ben writun in the book and not to 

‘i A God; here the 
of Hien, the’ sone of Anany, which! he Scripture 
ordeynede™ in the book" of kyngis® of ie cea 


Israel. After these thingis Josaphat, kyng 35 Gai an 


of Juda, made frendschipis with Ocozie, 224 this was 
bs suffrid of many 
kyng of Israel, whose werkis weren ful?  kyngis, to 


CG ewe more 
yuele; and he? was parcener™ that® thei'36 yuel. rire 


here. C. 


y Om. as. 


iAndins. kthe menof Judains.  ! for 
r Om. 1s, 

x And INs. 

4d the hij ery. 


h remenaunt Ins. 


Suponis. t how that s. 
Y upon 1. wilsumli vpon s. 
e placis BCDEFGKLMNOPQRS 
1 of the 1ns. Om. scpGKo 
™ ordeynede fo be writen ins. ™ bookis x. 
t parcener with Ochozie 1. parcener to him n: 


t Ocozie and he bi oon assent s. 


XX. 35 —XXI. 7. 


35kyngis of Yrael. After thes thingus Jo- 
saphath, kyng of Juda, wente in fren- 
schippes with Ochosie, the king of Yrael, 

36 whos werkes weren werst, and parcener 
was that thei schulden maken schippis, 
that schulden gon in to Tharsis; and 

37 thei maden a nauee in Aziongaber. For- 
sothe Heliezer,.the sone of Doden, of 
Mareza, prophecyede to Josaphath, sey- 
inge, For thou haddist couenaunt of pese 
with Ochosia, the Lord smote thi werkes ; 
and the schippes ben to-broken, and they 
my3ten not gon in to Tharsis. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Josaphath forsothe slepte? with his fa- 
ders, and is biryed with hem in the cite 
of Dauid; and Joram, his sone, regned 

2for hym. The whiche hadde bretheren, 
sonus of Josaphath, Azaryam, Jahiel, and 
Zacharie, and* Azarie, and Mychael, and 
Saphaciam ; alle thes the sonis of Josa- 

3phath, kyng of Juda. And his fadir 3aue 
to hem many 3iftis of gold and of syluer, 
and pensyouns, with the most strengthed 
citees in Juda; the rewme forsothe he 
toke to Joram, for thi that he was the 
afirst goten. Joram forsothe roos vpon 
the rewme of his fadir; and whanne he 
hadde confermede him selue, he slew3 alle 
his bretheren with swerde, and sum of 
sthe princis of Juda. Of two and thritty 
jeer Joram was, whanne he beganne to 
regnen; and ei3t> jeer he regnede in Je- 
grusalem. And he wente in the weyes of 
the kyngis of Irael, as the hous of Achab 
hadde don, the dou3ter forsothe of A- 
chab was his wijf; and he dide euyl in 
7the si3t of the Lord. Forsothe the Lord 
wolde not distruyen the hous of Dauid, 
for the couenaunt that he hadde gon in 
with hym, and for he hadde behoten 


z sleep c. 


u the whiche 1. whiche ns. VY thei schulden c. 
Z the sone 1Ns, a hast had Ins. 
consentide to make 1xs. 
| that is to wite, Azarie 1. that is, Azarie 8. 
2 or renits 18. Om. N. © ful stronge 1. 
[wexe s] my3ti Ns. t upon 1s. 
weles 8. Ycertis ins. % wolde not t. 


forthi that s. © hiz3te ins. f Dauid is. 


a Om. ABFH. 


Ww wende 1. 
b hath smyte or destried 1s. hath distried n. 
4 al to-brokun 1ns. & thei my3ten vs. f And Ns. 
kand Ananie s. 1 Om. wn. 
P his 1ns. 
u silf in the [his s] rewme is. 
@ couenaunt of pees 8. 
& Om. N. sones afler him s. 


I]. PARALIPOMENON. 43] 


maden schippis, that" schulden’ go” in to 
Tharsis; and thei maden o schip* in to 
Asiongaber. SotheliY Eliezer, sone’ of37 
Dodan, of Maresa, profesiede to Josaphat, 
and seide, For thou haddist* boond of pees 
with Ocozie, the Lord smoot thi werkis ; 
and the schippis® ben brokun‘, and my3ten® 
not go in to Tharsis. 


CAP. XXI. 


Forsothef Josaphat slepte with hise fa-1 
dris, and was® biried with hem in the citee 
of Dauid; and Joram, his sone, regnede 
for hym. And he hadde britheren, the 2 
sones of Josaphat, Azarie’, Jahiel, and Za- 
carie, Anany*, and Mychael, and Saphatie; 
alle these weren the sones of Josaphat, 
kyng of Juda. And her fadir 3af to hems 
many 3iftis of gold and of! siluer, and™ 
rentis®, with strongeste® citees in Juda; 
but he 3af the rewme to Joram, for he was 
the? firste gendrid4. Forsothe™ Joram roos* 4 
ont the rewme of his fadir ; and whanne he 
hadde confermyd hym silf", he killide’ alle 
hise britheren bi swerd, and summe” of 
the princes of Juda. Joram was of twos 
and thritti 3eer, whanne he bigan to regne ; 
and he regnede eiz3te 3eer in Jerusalem. 
And he 3ede in the weies* of the kyngisé 
of Israel, as the hows of Achab hadde do, 
forY the dou3ter of Achab was his wijf; 
and he dide yuel in the si3t of the Lord. 
But the Lord nolde’ distrie the hows of7 
Dauid, for the couenaunt? which? he ‘hadde 
maad¢ with Dauid, and for* he ‘hadde bi- 
hi3te® to 3yue to hymf a lanterne, and to 
hise sones® in al tyme. In tho daies Edom s 


b seuene E. 


x schip fo go 1. shippe gos. Y And Ins, 
¢ schippis whiche he 
she was ns. bJoram rns. 
™ and he 3af hem penciouns tns. 
rAndins. $8 roos and wexide 
walsosummer. * yuel 

¢madeins. 4 that Nn, 


4 goten sone 1. 
¥ slew3 INS. 
» that Ns. 


432 


that he schulde 3euen to hym a lantern, 
sand to his sonus in al tyme. In tho days 
Edom rebellide, that he were not suget 
to Jude, and he sette to hym a kyng. 
9 And whanne Joram was passed with his 
princis, and with al the chyualrie, that 
was with hym, he ros the ni3t, and smote 
Edom, ‘the whiche® hadde enuyrounde 
hym, and alle the duykis of his chyualrye. 
10 Neuer the later Edom rebellide, that he 
were not vnder the comaundinge of Juda 
vnto this day. That tyme and Lobna 
wente awey, that he were not vnder the 
hond of hym; forsothe he hadde for- 
isaken the Lord God of their fadirs. For- 
thermore he forgide hee3e thingus in the 
cytees of Juda, and he maad the dwellers 
of Jerusalem to do fornycacioun, and 
12 Juda to breken the lawe. Forsothe ther 
ben brou3t to hym lettris fro Helia, the 
prophete, in the whiche was writen, Thes 
thingus seith the Lord God of Dauid, thi 
13fadir, For thon wentist not in the weies 
of Josaphath, thi fadir, and in the wei of 
Aza, kyng of Juda, bot and thou wentist 
bi the wey of the kyngis of Irael, and 
thou madist Judam and the dwellers of 
Jerusalem to don fornycacioun, folewynge 
the fornycacioun of the hous of¢ Achab ; 
ferthermore and thi bretheren and the 
hous of thi fadir, beter thanne thi silf, 
14thou hast sleyn; loo! the Lord schal 
smyten thee with a grete veniaunce, with 
thi puple, and sonus, and thi wyues, and 
iwwith al thi substaunce; thou forsothe 
schalt waxen seek the most warst lan- 
gour of wombe, to the tyme that thi 
guttis gon out lity] melum by sundre 
isdays. Thanne the Lord rerede a3cinus 
Joram the spirite of Philisteis, and of 
Arabes, the which ben nee3 coostis to 


© that c. 


h so that s. i passid forth ajens Edom ins. k with al ins. 1] roos up 1s. 
P vnto INs. to X. 
u certis INS. 
8 lawe of God ns. 
f thou hast maad vs. 


"the rns. 9 rebellid so ajens Juda s. 
Joram is. °& so that is.  ¢ power 1Ns. 
made ns. YOm.1. 2 he made Juda ns. 


4 hast not go Ins. © hast go Ins. 
k fader, that is, princis of the house of thi fader s. 
Jor this. thi wyuesixs. © and INs, 
£Om. ns. Ureiside up rns. Y of Arabeis crns. 
up ins. 2 thei wasteden rns. ® substaunce rns. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


P Om. s. 
w the whiche 1. whiche ns. 


XXI, 8-16. 


rebellide, that® it was not suget to Juda, 

and it ordeynede a kyng to it silf. Ando 

whanne Joram hadde passide! with hise 

princes, and alk the multitude of kny3tis, 

that was with hym, he roos! bi ni3t, and 

smoot Edom+, that cumpasside him, and™ 

alle hise" duykis of his multitude of kny3tis.  sudeynly Ydu- 
Netheles Edom rebellide®, that it was not 10 were iv Wil 
vndir the lordschip of Juda ‘til to? this %; 0 hey 


+ Edom; that 
is, he killide 


wolden go to 
: q st _ helpe Ydumeys 
dai. In that tyme also Lobna’ 3ede awei", 7° iGo” 
that’ it was not vndur the hond‘ of hym; — 23ens him. 
Lire here. c. 


for" he’ hadde forsake the Lord God of 
hise fadris. Ferthermore he made hi3el 
places” in the citees of Juda, and made* 
the dwelleris of Jerusalem to do fornyca- 
cioun, ‘that is, idolatrieY, and Juda? to 
breke the lawe*. Forsothe® lettris weren 12 
brou3t to hym fro Elie, the prophete, in 
whiche it was writun, The Lord God of 
Dauid, thi fadir, seith these thingis, For®13 
thou ‘3edist not’ in the weies of Josaphat, 
thi fadir, and in the weie of Asa, kyng of 
Juda, but thou 3edist® bi the weie of the 
kyngis of Israel, and madist‘ Juda and the 
dwelleris of Jerusalem to do fornicacioun, 
and suedist® the fornicacioun® of the hows 
of Achab; ferthermore and thou hast 
slayn thi britheren and‘ the hows of thi 
fadir*, ‘that weren' betere than thou; lo™!14 
the Lord schal smyte thee with a greet 
veniaunce, and thi puple, and thi sones, 
and wyues®, and al thi catel ; sotheli® thou 15 
schalt be sijk ‘with the? worste sorewe of 
wombe?, til? thin entrailis go out litil’ and 
litil bit ech dai. Therfor the Lord reiside® 16 
ajens Joram the spirit of Filisteis and 
Arabeis’, that” marchen with Ethiopiens ; 
and thei* stieden’ in to the lond of Juda, 17 
and wastiden* it, and thei token awei al 
the cate]*, that was foundun in the hows 
of the kyng, ferthermore and hise sones, 


d Om. F. 


mand Joram vencushide xs. 
4 the cuntrey of Lobna ins. —* awei fro 
v Joram ins. placis of ydolatrie 1s. * he 
b And ins. ¢ For that rn. Forthi that s. 
& thou hast sued rns. 5 leccherie ns. ‘ims; 
1Om. n. which werin s. mlo! that is, wite thou 

Qthiwombers. ‘Ttilthatins.  § bi litil rs. 
.X these ins. Y stieden 


XXI. 17—-XXII. 3. 


17 Ethiopes; and thei stey3eden up in to 
the lond of Juda, and thei wastiden it, 
and thei distruyeden al the substaunce, 
that is founden in the hous of the kyng; 
ferthermore and the sonus of hym, and 
the® wijues; and ther laft not to hym a 
sone bot Joacha, that was leste thoru3 

is birth. And vpon alle thes thingus the 
Lord smote hym with vncurable sorowe of 

19wombe. And whanne to the day schulde 
folowen day, and the spacis of tymes 
weren turned ouer, of two 3eer the cercle 
is fulfild; and so with longe langour he 
is wastid, so that he schot out also his 
guttis, and so he wantide the langour to 
gydre and lijf', and he is deed in warst 
infirmyte. And the puple dide not to hym 
the deedis office after the maner of bren- 
nynge, as it hadde done to the more of 

2ohym. Of two and thritty 3eer he was, 
whanne he beganne to regnen, and ei3t 
jeer he regnede in Jerusalem, and he 
wente not rij3t; and thei biryeden hym 
in the cyte of Dauid, neuer the later not 
in the sepulcre of kyngis. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 The dwellers forsothe of Jerusalem 
setten Ochosiam, his leste sone, kyng for 
hym; alle forsothe the more tloru3 
birthe, that beforn hym weren, theeues 
of Arabes hadden slayn, the whiche had- 
den fallyn in to the tentis. And regnede 
Ochosias, the sone of Joram, kyng of 

2Juda. Of two and fourty 3eer was Ocho- 
sias, whanne he hadde begunne to reg- 
nen, and oon 3eer he regnede in Jerusa- 
lem; name of his modir, Athalia, dou3ter 

sof Amry. And he wente in by the weye 
of the hous of Achab; forsothe his modir 
putte hym in, that he vnpitously schulde 


e Om. ce. 


b hise wyues thei token awey ins. © Om. 1. 
& Joram ins. +} his ins. 
kyng 1. king Joram s. 9 of vile s. 
or voyded oxts. Ff his owner. §% Om. 1Ns. 
x Joram ns. Y riztfuli in the [Goddis 8} lawe 1s. 
> the theues 1vs. ¢ Arabie Ns. ¢ whiche ns. 
h hise ws. } grettere or eldre bretheren 18. 
" regned king 8. 9 And Ins. 


VOL. II. 


Il, PARALIPOMENON. 


4 his 1Ns. 
i Om, BcDIM pr. m. Nosx. 
P langwschyng IN. 
€ sorwe or peyne 8. 
Z the 3oungist sone of Joram Ns. 
e fillen feersly s. 
k Om. 1. 
P entride and 3ede s. 


433 


and wyues’; and no sone was left to hym, 
no° but Joachaz, that was the® leeste® inf 
birthe. And ouer alle these thingis the 1s 
Lord smoot hym® with vncurable sorewe 
of the" wombe. And whanne dai camis 
aftir ai dai, and the spaces of tymes weren 
turned aboute, the* cours of twey 3eer was 
fillid'; and so™ he® was wastid ‘bi long® 
rot?, so that he castide out also his™ en- 
trailis, and so’ he wantide sorewe*t and 
liyf" togidere, and he was deed in the 
werste sikenesse. And the puple dide not 
to hym seruyce of deed men bi the custom 
of brennyng, as it’ hadde do to hise gret- 
tere, ‘ether auncetris*. He* was of two20 
and thritti 3eer whanne he bigan to regne, 
and he regnede eiz3te 3eer in Jerusalem, 
and he 3ede not ri3tfuli; and thei birieden 
hym in the citee of Dauid, netheles not in 
the sepulcre of kingis. 


CAP. XXII. 


Forsothe the dwelleris of Jerusalem or-1 
deyneden Ocozie, ‘his leeste sone’, kyng* 
for hym; for theues> of Arabeis®, that‘ 
felden® in to the castels’, hadden® slayn 
alle thet grettere‘‘in birthe', that! weren™ 
bifor hym. And Ocozie, the sone of Jo- 
ram, kyng of Juda, regnede". Ocozie was2 
of two and fourti 3eer, whanne he bigan 
to regne, and he regnede o 3eer in Jeru- 
salem; the name of his modir was Atha- 
lia, the dou3ter of Amry. But® he en-3 
trideP bi the weie of the hows‘ of Achab ; 
for his modir compellide hym to do yuele. 
Therfor™ he dide yuel in the sijt of the4 


f the lif c. 


€ leeste sone 1s. f or 30ungest sone in s. 
Kand the is. ! fulfillid ins. ™ Om. 1ns. " the 
4 defiede or delywerde out 1, defiede n. defied 
u his liyfiws. VYhex. W Om. 1N, 
4 fo be kyng Ns. 
‘eastels of Juda ns. & and hadden x. 

lwhiche rns. ™ weren goten 1. werin gendrid s. 
4 meynee ins. 1° Certis 1Ns. 


3K 


434 


4done. Thanne he dyde yuel in the si3t 
of the Lord, as the hous of Achab; thei 
forsothe weren to hym counseilers after 
the deth of his fadir, in to his own deth; 
sand he wente in the counseyle of hem. 
And he wente with Joram, sone of Achab, 
king of Yrael, in to bataile az3einus Asael, 
kyng of Cyrie, in Ramoth-galaad. And 
6Cyres woundiden Joram; the whiche is 
turned a3ein, that he were helid in Jezrael; 
forsothe many woundis he hadde taken 
in the forseid strijf. Thanne Ochosias, 
king of Juda, the sone of Joram, came 
doun for to visiten Joram, the sone of 
7 Achab, seeke in Jezrael; the wille for- 
sothe of God was a3einus Ochosiam, that 
he were commyn to Joram. And whanne 
he were commen, that he schulde gon 
in with hym a3einus Hieu, the sone of 
Nampsy, whome God anoyntide, that he 
schulde don awey the hous of Achab. 
&’ Thanne whanne Hieu schulde ouerturnen® 
the hous of Achab, he fonde the princis of 
Juda, and the sonus of the bretheren of 
Ochosie, that mynystreden to hym; and 
9he slew; hem. And hym Ochosie sechi- 
ynge, he toke lurkyng in Samarie, and 
brou3t forth to hym he slew3; and thei 
birieden hym, forthi that he was the sone 
of Josaphath, the whiche hadde sou3te 
God in al his herte. And ther was no 
more eny hope, that eny schulde regnen 
ioof the stoc of Ochosie. Forsothe Athalia, 
his modir, seeynge that hire sone was 
deed, ros, and slew3 al the kingus stoc 
11o0f the hous of Joram. Bot Josabeth, the 
dou3ter of the kyng, toke Joas, the sone 
of Ochosie, and sche staale hym fro the 
myddis of the sonus of the kyng, whanne 
thei schulde ben slayn; and sche hidde 
hym with his nursche in the bed place 
of lity] beddis. Josabeth forsothe, that 
hadde hydde hym, was the dou3ter of 


Il, PARALIPOMENON. 


XXII. 4—ti. 


Lord, as* the hows of Achab; for thei' 
weren counselouris to hym" in to his 
perischyng’, aftir the deth of his fadir ; 
and” he 3ede in the counsele of hem.s 
And he* 3ede with Joram, the sone of 
Achab, kyng of Israel, in to batel a3ens 
Azahel, kyng of Sirye, in to Ramoth of 
Galaad. And men of Sirie woundiden Jo- 
ram; whichyY turnede ajen for to be heelid s 
in Jezrahel; for he hadde take many 
woundis in the forseid batel. Therfor 
Ocozie, kyng of Juda, the sone of Joram, 
jede doun’? to visite Joram, the* sone of 
Achab, sijk® in Jezrahel; for® it was; 
Goddis wille a3ens Ocozie, that he cain 
to Joram. And whanne he was comun‘, 
he 3ede out with hym a3ens Hieu, the 
sone of Namsi, whom God anoyntide®, that 
he schulde do awey the hows of Achab. 
Therfor whanne Hieu destriede the howss 
of Achab, he foond‘ the’ princis of Juda, 
and the sones of the britheren of Ocozie, 
that®‘mynystriden to hym'; and hek killide 
hem. And he sou3te thilke Ocozie, and9 
cau3te! him hid in Samarie, and after that 
he was bron3t to Hieu, Hieu killide hym ; 
and thei birieden hym, for he was the 
sone of Josaphat, that hadde sou3t God in 
al his herte. And noon hope was more, 
that ony of the generacioun of Ocozie 
schulde regne. For™ Athalia, his" modir®, 10 
si3, that hir sone was deed, and sche roos?, 
and killide alle the kyngis generacioun of 
the hows of Joram. Forsothe§ Josabeth, 11 
the dou3ter of the’ kyng*, took Joas, the 
sone of Ocozie, and stalt hym fro the 
myddis of the sones of the kyng, whanne 
thei weren slayn; and sche hidde hym 
with his nurse in the" closet of beddis. 
Forsothe’ Josabeth, that ‘hadde hid” hym, 
was the* dou3tir of kyng Joram, and wijf 
of Joiada, the bischop, and the sister of 
Ocozie; and therfor Athalia killide not 


& ouertrowen B. 


8 as dide INS. 


x Ochozie ins. Ythe whichr. 2 ont x. 


t his meynees 1. the meynee of Achab s. 
aOm. x. 


w Om. s. 
d comun to 


¥ Ochozie 1s. 
b that was sijk 1s. 


¥ spillyng 1. 


¢ forsothe Ins. 


Joram xs. © anoyntide king upon Israel 1s.  foond there ins. © Om.c. 4 the whiche 1. whiche ns. 
i sernyden Ochozie ins. k Hien ins. |! he cau3te rns. ™ And ins. the ms. 9% modir of Ochozie rs. 
Proos vp ns. 4 Andis, FOm.1ns. §kyng Joramins, tsche stalins. Yaws. VAnd ns. For x. 


Ww hidde as. * Om, 1Ns. 


XXII. 12—XXHI. 7. 


kyng Joram, wijf of Joiade, bischop, sis- 
ter of Ochosie ; and therfore Athalie slew3 
izhym" not. Thanne he was with hem in 
the hous of God hid sexe 3eer, in the 
whiche Athalie regnede vpon the lond. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 Joiada forsothe the seuenth 3eer com- 
fortide, toke the maisters of hundrithes, 
Azariam, that is, the sone of Jeroboam, 
and Ismael, the sone of Johannan, also 
Azariam, the sone of Obed, and Maazi- 
am, the sone of Adaye, and Elisaphath, 
the sone of Ysecry ; and he wente in with 

2hem counseyl and pese couenaunt. The 
whiche ennyrounynge Judam, gaderden 
Leuytis of alle the cytees of Juda, and 
the princis of the meynes of Irael, and 

3camen ‘in to! Jerusalem. Thanne wente 
in couenaunt al the multitude in the hous 
of the Lord with the kyng. And Joiada 
seide to hem, Loo! the sone of the kyng 
schal regnen, as the Lord spake vpon the 
asonus of Dauid. This is thanne the word 
5that 3e schul done. The thridde part of 
3ou that ben commen to the saboth, of 
prestis, and of Leuytis, and of porters, 
schal ben in the jaatis; the thrid for- 
sothe part at the hous of the kyng; and 
the thrid part at the jaate, that is clepid 
of the foundement. Al forsothe the tother 
comoun be in the porches of the hous of 
éthe Lord; ne eny other man comme in 
to the hous of the Lord, bot the prestis, 
and that mynystren of Leuytis; thei 
aloonly commen in, that ben halowed, 
and alle the tother comoun keepe wele 
7the wardis of the Lord. The Leuytis 
forsothe enuyroun thei the kyng, eche 
hauynge their armes ; 3if eny other“ schal 
commyn in to the temple, be he slayn; 


bhir £ prom. 


y And ins. 2 Joas ins. ® which 3eris 1s. > upon rns. € lond of Juda IS. 
& the sone INs. 
m thei camen Ins. 
8 word either heest s. 
¥ be wacchyng s. 

f sernen INS. 
k halewid in to the temple 1s. | oother 1s. ™ kepe thei ins, ® And Ins, 


¢he took to himins. ' is to wile 1. 
land thet gaderiden togidere 1s. 
bishopes. 4 Lo! Joas ins. 

kepyngs. Wandins. X*avn. 
© oother 1s. d be it s. 


r Om. ns. 
€ place s. 


heixs. 9 Om. N., 


Fr entre INs. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


ito ABFU. 


435 


hir. TherforY he? was hid with hem ini 
the hows of God sixe 3eer, in whiche® 
Athalia regnede on? the lond¢. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Forsothe in the seuenthe 3eer Joiada’i 
was coumfortid, and took® centuriouns, 
that is‘, Azarie, sone? of Jeroboam, and 
Ismael, the sone of Johannam, and Aza- 
rie, the sone of Obeth, and Maasie, the 
sone of Adaie, and Elisaphat, the sone of 
Zechri; and he made with hem a! counsel 
and a boond of pees. Which cumpassiden 2 
Juda, and gaderiden* togidere dekenes of 
alle the citees of Juda, and! the princes of 
the meynees of Israel, and camen™ in to 
Jerusalem. Therfor" al the multitudes 
made® couenaunt in the hows of the Lord 
with the kyng. And Joiada? seide to hem, 
Lo‘! the’ sone of the kyng schal regne, 
as the Lord spak on the sones of Dauid. 
Therfor this is the word’, whicht 3e schu-4 
len do. The thridde part of 30u that" bens 
comun to the sabat, of preestis, and of 
dekenes, and of porterys, schal be in the 
3atis’; sotheli¥ the* thridde part schal beY 
at the hows of the kyng; and the thridde’ 
part schal be at the 3ate, which® is clepid 
of the foundement. Forsothe? al the tother¢ 
comyn puple be’ in the large places® of 
the hows of the Lord; and noon: others 
man entre in to the hows of the Lord, no 
but preestis, and thei that mynystrenf of § 
the! dekenes'; oneli entre thei, that ben 
halewid*, and al the tother! comyn puple 
kepe™ the kepyngis of the Lord. For-; 
sothe" the dekenes cumpasse® the kyng, 
and ech man hane? hise armuris; and if 
ony othere man‘ entrith' in to the temple, 


k other man c. 


4 Joiada the bischop ins. 
1 The which 1. thei gaderiden ns. 
© maade fogidre ss. —P Joiada the 
tthat ins. twhiche ns.  ¥ jatis 
z oother thridde 1s. athatrns. > And rns. 
fors. %Om.1. i dekenes zn the temple 1s. 
© cumpasse thei rns. P hane 


h Om. ins. 
n And INs. 


3K 2 


436 


and be thei with the kyng commynge in 
sand goinge out. Thanne the Leuytis 
diden, and al Juda, after alle thingis that 
Joiada, the bischop, hadde comaundide; 
and alle thei token the men, that weren 
vndir hem, and thei camen by ordre of 
the saboth with hem, that nowe hadden 
fulfild the saboth, and weren gon out. 
i Forsothe Joiade, the bischop, hadde not 
leetyn the cumpanyes to! gon awey, the 
whiche weren wont by sundre weekis to 
comme after to hem selue. And Joiada, 
the prest, 3af to the leders of hundrithis 
speres, and tergetis, and bokelers of kyng 
Dauid, the whiche he hadde sacride in 
ioto the hous of the Lord. And he sette 
al the puple, of holdyng daggers, fro the 
ri3t partie of the temple vnto the left 
part of the temple, before the auter and 
the temple, by enuyroun of the kyng. 
11 And thei ladden out the kingus sone, and 
putten on to hym a dyademe; and 3euen 
to hym in his hond the lawe to ben 
holden, and thei setten hym kyng. And 
Joiada, the byschop, enoyntide hym, and 
his sonus; and thei inwardly preyden, 
izand seyden, Lyue the kyng! That 
whanne Athalia hadde herde, that is, the 
voice of men rennyng and preysyng the 
kyng, sche wente in to the puple, into 
i3the temple of the Lord. And whanne 
sche had seen the kyng stondynge upon 
the gree in the entre, and princis and 
companyes abouten hym, and al the pu- 
ple of the lond ioyinge, and criynge in 
trumpis, and orgnys of dyuerse maner, 
syngynge to gydir, and the voice of men 
preysynge, sche kutte hir clothis, and 
1sseith, Aspyes! aspyes! Forsothe Joiada, 
the bischop, gon out to the leeders of 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXII. 8—14. 


be he slayn; and be thei® with the kyng 
entrynget and goynge out. Therfor thes 
dekenes and al Juda diden bi alle thingis, 
which Joiada, the bischop, ladde co- 
maundid"; and alle’ token the men, that 
weren with hem, and camen” bi the ordre 
of sabat® with hem, that hadden ‘fillid 
now’ the sabat, and schulen go’ out®. Fors 
Joiada, the bischop, suffride not the cum- 
penyes to go awei>, that weren wont! to 
come® oon after ‘the totherf bi ech wouke. 
And Joiada, the preest, 3af to the centu- 
riouns speris, and scheeldis, and bokeleris 
of kyng Dauid, whiche® he" hadde halewid 
in to! the hows of the Lord. And hek or-10 
deynede al the puple, of hem ‘that helden! 
swerdis, at™ the ri3t side of the temple 
‘til to" the left side of the temple, bifor the 
auter and° the temple, bi cumpas? of the 
king. And thei ledden out’ the sone of 11 
the kyng, and’ settiden’ a diademe ont 
hym"; and thei 3auen to hym in his hond 
the lawe’ to be holdun, and thei maden 
hym kyng. And Joiada, the bischop, and 
his sones anoyntiden hym; and thei pre- 
iden” hertli, and seiden, The kyng lyue*™! 
And whanne Athalia hadde herd thisi2 
thing, that is, the vois of men rennynge 
and preisynge theY kyng, sche entride to’ 
the puple, in to the temple of the Lord. 
And whanne sche hadde seyn the kyng1; 
stondynge on* the grees in the entryng>, 
and the® princes and cumpenyes? of kny3tis 
aboute hym, and al the puple of the lond 
ioiynge, and sownynge® with trumpis, and 
syngynge togidere with orguns of dyuerse 
kynde, and the vois of men preisyngef, 
sche to-rente hir clothis, and seide, Tre- 
souns! tresouns! Sothelié Joiada, the bi-14 
schop, 3ede out to the centuriouns, and 


1Om. c. 


S the dekens Ins. t entrynge ynne INS, 


u comaundid fo hem s. 


valle thei 1s. thei camen #o 


Jerusalem 1s. * the sabat ins. Y now fulfillid ins. 2 haue gors. han go N. 4 out thenns 1s. > awei fro 


¢ whiche ins. 4 woned 1. 


the temple 1s. 
b Dauid mw. king Dauith s. 


which weepens s. 


€ come thidur n. 
i Om. n. 


f an oother 1Ns. 


¢ & the whiche WeEpYyNs 1. 
k Joiada ins. 


l whiche hadden ns. that 


holden o. m ¢o be at Ns. 1 ynto 1. lastinge vnto Ns, to x. ° of As, P the enuyroun ins. the 
cumpas plures. out Joas ins. ‘and theirs. § setten Is. tuponis. this heed ins. Vv lawe of 
God xs. ¥* preieden toGod s. _* liue he welsumlis, Yans. 7intos. @atins. > entryng of the 


temple 1. entryng of the temple of God s. 
f preisynge a kyng 1s. § And 1s. 


¢ Om. ins, 


d the cumpenyes ¢. € sownyng to gidre s. 


XXIIL. 15——-XXIV. 2. 


hundrithes, and princis of the hoost, seide 
to hem, Ledith hir out of the purseyntis 
of the temple, and be sche slayn with 
out forth with swerd; and the prest co- 
maundid, that sche shuld not be slayn in 
isthe hous of the Lord. And he putte on 
hondis to the nollis of hyre ; and whanne 
sche had gon in the 3ate of the hors, of 
the hous of the king, thei slewen hir 
16there. Forsothe Joiada couenauntide co- 
uenaunt of pese betwene hym and al the 
puple and the kyng, that ther were a 
17puple of the Lord. And so al the puple 
wente ‘in to™ the hous of Baal, and thei 
distroyeden it ; and auters, and mawmetis 
of it thei to-breeken; Mathan also, the 
preste of Baal, thei slewen before the 
isauters. Forsothe Joiada sette prouostis 
in the hons of the Lord, that vndir the 
hondis of prestis, and Leuytis, the whiche 
Dauid delide in the hous of the Lord, 
that thei schulden offeren brent sacrifices 
to the Lord, as it is writen in the boke 
of Moysy, in ioye and songus, after the 
19disposicyoun of Dauid. Also he sette 
porters in the 3atis of the hous of the 
Lord, that ther schulde not gon in to 
20it vnelene in eny thing. And he toke 
leeders of hundrithes, and most stronge 
men, and princis of the puple, and al the 
comoun of the lond. And thei maden 
the kyng to comme doun fro the hous 
of the Lord, and gon in by the mydil of 
the ouer3ate in to the hous of the kyng; 
and thei setten hym in the kyngus see. 
21And al the puple of the lond gladide, 
and the cytee restyde; bot Athalia is 
slayn with swerde. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Of seuen" 3eer was Joas, whanne he 
hadde begunne to regnen, and fourtye 
3eer he regnede in Jerusalem; name of 
2his modir Sebia of Bersabe. And he 
dyde that was good before the Lord, alle 


m in CE, 


} to princes in. to the princis s, 
distrieden ins, © thei braken 1s. 
tmen ins. “in songis ins.  Y Joiada ins. 
Zofs. ®setten 1. » restide fro werris 18. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


i he seide in. 
P the symulacris 1Ns. 
w Joiada Ins. 
¢ and ns. 


437 


princes" of the oost, and seide' to hem, 
Lede 3e hir with out the ‘purseyntis, ethir* 
closyngis, of the temple, and be sche slayn 
with outforth bi swerd; and the preest 
comaundide, that sche schulde not be slayn 
in the hows of the Lord. And thei! set-15 
tiden hondis on™ hir nol; and whanne she 
hadde entrid in to the 3ate of the horsis, 
of the kyngis hows, thei killiden hir there. 
Forsothe Joiada couenauntide a boond of 16 
pees bitwixe him silf and al the puple 
and the kyng, that it schulde be the puple 
of the Lord. Therfor al the puple entride 17 
in to the hows of Baal, and distrieden” it, 
and braken® the auteris and symylacris? 
therof; but thei killiden bifor the auteris 
Mathan, the preest of Baal. Forsothe%18 
Joiada ordeynede souereyns in the hows 
of the Lord, that vndur the hondis of 
preestis, and of dekenes, whiche™ Dauid 
departide in’ the hows of the Lord, thei' 
schulden offre brent sacrifices to the Lord, 
as it is writun in the book of Moises, in 
ioie and songis", by the ordynaunce of 
Dauid. Also he’ ordeynede porteris in1i9 
the 3atis of the hows of the Lord, that an 
vnclene man in ony thing schulde not 
entre in to it. And he” took the* centu-20 
rionns, and’ strongesteY men, and princes 
of the puple, and al the comyn puple of 
the lond. And thei maden the kyng to go 
doun fro* the hows of the Lord, and to 
entre bi the myddis of the hijere jate in 
to the hows of the kyng; and thei set- 
tiden* hym in the kyngis trone. And al2i 
the puple of the lond was glad, aid the 
citee restide®; forsothe® Athalia was slayn 
bi swerd. 


CAP. XXIV. 


Joas was of seuene 3eer, whanne he! 
bigan to regne, and he regnyde fourti 
3eer in Jerusalem; the name of his modir 
was Sebia of Bersabee. And he dide that, 2 
that was good bifor the Lord, in alle the 


D seue C. 


lmenins. ™uponts. ® thei 
rthe whiche 1. 5 into s. 
y the strongeste 1. 


k Om. ins. 
q And Ins. 
x Om. 1n. fo him s. 


438 


sthe days of Joiada, the preste. Forsothe 
and Joas took two wijues, of the whiche 
the gat sones and dou3ters. After whiche 
thingus it pleside to Joas, that he schulde 
senstore the hous of the Lord. And he 
gadirde the prestis and Leuytis, and 
seyde to hem, Goth out to the cytees of 
Juda, and gadereth of al Irael monee, to 
the reparaciouns of the temple of the 
Lord oure God, by alle 3eers; and swijth 
doth it. Bot the Leuytis diden it more 
snecgligently. And thekyng clepideJoiada, 
prince, and seyde to hym, Why was not 
to thee bisynesse, that thou constreyn 
Leuytis to brengyn in fro Juda and Je- 
rusalem monee, the whiche is ordeynd of 
Moyses, the seruaunt of the Lord, that 
al the multitude of Irael schulde bryngyn 
it? in to the tabernacle of wytnessynge ? 
7 Athalia forsothe most vnpitous, and hir 
sonus, distruyeden the hous of God; and 
of alle thingus, that werfen halowed to the 
temple of the Lord, sche enournede the 
stemple? of Baalym. Thann the kyng 
~comaundide, and thei maaden the ark, 
and putten it beside the 3ate of the Lord 
awith outeforth. And it is prechid in 
Juda and in Jerusalem, that alle schulden 
bere pris to the Lord, that Moyses or- 
deynde to the sernauntis of God vpon al 
1oIrael, in. deserte. And alle the princis 
and alle the puple gladedyn, and goon 
in, thei 3euen in to the ark of the Lord, 
iiand putten, so that it was ful. And 
whanne tyme was, that thei schulden 
bern the arke bifore the kyng bi the 
hondis of Leuytis, forsothe thei seen 
myche monee; and ther wente in a 
scribe of lawe, whom the firste preste 
hadde ordeyned, and thei heelden oute 
the monee, that was in the arke; for- 
sothe the arke thei bern a3ein to his 
place. And so thei diden bi sundre days, 


°o Om. “4BFH. 


d4Om.cx. ¢ Om. ins. f gaat 1. 
3oure God ins. ™ this thing 1Ns, 
which 1. ° Gods. 
Xx jn Jerusalem ins. 
© fillid with tresour s. 
money to be in the arke s. 
° and INs. 


n hastily 1. 
S wickid womman 13. 
Yhiss. 2 that 1ns. 


ia INs, 
P the place therof 1Ns. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


g And after s. 
° diden this thing 1Ns. 
t the thingis 1N. 
athe Lord ns. > upon 1s. 
f forthi that 1s. for that n. 

k kyngis 1s. 


XXIV. g—11. 


daies of Joiada, the’ preest. Sotheli® ands 
Joas took twei wyues, of whyche he gen- 
dridef sones and dou3tris. After® whiche4 
thingis it pleside Joas" to! reparele the 
hows of the Lord. And he gaderide to-5 
gidere preestis and dekenes, and seide to 
hem, Go 3e out to the citees of Juda, and 
gadere 3e of al Israel money, to the* re- 
parelyng of the temple of ‘3oure Lord God), 
bi ech 3eer; and do 3e this™ hijzyngli’. 
Certis the dekenes diden® necgligentli. Andc 
the kyng clepide Joiada, the prince?, and 
seide to hym, Whi was it not charge to 
thee, to constreyne the dekenes to brynge 
yn money of Juda and of Jerusalem, 
which? money was ordeyned of Moises, 
the seruaunt of ‘the Lord’, that al the 
multitude of Israel schulde brynge it in 
to the tabernacle of witnessyng? For the7 
worste’ Athalia, and hir sones, distrieden 
the hows of God ; and of alle thingis‘, that® 
weren halewid to the temple of the Lord, 
thei ourneden the temple of Baalym. Ther-« 
for the kyng comaundide, and’ thei maden 
an arke, and settiden” it bisidis the 3ate 
of the Lord with out forth. And it wass 
prechid in Juda and Jerusalem*, that ech 
man schulde brynge to the Lord the’ prijs, 
which? Moyses, the seruaunt of God?, or- 
deynede on” al Israel, in deseert. And alle1o 
the princes and° al the puple weren glad, 
and thei entriden, and brou3ten, and senten@ 
in to the arke of the Lord, so that it was 
fillid®. And whanne it was tyme, that theii 
schulden bere the arke bifor the kyng bi 
the hondis of dekenes, for’ thei sien’ 
myche money", the: clerk of the kyng* 
entride, and he whom the firste! preest 
hadde™ ordeynede, and thei schedden® out 
the money, that was in the arke; sotheli® 
thei baren a3en the arke to ‘his place’. And 
so thei diden bi alle daies, and money with 
out noumbre was gaderid togidere ; which 12 


P aunswering place E pr. mi. 


k Om. Nn. ! the Lord 
P prinee of prestis 1s. 4 the 
Vthat s. Wthei settiden ins. 
Cof x. dsenten freli hir 3iflis s. 
& sien or perseyuedin s. h money in the arke 1. 

1 firste or cheef'1s. ™Om.n. ® helden 1. 


hto Joas1. i for to ins. 


u whiche Ns. 


XXIV. 12-——20. 


and ther is gadird monee with oute 
iznoumbre; the whiche the kyng and 
Joiada 3euen to hem that stoden vpon 
the werkis of the hous of the Lord. And 
thei hireden of it hewers of stoones, and 
craftise men of alle werkis, that thei re- 
storen the hous of the Lord ; also forgers 
of yren, and of brasse, that that, that 
hadde begunne to fallen, were susteyned. 
is And thes that wrou3ten diden wijsly, and 
the gap of the wallis was hillid bi the 
hondis of hem ; and thei rereden the hous 
of the Lord in to the rather state, and 
14thei maaden it to stonden fast. And 
whanne thei hadden fulfild alle the 
werkis, thei brou3ten before the kyng 
and Joiada the tother part of the monee, 
of the whiche ben maad the vessels of 
the temple in to the seruyse, and to brent 
sacrifices; also violis, aud other golden 
vessels and sylueren. And ther weren 
offrid brent sacrifices in the hous of the 
Lord contynuly, alle the days of Joiade. 
15 Forsothe Joiada eeldide ful of days, and 
dyed, whanne he was of an hundrith and 
is thritti? 3eer; and thei birieden hym in 
the cytee of Dauid with kingus; forthi 
that he hadde done good with Irael, and 
i7with his hous. Forsothe after that Joi- 
ada died, the princis of Jude wenten in, 
and honoureden the kyng, the whiche 
pleside by the seruyses of hem, assentide 
isto hem. And thei forsoken the temple4 
of the Lord God of their fadirs, and thei 
serueden to mawmette woodis, and grauen 
thingus; and ther is don the wrath of 
the Lord a3eynus Judam and Jerusalem 
i9for this synne. And he sente to hem 
prophetis, that thei schulden turnen a3ein 
to the Lord; whom beforen witnessynge 
20 thei wolden not heeren. And so the Spi- 
rite of the Lord clothed Zacharie, the 
sone of Joiade, preste; and he stode in 


P thrittith a. 


r Om. ins. 
y the werkis 1N. 


4 And of that money 1s, 
maden ins. ~ fulfillid rvs. 
4 gode thingis 1x. many good thingis s. 
sentide ins, k thei seruyden ins. 1 God 12. 
P wolden not 1. 4 Thanne 1. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


Sand s. 
z Om. Ins. 
e And ns. 
™ to him 1s. 
¥ clothide or enuyrounde 18. 


439 


the kyng and Joiada 3auen to hem that 
weren souereyns of the werkis of the hows 
of the Lord. And4 thei hiriden therof* 
kitteris of stonys, and crafti men of alle 
werkis, that thei schulden reparele the 
hows of the Lord; also thei hiriden 
smythis of yrun, and of bras, that’ that 
thing schulde be vndurset, thatt bigan to 
falle. Thei that wrou3ten diden craftili, 13 
and the" crasyng of the wallis was stop- 
pid bi the hondis of hem ; and thei reisiden 
the hows of the Lord in to’ the formere 
staat, and maden™ it to stonde stidfastli. 
And whanne thei hadden fillid* alle werkis’, 14 
thei hrou3ten bifor the kyng and Joiada 
the tother part of the money, of which 
money vessels weren maad in to the’ ser- 
uyee of the temple, and to brent sacri- 
fices?; also viols, and othere vessels of 
gold and of siluer ‘weren maad therof”. 
And brent saerifices weren offrid in the 
hows of the Lord econtynueli, in alle the 
daies of Joiada. Forsothe® Joiada ful of 15 
daies wexide eld, and he was deed, whanne 
he was of an hundrid 3eer and thritti; 
and thei birieden hym in the citee of 16 
Daunid with kyngis; for he hadde do good 
with Israel, and with his hows. But! 
aftir that! Joiada diede®, the princes of 
Juda entriden, and worschipiden the kyng, 
which? was flaterid with her seruices, and 
assentide! to hem. And thei forsoken the 18 
temple of the Lord God of her fadris, 
and seruyden* idols in wodis, and grauen 
ymagis; and the ire of the Lord was 
maad ajens Juda and Jerusalem for this 
synne. And he! sente to hem profetis, that 19 
thei schulen turne ajen to™ the Lord; 
whiche® profetis witnessynge® thei nolden? 
here. Therfor’ the Spirit of the Lord 20 
elothide’ Zacharie, the preest, the sone of 
Joiada; and he stood in the® si3t of the 
puple, and seide to hem, The Lord seith 


4 couenaunt EF pr.m. 


vOm. s. © thei, 
a sacrifice Ns. %Om.N. ° And INs. 

Swasdeedin. bthat1. 1 he con- 
© witnessinge the truthe Ns. 


tthe whiche 1. of thes. 
f Om. 1. 
2 the whiche 1. 
8 Om. IN. 


44.0 


the sijte of the puple, and seyde, Thes 
thingus seith the Lord, Why ouerpasse 
je the heeste of the Lord, that schal not 
profiten to 30u, and 3e han forsaken the 
21 Lord, that he forsake 3ou? The whiche 
gadered a3eynus hym, senten stoones, after 
the heste of the kyng, in the hall of the 
zzhous of the Lord. And king Joas is not 
recordid of the mercy that Joiada, the 
fadir of hym, hadde done with hym; bot 
he" slew3 his sone. The whiche, whanne 
the schulde dyen, seith, The Lord see, and 
a3requyre. And whanne the jeer was ouer- 
turned, the hoost of Cirie steijede up 
a3einus hym, and came in to Judam and 
Jerusalem, and slew3 alle the princis of 
the puple; and al the pray thei senten 
aito the king, to Damasc. And certis 
whanne ther was commen a litil noum- 
bre of Ciries, the Lord toke in’ the 
hondis of hem vnnoumbreable multitude, 
forthy that thei hadde forsaken the 
Lord God of their fadirs. In to Joas also 
thei enhauntiden schenschipful domys ; 
2and goynge awey thei laften hym in 
grete langours. Forsothe his seruauntis 
arisen a3einus hym, in to vengyng of the 
blode of the sone of Joiade, prest; and 
thei slewen hym in his bed, and he is 
deed. And thei birieden hym in the 
cytee of Dauid, bot not in the sepulcris 
26o0f kingis. Forsothe ther aweytiden to 
hym Zabath, the sone of Semath Ama- 
nytidis, and Josabeth, the sone of Se- 
27 marith, Moabitidis. Bot the sonus of hym, 
and the soume of monee that was leyd 
to gydre vndir hym, and the enstorynge 
of the hous of God, ben writen more dili- 
gently in the boke of Kyngis. 


r Om. apcri. 


t heest INs. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXIV. 21-27. 


these thingis, Whi breken 3e the co- 
maundement' of the Lord, ‘which thing" 
schal not profite to 3ou, and 3e han for- 
sake the Lord, that he schulde forsake 
jou? Whiche’ weren” gaderide togidere 21 
a3ens hym*, andy senten’ stonys*, bi® co- 
maundement® ‘of the kyng*, in the large 
place of the hows of the Lord. And kyng 22 
Joas hadde not mynde on® the merci! 
which’ Joiada, the fadir of Zacharie, hadde 
doon with hym; but he killide the sone 
of Joiada. And whanne Zacharie diede, 
he seide, The Lord se", and seke’. And 23 
whanne a 3eer was turned aboute, ‘ether 
endid', the oost of Sirie stiede™ a3ens 
Joas, and it cam in to Juda and in to Je- 
rusalem, and it killide alle the princes of 
the puple; and thei" senten al the prey 
to the kyng, to? Damask4. And certeyn, as 
whanne a ful litle noumbre of men of 
Sirie was comun', the Lord bitook in her 
hondis a multitude’ with out noumbre, for 
thei hadden forsake the Lord God of her 
fadris. Also thei vsident schameful® domes 
in’ Joas ; and thei 3eden” awei*, and lefteny 25 
hym in grete sorewis. Sotheli* hise ser- 
nauntis risiden’ a3ens hym, in to veniaunce 
of the blood of the sone of Joiada, preest ; 
and killiden® hym in his bed, arid he was 
deed. And thei® birieden hym in the citee 
of Dauid, but not in the sepulcris* of 
kyngis. Forsothe® Sabath, the sone ofo¢ 
Semath of Amon, and Josabeth, the sone 
of Semarith of Moab, settiden tresouns to 
hym!. Sothelig hise sones, and the summe 27 
of money that was gaderid yndur hym, and 
the reparelyng of the hows of God, ben 
writun diligentli in the book of Kyngis. 


Sin to E prom. 


. u the whiche thing 7. that n. v And the peple 1ns. Wwasi.  %* the prophet 1. 
the profeet of God s. Yand thei ins. 2 threwen 1. castiden m. senten, éhaé is, thei threwen s. 8 stonys ai 
him 1Ns. bi the kyngis1. c¢heest rns. €Om.1.  ¢ofins.  f merci or goodnesse s. & that INs. 


h se this thing i. se or take heede to this thing s. 


K brou3t 1. 1 Om, rn. 
¥ comun in to Juda ins. 
Yajens INS. W wenten 1. 


™ stiede up 1xs. 


x awei fro him s. 


a the men of Sirie is. the men Nn. 
8 multitude of Jemis 1s. 
y thei leften s. 


i agen seke it 1. azen seke N. ajen seke he if s. 
Pofa. 4 Sirie rns. 
2 shaamful or at eit s. 

a resen up INS. thei 


t vsiden or diden s. 
z And ins. 


killiden ins. ¢menins. 4sepulcres, ¢€ Andins. {Joasins. § Certis ins. 


XXV. I—9. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Amasias forsothe, his sone, regnede for 
hym ; of fyue and twenty 3eer was Ama- 
sias, whanne he hadde begunne to regnen, 
and nyne and twenty 3eer he regnede in 
Jerusalem; name of his modir Joiaden, 

2of Jerusalem. And he dide good in the 
si3te of the Lord, neuer the later not in 

3perfijt herte. And whanne he saw3 the 
empyre strengthed to hym, he kutte the 
seruauntis throtis, that slewen his fadir 
4the kyng; bot the sonus of hem he slew3 
not; as it is writen in the boke of the 
lawe of Moyses, where the Lord co- 
maundide, seyinge, The fadirs schul not 
ben slayn for the sonus, ne the sonus for 
their fadirs; bot echone' in his synne 
sschal dyen. Thanne Amazias gaderde 
Judam, and ordeynede hem by meynees 
leders of thousandis and maystris of hun- 
drithis, in al Juda and Beniamyn; and 
he tolde fro twentye 3eer and aboue, and 
he fonde thritty thousande of 3onge men, 
that my3ten gon out to fizten, and holden 
6Spere and terget. Also by meed he hyred 
of Irael an hundrith thousand of stronge 
men, for an hundrith talentis of syluer, 
that thei schulden fizten a3einus the sonus 

;0f Edom. ‘There came forsothe to hym 
a man of God, and seith, O! kyng, go not 
out with thee the hoost of Irael; for- 
sothe the Lord is not with Irael and 

swith alle the sonus of Effraym; that 3if 
thou weenist in strengthe of hoost batails 
to stonden, the Lord schal maken tliee 
to ben ouercommen of enmyes; of God 
forsothe is to helpen, and in to flizst to 

9turnen. And Amazias seide to the man 
of God, What thanne schal be done of 
the hundrith talentis, that I 3af to the 
kny3tis of Irael? And the man of God 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


441 


CAP. XXV. 


Forsothe Amasie, ‘his sone’, regnede for 1 
hym; Amasie was of fyue and tweuti 3eer, 
whanne he bigan to regne, and he regnyde 
nyne and twenti 3eer in Jerusalem; the 
name of his modir was Joiaden, of Jeru- 
salem. And he dide good in the si3t of2 
the Lord, netheles not in perfit herte. 
And whanne he si3 the empire strengthids 
to hym silf, he stranglide the seruauntis, 
thatj killiden the kyng, his fadir; but hes 
killide not the sones of hem; as it is writun 
in the book of the lawe of Moises, where 
the Lord comaundide, seiynge*, Fadris 
schulen not be slayn for the! sones, ne- 
ther the™ sones for her fadris; but ech 
man schal ‘die in® his owne synne. Ther-5 
for? Amasie gaderide togidere? Juda‘, and 
ordeynede™ hem bi meynees and® tribunes 
and centuriouns, int al Juda and Benia- 
myn; and he noumbride" fro twenti 3eer 
and aboue, and he foonde thritti thou- 
synde of 3onge’ men, that 3eden out to 
batel, and helden spere and scheeld. Also6 
for mede he hiride of Israel an hundrid 
thousynde of stronge men, for an hundrid 
talentis of siluer, that thei schulden fizte 
a3ens the sones of Edom. Forsothe” a7 
man of God cam to hym*, and seide, AY! 
kyng’, the oost of Israel go? not out with 
thee, for? the Lord is not with Israel and 
with alle the sones of Effraym; for if8 
thou gessist that batels stonden in the® 
my3t of oost’, the Lord schal make thee 
to be ouercomun of enemyes®, for' it is of 
God for to helpe, and to turne® in to flizt. 
And Amasie seide to the man of God,» 
What therfor schal be doon of the hun- 
drid talentis, which Y 3af to the kny3tis 
of Israel? And the man of God answer- 
ide to hym, The Lord hath, wherof he 


t eche c. 


h And rys. 
Vher xs. ™ Om. ins. 
ordeynede Ins. 
v able 30ung s. 
¢ Om. Ins. 
h thanne s. 


VOL. II. 


2 in or for s. 
* Om. 1. and he ordeyned s. 
wAndins. * Amasie INs. 
4 an oost ins. the oost xb. 
i haue s. 


ithe sone of Joas1. sone of Joas nN. Joas sone s. 
° And ins. P Om. 1N. thanne s. 
tand1. 
YA! Alv. 


€ thin enemyes IN. 


Jwhiche ns. — * seiynge thus 1. 
4 the men of Juda ins, * he 
u noumbride hem 1N. noumbrid the peple s. 
2 thou kyng vs. *goits.  certis ins, 
f forsothe 1Ns. & turne men Ns. 


31L 


442 


answerde, The Lord hath, wherof he may 
103eue to thee many mo thanne these. And 
so Amazias seuered the" hoost that came 
to hym of Effraym, that he schulde 
turnen a3eyn in to his place; and thei, 
a3cinus Judam hugely wratthed’, ben turn- 
irede ajein in to their regyoun. Bot Ama- 
zias trustily ladde out his puple, and 
wente in to the valeye of salt places, and 
he smote the sonus of Seyr, tenn thou- 
izsand. And other tenn thousand of men 
token the sonus of Juda, and brou3ten to 
an hee3e fallynge place of a maner stoon ; 
and thei tumbleden hem doun fro the 
cop in to the lowest; the whiche al to- 
i3sbrosten. And that hoost that” Amazie 
sente a3ein, that it jeede not with hym 
in to batayle, is helde out in the cytees of 
Juda fro Samarie and to Betheron; and, 
thre thousand sleen, he deuydide* myche 
i4preye. Amazias also after the slau3ter 
of Ydumes, the brou3t to goddis of the 
sonis of Seyr, he sette hem in to goddis 
to hym, and le honourede hem, and to 
15hem he brende ensence. For what thing 
the Lord wroth a3eynst Amazie, he sente 
to hym a prophete, that schulde sey to 
hym, Why hast thou honourede goddis 
that han not delyuerde their puple fro 
6thin hond? And whanne these thingus 
he schulde speken, he answerde to hym, 
Whether ert thou the counseylere of the 
kyng? rest, lest perauenture I slee thee. 
And so the prophete goynge aweye, I 
woote, he seith, that the Lord hath 
thou3te to sleen thee; for thou hast don 
this yuel, and ferthermore thou hast not 
17assentide to my counseyle. Thanne Ama- 
zias, king of Juda, the werst counseil gon 
in, sente to Joas, the sone of Joachas, sone 
of Hieu, the king of Irael, seyinge, Cum, 


Uthat c. Ywratthith eu. 


1 the men Ins. 
T and thei rns. 


k many 1. 
@a IM pr.m. 
fallyng s. 
it N. 
© he ordeynede ins. f to be into 1. 
k han not delynered is. 
Jro him s. 
sente INS, 


5 casten 1. 


1 And whanne Ins. 
P hath thou3t ms. q hast do xs. 
v he seide 1x. he seide to him s. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


w that abode stille rz. 
™ thei turneden INs. 


* to-braken 1. to-brasten N. to-braste s. 
> thousynde of Juda 1. thousynde men of Juda ns. 
& he worschipide ins. 
m thou to speke thus to me Ns. 

t for thou s. 


XXV. 10—17, 


may 3elde to thee myche* mo thingis 
than these. Therfor Amasie departide the 10 
oost that cam to hym fro Effraym, that 
it schulde turne ajen in to his place; and 
thei! weren wrooth greetli ajens Juda, and 
turneden™ ajen in to her cuntrei. For-11 
sothe" Amasie ledde out tristili his puple, 
and 3ede° in to the valei of makyngis of 
salt, and he killide of the sones of Seir 
ten thousynde. And the sones of Judaie 
token othere ten thousynde of men, and 
brou3ten? to the hi3 scarre of summe’ 
stoon; and’ castiden* hem doun fro the 
hijeste' in to the" pit; whiche” alle” 
braken*®. And thilke oost whom’ Amasie13 
hadde sent ajen, that it schulde not go 
with him to batel, was spred abrood in 
the citees of Juda fro Samarie ‘til to# 
Betheron ; and aftir ‘that it* hadde slayn 
thre thousynde>, it took awey* a greet 
preie. And Amasie, after the sleyng of14 
Idumeis, and after that he hadde brou3t4 
the goddis of the sones of Seir, ordeynede® 
hem ‘in tof goddis to hym silf, and wor- 
schipideé hem, and brente encense to hem. 
Wherfor the Lord was wrooth a3ens Ama-15 
sie, and sente® to hym a profete, that seide 
to hym, Whi worschipist thon goddis thati 
‘delyueriden not* her puple fro thin hond? 
Whanne! the profete spak these thingis, 16 
Amasie answeride to hym, Whether thou 
art a counselour of the king ? ceesse thou™, 
lest perauenture Y sle thee. Therfor" the 
profete 3ede awei°, and seide, Y woot, that 
the Lord thou3te? to sle thee; for thou 
didist? this yuel, and ferthermore thou" 
assentidist* not to my counsel. Therfor17 
Amasie, the king of Juda, whanne he 
hadde take' a ful yuel counsel, sente® to 
the kyng of Israel Joas, the sone of Joa- 
chaz, the sone of Hieu, and seide’, Come 


x denide c. 


nAnd ins. © he 3ede ins. Pthei brou3ten hem ins. 
t hizeste part 1. 


Yai Vthewhicher. W al tnx her 
Ythat1.  Zyntorins.  @ the oost of Israel 1s. 
Cawei with its. 4 brou3zt thens nith him s. 
hhe sente ins. ithe whiche 1. whiche ns. 
n And ins. © awei 


Sassentist ns. ¢ Om. 1Ns. uhe 


XXV. 18—27. 


1gsee we” us to gyder. And he sente a3ein 
messagers, seyinge, The thistil that is in 
Liban sente to the cedre of Liban, sey- 
inge, 3eue thi dou3ter wijf to my sone; 
and loo! the bestis that weren in the 
wode of Liban wenten and to-treden the 
19 thistil. Thou seidist, I haue smyten E- 
dom, and therfore thin hert is rered in to 
prid; sitt in thi hous; why enyl stirrist 
thou ajeinus thee, that thou falle, and 
2Juda with thee? Amazias wolde not 
heeren, for thi that the wille of the Lord 
was, that he schulde ben taken in the 
hondes of the eninyes, for the goddis of 
21Edom. Thanne Joas, kyng of Irael, 
stei3ide up, and thei 3euen to hem silf 
beholdingis either to other. Amazias 
forsothe, kyng of Juda, was in Beth- 
gesames of Juda; and Juda felle beforn 
23 Irael, and flei3 in to his tabernaclis. For- 
sothe Joas, kyng of Irael, toke Amaziam, 
kyng of Juda, sone of Joas, sone of Ocho- 
sie, in Bethsames, and brou3t in to Jeru- 
salem; and distruyde the wallis of it fro 
the 3ate of Effraym vnto the 3ate of the* 
24corner, in foure hundrith cubitis. And 
al the gold aud the? syluer, and alle the 
vessels that he founde in the hous of the 
Lord, and anentis Obededom, in the tre- 
sories and of the kyngis hous, also and 
the sonus of taken to prisoun he brou3te 
25in to Samarie. Forsothe Amazias, the 
sone of Joas, kyng of Juda, lyuede, after 
that Joas, the sone of Joachaz, kyng of 
26Irael, is deed, fyfteen 3eer. The rem- 
naunt forsothe of the wordis of Amazie, 
the rather and the last, ben writen in the 
boke of the kingus of Juda and of Irael. 
27 The whiche after that he wente awei fro 


Z seew or loyne A. 2 


WwW thou fo me s. 
tohims. » thystil1. tasil x.  ¢ that ins. 
hOm. rs. iOm.x. J Om. 1. 
or abides. "thiselffins. © falle or perische 1s. 
‘takun x. § hise enemyes Ns. 
Juda 1. stiede azens Juda x. stiede up ajens Juda 3. 
Zacieeofis. he fledde rns. » And ins. 

& brou3te him ns. 4 Joasin. i vnto rns. to x. 
” ostagis he took awei nith him s. ® And Ins. 
and the a pr.m. * Andins. t remenaunt 1Ns. 


3 


I]. PARALIPOMENON. 


x and se we 1N. and se thow we s. 

d Om. s. 
k thistil 1. tasil ns. 

t Edom whiehe he wirschipide 1s, 


¢ Om. s. 
k enbitis of lengthe s. 


U and INS, 


443 


thou”, se we* vs togidere. And hey sente tg 
a3en? messangeris*, and seide, A ‘cardue, 
ether a tasil®, which® is in* the Liban® 
sente to the’ cedre’ of the Liban, and 
seide, 3yue thi dou3ter a® wijf to my 
sone; and lo! beestis that weren in thei 
wode of the) Liban 3eden and defouliden 
the cardue®. Thou seidist, Y haue smyte! 19 
Edom, and therfor thin herte is reysid in 
to pride; sitte thou™ in thin hows; whi 
stirist thou yuel ajens thee", that thou 
falle®, and Juda with thee? Amasie nolde? 20 
here’, for it was the wille of the Lord, 
that he schulde be bitakun'™ in to the 
hondis of enemyes*, for the goddis of 
Edom'. Therfor Joas, kyng" of Israel, 21 
stiede’, and thei” sizjen hem silf togidere. 
Sothelit Amasie, they kyng of Juda, was 
in Bethsames of? Juda; and Juda feldeze 
doun bifor Israel, and fledde* in to his 
tabernaclis. Certis? the kyng of Israel 23 
took in Bethsames Amasie, the® kyng of 
Juda, the’ sone of Joas, sone® of Joachaz, 
and’ brou3tes in to Jerusalem; and he? 
destriede the wallis therof fro the 3ate of 
Effraym ‘til toi the 3ate of the corner, bi 
foure hundrid cubitis*. And be ledde2 
a3en in to Samarie al the gold and siluer, 
and alle vessels! whiche™ he foond in the 
hows of the Lord, and at Obededom, in 
the tresouris also of the kyngis hows, 
also and the sones of ostagis". Forsothe® 25 
Amasie, kyng? of Juda, the? sone of 
Joas, lyuede fiftene 3eer aftir that Joas, 
kyng’ of Israel, the™ sone of Joachaz, | 
was deed. Sotheli’ the residuet of" the26 
formere and the laste wordis of Amasie 
ben writun in the book of kyngis of Juda 
and of Israel. And aftir that he 3ede¥27 


Om. Bp. POm. acn.. 


Y the kyng of Israel 1s. 2 Om.1. ® messageris 
€ Liban or mounts. fains.  & eedre tree INS. 

1 smetyn or distroyed s. ™ thou stille 1. thou 
P wolde not 1. 4 here this 1. here these wordis ns. 
uthe kyng ins. VY wente up ajens 
xAndins. yOm.s, 
¢Om.ns. ¢thesonein. fand he tns. 
\the vessels ins. ™ that 1. 
P the kyng 1nx. 4 and the a. T the kyng IN. 
v had gon Ins. 


Ww he and Amasie 1ns. 


LQ 


444 


the Lord benten to hym buschmentis in 
Jerusalem ; and whanne he hadde flowen 
to Lachis, thei senten and slewen hym 

28there; and bryngynge a3ein vpon hors, 
biryeden hym with his faders in the citee 
of Dauid. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 Forsothe al the puple of Juda his sone, 
Osie, of sexteen 3eer, setten kyng for his 
2fadir Amazie. He bild up Aylath, and 
restored it to the lordschip of Juda, aftir 
3that the kyng slepte with his fadirs. Of 
sexteen 3eer Osias was, whanne he hadde 
begunne to regnen; and two and fyfty 
3eer he regned in Jerusalem ; name of his 
amodre, Yechelya, of Jerusalem. And he 
dide that was ri3t in the si3t of the Lord, 
aftir alle thingus that Amazias, his fader, 
shadde done. And he sou3te the Lord in 
the days of Zacharie, vndirstondinge and 
seeing God; and whanne he schuld sechen 
6 God, he louede hym in alle thingus. Af- 
tirward he wente out, and fau3te a3einus 
Philisteis, and he* distruyede the wall of 
Geth, and the wall of Jabnye, and the 
wal of Azoty; and he bilde up bur3 
7towns in Azote of Phylisteym. And the 
Lord halpe hym ajeynus Philisteym, and 
a3enus Arabas that dwelliden in Garba- 
shal, and a3jenus Amonytis. And Amonytis 
spendiden the 3iftis to Ozie, and his name 
is puplischit vnto the entre of Egipt for 
ghis oft victories. And Ozias bilde up 
. toures in Jerusalem vpon the 3ate of the 
corner, and vpon the 3ate of the valey, 
and other in the same side of the wall; 
ioand he fastnede hem. And he bilde out 
also toures in wildirnesse, and dalf out 
many cysternes; forthi that he hadde 
many beestis bothe in the wijlde feeldis 
and in the wastite of desert. Also vynes 
he hadde and wyne makers in hillis, and 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXV. 28—XXVI. Io. 


awei fro the Lord, thei settiden” to hym 
tresouns in Jerusalem; and whanne he 
hadde fledde to Lachis, thei senten* and 
killiden hym there; and thei brou3teny 2: 
a3en on” horsis, and birieden* hym with 
his fadris in the citee of Dauid. 


CAP. XXVI. 


Forsothe al the puple of Juda made! 
kyng®, Ozie, his sone, ‘of sixtene® 3eer4, for® 
his fader Amasie. He bildide Hailath, and 2 
restoride it to the lordschipe of Juda, after 
that thef kyng® slepte with hise fadris. 
Ozie was of sixtene® 3eer, whanne he bi-3 
gan to regne; and he regnede two and 
fifti 3eer in Jerusalem; the! name of his 
modir was Hiechelia, of Jerusalem. And +4 
he dide that*, that was ri3tful in the si3t 
of the Lord, bi alle thingis whiche Amasie, 
his fadir, hadde do. And he sou3te thes 
Lord in the daies of Zacarie, vndurstond- 
ynge and seynge God; and whanne he 
sou3te God, God reulide hym in alle 
thingis. Forsothe! he 3ede out, and fau3t 6 
a3ens Filisteis, and distriede the wal of 
Geth™, and the wal of Jabyne, and the wal 
of Azotus; and he hildide stronge places 
in Azotus and in Filistiym. And the7 
Lord helpide hym bothe a3ens Filisteis, 
and a3ens" Arabeis that dwelliden in Gar- 
bahal, and° a3enus Amonytis. Amonytiss 
paieden 3iftis to Ozie, and his name was 
pupplischid ‘til to? the entryng of Egipt 
for ofte! victories. And Ozie bildide touris* 9 
in Jerusalem ouer the j3ate of the corner, 
and ouer the 3ate of the valey, and’ otheret 
touris" in the same side of the wal; and 
made’ tho stidefast”. Also he bildide touris 10 
in the* wildirnesse, and heY diggide ful 
many cisternes ; for he hadde many? beestis 
as wel in the? feeldi places as in the’ wast- 
nesse of deseert. Also he hadde vyneris 
and tiliers of vynes in the® hilles, and in 


¢ Om. c. 

Wsetten 1. %*senten fhiders. Y bron3ten himins. %vpons. 4 thei birieden ins. » Om. 1s. 
© of fyftene N. that was of fiftene s. 43eer agers. ¢kyng forins. fOm.1ns.  & kyng Amasie Ns. 
4 fyftene N. iandthes. k that thingins. |! Andins.’ ™ strength of Geths. "Om.s. °Om.s. 
Pynto Ins. tox. 4 hise ofte 1s.  gatis s. Sand he madens. tmootherer. %Om.1. Vhe 
made ins. W stidfast or strong s. *Om.1ns. YOm.N. 2 ful many ins. ®Om.insx. bOm. cs. 


¢ Om, ins. 


XXXVI. 11—1I9. 


in Carmele; forsothe he was a man 3euen 
1to erth tyllyinge’. The hoost forsothe of 
the fy3tynge men of hym, that wenten 
forth to batayles, was vndir the hond of 
Heiel, scribe, and Mazie, doctour, and yn- 
dir the hond of Ananye that was of the 
‘duykis of the kyng; and al the noumbre 
of princis, by their meynees, of stronge 
men two thousand and sexe hundrith. 
13 And vndir hem al the hoost of thre hun- 
drith and seuen thousand and fyue hun- 
drith, that weren able to batail, and for 
i4 the king a3einus the enmyes fou3ten. And 
Ozias maad redy to hem, that is, to al 
the hoost, tergetis, and speres, and hel- 
mes, and hauberiouns, and bowes, and 
isslyngis to stones to ben throwen. And 
he maad in Jerusalem engynes of dy- 
uerse maner, the whiche he sette in 
toures, and in the corners of wallis, that 
thei schulden casten arewes and grete 
stones; and his name is gon out aferre, 
for thi that the Lord halpe hym, and 
ishadde strengthede hym. Bot whanne he 
was strengthed, his hert is arered® in to 
his deth; and he dispisede the Lord his 
God; and gon in to the temple of the 
Lord, he wolde brenne encense vpon the 
i7autir of niaad encense. And anoon aftir 
hym wente in Azarias, the preste, and 
with hym prestis of the Lord, seuenty 
1ginen most worthi; and thei withstoden 
to the kyng, and seyden, Ozia, it is not 
of thin office, that thou brenne encense to 
the Lord, bot of the prestis of the Lord, 
that is, of the sonus of Aaron, that ben 
sacrid to syche af maner seruyse; go out 
fro the seyntuarye, ne dispise thou; for 
it schal not ben wijtyd to thee in to glo- 
rie of the Lord God. And Ozias is 
wroth, and holdinge in the hond a cen- 
sere, that he brenne encense, he ‘thratt to% 
the prestis; and anoon ther is sprungen 


4 tilthynge x. ¢ rerid c. 

4 the greet mounteyne ins. Carmele 1 marg. 
bh Om. ins. ! that is, thre 1s. 
aduersaries Is. "setterns. © Om. a. 
God ins. tuponis. sixty rvs. Vv Om. rns. 
him s. 2 but it is 1. but this office is s. 
God 1s. f wroth therfor s. & Om. cELP. 
nemyn hims. * upow is. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


f Om. ecru, 


e And In. 
ithe whiche 1. whiche ns. 
P caste out INS. 
w of ful noble men s. 
@Om.1. > whiche ns. 
h his Is. 


445 


Carmele’; for he was a man 3ouun to 
erthetilthe. Forsothe® the oost of hiseii 
werriours, that 3eden forth to batels, vudur 
the hond of Heiel, scribe, and of Masie, 
techere', and vndur the hond of Ananye 
that was of the duykis of the kyng; and 
al the noumbre of princes, by her meynees, 
was of stronge men two thousynde and 
sixe hundrid. And vndur hem was al the1s 
oost, thre! hundrid thousynde and seuen 
thousynde and fyue hundrid, that) weren 
able* to batel, and fou3ten' for the king 
ajens aduersaries™. And Ozie made redi1i4 
to hem, that is, to al the oost, scheldis, 
and speris, and basynetis, and haburiouns, 
and bouwis, and slyngis to caste stonys. 
And he made in Jerusalem engynes of dy-15 
uerse kynde, which he settide" in tonris, 
and in the® corneris of wallis, that tho 
schulden caste? arowis and grete stoonys ; 
and his name 3ede out fer, for the Lord 
helpide hym, and hadde maad him strong. 
But whanne he was niaad strong, his herte 16 
was reisid4 in to his perischyng; and het 
dispiside ‘his Lord God’; and he entride 
in to the temple of the Lord, and wolde 
brenne encense on‘ the auter of encense. 
And anoon Azarie, the preest, entride after 17 
hym, and with hym the" preestis of the 
Lord, seuentiY ‘men ful noble”; whiche* 18 
a3enstoden the kyng, and seiden’, Ozie, it 
is not of thin office, that thou brenne en- 
cense to the Lord, but* of the* preestis of 
the Lord, that is, of the sones of Aaron, 
that? ben halewid to siche seruyce; go 
thou out of thee seyntuarye; dispise’ thou 
not®; for this thing schal not be arettid of 
the Lord God to thee in to glorie. And 1s 
Ozie was wrootli, and he® helde in the" 
hond the censere for to offre encence, and 
manaasside! the preestis}; and anoon lepre 
was sprungun forth in his forheed, bifor 
the preestis in the hows of the Lord on* 


& was dryuen of £ pr. m. 


£ the techere Ins. & souereyn of INs. 
kable men ins. ! these foujten 1s. ™ hise 
dreisid up ins. *Om.s. 8 the Lord his 
X the whiche 1.  Y seiden to 
4 and dispise rvs. © not 

J prestis for that thet vnder- 


¢ Om. I. 
The manasside 1Ns. 


446 


a lepre in his forhede, before the prestis in 
the hous of the Lord vpon the auter of maad 
20eucense. And whanne Azaria, the bischop, 
hadde beholden hym, and alle the tother 
prestis seen a lepre in his forhede, hastely 
thei puttyn hym out; and he aferd hy3ede 
to gon out; forthi that he hadde feelid 
21 anoon the veniaunce of the Lord. Thanne 
Ozias was mesel vnto the day of his deth, 
and dwellide in an hous seuered, ful of 
lepre ; for the whiche he was throwen out 
fro the hous of the Lord. Bot Joathan, 
his sone, gouernede the hous of the kyng, 
yeand demede the puple of the lond. The 
remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of Ozie, 
of the rather and of the last, wrote 
Ysayas, the sone of Amos, prophete. 
23 And Ozias slepte with his fadirs, and 
thei biryeden hym not in the feeld of 
kyngis sepulcres, forthi that he was lee- 
prous; and Joathan, his sone, regnede 
for hym. 
CAP. XXVII. 

1 Of fyne and twenty 3eer was Joathan, 
whanne he hadde begunne to regnen, and 
sixteen jeer he regnede in Jerusalem; 
name of his moder Jerusa, the dou3ter of 

2Sadoch. And he dide that was ri3t be- 
fore the Lord, aftir alle thingus that Ozias, 
his fadir, hadde don; out take that he 
wente not in to the temple of the Lord, 

sand 3it the puple trespasside. He bild 
up the hee3 3ate of the hous of the Lord, 
and in the wal of Ophel many thingus 
sinaad"; and citees bilde in the hillis of 
Juda, and in hee3 wodis, castels, and 
stoures. And he fau3t ajeinus the kyng of 
the sonus of Amon, and ouercame hym ; 
and the sonus of Amon 3euen to hym in 
that tyme an hundrith talentis of syluer, 
and tenn thousand choris of barly, and as 
fele of whete ; thes thingus 3euen to hym 
the sonus of Amon the secound 3eer and 
sthe thrid. And Joathan is strengthed, 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXVI, 20—XXVII. 6. 


the auter of encense. And whanne Azarie, 20 
the bischop, hadde biholde hym, and! alle 
othere™ preestis ‘adden biholde him*, thei 
sien lepre in his forheed, and hiyngli® thei 
puttiden hym? out4; but also he was aferd, 
and hastide to go out; for he feelide anoon 
the veniaunce of the Lord. Therfor kyng 21 
Ozie was leprouse ‘til to’ the® dai of his 
deeth, and dwellidet in an hows bi it silf, 
and he was ful of lepre; ‘for which" he 
was cast out of the hows of the Lord. 
Forsothe’ Joathan, his sone, gouernyde the 
hows" of the kyng, and demyde* the puple 
of the lond. SotheliY Ysaie, the prophete, 22 
the sone of Amos, wroot the residue* ‘of 
the® formere and of? the laste wordis of 
Ozie. And Ozie slepte with hise fadris, 23 
and thei birieden not hym in the feeld of 
the kyngis sepulcris, for he was leprouse ; 
and Joathan, his sone, regnyde for hym. 


CAP. XXVII. 


Joathan® was of fyue and twenti 3eer,1 
whanne he bigan to regne, and he regnede 
sixtene 3eer in Jerusalem ; the name of his 
modir was® Jerusa, the dou3ter of Sadoch. 
Hef dide that, that was ri3tful bifor the2 
Lord, bi alle thingis whiche Ozie, his fadir, 
hadde do; outakun that he entride not in 
to the temple of the Lord, and the puple 
trespasside 3it®. He bildide the hi3 3ate3 
of the hous of the Lord, and he bildide 
manye thingis in the wal of Ophel; also4 
he hildide citees in the hillis of Juda, and 
he bildide castels and touris in forestis. 
He faut ajens the kyng of the sones of 
Amon, and ouercam hym; and the sones 
of Amon 3auen to hym in that tyme an 
hundrid talentis of siluer, and ten thou- 
synde choris of barli, and so many of 
wheete ; the sones of Amon 3auen these 
thingis to hym in the secounde and ini 
the* thridde jeer. And Joathan! was maad 6 


h he maad c. 


land alsoins. ™ Om. a. the othere rns. 
temple s. ™ vnto ins. tox. $8 Om. a. 
w house or meyne s. > he demyde ns. 
d Jonathan ws. ¢ Om. Nn, 
k Om. s. 1 Jonathan ws. 


" Om. Ins. 
t he dwellide ins. 
y And ins, 

f Joathan 1. Jonathan wns. 


%anoont. P the kyng ns. 

u wherfor 1. for which lepre s. 
Zremenaunt 1w. Om.s. 4 Om. s. 
& 3it therynne 1x. 4 And he ins. 


4 out of the 
v And ins. 
b Om. s. 
i Om. ns. 


XXVIL. 7—XXVII1L. 8. 


forthi that he hadde dresside his weys 
7before the Lord his God. The remnaunt 
forsothe of the wordis of Joathan, and 
alle the fi3tyngis of hym, and werkes, 
ben writen in the boke of kingus of Irael 
sand of Juda. Of fyue and twenty 3eer 
he was, whaune he hadde begunne to 
regnen, and sixtene 3eer he regnede in 

9 Jerusalem. And Joathan slepte with his 
faders, and thei birieden hyin in the citee 
of Danid; and Achaz, his sone, regned 
for hym. 

CAP. XXVIII. 

1 Of fyue and twenty 3eer was Achaz, 
whanne he hadde begunne to regnen, 
and sexteene seer he regnede in Jerusa- 
lem; and he dide not ri3t in the si3t of 

2the Lord, as Danid, his fadir; bot wente 
in the weyes of the kyngis of Irael. For- 
thermore and he 3eetyde ymagis to Ba- 

3alym. He is that brende encense in the 
valey of Bennon, and he enuyrounde his 
sonus in fijr aftir the rijt of gentilis, the 
whiche the Lord slow3 in the commynge 
4of the sonus of Irael. Also he sacrified, 
and brende maad encense in hei3tis, and 
in hillis, and vnder alle braunchid tree. 

5 And the Lord his God toke hym in the 
hond of the kyng of Cyrie, the whiche 
smote hym, and a gret prey of his em- 
pyre toke, and brou3t in to Damase. And 
he is taken to the hondis of the kyng of 
Trael, and smyten with a grete veniaunce. 

6 And Phacee, the sone of Romelie, slew3 
of Juda an hundrith and twenty thou- 
sand in oo day, and alle men fi3ters; for 
thi that thei hadden forsake the Lord 

7God of their fadirs. The same tyme 
Jechry, a my3ty man of Effraym, slew3 
Maaziam, the sone of the kyng, and Esri- 
cham, duyke of his hous, also Elchanan, 

8the secounde fro the kyng. And the 
sonus of Jrael token of their bretheren 
two hundrith thousand of wymmen and 
of knaue childre and of mayde childre, 


™ the Lord his God rns. 
kyugis in. § Jonathan wns. 
brent s. Ywhomt. 
Lord his God ns. 
h he was 1Ns. 


a And ins. 
t rigtwisnesse 1. 


¢Qm.s. 4 the which 1. 
i smytun of him 1s. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


© remenannt INS. 
uOm. nN. 

z Israel fro Egipt 1. Israel towardus the lend of bihest s. 
© smoot or overcame S. 
Kk of the men of ins. 


447 


strong, for he hadde dressid hise weies bi- 
for ‘his Lord God™. Forsothe" the resi-7 
due® of wordis? of Joathan4, and alle hise 
batels, and werkis, ben writun in the book 
of kyngis™ of Israel and of Juda. He wass 
of fyue and twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan 
to regne, and he regnede sixtene jeer in 
Jerusalem. And Joathan’ slepte with hise9 
fadris, and thei birieden hym in the citee 
of Dauid; and Achaz, his sone, regnede 
for him. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Achaz was of twenti jeer, whanne he1 
bigan to regne, and he regnede sixtene ~ 
seer in Jerusalem; he dide not ri3tful- 
nesset in the si3t of the Lord, as Dauid, 
his fadir, dide"; but he 3ede in the weies2 
of the kyngis of Israel. Ferthermore and 
he 3etyde’ ymagis to Baalym. He it is3 
that brente encense in the valey of Been- 
non, and¥ purgide* hise sones bi fier bi 
the custom of hethene men, whicheY the 
Lord killide in the comyng of the sones 
of Israel?. Also he® made sacrifice, and 4 
brente encense in hi3 places, and in hillis, 
and vndur ech tree ful of bowis. Aud ‘his5 
Lord God? bitook hym in the hond of the° 
kyng of Sirie, which’ smoot® Achaz, and 
tookf a greet preie of his empire, and 
brou3ten® in to Damask. Also Achaz was 
bitakun to the hondis of the kyng of 
Israel, and was" smytun! with a greet 
wounde. And Facee, the sone of Romelie, 6 
killide of § Juda sixe scoore thousynde in 
o dai, alle the men werriours; for thei 
hadden forsake the Lord God of her fa- 
dris. In the same tyme Zechry, a my3ti7 
man of Effraym, killide Maasie, the sone 
of Rogloth, the kyng; and ‘he hillide! 
Ezrica, the duyk of his hows, and E]- 
cana, the secounde™ fro the kyng. Ands 
the sones of Israel token of her britheren 
two hundrid thousynde of wymmen and 
of children and of damysels, and prey 


q Jonathan ns. * the 
Wors. * purgide or 
a Achaz ms. » the 
f he took 1s. & he brou3te i 1Ns. 
™ secounde persone S. 


P the wordis 1Ns. 
Vv 3etyde out IN. 


10m. in. 


448 ITI. PARALIPOMENON, 


and a pray with out noumbre ; and thei 
9brou3ten it in to Samarie. In that tem- 
pest was ther a prophete of the Lord, 
Obed by name, the whiche gon out meet- 
yng to the hoost commyng to Samarie, 
seide to hem, Lo! the Lord God of oure 
fadirs is wrooth ajeinus Judam, and toke 
hem in jour hondis; and 3e han sleen 
hem cruely, so that in to heuen 3oure 
loeruelte schulde commen. Forthermore 
the sonis of Juda and of Jerusalem 3ee 
wiln subjecten to 3ou seruauntis and 
hond wymmen ; that ‘indeede is no nede'; 
se han synned vpon this to the Lord 
1130ure God. Bot heerith my counseil, and 
bringith a3ein the caytyues, the whiche 
je han lad awey of 3oure bretheren; for 
grete woodnesse of the Lord stant ouer 
12to 30u. And so the men of the princis 
of the sonus of Effraym stodyn, Azarias, 
the sone of Johannan, Barachias, the 
sone of Mosollamoth, Jezechias, the sone 
of Sellum, and Amazias, the sone of 
Adaly, a3jeyn hem that camen fro the 
i3sbataile; and seyden to hem, 3e schul 
not bryngen in hydre the caytifes, lest 
we synnen to the Lord; why wille 3c 
casten to vpon 3oure synues, and hepen 
olde synnes ? Grete forsothe symne it is ; 
and the wrath of the wodnesse of the 
14 Lord stant vpon Yrael. And the fi3tynge 
men laften the pray, and alle thingis that 
thei hadden taken, before the princis and 
isal the multitude. And the men, the 
whiche aboue we myndedyn, stoden, and, 
takynge the caityues, clothedyn of the 
spoylis alle that weren nakyd; and 
whanne thei hadden clothede* hem, and 
schod, and fyld hem with mete and 
drynk, and anoyntide for the! trauayle, 


XXVIII. 9—15. 


with out noumbre; and baren" it in to 
Samarie. In that tempest® a profete of9 
the Lord, Obed bi name, was there, which? 
3ede out a3ens the oost! comynge in to Sa- 
marie, and seide™ to hem, Lo! the Lord 
God of 3oure fadris was wrooth a3ens Juda, 
and bitooks hem in 3oure hondis; and 3e 
han slayn hem crueli, so that 5oure cruelte 
stretchidet forth in to heuene. Ferther-10 
more" 3e wolen make suget to jou the 
sones of Juda and of Jerusalem in to ser- 
uauntis and handmaidis’; which thing is 
not nedeful to be doon; for” 3e han syn- 
ned on* this thing to ‘joure Lord God’. 
But here? 3e my councel, and lede* ajen 11 
the prisounneris, whyche? 3e han brou3t® of 
joure britheren ; for greet veniaunce of the 
Lord nei3ith* to 30u. Therfor men® of the 12 
princes of the sones of Effraym, Azarie, 
the sone of Johannan, Barachief, the sone 
of Mosollamoth, JesechieS, the sone of Sel- 
lum, and Amasie, the sone of Adali, stoden 
ajens hem that" camen fro the batel; and15 
seiden to hem, 3e schulen not brynge in 
hidur the! prisoneris, lest we* doen synne 
a3ens the Lord; whi woleu! 5e ‘ley to™ on 
joure synnes, and heepe elde" trespassis ? 
For? it? is greet synne; the’ ire™ of the 
strong veniaunce of the Lord neizeth on* 
Israel. And the men werriouris' leften 14 
the prey, and alle thingis whiche thei 
hadden take, bifor the princes and al the 
multitude. And the men stoden", whiche ts 
we remembriden’ bifore, and thei token 
the prisounneris, and clothiden” of the 
spuylis alle that weren nakid; and whanne 
thei hadden clothid hem, and hadden* 
schod’, and hadden? refreschid? with mete 
and drynke”, and hadden* anoyntid? for 
trauel®, and haddenf 3oue cure, ‘ether me- 


iis were to a wicked deede e pr.m. kcladc. 1 that c. 


"thei baren rns. © tempest or veniaunce 1s. 
v he seide ms. S he hath bitake is. 


maidenes s. _-W certis INs. * vpon N. in s. 


P the which 1. which profeet s. 4 oost of Israel ins. 
t stretchith rns. 
y the Lord goure God ns.“ herith s. 8 Jedeth rns. 


u And n. Ferthermore and s. Vv hond 


bthat 1. © brou3t theans 1s. 4 ny3ith nig3s. ¢men of Israels. and Barachie s. & and Jesechie s. 


h the whiche 1. whiche ns. i tho ns. k we consentinge to 30u 1. we coneente to 30u tos. | wilt. 
™ caste up more yuel 1. leyn to more yuel vps. 9 30ure olde 1s. 9 Certis ins. Pthisins. 4 and 
the tn. therfor the s. t wraththe nv. § upon Is. t werriouris of Israel 1s. v stoden there Is. 


Vv remembreden azd rehersiden ss. ¥* thei clothiden ivs. * Om.1Ns.  Yschod hem ins. 2 Om. Ns. 


*refreschid hem ins. > with drynke 1n. 
trauelle s, f Om. ins. 


c¢ Om. N. 


danointid hem xs. © her trauel 1. her greet 


oSE—$<—$< SC —_ 


XXVIII. 16—25. 


and 3euen to hem besynesse; who so 
euer my3ten not gon, and’ weren with 
feble body, thei putten hem: on bestis, 
and ladden to Jericho, the citee of palmes, 
to their bretheren; and thei ben turned 
l6a3ein in to Samarie. That tyme kyng 
Achaz sente to the kyng of Assiries, ask- 
izynge helpe. And Ydumeis camen, and 
smyten many of Juda, and token grete 
ispray. And the Philisteis ben held out 
by wijld feeldy cytees, and at the south 
of Juda; and thei token Bethsames, and 
Hailon, and Gaderoth, Socoth also, and 
Thannan, and Zamro, with their litil 
19touns; and thei dwelliden in hem. For- 
sothe the Lord hadde meekide Judam for 
Achaz, kyng of Juda; forthi that he 
hadde nakyd hym fro helpe, and hadde 
20the Lord to .dispyte. And the Lord 
brou3t ajeinus hym Teglat Falasar, king 
of Assiries, the whiche tourmentyde hym, 
and no man withstondinge, waastide. 
21Thanne Achaz, the hous of the Lord 
spoylide, and the hous of kingus and 
princis, 3af to the kyng of Assiries 3iftis, 
and neuer the latre it profitide no thing 
22to hym. Forthermore and in tyme of 
his anguysch he echide dispite in to the 
23 Lord ; he by hym silf kyng Achaz offrede 
to the goddis of Damasc slayn sacrifices, 
to his smyters, and seyde, The goddis 
of the kingus of Cyrie helpen to hem, 
the which I schal plesen with hoostis, 
and thei schul stonden to to me; whanne 
ajeenward thei weren fallyng to hym, 
a4and to al Irael. And so Achaz, alle the 
vessels of the hous of God taken awey, 
and broken to gydre, closede the 3atis of 
the temple of God, and maad to hym 
auters in alle the corners of Jerusalem. 
25 Also in alle the cytees of Juda he maad 
up auters to brennen encense, and he ter- 


£Om.1s. bOm.1ns.  ‘ euere of hem ins. 
britheren rns. 
t south cost ins. 
x him self ins. 
€ the while 1s. 
or destriers 18. 
8 the citees ins. 


VOL. II. 


P help of him 18, 
u thei dwelliden 1Ns. 
yOm.ins. 2 Achaz ins. 
fthe princes ins. & he jaf 1Ns. 
™m he seide 1ns. 4% the whiche 1. 

t brenne upon s. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


kK weren feble and mi3t not go s. 
[puttiden n] hem on horsis 1n. thei puttiden on horsis s. 
4 men of Ydumee 1. men of Edom ns. 
v Sothly 1n. Forsoth s. 
@ the king ns. 
b not s. 
© falling and hindring s. 
U gtiride therbi Is. 


449 


decyn®, to hem; ‘thei puttiden hem on 
horsis*, whiche euere! ‘my3ten not go, and 
weren feble* ‘of bodi!, and brou3ten™ to 
Jerico, a" citee of palines, to ‘the britheren 
of hem®; and thei turneden ajen in to 
Samarie. In that tyme kyng Achaz sente 16 
to the kyng of Assiriens, and axide help?. 
And Ydumeis! camen, and killiden™ many* 17 
men of Juda, and token greet prey. Also1s 
Filisteis weren spred abrood bi citees of 
the feeldis, and at the south of Juda; and 
thei token Bethsames, and Hailon, and 
Gaderoth, and Socoth, and Thamnan, and 
Zamro, with her villagis; and dwelliden® 
in tho. For’ the Lord made low Juda for 19 
Achaz, the kyng of Juda; for” he hadde 
maad him* nakid of help, and haddeY dis- 
pisid the Lord. And the Lord brou3te20 
a3ens him’ Teglat Phalasar, kyng* of As- 
siriens, that turmentide hym®, and waast- 
ide hyn, while® no man ajenstood. Ther-2! 
for Achaz, after that he hadde spnylid the 
hows of the Lord, and the hows of the 
kyng and of princes‘, 3af® 3iftis to the 
kyng of Assiriens, and netheles it profitide 
‘no thing' to hym. Ferthermore also in22 
the tyme of his angwisch he encreesside 
dispit a3ens God}; thilke! kyng Achaz bik + As Lea ie 
hym silf offride sacrifices to the goddis of 23in her sijk. 
Damask, hise smyteris!, and seide™, The eae eae 
goddis of the kyngis of Sirie helpen hem, “* 
whiche" goddis Y schal plese bi sacrifices, 
and thei schulen help ine; whanne ajen- 
ward thei weren fallyng® to hym, and to? 
al Israel. Therfor aftir that Achaz hadde2a 
take awei, and broke alle the vessels of the 
hows of God, he closide the 3atis of Goddis 
temple, and: made™ auteris to hym silf in 
alle the corneris of Jerusalem. And in2s 
alle citees* of Juda he bildide auteris to 
brennet encence, and he stiride® the Lord 
God of hise fadris to’ wrathfulnesse. So-26 


' of bodi thei putten 
m thei brou3ten hem ins. "theins. ° her 
T thei killiden in. & Om. s. 
w for thi that 1n. for that that s. 
¢Om. ins. 4 Om. plures. 
k Om. ns. ! smyteris 

P Om.s. * he made Ins. 


b which ns. 
i for thilke ing. 


Yin tos. 
3M 


450 


rede to wrath the Lord God of their 
a¢fadirs. The remnaunt forsothe of his 
wordis and of alle his werkes, of the ra- 
ther and of the last, ben writen in the 
boke of the kyngis of Juda and of Ivael. 
27 And Achaz slepte with his™ fadirs, and 
thei birieden hym in the cyte of Dauid 
of Jerusalem ; ne forsothe thei receyueden 
hym in the sepulcres of the kingus of 
Irael ; and Ezechias, his sone, regnede 
for hym. 
CAP. XXIX. 

i Ezechias thanne beganne to regnen, 
whanne he was of fyue and twenty jeer, 
and nyne and twenty 3eer he regnede in 
Jerusalém; name of his modir, Abia, the 

2dou3ter of Zacharye. And he dide that 
was plesaunt in the si3t of the Lord, aftir 
alle thiugus that Dauid, his fadir, hadde 

3done. In that 3eer and the first moneth 
of his regne he opnede the 3ate leues of 
the hous of the Lord, and he enstorede 
4hem; and brou3te to the prestis and the 
Leuytis, and gaderede hem in to the 
seste strete, and seide to hem, Heerith 
me, Leuytis, and beth halowed ; clensith 
the hous of the Lord God of oure faders, 
and doth awey alle vnclennesse fro the 
6seyntuarye. QOure fadirs synneden, and 
diden euyl in the si3te of the Lord oure 
God, forsakyng hym ; thei turneden awei 
their faces fro the tabernacle of the Lord 
zoure God, and 3euen bac. Thei closeden 
the dores that weren in the jate hous, 
and quencheden the lanterns; and en- 
cense thei brenneden not, and brent sa- 
crifices thei offreden not in the seyn- 
stuarye of God of Irael. And so the 
woodnesse of the Lord is sterid vpon 
Judam and Jerusalem; and he toke hem 
in to distourblynge, and into deth, and 
in to whistlyng, as 3e beholden with 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXVIII. 26—XXIX. 8. 


theli® the residue* of hiseY wordis and of 
alle hise werkis, the formere and the laste, 
ben writun in the book of kyngis of Juda 
and of Israel. And Achaz slepte with27 
hise fadris, and thei birieden hym in the 
citee of Jerusalem; for thei resseyueden 
not hym in? the sepulcris of the kyngis of 
Israel; and Ezechie, his sone, regnede for 
hym. 


CAP. XXIX. 


Therfor* Ezechie bigan to regne, whaune 1 
he was of fyue and twenti 3eer, and he 
regnede in Jerusalem nyne and twenti 
3eer; the name of his modir was Abia, the 
dou3tir of Zacharie. And he? dide that,2 
that® was pleasaunt4 in the si3t of the 
Lord, bi alle thingis whiche® Dauid, his 
fadir, hadde do. In that 3eer and thef3 
firste monethe of his rewme he openyde 
the 3atis of the hows of the Lord, and 
restoride? tho"; and he brou3te' the*4 
preestis and dekenes, and gaderide! hem™ 
in to the eest strete, and seide" to hem,5 
Sones of Leuy, here 3e me, and be 3e ha- 
lewid®; clense 3e the hows of the Lord 
God of 3oure fadris; do? 3e awei al vn- 
clennesse fro the seyntuarie. Oure fadris¢ 
synneden?, and diden™ yuel in the si3t of 
‘oure Lord God’, and forsokent hym; thei 
turneden awei her faces" fro the tabernacle 
of ‘oure Lord God’, and 3auen” the* bak. 
Thei closiden the doris that weren in the7 
porche, and quenchiden the lanternes’; and 
thei brenten? not? encense, and thei offriden 
not brent sacrifices in the seyntuarie of 
God of Israel. Therfor the stronge ven-8 
jaunce of the Lord-was reisid on> Juda 
and Jerusalem; and he 3af hem in to 
stiryng’, and in to perischyng, and in to 
‘hisshing, ether4 scornyng, as 3e seen® with 


™ Om. zB. 
w And ins. *remenaunt ins. Y Achaz ins. 7in tons. 2 Andsinxs. > Ezechie ins. ¢ thinge s. 
d plesynge ins. © thats. fin the rns.  & restoride or repereilide 1s. 4 tho 3atis ns.‘ brou3t hider s. 
k Om. ins. 1! he gaderide ins. ™ hem éo gidre rns. he seide ins. © halwed to serue the Lord s. 


Panddoins. 4 han synned rns. 
3oure Lord God x. t thei forsoken 1Ns. 

thei 3anen or turned therto s. x her rvs. 
bupon is. © mouyng IN. 


vr han don 1. don ns. 
uU face s. 

Y lanterns therof s. 
mouyng or unstablenesse s. 


8 the Lord oure God wn. the Lord 30ur God s. 
Vthe Lord oure God ins. ¥ thei 3anen therto 1N. 
% brou3ten Ns. a not thider s. 


4 Om. ins, © sizjen now s. 


XXIX. g9—18. 


930ure eejen. Lo! oure fadirs fellen with 
swerdis; oure sonus, and oure dou3ters, 
and oure wijues ben lad caityf for this 
1ohidous gilt. Nowe thanne it plesith to 
me, that we gon in pese couenaunt with 
the Lord God of Irael, and he do awey 
i1fro us the woodnesse of his wrath. My 
sonus, willith not dispisen; the Lord 
chees 30u, that 3e stonden beforn hym, 
and mynystren to hym, and heryen hym, 
izand brennen to hym encense. Thanne 
the Leuytis rysen, Maath, the sone of 
Amazie, and Joel, the sone of Azarie, 
of the sonis of Caath; bot of the sonus 
of Merery, Ciz, the sone of Abday, and 
Azarias, the sone of Jalalael ; of the sonus 
forsothe of Jersan, Joha, the sone of 
Zemma, and Hedem, the sone of Joha; 
izand forsothe of the sonus of Elizaphan, 
Zamry, and Jahiel; of the sonus also of 
11Asaph, Zacharias, and Mathanyas; also 
of the sonus of Heman, Jahiel, and Semei; 
bot and of the sonus of Yditum, Semeyas, 
isand Oziel. And thei gadreden their bre- 
theren, and ben halowed, and gon in, after 
the maundement of the kyng, and the 
heste of the Lord, that thei clensen the 
16hous of the Lord. And the prestis gon 
in to the temple of the Lord, that thei 
halowen it, beeren out al the vnclennesse, 
that with inne thei hadden foundyn in the 
vestiarie of the hous of the Lord; the 
whiche token the Leuytis, and beeren out 
with out forth to the streme of Cedron. 
17 And thei begunnen the first day of the 
first moneth to clensen, and in the ey3the 
day of the same moneth thei wenten in 
to the 3ate hous of the temple of the 
Lord, and thei purgedyn the temple ei3te 
days; and in the sixtenthe day of the 
same moneth, that thei hadden begunnen, 
isthei fulfilden. And thei wenten in to 
Ezechie, the kyng; and seyden to hym, 


f han falle ins. € Om. rns. 4 oure wyues INS. 
™ that je brenne rns. _® resen up I. risiden up Ns. 
op s. 4 and rns. 
_Elisaphan riseden vp s. 
* Iditum risiden vp ws. 
b heest rvs. © the vnclennesse 1Ns. 
hinto a. i And ins. 
thinge 8. ° Om. Nn. 


u Asaph riseden up s. 
Y thei weren 1Ns. 
4 that 1Ns. 


I. PARALIPOMENON. 


r Jerson resen up 1. Jerson riseden up s. 
vOm. s. 
2 entriden into the temple 1 marg. Ns teat. 


k clense it 1. clense the temple s. 


451 


joure izen. Lo! oure fadris felden‘ douns 
bi swerdis ; oure sones, and oure dou3tris, 
and wyues" ben led‘ prisouneris for this 
greet trespas. Now therfor it plesith me, 10 
that we make a boond of pees with the 
Lord God of Israel, and that he turne fro 
vs the stronge veniaunce of his ire’, My! 
sones, nyle 3e be! reccheles; the Lord hath 
chose 30u, that 3e stonde bifor hym, and 
serue hym, that 3e herie hym, and brenne™ 
encense to hym. Therfor the dekenes ris- 12 
iden", Mahat, the sone of Amasie, and Jo- 
hel, the sone of Azarie, of the sones of 
Caath; sotheli® of the sones of Merarye?, 
Cys, the sone of Abdai, and Azarie, the 
sone of Jelaleel ; forsothe! of the sones of 
Jerson’, Joha, the sone of Zemma, and 
Hedem, the sone of Johaa; and sotheli’ 13 
of the sones of Elisaphan‘, Samri, and Ja- 
hiel; and of the sones of Asaph", Zacharie, 
and Mathanye; also of’ the sones of He-14 
man”, Jahiel, and Semei; but also of the 
sones of Iditum*, Semei, and Oziel. Andis 
thei gaderiden to gidere her britheren, and 
werenY halewid; and thei entriden? bi? 
comaundement® of the kyng, and bi co- 
maundement of the Lord, for to clense the 
hows of the Lord. Also preestis entriden 16 
in to the temple of the Lord, for to halewe 
it, and thei baren out al vnclennesse‘, 
which? thei founden ther ynne in the 
porche, ‘ethtr large place®, of the hows 
of the Lord; which vnclennesse the de- 
kenes token, and baren’ out’ to® the 
stronde of Cedron with outforth. Sothelii 17 
thei bigunnen to clense* in the firste dai 
of the firste monethe, and in the ei3te dai 
of the same monethe thei entriden in to 
the porche of the hows of the Lord, and 
thei clensiden the temple ei3te! daies ; and 
in the sixtenthe dai of the same monethe 
thei filliden™ that®, that thei hadden bi- 
gunne. And thei entriden to Ezechie, the° 13 


i ledde fro vs s. 


° and INs. 


k wraththe rvs. 1 here ynne be s. 
P Merarye resen up 1. Merarye riseden 
s Om. Ns. t Elisaphan resen up 1. 
w Heman resen vp 1. Heman riseden up 8. 
a bi the cx. 
& Om. s. 
2 the 


f thei baren ¢/ 1N. barin if s. 
Tin ei3te rvs. ™ fulfilliden 1s. 


e Om. INs. 


3M 2 


452 
We han halowed al the hous of the Lord, 


and the auter of brent" sacrifice of hym, . 


and his vessels, also and the horde of pro- 
19 posicyoun with alle his vessels, and alle 
the® purtenauncis of the temple, that kyng 
Achaz in his rewme hadde polutide, after 
that he hadde trespassede; and loo! leid 
out ben alle thingus before the auter of 
20 the Lord. And Ezechie, the kyng, rijsyng 
erly, gadered in oon alle princis? of the 
cytee, and he stei3ede up in to the hous 
2i0f the Lord; and thei offreden to gyder 
boolis seuen, and wetheris seven, and4 
lombis seuen, and geet seuen, for the 
synne, for the rewmie, for the seyntuarye, 
for Juda. And he seide to the prestis, 
sonis of Aaron, that thei schulden offren 
22vpon the auter of the Lord. Thanne 
thei slewen boolis, and the prestis token 
the blood, and heldyn it vpon the auter ; 
also thei slewen wethers, and of hem the 
blood thei heldyn vpon the auter; and 
thei offreden lombis, and helden vpon the 
23auter the blood. And thei applieden the 
geet for the synne before the kyng and 
al the multitude, and thei putten their 
2ihondis vpon hem; and the prestis of- 
freden hem, and thei sprengden the blood 
of hem beforn the auter, for the synne of 
al Irael. Forsothe for al Irael the kyng 
hadde comaundide, that there schulde be 
25don brent sacrifice, and for synne. And 
he ordeynde Leuytis in the hous of the 
Lord, with cymbales, and sawtrees, and 
harpis, aftir the disposicyoun of king 
Dauid, and of Gad, seear, and of Nathan, 
the prophete ; forsothe the heste of the 
Lord it was bi the hond of his prophetis. 
26And the Leuytis stoden, holdyng the 
orgnys of Dauid; and prestis the trumpis. 
27And Ezechias comaundide, that ther 


& 
nhis brent £ prim. 9 Om.c. 


q that 1Ns. 

v he stiede up 1s. he stiede n. 
@ the kyng Ins. 

& upon'is. 4 thei ns. 


P halewid or clensid 1s. 
gaderide Ns. 
Z and for INS. 
f helden 1. 
9° upon Is. 
t Om.s. U upon ts. 
Om.s. 4Forsothe ms. 
& this rvs.) Om. rns. 


i helden 1. 


b synne therof Ns. 
i heeld in her hondis s. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


P the princis ce pr.m. 


' had broke s. 
W with hem ins. 

» offre sacrifices Ns. 

k upon ts. 

P prestis for synne in. prestis also for synne s. 

¥ tho, and killiden hem ins. ¥ hem 1. 


© the kyng ins. 4% kyng Dauid ins. 


XXIX. 19—~-27. 


king, and seiden to hym, We han halewid? 
al the hows of the Lord, and the auter of 
brent sacrifice therof, and the vessels ther- 
of, also and the boord of settyngforth with 
alle hise vessels, and al the purtenaunce 19 
of the temple,‘ which purtenaunce! king 
Achaz hadde defoulid in-his rewme, aftir 
that he brak" the lawe*®; and lo! alle 
thingis ben set forth bifor the auter of the 
Lord. And Ezechie, the kyng, roost in the 20 
morwetid, and gaderide” togidere alle the 
princes of the citee, and stiedeY in” to the 
hows of the Lord; and* thei offriden to-2! 
gidere seuene bolis, and seuene rammes, 
seuene lambren, and seuene buckis of geet, 
for synneY, for? the rewmef, for the seyn- 
tuarye, and for Juda. And he® seide to 
preestis, the sones of Aaron, that thei 
schulden offre” on® the auter of the Lord. acon 
Therfor thei® killiden bolis, and ‘tlie 22 nystringe 
preestis® tooken the blood, and scheddenf thet (sn 
it ons the auter ; also thei killiden rammes, jp Pele 4” 
and ‘the preestis schedden' the blood of 

tho on* the auter; thei! offriden lambren, 

and ‘the preestis™ schedden® the blood on® 

the auter. And thei? brou3ten buckis of 23 

geet ‘for synne’ bifor the kyng and al 

the multitude, and thei’ settiden’ her‘ 

hondis on" tho’; and the preestis offriden 24 

tho’, and spreynten* the blood ofY tho? 

bifor the auter, for the clensyng of al Is- 

rael. For* the king comaundide, that brent 

sacrifice shulde be made for al Israel, and 

for synne. Also he® ordeynede dekenes 25 

in the hows of the Lord, with cymbalis, 

and sawtrees, and harpis, bi the orde- 

naunce of ‘Dauid the kyng4, and of © Gad, 

the profete, and of Nathan, the profete ; 

for‘ it was the comaundement of the Lord 

bi the hond of hise prophetis. And the! 26 

dekenes stoden, and helden! the orguns of 


+ for the 
rewwme ; that is, 
for the princes. 
for the seyn- 
tuarie, that is, 
for preestis and 


q Om. acH. 


8 lawe of God s. 
x and there 1s. 
¢ upon Is. 


t roos up INS. the 
Y her owne synne ins. 
4 the prestis ns. € thei Ins. 

land thei rns. ™theiins. ® helden 1. 
q Om. ins. * the prestis Ins. 8 setten 1. 
x thei spreynten Ins. ¥ Om.s. 2 hem 1. 
€bis. f certis ms. 


XXIX. 28—35. 


schulden ben offred brent sacrifices vpon 
the auter; and whanne thei schulden 
offren brent sacrifices, thei begunnen to 
syngen preysyngis to the Lord, and sown 
. with trumpis, and in dyuerse orgnys, that 
Dauid, king of Irael, hadde maad redy to 
28sown with. Al the puple forsothe ho- 
nourynge, the syngers and tho that 
helden trumpis weren in their offices‘, to 
the tyme that the brent sacrifices weren 
29 ful eendid. And whanne the offryng was 
eendid, the kyng is ful bowed, and alle 
that weren with hym, and thei honour- 
30eden. And Ezechias comaundide and the 
princis to Lenytis, that thei schulden 
preysen the Lord with the wordis of 
Dauid, and of Asaph, seear ; the whiche 
preyseden with grete gladnesse, and the 
31knee ful bowede, thei hononrden. Eze- 
chias forsothe thes* also addide, 3e han 
fulfild 3oure hondis to the Lord ; commith 
nee3, and offrith sacrifices and preysingis 
32in the hous of the Lord. Thanne al the 
multitude offtide oostis, and preysingis, 
and brent sacrifices, with deuout mynde. 
Forsothe the noumbre of the brent sa- 
crifices, that the multitude offride, was 
this; boolis seuenty, wethers an hundrith, 
33lombis two hundrith. Also thei halow- 
eden to the Lord oxest sexe hundrith, 
34and scheep thre thousand. The prestis 
forsothe weren fewe, and my3ten not suf- 
fice that thei drawen of the skynnes of 
the brent sacrifices; wherfore and the 
Leuitis their bretheren helpiden" hem, to 
the tyme that the werc were fulfild, and 
the bischopis weren halowed; the Le- 
uytis forsothe with li3ter rijt ben ha- 
35lowed thanne the prestis. Ther weren 
thanne many brent sacrifices, and talowes 
of pesible thingus, and liquours offryngis 


rofis cy. §& this c. 


kuponis. !withs. ™Om. ns. ® Om. s. 
© bowid doun 1x. bowed doun lowe s. 
salmus 1. wordis or psalmes nN. wordis of salmes s. 
Lord ns. 
8 And ins. » addide to ins. 
lo ouercome her enemyes ns. g And Ins. 
Moxen ins. "%Andins. © thei my3ten 1Ns. 
4 halwed bi vertu of her besy and milful trauel s. 
20m.a. YOm.s. Wand ynnere 1ns. 


chan, he seide s. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


t oxen AcH. 


© sowne wilh INS. 
8Om. nN. God mekeli s. 


y thei kneliden 1n. thei kneliden low s. 
4 hondis with blessyngis 18. 
h senene ns. 

P drawe awei or hilde 1 marg. drawe or fle of s. text. 
¥ and INs. 
x fatnesse s. 


453 


Dauid ; and preestis helden trumpis. And 27 
Ezechie comaundide, that thei schulden 
offre brent sacrifices on‘ the auter; and 
whanne brent sacrifices weren offrid, thei 
bigunnen to synge preisyngis to the Lord, 
and to sowne with trumpis, and in! dy- 
uerse orguns, whiche Dauid, the™ kyng of 
Israel, hadde maad redi for® to sowne®. 
Forsothe? whanne al the cumpenye wor-2s 
schipide?, syngeris and thei that helden 
trumpis weren in her office, til the brent 
sacrifice was fillid. And whanne the of-29 
fryng was endid, the kyng was bowid', 
and alle that weren with hym, and thei 
worschipiden God’. And Ezechiet and 30 
the princes comaundiden to the dekenes, 
that thei schulden preise the Lord with" 
the wordis* of Dauith, and of Asaph, the 
profete; whiche” preisiden hym* with greet 
gladnesse, and kneliden’, and worschip- 
iden. Sothely* Ezechie addide® also these 31 
thingis, 3e han® fillid 30ure hondis‘ to the 
Lord; neiz3e 3e, and offre® sacrifices and 
preisyngis in the hows of the Lord. Ther-32 
for al the multitude offride with deuoute 
soule sacrifices’, and preisyngis, and brent 
sacrifices. Sothelif this was the noumbre 
of brent sacrifices, whiche the multitude 
offride; seuenti® bolis, and? an* hundrid 
rammes, two! hundrid lambren. Also thei 33 
halewiden to the Lord sixe hundrid oxis™, 
and thre thousynde sheep. Forsothe" the ss 
preestis weren fewe, and my3ten® not suf- 
fice for to ‘drawe awei? the skynnes of 
brent sacrifices; wherfor and the dekenes 
her britheren helpiden hem, til the werk 
was fillid, and the preestis weren halewid4; 
for the dekenes ben halewid bi li3tere cus- 
tom’ thant the" preestis. Therfor there 35 
weren ful’ many brent sacrifices, ynnere” 
fatnessis* of pesible sacrifices, and the 


uholpen c. 


p And ins. 4@ worshepid the Lord s. 
tthe king ins. ins. VY wordis or the 
W the whiche dekens 1n. which dekenes s. x the 
2 worschipiden him 1. worschipiden him gladli ns. 
€ offrith in. sacrifices 
iQm.m. kOm.s. and two rns. 
Senstom of traueil ins. t than ben ins. 
y Om. N. 


454 


of brent sacrifices, and the herying of the 

s6hous of the Lord is ful eendid. And 
Ezechie is glad, and al the puple with 
hym, forthi that the seruyce of the 
Lord was ful eendid; forsothe of sodenly 
it pleside that to ben don. 


CAP. XXX. 


1 Ezechie also sente to al Irael and Juda, 
and he wroote letters to Effraym and 
Manassen, that thei schulden commen in 
to the hous of the Lord in Jerusalem, 
and do pasch to the Lord God of Irael. 

2 Thanne gon in the counsele of the kyng, 
and of the princis, and of al the com- 
panye of Irael, thei deemedyn that they 
schulden don pasch the secounde moneth. 

3Forsothe thei camen not to gydre to don 
in his tyme; for the prestis that my3ten 
suffisen weren not halowed, and the pu- 
ple not 3it was gadered in to Jerusalem. 

4And the word pleside to the kyng, and 
sto al the multitude. And they deemeden 
for to senden messagers in to al Irael, 
fro Bersabe vnto Dan, that thei schulden 
commen, and don pasch to the Lord God 
of Irael in Jerusalem; manye forsothe 
hadden not done, as in the lawe it is 
6beforn writen. And curours wenten with 
letters, of the heste of the kyng and of 
his princis, in to al Irael and Juda, after 
the whiche thing the kyng hadde co- 
maundide prechours, Sonis of Irael, 
turnith a3ein to the Lord God of Abra- 
hain, and of Ysaac, and of Irael; and he 
schal be turned a3ein to the releuys, that 
scapeden the hondis of the kyng of As- 
7siries. Willith not ben maad as 3oure 
fadirs and bretheren, that wenten awey 
fro the Lord God of their fadirs; and he 
atoke hem in to deth, as 3e seen. Willith 
not ful hardne jour nollis, as 3oure fadirs ; 


II]. PARALIPOMENON. 


<xTk, 5 6— xe 


moyste sacrifices of brent sacrifices, and? 
the worschip*, ‘ethir ournyng, of the 


‘Lordis hows’ was fillid. And Ezechie36 - 


was glad, and al the puple, for the ser- 
uyce of the Lord was fillid’; for® it 
pleside‘, that this was doon sodeynlys. 


CAP. XXX. 


And Ezechie sente to al Israel and to1 
Juda, and he wroot pistlis to Effraym and 
to Manasses, that thei schulden come in 
to the hous of the Lord in Jerusalem, and 
make" paske to the Lord God of Israel. 
Therfor whanne counseil was takun of2 
the kyng, and of princes, and of al the 
cumpeny of Jerusalem, thei demydeni to 
make paske in the secounde moneth. Fors 
thei demyden* not to! do™ in his tymet; 
for the preestis that® my3ten suffice? weren 
noti halewid", and the puple was not 3it 
gaderid in to Jerusalem. And the® word's 
pleside the king, and al the multitude. 


And thei demyden" to sende messangeriss_ 


in to al Israel, fro Bersabee ‘til to’ Dan, 
that thei schulden come, and make pask 
to the Lord God of Israel in Jerusalem ; 
for many men hadden not” do*, as it is 
bifor writun in the lawe. And corouriss 
3eden forth with pistlis, bi comaundement 
of the kyng and of hise princis, in to al 
Israel and Juda, and prechiden? bi that, 
that the kyng hadde comaundid*, Sones of 
Israel, turne 3e ajen to the Lord God of 
Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Israel; and 
he schal turne ajen to the residue> men, 
that® ascapiden the hondis of the kyng of 
Assiriens. Nyle 3e be maad® as 3oure fa-7 
dris and britheren®, that‘ 3eden® awei fro 
the Lord God of her fadris; and he" jaue' 
hem in to perischyng, as 3e seen*. Nyles 
3e make hard 3oure nollis, as 30ure fadris 
diden ; 3yue 3e hondis'{ to™ the Lord, and 


z and herbi 1s. ® worschiping x. >Om.1ns. ¢ hows of the Lords. 4 fulfillid rn, fulfillid preisabli s. 


ecertisins. f pleside the kyng ns. 


there 1s. i demed or purposide s. 
solempnite s. © whiche Ns. 
ordeyned s. 8 this 1Ns. t word or counseil 1Ns. 


Y vito Is. into N. to X. 


& hastily 1. sodeynli or hastili, and with good wille s. 
k demyden or gessiden 1s. 
P suffice Herto 1n. suffice therto s. 


W not long tyme bifore ns. 


h make 
m do this n. do this hize 
q not 3i¢ Ns. v halwed, chosen, or 

u demed as worthi thing to preisyng of the Lord s. 
x do it 1. do this n. do this thing s. Y the heest 1. 


1 to moe INS. 


heest Ns. 2Om.1Nns. @comaundid, thei prechiden, and seiden 1. comaundid, thei prechiden n. comaundide, 


thei precheden a greet solempnite of pask, and seiden s. 


f whiche ns. 
™ or bihote 3e to s. 


rebel Ns. 
seen Is. 


€ 3oure britheren Ins. 
1 soure hondis Ins. 


& wenten I. 


d maad 
kK now 


¢ whiche n, 
i therfor 3aue s. 


b remenaunt of INS. 
h the Lord ins. 


t tyme; that 

is, the firste 

monethe. Lire 
Te. Ce 


+ hondis ; in 
bihetinge that 
3e schulen 
serue him feith- 
fuly. Lire 
here. C. 


XXX. 9—I7- 


takith hondis’ to the Lord, and commith 
to the seyntuarye of hym, that he ha- 
lowed” with out eende; seruith to the 
Lord God of 3our fadirs, and schal ben 
turned awey fro 30u the wrath of his 
ywoodnesse. 3if forsothe 3e weren turned 
ajein to the Lord, 3our bretheren and 
jour sonus schul haue mercy, with their 
lordis that hem laddyn caitijf; and thei 
schul ben turned ajein into this lond. For- 
sothe pytouse and mercyable is the Lord 
oure God; and he schal not turnen awey 
his face fro 30u, 3if 3e weren turned a3ein 
ioto hym. Thanne currours wente swiftly 
fro cyte vuto cite thoru3 the lond of Ef- 
fraym and Manasse vnto Zabulon, hem 
11 Scoornynge and vndermowynge hem. Ne- 
uerthelater sum men of Aser, and of 
Manasse, and of Zabulon, assentynge to 
12the counseile, camen in to Jerusalem. In 
Juda. forsothe is done the hond of the 
Lord, that he schulde 3euen to hem oon 
herte, and thei schulden don, after the 
heste of the kyng and princis, the word 
130f the Lord. And there ben gadered into 
Jerusalem many puplis, that thei don the 
solempnyte of therf looues in the se- 
‘scounde moneth. And rijsyng thei dis- 
truyden the auters, that weren in Jeru- 
salem ; and alle thingus in the whiche to 
mawmetis was brend encense, turnynge 
vpsadoun, thei threwen in to the streme 
isof Cedron. Thei offriden forsothe pasch 
the fourtenth day of the secound moneth ; 
the prestis also and Leuytis at the last 
halowed, offreden brent sacrifice in the 
i¢hous of the Lord. And thei stoden in 
their ordre, aftir the disposicyoun and the 
lawe of Moyses, the man of God. The 
prestis forsothe hadden taken the blood 
to ben sched of the hondis of Leuytis, 
i7forthi that myche puple was not ha- 


v hondith nr. heede arn. 


n hath halewid ins. © Om. Fe1KLMNXbe. 
than led ins. 4 hem owt of her lond s. 
30u INS. 2 vnto INS, 
© Certis 1Ns. f grace of the s. & heest ins. 
risiden up Ns. * thei destrieden 1Ns. 
castiden hem Ins. 


P cedris a pr. m. EKLMXxbg. 
sacrificid s. 


t thei offriden ins. U And ts. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


P wrath Ins. 
v the Lord oure God rns. 
@ the men 1. the men of tho cuntreis ns. 
h Jooues, that is, pask 1Ns. 
! auteris of ydolis ins. 

4 And ins. 
Y blood of bestis ins. 


455 


come 3e to his seyntuarie, which he halew- 
ide® withouten ende; serue 3e the Lord 
God® of 3oure fadris, and the ire? of his 
strong veniaunce schal ‘be turned’ awey 
fro 30u. For’ if je turnen a3en to theg 
Lord, 3oure britheren and j3oure sones 
schulen haue mercy, bifor her lordis that’ 
leddent hem" prisoneris ; and thei schulen 
turne a3en in to this lond. For ‘owe Lord 
God’ is pitouse, ‘ethir benygne’, and mer- 
ciful; and he schal* not turne awey his 
face fro 30u, if 3e turneY ajen to hym. 
Therfor the corours 3eden swiftli fro cytee 10 
in to citee thorou the lond of Effraym and 
of Manasses ‘til to? Zabulon, while thei? 
scorniden and bimowiden hem. Netheles11 
sum men of Aser, and of Manasses, and of 
Zabulon, assentiden® to the’ counsel, and 
cameu in to Jerusalem. Forsothe® the 12 
hond of thef Lord was maad in Juda, that 
he 3af to hem oon herte, and that thei 
diden the word of the Lord, bi the co- 
maundement’ of the kyng and of the 
princes. And many puplis weren gaderid 13 
in to Jerusalem, for to make the solemp- 
nyte of therf looues® in the secounde 
monethe. And thei risideni, and destri-14 
edenk the auteris!, that™ weren in Jerusa- 
lem; and ‘thei destriynge® alle thingis in 
whiche encense was brent to idols, cast- 
iden® forth in to the stronde of CedronP. 
Forsothe! thei offriden pask in the four- ts 
tenthe dai of the secounde monethe; also 
the preestis and the’ dekenes weren ha- 
lewid at the laste’, and offriden' brent sa- 
crifices in the hows of the Lord. Andis 
thei stoden in her ordre, bi the ordynaunce 
and lawe of Moises, the man of God. So- 

thely" the preestis token of the hondis of 0 the kyne 
dekenest the blood’ to be sched out, for 17 o¥reden pask 
myche cumpeny was not” halewid ; and _ weren not fully 
therfor the dekenes offriden pask for hem, 


+ of dehenes ; 
for bi co- 
mauudement 


clensid. Lire 
here. c. 


w halowe B sec. m. 


r Forsothe ins. §% whiche ins. 
wOm.ins. * wole ins. Y turne 
born. © consentiden ns. 4 this ns. 
iresen EL. resem up I. 
m whiche ns. "distroyedens. © thei 
tOm.n. 8 last or whan the peple had 
W not 3% INS, 


q turne Nn. 


456 


lowed ; and therfore the Lenytis schulden 
offren pasch to hem, that ‘came not to 
isgydre* to ben halowed to the Lord. A 
grete also part of the puple of Effraym, 
and Manasse, and Ysachar, and Zabulon, 
the whiche was not halowed, eetyn pasch 
not after that it is writen. And Ezechie 
preyede for hem, seyinge, The goad 
19 Lord schal haue mercy to alle, that in al 
herte sechen the Lord God of ther fa- 
dirs; and it schal not ben wijtid to hem, 
20that thei ben not halowed. Whome the 
Lord herde, and is plesid to the puple. 
21 And the sonus of Irael, that ben founden 
in Jerusalem, diden the solempnyte of 
therf looues seuen days in grete ioye, 
preisyngeY the Lord bi eche dais; the 
Leuytis also and the prestis by orgnys, 
22that to their office fellen. And Ezechias 
spac to the herte of alle the Leuytis, that 
hadden good vndirstondynge vpon the 
Lord; and thei eeten seuen days of the 
solempnyte, offrynge slayn sacrifice? of 
pesyble thingus, and preysyng the Lord 
23God of their fadirs. And it pleside to 
al the multitude, that thei schulden also 
halowen other seuen days; the whiche 
24and thei diden with ful grete ioy. Eze- 
chias forsothe, king of Juda, 3af to the 
multitude a thousand boolis, and seuen 
thousand of scheep; the princis forsothe 
jeuen to the puple a thousand boolis, 
and scheep tenn thousand. Thanne is 
halowed a more multitude of prestis; 
25and gladnesse thoru3 held al the puple 
of Juda, both of prestis and of Leuytis, 
and of al the besy commyng, that weren 
commen of Irael, and of the comlyngis 
of the lond of Irael, and of the dwellers 
oof Juda. And ther is don a grete so- 
lempnyte in Jerusalem, whiche? maner 


x remembredyn not £ pr. m. 


x whiche ins. Y not thanne ns. 
4 halwed bi offring of 3iftis 1s. ¢ Om. 8. 
nyte mvs. * thei herieden ts. 
P office Ns. 9 the kyng rs, r whiche Ins. 
sacrifices of the peple s, * offryng to the Lord s. 
¥ princes of Juda is. 7a ful 1Ns. 
i the sone INs. 


&kynd ns. 4 Om. Ins. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


Y preyinge zB. 


z of Manasses s. 
f the kyng ins. 
I the dekenes In. 


4 of ns. 


XXX. 18—26. 


that* my3ten not’ be halewid to the Lord. 
Also a greet part of the puple of Effraym, 13 
and Manasses’?, and of Ysachar, and of 
Zabulon, that was not. halewid, eet pask 
not bi that that is writun. And Ezechie 
preyde for hem, and seide, The good Lord 
schal do mercy to alle men, that* seken in 19 
al the’ herte the Lord God of her fadris ; 
and it schal not be arettid to hem‘, that 
thei ben not halewid’. And® the Lord2zo 
herde hymf, and was® plesid to the puple. 
And the sones of Israel, that® werenei 
founden in Jerusalem, maden solempnyte! 
of therf looues seuene daies in greet glad- 
nesse, and herieden* the Lord bi ech dai; 
and dekenes! and preestis™ ‘preisiden the 
Lord® bi orguns, that® acordiden to her 
officesP, And Ezechie’ spak to the herte 22 
of alle the dekenes, that" hadden good vn- 
durstondyng of the Lord; and thei eeten’ 
bi seuene daies of the solempnyte, of- 
frynge' sacrifices" of pesible thingis, and 
heriynge the Lord God of her fadris. And23 
it pleside al the multitude to halewe also 
othere seuene daies; which thing’ also 
thei diden with greet ioye. Forsothe™ 24 
Ezechie, kyng of Juda, 3af to the multi- 
tude a thousynde bolis, and seuene thou- 
synde of scheep; sothelix the princesY 
3auen to the puple a thousynde bolis, and 
ten thousynde scheep. Therfor ful? greet 
multitude of preestis was halewid}; and 25 + that is, or- 


al the cumpany of Juda was fillid with @yneele Bile 
gladnesse, as wel of* preestis and dekenes, §¥¢ Lord thes 
as of al the multitude, that camen fro Is- 

rael, and ‘of conuersis® of the lond of 

Israel, and of dwelleris® in? Judat. And26 


greet solempnytee was maad in Jerusalem, 
which maner’ solempnyte" was not in that 
citee fro the daies of Salomon, sone! of 
Dauid, kyng of Israel. Sotheli* preestis27 


Z sacrifices c. the whiche zB. 


a whiche ins. her rns. © hem indo synne ts. 
Shewasins. bwhichs. i 
m the prestis s. " herieden him 1. 


i the solemp- 
© whiche Ins. 


8 eeten bi tho sacrifices 1. eeten of tho n. eten of tho 
4 the sacrifices s. 
a the cumpenye of 1. the multitude of s. 
multitude of men conuertid Ns. ¢ the dwelleris rns. 
kK And ins. 


wAndins. * and Ins. 
b of men conuertid 1. the 
¢ Juda was glad in the Lord xs. f what 1Ns. 


vOm. s. 


See NK XT. 6. 


was not in the same cyte fro the days of 


Salomon, sone of Dauid, kyng of Irael. © 


27 Forsothe the prestis and Leuytis risen, 
blessyng to the puple; and the voyce of 
hem is herd, and the preyer ful came 
into the hooly dwellinge place of heuen. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 And whanne thes thingus weren ma- 
nerly ful halowed, al Irael wente out, 
that was founden in the citees of Juda; 
and thei breeken the mawmetis, and 
hewen doun mawmete wodis, and the 
heeje thingus thei wastiden, and the au- 
ters distruyden, not onely of al Juda 
and Beniamyn, bot and of Effraym also 
and of Manasse, to the tyme that fully 
thei weren don awey. And alle the sonus 
of Irael ben torned a3ein in to posses- 

zsiouns, and their citees. 
sothe sette prestis companyes and Le- 
uytis bi their deuysiouns, echone? in pro- 
pre office, bothe of prestis, that is, and 
of Leuytis, to brent sacrifices and _pesi- 
ble, that thei seruen, and knowlechen, and 
syngen in the 3atis of the tentis of the 

3Lord. A paartye forsothe of the kyng was, 
that of his propre substaunce schulde ben 
offrid brent sacrifice erly and at euen, the 
sabothis also, and kalendis, and other so- 
lempnytes, as it is writen in the lawe of 
4Moyses. Also he comaundide to the pu- 
ple of the dwellers in Jerusalem, that thei 
jeuen partis to prestis and Leuytis, that 
thei mown taken tent to the lawe of the 
sLord. The whiche whanne was pu- 
plischt in the® eris of the multitude, the 
sonus of Irael offreden manye first fruytis 
of whete, and of wyne, and of oyle, also 
of hony ; and of alle thingus that the erth 

6 getith, thei offreden dymys. Bot and the 

sonus of Irael and of Juda, that dwelliden 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


Ezechias for- : 


457 


and dekenes rysydeu', and blessiden the 
puple; and the vois of hem was herd, 
and the™ preier cam in to the hooli 
dwelling place of heuene. 


CAP. XXXI. 


And whanne these thingis weren doon! 


ri3tfuli, al Israel 3ede out, that was foundun 
in the citees of Juda; and thei braken simy- 
lacris, and kittiden® doun ‘woodis, and 
wastiden® hi3? places, and distrieden’ au- 
teris, not’ oneli of al Juda and Beniamyn', 
but also and" of Effraym and Manasses’, 
til” thei distrieden* outirliY. And? alle 
the sones of Israel turneden a3en in to her 
possessiouns and citees. Forsothe* Eze-2 
chie ordeynede cumpenyes of preestis and 
of ® dekenes bi her departyngis, ech man in 
his owne office, that is, as wel of preestis 
as of dekenes, to® brent sacrifices and pe- 
sible sacrifices, that thei schulden mynys- 
tre’, and knowleche, and synge in the 3atis 
of the castelst of the Lord. 
part of the kyngf was, that of his owne 
catel brent sacrifice schulde be offrid 
enere" in the morewtid and euentide’, also 
in sabatis*, and calendis, and othere! so- 
lempnytees, as it is writun in the lawe of 
Moises. Also he™ comaundide to the pu-4 
ple of hem that dwelliden in Jerusalem, 
to 3yue partis" to the preestis and dekenes, 
that thei my3ten 3yue tent to the lawe of 
the Lord. And® whanne? this1 was knowun 5 
in the eeris of the multitude, the sones of 
Israel offriden ful many firste fruytis of 
wheete, of wyn, of oyle, and of hony ; and 
of alle thingis whiche the erthe bringith 
forth, thei offriden tithis. But also thee 
sones of Israel and of Juda, that’ dwell- 
iden in the citees of Juda, offriden tithis 


bechec. © Om. aBrH. 
1yisen EL, resen upt. riseden up Ns. ™herins. 1 thei kittiden vs. © thei wastiden 1s. P_hi3, 
that is, solenpne s. 4 thei destrieden ins. the auteris 1n. there the auteris s. Sand notin.  * of 


Beniamyn n. 4% Om. 1ns. 
outirli 1. her ydols outirli ns. 
dserue ins. € And INs. 


Zz And thanne 1. 


ijn the euentide in. * sabot 1.  ! in othere rns. 
POm.N. 4 this thing ins. * whiche ns. 
VOL. II. 


v of Manasses 1MNSX. 


f kyngis saerifice tn. kingis sacrifices s. 


x had destried xs. _—*Y tho auters 
b Om. s. ¢ the king ordeined to s. 
& substaunce INs. h enermore s. 
0 part of lywelood ins. 9 Om. 8. 


w til that ins. 
a And Ins. 


™ jhe king 1Ns. 


3.N 


Sotheli® thes + castels; that 


is, of the large 
places of 
prestis and 
dekenes. Lire 
here. C. 


458 Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


in the cytees of Juda offreden dymes of 
oxen and scheep, and dymes of hooly 
thingus, that thei hadden vowed to the 
Lord ther God, and, alle thingus beerynge, 
7maaden many heepils. The thrid moneth 
thei begunne to castyn groundis of the 
heepils, and the seuenth moneth thei 
seendiden hem. And whanne Ezechias 
and his princis weren commen in, thei 
seen the heepils, and thei blesseden to the 
9Lord, and to the puple of Irael. And 
Ezechias askide the prestis and Leuytis, 
10 why the heepils schulden so lyen. Aza- 
zie, the prest, first of the stoc of Sadoch, 
answerde to hym, seyinge, Sithen the 
first fruytis begunne to ben offrid in the 
hous of the Lord, we eetyn and ben ful- 
fild, and there ben laft many thingus; 
forthi that the Lord hath blessid to his 
puple; of the releuys forsothe this is the 
11 plente, that thou seest. Thanne Ezechias 
comaundide, that thei schulden make 
redy bernes in the hous of the Lord; the 
whiche thing whan thei hadden don, 
12thei brou3ten in bothe first fruytis, and 
dymes, and what euer thingus thei had- 
den vowed feithfully. Forsothe the pre- 
fect of hem was Chonenyas, Leuyte ; and 
13Semeye, his brother, the secounde; aftir 
whome Jehiel, and Azarias, and Naath, 
and Azahel, and Jerymoth, Jozabad also, 
and Helieel, and Jesmahias, and Maath, 
and Banayas, prouostis vndir the hondis 
of Chonenye and Semeye, his brother, of 
the maundement of kyng Ezechie, and of 
Azarie, the bischop of the hous of the 
Lord, to whom alle thingus perteyneden. 
14Chore forsothe, the sone of Jemna, Le- 
uyte, and porter of the este 3ate, was 
prouost to thes that wilfully offreden to 


8 oxen INS. 
temple ins. 
these thingis s. 
that ns. 
kyng ins. ™ the dekenes ins. 
of tho 1. ete of tho fruytis s. 


t Om. 1. thei offriden xs. 
@Om.s. > Om. rns. 


2 tho INs. 


8 fulfillid rs. 


u the Lord her God s. 
x to prestis and dekenes to be susteyned with, and s. 

¢ Oni. plures. 
& entrid iz thiders. tho pv. ‘heep c. heepis of sacrifices 1s. 
© And Azarie INs, 


XXXI. 7—14. 


of oxis’ and of scheep, and thet tithis of 
holi thingis, whiche thei avowiden to ‘her 
Lord God", and thei brou3ten alle’ thingis”, 
and* maden’ ful? many heepis. 
thridde monethe thei bigunnen to leie the” 
foundementis of the® heepis, and in the 
seuenthe monethe thei filliden? tho heepis. 


And whannef Ezechie and hise princess 


hadden entrid&, thei sizjen the" heepisi, 
and blessiden* the Lord, and the puple 


of Israel. And Ezechie! axide the preestiss 


and dekenes™, whi the" heepis laien so. 


Azarie®, the firste? preest of the genera-10 


cioun of Sadoch, answeride to hymn, and 
seide, Sithen’ the firste fruytis bigunnen 
to be offrid in the hows of the Lord, we 
han ete™ and ben fillid’, and ful many 
thingis ben left‘; for the Lord hath blessid" 
his puple; sotheliY this plentee, which” 


thou seest, is of the relifs*. Therfor Eze- 11 


chieY comaundide, that thei schulden make 
redi bernes in the hows of the Lord; and 


whanne thei hadden do this thing, thei? 12 


brou3ten in? feithfuly bothe the? firste 
fruytis, and tithis, and what euere thingis 
thei hadden avowid. Forsothe® Chonenye, 
the dekene, was the‘ souereyn® of tho'; and 


Semei his brother was the secounde’; aftir i3 


whom Jehiel, and Azarie, and Nabath, and 
Asahel, and Jerimoth, ‘and Jozabad*, and 
Helyel, and Jesmahie, and Maath, and 
Banaie, weren souereyns vudur the hondis' 
of Chonenye and Semei, his brother, bi‘ 
the comaundement! of ‘Ezechie the kyng™, 
and of Azarie, the bischop of the hows of 
the Lord, to whiche® alle thingis perteyn- 
eden°. 
dekene and portere of the eest jate, was 
souereyn of tho thingis that? weren of- 
frid bi fre wille to the Lord, and4 of the" 


Valle theses. Ww thingis info the 


Y thei maden ins. z Om. in. Of 
4 filliden or endiden 1s. the a. f whanne 
k thei blessiden rns. |! the 
P first or cheefis. 4S8ith1. Fete 
u blessid, that is, he hath encresid 1. 


In? the7 


But Chore, the sone of Jemnya, 14 


blessid, that is, mith diuers goodis he hath encreside s. 


t left 3it here s. 
Vv and Ins. 


remenauntis N. remnauntis over our /yfelood s. ¥ the kyng rns. 


¢ And ins. 


EGIKLMNsxbge. 


¢ d Om. Ins. 
i hondis or poweris s. 
° perteyneden ¢o be ordeyned s. 


© sovereyn keper's. tho thingis rns. 
K these weren souereyns bis. | heest 1x 
Pwhiche ns. 4 Om.n. Also h 


Wthat ins. * remenauntis over 1. 
2menins. in éhkiders. » her ins. 
& secounde nexi him rys. 4Om. nN. 
s. m king Ezechie ns. B whom 1. 


e was sonereyns. alle the a pr.m. 


XXXI. 15—XXXII. 2. 


the Lord, and to the first fruytis, and to 
is the sacred in to the holy of halowes; and 
vndir hir cure Eden, and Beniamyn, Je- 
sue, and Semeyas, Amarias also, and Se- 
chenyas, in the citees of prestis, that 
feithfully thei delen to their bretheren 
16 Parties, to the lesse and to the more, out 
taken the men fro thre 3eer and abouen, 
thes thingus to alle that wenten in to the 
temple of the Lord, and what euer thing 
bi eche dais was hired in the sernyse and 
izkeepyngis after their deuysiouns. To 
prestis bi meynes, and to Leuytis fro 
twenty jeer and aboue by ordres and 
is their companyes, and to al the multitude, 
bothe to wijues and .to the’ fre childre 
of hem of either kynde, feithfully of mete 
of thes thingus that weren halowed weren 
i93euen. Bot and of the sonus of Aaron 
bi feeldis and suburbis of eche cytees 
ther weren disposid men, that by partis 
schulden delen to al male kynde of prestis 
a9and Leuytis. Thanne Ezechias dide alle 
thingus, that we han seide, in al Juda, and 
wrou3te ri3t and gode and soth thing be- 
aifore the Lord his God, in al herying of 
the sernyse of the hous of the Lord, 
after the lawe and cerymonyes, willynge 
to sechen the Lord his God in al his 
herte; and he dide, and is maad welsum. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 After the® whiche thingis and siche 
a maner treuth, came Senacherub, king 
of Assiries, and gon in to Judam, be- 
seegide strengthed cytees, wilnynge to 
gtaken hem. The whiche thing whanne 
Ezechias hadde herd, that is‘, Senacherub 
to han commen, and al the bure of the® 


40m. 2. © Om.c. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


fis, in B. 


459 


firste fruytis, and of thingis halewid in 
to hoolis thingis of the noumbre of hooli 
thingis; and vndur his cure weren Eden, '5 
and Beniamyn, Jesue, and Semeye, and 
Amarie, and Sechenye, in the citees of 
preestis, that thei schulden departe feith- 
fuli to her britheren the partis‘, to the 
lesse and the" grettere, outakun malis 16 
fro’ three 3eer and aboue, these thingis 
to alle that entriden in to the temple of 
the Lord, and what euer thing bi ech dai 
was hirid in the seruyce and obseruaunces* 
bi her departyngis. To preestis bi mey- 37 
nees’, and to? dekenes fro ‘the twentithe® 
jeer and aboue bi her ordris and cum- 
penyes, and to alle the multitude, bothe? is 
to the wyues and fre’ children of hem 
of ever either kynde*®, metis weren j3ouun 
feithfulif of these thingis that? weren ha- 
lewid", But also men of the sones of 19 
Aaron weren ordeyned bi the feeldis and 
subarbis! of alle. citees*, whyche! men™ 
schulden dele partis" to al the male kynde 
of preestis and dekenes®. Therfor? Eze- 29 
chie! dide alle thingis', whiche we seiden’, 
in al Juda, and he wrou3te that, that was 
ri3tful and good and trewe bifor ‘his Lord 
God', in al the" religioun of the’ seruyce 2 
of the hows of the Lord, bi the lawe” and 
cerymonyes*; and he wolde seke his’ Lord 
God in? al his herte, and he dide*, and 
hadde prosperite. 


CAP. XXXII. 


Aftir whiche thingis and sich treuthe, ; 
Senacherib, the kyng of Assiriens, cam 
and entride in to Juda; and he bisegide 
stronge citees, and wolde take’ tho. And» 
whanne Ezechie hadde herd this thing, 
that is, that Senacherib was* comun, and 
that al the’ fersnesse of batel* was turned 


¢Om. c pr.m. 


8 the holi s. ¢ partis, that weren lymytid to hem for lyflode 1s, “to the 1ns. ¥ of x. W weren do to 1Ns. 
* obseruaunces of the temple 18. Y her meynees rns. 2 Om. N sec.m.s. 4% twenty ns. that is, bothe s. 
¢ Om. plures. to the fre 1s. to fre Nx. © kynde, that is, male and females. 'frelins. & whiche INS. 
b halewid or offrid in the temple 1s. _‘ bi subarbis ins. _* the citees 1. the citee ns. _'! the whiche 1. 
m Om. 1ns, "bi the partis ins. © of dekenes s. P Certis ns. 4 kyng Ezechie 1s, * thes thingis 1Ns. 
shan seid rxs. ¢ the Lord his God ins. *Om.1n. VOm.1N. ¥ lawe of God is. * bi the cerymonyes 
therof 1s. bi the cerymonyes N. Y the 1ns. zofw. adidesoins. hauetakerns. © had rns. 
dhis s. © his batel 1ns. 


3N 2 


460 


batayl to ben turned a3einus Jerusalem, 
3gon in counseile with the princis and 
most stronge.men, that thei schulden 
stoppyn the heuedis of wellis, that weren 
‘with oute the cyte; and, that deemyng 
1the sentence of alle, he gaderede a myche 
multitude, and thei stoppiden alle the 
wellis, and the ryuer, that flowede in the 
myddis of the lond; seyinge, Lest there 
commen kingis of Assiries, and fynde® 
saboundaunce . of watirs. And doyng 
tau3tly he bilde up al the wal that was 
seatered, and maad out tours ther vpon, 
and with oute forth another wall. And 
he enstored Mello in the cyte of Dauid ; 
and maad armour of al maner, and ter- 
sgettis. And he sette princis of fiz3ters in 
the hoost; and he togider clepide alle iu 
the strete of the 3ate of the citee, and he 
7spac to the herte of hem, seyinge,. Doth 
manly, and takith coumfort; willith not 
taken ferd, ne dreeden the kyng of As- 
siries, and al the multitude that is with 
hym;. forsothe many mo ben with us 
sthanne, with hym. With hym is the 
fleschely arm; with us the Lord oure 
God, the which, is oure help and fizter 
. for us. And the puple is comfortide 
with siche maner wordis of Ezechie, 
okyng of Juda. The whiche thingus after 
that ben don, Senacherub, the king of 
Assiries, sente his seruauntis vnto Jeru- 
salem; he forsothe with al his host be- 
segide Lachis ; to Ezechie, kyng of Juda, 
and to al the puple that was in the cytee, 
10 Seying, Thes thingus seith Senacherub, 
king of Assiries, In whome hauing trust 
11 3e sitten bisegid in Jerusalem ? For why 
Ezechias deceyuith 30u, that he take to 
deth in hungur and thirst, affermynge 
that the Lord 3oure God delyuer 30u fro 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXXII. 3—t11. 


a3ens Jerusalem, he took counsel with thefs 
princes and® strongest" men, that thei 
schulden stoppe the heedis of wellis, that! 
weren without the citee; and whanne the 


sentence of alle men demyde this), he ga-4. 
deride togidere a ful greet multitude*, and | 


thei stoppiden alle the wellis, and the! 
ryuer, that flowide™ in the" myddis of the 
lond; and® seiden?, Lest the kyngis of As- 
siriens comen, and fynden abundance of 
watris. Also he dide wattili, and bildide's 
al the wal that was distride, and he bild- 
ide touris aboue’, and an other wal with- 
outforth. And he reparilide Mello in' the 
citee of Dauid; and made" armure’ of al 
kynde, and scheldis. And he ordeynede¢ 
princes” of werriouris in® the oost; and 
he clepide togidere alle men in the street 
of the 3ate of the citee, and spake’ to the 
herte of hem’, and seide, Do 3e manli, and7 
be 3e coumfortid ; nyle 3e drede, nether be 
3e* aferd of the kyng of Assiriens, and of 
al the multitude which® is with him ; for 
many mot ben with vs than with him. 
Fleischli®. arm! is with him; ‘oure Lord® 
God’ is with vs, which' is oure helpere, 
and schal' fiz3te for vs. And the puple was 
coumfortid with sich wordis of Ezechie, 
kyng of Juda. And aftir that these thingis9 
weren doon*, Sennacherib sente hise ser- 
uauntis to Jerusalem; for he! ‘with al the 
oost™ bisegide Lachis. He sente to Eze- 
chie, kyng of Juda, and to al the puple 


Lord killide 
esch strong 
man and wer- 
rioure of the 
oost of the king 
of Assiriens. 


‘ 
+ many mo; 
that is, the 
vertu of God 
and of hise 
aungels, whos 
strengthe is 
my3tiere than 
al the vertu of 
men, wherfor 
it is seid with 
ynne that the 
aungel of the 


that was in the citee™, and seide®, Sen-10 Live here. c. 


nacherib, the? kyng of Assiriens, seith 
these thingis, In whom han 3e trist, and 


sitten bisegid in Jerusalem ? Whether@11 


Ezechie disseyueth 30u, that he bitake 
jou’ to deeth in hungur and thirst, and* 
affermeth", that’ ‘3oure Lord God“ schal 
delyuere 30u fro the hond of the kyng of 


h fynde thei £ prom. 


£ and with ts. 
k multitude of men ts. 


f Om. INs. 
Jitable ws. 


la Ins. 


the wal N. on the walle s. * Om, 1Ns. 


h moost stronge INS. 
m was Ss. 
whi 1. seiden, Stopping of the cours of watris is speedful, Ns. 
u he made rns. 


i whiche ns. 


i this profttable 1. this to be pro- 
"Om. N. 


Oand thei ins. P seiden the cause 
4 Ezechie 1xns. the bildide rns. 8 aboue 
Vv to be ther inne armures. *Om.N. * to 


be ins. Yhe spake 1ns. 2 his menins. 2Om.s. > neins. ¢ that ins. 4 forsothe rn. € a fleischli ins. 


farm or power 1S. 
lhe himself rvs. ™ Om.n. 
T3eRr. $8 Om. plures. 
God tins. 


t and he Ns. 


& and the Lord oure God rs. 
1 citee of Jerusalem 1Ns. 
u affermeth or bihotith 1. 


hthaty. ihe schal rns. 
© he seide rns. P Om. rns. 
Vv 30u that s. 


k doon and spoken s. 
4 Whether not 1Ns. 
w the Lord 3oure 


XXXII. 12-——21. 


i2the hond of the kyng of Assiries ? Whe- 
ther this is Ezechie, that distruyede his 
hee3e thingus and auters, and comaundide 
to Jude and Jerusalem, seyinge, Before 
oon auter 3e schul honouren, and in! it 3e 
isschul brenne encense? Whether 3e vn- 
knowen what I haue don, and my fadirs, 
to alle puplis of londis? Whether the 
goddis of Gentilis and of alle londis 
my3ten delyueren their regyoun fro my 
14hond ? Who is of alle the goddis of Gen- 
tilis, whom my fadirs waastiden, that 
my3te delyueren his puple of myn hond, 
that also joure God my3te delyueren 3o0u 
150f this hond? Thanne 30u deceyue not 
Ezechie, ne by veyn mouynge begile, ne 
trowe 3e to hym; 3if forsothe no God of 
: alle Gentilis and of regyouns my3te dely- 
ueren his puple of my hond, and of the 
hond of my fadirs, folowyngly ne 3our 
God schal mown delyuer 30u of this myn 
ishond. Bot and many other thingus his 
seruauntis speeken a3einus the Lord God, 
17and a3einus Ezechie, his seruaunt. Also 
letters he wroot ful of blasfemy in to the 
Lord God: of Irael, and he spac a3einus 
hym, As the goddis of Gentilis of other 
: londis my3ten not delyueren their puple 
fro myn hond, so and the God of Ezechie 
schal not mowen delyuer his puple fro 
igthis hond. Forthermore and with a grete 
crie in Jews tunge a3einus the puple, that 
sat in the wallis of Jerusalem, he ful out 
sounnede, that he agaste™ hem, and take 
19the cite. . And he spac‘ajein the God of 
Irael, as azeinus the goddis of the" puplis 
of the erth, the werkis ‘of menus hondis. 
20Thanne preyden Ezechias, king, and 
Isaias, the® sone of “Ainos, prophete, 
a3eynus this blasfemye ; and thei cryeden 
210ut vnto heuen. And the Lord sente his 
aungel, that smote eche stronge man and 
fizter, and the prince of the hoost of the 
kyng of Assiries ; and he is turned aj3eyn 
with schenschip in to his Jond. And 


1Om. pz. 


x Om. is. Y is not pins. 
Lord God ns. © fadris s. f hondis ns. 
not jou s. khondisns. 1! God, and seide 1Ns. 
whiche 1. 4 Senaeherib ins. * to c. 


% hi3 solempne s. 


m gaste ACEF. gatt Ul. 


a the auteris rns. 
& the goddis Ins. 
m upon INS. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 461 


Assyriens ? Whether not* this isY Ezechie, 12 
that distriede hi;? places, and auteris® of 
hymn, and comaundide to Juda and to* Je- 
rusalem, and seide, 3e schulen worschipe® 
bifor oon auter, and therynne se schulen 
brenne encense? Whether 3e witen not 13 
what thingis Y haue do, and my fadir®, 
to alle the puplis of londis? Whether the 
goddis of folkis and of alle londis my3ten 
delyuere her cuntrei fro myn hond£? Whos 
is of alle goddis§ of folkis, whiche my 
fadris distrieden, that iny3te delyuere his 
puple fro myn hond, that also 3oure God 
may delyuere 3ou fro this hond? Therfor 1s 
Ezechie disseyue not 30u, nether scorne! 
bi veyn counselyng, nethir bileue 3e to 
hym; for if no god of alle folkis and cun- 
treis my3te delyuere his puple fro myn 
hond, and fro the hond* of my fadris, 
suyngli nether 3oure God schal mowe de- 
lyuere 30u fro this myn hond. But also1e 
hise seruauntis spaken many othir thingis 
ajenus the Lord God, and a3ens Ezechie, 
his sernaunte. Also he wroot epistlis ful 17 
of blasfemye ajens the Lord God of Israel, 
and he spak a3ens God!, As the goddis of 
othere folkis my3ten not delyuere her 
puple fro myn hond, so and the God of 
Ezechie may not delyuere his puple fro 
myn hond. Ferthermore and with greet 1s 
cry in the langage of Jewis he sownede 
ajens the puple, that sat on™ the wallis of 
Jerusalem, to make hem aferd, and to take 
the citee. And he spake a3jens God of Is- 19 
rael, as ajens the goddis of the" puplis of 
erthe, the werkis of mennus hondis. Ther-20 
for Ezechie, the kyng, and Ysaie, the pro- 
fete, the sone of Amos, preieden a3ens this 
blasfemye, and crieden® til in to heuene. 
And the Lord sente his aungel, that? 21 
killide ech strong man and werriour, and 
the prince of the oost of the kyng of 
Assiriens; and he4 turnede a3en with 
schenship ‘in to his lond. And whanne 
he hadde entrid in to the hows of his god, 


nQOm. an. 9° Om. c. 


b it INs. 
b myn Ins. 
n Om. INS. 


©Qm.s. 4 worschipe the 
i scorne he 30u 1N. scorne he 
© thei crieden rns. P the 


462 II. PARALIPOMENON. 


whanne he was gon in to the hous of 
his god, the sonus, that weren gon out of 
22 his wombe, slewen hym with swerd. And 
the Lord sauede Ezechie, and the dwell- 
ers of Jerusalem, fro the hond of Sena- 
cherub, kyng of Assiries, and fro the 
hond of alle men; and 3aue to hem reste 
23 by ennyroun. Many also beeren hoostis 
and sacrifices to the Lord in to Jernsa- 
lem, and 3iftis to Ezechie, kyng of Juda ; 
the whiche is enhaunsid after thes thingus 
21 before alle folkis of kynde. In tho dais 
siknede Ezechie vnto the deth, and he 
preyde the Lord; and he herde hym, and 
253aue to hym a sygne; bot not after the 
benefetis that he hadde taken, he 3eeld- 
ide?, for arered is his herte; and ther is 
don a3einus hym wrath, and a3einus Ju- 
26dam, and a3einus Jerusalem. And he is 
mekide aftirward, forthi that his herte 
was arered’, bothe he and the dwellers 
of Jerusalem; and therfore came not 
vpon hem the wrath of the Lord in the 
27dais of Ezechie. Forsothe Ezechias was 
riche, and ful glorious, and he gaderede 
to hym many tresoures of syluer, of gold, 
and of precious stone, of swote spices, 
and of alle maner armour, and of vessels 
2s0f grete prise. And leyinge places of 
whete, and of wyne, and of oyle,’ and 
eratchis of alle bestis, and foldes to feeld 
29bestis, and sixe cytees he bilde. He 
hadde forsothe flockis of scheep, and of 
drones vnnoumbreable; forthi that the 
Lord hadde 3euen to hym ful mych sub- 
3ostaunce. He is Ezechie, that stoppide 
the ouer well of the waters of Gyon, and 
he turnede hem awey vndirnethe toward 
the west of the citee of Dauid; in’ alle 
his werkis he dide welsumly, that he 
3iwolde. Neuerthelater in the message 
of the princis of Babyloyne, that weren 


XXXII. 22-—31. 


the sones, that’ 3eden ont of his wombe, 
killiden hym* with swerd. And the Lord 22 
sauyde Ezechie, and the dwelleris of Jeru- 
salem, fro the hond of Senacherib, kyng 
of Assiriens, and fro the hond of alle men; 
and 3af" to hem reste bi cumpas. Also23 
many men brou3ten offryngis and sacri- 
fices to the Lord in’ to Jerusalem, and 
3iftis to Ezechie, kyng of Juda; which* 
was enhaunsid aftir these thingis bifor 
alle folkis. In tho daies Ezechie was sijk 24 
‘til to the deth, and he preiede the Lord ; 
and he herde hym, and 3afY to hym a 
signe*; but he 3eldide not* bi? the bene-2s 
fices®© whiche’ he hadde take, for his 
herte was reisid®; and iref was maad a3ens 
hym, and a3ens Juda, and ajens Jerusa- 
lem. And he was mekid aftirward, for’ his 26 
herte was reisid; bothe" he was mekid, 
and the dwelleris of Jerusalem; and ther- 
for the ire! of the Lord cam notj on hem 
in the daies of Ezechie. Forsothe* Ezechie 27 
was riche, and ful noble, and gaderide! 
to hym silf ful many tresours of siluer, 
of™ gold, and of preciouse stoon", of ° 
swete smellynge spices, and of armuris of? 
al kynde, and‘ of vessels of greet prijs. 
Also he bildide large housis of wheete, of 28 
wyn, and of oile, and cratchis of alle 
beestis, and fooldis to scheep, and sixe™ 29 
citees. For’ he hadde vnnoumbrable flockis 
of scheep and of grete beestis; for the 
Lord hadde 3oue to hym ful myche catel. 
Thilke is Ezechie, that stoppide the hijere 30 
welle of the watris of Gion, and turnedet 
tho awei vndur the erthe at the west® of 
the citee of Dauid; in alle hise werkis he 
dide ‘bi prosperite’, what ener” thing*® he 
wolde. Netheles in the message of thes: 
princes of Babiloyne, thatY weren sent to 
hym for to axe of the grete wondir, that 
bifelde on? the lond*, God forsook hym, 


P3eldc. QGreridc. and zn. 


swhiche rns. thim theres. thegafins. VOm.N. Wthatr. *vnto rns. Yheyafins. 2 token 
of helthe 1s. token N. 4 not to him azen 1. not thankingis to the Lords. > aftir 1. ¢ benefetis Is. 
d that 1.  reised into pride s.  f wraththe 1. wraththe of the Lord ws. & for thi that 1x. for that 
that s. hand bothe rvs. iwraththe vs. J upon ins, -* And ins. | he gaderide ivs. ™ and of sg. 
and x. ™stonesins. and c. and of insc. Pand ofs. 9Om.s. ¢ he bildide sixe ins. $ And ins. 
theturnede ins. westside ns. Vwelsumly ins. WOm.ins. *thingisins. Y whiche ins. 


Zupon ins. @ lond of Juda ins. 


XXXII. 32—-XXXIII. 7. 


sente to hym, that thei schulden asken 
of the wonder, that hadde fallen vpon the 
erth, God forsoke hym, that he schulde 
be temptid, and alle thingus schulden ben 
maad knowen that weren in his herte. 
32 The remnaunt forsothe of the wordis of 
Ezechie, and of his mercyes, ben writen 
in the visioun of Ysay, the sone of Amos, 
prophete, and in the boke of kingus of 
33 Juda and of Irael. And Ezechie slepte 
with his fadirs, and thei birieden hym 
vpon the sepulcres’ of the sonus of Dauid. 
And al Juda maad solempne his deed of- 
fices, and alle the dwelleres of Jerusalem ; 
and Manasses, his sone, regnede for hym. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


1 Of twelue 3eer was Manasses, whanne 
he hadde begunne to regnen, and fyue 
and fyfty 3eer he regned in Jerusalem. 

2Forsothe he dide euy] before the Lord 
aftir the abomynacyouns of Gentilis, the 
whiche the Lord turnede vpsadoun be- 

3fore the sonus of Irae]. And turnede he 
enstored the hee3e thingus, ‘the whichet 
Ezechie, his fadir, hadde distruyede. 
And he sette up auters of Baalym, and 
maad mawmete wodus, and honourede al 
the kny3thode of heuen, and heriede it. 
4And he bilde wp auters in the hous of 
the Lord, of the whiche the Lord hadde 
seyde, In Jerusalem schal ben my name 
swithout eend. Forsothe he bilde up 
hem to al the hoost of heuen in the two 
sporchis of the hous of the Lord. And 
he made his sonus to passen thoru3 fijr 
in the valey of Hennon; and he weytide 
sweuens, and he folowede deuynynge in 
briddes, and he enseruede to enchaunt- 
yng craftis, and he hadde with hym de- 
uynours and enchaunters, and many 
euyls wrou3t" before the Lord, that he 
7terre hym. Grauen also and 3o0ten tookne 


8 sepulere c. 


d And rns. 
k seruice s. 
P turnede agen 1Ns. 

u he worschipide is. 


> assaied INS. 
sone ins. ‘and also ns. 
ciouns 1. © whom 1. 
t mawmet wodis ins. 
y And ins, % Manassesins. ®and 1. 
¢andheins. fandhes.  & trechetouris B. 
k And ins. | sette 1. settide or ordeynede s. 


c was 8. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


t that c. 


© remenaunt INs. 
1 And 1ns. 
4 solempne places 1s. 
¥v which hous 1Ns. 
b Om. cis to N. 
h which 8. 


463 


that he were temptid®, and that alle 
thingis weren knowun that weren® in his 
herte. Sotheli? the residue® of wordis‘ of 32 
Ezechie, and of hise mercies, ben writun 
in the profesie’ of Ysaie, the profete, sone 
of Amos, andi in the book of kyngis of 
Juda and of Israel. And Ezechie sleptess 
with hise fadris, and thei birieden hym 
aboue the sepulcris of the sones of Dauid. 
And a] Juda and alle the dwelleris of Je- 
rusalem maden solempne the seruyces* of 
his biriyng; and Manasses, his sone, reg- 
nide for him. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


Manasses was of twelue 3eer, whanne! 
he bygan to regne, and he regnyde in Je- 
rusalem fyue and fifti 3eer. Forsothe! he2 
dide yuel bifor the Lord bi™ abhomyna- 
ciouns®" of hethene men, whiche® the Lord 
destriede bifor the sones of Israel. And3 
he turnede?, and restoride the hi3e places, 
whiche Ezechie, his fadir, hadde destried. 
And he bildide™ auteris to Baalym, and 
made’ wodis‘, and worschipide" al the 
kny3thod of heuene, and heriede it. And4 
he bildide auteris in the hows of the Lord, 
of which” the Lord hadde™ seid, My name 
schal be* in Jerusalem with outen ende. 
SotheliY he” bildide tho auteris to al thes 
kny3thod of heuene in* the’ twei large 
places of the hows of the Lord. Andsé6 
he made hise sones to passe thorou3 the 
fier in the valei of Beennon; he kepte® 
dremes’; he suede fals diuynyng bi chi- 
teryng of briddis; he® seruyde witche 
craftis; he® hadde with hym _astronomy- 
eris and enchaunteris, ‘efhir trigetour's®, 
that» disseyuen' mennus wittisi, and he 
wrou3te many yuelis bifor the Lord to 
terre hym to wraththe. Also‘ he settide!7 


u he wro3te c. 


f the wordis 1vs. & prophecies ins, } the 
™ aftiri. 4 al abhomynaciouns c. the abhomina- 
t bildide up ins. —§ he made ns. 

Ww Om. ins. x be inelepid 1s. 
¢ kepte or waitide 1s. 4 aftir dremes 1Ns. 
i deceineden ELM. ‘3 Gloss omitted in in. 


464 


lhe putte in the hous of the Lord, of the’ 
whiche God spac to Dauid, and to Salo- 
mon, his sone, seyinge, In this hous and 
in Jerusalem, that I chees of alle the 
lynagis of Irae}, I schal putte my name 
8in to euermore; and I schal not maken 
to meuen the fote of Iracl fro the lond 
that I toke to” the fadirs of hem, so oonly 
3if thei kepyn to don that I comaundide 
to hem, and al the lawe, and cerymonyes, 
and domys, by the hond of Moyses. 
*Thanne Manasses deceyuede Judam, and 
the dwellers of Jerusalem, that thei diden 
euyl ouer alle Gentylis, ‘the whiche* the 
Lord ouerturnede fro tlie face of the sonus 
10 of Irael. And the Lord spac to hym, and 
to his puple; and thei wolden not taken 
i1heede. Therfore he ouerladde in to hem 
princis and hoostis of the kyng of As- ' 
siries ; and thei tooken Manassen, and 
bounden with cheynes and with gyues 
12 thei brou3ten hym in to Babyloyne. The 
which aftir that he was to gydre an- 
guyscht, he preyde the Lord his God, 
and dide penaunce gretely before the God 
130f his fadirs. And he preyede hym, and 
halsendeY ententijfly; and he herde the 
orisoun of hym, and he brou3te hym a3ein 
in to Jerusalem in to his kyngdam; and 
Manasses knew3, that the Lord he is 
14God. After thes thingus he bilde a wal 
withoute the cytee of Dauid, at the west 
of Gyon, in the grete valey, fro the entre 
of the 3ate of fischis, bi enuyroun vuto 
- Ofel; and he enhauncide it hugeli; and 
he sette princis of the hoost in alle the 
isStrengthed cytees of Juda. And he toke 
awey alien goddis and symulacres fro the 
hous of the Lord; the auters also that he 
hadde maad in the hil of the hous of the 
Lord and in Jerusalem, and al he threw3 
isaferre out of the cite. Bot he enstorede 
the auter of the Lord, and offrede vpon 


vOm.c. Wfro apru. *thatc. Y hilsnede c. 
™ 3otun Ns. n Om. 1. ° Om. ns. P the which 1. 4 the which 1. which citee s. r that 1Ns. 
Sthatins. ¢ttaken hede ins. thati. Vv haue comaundid ins. Walle1. *lawisi1. Y hond or 
heesis. % But ins. ® the men of Juda ins. so thats. ¢ faces a pr.m. 4 wolden not 1. & heed to 
hims. fuponss. & thei ledden ins. 4 the Lord his God ins. ‘of merci ands. * he dide rns. 
! bisechide him ins. ™he hrovu3tein. torn. Candi. Pand éhanneins. 4 God aloone 1. God 
oonlins. © Manasses ins. § west sidc Ins. t vnto INS. to x. it upi. up Ns. VY gretli thai wal ws. 


w hil or heizthe 1. hil or the heizthe s. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


x castide hem 1Ns. 


XXXIII. 8—16. 


a grauun™ signe" and a 3otun signe® in 
the hows of the Lord, of which? hows 
God spak to Dauid, and to Salomon, his 

sone, aud seide, Y ‘schal sette my name 
with outen ende in this hows and in Jeru- 
salem, which? Y chees of alle the lynagis - 
of Israel; and Y schal not make the foots 
of Israel to moue fro the lond whicht Y, 
jaf to her fadris, so oneli if* thei kepen* 
to do tho thingis whiche" Y comaundideY 
to hem, and al” the lawe*, and cerymo- 
nyes, and domes, bi the hondY of Moises. 
Therfor? Manasses disseyuede Juda’, and9 
the dwelleris of Jerusalem, that” thei diden 
yuel, nore than alle hethene men, whiche 
the Lord hadde distriede fro the face® of 
the sones of Israel. And the Lord spak 19 
to hym, and to his puple ; and thei nolden® 
take heed®. Therfor the Lord brou3te onf!) 
hem the princes of the oost of the kyng 


of Assiriens{; and thei token Manasses, te 
. that is, hem 

and bounden hym with chaynes, and __ that weren 
. b 6 rinces of the 
stockis, and ledden§ hym in to Babi- iit cr Assi. 


loyne. And aftir that he was angwischid, 12 eying ar 

he preiede ‘his Lord God}, andi dide* pe- anaes) 

nauuce gretli bifor the God of hise fadris. _ riens, for 

And he preiede God, and bisechide! en» iAiaap area 

tentifli; and God herde his preier, and ee 

brou3te™ lym ajen ‘in to" Jerusalem in® to See 

his rewme; and? Manasses knew, that the  Assiriens, but 

Lord hym silf is God4. Aftir these thingis 14 or Batiloyne 

het bildide the wal with out the citee of (O'Anitiens,. 

Dauid, at the west* of Gion, in the valei, *s Josephus 

fro the entryng of the 3ate of fischis, bi nye ea 

cumpas ‘til tot Ophel; and he reiside it® tedden him in 
4 : to Babiloyne. 

gretli’; and he ordeynede princes of the Lise here. c. 

oost in alle ‘the stronge citees of Juda. 

And he dide awei alien goddis and symy-15 

lacris fro the hows of the Lord; and he 

dide awei the auteris, whiche he hadde 

maad in the hil” of the hows of the Lord, 

and in Jerusalem, and he castide* awei 

alley with out the citee. Certis he restoride 16 


yOm s. 





XXXII. 17-—-XXXIV. 2. 


it slayn sacrifices, and pesible, and preys- 
ynge; and he comauudede to Jude, that 
17he schulde seruen to God of Irael. Neuer 
the later 3it the puple offrede in heejze 
isthingus to the Lord his God. The rem- 
naunt forsothe of the dedis of Manasse, 
and the obsecracioun of hym to his God, 
the wordis also of the seearis, that speeken 
to hym in the name of the Lord God of 
Jrael, ben conteenede in the wordis of the 
19kingus of Irael. The preyer also of hym, 
and heering, and alle the synnes, and dis- 
pitis, also the places in the whiche he 
bilde up heeje thingus, and maad maw- 
mete? wodis and yinagis, before that he 
dide penaunce, ben writen in the wordis 
200f Ozai. Forsothe Manasses slepte with 
his faders, and they birieden hym in his 
hous; and Amon, his sone, regnede for 
2lhym. Of two and twenty 3eer was Amon, 
whanne he hadde begunne to regnen ; and 
22 two 3eer he regnede in Jerusalem. And 
he dide euyl in the si3te of the Lord, as 
hadde done Manasses, his fader; and to 
alle the mawmetis, that Manasses hadde 
23 forgide, he offride, and seruede. And he 
dradde not the face of the Lord, as 
dradde Manasses, his fadir; and manye 
24more thingus trespasside. And whanne 
his seruauntis hadden sworn to gydre 
a3einus hym, thei slowen hym in his hous. 
25 But the tother multitude of the puple, 
hem slayn that hadden smyten Amon, 
thei setten Joziam, his sone, kyng for 
hym. 
CAP. XXXIV. 
1 Of ei3t 3eer was Jozias, whaune he 
hadde begunne to regnen, and oon and 
thritty 3eer he regnede in Jerusalem. 
2 And he dide that was ri3t in the si3t of 
the Lord; and he wente in the weies of 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


- 


465 


the auter of the Lord, and offride? ther- 
onne? slayn sacrifices, and pesible sacrifices, 
and preisyng’; and he comaundide Juda® 
to serue the Lord God of Israel. Netheles 17 
the puple? offride 3it in hi3° places to ‘her 
Lord God‘, Forsothe® the residue’ of 1s 
dedis' of Manasses, and his bisechyng to 
‘his Lord God", and the wordis of profetis, 
that! spaken to hym in the™ name of the 
Lord God of Israel, ben conteyned in the 
wordis of the kyngis of Israel. And hist 
preier", and the® heryng?, and alle syiiues4, 
and dispisyng", also’ the places in whiche 
he bildide hi3 thingis, and made wodis* 
and ymagis, bifor that he dide penaunce, 
ben" writun in the bokis’ of Ozai”. For- 20 
sothe* Manasses slepte with hise fadris, 
and thei birieden hym in his hows; and 
Amon, his sone, regnyde for hym. Amon?! 
was of two and twenti 3eer, whanne he 
bigan to regne; and he regnyde twei jeer 
in Jerusalem. And he dide yuel in the 22 
sijt of the Lord, as Manasses, his fadir, 
hadde doY; and he offride, and seruyde 
to alle the* idols, whiche Manasses* hadde 
maad. And he reuerenside not the face 25 
of the Lord, as Manasses, ‘his fadir?, re- 
uerenside®; and he dide mych gretter 
trespassis'. And whanne his seruauntis 24 
‘hadden ‘swore to gyder® ajens hym, thei 
killiden hym in his hows. Sotheli’ the2s 
residueS multitude of the puple', aftir that 
thei hadden slayn' hem that ‘hadden slayn* 
Amon, ordeyneden! Josie, his sone, kyng 
for hym. ‘ 
CAP. XXXIV. 

Josie was of ei3te 3eer, whanne he bigan 1 
to regne, and he regnede in Jerusalem oon 
and thritti 3eer. And he dide that, that™: 
was ri3tful in the si3t of the Lord; and 
jede" in the waies of Danid, his fadir, and 


2 mamnet c. 


Zhe offride ins. ther upon 1s. 
her own fyndyngs 3. © hi3 solempne 1s. 
dedis ins. © the Lord his God 1ns._ 1 whiche wns. 
that the Lord herd him s. 4 his syunes 1Ns, 
uthese bens. ‘book ins. Ww Yzaye s. 
Manasses s. > Om. s. 


passis than his fadir in. trespassis than his fader dide s. S 
h puple that consentide not to the deth of Amon 1s. puple that consentide not to his 
| thei ordeyneden rns. 


30 


& remenaunt Ns. 
deeth x. ikilliden s. 


VOL. II. 


kK killiden ins. 


b preisyng to the Lord s. 
f the Lord her God rns. 
m Om. ns. 

ral his dispisyng s. 
x And Ins. 
¢ renerenside not first 1. reuerenside not N. first reuerencid him not s. 


© the men of Judains. 4 peple 3it after 

g¢ And ins. bremenannt ins. } the 
0 preier fo Gods. © Om.r. P herying 

Sand also ins. t mawmet wodis 1Ns. 
Yfirst dos. 2Om.1. “at his beginnyng 
d tres- 
© bi conspiracioun had sworyn s. f And rns. 


m Om. s. 7 he 3ede rns. 


466 


Dauid, his fadir, and he bowede not to 
_3the rijt ne to the left. The ci3the jeer 
forsothe of his empyre, whanne 3it he was 
a child, he beganne to sechen the God of 
his fadir Dauid; and the twelfthe 3eer 
aftir that he hadde beguinnen, he clen- 
sede Judeam and Jerusalem fro heeje 
thingus, and mawmete wodis, and symu- 
4lacres, and grauen thingus. And _ thei 
distruy3eden befcre hym the auters of. 
Baalym, and the symulacres that weren 
sett vpon; thei waastiden also the maw- 
mete wodis. And granen thingus he 
hew3 doun, and mynuscht ; and vpon the 
toumbis of hem, that weren wount to 
sOffren, he scaterede the releuys. For- 
thermore the boones of prestis he brende 
in the auters of mawnietis, and he clensed 
6Judam and Jerusalem. Bot and in the 
citees of Manasse, and of Effraym, and 
of Semeon, vuto Neptalym, alle thingus 
7he turnede vpsadoun. And whanne the 
auters he hadde ‘to-scaterede*, and the 
mawmete wodus and grauen thingus he 
hadde to-bray3ide in to gobetis, and al 
the wasching templis he hadde waastide 
fro al the lond of Irael, he is turnede 
gajein in to Jerusalem. Thanne the 
ei3tenthe 3eer of his regne, the lond now 
clensede and the temple of the Lord, he 
sente Saphan, the sone of Elchie, and’ 
Maazian, prince of the cytee, and Joa, 
the sone of Joachas, chauncelere, that 
thei schulden enstore the hous of the 
9Lord their God. The whiche camyn to 
Elchyam, the grete preste; and monee 
taken of hym, that was brou3t into the 
hous of the Lord, and that gadereden 
Leuytis aud porters, of Manasse, and of 
Effraym, and of alle the tother of Irael, 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXXIV. 3—9. 


bowide® not to the ri3t side nether to the 
left side. Forsothe? in the ei3tethe 3eers 
of the rewme of his empire, whanne he 
was 3it a child, he bigan to seke God‘ of 
his fadir Dauid; and in’ the tweluethe 
3eer after’ that he bigan', he clenside Juda 
and Jerusalem fro" hi3" places, and wodis", 
and similacris*, and grauunY ymagis. And 4 
thei? destrieden bifor hym the auteris of 
Baalym, and thei destrieden the symy- 
lacris, that weren put aboue*. Also he 
hewide doun the wodis", and grauun® 
ymagis, and brak@ to® smale gobetis ; and 
scateride® abrood ‘the smale gobetis® on! 
the! birielis of hem, that* weren wont to 
offre ‘to tho!. Ferthermore he™ brente thes 
boonys of preestis in" the auteris of idols, 
and he clenside Juda and Jerusalem®. Bute 
also he destriede alle idols? in‘ the citees* 
of Manasses, and of Effraym, and of Sy- 
meon, ‘til to’ Neptalym. And whanne het7 
hadde scateride the" auteris, and hadde’ 
al toY-broke in to gobetis the wodis*, and 
grauun’ ymagis, and hadde? destried alle 
templis* of ydols fro al the lond of Israel, 
he turnede ajen in to Jerusalem. Therfors 
in the ei3tenthe 3eer of his rewme, whanne 
the lond and temple” ‘of the Lord* was 
clensid nowe*, he sente Saphan, the sone 
of Helchie, and Masie, the prince of the 
citee, and Joa, the sone of Joachaz, chaun- 
celer®, that thei schulden.reparele the hous 


‘of his Lord God'. Whiche® camen to Hel-» 


chie, the grete preest; and whanne thei 
hadden take of hym the money, which 
was brou3t in to the hows of the Lord; 
andi which monei the dekenes and por- 
teris hadden gaderid of Manasses*, and of 
Effraym, and of alle the residue! men™ of 
Israel, and of al" Juda and Beniamyn®, 


8 scattered c. 


ohe bowide Ins. PAndins. (the Gods. © aftirins, SOm.1ns. tbigan fo regne ins. 4 of INS. 
v hi3 solempne ins. —_ ¥ of mawmet wodis 1Ns. x of similacris rvs. Y of granun ins. 2 the men of 
Josie ins. 4 aboue tho auters 1s. > mawmett wodis ins. © the granens. dhe brak 1s. ©¢ thes into 1Ns. 
‘tho smale gobetis he scateride ins. € Om.1ns. hvponis. iOm.c.  whiche vs. | do the ymagis 
of ydolatrie 1 marg. to tho ymagis Ns. ™ the kyng ins. 2 nponis. on N. © Jerusalem of ydolatrie Ns. 
P the idols ins. Gofs. ‘citee as. Svntoins. tkyug Jostasins. “Uthes ins. VOm. ins. WOm. 1. 
* mawmett wodis ins. Y the grauun ins. #whanne he hadde ins. 4 the temples rns. © the temple 1Ns. 
©Om.s. ¢€Om.n. ©¢ his chaunceler ins. fthe Lord his God ins.  & The whiche men 1. Which men s. 
hthatin. 1! Om. a prim.ins. * men of Manasses ins. |! remenaunt ins. ™of mens. » Om. ins. 
° of Beniamyn rs. 


XXXIV. 1ro—21. 


also of al Juda and Beniamyn, and the 
i0dwellers of Jerusalem, thei token in the 
hondis of hem that stoden vpon to the 
werkmen in the hous of the Lord, that 
thei enstoren the temple, and eche feble 
iithingus thei bocchyn. And thei 3euen it 
to the craftise men, and to masouns, that 
thei schulden bien hewen stones of the 
quarers, and trees to the iunctours of the 
bildynge, and to the ioynynge of the 
houses, that the kingus of Irael hadden 
i2distruyede. The whiche feithfully alle 
thingus diden. Forsothe prouostis of the 
werkmen weren Jabath, and Abdias, of 
the sonus of Merery; Zacharias, and Mo- 
sollam, of the sonis of Caath; that streyn- 
eden the werk ; alle Leuytis, cunnynge in 
izorgnys to syngyn. Vpon hem forsothe 
that to dyuerse vses beeren birthens weren 
scribis, and maisters, the porters of the 
14 Leuytis. 
feren the monee, that was brou3t in to 
the temple of the Lord, Elchias, the 
preste, fonde a boke of the lawe of the 
is Lord by the hond of Moisy; and seith 
to Saphan, scribe, The boke of the lawe 
I haue founden in the hous of the Lord. 
i6 And he toke to hym, and he brou3t in 
the volume to the kyng; and tolde to 
hym, seyinge, Alle thingus that thou hast 
3euen in to the hondis of thi seruauntis, 
i7loo! thei ben fulfild. The syluer that is 
founden in the hous of the Lord thei 
han 30tyn; and it is 3euen to the prefectis 
of craftise men, and forgynge dyuerse 
iswerkis ; forthermore Elchias, the preste, 
toke to me this boke. The whiche whanne 
iy the kyng present, he hadde reherside, and 
he hadde herd the wordis of the lawe, he 
20kutte his clothes; and he comaundide to 
Elchie, and to Aichan, the sone of Sa- 
phan, and to Abdon, the sone of Micha, 
also to Saphan, scribe, and to Asie, the 
21seruaunt of the kyng, seyinge, Goth, and 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


And whanne thei schuiden of- . 


467 


and of the dwelleris of Jerusalem, thei io 
3auen it in? the hondis of hem that‘ weren 
souereyns of the werk men in the hows of 
the Lord, that thei schulden restore the 
temple, and reparele alle feble’ thingis’. 
And thei 3auen that monet to thet crafti! 
men and masouns, for to bie stoonys hewid 
out of the ‘delues, ether" quarreris", and 
trees* to theY ioynyngis of the bildyng’, and 
to the coupling of housis, whiche the kingis 
of Juda hadden destried. Whiche* men 12 
diden feithfuli alle thingis. Sotheli® the 
souereyns of worcheris weren Jabath, and 
Abdie, of the sones of Merari; Zacarie4, 
and Mosallam, of the sones of Caath; 
whiche hastiden the werk; alle® weren 
dekenes, kunnynge‘ to synge with orguns. 
Sotheli ouer them that baren birthuns to1s 
dyuerse vsis weren the" scribis, and mais- 
tris of the! dekenes, and porteris. Andi 
whanne thei baren out the monei, that 
was borun" in to the temple of the Lord, 
Helchie, ‘the preest!, foond the™ book of 
the lawe of the Lord bi the hond" of 
Moises. And he® seide to Saphan, thes 
writere, Y haue founde the? book of the 
lawe in the hows of the Lord. And Hel-ts 
chie took? to Saphan, and he bar in the™ 
book to the king; and telde* to hym, and 
seide, Lo! alle thingis ben fillid', whiche 
thou hast 3oue in to the hondis of thi ser- 
uauntis. Thei" han wellyd togidere the’ 17 
siluere, which is foundun in the hous of 
the Lord; and it is 3ouun to the soue- 
reyns of the’ crafti men, and makynge 
dyuerse werkis ; ferthermore Helchie, the is 
preest, took to me this book. And whanne 
he hadde rehersid this book in the* pre- 
sence of the kyng, and heY hadde herd the 19 
wordis of the lawe, he to-rente hise clothis ; 
and he comaundide to Helchie, and to Ai- 20 
chan, the sone of Saphan, and to Abdon, 
the sone of Mycha, and to Saphan, the 
scryuen, and to Asaie, the seruaunt of the 


Pintos. Qwhiche ins. * the feble ins. 8 thingis therof ins. t Om.1ns. 'Om. ins. © quarreis A. 


* lo bie trees ins. YOm.1ns. 2 bildingis1. The whiche1. > werk men «xs. .¢ Andins. 4 and 
Zacarie ns. alle thes ns. f kunnynge men 1ns. 8 And ins. h Om. In sec.m.s. 1 Om. ins, 
k bro3t ins. 10m.s. ™arns. "®hond or loors. © Helchierns. Pains. Vtook if ins. © that 1Ns. 
8hetelde ins.  ¢ fulfillid 1. fulfillid or endides. “And theis. Vthin. WOm.1ns. * Om. rns. 


Y whanne the kyng is. 
302 


468 II. PARALIPOMENON. 


preyeth the Lord for me, and for the 
remnaunt of Irael and of Juda, vpon alle 
the wordis of this boke, that is founden. 
Forsothe grete woodnesse of the Lord 
droppide vpon us, forthi that oure fadirs 
han not kept the wordis of the Lord, 
that thei schulden don alle thingus that 
22 ben writen in this volume. Thanne wente 
Elchias, and thes that to gider of the 
kyng weren sent, to Oldam, prophetisse, 
wijf of Sellum, sone of Thecuath, sone of 
Azia, keper of the clothes, ‘the whiche® 
dwellide in Jerusalem in ‘the secounde 
wallynge®; and thei speekyn to hyr the 
23 wordis, that we han aboue told. And 
sche answerde to hem, Thes thingus seith 
the Lord God of Irael, Seith to the man, 
zithat sente 3ou to me, Thes thingus seith 
the Lord, Loo! I schal bryngyn in euyls 
vpon this place, and vpon the dwellers of 
it, and alle the cursingus that ben writen 
in this boke, that thei radden beforn the 
2kyng of Juda. For thei forsoken me, 
and sacrifieden to alien goddis, that me 
to wrath thei schulden terren in alle the 
werkis of their hondus; and therfor my 
woodnesse schal droppen vpon this place, 
agand it schal not ben queynt. To the kyng 
forsothe of Juda, that sente 3ou for the 
Lord to ben preyede, thus spekith, Thes 
thingus seith the Lord God of Irael, 
For thou hast herd the word of this 
27 Volume, and thin hert is tempered, and 
thou ert meekid in the si3t of the Lord 
vpon thes thingus that ben seid aj3ein 
this place and the dwellers of Jerusalem, 
and thou dreedist reuerently my face, 
and cuttist thi clothes, and weptist before 
me; I forsothe haue herd thee, seith the 
28 Lord. Nowe forsothe I schal gedre thee 
to thi faders, and thou schalt be brout in 
to thi sepulcre in pese; and thin ee3en 


XXXIV. 22—28. 


kyng, and seide*, Go 3e, and preie® the2! 
Lord for me, and for the resydue” men‘ of 
Israel and of Juda, on alle the wordis of 
this book, which? is® foundun. For‘ greet 
veniaunce of the Lord hath droppid on& 
vs, for oure fadris kepten not the wordis 
of the Lord, to do alle thingis that" ben 
writun in this book. Therfor Helchie22 
3ede!, and thei that weren sent togidere 
of * the king, to! Olda, the prophetesse, the 
wijf of Sellum, sone™ of Thecuath, sone™ 
of Asra, kepere of clothis", which® Olda 
dwellide in Jerusalem in the secounde 
warde ; and thei spaken to hir the wordis, 
whiche we telden bifore. And sche an-23 
sweride to hem, The Lord God of Israel 
seith these thingis, Seie 3e to the? man, 
that sente 30u to me, The Lord seithes 


’ these thingis, Lo! Y schal brynge ynne4 


yuels on™ this place, and on* the dwelleris 
therof, and alle the cursyngis that ben 
writun in this book, whicht thei redden" 
bifor the kyng of Juda. For thei hans 
forsake me, and han sacrifiedY to alien 
goddis, for to terre me to wrathfulnesse 
in alle the werkis of her hondis; therfor 
my strong veniaunce schal droppe on™ this 
place, and it schal not be quenchid*. But 26 
speke 3e thus to the kyng of Juda, that 
sente 30u to preye the Lord, The Lord 
God of Israel seith these thingis, For thou 
herdist the wordis of the bookY, and thin 97 
herte” is maad neisch*, and thou art mekid 
in the si3t of the Lord of these thingis 
that® ben seide a3ens this place aud thet 
dwelleris of Jerusalem, and thou hast re- 
uerensid my face, and hast to-rente thi 
clothis, and hast wepte bifor me; also Y 
haue® herd thee, seith the Lord. Forf2s 
now Y schal gadere thee to thi fadris, and 
thou schalt be borun in to thi sepulere in 
pees ; and thin i3en schulen not se al yuel8, 


> that c. © a closet £ pr. vice. the closct sec. v. welsum fortune fertia v. the secounde walling 


quarta v. 


z he seide 1x. he seide fo hem s. 4 preieth 1ns. 


now is. fCertis1xs. g upon is. 4 whiche rns. 


bremenaunt mys. Cofmenins. 4that ins. € is 
iOm.1n. frowns. 1! wenten to rx. ™ the sone rvs. 
2 the kingis clothis 1xs. © the which r.  P that s. 


q4QOm.s. Tuponis. Suponins. ¢t that ins. 


«han rad ins. VY sacrifisid plures. W upon 1s. * quenchid or lettid s. y hook of Goddis domes. % herte 


therbi is. ® nesshe to understonde Goddis sentence s. 


bofor fors. ¢whiche ns. a3ens the 1. © haue 


therfor s. { Certis ins. & the yuel, that is, noon of aile the yuels ins. 


XXXIV. 29-——XXXV. 3. 


schul not seen al the euyl, that Iam to 
bryngyn in vpon this place, and vpon the 
dwellers of it. And so thei tolden to the 
kyng alle thingus, that sche hadde seyde. 
a9 And he, clepide to gidre alle the more 
thoru3 birthe of Juda and of Jerusalem, 
39 Steizede up in to the hous of the Lord, 
and also togydre alle the men of Juda, 
and the dwellers of Jerusalem, prestis, 
and Leuytis, and al the puple, fro the 
leste vnto the moste ; the whiche heeryng 
in the hous of the Lord, the kyng radde 
31 alle the wordis of the volume; and stond- 
yng in his chayere smote pese couenaunt 
before the Lord, that he schulde gon aftir 
hym, and keepyn the heestis, and witness- 
yngus, and justifiyngus, in al his herte and 
in al his soule; and he schulde done that 
ben writen in that volume, that he hadde 
seradde. Also he adiurede vpon this alle, 
that ben founden in Jerusalem and Ben- 
iamyn; and the dwellers of Jerusalem 
diden after the couenaunt of the Lord 
33 God of their fadirs. Thanne Jozias dide 
aweye alle the abomynaciouns of alle the 
regyouns of the sonus of Irael ; and maad 
alle, that weren laft in Jerusalem, to seruen 
to the Lord their God; alle the dais of 
his lijf thei wenten not awey fro ue 
Lord God of their fadirs. 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 Forsothe Jozias maad in Jerusalem 
pasch to the Lord, that was offred the 
2fourtenthe day of the first moneth; and 
he sette prestis in their offices; and he 
meuede hem louely, that thei schulden 
3mynystren in the hous of the Lord. Also 
to the Leuytis, at whos techinge al Irael 
was halowed to the Lord, he spak, Put- 
tith the ark in the seyntuarie of the 


hthat ins. | upon is. 
P and ther stieden up 1. 
Uvynto IN. to sx. Vv whos INS. 
_ *heestis ins. > the witnessyngis rs. 
gin Beniamyn 1. 
™ Jeft ins. © the ns. 
8 offrid or maad 1s. 
Y that 1s, 


* upon ts. 


P Om. 1. 
a gerue INS. 


© and in Ns. 
t Om. plures. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


1 Thanne 1. 
4 togidere with him ins. 

w forseide book s. 
¢ the iustifyingis ns. 
h bi heest of the king diden s, 
q Certis INs. 
v Om. a. 


469 


which® Y schal brynge yn on‘ this place, 
and on* the dwelleris therof. Therfor! 
thei telden to the king alle thingis, 
whiche™ Olda hadde seid. And aftir that 29 
he" hadde clepid togidere alle the eldere 
men of Juda and of Jerusalem, he stiede® 30 
in to the hows of the Lord, and? togidere4 
alle’ the men of Juda,‘and the dwelleris 
of Jerusalem‘, preestis, and dekenes, and 
al the puple, fro the leeste ‘til to" the 
moste ; to whiche’ herynge in the hows of 
the Lord, the kyng redde alle the wordis 
of the book”. And he stood in his* trone, 31 
and smoot’ a boond of pees bifor the Lord, 
for to ‘go aftir? hym, and to kepe the 
comaundementis*, and witnessyngis”, and 
lustifiyngis® of hym, in al his herte and 
in al his soule; and to do tho thingis 
that? weren writun in that book, which 
he hadde red. And he chargide greetli32 
on this thing alle men, that weren foundun 
in Jerusalem and Beniamyn’; and the 
dwellers of Jerusalem diden® aftir the 
couenaunt! of the Lord God of her fadris. 
Therfor Josie dide awei alle abhomyna-33 
ciouns* fro alle the cuntreis of the sones 
of Israel; and he! made alle men, that 
weren residue“ in Israel, to sertte her® 
Lord God; in® alle the? daies of his lijf 
thei 3eden not awei fro the Lord God of 
her fadris. 


CAP. XXXV. 


Forsothe! Josie made pask to the Lord! 
in Jerusalem, that" was offrid’ in the four- 
tenthe dai of the firste monethe; and he? 
ordeynede prestis in her offices; and he! 
comaundide hem for to mynystre" in the 
hows of the Lord. And he spak to the’3 
dekenes, at whos techyng al Israel was 
halewid to the Lord, Sette 3e"” the arke* 
in the seyntuarie of the temple, which’ 


m that 1. 2 the kyng Ns. 
T stied vp als. s Om. N. 
x the n. Y smote or made s. 
dwhich s. ¢thatins.  fupon INs. 
k the abhomynaciouns 1. ! Om. s. 
r the whiche pask 1. whiche pask ns. 
x arke of the Lord ns. 


© stiede up INs. 
t Om. Ins. 
2% sue INS. 


i heest 1Ns. 


W 3e, he seide 18. 


470 


temple, that Salomon, the sone of Dauid, 
kyng of Irael, bilde up; forsothe 3e schul 
bern it namore. Nowe forsothe mynys- 
treth to the Lord oure God and to his 
4puple Irael, and makith 3ou redy by 
houses and 3o0ure kynredis in the deuy- 
siouns of eche oon, as Dauid, king of 
Irae], comaundide, and Salomon, his sone, 
sdiscriuede; and mynystreth in the seyn- 
tuarie bi 3our meynees and Leuytis com- 
6 panyes, and, halowed, offreth pasch ; also 
3oure bretheren, that thei mowen aftir 
the wordis that the Lord spac in the 
hond of Moyses don, makith redy before. 
7 Forthermore Jozias 3aue to al the puple, 
that was founden in to the solempnyte of 
pasch, lombis, and kides of the flockes, 
and of other feeld beestis thritty thou- 
sand, of oxen forsothe, thre thousand ; 
thes thingus of al the substaunce of the 
skyng. Also his duykis wilfully that thei 


voweden offreden, bothe to the puple and ° 


prestis and Leuytis. Bot Elchias, and 
Zacharias, and Jehiel, princis of the hous 
of the Lord, 3euen to the prestis, to don 
pasch, feeld bestis mengyngly, two thou- 
sand and sexe hundrith, and oxen thre 
ohundrith. Choneyas forsothe, and Se- 
meyas, also Nathanael and his bretheren, 
also Azabias, Jahiel, and Josabas, princis 
of Leuytis, 3euen to other Leuytis, to ha- 
lowen the pasch, fyue thousand of feeld 
io beestis, and oxen fyue hundrith. And 
the seruyse is maad redy beforn ; and the 
prestis stoden in their office®, also Leuytis 
in companyes, after the kingis comaunde- 
iiment; and offred is pasch. And the 
prestis sprengeden their hondis with 
blood, and Leuytis drewen of skynnes 
12 of brent sacrifices, and seuerden hem, that 
thei schulden 3euen by houses and mey- 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


XXXV. 4-12. 


Salomon, kyng? of Israel, the sone of 
Dauid, bildide; for? 3e schulen no more 
bere it®, But now serue‘ ‘3oure Lord God! 
and his puple Israel, and make® 3ou redi4 
bi 30ure housis and meynees in the de- 
partyngis of ech bi hym silf, as Dauid, 
king of Israel, comaundide, and’ Salomon, 
his sone, discryuede’ ; and serue 3e in thes 
seyntuarie bi the" meynees and cumpenyes 
of dekenes, and be 3e halewid, and offree 
3e pask; also ‘make redii 3oure britheren', 
that thei moun ‘do bi! the wordis, whiche 
the Lord spak in™ the hond of Moyses. 
Ferthermore Josie 3af to al the puple",7 
that was foundun there in the solemp- 
nytee+ of pask, lambren, and kidis of the 
flockis, and of residue’ scheep ‘he 3af? 
thritti thousynde, and of oxis% thre thou- 
synde; these thingis of al’ the catel* of 
the kyng. And hise duykis offriden thos 
thingis whiche thei avowiden bi fre® wille, 
as wel to the puple as to prestis and de- 
kenes. Forsothe’ Elchie, and Zacharie, and 
Jehiel, princes of the hows of the Lord, 
3auen to preestis, to make pask in comyn, 
two thousynde and sixe hundrid scheep, 
and thre hundrid oxis*. Forsothe’ Cho-9 
nonye, and Semei, and Nathanael - and 
hise britheren, also? Asabie, Jahiel, and# 
Josabaz, princis» of dekenes, 3auen to 
othere dekenes, to make pask, fyue thou- 
synde of scheep, and fyue hundrid oxis*. 
And the seruyce was maad redi; and. 
preestis stoden in her office, and dekenes 
in cumpenyes‘, bi® comaundement of the 
kyng ; and pask was offrid8.: And preestis 11 
spreynten her hondis with blood, and de- 
kenes drowen of the skynnes of sacri- 
fices', and departiden* tho sacrificis, for to 12 
3yue! bi the™ housis and meyneis of alle 
men"; and that tho® schulden be offrid to 


© offices c. 


b it aboute ns. 
& ordeynede Ins. 


zthe kyng iy. 4 certis rs. 
je ins. f and as INs. 
gRuwxbg. Om. ins. 
2 multitude rs. 
staunce INS. 
a Om. x. 
maad 18. 


© the remenaunt of Ns. 
wher fre rns. VY And INs. 

b the princis ins. © oxen INS. 

h Om. 1ns. i the sacrified bestis rvs. 


© serue 3e¢ IMNSX. 
h Om. Ins. 
k britheren, be thei maad redi Ins. 
P Om. nN. 
Ww Om. EFGKLuxbe. * oxen Ins. Y And ins, 

4 her cumpanyes ns. 
k thei departiden 1ns. 


d the Lord 3oure God ins. © make 
i make 3e redi c. sec. m. be made redi DEGKLMoP 
do aftir 1. do her seruyce bi ns. ™ bi INs, 
4 oxen INS, © weren 3oue of ins, *Om.s. t sub- 
2 and also ins. 
fheest ins. & offrid or 
l3yue hem ins. ™ Om. IN, 


€ bi the c. 


men that weren come thidere to make pask 1s. © tho sacrifices 1s. 


T solempnytee ; 
that is, to make 
the solempnyte. 
Lire here. c. 


XXXV. 13——20. 


nees of echon, and thei schulden ben of- 
fred to the Lord, as it is writen in the 
boke of Moyses; and of oxen thei diden 
13]ije maner. And thei roosteden pasch 
vpon the fijr, after that it is wrijten in 
the lawe. Forsothe pesible hoostis thei 
seetheden in posnettis, and cawdrones, 
and pottis, and hastily thei deleden to al 
14the puple; to hem selue forsothe, and to 
the prestis aftirward‘ thei maden redy ; 
for in the offrynge of brent sacrifices and 
talewis, vnto the ny3t the prestis weren 
ocupied. Wherfore the Leuytis to hem 
silf and to the prestis, sonus of Aaron, 
is greitheden last. Bot the syngers, sonus 
of Asaph, stoden in their ordre, aftir the 
heste of Dauid, and Asaph, and Eman, 
and Ydytym, of the prophetis of the 
kyng; the porters forsothe bi alle the 
jatis keptyn al about, so that in no poynt 
forsothe thei wenten fro the seruyse ; 
wherfore and the bretheren of hem, Le- 
1euytis, greitheden to hem metis. Thanne 
al the heryinge of the Lord lawfuly is 
fulfild in that day, that thei do pasch, 
and offren brent sacrifice vpon the auter 
of the Lord, aftir the heste of the kyng 
17 Jozie. And the sonus of Irael, that weren 
founden, diden ther pasch in that tyme, 
and the’ solempnyte of therf looues seuen 
isdays. Ther was not a pasch lije to this 
in Irael, fro the days of Samuel, pro- 
phete; bot ne eny of the kingus of Irael 
maad pasch as Jozias, to the prestis and 
Leuytis, and to al Jude and Irael, that 
was founden, and to the dwellers of Je- 
igrusalem. The eiz3tenthe 3eer of the kyng- 
20dam of Jozie this pasch is halewed. After 
that Jozias hadde enstored the temple, 
Nechao, kyng of Egipt, steizede up to 
fiz3ten in Charchamys beside Eufraten ; 


f aftir c. 


Poxen ins. 4ofs. 
w in cawdruns ins. * in pottis rns. 
tos. ‘tos. 4the ynnere ins. ©@ fatnesse s. 
h the preestis ins. |!Om.1ns. k And ins. 


¥ the pask lomb ts. 


G4 her metis ins. 1 fulfillid ns. 
x Om. 1. Y foundun there 1s. 
d Nechao ins. 


5 upon Is. 
z Om. s. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


§ upon INS. 
¥ deliden 7 Ns. 
f the dekenes 1Ns. 
| heest 1Ns. 
no tyme cessynge therof'1. paynt, that is, thet weren in no tyme absent fro her office s. 
' Om. ns. 

8 king Josie 1Ns. 


471 


the Lord, as it is writun in the book of 
Moises; and of oxis? thei diden in4 lijk 
maner. And thei rostiden pask" on’ thes 
fier, bit that" that is writun in the lawe. 
Sotheli” thei sethiden pesible sacrifices in 
pannes, and cawdruns”, and pottis*, and 
in haste thei deliden’ to al the puple; but 14 
thei? maden redi aftirward to hem silf, 
and to prestis; for preestis? weren occu- 
pied ‘til to ny3t in the offryng of brent 
sacrifices and of ynnere® fatnessis®. Wher- 
for dekenesf maden redi® to hem silf and 
to preestis®, the sones of Aaron, ‘the laste’. 
Forsothe* syngeris, the sones of Asaph, 15 
stoden in her ordre, bi the comaundement! 
of Dauid, and of Asaph, and of Eman, 
and of Yditum, the profetis of the kyng; 
but the porteris kepten™ bi ech j3ate, so 
that thei 3eden not awei fro the" seruice, 
sotheli in a poynt®; wherfor and dekenes?, 
her britheren, maden redi metis’ to hem. 
Therfor al the religioun of the Lord was 16 
fillid® ri3tfuli in that day, that thei maden 
pask, and offriden brent sacrifices on’ the 
auter of the Lord, bi thet comaundement® 
of kyng’ Josie. And the sones of Israel, 17 
that weren foundun there, maden pask in 
that tyme, and the solempnite of therf 
loones seuene” daies. No pask was lijk 18 
this in Israel, fro the daies of Samuel, the 
prophete; but nethir ony of the kyngist 
of Israel made pask as Josie dide*, to 
preestis and dekenes, and to al Juda and 
Israel, that was foundunY, and to the 
dwelleris of Jerusalem. This pask was 19 
halewid in the ei3tenthe 3eer of ‘the rewme 
of? Josie’. Aftir® that Josie hadde re-20 
parelid the temple, Nechao, the kyng of 
Egipt, stiede® to fiz3te in Carcamys bisidis 
Eufrates; and Josie 3ede forth in to his 
metyng. And he seide bi messangeris 21 


& in the E pr. m. 


t aftir 1. 
Z the dekens 1Ns. 


u that biddyng s.  ¥ And Ins. 
a the prestis ins. > vnto iN. 
8 redi her part at the laste rns. 
nher ins. © poynt, 
P the dekenes Ns. 
w bi seuene INS. 
¢ stiede up 1Ns. 


m kepten her office 1s. 


Vv the kyng ns. 
bd And aftir ns. 


u heest 1Ns. 


+ kyngis; not 
as to multitude 
of puple, for in 
the tyme of 
Dauyth and 
of Salomon, 
more multi- 
tude of puple 
cam to the so- 
lempnyte of 
pask, but this 
excelence is 
vadurstondun 
as to the fre 
3ifte of Josie, 
that 3af more 
to the puple 
than Dauyth 
and Salomon, 
that weren 
richere. Lire 
here. c. 


472 


and Jozias wente forth in to a3ein com- 
21mynge of hym. And he, messagers sent 
to hym, seith, What to me and to thee, 
kyng of Juda? To day not a3einus thee I 
comme, bot a3einus an other hous I fy3te, 
to whom God comaundide mc hastely to 
gon; lene a3einus God to don, that is with 
22me, lest he slee thee. Jozias wolde not 
ben turned a3ein, bot greithede a3ein hym 
bataile; and he assentide not to the 


wordis of Nechao, of the mouth of God, © 


bot wente for to fizjten in the feeld of 
23Magedo. And there woundid of the 
scheters, seide to his childre, Ledith me 
out of the bataile, for gretely I am 
24woundid. The whiche beeren hym ouer 
fro oon chaar to an other, that folowede 
hym, in kingus maner, and beeren hym 
awey in to Jerusalem; and he is deed, 
and beried in the costeuous toumbe of 
his fadirs. And al Juda and Jerusalem 
25 weileden hym, Jeremyas most, whos alle 
the syngers and syngeresses in to the 
present day lamentaciouns vpon Jozie re- 
plyen; and as lawe it is hadde in Irael, 
Loo! it is told writen in the Lamenta- 
26ciouns. The remnaunt forsothe of the 
wordis of Jozie, and of his mercyes, the 
whiche in the lawe of the Lord ben co- 
maundide, also the werkis of hym, the 
first and the last, ben writen in the bok 
of the kyngus of Irael and of Juda. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Toke thanne the puple of the lond 
Joachaz, the sone of Jozie, and setten 
2king for his fader in Jerusalem. Of thre 
and twenty 3eer was Joachaz, whanne 
he hadde begunne to regnen, and thre 
3monethis he regnede in Jerusalem. For- 
sothe the king of Egipt, whanne he was 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


XX KV) 21— << ee 


sent to hym®, Kyng of Juda, what is’ to 
me and to thee? Y come not aj3ens thee 
to dai, but Y fizte ajens another howsé, to 
which God bad me go in haste; ceesse 
thou to do! a3ens God, which* is with me, 
lest he sle thee. Josie! nolde™ turne a3en, 22 
but made" redi batel ajens hym; and he 
assentide not to the wordis of Nechao, bi° 
Goddis mouth, but he 3ede for to fi3te in 
the feeld of Magedo. And there he was 23 
woundide of archeris, and seide? to hise 
children, ‘Lede 3e4 me out of the batel, 
for Y am woundid greetli. Whiche™ baren 24 
hym ouer fro the’ chare in to an other 
chare, that suede hym, bi custom of the 
kyng, and ‘baren out! hym" in to Jeru- 
salem; and he diede’, and was biried in 
the sepulcre of hise fadris. And al Juda 
and Jerusalem biweiliden hym, Jeremye* 25 
moost’, of whom alle syngeris and syng- 
eressis? ‘til in to® present> dai rehersen 
‘lamentaciouns, ether® weilyngis*, on® Jo- 
sie; and itf cam forth as a lawe in Israel, 
Lo! it is seid writun? in Lamentaciouns?. 
Forsothe' the residue‘ of wordis! of Jo-26 
sie, and of hise™ mercies", that® ben co- 
maundidP? in the lawe of the Lord, and 
hise werkis‘, ‘the firste™ and the laste, ben 
wryten in the book of kyngis* of Israel 
and of Juda. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


Therfor the puple of the lond' took 
Joachaz, the sone of Josie, and ordeynede 
hym kyng for his fadir in Jerusalem. 
Joachaz was of thre and twenti 3eer,2 
whanne he bigan to regne, and he regnede 
thre monethis in Jerusalem. Sotheli" thes 
kyng of Egipt, ‘whan heY hadde come 


b Om. c. 


e Josie ins. f cause of strijf is 13. 


g meyne INS. 


hthe which 1. ido thus Ns. * that ins. 1] And 


Josie c. But Josias ns. ™wolde not 1. "he made ins. © spokyn bis. P Josias seide rns. 4 Lede plures. 


Ledeth ins. ' And theirns.  § that ins. 


t thei bro3zteu rns. 


uhym forth iss. V diede there rns. 


whe was ns. * but Jeremye 1ns. Y beqweilide him moost ns. 2 syngsteris1. ®vnto1. > this present rNs. 


¢ Om. INs. 4 the weilyngis rns. © of INS. 
h Weilyngis ns. 1 Certis xs. 
° whiche ns. P boden rns. 

u And whanne Ins. 


q firste werkis ins. 
v Om. Ins. 


k remenaunt INs, 
r Om. INs. 


f this weilyng \Ns. 


& writyn to haue in mynde s. 
1 the wordis Ins. 


™ the rns. ¥ mercies of Josie s. 
‘the kyngis ins. _ t lond of Juda 1s. 


XXXVI. 4-——13. 


commen to Jerusalem’, remeuede hym, 
and condempnede the lond in an hundrith 
talentis of syluer and a talent of gold. 
4And he sette king for hym Elyachyn, 
his brother, vpon Judam and Jerusalem ; 
and he turnede his name Joachym. Hym 
forsothe Joachaz he toke with hym, and 
sbrou;t in to Egipt. Of fyue and twenty 
3eer was Joachym, whanne he hadde be- 
gunue to regnen, and elleuen 3eer he reg- 
nede in Jerusalem, and he dide euy] be- 
6forn the Lord his God. Ajeins this steizid 
up Nabugodonosor, king of Caldeis, and 
bounden with cheynes ladde in to Baby- 
zloyne. To the whiche and the vessels of 
the Lord he translatide, and putte hem 
sini his temple. The remnaunt forsothe 
of the wordis of Joachym, and _ his 
abomynaciouns that he wrou;te, and that 
ben founden in hym, ben contened in the 
boke of the kingus of Irael and of Juda. 
Thanne Joachym, his sone, regnede for 
ghym. Of ei3t 3eer was Joachym, whanne 
he hadde begunn to regnen, and thre 
monethis and tenn days he regned in 
Jerusalem, and he dide euy] in the si3t 
loof the Lord. And whanne the cercle of 
00 3eer were turned, king Nabugodonosor 
sente hem, the whiche and brou3ten hym 
into Babiloyne, born awey togider the 
most precious vessels of the hous of the 
Lord. Forsothe he sette Sedechie, his 
vnele, kyng vpon Judam and Jerusalem. 
irAnd of oon and twenty 3eer was Sede- 
chias, whanne he hadde begunne to reg- 
nen, and elleuen 3eer he regned in Jeru- 
1zsalem. And he dide euyl in the ee3en of 
the Lord his God, ne he schamyde the 
face of Jeremye, the prophete, spekinge to 
ishym of the mouth of the Lord. Also 
fro king Nabugodonosor he wente awei, 
the whiche hadde adiurede hym bi God ; 


b Irael p. 


whe remouyde ins. x he condempnede 1ns. 
Jerusalem 1, on Jerusalem n. © he turnede 1Ns. 
brou3te Aim ins. & And Joakym c. 
stizede up ns. | he ledde ins. 
qd remenaunt ins. F the wordis ns. 
w kynge of Babiloyn 1s. 


nosor ins. > upon 1s, 


m the which 1. 


x men in to Juda 1s. 


b the Lord his God ns. 


II]. PARALIPOMENON. 473 


to Jerusalem, remouyde® hym, and con- 
dempnede* the londY in an hundrid ta- 
lentis of siluer and in a’ talent of gold. 
And he ordeynede for hym Eliachim, his 4 
brother, kyng on* Juda and Jerusalem? ; 
and turnede® his name Joakym®. Sotheli¢ 
he took thilk Joachaz with hym silf, and 
brou3tef in to Egipt. Joakym® was ofs 
fyue and twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan to 
regne, and he regnyde eleuene 3eer in Je- 
rusalem, and he dide yuel bifor ‘his Lord 
God'. Nabugodonosori, kyng of Caldeis, 
styede* a3ens this Joakym, and ledde! hym 
boundun with chaynes in to Babiloyne. 
To which™ Babiloyne® he translatide also7 
the vessels of the® Lord, and settide? tho 
in his temple. Sotheli the residue‘ ofs 
wordis’ of Joakym, and of hise abhomy- 
naciouns whiche he wrou3te, and that® 
weren foundun in hym, ben conteyned in 
the book of kyngis of Israel and of Juda. 
Therfort Joachym, his sone, regnede for 
hym. Joachym was of ei3te 3eer, whanne 9 
he bigan to regne, and he regnede thre 
monethis and ten daies in Jerusalem, and 
he dide yuel in the si3t of the Lord. And 10 
whanne the cercle of the" 3eer was turned 
aboute, Nabugodonosor the’ kynge sente 
men*, whiche also bron3ten hym in to 
Babiloyne, whanne the moost preciouse 
vessels of the hows of the Lord weren 
borun out togidir’. Sotheli* he* ordeyn- 
ede Sedechie, his fadris brother, kyng on> 
Juda and Jerusalem. Sedechie was of oon! 
and twenti 3eer, whanne he bigan to regue, 
and he regnede eleuene jeer in Jerusalem. 
And he dide yuel in the si3t of ‘his Lord 12 
God‘, and he was not aschained of the face 
of Jeremye, the prophete, spekynge* to 
hym bi the mouth of the Lord. Also he1s 
3ede_awey® fro thef kyng Nabugodonosor, 
that® hadde* made hym to swere bi God; 


lin to pn, 
Y lond of Juda is, Zo008. ®uponis. > upon 
4 and clepide him Joakym 18. e Andins. fhe 


! And Nabugodonosor ns. 
© the hous of the n. 


k wente up 1. 


n cilee 18. P he sette INS. 


8 the whiche 1. whiche ns. ‘And ins. “thre a prom. YOu. ins. 
y togidre thens 8. 
© the Lord his God 1ns. 4 that spake ins. ¢ Om. ins. fOm.ns, & whiche rns. 


z And ix. Oi. s. 2 Nabugodo- 


h Om. ins. 5 God, that is [to bihote stidefastly 1.] to be trewe to him is. 


VOL. II. 


3P 


AT 4, 


and he endurede his nolle and herte, that 
he were not turnede a3ein to the Lord 
14God of Irael. Bot and alle the princis of 
prestis and the puple trespaseden wickid- 
ly‘, after alle the abomynaciouns of gen- 
tilis; and thei defouleden the hous of the 
Lord, that he halowede to hym in Jeru- 
issalem. The Lord forsothe God of their 
fadirs sente to hem bi the hond of his 
messagers, fro ny3t rijsyng, and eche 
day togydre monestynge ; forthi that he 
wolde sparen to the puple, and to his 
isdwellynge place. And thei vndremow- 
eden the messagers of God, and! dis- 
piseden his wordis, and scorneden to the 
prophetis ; to the tyme that schulde stei3 
vp the woodnesse of the Lord vpon his 
i7puple, and were no medecyne. And he 
brou3t vpon hem the king of Caldeis; 
and he slow3 the 3ong men of hem with 
swerd in the hous of the seyntuarye ; and 
he hadde not reuth of the 3ong waxe 
man, and of the meyden, and of the olde 
man, ne forsothe of the ful feble for eeld, 
18 bot alle he toke in his hondis. And alle 
the vessels of the hous of the Lord, bothe 
more and lasse, and the tresores of the 
temple, and of the kyng, and of the 
princis, he bare ouer in to Babiloyne. 
i9Enmyes brenden up the hous of the 
Lord, distruyeden the wal of Jerusalem, 
alle the toures brenden, and whateuer 
20was precyous thei waastiden. 3if eny 
hadde scapid the swerd, lad in to Baby- 
loyne, seruede to the king and his sonus ; 
to the tyme that the kyng of Persis 
21 hadde empyre, and were fulfild the word 
of the Lord of the mouth of Jeremye, 
and the lond schulde halowen their holy 


k wickeli c. 


lhis herte 1ns. 
4 And ns. 


k Sedcchie ins. 
p hadde halewid ns. 


I]. PARALIPOMENON. 


™ wolde not 1. 
t hond or bifore warning s. 


XXXVI. 14——21. 


and he* made hard his nol and herte!, that 
he nolde™ turne ajen to the Lord" of Is- 
rael. But also alle the princes of preestis 14 
and the puple trespassiden wickidli, bi alle 
abhomynaciouns® of hethene men; and 
thei defouliden the hows of the Lord, 
which he halewide? to hym silf in Jern- 
salem. Forsothe! the Lord God of her 1s 
fadris sente to hem bi the hond" of hise 
messangeris, ands roost bi ny3t", and 
amonestideY ech day; for” he sparide* 
his puple and dwellyng’ place. And theite 
scorneden? the messangeris of God, and 
dispisiden* hise wordis, and scorneden> 
hise prophetis; til the greet veniaunce of 
the Lord stiede on® his puple, and noon 
heelyng* were’. And he brou3te on® hem 17 
the kyng of Caldeis ; and killide® the 3onge 
men of hem ‘bi swerd: in the hows of 
seyntuarie* ; ‘he hadde not merci! of ™ a 
3ong ‘man, and of a° vergyn, and of an eld 
man, and sotheli® nether of P a4 man ni3 
the deth for eldnesse’, but he bitook alle’ 
int the hond of that" king of Caldeis. 
And he translatide in to Babiloyne alleis 
the vessels of the hows of the Lord, bothe 
the grettere and the lasse vessels, and the 
tresours of the temple, and of the kyng’, 
and of the princes”. Enemyes* brenten 19 
the hows of the Lord; theiY distrieden the 
wal of Jerusalem; thei brenten alle the 
touris ; and thei distrieden what euer thing 
was preciouse?, If ony man ascapide the 20 
swerd’, he was led® in to Babiloyne, and 
seruyde® the kyng and hise sones*; til 
the kyng of Peersis regnyde, and® the2) 
word of the Lord bi the mouth of Jere- 
mye was fillid‘, and til the lond halewide 
hise sabatis. For’ in? alle the daies of 


Vand at litil = pr. m. 


n Lord God 1ns. © the abhomynaciouns 1x8. 
8 and the Lord ns. t roos up INs. 


u ny3t, that is, whanne thei weren blyndid bi derknesse of synne, he profride his grace to hemis. ¥ he 


amonestide hem Ins. 
z yndermowiden in scorn 1. vndirmowiden ns. 
upon 1. vpons. 4noNns. 
he killide 1. bi swerd he killide ns. 1 Om. ins. 
nn man he had not thanne mercy 1Ns. 
men INS, 
Y and thei ns, 
there s. 
teyned vpon the men of Juda s. 


z preciouse therynne 1Ns. 


€ and til ins. 


W forthi that 1. for that n. for that that s. 
4 thei dispisiden Ins. 
© cure or heelyng 1s. cure N. 
k the seyntuarie ins. 1Om.1ns. ™onc, and p. "Om. a. 
© certis INS. P Om. INS. 
tin to1ns, “the ns. Om,1. Vv kyng of Juda ins. ¥ princes theroff ins. *And enemyes Ns. 
aswerd and was not slayn s. 
4 sones, this subiectioun was upon the men of Judai. sones, this subieccton or thraldom con- 
f fulfillid 1ns. 


* wolde spare ins. Y his dwellyng ins. 
b thet scorneden Ins, ¢ up 
fwereiohems. fuponis. 4 with swerd 


q he sparide a ins. Fageins. § alle 


b taken and led 1xs. © seruede 


& Sothely ins. > Juda in ts. 


+ This preyere 
of Manasses is 
not in Ebrue. 
AEH. 


XXXVI. 22-——-XXXVH. 


days. Forsothe alle the days of deso- 
lacioun he dide saboth, vnto the whijl 
o2seuenty 3eer weren fulfild. Forsothe the 
first 3eer of Cirus, kyng of Persis, to ful- 
fille the word of the Lord, that he hadde 
spoken by the mouth of Jeremye, the 
Lord stired the spirite of Cirus, kyng of 
Persis, that comaundide to ben prechide 
to al his rewme also by scripture, sey- 
23inge, Thes thingus seith Cirns, kyng of 
Persis, Alle the rewmes of the erth 3af 
to me the Lord God of heuen, and he 
comaundide to me, that I schulde bilde 
up to hym an hous in Jerusalem, the 
whiche is in Jude. Who of 30 is in al 
the puple of hym? be the Lord his God 
with hym, and stei3e he up. Lord Godt 
Almy3ty of our faders, Abraham, Ysaac, 
and Jacob, and to the rijtwise seede of 
hem, the whiche madist henen and erth 
with al the ournynge of hem, ‘the whiche™ 
markedist the se with the word of thin 
heste, whiche" closedist the depnesse, and 
merkedist to thi ferful and preysable 
name, that alle inwardly dreeden, and 
tremblen fro thi chere of thi vertue, and 
vusuffrable wrath vpon the synnful of 
thi thretynge. Forsothe with oute me- 
sure grete and vnserchable the mercy of 
thi beheste; for thou art Lord alther- 
hee3est vpon al erth, long abidyng and 
miche mercyful, and othinkyng vpon the 
malices of men. Thou forsothe, Lord, af- 
ter thi goodnesse hast bihoten penaunce 
of remissioun of synnes; and thou, God 
of ri3twijs men, hast not putte penaunce 
to the ri3twijse, Abraham, Ysaac, and 
Jacob, to hem that to thee synnede not. 
For I haue synnede ouer the noumbre of 
grauel of the see; multiplied ben my 


m that c. 


i desolacioun or of the distrying or forsaking therof s. 


kyng ins. © fulfille ins. P the king ns. 4 whiche 1s. 
*Om. ins. thath 3ouenins. 4 that ins. 
his God ns. * he ups. he up thidur ns. Y Om. 1Ns. 


4 thin heest ins. ¢ depnesse 1Ns, 
iOm.ns. * wraththe ins. ! upon 1s. 

verili forthenk her synne s. P and it 1Ns. 
t thou art moost 1Ns. ® longe abidynge 1Ns. 
z Om. 1Nns. thou hast 1Ns. 


II. PARALIPOMENON. 


Vv puple, that wil go wirschipe him there 1s. 


& stidefast ins. 
m may not be suffrid 1ns. 
q Om. Ns. 

Vv ful ms. 
b Lord, that art God 1. Lord, which art God ns. 


3P2 


f markid hem 1s. 


475 


desolacionn' it* made sabat, til that se- 
uenti 3eer weren fillid!. Forsothe™ in the 22 
firste 3eer of Cyrus, kyng" of Persis, to 
fille’ the word of the Lord, which he 
hadde spoke bi the mouth of Jeremye, the 
Lord reiside the spirit of Cirus, king? of 
Persis, that’ comaundide to be prechid in 
al his rewme, 3he, bi scripture’, and seide, 
Cirus, the’ king of Persis, seith these2: 
thingis, The Lord God of heuene 3af* to 
me alle the rewmes of erthe, and he co- 
maundide to me, that Y schulde bilde to 
hym an hows in Jerusalem, which" is in 
Judee. Who of 3ou is in al his puple’? 
‘his Lord God’ be with hym, and stie hex 
‘in to Jerusalem). 


CAP. XXXVII. 


Lord Godt Almy3ti of our fadris, Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Jacob’, and of her iust 
seed, which*® madist heuene and erthe 
with? al the ournyng of tho’, which hast 
markid the see bi the word of ‘thi co- 
maundement", which hast closid togidere 
the depthe® of watris, and hast markidf to 
thi ferdful® and preysable name, which? 
alle men dreden, ‘and tremblen' of the 
cheer of thi vertu, and the ire*® of thi 
manassyng on! synneris ‘is vnsuffrable™, 
‘ether may not be susteyned". Sotheli® the 
merci of thi biheest is fulgreet and? ‘vn- 
serchable, ether’ may not be compre- 
hendid ‘bi mannus wit' ; for ‘thou art the* 
Lord moost' hi3 ouer al erthe; thou art 
pacient", and myche” merciful, and ‘do- 
ynge penaunce” on the malices* of men. 
Treuli’, Lord, thou? bi thi goodnesse hast* 
bihi3t penauncet of for3yuenesse of synnes; 
and thou, God? of iust men, hast not set 
penaunce to iust men, to Abraham, Ysaac®, 


+ This is the 
preyere of Ma-, 
nasses, but it is 
not in Ebren, 
nether it is of 
the text. Lire 
here. C. 


+ penaunce ; 

that is, for3y- 
nynge synnes 
for repenting 
of men. c. 


n that c. the whiche £. 


kOm.1. 1{fulfillid rvs, ™ Sothliins. » the 

t writing 1N. writing he sente out hise lettris s. 
w the Lord 

athatr. and ins. © hem ns. 
bh the which name 1. which name ns. 

nOm. ins. © Sotheli to hem that 
t bi mannus wickidnesse p. Om. 1x. 8 Om. Ns. 
w forthinkynge rvs. * malice rns. Y certis 1Ns. 
© to Ysaac s. 


Z of Jacob s. 


476 


wickidnesses®. I am myche croked with 
myche bond of yren, and there is not 
ajeyn brething to me; for J stirede thi 
wrath, and euyl before thee I dide, set- 
tyng abomynacyouns and multiplying of- 
fenciouns. And nowe I bowe the knees 
of myn herte, preyinge of thee goodnesse, 
Lord. I synnede, Lord, I synnede, and 
my wickidnesse? I knowe. I aske, prey- 
inge thee, Lord; for3eue to me, for3eue 
to me, ne togidre leese thou me with my 
wickidnesses4, ne without eend reserue 
thou enyls to me. For" vnworthi thou 
schalt sauen me after thi grete mercy, 
and I schal preysen thee euermore alle 
the days of my lyue; for thee preyseth 
al the vertue of heuens, and to thee is 
glorie in to world‘ of worldis. Amen. 


Here eendith the secounde boke of 
Paralipomenon. Blesside be the Holy 
Trynyte®. 


© wickenessis c. P wickenesse c. 


Il. PARALIPOMENON. 


4 wickenessis c. 


XXXVIT. 


and Jacob’, to hem that synneden not 
ajens thee®. For‘ Y haue synned more 
than the noumbre is of the grauel of the 
see; my wickidnessis ben multiplied. Y 
am bowid with myche® boond of yrun, 
and no brething is to me; for Y haue 
stirid thi wrathfulnesse, and Y haue doon 
yuel bifor thee,‘and Y haue set! abhomy- 
naciouns, and ‘Y haue multiplied* offen- 
siouns!. And now Y bowe the knees of 
myn herte, and biseche™ goodnesse" of 
thee, Lord. Y haue synned®, Lord; Y haue 
synned?, and Y knowleche4 my wickid- 
nesse. Y axe’, and preye’ thee, Lord ; for- 
3yue thou to me‘, for3yue thou" to me’; 
leese thou me not togidire with my wickid- 
nessis, nether reserue” thou* yuels to me 
withouten ende. For, Lord, biY thi greet 
merci thou? schalt saue me vnworthi?, 
and> Y schal herie thee euere in alle the 
daies of my lijf; for al the vertut of 
heuenes herieth® thee, and to thee is glorie 
in to worldis of worldis. Amen. 


Flere endith the seeounde book of 
Paralipomenon, and here bigynneth the 
Jirste book of Esdre*. 


tTFor me ge pr.m. sOm. nu. tworldusc. " Here 


endith the secounde book of Paralypomenon, and now bigynneth the proloog on the three bookis of Esdre. a. 


Here endith the secounde booc of Paralipomynon, and bigynneth the booc of Esdre the firste. E. 


rubric in CFH. 


No final 


4 to Jacob s. ¢ thee thou setitst not penaunce, ut Ns. f But for 1. For that n. Forthi that s. & bound s. 


ha greet 1ns. i settyng in me 1s. settinge N. ‘multipliynge thin in. multipliyng ajens me this.  confes~ 
siouns s. ™Ibiseche ins. " the goodnesse ins. °synned greetli s. P synned greuousli in thi sizts. Uknow- 
leche to thee s. * axe merey 1s. $1 preie ns. * me my synne 1s. thou tins. VY mefor thi holi name, 
Lords. Wkepeins.  *Om.p.  Yaftirins. J érist thatthous.  moost ynworthi wrecche s. 
> Om.s. © pretsithins. 4 Here endith the secunde book of Paralipomenon, and bigynnith a prolog on 
Esdras the I. G. Heere endith the secounde book of Paralipomynon. 1c. Here endeth the seconde book of 
Paralipomenon ; se now the prolog of Esdre. x. Here endith the secounde book of Paralipomenon, and here 
bigynneth a prologe on the firste book of Esdre. m. Here endith the secounde book of Paralipomenon, and 
bigynneth the prologe on the bookis of Esdre and Neome. 0. Here endith Parilypomynon, and biginneth 
Esdre the Firste. s. No final rubric in evr. 


+ vertu; that 
is, alle tho or- 
dris of aungels. 
Live here. c. 


I. ESDRAS. 


[Prologue on the First book of Esdras. | 


Tus firste book of Esdre, whiche was a wurthi man among Jewis, and writer of 
the lawe of God, tellith, that Cyrus, the king of Persis, stirid by the Spirit of God, 
ordeynde Esdre, the scryuein, ledere to al the peple of Juda, that was translatid in to 
Babiloyne, to bringe hem a3en in to her lond, with alle the vessels that weren of the 
hous of the Lord, and 3af gold and siluer in greet plente, to make sacrifise to the Lord 
in Jerusalem. : 


[Prologue to the books of Esdras*.] 


WHETHER it be hardere to do that 3ee asken, or to denyen, I haue not 3yt demed ; 
for nouther to 30u any thing comaundende is of sentence to forsaken, and the gretnesse 
of charge put vpon oure nollis bereth doun, that rathere it be to fallen doun vndir the 
berthene, than to reren. The studies of enuyouse men ne3hen to this, that alle thing 
that we wryten, weenen repref wrthi, and other while concience repugnende a3en hem- 
self, opinli thei to-tern that thei reden priveli; in so myche that I am constreyned to 
crien, and sein, Lord, deliuere my soule fro wicke® lippis, and fro a trecherous tunge. 
The thridde 3er is that euer mor 3ee wrijten and a3een wrijten, that the boc of Esdre 
and Ester I translate® to 30u fro Ebrue, as thof? 3ee han not Grekis® and’ Latynes® 
volumus, or what euere thing that is that of vs is turned, not anon of alle men it be to 
be dispisid. In vein forsothe, as seith sum man, to enforcen, ne other thing in trauailing 
sechen! but hate, is of vttermost wodnesse. And so, I beseche 3ou, my derworthest 
Domynyon and Rogacian, that 3e apa3ed bi priuat lessoun, ber not out the bokisin to 
comun, lest 3ee profre metis to vggli men; and eschewe 3ee the pride of hem, that onli 
to demen of othere, and thei themselue knewen no thing to do. If any forsothe of 
brethern ben, to whom ouren displesen not, to them 3iueth a saumpler, amonestende 
that the Ebrue namus, of the whiche in this volume is gret plente, distinctli and bi 
spacis thei transcryue; forsothe no thing it profitide to hau amendid bokis, but the 
amending be kept bi diligence of writeris. Ne any man moue it, that 0 boc is maad of 
vs, ne delite he in the sweuenes of the writen thingus withoute autorite of the thridde 
and of the ferthe boc; for and anentis the Ebrues the woordis of Esdre and of Noemye 
in o volume ben togidere drawen, and thoo thingus that ben not had anentis hem, ‘ne 
ben not* of the foure and twenti olde men, ben worthi to be cast awei aferr. If any 
man forsothe a3en legge to vs the seuenti remenoures, of whom the saumpleris the 
diuersete shewith hem to-torn and turned vpsodoun, ne forsothe it mai not ben 


@ This prologue is from . 


2 Prolougus rm. No initial rubric in act. > wickid an et K passim. translatide K. 430f Fr. © Grnes nm. 
nex. & Latinc. » Om. x. isechyng x. * nethir ben x. 


478 I. ESDRAS. 


afermed soth that that is diuers, sendeth hym to the euangelies, in the whiche many 
thingus ben put of the olde testament, the! whiche anent the seuenti remenoures ben 
not had, as that, For Nazare he shal ben clepid; and, Fro Egipt I clepede my sone; 
and, They shul seen in whom thei pungeden; and manye othere thingus, the whiche 
we reseruen to a braddere werc; and asketh of hym, where thei ben writen; and whan 
thei scl] not moun tellen, rede 3ee of thoo saumpleris, the whiche, sum time maad 
of vs, ben stikid eche dai with the tungus of euele spekeris. But that to short tretee 
I come; certis that I‘am to concluden™ is most ri3twis; haue I maad any thing that is 
not had in Greee, or that otherwise is had than off me is turned 2 Wherto the remenour 
thei to-tern? Aske thei the Ebrues, and bi thoo® autouris, to my translacioun or 3iue thei 
feith or withdrawe. Certis another is, for thei wiln myssein to me, that it® is seid, with 
closid e3en, and thei folewen not the studie and the weel willing of Greekis, the whiche 
aftir the seuenty remenoures, now shinende the euangelie of Crist, and curiousli reden 
Jewis and Hebionytis, remenoures of the olde lawe, Aquilam, that is, Symachum?, and 
Theodocian, and bi the trauaile of Origenes thei halewiden to4 chirchis in sixe maner 
translaciouns. Myche more Latin men a3ten to be kinde, that thei beholden Grece 
gladende of hem any thing to borewen. The firste forsothe is of gret costis and of dif- 
ficulte withoute ende, to moun han alle the exsaumpleris ; also theraftir thei that han, 
and ben vnkunnende of Ebrue speche, more shuln erren, vnknowende who of manye 
trewliere seith. The whiche also fel sim time to a most wis man amongis the Grekis, 
that otherwhile leuende the sens‘ of scripture he folewide the errour of eche remenour. 
Wee forsothe that’ nameli of Ebru tunge han a litil kunnyng, and Latin speche 3it 
hider to failith not to vs, that of othere more we moun demen, and thoo thingus that 
wee vsself* vnderstonden, in onre owne tunge shewin. And so thof the serpentt hisse 
and the ouercomere if he throwe not breinyngus vp, neuer my speche shal be stille, 
Crist helpende ; also the tunge kut of it shal blaberen. Rede thei that wiln; that wiln 
not, caste thei awei. And serche thei out the letteris, and falsli acuse thei the lettris; 
more bi 3oure charite I shal ben stirid to studie, than I shal ben agast bi the hate and 
the" bachiting of lem. 
Another prolog’. 


Esdras and Neemye, helpere”, that is, and* coumfortour fro the Lord, in o volume 
ben drawen. Thei enstoren the temple; the wallis of the cite thei maken vp. And al that 
cumpanye of the puple turnende a3een in to the kuntre, and the descripcioun of prestus, 
and of Leuitus, and of the conuertide to the fole of Irael, and by alle the meynes of theY 
wallis and touris the werkis deuidid, other thing bern? in the rinde, other thing they 
holdin in the mar3. 


Here folewith the comendacioun of E'sdre. 


This* aftir Jude brend vp of the Caldeis,-whil the Jewis weren turned a3een into 
Jerusalem, alle the bokis of the olde testament reparaileide, and enspirid with Godis 
Spirit alle the volumys of profetis, that weren of the Jentilis corupt amendide; wher- 
fore it is writen, Esdras ste3ide vp fro Babiloyne, and he a swift scribe in the lawe of 
Moises, swift, that is, for more redi figuris of lettris, than the Ebrues beforhond 
hadden, he fond. 

Here eendeth the prolog of E'sdre; se now the book». 


10m. x. M™haueseid x. thilke aeruK. °Om.x. PSmachumc. 4dthe x. ‘*°sentense 4. 
Om. 4. touresilfx. wOmx Prologus 4. The proloug. r. Another prolog on Esdre. x. No 
rubric in cuz. Whelp uw. *Om.cux. YOm.x«. thei berenx. 4 This Esdre x. % From x. No 
final rubric in the other Mss. 


I, 1—7. 


Here begynneth the fyrst book of 
L'sdre®. 


CARS I. 


1 IN the firste 3er of Ciri, king of Persis, 
that the woord of the Lord of the mouth 
of Jeremye were fulfild, the Lord rerede 
the spirit of Ciri, king of Persis, and 
ladde ouer the vois in al his rewme also 

2bi scripture, seiende, These thingus seith 
Cirus, king of Persis, Alle the renmes of 
the erthe the Lord God of heuene and 
of* erthe hath 3iue to me, and he co- 
maundede to me, that I shulde bilde to 
hym an hous in Jerusalem, that is in 

3Jude. Who is in 3ou of al the puple of 
hym? be the God of hym with hym; ste3e 
he vp in to Jerusalem, that is in Jude, 
and bilde he vp an hous of the Lord God 
of Irael; he is God, that is in Jerusalem. 
4And alle the othere in alle placis, wher 
euere thei dwellen, helpe thei hym; the 
men of his place, with siluer, and gold, 
and substaunce, and bestis, out take that 
wilfulli thei offre to the temple of God, 
5that is in Jerusalem. And the princis of 
the fadris of Juda and of Beniamyn, and 
prestis, and Leuitus, eche whos spirit God 
rerede, risen, that thei ste3en vp to® bilden 
the temple of the Lord, that was in Je- 
6rusalem. And alle that weren in the 
enuyroun helpiden the hondis of hem, in 
siluerene, and goldene vesselis, in sub- 
staunce, in necessarie thing, in bestis, out 
take thoo thingus that thei hadden offrid 
7wilfully. Forsothe king Cirus bro3te 
forth the vesselis of the temple of the 
Lord, the whiche Nabugodonosor hadde 


¢ From «4. 


I. ESDRAS. 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


479 


Here bigynneth the firste book of 
Esdre*. 


CAP. I. 


In the firste 3eer of Cirus, kyng of1 
Persis, that the word of the Lord bi the 
mouth of Jeremye schulde be fillid®, the 
Lord reiside the spirit of Cyrus, kyng of 
Persis; and he pupplischide a vois in al 
his rewme, 3e, bi the® scripture‘, and® seide, 
Cirus, the kyng of Persis, seith these 
thingis, The Lord God of heuene jaf‘ to 
me alle the rewmes of erthe, and he co- 
maundide® to me, that Y schulde bilde to 
hym an hows in Jerusalem, which" is in 
Judee!. Who is among 30u of al his pu-3 
plej? his God be with hym; stie* he! in to 
Jerusalem, which™ is in Judee", and bilde 
he the hows of the Lord God of Israel; 
he is God, which is in Jerusalem. And°4 
alle othere? men, ‘that dwellen4 where 
euere’ in alle places, helpe’ hymt; the" 
men of her place helpeY in” siluer, and 
gold, and catel*, and scheep, outakunY that 
that thei offren wilfulli to the temple of 
God, which? is in Jerusalem. And@ thes 
prineis of fadris® of Juda and of Benia- 
myn risiden’, and the preestis, and de- 
kenes*, and ech man whos spirit God 
reiside, for to stief to® bilde the temple 
of the Lord, that was in Jerusalem. Ande 
alle men that weren ‘in cumpas* helpiden 
the hondis of hem’, in‘ vesselis of siluer, 
and of gold, ‘in catel', in™ purtenaunce 
of houshold, and in®™ alle® werk beestis, 
outakun? these thingis which thei of- 
friden bi fred wille. Forsothe™ kyng Cyrus7 
brou3te forth the vessels of the temple of 


4QOm.c. €¢ that thet an. 


@ From umm. The firste book of Esdras. env. Of Esdre Book. 0. No initial rubric in the other Mss.» ful- 


fillid ins. 
3oue INs. 


cOm. A sec. m. Ss. 
& he comaundide s. 
kand styes. !he up tvs. 

q Om. rns. * eutere thei dwellen 1Ns. 
house of the Lord s. Om. IN. 
overs. % that Ns. 
bOm.ins. ©¢ the fadris ins. 
salem for to 1n. in to Jerusalem for to s. 
ihem that bildiden the temple s. k with ins. 
‘with ins. © Om. Beisvw. 


4 writyng 1Ns. 
h that ins. 
m that INs. 


€ he sente and 1. he sente out hise lettris and s. 
i Juda ins. 
n Juda ns. 
8 helpe thei ins. 
Vv helpe thei 1s. 
a And thanue 1. Om. x. And whanne the king had 3oue this coumfort to the peple s. 
d resen up 1. risiden up Ns. 
hin cumpas aboule iN. dvwelling bi cumpas about Jerusalem se 
l with her substaunce 1s. 
P withoute 3. outakin or ouer s. 


f hath 
J peple, that hath wille to help this bytdyng s. 
© helpful to his peple, ands. __P the othere c. 
t hym thal bildith 1. him that wold bylde the 
Wwith ins.  -* with catel ins. Y ontakin or 
e the dekenes s. fstie up ins. & to Jeru- 
m with ins. and ELO. 


q her freins. ¥ And ns. 


480 


taken fro Jerusalem, and hadde put hem 
sin the temple of his god. Forsothe Cirus, 
king of Persis, bro3te them forth bi the 
hond of Mitridatis, sone of Gazabar ; and 
he noumbride hem to Zazabazar, prince 
gof Jude. And this is the noumbre of 
hem; goldene violis, thretti; siluerenn 
violis, a thousend; knyues, nyne and 
lotwenti; goldenn cuppis, thretti; siluerenn 
cuppis, two thousend foure hundrid and 
11ten; othere vesselis, a thousend; alle the 
vesselis, goldene and siluerene, fine thou- 
send and foure hundrid. Alle Zazebazar 
toc, with hem that stezeden vp fro the 
transmygracioun of Babiloyne, in to Je- 
rusalem. 


CAPRA TL 


| These forsothe ben the men, sonus of 
the prouynce, that ste3eden vp fro thef 
caitifte, that Nabugodonosor, king of Ba- 
biloyne, hadde taken ouer in to Babiloine ; 
and thei ben turned a3een in to Jerusa- 
2lem and Jude, eche’ in to his cite, the 
whiche camen with Zorobabel; Jesua, 
Neeinya, Saraia, Rahelaia, Mordochaa, 
Belsan, Mesfar, Begnai, Reum, Baana. 
The noumbre of the men of the puple of 
sIrael; sones of Fares, two thonsend an 
hundrid and two and seuenti; the sonus 
of Arethi, senene hundrid fiue and se- 
4uenti; the sonus of Sefesia, thre hundrid 
sand two and seuenti; the sonus of Aria, 
«seuene hundrid and fiue and seuenti; the 
sonus of Fee and of Moab, sones of Josue 
and of Joab, two thousend nyne hundrid 
jzand twelue; the sones of Elam, a thou- 
send two hundrid and foure and fifti; 
sthe sonus of Sechua, nyne hundrid and 
ofiue and fourty; the sonis of Zaahai, 


I. ESDRAS. 


I. 8—II. g. 


the Lord, whiche’ Nabugodonosor hadde 

take fro Jerusalem, and hadde set thot in 

the temple of his god. Sotheli® Cyrus,s 

the kyng of Persis, brou3te forth tho’ bi 

the hond of Mytridatis, sone” of Gazabar ; 

and* noumbride tho to” Sasabazar, the 

prince of Juda. And? this is the noumbreg 

of tho* vessels; goldun violis, thritti; sil- 

uerne viols, a thousynde; ‘grete knyues, 

nyne and twenti®; goldun® cuppist, thrit- + goldun cup- 
ti; siluerne cuppis, two thousynde foure lott is eal 
hundrid and ten; otheref vessels, a thon- “7” ""* 
synde; alle the vessels of gold and sil-11 

uere’ weren fyue thousynde foure! hun- 

drid. Sasabazar* took alle vessels!, with 

hem that stieden™ fro the transmygra- 

cioun" of Babiloyne, in to Jerusalem. 


CAR. Uy 


Forsothe® ,these ben the sones of pro-1 
uynceP}, thatt stieden™ fro the caitifte, 
which Nabugodonosor, kyng* of Babi- 
loyne, hadde translatid in to Babiloyne; 
and thei turneden a3en in to Jerusalem 
and in to Juda, ech mam in to his citee, 
that camen with Zorobabel ; Jesuat, Nee-2 
mie, Saray, Rahelaie, Mardochaa, Belsan, 
Mesfar, Begnay, Reum, Baana". This is 
the noumbre of men of the sones of Is- 
rael; the sones of Phares’, two” thou-3 
synde an hundrid and two and seuenti; 
the sones of Arethi, seuene* hundrid and 
fyue and senenti; the sones of Sephezie, 4 
threY hundrid and two and senenti; thes 
sones of Area, seuene? hundrid and fyue 
and seuenti; the sones of Phe and ofe6 
Moab, sones* of Josue and of Joab, twei? 
thousynde nyne® hundrid and twelue; the7 
sones of Helam, a thousynde two hun- 
drid and foure and fifti; the sones ofs 
Zechua, nyne® hundrid and fyne and 


i prouynee ; 
that is, of Ju- 
dee. Lire 
here. c. 


£Om.c. § eche one £. echon cri. 
Sthe whiche1. themins. tAndins. tho vesselsis. the soneins. and the kyng in. 
yintox. Om.s. 2Om.s. thei. >a thonsand and nyne and thritti grete knyues ns. ¢ thritti 
goldun ins. 4Om.in. eandtwos. fand othere rns.  & violis, vesselis s. » of siluere ins. i and 


foure ins. & And Sasabazar 1Ns. 
cioun ether ouer passing s. © And 1NS. 


up Ns. § the kyng scperGHKLMOPQRUWb. 
Phares 1s. W weren two Ns. * weren seuene INS. 
sones ns. b weren two INS. C and nyne A. 


| thes vessels 1x. the veaselis s. 
P the prouynce 1Ns. 
' that is, Jesua 18. 


a weren a NS. 


™ stieden up INS. ™ transmygra- 
awhiche ns. ° 3eden up 1. stieden 

uand Baanains.  ¥ the lynage of 
Y weren thre N. 2 weren seuene 1N. 8 and the 
© weren nyne NS. 


II. 10——40. 


10seuene hundrid and sixti; the sonus of 

Baany, sixe hundrid and two and fourti ; 
tisonus of Bebai, sixe hundrid and thre and 
12twenti; sonus of Asgad, a thousend two 
13hundrid and two and twenti; sonus of 

Adonycam, sixe hundrid and sixe and 
14sixti; sonus of Beguai, two thousend and 
15 sixe and fifti; sonus of Adin, foure hun- 
16drid and foure and fifti; sonys of Aser, 

that weren of Ezechie, nynti and ei3te; 
17sonus of Besai, thre hundrid and thre and 
18twenti; sonus of Jora, an hundrid and 
19twelue; sonus of Ason, two hundrid and 
20thre and twenti; sonus of Jebar, nynti 
2iand fine; sonus of Bethlem, an hundrid 
22and thre and twenti; the men of Necofa, 
a3sixe and fifti; the men of Anatot, an 
24hundrid and ei3te and twenti; sonus of 
25 Asmoneth, two” and fourti; sonus of Ca- 

riathiarym, Cefiara, and Berhoc, seuene 
2éhundrid and thre and fourti; sonus of 

Arama and of Gaba, sixe hundrid and 
2700n and twenti; men of Machinas, an 
2shundrid and two and twenti; men of 

Bethel and of Gai, two hundrid and thre 
29and twenti; sonus of Nebo, two and fifti; 
sosonys of Megbis, an hundrid and sixe 
3iand fifti; the sonus of the tother Elam, 

a thousend two hundrid and foure and 
sefifti; the sonus of Arym, thre hundrid 
a3and twenti; the sonus of Ladadin and of 

Ono, seven hundrid and fine and twenti; 
34sonus of Jericho, thre hundrid and fiue 
3sand fourti; sonus of Sanaa, thre thou- 
3csend sixe! hundrid and thretti; prestus, 

sonus of Idaia,in the hous of Jesue, nyne 
37 hundrid senenti* and thre; sonus of Em- 
38 meor, a thousend and two and fifti; sonus 

of Fesur, a thousend two hundrid and 
39 Seuene and fourti; sonus of Arym, a thou- 
4o send and seuentene ; Leuitus, the sonus of 

Jesue and of Cedinyel, sonus of Odonia, 


h an hundrid and two a. 


& weren sixe INS. 
© Om. Is. 


f weren seuene NS. 
™ weren sixe NS. " weren two NS. 
3 weren thre ns. + weren an NS. 
Y weren sixe NS. 2% mweren an Ns. 
© weren sixe NS. f Om. In. & weren two Ns. 
l weren thre Ns. ™ weren seuene INS. 
nyne Ins. T° werena Ns. 


VOL. II. 


I. ESDRAS. 


iiand sixe 4H. 


h weren sixe Ns. 

P weren foure INS. 
Y twenti BC sec. m. XXill. v. 
b of Cephiara 1ns. 
h weren two Ns. 


U weren two NS. 
® weren two Ns. 


D weren thre Ns. 


481 


fourti; the sones of Zahai, seuenef hun-9 
drid and sixti; the sones of Bany, sixe’ 10 
hundrid and two and fourti; the sones of 11 
Bebai, sixe" hundrid and thre and twenti; 
the sones' of Azgad, a‘ thousynde two! 12 
hundrid and two and twenti; the sones13 
of Adonycam, sixe™ hundrid and sixe and 
sixti; the sones of Beguai, two" thou-14 
synde two hundrid and°® sixe and fifti; 
the sones of Adyn, fonre? hundrid and15 
foure and fifti; the sones of Ather, that 16 
weren of Ezechie, nynti™ and ci3te; the17 
sones of Besai, thre’ hundrid and thre and 
twenti; the sones of Jora, ant hundrid 18 
and twelue; the sones of Asom, two" hun-19 
drid and thre and thrittiY; the sones of 20 
Gebar weren nynti and fyue; the sones2! 
of Bethleem weren* an hundrid and ei3te 
and twenti; the men* of Nechopha, sixeY 22 
and fifti; the men of Anathot, an? hun-23 
drid and ei3te and twenti; the sones of 24 
Asmaneth, two* and fourti; the sones of 25 
Cariathiarym, Cephiara, and Berhoc, se- 
uene® hundrid and thre and fourti4; the 26 
sones of Arama and of Gaba, sixe® hun- 
drid and oon and twenti; men of ‘Math-27 
mas, an hundrid and two and twenti; 
men of Bethel and of Gay, twos hundrid 28 
and thre and twenti; the sones of Nebo, 29 
two" and fifti; the sones of Nebgis, aniso 
hundrid and sixe and fifti; the sones of31 
the tother Helam, a* thousynde two hun- 
drid and foure and fifti; the sones of32 
Arym, thre! hundrid and twenti; the sones 33 
of Loradid and of Ono, seuene™ hundrid 
and fyue and twenti; the sones of Jerico, 34 
thre" hundrid°® and fyue and fourti; thess 
sones of Sanaa, thre? thousynde sixe hun- 
drid and thritti; preestis, the sones of36 
Idaie, in the hows of Jesue, nyne? hun- 
drid and thre and seuenti; the sones of37 
Emmeor, a’ thousynde and two and fifti; 


k and seuenti 4H. 


sones weren N. kK werenas. land twoc. 
awhiche ns. ' weren nynti Ns. 
wOm.1. * sones Ns. 
© weren seuene ins. 4 fyfti N. 
iwerenan xs. werena ns. 


othousand N. P weren thre Ns. 4 weren 


3Q 


432 


41 seuenti and foure; chauntoures, sonus of 
Asaf, an hundrid and ei3te and twenti; 
42the sonus of the! porteris, sones of Sel- 
lum, the sonus of Ather, sonus of Thel- 
mon, the sonus of Accub, ‘the sonus™ of 
Aritha, the sonus of Sobar, the sonus of 
Sobai, alle, an hundrid and ei3te and 
43thretti; sodeknys, sonus of Ozai, the 
sonus of Azufa, the sonus of Thebaoth, 
44the sonus of Ceros, the sonus of Cisaa, the 
45sonus of Fadon, the sonus of Jebona, the 
46sonus of Agoba, the sonus of Accub, the 
sonus of Accab, the sonus of Selmai, the 
47sonus of Annan, the sonus of Gaddei, the 
assonus of Gaer, the sonus of Rahaia, the 
sonus of Jasin, the sonus of Nethoda, the 
49sonus of Gasem, the sonus of Asa, the 
sosonus of Fasea, the sonus of Besee, the 
sonus of Asennaa, the sonus of Numyn, 
51 the sonus of Nechusym, the sonus of Be- 
chne, the sonus of Accufa, the sonus of 
52 Assur, the sonus of Besuth, the sonus of 
53 Maida, the sonus of Arsa, the sonus of 
Berchos, the sonus of Cizara, the sonus 
540f Thema, the sonus of Nazia, the sonus 
550f Acufa, the sonus of the" seruauns of 
Salamon, the sonus of Sothelthei, the 
sonus of Sofereth, the sonus of Feruda, 
s6the sonus of Jala, the sonus of Derchon, 
57 the sonus of Jedel, the sonus of Safatha, 
the sonus of Athil, the sonus of Fesore- 
thei, that weren of Azebam, the sonus 
ssof Ammy; alle the sodeknys, and the 
sonus of the seruauns of Salamon, thre 
s9hundrid and nynti and two. And these 
- that stejeden vp fro Thelmela, and The- 
lersa, Cherub, and Don, and Mer, and 
thei my3ten not shewe the hous of ther 
faders and ther sed, whether of Irael 
o thei weren ; the sonus of Delaia, the sonus 
of Tobia, the sonus of Nechoda, sixe hun- 
‘61 drid and two and fifti; and of the sonus 
of prestus, the sonus of Obia, the sonus of 


10m. «4. 


8 werenawNs. twerenaNs. 4 the sones INS. 
y the sones ns. “alle thes 1s. ® the sones Ins. 
fand Thelersa c. fro Thelersa 1ns. 
1 seed or progeny s. 
the Ns. 


m Israel, weren thes 1s. 


I. ESDRAS. 


™M sone 4. 


Vv weren foure Ns. 
b whiche n. 
& fro Cherub ins. 
" that weren sixe 1. whiche weren sixe ns. 


Il. 41 —6r1. 


the sones of Phesur, a* thousynde two3s 

hundrid and seuene and fourti; the sones39 

of Arym, at thousynde and seuentene ; 

dekenes, the sones of Jesue and of Cedy-40 

nyel, sones" of Odonye, foureY and seuenti ; 

syngeris, the sones of Asaph, an” hundrid 41 

and ei3te and twenti; the sones of por-42 

teris, sones* of Sellum, sones of Ather, 

sones of Thelmon, sonesY of Accub, sones 

of Aritha, sones of Sobar, sones of Sobai, 

alle? weren an hundrid and ei3te and 

thritty; Nathynneisf, the sones of Osai, 43+ Nathynneis; 

sones* of Asupha, sones* of Thebaoth, ian ae 

sones* of Ceros, sones* of Sisaa, sones* of 44 "go the haws 

Phadon, sones* of Jebana, sones* of Agaba, 45 pee 

sones? of Accub, sones* of Accah, sones* of 46 

Selmai, sones* of Annam, sones* of Gad-47 

del, sones* of Gaer, sones* of Rahaia, sones® 48 

of Rasyn, sones* of Nethoda, sones* of Ga- 

zem, sones® of Asa, sones* of Phasea, sones* 49 

of Besee, sones* of Asennaa, sones® of Nu-50 

myn, sones* of Nethusym, sones* of Beth-51 

uth, sones? of Acupha, sones* of Aryn, 

sones® of Besluth, sones* of Maida, sones* 52 

of Arsa, sones* of Bercos, sones? of Sisara, 53 

sones* of Thema, sones* of Nasia, sones® of 54 

Acupha, the sones of the seruauntis{ of 55 a heme 

Salomon, the sones of Sothelthei, the  seruauntis of 
Salomon, that 

sones of Soforeth, the sones of Pharuda,  weren assigned 

the sones of Asa, the sones of Delcon, these‘ thine 

sones of Gedeb, the sones of Saphata, the 57 fa eee 


sones of Atil, the sones of Phecerethi, tho thingis that 
weren worthy 
that weren of Asebam, the sones of tobe reparelid. 


Lire here. c. 


Ammy ; alle the Nathyneis, and the sonesss 
of the® seruauntis of Salomon weren' thre 
hundrid nynti and tweyne. And thei thats 
stieden® fro Thelmela, Thelersa‘, Cherubé, 
and’ Don, and Meyi, and my3ten not 
schewe the hows* of her fadris and her 
seed!, whether thei weren of Israel™; the 60 
sones of Delaya, the sones of Thobie, the 
sones of Nethoda, sixe" hundrid and two 
and fifti; and of the sones of prestis, the® 61 


"Om. 4. 


x the sones INs. 
€ stieden up INs. 
k hows or meynee Is. 
9° weren 


W weren an NS. 
¢Omwn. 4Om.1. 


hfro us. i fro Mey Ins. 


Il, 62—IIl. 2. 


Accos, the sonus of Bersellai, that toc a 
wif of the do3tris of Bersellai Galaditis, 
and he is clepid bi the name of hem; 
62these so3ten the scripture of ther gene- 
logie, and founden not, and thei ben cast 
czawei fro presthod. And Athersatha seide 
to them, that thei shulde not eten of the 
holi of halewis, to the time that ther 
64 Shulde risen a ta3t prest and perfit®. Al 
the multitude as o man, two and fourti 
65 thousend thre hundrid and sixti, out take 
the seruauntis of hem and hand maid- 
enes, that weren senen thousend thre 
hundrid seuene and thretti; and in hem 
singeres and singeressis, two hundrid. 
66 The hors of hem, sixe hundrid and sixe 
and thretti; the mulis of hem, foure hun- 
67 drid and fiue and fourti; the camailis of 
hem, foure hundrid and fiue and thretti ; 
the assis of hem, sixe thousend seuene 
cs hundrid and twenti. And of the princis 
of the? fadris, whan thei shulden gon in 
to the temple of the Lord, that is in Je- 
rusalem, wilfulli thei offriden in to the 
hous of God, to it to be maad out in his 
e9place; after ther strengthis thei 3euen4 
the costis of the werk, of gold, shillingis 
fourti thousend and a thousend; of sil- 
uer, besauntus fiue thousent ; and prestus 
zo clothis an hundrid. ‘Thanne dwelten the 
prestus and the Lenitus of the puple, and 
the singeres, and porteris, and sodeknys 
in ther cites, and al Israel in their cytees. 


CAP. III. 


i And now was comen the seuenthe 
monyth, and the sonus of Irael weren in 
ther cites. Thanne is gedered the puple 

gas oon in to Jerusalem. And ther ros 
Josue, the sone of Josedeeh, and the bre- 
thern of hym, prestus, and Sorobabel, 


oa perfijt 4. 


P the sones crns. 4 and the sones 18. 
i1Ns. ™ therfore cast 18. 
al c. ¥ beynge as 1. was as N. 

b sixtt men 8. © withoute 1. 

bsyngsteres 1. 1Om.1. * Om. 1. 
4 place where it was arst 18. 
Nathyney ts. 


1Om. 1. 


Vv Israel dwelliden s. 


I. ESDRAS. 


P Om. 4. 


t the whicli 1. and the sones which n. 
va perfit 1s. a perfit man Nn. 
Z man eonsentide hereto s. 
4 her handmaydens 1ns. 
™ that 1Ns. 

t aftir her power thei ins. 

Ww whanne AINs. 


483 


sones of Obia, sonesP of Accos, sones? of 
Berzellai, which" took a wijf of the don3- 
tris of Bersellai Galadite, and was* clepid 
bi the name of hem; these sou3ten the 62 


scripture of her genologie*, and foundent ee 
° that ts. - 
not, and thei weren cast" out of preest- rede c 


hod. And Attersathat seide to hem, that 63 + Adersatha; 
thei schulden not ete of the hooli of hooli{ ee 
thingis, til a wijs preest and perfit” roos”. oa ee 
Al* the multitude asY o man”§, two* and 64 Pees 
fourti thousynde thre hundrid and sixti, 


prestis aloone. 
6 Lire here. c. 
outakun® the seruauntis of hem and ‘the 65§ 6 man; that 


5 : ee 
handmaydis?, that® weren seuene thou- ra will tw 
synde thre hundrid and seuene and thretti ; a A a 


and’ among hem weren’ syngeris and ‘re. ¢. 
syngeressis twei hundrid. The horsis of 66 
hem weren sixe hundrid and sixe and 
thritti; the mulis of hem weren' foure 
hundrid and fyue and fourti; the camels 67 
of hem weren* foure hundrid and fyue 
and thritti; the assis of hem weren! sixe 
thousynde seuene hundrid and twenti. 
And of the princes of fadris, whanne theiss 
entriden in to the temple|| of the Lord, 
which™ is in Jerusalem, thei offriden" of 
fre® wille in to the hows of God, to bilde 
it in his? place1; thei" 3auen ‘bi her my3tes* 69 
the costis of the werk, oon and fourti 
thousynde platis of gold; fyuet thousynde 
besauntis of siluer ; and preestis clothis an 
hundrid. Therfor preestis and dekenes of 70 
the puple, and syngeris, and porteris, and 
Nathynneis® dwelliden in her citees, and 
al Israel” in her cytees. 


|| Zemple ; that 
is, the place, 
where the tem- 
ple was. Lire 
here. Cc. 


CAP. III. 


And thanne” the seuenthe monethe was ; 
comun, and the sones of Israel weren in nee 
2 
her citees. Therfor* the puple was ga-2 4nd purpos, to 


“ $ the reising of 
derid as o man in to Jerusalem. And the auter, and 


of the founde- 


Josue, the sone of Josedech, roos¥, and iment of the 
hise britheren, prestis, and Zorobabel, femMe. Hire 


q 3euen to c. 


She was rns. ¢ founden 
W roos lp IN. roos up among hems. * And 
a weren two 1. and ther weren two NS. 

f Om. s. g Om. nN. 
© her fre ins. P the Ns. 
u the men of 


e whiche 1Ns. 
D offriden there s. 
8Om.1ns. and fyne INs. 
x And ins. Y roos up INS. 


3Q2 


484 


‘the sone of Salatiel, and the brethern 
of hym, and thei bilden™ vp ans auter of 
God of Irael, that thei offre in it brent 
sacrifises, as it is writen in the lawe off 
3 Moises, man of God. Forsothe thei set- 
ten an‘ auter vpon his feet, the puplis of 
londis ferende hem by enuyroun, and thei 
offriden vpon it brent sacrifise to the 
4Lord erli and at euen. And thei maden 
the solempnete of tabernaclis", as it is 
writen, and brent sacrifise alle da3es bi 
order, after the comaundid were of the 
sdai in his dai; and after this, contynuel 
brent sacrifise, bothe in calendis and in 
alle solempnetes of the Lord that weren 
halewid, and in alle thingis in the whiche 
6 3ifte was freli offrid to God. The firste 
dai of the seuenthe monyth thei begunne 
to offre brent sacrifise to the Lord; for- 
sothe the temple of God was not 3it 
7founded. And thei 3eue money to hew- 
eris of stonus, and to leieris’, and mete, 
and drink, and oile, to Sidones and Tires, 
that thei shulde bringen ceder trees fro 
Liban to the se of Joppen, after that 
Cirus, the king of Persis, had comaundid 
gto them. The secunde forsothe 3er of the 
comyng of hem to the temple of God in 
to Jerusalem, the secunde monyth, be- 
9 gunne Sorababel, the sone of Salatiel, and 
Josue, the sone of Josedech, and othere 
of the brethern of hem, prestus and Le- 
uitus, and alle that weren commen fro the 
caitifte in to Jerusalem; and thei ordein- 
eden Leuitus, fro twenti 3er and aboue, 
that thei shulden heejen the werk of the 
Lord; and Josue stod, and his sonus and 
his brethern, Cediniel and his sonus, and 
the sonus of Juda, as o man, that thei 
shulden stonden in vpon hem that diden 
werk in the temple of God; the sones of 
Benadab, sonus of hem and brethern of 
r bildiden «. 


sOm.c. tOm.c. 


Z therupon INS. 


a Andins. > upon 1ns. 
solempnytee INS. 


§ and thei offriden 1s. 


contynuel rvs. | and this thei diden s, 
POm. a, (the liggerisin. * Om. s. 
Babiloyne 1s. 


alle these stoden togidere s. 2 of 1Ns, 


I. ESDRAS. 


u the tabernacles c. 


¢ othere londis 1s. 
h sacrifices bi s. 
wrou3ten the werk of the day 1s. and in the day bi heest thei wrou3ten the werk of the day n. 
m Om. Nn. the solempnitees s. 
§ mounteyne INS. 
w bigunnen the werk of Goddis temple 1s. 


Ul. 3—9. 


the sone of Salatiel, and hise britheren, 
and thei bildiden the auter of God of Is- 
rael for to offre therynne? brent sacrifices, 
as it is writun in the lawe of Moises, the 
man of God. Forsothe® thei settiden the3 
auter on® his foundementis, while the pu- 
plis of londis® bi cumpas maden hem aferd, 
and thei offriden on‘ that auter brent sa- 
crifice® to the Lord in the morewtid and 
euentid. And thei maden solempnyteef of 4 
tabernaclis, a8 it is writun, and& brent sa- 
crifice® ech dai bi ordre, ‘bi the werk of 
the dai comaundid in his dai!, And afters 
this thei offriden contynuel* brent sacri- 
fice, bothe in calendis and in alle solemp- 
nytees of the Lord, that weren halewid, 
and! in alle solempnytees™, in whiche 3ifte” 
was offrid to the Lord bi fre wille. In6é 
the firste dai of the seuenthe monethe thei 
bigunnen to offre brent sacrifice to the 
Lord; certis the temple of God was not 
foundid 3it. But thei 3anen monei to7 
heweris® of stoon, and to? liggeris4 of 
stoon, and thei 3awenx mete, and drynke, 
and oile, to men of Sidon, and ‘to men' of 
Tire, that thei schulden brynge cedre trees 
fro the Liban* to the see of Joppe, bi 
that that Cirus, kyng' of Persis, hadde 
comaundid to hem. Forsothe® in the se-8 
counde 3eer of her comyng to the temple 
of God in Jerusalem, in the secounde 
monethe, Zorobabel, the sone of Salatiel, 
and Josue, the sone of Josedech, ando 
othere of her britheren, preestis and de- 
kenes, and alle that camen fro the caitifte’ 
in to Jerusalem, bigunnen”; and thei or- 
deyneden dekenes, fro twenti 3eer and 
aboue, for to haste the werk of the Lord; 
and Josue stood, and hise sones, and hise 
britheren, Cedynyel* and hise sones, and 
the sones of JudaY, as o man, to be. bisi 
ouer hem that maden the werk in? the 


V leggeris AEFH. 


dupon ins. © sacrifices xs. f the 
i and in the day bi the heest of the lawe thei 
k the 
neny 3ift s. ° the heweris 1s. 
tthe kyng in. %Andrns.  caitifte of 
x and Cedynyel ns. Y Juda dogidre 1. Juda; 


Il], 10—IV, 4. 


iohem, Leuitus. Thanne groundid of the 
masonus the temple of the Lord, prestus 
stoden in ther arai with trumpis, and 
Leuitus, sonus of Asaf, in cimbalis, that 
thei preise God bi the hond of Dauid, 
uking of Irael. And thei sungen togidere 
in ympnes and knouleching to the Lord, 
For ‘he is’ good, for in to withoute ende 
the merci of hym vpon Irael. Also al 
the puple criede out with a gret cry, in 
preisinge the Lord, for thi that the tem- 
iwple of the Lord was founded. Manie 
also of the prestis, and Leuitus, and the 
princis of fadris, and the eldere, that 
hadden seen the rathere temple, whan it 
was foundid, and this temple in the e3en 
of hem, wepten with a gret vois, and 
manye criende out in gladnesse rereden 
13Vp a vois; ne any man my3te knowen 
the vois of the cri of men gladende, and 
the vois of the weping of the puple; 
forsothe mengingli togidere the puple 
criede out with a gret cri, and the vois 
iwas herd aferr. Forsothe the enemys of 
Jude and of Beniamyn herden, for the 
sonus of caitifte shulden bilden vp the 
2temple to the Lord God of Irael; and, 
ne3hende to Sorobabel, and to the princis 
of fadris, seiden to hem, Bilde wee vp 
with 30u, for so as 3ee, wee sechen 3our 
God; lo! wee offren slain sacrifises fro 
the da3es of Assoroddon, king of Assur, 
3that bro3te vs hider. And Sorobabel 
seide to them, and Josue, and the tothere 
princis of the fadris of Irael, It is not to 
vs and to 30u, that wee bilde vp an hous 
to oure God; but wee vsself alone shul 
bilden vp to the Lord oure God, as to vs 
4Cirus, king of Persis, comaundede. It is 
do forsothe, that the puple of the lond 
shulde lette the hondis of the puple of 
Jude, and disturben” them in bilding. 


vOm. ce. 


a andtheins. > dekenes also1. Om. s. 
meutis s. f stoden synginge in 1Ns. 
knowleching s. * uponis. ! Om.ns. 
gladnesse N. 9 reisiden up 1Ns. 
the 1. peple bothe ioying and meping s. 
Jerusalem and byldide there s. a camen INS. 


!Om. s. 


mOm.1n. © And Ins. 


I. ESDRAS. 


¢ Om. 1n. weren bisi there aboute s. 
& preise ins.  hond or ordynaunce s. iin knowlechyng 1. in deuout 
™ si3en this Ns. 
¥ voice of preisyng 8. 

x voice of hem s. 
b thei seiden 1Ns. 
€ hidur in to this lond 1s. f Om. 1Ns. & bilde togidre ins. } bilde an hous 1s. 


485 


temple of God; the* sones of Benadab, her 
sones and her britheren, dekenes), ‘weren 
bisy®. Therfor whanne the temple ‘of 10 
the Lord’ was foundid of stoon leggeris, 
prestis stoden in her ournement® with 
trumpis, and dekenes, the sones of Asaph, 
inf cymbalis, for to herie® God bi the hond" 
of Dauid, kyng of Israel. And thei sungen 11 
togidere in ympnes and knoulechyng' to 
the Lord, For he is good, for his merci is 
with outen ende on* Israel. And al the 
puple criede with greet! cry, in preisynge 
the Lord, for the temple of the Lord was 
foundid. Also ful manye of the preestis, 12 
and of the dekenes, and the princes of fa- 
dris, and the eldre men, that hadden seyn 
the formere temple, whanne it was foundid, 
and this™ temple bifor her ijen, wepten" 
with greet vuis®, and many men criynge 
in gladnesse? reisiden’ the vois'; and no13 
man my3te knowe the vois of cry* of men’ 
beynge glad, and the vois of wepyng of 
the puple; for" the’ puple™ criede togidere 
with greet cry, and the vois* was herd 
afer. 
CAPRA. 

ForsotheY the enemyes of Juda and of! 
Beniamyn herden, that the sones of cai- 
tifte bildiden? a temple to the Lord God 
of Israel ;. and thei nei3eden* to Zorobabel, 2 
and to the princes of fadris, and seiden> 
to hem’, Bilde we with 30u, for so as 3e4, 
we seken 3oure God; lo! we han offrid 
sacrificis fro the daies of Assoraddon, kyng 
of Assur, that brou3te vs hidur®. And Zo-3 
robabel, and Josue, and the othere princes 
of the fadris of Israel, seiden to hem, It is 
not to vs and to 30u, that we bilde’ an 
hows to oure God; but we vs silf aloone 
schulen bilde" to ‘oure Lord Godi, as Cirus, 
the! kyng of Persis, comaundide to™ vs. 
Forsothe® it was doon, that the puple of4 


Ww disturblen aEFU. 


4Qm.N. © ourne- 

0 thei wepten i. © vois for zoye 18s. P greet 
Scryings. tthe menin. Ytandins. Val 
y And ins. 2 werin commyn ajen in to 
chem iz gile ins. 4 3e don 1s. 
1 the Lord oure God 1ns. 


486 


+Forsothe thei hadden hirid a3en hem 
counseileris, that thei shulden destro3e 
the conseil of hem, alle the da3es of Ciri, 
king of Persis, and vnto the regne of 
Daryi, king of Persis, two 3eer thei ben 
lettid. 

CAP. IV. 

6 In the regne forsothe of Assueri, he 
is Artaxerses, in the begynning of his 
regne, thei writen accusacioun a3en the 

7dwelleris of Jude and of Jerusalem; and 
in the dazis of Artaxerses, Besellam 
Mitridates wrot, and Thabel, and the 
tothere that weren in the counseil of 
hem, to Artaxerses, king of Persis. For- 
sothe the epistil of accusacioun is writen 

Cire maner, and it was rad in Cire 

sspeche. Reum, Bethlem, and Sansai, 
scribe, writen oon epistil fro Jerusalem 
to Artaxerse the king ‘on this maner*; 

9Reum, Bethlem, and Sansai, scribe, and 
the tothere counseilourys of hem, Dinaei, 

Farsarei, Therfalei, Arfasei, Arthuei, Ba- 
biloynys, Susannathaneis, Daceis, Elam- 

loytis, and the tothere of the Jentilis, 
whom translatide the grete and glorious 

Assennafar, and made them to dwellen 
in the cites of Samarie, and in othere re- 

i1giouns be3unde the flod, in pes. This is 
the saumpler of the epistil, that thei 
senten to hym. To Artaxersi, king, thi 
seruauns, men that ben be3unde the flod, 
i2greting sein. Be it knowen to the king, 
for Jewis that ste3eden vp fro thee to vs, 
camen in to Jerusalem, cite rebel and 
werst, the whiche thei bilden vp, mak- 
ende vp the stonene wallis of it, and 
ismakende wowis’. Now thanne be it 
knowe to the king, for if that cite were 
bild vp, and the wallis of it enstorid, tri- 
bute, and pedage, and 3eris rentus thei 
shul not 3iue, and vnto the king this 


x of this matere £ pr.m. 


© and her. inher ns. P the councelours x. 


t And ins. is clepid ws. Vand ins, 
Ywritidentos. 2 Andins. 4 the langage s. 
© writere ins. fwritide N. Sains. 1 pistle ns. 


that is to wite 1. hem, that is ns. 


in pees rns. ' Om.ins. § that ins. t Om. s. 


I. ESDRAS. 


4 counseil or purpos Is. 
W wroot this accusing of Jemis INS. 


2 and Susanne ns. 


IV, 5—13. 


the lond lettide the hondis of the puple of 
Juda, and trobliden hem in® bildyng. Ands5 
thei hiriden counselouris? a3ens the Jewis, 
that thei schulden destrie the counseil‘ of 
the’ Jewis, in alle the daies of Cirus, king 
of Persis, and ‘til to* the rewme of Darius, 
king of Persis. Forsothe' in the rewmec 
of Assueris, he is" Artaxersis{, in’ the 
bigynnyng of his rewme, thei writiden 
accusing a3ens the dwellers of Juda and 
of Jerusalem; and in the daies of Ar-7 
taxarses, Besellam wroot*, Mytridates*, 
and Thabel, and othere, that weren in 
the counsel of hem, toY Artaxarses, kyng 
of Persis. For? the pistle of accusyng was 
writun in langage* of Sirie, and was? red 
in word‘ of Sirie. Reum‘, Beel, Theem, 8 
and Samsai, the seryuen®, writen‘ sich oon$ 
epistle” fro Jerusalem to the! kyng Artax- 
erses; Reum*, Beel, Theem, and Samsai, 9 
the writere!, and othere counselouris of 
hem™, Dyney, Pharsathei, and Ther- 
phalei, Arphasei, Harthuei, men of Babi- 
loyne, Susanne", Thanei, Dacei®, men of 
Helam, and othere of hethene men, 10 
whiche the grete and gloriouse? Asenna- 
phar translatide, and made hem to dwelle4 
in the citees of Samarie, and in othere 
cuntrees bijonde the flood, ‘in pees". This 11 
is the saumplere of the pistle, which’ thei 
senten to the kyng. “To Artaxerses, king*, 
thi seruauntis, men ‘that ben" biz3ende the 
flood, seyn helthe’. Be it knowun to the12 
kyng, that the” Jewis, that* stiedenY fro 
thee, ben comun to ys ‘in to’ Jerusalem, 
the rebel and worste> citee, which thei 
bilden, and thei maken the ground wallis 
therof, and arayen® the wallis¢ aboue. 
Nou therfor be it knowun to the kyng, 1; 
that if thilke citee be bildid, and® the 
wallis therof be restorid, theif schulen not 
3yue® tribut, and tol, and annuel rentis, 


Y yowis AC sec. m. 


tOm.c. 8 vnto INs. to x. 
x and Mytridates ns. 


b it was 1Ns. ¢the word ins. «¢ And Reum ns. 


iQm.ns. k and Reumns. 1 scryueyn x, ™ hem 
© and Daceiins. P gloriouse kyng 1s. 4 dwelle 
uOm.1. dwellinge ns. ¥ helthe to thee 1x. ¥ Om.x. 


* whiche 1n. Om. s, Y stieden up ins. 7ins. ®a rns. ful yuel 1. the worste Ns. © thei arayen Is. 


4 wallis therof's. ¢andifiws. f Jewis ws. 


& thanne 3yue Ns. 


+ This clause, 
he is Artaz- 
erses, ig not 

in Ebreu, ne- 
ther is of the 
text, but first 
it was set of 
sum doctour bi 
the maner of 
a glos, and 
aftirward bi 
vnkunning of 
writers, it was 
set in the text. 
Lire here. c. 


IV. 14-——23. 


14blame shal come. Wee thanne mynde 
hauende of the salt, that in the paleis 
wee eeten, and for the harmys of the 
king to seen vnleeful wee holden’, ther- 
fore wee han sent and told to the king; 
isthat thou enserche in the bokis of the 
stories of thi fadris, and thou shalt finde 
write in armaries, and knowen, for that® 
cite is a rebel cite, and no3ende to kingus 
and to prouincis®, and batailis ben sterid 
vp in it of old da3es ; for what thing and 
16that cite is destro3id. Wee tellen to the 
king, for if that cite were bild vp, and 
his wallis enstorid, thou shalt not han 
17 possessioun be3unde the flod. The king 
sente woord to Reum, Bethlem, and to 
Sansay, scribe, and to the tothere that 
weren in the counseil of hem, dwelleris 
of Samarie, and to the tothere bez3unde 
the flod, Greetinge, seiende, and pes. 
18The acusacioun, that 3ee senten to vs, 
igopenli is rad befor me; and of me it 
is comaundid, and thei ensercheden, and 
founden, for that cite of olde dajes a3en 
kingus rebellith, and descenciouns and 
20 batailis ben rerid vp in it; for and most 
stronge kingis weren in Jerusalem, the 
whiche and° lordshipeden to al the re- 
gioun that is bej3unde the flod; tribute 
also, and pedage, and rentis, thei token. 
21 Now thanne hereth the sentence, that 3ee 
forfende ‘thoo men‘, and that cite be not 
bild vp, to the time if perauenture of me it 
22 were comaundid. Seeth, lest necgligentli 
this be fulfild, and litilmelum growe euel 
23a3en kingys. And so the saumple of the 
maundenient of Artaxerses, king, is rad 
befor Reum, Bethlem, and Sansai, scribe, 
and the counseileris of hem; and thei 
wenten hastif in to Jerusalem to the 
Jewis, and thei forfendeden® them in 
athe «a. 


2 seyn E pr.m. b the prouyncis 4. 


itornsx. that 1s. 


b trespas or harm Ns. 
P thi m. 


of thos. ° acounte and seke is. 
ifins. °%QOm.1ns.  Y 3endis p. 
a Om. n. b writere Ns. © and to 1NS. 
faccusynge of Jewis 1s. & that 1Ns. 
k Om. ns. 1 citee Jerusalem 1s. 

P that ins. 4 tho kyngis ws. 
heest ins. ® fulfillid ms. 


x yuel fro thens 8. 
>the kyng x. © and Beel ins. 


I. ESDRAS. 


¢ Om. c. 


1 thi 1s. 

q citee Jerusalem Ns. 
x word ajen 1s. 
d he seide in, he seide to hem s. 
4 me ¢o be sou3t 1. me fo seke out the cronyclis Ns. 
m rebelled s. 
¥ sentence of me INS. 
Y encreesse so 1. encrecid x. 
© writere INS. 


w And the ns. 


@ and Theem 1ns. 


487 


and this trespas" schal come ‘til toi the 
kyng. Therfor we ben myndeful of the 14 


ichk 1 1 7 m + salé; that is 
salt}, which* we eeten in the! paleis, and™ tat: that is, 


for we holden it vnleueful to se the harmes — with 
t. 
of the kyng*, therfor we han sent and teld here. c._ 


to the kyng; that thou acounte® in the? 1s 
bokis of stories of thi fadris, and thou 
schalt fynde writun in cronyclis, and thou 
schalt wite, that thilke citee1 is a rebel 
citee, and that it anoieth kyngis and pro- 
uynces, and batels™ ben reisid therynne of 
elde daies; wherfor also thilke citee was 
distried. We tellen to the kyng, that ifte 
thilke’ citee be bildid, and‘ the" wallis 
therof be restorid, thou schalt not haue 
possessioun bizende’ the flood. The” kyng 17 
sente word* to Reum, Beel’, Theem?, and* 
to Samsai, the secryuen’, and to othere 
that weren in the counsel of hem, to® the 
dwelleris of Samarie, and to othere bi- 
jendis the flood, and seide‘, Helthe and 
pees*. The accusyng‘, which® 3e senten to 18 
vs, was red opynli bifor me; and it wasi9 
comaundid of me®, and thei! rekenyden, and 
theik foundun, that thilke citee! rebellith™ 
of elde daies az3ens kyngis, and dissen- 
ciouns and batels ben reisid therynne ; for 20 
whi ‘and ful stronge kyngis weren in 
Jerusalem", which also weren lordis of al 
the cuntrei which? is bizende the flood; 
also theid token tribut, and tol, and rentis. 
Now therfor here 3e the sentence’, that 3e 21 
forbede tho men’, and that thilke citeet be 
not bildid, til if" perauenture it be co- 
maundid of me. Se 3e, that this’ be note 
fillid® necgligentli, and yuel* encreesseY 
litil ‘and litil? ajens kyngis. Therfor theo; 
saumple of the comaundement* of kyng> 
Artaxarses was red bifor Reum, Beel®, 
Theem‘, and Samsai, the scryueyn*, and 
her‘ counseleris ; and thei 3eden hastili® in 


dtome 4. the men. ©¢ forfenden a. 


m Om. s. 
r that batels 1Ns. 
y to Beel rs. 


n king, and to certifie him not 
Sthats. ¢ and 
z to Theem ins. 
€ pees be fo 30u 1Ns. F 
i men INS, 
n ther weren in Jerusalem ful stronge kyngis 1. 
s men to bilde ins. *Om.n. UOm. a. V this 
z2Om.N. 4 heest ins. 
f bifore her ins. & in haast 1. 


488 


2spower and strengthe. Thanne is laft of 
the were of the hous of God in Jeru- 
salem, and it was not maad vnto the 
secunde 3er of the regne of Darii, king 
of Persis. 


CAP. V. 


1 Forsothe ther profecieden Aggeus, 
profete, and Zacharias, profete, the sone 
of Addo, propheciende to the Jewis that 
weren in Jude and Jerusalem, in the 

oname of God of Irael. Thanne risen 
Sorobabel, the sone of Salatiel, and Josue, 
the sone of Josedech, and thei begunnen 
to bilden vp the temple of God in Jeru- 
salem; and with hem profetis, helpende 

3hem. In that forsothe time cam to hem 

Thathannai, that was duk be3unde the 
flod, and Starbusannai, and the counseil- 
oures of hem; and thus thei seiden to 
hem, Who 3af to 3ou counseil, that this 
hous 3ee shulden bilden vp, and these 

4wallis enstoren ? To the whiche wee an- 
swerden to hem, whiche weren the namys 

sof men, autouris of that bilding. The 
eje forsothe of the God of hem is don 
vpon the olde men of Jewis, and thei 
iny3te not forfenden hem; and it pleside 
that the thing were told to Darie, and 
thanne thei shulden don aseeth ajen 
6that acusing. The saumpler of the epi- 
stil, that sente Thathannai, duk of the 
regioun be3unde the flod, and Starbusan- 
nai, and the counseileris of hym, Arfar- 

, sacei, that weren be3unde the flod, to 

7 Darie, the king. The woord that thei 
senten to hym thus was writen; To 

8 Darie, the king, alle pes. Be it knowen 
to the king, wee to han go to Jude pro- 
uynce, to the hous of the grete God, that 
is bild vp with ston vnpolisht, and trees 
ben sett in the wowis‘, and that werc 


J. ESDRAS. 


IV. 24—V. 8. 


to Jerusalem to the Jewis, and" forbed- 


ideni hem with arm and my3tt. Thanne24t mist; that 
with strengthe 


the werk of Goddis hows in Jerusalem of oost, which 
£ ; ‘ the Jewi 
was left, and it was not maad til! to the mysadtaon 
~WQM 5 0 ae a3en stonde. 
secounde 3eer of Darius™, king" of Persis. Fire here. c. 


CAP. 


Forsothe Aggei, the prophete, and Za-1 
charie, the prophete, the sone of Ado, 
prophesieden®, prophesiynge in the name 
of God of Israel, to the Jewis that weren 
in Juda and Jerusalem. Thanne Zoroba-2 
bel, the sone of Salatiel, and Josue, the 
sone of Josedech, risiden?, and bigunnen4 
to bilde the temple of God in Jerusalem ; 
and with hem rysyden* the prophetis of - 
God, helpynge hem. Forsothe® in that3 
tyme Tatannai, that was duyk bizende 
the flood, and Starbusannay, and the coun- 
selouris of hem, camen to hem’, and seiden 
thus to hem, Who 3af counsel to 3ou to 
bilde this hows, and to restore these 
wallis? To which" thing’ we answeriden4 
to hem’, whiche weren the names of men, 


autours of that bildyng. Forsothe the izefs tthe ise; thatis 
the biholding of 


of God of hem* was maad on the eldeY — Goddis mersy 
men of Jewis, and thei my3ten not for- 204 help Lire 


bede? the Jewis*; and it pleside that the 
thing schulde be teld to Darius, and> 
thanne thei schulden make satisfaccioun 
ajens that accusyng. Zhis ts the saum-6 
pler of the pistle, which Tathannai, duyk 
of the cuntrey bi3ende the flood, and Star- 
bursannai, and hise counselouris, Arpha- 
sacei, that® weren bi3ende the flood, senten 
to kyng Darius. The word which thei7 
senten to hym was writun thus; Al pees 
be to thee kyng Darius. Be it knowuns 
to the kyng, that we 3eden to the pro- 
uince of Judee, to the hows of greet God, 
which! is bildid with stoon vnpolischid, 
and trees ben set® in the wallis, and 


f vowis H. 


hand thei ms.  ! forbeden 1. 
king 1Ns. 
4 thei bigunnen rns. 
which 1. Vaxing nN. arynd s. 
y eldre Gurknsx. olde EL. 
God s. b and that rs. 
h wallis theroff 1s. 


© whiche ns. 


k hem to bilde ins. 
© profecieden thanne and thei weren s. 
T risen EL. resen up 1. risiden up Ns. 
whem and tolden 1x. hem and telden hem s. 
- 2 forbede or lette 1s. 
4 that IN. 


10m. ans. ™ the rewme of Darins xs, ™ the 
P resin £ ef L pass. resen up 1. risiden up Ns. 

s Andin. Om.s. tthe Jewis ins. 4 the 
x Jewis x. the Jewis s. 
a Jewis to bilde 1. Jewis to bilde the house of 
€Om.n.  f that 1. & sent or leide s. 


Vv. o—17. 


diligentli is maad up’, and waxeth in the 
9hondis of hem. Wee axeden thanne thoo 
olde men, and thus we seiden to them, 
Who jaf to 3ou power that this hous 3ee 
shulden bilden, and the wallis enstoren ? 
10 But and the names of hem we han so3t 
of hem, that wee telle to thee; and we 
han write the namus of the’ men that 
11 ben princis in hem. Forsothe such woord 
thei answerden to vs, seiende, We ben 
the seruauns of God of heuene and of 
erthe; and we bilden vp the temple that 
was maad out befor these 3eris manye, and 
the whiche the grete king of Irael hadde 
12 bild, and maad out. Forsothe aftir that 
to wrathe oure fadris hadden terred the 
God of heuene, he toc hem in the hond 
of Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, 
Caldeis ; and this hous he destrojede, 
and the puple of it he translatide in to 
13 Babiloine. Forsothe the firste 3er of Ciri, 
king of Babiloine, Cirus, king of Babi- 
loyne, purposide a maundement, that the 
hous of God shulde be maad vp. For 
and the vesselis of the temple of God, 
goldene and silnerene, that Nabugodono- 
sor hadde take fro the temple, that was 
in Jerusalem, and hadde born hem awet 
in to the temple of Babiloyne, king Cirus 
bro3te forth fro the temple of Babyloyne, 
and ben 3iue to Zazabazar bi name, whom 
15and he ordeynede prince. And he seide 
to hym, These vesselis tac, and go, and 
put hem in the temple, that is in Jeru- 
salem; and the! hous of God be bild vp 
16in his place. And so thanne thilkej Za- 
zabazar cam, and sette the groundis of 
the temple of God in Jerusalem ; and fro 
that time vnto now it is bild, and 3it is 
17 not fulfild. Now thanne if it seme to the 
king good, enserche he in the librarie of 
the king, that is in Babiloyne, whether 


gOm.c. 5 Om. a. 
Lherr ™Om.1. 

8 the temple which rns. 
x Om. Ins. 


iand itins.  Jewis ns. 
tovs s. * whiche ins. 
w hadden stirid 1Ns. 


I. ESDRAS. 


Y of Caldey 1n. of the cuntrey of Caldey s. 


489 


thilke werk is bildid diligently, andi en- 
creessith in the hondis of hem*. Therforg 
we axiden tho elde men, and thus we 
seiden to hem, Who 3af to 3ou power to 
bilde this hows, and to restore these 
wallis? But also we axiden of hem the! 10 
names ‘of hem™, that we schulden telle 
to thee; and we han write the names of 
men", whiche thei ben, that ben princes 
among hem. Sotheli® thei answeriden bi 11 
sich word?, and seiden?, We ben the ser- 
uauntis of God of heuene and of erthe; 
and we bilden the temple that was bildid 
bifor these many 3eeris, and ‘which temple* 
thet greet kyng of Israel ‘hadde bildid®, 
and maad’. But aftir that oure fadris 12 
stiryden” God of heuene and of erthe to 
wrathfulnesse, bothe* he bitook hem in 
the hond of Nabugodonosor, Caldey’, kyng 
of Babiloyne; and he distriede this hows’, 
and translatide* the puple therof in to 
Babiloyne. Forsothe® in the firste 3eer of 13 
Cirus, king of Babiloyne, Cirus‘, the’ king 
of Babiloyne, settide® forth ‘a comaunde- 


‘ment, that the hows of God schulde be 


bildid. For whi kyng Cirus brou3te forth 14 
‘fro the temple of Babiloynes also the 
goldun and siluerne vessels of Goddis tem- 
ple, whiche Nabugodonosor hadde take fro 
the temple, that was in Jerusalem, and 
hadde bore tho awei in to the temple of 
Babiloyne ; and tho vessels weren 3onun 
to Sasabazar bi name, whom ‘he made* 
also! prince’. And Cirus seide to hym, 
Take these vessels, and go, and sette tho! is 
in the temple, which™ is in Jerusalem ; 
and the" hows of God be® bildid in ‘his 
placeP, Therfor thanne thilke Sasabazar 16 
cam4, and settide™ the foundementis of 
Goddis temple in Jerusalem; and fro that 
tyme ‘til to’ now it is bildid, and is not 
3it fillid". Now therfor if it ‘semeth good” 17 


ithis 4. Jj that c sec.m. 
nthomenins. © And ins. P wordis ns. 4 seiden 
t Salomon the ins.  bildide 1x. ¥ hadde maad x. 


z hows of God 1s. ® he 


translatide ns. >b Andins. this Cirns1s. 4Om.1n. © puttide 1. settide or puttide ns. fan 
heeste ns. &Om.N. 4 OQOm.1Ns. ‘also Cirus had maadins. _ * prince upon the lond of Juda 1s. 
Them ins. ™that rvs. %bethe rns. © Om. ins. P the place where it was [erst 8] NS. 4 cam in to 
Juda is. *hesettide ins. Svntoins. titisins., ™ fulfillid ins. ¥ semeth good or plesith x. semeth 
or plesith s. 

VOL. TI. 3R 


490 


forsothe of king Cire it be comaunded, 
that the hous of God shulde be bilde vp 
in Jerusalem ; and the wil of the king 
vpon this thing sende he to vs. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Thanne king Darie comaunded, and 
thei enserchiden in the tresorie of the 
bokis, that weren leid vp in Babiloine. 
2 And there is founde in Egbadonys, that 
is a castel i in Medene prouynce, o volume, 
and such a sentence was writen in it. 
3The firste 3er of Ciri king, Cirus the 
king demede, that the hous of God, that 
is in Jerusalem, shulde be bild vp in the 
place where thei offren ostus, and that 
thei putte groundis vnderberende the 
hei3te of sixti cubitus, and the breede of 
4sixti cubitus, and thre ordris of ynpo- 
lisht stonis, and so ordris of newe trees. 
Costis forsothe of the hous of the king 
sshulden ben 3iue. But and the vesselis, 
goldene and siluerene of the temple of 
God, that Nabugodonosor hadde take of 
the! temple of Jerusalem, and bro3t hem 
in to Babiloine, be thei 3olden, and born 
a3een in to the temple of Jerusalem, and 
in to ther place, the whiche and ben 
cput in™ the temple of God. Now thanne 
Thathannai, duke of the regioun that is 
be3unde the flod, and Scarbusannai, and 
3oure counseileris, Arfasacei, that ben be- 
3unde the flod, aferr goth awei fro them ; 
zand leteth to” be maad that® temple of 
God of the duke of Jewis, and of the 
elders of hem; and that hous of God 
&bilde thei in his place. But and of me 
it is comaundid, that it behoueth to be 
maad of thoo prestus of Jewis, that the 


k the which au. !Om. a. 


w rekene or se N. 


I. ESDRAS. 


™m in to E pr.m. 


xhe diligently 1. he or seke he diligently s. 


VI. 1—8. 


to the king, rikene” he* in the bibletY of 
the kyng, which? is in Babiloyne, whether 
it be? comaundid of kyng Cyrus, that 
Goddis hows schulde be bildid in® Jeru- 
salem®; and sende’ he to vs the wille of 
the kyng ‘on this thing®. 


CAP. VI. 


Thannef kyng Darius comaundide, and1 
thei rekenyden® in the biblet of bokis, 
that weren kept in Babiloyne. And ol2 
book was foundun in Egbatanys, which 
is a castel in the prouynce of Medena, 
and sich a sentence of the kyng was 
writun therynne. In the first 3eer of kyngs 
Cirus, Cirus the kyng demyde*, that, 
‘Goddis hows!, which™ is in Jerusalem, 
schulde be bildid in the place where thei 
offren sacrifices, and that thei sette foun- 
dementis" supportynge® the hei3the? of 
sixti cubitis, and the lengthe of sixti cu- 
bitis, thre’ ordris of stonys vnpolischid, 4 
and so ordris™ of newe trees. Sothelis 
costist schulen be 3ouun of the kyngis 
hows. But also the goldun and siluernes 
vessels of Goddis temple, whiche Nabugo- 
donosor took fro the temple of Jerusalem, 
and brou3te tho" in’ to Babiloyne, bew 
3oldun, and borun ajen in to the temple 
of Jerusalem, and in to her place, whiche* 
alsoY be? set in the temple of God. Nowe 
therfor Tathannai, duyk of the cuntrei 
which* is bizende the flood, and> Starbu- 
sannai, and 3oure counseleris, Arphasacel, 
that® ben by3ende the flood, departe je 
fer fro hem’; and suffre 3e, that thilke7 
temple of God be maad of the duyk of 
Jewis, and of the eldre men of hem; and 
that thei bilde that hows of God in his 
place. But also it is comaundid of me,s 
that that bihoueth to be maad of tho 


nOm.c. © the 4. 


Ybiblet, that is, the soak of cronicling 1. 


biblet of cronyclis x. biblet, that is, in the book of cronyclis s. 2 the which 1. which books. is iv. 

borins. ¢Jerusalem or nat 1. Jerusalem or nays. upon this thing sende 1s. ¢Om.1s, f Whanne a. 

& rekenyden or sou3ten ns. 4 whiche bokis ins. ithatins.  demede or ordeyned s. | the hous of 
God ins, ™thatins. "®foundement eu. © beringe up 1. up beringe ns. ? heigthe of the werk 1. 
heiz3the of werk ns. Gand sette thei thre ins. ° the ordris ins. 8 And ns. t costis herfo 1s. % hem rs. 
¥Om.1s. Wbetheiins. *the whicher. Yvesselsalsoins. %betheirn. ®thatins. »ofs. 
¢whiche ns. 4 the Jewis ins. 


VI. g—16. 


hous of God be bild vp, that is, that of 
the kingis cofre, that is, of tributis, that 
ben 3iue of the regioun be3unde the flod, 
besili costys be 3iue to thoo men, lest be 
olettid the werk. That if nede were, and? 
caluis, and lombis, and kidis in to brent 
sacrifise to the God of heuene; whete, 
salt, and win, and oile, aftir the ¢ustum 
of prestus that ben in Jerusalem, be ther 
3iue to them bi alle dajis, lest ther be in 
ioany thing pleynyng. And offre thei of- 
fringus to the God of heuene; and pre3e 
thei for the lif of the king and of his 
irsonus. Of me thanne is sett a decree, 
- that eche man that this comaundement 
chaungith, be don awei the tree of the 
hous of hym, and be he rerid vp, and to- 
brosid in it; the hous forsothe of hym 
12 be forfetid4. God forsothe, that maketh 
to dwellen his name there, scatere alle 
reumys and puple, that strecchith out 
ther hond, that thei withstonde and sca- 
tere that hous of God, that is in Jerusa- 
lem. I Darie haue ordeined a decre, the 
13 whiche bisili I wile to be fulfild. Ther- 
fore Thathannai, duk of the regioun be- 
jonde the flod, and Scarbusannay, and 
the conseileris of hyni, after that king 
Darie hadde comaunded so diligentli, 
14folewiden out. The eldere forsothe of 
Jewis bilden vp, aud hadden prosperite, 
after the profecie of Aggei, the profete, 
and of Zacarie, sone of Addo; and thei 
bilden, and maden, the God of Irael co- 
maundende, and comaundende Ciro, and 
Darie, and Artaxerse, kingus of Persis ; 
sand thei fulfilden this’ hous of God vnto 
the thridde dai of the monyth of Adar, 
that is the sixte 3er of the regne of 


I. ESDRAS. 


491 


preestis of Jewys, that the hows of God 
be bildid, that is, that costis be j3ouun 
bisili to tho men of the arke of the kyng, 
that is, of tributis®, that ben 3ouun of the 
contrei bizende the flood, lest the werk be 
lettid. That if it be nede, 3yue thei bothes 
calues, and lambren, and kidis in to brent 


sacrifice to Godt of heuene; wheete’, salt, + God; this 
: ie ae e king hadde the 
and wyn, and oile, bi the custom of _ feith of a veri 
God, and he 


preestis that ben in Jerusalem, be 3ouun was not holdun 
to the lawe of 


to hem bi ech dai, that no pleynt be in  yyoses, sithen 
ony thing. And offre thei offryngis to10 eo, a 
God of heuene; and preye thei for the’ 

lijf of the kyng and of hise sones. Ther-11 whether 
for the" sentence is seti of me, that if ony man 
man chaungith* this comaundement!, a tre _Ynge to helehe 
be takun of his hows, and be reisid™, and = maner couen- 
be he" hangid therynne®; sotheli? his mig ibe ; 
hows be® forfetid. Forsothe™ God, tHat 12s ee 


it suffiside to 


makith his name to dwelle there, distrie sonrehang® 
alle rewmes* and puple, that holdith' forth — mysterie of 
her hond to impugne and destrie thilke ‘ere. c. 


hows of God, which" is in Jerusalem. I 
Darius’ haue demyd the sentence”, which 
Y wole be fillid* diligentli. Therfor Ta-13 
thannai, duyk of the ‘cuntrei bizende the 
flood, andY Starbusannai, and hise coun- 
seleris, diden execucioun, ‘ether filliden?, 
so* diligentli, bi that that” kyng Darius 
hadde comaundid. Sotheli® the eldre men 14 
of Jewis bildiden4, and hadden® prosperite, 
bi the profesie of Aggey, the profete, and 
of Zacarie, the sone of Ado; and thei 
bildiden, and maden‘, for God of Israel 
comaundide’, and for® Cirus, and Darius, 
and Artaxerses, kyngis of Persis, co- 
maundideni; and thei performyden this 15 
hows of God ‘til toj the thridde dai of 
the monethe Adar*}, which! is the sixte 


; t Adar ; this 
is the xii. mo- 
nethe anentis 
Jewis, and an- 


i¢king Darie. Forsothe the sonus of Irael, _3eer of the rewme of king Darius. For-1 1g mene) 28 aly 
i “ o oure Marc! 
prestus and Leuitus, and the tothere of | sothe™ the sones of Israel, the" preestis and in party to 
. : : eb 
the sonus of transmygracioun, maden the and dekenes, and the® othere of the sones Lire} ag me 
P both 4. 4 opynli destrojed £ pr.m. 1 the a, 
© the tributis 1s. f also wheete rns. & Om. ins. ™thisc. !boden ins. * chaunge ms. ! heest ins. 
™ it reisid up ws. 2Om. 1s. © ther upon is. theron x. Pand bers. 9Om.1ns. * Andiys. § the 
rewmess. tholdenxc. thatrns. v Darins the kyng 1. Darins king ns. W forseid sentence Ns. 
x fulfillid vs. ¥ flood bigzonde the s. 7 ether fulfillidenc. Om. rns. 2 Om. tvs. > heest that s. 
c And ins, 4 bildiden Goddis temple ins. © thei hadden ims. f maden the femple ins. & comaundide 


soins. 4} also ins. 


m And ins. 2 Om. ins. © Om. ins. 


} comaundiden this thing 1Ns. 


jvnto rms. * Adar or Marche rns. ! that ins. 


8Rr2 


492 


dedicacioun of the hous of God in io3e ; 
i7and offriden, in the dedicacioun of the 
hous of God, caluys an hundrid, wetheris 
two hundrid, lambys foure hundrid, get 
buckis for the synne of al the puple 
twelue, after the noumbre of the linagis 
isof Irael. And thei ordeyneden prestus in 
ther ordris, and Leuitus in ther whilis, 
vp on the werkis of God in Jerusalem, 
as it is write in the boc of Moises. 
19 Forsothe the sonus of transmygracioun 
maden pasch, the fourtenthe dai of the 
20 firste monyth. Forsothe the prestus and 
Leuitus as oon weren purified, alle clene 
to offren pasch to alle the sonus of 
transmygracioun, and to their brethern 
21 prestus, and to themself. And the sonus 
of Ivael, that weren turned a3een of the 
transmygracioun, eeten, and alle’ that 
hadden seuered hemself fro alt defouling 
of Jentilis of the lond to them, that thei 
92 seche the Lord God of Irael. And thei 
maden the solempnete of therue louys 
seuen dajes in gladnesse; for the Lord 
hadde gladid hem, and conuertid the 
herte of king Assur to hem, that he 
helpe the hondis of hem in the werk of 
the hous of the Lord God of Irael. 


CAP. VII. 

1 Aftir these woordis forsothe, in the 
regne of Artaxerses, king of Persis, Es- 
dras, the sone of Saraie, sone of Azarie, 

asone of Elchie, sone of Sellum, sone of 

3Sadoch, sone of Achitob, sone of Amarie, 
asone of Azarie, sone of Maraioth, sone 
5of Saraie, sone of Osi, sone of Bocci, sone 
of Abisue, sone of Finees, sone of Elea- 
sar, sone of Aron, prest fro the begyn- 
snyng; this Esdras ste3ede vp fro Babi- 
loine, and he a swift scribe in the lawe 


8 eche E pr.m. 


P of hem that s. 4 the transmygracioun s. 
utwor and two ns. VY and-foure s. 
lynage L. Zvpons, 4 And ins. 
fOm, ins.  & the transmygracioun s. 


b Forsothe rvs. 
bh Om. s. 


J]. ESDRAS. 


tOm. 


w and twelue Ns. 


i Om. x. 


Vi, 17—=vidae 


of transmygracioun, ‘that is, that? camen 
Jro transmigracioun', ‘ether caitifte’, 
maden the halewyng of Goddis hows in 
ioie; and offriden’, ‘in the halewyng of17 
Goddis hows‘, an hundrid caluys, twei® 
hundryd wetheris, foure’ hundrid lam- 
bren, twelue” buckis of geet for the 
synne of al Israel, bi the* noumbre of 
lynagisY of Israel. And thei ordeyneden 1s 
preestis in her ordris, and dekenes in her 
whilis, on? the werkis of God in Jerusa- 
lem, as it is writun in the book of Moises. 
Forsothe* the sones of transmygracioun 19 
maden pask, in the fourtenthe dai of the 
firste monethe. For? the® preestis and 
dekenes? as o man weren clensid, alle® 
weren clene for‘ to offre pask to alle the 
sones of transmygracioun, and to her bri- 
theren preestis, and to hem silf. And thei 
sones of Israel eeten, that turneden ajen 
fro transmygracioun’, and ech man eet, 
that hadde departid hym silf fro al® the! 
defoulyng of hethene men of the* lond, 
for to seke the Lord God of Israel. And22 
thei maden solempnyte! of therf looues 
seuene daies in gladnesse; for the Lord 
hadde maad hem glad, and hadde™ turned 
the herte of the kyng of Assur to hem, 
that he wolde helpe ‘her hondis" in the 
werk of the hows of the Lord God of 
Israel. 
CAP. VII. 

Forsothe® aftir these wordis Esdras, the1 
sone of Saraie, sone of Azarie, sone of 
Helchie, sone of Sellum, sone of Sadoch, 2 
sone of Achitob, sone of Amarie, sone of3 
Azarie, sone of Maraioth, sone of Saraie, 4 
sone of Ozi, sone of Bocci, sone of Abisue, 5 
sone of Phynees, sone of Eleazar, sone of 
Aaron, preest at the bigynnyng, was? in 
the rewme of Artaxerses, king of Persis ; 
thilke Esdras stiede1 fro Babiloyne, and6 
he was a swift writeref in the lawe of 


t Om. c. 


s.'Gloss omitted in in. § thei offriden ns. tOm.s. 
xQOm.ns.  Y the lynagis sceNPV pr.m. the 

4 dekenes of the firsts. © alle thei 1ns. 
k that ins. ! the solempnyte ins. ™ he 


© Om. 1. 


hadde ins. "the hondis of hem ins. © And ins. P he was 1. this was N. this Esdras was s. 4stiede up ivs. 


+ writere ; for 
he reparelide 
the lawe brent 
by Caldeis, and 
for he foond 
newe lettris, bi 
whiche the 
wordis of 
Ebren ben 
writun sped- 
lyere and 
betere. Lire 
here. c. 


Vil. 7—16. 


‘of Moises, the whiche the Lord God of 
Trae] 3af; and the king 3af to hym, after 
the goode hond of the Lord his God 

7vpon hym, al his asking. And ther 
ste3eden vp of the sonus of Irael, and of 
the sonus of prestus, and of the sonus of 
Leuitus, and of the singeres, and of the 
porteris, and of the sodeknys, in Jerusa- 
lem the seuenthe 3er of Artaxerses, king. 

8 And thei camen in to Jerusalem the fifte 
monyth; this is the seuenthe 3er of the 

9king. For in the firste dai of the firste 
monyth thei begunnen to ste3en vp fro 
Babiloine, and in the firste dai of the 
fifte monyth he cam in to Jerusalem, 
after the goode hond of his God vpon 

l0hym. Esdras forsothe greithede his 
herte, that he enserche the lawe of the 
Lord, and do, and teche in Jrael maun- 
1idement and dom. This is forsothe the 
saumpler of the epistil of the maunde- 
ment, that king Artaxerses 3af to Esdre, 
preest, wis scribe in woordis and in 
maundemens of the Lord, and his ceri- 
wzmoines in IJrael. Artaxerses, king of 
kingus, to Esdre, the prest, most wis 
scribe of the lawe of God of heuene, 
i3sgreting. Of ime is a decre, that to whom- 
soeuer it plese in my rewme of the puple 
of Irael, and of his prestus, and of the 
Leuitus, to gon in to Jerusalem, go he 
14with thee. Forsothe fro the face of the 
king and of the seuene counseileris of 
hym thou art sent, that thou visite Jude 
and Jerusalem in the lawe of thi God, 

15 that is in thi hond; and that thou bere 
siluer and gold, that the king and his 
counseileris wilfulli offriden to the God 
of Irael, whos tabernacle is in Jerusalem. 

is And al the siluer and gold, what euere 
thou findist in al the prouince of Babi- 
loine, and the puple wile offren, and of 
‘the prestus that wilfulli offriden to the 


T that 1. which Jawe s. 
W of INS. 
Zz Om. Ins. 
€ stie up INs. 
dede s. 


8 3aue to his peple s. 


2 Om. INs. 
f hond or help 1s. 
™ to teche 1s. © heest 1Ns. 


& the INs. 


$that1. tOm. ns, 
x the moost ins. Yheueness. 2 presens IN. 
siluer Ins. 4 what1. € that that the 1Ns. 


I. ESDRAS. 


t Esdras Ins. 
x in the seuenthe jeer of Artaxerxes kyng there 1Ns. 

b senenthe jeer a sec.m. senenthe monthe ins. 
h Lord God s. 
© doom of the Lord ins. ‘ 
¥ the preest rvs. Va writere 1n. that was a writere s. YY lerned m. W heestis 1Ns. 
a the lond of Judee 1Ns. 
f take of 1. take thou of Ns. 


493 


Moises, which’ the Lord God of Israel 
3af*; and the kyng 3af to hymt al his 
axyng, by the goode hoond" of his’ Lord 
God on” hym. And there* stiedenY of7 
the sones of Israel, and of the sones of 
preestis, and of the sones of dekenes, and 
of the? syngeris, and of the’ porteris, and 
of Nathyneis, ‘in to Jerusalem in the se- 
uenthe 3eer of Artaxerses, kyng*. Ands 
thei camen in to Jerusalem in the fyuethe 
monethe; thilke is the seuenthe” of the 
kyng. For* in the firste dai of the firstes 
monethe he? bigan to stie® fro Babi- 
loyne, and in the firste dai of the fyuethe 
monethe he cam in to Jerusalem, bi the 
good hondf of his’ God® on‘ hym. For- 
sothe* Esdras made redi his herte to en-10 
quere the lawe of the Lord, and to dol, 
and teche™ in Israel the comaundement® 
and doom®. Sotheli? this is the saum-1 
pler of the pistle of the’ comaundement, 
which’ thet kyng Artaxerses 3af to Esdras, 
preest", writere’ lerud’Y in the wordis and 
comaundenientis” of the Lord, and in hise 
cerymonyes in Israel. Artaxerses, kyngi2 
of kyngis, desirith helthe to Esdras, the 
preest, moost* wijs writere of the lawe of 
God of heueneY. It is demyd of me, that13 
whom euer it plesith in my rewme of the 
puple of Israel, and of hise preestis, and 
dekenes, to go in to Jerusalem, go he with’ 
thee. 
the kyng and of hise seuene counseleris, 
that thou visite Judee* and Jerusalem in 
the lawe of thi God, which” is in thin 
hond; and that thou bere siluer and gold, ts 
which the kyng and hise counseleris han 
offrid bi fre wille to God of Israel, whos 
tabernacle is in Jerusalem. And take thou 16 
freli al siluer® and gold, which? ener thou 
fyndist in al the prouynce of Babiloyne, 
and the® puple wole offre, and of! preestis 
that® offriden bi fre wille to the hows of 


whond or mouyng 1s. —_-Y the Ins. 

y stieden up into Jerusalem men Ns. 
e Andins. 4 Esdras ns, 

k Andins. 1! do it 1. do it in 
pAndins. Gepistlery. Om. s. 


i of INs. 


b the whiche lawe1. © the 


& that that thei rns. 


For thou art sent fro the face? of 14 + face; that is, 


494 


hous of ther God, that is in Jerusalem, 
i7freli to taken; and bisili bie of that 
monei calues, wetheris, lombis, and sacri- 
fises, and the offring of likouris of hem ; 
and offre them vpon the auter of the 
temple of 3our God, that is in Jerusalem. 
18 But and if any thing to thee, and to thi 
brethern plese, of the remnaunt of siluer 
and of gold that 3ee do, after the wil of 
19 30ure God doth ; also the vesselis that ben 
jiue in the seruise of the hous of thi God, 
tac in the si3te of God in to Jerusalem. 
20 But and othere thingus the whiche nede 
were in the hous of thi God, hou miche 
euere is nede, that thou spende, thou shalt 
3iue of the tresor of the king and of the 
21comun bagge, and of me. I, Artaxerses, 
king, haue ordeined, and demed to alle 
the keperis of the comun cofre, that ben 
bezonde the flod, that what euer aske of 
3ou Esdras, prest, scribe" of the lawe of 
God of heuene, withoute tariyng 3iue 
223ee, vnto an hundrid talentus of siluir, 
and vnto an hundrid batus of win, and 
vnto an hundrid choris of whete, and 
vnto an hundrid batus of oile, salt for- 
23sothe withoute mesure. Al that to the 
rit of God of heuene perteneth, be it 3iue 
bisii in the hous of God of heuene, lest 
perauenture he be wroth a3en the reume 
21of the king and of his sonus. To 3ou 
also we maken knowen of alle the prestus, 
and Leuitus, singeres, porteris, sodeknys, 
and mynystris of the hous of this God, 
and’ pedage and tribute and 3eris frutus 
haue 3ee no power of putting ‘vpon” 
2shem. Thou forsothe, Esdra, after the 
wisdam of thi God, that is in thin hond, 
ordeine thou domysmen and gouernoures, 
that thei deme to al the puple, that is 


u and scribe c. 


I. ESDRAS. 


v On. a. 


VII. 17-——25. 


her God, whichi is in Jerusalem ; and bie 17 
thou bisili of this monei calues, rammes, 
lambren*, and sacrifices', and moiste sacri- 
fices of tho; and offre thon tho on™ the 
auter of the temple of 3oure God, which” 
temple is in Jerusalem. But also° if ony 1s 
thing plesith to thee, and to thi britheren, 
for? to do of the residue’ siluer and gold", 
do 3e$ bi the wille of 3oure God ; also bi-19 
taket thou in the si3t of God in Jerusalem 
the vessels, that" ben 3onun in to the ser- 
uyce of the hows of thi God. But also 20 
thou schalt 3yue of ¥ the tresouris” of the 
kyng, and of the comyn arke*, ‘ethir 
purseY, and of me ‘othere thingis, that 
ben nedeful in the hows of thi God?, as 
myche euere as is* nedeful, that thon 
spende. Y Artaxerses, kyng, haue or-21 
deyned, and demyd to alle the keperis of 
the comyn arke>, that ben bizende the 
flood, that what euer thing Esdras, the 
preest, writere® of the lawe of God of 
heuene, axith of 30u, 3e 3yue’ with out 
tariyng, ‘til toe anf hundrid talentis of sil-22 
uer, and to$ an hnndrid ‘mesuris clepid® 


chorust of wheete, and til! an hundrid + choreis 

ome “7k ae «xz. buschels. 1. 
mesurisi clepid* bathus of wyn, and ‘til a choor is 
to! an hundrid ‘mesuris clepid™ bathus of {yt >" 
oile, salt® forsothe® without mesure. A123 


thing that perteyneth to the custom?,‘ethir 
religioun’, of God of heuene, be™ 3ouun 
diligentli in the hows of God of heuene, 
lest perauenture he® be wrooth a3ens the 
rewme of the kyng and of hise sones. 
Also we make knowun to 3ou of* alle the 24 
preestis, and dekenes, syngeris", and’ por- 
teris*, and* Nathyneis’, and? mynystris 
of the hows of this? God, ‘that 3e han not 
power? to put on* hem tol, and tribute, and 
costis¢ for keperis® of the lond. Forsothef2s 


Won c. 


hOm.wn. ithat ms. * and lambren ins. | othere offryngis ins. “upon is. 4 the which 1. ° ower 
this alsois. POm.ns. 4@Om.1Nns. ‘gold that levnith ins. ‘3e7t1s.  ¢ bitake or ordeyne 1s. 
uwhiche xs. VY Om.G. Wtresour Bc. *hnechens. Y¥Om.Ns. 7 takes. ®itisn. > hnucche ins. 


¢ and writere s. 


or arke 1 marg. 
& til FenK pr.m. MNSxb. 


f the summe of an s. 
l ynto ins. til kK pr.m. tox. ™ Om, Ins. 
° Om. ins, P wirschip ins. 4 Om. Ins. 

of ins. 4 of syngeris 1. ne of syngeris Ns. 
Xneins. Y of the men of Nathyneis 1Ns. 
4 othere costis ins. © kepyng ins. ‘ But 1s. 


4 3yue it 1. 3ene that thing to him s. 


€ vnto ins. til K pr. m. 


h Om. Ins. i vnto INS. j Om. s. k of 1Ns. 


» and 3eueth him salt 1. and salt N. and 3eue 3¢ to him salt s. 
t be it Ins. 
Vv ne of INS. 
Z ne of the Ins. 


8 God ins. t that 3e haue not power of noon 
W the porteris 1. porteris of Goddis house s. 
8Om.1ns. bOm.ins. © upon ts. 


VIL. 26—VIII. 6, 


bezonde the flod, to hem, that is, that 
knewen the lawe of thi God, and the 
lawe of the king; but and vnwise men 

26techeth freely. And eche that doth not 
the lawe of thi God, and the lawe of the 
king bisili, dom shal ben of hym, or* in 
to deth, or* in to outlawe, or in to con- 
dempnacioun of his substaunce, or certis 
‘in to prisoun. And Esdras, scribe, seide, 

27 Blessid the Lord God of oure fadris, that 
3af this in the herte of the king, that he 
shulde glorifie the hous of the Lord, that 

281s in Jerusalem, and in me hath in bowid 
his merci befor the king, and his coun- 
seileris, and alle the my3ti princis of the 
king And I, coumfortid bi the hond of 
the Lord, of my God, that was in me, 
I gaderede of the sonus of Irael princis, 
that stezeden vp with me. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 These thanne ben the princis of meines, 
and this the genelogie of hem, that ste3- 
eden vp with me in the reume of Ar- 

2 taxerses, king, fro Babiloime. Of the sonus 
of Finees, Jerson; of the sonus of Itha- 
mar, Danyel; of the sonus of Dauid, 

3 Archus ; of the sonus of Sechemye and of 
the sonus of Faros, Zacharias, and with 
hym ben noumbrid an hundrid and fifti 

4men; of the sonus of Fethmoab and of 
Eleoenai, sone of Zacharie, and with 

shym two hundrid men; of the sonus of 
Sechemye, sone of Jesechiel, and with 
cshym thre hundrid men; of the sonus of 


I. ESDRAS. 


495 


thou%, Esdras, bi the wisdom of thi! God, 
whichi is in thin hond, ordeyne iugis and 
gouernouris, that thei deme to! the puple, 
which™ is bizende the flood, that is", to® 
hem that kunnen? the lawe of thi God, 
and the lawe of the kyng; but also teche 
3e freli vnkunnynge men. And ech man, 26 
that doth not4 the lawe of thi God, and 
the lawe of the kyng diligentli', doom* 
schal be of hyin, ethirt in" to the’ deeth, 
ethir in to exilyng”, ethir in to condemp- 
nyng* of his catel, ethir certis in to pri- 
soun. And Esdras, the writere, seideY, 
Blissid be the Lord God of oure fadris, 27 
that 3af this thing’ in? the> herte of the 
kyng, that he schulde glorifie the hows of 
the Lord, which® is in Jerusalem, and 28 
bowide’ his. mercy in to me bifor the 
kyng, and hise counseleris, and bifore alle 
the® my3ti princes of the kyng. And Y was 
coumfortid bi the hond of ‘my Lord# 
God}, that was in me, and Y gederide of i 
the sones of Israel princes“, that! stieden™ 
with me®. 


CAP. Vali. 


Therfor® these ben the princes of mey-} 
nees, and this is the genologie? of hem, 
whiche? beynge™ in the rewme of Ar- 
taxerses, kyng’, stieden* with" me fro 
Babiloyne. Of the sones of Phynees, Ger-2 
son’; of the sones of Ythamar, Danyel ; 
of the sones of Dauid, Arcus; of thes 
sones of Sechemye and of the sones of 
Pharos, Zacarie”, and with hym weren 
noumbrid an hundrid and fifti men; of4 
the sones of Phet, Moab, and* Elioneay, 
the sone of Zacharie’, and with hym? two 
hundrid men; of the sones of Sechemye, 5 
the sone of Ezechiel*, and with hym? thre 


x outher 4eru. 


&Om.1s. bhOm.1. ithat ins. 
tustly 1. is, that thei rewle and deme trenli s. 
F Om. ins. §& this doom ins. 
x leesing ins. _Y seide to the king Ns. 
bowide 1n. be the Lord preised that bowid s. 
Lord Gods. » my God 1. 


up ins. ™ me {in s] to Jerusalem 1s, 
Sthe kyng1. and sticden ins. 4 up with 1. 
xOm.ns.  ¥ Zacarie was prince 1s. 


> hym 3eden up 1. him stieden vp s. 


k ordeyne thou rns. 

© Om. IN. 
t ethir he sehal go 1s. 
Z counseil INS. 
e Om. 1. 
i togidre princis of 1Ns. 
© Forsothe Ins. 
VY Gerson was prince INS. 
z hym 3eden up 1. him stieden vp 8. 


nis, that thei reule 
4 not diligently ins. 
uQOm. ins. ¥ Om. scinsvw. W outlawyug Ns. 
2@intoins. »°Om.n. ¢thatins. 4 that 
fhond or the goodnesse s. & the Lord 1n. the 
lthe whiche 1. whiche ns. ™ stieden 
4 that ins. 1 weren INS. 
w Zacarie was prince 18. 
a Ezechiel was prince 1s. 


10m. ins. ™ that 1ns. 
P knowen Ins. 


k Om. ins. 
P generacioun INS. 


496 


Addaenebeth, sone of Jonathan, and with 
zhym fifti men; of the sonys of Elam, 
Isaias, the sone of Italie, and with hym 
gsenenti men; of the sonus of Safacie, Ze- 
bedias, the sone of Mychael, and with 
ghym ei3teti men; of the sonus of Joab, 
Obedia, the sone of Jehiel, and with hym 
1otwo hundrid and eiz3tetene men; of the 
sonus of Salomyth, the sone of Josfie, 
and with hym an hundrid and sixti 
11men; of the sonus of Belbai, Zacharias, 
the sone of Bebai, and with hym twenti 
izand ei3te men; of the sonus of Esiad, 
Johannan, the sone of Esethan, and with 
hym an hundrid and ten men; of the 
issonus of Odonycham, that last weren, 
and these the namus of hem, Elifilech, 
and Heiel, and Samaias, and with hem 
1asixti men; of the sonus of Beguy, Vthai, 
and Saccur, and with hem seuenti men. 
is I gederede hem forsothe to the flod, that 
reuneth to Hanna; and wee dwelten 
there thre da3is. And J so3te in the puple, 
and in the prestus of the sonus of Leuy, 
isand I fond not there. And so I sente 


I. ESDRAS. 


VIII. 7—19. 


hundrid men; of the sones of Addam,6 
Nabeth, the sone of Jonathan’, and with 


hym4 fifti men; of the sones of Elam,7_ 


Ysaie, the sone of Italie, and with him 
seuenti men; of the sones of Saphacie,s 
Zebedie, the sone of Mycael, and with 
him fourescore men ; of the sones of Joab,9 
Obedie, the sone of Jehiel, and with him 
two hundrid and eijtene-men; of® the1o0 
sones of Salomyth, the sone of Josphie, 
and with hym an hundrid and sixti men; 
of the sones of Belbai, Zacarie, the sone11 
of Belbai, and with hym twenti and ei3te 
men; of the sones of Ezead, Johannam*, 12 
the sone of Ezethan, and with hym an 
hundrid and ten men; of the sones of 13 
Adonycam, that weren$ the® laste, and 
these beni the names of hem, Eliphelech, 
and Ejihel, and Samaie, and with hem 
werenk sexti men; of the sones of Beguy, 14 
Vtai, and Zaccur', and with hem weren™ 
seuenti men. Forsothe™ Y° gaderide hem? 15 
togidere? at the flood, that renneth doun 
to Hanna; and we dwelliden there thre 
daies. And ‘Y sou3te" in’ the puple, and int 


Elizer, and Arihel, and Semeiam, and 


the prestis of the sonus of Leuy{t, and Y + Lewy; that 
Elnathan, and Jaubeth, and an other 


5 is, dek 
fonde uot there. Therfor Y sente Eliezer, 16 ¢’mply and not 


Elnathan, and Nathan, and Zacharie, and 
Mesollam, princis; and Joarib, and El- 
i7nathan, wise men; and I sente hem to 
Heldo, the whiche is the firste in the 
place off Casfee, and I putte in the mouth 
of hem woordis, that thei shulden speken 
to Eldo, and to the brethern of hym, 
sodeknys, in the place of Casfee, that 
thei shulden bringe to vs mynystris of 
isthe hous of oure God. And thei bro3ten 
to vs, bi the goode hond of oure God 
vpon vs, a most wis man of the sonus of 
Mooli, sone of Leui, sone of Irael; and 
Sarabiam, and the sonus of hym, twenti, 
igand the brethern of hym, ei3tetene; and 
Azabie, and with hym, Isaie, of the sonys 


¢ Jonathan was prince s. 
hthat vu. i Om. plures. 
o Andins. ° Y Esdras 1s. 
tOm.rys. —_¥ Leuy I sou3te rns. 
sentes. * which weren wise s. 
the first or chefe man s. 


4 hiym weren INs. 


{€ putte INS. 


e and of s. 

K 3eden up 1. Om. n. slieden up s. 
P alle hem 1. alle these men ns. 
Vv which alle weren princis s. 

y and these 1. and alle these s. 

4 the wordis 1ns. 

h thei brouzten ans. ithe sone rs. J and thei brouzten rns. * qweren eiztene rns. 


and Ariehel, and Semeam, and Helnathan, 
and Jaubeth, and an other Helnathan, 
and Nathan, and Zacharie, and Mesollam, 
princes’ ; and” Joarib, and Elnathan, wise* 
men; andy Y sente hem? to Heldo, which? !17 
is ‘the firste’ in the place of Casphie, and 
Y puttide® in the mouth of hem wordis¢, 
whiche thei schulden speke to Heldo, and 
to hise britheren, Natynneis, in the place 
of Casphie, for to brynge to vs the mynys- 
tris of the hows of oure God. And ‘thei1s 
brou3ten to vs°, bi the good hoondf of oure 
God on® vs, a" ful wijs man of the sones 
of Mooli, the sone of Leuy, sone? of Israel; 
andj Sarabie, and his sones twenti, and 
his britheren ei3tene*; and Azabie, and 19 


f Johannam Adonyca s. & weren in B, 
1 Zaccur weren princes 1s. ™ Om. Nn. 
4Om.1ns, 'Om.1. 8 among rns, 
wand with hem 1. and with hem I 
z2QOm.1ns. ®that ins. > cheef 1. 
©Om.1ns. fhond or loves. & upon Ins. 


prestis. Lire 


here. C. 


VIIL, 20-—29. 


of Merari, the brethern of hym, and the 
zosonys of hym, twenti; and of the sodek- 
nys, thatY Danid hadde 3iue and princis 
to the seruise of Leuitys, sodeknys two 
hundrid and twenti; alle these bi ther 
ginamys weren clepid. And I prechide 
there fasting beside the flod of Hanna, 
that we shulden ben trauailid in pe- 
naunce befor the Lord oure God, and 
asken of hym a ri3t weie to vs, and to 
oure sonus, and to al oure substaunce. 
22Forsothe I was ashamyd to asken the 
king helpe, and horse men, that my3ten 
defenden vs fro the enemy in the weie, 
for wee hadden seid to the king, The 
hond of oure God is vpon alle that sechen 
hym in goodnesse; and the empire of 
hym, and the strengthe of hym, and 
wodnesse vpon alle that forsaken hym. 
23 Wee fasteden forsothe, and pre3eden oure 
.God for this, and it cam to vs welsumli. 
24 And I seuerede of the princis of prestis 
twelue, Sarabiam,Sazabiam, and with hem 
25 of the brethern of hem, ten; and I peisede 
to hem the siluer and gold, and the sa- 
cride vesselis of the hous of oure God, the 
whiche the king hadde offrid, and the 
counseileris of hym, and the princis of 
hym, and al Irael, of hem that weren 
26founden. And I peisede in the hondis of 
hem of siluer talentis sixe hundrid and 
fifti, and siluerene vesselys an hundrid ; 
270f gold an hundrid talentus, and goldene 
chalicis twenti, the whiche hadden a 
thousend shillingus; and two faire ves- 
2gselis of best-shinende bras as gold. And 
I seide to hem, 3ee halewis of the Lord, 
and the holy vesselis, and’ siluer and 
gold, that wilfulli is offrid to the Lord 
29 God* of oure fadris, waketh, and kepith, 
to the time that 3ee peisen vp befor the 
princis of prestus, and of Leuitus, and 


Y the whiche 4zeru. 


leamen with 1s. ™that1.  ® othere 1Ns. 
comaundide fastyng 1s. I prechide fasting N. 
God ins. t* riz3t ins. °snbstaunce Ns. 
Yhond or helps. Zupon ins. 4 his strong Ns. 
departiden s. _f that is, Sarabie 1s. 
whiche 1. whiche ns. * hadden iz mei3é 18. 
1 and therfor 1s. © kepeth 1ns. P of acs. 


VOL. II. 


I. ESDRAS. 


2 of c prem. 


o Om. INs. 
Tbe soi. in doyng penaunce be s. 
Vv Certis Ns. 
b forsakith Nn. 
€ alle the men that weren founden of Israel 1N. 

1 7 bitoke hem two. I toke to hem two s. 
4 the silner 1N. 


38 


497 


Isaie, with’ him of the sones of Merari, 
thei brou3ten his britheren, and his sones, 
twenti; and of Nathynneis, whiche™ Dauid 20 
and the" princis hadden 3oue to the ser- 
uyces of dekenes, the: brou3ten two hun- 
drid and twenti Nathynneis; alle these 
weren clepid bi her names. And ‘Y21 
prechide® there fastyng? bisidis the flood 
of Hanna‘, that we schulden be" tur- 
mentid bifor ‘oure Lord God’, and that 
we schulden axe of him the ri3tfult weie 
to vs, and to oure sones, and to al oure 
catel". For’ Y schamede to axe of the 22 
kyng help, and horse men, that” schulden 
defende vs fro enemyes* in the weie, for 
we hadden seid to the king, The hondy of 
oure God is on? alle men that seken hym 
in goodnesse; and his lordschip, and his 
strengthe, and strong* veniaunce ben on 
alle men that forsaken* hym. Forsothe*23 
we fastiden, and preieden oure God for 
this thing, and it bifelde to vs ‘bi pros- 
perite’, And ‘Y departide® twelue of the 2s 
princes of prestis, Sarabie‘, and Asabie, 
and ten of her britheren with hem; and25 
Y bitook vndur certeyn wei3te and noum- 
bre to hem the siluer and gold, and the 
halewid vessels of the hows of oure God, 
whiche the kyng hadde offrid, and hise 
counseleris, and hise princes, and ‘al Is- 
rael, of hem that weren foundun®. And 26 
Y bitook vndur certeyn wei3te and noum- 
bre in® the hondis of hem sixe hundrid 
and fifti talentis of siluer, and an hun- 
drid siluerne vessels; an hundrid talentis 
of gold, and twenti goldun cuppis, that! 27 
hadden* a thousynde peesis of gold ; and 
twei! faire vessels of best™ bras, schyn- 
ynge as gold. And Y seide to hem, 3e 28 
ben the hooli men of the Lord, and" wake 29 
3e, and kepe® the hooli vessels, and? siluer4 
and gold', which® is offrid bi fre wille to 


a oure God c. 


4 Hanna I prechide or 
8 the Lord onre 
Wwhiche Ins. “enemy A sec. 7. onr enemyes Ss. 
cAnd rns. ‘4welsnmly vs. & we 
hintos. ithe 

™ ful good 1. 


P Om. INS. 


tof golds, § that 1. 


498 I. ESDRAS. VIII. 30-—36. 


dukis of meines of Irael in Jerusalem, in 
30to the tresor® of the hous of God. For- 
sothe the prestus and Leuitus token the 
peis of siluer, and of gold, and of vesselis, 
that thei bringe in to Jerusalem, in to the 
3ihous of ther God. Thanne we moueden 
forth fro the flod of Hanna, the twelfthe 
dai of the firste monyth, that we go in 
to Jerusalem; and the hond of oure God 
was vpon vs, and deliuerede vs fro the 
hond of the enemy and of the spiere in 
32the weie. And wee camen to Jerusalem, 
33and wee dwelten there thre da3is. The 
ferthe forsothe dai peisid vp is the siluer 
and gold, and the vesselis, in the hous of 
oure God, bi the hond of Remmoth, sone® 
of Vrie, prest ; and with hym Eleazar, the 
sone of Fynees, and with hem Josaded, 
the sone of Josue, and Noadoia, the sone 
of Bennoi, Leuite, aftir the noumbre and 
34 wei3te of alle thingus; and al the wei3te 
35is descriued in that time. But the sonus 
of transmygracioun, that weren come fro 
caitifte, offriden brent sacrifises to the 
Lord God of Irael, caluys twelue for 
al the puple of Irael, wetheris nynti 
and sixe, lambis seuenti and seuene, got 
buckis for synne twelue; alle in to brent 
36Sacrifise to the Lord. Thei 3euen for- 
sothe maundemens of the king to the 
satrapis, that weren of the si3te of the 
king, and to the dukis bejonde the flod ; 
and thei rereden vp a puple, and‘ the 
hous of God. 


> tresorie E pr.m. 


the Lord God of oure fadris, tilt 3e 3elde” 
vndur certeyn wei3te and noumbre bifor 
th princes of prestis, and of dekenes, and 
bifor the’ duykis of meynees of Israel in 
Jerusalem, in to the tresour of Goddis 
hows. Sotheli* the preestis and dekenes30 
token the weizte of siluer, and of gold, 
and of vessels, for to bereY in to Jerusa- 
lem, in to the hows of oure God. Therfor?31 
we mouyden? forth fro the flood of Hanna, 
in the tweluethe dai of the firste monethe, 
for to go in to Jerusalem; and the hond> 
of oure God was on¢ vs, and delyuerde vs 
fro the hond of enemye’ and of aspiere® 
in the weie. And we camen to Jerusalem, 32 
and we dwelliden there thre daies. For-33 
sothef in the fourthe dai® the siluer was 
joldun” vndur certeyn wei3te and nouin- 
bre, and the gold, and the! vessels, ‘in the 
hows of oure God‘, by the noumbre and 
wei;te of alle thingis, bi the hond of Rem- 
moth, ‘sone of Vriel, preest ; and with him 
was Eleazar, the sone of Phynees, and 
with him weren Jozaded, the sone of 
Josue, and Noadaie, the sone of Bennoy, 
dekenes™ ; and al the wei3te was discriued 34 
in that tyme. But also the sones of35 
transmygracioun, that camen fro caitifte, 
offriden brent sacrifices" to the Lord God 
of Israel, ‘twelue calues® for al the puple 
of Israel?, nynti4 and sixe rammes, se- 
uene’ and seuenti lambren, twelue® buckis 
of geet for synne; alle thingis‘ in to brent 
sacrifice to the Lord. Forsothe" thei 3auen 36 
the comaundementis’ of the kyng to the 
princes”, that weren of* the si3t of the 
king, and to theY duykis* bizende? the 
flood; and® thei reisiden® the puple, and 
the hows of God. 


cthe sone F. ‘din «. 


t ynto the tyme that ins. “3elde it ajen ins. VOm.1ns. * And ins. Ybere hemis. 2% Thanne rns. 


@remoueden 1ns. © hond or graces. © upon INs. 


d oure enemy'Ns. © the aspiere rvs. f And Ins. 


& dai in the hons of oure God rvs. =. 330ldun up ns. iOm.s. & Om.1ns. _! the sone of Urie 1. 


Om. ns. ™ which weren dekenes s. © sacrifice IN. 


© Om. ins. P Israel weren offrid twelue calues 1s. 


Israel twelue calues N. 9 and nynti ins. ™ and seuene ins. § and twelue ins. * weren offrid 1. these weren 
ofrid Ns. Andins. Vheestis1ns, Wwisemenins. *ins. YOm.1Ns. % duykis that werens. 
a of bigende 1ns. © and into heriyng of God is. ©¢ reisiden up 1N. 


IX. 1-—8. 


CAPITIS 


1 Aftir forsothe that these thingis ben 
fulfild, ne3heden to me the princis, 
seiende, The puple of Irael is not se- 
uered, and prestus, and Leuitus, fro the 
puplis of londis, and fro the abhomyna- 
ciouns® of hem, of Cananei, that is, of 
Ethei, and of Feresei, and of Jebusei, 
and of Amonitus, and of Moabitus, and 
zof Egipcienus, and of Amoriees. For- 
sothe thei token of the do3tris of hem to 
hem, and to ther sonus, wiues, and thei 
mengden holi sed with the puplis of 
londis; the hond also of princis and of 
maistris was in this firste trespasing. 
3And whan J hadde herd this woord, I 
cutte my mantil and cote, and pullide 
out the heris of myn hed and berd, and 
4sat weilende. Forsothe ther camen to 
me alle that dradden the woord of God 
of Irael, for the trespasing of hem that 
weren come fro the caitifte; and I sat 
5dreri vito the euetid sacrifise. And in the 
euetid sacrifise I ros fro myn affliccioun, 
andf the mantil cut and cote, I bowide 
my knes, and spradde out myn hondis to 
6the Lord my God, and seide, Mi God, 
I am confoundid and ashamed to reren 
my face to thee, for oure wickenessis® 
ben multiplied vpon! oure hed, and oure 
7giltis ben sprungen vnto heuene, fro the 
da3is of oure fadris; but and wee vsself 
han synned greuousli vnto this dai, and 
in oure wickenessis we ben taken, wee, 
and oure kingus, and oure prestus, in the 
hondis of kingus of londis, and in to 
swerd, and in to caitifte, and in to ra- 
vein, and in to confusioun of chere, as 
gand in this dai. And now as at* litil 


€ domynaciouns = pr.m. f Om. c. 


I. ESDRAS. 


& knit 4. 


499 


Car. IX. 


Forsothe! after that these thingis weren 1 
fillid’, the princes neijeden to mef, and 
seiden, The puple of Israel, and the 
prestis, and dekenes, ben not depertid 
fro the ‘puplis of londis, and® fro abho- 
minaciouns' of hem, that is, of Cananei, 
of Ethei, and of Pheresei, and of Jebusei, 
and of Amonytis, and of Moabitis, and of 
Egipcians, and of Ammorreis. For thei!? 
han take‘of her dou3tris™ wyues to hem 
silf, and to lier sones, and thei han medlid 
hooli® seed with the puplis of londis®; also? 
the hond4 of princes" and of magistratis* 
was thet firste in this trespassyng. And3 
whanne Y" hadde herd this word, Y to- 
rente my mentil and coote’, and Y pullide 
awei the heeris of myn heed and berd", 
and Y sat morenynge. Forsothe* alle thaty 4 
dredden the word of God of Israel camen 
togidere to me, for the trespassyng of hem 
that weren comun fro caitifte?; and Y sat 
sori ‘til to* the sacrifice of euentid. And ins 
the sacrifice of euentid Y roos’ fro myn 
afflicioun, and aftir that Y to-rente® the? 
mentil and coote*, Yf bowide my knees, 
and J& spredde abrood myn hondis to ‘my 
Lord God}, and Y seide, My God, Y ame 
confoundid and aschamed to reise! my face 
to thee, for oure* wickidnessis ben multi- 
plied ‘on myn heed!, and oure trespassis 
encreessiden™ ‘ti] to" heuene, fro the daies7 
of oure fadris®; but? also we vs‘ silf han 
synned greuousli ‘til to™ this dai, and for 
our wickidnessis we, and oure kyngis, and 
oure prestis ben bitakun in*® the hondis 
of kyngis of londis', bothe in to swerd, 
and in to caitifte, in to raueyn, and in to 
schenship of cheer, as also in this dai®. 


h wickidnes 4. ivpc. Kac. 


@Andins. €¢ fulfillidins. me, Esdras 1. me, thal is, to Esdras s.  & peple and ritis of othere Nn. 
peple and ritis and othere s, »neins. ithe abhomynaciounsins. & Om. a. | of the dou3tris of thes 
peplis thei ins. ™QOm.1ns. her hooli ns. © hethen londisins. Pandins. 4 hond or the doyng s. 


tOm. ns. 
Z the caitifte ins. 
© my coote Ins. 


rthe pryncis ns. § maistir inen Ins, 
x Certig ins. Y thei that ns. 
to-rente ins. 4 my INs. 


D ynto 1N. in to 8. 
€ hethen londis ins. 


encressid 1Ns. 
8 in to INS. 


uY, Esdras s. 


f and a. 
‘ upon myn heed or over myn understondyng oure 18. upon myn heed oure nN. 
© fadris hidere to 1s. 
u dai is schewid Is. 


3s 2 


Y my coote ins. W of my beerd Ns. 


&ynto IN. on tos. tilx. roosupins. © hadde 
§ Om. a. | the Lord my God rvs. } reise up 1. 
1 Om, Ins. m han 


Pand ins. 4oure Ns. ‘° vnto INS. to x. 


500 I. ESDRAS. IX. g—15; 


aud at a moment is don oure pre3ere 
anent the Lord our God, that the rem- 
nauntus ben for3iue! to vs, and the pes of 
hym be 3iuen in his holi place, and oure 
God li3te oure e3en, and 3iue to vs a litil 
9lif in oure seruise. For seruauns wee ben, 
and in oure seruise our God forsoc not 
vs; and he bowide in vpon vs mercy be- 
for the king of Persis, that he™ 3eue to 
vs lijf, and rere the hous of oure God, 
and make out the wildernessis" of it, and 
3eue to vs hope in Juda and in® Jerusa- 
iolem, And now what shul wee sein, Lord 
oure God, after these thingus? For wee 
itban forsake thin hestus, that thou hast 
comaundid in the hond of thi seruauns 
prophetis, seiende, The lond, to the 
whiche jee shu] gon out, that 3ee welden 
it, is a lond vnelene, after the vnclenesse 
of puplis, and of othere londis, the whiche 
fulfilden it with the? abhomynaciouns of 
hem, fro mouth vnto mouth in ther de- 
12fouling. Now thanne joure do3tris ne 
3iue 3e to the sonus of hem, and the do3- 
tris of hem taketh not to jour sonus; and 
seketh not pes of hem and prosperite of 
hem vnto enermor; that 3ee be coum- 
fortid, and eten that ben goode thingus 
of the lond, and eiris 3ee haue 3oure 
13sonus ynto the world. And after alle 
thingus that camen vpon vs in oure 
werste werkis, and in oure grete gilte, 
for thou, oure God, deliueredist vs fro 
oure wickenesse, and 3eue to vs helthe, 
14as is to dai, that we be not turned, and 
make thin hestis in vein, ne bi matri- 
moyne we ben joyned with the puplis 
of these abhomynaciouns. Whether thou 
art wroth to vs vnto the ending, lest thou 
15leue to vs relikis and helthe? Lord God 


And now as at a litilY and at a moments 

oure preier is maad anentis ‘oure Lord 

God", that relikis* schulden’ be left to vs, 

and that ‘his peesY+ schulde? be 3ouun in + Pees; in 
his hooli place, and that onre God schulde® i. a il stake, 
li3tne oure izen, and 3yue to vs a litil lijf te endian 
in oure seruage. For we ben seruauntis,9 ™°* in Jeru- 


salem. Lire 
and oure God forsoke vs not im oure ser- ere. c. 
uage®; and he bowide® merci‘ on® vs bifor 
the king of Persis, that he schulde 3yue- 
lijf to vs, and enhaunse the hows of oure 
God, and that he schulde bilde the wil- 
dernessist therof‘, and 3yue to vs hope 1 wildirnesses; 
in Juda and in Jerusalem. And NOW, 10 texpie trened 
‘oure Lord God", what schulen we seie poe 
after these thingis? For! we han forsake 
thi comaundementis*, whiche thou co-11 
maundidist in the hond of thi seruauntis 
profetis, and seidist!, The lond, to™ which 
3e schulen entre, to holde it in possessioun, 
is an vnclene lond, bi the vneclennesse of 
puplis, and of othere® londis®, in the abho- 
mynaciouns of hem, that filliden? it with 
her defoulyng, fro the mouth‘ ‘til to™ the 
mouth’. Now therfort 3iue 3e not 3o0ure12 
dou3tris to her sones, and" take 3e not her 
dou3tris to 3oure sones; and’ seke 3e not 
the pees of hem and the* prosperite ‘of 
hemyY ‘til in to* with outen ende; that 3e 
be coumfortid, and ete the goodis*, that 
ben of the lond®, and that 3e haue eiris®, 
3oure sones’, ‘til in to® ‘the world’. And13 
after alle thingis®’ that camen on? vs in 
oure werste werkis, and in‘ oure grete 
trespas, for* thou, oure God, hast dely- 
uered vs fro oure wickidnesse, and hast! 
3oue helthe to vs, as ‘it is™ to" dai, that14 
we schulden not be turned®, and make 
voide thi comaundementis?, and? that we 
schulden not ioyne matrimonyes with the 


lforsakyn 4. ™3e 4. " wildirnes 4. 9 Om.c. P Om. 4. 


vlitil tyme 1s. Wthe Lord oure God ins. * relikis, that is, a fewe men c. marg. relikis, or remenauntis 1. 
relifs n. relikis, that is, afler cummers s. pees of the Lord ins. 2Om. ins. 20Om.ins. > thraldom 1. 
seruage or caitifie s. © bowide doun rns. dhis mercis. ©uponins.  f therof or the desolat things 


therof's. & hope or mercis. » Lord oure God ns. 


i Sothelins.  heestis ns. } thou seidist ns. 


mOm.s. "othere hethen 1s. © londis it is defoulid tvs. P han fulfillid xs. 9 mouth of fadris vs. 
Tynto1ns. § mouth of her sones ins. t therfor 3e Jewis 1s. Uneins. Yne ms. Wne ins. * her rns. 
y¥Om.1ns. 2 vntor. 4 gode thingis rvs. berthe rvs. ¢ Om.1ns. 4 sones joure eiris rvs. © vnto F. 
into x. fwithouten ende ins. & disesis1s. 4 uponins. iOm.ins. * Om. 1s. ! thou hast rs. 
™Om.n. ®schewid to 1s. © turned awei 1. turned awey fro thee ns. P hestis 1xs, 4 Om. x. 


X.1—7- 


of Irael, ri3twis thou art; for wee ben 
forsaken, the whiche shulden ben saaf as 
bi.this dai, lo! befor thee we ben in oure 
gilte; forsothe it mai not ben stonden 
befor thee vpon this. 


CAR. x 


1 So thanne Esdre prej3ende, and besech- 
ende God, and wepende, and liende befor 
the temple of God, ther is gedered to 
hym a ful myche cumpanye gret of men, 
and of wymmen, and childer; and the 

2puple wepte with myche weping.. And 

‘ Sechenyas, the sone of Jaiel, of the sonus 
of Elam, answerde, and seide to Esdre, 
Wee han trespasid in oure God, and wee 
han weddid aliene wiues of the puplis of 
the lond. And now, for ther is penaunce 

3in Irael vpon this, smyte wee couenaunt 
of pes with the Lord oure God, and 
throwe awei alle oure wiues, and hem 
that of hem ben born, after the wil of 
the Lord; and of hem that dreden the 
maundement of oure God, after the lawe 

4be it don. Ris, thin it is to demen, and 
wee shul be with thee; tac coumfort, 
sand do. Thanne Esdras ros, and ad- 
iurede the princis of prestus, and of Le- 
uitus, and al Irael, that thei shulden do 
cafter this woord; and thei sworen. And 
Esdras ros befor the hous of God, and 
wente awei to the bed place of Johannan, 
sone of Eliasif, and he wente in thider ; 
bred he eet not, and water he dranc not; 
forsothe he weilede the trespasing of hem, 
7that fro the caitifte weren comen.. And 


ther is sent a vois in Juda and Jerusa- ° 


lem, to alle the sonus of transmygracioun, 


8 ynto INS. into xX. 
Ww day thou schewist 18. 
© ground ins. 


t Lord, whether 1s. 
of tht peple s. ¥ to 1Ns. 
abe sett ins. > upon 1s. 


© the Lord oure God 1Ns. 
8 heest ins. ¢ Om. rns. 
ydothusis. % Thanne1. 

€ sworen herto ts. { roos up INS. 

1 Om. ins. ™ certis 1Ns. 


® make Ins. 

lawe, bi rns. 
this thing ns. 
KLMNPDb. 
k ne Ins. 


I. ESDRAS.. 


t Om. 1. 
x sothly 1s. 
4 God for the peple is. 
Shauer, and we ins. thaue1. kOm.1ns. } lond of hethen peplis rvs. 
P oure alien wyues INS. 
u thou up INs. 
4 roos 1p INS. 

& the sone Ns. 
2 weilide INs. 


501 


puplis of these abhomynacouns. Whether* 
thou art wrooth to vs ‘til to® thet endyng, 
that thou schuldist not leeue to us reme- 
nauntis"}, and’ helthe? Lord God of Is-15 +t remenauntis ; 
rael, thou’ art iust; for we ben left, that mea Soe 
schulden be sauyd as in this day”, lo! we 

ben bifor thee in oure synne; for* meY 
may ‘not? stonde* bifor thee on? this{ 
thing®. 


} on this; that 
is, to excuse 
ether defende. 
Lire here. c. 


CXP as: 


Therfor while Esdras preiede so, and1 
bisou3te God4, and wepte, and lai bifor: 
the temple of God, a ful greet cumpenye 
of Israel, of men, and of wymmen, and 
of children, was gaderid® to him ; and the 
puple wepte bif myche weping. And Se-2 


chenyej, the sone of Jehiel, of the sones: § Sechenye; 


he was of the 


of Helam, answeride, and seide to Esdras, _ princypalis of 

r . h__ the puple, and 
We hané trespasside a3ens oure God, and® (2342 this'in 
han weddid wyues, alien wymmen, of ‘the the name of 
é him silf, and 

puplis of* the lond’. And now, for pe- of othere prin- 
cipals. Lire 


naunce”™ is in Israel on this thing, smyte™3 here. c. 
we boond of pees with ‘oure Lord God°, 
and caste we awei alle‘wyues aliens?,.and 
hem that ben borun of tho wyues’, bit the 
wille of the Lord; and of hem that dreden 
the comaundement® of oure God,‘be it don 
bi the lawe'. Rise thou", it ‘is thin’ office 4 
to deme*, and we schulen be with thee; 
be thou coumfortid, and doY. Therfor?s 
Esdras roos*, and chargide> greetli the 
princes of prestis, and of° dekenes, and 
of4 al Israel, to do after this word; and 
thei sworen®. And Esdras roos bifor thes 
hows of God, and he 3ede to the bed of 
Johannan, sone® of Eliasiph, and entride 
thidur ; he eet not! breed, and* drank not! 
watir; for™ he biweilide" the trespassing® 
of hem, that weren comun fro the caitifte.. 
And a vois of hem: was sent in to Juda7 
and Jerusalem, to alle. the sones of trans- 


” 


u the remenauntis of thi peple 1. remenauntis 
y no thing ins. men Hx. 2 Om. INs. 
" e gaderid togidre ins. f with 1. 
™ penaunce or ponishing s. 
4 wyues, and Ns. be this don bi the 
w Om. plures, * deme 
¢ Om. x. 4 Om. EFHI 

i not in this tyme s, 


Vv perteyneth to thee 1. 

b he chargide rns. 

h he entride 1s. 
© trispacis s. 


502 


that thei shulden be gedered in to Jeru- 
ssalem; and alle that cometh not in thre 
da3is, aftir the counseil of the princis and 
of the elders, al his substaunce shal be 
taken awei, and he shal be cast awei 
fro the cumpanye of transmygracioun. 
9Thanne alle the men of Juda and of 
Beniamyn camyn togidre in Jerusalem 
thre dajes; it is the nynthe monyth, in 
the twentithe dai of the monyth ; and al 
the puple sat in the strete of the hous of 
God, tremblende for synne and reynes. 
io And Esdras, the prest, ros, and seide 
to hem, 3ee han trespasid, and wedded 
aliene wiues, that jee adden vp on the 
ugilte of Irael. And now 3iueth confes- 
sioun to the Lord God of oure fadris, 
and doth the plesaunce of hym, and beth 
seuered fro the puplis of the lond, and 
igfro alien wiues. And al the multitude 
answerde, and seide with a gret vois, 
13 After thi woord to vs, so be it do. Ner- 
thelatere for the puple is myche, and 
the time of rein, and we sustene not to 
stonde with oute forth, and it is not 
the were of o dai, or of two; forsothe 
hidousli we han synned in this woord ; 
itbe ther sett princis in al the multitude, 
and alle in oure cites, that han wedded 
aliene wiues, come thei in the time set, 
and with hem the elders, bi cite and cite, 
and the domesmen of it, to the time that 
the wrathe of oure God be turned awei 
isfro vs vpon this synne. Thanne Jona- 
than, the sone of Azahel, and Jasia, the 
.sone of Thechue, stoden vpon this; and 
Mosollam, and Sebethai, Leuitus, holpen 
ishem. And so diden the sonus of trans- 
mygracoun. And Esdras, prest, and the 
men, princis of the meynes, wenten awei 
in to the housis of ther fadris, and alle 


P caitiftee 1Ns. 
Va large place ins. 
2 3e han 1Ns. 
f Om. 1. 
lus stidefast x. vs ferm and stable s. 
Preyn now Ins. 4 is gref INS, 
thou sehewist to us 18. 
Y come thet rns. 2 to here prineis in ts, 
of the peple x. © wrath Ins, 4 of 1. upon Ns, 
b that weren princes 1Ns. 


4 gaderid togidre Ns. 
w thei trembliden 1Nns. 
a thei a pr. m. 


V be therfor princes 1s. 


I. ESDRAS. 


r Om. n. 

* for reyn that thanue felle 1s. for reyn N.- 
» leie ta or eneresse 18. 
& hethen ins. " 3oure alien wyues 1s. alien wyuesn. i Aftir1. Ben. seid to 1. word to Ns. 
m and so Ns. 
T susteinen 1. suflicen Ns. 
W multitude o iustife this synne 1s. 
& tyme INS. 
© upon INs. 


X. 8—16.. 


mygracioun?, that thei schulden be ga- 
derid4 in to™ Jerusalem; and ech mans 
that cometh not’ in thre-daies, bi thet 
counsel of the" princes and of eldre men, 
al his catel schal be takun awey fro him, 
and he schal be cast awei fro the cum- 
peny of transmygracioun. Therfor alleg 
the men of Juda and of Beniamyn camen 
togidere in to Jerusalem in thre daies; 
thilke is the nynthe monethe, in the twen- 
tithe dai of the monethe; and al the pu- 
ple sat in ‘the street’ of Goddis hows, and 
trembliden¥ for synne and reyn*. Andio 
Esdras, the preest, roos’, and seide to hem, 
3e han trespassid, and han? weddid wyues, 
alien wymmen, that 3e* schulden ‘leie to? 
on® the trespas of Israel. And‘? now® 3yue11 
3e knowlechyng to the Lord God! of oure 
fadris, and do 3e his pleasaunce, and be 3e 
departid fro the puplis of the londs’, and 
fro ‘wyues aliens®, And al the multitude 12 
answeride, and seide with greet vois, Bi! 
thi word to* ys!, so™ be it doon. Netheles 13 
for" the puple® is myche, and the tyme of 
reyn? isi, and we suffren™ not to stonde 
withoutforth, and it’ is not werk' of o 
dai, nether of tweyne; for we han synned 
greetli in this word"; ‘princes be or-14 
deyned in al the multitude”, and alle men 
in oure citees, that han weddid ‘wyues 
aliens*, comeY in? tymes* ordeyned, and 
with hem come the eldere men, bi citee 
and citee, and the iugis therof», til the 
ire’ of oure God be turned awei fro vs 
on’ this synne. Therfor Jonathan, the 1s 
sone of Asahel, and Jaazie, the sone of 
Thecue, stoden on® this thing; and Mo- 
sollam, and Sebethai, dekenes, helpiden 
hem. And the sones of transmygracioun 16 
diden sof. And Esdras, the prest, and 
men8, princes of meynees, 3eden into the 


8 not thidere 1s. tOm.ins. 4% Om. caings. 
¥ roos up INS. 


© upon INS. 14Om.s. © now therfore 1s. 
n for that 1. for that that s. 


® this INS. 


© multitude ins. 
t the werk mvs. word thal 
* alien wyues IN. 

» of the peple do thei iust execucioun 1s. 
f so as it was ordeyned 1s. & the men IN. 


X. 17—33. 


bi ther namys; and thei seten in the 
firste dai of the tenthe monith, that thei 
17enserche the thing. And alle the men 
that hadden weddid alien wiues ben 
endid, vn to the firste dai of the firste 
ismoneth. And ther ben founden of the 
sonus of prestus, that weddeden hethene 
wiues; of the sonus of Josue, the sones 
of Josedech, and the brethern of hym, 
Maasia, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Go- 
i9dolia. And thei 3euen ther hondis, that 
thei shulden casten awei ther wiues, 
and for ther gilte thei shulden offren a 
20 wether of the shep. And of the sonus 
210f Semmer; Anam and Sebedia. And of 
the sonus of Seerim ; Maazia, and Helia, 
22and Semeia, and Jehiel, and Osias. And 
of the sonus of Fessur; Helioenai, Maa- 
zia, Hismael, Nathanael, and Josabeth, 
23and Elasa. And of the sones of Le- 
nitus; Josabeth, and Semei, and Eliaia; 
he is Calithafathaia; Juda, and Elieser. 
24 And of the singeris, Eliazub; and of the 
porteris, Sellum, and Thellem, and Vri. 
25 And of Irael, of the sonus of Faros; Re- 
mea, and Ezia, and Melchia, and Bua- 
nym, and Eliezer, and Melchia, and 
26 Banya. And of the sonus of Elam ; Ma- 
thanya, and Zacharias, and Jehil, and 
27 Abdi, and Rimoth, and Helia. And of 
the sonus of Secua; Helieonai, Heliazub, 
Mathanya, and Jerymuth, and Saeth, 
28and Aziza. And of the sonus of Bebai; 
29 Johannan, Ananya, Zabbai, Athalia. And 
of the sonys of Beny; Mosollam, and Me- 
lue, and® Azaia, Jasub, and Saal, and Ja- 
30moth. And of the sonus of Faeth; Moab, 
Edua, and Calal, Banaias, and Massias, 
Mathanyas, Beseleel, and Bemym, and 
31 Manasse. And of the sonus of Erem; 
Elieer, Jesue, Melchias, Semeias, Symeon, 
33 Beniamyn, Maloth, Samarias. And of 
the sonus of Asom; Mathanai, Mathetha, 


q Om. c. 


i hous wn. 


I. ESDRAS. 


K alle the eldre is. 1men and iugis 1s. Om.N. 


503 


howsis' of her fadris, and alles men! bi 
her names; and thei saten in the firste dai 
of the tenthe monethe, for to seke™ the 
thing. And alle men weren endid®, that 17 
hadden weddid ‘wyues aliens?, ‘til to4 the 
firste dai of the firste monethe. And theres 
weren foundun of the sones of preestis, 
that weddiden" ‘wyues aliens’; of the sones 
of Josue, the sone of Josedech, and hise 
britheren, Maasie, and Eliezer, and Jarib, 
and Godoliet. And thei 3auen her hondis"f, 19 + her hondis ; 
that thei schulden caste out her wyues, pe eel Se 
and offre’ for her trespas a ram of the” * slempne 
scheep. And of the sones of Semmer ; 20/7: © 
Anam, and Zebedie. And of the sones of 21 
Serym; Maasie, and Helie, and Semeie, 
and Jehiel, and Ozie. And of the sones of 22 
Phessur; Helioneai, Maasie, Hismael, Na- 
thanael, and Jozabet, and Elasa. And of23 
the sones of dekenes; Josabeth, and Semey, 
and Elaie; he is* Calithaphataie; Juda, 
and Elezer. And of syngeris, Eliazub ; 24 
and of porteris, Sellum, and Thellem, and 
Vry. And of¥ Israel, of the sones of Pha-25 
ros; Remea, and Ezia, and Melchia, and 
Vnanym, and Eliezer, and Melchia, and 
Banea. And of the sones of Elam; Ma-26 
thanye, and Zacharie, and Jehil, and Abdi, 
and Rymoth, and Helia. And of the sones 27 
of Zechua; Helioneay, Heliasib, Mathanye, 
and Jerymuth, and Zaeth, and Aziza. And 28 
of the sones of Bebai; Johannan, Ananye, 
Zabbai, Athalia?. And of the sones of Beny; 29 
Mosallam, and Melue, and Azatie, Jasub’, 
and Saal, and Ramoth. And of the sones 30 
of Phaeth; Moab, Edua, and Calal, Banaie,. 
and Massie, Mathanye, Beseleel, and Ben- 
nun, and Manasse. And of the sones of31 
Erem ; Elieer, Jesue, Melchie, Semeye, Sy- 
meon, Beniamyn, Maloth, Samarie. And 3; 
of the sones of Asom; Mathanai, Mathe- 
tha, Zabeth, Eliphelech, Jermai, Manasse, 
Semei*. Of the sones of Bany; Maddi, 34 


t Om. 4. 


™ enquere Ins. "thing that was amysse s. 


© that is, here causis weren determyned 1 marg. endid, that [is], the caucis of alle men weren determyned s. 


P alien wyues Ins. 4 vnto INs. 
Godolie weren foundun gilti s. 

offre x. that thei shulden offre s. W Om. ins. 
a and Jasub rvs. » and Samarie 1ns. 


¥ hadden wedded ins. 

u hondis, that és, thei assuriden 18. 
x is clepid 18. 
© and Semei Ins. 


s alien wyues ins. t Godolie weren foundun 1. 
v thei schulden offre 1. shulden 


Y of the men of Ns. 2 and Thalia rs. 


504 


Zabeth, Elifelech, Jermai, Manasse, Se- 
samei. And of h sonus of Bany; Maddi, 
3s Amram, and Huel, Baneas, and Badaias, 
36Cheilian, Bianna, Marimuth, and Elia- 
27 sif, Mathanyas, Mathanay, and Jasi, and 
39 Lany, and Bennan, and Semei, and Sal- 
somyes, and Nathan, and Daias, Mesuede- 
4ibai, Susai, Sarai, Esriel, and‘ Seloman, 
4? Semeria, Sellum, Amaria, Joseph. Of the 

sonus of Nebny; Aiel, Mathathias, Zabed, 
44Zabina, Jebdu, and Joel, Banai. Alle 

these hadden taken hethene wiues, and 
ther weren of these wymmen, that had- 
den born sonys. 


Explicit liber primus. 
secundus®. 


Incipit liber 


I. ESDRAS. 


X. 34-44. 


Amram, and Huel, Baneas, and Badaie, 35 
Cheilian’, Biamna, Marymuth, and Elia-36 
siph, Mathanye®, and Jasy, and Bany, and 3) 
Bennan, and Semei, and Salymas, and Na-39 


than, and Daias, Metuedabai, Sisai, Sarai, 40 


Ezrel, and Seloman, Semerie, Sellum, Ama- ea 
rie, Joseph’. Of the sones of Nebny;.Aiel, 43 
Mathatie, Zabed, Zabina, Jebdu, and Jo- 
hel, Banai®. Alle these hadden take ‘wyues 44 
aliens’, and of hem weren wymmen, that 


hadden bore children. 


Here eendith the firste book of Esdras, 
and here bigynneth the secound book*. 


t Om. an. " Here eendith the first book of Esdre, and now begynneth the secounde. a. Explicit liber 
Esdre primus, incipit secundus. &. Here endith Esdre the first, and now bygyneth Esdre the secounde. F. 
No final rubric in 1. 


4 and Cheilian c. ¢ Mathanye, and Mathanay pc. Mathanye, Mathanay v. fand Joseph 1x. §Om.1ys. 
hand Banairns. ‘alien wyues 1. alien or hethen wines s. k From gprouw. Here endith the firste 
book of Esdras, and bigynneth a prologe on the ij. book. am. Here endeth the firste book of Esdre, and 
here bigynneth the ij. book of Esdre. ux. Heere endith the firste book of Esdre, and the secounde biginnith. 1. 
Heere eendeth the firstc book of Esdre; see now the seconde book of Esdre or Neemye. x. Here endith the 

Jirste book of Esdras, and bigynneth the secunde. nrsv. Here endith the firste book of Esdre, and bigynneth 
the secunde book. gb. No final rubric in acexr. 


Il. ESDRAS. 


[ Prologue on the Second book of Esdras*. | 


In this secounde book of Esdre is contened the actis of Neemye, duyk and gouernour 
of the peple of Juda, which made a3en the wallis and 3atis of Jerusalem, and the hous 
of the Lord, and heeld smal houshold, and oppresside not the peple, but’ dredde God, 
and kepte hise comaundementis, in so myche that he suffride not the peple to bringe 
yn burthuns in to the cite, neither ledinge out, in the dai of sabat; therfor he wrou}te 


alle thingis with prosperite, and God was with him. 


The second book of Esdras*. 


CAP. 


1 THE woordis of Neemye, sone of E]- 
chie. And it is do in the monith of 
December, the twentithe 3er, and I was 
2in the bur3 toun of Susis; and ther cam 
to me Annam, oon of my brethern, he 
and the men of Juda; and IJ askide hem 
of Jewis>, that abiden stille, and laften 
ouer of the caitifte, and of Jerusalem. 
3 And thei seiden to me, Thei that abiden 
stille, and ben laft of the caitifte there in 
the prouynce, ben in gret affliccioun, and 
in repref; and the wal of Jerusalem is 
scatered, and his 3atis ben brend® with 
afijr. And whan I hadde herd such maner 
woordis, I sat and wepte, and weilide 
manye dajes, and fastide, and prejede be- 
sfor the face of God of heuene; and seide, 
I beseche, Lord God of heuene, strong, 


a No initial rubric in the Mss. but in c, Neemye, as a running title. 


® This prologue is from m. 


Here bigynneth the ii. book of Esdras, that is elepid Neemie. uv. No initial rubric in r1m1Nosvxb. 
€ that is, Nouembre 1 marg. s text. 
k Om. N. 


4 monethe of rns. 
h Om. ins. | caitifte, and that dwelleden 1s. 
it ins. PI wepte rvs. 
strong INS. 


VOL. Il. 


ben the 18. 


4 I morenede herfore 1Ns. 


Here bigynneth the secounde book of 
Esdre®. 


CAR: 


THE‘ wordis of Neemye, the sone of! 
Helchie. And it was doon in the monethe4 
Casleu®, in the twentithef 3eer, and Y was 
in the caste] Susis®; and Ananye, oon of2 
my britheren, cam to me, he and men of 
Juda; and Y axide hem of the Jewis, that 
weren left, and weren alyue of the caitifte, 
and of Jerusalem. And thei seiden to me,3 
Thei that ‘dwelliden, and" ben left of the 
caitifte’ theres in! the prouynce, ben in 
greet turment, and in™ schenship ; and the 
wal of Jerusalem is destried, and the 3atis 
therof® ben brent with fier. And whanne« 
Y hadde herd siche wordis, Y sat and 
wepte?, and moreneded many daies, and 
Y fastide, and preiede’ bifor the face of 
God of heuene; and Y seide, Y biseche’, s 
Lord God of heuene, strong‘, greet, and 


b the Jewis au. © brend vp ac. 


> Here endith the prologe, and bigynneth the secunde book of Esdras. G. 


© These 

& of Susis mvs. 
nN wallis s. © of 
t that art 


f twenti Nn. 
m Om. s. 
8 biseche thee ns. 


lstille in rns. 
tI preiede rns. 


3T 


506 


gret, and ferful, that’ kepist couenaunt 
and merci with hem, that loouen thee, 
sand kepen thi maundemens; be thi ere 
maad herknende, and thi ejen opened, 
that thou here the orisoun of thi ser- 
uaunt, in the whiche I prey3e befor® thee 
to dai, ny3t and dai, for the sonys of 
Irael, thi seruauns, and I knowleche for 
the synnes of the sones of Irael, in the 
whiche thei synneden to thee; and I and 
z7the hous of my fader han synned; bi 
vanyte wee ben born doun, and wee han 
not kept the héste, and cerimoines, and 
domns, that thou comaundedest! to Moises, 
sthiseruaunt. Haue mynde of the® woord, 
that thou comaundedest‘ to thi seruaunt, 
seiende, Whan 3ee han trespasid, I shal 
gscatere 30u in to puplis; and if 3ee be 
turned a3een to me, that 3ee kepe myn 
hestus, and don hem, also if 3ee weren 
lad awei to the endis of heuene, thennus 
I shal gadere 30u togidere, and leden in 
to the place, that I ches, that my name 
iodwelle there. And wee" thi seruanns, 
and thi puple, whom thou hast bo3t in 
thi grete strengthe, and in thi stronge 
ithond. I beseche, Lord, be thin ere tak- 
ende heede to the orisoun of thi seruaunt, 
and to the orisoun of thi seruauns, that 
wiln dreden thi name; and dresse thi 
seruaunt to dai, and 3if to hym merci 
befor this man. I forsothe was the! 
booteler of the king. 


CAP. II. 


1 It is do forsothe in the monith of 
Aprill, the twentithe 3er of Artaxerses, 
the king, and win was befor hym, and 
I heuede vp the win, and 3af to the king, 

2and I was astoneid beforn his face. And 
the king seide to me, Whi is thi chere 
dreri, sithen I see thee not sijk? That is 


IJ. ESDRAS. 


I, 6—II. 2. 


ferdful, which" kepist couenaunt and merci 
with hem, that louen thee, and kepen thin 
heestis ; thin eere be maad herknynge’,6 
and thin i3en openyd”, that thou here the 
preier of thi seruaunt, bi* which’ Y preie 
bifor thee ‘to dai’, bi? ny3t and dai, for the 
sones of Israel, thi seruauntis, and‘ Y knou- 
leche® for the synnes of the sones of Israel, 
bi which thei han synned to thee; bothe 
Y and the hows of my fadir han synned®; 
we weren disseyued bi vanyte, and we7 
‘kepten not! ‘thi comaundement®, and cery- 
monyes, and domes, which thou comaund- 
idist* to Moises, thi seruaunt. Haue mynde8 
of the word, which thon comaundidist to 
thi seruaunt Moises, and seidist, Whanne 
3e han. trespassid, Y schal scatere 30n 
in to puplis; and if 3e turnen a3en to9 
me, that 3e kepe myn heestis, and do tho, 
jhe, thou3 3e ben led awei to the fertheste 
thingis of heuene, fro thennus Y schal ga- 
dere 3ou togidere, and Y schal brynge 3o0u 
in to the place, which Y chees*, that my 
name schulde dwelle there. And! we ben 10 
thi seruauntis, and thi puple, whiche thou 
‘a3en bon3tist™ in thi greet strengthe, and 
in thi strong hond. Lord, Y biseche, 1! 
‘thin eere be® ententif? to the preier of 
thi sernauut, and to the preier’ of thi 
sernauntis, that wolen drede thi name; 
and dresse’ thi seruaunt to dai, and 3iue 
thous merci to him bifor this man*y. For’ 
Y was the boteler of the kyng. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothe it was doon in the monethe! 
Nysan*{, in the twentithe 3eer of Arta- 
xerses, kyng’, and wyn was bifor hym, and 
Y reyside” the wyn, and 3af* to the kyng, 
and Y was as langwischynge bifor his face. 
And the kyng seide to me, Whi is thiz 
cheer sory’, sithen® Y se not thee sijk ? 


d the which su. ¢to a. fcomaundist au. &thia. bweben «a. iOm.c. * Om. c. 


u that INs. Vv herkenyng fo me s. 
zOm.ins. 2 now bins, > hi dai 1. 
f haue not kept ins. 
chosen ins. ! And, Lord, 1. Lord, s. 
P takynge hede 1ns. 4 preiers s. 
u man Artazerses INS. 
= toke up INs. 


Vv Certis 1s. 


W be openyd Nn. 
¢ Om. Ins. 
& thin heest xn. thin heestis s. 
™m hast ajen hou3t 1Ns. 
T dresse thou 1n. dresse thou me s. 
w And ins. 
aT 3afit ins. » drury or heuy x. drery ns. 


x with 1. y the which 1. which preier s. 
4 I knowleche that bothe rvs. ¢ synned to thee Is. 

h hast comaundid rns. i that rN. k haue 
® biseche thee 1s. © be thin eere Ns. 
$Om.1ns. t him, that is, to me s. 
x of Nysan, that is, Aprel ins. _¥ the kyng 1. 
¢ sith 1. 


tT this man; 
that is, Artax- 
erses, king. 
Lire here. c. 

+ Nysan; the 
comyn opyn- 
youn of Jewes 
is this, that 
the world was 
maad of nou3t 
in the monethe 
which is clepid 
Tissery, and it 
answerith in 
party to oure 
Septembre, and 
in party to 
Octobre; and 
this monethe 

is seid outirly 
the firste anen- 
tis Ebreys, and 
by maner of 
rekenyng, 
Casleu is the 
thirde monethe, 
and Nysan is 
the vii. mo- 
nethe, and 
these fallen in 
the same 3eer, 
and thus is 
rekenyng maad 
here; bnt for 
the Jewis 3eden 
out of Egipt in 
the monethe 
Nysan, therfor 
thilke monethe 
is clepid the 
firste, in xii. c° 
of Exody, and 
in rikenynge 
in this maner, 
Caslen and Ny. 
san suynge, ben 
not in the same 
3eer, but Cas- 
len is the ix. 
monethe of the 
3eer bifor- 
goynge, and 
Nysan suynge 
is the bigyn- 
nyng of the 
3eer snynge. 
Lire here. c. 


Il. 3—11. II. ESDRAS. 507 


not in vein; but I wot not the euel that 
is in thin herte. And I dradde ful myche ; 
3and I seide to the king, King, with outen 
ende liue; whi shulde not my chere so- 
rewin priueli ? for the cite of the hous of 
the sepulcris of my fader! is desert, and 
4his jatus ben brent with fiir. And the 
king seith to me, For what thing askist 
thou? And I pre3ede the God of heuene, 
sand seide to the king, If it is seen good 
to the king, and if it plese to thi ser- 
uauns befor thi face, that thou sende me 
in to Jude, I beseche, to the cite of the 
sepulere of my fader, and I shal bilden 
cit. And the king seide to me, and the 
quen that sat biside hym, Vnto what 
time shal be thi wei, and ‘whanne shalt™ 
thou come ajeen? And I pleside befor 
the chere of the king, and he sente me, 
zand I sette hym a time ; and seide to the 
king, If to the king it is seen good, lettris 
3iue he to me to the dukis of the regioun 
be3onde the flod, that thei lede me ouer, 
sto the time I" come in to Jude; and a 
lettre to Asaf, kepere of the wilde wode 
of the king, that he 3iue to me trees, that 
I mowe couere the 3atis of the tour of 
the hous, and of the wal of the cite, and 
the hous that I shal come in. And the 
king 3af to me, after the goode hond of 
g9my God with me. And I cam to the 
dukis of the regioun be3unde the flod, 
and I 3af to hym the epistolis of the 
king. Forsothe the king hadde sent with 
10 Me prinsis of kni3tus, and horsemen. And 
Sanaballath Oronyte, and Tobie, ser- 
uaunt Amonyte, herden, and ben euele 
pa3id bi gret sorewe, that a man was 
come, that shulde seche the prosperite of 
11 the sonus of Irael. And I cam in to Je- 
rusalem, and I° was there thre dajes. 


l fadris 4. ™ what wolt 4. 


This‘ is not without cause; but ‘yuel, Y 
not what®, is in thin herte. And!‘ Y dredde 
ful greetli ; and seideS to the kyng, Kyng,3 
lyue thou withouten ende; whi moreneth" 
not' my cheer‘? for the citee of the hows 
of the sepulcris of my fadir is desert, 
‘ether forsakun', and the 3atis therof ben 
brent with fier. And the kyng seide to4 
me, For what thing axist thou? And Y 
preiede God of heuene, and seide™ to thes 
kyng, If it semeth good to the kyng, and 
if it plesith thi seruauntis bifor" thi face, 
Y biseche®, that thou sende me in to Judee, 
to the citee of the sepulcre of my fadir, 
and Y schal bilde it. And the kyng seides 
to me, and the queen} sat bisidis him, 
“Til to? what tyme schal thi weie be, and 
whanne schalt thou turne a3en? And Y4 
pleside ‘bifor the cheer of" the kyng, and 
he sente me‘, and Y ordeynede' to hym" a 
time’; and Y seide to ‘the kyng”, If it7 
semeth good to the kyng, 3yue he pistlis* 
to me to the duykis of the cuntrey bizende 
the flood, that thei lede me ouer, til Y 
come in to Judee; ‘and a pistleY to Asaph, 8 
kepere’ of the kyngis forest, that he 3yue 
trees to me, that Y may hile the 3atis of 
the tour of the hows, and of the wal of 
the citee, and the hows, into which Y 
schal entref. And ‘the kyng 3af to me’, 
bi the good hond? of my God with* me?. 
And Y cam to the duykis of the cuntreis 
bizjende the flood, and Y 3af to hem the 
pistlis® of the kyng. Sothelif the kyng 
‘hadde sent? with me the? princes of 
kny3tis', and horsemen. And Sanabal-1o0 
lath Oronythes, and Tobie, the seruaunt 
Amanytes*, herden!, and thei weren soreu- 
ful bi greet turment™, for" a man was 
comun, that sou3te prosperite of the sones 
of Israel. And Y cam in to Jerusalem, 11 


athat lan. 9° Om. a. 


4 It 1. This drerinesse s. ¢ I woot not what yuel ins. ‘And thanne1. &I seide ins. 4 Om. ns. 


ischulde not ins. * cheer mourne ins. ! Om. cins. 


thees. P Vntorns. Tilx. Gitin. ‘towns. 


mJ seide ins. which ben bifore s. © biseche 


*me forth ins. tsetteivs. Uthe kyng ins. * tyme 


of comyng azen n. tyme of myn azen comyng s. * bimins. * pistlis or lettres 1s. Ya lettre also 1. and 


a lettre n. also sende the king a lettres. 2 the kepere 1N. 2QOm.1ns. 5 hond or help 1. hond or 
race Ns. © beynge with 1. that was with ns. 4 me the kyng 3aaf to me myn aayng Ins. © lettres INS. 
And ins. & sente rns. Om. ins. ! Ais kny3tis ans. * of Amanytes1. 1! herden of my comyng 1s. 


™ turment of herte 1. ™ for cause that 1. that n. for that that s. 


3T 2 


t quene; thus 
it is in Ebreu, 
and bi this the 
king, and not 
queen, spak to 
Neemye this 
that sueth. 
Lire here. c. 


t entre; that 

is, the hows 

which Y pur- 

pose to bilde 

for my dwell- 

ing place. Lire 
e. C. 


508 


iz And I ros the ny3t, and fewe men with 
me, and I shewide to no man, what God 
hadde 3iuen in myn herte, that I shulde 
do in Jerusalem; and there was noon 
helpely beeste to me, but the beeste that 
13] sat on. And I wente out bi the 3ate 
of the valei the ny3t, and beforn the welle 
of the dragoun, and at the drit 3ate; and 
I beheeld the wal of Jerusalem seaterid, 
i4and his 3atis wastid with fijr. And I 
passide ouer to the 3ate of the welle, and 
to the watir ecundict of the king, and 
ther was no place to the beeste, that I 
issat on that he my3te passen ouer; and 
I ste3ide vp bi the strem the ny3t, and I 
beheeld the wal, and? turned ajeen [4 
cam to the 3ate of the valei, and am 
16comen a3een. The maister iuges forsothe 
wisten not, whider I was go, or what IJ 
wolde do; but and to the Jewis, and to 
the prestus, and to the most worshipeful 
men, and to the maister iuges, and to the 
tothere that maden the were, vnto that 
of the placis no thing I hadde shewid. 
17 And I seide to hem, 3ee han knowen the 
affliccioun, in whiche we ben, for Jerusa- 
lem is desert, and his 3atis ben wastid 
with fijr; cometh, and bilde we vp the 
wallis of Jerusalem, and be we no more 
isrepref. And I shewide to hem the hond 
of my God, that it was good with me, 
and the woordis of the king, that he space 
to me; and I sey, Rise we, and bilde we; 
and the hondis of hem ben coumfortid 
i9in goode. Forsothe Sanballath Oronyte, 
and Tobias, seruaunt Amonyte, and Go- 
sem Arabs, herden, and seorneden vs, 
and despiseden; and seiden, What is 
this thing that 3ee don? whether ajen 
20the king 3ee rebellen? And I 3eld™ to 
them a woord, and seide to them, God 


Pla. GandI a, 


P ther was nor. 1Om. 1 
W 3ate chat is elepid the 3ale s. 


° roos up INS. 
v I wente to 18. 
a Om. INs. 
e Om, Ins. 
1Om. s. 
8 ynto Ins, til x. 
x in schenschip Ns. 
c And rns. of Amanytes 1. 
h answeride ins. iI seide rns. 


f and in the ni3t 1s. 
mI camins. © And ns, 
‘t Om. x. 


II. ESDRAS. 


t Om. 1. 
x dunge Ins. 
b for to passe to 1, for to passe was to Ns. 
& wente up 1. stiede up Ns. 
© maistir men INS. 
u Gloss omitted in 1Ns. 
¥ hond or the help 1. hond or cumfort s. 
€ herden this 1. herd oure purpose s. 


Ii. 12—20. 


and Y was there thre daies. And Y roos® 12 
bi ny3t, Y and a fewe men with me, and 
Y schewide not to ony man, what thing 
God hadde 3oue in myn herte, that Y 
wolde do in Jerusalem; and no? werk 
beest was with me, not but the beeste, 
‘on which’ Y sat'. And Y 3ede out bi theis 
jate of the valei bi ny3t, and bifor the 
welle of dragoun", and to” the 3at" of 
drit*; and Y bihelde the wal of Jerusalem 
distried, and the 3atis therof wastid bi 
fier. And Y passidY to the 3ate of thes 
welle, and to the watir cundit of the kyng, 
and no? place was* to the hors,‘on which® 
Y sat’ ‘for to passe®; and‘ Y stiede® bi the 1s 
stronde ‘in ny3t", and Yi bihelde the walk, 
and Y! turnede a3en, and cam™ to the 3ate 
of the valei, and Y 3ede ajen. Forsothe® 16 
the magistratis® wisten not, whidir Y 
hadde go, ethir what Y wolde do; but 
also Y hadde not schewid ony thing to 
the Jewis, and prestis, andP to the best 
men, and magestratis1, and" to othere men 
that maden the werk, ‘til to® that ‘place, 
that is, til to thatt tyme". And Y seidei7 
to hem, 3e knowen the turment’, in which 
we ben, for Jerusalem is deseert, and the 
3atis therof ben wastid with fier; come 3e, 
bilde we the wallis of Jerusalem, and be 
we no more schenship*. And Y schewide1s 
to hem the hondY of my God, that it was 
good with me, and the wordis* of the 
kyng, whiche he spak to me; and Y seide, 
Rise we®, and bilde we; and the hondis 
of hem weren coumfortid in good>. For-19 
sothe® Sanballath Oronytes, and Tobie, the 
seruaunt Amanytes’, and Gosem Arabs, 
herden®, and scornedenf vs, and dispisiden ; 
and seiden, What is this thing, which® 3e 
doon? whether 3e rebellen ajens the kyng? 
And Y 3eldide* to hem a word, and seidei 20 


T yeldide aE see. m. FH. 


S that 1. t sat on 1. 
Y passide forth 1s. 
¢ that 1. upon which ns. 
hOm.ins. iQOm.s. § walliss, 
Pne Ins, 4maistirmen ins, ‘Tne Ins. 
Vturmentis c. W we Jewis 1. we the Jewis s, 
zwords. @weupins. > God ns. 
f thei scorneden ins. & that rns. 


u the dragoun 1. 
2 ther was no 1. 
4 sat upon 1. 


Ill. I—I0. 


of heuene, he helpith vs, and wee his 
seruauns ben; rise wee, and bilde wee; 
to 30u forsothe is mo’ part and ri3twis- 
nesse and mynde in Jerusalem. 


CAP. III. 


1 And Eliasif, the grete prest, ros‘, and 
his brethern, and prestus, and thei bilden® 
vp the 3atis of the floc; thei” halewiden 
it, and setten the 3ate leuys of it, and 
vn to the tour of an hundrid cubitus thei 
halewiden it, vn to the tour of Anane- 

2hel. And beside hym the men of Jericho 
bilden; and biside hem bilde Zaccur, the 

3sone of Amri. The 3ate forsothe of 
fisshis” bilden vp the sonus of Azanaa; 
thei couereden it*, and setten his 3ate 
leues, and lokis, and heengis. And biside 
hem bilde Marimuth, the sone of Vri, 
asone of Accus. And biside hym bilde 
Mosolla, the sone of Barachie, sone of 
Mesezebeel. And biside hym bilde Sa- 
sdoc, the sone of Baana. And biside hym 
bilden Thecuenus ; forsothe the more wir- 
shipeful men of hem vnder putten not 
ther neckis in the werc of the Lord 
ether God. And the olde 3ate bilden vp 
Joiada, the sone of Fasia, and Mosoilam, 
the sone of Besoida; and thei couereden 
it, and setten his 3ate leuis, and lokis, 
zand heengis. And biside hem bilden 
Melchia Gabonite, and Jaddon Metho- 
nothite, men of Gabaon and Masfa, for 
the duk that was in the regioun be3onde 
sthe flod. And biside hym bilde Eziel, 
the sone of Aria, goldsmith; and biside 
hym bilde Annany, the sone of a piment 
makere; and thei laften Jerusalem vnto 
9the wal of the braddere strete. And bi- 
side hym bilde Rafaia, the sone of Hahul, 

10 prince of a toun of Jerusalem. And bi- 

side hym bilde Jeieda, the sone of Ra- 


Snot 4. taroos 4. 


k we up IN. we vp in his name s. 


II. ESDRAS. 


u bildiden 4. Vand 4. 


' bilde we it 1. bilde we n. bilde we éhis place s. 


509 


to hem, God hym silf of heuene helpith vs, 
and we ben hise seruauntis; rise we, and 
bilde!; forsothe part and ri3tfulnesse™ and 
nynde in Jerusalem is not to 30u". ; 


CAP. III. 


Aud Ehiasiph, the greet preest, roos®, i 
and hise britheren, and prestis, and thei 
bildiden the 3ate of the floc; thei maden 
it? stidfast?; and® settiden’ the 3atis ther- 
of, and ‘til tot the tour of an hundrid cu- 
bitis, thei maden it" stidfast’, ‘til to” the 
tour of Ananehel. And bisidis hym the2 
men of Jerico bildiden; and bisidis hem* 
Zaccur, the sone of Amry, bildideY. For-s 
sothe? the sones of Asamaa bildiden® the 
jatis of fischis; thei» hiliden it, and set- 
tiden® the 3atis therof, and lockis*’, and 
barris. And Marymuth, sone® of Vrye, the 
sone of Accus, bildide bisidis hem. And4 
Mosolla, sonef of Barachie, the sone of 
Meseze, bildide bisidis hym. And Sadoch, 
the sone of Baana, bildide bistdis him. 
And men of Thecue bildiden bisidis hym ; 5 
but the principal men of hem puttiden? 
not her neckis vndur® in the werk of her 
Lord God. And Joiada, the sone of Pha-6 
sea, and Mosollam, the sone of Besoyda, 
bildiden the elde 3ate; thei hilideni it, and 
settiden* the 3atis therof, and lockis!, and 
barris. And Melchie Gabaonyte, and Jad-7 
don Methonatite, men of Gabaon and of 
Maspha, bildiden bisidis hem, for the 
duyk that was in the cuntrei bijende the 
flood. And Eziel, goldsmy3t™, the sones 
of Araie, bildide bisidis hym; and An- 
nany, the sone of ‘a makere of oynement”, 
bildide bisidis him; and thei leften Jeru- 
salem® ‘til toP the wal of the largere4 
street. And Raphaie, the sone of Hahul, 9 
prince of a street of Jerusalem, bildide bi- 
sidis him. And Jeieda, the sone of Ara- 10 


w the fisshis c. *¥ Om. c. 


m riztwisnesse 1. 


n 30u ¢hai grucchen her ajens 1s. °roosupiNs. P Om, EFGHKLMNopsxb, 4 stidfast werk ns, and 
thei mss. 8 setten up 1. settiden up Ns. t vnto ins. til. tox. U Om, EFGNIKLMNopsxb.  stidfast 
werk 1s. © vnto1n, and vntos. tox. *hem bildideixs. yOm.ins. 7 Andins. — ® bildeny. 


band theiins. © settiden up 1Ns. 

fthe sone ins. & vndirputtiden ins, 
™ the goldsmy3t Ns. 
til x. 


b Om. 1Ns. 
. an oynement makere INs. 
4 large insb. lengere a. 


4 maden lockis 1. thei maden iherto lockis s. 
i bildiden ns. 
© Jerusalem bild 1. Jerusalem bildid ns. 


e the sone CEILNSX. 
I the lockis 1ns. 
P vnto Ins. 


k settiden up Ns. 


510 II. ESDRAS. Ill. 11-20. 


math, aj3en his hous; and biside hym 
1! bilde Accus, the sone of Azebonie. The 
niyddel forsothe partY of the toun bilde 
Melchias, the sone of Herem, and Asub, 
the sone of Feth Moab; and the tour of 
ouenus. Biside hym bilde Sellum, the 
sone of Aloes, prince of the myddel part 
of a toun of Jerusalem, and he and his 
issonus. And the 3ate of the valei bilde 
Annun, and the dwelleris of Sanoe; thei 
bilden it, and setten his 3ate leuis, and 
lokis, and henglis?, and a thousend cu- 
bitus in the wal vnto the 3ate of the 
u4dunge hil. And the 3ate of the dunge 
hil bilde Melchias, the sone of Recab, 
prince of the toun of Bethacharem; he 
bilde it, and sette his jate leues, and 
_ wlokis, and henglis*. And the 3ate of the 
welle bilde Sellum, the sone of Colosai, 
prince of the toun of Masfa; he bilde it, 
and couerede, and sette his 3ate leuis, 
and lockis, and heengis® ; and the wallis 
of the fish pond of Siloe in to the 3erd 
of the king, and vn to the grees of the 
king, that comen doun fro the cite of 
isDauid. After hym bilde Neemyas, the 
sone of Asboc, the prince of the half 
part® of the toun of Bethsuri, vnto a3en 
the sepulcre of Dauid, and vnto the fish 
pond, that bi gret were is maad,and vnto 
i7the hous of stronge men. After hym 
bilden Leuitus; and after hem Reum, 
the sone of Benny. After hym bilde 
Azebias, prince of the half part of the 
istoun of Cheile, in his toun. After hym 
bilden the brethern of hem, Bethin, the 
sone of Enadad, prince of the half part* 
190f Cheila. And Aser, the sonn of Josue, 
prince of Masfa, bilde beside hym the 
secunde mesure a3en the ste3ing vp of 
20the most fast corner. After hym in the 
hil bilde Baruch, the sone of Sachaie, the 


math, bildide bisidis him ajens" his owne 
hous; and Accuss, the sone of Asebonye, 
bildide bisidis hym. Forsothet Melchie, 11 
the sone of Herem, and Asub, the sone of 
Phet Moab", bildiden the” half part of 
the” street, and the tour of ouenys. Sel-12 
lum, the sone of Aloes, prince™ of they 
half part of a street of Jerusalem, bildide 
bisidis hym, he and hise sones. And Am- 33 
ram, and the dwelleris of Zanoe, bildiden 
the 3ate of the valei; thei bildiden? it, and 
settiden® the 3atis therof, and lockis?, and 
barris therof®; and thei bildiden* a thou- 
synde cubitis in the wal ‘til to® the 3ate 
of the dunghil. And Melchie, the sone of 14 
Rechab, prynce of a street of Bethacarem, 
bildide the 3ate of the dunghil; he bildide 
it, and settide', and hilide the 3atis therof, 
and lockis®, and barris'. And Sellum, the 15 
sone of Colozai, prince of a toun Masphai, 
bildide the 3ate of the welle; he bildide it, 
and hilide*, and! settide™ the 3atis therof, 
and lockis, and barris ; and he bildide the 
wallis of the cisterne of Ciloe ‘til in to® 
the orchard of the kyng, and ‘til to° the 
greces of the kyng, that? comen doun fro 
the citee of Dauid. Nemye’, the sone of 16 
Azboch, prince of the half part of the 
street of Bethsury, bildide after hym til" 
a3ens* the sepulcre of Dauid, and ‘til tot 
the cisterne, which® is bildide -with greet 
werk, and ‘til to’ the hous.of stronge men. 
Dekenes” bildiden after hym; and Reum, 17 
the sone of Beny, bildide aftir ‘hem*. Ase- 
bie’, the? prince of half part .of the street 
of Cheile, bildide in his street aftir hym. 
The* britheren of hem, Bethyn‘, the sone is 
of Enadab, prince of the’ half part of 
Cheyla, bildiden after hym*. And Aser, the 19 
sone of Josue, prince of Maspha, bildide 
bisidis hym the secoundet mesure a3ens 
the stiyng’ of the ‘moost stidefast® corner. 


Y partie au. Zheengis su. ®heengys seu. » heenglis r. ¢ partie aH. 


T ouer ajens 1. forn agens ns. * Accubws. t Andins. "of Moabyus. YOm.1n. Wains. * and 
prince 1s. and the prince N. YOm.s. 7 bilden cpHosxb. ® settiden up ins. » the lockis 1vs. © therof 


thet ordeyneden s. 4 bildenc. & vnto INS. to xX. 


‘settide it up iss. & ordeyned lockis 1. _» barris 


he ordeyned tohems. of Masphains.  hilide itins. land hens. ™ sette up 1. settide up ns. 


2 ynto INs. into x. © vnto1Ns. til x. P whiche INs. 
forn ajens ns. ‘ vnto 1Ns. til x prim. % that ins. 
y And Asebie rvs. z Om. s. a And the rns. 


4 And Neemye 1ns. f vntoINs. § ouer ajens 1. 
Vv ynto ins. tox. W And dekenes ins. * him ns. 
> him bildiden aftir him ns. © and Bethyn 1ns. 


4Om.is. ¢hemi. fstiyng up is. & strengest 1. mooste staliworthe ns. 


+ secounde ; 
that is, his por- 
cioun in the 
secounde wal. 
Lire here. c. 


II. 21—IV. t. 


secunde mesure fro the corner vnto the 
j3ate of the hous of Eliazif, grete prest. 
21 After hym bilde Marimuth, the sone of 
Vrie, sone of Accur, the secunde mesure 
fro the 3ate of the hous of Eliasif, to the 
time that the hous of Eliasif were stra3t 
22out. And aftir hym bildeden® the® prestus, 
23men of the wilde feldis of Jordan. After 
hymf bilden Beniamyn and Asub ajen 
ther hous; and after hym bilde Asarias, 
the sone of Moosie, sone of Ananye, a3en 
zthis hous. Aftir hym bilde Benni, the 
sone of Senadad, the secunde mesure fro 
the hous of Azarie vnto the bowing and 
25 vnto the corner. Falel, the sone of Osi, 
a3en the bowing, and the tour that stant 
aboue, fro the he3e hous of the king, that 
is in the porche of the prisoun ; and after 
26hym Fadaia, the sone of Feros. Gabon- 
ites, water bereris forsothe dwelten in 
Ofel a3en the 3ate of watris at the est, 
ajand the tour that abone semede. After 
hym bilden Thecuynes the secunde me- 
sure forn a3en, fro the grete tour and 
stondende abone vnto the wal of the 
2stemple. Aboue forsothe at the horse 
jate bildeden the prestus, eche ajen his 
hous. Aftir hem bilde Seddo, the sone 
29 of Enner, a3en his hous. After hym bilde 
Semeia, the sone of Sechenye, kepere of 
sothe est 3ate. After hym bilde Ananye, 
the sone of Selemye, and Anon, the sone 
of Selon, the sixte, the secunde mesure. 
After hym bilde Mosollam, the sone of 
Barachie, ajen his tresorie. After hym 
bilde Melchias, the sone of a goldsmith, 
vnto the hous of sodeknys, and of the 
men sellende sheldis agen the judicial 
3ate, and vnto the supping place of the 
sicorner. And withinne the supping place 
of the corner in to the jate of the king 
\bilden craftusmen and marchandus. It 


d bylden u. 


b And Baruch rns. i vnto ins. 
o And Beniamyn rns. P bilden c. 
t And Bennuy ins. u ynto INS, to xX. 
Ystrecchith ins. 7a INS. a and Phadaie 1ns. 
ouer other. Ands. ©¢ forn azenss. f Om. s. 
Seddo s. 1! forn ajens ns. ™ And Ananye ins. 
a And Melchie ins. * vnto ins. 


iW. ESDRAS. 


¢ Om. H. 


k And Marymuth ins. 
4 hym EFGHKLMNsx. ' forn ajens ins. § ouer ajens 1. forn ajens Ns. 
¥ vnto ins. til x. 


& vnto Ns. 
n bildiden n. 
$ ouer ajens 1. forn ajens N&. 


511 


Baruch, the sone of Zachay, bildide aftir 20 
hym in the hil the secounde mesure fro 
the corner ‘til to! the 3ate of the hows of 
Eliasiph, the greet prest. Marymuth‘,1 
the sone of Vrie, sone of Zaccur, bildide 
after hym the secounde mesure fro the 
jate of Eliasiph, as fer as the hows of 
Eliasiph was stretchid! forth. And prestis, 22 
men™ of the® feeldi places of Jordan, bild- 
iden aftir hym. Beniamyn® and Asub23 
bildiden? after hem4 a3ens" her hows; and 
Azarie, the sone of Maasie, sone of Ana- 
nye, bildide aftir hym ajens* his owne 
hows. Bennuy', the sone of Senadad, bild-24 
ide after hym the secounde mesure fro 
the hows of Azarie ‘til to" the bowyng 
and ‘til to’ the corner. Phalel”, the sonees 
of Ozi, beldide a3ens* the bowyng, and 
the tour that stondithY forth, fro the hi3 
hows of the kyng, that is in the large 
place of the? prisoun; Phadaie*, the sone 
of Pheros, bildide after hym. Forsothe> 2s 
Nathynneis dwelliden in Ophel til ajens 
the 3ate of watris at the eest, and® the 
tour that apperide’, Aftir hym men of27 
Thecue bildiden the secounde mesure 
euene a3ens®, fro the greet tour and‘ ap- 
perynge ‘til to& the wal of the temple. 
Forsothe® prestis bildiden abone at the2s 
j3ate of horsis, ech man ajens' his hows. 
Seddo*, the sone of Enner, bildide ajens! 
his hows aftir hem. And Semeie, the29 
sone of Sechenye, the kepere of the eest 
3ate, bildide after hym. Ananye™, the30 
sone of Selemye, and Anon, the sixte sone 
of Selon, bildide" aftir hym the secounde 
mesure. Mosallam®, the sone of Barachie, 
bildide ajenus? his tresorie after hym. 
Melchie‘, the sone of a goldsmi3t, bildide 
aftir hym ‘til to" the hows of Nathynneis, 
and of men sillynge scheldis ajens* the 
3ate of iugis, and ‘til tot the" soler of the 


fhem «. 


Istreizt 1. ™the menins. *® Om. rns. 
w And Phalel ins. ; 
b Andins. © coost and forn ajens s. 4 apperide 
h And ys. i forn ajens ns. * And nN. And 
© And Mosallam 1ns. P forn ajens INs. 


tynto Ins. Yain. 


x forn ajens INS, 


512 


is do forsothe, whan Sanaballath hadde 
herd, that we schulden bilde the wal, he 
wrathide ‘gretli, and®, moued ful myche, 
escornede the Jewis. And he seide beforn 
his brethern, and the court of Samari- 
tanys®, What do the Jewis ful feble? 
Whether shuln leuen hem the Jeutilis ? 
Whether shul thei sacrifien and fulfillen 
in o dai? Whether thei shuln moun 
bilden vp stonis of the hillokis of pouder, 
3that ben brent? But and Tobias Amon- 
ite seith to his ne3hebores, Bilde thei; 
if ther steze vp a fox, he shal lepe ouer 
4ther ston wal. And Neemie seide, Here 
thou, oure God, for we ben maad despit ; 
turne the repref vp on the hed of hem, 
and 3if hem in to despising in the lond 
sof caitifte ; ne couere thou the wickenesse 
of hem, and the synnus of hem befor thi 
face be not don awei; for thei scorneden 
6the bilders. And so we bilden the wal, 
and al we ioyneden togidere vnto the 
half parti, and the herte of the puple is 
stirid to werken. 


CAP. IV. 


7 It is do forsothe, whan Sanaballath 
hadde herd, and* Tobias, and Arabes, 
and Amanytes, and Azozie, that the gap 
of the wal of Jerusalem was maad al hol, 
and that the chinys! ‘or crauasis™ begun- 
nen to be closid, thei ben ful myche 

swroth. And alle thei ben gedered togi- 
dere, that thei comen and fi3te a3en Jeru- 

gsalem, and casten busshemens. And we 
pre3eden the Lord oure God, and we set- 
ten keperis vp on the wal dai and ny3t 
10a3en hem. Forsothe Judas seide, The 
strengthe of the berere is feblid, and 
there is to miche erthe, and we shul not 
1; Moun bilden vp the wal. And oure ene- 


II. ESDRAS. 


IV. 2—11. 


corner. And crafti men and marchauntis31 
bildiden with ynne the soler of the corner 
and’ the 3ate of the kyng. 


CAP. IV. 


Forsothe” it was doon, whanne Sana-1 
ballath hadde herd, that we bildiden the 
wal, he* was ful wrooth, and he was stirid 
greetli, and scornedeY the Jewis. And hez 
seide bifor hise britheren, and the? multi- 
tude of Samaritans, What doen the feble 
Jewis ? Whether hethene men schulen suf- 
fre hem? ? Whether thei schulen fille”, and 
make sacrifice in o dai? Whether thei 
moun bilde stonys of the’ heepis of the® 
dust, that’ ben brent? But& also Tobies 
Amanytes, his neijbore, seide, Bilde thei ; 
if a fox stieth, he schal ‘skippe ouer! the* 
stony! wal ‘of hem™. And Neemye seide, 4 
Oure God, here thou, for we ben maad 
dispising ; turne thou the schenschip on" 
her°® heed, and 3yne thou hem in to dis- 
pisyng in the lond of caytifte; hile thous 
not the wickidnesse of hem, and her synnes 
beP not doon awei bifor thi face; for thei 
scorneden bilderis!. Therfor™ we bildiden‘ 6 
the wal, and ioynedent togidere al ‘til to" 
the half part, and the herte of the puple 
was exitid to worche. Forsothe’ it was7 
doon, whanne Sanaballat ‘hadde herd”, 
and Tobie, and* Arabiens’, and Amanytys, 
and men of Azotus hadden herd, that the 
brekyng of the wal of Jerusalem was 
stoppid, and that the crasyngis hadden 
bigunne to be closid togidere, thei weren 
ful wrothe. And alle? weren gaderid to-8 
gidere to come and fi3te ajens Jerusalem, ' 
and to caste tresouns*. And we preiedeng : 
oure® Lord God‘, and we settiden keperis 
on the wal bi? dai and ni3t azens hem. Mee 
Forsothe® Judaft seidet, The strengthe of 10(,.°%" | 


here. c. 


&Om.c. } the Samaritanys 4. ipartieau. ‘Om. 4. I chynys 4. chynes er. chenes u. ™ of 
crauasis F. Om. E pr. m. 
. Vand thei bildiden ts. W Andins. *Xandhewns. Yhescornedeins. 2 biforethe rns. ® hem | 
thus s. > fulfille this cuntrey ins. Cuponins. ¢Om.1ns. €Om.ixs. f whiche ins. & And Ins. 
h go up 1. stie up N. shal stie vp s. jouerlepe ins. / herins. !stonen1. ™Om.1xs. ® upon INs. 
her owne ins. Pbencp. 4 the bilders x. the bilders of thi citee 1s. * Thannes.  § bildiden up in. 
bilden vp s..  * we ioyneden é 1Ns. uvnto Is. intoNn. . V And Ins, w Om. ins. x Om. s. 
y Arabietis ns. z thei alle ns. @ tresouns ajens it Ns. >the ins. ¢oureGodins. ‘4Om.1. 
¢ Andins. f men of Judain. & seiden ins. 


IV. 12—20. II. ESDRAS. 513 


mis seiden, Wite thei not, and vnknowe 
thei, to the time that we comen in to the 
middel of hem, and slen hem, and make 
12the werc to cesen. It is do forsothe, the 
Jewis comende, that dwelten bisides hem, 
and seiende to vs ten sithis, of alle the 
placis fro whiche" thei weren come to vs, 
13] sette in a place behinde the wal bi 
enuyroun a puple in order, with ther 
14swerdis, and speris, and bowis. I° be- 
heeld, and ros, and seide® to the more 
wrshipeful men, and maister iugis, and to 
the tother part of the comun, Wilith not 
dreden fro the face of hem; of the grete 
Lord and ferful hath mynde, and fi3teth 
for 3our brethern, and 3our? sonns, and 
1530ur do3tris, 3our wines, and housis. It 
is do forsothe, whan oure enemys hadden 
herd to be told to vs, God scaterede the 
conseil of hem ; and alle wee ben turned 
a3een to the wallis, eche to his werk. 
16 And it is do fro that dai, the half part 
of the 3unge men maden the werk, and 
the half part was redi to bataile; and 
speris, and sheeldis, and bowis, and ha- 
beriones, and princis bihinde them, in al 
17the hous of Juda, of bilders in the wal, 
and of bereris berthenus, and of leieris 
on; with ther oon hond thei maden the 
werc, and with the tother thei heelden 
igsswerd. Forsothe of the bilders eche was 
gird abonte the hipis with a swerd ; and 
thei bilden, and crieden with trumpe bi- 
l9syde me. And I seide to the most wr- 
shipeful men, and to the maister iugis, 
and to the tother part of the comun, 
A gret were it is, and brod, and we ben 
seuered in the wal aferr, an other fro 
20an other; in what euere place 3ee shul 
here the criyng of the trumpe, thider 


the berere" is! maad feble, and tlie erthek} + te erthe ; 
is ful! myche, and we moun not bilde™ the faa.” 
wal. And oure enemyes seiden®, Wite thei 1 pee 
not, and knowe thei not, til we comen in edie etel 
to the myddil of hem, and sleen hem, and — quantite, so 
maken the werk to ceesse. Forsothe® eis sora | an 
was doon, whanne? Jewis came‘, that" pe 
dwelliden bisidis hem’, and seiden to vst 

‘bi ten tymes", froY alle places” fro whiche 

thei camen to vs, Y ordeynede the puple13 

in ordre, with her swerdis, and speris, and 

bouwis, in a place bihynde the wal* bi 

cumpas. YY bihelde, and roos*, and seide? 14 

to the principal men», and magistratis*, and 

to ‘the tother’ part of the comyn puple, 

Nyle 3e drede of her face ; haue® 3e mynde 

of the greet Lord, and ferdful, and fi3te 

3e for 3oure britheren, and 3oure’ sones, 

and 30ure® dou3tris, for 3oure wyues, and 

housis', Forsothe* it was doon, whanne 1s 

oure enemyes hadden herd that it was 

teld to vs, God distriede her counsel ; and! 

alle we turneden ajen to the wallis, ech 

man to his werk. And it was doon fro16 

that dai, the half part of 3onge™ men made 

werk", and the half part was redi to batel ; 

‘and speris, and scheldis, and bouwis, and 
harburiouns, and princes® aftir hem, in al 

the hows of men of Juda, bildynge in the 17 

wal, and berynge birthuns, and puttynge 

on; with? her4 oon hond thei maden werk", 

and with the® tothert thei helden swerd". 

For ech of the bilderis was’ gird with the” js 

swerd on* they reynes; and thei bildiden’, 

and sowneden* with clariouns bisidis me. 

And Y seide to the principal men, and 19 
magistratis®, and to the tothir! part of the 

comyn puple, The werk is greet and brood, 

and we ben departid fer in the wal, oon 

from anothir ; in® what euer place ef heren 20 


a the whiche aeru. © And I 4. seic  P for jour 4. 


hkepere ins. 1 of the wal is 1s. k erthe aboute it 1. erthe in cumpas of the wal s. 1 Om. Ns. 


mhilde on 1. bildeupws. 2 hanseid ins. © Andins. 


P whanne that ins. 4 Om.1Ns. ' the whicher. 


8 hem canten ten tymes rns. t us her purpos ins. 'Om.1ns. Yandfroins. Wthe placesins. * wallisc. 
yAnd Yins. I roosupins. @I seiden. » Om.1ns. © maister men Ins. 4 that oother1. © but 
haue ins. f forjourein. & for 3ours. "and for iws. i meyneesiys. * Andins. | and thanne 1s. 
mthe 3onge1ns. the werk c. © princes weren redi1. princes weren born s. ‘P and in al the hous of 
men of Juda bildinge in the wal, and of hem that beeren birthuns, and of hem that puttiden birthuns upon 
hem that shulden bere hem, aftir her pryncis, speris, and sheeldis, and boowis, and haburiouns; and with n. 


4thes. ‘the werkc. ‘thats. ¢t other Bis. 


u her swerd iN. Ywerenn. Wains. * upon INs. 


Yhisins. 2 bildeden the wal ins. 4 thei sowneden ins. > Om.1n. ¢ maistir men ins. 4 oother 18. 


© therfore in 1. for ther ins. f that 3e 1s. 


VOL. TI. 3U 


514 


renneth togidere to vs; forsothe oure 

21God shal fijte for vs. And we vsself4 
shul make the werk, and the half part 
of vs holde speris, fro the ste3ing vp of 
the morutid to the time that the sterris 

z2g0u out. Also that time I seide to the 
puple, Eche with his child dwelle in the 
middel of Jerusalem, and be ther to 3ou 

23whilis by ny3t and dai to werken. I 
forsothe, and my brethern, and the kepe- 
ris, and my childer, that weren bihinde 
me, diden® not of oure clothis; echet onli 
was nakid to baptem. 


CAP. V. 


1 And ther is maad a cri of the puple 
and of ther wiues, a gret, a3en Jewis, 
2ther brethern. And ther weren that 
seiden, Oure sonus and oure do3tris ben 
ful manye; take we for the pris of hem 
3whete, and ete we, and line wee. And 
ther weren that seiden, Oure feldis, and 
vines, and oure housis lei wee to", and 
4take wee whete in hunger. And othere 
seiden, Borewe wee monei in to the tri- 
butus of theking, and jiue wee oure feldis, 
sand oure vines. And now as the flesh of 
oure brethern, so oure flesh ben; and as 
the sonys of hem, so and oure sonus ; lo! 
we han vnder 30kid our sonus and oure 
do3tris in to seruage, and of oure do3tris 
ben thrallis, and we han not, wherof thei 
moun be bo3t; and our feldus, and oure 
6 vines other men welden. And I wrathide 
ful myche, whan I hadde herd the cri of 
7hem after these woordys. And myn herte 
tho3te with me, and I blamede the most 
wrshipeful men and maister ingis; and 
seide to hem, Echone aske 3ee not vsuris 
of 3oure brethern. And I gederede a3en 


4 oure silf 4. ° in that ay. 


& Om.1ns. bauins. i forsothe rvs. 
hondiss. ® spryngyng up 1. sti3yng up Ns. 
dwelle he stille s. § myddis cs. 
xs, Om.1. YOm.1ns. W worche ynne 1. 


b weren goynge ns. © but ech ins. 
h forth fo sale 1. forth to selle ws, 


II. ESDRAS. 


8 we diden E pr. m. 


k oure self ns. 

© til n232 18. 

t nijt and day be ther dywerse whilis 1. [bi s] nizt and dai while melis 

x the rs. 
4 of us INS. 

i wheete éo ele Ns. 


IV. 21—V. 7. 


the® sown of the" trumpe, renne 3e togidere 
thidur to vs; for' oure God schal fi3te for 


vs. And we ‘vs silf* schal make the werk, 21 


and the half part! of vs holde™ speris, fro 
‘the stiyng" of the moreutid til° that sterris 


go out. And ‘in that tyme? Y seide to the22 


puple, Ech man with his child4 dwelle in 
the myddil’ of Jerusalem, and whilist be" 
to vs ‘bi ny3tft and dai’ to worche”. 
Y, and my britheren, and my* keperis, and 
children’, that? weren» after me, diden not 
of oure clothis ; ech® man# was maad nakid 
oneli to waischyng. 


CAP. V. 

And greet cry of the puple and of her1 
wyues was maad ajens her britheren Jewis. 
And there weren® that seiden, Oure sones 2 
and oure dou3tris‘ ben ful manye; take we 
wheete for the prijs of hem, and ete we, 
and lyue. And there weren that seiden, 3 
Sette we{ forth oure feeldis, and vyneris, 
and oure howsis, and take we wheete! in 
hungur*. And othere men! seiden, Take4 
we money bi borewyng§ in™ to the" tri- 
butis of the kyng, and 3yue® oure feeldis 
and vyneris?. And now as the fleischis4|| 5 
of oure britheren bent, so* and‘ oure® 
fleischis” ben”; and as ben* the sones of 
hem, soY and? oure® sones® ben; lo! we 
han maad suget4 oure sones and oure dou3- 
tris in to seruage, and seruauntissis‘ ben? 
of oure dou3tris', and we han not wherof 
thei moun be a3enbou3t ; and othere men 
han in possessioun oure feeldis, and oure 
vyneris. And Y was ful wrooth, whanne6 
Y hadde herde the cry of hem bi these 
wordis. And myn herte thou3te with me,7 
and Y blamede the principal men! and 
magistratis* ; and Y seide to hem, Axe! 3e 


teche oon 4eFH. % Om. c. 


10m. ns. ™ holde we 1n. holde we in our 
P Om. Ns pr.m. 4sheelds. 1 dwelle he 1N. 


a whiche ns. 
& Also Ins. 
m oblischinge 


Yofn. 2 my children ins. 
© weren of hemis. —f dou3tren ts. 
k this hungur ins. 1 of hem 1s. 


usinis. "Om.1s, © 3yue wetohim is. P our vynerss. bodiesis. ben maad thral1. ben made thral or 


wastid 8. 
Zz Om. 


Srijtso1. *Om.1. ¥ be oure I. 
®abeoure 1. > in caitiftee1 marg. 


v bodies 1s. 
¢ Om. 1. 


w Om. 1. 


x ben in cailifies. Y ri3t so 1. 
@ Om. 1s. 


€ dou3tris sugettis 1s. f seruauntis N. 


Om.1s. §Om. 1s. } doujtren ben maad seruauntessis 1. doujztren ben seruauntessis s. 1 Om.1s. * mais- 


tir men 1s. |! Ecbe of jou axe Is. 


But 23 t éy nysé s not 


to worche bi 
the ny3t, but 
summe weren 
ordeyned hi 
whilis to wake 
bi ny3t, for 
keping of the 
cytee. Lire 
here. C. 


t Sette we ; to 
silling ether to 
lenyng to wed- 
dis. Lire here. 
c. 


§ borewyng ; 
for vsure. Lire 
here. Cc. 


ll Aeischis ; 
that is, as oure 
britheren in 
Babiloyne ben 
in turment, so 
and we here, 
aud as here 
children ben 
seruauntis of 
hethen men, so 
oure children 
ben hereboonde 
to Jewis. 

Lire here. c. 


V. 8—15. 


shem a gret conuocacioun, and seide to 
them, Wee, as 3ce witen, han forbo3t oure 
brethern Jewis, that weren sold to the 
Jentilis, after oure power ; and 3ee thanne 
sellen 3oure brethern, and wee shul bien’ 
hem a3een. And thei heelden ther pes, 
ne founden not what thei shulden an- 
oswern. And I seide to hem, This is no 
good thing, that 3ee don; whi in the 
drede of oure God 3ee gon not, lest it be 
repreuid to vs of the Jentilis, oure ene- 
iomys? And I and my brethern, and my 
childer, lenten to manye men monei and 
whete, ne wee askeden not ajen this in 
to comun; and other thing that is a3t™ to 
i1vs graunte wee. 3eldeth to them to dai 


II. ESDRAS. 


515 


not vsuris™, ‘ech man" of 3oure britheren. 
And Y gaderide togidire a greet cumpeny 
ajens hem, and Y seide to hem, As 3e8 
witen, we° bi oure power ajenbou3ten? oure 
britheren Jewis, that weren seeld to he- 
thene men; and 3e therfor’ sillen 3oure 
britheren, and schulen we a3enbie hem! ? 
And thei holden silence, and founden not 
what thei schulen answere. And Y seideg 
to hem, It is not good thing, which’ 3e 
doon; whi goen 3e not in the drede of 
oure God, and repreef be not seid to vs of 
hethene men, oure enemyes? othe Y 10 
and my britheren, and my children, han 
lent to ful many men monei and wheete ; in 
comyn{ axe we not this a3en; for3yuet 


that is, consente 


ther feldis, and ther vines, their oliues, we in comyn, 


we alien money", which is due to vs’. 
i that th 
and ther housis; but more and the hun- Pee te 


3elde” 3e to hem to dai her feeldis, and 11 thingis be not 
axid ajen. 


drid part of monee of whete, and of win, 
and oile, that 3ee weren wont to asken of 
i2hem, 3iueth for hem. And thei seiden, 
Wee shal 3elden, and of hem nothing we 
sechen* ; and thus wee shul do as thou 
spekist. And I clepide the prestis, and 
adiurede hem, that thei shulde do aftir 
i3that I hadde seid. Ferthermor I shakide 
out my bosum, and seide, Thus God shake 
out eche man, that fulfillith not this woord 
of his hous, and of his trauailis; and be 
he shaken out, and maad voide. And al 
the multitude seide, Amen; and preis- 
eden God. Thanne dide the puple, as it 
i4was seid. Forsothe fro that dai that the 
king hadde comaunded to me, that I were 
duke in the lond of Juda, fro the twen- 
- tithe 3er vn to the’ two and threttithe 
3er of king Artaxerses, bi twelue 3er, 
I and my brethern the 3eris frutus, that 
1s weren due to dukis, wee eeten not. For- 
sothe the firste dukis that weren befor 
me greueden the puple, and token of hem 
in bred, and win, and in mone, eche dai 


her vyneris, her olyue places, and her 
housis ; but* rather 3yue 3e for hem botheY 
the hundrid part ‘of money” of wheete, of 
wyu, and of oile, which we* weren wont 
to> take of hem. And thei seiden, Wee 
schulen 3elde®, and we schulen axe no 
thing of hem; and we schulen do so as 
thou spekist. And Y eclepide the preestis, 
and Y made hem to swere, that thei 
schulden do aftir that®, that Y haddef seid. 
Ferthermores Y schook' my bosum, and 13 
Y seide, So God schake awei ech man, 
‘that fillith not this word! fro his hows, 
and hise* trauels!; and be he schakun 
awei, and be he maad voide. And al the 
multitude seide, Amen; and thei herieden 
God. Therfor™ the puple dide, as it was 
seid. Forsothe" fro that dai in which the 14 
kyng hadde comaundid to me, that Y 
schulde be duyk in the lond of Juda, fro 
the twentithe 3eer ‘til to° the two and 
threttithe 3eer of Artaxerses kyng, bi? 
twelue 3eer, Y and my britheren eeten not 
sustenauncis4, that" weren due to duykis. 


Y forbyen £ pr. m. Wowid aeFu. *shnl sechen £ pr.m. Y Om. 4, 


™ yseris or encreces. 2" Om.18. © we hanet. 
t but forzyue is. % money or vsure 18. 
w And ajen 3elde1s. Xandis. y Om. 1s. 


P azenbou3t 1. : 
Vv bi couenaunt 1. marg. vs bi the graunt of hem that hizten it s. 
Zz Om. BorFUNPRUVX. of the monei K. of money and o. 


Qnowis. them of 301s. § that 1s. 


ajzeBcisv. > bivsetos. ¢ 3elde tho godis to hem 1. 3elden her goodis tohems. 4Om.1. © this 1s. 
fhave rx. 8 And ferthermore 1s. 4 shoke or made emptis. ‘1Om.1s. fro hise1s. } trauels, that 
fulfillith not this word 1s. ™ Andis. 2Sothlyis. °vntors. Pthatis bis. 4 the sustenauncis 1s, 


t the whiche 1. which s. 


3U 2 


516 II. ESDRAS. V. 16——VIL. 5. 


fourti ouncis; but and the seruauns of 
hem presseden doun the puple. I for- 
sothe dide not so, for the drede of God ; 
is but rathere in the werk of the wal bild- 
ede, and feeld I bo3te not, and alle my 
17 childer gedered weren to the werc. Also 
Jewis? and the maister iugis of hem 
weren an hundrid men and fifti; and 
thoo that camen to vs. of the Jentilis, 
that ben in oure ennyroun, weren in my 
isbord. Forsoth there was* greithid to 
me bi alle da3is an oxe, sixe chosen we- 
theris, out take volatilis, and betwe> ten 
da3es diuerse wines; and othere manye 
thingus I 35af; ferthermor and the 3eris 
frutis of my duchie I so3te not; for- 
sothe the puple gretli was poueresht. 
19 My God, haue mynde of me in to goode, 
after alle thingis that I haue do to this 
puple. 


CAPR. Vi. 


1 It is do forsothe, whan Sanaballath 
hadde herd, and Thobias, and Gosem 
Arabs®, and oure othere enemys, that I 
hadde bild the wal, and ther was not 
in it laft brosure among; forsothe vnto 
that time I hadde not put 3ate lenes in 
2the 3ate; Sanaballath, and Thobias, and 
Gosem Arabs senten to me, seiende, 
Cum, and smite wee pes couenaunt to- 
gidere in litle tounus, in a feeld; thei 
forsothe tho3ten, that thei do to me euel. 
3Thanne I sente to hem messageris, 
seiende, A gret were I do, and I mai not 
come doun, lest parauenture it be laft, 
whan I shulde comen, and descende to 
430u. Forsothe thei senten to me after 
this woord bi foure sithes, and I an- 
swerde to hem after the rathere woord. 
5 And Sanaballath sente to me after the 


But the firste duykis, that weren bifor me, 15 
greuyden the puple, and token* of hem in 
breed, and‘ in" wiyn, and in’ monei, ech 
dai fourti siclis; but” also her mynistris 
oppressiden the puple. Forsothe* Y dide 
not so, for the drede of God; but rather 16 
YY bildide in the werk of the wal, and Y 
bou3te no feeld, and alle my children weren 
gaderid? to the? werk. Also ‘Jewis and the 17 
magistratis of hem®, an hundrid and fifti 
men; and thei that camen to me fro he- 
thene men, that ben in oure cumpas, 
werent in my table. Forsothe® bif ech 1s 
dai oon’ oxe was maad redi to me?, sixei 
chosun wetheris, outakun volatils, and 


- withynne ten daies dyuerse* wynes; and 


Y! 3af many othere thingis™; ferther- 
more and Y axide not the sustenauncis of 
my duchee ; for the puple was maad ful 
pore. My God, haue thou mynde of" me!9 
in to good, bi alle thingis whiche Y dide® 
to this puple. 


CAP. VI. 

Forsothe it was doon, whanne Sana-! 
ballath hadde herd, and Tobie?, and Gosem 
of Arabie, and oure other enemyes, that Y 
hadde bildide’ the wal’, and* nomore brek- 
yng was therynne; sothelit ‘til to" that 
tyme Y hadde not set’ leeuys” of schit- 
tyng in* the satis; Sanaballath’, and2 
Tobie, and Gosem of Arabie senten to 
me, and seiden, Come thon’, and smyte 
we boond of pees in calues?, ‘in o feeld>; 
forsothe® thei thou3ten for’ to do yuel to 
me. Therfor Y sente messangeris to hem, 3 
and Y seide, Y make a greet werk, and 
Y mai not go doun®, lest perauenture it be 
doon retchelesli', whanne Y come, and go 
doun to 30u. Sotheli® thei senten to me4 
‘bi this word" bi foure tymes, and Y an- 
sweride toi hem by the formere word. 
And Sanaballath sente to me the fyuethes 


z the Jewis 4. 7 weren 4, > betwixe 4. betwen E£ pass. bytwene rH. ¢ Arabes 4. 


8 theitokeni. tOm.x. Om. sx. VY Om. 5s. 
z gatherid togidre with me 1s. ®Om.1s. > Om. is. 


wandis. * Butis. YJ sugettide my self and Y 1s. 


© men [of s] Jewis and maistir men ts. 4 weren 


etynget. © Andis. £Om.1. Sanis. mein myn houshold 1s. iand sixe 1s. * J hadde dyuerse 1s. 
10m.s. ™ thingis to divers men 1s. "on 1x. “hane dots. P also Tobie1s. 4 bildide also up is. * wal 
of Jerusalem 1s. “and thatis. tandis. Uvntots. tox. Vsetupis. Wtheleeuys1. * of 1s. 
y and Sanballath 1s. 2thouintoafeeld 1s.  vilagiss. >bOm.1s. ¢certisis. TOm.1s, ¢ doun 
therfro1s. f necgligently 1s. & And aftir this word 1. And bi this words. & Om.1s. i Om.1s. 


VI. 6—14. 


rathere woord the fifte sithe his child; 
and he hadde a lettre in his hond writen 
¢in this maner ; In Gentilis it is herd, and 
Gosem seide, for thou and the Jewis 
thenken to rebellen, and therfore 3ee 
bilden, and thou wilt rere thee vp on hem 
7king ; for what cause and profetus thou 
hast sett, that prechen of thee in Jeru- 
salem, seiende, A king in Jerusalem is ; 
the king is to here these woordis; ther- 
fore cum now, that wee go in counseil 
stogidere. And I sente to hem, seiende, 
It is not don after these woordis that 
thou spekist ; forsothe of thin herte thou 
9makist these thingus. Alle these fereden 
vs, thenkende that our hondis shulden 
cesen fro werkis, and resten a3een; for 
what cause more I confortid myn hond. 
10 And I wente in to the hous of Samaie, 
sone of Dalie, sone of Methabehel, pri- 
uyli, the whiche seith, Trete wee with 
vs in the hous of God, in the middel of 
the temple, and close we the 3atus of the 
hous; for ther ben to come that thei sle 
thee, and the ny3t thei ben to come that 
11 thei sle thee. And I seide, Whethir any 
man lic me fleeth, and who as I shal go 
in to the temple, and liuen? I shal not 
iggon in. And I vnderstod that God hadde 
not sent hym, but as profeciende he hadde 
spoke to me; and Thobias and Sanabal- 
i3slath bi mede hadden hirid hym. For- 
sothe he hadde take pris, that aferd I 
shulde don, and synnen ; and thei my3te 
14han euel, that thei repreue to me. Haue 
mynde of me, Lord, for Tobias and Sana- 
ballath, after? suche werkus of hem; but 
and of Nadie, profete, and of othere pro- 


II. ESDRAS. 


517 


tyme bi the formere word his child; and 
he hadde in his hond a pistle* writun in 
this maner; It is herd among hetheneé 
men, and Gosem seide!, that thou and the™ 
Jewis thenken for to rebelle, and therfor 3e 
bilden®, and thou? wolt ‘reise thee? king on4 
hem’; for which’ cause also thou hast set7 
profetis, that' prechen of thee in Jerusa- 
lem, and seient, A king is in Jerusalem ; 
the king schal here these wordis; therfor 
come thou now, that we take counsel" to- 
gidere. And Y sente to hem, and seide,s 
It is not doon bi’ these wordis whiche¥ 
thou spekist ; for of thin* herte thou mak- 
ist these thingis. Alle these men maden9 
vs aferd, and thou3ten that oure hondis 
schulden ceesse froY werkis?, that? we 
schulden reste’; for which cause Y coum- 
fortide more myn hond*. And Y entride to 
priueli in to the hows of Samaie, sone! of 
Dalie, the sone of Methabehel, which® 
seidef, Trete we® with vs" silf in the hows 
of God, in the myddis! of the temple, and 
close we the 3atis of the hows; for thei 
schulen come to sle thee, ‘and thei schulen* 
come ‘bi ni3t! to sle thee. And Y seide, 11 
Whether ony man lijk™ mef fledde®, and = t 4yk me; that 
6 18, tristinge so 

who as Y schal entre in to the temple, 


to God, as ¥ 
do. schat lyue ; 
and schal lyue®? Y schal? not entre. 1295 i he. Ag 


as if he seide, 


And Y vridurstood" that God ‘hadde not fon 
sent’ hym', but ‘he spak as profesiynge pai ee 
to me; and" Tobie and Sanaballath ‘had- fending, as Y 


ae do, fledde to 
den hiridY hym for meede’. For he hadde 13 the temple for 


take* prijs, that Y schulde be aferd, and Galioe mit 
do’, and” that Y schulde* do? synne®; and  9%¢y bis list 
thei? schulden® hauef yuel%, which thei 

schulden’ putte to me with schenschip. 

Lord, haue mynde of me, for’ Tobye and 14 


d Om. c. 


m On. 1s. 
4 upon 1s. 


k Jettere is. |! hath seid 18. 
thou s. P enhaunce thi self 1s. 


her werkis x. 4 and that 1s. 
honde in wirching s. 
i myddil 1. 
for sich a thing 1. hath fled for such a lawe s. 
entre thider ¢o take grith s. 
uQm.1s. V hiriden 1s. 
her will 18. 
and the king in bildinge [of Jerusalem s] 18. 
a3ens me 1. yuel or quarel azens me 3. 


4 the sone Is. 


n bilden the wal. bilden the wal of Jerusalem s. 

¥ the Jewis 1. Jewis 8. 
ttOm.a. 4% counsel heroffis. ¥ aftir1. W that 1. in which s. 
b reste fro bilding 1. reste fro bildyng of Jerusalem s. 
€ the whiche 1. 
k she and bi nizt thei wil 1. 3ea bi ni3t thei shuln s. 


t haue vndirstonde rs. 
W meede, and he hath spoke to me as propheciynge ts. 
z Om. 1. and thei enforsyn hem to proue s. 
that thei 1. 


h wolden 1. i that for 1s. 


© that 
t whiche 1s. 
2 oure werkis 18. 

¢ hond therto 1. 


8 the which 1. 
xthin omne1. Yofs. 


f seide fo me 18. & we there s. h our 8. 
1Om.1s. ™Tlijk tos. hath fled 
© lyue or be sauid theres. P wilt. entre thidere 1. 


8 sente not Is. t this man 1. this messager s. 
* take of hemis. ¥ do 
bOm.1. © synne azens God 


fin this haueis. & yuel 


a schulde so 1. 
€ wolden 1. 


518 


15 fetus, that fereden me. Forsothe the wal 
is fulfild the fiue and twentithe dai of 
the sixte moneth, in two and fifti dajes. 

16]t is do thanne, whan alle oure enemys 
hadden herd, that alle the Jentilis that 
werell in oure enuyroun dredden, and 
fellen togidere with inne themself, and 
knewen, that of the Lord was do this 

17were. But and in tho da3es manye epi- 
stolis of the moste wrthi men of Jewis 
weren sent to Tobie, and fro Tobie camen 

isto them. Manye forsothe weren in Jude, 
hauende his oth; for he was the sone in 
lawe of Sechenye, sone of Jorel; and Jo- 
hannan, his sone, hadde taken the do3ter 
190f Mosollam, sone of Barachie. But and 
thei preseden hym befor me, and my 
woordis thei tolden to hym; and Tho- 
bias sente lettris, that he shulde fere me. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Aftir forsothe that the wal is maad 
vp, and I sette the 3ate lenys, and noum- 
bride the porteres, and the singeris, and 

2the Leuitis, I comaundede to Aneny, my 
brother, and to Ananye, prince of the 
hous of Jerusalem ; he forsothe as a soth- 
fast man, and dredende God more than 

3othere was seen; and I seide to hem, 
The 3atis of Jerusalem be thei not opened 
vnto the hete of the sunne ; and whan 3it 
I stod nee3h, the 3atis ben closid and 
stoppid. And I sette keperis of the 
dwelleris of Jerusalem, eche bi ther 
4whilis, and eche ajen his hous. Forsothe 
the cite was myche brod and gret, and 
the puple litil in the middel of it, and 
5ther weren not housis bild. God for- 
sothe 3af in myn herte, and I gaderede 
togidere the most wrshipeful men, and 


k han troublid, and aftir her 1s. 


IJ. ESDRAS. 


] 3elde to hem ts. 


Viig-=valenee 


Sanaballath, bi* siche werkis ‘of hem!; but 
also of ™ Noadie, the profete, and of othere 


profetis, that maden™ me aferd. Forsothe® 5 


the wal was fillid? in the fyue and twen- 
tithe dai of the monethe Ebul‘}, in two 
and fifti daies. 
whanne alle oure enemyes hadden herd, ° 
that alle hethene men dredden’, that weren 
in oure cumpas, and thei felden doun with 
yune hem silf, and wiste', that this work 


was maad of God. But also in tho daies17 


many pistlis" of the principal men of Jewis . 
weren sent to Tobie, and camen’ fro Tobie 

to hem. 
and” hadden his ooth*{; for he hadde 
weddid the dou3ter of Sechenye, the sone 
of RotelY ; and Johannam, his sone, hadde 
take the dou3ter of Mosallam, sone? of 


Barachie. But* also thei preisiden hym>19 


bifor me, and telden my* wordis’ to® 
hym; and Tobie sente lettris, forf to make 
me aferd. 

CAP. VII. 

Forsothe’ aftir that the wal of Jerusa-1 
lem was bildid, and Y hadde set® satis', 
and Y* hadde noumbrid porters!, and 
syngeris, and dekenys, Y comaundide to™2 
Aneny, my brother, and to Ananye, the" 
prince of the hows of Jerusalem; for he® 
semyde a sothefast man, and dredynge 
God more than othere men diden; ‘and3 
Y seide ‘to hem?, The 3atis of Jerusalem ; 
ben not openyd ‘til tot the heete of the 
sunne; and, whanne Y was 3it present, 
the 3atis weren closid, and lockid. And 
Y settide’ keperis* of the dwelleris of Je- 
rusalem, alle men bi her whilis', and ech 
man a3ens" his’ hows. Sotheli’ the citee4 
was ful brood and greet, and litil puple 
was in myddis* therof, and housisY weren 
not bildid?§. Forsothe* God 3af> in myns 
herte, and Y gaderide togidere the prin- 


m haue thou mynde of s, 2 han maad 18. 


oAndis. Pendidy, fillid or endid s. 4 of Ebnl, that is, August 1. of Ebuls. *Andz. § dredden 
us, dredden of vss. ¢ thei wisten 1. thei wisten ¢hannes. lettris1s. Vv camenalsors. W that 1s. 
x goth, that is, weren sworen to him 1. ooth, and weren asurid to him bi ooths. __¥ Rotel, a greet potes- 
tates. %thesoneis. 8 Andis. >this Tobie 1s. tomers. 4 feerful wordiss. ¢of1s. Om. 1s. 
& Andis. h set up is. ithe 3atis therofts. * Om.1s. | the portersts. ™Om.s. "Om,s. © this 
princes. P Om.s. vntos. ‘setts. S$ kepers therofs. ‘'whilis or tymes1. “forn ajensis. VY his 
owneis.- W Andis,  * the myddis 1s. y the housis 1s. Z 3itt bildid 1s. 8 Andis,  » 3aue 
to me 8. 


For many men weren in Judee, 18 


+ Ebul; Ebul 
is the sixte 


Sotheli™ it was doon, 16 monethe anen- 


tis Ebreis, and 
it answerith in 
parti to onre 
August, and in 
party to Sep- 
tembre. Lire 
here. c. 


+ ooth ; that is, 
bond of pees 
with him, con- 
fermed with an 
ooth. Lire 
here. Cc. 


§ housis weren 
not bildid to 
enhabite, but 
hulkis and 
pentisis weren 
maad bisidis 
the wallis in 
the ynnere 
part, in whiche 
they my3ten 
abide for a 
litil tyme, til 
the citee were 
bildid. Lire 
here. c. 


VII. 6—26. 


the maister iugis, and the comun, that I 
noumbre hem; and I fond the boc of the 
noumbring of hem, that hadden ste3id 
vp first. And it is founde® writen in it, 
6 These’ the sones of the prouince, that 
stezeden vp fro the caitifte of transmigra- 
cioun, the whiche Nabugodonosor, king 
of Babiloine, hadde translatid; and thei 
ben turned a3een in to Jerusalem and in 
7to Jude, eche in to his cite, that camen 
with Sorobabel; Josue, Neemias, A zarias, 
Raamias, Naanum, Mardocheus, Bethsar, 
Mesfarath, Beggai, Naum, Banaa. The 
noumbre of the men of the puple of 
8Irael; the sones of Faros, two thousend 
gand hundrid and two and seuenti; the 
sonus of Safaie, thre hundrid foure score 
10and two; the sonus of Area, sixe hundrid 
iitwo and fifti; the sonus of Faeth Moab, 
of the sonus of Josue and of Joab, two 
thousend ei3teS hundrid and ei3tetene ; 
12the sonus of Elam, a thousend ei3te hun- 
isdrid and foure and fifti; the sonus of 
Zechua, ei3te hundrid and fiue and fourti ; 
14the sonus of Zachai, senene hundrid and 
issixty ; the sonus of Bennui, sixe hundrid 
igand ei3te and fourti; the sonus of Ebai, 
W7sixe hundrid ‘and ei3te" and twenti; the 
sonus of Asgad, two thousend thre hun- 
isdrid and two and twenti; the sonus of 
Asonycham, sixe hundrid and seuene and 
i9sixti; the sonus of Bagoamy, two thou- 
20send and seuene and sixti; the sonus of 
Adin, sixe hundrid and fine and fifti; 
21the sonus of Aser, sone of Ezechie, e13te 
22and twenti; the sonus of Asem, thre hun- 
a3drid and eijte and twenti; the sonus of 
-Bethsai, thre hundrid and foure and 
24twenti; the sonus of Aref, an hundrid 
25and seuene and twenti; the sonus of Sa- 
26laon, fiue and nynti; the men of Beth- 
lem and of Nethufa, an hundrid foure 


e Oni. E pr. m. 


II. ESDRAS. 


f These ben 4. 


519 


cipal men’, and magistratis‘’,and the comyn 
puple, for to nourmmbre hem; and Y foond 
the® book of the noumbre of hem, that 
hadden stied‘ first. And it was foundun 
writun ther ynne, These ben the sones of 6 
the prouynce, ‘that stieden* fro the cai- 
tifte of men passynge ouer!, whiche Nabu- 
godonosor, the kyng of Babiloyne, hadde 
‘translatid, etheri led ouer* ; and thei that7 
weren comun with Zorobabel turneden 
a3en in to Jerusalem and in to Judee, ech 
man in! to his citee; Josue™, Neemye, 
Azarie, Raanye, Naanum, Mardochee, 
Bethsar, Mespharath, Beggaay, Naum, 
Baana®. The°® noumbre of men? of the 
puple of Israel4; the sones of Pharos, two's 
thousynde an hundrid and two and se- 
uenti; the sones of Saphaie, thre® hun-9» 
drid and two and seuenti; the sones of 10 
Area, sixe' hundrid and two and fifti; 
the sones of Phaeth Moab, of the sones11 
of Josue and of Joab, two" thousynde 
ei3te hundrid and ei3tene; the sones of 12 
Helam, a’ thousynde ei3te hundrid and 
foure and fifti; the sones of Ezecua, ei3te” 13 
hundrid and fyue and fourti; the sones14 
of Zachai, seuene* hundrid and sixti; the1s 
sones of Bennuy, sixeY hundrid and eijte 
and fourti; the sones of Hebahi, sixeY i¢ 
hundrid and ei3te and twenti; the sones17 
of Degad, two* thousynde thre hundrid ° 
and two and twenti; the sones of Azo-1s 
nicam, sixe? hundrid and _ seuene - and 
sixti; the sones of Bagoamy, two" thou- 19 
synde and seuene and sixti; the sones 20 
of Adyn, sixe® hundrid and fine and’ 
fifti; the sones of Azer, sone’ of Eze-21 
chie, ei3te® and twenti; the sones of A-22 
sem, thref hundrid and eijte and twenti; 
the sones of Bethsai, thre? hundrid and 2s 
foure and twenti; the sones of Areph, 24 
an» hundrid and seuene and twenti; thes 


B sexe 4. b Om. a. 


¢Om.1is. 4 maistirmenis. ¢ars. fstied up. & first fro the caitiftee 1s. » whiche 3eden up 1. 


which stieden vp s. 
1 Om. 1s. 
men s. q Israel is this 18. 

VY werenais. W weren ei3zte Is. 
b weren twos. © weren sixe Is. 
h qweren an 18. 


¥ weren two Is. 


i ouer fro Babiloyne to Jerusalem 1s. j 
™ that is to wite, Josue 1. that is to seie, Josue s. 
3 weren thre s. 
X weren seuene Is. 

4 the sone 1s. 


k ouer into Babiloyne 18. 
o And the is. P the 
t weren sixe s. U qweren two IS. 
Z weren two IS. %weren Sixe1s. 
fweren thre 1s. & weren thre ts. 


Om. Is. 
® and Baana 1s. 


Y weren sixe Is. 
© weren eizte 15 


520 


27 score and ei3te; men of Anatot, an hun- 
esdrid and ei3te and twenti; men of Beth- 
29samoth, two and fourti; men of Cariathi- 
arim, Sefira, and Beroth, seuene hundrid 
z0and thre and fourti; men of Ramaa and 
of Gabaa, sixe hundrid and oon and 
31twenti; men of Machinas, two hundrid 
seand two and twenti; men of Bethel and 
of Hai, an hundrid aud thre and twenti ; 
33men of the tother Nebo, two and fifti; 
34men of the tother Elam, a thousend two 
35hundrid and foure and fifti; the sonus 
seof Arem, thre hundrid and twenti; the 
sonus of Jericho, thre hundrid and fiue 
37and fourti; the sonus of Joiadid and of 
Anon, seuene hundrid and oon and 
3stwenti; the sonus of Senaa, thre thou- 
39send nyne hundrid and thretti; prestus, 
the sonus of Joiada, in the hous of Josue, 
4onyne hundrid and foure and seuenti; the 
sonys of Emmer, a thousend and two and 
41 fifti; the sonus of Fassur, a thousend two 
42hundrid senene and fourti; the sones of 
Arem, a thousend and seuentene; Le- 
i uitus, sonus of Josue and of Gadimel,sonus 
of Odina, seuenti and foure; singeres, 
4s sonus of Asaf, an hundrid and seuene and 
4¢fourti ; porteres, sonus of Sellum, sonus of 
Ather, sonus of Thelmon, sonus of Accub, 
sonus of Accita, sonus of Sobai, an hun- 
47drid and ei3te and thretti; sodeknes, 
sonus of Soa, sonus of Asfa, sonus of The- 
48baoth, sonus of Cheros, sonus of Sicca, 
souus of Fado, sonus of Lebana, sonus of 
49 Agaba, sonus of Selmon, sonus of Anon, 
s0sonus of Jeddel, sonys of Gair, sonus of 
Raaia, sonus of Rasym, sonus of Nechoda, 
slsonus of Jesem, sonus of Asa, sonus of 
52 Fascha, sonus of Besai, sonus of Minuin, 
sssonus of Nefusym, sonis of Bechue, sonus 
54 of Acufa, sonus of Assur, sonus of Belloth, 
sssonus of Meida, sonus of Arsa, sonus of 
Berchos, sonus of Cizara, sonus of Thema, 
sonus of Nezia, sonus of Athifa, sonus of 
the seruauns of Salomon, sonus of Sothai, 


1 weren fyne 1s. & weren an 18. 


Il. ESDRAS. 


1 weren two 18. 


VII. 27—57. 


sones of Zabaon, fyue! and twenti; the 26 
men of Bethleem and of Necupha, an* 
hundrid foure score and eij3te; the men 27 
of Anatoth, an* hundrid and ei3te and 
twenti; the men of Bethamoth, two! and 2s 
fourti; the men of Cariathiarym, of Ce-29 
phura, and Beroth™, seuene® hundrid and 
thre and fourti; the men of Rama and of 30 
Gabaa, sixe® hundrid and oon and twenti; 
the men of Machimas, two? hundrid and 31 
two and twenti; the men of Bethel and 32 
of Hay, an‘ hundrid and thre and twenti; 
the men of the tother® Nebo, two* and 33 
fifti; the men of the tothert Helam, a®s4 
thousynde two hundrid and foure and 
fifti; the sones of Arem, thre’ hundrid3s 
and twenti; the sones of Jerico, thre’ 36 
hundrid and fyue and fourti; the sones37 
of Joiadid and Anon*, seueneY hundrid 
and oon and twenti; the sones of Senaa, 3s 
thre? thousynde nyne hundrid and thritti ; 
preestis, the sones of Idaie, in the hous of 39 
Josua, nyne* hundrid and foure and se- 
uenti; the sones of Emmer, a? thousynde 40 
and two and fifti; the sones of Phassur, 41 
a> thousynd two® hundrid and ‘seuene and 
fourti4; the sones of Arem, a? thousynde 42 
and ei3tene; dekenes, the sones of Josue 4s 
and of Gadymel, sones® of Odyna, fouref 44 
and seuenti; syngeris, the® sones of Asaph, 45 
an’ hundrid and seuene and fourti; por-46 
teris, the sones of Sellum, sones! of Ater, 
sones! of Thelmon, sones‘ of Accub, sones i 
of Accita, sones: of Sobai, an*k hundrid 
and ei3te and thretti; Nathynneis, sones! 47 
of Soa, sones! of Aspha, sones! of Theba- 
oth, sones! of Cheros, sones! of Sicca, sones! 48 
of Phado, sones! of Lebana, sones! of Aga- 
ba, sones! of Selmon, sones! of Anan, sones! 49 
of Geddel, sones! of Gaer, sones! of Raaie, 50 
sones! of Rasym, sones! of Necuda, sones! 51 
of Jezem, sones! of Asa, sones! of Phascha, 
sones! of Besai, sones! of Mynum, sones of se 
Nephusym, sones of Bechue, sones of Acu-53 
pha, sones of Assur, sones of Belloth, sones 54 


m of Beroth 1s.  weren senene 1s. © weren 
sixe IS, P weren two 1s. 4Wweren an Is. Yr oother 1s. 8 qeren two Is. t oother is. U weren a IS, 
Y weren thre 1s. Ww weren thre Is. x of Anon Is. Y weren seuene Is. Z weren thre 1s. & weren 
nyne ts. %werenats. Candtwok. 4seuenti and foure a pr.m. sixti and seuene a sec.m. &the 
sones 1s. ‘werenfoures. fofthe is. »werenans. ithe sonesis. * werenanis. 1! the sones 18. 


Vit. 58—70. 


sssonus of Soforeth, sonus of Ferida, sonus 
of Jachala, sonus of Dalchon, sonns of 
59 Jeddel, sonus of Safacia, sonus of Atchil, 
sonus of Foeereth, that was born of 
6o Abaim, sone of Amon; alle the sodek- 
nes, and the sonus of the thrallis of Sala- 
mon, thre lhundrid and two and twenti. 
61 These ben that stez3eden vp of Themelath, 
Thelarsa, Cherub, Addo, and Emmer, 
and thei my3ten not shewe the hous of 
ther fadirs, and ther sed, whether of 
62 Israel thei weren ; sonus of Dalaia, sonus 
of Thobia, sonus of Nethoda, sixe hun- 
o3drid and two and fourti; and of the 
prestis, sonus of Abia, sonus of Achos, 
sonus of Bersellai, that toc a wif of the 
do3tris of Bersellai Galadite, and is cle- 
61pid bi the name of hem; these so3ten the 
scripture of ther genelogie, and founde 
65 not, and ben cast out fro presthod. And 
Athersatha seide to them, that thei shul- 
den not eten of the holi thingus of ha- 
lewis, to the time that ther rijse a ta3t 
esand lerned prest. Al the multitude as o 
man, two and fourti thousend thre hun- 
e7drid and sixti, with oute the seruauns 
and the hand wymmen of hem, that 
weren seuen thousend thre hundrid and 
seuene and thretti ; and among hem sing- 
eres and singressis two hundrid and fiue 
esand fourti. The hors of hem, seuene 
e9hundrid and thre and thretti; the ca- 
mailis of hem, foure hundrid and fiue and 
thretti ; the assis of hem, sixe thousend 
seuene hundred and thretti; ‘the mulis of 
hem, two hundrid and fiue and fourti', 
joSumme forsothe of the princis of the 
meynes 3euen expensis in to the werc of 
God; Athersatha 3af in to the tresorie, 
of gold, dragmys a thousend, fifty violis, 


Il. ESDRAS. 


521 


of Meida, sones of Arsa, sones of Berchos, 55 
sones of Sisara, sones of Thema, sones of 56 
Nesia, sones of Atipha, sones of the ser-57 
nauntis of Salomon, sones of Sothai, sones 
of Sophoreth, sones of Pherida, sones of 58 
Jacala, sones of Dalcon, sones of Geddel, 
sones of Saphatie, sones of Atthal, the 59 
sones of Phetereth, ‘that was" borun of 
Abaim, sone® of Amon; alle Natynneis, ¢o 
and the sones of the seruauntis of Salo- 
mon, weren thre hundrid and two and 
twenti?. Forsothe’ these it" ben’ that! 
stiedent, Dethemel", Mela’, Thelarsa”, 
Cherub*, AddoY, and Emmer’, and* ny3ten 
not schewe the hows of her fadris, and 
her seed, whether thei weren of ¢ Israel4 ; 
the sones of Dalaie, the sones of Tobie, 2 
the® sones of Nethoda, sixe’ hundrid and 
two aud fourti; and of prestis’, the sones 63 
of Abia, the sones of Achcs, the sones of 
Berzellai, that took a wijf of the dou3tris 
of Berzellai of Galaad, aud was" clepid bi 
the name of hem; these! sou3ten the scrip- 64 
ture of her genelogie*, and founden! not, 
and weren™ cast out of presthod. And 65 
Athersata seide to hem, that thei schulden 
not eete of the hooli thingis of hooli men, 
til" a wijs prest ‘and lerud? roos?. A] the 66 
multitude as! o man, two’ and fourti thou- 
synde sixe hundrid and sixti’, outakunt67 
the" seruauntis and handmaidis’ of hem, 
that” weren seuene thousynde thre hun- 
drid and seuene and thretti; and* among 
the syngeris and syngeressisY, sixe? hun- 
drid and fyue and fourti*. The horsis of 6s 
hem, sixe® hundrid and sixe and thritti; 
the mulis of hem, two® hundrid aud fyue 
and fourti; the camels of hem, foure’ 69 
huudrid and fyne and thritti; the assis 
of hem, sixe® thousynde ei3te hundrid and 


prestus cotus fiue hundrid and thretti. thritti. Forsothef summe of the princes 70 
iOm. acru. 
™QOm. 1s. "whiche weren1s. the soners. Psevnentisx. dAndis. «that suenrs. §&ben 
thei 1s. t stieden up of the cuntrey 1s. u of Dethemel 1x pr.m. of Themel s. vOm.1s. Woof 


Thelarsa 1s. * of Chernbis. yY of Addo 1s. 
the lynage of 1s. 
was 1s. i these men s. 
° Jerned em. Om. 1s. 


ther weren of hem two 8. 


k generacioun 1s. 


8 gixti men IS. 


xOm. x. Ysyngsteres 1. 2 weren sixe Is. 
© weren two 1s. 4 qweren foure 1s. © weren sixe IS. 
VOL. II. 


2 of Emmer 1s. 
d [srael or no 1. Israel or nay s. 
l thei fonnden ¢ 1s. 
P rise [ros s] up among the peple 1s. 
t withonte 1. 

8 fourti seruauntis and hondmaydens s. 


athe whiche 1. which s. > ners. ¢ of 
& the prestis1s. he 
n til that 1s. 
rand 

w whiche 1s. 
> weren sixe Is. 


f weren sixe 1S. 
™ thei weren ¢herfore 1s. 
4 was asi. was gaderid togidre as s. 

2 Om.1.  ¥ handmaidens ts. 


e Om. 1. 


‘ Sothely 1s. 


3X 


522 


71 And of the princis of thes meines ther 
3euen in to the tresorie of the werk, of 
gold, dragmis twenti thousend, and of 
siluer, two thousend besauntus and two 

72zhundrid. And that that 3af the tother 
puple, of gold, dragmis twenti thousend, 
and of siluer, besauntus two thousend, and 
prestus cotus sixti and seuenn. Forsothe 
the prestus, and Leuitus, and the porteris, 
and singeris, and the tother comun, and 
the sodeknys, and al Irael dwelten in 
ther cites. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 And the seuenthe monethe of the feste 
of tabernaclis was comen vnder Esdra 
and Neemie; the sonus forsothe of Irael 
weren in ther cites. And al the puple is 
gedered as 00 man, at the strete that is 
befor the 3ate of watris. And thei seiden 
to Esdra, scribe, that he shulde bringe 
forth the boc of the lawe of Moises, that 
the Lord hadde comaundid to Irael. 

2Thanne Esdras, the prest, bro3te forth 
the lawe, befor the multitude of men and 
wymmen, and to alle that my3ten vnder- 
stonde, in the firste dai of the seuenthe 

3smonyth. And he radde in it apertli in 
the strete that was befor the 3ate of 
watris, fro the morutid vnto the! middai, 
in the si3te of men and wymmen and of 
wise men; and the eris of al the puple 
4weren ri3t to the boc. Forsothe Esdras 
scribe stod vpon a treene gree™, the 
whiche he hadde maad to speken in; and 
ther stoden beside hym, Mathathias, 
and Semma, and Anania, and Vria, and 
Elchia, and Maasia, at his ri3t side; and 
at his left", Fadaia, Misael, and Melchia, 
Assum, and Asef, Dana, and Acharia, 


k Om. 4. | Om. EFn. 


IJ. ESDRAS. 


m prece AFH. 


VII. 71—VIII. 4. 


of meynees® 3auen costis in to the werk 
of God; Athersata 3af in to the tresour, 
a thousynde dragmes of gold, fifti> viols, 
fyue! hundrid and thritti cootis of prestis. 


And of the prynces of meynees thei 3auen 7! 


in to the tresour of the werk, twenti thou- 
synde dragmes of gold, aud two thousynde 


and two hundrid besauntis of siluer. And 72 


that that the residue‘ puple 3af, twenti! 
thousynde dragmes of gold, and two thou- 
synde besauntis of siluer, and seuene and 
sixti cootis of prestis. Sotheli™ prestis, 
and dekenes, and porteris, and syngeris, 
and the residue" puple, and Natynneis, 
and al Israel dwelliden® in her citees. 


CAP. VIII. 


And? the seuenthe monethe‘} ‘was comunt | 
vndur Esdras* and Neemye'; sotheli the 
sones of Israel weren in her cytees. And al 
the puple was gaderid togydere as 0 man, 
to" the’ street which” is bifor the 3ate of 
watris. And thei seiden to Esdras, the 
scribe*, that he schulde bryngeY the book 
of the lawe of Moises, which? the Lord 
hadde comanundid to Israel. Therfor*2 
Esdras, the preest, brou3te” the lawe bifor 
the multitude of men and of wymmen, and 
bifor alle that my3ten vndurstonde’, ‘in 
the firste day of the seuenth monethe®. 
And hef redde in it opynli in the streets 
that was bifor the 3ate of watris, fro the 
morewtid ‘til to’ myddai, in the si3t of men 
and of wymmen and of wise men; and the 
eeris of al the puple weren reisid® to the 
book!. Forsothe* Esdras the writere stood 4 
on the! grees of tree, which™ he hadde 
maad to speke theron" ; and Mathatie, and 
Semma, and Ananye, and Vrie, and El- 
chie, and Maasie stoden bisidis hym at his 
ri3t half; and Phadaie, Mysael, and Mel- 
chie, Assum, and Aseph, Dana, and Za- 
charie, and Mosollam stoden at the left 


n left side 4. 


&themeyneesis. hand fiftis. tandfyueis. kremenauntis. !wastwenti1s. ™ Andis. "remenaunt 


1s. ° dwelliden there aftiris. ? And whannes. 
8 the office of Esdras 1s. t of Neemye 1s. 


q monethe of the feest of tabernaclis 1s. 
U into Is. 


r had come rs. 


Yaris. Wthatis. * writeris. Y brynge forth 1s. 


2 whiche /awe 1s. * Therfor in the firste day of the seuenthe monthe 1s. > hrou3te forth 1s. ¢ alle men 1s. 


e Om. 1s. f Om. s. 


m that 1. 


a yndirstonde id Is. 
k Andis. fas. 


& vnto Is. 
2 upon 1. vpon to the peple s. 


b reisid up 1s. i book to here the lawe s. 


+ this word 
synofegie is nat 
in Ebreu, ne- 
ther is of the 
text, nether is 
vndurstondun 
for senofegie 
and the feste 
of tabernaclis 
is al oon, that 
was maad in 
the xv. day. 
Lire here. c. 


VIII. 5—13. 


sand Mosollam. And Esdras openede the 
boc beforn al the puple; vp on al the 
puple forsothe he stod ouer; and whan he 
6 hadde opened it, al the puple stod. And 
Esdras blesside to the Lord God with a 
gret vois; and al the puple answerde, 
Amen, Amen, rerend vp ther hondus. 
And thei ben ful bowid, and bowid in to 
7the erthe thei honoureden God. But 
Josue, and Baani, and Serebia, Jamyn, 
Accub, Sefai, Odia, Maasia, Celitha, 
Azarias, Josabeth, Anan, Fallaia, Le- 
uitus, maden silence in the puple to the 
lawe to ben herd. The puple forsothe 
sstod in his gree. And thei radden in the 
boc of the lawe distinctli and apertli to 
vynderstonde ; and thei vnderstoden, whan 
git schulde be rad. Forsothe Neemias, he 
is Athersata, seide, and Esdras, prest and 
scribe, and the Leuitus, remenyng to al 
the puple, A dai is halewid to the Lord 
oure God ; wileth not weilen, and wileth 
not wepen. Forsothe al the puple wepte, 
whan he® herde the woordis of the lawe, 
10 And he seide to them, Goth, and eteth 
fatte thingis, and drinketh meth, and 
sendeth for hem, that han not maad redi 
to them self, for it is the holi dai of the 
Lord ; wileth not be dreri, forsothe the? 
11ioje of the Lord is 3oure strengthe. Also 
Leuitus maden silence in al the puple, 
seiende, Holdeth 3our pes, for it is hali- 
i2dai, and wileth not sorewen. And so al 
the puple wente to‘ ete, and drinken, and 
to sende partis, and to make gret glad- 
nesse ; for thei vnderstoden the woordis, 
i3that he hadde ta3t hem. In the secunde 
dai ben gedered the princis of meynes, 
and al the puple, prestus, and Leuitus, to 
Esdra, scribe, that he remene to them the 


© thei nu. 


© book of Goddis lawe s. 


doon, K marg. ‘Sreisyngeuprs.  upont. 
Y atreed a. Om. 1. or atreet s. Z to be Is. 
€ ther reddes. 2 Andis. ¢ Om. 1s. 


i This 1s. the Lord oure God 1s. 1 now morne s. 
P etith s. 4 or meeth 1. or water maad swete with hony s. 
drynke s. shanis. t wherof to make redi s. 


Il. ESDRAS. 


P Om. 4. 


P he stondyng on the greece s. 
u And ts. 

a yndurstonde it 1. 
fis clepid Is. 


523 


half. And Esdras openyde the book°® bifors 
al the puple ; for he? apperide ouer al the 
puple; and whanne he hadde openyd the 
book, al the puple stood’. And Esdrase 
blesside the Lord God with greet vois ; and 
al the puple answeride, Amen, Amen’, 
reisynge* her hondis. And thei weren 
bowid, and thei worschipiden God, lowli 
on‘ the erthe. Forsothe" Josue, and Baany,7 
and Serebie, Jamyn’, Acub, Septhai, Odia, 
Maasie, Celitha, Ajarie, Jozabeth, Anan, 
Phallaie, dekenes, maden silence in the 
puple for to here the lawe. Sotheli” the 
puple stood in her degree. And thei*8 
redden in the book of Goddis lawe dis- 
tinctli, ‘ether atreetY, and opynli to? vndur- 
stonde®; ‘and thei vndurstoden>, whanne 
it was red®. Forsothe’ Neemye seide®, hes 
isf Athersata’, and Esdras, the preest and 
writere, and the dekenes, expownynge to 
al the puple, It! is a dai halewid to ‘oure 
Lord God*; nyle 3e morne!, and nyle 3e 
wepe{. For™ al the puple wepte, whanne — ¢ To mourne 
it herde the wordis of the" lawe. And 1034 ,vepe in 


the holi day, is 
he® seide to hem, Go 3e, and ‘ete 3eP fatte 1 consent to 


synne, which is 


thingis, and drynke 3e wiyn ‘maad swete cae Seca 
. 6 yng and wep. 
with hony4, and sende 3e partis™ to hem, _ ing. s. 3 


that maden® not redi* to hem silf, for it 
is an hooli dai of the Lord; ‘nyle 3e be 
sory", for’ the ioye§ of the Lord is 3oure 


§ ioie ; that is, 


strengthe, Sotheliv the dekenes maden11 fey! jo" 
silence in al the puple, and seiden*, Be 3e j¢oven % 
4 3 é z 5 A ane loye in 
stille, for itY is an hooli dai, and ‘nyle 3e — the Lord in 
this solemp- 


Therfor* al the puple® 12 nyte, is zoure 
coumfort, mak- 
inge 30u stronge 
to goodnesse. 
Lire here. c. 


make sorewe’. 
jede for to ete, and drynke, and to sende 
partis’, and ‘to make‘ greet gladnesse ; for 
thei vndurstoden the wordis||*, whichef he® — | To a feithfut 
hadde tau3t hem. And in the secound dai 137 yy, 
the princes of meynees, alle" the! puplis, {0 “derstonde 


2 4 his lawe, and 
prestis, and dekenes, weren gaderid to- 40 therafter. s, 


4 for to AEFI. 


@ stood to here x. * that ts, be it doon, be it 
vand Jamynis. Andis.  * prestis s, 
b Om. 1, and men vnderstode it s. 

& Athersata seide 1s.» expowninge the lawe 1s. 
m Sothly 1s. 2 Goddiss. © Neemyet. the preist s, 
r part therof 1. part of 30ur mete and 


" therfor be 3e not sory 1. nyle 3e now therfor be sori s. 


y Sothly 13, w And rs, * thei seidenis. Ythis 1s. 2 make3e no sorewer. 4 Thanne 1. b multitude ts. 


© partis therof to the nedy 1. part therof to pore men 8. 


fthat 1. & the techeres. “and allers. !Om.s. 


4 thei maden 1s, € wordis of Goddis lane 8, 


3x 2 


524 


is woordis of the lawe. And thei founde 
writen in the lawe, the Lord to han co- 
maundid in the hond of Moises, that the 
sonus of Irael dwelle in tabernaclis in the 

1s Solempne dai, the seuenthe moneth; and 
that thei prechen, aud pupplishen vois 
in alle ther cites, and in Jerusalem ; 
seiende, Goth out in to the hil, and bring- 
eth braunchis of oliues, and braunchis of 
the most fair tree, and the braunchis of 
niyrt? tree, and bowis of palmys, and 
braunchis of a wodi tree, that ther be 

16inade tabernaclis, as it is write. And 
al the puple wente out, and bro3ten, and 
maden tabernaclis to them, eche in his 
hous, and in ther porchis, and in the por- 
chis of the hous of God, and in the strete 
of the 3ate of watris, and in the strete of 

lithe 3ate of Effraym. Thanue al the 
chirche of hem, that ben turned a3een fro 
the caitifte, made tabernaclis, and thei 
dwelten in tabernaclis. Forsothe the 
sonus of Irael hadden nott maad suche 
thiugis fro the dai of Josue, sone of Nun, 
vnto that dai; and ther was a gret 

isgladnesse ri3t miche. Forsothe he 
radde in the boc of the lawe bi eche 
da3es, fro the firste dai vn to the laste 
dai; and thei maden solempnete seuene 
da3es, and in the eij3the a colect, after 
the custum. 


CAP. IX. 


1 In the foure and twentithe dai forsothe 
of this monith, the sonus of Irael camen 
togidere im fasting, and in sackis, and 

2erthe vpon’ hem. And the sed of the 
senus of Irael is seuered fro eche alien 
sone. And thei stoden befor the Lord, 
and thei knoulecheden ther synnes, and 


Toimyr F. 


II. ESDRAS. 


VIII. 14-—IX. 2. 


gidere to Esdras, the writere, that he 
schulde expowne to hem the wordis of the 
lawe. And thei foundun writun in the 
lawe, that the Lord comaundide ‘in the 
honda" of Moyses, that the sones of Israel 
dwelle! in tabernaclis™ in the solempne dai, 
in the seuenthe moneth; and that theiis 
preche, and pupplische a vois in alle her 
citees, and in Jerusalem ; and seie, Go 3e 
out in to the hil, and brynge 3e bowis of 
olyue", and bowis of the faireste tree, the 
bowis of a myrte® tree, and the braunchis 
of a? palm tree’, and the bowis of a ‘tree 
ful of wode’, that tabernaclis be maad’, as 
it is writun. And! al the puple 3ede out, 16 
and thei brou3ten", and maden’ to hem 
silf* tabernaclis, ‘ech man in* ‘his hows 
roof, and in? her stretis, ‘ether for3erdis*, 
and in the large placis> of Goddis hows, 
and in the street of the 3ate of watris, and 
in the street of the 3ate of Effraym. Ther-17 
for al the chirche® of hem, that camen 
a3en"fro caytifte®, made! tabernaclis, and thei 
dwelliden in tabernaclis’. For" the sones 
of Israel liadden not do siche thingis fro the 
daies of Josue, sone! of Nun, ‘til to¥ that 
dai; and ful greet gladnesse was!. Forsothe™ 18 
Esdras radde in the book of Goddis lawe 
bi alle daies", fro the firste dai ‘til to° the 
laste dai; and thei maden solempnytee? bi 
seuene daies, and in the ei3te day thet 
maden a gaderyngt of siluer", ‘bi the cus- 
toms. 


tT @ gadering ; 
thas is, for ne- 
cessaries of the 
temple. Lire 
here. c. 


CAP. IX. 


Forsothet in the foure and twentithe1 
dai of this monethe, the sones of Israel 
camel togidere in fastyng", and in2 
sackis, and ‘erthe was’ on” hem*. And 
the seed’ of the sones of Israel was de- 
partid fro ech alien sone?. And thei 
stoden® bifor the Lord, and knoulechi- 


Svpc. 


k hond or bi the doyng s. 3 dwelle stille 1s. ™ the tabernaclis1. her tabernacliss. ® the olyue tree 18. 


Omirres. P Om. Is. 
hem bowis 1s. 
b strect 1s. 
4 togidre s. 
k ynto 1s. 


9 trees Is. 


Vv thei maden 1s. ¥ Om. s. 


€ the caitifte s. 


° vnto Is. tox. P the solemnytee s. 
the lawe s. 5 Om. 1s. t Sothely 1s. 
Wupon is. * hem silfs. Ylynageis. 2 man ts. 


T wody tree Is. 

x Om. s. 
€ that is, the congregacioun of iust folk 1 marg. chirche, that is, the gaderyng togidre s. 
t made to hem siif 's. 
1 was there among hem 1. was ther among the peple s. 
4 day bi custom 1s. 

u fastyngis Is. 
@ stoden up Is. 


8 maad of the bowis 1s. tOm.s. % brouzten with 
y her hilid placer. Om. s. 2 Om.s. 2 Om. 1s. 


£ tho tabernaclis 1s. 4 Certisis. 3 the sone 1s. 
m Andis. © dayes of the solempnite s. 
Y siluer fo do withal charitable werkis after 

Vv ther was erthe 1. thet castiden erthe s. 


IX, 3—11!. 


3sthe wickednesses of ther fadris. And 
thei risen togidere to stonden, and thei 
radden in the volum of the lawe of the 
’ Lord ther God foure sithes in the dai, 
and foure sithes in the ny3t; thei knou- 
lecheden, and preiseden the Lord ther 
4God. Forsothe ther risen vp on the 
gree, of Leuitus Jesue, and Baani, and 
Cediniel, Remni, Abany, Sarabias, Baani. 
5 And the Leuitus crieden with a gret vois 
to the Lord ther God. And Jesue and 
Sedeniel, Bonni, Assebia, Serebia, Arabia, 
Odaia, Sebua, Fachaia, seiden, Riseth, 
and blesseth to the Lord oure God fro 
withouten ende and vn to with oute 
ende ; and hlesse thei to the he3e name of 
thi glorie in alle blessing and preising. 
¢ And Esdras seide, Thou thi self, Lord, 
alone; thou madist heuene of heuenus, 
and al the ost of hem, the erthe and alle 
thingus that in it ben, ses and alle thingus 
that in hem ben, and thou quikenest 
alle these thingis; and the ost of heuene 
7honoureth thee. Thou thi self Lord 
God, that chesedest Abraham, and lad- 
dest hym out fro the fijr of Caldeis, and 
tsettist his name Abraham ; and foundist* 
his herte trewe befor thee, and smite with 
hym pes couuenaunt, that thou 3eue to 
hym the lond of Cananee, Ethei, and 
Euei, and Amorrei, and Feresei, and Je- 
busei, and Jergesei, that thou 3eue to his 
sed; and thou hast fulfild thi woordis, 
9for thou art ri3twis. And thou hast seen 
the affliccioun of oure fadris in Egipt, 
and the cri of hem thou hast herd vpon 
10the rede se. And thon 3eue tocnes and 
wndris in Farao, and in alle his seruauns, 
and in al the puple of that lond ; for- 
sothe thou hast knowen, for proudli thei 
diden a3en hem; and thou madest to thee 
11a name as in this dai. And the see thou 


II. ESDRAS. 


525 


den her synnes, and the wickidnessis of 
her fadris. And theif risiden? togidere3 
to stonde®; and thei redden in the 
book of the lawe of ‘her Lord God4 
fouresithis in the dai, and fouresithis 
in the ni3t; thei knoulechiden, and he- 
rieden ‘her Lord God‘.  Forsothe &4 
‘thei risiden on the degree, of dekenes‘, 
Jesuy, and Bany, Cedynyel*, Remmy, 
Abany*, Sarabie, Bany, and! Chanany*. 
‘And the dekenes crieden with grete vois5 
to her Lord God!. And™ Jesue, and Cedy- 
niel, Bonny, Assebie, Serebie, Arabie, 
Odaie, Sebua, and Facaia", seiden, Rise 3e, 
and blesse 3e ‘30ure Lord God® fro without 
bigynnyng and til in to with outen ende ; 
and blesse? thei the hizje name of thi glorie 
in al blessyng and preysyng. And Esdras 6 
seide{, Thou thi silf, Lord, art aloone’; 
thou madist heuene and the heuene of 
heuenes, and al the oost of tho heuenes* ; 
thou madist the erthe and alle thingis that 
ben there ynne; ‘thou madist* the sees and 
alle thingis that ben in thot; and thou 
quikenyst alle these thingis ; and the oost|| 
of heuene worschipith thee. Thou thi silf7 
art the Lord God, that chesidist Abram, 
and leddist hym out of the fier of Caldeis, 
and settidist® his name Abraham; and & 
foundist’ his herte feithful bifor thee, and 
thou hast smyte with hym a_ boond of 
pees, that*® thou woldist 3yue to hym the 
lond of Cananei, of Ethei, of Kuey, and* 
of Ammorrei, and of Pherezei, and of Je- 
buzei, and of Gergesei, that’ thou woldist 
3yue it to his seed ; and thou hast fillid? thi 
wordis, for thou art iust. And thou hast9 
seyn the turment of oure fadris in Egipt, 
and thou herdist the cry of hem on? the 
reed see. 
grete wondris in Farao, and in alle hise 
seruauntis, and in al the puple of that 


t fonnde c. 


b yesen 1, risen EL. 
8 and Cedynyel 1s. 


hand Abany Is. 
degree of dekenes ts. 


1Om. 3s. 


God 1s. P Lord, blesse 1s. 4 alone God s. 
settidist 1. thon settidest or clepidist s. 
lidrs. @uponis. » tokens 1s. 


¢ stonde bifore the Lord s. 


4 the Lord her God 1s. c And 1s. f Om. 1s. 


iQm.1. Chanany residen up [to reed Goddis lawe s] upon the 
m And the dekenes s. 
Lord her God, and 1. Facaia crieden with a greet voice to the Lord her God, and s. 
r Om. 1. 
V thon foundist 18. 


n Facaia, dekens, crieden with gret voice to the 
© the Lord 3o0ure 
Sand. and thou madists. thems. 4% thou 
wands. *Om.1 Yandthatis. 2 fulfil- 


+ and they ; 
that is, dekenes. 
Lire here. C. 


+ this word 
and Esdras 
seide, ig not in 
Ebren, nether 
is of the text, 
for it is not the 
word of Esdras 
aloone, but also 
of othere men 
knoulechinge 
that God is cre- 
atoure of alle 
heuenly thingis 
and erthely 
thingis. Lire 
here. c. 

§ oost ; that is, 
sterris and 
listis. Lire 
here. C. 

|| oos¢ ; for aun- 
gels worsche- 
pen God bi 
propir wor- 
schip, and 
sterris and 1i3tis 
worschepen 
him, bi wor- 
schip seid 
largely, in as 
myche as bi 
the 3iftis of her 
liztis, the good- 
nesse and wis- 
dom of God is 
knowun, and 
Li this reson- 
able creaturis 


And thou hast 30ue signes® and 10 ben stirrid to 


worschipe God 
hi propir wor- 
schip. Lire 
here. c. 


526 II]. ESDRAS. IX. 12-19. 


deuidedest beforn hem, and thei passeden 
ouer thur3 the middel of the se in drie ; 
the pursueris forsothe of hem thou threwe 
aferr in to the depnesse, as a ston in 
1gstronge watris. And in a pileer of a 
cloude ledere of hem thou were bi dai, 
and in a piler of fijr bi ny3t, that the 
weie aperede to them, bi whiche thei 
i3wenten in. Also to the hil of Sinai thou 
came doun, and speke to hem fro heuene, 
and 3eue to them ri3te domus, and the 
lawe of treuthe, cerimoines, and gode 
i4hestus. And halewid sabot thou shew- 
edest to them; and maundemens, and 
cerimoines, and lawe, thou comaund- 
edist" to them, in the hond of Moises, 
15thi seruaunt. Bred also fro heuene thou 
jeue to them in ther hunger; and water 
of a ston thou bro3tist out to hem thre- 
stende; and thou seidest to them, that 
_thei shulden gon in, and welde the lond, 
vp on the whiche thou reredist thin hond, 
16that thou take it to hem. Thei forsothe 
and ther fadris proudli diden, and in- 
wardli hardeden ther nollis, and thei 
17herden not thi maundemens. And thei 
wolden not heren; and thei recordeden 
not of thi merueilis, that thou haddest 
do to them; and thei inwardli hardeden 
ther nollis; and thei j3euen hed’, that 
thei were turned togidere to ther thral- 
dam; thou forsothe God merciful, and 
noble, and benigne, longe abidende, and 
of myche mercy, and thou forsoke not 
1shem; and forsothe whan thei hadden 
maad to them a calf, as bi strif 3oten, 
and seiden, This is thi God that ladde 
thee out fro Egipt, and thei diden grete 
19blasfemys. Thou forsothe in thi manie 
mercies lafttist them not in desert ; a piler 
of a cloude wente not awei fro hem bi 


U comaundist a. 


lond ; for thou knowist, that theit diden. 
proudli ajens oure fadris; and? thou 
madist to thee a name*, as also in this 
daif. And thou departidist the see bifor1 
hem, and thei passiden thorou the ‘myd- 
dis of the see" in the’ drie place ; forsothe* 
thou castidist doun the pursueris of hem 
into! depthe™, as a stoon in strong watris. 
And in a piler of cloude thou were the 12 
ledere of hem bi dai, and in a piler of fier 
bi ny3t, that the weie, bi which thei en- 
triden, schulde appere to hem. Also thou 13s 
caimest doun at® the hil of Synai, and 
spakist® with? hem? fro heuene, and thou 
janest to hem ri3tful domes, and the lawe 
of trewthe, cerymonyes’, and goode co- 
maundementis’. And thou schewidist tois 
hem an halewid sabat; and thou co- 
maundidist ‘to hem' comaundementis", and 
ceryinonyes’, and lawe”, in the hond of 
Moises, thi seruaunt. Also* thou 3auest is 
to hem breed froY heuene in her hungur; 
and thou leddist out of the stoon watir? 
to hem thirstinge ; and thou seidist to hem, 
that thei schulden entre, and haue in pos- 
sessioun the* lond, on® which? dond thou 
reisidist® thin hond, that thou schuldist 
3yue zé to hem. Buté ‘thei and* oure fa-16 
dris diden proudli‘, and maden* hard her 
nollis, and herden! not thi comaunde- 
mentis™. And thei nolden® here; and17 
thei hadden not mynde of° thi merueils, 
which thou haddist do to hem; and thei 
maden hard her nollis ; and thei 3auen the? 
heed‘, that" thei ‘weren als turned! to her 
seruage as bi strijf; but thou art God" 
helpful’, meke, and merciful, abidynge 
longe, ‘ether pacient”, and of myche mer- 
ciful doyng, and forsokist* not hem; and 1s 
sotheliY whanne thei hadden maad to hem 
a 30tun calf, as bi strijf, and hadden seid, 


v heued ern. hede «. 


© men of Egipt 1s. 4 and in the destruccioun of Farao and his seruauntis s. © gloryous name 1s. day 


itis knowe 8. & thi pepleis. & Om. 1s. iais, 


fro hence tos. © thou spakist 1s. P there with s. 


kKandis. !vntos. ™thedepthe Bcisv. "™to1. 
4 oure fadris 1s. and cerymonyes 8s. & heestis 1s 


*Om. 1s, thin heestis to hem 1s. VY thi cerymonyes 1s. Wthilawe 1s. * Andis. Yof a. to HU pr.m. 
zwatriss. 8a goods. » of bikest1 marg. ©uponis. 4the which. ©€residist up1. f Om. reumx. 
& But 3it1. bOm.1. that peple ands. i proudli azens thee s. * thei madeniss. 1 thei herden 18. 
m hestis 1s. "wolden not1. °on piures. Pheris. ‘heed takinge counsel togidre 1. heed takinge 
togidre wickid counsel s. T so that s. 8 wolden be 1. * turned awei togidre 1. togidre turned s. 
u Om. 1s. Van helpful God 1s. W Om, 1s. * thou forsakist 1s. Y Om, 18. 


IX. 20—27. 


dai, that it lede hem in to the weie; and 
a piler of fijr bi ny3t, that he shewe to 
them the weie, bi whiche* thei shulden 
20gon in. And thi goode Spirit thou 3eue 
to hem, that shulde teche them; and thi 
aungelis mete thou forfendedestY not fro 
the mouth of hem, and watir thou 3eue 
21to hem in thrist. Fourti 3er thou feddist 
hem in desert, and no thing to hem fail- 
ede; the clothis of hem eeldeden not, and 
22the feet of hem ben not ouertroden. And 
thou 3eue to hem reumys, and puplis ; and 
partidist to them lotis, and thei weldiden 
the lond of Seon, and the lond of the 
king of Esebon, and the lond of Og, king 
230f Basan. And the sonus of hem thou 
multepliedest, as the sterris of heuene; 
and bro3tist hem to the lond, of the 
whiche thou haddest seid to ther fadris, 
that thei shulden gon in, and welden it. 
24 And the sonus of Irael camen, and weld- 
eden the lond; and thou mekedest beforn 
hem the Cananees, dwelleris of the lond ; 
and thou 3eue hem in to ther hondis, 
and the kingus of hem, and the puplis of 
the lond, that thei do to hem as it pleside 
25tothem. And thei token strengthid cites, 
and fat erthe; and weldeden housis: ful 
of alle goodis, cisternes* of other men 
forgid, vines, and oliues, and manie appil 
trees. And thei eeteu, and ben fulfild, 
and ben maad fatte; and thei abound- 
eden in richessis in thi grete goodnesse. 
26Thei terreden forsothe thee to wrathe, 
and wenten awei fro thee, and threwen 
awei thi lawe bihinde ther backes; and 
thi profetus slowen, that witnesseden to 
them, that thei shulden turne a3een to 
thee ; and thei diden grete blasfemys. 
27And thou 3eue them into the hond of 
ther enemis ; and thei tormenteden hem; 
and in time? of ther tribulacioun thei 
crieden to thee; and thou fro heuene 


* the whiche zeru. 


II. ESDRAS. 


¥ forfendist au pr. m. 


527 


This is thi God’, that ‘ledde thee out of 
Egipt, and thei diden grete blasfemyes*. 
But thou” in thi many mercyes leftist®19 
not hem? in deseert; for a piler of cloude 
3ede not awei fro hem bi the dai, that it 
schulde lede hem in to the wele®; and af 
piler of fier 3ede not awet ‘fro hems bi 
ny3t, that it schulde schewe to hem the 
weie, bi which thei schulden entre. And 20 
thou 3auest to hem thi good Spirit, that 
tau3te hem; and thou forbedist not thin 
aungels* mete fro her mouth, and thou 
3auest to hem water in thirst', Fourti2! 
3eer thou feddist hem in deseert, and no 
thing failide to hem‘ ; her clothis! wexiden 
not elde™, and her feet weren not hirt. 
And thou 3auest to hem rewmes, and pu-22 
plis; and thou departidist lottis, ‘ether 
eritagis", to hem, and thei hadden in pos- 
sessioun the lond of Seon, and the lond 
of the kyng of Esebon, and the lond of 
Og®, kyng? of Basan. And thou multi-23 
pliedist the sones of hem, as the sterris of 
heuene?; and thou brou3tist hem to the 
lond, of which thou seidist to her fadris, 
that thei schulden entre, and holde it in 
possessioun. And the sones of Israelos 
camen", and hadden® thet lond in posses- 
sioun; and bifor hem thou madist low" 
the’ dwellers of the” lond, Cananeis* ; and 
thou 3auest hem in to the hondis of the 
sones of Israel, and the kyngis of hem, 
and the puplis of the lond, that thei diden 
to hem, as it pleside hem. And thei token es 
citeesY maad? strong*, and fat® erthe; and 
thei hadden in possessioun housis fulle of 
alle goodis, cisternes® maad of othere men, 
vineris*, and places of olyues, and many 
apple trees. And thei eeten, and weren 
fillid®, and weren maad fat; and haddenf 
plentee of ritchessis ‘in thi greet good- 
nesse. Sotheli® thei terriden thee to26 
wrathfulnesse, and 3eden" awei fro thee, 


Zand cisternys 4. 3 that time c. 


* God, /srael 1s. 4 blasfemye éo thin name s. > thou, Lords. leftist or forsokist s. | 4 hem 
herfors. © weie wheder thei weren to gos. fthes. &Om.1. 4 aungels. i her thirst rs. * hem 
al that tymes. ‘\clothingi. ™oldeis. "Om.1. ©°Om.1s. Pthekyngts. 4 the firmament 1. 


¥ comen thidere 18. 
x Om. 1. 

cisternes 18. 
& And 3it 1s. 


Y her citees 1s. 
d and vineris 1s. 
h wenten 1. 


e fulfillid 1s. 


8 thei hadden rs. tthat 1s. tlow (the s] men of Chananye 1s. ¥Om.1s, ¥ that 1, 
% whiche weren maad ts, 


a@andalso 1s. 5 fat or plentuouss. & and 


f in thi greet goodnesses [goodnesse s] thei hadden 18. 


528 II. ESDRAS. 


herdest hem, and aftir thi manie deedis 
of mercy thou 3ene to hem saucoures, that 
shulden sauen hem fro the hond of ther 
egenemis. And whan thei haddeu restid, 
thei ben turned a3en that thei do euel in 
thi si3te; and thou forsoke hem in the 
hond of ther enemys, and thei weld- 
eden hem; and thei ben conuertyd, and 
thei crieden to thee; thou forsothe fro 
heuene herdist, and deliueredest hem in 
29thi mercies manie times. And thou wit- 
nessedest to them, that thei shulden 
turnen ajeen to thi lawe; thei forsothe 
prondli diden, and thei herden not thi 
maundementus, and in thi domys thei 
synneden, the whiche what man doth 
shal liuen in hem; and thei 3euen a 
going awey shulder, and ther nol thei 
30imwardli hardeden. And thou drowe afer 
vpon hem manie 3eris, and thou witness- 
edist hem in thi Spirit bi the hond of thi 
profetus; and thei herden not ; and thou 
toke them in to the hond of the puplis 
3iof londis. Forsothe in thi manie mer- 
cies thou madist not hem in to wasting, 
ne forsoke them; for God of mysera- 
szciouns, and benigne thou art. And so 
now, Lord oure God, grete God, strong, 
and ferful, kepende conenaunt and merci, 
ne turne thou awei thi face in al the tra- 
uaile that hath founden vs, oure kingis, 
and oure princis, and oure fadris, and 
oure prestis, and oure profetis, and al thi 
puple, fro the da3is of king Assur vnto 
“3this dai. And thou art ri3twis in alle 
thingus, that camen vpon vs ; for treuthe 
thou didist to vs; wee forsothe vnpitousli 
sididen. Oure kingus, and oure princis, 
oure prestis, and oure fadris, diden not 
thi lawe, and tentiden not to thin hestis, 
and thy witnessis that thou witnessedist 
35in hem, And thei in their goode reumis, 


IX. 28—35 


and castiden* awei thi lawe bihynde her 
backis!; and thei killiden thi prophetis, 
that. witnessiden to hem, that thei schul- 
den turne ajen to thee; and thei diden 


grete blasfemyes. And thou jauest hem 27 


in to the hond of her enemyes; and thei 
turmentiden hein; and in the tyme of her 
tribulacioun thei crieden to thee; and thou 
herdist them fro heuyn, and bi thi many 
merciful doyngis thou 3auest hem™ sauy- 
ours, that sauyden hem fro the hond of 


her enemyes. And whanne thei hadden 9 


restid, thei turneden ajen to do yuel in 
thi sij3t; and thou forsokist hem in the 
hond of her enemyes, and enemyes hadden 
hem in possessioun ; and™ thei weren con- 
uertid®, and thei? crieden to thee; forsothe4 
thou herdist hem fro heuene, and" dely- 
ueridist® hem ‘in thi mercies in‘ many 


tymes. And thou witnessidist to hem, 29 


that thei schulden turne a3en to thi lawe ; 
but thei diden proudli, and herden not 
thin heestis, and synneden" in thi domes, 
whicheY a¥ man that schal do* schal lyue 
in tho; andY thei 3auen the? schuldre 
goynge* awei, and thei maden hard her 
nol®, And thou drowist along manys 
3eeris on® hem‘, and thou witnessidist to 
hem in thi Spirit bi the hond® of thi pro- 
phetis'; and thei herden’ not; and® thou 
3auest hem in to the hond of the! puplis 


of londis*. But in thi mercies! ful manye™ 31 


thou madist not hem in" to wastyng, ne- 
thir thou forsokist hem; for® thou art God 


of merciful doynges, and meke. Now ther-3e 


for, oure Lord God, greet God, strong, and 
ferdful?, kepynge couenaunt and merci, 
turne thou not awei thi face’ in al the 
trauel that foond' vs, oure’ kyngis, and 
oure princes, and oure fadris, and oure 
preestis, and oure profetis, and al thi pu- 
ple, fro the daies of kyng Assur til to this 


and in thi miche goodnesse that thou dai. And thou" art iust in alle thingis, 44 


k thei castiden 1s. 1bakis. ™tohem plures. "than s. © turned ajen x. turned agen éo thee s. 
P Om. is. Gand is. f and in thi mercy doyng thou 1s. s delyneryst ac. tOm.1s. ttbirs. ™ thei 
synneden 1s. the whiche domes 1. which domes s, thes. *do hems. Y but1. but here ajens s. 
7heris. ®and 3eden 1s. _ nollis and wolden not obei to thi domess. ¢uponis. 4 hem, suffryng 
hems. © honde or sonde 1. honde or tellynge s. _f profetis that thei weren lawe brekers s. & herden 
hem is. hand therforts. iOm.1s. * strange londists. 1.Om.1s. ™ manye merciful doyngis 1s. 
® to be ints. © sothely 1s. P stidefast 1s. 4 face fro vss. ‘hath founds. and oure is. present 
tyme is. ¥ Lord, thou ts. 


IX. 36-——X. 19. 


haddest 3ine to hem, and in® the most 
large lond and fat, that thou haddest 
taken in the si3te of hem, thei serneden 
not to thee, ne ben turned ajeen fro ther 
36 werste studies. Lo! wee vsself to dai ben 
thrallis ; and the lond that thou jeue to 
oure fadris, that thei shulden ete the bred 
of it, and tho thingus that ben goode of 


37it; and we vsself® ben thrallis in it. And - 


the frutus of hem ben multiplied to kingis, 
that thou hast put vp on vs for oure 
synnes ; and thei lordshipen to oure bo- 
dies, and to oure bestis, aftir ther wil, 

38and in gret tribulacioun we ben. Thanne 
vp on alle these thingus wee vsself & 
smijten pes couenaunt, and wrijten, and 
oure princis, oure Leuitis, oure prestis 
sette marke. 


CAP. X. 


1 Selers forsothe weren Neemias, Ather- 
2sata, sone of Achelai, and Sedechias, Sa- 
3raias, Azarias, Jeremias, Fasur, Amaria, 
§ Melchia, Accus, Sebenia, Mellucharem, 
6 Nerimuth, Oddias, Daniel, Jenthon, Ba- 
7ruch, Mosollam, Abia, Mianymy, Mazia, 
9 Belga, Semeia; these preestis. But the 

Leuitus ; Jesue, sone of Azarie, Bennuy, 
wof the sonus of Ennadab, Cediniel, and 

the brether of hem, Sechenia, Odomia, 
i Thelitha, Falaia, Anam, Micha, Roob, 
12 Azabia, Zaccur, Zerebias, Zabanya, Odi- 
ig4as, Bani, Hanyim. The hedis of the 

puple, Fethos, Moab, Elam, Zecu, Banni, 
my Bonni, Asgad, Bebai, Donai, Bagoai, 
7 Adin, Ather, Azothia, Asin, Adonia, 
i9 Asuyn, Bessaia, Ares, Anathoth, Nebay, 


II. ESDRAS. 


529 


that camen on’ vs, for’ thou didist trewthe 
to vs; but* we han do wickidliY. Oure?34 
kyngis, and oure princes, oure* prestis, 
and fadris> ‘diden not® thi lawe; and thei 
perseyueden not thin heestis and witness- 
yngis‘, whiche® thou witnessidistf in hem’. 
And thei in her good rewmes, and in thi3s 
myche goodnesse, which thou 3auest? to 
hem, and in the largesti lond and fat, 
whych thou haddist 3oue in the si3t of 
hem, serueden not thee, nether turneden 
a3en fro her werste studies. Lo! we ‘vs36 
silf! ben thrallis to dai; and the lond™ 
which" thou 3auest® to oure fadris, that 
thei schulden ete the breed therof, and 
the goodis that ben therof, ‘is thral? ; and 
we ‘vs silf4 ben thrallis, ‘ethir boonde 
men‘, in that lond. And the fruytis therof37 
ben multiplied to kyngis, whiche’ thou 
hast set on' vs for oure synnes; and thei 
ben lordis of oure bodies, and of oure 
beestis, bi her wille, and we ben in greet 
tribulacioun. , 


“CAP. X. 


Therfor on alle these thingist we ‘vs38 
silf" smyten’ and writen boond” of pees, 
and* oure princes, oureY dekenes, and oure 
prestis aseelen’. Forsothe* the seeleris1 
weren Neemye, Athersata>, the sone of 
Achilai, and Sedechie, Saraie, Azarie, Je-2 
remnye, Phasur, Amarie, Melchie, Accus, : 
Sebenye, Mellucarem, Nerymuth, Oddie, 5 
Danyel, Genton, Baruc, Mosollam, Abia, § 
Mianymy, Mazie, Belga, and Semeie; these g 
weren prestis. Forsothe® dekenes wereny 
Josue, the sone of Azarie, Bennuy*, of the 
sones of Ennadab, Cedinyel*, and hise bri- 10 
theren, Sethenye, Odenmye, Telita, Pha- 
laie, Anam, Myca, Roob, Asebie, Zaccur, }} 
Serebie, Sabanye, Odias, Bany, Hamynf. 13 
The® heedis of the puple, Phetos!, Moab, 14 


¢Om.4. 4in a. ¢oureself 4. (the whiche aern. & oureself a. 

Yto1s. Wforevers. *andis. Y wickidli ajens thee 1s. 2And oure 1s. 4andoure 1s.  oure 
fadris 1s. ¢hannotdonts. 4 thi witnessyngis1s. ¢thatx. f hast witnessid1s. & thin hestis 1s. 
b hast 3jouers. ifullarges. k Lo! therfore 1s. loure self Einys. ™londalsor. “that1s. © hast 
jouen 1s. POm.1. ‘oure self Einps. *Om.cris. Sthatr. tuponis. 4 oure self E pass. L pass. 
8 pass. v maken 1s. w a boond 18. x bitwize the Lord our God and vs ands. __¥ and oure 1s. 


z aseelen it 1. aseelen this obligacioun on our side 8. 


Athersata s. ¢ And the 1s. 
h cheef men 1. heedis men s. 


VOL. II. 


4 and Benny s. 
\ weren Phetos 18. 


& weren Cydyniel s. 


a And 1s. » that is, Athersata 1. that is clepid 


fend Hamynis. 8 And the 1s. 


3 Y 


+ thingts ; that 


is, synnes passid © 


to be eschewid 
outirly. Lire 
here, C. 


530 


20 Methpia, Mosollam, Azir, Meisabel, Sa- 
33 doc, Reddua, Felthia, Anania, Ozee, Ana- 
3 nia, Azub, Aloes, Faleam, Sobeth, Reu, 
26 Azebina, Mathsia, Ethaia, Anam, Mel- 
27 lucharem, Baana; and othere of the pu- 
‘ ple, prestus, Leuitus, porteres, and sing- 
eres, sodeknes, and alle that seuereden 
hemself fro the puplis of londis to the 
lawe of God, ther wiues, and ther sonus, 
zgand ther do3tris; alle that my3ten sa- 
uouren, behotende for ther brethern, 
ther most wrshipeful men, and thei that 
camen to behoten, and swern, that thei 
shulden gon in the lawe of the Lord, 
that he hadde 3ine in the hond of Moises, 
his seruaunt, that thei shulde don and 
kepe alle the maundemens of the Lord 
ther God, and his domys, his" cerymo- 
30nies; and .that wee shulden not 3iuen 
oure do3tris to the puple of the lond, and 
there do3tris wee shulde not take to oure 
3isones. The puplis forsothe of the lond, 
that bringen in chaffaris, and alle thingus 
to vsen bi the dai of sabot, that thei selle, 
wee shul not taken of hem in the sabot, 
and in the halewid dai; and wee shuln 
forz3iue the senenthe 3er, and exaccioun of 
szalle hond. And we shul setten vp on vs 
hestus, that we 3iue the thridde part of 
an ounce bi the jer to the were of the 
33 Lord oure God, to the loues of proposi- 
cioun, and to the sacrifise euermor du- 
rende, and in to brent sacryfise euermor 
lastende, in sabatis, in calendis, in so- 
lempnetees, in halewid da3is, and for 
synne, that it be prejed for Irael, and 
in to alle vse of the hous of oure’ God. 
34 Thanne we leiden lotis vp on the offring 
of trees, betwe* prestis and Leuitis and 
the puple, that thei shulden bringen in 


h and his 4. ithe Lord oure a. 


k and preestis 1s. Y and dekenes 1s. 


II. ESDRAS. 


X. 20-—34. 


Elam, Zecu, Banny, Bonny, Azgad, Be-1s 
bay, Donai, Bogoia, Adyn, Ather, Azo-$ 
chie, Azur, Odenye, Assuyn, Bessaie, Ares, 6 
Anatoth, Nebai, Methpie, Mosollam, Azir, 20 
Meizabel, Sadoch, Reddua, Pheltie, Ana-32 
nye, Osee, Anaie, Azub, Aloes, Phaleam, 33 
Sobeth, Renu, Asebyne, Mathsie, Ethaie, 25 
Anam, Mellucarem, Baana ; and othere of 27 
the puple, prestis*, dekenes!, porteris, and a 
syngeris, Natynneis™, and alle men that 
departiden hem silf fro the" puplis°® of 
londis? to’ the lawe of God, the wyues of 
hem, and‘ ‘the sones of hem, and the dou3- 
tris of hem’; alle' that my3ten vndur-29 
stonde, biketynge® for her britheren, the’ 
principal men of hem, ‘and thei” that 
camen* to biheete, and to swere, that 
thei schulden go in the lawe of the Lord, 
which he ‘hadde 30ue? bi the hond of 
Moyses, his seruaunt, that? thei schulden 
do and kepe alle the heestis of ‘oure 
Lord God?, and hise domes, and hise cery- 
monyes; and‘ that we schulden not 3yne30 
oure dou3tris to the’ puple of the lond, 
and that we schulden not take her dou3- 
tris to oure sones. Also® the puplisf ofs1 
the lond, ‘that bryngen in thingis set to 
sale, and alle thingis to vss, bi8 the dai of 
sabat, for to sille', we schulen not* take! 
of hem in the sabat™, and in a®™ dai 
halewid°®; and? we schulen leene{ the se-_ 
uenthe 3eer, and the’ axyuge of al honds. 
And' we schulen ordeyne"® comaunde-32 
mentis ‘on vs’, that” we 3yue the thridde 
part of a sicle ‘bi the 3eer* to the werk of 
‘oure Lord God’, to? the looues of settyng- 33 
forth, and to the euerlastynge sacrifice®, 
‘and in to brent sacrifice euerlastynge®, in® 
sabatis, in? calendis®, ‘that is, bigynnyngis 
of monethis‘, in® solermpnytees, in halewid 


k betwixe a. betwen £ pass. bytwene F ef HW pass. 


m and Natynueis c. tho ben suddekns B et L marg. 


" hethen 1s. © peples.  P othere londis 1. divers londiss. 4 turnynge to 1. ‘and camentos. *Om.s. 
8Om.1. tandalles. maden bihetynge 1s. Vvandthes. WOm.s. *camen ¢thidere 1s.  bihotiden 
and sworen that s. %3af1s. 9 and that 1s. b the Lord oure God 1s. ¢ also we sworen that s. 


d hethen 18. € Also we sworen that if 1s. 


f peple :s. 


& brynge yn bi1. bryng ynne among vs bi s. 


i sille thingis sett to sale and alle thingis perteynynge to vss 1s. * not in ony wise 1s. ‘take ony thing 1s. 


m sabat dai 1s. 2 the ts. 


© that is halewed 1. that is halwede bi the lawe of God s. 


P and also 1s. 


9 leeue or relesse 1s. Om. 1s. 8 maner hoond of dett 1. hond and of eeh dettours. +t And also s. 
“ordeyne upon us ts. Y Om. 1s. W that bi ech 3eer 1s. *Om.1s. ythe Lord our Gods. 2 and to 1s. 
4 brent sacrifice s. b which sacrifices s. ¢ to be offrid in 1. shuln be offrid ins. andin1. © the firste 


daies of the monethis 1s. f Om.1s. & and in 1s. 


h and in Is. 


tT leeue 3 with 
out tithe and 
sowiug and 
gadering. aa- 
yng ; that is, 
releesse dettis, 
and delynere 
Ebrew ser- 
uauntis. Lire 
here. C. 


X. 35—39- II. ESDRAS. 531 


to the hous of oure God, bi the housis of 
oure fadris bi times, fro times of the3er 
vn to a 3er, that thei shulden brennen 
vp on the auter of the Lord oure God, 
as it is writen in the lawe of Moises; 
3sand that we bringe forth oure firste 
goten of oure lond, and the! firste of alle 
frut of eche tree, fro 3er in to 3er, in to 
36the hous of the Lord, and the firste of 


oure childer, and of onre bestus, as it is’ 


writen in the lawe, and the firste of 
oure oxen, and of oure shep, that thei be 
offrid in the hous of oure God, to prestis 
that seruen in the hous of oure God; 
37 and the firste of oure™ metus, and of oure 
sacrifises of likouris, and appilis of eche 
tree, also of vindage, and of oile, bringe 
wee to prestis", to the tresorie of the 
Lord, and the tenthe part of oure lond 
to Leuitus; thoo Leuitis shul take dimes 
330f alle the cites of oure werkis. For- 


sothe the sone of Aron, prest, shal be 


with the Leuitus in the dimes of Leuitis ; 
and Leuitus shuln offre the tenthe part of 
ther dime in the hous of oure God, to 
the tresorie, in the hous of the tresor. 

39To the tresorie forsothe shul bern the 
sonus of Irael and the sonus of Leui the 
firste of whete, and of win, and of oile ; 
and there shul ben the halewid vesselis 
and prestus, and singeris, and porteris, and 
seruauns; and we shul not leue the hous 
of oure God. 


10m.4. ™Om. 4. 


daies, and for synne, that ‘me preie' for 
Israel, and* in to al the vss of the hows of 
oure God. ‘Therfor we senten! ‘lottis on 34 
the offryng of trees™, bitwixe" prestis and 
dekenes and the puple®, that tho schulden 
be brou3t in to the hows of oure God, bi 
the housis? of oure fadris bil tymes, fro 
the tymes of a 3eer ‘til to" a 3eer, that ‘tho 
schulden® brenne ont the auter of ‘oure 
Lord God", as it is writun in the lawe of 
Moyses ; and that we bringe the firste gen-35 
drid thingis of oure lond, and the firste 
fruytis of al fruyt of ech tree, fro 3eer in 
to 3eer, in to the hows of the Lord, and 36 
the firste gendrid’ thingis of oure sones, 
and of oure beestis’, as it is writun in the 
lawe, and the firste gendrid* thingis of 
oure oxisY, and of oure scheep, that tho 
be offrid in the hows of oure God, to 
prestis? that mynystren* in the hows of 
oure God; and’ we schulen brynge the 37 
firste fruytis of oure metis, and of oure 
moiste sacrifices, and the applis® of ech 
tre, and of? vendage, and of oile, to® 
‘prestis, atf the treserie of the Lord&, and 
the tenthe part of oure lond to" dekenes ; 
thilke dekenes schulen take tithis of alle 
the citees of oure werkis. Sothelii a prest, 38 
the sone of Aaron, schal be with the de- 
kenes in the tithis of dekenes; and the 
dekenes schulen offre the tenthe* part of 
her tithe in the hows of oure God!, ‘at the 
tresorie, in the hows of tresour™. For" thes9 
sones of Israel and the sones of Leuy 
schulen brynge’ the firste fruytis of wheete, 
of wiyn, aud of oile? ; and halewid vessels 
schulen be there, and prestis, and syngeris, 
and porteris, and mynystris1; and wet 
schulen not forsake the hows of ‘oure 
God’, 


” the preestis 4. 


imen preie Hux. preier be maad 1s, = and be that moneth putt 1. and be the forseide moneth put s. 
! Also we castiden 8. Om.1. ™Om.1. 1% Also bitwixe1. © puple we castiden lottis on the offryng of 
trees 1. Pmeynees1s. in certeynis. sufficient unto 1s. tilx. 8 thilke wode schulde 1. that mode 


shuldes. tuponis. "the Lord oure God 1s. 


Vv goten 1. W beestis, brynge we thider s. * goten 1. 


Yoxents. the preestiss. 4seruenis. and also. andals. ¢fruytiss, 4 the fruytis of 18. 
d these shuln be brou3t to s. f Om. 1s. & Lord, and [gozen s] to prestis rs. h we sehul 3iue to i. 
1}Andis. ktithess. 1 God fo prestis 1. Lord to preestiss. ™Om.1. ™ Andis. © brynge ¢hidere 1. 


© oyle to thilk place s. 4 mynystris also 1s. 
thens s. 


T thei 1s. 8 the Lord 1. our Lord, absenting hem 


3Y2 


CAP. XI. 


1 Forsothe the princis of the puple 
dwelten in Jerusalem ; the most wrshipe- 
ful men with oute lot in the middel of the 
puple dwelten; the tother forsothe pu- 
ple leide lot, that it take o part of ten®, 
that weren to dwellen in Jerusalem, in 
the holi cite; the tenthe part of the pu- 
ple is rerid, that it dwelle in Jerusalem, 
for the cite was voide; nyne forsothe 

2partis in cites. Forsothe the puple bless- 
ide to alle men, that hadden offrid hem- 
self wilfulli, that thei dwelle in Jerusa- 

3lem. And so these ben the princis of the 
prouince, that dwelten in Jerusalem, and 
in the cites of Juda; forsothe eche dwelte 
in his possessioun, in ther cites, Irael, 
prestis, Leuitis, sodeknis, and the sonus 
4of the? thrallis of Salomon. And in Je- 
rusalem dwelten of the sonus of Juda, 
and of the sonus of Beniamyn; of the 
sonus of Juda, Athaias, ‘the sone4 of 

Azian, the sonus of Zacharie, the sonus of 
Amarie, the sonus of Safaie, the sonus of 

5 Malalele; of the sonus of Fares, Amasia, 
the sone of Baruch, the sone of Cholosai, 
the sone of Asia, the sone of Adaia, the 
sone of Josarib, the sone of Zacharie, the 

ssone of Salonites ; alle the sonus of Fares, 
that dwelten in Jerusalem, foure hundrid 

7sixti and eiz3te, stronge men. These ben 
forsothe the sonus of Beniamyn ; Sellum, 
the sone of Mosollam, the sone of Joadi, 
the sone of Sadaia, the sone of Cholaia, 
the sone of Maisia, the sone of Ethel, the 
ssone of Saia; and aftir hym Gabai, Sel- 
lai, nyne hundrid and ei3te and twenti; 
and Joel, the sone of Secry, the prouost 
of hem, and Judas, the sone of Sennua, 
1ovpon the cite the secunde. And of the 
prestis ; Idaia, the sone of Joarib, Jachim, 


© the ten aru. 


t and the 1s. 
Jerusalem, the hooly citee 1s. 
© othere citees Is. 4 And ss. 
hOm.1s. iOm.1s. * Om.is. 1 Om. 15. 


rOm.1s. 8’ Om.1s. t hym dwelliden there 1s. 
x the sone 1s. y Om. 1s. 


x Om. 1s. 


II. ESDRAS. 


P Om. 4. 


u lot of ony part limytid to hem 1s. 
y for the 1s. 
e that prouynce 1. the province s. 
m Om. Is. 
u twenti men Is. 


XI. I—t10. 


CAPT 


Forsothe the princis of the puple dwell-1 
iden in Jerusalem; thet principalt men 
dwelliden in the myddis of the puple 
with out lot"; but the residue’ puple” 
sente lot, for to take o part of ten, ‘whiche 
schulden dwelle in Jerusalem, in the hooli 


+ the princi- 
pal; this re- 
soun is not in 
Ebreu, nether 
is of the text, 
to this word 
with out lot be 
passid ; also this 


5 if resoun the 
citee*; theY tenthe part of the puple is?  ‘tenthe part and 
: so forth til 
chosun for to dwelle in Jerusalem, for the © thidir was 
j idea: b ae void, is not in 
citee was voide*; forsothe? the nyne partis fi.) ire 


dwelliden in citees*. Forsothe4 the puple2 77. ¢. 
blesside alle men, that profriden hem silf 
bi fre wille to dwelle in Jerusalem. Ands3 
so these ben the princes of prouynce®, that 
dwelliden in Jerusalem, and in the citees 
of Juda; sothely’ ech man dwellide in his 
possessioun, in her citees of Israel, prestis’, 
dekenes, Nathynneis, and the sones of the 
seruauntis of Salomon. And men of the4 
sones of Juda, and of the sones of Ben- 
iamyn dwelliden in Jerusalem; of the 
sones of Juda, Athaie, the sone of Aziam, 
sone of Zacarie, sone of Amarie, sone of 
Saphie, sone of Malaleel; of the sones ofs 
Phares, Amasie, the sone of Baruch, the" 
sone of Colozay, the’ sone of Azie, the* 
sone of Adaie, the! sone of Jozarib, the™ 
sone of Zacarie, the® sone of Salonytes ; 
alle the sones of Phares, that dwelliden ine 
Jerusalem, weren foure hundrid ei3te° and 
sixti, stronge men. Sotheli? these ben the7 
sones of Beniamyn; Sellum, the sone of 
Mosollam, the sone of Joedi, the’ sone of 
Sadaie, the® sone of Colaie, the® sone of 
Masie, the’ sone of Ethel, the® sone of 
Saie; and aftir hymt Gabai, Sellai, nyntis 
and ei3te and twenti"; and Johel, the sone 
of Zechri, was the souereyn of hem, and 
Judas, the sone of Semyna, was the se- 
counde man on’ the citee”. And of prestis ; 10 
Idaie, sone* of Joarib, Jachyn, Saraie, the 11 


9 of the sones 4. 


Vv remenaunt Is. 
2 was Is. 


W puple, that schulde dwelle in 
a voide of dwellers s. ? and 1s. 
f and 15s. & that is, prestis 1s. 
"Om. 1s. ° and eiz3tec. P Andis. 4 Om.3s. 
VY upon is.. W citee of Jerusalem 1s. 


XI. 11-23. 


11 Saraia, the sone of Elchie, the sone of 
Mosollam, the sone of Sadoch, the sone of 
Meraioth, the sone of Achitob, princis of 

12 the hous of God, and the brethern of hem, 
doende the’ werkis of the temple; ei3te 
hundrid and two and twenti. And Adaia, 
the sone of Jeroam, the sone of Feler, 
the sone of Ampsi, the sone of Zacharie, 
the sone of Fessur, the sone of Melchie, 

izand the brethern of hem, princis of fa- 
dris; two hundrid and two and fourty. 
And Amazie, the sone of Azriel, the sone 
of Azi, the sone of Mosollamoth, the sone 

140f Seminer, and the brether of hem, ful 
mi3ti, an hundrid and ei3te and twenti; 
and the prouost of hem, Zebdiel, the sone 

15 of mi3ti men. And of the Leuitus; Zeche- 
nia, the sone of Azab, the sone of Azarie, 

16 the sone of Azabie, the sone of Boni, and 
of Sabathai, and Josabel ; and vp on alle 
the werkis that weren with oute forth 
in the hous of God, fro* the princis of 

17 Leuitus. And Mathania, the sone of Mi- 
cha, the sone of Sebdai, the sone of Asaf, 
prince, to preisen, and to knoulechen in 
orisoun; and Bethechias the secunde of 
his brethern, and Abdia, the sone of 
Sammia, the sone of Galai, the sone of 

18Iditum. Alle the Leuitus in the holi cite, 

19two hundrid foure score and foure. And 
the porteris; Accub, Thelmon, and the 
brethern of hem, that kepten the doris; 
20an hundrid seuentit and two. And the 
tothere of Irael, prestis, and Leuitus, in 
alle the cites of Juda, eche in his posses- 
2Ilsioun. And the sodeknis, that*t dwelten 
in Ofel, and Ciacha, and Gaffa, of the 
22sodekins. And bisshopis of Leuitus in 
Jerusalein; Aazi, the sone of Bani, the 
sone of Azabie, the sone of Mathanie, 
the sone of Miche. Of the sonus of Asaf, 
singeres in the seruise of the hous of God. 
23 Forsothe the heste of the king was vpon 


rOm. acrHu. 8 for 4. 


II. ESDRAS. 


t and seuenti 4. 


533 


sone of Helchie, they sone of Mossollam, 
theY sone of Sadoch, the’ sone of Meraioth, 
theY sone of Achitob, ‘the princis? of ‘Goddis 
hows’, and her britheren, makynge the 12 
werkis of the temple, weren ei3te hundrid 
and two and twenti. And Adaie, the sone 
of Jeroam, the” sone of Pheler, the> sone 
of Amsi, the” sone of Zacarie, the” sone of 
Phessur, the? sone of Melchie, and the13 
britheren of hem, the princes of fadris, 
weren two hundrid and two and fourti. 
And Amasie, the sone of Azrihel, the’ sone 
of Azi, the’ sone of Mosollamoth, the’ sone 
of Semyner, and her britheren, ful my3ti14 
men, weren an hundrid and ei3te and 
twenti; and the souereyn of hem was 
Zebdiel, the sone of ° my3ty men. And of1s 
dekenes ; Sechenye, the sone of Azab, the 
sone of Azarie, the sone of Azabie, the 
sone of Bone, and Sabathai ; and Jozabed 16 
was ordened of the princes of dekenes, on‘ 
alle the werkis that weren® with out forth 
in Goddis hows. And Mathanye, the sone 17 
of Mycha, the> sone of Zebdai, the" sone 
of Asaph, was prince!, to herie* and to! 
knowleche™ in preier" ; and Bethechie zcas 
the secounde of hise britheren, and Abdie, 
the sone of Sammya, the® sone of Galal, 
the® sone of Iditum?. Alle the dekenes ts 
in the hooli citee3, weren two hundrid 
and’ foure score and foure. And the por-19 
teris, Accub, Thelmon, and the britheren 
of hem, that kepten the doris’, weren an 
hundrid ‘and two and seuenti'. And othere 20 
men of Israel, prestis, and dekenes, in alle 
the citees of Juda, ech man in his posses- 
sioun. And Natynneis, that dwelliden in2! 
Ophel, and" Siacha, and" Gaspha’; of ¥ 
Natynneis. And* bischopis’} of dekenes” 22 
in Jerusalem ; Azi*, the sone of Bany, tlie 
sone of Asabie, the sone of Mathanye, the 
sone of Mychee. Of the sones of Asaph, 
syngeris® in the seruyce of Goddis hows. 


tt that that c. 


yOm. 18. 4thes weren princis 1s, 4the hous of God 1s. bOm.1s. ¢Om.1s. ¢Om.1s. ¢ of cosyn of s. 


fuponis. § weren don1. » Om. ts. 
leche to him 1s. 
Jerusalem 1. citee of Jerusalem s. 
wins. ¥ Gaspha hadden her possessioun 18. 


z the dekenes 13. 


] prince in Goddus hous ts. 
0 preier in hise merciful doyngis s. 
r Om. plures. 
w And of 1s. And kK. 
a weren Azi1s, » weren syngeris 1s. 


k herie Gods. !Om. 1. ™ know- 
P Iditum, weren the dekenes s. 41 citee 
t four score and two s. 
Y bischop plures. 


© Om. 18. 
8 doris of the temple 1s. 
x and of Bis. 


+t bischopis; in 
Ebreu it is, and 
souereyns of 
dekenes, for 
prestis aloone 
weren bischops 
bi propir 
speche, and 
hadden ahone 
hem onely oon 
bizeste bischop ; 
therfor this 
Azi is seid here 
bischop of de- 
kenes, bi large 
speche, in as 
myche as he 
was souereyn 
of hem; for a 
bischop is seid, 
as hauynge 
cure aboue 
othere men. 
Lire here. c 


534 


hem, and ordre in the singeris bi alle 
24da3is; and Afataia, the sone of Mosese- 
liel, of the sonus of Zara, sone of Juda, in 
the hond of the king, aftir al" the woord 
2,0f the puple; and in the housis bi alle 
the’ regiouns of hem. Of the sonis of Juda 
dwelten in Cariatharbe, and in the do3tris 
of it, and in Dibon, and in the do;tris of 
it, and in Capceel, and in the litle tounus 
260f it; and in Jesue, and in Molada, and 
27in Bethfeleth, and in Asersual, and in 
28 Bersabe, and in the do3tris of it; and in 
Sichelech, and in Mochone, and in the 
29 do3tris of it; and in Remon, and in Sara, 
3soand in Jerimuth, Sonocha, Odollam, and 
in the litle tounus of hem; in Lachis, in 
the regiouns of it; Azecha, and in the 
do3tris of it; and thei dwelten in Ber- 
3isabe vn to the valei of Ennon. The sonus 
forsothe of Beniamyn ; Areba, Mechinas, 
and Aja, and Bethel, and in the do3tris 
Be of it; Anatot, Nob, Anania, Nazor, Rama, 
2 Jetheem, Adid, Zoboim, Nebollaloth, and 
36 Onam, in the valei of craftis men. And 
of Leuitus, the porceouns of Jude and of 
Beniamyn. 


CAP. XII. 


1 These forsothe ben the prestus and the 
Leuitis, that steyeden vp with Sorobabel, 
the sone of Salatiel, and Josue; Saraia, 

2Jeremia, Esdras, Amaria, Melluch, Accus, 

# Sechenia, Reum, Merimuth, Addo, Je- 

sthom, Miomin, Abia, Meldaa, Belga, 

6Semeia, and Joarib, Adaia, Sellum, A- 

7moe, Elceia, Idaia; these the princis of 
prestys, and the brethern of hem, in the 

8da3es of Josue. But Leuitus; Jesua, Ben- 
nui, Cediniel, Serabia, Juda, Mathanias, 
vp ou the ympnes, thei and the brether 


u Om. c. 


¢ heest 1s. 4 upon 1s. 
or bi the heest of him s. 1 peple dide his office s, 
in Odollam 1s. P therof 1s. 
the sones of Judas. _¥ vnto 18. 
the vilagis 1s. 8 in Nob ts. 
Adid 1s. & in Sohoym 1s, 
thes weren the porciouns 1s. 
and into Juda s. 
Om.s. 4 Om.ts. 
ouer the Is, 


v And 1s. 
bin Ananya Is. 
h in Nebollaloth 1s. 
n Certis 1s. 


II. ESDRAS. 


chem, thaé thei shulden be syngers s. 

k Om. 1. 

@ cuntrei A pr.m. et plures. 

Ww in Mechynas 1s. 
¢ in Asor 1s. 
ithe dekenes 1. 

© the prestis 18. 

q Jadie, in the daies of Josue 1s. * and [ofs] the bretheren of 1s. 8Om.1s. 

Vv Mathanye, thes weren dekens 1s. W and thei and her bretheren weren souereyns 


XI, 24-——XI. 8. 


For the comaundement® of the kyng was 23 

on? hem®, and ordre® was in syngeris bi 

alle daies; and Aphataie, the sone of Mo-21 

sezehel, of the sones of Zara, sone® of Juda, 

in the hondt of the kyng*, bi ech word of Me ethene ; 
the puple'; and in the housis bi alle the 25 ordenaunce of 
cuntreis of hem. Of the sones of Juda nie a” i 
dwelliden in Cariatharbe, and in the vilagis 

therof, and in Dibon, and in the vilagis 

therof, and in Capseel, and in the* townes 

therof; and in Jesue, and in Molada, and 26 

in Bethpheleth, and in Asersual, and in 27 
Bersabee, and in! the vilagis therof; and 2s 

in Sicheleg, and in Mochone, and in the™ 

vilagis therof; and in Remmon, and ineg 

Sara, and in Jerymuth, Zonocha®,.Odol-30 

lam, and in the townes ‘of tho? ; in Lachis, 

and in the cnntreis’ therof; in Azecha and 

the’ vilagis therof; and* thei dwelliden in 

Bersabee ‘til to" the valei of Ennon. For-31 

sothe’ the sones of Beniamyn dwelliden in 

Areba, Mechynas”, and Aia*, and BethelY 

and vilagis? therof; in Anatoth, Nob®,32 
Ananya, Asor®, Rama‘, Jethaym*, Adid‘, 3? 
Soboym’, Nebollaloth", and in Onam, the3s 

valei of crafti men. And of dekenes', ‘these 


porciouns*t of Juda and of! Beniamyn™. t porciouns ; 


that is, summe 
of the lynage 
of Leuy dwell- 
iden with out 
Jerusalem in 
euer either 
part, that is, in 
the part of 


CAP. XII. 


Sotheli® these weren prestis® and de-1 
kenes, that stieden? with Zorobabel, the 
sone of Salatiel, and with Josue; Saraie, Juda, and in ~ 
Jeremye, Esdras, Amarie, Melluch, Accus, 2 ioe for 
Sechenye, Reum, Merymucth, Addo, Je-3 Pines 7 
thon, Myomyn, Abia, Meldaa, Belga, Se-s fsenedt 
meie, and Joarib, Adaie, Sellum, Amoe,g “ere. ¢ 
Elceia, and Jadie’; these weren the princes7 
of* prestis ‘and her britheren, in the daies 
of Josue’. Certist dekenes"; Jesua, Ben-s 
nuy, Cedynyel, Serabie, Juda, Mathanye’, 


‘weren ouer the® ympnes, ‘thei and her 


v Om. c. 


& the sone 1s. 
mQOm.s. 1% in Zonoche ts. 
Salsos. thei of Judai. 
xin Aiais. Yin Bethel is. 7 in 
din Ramais. ¢in Jethaymis. fin 
kOm.1s. 10Om.s. ™ Beniamyn 
P stieden up 1. stieden vp into Jerusalem 


t Andi. 


f an ordre 1s. 
1Om. s. 
rin the 1s. 


b king 


XI. g—28. 


9of hem, in the dajis of Josue ; and Bese- 
chia, and Ezamith, and the brethern of 
10 hein, eche in his offis. Josue forsothe gat 
Joachim, and Joachim gat Eliazub, and 
11 Eliazub gat Joiada, and Joiada gat Jona- 
12than, and Jonathan gat Jedaia. In thew 
.da3is forsothe of Joachim weren prestus, 
and the princis of meines, Saraie, Amarie, 
13 Jeremie, Ananie, Esdre, Mosollam, Ama- 
lirie, Johannan, Milicho, Jonathan, Sebe- 
usnie, Josef, Aram, Edua, Maraioth, Elchi, 
- Adaie, Zacharie, Jenthon, Mosollam, A- 
bie, Zecarie, Miamin, and Moadie, Fel- 
i8thi, Belge, Sannia, Semeie, Jonathan, 
Be Joarib, Mathania, Jodaie, Asi, Sellaie, 
21 Celaie, Mochebor, Elchie, Azebias, Idaie, 
22 Nathaneel. Leuitus in the da3es of Elia- 
zub, and of Joiada, and Jonan, and Jed- 
doa, writen princis of meines, and prestis 
23in the regne of Darie of* Persis. The 
sonus of Leui, princis of meines, writen 
in the boc of the woordis of da3es, and 
vn to the dajes of Jonathan, sone of Elia- 
24zub. And the princis of Leuitys ; Aze- 
bia, Zerebia, and Jesue, sone of Cediniel ; 
and the brethern of hem bi ther whilis, 
that thei shulden preisen and knoulechen, 
aftir the heste of king Dauid, man of 
God, and waiten aboute euene bi ordre. 
25 Mathania, Belthbecia, and Obedia, Mo- 
sollam, Thelmon, Accub, keperis of 3atis, 
26and of vestiaries befor the 3atus. These 
in the da3es of Joachim, sone of Josue, 
sone of Josedech, and in the dajes of 
Neemie, duke, and Esdre, prest and 
a7scribe. In the dedicacioun forsothe of 
the wal of Jerusalem thei so3ten Lenites 
fro alle ther placis, that thei bringen 
them in to Jerusalem, and do the dedica- 
cioun in gladnesse, and in doing of gracis, 
and in song, and in cimbalis, and in sau- 
28 trees, and in harpis. Forsothe the sonus 


II. ESDRAS. 


535 


britheren* ; and Bezechie, and Ezanny,9» 
and the britheren of hem, ech man in his 
office’. Sotheli? Josue gendride* Joachym, 10 
and Joachym gendride® Eliasib, and Elia- 
sib gendride® Joiada, and Joiada gendride? 11 
Jonathan, and Jonathan gendride’ Jed- 
daia, Forsothe® in the daies of Joachym 12 
weren! prestis®, and princis’ of meynees*® 
of prestis, Saraie", Amarie, Jeremye, Ana- 
nye, Esdre, Mosollam, Amarie, Johannam, 13 
Mylico, Jonathan, Sebenye, Joseph, Aram, : 
Edua, Maraioth, Elchie, Addaie, Zacharie, 16 
Genthon, Mosollam, Abie, Zecherie, Mya-17 
myn, and! Moadie, Phelti, Belge, Sannya, 18 
Semeie, Jonathan, Joarib, Mathanye, Jo-19 
daie, Azi, Sellaye, Mochebor, Helchie, Ase- a 
bie, Idaie, Nathanael*. Dekenes! inthe daies 22 
of Eliasib, and of Joiada, and of Jonam, 
and of Jedda, weren™ writun princes of 
meynees, ‘and prestis® in the rewme of 
Darius of° Persis. The sones of Lety,23 
princes of meynees, weren writun in the 
book of wordis? of daies, and ‘til to4 the: 
daies of Jonathan, sone" of Eliasib. ‘And 24 
the princes of dekenes weren’ Asebie, Se- 
rebie, and‘ Jesue, the sone of Cedynyel; 
and the britheren of hem bi her whiles", 
that thei schulden herie’ and knowleche 
bi* the comaundementY of kyng Dauid, 
the man of God, and? thei schulden kepe* 
euenli bi ordre. Mathanye”, and Bethbecie, 2s 
and Obedie, Mosollam*, Thelmon, Accub®, 
weren keperis of the 3atis, and of the 
porchis bifor the 3atis. These® weren inc 
the daies of Joachym, sonef of Josue, sone 
of Josedech, and in the daies of Neemye, 
duyk®, and of Esdras, the prest and 
writere. Forsothe" in the halewyng of27 
the wal of Jerusalem thei! sou3ten dekenes 
of alle her places, to bryng hem in to Jern- 
salem, and to make the halewyng in glad- 
nesse, in the* doyng-of thankyngis, and in 


wOm.a. * kyng of 4. 
xOm.1s. Y office had his charges. 2% Andis. ®gaati1. bgaati. ¢ Andis. 4 Om. 1. these 
weren s, the prestisis. {the princis1s. & the meyness. } weren Saraier. iOm.1. ¥ and 
Nathanael 1s. 10Om.1. Ands. ™dekens and prestis weren 1s. %Om.1s. © kyng of 1s. _ P the 
wordis 1s. Qvntois. 'thesoness. * These weren the princis of dekeness. 'Om.s.  % whilis or 
tymes 1. ¥ herie God 1s. ¥ knowleche him 1. knowlech in her preier the beneficis of the Lord s. * weren 
ordeyned bis. Yheestis. 2andthatis. 4 kepe her office 1. kepe her whilis in her office s. » And 


© and Mosollam ts. 


Mathanye 1s. 
k Om. 1s. 


h Andis. ! mens. 


@ and Accub 1s. 


f the sone 1s. 


e These men 1s. & the duyk 1s. 


536 


of singeris ben gadered and of the wilde 
feldis aboute Jerusalem, and of the tounus 
2v0f Netlofati, and of the hous of Galgal, 
and of the regiouns of Jebes, and of 
Amanech ; for tounes the singeris bilden 
to hemself in the enuiroun of Jerusalem. 
30 And the prestus and Leuitus ben cleusid, 
and thei clenseden the puple, and the 
313atus of the wal. Forsothe I made the 
princis? of Juda to stejen vp vpon the 
wal, and IJ sette two grete querus of preis- 
eris ; and thei wenten at the ri3t side vpon 
32 the wal, at the 3ate of the* dunghil. ' And 
ther wenten after hem Osias, and the 
33half part> of princis of Juda, and Aza- 
ria, Esdras®, and Mosollam, Juda‘, and 
Beniamyn, and Semeia, and Jeremia. 
31 And of the sonus of prestis, in trumpis ; 
Zacharias, the sone of Jonathan, the sone 
of Semeie, the sone of Mathanie, the sone 
of Machaie, the sone of Seecur, the sone 
350f Asaf. And the brethern of hym; 
Semeia, and Azarel, Malalai, Galalay, 
Mai, Nathanael, and Juda, and Amani, 
in the vesselis of the song of Dauid, man 
of God ; and Esdras, scribe, beforn hem, in 
36the welle 3ate. And azen hem stezeden 
vp in the gres of the cite of Dauid, in 
the ste3ing vp of the wal, vp on the hous 
of Danid, and vn to the 3ate of watris at 
37the est. And the secunde quer of men 
tellende gracis wente forn a3en, and I 
after it ; and the half part of the puple vp 
on the wal, and vp on the tour of ouenus, 
3sand vn to the most large wal; and vp on 
the 3ate of Effraym, and vp on the olde 
3ate, and vp on thi 3ate of fisshis, and the 
tour of Ananeliel, and the tour of Emath, 
3vand vn to the floc 3ate; and thei stoden in 
the warde jate. And two queris of men 
preisende stoden in the hous of God, and 


yOm.c. % preestis a. ® Om. EH. 


lAndis.  ™ gaderid togidre 1s. 
r Andis. Suponis. t queris or cumpanyes s. 
x Om. 1. 3eden also after hems. y Om. is. 
bifor is. 4ments. ¢ stieden up rs. 
1 the watris 1s. ™ eest coost 18. 
a3ens or on the other side s. q Y 3ede 1s. 
¥ toure 3ale, that is clepid the toure s. 
®ouer1s. > ouer is. © ouer Is. 


IJ. ESDRAS. 


> partie au. 


1 cuntrey Is. 
u heriynge éhe Lord 1s. 
% weren presyng the Lord in s. 
fOm.1s. 8 stiyng up is. 
n quere of processioun s. 
Tit 1. hems. 
W thei 3eden vnto 18. 


XII. 29-—39. 


song, and in cymbalis, and in sautrees, and 
in harpis. Sotheli! the sones of syngeris2s 
weren gaderid™ bothe fro the feeldi places 
aboute Jerusalem, and fro the townes of 
Nethophati, and fro the hows of Galgal, 29 
and fro the cuntreis" of Gebez, and of Ama- 
nech ; for syngeris® hadden bildid townes 
to hem silf in the cumpas of Jerusalem. 
And prestis and dekenes weren clensid, 30 
and? thei? clensiden the puple, and the 
jatis, and the wal. Forsothe™ Y made the 31 
princes of Juda to stie on® the wal, and 
Y ordeynede twei greete querist of men 
heriynge" ; and thei 3eden to the ri3t side’ 
on the wal, to the 3ate of the dunghil. 
And Osaie 3ede aftir hem, and the half32 
part of prynces” of Juda, and Azarie, 33 
Esdras, and Mosollam, Juda, and Benia- 
myn, and Semeye, and Jeremye ‘3eden 
aftir hem*. And of the sones of prestis 34 
syngynge in trumpis; Zacharie, the sone 
of Jonathan, the sone of Semeie, theY sone 
of Mathanye, the’ sone of Machaie, they 
sone of Zeccur, theY sone of Asaph. And35 
hise britheren ; Semeie, and Azarel, Mala- 
lai, Galalai, Maai, Nathanael, and Juda, 
and Amany, in* the* instrumentis of 
song of Dauid, the man of God; and Es- 
dras, the wrytere, bifor® hem, in the 3ate of 
the welle. And thei? stieden® a3ens hem 36 
in the greis of the citee of Dauid, in thef 
stiyng® of the" wal, on‘ the hows of Dauid, 
and ‘til to* the sate of watris! at the ecest™. 
And the secounde queer” of men tellynge® 37 
thankyngis 3ede eulene ajens?, and Y4 aftir 
hyin'; and the’ half part of the puple was 
on‘ the wal, and on" the tour’ of ouenys, 
and ‘til to¥ the broddeste wal; and on* the 38 
3ate of Effraym, and’ on? the elde sate, 
and on* the 3ate of fischis, and on? the 
toure of Ananeel, and on the tour of 


© and Esdras «4. Gand Juda a. 


P and thanne 1. 
V half 1s. 


© the syngeris 1s. a Om. c. 
w the princis s. 
aQm.is. © was 
jouer is. * vnto 1s. 
P ouer ajens I. ouer 
upon Is. U upon Is. 
yOm.s. 7 ouer1. Om.s. 


h Om. s. 

© tellynge out 1s. 
s Om. Is. 

x ouer Is, 


XII. 40——XIII. 1. 


I and the half part of maister iugis with 
4ome. And the prestus, Eliachim, Maazia, 
Myamin, Michia, Elioenai, Zacharia, 
41 Anania, in trumpis; and Maazia, and 
Senea, and Eleazar, and Azi, and Johan- 
nan, and Melchia, and Elam, and Ezer; 
and clerli sungen® the singeris, and Je- 
42sraia, the prouost. And thei offreden in 
that dai grete slaine sacrifises, and thei 
gladeden ; God forsothe hadde gladid hem 
in gret gladnesse. But and the wiues of 
hem and the fre childer io3eden, and the 
gladnesse of Jerusalem is herd aferre. 
43 Also thei noumbreden in that dai men 
vpon the tresories of the tresor, to sacri- 
fise of likour, and to thef firste frutis, and 
dimes, that the princis of the cite, in fair- 
nesse of doing of gracis, shulden bringen 
in to the prestis and Leuitus bi hem ; for 
Juda gladede in the prestus and Leuitus 
44stondende to. And thei kepten the ob- 
seruacioun of ther God, and the besinesse 
of clensing; and singeris, and porteris, 
after the heste of Dauid and of Salamon, 
45 his sone; for in the da3is of Dauid and of 
Asaph from the beginnyng weren princis 
ordeined of singeris in dite, of men prei- 
46sende and knoulechende to¥ God. And 
al Irael, in the da3es of Sorobabel, and in 
the da3es of Neemie, 3euen partus to sing- 
eris and porteris bi alle dajes; and thei 
halewiden the Leuitus, and the® Leuitis 
halewiden the sonys of Aaron. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 In the dai forsothe is rad in the volum 
of Moises, herende the puple; and ther 


€ syngen 4. 


dynto1s. *Om.1s.  £ stoden stille rs. 
the Lord s. * maistir men 18. 
P sacrifices of victorie 18. 
U that weren ouer 1, which weren ouer 8. 
z Om. 1s, 2 Om. 1s. 
4 beinge present 1. 


€ thes souereyns 18. 
the syngeris 1. 


ithe porteris 1s. * heest is. 


II. ESDRAS. 


£Om. 4n. 


& the two Is. 

| herieden in 1. sunge in 8. 
q sothely the Lord 1. Om. s. 

Vv the tresour 1s. 
b in seemlynesse of doyng of thankyngis ¢o the Lord princes 1s. 
f and the 1s. 
10m. s. 


537 


Emath, and thei camen ‘til to’ the 3ate of 
the® floc; and thei stoden‘ in the 3ate of39 
kepyng. And twei® queeris of men heri- 
ynge' stoden in the hows of God, and Y 
and the half part of magistratis* with me. 
And the prestis, Eliachym, Maasie, Mya- 40 
myn, Mychea, Helioneai, Zacharie, Ana- 
nye, in! trumpis ; and Maasie, and Senea, 41 
and Eleazar, and Azi, and Johannan, and 
Melchia, and Elam, and Ezer; and the 
syngeris sungen clereli, and Jezraie, the™ 
souereyn"®. And thei® offriden in that dai 42 
grete sacrifices?, and weren glad ; ‘for God4 
‘hadde maad hem glad’ with grete glad- 
nesse. But also her wyues and lawful* 
childre weren ioiful, and the gladnesse of 
Jerusalem was herd fer. Also thei noum- 43 
briden in that dai ment ouer" the keping 
places of tresour’, toY moiste sacrifices, and 
to* theY firste fruytis, and to? tithis, that 
the* princes of the citee schulden brynge 
in bi hem, ‘in the fairenesse of doyng of 
thankyngis‘, prestis and dekenes ; for Juda 
was glad in prestis and dekenes present?. 
And thei® kepten the kepyng of her God, 44 
the’ kepyng of clensyng® ; and syngeris, 
and porteris!, bi the comaundement* of 
Dauid and of! Salomon, his sone; for in4s 
the daies of Dauid and of Asaph fro the 
bigynnyng princes of syngeris weren or- 
deyned, heriyng™ in® song®, and knou- 
lechynge to God?. And al Israel, in the4e 
daies of Zorobabel, and in the daies of 
Neemye, 3auen partis? to syngeris and to 
porteris bi alle ‘the daies"; and* theitt ha- 
lewiden dekenes, and the dekenes halewiden 
the sones of Aaron. 


CAP. XIII. 


Forsothe in that dai it was red in the1 
book of Moises, in heryng of the puple; 


gOm. 4. 4 Om. an. 


h of the other processiouns of 8. i heriynge 
mheris. ®%sonereyn alsois. © men 1s. 
tOm.s. Sher lawfulis. the men ts. 
W to resceyuers. *Om.1s. Y¥ Om. s. 

¢ Om. 18. 
& the clensyngis. > thei kepten or reuliden 
mQOm.1s. 2tobeinis. © song heriynge 


the Lordis. P God his wonderfulnesse and his merciful doyng 8. 4 partis of diuers fruytis 8. * tymes is. 


*Om.s. ¢t thes prestis 1s. 
VOL. II. 


32 


+ and thei; that 
is, the peple 
payede tithis to 
the dekenes, 
and the dekenes 
payede tithis to 
the prestis. 
Lire here. c. 


538 


is founde writen in it, that Amonites 
and Moabitis a3ten not to gon in to the 
2chirche of God vnto withoute ende; for 
thi that thei a3en camen not to the sonus 
of Irael with bred and watir, and thei 
hireden ajen hem‘ Balam to cursen to 
hem ; and oure God turnede the cursing 
3in to blessing. It is do forsothe, whan thei 
hadden herd the lawe, thei seuereden alle 
4alien fro Irael. And vpon these thingus 
was Eliasub, the prest, that was prouost 
in the ‘tresorie of the hous* of oure God, 
sand ne3hebore to Tobie. Thanne he 
made to hym a gret tresorie; and there 
weren beforn hym leiende vp 3iftis, and 
encens, and vesselis, and the dime of 
whete, win, and of! oile, partis of Le- 
uitis, and of singeris, and of porteris, and 
sthe preestus firste frutis. In alle these 
thingus forsothe I was not in Jerusa- 
lem; for in the two and threttithe 3er 
of Artaxerses, king of Babiloine, I cam 
to the king, and in the ende of dajis I 
7prezide the king. And I cam into Jeru- 
salem, and I vnderstod the™ euel, that 
Eliazub hadde do to Tobie, that he make 
to hym a tresor in the vestiaries of the 
shous off God; and euel it is seen to me 
gretli. And I threw out the vesselis of 
9the hous of Tobie fro the tresorie; and I 
comaundede, and thei clenseden the tre- 
sories ; and I bar a3een thider the ves- 
selis of the hous of God, sacrifise, and 
1oencens. And I knew3 for the partis of 
Leuitus weren not 3iuen, and that eche 
was in to his regioun of the Leuitus, and 
of the singerys, and of hem that ministre- 
1.den; and I pursuede the cause a3en the 
master iugis, and seide, Whi han wee 
forsake the hous of God? And I gede- 


II. ESDRAS. 


XIII. 2——t1. 


and it was foundun writun ther ynne, that 
Amonytis and Moabitis owen not entre® 
in to the chirche of God til’ in to with 
outen ende; for thei metten not the sones2 
of Israel with breed and watir”, and thei 
hiriden ajens the sones of Israel Balaam, 
for to curse hem; and oure God turnede 
the cursyng in to blessyng. Sotheli* its 
was doon, whanne ‘thei haddeny herd the 
lawe, thei departiden ech alien? fro Israel. 
And upon? these thingis Eliasib®, the prest, 4 
‘was blameful‘, that’ was the® souereyn in 
the tresorie of the hows of oure God, and 
was thes neijboret of" Tobie. Therforis 
he* made to him! a grete treserie, ‘that 7s™, 
in the hows of God"; and men® kepynge? 
3iftis4, and encence, and vessels", and the 
tithe of wheete, ofS wyn, and of oile, thet 
partis of dekenes, and of syngeris, and of 
porteris, and the firste fruytis of prestis, 
‘weren theret bifor him’. Forsothe’ ine 
alle these thingis Y was not in Jerusalem ; 
for in the two and thrittithe jeer of Ar- 
taxerses, kyng of Babiloyne, Y cam to the 
kyng, and in the ende of daies” Y preiede 
the* kyng. AndY Y cam in to Jerusalem, 7 
and Y vndurstood the yuel, which? Eliasib 
hadde do to Tobie, to make to hym a 
tresour in the porchis of Goddis hows; 
and to me it* semede ful yuel. And Ys 
castide forth the vessels of the hows of 
Tobie out of the tresorie; and Y co-9 
maundide*, and thei clensiden the treso- 
ries; and Y brou3te ajen there the vessels 
of Goddis hous, sacrifice’, and encence®. 
And Y knew that the partes of dekenes‘ 10 
weren not 3ouun%, and that» ech mani of 
the dekenes and of the syngeris, and of 
hem that mynystriden* hadde fledde! in to 
his cuntrei; and Y dide the cause™ ajens11 


i Om. a. * hous tresorie £ prom. 10m. a. ™ that a. 


“to entre 1s. VY Om. k. 
had is. 2 alten man that was no Jewe 1s. 
Eliasib 1s. ¢ Om, 1. dblameful's. 4 whiche 1. 
k Eliasihb rs. 1 him self is. ™ Om. 1. 


u On. 1s. 
b ont s. 


v Andis. daies of him 1s. 


 goynge toward the loond of bikcest 1 marg. s teat, 
4 oon of A pr.m. FH. one of EL. on BC sec. man. EV. 
€ Om. Is. 
1 oure God u. 
the 1s. 4 3iftis offrid 1. 3iftis that weren offrid s. © dyuerse vessels 18. 
X to the 1s. 
© comaundide the mynystris 1s. 4 and the sacrifice therof 1s. © the encense1s. f the dekenes 1. 


x Andis. Y the peple 
>b was 
htoas, i Andis. 
P that kepten 
t and the 1. and s. 


a this thing 1s. 


fhe wasis. & Om. 1s, 
© there bifore him weren men 1s. 
8 and of x. 

y And than s. 2 that is. 


8 3ouun to hem 1s. } that therfors. iOm.r. * mynystriden in the temple 1s. 1 gon awey Is. ™ cause 


or execucioun 1. cause, that is, execucioun or dome s. 


t the neizbore ; 
that is, frend, 
by the matri- 
monye of his 
cosyn that 
hadde weddid 
the dous3ter of 
Sanaballath. 
Lire here. c. 


t weren there ; 
that is, tho 
thingis that 
weren halewid 
to Goddis re- 
ligioun weren 
remoued fro 
thennus thatthe 
vessels of Tobie 
schulden be 
put there. 

Lire here. c. 


= ee 


XIII. 12——XIV. tg. 


rede hem, and made to stonde in ther 

l2staciouns. And al Juda: bro3te to® the 
dime of whete, and of win, and of oile, in 

i3to bernes. And wee setten vpon the 
bernes, Selemiam, prest, and Sadoch, 
scribe, and Fadaiam, of the Leuitus, and 
biside hem, Anan, the sone of Saccur, 
the sone of Mathanie; for feithful thei 
ben preued, and to them ben take to 

i4kepe the partis of ther brethren. My 
God, haue mynde of me for this, and do 
thou not awei my mercies, that I dide in 
the hous of my God, and in his ceri- 
moines. 


CAP. XIV. 


15 In thoo dazes I sa3 in Juda tredende 
pressours in the sabot, hipelis berende, 
and chargende vpon assis win, and 
grapis, and figis, and eche charge, and 
berende in to Jerusalem in the dai of 
sabot ; and I witnessede vpon hem, that 
in the dai, in whiche it was not leeful to 

16sellen, thei solden. And Tiris dwelten® in 
it, berende in fisshis and alle chaffaris, 
and thei solden in the sabatis to the sonus 

iwof Juda and of Jerusalem. And I re- 

_ preuede the most wrshipeful men of 
Juda, and seide to hem, What is this 
euele thing that 3ee don, and defoulen 

18the dai of sabot? Whether nott these 

- thingus diden oure fadris, and oure God 
bro3te vp on vs al this euel, and vpon this 
cite ? and 3ee adden wrathe vpon Irael, 

19defoulende the sabot. It is do forsothe, 

. whan the 3atis of Jerusalem hadden restid 
in the sabot dai, I seide, Closeth the 3atis ; 


"to me 4. 


‘Il. ESDRAS. 


539 


magistratis"}, and° Y seide, Whi ‘forsaken 
weP the hous of God? And Y gaderide 
hem! togidere, ‘that is", dekenes and myn- 
ystriss ‘that hadden go aveit, and Y made 
hem* to stonde in her stondyngis. And 12 
al Juda brou3te the’ tithe of wheete, of 
wiyn, and of oile, in to bernes*. And we13 
ordeyneden on the* bernes, Selemye, the 
prest, and Sadoch, the writere, and Pha- 
daie, of Y the dekenes, and bisidis hem’, 
Anan, the sone of Zaccur, the sone of 
Mathanye ; for thei* weren preued feitlful 
men, and the partis of her britheren 
weren bitakun to hem. My God, haue14 
mynde of me for this thing, and do thou 
not awei my merciful doyngis, whiche Y 
dide® in the hows of my God, and in hise 
cerymonyes. 


CAP. XIV. 


Yn tho daies Y si3 in Juda men tredinge 15 
pressours in the sabat*, ‘men bryngynge@ 
hepis®, and chargyngef on assis wiyn, and 
grapis, and figis, and al birthun’, and 
‘bringynge in to Jerusalem in the dai of 
sabati; and Y witnesside to hem, that thei 
schulden sille* in the! dai, in which it was 
leueful to sille™. And® men of Tire dwell-16 
iden ‘in it°, and brousten? in‘ fischis, and 
alle thingis set to sale, and’ thei selden® 
‘in the sabatist to the sones of Juda and of 
Jerusalem. And Y rebuykide" the prin-17 
cipal men of Juda, and Y seide to hem, 
What is this yuel thing which’ 3e doen*, 
and maken vnhooli the daie of the sabat ? 
Whether oure fadris diden not these1s 
thingis, and oure God’ brou3te* on* vs 
al this yuel, and on® this citee ? and ‘3e 
encreessen® wrathfulnesse’ on® Israel, in 
defoulynge the sabat. Forsothe® it was 19 
doon, whanne the jatis of Jerusalem 


° dwelleden arrn. 


o maistir men 1s. ° that suffriden this yuel,and s. P forsaken 3e plures. haue 3e forsake 1s. 4 Om. ts. 


Tihe rs. & the mynystris 1s. ¢* Om. 1. 
Z hem we ordeyneden 1, 4% thes ts. 
birthins 1s. thei chargiden up 1. 


in to Jerusalem 1s. sille thes thingis 1s. 


°Om.1s. P thei brou3ten 1s. 4 ther ynne thydre s. 
Om. 1s. " rebuykide herfore 1s, V that 18. 

aupon is. buponis. ¢° Om. Is. 

& And 18. 


b haue do 1s. 
& othere charge 1s. 
! that 1s. 


x done in the 3atis s. ¥ God herfore 1s. 
4 the wrathfulnesse of God 1s. 


1 Om. plures. VOm.1s. W the bernes s. * thes 18. Y oon of 18. 
© sabat day 1s. 


4 and thei brou3zten 1s. ¢ hepis or 
i sahat, and thei bron3ten thes thingis 
« And in Jerusalem 1s. 
8 selden thes thingis 1s. 
z hath brou3t 1s. 
f thus the s. 


h Om. 1s. 
m sille thingis 1s. 
r and in the sabot day 1s, 


e 3e encressen upon Is, 


322 


+ magistratis ; 
that is, the 
hizeste preest 
and othere 
principal men 
faueringe him. 
Lire here. c. 


540 


and thei closeden the 3atis; and I co- 
maundede, that thei shulden not opene 
them vuto after the sabot. And of my 
childer I ordeinede noumbris vp on the 
jatis, that no man shulde bern in? charge 

20vp on the sabot dai. And the marchaun- 
dis dwelten, aud sellende al ther chaffaris, 

21 withoute Jerusalem ones and twies. And 
I witnessede to them, and seide to hem, 
Whi dwelle 3ee forn a3en of? the wal? If 
the secunde this 3ee do, hond I shal lein 
in 3ou. And so fro that time thei camen 

22not in the sabot. Also I seide to the 
Leuitis, that thei shulden be clensid, 
and comen to the 3atis to be kept, and 
to halewen the sabat dai. And bi this 
thanne haue mynde of me, my God, and 
spare to me aftir the multitude of thié 
myseraciouns. 


CAP. XV. 


23 But in thoo dayes Y sa3 the Jewis 
weddinge® wines, Azotitis, Amonitis, and 
21 Moabitis. And the sonus of hem speeken 
of the half partt Azotitis maner, and thei 
couthen not speken Jeuli, and thei speken 
after the tunge of puple and of puple. 
25 And I repreuede hem, and curside; and 
J felde of hem men, and made hem ballid, 
and made hem swern in the Lord, that 
thei shulde not 3iue ther do3tris to the 
sonus of hem, and thei shulden not take of 
the do3tris of hem to ther sonus and to 
26 hemself; seiende, Whether not in such 
maner thing synnede Salamon, the" king 
of Irael? And certus in manie Jentilis 
was ther no king of Irael lic hym, and 
he was derworthe to his God, and hys 
God sette bym king vpon al Irael, and 
hym thanne ladden to synne aliene wym- 
27men. Whether and wee vnbuxhum shul 
don al this grete evel, that wee trespa- 


POm. 4. 4Om. 4c prim. * the F. 
hand Y1s. i seide fo the porters 1s. 
kepe hem 1. 3atis to kepe shitte s. 
days. 'Om.4.  * 3e there is. 
*upon is. * tyme forth ts, 
shewe s, © sabot fo be holi s. 
ithat 1. that, that was not leeful s. 
wymmen s. © hallid or aschamed 1s. 
thingis s, 4 ther was. Y vpon 1s. 


Y not thidere 1s. 
k Om. 1s. 


wOnm.t. 


Ul. ESDRAS. 


k comaundide hem s. 
"man bi hems. 
t anentis or on the other side of s. 
Z to sille eny thing in s. 
d spare thou rs. ¢ in Is. 
1 curside hem 1. 
P Om. 15. 


XIII. 20-27. 


hadden restid in the dai of sabat, Y* 
seide’, Schitte 3e the 3atis ; and thei schit- 
tiden the 3atis; and I comaundide*, that 
thei schuden not opene tho 3jatis til aftir 
the sabat. And of my children! Y ordeynede 
noumbris on the jatis™, that no man® 
schulde brynge in a birthun in the dai of 
sabat. And° marchauntis, and men sil-20 
linge alle thingis set to sale dwelliden with 
out Jerusalem onys and? twiesl. And Y21 
aresonyde hem, and Y* seide to hem, Whi 
dwellen 3e* euene ajens' the wal? If 3e 
doon this" the secounde tyme, Y schal’ 
sette hondt on” 30u. Therfor fro that t+ hon ste 
tyme* thei camen not’ in? the sabat. Also 22 bete ae 
Y seide to dekenes®, that thei schulden be a 
clensid, and that thet schulden come to 
kepe the j3atis, and to halowe® the dai of 
sabat®. And therfor for this thing, my 
God, haue mynde of me, and spare’ me 
bi® the mychilnesse of thi merciful do- 
yngis. But also in tho daies Y si3 Jewys23 
weddinge wyues, wymmen of Azotus, and 
wymmen of Amonytis, and wymmen of 
Moabitis. And her children spaken half24 
part bi the speche of A3otus, and koudenf 
not speke bi the speche of Jewis, and thei 
spaken bi the langage of puple" and of 
puplel. And Y rebuykide hem, and Y*25 
curside!; and Y beet the men™ ‘of hem?, 
and Y made hem ballid®, and Y made 
hem toP swere bi the Lord, that thei 
schulden not 3yue her dou3tris to the sones 
of ‘tho aliens1, and that thei schulden not 
take of the dou3tris of ‘tho aliens" to her 
sones, and to hem silf; and Y seide, Whe-26 
ther Salomon, the kyng of Israel, synnede 
not in siche a’ thingt? And certis in many 
folkis was" no kyng lijk hym, and he was 
loued of his God, and God settide hym 
kyng on’ al Israel, and therfor” alien 


wymmen brou3ten hym to synne. Whe-27 
Swending c. ¢ partie aerH. "Om. 4. 
1 children or seruauniis 1s. ™ 3atis to 


o And thans. Por1s. 4 tweyes in the sabot 
u this thing 18, V shal 6: foors s. 
athe dekeness. » halwe or 

Saftir1. 4 that puple 1s. 
m housbondis 1s. ® Om.1. of the 
Vhem 1 ¢ext. aliens 1-marg. ‘hemi. 8 Om. 1s. 


f thei kouden 1s. 


XH. 28—31. 


sen in the Lord oure God, and wedden 
28 straunge wiues. Of’ the sonus forsothe 
of Joiada, sone of the grete prest, Eli- 
azib, sone in lawe was Sanaballath Oro- 
29nite, whom I drof frome. MRecorde thou, 
Lord my God, a3en hem, that defoulen 
presthod, and the prestus and Leuitus ri3t. 
30 Thanne I clensede hem fro alle alienes, 
and ordeinede ordris of prestis and of 
31 Leuitis, eche in his seruise, and in offring 
of trees in ordeined times, and in firste 
frutis. Haue mynde of me, mi God, in 
to goode. 


Explicit liber secundus Esdre™. 


v And of «. 
secundus Esdre, incipit tertius. E. 
No final rubric in #. 


X the Lord oure God 1s. ¥ Sothely 18. 
ordris 16. 4 to be in 18. e Om. 1s. 


II. ESDRAS. 


% the which 1. 
f trees or of wode to brenne with offrid sacrifices s. 


541 


ther also we vnobedient schulden do al 
this grete yuel, that we trespasse ajens 
‘oure Lord God*, and wedde alien wyues ? 
ForsotheY Sanabalath Horonyte hadde2s 
weddid a dou3ter of the sones of Joiada, 
sone of Eliasib, the grete prest, which? 
Sanaballath Y droof* awei frome. My29 
Lord God, haue mynde a3ens hem, that 
defoulen presthod, and the ri3t of prestis 
and of dekenes. Therfor I clenside hem> 
fro alle aliens, and I ordeynede ordris° of 
prestis and of dekenes, ech man in his ser- 30 
uice, and in‘ the® offring, that ts, dressing, 31 
of trees‘ in tymes ordeyned, and in the 
firste fruytis. My God, haue mynde of 
me in to good. 


+ ajenus hem ; 
in punysching 
hem orribly 
and greuously, 
to the drede 
of othere men. 
Lire here. c. 


Here eendith the secunde book of Esdre, 
and here bigynneth the book of Tobies. 


w Here endith the secounde book of Esdre, and now begynneth the 3. 4. Explicit liber 
Here endeth Esdre secundo, and now bygyuneth Esdre tercio. F. 


¢ the 
& From 


a drofe therfor s. > the prestis 1s. 


BopFQuvWwxb. Here endith the secounde book of Esdras, and bigynneth a prologe on the book of Thobie. c. 
Here endeth the secounde book of Esdre, and here bygynneth Tobie. urs. Heere endith the secounde book of 
Esdre, and heere biginnyth the thridde book of Esdre. 1. Here endeth the seconde book of Esdre, or Neemye ; 
se now the prolog of Tobie. k. Here endith the secounde book of Esdre, and here bigynneth a prologe on the 
book of Tobie. m. Here endith the secunde book of Esdre, and bigynneth a storie of an hooly man Tobie, 
that bifelde in the sixte 3eer of Ezechie, king of Juda n. Here endith the secounde book of Esdre, and bi- 
gynneth the prolog on the book of Tobie. o. No final rubric in the other Mss. 


Il. 


ESDRAS. 





CAP. I. 


1 AwND Josias made pasch in Jerusalem 
to the Lord, and he offride pasch the 
fourtenthe dai of the moone of the firste 

zmonith, ordeinende prestis bi whilis of 
da3is, clothid in stolis, in the temple of 

3the Lord. And he seide to the Leuitus, the 
holi seruauns of Irael, that thei shulden 
halewe them self to the Lord, in setting 
of the holi arke of the Lord in the hous, 
that king Salamon, the sone of Danid, 
4bilde; It shal not be to 3ou to taken it 
vp on shuldris ; and now serueth to oure 

Lord, and doth the cure of that fole of 
Irael, of parti aftir tounis, and? ther 

slinagis, aftir the writing of Dauid, king 
of Irael, and aftir the grete wrshipeful 
doing of Salamon, his sone, alle in the 
temple, and aftir 3o0ure litil fader partie 
of princehod of hem, that stonden in the 
si3te of the brethern of the sonus of Irael. 

6 Offrith pasch, and maketh redi sacrifises 
to 30ure brethern; and doth aftir the 
heste of the Lord, that* is 3ine to Moises. 

7And Josias 3af in to the fole that is 
founde, shep, of lombis, and of kidis, and 
of she got, thretti thousend ; calues thre 

sthousend. These thingus of the kingus 
thingus ben 3iuen aftir beheste to the 
puple, and to prestis, in to pasch; shep 
in noumbre two thousend, and caluis an 


8 No initial rubric in the Mss. of either version. 


CAP. I. 


AND Josias made pask in Jerusalem 
to the Lord, and he offride pask the four- 
tenthe day of the monthe of the first 
monthe, ordeynynge prestis bi ez whiles2 
of daies, clothid in stolis, o7 longe clothis, 
in the temple of the Lord. And he seide3 
to the dekens, the holy seruauntis of Israel, 
that thei schulden halewe hem self to the 
Lord, in settynge of the holy arke of the 
Lord in the hous, that kyng Salomon, the 
sone of Dauid, bildide; It schal not be to« 
jou zo more to take it upon schuldris; 
and now serueth to oure Lord, and do 3e 
cure of that folk of Israel, of the part aftir 
townes, and her lynagis, aftir the writyng 5 
of Dauid, kyng of Israel, and aftir the 
greet wirschipful doyng of Salomon, his 
sone, in al the temple, and aftir 3o0ure litil 
fadris part of princehood of hem, that 
stonden in the si3t of the bretheren of the 
sones of Israel. Offre 3e pask, and maketh ¢ 
redy the sacrifices to 3oure bretheren ; and 
do 3e aftir the heest of the Lord, that is 
3ouen to Moyses. And Josias 3af to the, 
fole that was founden ¢here, scheep, of 
lombis, and of kides, and of sche geet, 
thritti thousynd; calues, thre thousynd. 
Thes 37/tis ben 3ouen of the kingis ownes 
thingis aftir the heest of the Lord to the 
peple, and to prestis, in to pask ; scheep 


bin «a. ¢ that that a. 


I. g—24. 


9hundrid. And Jechonias, and Semeias, 
and Nathanael, brother, and Azabhias, 
and Oziel, and Coraba, in to pasch, shep, 
10 fiue thousend ; caluis, five hundrid. And 
whan these thingis weren do nobli, the 
prestis and Leuitus stoden, hauende 
11 therue loues bi linagys. And aftir the 
parties of the princehod of fadris in the 
sijte of the puple thei offriden to the 
Lord, aftir thoo thingus that in the boc 
120f Moises ben writen. And thei rosteden 
pasch with fijr, as it behonede ; and ostus 
thei soden in sething vesselis and pottis, 
13 with weel willing. And thei bro3ten to 
alle that weren of the fole; and aftir 
these thingus thei maden redi to hemself 
i4and to prestis. The prestus forsothe of- 
friden talewis, vnto the hour was endid ; 
and Leuitus maden redi to hemself, and 
to ther bretheren, and to the sonys of 
1s Aron. And the sacrifieris* offriden do3- 
tris, after ordre, and after the heste of 
Dauid; and Azaf, and Zacharias, and 
16 Jeddinus, that was of the king; and the 
ussheris bi alle the 3atis, so that noon 
ouerpasside his. Forsothe the brethern 
170f hem gretheden to hem. And thoo 
thingis, that perteneden to the sacrifise 


180f the Lord, ben ended. In that dai thei. 


dide pasch, and offriden ostis vp on the 
sacrifise of the Lord, after the heste of 
i9king Josie. And the sonus of Irael, that 
ben founde, diden in that time pasch, 
and the feste dai of therue lones bi seuene 
20da3es. And there is not solempnisid such 
a pasch in Irael, fro the times of Samuel, 
2ithe profete. And alle the kingus of Irael 
haleweden not such a pasch, as dide 
Josias, and the prestus, and Leuitis, and 
Jewis, and al Irael, that ben founden in 
22the commemoracioun at Jerusalem. The 
eizjetenthe 3er, regnende Josias, is halewid 
23pasch. And the werkis of Josie ben made 
rij3te in the sij3te of his Lord, in ful herte 
24dredende; and thoo thingus forsothe that 
abouten hym ben writen, in the rathere 
times of hem that sinneden, who so euere 
weren vnreligious ajen the Lord, befor 


III. ESDRAS. 


543 


in noumbre two thousynd, and calues an 
hundrid. And Jechonyas, and Semeias, 9 
and Nathanael, his brother, and Azabias, 
and Oziel,and Coroba, 3aven in to pask, fyne 
thousynd scheep, and fyue hundrid calues. 
And whanne thes thingis weren nobly 10 
don, the prestis and dekens stoden, hau- 
ynge therf looues bi lynages. And aftir 1 
the partis of the princehood of fadris thei 
offriden to the Lord in the si3t of the 
peple, after tho thingis that ben writen in 
the book of Moyses. And thei rostiden 12 
the pask with fijr, as it bihouyde; and 
thei soden oostis in sethinge vessels and 
in pottis, with wel willyng. And theiis 
brou3ten zé to alle that ther weren of the 
folk; and aftir thes thingis thei maden 
redy to hem self and to prestis. Forsothe 14 
the prestis offriden ynner fatnesse, vnto 
the hour was endid; and dekens grey- 
thiden to hem self, and to her bretheren, 
and to the sones of Aaron. And mens 
sacrifiynge offriden her dou3tris, aftir the 
oordre and the heestis of Dauid; and 
Azaph, and Zacharie, and Jeddynus, that 
was of the king; and the porters bi alle i¢ 
the 3atis offriden, so that noon passide his 
jate. Forsothe her bretheren greythiden 
to hem. And so tho thingis, that per-17 
teynyden to the sacrifice of the Lord, ben 
endid. In that day thei diden pask, and is 
offriden ostis upon the sacrifice of the 
Lord, aftir the heest of kyng Josie. Andig 
the sones of Israel, that weren founden 
present, diden in that tyme pask, and the 
feest day of therf looues bi seuen daies. 
And ther was not solempnyzed sich a20 
paske in Israel, fro the tymes of Samuel, 
the prophet. And alle the kyngis ofa 
Israel halewiden not sich a pask, as diden 
Josias, and the prestis, and dekens, and 
Jewis, and al Israel, that weren founden 
in the commemoracioun, or mynde mak- 
ing, at Jerusalem. In the ei3tenthe 3er, 22 
Josie regnynge, this pask was halewid. 
And the werkis of Josie ben maad ri3t in 23 
the si3t of his Lord, in ful dredynge herte ; 
and tho thingis forsothe that weren aboute 24 


4 sacrifiseres AEFH. 


544 


alle fole, and that so3ten not the woordis 
2,of the Lord vp on Irael. And aftir al 
this deede of Josie, Farao, king of Egipt, 
stezede vp, comende to casten awei in 
Careamys vpon Eufraten; and Josias 
26wente in to meeting to hym. And the 
king of Egipt sente to Josiam, seiende, 
What is to me and to thee, king of Jude ? 
27] am not sent of the Lord, vpon Eufraten 
forsothe is mi bataile; hee3ende go doun. 
28 And Josias is not turned ajeen vp on 
the char, but enforcide to ouercomyn hym, 
not takende heede to the woord of the 
29 profete, of the mouth of the Lord; but 
he sette to hym bataile in the feld of 
Mecedan; and princis descendeden to 
30king Josiam. And the king seide to his 
childer, Moueth me awei fro the bataile ; 
forsothe I am gretli maad sijk. And anoon 
his childre moueden hym awei fro the 
3isheltrun. And he ste3ede vp vpon his 
secunde® char; and comende to Jerusa- 
lem, diede, and is biried in the fader se- 
sepulcre. And in al Jude thei weileden 
Josie, and thei that befor seten with 
wiues, weilede hym vnto this dai; and 
this is 3iue to be don euermor in to al 
33 the kinrede of Irael. These thingus for- 
sothe ben beforn writen in the boe of 
stories of kingus of Juda, and ‘in tof alle 
iestis, the deede of Josie, the glorie of 
hym, and his vnderstonding in the lawe 
of God; for euenli ben don of hym, and 
thoo thingus that ben not writen in the 
34 boc of kingus of Irael and of Juda. And 
thei that weren of the kinrede, takende 
Jechoniam, the sone of Josie, setten king 
for Josie, his fadir, whan he was of thre 
35and thretti 3er. And he regnede vp on 
Irael thre monethis; and the king of 
Egipt putte hym awei, that he regne not 
36in Jerusalem. And he pilde’ the folc of 
an hundrid talentus of siluer, and a talent 
370f gold. And the king of Egipt sette 
Joachym, his brother, king of Jude and 
380f Jerusalem; and he bond the maister 
iugis of Joachim ; Saracel, his brother, 
39 takende, he bro3te a3een to Egipt. Joa- 


€ secoundarie 4EFH, 


III. ESDRAS. 


fin 4. 


I. 25—39. 


him ben writen, in the rathere tynies of 
hem that synnyden, and the whiche weren 
vnreligious a3en the Lord, bifore or more 
than al hethen folk, and the whiche syn- 
ners sou3ten not the wordis of the Lord 
upon Israel. And aftir al this deede of 25 
Josie, Pharao, king of Egipt, 3ede up, 
comynge to casten awey in Carcamys upon 
Eufraten ; and Josias wente in to metyng 
to him. And the king of Egipt sente to26 
Josiam, seiynge, What is to me and to 
thee, kyng of Jude? I am not sent of the27 
Lord, upon Eufraten forsothe is my ba- 
taile; hastily therfor go doun. And Jo-28 
sias was not turned a3en upon the chare, 
but he enforside him self to ouercome 
Pharao, not takinge hede to the word of 
the prophet, fro the mouth of the Lord ; 
but he sette to him bataile in the feeld of 29 
Mecedan ; and princis camen doun to kyng 
Josiam. And thanne the king seide to his 30 
children, or seruauntes, Moueth me awey 
fro the bataile; forsothe Iam gretly maad 
sijk. And anoon his children moueden 
him awey fro the scheltrun. And he3i 
stiede upon his secoundarie chare; and 
comynge to Jerusalem, he diede, and was 
biried in Ais fadris sepulere. And in al 32 
Jude thei biweiliden Josie, and thei that 
bifore seten with wyues, weiliden him vnto 
this day; and this is grauntid to be don 
euer more in al the kynrede of Israel. 
Thes thingis forsothe ben writen in the33 
book of stories of kyngis of Juda, and the 
glorie of Josie, and his vndirstonding in 
the lawe of God, bi alle dedes of the doyng 
of him ; for euenly tho weren don of hym, 
and the whiche ben not writun in the 
book of kingis of Israel and of Juda. And 34 
thei that weren of the kynrede token Je- 
conye, the sone of Josie, and setten him 
king for Josie, his fadir, whanne he was 
of thre and thritty 3eer. And he regnyde3s 
upon Israel thre monthis; and ¢hanne the 
kyng of Egipt putte him awey, that he 
regnyde not in Jerusalem. And he pilidese 
the folk of an hundrid talentis of siluer, 
and of a talent of gold. And the kyng of37 


§ pilede 4EFH. 


I. 40——53- 


chim was of fiue and twenti 3er, whan 
he regnede in the lond of Juda and of 
Jerusalem ; and he dide euel in the si3te 
4vof the Lord. Aftir this forsothe Nabu- 
godonosor, king of Babiloine, stezede vp, 
and bindende hym+ in a strong! bond, 
41 bro3te in to Babiloine; and the holi ves- 
selis of God Nabugodonosor toe and 
bro3te, and sacride in his temple in Babi- 
42loine. Forsothe of his vnclennesse and 
vnreligiosite it is writen in the boc of 
43the times of kingus. And Joachim, his 
sone, regnede for hym ; whan forsothe he 
44 was ordeined, he was of ei3te 3er. For- 
sothe he regnede thre monethis and ten 
da3es in Jerusalem ; and didej euel in the 
4ssi3te of the Lord. And aftir a 3er Nabu- 
godonosor sendende bro3te hym ouer in 
to Babiloine, togidere with the sacride 
46 vesselis of the Lord. And he sette Sede- 
chiam king of Juda and of Jerusalem, 
47 whan he was of oon and twenti 3er. For- 
sothe he regnede elleuen 3er; and dide 
euel in the siz3te of the Lord, and was not 
adrad of the woordis that ben seid of Je- 
remie, the profete, of the mouth of the 
48 Lord ; and adiurid of king Nabugodono- 
‘sor, forsworn wente awei, and his* hard- 
ned nol, and with his herte trespaside the 
lawful thingus of the Lord God of Irael. 
49 And the dukis of the puple of the Lord 
manie thingus wickeli beeren, and vupi- 
tousli diden ouer alle the vnclennessis of 
Jentilis; and thei defouleden the temple 
of the Lord, that was holi! in Jerusalem. 
soAnd God of ther fadris sente bi his 
aungil to a3een clepen hem, for the 
whiche thing he sparede to hem, and to 
sither tabernacle. Thei forsothe scorn- 
eden in ther corneris, and that dai that 
the Lord spac, thei weren bobbende his 
seprofetus. The whiche vnto wrathe is 
stirid vp on his fole™, for ther irreligi- 
osite. Comaundende and ste3ende vp the 
s3kingus of Caldeis, thei slowen the 3unge 
men of hem in swerd, in the enuyroun of 
the holi temple of hem; and thei spareden 
not to 3ung man, and to maiden, and to 


hOm.c pr.m. ideuynyd x pr. m. ihe dide «. 
VOL. II. 


IJ. ESDRAS. 


545 


Egipt sette Joachim, his brother, kyng of 
Jude and of Jerusalem; and he bonde the 
maistir iuges of Joachim, and takynge Sa- 
racel, his brother, he brou3te him a3en to 
Egipt. Joachim was of fyue and twenty 39 
3eer, whanne he regnyde in the loond of 
Juda and of Jerusalem ; and he dide yuel 
thing in the si3t of the Lord. Aftir this 40 
forsothe Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babi- 
loyne, stiede up, and byndynge Joachim 
in a strong boond, brou3te him in to 
Babiloyne; and Nabugodonosor toke and 41 
brou3te the holy vessels of God, and sa- 
cride tho in his temple in Babiloyne. For-42 
sothe of his vnclennesse and his vnreli- 
gioustee it is writen in the book of the 
tymes of kyngis. And Joachim, his sone, 43 
regnyde for him; whanne forsothe he was 
ordeyned king, he was of eizte 3eer. For- 44 
sothe he regnyde thre monthis and ten 
daies in Jerusalem; and dide yuel in si3t 
of the Lord. And aftir a 3er Nabugodo- 4s 
nosor seute, and brou3te him ouer in to 
Babiloyne, togidre with the sacrid vessels 
of the Lord. And he sette Sedechie kyng 46 
of Juda and of Jerusalem, whanne he was 
of oon and twenti 3eer. Forsothe he reg-47 
nyde elleuen 3eer ; and he dide yuel in si3t 
of the Lord, and was not adred of the 
wordis that ben seid of Jeremye, the pro- 
phet, fro the mouth of the Lord. And he4s 
adiurid, or chargid bi ooth, of kyng Nabu- 
godonosor, forsworn wente awey, and his 
noll made hard, he ouerpasside the lawe- 
ful thingis of the Lord God of Israel. 
And the duykis of the Lordis peple baren 49 
hem wickidly many thingis, and thei diden 
vnpitously ouer alle the wickidnessis of 
Gentiles; and thei defouliden the temple 
of the Lord, that was hooly in Jerusalem. 
And God of her fadris sente bi his aungel 50 
to azenclepe hem, for the whiche thing he 
sparide to hem, and to her tabernaclis. 
Thei forsothe scornyden in her corners, 51 
and that dai that the Lord spake, thei 
weren bobbynge his prophetis. The whiche se 
Lord is stirid to wraththe upon his folk, 
for their irreligiositee. And the kyngis 
1Om.c. 


k with his £ pr.m. m puple c nr. ™, 


4a 


546 Il. ESDRAS. I. s4—II. 8. 


540ld man, and to ful waxen man; but and 
alle thei ben taken in to the hondus of 
hem; and alle the sacride vesselis of the 
Lord, and the kingis cofrys takende, thei 
55 bro3ten in to Babiloine. And thei brenden 
vp the hous of the Lord, and distrieden 
the wallis of Jerusalem, and his touris 
sé6brenden with fijr. And thei wasteden 
alle the wrshipeful thingus, and to no3t 
bro3ten; and the laft fro swerd thei 
57 bro3ten in to Babiloine. And thei weren 
his thrallis, vnto the time that Persis reg- 
neden, in the fulfilling of the woord of 
58the Lord, in the mouth of Jeremie; for 
to the lond wolde do benigneli ther sa- 
batis, al the time of ther forsaking he 
sabatisede, in the apliyng of seuenti? 3er. 


CAP. II. 


1 Regnende Ciro, king of Persis, in the 
fulfilling of the woord of the Lord, in 
2the mouth of Jeremie, the Lord rerede 
the spirit of Ciri, king of Persis; and 
prechide in al his reume togidere bi 
3scripture, seiende, These thingus seith 
Cirus, king of Persis, Me hath ordeined 
king to the world of erthis the Lord of 
4Irael, the heeze Lord; and he signefiede 
to me to bilde to hym an hous in Jeru- 
ssalem, that isin Juda. If ani man is of 
joure kinrede, his Lord ste3e vp with 
6hym in to Jerusalem. Hou fele euere 
thanne aboute placis dwellen, helpe thei 
hym that ben in that place, in gold and 
7siluer, in 3iftis, with hors, and bestis, 
and with othere thingus, that aftir vouwis 
ben leid vp in to the hous of the Lord, 
sthat is in Jerusalem. And the stondende 
princis of linagis of tounus of Jude, of 
the linage of Beniamyn, and prestis and 
Leuitis, whom the Lord stiride to ste3en 
vp, and to bilden vp the hous of the 


of Caldeis comaundiden, and stizeden up, 
thei slowen the 3ounge men of hem with 53 
swerd, aboute the hooly temple of hem; 
and thei spariden not to 3onge man, ne to 
maiden, ne to old man, and to ful woxen 
man; but also alle thei ben taken in to54 
the hondis of hem; and thei token alle 
the sacrid vessels of the Lord, and the 
kyngis coffres, and brou3ten tho in to Ba- 
biloyne. And thei brenden up the housss 
of the Lord, and destroieden the wallis of 
Jerusalem, and thei brenden his touris 
with fijr. And thei wastiden alle thes6 
wurschipful thingis, and brou3ten hem to 
nou3t ; and thei brou3ten the peple lefte 
of the swerd in to Babiloyne. And thei 57 
weren his thrallis, vn to the tyme that 
Peersis regnyden, in the fulfillynge of the 
word of the Lord, in the mouth of Je- 
remye; til that the loond wolde do be-58 
nyngnely their sabotis, he sabatisede al the 
tyme of their forsakyng, in the appliynge 
of seuenti 3er. 


CAP. II. 


Regnynge Cyro, kyng of Peersis, in the1 
fulfillyng of the word of the Lord, in the 
mouth of Jeremye, the Lord reiside up2 
the spirit of Ciry, kyng of Persis; and he 
prechide in al his rewme togidre bi scrip- 
ture, seiynge, Thes thingis seith Cirus,3 
kyng of Persis, The Lord of Israel, the 
hije Lord, hath ordeyned me kyng to the 
world of erthis; and he signyfiede to me4 
to bilde to him an hous in Jerusalem, that 
is in Juda. If ther is ony man of 3oures 
kynrede, his Lord stie up with him in 
to Jerusalem. Therfor hou many eueré 
dwellen in places aboute, helpe thei hem 
that dwellen in that place, in gold and 
siluer, in 3iftis, with hors, and bestis, and7 
with othere thingis, the whiche aftir vowes 
ben leid up in to the hous of the Lord, 
that isin Jerusalem. And the stondynges 
princis of lynages of townes of Jude, of 
the lynage of Beniamyn, and prestis and 
dekens, whom the Lord stiride to wende 
up, and to bilde up the hous of the Lord, 


© the seuenti au. 


Il. 9—21. 


Lord, that is in Jerusalem; and thoo, 
that weren in the enuyroun of hem, 
9shulden helpe? in alle siluer and gold of 
it, and in bestis, and in manie vouwis; 
1omanie, of whom the wit is stirid. And 
king Cirus bro3te forth the sacride ves- 
selis of the Lord, that Nabugodonosor 
translatide fro Jerusalem, and sacride 
hem in his maumet. And bringende 
forth hem Cirus, king of Persis, toc to 
Mitridate, that was vp on the tresoris of 
izhym. Bi hym forsothe thei ben taken 
13to Salmanasar, gouernour of Jude. Of 
these forsothe this the noumbre; siluer 
sacrid vesselis of likouris, two thousend 
and foure hundrid; siluerene drinking 
vesselis, thretti; goldene violis, thretti; 
also siluerene, two thousend and foure 
hundrid; and othere vesselis, a thousend. 
i4Alle forsothe goldene vesselis and sil- 
uerene, four thousend foure hundrid and 
15ei3te and sixti. And thei ben deliuerd 
out to Salmanasar, togidere with hem, 
that of the caytifte of Babiloine weren 
16comen in to Jerusalem. Forsothe in the 
times of Artaxerses, king of Persis, writen 
to hym", of these that dwelten in Jude 
and in Jerusalem, Balsamus, and Mitri- 
datus, and Sabellius, and Ratinius, Bal- 
teneus, Samelius, scribe, and othere dwell- 
ende in Samarie, and in othere placis, 
the vnderset lettre to king Artaxersi. 
17 Lord, thi childer, Ratinus, and Sabelius, 
scribe, and othere domysmen of thi cort, 
of thingus that fallen in to Coelem Siriem, 
18and Fenicem. And now be it knowen to 
the lord the king, for Jewis, that ste3- 
eden vp fro 30u to vs, comende in to Je- 
rusalem, cite a3een flowen to, and werst*, 
bilden up*t the ouenus of it, and setten the 
19 wallis, and reren the temple. That if 
this cite and wallis weren ful endid, thei 
shul not suffre to 3elde tributis, but also 
20thei shuln ajen stonde to kingus. And 
for that that is do aboute the temple, to 
han ri3tli wee han demyd to not despisen 
21 that same thing, but ‘to maken knowen® 
to the lord the king, that if’ it shal 
@ this is 4. 


P helpe them c. T ben 4. 


III. ESDRAS. 


8 ferst H. 


547 


that is in Jerusalem; and thei, that weren 
in the enuyroun, or 7x cumpas, of hem, 
schulden helpe in al siluer and gold of it,9 
and in bestis, and in many vowis; and 
many othere, of whom the witt is stirid, 
helpe thei also. And kyng Cirus brou3te 10 
forth the sacrid vessels of the Lord, the 
whiche Nabugodonosor translatide fro Je- 
rusalem, and sacride hem in his mawmett. 
And Cirus, king of Persis, bryngynge hem 11 
forth, toke ¢ho to Mitridate, that was upon 
the tresours of him. Forsothe bi him thei 12 
ben taken to Salmanasar, gouernour of 
Jude. Of thes thinges forsothe this is13 
the noumbre; silueren halewid vessels of 
licours, two thousynd and foure hundrid ; 
thritti silueren drinkynge vessels; thritty 
goldene violes; and two thousynd and foure 
hundrid silueren violes; and a thousynd 
othere vessels. Forsothe alle the golden 14 
and silueren vessels zveven foure thousynd 
and foure hundrid and ei3t and sixty. And 15 
thei ben delyuered out to Salmanasar, to- 
gidere with hem, that weren comen in to 
Jerusalem of the caytiftee or thraldom of 
Babiloyne. Forsothe in the tyme of Ar-16 
taxerses, kyng of Persis, ther wreten to 
him, of thes that dwelliden in Judee and in 
Jerusalem, Balsamus, and Mitridatus, and 
Sabelius, and Ratymus, Baltheneus, and 
Samelius, the scribe, and othere dwellinge 
in Samarie, and in othere placis, ¢hez 
writen this subiect lettre to the kyng 
Artaxersy. Lord, thi children, Ratymus, 17 
and Sabelius, the scribe, and othere domes 
men of thi court, of thingis that fallen in 
Coelem Siriem, and Fenycen. And now1s 
be it knowen to the lord the kyng, that 
Jewis, the whiche stieden up fro 3ou to us, 
comynge in to Jerusalem, a citee of fleers 
awei, and a ful yuel ccfee, thei bilden up 
the ouenes of it, and thei setten the 
wallis, and reren the temple. That if this 19 
citee and wallis weren maad up, thei shul 
not suffre to 3elde tributis, but also thei 
shul a3enstonde to kyngis. And for cause 20 
that that thing is done aboute the temple, 
to haue if ri3tly we haue demed to not 
vOm. 4. 


tOm.c. anon to don £ pr.m. 


4Aa2 


548 


seme, OV! thee” king, be it so3t in the* 
22 bokis of thi fadris ; and thou shalt finde in 
the remembrauncis writen of hem, and 
thou shalt knowen, for that cite was 
a3een floun, and kingis and cites smitende 
23 togidere, and Jewis a3een fleende, and 
makende batailis in it fro euermor; for 
2awhat cause this cite is desert. Now 
thanne knowen we maken, lord’ king’, 
for if this cite were bild vp, and of this 
the wallis weren rerid*, comyng doun 
shal not be to thee in to Coelem Ciriem 
2sand Fenicem. Thanne the king wrot 
a3ee to Ratinum, that wrot the fallende 
thingus, and to Bellumym, and to Sabellio, 
scribe, and to othire ordeined, and dwell- 
eris in Cirie and Fenyce, thoo thingus 
26 that ben sett vnder.. I ha® rad the lettre‘, 
that thou sentist to me. Thanne® I co- 
maundide to be so3t; and it is founde, 
for that cite is fro alwei withstondende 
27to kingus, and the men a3een fugitif, and 
batailis in it makende; and most stronge 
kingus han ben in Jerusalem lordship- 
ende, and tributus askende of Cele Cirie 
gsand Fenice. Now thanne I comaundede 
to forfende thoo men to bilden vp the 
cite, and to puruein, lest ani thing more 
29 this thing be maad ; but go thei not forth 
in to more, sithen thei ben of malice, so 
that to kingis greeues ben* born in. 


CAP. III. 


30 Thanne these thingus rehersid, that of 
king Artaxerse weren writen, Rathinus, 
and Sabellius, scribe, and that with hem 
weren ordeined, ioynende‘, hee3endelis 
camen in to Jerusalem, with horse men, 

31and puple, and cumpanie ; and begunnen 
to forfenden the bilders. And thei voided- 
en fro the bilding of the temple in Jern- 
salem, vnto the secunde 3er of the regne 

1of Darie, king of Persis. King Darie 


V of a. 


x Om. 4. 
bhaue sern, 


W the 4. Om. £ pr.m. 


Il. ESDRAS. 


Il, 22——III. 1. 


despise that same thing, but to make2! 
knowen to the lord kyng, that if it schal 
be seen plesyng to the king, be it sou3t in 
the bookis of thi fadris; and thou schalt 22 
fynde in remembrauncis writen of hem, 
and thou schalt knowe, that thilke citee 
was ajen flowun, and kyngis and citees 
smytinge togidre, and Jewis fleynge a3en, 23 
and makinge bateilis in it alwey; for the 
whiche cause this citee was forsake. Now 24 
therfor we maken knowen to the lord 
king, that if this citee were bild up, and 
the wallis of it weren arerid, ther schal be 
no comyng doun to thee in to Choelem 
Cyriem and Fenycen. Thanne the kyng2s 
wroot aj3en to Ratimym, that wroot tho 
thingis that bifellen, and to Bellumym, 
and to Sabellio, the scribe, and to othere 
ordeyned souereyns, and dwellinge in 
Cirye and in Fenyce, he wrot to hem thes 
thingis that ben sett vndir. I haue rad 26 
the lettre, that thou sentist to me. Ther- 
for I comaundide 2¢ to be sou3t ; and it was 
founden, that thilke citee was alwey with- 
stondynge to kyngis, and men a3en fugi-27 
tijf, and makynge bateilis in it; and moost 
stronge kingis han ben lordschipinge in 
Jerusalem, and askinge tributis of Chole 
Cirie and Fenycem. Now therfore I co-28 
maunde to forfende tho men to bilde up 
the citee, and to loke, that ony thing be 
not maad her aftir; but that thei passe29 
not in to ful myche, sith thei ben of 
malice, so that greuauncis be not brou3t 
ther to kinges. 


CAP. III. 


Thanne aftir thes thingis weren re-30 
hersid, that weren writen of Artaxerses, 
the kyng, Rathinus, and Sabellius, the 
scribe, and thei that weren with hem or- 
deyned, ioynynge, hyingly camen in to 
Jerusalem, with horse men, and peple, and 
with cumpanye ; and thei bigunnen to for-31 
fende the buylders. And thei voididen 
thanne fro the bildyng of the temple, vnto 
the secounde 3eer of the rewme of Darij, 


Y the lord a. 2 the kyng a. 8 arered 4EFH. 


‘thingis x prm. 4 That 4. ¢ ben not c prim. f runnyuge £ pr.m. 8& hee3yngli er. 


III. 2—17. 


made a gret soper to alle his seruauns, 
and to alle the maister iugis of Meedis 
zand of Persis, and to alle that wereden® 
purper, and to gouernoures, and to coun- 
seileris, and to prefectis vnder hym, fro 
Ynde vnto Ethiope, to an hundrid and 
3seuene and twenti prouincis. And whan 
they hadden eten and drunken, and ful- 
fild, turneden ajeen, thanne king Darie 
ste3ede vp in his litil bed place, and sleep’, 
aand is wakid*. Thanne thoo thre 3unge 
men, keperis of the body, that kepten the 
bodi of the king, seiden the tothir to the 
stother, Seie wee eche of vs a woord, that 
befor passe; and whos euere woord seme 
wisere of the tother, king Darie shal 
6 3iue to hym grete 3iftus, and to be couered 
with purper, and to drinken in gold, and 
vpon gold to slepen, and a goldene char, 
with bridel, and a bys mytre, and a be3e 
yaboute the necke; and in the secunde 
place he shal sitte fro Darie, for his wis- 
dam ; and the cosin of Darie he shal be 
sclepid. Thanne eche writende his woord, 
seleden, and putten vnder the pilwe 
gof king Darie; and seiden, Whan the 
king hadde rise!, thei shul 3iue: to hym 
ther thingus writen, and what euere 
thing the king shal demen of thre, and 
the maister iugis of Persis, for the woord 
of hym is wisere, to hym shal be 3iue the 
10 Victorie, as it is write. Oon wrot, Strong 
nis win. The tother wrot, Strengere is 
igthe king. The thridde wrot, Strengere 
ben wymmen ; ouer alle thingus forsothe 
}30uercometh treuthe. And whan the king 
hadde risen, thei token ther writen 
thingis, and 3euen to hym, and he radde. 
1a And sendende he clepide alle the maister 
iugis of Persis, and of Meedis, and the 
clothed in purper, and the reuleris of 
15 prouincis, and prefectis ; and thei seten 
in conseil, and ben rad write befor them. 
1g And he seide, Clepeth the 3unge men, and 
thei shul shewe ther woordis. And thei 
y, ben clepid™, and camen in. And he seide 
to hem, Shewith to vs of these thingus that 
ben writen. And the rathere, that hadde 


hwerdenc. i slepte azru. 


III. ESDRAS. 


k waken 4EFH. 


549 


kyng of Persis. Kyng Darius made al 
gret soper to alle his seruauntis, and to 
alle the maister inges of Medes and of 
Persis, and to alle that wereden purpre,2 
and to gouernours, and to counselers, and 
to prefectis vndir him, fro Ynde vn to 
Ethiope, to an hundrid and seuen and 
twenty prouyncis. And whanne thei3 
hadden eten and drunken, and weren ful- 
fillid, thei turneden ajen. Thanne kyng 
Darius stiede vp in his litil bed place, and 
slepte, and was waken. Thanne thilke4 
thre 3ounge men, kepers of the bodi, the 
whiche kepten the bodi of the kyng, 
seiden oon to an oother, Sey we ech of uss 
a word, that bifore passe in hunnyng ; and 
whos euer word seme wiser than of an 
oother, kyng Darius schal 3iue to him 
grete 3iftis, and to be kouered with pur-6 
pre, aud to drynke in gold, and to slepe 
upon gold; and he schal 3iue him a golden 
chare, with the bridil, and a mytre of bijs, 
and a bie aboute the necke ; and he schal7 
sitte in the secounde place fro Darius, for 
his wisdom ; and he schal be clepid Daryus 
cosyn. Thanne ech of hem thre writinge 8 
his word, seleden, and putten zo vndir the 
pelewe of kyng Daryus; and _ seiden,9 
Whanne the king hath risen, thei wil take 
to him her thingis writen, and what euer 
thing the kyng shall deme of thre, and the 
maistir iuges of Persis, forsothe the word 
of him is wiser than of the othere, to him 
scha] be 3ouen the victorie, as it is writen. 
Oon wrot, Wyn is strong. An oother}j? 
wrot, The kyng is strenger. The thridde 12 
wrot, Wymmen ben strengiste; treuthe 
ouercomith forsothe ouer alle thingis. And 13 
whanne the kyng had resen up, thei token 
her thingis writen, and 3ouen ¢ho to him, 
and he radde. And he sende and clepede 4 
alle the maistre iuges of Persis, and of the 
lond Medis, and the clothid men in pur- 
pre, and the rewlers of prouynces, and 
prefectis; and thei seten in counsel, and 15 
the writingis weren red bifore hem. And 16 
the kyng seide, Clepeth the 3ounge men, 
and thei schul schewe her wordis. And 


larijse agrH. ™ clepen 4. 


550 


isseid of the strengthe of win, began, and 
seide, Men! hou miche win is passende 
strong; to alle men that drinken it it 
19 berth doun the mynde ; also of king and 
of faderles child it maketh the minde 
vein; also of seruaunt and of freman, of 
2z0pore and of riche; and alle minde it™ 
turneth in to sikyrnesse, and in to glad- 
nesse; and it remembreth not of® any 
21sorewe and dette; and alle the entrailis 
it makith onest; and it remembrith not 
king, ne maister iuge; and alle thingis 
22bi talent it maketh to speke; and thei 
remembre not, whan thei han drunke, 
frendshipe ne brotherhed, and after not 
23miche thei taken swerdis; and whan of 
win thei drownyn, and rijsen, thei han 
2ano mynde that thei diden. O men! 
whether win is not passendeli strong, 
that thus constreineth to do? And this 
seid, he held his pes. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And the folewere began to sein, that 
zseith of the strengthe of king, O men! 
whether men ben not passendely strong, 
that erthe and se holden, and alle thingus 
3that in hem ben? The king forsothe ouer 
alle thingus passith, and hath lordshipe 
of hem, and alle thing, what enere he shal 
4sei to them, thei don. And if? he sende 
hem to fi3teres, thei gon, and destro3en 
shillis, and wallis, and touris; thei ben 
slain, and slen, and the woord of the 
king thei passe not; for if thei ouer- 
comen, thei bringe to the king alle 
thingus, whateuere thingus thei han spoil- 
6id euermor, and alle othere thingus. 
And‘ hou fele euere bern not" kni3thod, 
ne fiz3ten, but eren the lond, eftsone whan 
thei weren repende, thei bringe tributus 
7to the king. And he oon alone ; and if he 
seie to slen, thei slen; and if he seie to 
sfor3iuen, thei forz3iuen ; and if he seie to 


nhe sz. 9° Om. AEFH. 


Il. ESDRAS. 


P Om. c. 


HI. 18—IVv. 8. 


thei weren clepid, and thei camen yn. 
And Darius seide to hem, Schewe 3¢ to us 17 
of thes thingis that ben writen. And the 
firste, that had seid of the strengthe of 
wyn, he biganne, and seide to hem, Men!18 
ful passynge strong is wyn; to alle men 
that drynken it it berith doun the mynde ; 
also it makith the mynde veyn, bothe of 19 
kyng and of the fadirles child ; also of ser- 
uaunt and of fre men, of pore and of riche; 
and it turnith al the mynde in to sikir-20 
nesse, and to gladnesse ; and it remembrith 
not ony serewe and dette; and it makithai 
alle the entrailes honest ; and it remem- 
brith not kyng, ne maistir iuge; and alle 
thingis it makith speke bi talent; and 22 
whanne thei han drunken, thei remem- 
bren not frendschip ne brotherhed, and 
not longe aftir thei taken swerdis; and 23 
whanne thei han be drowned of wyn, 
and rijsen, thei han no mynde what 
thinges thei diden. O men! whether wyn 2 
is not passyngly strong, that thus con- 
streynith men to do? And this thing seid, 
he hilde his pes. 


CAP. IV. 


And the neate folewer biganne to sey, 
that seide of the strengthe of a kyng, O2 
men! whether men ben not passyngly 
stronge, the whiche holden loond and see, 
and alle thingis that ben in hem ? The kyng3 
forsothe passith aboue alle thingis, and he 
hath lordschip of hem, and thei don al 
thing, what euer he wil sey to hem. And 4 
if he sende hem to fiz3ters, thei gon, and 
destroyen hillis, and walles, and toures; 
thei ben sleyn, and slen, and thei passens 
not the word of the kyng ; for if thei ouer- 
comen, thei bryngen to the king alle 
thingis, what euer thingis thei han spoil- 
ed euermore, and all othere thingis. And ¢ 
hou fele euer beren not kny3thod, ne fi3ten, 
but eren the loond, eftsone whanne thei 
schul repe, thei bringen tributis to the 
king. And he zs oon aloone; and if he7 
bidde to sle, thei sleen; and if he bidde 
hem to for3iue, thei forjiven; and if hes 


q Om. 4. Tup E pr. m. 


IV. 9—25- 


smyten, thei smite; if he seie to out- 
lawen, thei outlawen ; if he seie to bilden, 
9thei bilden; if he seie to fallen’ of, thei 
fallen’ of; if he seie to plaunten, thei 
10 plaunten ; and alle fole and vertues hym 
obeshen ; and ouer these‘ thingus he shal 
usitte, and drinke, and slepen. These 
forsothe in enuyroun kepen hym, and 
moun not go eche, and do ther werkis, 
but and in woord men ben obeshende to 
izhym. What maner wise the king pass- 
eth not befor, that thus is losid"? And 
i3he heeld his pes. The thridde, that 
hadde seid of wymmen, and of treuthe; 
usthis is Sorobabel; began to speke, Men ! 
not gret the king, and manie men, ne win 
passeth beforn; who is thanne that hath 
is lordshipe of hem? Whether not wymmen 
geete™ king, and al the puple, that lord- 
shipe to the se, and to’ the erthe, and of 
i¢hem ben born? And thei bro3ten forth 
hem that plaunteden vines, of the whiche 
17win is maad. And thei maken the stolis 
of alle men, and thei don glorie to men, 
and men monn not ben seuered fro wym- 
ismen. If thei gedere togidere gold and 
seluer, and alle fair thing, and seen a 
womman in good abite, and in good fair- 
i9nesse, alle these thingis forsakende, in to 
hir thei taken heede, and the mouth 
opened, beholden, and” hir drawen*™ to 
more than gold or’ siluer, or any precious 
20 thing’y. A man hys fader shal forsaken, 
that nurshide hym, and his regioun, and 
21to a woman ioyneth togidere, and with 
a womman leueth the lif, and nouther 
fader remembreth, ne moder, ne regioun. 
22 And therfore it behoueth vs to knowen, 
for wyminen han lordshipe of vs. Whe- 
a3ther sorewe 3ee not? And a man take 
his swerd, and goth in the weie to do 
theftis, and mansla3teris’, and to seilen 
2touer the se and flodis; and a leoun® he 
seeth, and in derenesse® he goth in; and 
whan he hath don thefte, and gilis, and 
asraueines, he bringeth to his leef. And 
eft a man looueth his wif mor than fader 


s hewen £ pr.m. t alle these c pr. m. E pr.m. 
v Om. 4. al £ pr.m. Win c. x and drawen c. 
a lioun 4FH,. dirknessis a. 


lil. ESDRAS. 


551 


sey hem to smyten, thei smyten ; if he sey 
to outlawe, thei outlawen; if he bidde 
hem to bilden, thei bilden; if he bidde tog 
throwe doun, thei throwen adoun; if he 
bidde to plaunte, thei plaunten; and alle1o 
folk and vertues obeishen to him ; and ouer 
alle thes thingis he schal sitte, and drynke, 
and slepe. Thes forsothe kepen him 
aboute, and moun not gon echoon, and do 
her owne werkis, but in his word men 
obeishen to him. What maner wise pass- 12 
ith not the kyng bifore oothere, that thus 
is loosid? And he helde his pes. The13 
thridde, that had seid of wymmen, and of 
treuthe; this is sezd Sorobabel; he bi- 
ganne to speke, O men! the kyng is noti« 
greet, neither many othere men, ne wyn 
passith biforn; who is it thanne that hath 
lordschip of hem? Whether not wymmen, 15 
that han goten kyngis, and al the peple, 
the whiche kingis han lordschip bothe of 
see and of loond, and of wymmen thei ben 
born? And thei brou3ten forth hem that 16 
plauntiden vynes, of the whiche wyn is 
maad. And thei maken the stoles, ori7 
longe clothis, of alle men, and thei don 
glorie to men, and men moun not be se- 
uered fro wymmen. If thei gedere togidere 18 
gold and siluer, and al fair thing, and 
seen a womman in good aray, and in good 
fairnesse, thei, forsakynge alle thes thingis, 19 
taken heede to here, and the mouth open- 
ed, thei biholden Azrv, and thei drawen 
more to hir thau to gold and siluer, or 
ony precious thing. A man schal forsake 20 
his fadir, that norishide him, and _ his 
owne loond, and to a wommau he loyn- 
ith him togidre, and with a womman he21 
lyuith his lijf, and noither remembrith 
fadir, ne modir, ne the lond of his birthe. 
And therfor it bihouith us to knowen, that 22 
wymmen han lordschip of us. Whether 
3e serewen not? And also a man takith 23 
his swerd, and goth in the wey to don 
theftis, and man slau3tris, and to seilen 
ouer the see, and ower flodes; and hea 
seeth a lioun, and he goth in derkenessis ;. 


u defamed £ pr.m. 


uu geten the 4. geeten FE, 
Yand 4H. 


yy ston c pr.m. 2 mansla3tis cu, 


552 


26or modir; and manie woode men ben 
maade for ther wiues, and thrallis ben 
27 made for hem; and manie pershiden, and 
ben stranglid, and synneden for wymmen. 
2s And now leeueth to® me; for gret is the 
king in his power, for alle regiouns* ben 
2gaferd to touchen hym. I sa3 ner the 
latere Apemen, the do3ter of wndirful man 
Besacis, the secundarie wif of the king, 
sittende biside the king at the rizt side; 
3o0and takende awei the diademe fro his 
hed, and puttende on to hirself*, and with 
the hondis she smot the king of the lift 
31hond. And ouer these thingus, the mouth 
opened, he beheeld hir, and if she loowe 
to hym, he 10036, and if she were wroth 
to hym, he glosith, to the time that he be 
szrecounsilid ‘in to® grace. O men! whi 
ben not wymmen strengere? Gret is the 
erthe, and hee3 is heuene, that these 
33thingus don. And thanne the king and 
the purprid men beheelden either in to 
other; and he! began to speken of 
3itreuthe. O men! whether stronge ben 
not wymmen ? Gret is the erthe, and he3 
is heuene, and swift is the cours of the 
sunne; it is turned in the cumpas of he- 
ene, and eft it renneth a3een in to the 
35same place o dai. Whether not a gret 
doere is he, that maketh these thingus ? 
and treuthe gret, and strengere beforn 
3éalle thingis ? Al erthe treuthe inwardli 
clepeth, heuene also it blesseth, and alle 
werkus ben moued and dreden it; and 
ther is not with it any thing wickedj. 
37 Wickedi king, wicked) wymmen, and 
wicked) alle the sonis of men, and wickedi 
alle the werkis of hem, and ther is not 
in hem treuthe, and in ther wickednessis* 
38 thei shuln pershen ; and treuthe dwellith, 
and waxeth in to with oute ende, and 
lineth, and weldeth, in to worldis of 
39 worldis. And to taken persones and 
differencis is not anent it; but thoo 
thingis that ben ri3twis it doth, to alle 
vnri3twise and euele men; and alle men 
40 ben maad benigne in his werkis. And 


¢ Om. AEFH. 4 regioun 4. 


¢hym £ pr. m. 
Jwicke c pr.m.  wickenessis c. 


III. ESDRAS. 


IV. 26—40. 


and whanne he hath don his thefte, and 
gijles, and raueynes, he bringith it to his 
leef. And efte a man louith his wijf more 25 
than fadir or modir; and many men ben 26 
maad woode for their wyues, and many 
ben maad thrallis for hem; and many 27 
perischiden, and weren stranglid, and many 
han synned for wymmen. And now leeu- 28 
eth me; forsothe a kyng is greet, and 
his power, for alle regiouns, or kingdoms 
aboute, ben aferd to touche him. I saw3e29 
neuer the latter Apeemen, the dou3ter of 
Besacis, the wondirful man, the secound- 
arie wijf of the kyng, sittynge biside the 
kyng at the rij3t side; and takynge awey 30 
the diademe fro his heed, and puttynge it 
on hir self, and with the pawme of hir lift 
hoond she smote the kyng. And ouersi 
thes thingis, the mouth opened, he bihilde 
hir, and if sche low3e to him, he low3e, and 
if sche were wrooth to him, he glosith or 
plesith, vnto the tyme that he be recoun- 
silid to grace. © men! whi ben notse 
wymmen strengist ? Greet is the erthe, 
and heuen is hi3, that don thes thingis. 
Thanne the kyng and the purpred men33 
bihelden either in to oothere; and he bi- 
ganne to speke of treuthe. O men! wher 34 
wymmen ben not stronge? Greet is the 
eerthe, and heuen is hi3, and the cours of 
the sunne is swift; it is turned in the 
cumpas of heuen, and eft it renneth a3en 
in to the same place in a day. Wher he3s 
is not a greet doer, that makith thes 
thingis ? and treuthe greet, and strenger 
biforn alle thingis? All ertlie clepith in-36 
wardly trouthe, also it blessith heuene, 
and alle werkis ben moued and dreden it; 
and ther is no wickid thing with it. 
Wickid kyng, and wickid wymmen, and 37 
alle the sones of men ben wickid, and ther 
is not treuthe in hem, and in her wickid- 
nesse thei schul perische; and treuthe3s 
dwellith, and wexith in to withouten ende, 
and it lyuith, and weldith, into worldus of 
worldis. It is not anentis treuthe to out-39 
take persoones, and differencis ; but it doth 


fandofc. f&loowj3z. htoina. iOm.c. 





IV. 41—52. 


ther is not in his dom wickednesse*, but 
strengthe, and reume, and power, and 
mageste of alle duringis aboue time. 
4t Blessid be the God of treuthe! And he 
lafte in speking. And alle puplis crieden, 
and seiden, Gret is treuthe, and beforn 
42 passeth. ‘Thanne the king seith to hym, 
Aske, if any thing thou wilt more ouer, 
than ther ben! writen, and I shal 3iue to 
thee, aftir that thon art founde wisere ; 
and next to™ me thou shalt sitte, and my 
43cosin thou shalt be clepid. Thanne he 
seith to the king, Be thou myndeful of 
the vou, that thou vouwidist, to bilde® 
Jerusalem, in the dai that® thou toke the 
44reume; and alle the vesselis, that ben 
taken of Jerusalem, to senden a3een, the 
whiche Cirus seuerede, whan he slo3 Ba- 
biloine, and wolde senden a3een thoo 
45thingus thider. And thou woldist bilden 
vp the teinple, that Idumeis brenden vp?, 
for Jude is put out of termes fro Caldeis. 
46 And now this is that I aske, lord, and 
that I bidde; this is maieste that of thee 
I aske, that thou do the vou, that thou 
vouwedist to the king of heuene, of thi 
47mouth. Thanne Darie, the king, risende 
kiste hym, and wrot epistolis to alle’ the 
dispensatouris, and prefectis, and purprid 
men, that thei shulden leden hym forth, 
and hem that with hym weren, alle ste3- 
48ende vp to bilde Jerusalem. And to alle 
the prefectis that weren in Cirie, and4 
Fenice, and Liban, he wrot epistolis, that 
thei shulden drawe cedre trees fro Liban 
in to Jerusalem, that thei bilde vp with 
49hem the cite. And he wrot to alle the 
Jewis, that stez3eden vp fro the reume in 
Jude, for fredam, alle my3ti man, and 
maister iuge, and prefect, to not comen 
s0ouer to the 3atus of hem, and eche re- 
gioun, that thei hadden weldid, to be free 
fro hem; and Idumeis laften the castelis, 
sithat thei weldeden of the Jewis, and in 
to the making of the temple to" 3iue bi 
3eris twenti talentis, vnto the time that 
s2it be ful bildid; and to offren ostis eche 


Ill. ESDRAS. 553 


tho thingis that ben ri3tful, to alle vnri5t- 
wise and yuel men; and alle men ben 
maad benyngne in his werkis. And ther 4o 
is not wickidnesse in his doom, but ther zs 
strengthe, and rewme, and power, and 
magestee of alle duryngis aboue tyme. 
Blessid be the God of treuthe! And 41 
thanne he lefte in spekynge. And alle 
the peplis crieden, and seiden, Grect is 
treuthe, and it passith bifore alle othere. 
Thanne the kyng seide to him, Aske, if 42 
thou wilt, ony thing more ouer, than ther 
ben writen, and I schal 3iue to thee, aftir 
that thou art founden wiser; and next to 
me thou schalt sitte, and thou schalt be 
clepid my cosyn. Thanne seide he to the 43 
king, Be thou myndeful of the vow3, that: 
thou vowidist, to bilden up Jerusalem, in 
the day in whiche thou toke the rewme; 
and to senden ajen alle the vessels, that 44 
ben taken fro Jerusalem, the whiche Cy- 
rus departide, whanne he slou3 Babiloyne, 
and wolde sende a3en thoo thingis thidere. 
And thou woldist bilde up the temple, that 45 
Ydumes brenden, for Judee is put out of 
her termes, o7 marchis, of the Caldeis. 
And now, lord, this it is that I aske, and 46 
that I bidde; this is the mageste that I 
aske of thee, that thon do the vow that 
thou vowidist to the kyng of heuen, of thi 
mouth. Thanne Darius, the kyng, risynge 47 
kisside him, and wroot epistlis to alle the 
dispensatours, and prefectis, and to men 
clothid in purpre, that thei schulden lede 
him forth, and hem that weren with him, 
alle wendynge up to bilde Jerusalem. And 48 
to alle the prefectis that weren in Sirie, 
and Fenyce, and Liban, he wroot' epistles, 
that thei schulden drawe cedre trees fro 
the Ai/Z Liban in to Jerusalem, that thei 
bilde up the citee with hem. And he4g 
wroot to alle the Jewis, that steyden up 
fro the rewme in Judee, for fredam, that 
ony man of power, or maistir iuge, and 
prefect, schulden not come ouer to the 
jatis of hem, and eche regioun, that thei 50 
hadden holde, to be fre fro hem; and that 


k wickenesse c. lig a, m Om, A. a bilde in c. © in whiche Ar. P Om. 4. q Om. c. 
t thei 4. 
VOL. It. 4B 


554 


dai vp on the place of sacrid thingus, as 
thei han heste ; othere ten talentus to of- 
53fren bi alle 3eris; and to alle men, that 
gon forth fro Babiloine, to make cite’, as 
fredam were, bothe to hem, and to the 
sonus of hem, and to alle the prestis that 
s4gon beforn. Forsothe he wrot’ and the 
quantite; and the sacrid stole he co- 
maundede to be 3iue, in the whiche thei 
ssshulden serue; and to the Leuitis he 
wrot to 3iue wagis, vnto the dai that the 
hous shulde be fulli endid, and Jerusalem 
56maad out; and to alle men kepende the 
cite he wrot, to 3iue to hem lotis and 
s7wagis. And he lafte alle the vesselis, 
that Cirus hadde seuered fro Babiloine ; 
and alle thingis, whateuere Cirus seide, 
also he comaundede to be don, and to be 
58sent to Jerusalem. And whan that 3unge 
man hadde go forth, rerende the face in 
to Jerusalem, he*s blesside the king of he- 
59 uene, and seide, Of thee is victorie, and 
of thee is wisdam, and clernesse, and I 
60am thy seruaunt. Blessid thou art, for 
thou hast 3iue to me wisdam, and I knou- 
61 leche to thee, Lord of oure fadris. And 
he toc the epistolis, and wente forth in to 
Babiloine ; and cam, and tolde to alle his 
62 brethern that weren in Babiloine. And 
thei blesseden the God of ther fadris, 
that 3af to hem for3iuenesse and refresh- 
63ing, that thei ste3en vp, and bilde Jeru- 
salem, and the temple, where is his name 
nemnyd in it; and thei iojeden ful out 
with musikis and gladnessys‘ seuene 
dajes. 


CAP. Vv. 


1 Aftir these thingus forsothe ben chosen, 
that thei ste3en vp, the princis of tounus, 
bi housis, bi ther linagis, and the wiues 
of hem, and sones and do3tris of hem, 
and seruauns and hand wymmen of hem, 


S cytees a. 


III. ESDRAS. 


88 Om. cerH. 


IV. 53-——V._I. 


Ydumeis leue up the castels of Jewis, that 
thei withholden, and to 3iue 3er bi 3ers1 
twenty talentis, in to making of the tem- 
ple, vnto the tyme that it be ful bildid; 
and ech day to offre ostis upon the places2 
of sacrid thingis, as thei ben comaundid ; 
to offre, bi alle 3eris, othere ten talentis; 
and to alle men, that gon forth fro Babi-s3 
loyne, to make the citee, as fredom were, 
bothe to hem, and to the sones of hem, 
and to the prestis that gon bifore. For-s54 
sothe also he wroot the quantitee; and he 
comaundide the sacrid stole, or vestyment, 
to be 3ouen, in whiche thei schulden serue ; 
and he wroot wagis to be 3ouen to thess 
dekens, vito the day that the hous schulde 
be fully endid, and Jerusalem maad out; 
and he wrot to alle men kepinge the citee, 56 
to 3iue to the bilders lottis and wagis. 
And he lefte hem alle the vessels, thats7 
Cirus had partid fro Babiloyn; and alle 
thingis, what euer Cyrus seide, he co- 
maundide z¢ to be don, and to be sent to 
Jerusalem. And whanne that 3ounge manss 
had gon forth, reisynge his face toward 
Jerusalem, he blesside the kyng of heuen, 
and seide, Of thee, Lord, is victorie, and 59 
of thee is wisdom, and clernesse, and I am 
thi seruaunt. Thou art blessid, for thou 60 
hast 3ouen to me wisdom, and I know- 
leche to thee, Lord of oure fadris. Ande 
he toke the epistlis, or lettres, and wente 
forth in to Babiloyne; and he came, and 
tolde to alle his bretheren, that weren in 
Babyloyne. And thei blessiden the God of ¢2 
her fadris, that 3af to hem for3iuenesse and 
refreschyng, that thei schulden stye up, 63 
and bilde Jerusalem, and the temple, where 
his name is nemned in it; and thei ioy- 
eden with musikis and with gladnesse 
seuen daies. 


CAP. V. 


Aftir thes thingis forsothe ther weren, 
pryncis chosen of townus, that thei schul- 
den wende up, bi housis, bi her lynagis, 
and the wyues of hem, and the sonus and 
dou3tris of hem, and seruauntis and hand 


t gladnes 4. 


V. 215. 


zand bestis of hem. And king Darie sente 
togidere with hem a thousend horse men, 
to the time that thei broj3ten hem in to 
Jerusalem, with pes, and with musikis, 
and timbres, and trumpis; and alle the 
3brethern weren pleiende. And he made 
4hem to stezen vp togidere with hem. And 
these ben the namis of the" men that 
ste3eden vp, bi their tounus, in to linagis, 
and in to part of the princehod of hem. 
5 Prestus ; the sonus of Finees, the sonus of 
Aron, Jesus, the sone of Josedech, Ja- 
chim, the sone of Sorobabel, sone of Sola- 
tiel, of the hous of Dauid, of the progenie 
of Fares, of the linage forsothe of Juda, 
sthat spac vnder Darie, king of Persis, 
merueilous doende woordis, in the se- 
cunde 3er of his regne’, in Aprill, the 
7firste moneth. Forsothe these ben, that 
of Juda ste3eden vp fro the caitifte of 
transmigracioun, whom Nabugodonosor, 
king of Babiloine, translatide into Babi- 
loine ; and is turned ajeen in to Jerusa- 
slem, and in to alle the cites of Jude, 
eche in to his cite, that camen with Soro- 
babel and Jesu; Neemias, Ariores, Eli- 
meo, Emanio, Mardocheo, Beelsuro, Meth- 
satothor, Olioro, Eboma, oon of the princis 
9of hem. And the noumbre fro the Jen- 
tilis of hem, fro the prouostis of hem ; the 
sonus of Fares, two thousend an hundrid 
1oand seuenti and two; the sonus of Ares, 
i) thre thousend fifti and seuene; the sonus 
of Femo, an hundrid and two and fourti; 
in the sonus of Jese and Joabes, a thou- 
i2send thre hundrid and two; the sonus of 
Denny, two thousend foure hundrid and 
seuenti; the sones of Choraba, two hun- 
drid and fiue; the sonus of Banycha, an 
i3hundrid and sixti and ei3te; the sonus of 
Bebeth, foure” hundrid and thre; the 
sonus of Archad, foure hundrid and se- 
i4uene and twenti; the sonus of Hau, 
seuene and thretti; the sonus of Sozaar, 
two thousend sixti and seuene; the sonus 
of Adymy, foure hundrid and oon and 
15 sixti; the sonus of Azeroectis, an hundrid 
and ei3te; the sonus of Ziazo and Zelas, 


2» Om. 4. 


III. ESDRAS. 


vrewme AH. 


4B2 


555 


maydens of hem, and her bestis. And2 
kyng Darye scende togidre with hem a 
thousynd hors men, to the tyme that thei 
brou3te hem in to Jerusalem, with pees, 
and with musikis, and tymbres, and trum- 
pis; and alle the britheren weren pleiynge. 
And he made hem to stie up togidre withs 
hem. And thes ben the names of the men, 4 
that 3eden up, bi her tounnes, in to lynagis, 
and in to part of the princehod of hem. 
Prestis ; the sones of Fynees, the sones of5 
Aaron, Jesus, the sone of Josedech, Joa- 
chim, the sone of Sorobabel, sone of Sala- 
thiel, of the hous of Dauid, of the pro- 
genye of Phares, of the lynage forsothe 
of Juda, that spac vndir Darij, king of¢ 
Persis, merueylous doynge wordis, in the 
secounde 3eer of his rewme, in Aprel, the 
firste monthe. Forsothe thes it ben, that7 
stieden up of Juda fro the caitiftee, or 
thraldom, of the transmygracioun, whom 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, trans- 
latide in to Babiloyne; and ech is turned 
a3en in to Jerusalem, and in to alle thes 
citees of Judee, ech in to his owne citee, 
that camen with Sorobabel, and with Jesu; 
Neemyas, Ariores, and Elymeo, Emmanyo, 
Mardocheo, Beelsuro, Methsatothor, Olioro, 
Eboma, oon of the princis of hem. Ando 
the noumbre fro the Gentiles of hem, fro 
the prouostis, 07 reeuys, of hem ; the sones 
of Phares, two thousynd an hundrid se- 
uenty and two; the sones of Ares, thre 10 
thousynd and fifty and seuen; the sones11 
of Phemo, an hundrid and two and fourty ; 
the sones of Jesu and of Joabes, a thou- 
synd thre hundrid and two; the sones of 12 
Denny, two thousynd foure hundrid and 
seuenty ; the sones of Choroba, two hun- 
drid and fyue; the sones of Banycha, an 
hundrid and sixty and ei3te ; the sones of 13 
Bebeth, foure hundrid and thre; the sones 
of Arcad, foure hundrid and seuen and 
twenty; the sones of Thau, seuen andi 
thritty; the sonis of Zozaar, two thou- 
synd sixty and seuen; the sones of Ady- 
my, foure hundrid and oon and sixty; the 15 
sones of Azeroectis, an hundrid and ei3te ; 


w thre £ pr. m. 


556 


an hundrid and seuene ; the sonus of Azo- 
roch, foure hundrid and nyne and thretty; 
isthe sonus of Jebdarbone, an hundrid and 
two and thretti; the sonus of Ananie, an 
hundridand thretti; ‘the sonus of Arsom” ; 
17the sonus of Marsar, foure hundrid and 
two and twenti*; the sonus of Saberns, 
ninti and fiue; the sonus of Sofelomon, 
isan hundrid and thre and twenti; the 
sonus of Nepobai, fiue and fifti ; the sonus 
of Echanatus, an hundrid and ei3te and 
fifti; the sonus of Ebeathamus, an hun- 
iodrid and two and thretti; the sonus of 
Octatarpatros, the whiche Enechades 
and Modie, foure hundrid and two and 
twenti; the whiche of Gramas and Ga- 
20 bia, an hundrid and oon and twenti; the 
whiche of Besellon and of Agie, fine and 
sixti; the whiche of Bascharo, an hun- 
21 drid and two and twenti; the whiche of 
Bethonobes, fiue and fifti; the sones of 
Lyptis, an hundred and fyue and fifty ; 
the sonus of Jabomy, thre hundrid and 
22 seuene and fifti; the sonus of Sichem, thre 
hundrid and seuenti; the sonus of Sana- 
don and Chomus, thre hundrid and se- 
23uenti and ei3te ; the sonus of Ericus, two 
thousend an hundrid and fiue and fifti; 
the sonus of Anaas, thre hundrid and se- 
aduenti. Prestis; the sonus of Jeddus, the 
sonus of Enitem, the sonusof Eliazib, thre 
hundrid and two and seuenti ; the sonus 
of Emmechus, two hundrid and two and 
25 fifti; the sonus of Sasurij, thre hundrid 
and seuene and fifti; the sonus of Caree, 
26two hundrid and seuene and twenti. Le- 
uitis ; the sonus of Jesu, in Caduel, and 
Banus, and Serebias, and Edias, foure 
and seuenti; al the noumbre fro the two” 
and twenti*® 3er, thretti thousend foure 
27hundrid and two and sixti; sones, and 
do3tris, and wiues, al the noumbring, 
sixti> thousend two hundrid and two and 
2sfourti. Sonus of prestis, that sungen in 
the temple; the sonus of Asaf, an hundrid 
29 and ei3te and twenti. Ussheris forsothe ; 
the® sonus of Esuem, the sonus of Ather, 
the sonus of Amon, the sonus of Accuba 
wOm. 4, 


2 thretth 4. yOm. a. 


III. ESDRAS. 


z twelfthe z pr. m. 


V. 16—29. 


the sonus of Ziazo and Zelas, an hundrid 
and senene; the sones of Azoroch, foure 
hundrid and nyne and thritty ; the sones 16 
of Jebdarbone, an hundrid and two and 
thritty ; the sones of Ananye, an hundrid 
and thritty; the sones of Arsom; the17 
sones of Marsar, foure hundrid and two 
and twenty ; the sones of Saberus, nynty 
and fyue; the sones of Sophelemon, an 
hundrid and thre and twenty; the sonesis 
of Nepobai, fyue and fifty; the sones of 
Ecbanatus, an hundrid and ei3t and fifty ; 
the sones of Ebethamus, an hundrid and 
two and thritty ; the sones of Octatarpa-19 
tros, the whiche weren clepid Emochadies 
and Modie, foure hundrid and two and 
twenti; thei that weren of Gramas and 
Gahia, an hundrid and oon and twenti; 
the whiche werez of Besellon and of Agie, 20 
fyue and sixty; thei that ‘weren of Bas- 
charo, an hundrid and two and twenty; 
the whiche of Bethonobes, fyue and fifty ; 21 
the sones of Lippis, an hundrid and fyue 
and fifty; the sones of Jabomy, thre hun- 
drid and seuen and fifty; the sones of22 
Sichem, thre hundrid and senenty; the 
sones of Sanadon and of Chamus, thre 
hundrid and seuenty and ei3te; the sones 23 
of Ericus, two thousynd an hundrid and 
fyue and fifty; the sones of Anaas, thre 
hundrid and seuenty. Prestis; the sones 24 
of Jeddus, the sones of Enytem, the sones 
of Eliazib, thre hundrid and two and se- 
uenty; the sones of Emmechus, two hun- 
drid and two and fifty; the sones of Sa-25 
surij, thre hundrid and seuen and fifty ; 
the sones of Charee, two hundrid and seuen 
and twenty. Dekens; the sonus of Jesu, 26 
in Caduel, and Banus, and Serebias, and 
Edias, foure and seuenty ; al the noumbre 
fro the two and twenty 3eer, thritti thou- 
synd foure hundrid and two and sixty ; 
sones, and dou3tris, and wyues, al thee7 
noumbryng, sixty thousynd two hundrid 
and two and fourty. The sones of prestis, 28 
that sungen in the temple; the sones of 
Asaph, an hundrid and ei3t and twenty. 
Vschers forsothe; the sones of Esueum, 29 
© of the 4. 


4 twentithe z. > fourti z pr. m. 


Vv. 30——39- 


Copa, the sonus of Tobi, alle an hundrid 
39 and nyne and thretti. Prestis, seruende 
in the temple; sonus of Sel, the sonus of 
Gasipa, the sonus of Tabloth, the sonus of 
Carie, the sonus of Su, the sonus of Fellu, 
the sonus of Labana, the sonus of Acma- 
tha, the sones of Accub, the sonus of Vta, 
the sonus of Ceta, the sonus of Agab, the 
sonus of Obai, the sonus of Anan, the sonus 
31 of Caima, the sonus of Juddu, the sonus of 
An, the sonus of Radin, the sonus of De- 
samyn, the sonus of Nechoba, the sonus 
of Saseba, the sonus of Gaze, the sonus of 
Osin, the sonus of Finoe, the sonus of 
Atren, the sonus of Baseem, the sonus of 
Aziana, the sonus of Manai, the sonus of 
Nafisim, the sones of Accufu, the sonus 
of Agista, the sonus of Aria Faucin‘, the 
32 sonus of Fasalon, the sonus of Meedda, the 
sonus of Fusia, the sonus of Careth, the 
sonus of Barchus, the sonus of Caree, the 
sonus of Thoesi, the sonus of Nasith, the 
33sonys of Agisti, the sonus of Pedon. Sal- 
mon, the sonus of hym, the sonus of 
Asoffoth, the sonus of Farida, the sonus 
of Theli, the sonus of Dedon, the sonus of 


34 Gaddahel, the sonus of Cefegi, the sonus’ 


of Aggia, the sonus of Facareth, the sonus 
of Sabathan, the sonus of Saranoth, the 
sonus of Malcie, the sones of Amee, the 
sonus of Safuy, the sonus of Addus, the 
sonus of Suba, the sonus of Eyra, the 
sonus of Rabatis, the sonus of Fasofath, 
35the sonus of Malmon. Alle in holi ser- 
uende; and the childer of Salomon, foure 
36 hundrid foure score and two. These ben 
the sonus, that stezeden vp Atheemel and 
Thersas; the princis of hem, Carmellam 
37and Careth ; and thei my3ten not tellen 
out ther cites, and progenies, what 
maner thei ben; and of Irael, the sonus of 
Dalarij, the sonus of Tubam, the sonus of 
38 Nechodaici. And of the prestis, that 
vseden presthod, and ben not founde ; the 
sonus of Obia, the sonus of Achisos, the 
sonus of Addin, that toc Vnim wif, of 
39 the do3tris of Fargelen, and ben clepid bi 
the name of hir; and of these is so3t the 


Ill. ESDRAS. 


557 


the sones of Ather, the sones of Amon, the 
sones of Accuba Copa, the sones of Thoby, 
alle an hundrid and nyne and _thritty. 
Prestis, seruynge in the temple ; sones of30 
Sel, the sones of Gasipa, the sones of Ta- 
bloth, the sones of Carie, the sones of Su, 
the sones of Phellu, the sones of Labana, 
the sones of Acmathi, the sotes of Accub, 
the sones of Vta, the sonus of Cetha, the 
sones of Agab, the sones of Obay, the 
sones of Anan, the sones of Chayma, the 
sones of Jeddu, the sones of An, the sones31 
of Radyn, the sones of Desamyn, the sones 
of Nechoba, the sones of Caseba, the sones 
of Gase, the sones of Osyn, the sones of 
Phynoe, the sones of Atren, the sones of 
Bascem, the sones of Aziana, the sones of 
Manay, the sones of Naphisym, the sones 
of Accuphu, the sones of Agista, the sonus 
of Aria Phausym, the sones of Phasaluon, 
the sones of Meeda, the sones of Phusia, 32 
the sones of Careth, the sones of Barthus, 
the sones of Caree, the sones of Thoesy, 
the sones of Nasith, the sones of Agisty, 
the sones of Pedon. Salmon, the sones of33 
hym, the sones of Asophoth, the sones of 
Pharida, the sones of Thely, the sones of 
Dedon, the sones of Gaddahel, the sones 
of Cephegy, the sones of Aggya, the sones 34 
of Phacareth, the sones of Sabathan, the 
sones of Saroneth, the sones of Malcie, the 
sones of Ame, the sones of Saphuy, the 
sones of Addus, the sones of Suba, the 
sones of Eirra, the sones of Rabatis, the 
sones of Phasophat, the sonus of Malmon. 
Alle thes weren in holy seruyng; and the 3s 
children of Salmon weren foure hundrid 
foure score and two. These ben the sones 36 
that 3eden up to Athemel and Thersas ; the 
princis of hem weren Carmellam and Ca- 
reth; aud theimy3ten not telle out hercitees, 37 
and her progenyes, what manere thei ben ; 
and of Israel, the sones of Dalarij, the sones 
of Tubam, the sones of Nechodaicy. And se 
of the prestis, that vsiden presthod, and 
weren founden; the sones of Obia, the 
sones of Achisos, the sones of Addyn, that 
token Vmyn wijf, of the dou3tris of Phar- 


4 the sonys of Faucin £ pr. m. 


558 


write genelogie of kinrede, and it is not 
founden, and thei ben forfendid to vse 
4opresthod. And Neemie seide to hem, 
and Ascaras®’, that thei take not part of 
the holi thingus, to the time that ther 
risef a ta3t bisshop, in to shewing and 
4ltreuthe. Als forsothe Irael was twelue 
thousend, out take seruauns and hand 
wymmen, two and fourti thousend thre 
42 hundrid and sixti. The seruauns of hem 
and hand wymmen, seuene thousend three 
hundrid and seuene and thretti; singeres 
and singeressis, two hundrid and fiue and 
43sixti®; camailis, foure hundrid and fiue 
and thretti; hors, seuen thousend sixe! 
and thretti; mulis, two hundrid thousend 
and fiue and fourti; bestis vnder 30c, fiue 
44thousend and fiue and twenti. And of 
thoo prouostis bi tounus, whil thei shul- 
den come in to the temple of God, that 
was in Jerusalem, to ben auouwid to 
rere the temple in his place, after ther 
45vertue; and to be 3iue in to the temple 
the* holi tresorie of werkis, eleue thou- 
send besauns, and prestis stolis an hun- 
4sdrid. And ther dwelten prestus, and 
Leuitus, and that weren of the fole in 
Jerusalem, and in the regioun; and the 
holi singeres, yssheris, aud al Irael, in 
47ther regiouns. In stondende forsothe the 
seuenthe moneth, and whan the sonus 
of Irael weren eche in his owne thingus, 
thei camen togidere of oon acord in to 
the porche, that was befor the est 3ate. 
48 And stondende Jesns, the sone of Jose- 
dech, and his brether, prestis, and So- 
robabel, the sone of Salatiel, and of this 
49the brether, maden redi an auter, that 
thei offre vpon it brent sacrifises, aftir 
thoo! thingus that in the boc of Moises, 
soman of God, ben writen. And _ ther 
camen to hem of othere naciouns of the 
Jond, and rereden the holi tresorie in his 
place, alle the fole of the lond; and thei 
offriden ostis, and morutide brent sacri- 
sifises to the Lord. And thei diden the 
feste of tabernaclis, and a solempne dai, 
as it is write in the lawe, and sacrifises 
& Om. a. 


© Esderas 4. farise au. 


HI. ESDRAS. 


h thretti «. 


V. 40——5S¢. 


gelen, and thei ben clepid bi the name of29 
hir; and of thes is soujt the genologie 
writen of the kynrede, and thei ben for- 
fendid to vsen presthode. And Neemye 40 
seide to hem, aud Astaras, that thei take 
not part of the hooly thingis, til the tyme 
that ther arijse a tau3t bischop, in to 
schewyng and treuthe. Al Israel forsothe 41 
was twelff thousynd, out take seruauntis 
and hand maidens, two aud fourty thou- 
synd thre hundrid and sixti. The ser-4e 
uauntis of hand maidens weren seuen 
thousynd thre hundrid and seuen and 
thritty ; syngers and singsters, two hun- 
drid and fyue and sixty ; cameils, foure 43 
hundrid and fyue and thritty; horsis, 
seuen thousind sixe and thritti; mules, two 
hundrid thousynd aud fyue and fourty ; 
bestis vndir 30k, fyue thousynd and fyue 
and twenty. And of tho prouostis, o7 44 
reeues, bi tounnes, while thei schulden 
come in to the temple of God, that was in 
Jerusalem, to ben avowid to rere up the 
temple in his place, aftir her vertue ; and 45 


_the hooly tresorie to be 30uen in to the 


temple of werkis, weren elleuen thousynd 
besauntis, and an hundrid prestis stolis. 
And ther dwelliden prestis, and dekens, 46 
and othere, that weren of the peple, in 
Jerusalem, and in the rewme; and the 
hooly syngers, and vsshers, and al Israel, 
in her regiouns. While the seuenthe47 
monthe 32 lastide, and whanne the 
sonus of Israel weren ech in his owne 
thingis, thei camen togidre of oon accord 
in to the porche, that was bifore the eest 
jate. And while Jesus, the sone of Jose-48 
dech, and his bretheren, prestis, stoden, 
and Sorobabel, the sone of Salatiel, and 
his bretheren, thei maden redy an auter, 
that thei wolden offre on it brent sacri- 49 
fices, aftir tho thingis that ben writen in 
the book of Moyses, the man of God. And 50 
ther camen to hem of othere naciouns of 
the loond, and reriden the holy tresorie in 
his place, alle the folk of the lond; and 
thei offriden oostis, and brent sacrifises of 
the morutijd to the Lord. And thei didens51 
K of a. 


iand sixe 4. lthe a. 


V. 52— 65. 


szeche dai, as it behouede™. And aftir 
these thingus the" ordeined offringus, and 
ostus of sabatis, and of newe mones, and 
530f alle halewid solempne dazes. And 
hou fele euere vouweden to the Lord, fro 
the newe mone of the seuenthe moneth, 
token® ostis to offre to God; and the 
temple of the Lord 3it was not bild vp. 
54 And thei 3eue monee to masonus, and to 
wri3tus, and drink and metus with io3e. 
55 And thei 3eue carris to Sidonyes and to 
Tires, that thei shulden carien ouer to 
hem fro Liban wode cedre bemus, and 
maken a naue in to Joppe hauene, aftir 
the decre that was write to them fro 
séCiro, king of Persis. And in the se- 
cunde 3er thei comende in to the temple 
of God, in to Jerusalem, the secunde 
moneth began Sorobabel, the sone of Sa- 
latiel, and Jesus, the sone of Josedech, 
and the brethern of hem, and prestis, 
and Leuitus, and alle that camen fro the 
s7caitifte in to Jerusalem; and foundeden 
the temple of God, in the newe mone of 
the secunde moneth of the secunde 3er, 
whan thei hadde comen in to Jude and 
58 Jerusalem ; and setten? Leuitus fro twenti 
jer vpon the werkis of the Lord. And 
Jesus stod, his sone, and brethern, alle 
Leuitus togidere castende, and foleweris 
out of the Jawe, and doende werkis in 
59the hous of the Lord. And ther stoden 
prestys, hauende stolis, with trumpis, 
and Leuitus, the sonus of Asaf, hauende 
cocymbalis, togidere preisende the Lord, 
and blessende, aftir Dauid, king of Irael. 
61 And thei sungen a song to the Lord, for 
his swetnesse and wrshipe in to worldis 
czvp on al Jrael. And al the puple with 
trumpe sungen, and crieden with gret 
vois, preisende togidere the Lord, in the 
esrering of the hous of the Lord. And 
ther camen of prestus, and of Leuitus, 
and of presidentus aftir the tounus, to 
the! elders that hadden seen the rathere 
64hous, and at the bilding vp of this, with 
cri, and with gret weiling; and manye 
65 With trumpis, and gret ioje, so that 


m is behouede c sec. m. 1. thei an. 


Ill. ESDRAS. 


°thei token & pr. m. 


559 


the feest of tabernaclis, and a solempne 
dai, as it is writen in the lawe, and sacri- 
fises ech day, as it bihouyde. And aftirs2 
thes thingis thei ordeyneden offryngis, and 
oostis of sabotis, and of newe mones, and 
of alle solempne daies halewid. And houss 
many euere vowiden to the Lord, fro the 
tyme of the newe moone of the seuenthe 
monthe, thei token oostis to offren to God ; 
and the temple of the Lord was not 3itt 
bildid up. And thei 3auen money to ma-54 
souns, and to wri3tis, and drynkis and 
metis with ioye. And thei j3auen carriss5 
to Sydonyes and to Tyres, that thei schul- 
den carie over to hem fro Lyban wode 
cedre beemes, and to make a nauee in to 
the haauen of Joppe, aftir the decree that 
was writen to hem fro Cyro, kyng of 
Persis. And in the secounde jeer thei s5¢ 
camen in to the temple of God, in to Je- 
rusalem; the secunde monthe Sorobabel 
biganne, the sone of Salatiel, and Jesus, 
the sone of Josedech, and the bretheren of 
hem, and prestis, and Leuytis, and alle 
thei that camen fro the caitiftee in to Je- 
rusalem ; and founden the temple of God, 57 
in the newe moone of the secunde monthe 
of the secunde 3eer, whanne thei hadden 
come in to Judee and to Jerusalem ; and 5s 
setten dekens fro the age of twenty 3eer 
upon the werkis of the Lord. And Jesus 
stode, his sone, and his bretheren, alle the 
dekens togidre castynge, and executours, 
or folewers, of the lawe, and doynge werkis 
in the hous of the Lord. And ther stodens9 
prestis, hauynge stoles, or longe clothis, 
with trumpis, and Leuytis, the sones of 
Asaph, hauynge cymbals, togidre preis- 60 
yng the Lord, and blessynge him, aftir the 
maner of Dauid, kyug of Israel. Ande 
thei sungen a song to the Lord, for his 
swetnesse and his worschip in to worldis, 
or euer, upon al Israel. And al the peple cz 
sungen with trumpe, and crieden with 
gret vois, preisynge togidre the Lord, in 
the rerynge of the Lordus hous. Andcs 
ther camen many of the prestis, and of 
dekens, and of presidentis aftir tounnes, 


Psenten 4. 4 Om. 4. 


560 


the puple herde not the trumpis, for 
the weiling of the puple. Forsothe a 
cumpanye was singende wrshipefulli in 
66 trumpe, so that afer it was herd. And 
the enemis herden tlie linagis of Juda 
and of Beniamyn, and camen to wite, 
67 what was the vois of the trumpes. And 
thei knewen, for thei that weren of the 
caitifte bilden the temple to the Lord 
68God of Irae]. And comende nee} to So- 
robabel, and to Jesu, and to the prouostis 
of tounus, seiden to hem, Wee shul bilde 
69 togidere with 3o0u. Lic maner forsothe 
wee han herd of" oure Lord, and we to- 
gidere han go fro the dajes of Asbasa- 
reth, king of Assiries, that wente ouer 
zohennus. And seide to hem Sorobabel, 
and Jesue, and the princis of the tounus 
7tof Irael, It is not to vs and to 3ou to 
bilden vp the hous of oure God; we for- 
sothe alone shul bilden the hous of oure 
God, aftir thoo thingus, that Cirns, king 
z2of Persis, comaundede. The Jentilis for- 
sothe of the lond leuende to them that 
ben in Jude, and rerende vp the werk of 
the* bilding, and aspies and puple bring- 
ende forth, forfendeden hem to bilden 
73vp3; and letteden the men, hauntende the 
goingus to, that the bilding shulde not 
ben endid al the time of the lif of king 
Ciri ; and thei drowen along the making 
vp bi two 3er, vn to the regne of Darie. 


CAP. VI. 


t In the secunde forsothe 3er of the regne 
of Darie profeciede Agge, and Sacharie, 
the sone of Addin, profete, anent Jude 
and in Jerusalem, in the naine of the 
2Lord God of Irael, vpon hem. Thane 
stondende Sorobabel, the sone of Salatiel, 
and Jesus, the sone of Jesedech, begun- 
nen to bilden vp the hous of the Lord, 
3that is in Jerusalem; whan ther weren 


r Om. au. 


II. ESDRAS. 


Vv. 66—VI. 3. 


to the eldris that hadden seen the rather 
hous, and at the bildyng up of this hows, 64 
with cry, and with greet weilyng; and 
many with trumpis, and gret ioye, so that 6s 
the peple herde not the trumpis, for the 
gret weilyng of the peple. Forsothe ther 
was a cumpeny syngynge wirschipfully in 
trumpe, so that it was herd a ferr. Andee 
the enmyes herden the lynagis of Juda 
and of Beniamyn, and camen to wite, 
what was this vois of trumpis. And thei ¢7 
knewen, that thei that weren of the cai- 
tiftee bildiden the temple to the Lord God 
of Israel. And the enmyes comynge ni3 ¢ 
to Sorobabel, and to Jesu, and to the 
reeues of tounnes, thei seiden to hem, We 
schul bilde togidre with 3ou. In lijkeg 
maner forsothe we haue herd oure Lord, 
and we haue gon togidre from the daies of 
Asbasareth, kyng of Assiriens, that ouer 
passide fro hennes. And Sorobabel, and 7 
Jesus, and the princis of the tounnus of 
Israel seiden to hem, It longith not to us72 
and to 30u fogidere to bilde up the hous 
of oure God ; forsothe we aloone shu] bilde 
the hous of oure God, aftir tho thingis, 
that Cyrus, kyng of Persis, comaundide: 
The Gentiles forsothe of the loond leuynge 72 
with hem that ben in Judee, and rerynge 
up the werk of bildyng, and bringynge 
forth bothe aspies and peple, thei for- 
fendiden hem to bilden up; and thei let-73 
tiden men, hauntynge the goynges to, that 
the bildyng shulde not be endid in al the 
tyme of the lijf of the kyng Ciry; and 
thei drowen along the makyng up bi two 
3eer, vnto the regne of Darij. 


CAP. VI. 


Forsothe in the secounde 3eer of thei 
rewme of Darij, Agge propheciede, and 
Zacharias, the sone of Addyn, a prophete, 
anentis Judee and in Jerusalem, in the 
name of the Lord God of Israel, upon 
hem. Thanne stondynge Sorobabel, the2 
sone of Salathiel, and Jesus, the sone of 
Josedech, thei bigunnen to bilde up the 
hous of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem; 


8 Om. AH. 


VI. 4—16. 


nee3 to hem profetis of the Lord, and 
holpent hem. In that time cam to hem 
Cisennes, the vnder litil king of Cirie and 
of Fenices, and Satrabosones, and ther 
4felawis. And thei seiden to hem, Who 
comaundende to 30u, this hous 3e bilden, 
and this rof, and othere manie thingus 
3ee parformen ? and who ben the bilders, 
5that these thingus bilden vp? And the 
’ visiting don vp on hem that weren of the 
caitifte, hadden grace of the Lord the 
celders of Irael; and thei ben not lettid 
to bilden vp, to the time that it were 
signefied to Darie of alle these thingus, 
zand an answere were taken. The saum- 
ple of the epistil, that to Darie senten 
Cisennes, vnder king of Cirie and of 
Fenyces, and Satrobosanes, and ther 
felawis, in Cirie and in Fenice reuleris. 
8To king Darie, greeting. Alle thingus 
knowen be thei to the lord the king ; for 
whan we camen in to the regioun of 
Jude, and wenteu in to Jerusalem, wee 
founde men bildende a gret hous of God, 
gand a temple of grete poolisht stones, 
1oand of precious materes in wallis; and 
thoo werkis besili to be maad, and to 
helpe, and" to make welsum in the 
hondis of hem, and in alle glorie, as most 
i diligentli to be parformed. ‘Thanne wee 
askeden the eldere men, seiende, Who 
suffrende 3ee bilden to 3ou this hous, and 
wthese werkus founden? Therfore for- 
sothe wee askeden hem, that knowen 
wee my3ten make to thee the men, and 
the prouostis; and the writing of the 
namis of the prouostus wee askeden hem. 
13 And thei answerden to vs, seiende, We 
ben the seruauns of the Lord, that made 
i4heuene and erthe; and this hous was 
bild beforn these manie 3eris of the king 
of Irael, gret, and most strong, and it is 
isful endid. And for oure fadris weren 
terrende and synneden’ in the God of 
Trael, he toe hem in to the hondus of 
Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloine, king 
wof Caldeis; and this hous destrojende 
brenden vp, and the puple caitif bro3ten 


t helpeden ay. 4Om. 4. 
VOL. II. 


III. ESDRAS. 561 


whanne ther weren ni3 to hem prophetis3 
of the Lord, and helpiden hem. In that 
tyme came to hem Cysennes, the vndir 
litil kyng of Cirye and of Fenycis, and 
Satrabozanes, and her felawis. And thei4 
seiden to hem, Who comaundide to 3o0u, 
that 3e bilden this hows, and this roof, 
and many othere thingis 3e perfourmen ? 
and who ben tho bilders, that bilden up 
thes thingis? And the eldre men of Is-s 
rael hadden grace of the Lord, whanne 
the visitacioun of hem was maad upon 
hem that weren of the caitifte; and theic 
weren not lettid to bilden up, to the tyme 
that it were signified to Darij of alle thes 
thingis, and an answere were taken a3en. 
This is the ensaumple of the lettre, that7 
Cysennes, the vndir kyng of Cyrie and of 
Fenyees, and Satrobosanes, and her fe- 
lawis, rewlers in Sirye and in Fenyce, 
senden fo the king. To kyng Darye, 
gretyng. Alle thingis be thei knowen tos 
the lord the kyng; forsothe whanne we 
eamen in to the regioun of Judeé, and 
wenten in to Jerusalem, we founden men 
bildynge a greet hous of God, and a temple9 
of gret polishid stones, and of precious 
maters in the wallis ; and tho werkis besily 10 
in makynge, and to help, and to make wel- 
sum in the hondis of hem, and in al glorie, 
ful diligently to be perfourmyd. Thanne1 
we askiden the eldre men, seiynge, Who 
suffride 30n to bilde this hous, and to bilde 
thes werkis? Therfor forsothe we askiden 12 
hem, that we my3ten make knowen to thee 
the men, and the prouostis, o7 euys ; and 
we askiden hem the writyng of the names 
of the maistris of the werk. And thei an-13 
sweriden to vs, selynge, We ben seruauntis 
of the Lord, that made bothe heuen and 
erthe; and this hous was bild bifore thes 14 
many 3eris of the kyng of Israel, that was 
greet, and a ful strong kyng, and it was 
destried a3en. And for oure fadris terriden 15 
and synneden ajen God of Israel, he bitook 
hem in to the hondis of Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, kyng of Caldeis ; and 16 
thei destrieden and brenden up this hous, 


¥ thei synneden a. w and he 4. 


AC 


562 


17in to Babiloyne. In the firste 3er reg- 
nende Ciro, king of Babiloine, king Cirus 
iswrot to bilden vp this hous; and thoo* 
holi goldene vesselis and siluerene, that 
Nabugodonosor hadde born awei fro the 
hous, that is in Jerusalem, and hadde 
sacrid hem in his temple, eft king Cirus 
bro3te them forth fro the temple that 
was in Babiloyne, and ben take to Soro- 
babel, and to Salmanasar, vndir litil king. 
i9 And it is comaundid to hem, that thei 
offren these vesselis, and lein vp in the 
temple, that was in Jerusalem, and that 
temple of God to bilden vp in that place. 
20 Thanne Salmanasar vnder leide the foun- 
demens of the hous of the Lord, that is 
in Jerusalem ; and fro thennus vn to now 
21is bild vp, and toc no ful ending. Now 
thanne, if it is demed of thee, O king! be 
it parfitli so3t in the kingis libraries of 
22king Ciri, that ben in Babilome; and if 
it were founden in the counseil of king 
Ciri, to ben begunne the making of the 
hous of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem, 
and it shal be shewid of the lord oure 
king, wrijte he of these thingus to vs. 
23 Thanne king Darie comaundede to ben 
inwardli so3t in the librarijs; and ther 
is founde in Egbatenis, bur3toun, that 
is in the myddel regioun, o place, in the 
24whiche weren writen these thingus. The 
firste 3er regnende Ciro king, Cirus co- 
maundede the hous of the Lord, that is 
in Jerusalem, to bilden vp, where thei 
25 brenden with’ contynuel fijr; whos hei3te 
is maad of ten cubitis, and breede of 
fourti cubitus, squarid with thre polisht 
stonus, and with soleer tree of the same 
regioun, and with oon newe soleer; and 
costus to be 3iuen of the hous of king 
26Cirus; and the holi vesselis of the hous 
of the Lord, both goldene and siluerene, 
that Nabugodonosor bar awei, that thei 
be put thider in to” the hous, that is in 
27 Jerusalem, where thei weren put. And 
lie comaundede besinesse to don Cisen- 
nem, vnder litil king of Cirie and Fe- 
nice, and Satrabusanam, and his felawis, 


x the F. 


Ill. ESDRAS. 


y Om. c. 


VI. 17——27. 


and thei brou3ten the peple maad thral in 
to Babiloyne. In the first 3eer regnynge 17 
Cyro, kyng of Babiloyne, kyng Cyrus 
wroot to bilden up this hous; and thois 
hooly golden vessels and silueren, that 
Nabugodonosor had born awey fro the 
hous of God, that is in Jerusalem, and 
had sacrid hem in his temple, efte kyng 
Cyrus brou3te hem forth fro the temple 
that was in Babiloyn, and thei weren bi- 
take to Sorobabel, and to Salmanasar, the 
vndir litil kyng. And it was comaundid 19 
to hem, that thei offre thes vessels, and 
thei schulde ley hem up in the temple, 
that was in Jerusalem, and to bilde up 
that temple of God in that place. Thanne 20 
Salmanasar vndirleide the foundementis of 
the hous of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem; 
and fro thennes vn to now is a bildynge, 
and hath take no ful endyng. Now thanne, 21 
O kyng! if it is demed of thee, that it be 
perfitly sou3t in the kyngis libraries of 
kyng Cyry, that ben in Babiloyne; and if22 
it were foinden in the counseil of kyng 
Ciry, the makyng of the hous of the Lord, 
that is in Jerusalem, to be bigunnen, and 
if it schal be schewid of the lord oure 
kyng, write he to vs of thes thingis. 
Thanne kyng Darie comaundid to ben23 
ynwardly sou3t in the libraries; and ther 
was founden in Egbathanys, a borou3 
town, that is in the myddil regioun, a 
place, in the whiche weren wreten thes 
thingis. The firste jer regnynge Cyro2s 
kyng, Cyrus comaundide to bilden up the 
hous of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem, 
where thei brenden with contynuel fijr; 
whos heiz3t was maad of Ix. cubitis, and 25 
the brede of sixty cubitis, squarid with 
thre polischid stones, and with soler tree 
of the same regionn, and with o newe 
soler; and costis to be 3ouen of the hous 
of king Cyrus; and the holy vessels of 26 
the hous of the Lord, bothe golden and 
silueren, that Nabugodonosor bare awey, 
that tho be putt thidere in to the hous, 
that is in Jerusalem, where thei weren 
put. And he comaundide Cysennem, the27 


z Om. 4. 


VI. 28—VII. 4. 


and thei that weren in Cirie and in Fe- 
nice ordeineden reuleris, that thei ab- 
28stene them fro the same place. And I 
also comaundede al to maken vp, and 
forth lookide, that thei helpe them that 
ben of the caitifte of Jewis, to the time 
that the temple of the hous of the Lord 
29 be ful endid; and of the trauaile of the 
tributus of Cirie Choeles and Fenices dili- 
gentli a quantite to be 3iue to these men, 
to the sacrifise of the Lord, to Soroba- 
bel, prefect, to bolis, and wetheris, and 
30lambis; also forsothe and whete, and 
salt, and win, and oile, besili bi alle 3eris, 
as the prestus, that ben in Jerusalem, or- 
deineden to be fulfild eche dai, with oute 
siany delai; that ther ben offrid offringus 
of likourus to the heizeste God, for the 
king, and his childer, and pre3e for the 
32hf of hem. And be it denounsid, that 
whoso euere ouer passen*? any thing of 
these thingus that ben writen, or despisen, 
be ther taken a tree of ther own pro- 
per, and be thei hangid, and the goodis 
330f hem to the king be eschetid. Therfore 
and the Lord, whos name is inwardli 
clepid there, outlawe eche king and fole, 
that strecchen out ther hond to forfenden, 
or to euele treten that hous of the Lord, 
34that is in Jerusalem. I, king Darie, haue 
maad a decre, to be don as most dili- 
gentli aftir these thingis. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Thanne Cisennes, vnder liti] king of 
Choelem Cirie and Fenicem, and Satra- 
busanes, and the felawis, obesheden’ to 
these thingus, that of king Darye weren 
2demed, stoden in to the holi werkis most 
diligentli, togidere werkende with the 
eldere men of Jewis, princis of Cirie. 
3And the sacrid holi werkis ben made 
welsum, profeciende Agge and Sacarie, 
4profetus. And alle thingus thei fulfilden, 
bi the heste of the Lord God of Irael, 
and of the counseil of Ciri, and of Darie, 


II. ESDRAS. 563 


vndir litil kyng of Cyrie and Fenyce, and 
Satrabusanam, and his felawis, to do her 
bisynesse, and thei that weren in Sirie 
and Fenyce ordeyneden rewlers, that thei 
schulden absteyne them fro the same place. 
And I also comaundide to make ¢¢ up al, 28 
and I lokide forth, that thei help them 
that ben of the caitiftee of Jewis, vnto the 
tyme that the temple of the hous of the 
Lord be full endid ; and a quantitee to be 29 
3ouen diligently to these men of the tra- 
ueile of the tributis of Sirye Choles and 
Fenyces, to the sacrifice ofthe Lord, to 
Sorobabel, the prefect, to bolis, and we- 
theris, and to lombis; also forsothe bothe 30 
whete, and salt, wyn, and oile, bisily bi 
alle 3eris, as the prestis, that ben in Jeru- 
salem, ordeyneden to be fulfillid eche day, 
withoute ony delay; adso that ther bes 
offrid offryngis of licours to the hizest 
God, for the kyng, and for his children, 
and preie thei for the lijf of hem. And32 
be it denounsid, that who so euer ouer 
passen ony thing of these thingis that ben 
wreten, outher despisen, be ther taken a 
tree of her owne, and be thei hangid 
theron, and her goodes be ethchetid to 
the kyng. Therfor also the Lord, whos 3 
name is ynwardly clepid there, outlawe 
he eche kyng and folk, that strecchen out 
her hoond to offende, or to yuele trete 
that hous of the Lord, that is in Jerusa- 
lem. I, kyng Darie, hane maad a decree, 34 
to be don as moost diligently after thes 
thingis. 
CAP. VII. 

Thanne Cysennes, the litil vndir kyng1 
of Choelem Cyrie and Fenycen, and Satra- 
busanes, and her felawis, obeisheden to 
these thingis, that weren demyd of kyng 
Darie, and stoden ful diligently in to thee 
hooly werkis, wirchinge togidre with the 
eldre men of Jewis, princis of Cirie. And 3 
the hooly werkis ben maad welsum, as 
the prophetes Agge and Zacharie prophe- 
cieden. And thei fulfilliden alle thingis, 4 
aftir the heest of the Lord God of Israel, 
and aftir the counseil of Cyri, and of 


a passith a. 


4c 2 


564 


“sand of Artaxerse, king of Persis. And 
oure hous is endyd, vnto the thre and 
tweutithe dai of the moneth of March, 

sthe sixte 3er of king Darie. And the 
sonus of Irae] diden, and the prestis, and 
Leuitus, and othere that weren of the 
caitifte, that ben set to, after thoo thingus 
that ben writen in the boc of Moises. 

7And thei offriden in to the dedicacioun 
of the temple of the Lord, bolis, an hun- 
drid; wetheris, two hundrid; lambis, 
sfoure hundrid; kidis for the synnes of 
al Irael, twelue, after the noumbre of the 
olinagis of Irae]. And the prestus stoden, 
and Lenitus, clad‘ the stolis, bi the linagis, 
vypon the werc of the Lord God of Irael, 
after the boc of Moises ; and vssheris bi 
toalle the 3atis. And the sonus of Irael 
diden, with hem that weren of the cai- 
tifte, that pasch, the mone of the firste 
moneth, fourtene, whan ben halewid the 

1 prestis and the Leuitus. And alle the 
sonus of caitifte ben not togidere halewid, 
for alle the Leuitus ben togidere halewid. 

12 And thei offriden pasch to alle the sonus 
of caitifte, and to ther brethern, prestis, 

izand to hemself, And the sonus of Irael 
eeten, that weren in® the caitifte, alle 
that hadden laft fro alle the cursidnessis 
of the Jentilis of the erthe, sechende the 

14 Lord; and thei haleweden the feste dai 
of therue loues, seuene dajes etende in 

isthe si3te of the Lord; for he conuertide 
the counseil of the king of Assiris in 
hem, to coumforte the hondus of hem to 
the werkis of the Lord God of Ivael. 

1 And after this, regnende Artaxerse, king 
of Persis, wente to Esdras, the sone of 
Azarie, sone of Elchie, sone of Salome, 

2sone of Sadduch, sone of Achitob, sone 
of Ameri, sone of Azaei, sone of Bocce, 
sone of Abisae, sone of Finees, sone of 
Eleasar, sone of Aron, firste preest. 

3This Esdras stejede vp fro Babiloine, 
whan he was scribe, and: witti in the 
lawe of Moises, that is 3iuen of the Lord 
40f Irael, to sein and to do. And the 
king 3af to hym glorie, that he hadde 


¢ clothede 4Erz. 


lI. ESDRAS. 


VIL. 5-—VHI. 4. 


Darij, and of Artaxersis, kyng of Persis. 
And oure hous is endid, in the three ands 
twentithe dai of the monthe of Marche, 
in the sixte 3eer of kyng Darij. And thes 
sones of Israel, and the prestis, and de- 
kens, and othere that weren of the caitiftee, 
the whiche ben sett to, diden aftir thoo 
thingis that ben writen in the book of 
Moyses. And thei offreden in to the dedi-7 
catioun of the temple of the Lord, an hun- 
drid bolis, two hundrid wetheris, foure 
hundrid lambren, twelue kides, for thes 
synnes of al Isracl, after the noumbre of 
the xij. lynages of Israel. And the prestis 9 
and dekens stoden, clothid with the stclis, 
bi her lynagis, upon the werkis of the 
Lord God of Israel, aftir the book of 
Moyses; and ther weren porters bi alle 
the 3atis. And the sones of Israel diden 10 
that pask, with hem that weren of the 
caitiftee, in the moone of the first inonthe, 
the fourtenthe day, whanne the prestis 
and dekens ben halewid. And alle thei 
sones of caitiftee thei ben not halewid to- 
gidre, for alle the Leuytis ben halewid 
togidere. And thei offreden pask to ale12 
the sones of caitiftee, and to her bretheren, 
prestis, and to them selff. And the sonus1s 
of Israel, the whiche weren of the caitiftee, 
alle thei that hadden left fro alle the 
cursidnessis of Gentiles, 07 hethen folk, 
of the eerthe, eeten, and sou3ten the Lord ; 
and thei halewiden the feest day of therff 14 
looues, seuene daies etynge in sizt of the 
Lord; for he conuertide the counseil of 15 
the kyng of Assirijs in hem, to coumforte 
the hondis of hem to the werkis of the 
Lord God of Israel. And aftir this, while1 
Artaxerse, kyng of Persis, regnyde, ther 
wente to Esdras, a man that was the sone 
of Azarie, sone of Elehie, sone of Salome, 
sone of Sadduch, sone of Achitob, sone of2 
Amiarie, sone of Aza, sone of Bocce, sone 
of Abisae, sone of Phynees, sone of Elea- 
zar, sone of Aaron, the first preest. Thiss 
Esdras stiede up fro Babiloyne, whanne 
he was scribe, and witty in the lawe of 
Moyses, the whiche was 3ouen of the Lord 


4 of & pr. m. 


VIII. 5——14. 


founde grace in alle dignete, and desijr, 
sin the sijte of hym®. And ther ste3eden 
vp togidere with hym of the sonus of 
Irael, and prestis, and Leuitus, and holi 
singeres of the temple, and vssheris, and 
seruauns of the temple, in to Jerusalem. 
6 The seuenthe 3er regnende Artaxerse, in 
the fifte monyth, this is the seuenthe 3er 
of the regne, goende out forsothe fro 
Babiloine in the newe mone of the fifte 
z7moneth, thei camen to Jerusalem, after 
the‘ hestus of hym, after the 3iuen , pros- 
perite of the weie to hem of that Lord. 
8In these thingys forsothe Esdras weldede 
gret discipline, lest he passide biside any 
thing of thoo thingis that weren of the 
lawe of the Lord, and hestus, and in 
techende al Irael alle ri3twesnesse and 
ydom. Comende forsothe nee3 thei that 
writen the writen thingus of king Arta- 
xerses, token writen that, that cam fro 
king Artaxerses to Esdras, prest, and 
redere of the lawe of the Lord, of whiche 
thinge the exsaumple is leid vnder. 


CAP. VIII. 


109 King Artaxerse to Esdre, prest, and 
redere of the lawe of the Lord, greeting. 
11 More benygne I demende also to bene- 
fetus, comandede to hem that desiren of 
the fole of Jewis ther owne thingus wil- 
fulli, and of the prestis, and Leuits, that 
ben in my reume, to felashipen with thee 
izin to Jerusalem. Thane if any couetten 
to go with thee, come thei togidere, and 
go thei forth, as it pleseth to me, and to 
13my seuene frendis counseileris ; that thei 
visite thoo thingus, that ben don after 
Jude and Jerusalem, kepende the® lawe, 
as thou hast in the lawe of the Lord; 
isand bere thei 3iftus to the Lord of Irael, 
the whiche I knew3, and the frendis of 
Jerusalem, and al the gold and siluer, 


€ hem c pr. m. 


Ill. ESDRAS. 


f Om. 4. 


565 


of Israel, to sey zt and do zt. And thes 
kyng 3aaf to him glorie, that he hadde 

founden grace in al dignytee, and in de- 

sijr, in the si3t of him. And ther stiedes 
up with him in to Jerusalem of the sones 

of Israel, bothe prestis, and dekens, and 

holy syngers of the temple, and vsshers, 

and seruauntis of the temple. In the se-« 
uenthe 3eer regnynge Artaxerse, in the 

fifthe monthe, this is the seuenthe 3eer of 

the rewme, goynge out forsothe fro Babi- 

loyne in the newe moone of the fifte 

monthe, thei camen to Jerusalem, aftir7 
the heestis of him, whanne the prosperitee 

of the wey was grauntid to hem of that 

Lord. In these thingis forsothe Esdras» 
weldide greet discipline, lest he passide 

ony thing of tho thingis that weren of 
the lawe of the Lord, and of the heestis, 

and in techynge al Israel al riz3twisnesse 

and doom. Thei forsothe that writen they 
writyngis of kyng Artaxerses, comynge 

ni3*, token writen that, that came from 

kyng Artaxerses to Esdras, the prest, and 

redere of the lawe of the Lord, the en- 

saumple of the whiche thing writen is 

sett next aftir. 


CAP. VIII. 


Kyng Artaxerses to Esdre, the prest, 1 
and redere of the lawe of the Lord, sendith 
gretyng. More benygne I demynge also11 
to benefetis, comaundide to hem that de- 
siren of the folke of Jewis their owne 
thingis wilfully, and of the prestis, and 
of dekens, that ben in my rewme, to felaw- 
schipe with thee in to Jerusalem. Thanne i2 
if ony coueiten to gon with thee, come 
thei togidre, and go thei forth, as it plesith 
to me, and to my seuene frendis coun- 
seilers; that thei visite tho thingis, thats 
ben don aftir Jude and Jerusalem, kepinge 
the lawe, as thou hast in the lawe of the 
Lord; and bere thei 3iftis to the Lord of is 
Israel, whom I knew, and the frendis of 
Jerusalem, and al the gold and the siluer, 


gin the c. 


a ni3 to Esdras 1 pr. m. 


566 III. ESDRAS. 


that were founden in the regioun of Ba- 
biloine, to the Lord in Jerusalem, with 
isthat that is 3iuen of that fole in the 
temple of the Lord, of hem that is in 
Jerusalem ; that be gedered this gold and 
siluer, and to bolis, and wetheris, and 
lambis, and kidis, and that to these ben 
isecouenable; that thet offre ostis to the 
Lord, vp on the anter of the Lord of hem, 
17that is in Jerusalem. And alle thingus 
what euere thou wilt with" thi brethern 
don, with gold and siluer parforme, for 
the wil, after the heste of the Lord thi 
18God. And the sacride holi vesselis, that 
ben 3ine to thee, to the werkis of the 
hous of the Lord thi God, that is in Je- 
19yusalem, and othere thingus, what euere 
to thee wiln helpen to the werkis of the 
temple of thi God, thou shalt 3iue of the 
20kingis tresorie, whan thou wilt with thi 
brethern maken, with gold and siluer ; 
and parforme thou aftir the wil of thi 
21 Lord. And I, king Artaxerses, haue co- 
maundid to the keperis of the tresories 
of Cirie and of Fenice, that what euere 
thingus Esdras, prest, and redere of the 
lawe of the Lord, write fore, besili be it 
3iue to hym, vnto an hundrid talentis of 
2esiluer, lic maner and of gold; and vnto 
an hundrid busshelis of whete, and an 
hundrid vesselis of win, and othere 
thingis, what euere abounden, with oute 
23taxing. Alle thingus after the lawe of 
God be don to the heiz3este God, lest par- 
auenture rise! vp wrathe in the reume of 
the king, and of the sone, and of] the sones 
210f hym. To 30u forsothe is seid, that to 
alle the prestis, and Leuitus, and holi 
singeres, and seruauns of the temple, and 
25scribis of this temple, no tribute, ue any 
other forfending be born to, ne hane 
any man power to a3en casten any thing 
26to hem. Thou forsothe, Esdras, aftir the 
wisdam of God ordeine domesmen and 
arbitrouris, in al Cirie and Fenice, and 
alle that the lawe of thi God knewen, 
27teche; that hou fele euere ouerpasse the 
lawe, bisili be thei punshid, or bi deth, 


h that 4. 


VHI. 15-—27. 


that weren founde in the rewme of Babi- 
loyne, be it born to the Lord in Jerusalem, 
with that that is 30uen of thilke folk in15 
the temple of the Lord, of hem that is in 
Jerusalem; that this gold be gederid and 
siluer, to bolis, and wetheris, and to lambis, 
and kides, and that to these ben couenable; 
that thei offren oostes to the Lord, upon 16 
the auter of the Lord of hem, that is in 
Jerusalem. And alle thingis what euer17 
thou wilt do with thi bretheren, perfourme 
it with gold and siluer, for ¢hz will, aftir 
the heest of the Lord thi God. And the 1s 
sacrid hooly vessels, the whiche weren 
3ouen to thee, to the werkis of the Lordis 
hous, thi God, that is in Jerusalem, and ig 
othere thingis, what euere woln helpe to 
the werkis of the temple of thi God, thou 
schalt 3iuen 7 of the kyngis tresorie, 
whanne thou wilt maken the werk with :o 
thi bretheren, with gold and silner; and 
parfourme thou ad thing aftir the will of 
thi Lord. And I, kyng Artaxerses, haue 21 
comaundid to kepers of the tresours of 
Cirye and of Fenyce, that what euer 
thingis Esdras, the preest, and redere of 
the lawe of the Lord, wrijte fore, bisily 
be it 3ouen to him, vn to an hundrid ta- 
lentis of siluer, also and of gold; and vnto22 
an hundrid busshelis of whete, and an 
hundrid vessels of wyn, and othere thingis, 
what euer abounden, withoute taxynge. 
Alle thingis be don to the hiest God, aftir 23 
the lawe of God, lest perauenture wraththe 
arijse up in the rewme of the kyng, and 
of his sone, and of the sones of him. To2za 
3ou forsothe it was seid, that to alle the 
prestis, and dekens, and to holy syngers, 
and seruauntis of the temple, and to scribis 
of this temple, no tribute, no ony oother2s 
forfendyng be born to hem, ne haue ther 
ony man power to ajen caste ony thing 
tohem. Thou forsothe, Esdras, aftir the 26 
wisdom of God ordeyne domesmen and 
arbitrours, in al Cirye and Fenyce, and 
teche alle that knowen the lawe of thi 
God ; that hou fele euere passen the lawe, 27 
thei be besely punyshid, or bi deth, or bi 


iarijse aeFu. J Om. c. 


VILL. 28—45. 


or bi torment, or also bi multing of 
28monee, or bi seuering awei. And Esdras, 
scribe, seide, Blessid be the Lord God of 
oure fadris, that jaf this wil in to the 
herte of the king, to clarifieu his hous, 
zythat is in Jerusalem; and me hath 
wrshipid -in the si3te of the king, and 
counseileris, and his frendis, and of his 
30 purprid men. And I am maad stedefast 
in inwit, after the helping of the Lord 
oure God; and I gederede of Irael men, 
that thei shulden stezen vp togidere with 
stme. And these ben the prouostis, after 
ther kuntres, and porciounelis) prince- 
hodis of hem, that with me ste3eden vp 
fro Babiloine, in the reume of Artaxersis. 
32Of the sonus of Fares, Jersomus; of the 
sonus of Ciameruth, Amenus; of the sonus 
330f Dauid, Accus, the sone of Cecelie; of 
the sonus of Fares, Zacharie, and with 
hym ben turned ajeen an hundrid men 
34and fifti; of the sonus of Ductor, Moabi- 
lonys, Zaraei, and with hym two hun- 
35drid men and fifti; of the sonus of Sa- 
cues, Jechonie, Cetheeli, and with hym 
36two hundrid men and fifti; of the sones 
of Solomosias, Gotholie, and with hym 
37seuenti men; of the sones of Sofocie, 
Zarias, Micheli, and with hym foure 
38score men; of the sonus of Jobab, Dias, 
Jeseli, and with hym two hundrid men 
39and twelue; of the sonus of Banie, Sal- 
imoth, the sone of Josafie, and with hym 
40an hundrid men and sixti; of the sonus 
of Beer, Zacharias, Bebei, and with hym 
4itwo hundrid men and ei3te; of the sones 
of Azachie, Channes, Acharie, and with 
42hym an hundrid men and ten; of the 
sonus of Adonicam, hem last, and these 
ben the namus of hem, Elifalam, the sone 
of Jebel, and Semeias, and with hym se- 
43uenti men. And I gederede hem to the 
flod, that is seid Thia and Methati; 
there wee weren thre da3is, and I knew3 
44hem. And of the sonus of prestis and 
450f Leuitus I fond not there. And IJ sente 
to Eleasar, and to Accebam, and Masman, 
and Malolan, and Enathan, and Samea, 
and Joribum, Nathan, Ennagan, Zacharie, 


Ill. ESDRAS. 


567 


tourment, or also bi multyng, o7 punysch- 
ing, of money, or bi departyng awey. And 28 
Esdras, the scribe, seide, Blessid be the 
Lord God of oure fadris, that 3aaf this 
will in to the herte of the kyng, to clarifie 
his hous, that is in Jerusalem; and hath 29 
wirschipid me in si3t of the kyng, and of 
hise counselours, and of hise frendis, and 
of hise purpred men. And I am maad3o 
stidefast in inwitt, aftir the helpyng of 
the Lord oure God; and IJ gadride of Is- 
rael men, that thei schulden stie up to- 
gidre with me. And these ben the pro-3! 
nostis, aftir their cuntrees, and porcionel 
princehedis of hem, that with me stieden 
up fro Babiloyne, in the rewme of Artax- 
erses. Of the sones of Phares was Jer-32 
somus; of the sones of Cyemarith, Ame- 
nus; of the sones of Dauid, Accus, the 
sone of Cecelie; of the sones of Phares, 33 
Zacharie, and with him ben turned ajen 
an hundrid men and fifty ; of the sonus of 34 
Ductor, Moabilonys, Zaraey, and with him 
two hundrid men and fifty; of the sonus 35 
of Sacues, Jechonye, Thetheely, and with 
him two hundrid men and fifty; of the36 
sones of Salomosias, Gotholie, and with 
him seuenty men ; of the sones of Sapha-37 
cye, Zarias, Mychely, and with him foure 
score men; of the sones of Jobab, Dias, 38 
Jesely, and with him two hundrid men 
and twelue; of the sones of Banye, Saly-39 
moth, the sone of Josaphie, and with him 
an hundrid men and sixty; of the sones 40 
of Beer, Zacharie, Bebey, and with him 
two hundrid men and ei3te; of the sones4i 
of Azachie, Channes, Acharie, and with 
him an hundrid men and ten; of tle sones 42 
of Adonycam, that ben the laste, and thes 
ben the names of hem, Elyphalam, the 
sone of Jebel, and Semeas, and with him 
seuenty men. And IJ gedride hem to thes 
flood, that is seid Thia and Methaty ; 
there we weren thre daies, and I knewe 
hem. And of the sones of prestis and of 44 
Leuytis I fonde not there. And I sente 45 
to Eleazar, and to Eccelom, and Masman, 
and Malolan, and Enaathan, and Samea, 
and Joribum, Nathan, Enuagan, Zacharie, 


J porciounel ¢ pr. m. 


568 


and Mosollamym, hem leders and wise 
4smen. And I seide to hem, that thei 
shulden come to Luddyum, that was at 
47 the place of the tresorie. And I sente to 
them, that thei shulden sei to Luddium, 
and his brethern, and to hem that weren 
in the tresorie, that thei shulden sende to 
vs hem that shulden vse presthod in the 
4shous of the Lord oure God. And thei 
bro3ten to vs, after the stronge hond of 
the Lord oure God, wise men of the 
sonus of Mooli, sone of Leuy, sone of 
Irael, Sebebian, and sonus, and brethern, 
sg9that weren ei3tetene; Asbiam, and A- 
mum, of tlie sonus of Cananei; and the 
sosonus of hem, twenti men. And of hem 
that in the temple serueden, the whiche 
Dauid 3af, and thei princis, to the werk- 
ing to the Leuitus, to the temple, of men 
sernende, two hundrid and tweuti. The 
namys of alle ben signefied in scripturis. 
s1And I vouwede there fasting to 3unge 
men, in the si3te of the Lord, that I 
shulde sechen of hym gvod weie to vs, 
and that weren with vs, of sonus, and 
52 bestus, for aspies. Forsothe I shamede 
to asken of the king foot men and horse 
men, in felashipe of grace, of keping a3en 
53 0ure aduersaries. Forsothe we seiden to 
the king, For the vertue of the Lord shal 
be with hem, that inwardli sechen hym 
s4in alle efect. And eft we prejeden the 
Lord oure God, after these thingis, whom 
and benigne we hadden; and hol wee 
55ben maad to oure God. And I seuerede 
of the prouostis of the fole, and of the 
prestus of the puple, twelue men, and 
Sedebian, and Affamian, and with hem of 
s6ther brethern ten men. And I peisede 
to hem siluer and gold, and _prestis 
vesselis, of the hous of the Lord oure 
God, the whiche the king hadde 3iuen, 
and his counseileris, and princis, and al 
s7Irael. And whan IJ hadde peisid, I toc 
talentus of siluer an hundrid and _ fifti, 
and siluerene vesselis of an hundrid ta- 
lentis, and of gold talentus an hundrid, 
ssand of goldene vesselis seue score, and 
brasene vesselis of good metal shinende, 


II. ESDRAS. 


VIII. 46—58. 


Mosollamym, the whiche weren leders and 
wise men. And I seide to hem, that thei4c 
schulden come to Luddium, that was at 
the place of the tresorie. And I sente to47 
hem, that they schulden sey to Luddyum, 
and his bretheren, and to hem that weren 
in the tresorie, that thei schulden sende to 
vs hem that schulden vse presthod in the 
hous of the Lord oure God. And thei48 
brou3ten to us, aftir the strong hoond of 
the Lord oure God, wise men of the sones 
of Mooly, sone of Leuy, sone of Israel, 
Sebebian, and sones, and bretheren, that 
weren ei3tene ; Asbiam, and Ammum, of a9 
the sones of Chananey ; and the sonus of 
hem weren twenti men. And of hem that so 
sernyden in the temple, the whiche Dauid 
and thei princis 3auen, to the wirching to 
the Leuytis, to the temple, of men ser- 
uynge, two hundrid and twenty. The 
naines of alle ben signyfied in scripturis. 
And I vowide there fastyng to 3onge men, 51 
in the si3t of the Lord, that I schulde 
seche of hym a good wey to us, and fo 
hem that weren with us, of sones, and 
bestis, for aspies. Forsothe I schamydes2 
to aske of the kyng foot men and hors 
men, in felauschipe of grace, of keping 
ajen oure aduersaries. Forsothe we seiden 53 
to the kyng, For the vertue of the Lord 
schal be with hem, that inwardly sechen 
him in al effect. And efte we preieden 54 
the Lord oure God, aftir thes thingis, 
whom also we hadden benyngly ; and we 
ben maad hoo] to oure God. And I de-s5s 
partide of the prouostis of the folc, and of 
the prestis of the temple, xij men, and 
Sedebian, and Affamyan, and ten men with 
hem of her bretheren. And I weiede tos¢ 
hem siluer and gold, and prestis vessels, of 
the hous of the Lord oure God, the whiche 
the kyng had 3ouen, and his counseilers, 
and princis, and al Israel. And whannes7 
I hadde peisid i¢, I toke an hundrid ta- 
lentis of siluer and fifty, and silueren 
vessels of an hundrid talentis, and of gold 
an hundrid talentis, and of golden vessels 58 
seuen score, and twelue brasen vessels of 
good schynynge metal, 3eldinge the lik- 


k And the c. 


VIII. 59-71. 


twelue, 3eldende the licnesse of gold. 
59And IJ seide to hem, And 3ee ben_holi to 
the Lord, and the vesselis ben holi, and 
the gold and the seluer is of the auou to 
60the Lord God of oure fadris. Waketh, 
and kepeth, to the time that 3ee take of 
the prouostis of the puple, and of the 
prestis, and of the Leuitis, and princis of 
the cites of Irael, in Jerusalem, in the 
prine chaumbre of the hous of oure God. 
61 And these prestis and Leuitus, that token 
gold and siluer, and vesselis, that weren 
in Jerusalem, bro3ten in to the temple of 
cgthe Lord. And we moueden forth fro 
the flod of Thia, the twelfthe dai of the 
firste moneth, for to we 3iden in to Jeru- 
63salem. And whan the thridde dai was 
don, the ferthe forsothe dai the peisid 
gold and siluer is taken in the hous of 
the Lord oure God, to Marymoth, the 
sisone of Jori, prest; and with hyin was 
Eleasar, the sone of Finees; and ther 
weren with hem Josabdus, the sone of 
Jesu, and Medias, and Banny, the sone 
of a Leuite; at noumbre and wei3te alle 
csthingus. And the peis of hem is writen 
6cin the same hour. Thoo forsothe, that 
camen fro the caitifte, offriden sacrifise 
of the Lord of Irael, bolis, twelue for al 
Irael; wetheres, foure score and sixe ; 
s7lambis, two and seuenti; get for synne 
twelue, and for helthe twelue kijn; alle 
6sin to the sacrifise of the Lord. And thei 
eft radden the hestis of the king to the 
kingis dispensatouris, and to the litle 
vnder kingus of Choele, and Cirie, and 
Fenice; and thei wrshipeden the folc 
cgand the temple of the Lord. And these 
thingis ful endid, thei camen to me, 
seiende, The kinrede of Irael, and thie 
zoprincis, and prestys, and Leuitis, and 
aliene folkis, and naciouns of the lond, 
han not seuered ther vnclennesses fro 
Cananeis, and Etheis, and Fereseis, and 
Jebuseis, and Moabitis, and Egipcienes, 
ziand Idumeis ; forsothe thei ben ioyned to 


III. ESDRAS. 


569 


nesse of gold. And I seide to hem, Bothe so 
3e ben holy to the Lord, and the vessels 
ben holy, and the gold and the siluer is of 
the avowe to the Lord God of oure fadris. 
Wake 3e, and kepe i¢, til the tyme that 6o 
3e take zt of the prouostes of the peple, 
and of the prestis, and of the dekens, and 
of princis of the citees of Israel and Jeru- 
salem, in the priuey chauinbre of the hous 
of oure God. And thes prestis and de-61 
kens, that token gold and siluer, and ves- 
sels, that weren in Jerusalem, thei bro3ten 
thoo in to the temple of the Lord. And 62 
we moeueden forth fro the flood of Thya, 
the twelfthe day of the firste monthe, til 
that we 3eden in to Jerusalem. Andes 
whanne the thrid day was don, the firthe 
day forsothe the peisid gold and _ siluer 
was bitaken in to the hous of the Lord 
oure God, to Marymoth, the sone of Jory, 
the prest ; and with him was Eleazar, the 61 
sone of Phynees; and ther weren with 
him Josabdus, the sone of Jesu, and Me- 
dias, and Banny, the sone of a deken; 
alle thingis at noumbre and wei3t. And 65 
the wei3t of hem is writen in the same 
hour. hoo forsothe, that camen fro the 6é 
caitifte, offriden sacrifice of the Lord of 
Israel, twelue bolis for alle Israel, foure 
score wetheris and sixe, two and seuenty 67 
lambren, twelue geet for synne, and twelue 
kiyn for helthe; alle in to the sacrifice of 
the Lord. And eft thei redden the hestis 6s 
of the kyng to the kyngis dispensatours, 
and to the litle vndir kyngis of Choele, 
and of Cirye, and of Fenyce; and thei 
wirschipiden the fole and the temple of 
the Lord. And aftir thes thingis weren cs 
endid’, thei camen to me, seiynge, The 
kynrede of Israel, and the princis, and the 
prestis, and Leuytis, and alien folkis, and 7o 
naciouns of the Jond, han not partid awey 
her ynelennessis fro the Chananeis, and 
Etheis, and fro Pheriseis, and Jebuseis, 
and fro the Moabitis, and Egipcians, and 
Ydumeis ; forsothe thei weren ioyned to71 


d fillid endid x. 


VOL. II. 


4D 


570 


the do3tris of hem, and thei and ther 
souis; and the holi sed is! mengd to- 
gidere to the hethene fole of the lond; 
and parceneres weren the prouostus and 
maistir iugis of this wickednesse, fro the 
72 begynnyng of that reume. And anon as 
I herde these thingis, I cutte the clothis, 
and the sacrid cote, and to-terende the 
heris of the hed, and the berd, I sat so- 
73rewende, and dreri. And ther camen 
to me as fele as euere weren thanne 
moued in the woord of the Lord God of 
Irael, me weilende vp on this™ wicke- 
nesse?; and I sat soreweful vnto the 
74euentid sacrifise. And risende fro fast- 
ing, hauende the clothis cut, miche 
knelende, and strecchende out the hondis 
75to the Lord, I seide, Lord, I am con- 
foundid, and I am adrad befor thi face. 
76 Forsothe oure synnes ben multiplied vp 
on oure hedis, and oure wickednessis ben 
77enhauncid vnuto heuene; for fro the time 
of oure fadris we ben in gret synne vn 
78to this day. And for oure synnes, and 
of oure fadris we ben taken, with oure 
brethern, and with oure prestus, and 
kingus of the lond, in to swerd, and cai- 
tifte, and in to prei, with confusion, vn 
7to the dai that is now. And now hou 
inyche is, that falleth to vs the merci of 
thee, Lord God ; lef to vs a roote and a 
80name, in to the place of thin halewing, to 
vnkoueren oure 3iuere of li3t in the hous 
of the Lord oure God, to 3iue to vs mete 
s1in the time of oure seruage. And whan 
Wee seruen, wee ben not forsaken of the 
Lord oure God; but he sette vs in grace, 
puttende to vskingus of Persis to3iue mete, 
szand to clarifien the temple of the Lord 
oure God, and to edefie the desertis of 
Sion, and to 3iue to vs stablenesse in Jude 
s3and Jerusalem. And now what sei wee, 
Lord, hauende these thingus ? We han 
ouyr passid thin hestis, ‘the whiche® thou 
3eue in to the hondis of thi childer, pro- 
sifetus, seiende, For the lond, in the 


land «4. ™ the nu. 


Ill. ESDRAS. 


a wickidnes AH. 


VUI. 72——84. . 


the dou3tris of hem, bothe thei and their 
sones; and the hooly seed was mengid 
togidre with the hethene folk of the loond ; 
and the prouostis and maistre iuges weren 
parceners of this wickidnesse, fro the bi- 
gynnyng of that rewme. And anoon as 172 
herde thes thingis, I kitte my clothis, and 
the halewid coote, and I taar the heris of 
myn hed, and the berd, and J sate serew- 
ynge, and drury. And ther camen to me73 
thanne as many as euer weren moued in 
the word of the Lord God of Israel, weil- 
ynge me upon this wickidnesse; and I 
saat serewful vnto the euentijd sacrifice. 
And thanne I risynge fro fastyng, hau-74 
ynge my clothis kitt, knelide myche, and 
strecchinge out myn hondis to the Lord, 175 
seide, Lord, I am confoundid, and J am 
adred bifore thi face. Forsothe oure 76 
synnes ben multiplied upon oure hedis, 
and oure wickidnessis ben enhaunsid vnto 
heuen ; for fro the tyme of oure fadris we 77 
haue be in gret synne vnto this dai. 
And for oure owne synnes, and for the 78 
synne of oure fadris we ben taken, with 
oure bretheren, and with oure prestis, and 
with kyngis of the loond, in to swerd, and 
caitiftee, and in to prey, with confusion, 
vnto the dai that is now. And now hou79 
myche is 7¢, that the mercy of thee, Lord 
God, fallith to us; leue thou to us a roote 
and a name, in to the place of thin halew- 
yng, to vnkoueren oure 3yuere of 1i3t in 80 
the hous of the Lord oure God, to 3iue to 
us mete in the tyme of oure seruage. And 8) 
whanne we seruyden, we weren not forsa- 
ken of the Lord oure God; but he sette us 
in grace, puttynge to us kyngis of Persis 
to 3iue ws mete, and to clarifie the temple 82 
of the Lord oure God, and to bilde the 
deseertis of Syon, and to 3iue to us stable- 
nesse in Judee and in Jerusalem. And 33 
now, Lord, what sey we, hauynge thes 
thingis? We haue ouerpassid thin hestis, 
the whiche thou 3iue in to the hondis of 
thi children, prophetis, that seiden, For- s4 


© that c pr.m. 


VIIL. 85—97. 


whiche 3ee wenten in, to welden his eri- 
tage, is a defoulid lond with filthes of 
the® hethene men of the lond, and the 
vnelennessis of hem han fulfild it al in 
85 his vnclennesse. And now 3o0ure do3tris 
3ee shul not ioyne to ther sonus, and ther 
do3tris 3ee shul not take to 3oure sonus; 
86and 3ee shul not seche to han pes with 
hem alle time, that comende aboue 3ee 
ete the beste thingus of the lond, and the 
eritage 3ee delen to 3oure sonus, in to the 
87during aboue time. And thoo thingus 
that fallen to vs, alle ben do for oure 
shrewde werkis, and oure grete synnes. 
83 And thou hast 3iue to vs such a roote, 
and eft wee ben turned a3een to ouer 
passe thi laweful thingis, that the vn- 
clennessis? of the hethene fole of this 
89lond weren mengd. Whether thou shalt 
not wrathen to vs, to leesen vs, for to the 
9Jroote be forsaken, and oure sed ? Lord 
God of Irael, thou art sothfast; forsothe 
the roote is forsaken, vnto the dai that is 
9inow. Lo! now we ben in thi si3te in 
oure wickenessis1; forsothe it is not 3it 
to stonde befor thee in these thingus. 
92And whan honourende Esdras knou- 
lechede, wepende, falle’ doun to the erthe 
befor the temple, ben gedered beforn 
hym of Jerusalem a ful gret cumpanye, 
men, and wemmen, and 3unge nien, and 
3unge wymmen; forsothe the weping 
yswas gret in that multitude. And whan 
Jechonias, the sone of Jeeli, of the sonus 
of Irael, hadde cried, Esdras seide, Wee 
han synned a3en the Lord, that wee han 
sett with vs in to matrimoyne hethene 
wymmen, of the Jentilis of the lond. 
#4 And now who so euere is ouer al Irael 
in these thingus, be ther to vs an oth of 
the Lord, to putten awei alle oure wiues, 
that of the hethene ben, with ther sonus ; 
95as to thee is demed of the more, aftir the 
lawe of the Lord. Risende’ vp, shen 
960ut; to thee forsothe abideth this nede, 
97and wee ben with thee; do manli. And 
risende® vp Esdras, he made the princis 


© Om. 4. P vncleunes 4. 


III, ESDRAS. 


4 wickidnessis 4 ef 11 passim. 


4D 2 


571 


sothe the lond, in whiche 3e haue entrid, to 
welde the heritage of it, is a defoulid lond 
with the filthis of hethen men of the lond, 
and the vnelennessis of hem han fulfillid 
al it in his vnelennesse. And now therfor 8 
3e schul not ioyne 3oure dou3tris to her 
sones, and her dou3tris 3e schul not take 
to 30ure sones ; and 3e schul not seche to86 
haue pes with hem al tyme, that comynge 
aboue 3e ete the beste thingis of the lond, 
and that 3e dele the heritage to 3oure 
sones, for euere. And thoo thingis that 87 
fallen to us, be thei alle don for oure 
schrewid werkis, and oure grete synnes. 
And thou hast 3ouen to us sich a roote, 8 
and eft we ben turned a3en to ouerpasse 
thi laweful thingis, that the vnclennessis 
of the hethen fole of this lond weren 
mengid. Whether thou schalt not wrath-89 
then to us, to lese us, for til the roote be 
forsaken, and oure seed? Lord God of90 
Israel, thou art sothfast ; forsothe the root 
is forsaken, ynto tlie day that is now. Lo!91 
now we ben in thi siz3t in oure wickid- 
nessis; forsothe it is not 3itt to stonde 
bifore thee in thes thingis. And whannes2 
Esdras honouringe knowlechide, wepinge, 
he fel doun to the erthe bifore the temple, 
ther ben gederid bifore him a ful gret 
multitude of Jerusalem, men, and wym- 
men, and 3ounge men, and 3ounge wym- 
men; forsothe the wepynge was gret in 
that multitude. And whanne Jechonyas, 93 
the sone of Jeely, of the sones of Israel, 
hadde cried, Esdras seide, We have synned 
a3en the Lord, for that we hane sett with 
us in to matrimonye hethen wymmen, of 
the Gentiles of the lond. And now whoogs 
so euer is ouer al Israel in thes thingis, be 
ther to vs an ooth of the Lord, to putten 
awey alle oure wyues, that ben, with her 
sones, of tlie hethene folk ; as it is demed 95 
to thee of the grettere men, aftir the lawe 
of the Lord. Arijse zow up, and schewe 
thi will; forsothe to thee abijdith this9s 
nede, and we ben with thee; do manly. 
And Esdras arisynge up, made the princis 97 


t fallid aeru. 8 Arijsynge 4EFH. 


572 


off prestis, and the Leuitus, and al Irael, 
to swere to don aftir these alle these 
thingis ; and thei sworen. 


CAP. IX. 


1 And risende' vp Esdras fro ‘the beforn" 
porche of the temple, wente in to the 
2eelle of Jonathe, sone of Nazabi. And 
herberewid there, he tastede no bred, ne 
water’ dranc, vp on the wickednesses of 
3the multitude. And ther is maad a 
preching in al Jude and in Jerusalem, to 
alle that weren of the caitifte gedered in 
4 Jerusalem, Whosoeuere a3een cometh not 
to the secunde or the thridde dai, aftir 
the dom of the eldere men sittende, his 
facultees shul ben taken awei, and he 
alien demed fro the multitude of caitifte™. 
5 And alle ben gedered togidere, that weren 
of the linage of Juda and of Beniamyn, 
thre dajes in Jerusalem; this is the 
nynthe moneth, the twentithe dai of the 
6monyth. And al the multitude sat in 
the flor of the temple, tremblende for 
7the present winter. Esdras risende vp, 
seide to Irael, 3ee wickedeli diden, set- 
tende* 30u in to matrimoine hethene 
wiues, that 3ee adde to the synnes of 
sIrael. And now 3iueth shrifte, and gret 
doing to the Lord God of oure fadris ; 
yand parformeth his wil, and goth awei 
fro the hethene folc of the lond, and fro 
1ohethene wiues. And al the multitude 
criede, and seiden with a gret vois, As 
11thou hast seid, weeY shul do. But for 
the multitude is gret, and the time win- 
ter, and wee moun not vnholpen’ stonde, 
and this were is not to vs of o dai, ne of 
two; myche in these thingus wee han 
1gsynned ; stonde the prouostus of the mul- 
titude, and alle that with vs dwellen, and 
hou fele euere han ‘anent them* hethene 
13 wiues ; and stonde thei ne3 in the accept 
time of alle place, prestis, and domes 
men, for to thei losne the wrathe of the 
11 Lord, of this nede. Jonathas forsothe, 


u before the 4. 
z vnhelpid ax, 


togytcgs 
arisynge A. 
Y so wee E prem. 


Vv no water 4. 


III. ESDRAS. 


W the caitifte c pr. m. H. 
4 anentis vs 4. 


IX. t—14. 


of prestes, and the dekens, and al Israel, 
to swere to do aftir alle thes thingis; and 
thei sworen. 


CAP. IX. 


And Esdras risynge up fro the fore. 
porche of the temple, wente in to the celle 
of Jonathe, the sone of Nazaby. And hee 
herbowrewid there, tastide no bred, ne 
dronke watir, for the wickidnessis of the 
multitude. And ther was maad a prech-3 
yng in al Judee and in Jerusalem, to alle 
that weren of the caitiftee gederid in Je- 
rusalem, Who so euer a3en comith not to4 
the secounde or the thrid day, aftir the doom 
of the eldre men sittynge, his facultees 
schul be taken awey, aud he be demed alien 
fro the multitude of the caitiftee. Ands 
alle, that weren of the lynage of Judee and 
of Beniamyn, weren gedrid togidre, thre 
daies in Jerusalem; this is the nynthe 
monthe, the twentithe day of the monthe. 
And al the multitude saat in the floor of6 
the temple, tremblynge for wyntir thanne 
beynge. -dud Esdras risynge up, seide to7 
Israel, 3e han do wickidly, settynge to 30u- 
in to matrimonye hethen wyues, that 3e 
adde to the synnes of Israel. And now 3ines 
3e to the Lord God of oure fadris confes- 
sioun, and gret worthynesse; and _ per-9 
fourme 3e his will, and goth awey fro the 
hethene fole of the lond, and fro hethene 
wyues. And al the multitude criede, and 10 
thei seiden with a gret voice, We schul do, 
as thou hast seid. But for the multitude is 11 
gret, and the tyme is wyntir, and we 
mowen not stonde vnholpen, and this werk 
is not to us of oo day, ne of two; myche 
we haue synned in thes thingis; ¢herfori2 
stonde the prouostis of the multitude, and 
alle that dwellen with us, and hou many 
euere han anentis hem hethen wijues; and 13 
stonde thei ny3 in the tyme that is take, | 
prestis, and domesmen, til that thei lousen 
the wraththe of the Lord, of this nede. 
Jonathas forsothe, the sone of Ezely, and 14 


x settynge 4EFH. sentende c. 


IX. 15-——31. 


the sone of Ezeli, and Ozias, Thethan, 
token aftir these thingus, and Bosoramus, 
and Leuys?, and Satheus togidere wro3ten 
iswith hem. And ther stoden aftir alle 
these thingus, alle that weren of the cai- 
1stifte. And Esdras, prest, ches to hym 
men, grete princis, of the fadris of hem, 
after the names; and thei seten togidere, 
in the newe mone of the tenthe moneth, 
17to examyne this nede. And it is deter- 
myued of the men, that hadden hethene 
wiues, vnto the newe mones of the firste 
ismoneth. And there ben founden mengd 
among of the prestis, that hadden he- 
19thene wites; of the sonus of Jesu, the 
sonus of Josedech, and of his brethern, 
Maseas, and Eleeserus, and Joribus, and 


20Joadeus. And thei leiden® hondis, that | 


thei shulden putten awei ther wiues, 
and to sacrifien, in to preieere for ther 
2lignoraunce. And of the sonus of Sem- 
mery, Masseas, and Esses, and Geleth, 
22 Azarias; and of the sones of Fosore, 
Leomasias, Hismaeius, and Nathanias, 
23 Jussio, Leddus, and Talsas. And of the 
Leuitus, Josabdus, and Semeis, and Cho- 
litus, and Calitas, and Facceas, and Colu- 
24as, and Elionas. And of the sacrid syng- 
2eres, Eliazub, Zaccurus. And of the 
26 vssheris, Salumus, and Tholbanes. And 
of Irael, of the sonus of Forchosi, and 
Remias, and Jeddias, and Melchias, and 
Michelus, and Eliasarus, and Jemebias, 
2z7and Bannas. And of the sonis of Jola- 
maui, Anias, and Zacharias, Jerselus, and 
28 Jobdius, and Erimoth, and Elias. And 
of the sonus of Sachon, Eliadas, and Elia- 
sumus, and Othias, and Jarimoth and 
29 Zabdis, and Thebedias. And of the 
sones of Bede, Johanues, and Amanyas, 
soand Zabdias, and Emetis. And of the 
sonis of Baum, Olamus, and Mallucus, 
and Jeddeus, and Jasub, and Azabus, 
3iand Jerimoth. And of the sonis of Ad- 
din, Nathus and Moosias, and Caalemus, 
and Raanas, and Baseas, Mathatias, and 
Bethsel, and Bonnus, and Manasses. 


HiIl. ESDRAS. 573 


Ozias, Thethan, token aftir thes thingis, 
and Bosoramus, and Leuys, and Satheus 
wrou3ten togidre with hem. And _ allets 
that weren of the caitiftee stoden there, 
aftir alle thes thingis. And Esdras, prest, 16 
chees to him men, grete princis, of the 
fadris of hem, aftir the names; and thei 
seten togidre, in the newe moone of the 
tenthe monthe, to examyne this nede. 
And it is determyned of the men, that17 
hadden hethen wyues, vnto the newe 
mones of the firste monthe. And thers 
ben founden mengid among of the prestis, 
that hadden hethen wines; of the sones of 19 
Jesu, the sone of Josedech, and of his 
bretheren, Maseas, and Eleeserus, and 
Joribus, and Joadeus. And thei leiden 20 
her hoondis, that thei schuldn putte awey 
their wyues, and for to sacrifie a ram, in 
to preier for their ignoraunce. And of 2! 
the sones of Semmery, Masseas, and Esses, 
and Geley, Azarias; and of the sonus of22 
Phosore, Leomasias, Hismaenis, and Na- 
thanae, Jussio, Jeddus, and Talsas. And 23 
of the dekens, Josabdus, and Semeis, and 
Cholitus, and Calitas, and Phacceas, and 
Coluas, and Elionas. And of the halewid 24 
syngers, Eliazub, Zacturus. And of the25 
vsschers, Salumus, and Thosbanes. And 26 
of Israel, of the sones of Phorcosy, aud 
Remyas, and Jeddias, and Melchias, and 
Mychelus, and Eleazarus, and Jemebias, 
and Bannas. And of the sones of Jol-27 
amani, Anias, and Zacharias, Jerselus, 


‘and Jobdius, and Erymath, and Elias. 


And of the sonus of Sachon, Eleadas, and 2° 
Eleasumus, and Othias, and Jarymoth, 
and Zabdis, and Thebedias. And of the29 
sones of Bedo, Johannes, and Amanyas, 
and Zabdias, and Emetis. And of these 
sonus of Banny, Olamus, and Mallucus, 
and Jeddeus, and Jazub, and Azabus, and 
Jerymoth. And of the sones of Addyn,3: 
Naathus, and Moosias, and Calemus, and 
Raanas, and Baseas, Mathatias, and Beth- 
sel, and Bonnus, and Manasses. And of32 
the sones of Myaic, Nenyas, and Apheas, 


» Leuytis a. ¢ wenten in £ pr.m. dOm, 4. 


574 


32 And of the sonus of Miaie, Nenyas, and 
Afeas, and Melcheas, and Sameas, and 
Simon, Beniamyn, and Malchus, and 

38 Marias. Of the sonus of Azom, Cartancus, 
Mathatias, and Bannus, and Elifalath, 

3sand Manasses, and Semeth. And of the 
sonus of Banny, Jeremias, and Modias, 
and Abramus, and Johel, and Baneas, 
and Pelias, and Jonas, and Marymoth, 
and Eliazub, and Mathaneus, and Ele- 
asis, and Orisas, and Dielus, and Same- 

35 dius, aud Zambris, and Josefus. And of 
the sonus of Nobei, Idelus, and Matha- 
tias, and Zabadus, and Cetheda, Seduni, 

3sé6and Jessel, Baneas. Alle these toineden 
to hem hethene wiues, and laften hem, 

37 with the sones. And prestis, and Le- 
uitus, and that weren of Irael, dwelten in 
Jerusalem in oon hol regioun, the newe 
none of the seuenthe moneth; and the 
sonus of Irael weren in ther abidingus. 

38 And al the multitude is gedered togidere 
in to the flor, that is fro the est of the 

sosacrid 3ate. And thei seiden to Esdre, 
hisshop and redere, that he shulde bringe 
forth the lawe of Moises, that is 3iuen 

400f the Lord God of Irael. And Esdras, 
bisshop, bro3te forth the lawe to al the 
multitude of hem, fro man vnto wom- 
man, and to alle the prestus, to heren the 
lawe, in the newe mone of the seuenthe 
41moneth. And he radde in the flor, that 
is befor the holi j3ate of the temple, fro 
the firste 1i3t vnto euen, befor men and 
wymmen 3 and alle thei 3euen wit to the 
4a2zlawe. And Esdras, prest, and redere of 
the lawe, stod vp on the treene chajer, 
43that was forgid. And there stoden to 
hym Mathatias, and Samus, and Ana- 
nyas, Azarias, Vrias, Ezechias, and Bal- 
44Samus, at the ri3t ; and at the lift, Faldeus, 
and® Misael, Malachias, Abustas, Sabus, 

45 Nabadias, and Zacharias. And‘ Esdras 
toc a boc beforn al the multitude; for- 
sothe he sat beforn in glorie, in the si3te® 

4¢of alle. And whan he hadde asoilid the 
lawe, alle stoden vp ri3t. And Esdras 


e Om. an. f Om, a. 


II. ESDRAS. 


IX. 32——46. 


and Melcheas, and Sameas, and Symon, 
Beniamyn, and Malchus, and Marias. Of33 
the sones of Azom, Cartaneus, Mathatias, 
and Bannus, and Eliphalath, and Ma- 
nasses, and Semey. Of the sones of31 
Banny, Jeremias, and Moodias, and Abra- 
mus, and Johel, and Baneas, and Pelias, 
and Jonas, and Marymoth, and Eliazub, 
and Mathaneus, and Eleazis, and Ozias, 
and Dielus, and Samedius, and Zambris, 
and Josephus. And of the sones of Nobey, 35 
Ydelus, and Mathatias, and Zaladus, and 
Setheda, Sedyim, and Jessei, Baneas. Alle3s 
these ioyneden to hem hethen wyues, and 
leften hem, with her sones. And prestis,37 
and dekens, and thei that weren of Israel, 
dwelliden in Jerusalem in an oo regioun, 
the newe moone of the seuenthe monthe; 
and the sones of Israel weren in their 
abidyngis. And al the multitude gedride 3s 
togidre in the floor, that is fro the eest of 
the halewid 3ate. And thei seiden toss 
Esdre, bisschop and reder, that he schulde 
brynge forth the lawe of Moises, that was 
joven of the Lord God of Israel. And 40 
Esdras, the bisschop, brou3te forth the lawe 
to al the multitude of hem, fro man vn to 
womman, and to alle the prestis, to here 
the lawe, in the newe moone of the se- 
uenthe monthe. And he radde in the4i 
floor, that is bifore the hooly 3ate of the 
temple, fro the firste li3t of the daie vuto 
euyn, bifore men and wymmen; and alle 
thei 3auen witt to the lawe. And Esdras, 42 
the prest, and redere of the lawe, stood 
upon the treen chaier, that was maad 
therfore. And ther stoden with hima 
Mathatias, and Samus, and Ananyas, 
Azarias, Vrias, Ezechias, and Balsamus, 
at the rijt side; and at the left side, Pha-41 
leleus, Mysael, Malachias, Abustas, Sabus, 
Nabadias, and Zacharias. And Esdras4s 
took a book bifore al the multitude; for- 
sothe he sate bifore in worschip, in the 
siz3t of alle. And whanne he hadde as-4¢ 
soilid the lawe, alle thei stoden upright. 
And Esdras blesside the Lord God, alther 


& multitude E pr. m. 


IX. 47—56. 


blesside the Lord God, al ther heizest 
47God of Sabaoth, al my3ti. And al the 
puple answerde, Amen. And eft, the 
hondis rerid vp, thei, fallende doun in to 
48the erthe, honoureden the Lord. And 
Esdras comaundede, that ther shulden 
teche the lawe, Jesus, and Banaeus, and 
Sarabias, and Jadinus, and Accubus, and 
Sabatheus, and Calithes, and Azarias, 
and Joradus, and Ananias, and Filas, 
49 Leuite. The whiche ta3ten the lawe of 
the Lord, and in’ the multitude radden 
the lawe of the Lord; and eche putten 
beforn hem, that vndirstoden the lessoun. 
50 And Atharathes seide to Esdre, the bis- 
shop and redere, and to the Leuitus that 
51 ta3ten the multitude, seiende, This dai is 
holi to the Lord. And alle wepten, 
52 whan thei hadden herd the lawe. And 
Esdras seide, 3ee thanne, gon atwynne, 
eteth alle most fatte thingys, and drink- 
eth alle most sweete, and sendeth 3iftus 
53to hem that han not; forsothe holi is 
this dai of the Lord; and wileth not ben 
sori, the Lord forsothe shal clarifien vs. 
siAnd the Leuitus denounceden in opene 
to alle men, seiende, Thi§’ dai is holi; 
55 Wileth not ben sori. And ‘alle wenten 
awei, to eten, and to drinken, and to han 
plente of mete, and to 3iue 3iftus to hem 
that han not, that thei plenteuousli eten. 
Gret doingli forsothe the: ben enhauncid 
in the woordis, with the whiche thei ben 
s6ta3t. And alle thei ben gedered in to 
Jerusalem, to make solempne the glad- 
nesse, after the testament of the Lord 
God of Irael. 


flere endith the thridde book of 
Eisdre, and now begynneth the prolog 
of the book of Tobie. 


h Om. 4. 
rubric in cH. 


III. ESDRAS. 


575 


hiz3est God of Sabaoth, al my3ti. And al47 
the peple answeride, Amen. And efte 
thei reisyden up er hondis, and fallynge 
doun vnto the erthe, thei honouriden the 
Lord. And Esdras comaundide, that these 4s 
schulden teche the lawe, Jesus, and Ba- 
naeus, and Sarabias, and Jadmus, and 
Accubus, and Sabatheus, and Calithes, 
and Azarias, and Joradus, and Ananyas, 
and Philas, dekens. The whiche tau3ten 49 
the lawe of the Lord, and in the multitude 
thei radden the lawe of the Lord; and 
eche bi him self, that vndirstoden the 
lesson, tolde zé before hem. And Atha-s0 
rathes seide to Esdre, the bisschop and 
redere, and to the Leuytis that tau3ten 
the multitude, seiynge, This day is hooly 5: 
to the Lord. And alle thei wepten, 
whanne thei hadden herd the lawe. And 52 
Esdras seide, 3e therfore, aftir 3e ben 
gon atwynne, eteth alle moost fatte thingis, 
and drynketh alle mooste swete, and sende 
3e 3iftis to hem that han not; forsothe this 53 
day of the Lord is hooly ; and be 3e not 
sory, the Lord forsothe schal clarifie vs. 
And the dekens denounciden, or schew-51 
iden, openly to alle men, seiynge, This 
day is hooly ; wille 3e not be sory. And 5; 
thanne alle. thei wenten awey, to ete, and 
to drynke, and to haue plentee of mete, 
and to 3iue 3iftis to hem that han not, 
wheroff to ete plenteuously. Gretly for- 
sothe thei ben enhaunsid in the wordis, 
with the whiche thei ben tau3t. And alle ;,; 
thei weren gadrid in to Jerusalem, to 
make solempne the gladnesse, aftir the 
testament of the Lord God of Israel. 


Hleere endith the thridde book of 
Esdre, and bigynnith Thobie. 


i From a. Explicit liber Esdre tertius. 2. Here endith the thrid bok of Esdre, r. No final 


TOBIT. 


[Prologue on the book of Tobit*. 


In this book of Tobie ben contened the seuen dedis of merci, whiche Tobie wrou3te 
with his peple of the sones of Israel, that weren in caitifte, acordinge to the gospel of 
Crist, seiynge, Blessid ben thei that ben merciful, for thei schtllen haue merci ; wherfor 
Tobie doinge merci hadde merci of God, which sente his aungel to comforte him, and 
to do merci to him, as he hadde do bifore to his peple of Israel. 


Here begynneth proloug of Tobie’. 


To Cromacio and Eliodre, bisshopys, Jerome, prest, in the Lord sendeth greeting. 
To merueilen I cese not the instaunce of 3oure asking; forsothe 3ee asken of ime, that 
the boc, writen in Caldee sermoun, in to Latin writing I drawe, the boc of Tobie that 
is, the whiche Ebrues, seuerende fro the noumbre of Godis scripturis, to these that holi 
scriptures remembren? casten to. I haue don aseeth to 3oure desijr, ner the latere 
not to my studie. Forsothe the studies of Ebrues vndernymyn vs, and wijten to vs 
these thingis to translaten to the® Latin eris ajen ther? bible. But I demende to be 
betere to desplesen to the dom of Farisees, and to serue to the bisshopis maundemens, 
bisiede® as I my3te; and, for the tunge of Caldeis is nee3 to Ebrue sermoun, findende a 
most wijs spekere off either tunge, I toc to the trauaile of o dai; and what euere thing 
he to me expressede in Ebrue woordis, thoo thingus I, clepid to a notorie, expounede 
in Latin woordis. To 30ure prieeris the meede of this werk& I shal 3elde, whan 


I lerne me to han fulfild this were to ben acceptid of" 30u that! voucheden saaf to 
comaunden. 


Heere endith the prolog of Tobie, and now begynneth the book, 


a This prologue is from m. 


@ From F. Incipil prologus Jeronimi in librum Thobie. e. Prologus. 1. No initial rubric in acto. 
b be remembren £ pr. m. ¢ Om. at. d the nK. € bisiede me E pr. m. f to o. & werk. 
man 4. }too. ithe whiche aeru. ji From ar. Here endeth the prolog af Tobie, se now the booc. 1. 
Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth the book. 0, No final rubric in cen. 


I. 1—12. 


Tobie*. 


CAPT 


1 Toste, of the linage and of the cite of 
Neptalim, that is in the ouere partis of 
Galilee, aboue Nason, after the weie 
that ledith to the west, in the left 

2hauende the cite of Sofeth, whan he was 
ca3t in the dajes of Salmanasar, king of 
Assiries, ner the latere in caitifte! sett, 

3the. weie of treuthe he forsoc not, so that 
alle thingus that he my3te han, eche dai 
to the caityue brethern that weren of 

‘his kinrede he delede. And whan he 
was alle 3ungere in the linage of Nepta- 
lim, ner the latere no childli thing he 

5dide in deede. After whan alle wenten 
to the goldene calues, the whiche Jero- 
boam, king of Irael, made, this alone flei3 

6the cumpanve of alle; and wente to Jeru- 
salem, to the temple of the Lord, and 
there honourede the Lord God of Irael, 
alle his firste frutis and his dymys treuli 
7offrende ; so that in the thredde™ 3er to 
the conuertid fro Jentilis and to come- 
slingus he mynystrede alle tithing. These 
thingus, and to these lic, after the lawe of 
9God a litil child he kepte wel. Whan 
forsothe he was maad a man, he toc a 
wif, Anne, of his linage; and he gat of 
hir a sone, his own name puttende to 
lohym; whom fro the time that he began 
to speken, he ta3te to dreden God, and to 
llabstenen" fro alle synne. Thanne whan 
by caytifte he was come, with his wif and 
sone, in to the cite Nynyue, with al his 

12 linage, and alle eeten of the metis of Jen- 

tilis, this kepte his soule, and neuere is 


k Running title in c. Jncipit liber. E. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


™ firste £ pr. m. "abstenen hym g£ pr. m. 


b The book of Tobie. uuy. Here bigynneth Tobie. ag. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
€ and whanne 1s. 
k his thral 1. his caitif s. 


thers. ¢ the which: 4 it hath 1s. 
h my3te devefully 1s. i haue or gele 1s. 

childely 1s. © Certis 1s. 
‘cumpanys. ° Om.s. 
4 his 1. 


comlyngis come fro other cuntreiss. 4 This 1, 


TOBIT. 


P the Jewis peisg. othere 1. 
Vv thilke Jewis 1. Jemis s. 

b men that weren turned to the bileue 1. men turned to the bileue s. 

€ man Thebie 1s. 


577 


Here bigynneth the book of Tobie». - 


CAP. I. 


ToBiEet was of the lynage and” citee of 1 
Neptalym, which¢ is in the hi3ere partis of 
Galilee, aboue Naason, bihynde the weie 
that ledith to the west, and hath? in the 
lefte side the citee of Sapheth, whanne® hef2 
was takun in the daies of Salmanazar, 
kyng of Assiriens, netheles he set in cay- 
tifte, ‘ether takun prisoners, forsook not 
the weie of treuthe, so that he depart-3 
ide ech dai alle thingis whiche he my3te 
haue’, with caitif* britheren that weren of 
his kyn. And whanne he was 3ongere4 
than alle!t in the lynage of Neptalym, 
netheles he dide no childische™ thing in 
werk". Forsothe® whanne alle Jewis?s 
3eden to the? goldun calues, whiche Jero- 
boam, the kyng of Israel, made’, this 
Tobie aloone fledde the’ cumpenyes': of 
alle" men’; and” he 3ede* to Jerusalem, toe 
the temple of the Lord, and there he wor- 
schipide the Lord God’ of Israel; and he 
offride feithfuly alle hise firste fruytis, and 
hise tithis ; so that in the thridde 3eer he7 
mynystride* al the* tithe to conuersis® and 
comlyngis®. The’ 3onge man¢ keptef theses 
thingis, and thingis® lijk® these, bi the lawe 
of God of heuene. Sotheli* whanne heo 
was maad a ian, he took a wijf, Anne™, 
of his lynage; and he gendride® of hir a 
sone, and puttide® his owne name to hym; 


whom he tau3te fro 3ong childhed for? to 10 


drede God, and for to absteyne’ fro al 
synne. 
was comun, with his wijf and sone’, in to 


the citee Nynyue', with al his lynage, and 12 


I the caitifte cz pr. m. 


bb and of 
& either maad thral 1s. 
mQOm.1s. © werk 
rhad mades. al thes, 
yOm. a. 2 3aaf 1s. 

¢ to comlyngis 1. 
f kepte in doynge 1. kept or dide s. 


f Thobie ts. 
1 alle othere 1. 
4 worshepe the s. 
wOm. a. * wenter. 


8 othere thingis 1. 4 lijk to 1s. i aftir1. & Andis, ! man hauyng discresioun s. ™ Anne bi name 1s. 
"gaat. °he puttet. he puttides. POm.isx. 4absteyne hims. *'Thobiets.  §& his sone a. 
t of Nynyue zceis. 

VOL. 1, 4k 


Therfor whanne bi caitifte he" 


t+ This storie 
of Tobie bifelde 
in the sixte 
jeer of king 
Ezechie. 

Lire here. a 

et plures, 


t than alle ; 
notable per- 
sonys. Lire 
here. cv. 


578 TOBIT. 


isdefoulid in metis of hem. And for he 
was myndeful of the Lord in al his herte, 
God jaf to hym grace in the sizte of king 
14Salamanasar; and 3af to hym power to 
go whider euere he wolde, hauende fre- 
dam to do what cuere he hadde wold. 
1s Thanne he wente bi alle that weren in 
the caitifte, and monestingus of helthe he 
is3af to hem. Whan forsothe he was 
come in to Ragis, cite of Medis, and of 
these thingus with the whiche he was 
wrshipid of the king, hadde ten talentis of 
17siluer ; and with myche cumpanye of his 
kinrede, he sa3 Gabel nedi, that was of 
his linage, he 3af to hym the seid® peis 
is of siluer, vndir writing. Forsothe? after 
miche of time king Salmanasar dead, 
whan his sone Senacherub regnede for 
hym, and hadde the sonus of Irael hate- 
igsum in his sizte, Tobie wente eche dai bi 
al hys kinrede, and coumfortide hem, and 
denidede4 to eche, as he my3te, of his fa- 
20 cultees ; the hungri men he fedde, and to 
the nakide he 3af clothis, and to the 
deade and the slaine besi™ he fond sepul- 
ziture. After whan king Senacherub was 
turned a3een, fleende fro Jude the veni- 
aulce that abouten hym God hadde do 
for his blasfemye, and wroth slo3 manie 
of the sonus of Irael, Tobie biriede the 
22 bodies of hem. And wher it was told to 
the king, he comandide hym to be slain, 
23and toc al his substaunce. Tobie for- 
sothe with his sone and with wif’ fleende, 
nakid lurkide, for manie looueden hym. 
24 After forsothe fiue and fourti dajes, the 
2king his sonus slowen; and Tobie is 
turned a3een to his hous, and al his fa- 
culte‘ restorid to hyn. 


° forseid 4. P Not ze pr.m. 4 deuyde a. 
uOm.1.  ¥ eeten there ts. 
athe mens. > thraldomr. he jaf 1s. 


W soule or his consience cleene s. 
d Om. 1s. 


J. 13—25. 


alle men" eetenY of the meetis of hethene 

men, this Tobie kepte his soule’, and 

was* nevere defoulid in the metist of hem. frets OF 
And’ for he was myndeful of the Lord in 13 bi Moises lawe. 
al his herte, God 3af grace to hym in the 

siz3t of Salamanazar, the kyng ; and he 3af14 

to Tobie power to go whidur euer he 

wolde, and he hadde fredom to do what 

euer thingis he wolde. Therfor he’ 3ede1s 

bi alle men? that weren in caitifte’, and 

3af’ to hem theé heestis of helthe*. So-16 

thelif whanne he was comyn in to Rages, 

a citee of Medeis, and hadde" ten talentis 

of siluer, of these thingis bi whiche he was 

onouvid of the kyng'; and si3* Gabelus17 

nedi, that was of! his lynage™, with myche 

cumpeny of his kyn®, Tobie° jaf to hym, 

vndur an obligacioun, the forseid wei3te 

of siluer. Forsothe? after myche tyme, 1s 

aftir? that Salamanazar, the kyng, was 

deed, whanne Senacherib, his sone, regn- 

yde for hym, and hadde"™ the sones of 

Israel hateful in his sij3t, Tobie 3ede echo 

dai bi al his kynrede, and eoumfortide 

hem, and departide’ of hise catels' to ech 

man, as he my3te ; he fedde hungri men, 20 

and 3af clothis to nakid men, and he ‘jaf 

bisili* sepulture to deed men and slayn. 

Sothelivy whanne the’ kyng Senacheribsi 

turnede a3en, fleynge fro Judee the* veni- 

aunce that God ‘hadde doY aboute? hym 

for his blasfemye, and he* was wrooth, and 

killide many of the sones of Israel, Tobie 

biriede ‘the bodies of hem>. And aftiree 

that it® was teld to the kyng, he comaund- 

ide Tobie to be slayn, and he took awei4 

al his catel. Sotheli¢ Tobie fledde with 23 

his sone and with his wijf, and was‘ hid 

nakidf{, for many men loueden hymm. For- 24} nakid; that 
sothe® after’ fyue and fourti daies', the ee 
sones of the kyng kyilliden the kyng; 7°" ° 
and* Tobie turnede a3en to his hows, and 2s 

al his catel was restorid to hym. 2 


' facultees .. 


2 Thobie ts. 
f And 1s. 


Thisili a. * his wijf «. 


y Om. s. 
€ helth, to be pacient in her disese s. 


x he was 1. 


& of the cuntree of 1. » he hadde 1s. } kyng, to haue fredom of his owne good 1s. * he siz 1s. | aman of 1s. 


- scynis. "lynagex. andr. and Tobies. P Andis. 4Om.s. "hehadder. % he departide is. 
ek Is, u bisili ordeynede 1 =Y And 1s. WOm.s. X*fortheis. Ydidethere1s. 2to1s. ® Om.1. 
her bodies 1s. ¢thisis. 4frohimis. ¢ Andis. fhe wasis. @ Andis. 6 Om.1s. i daies aftir 


this 1s. and thanne 1s. 


Il. 1—13. 


CAP. II. 


1 Aftir these thingus forsothe, whan was 
the feste dai of the Lord, and shulde be 
maad a good meteshipe in the hous of 

2Tobie, he seide to his sone, Go, and 
bring summe men of oure linage, dred- 

send God, and ete thei with vs. And 
whan he shulde gon, turned a3een he 
tolde to hym, oon of the sonus of Irael 
slain" to lyn in the strete; and anoon 
stertende ont fro his mete sete, leuende 
4the mete, fastende cam to the bodi; and 
takende it, he bar to his hous priueli, that 
whil the sunne were go doun, slee3li he 
sshulde birien it. And whan he hadde 
hid the bodi, he eet bred with weiling 
eand trembling, remembrende that’ woord, 
that the Lord seide by Amos, the pro- 
fete, 3oure feste da3es shul be turned in 
7to weiling and sorewing. Whan forsothe 
the sunne hadde go doun, he wente, and 
sbiriede it. Forsothe alle hise ne3heboris 
vndernomyn hym, seiende, Now bi cause 
of this thing thou art comaundid to be 
slain, and vnnethe thou hast scapid the 
maundement of deth, and eft thou biriest 
gthe deade? But Tobye, more dredende 
God than the king, ca3te the bodies of 
the slaine, and hidde in his hous, and in 
tothe mydny3tus biriede’ hem. It fel for- 
sothe, that on a dai weri* of biriyng, co- 
mende hom, he hadde cast hymself beside 
ithe wal, and hadde faste slept; and fro 
the nest of swalewis to hym slepende 
hote toordis fellen in vp on his e3en; 
izand wasY maad blind. ‘This forsothe 
temptacioun therfore the Lord suffride 
to come to hym, that to the* after- 
comeres shulde exsaumple be 3iuen of his 

13 pacience, as and of holi Job. And whan 

fro his time that he began to speke, 


uQm.4. VYthe au. Whe biriede «. 


}Certis 1s. ™ Om. 1s. 
forth s. 8% his fadir1is. t Tobie rose up 1s. 
ifisg. Zintos. awere1. % Om. g. 
mynde is. ftheg. gthatis. 5 Om.1s. 
" heest 1s. © thou biriest 1s. F he took 1s, 

s Andis. tar, t Tobie rs. 
doun hoote 1. 
®uponis. and so1. 


¢ Andis. 4 to bifalle 1s, 


TOBIT. 


* trauailid z£ pr. m. 
n brynge yn hidereis. © kyn 1s. 

u he lefte 1s. 
¢ the breed AB pr. 2. 

i And 1s. 
a hidde hem 1. he hidde hem s. 
Vv biriyng deed bodies 18. 
¥ toordis ncpeFGKLMNOoPeRUVWxabfh, drit m see. m. dounge 1. filthe s. 
€ ensaumple 1s. 


579 


CyeP. II. 


Forsothe! aftir these thingis, whanne a1 
feeste dai of the Lord was, and a™ good 
meete was maad in the hows of Tobie, he 
seide to his sone, Go thou, and brynge"e 
sum men of oure lynage®, ‘that dredenP 
God, that thei ete with vs. And whannes 
he? was goon’, he turnede a3en, and telde 
to hym’, that oon of the sones of Israel lai 
stranglid in the street; and anoon ‘he 
skippidet fro his sittyng place, and lefte® 
the’ mete, and cam fastynge to the bodi¥ ; 
and he took it*, and barY to” his hows pry-4 
uely, for to birie hym warli, whaune the 
sunne was? go> doun. And whanne hes 
hadde hid the bodi, he eet breed® with 
morenyng and tremblyng’, and remem-¢ 
bride® that‘ word, which® the Lord seide 
bi Amos, the prophete, 3oure feeste daies 
schulen be turned in to morenyng and 
‘lamentacioun, ether* weilyng. Sotheli', 
whanne the sunne was go doun, Tobie 
3ede, and biriede hym. Forsothe* alle hise g 
nei3boris blameden hym, and seiden, Now 
for the! cause of this thing thou were co- 
maundid to be slayn, and vnnethis thou 
aseapidist™ the comaundement" of deeth, 
and eft ‘biriest thou® deed men? Buty 
Tobie dredde more God than the kyng, 
and took? awei the bodies of slayn men, 
and hidde? in his hows, and biriede™ tho 
in the myddil of ny3tis. Sothelis it bi- 19 
felde, that in sum* day he" was maad wery 
of biriyng’; and he cam hoom, and leide 
hym silf bisidis a wal, and slepte”; and 1, 
while he slepte, hoote* orduresY ‘fellen 
doun? fro the nest of swalewis on* hise 
izen; and he was maad blynd. Forsothe® 12 
herfor the Lord suffride this temptacioun 
bifalle’ to hym, that the saumple® of his 
pacience, ‘as also of seynt Job‘, schulde be 


yYhe was c prom. % Om, au. 


Pdredyngs. 4 30ung Thobiets. * gone 
vhisis. Wded bodi1. *itupis. Y¥ bar 
d with tremblyng 1s. © he hadde in’ 
k Sothely 1s. !Om, 1s. ™ hast ascapid s, 
the hidde 1. he biriede s. 
w he slepte there 1. slepte theres, * ther fell 
z Om. 1. 


f Om. 1s. 


4EQ 


580 


euermore he dredde God, and kepte his 
hestis, he sorewide not ajen God, that 
the veniaunce of blindnesse cam to hym ; 
14 but vnmouable in the drede of God abod 
stille, gracis doende to God alle the da3es 
wof his lif. For as to blisful Job asail- 
eden the kingus, so to this fader and 
moder and his cosynes scorneden his lif, 
is seiende, Where is thin hope, for the whiche 
alinesse deede and sepulturis thou didist ? 
17 Tobie forsothe blamede hem, seiende, 


TOBIT. 


Il. 14=<I11. 2. 


3ouun to ‘after comeris®. For whi whanne 13 
he? dredde God euere fro his 3ong childhed, 
and kepte hise comaundementis!, he was 
not sory* a3ens God, for' the sikenesse of 
blyndnesse cam to hym; but he dwellide.s 
ynmouable in the drede of God, and dide™ 
thankyngis to God in alle the dais of his 
lijf. For whi as kyngis vpbreididen™ 1s 
seynt? Job, so i bifelde to this Tobie, 
hise? eldris and kynesmen‘ scorneden his 


lijf, and seident, Where is* thin hopet, for 16 4 hope ; these 


bileuyden the 
rewarding of 


which thou didist almes dedis and biri- 
yngist? Sotheli® Tobie blamyde hem’, 17 an one 
and seide’, Nyle 3e speke so, for we ben 18!" eae ds 
the sones of hooli men, and we abiden of Joob diden. 
that lijf, which* God schal 3yue to hem 


Lire here. c. 
that’ chaungen’ neuere her feith fro hym. 


18 Wileth not so speken, for the sonus of 
halewis wee ben, and that lif wee abijden, 
that God is to 3iue to hem that ther 

19 feith neuermor chaungen frohym. Anne 
forsothe, his wif, wente to weuyng were 
eche dai, and of the trauaile of hir hondis 


the liflode, that she my3te gete, she bro3te. 
20 And it is do, that takende a kide of she 
2iget, she bro3te hom. Of the whiche ble- 


Forsothe* Anne, his wijf, 3ede ech dai to 19 
the ‘werk of weuyng”, and brou3te® lyne- 
lode’, which® sche my3te gete of the trauel 


of hir hondis. Wherof f it ‘was doon®, that 20 
sche took a kide of geet", and brou3te! 
hoom. And whanne* hir hosebonde hadde! 21 
herd the vois of this kide bletynge, he 
seide, Se™ 3e, lest perauenture it" be® of 
thefte, but? ‘3elde 3e4 it" to ‘hise lordis®; 

for it is not leueful ‘to vst, ethir to ete 
ether to touche ony thing of thefte. At22 
these thingis" his’ wijf*” was wrooth, and 
answeride*, OpynliY thin hope is? maad 
veyn, and thin almes dedis apperiden® p 
now», And bi these® and ‘ote eo 23 and co, a 


: : : doon for ipocri- 
wordis? sche seide schenschip to hym®. aie, Zape Wie 


Cc. 


tende the vois whan hir man hadde herd, 
seide*, Looketh, lest parauenture it be 
stoln, but 3eldeth it to his lordis ; for it 
is not leeful to vs, or? to eten of stelthe 

gzany thing or to tovehen. At these 
thingis his wif wroth answerde, Openli 
vein is maad thin hope, and thine almesse 

23deedis now han aperid. And in these 
and in othere suche maner woordis she 
putte reprof to hym. 


+ apperiden ; 


CAP. III. 


i Thanne Tobie inwardli weilede, and 
2 began to pre3e with teres, seyende, Ri3t- 
wis thou art, Lord, and alle thi domes 
ben® rij3twise, and alle thi weies merci, 


CAP. III. 


Thanne Tobie inwardli sorewide, and1 
bigan‘ to preye with teeris, and seides, 
Lord, thou art iust, and alle thi domes2 
ben iust, and alle thi weies ben mercy, and 


She seide 4. > forau. ¢ Om. an. 


e after comers as also it is of hooly Job 1. aftercomeris, as also the paciens of seint Job s. “h Tobie 1s. 
2 estis as: sory or heuy 1. sori or gruching &. 1 for that 1. for that that s. ™ he dide 1s. 
; abu encir. © blessid 1s, P that hiseis. 4hiskynesmens. ' seiden fo hims. 8 is now 18. 
Bp te! aeDMe fp deed men 1s, “Andis. VY hem that thus spakens. Whe seide 1. he seide to hem s. 
: ies Bas y which s. 7 chaungidens. ® Andis. > weuynge craft H sec.m. © sche brou3te hom 1s. 

the lyuelode 1s. © that 1s. f Wherfors. Where x. 4 bifelleis. geet, for her weuyng s. she 
peor itis. kwhanne Tobiets. 1Om.s. ™ Loker. this kiders, © be gotun is, P but if it so 
Mg 1. but thanne s. Q3eldeth 1. 1 it ajenas. 8 hem that ou3ten itis. tOm.1. Uwordis1. Y the x. 

wijf of Tohie 1, * sche answeride fo himis. y Now is opynli 1. Now apertlis. 2Om.1. 4 han 


P I. . ° rT . . . 
a eerid b Om Is. c these WoO dis I these wor dis of malice § d bi siche othere 1s e hir husbonde IS. 


il. 3——14. 


sand treuthe, and dom. And now, Lord, 
haue mynde of me, ne take thou ven- 
iaunce of my synnes, ne remembre thou 
my giltis, or of my fader and moder. 
4For wee han not obeshid to thin hestis, 
and wee ben taken in to wasting, and 
caitifte, and deth, and in to fable, and 
in to reprof to’ alle naciouns, in the 
5 whiche thou hast scatered vs. And now, 
Lord, grete ben thi domys; for wee han 
not don aftir thin hestis, and wee han 
snot go cleerli befor thee. And now, 
Lord, after thi wille do with me merci, 
and comaunde in pes my spirit to be 
resceiued; it is spedful forsothe to me 
7more to dien than to linen. And so the 
same dai fel, that Sara, the do3ter of Ra- 
guel, in Ragis, cite of Medis, and she 
herde the repret of oon of the handwym- 
smen of hir fadir; for she was take to 
seuene men, and a deuel, Asmodius bi 
name, slo3 hem, anoon as thei weren gon 
9in to hir. Thanne whan she blamede 
the child womman for hir gilte, she an- 
swerde to hir, seiende, See wee no more 
of thee sone or® do3ter vp on erthe, thou 
10sleeresse of thi men; whether and slen 
thou wilt me, as and thou slowe seuene 
men? At this vois she wente in to the 
ouere bed place of hir hous, and thre 
da3is and thre ny3t she eet not, ne dranc ; 
11 but in orisoun abidende stille, with teres 
she prejede God, that fro this reprof he 
12shulde deliueren hir. It is do forsothe 
the thridde dai, whil she fulfilde the 
1orisoun, blessende the Lord, she seide, 
Blessid is thi name, God of oure fadris, 
that whan thou were wrathid, thou shalt 
do merci, and in time of tribulacioun 
synnes thou for3iuest to hem, that in- 
izwardli clepen thee. To thee, Lord,’ I 
turne my face, and to thee myn e3en I 


1 OBIT. 581 


treuthe, and doom. And now, Lord, haues 
thou’ mynde of me, and take thou not 
veniaunce of my synnes, nether haue thou 
mynde of my trespassis, ethirs of my fa- 
dris!, For we ‘obeieden not™ to ‘thi co-4 
maundementis", and® we ben takun in to 
rifelyng, and in to caitifte, and in to deth, 
and in to ‘a fable?, and in to schenschip 
to alle naciouns, among whiche thou hast 
scaterid vs. And now, Lord, thi domess 
ben grete1; for we han not do aftir ‘thi 
comaundementis', and we han not go clenli 
bifor thee. And now, Lord, bis thi willes 
do thou merci’ with me, and comaunde 
thou my spirit to be resseyued in pees; 
for" it spedith more to me to die than to 
lyue. And so it bifelde in” the same dai,7 
that Sare, the dou3ter of Raguel, was in 
Rages, a citee of Medeis, and sche herd 
schenschip of * oon of the handmaidis’ of: 
hir fadir; for sche? was 3ouun to seuenes 
hosebondis, and a feend, Asmodeus bi 
name, killide hem?, anoon as thei hadden 
entrid to hir®, Therfor® whanne sche‘y 
blamyde ‘the damysele® for her gilt, the 
damisele answeride to hir, and seide, Thou 
sleeressef of thin hosebondis, se we ‘no 
more a€ sone ether a’ dou3ter of thee ‘on 
erthe'; whether also thou wolt sle me, as 10 
also thou hast slayn seuene men? At this 
vois* sche! 3ede in to the hizere closet of 
hir hows, and thre daies and thre ny3tis 
sche eet not, nether drank; but sche con-11 
tynuede in preier™ with teeris, and bi- 
sou3te" God, that he schulde delyuere hir 
fro this schenschip. Forsothe® it was doon iz 
in the thridde dai, while sche hadde fillid? 
the! preier, sche blesside the Lord, and 13 
seide, God of oure fadris, thi name is 
blessid, which’ whanne thou hast be 
wrooth, schalt do* merci, and in tyme of 
tribulacioun for3yuestt synnes" to hem, 


dofa. &ne 4. 
. bOm.1. tnot withoute cend s. * neither 1s. | fadris ¢respassis 1. ™ haue not obeied 1s. 9 thin 
hestis 1s. and therfor 1s. _P ianglyng 1s. 4 grete and dredeful 1s. _‘* thin hestis1s. —§ aftir 1s, 
tOm.1. ‘forsothe 1s. VY also Is. w that in s. x spoken of 1. seide to hir silf of.s. _ Y hoond 
maidens sx. %Sarais. ®hem alles. » hir, milnyng hir for hir fleshli lust s. ¢ Andis. 4 Sara 1s. 


© hir maide rs.  sleestere 1. quellere 1 sec.m. & neuere upon erthe 1. no more vpon erthes. Om. 1s. 


1Om.1s. k words. 


'Saras. ™ holi preier 8. 
r the which 1. 


8 of thi zoodnesse do 8. 


n sche bisou3te 1s. 
t thou for3yuest 1s. 


oAndis.  P fulfillid 1s. 


u synne 8. 


q hir 1s. 


582 


isvere. I aske, Lord, that fro the bond of 
this repref thou asoile me, or certis fro 
isaboue thef erthe thou delyuere me. Thou 
wost, Lord, for neuere I coueitide man, 
and clene I hane kept my soule fro alle 
i7]ust. Neuere with pleieres I inengde me, 
ne with hem that in lijtnesse gon par- 
iseener I 3af me. An husbonde forsothe 
with thi drede, not with my lust, I con- 
issentide to taken. And or® I was vnwrthi 
to hem, or thei paranenture to me weren 
not wrthi; for parauenture to an other 
2oman thou hast kept me. Forsothe in 
2imannys power is not thi counseil. That 
forsothe for certein hath eche man that 
herieth thee, for his lif, if in prouyng® 
it were, shal ben crouned; if forsothe in 
tribulacioun it were, it shal be deliuered ; 
and if in chastising it were, it shal ben 
22leful to come to thi merci. Forsothe thou 
hast not delit in oure leesingus; for after 
tempest thou inakist reste, and after 
teres sheding and weiling', ful out io3ing 
oathou heeldest in. Be thi name, God of 
24 Irael, blessid in to worldus. In that time 
ben herd ful the prejeeris of bothe in the 
siz3te of the glorie of the most good God ; 
zosand ther is sent an aungil of the Lord, 
the holi Rafael, that he shnlde curen hem 
bothe, whos orisouns 0 time in the si3te 
of the Lord ben rehersid. 


CAR, LY, 


1 Thanne whan Tobie wende his pre- 
3eere to ben herd, that he my3te dien, he 
2clepide to hym Tobie, his sone, and seide 
to hym, Here, my sone, the woordis of 
my mouth, and hem in thi herte as foun- 
sdemens mak togidere. Whan God shal 


fOm.c. & other anrn. 


Vv al togidre s. 


4 to be parcener 1s. 
° this thing 1s. P Om. ise. 
tandis. 4 delynerid whan best tyme is s. 

Y outioiynge rs. Zisg. 80m. x. ‘> Om. 1s. 
(the higest s. § Om. 1. 
" a foundement Is. 


i But, Lord 1s. 


TOBIT. 


h reprouynge au. 


wand I lifte up [myn ijen s] to 1s. 

ame oulis. Pofs, €Om.1s. dian for fleshli lusts. ¢ that Y 1s. 

K Certis 1s. 

4 as bileue that s. 

V leueful fo him 1s. 
¢ bothe Voie and Sara 1s. 

b of holi aungels weren s, 


WI. 15-—I1V. 3. 


that inwardli clepen thee. Lord, to thee 14 
Y turne togidere’Y my face; to” thee NYC 
reise ‘myn ijen**. Lord, Y axe’, that thou 15 
assoile? ne® fro> the boond of this schen- 
schip, ether certis that thou take me awei 
fro aboue the® erthe. Lord, thou wost, 16 
that Y neuere coueitide man‘, and Y® haue 
kept my soule cleene fro al coneitise’, Y17 
medlide me neuere with pleieris}, nether 
Y 3af me parcener+ with hem that goon 
in vnstablenesse. Buti Y cousentide to1s 
take an hosebonde with thi drede, not 
with my lust. And ether Y was vnworthi 19 
to hem, ether thei perauenture weren not 
worthi to me; for in hap thou hast kept 
me to another hosebonde. For‘ thi coun-20 
cel is not in the power of man!, Forsothe™ 21 
ech" that worsehipith thee hath this® for 
a? certeyn, that if his lijf is" in preuyng, 
he schal be corowned*; sotheli' if he is in 
tribulacioun, he schal be delyuerid’; and 
if he is in chastisyngt, it schal be leueful’ — tin chastisyng; 
to come to thi merci. For’ thou delitist 22 minim ene 
not in oure lossis; for after tempest thou pee is oe 
makist pesible*, and after morenyng and pase 
wepyng thou bryngist yn ful ioye”%. God 23 here. c. 

of Israel, thi name be? blessid ‘in to 

worldis, that is, tl® ix to” withouten ende. 

In that tyme the preieris of bothe® weren 24 

herd in the? si3t of glorie® of hizestef God ; 

and Raphael, the hooli aungel of the Lord, 25 

was sent for? to heele hem bothe, whose 

preyeris weren® rehersid in o tyine in thei 

si3t of the Lord. 


+ pleieris ; dis- 
solutly and 
vnonestly. Lire 
here. c. 


CAP. IV. 


Therfor whanne Tobie gesside his preier 1 
to be herd, that he my3te die, he clepide 
Tobie, his sone, to hym silf*, and seide to2 
hym, My sone, here thou the wordis of 
my mouth, and bilde' thou tho™ as foun- 
dementis" in thin herte. Whanne God3 


i wepinge au. 


xOm.1s. **Om.s. Y axe of thee s. #% louse 1s. 
! unleeful coueitise 1s. & myself rs. 

Iman to knowe its. ™ Butis.  ® ech maz 1s. 
Tishereis. § erowned, if he continue pacienth s. 
w Certis 1s. x pesible wedre 1s. 
4Om. 1s. ¢ the glorie is. 
1 grounde rs, ™ hem 1s, 


iOm.1. * Om. 1s. 


IV. y4—18. 


take my soule, my bodi birie ; and wrshipe 
thou shalt han to thi moder alle the dajes 
4of thi lif; forsothe myndeful thou owist 
to be, what and hou grete she suffride 
sperilis for thee in hir wombe. Whan 
forsothe and she haue fulfild the time of 
hir lif, thou ‘shalt birien hir aboute me. 
6 Alle forsothe the dajes of thi lif in mynde 
haue thou* God, and bewar, lest any time 
to synne thou consente, and leie aside the 
7 hestis of oure God. Of thi substaunce do 
almesse deede, and wile thou not turne 
awei thi face fro any pore man; so for- 


sothe it shal be do, that neither fro thee . 


be turned awei the face of the Lord. 
8 What maner wise thou shalt moun, so 
ybe thou merciful. If myche were to thee, 
abundauntli 3if; if litil ther were, also 
\olitil gladli studie to parten. Forsotlie a 
good ineede to thee thou tresorist in the 
i1dai of nede; for almesse deede fro alle 
synne and fro deth delyuereth, and shal 
not suffre the soule to gon in to derc- 
ignesses. Gret trost shal ben almesse deede 
befor the most goode God to alle men 
i3doende it. Tac heede to thee, sone, fro 
alle fornicacioun, and, beside thi wif, neuer 
suffre thou synne of euel- los to knowen. 
14 Pride neuer in thi wit or in thi woord 
suffre thou to han lordshipe; in it for- 
issothe al perdicioun toc begynnyng. Who 
so euere’ any thing to thee wercheth, 
anoon 3eeld his meede, and the meed of 
thin hiryd man algate anent thee abijde 
ienot. That of an other thou hatist to be 
do to thee, looke thou, that any time thou 
17do™ not to an other. Thi bred with the 
hungri and with the nedi ett, and of thi 
isclothis nakide men couere. ‘Thi bred 
and thi win vp on the sepulture of the 
ri3twise ordeyne, and wile thou not of 


TOBIT. 


583 


hath take my soule, byrie thou my bodi; 
and ‘thou schal haue onour to thi modir® 
in alle the daies of hir? lijf4; for’ thou 
owist to be myndeful, what perels and 
how grete* sche suffride for thee in hir , 
woimbe. Forsothet whanne also sche hath 5 
fillid" the tyme of hir lijf, thou schalt 
birie hir bisidis me. Sotheli’ in alle thee 
daies of thi lijf haue thou God in mynde, 
and be thou war, lest ony tyme thou con- 
sente to synne, and forsake the heestis of 
oure God. Of thi* catel do thou almes,7 
aud nyle thou turne awei thi face fro ony 
poret man; forY so it schal be doon, that 
the face of the Lord be not turned awei t 

fro thee. As thou maist*, so® be thous eer 
merciful. If thou hast myche®, 3yue thous pissin ve 
plenteuousli; if¢ thou hast a litil, also be 

thou bisi to departe wilfuli® af litil. For? 10 
thou tresorist to thee a good meede in the 
dai of nede; for whi almes delyuereth fro 11 
al synne and fro deeth", and sehali not 
suffre the soule to go in to* derknessis!. 
Almes schal be grete™ trist bifor the hi3-12 
este God to alle men doynge it®. Sone, 13 
take heede to thi silf, and? fle4 fro al for- 
nieacioun, and, ‘outakun thi wijf', suffre 
thou neuereS’ to know' synne". SuffreY 1 
thou neuere pride to haue lordschip in thi 
wit, nether in thi word; for al ‘los, ether 
dampnacioun, took bigiunyng in that* 
pride. Who euere worchith ony thing to1s 
thee, 3elde thou anoon his mede, and outirli 
the hire of ‘thin hirid manY dwelle” not at* 


t+ ony pore ; if 
thou maist not 
3yue catel, 3yue 


ton the sepul- 

ere; not to 

sette metis on 

the sepnlcris 

of deed men, as 

if deed men 

hhadden nede 

5 to bodily metis 

thee. That” that thou hatist to be doot 16 nether @ make 
grete feestis for 


5 F c d 
to thee of another man, se® thou‘, lest ony eridecetervesn, 
tyme thou do® to another man. Ete TET eine 
breed® with hungri men and nedi, and — men; but that 
. « ° . . pore nen be 
with thi clothis hile thou nakid men. 
deyne thi breed and thi wiyn on the sepul- 


Ov- 18 fed in the deth 
tures{ of a iust man, and nyle thou ete 


of iust men, for 
the soulis of 
hem. Lire 
here. c. 


kOm. a. 1}Om. 4. ™ doit a, 

©Om.1s. Pthiis. 4 lijf thou schalt do honour to thi modir 1s, —-* forsothe 1s. 8 grete perels 1. 
t Andis. Uendidis. VAndis. WAndofs. <thiowners. Yandis. 2 maist, that is, after thi 
powers. ®Om.is. > myche catelis. itis, dandifis. ¢ gladly 1s. fthat 1s. 8 Certis thanne 1. 
Certis if thou thus doist s. 1 deeth of helle . iit schalis. * Om.cx. | depenesse p. derknesse EL. 
mthe grets. it as God lechith1. it afler Goddis hestes. POm.s. 4 fle thou aney 1. fle thou s. 
rOm.1s. ® neuere thee 1. neuer eny 8.- t know of thee 8. _¥ that hidous synne, outaken thi wijf 18. 
v And suffre 1s. WOm.1s. * Om.1s. Y¥ thi werk manis. *dwelle 1s. ® with s. b That thing 1s. 
eloke 1. 4 thou waarly 1. thou, or bewars. ¢ do that thing 1s. f meter. 86 biriyng 1s. 


584 


iit eten and drinke with the sinful. Coun- 

20 seil enermor of the wise man seek. Alle 
time blesse God, and aske of hym, that 
thi weies he make redi, and alle thi coun- 

21 seilis in hym abijde stille. I shewe also to 
thee, my sone, me to han 3iue ten talentus 
of seluer, whil 3it thou were a litil faunt, 
to Gabel, in Ragis, cite of Medis; and 

asthe writ of it anent me I haue; and 
therfore enserche, what maner to hym 
thon come, and resceyue of hym the 
aboue membrid wei3te of siluer, and re- 

23store to hym his writ. Wile thou not 
dreden, sone myn; a pore lijf forsothe 
wee bern, but manye goodis wee shul 
han, if wee drede God, and gon awei fro 
alle synne, and do wel. 


CAP. V. 


1 Thanne answerde Tobie to his fader, 
and seide, Alle thingus, what euere thou 
hast comaundid to me, fader, I shal do; 

zhou forsothe this monei I shal enserche, 
I knowe not; he me knowith not, and I 
hym vnknowe; what tocne shal I 3iue to 
hym ? but neither the weie, bi the whiche 

3me goth thider, any time I knew. Thanne 
his fader answerde to hym, and seide, 
Forsothe his writ anent me I haue, the 
whiche whanne thou to hym shewist, 
sanoon he shal 3elde the monee. But go 
now, and enserche to thee sum feithful 
man, that go with thee, saued his meede, 
whil 3it I line, that thou resceyue it. 
sThanne Tobie gon out, fond a 3ung man 
stondende, ful fair, gird, and as redi to 
e6gon; and vnknowende that an aungil 
of God he was, grette hym, and seide, 
Whennus han wee thee, goode 3unge 
y;man? And he answerde, Of the sonus 
of Irael. And Tobie seide to hym, Hast 
thou knowen the weie, that ledeth in to 
athe regioun of Medis? To whom” he 
answerde, I haue knowen, and alle the 


TOBIT. 


IV. 19—V. 8. 


and drynke therof with synneris. Euere 19 
seke thou perfitli a" counsel of a wijs man. 
Ali tyme blesse thou God, and axe thou 20 
of hym, that he dresse thi weies, and alle 
thi counsels dwelle* in hym. Also, my 2! 
sone, Y schewe to thee, that the! while 
thou were 3it a litil child, Y 3af ten ta- 
lentis of siluer to Gabelus, in™ Rages, a 
citee of Medeis"; and Y° haue his obliga- 
cioun anentis me; and? therfor perfitlis22 
enquere thon", hou thou schalt come to 
hym, and resseyue* of hym the forseid 
wei3te of siluer, and restore to hym his 
obligacioun. My sone, nyle thou drede ; 23 
forsothe we leden a pore lijf, but we schu- 
len have many goodis, if we dreden God, 
and goent awei fro al synne{, and doen 
wel. 
CAP. V. 

Thanne Tobie answeride to his fadir,1 
and seide, Fadir, Y schal do alle thingis, 
which ever thou comaundidist to me; but2 
Y noot, hou Y schal gete this money; he" 
knowith not me, and Y knowe not him; 
what tokyn schal Y 3yue to hym? but 
nether Y knew ony tyme the weie, bi 
which me goith thidur. Thanne his fadir3 
answerid to hym, and seide, SothelivY Y 
haue this” obligacioun at* me, which the 
while thou schewistY to him, he schal re- 
store anoon the monei. But go? now, and 4 
enquere to thee sum feithful man, that 
schal go with thee for his hire saf, ‘the 
while Y lyue 3it*, that” thou resseyue that 
monei®. Thanne Tobie 3ede out‘, ands 
foond® af 3ong{ oon’ stondynge, ‘schyn- 
yuge, and gird, and as redi to go; andeé 
hei wiste not, that it* was the angel of 
God. And he grette! the 3ong oon™, and 
seide, Of whennus han we thee, goode™ 
jonge man? And he answeride, Of° the7 
sones of Israel{. And Tobie seide to hym, 
Knowist thou the weie, that ledith in to 
the cuntrei of Medeis? To whom he an-s 


a the whiche £ pr.m. 


h Om, 1s. 
Medeis s. 


i Tn al ss. 
°Om.H.  P Om.ts. 
“Gabelus is, YCertisis. W his 1. 
Dand thats. ¢ monei 3if while I liue ts. 
btuckid up 1s. i Tobies. kK het. 


4 Om. 1s. 


k dwelle thei perfijtly 1s. 


X here anentis 1s. 
4 forth 1s. 
1 saluede 1. salutide s. 


10m.1. ™ thai dwellith in 1s. 
t thou bisily 1s. resseyue thow 1. 
Y schewist 7 ss. 
€ he foond 1s. 
m maz 1s. 


n the cuntrey of 
* if we goen 1. 
Zgo thous. ® Om. 1s. 
fa schynynge 1s. & man Is. 
2Om. g. °L am of 1s. 


+ al synne ; 
dedly, for we 
moun not 
outirly eschewe 
al venyal in 
this liyf. Lire 
here. C. 


+ a 30ng ; that 
is, an aungel 
apperinge in 
the licnesse of 
a jong man. 
schynynge ; 
that is, ful 
faire in the 
face. Lire 
here. C. 

§ of Israel ; 
the aungel 
seide soth, 
thou; he were 
no man, for 
tho thingis that 
ben doon of 
aungels among 
m 


fygure, and by 
this speche he 
signetieth the 
ioynyng to 
gidere of cha- 
rite, by which 
hooly aungels 
ben ioyued with 
deuout feithful 
men. Lire 
here. C. 


V. 9-—23.- 


weies of it oftesithes I haue go, and haue 
dwellid anent Gabel, 3oure brother, that 
dwelleth in Ragis, cite of Medis, that is 
gsett in the hil of Exbatenys. To whom 
Tobie seith, Suffre me, I beseche, to the 
time these thingus I telle to my fader. 
10 Thanne Tobie, gon in, shewide? alle these 
thingus to his fader ; vpe the whiche the 
fader, wundrid, pre3ede, that he shulde 
11comen in to hym; and so gon in, sa- 
lutide hym, and seide, Io3e to thee euer- 
izmor be! And Tobie seith, What io3e to 
mie shal be, that? in derknesses sitte, and 
isthe 1i3t of heuene see not? To whom 
seith the 3unge man, In strong inwit be 
thou ; ful nee3 it is that of God thou be 
iscurid. And so seide Tobie to hym, Whe- 
ther shalt thou mown ful lede my sone 
to Gabel in to Ragis, cite of Medis, and 
whan thou comest a3een, I shal jelde thee 
is thi meede? And the aungil seide to hym, 
I shal leden, and a3een lede hym to thee 
ishol. To whom answerde Tobie, I preje 
thee, shew to me, of what hous, and of 
17 what linage thou art? To whom Rafael, 


the aungil, seide, The kinrede thou askist — 


of the hirid man, or that hirid man, that 
iswith thi sone go? But lest parauenture 
I make thee stirid, I am Azarie, the sone 
igof gretel Ananye. And Tobie answerde, 
Of gret kinrede thou art ; but I aske, be 
thou not wroth, for I wolde knowe thi 
20kinrede. Forsothe the aungil seide to 
hym, I sound shal lede, and sound slial’ 
21a3een bringe to thee thi sone. Forsothe 
Tobie answerende seide, Wel go 3ee, 
and the Lord be in 30ure weie, and his 
gzaungil folewe with 3ou. Thanne alle 
thingus maad redi, that weren to be born 
in the weie, Tobie dide farewel to his 
fader and to his moder; and thei wente 
23 bothe togidere. And whan thei weren 


© and shewide au. 


TOBIT. 


P the whiche 4EFi. 


585 


sweride, Y knowe?, and Y haue go ofte 
alle the weies therof, and Y hauc dwellid 
ati Gabelus, 3oure brother’, that’ dwellith 
in Rages, a citee of Medeis, which' is set 
in ‘the hil of ® Echbathanis. To whomog 
Tobie seide, Y biseche’, abide thou me”, 
til Y telle these thingis to my fader. 
Thanne Tobie entride, and telde* 
these thingis to his fader; on which’  cience of his 
+ ¥ 4 . blyndnesse, but 
thingis the’ fader wondride*, and preiede", _ dispisinge the 
that he wolde entre® to him. Therfor’ hei We he 
entride, and grette® Tobie, and seide’, Ioie Rees 
be cuere to thee! And Tobie seide, What 12 yee die 
manery ioie schal be to me, that sitte in 
derknessis, and se not ‘the lijt$ of he- 
uene"? To whom the 3ong oon! seide, Be 13 
thou of strong wit‘; it is in the nextel 
that thou be heelid of God. 


+ what maner ; 
alle 10 he seide not 
this by vnpa- 


t Azarie ; the 
anngel seide 
soth, for his 
speche was 
fyguratif. Aza- 
rie is inter- 
pretid the hel- 
Therfor™ 14 pere of God ; 


: . . treuly goode 

Tobie seide to hym, Whether thou maist — aungels ben 
‘ the helperis of 

lede my sone to Gabelus in to Rages, the” Goa, i 
citee of Medeis, aud whanne thou comest eee 

a3en, Y schal restore thi mede to thee?  dressid in to 


R helthe bi the 
And the aungel seide to hym, Y schal 15 seruyce of hem ; 


lede®, and? bringe’ a3en him hool to thee. Pali 
To whom Tobie answeride, Y preie thee, igen 
schewe to me, of what hows, ether of what Los 
lynage thou art? To whom Raphael, the 17 We ben the 
helperis of 


aungel, seide, Axist thou the kyn of" the — God. Ananye 
hirid man, ethirs the hirid man hym silf, thegmteor 


that schal go with thi sone? But lest 1s God whos 
sones aungels 
perauenture Y make thee douteful, Y am benin eae ‘ 
a maner, bl whic. 
Azarie}, the sone of gretet Ananye. And 19 they ben seid 
. ‘ tl f 
Tobie answeride, Thou art of greet kyn ; plorietahich is 
but Y axe", that thou be not wrooth, that 


grace fully 
endid, ethir 
Y wolde knowe thi kyn. 


Forsothe’ the 20 perfit; but 
Tobie vndur- 


aungel seide to hym, Y schal lede™ thi stood that he 
zs was a man, the 
sone hool, and Y schal bring* ajzenY to sone of sum 


noble man of 


thee ‘thi sone hool?. Sotheli@ Tobie an-21 terse, but the 


sweride, and seide, Wel ‘go 3e, and the "sel dis- 
3 : ; seynede not 
Lord be in 3oure weie, and his aungel go Tobie in this, 


‘ ae for Tobie hadde 
with 3ou. Thanne whanne alle thingis 22 thus betere his 


: . urpos. Li 
weren redi, that schulden be borun® in ferc 


4 the greet preest 4. . ° I shal a. 


Pknowe if 1s. with is. "cosynis. ’ which s. tthe which eifee 1. which cites. "Om. 1s. Vv hiseche 


thees. Wmeheres. *he telde 1. 


y the which 1. 


zhis 1. @wondride how he had so soon gelen him a 


Jelowe s. ” he preiede the 3ounge man 1s. ¢entre yn s. 4Thannei. ¢ saluede 1. salutide s. f seide fo 
himis. €Om.s. htheeiri. tmanis. * inwitt m1, ! moost niz fyme is. ful ny3 H sec.m. ™ Thanne t. 


ae eae lede him 11 see.m. lede him thidere 1s. 
axist thou who is 1s. t the grete 1. 
x lede plures. Y lim agen hool is. 2 Om. 18. 


VOL. II. 4¥F 


P and I schal 1s. 
u axe [thee s] or preie thee 18. 
a And 1. 


tofmes. 8 ethir 
w Jede forth 1s, 
¢ borne with hin s. 


4 lede plures. 
Vv And ts. 
b mote 3e go 1 sec. m. 


586 


go forth, his moder began to wepen, and 
sein, The staf of oure elde thou hast 
taken awei, and hast sent ouer fro vs ; 
osneuere hadde be that mouee, for the 
o5whiche thou sentist hym; forsothe oure 
porenesse suffiside to vs, that richessis 
wee shulden counte that, that oure sone 
2¢ wee sejen. And Tobie seide to hir, Wile 
thou not wepen ; saf slial comen oure sone, 
and saf shal ajeen turne to vs, and thin 
27 e3en shul seen hym. I leeue forsothe, that 
the goode aungil of God folewes hym, 
and wel shal disposen alle thingus, that 
ben don aboute hym, so that with io3e 
28he be turned ajeen to vs. At this vois 
ceside his modir to wepen, and was 
stille. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Tobie forsothe wente forth, and an 
hound folewide hym, and he abod the 
firste abiding biside the flod of Tigris. 
2And he wente out fort to wasshen his 
feet; and lo! a gret fish wente out for* 
3to deuouren hym. Whom dredende To- 
bie criede out" with a gret vois, seiende, 
4 Lord, he asailethY me. And the aungil 
seide to hym, Cach his fin, and draj3 it 
to thee. The whiche thing whan he 
hadde do, he dro3 it in to the drie, and 
sit began to quappe befor his feet. Thanne 
the aungil seide to hym, Opene this fish, 
and his herte and galle and mawe lei vp 
to thee; these thingus forsothe ben pro- 
6fitabli necessarie to medicynes. The 
whiche thingus whan he hadde do, he 


§ folewith 4. t Om. c. 


dweie with hem 1. © Om. s. 
aungel and Tobie ts. 
m gent him 1s. 
Gneuere ben is. ‘thatr. §* hast sent 1s. 
W richessis fo us 1s. x han seen Is. 
¢ Sothly 1s. ¢ the Lord s. 
hound 1s. i Tobie 1s. 


of her first iorney s. 


f Om. g. 


TOBIT. 


u Om. au. 


& moder to fare wel s. 

k sele to oold Tobie 1. seie to Tobie hir husbond s. 

2 Om. A pr.m. et plures. wolde God 11 sec. m. 

t him fore 1. 

Y sone bisidis vs s. 

© that aungel 1, that the aungel s. 
k abood 1. duellide or abood s. 

™ Om, BCEF pr. im. H prom. LPUVX. 


V. 24-—VI. 6. 


the weie’, Tobie made ‘farewel to® his 

fadir and hisf modir&; and ‘bothe 3eden> 

togidere. And whanne thei! weren goon 23 

forth, his modir bigan to wepe, and to 

seie*, Thou hast take the staf!{ of oure + te stuf; that 
eelde, and hast sent™ awey fro vs; ‘Y 24 boa fae 
wolde” thilke® monei were? neuere', ‘for (yn a 
which’ thou sentists him‘; oure pouert 25 ts the ser- 


uyce of re- 
sufficide to vs, that we schulden arette® eae ani 
ere 
this” richessis*, that we sien* oure sone’. purnyaunce, if 


. . . they han nede. 
And Tobie seide to hir, ‘Nyle thou wepe? ; 26 eka 


oure sone schal come saaf, and he schal 
turne a3en saaf to vs, and thin ijen schulen 
se hym. For® Y bilene, that the good 27 
aungel of God’ goith with him, and he® 
schal dispose wel alle thingis, that ben 
doon aboute hym, so that he turne a3eu 
with ioie to vs. At this voisf his moder 23 
ceesside to wepe, and was stille. 


CAP VG 


Forsothe® Tobie 3ede forth, and ‘a dogge®) 
suede hym, and he! dwellide* in the firste 
dwellyng! bisidis the flood of Tigrys. 
And he ‘3ede out" to waische hise feet ;2 
and lo! a greet fisch 3ede out’ to deuoure 
hym. Which? fisch Tobie dredde, and3 
criede? with greet vois, and seide, Sire, 
het assailith me. And the aungel seide4 
to hym, Take ‘thou his‘ gile, ‘ether iowe*, 
and drawe hym to thee. And whanne he" 
hadde do this thing, he drow it’ in to the” 
drie place, and it bigan to spraule bifor* 
hiseY feet?. Thanne the aungel seide tos 
hym‘, Drawe out the entrails of this fisch, 
and kepe to thee his herte and® galle and 
mawe®; for’ these thingis ben nedeful to® 
medicyns profitablif. And whanne he&6 


VY coometh on E£ pr. m. 


‘the 
| staf or the sustynauuce 1. 
© that ms. that that 1. P had ats. 
uhaue arettid 1s. -¥ this thing fo be 1. 
@ Wepe thou not 1. b saaf thidere 1s. 
Tyois or words. €& Andis. ban 
1 dwellyng of his tourney 1. duellyng or restyng 
1 wente forth 1. 3ede forth s. © ont a3ens 


h thei walkiden forth bothe 1. 


him s. P The which 1. 4 therfor he criede 1s. * this fisch 1s. the fisch bi the 1s. ¢t Om. 1. or 83 the 
towe s. “Tobie is. ¥ the fisch is. Was. *toforeg. yther.Om.s. 2 feet of Tobie 1. Tobie s. 
*Tobic is, bhisis. ¢hismawers. 4certisis, ¢andtos. f thei helpen protitabli 1. thei wolen help 


profitabli s. & Tobie rs. 


VI. 7—-17. 


rostide his flesh”, and beren with hem 
in the weie; the tother thei saltiden, that 
shulden suffise to them in the weie, to 
the time that thei shulden ful come in to 
7 Ragis, cite of Medis. Thanne Tobie ask- 
ide the aungil, and seide to hym, I be- 
seche, Asarie, brother, that thou sei to 
me, what remedie shuln han _ these 
thingus, that of the fish thou hast co- 
smaundid to be kept. And the aungil 
answerende seide to hym, A parcel of 
his herte if thou putte vp on theX colis, 
his smoke putteth out al the kinde of 
deuelis, outher fro man or fro womman, 
so that he come no more nee3 to hem. 
9And the galle is worth to ejen to ben 
enointid, in the whiche were rime, and 
thei shul ben hol. And Tobie seide to 
hym, Where wilt thou, that wee dwelle ? 
u And the aungil answerende seith, Heer 
is a man, Raguel bi name, nee3 of thi 
linage, and this hath a do3ter, Sara bi 
name; but any other he hath saue hir, 
12neither male ne femele. ‘To thee is due 
‘ al his substaunce; and thee behoueth to 
ishan hir wif. Aske thanne hir of hir 
fader; and he shal 3iue to thee hir wif. 
14 Thanne auswerde Tobie, and seide, I haue 
herd, for she hath ben take to senene men, 
and thei ben deade; but and these thingus 
is I haue herd, for a deuel slo3 hem. I drede 
thanne, lest paranenture and these thingus 
fallen to me; and sithen I am alone to 
my fader and moder, I putte doun the 
16 eelde of hem wytl sorewe to helle. Thanne 
aungil Rafael seide to hym, Here me, 
and I shal shewe to thee, who ben, to 
i7whom mai the deuel han maistrie; in 
hem, that wedloc so taken, that God fro 
them and fro ther mynde thei closen 


W fish 4H. 


h these nc. the g. / thingis n. 
that fleisch and baren it forth 1s. 
thingis or remenauntis of that fissh s. 
comanndist fg. tuponis. 4% Om, ts. 
{this s] fisch 1s. 
€ knaue child 1. male childe s. 
wijf 1 sec. m. | answerede to him 1s. 
also1, ‘and therfor is. 8% Om. s. 
¥ drede to putte 1s. 


Pas. 


f maide child 1. 


tOm. 1, 


TOBIT. 


k the fleisch therof 1s. hise flesch r. the fleisch of the fisch a. 
™ in the weie with hem Is. 
4 remedies s. 
v hoot coolis 1s. 
Zanoynte with 1s. 4thei1. ) be ther thur3 s. Cabiden 1. duelle or abyde s. 
g thou moste 1. 
™ this Sara 1s. 

U sith 1. 
2 to helle her eelde with drurynesse 1s. 
4 certis ouer 1. certis the feend hath power ouer s. © her weddyngis 18. 


4EFQ 


587 


hadde do this thing’, he rostide ‘hise 
fleischis*, and thei token! ‘with hem in 
the weie™; thei" saltiden othere thingis®, 
that schulde suffiee to hem in the weie, 
til thei camen in to Rages, the? citee of 
Medeis. Thanne Tobie axide the aungel,7 
and seide to hym, Azarie, brother, Y bi- 
seche thee, that thou seie to me, what re- 
medie’ these thingis schulen haue, whiche™ 
thou comaundidist’ to be kept of the fisch. 
And the aungel answeride, and seide tos 
hym, If thou puttist a lytil part of his 
herte ont the" coolis’, the smoke therof 
dryueth aweift al the” kynde of feendis, 
ethir fro man cther, fro womman, so that 
it neiz3e* no more to hem. And the galleY» 
is myche worth to anoynte’ i3en, in whiche 
is a web, and tho* schulen be" heelid. Ando 
Tobie seide to him, Where wolt thou, that 
we dwelle®? And the aungel answeride, 11 
and scide, Here is a man, Raguel bi name, 
a ny3? man of thi lynage, and he hath a 
dou3tir, Sare bi name; but nether he hath 
male® nethir ony other femal‘, outakun hir. 


+ dryueth 
awey ; that is, 
figurith the 
putting awey 
of fendis, for 
the dedis of 
the aungel 
aboute Tobie 
weren fygura- 
tif in many 
thingis 3 ther- 
for thilke 
smoke figuride 
the virtu of 
preyer of 
jongere Tobie 
and of Sare, bi 
whos merit the 
aungel Raphael 
puttide awey 


_the fend fro 


Sare; wherfor 
it is seid in 

viij. e°. that 
not thilke 
smoke droof 
awey the fend, 
but that Ra- 
phael took him, 
and boond him 
in the hijere 
partis of Egipt ; 
for sithen 
aungels ben 


Al his catel is due to thee ; and it bihoueth 12 outirly crea- 


turis of viudur- 


thee® haue hir to wijf*. Therfor axe thow 13 stonding, and 


hir of hir fadir ; and he schal 3yue ‘hir ai 
wijf to thee‘. Thanne Tobie answeridel, 14 
and seide, Y haue herd, that sche™ was 
jouun to seuene hosebondis, and thei" ben 
deed; but also® Y herde? this, that a fend 


killide hem. Therfor™ Y dredde, lest per-1s 


auenture also’ these’ thingis bifalle to me; 
and sithen" Y am oon’ aloone” to my fa- 
dir and modir*, Y putteY doun ‘with so- 
rewe her eelde to hellis*t. Thanne thei 
aungel Raphael seide to hym*, Here thou 
me, and Y schal schewe to thee, ‘whiche 
ith ben, ouer whiche® the fend hath mais- 
trie; ouer’ hem, that taken so weddyngys®, 17 


x Om. an. 


I token 
° thingis of that fishe 1. 

S hast comaundid 1s. 
y galle of the 
4 Om. 1. 
i Om. s. ‘ thee hir to 

©On.1. P have herd 1s. 4 this 
W oonly sone 1s. * to my modir B. 
» who thei1s. © whom 1s. 


0 and thei ts. 
t which thingis s. 
wOm.1s. * schal neize 1. 


h thi wijf 1. 
0 alle thei 1s. 
Van Is. 

a Tobie Is. 


han no bodies 
kyndly to hem, 
no materiel 
creature may 
make othir 
prenting in 
hem, wherfor 
this smoke put- 
tide not awey 
the fend, but 
figuride his 
putting awey. 
Lire here. 
Tt hellis ; he 
dredde lest if 
he were deed, 
that his fadir 
and modir 
selunlden be 
vnpacient for 
sorewe, and so 
die bothe 
bodily and 
goostly. Lire 
here. C. 


588 


out, and to ther lustis so thei taken 
heede, as an hors and a mule, in the 
whiche is not vnderstonding, hath vpon 
ishem the deuel power. Thou forsothe, 
whan thou shalt taken hir, gon in to the 
bed place, bi thre da3es be thou continent 
fro hir, and no thing other but to prei- 
19 eeris thou shalt stonde in with hir. That 
ny3t forsothe the awe of the fish brent, 
20 the deuel shal be dryuen awei. The se- 
cunde forsothe ny3t in the coupling’ of 
holi patriarkis thou shalt ben admittid. 
21 The thridde forsothe ny3t blessing thou 
shalt gete, that sonus be goten of 30u 
22sounde. The thridde forsothe ny3t ouer- 
passid, thou shalt take the maiden with 
the drede of the Lord, and for looue of 
sonus more than of lust lad, that in the 
sed of Abraham thou gete blessing in 
souus. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Forsothe thei-wenten in to Raguel; 
and Raguel resceyuede hem with io3e. 
2And Raguel, beholdende Tobie, seide to 
Anne, his wif, Hou lic is this 3unge man 
3to oure auntis sone. And whan these 
thingus he hadde seid, he seith, Whennus 
be 3ee, 3unge men, my brethern? And 
thei seiden, Of the linage of Neptalim 
4 wee ben, of the caitifte of Nynyue. Raguel 
seide to them, Knowe 3ee Tobie, my bro- 
ther? The whiche answerden, Wee han 
sknowen. And whan he spac of? hym 
manye goode thingus, the aungil seide to 
Raguel, Tobie, of the*whiche thou askest, 
6is thisis fader. And Raguel putte hym 


TOBIT. 


VI. 18 —VII. 6. 


that thei close out God fro hem and fro 
her mynde; ‘the fend hath power ouer 
hem, that® 3yuen so tent to her! letcherie, 
as an‘ hors! and mule™ doon™, ‘that han® 
noon vndurstondyng?. But whanne thou 1s 
hast take hir4, entre thou" in to the’ bedt, 
and bi thre daies be thou continent" ‘fro 
hir’, and to noon other thing’ thou schalt 
3yue tent* with hir, noY but* to preieris. 
Forsothe® in that firste ni3t, whanne the 19 
mawe of the fisch is® brent, the fend? schal 
be dryuun awei*. Sothelif in the secounde 20 
ny3t thou’ schalt be resseyued in the" cou- 
plyng' of hooli patriarkis*. Forsothe! in a1 
the thridde ny3t thou™ schalt gete bless- 
yng", that hoole sones® be gendrid of 3o0u. 
But whanne the thridde ni3t is passid, 22 
thou schalt take the virgyn with the? 
drede of the Lord, and thon  schalt be 
led" more bi the loue of children® than 
of* lust", that in the seed of Abraham 
thou gete blessyng in sones’. 


CAP. VII. 


‘Forsothe thei’ entriden to Raguel ; and! 
Raguel* resseyuede hem with ioie. And2 
Raguel bihelde Tobie, and seideY to Anne, 
his wijf, This 3ong man is ful lijk my 
sister sone. And whanne he’ hadde seid3 
these thingis*, he seide, Of whennus ben 
3e, 30nge men, oure britheren? And thei 
seiden, We ben of the lynage of Nepta- 
lym, of the caitifte of Nynyue. And Ra-4 
guel seide to hem, Knowen 3e Tobi, my 
brother? Whiche> answeriden, We knowen 
him’. And ‘whanne he spak? manye good 5 
thingis of Tobie, the aungel seide to Ra- 
guel*, Tobie, of whom thou axist, is the 
fadir of this man. Thanne Raguel bow-¢ 


Y counseilyuge au. 2 to 4. ® Om. c. 
fOm.3s. and thatrs. bherbisinesses. §Om.s. kOm.3. thors doiths. ™amuales. 
1 Ow. 1s. ° in whom is s. P vndirstondyng, ower hem the feend hath maistrie 1, @ hir fo wi7f's. 
'Om.s.  Sthis. ‘bed places. Uchastis, absteynyng thee from hir ix al fleshli Insts. ¥ thing 
in that [this s] tyme 1s. * thi bisynesse 1. the bisinesse s. yOm.1. 2 but oonly 1. a Certis 1s. 
h the 1s. ¢ schal be is. 4 fend therbiis. © awei fro 30us. f Andis.  & bi holi preier and bisi mynde 


thous. Om. 1s. { couplyng or mariage 1s. 
" thur3 thi holi preter and good purpose thou s. 


verlnuess, POm.1s. 4% in thi wil thou s. 
of flessh 8. ¥ thi sones 1. soues bryngyng forth s. 
seide 1s. 2 Raguel is, 8 thingis to his wijf 18. 


whan Raguel spake s. ¢ him rs. 


k patriarkis, whose mynde is withouten ende s. 
" the blessyng of God 1s. 
T led axd moued s. 
Ww Thanne the aungel and Tobie 1s. 
> And thei 1s. 


1 And 1s. 
© sones in rizt feith and other 
8 geting of children 1s. * bits. & Inst 
xXher Yhe 


¢Om, plures. 4 Raguel spekynge 1. 


VII. 719. 


self, and with teres kiste hym, and wep- 
jende vp on his necke, seide, Blessing be 
to thee, sone myn; for of good and of the 
gbeste man thou art sone’. And Anne, 
his wif, and Sara, the do3ter of hem, 
ywepten. After forsothe that thei hadden 
spoken, Raguel comaundede a wether to 
be slain, and to be maad redi a feste. 
And whan he beso3te them to sitte doun 
1oto the mete, Tobie seith, Heer I to dai 
shal not ete, ne drinke, but it first myn 
asking thou conferme, and thou behote 
\1to 3iue to me Sara, thi do3ter. The 
whiche woord herd, Raguel dradde, wit- 
ende what fel to thoo® seuene men; and 
he began to dreden, lest parauenture lic 
maner to this’ shulde fallen, and he die. 
And whan he doutede, and 3af not any 
1zanswere to the askere, the aungil seide 
to hym, Wile thou not dreden to 3iuen 
hir to this; for to this dredende God 
wif thi do3tir is due; therfore an other 
ismy3te not han hir. Thanne seide Ra- 
guel, I doute not, that God preieeris® and 
ls4my teres in his si3te hath taken. And 
I trowe, for the Lord therfore made 3ou 
to come to me, that and this shulde be 
ioyned to hir kin after the lawe of 
Moises; and now wile thou not bern 
1s doute, for to thee hir I shal take’. And 
takende the ri3t hond of his do3ter toc to 
the ri3t hond of Tobie, seiende, God of 
Abraham, and God of Isaae, and God of 
Jacob, be with 3o0u, and hes ioine 3o0u, 
isand fulfille his blissing in 3ou. And the 
chartre taken, thei maden the conscrip- 
17cioun of the wedloe. And after these 
thingus thei plenteuousli eeten, blessende 
i8God. And Raguel clepede to hym Anna, 
his wif, and comaundede to hir, that she 
19 shulde make redi an other bed place. And 
he bro3te in to it Sara, his do3ter, and 
4 this man 4. 


bthe sonec. ¢ thes. 


TOBIT. 


A 


589 


edef doun hym silf, and with teeris he 
kisside Tobie, and he® wepte on" his 
necke, and seide, My sone, blessyng be to7 
thee ; for thou art the sone of a good! and 

a ful noble man. And Anne, ‘his wijf!,s 
and Sare™, ‘the dou3tir of hem", wepten®. 
Forsothe? after that thei hadden spoke4,» 
Raguel comaundide a wethir to be slayn, 
and a feeste to be maad redi. And whanne 
he” excitide’ hem to sitte doun to mete, 
Tobie seide, Y schal not ete, nethir drynke 10 
here to dai, not but thou conferme first 
myn axyng, and biheete® to 3yue to me 
Sare, thi dou;ter’. And whanne this word 11 
was herd, Raguel dredde, witynge what 
bifelde to tho” seuene men; and he* bi- 
gan for’ to drede, lest perauenture it 
schulde bifalle in lijk maner to this To- 
bie. And whanne he doutide’, and 3af noon 
answere to the axere, the aungel seide to 12 
hym*, Nyle thou drede to 3yue hir to this 
man; for thi dou3ter ‘is due wiyf® to this 
man dredynge God ; therfor another man 
my3te not haue hir. Thanne Raguel seide, 13 
Y doute not, that® God hath resseyued my 
preieris and teeris’ in his si3t. And Y 14 
bileue, that herfor® the Lord made 3ou 
comef to me, that also this womman 
schulde be ioyned to her kynrede bi the 
lawe of Moises; and now® nyle thou bere 
douteh, that Y schal 3yue hir to thee. 
And he! took the ri3t hond of his dou3ter, ts 
and 3af* to the ri3t hond of Tobie, and 
seide, God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, 
and God of Jacob, be with 3ou, and he 
ioyne 3ou togidere, and ‘he fille! his bless- 
yng in 30u. And whanne™ a chartere 16 
‘was takun", thei? maden ‘writyng togi- 
dereP of 4 the mariage. And aftir these 17 
thingis thei eten, and blessiden God. And 18 
Raguel clepide to hym Anne, his wijf, 
and comaundide’ hir to make redi another 

& Om. a4. 


€ my preiers 4. f 3yue a. 


f sente EH pr.m. Lxg. & Ragnel is. b upon rs. i ful good s. * the best seELpuvxg. ful noble c pr. m. 


a noble wn sec.m. noble s. 
© wepten bolhe 1s. 
tOm.t. 4 bihote 1s. 
this mater s.  ® Raguel ts. 
comet. §& now, Tobie 1s. 

+! fulfille he ts. 
of 1s. 


¥ dou3ter to wijf 1s. 


m thei token 1s. ® Om. ts. 


t he comaundide 1s. 


Uthe wijf of Ragnel 1. Raguelis wife s. 
PAnd 1. 4 spoke ¢hus 1. spoken (hus logidre s. * Raguelis. § mouyde ts. excite b. 
Ww the ts. 

b owith to be jouen 1s. 
h ony doute 1. dou3t in thin herte s, 
o and thei ts. 


m Om. s. a her dou3tir ts. 
x Raguel ts. 


yOm. 1s. * doutid or musyd in 
¢ that ne 18. 


d my teeriss. ‘therfors. fto 
i Raguelis. he gaf dir 1. gaue hir s, 
P togidere a writyng 1s. 4 of witnessyng 


te 


590 


she wepte; and he seith to hir, In strong 
inwit be thou, do3ter myn; the Lord of 
henene 3iue to thee ioze, for the no3e that 
thou hast suffrid. 


CAP eV AIT: 


1 Aftir forsothe that thei suppeden, thei 
2bro3ten the 3unge man in to hir. And 
so Tobie recordid of the woordis of the 
aungil, bro3te forth of his bagge a part 
of the mawe, and putte it vp on the 
squike colis. Thanne aungil Rafael ca3te 
the deuel, and bond hym in the® desert 
sof the ouere Egipt. Thanne Tobie be- 
so;3te the maiden, and seide to bir, Sara, 
rijs, and presee wee to dai to! God, and 
to moru, and the. secunde moru; for 
these thre ny3tis wee shul be joined to 
God; the thridde forsothe ny3t passid 
souer, wee shul ben in oure wedloc; sonus 
forsothe of halewis wee ben, and wee 
moun not so be ioyned as and Jentilis, 
6that vnknowen God. Risende forsothe 
togidere, bisili thei pre3eden bothe togi- 
dere, that helthe shulde be 3iue to hem. 
7And Tobie seide, Lord God of onre fa- 
dris, blesse thee heuenus, and érthis, and 
se, and wellis, and flodis, and eche thi 
screature, that is in hem; thou* madist 
Adam of the slim of erthe!, and thou 3eue 
9to hym helpe, Eue. And now, Lord, thou 
wost, for not bicause of leccherie I take 
my sister, but for onli loue of bringing 
forth of childre, in the™ whiche be blessid 
10thi name in to worldis ‘of worldis". Also 
seide Sara, Haue merci to vs, Lord, haue 
merei to vs, and eelde wee bothe togidere 
iihole. And it is do aboute chykenys® crow- 


TOBIT. 


VISIT. t—a15. 


bed. And sche ledde Sare, hir dou3tir, in 19 
to it, and sche’ wepte; and Anne seide to 
hir, My dou3ter, be thou of strong wit"; 
the Lord of heuene 3yue to’ thee ioie, for 
the anoie that thou suffridist™. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe* aftir that thei hadden soupid, 1 
thei brou3ten inY the 30ng man to® hir. 
Therfor* Tobie? bithou3te® of ¢ the wordis2 
of the aungel, and ‘brou3te forth® of his 
scrippe a part of the mawe‘, and puttide® 
it on” quike! coolis. Thanne* Raphael, the3 
aungel, took the fend, and boond! hym™ in 
the" desert of hiz3ere Egipte. Thanne®4 
Tobie monestideP the virgyn, and seide4 
to hir, Sare, rise vp, and preye we God to 
dai, and to morewe, and ‘the secounde™ 
morewe; for in these thre ny3tis we ben 
joyned*t to God‘; sotheli* whanne the 
thridde ny3t is passid, we schulen beY ‘in  ioyned to God 
a 0. Seas . bi deuocioun 
oure mariage”; for* we ben the childrens and preyer, 
of hooli men, and we moun not soY be wee 
ioyned* togidere* as also? hethene men‘,  ¢fmatrimonye 
that knowen not God. Sotheli thei ris-6 
iden‘ togidere, and bothe® preyeden togi- 
dere bisili, that helthef schulde be 3ouun 
to hem. And Tobie seide, Lord God of7 
oure fadris, heuenes, and londis%, and the 
see, and wellis, and floodis, and ech crea- 
ture of thin, which" is in tho, blesse thee’; 
thou madist Adam of the sliym of erthe,s 
and 3auest* to hym an help, Eue. And» 
now, Lord, thou woost, that Y take my 
sistir! not for cause of letcherie, but for 
loue aloone of eeris™, in® whiche® thi name 
be blessid in to worldis? of worldis. Ther-10 
ford Sare seide, Lord, haue thou merey on 
vs, haue thou merci on vs, and waxe we 


t ioyned ; that 
is, owen to he 


hOm. an. iOm. au. k thou forsothe 4. 1 the erthe & prim. mQm. au. "Om. c. 
© cokkis a. ; 

SSareis. tastrong 4 pr.m. “ynwitt u sec.m.is. VY Om. eraniKumsxafgh. hast suffrid 1s. 
x Andis. YOm.1is. % Tobieintors. @And1, And thannes. he g. ¢ bithou3te himis. 4Om.g. 
: he drewe out 1s. f mawe of the fische 1s. & he puttide 1s. uponis, ithe quyke g. * And than s. 

he a3en boond 1s. ™hym fasteis. "Om.sx. ©%Andthans. Pwarnyde 1. amonestides. 4 he 
seide 1. Taftirto1. *ioyned togidre s. t God, ¢o preie him hertli to dresse alle our waies 8, “and 1s. 


* be ooned 1s. 
* togidre in wedlok s. » Om.1. 
‘helthe of body and of soule s. 
jaucst 1s, | sistir to wijf is. 


© men ben s, 


w mariage thorou drede and loue of the Lord s. 
4 resen EL, resen up 1. riseden vp s. 
&erthes 1. alle londis s. 

™ getyng of children 1s. 


x certis is. YOm.1s. 2 couplid is. 
vr € thei bothe 1s. 
iittotheer. tothees. * thou 


° the whiche children getyng 1s. 


h that 1s. 
R into x. 


P world crunuQquvwxbigh. the world erLopra. the worldis s. 4 Aud thanne 1s. 


VIII. 12—24. 


ing, Raguel comaundede his seruauns to 
be clepid; and thei wenten? with hym 
that thei delue a biriel4. Forsothe he 
dradde, lest lic maner shulde falle to 
hym, that and to the tothere seuene, that 
13 wenten in to hir, And whan thei hadden 
maad redi the pit, Raguel gon a3een to 
ishis wif, seide to hir, Send oon of thin 
hand wimmen, and see she, if he is dead, 
1sthat I birie hym, befor it waxe li3t. And 
she sente oon of hir hand wimmen, the 
whiche gon in to the bed place, fond hem 
saue and sounde, slepende togidere with 
ichem self. And she, turned a3een, told 
good message. And thei blesseden the 
Lord, Raguel, that is, and Anna, his wif, 
17and seiden, Wee blessen thee, Lord God 
of Irael, for it falleth not to vs, as we 
iswenden ; forsothe thou hast do with vs 
thi mercy, and hast closid out fro vs the 
igeneiny pursuende vs. Don thou hast 
mercy to thi two alone. Mac hem, my 
Lord, to bless thee more fulli, and to 
offre to thee sacrifise of thi preising, and 
of ther helthe, that the vnyuersite of 
Jentilis knowe, for thou art God alone in 
20al erthe. And anoon Raguel comaundede 
to his seruauntis, that thei shulden fille 
the pit, that thei hadden maad, befor that 
21it waxe 1i3t. ‘To his wif forsothe he 
seide, that she shulde ordeyne a feste, 
and make redi alle thingus, that in to 
metis weren necessarie to weie goeris. 
22 Also two fatte kijn, and foure wetheres he 
made to be slain, and plentenous metus to 
ben maad redi to alle his ne3hebores, and 
23to alle his frendis. And Raguel adiur- 
ede Tobie, that two wikis he shulde 
2ddwelle anent hym. Of alle thingus for- 
sothe that Raguel weldede, the half part 
he 3af to Tobie; and he made this scrip- 


P weren 4. 


‘ hoole in body and soule 18. 
w Tobie 1s. * the oothere seuene Is. 
> Raguel and his seruauntis 1s. ¢ Anne, his s. 
ber Tobieiss. » Om. rsx. 
m Om. s. 0 closet or bed chaumbre 18. 


TOBIT. 


8 crowyng of cockis 1s. 
¥y which s. 
4 he seide 18. 
1}i3t of day 1. lizt of day time s. 
© sche foond 1s. 


591 


bothe eelde togidere hoole’. And it was1i 
doon aboute the ‘cockis crowyng’, Raguel 
made hise seruauntis to be clepid, and 
thei 3eden with hym to digge a sepulcret. 
For" he dredde, lest it bifelde’ in lijk12 
maner to hym”, that bifelde also to ‘se- 
uene othere* men, that’ entriden? to hir*. 
And whanne thei? hadden maad redi ais 
pit, Raguel 3ede azen to his® wijf, and 
seide? to hir, Sende oon of thin hand-14 
maydis®, and sef sche, whether ‘he is? 
deed, that Y byrie hym, bifor that the 
lizti come. And sche sente oon of hirts 
handmaidis*, which! entride in to™ the 
closet", and foond® hem saaf? and sounde, 
slepynge togidir with? hem silf. And sche ts 
turnede a3en, and teld good massage. And 
thei blessiden the Lord, that is, Raguel 
and Anne, his wijf, and seiden, Lord God 17 
of Israel, we-blessen thee, for it ‘bifelde 
not’ to vs, as we gessiden ; for’ thou hast 18 
do thit merci with ys, and" hast schit out 
fro vs the enemy pursuynge vs. Sotheli19 
thou hast do merci ‘to tweyne’ aloone. 
My Lord, make thou hem to blesse thee 
fulliere, and for to offre to thee the sacri- 
fice of thi preisyng, and of her helthe, that 
the vnyuersite” of folkis knowe, that thou 
art God. aloone in al erthe. And anoon 20 
Raguel comaundide hise seruauntis to 
filles the pit, which’ thei hadden maad, 
bifor that the? 1i3t? cam. ‘Forsothe he>21 
seide to his wijf, that sche schulde araie a 
feeste, and make® redi alle thingis, that 
weren nedeful to men makynge iournei. 
Also he’ made to be slayn twei® fatte 22 
kien, and foure wetheris, and metis‘ to be 
maad redi to alle hise nei3boris, and alles 
hise frendis. And Raguel made Tobie 23 
to sweret, that he schulde ‘dwelle twei 
woukis at. Raguel!. Sotheli* of! alles 


q birielis cE sec. m. 


u Forsothe 1s. —-'¥_~bad hifalle 1s. 
a Sare bifore 1. Sare s. 
© hoond maydens tsxf. floke 1. & Tobie 
k handmaydens 1sx. | the which 1. 
qbi1.  °¢ hath not bifalle ts. 


t graue 18. 
Z entriden in to wedlok s. 


P hool 1s. 


Scertis 1s. ¢ Om. EGHIKUMsxafgh. thou is. Y with two1s, ¥ vnyuersite or al manere 1. vniuersitee 


or the multitudes. * fille ajen 1s. that 3s. 
schulde make 1s. 4 Raguelis. € two 1. 
with him two wokis rs. k Andis. ! Om. 1s. 


Zz Om. 1s. 
f he made metis Is. 


¢ that sche 


b And Raguel 1s. 
i abijde 


a ]izt of day 1s. 
h bihote him 1s. 


& to alle ts. 


592 


ture, that the half part that lafte ouer, 
after ther’ deth shulde come to the hous 
of Tobie. 


CAP. TX. 


1 Thanne Tobie clepide to hy the aun- 
gil, whom forsothe he wende a man ; and 
seide to hym, Azarie, brother, J aske, 

2that thou herkne my woordis. If myself 
I take to thee a seruaunt, I shal not ben 

3euene worthi to thi providence. Ner 
the latere I beseche thee, that thou take 
to thee bestis, or’ seruyses, and go to 
Gabel in to Ragis, cite of Medis, and 
3eld to hym his writ; and thou shalt re- 
sceyuen of hym mone, and preje hym to 
scomen to my bridalis. Forsothe thiself 
wost, that my fadir noumbreth the da3is, 
and if It shul tarien o dai more, his lijf 
sshal be maad sori. And certis thou seest, 
hou Raguel hath coniurid me, whos 
éadiurement I mai not dispisen. Thanne 

Rafael, takende foure of the seruauns of 
Raguel, and two camailis, wente in to 
Ragis, cite of Medis, and findende Gabel 
3af to hym his writ, and resceyuede of 

7hym al the monee; and shewede to hym 
of Tobie, the sone of Tobie, alle thingus 
that ben don. And he made hym to 

scome with hym to the bridalis. And 
whan he was come in to the hous of Ra- 
guel, he fonde Tobie sittende; and stir- 
ytende thei kisten hem togidere. And 
Gabel wepte, and blesside God, and 
seide, Blesse thee the Lord God of Irael, 
for the sone thou art of the beste man, 
and ri3twis, and dredende God, and 
io doende alinesse deedis; and be ther seid 
blessing vp on thi wif, and vp on 3o0ure 


TOBIT. 


IX. 1— 10. 


thingis, whiche™ Raguel hadde in posses- 
sioun, he 3af the half part" to Tobie ; and 
he® made this scripture?, that the half 
part, that was left‘, schulde come to the 
lordschip of Tobie aftir the deeth of hem". 


CAP. IX. 


Thanne Tobie clepide to hym the aun-1 
gel, whom sotheli he gesside aman. And 
Tobie seide to hym, Azarie, brother, Y 
axe’, that thou herknet my wordis. Thou3"2 
Y bitake’ my silf seruaunt to thee, Y™ 
schal not* be euene worthi to thi puruy- 
auncey. Netheles Y biseche thee’, that thous; 
take to thee beestis, ethir seruyces*{, and 
go> thou to Gabelus ‘in to’ Rages, a® citee 
of Medeis, and 3eldef to hym his obliga- 
cioun ; and take of hym the money®, and 
preie hyin to come to my weddyngis. 
For thou woost, that my fadir noumbrith 4 
the daies', and yf Y tarie 0 dai more‘, his 
soule! schal be maad sorie™. And certiss 
thou seest, hou Raguel hath chargid 
me", whos chargyng® Y mai not dispise. 
Thanne Raphael took foure of the ser-6 
uauntis of Raguel, and twei camels, and 
3ede? in to Rages, a citee of Medeis, and 
he foond? Gabelus, and 3af" to hym his 
obligacioun, and resseyuede’ of hyn al the 
monei; and he‘ schewide to hym" of%7 
Tobie, the sone of Tobie, alle’ thingis that 
weren doon*, And he made Gabelus comeY 
with hym to the weddyngis*. And whannes 
he® entride® in to the hows of Raguel, he 
foond Tobie sittynge at the mete; and ‘he 
skippide® vp, and thei kissiden hem silf- 
togidere. And Gabelus wepte, and blesside® 9 
God, and seide, The Lord God of Israel 
blesse thee, for thou art the sone of a ful 
good man, and iust®, and dredynge God, 


and doynge almesdedis; and blessing‘ be 10 


Tthec. Sande prim. t Om. F. 

m that 1s. 9 part therofs. © Raguel is. P obligacioun writen 1s. 4 left of his catel 1s. * him and 
of his wijf is. Saxe of thee 1s. therkex. Ifis, Vschal bitakers. Witt Yr.  * not bi mi 
kunnyng 8. Y purueyaunce or wisdom 1s. 2 Om.1. ® sernauntis 1s. > goin B pr.m. x. © Om. plures. 
: ink. theirs. fbitake thouis. & money that he owith to my faders. » com hedirs, i daies of our 
tourney 1. daies whilis I am out in this iorney s. k more ower 1. more over than he hath set lo me s. 
‘lijfis. ™heuy 1s. 9 me ¢o dwelle stillet. me to duelle here with him s. © biheest 1s. P he jede Is. 


4 foond there 1s. © he gaf 1s. 
x doon to him s. Y to come ts. 
{risede s] up anoon 1s. 


S he resseyued 1s. 


t Raphael rs. 
z weddyngs of Tobie 1s. 
dhe blesside s. Caiustis. f blessing or encressyng 1. the blessing of God s. 


u Gabelnsis. VY Om.s. 
@ Gabelus is. » hadde entrid x. 


W and alle 1s. 
¢ Tobie roos 


tT seruyces 5 
that is, seru- 
auntis able to 
go with thee. 
Lire here. c. 


IX. 11—X. 7. 


ufadris and modris, and see 3ce 3oure 
sonus, and sonus of 3oure sonus, yn to the 
thridde and ferthe" ieneracioun ; and be 
3our seed blessid of God of Irael, that 

1gregneth in to worldys of worldis. And 
whan alle hadden seid Amen, thei wenten 
to the feste; but and with drede’ of the 
Lord thei enhaunteden the feste of bri- 
dalis. 


CAP. X. 


i Whan forsothe Tobie made abidingus” 
bi enchesoun of the bridalis, his fadir 
Tobie was stirid, seiende, Wenest thou, 
whi my sone abit*, and whi he is with- 

2holden there? Wenest thou, lest Gabel 
be dead, and no man 3elde to hym the 

3monei? Forsothe he began to be sori, 
and Anna, his wif, with hym; and thei 
begunne bothe togidyrY to wepe, for thi 
that the’ sett dai ther sone was not 
4turned ajeen to hem. Thanne wepte his 
modir with vnremediable teris, and seide, 
Allas me! my sone, wherto sente wee 
thee to pilgrimagen, the li3t of oure e3en, 
the® staf of oure eelde, solace of oure lif, 
hope of oure after bringing forth of 
schilder ? Alle thingis togidere in thee oon 
hauende, wee shulden not lete thee gon 
cfro vs. To whom seide Tobie, Be stille, 
and wile thou not.be disturbid; hol is 
oure sone; feithful inow® is that man, 
7with the whiche wee senten hym. She 
forsothe no wise my3te take coumfort, 
but eche dai stertende out, beheeld aboute, 
and wente aboute alle the weies, bi the® 
whiche semede hope of turnyng ajeen, 
that afer she my3te seen hym comende?, 


uthe ferthe au. VY the drede £.. Wabidyng a. x abideth 4. ¥Om.cpr.m. 
4 lynynge £ pr.m. 


b ynow3 aur. and trewe u, © Om.c. 


& brou3t 1. brou3t or comes. 4 vpons. 


outen ende 18. world of worldis x. to worldis of worldis a. 
§ cause 18. bicause g. 


dyngisis. @Om.1s. ° tariyngs. 


TOBIT. 


593 


seid® on? thi wijf, and on! 3oure fadris 
and modris, and se 3e 3oure sones, and the 11 
sones of 3oure sones, til* in to the thridde 
and the fourthe generacioun ; and 3o0ure 
seed be blessid of God of Israel, that 
regneth in ‘to the worldis of worldis!, 
And whanne alle men hadden seid Amen, 12 
thei 3eden to ‘the feeste™; but" also® thei 
vsiden the feeste of weddyngis? with the4 
drede of the Lord. 


CAP. X. 


Sotheli whanne Tobie made tariyngis"1 
for ‘the cause* of weddyngist, ‘Tobie his" 
fadir was angwisched’, seiynge”, Gessist* 
thou, whiY my? sone tarieth®, ethir whi he 
is ‘witholdun there ? Gessist thou, whe-2 
ther Gabelus is® deed, and no man 3eldith 
to hym the monei? ‘Forsothe he! bigan tos 
be ‘sorie ful myche®, and! Anne, his wif, 
with hym; and bothe® bigunnen to wepe 
togidere, for" her sone turnede not! ajen to 
hem ‘in thei dai set. Therfor* his modir4 
wepte with teeris withouten remedie, and 
seide, Alas to me! my sone, whi senten 
we thee! a! pilgrimage, the™ li3t of oure 
igen, the staff of oure eelde, the solace of 
oure lijf, the" hope of oure eiris® ? WeP had-s 
den alle thingis togidere in4 thee oon", ands parte a 
ou3te’ not leete" thee go fro vs. To whom eelde owen to 

‘ ° . be susteyned of 
Tobie seide, Be stille’, and nyle thou be © sones. Lire 
troblid ; oure sone is hool”; thilke® man “* 
is feithful ynow, with whom we senten 
hym’. Forsothe’ sche”* my3te not be coum-7 
fortid in ony maner, but ech dai sche 
‘skippide forthe’, and lokide aboute®, and 
cumpasside® alle the weies, bi whiche the 
hope of ‘comyng ajen was seyn®, tof se 
hym comynge afer, if it my3te be doon. 


+ the staf ; for 
as a siyk man 
is susteyned bi 


Zatthe aru. 20m. an. 


‘uponis. Omg. & Om. x. |! worldis of worldis scrvbfg with- 


P tho wed- 
Vv heuyed is, 


nandis. © Om.1s. 
u Tobies g. 


m mete Is. 
t his weddyngis 1s. 


w and he [Om. s] seide fo his nijfis. * Whi gessist1s. YOm.18. 2 that mys. ® tarieth thusts. » holden 


there thus longe 1s. ©be1is. 4 Certis Tobie is. 
that 1. for that that s. i not hoom 1s. 
sich 18. Om. 6. 
into x. F* aloone 1. 
saaf 1. hool and in good quert 8. 
8 wente out 18. 
semyde [was sein 8] éo hir 18. 


VOL. II. 


8 and therfor 1. 
x for thilke 1s. 


f for to I. 


e ful sory 18. 
j Om. g. in that s. 

™ thou ari the 1. sith thou art the s. 
t we ou3te 18. 
y hym forth 1s. 
b aboute after him 1. abou3t after hir sone a. 


& bothe thei 1s. 1} for 
1 thee for [Om. s] to go 
Nand the1s. © aftir comers 1s. P Whan we s. 
uto haue leet 1s. ¥ stille, wijf1s. Whool and , 
2 But 321. But s. 22% his modir ts. 
e his agen comyng 


f and also 18. 
k Thanne 1. 


¢ sche cumpesside 1s. 


46 


594 


sif it my3te be do. But forsothe Raguel 
seide to his sone in lawe, Dwel heer, 
and I shal senden a messager of helthe 
ofro thee to Tobie, thi fader, To whom 
Tobie seide, I knew, that my fader and 
my moder now counten the da3es, and 

other spirit is tormentid in hem. And 
whan with® manye woordis Raguel pre3- 
ede Tobie, and he hym bi no resoun 
wolde heren, he toc to hym Sara, and 
the half part of al his substaunce, in 
childer, in hand wymmen, in bestis, in 
camailis, and in kijn, and myche monee ; 
and saaf and iojende he lafte hym fro 

ithym, seiende, The holi aungil of the 
Lord be in 3oure weie, and ful bringe 
jou sound, and finde 3ee alle thingus ri3te 
aboute 3oure fadris and modris, and see 
myn e3en 3oure sonus, rathere than I die. 

12 And the fader and moder, takende ther 
do3ter, kisten hyr, and laften hir to gon, 

i3monestende hirf to wrshipen hir fader 
and moder in lawe, to looue the hus- 
bonde, to reule the meyne, to gouerne 
the hous, to 3iue hirself vnreprefable. 


CAPR. XTE 


1 And whan thei weren turned ajeen, 
thei camen to Carre, that is in myddel 
wei ajen Nynyuen, the elleuenthe dai. 
2And the aungil seide, Tobie brother, 
thou wost, what maner thou laftist thi 
3fader. And so if it plese to thee, go wee 
beforn; and with softe pas the meyne, to- 
gidere with thi wif and with the bestys, 
4folewe thei oure wei. And whan that 
hadde plesid, that thei shulden go, Rafael 


€ that c. 


& But certis is. 4 seide thanne 1s. 
me 1s. ™ messenger éo elle 1s, 
Jor my long duellyng 5, 1 had preied 1s. 
thanne 1. Ww Sare, his douzler's. _* his good 18. 
6 Om. 1s. and sor 4 Raguel is. ¢ Om. ts. 
hoom 1. sounde to 30ur_freendis s. 
“her dou3tir 1. Sare, her dou3ter s. 
comaundiden is. 4 and to 18, 

W gouerne wiseli s. * hir is, 

fader and moder s} in the elleuenthe day 18. 
to Tobie is. 
thing 1s. 


thir is. 


TOBIT. 


i to Tobie s. 
4 thin helthe 1s. 
Q 8 wordis to abijde 1. wordis to abide with him s. 
consente to him for no 1. nold concente to him for no s. 
Y seruauntis 1s. 
. f saaf in good helthe s. 
tsoure modir rs. 
© go with him. go forth with Tobie hir husbonde s. 
§ and to Is. 
y Tobie and his wijf weren turned to go [thennus 1] [hoom to his 
2 that 1. 
© fader heuy in thi departyng fro him s. 
K pleside Tobie 1. pleside to Tobie s. \thei twos. ™ go bifore 1s. 


X. 8—XI. 4. 


And sotheli? Raguel seide" to‘ ‘the hose-s 
boude of his dou3tirj, Dwelle* thou here’, 
and Y schal sende a messanger™ of helthe" 
‘of thee® to Tobie, thi fadir. To whomoe 
Tobie seide, Y knowe, that my fadir and 
my modir rekynen now the daies?, and 
her spirit is turmentid in hem’. And 10 
whanne Raguel preiede" Tobie with many 
wordiss, and he ‘nolde here Raguel bi ony* 
resoun", Raguel bitookY to hym Sare”, 
and half ‘the part of al his catel*, in chil- 
drenY aud damysels’, in scheep and camels*, 
and> in kiyn, and in myche monei; and¢ 
he delyueride fro hym silf¢ Tobie saaff 
and iolynge, and seide’, The hooli aungel 11 
of the Lord be in 3oure weie, and brynge 
jou sounde", and fynde 3e alle thingis ri3t- 
fuli aboute 3oure fadir and modir!, and myn 12 
i3en se 3oure sones, bifor that Y die. And 
the fadir and modir! token ‘her dou3ter™, 
and kissiden hir", and leeten hir go°, and 13 
monestiden? hir to onour the fader and 
modir of hir hosebonde, to? loue the’ hose- 
bonde, to’ reulet the" meynee, to” gouerne™ 
thex hows, and to schewe hir self vnre- 
preuable. 


CAP. XI. 


And whanne ‘thei turneden ajen’, thei 
camen to Carram, which? is* in the myddil 
of the weie a3ens Nynyue, ‘in the elenenthe 
dait’. And® the aungel seide*’, Tobie 
brother, thou woost, hou thou leftist thi fro departing 
fadir’. Therfor if it plesith thee’, go wes {Panu 
bifore ; and the meineis, with thi wijf to- “ire here. c. 
gidere and& with the beestis, sue’ oure 
weie with soft goynge. And whanne this! 4 
pleside*, that thei! schulden go™, Raphael 


+ the enle- 
uenthe day ; 


f£ Om. au. 


Jj his dou3ter housbonde 1. 
© Om. Is. 


k Abijde 1. 1 here with 
P daies of myn absens fro hems. 4 hem 
t wolde not 
v bitook 

8 in camels 1s. 
§ Raguel seide 1s.) sounde 

1 moder of Sares. ™ Om. 1s. 
P thei 

v and to Is. 


u resoun that he shewid, thanne s. 
z hand maydens rs. 


k Raguel the s. 
treule welts. 4 hir is. 


d seide 
i this 


bOm.1s. ¢ And theres. 
&Om.1. © sue thei ss. 


isa place s. 
f to thee Is. 


XI. 5-——1I5. 


seide to Tobie, Tac with thee of the galle 
of the fish, forsothe it shal be necessarie. 
And so Tobie toc of that galle, and thei 
swenten. Anne forsothe sat beside the 
weie eche dai in the euese of the hil, fro 
whennus she my3te beholden fro aferr. 
6 And whil fro the same place she beheeld 
his comyng, she sa3 aferr, and anoon she 
knew3 hir sone comende; and rennende 
she tolde to hir husbonde, seiende, Lo! 
7thi sone cometh. And Rafael seide to 
Tobie, But wher thou shalt gon in to 
thin hous, anoon honoure the Lord thi 
God, and gracis doende to hym, ne3he to 
sthi fader, and kis hym. And anoon 
anointe vp on hys é3en of that’galle of 
the fish, that thou’ berest with thee; 
wite thou forsothe, for anoon his ejen 
shul ben opened, and thi fader shal seen 
the liz3t of heuene, and in thi si3te he 
9shal ioj3en. Thanne the hound ran be- 
forn, that togidere was in the weie, and, 
as a messager comende nei3%, with the 
1ofaunyng of his tail he iojede. And ri- 
sende vp the blinde fader, stumblende 
with the feet, began to rennen, and, the 
hond 3iuen to the child, he cam a3en to 
1nmeete with his sone. And takende he 
kiste hym, with his wijf, and thei be- 
i2gunnen bothe to wepe with ioje. And 
whan thei hadden honourid God, and do 
is gracys, thei seten togidere. Thanne Tobie, 
takende of the galle of the fish, enointede 
i4the ejen of his fadir. And he suffrede 
as almost half an hour, and the ryme of 
his e3en began, as the fellis of an ey, to 
isgon out. The whiche Tobie takende, 
dro3 fro his ezen, and anoon he resceyuede 


TOBIT. 


595 


seide to Tobie, Take with thee of. the galle 
of the" fisch, for it schal be nedeful. 
Therfor? Tobie took? of that galle, and 
thei? 3eden forth’. Forsothe’ Anne** sats 
bisidis the weie ech dai in the cop of thet 
hil, fro whennus sche my3te biholde fro 
afer". And while’ sche bihelde fro’ thee 
same place the comyng of hym, sche si3 
a fer, and knew” anoon hir sone comynge ; 
and* sche ran’, and telde to* hir hose- 
bonde, and seide*, Lo®!: thi sone’ cometh. 
And Raphael seide to Tobie*, And¢ whanne7 
thou hast entrid in to thin hows, anoon 
worschipe® ‘thi Lord God‘, and do thou 
thankyngis to hym, andé nei3e-to thi fadir, 
and kisse hym. And anoon anoynte on"s 
hise i3en of this galle of the fisch, whichi 
galle* thou berist with thee; for ‘whi wite 
thou!, that™ anoon" hise izen schulen be 
openyd, and ‘thi fadir® schal se the li3t of 
heuene, and he schal be ioiful in thi si3t. 
Thanne the? dogge’ ‘ran bifore’, ‘that was9 
togidere in the weie’, and made‘ ioie with 
the" faunyng of his tail’, as a” messanger 
comynge*. ' And his’ blynde fadir? roos 10 
vp, and bigan? to renne, hirtynge> ‘in thee 
feet, and whanne he hadde 3oue hond® to 
a-child’, he ran ajens his sone. And he&1 
resseyuede> and kisside hymn, ‘with his 
wijfi, and’ bothe’ bigunnen to wepe- for 
ioie. And whanne thei hadden worschipid !2 
God, and hadden!: do thankyngis™, thei 
saten" togidere. Thanne® Tobie took of 1s 
the galle of the fiscl, and anoyntide?’ the 
i3en of his fadir. And4 he abood! as® half*14 
an our almest®, and’ the’ web, as the litil 
skyn of an ey, bigan to go out of hise ijen. 
Which* web Tobie’ took, and’ drow? fro1s 


£Om.c. 


a thir. oThanner. P toke with him s. 
ss Anne, the moder of Tobie s. tants. 
whilis s. Wshe knewe s. * and for ioye s. 
now is. ©30ung Tobie 1s. 4 Om. 1. 
hthou uponis. ithe which1. k Om. s. 
Pag. 4 hound that 3ede forth in the wey 1s. 
uOm.1s.  ¥ taile to old Tobie and his wife s. 


4 he aud Raphael 1s. 
u ferr to loke aftir hint 1. ferre to loke after hir sone s. 
Y ran hoom ts. 
€ worschipe thou 1s. 
1 thou schalt wite 1s. 
r for hem ran hoom bifore s. 

w Om. s. 


s And 1s. 
v the 
zOm.is. 2 sche seide lo himis. »% Lo! 

f the Lord thi God 1s. € and dhanne ts. 
m that herbits. "Om.s. hers. 
sOm. 1s. t he made ts. 
x coming bifore 1. comyng and brynging 


¥ forth togidre 1s. 


good tithings s. Ythe 1s. 2 fadir of Tobie is. 4he bigan is. > stnmblynger. shoueling forth s. hirtynge 


ethir stumblinge x sec. m. © with his 1s. 
with his wijf 1s.  resseyuede her sone 1s. 
yngis tohims.  ® saten doun rs. 
T abood the wirching of that medicyne s. 
than s. Wa plures. * The which 1. 


4 Tobie 1s. 
i Om. 1s, 
o And thanne 1s. 

S as if mere 1. 
¥ goung Tobie 1. Tobie his sone s. 


4G 2 


e his hond rs. child ¢o ede himis. & Tobie 


k hothe he and his soneis. '!Om.1. ™ thank- 
P he anoyntide ¢herwith 18. 4 And thanne 1. 
t almoost half ts. u Om. 1s. Vv and 


z drewe if s. 


596 


16si3t. And thei glorifieden God, he, that 
is, and his wif, and alle that knewen 

izhym. And Tobie seide, I blesse thee, 
Lord God of Irael, for thou hast chas- 
tisid me, and thou hast sauyd me; and 

islo! I see Tobie, my sone. Also after 
seuen da3es Sara, the wif of his sone, 
cam in, and al the meyne, and the bestis 
hole, and the camailis, and myche monee 
of the wif, but and the monee that he 

ighadde taken of Gabel. And he tolde to 
his fader and moder alle the benefetus of 
God, that he hadde don abouten hym bi 

20the man, that hym hadde lad. And ther 
camen Achior and Nabath, ‘cosynes to! 
Tobie, iozende to Tobie, togidere thank- 
ende to hym of alle goodis, that God 

2ihadde shewid abouten hym. And bi 
seuene dajes etende, with! gret ioje thei 
gladeden. 


CAP. XII. 


i Thanne Tobie clepide to hym his sone, 
and seide to hym, What moun wee 3iue 
to this holi man, that with thee cam ? 

2 Tobie answerende seide to his fadir, 
Fader, what meede shul wee 3ine to hym, 
or what thing wrthi mai ben to the bene- 

3fetis of hym? Me he hath led, and aj3een 
bro3t hol; the monee fro Gabel he toc; a 
wif he me made to han, and the deuel 
fro hir he refreynede ; ioje he dide to hir 
fader and to hir moder; me myself fro 
the deuouring of the fish he delyuerede ; 
thee also to seen the lijt of heuene he 
made; and with alle goodis bi hym wee 
ben fulfild ; what to hym to these thingus 
4wrthi wee shuln moun 3iue? But I aske 
thee, fader, that thou pre3e hym, if par- 


4 and the childre of £ pr. m. 


ahis si3t1s. > is to wite 1. ¢ Tobie 1s. 
© entride or cam hoom s. i meynee 1s. 
with hir hool and soundes.  ™ and also s. 
8 Gabelns was brou3t with hem 1. t Tobie 1s. 
w hym in the wey 1. X ni3 cosyns 18. 
thankiden is. > God with hym 1s. 
joyeden rs. f What thing 1s. 
Medde me forth 18. 
that he hizte (ou3z¢ s] to thee 18. P and he 1s. 
"Om.c. Vhath maad rs. W fulfillid rs. 


&¢ And Tobie 1s. 


TOBIT. 


d Om. ts. 
k Om. 18x. 
© Tobies 1. 


y Om. 1s. 
© goodnessis that 1. goodnessis which s. 
h moun 3yue 18. 
™ he hath brou3t me a3en hool 1s. ledde a3en me hool nxg. 
@ and he 1sx, 


xof x. Y thing therfore 1s. 


XL 16—XIL 4. 


hise iz3en, and anoon he resseyuede si3t’. 
And thei glorifieden God, that is, he®,16 
and his wijf, and alle that knewen hym. 
And Tobie seide, Lord God of Israel, Y 17 
blesse thee, for thou hast chastisid me, and 
thou? hast saued me ; and lo*! Y se Tobie, 
my sone. Also Sare, the wijf of his®18 
sone, entride aftir senene daies, and alle 
the meynees!, and the* beestis hoole!, and 
camels™, and® miche monei of the® wijf, 
but? also the money which‘ ‘he hadde res- 
seyned’ of Gabelus’. And het telde to his 19 
fadir and modir alle the benefices" of God, 
whiche he hadde do aboute hymn bi the 
man, that hadde led’ hym”. And Achior 20 
and Nabath, the ‘sistir sones* of Tobie, 
eamen joifulY to Tobie*, and thankiden@ 
hym? of alle the ‘goodis, whiche® God 
hadde schewid aboute hym. And _ bi2i 
seuene daies thei eeten’, and ioyden® with 
greet loye. 


CAP. XII. 


Thanne Tobie clepide to hym his sone, 1 
and seide to hym, What moun we 3yue 
to this hooli man, that cam with thee? 
Tobie® answeride, and seide to his fadir, 2 
Fadir, what meede schulen we 3yue’ to 
hym, ether what! mai be worthi to hise 
benefices* ? He ledde!, and ‘brou3te mes 
hool a3en™; he" resseyuede of Gabelus the 
monei’; he? made me to hane a wijf, and 
he droof awei the feend fro hir; he1 made 
joie to hir fadir and moder ; he® delyuerede 


‘my silft fro the" deuouryng of a fiseh ; 


and he made’ thee to se the li3t of heuene; | 
and we ben fillidY¥ with* alle goodis bi 
hym; what thingy worthi to these thingis 
moun we 3yue to hym? But, fadir, Y4 
axe thee’, that thou preie hym, if peranen- 


i with hym c pr. m. 


f Thanne also 1s. & Tobie his s. 
m camels hool with hir 1. camels camen 
Pandr. 4that1. * Tobie resceyuyde 1. 
u goodnessis 1. good s. Vv led and feloushipid s. 
2 Tobie, and weren ioyful with him 1s. 8 thei 
deeten theres. © thei 
‘what thing 1s. « goodnessis 1s. 
nandhe is. © monei 
rhath maadis. Shealsos. tt me 1s. 
2 thee, that 1s, I beseche thee s. 


© lo! now 1. 
1 Om. 1s. 


XIT. 5——19. 


auenture he shal vouche saf the half of 
alle thingus, what euere ben bro3t, to take 
sto hym. And clepende hym his fader 
and the sone, token hym apart, and thei 
begunne to prejen, that he vouche saaf 
the half part of alle thingus, that thei 
G6bro3ten, acceptid to han. Thanne he 
seide to hem priueli, Blesseth God of 
heuene, and beforn alle thingus liuende 
knoulecheth to hym, for he hath don his 
7merci with 3ou. Forsothe the sacrament 
of the king to hiden is good; the werkis 
forsothe of God to shewen and to know- 
8lechen is wrshipeful. Good is orisoun 
with fasting, and almesse deede more 
othan tresores of gold to hiden ; for almes 
deede fro deth deliuereth, and it is that 
purgeth synnes, and shal make to finde 
loeuere lastende lif. Thei forsothe that 
don synne and wickenesse!, ben enemys 
of ther soule. Thanne I opene to 3ou 
the treuthe, and shal not hide fro 30u the 
12priue woord. Whan thou pre3edest with 
teris, and thou biriedest the deade, and 
laftist the mete, and the deade bi dai 
thon hiddest in thin hous, and the™ ny3t 
thou biriedest, I offride thin orisoun to 
isthe Lord. And for thou were acceptid 
to God, it was nedful that temptacioun 
1ushulde preue thee. And now the Lord 
sente me, that I shulde hele thee, and 
Sara, the wif of thi sone, fro the deuel 
isdeliueren. I forsothe am Rafael, aungil, 
oon of the seuene that stonden befor the 
isLord. And whan these thingus thei 
hadden herd, thei ben disturbid, and fel- 
len doun tremblende vp on ther face. 
17 And the aungil seide to hem, Pes to 3ou, 
iswileth not dreden; forsothe whan I 
was with 30u, I was bi the wil of God. 
19 Forsothe I was seen with 3ou to eten and 


k Om. au. 


a half part uimsfg. > whiche 1s. 
Raphael s. & thei token 1s. 
m Raphael is. ® Om.cs. © Sothely 1s. 
8 is ever s. t knowe Is. 

w thilke thing 1s. * Om. 1s, 
deed 1s. 4 biriedist hem rs. 

k that I schulde 1s. ! for to 1. 

P thei fellen doun 1s. 4 upon 1s. 
u was thanne s. 
tn holi werkis s, 


y Om. Is. 
e bis. 
m Forsothe 1s. 


z Certis 18. 


TOBIT. 


I wickednesse 4EFH. 


¢ brou3t hidere 1s. 
h thei bigunnen 1s. 

P good councel s. 

u with almes 1. almes doyng s. 
z makith man s. 
f thanne Y 1s. 
n Tobie and his sone 1s. 
T Raphael the s. 
Vv wille, doyng so his biddyng. s. ¥ Therfore blesse 1. 


597 


ture he schal vouche saaf to take to hym, 

the half* of alle thingis, what" cuer thingis 

ben brou3t’. And the’ fadir and the‘s 

sone clepiden hym‘, and token’ hym asidis 

half, and bigunnen® to! preie*, that he 

wolde vouche saaf to haue acceptable the 

half part of alle thingis, whiche thei hadden 

brou3t!. Thanne he™ seide to hem priueli,¢ 

Blesse 3e God of heuene, and knouleche 

3e to hym bifor alle men lyuynge, for he 

hath do his" merci with 3ou. For® it is7 

goodP to hide the priuyte of a4 kyng™; but 

it is’ worschipful to schewe and know- 

lechet the werkis of God. Preier is good 8 

with fastyng, and almes", more” than to 

hide tresouris of gold; for whi almes de-9 

lyuereth fro deth, and thilke” almes it* 

isY that purgith synnes, and makith’ to a 
fynde euerlastynge lijf. Forsothe thei 10 God the prey- 
that doon synne and wickidnesse, ben jot Ss sihews 
*enemyes of her soule. Therfor Y schewe 11 $2) ‘ping to 
trewthe to 30u, and Y schal not hide fro — thingis ben 


Whane thou* prey- 12 to hise izen, 
i 4 4s . ; 3he bifor that 
edist with teeris, and biryedist deed men, _ tho be doon, 
and ‘forsokist the? meete, and hiddist deed* 
° ee . ee +d thing at Goddis 
men bi dai in thin hows, and biriedist@ ‘in councilor 
owith to be 

. A just men; for 
God", it was nedeful that temptacioun aungels hen 
schulde preue thee. And now the Lord 14 §Pittis of ser- 
sente! me ‘for to* cure thee, and to! de- 

hem that taken 

the eritage of 

helthe; to 
oon of the seuene{ that ben present bifor Fire here c. 

% sn t seuene ; that 
the Lord. And whanne thei" hadden herd te oes 
tremblynge on‘ her face. And the" aungel 17 § distrrdlid s 
i that is, the 
seide to hem, Pees be to 3ou, nyle 3e  wondriden a 
drede; for’ whanne Y was with 30u‘, Y 18 o¢ Goadis beng 


nakid and opyn 

3ou a pryuy word. 
hut to take 
counsel of this 

e f 4 : yey 
ridet thi preier® to the 

the Det Y" off t P doon of this 

Lord. And for thou were acceptable to 13 thing ahoute 
uyce sent in 
to seruyce, for 

lyuere Sare, the wijf of thi sone, fro the 

fend. For™ Y am Raphael, the aungel, 15 Ebrewis in the 
firste chaptire. 

this, thei weren disturblid°§, and felden? _ site of aungels. 
Lire here. c. 
weren astonyed 

was" bi Goddis wille’. Blesse” 3e hym*, 783 sboute 
em. Lire 


and synge 3e to hym’. Sotheli? Y seinyde 19 *ere. c. 
m in the a. 


4 Tobie the 1s. & hiss. f Raphael 1. to hem 
ifortos. k preiehimis. 1! brou3t thidre s. 
dan erthely 1s. *™ king, for bodeli pereile s. 

¥ more worth 1. 3ca zt is more mworthi s. 
athou, Tobie s. » leftist thi1s. © tho 

& preiers is. the Lordrs. i hath sent 1s. 
© disturblid or astoneyed 1s. 
t 30u in the likenesse of a man s. 
x him in herl and words. Y him 


s forsothe ts. 


598 
to drinken; but I inuysible mete, and 
drink that of men mai not ben seen, vse. 

2 Time is thanne, that I turne ajeen to 
hym, that me sente ; 3ee forsothe blesseth 
God, and telleth out alle his merueilis 5 

2ihym blisseth, and syngeth to hym. And 
whan these thingus he hadde seid, he is 
born awei fro the si3te of hem; and thei 

22my3ten seen hym no mor, Thanne thei, 
throwen down bi thre houris in to the 
face, blessiden® God. 


CAP. XIII. 


And risende thei tolden alle his mer- 
iueilis. Forsothe the® eldere Tohie, open- 
ende his mouth, blesside God, and seide, 
Lord, thou art gret in to with oute ende, 
gand in to alle worldis thi reume; for 
thou scourgist, and sauest ; ledest to hellis, 
and a3een bringist ; and ther is not that 
3ascapeP thin hond. Knoulecheth to the 
Lord, 3ee sonus of IJrael, and in the si3te 
sof Jentilis preiseth hym; for therfore 
he scaterede 30u among Jentilis, that vn- 
knowen God, that 3ee tellen out his mer- 
ueilis, and maken’ hem to knowen, for 
there is noon other God almy3ti biside 
shym. He chastiseth vs for oure wicked- 
nesse ; and he shal sanen vs for his mercy. 
6 Beholdeth thanne, what thingis he hath 
do with vs, and with drede and trem- 
bling knoulecheth to hym ; and the king 
of worldis enhaunseth in 3oure werkus. 
71 forsothe in the lond of my caitifte shal 
knouleche to hym; for he hath shewid 
shis mageste in to a" synful fole. Beth 
conuertid also, 3ee synful men, and doth 
rijtwisnesse befor God, leenende that he 
9 doth mercy with vs. I forsothe and my 


" thei blessiden & prem. © Om. c. 
4 to drynke 1s. 


; bOm.s. © me fo 30 s. 
thei g. & wordis g. 


h thei thanne s. 
4 opnynge 1s. T Om. 1s. 
x ledist hem 1s. 


8 Om. s. 


Lord is. 4 hath scatrid 1s. ¢ whiche 1s. 
* hath chastisid 1s. | schryue 18. 

‘| worshepe or dignyte s. * upon 1s. 
word and deed turned fro jour SYNNE 8. 


™ 3e 3ou s. 


TOBIT. 


P ascapith a. 


dhym ix word 1s. 
i And thanne s. 
space of thre ouris 1. face, avd leien there the space of thre ouris s. 
t withouten ende 1s. 
Y hellis, whieh continuen her synnes to her end s. 
to thee that bileuen in thee, and kepyn thin heestis ; for s. 
f that 3e make 1s. 
1 Sothely 1s. 
8 3e symneris Is, 
U and thaune s. 


Nile 2o——seldieec: 


to ete{ and drynke* with 3ou; but Y vse 
vnuysible meete, and drynk that mai not 
be seyn of men. Therfor it is tyme, that 20 
Y turne{ ajen to hym, that sente me‘; 
but blesse 3e God, and telle 3e out alle 
hise merueils ; blesse 3e hym*, and synge 
je to hym®. And whanne hef hadde seide 21 
these thingis’, he was takun awei fro her 
si3t; and thei? my3ten no more se hym. 
Thannei thei felden doun ‘bi ‘thre ouris* 22 
on! the™ face", and blessiden® God; and 
thei risynge vp telden alle hise merueils. 


CAP. XII. 


Forsothe? the eldere Tobie openyde’ his1 
mouth, and' blesside God, and seide, Lord, 
thou art greet with outenende; and thi 
rewme is in to® ‘alle worldis'; for" thou2 
betist’, and makist saaf”; thou ledist* 
doun to hellis’, and ‘ledist ajen?; and* 
noon is that ascapith thin hoond. Sones3 
of Israel, knowleche 3e to the: Lord, and 
herye 3e hym in the si3t of hethene men? ; 
for herfor he scateride’ jou among he-4 
thene men, that® knowen not God, that 3e 
telle out his merueils, and makef hem to 
wite, that? noon othere God is’ almy3ti 
outakun hymi. He chastiside* vs for oure5 
wickidnessis ; and he schal saue vs for his 
mercy. Therfor biholde 3e, what thingis6 
he hath do with 30u, and knouleche! 3e™ 
to hym with drede and tremblyng; and 
enhaunse je the kyng of worldis in 3oure 
werkis. Forsothe" Y in the lond of my7 
caitifte schal knowleche® to hym; for he 
schewide? his maieste? on™ a'synful fole. 
Therfor, synneris’, be 3e connertid’, and dos 
3e ri3tfulnesse bifor God, and" bileue 3e, 
that he schal do his merci with jou. 
Sotheli Y$ and my soule schulen be glad ing 


4 maketh au. * Om. An. 


f the aungel 1s. 
face the 


P Sothely ts. 
Ww hem saaf ts. 


© him in werk s. 
Tupon is. ™ her ts. 
© thei blessiden 1s. 
u for, Lord s. Y betist men s. 


k Om. Is. 


z thou ajen ledist hems. 4 for 1. 
> men, fo 3eue good ensaumple to hems. © the 
& that therisis. 6b Om.1s. the x. 


© schryne mers.  P hath schewid 1s. 
t conuertid, that is, be 3e altogidre in hert and 


+ V semyde to 
ete ; aungels 
apperinge in 
bodies takun, 
moun take 
mete and 
drynke, and 
drawe in to the 
wombes, for 
this is doon 
hi bodily mou- 
yug, and bodily 
kynde obeyeth 
to aungels as to 
bodily mouyng; 
but aungels 
turnen not 
mete and 
drynke in to 
the kynde of 
body as takun 
by the vertu of 
nursching ; for 
siche bodies ben 
uot onyd kynd- 
ly to hem, and 
therfor tho 
bodies ben not 
able to be 
nurschid. Lire 
here. c. 
t ¥ durne ; 
not that aun- 
gels goen awey 
fro God, but 
the turnyng 
ajen is disaper- 
ing, vanysching 
awey fro men- 
nus si3t. Lire 
ere. C. 


§ V’; that is, 
the ynner man, 
and my soule, 
that is, sensual- 
ite, ethir the 
lowere my3t of 
the soule. 

Lire here. C. 


XII. 10—23. 


1osoule in hym shuln gladen. Blesseth the 
Lord, 3ee alle chosen of hym; doth dajes 
of gladnesse, and knoulecheth to hym. 
Jerusalem, cite of God, the Lord hath 
chastisid thee in the werkis of thin hondis. 
12 Knouleche thou to God in thi goodis, and 
blesse God of worldys, that he bilde a3een 
in thee his tabernacle, and clepe a3een to 
thee alle thi caitiues; and thou io3e into 
izalle worldis of worldis. With shynende 
liz3t thou shalt shyne, and alle the costus 
140f erthe shuln honoure thee. Naciouns 
fro aferr shuln come to thee, and bring- 
ende 3iftus shuln honouren in thee the 
Lord, and thi lond in to halewing thei 
isshuln han; forsothe a gret name thei 
16shul inwardli clepen in thee. And cursid 
shuln ben, that despise thee, and dampned 
shul he, that blasfemen thee ; and blessid 
17Shul be that bilden vp thee. Thou for- 
sothe shalt gladen in thi sonus, for alle 
shul be blessyd, and be gedered togidere 
isto the Lord. Blessid* alle that loouen 
19thee, and that io3en vp on thi pes. My 
soule, blesse the Lord, for he hath de- 
lyuered Jerusalem, his cite, fro alle his 
20 tribulaciouns, the Lord oure God. Blessid 
I shal be, if ther weren relikis of my‘ 
sed to be seen the clerte of Jerusalem. 
21 The 3atus of Jerusalem of safijr and of 
smaragd shul be bild, and of precious 
22ston al the cumpas of his wallis. And" 
of whyit ston and clene gold alle his 
streetis shul ben pauyd; bi his tounus 
23alleluia shal be sungen. Blessid the 
Lord that enhauncide it, that his reume 
be in to worldys of worldys vp on it. 
Amen. 


8 Blessid ben «. 


TOBIT. 


t thi £ pr.m. 


599 


hym’. Alle chosun” of the Lord, blesse 10 
3e hym ; make* 3e theY daies of gladnesse, 
and knouleche’ 3e? to hym. Jerusalem, 11 

the citee of God, the Lord hath chastisid* Fae 
thee for the werkis of thin hondis®, — schal chastise, 
Knouleche® thou’ to God in thi goodis*, Barred th the 
and blesse thou God of worldis’, that he ‘Ye pf Tobie. 
bilde ajen in thee his tabernacle, and a3en 

clepe to thee alle thi prisoneris ; and that 

thou haue ioie in to alle worldis of worldis. 

Thou schalt schyne with bri3t lizt+, and 13 + M3; this list 
alle the" coostis of erthe! schulen wor- fil inthe tom- 
schipe thee. Naciouns* schulen come frou” Ne 
fer to thee, and thei schulen brynge 3iftis', 

and schulen worschipe the Lord in thee, 

and thei schulen haue thi lond™ in to 

halewyng; for" thei schulen ‘clepe in thee® 1s 

the grete name?. And thei schulen bets 

cursid, that dispisen thee, and thei schulen 

be dampned, that blasfemen theel; and 

thei schulen be blessid, that bilden thee. 

Forsothe’ thou schalt be glad in thi sones, 17 

for alle’ schulen be blessid, and schulent 

be gaderid togidere to the Lord. Blessid t8 

ben alle" that louen thee, and that han 

ioie on’ thi pees. My soule, blesse thou 19 

the Lord, for ‘oure Lord God” hath dely- 

uered Jerusalein{, his citee, fro alle tribu- + This is seid of 
laciouns .therof. Y schal be blessid, if thie 20 aie ate 
relikisX of my seed schulen beY to se the i bis: Lire 
clerenesse of Jerusalem. The 3atis of Je-21 

rusalem schulen be bildid of saphire§ and 


* hath chas- 


§ of saphire ; 
bi this bilding 
of precionse 


smaragde’, and of preciouse stoon ; al the 
d . stones, ben vn- 
cumpas of wallis* therof schal be of white guretcndun 
and clene stoon. Alle” the stretis therof22 ven‘ 
schulen be strewid; and alleluya, ‘that is, whiche the 

F chosnn men of 

the heriyng of God“, schal be sungun bi? God Se oad 

P3 2 , ting to dy- 

the stretis therof. Blessid be the Lord, 23 uerse dwell- 
° 9 : ingis of heuenli 

that enhaunside® it, that his rewme’ be jefseatem bi 

oucn : ° dyuersites of 

on’ it in to worldis of worldis. Amen. eee ee ae 
here. c. 


«Om c. 


Vhim outward and inwarde s. * chosunmenis. X do Apr.m. BC sup. ras. EUPUVX. and do L. do make a. 


y Om. Ein. here in holinesse the s. 
d thou thee s. 
thon 1s. b Om. 1. 


z schryue 1s. 


i the erthe g. 


m lond, that is, the loud that Jerusalem is in thanne s. 


4 3e 30u IS. 
€ goodis whilis thou maist do good s. 


» hondis weren synfuls. © Schryue 1s. 


f worldis, that is, withouten endyng s. & Thanne 
k Naciouns, that is, many men fro dyuers cuntreis s. | 3iftis to thee s. 
n and in thee, Jerusalem 1s. o ynwardly 


clepe 1s. P name of the Lord is. 41 thee, that is, thei that bacbityn or wrongfulli repreuen thee s. * For- 


sothe, Jerusalem 1s, ‘alle thei1s. thei schulenis. alle thei1s. Yuponis. W the Lord oure 
Godis. <Xaftircomersis. _¥ be abidinge 1s. z of smaragde 1s. 4 the wallisis. — aud alle 1s. 
¢ Om. tx. 4 thorou3 is. & hath enhaunsidis. f rewme or gouernaunce 1s. & upon ts. : 


600 


CAPONIV. 


1 And the woordis of Tobie ben ful 
endid; and after that he is liztid to seen, 
he linede two and fourti 3er, and he sa3 

2the sonus of his sonus sonus. And so ful- 
fild an hundrid -3er and. twelue’, he is 

3biryed” wrshipefulli in Nynyue. Of sixe 
and fifti 3er forsothe he lafte the li3t of 
e3en ; forsothe in the sixtithe eer of age 
she resceyuede. The remnaunt forsothe 
of his lif was in io3e, and with good pro- 
fit of the drede of God he passide in pes. 
sIn the hour forsothe of his deth he cle- 
pide to hym Tobie, his sone, and seuene 
junge sonus of hym, his sonus sonus, and 
eseide to hem, Nee3h shal be the destruc- 
cioun of Nynyue, forsothe the woord of 

God falleth not of; and oure brethern, 
that ben scaterid fro the lond of Irael, 

zshul be turned a3een to it. Al _forsothe 
the desert lond of it shal be fulfild, and 
the hous of God, that in it was brent, shal 
be bild a3een, and thider shul turne a3een 

salle men dredende God. And Jentilis 
shuln leue there maumetus, and thei shul 
come to Jerusalem, and dwellen in it. 
9And ther shul iojen in it alle kingus 
of erthe, honourende the king* of Irael. 
io Hereth thanne, my sonus, 3oure fader ; 
serueth to the Lord in drede and in 
treuthe ; and inwardli secheth, that 3ee 
udo that ben plesaunt to hym. And to 
3oure sonus comaundeth, that thei do ri3t- 
wisnessis and almesse deedis; that thei 
be myndeful of God, and blesse God in 
alle time, in treuthe and in al his vertue. 
12 Now thanne, my sonus, hereth me, and 
wileth not dwellen heer, but what euere 
dai jee birie 3oure moder aboute me in o 


¥ two E£ pr.m. 


TOBIT. 


w deed and biried 4. 


XIV. I—12. 


CAP. XIV. 


And" the wordis of Tobie{ weren1 
endid; and aftir that he was li3tned', he 
lyuede two and fourti 3eer, and si3* the 
sones of hise sones sones. For! whanne2 
an hundrid 3eer and tweyn weren fillid™, 
he was biried worschipfuli in Nynyue. 
‘For he" of sixe and fifti 3eer loste® thes 
li3t of izenP; sothelid he™ sixti* 3eer eeld* 
resseyuede" ‘that li3t*. Forsothe™ the resi-4 
due* of his lijf was in ioie, and he 3edeY 
in pees* with good encresyng of Goddis 
drede. Forsothe* in the our of his deeths 
he clepide to hym Tobie, his sone, and 
seuene 3onge sones of hym, hise sones 
sones, and seide” to hem, The perischyng® 6 
of Nynyue schal be ni3, for’ the word of 
God schal not falle doun*{; and 3oure 
britheren, that’ ben scaterid fro the lond 
of Israel, schulen turne a3en to it. Sotheli$7 
al deseert" lond therof i schal be fillid*, and 
the hows of God, which! is brent ther 
yune, schal be bildid a3en, and alle™ that 
dreden God schulen turne ajen_ thidur. 
And hethene men schulen forsake hers 
idols}, and schulen” come to Jerusalem, 
and schulen® ‘enhabite it?. And alle thes 
kyngis of erthe schulen haue ioie ther 
ynne, and schulen’ worschipe the kyng 
of Israel. Therfor, my sones, here 3e 30ure jo 
fadir; serue 3e the Lord in drede and 
treuthe™; and enquere 3e to do tho thingis 
that ben plesaunt to hym. And comaunde }; 
3e 3oure sones to do ri3tfulnessis® and 
almesdedis ; that' thei be myndeful of God, 
and blesse" God in al tyme, in treuthe and 
in al her’ vertu’. Now therfor, my sones, jg 
here 3e me, and nyle 3e dwelle here*, but 
in what euer dai 3e han biried 3oure modir 


x kingis BE pr. im. 


h And thus 1s.‘ ligtned of his blyndnesse s. Khe sigz1s. lAndis, M™endid 1s. " Sothely whanne 


Tobie was 1s. © he loste 15. 
u he resseynede 18. V his siz3t azen 1s. 
his (Iyues s] ende rs. 8 And ts. 
void 1. awei voide, that neuer it shal be fulfillid s. 
k fulfillid is. I thatrs. ™ alle men 1s. 
(thei schulen is. fT in treuthe 1. 
¥ Om. g. ¥ power 1s, 


P his igen 1s. 


x here in Nynyue s. 


Ww Sothely 1s. 
b he seide 1s. 


9 thei schulen 1s, 
* riz3twisnesses 1. ri3tfulnesse s. 


dand whanne is. ‘he wasis. Sof sixtis. + age Is. 
Xremenaunt 1s. Y 3ede or /yuede s. 2 pees Jo 

¢ pereshing or destruccioun 8. ‘certis is. © awey 
fwhichs, Andis. hthedesertis, 3 of it 1s. 


© thei schulen 1s. 


P dwelle therynne 15. 
t and that 1s. 


u that thei blesse 1s. 


+ Tobie kno- 
lechinge and 
propheciynge 
of heuenly Je- 
rusalem. 1. 
The preisable 
knowleching 
of Tobie, and 
his profecie of 
heuenli Jeru- 
salem. s. 


t falle doun; 
sum is profesie 
of manaas, and 
this is chaung- 
id, as the me- 
ritis of men 
chaungen ; and 
in this maner 
Jonas profe- 
ciede the dis- 
triyng of Ny- 
nyue, but for 
thei diden pe- 
naunce, this 
peyne was de- 
layed; and 
whanne thei 
turneden a3en 
to her synnes, 
God jaf ful 
doom of dis- 
triynge of Ny- 
nyue bi profe- 
sie of predes- 
tynacionn ether 
of ful doom, as 
it is in Goddis 
knowyng, and 
this profesie 
ether doom is 
nenere chaung- 
id. Lire here. 


c. s 

§ forsake her 
tdols ; this pro- 
fesie was fillid 
in part, whanne 
the Jewis turn- 
eden ajen fro 
Babiloyne; but 
more perfitly it 
was fillid in the 
tyme of Crist 
and hise apo- 
stlis, whanne 
hethen men 
forsoken her 
idols, and 
camen to 
cristen feith, 
and serneden 
Crist truly, 
King of Israel. 
Lire here. ¢. 


XIV. 13—17. 


biriele, fro that tyme dresseth 3oure go- 
i3ingus, that 3ee go hennus; forsothe I sce 
that his wickednesse ende shal 3iue to it. 
14It is do forsothe after the deth of his 
moder, Tobie wente awei fro Nynyue, 
with his wif, and sonus’, and sonus of 
sonus’, and is turned ajeen to his fader 
1sand moder in lawe. And he fond hem 
sound in good eelde. And the cure of 
hem he bar, and he closide the e3en of 
hem; and al the eritage of the hous of 
Raguel he perceyuede, and he sa3 the 
fifte ieneracioun, the sonus of his sonus. 
i¢And fulfild nynti and nyne 3er in the 
drede of the Lord, with io3e thei birieden 
izhym. AI forsothe his kinrede, and al his 
ieneracioun, in good lif, and in holy con- 
uersacioun, abod stille, so that thei weren 
acceptid bothe to God and to men, and to 
alle dwellende in the lond. 


Here endith the book of Tobie, and 
now begynneth the prologe of Judith. 


y his sones a. 


Y bisidis 1. here bisidis s. 7 a 18. 
€ 30unger Tobie s. ‘his sones 1s. & his sones 1s, 


TOBIT. 


z From a. Explicit liber Tobie. &. 


601 


bisideY me in o* sepulcre, fro that dai 
dresse 3e 3oure steppis, that 3e go out fro 
hennus; for? Y se that the wickidnesse 13 
therof> schal ‘3yue an ende® therto. For- 14 
sothe’ it was doon aftir the deeth of his* 
modir, Tobie 3ede awei fro Nynyue, with 
his wijf, and sones‘, and with the sones of 
sones?, and turnede" ajen to the fadir and 
modir of his wijf. And he foond hems 
sounde! in* good eelde. And he dide the 
cure of hem}, and he closide her ijen; 
and™ he took al the erytage of the hows 
of Raguel, and he" si3 the fyuethe gene- 
racioun, the sones of hise sones. And 1¢é 
whanne nynti 3eer and nyne weren fillid° 
jn the drede of the Lord, thei birieden 
hym? with ioie. Forsothe al his kynrede, 17 
and al his generacioun, dwellide perfitli in 
good lijf, and in hooli conuersacioun, so 
that thei weren acceptable bothe’ to God 
and to men, and’ to alle enhabitynge® thet 
erthe. 


Here endith the book of Tobie, and 
here bigynneth the book of Judith". 


No final rubric in crn. 


8 sothely 1s. > of Nynyue 1s. © bringe destrncciouu rs. 4 And 1s. 
h he turnede ts. 


i sonnde and hoolis. * and ins. 


lhem, beringe hir charge while thet lynyden 1s. ™ and after that s. © Tobie 1s. © fulfillid is. P Tobie rs. 
4Om. x. 'Om.c.  § that dwellidenin is. tOm.1s, 4 Here eendith Tobye, and higynneth the book 
of Judith. w. Here endith Tobie, and here bigynneth Judith. conqsub. Here endith Thobie, and bigynneth 
a prologe on Judith. Goa. Heere endith Thobte, and bigynnith Judith. 1. Here endeth the book of Thobie; 
se now the prolog of Judith. x. Here endith the book of Tobie, and here bigynneth a prologe on the book 
of Judith. m. Here endith the book of Tobie, and bigynneth the beok of Judith. xvx. Heere eendith the 
hook of Thobie, and bigynneth the book of Judicum. x. Explicit Tobie. £. Here endith Tobie. g. Here endith 
the blessid book of Tobie. 1. No final rubric in pir. ’ 


VOL. IF 


JUDITH. 


[Prologue on the book of Judith. | 


Ty1s book of Judith, the holi widewe, 3yueth vs ensaumple to be of holi conuer- 
sacioun, and to triste hoolliche in the help of Almy3ti God, as Judith dide, which 
ouercam oonli bi the help of God the grete prince Olofernes, tristinge in the strengthe 
of fleschli arm, and not in the help of God. 


Prologus*. 


Anentus the Ebrues the boc of Judith is rad among thoo scriptures, whos autour is 
ynknowen, whos autorite to be strengthid thoo thingus that in to strijf comen lasse 
couenable is demed; ner the latere in Caldeis sermoun writen among the stories it 
is countid. But for this boc Nycene® synod‘ in the noumbre of holi scripturis is rad 
to han® countid, I assentide to 3oure asking, 3he, to 3oure stedefast asking; and the 
occupaciouns leid aside, with whichef hugeli I was artid, to thys thing o hitil waking 
while’ I 3af, more sence of sence than woord of woord translatende. Of manye bokis 
the most vicious diuersete I+ kutte awei, onli thoo thingus that with parfit! ynderstond- 
inge I my3te finde in Caldeis woordis, in Latin I expressede. Taketh Judith, widewe, 
saumple of chastyte, and declareth in perpetewel wrshipeful tellingus with the preismg 
of victorie. This forsothe not oneli to wymmen, but also to men, wrthi to ben folewid 
he 3af, that, 3eldere of hir chastite, such a vertue 3af to hir, that the vnouercomen of 
alle men she ouercam, and the vnouerpassable she ouerpassede. 


An nother prolog of Judith*. 


Judith, widewe, the do3ter of Merari, of the linage of Symeon, ful miche gret in 
glorie, and of men the parfitere; the whiche in figure of the churche girde of the 
deuel in the hed, ne she dradde deth for the helthe of the puple, ne the kingus wod- 
nesse quakide; for whi the slepende prince she slo3, and, saued the chastite, to hir 
citeseynus she bro3te a3een the principal victorie; forsothe she liuede an hundrid 3er 
and fiue, and is biried in the spelunke of hir husbonde Manasse, in Betulia. 


Here endith the prolog of Judith, and now begynneth the book’. 


® This prologue is from m. 


; a From un. No initial rubric in the other Mss. > ben arHio. ¢in Nicenys io. 4 sene sFuiLo. 
Web Lo. i the whiche armi. § Om. 10. 6 Om.x1o. i profyt ro. & From 4, No rubric in the 

: . Mss. From a. Here endeth the prolog of Judith, se nom the booc. 1. Here endith the prolog of 
udith, and bygynneth the book of hir. 10. No final rubric in the other Mss. 


I, 1— 12. 


Here beginneth the bok of Judith”. 
CAPE 


1 ARFAXATH forsothe, king of Meedis, 
hadde put vnder 30c manie Jentilis to 
his empire; and he bilde vp a cite most 

amy3ti, that he clepede Egbatenys. Of 
square stones and hewen he made his 
wallis, in hei3te of seuenti cubitus, and 
in breede of thretti cubitus. His tourys 
forsothe he sette in hei3te of an hundrid 

3cubitis. Bi square forsothe of hem either 
side was strecchid, in space of twenti feet ; 
and he putte his 3atis in the hei3te of the 
4touris. And he gloriede, as my3ti in 
my3t of his ost, and in glorie of his 
5foure horsid carris". The twelfthe 3er 
therfore of his regne, Nabugodonosor, 
king of Assiries, that regnede in the 
grete cite of Nynyue, fa3t a3en Arfaxath, 
sand waan hym in the grete feld, that is 
clepid Ragau, aboute Eufraten, and Tigre, 
and Jodasan, in the feld of Erioth, king 
70f Elikis*. Thanne is enhauncid vp the 
reume of Nabugodonosor, and his herte 
is rerid? ; and he sente to alle, that dwel- 
ten in Cicilie, and Damasch, and Lyban, 
sand to the Jentilis, that ben in Carmel 
and Cedar, and to the dwelleris in Gali- 
lee, and in the grete feld of Esdrelon, 
gand to alle, that weren in Samarie, and 
be3onde Jordan flod, vnto Jerusalem; and 
to al the lond of Jesse, to that me cometh 
ioto the hillis of Ethiope. To alle these 
Nahugodonosor, king of Assiries, sente 
l1messageres; the whiche alle with o wil 
withseiden, and thei senten hem ajeen 
voide, and with oute wrshipe casten 
izawei. Thanne endeyned king’ Nabugo- 
donosor to al that lond, swor bi the 


m From r. No initial rnbric in the other Mss. 
kyng 4. 


a From Etmp. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


£Om. s. 
m the mm. 
the gat 1. he gat or foke s. 
¥ of Tigris 1s. 
e til that 18. 


koruen 1ks. & Om. ¢. 
nesse 1. square werk s. 
8 he fau3te a3ens 1s. 
flood of Eufrates 1s. 
Jordan 1s. 4 vn to ts, 
thes 1s. 


castiden hem 1s. 9 awgi fro hem s. 


JUDITH. 


& the wallis weren of s. 
" side of hem s. 


2 of Jadasa 18. 
, f To alle thes men Nabugodonosor 1s. 
i agenseiden and withstoden his maundement 8. 


603 


Here biginneth the bok of Judith*. 


CAP. I. 


‘AND so» Arphaxat, kyng+ of Medeis, ! 
hadde maad suget many folkis to his em- 
pire; and he bildide a ful my3ti citee, 
which he clepide Egbathanys. Of squarid¢2 
stonys and korfe' he made the wallis ther- 
of, in the hei3the of thre score cubitis and 
ten, and® in the breede of § thritti cubitis. 
Sotheli® he settide! the touris therof in 
the hei3the of an hundrid cubitis. For-3 
sothe* bi the square! of tho™ touris euer 
either side" was stretchid forth, bi the 
space of tweuti feet; and he settide® the 
jatis of that citee in the heijthe of the? 
touris. And he hadde glorie, as mi3ti4 in4 
the power of his oost, and in the glorie 
of hise charis. Therfor Nabugodonosorf, 5 
kyng of Assyriens, that regnede in the 
grete citee Nynyue, fau3t" in the tweluethe 
jeer of his rewme ajens’ Arphaxat, and 
gatt him" in the greet feeld, ‘which is” 6 
clepid Ragau, bisidis Eufrates*, and Ti- 
gris¥, and Jadasa’, in the feeld of Erioch, 
kyng* of Elichoris. Thanne the rewme of7 
Nabugodonosor was enhaunsid, and his 
herte was reisid¥; and he sente to alle men, 
that dwelliden in Cilicie, and in Damask, 
and in Liban, and to folkis, that weren ins 
Carmele, and in Cedar, and to men dwell- 
ynge in Galile, and in the grete feeld of Es- 
drolon, and to alle men, that weren in Sama-9 
rie, and bizende the flood Jordan’, ‘til tot 
Jerusalem; and to al the lond of Jesse, til¢ 


me come to the hillis of Ethiope. Nabugo- 10 


donosor‘, kyng of Assiriens, sente messan- 


geris to alle these men’; ‘which alle" a3en- 1 


seideni with o wille, and senten* a3en hem! 
voide, and castiden™ awei® with out onour. 


Ncartis aru. © Elibis aru. Parered aru. 4 the 


> Certis rs. ¢squaaris, 4 kit BcENLPUVX. of 
hAndis. isetters. k Andis. ! squaar- 

© sette 1s. P tho 1sx. 4a mij3ti man 1s. * Om. 1s, 
uArphacatis. Yaats, W that wasis.  * the 
a the kyng 1s. b reisid into prides. © of 
£Om.1s. 4 and alle 


k thei senten 1s. ! his messangeris 1s. ™ thei 


4H 2 


t+ king; that 
is, willing to 
regne by vio- 
lence. Lire 
here. €. 


t Nubugodono- 
sor; that is, 
Cambises, sone 
of Cirus, and 
this Cambises 
is seid the ij. 
Nabugodono- 
sor, for he let- 
tide the bilding 
of Jerusalem, 
as the firste 
Nabugodonosor 
distriede Jeru- 
salem. Lire 
here. €. 


604 


rewme and his trone, that he shulde de- 
fenden hym fro alle thoo regiounus. 


CAP. II. 


1 The threttenthe 3er of Nabugodonosor 
king, the two and twentithe dai of the 
firste moneth, ther is don a woord in 
the hous off Nabugodonosor, king of As- 

2siries, that he shulde defenden hym. And 
le clepede to hym alle the more thur3 
birthe, and alle the dukis, lis fizteres ; 
and he hadde with hem the priuyte of 

shis counscil. And he seide his thenk- 
ing in hym to ben, that al the erthe he 
ashulde vnder 30ke to his empire. The 
whiche sawe whan it pleside to alle men, 
king Nabugodonosor clepede Olofernes, 

5 prince of his chiualrie, and seide to hym, 
Go out ajen eche reume of the west, and 
a3jen hem nameli, that despiseden myn 

sempire. And thi e3e spare not to any 
reume, and alle strengthid cite thou shalt 

7vnderz3oke to me. ‘Thanne Olofernes cle- 
pyde dukis and the maister domys men 
of the vertue of Assiries, and noumbrede 
men in to the speding, as the king co- 
maundede to hym,an hundrid and twenti 
thousend of fiz3tende foot men, and horse 
simen and archeris twelf thousend. And 
‘al his ost redi he made to go before in 
multitude of ynnoumbrable camailis, with 
thoo that shulden snffisen plenteuousli 
to the ostis, of oxen also droues, and 
flockis of shep, of the whiche was no 
gnoumbre. Whete of al Cirie in his going 
iohe ordeynede to be maad redi. Myche 
forsothe gold and siluer of the hous of 
i1the king he toc ful myche. And he wente 
forth, he, and al the ost, with foure horsid 
cartis, and horse men, and archeris, that 


°Om.1s. P the x. 
uhim fro his enemyes s.  V hise s. 
and his entent's. — ® was sett 15. 
€the men 1. hise mens. f he ts. 
™ myn heest 1s. 
batails. * had boden 1s. 
sente 1. and he seule bifore him s. 
men of is. > Om. 18. 
part is, 


bone. 


* oxen Is. 
© took with him ts. 


JUDITH. 


1 lond, that ajenstoden his heest s. 
W the duykis 1s. 
© seiyng of [the king s| Nabugodonsor 1s. 
: & the prince 1. he seide ts. i 
Q 3@ BCDEFIIKLMNOPQRSVWxab. 


8 he noumbride sixe s. 


Il, 1—ItT. 


Thanne kyng® Nabugodonosor was wrooth 12 
to al that? lond4, and swoor' bi his rewme 
and trone’, that he wolde defendet him 
fro alle these cuntreis. 


+ defende ; 
that is, asaile 
alle tho cun- 
treys. Lire 
here. C. 


CARPAL 

In the thrittenthe 3eer of kyng Nabu-. 
godonosor, in the two and twentithe dai 
of the firste monethe, a word was maad 
int the hows of Nabugodonosor, kyng of 
Assiriens, that he wolde defende hym’. 
And he clepide to hym alle the’ eldere2 
men, and alle duykis’, hise* werriouris ; 
and haddeY with hem the priuete of his 
counsel. And he seide, that his thou3te?3 
was’ in? that thing, to make suget ech lond 
to his empire. And whanne this seiyng®4 
hadde plesidé alle men®, ‘kyng Nabugodo- 
nosor! clepide Holofernes, prince? of his 
chyualrie, and seide* to hym, Go thou out 
a3ens ech rewme of! the west*, and ajens 
hem principali, that dispisiden! ‘my co- 
maundement™. Thin ij3en" schal not sparec 
ony rewme, and thou schalt make suget 
to me ech strengthid citee. Thanne Holo-7 
fernes clepide the duykis and magistratis® 
of the vertu? of Assiriens, and he noum- 
bride men in to the makyng redi4, as the 
kyng ‘comaundide to‘ hym, sixe’ score 
thousynde of foot men fizteris, and twelue 
thousynde horse men and archeris. Ands 
he made al his purnyaunce to go biforet 
in multitude of ynnoumbrable camels, with 
these" thingis that suffisiden plenteuousli 
to the’ oostis, and” droues of oxis*, and 
flockis of scheep, of which was noon 
noumbre. Hey ordeynede? whete to beg 
maad redi of al? Sirie ‘in his passage’. And lo 
he took® ful? myche gold and siluer of the 
kyngis hows. And he‘, and al his oost,11 
3ede forth with charis, and horse meu, and 
archeris, whichef hiliden the face’ of the 


‘in tos. 
% thou3t 
d plesid to 1s. 

! dispisyn s. 


8 bi his trone 1s. 
y he hadde 1s. 


r he swoor Is. 
x whieh weren hise s. 


iats. west eoost s. 


° the maistir men ts. Ppower1s. 4 redi of 
tbifore himis. thos. Vhisis. Wand he 

y And in his pasage he 1s. %ordeyne no. alle the 
40Om.1. © Holofernesis. fthe whicher.  & oner 


es 


Il. 12——IIl, 3. 


couereden the face of the erthe, as lo- 
izeustus. And whan he hadde ouerpassid 
the coostus of Assiries, he cam to the 
grete hillis of Auge, that ben fro the lift 
side of Cicilie; and he ste3ede vp alle the 
eastelis of hem, and weldede eche hold 
13strengthid. Forsothe he brac out the 
most riche cite Melothi, and spoilide alle 


JUDITH. 


605 


erthe, as locustis door. And whamne heis 
hadde passid the endis' of Assiriens, he 
came to the* grete hillis Auge, that™ ben 
at the lift half of Cilicie; and he stiede™ in 
to alle the castels of lem, and he gat ech 
strong place®. Forsothe? he brak4 the13 
richeste’, ethir’ famouset, citee Melothi®, 
and robbideY alle the sones of Tharsis, 


the sonus of Tarsis, and the sonus of Is- 
mael, that weren a3en the face of desert, 
and at the south of the lond of Celeon. 


and‘Y the sones of Ismaelt, that weren” 
ajens the face of desert, and at the south* 
of the lond Celeon’. 


+ Summe bokes 
han of Israel ; 
but elde bokis 


14 And he passide ouer Eufraten, and cam 
in to Mesopotanee, and brac alle the he3e 
cites that weren there, fro the strem of 
Mambre vn to it be ful come to the se. 

15 And he ocupiede the termes of it fro 
Cicilie vu to the coostus of Jafeth, that 

16ben to the south. And he bro3te alle 
the sonus of Madian, and spoilide alle the 
richessis of hem; and alle with stondende 
to hym he slo3 in the mouth of the‘ swerd. 

17 And after these thingus he cam doun in 
to the feldis of Damasch, in the da3es of 
rep, and he brende vp alle the sowen 
thingus, and alle trees and vynes he made 

18to ben hewen doun; and the drede of 
hym fel vp alle the dwelleris in the lond. 


CAP. III. 


1 Thanne thei senten ther legatus of alle 
cites and prouyncis, the kingus and the 
princis of Cirie, that is, of Mesopotanie, 
and of Cirie Sobal, and of Libie, and of 
Cicilie. The whiche comende to Olofer- 

2nen, seiden, Cese thin indignacioun aboute 
vs; betere forsothe it is that liuende wee 
serue to Nabugodonosor, the grete king, 
and soget wee be to thee, than diende 
with oure deth wee vsself* suffre the 

3harmys of oure seruyse. Al oure cite, 


4 Om. c pr.m. 


And he passide Eu- 1428 (mee 
frates, and cam” in to Mesopotanye, and — yeriere lettre. 
he brak* alle hi3e? citees* that weren there, 

fro the stronde Manbret til ‘me come? to 

the see. And he occupiede the endisfis 
therof% fro Cilicie ‘til to" the endis of 

Japhet, thati ben at the south. And he1s 
brou3te™ alle the sones of Madian, and he 

‘robbide al the richessis of hem!; and he 
killide ‘bi the™ scharpnesse of swerd alle 

men aj3enstondynge hym. And _after17 

these thingis he" cam doun in to the 

feeldis of Damask, in the daies of ripe 

corn®, and he brente alle cornes?, and he 

made alle trees! and vynes to be kit down ; 

and his drede ‘felde ont alle men ‘enhabit- 18 

ynge the lond’. 


CAP, Ill. 


Thanne kyngist and princes of alle! 
citees and prouynces, that is, of Cirie, of 
Mesopotanye, and of Sirie Sobal, and of 
Libie, and of Cilicie, sente her messan- 
geris". ‘Whiche comynge’ to Holofernes, 
seiden”, Thin indignacioun ceesse aboute2 
vs; for it is betere, that we lyue and serue 
Nabugodonosor, the grete kyng, and be* 
suget to thee, than that we die, and suf- 
fre with oure perischyngY the harmes} of harmes than is 
oure seruage’, Ech citee of oure*, al?3 late 


+ harmes ; that 
is, suffre more 


r ouresilf ari. 


bOm.1. icoostiss. kOm.s. ! clepid Auge 1. that weren clepid Auge s. ™ which s. " stiede up 15. 


9 place there 1. place of that cunirei s. P And 1s. 


4 brak and destriede 18. 


T moost strong 1s. * Oni. Is. 


t famousiste B. Om.1s. “clepid Melothi 1s. v he robbide 1s. Vv and spoilid s. ¥ weren duclling s. * south 


coostis. Y of Celeon ts. 2 he cam ts. 
Mambre 1, ¢ that men coments. 
which endis or coostis s. 
n FHolofernes 1s. 
upon 1s. 
¥v and whanne thei camen Is. 
2ouris 1s. » and als. 


f coostis 15. 
k brou3te with him s. 
© corn, that is, in haruest s. 


w thei seiden 1s. 


a brake and wastid s. 
& of that cuntrey s. 


P thilke cornes 1, tho cornes s. 
8 dwellynge on erthe 1. duelling vpon al erthe s. t the kyngis 1s. 
x to be 1s. 


¢ cheef citees s. 4 of 

i the whiche endis 1. 
1 toke fro hem alle her richessis 1s. m with 1. 
athe trees is. ° felle 
u messagers fo Holofernes s. 
Z thraldom 1s, 


b the hize 1s. 
h yn to 1s. 


¥Y greet perishing 8. 


606 


al’ oure possessionn, alle hillis, and litle 
hillis, and feldis, and droues of oxen, and 
flockis of shep, and of she get, and of 
hors, aud of cainailis, and alle oure facul- 
itees and meynes in thi sijte ben; alle 
sthingus ben vndir thi lawe. Wee also 
sand oure sonus ben thy seruauns. Cum 
to vs a pesible lord, and vse oure ser- 
7uyse, as it pleseth to thee. Thanne he 
cam doun fro the hillis, with horsmen in 
gret vertue, and weldede eche cite, and 
salle ment dwellende in the lond. Of alle 
forsothe cites he toc to hym helperis, 
9stronge men and chosen to bataile. And 
so myche drede to that pronynce fel in, 
that of alle cites the dwelleris, princys 
and wrshipeful men, togidre with the 
puple wenten out in to meeting to hym 
19 comende, resceyuende hymn with crounus 
and lawmpis, ledende dauncis in trumpis 
liand timbris. And 3it ner the latere 
these thingus doende thei my3ten not 
izswagen the feerste of his brest; for and 
ther cites he destroj3ede, and ther mau- 
is met wodus he heew doun. Forsothe king 
Nabugodonosor hadde comanndid to hym, 
that alle the goddis of the lond he shulde 
ontlawen, that is, that he god alone were 
seid of these naciouns, that my3ten ben 
vnder3okid bi the my3t of Olofernes. 
14 Passende forsothe Cirie Sobal, and al Ap- 
panyam, and al Mesopotanye, cam to Idu- 
1smes in" the lond of Gabaa; and he toc 
the cites of hem, and sat there bi thretti 
dajes, in whiche’ dajes he comaundede 
to be gedered togidere al the ost of his 
vertue. 


Sandal a. of uw. tmance. 


© oure possessioun 1s. 4 oxre mounteyns 1s. 
meyneis 1s. jour thingis s. & and be thou as. 
? that dwellide in that 1s. 
‘ that he came to, hes. ¥% drede of Iolofernes 1s. 
Y meu of honour 1s, 2 her peplis s. 
resseyueden him ts. 4 thei Jedden 1s. 
hCertists. itOm.is. k Holofernes 1s. 
» Holofernes 1s. 4 passide ouer 1s. 


dwellide is. W Om. ts. * vertu BEHLPUVX. 


JUDITH. 


"in to an. 


© oure feeldis 1s. 
Ito thee ts, 
4 lond where he came 1. lond that he came to s. 
V upon is, 

4 comyng towardis hem s. 
© daunces bifore him s. 
1 which s. 
t of Sobal s. 


II. 4—15. 


possessioun®, alle munteyns‘’, and litle 
hillis, and feeldis®, and droues of oxesf, 
aud flockis’ of scheep, and of geet, and 
of horsis, and of camels, and alle oure 
richessis and meyneis® ben in thi si3t; 
alle thingis! be vndur thi lawe. Also we 
and oure children ben thi seruauntis. 
Come thou a* pesible lord to vs, and yseé 
thou oure seruyce, as it plesith thee'. 
Thanne he™ cam doun fro the hillis, with7 
kny3tis in greet ‘vertu, that is", strengthe, 
and gat® ech citee, and ech man ‘enhabit- 
ynge the? lond4. Forsothie” of alle citees*s 
het took to hym helperis, stronge men and 
chosun to batel. And so grete drede® lay9 
on’ alle prouynces, that enhabiteris” of 
alle citees, princes* and ‘onourid meny, 
jeden togidere out with puplis? to meete 
hym comynge*, and ‘resseyueden hym?10 
with corouns and Jaumpis‘, and ledden® 
daunsis® with pipis and tympans. Nethe-11 
les thei doynge these thingis my3ten not 
swage the fersnesse of his herte; for while 
bothef he distriede her citees, and hew# 
doun her wodis. For* kyngi Nabugodo-13 
nosor hadde comaundid to hym*, that he 
schulde distrie alle the goddis of erthe, 
that is, that he aloone schulde be seid god 
of alle these uaciouns, that! my3ten be 
maad suget™ bi the power" of Holofernes. 
Forsothe® he? passide! al Sirie Sobal', and 14 
als Appanye, and al Mesopotanye, and cam! 
to Idumeis ‘in to" the lond of Gabaa; and 15 
he took the citees of hem, and dwellide’ 
there’ bi thritti daies, in whiche daies he - 
comaundide al the oost of his power* to be 
gaderid togidere’. 


Vthe whiche aru. 


b oure 
© he gat 1s. 
s the citees 1s. 
x and the princes 1s. 
¢ with [list s] laumpis thei 

& he hewide 1. hewide s. 

n powers s. ° And is. 
thecamis. Yin x. VY he 


foxenis. §& oure flockis 1s. 
m Holofernes 1s. 2 Om. 1s. 
r And 1s. 
W the dwellers 1s. 
b Om. 1s. 
fOm. s. 
™ sugettis 1s. 
Sal the cuntrey of s. 


¥ togidere fo him is, 


LVg 120 


CAP ive 


1 Thanne herende the sonus of Irael 
these thingus, that dwelten in the lond 
of Juda, dredden gretli fro the face of 
2hym. Drede also and orrour assailede 
the wittus of hem, lest that he shulde do 
to Jerusalem and to the temple of the 
Lord, that he hadde do to othere cites 
3and to ther templis. And thei senten 
in to al Samarie, bi enuyroun vnto Jeri- 
cho, and thei ocupieden beforn alle the 
tcoppis of hillis; and with wallis thei 
enuyrouneden ther tounus, and gedereden 
whetis in to the befor greithing of fi3t. 
5The prest also Eliachym wrot to alle, 
that weren aboute Esdrelon, that is a3en 
the face of the grete feld biside Dotaym, 
and to alle bi whom passing my3te be, 
6that thei welde the ste3ingus vp of hillis, 
bi whiche weie my3te be to Jerusalem, 
and there thei shulden kepe, where my3te 
7be streit weie betwen hillis. And the 
sonus of Jrael diden after that Eleachym, 
the prest of the Lord, hadde ordeined to 
shem. And al the puple criede to the 
Lord with gret instaunce, and mekeden 
ther soulis in fastingus, thei and ther 
9wymmen. And the prestus clothiden 
hemselue with heiris, and the 3unge chil- 
der threwen hemself doun befor the face 
of the temple of the Lord, and the auter 
of the Lord thei couereden with an heire. 
10 And thei crieden to the Lord God of 
Trael alle togidere, lest weren 3yuen ther 
childer in to prei, and ther wyues in to 
deuyseoun, and ther cites in to destruc- 
cioun, and the holi thingus of hem in to 
i pollucioun. Thanne Eleachym, the grete 
prest of the Lord, enuyrounede al Irael, 
12and spac to hem, seiende, Witeth, for the 
Lord hath herd oure prejeeris, if dwell- 


zZ thei dredden 1s. 9 the faee of Holofernes 1s. 
distried s. vn to Jericho the Jewis 1s. 
gaderiden 1s. 
wonyng 8. "euenazenus 1s. ° ke wroot to Is. 
Supoftheis.  ¢ hillis a weie 18. 
x perceyued among 1s. Y the hillis 1s. 
d instaunce or herlli biseching s. © the 3onge c. 
iOm.s. * greet or cheif's. lhe spake s. 


JUDITH. 


e Om. 1s. 
k the making coFe11KMNOQRSUVWXab. 
P whom 1. 
u to her enemyes mizteu s. 

Z this Acest 1s. 
f lomli azens s. 


607 


CA Po1V. 


Thanne the sones of Israel, that dwell-1 
iden in the lond of Juda, herden these 
thingis, and dredden’* greetli of ‘his face. 
Also tremblyng and hidousnesse asailides 
the wittis of hem, lest he schulde do this 
thing> to Jerusalem and to the temple of 
the Lord, which thing he hadde do to 
othere citees and templis of tho®. And3 
thei? senten in to al Samarie, bi cumpas 
‘til to Jerico®, and bifore’ ocupieden alle 
the coppis® of hillis®; and thei cuimpass-4 
iden her townes with wallis, and gader- 
iden! togidere wheete in to making* redi 
of batel. Also the prest! Eliachym wroots 
to alle men, ‘that weren™ ajenus Esdrelon, 
which is a3enus" the face of the grete 
feeld bisidis Dotayin, and to° alle men bi 
whiche? passage1 my3te be, that" theic 
schulden holde the stiyngis of* hillis, bi 
whiche weiet my3te" be to Jerusalem, and 
that’ thei schulden kepe’ there, where 
streyt weie mi3te be ainong* hillisy. And7 
the sones of Israel diden aftir this’, that 
Eliachym, prest* of the Lord, hadde or- 
deyned to? hem. And al the puple® criedes 
to the Lord with greet instaunce*, and 
thei and the wymmen of hem mekiden 
her soulis in fastyngis. And the prestis» 
clothiden hem silf with heyris, and 3onge® 
children boweden hem silf a3ens‘ the face’ 
of the temple of the Lord, and thei! hili- 
den the auter of the Lord with an heire. 
And thei crieden togidere to the Lord te 
God of Israel, lest the children of hem 
schulden be 3ouun in' to prey, and the 


wyues of hem in to departyngt}, and her + departing: 
ss i F . A A bi violence of 
citees in to distriyng, and her hooli thingis — rauyscheris. 
Lire here. ¢. 


in to defoulyng. ‘Thanne Eliachym, the 1 
grete* prest of the Lord, cumpasside al 
Israel, and spak! to hem, and scide, Wite 12 


b these thingis s. = ¢ hem 1. hem the which he had 
f thei bifore 1s. & heiztis 1s.) the hillis1s. 1 thei 
1 hi3 cheef preest s. ™ dwellinge 1, that weren 
4 thanne as passage s. * and he bad that s. 
Vv he bad hem thats.  kepe wele s. 
athe prest 1s. bfors. ¢ peple of Jewis s. 
& hiholding 1s. the prestis 1s. 


608 JUDITH. Iv. 13-—V. 5. 


ende 3ee abijde stille in fastingus and in 
13 prejeeris in the siz3te of the Lord. Beth 
myndeful of Moises, the seruaunt of the 
Lord, that” cast doun Amalech trost- 
ende in his vertue, and in his my3t, and 
in his ost, and in his targetis, and in his 
charis, and in his horsemen, not with 
iryn fistende, but with holi pre3eeris 
1sprejende; so shul ben born doun alle 
the enemys of Irael, if 3ee stedefastli 
abijden in this werk, that 3ee han be- 
isgunne. Therfore at this exhortacioun of 
hym thei, prezende the Lord, abiden stille 
1i6in the sijte of the Lord, so that also 
these, that brent sacrifises offriden to the 
Lord, gird with heiris offriden sacrifise 
to the Lord, and ther was askis vpon 
17the hed of hem. And of al ther herte 
alle prejeden God, that he shulde visiten 
his puple Irael. 


CAPS V.. 


i And it is told to Olofernes, prince of 
the chiualrie of Assiries, that the sonus 
of Irael maden hem redi to withstonden, 
and that thei hadden closid the weies of 

2hillis. And with ful myche wodnesse he 
brende out in to gret wrathe; and he 
clepide alle the princis of Moab, and dukis 

3of Amon, and seide to hem, Seith to me, 
who ben thise puple, that the hillis segen ; 
and what maner, and hou fele ben the 
cites of hem; what also be the vertue of 
hem, or what he the multitude of hem, 
or who be the king of the chiualrie of 
ahem; whi hbeforn alle, that dwellen in the 
est, these dispisiden* me, and wenten not 
oute to meeten with vs, that thei shulden 
staken vs with pes? Thanne Achior, duke 
of alle the sonus of Amon, answerende, 
seith, If thou vouche saaf to here, my 


2 W the whiche aru. 


"in bileue shuln duelle s._ 4 in preieris a pr. m. s. 
and so as Amalech was cast doun so shulns. * Om. 1s. & casten ts. ¢ that 1s. 


3e, that the Lord schal here 3oure preieris, 
if 3e dwellinge dwellen™ perfitli in fast- 
yngis and preieris® in the si3t of the 
Lord. Be 3e myndful of Moises, the ser-13 
uaunt of the Lord, which® not in fiz3tynge 
with irun, but in preiynge with hooli 
preieris, castide doun Amalech tristinge 
in his vertu?, and in his power, and in 
his oost, and in hise scheldis, and in hise 
charis, and in hise kny3tis; so4 alle the14 
enemyes of Israel schulen™ be cast* doun, 
if 3e continuen in this werk, which' 3e 
han bigunne. Therfor at this excityng™ 15 
of hym’ thei’ preieden hertli the* Lord, 
‘and dwelliden in the si3t of the Lord’, 


so that also thei, that offriden brent sacri-16 


fices? to the Lord, weren gird with heiris, 
and thei offriden sacrifices to the Lord, 
and ‘aische was* on” her heedis. And alle17 
men of al her herte preieden God*, that 
he wolde visite his puple Israel. 


CAPs4, 


And it was teld to Holofernes, prince1 
of the chiualrie of Assiriens’, that the 
children® of Israel maden redi hem silf to 
ajenstonde’, and that thei hadden closid 
togidere the weies of hillis’. And" biz 
ouer greet woodnesse he! brente out in to 
greet wrathfulnesse; and he clepide alle 
the princes of Moab, and the duykis of 
Amon, and seidej to hem, Seie 3e to me,3 
who this puple is, that bisegith the hilli 
places ; ethir whiche, and what maner, and 
hou grete ben her citees; also what is the 
vertu! of hem, ether what is the multi- 
tude of hem, ethir who is the kyng of her 
chynalrie ; and whi bifor alle men, that4 
dwellen in the eest, han these men dis- 
pisid me, and™ thei han not go out to 
resseyue vs with pees? Than Achior,s 
duyk of alle the sones of Amon, answerde 


x dispisen 4H. 


°the which 1. Pstrengthe 1s. 4 and so schul 1. 
« excityng or stiring s. 


\ Eliakin the preest s. _¥ men of Israels. *to thes. yOm.b. 2 sacrifice s. ®askis weren eu. asschis 


was F. askis was p. asske or pouder was s. > pudt upon 1s. ¢ the Lord 1s. 


4 men of Assirie 1s. 


© sones 18. f azenstonde him is. & the hillis 1s. And Olofernes 1. And herfor Holofernes s. i Om. 18. 


ihe seide is. & also telle 3e mes. } strengthe 1s. 


m and whi 1s. 


V. 6—15. 


lord, I shal sei the treuthe in thi’ si3t of 
this puple that in the mountaynes dwell- 
ith, and ther shal not go out a fals 
é6woord of my mouth. This puple is of 
7the progenye of Caldeis; this first in 
Mesopotanye dwelte ; for thei wolde not 
folewe the godis of ther fadris, that 
sweren in the lond of Caldeis. And so 
forsakende the cerimoynes of ther fa- 
dris, that with the multitude of godis 
g9weren, o God of heuene thei herieden, 
the whiche and comaundede to hem, that 
thei shulden gon out thennus, and dwelle 
in Carram. And whan hungir hadde ouer- 
couered al the lond, thei wenten doun 
into Egipt, and there bi foure hundrid 
3er so ben multiplied, that the ost of hem 
lomy3te not ben noumbrid. And whan the 
king of Egipt hadde greued hem, and in 
bildingus* of his cites in clei and tijl 
hadde vuder3okid hem, thei crieden to 
ther God, and he smot al the lond of 
11Egipt with diuerse veniauncis. And 
whan Egipcyenus hadden cast hem out 
fro hem, and veniaunce hadde cesid fro 
hem, and eft thei wolden hem taken, and 
12 to their seruise a3een clepen, hem fleende, 
God of heuene openede the se, so that on 
either side the watris as wallis weren 
maad sad, and thei drie foot the ground 
130f the se goende passeden ouer. In the 
whiche place whil the vnnoumbrable ost 
of Egipcienus them shulde pursuen, so 
with watris it is couered, that ther lafte 
not ne*® oon, that the deede to after 
14comeres shulde telle. Also, gon out the 
Rede Se, thei wenten a3en the desertus of 
the mountus of Sina, in the whiche ne- 
uere man my3te dwellen, or sone of man 
isrestide. There bitter wellis ben maad 
swete to them to drinke ; and bi fourti 3er 


y the an. 


nhere mets. ©thetreuther. P and thiss. 
t [the s] whiche cerymonyes 1s. 
tijlis. %Godis. 4 the men of Egipt 1s. 
Egipt 1s. © eftsoons 18. 
God is. * men of Israel 1s. 


the s. © and in her walkynge 1s. 


‘ fleynge awei I. 
P feet I. 


JUDITH. 


2 bieldynge a. 


4 wolden not 1. 
ujnis. VY thei worschipiden 1s. 
b cast Is. 
f whanne thei wolden 15s. 
™ on that Is. 
q Om. Is. 


609 


and seide, My lord, if thou vouchist saaf 
to here", Y schal seie treuthe® in thi si3t 
of this puple that dwellith in the hilli 
places, and a fals word schal not go out 
of my mouth. This puple is of the gene-« 
racioun of Caldeis; this? puple dwellide7 
firste in Mesopotanye; for thei nolden4 
sue the goddis of her fadris, that" weren’ 
in the lond of Caldeis. TTherfor thei for-s 
soken the cerymonyes of her fadris, thatt 
weren with" the multitude of goddis, and9 
worschipidenY o God of heuene, which 
also comaundide to hem to go out fro 
thennus}, and to dwelle in Carram. And 
whanne hungur hadde hilid al the lond", 
thei 3eden doun in to Egipt, and there 
thei weren so multiplied bi foure hundrid 
3eer, that the oost of hem my3te not be 


noumbridt. And whanne the kyng of 10? This naty- 


Egipt hadde greuyd hem, and hadde* 
maad hem sugetis in the bildyngis of hise 
citees in cley and tijlY stoon, thei crieden 
to her God, and he* smoot al tlie lond 
of Egipt with dyuerse veniaunces. Andit 
whanne Egipcians* hadden castid> out 
‘hem fro hem silf°, and the veniaunce 
hadde ceessid fro hem“, and efte® woldenf 
take hem&, and a3en clepe" to her ser- 
uyce, God' of heuene openyde the see to12 
these men* fleynge!, so that on this side 
and that™ side the" watris weren maad 
sad as wallis, and° these men with dry 
foot? passiden ‘in walkynge bi the depthe" 
of the see. In which place the while‘s 
vnnoumbrable oost of Egipcianst pursuiede 
hem", it was so kyueryd’ with watris, 
that there dwellide not nameli oon”, that 
schulde telle the dede to aftir comeris. 
Also* theiY jeden out of the Reed See, and 14 
ocupieden’ the desertis of the hil Sina’, in 
whiche> ‘neuere man my3te® dwelle, nethir 


aOm, 4. 


$ weren worshepid s. 
xOm.1s. Yin 


r which s. 
Ww lond of Carran 1s. 
¢ fro hem the men of Israel rs. 4 the men of 
& the men of Israel 1s. 4 clepe hem 1. i thanne 
" where this peple wentyn ouer the see, 


¥ depnesse 1s. § whiliss. * men of Egipt 1s. 


t Israel 1s. Vhilid 1s. Woo man alyue 1s. * Thanne also s. Ythe men of Israel 1s. 2 thei ocupieden Is. 


8 of Sima cs. 
VOL. TI. 


b [the s] whiche desertis 1s. 


¢ ther my3te neuer man 1. 


41 


610 


ie5eris frute fro heuene thei geeten. Wher 
euere thei wenten in, with oute bowe and 
arwe, and with oute sheld and swerd 
ther God fa3t for hem, and ouercam. 
17 And ther was not that shulde asailen to 
that puple, but whan it wente awei fro 
isthe heriyng of the Lord his God. As 
ofte sithes forsothe biside hym ther God 
an other thei herieden, thei ben 3iuen in 
to prei>, and in to swerd, and in to re- 
19 pref. As ofte sithes forsothe thei otho3ten 
themself to han gon awey fro the heriyng 
of ther God, God of heuene* 3af to hem 
20 vertue of withstonding. Ferthermore king 
Cananee, and Jebusee, and Feresee, and 
Ethee, and Euee, and Amorree, and alle 
the my3ti men in Esebon thei threwe 
doun, and the londis of hem, and the 
2icitees of hem thei weldeden; and.ynto 
the time that thei hadden synned in the 
si3te of ther God, goodis weren with 
hem, the God forsothe of hem hateth 
22 wickenesse’. For and befor these 3erys, 
whan thei hadden gon awei fro the weie 
that God hadde 3iue to them, that thei 
shulden gon in it, thei ben destro3id with 
manye batailis of naciouns, and manye of 
hem ben lad caitif in to a lond not theris. 
23 Forsothe not 3ore® ago, turned azeen to 
the Lord ther God, fro the scatering that 
thei weren scaterid, thei ben gedered in 
to oon; and thei stejeden vp alle these 
mounteynes, and eft weldenf Jerusalem, 
wher ben the holi thingus of halewis. 
24 Now thanne, my lord, enserche, if ther 
is any wickednesse of hem in the si3te 
of ther God, and ste3e wee vp to hem; 
for takende he shal taken hem ther God 
to thee, and vnderjokid shulf ben vnder 
25 the 30c of thi my3t. If forsothe ther is 
noon offencioun of this puple befor ther 


» the praye 4. © hem a. 


_ Lonyt. © there restyde 1. rest there s. 
in to what cuntrey s. * he ouercam 1s. 


JUDITH. 


4 wickedenesse AEFH. 


f gaten hem 1. 
1 her aduersaries with s. 


V. 16—25. 


the? sone of man restyde®. There bittir 15 
wellis weren maad swete to hem for to 
drynke; and bi fourti 3eer thei gatenf 
lyuelode® fro heuene. Where" euere! thei 16 
entriden, her God fau3t for hem, and ouer 
cam* with! out bouwe and arowe, and 
without scheld and swerd. And ‘nooni7 
was™ that castide doun this puple, no? 
but whanne it 3ede awey fro the wor- 
schipyng of her® Lord God?. Sotheli asis 
ofte euere as thei worschipiden an‘ other™ 
outakun thilke her’ God, thei weren jouun 
in to preye, and in to swerd, and in to 
schenschip. But as ofte euere as theiis 
repentiden that thei hadden go awei fro 
the worschipyng of her God, God of he- 
uene 3af to hem vertue to azenstonde*. 
Forsothe" thei castiden’ doun the kyng20 
Cananei”, and Jebusei*, and Pheresei’, and 
Ethei’, and Euey?, and Ammorrei>, and 
alle the my3ti men of Esebon, and thei 
hadden in possessioun the londis of hem, 
and the citees of hem; and¢ til that* thei2i 
hadden synned in the si3t of her God, 
good thingis® weren with hem, for‘ the 
God of hem hatith wickidnesse. For whi22 
and bifor these 3eeris, whanne thei hadden 
go awei fro the weie which® God hadde 
joue to hem, that thei schulden go ther 
ynne, thei weren distried of naciouns® bi 
many batels, and ful many of hem weren 
led prisoneris in to a lond not hern. For-23 
sothe' a while agoon* thei turneden a3en 
to ‘her Lord God!, and weren™ gaderid 
togidere fro the scateryng, in which thei 
weren scaterid; and® thei stieden® in to 
alle these hilli places, and? eft thei han 
Jerusalem in possessioun, where the hooli 
of hooli thingis ben. Now therfor, my 24 
lord, enquere thou perfitli, if ony wickid- 
nesse of hem is in the si3t of her God, 


©a3eer 4. f#weeldiden 4. 8 thei shulen a. 


& the liuelode s. » And wherers. i euer 


m ther was no man I. no man was s. 


2Om.1. © the is. P God theroff 1s. ony. rother Gods. ‘sherowners. ¢ ajenstonde her 
enemyes s. “Certisis. For u. Vcaste a. Wof Cananeiis. * of Jebusei is. Y of Pheresei 1s. 2 of 
Ethei is, 3 of Euey 1s. > of Amorreits. ¢Om.s. 4Om.1s, ¢ thingis and prosperite s. £ sothely 1. 
& that 1. ) divers naciouns s. i Butis. k agor1s. the Lord her God 1s. ™ thei weren 1s. and 


now 1s. © han stied up is. P and alsos. 


V. 26-—VI. 4. 


God, wee shul not moun withstonde to 
them; for ther God shal defende them, 
and wee shul ben in to repref of al 
26erthe. And it is do, whan Achior hadde 
cesid to speken these woordis, alle" the 
grete men of Olofernes ben wrothe, and 
tho3ten to slen hym, seiende, either to 
27 other, Who is he this that seith, the sonus 
of Irael to moun withstonde to king Na- 
bugodonosor and to his ostus, men with 
oute armys, and with oute vertue, and 
with oute wisdam of the craft of fizting ? 
28 That thanne Achior knowe, for* he bi- 
gileth vs, steze wee vp in to the moun- 
taines; and whan the my3ti men of hem 
weren taken, thanne with the saine he 
29shal ben smyte thur3 with swerd; that 
alle fole knowen, for! Nabugodonosor is 
god vpon erthe, and bisides hym ys not 
an othir. 


CAP. VI. 


1 It is do forsothe, whan thei hadden 
cesid to speken, Olofernes, endeyned 
2hugeli, seide to Achior, For thou hast 
profecied to vs, seiende, that the fole of 
Irael was defendid of ther God, that I 
shewe to thee, that ther is no god but 
3 Nabugodonosor ; whan wee han smyte 
them alle as o man, thaune and thiself 
with hem with the swerd of Assiries 
shalt dien, and al Irael with thee shal 
4dispershen in perdicioun; and thou shalt 
preue, for Nabugodonosor be lord of al 
erthe; and thanne the swerd of my kny3t- 
hod shal passe thur3 thi sidis, and stikid 
thou shalt fallen among the woundid men 
of Irael, and thou shalt no mor take breth, 
to the time that thou be put out of the 


h and alle 4u. 


q we thanne up 1s. f wroth ajens him s. 


JUDITH. 


LOm. a. 


8 thei seiden 1s. 


611 


and stie we! to hem; for her God bitak- 
ynge schal bitake hem to thee, and thei 
schulen be maad suget vndur the 30k of 
thi my3t. Trewli if noon offense of this 25 
puple is bifor her God, we moun not a3en- 
stonde hem; for the God of hem schal 
defende hem, and we schulen be in to 
schenschip to al erthe. And it was doon,26 
whanne Achior hadde ceessid to speke 
these wordis, alle the grete men of Holo- 
fernes weren wrothe', and thei thou3ten 
to sle hym, and seiden’® togidere, Who is 27 
this that seith, that the sones of Israel, 
ment with outen armure, and with out 
vertu", and with out kunnyng of the craft 
of fiztynge, moun a3enstonde kyng Nabu- 
godonosor and hise oostis? Therfor that 28 
Achior’ knowe, that he disseyueth vs, stie 
we" in to the hilli places; and whanne 
the my3ti men of hem* ben takun, thanne 
he schal be persid with swerdY with the 
same men; ‘that ech? folk knowe, that 29 
Nabugodonosor is god of erthe, and 
outakun hym ‘noon other is*. 


CAP. VI. 


Forsothe> it was doon, whanne thei! 
hadden ceessid to speke, Holofernes hadde 
dedeyn ‘gretli, and: seide* to Achior, For2 
thou propheciedist* to vs, and seidist, that 
the folk of Israel is defendid of her God, 
that® Y schewe to thee, that no god is 
nof but Nabugedonosor ; whanne we® han3 
slayn ‘hem alle as o man*, thanne also 
thou schalt perische with hem bi! the 
swerd of Assiriens*, and al Israel schal 
perische dyuerseli with thee in perdi- 
cioun; and thou schalt preue, that Nabu-4 
godonosor is lord of al erthe; and thanne 
the swerd of my chyualrie schal passe 
thorou3 thi sidis, and thou schalt be 
persid!, and schalt™ falle among the 
woundid men of Israel, and thou schalt 


k that 4. I that au. 


t the whiche ben men 1. which ben mens. 


4 strengthe 1s. ¥ this Achiors. Wweupis. %* Jewisis. Yaswerdis. Zandal1. 4 ther is noon 
other 1. noon other god ist, > Andis. ¢he seide1s. 4 hast prophecied 1s. ¢ and that 1s. fOm. 1. 
8 weasoomanis. alle the sones of Israel 1s. iwith 1 k men of Assirie 1s. | perischid a. 


m thou schalt 1s. 


412 


612 JUDITH. VI. 5—13. 


slond with hem. But forsothe if thi pro- 
fecie soth™ thou weene’, falle not doun 
thi chere; and the palenesse that with- 
holdeth thi face, go awei fro thee, if 
these my woordis thou weenest not to 
c6moun be fulfild. Forsothe that thou 
knowe, for togidere with them that thou 
shalt knowe bi experiense, lo! fro this 
hour thou shalt be felashipid to the pu- 
ple of hem, and whan wrthi peynes of 
my swerd thei han taken, thiself shalt 
zvuderlin to lic veniaunee. Thanne Olo- 
fernes comaundide to his seruauns, that 
thei shulden taken Achior, and leden 
hym in to Betulie, and taken hym in 
sthe hond of the sonus of Irael. And 
the seruauns of Olofernes, takende hym, 
wenten bi the wilde feldis, but whan 
thei hadden ne3hed to the mounteynes, 
ywenten out ajen hem slingeres. Thei 
forsothe, turnende aside fro the side of 
the hil, bounden Achior to a tree hondus 
and feet, and so bounden of cordis thei 
laften hym, and ben turned ajeen to 
iother lord. But the sonus of Irael, co- 
mende doun fro Betulie, camen to hym, 
whom loosende thei® ladden to Betulie, 
and in to the myddel of the puple hym 
settende askeden hym, what of thingus 
it were, that hym bounde the Assiries 
nhadden laft. In thoo dajes weren there 
princis, Osias, the sone of Myca, of the 
linage of Symeon, and Carmy, the whiche 
wand Gothonyel. And so in the myddel 
of the elders, and in the si3te of alle 
men, Achior seide alle thingus, that he 
askid of Olofernes hadde spoken, and 
what maner the puple of Olofernes 
is wolde for this woord slen hym, and what 
maner he Olofernes wroth comaundede 
hym to be take to the men of Irael for 


no more brethe a3en", til thou be distried 
with hem. But certis if thou gessist this 
profecie sothe, thi cheer falle® not doun; 
and the palenesse that hath gete thi face, 
goP awey fro thee, if thou gessist that 
these my wordis moun not ‘be fillid4. 
But that thou knowe, that thou schalte 
feele this thing togidere with hem’, los! 
fro this our thou schalt be felouschipid 
to the puple of hem, that whanne thei 
han taket worthi peynes of my swerd, 
thou be suget to lijk veniaunce. Thanne7 
Olofernes comaundide hise® sernauntis to 
take Achior, and to lede hym in to Be- 
thulia, and to bitake hym in to the hondis 
of the sones of Israel. And the sernauntis 8 
of Olofernes token him, and 3eden’ forth 
bi the feeldi places, but whanne thei had- 
den nei3id to the hilli places, slingeris” 
jeden out ajens hem. Sotheli* thei turn-9 
eden aweiY fro the side of the hil, and 
bounden? Achior to a tre bi hondis* and 
feet, and so thei leften hym boundun with 
withthis®, and turneden® a3en to her lord. 
Certi§’ the sones of Israel 3eden doun1 
fro Bethulia, and camen* to hym‘, whom 
thei vnbounden, and ledden® to Bethulia, 
and thei settiden" hymi in to* the! myddis 
of the puple, and axiden™, what manere® 
of°® thinges bifel?, that Assiriens? hadden 
left hym boundun. In tho daies princes"11 
weren there, Ozias’, the sone of Myeha, 
of the lynage of Symeon, and Charmy‘, 
which is also" Gothonyel. Therfor in the’ 12 
myddis of eldere men, and in the si3t 
of alle men, Achior seide alle thingis*, 
whiche he was axid of Holofernes, and 
haddeY spoke”, and hou the puple of Holo- 
fernes wolde sle hym for this word®, and 13 
hou Holofernes hym silf was wrooth, and 
comaundide hym to be bitakun for this 


™M be soth 4. 2 wenyst 4EFH. © Om, AEFH. 


7Om.s. © falle it 1s. P go it 1s. 4 ben fulfillid as. © the children of Israelis. %lo! now 1s. 


* takin or suffrid s. “to hise s. v thei 3eden Is. 


Ww men throwynge stones with slyngis 1s. | * And 1s. 


Yagen a. % thei bounden is. @ hise hondiss. » ropis1. ¢theiturnedenis. 4 And 1. And thanne s. 


€ thei camenis. f Achioris. 8 ledden hin 1s. 


h setten 1. settiden or brow3ts. 1 Om.s. k Om. rx. 


1Om. s. ™ thei axiden 1, axiden him s. 2 Om. penipuvx. °Om.1. P was BCEHLPUVX. 4 the men 
ce oe 1s. thes princes 1. these princis of Jewis s. 8 that is, Oziass. Gharmy, the prince s. 
also clepid 1s. VOm.is. Wthesx. the thingisis. ¥ which thingis he had s. 2 told to Holo- 


Jernes 1s. ® word that he had seid 1s. 


VI. 14-——21. 


this cause, that whil he shulde ouercome 
the sonus of Irael, thanne and that Achior 
he comnaunde? with dyuers tormentus to 
dien, for that that he hadde seid, God of 
itsheuene is the defendere of hem. And 
whan alle thingus Achior hadde expoun- 
ed, al the puple fel in to the face, honour- 
ende the Lord; and with comun la- 
menting’ and weping alle of o wil ther 
15 pre3eeris to the Lord helden out, seiende, 
Lord God of heuene and of erthe, see the 
pride of hem, and beholde to oure mek- 
nesse, and to the face of thi halewis tac 
heede, and shew3 for thou forsakist not 
that befor alle thingus taken trost of 
thee, and principally takende trost of 
hemself, and of ther vertue gloriende 
igthou meekist. And so the weping endid, 
and bi al the dai the orisoun of the pu- 
17 ple fulfild, thei coumforteden Achior, sei- 
ende, God of oure fadris, whos vertue 
thou hast prechid, he 3eldere to thee this 
recompensacioun shal 3iue, that thou ra- 
isthere see* the deth of hem. Whan for- 
sothe the Lord oure God shal 3iue. this 
fredam to his seruauns, be and the Lord 
with thee in the myddel of vs, that as it 
shal plese to thee, so with alle thine thou 
19 dwelle. Thanne Osias, the counseil endid, 
toc hym in to his hous, and made a gret 
z0soper. And, alle the prestus clepid togi- 
21 dere, the fasting fulfild, thei eeten. After 
forsothe, al the puple clepid togidere, thur3 
out al the ny3t withinne the chirche thei 
prejeden, askende helpe of the God of 
Irael. 


P comaundide «. 


b the men Is. 
peple 18. 
thou hede to 1s. 
good werkus s. 
or strengthe s. 
> rewarder of al goodnesse 8. © he schal 1s. 
God 1s. 
plese 1. thanne plese s. 
P Achior ts. 

v thei axiden 1s. 


© Holofernes 13. 


T forsokist w. 8% in 3s. 


8 fulfillid 1s. 


v and after s. 


JUDITH. 


4 weymentyng 4. 


d to perishe s. 
i thes thingis 1s. * vpons. lher1s. ™ and of s. 
4 schewe thou n. schewe we c pr.m. DFHIMORX pr.m.ab. shewe we bi verre bileue, and 
t that thou 3s. 
x weping of the men of Israel 8. 

d Om. ts. 
h sernauntis, that we han ouercome our enemyes 8. 
m al] thi thing 1. al thi thing among vs s. 
tOm. 1. and hemsilf bi same recreacioun s. 


613 


cause to men? of Israel, that the while he¢ 
ouercam the sones of Israel, thanne he 
comaundide that also thilk Achior pe- 
rische’ bi® dyuerse turmentis, for’ this 
that he hadde seid, God of heuene is the 
defendere of hem". And whanne Achior 14 
hadde expowned alle thingis', al the pu- 
ple felde doun on* the! face, and wor- 
schipide the Lord; and with comyn weil- 
yng and wepyng thei schedden out to the 
Lord her preyeris of™ o wille, seiynge”, is 
Lord God of heuene and of erthe, biholde 
the pride of hem®, and biholde thou to 
oure mekenesse, and perseyue? the face of 
thi seyntis, and schewe4 that thou for- 
sakist® not men tristynge of* thee, and 
thout makist low men tristynge of hem silf, 
and‘men hauynge" glorie of her’ vertu’. 
Therfor whanne the-wepyng* was endid, is 
and the preier of the puple bi al the dai 
was fillidY, thei coumfortiden Achior, and 17 
seiden, God of oure fadris, whos vertu 
thou prechidist®, he is rewardere’, and 
schal° 3yue to’ thee this* while, that thou 
se more the perischyng of hem. Forsothe is 
whanne ‘oure Lord God? hath 30ue this 
fredom to hise seruauntis", also the Lord 
be! with thee in the myddis* of vs, that 
as it plesith! thee, so thou lyue with ‘alle 
thi thingis™. Thanne after that the" coun- 19 
sel was endid, Ozias® resseyuede hym? in 
to his hows, and made a greet soper to 
hym. And whanne alle the prestis weren 20 
clepid togidere, aftir that the fastyng was 
fillid’, thei refreischiden Achior ‘and hem 
sift, Forsothe" aftirward al the puple 2 
was clepid togidere, and thei preieden bi 
al the ni3t with ynne the chirche, and 
axiden’ help of God of Israel. 


Tto a. 8 shal se 4. 
ewithis, fandfors. &thisthing1s. 1) his 
1 thei seiden 1s. ° thin enmyes is. P take 


v her owne 1s. W vertu 
y fulfillid 1s. % power Is. 8 hast prechid 1s. 

© grace for this1s. f Andis. 6 the Lord oure 
i be thanne 1s. k myddle 1s. | schal 
uthis 1s. © Ozias, the cheef preest 18. 
u Aud ts. 


whem that han 1s. 


614 


CAP. VII. 


i Olofernes forsothe that‘ tother dai co- 
maundide to his" ostus, that thei shulden 
2ste3e vp asen Betulie. Ther weren for- 
sothe footmen of fi3teres an hundrid and 
twenti thousend, and horse men twelue 
thousend, biside the redi cumpanyes of 
thoo’ men, whom caitifte hadde ocupied, 
and weren bro3t fro prouyncis and cites, 
30f alle 3outhe. Alle togidere maden them- 
self redi to the fi3t a3en the sones of Irael ; 
and thei camen bi the brinke of the hil 
ynto the cop, that beholdeth Dotaym, fro 
the place that is seid Belena vnto Sel- 
4mon, that is ajen Esdrelon. The sones 
forsothe of Irael, as thei se3en the multi- 
tude of hem, thei threwen themself doun 
vpon the erthe, puttende askis vpon ther 
hedis, togidere of o wil pre3ende, that 
God of Irael his merci shewe vp on his 
spuple. And takende ther armys of ba- 
taile, seten bi the placis that leden the 
path of streit weie betwe" the hilli placis, 
and thei weren kepende them al dai and 
eny3t. But Olofernes, whil he goth aboute 
bi cumpas, fond that a welle, that flowide 
in to the watir condute of them, fro the 
south partie out of the cite diuersli reul- 
ide, and comaundede* to ben hewe doun 
7the water cundute of hem. Ner the 
latere ther weren not fer from the wallis 
wellis, of the whiche theefli thei weren 
seen to drawe water, rathere to refreshen 
athan to drinken. But the sonus of Amon 
and of Moab wenten to Olofernes, sei- 
ende, The sones of Irael not in spere and 
arewe trosten, but the mountaynes de- 
fenden hem, and strengthen hem the litle 


tthe aern, Om. aH. VY Om. an. 


Ww that oother 1. the others. ¥* stie up Is. 


JUDITH. 


W bitwix 4. betwen £. bitwene u. 


e othe y And ts. 
fizters of footmen with him 1. fizters of footmen s. 


VII. 1—8, 


CAP. VII. 


Forsothe in ‘the tother¥ dai Holofernes) 
comaundide hise oostis to stie* a3ens Beth- 
ulia. ForsotheY there weren’ sixe score2 
thousynde ‘foot men of fi3teris*, and twelue 
thousynde kny3tis, ‘outakun the makyng 
redi of tho men, whiche caitifte® hadde 
ocupied’, and weren brou3t fro prouynces 
and citees, of alle 3ongthe®. Alle’ togideres 
maden hem redi to batel a3ens the sones 
of Israel; and thei camen bi the side of 
the’ hil ‘til toi the cop*, that biholdith 
Dothaym, fro the place which! is seid 
Belma ‘til to™ Selmon, which is a3ens 
Esdrolon. Forsothe" the sones of Israel, 4 
as° thei sien the multitude of hem, bow- 
iden? doun hem silf on? the erthe, and 
senten’ aische® ont her heedis, and preiden® 
with o wille, that God of Israel schulde 
schewe his merci on’ his puple. And theis 
token her armuris of batel, and saten” 
bi the places ‘that dressen* the path of 
streyt” weie bitwixe hilli? places*, and 
thei kepten tho places al the dai and 
ny3t. Certis Holofernes, the while® hee 
3ede aboute bi cumpas, foonde that the 
welle, that flowide in to the watir cundit 
of hem‘, was dressid® at the south part 
with out the citee, and he comaundide her 
watir cundit to be kit‘. Netheles® wellis7 
weren not fer fro the wallis", of whiche! 
wellis thei weren seyn to drawe watir 
bi thefte!, rather to refreische™ than to 
drynke. But the sones of Amon and ofs 
Moab neiziden to Holofernes, and seiden”, 
The sones of Israel tristen not in spere 
and arowe®, but hillis defenden hem, and 
litle hillis set in the rooche of stoon maken 


X he comaundide an. 


Zweren with hems. 4 of footmen fizteris B. 


b withoute thilke men, that weren ¢here redy 1. 


outakyn tho men, which weren there redy s. © the caitifte 1. the caitifte of Holofernes s. 4 ocupied 
or made thrals. © 30ngthe or of able fizters 1s. And alle 1. And alle theres. 4 anis. ‘vn to 1s. 
k heigte therof'1s. 1that1. ™ynto1s. Andis. ©assoonass. P thei bowidenrs. 4 upon Is. 
rthrewen 1s. ° asshe or poudres. tuponis. % thei preieden 1s. VYvponis. W theisatenis. * bi 


whiche 1s. that dressiden x.y the streyt 1s. 2the hilli cis. 8 places is dressid 1s. bal ny3t 1. © whilis s. 


4 men of Israel Is. © dressid or ordeyned ys. 
of the eitee s. ithe whiche 1, which wellis s. 
™ refreische hem is. "© thei seiden éo him ts. 


f kit at two x. kitte sonder s. 
k men of Israel 1s, 
° in arowe Is. 


& And netheles 1s. 4 wallis 
I stelthe 1. stelthe or priueli s. 


VIL. 9—17. 


9 hillis sett in a dich broken beforn. Thanne 
that with oute going to fijt” thou mowe 
ouercome them, put keperis of wellis, that 
thei drawe not of hem; and with oute 
swerd thou shalt slen hem, or certis 
weried thei shuln take ther cite, the 
whiche thei weenen in the hillis to moun 

10not ben ouercome. And these woordis 
pleseden beforn Olofernes, and beforn alle 
his cruel kny3tus; and he sette bi enuy- 

1roun hundredis bi alle the wellis. And 
whan this warde bi twenti da3is was ful 
ended, faileden the cisternes and the ge- 
deringis of watris to alle the dwelleris in 
Betulie, so that ther was not with inne 
the cite, wher of thei my3ten han ynow3 
or for o dai, for at mesure watir” was 3iue 
12to the puplis eche dai. Thanne to Osias 
alle men and wymmen, and 3unge men, 
and litle childer, gadered togidere, alle 
13togidere with o vois seiden, The Lord 
deme betwen® vs and thee, for thou hast 
don in to vs euelys, not willende to speken 
pesibli with the Assiries, and for that 
God hath sold vs in the hondis of hem. 
14And therfore ther is not that helpeth, 
whan wee ben throwe doun befor the 
ejen of hem in thrist, and in gret perdi- 
iscioun. And now gedereth alle men, that 
ben in this citee, that wilfulli wee of al 
16the puple taken vs to Olofernes. Betere 
it is that caitif wee blisse God liuende, 
than wee die, and be repref to alle flesh, 
whan wee seen oure wiues and oure chil- 
i7der dien® beforn oure e3en. Wee taken 
to witnesse to dai heuene and erthe, and 
God of oure fadris, that doth veniaunce 
on vs after oure synnes, that now 3ee 
take the cite in the hond of the chiualrie 
of Olofernes, that oure ende be short in 
the mouth of swerd, that leugere is maad 


y the fizt c. 4 the water a. 


4 not walir 1s. 
t thei schulen 1s, 4 bitake fo thee 1s. 


P her wellis 18. 
walir s, 


JUDITH. 


a betwixe 4. bitwene 11. 


¥ whanne thei ben 1s. 
V¥ the which citee, for tt is sett in the hillis ts. 


615 


hem stronge. Therfor that thou maist9 
ouercome hem without asailyng of batel, 
sette thou keperis of wellis?, that thei 
drawe not4 of tho; and thou schalt sle 
hem without swerd, ethir certis theiT maad 
feynt® schulen' bitake" her citee, which’ 
thei gessen ‘to mow” not® be ouercomun 
‘in the hillisy. And these wordis plesiden 10 
bifor Holofernes, and bifor alle hise kny3tis; 
and he ordeynede bi cumpas bi ech welle 
an hundrid men. And whanne ‘this kep-11 
yng was fillid? bi twenti daies*, cisternes® 
and gaderyngis® of watris fayliden to alle 
men dwellynge in Bethulia, so that there 
was not® with ynne the citee, wherof thei 
schulden be fillid‘, nameli o dai, for the 
watir was 30uun at% mesure to the puplis® 
ech dai. Thanne alle men and wymmen, 12 
3onge men and elde, and litle children, 
weren gaderid togidere to Ozie', and alle 
thei seiden togidere with o vois*, The13 
Lord deme bitwixe vs and thee, for thou, 
not wyllynge! speke™ pesibli with Assi- 
riens", hast ‘do yuels® a3enus vs, and for 
this thing God hath seld vs in? the hondis 
of hem. And4 therfor ‘noon is™ that help- 14 
ith’, whanne we ben cast doun in thirst, 
and in greet los bifor her i3en. Andt1s 
now" gadere 3e togidere alle men, that 
ben in the’ citee, that alle we puplis bi- 
take vs” bi fre wille to Holofernes. It is16é 
betere that we* prisoneris blesseY God and 
lyue, than that we die”, and be* schenschip 
to ech man, sithen® we seen that® oure 
wyues and oure 3onge children dien® bifor 
oure izen. We clepen in to witnessyng to 17 
dai heuene and erthe, and the God of 
oure fadris, that® punischith vs aftir oure 
synnes, that nowe 3e bitake the® citee in 
to the hondis of the chyualrie of Holo- 
fernes, and oure" ende be‘ schort in the 


b to dien az. 


8 feynt for defaule 1. feynt for defaule of 


wOm.1. 


it mows. *it may not 1. -yOm.1s. 2Om.1s. ® daies the kepyng of the wellis was fulfillid 1s. » the 


cisternes 1s. © the gaderyngis 1s. 4the men of Israel 1s. ¢notofwaters.  fulfillidy. & bi ss. 
h peple isx. | Ozie, ihe cheef prest 1s. & voice to hims. | wilnynge 1s. ™ to speke 1s, ™ the men of 
Assirie 1s. © don ynele thingis 1s. Pinto1s. ¢Om.s. ‘therisnoonr. §helpith vss. tOm.s, 


™ now therfore 1s. V this 1s. W vs self 1s. * we ben maad 1s. Y and blesse 1s. * die thus 1. die bt defaute 


or bi the honde of our enemyes 8. 


¢which s. fands. & this 1s. » that oure 18. 


8 we be I. so be s. 


band sithis. © Om.1s. 4 dien for defaute 1s. 


i be maad 1s. 


616 


isin dro3te of thrist. And whan these 
thingis thei hadden seid, weping and 
gret 3elling is maad in a gret chirche of 
alle men, and bi manye houris with o 
vois thei erieden to the Lord, seiende, 
19 Wee han synned with oure fadris, vn- 
riz3twisli wee han don, wickednesse wee 
zohan maad. For thou art piteuous, hane 
merci on vs, and in thi scourge venge 
oure wickednessis; and wile thou not 
taken men knoulechende thee to the pu- 
ei ple that knowith not thee, that thei sei 
not among Jentilis, Where is the God of 
sohem? And whan, trauailid with these 
cries and these wepingis, thei weren 
23 weri, Osias risende, the teris inshed, 
seide, Euene inwit beth, brethern, ‘and 
these fiue dajes bijde wee of the Lord 
gimercy ; parauenture forsothe his indig- 
nacioun he shal putten awei, and 3iue 
25 glorie to his name. If forsothe, fiue da3es 
passid ouer, helpe cometh® not, wee shul 
do these woordis that 3ee han spoken. 


CARS VII: 


, And it is do, whan these woordis hadde 
herd Judit, widewe, that was the do3ter 
of Merari, sone of Idor, sone of Joseph, 
sone of Ozie, sone of Elai, sone of Jam- 
nor, sone of Jedeon, sone of Rafoni, sone 
of Achitob, sone of Melchie, sone of Euam, 
sone of Mathanye, sone of Salathiel, sone 

20f Symeon, sone of Ruben. And hir hus- 
bonde was Manasses, that diede in the 

3dajes of barli rip; forsothe he stod ouer 
the? men bindende sheues in the feld, 
and ther cam hete vp on his hed, and 
he diede in Betulie his cite, and is biried 
4there with his fadris. Forsothe Judit 
was the laft widue of hym now thre 3er 
sand sixe monethis. And in the onere® 
partis of hir hous she made to hir a 


JUDITH. 


VII. 18—VIII. 3. 


scharpnesse of swerd, which* ende is! maad 
lengere in the drynesse of thirst. And 1s 
whanne thei hadden seid these thingis, 
greet wepyng and 3ellyng was maad of 
alle men in the grete chirche, and bi 
many ouris thei crieden ‘with 0 vois™ to 
the Lord, and seiden, We and oure fadris 19 
han synned, we han do vniustli, we" diden® 
wickidnesse. Thou?, for thou art mercyful, 20 
haue mercy on vs, and venge’ oure wickid- 
uessis’ in’ thi scourge; and‘ nyle thou bi- 
take men" knoulechynge’ thee to a” puple 
that knowith not thee, that thei seie not 21 
amonge hethene men, Where is the God 
of hem ? And whanne theiX weren maad 22 
feynt with these cries, and weren maad 
wery with these wepyngis, and weren 
stille, Ozie roos up, bischedY with teeris, 23 
and seide, Britheren, be 3e pacient, and bi 
these fyne daies abide we mercy’ of the 
Lord; for in hap he schal kitte awei his 24 
indignacioun, and schal* 3yue glorie to his 
name. Sotheli if whanne these fyue daies 25 
ben passid, help cometh? not, we schulen 
do these wordis whiche 3e han spoke. 


CAP. VIII. 


And it was doon, whanne Judith, thet 
widowe, had herd these wordis, whiche 
Judith’ was the dou3ter of Merary, the 
sone of Idor, the sone of Joseph, the sone 
of Ozie, the sone of Elai, the sone of 
Jamnor, the sone of Jedeon, the sone of 
Raphony, the sone of Achitob, the sone 
of Melchie, the sone of Euam, the sone of 
Mathanye, the sone of Salatiel, the sone 
of Symeon, the’ sone of Ruben. And hire 
hosebonde was® Manasses, that was deed 
in the daies of barli heruest; for he stood 3 
bisili ouer men byndynge togidere reepis 
in the feeld, and heete cain on® his heed, 
and he was deed in Bethulia his citee, and 
was biried there with hise fadris. So-4 
thelii Judith left of hym* was widewe 


©coome 4eFH. 4QOm, an. © corner 4. 
k ne ; 
: ee unas 1. lisnowis. ™Om.1. ®andwer. ©hanedor. P Thou, Lordi. 4 avenge c: 
aa nesse ca, S witha. tand, Lordi. | umec. Vschryuynge tor WOm.1.  * the sones of 
2 ble 1. H al bisched 1. 2the mercy cgig. ®heschalr. >bcomeis. © Om.1. dandther. & was 
clepid i.“ certist1. Suponi, Bhe wast. i Andi. & hym or lyuynge aflir him. 


VIII. 6—19. 


priue bed _ place, ‘in whichef with hir 
c¢hand wymmen closid she dwelte; and, 
hauende vp on hir lendis an heire, fastide 
alle the da3es of hir lif, saue sabatis, and 
newe mones, and the festis of the hous 
70f Irael. Forsothe she was with fair be- 
holding ful myche, to whom hir husbonde 
hadde laft myche richesse, and plenteuous 
meyne, and possessiouns ful with droues 
sof oxen, and flockis of shep. And this 
was in alle thingus most famous; for she 
dradde God gretli, ne ther was that shulde 
gspeken of hir euel woord. And so this 
whan she hadde herd, for Osias hadde 
behoten, that, the fifte dai passid ouer, he 
shulde take the cite, she sente to the 
loprestis of Cambre and of Cary. And 
thei camen to hir; and she seide to them, 
What is this woord, in the® whiche Osias 
consentide that he take the cite to As- 
siries, if with inne fiue da3es ther come 
1tnot helpe to vs? And who ben 3ee that 
12tempten the Lord? This woord is not 
that stire merey; but rathere that rere" 
13 wrathe, and teende woodnesse. 3ee han 
sett a time of mercy: doing of the Lord, 
and in 3oure dom 3ee han ordeyned a dai 
14to hym. But for the Lord is pacient, in 
this synne othinke wee, and his for3iue- 
15 nesse with teres aske wee; ne forsothe as 
a man so God shal tlreten*, ne as the 
sone of man to wrathe he shal ben en- 
16flaumed. And therfore meke wee to hym 
oure soulis, and in contrit spirit and 
i7mekid serue wee to hym; and sei wee 
wepende to the Lord, that aftir his wil 
so he do with vs his mercy; and as oure 
herte is disturbid' in the pride of hem, 
18so also of oure mecnesse wee glorien, For 
wee han not folewid the synnes of oure 
fadris, that forsoken ther God, and 
i9honoureden alien godis; for the whiche 
hidous gilte thei ben 3iuen in to swerd, 


fthe whiche 4zeru. &Om. an. Harere aern. {the mercy £ pr.m. 


JUDITH. 


617 


thanne thre jeer and sixe monethis. And 
rin the hizere partis of hir hows sche made 
to hir a priuy closet, in which sche dwell- 
ide cloos with hir damesels; and sches 
hadde an heire on! her leendis, and fastide™ 
alle the daies of hir lijf, outakun sabatis®, 
and the ‘bigynnyngis of monethis®, and the 
feestis of the hows? of Israel. Sothelit7 
sche was of? ful’ semeli biholdyng*, to 
whom hir hosebonde hadde left many 
richessis, and plenteuouse meynee, and 
possessiouns ful of droues of oxis", and 


of’ flockis of scheep. And this Judiths 
was moost famouse among alle men; for 
sche dredde God greetli, nethir ony was 
that spak of hir an yuel word. Therfor9 
whanne this Judith hadde herd, that Ozie 
hadde bihi3te, that whanne the fyuethe 
day was passid, he wolde bitake the citee”, 
sche sente to the prestis— Cambri and t “e prestis; 
és ‘ Judith spak to 
Carmy. And thei camen to hir; and sche 10 the prestis more 
yi ’ P 
. 6 ‘ . f coupable, f 
seide to hem, What is this word, in which ¢rthat consent 
; +4 x : . suede the dis- 
Ozie consentide* to bitake theY citee to tive of God- 
iri zy i 1 dis worschip, 
Assiriens’, if with ynne fyue daies help (’s wpsthip, 
cometh* not> to vs? And who ben 3e that 11 prestis ousten 
5 “4 ° A for to loue more 
tempten the Lord? This ‘word is not®12 feruently, than 
oe . os hi i 
that stirith merci; but rather that® stirith ee ag 
ire®, and kyndlith woodnessef. Han 3e set 13 this citee the 
F weye was redy 
tyme of the merciful' doynge of the Lord, . t eperiies te 
0 . A go to Jerusa- 
and in 3oure wille ‘3e han! set a dai to lem, and dis- 
: trie Goddi: 
hym? But for the Lord is pacient, do we Me setae: 
3 ° for they ou3ten 
penaunce for this synne, and axe we with  gefonad tha 
teeris his for3yuenesse ; for* God schal not 15 rtee, as longe 
5 % as they my3ten, 
manaasse so as man, nethir as ‘a sone of _ she, in most 
; turmeut. Lire 
man! he schal be enflawmed to wrathful- here. c. 
nesse. And therfor meke we oure soulis 16 
to hym, and in contrit™ spirit and maad® 
meke serue we® hym ; and seie we wepynge 17 
to the Lord, that aftir his wille so he do 
his merci with vs; and as oure herte is 
troblid in the pride of hem?, so haue we 
glorie ‘also of 9 oure mekenesse. For we 18 
‘sueden not the synnes of oure fadris, 
k threten vs 4. ! disturblid an. 


Tuponi. ™sche fastider. the sabot daies1. © firste daies of the mone 1. _P hows or femple 1. 
qAnd1. 'Om.o. Safulc. ‘in byholdyngeo. oxent. vOm.c.  W citee fo Holofernes 1. 
xhath consentid 1. ythisi. %menofAssirie1 ‘comer. > nat1. cisno word: ‘itt. 
© Goddis wraththe 1. f his woodnesse 1. &atyme1. bmercyi. !haue3er. *certist. | the sone of 
man Cc. mannus sone 1. ™acontrit1, Oymaad1. %wetor. Poureenmycs1. Gini. TT haue not 
sued 1. 

VOL. H. 4K 


618 


and in to rattein, and in to confusioun to 
ther™ enemys; wee forsothe other God 
20 knowen not saue hym. Abijde wee meke 
the coumforting of hym, and he shal 
sechen out oure blod fro the torment- 
ingis" of oure enemys ; and he shal meken 
alle Jentilis, who so euere rijsen° ajen 
ys; and he shal make them with oute 
21 wrshipe, the Lord owe God. And now, 
brethern, for 3ee that ben prestis in the 
puple of God, of jou hangeth the lif of 
hem at 3oure speche, rereth vp the hertis 
of hem, that myndeful 3ee be, for joure 
fadris ben temptid, for thei shulden be 
preued, if verreli thei herieden ther? 
22God. Myndeful owen thei to ben, what 
maner oure fader Abraham is temptid, 
and, bi manye tribulaciouns preuyd, the 
23 frend of God is maad. So Isaac, so Ja- 
cob, so Moises, and alle that pleseden to 
the Lord, bi manye tribulaciouns pass- 
eseden feithful. Thei forsothe that temp- 
taciouns resseyueden not with the4 drede 
of God, and bro3ten forth ther vnpa- 
cience, and the repref of ther grucching 
25a3en the Lord, ben exilid of the exilere, 
26and of serpentis' pershiden. And wee 
thanne venge we not vsself’ for these 
27 thingus that wee suffren; but, wijtende 
to oure synnes these same lasse tormentis 
to ben, the scourgis of the Lord, as ser- 
uauns of the Lord that ben chastisid, to 
amendement, and not to han come to 
28oure perdicioun, wee leeuent. And Osias 
and the prestis seiden to hir, Alle thingus, 
that thou hast spoke, ben sothe, and ther 
is not in thi woordis any repreuyng. 
29 Now thanne prei thou for vs, for thou 
art an holi womman, and dredende God. 
30 And Judit seide to them, As that, that 
I my3te speken, 3ee knowen to ben of 
31 God, so that I purposide to do, preueth, 


™ alle there z pr. m. 


0 tormenting c. 
§ oureself au. 


thileuen «4. 


JUD DEE. 


© arijsen AEFU. 


VIII. 20-—31. 


thats forsoken her God, and worschipiden 
alien goddis; for which' greet trespas thei" 19 
weren 3ouun to her enemyes in to swerd, 
and in to raueyn, and in to confusioun ; 
but we knowen not an othir God outakun 
hym. ‘Abide we meke’ his coumfort, and 20 
he schal seke” oure blood of the turmentis 
of oure enemies; and he schal make meke 
alle folkis, whiche euer risen* ajens vs; 
and oureY Lord God schal make hem with- 
out onour. And now, britheren, for 3e21 
ben prestis in the puple of God, and the 
soule of hem’ hangith of 30u, reise 3e* her 
hertis” at 3oure speche, that thei be mynde- 
ful, that oure fadris weren temptid, that 
thei schulden be preued, whethir thei wor- 
schipiden God verili. Thei owen to be22 
myndeful, hou oure fadir Abraham was 
temptid®, and? he was preuyd bi many 
tribulaciouns, and® was maad the frend of 
God. So Isaac, so Jacob, sof Moyses, and 23 
alle that plesiden ‘the Lord’, passiden 
feithful! bi many tribulaciouns. Sothelij 24 
thei that resseyueden not temptaciouns 
with the* drede of the Lord, and brou3ten! 
forth her vnpacience, and the schenschip 
of her grutchyng ‘a3ens the Lord™, weren® 25 
distried of a distriere, and perischiden® of 
serpentis. And therfor venge we not vs26 
for these thingis whiche? we suffren; but 27 
arette we, that these same turmentis ben 
lesse than oure synnes, and bileue we, as 
seruauntis of the Lord that4 ben chastisid, 
that the betyngis" of the Lord ben comun 
to amendyng’, and not to oure perdicioun. 
And Ozie and the prestis seiden to hirt,2s 
Alle thingis", whiche’ thou hast spoke, 
ben sothe, and no repreuyng is in thi 
wordis. Now therfor preie thou for vs, 29 
for thou art an hooli womman, and dred- 
ynge God. And Judith seide to hem, As 30 
3e knowen, that this”, that Y my3te speke, 
q Om. au. 


P Om. an. T the serpentis c. 


s the whiche 1. : tthe which 1. u oure fadris 1. Therfore, we beynge meke, abide we 1. W seke or 
reese t. *Xhanrisent, Yther. 2 the pepler. %3eup1. Phertisto God1. Cassaiedi. 4 and 
ie sane so he i f and so 1. § to God 1. h passiden forth 1. i feithfuli a pr. m. s. 
ae I. m. I. ajens the Lord brou3ten1. ™Om.1. "thei werent. © thei perischiden 1. 

att.  dwhiche 1. Ftourmentis1. 8 owreamendyng1. ¢t Judith. ¥ thes thingis 1. V that 1. 


W this thing 1, 


VIII. 32-—IX. 7. 


if it is of God; and pre3eth, that God 
32stedefast make my counseil. 3ee shul 
stonden at the 3ate this ny3t, and I shal 
gon out with my fre handmaiden; and 
pre3eth, that, as 3ee han seid, the" Lord 
33in fiue da3es beholde his puple Irael. 3ou 
forsothe I wile, that 3ee serche my deede, 
and vnto the time that I bringe a3een 
woord to 30u, noon other thing be don, 
but orisoun for me to the Lord oure God. 
34 And Osias, the prince of Jude, seide to 
hir, Go in pes, and the Lord be with 
thee in’ the veniynge of oure enemys. 
And, turnende a3een, thei wenten awei. 


CAP. IX. 


1 The whiche goende awei, Judit wente 
in to hir oratorie, and, clothende hir with 
an heire, putte askes” vp on hir hed; 
and, throwende hirself doun to the Lord, 

ecriede to the Lord, seiende, Lord God of 
my fader Symeon, that 3eue to hym a 
swerd in to defending of alienes, that 
weren defouleris in ther defouling, and 
nakeden the hipe of the maiden in to 

3confusioun; and thou 3eue the wymmen 
of hem in to prei, the do3tris of hem in 
to caitifte, and al the prei in to deui- 
sioun to thi seruauns, that looueden thi 
looue; help, I beseche, Lord, to me 
4widewe. Thou forsothe didist rathere 
thingis, and thoo after thoo thou tho3tist, 
and this deede is, that thi self woldist. 

5 Alle forsothe thi weies ben maad redi, 
and thi domes in thi prouidence thou 

shast put. Beholde the tentis of Assiries 
now, as thanne the tentis of Egipcienus 
thou vouchedest. saf to beholde, whan af- 
ter thi seruauns thei runnen armed, trost- 
ende in ther foure horsid cartis, and in 
ther horsing, and in the multitude of 

7fisteres. But thou beheelde vp on the 


u that the 4. 


2Z thes 1. 
e Om. 1. 
m of 1 


x haue purposid 1. ¥ forth 1. 
jou 1. 4 Oxias and the prestis 1. 
k that 1. 1 the whiche 1. 


JUDGE: 


Vand in c sec. m. 


a wile not 1. 
f sche puttide 1. 
n her owne confusioun 1. 


619 


is of God, so prene 3e, if this that Y pur-31 
poside* to do, is of God ; and preie 3e, that 
God make stidfast my counsel. 3e¢ schulen 32 
stonde at the 3ate this ni3t, and Y schal go 
outY with my fre handmayde ; and preic 3e, 
that, as 3e seiden, the Lord biholde his puple 
Israel in? fyue daies. But Y nyle*, thats 
3e enquere my doyng, and til that” Y telle 

*to 30u, ‘noon othir thing be doon, no® but 
preier for me to oure Lord God. And34 
Ozie, the prince of Juda, seide to hir, Go 
thou in pees, and the Lord be with thee 
in the veniaunce of oure enemyes. And 
theit turneden azen®, and 3eden awey. 


CAP..1X. 


And while thei 3eden awei, Judith en-1 
tride in to hir oratorie, and sche clothide 
hir silf with an heire, and puttide! aische® 
on’ hir heed; and sche bowide doun hir 
silf to the Lord, and criedei to the Lord, 
and seide, Lord God of my fadir Symeon, 2 
which* 3auest to hym a swerd in to de- 
fence{ of aliens, that! weren defouleris in™ 
her defoulyng, and maden nakid the hipe 
of a virgyn in to confusioun®; and thous 
jauest the wymmen of hem in to prey, 
the°® dou3tris of hem in to caitifte, and? al 
the prey in to departyng to thi seruauntis, 
that loueden fernentli thi feruent louet ; 
Lord, Y biseche4, helpe thou me a widewe. 
For" thou madist thes formere thingis, and 4 
thou;tist' tho thingis aftir® tho’, and this 
thing is maad", which thou woldist. For*s 
alle thi weies ben redi, and thou has set 
thi domes in thiY puruyaunce. Biholdee 
thou the castels? of Assiriens* now, as 
thon vouchidist saaf to biholde thanne4 
the castels* of Egipcians’, whanne thei 
runnen® armed after thi seruauntis, and 
tristiden in charis", and in niultitude’ of 
her kny3tis, and in multitude* of wer- 


Wasshen 4. asken . 


bOm.1.  ¢ be ther don noon othir thing of 
ashen s. 4upons. sche criede 1. 
Oandther. P and ¢hou 3auest 1. 


4 hiseche theer. ‘'Certis1. *Om.1. ¢t thoustis scerps. Om.1. andi. ¥ tho thou thouztist to 
make aftirward 1 W maad tous1. * Sothely 1. ythiowne1. 2 strengthis1, ® the men of Assirie 1. 
bOm.1. ¢thanne thour. 40Om.1. ¢strengthis1. fthe men of Egipt1. &camenr. 4 her charis 1. 


ithe multitude 1. * the multitude 1. 


4K 2 


+ defence ; that 
is, in defending 
of him silf fro 

aliens ; defence 
here is seid the 


.sleing of Siche- 


mytis, for the 
violent oppress- 
ing of Dyna, 
the douster of 
Jacob. Lire 
here. C. 

t thy feruent 
loue ; the con- 
trarie semeth, 
for Jacob re- 
preuyde that 
doing of Sy- 
myon and of 
Leuy in xxiiij. 
c®. and in xlix. 
c°. of Genesis ; 
the soiling is 
this; the fer- 
uent lone to 
avenge the de- 
fouling of a 
virgyn, was 
leuetnl and 
inst, for they 
hadden no 
inge that wolde 
punysche the 
dede, of which 
the prince of 
the citee was 
auctour, and 
his puple was 
fantours and 
thus spekith 
Judith here, 
and Jacob re- 
preuyde the 
yuel and trai- 
terouse mancr 
of venging, in 
as myche as 
the sones of 
Jacob braken 
conenannt 
maad with Si- 
chemytis. Lire 
here. C. 


620 


tentis of hem, and dercnesses ouertra- 
suaileden hem; the se heeld the feet of 
ghem, and watris couereden hem. So, 
Lord, and these be maad, that trosten in 
ther multitude; and in ther charis, and 
iu wepnys, and in ther arewis, and in 
losperis glorien ; and thei knowen not, for 
thou thi self art oure God, that to-tredest 
batailis fro the bigynnyng, and Lord 
liname is to thee. Rere vp thin arm as 
fro the begynnyng, and hurtle the vertue 
of hem in thi vertue; falle the vertue of 
hem in thi wrathe, that behoten them- 
self to defoule thin holi thingus, and to 
polluten the tabernacle of thi name, and 
* to throwe doun with swerd the horne of 
12thin auter. Do, Lord, that the pride of 
hem be cut awei with ther owne swerd 3 
13be he taken with the grane of his e3en 
in me; and thou shalt smyten hym of 
\sthe lippis of my charite. 3if to me in 
wil stedefastnesse, that I dispise hym 
and his vertue, and I turne hym vp so 
Udoun. Forsothe he shal be the memorial 
of thi name, whan the hondis of a wom- 
16man han throwen hym doun. Forsothe, 
Lord, not in multitude is thi vertue, ne 
in strengthys of hors thi wil; ne proude 
inen pleseden to thee fro the begynnyng, 
but of meke men and of buxum ener- 
1jmor to thee pleside the pre3eere. God 
of heuenes, makere of watris, and Lord 
of eche creature, here me wrecche pre3- 
ende and of thi merei principali takende 
strost. Haue mynde, Lord, of thi testa- 
ment, and 3if woord in my mouth, and 
strengthe the counseil in myn herte, that 
thin hous in thin* halewinge abijde stille; 
i9and alle Jentilis knowen, for thon art 
God, and ther is noon other biside thee. 


JUDITH. 


IX. 8—19. 


riours!. But thou biheldist on the castels™7 
of hem, and derknessis maden hem feynt ; 
the botme of the see helde her feet, ands 
watris hiliden hem. Lord, ‘also these men 9 
be maad so, that" tristen in her multitude, 
and in her charis, and in scharp® schaftis 
with oute irun, and in her arowis; and 
han glorie? in her speris ; and witen4 not, 10 


* that thou thi silf art oure™ God, thats ‘al 


to-brekist batelst fro the bigynnyng", and 
the’ Lord is name to thee. Reise” thin 
armt as* at the bigynnyng, andy hurle’ 
doun the power® of hem ‘in thi vertu? ; the 
power® of hem falle’ doun in thi wrath- 
fulnesse®’, whiche biheten hem to defoule 
‘thin hooli thingis, and to defoulef the 
tabernacle of thi name, and to cast doun 
with her swerd the horn® of thin auter. 
Lord, make thou that the pride of hem12 
be kit of with her owne swerd; be" heiis 
takun with the snare of hise i3en in me; 
and thou schalt smyte hym with the lippis 
of my charitef. 3yue* thou to! me stid-14 4 my charite; 
fastnesse in soule, that Y dispise hym™ that ea 


+ arm; that is, 
thi power. 
Lire here. c. 


swete wordis 
and his vertu", and distrie®? hym. For? it 15 #4 schewinge 


loue. Lire 
schal be a memorial4 of* thi name, whanne “ere. c. 
the hondis of a womman han cast hym doun. 
For whi, Lord, thi vertu’ is not in multi-16 
tude, nether thi wille is in the strengthis 
of horsis; and' proude spiritis plesiden not 


thee at the bigynnyng, but the preier of 


- meke men and mylde ‘pleside euere" thee. 


God of heuenes, the’ creatour of watris, 17 
and Lord of alle” creature, here thou me 
wretchid womman preiynge* and tristynge 
of thi merci. Lord, haue thou mynde of 1s 
thi testament, and 3yue thou a word.in 
my mouth’, and make thou strong the 
counsel? in myn herte, that thin hows 
dwelle perfitly in thin halewyng; and 19 
that alle folkis knowe, that thou art God, 
and* noon other is outakun thee. 


x Om. An. 


! her werriouris 1. 
P veyn glorie 1. 
v Om. 1. 


m powers I. 
4 thei witen 1. 7 Om. s, 
Ww Reise up 1. * as thou didist 1. 


1 be thes men maad also in lijk manere, whiche 1. 
8 whiche 1. 
Y and in thi vertu 7. 


© her scharp 1. 
u bigynnyng hast alto broke batails 1. 
Z hurledist 1. hurtle R. 4 vertu BEH 


tOm.1. 


a m. LPUVX. >bOm.1. © vertuGKimxa. 4 falle its. ¢ rigtfulnesser. fOm.31. & my3t 1. 
and be 1. 4 Holofernes 1. ¥ 3yue, Lord1. 1}Om.s. ™ Holofernes1. ™ power 1 sec.m.1. © make 

me to distrie 1. PCertis1, 4 myndfulnesse 1. Ttonpr.m. § power1. tand, Lordi. * hath euer 

plesidr. vthouartr. Wechr. * Om. 1, 8 and that 1. 


¥Y mouth ¢o speke 1. 


Z counsel of thee 1. 


X. r——8. 


CAP. X. 


1 It is do forsothe, whan she hadde cesid 
to crien to the Lord, she ros fro the place, 
in whiche she lai throwe doun toY the 

2Lord. And she clepide hir fre maiden, 
and cam doun in to hir hous; she? dide 
awei fro hir the heire, and clothide hyr- 
self out of the clothing of hir widewehed. 

3 And she wesh hir bodi, and oyntide hir- 
self with the beste myrre, and she platte 
the her of hir hed, and putte a mytre 
vp on hir hed, and she clothide hir with 
the clothis of hir jolite, and clothide hir- 


self ga3e shon to hir feet; and she toc - 


armes onournemens’, and lilies, and ere 
ringus, and finger ringys, and with alle 
hir onournemens’ she onournede hir. 
4+To whom also the Lord 3af bri3tnesse, 
for al this composicioun not of lust, but 
of vertue heeng®; and therfore the Lord 
made more this fairnesse in to hir, that 
she aperede to the e3en of alle men with 
5 fairnesse vncomparable. And so she putte 
on to hir fre maiden a botel of wijn, and 
‘a vessel? of oile, and potage, and dried 
figes, and loues, and chese, and wente 
sforth. And whan thei weren come to 
the 3ate of the cite, thei founden Osiam 
7 abidende, and the prestis of the cite. The 
whiche whan thei hadden seen hir, stone- 
3ende merueileden ful miche the fairnesse 
sof hir. No thing ner the latere askende 
hir laften to passen, seiende, God of oure 
fadris 3iue to thee grace, and al the 
counseil of thin herte with his vertue 
strengthe, and glorie vp on thee Jeru- 
salein, and be thi name in the noumbre 


Y into E pr.m. 2 and sue 4. 


mentis ar. ¢ hangide azFu. 4 vessels an. 
bAnd1. ¢ Judith1. “roosup1. © Judith cam 1. 
anoyntide rs. |! ful good1. ™ schedde ts. schoddide ux. 


ournement 1s. Puponis. 4 sche hilide is. 


JUDITH. 


® houournementis £. ournementis F. 


621 


ALP xX. 


Forsothe?it was doon, whanne sche‘hadde 1 
ceessid to crie to the Lord, sche roos¢ fro 
the place, in which sche lay bowid doun to 
the Lord. And sche clepide hir fre hand-2 
maide, and cam? doun in to hir hows; and 
sche took awei fro hir‘ the heire, and® vn- 
clothide hir silf‘ fro the clothing of hir wi- 
dewehod. And sche waischide hir bodi, and 3 
anoyntide hir with beste! myrret, and sche 
schedide™ the heer of hir heed, and settide" 
a mytre® on? hir heed, and sche clothide 
hir with the clothis of hyr gladnesse, and 
clothide’ hir feet with sandalies’; and sche 
took ournementis® of thet armes, aid lilies, 
and eeryngis, and ryngis", and ournede* 
hir silf* with alle hir ournementis. To4 
whom also* the Lord 3af bri3tnesseY, for al 
this ourenement? hangide* not? of letcherie, 
but of* vertu’; and® therforf the Lord 
‘made large this fairnesse on hir, that! 
bi ‘vncomparable fairnesse* sche apperide! 
to the i3en of alle men. Therfor™ sches 
puttide on" hir fre handmaide a botel of 
wyn®, and a vessel of oile, and meet maad 
of meele, and dried? figus, and looues4, and 
cheese, and 3eden™ forth. And whanneé 
thei weren comen to the 3ate’ of the citee, 
thei foundent Ozie and the prestis of the 
citee abidynge fiz". And whanne ‘thei7 
hadden seyn hir, thei weren astonyed, and 
wondriden’ ful myche on hir fairnesse. 
Netheles thei axiden hir no thing, ands 
leeten” passe‘, and seidenY, The? God of 
oure fadris 3yue grace to thee, and make* 
strong with his vertu al the counsel of 
thin herte, and Jerusalem haue? glorie on® 


b honournementis Fr. ourne- 


fhirselfis. and schets. iOm.1. * sche 
1 sche settide 1s. © mytre, that is, a semely 


* sandalies, that is, an ournement of feet, which was vsid in 


the old tyme s. *%the ournementis 1s. tOm.1s. 4 ofhere ryngis 1s. VY sche ournede 1s, WOm.1s. * also 
ouer al this 1. also ouer al her owrnement s. ¥ fairnesse 1s. 7 ournement, that is, noon of al this ournement s. 
2Om.1. > not upon hir bicause s. © bicause of s. vertu hangide on hir 1. ©Om.s. f therfor in hir 1s. 
& made large or eneresside 1s. 4uponis. 'sothatis. * fairnesse that my3te not be comparisound 1s. 
1 apperide semely 1s. ™ And thanne 1s. "upon 1s. © wyne fo bere with hirs. YP of dried 1s. 4 sche 
toke to hir looues 1s. * thei 3eden 1s. § 3atisas. ¢ founden there 1s, ¥ Judith ts. V thei wondriden Is. 
w thei leeten Airis. _* passe forth is. Yseidentohirs, 2Om.1. b haue it ts. 
© upon Is. 


a make he Is. 


+ myrre; that 
is, oynement 
maad of myrre 
for greet part. 
Lire here. c. 


622 


vof seintus and of ri3twis men. And these, 
that ther weren, alle with o vois seiden, 
10 Be it do! be it do! Thanne Judit pre3- 
ende the Lord, passede thur3 the 3atis, 
ilshe and hir fre maiden. It is do forsothe, 
whan she cam donn the hil aboute spring 
of the dai, ajen camen to hir the aspies 
of the® Assiries, and heelden hir, seiende, 
Whennes comest thou, or whider gost 
i2thou? The whiche answerde, A do3ter I 
am of Ebrues, and therfore I flei; fro the 
face of hem, for to comen I knew, that 
thei shul ben to jou in to prei taking, 
for thi that despisende 30u wolden not 
freeli taken themself, that thei shulden 
i3finde mercy in 3oure si3te. For this 
cause I tho3te with myself, seiende, I 
shal go to the face off Olofernes prince, 
that I shewe to hym the priuites of hem, 
and I shal shewe to hym, bi what entre 
he mai wynne hem, so that ther falle 
i4not oon man of his ost. And whan thoo 
men hadden herd hir woordis, thei be- 
heelden hir face, and she was in ther 
ejen stoneyng, for thei merueileden ful 
ismyehe the fairnesse of hir. And thei 
seiden to hir, Thou hast kept thi lif, for 
thi that such a counseil thou hast founde, 
1¢that thou come doun to oure lord. This 
forsothe wite thou, that, whan thou stond- 
ist in his sij3te, he shal wel do to thee, 
and thou shalt be most acceptid in his 
herte. And thei ladden hir to the ta- 
bernacle of Olofernes, aud shewiden hir. 
17 And whan she was comen in beforn his 
face, anoon Olofernes is ca3t in his ejen. 
18 And hise tyraunt kny3tis seiden to hym, 
Who despisede the puple of Jewis, that 
han so faire wymmen, that not for hem 
bi ri3t ajen hem wee owen to fi3ten ? 
i9 And so Judit seande Olofernes sittende 
in the canope, that was of purper, and 


JUDITH. 


X. O—19- 


thee, and thi name be in the noumbre of 
hooli and inst men. And alle thei, thats 
weren there, seiden with o vois, Be it 
doon! be it doon! Therfor4 Judith preiede 10 
the Lord, and passide® thorou3 the 3atis, 
schef and hir fre? handmaydeb, Forsothe!!! 
it was doon, whanne sche cam doun of 
the hil aboute the risynge* of the dai, 
the aspieris! of Assiriens™ metten hir, and 
helden® hir, and seiden, Fro whennus 
comest thou, ether whidur goist thou? 
And sche® answeride, Y am a dou3ter of 12 
Ebreis?, and therfor Y fledde4 fro the face 
of hem, for Y knew", that it* schal come, 
that thei schulen be 3onun to 30u in to 
prey, for thei dispisident 3ou, and nolde" 
bitake’ hem silf wilfuli’, that thei schul- 
den fynde* grace in 3oure si3t. 


+ Vknew; 
these wordis of 
Judith, and 
many mo 
wordis suynge, 
ben leesinge, 

3 feyned for de- 
ForY this 13 lyueraunce of 
the puple wor- 


cause Y thou3te with? me*, and seide”,  schipinge God, 

E and for the 

Y schal go to the face® of the prynce costings dom 
of proude Holo- 


Holofernes, for to schewe to hym the pri- 
uytees of hem‘, and Y schal schewe to 
hym, bi what entryng® he mai gete hem, and: 

so that not o man of his oost falle dounf. ee 
And whanne tho men hadden herd the 14 Which it nedith 
wordis of hirs, thei bihelden hir face, and Jad 
wondryng was in her ijen, for thei won- _ hadden venyal 
driden greetli on hir fairnesse. And thei 1 dee 
seiden to hir, Thon hast kept thi lijf, for® ae? ae 
thou hast founde sich a counsel, that thou “ere ¢ 
woldist come doun to oure lord. Sotheliii6é 

wite thou this‘, that, whanne thou ‘hast 

stonde! in his si;t, he schal do wel to thee, 

and thou schalt be moost acceptable in his 

herte. And thei ledden hir to the taber- 

naele of Holofernes, and thei schewiden 

hir fo hym. And whanne sche hadde en-17 

trid bifor his face, anoon Holofernes was 

takun bi hise ijen™. And hise kny3tis1e 

seiden to hym, Who schal dispise" the 

puple of Jewis, whiche® han so faire wym- 

men, that we owen not to fiz3te skilfuli 


fernes, purpos- 
inge to distrie 
Goddis onour, 
and siche lees- 


° Om. an. 
d Certists. ¢ sche passide forthis. fOm.1s. gOm.1. 2b handmayde with hir rs. 7 And ts. 
k spryngyng 1s. | spieris1s. ™ the men of Assirie1s. "thei helden1. © Judithts. P the men of 
Ebreis 1s. 4 haue fled is. ‘knower. 5 this thing 1s. ‘han dispisid 1s. 4 for thei wolden not 1. for 
thei nulden s. vtakec. W wilfuli fo 30u 1s. * haue founden 1s. Y And fors. 2 with ynner. 4me 
immy hertes. >I seideis. © presences. 4 the men of Israels. entre x.  f doun bi decth s. 


© Judith 1s.» for thi thatis. t And ts. 


destrie t. dispise or leue to distrie s. © that 1. 


K this thing 1s. | stondist 1. ™ izen with lust 1s. © dispise fo 


X. 20— XI. 9g. 


of gold, and of smaragd, and of most 

20precious stones with inne wouen, and 
whan ‘in tof his face she hadde lokid, 
she honourede hym, fallende hyrself doun 
vpon the erthe; and the seruauns of Olo- 
fernes rereden hir vp, ther® lord co- 
maundende. 


CAP. XI. 


1 Thanne Olofernes seide to hir, Euene 
inwit be thou, and wile thou not dreden 
in thin herte, for I neuere nojede man, 
that wolde serue to king Nabugodonosor. 

2Thi puple forsothe, if it hadde not de- 
spisid me, I hadde not rerid myn hond 

3vp on it. Now forsothe sei to me, of h 
what cause thou wentist awei fro them, 
and it pleside to thee that thou hast come 

ato vs. And Judit seide, Tac the woordis 
of thin hand maiden ; for, if thou folewist 
the woordis of thin hand maiden, a parfit 

s thing the Lord shal don with thee. For- 
sothe Nabugodonosor liueth, king of the! 
erthe, and his vertue liueth, that is in 
thee to the chastising of alle liues er- 
rende*; for not onli men shul serue to 
hym bi thee, but and bestis of the feld 

6obeshen to hym. Forsothe the redynesse 
of thin inwit is told to alle folkis; and 
it is open to al the world, for thou alone 
good and my3ti art in al his reame; and 
thi discipline to alle prouyncis is prechid. 

7Ne that is vnknowen, that Achior spac, 
ne that is vnwist, that hym thou hast 
scomaundid to fallen. Forsothe it is 
knowen so oure God offendid to synnes, 
that he hath sent by his profetis to the 
puple, that he shal taken it for ther 
ysynnes. And for the sones of Irael witen 
them to han offendid the Lord ther God, 


fOm. 4. &Sthe a. bfora. iOm. au. 
Pp Andis. 4withynne is.  * that was wijd 1s. 
Yof gold 1s. Wofsmaragde1. * of moost 1. 
bowide 1s. > hir up 1s. © comaundide so 18. 
h And 1s. imy power ups. * sefe thou now 15. 


sue Is. 
u shul obeie 1s. 
> Forsothe 1s. 


Vv hym 0 thee 18. 
¢hath sent 1s. 4 peple of vs s. 


JUDITH. 


¥ stoones weren frette ther upon s. 
a Judith 1s. 


° and do after the s. P power 1s. 4 lyues 1. 
w soule or wit s. 
€ hem to her enmyes 1s. 


623 


a3enus hem for these wymmen? Therfor? 19 


Judith si3 Holofernes sittynge int a cur- 
teynf, round’ bynethe and scharp* aboue, 
that' was wouun of" purpur, and gold’, 
and smaragde”, and moost* preciouse 


t « curtyn; 
that is, in a 
chayer, hilid 
with siche a 
curtyn. Lire 


stoonys’, and whaune sche hadde lokid 20" © 


in to? his face, sche worschipide hym, and 
bowide® doun hir silf on the erthe; and 
the seruauntis of Holofernes reisiden hir?, 
for her lord comaundide‘. 


CAP. XI. 


Thanne Holofernes seide to hir’, Bei 
thou coumfortid, and nyle thou drede in 
thin herte, for Y neuere anoyede® man, that 
wolde serue Nabugodonosor, the’ kyngs. 
Sotheli if thi puple hadde not dispisid 2 
me, Y hadde not reisid ‘myn hondi on it. 
But ‘now seie* to me, for what cause3 
3edist thou awei fro hem, and! it pleside 
thee to come to vs. And Judith seide, 
Take™ thou the wordis of thin hand- 
maide; for, if thou suest® the® wordis of 
thin handmaide, the Lord schal make a 
perfit thing with thee. Forsothe Nabu-s 
godonosor, the kyng of erthe, lyueth, and 
his vertu? lyueth, which is in thee to the 
chastisyng of alle soulis’ errynge; for not 
oneli" men schulen serne hym’ ‘bi thee’, 
but also beestis of the feeld obeien® to 
hym’. For the prudence of thi soule” is¢ 
teld to alle folkis; and it is schewid to al 
the world, that thou aloon art good and 
my3ti in al his rewme; and thi techyng 
is prechid in alle prouyncis. Nether this7 
thing is hid, which’ Achior spak*, nether 
that thing is vnknowun, which thou co- 
maundidist® to bifalle to hym. For? it iss 
knowun, that oure God is so offendid bi 
synnes, that he sente® bi hise profetis to 
the puple’, that lhe wolde bitake hem* for 
her synnes. And for the sones of Israel9 
witen, that thei han offendid ‘her Lord 


k lyuynge E pr.m. errynge sec. mt. 


t the whiche 1. whieh s. 4 with s. 
«Om. Is. she 
© noiede 1s. fOm.s. & kyng of Assirie 1s. 
land whit. whis. ™ Take to herte 1s." schalt . 
t oneli bi thee 1s. 8 Nabugodonosor 1s. *Om. 1s. 
ythat1. 2 hath spoke 1s.  comaundist 1s. 


5 narou3 Is. 


624 JUDIE A: 


iohis trembling is vp on hem. Ferthermor 
also hungir hath asailid hem, and of the 
dro3te of water now among deade men 
ben countid. Therfore this thei ordeynen, 
that ther bestis thei slen, and the blod 
i20f hem thei drinken; and the holi thingis 
of ther Lord, that God comaundide not 
to be touchid, in! whete, win, and oile, 
these thingus thei han tho3t to 3iuen out, 
and wiln waste thoo thingus, that with 
hondus thei shulden not touche; thanne 
for these thingys thei don, it is certein 
isthat in to leesing thei shul be 3iue. The 
whiche thing I, thin hand maiden, know- 
ende, flei3 fro them, and the Lord sente 
laine these same thingus to telle thee. I 
forsothe, thin hand maiden, herie God, 
also now anent thee; and thin hand 
maiden shal gon out, and I shal prejen 
isGod; and he shal sei to me, for he shal 
3elde to them ther synne; and comende 
I shal telle to thee, so that I shal bringe 
thee bi the myddel of Jerusalem, and 
thou shalt han al the puple of Irael as 
shep to whiche™ is no shepperde, and 
ther shal not berken or® oon a3en thee ; 
isfor these thingis to me ben seid bi the 
17 prouidence of God. And for God is wroth 
to them, I am sent these same thingus to 
18telle thee®. Forsothe alle these woordis 
pleseden heforn Olofernes, and beforn his 
childer ; and thet merueileden at the wis- 
dam of hir; and the tother? seide to the 
19 tother, Ther is not such a womman vpon 
erthe in si3te, in fairnesse, and‘ in wit of 
20 woordis. And Olofernes seide to hir, God 
hath do wel, that sente thee befor the 
puple, that thou 3eue it in oure hondis; 
21 and for good is thi beheste, if thi God do 
to me these thingus, he shal ben and my 
God, and thou in the hous of Nabugodo- 
nosor shalt be gret, and thi name shal be 
nemned in al erthe. 


1Om. 4. ™the whiche uz. 2 Om. a. 


f the Lord her God is. &hemtr. h upon 1s. 


XI. 10-——21. 


God‘, the tremblyng of hym® is on? hem. 
Ferthermore also hungur hath asailid hem, 10 
and for drynesse of watir thei ben rikenyd 
now among deed men. Forsothe! thei or-11 
deynen this*, that thei sle her beestis, and 
drynke her blood; and thei thou3ten! to12 
3yue these hooli thingis ‘of her Lord in™ 
wheete, wyn, and oile, whiche® God co- 
maundide to be not touchid, and thei 
wolen waste the™ thingis, which thei 
ou3ten® not touche? with hondis; therfor 
for thei doen these thingis, it is certeyn 
that thei schulen be 30uun in to perdi- 
cioun. Which thing Y, thin handmaide, 13 


‘knew4, and’ fledde fro hem, and the Lord 


sente’ me to telle these same thingis to 
thee. Fort Y, thin handmaide, worschipe 14 
God, also now at® thee; and thin hand- 
maide schal go out’, and Y schal preie 
God: and he schal seie to me, whanne he 15 
schal 3elde to hem’ her synne ; and Y schal 
come, and telle to* thee, so that Y brynge 
thee thorou3 the myddis of Jerusalem, and 
thou schalt haue al the puple of Israel as 
scheep ‘to whiche isY no scheepherde’, and 
ther schal not berke* aj3ens thee nameli 
oon; for these thingis ben seid to me bis 
the puruyaunce of God. And for God is17 
wrooth to hem, Y am sente to telle to? 
thee these same thingis. Sotheli® alleis 
these wordis plesiden bifor Holofernes, and 
bifore hise children’; and thei wondriden 
at the wisdom of hir®; and oonf seide to 
another, Ther is not sich a womman on® i9 
erthe in si3t, in fairenesse, and in wit of 
wordis. And Holofernes seide to hir, God 20 
dide wel, that sente thee bifor the puple, 
that thou 3yue" it ini myn hondis; and*21 
for thi biheest is good, if thi God doith 
these thingis to me, he schal be also my 
God, and thow schalt be greet in the hows 
of Nabugodonosor, and thi name schal be 
nemyd in al erthe. 


©totheec. Ptoon 4. 910m. 4. 


Patines i And this thing is. * now1s. ‘han thoujt1. ™ to 
bie with 1. of her Lord to bie with s. " the whiche 1. nn ae AS. : 


© owen IRS. P to touche a. 


re is. "and therfor 11, and herefor1s, 8 hathsentrs. ¢ Sothely 1s. anentis1. VY forth is. 
te Jeniss. *Om.1. Ythat1. 2 schepherde isto 1. ® chide 1. chide either speke fouls. b Om.1. 


e Certists. 4 seruauntis 1s. © Judith 1s. 
k Om, s. 


foonofhems. &uponts. bbitakeis. lin tos. 


XIT. 1-11. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Thanne he comaundede hir to gon in, 
wher his tresories* weren leid vp, and he 
comaundide hir to dwelle there; and he 
ordeynede, what shulde be 3iue to hir of 

2his feste. To wliom answerde Judit, and 
seide, Now I shal not moun ete of these 
thingus, that thou comaundist to me to be 
3olden, lest ther come vp on me gilte; 
of thoo thingis forsothe that with me I 

3haue bro3t, I shal ete. To whom seith 
Olofernes, If these thingis failen to thee, 
that with thee thou hast bro3t, what shul 
4wee do to thee? And Judit seide, Lord, 
thi soule liueth, for thin hand maide shal 
not spende alle these thingus, to the time 
that God shul do in myn hond thoo 
thingus that I haue tho3t. And his ser- 
uauns ladden hir in to the tabernacle, 
swher he hadde comaundede. And she 
askide, whil she shulde gon in, that ther 
shulde be 3iue to hir fredam, the ny3t, 
and beforn the 1i3t’, of going out to ori- 
esoun, and of pre3ing the Lord. And he 
comaundede to his cubicularies, that, as it 
pleside to hir, she shulde gon out, and 
comen in, to pre3en hir God bi thre dajes. 
7And she wente out on ny3tis in to the 
valei of Betulie, and baptiside hirself in 
sto the welle of watir. And as she ste3ede 
vp, she pre3ede the Lord God of Irael, 
that he shulde gouerne hir wei to thet 
9deliueryng of hir puple. And goende in, 
clen she dwelte in the tabernacle, vnto 
jo the time she toc hir mete vnto euen. And 
it is don the ferthe dai, Olofernes made a 
soper to his seruauns, and seide to Vagio, 
gelding, Go, and sweteli moue this Ebru, 
that wilfulli she sente" to dwelle with 
1ime. Forsothe a foul thing it is anent 
Assiries, if a womman scorne a man, 
doende that she passe fro hym withoute 


JUDITH. 


625 


CAP. XII. 


Thanne Holofernes comaundide hir! to1 
entre, where his tresouris weren kept, and 
he comaundide hir to dwelle there ; and he 
ordeynede, what™ schulde be 3ouun to hir 
of his feeste. To whom Judith answeride, 2 
and seide, Now Y may not ete of these 
thingis, which thou comaundidist to be 
jouun to me, lest offence come on me; 
but Y schal ete of these thingis, whiche 
Y brou3te" with me. To whom Holofernes3 
seide, If these thingis failen"", whiche thou 
brou3tist® with thee, what schulen we? do 
to thee? And Judith seide, Lord, thi soule4 
lyueth, for thin handmaide schal not spende 
alle these thingis, til God schal do in myn 
hondis these thingis which Y thou3te4. 
And hise seruauntis ledden hir in to the 
tabernacle, whidur he hadde comaundid. 
And sche axide', the® while sche entridet,s 
that fredom schulde be 3ouun to hir to go 
out to preier, in the ny3t, and bifor the 
li3t", andY to biseche the Lord. And he’’s 
comaundide to his chaumberleyuns, that, as 
it pleside hir, sche schulde go out, and 
entre’, for to preie hir God bi thre daies. 
And sche 3ede out* in ny3tis in to the7 
valei of Bethulia, and waischide’ hir silf? 
in the® welle of watir. And as sches 
stiede>, sche preiede the Lord God of Is- 
rael, that he wolde dresse hir weie to the 
delyueraunce of his puple. And sche en-9 
tride®, and dwellide clene in the taber- 
nacle, til that sche took hir mete in the 
euentid. And it was doon in the fourthet 10 +t fourthe ; fro 
dai, Holofernes made a soper to hise ser- SR aa 
uauntis, and he seide to Vagao, thet {yteof Bithu- 
chaumburleyn, Go thou, and councele® “ 
thatf Ebrew womman, that sche consente 
wilfuli to dwelle with me. For it is foul®11 
anentis Assiriens", if a womman scornei 
a man, in doynge* that! sche passe ‘with 


T tresours 4. tresour H. S while Eprom. Om. a. ¥ asente 4. 


1 Judith 1s. | ™ what thing 1s. 
.thanne is. 4 haue thou3t fo do 18. 
 lizt of [the 5] dai came1s. YVOm.1. 
zOm.1. theres. a 18. 
£ Judith the 1s. & a foul thing ts. 
l and that 1s. 


VOL. II. 


" haue brou3t rs. 
r axide of Holofernes s. 
vw Holofernes 1s. 
» stiede up 1. stiede vp there s. 
h men of Assirie 18. 


nn failen fo thee ts. © hast brouzt is. P we 
8Om.1. t entride iz to the tabernaele s. 
wynt. *forth1s. Y¥ sche waischide ts, 
€entride yn ts. ‘@his1s. © counsel thou s. 
i scorne or desceyue 1. k hir doynge 1. 


4. 


626 JUDITH. XII, 12—XIIL. 6. 


izhir offis. Thanne wente in Vagio to Ju- 
dit, and seide, Be not adrad, thou goode 
child maide’, to gon in to my lord, that 
she be maad wrshipeful beforn his face, 
and ete she with hym, and drinke win 
iswith gladnesse. ‘To whom Judit an- 
swerde, What am I, that I a3euseie to 
1amy lord? Alle thing, that shal ben be- 
forn his e3en good and best, I shal do. 
What euere forsothe to hym shulde plese, 
that to me shal be best alle dazes* of my 
islif. And she ros, and enournede hirself 
with hir clothis, and gon in she stod 
isbeforn his face. Forsothe the herte of 
Olofernes is smyten; forsothe he was 
i7brennende in the lust of hir. And Olo- 
fernes seide to hir, Drink now, and sitt 
doun in io3e; for thou hast founde grace 
ig befor me. Aud Judit seide, I shal drinke, 
lord, for my lif is magnyfied to dai be- 
igforn alle the da3es of my liuyng. And 
she toc, and eet, and dranc beforn hym 
thoo thingis, that hir hond maiden hadde 
29 maad redi to hir. And Olofernes is maad 
myrie ‘to hirx, and myche win he drane 
ful myehe, hou myche in o dai neuere 
he hadde drunken in his lyne. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 As forsothe euetidY is do, his seruauns 
he3eden to ther herbergeries; and Vagio 
closide the dores of the priue chawmbre, 

zand wente. Forsothe alle weren ouer- 

gtrauailid of win; and Judit was alone 
sin the priue chaumbre. But Olofernes 
lai in the bed, with to myche drunk- 
senesse aslepe. And Judit seide to hir 
child womman, that she shulde stonde 
with oute forthe befor the dore of the 

6 priue chaumbre, and waiten aboute. And 
Judit stod befor the bed, prezende with 
teres, and with moouyng of lippis in 


out part™ fro hym. Thanne Vagao en-i2 
tride” to Judith, and seide®, A good dame- 
sele be not aschamed to entre? to my 
lord, that sehe be onourid bifor his face, 
and that sche eete with hym, and drynke 
wiyn with gladnesse. To whom Judithis 
answeryde, Who am Y, that Y ajenseie 
iny lord? Y schal do al thing, that schal 14 
be good and best bifor hise izen. Sotheli4 
what euer thing plesith hym, this’ schal 
be best to me in alle the daies of my lijf. 
And sche roos’, and ournede hir silft with is 
hir clothis, and entride", and stood bifor 
‘his face’. Forsothe” the herte of Holo-i6é 
fernes was stirid*; for he was breunynge 
in theY coueitise of hir. And Holofernes 17 
seide to hir, Drynke thou now, and take? 
mete in* gladnesse; for thou hast founde 
grace bifor me. And Judith seide, Lord, i8 
Y sehal drynke, for my soule is magny- 
fied to dai bifor alle the daies of iy lijf. 
And sche took, and eet, and drank bifor19 
hym tho thingis, whiche hir handmayde 
hadde maad redi to hir. And Holofernes 20 
was maad glad ‘to hir>, and he drank® ful 
myche wiyn, hou myche he hadde neuere 
drank in o dai in his lijf. 


CAP. XIII. 


Forsothe as? euentid was maad, hise‘! 
seruauntis® hastiden® to her ynnest; and 
Vagao" closid togidere the doris of the 
closet', and 3edej forth. For alle men2 
weren maad feynt* of wiyn; and Judith3 
aloone was! in™ the closet. Certis Holo-4 
fernes lai" in the® bed, aslepid with ful 
myche drunkenesse. And Judith seide tos 
hir damesele, that sche schulde stonde 
with outforth bifor the dore of the closet, 
and aspieP, And Judith stood bifor theé 
bed4, preiynge® with teeris, and with stir- 
yng’ of lippis' ‘in silence, seiynge", Lord7 


e Ywomman c pr.m. Wthe dais au. * Om. a. Y enentide 4H. 


™freet. Mentride yn is. © he seide to hir ts. 


Pentre ynis. 4 Andis. Tthisthing Is. § roos 


up ts. tOm.1s. sche entride yn is. ¥ the face of Holofernes 1s. W Andis. % stiride fo /ust s. 
Y fleishly 1. 2 take thous. @withs. > toward hir 1. to hir wardus s. © drank thanne 1s. 4 as soone. 
asis. ¢the 1s, f seruauatis of Holofernes 1s, & hastiden hem is. h Vages, chamberleyne 1. Vagao, his 
chaumberleyne s. 1 closet where Holofernes lay 1s. ihe 3ede 1s. feynt or drunken 1s. was there 1s. 


mwithynner. © Jai therets. a 18. 


P aspie that no man were niz.s. 1 bed of him 1. hed of Holo- 


Tr e & * . . . e 
Jernes 8. and she preiede 1s. § mouyng 1s. t hir lippis 1s. 4 sehe seide in silence 1s. 


f ynnes; that 
is, tentis. Lire 
here. c. 


XIII. 7—109. 


7silence, seiende, Conferme me, Lord God 
of Irael, and behold in this hour to the 
werkis of myn hondis, that thou rere vp 
thi cite Jerusalein, as thou hast behoten ; 
and that, that I leeuende to moun be don 
sbi thee tho3te, I parforme. And whan 
that she hadde seid, she wente to the 
piler that was at the hed of his bed, and 
his swerd, that in it bounden heeng’, she 
dlosede. And whan she hadde drawen it 
out, she toc the her of his hed, and seith, 
Conferme me, God of Irael, in this hour. 
10 And she smot twies in to his haterel, 
and she cutte of his hed; and she toc 
awei his canope fro the pileris, and she 
liturnede out his body behedid*, And 
after a litil while she wente out, and toc 
the hed of Olofernes to hir hand maiden, 
and comaundede, that she shulde putten 
12it in to hir scrippe. And thei two wenten 
out after ther vsage as to prejeere, and 
thei passeden the tentis, and, goende 
aboute the valei, camen to the 3ate of 
13the cite. And Judit seide aferre to the 
keperis of the wallis, Openeth the 3atis, 
for with vs is God, that dide gret vertue 
14in Irael. And it is. do, whan the men 
hadden herd hir vois, thei clepeden the 
is prestis of the cite. And alle runnen a3en 
hir fro the leste to the moste; for thei 
i¢hopeden hir no mor to be to come. And, 
teendende li3tis, alle wenten abouten hir. 
She forsothe stezende vp in to an hei3ere 
place, comaundede to be maad silence. 
And whan alle hadden holden ther pes, 
17 Judit seide, Preiseth the Lord oure God, 
that forsaketh not men hopende in hym, 
igsand in me, his hand womman, hath® ful- 
fild his merci, that he behi3te to the hous 
of Irael, and hath slain in myn hond the 
i9enemy of his puple this ny3t. And bring- 


z hangede EF. 


JUDITH. 


a beheueded srrn. 


627 


God of Israel, conferme me’, and biholde 

in this our* toY the werkis of myn hondis, 

that, as thou bihi3tist’, thou reise* Jerusa- 

lem thi citee; and that Y performe this 

thing, which thing Y bileuynge thoujte 

to mow be doon bi thee. And whannes 

sche hadde seid this*, sche neizede to the 

piler that was at the heed of his® bed‘, 

and sche loside his swerd, that hangide® 

boundun ‘ther ynne'. And whanne sches 

hadde drawe out of the scheeth thilke ‘ 
swerd, sche took the heer of his heed; and 
seide, Lord God of Israel, conferme me in 
this our, And sche smoot twies on* his 10 
necke, and kittide! awei™ his heed; and 
sche took awei his curteyn fro the pileris, 
and walewide" awei his bodi heedles. And11 
aftir a litil sche 3ede out, and bitook® the 
heed of Holofernes to hir handmaide, and 
comaundide?, that sche schulde putte it in 
to hir scrippe. And‘ the twei wymmen 12 
jeden ont ‘bi her custom® as‘ to preier", 
and passiden’ the castels’} of Assiriens*, 
and thei cumpassiden’ the valei, and camen? 
to the 3ate of the citee. And Judith seide1s 
afer to the keperis of the wallis,‘Opene 3e* 
the 3atis, for God is with vs, that hath do 
greet vertu in Israel. And it was doon,14 
whanne the? men hadden herd ‘her vois°, 
thei clepiden the prestis of the citee. And 15 
alle men fro the leest ‘til to’ the mooste 
runnen to hir®; for thei hopiden not, that 
sche schulde comef now. And thei teend- 16 
iden& li3tis, and alle men cumpassiden 
aboute hir. Sotheli® sche stiede! in to an 
hizere place, and* comaundide! silence to 
be maad. And whanne alle men weren 
stille, Judith seide, Herie 3e ‘oure Lord 17 
God™, that hath not forsake hem that 
hopen" in hym, and bi me, his handmaide, ts 
he hath fillid® his merci, which he bihi3te 


t+ castels 3 that 
is, oost. CV. 


bthet camenc. ¢he hath a. 


Vv me, or make me stable 1. me, that is, make me stable in this doyng 8. “Om.18. * tyme Is. Y biholde 


thon tors. 2 hast bihizt 1s. 
f bed of Holofernes 1. 
m offi. "sche walewider. 9° sche bitook 1. 
‘forth 1. §Om.1. tas it were 1. 
Y 3eden aboute 1. 2 thei camen 1. ® Openeth 1. 
fhaue comer. 6 teenden c. teendiden up I. 

m the Lord oure God 1. ® tristen 1. © fulfillid 1. 


@ reise up Is. 
& hangide there 1. 


4L 2 


> helpe me that s. 
h on the piler 1. 
P Judith comaundide hir 1. 
u her preier 1, ¥ thei passiden 1. 
> tho 1. 
h And 1. 


¢ this thing 1s. @Om.N. & the a1. 
‘ tyme 1. kini. sche kittide 1. 
q And bi her custom 1. 
wtentis 1. * the men of Assirie 1. 
¢ the vois of Jndith 1. dvnto1 ¢ Judith 1. 
istiede np. and sche x. ! comaunde a. 


628 


ende forth of the scrippe the hed of Olo- 
fernes, shewide to them, seiende, Lo! the 
hed of Olofernes, prince of ‘the chiualrie 
of Assiries; and, lo! the canope of hym, 
in whiche he lai in his drunkinhed, wher 
and bi the hond of a womman smot hym 
20the Lord our God. Forsothe the Lord 
God lineth, for his aungil kepte me, and 
hennus goende, and there dwellende, and 
thennus hider turnende a3een; and the 
Lord suffride not me his hand womman 
to be defoulid, but with oute pollucioun 
of synne hath a3een clepid me to 3ou, 
iozende in his victorie, in myn ascaping, 
21in 3oure delineraunce. Knoulecheth to 
hym alle, for good, for in to the world 
22his merci. Alle forsothe, honourende the 
Lord, seiden to hir, The Lord blesside 
thee in his vertue, for bi thee to no3t he 
23hath bro3t oure’ enemys. But Osias, the 
prince of the puple of Irael, seide to hir, 
Blessid thou art, do3ter, of the Lord, the 
heje God, befor alle wyinmmen vp on 
aserthe. Blessid the Lord, that made he- 
uene and erthe, and that hath dressid 
thee in to the woundis of the hed of the 
25 prince of oure enemys ; for to dai so thi 
name he hath magnefied, that thi preis- 
ing go not awei fro the mouth of men, 
that weren myndeful of the vertue of 
the Lord in to with oute ende; for the 
whiche thingus® thou sparedest not to thi 
lif for anguysshis and tribulaciouns of 
thi kinrede, but holpedist to the falling 
26 befor the si3te of oure God. And al the 
27puple seide, So be it! so be it! For- 
sothe Achior clepid cam; and Judit seide 
to hym, God of Irael, to the whiche wit- 
nessing thou hast 3iue, that he be vengid 
of his enemys, he the hed of alle mys- 
beleeued men hath hewen of in this ny3t 
23in myn hond. And that thou preue for 


dhis # prem. 


JUDITH. 


XIII. 20-——28. 


to the hows of Israel, and? hath slayn in 
myn hond the enemye of his puple ‘in this 
ni3t4.. And sche ‘broujte forth’ of thes 19 
serippe the heed of Holofernes, and 
schewide"® it to hem, and seide, Lo! the 
heed of Holofernes, prince of the chiualrie 
of Assiriens’; and, lo! his curteyn, in¥ 
which he lay in his drunkenesse, where 
also oure* Lord GodY killide hym bi the 
hond of a womman. Forsothe the Lord 20 
God lyueth, for his aungel kepte* me, 
bothe goynge fro hennus, and dwellynge 
there, and turnynge a3en fro thennus 
hidur; and the Lord ‘suffride not his 
handmaide to be defoulid, but with out 
defoulyng of synne he ajen clepid me to 
3ou, and Y haue ioie in his‘ victorie’, and 
in ‘my scapyng*, and in 3oure delyuer- 
aunce. Knouleche 3e alle to hym*, for he21 
is good, for his mercy is in to ‘the worlds. 
Sotheli alle men worschipiden the Lord, 22 
and seiden to hir", The Lord hath blessid 
thee in his vertu, for bi thee he hath 
brou3t to nou3t oure enemyes. Certis!23 
Ozie, prince* of the puple of Israel, seide 
to hir', Dou3tir, thou art blessid of the 
hi3 Lord God, bifor alle wymmen on™ 
erthe. Blessid be the Lord", that made2a 
heuene and erthe, and that dresside thee 
in to the woundis of the heed of the 
prince of oure enemyes; for to dai hees 
hath magnefied so thi name, that thi 
preisyng go not awei fro the mouth of 
men, that® schulen be myndeful of the ° 
vertu of the Lord with outen ende; for 
whiche? thou sparidist not thi lijf for9 
the angwischis and tribulaciouns of thi 
kyn, but* helpidist® the fallinget bifor the 
si3t of oure God. And al the puple seide, 25 
‘Be it! be it"! Forsothe’ Achior was 27 
clepid, and cam”; and Judith seide to 
hyin, Thilke God of Israel, to whom thou 


© thing au. 


P and in this niz3the r. 4Om.1. ttokeout1. Shirs. tOm.s. sche shewider. men of 
av eeine 1. Wwithynne 1. *the 1. Youre Godi. 2 hath kept. hath not snffrid1. > hath agen 1. 

Om.1 4 victorie of the Lord 1. € my schapyng A. myn ascapyng1. fthe Lord1. & withouten 
ender. 4 Judith: iAndthanner. & the prince 1.) Judith 1. “m upon 1. " Lord God ap pr.m 
® the whiche 1. P whiche men 1. ao 


the peple 1. 


thanne tr. he cam 1, 


h 9 but puttidist it for 1. 
4 Be it thus don, be it thus don 1. Amen! amen! that is, 


rand thou. § hast holpenr. ¢ fallinge of 


be it, be tt K. Be it s. v And 


XIII. 29—XIV. 6. 


so it is, lo! the hed of Olofernes, that in 
the despising of his pride God of Israel 
dispiside, and to thee deth thratte, sei- 
ende, Whan the puple of Irael were 
taken, I shal comaunde with a swerd to 

29stiken hym thur3 the sides. Seende for- 
sothe Achior the hed of Olofernes, an- 
guysht for inward drede, fel in to his 
face vpon the erthe, and his lif quap- 

30 pide. After forsothe that, the spirit taken 
ajeen, he is reformed, he fel doun to hir 

31 feet, and honourede hir, and seide, Blessid 
be thou of thi God in al the tabernacle of 
Jacob; for in alle fole, that hereth thi 
name, shal be magnefied vp on thee God 
of Irael. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Judit forsothe seide to al the puple, 
Hereth, brethern ; hangeth vp this hed 
2vp on the wallis. And it shal be, whan 
the sunne goth out, eche man take his 
armes, and goth out with bure, not that 
3ee go doun benethe, but as buref doende. 
3Thanne it shal nede ben, that the spieres® 
of the lond flen to ther prince to be rerid 
4avp to the fi3t. And whan the dukis of 
hem comen to gidere to the tabernaclis 
of Olofernes, and finden hym heded}, in 
his blod wrappid, drede shal fal doun 
svpon hem. And whan 3ee knowen them 
to fleen, goth after hem siker, for God 
shal to-trede them vnder 3o0ure feet. 
6Thanne Achior seande the vertue that 
God of Irael hadde do, laft the custum 
of his hethenenesse, leeuede' to God; and 
circumcidede the flesh of his 3erde, and 
is put to the puple of Irael, and al the 
successioun of his kinrede vnto the dai 


JUDITH. 


629 


3auest witnessyng, that he auengith hym 
of hise enemyes, hath kit of the heed of 
alle ynbileueful men in this ni3t bi myn 
hond. And that* thou preue that it is2s 
so, loY! the heed of Holofernes, which? in 
the dispit of his pride dispiside God of 
Israel, and manaasside®* deth to thee, and 
seide, Whanne the puple of Israel is takun, 
Y schal comaunde thi sidis to be persid 
with a swerd. Sotheli® Achior si; the29 
heed of Holofernes, and was angwischid 
for drede, and felde’ doun on his face on® 
the erthe, and his soule suffride eneyn- 
tisyng’ Sotheli® aftir that he hadde3so 
take a3en spirit, and was coumfortid, he 
felde doun at ‘hir feeti, and worschipide* 
hir, and seide, Blessid art thou of thi God 31 
in al! the tabernacle™+ of Jacob; for in 
ech® folk, that schal here thi name, God 
of Israel schal be magnyfied in thee. 


+ al the tuber- 
nacle ; that is, 
of alle men 
dwellinge in 
the tahernaclis 
of Ebreys, com- 
yng forth of 
Jacob. Lire 


CAP. XIV. 
here. C. 


Forsothe Judith seide to al the puple,1 
Britheren, here 3e; hang 3e° this heed onP 
joure wallis, And it schal be%, whanne2 
the sunne ‘goith out", ech man take hise 
armuris, and go 3e out with feersnesse, 
not that 3e go® doun binethe‘, but as 
makyng® asau3t. ThanneY it schal bes 
nede,; that the spieris of the lond fle to 
reise’ her prynce to batel. And whanne4 
the duykis of hem rennen* togidere to 
the tabernacle of Holofernes, and fyndeny 
hym heedles, waltrid in his blood, dreed 
schal falle doun on? hem. And whannes 
3e knowen that thei fleen, go 3e sikirli 
aftir hem, for God schal al to-breke hem 
vndur 30ure feet. Thanne Achior si3 thes 
vertu that God of Israel hadde do, and 
he forsook the custom of hethenesse, and 
bileuede* to God; and he circumcidede 
the fleisch of his 3erde, and he was put to 
the puple of Israel, and al the aftircomyng 


f woodnesse E pr.m. &spiesc. 4 heuedid ern, i and bileuede 4, 
xOm.s. Yo !heret, %the whichz. ®he manaasside1. >» And whannert. Chex, 4he fille 1. 
€upon1. ff that is, swomnyng 1 marg. €& Andi. + his spirit. ithe feet of Judith 1, * he wor- 
schipide1. Jalle1, ™tabernaclis1. alr. %3e¢upi. Pupont ins. 4 be don thati. * risith 1 
Sgoalr. ¢ binethe the hill1. men makynget. Y Andthannez, Wreiseups. * schal renner. 


Y thei schal fynder. % upon t. 


* he bilenede 1. 


630 


jthat is now. Anon forsothe that sprungen 
is dai, thei heengen* vpon the wallis the 
hed of Olofernes ; and eche! toc his armes, 
and thei wenten out with gret noise and 
aselling. Whiche thing seande, the aspies 
runnen togidere to the tabernacle of Olo- 
9fernes. Forsothe thei, that weren comende 
in the tabernacle, and befor the incomyng 
of the priue chaumbre makende noise, for 
ende to reren™ hym, bi craft casten vn- 
reste, that not of the rereres", but of the 
noise makeris Olofernes shulde waken°. 
10No man forsothe was hardi the taber- 
nacle of the vertue of Assiries knockende 
iior entrende to openen. But whan his 
dukis hadden come, and the leders of 
thousendis, and alle the more of the ost 
of the king of Assiries, thei seiden to the 
12 priue chaumberleynes, Goth, and rereth? 
hym; for myis gon out of ther caues 
ben hardi to clepen forth? vs to bataile. 
i3Thanne Vagio, gon in to his prine 
chaumbre, stod befor the curtin, and 
made fawnyng with his hondis; for- 
sothe he trowide hym with Judit to 
i4slepen. But whan no mouyng of hym 
liende with the wit of eris parceiuede, 
he wente to nez3hende to the curtin, and 
rerende’ it, and seande the carein of Olo- 
fernes withouten hed to lin roten in his 
blod vpon the’ erthe, criede out with a 
gret vois with weeping, and cutte his 
isclothis. And gon in to the tabernacle of 
Judit, fond her not, and he out sterte 
16with oute to the puple, and seide, An 
Ebru. womman hath do confusioun in 
the hous of king Nabugodonosor; lo! 
forsothe Olofernes lith in the erthe, and 
\7his hed is not in hym. The whiche 


k hangyden arru. leche one 4EFH. 


Parereth arrn. 9Om.c. ° arerynge E. & Om.c. 
bvntor ¢tymer. 4Certis1. © spronge 1. 
k thei runneni. J! And1. 


JUDITH. 


™ arere AEFH. 


™ bed of Holofernes 1. 


XIV. 7—17. 


of his kyn ‘til in to® this dai*. Forsothe’7 

anoon as the dai roos*, thei hangiden the 

heed of Holofernes onf the® wallis’; andi 

ech man took his armuris, and thei 3eden 

out with grete noise and 3ellyng. Whichs 

thing the aspieris sien, and runnen* to the 

tabernacle of Holofernes. Certis! thei, thats 

weren in the tabernacle, camen, and maden 

noise bifore the entryng of the bed™, and? 

ymagyneden by craft vnrestfulnesse for 

cause of reisyng®, that Holofernes schulde 

awake not of the reiseris, but of sowneris?. 

For‘ no man was hardi to opene the taber-10 

nacle of the vertu't of Assiriens®’ bi knock- + the vertu; 
dl . 4 that is, of the 

yng ethir bi entryng. But whamnne hise 11 prince of the 

duykis, and tribunest, and alle the grettere ae 

men of the oost of the kyng of Assiriens™  Strensthe of 

weren comen’, thei seiden to the chaum- peek a 

burleyns”, Entre 3e*, and reise 3e hymy; 12 

for myis ben goon out of her caues, and 

doren? excite* vs to bate]. Thanne Vagao>13 

entride in to his closet, and stood® bifor 

the curtyn‘’, and made® betyng togidere 

with hise hondis; for’ he supposide hym 

to slepe with Judith. But whanne® hel4 

perseynede not ‘with wit of eeris ony 

stiryng of Holofernes liggynge', he cam 

nei3zynge* to the curtyn, and he ‘reiside 

it!, and si3™ the deed bodi® with out the® 

heed ‘of Holofernes? ‘maad slow4 in his 

blood ligge’ on the erthe, and he criede bi‘ 

grete vois with weping, and to-rente" hise 

clothis. And he’ entride in to the taber-15 

nacle of Judith, and foond” not hir, and* 

he skippideY out to the puple, and seide, 16 

Oon* Ebrew womman hath maad? confu- 

sioun in the hows of kyng Nabugodono- 

sor; for lot! Holofernes liggith’ in the 

erthe, and his heed is not in? hym. And17 


© awaken AEFH, 


n arereris AEFH. 


i and thanne 1. 
P the noise of 


h wal s. 
° upreisyng 1. 


fupony.  & her 1, 
" and thei 1. 


sowneris 1. the sowneris CMR. 4 Certis 1. T power or cheef prince 1. Ss men of Assirie r. t his 

tribunes 1. u Assirie 1. ¥ comen fogidere 1. w chaumberleyns of Holofernes 1. X 3e in to him 1. 

yhymupt. *theidoren1. @moeue1. > Vagao, the chamburleyne 1, © he stood 1. 4 curteyn of his 

bedi. ©hemadet. fsothely 1. & whanne bi the witt or listnyng of his eeris1. 4 Om.1. } liggynge 

there 1. : K ni3 and neizide 1.) drew3 iftup1. ™he siz 1. © bodi of Holofernes1. © Om.1. P Om. 1. 

: defonlid 1. 5 Om.1. 8 and liggynge up1. twithis. heto-renter. ¥ Vagaoi. ‘he foond 1. 
and anoont Ywenter ZAn1. @dor bOm.t Clo! certist. 4 lijth 1. ¢ with 1. 


— 


XIV. 18——XV. 8. 


thing whan hadden herd the princis of 
the vertue of Assiries, alle cutten ther 
clothis, and vutolerable drede and trem- 
bling fel vp on hem, and ther inwittis 
18 ben disturbid' gretly. And ther is maad 
an yntolerable cry in to the middel tentis. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And whan al the ost hadde herd Olo- 
fernes of hedid", flei; mynde and counseil 
fro’ them, and with onli trembling and 

2drede stirid token socour of flijt, so that 
noon wolde speke with his ne3hebore ; 
but, the hed bowid down, alle thingus 
laft, to scape’ the Ebrues, whom armed 
vp on hem to come thei hadden herd, 
thei enforceden, fleende bi weies of feldis, 

3and bi sties of ful litle hillis. And so 
the sonus of Irael, seande them fleende, 
folewiden, goende doun, and criende with 
atrumpis, and 3ellende after hem. And 
for Assiries not togidere in oon wenten 
fallende doun in to fli3t, the sonus forsothe 
of Irael with o cumpany pursuende fe- 

5 bleden alle, that thei my3ten finde. And 
Osias sente messageres bi alle the cites 

cand regiouns of Irael. And so alle re- 
gioun and alle cite sente a chosen 3outhe* 
armed after hem ; and thei pursneden hem 
in mouth of swerd, to the time that thei 

z7came to the vtmost of ther costis. The 
tothere men forsothe, that weren in Be- 
tulia, wenten in to the tentis of Assiries, 
and the prei, that Assiries fleende hadden 
laft, thei token with them, and thei ben 
awrshipid gretli. Thei forsothe that had- 
den ben ouercomeres, ben turned a3een to 
Betulie, alle thingis whateuere weren of 


t disturblid au. heueded eru. 


fOm.1. & powers, 4 men of Assirie 1. 
parisound 1. ! thorowe ont 1. 
doun his heed 1. her thingis 1. 
Assirie1. —® fleynge awey 1. 
4maden noyses. > the men of Assirie 1. 
far. alle the men of hem 1. 
m sente forth 1. n the Jewis 1. 
* Andi. tt remenaunt 1. 
Assirie 1. y¥ thei token 1. 


2Om.1. » that 1. 


JUDITH. 


i upon 1. 
" to be biheedid 1. 
8 yleft bihynde hem t. 

x thei sueden aftir 1. 
¢ but 3eden 1. 
h fynde or take 1. 
© the men of Assirie 1. 
U of the sones of Israel 1. 


631 


whanne the prynces of the’ vertu’ of As- 
siriens’ hadden herd this thing, alle thei 
to-renten her clothis, and vnsuffrable drede 
and tremblyng felde doun on' hem, and 
her soulis) weren troblid greetli. And 18 
‘yncomparable cry was maad ‘bi the 
myddil of! her tentis. 


CAP. XV. 


And whanne al the oost hadde herd} 
Holofernes biheedid®, nynde and councel 
fledde fro hem, and thei ‘schakun_ bi° 
tremblyng and drede aloone? token the 
help of flizt, so that no man spak with2 
his neizjbore; but ‘whanne the heed was 
bowid doun4, and alle thingis" ‘weren for- 
sakun’, thei weren bisy to ascape Ebreis’, 
which thei hadden herd to come armed 
on" hem; and thei fledden bi the weies 
of feeldis, and bi the pathis of litle hillis. 
Therfor the sones of Israel siz3en -Assi-3 
riens* fleynge’, and sueden* hem, and 
camenY donn, and sowneden’? with trum- 
pis, and 3elliden* aftir hem. And fora 
Assiriens® not gaderid togidere 3eden® 
heedlyng* in to fli3t, forsothe® the sones 
of Israel pursuynge with of cumpeny 
maden feble alle$, whiche thei my3ten 
fynde>, “And Ozie: sente* imessangeriss 
bi alle the! citees and cuntreis of Israel. 
Therfor ecli cuntrei and ech citee sente™6 
chosun 3onge men armed after hem; and 
thei® pursueden ‘thilke Assiriens® with 
the? scharpnesse of swerd, til thei camen 
to the laste part of her‘ coostis". Forsothe’7 
the residue' men", that weren’ in” Bethu- 
lia, entriden in to the tentis of Assiriens*, 
and token’ awey with hem the* prey, 
which? Assiriens fleynge® hadden left, and 


vYofa. Wascapyn 4EFN. * 300g 4. 
§ 


J ynwittis 1. 


k ery that my3te not be eom- 
© stirid with oonly 1. 


POm.1. 4 ech man bowynge 
tthe Jewist. “upons.  Y-the men of 
Y men of Israel eamen 1. % thei sowneden 1. 
4 heedlingis ux. hedlingis rp. © therfor 1. 
1 Ozie, her prince. * sente forth 1. } Om. 1. 
pPOm.c. (ther. ° coostis of Israel 1. 
vweren deft 1. W in the citee of 1. * the men of 


¢ fleynge awey I. 


632 


hem, thei token awei with them, so that 
ther was no noumbre in feld bestis, and 
in hous bestis, and in alle the mouable 
thingus of hem, that fro the leste vnto 
the myche alle weren made riche of ‘the 
9‘prei takingusY of hem. Joachym forsothe, 
the heje bisshop of Jerusalem, cam in to 
Betulie with alle the prestis, that he see 
io Judit. The whiche whan hadde gon out 
to hym, alle blessiden hir with 0 vois, 
seiende, Thon glorie of Jerusalem, thou 
gladnesse of Irael, thou the wrshipe 
i1doende of oure puple, that didist manli, 
and thin herte is coumfortid, for thi that 
chastite thou loouedest, and aftir thi man 
an other thou knewe not; and therfore 
the hond of the Lord coumfortide thee, 
and therfore thou shalt be blissid in to 
iz with oute ende. And al the puple seide, 
13 Be it do! be it do! Forsothe bi thretti 
da3es vnnethe ben gedered the spoilis of 
ithe Assiries of the puple of Irael. But 
alle the proper richessis of Olofernes, that 
ben proued to han ben, thei 3eue to Ju- 
dit, in gold, and siluer, and clothis, and 
jiemmes, and in alle purtenaunces to 
household ; and alle thingus ben taken 
isto hir of the puple. And alle puplis 
io3eden, with wymmen, and maidenes, and 
1 3unge men, in orgnys and harpis. Thanne 
Judit song this song to the Lord, seiende, 
2Begynneth in timbris; singeth to the 
Lord in cimbalis; manerly singeth to 
hym a new salm; ful out iojeth, and in- 
3wardli clepeth his name. The Lord to- 
tredende batailis, Lord name is to hym. 
4That putte his tentis in the middel off 
his puple, that he deliuere vs fro the 
shond of alle oure enemys. Assur cam 
fro hillis, fro the north, in multitude of 


JUDITH. 


XV. 9—XVI. 5. 


thei’ weren chargid gretli®. But‘ thei thats 
weren ouercomerys, turneden® ajen to Be- 
thulia", and thei token awei with hem alle 
thingis which! euer weren of tho Assi- 
riensj,so that no* noumbre was! in scheep, 
and beestis, and in alle mouable thingis of 
hem, that™ fro the leeste ‘til to" the mooste 
alle men® weren maad riche of her? preies. 
Forsothe Joachym, the hi3zeste bischop, 9 
cam fro Jerusalem in to Bethulia with 
alle the’ prestis, to se Judith. And whanne 10 
sche hadde goon out" to hym, alle® bless- 
iden hir with o vois, and seiden, Thou art 


the glorie} of Jerusalem, and thou art the — t the glorie ; 
for sche kepte 

gladnesse of Israel, thou art the onour of _ the worschip- 
yng of God 


oure puple, whicht hast do manli, and™ 1) chat was in 
thin herte was coumfortid’, for thou loued- ae a 
ist chastite, and aftir thin hosebonde thou 


schiping the 
, Jewes hadden 
knowist” not another*; therfor and the 


most glorie, 
and in sleynge 


hond of the Lord coumfortide thee, and — Holofernes, that 
therfor thou schalt be blessid with outen aoagt ee 


ende. And al they puple seide, ‘Be it! be 12 shiping, sche 


it?! Forsothe bi thritti daies vnnethis the* 13 onour and of 
spuylis of Assiriens> weren® gaderid‘ of fecal of 
the puple® of Israel. Certis thei 3auen to14 jo" 4” 
Judith alle thingis, that weren preued to 

be propir, ‘ether synguler', of Holofernes, 

in gold, andé siluer, and in clothis, and in 

gemmes, and in alle purtenaunce of hous- 

hold; and alle thingis weren 3ouun to hir 

of the puple. And alle puplis ‘maden ioye®, !5 

with wymmen, and vergynes, and 3onge! 


menj, in organs and harpis. 


CAP. XVI. 


Thanne Judith song ‘this song* to the1 
Lord, and seide, Bigynne 3e™ in tympans; 2 
synge 3e" to the Lord in cymbalis ; synge 3e 
swetli a newe salm to hym; fulli make 3e 
ioye, and inwardli clepe 3e his name. The3 


Y pray takynge aun. 


4 men of Israel 1. 
citee Bethulia 1. i what 1. 
to x. © men of Israel 1. 

Y coumfortid in God 1. 


P the 1. 
w knewe 1. 


q hise 1. 


© gretli chargid with catel 1. 
J mennus of Assirie 1. 
¥ forth 1. 
X another man 1. 


f Andy, 
K ther was no 1. 
8 alle thei r. 
y Om. a. 


& in her pursuyt turneden 1. 4 the 
1Om.1. ™ sothat 3. 4 vnto 1. 

tthe which 1. and cerfis 1. 
Z Be it don, be it don 1. Amen! 


pur | that is, be it, be it kK. 8 weren the. > men of Assirier. ¢Om.1. 4 gaderid up1. & ment. 
z an i Sint, bOm.1. iwith gonger, jmen madenioyer Om.s.  ™ 3e ¢o preise God 1. 


XVI. 7—18. 


his strengthe; whos multitude stoppide 
the stremes?, and the hors of hem couer- 
seden the valeis. And he seide, hymself 
to brennen vp oure costis, and oure 3unge 
men to slen with swerd, my fauntis to 
jiue in to prei, and maidenes in to eai- 
7tifte. The Lord forsothe Almy3ti nozede 
hym, and toc* to the hondis of a wom- 
gman, and confoundede hym. Forsothe 
the my3ti of hem fel not of 3unge men, 
ne the sonus of a tiraunt smyten hym, ne. 
hese ieauntus putten hem to hym; but 
Judit, wydewe, the do3ter of Merari, in 
the fairnesse of hir face vnloside hym. 
9Forsothe she clothide hir fro the cloth 
of hyr widewehed, and clothide hir in 
the cloth of gladnesse, in> ful out io3ing 
ioto the sonus of Irael. She oyntide® hir 
face with an? oynement, and she bond 
togidere hir crisp heris with a mitre, to 
indesceinen hym. MHir ga3e shon rauesh- 
eden his e3en, hir fairnesse made his lif 
eaitif; sche girde of with a swerd his 
izhaterel. The Persis grisiden hir stede- 
fastnesse, and Medis hir hardynesse. 
is Thanne 3elleden the tentis of Assiries, 
whan apereden my meke, drie waxende 
isin thrist. The sonus of child wymmen 
puugeden them, and as childer fleende 
slowen hem ; thei persheden in bataile fro 
isthe face of my Lord. A newe ympne 
igsinge wee to the Lord oure Ged. Lord 
Adonai, a gret God thou art, and beforn 
alle cleer in thi vertue, and whom no. 
i7man mai ouercome. To thee serue alle 
thi creature®, for thou hast seid, and 
thei ben maad; thou sentist thi spirit, 
and thei ben formed; and ther is not 
is that withstonde to thi comanding. Hillis 


Z sterris 4. sternesse H. 


8 toc him AE pr.m. 
€ creaturis 4. 


0QOm.1. Pwhicher. 4 strengthisr. ‘Om. 1. 
wwith1, * he thou3zte tor. 
b doun 63 strengthe 1. ‘cheef1. 4 sche clothide 1. 
i Holofernes 1. i The ournement of hir feet 1. 


™ stronge powers x. 4 the men of Assirie 1. 


to hem. T 30ung wymmen 1, 8 han prickid 1. 
wOm.cs. *Om.s, YOm.1a. 2 Om. 8. 
VOL. II. 


JUDITH. 


y and the virgyns therof 1. 


i kitte 1. 
9 3elliden for drede 1. 


\o grete Lord 1. 
4M 


633 


Lord al to-brekith batels, the® Lord is name 

to hym; that? hath set hise castelst| in the’ 4 + castelss that 
myddis of his puple, for to deliuere vs fro Litas © 
the hond of alle oure enemyes. Assurs 

cam fro the’ hillis, fro' the north, in the 

multitude of his strengthe; whose multi- 

tude stoppide strondis, and the horsis of 

hem hiliden valeis. And he seide, that® 6 

he schulde brenne my coostis’, and sle my 

jonge men bi” swerd, to* 3ine my 3onge 

children in to prei, virgynsY in to caitifte. 

But the Lord Almy3ti anoiede hym, and7 

bitook hym in to the hondis of a wom- 

man, and schente’ hym. For the my3ti?® 

of hem felde not doun® of 3onge men, ne- 

ther the sones of giauntis killiden hym, 

nether hize® giauntis puttiden hem silf to 

hym; but Judith, the dou3tir of Merari, 

ouercam hym bi the fairnesse of hir face. 

For sche vnelothide hir fro the cloth of9 
widewehod, and clothide’ hir with the 

cloth of gladnesse, in® the’ ful? ioiyng of 

the sones of Israel. Sche anoyntide hir1o 

face with oynement, and boond!" togidere 

the tressis of hir heeris with a coronal, to 

disseyuet hym', ‘Hir sandalies!! ranysch-11  disseyue ; not 
iden hise izen, hir fairnesse made his soule ee panne 
caitif; with a swerd sche kittidej of his nee ie ae 
necke. ‘Men of* Persis hadden hid@us- 12 be schalde de. 
nesse of hir stidfastnesse, and Medeis! of _ to wiyf, and bi 
hyr hardynesse. Thanne the castels™ of ouaae 
Assiriens" jelliden®, whanne my meke men?, See 
wexinge drie for thirst, apperidens. fie Oe al rae 
sones of damesels™ prickiden’ hem, and Lire here. c- 
killident hem as children fleynge; thei 

perischiden in batel fro the face of my 

God. ‘Synge we an ympne to the Lord®, 15 

synge’ we a neweY ympne to oure God’. , 

Lord’, Lord? God, thou art grete*, and ful 16 


band of apr.m.  ¢enoyntide zery. 4 Om. 4H. 


sOm.1. tand fror, tOm.1. ¥ coostis of Israel 1. 
Z sche schente 1, 4 my3ti prince 1. mij3te x. 
fOm.1s. 8 fnl out yr. sche boond 1. 
k of the cuntrey of 1. |! men of Medeis 1. 
P men of Israel 1. 4 apperiden 
t thei han killid 1. uOm.s. VY and synge 1. 


€in to1. 


634 


fro foundemens shuln’ ben moued with 
watris; stonus as wax shul melte befor 
i9 thi face. Who forsothe dreden thee, gret 
20 shul be anentis thee bi alle thingus. Wo 
to the fole risende vp on my kinrede; 
the Lord forsothe Almy3ti shal venge in 
hem, in the dai of dom he shal visite 
2ithem. Forsothe he shal 3iue fijr and 
wormes in ther flesh, that thei be brend, 
and lyuen, and feelen vnto enermore. 
22 And it is do after these thingus, al the 
puple after the victorie cam to Jerusalem 
to honoure the Lord; and anoon as thei 
weren purified, alle offreden brent sacri- 
fises, and youwis, and ther _behestis. 
23 Forsothe Judit alle the armes of bataile 
of Olofernes, that the puple 3af to hir, 
and the canope, that she hadde taken, 
24she toc in to the curs of for3eting. For- 
sothe al the puple was iojeful after the 
face of seintis; and bi thre monethis the 
io3e of this victorie is solempnysid with 
2Jdudit. After thoo da3es forsothe eche 
wente a3een in to his owne; and Judit 
1s maad gret in Betulie, and was more 
26cler to alle men of the lond of Irael. For- 
sothe she was ioyned to the vertue of 
chastite, so that she knew no man alle 
the da3is of hir lif, sithen is dead Ma- 
27nasses, hir husbonde. Forsothe she was 
in feste da3es forth goende with gret 
2glorie. Forsothe she dwelte in the hous 
of hir man an hundrid 3er and fiue; and 
she lafte hir damesele free$. And she is 
dead, and biriede with hir husbonde in 
29 Betulie ; and al the puple weilide hir 
3oseuen dajes. In al the space forsothe of 
hir lif was not that disturbide® Ivael, 
s1and after hir deth manye jer. The da3es 
forsothe of this feste of victorie of thei 


JUDITH. 


XVI. 19—31. 


cleer> in thi vertu, and® whom no man 
may ouercome. Ech creature of thin serue?!7 
thee, for thou seidist, and thingis® weren 
maad; thou sentist thi spirit, and thingis‘ 
weren maad of nou3t; and noon® is that 
ajenstondith thi comaundement". Hillisi1s 
schulen be moued fro foundementis* with 
watris; stonys! schulen flete abrood as 
wex bifor thi face. Sotheli™ thei that 19 
dreden thee, schulen be grete anentis thee 
bi alle thingis. Woo to the folk rysynge20 
on® my kyn; for? the Lord Almy3ti schal 
take veniaunce in hem, in? the dai of 
doom he schal visite hem. For’ he schal21 
3yue fier and wormes in the fleischis of 
hem, that thei be brent, and lyue, and 
feelet til in to with outen ende. And it22 
was doon aftir these thingis, al the puple* 
aftir the victorie' cam to Jerusalem to 
worschipe" the Lord; and anoon as thei 
weren clensid’, alle men offriden brent 
sacrifices, and avowis, and her biheestis. 


Certis” Judith -3af*f in to theY cursyng 23 + Judith say; 
of for3etyng? alle the armuris of batel of oe eile 
Holofernes, whiche the* puple 3af® to hir, ‘at ne - 

and® the curteyn, which sche hadde take _ the aftirwards, 
; a é but tho schul- 
awei. Forsothe’ al the puple was myrie 24 den be kept in 


: i 3 the pl if 
aftir the face of hooli men; and bi thre  Godhis wor- 

‘ 5 6 . am schiping, to 
monethis the ioye of this victorie was the iyaee dl 


halewid with Judith. Sotheli® aftir tho 25 Goddis bene- 
e ‘ ¢ fice. Lire here. 

daies ech man 3ede a3enf in to his owne®;_ «. 

and Judith was maad greet in Bethulia, 

and sche was more cleer thanne alle wym- 


men” of the lond of Israel. For? ‘chastite 26 


was ioyned to hir vertu{, so that sche = ¢ vertu; of 
k 1 ° paps stidefastnesse. 
knewe not* man! alle the daies of hir lijf, ij which sche 
sithen™ Manasses, hir hosebonde, was deed. b24de cast 
doun Holo- 


Sotheli® in ‘feeste daies® sche? cam forth 27 fernes. Lire 
with? greet glorie’. Forsothe® sche dwell-23 
ide in the hows of hir hosebonde an hun- 


fOm. 4. &freest an. 4 disturblide au. i Om, a. 

Dcleer art thovu1. ©Om.croa. 4 serueittor © so alle thingis1. f thanne alle thingis 2. § no 
creature 1.» comaundement fynaly 1. i For hillis1. * the fonndementis 1. | and stonys1, ™ Andi. 
ee upon t. © forsothe 1. Pandin1. 4Sothely 1. 1 thei feele the feersnesse therof 1. 8 puple of 
nad 1. t victorie of Holofernes 1. _ worsehipe there1. ¥ clensid after the lawe 1. _W Forsothe 1. 
. jaf thannet. Y Om. plures. * fiz3tngc. &8Om.c.  » had goueni. Calso1. 4Certisx. © And. 
marey FURR. 8 thingis BcDEGKLMNoPQRsuywxab. owne dwellynge place 1. h the mymment. i Certis1. 

no 1. man fleishly 1. ™sithi, tOm.1, © solempue halidaies 1. P Judith: 4 and with1. 


* glorie sche was wirschipid bifore othere symmen 1, 


a Andi. 


a ee 


XVI. 31. JUDITH, 635 


Ebrues in the noumbre of holi dajes is drid 3eer and fyue; and sche leftet hir 
acceptid, and heried of the Jewis fro that handmaide fre. And" sche’ was deed, and 


time vnto the present day. biried® with hir hosebonde in Bethulia ; 
and al the puple biweilide hir seuene 2s 
Explicit liber Judith*. daies. Forsothe* in al the space of her lijf30 


noonY ‘was disturblide’ Israel, and many 
3eeris aftir hir deeth. Sotheli* the day of31 
the> victorie of this feeste is takun of 
Ebreis® in the noumbre of hooli daies, and 
it is worschipid of the Jewis fro that tyme 
til in to present® day. 


Here endith the book of Judith. 


k Here endith the book of Judith, and now bigynneth the prolog of the book of Hester. a. Here endith 
the bok of Judith, and now the bok of Ester. ¥. 


tlefte or madet. And thanner. Vv Judith1. W sche was biried 1. * For sos. y¥ ther was noon 1, 
z that onercame 1. was that disturblide s. @And1. %Om.a. ¢Ebreis, and rekenyd 1. 4 this present 1. 
e Here eendith the book of Judith, and here bigynneth Hester. spub. Here endith the book of Judith, and 
here biginneth the book of Hester. crw. Here endith Judith, and bigynnith the prolog of Hester. c. Here 
endeth Judith, and here bigynneth Hester. u. Heere endith the book of Judith, and bigynnith Ester. 19. 
Here endeth the book of Judith, se now the prolog of Hester. x. Here endith the book of Judith, and 
here bigynneth a prologe on the book of Hester. m. Here endith the book of Judith, and bigynneth the 
book of Hester. nv. Here endith the book of Judith, and bigyn{neth] the prolog on the book of Hester. o. 
Here endith Judith, and bigynneth the booc of Hester. x. Here endith the book of Judith. a. No final 
rubric in ELps, 


4M 2 


ESTHER. 





[Prologue on the book of Esther*. | 


THs book of Hester, the qween, makith mynde of the ri3tful Mardochee, and of the 
wickide man Aman, how he castide the deeth of Mardochee, and also of alle Jewis, for 
hate that he hadde to Mardochee; wherfor thoru3 the help of God and of the qween 
Hester his wickidnesse was retourned in to his owne heed ; for God helpith hem that 
tristen in him, and lyuen iustli in the drede of him. 


Here bigynneth a prolog on the booc of Ester*. 


‘The boc of Ester to be maad vicious of dyuerse translatoures is knowen®, whom I, 
of the libraries of Ebrues takende vp, woord bi woord more openli translatide; the 
whiche boc the comun making drawith along hider and thider with the torne dra3tis, 
addende thoot thingis, that ‘of tyme’ my3ten ben seid and herd ; as it is wont to scoleris 
disciplines, and a theme taken, to out thenke what woordis he my3te vsen, he that 
suffride wrong, or he that dide wrong. 3ee forsothe, O! Paule and Eustache, that onli 
han studied to gon in to the libraries of Ebrues, and the striues of interpretoures han 
knowen, holdende Ester® an Ebru boc, beholdeth bi alle the woordis oure translacioun ; 
that 3ee moun knowen me no thing also to han encresid addende, but with trewe wit- 
nessing simpleli‘, as it is had in Ebreu, the Ebru storie to han taken tos Latin tunge. 
Ne we desiren the preisingus® of men, ne blamingus wee dreden. Forsothe wee besiende 
to plesen to God, vtterli wee drede not the thretis of men; for God scatereth the bones 
of hem that desiren to plesen to men, andi, after the apostil, they, that suche men ben, 
moun not ben the* seruauns of Crist. Ferthermor in the boc of Ester wee han maad an 
abece of red colour vnto the eijthe! lettre in diuers placis, willende, that is, the order of 
the seuenti interpretoures bi these thingus to™ shewen a" wijs redere ; we forsothe after 


the maner han leuere, and° in the making of the? seuenti remenoures, to pursue the 
order of Ebrues. 


Here endith the prolog of Hester, and now bigynneth the books. 


a This prologue is from m. 


8 From £. Prologus. 4, Here bigynneth the prolog on the book of Hester. t. No initial rubric in cro. 
» It is knowun the book of Hester to be maad visious of dyucrse translatours Lo. ¢ the Lo. 4 ofte 
tymes L. © after aHLo. £ sympli sHLo. & in to L. 4 preisyng Lo. iOm. x. k Om. 1. 
Veizteenthe anizo, ™Om.c. “toacr °Om.1. POm. mu. 4 From a. Here endith the prolog, and 
bigynneth the booc of Ester. z. Here endeth the prolog of Hester, se now the book. 1. Here eendith the 


prolog of Hester, and bigynneth i. c°. x. Here endith the prolog on Hester, and bigynneth the book. o. 
No rubric in crn. 


Hesther*. 


CAL i. 


1 In the dazes of king Assueri, that 
regnede fro Jude vnto Ethiope, vp on an 
hundrid and seuene and twenti pro- 

2uynces, whan he sat in the see of his 
regne, Susa cyte was the begynnyng of 

3his rewme. The thridde thanne jer of 
his empire he made a gret feste to alle 
the princis, and to his most strong chil- 
dre of Persis, and of Meedis, to the noble 
men, and to the prefectus of prouincis, be- 
4forn hym, that he shewe the richesses of 
the glorie of his regne, and the iykil- 
. nesse, and the bost of his power myche 
tyme, an hundrid, that is, and foure score 
sda3es. And whan the da3es of the feste 
weren ful endid, he bad al the puple that 
is founde-in Susys, fro the moste vnto the 
leste; and he comaundede seuene dajes a 
feste to be maad redi in the vestiarie of 
the 3erd and of the wode, that was sett 
togidere with the kingis enournyng and 
shond. And ther heengen” on cche side 
tentis of the colour of the eir, and of 
goldene colour, and of iacinctin, sustened 
with bijs cordis, and purper, that weren 
inset with yuer cerclis, and thei weren 
vnderset with marbil pileeris; also goldene 
setis and.siluerene vp on the raied° pa- 
ment smaragd and pario stones’ weren 
disposid ; the whiche thing. the peynteur 
with wonder diuersete made fair. For- 
sothe thei, that weren biden, drunken of 
goldene cuppis, and with other and othere 
vesselis metis weren bro3t in; win also, as 
it was wrthi for the kingis grete doing, 


8 No initial rubric, but only this running title in the Mss. 


4 strate stones £ pr. m. 


& Here bigynneth Hester. Eup. No initial rubric in HNogrsvxb. 


Susacw. ¢And1. — fand to alle his. 

J for to 1. k the boost 1. Vand in 1. 

Ffeste lastide 1. © endid 1. P the emperour 1. 

tOm.s, Uthisi1. Yanr. W ofa woder. 

holden up 1. aa and x. b purpel E. purpul Lp. 

€ the cercles a pr.m. fyunorie 1. 8 and thei 1. 

1upon1. ™ with ofhere dyuerse 1. ® and precious stones 1. 
Toont *Om.s. 


ESTHER. 


€ children or seruauntis 1. 
m XxX. BDEMLO. ei3ti cCNVw. seuenti M. 


xX set aboute 1. 


hand x. 


637 


Here bigynneth the book of Hester*. 


Ciel 1, 


In the daies of kyng Assuerus, that1 
regnede fro Ynde ‘til to? Ethiopie, on® an 
hundrid and seuene and twenti prouynces, 
whanne he sat in the seete of his rewme,2 
the citee Susat was the bigynnyng of his 
rewme. Therfor® in the thridde jeer of3 
his empire he made a greet feeste to alle 
hise princes andf children’, the" strongeste 
men of Persis, and to the noble men of 
Medeis, and to the prefectis' of prouynces, 
bifor him silf, toi schewe the richessis of 4 
the glorie of his rewme, and the gretnesse, 
and boost of his power in! myche tyme, 
that is, an hundrid and ‘foure scoor™ 
daies". And whanne the daies of thes 
feeste weren fillid®, he? clepide to feeste4 
al the puple that was foundun in Susa’, 
fro the moost ‘til to® the leeste; and het 
comaundide the" feeste to be maad redi bi 
selene daies in the porchet of the’ orcherd 
and wode™, that was set* with the kyngis 
ournement and hondY}. And tentis of ‘thee 
colour of” the eir, and of gold, and of 
jiacynet, susteyned* with coordis of* bijs, 
and of purpur’, hangiden* on ech side, 
whiche® weren set in cerclis® of yuer‘, and& 
weren vndur set with pilers of marble; 
also seetis' at the maner of beddis of gold 
and of siluer ‘weren disposid* on! the 
pawment. arayede with smaragde and dy- 
uerse™ stoon"; which® pawment peynture 
made fair bi wondurful dyuersite. So-7 
theli? thei, that weren clepid to meet, 
drunkin in goldun cuppis, and metes 
weren borun in4 with othere™ ‘and othere’ 


b hongeden azru. ¢ Om. 4E prem, FH. 


b yito 1. to x. 


Cnupont. of 
h to the 1. 


i cheef men 1. 

n daies this 
? the citee of Susa 1. 8 ynto 1, 
y with his bond 1. 2 Om. 8. ® weren 
¢ and thei hangiden 1. 4 the whiche fentis 1. 
i ther weren ordeyned sectis 1. * Om. 1. 
Othe which 1, P And1. 4 in to hem. 


q his feeste 1. 


+ porche ; that 
is, aley. Lire 
here. Cc. 

t hond; that 
is, werkis. 
Lire here. c. 


638 ESTHER. 


splente and chef was set. And ther was 
not that constreynede to drinke hem that 
wolden not; but so the king hadde or- 
deyned, befor settende sunder men of his 
princis to the bord, that eche man shulde 
9take that he wolde. Also Vasthi, the 
quen, made a feste of wymmen m the 
paleis, wher king Assuer was wont to 
1odwelle. And so the seuenthe dai, whan 
he was gladere cherid, and after to myche 
drinking was chaufid with win, he co- 
maundede to Naumam, and Baracha, and 
Arbana, aud Gabatha, and Zarath, and 
Abgatha, and Carthas, seuene geldingis, 
i1that in his si3te mynystreden, that thei 
shulden bringen in Vasthi, the quen, be- 
for the king, put vp on hir hed a dia- 
deme, that he shewe to alle ‘princis and 
puplis® the fairnesse of hir; forsothe she 
l2was ful fair. The whiche forsoc, and at 
the kings heste, that bi the geldingis he 
hadde comaundid, she dispiside to comen. 
Wherfore the king wroth, and‘ with 
ismyche wodnesse tend, askide the wise 
men, that of the kingis maner euermor 
weren nee3 to hym, and dide alle thingus 
bi the counseil of hem, kunnende the 
14lawe and the ri3tis of more men; for- 
sothe the firste and the nexte weren Car- 
cena, and Secaba, Admatha, and Tharsis, 
and Mares, and Marsana, and Mamucha, 
seuene dukis of Persis and of Medis, that 
sejen the face of the king, and first after 
15hym weren wont to sitten ; to what sen- 
tence quené Vasthi shulden vnderlyn, that 
the heste of king Assuer, the whiche bi 
geldingis he hadde sent, she wolde not 
isdo. And Manucha answerde, herende 
the king and the princis, Not onli quen 
Vasthi hath greued the king, but alle 
the princis and puplis, that ben in alle 
17 the prouyncis of king Assuer. Forsothe 


I. 8—17. 


vessels; also plenteuouse wiyn, and ‘the 
best' was set", as it was worthi to the 
greet doyng’ of the kyng. And ‘noons 
was” that constreynede ‘men not will- 
ynge to* drynke ; but soY the kyng hadde 
ordeyned, ‘makynge souereyns? of hise 
princes* ‘to alle boordis®, that ech man 
schulde take that, that he wolde. Alsog 
Vasthi, the queen, made a feeste of wym- 
men in the paleis, where kyng Assuerus 


was wont! to dwelle. Therfor in the se-10 


uenthe dai, whanne the kyng was glad- 
dere®, and was‘ hoot of wiyn aftir ful 
myche drinkyng, he comaundide® Nau- 
man, and Baracha, and" Arbana, and® 
Gabatha, and» Zarath, and® Abgatha, and 
Charchas, seuene oneste and chast ser- 


uauntis, ‘that mynistriden! in his si3t, that 1 


thei schulden brynge in bifor the kyng 
the queen Vasti, with a diademe set on* 
hir heed, to schewe hir fairnesse to alle 
the puplis and prynces; for! sche was ful 


fair. And sche forsook, and dispiside to 12 


come at the comaundement of the kyng, 
which™ he hadde sent” bi the° oneste and 
chast seruauntes. Wherfor the kyng was 
wrooth, and kyndlid? bid fulgreet wood- 


nesse; and he axide the wise men, whiche13 


bi the" ‘kyngis custom’ weren euere with 
hym, and he dide alle thingis bi the coun- 
sel of hem, kunnynge' the lawis" and ritisY 


of grettere* men; forsothe* the’ firste? 14 


and the® nexte weren Carsena, and Secha- 
aba, Admatha, and Tharsis, and Mares, 
and Marsana, and Manucha, seuene duykis 
of Persis and of Medeis, that? sien the 
face of the kyng, and weren wont to sitte 


the firste aftir hym ; ‘the kyng® axide hem,1s 


to what sentence the queen Vasthi schulde 
be suget, that nolde? do the comaunde- 
ment of kyng Assuerus, which® he hadde 
sent! bi the® onest and chast seruauntis. 


® the puplis and princis 4. puplis and princis z, fOm.c, & the quene x prem 


‘ful good 1, set forth bifore hem 1.-_V preisyng1. |W ther wasno mani. * hem to drynke that 


wolden not 1. Ytoalle the bordis1. 2 Om. 1. 


8 princes to be soneregnes1. %Om.1. 4 woned 1. 


© gladdere than bifore 1. f whanne he was1. & comaundide to1. band tor. ithe whiche seruyden 1. 


kKuponr. lcertis1. ™ the which comaundement t. 


Qwith1. 1'Om,1.  § custom of the kyng 1, 
x and 1 YOm.c. 2 firste ment. ®@ Om. 1. 
which comaundement 1. ‘sent to hirt. & his 1. 


2 sent to hir 1, °his1. Phe kyndlid or fend 1. 


‘that knewen 1. Utlawer. VY the ritis1. W grettist 1. 
bthe whiche 1. Cand he1. 4wolde not1. € the 


a h6ULl rr 


I. 18—Il. 2. 


the woord of the quen shal gon out to 
alle wymmen, that thei dispise ther hus- 
bondis, and seyn, King Assuer comaund- 
ide, that Vasthi, the quen, shulde gon in 
isto hym, and she wolde not. And bi this 
exsaumple alle the wiues of princis of 
Persis and of Medis shuln dispise the 
hestis of ther husbondis; wherfore ri3t- 
l9wis is the kingis indignacioun. If it 
plese to thee, go ther out a maunde- 
ment fro thi face, and be it writen after 
the lawe of Persis and of Medis, the 
whiche to ouerpassen is vnleeful, that 
no more Vasthi go in to the king, but 
his reume an other, that is betere than 
20she, take. And this be puplishid in echei 
empire of thi prouynce, that is most brod, 
that alle wyues, bothe of * more and of* 
lasse, bere. to ther husbondis wrshipe. 
21 And his counseil pleside to the king and 
to the princis; and the king dide after 
22the counseil of Manucha, and sente epi- 
stelis bi alle prouyncis of his reume, that 
eche folc heren and reden imy3te, with 
diuerse tungis and lettris, men to be 
princis and more men in ther! housis ; 
and that bi alle puplis to be pupplisht. 


CAP. II. 


1 And so these thingus don, after that 
the indignacioun of king Assuer fro fer- 
nour hadde passid, he’recordide of Vasthi, 
and what she hadde do, and what she 

2hadde suffrid. And the childer and his 
mynystris seiden to the king, Be ther 


h comaundement 4. ‘alle z pr.m. 


h but sche hath dispisid 1. 
‘ensaumple r. © the pryuices 1. 
‘ plese 1. 
Y ouer passid or broke 1. 
I this heest 1. © the gretterec, f And ther. 

K sente out 1, !Jettris1. ™langisc, "Om. 1. 
kyng cn. ' swagid 1s. § bithou3te him, t and 1. 


ithe prouynces 1. 
P heestis 1. 


2 be it writen that 1. 


ESTHER. 


q her hosebondis 1. 
8 go ther out a comaundement fro thi face 1. 
® Vasthi the queen I. 
& counsel of this duyk 1. 
© grettere men I. 


639 


And Manucha answeride, in audience of 16 
the kyng and of the pryncis, The queen 
Vasthi hath not oneli dispisid the kyng, 
but® alle the pryncis and puplis, that ben 
in alle prouynces! of kyng Assuerus. For 17 
the word of the queen schal go out to alle 
wymmen, that thei* dispise her hose- 
bondis, and seie, Kyng Assuerus co- 
maundide, that the queen Vasthi schulde 
entre! to hym, and sche nolde™. And bils 
this saumple" alle the wyues of prynces® 
of Persis and of Medeis schulen dis- 
pise the comaundementis? of hosebondis9 ; 
wherfor the indignacioun of the kyng" is 
iust’. If it plesitht to thee, ‘a comaunde- t9 
ment go out fro thi face", and ‘be writun’ 
bi the lawe of Persis and of Medeis, which* 
it* is vnleueful to be passid’, that? Vasthi* 
entre? no more to the kyng, but anothir 
womman, which is betere than sche, take 
‘the rewme of hir®. And be this puplischid 20 
in to al the empire of thi prouynces, which 
is ful large, that alle wyues, both of gret- 
tere® men and of lesse, 3yue onour to her 
hosebondis. His‘ counsel pleside® the 2! 
kyng and the! prynces, and the kyng dide 
bi the counsel of Manucha; and he sentek 22 
pistlis! bi alle the prouyncis of his rewme, 
as ech folk my3te here and rede, in dyuerse 
langagis™ and lettris, that hosebondis ben 
prynces and the" grettere® in her housis ; 
and ‘he sente?, that this’ be pupplischid bi 
alle puplis. 


CAP. II. 


Therfor whanne these thingis weren! 
doon, aftir that the indignacioun of kyng" 
Assuerus was coold''}, he bithou3te® of 
Vasthi, and what thingis sche hadde do, 
ethirt what thingis sche suffride’. And’2 
the children and the mynystris of the 


t was coold ; 
that is, the 
passioun of ire, 
and of trobling 
was passid. 
Lire here. c. 


k Om. £ pr.m. | ther owne c. 


m wolde not 1. 
r kyng ajens hir1. 8 inst therfore 1. 
v Om. 1. w the which Jawe 1. xOm. 1. 
b come I. c hir rewme 1. 
h pleside tor. ito ther 
POm.1. 4this thing: * the 

v And thanne 1. 


k thei also 1. lhaue come 1. 


u had suffrid 1. 


640 


s03t to the king child wymmen, maidenes 
3and faire; and be ther sent, that beholden 
bi™ alle pronyncis faire child wymmen 
and maidenes; and bringe thei hem to 
Susa cite, and take thei in to the hous of 
wymmen, vider the hond of Egei, geld- 
ing, that is prouost and kepere of the 
kingus wymmen; and take thei wym- 
menus" ournemens®, and othere thingus 
4to vse necessarie. And who euere among 
alle to the ejen of the king shal plese, 
she regne for Vasthi. The woord pleside 
to the king; and so as thei hadden 
smoued, he comaundide to be do. Ther 
was forsothe a Jew man in the cite of 
Susis, Mardoche bi name, the sone of 
Jair, sone of Semei, sone of Cis, of the 
6linage’' of Gemyny; that was translatid 
fro Jernsalem that time that Nabugodo- 
nosor, king of Babiloyne, hadde trans- 
zlatid Jeconye, the? king of Juda; the 
~whiche was the nurse of the do3ter of 
his brother, Edisse, that bi an other name 
was clepid Ester, and either fader and 
moder hadde laft, ful myche fair, and 
semeli in face; and hir fader and moder 
dead, Mardoche clepid hir to hym in to 
8do3ter. And whanne the maundement of 
the king more wex knowen, and after his 
heste manye faire maidenes were bro3t to 
Susem, and to Egeo, gelding, wer taken, 
Ester also among othere child maidenes 
is take to hym, that she wer kept in 
9the noumbre of wymmen. The whiche 
pleside to hym, and fond grace in his 
si3te, that he shulde he3en the wymmen 
enournyng, and 3eue to hir hir partis 
and senene most faire child wymmen of 
the hous of the king; and bothe hir and 
hir dameselis she shulde enournen and 
oarajen. The whiche wolde not to hym 


ESTHER. 


II, 3-—10. 


kyng seiden to ‘the kyng’, Damyselis*, 
virgyns’ ‘and faire’, be sou3t to the kyng ; 
and ‘men ben® sent», that® schulen biholde 3 
bi alle prouinces damesels faire and vir- 
gyns; and brynge thei hem to the citee 
Susa‘, and bitake thei® in to the hows of 
wymmen, vndur the hond‘ of Egei, the 
onest seruaunt and chast, which is the 
souereyn and kepere of the kyngis wym- 
men; and take the" damesels ournement 
of wymmen, and other thingis nedeful to 
vsis‘: And which euer damesele among*4 
alle! plesith™ the ijen of the kyng, regne 
sche for Vasti. The" word pleside the 
kyng; and he comaundide to be don so, 
as thei counceliden. Forsothe® a man, as 
Jew, was in the citee Susa?, Mardoche bi 
name, the sone of Jair, sone’ of Semei, 
sone? of Cys, of the generacioun of Ge- 
myny; that was translatid fro Jerusalem 6 
in that tyme, wherynne™ Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, hadde translatid Je- 
chonye, kyng of Juda; which’ Mardochei 
was the nurschere of Edissa, the dou3ter 
of his brothir, which dow3ti7" was clepid 
Hester bi anothir name, and sche’ hadde¥ 
lost® bothe fadirY and modir?; sche® was 
ful fair, and semeli of face; and whanne 
hir fadir and modir weren deed, Mardoche 


‘purchaside hir in to a dou3tir to hym- 


silf>, And whanne the comaundement ofs 
the kyng was ofte pupplischid, ane bi his 
comaundeiment® many faire virgyns weren 
brou3t to Susa, and weren? bitakun to 
Egey, the onest seruaunt and chast, also 
Hester among othere damesels was by- 
takun to hym, that sche schulde be kept 
in the noumbre of wymmen®. And _ schef9 
pleside hym®, and foond! grace in his si3t, 
that' he hastide* the! ournement of wym- 
men, and bitook™ to hir® her partis®, and 


m Om. 4H. "wymmen 4H. © enourmentis cern. P Om, 4H. 

w him L x Faire damyselis1, —-¥ and virgyns 1. z Om. 1. a be ther men 1. b sent forth 1. 
¢whichet. 4 of Susa 1 ¢thei hemt. fkepyng1. ethe which1. bthor. ihervsisr. * ofc. 
1 alle hem 1, ™ plesith moostt. © Andthis1. °And1. Pof Susaix see.m. the soneis. fin 
whiche 1. 8 the which 1s. t the which 7. u Fdissats. Y bideth sche 1s. WOm.s.  ~* left or 


forzede 1. forzede s. 
his dou3ter ts. © heest 1s. 

h sche foond 1s. i so that s. 
of alle thingis nedeful to hir s, 


Y hir fadir 1s, 


2 hir modir 1s. 


4 thei weren 1. © thi/ke wymmen 1. tho wymmens. f Hester 1s. & Egey 1s. 
K hastide to take to hir 1s. 


aand sche1s. » toke hir to him, and he made hir 


lan1. ™he bitook 1s. ™ Hester 1s. © partis 


Il. 11—15. ESTHER. 641 


shewe the puple and hir kuntre; forsothe 
Mardoche hadde comaundid to hir, that 
of this ‘thing vtterli she shulde holde hir 
ipes. The whiche wente eche dai befor 
the vestiarie of the hous, in the whiche 
chosene maidenes weren kept, doende 
cure of the helthe of Ester, and willende 
izto witen, what to hir shulde falle. And 
whan tyme was comen of alle the child 
wymmen by order, that thei shulden gon 
in to the king, alle thingus fulfild that 
to wymmenys? enournyng" pertende, the 
twelfthe moneth was turned ouer ; so onli 
that sixe monethis thei shulde ben enoynt 
with myrtine oile, and othere sixe thei 
shulden vse maner pimentis and swote 
i3spice. And goende in to the king, what- 
euere thei hadden askid pertenende to 
ournyng, thei token; and, as it to them 
hadde plesid, enourned, of the chaumbre 
of wymmen to the kingus priue chaumbre 
i4wenten. And she that cam in at euen, 
wente oute at morn®; and thennes in to 
the secounde housis weren bro3t, that 
weren vnder the hond of gelding Zagazi, 
that stod before to the secoundarie wyues 
of the king; and she hadde no power of 
turnyng a3een more to the king, but if 
the king wolde, and hir hadde comaundid 
isto come bi name. Forsothe the tyme 
turned ouer bi order, the dai stood, in 
that Ester, the do3ter of Abihael, brother 
of Mardoche, whom to hym he hadde 
clepid in to do3ter, shulde gon in to the 
king; the whiche so3te not wymmenes 
enournyng, but whateuere thing wolde 
Egee, gelding, the kepere of maidenes, 
thoo thingis to hir to enournyng he 3af ; 
forsothe she was ful semeli, and with 
vntrouable fairnesse, and to the ejen of 


seuene the faireste damesels of the kyngis 

hows; and? he? ournede and araiede bothe 

hir and damesels' suynge hir feet.. And 10 

‘sche nolde* schewe to hymt hir puple 

and" hir cuntrei; for Mardoche hadde co- 

maundid to’ hir, that in al maner sche 

schulde be stille of this thing. And hel! 

walkide ech dai bifor the porche of the 

dore, in which the chosun virgyns weren 

kept, and he dide the cure of the* helthe 

of Hester’, and wolde’ wite, what bifelde 

to hyr. And whanne the tyme of alle*12 

damesels bi ordre was comun, that thei 

schulden entre” to the kyng, whanne® alle 

thingis weren fillid¢ that® perteyneden to 

wymmens atire, the' tweluethe monethes 

was turned"; so oneli thati thei weren 

anoyntid with oile* of ‘myrte tre! bi sixe 

monethis, and bi othere sixe monethis 

‘thei vsiden summe™ pymentis" and swete- 

smellynge oynementis. And thei entriden 13 

to the kyng, and what euer thing per- 

teynynge to ournement® thei axiden, thei 

tokenP; and thet weren araied as it 

pleside? hem, and’ passiden’ fro the chaum- 

bre of wymmen to the kyngis bed. And14 

sche that hadde entrid‘ in the euentid, 

3ede ont" in the morwetid ; and fro thennus 

thei weren led forth in to the secounde 

housis, that’ weren vndur the hond” of 

Sagazi, onest* seruaunt and chast, that 

was gouernour of the kyngis concubynst; — + concubyns; 
yt is licly 

and scheY hadde not power to go a3en that these that 

more to the kyng, no* but the kyng wolde, het oct 

and had comaundid hir to come? bi name?, ecstatic 

Sothelif whanne the tyme was turned 15 they weren 

aboute bi ordre, the’ dai nei3ede, wher- nae 

ynne Hester, the dou3ter of Abiahel, bro- P rinigpal 

ther® of Mardoche,‘whom he hadde pur- fue: 4” 

chasid in to a dou3ter to hym silf!, ou3te 


4 wimmen «a. F honournyng EFU. ® morwen 4A. morewen EFI. 


P and in most honest maner to plese the king with s. 


® Hester wolde not 1. Hester nuld s. * Egey 1s. 


4 Egey 1s. * thilke damesels 1. tho damyseils s. 


U neither 1s. YOm.1s. W Mardochens is. * Om. a. 


y hir, of ony maner infirmytee 1. hir, if ony infirmyte took hir s. 7 he wolde is. 4 alle the 1s.» go yn 1s. 
© and whanne Is. fultllid is. ¢ which s. fandtheis. & monethe of the3cer 1. moneth which tho 
damysels sholden apere bifore the king s. 4 brou3t aboute 1. turned or endid s. 10Om.s. * the oile 1s. 
I myrre isb. myrre tree HX. mirre tree K. ™summe vsidens. » pymentis, tha is, delicious drinkis s. 
°her ournement 1s. P token it 1. token i with hems. 4 pleside tors. ‘and thannes. § thei passiden 


forth 1s. tentrid ¢hidir 1s. 4 forth 1s. Y whiche 1s. 


wkepyng 1s. %* the onest 1s. Y sehe éhaé 3ede 


Jro the kyng is. 7 Om.1. 4 haue hir to come to hims. name tohim1. ¢Andis. 4 and thes. 
€ the brother 1s. f (the s] whiche Hester Mardoche had take to him, and made hir his dou3ter 1s. 


VOL. II. 


4N 


642 


alle men gracious and loouesum was seen. 
is And so she is lad to the priue chaumbre 
of king Assuer, the tenthe moneth, that 
is clepid Thebeth, that is, Januer, the 
17senenthe jer of his regne. And the king 
loouede hir more than alle the wymmen, 
and she hadde grace and mercy befor 
hym ouer alle the wymmen ; and he putte 
the diademe of the reuine vp on hir hed, 
and he made her to regnen in the stede 
isof Vasthi. And he comaundide a ful 
glorious feste to be maad redi to alle the 
princis and to his seruauns, for the cou- 
pling and the bridalis of Ester; and he 
3af reste to alle prouyncis, and grauntide 
large 3iftis aftir principal gret doing. 
iy And whan the seconde maidenes weren 
so3t, and gedered togidere, Mardoche 
20dwelte at the kingis 3ate. And 3it not 
Ester hadde told out the kuntre and hir 
puple, after the heste of hym; what euere 
thing forsothe he comaundide, Ester kepte 
wel, and so alle thingus she dide, as she 
was wont that tyme, that he nurshide 
athir a litil child. That time thanne that 
Mardoche at the kingus 3ate dwelte, ben 
wrothe Bagathan and Thares, two geld- 
ingis of the king, that weren porteres, 
and in the firste entre of the paleis 
dwelten ; and wolden a3en risen in to the 
22king, and slen hym. The whiche thing 
was not vnkuowen to Mardoche, and anoon 
he tolde to quent Ester, and she to the 
king, of name of Mardoche, that to hir 
2athe thing hadde told. It is so3t, and is" 
founde, and either of hem is hangid in the 
iebet ; and it is comaundid to the stories, 
and taken to the bokis of 3eris’ deedis, 
befor the king. 


' the queen 4. 


ESTHER. 


Uit Is AH. 


II. 16—23. 


entre$ to the kyng; and sche axide not 
wymmenus ournement, but what euer 
thingis Egei, the onest seruaunt and chast, 
kepere" of virgyns!, wolde, he 3af these 
thingis to hir* to ournement!; for™ sche 
was ful schapli, and of fairnesse that may 
not li3tli be bileuyd, and sche semyde®™ 
graciouse and amyable to the ijen of alle 
men. ‘Therfor sche was lad to® the bed 16 
of kyng Assuerus, in the tenthe monethe, 
which? is clepid Cebeth4, in the seuenthe 
3eer of his rewme. And the kyng fer-17 
uentli louyde hir’ moret than alle wym- 
men, and sche hadde grace and mercy 
bifor hym ouer alle wymmen"; and heY 
settide” the* diademeY of rewme? ‘on hir 
heed*, and he> made hir to regne in the 
stide of Vasthi. And he comaundide ais 
ful worschipful feeste to be maad redi to 
alle hise princes and seruauntis, for the 
loynyng® togidere and the weddyngis of 
Hester ; and he jaf restt to alle prouynces, 
and 3af4 3iftis aftir the worschipful doyng tribut. Lire 
éTe. C. 


+ reste ; that 
is, releessing of 


of a prynce. And whanne virgyns weren 19+ poreris ; for 
e 6 al this sen- 
sou3t also the secounde tyme®, andieEn tence, porter 
gaderid togidere, Mardochee dwellidef at A pe of 
e paleys, in 
the 3ate of the kyng%. Hester’ hadde not 20 Ebrew it is, 
keperis of pur-~ 


3it schewid hir cuntrei and puple', bi co- fenaunce of 
k 1. 10 housheld, and 
maundement* of hym'; for whi™ what gicscorith 


i ae to the 
lettre suynge. 
The cause of 
this dyuersite 
is this, that the 
Ebrew word 
here signefieth 
bothe threis- 
fold, aud pur- 
tenaunce of 
houshold, and 
oure transla- 
cioun sueth 
the firste signy- 
fycacioun, and 
Ebreys suen 
the secunde. 
Lire here. c. 


euer thing he comaundide®", Hester? kepte?, 
and sche dide so4 alle thingis, as sche was 
wont’ in that tyme, in which he nurschide 
hir a litil child. Therfor* in that tyme, 2 
wherynnet Mardochee dwellide® at the 
‘jate of the king’, Bagathan and Thares, 
twei seruauntis of the kyng, weren 
wrothe”, ‘that weren porteris*{, andY 
saten in the first threisfold? of the paleis ; 
and thei wolden rise* a3ens the kyng, 


V the jeris 4. 


& to entre 1s. band kepere rs. i the virgyns 1. the kings virgyns s. * Hester 1s. 1 dir ournement 1s. 


™ certis 1s. 
r Om. 1. 

Xai, 
> Om. Is. 


MD was seen 15S. 
S Hester 1s. 


Sin tos. P that 1. 
* more feruently 1. 
© couplyng 1s. 4 he gaf cix sec. m. s. 
m™Om. 1. "™comaundide hir 1s. © sche 1s. 
‘in whiche 1s. 4 dwellide porter 1s. 


weren his porteris s. Y¥ and thei is. 
seets. 8 hane risen 1s. 


u othere wymmen I. 

y diademe or crowne 1. diademe, that is, coroun s. 

© tyme fo the kyng 1s. 

a@ porter 1. king, and was a porters.» And Hester 18. 

P kepte i 1s. 
Vv kyngis gate 1s. 

* threisfold as cheef porters 1. threshfoold, or upon the cheef porters 


4 Feuer3eer A marg. Tebeth, that is, Janyuer 1sx marg. 


Vshe L. W sette upon hir heed 1s, 
2 the rewme CEKL. his rewme ys. 4 Om. 1s. 
 dwellide thanne 1s. & kyng, 
ihir puple zs. the heest 1s. ! Mardoche 1s. 
4 so thanneis. ‘*woned1. §& Thannes, . 


w wrothe ajens the kyngis. * Om.1. thei 


WI. 1—6. 


or nil: 


Aftir these thingus king Assuer en- 
hauncide Aaman, the’ sone of Amadathi, 
that was of the linage of Agag, and 
putte his sete ouer alle the princis that 

2he hadde. And alle the seruauns of 
the king, that withinne the paleis 3atis 
dwelten, boweden kne*, and honoureden 
Aaman ; so forsothe the emperour hadde 
comaundid to hem; onli Mardoche bow- 
3ede not kne*, ne honourede hym. To 
whom seiden the childer of the king, that 
to the 3atis of the paleys seten before, 
Whi beside other men thou kepist not 
4the hestis of the king? Whan these 
thingus more often thei seiden, and heY 
wolde not heren, thei tolden to Aman, 
coueitende to witen, whether he wolde 
stonde stedefast in the sentence; forsothe 
he hadde seid to them, hym to ben a Jew. 
5The whiche thing whan Aman hadde 
herd, and bi experience proued, that Mar- 
doche bowide not kne to hym, ne ho- 
snourede, he is wroth ful gretli, and for 
no3t tolde in to Mardoche on to” putte 
hondis; forsothe he hadde herd, that he 
was of Jew kinrede, and more wolde 
leesen al the nacioun of Jewis, that weren 


w Om. 4. 


b haue sleyn ts. © The which 1. 
Zinis. tbatis. 1 And it 1s. 
in 1. his tresoun was set to be wrilyn in s. 
4 Om. s. 
king s. 
Mardochee 1s. 
€ which s. 
| heestis 1s. 
hem. P tolden thes thingis thanne 1. 


Sand the kyng 1s. _ ¢ sette 18. 
z his 18. 
fabone 1. Om. x. 


k wise, that is, more dilygently s. 


hadde 1. Om. s. 
if 1. rettid s. 
b Aaman 1s. 


Y nou3t, or for no veniaunce 8. 
¢ the more rathir 1. more herfor s. 


ESTHER. 


* the knee a. 


4 Mardoche 1s. © telde this 1. toold this tresoun s. 
k foundun sooth 1s. 
"it was 1. 
t kyng, to be entrid 1. to be entrid in hem, to haue in mynde this tresoun, and to dreed the 
U that 3. 
a knees fo himt. knees to Aaman 8. 
& paleis, sciden to Mardochie 1s. 
1 men don 1s. 
q for thei coueitiden to 1s. 
sentence schewid to hem 1. the sentence that he had shewed to hem s. the sentence X see. m. 
u the soth bi knowyng of the treuthe theroff is. 
2 upon Is. 


643 


and sle’ hym. Which* thing was not hid 22 + bowide nos 


fro Mardochee, and anoon he? telde® to 
the queen Hester, and sche’ to the kyng, 
bi€ the name of Mardochee, that hadde 


teld the" thing to hir. It! was sou3t, and 23 


it was foundnn*, and ech! of hem was 
hangid in a iebat; and ‘it was sent to™ 
storyes, and was" bitakun® to bookis? of 
3eeris, ‘bifor thed kyng". 


CAP. III. 


Aftir these thingis kyng Assuerus en-1 
haunside Aaman, the sone of Amadathi, 
that was of the kynrede of Agag, and’ 
settide' his trone aboue alle the princes 
whiche" he hadde. And alle the ser-2 
uauntis of the kyng, that lyuyden’ in the 
jatis of the paleis, kneliden, and worschip- 
iden Aaman; for” the emperour hadde 
comaundid so* to hem; MardocheeY aloone 
bowide not the? knees*{, nethir worschip- 
ide hym. ‘T'o whom? the children’ of thes 
kyng seiden*, that® saten bifore’ at the 
jatis of the paleis®, Whi kepist ‘thou not* 
the comaundementis' of the kyng, othere 
wise‘ than othere men!? And whanne4 
thei seiden ful ofte™ these thingis, and he 
nolde® here®, thei tolden? to Aaman, ‘and 
wolden? wite, whether he contynuede™ in 
sentence’; for he hadde seid to hem, that 
he was a Jew. And whanne Aaman haddes 


‘herd this thing, and haddet preued ‘bi ex- 


perience", that Mardochee bowide not the’ 
kne to hym, nethir worschipide hym, he 
was ful wrooth, and he’ ledde* for nou3tY 6 
to sette hise hondis on’ Mardochee aloone®; 
for he> hadde herd, that Mardochee was of 
the fole of Jewis, and more® he wolde 


yOm. an. 2% Om. 1. 

f sche folde it 1s. 
m this was comaundid éo be writen 
P the bookis 1s. 


1 either 1s. 
© bitakyn bifore the king s. 


Vv sernyden 1. w for so 1. xOm.1.  ¥ but 
bAndis. © seruauntis is. 4 Om. 1s. 
h not thon, sith thou art a Jew s. 
m ofte fo him is. " wolde nat 1. © here 
tT wolde contynue Ksec.m.wa.  § the 
t whanne he 
vhisrs. Ww Aamanis. ~* arettide 
a aloone, to sle him 1. aloone, to kille him s. 


4N 2 


the knees ; for 
Aaman bi his 
pride wolde 
take to him 
silf Goddis 
onour, and 
make him silf 
to be wor- 
schipid as God, 
as the Ebrew 
glos seith here ; 
nethelis it is 
leueful to 
Cristen men 

to knele, 3he, 
on bothe knees 
to a cristen 
man, for in 
111. book of 
Kingis, xxv.c*. 
Abigail knel- 
ide thus to 
Dauyth ; and 
in 1111. book of 
Kingis, iii. c°. 
Abdie, the pro- 
fete, knelide 
thus to Elie, 
the profete ; 
and hooly 
chirche suffrith 
witingly this 
custom among 
Cristen men, 
and prechith 
not ajenus it ; 
netheles, as 
Austin seith, 
in x. book of 
Goddis citee, 
itij. c°. sacrifice 
is reserued 
onely to God. 
Also Judith, in 
x. c°. knelide 
thus to Holo- 
fernes, and in 
xxij. c°. of 
Apoc. Joon 
Evangelist, 
that dide no 
dedly synne 
after the send- 
ing of the 
Hooly Goost, 
knelide thus 
to the aungel ; 
but the aungel 
forbeed him 

to knele thus, 
to schewe the 
excelence that 
mankinde 
hadde gete bi 
Goddis Sone 
maad man, as 
Greg. ex- 
pownyth in the 
v. Omely on 
the Gospels. 
Live here. c. 


644 ESTHER. HI. 7-13. 


zin the reume of Assuer. The’ firste 
moneth, whos name is Nysan, the twelfthe 
jer of the regne of Assuer, lot is leid in 
to a vessel, that Ebruli is seid fur, be- 
forn Aman, what dai and what moneth 
the fole of Jewis shulde be slayn; and 
the twelfthe moneth wente out, that is 
sclepid Adar. And Aman seide to king 
Assuer, Ther is a puple bi alle the 
prouyneis of thi reume scaterid, and fro 
themself* togidere severed, newe vsende 
lawis and cerimoynes, ferthermor and the 
statutis of the king dispisende ; and best 
thou hast knowen, that it spedeth not to 
thi reume, that ouercustomed it waxe 
gproud bi leeue. If to thee it plese, deme 
that it pershe, and ten thousend of ta- 
lentis I shal lei to tresories of thi rich- 
1oesse*, Thanne the king toc of his hond 
the ring that he vside, and 3af it to the 
enemys of Jewys, Aman, sone of Ama- 
i1dathi, of the kinrede of Agag. And he 
seide to hym, The siluer that thou be- 
hotist, be thin; of the puple do that to 
12 thee plesith. And the scribis of the king 
ben clepid the firste moneth of Nysan, 
the threttenthe dai of the same moneth ; 
and it is writen, as Aman hadde co- 
maundid, to alle the satrapis of the king, 
and domysmen of dyuerse prouyncis and 
folkis, that alle fole’ my3ten rede and 
heren, for the diuersite of tungis, of the 
name of king Assuer. And the lettris 
i3selid? with his ring ben sent bi the co- 
rouris of the king to alle his prouyncis, 
that thei shulde slen and don awei alle 
the Jewis, fro child vn to old ian, litle 
childer and wymmen, o dai, that is, the 


leese? al the nacioun of Jewis, that® weren 
in the rewme of Assuerus. Inf the firste7 
monethe, whos nam is’ Nysan", in the 
tweluethe 3eer of the rewme of Assuerus, 
lot was senti in to a vessel, which * /ot is 
seid in Ebrew phurf, ‘bifor Aaman!, in 
what dai and in what monethe the folk 
of Jewis ou3te to be slayn; and™ the 
tweluethe monethe 3ede out, which" is 
clepid Adar®. And? Aaman seide to the18 
king Assuerus, A puple is scaterid bi alle 
the’ prouynces of thi rewme, and is* de- 
partid fro it’ silf togidere", and™ vsith’ 
newe lawis and cerymonyes, and ferther- 
more® itY dispisith also* the comaunde- 
mentis” of the kyng; and thou knowest 
best, that it spedith not to thi rewme, 
‘that it encreesse in malice* bi licence>, If9 
it plesith® thee’, ‘deme thou® that itf pe- 
risch, and Y schal paie ten thousynde of 8 
talentis® to the keperis of thi tresour. 
Therfor' the kyug took ‘fro his hond the 10 
ryng* which he vside!, and 3af™ it to 
Aaman, the sone of Amadathi, of the 
kynrede of Agag, to" the enemy of Jewis. 
And the kyng seide to hym®, The siluer, 11 
which? thou bihi3tist9, be™ thin’; dot thou 
of the" puple that’, that plesith” thee. 
And* theY serynens? of the kyng weren 12 
clepid in the firste monethe Nysan®*, in the 
threttenthe dai of the same monethe; and 
it was writun, as Aaman hadde comaundid, 
to alle prynces? of the kyng, and to domes- 
men of prouynces® and of dyuerse? folkis, 
that® ech folk my3te rede’ and here®, ‘for 
dyuersite of langagis>, bi' the name of 
kyng Assuerus. And* lettris aseelid' with 
the ring of the kyng weren sent bi the13 


22Inthecpr.m. @hymsilfau. Dritchessis 4. © folkis an. 4aselid & pr.m. 


_ 4 fordo 1. © the whiche 1. whiche s. £ Thanne in 18. & was 8. b Nysan, that is, Aprel 1s. 
icaste 1s. «the which 1. J bifore him, to mite 1. this lot Aaman, which bilened in wichche craft, did caste 


bifore him to wite s. ™ and bi the loti 1s. ™ that 1. 


© March a. marg. Adar, that is, Marche 1s. P And 


thanne 1s, VOm.1s. *Om.s. Sitisis. ‘tthis. %Om.1. and as a peple without propre or 
certeyn abydinge 8.  V this peple vsith 1. this peple vsen s. * ferthermore alsot. YOm.s, 2 Om. s. 
2z hestis 1s. ° 8 to be infect bi unwisdom of proude folk and yuele manered 1s.» thi licence 1. licence of 
thees. ¢pleeses. 4totheer. ¢ deeme and comaundes. this peple 1s. & Om. cis.» talentis of 
siluer 1. 1 Thanne therfor 1. Therfor than s. his ryng fro his fyngir s. | vside for a sygnets. ™ he 
jafiis. 2Om.1.° Aamanis. P that 1s. 4 hast bihizt 1. hast bihizt to mes. ‘be if 1s. § thin owne 1s, 
tanddois. “thats. that thing 1s. W plesith to 1s. * And thanneis.  Y bi the heeste of Aaman, 


thes. Zwriters1. a of Nysan, that is, Aprel ts. 


b the prynces 1s. ¢ dynerse prouynces 1s. 4 Om. 1s. 


© that for dyuers [of s] langage 1s. f rede hem 1. rede thise lettris s. & here hens 18. bh Om. 18. 


‘int. to be sent ins. k And thus 1s. 1} enselid 1. 


t+ phur ; is no 
word of Ebrew, 
but of Persis, 
and therfor in 
Ebreu it is 
seid phur, go- 
ral, so that 
goral is an 
Ebreu word, 
and signefieth 
lot. Lire here. 
Cc. 


WI. 14—IV. 5. 


threttenthe® dai of the twelfthe moneth, 
that is clepid Adar, that is, March; and 

M4ther goodis thei shulden forfeten. The 
sentence forsothe of thef epistelis? was 
this, that alle prouyncis shulden knowe, 
and go themself to the forseide dai. And 
thei, that weren sent, heezeden to ful- 
fillen out the heste of the king; and 
anoon in Susis heeng" the maundement 
fro! the king, and Aman solempneli mak- 
ende a feste, and alle the Jewis, that in 
the cite weren, wepende. 


CAP. IY. 


1 The whiche thingis* whan Mardocheus 
hadde herd, he cutte his clothis, and is 
clad! with a sac, sprengende askis™ to his 
hed, and in the strete of the myddil cite 
with gret vois criede, shewende the bit- 

2ternesse of his inwit, and with this wep- 
ing vnto the 3atis of the paleis goende ; 
forsothe it was not leful a man clad® 
with a sac to entre the kingis halle. 

3 Also in alle prouyncis, bur3 townes, and 
placis, to the whiche the cruel bidding 
of the king hadde ful comyn, gret weil- 
ing was anentis the Jewis fastende, and 
3ellende, and wepende, manye men ysende 

4for bed sac and askis®. Forsothe the 
childer? wymmen of Ester, and the geld- 
ingus, wenten in, and tolden to hir; the 
whiche herende is stoneid’, and sente a 
cloth, that the sac don awei, he shulde 
clothin hym; the whiche taken he wolde 

snot. And Athac, gelding, clepid, whom 
the king hadde 3iue to hir seruaunt, she 


ESTHER. 


645 


corouris of the kyng to alle hise pro- 
uynces, that thei schulden sle, and ‘do 
awei™ alle Jewis®, fro a° child to? an eld 
man, litle’ children and wymmen, in o dai, 
that is, in the thrittenthe dai of the 
tweluethe monethe, which" is clepid Adar‘; 
and‘ that thei sclhulden take awei the 
goodis of Jewis". Forsothe’ the sentence 14 


‘in schort* of the* pistlis’ was this’, that 


alle prouyncis schulden wite, and make 
hem redi to the forseid dai. And the co- 
roures, that weren sent, hastiden? to fille¢ 
the comaundement’ of the kyng; and 
anoon the comaundement® hangidef in 
Susa’, ‘while the kyng* and Aaman madeni 
feeste, and ‘the while* that! alle Jewis™ 
wepten, that weren in the" citee. 


CAP. IV. 


And whanne Mardochee hadde herd! 
these thingis, he to-rente hise clothis, and 
he was clothid in a sak, and spreynt°® 
aische on? the? heed, and he criede with 
greet vois in the street of the myddis of 


“the citee, and schewide' the bitternesse of 


his soule, and he 3ede with this 3ellyng ‘til2 
to’ the 3atis of the paleis; fort it was not 
leueful a man clothid with a sak to entre 
in to the halle of the kyng. Also in alles 
prouynces, citees", and places’, to which 
the cruel sentence of the king was comun, 
was” greet weilyng, fastyng, 3ellyng*, and 
wepyngY anentis the Jewis, and many 
Jewis vsiden sak? and aische for bed’. 
Sotheli> the dameselis and onest® ser-4 
uauntis and chast of Hester entriden‘, 
and telden® to hirf; which thing sche 
herde, and was® astonyed ; and sche sente 
a cloth to Mardochee, that whanne the 
sak was! takun a wei, he schulde clothe 
hym therynne; which! cloth he nolde* 


€ threttithe an. fOm. Hu. — & epistil az. h hongide out 4. hangide ern. iof.a. thing c. 
'eclothid an. ™asshen a. "%clothid au. ©asshen 4. P child su. 4 astoneyd azru. 
mfordo1. ®the Jewist. °Om.cr. Pvntor dandlitler ‘thats. § March a. marg. Adar or 


Marche 1. t and thet weren also comaundid 1. 


Y epistolis RuLpra. lettris 1. 


uthe Jewis 1s. 
2 this, writen in a fewe wordis 1. 
¢ fulfille 1. dheest 1. © heest of the kyng 1. comaundement of the hing s. 


w Om. 1. x Om. c. 
b hastiden hem self 1. 
& the citee 


v And 1. 
® sent forth 1. 
f was hangid up 1. 


of Susar. 2 Om. 1. imadear. k Om. xx. !Om. plures. ™ the Jewis 1s. "that 1. © he spreynt 1. 
Puponi, Ghis1 'theschewider. 8 vntor, tox. tsothely1. Uincitees1 Vin placesi. W ther 
was I. x Om. 1. Y wepyng and 3ellyng 1. Zasak1. aherbedi1. > Ands. ¢ the onest 1. 


dentriden yn 1. © telden this thing 1. ‘Hester 1. & sche wast. } were 1. ithe which x. * wolde not 1. 


646 


comaundide, that he shulde go to Mar- 
doche, and lernen of hym, whi that thing 
ehe dide. And Athac gon out, wente to 
Mardoche stondende in the strete of the 
zcyte, beforn the dore of the paleis; the 
whiche shewide to hym alle thingus that 
hadden falle, hou Aman hadde behoten, 
that he shulde bringe siluer in to the 
tresories of the king for the Jewis deth. 
sAlso the saumple of the maundement, 
that heeng" in Susis, he 3af to hym, that 
to the quen he shulde shewen, and 
warnen hir, that she go in to the king, 
yand preje hym for hir puple. And 


Athae, gon out, tolde Ester alle thingus, : 


iothat Mardoche hadde seid. The whiche 
answerde to hym, and seide, that he 
ushulde sey to Mardoche, Alle the’ ser- 
uauns of the king, and alle prouyncis 
that ben vader his comaunding, knowen, 
that outhert man or womman not clepid 
entre the innermor porche of the king, 
withoute ajeen cleping" anoon he be’ 
slain, but if perauenture the king ‘the 
goldene 3erde to hyin strecche for signe 
of mercy, and so he may lyuen; I thanne 
what maner shal moun entre to the king, 
that now thretti dajis am not clepid to 
12hym? The whiche-thing whan Mardoche 
13 hadde herd, eft he sente to Ester, seiende, 
Ne wene thou, that thi lif onli thou deli- 
uere, for in the hous of the king thou art, 
14 for alle Jewis; if thou holde” thi pes, bi 
an other ocasioun the Jewis shul be deli- 
uered, and thou and the hous of thi fader 
shul pershen; and who knew, whether 
therfore to the reume thou came*, that 
in such a time thou shuldest be redi? 
15 And eft Ester these woordis sente to 
16 Mardoche, Go, and gedere alle the Jewis, 
that in Susis thou findist, and pre3eth 


ESTHER. 


lv. 6—16. 


take. And aftir that! Athac, the™ onests 
seruaunt and chast", ‘was clepid®, whom 
the kyng hadde 3oue a mynystre? to hir4, 
sche’ comaundide, that he schulde go to 
Mardochee, and lerne of hym, whi he dide 
this thing. And Athac 3ede out*, and 3ede‘é 
to Mardochee stondynge in the street of the 
citee, bifor the dore" of the paleis ; which’7 
schewide to Athac alle thingis that bi- 
felden”, hou Aaman hadde bihi3t to bryng 
siluer in to tresours* of the kyng for the 
deeth of Jewis?. Also he® 3af to Athacs 
the copie of the comaundement?, that 
hangide in Susa‘, to’ schewe to the queen, 
aud to moneste® hir for to entref to the 
kyng, and to biseche hym for hir puple. 
And Athac 3ede ajen, and telde to Hesters 
alle thingis, whiche® Mardochee hadde 
seid’, And sche answeryde to hym', and 10 
seide, that he schulde seie* to Mardochee, 
Alle! the seruauntis of the kyng, and alle 
prouyncis™ that® ben vndur his lordschip, 
knowen, that whether a° man ether a? 
womman not clepid! entrith in to the 
ynnere halle of the kyng, he schal be 
slayn anoon with outen ony tariyng, not 
but’ in hap the kyng holditht forth" the 
goldun 3erde ‘to hym’ for ‘the signe’ of 
merci, and* he mai lyue so; therfor hou 
mai Y entre to the kyng, whichY am not 
clepid to hym now bi thritti daies ? And 12 
whanne Mardochee hadde herd ‘this, thing’, 
he sente efte to Hester, and seide, Gesse 13 
thou not, that thou schalt delyuer oonli 
thi lijf, for? thou art in the hows of the God hath many 
kyng, bifor alle Jewis’; for if thou art 14 lyuere fm 
stille now, Jewis® schulen be delyuered haawa 


t+ bi another 
occasioun ; for 


here. ¢. 
bi another occasioun’{, and thou and the BF pen 
hows of thi fadir schulen perische {; and  Goddis ristful- 


nesse, for thon 

hast dispisid 

thi puple. Lire 
Te. Cs 


who knowith, whether herfor thou camist 
to the rewme, that thou schuldist be maad 


r hangede 4eFH. s Om. a. t or AEFH. u aclepyng F. ¥ shal be a. W holdist seru. 
x come AEFH. 

' this thing, was clepid 1. Mani. "%achastr. oOm.1. Pseruaunti. 4 Hesterz. t and sche 1. 
* forth 1. ‘hecamer. “3jate1. Yvand her, Whadden bifaller. the tresonrs1. YOm.1. 2 the 
Jewis 1. @ Mardochee 1. > dAingis heest 1. ¢ the citee of Susa1. 4 forto1r. © mone. f entre yn i. 
&thati. bseid to himr. i Athaci. & seie this thing 1. ‘that aller. ™ the prouyncis 1, ® whiche 1. 
¢Om.1  POm.1. 4 clepid of the kyngt. ' Om.1. Sbutifi. tholder. 4 forth to him 1. 
YOm.1. Watokent, ¥*and thats.” Ythatz. 2 thes thingis 1. for thithat1, » the Jewis 1. 


¢ the Jewis1, 4 wey 1, 


IV. 17—V. 6. 


for me; ne eteth, ne drinkith thre da3es 
and thre ny3t, and I with myn hond 
wymmen lic maner shal fasten; and 
thanne not clepid I shal gon in to the 
king, a3en the lawe doende, takende me 

17to deth and to perile. And so Mardoche 
wente, and dide alle thingus, that Ester 
hadde comaundid to hym. 


CAP. V. 


1 Forsothe the thridde dai Ester was 
clad’ with kingus clothis, and stod in the 
porche of the kingus hous, that was with- 
inne forth a3en the kingis hous; and? 
he sat vp on his see, in the constorie of 
the paleis, ajen the dore of the hous. 

2And whan he hadde seen Ester, the 
quen, stondende, she pleside to his e3en, 
and he stra3te out ajen hir a goldene 
jerde, that he heeld with hond; the 
whiche ne3hende kiste the ouermor? of 

3his 3erde. And the kyng seide to hir, 
What wilt thou, quen Ester? what is 
thin asking? Also if the half part of the 
reume thou aske, it shal ben 3iue to thee. 

4 And she answerde, If to the king it plese, 
I beseche, that thou come to me to dai, 
and Aman with thee, to the feste, that 

5I haue greithid. And anoon the king, 
Clepeth, he seith, Aman anon, that he 
obeshe to the wil of Ester. And so the’ 
king and Aman cainen to the feste, that 

6the quen hadde maad redi to hem. And 
the king seide to hir, after that he hadde 
drunke win plenteuously ; What askist 
thou, that be 3iue to thee, and for what 
thing pre3ist thou? Also if the half part 
of my reume thou aske, thou shalt gete. 


Y clothed arru. 


eQOm.o.  f tyme fo helpe 1. 
kentreynr.  ! Om. plures. 
t withynneforth forn ajens 1. 
xthatr. Yhiss. % Hester 1. 
wilt thou rp. ¢ 3if EL. Om. Pp. 
thanne 1. ™ Hester1. ® drunken 1. 
Saxe 1. axedist s. 


m 3ede forth 1. 
* the kyng 1. 
8 neizide ni3 1. 
f axe cp1. 
oOm. 1. 


ESTHER. 


z Om. c. 


& Mardochee, seiynge 1. 
n that 1. 
t upon 1. 

sche kisside 1. 
8 plesith to 1. 


647 


redi in sich a° tyme’? And eft Hester sente 1s 
these wordis to Mardochee’, Go thou, and 16 
gadere togidere alle Jewis', whiche thou 
fyndist in Susa, and preie 3e for me; ete 
3e not}, nether drynke 3e in thre daies and 
thre ny3tis, and Y with myn handmaydis! 
schal fast in lijk maner; and thanne Y 
not clepid schal entre’ to the kyng, and 

Y schal do a3jens the lawe, and Y! schal her nee 
bitake me to deth and to perel. Therfor 17 in thre dayes, 
Mardochee 3ede”, and dide alle thingis, Toe 
whiche" Hester hadde comaundid to hym. 


+ ele 36 not; 
that is, faste 
3e, and ete onys 
onely in the 
day, for it were 
vndiscreet ab- 
stynence to ete 


CAP. V. 


Forsothe® in the thridde dai Hester was1 
clothid in ‘the kyngis? clothis, and stood4 
in the porche of the kyngis hows, that « 
was ‘the ynnere ajens™ the kyngis halle; 
and heS sat ont his trone, in the consistorie 
of the" paleis, a3ens the dore of the hows. 
And whanne he hadde seyn Hester, thee 
queen, stondynge’, sche pleside™ hise i3en, 
and he helde forth aj3ens hir the goldun 
3erde, which* he helde in they hond; and 
sche? nei3ide*, and kisside? the hi3nesse° 
of his 3erde. And the king seide to hir,3° 
Hester, the queen, what ‘wolt thou’? what 
is thin axyng? 3he, thou3® thou axist! the 
half part of my rewme, it schal be 30uun 
to thee. And sche answeride, If it plesith® 4 
the kyng, Y biseche, that thou come to 
me to dai, and Aaman with thee, to the 
feeste, which" Y haue maad redi. Ands 
anoon the king seide, Clepe 3ei Aaman 
soone*, that he obeie to the wille of Hester. 
Therfor! the kyng and Aaman camen to 
the feeste, which the queen hadde maad 
redi to hem. And the king seide to hir™, 6 
aftir that he hadde drank" wiyn® plen- 
teuousli, What? axist thou4, that it be 
jouun to thee, and for what thing axist 
thouT? 3he, thou3 thou axist* the half 


4 ouermost AEFH. 


h the Jewis rx sec. m. 1 handmaidens 1. 
© Certis 1. P real 1. 4 sche stood 1. 
uhis1, YVstondynge there1. ® pleside to 1. 
cender. 4 woltow B. seist thou EL. 
hthatr. .i3¢anoont, kOm.1. ! And 


P What thing 1s. 4 thou of mes. * thou now s. 


648 


7To whom answerde Ester, Myn asking 
sand my pre3eeris ben these. If I haue 
founde grace in the si3te of the king, and 
if to the king it plese, that he 3iue to me 
that I pre3e fore, and fulfille myn ask- 
ing, come the king and Aman to the 
feste, that I haue maad redi to hem; and 
to morn I shal opene to the king my wil. 
9And so Aman wente out that dai glad 
and merie. And whan he hadde seen 
Mardoche sittende at the j3atis of the 
paleis, and not onli not to> han rise to 
hym, but ne moued forsothe of the place 
iwof his sitting, he endeynede gretli; and 
the wrathe feyned, turnede ajeen in to 
his hous, clepide to gidere to hym frendis, 
uand Sares, his wif, and expounede to 
hem the mychilnesse of his richessis, and 
the cumpanye of sones, and with ‘hou 
nyche® glorie vp on alle the princis and 
his seruauns the king hym hadde rerid. 
12And after these thingus he seith, The 
quen also Ester noon other man clepeth 
with the king to the feste, saue me, anent 
whom also to morn with the king I am 
13to ete. And whan alle these thingus I 
haue, no thing I wene me to han, as longe 
as I see Mardoche, Jeu, sittende at the 
i4kingis 3atis. And Sares, his wif, and 
othere frendis answerden,Comaunde to ben 
maad redi an hei3 bem, hauende of hei3te 
fifti cubitis ; and sei erli to the king, that 
Mardoche be hangid vp on it; and so 
thou shalt go with the king glad to the 
isfeste. And the counseil pleside, and he 
comaundide to be maad redi an hei3 cros. 


bOm. c. 


tsholdest s. "gete it 1s. v seyde s. 
*ajeyntos, athatr. > Thanne x. 
S risen up rs. he moued him 1s. 
as not wrooth kerfore, and 1s. 
3 thingis to hem 1s. t hir rs, 
2 beem or a galewe tre s, 
hims. 4 ther upon 1. 
a jebet s. 


i ones fro s. 
2 Om, s. 
U whom ts. 

8 speke 1s. 
© queens feeste s. 


ESTHER. 


w that thing 1s. 

¢ Aaman that dai 1. 

k Aaaman Is. 
© Om. Is. 

¥ thou; 1s. 

» to morew eerly s. 

f counsel of hem 1. counceil of these s. 


Ve. 7—15. 


part of my rewme, thou schaltt gete*. To7 
whom Hester answeride’, My axyng and 
preieris ben these. If Y haue founde graces 
in the si3t of the kyng, and if it plesith 
the kyng, that he 3yue to me that, that 
Y axe, and that he fille* myn axyng, the 
kyng and Aaman come’ to’ the feeste, 
which’ Y haue maad redi to hem; and to 
morewe Y schal opene my wille to the 
kyng. Therfor> Aaman® 3ede out? gladg 
and swift ‘in that dait. And whanne he 
hadde seyn Mardochee sittynge bifor the 
jatis of the paleys, and not oneli to haue 
not' rise’ to hym, but sotheli nether 
moued® fro! the place of his sittyng, he* 
was! ful wrooth; and ‘whanne the ire was 10 
dissymelid, he™ turnede a3en in to his 
hows, and he clepide togidire ‘to him? silf° 
frendis?, and Zares, his wijf; and he de-1) 
claride’ to hem the greetnesse of his rich- 
essis, and the cumpeny of children", and 
with hou greet glorie the kyng hadde 
enhaunsid hym aboue alle hise princis 
and seruauntis. And he seide after these 12 
thinges*, Also the queen Hester clepide 
noon other man with the kyng to thet 
feeste, outakun me, anentis ‘which gueen"™ 
Y schal ete also to morewe with the kyng. 
And whanne’ Y haue alle these thingis, 13 
Y gesse that Y haue no thing, as long as 
Y se Mardochee, Jew”, sittynge bifor the 
‘kyngis 3atis*. And Zares, his wijf, and 14 
othereY frendis answeriden to hym, Co- 
maunde thou an hi3 beem? to be maad 
redi, hauynge fifti cubitis of heijthe; and 
seie* thou eerly® to the kyng*, that Mar- 
dochee be hangid theronne’; and so thou 
schalt go glad with the kyng to the feeste®. 
And the counsel‘ plesyde him, and he co-15 
maundide an hi3 cros® to be maad redi. 


¢ what £ pr. im. 


x fulfille 1s. = Y come thei to moreme 1s. 
4 forth thers 1. thenss. ¢€Om.r. f Om. s. 
' herfore was. ™ Aaman feynyde him 
P hise frendis cis. ‘tolde is. * kis children 1s. 

wthe Jew rs. * jatis of the kyng is. Y his s. 
¢ kyng, preiynge him 1. kyng, and aze of 
€ cros, that is, 


VI. 1-10. 


CAP. Vlg 


1 That ny3t the king ladde withoute slep, 
and he comaundide to be bro3t to hym 
stories, and the bokis of 3eris deedis of 
rathere times. The whiche thingus whan, 

2hym present, weren rad, it is come to 
that place, wher was write, hon Mar- 


doche hadde told the aspies of Gabathan . 


and Thares, geldingis, coneitende to sle 
3king Assuer. The whiche thing whan 
the king hadde herd, he? seith, What for 
this feith of wrshipe or of mede Mar- 
doche hath goten? And his seruans and 
mynestres seiden to hym, No thing of 
4mede vtterli he toc. And anoon the king, 
Who is, he seith, in the porche? Aman 
forsothe wente in the innere® porehe of 
the kingus hous, that he make sugges- 
tioun to the king, that he comaunde 
Mardoche to be ficchid on the iebet, that 
sto hym was maad redi beforn. And the 
childer answerden, Aman stant’ in the 
porche. And the king seide, Come he in. 
6And whan he was ecomyn, he seide to 
hym, What owith to be do to the man, 
whom the king desireth to honouren ? 
Aman thenkende in his herte, and trow- 
ende, that noon other man but® hym the 
7 king wolde honouren, answerde, The man, 
whom the king coueitith to honouren, 
sowith to be clad? with kingus clothis, 
and to be put vpon an hors that is of 
the kingus sadil, and to take the kingus 
9diademe vp on his hed; and the firste of 
the kingus princis and kny3tis holde his 
hors, and bi the stretis of the cite goende, 
crie he, and seie, Thus shal ben honoured, 
10 whom euere! the king wile honoure. And 
so the king seide to hym, Hee3e/, and, 


d Om. zeru. €nere su. f stoondith a. 


thee 4. 


h wakide ts. 
m of Thares 1. 
myuistris rs. 
kyng rs. * upon 1s. 


» priuey 1s. 
8 more and lesse seiden s. 
Yais. that 1. 


ESTHER. 


& than au. 


i bifore passid 1. passid bifore hoond s. 
o sernauntis of the king 1s. 
t the kyug 1s. 

ais M. 


649 


CAP. VI. 


The kyng ledde* that ny3t with out 
sleep, and he comaundide the stories and 
the bookis of 3eeris ‘of formere tymes' to 
be brou3t to hym. And whanne tho! 
weren red in his presense, me cam to2 
the! place, where it was writun, hou Mar- 
dochee hadde teld the tresouns of Gaba- 
than and Thares™, oneste® seruauntis®, 
couetynge to strangle? kyng Assuerus. 
And whanne the kyng hadde herd this‘, 
he seide, What onour and meede gat Mar- 
dochee for this feithfulnesse? And _ hise 
seruauntis and mynystris™ seiden’ to hym', 
Outirli he took" no meede. And anoon4 
the kyng seide, Who is in the halle? 
Sotheli¥ Aaman hadde entrid in to the 
ynnere halle of the kyngis hows, to make 
suggestioun to the kyug, that he” schulde 
eomaunde Mardoehee to be hangid on* 
the’ iebat, which? was? maad redi® to hin. 
And the ehildren® answeriden®, Aamans 
stondith in the halle. And the kyngs 
seide, Entre hee. And whanne hef was 
comun yn, the kyng seide to hym, What 
owith to be don to the man, whom the 
kyng desirith onoure’? Aaman? thou3te 
in his herte, and gesside’, that the kyng 
wolde onoure noon othere man no* but 
hym silf!; and™ he answeride", The man, 7 
whom the kyng couetith to onoure, owiths 
to be clothid with® the kyngis clothist, 
and? to be set on! the hors{ which" is of 
the kyngis sadel, and to take the kyngis 
diademe‘) ont his heed; and the firste" of 
the’ princes and stronge” men of the kyng 
holde* his hors’, and go bi the stretis of 
the citee, and crie*, and seie, Thus he sehal 
be onourid, whom euer> the kyng wole 
J Hei3 


4 clothed szeru. i whom so euere 4. 


k tho dokis is. that B sup. ras. ¢ see. m. Vv. 


P haue stranglid 1s. 4 this story reds. * his 
" took of the herfore s. Vv Certis is. W the 


b redi of daman is. © children of the kyng 1s. 


4 answeriden to him 1. seyden to him s. & he yni. he inne fo mes. f Aaman is. & to onoure A see. m. §. 


h And Aaman s. ihe gesside 1s. k Om, 15. 
°ins. Pand him owith1s. upon 1s. 
4 cheef 1. firste or cheefs. ¥ Om. s. 


ledinge his bridil s. 
VOL. HH. 


Vsilf Aaman 1s. 
t the which i. 

W of the stronge 1s. 
% go he i. go this cheef prince s. 


40 


™ and therfore s. ™ answeride thus s. 
3 diademe, that ts, his corouns. ¢ upon 18. 
x he holde 1s. hors, /edinge him 1. hors, 


a crie fe is. » Om. 1s. 


+ kyngis 
clothis s that 
is, whiche it 
ig not leueful 
to ony man 

to vse, no but 
to the kyng. ¢. 
t on the hors, 
etc.; that is, 
whom no man 
rood, no but 
the kyng. c. 

§ the kyngis 
diademe, etc. ; 
of whiche 
thingis it is 
opyn ynow, 
that Aaman 
aspiride to the 
rewme. Lire 
here. ¢. 


650 


the stole taken and an hors, do, as thou 
hast spoke, to Mardoche, Jew, that sit* 
befor the 3atis of the paleis; bewar, lest 
any thing of tho, that thou hast spoken, 
irthou leue of. And so Amani toc a stole 
and an hors, aud Mardoche clad! in the 
strete of the cite, and set vp on the™ hors, 
wente beforn, and criede, This wrshipe 
he is wrthi, whom euere the king wile 
izhonoure. And Mardoche is turned a3een 
to the 3ate of the paleys, and Aman 
heesede to gon in to his hous, weilende, 
izand the hed couered. And he tolde to 
Sari, his wif, and to frendis, alle thingus 
that hadden falle to hym. To whom an- 
swerden the wise men, whom he hadde 
in counseil, and his wif, If of the sed of 
Jewis is Mardoche, befor whom thou 
begunne to fallen, thou shalt not moun 
withstonde to hym, but thou shalt falle 
141n his si3t.  3it hem spekende, the geld- 
ingis of the king camen, and anon hym 
to the feste, that the quen hadde maad 
redi, thei constreyneden to" gon. 


CAP. VII. 


1 And so the king cam in® and Aman 
to the feste, that thei shulde drinke with 
2the quen. And the king seide to hir 
also in the seconde day, aftir that he was 
chaufid with wyn, What is thin asking, 
Ester, that it be 3iue to thee, and what 
wilt thou to be do?? Also if the half part 
of ny reume thou aske, thou shalt gete. 
3 To whom she answerd, If I hane founde 
grace in thin ejen, O! king, and if to 
thee it plese, 3if to me my lif, for the 


k sittith au. | clothed er. ™an au. 


¢ And thanne is. 
thee is. iand be 1s. 


4 Aaman is. 
k oute vadon s. 


ESTHER. 


ohym to £ prem. 


© thou thee 1s. 
I these undon 1. 


VI. 11—VII. 3. 


onoure. Therfor® the kyng seide to hym?, 10 


Haste thou’, and whanne ‘a stoolef{ and 
horss is takun®, do thou, as thou hast 
spoke, to Mardochee the Jew, that sittith 
bifor the 3atis of the paleis; be! thou 
war, that thou lIeeue not out* ony thing 
of these, whiche thou hast spoke™. Ther-11 
for" Aaman took ‘a stoole and hors®, and 
sedeP, and criede bifor Mardochee clothid4 
in the strete™ of the citee, and set on’ ‘the 
horst, He is worthi this onour, whom euer 


t a stoole ; 
that is, the 
kyngis cloth, 
and the kyngis 
hors ; he spek - 
ith not of the 
diademe, for it 
was not semely 
that another 
man than the 
king schnide 
bere it. Lire 
here. c. 


the kyng wole onoure. And" Mardochee 12 


turnede a3en to the jate of the paleis, 
and Aaman hastide to go in to his hows, 


morenynge, and with the” heed hilid. Andis 


he teld to Zares, lis wijf, and to frendis” 
alle thingis that hadden bifelde* to hym. 
To whom the wise men{, whicheY he 
hadde* in counsel?, and his wijf, answer- 
iden, If Mardochee, bifor whom thon hast® 
bigunne to falle, is of the seed of Jewis, 
thou’ schalt not¢ mowe® ajenstonde hym, 
but thou schalt fallef in his sijt. 3it while 14 
thei spaken®, the oneste sernauntis and 
chast of the kyng camen®, and compellideni 
hym to go soone* to the feeste, which the 
queen hadde maad redi. 


CAP. VII. 


Therfor! the kyng and Aaman entriden™1 
to the feeste, to" drynke with the queen. 
And the kyng seide? to hir4, 3he’, in the2 
secounde dai, aftir that he was hoot® of 
thet wiyn", Hester, what is thin axyng’, 
that it be 3ouun to thee, and what wolt” 
thou be doon? jhe, thou3 thou axist* the 
half part of my rewme, thou schalt geteY. 
To whom sche answeride, A?! king*, if Y3 
haue founde grace in thin ijen, and if it. 
plesith® thee, 3yue thou iy lijf to me, for 
00 that c. 


© Om. c. P do to thee c pr. vice. 


& his hors is. 4h take fo 
» And thanne 1s. © the 


f the kyngis clothing 1s. 
™m now spoke 18. 


kyngis cloth and his palfrey is. Phe j3ede forth is. 4 clothid in the kyugis clothinge s. * cheef strete 1s. 


Supon is. t his palfrey 1s. 
whiche 1. 2 hadde fowardis him s. 
doinge to him this hi3 seruise, thou s. 
8 spaken thes thingis ts. 
™ entriden yn i. 
uwyn drinkinge s. 
b plesith to is. 


and tors. P seide also 1. 
Vv axyng of me 1s. 


u And aftir this 1s. 

@ his counsel 1. 
4 not thanne 1s. 

b camen aflir Aaman is. i thei compelliden ts. 

q Efester is. 


Wwilta. * axe is. 


vhisis. his frendis1s. * bifallerms. Y the 
b hast now s. © doynge thi seruyse to him, thou 1. 

€Om.is. f falle schamefully 1, falle shamly s. 
k anoon 1s. |! And thaune 1s. 
rOm. 1s. § hoot or chaufed s. tOm. cts. 
yYhaueitis, ZO!1, 4 my lord kyng s. 


t wise men ; 
an Ebreu glos 
seith here, that 
these wise men 
hadden seyn 
the bokis of 
Moyses lJawe, 
for summe 
Jewis, takun 
prisoneris, 
hadden trans- 
latid thanne 
the bokis in to 
language of 
Persis; and 
there they had- 
den seyn, that 
Ebreys ben 
“comparisond 
ether liened to 
the steris of 
heuene, and 
to the dust of 
erthe, as it is 
had in xiii. ¢°, 
and xxxy. c°. 
of Genesis ; and 
therfor they 
seiden, whanne 
Ebreys higyn- 
nen to falle, 
they ben brou3t 
to nou3t as 
dust, and 
whanne they 
bigynnen to 
haue the mais. 
try, thei stien 
as the steris 
of henene, and 
therfor thou 
maist not ajen- 
stonde hem. 
Lire here. c. 


VII. 4—10, 


whiche I pre3e, and my puple, for the 
4whiche I beseche. Forsothe wee ben 
taken, I and my puple, that wee be to- 
treden, slain?,aud pershen; and wolde God 
in to thrallis and thrallessis wee were 
sold, and it were tolerable euel, and 
weilende I shulde holden my pes; now 
forsothe oure enemy is, whos cruelte 
sreboundeth in to the king. And king 
Assuer answerende seith, Who is he 
this, and of what power, that these 
Gthingus he be hardi to do? And Ester 
seide, Enemy and oure werste enemy is 
this Aman. The whiche thing he herende 
anoon stone3ede, not suffrende to bern the 
7chere of the king and of the quen. For- 
sothe the king ros wroth, and fro the 
place of the feste wente in to a 3erd set 
with trees. Also Aman ros for to pre3en 
Ester, the quen, for his lif; forsothe he 
vnderstod euel maad redi to hym of the 
sking. The whiche whan was comen 
aj3een fro the 3erd set with wodis, and 
he hadde comyn in to the place of the 
feste, he fond Aman vpon the bed to han 
fallen doun, in the whiche lai Ester; and 
seith, Also the quen he wile opresse, me 
present, in myn hous. Ne 3it the woord 
of the kingus mouth hadde gon out, and 
anon couereden his face the seruauns of 
athe king. And Arbona, oon of the geld- 
ingus that stoden in the seruyse of the 
king, seide, Lo! the tree that he hadde 
maad redi to Mardoche, that spac for 
the king, stant‘ in the hous of Aman, 
hauende of hei3te fifti cnbitis. To whom 
io seide the king, Hangeth hym in it. And 
so Aman is hangid in the iebet, that he 


P and slain c. 


¢ the which thing 1. d preie thee now 18. 
3eue to me the iff of my s. 
k demed 1. 
that Is. " my3te haue be suffrid 1s. 
stille, and suffrid mekly my thraldom s. 
Csichets. «The which 1. © whanne he 1. 
isemblaunt 1. semblaunt or the indignacioun s. 
up Is. ©to be maad is. P Om. Is. 
falle 1s, ®uponis.  Aaman wole also 1s. 
Ymenis. Z thes. 4 face of Aaman 1s. 

& Om. 1s. 


ESTHER. 


1 3e up Is. 


651 


which¢ Y preie’, and my® puple, for which 

Ye biseche’. For! Y and my puple ben4 

jouun*, that we be defoulid, and stranglid, 

and that we perische; ‘and Y wolde, that 

we weren seeld! in to seruanntis and ser- 
uauntessis, ‘and the™ yuel ‘were suffrable®, 

and Y ‘were stille weilynge®; but now 

oure enemy is’, whos cruelte turneth ‘in 

tol the kyng}. And kyng* Assuerus an-» ee 
sweride, and seide, Who is this®, and of  whanne we 
what power, that he be hardi to do these* UTE hae 
thingis? And Hester seide, Oure worste ¢ Uae 
aduersarie and enemy is this Aaman. itisscah | 
Which? thing he® herde’, and was aston- tere. c. 
yde anoon, and ‘suffride not" to bere the 
semelaunti of the kyng and of the queen. 
Forsothe* the kyng roos! wrooth, and fro7 

the place of the feeste he entride in to 

a gardyn biset™ with trees. And Aaman 

roos" for to preie Hester, the queen, for 

his lijf; for he vndurstood yuel maad° 

redi of the kyng to hym. And whannes 

the kyng turnede ajen fro the gardyn 

‘biset with wodeP, and hadde entrid in to 

the place of feeste? he foond that Aaman 

felde’ doun on’ the bed, wherynne Hester 

lai. And the king seide, ‘Also he wolet 

oppresse the" queen, while Y am present, 

in myn hows. The” word was not 3it¥ 

goon out* of the kyngis mouth, and anoon 

thei’ hiliden his? face*. Aud Arbona seide?, 9 

oon of the onest seruauntis and chast, that 

stoden in the® seruyce of the kyng*, Lo! 

the® tre hauynge fifti cubitis of heiz3the 

stondith in the hows of Aaman, which 

tre? he hadde maad redi to Mardochee, 

that spak for the kyng’. To whom the 

kyng seide, Hange 3e' Aaman in that tre. 


@ stondith «. 


© also the lijf of my 1. also, lord, I biseche thee herlly to 
f the which 1. Om. s. i 
10! whi ne had we rather be sold 1. O lord! whi ne hadde we 63 thin heste ben sold s. 


£Om.s. 4} biseche thee 1. Om. s. i Certis 1s. 


m for 


© weilynge schulde haue be stille 1. now wepinge shulde haue be 
P is present 1s, 
f hadde herd s. 
k And 1s, 
4 the feeste crt. feeste holding 1. hoolding of the feste s. 
u Ifester the s. 
bOm. Is. 
h king, and made knowe his traytours s. 


402 


4 ajens Is. a the kyng 1. b this enemy s. 
ghers. 4» he was nat sufficient ts. 
lroos up 1s. ™ biset aboute 1s. " roos 
r had 
x out fulli s. 
f the which 1. 


vAndthe 1s. W Om. c. 
d kyng, seide 1s. © a Is, 
k gebett 1s. 


¢ Om. 1. 


652 


hadde maad redi to Mardoche, and the 
kingis wrathe restide. 


CAP. VIIL. 


1 That dai king Assuer 3af to Ester, the 
quen, the hous of Aman, aduersarie of 
Jewis. And Mardoche wente in befor 
the face of the king; Ester forsothe 
knoulechide to hym, that he was hir 

2em'. And so the king toc the ring, the 
whiche of Aman he hadde comaundid to 
be resceined, and toe to Mardoche. Ester 
forsothe sette Mardoche vp on hir hous. 

3Ne with these thingus pa3ed, she fel doun 
at the feet of the king, and wepte, and 
spac to hym, and prejede, that the malice 
of Aman Agachite, and his werste castis, 
that he hadde tho3t out ajen the Jewis, 
she comaunde to be maad voide. And 
he of maner the kingus goldene septre 
strau;3te out with the’ hond, with the 
whiche a tocne of the kingys mercy was 
shewid. And so she risende stod before 
shym, and seith, If it plese to the king, 
and if I haue founde grace in his e3en, 
and iny prejeere be not seen to ben con- 
trarie to hym, I beseche, that with newe 
epistelis the olde lettris of Aman, spiere 
and enemye of Jewis, with the whiche 
he hadde comaundid them to pershen in 
salle the kingus prouyncis, be mendid; hou 
forsothe shal I moun suffre the deth and 
7the sla3ter of my puple? And king As- 
suer answerde to Ester, the quen, and to 
Mardoche, Jew, The hous of Aman I haue 
grauntid to Ester, the quen, and hym I 
haue comaundidt to be ficchid on the cros, 
for he was hardi to putte hond in to the 
sJewis. Thanne writeth to the Jewis, as 


‘ vncle 4m. encle F. 


VAnd so 1s. ™ same iebat 1. 
Jewis 1s. GVenmye rs. * the Jewis cs. 
fadiris. Wofis, *hegafitis. y Andis. 


nicynees s, 
therfore Hester felle s. 
to be maad void 1s. 1 the /ynage of Agag 1 

af : gag Is. 
Piss. 4 And thanne Hester 1s. 
V the traitour 1s. 
® hane grauntid 1s, 


4 sche wepte 1s. 


buponar. onas. 


ESTHER. 


‘to be maad voide™. 


s Om. 4. 


a and thanne 1. and so thanne s. 
S entride yn rs. 


> thingis whiche Aaman had conspirid [a3ens the Jewis s] 18. 
© the kyug is. 
1 the Jewis 1s. 
t the kyng 1s. 
W the whiche leftres 1. which lettris s. 


Vill, 1—8. 


Therfor! Aaman was hangid in the iebat™, to 


which he hadde maad redi to Mardochee, 
and® the ire® of the kyng restide?. 


CAP. VIII. 


In that dai kyng Assuerus 3af to Hester, } 
the queen, the hows} of Aaman, aduer- 
saried of Jewis'. And Mardochee entride’ 
bifor the face of the kyng; fort Hester, 
knoulechide to" hym, that he was ‘hir 
fadris brother’. Therfor the kyng took2 
the ryng, which he hadde comaundid to 
be resseyued froY Aaman, and 3af* to 
Mardochee. ForsotheY Hester ordeynede 
Mardochee ouer? hir hows*. And Hester3 
was not appaied with these thingis?, and 
felde® doun to the feet of the kyng, and 
wepte’, and spak to hym®, and preiede’, 
that he schulde® comaunde® the inalice of 
Aaman of Agagi, and hise worste castis, 
whiche he hadde thou3te out ajens Jewis!, 
And the kyng bi4 
custom helde forth the goldun 3erde of 
the kyng with his hond, bi which the 
signe" of merci® was? schewid. ‘Therfor 
sche? roos vp, and stood bifor hym’, ands 
seide, If it plesith’ the kyng, and if Y 
haue founde grace hifor hise i3en, and if 
my preier is not seyn ‘to bet contrarie to 
hym, Y biseche®, that the elde lettris of 
Aaman, traitour’ and enemy of Jewis, by 
whiche¥ he hadde comaundid hem to pe- 
rische in alle the pronynces of the kyng, 
be aiendid bi newe pistlis* ; for hou schal 
Y mowe suffre the deth, and the sleyng 
of my puple? And kyng Assnerus an-7 
sweride to Hester, the queen, and to Mar- 
dochee, Jew’, Y* grauntide* the hows of 
Aaman to Hester, the queen, and Y co- 
maundide hym to be hangid ‘on the? cros, 


t sent E prim. 

© wraththe rs. P restide azens the 
t certisis. Ut Om.1s. VY the brother of hir 
z to be ouer 1. to be souerein overs. 4 meynee I. 
¢ and therfor felle 1. and 


f preiede Himis. & wolde1. 4 comaunde 
mQOm.1s. token rs. © his merci s. 
8 plesith to is. tOm. s. u biseche fhe, lord s. 


xlettresis. Ythe Jews. 2 and seide, 1s. 


+ hows ; that 
is, alle his 
castels. Lire 
here. 


VIIL. 9—14. 


it plesith to 30u, in the kingus name, 
selende the lettris with my ring. For- 
sothe this was the custum, that to the 
epistolis, the whiche of the kingus name 
weren sent, and weren selid with his 
ring, no man shulde ben hardi to with- 
yseyn. And the seribis and the librarijs 
of the king clepid; forsothe tine was of 
the thridde moneth, that is elepid Ciban, 
that is, June, the thre and twentithe dai 
of it; ben write the epistolis, as Mardoche 
wolde, to the Jewis, and to the princis, 
and proeuratoures, and ingis, that in an 
hundrid and seuene and twenti prouyneis, 
fro Ynde vnto Ethiope, befor seten, to pro- 
uynee and prouynce, to puple and puple, 
aftir tungis and ther lettris, and to the 
Jewis, that thei my3te reden and heren. 
10 And tho epistolis, that in the kingus name 
wer sent, with his ring ben selid, and 
sent bi messageris, that bi alle the pro- 
uyneis rennende shulde come before the 
olde lettris with the newe messageris. 
11 To whom the king comaundide, that thei 
shulden gadere togidere the Jewis bi alle 
the cites, and thei shulden comaunden in 
oon to be gedered, that thei stonde for 
ther liues; and alle their enemys, with 
ther wiues and fre childer, and alle 
ther housis, thei shulden slen, and don 
vawei. And ther is set" bi’ alle pro- 
uyneis” o dai of veniaunce, that is, the 
threttenthe dai of Adar, the twelfthe 
ismoneth. And the shorte sentence of the 
epistil was this, that in alle* londis and 
puplis, the whiche vnderle3en to the em- 
pire of king Assuer, it shulde be maad 
knowen, Jewis to be redi to be take 
l4veniaunce of ther enemys. And ther 
wenten out messageris, berende beforn 
messagis; and the maundement of the king 


Usent 4. Vin a. 


ESTHER. 


W the prouyneis ar. 


653 


fore he was harii to sette hond ajens the 
Jewis. Therfor! write 3e to Jewis*, as its 
plesith to 30u, ‘bi the®¢ name of the kyng’, 
and aseele 3e the lettris with my ring. 
For this was the® enstom, that no man 
durste a3enseie the pistlis®, thati weren 
sente in the kyngis name, and weren 
aseelidk with his ryng. And whanne thes 
dyteris! and ‘writeris of the kyng™ weren 
clepid; ‘sotheli it was" the tyme of the 
thridde monethe, which® is clepid Sibanp, 
in the thre and twentithe dai of that4 
monethe; pistlis’ weren writun, as Mar- 
dochee wolde, to Jewis, and to princes, 
and to proecuratouris, and to iugis, that 
weren souereyns of* an hundrid and se- 
nene and twertti prouynees, fro Iynde ‘til 
tot Ethiope, to" prouynee and to pro- 
nynce’, to puple” and to pupley, bi her 
langagis and lettris’, and to Jewis*, that 
thei my3ten rede and here>, And tho. 
pistlis’, that weren sent ‘bi the kyngis 
name’, weren aseelid with his ryng, and 
sentf bi messangeris®, whiche® runnen 
aboute bi alle prouynees, and camen' with 
newe messagis bifor* the elde lettris!. To 
whiche™ the kyng comaundide, that thei 
sechulden clepe togidere the Jewis" bi alle 
citees, ‘and comaunde to be gaderid togi- 
dere®, that? thei sechulden stonde4 for her 
lyues; and schuldent sle, and do awet alle 
her enemyes, with her wynes and chil- 
dren’, ard allet howsis®. And o dai of. 
veniaunce, that is, in’ the thrittenthe dai 
of the tweluethe monethe Adar’, was or- 
deined bi alle prouynces. And the schort1s 
sentence of the pistle* was this’, that it 
were maad knowun in alle londis and 
puplis, that weren suget to the empire of 
kyng Assuerus, that the Jewis ben redi* 
to take veniaunce of her enemyes. And 14 


_ 


x Om. a. 


¢ for thi that 1. for this. 4 Therfor in the name of the king 1s. ¢ the Jewis 1s. ¢€ Om, a. ‘fOm. 1s. 


i which s. * seelid 1. 


o that 1. 


Eas. » lettres 1s. 
v it was thanne 1. 
Souerm. ¢t yntor. 


lettris 1, @the Jewist. here hem 1. 


laraiers of the kyngis letiris 1. endyters s. 
P May, a marg. Siban, that is, June 1. 
U thei weren writen to that 1, 


¢thilke 1. ‘lettres 1. epistelis s. 


m his writeris 1. 
athe r. lettres 1. epistlis s. 
wthat pupler. Y¥that 1. % bi her 
€ in the name of the kyng 1. 


Vv that 1. 


f weren sent forth 1. & his messangeris1. > the whiche1. ‘thei eament.  & bifor that 1. | lettris 
weren exseculid 1, ™whomi. ® Jewis, and comaunde hem to be gaderid togidre 1. ° Om.1, Pand 
that 1. 9 stonde ¢ogidere 1. = t that thei schuniden 1. — 8 with her children 1. twith aller, her 
housholdis 1. v Om. 1. w Mareh, a marg. Adar, that is, Marche 1. of Adar x see. m. x epistle s. 
y Oin. 1. 2 redi that day 1. 


654 


15 hengY in Susis. Mardoche forsothe of the 
paleis and of the si3te of the king goende 
out, sechynede in kingis clothis, iacinctine, 
that is, and? of eir® colour, berende a 
goldene coroun in the hed, and wrappid 
with a silkene pal and purper; and al 

16 the cite ful out iosede, and is glad. For- 
sothe to the Jewis is seen to ben sprungen 
a newe list, io5e, wrshiping, and daunc- 

i7ing, anentis alle puplis, cites, and alle 
prouyucis, whider euere the kingus inaun- 
demens eamen, merteilouse out io3zingis®, 
metys plenteuous, and festis, and feste 
da3es, in so myche, that manye of the 
tother fole and sect to ther religioun 
and cerimoynes weren ioyned; gret for- 
sothe drede of Jewis name alle men 
hadde asalid. 


CAP. IX. 


1 Thanne of © the twelfthe moneth, whom 
Adar to be clepid now beforn wee seiden, 
the threttenthe day, whanne to alle the 
Jewis sla3ter was greithid, and enemys 
waiteden to the blod of hem, the while 
turned, the Jewis begunne to ben ouer 
heijere, and hem of the aduersaries to 
2venge. And ther ben gedered bi alle 
cites’, bur3® tounys, and placis, that thei 
shulde streeehen out hond a3en enemys 
and ther pursueris; and no man was 
hardi to withstonde, for thi that the fer 
of the gretnesse of hem alle puplis hadde 
3persid. For and of prouyncis the iugis, 
dukis, and procuratoures, and al dignete, 
that to alle placis and werkis weren be- 
forn, ful out enhauncide the Jewis, for 
4drede of Mardoche, whom to be prince 
of the paleis and of myche power thei 
a feir mw. 


yhenged sern. 2 Om, am. 


20Om.1. forth.  ¢ this same 1. 
hOm.cw. ihe schynede 1. 
dochie 1. P on Guix. 
W rise up 1. 

hem was a1. 


Ghe wast. Y hilid 1. 
x and ioie 1. Y and onour 1. 


dand metis1. © many men 1. 


ESTHER. 


b jojing aera. 


d heest 1. 
k is fo sey. lini. ™ jacynct clothis 1. 
8 siluer s. 
2 was atl. 


f Om. I. 


VIII, 15—IX. 4. 


the* messangeris 3eden out, bifor berynge 
swift messages; and the° comaundement4 
of the kyng hangide in Susa*. Sothelif1s 
Mardochee 3ede out of the paleis? and 
of the kyngis si3t, and schynede! in the 
kyngis clothis, that is*, of! iaeynet™ and 
of ® eolour of the eir, and he® bar a goldun 
coroun in? his heed, and was! clothid’ with 

a mentil of selk* and of purpur'; and al 
the citee fulli ioiede", and was glad. For-16 
sothe’ a newe li3t semede to rise’ to the 
Jewis, ioie*, onoury, and daunsyng, at? alle 17 
puplis, citees*, and alle** prouynces, whidur 
euere the comaundementis® of the kyng 
camen, a° wondurful ioie, metis’, and 
feestis, and an hooli dai, in so myche, that 
many® of anf other folk and seet® weren 
ioyned to the religioun and cerymonyes"” 
of hem‘; for* the! greet drede of the name 
of Jewis ‘hadde asaylid™ alle hem”. 


CAP. IX. 


Therfor in the thrittenthe dai of the! 
tweluethe monethe, which® we seiden now 
bifore to be clepid Adar, whanne sleyng 
was maad redi to alle Jewis?, and her 
enemyes settiden tresoun to blood4, a3en- 
ward Jewes’ bigunnen® to be the hijere*, 
and to venge hem of aduersaries". And2 
thei” weren gaderid togidere bi alle citees, 
eastels, and places, to stretehe forth hond¥ 
a3ens her enemyes and pursueris*; and no 
man was hardi to a3enstonde’, for the 
drede of her gretnesse hadde persid? alle 
puplis. For whi bothe the* iugis, duykis, 3 
and procuratouris of prouynees, and ech 
dignyte, that weren souereyns of alle places 
and werkis", enhaunsiden Jewis*, for the 
drede of Mardochee, whom thei knewen®4 
to be prince of the paleis’, and to mow do 
ful nyche; and the fame of his name en- 
4 the citees H. 


¢ Om. 4. € and bur3 4c. 


€ the citee of Susar. f Andy. & kyngis paleis 1. 
1 in clothis hauynge 1. © Mar- 
t purpul s. “out ioiede 1. V¥ Certis thanne 1. 
aand citees 1. at alle1. » heestis 1. © among 


& of an oother sect 1. 4 to the cerymonyes 1. 


iJewis 1. k sothely 1. !Om.1. ™ assailide 1. 1 men plures. © the whichi. P the Jewis b: daman 1. 


dher blood 1. the Jewis 1. § xow bigunnen t. 
wher honder. * her pursueris 1, 
Jewis 1. 40Om.1, © knowen o. 


t higere part 1. 
Y azenstonde hem 1. 
f kingis paleis 1. 


v the Jewis 1. 
¢ the 


u her aduersaries c1. 


z peerschidi1. 2®Om.1. » of werkis 1. 


1X. 5—16. 


knewen; also the fame of his name wex 
eehe dai, and bi thef mouthis of alle men 
softe flei3. And so the Jewis smyten ther 
enemys with a gret veniaunce, and slowen 
hem, 3eldende to hem that thei to them 
céhadden maad redi to do, in so iniche, 
that also in Susis fine hundrid men thei 
slowen, with oute the ten sonys of Aman 
Agagite, enemy of the Jewis, of whom 
7these ben the namys; Fasondatha, Del- 
fon, and Esfata, and Forata, and Dalia, 
gand Aridatha, and Efermesta, and Arisai, 
1oand Aridai, and Vaisatha. Whom whan 
thei hadde slain, thei wolden not pursue 
11 praies® of the substauncis! of hem. And 
anon the noumbre of hem, that weren 
12slain in Susis, is told to the king. The 


whiche seide to the quen, In the cite of . 


Susis the Jewis slowen fiue hundrid men, 
and othere ten sones of Aman; hou 
myehe sla3ter wenest thou them to en- 
haunten* in alle prouyncis? what more 
askist thou? and what wilt thou, that I 
13comaunde to be don? To whom she an- 
suerde, If to the king it plese, be ther 
jiue power to the Jewis, that as thei 
diden to day in Susis, so and do thei to 
morn, and the ten sones of Aman be 
l4thei hangid in iebetis. And the king 
comaundide, that so it shulde be do; and 
anon in Susis heeng' a maundement, and 
15the ten sonus of Aman ben hangid. The 
Jewis gederede togidere, the fourtenthe 
dai of the monyth of Adar, and ther 
be slain in Susis thre hundrid men, ne 
ther substaunce fro them is raueshid 
isawei. But and bi alle the™ prouyncis, 
that vnder le3en to the maundement of 
the king, the Jewis stoden for ther liues, 
the enemys slain and ther pursueris, in 
so miche, that fiue and seuenti thousend 
of slaine men weren fulfild, and no man 


f Om. 4. 
m Om. 4H. 


Shandon ze prm. 1 pris c. 


h smeten EILP. smetin s. 
© the kynrede of Agag 1. 


& wW passide t. 
a the Jewis 1. 
8 wolden not 1. 


ESTHER. 


i substaunee Au. 


ihers. the n. 
P the whiehe sones I. 
t do RCDEFGULMNOPQRSUVWxab. touche K sec. m, the preies K sec.m, ¥ suhstaunee 1. 


655 


ereeside eeh dai, and fleif bi the mouthis 
of alle men. Therfor the Jewis smytiden! 5 
her enemyes with greet veniaunce, and 
killiden hem, and 3eldiden to tho! enemyes 
that, that* thei hadden maad redi to do to 
‘the Jewis!, in so myche, that also in Susa™ 6 
thei® killiden fyue hundrid men, with out 
the ten sones of Aaman of Agag®, the 
enemye of Jewis, of whieheP these ben 
the names; Phasandatha, Delphon, and47 
Esphata, and‘ Phorata, and4 Adalia, and4® 
Aridatha, and’ Ephermesta, and‘ Arisai,9 
and? Aridai, and Vaizatha. And whanne to 
the Jewis hadden slayn hem", thei nolden’ 
taket preies" of the eatels’ of hem. And 11 
anoon the noumbre of hem, that weren 
slayn in Susa¥, was teld to the kyng. 
Which* seide to the queen, JewisY han 12 
slayn fyue hundrid men in the eitee of 
Susa, and othere? ten sones of Aaman; 
hou grete sleyng gessist thou, that thei 
haunten in alle prouynees? what axist 
thou more? and what wolt* thou, that 
Y comaunde to be doon? To whom sehe? 13 
answeride, If it plesith® the kyng, power 
be 3ouun to the Jewis, that as thei han do 
to dai in Susa‘, so do thei also to morewe, 
and that the ten sones of Aaman be hangid 
vp in iebatis. And the kyng eomaundide, 14 
that it sehulde be doon so; and anoon the 
eomaundement® hangide in Susa, and the 
ten sones of Aainan weren hangid. Ther-15 
forf whanne the Jewis weren gaderid togi- 
dere, in the fourteuthe dai of the monethe 
Adar®, thre hundrid men weren slayn? in 
Susai, and the Jewis token not awei the 
catel of thok men. But also bi alle the16 
prouyniees, that weren suget to the lord- 
sehip of the kyng, Jewis' stoden for her 
lyues, whanne her enemyes and pursueris™ 
weren slayn, in" so myehe, that® fyue and 
seuenti thousynde of slayn men ‘weren 


k haunten 4. lhangede 4EFu. 


n the citee of Susa 1. 
r the sones of Aaman 1. 


k Om. as, hem. 
q Om. ft. 


eastels Gorxa. eatel LPs. batailes n. w the citee of Susat, * And he 1. ythe Jewis 1. 2 the 1. 
awilt: > Hester1. plesithto1. 4 the citee of Susar. © heest of the kyng1. fAndi.  & of 
Marche 1. h slayn that day 1. i the citee of Susa 1. k thilke sleyin i. 1 the Jewis 1. ™ her 
pursneris 1, ®audinx. © that thei fulfilliden ‘he noumbre of 1. 


656 ESTHER. 


_ of ther substaunce any thing toucliide. 
17Forsothe the threttenthe dai of the 
monyth Adar” was of o sla3ter anentis 
alle, and the fourtenthe dai thei lafte to 
slen; whom thei ordeyneden to be so- 
lempne, that in that time eche 3er ther- 
after thei shulden voiden to plenteuous 
ismetis, aud to io3e, and to festis. And 
these, that in the cite of Susys hadden 
hauntid the® slater, the threttenthe and 
the fourtenthe dai of the same moneth 
ben ocupied in the sla3ter. The fiftenthe 
forsothe dai thei laften to smyte; and 
therfore the same dai thei ordeyneden 
solempne of plentenous metis and of 
19gladnesse. These forsothe Jewis, that 
in bur3 tounys not wallid and tounes 
duelten, the fourtenthe daie of the 
moneth of Adar, of festis, and of io3e 
demeden, so that thei ful? out gladen in 
it, and senden to hemself togidere partis 
200f plentes and of metis. And so Mar- 
doche wrot alle these thingus, and com- 
prehendid in lettris sented to the Jewis, 
that in alle the’ prouyneis of the king 
21 dwelten, bothe in nee3h set and afer, that 
the fourtenthe and the fiftenthe dai of 
the moneth of’ Adar thei shulden take 
for festis, and euermor, the 3er turnende 
a3een, with solempne wrshipe thei shul- 
22den halewe; for in tho da3is the Jewis 
vengide them of ther enemys, and weil- 
ing and sorewe in to io3e and gladnesse 
ben turned; and these da3es shulde ben 
dazes of plentenous metis, and of glad- 
nesse, and thei shulden sende to them- 
self partis togidere of thet metis, and to 
pore men thei shulden graunt litle 3iftis. 
23Forsothe the Jewis token in to a so- 
lempne custum alle thingus, that thei 
hadde begunne that time to do, and that 


nof Adar au. © Om.c. P folli sern. 


POm.1. 4Jewer. ° goodis 1. 
that dai1. —¥ solempne at hem 1. 
4 contynueden her 1. 
solempne1. i And. & in vilagis 1. 
metis1. P Andt. 4@ he sente alle 1. 
and holde for here feeste daies 1. 
morenyng 1. @ her sorewe 1, 


S Certis 1. 
2 so that 1. 
€ and int. dai and a, 


v Om. a. 
b and therfor 1. 


4 and sente a. 


t of Marche 1. 

@ schulden fhanne 1. 
f the fourtenthe cpreu1KMNOPQsuvVab. 
1 fo be solempne of 1. 
T writen 1, 8 the prouyncis IX see. m. 
Ww Om. 1. 


¢ the Jewis 1. 


IX, 17-——23, 


fillid?, and no man‘ touchide ony thing of 
the catelis™ of hem. Forsothe’ the thrit-17 
tenthe dai of the monethe Adart was o" 
dai of sleyng at’ alle Jewts*, and in the 
fourtenthe dai thei ceessiden to sle; which* 
thei ordeyneden to be solempne’, that? 
therynne in ech tyme aftirward thei 
schulden® 3yue tent to metis, to ioye, and 
to feestis. And thei’, that hauntiden‘®1a 
sleyng in the citee of Susa, ‘lyneden in¢ 
sleyng in the thrittenthe and® fourtenthe® 
dai of the same monethe. But in the fif- 
tenthe dai thei ceessiden to sle; and& 
therfor thei ordeyneden the same dai so- 
lempne of feestis and of gladnesse. For-19 
sothe’ these Jewis, that dwelliden in borow 
townes not wallid and vilagis*, demeden 
the fourtenthe dai of the monethe Adar 
of! feestis, and of ioie, so that thei™ be 
ioiful theryune, and sende ech to other 
partis of feestis" and of metis®. Therfor? 20 
Mardochee wroot alle these thingis, and 
sente? these thingis comprehendid" bi let- 
tris to the Jewis, that dwelliden in alle 
prouynees® of the kyng, as wel to Jewis 
set' ny3 as fer, that thei schulden res-21 
seyue" the fourtenthe and the’ fiftenthe 
dai of the monethe Adar ‘for feestis’, and 
euer whanne the 3eer turneth aj3en, ‘thei 
schulden* haloweY with soleinpne onour ; 
for in tho daies the Jewis vengiden hem 22 
silf of her enemyes, and morenyng”? and 
sorewe* weren turned in to gladnesse and 
joie; and” these daies schulden be dates of 
feestis, and of gladnesse, and ‘that thei‘ 
schulden sende ech to other partis of 
metis®, and ‘3yue litle 3iftis' to pore men. 
Forsothes the Jewis resseyueden in tos 
solempne® custom alle thingis', whicbe 
thei bigunnen to do in that tyme, and 
whiche thingis Mardochee hadde  co- 


rOm. 4. $ Om. aern. * Om. a. 


uther Vanentis1. “hemi. * and 
b tho Jewis 1. © vsiden the 1. 
Om. a. 2} to be 
n her feestis 1. © her 
t dwellinge 1, ™ resseyue 
Y halowe thes daies 1. 2 thanne her 
e her metis1. f that thei departe of her 


m alle the Jewis 1. 


Xtol. 


godis1. Andi. For the sothe s. » the solempne co pr.m. a solempne 1. i ¢ho thingis 1. 


IX, 24——30. 


Mardoche in lettris hadde sent to be do. 
24Aman forsothe, the sone of Amadathi, 
stoc of Agag, enemy and aduersarie of 
Jewis, tho3te ajen hem euel, that he 
shulde sle them and don awei, and leide 
fur, that in oure tunge is turned in to lot. 
2,And afterward Ester wente in to the 
king, besechende, that his ententis with 
the" lettris of the king shulden be maad 
voide, and the euel, that a3en Jewis he 
hadde tho3t, shulde be turned a3een in to 
his hed. Afterward and’ hym and his 
26sonus thei ficcheden toY the cros. And 
fro that time these da3is be clepid Furim, 
that is, of lotis, forthi that fur, that is, 
lot, in to a pot was put; and alle thingus 
that ben don ben contened in the volume 
270f the epistil, that is, of this boc; alle 
thingus that thei suffreden, and that 
ther after ben chaungid, Jewis and 
ther sed token vp on hem, and vp on 
alle that wolden to ther religioun be 
couplid, that to no mau it be leful these 
two da3es with oute solempnete to ouer- 
passe, whom scripture’ witnesseth, and 
othere tymes asken, the 3eres to them- 
og self continueli comende aftir other. These 
ben the da3is, whom neuer any for3eting 
shal don awei, and bi sunder ienera- 
ciouns alle prouyncis, that in alle the 
world ben, shuln halewen; ne ther is 
any cite, in the whiche dajis of Furim, 
that is, of lotis, be not kept of the* 
Jewis, and of ther progenye, that with 
29 these cerimoynes is oblisht. And Ester, 
quen, the do3tir of Abihael, and Mar- 
doche, Jeu, writen also the secounde 
epistil, that with alle besynesse this dai 
solempneli shulde ben halewid ther af- 
soterward. And thei sente to theY Jewis, 
that in an hundrid and seuene and twenti 


ESTHER. 


657 


maundid bi lettris to be doon. Sothelik 24 
Aaman, the sone of Amadathi, of the 
kynrede of Agag, the enemy and aduer- 
sarie of Jewis, thou3te yuel ajens hem, to 
sle hem and to do! awei, and he sente™ 
phur, which" is interpretid® in? oure lan- 
gaged ‘in to" lot’. And afterward‘ Hester 25 
entride" to the kyng, and bisou3te’, that 
‘hise enforsyngis” schulden be maad voide 
bi the lettris of the kyng, and that the 
yuel, which* he hadde thou3t aj3enus the 
Jewis, schulde turne a3en in to his heed. 
‘Forsothe theiY hangiden? on* the” cros 
‘bothe hym® and hise sones4, And fro 26 
that tyme® these daies weren clepid ‘Phu- 
rym, that is, of lottis, for ‘phur, that is®, 
lot, was sent" in to a vessel; and the 
Jewis resseyneden on' hem silf, and onk 
her seed, and on! alle men that wolden 
be couplid to her religioun, alle thingis 
that weren doon™, and ben" conteyned in 
the volym® of the pistle?, ‘that is, of this 
book’, and whiche™ thingis thei’ suffriden, 27 
and whichet thingis weren chaungid aftir- 
ward, that" it be not leueful to ony man 
to passe’ with out solempnyte these” ‘daies, 
which* the scripture witnessith, and cer- 
teyn tymes axen, while theY 3eeris comen 
contynuely oon aftir an other. These 2s 
ben the daies, whiche neuer ony for3et- 
yng schal do awei, and? bi alle genera- 
ciouns alle prouyuces®, that ben in al the 
world, schulen halewe>; nether ‘ony citee 
is*, in which the daies of Phurym4, that 
is, of lottis®, schulen not be kept of Jewis, 
and of the generacioun of hem, which is 
bounden to these cerymonyes. And Hes-2 
ter, the queen, the dou3ter of Abiahel, 
and Mardochee, the Jew, writiden! also 
the secounde pistle®, that this solempne 
dai schulde be halewid aftirward with al 


+) 
ra 


uOm. 4. Vbothe 4. Wona. *Om.an. Y hem an. 

k For1. !dohemi. ™caste1. "thatr. © tosey 1. Pon Nn. 4 langagis p. lange ps. * Om.1. 
$ lot éo do it 1. t aftir this 1. u entride yn 1. V sche bisou3te the hyng 1. W the enforsyngis of 
Aamani, *that1. Yandsothe Jewis1. 2hangideu Aamant. @uponi. bar. ¢Om.1. 4 sones 
alsor1. tyme forths. fthe daiesoflott1, § Om.1. Bcastr. j‘tupont. kuponr. luponi. 
m doon bi Hester and Mardochie1. % alle thingis thatben 1. © book 1. P epistles. 4@Om.1. * the 
whiche 1. 8 the Jewis1. tthe whicher. sothati. ¥ passe thes éwo daies 1. WY Om.1. * which 
daies1. Ythati. Zbutr. the prouynces 1. > halowe hemi. © ther is ony citee 1. @ Phur 1. 
elott1. fwreten 1. writins. § epistle s. 

VOL. I. 4p 


658 


prouyncis of king Assuer dwelten, that 
thei shulden han pes, and resceyue treuthe, 

31 kepende wel the dajes of lotis, and in 
ther tyme with io3e shulden halewe; as 
hadden ordeyned Mardoche and Ester, 
thei to be kept hadden taken, of hemself 
and of ther sed, fastingis’, and clamoures, 

3zand dajes of lotis, and alle thingus that 
ben contened in the storie of this boc, 
that is clepid Ester. 


CAPE X. 


1 King forsothe Assuer al the lond and 
alle the ilis of the se made tributaries ; 
2whos strengthe and empire and dignete 
and heiznesse, that he enhauncide Mar- 
doche in, ben writen in the bokis of 
3 Medis and of Persis; and hou Mardoche 
of Jeu kinrede were the secounde fro 
king Assuer, and gret anentis the Jewis, 
and acceptable to the fole of ther bre- 
thern, sechende goodis to his puple, 
and spekende tho thingus, that to the pes 
of his sed shulden pertene. Zhe whiche 
ben had in Ebru in pleyn feith I ex- 
pressede; these thingus forsothe, that 
Jolewen, I fond write in the comun 
making, the whiche in Grekis tunge 
and lettris ben contened ; and eft after 
the ende of the boe this chapitre was 
seid, that after oure consuetude with 
obelo, that is, with ‘a stric*, wee han be- 
4 for notid. And Mardoche seide, Of God 
5these thingus ben don. I am recordid of 
a sweuene, that I sa3, magnefiende these 
same thingus, ne of tho any thing was 
svoide. A litil welle, that grew in to a 
flod, and in to 1i3t and sunne is turned, 


2 fastynge 4. 


ESTHER. 


IX. 31—X. 6. 


bisynesse. And" thei senten to tho! Jewis, 30 
that dwelliden in an hundrid and seuene 
and twenti prouynces of kyng Assuerus, 
that thei schulden haue peesf, and res- that is, dwelle 
k 4 pesibly among 
seyue the trewthet, and kepe® the daies of 31 hethen men, 
- 0 i. 6 and he not 
lottis!, and halewe™ with ioie in her tyme, ‘Vantoun as 
.  tristinge of the 
as Mardochee and Hester hadden ordeyned 3 Sawant a 
and thei" resseiueden the fastyngis, and the ani 
: i oche. Lire 
cries®, and the daies of lottis4, to be kept of ere. c. 


t haue pecs ; 


ter and of Mar- 
. +. tf and resseyue ~ 
hem silf and of her seed, and ‘that thei 32 ine treuthe, of 
. rar this book 
schulden resseyue among hooli bookis™ song hooly 
alle thingis that ben conteyned in the sto-  bekis. Lire 
here. c. 


rie of this book, which® is clepid Hester. 


CAP X. 


Forsothe kyng Assuerus inade tribu-1 
tarye ech lond, and alle the ilis of the 
see; whos strengthe and empire and‘ dig-2 
nyte and hiznesse, by which he enhaunside 
Mardochee, ben writun in the bookis of 
Medeis and of Persis; and how" Mar-3 
dochee of’ the kyn of Jewis was the 
secounde” fro king Assuerus, and* was 
greet anentis Jewis’, and acceptable’ to 
the puple of hise britheren, and he sou3te 
goodis* to his puple, and spak? tho thingis, 
that® perteyneden to the pees of his seed. 
Here endith the teat of Ebrew*. I haue 
set opynli with ful feith tho thingis, that 
ben had in Eebrew; but Y foond these 
thingis, that suen, writun® in the comyn 
translacioun, that ben conteyned im the 
langage! and lettris of Grekis ; and in the 
meene tyme this chapitre was seid after 
the ende of the book, ‘which chapitre we 
bi oure custom han bifor markid& ‘with 
a> spite‘. And Mardochee seide, These 
thingis ben doon of God. Y haue myndes 
on* the! dreem, which™ 'Y si3, signifiynge" 
these same thingis®, and no thing of tho 
was voide. AP litil welle, that’ wexides 


aa stirke n. 


h And alsor  ithilke 1. — * that thei schulden keper. Jlott1. ™halewe hemi. 1 the Jewis 1. 
° solempne cries1. lott 1. 7 thei resceynedent. $thati. this dignyte1. ‘thowthatr. v the 
whiche was of qe W secounde maz 1. xand Mardochie 1. y the Jewis 1. Z he was acceptable 1. 
a gode thingis 1. bhespak1. ¢whiche1. 4 Ebrew, and this is a rubrich text ¢ marg. ¢ Om. B. 
flangagis w. ¢€ Om. » Om. nr i dispile D. spite, ether a spere EGLNPQRX. spile, either a finger M. 


spite, ether a sterr 0, spile, ether a snia. Om. 1B. 


Kofi Jan. m the which 1. 0 schewide 1, 


° thingis ¢hal now appeeren 1. PIsizar. 4 the whiche 1, 


X. 7——-XI. 3. 


and in to manye watris reboundide, is 
Ester, that the king toc wif, and wolde 
7to be quen. Two forsothe dragounes, I 
sam and Aman; the fole that camen togi- 
dere, these ben, that enforceden to don 
gawei the name of Jewis. Forsothe my 
folc is Ivael, that criede to the Lord ; and 
the Lord made saaf his puple, and deli- 
uerede vs fro alle euelis, and made grete 
signes and wondris among the Jentilis; 
10and comaundide two lotis to ben, oon of 
the puple of God, and an other of alle 
11 Jentilis. And either lot cain in to the 
set dai befor God now fro that time to 
i2alle Jentilis. And the Lord recordide of 
i3his puple, and rewide of his eritage. And 
these dajes shul be kept in the moneth 
of Adar, the fourtenthe and the? fiftenthe 
dai of the same moneth, with alle bisy- 
nesse and io3e of the puple gedered in to 
o cumpanye, in to alle ther aftirward 
ieneraciouns of the puple of Irael. 


CAP. XI. 


1 The ferthe 3er, regnende Ptholome and 
Cleopatra, Dositheus, that a prest and of 
Leuy kinrede seide hymself to be, and 
Ptholome, his sone, bro3ten this epistil 
of furim, the whiche thei seiden, Silima- 
cum, the sone of Ptholome, in Jerusalem 
to han remened. This forsothe was the 
begynnyng in the comun translacioun, 
that nouther in Ebru, ne anent any of 

2the® remenours is told. The secounde 
jer, regnyng Artaxerse the moste, the 
firste dai of the moneth Nysan, Mar- 
doche, the sone of Jari, sone of Semei, 
sone of Cis, of the linage of Beniamyn, 

3a man Jeu, that dwelte in the cite of 


ESTHER. 


659 


in to a flood, and was" turned in to the* 
]iz3t_ and‘ sunne’, and turnede’ ajen in to 
ful many watris, is” Hester, whom the 
kyng took in to wijf, and wolde* that 
sche were his queen. SotheliY twei? dra-7 
gouns, Y am and Aaman; folkis* thats 
camen togidere, ben these, that enforsiden® 
to do a wei the name of Jewis. Sothelic9 
my folk Israel it is, that criede to the 
Lord; and the Lord made saaf his puple, 
and delyueride? vs fro alle ynels, and dide® 
grete signes‘ and wondris among hethene 
men; and he comaundide® twei® lottis to 10 
be, oon of Goddis puple, and the totheri 
of alle hethene men. And euer either lot 1 
cam in to ‘determynd dai thanne! fro that 
tyme bifor God and alle folkis. And the12 
Lord hadde mynde on™ his puple, and 
hadde" merci on° his eritage. And these 13 
daies? schulen be kept in the monethe 
Adar4, in the fourtenthe ‘and the’ fif- 
tenthe® dai of the same monethe, with al 
bisynesse and ioie of the puple gaderid 
in to o cumpenye, in to alle generaciouns' 
of the puple of Israel aftirward. 


CAP XE 


In the fourthe 3eer, whanne Ptolome1 
and Cleopatra regneden, Dositheus, that 
seide hym silf to be a prest and of the 
kyn of Leuy, and Ptolome, his sone, 
brou3ten this pistle" of lottis’ in to Je- 
rusalem, which” pistle* thei seiden, that 
Lysimachus, the sone of Ptolome, trans- 
latide. AlsoY this bigynnyng was in the 
comyn trauslacioun, which" bigynnyng is 
not teld in Ebreu, nethir at ony of 
the* translatouris. In the secounde 3eer,2 
whanne Artaxerses the moost> regnyde, 
Mardochee, the sone of Jairy, sone® of 
Semei, sone’ of Cys, of the lynage of Ben- 
iamyn, si3 a dreem in the firste dai of the 


bOm. 4a. ¢ Om. an. 
ritwast. °&Om.sern. tofEeL. Yintothesunner. Vitturneder, W ¢his welleis1. *he 
wolde1, yAnd1. *thetwor. ?and many folkis1. > enforsiden hem1. © Buti. 4 he hath 
delyuered 1. he hath dor. ‘tokeness. 8 hath comaundid 1. btwor. ‘oother1. * And thanne 1, 
1a daiordeyned1. ™of1. ®hehadder. °of1. P solempne daies1. of Marcher, * Om. Ix. 
‘sOm.s. ‘the generaciouns1. "epistles. Vlott 1. Ww the whieh 1. * epistles. ¥ This is a rubrich ; 
for B. 2 the whicha. *thow. ” my3tiest king1. ¢ the sone1, 4 the sone 1. 


4P2 


660 
Susis, a gret man, and among the firste 
sof the kingus halle, sa3 a sweuene. For- 
sothe he was of the noumbre of caityues, 
whoin Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, 
hadde translatid fro Jerusalem with Je- 
sconye, king of Jude. And this was his 
sweuene. There semeden voisis, and noisis, 
and thundris, and erthe quaues, and dis- 
sturbing’ vp on the erthe. And lo! two 
grete dragounes, redi a3en hemself in to 
jbataile; at whos cri alle naciouns ben 
stirid togidere, that thei fi3te azen the 
éfole off ri3twis men. And that dai was of 
dercnessis, and of perile, of tribulacioun, 
and of anguysh, and gret fer vp on erthe. 
9 And disturbid‘ is the fole of ri3twis men, 
dredende ther euelis, and maad redi to 
lothe deth. Thei crieden to God; and hem 
criende out, a litle welle wex in to the 
moste flod, and in to manye watris re- 
idundede. Lijt and the sunne is sprun- 
gen; aud meke men ben enhauncid, 
igand thei deuoureden the gloriouse. The 
whiche thing whan Mardoche hadde seen, 
and risen of the bed, he tho3te, what God 
wolde do, and ficchid he hadde in the 
inwit, coueitende to wite, what the sue- 
uene shulde betocne. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Forsothe he dwelte that time in the 
halle of the king, with Bagatha and 
Thara, geldingus of the king, that por- 
2teris weren of the paleis. And whan he 
hadde vnderstonde the tho3tis of hem, 
and the besynessis mor diligentli hadde 
seen before, he lernede that thei enfor- 
ciden to putten hond in to king Artax- 
ersen, and tolde vp on it to the king. 


ESTHER. 


XI. 4——XII. 2. 


monethe Nysan®; and Mardochee was a3 
man Jew!, that dwellide in the citee of 
Susa, a$ grete man, and" amonge the 
firste’ men of the kyngis halle. Sothelij¢ 
he was of that noumbre of prisoneris, 
which Nabugodonosor, the* kyng of Babi- 
loyn, hadde translatid fro Jerusalem with 
Jeconye, kyng of Judee. And this wass 
‘his dreem!. Voices™ and noises and thun- 
dris and erthemouyngis and troblyug" 
apperiden on® the erthe. And? lo! tweis 
grete dragouns, and maad? redi a3ens hem 
silf in to batel; at the’ cry ‘of which’ alle7 
naciouns weren stirid togidere, to fizte 
a3ens the fole of iust men. And that wass 
a day of derknessis, and of perel, of tribu- 
lacioun, and of angwisch, and grete drede 
was ont erthe. And the fole of iust meno 
dredynge ‘her ynels® was’ disturblid, and 
maad redi to deeth. And thei crieden to10 
God; and whanne thei crieden, a” litil 
welle encreesside in to a ful greet flood, 
and turnede* a3en in to ful many watris. 
The’ li3t and? the sunue roos?; and mekei1 
men weren enhaunsid, and deuouriden® 
noble men. And whanne Mardochee* iz 
hadde seyn this thing, and hadde rise fro 
the’ bed, he thou3te, what God wolde do, 
and he hadde fast set in soule*®, and couet- 
idef to wite, what the dreem signyfiedes. 


CAP. XII. 


Forsothe Mardochee dwellide that tyme1 
in the halle of the kyng, with Bagatha and 
Thara, oneste! seruauntis* of the kyng, 
that weren porteris of the paleis!. Ande 
whanne he hadde vndurstonde the thou3tis 
of hem™, and hadde® bifor seyn ful dili- 
gentli the® bisynessis, he lurnyde that 
thei enforsiden? to set hond4 on™ kyng* 
Artaxerses, and he telde of that thing to 


4 disturbling au. 


© Nysan, ¢hat is, June 1. fa Jew scperGuKLMNoparsuvwxab. & and he wasar. »bOm,1. ‘ cheef 1. 


jAndr kOm. 1. ! the dreem of Mardochie 1. 
POm.c. 4 éhet weren maadi. ° whos 1. 
Ywerenr. WIT saw3ear ¥%* it turnede 3. 


deuouriden and ouvercamen 1. 
coueitide 1. bitokenyde 1.» Certis 1. 
m these men 1. " he hadde 1. © her x. 
kyng 1. 


m He siz that voices 1. 
s Om. 1. 
yY And thanne the 1. 
¢ Mardochee in his sleep I. 
i the oneste 1. 
P enforsiden hem 1. 


0 greet troblyng 1. © upon 1. 
u the yuel of her enmyes 1. 

Z of cn. @ roos up I. thei 
ad his 1. € his soule this vistoun 1. fhe 

k sernauntis and chaast 1. | kyngis paleis t. 
q her hond 1. Tupont  § the 


t thanne upon t. 


aie — MIT. 4. 


3 The which®, of either questioun had con- 
fessid, he comaundede to ben had to deth. 
4The king forsothe that was don, wrot 
in librarijes, but and Mardoche the mynde 
sof the thing toc to lettris. And the king 
comaundide to hym, that in the halle of 
the paleis he shulde duelle, 3iftis 3iue to 
shym for the telling. Aman forsothe, the 
sone of Amadathy, gelding, was most 
glorious befor the king, and wolde no3en 
to Mardoche, and his puple, for the two 
geldingus of the king that weren slain. 
Hider to the prohemy ; thoo thingus, 
that folewen, in that place weren put, 
wher is write in the volume, And thei 
wasteden the goodis or ther substauncis; 
the whiche onli in the comun transta- 
cioun we han’ founden. Of the epistil 
JSorsothe this was the saumpler. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 The moste king Artaxerses, fro Ynde 
vnto Ethiope, of an hundrid and seuene 
and twenti prouyncis, to princis and 
dukis, that to his empire ben soget, 
2greting seith. Whan to manye folkis 
I shulde comaunden, and al the world 
hadde sogetid to my comaunding, I wolde 
not the mykilnesse of my power mys- 
vsen, but with mercy and softenesse go- 
nerne the sogetis, that, with oute any 
drede ouerpassende the lif in silence, thei 
shulden vse the pes desirid to alle deadli 
3men. Me forsothe sechende of my coun- 
seileris, hou that my3te be fulfild, oon, 
that in wisdam and feith othere men 
‘passide, and was after the king the se- 
aconde, Aaman bi name, tolde to me in 
al the world of londis to ben a puple 
seaterid, that newe shulde vsen lawis, 
and, ajen the custum of alle Jentilis 


€ which iche c. 


t either of hem 1. 


ESTHER. 


u knowlechinge her tresoun 1. 


661 


the kyng. And whanne enqueryng was; 
had of euer eithir', the kyng comaundide 

hem, ‘that knoulechiden", to be led to 

deth’. Forsothe’ the kyng wroot in bookis 4 
that*, that was doon, but’ also Mardochee 

bitook” the* mynde of the” thing to lettris®. 

And the kyng comaundide hym*, that hes 
schulde dwelle in the halle of the paleis, 

and 3af® to hym 3iftis for the tellynge. 

Forsothef Aaman, the sone of Amadathi, « 
a bugei, was’ moost glorius bifor the kyng, 

and he wolde anoye’ Mardochee, and his 

puple, for the ‘tweyne oneste! seruauntis of 

the king ‘that weren slaynk. MHidur to 

is the prohemye ; tho thingis, that suen, 

weren set! in that place, where tt was™ 

writun in the book, And thei token awey 

the goodis, ether the catels of hem; whiche 

thingis we founden in the comyn trans- 

lacioun. Sotheli this was the saumpler of 
the pistle, 


CAP. XIUL 


The gretteste kyng Artaxerses, fro1 
Iynde ‘til to” Ethiope, seith helthe to the 
princes and duykys of an hundrid and 
seuene and twenti prouynces, whicheP 
princes and duykis ben suget’ to his em- 
pire. Whanne Y was lord" of ful many2 
folkis, and’ Y hadde maad suget al the 
world to my lordschip, Y wolde not mys- 
use the greetnesse of power, but gouerne 
sugetist bi merci and softnesse, that thei, 
ledynge lijf¥ in silence with outen ony 
drede, schulden vse pees couetid of alle 
deedli men. Sotheliv whanne Y axide of3 
my counselours, hou this” iny3te be fillid*, 
oon’, Aaman bi name, that passide othere 
men in wisdom and ‘feithfulnesse, and? was 
the secounde aftir the kyng, schewide to4 
me, that a puple was scaterid in al the 
roundnesse of londis, which? puple vside 
newe lawis, and dide® a3ens the custom of 


£ Om.c pr. m. 


Vthedeth:1, WAnds. *that thing 1. Y and 1. 


Ztoker. 2Om.1. >this1. ¢ be writen in lettris1. 4 Mardochie1. ¢he jaft. f And3. & was 
thaune 1. %haue anoied1. itwo priuey 1.  * whiehe Aaman louyde myche 1. J writun xX. Mist. 
N epistle EHLV. Ovntot. Pthe whiches. 4sugettis:. ‘lord, he seide,1. Sand whanuet. +t my 


sugetis 1. 
nesse, the whiche r. 


wher lijf1. Vv And 1. 
a the which 1. 


W this gouernaile 1. 
b that this peple dide 1. 


x best fulfillid 1. Yoo prince 1. 2 in feithful- 


662 


doende, the hestis of the kingis dispise, 
and the ‘oon acordf of dinerse naciouns 
swith ther descencioun defoule. The 
whiche thing whan we hadden lerned, 
seande o fole rebel ajen alle kinde of men 
to vse shreude lawis, and to oure hestis 
to gon a3en, and to disturbe the pes and 
the acord of the prouyncis soget to vs, 
6wee comaundeden, that who so euere 
Aman, that is prouost to alle prouyncis, 
and secounde fro the king, and whom 
in stede of a fader wee wrshipen, shal 
shewyn, with wiues and fre childer be 
thei don awei of ther enemys, and no 
man haue mercy of§ them, the four- 
tenthe dai of the twelfthe moneth Adar, 
zof the 3er present; that wicke" men, 0 dai 
to helle goende doun, 3elde to oure em- 
pire the pes, that thei han disturbid'. 
Hider to the saumple of the epistil; 
thoo thingus, that folewen, after that 
place writen’ I fond, wher is rad, 
And goende Mardoche dide alle thingus, 
that Ester hadde comaundid to hym; 
and ner the latere thei ben not had 
in I’bru, and anent no man of the re- 
smenoures ther ben vtterli told. Mar- 
doche forsothe prez3ede the Lord, mynde- 
9ful of alle his werkis, and seide, Lord, 
Lord, king almy3ti, in thi power alle 
thingis ben set, and ther is not, that 
mai withstonde to thy wil; if thou deme 
to sauen IJrael, anoon wee shul be dely- 
1uered. Thou madist heuene and erthe, 
and alle thing that is contened in the 
i;cumpas of heuene. Lord of alle thingus 
thou art, ne ther is that withstonde* to 
12thi mageste. Alle thingus thou knewe, 
and wost, that not for pride and strif 
and any! coueitise of glorie I do this, 
that I honoure not the most proud 
13 Aman; forsothe gladli for the helthe of 


ESTHER. 


XIII. s—13. 


alle folkis, and dispiside® the comaunde- 
mentis* of kyngis, and defoulide® bi his 
discencioun the acordyng of alle naciouns. 
And whanne we hadden lerned this thing, 5 
and sien, that of folk rebel az3ens al the 
kynde of men vside weiward lawis, and® 
was contrarie to oure comaundementis', 
and disturblides the pees and acording 
of prouynces suget to vs, ‘we comaund-¢6 
iden, that whiche euere! Aaman ‘schewide, 
which™ is souereyn of alle prouynces, and 
is" the secounde fro® the kyng, and? whom 
we onouren in ‘the place’ of fadir', theis 
with her wiues and childrent be" doon 
awei of her enemyes, and noon’ haue 
merci on” hem, in* the fourtenthe dai of 
the twelfithe monethe Adar’, of present? 
seer; that cursid men go doun to hellis*7 
in o dai, and 3elde> pees to oure empire, 
which thei hadden troblid. HHidur* to is 
the saumpler® of the pistle®; these thingis, 
that suen, ¥ fooud writun aftir that place, 
where it is red‘, And Mardochee 3ede, and 
dide alle thingis, whiche Hester hadde co- 
maundide to hym; xetheles tho thingis 
ben not hadde in Ebrew, and® outirli tho 
ben not seid at ony of the translatours. 
Forsothe’ Mardochee bisou3te the Lerd,s 
and was' myndeful of alle ‘hise werkys*, 
and seide!, Lord God, kyng almy3ti, alles 
thingis ben set in thi lordschip, ‘ethir 
power™, and ‘noon is®, that may ajen- 
stonde thi wille; if thou demest for to 
saue Israel, we schulen be delyuered anoon. 
Thou madist heuene and erthe, and what 10 
euer thing is conteyned in the cumpas of 
heuene. Thou art Lord of alle thingis,11 
and ‘noon is® that ajenstondith thi maieste. 
Thou knowist alle thingis, and woost, that 12 
not for pride and dispit and? ony coueytise 
of gloriel Y dide this" thing, that’ Y wor- 
schipidet not Aaman moost" proud’; for 13 


f concord au. on 4. } wickede avru. idisturblid 4. 3 wher writen ac. * withstondith 4. ! my All. 


_ Cit dispiside 1. ¢ heestis 1. ¢ it defoulide 1. 
iheestisi1, * éhadé it disturblide 1. 
4 stede 1. T a fadir 1. 
ther children1. 4 Om. 1, 
present 1. helle 1. 
f seid x. & Om. K. 
» ther is noon 1. 

‘ worschip v. 


1 thanne sith t. 


VY no man 1. 
» gelde thei so 1. 
h Certis 1. 

© ther is noon 1. 
u the moost 1. 


W upon 1, 
ihe was 1. 


¥ proud man 1. 


f ther was ai. 


© A rubrich. Hidur se. 
k the werkys of the Lord 1. 
P neither for 1. 


h that it was 1. 
© persoone aftir 1. POm.1. 


& and that it vside 1. 


mOm.1. “he ist. 


8 therfor we comaunden that whiche ener that Aaman hath schewid, be thei 1. 


Y of Marche 1. 
4 ensaumpler ELP. 


« be this veniaunce don 1. 2 this 
© episile EHL. 
The seide 1. m Om. I. 


4 veyn glorie 1. T ony R. 8 and that a. 


w forsothe 1. 


. XIT. 14-—XIV. 7. 


Trael also the steppis of his feet I were 
1aredi to kisse, but I dradde, lest the 
wrshipe of my God I shulde bern ouer 
to man, and Jest any man I shulde ho- 
15noure out take my God.- And now, Lord 
- king, God of Abraham, haue mercy of 
thi puple, for oure enemys wiln leesen 
is vs, and thin eritage don awei;'ne dispise 
thou thi part, that thou hast a3een bo3t 
17fro Egipt. Heere my pre3eere, and mer- 
ciful be thou to the lot, and the litle 
corde of thin eritage; and turne oure 
weiling in to io3e, that liuende we preise 
thi name, Lord; and ne close thou the 
igmouthis of men preisende thee. And al 
Trael lic mynde and beseching criede to 
the Lord, for thi that to hem shulde 
hange in certeyn deth. 


CAP. XIV. 


-) Ester also the quen flei3 to the Lord, 
dredende the perile, that wex abone. 
2And whan she hadde do doun hir kingus 
clothis, she toc couenable clothis to wep- 
ingis and to weiling; and for diuers 
oynemens with askis and drit she ful- 
filde the hed, and hir bodi mekide with 
fastingus ; and alle placis, in the whiche 
she was wont to gladen, with to-tering 
sof heris she fulfilde. And she prejede 
the Lord God of Irael, seiende, My Lord, 
that art king alone, help me solitarie, 
and of whom saue thee is noon other 
shelpere; my perile is in myn hondis. 
5I haue herd of my fader, that thou 
shuldest han taken Irae] fro alle Jen- 
tilis, and oure fadris fro alle ther more 
behinde, that thou shuldist welde the 
euermor durende eritage ; and thou didist 
6to hem, as thou speke. Wee han synned 
in thi si3te, and therfore thou hast taken 
7vs in to the hondis of oure enemys ; for- 
sothe wee han heried the godis of hem. 


y Om. 1. 
f Lord God 1. 


* to haue kissid wilfuli 1. 

4 for cause that 1. © Om. 1. 

I took thanne 1. k to morenyng 1. 
-" drit plures. vile poudre or dust 1. 

places of hir heed 1. ¢ which placis 1. 

taken or chosen 1. Y¥ an euerlastynge 1. 


ESTHER. 


2 the which part 1. 

& sche dredde . 
1 oynementis that sche had vsid bifore 1. 

© sche mekide 1. 

« sche bisou3te 1. 

* spoke or 413 1. 


663 
Y was redi ‘wilfuli to kisse*, 3he, the 
steppis of hise feet for the helthe of Israel, 
but Y dredde, lest Y schulde bere ouere to 14 
aY man the onour of my God, and lest Y 
schulde worschipe ony man outakun my 
God. And now, Lord kyng, God of Abra-1s 
ham, haue thou merci on thi puple, for 
oure enemyes wolen leese vs, and do awei 
thin eritage; dispise not thi part, which? 16 
thou azenbou3tist fro Egipt. Here thou; 
my preier, and be thou merciful to the 
lot, and the* part of thin eritage; and 
turne thou oure morenyng in to ioie, that 
we lyuynge herie thi name, Lord; and 
close thou’ not the mouthis of men 
heriynge thee. And al Israel with lijk® 1, 
mynde and bisechyng criede to the Lord, 
for’ certeyn deeth neizede to hem. 


CAP. XIV. 


Also the® queen Hester fledde to the, 
Lord‘, and dredde® the perel, that nei3ede. 
And whanne sche hadde put awei the, 
kyngis clothis®, sche took: clothis couen- 
able to wepyngis and morenyng* ; and for 
dyuerse oynementis! sche ‘fillide the“ heed 
with aische and dust", and ‘made meke® 
hir bodi with fastyngys; and with to?- 
breidyng.awei of heeris‘, sche fillide™ alle 
places’, in whicht sche was wout to be 
glad; and bisou3te" the Lord God of; 
Israel, and seide, My Lord, which’ aloone 
art oure kyng, helpe me a womman left 
aloone, and of whom noon othere helpere 
is outakun thee; my perel is in my hondis. , 
Y haue herd of my fadir, that thou, Lord, ; 
tokist*® awei Israel fro alle folkis, and* 
oure fadris fro alle her grettere men bi- 
fore, that thou schuldist welde euerlast- 
yngeY eritage; and thou hast do to hem, 
as thou hast spoke. We synneden® ing 


.thi si3t, and therfor thou hast bitake vs 


in to the hondis of oure enemyes; for; 


atothe rx. >bOm.s.  ¢ sich maner 1. 
h clothis that perteyneden to the queen 1. 
m fulfillide hir 1. 
qhir heer1. * fulfillider. 5% the 
whast take 1. * and ¢hou hast 

> forsothe 1. 


P Om. 1. 
Vv that 1. 
a haue synned 1. 


664 ESTHER. 


8 Riztwis thou art, Lord ; and now it suf- 
fiseth not to them, that with most hard 
seruyse they oppressen vs, but, the 
strengthe of ther hondis wijtende to 

athe power of maumetis, wiln chaunge 
thin hestis™, and don awei thin eritage, 
and close the mouthis of men preisende 
thee, and quenchen out the glorie of the 

1otemple and of thin auter, that thei opene 
the mouthis of Jentilis, and preise the 
strengthe of maumetis, and prechen a 

ii fleshli king in to euermor. Ne take thou, 
Lord, thi kingus dignete to them, that 
ben not, lest thei lazhen at oure falling ; 
but turne the counseil of hem vp on 
hem®, and hym that in vs began to waxe 

i2feers, scatere. Haue mynde, Lord, and 
sheu3 thee to vs in time of oure tribula- 
cionn; and 3if to me trost, Lord, king 

13 of Jewis and of alle power ; 3if a semeli 
woord in my mouth in the si3te of the 
leoun, and ber ouer the herte of hym in 
to the hate of oure enemy, that and he 
pershe, and othere that consenten to hym. 

14Vs also deliuere in thin hond, and help 
me, noon other hauende helpe but thee, 
Lord, that hast kunnyng of alle thingis. 

is And thou hast knowen for I hatide the 
glorie of wicke® men, and wlate the bed 
of vncircumcidide men, and of alle he- 
16thene. Thou knowist infirmyte and my 
nede, that I wlate the signe of pride and 
of my glorie, that is vpon myn hed in 
the da3is of my shewing, and I wlate it 
as the cloth of the womman in flux of 
blod, and I bere not in the da3is of my 
17sllence, and that I eet not in the bord of 
Aman, ne to me pleside the feste of the 
king, and I dranc nott win of sacrifises ; 
isand neuere gladide thin hond womman, 


XIV. 8—18, 


we worschipiden® the goddis of hem. 
Lord‘, thou art iust ; and now it suffisith a 
not to hem’, that thei oppressen vs with 
hardestef sernage, but thei aretten the 
strengthe of her hondis to the power of 
idols, and’ wolen chaunge thi biheestis, 9 
and do” awei thin eritage, and close the 
monthis of men heriynge thee, and quenche' 
the glorie of thik temple and auter!, that™ 10 
thei opene" the mouthis of hethene men, 
and preise® the strengthe of ydols, and 
preche a fleischli? kyng with outen ende. 
Lord, 3yue thou not thi kyngis 3erde4 toll 
hem, that ben no3t’, lest® thei lei3en" at 
oure fallyng; but turne thou the councel 
of hem on" hem’, and distrie thou hym, 
that bigan to be cruel a3ens vs. Lord, 12 
haue thou mynde, and schewe thee to vs 
in the tyme of tribulacioun; and, Lord, 
kyng of goddis and” of al power, 3yue 
thou trist to me; 3yue thou a word wel i3 
dressid in my mouth in the* si3t of the 
liounY, and turne? over his herte in to 
the hatrede of oure enemy, that bothe he 
perische, and othere men that consenten* 
to hym. But? delynere vs in thin hond,14 
and helpe me, hauynge noon othere help 
no® but thee, Lord, that hast the kunnyng 
of alle thingis ; and knowist? that Y hate 15 
the glorie of wickid men, and that Y wlate 
the bed of vncircumcidid men, and of ech 
alien. Thou‘ knowist my freelte and nedef, 16 
that Y holde abhomynable the signe® of 
my pride and gloriet, which is on myn 
heed in the daies! of my schewyng, and 
that Y wlate it ‘as the cloth of a womman 
hauynge vneleene blood‘, and Y bere not! 
in the daies of my stillenesse™, and that"17 
Y eet not in the boord of Aaman, nether 
the feeste of the kyng pleside me, and Y 


m behestis E. Uus Ez prem. © wickede 2gFH. 


¢ haue wirschipid 1. dAnds. €oureenmyes1. — £ ful hard 1. 


woln do 1. ithei woln quenche 1. the plures. 


& and therfor thei 1. h thei 


lof the auter1. ™and1. "%wolnopenet © thei 


woln preise 1. _P fleischi acuNov. fleischli man to the 1. 4 3erde or gouernaile 1. * not plures. not of 


thisort1. Sthatr. tleenotr1. 4 upon tr. 


VYhemself1. Wand kyng1. *Om.1.  Y lioun 


Assuerus 1. 2turne thou 1. @ consentiden 1. bBut, Lord 1. ©Om.1. 4 Lord, thou knowist 1. ¢And, 


Lord, thou 1. f my nede 1. 
as the blodi skin of wommans infirmytee s, 


& signe or schewyng1. bof myglorier iday1. &Om.1 sec. m. 
Inot, or vse it 1. not, that is, I vse not swich pride s. 


™ stilnesse, oude of the kingis presence 8. ® thou wost, Lord, that s. 


XIV. 19—XV. 8. 


sithen hider I am translatid vnto the pre- 
sent dai, but in thee, Lord God of Abra- 
i9ham. Strong God ouer alle, heere the 
vois of hem, that noon other hope? han, 
and delyuere vs fro the hond of wicke4 
men, and pul out me fro my drede. 
These thingus also addid I fond in the 


comun translacioun, 


, CAP. XV. 


1 And no doute that Mardoche sente to 
hir, that Ester shulde gon in to the king, 
and pre3e for hir puple,and for hir kuntre. 

2 Myndeful, he seith, be thou of the da3es 
of thi mecnesse, hou thou art nurshid 
in myn hond; for Aman, ordeined the 
secounde of the king, spac a3en ys in to 

3deth ; and thou inwardli clep the Lord, 
and spec to the king for vs, and deliuere 
vs fro deth. Also and these thingus, that 
ben vnderieid, in the comun translacioun 

4I fond, Forsothe the thridde dai she dide 
doun the clothis of hir enournyng, and 

shir owne glorie is don aboute. And 
whan with the kingis abite she schyned, 
and inwardli hadde clepid the Gouernour 
of alle thingus and sauere God, she toc 

6two seruauntes, and vp on the oon’ for- 
sothe she lenede, as for delicis and ful 
myche tendernesse not suffrynde to bern 
7vhir owne bodi; the tother forsothe of the 
dameselis folewede the ladi, berende vp 
the clothys flowende doun in to the erthe. 
sShe forsothe thur3shed the chere with 
rose colour, and freeli, and with bri3te 
ejen she couerede the dreri inwit, and 


P helpe au. 


© and thou woost 1. and Loril, thou wost s. 
was never glad is, 4 Om.1. 
y thou, Lord s. 
this addid c pr. m. this thingis addid c see. m. 
€ seide fo hir 18. f forsothe 18. 
k therfor 1. forthis. 1 Lord God to help s. 
4 ordeynede 1s. ‘hirs, % enournyng xX sec. m. 
w¥ God, and schynyde in the kingis clothing 1s. 
zOm.1s. ® Hester 1s. > upon is. 


ESTHER. 


q wickede 4EFH. 


P J thin 1s. 
VYthe aru. WA! stronge God 1. That art a stronge God s. * alle other s. 
2 hope than thee 1. hope than in thee s. 
b Om. A sec. m. s. 
& which is s. 
™ speke thou Is. 
t sche was 1s. 
X took to hir 1s. 
© oon of hem 18, 


665 


drank not the wiyn of moiste sacrifices, 
and°® that thin? handmayde ‘was neuere 18 
glad4, sithen’ Y was translatid hidur til 
in to present’ dai‘, no" but in thee’, Lord 
God of Abraham. ‘God stronge* aboue 1s 
allex, here thou’ the vois of hem, that han 
noon othere hope’, and delyuere thou vs 
fro the hond of wickid men, and delyuere 
thou me fro my drede. Also Y foond 
‘these wordis* in the comyn translacioun. 


OAPs. Ne 


And ‘he sente to hir’, no doute thati 
ne Mardochee sente to Hester, that sche 
schulde entre® to the kyng, and preie for 
hir puple, and for hir cuntrei. Het seide®, 2 
Be thou myndeful of the daies of thi 
mekenesse, hou thou were nurschid in 
myn hond; forf Aaman, ordeyned§ the se- 
counde! fro the kyng, spaki ajens vs in to 
deth ; and* thou inwardli clepe the Lord!,s 
and speke™ to the kyng for vs, and dely- 
uere vs fro deeth. dud" also Y foond 
these thingis, that suen, in the comyn 
transiacioun. Forsothe® in the thridde 4 
dai sche? ‘puttide of 4 the’ clothis of hir 
ournyng’, and was! cumpassid with hir 
glorie". And whanne sche ‘schinede ins 
the kyngis clothing, and’ hadde inwardli 
clepid the Gouernour of alle thingis and 
the sauyour God", sche took* twei ser- 
uauntis’, and sotheli? sche? leenyde on, 
oon’, as not4 susteynynge® to bere hirf 
body, for delices and ful greet tendir- 
nesse; but the tother® ‘of the seruaunt-, 
essis' suede the ladi, and bar vp the clothis 
fletinge! doun ‘in to™ the erthe. ‘Sotheli, 
sche was bisched" with ‘colour of roosis® 


T toon 4. 


t dai 


rsith 1. § this present Is. 


q Om. 1s. 

® these thingis addid B. these addid plures. 
eentre yn is. 4 And Mardochie 1s. 
h secounde persone in power S. i hath spoke 1s. 
"Om. Gewx. © Certis 1s. P Hester Is. 

% glorie in ful riche avaie Ss. V Om. 1s. 
Y sernauntessis BCEISVX S€C. 7m. 
f hir owne 18. 


dif sche had not 1s. © suffisid 18. 


& for ful rs. Boother 1. !seruauntesse rs. k hirzs. I trailiuge a sup. ras. F sup. ras.18. ™ upon Is. on a. 


a And Hester in hir face was colourid 1s. 
VOL. II. 


© roose colouris 8. 


4Q 


666 


drawe togidere with ful myche drede. 
9 Thanne she gon in alle the doris bi ordre, 
stod ajen the king, wher he sat vp on 
the see of his regne, clothid with kingus 
clothis, and shinende with gold and pre- 
cious stones; and he was ferful in si3te. 
10 And whan he hadde rerid vp the face, 
and with brennende cen the wodnesse 
of the brest hadde shewid, the quen fel 
doun ; and the colour chaungid in to pale- 
nesse, the weeri hed vpon the hond maide® 
1:she howide doun. And God turnede the 
spirit of the king in to debonernesse, and 
heejende and dredende he stirte out of 
the see; and sustenende hir with his 
armys, to the tyme she turnede a3een to 
y2hirself, with these woordis gloside, What 
hast thou, Ester ? I am thi brother; wile 
i3thou not drede, thou shalt not die; for- 
sothe not for thee, but for alle this** lawe 
sist ordeyned. Cum hider thanne, and 
is touche the kingus 3erde. And whan she 
heeld hir pes, he toe the kingus 3erde, 
and putte vp on hir necke, and kiste hir, 
and seith, Whi to me spekist thou not? 
16 Lhe whiche answerde, I sa3 thee, lord, as 
the angil of God, and myn herte is dis- 
17 turbid" for drede of thi glorie ; forsothe, 
lord, thou art gretli merueilous, and thi 
is face is ful of graeis. And whan he spac, 
eft she fel doun, and uttirli swounede. 
i9 The king forsothe was disturbid", and 
alle his mynestris coumfortiden hym. 
The saumple of the epistil of king Ar- 
taxerses, that for the Jewis he sente to 
alle the prouyncis of his reume; the 
whiehe and it is not had in Ebrue 
volume. 


8 maiden 4EN. 


Pp Om. 1s. hir plesaunt ts. ¥ hir is. 
x sche stood is. Y euen anentes s. Z upon Is. 
schynyde 1s. © andins, ‘he was 1s. 


m™ down bifore him 1s. 
sthe kyng ts. ' hasty 1. hastinge s. 
up the queen 1s. 2 faire to hir 1s. 
cummynge lo me withouten clepinge s. 
be buaum to her husbondis ts. 
Ithe kyng 1s, ™ his 1s, 
T doun in a sown s. 

is the Kk, This is the Rr. 


" hir 1s. 


! thou hidere ts. 
2 touchide therwith 1s. 
s sche was ts. ' And 1s. 


ESTHER. 


88 is this ¢ prem. 


8 that was Is. 
a the king was 1s. 
& reisid up 1s. 
© hir 1. and hir s. 
4 dredynge 1s. 

a what grecf Is. 
¢ oonly for s. 
& my Is. 

© the c. 
u troblid herfore 1s. 


XV. g—I19. 


‘in the cheer?, and with pleasannt4? and 
sehynynge izen sehe hilide the" sorenful 
soule, and® drawun togidere with ful 
myche drede. Therfor' sche entride" tho-9 
rou3” alle the doris bi ordre’, and stood* 
ajensY the kyng, where he sat on’ the 
seete of his rewme, and was® clothid in 
the’ kyngis clothis®, and schynyde? iu 
gold and® preciouse stoonys, and was 
dredeful in si3t. And whanne he hadde to 
reisid® the! face, and hadde sehewid the 
woodnesse! of herte* with brennynge i3en, 
the queen felde doun™; and whanne the" 
colour was chaungid in to palenesse, sche 
restide the® heed slidun? on‘ the’ hand- 
maide. And God turnede the spirit of1 
the kyng in to myldenesse, and he hast- 
idet, and dredde", ‘and skippyde out’ of 
the” seete ; and he* ‘susteynede hirY with 
hise armes, til sche cam ajen to hir self; 
and he spak faire” bi these wordis, Hester, 12 
what* hast thou? Y aim thi brother; nyle 
thou drede, thou schalt not die”; for this 13s 
lawe is not maad for® thee, but? for alle 
men®. Therfor neiz3e thou’, and touche 14 
thes ceptre, ‘that ts, the kyngis 3erde, 
And whanne sche! was stille’, he! took 15 
the™ goldun 3erde, and ‘puttide on™ hir 
necke; and he kisside hir, and seide,Why 
spekist thou not to me? And sche an-16 
sweride, Lord, Y si3 thee as an° aungel of 
God, and myn herte was troblid for®® the? 
drede of thi glorye; for, lord, thou art ful17 
wondurful, and thi face is ful of graces. 
And whanne sche spak3, eft sche felde 138 
doun’, and was’ alinest deed. Sotheli' the 19 
kyng was troblid", and alle hise mynys- 
tris’ coumfortiden hir. The’ saumpler 


tOm.c. 8 disturblid an. 


vbis. W rewe is, 
Caray 1s. ‘he 

hhis is. iausternesse 1s. * his herte rus. 
P bowid doun Is. 4 upon Is. r hir 1s. 
Y rose up anoon 1s. Whisis. *X Om. c.. ¥ helde 
b die for this comyng thus to me 1. die for thé 

4 but if is maad 1s. ¢ othere, that thei [wymmen s] 
h or 3erde 1. i Hester 1s. * coumfortid ts. 
00 froa. POm.s. 4 had thus spoke ts. 
V seruauntis 1s. W This swinge 


tAndt. ™entride yn Is. 
b Om. Is. 


XVI, i— To. 


GieP. XV I. 


. Artaxerses, the grete king, fro Ynde 
vunto Ethiope, of an hundrid and seuene 
and twenti prouyncis, to dukis and 
princis, that to oure comaunding obe- 
2shen, seith greeting. Manye the good- 
nesse of princis and wrshipe, that in to 
hem is 3iuen, han mys vsid in to pride; 
3and not onli enforcen to opresse the 
sogetis to the king, but the glorie 3iue 
tohem not berende, in to them that 3iuen 
4waiten aspies; ne ben not pa3id to not 
do gracis to benefetis, and defoule the 
rij3tus of humanyte in to them; but also 
demen hemself to moun flee the sentence 
sof God demende alle thingus. And in so 
myche to wodnesse hreken out, that to 
hem that besili kepen the offis taken to 
hem, and so alle thingus don, that thei 
ben wrthi the preising" of alle men, with 
the’ priue and sotile flateringus’ of lesingus 
6thei enforsen to turne vp so doun, whil 
the symple eris of princis and of ther 
kinde other men eymende with fel gile 
7desceyuen. The whiche thing and of olde 
stories is proued, and of these thingus 
that ben don eche dai; hou bi euele so- 
gestiouns of summe men the studies of 
skingus ben depraued. Wherfore it is to 
9 purueye to the pes of alle prouyncis. Ne 
3ee shul not wene, if diuers thingus we 
comaunde, to come of li3tnesse of oure 
inwit; but for qualite and necessite of 
tymes, as the profit of the comun thing 
ioasketh, to do sentence. And that 3ee 


* preuing c. 


x Om. ancpivv. the pistle of ¥. YOm.GKmNoswa. 2 frooa. *Om.x. » also Pr. 
f beynge lord fro 1. whos lordship was fro s. 

1 swich men s. 
P taken 1s. 


© saumpler hereof s. 


which s. ithe honours. Jjthatis.  * taken 1s. 
not ether vsen nol duly s. © the glorie 1s. 
t goodnessis 18. enforsen hem 1s. YV Om. Is. 


gessynge othere men bi her owen kynde blameful 1s. 
€ thingis, as now we bidden ov thing to be don, and now we forbeden the 


{ herte 1s. 


d fyl contrarious 1s. 
f this rs. & Om. Bcrkb. 


€ Om. Is. 


same Ss. h Om, B. 


ESTHER. 


w the offices 15. 


667 


of ‘the lettre of * the’ kyng Artaxerses, 
which he sente for? the Jewis to alle 
the® prouynees of his rewme; and” thee 
same" saumpler® ts not had in the book 


of Ebreu. 


CAP. XVI. 


The grete kyng Artaxerses, frof Yinde! 
‘til to8 Ethiopie, seith helthe to the duykis 
and pryncis of an hundrid and seuene and 
twenti prouynces, that obeien to oure co- 
maundement. Many men mysusen in to2 
pride the goodnesse and onour' of princes, 
which/ is 3ouun* to hem; and not oneli: 
thei’ enforsen™ to oppresse sugetis to 
kyngis, but thei beren not” glorie® 3ouun? 
to hem, and maken? redy tresouns ajens 
hem, that 3auen ¢he® glories’. And thei 
ben not apaied to do not thankyngis for 
benefices', and to defoule in hem silf the 
lawis of curtesie; but also thei demen, 
that thei moun fle the sentence of God 
seynge alle thingis. And thei breken outs 
in to so mych woodnesse, that thei en- 
forsen" with the’ roopis of leesyngis to 
distrie hem, that kepen diligentli offices” 
bitakun to hem, and doen so alle thingis, 
that thei ben worthi the* preisyng of alle 
men; whileY bi sutil frande ‘false men7« 
disseyuen the symple* eeris of kyngis>, 
‘and gessynge othere men bi her owne 
kynde®. Which thing is preuyd bothe biz 
elde stories, and hi these thingis that ben 
doen ech dai; hou the studies of kyngis 
ben maad schrewid? bi yuele suggestiouns 
of summen. Wherfor it is to purueye fors 
the pees of alle prouynces. And thou3 we» 
comaunden dyuerse thingis®, 3e owen not 
to gesse, that it' cometh of the? vnstable- 
nesse of oure’ soule'; but that we 3yuen 
sentence" for the maner and nede of tymes, 


v litle cordis E pr. m. 


C this K. 4Om. c. 
€to rx. vntois. 4 the whiche 1. 
m enforsen hems. ° not dewly 1. 
thers. § glorie to hem 1s. 
y and while malicious men 
@ sotel s. > the king s. 


9 thes maken 1s. 
x Om. Is. 
2 thei 1. swiche s. 


k sentence bz oure counseil 18. 


4Q2 


668 


more openli vndirstonde that wee han 
seid ; Aaman, the sone of Amadathi, wille 
and kinrede of Macedo, and alien fro the 
blod of Persis, and oure pite with his 
cruelte defoulende, a pilgrim is taken of 
ivs; and so myche humanyte expert in 
hymself, that oure fader he were clepid, 
and hononred of alle men the secounde 
after the king; the whiche in so myche 
swelling of pride is born, that he en- 
forcide to priuen vs the reume and spirit. 
is For Mardoche, bi whos feith and bene- 
fetis wee linen, and the felawe of oure 
reume Ester, with al hir fole, with newe 
maner and vnherd engynes ful out askide 
isin to deth; these thingus thenkende, that, 
hem slain, he shulde aspte’ to oure onli- 
hed, and the reume of Persis to ouerbern 
isin to Macedoynes. Wee forsothe outerli 
finden in no blame the Jewis, ordeyned 
to deth of the werste man of deadli men; 
isbut a3eenward vsende riz3te lawis, and 
the sones of the he3est, and the moste, 
and euermor liuende God, thur3 whos 
benefet and to oure fadris and to vs the 
reume ys taken, and vnto to dai is kept. 
17 Wherfore tho lettris,that vnder oure name 
ishe 3af forth, witeth to ben as none. For 
the whiche hidous gilte befor the 3atis of 
this cite, that is, Susis, and he that caste, 
and al his kinrede, hangeth in iebetis*; 
not vs, but God to hym 3eldende that he 
19deseruede. This forsothe maundement, 
that wee now senden, in alle cites be 
purposid, that it be leful to Jewis to vse 
gother lawis. To whom 3ee shul be to 
helpe, that tho men, the whiche hemself 
to ther deth hadden maad redi, thei 
moun slen, the fourtenthe dai of the 
twelfthe moneth, that is clepid Adar; 


W enspien AFH. 


ESTHER. 


XVI. 11—20. 


as the profit of the! comyn thing axith. 

And that 3e vudurstonde opynliere™ that", 10 

that we seyen ; Aaman, the sone of Ama- 

dathi, a man of Macedoyne bi® soule? and 

folk4, and an® alien fro the blood’ of Per- ' 
sis, and‘ defoulynge oure pitee with his 
cruelte, was a pilgrym, e¢hir" a straun- 

ger, and was resseyned of vs*; and hen 
feelide in hym silf so grete curtesie of vs, 

that he was clepid oure fadir, and wasY 
worschipid of alle men the* secounde* 

aftir the kyng; which® Aaman was reisid 12 

in to so greet bolnyng of pride, that he 
enforsidee to pryue us of the rewme and 

spirit’. For bi suinme newe and vnherd 13 
castis he axide in to deeth Mardochee, bi 

whos feith and benefices we liuen, and* 

the felowe of oure rewme Hester, with alf 

hir folk®; and he thoujte these thingis, 14 

that whanne thei" weren slayn, he schulde 

sette tresoun to! ‘oure aloonenesse*{, and + to oure 
that he schulde! translate the rewme of panini” 
Persis in to Macedoynes™. Forsothe® we 15%! sloone: ¢: 
founden not the Jewis in ony gilt outirli, 

that° weren ordeyned to deth? by thed 

worste of deedli men; but aj3enward that* 

thei’ vsen iust lawis, and ben the sones of 16 

the hizeste and moste God‘, and ‘eucre 
lyuyuge", bi whos benefice’ the” rewme 

was 30uun bothe to oure fadris and to vs, 

and is kept ‘til to¥ dai¥. Wherfor wyte 3e, 17 

that tho lettris ben voide, whiche? thilke 

Aaman sente vndur oure name. For which 18 

greet trespas bothe he® that ymagynede?, 

and al his kynrede, hangith in iebatis bifor 

the 3atis of this® citee, ‘that is’, Susa; for 

not we, but God 3eldide to hyim that, that 

he desseruyde. Forsothe® this comaunde- 19 
ment‘, which we senden" now, be! set 

forth* in alle citees, that it be leueful to 


x the iebetis «. 


1Om. 1, ™ more openly 1s. ™ that thing 1. that that thing s. ° bothe birs. P kynde 1s. 4 bi folk 1s. 
rOm. 1s, § blood or kynde 1. blood of kynrede s. tand he 1s. toris. VOm.c. Whe was is. * vs moost 


favourably s.  Yhe was ts. 2 as the 1s. 


@ secounde persoone Is. 


b the which 1. © enforside him 18. 


“lif a. sec.m. of oure lijf1s. ¢and also 1. fOm.s. & folk he wolde haue distrioicd s. » thes 1s. i ajens s. 


kK oure orlinesse A sec. m. us so maad aloone 1. oure aloonesse, that is, to the kyngis persone 8. 
™ the rewme of Macedoynes 1. the rewme of Macedonie s. 
9 him that is 1. 
or cuere! Vv benefices c. goodnesse 1s. 
this dai bi his graces. 2 the whiche 1. ® Aaman s. 


thanne 1. 
netheles 1. which s. P the deth 1. 
* of cuerelastynge God rs. 


4 of s, 


1 wolde 
n And forsothe 1s. © the whiche 
t we founden that1s. § the Jewis1s. * Om. ts. 
Wthisis. *vntor.intos.  Y this dait. 
b ymagynede it 1. ymagynide this yuel s. © the s. 


© Therfor 1, For this. fheest rs. & that 3s. hsenden forthrs. {be it 1s. kK up Is. 


XVI, 22—24. 


2ithis forsothe dai of sorewe and of weil- 
ing the Almy3ti God turnede to hem in 
22to io3e. Wherfore and 3ee among other 
feste da3is this dai haueth’, and halewith 
23it with alle gladnesse; and herafter alle 
men knowe, that feithful obeshen to Per- 
sis, for feith to take wrthi mede; thei for- 
sothe that waiten to the regne of hem, to 
24 pershe for the” hidous gilte. Eche* for- 
sothe prouynce and cite, that wil not of 
this solempnete ben parcener, bi swerd 
and fyr pershe he; and so be he don 
awei, that not onli to men but to bestis 
with oute wei ‘be in to® ener mor, for ex- 
saumple of dispising and vnobeisaunce. 


Explicit’. 


yhath an. Om. an. 8 Alle & prim. 


ESTHER. 


b be it in 4. be it euere in to m. 


669 


Jewis! to vse her lawis. ‘Whyche Jewis™ 20 
3e owen" helpe®, that thei moun sle hem, 
that maden hem silf redi? to the deeth 
of Jewis, in the thrittenthe dai of the 
tweluethe monethe, which’ is clepyd A- 
dar; for Almy3ti God turneth’ this dai21 
of weilyng and morenyng* in to ioye to 
hem". Wherfor and 3eY han” this dai22 
among othere feeste daies, and halowe* it 
with alY gladnesse; that it be knowun 
aftirward, that alle men, that obeien feith- 23 
fuli to Persis’, resseyuen worthi meed for 
feith*; sotheli® that thei, that setten® tre- 
soun to the rewme of hem, perischen? for 
the® felony. Forsothef ech prouynce and 24 
citee, that wole not be parcenere of this 
solempnytee, perische® bi swerd and fier"; 
and be it ‘doon awey' so‘, that not oneli 
it be with out weie to men but also to 
beestis with outen ende, for ensaumple! of 
dispisyng™ and vnobedience. 


Here endith the book of Hester, and 
here bygynneth the book of Job». 


¢ Here endith the book of 


Hester, and now bigynneth the prolog of the book of Job. a. Explicit liber Ester. x. No tinal rubric in riz. 


m Whom also 1. 
Marche 18. * hath turned 1s. 
whaue plures. * halewe 3e 18. 
€ senten w. settiden v. ¢ perishe 1. 
fordon1. =! the ensanmple ts. 


1 the Jewis 1. 2 owen also s. 


y Om. 18s. 
e her 1s. 


° to helpe 1s. 
t of morenyng Is. : 
2 the kyngis of Persis 1s. 
f And 1s. 
m her dispisyng 1s. 


P to be redi s. 
u the Jewis 18. 


4that1. * Adar, or 
Vv we comaunden that 3e 18. 
Sher feithis. » and 1s. 
& perische if 1. 4 bi fier ts. i Om.1. so 
0 Here endith the book of Hester, and bigynneth 


a prolog on the book of Job. a. Heere endith Hester. 1. Heere eendeth the book of Hester, se now the prolog 


of Joob. k. 


Here endith the book of Hester, and here bigynneth the prologe on the book of Joob. mo. 


Here endith the book of Hester, and bigynneth the book of Joob. Nvx. Here eendith Hester, and bigynneth 
the first prolog of Joob. x. Here endith Hester, and bigynneth the book of Job.s. Here eendith the book 


of Hester. a. No final rubric in evr. 


JO B. 





[Prologue on the book of Job*. } 


In this book of Joob is contened, first, the possessioun and prosperite of the iust 
man Joob; and, aftirward, how God suffride him to be temptid of Sathan, by los of 
hise worldli goodis, and of hise children ; and afterward bi sijknesse of his owne flesch, 
and bi repreef of hise frendis, and of his owne wijf; and ensaumple to vs, that no man 
is temptid more than he mai withstonde, if he be iust and pacient, with preier of the 
help of God. 


Incipit prologus in lhbro Job*. 


I am constreyned bi alle the bokis of Godis scripture to answern to the euele sawis 
of aduersaries, that sinfulli putten to me, that my remenyng I shulde make into” thee 
vndernymyng of the’ Seuenti remenoures ; as tho3°, anent the Grekis, Aquila, Simacus, 
and Theodocian, or woordf of § woord, or sens of& sens, or of either mengd, and tem- 
pred maner of mene translacioun tolden out; and Origenes alle the volumes of the 
Olde Testament markide with signe of a 3erde, ‘and with signe of a sterreb, the whiche 
or addid, or taken of Theodocian, sette in to the olde translacioun, pronende to han 
failid that is added. Thanne lerne my bacbiteres to resceyuen in the hoole, that in 
parcelis thei resceyueden, or to shauen awey my remenyng with ther sterre signes. Ne 
forsothe it may be do, thati whom they beheelde manye thingus to han lafte of, not the 
same men also in summe thingus to han errid thei knowlechen, nameli, in Job, to 
the whiche that if tho thingus, that vnder sterre signe ben addid, thou withdrawe, the 
most part of thi volume shal be kut of; and that only anent the Grekis. But and* anent 
the Latynes, befor that translacioun, that vnder sterre signes and 3erde signes not 3ore 
we maden out, seuene hundrid almest or ei3te hundrid vers failen; with the whiche the 
boc shortid, and to-torn and to-bite, sheweth openli to the rederes his foule defaute. 
This forsothe translacioun non remenour of the olde folewith, but of that! Ebru and 
Arabik woord, and other while Cire, now woordis, now sens, now either togidere shal 
tellen out. Also forsothe al the boc anent the Ebrues is seid™ dere and slidery®, and that 
the cheef spekeris of Grekis clepen defaute of comun maner of speche, whil other thing 


a This prologue is from m. 


: a Incipit BraENs in librum Job. nr. Prologus libri Job. r. Prologus. u. No initial rubric in 4.» toi. 
aon. on. ; Om.o. ¢« thof EFH. fofwoord Einras. &bia. » Om. R. i that thoo £ pr.v. 
Om.o. I\the savor. m eid an. 2 schyndri . slider r. 


JOB. 671 


is spoken and other thing is don; as if thou woldest an eel or a laumprun holde with 
streite hondis, how myche strengerli® thou thristis, so myche the? sunnere it shal sliden 
awey. I haue remembrid me, Liddium, a imaner doctour, that anent the Ebruis the 
firste was weened to ben had, for the vnderstonding of this volume not with fewe 
penys to han hirid, with whos doctrine if any thing I profitede, I wot neuere; this oon 
I wot wel, me not to han mo3t? remene, but that before I hadde vnderstonde. And so 
fro the begynnyng of the volume vnto the woordis of Job, anent the Ebruys the 
enditing" is prose; but fro the woordis of Job, in the’ whiche he seith, Pershe the dai 
in the whiche I am born, and the ny3t, int whiche" it is seid, a man is conseined, vnto 
that place wher befor the end of the volume it is write, Therfor I myself reproue, and 
do penaunce in colis and asken’, ben vers of sixe feet, rennende with dactile and sponde 
feet, and for the langage of the tunge ofte takende and othere feet, not of the same 
silablis, but of the same times. Otherwhile also that sweete rym and sweteli sounende 
is told with noumbris” loosid with lawe; the whiche thing versifioures more than a 
symple redere vnderstonden. Fro the foreseide vers forsothe vnto the ende of the boc, 
the litle distinccioun that leueth with prose enditing is wouen*. The whiche thing if ¥ 
to? any man is seen vntrouable, metre, that is, to be anent the Ebrues, and in maner of 
oure Flacci, and Graccy, Pindarie, and Alchei, and Saffo, that weren Grek poetis, or the 
Sauter, or the* Lamentaciouns? of Jeremie, or alle almest the Kanticulis of scripturis 
to® ben comprehendid, that is to seye, in metre, rede he Filonem, Josef, Origenem, 
Cesariensem Eusebeum, and bi the witnesse of hem he shal proue me to sey soth. 
Here therfore yn houndis, therfore me in this volume to han trauailid, not that the 
olde remenyng I repreue, but that tho thingis, that in it or ben derc, or ben laft of, or 
certis bi the? vice of writeres depraued, shulden be maad more open bi oure remenyng ; 
the whiche and the* Ebrnues sermoun a parti wee han lerned, and in Latin fulli fro thef 
cradelis among gramarienes’, and retorikis, and filosofres wee ben defoulid. That if 
anent the Grekis, aftir the making of the Seuenti, now the euangelie of Crist shynende, 
Jew Aquila, and Simacus, and Theodocian, Jewinge eretikis, ben founde, that manye 
mysterijs of the Saueour bi treccherous remenyng hidden, and nerthelatere in sixe 
exaumpleris® ben hadi anent the chirches, and ben expouned of chirchemen; myche 
more I, a Cristene man, born of fader and moder Cristene, and the baner of the cros 
in my forhed berende, whos studie was to telle a3een laft of thingus, and to amende the 
depraued, and the sacramens of the chirche with pure and trewe sermounes to openen, 
or of proude men or of shreude reders I a3te not to be reprened. Haue* that wiln olde 
bokis, and in rede skynnes with gold and siluer writen, or with capital lettris, as comunli 
men sein, chargis grauen out more than bokis, so that to me and to myne thei suffre 
to han pore scrowis, and not as myche faire bokis as amendid. Hithir forsothe transla- 
cioun, and the Seuenti after Grekis, and myn after the Ebrues, in Latin bi my trauaile 
is translatid ; chese eche man that he wile, and proue he! hymself more studious than 
euel willid. 


Anothir prolog™. 
Ir forsothe a iunket" with resshe I shulde make, or the leues of palniys I shulde 


platte°, that in the? swot of my chere I shulde ete bred, and the were of the wombe 
with besi mynde treten, no man shulde bite, no man shulde reprene. Now forsothe for 


© strenglier a. P Om. nor. q Om. rR. Teendyng rn.’ * Om. aeFuorn. tOm.u. the 
whiche 4erHor. Vasshen 4. asche or. Wnoumbring or. ¥* weuid aeruior. Yitc. 2% Om. anor. 
2Om.o. > Lamentacioun or. ©Om. rR. @Om.0. ¢Om.r. fthoo #.  & the gramariens or. 


h ensaumpleris on, ilad anor. * Haue theior. hem azruior. ™ From a. Anothir prolog on the 
same. on, Om. ceri. “ionke 0, © plauute aor. P Om. a. 


JOB. I. 1—4. 


672 


after the sentence of the Saueour, I wile werke the mete that persheth not, the olde 
weie of Godys volumys to purgen fro thornes and busshis, double errour4 is pi3t in to 
me; a fals corectour’ of vices I am clepid, and erroures not to taken awei, but to sowen. 
So myche forsothe is the custum of oldnesse, that also other while confesid vicis 
plesen, whil more faire bokis they wilu han than amendid. Wherfore, O! moost’ looued 
brethern, oon, exsaumplert of noblehed for the werelis, lepis, basketis, and litle 3iftis of 
munkis, these spirituéel and siftis to dwelle taketh; and blisful Job, that 3it anent Latynes 
lai in the drit, and with wermes of erroures brac out, hool and withoute wem io3eth. 
What maner. forsothe, after prouyng and victorie, double to hym alle thingus ben 
30lden, so I" in to 30ure tunge, that hardili I speke, haue maad hym to han that’ he 
hadde lost. Therfor and¥ 30u and eche redere I warne ‘to gidere* with besy before 
telling, aud in the begynnyngus of bokis the same thingus euermor ioynende, I preje, 
‘that wher euermor’ litle 3erdis goende beforn 3ee shul see, witeth tho thingis that ben 
vnder leid in Ebru volumys not to* ben* had; but wher the image of a sterre shyneth 
beforn, of Ebru in oure sermoun ben added. Also and thoo thingus weren? seen to ben 
had¢ in Grek, aud so weren corupt, that the’ wit to® the reders thei token awei, 30u 
pre3ende, with gret trauaile Iamendide; wenende more what profitable thing to comyn 
of myn hate to the chirchis of Crist, than of other mennys besinesse. 


Here endeth the prolog of Job, and now bigynneth the book'. 





Incipit liber Job*. Here bigynnith the bok of Joob*. 


CAPS I. CAP. I. 


1! THER was a man in the lond of Hus, 
Job by name; and that man was simple, 
and ri3t, and dredende God, and goende 

2awei fro enel. And ther ben born to 

3hym seue sones, and thre don3tris; and 
his possessioun was seuen thousend of 
shep, and thre thousend of camailis, also 
fiue> hundrid 3okis of oxen, and fiue hun- 
dryd assis, and ful myche meyne; and 
that man was gret among alle the men 
1of the est. And his sones weuten, and 


lond of Hus*; and thilke man? was sym- 
ple}, and ri3tful’, and dredyuge God, and 
goynge awey fro yuel. 
and thre dou3tris weren* borun to hym; 


of scheep, and thre thousynde of? camels, 
and fyue hundrid 3ockis of oxis*, and fyne 
hundrid of femal assis, and ful myche 
meynee; and ‘thilke man! was grete™ 
ainong alle men” of the eest. 


maden festis bi housis, eche in his day; — sones 3eden, and maden feestis bi housis®, 
and sendende thei clepeden ther thre sis- | ech man? in his day; and thei4 senten, and 
tris, that thei shulden ete,and drinke win —clepiden her thre sistris, ‘that thei schul- 

Qerrours or. Yconiectour or. 8 3e most orn. texsaumple mn. Uthat rR. Vthat thatr. Ww Om. 1. 
x Om. rR. Y euermore, that wher enere or. z2Om. anor. ®Om.1. that weren or. ©¢ hid pr. 


{From a. Here endeth the prolog of Joob, se now the booe. 1. Here eendith the 


43e4. schen. of R. 
a Incipit liber. E. Here begynneth 


prologis, and bigynneth the boke of Joob. rR. No final rubric in cerno. 
the bok of Job. . No initial rnbric in the other Mss.» fifty = pr. m. 


@ From umopf. Heere biginnith Job. Ue No initial rubric in the other Mss. > Om.i1s. © Hus was 
aman that hizjte Jobis. dJobis. €a symple man 1. a symple man, thal is, he was withouten double- 
nesse and variaunce s. f he was riz3tful is. ¢ And ther weren1. 2Om.1. iQm.1s. Koxenis. ! this 
ee is. ™Magrete mantis, "themens, ° her housis 1s. Pman of hems. 4 in her feeste daies 

ie 5. 


‘A man, Joobt bi name, was” in thei 


And seuene sones2 


and his possessioun was seuene thousyndes 


And hise4 


t A glos. Job 
was @ very man 
in kynde, and 
his book is a 
very thing doon 
in dede, and 
not a parable, 
as sum men 
seiden. Job 
cam of Nacor, 
as Jerom, in 
the book of 
Ebreu Ques- 
tiouns on Ge- 
nesis, and 
Ebreis wit- 
aessen, to 
whiche it is to 
3yue credence 
in this matere ; 
thou; dustyn 
and many 
othere seyn, 
that he cam 

of Abraham, 
bi Esau; also 
Job was the 
Syuethe fro 
Abraham, and 
was in the tyme 
of Moyses. a et 
plures. 

+ symple ; 
without gile. 
riztful ; goinge 
bi the lyne of 
riztfulnesse in 
his dedis, to 

the ende of 
heuenely blis. 
dredinge God ; 
bi drede of 
sones reuerence, 
that enclosith 
loue. goinge 
atwei fro yuel ; 
not for drede 
of peyne, as 
yuele men 
doon, but for 
the loue of 
vertu, which is 
the purpos of 
goode men. 
Lire here. c. 


I. s—15. 


swith hem. And whan the da3es of the 
feste hadden passid aboute, Job sente to 
them, and haliwide them, and risende 
erli, offride brent sacrifise bi alle. For- 
sothe he seide, Lest perauenture my sonys 
symnen, and blisse to God in ther hertis. 
6So Job dide alle da3is. On a dai forsothe, 
whan the sones of God wer come, that 
thei shulde stonde nee3 before God, was 
7nee3 among hem and Sathan. To whom 
seide the Lord, Whennus* comest thou? 
The whiche anuswerende seith, I haue 
enuyround the erthe, and thur3 gon it. 
8And the Lord seide to hym, Whether 
hast thou not beholde my seruaunt Job, 
that ther be not lic to hym in the? erthe, 
aman simple, and ri3t, and® dredende 
9 God, and goende awei fro euel. To whom 
answerde Sathan, Whether in vein Job 
todredith God? Whether hast thon not 
strengthid hym, and his hous, and al his 
substaunce bi enuyroun? To the werkis 
of his hondis thou hast blissid, and his 
li possessioun wex in the’ erthe. But 
strecche out a litil thin hond, and touche 
alle thingus that he weldeth ; but in the 
i2face he blesse to thee. Thanne the Lord 
seide to Sathan, Lo! alle thingus, that he 
hath, in thin hond ben; onli in hym ne 
strecche thou out thin hond. And Sa- 
than is gon out fro the face of the Lord. 
13 Whan forsothe on a dai the sones and 
his do3tris shulden ete, and drinke win 
in the hous of ther firste gote brother, 
i4a messager cam to Job, that shulde sein, 
Oxen ereden, and she assis weren fed 
15 beside them; and Sabeis feerly fellen to, 
and token alle thingis, and smyte the 


¢ Whenne ern. 


tT to 18, 8 to drynke 13. t her feeste 1s. 


holynesse 1. hem, that is, he meuid hem to holynesse s. 
b for hem 1. for his children s. 


Zroos up 1s. he offride 1s. 
for hems. {fAnd Jobis.  & her feest daies 1. 
makinge sacrifice 1. Lord, to maken her sacrifice s. 
Sathan is, 4 Wher plures passim. 


bons. C¢holde scernteuvx. 4 that 1. 
hems. fandifis. gcurse1s. 4 thane s. 

bileue thou not tome K. * Thanne 1. 1 that 1. 
be my suffraunce s. © but oneli 1s. 


JOB. 


d Om. 4. 


« world bi greet fame 1s. 


r that ther is 1. 
*Om.1is. Yveynli or in ydel 1. veynli withouten cause s. 2 enuyroun 1s reset 
© possessioun fakynge hem awey 1. possessioun anentischinge 
i he is verily symple and riztwis [and dreding thee s] 1s. 

m Job 1s. 
P his perscone 1s. 


673 


den’ ete, and drynke’ wiyn with hem. Ands +¢ in to the 


whanne the daies of feestet hadden passid (7,43 thats: 


in to the world"{, Joob sente to hem, and — the wouke. 
: 2 Lire here. c. 
halewide hem”, and* heY roos* eerli, and} sides that 
is, thou3te. 


offride* brent sacrifices ‘bi alleb. For he 
seide {, Lest perauenture my sones do 

A : " : f aungels. fo be 
synne, and curse God in her hertis. Joob’ si OME sere 
dide so in alle daies®. Forsothe® in sumig angels ben 


Lire here. c. 
§ sones of God; 
that is, holi 


¢ propirli present 
day, whanne the sones of God§ ‘weren to God, that ben 
k . I not [sent] ont to 
comun* to be present bifor the Lord}, also  outermere ser- 
8, othere 
Sathan cam™ among hem". To whom the7 {Pat ven sent 


Lord seide, Fro whennus comest thou ? ga 
Which® answeride, and seide, Y haue cum- 04. In large 


maner of spek- 


passid the erthe, and Y haue walkid thorou3 _ inge, alle aun- 
gels and my- 


it. And the Lord seide to hym, Whe-s nystringe ben 


ther? thou hast biholde my seruaunt Joob, on Gorn 


r Sj ist ]yj us fe z as myche as 
that" noon’ in erthe is lyik hym™; he is a tyche as 
a’ symple man*, and ri3tful, and dredynge __ lerely ; thus 

* spekith Danyel 

God, and goynge awei fro yuel? To whomg in vii. e°., sei- 
* . thou- 

Sathan answeride, Whether Joob dredith 77.9? thousinae 


God veynli’||? Whethir thou hast Moti aes 


and tensithis 


cumpassid hym, and his hows, and al his ae hued 
- 6 ousinde 
catel bi cumpas’?? Thou hast blessid the — weren present 
to him. In the 


werkis of hise hondis, and hise possessioun  fargeste maner, 
4 sb e fendis hen seid 
encreesside* in” erthe. But stretche® forth 11 0 he present 
thin hond a litil, and touche thou alle 04, in as 
— P F : myche as thei 
thingis whiche’ he hath in possessioun® ; pid andes 
: ‘ é 5 en opyn to 
if ‘he cursith® not thee ‘in the face, ‘bileue aide ae 
z : d thus spek- 
not to me}, Therfor* the Lord seide to 12th the sorp- 
Sathan, Lo! alle thingis, whiche! he™ {ure here. Lire 
hath, ben in thin hond"; oneli® stretche pee oe 
a é rede 70 
thou not forth thin hond in tohym?. And4 — veyniy; as if 
h 
Sathan 3ede out fro the face of the Lord. pee re 


Sotheli* whanne in sum* dai ‘hise sonesti3 ¢? thee fr 
and dou3tris¥ eeten, and drunken wiyn in  temperal 
thingis. cum- 


the hows of her firste gendrid™ brothir, a14 ree s $0 him 
. . and hise thingis 
messanger cam to Job, ‘whiche messan-— with thi pro- 
5 i ‘ * tecci that 
ger*® seideY, Oxis? eriden*, and femal assis aay cat 
tempte hym. 
Lire here. c. 


€ Om. 4. f Om. «an. 


whem or mouyde hem to 
x and bi alle her feest dates 1s. y Job 1s. 
eAndis. © hertis, I shal do penaunce 


h Andis. ia plures.oos. *camens. 1! Lord, 
™ cam ni3 1s. "hem fo disturble hems. © And 
Snomanis. tOm.1 ttohims. WOm. rs. 


ahath encressid 1. is encresed s. 


. hond or power 1. ond or iu thi power 
q And thanne s. r And is. Forsothe n. 


*a plures. tthe sones of Jobis. his dou3ztrisi1s. Wgoten1. *andts. Y seide fo himis. 2 Thin 
oxen 1s. 4 that eriden ¢hi loond s. ° and thi 1s. 
VOL. II. 4nR 


674 JOB. 


childer$ with swerd ; and I alone scapide® 
isthat I shulde telle to thee. And whan 
3it he spac, cam an other, and seide, The 
fyr of God cam doun fro heuene, and the 
shep tonchid, and the childer wastide ; 
and I alone flei3 awei that I telle to thee. 
17 But 3it hym spekende, cam and an other, 
and seide, Caldeis maden thre cumpanyes, 
and asailiden the camailis, and token 
hem, also and the childer thei smyten 
with swerd; and I alone flei3 awei that 
is] telle to thee. And 3it he spac, and lo! 
an other cam inne, and seide, Thi sones 
and do3tris etende, and drinkende win in 
the hous of ther! firste goten brother, 
wfeerli an hidons wind fel in fro the re- 
giounk of desert, and smot togidere the 
foure corneres of the hous, the whiche 
fallende opresside thi! fre childer, and 
ben deade; aud IJ alone flei3 awei that I 
20telle to thee. Thanne Job ros, and kutte 
his eclothis, and his hed shauen fel in to 
21 the erthe, and honourede, and seide, Nakid 
I wente out fro the wombe of niy moder, 
and nakid I shal gon a3een thider; the 
Lord 3af, the Lord toc awei; as to the 
Lord pleside, so" it is do; be the name 
220f the Lord blissid. In alle thes thingus" 
Job synuede not with his lippis, ne -any 
foli thing a3en God spac. 


CAP) We 


1 It is do forsothe, whan on a dai hadden 


comen the sones of God, and stoden be- 


& children 4 passim. hascaped x. i the a. 
© lesewiden is. 4 there bisidis s. © hem ys. 
hawey with hems. ‘thigodists, k Om. 1s. 


a this to 1. these thingis to s. 
8 seide fo Jobs. tit hath wastid rs. 
*scapid s. Y Om. 1s. 


k regiouns 4. 


f men of the cuntrey of Sabey 1s. 
1 swerd thei han sleyn thi seruauntis 1s. 
0° while 1. whilis s. 
u thi scheep 1s. 
zit 1. thee these thingis s. 


I. 16—IL. 1. 


‘weren lesewid® bisidis tho? ; and Sabeis 15 
felden yn, and token’ awey® alle thingis', 
and ‘smytiden the children* with swerd!; 
and Y aloone ascapide for™ to telle to” 
thee. And whanne® he? spak 3it9, anothir™ !6 
cam, and seide’, Fier of God cam doun fro 
heuene, and wastidet scheep", and ‘children 
touchid®; and Y aloone ascapide* for’ to 
telle: ‘to thee?. But 3it the* while he>!7 
spak, also anothir cam, and seide, Caldeis¢ 
maden® thre cumpenyes, and® assailiden 
thef camels, and token$ tho awei, and 
thei smytiden' ‘also the children* with! 
swerd; and Y aloone ascapide™ to telle 
to" thee®. AndP 3it1 he spak, and’, lo! 18 
anothir entride’, and seide, While thi 
sones and dou3trist eeten, and drunken 
wiyn in the hows of her firste gendrid® 
brothir, a” greet wynde felde yn sudenli ts 
fro the coost of desert, and schook* foure 
corneris of the hows, ‘which feldeY doun, 
and’ oppresside thi® children, and thei ben 
deed: and Y aloone fledde to ‘telle to 
thee. Thanne Joob roos*, and‘? to-rente20 
hise clothis, and ‘with pollid heed® he 
felde doun on‘ the erthe, and worschip- 
ide’ God, and seide, Y 3ede nakid out of21 
the wombe of my modir, Y' schal turne 
ajen nakid* thidur!; the Lord 3af, them 
Lord took® awei; as it pleside the Lord, 
so‘it is? doon; the name of the Lord be 
blessid. In alle these thingis Joob syn-22 
nede not in hise lippis, nether spakP ony 
fonned’ thing a3ens" God. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothe® it was doon, whannet in sum"1 
dai the sones of God ‘weren comun™, and* 


Ithec,. ™Om.an. ® thing c. Om. H. 


& thei token rs. 
m Om. 1. 
q Om. s. ¥ also anothir 1. 
W smeten thi children 1. sleyn thi children s. 
aOm.1s. > this messanger 1s. © Men of the 


P this messanger 1s. 


cuntrey of Caldey rs. han maadis. ¢ andtheirs. fthir. &hantakers. %hemis,  ihan 
killid ts. smiten r. & Om.1. | thi sernauntis withis. ™ scapide s. 20Om.1s. © thee these thingis s. 
P Om. BenLx. 4 3it while 3. 3it the while thats. ‘Om.3s. 8 entride yn to Job rs. +t thi don3tris 18. 
“gotten. Wandar. ands. *itstroker. Yandthe hons feller. Zanditr. ®thes. »Om.17. 
¢roosup1. and he 1. © whamne his heed was polleds. f‘npons. intos. Sand her. » worschip s. 
‘and nakid Ys. and nakid s.5 *Om.1s, 10m.s. ™andther. ™ hath taken 1s. takyt s. © be its. 
Phe spak i. 4 foly is. *tor sAndi. tOmoy. the sume sec.m. ar.  W weren come fo herie 


him 1. shulden comes. * and thei 1. 


II. 2-11. 


fore the Lord, and Sathan hadde comen 
zamong hem, aud stod in his si3t, that the 
Lord seide to Sathan, Whennes comest 
thou? The whiche answerende seith, I 
haue gon aboute the erthe, and thur3 
3passid it. And the Lord seide to Sathan, 
Whether hast thon beholde my seruaunt 
Job, that ther be not to hym lic in the 
erthe, a man simple, and ri3t, and dred- 
ende God, and goende awei fro euel, and 
3it withholdende innocence? Thou for- 
sothe hast stirid me a3en hym, that I 
4scourge hym in vein. To whom an- 
swerde Sathan, and seith, Fel for fel, 
and alle thingus that a man hath he 
sshulde 3iue for his soule; ellis put thin 
hond, and touche his bon and flesh, and 
thanne thou shalt see, that in to the face 
6he blisse to thee. Thanne the Lord seide 
to Sathan, Lo! in thin hond he is; 
qnerthelater his lif kep. Thanne Sa- 
than, gon out fro the face of the Lord, 
he smot Job ‘with the® werste stinkende 
bleyne fro the sole of the fot vnto the 
snol; the whiche with a sherd scrapide 
awei the quyture, sittende in the dung- 
vhil. His wif forsothe seide to hym, 3it 
forsothe thou abidist stille in thi sym- 
10 plete. Blisse to God, and die. The whiche 
seith to hir, As oon of the fool wyinmen 
thou speeke; if goodis wee han taken of 
the hond of the Lord, euelis forsothe 
why shulde wee not suffre? In alle these 
thingis Job synnede not with his lippis. 
11 Thanne thre? frendus of Job, herende al 
the euel that hadde fallen to hym, alle 
camen fro ther place, Elifath Themanites, 
and Baldach Suytes, and Sofar Naamat- 
ites; forsothe thei hadden seid togidere 
to themself, that comende togidere thei 
shulden visiten hym, and coumforten. 


JOB. 


‘and Y haue go thur3 it®. 


675 


stodenY bifor the Lord, and Sathan ‘was 
comun’? among hem, and* stood in his! 
si3t°, that’ the Lord seide® to Sathan, Fro2 
whennus comest thou? Which! answeride, 
and seide, Y haue cumpassid the erthe, 
And the Lords 
seide to Sathan, Whethir thou hast  bi- 
holde* my seruaunt Jocb, that! noon* in 
erthe is! lijk™ hym; he és a" syinple 
man®, and? ri3tful, and dredynge God, and 
goynge? awei fro yuel, and 3it holdynge* 
innocence? ‘But thou’ hast moued me 
ajens him, that ‘Y schulde turmentet hym 
i veyn. To whom Sathan answeride, 4 
and seide*, ‘A man sclial 3yue skyn for 
skyu’, and alle thingis that he hath for 
his lijf%; ‘ellis sende* thin hond, ands 
touche his boon andy fleisch, and thanne 
thou schalt se, that he schal curse thee in 
the? face. Therfor* the Lord seide toé 
Sathan, Lo! he? is® in ‘thin hond*; ne- 
theles kepe thou his lijf. Therfor Sathan7 
3ede out fro the face of the Lord, andé 
smoot Joob with ‘a ful wickid‘ botche fro 
the sole of thes foot ‘til to" his top; 
whichi Joob* schauyde! the quytere with™ # 
a schelle,‘and sat in the dunghil®. For-9 
sothe his wijf seide to hym, Dwellist thou 
3it in thi, symplenesse{ ? Curse thou God, Me ad 
and die®. And Joob seide?, Thou hast 10 nesse. Lire 
spoke as oon of the fonned wymmen; if teas 
we han take goodis’ of the hond of the 
Lord, whi forsothe suffren we not yuels*? 
In alle these thingis Joob synnede not in 
hise lippis. Therfort thre® frendis of Joob 1! 
herden al the yuel, that hadde bifelde* 
to hym, and camen* ech many’ fro his 
place, Eliphath Temanytes, and Baldach 
Suythes, and Sophar Naamathites; for? 
thei ‘hadden seide* togidere to hem silf, 
that thei wolden come togidere, and visite 


°oOm, an. P the thre c. 
ystondes. Zcomes. @andher. »Om.1. © sigt of the Lord 1. Gandia. ¢shuld says. f The 
which 1. & Om.s. 5 not considerd s. ithattheriss. Knomani. 'Om.s, ™lijk tors. "Om.s. 
°Om.s. Pandar. 4departyngs. ‘he holdith:, *And thon forthers. thou vex hyms. 4 seide 
to the Lords. vOm.s. Wsouler. *therfor putte tor Yandhis1. 7thir. ® Thannex. ? Job1. 
Cisnowr. 4thipowerr. ¢andher. {the worste stynkynge1. ghiss. hynto1 tox. fand 1. 


k Job sate in a dunge hill 1. 
wole1. _P seide éo hir ts. 
uthen thes. ¥ bifalle 1s. 


4 gode thingis 1. 


land he schauyde awey 1. 
¥ thanne 1. 
y of hem. 


4nQ 


* thei camen fo him 1. 


o die as the lawe 
t And thanne 1. 


m of him with1. " Om. 1. 
8 gladly yuel thingis 1. 
Z sothely 1. @ seiden 1, 


676 


12And whan thei hadden rerid up aferr 
ther e3en, thei knewen hym not; and 
criende ont thei wepten, and, the clothis 
kitt, thei sprengden poudre ypon ther hed 

13in to heuene. And thei seten with hym 
in the erthe seuen da3is and seuen ny3t, 
and no man spac to hym woord ; forsothe 
thei sezeu the sorewe to ben hydous. 


CAP. III. 


1 Aftir these thingus Job openede his 
2mouth, and curside to his dai, and seide, 
3 Pershe the dai in the whiche I am born, 
and the ny3t in the whiche it is seid, A 
4man is couceyued. That dai be turned 
in to derenessis; God seche it not from 
aboue, and be it not in recording, ne be 
sit listid with 1i3t. Derenesses derene it, 
and the shadewe of deth ocupie it in 
derenesse ; and be it with inne wrappid 
6with bitternesse. A dere whirlewind 
welde that ny3t; and be it not countid 
in the da3es of the 3er, ne noumbrid in 
7monethis. Be that ny3t solitarie, and not 
spreise wrthi. Curse thei to it, that cursen 
to the dai, that ben redi to rere Leui- 
yethan. The sterris be thei derkid4? with 
the dercnesse of it; abide it li3t, and se 
not, ne the springing™ of the risende 
i0morwetid. For it closide’ not the doris 
of the wombe, that bar me, ne toc awei 
iieuelis fro myn eyen. Whi not in the 
wombe I am dead ? gon out of the wombe 
iznot anoon I pershide? Whi taken out of 
i3the knes? whi soukid the tetis? Now 
forsothe slepende I sholde holde my pes, 
14and with my slep resten, with kingus 
and counseileris of the erthe, that bilden 
15to hem solitarie dwellingus; or with 
princis that welde gold, and fulfillen 
i¢ther housis with siluer; or as" abortif 


ddercned azrH.  sprynge a. 


vb Job 1. © coumforte hin 1. 
hknowen a. iJobyr. 3 thanne thei 1. 
intor, Phevenward1. 4 Jobr. 

x Derkenes 5. Y make thei 1. 
f whiche 1. 
seitt. littook 1. m yuel 1. 
¥ with worthi men of counseil 1. 


F upon 1. 
Z of myist 1. 


n fro 1. 
§ the erthe 1. 


JOB. 


$ is close nH. 


4 thei afer r. 

K and thei 1. 
§ forsothe 1. 
% wrappid s. 
& Lenyathan, that is, a venym matir eddre 1. 
° upon 1. 

t whiche r. 


Il, 12—IlII. 16. 


hym?, and coumforte*. And whanne thei‘ 12 
hadden reisid® afer‘ ‘her i3en8, thei knewen® 
not hym'; and theij crieden, and wepten, 
and* to-renten her clothis, and! spreynten 
dust on™ her heed" ‘in to® heuene?. And13 
thei saten with hym‘4 in the erthe senene 
daies and senene ny3tis, and no man spak 
a word to hym; for® thei sien, that his 
sorewe was greet. 


CAP. IT. 


Aftir these thingis Joob openyde his1 
mouth, and cursidet his dai, and seide",2 
Perische the dai? in which Y was borun, 3 
and the ny3t in which it was seid, The” 
man is conceyued. Thilke dai be turnede4 
in to derknessis; God seke not it aboue, 
aud he it not in myndef, nethir be it 1i3t- 
ned with li3t. Derknessis* make’ it derk, 5 
and the schadewe of deeth and myist* oc- 
cupie it; and be it wlappid® with bittir- 
nesse. Derk whirlwynde holde that ni3t ; 6 
be it not rikynyd among the? daies of the 
3eer, nethir be it noumbrid among the 
monethes. Thilke ny3t be soleyn, and not?7 
worthi of® preisyng. Curse thei it, thats 
cursen the dai, that’ ben redi to reise Le- 
uyathans§. Sterris" bei maad derk with9 
the derknesse therof; abide it li3t, and 
se it not, nethir* the bigynnyng of the 
morwetid risyng vp. For it closide not 10 
the doris of the wombe, that bar me, ne- 
thir took! awei yuels™ fro min izen. Whill 
was not Y deed in the wombe ? whi 3ede 
Y out of" the wombe, and perischide not 
anoon ? Whi was Y takun on° knees? 12 
whi was Y suclid? with teetis ? For? now !3 
Y slepynge schulde be stille, and schulde%4 
reste in my sleep, with kyngis, and con-14 
suls’ of erthe’, that* bilden to hem soleyn 
places ; ethir with" prynces that han gold 
in possessioun, and fillen her housis with 


tOm.c. Om. an. 

& hem 3et s. 
9 biholdynge 
wAL 


f Om. 1. afore s. 
mupont, ” heedis 1. 
thecurside 1. he seide 1. 
bOm.1. ¢Om.s. be it notr & Om.1. 
h Sterris of that nijtr. ibe their. * nethir 
P3iue souker. 4 Forsothe 1. 441 schulde 1. 
ul schulde reste with 1. 


€ reisid up 1. 
land thei 1. 


+ Perische the 
lay; Greg. in 
lit. book of 
Morals seith, 
that Jooh spek- 
ith in parable, 
ethir to goostly 
vndurstonding, 
and not to the 
lettre; for 
many wordis 
here takun to 
the lettre ben 
vnresonable 
and vnpossible, 
and of a man 
vnpacient and 
dispeiringe, and 
blasfemynge 
God ; but Joob 
was not siche 
a man, as God 
witnessith in 
the ende. Ne- 
theles Tomas 
Alquyn here 
expowneth this 
proces to the 
lettre, and 
scith, that Joob 
spekith here 
aftir the sen- 
sualite, ether 
fleisly Just, and 
bi the resoun 
of soule he suf- 
fride wilfully 
and paciently 
his disese. But 
for it sueth 
herof that Jooh 
and hise frendis 
disputiden to 
dyuerse wittis, 
and not to the 
purpos, therfor 
it may be seid 
betere, that 
these frendis 
settiden pu- 
nysching only 
for synne 
passid, and re- 
warding onely 
in this liyf for 
goode werkis 
passid. Therfor 
Joob argueth 
ajenus hem, that 
it sueth of her 
errour, that 
Joob schulde 
skilefuly curse 
the day of his 
birthe, and 
othere thingis, 
as the text 
sowneth, and 
Joob spekith 
of day passid, 
bi wordis of 
tyme to com. 
ynge, but in 
truth Joob 
curside not his 





wie —tv. 8. JOB. 677 


hid I shulde not abide, or that conceyued 
17 sejen not 1i3t. There vnpitous men cesiden 
fro noise, and there resteden the wery in 
18strengthe. And sum time togidere ioyned 
withoute gref thei herden not the vois of 
19the askere with strif. Litil and gret ther 
ben, and seruaunt and fre man fro ther 
20lord. Whi to the wrecche is 3iue 1i3t, 
and lif to hem that ben in bitternesse of 
zisoule? The whiche abiden deth, and’ 
cometh not; as men deluende out tresor 
22and io3en hugely, whan thei finde the 
23sepulcre? To the man whos weie is hid, 
and God hath cumpassid hym with derc- 
24nessis ? Er I shul ete, I sizhe; and as of 
25 flowende water, so my roring. For the 
drede, that I dradde, ys ful ont come to 
me; and that I shamede of, is falle. 
26 Whether I feynede not? whether” I 
heeld not my pes? whether I restide 
not? and ther is comen vp on me indig- 
nacioun. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Answerende forsothe Elifath Thema- 
2nythes seide, If wee begynne to speke to 
thee, perauenture grenously thou shalt 
taken; but the conceinede woord who 
3shal moun holde? Lo! thou hast ta3t 
manye men, and thou hast strengthid 
4the weri hondis. Thi woordis han maad 
stable the vnstedefast, and the tremblende 
5knes thou hast coumfortid. Now for- 
sothe is comen vp on thee veniaunce, and 
thou hast failid; it hath touchid thee, 
sand thou art disturbid*. Wher is thi 
drede, thi strengthe, and thi pacience, 
zand the perfeccioun of thi weies? Re- 
corde, I] beseche thee, who enere inno- 
cent pershide, or whanne ‘ri3twis menY 
oben don awei? But rathere I haue seen 
hem, that werken wickidnesse, and sowen 


siluer ; ethir as a ‘thing hid not borun’ 16 cay of Lirthe, 
z "a ut pacient 
Y schulde not stonde*, ethir whicheY con- — snffride his 
: : ee disese, and held 
seyued sien’ not li3t. There wickid mem 17 sista! sentence, 
: as God wit- 
ceessiden of noise, and there men maad jescith in the 
wery of strengthe restiden. And Stim 1s eade. Lire 
‘ - ere. C- 
tyme boundun® togidere with out disese 1 This word, s¢ 
4, not in mynde. 
thei herden not the voys of the wrongful is TOU ER, 
oye b nether in bokis 
axere. A litil man and greet? man be°1 7a pire 
there, and a seruaunt free® fro his lord. “¢*e: ©: 
§ Leuyathan ; 


Whi is li3t 3ouun to the wretche, and 1ijf20 that is, the 
euel, as Al- 


to hem that ben in bitternesse of soule ? — quyn seith. 
Whichef abiden deeth, and it cometh not; 21 tne : 
as men diggynge® out tresour and ioien 224 v- 
greetly, whanne thei han founde a sepul- 

cre? Whi is li3t 30uun to a man, whose3 

weie is hid, and God hath cumpassid hym 

with derknessis? Bifore that Y ete, Y 24 

si3he; and as of watir flowynge, so is my 

roryng. For" the drede, which' Y dredde, 25 

cam* to me; and that!, that Y schamede, 

bifelde™. Whether Y dissymilide" not ? 26 
whether Y was not stille? whether Y 

restide not? and° indignacioun cometh? 

on me. 


CAP. IV. 


Forsothe? Eliphat Themanytes answer-1 
ide, and seide’, If we bigynnen to’ speke2z 
to thee, in hap thou schalt take it heuyli; 
but who may holdet a word conseyued ? 
Lo! thou hast tau3t ful many men, and3 
thou hast strengthid hondis maad feynt. 
Thi wordis confermyden" men doutynge, 4 
and thou coumfortidist™ knees tremblynge. 
But now a wounde* is comun on’ thee, 5 
and thon hast failid; it touchide? thee, 
and thou art disturblid. Where is thie 
drede, thi strengthe, and thi pacience, and 
the perfeccioun of thi weies? Y biseche7 
thee, hane thou mynde, what innocent 
man perischide enere, ethir whanne ri3t- 
ful men weren doon awei? Certis rathirs 
Y si3 nem, that worchen wickidnesse, and 
sowen* sorewis, and repen tho, to haues 


Yasan. * Om. an. * distourblid 4. ¥ the rijtwise 4. riztwise m. 


w child or a beest born bifore the tyme and hid 1. 


xhane beni. Yastheithat beni. 7 and sien 1. 


amen boundeni. bagreet1. ¢beher. 4sernaunt be he therer. ¢ fers. f The whiche 1. & that 


diggenr. hCertis1. ithat1. * hath come 1. 


that thing 1. ™ hath bifalle tome1, ” feynyde 1. 


Cand 3i# 1. Phathcomeni. 4Thanne1. ‘scideto Joby. Sand: tholde im silencer © han 
confermyd 1. hast coumfortid 1. * wounde or sijknesse1. Yuponi. hath touchid1. ® that 


sowen I, 


678 


gsorewis, and repen hem, God blowende, 
to han pershid, and? thur3 the spirit of 
iohis wrathe to be wastid. The roring 
of aleoun, and the vois of a leounesse, 
and the teth of leoun whelpis ben to- 
ibrosid. The tigre pershide, forthi that 
he hadde no prei; and the leoun whelpis 
i2ben scaterid. But to me is seid a woord 
hid, and as theefli myn ere toc the veynes 
130f his gruching. In the orroure of the 
ny3t sizte, whan slep is wont to ocupic 
14men, inward drede heeld me, and trem- 
bling; and alle my bones ben agast. 
is And whan the spirit me present shulde 
passe, inwardli griseden the heris of my 
ig flesh. Ther stod oon, whos chere I knew 
not, an ymage befor myn e3en; and a 
iz7vois as of a softe eir I herde. Whethir 
a* man of God shal be iustified bi com- 
parisoun ; and a man shal be more clene 
isthan his Makere? Lo! that seruen to 
hym ben not stable; and in his aungelis 
1i9he fond shreudenesse. Myche more these 
that dwellen® cleyene housis, that han an 
erthely foundement, shul be wastid as of 
29a moshe’, Fro morutid vnto euen thei 
shul ben hewe doun; and for no man 
vnderstondith, with outen ende thei shul 
91 pershe. Thei forsothe, that weren lafte, 
shul be taken awei fro hem, and dien, 
and not in wisdam. 


CAP. V. 


1 Clep thanne, if ther is that answere to 
thee, and turne to summe of the seintis. 
2 Wrathe sleth a man fol, and enuye sleth 
3a litil child. I sa3 a fool with a stable 
roote, and I curside to his fairnesse anoon. 
4 Aferr shul be maade his sones fro helthe, 
and shul be to-treden in the 3ate, and 
sther shal not be that delinere. Whos 
rep the hungri shal ete, and hym shal 


z Om, «4. 


athe arr, Dtheis. 


> sownynge ajens hemi. © the 1. 
& the liounis whelpis, that ts, his children 1. 
priuey 1. “spekyngy. © sizt of the nizt 1. 
Smyn heed.  chere or lickenesse 1. 
bwhichex. ¢Frother. 4 yntil 1. 
is ony man 1. k an vnwise 1. 


° The 1. 


u the 1. 


JOB. 


© dwellen in «. 


4 lioun, that is, Job 1. 
hal now 1. 

P and drede 1. 
wOm. 1. 
e to the 1. 
1 child withouten witt 1. 


IV. 9-—V. 5. 


perischid bi God blowynge®, and to be 


wastid bi the spirit of his ire. The roryng 10 


of a° lioun*+, and the vois of a® lionesse’, 
and the teeth of ‘whelpis of liouns’ ben 
al" to-brokun. Tigris perischide, for sche 11 
hadde not prey; and the! whelpis of a‘ 


+ A glos. Bia 
Tioun he vndur- 
stondith Joob; 
bi a lionesse 
and tigris he 
yndurstondith 
his wiyf ; bi 


lioun ben distried. Certis an hid word 12 %¢ teeth of 


was seid to me, and myn eere took as! 
theueli the veynes of priuy™ noise" therof. 
In the hidousnesse of ‘ny3tis si3t®, whanne 1 


heuy sleep is wont to occupie men, drede? 14 


and tremblyng heldei me; and alle .my 


boonys weren aferd. And whanne the1s5 


spirit ‘;ede in my presence’, the heiris of 
‘my fleisch* hadden hidousnesse. 
stood, whos cheret Y knewe not, an ymage 
bifor myn i3en; and Y herde a" vois as” 
of softe* wynd. Whether a man schal be17 
maad iust{ in comparisoun of God ? ethir 
whethirY a man schal be clennere than his 
Makere? Lo! thei that sernen hym ben 1s 
not stidefast; and he findith? schrewid- 
nesse in hise aungels. Hou myche more 19 
thei that dwellen in housis of cley, that 
han an ertheli foundement, schulen be 
wastyd as of a mou3te. Fro* morewtid 20 
til’ tot euentid thei schulen be kit doun ; 
and for no man vndurstondith, thei schu- 
len perische with outen ende. Sothelif2 
thei, that ben residue’, schulen be takun 
awei(; thei schulen die, and not in wisdom. 


CAP. Va 


Therfor" clepe thou, if ‘ony is‘ that schal1 
answere thee, and turne thou to summe of 
seyntis. Wrathfulnesse sleeth ‘a fonned*2 
man, and enuye sleeth a litil child!. Y si33 
a fool with stidefast|] rote, and Y eurside 
his feirnesse anoon. Hise sones schulen4 
be maad fer fro helthe, and thei schulen 
be defoulid in the 3ate, and ‘noon schal 
be™ that schal delyuere hem™. Whos? ripes 


4d mowghe azn. moughe F. 


ether. f lionesse, that is, his wif f 1. 
iOm.1 <Kther Jlasitwerer ™ the 
dhelden i. * passide me beynge present 1. 
Xasofter yYOm.1. 2 hath founder. 
fAnd*. flefti. 4 Therfor, Job1. i ther 
m ther schal be noon 1. 1 Om. plures. 


Oon 16 


liouns he vn- 
durstondith 
hise sones, 
Live here. c et 


3 plures. 


t maad iust ; 
this is the sen- 
tence of Eli- 
phat, sithen no 
man is ri3t- 
fulere nethir 
clennere than 
God, and a 
ri3tful inge 
dampneth not 
an innocent 
man, therfor 
God punysch- 
ith not a man 
without his 
synne bifor 
doon. This re- 
soun is not 
worth; for 
whanne 2 iuge 
dampnyth an 
innocent man, 
he may not 
rewarde him 
aftir deth, but 
God punysch. 
ith a man here 
with ont gilt 
for to encreesse 
his meede in 
blis, and to3yue 
saumple of pa- 
cience to othere 
men. Lire 
here. c. 

§ awey ; that 
is, fro present 
liyf. c. 

ll stidefust ; that 
is, sad in pros- 
perite. Lire 
here. Cc. 


Vv. 6—24. 


raueshe the armed, and the thristi men 
6shul drinke his richessis. No thing in 
the erthe is maad withoute cause, and of 
7the erthe shal not gon out sorewe. A 
mau to trauaile is born, and a brid to 
8fleen. For what thing I shal pre3e the 
Lord, and to my God I shal putte my 
9speche. That doth grete thingus, and vn- 
serchable, and merueilouse thingus with- 
iooute noumbre. That 3ineth reyn vpon 
the face of the erthe, and moysteth with 
11 watris alle thingus. That setteth meke 
men in to heijte, and weilende men 
12rereth¢ with helthe. That scatereth the 
tho3tis of euele men, that ther hondis 
13moun not fulfille that thei begunne. That 
caccheth wise men in ther felnesse, and 
14the counseil of shrewis scattereth. Bi 
the dai thei shul renne in to dercnessis, 
and as in ny3t so thei shul graspen in 
ismydday. But saf he shal make the nedi 
fro the swerd of the mouth of hem, and 
fro the hond doende violence the pore 
isman. And he shal be to the nédi man 
hope, wickidnesse forsothe shal drawe to- 
17 gidere his mouth. Blisfulf the men that 
is chastisid of the Lord; thanne the 
blamyng of the Lord ne repreue thou. 
is For he woundeth, and lecheth ; smyteth, 
19 and his hondis shuln helen. In sixe tribu- 
laciouns he shal deliuere thee, and in the 
20seuenthe shal not touche thee euel. In 
hungir he shal deliuere thee fro deth, 
and in bataile fro the hond of swerd. 
21 Fro the scourge of tunge thou shalt ben 
hid, and thou shalt not drede wrecchid- 
22nesse, whan it cometh. In wastite and 
hunger thou shalt la3whin, and beste of 
23the erthe thou shalt not dreden. But 
with stones of regiouns thi couenaunt, 
and the bestis of erthe shul be pesible to 
24thee. And thou shalt wite, that thi ta- 
bernacle haue pes, and visitende thi kinde 


€ rerynge 4. 


qOm.1. © Om. xe. 
y The which 1. 


P corn of him 1. 
erthe 1. * he moistith 1. 
d her owne tf. 
kOm.1 !Om. ns. ™ the f. 
4 wickidnesse of endurid men 1. 
x Om. 1. 


Fr that 1. 


JOB. 


8 the whiche thingis 1. 
Zand het. 
© felnesse, ether mylynesse K marg. £ Om. 1. 
2 God schal saue fro 1. 


8 and he 1. 


679 


corn? an hungri man schal ete, and an 
armed man schal rauysche hym, and thei, 
that thirsten, schulen drynke hise richessis. 
No thing is doon in erthe with out cause, ¢ 
and soreweft schal not go out of the‘ erthe. 
A man is borun to labour, and a brid to7 
fliz3t. Wherfor Y schal biseche the Lord,8 
and Y schal sette my speche to my God. 
That makith grete thingis, and" thats9 
moun not be sou3t out, and wondurful 
thingis with out noumbre. Which* 3yueth 10 
reyn on" the face of erthe”, and moistith* 
alle thingis with watris. Which’ settith 1 
meke men an hi3, and’ reisith with helthe 
hem that morenen. Which distrieth the12 
thou3tis of yuel willid men, that her hondis 
moun not fille? tho thingis that thei bi- 
gunnen>. Which takith cautelouse® men 13 
in the? felnesse® ‘of hem‘, and® distrieth 
the counsel of schrewis. Bi dai® theiii 
schulen renne in to derknessis, and as in 
ny3t so* thei schulen grope in myddai. 
Certis God schal make saaf a nedi mantis 
fro the! swerd of her™ mouth, and a pore 
man fro" the hond of the violent®, ‘ethir 
rauynour?, And hope schal be to a nediicé 
man, but wickidnesse? schal drawe togi- 
dere his month. Blessid is the man,17 
which’ is chastisid of the Lord; therfor 
repreue thou not the blainyng of the Lord. 
For he woundith, and’ doith medicyn ; he1s 
smytith, and hise hondis schulen make 
hool. In sixe tribulaciouns he schal dely- 19 
uere thee, and iu the seuenthe tribulacioun 
yuel schal not touche thee. In hungur he20 
schal delynere thee fro deeth, and in batel 
fro thet power of swerd. Thou schalt be21 
hid fro the scourge of tunge", and thou 
schalt not drede myseiste”, ethir wretehid- 
nesse*, whanne it cometh. In distriyng 22 
maad of enemyes and in hungur thou 
schalt leize, and thou schalt not drede the 
beestis of erthe. But thi couenaunt schale2s 


f Blessyd is 4. Blessid u. 


t The which God 1. 
bhan bigunne 1. 


tupons. W the 
¢ slie cautelouse 1. 
Sandher. 4 dai or openly 1. i siche 1. 
© violent mani. P ethir rauenours N. Om. t. 
tOm 1 Yan yuel tunge I.  W myseesnesse 1. 


a fulfille 1. 


+ sorewe; that 
is, aduersite 
hifallith not to 
ony man with 
out cause. Lire 
here. c. 


ta nedy man; 
amendid of his 
trespassis hi 
nedynesse. 
Lire here. c. 


680 


2sthou shalt not synne. And thou shalt 
wite also, for manyfold shal be thi sed, 
and thi progenye as the erbe of the? 

26erthe. Thou shalt go in to the sepulcre 
in plenteuousnessis, as is born in an hep 

27 off whete in his tyme. Lo! this, as wee 
han enserchid, so is; that is herd, in 
mynde thur3 trete. 


CAP. VI. 


5 Answerende forsothe Job seith, Wolde 
God, my synnes weren we3ed, bi the 
whiche wrathe I deseruede; and the® 
wrecchidnesse! that I suffre, in a ba- 
3launce. As the grauel of the se this 
more grenous shulde seme ; wherfore and 
4iy woordis ben ful of sorewe. For the 
arwis of the Lord ben in me, of the 
whiche the indignacioun drinketh vp my 
spirit; and the gastnessis of the Lord 
5fi3ten a3jen me. Whethir an asse shal 
roren, whan he hath erbe? Or an oxe 
shul loowen, whan befor the fulle cracche 
che shal stonde? Or shal moun ben eten 
vnsauere thing, that is not with salt 
poudrid? Or shal a man moun taste, 
7that tastid bringeth deth? Forsothe to 
the hungrende lif, also bitter thingis 
semen to be sweete ; that beforn my soule 
wolde not touche, now for anguysh ben 
8my metis. Who 3eue, that nyn asking 
come; and that I abijde, 3elde to me God ? 
9And that began, he me to-trede; lose 
10his hond, and hewe me doun? And this 
be to me a coumfort, that the tormeunt- 
ende me with sorewe pershe not, ne 
withseie to the woordis of a seint. What 


JOB. 


V. 25-——-VI. 10. 


be with theY stonys of erthe, and beestis 
of erthe schulen be pesible to thee. And 24 
thou schalt wite, that thi tabernacle hath? 
pees, and thou visitynget thi fairnesse 
schalt not do* synne. 
wite also, that thi seed schal be’ many 
fold, and thi generacioun schal be as an or thou sehale 
not be reised 
erbe of erthe. In abundaunce thou schalt 26 in to pride, but 
a more in to 
go in to the sepulere, as an heep of wheete _ preisinge of 
is borun in his tyme. Lo! this is so, as27,0% 2” 
we han sou3t ; which? thing herd?, trete 
thouf in? minde. 


t visilyng ; 
that is, bihold- 
And thou schalt 25 ing thi pros- 


perite. schalt 
nol do synne ; 


CAP. VI. 


Forsothet Joob answeride, and seide, Y} 
wolde, that my synnes, bi whiche Y ‘des- 
seruede ire!, and the wretchidnesse which 
Y suffre, weren peisid in a balaunce. As3 
the grauel of the see, this wretchidnesse 
schulde appere greuousere* ; wherfor and 
my wordis ben ful of sorewe}. For thes + and my 
arowis of the Lord ben in me, the indig- init a 
nacioun! of whiche™ drynkith vp my spi- 


Sfulle of soreuwe; 
resonably, if 
rit ; and the dredis of the Lord fi3ten a3ens 


no rewarding 
is in liyf to 


me. Whether a feeld asse schal rore™,5 comynge y 

° eynes in this 
whanne he hath gras°? Ethir whether an lyf as Eliphath 
oxe schal lowe, whanne he stondith byfor 524° 7” 


a ‘ful cratche?? Ether whethir a thinge 

vnsanuery may be etun, which is not maad 

sauery bi salt? Ether whether ony man 

may taaste a thing, which‘ tastid bryng- 

ith’ deeth? For whi to an hungri soule, 

3he’, bittir thingis semen to be swete ; 

tho thingis whiche my soule noldet touche 

bifore", ben now my meetis for angwisch. 

Who 3yueth”, that inyn axyng come* ; and & 

that God 3yue* to me that*, that Y abide ? 

And he that bigan®, al¢ to-breke’ me®; re-9 

leessef he his hond8, and kitte® me douni§? _ § dou, fro pre- 
sent liyf. Lire 

And ‘this be* coumfort to me, that he! tur- 10 here. c. 

mente me with sorewe, and spare™ not, 


£ Om. acr. my a. i wrecelenesse c. 


yOm.1. 2 schalhauer. 4@Om.1. 
thou hast herd 1. Fita. & in thi1. 
greuous 1. ! indignaciouns 1s, 
ful of mete 1s, 4 which thing 1s. 


thing 1s. > hath bigunne 1s. 


fromes. »kitte he rs, 
™ spare ine Is, 


» be encressid 1. 
h And 1, 
™ thes arowis 1s. rore for hungre 1s. 
’ bryngith yn 1s. 

" 3yueth or grauntith 1. 3yueth s prem, graunteth s sec. m. 
© to punyshe, al 1. iustly to punishe me for my synne al s. 
© me with diuers anoyes, til I be Met ee my filthe ae : ge 


i doun, that I wex no more up to synne 8. 


C this thing 1. the whichi. ¢ whanne 
i haue deserued the wraththe of God1. * more 
° gras in plente s. P cratche 
3 Om. s. t wolde not 1. u bifore hoond s. 

x come fo me Is. 2 3yueth c. a that 
4 to-breke he 1s. 

& hond, which he hath long tide 
k be this thing 1s. 1 the Lord ts. 


f louse 1s. 


: 
| 
| 
| 


a ee ee ee 


VI. 12-—25, 


forsothe is my strengthe, that I suffre ? 
or what myn ende, that I pacientli do? 
12 Ne the strengthe of stones iny strengthe, 
isne my flesh is brasene. Lo! ther is not 
helpe to me in me; also my necessarie 
14amen wenten awei frome. He that taketh 
awei fro his frend mercy, the drede of 
isthe Lord forsaketh. “My brethern pass- 
eden biside me, as a strem that raueshe- 
igmelum* passeth in valeis. That dreden 
i7frost, snow3 shal falle vpon hem. The 
time that thei wer scaterid, thei shul 
pershe; and as thei enchaufe, thei shul 
1s be losid fro ther place. Withinne wrap- 
pid ben the sties of ther goingus; thei 
i9Shul gon in vein, and pershen. Behold- 
eth! the sties of Theman, the weies of 
99Saba; and abidith a litil while. Thei 
ben confoundid, for I hopide ; thei camen 
also to me, and with shame thei ben 
9, ouercouered. Now 3ee han comen™, and 
now seande my veniaunce 3ee dreden. 
22 Whether I seide, Bringeth to me, and of 
23 30Ure substaunce 3ineth to me? or, Deli- 
uere me fro the hond of the enemy, and 
fro the hond of stronge men pullith out 
24me? Techeth me, and I shal be stille; 
and if any thing perauenture I haue vn- 
25 knowen, enformeth me. Whi han _ 3ee 
bacbitid to the woordis of treuthe ? whan 
of 30u no man be, that mai vndernyme 
agsme. To blamen" onli spechis 3ee or- 
deynyn, and ajen wind woordis 3ee 
27Speken. Vpon the faderles child 3ee fallen 
on, and enforsen 3oure frend to turne vp 
2380 doun. Nerthelater® that 3ee han he- 
gunne, fulfillith ; 3iueth ere, and seeth, 


k ranyshe meel 4. raneshemeles er. rauyschith mele u. 


a blamen me £ sup.ras. © Neuerthelater szru. 


0 moost hooli 1. holi Lord s. 
4 suffre it s. 
u departiden 1s. 


° Om. 1s. 
T my selff 1. me as of my silf 8. 
w fro me 8. 


JOB. 


681 
and that Y a3enseie not the wordis of the 
hooli". For whi°, what is my strengthe, 11 
that Y suffre?? ethir which is myn ende, 
that Y dod pacientlit? Nethir my strengthe 12 t paciently ; 

bi the errour 
is the strengthe of stoonus, nether iny of Eliphat, sei- 
fleisch is of bras. Lo! noon help is to me is eS 
in me™; also’ my meynealt frendis ‘3eden pace an thea 
awey" fro me. He that takith awei merci We anes 
fro his frend, forsakith the drede of the — resoun to suf- 
Lord. My britheren passiden me’, as Hay Copies. 
stronde dotth, that passith* ruschyngli” in 
grete valeis. Snow schal come on’ hein, 16 
that dreden frost*. In the tyme wherynne 1; 
thei ben> scaterid, thei schulen perische ; 
and as* thei ben’ hoote, thei schulen be 
vnknyt® frof her place. The pathis of her is 
steppis ben wlappid’; thei schulen go in . 
veyn, and? schulen perische. Biholde 3e iy 
the pathis of Theman}, and the weies of + the pathis of 
Saba; and abide 3e a litil. Thei ben schenti, 29 Ce Ca 
for Y hopide*; and thei camen ‘til to! me, oan And” 
and thei ben hilid with schame. Now 3e ot ae 
ben comun™, and now 3e seen my wounde®, that her com. 
and° dreden?. Whether Y seide’, Brynge 22 eh am 
3e to me, and 3iue 3e of 3oure catel to me? Se pa 
ethir", Delyuere 3e me fro the hond ofo3° 
enemy‘, and rauyschet 3e me fro the hond 
of stronge men? Teche 3e me", and Yas 
schal be stille; and if in hap Y vnknew 
ony thing’, teche 3e% me’. Whi han 3e9; 
depraued? the wordis of trewthe? sithen* 
noon is of 3ou, that may° repreue me’, 
3e maken redi spechis® oneli for to blame’ og 
andé 3e bryngen forth wordis! in to wyude. 
3e fallen in* on! a fadirles child, and™ en-97 
forsen to" peruerte® 3oure frend!. Netheles og 
fille! 3e that, that 3e han bigunne™; 3yue* 
1 Biholde a. ™ comen to me E sup. ras. 


P suffre, Y suffre the seourge that Y haue deserued s. 
8 and also 1s. 
x passith or rennyth s. 


t nesessarie 1. necessarie and home s. 


y ruschyngli and hastily 1s. 2 upon 1s. 


a frost, thal is, he that wile not suffre here, schal suffre more aflir 1 marg. frost, that is, who wole not 


suffre here a lytil while, shal ellis where suffre longere s. 


elousid 1s. — ! and removed fro s. 
k hopide in the Lords. | vnto 1s. 
Pp 3e dreden 18. 4 seide éo 30u 18. 
“me trenthes. ™ thing of this that I speke s. 
theris1. bOm.1. © may iustly 8. 
that 3e sholden ioie of s. & and so Is. 
luponis. M™Mand3e1s. 1 30u tots. 
® bigunne (o éhe merite of pacient men s. 


VOL. II. 


& wlappid with diuers disesis s. 
™ comen hidre 8. 
t ethir seide 1. ethir seide I to 30m s. 
x 3e it 1. 
me for my suffringe s. 
h 3oure wordis ts. 
© turne 1s. 
a and 3yue Is. 


4s 


€ whanne ts. 4 schul wexe ts. 
h and thei ts. i aschanied 1s. 
© which I disservide and s. 
8 myn enemy 1s. * bynyme 1. 
2 eontraried 1s. 4 sith 
f blame that thyng 
k in here i. 
4 fulfille 1s. 


b schul be 18. 
D yeniaunce Is. 


Y me bellir s. 
€ zoure spechis 1s. 
i wynde fo be wastid s. 

P frend awey fro [the s] treuthe 1s. 


682 JOB. V1. 29—VII. 13. 


o9whether I lie. Answerth, I beseche, 
withoute strif, and spekende that, that is 

soriztwis, shewith. And 3ee shul not finde 
in my tunge wickidnesse, ne in my chekis 
folie shal thur3 soune. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Knisthod is the lif of man vpon erthe, 
and as the dajes of an hirid man, the 
2da3is of hym. As an hert desireth sha- 
dewe, and as an hirid man abideth the 
3ende of his werc; so and I hadde voide 
monethis, and trauailous ny3tis I noum- 
4bride out tome. If I shul slepen, I shal 
sey, Whanne shal I rise? and eft I shal 
abide the euetid, and I shal be fulfild 
sWith sorewis vnto derenessis. My flesh 
is clad4 with roting, and with filthis of 
pouder; my fel driede, and is drawen to- 
sgidere. My da3es swiftliere passiden 
than of the weuere the web is kut of; 
and thei ben wastid withoute any hope. 
7Haue mynde, for wind is my lif, and 
myn e3e shal not be turned a3een, that 
81 see goodis. Ne the si3te of man shal 
beholde me; but thin ejen in me, and J] 
9shal not stonden. As a cloude is wastid, 
and passeth, so that goth doun to helle, 
1oshal not ste3en vp; ne shal turne a3cen 
more in to his hous, ne his place shal 
1imore ouer knowen hym. Wherfore and 
I shal not spare to my mouth; IJ shal 
speke in the tribulacioun of my spirit, 
and I shal talke with the bitternesse of 
1zmy soule. Whether am I the se, or a 
whal, for 3ee han enuyround me with a 
isprisoun? If I shal seyn, My bed shal 
coumforte me, and I shal be releued 


3e thet eereY, and” se 3e, whether Y lie. 
Y biseche*, answere 3eY with out strijf, 29 
and speke 3e%, and deme 3e that, that is 
iust. And 3e schulen not@ fynde wickid-30 
nesse in my tunge”, nethir foli schal sowne 
in my chekis®. 


CAP. VII. 


Kny3thod‘ is® lijf of manf on erthe,1 
and his daies ben as the daies of an hired 
man, As an hert desireth schadowe, and2 
as an hirede man abideth the ende of his 
werk ; so and! Y hadde* voide} monethis, 3 
and Y noumbrede! trauailous ni3tes to me. 
If Y schal slepe, Y schal seie, Whanne4 
schal Y rise ? and eft Y schal abide the 
euentid, and Y schal be fillid™ with so- 
rewis ‘til to" derknessis®. Mi fleisch iss 
clothid with rot, and filthisP of dust ; my4 
skyn driede vp, and is’ drawun togidere. 
My daies passiden’ swiftlieret thanne ac 
web is kit doun® ‘of a webstere”; and tho 
daies ben wastid with outen ony hope*. 
God, haue thou mynde, for my lijf is7 
wynde’, and myn ije schal not turne a3en, 
that it se goodis*. Nethir the si3t of mans 
schal biholde me; but? thin izen° ben in 
me’, and Y schal not ‘be im deedli lijf. 
As a cloude is wastid, and passith‘, so hes 
that goith doun to® helle, schal not stie" ; 
nether schali turne ajen more in to his10 
hows, and his place schal no more knowe 
hym. Wherfor and Y schal not spare 
my mouth; Y schal speke in the tribula- 
cioun of my spirit, Y* schal talke togidere 
with the bitternesse of my soule. Whether !2 
Y am the! see, ethir a whal, for thou hast™ 
cumpassid me with prisoun™? If Y° seieP, 13 
My bed® schal coumfort me, and Y schal 


q clothed szrH. 


t3oure is. Ueere or hering 1. — W for to lystne the trewthe, and s. x biseche jou 1s. -Y ge me 18. 
Z 3e trenthe s. 4 not thanne s. > tunge, thow I deeme my synne more thanne the veniaunce that I suffre s. 
© chekis, thou3 I coueite to be punyshid here, and sparid aftir 1s. 4 Kny3thod, that is, contynuel traueyle 


and fy3tinge azen vices s. is the1s. fa mans. 


Supon-t. here ons. » man, that bisely traueylith in 


ircnthe fro morewe til euens. i1Om.s. * haue had 1s. 1lhaue noumbrid 1s. ™ fulfillid 1s.» vnto 1. 


into s. © derknessis come is. P with filthe 1s. 


Gand my is. Titis1s. §han passid 1s. ¢ swifter 1. 


u doun fro the loomes 1. Om. 1. of the webstere s. _ ¥ hope of comyng azen 1. hope of ajen cleping s. 
: Lord is, * wynde, that is, unstable Is. 2 goodis of this lyfs. >» Om.1. but, Lords. © igen, Lord 1. 
me, biholdynge mes. © abijde 1. passith soone awey 1s. Sintos. bstieupt. stie up éhennys s. 


ihe schalis. Kand Yas. lax. m hast, Lord s. 


4 litil bed 1s, 


4a prisoun 1s. ° Y schal is. P seie my feelynge s. 


+t voide; that 
is, not hauyng 
the laste ende, 
that is, blis. 
Lire here. c. 


VII. 14—VIII. 8. 


14spekende with me in my bed ; thou shalt 
fere me bi sweuenys, and bi viseouns ; 
thur3orrour thou shalt smyte me to gidere. 
1s Wherfore my soule ches hangyng vp, and 
i6my bones deth. J despeirede, now I shal 
no mor line; spare to me, Lord, no thing 
17 forsothe ben my da3es. What is a man, 
for thou magnefiest hym? or what thou 
Issettis to ajen hym thin herte? Thou 
visitist hym the morutid, and feerli thou 
i9prouest hym. Hou longe thou sparist 


not to me, ne letist me, that I swolewe ' 


20my spotele? I haue synned; what shal 
I don to thee, O! kepere of men? Whi 
hast thou put me contrarie to thee, and 

21am maad to myself heuy? Whi takist 
thou not awei my synne, and‘ whi dost 
thou not awei my wickidnesse? Lo! 
nowe in pouder I slepe, and if erli thou 
seche’ me, I shal not stonde stille. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Answerende forsothe Baldach Suythes 
2seide, Hou longe shalt thon speke suche 
thingus? Ther is a manyfold spirit of the 
3woord of thi mouth. Whether God sup- 
plauntith dom, and the Almy3ti turneth 
4vpso doun, that is rij3twis? Also if thi 
sonys synneden to-hym, and lafte them 
5in the hond of ther wickidnesse; thou 
nerthelatere’, if thou erli to gidere risist 
to God, and the Almy3ti haddest pre3id, 
Gif clene and ri3twis thou gost, anoon he 
shal waken out to thee, and maad pesible 
the dwelling place of thi rijtwisnesse he 
7shal 3elde; in so myche that thi rather- 
more weren litle, and thi laste thingis 
sshuln be multiplied ful myche. Forsothe 
aske the rathermor ieneracioun, and bi- 
sili enserche the mynde of the faders. 


q Om. c. 


T releenyd or quietids. 8 my self 1s. 
y hath choseu to be reisid up ts. 
¢ man of him silf 8. 


2 han chosen 18. 
d makist him greet 18. 


» thou suffrist s. !Ol1s.  * abide over thi clepyng s. 
or takith aweys. ©Om.1s. P that thing 1s. 4 For 1s, 
uv bisechist him 1s. ¥ Om.1s. and if 1s. 


schal s. » riztwisnesse s. 


& oolde fadris gs. 5 Certis 1s. 


4s 2 


JOB. 


T sechest AEFH. 


t beddyng ts. 
a Hope of lijf heere hath cessid in me 18. 
€ hym that is so freel 1s. 


Y riztful én his sizé 18. 
€ whi take hede, and s. 


683 


be ‘releeuyd', spekynge with me* in my 
bed*; thou schalt make me aferd bi dremys, 14 
and thou" schalt schake me with ‘orrour, 
ethir™ hidousnesse, ‘bi siz3tis*. Wherfort 1s 
my soule ‘chees hangyng’, and my boonys 


cheesiden? deth. ‘Y dispeiride*, now Y schal 16 


no more lyue; Lord, sparet thon me, for® 


my daies ben nou3t. What is a man‘, for17 


thou ‘magnifiest hym?? ether what settist 
thou thin herte toward hym*? 
visitist hym eerly%, and sudeynli thou 


preuest hym. Hou long sparist thou not 19 


me, nether suffrist? me, that Y swolowe 


Thon is 


wherfor ; 


ae 
that is, for the 


wrecehidnessis 
whiehe Y feele, 
and fro whiche 
semeth no re- 
leeuyng in pre- 
sent liyf, and, 
bi the errour 
of Eliphat, no 
rewarding schal 
be in another 
liyf for peynes 
that ben suf- 
frid in this liyf; 
therfor my 
soule chees 
hanging ; that 


my spotele? Y haue synned; Ai! thou ois, deth, be 


kepere of men, what schal Y do to thee ? 
Whi hast thou set me contrarie to thee, 
and Y am maad greuouse to my silf? 
Whi doist thou not awei my sinne, andai 
whi takist thou not awei my wickidnesse ? 
Lo! now Y schal slepe in dust, and if 
thou sekist me eerli, Y schal not abide'. 


CAP. VUI. 


Sotheli! Baldath Suytes answeride, and1 
seide™, Hou longe schalt thou speke siche2 
thingis? The spirit of the word of thi 
mouth is manyfold. Whether God sup-3 
plauntith™, ‘ethir disseyueth®, doom, and 
whether Almy3ti God distrieth that?, that 
is iust? 3he4, thou; thi sones synneden4 
a3ens hym', and’ he lefte hem in the hond 
of her wickidnesse ; netheles, if thou risist 5 
eerli to God’, and bisechist" ‘ Almy3ti God”, 
if* thou goist clene and ri3tfulY, anoon hes 
schal wake? fulli to thee, and schal? make 
pesible the dwellyng place of thi ry3t- 
fulnesse’; in so miche that thi formere 7; 
thingis weren litil, and that thi laste 
thingis be multiplied greetli. For whi‘, axe s 
thou? thee formere generacioun‘, and seke 
thou diligentli the mynde of fadris®. For 


8 neuerthelater 4EFH. 


x Om, 18. 
> certis Is. 
& ful eerly s. 


U thon bi siztisis. W Om. 18. 

f Lord, thou s. 

m seide fo Jobs. " supplantith 
8 and thowz31s. * the Lord s. 

2 wake and take heedes. ahe 

€QOm.10. f generaciouns A sec. m. 18. 


1 Whanne s. 
r the Lord 1s. 


Om. s. 


it neuere 80 
foul. Y dispeir- 
ide; of temporal 
prosperite, 
which Eliphat 
biheetith to me. 
¥ schal no more 
tyue; in dedly 
liyf attir deth. 
Lire here. c. 

t spare: here 
Joob schewith, 
that veri abid- 
ing is this, that 
God take him 
awey fro pre- 
sent wrecchid- 
nesse, that he 
haue reste in 
anotber liyf ; 
and bi alle 
these wordis 

of Joob is 
schewid onely 
his desir, that 
God delyuere 
him fro synne, 
that he be not 
taried fro liyf 
to comynge. 
Lire here. c. 


684 


»Forsothe wee ben as 3istai' born, and 
wee han vukunnyng; for as shadewe oure 
10dazis ben yp on erthe", And thei shul 
techie thee, and speke to thee, and fro 
thin herte shul bringe forth spechis. 
11 Whether a resshe may liuen withoute 
humonr? or reeddi place growe with 
120ute water? Whanne 3it" it be in flour, 
and be it not taken with hond, beforn 
isalle erbis it waxeth drie. So the weies of 
alle men, that for3eteu God; and the hope 
isof an ipocrite shal pershe. To hym shal 
not plese his couwardise, and as the web 
isof attercoppis, his trost. He shal lene 
vp on his hous, and it shal not stonde ; 
he shal vnder setten it, and it shal not 
isyise*. Moiste semeth the resshe, befor 
the sunne come; and in his springing 
i7the buriownyng of it shal gon out. Vp on 
an hep of stones his rootis shul be maad 
thicke, and among the stonys it shal 
isdwelle. And if it pulle it vp fro his 
place, it shal denyen hym, and seyn, I 
wknew not thee. This forsothe is the 
gladnesse of his weie, that eft fro the 
20erthe othere be buriouned. God shal not 
throwen aferr the symple, ne putten hond 
a:to shrewis; to the time that thi mouth 
be fulfild with laj3hing, and thi lippis 
22with io3e. Thei that hateden thee shul 
be clad with confusioun; and the taber- 
nacle of vnpitouse men shal not stonde 
stille. 


CAP. IX. 


: Answerende Job seith, Verreli I wot, 
that so it is, and that a man compari- 
3soun to God shal not be iustified. If he 
wile striue with hym, he shal not moun 
answere to hym oon for a thousend. 
4Wis* in herte he is, and strong in 
strengthe; who withstod’ to hym, and 


1 
2 


tsisterday az. the erthe 4. v Om. 4. 


i sistirdai, that is, of late tyme s. 
Jfadris 1. oolde fadris 5. = Om. c. 
whanne 1s. tthe reed 1s. % flour most quik s. 


JOB. 


W arijsen 4EFH. 


K and therfor 1. Om. s. 
© trewe spechis Is. 
Wit is 1. 


VIII. 9—IX. 4. 


we ben men of 3istirdai!, and* ‘kunnen not!; + spechis ; here 
. b Baldath vndur- 
for oure daies ben as schadewe on the _ stoa, that bi 
; *m dedis of fadris 
erthe. And thei™ schulen teche thee, 10 asuidde eta 
thei schulen speke to thee, and of her® net be foundun 
E : : that ony weren 
herte thei schulen bring forth spechis®{. pnnyschid, no 
Q but for her 
Whether a rusche may lyue? with out.) syines passid, 
: 2 wg * pet and thei that 
moysture ? ethir a spierd ‘may wexe" with Yorn amendid 
out watir ? Whanne’ it' is 3it in the flour’, 1 ee 
nethir is¥ takun* with hond, it wexethY _ poral pe 
. ° . bi perite; but 
drie bifor alle erbis. So* the weies of alle 13 this is not 
th li. 
men, that forjeten God; and the hope of Tirehere.c. 
a . i Q * cowardise ; 
an ypocrite schal perische. His cowardise} 14 ioe tH 
schal not plese hym’, and his trist schal hen no ome 
aralse 18 - 
be as a web of yreyns*. He schal leene®, 15 tere than for 
4 5 tranele strong- 
‘ether reste’, on® his hows, and it schal ty in Goddis” 
. G ° heestis for 
not stonde; he schal vndursette it, and it mannussellt 
schal not rise‘ togidere. The rusche semeth 16274 sich cow. 
: i _ ,  ardise displesith 
moist, bifor that the sunne come’; and in an ion 
c whanne he 
the risyng of the sunne the seed therof  fallith fro tem- 
‘ al good 
schal go out. Rootis" therof schulen be 17 }iter fro man- 
i i k nus preising. 
maad thicke on! an* heep of stoonys, and 7) PUhné: 
it schal dwelle among stoonys. If a man 18§ God schal not 
< : i 4 caste awey @ 
drawith it out of ‘his place!, his™ place — simple man; 

r % euere this is 
schal denye it, and schal" seie®, Y knowe _ soth in goostly 
thee not. For this is the gladnesse of his 19 8°0tis ‘hat ben 
weie, that eft othere ruschis springe out papheauie 
of the erthe. Forsothe God schal ot caste 20 goodis it is not 

‘ 5 enere soth, for 
a wei a symple man}, nethir schal? dresse — God withdraw. 
Bilin ae - . ith te al 
hond’ to wickid men; til thi mouth heai roodis {0 aint 
fillid' with lei3tir, and thi lippis with  symplemenand 
: ‘ 
hertli song. Thei that haten thee schulen 22 sence ee 
cee ; goostly goodis 
be clothid with schenschip; and the taber- and euerlast- 
ee inge. Lire 
nacle of wickid men schal not stonde’. | heen 
symple ; that 
1s, innocent 
CAP. IX. nie that 
a 7 oa, 1 serueth God 
Joobt answeride, and seide, Verili Y 4 bi veri herte 
a ae and not feyned. 
woot, that it is sol], and that a man com- Lire here. c. 
. F so; that God 
parisound to God schal not be maad iust. pte naa 
.. . dom, and dis- 
If he wole stryue with God, he may nots (red, not a 
answere to God oon] for a thousynde. ins thing. 
. ce : é Lire here. c. 
He" is wiys in herte, and strong in my3t;4 { 2%: that 
is, he mai seie 
who a3enstood” hym, and hadde pees? no thing re- 
sonably a3ens 
Goddis doom 
Lire here. C. 


x A wis Einras. Y withstond Fr. 


1 we vnknowen 1. Om. s. 
P growe is. reedis. "Om. 1s. 
x takun or nejed s. Y wex s. 


m thilke 
8 And 
% So bens. 


* God 1s. > spithers 1, areyns, that soone faylith s. ¢leene himts. 4Om.18. © upon 1s. f rise up Is. 


® come theron 1. come ther vpon s. 
™ thatis. Ditschal1. © seie in effect 1s. 
hem s. ¢ And Jobis. % The Lord 1s. 


b The rootis 1s. 
P he schal 1s. 
w hath azenstonde 1s. 


i upon Is. 


K the s. ! the place therof rs. 
his hond 1s. 


r fulfillid 1s. % stonde with 


IX. 5—-22. 


spes hadde? That translatide hillis, and 
these wisten not ; whom he turnede vpso 
6doun in his wodnesse. That stirith the 
erthe fro his place, and his pileris shul 
7be smyte togidere. That comaundith to 
the sunne, and springeth not; and closeth 
sthe sterris, as vnder a sel. The whiche 
alone streccheth out heuenes, and goth 
yvp on the flodis of the se. That inaketh 
the sterris, that is? clepid Arthurus, and 
Orionas, and Iadas, and the innermor of 
wthe south. That maketh grete thingus 
and vuserchable, and merueilouse thingus, 
tof whiche is no noumbre. If he come to 
me, I shal not seen hym; if he go awei, 
121 shal not vnderstonde. If feerli he aske, 
who shal answere to hym? or who may 
i3sein to hym, Whi dost thou thus? God, 
to whos wrathe no man mai withstonde ; 
vnder whom ben bowid, that bern the 
14world. Hou myche am I, that I answere 
to hym, and speke in my woordus with 
1shym? The whiche also, if I shul han 
any thing ri3t*, shal not answern; but my 
is domys man I shal pre3jen. And whan he 
hereth me inwardli clepende, I leue not, 
i7that he shal here my vois. In a whirle- 
wind forsothe he shal to-brose me, and 
multiplien my woundis also withoute 
iscause. He graunteth not my spirit to 
resten, and he fulfillith me with bitter- 
ignessis. If strengthe is so3t, he is most 
strong’; if euenenesse of dom, no man 
shal ben hardi for me to 3elde witnesse. 
20 If I wile iustefie me, my mouth shal con- 
dempne me ; if innocent I shal shewe me, 
21a shrewe he shal proue me. Also iff 
symple I shul be, that same my soule 
shal vnknowe ; and it shal noe ine of my 
22lif. O thing is, that I spac, also the in- 


JOB. 


685 


Which* bar’ hillis* fro 0 place to anothir,s 
and thei@ wisten not ; whiche” he‘ distriede 
in his strong veniaunce. Which stirith thee 
erthe fro his place, and the pilers therof 
schulen ‘be schakun‘ togidere. Which® co-7 
maundith to the sunne, and it risith not; 
andf he closith the sterris, as vndur a sig- 
net. Which® aloone stretchith forth he-s 
uenes, and> goith on! the wawis of the 
see. Which* makith Arituret, and Ori-9 
onas, and Hiadas, ‘that 7s, seuene sterris', 

and the™ innere thingis of the south. anaes 
Which? makith grete thingis, and that ea 
moun not be sou3t out, and® wondurful een 
thingis, of whiche is? noon noumbre. If 411 pestis. Lire 
he cometh to me, ‘that ts, bi his grace’, pe 

Y schal not se hym; if* he goith awey'‘, 

‘that ts, in withdrawynge his grace’, Y 
schal not vndurstonde. If he axith so-12 
deynli*, who schal answere to hym? ethir 
who may seie to hym, Whi doist thou so ? 
‘God ts he*, whos wraththe no man may 13 
withstonde; and vndur whom thei ben 
bowid, that beren the world. Hou greet’ 14 
am Y*%, that Y answere to hym, and speke?® 
bi my wordis with hym? Which also schal 1s 
not answere>, thou3 Y haue ony thing 
iust; but Y schal biseche my iuge®. 
And whanne he hath herd me inwardlite 
clepynge®, Y bileue not, that he hath herd 
my vois. For® in a whirlewynd! he schal 17 
al to-breke me, and he schal multiplie my 
woundis, 3he, withont cause. He graunt-1s 
ith not, that my spirit haue reste, and he 
fillith me with bittirnesses. If strengthe 19 
is sou3t&, ‘he is" moost strong; if! equyte* 
of doom is sou3t, no man dar 3elde wit- 
nessynge for me. If Y wole make me2o0 
iust{, my’ mouth schal dampne me; if™ 
Y schal schewe me innocent", he schal 


+ Ariture ; is 
a gadering of 
sterris aboute 


t me iust ; bi 
my witnessing 
ajenus Goddis 


nocent and the vnpitous he shal waste. preue me a schrewe. 3he, thou3 Y am®2) fom. Hire 
Zben a, Aofriz3t 4. bOm. Hw. © Om. an. 
xHeis. Yitisthatbars. 7 ouerhillists. @mens, whom 1. which of hem s. ¢ Om. a. 
dgchake:. ¢Heis. fOm.is. & Hlets. bandhers. ‘iuponis. k Hers, | that is, the seuene 


sterris B. that ben ynner sterris, whiche sum men clepen the seuen sterris t marg. that is, innermore sterris, 


which summe men clepith the vii. sterriss. ™Om.1. "Hess. andalso1 Ptheriss, 4 If bi his 
graces. ‘*Om.1s. 8 and if bi withdrawyng his graces. _ -* fro me is. u Om, Is. W sodeynli 
rekenyng s. * HeisGodis.  ¥ greet thaune 1s. zY, seitth Jobs. 9 that I speke 1s. > answere 
tohims. © inge to spare mes. ‘clepynge hims. © Forsothe 1s. f whirlewynd or sodeynly 1. whirle- 


wynd, that is, sodeynly s. 


& sou3t than s. 
mand if 1s. ™ an innocent Is. 


ober. 


his hes. 


iandifis.  euenesse1s. |! my omue is. 


686 


23 If he scourgeth, sle he onys, and not of 
21 the peynes of innocentis lazhe. The erthe 
is sine in to the hondis of the vnpitous ; 
his dom couereth the chere; that if he is 
2snot, who thanne is? My da3is swiftere 
weren than a corour; thei floun, and thei 
26se3en no good. Thei passeden as shipis4 
berende appelis, as an egle fleende to 
ez7mete. Whan J shal sei, Nai, thus I shal 
speke; I chaunge my face, and with 
28sorewe I am tormentid. I shamede alle 
my werkis, witende that thou shuldist 
29 not spare tothe giltende. If forsothe and 
so J am vnpitous, whi in vein haue I 
30tranailid? If I shul be wasshe as with 
watris® of snow3, and myn hondis as most 
31 clene shynedenf, nerthelatere® with filthis 
thou shalt weete me, and my clothis shul 
se wlaten me. Ne forsothe to the man that 
is lic me, J shal answern; ne that with 
33me in dom ecuenli mai ben herd. Ther 
is not, that either mai vndernyme, and 
aiputten his hond in bothe. Do he awei 
fro me his 3erde, and his inward drede 
3ofere me not. I shal speke, and I shal 
not dreden hym; ne forsothe I mai 
dredende answern. 


CAPEX. 


i It nozeth me of" my lif; I shal leten 
a3en me my speche, I shal speke in bit- 
2ternesse to my soule. J‘ shal sei to God, 
Wile thou not me condempne; shew to 
3me, whi me so thou demest. Whether 
good to thee it semeth, if thou chalenge 
and opresse me, the werk of thin hondis ; 
aud the counseil of vnpitous men thou 


JOB. 


IX. 23—X. 3. 


symple, my soule schal not knowe this 
same thing; and it schal anoye me of my 


es : _ . Pp q + Y spak ; that 
lijf. O thing is, which Y spak +, he? schal 22 io eee 
waste ‘bi deth™ also’ the innocent and _ teyne, that — 
acs @ peynes in this 
wickid' man. If" he betith”, sle he onys, 23 liyf ben souun 
: j cays ae of God, not 
and lei3e “e not of the peynes of innocent  onely for 
men. The erthe is 3jouunt in to the hondis 24777", 7 
of the wickid*; heY hilith the face of = ie aoe 
° ° . ° . 4 3 ou 
iugis’ ; that if he* is not, who therfor? is? _ seist, that Satan 
3 : : is cause of 
Mi daies weren swiftere than a corour ; 25 wrongis doon 
s . d « .., to fanocent 
thei fledden®, and sien not good®. Thei26 ion, for he 
: Ps og G hath power 
passiden® as schippis' berynge applis, ase in erthe, and 
an egle fleynge to mete. Whanne Y seie",27 eS ae 
i 3iftis an 
Y schal] not speke so; Y chaunge my face, favour, that 
. . they se not 
and Y am turmentid with sorewe. Y drede 28 equite in con- 
: . ‘ ‘ dempnynge 
alle my werkis, witynge that thou ‘woldist innocentis, tis 
not spare! the trespassour. Sotheli* if Y 29 es 
oye : 3 7 LON Se 
am also thus wickid§, whi haue Y trauelid ten oa 
- dj _ thing, no bnt 
in veyn!? Thou3 Y am™ waischun as® with 30 he he suffrid 
: . f God ; 
watris of snow, and thou3 myn hondis® onan 
schynen? as? moost cleene', netheles thou 31 Peynes of inno- 
3 : é ‘ centis moten 
schalt dippe me in filthis*, and my clothis, iy bid i, 
. . . ae é, 
‘that is, werkist, schulen holde" me abho- that is, Satan,” 
a is not the fi 
mynable. Trewli Y schal not answere 232 cause ofthe 
ach’ is Jiik* . forseid peynes, 
man, which 18 lijke me ; nether — MAY soho is, aso 
be herd euenli with me in doom. ‘Noonss pil Bie suf- 
3 me rith. Lire 
isY, that may repreue euer eithir, and sette here. c. 
5 8 o ho thus wickid ; 
his hond in bothe. Do he awei his 3erde34 Sat 
nance " seruede so 
fro me, and his drede make not me aferd. greet turment, 
Y schal speke, and Y schal not drede hym 3; 35 “/# have ¥ 
trauelid in 


for? Y may not answere dredynge. veyn; to kepe 
innocence so 
diligently. 
CAP. X. Lire here. c. 


Yt anoieth my soule of my lijf; Y schal1 
lete? my speche a3ens me, Y schal speke 
in the bitternesse of my soule. Y> schal2 
seie to God, Nyle thou condempne me; 
schewe thou to me’, whi thou demest me 
so. Whether it semeth good to thee, if3 
thou ‘falsli chalengist’ and oppressist me, 
the werk of thin hondis; and® if thou 


_ Othe shipis c. © quyke watris z pr.v. fhelpeden z pr.m. & neuerthelater anrFH. > Om. aru. 
i And I ami. 

P haue spoken 1s. the Lordis. tOm.1. 8 Om.1s. tthe wickid 1s. ™ Also ifis. © betith or 
punnishith s. — * wickid man is. _‘Y and it 1s. 2 the iugis ‘herofis. ®the Lord1s. > thanne ts. 
© fledden awey 1. 4 good thing 1s. © passiden awey 1s. faships. &andasis. 4} shal seies. 
' sparist not 1s. * And 1s. 1} veyn, gessynge me lesse yuel, than I knowe me now to be s. ™ schal be 18. 
a Om. s. © hondis, that is, my werkis s, P schyne 1. qOm.c. 'cleene thing 1s.  $ filthis, and 
punnishe me as vnclene s. * Om. 1. that is, my werkis s. ™holde or schewe 18. W that 1s. * lijk tos. 
y Ther isnooni. 2certists. aleneis. >%AndIs, ¢ me, Lord 1s. d chalengist me as fals 1s. 


fas s, 


X. 4-——20. 


4helpe? Whether fleshly ez3en ben to thee, 
or as seeth a man, and thou shalt seen? 

5 Whether as the da3is of man, thi da3es, 
and thi_3eris ben as mannys* tymes ; 
6that thou seche my wickidnesse, and my 
7synne thou serche? And wite thou, for 
no thing vupitous I dide; sithen! ther is 
no man, that of thin hond mai deliuere ? 
8Thin hondis maden me, and formeden 
me al in enuyroun; and so feerli thou 
9puttist me doun. Haue mynde, I be- 
seche, that as clei thou madist me, and 
in to pouder thou shalt a3een bringe me. 
10 Whether not as myle thou hast mylkid 
me, aud as chese thou hast crudded me? 
11 With fel and flesh thou hast clad™ me; 
with bones and senewis thou hast togi- 
12dere ioyned me. Lif and mercy thou hast 
3iue to me, and thi visiting kepte my 
izspirit. A) be it that these thingus thou 
hidist in thin herte, nerthelatere™ I wot, for 
4of alle thingus thou hast mynde. If I 
synnede, and at an houre thou sparedest 
to me; whi fro my wickidnesse thou suf- 
15 frist not me to he clene ? And ifa wicke™ 
man I shal be, wo is to me; and if ri3t- 
wis, I shal not reren vp the hed, fulfild 
16 with affliccioun and wrecchidnesse. And 
for pride as a leounesse thou shalt take 
me; and turned ajeen, merueilously thou 
17 tormentist me. Thou restorist thi wit- 
nessis a3jen me, and thou multipliest thi 
wrathe ajen me; and peynes fij3ten® in me. 
18 Whi of the wombe thou bro3tist me out ? 
That wolde God I hadde be wastid, that 
19e3e shulde not seen me. IJ hadde ben as 
I were not, fro the wombe translatid to 
20the toumbe. Whether not the fewenesse 
of my da3is shal ben endid in short? Let 
me thanne, that I weile a litil while my 
21 sorewe, er I £0, and turne not a3een, to 


Kk man 4. many H. sinc. 
© enhaunten kny3thod £ pr. m. 


m clothed 4eFu. 


JOB. 687 


helpist the counsel of wickid men ? Whe-4 
thir fleischli izen ben to thee, ethir, as a 
man seeth, also‘ ‘thou schaltS se ? Whether s 
thi daies ben as the daies of man, and 
‘thi 3eeris ben' as mannus tymes+; that thous 
enquere my wickidnesse, and enserche my 
synne? Andi wite*, that Y haue do no7 
‘wickid thing! ; sithen™ no” man is®, that 
may delyuere fro thin hond ? Thin hondiss 
han maad me, and han? formed me al in 
cumpas ; and thou castist1 me doun sot 
sodeynli. Y* preye’, haue thou mynde,9 
that thon madist me as cley, and schalt" 


+ as mannus 
tymes 3 God 
punyschith not 
an innocent 
man bi malice, 
as a tirannt 
doth, nether bi 
vnkunnyng of 
truthe, as an 
erthely iuge 
doith. Lire 
here. c. 

t wo is tome; 
that is, Y am 
and was in so 
greet tribula- 
cioun, that it 
ou3te suffise to 


brynge’ me a3en in to dust. Whether thou 10 thee for peyne. 


: Lire here. c. 
hast not mylkid me as mylk, and hast® — gjouen knyat- 
° i i 2 hod ; that is 

cruddid me togidere as cheese? Thou} et 


clothidistY me with skyn and _ fleisch?; 
thou* hast ioyned me togidere with boonys 
and senewis. 
mercy to me, and thi visiting hath kept 
my spirit. 
thingis in thin herte, netheles Y woot, 


that thou hast mynde of alle thingis®. If¢14 


Y dide synne, and® thou sparidist me at 
an our; whi suffrist thou not me to be 


suget, that in 
no maner Y 
may ajen- 
stonde. Lire 


Thou hast jone lijf and 12 here. c. 


W that Y were 
wastid ; here 


Thou3’ thou helist these is Joo preveth, 


that contradie- 
eioun sueth of 
the seiynge of 
hise aduersa- 
ries, for thei 
seiden that 
mannnus blis is 
in temporal 


cleene of my wickidnesse? And if Y was 15 prosperites 


wickid, wo is to me{; and if Y was iust, 
Y fillid® with turment and wretchidnesse 


therof i¢ sueth, 
that mannus 
liyf, soiet to 
grete peynes, is 
hateful and 


A s | e ° 
schal not reise the heed’. And if Y rezse 16 yiaouse, name- 


‘the heedi for pride, thou schalt take 
me as a lionesse; and thou turnest a3en, 
and turmentist me* wondirli!. Thou™ ga-17 
derist in store thi” witnessis ajens me, and 
thou multipliest thin yre, ‘that is, ven- 
taunee®, ajens me; and peynes holden 


ly, whanne no 
releeuyng of 
peyne apperith, 
as it was of 
Joob ; and they 
seiden also, that 
no thing of 
man dwellith 
aftir deth; ther- 
of it sueth, that 
deth puttith 


kny3thod?) in me. Whit hast thou led me 18 avey alle 


out of the wombe? ‘And Y wolde, that Y 
were’ wastid||, lest* an i3e ‘schulde se‘ me. 


goodis cutirly, 
and so it is 
most orible; and 
therfor liyf, be 


That Y hadde be, as if Y were not, and 19% neuere so 


‘were translatid, ethir borun ouer", fro the 
wombe to the sepulecre. 


" neuerthelater passim AEFI. no wickid 4EFH. 


£Om.s. &szchalt thou 1s. 4amans. |! benthi3cerisis. J And, Lord 1. And thou, Lords. \ that 


thou wite 1. | wickidnesse, 3ildinge me to thee s. 
q hast cast rs. ‘'Om.1s. §& Lord, Y 1s. 
y hast clothid 1s. 2 with fleisch s. 


mhanneis. ¢Om.1s. f Om.c. fors. 
handwith:1. iQOm.is. Jit 1. vp myn heed s. 
"thea. ©°OQOm.1s.  P the kny3thod 1. 


m sith is. 

t preye thee 1s, “thou schalt 1s. Wledeis. * thou hast 1s, 
a and thou 1s. 
& schal not reise up myn heed (fo thee s], that am fulfillid 18. 
Kk me wilfulli s. 
q Lord, whi 1s. 


"therisno1 °Om.1. _ P thei han 1s. 


b Andthou3 s. ¢ these thingis s. 4 And if 
1 wondirfully 1s. =.™ For thou x. 


r Whi ne had I erst ben 18. S that 1s. 


t had not seen 1s. had ben ouer bornis. W Whether not 1s. 


peyneful, owith 
to be coueitid 
skilefuly. Lire 


Whether the 20 here. c. 


688 


the derke erthe, and couered with the 
dercnesse of deth the erthe of wrecchid- 

sgnesse and of derenessis; wher shadewe 
of deth?, and noon order, but fulli in- 
dwellith euere durende orrour. 


CAP. XI. 


1 Answerende forsothe Sofar Naama- 
2tithes seide, Whether he, that manye 
thingus spekith, whether and he shal 
heren ? or a man ful of woordis shal be 
siustefied ? To thee alone men shul holde 
ther pes? and whan other men thou 
scornest, of no man thou shalt be con- 
afoundid ? Thou forsothe seidist, Pure is 
my woord, and clene I am in thi siste. 
5 And wolde God, God shulde speke with 
ethee, and openen his lippis to thee; that 
he shulde shewe to thee the priuytes of 
wisdam, and that manyfold is his lawe, 
and thou shuldest vnderstonde, that manye 
lasse thingus thou art askid of hym, than 
7deserueth thi wickidnesse. Perauenture 
the steppis of God thou shalt holde, and 
vnto perfit the Almy3ti thou shalt finde. 
8Heizere than heuene he is, and what 
shalt thou do? deppere than helle, and 
gwhennys shalt thou knowen? Lengere 
than the erthe the mesure of hym, and 
io braddere than the se. If he turne vpso 
doun alle thingus, or in to oon drawe 
‘togidere, who shal a3ensein to hym? Or 
who shal moun sey to hym, Whi dost 
i1thou so? He forsothe knew3 the vanyte 
of men; and seande wickidnesse whether 
izhe beholde not? A veyn man in to pride 
is rerid; and as a colt of an asse, he 
13weeneth hymself born free. Thou for- 
sothe hast fastned thin herte, and hast 


JOB. X. 22-—XI. 14. 


fewnesse of my daies schal not* be endid 
in schortY ? Therfor? suffre thon me, that 
Y biweile ‘a litil? my sorewe, bifor® that21 
Y go, and turne not a3en, to® the derk 
lond, and hilid with the’ derknesse® of 
deth, to the lond of wrecchidnesse and of 
derknessis ; where is schadewe of deeth, 22 
and noon ordre, but euerlastynge hidous- 
nesse dwellith!. 


CAP. XI. 


Forsothes Sophar Naamathites answer- 1 
ide, and seide', Whether he, that spekith 2 
many thingis, schal not also here? ether 
whethiri a man ful of wordis schal be 
maad iust? Schulen men be stille to thee3 
aloone? whanne* thou hast scorned othere 
men, schalt thou not be ouercomun of ony 
man}? For! thou seidist, My word is + of ony man; 
cleene, and Y am cleene in thi sist. Ands ges 
‘Y wolde, that God spak™ with thee, and ee me 
openyde hise lippis to thee; to schewe™6 "7% 
to thee the priuetees of wisdom, and that 
his lawe is manyfold, and thou schuldist® 
vndurstonde, that thou art requirid of 
hym? fo pate myche lesse thingis, than 
thi wickidnesse disserueth. In hap thou7 
schalt comprehende’ the steppist of God, 
and thou schalt fynde Almy3ti God “til tot Sophar seith 
perfeccioun. He is hiz3ere than henene, and 8 He LHe 
what schalt thou do? he is deppere than heres 
helle, and wherof schalt thon knowe? His9 
mesure 2s lengere than erthe*, and brodere 
than the see. If he distrieth alle thingis, 10 
ethir dryuetht streitli ‘in to" oon, who schal 
ajenseie hym? Ethir who may seie to a 
hym, Whi doest thou so? For he know- ii et hea 
ith the vanyte of men; and* whether he 


t comprehende 
the steppis ; 


gis. Lire here. 
® . . Cc 
seynge byholdith not wickidnesse§? A veyn 12 \\ stidefust thyn 
. Pere: > : herte; in con- 
man is reisid in to pride; andY gessith hym tynuynge in. 
silf borun fre, as the colt of a wilde asse, ™2bee, and in 
But? thou hast maad stidefast thin hertel|, 13 s77¢4 «brood 5 


defendinge it. 
i } in veyn, for thi 
and hast* spred abrood thin hondis to malice lettith 


. . : the preyer. 
14sprad out to hym thin hondis. If the hym®. If thou doest awei ‘fro thee the 14 Lire here. c. 

, P deth is 4. 

* Om. 1s, ¥ schort tyme 1s. 2 Therfor, Lords. 8Om.s. bors. Cintos. 4Om.emnps. & derk- 

nessis Nov. —_f there dwellinge 1. dwellynge s. & Thanners. 1h seide to Jobs. ‘'Om.s. and 

whanne 1s. 1 Forsothe 1s. ™ whi ne hadde God spoke 1s. haue schewid 1s. ° schuldist thanne 1s. 

P oe 1s. 4 comprehende or take 1s. ‘vnto1 intos. $stheerthes. tdryueth hemis. “til tos, 

W Certis 1s. 


xOm:c. Yand hers. 


2 But, Jod s. 


@ thou hast 1s. > the Lordis. ¢ Om. s. 


XI. 1s-—XII. 10, 


wickidnesse, that is im thin hond, thou 
takest awei fro thee, and vnri;twisnesse 
15 abideth not stille in thi tabernacle, thanne 
thou shalt moun rere thi face with oute 
wem, and thou shalt be stable, and not 
16dreden. Of wrecchenesse’ also thou shalt 
forjete, and, as of watris that passeden, 
17thou shalt not recorde. And as myddai 
liz3ting it shal rise to thee at euen; and 
whan thee wastid thou wenest, thou shalt 
is Springe as the dai sterre. And thou shalt 
han trost, purposid to thee’ hope; and 
19doun dolue, siker thou shalt slepe. Thou 
shalt reste, and ther shal not be that 
feres thee; and manye shul preje thi 
20face. The e3en forsothe of vnpitous men 
shul faile; and out fli3t shal pershe fro 
hem, and the hope of hem abhomyna- 
ciount of soule. 


CAP. XI. 


: Answerende forsothe Job seide, Thanne 
jee ben men alone, that with 30u dwelle 
3wisdam ? And to me is an herte, as and 
to 3ou, ne lowere I am than 3ee; who 
forsothe these thingis, that 3ee knowen, 
avnknoweth ? Who is scorned of his frend, 
as I, inwardli shal clepe God, and he shal 
heren hym; forsothe the symplenesse of 
sthe rijtwise is scorned. A" laumpe de- 
spisid anent the tho3tis of riche men, 
6maad redi to the ordeyned time. The 
tabernaclis of reueres abounden; and 
hardili thei terren God, whan he 3iueth 
zalle thingus in to the hondis of hem. No 
wunder, aske the bestis, and thei shul 
teche thee; and the foulis of heuene, and 
sthei shul shewe to thee. Spec to the 
erthe, and it shal answer to thee; and 
the fisshis of the se shul telle tho thingis. 
9Who vnknoweth, that alle these thingis 
10the hond of the Lord made? In whos 
hond the soule of alle lyuynge, and the 


JOB. 


689 


wickidnesse, which is in thin hond, and® 
vnri3tfulnessef dwellith not in thi taber- 


nacle, thanne thou schalt mowe®%® reise! 1s 


thi face with out wemi, and thou schalt 
be stidefast, and thou schalt not drede. 


And thou schalt for3ete wretchidnesse, and 16 


thou schalt not thenke of* 77, as! of watris 


that han passid. And™ as myddai sehyn- 17 


ynge it” schal reise® to thee at? euentid ; 
and whanne thou gessist thee wastid, thou 


schalt rise vp as the dai sterre. And thous 


schalt haue trist, while hope schal be set 
forth to thee; and thon biried schalt slepe 
sikurli. Thou schalt 
schal be‘ that schal make thee aferd; 
and ful many men schulen biseche thi 
face. 
faile ; and socour schal perische fro hem, 
and the hope of hem schal be abhomina- 
cyioun of soule. 


CAPRA 


Sotheli Joob answeride, and seide; Ther-} 
for™ ben 3e8 men aloone, thatt wisdom 
dwelle with 3ou ? And to me is an hertet,3 
as and to 3ou, and Y am not lowere than 
3e"; for who knowith not these thingis, 
whiche 3e knowen? He that is scorned 4 
of his frend, as Y am, schal inwardli clepe 
God, and God schal here hym; for” the 
symplenesse of a iust man is scornedf. 
A* laumpe is dispisid at the thou3tis of's 
riche men, andY the? laumpe is maad redi 
to a tyme ordeyned. The tabernaelis of¢ 
robberis ben plenteuouse, ‘ether ful of 
goodis*; and boldli thei terren God to 
wraththe, whanne he hath 3oue alle thingis 
in to her® hondis. No wondur, ax thou? 
beestis§, and tho® schulen teche thee; and 
axe thou volatilis’ of the eir, and tho® 
schulen schewe to thee. Speke thou tos 
the erthe, and it schal answere’ thee; and 
the fischis of the see schulen telle tho 
thingis. Who knowith not that the honds 


4 wretchidnes au. ‘thin an. Safere azru. tthe abomynacioun 4. "And a an. 
dthat is. ¢andifrs. f vnriztwisnesse 1. £Om.18. breiseupis. iwem fo the Lords. * ons. 
Ino more than 1s. m Om. s. " grace 1. Goddis grace s. rise up Is. Pat the s. 4 ther 
schal be noon 1. + And 3e therforis. *Om.1s. tandis. "be 3es. _  forsothe 1s. x And ais. 
y Om. 18. 2 the whiche 1s. ® Om. 1s. b his s. ectheiis. ‘4 briddis1s. ¢thei1 fOm.1. 
6 answere to s. 
VOL. I. 47 


reste, and ‘noon 19 


But the izen of wickid men schulen 20 


t Aad to me is 
an herte s that 

is, vndurstond- 
ing. Lire here. 
c. 
t for the sym- 


pleness ete. ; 


that is, the liyf 
of hem that ben 
with out 
wryn{cJle of 
gile, is seornyd 
of worldly men, 
that setten her 
ende in tempe- 
ral goodis, that 
ben getun ofte 
with fraudis 
and leesingis, 
therfor thei 
aretten iust 
men that feen 
siche gaodis, 
foolis and vn- 
kunnynge3; at 
siche riche men 
the liyf of iust 
men Is dispisid, 
than3 it bea 

« laumpe, that 
conteyneth li3t 
of wisdom and 
brennyng of 
charite, maad 
redi to the blis 
of liyf to com- 
ynge, bi the 
merit of liyf. 
Lire here. c. 

§ A gloos. To 
axe creaturis, 
is to biholde 
the kyndis of 
tho, and the 
answer af erea- 
turis is in this, 
that bi sieh 
biholding a 
man rysith to 
the knowing 
of God, which 
is the firste 
eanse of alle 
thingis. Lire 
here. cet 
plures. 


690 


ispirit of alle flesh of man. Whether not 
the ere demeth woordis, and the chekis 
ig of the etere sauour ? In olde men is wis- 
isdam, and in myche time prudence. Anent 
hym is wisdam and strengthe; he hath 
lacounseil and vnderstonding. If he de- 
stroje, no man is that bilde vp; if he in- 
15close a2 man, uo man is that opene. If he 
holde togidere watris, alle things shul be 
maad drie ; if he out sende them, thei shul 
isturne vpsodonn the erthe. Anent hym 
is strengthe and wisdam ; he knew and’ 
the begilere and hym that is begilid. 
17 And he bringeth” forth the counseileris 
in to a fool ende, and domesmen in to 
isstoneing. The girdil of kingus he looside, 
and girte* with a corde the reenes of hem. 
19 He bringethY the prestis of hem vnglori- 
ous, and the beste men of wrshipe he 
2osupplauntith ; chaungende the lippe of 
trewe men, and the teching of olde men 
21doende awei. He heeldeth out despising? 
vp on princis, and hem, that weren opres- 
gsid, releueth. That sheweth? vp depe 
thingis fro derenessis ; and bringeth forth 
23in to li3t the shadewe of deth. That mul- 
teplieth Jentilis, and leesith hem, and 
turned vpso doun in to the? hoole re- 
zistoreth. That withinne chaungeth the 
herte of the prince of the puple of the 
erthe; and desceyneth hem, that in vein 
25thei go bi withoute weie. Thei shul 
graspen‘, as in derenessis, and not in li3t ; 
and he shal make them to erren as 
drunken. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Lo! alle thingus sa3 myn e3e, and myn 
ere herde; and I vnderstod alle thingus. 
2 Aftyr 3oure kunnyng and I knew3, ne the 


Y bothe «. 
4 arereth £ pr.m. 


W bre3te & prom. 
b Om. a. 


h Om, 1. 
© and if 1s. 
wv Om. s. 


i the wordis s. 
P eclosith 1s. 4 ther is noon 1, 

*Om.1t Yandheis. 2 Om.1s. 
fully s. e¢Tieis. fandheis. ¢ He 1s. 
10m. 1s. ™ hool xoumbreis. 1 He is. 


S hath seen is. t hath herd 1s. Also cuene 1s. 


JOB. 


* girdede 4EFH. 
© grape 4. gropen H. 


k sauour or the taast of mete s. 
T and if 1s. 
4 and he 1s. 
h and he 1s. 
and he is. P rizte weie s. 4 the Lord 1s. * ize, setth Job 1s, 


w Om. Is. | 


XII. ri-—XIII. 2. 


of the Lord made alle these thingis? In 10¢ she hotaien 
whos hond the soule is of ech lyuynge (ere watriss 
thing, and the spirit, ‘that is, resonable fe hae 
soule®, of ech fleisch of man. Whether 11 Lire are: 

the eere demeth not wordis!, and the chekis the gird vin 


so that reyn | 

pgs « 

the girdil of 

of the etere demen sauour*? Wisdom is 12 jy. myst of her | 


kingis ; that is, 
in elde men, and prudence is in myche pact 
tyme. Wisdom and strengthe is at God ; 33 a ae 
he! hath counsel and vndurstondyng. If 14 mennus herte. 
he distrieth, no™ man is® that bildith; 
if? he schittith? in a man, ‘noon is? that wake 
openith. If he holdith togidere watrist, alle 15 of hem that 


Lire here, c. 
§ chaungith the 


: ‘ 3 : ben wont to 
thingis schulen be maad drie; if he send-  speke truthis, 
ti 2 . “ as ben filoso- 
ith out tho watris, tho’ schulen distrie the  foris, fro 
: : hiche the li 
erthe. Strengthe and wisdom is att God ; 16 oF ver knew 
. : . ing is with- _ 
he knowith bothe hym that disseyneth Geary, 
and hym that is disseyued. And he bryng-17 tyme for her 
y at BaeY. yng Made and so 


ith conselours" in” to a fonned eende, and _ they speken 
Bee as, ° + x _ false thingis. 
iugis in to wondryng, ethir astonying*. and takith 


aweye, etc. in 


He vnbindith the girdil of kyngis{, and’ 19 riignae hem 


girdith her reynes with a coorde. He 19 lis whanne 
he withdrawith 


ledith her prestis with out glorie, and he his gece aay 
° . 2 . ith hem 3yue 
disseyueth the principal men, ‘ethir coun- vnproseaties 


wn i QP councel ether 
selours?; and he chaungith the lippis Of 20 nayfal, not shal 


sothefast men§, and* takith awei the doc- ba fals thing 
trine of elde men. He schedith out dis- a1 in to he 
_ h . de l th h bao Ingis, 
pisyng on” princes, and® releeueth hem, _ but for he 
. . ° withdrawith 
that weren* oppressid. Which® schewith 22 his lijtnyng 
depe thingis fro derknessis ; and‘ bryngith sud co op , 
forth in to lij3t the schadewe of deeth||. file fo 
Which imultiplicth folkis, and" leesith 23 oo 
. . . . ire here. C. 
hem, andi restorith hem destried*® in to || te schadewe 
} : ° ; of deth ; that 
the! hool™. Which® chaungith the herte 245, men dwell- 
of princes of the puple of erthe; and° dis- ge { 
° ° kar 
seyueth hem], that thei go in veyn out of ben 
2 iS . Son a 
the weie?. Thei schulen grope, as in derk- 25 dreden ech day : 
: wea to be slayn. 
nessis, and not in li3t ; and he schal make gr 


Lire here. C. 
q disseyueth 

hem to erre as drunken men. hem ; iva 
pinge hem in 
her felnessis, 


and so they 


CAP. XIII. 
3ynen vnprofit- 


Lo! myn i3e" si3§ alle thingis, and myn? ablecthirnoyful 
ie: lin th 
eere herde'; and Y vndurstood alle thingis. stide of goad 
: 


Tar, w counicel ; not 
Euene" with 3oure kunnyng also¥ Y kan, 2 guncel pet 
z preyere FE pr. m. 


Y bro3te EB pr. m. 


mtherisnor 2 Om1, 
taneutis 1. ™ yuele counselours Is. 
buponi. of s. Candhers, 4 is wrong- 
k whanne thei ben destried 1s. 


land he 1s. 
8 thel 1. 


i and he ts. 


7 


XIII, 3—24. 


3nethere of 3ou I am. But nerthelater 
to the Almy3ty I shal speke, and to dis- 
4pute with God I coueite; rathere shew- 
ende 30u forgeris of lesingus, and herieris 
sof shreude techingis. And wolde God, 
jee heelde 30ure pes, that 3ee weren 
6 weened wise men to ben. Hereth thanne 
my correcciouns; and to the dom of my 
7lippis taketh heede to. Whether God 
nedeth 3oure lesing, that for hym 3ee 
sspeke treccheries? Whether his face 3ee 
taken, and for God 3ee enforcen to deme ? 
9 Or‘ it shal plese to hym, whom hide no 
thing mai? Or he shal be desceiued, as 
10a man, with oure gilis? He 3ou shal vn- 
dernyme; for in hydelis his face 3ee take. 
11 Anoon as he stereth hymself, he shal dis- 
turbe® 30u ; and his drede shal falle‘ vp on 
1230u. 3oure mynde shal be comparisound 
to askis; and 3oure nollis shul be bro3t 
13a3een in to clei. Beth stille a litil while, 
that I speke, what euere thing to me the 
1umynde moue to’. Whi to-tere I my flesh 
with my teth, and my soule I bere in 
ismyn hondis? Also if he sle me, in hym 
I shal hope; nerthelatere’ my weies in 
ishis si3te I shal vndernyme. And he shal 
be my sauyoure ; forsothe ther shal not 
17come in his si3t eche ipocrite. Hereth 
my woord, and the derke speches par- 
isceyneth with joure eris. If I shul be 
demed, I wot that riz3twis I shal be 
iofounde. Who is he that be demed with 
me? Come he; whi beende stille I am 
20 wastid ? Two thingus onli ne do thou to 
me; and thanne fro thi face I shal not 
ziben hid. Thin hond fer do fro me; and 
22thi ferd gaste not me. Clep me, and | 
shal answeren to thee; or certis I shal 
2a3speke, and thou answere' to me. Hou 
fele haue I wickidnessis and synnes? Myn 
hidous trespasis and giltis sheu to me. 
24 Whi thi face thou hidist, and demest me 
f falle in a. 


d Outher sern. © disturble 4. 


answere E pr. mm. 


x God my feelynge s. Y fautours 1s. 
b enforsen 3ou 1s. © whethir 3oure gile s. 
{my is. k fleishe rs, Islees. ™ priuey 1s. 


r wickidnesse s. § grete giltis 1s. ¢ and my 1s. 


47 2 


JOB. 


& Om. 4. 


2 whi ue were 3e 1s. 
e bis. 
2Om. Is, 


691 
and Y am not lowere than 3e. But ne-s sent of God 
: enenly, but for 
theles Y schal speke to Almy3ti God, and ty his just 
. . ° XL s doom he with 
= See to dispute with God*}; and4 Or vih his 
rste Y schewe 30u makeri big pallies. 
: 3 akeris of leesyng, 3°, faith in 
and louyerisY of weyward techyngis. And 5 t disseit. Lire 
3 5 here. c. 
‘Y wolde that 3e weren* stille, that 3@ + dispute with 
. . ‘ God ; not folily 
weren gessid to be wise men. Therfor6 ;epreaynge his 
s erie = dedis, but en- 
here 3e my chastisyngis 3 and perseyue 3e Her ri snele 
the doom of my lippis. Whether God7 dy Hestruthes 
are RETE. Ca 
hath nede to 3oure leesyng*, that 3e speke 
gilis* for hym? Whether 3e taken hiss 
face, and enforsen” to deme for God ? Ethir» 
it® schal plese hym, fro whom no thing 
mai be hid? Whether he as a man schal 
be disseyued with® 3oure falsnessis? He 10 
schal repreue 30u3; for 3e taken his face in 
hiddlisf. Anoon as he schal stiref bya es taken 
. ° 4s face in 
he schal disturble 30u; and his drede schal _ hidilis; he 
ae: 
falle on’ 30u. 3oure mynde schal be egies eee 
oT ' . ; . man in hiddlis: 
parisound to aische ; and 3oure uollis iit spekith 
schulen be dryuun! in to clei. Be 3e stille SU ia 
ee ¢ .  sience for that 
a litil, that Y speke, what euer thing the! man; so diden 
. ° these men, for 
mynde hath schewid to me. Whi to-rende 14 they knewen 
Y my fleischis* with my teeth, and bere Sep niy 
my lijf in myn hondis? 3he, thou3 God 15 4nd netheles 
a they damp- 
sleeth’ me, Y schal hope in hym; netheles — neden him,as to 
: . A B appreue Goddis 
Y schal preue my weies in his si3t. And 16 sistfulnesse. 
iy : . Lire here. c. 
he schal be my sauyour x for whi ech that is, speken 
ypocrite schal not come in his si3t. Here 17°! him asenns 
¢ : consclenee. V. 
3e my word, and perseyue 3e with eeris 
derke and harde figuratif™ spechis. Yf18 
Y schal be demed§, Y woot that" Y schal  § if 1" schal be 
‘ lemed ; that i 
be foundun iust. Who is he that is demed 19 jf aoon bet ¥, 
with me? Come he; whi am Y stille, and 22un of the 
am wastid? Do® thou not to me twei ans erme Es 
5 e ‘ ewe, Y woo 
thingis oneli; and thanne Y schal not be ae it schal 
4 ve appreued as 
hid fro thi face. Make thin hond fer fro rr ae God 
. . ‘ seith in the 
me; and thi drede make? not ime aferd. onde of Joob. 
Clepe thou me, and Y schal answere thee ; 224” “ere. © 
ethir certis Y schal speke, and thou sehalt 
answere me4. Hou grete syimes and wick- 23 
idnessis™ haue Y? Schewe thou to me my 
felonyes*’, and‘ trespassis. Whi hidist thou 24 
h neuerthelatere arr cl u passim. i shalt 


a gilful thingis 1s. 
h driuen doun 1s. 
qtome s, 


zz leesyugis s. 
f moue Is. & upon Is. 
© Lord, dois. P make it 1s. 


692 


25thin enemy ? A3en a lef, that is raueshid 
with the wind, thou shewist thi my3t; 
scand drie stobil thou pursuest. Forsothe 
thou writist ajen me bitternessis*; and 
waste me thou wilt with synnes of my 
27waxende 3outhe. Thou hast! putte in 
the stoc my foot, and thou hast waitid 
alle my pathis; and the steppis of my 
28feet™ thou hast beholde. The whiche as 
rotenesse am to be wastid, and as cloth- 
ling that is eten of a mow3he. A man 
born of a womman, short time lin- 
ende, is fulfild with many wrecchidnessis. 
2That as a flour goth out, and is to- 
treden; and fleth as shadewe, and ne- 
3uere in the same state abit" stille. And 
wrthi thou bringist vpon such a man to 
opene thin ejen; and to bringe hym with 
4thee in todom? Who mai make clene 
the conceyued of vnclene sed? Whether 
not thou, that art alone ? 


CAP. XIV. 


5  Shorte ben the da3is of man, the 
noumbre of his monethis is anent thee ; 
thou hast ordeyned his termes, that shul 

6not moun be passid ouer. Go awei 
thanne a litil fro hym, that he reste; to 
the time that the desirid dai come, and 

7as of an hirid man the dai of hym. A 
tree hath hope, if it be kut of; eft it wax- 
eth grene, and his braunchis springen. 

8If his roote waxe old in the erthe, and 

2in® pouder were out dead; his stoc at 
the smel of water shal burioune?, and 
shal make an hep of leues, as whan first 

Wit is plauntid. A man forsothe whan he 
shal be dead, and nakid, and wastid ; 

it wher, I beseche, is he? What maner if 
watris gon awei fro the se, and flod voided 

12waxe drie, so a man, whan he slepeth, 
shal not rise, to the time that he be-to- 


K bitternesse w. 1 shalt c. 


™ foot E pr. m. 


JOB. 


XII, 255=X1V.onee 


thi face, and demest me thin enemy? Thou 2s 
schewist thi my3t a3ens a leef, which" is 
rauyschid" with the wynd; and thou pur- 
suest drye stobil. For” thou writist bitter-26 
nessis ajens me; and* woltY waste me with 
the? synnes of my 3ong wexynge age. 
Thou hast set my foot in” a stok*, and 27 
thou hast kept* alle my pathis; and thou 


hast biholde the steppis of my feet. And 28 


Y schal be wastid as rot, and as a cloth, 
which? is etun of © a mous3te. 


CAP. XIV. 


A man ist borun of a womman, and1 
lyueth® schort tyme, andf is® fillid® with 
many wretchidnessis. Which’ goith out,2 
and is defoulid as a flour; and fleeth* as 
schadewe), and dwellith™ neuere} perfitli 
in the same staat. And gessist thou it"3 
worthi® to opene thin i3en on? siche a 
man; and to brynge hym iu to doom with 
thee? Who may make a@ man clene® con-4 
seyued of vnclene seed? Whether not thou4, 
which art aloone? The daies of man® bens 
schorte, thet noumbre of his monethis is" 
at’ thee; thou hast set{, ether ordeyned, 
hise termes, whiche* moun not be passid. 
Therfor go’ thou awey fro hym a litil,6 
‘that is, bi withdrawyng of bodili hij fz, 
that he haue reste; til the* meede coueitid 
come, and his dai is as the dai of an hirid 
man. <A tree hath hope, if it is kit7 
doun; and eft it wexith greene, and hise 
braunches spreden forth. If the rootes 
therof is eeld in the erthe, and the stok 
therof is> ny3 deed in dust; it schal9 
buriowne at the odour® of watir, and it 
schal make heer‘ §, as whanne it was 
plauntid first. But whanne a man 
deed, and maad nakid, and wastid; Y 
preye®, where‘ is heé ? As if watris goen 11 
awei fro the see, and a! ryuer maad 
P out burioune c. 


Nabideth saeru. © in to 4. 


tt that 1. wrauyschid awey 1. W Andis.  * and thou 1s. ywiltr, 2Om.c. 22 Om, x. 
Aawaitid is. >the which y. thats.  ¢ with cnv. @ Om. 1. €elyuyngex. f Om. 1. gheiss. 
h fulfillidis. iAnd hers. he fleeth awey 1s. Jasechadewe is.  ™ he dwellith is. "Om.1. 
oworthi ding 1. Pvpons. thou, Lordis. © *thatis. 8% amans. t and the 1s. u beth s, 
Wanentisis. *the whiche 1 Ydeparters. *Om.iv. hisis.” >Om.c. ¢taast is. 4 heer or 
smal roote 1. heer or take rootes, & preye thee is. fwhatis. & he thanne1s. » asa 1s. 


1s 10 swerd and 


* that is, lawe 
of Goddis ri3t- 
fulnesse. v. 


















a 
t+ and dwellith 
neuere, etc. 3 
not that a man 
is euere in 
chaunging, as 
Eraclitus seide, 
but for he is 
not longe in 
the same dispo- 
sicioun, nether 
bi bodi nether 
bi soule. Lire 
here. C. 
t hast set; as 
this settyng is 
in Goddis or- 
denaunce, so 
the termes of 
mannus lyf 
moun not be 
passid bi short- 
ing nether bi 
dilaying ; set- 
tyng of mannns 
lyf also is in 
kyndly cansis, 
sum schortere, 
sum lengere, 
bi dyuersite of 
complexioun, 
and bi this 
manere the 
terme of man- 
bus lyf may 
be schortid, bi 
yuel gouer- 
nayle, and bi 


othere cause. 
Live here. c. 
§ heer ; that is, 
leenes and 

braunchis, Lir 
here. C. 


XIV. 13-—-XV. 4. 


treden; heuene shal not wake‘ out, ne he 
13shal rise fro his slep. Who 3eue to me 
that, that in helle thou defende me, and 
hide me, to the time thi wodnesse ouer- 
passe; and sette to me a time, in whiche 
14thou recorde of me? Whether weenest 
thou not a dead man eft liue? Alle the 
da3is, in whiche now I fijte, I abide, to 
the time myn inward chaunging come. 
15 Thou shalt elepe me, and I shal answere 
to" thee; to the were of thin hondis thou 
16shalt putte forth the ri3jt hond. Thou 
forsothe hast nowmbrid my goingis; but 
17spare to my synnes. Thou hast selid as 
in’ a litil sac iy giltis, but thou hast 
Wkurid my wickidnesse. <A fallende hil 
flowith doun, and a ston is born over 
19fro his place. Watris therlent out stones, 
and of smyting of watris the erthe litle 
mele is wastid; thanne men lic maner 
20thou shalt leese. Thou hast strengthid 
hym a litil, that in. to euermor he shulde 
passe; thou shalt inchaungen his face, 
z1and thou shalt senden hym out. If for- 
sothe noble shul ben his sonys, or® yn- 
22noble, he shal not vnderstonde. Ner- 
thelatere his flesh whil it liueth, shal 
sorewen, and his soule vp on himself shal] 
weilen. 


CAPA XV. 


1 Answerende forsothe Elifath Theman- 
2ythes seide; Whether a wis man shal 
answere, as spekende in to wind, and he 
shal fulfille with brennyng his stomac ? 
s’Thou vndernemyst hym with woordis, 
that is not euene to thee, and thou 
4spekist, that spedeth not to thee. As 
myche as in thee is, thou hast voidid’ 
drede; and taken awei pre3eeris befor 


4 waken him £ super ras, r Om. c. 


i voide of watris 1s. 


k slept bideth 1s. 
that 1s. 4 of 1, 


® Now ints. 8 Om. plures. 
* but, Lord 1s. yOm.s. 7% Om-.s. 
to Jobs.  f and when lie 1. and whether he s. 
thi preyeris 1s. 


JOB. 


8 Om, aru. 


1 Om. sis. 
t Om. ts. 
* and thou 1s. 
& brennynge wraththe is. 


693 


voide' wexe drie, so a man, whanne he12 
hath slept’, ‘that is, deed', he schal not 
rise a3enf, til heuene be brokun, ‘that is, 
be™ maad newe; he sehal not wake, 

nether he sehal ryse togidere fro his sleep. jane eae 
Who 3iueth this" to me, that thou deo tae ed 
fende me in helle, and that thou hide me, «en to lyf vn- 
til thi® greet veniaunce passe; and? thou ie 
sette to me a tyme, in which thou haue 

mynde on’ me? Gessist thou, whethir ais 

deed man schal lyue a3en? In” alle the* 

daies, in whiche Y holde kny3thod, nowt Y 

abide, til my chaungyng comef. Thou 15 tit my 
schalt clepe me, and Y schal answere thee; (n0wwinse is, 
thou schalt dresse the riz3t half, ‘that is, ‘sing sen to 
blis*, to the” werk of thin hondis. Sotheli Lge Da eis 
thou hast noumbrid my steppis ; but® — haue blis. 
spare thou my synnes. Thou hast seelid 7" "”"* © 
as inY a bagge my trespassis, but thou 

hast curid my wickidnesse. An hil fall-1s 

ynge droppith doun, and a rooche of stoon 

is borun ouer fro his place. Watris19 

maken stoonys holowe, and the erthe is 

wastid litil and litil bi waisehyng awey of 

watir; and therfor? thou schalt leese MEDS”  guetemeneté.: 
in lijk maner. Thou madist a man strong 20 Herre ahaa 
a litil, that he schulde passe with outen cae 
ende; thon schalt chaunge his face, and _ lesse stable. 
schalt sende hym out». Whether hise 21 Gaeta 
sones ben noble, ether vnnoble, he sehal 

not vndurstonde. Netheles his fleisch, 22 

while he lyueth, sehal haue sorewe, and 

his soule schal morne on¢ hym silf. 


+ he schul not 
rise ajen; that 
is, bi kyndly 


CAP. XV. 


Forsothet Eliphat Themanytes answer- 1 
ide, and seide®*, Whether a wise man sehal 2 
answere, as spekynge aj3ens the wynd, 
and‘ schal fille his stomac with brennyngs, 
‘that is, ire? For thou repreuest hym bis 
wordis, which is not lijk thee, and thou 
spekist that', that spedith not to thee. As4 
myche as is in thee, thou hast avoidid 
drede; and thou hast take awey preyeris* 


tthrillen au. 'outher zr. VY auoided erm. 


P and 
W this. 


© seide 
i that thing 1s. 


Mor 18. ether vy. ™ thisthing s. ° thes. 
u Om. 1. that is, eendlesse blisse s. 
b with outs. ¢uponis. 4 Thanne ts, 


b Om. 1s. 


694 


5sGod. Forsothe thi wickidnesse tau3te 
thi mouth, and” thou folewist* a tunge of 
Gblasfemende men. Thi mouth shal con- 
dempne thee, and not I, and thi lippis 
7shul answer to thee. Whether the firste 
man thou art born, and beforn alle hillis 
sformed? Whether the counseil of God 
thou hast herd, and lowereY than? thou 
gshalt ben his wisdam? What knewe 
thou’, that wee vnknowen ? What! vnder- 
jostondes® thou, that wee wite not? And 
men of the laste age and of manye 3eeris 
ben in vs, myche eldere than thi fadris. 
1 Whether gret it is, that God coumforte 
thee? But thi shreude woordis forfenden 
iethat. What rereth® thee thin herte, and 
as grete thingis theukende thou hast 
13Stone3id e3en? What a3en God swelleth 
thi spirit, that thou speke of thi mouth 
1asuche maner woordis? What is a man, 
that he be vndefoulid, and rijtwis seme 
isborn of a womman? Lo! among his 
seintus noon is vnchaungable, and heuenes 
16ben not clene in his si3t. Hou myche 
more an abhominable and an vnprofitable 
man, that drinketh as watris wickid- 
i7nesse? I shal shewe to thee, here me; 
isthat I sa3, I shal telle to thee. Wise men 
knoulechen, and shul not hide ther faders. 
19To whom alone is 3iue the erthe, and 
20 ther shal not passe an alien bi hem. Alle 
his da3is the ynpitous man proudeth ; and 
the noumbre of 3eris of his tiraundise is 
aivuncertein. The soun of ferd® euermore 
in the eris of hym, and whan pes is, he 
22euermor troweth aspies. He beleuethf 
not that he mai be turned a3een fro derc- 
nesses vnto 1i3t, beholdende swerd on alle 
23 sides aboute’. Whan he imoueth hym- 
self to sechen bred, he knew, that dai of 
dercnessis is maad redi in his hond. 
24Tribulacioun shal gasten hym, and an- 
guysh shal enuyroune hym, as a king 


w Om. E. x folowedist aru. 
knowen £ pr. m. 


b Whether & pr. m. 
fleueth & pr. m. 


§ abouten him £ super ras. 


' Certis 18. 
whether s. 4thingisa. 1 And whats. 
~Om.1. *Om1r. Yisais. 


2 the whiche 1. 
hem doun fro her prosperite v. 


¢ and he Is. 


JOB. 


Ythe lowere gE pr. m. 
© yndurstodist au. 


m and wher thou 1. and whether thou s. 
$ coumforte or fturne 1s. 

a wyse men aloone Is. 
4 moeueth 1s. 


XV. S——24. 


bifor God. For! wickidnesse hath tau3t 
thi mouth, and thou suest the tunge of 
blasfemeris. Thi tunge, and not Y, schal6é 
condempne thee, and thi lippis schulen 
auswere thee. Whether thou art borun7 
the firste man, and™ art formed bifor alle" 
little hillis? Whether thou herdist® thes 
counsel of God, and? his wisdom is lower ieee 
than thou? What thing? knowist thou,9 goode aungels 


% ‘ ether men; 
whiche we knowen not? What" thing — noon is vn- 


: : : hh le f 
vndurstondist thou, whiche we witen not?  fuqugene rr? 

¢ “@ 10 2nd this bi 
Bothe wise men and elde, myche eldre 10 deat 
than thi fadris, ben among vs. Whether 11 goode air 
*, 6 pen conterme: 
it is greet, that God coumforte® thee? But _ in good bi 


thi schrewid wordis forbeden this. What 12{2% 4" 

reisith thin herte thee, and thou as thenk- eee ae 
ynge grete thingist hast i3en astonyed ? heel? ae 
What bolneth thi spirit a3ens God, that 13 for abhomyna- 
thou brynge forth of thi mouth siche _ not bi propir 


out wem, and that he borun of a womman = SYnnes with 
’ out bridel of 
appere iust ? 
apy ont mesure. It 
semeth opinly, 
ben not cleene in his sij3t. How myche more* 16 mentis of Eli- 
aY man abhomynablet and vnprofitable, Pht 3eden not. 
I 17 Joob, for he 
axide not to 
schal schewe to thee, here thou me; Y dispute Sa 
. ‘ ‘Or 1 St: 
schal telle to thee that, that Y siz. Wise 1s.as euene with 
hi3ere, but as 
To whiche? aloone® the erthe is 3o0uun, 19!owere bi 


. * 5 ¢ kj satires 
wordis? What is a man, that he be with 14 guar is doth so 
Lo! noon® among hise 15 drede, and with 
seyntist is” vnchaungable, and heuenes 
that the argu- 
to the entente of 
that drynkith wickidnesse as water? 
dispute with 
: him eth 
men knoulechen, and hiden not her fadris. {eno 
meeke enquer- 


and an alien schal not passe bi hem?, A 20 ing of truthe, as 
Jeremye seith 


wickid man is proud in alle hise daies; in xii.c*. Lord, 
br chi : dat thou art ri3tful, 

and the noumbre of hise 3eeris and of ig y dispute 

his tirauntrie is vncerteyn. The sown of 21 “ith thes 


netheles Y schal 


drede is euere in hise eeris, and whanne __ speke to thee 
just thingis. 


pees is, he supposith euere tresouns. He 22 Lire here. c. 
bileueth not that he may turne a3en fro Mie is dedi 
derknessis to li3t; and° biholdith aboute pa 
on ech side a swerd. Whanne he stirith'23 "esis Fie 
hym to seke breed, he woot,§ that the dai of 


sonnyng; he 
eee we : : dredith to be 
derknessis is maad redi in his hond. Tri-24 poysoned of his 


* " me 
bulacioun schal make hym aferd, and fr hatrete, 

j . ether for meede. 
angwisch schal cumpas hym, as a kyng [ir pumen 


a8 whether thou hast 
€ his ferd E super ras. 


2 Om. FE pr. m. 
4 arereth AEFH. 


© hast herd is. P and wher 1. and 
t thon3tis s. ther is noon r. 
b hem, that is, shal not caste 


n On. s. 


ciounhenemeth - 


XV. 25—XVI. 6. 


25 that is beforn maad redi to bataile. For- 
sothe he bende his hond a3en God, and 
26a3en the Almy3ti he is strengthid. He 
ran a3en God the necke vpri3t, and he is 
e7armed with a fat nol. Fatnesse couerde 
his face, and of his sides grece hangeth. 
23 He shall dwelle in desolat® cites, and in 
desert housis, that ben bro3t in to toumbis. 
29 He shal not be maad riche, ne his sub- 
staunce shal abide stille; and he shal not 
soputte in the erthe his roote, ne gon 
awei fro derenessis. His braunchis flaume 
shal make drie, and he shal be take awei 
31 thur3 the spirit of his mouth. Trowe he 


not in vein bi errour desceyued, that for , 


seany pris he is to ben ajeen bo3t. Er 
his da3is ben fulfild, he shal pershe, and 

33 his hondis shul waxe drie; he! shal ‘ben 
hurt*® as a vine, in the firste flour his 
cluster, and as an oliue throwende awei his 

3i flour. Forsothe the gedering! of an ipo- 
crite barein, and fyr shal deuoure ther 

39 tabernaclis, that gladli taken 3iftis. He 
conceyuede sorewe, and bar wickidnesse, 
and his wombe befor makith redi trecche- 
ries, 


CAP. XVI. 


1 Answerende forsothe Job seide, I haue 
herd ofte sithes suche thingus; alle 3ee 
3 ben heuye coumfortoures. Whethir windi 
woordis shul not™ han ende? or any 
thing is greuous to thee, if thou spekist ? 
1And I my3te lic thingis of 3ou speken, 
and wolde God 3oure lif were for my 
slif; and I shulde coumforte 3ou with 
woordis, and moue myn hed vp on 30u; 
6I shulde strengthe 30u with my mouth, 
and moue the lippis as sparende to 3ou. 


JOB. 


695 


which® is maad redi to batel. For’ he2s 
helde forth his hond a3ens God, and he 
was maad strong ajens Almy3ti God. He 26 
ran with? neck reisid® a3ens God, and he 
was armed withi fat nol. Fatnesse, that 27 
is, pride ‘comyng forth’ of temporal 
aboundaunce, hilide his face, ‘that is™, the? 
knowyng® of ® vndurstondyng, and out- 
ward fatnesse1} hangith doun of his sidis. 
He schal dwelle in desolat citees, and in28 
deseert, ‘ethir forsakun™, housis’, that ben 
turned in to biriels. He schal not be29 
maad riche, nether his catel schal dwelle 
stidefastli; nether he schal sende his roote 
in the® erthe, nether he schal go awei30 
fro derknessis. Flawime} schal make drie 
hise braunchis, and he schal be takun 
awey bi the spirit of his mouth. Bileue31 
he not veynli disseyued” bi errour, that he 
schal be a3enbou3t bi ony prijs. Bifor 32 
that hise daies beni fillid, he schal perische, 


and hise hondis schulen wexe drye; he33 


schal be hirt as a vyne in the firste flour of 
his grape, and as an olyue tre castinge 
awei his flour. 
gidere of an ipocrite is bareyn, and fier 
schal deuoure the tabernaclis of hem, that 
taken’ 3iftis wilfuli*. He conseynede?§ 35 
sorewe, and childide® wickidnesse, and his 
wombe makith redi tretcheries. 


CAP. XVI. 


Forsothe’ Joob answeride, and seide,1 
Y‘herde ofte® siche thingis; alle 3e ben2 
heuy coumfortouris. Whether wordis ful3 
of wynd schulen haue an ende? ether ony 
thing is diseseful to thee, if thou spekist ? 
Also® Y my3te speke thingis lijk to jou, 4 
and ‘Y wolde, that 3oure soule|| were! for 
my soule ; and! Y wolde coumfort 3ou by*5 
wordis, and Y wolde moue myn heed on! 
3ou; Y wolde make 3ou stronge bi my6 
mouth, and Y wo/de moue lippis™ as 


hthe desolat 4. tOm.c. EK gladen, e prim. !gendryngea. ™ Om. 4. 
ethatis. f Forsothe1s. 8with isis. hreisedvps. iwithais. kKOm.n. 'Om.isv. ™Om.iv. 
"Om. cimrsv. © Om. tsy. Pandc. ort. hiss. 4 fatnesse, that is, vnschamefastnesse 1s. * Om. 18. 
sin housisacppr.m.Emu. tintor, UOms. Wthe whiche disseyued is 1. whiche is disseyued s. * For- 
sothe 1s. y taken gladly 1. 2Om.1. 4 hath conseiued 1s. conseyueth s. > and her. ¢ hath childid 1s. 
4 Sothely 1s. © haue ofte herd 1s.  certis alle 1s. & Andis. 4 whi ne were 3oure sowle s. | Om. 1s. 
k with 1. !uponis. ™ my lippis 1s. 


t+ futnesse ; 
that is, pride 
comynge forth 
of teniporal 
abundance, c. 


t flawie ete.; 
that is, Goddis 
ri3tfulnesse 
schal sle hise 
sones and dov3- 
tris. Lire here. 
om 


§ conseyuede 
sorewe ; that 
is, bifor thou3te 
to do yuel to 


For* the gaderyng to- 34 othere men. 


and childide 
wickidnesse, 
bringinge to 
effeet hise 
wiekid thoust, 
while he was in 
temperal pow- 
ere. makith redi; 
that is, aftir 
his casting 
doun he hath 
3it wille to 
anoye, if he 
my3te. Lire 
here. Cc. 

ll goure soule s 
that is, in 
affliccioun 

and henynesse 
in which Y am, 
and Y were 
delyuerid. Joo 
seide not this 
for desire of 
veniaunce, but 
for the love of 
riztfulnesse, 
and that they 
set in turment, 
schulden asaye 
the truthe of 
his frenschip. c. 


696 


7But what shal Ido? If I shal speke, 
iny sorewe ‘shal not reste”; and if I shul 
holde my pes, it ‘shal not go° fro me awei. 
8 Now forsothe my sorewe hath opressid 
me, and alle my lymes ben turned in 
9to no3t. My ryuelis seyn witnesse a3en 
ie, and the false seiere is rered vp a3en 
10 my face, withseiende to me. He gederede 
his wodnesse in me, and thretende to 
me gnastide vp on me with his teth; 
myn enemy with grisli e3en me beheld. 
11Thei openeden ther mouthis vp on me, 
and mysseiende smyten my cheke ; thei 
12ben fulfld with my peynes. God hath 
closid me anent the wicke, and to the 
1shondis of vnpitouse toc me. And I he 
sum time plenteuouse, feerli am sorewid ; 
he hath holde my nol; he hath to-brosid 
14me, and put me as in to a marke. He 
hath enuyround me with his speris, he 
woundede my leendis to gidere; he sparide 
not, and he dalf? out in to the erthe 
my bowelis. And he heew31 me with 
wounde yp on wounde; and he fel in to 
16me as a ieaunt. I souwide a sac vpon my 
skin; and I couerede my flesh with askis. 
17 My face to-swal for weping, and myn e3e 
\slidis daswiden. These thingus I suffride 
withoute wickidnesse of myn hond, whan 
19I hadde to God clene pre3eeris. Erthe, 
ne conere thou my blod, ne my cry finde 
20in thee place of lurking. Lo! forsothe in 
heuene is my witnesse; am I knowere 
210f myself in hei3tis? My woordi frendis, 
22myn e3e droppith to God. And wolde 
God, so a man shulde be demed with 
God, hou the sone of man is demed with 
23his felawe. Lo! forsothe shorte 3eris 
passen, and the sty, bi the™ whiche I shal 
not be turned ajeen, I go. 


Dresteth not u pr. m. © goth not £ pr. m. 


n'The is. © ryuelyngis of my face 1s. 
Sajeus ins. ‘tand he 1s. 
2 smeten 1. smyten 8. 
Lord hath holden 1s. & and he 1g. 
woundil 1s, ™ hath not sparid me 1s. 
Shath fullenis. ‘uponis. 0 upon Is. 
4 whine werea mans. » Lo! certis 1s, 


@anentis1. » a 1s, 


JOB. 


P deluede 4EFH. 


P reisid up 18. 
u hath biholde 1s. 
¢ wickid man Is. 
b me togidre 18. 
© he hath sched 1s. 
Ww Om. 1. or werk s. 


XVI. 7-—23. 


But what schal Y do? If7 + @/falsspek. 


e 30U. 
Spary: ng 3 ere; that is, 


Y speke, my sorewe restith not; and if Y  thedenelwhich 
° 4 “ * is a Here, and 

ain Stille, it goith not awei fro me. But the faair of 

leesing. a3en : 


seith me; bi my 






now my sorewe hath oppressid me, and 
alle my lymes ben dryaun in to nou3t. penis ee | 
My” ryuelyngis® seien witnessyng a3ens9 alae 

me, aud a fals spekeret is reisid? azens my géheyopenyden; 
face, and ajenseith me’. He gaderide* tO~10 Geuel and my 
gidere his woodnesse in* me, and he ma- cia thee 
naasside me, and‘ gnastide a3ens me with in ee 

his teeth; myn enemye bihelde™ me with asin i.c*. and 
ferdful ijen. Thei openyden} her mouthis i conden 

on” me, and thei seiden schenschip*, andy pale 
smytiden? my cheke; and thei ben fillid pee ee 
with my peynes. God hath closid me ta opiily, as he is 
togidere at? the> wickid*, and hath4 3oue BM al hel 
me to the hondis of wickid men. Y thilke 133%: 2° 


here. c. 
riche man and famouse® sum tyme, am al $79” eliddis, 
e - > 
to brokun sudeynli; ‘he heldef my nol; myn Tian ot 
. 6 yned bitwize 
he& hath broke me}, and hathi set meas in the iselidis; for 


si3t is maad 


to a signe, He! hath cumpasside me with 14 derk, by greek 
hise speris, he woundide™ togidere my vernal 
leendis ; he sparide not", and schedde® out bee ie 
myn entrails in to the erthe. He beetP 15 not ctc. + Jooh 
me with wounde on? wounde; he™ as a pears 
giaunt felde’ in ont me. Y sewide to- 16 jn email 
gidere a sak on" my skyn; and Y hilide eT 
my fleisch with aische. My face bolnyde 17 If thou louest 
of wepynge, and myn i3jeliddis} wexiden old, 1f thou 
derke. Y suffride these thingis with out 1 
wickidnesse of myn hond, ‘that is, werk”, oe 
whanne Y hadde cleene preieris to God. he yooh ae 
Erthe, hile thou not|] my blood, and my 19seiden, that he 
. : was punysched 
cry fynde* not in thee a place of hidyng. for his gilt, and 
‘For, loY! my witnesse is in heuene; and 200 Joo! hadde 
the knowere of my consience is in hije ae 
places. A”! my frendis, ful of wordis, myn 2! declaring of his 
ize droppith to God. And‘Y wolde, that 22 Lise here c. 
a man were® demed so with God, as the 
sone of inan is demed with his felowe. 
‘For lo>! schorte 3eeris passen, and Y go a23 
path, bi which Y schal not turne a3en. 


Qhewide zern. ° Om. sern. 


4 bi mi frendis v marg. 

x schenship fo me 18. 
dhe hath is. © of greet fame 1s. 
ihe hathis. Ktokenys. ! And he 1s, 

P hath bete 1s. 9 upon ts, 
x fynde it 1s. ¥ Forsothe 1s. 


hath gadrid 1s, 
y and thei 1s. 
f the 
m hath 
rand he 1s. 
zQO1s. 


W upon Is. 


XVII. 1-—XVIII. 3. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 My spirit shal be maad thynne; my 
da3is shul be shortid, and onli to me 
2leueth ouer a sepulere. I synnede not, 
sand in bittirnessis abideth myn e3e. Lord, 
deliuere me, and put me beside thee; and 
whos euere liond thou wilt, fizte a3en me. 
4 The herte of hem thou hast maad aferre® 
fro discipline; therfore thei shu] not ben 
senhauncid. A prei he behotith to felawis, 
Gand his sones e3en shul failen. Het putte 
me as in to a prouerbe of the commun, and 
7his exsaumple beforn hem. At the in- 
dignacioun daswide myn eje; and my 
élymes as vnto no3t ben bro3t. Riztwis 
men shul stone3en vp on that; and the 
innocent a3en the ipocrite shal be stirid 
gvp. And the ri3twis shal holden his weie, 
and with clene hondis adde strengthe. 
10 Thanne alle jee beth conuertid, and com- 
eth; and I shal not finde in 30u any wis 
iiman. My da3is passeden; my tho3tis ben 
i2scatered, tormentende myn herte. Ny3t 
thei turneden in to dai; and eft aftir 
isderenessis I hope 1i3t. If I shul sustene, 
helle is myn hous; and in derenessis I 
14beddede my bed. To stine I seide, Thou 
art my fader; My moder and my sister, 
isto wermes. Wher is thanne now myn 
abiding? and my pacience who behold- 
igeth ? In to the most deppest helle shul 
falle doun allemyne; wenest thou nameli, 
whethir there shal ben reste to me ? 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Answerende forsothe Baldath Suythes 
2seide, In to what ende woordis thou shalt 
boste ? Vnderstond rathere, and so speke 
3wee. Whi be wee holden as bestis, and 


8 ferre 4. 


€ spirit, seith Job1s. ais. e€ Om.s. 


JOB. 


f eche man 18. 


697 


CAP. XVII. 


Mi spirit® schal be maad feble; my 
daies schulen be maad schort, and oneli 
the’ sepulere is left to me. Y have not2 


synned{, and myn ize dwellith in bittir- + rhane not 


synned; thous 
Joob passide 


nessis. Lord, delyuere thou me, and settes 
not present liyf 
‘ tho weren not 
the herte of hem fer fro doctryn, ‘ethir 
schnide be 
tho. Lire here. 
felowis, and the i3en of hise sones schulen 
that settide 
bifor hem. Myn ‘ize dasewideP at in-7 vite. dihetith 
Tust men schulen wondre 8 Prosperite for 
on this thing; and an innocent schal be 
his opynyoun, 
ben taust of 
strengthe® to clene hondis. 
Jaile fro geting 
daies ben passid; my thon3tis ben scaterid, 
hope li3t. If Y ‘susteyne, ether” suffreis 
Y seide tou with ynne the 
3e ben my modir and my’ sister. Therfor 15 erthely prospe- 
othere of this 
schulen go doun in to deppeste helle; \ora, that sig- 


thon® me bisidis thee; and the hond of witli 
ech fizte ajens me. Thou& hast maada synnes,netheles 
80 grenouse, 

c . that sich peyne 
knowyng of trenthe® ; therfor' thei schulen “as 
not be enhaunsid. He bihetith} prey* tos tye hin fr 

Co 
' : + he biheteth ; 
faile. He hath set as in to a prouerbe™6 that is, Eliphat, 
of" the comyn puple, and his saumple® — mannas blis in 
erthely prospe- 
: : f prey to felowis : 
dignacioun?; and my membris ben dryuun fit is, erthely 
as in to nou3t. SiS nee 
that weren of 
reisid’ a3ens an ypocrite. And a just man9 and the izen of 
. . hi: 
schal holde his weie, and he schal adde 8 0 that 

Therfor alle 19 1 biser- 
: , rour, schulen 
3e bet conuertid, and come 3e3 and Y schal eee 

P 2 of veri blis. 
not fynde in 30u ony wiys man. My 11 Lire here. c. 
turmentynge myn herte. Tho han turned 12 
the ny3t ‘in to" day; and eft aftir derknessis 
pacientlx, helle is myn hous§; and Y hane _ § het, ete. ; 
1 bedinwlere : that is, biriyng 
arayede my bed in derknessis. 
. on c erthe, for Y 
rot, Thon art my fadur; and to wormes,  fisie’no more 
ite; in this 
where is now myn abidyng? and who _ place and 
biholdith my pacience? Alle my thingis 16 hook for helle, 
is an Ebreu 
gessist thou, whether reste schal be to me, 
nameli there. 


nefteth ofte a 
diche ether 
biriyng. Lire 
here. CK. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Forsothe? Baldach Suythes answeride,1 
and seide®, ‘Til to? what ende schalt thoue 
booste with wordis? Vndurstoude thou 
first, and so speke we’. Whi ben wes; 


t thei & pr. m. 


& Lord, thours. b Om. 1v. that is, fro 


knowyng of treuthe 8. i and therfor 1s. k to prey s. | to hise 1s. ™ prouerbe, ora lijknesse s. "to 1s, 
°ensaumple 1s. P izen dajewiden s. 4 the indignacioun of vawise men 1s. 1 reisid up 1s. § his 
strengthes. tbhe3es. inaprm WOm.1s. *Om.1 yYOm.1u 2 Thannets.  seide 
to Jobs. >&Vnto1s. ¢thouvss. 4 we togidre 1s. 

VOL. II. 40 


698 


4wee han waxe foul before thee? What 
lesist thou thi sowe in thi wodnesse ? 
Whether for thee the erthe shal be for- 
saken, and rochis shal be translatid fro 
5ther placis? Whether the 1i3t of the 
wycke man shal not be quenchid; ne 
6the flaume of his fyr shal shyne? Li3t 
shal waxe derk in his tabernacle; and 
the lanterne that is vpon hym shal be 
7quenchid. The goingis of his vertue 
shul be streitid"; and his counseyl shal 
sputten hym doun. Forsothe he putte 
in’ his feet in to the nett; and in his © 
9filthis he goth. His sole shal ben holde 
with a grene; and thrist shal brenne out 
loajen hym. His foot grene is hid in the 
erthe, and his desceyuende gyn vp on 
lithe sty. Al aboute feris shul gasten 
hym, and withinne wrappen his feet. . 
12 His strengthe shal ben feblid with hunger; - ° 
and scarsnesse of mete asaile his ribbis. 
13 Deuoure it the fairnesse of hys skin; the 
firste goten deth waste the armys of hym. 
14 His trost be pullid vp fro his tabernacle ; 
and deth trede vp on hym, as a king al 
1saboue. Dwellen his felawis in the taher- 
nacle of hym that is not; brumston be 
issprengd in his tabernacle. Doun‘ be 
dried his rootis; aboue* forsothe be to- 
Wtreden his rip. The mynde of hym 
pershe fro the erthe; and his name be 
ignot maad solempne in stretis. He shal 
putten hym out fro li3t in to derenessis; 
and fro the roundnesseY ouerbern hyim. 
19 His sed ne progenye shal ben in his 
puple, ne any remnaunt in the regiouns 
200f hym. In his dajes the laste men shul 
stone3en; aud grising shal asaile the firste. 
21 These thanne ben the tabernaclis of the 
wicke man; and this his place, that 
yvnknowith God. 


Ustreit au. Y Om. an. 


eof theeas1. f whi haue 1, 
for thee 1. and wherfore the s. ] and wher 1s. 
and in the knitlingis s.  P is leid on 1s. 4 every 18. 
bronston 1s. W And the 1s. * be thei 1s. 


© remenauntis of hem 1s, 4 lefteinz. © thats. 


JOB. 


w Adoun AEFH. 


& Whar tox. What or whis. 
™ that Is. 


y and be 1s. 


XVIII. 4-——21. 


arettid as® beestis, and han‘ we be foule 
bifor thee ? What leesist thou thi soule4 
in thi woodnes? Whether" the erthe* 
schal be forsakun ‘for thee!, and* hard 
stoonys schulen be borun ouer fro her 
place? Whethir the 1i3t? of a wickid mans 
schal not be quenchid; and! the flawme 
of his fier schal not schyne?  Li3t schalé 


* Wher the 
erthe, etc, 3 that 
is, sadnesse of 
oure sentence 
for thyn vnre- 
sonable wordis. 
Lire here. c. 
+ the lizt; that 
is, his temporal 
prosperite, 
Lire here. c. 

t with a snare; 
that is, custom 


i : of synne. r 
wexe derke in his tabernacle ; and the lan- ee that is, 

. . : rennyng and 
terne, which™ is on hym, schal be quenchid. desire to do 
The steppis of his vertu schulen be maad7 {ie frie ete; 
streit; and his counsel schal caste hym an is, hasty 

‘ : eth, comynge 
doun. For he hath sent® hise feet in tos itor Kyo 
Z : eth. Lire 
a net; and he goith in the meschis® therof. here. c. 
< Ors” ll is nots that 
His foot schal be holdun with a snaret;9 js, the felowis 
pr re of the deed 
and thirst schal brenne out a3ens hym. man, whic 
The foot trappe of hym is hid in the 10 va vila 
men, 
erthe, and his snare on? the path. Dredis11 ies tabernacle 
A Is the cre 
schulen make hyin aferd on ech‘ side, and™ whore hath 
h : : ‘ felowschi 
schuilen biwlappe’ hise feet. His strengthe 12 no ire 
be maad feble bi hungur; and pouert asaile ("7 here & 
e . . . e . 2 
hise ribbis. Denoure it the fairnesse of 13 that it; the a 
. ‘ men of the 
his -skyn; the firste) gendrid deth waste  peple; and the 
e : r é Jirste, that is, 
hise armes. His trist be takun awei fro 11 the grettere 
his tabernacle; and perischyng, as a kyng, ee 
aboue trede onthym. The felowis of hymis’%o% 
F : 5 wondre in hise 
that is not||, dwelle in his tabernacle;  ¢aies; the re. 

u ° . souns of Bal- 

brymston" be spreynt in his tabernacle. — dath prenen 
: 5 t hi 
The” rootis of hym be* maad drie bynethe; 16 4 the forseid™ 
sotheliY his ripe corn be? al to-brokun failen nota 
aboue. His mynde perische fro the erthe ; 17% Mee nd 
, in this hyf, 
and his name be not maad solempne in __ but also ofte 
E ‘ to iust m 
stretis. He schal put hym ont fro ‘H3t 18 that ben ae 
in to derknessis; and he schal bere hym onely inal 
ouer fro® the world. Nethir his seed 19 iy) su 
2 s th, but also 
nether kynrede? schal be in his puple, nether ftir deth thei 
‘he tid pe ° ben dispisid 
ony relifs® in’ hise cuntreis. The laste] 20 among men; as 
. : the hodi 
mien schulen wondre in hise daies; and [re padies of 
hidousnesse schal asaile the firste men. foredon aa . 
‘o 2 
Therfor these ben the tabernaclis of a2) weren att oa 
eLeq ne wae Ue 7 
wickid man; and this® is the place of hym, wilde beestis 
& : and briddis. 
that knowith not God. ; 


Xeft E prom.  Y mouth £ pr. m. 


h Wherfore s. iOm.s. * and wher 

° meshis or knyliingis 1. meschis 
Sbewrappe s. tupours. and 
aQm.s. » his kynrede s. 


n putt Is. 
r and thei 1s. 
z Om. 1s. 


thou3 this were 


lettid sum ty 
by Goddis 
ptreuyaunce. 
Lire here. Cc. 











XIX, I-20. 


CAP. XIX. 


; Answerende forsothe Job seide, Hou 
longe 3ee tormente my lif, and pownen? 
3me with woordis? Lo! ten sithes 3ee 
confounde me, and 3ee shame not, opress- 
aende me. Forsothe if I am vnknowende, 
5 With me it shal be, myn vnkunnyng. And 
3ee ajen me ben rerid, and vndernyme me 
e6with my repreues. Nameli now vnder- 
stondeth, for God not with? euene dom 
tormentith me, and with his scourgis 
7girdith me. Lo! I shal crie sufferende 
fors, and no man shal here; I shal crien 
gout, and ther is not that deme. My sty 
he heggide aboute, and J mai not gon 
ouer; and in my path he putte derc- 
gnesses. He spoilide me my glorie, and he 
10 toe awei the croune fro myn hed. He de- 
stro3zide me al aboute, and I pershe; and 
as to a pullid vp tree he toc awey myn 
i hope’. His wodnesse is wroth a3en me ; 
1and so me he hadde as his enemy. His 
theues camen togidere, and maden to hem 
a weie bi me; and besegiden in enuyroun 
ismy tabernacle. He imade a ferr my bre- 
thren fro me; and my knowen as alienes 
14wenten awei fro me. My ne3h men for- 
soken me; and that me hadden knowe 
15 for3cte me. The comelingus of myn hous 
and myn hond wymen as an alien hadden 
me$ and as a pilgrim I° was in the ejen 
isof hem. My seruaunt J clepide, and he 
answerde not to me; with my propre 
i7mouth I pre3ede hym. My wif agriside 
iny breth ; and I* pre3ede the sones of my 
iswombe. Foolys also despisiden me; and 
whan I hadde gon awei fro them, thei 
i9 bacbiten to® me. Sum time my coun- 
seyleris wlateden me; and whom I most 
20loouede withstod me. My bon clenede 
to my skin, the flesh wastid; and onli 


z ponen c. thralle & pr.m. pownen E sec. m. 


JOB. 


699 


CP XIX. 


Forsothe Joob answeride, and seide,! 
Hou long turmente 3e my soule, and al2 
to-breken me with wordis ? Lo! ten sithis3 
3e schendenf mef, and 3e ben not aschamed, + stenden mes 
‘ ‘ that is, enforsen 
oppressynge tne. Forsothe’ and if Y ‘koude 4 to schende me. 
h ‘ Lire here. c. 
not", myn vnkynnyng schal be with me. 
And 3e ben reisid a3ens me, andi repreuens 
me with my schenschipis. Nameli nows 
vndurstonde 3e, that God hath turmentid 
me not bi enene doom*{, and! hath cum- — + God hath tur- 
mentid me not 


passid me with hise betyngis. Lo! Y suf-7 ti euene doom; 
f I hal J a Joob seide not 
rynge violence schal crye, and no man his of his 
Me : ‘ owne entent ; 
schal here™ ; Y schal crye loude, and ‘noon pit he can. 
is® that demeth®. He? bisette! abonte iny 8 ‘ludide this of 
i the seiyngis of 
path, and Y may not go; and he settide™ _hise aduersa- 
Oras . z ries, that seiden 
derknessis in my weie. He hath spuylid9 that alle aduer- 
me of my glorye, and’ hath take awey the Eee 
coroun fro myn heed. He hath distried 10 i of God, for 
: i m peyne of synnes 
me on ech side, and Y perischidet ; and" Pee ely 
‘ and therof it 
he hath take awei myn hope", as fro a__ sueth, that the 
. . . doom of God 
tre pullid vp bi the roote. His stronge 1 was not euene 

, 4 a3enus Joob, of 
veniaunce was wrooth) ajens mes ‘and hes 2a ota 
hadde me so as his enemye. Hise theues 12 Ha nel 

. e gilt. Live 
camen* togidere, and ‘maden toY hem a_ tere. c. 

«as : . was wraoth 
wei bi me; and bisegiden? my tabernacle Ce ene 
* a b s turmentis to 
in* cumpas. He made fer my britheren 13 yo and this 
fro me; and my knowun® as aliens jeden —sueth of the 

A , 5 seiyng of hise 
awei fro me. My nei3boris forsoken® me ; 14 frendis, selynge 


$ that siche 
and thei that knewen me han forjete me. _ peynes ben 
7 for synne 
The tenauntis of myn hows, and myn is nay. Lie 
here. C. 


handmaydis® hadden me as a straunger ; 
and Y was as a pilgrym bifor her ijen. 
Y clepide my seruaunt, and he answerideic 
not to me; with myn owne mouthY preiede 
hym!. My wijf wlatide my breeth ; and Y 17 
preiede the sones|| of my woinbe. Also 16 Il the sones, 
foolis dispisiden me; and whanne Y was the sones of my 
goon awei fro hem, thei bacbitiden me. ee 
Theig, that weren my counselouris sui 19 

tyme, hadden abhomynacioun of me"; and 


a withouten 4. b fairnesse E pr.m. € Oln. c. 


4 Om. an. © bacbitiden «. baebiten 1. 

f haue schent 1s. 8 Certis 1s. b haue vnknowe 1s. ‘and 3e1s. * doom, for he sparid mes. land 
hers. ™here me1s. %therisnoon1. © demeth me worthi to be herd is.  ? The Lords. 4% hath 
bisett 1s. ‘bath sett rs. 8andhers. ¢ perishe worthly s. Om.1s. hope as je gessen is. * han 
come 1. Y thei han maad 1s. # thei han biseegid 1s. ® bis, > The Lord is. © knowun mens. 4 han 
forsake 1s. © handmaidens 1. f hym, but he herde mee nots. & Aud theirs. © me aftirward 1s. 


4u 2 


700 


21 the lippis ben lafte aboute my teth. Hau- 
eth reuthe of me, haueth reuthe of me, 
nameli, 3ee my frendis; for the hond of 

oe the Lord hath touchid me. Whi pursue 
3ee me, as God; and with my flesh 3ee 

23 be fulfild? Who 3iueth to me, that my 
woordis be writen? Who 3iueth to me 

aithat thei be grauen in a boc with an 
iren pointel, or with a pece of led; or with 

g5a chisell thei be grauen in flint? For- 
sothe I wot, that myn ajeenbiere liueth, 
and in the laste dai I am to rise fro the’ 

ogérthe; and eft shal ben ennyround with 
my skin, and in my flesh I shal se God, 

o7my sauere. Whom I myself am to seen, 
and myn e3en ben to beholden, and noon 
other. This myn hope is led vp in my 

gg bosum. Whi thanne now sey 3ee, Pursue 
wee hym, and the roote of woord finde 

a9 wee ajen hym? Fleeth thanne fro the 
face of swerd; for vengere of wickidnesse 
is the swerd, and witeth dom to be’. 


CAP. XX. 


1  Answerende forsothe Sofar Naamatites, 
2seide, Therfore my tho3tis diuers comyn 
after other to them; and my mynde in to 
3diuers thingus is raueshid. The doctrine 
that thou vndernemest me, I shal heren ; 
and the spirit of myn vnderstonding shal 
sanswern tome. That I wot fro the be- 
gynnyng, sithen a man ‘is sett! vp on 
serthe', that the preising of vnpitous men 
is short, and the io3e of an ipocrite at 
6the licnesse of a point. Ifhis pride ste3e 
vp in to henene, and the clonde touche 
zhis hed, as a dunghil, in the ende he shal 
ben lost ; and thei that hadden seen hym, 


fOm,. aerH. & mea. 


i my fleischis 1s. * lippis aloone x. of 1. 
or grauntith s.  grauntith 1s. 8 tho be 1. 
am is. man, but sich as I am now Kk marg. 
is, 7a myn hertev.  ¥ Om. 1s. 
d this hing 1. sith that 4s. 


f upon Is. 
h And thous 8. 1istie up 1s. 


k and #f is. 


JOB. 


h Tam sett & pr.m. 


™ of 1. 
t Certis 1s. 


x bosum, or bilewe 1. bosum, or in my beleeue s. bosum, that 
z And thanne 1s. 


XIX. 21——-XX. 7. 


he, whom Y louede moost, was aduersarie 


to me. Whanne fleischis! weren wastid, my 20 


boon cleuyde to my skyn; and ‘oneli lippis* 
ben left aboute my teeth. Haue 3e merci 21 
on! me, haue 3e merci on™ me, nameli, 3e 
my frendis; for the hond of the Lord hath 


touchid me. Whi pursuen 3e me, as God 22 


pursueth® ; and ben® fillid? with my 
fleischist ? Who 3yueth’ to me, that my 23 
wordis be writun? Who 3yueth™ to me, 
that tho be writun in a book with ana 
yrun poyntil, ethir with a plate of leed ; 
ethir with a chisel bes grauun in a flynt? 
Fort Y woot, that myn azenbiere lyueth, 25 
and in the laste dai Y schal rise fro the 
erthe; and eft Y schal be cumpassid with 26 
my skyn, and in my fleisch Y schal se 


+ with my iy 

Sleischis ; in 
Tectia me, 
and affermynge 
that Y am 
iustly punysch- 
id for synnes, 
far whi bac- 
biteris ben fillid 
with quyke 
fleschis. Lire 
here. C. 


God, my sauyour. Whoin Y iny silf schal 27 . 


se, and myn izen schulen biholde", and not 
an other man*{. This myn hope is kept 
in my bosum*. Whi therfor seien 3e now, 28 
Pursue we hym, and fynde we the roote 
of a word a3ens hym? Therfor fle 3e fro 29 
the face of the swerd§; for the swerd is 
the’ vengere of wickidnessis, and wite 3e, 
that doom schal be. 


CA Pax Xe 


Forsothe? Sophar Naamathites answer-1 
ide, and seide*, Therfor® ny thou3tis dy-2 
uerse comen|] oon aftir anothir; and the 
mynde is rauyischid in to dyuerse thingis. 
Y schal here the techyng, bi which thou3 
repreuest me; and the spirit of myn® vn- 
durstondyng schal answere me. Y woot 4 
this’ fro the bigynnyng, sithen® man was 
set onf erthe, that the preisyng of wickids 
men is schort, and the ioie of an ypocrite 
is at the licnesse of a poynt. Thou3" hiss 
pride ‘stieth ini to heuene, and* his heed 
touchith the cloudis, he schal be lost! in7 
the ende, as™ a dunghil; and, thei that 


i the erthe «. 


nQOm. 1s. 9° 3e ben rs. 


P fulfillid 1. 4 3yueth 
u biholde him ts. 


w man, than I my self that now 
a seide fo Job s. 


> Certis 1s. my 1s. © Om.s. 


& poynt soone passinge 1. poynt, that is, soone onerpassed 8. 
llost or forgele s. 


m of 1. 


t not another 
man ; that is, 

Y schal be the 
same man in 
body and soule, 
that Y am now. 
Lire here. c 


§ fro the face 
of the swerd ; 
that is, fro the 
sentence of 
Goddis doom. 
of wickidnessis 
that ben not 
punyschid here. 
Lire here. c. 


il dyuerse 
comen, ete. ; 
whanne Sophar 
hadde herd the 
wordis of Joob, 
he assentide of 
the doom to 
comynge and 
of vndedlynesse 
of soule, but 
he dissentide 
fro Joob in 
peynes and 
prosperites of 
this liyf, for he 
helde that ad- 
uersites weren 
peynes of 
synnes, and 
prosperites 
weren meede 
of vertu. Lire 
here. C. 





XX. 8—24. JOB. 701 


sshul sein, Wher is he? As a sweuene 
fleende awei he shal not be founde; he 
9shal passe as the ny3t siz3te. The e3e that 
hym sa3* shal not seen; and his place no 
10mor shal beholden hym. His sones shul 
be to-trede with nede; and the hondis of 
i1hym shul jelde! to hym his sorewe. The 
bones of hym shu be fulfild with vicis of 
his: waxende 3outhe; and with hym in 
12pouder thei shul slepe. Whan forsothe 
euel were sweete in his mouth, he hidde 
13it vnder his tunge. He shal spare to it, 
and not forsaken it; and hiden in ‘his 
l4throte™. The bred of hym in his wombe 
shal be turned in to galle of edderes 
1s withinneforth. The richessis that he de- 
uourede, he shal spewen out ; and of his 
is wombe God shal drawe them out. The 
hed of edderes shal rise; and the tunge 
170f the serpent shal slen hym. See he not 
the litle ryneres of the flod, of the strem 
18 of hony, and of buttere. He shal abie alle 
thingus that he dide, and nerthelatere 
he shal not be wastid; aftir the multi- 
tude of his findingus, so and" he shal 
i9suffre. For brekende togidere he nakide 
the hous of the pore man; raueshide, and 
20not bilde it. And his wombe is not ful- 
fild; and whan he shal han, that he hadde 
21 coueitid, he shal not moun welde. Ther 
‘lafte not® of his mete; and therfore u0 
22 thizig shal leue of his goodus. Whan he 
shal be fulfild, le shal be streyned, and 
brenne; and alle sorewe shal falle in to 
2shym. Wolde God his wombe be fulfild, 
that he sende out in to hym the wrathe 
of his wodnesse, and reyne vp on hym 
2this bataile. He shal fleen iren armys; 
and he shal falle in to the brasene bowe. 


sien® hym, schulen seie, Where is he? 
As a dreem fleynge awei® he schal not bes 
foundun ; he schal passe as? ‘a ny3tis si3t4. 
The ize that si3 hym’ schal not set; and9 


his place schal no more biholde him. Hise 10 41% '"* 


that is, hise 
sones" schulen be ‘al to-brokun* with reams 
nedynesse ; and hise hondis schulen 3elde ee 
TE. C 


to hym his sorewe. Hise boonyst} schulen 11 Shas tincedi tlic; 
: . . . that is, synne 
be fillid with the vices of his 30ng wex- in whichhe 


re = . delitide and 
ynge age; and’ schulen slepe with hym in yas gia. of 


dust. For? whanne yuel was swete in his 12 °”##ss for the 
; : bittirnesse of 

mouth, he hidde? it? vndur his tunge. He 13 peyne suynge. 
, a P Lire here. c. 

schal spare it®, and" schal not forsake it®;  § the heed of 


OP ac iv nakis, Tomas 
and‘ schal hide’ in his throte. His! breed{14‘Ajguyn and 


, 7 s k  summe othere 
in his wombe schal be turned in to gallek nme ov'e 


of snakis withynne!. He schal spue™ OIE. one 
A i , P his lettre. é€ 
the richessis, whiche he denouride” ; and heed of snakis 


: : & sehal rise, that 
God schal drawe tho ritchessis out of his jg, the denel 


* 11. ether another 
wombe. He schal souke the heed of snakis||; 16 7, y3ty man 


and the tunge of an addre schal sle hym, — schal tise to 
asaile him, as 

Se he not the® stremys of the flood of the 17 the heed of a 
snake is reisid 

stronde, of hony, and of botere. He schal 18 to bite. But 


. . . thi i. 
suffre peyne? for alle thingis whiche’ he  ¢ioun scordith 


‘Jr. not with the 
hath do, netheles he schal not be wastid'; Lbted ihe 


aftirs the multitude of his fyndyngis, so * - ae 
souke : an 
and‘ ‘he schal" suffre. For he brake, and 19 where we han 


* heed, in Ebreu 
made nakid the hows of a* pore man; he itis ros, that 


a Pe : 5 ‘ both 
rauyschideY, and bildide it not’. And his 20j80riy oe’ 


wombe was not? fillid; and whanne he pee oe in 
hath that, that he couetide, he may not _ ficacionn, that 
holde® in possessioun®. ‘No thing leftell21 plefn yaow. 

of his mete®; and therfor no thing schal 772757 0; 


s Sef, ‘ eed the galle oa 
dwelle of his goodis'. Whanne he is fillids, 22 0° 77" 


he® schal be maad streiti; he schal ‘be he oo 
; irone, ete.; 
hoot*, and alle sorewe schal falle in om! _ that is, peynes 
of present liyf, 


hym. ‘Y wolde, that™ his wombe be" fillid, 23 that smyten 


. ae visibly and of 
that he sende out? in? to hym the ire? of ay.” prasun 


his strong veniaunce, and’ reyne his batel foes that is, 
in to peynes of 


on* hym. He schal fle yrun§ armuris, and 2s helle. Lire 
ere. Ca 


¥ seeth am. seiz3 EF. !3elde them £. ™rootec. %Om. 4. © shal not leuen £ pr. m. 


n han seen 1s. © awei or soone forzelen s. POm.s. 4 the si3t of niztis1s. 1 hath seies. §% Om.s. 


tse him eft. se him s. © sones a/so 1s. x broke 1. broke to gidere s. yand theirs. 2 Certis 1s. 
ahidde and kepleis. ’Om.s. ©¢ it for a tyme. it toa tymes. “and hers. © it, but hoolde i s. 3 aud 
hess. hide itis. "throte; ands. til he may anoic, his1s. * the galle1. 1 withynne him 1s. 


m yome or caste 1s, © hath deuourid 1s. © Om. 1s. 


Ppeynes 1s. 4that3. 1 wastid bi tho peynes, but 


euer endures. Sandaftir1s. tOm.1s. 4%schalhes. W For whis. *theis. Y ranyschide it 13. 
2 not ajen is. 8 not 3ift 1. not 3if therbis. > holde it 1s. © possessioun Jong lyme s. 4 Ther lefte 
nothing 1. © meete fo poore men 8.  goodis to his bikoue, but s. & fulfillid with richesse 1. fulfillid with 
calels. 4 3ithe1, | streit in coucitise 1. * brenne in it1. brenne in coxeylyse and malice s. 1 upon 1. 
with s. ™ Whine were rs. ™Om.1s. © out fhanne1. POm.s. wraththers. ¢ and falle ast. 


8 upon 18. 


702 JOB. XX. 25——XXI. IT. 


25 Bro3t out, and goende out fro his shethe, 
and leitinge in to his bitternesse; thei 
shul go, and come vp on hym alle grisful. 

26 Hid derenessis be in his priue thingus; fyr 
shal deuoure hym, that shal not be brend 
vp; laft in his tabernacle he shal be tor- 

o7mentid. Heuenys shul shewen his wick- 
idnesse; and erthe shal rise a3en hyim. 

og The buriounyng of his hous shal ben 
opened; it? shal be tot drawen awei in 

29 the dai of the wodnesse of the Lord. This 
is the part of the vnpitous man fro God, 
and the eritage of his woordis fro the 
Lord. 


CAP. XXI. 


- 1 Answerende forsothe Job seide, Hereth, 
“I beseche, my woordis, and doth penaunce. 
3Suffreth me, and I shal speke ; and after 

my woordus, if it shul be seen, la3heth. 
4Whethir ajen man is my disputesoun, 
that thur3 desert I owe not to be maad 
ssory ? Taketh heede to me, and becometh 
doumbe; and puttith vpon the finger to 
63oure mouth. And" whan I shal recorde, 
drede and trembling shal smyte togidere 
7iny flesh. Whi thanne vnpitous men liuen, 
and ben rered vp, and coumfortid with 
srichessis ? The sed of hem abits stille be- 
forn hem; and the cumpanye of nee3h 
men, and of cosynes in the si3te of hem. 
9 The housis of hem ben sikere, and pesible; 
and the 3erde of God is not vp on hem. 
10 The oxe of hem conceyuede, and bar not 
abortif; the kow bar, and ist not priued 
ithe frut. The litle childer of hem gon 
out as floeckis; and the fauutis of hem 


he schal falle in to at brasun boowe. Led" 2s 

out, and* goynge out ‘of his schetheY, and 

schynynge, ‘ether smytinge with leit’,‘in 

to his* bittirnesse ; orrible fendis> schulen 

go, and schulen® come on* hym. Alle derk-26 

nessis ben hid in hise priuytees; fier, which® 

is not teendid‘, schal deuoure hym; he 

schal be turmentid left® in his tabernacle. 

Heuenes schulen schewe his wickidnesse ; 27 

and erthe schal rise> togidere ajens hym. 

The seed'} of his hows schal be* opyn ; it! 28 +The seed, etc.; 
schal be drawun doun in the dai of the™ iennaoun 
strong veniaunce of the Lord. This is the 29 pce 


part of a" wickid man, ‘which part iso  % encreessing 

. 5 of her owne 
sounn? of God, and the eritage of hise damnacionn. 
2 5 


wordis4 of* the Lord. mas 
CAPR AX xe 

Forsothe’ Joob answeride, and seide, Y 
preyet, here 3e my wordis, and do 3e pe- 
naunce". Suffre 3e me, that Y speke; and3 
leize 5e aftir my wordis, if it schal seme” 
worthix. Whether my disputyng is a3ens4 
man, that skilfuli Y owe not to be sori? 
Perseyue 3e me, and be 3e astonyed; ands 
sette 3e¥ fyngur? on* 30ure mouth. Ande 
whanne Y bithenke’, Y drede, and trem- 
blyng schakith my fleisch. Whi therfor7 
lyuen wickid men? Thei ben enhaunsid, 
and¢ coumfortid with richessis. Her seeds 
dwellith bifor hem; the cumpeny of¢ kynes- 
men, and of © sones of & sones dwellith® in 
her sijt. Her housis ben sikur, and pesi-9 
ble ; and the jerde! of God is not on* hem. 
The cow of hem conseyuedel, and caluede 10 
not a deed calf™; the™ cow caluyde, and° 
is not? priued4 of hir calf. Hert litle chil-11 
dren® goen out as flockis; and her 3onge 
children ‘maken fulli ioyet with pleies®. 


Pandita, @Om.u. rAnd arr, $s abideth au. ¢ it is E pr.m. 


*Om.1. & The whiche is led 1. Which is led or taken s. W out of his schethe or caas 1. out of his 


shethe, or out of the furel s. — * and this howe 18. 
b feerisis. ¢€Om.1s. uponis. that 1s. 


y Om. 1s. Zas leitis. 4 schal smyte him in 1s. 
fteendid of man is. & and left1s. b rise up 18. 


‘ generacioun 18. Kk be maad1. Vandits. ™Om.1s. "ther. © antecrist 1. which iss.  P 30xen to 
himis. 4 disceyuable wordis 1. ® ordeyned to him of 1. is also of s. s Sothely 1s. t preye 30u 18. 


u penaunce fur 30ure erringe 8. W seme /o 30% S. 
2 30ure fyngur is. @uponis. >» bithenke me 1s. 


x worthi to do so s. Y the BCDEKLMPQRUWI. 


cors. ofheris. ¢€Om.1.  f the sones plures. 


Sothers. bh lywens. i3erde or skourge 1. 3erde or the chastisynge s. k upon is. ! hath conceyued 18. 


™ calf, but a quyks. “hers. © and sche 1s. 


P now s. 4 maad calflees 1. calflees s. Y The 1s. 


8 children of hem 1. children of wickid mens. t ful outioyen 1s. 2 pleynges s. 





a 


XXII. 12—30. JOB. 703 


wegladen out with pleies. They holden the 
timbre, and the harpe; and io3en at the 
j3Soun of the" orgne. Thei’ leden in goodis 
ther da3is; and in a point to hellis thei 
ugo doun. The whiche seiden to God, 
Go awei fro vs; the kunnyng of thi’ 
Is Weies wee wiln not. Who is the Aliny3ti, 
that wee serue to hym? and what pro- 
ig fiteth to vs, if wee prejen hym? Ner- 
thelater for ther goodis ben not in the 
hond of hem, the counseil of vnpitous 
17men be aferr fro me. Hou ofte sithes 
the lanterne of vnpitouse men shal be 
quenchid, and flowing ouercam to them, 
and deuidede” the sorewis of his wod- 
ignesse? Thei shul ben as chaf befor the 
face of wind; and as a* sparke, that the 
igcole scatereth. God shal kepe to the 
sones of hym the sorewe of the fader; 
and whan he shal 3elde, thanne he shal 
20 knowen. His e3en shul seen his sla3ter ; 
and of the woduesse of the Almy3ti he 


21 8hal drinke. What forsothe to hyin per- 


teneth of his hous aftir hym, and if the 
noumbre of his monethis shal ‘come to 
gothe halfY? Whethir any man shal teche 
God kunnyng, that demeth he3e men? 
23 This dieth stronge and hol, riche and wel- 
24sun. His bowelis ben ful of tal3’; and the 
bones of hym ben moistid with mar3. 
25 Another forsothe dieth in the bitternesse 
96 0f his soule, withoute any richessis”. And 
nerthelater togidere in pouder thei shul 
27 Slepe, and wermes shul couere them. Cer- 
tis J haue knowe 3oure tho3tis, and joure 
23 Wicke* sentencis a3en me. 3ee seyn for- 
sothe, Wher is the hous of the prince ? 
and where the tabernaclis® of vnpitous 
2g9men? Asketh any man of the weie goeris; 
and these same thingis 3ee shul knowe 
30hym to vuderstonde. For the euele man 


u Om. 4. v And thei a, w the a. 
zwerkis e pr.m. ® wickid au. » tabernacle 4. 


w the tympan s. x and an s. 
b ledden s. © heere in 1. 


w diuyde a. 


* yharpe in here hondis 1s. 2 thei ioien rs. 
d gode thingis or /ustis 1. goodis thingis heere s. 


Thei holden tympan’, and* harpeY; and 12 

idien? at the soun of* orgun. Thei leden® 13 

in® goodis her daies; and in a point® thei 

goen doun to hellist. Whiche? men seiden 14+ “0 pee 
to God’, Go thou awei fro us; we nylen! hiriels, so that 
the kunnyng of thi weies. Who is Almisti ts pretoand her 


a 1m ? “9.  Sepulere, noon 
God, that we serue him? and what pro- “icoue 


fitith iti to vs, if we preien* him? Nethe- 1¢ eth bitwixe 
to hem. Lire 


-les for! her goodis{ ben not in her hond™, tere. c. 


‘ oye t her goodis, 
‘that is", power, the® counsel of wickid men Zc. ; temporal 
oodis, whiche 
be? fer fro me. Hou ofte schal the lan-17o;43G men 


ey se 4 Ee han, ben seid 
terne of wickid men be quenchid, and [ben 


flowing schal come on? hem, and God eebaid, tint 
e : is, power, tor 
schal departe’ the sorewis of his stronge — tho moun be 
cs r ° sh takun awey fro 
veniaunce ? hei schulen be as chaffis* bi- 18 hem bi viow 


. * lence ; hut 
for the face of the wynd; and as a deed  piictly goodis, 


sparcle, whiche' the whirlewynd scaterith | that ben in vir- 
2 tuouse men, 


abrood. God schal kepe the sorewe of the” 19 moun not be 

fadir§ to hise sones; and whanne he hath ee o 
joldun”, thanne he schal wite*. Hise i3en 20 ee 
schulen se her’ sleyng’; and he schal drynke eee 


of the stronge veniaunce of Almy3ti God. ferec. 
5 5 § of the fadir, 

For whi what perteyneth it to hym of liis a1 ct. ; in pu- 
: . hinge his 
hows? aftir hym, thou3 the noumbre of his Anes ee 


monethis be half takun awey ? Whether 22 4X0 the fadir 


ony man schal teche God kunnyng, which? — schal wites that 
hise sones ben 


demeth hem that ben hije? This ywed 23 punyschid for 
é : his synne, for 

man dieth strong and hool, riche and bles- temporal peyne 
° ° ° ° Is nt tl 

ful‘, ‘that is, myrie’. Hise entrails bem 24 i)‘ sones,” 


. } sti for the synne 
ful of fatnesse; and hise boonys ben moistid Wi es 
with merowis®. Sothelif anothir aichid & 25 Lire here. c. 
man dieth in the" bittirnesse of his soule, 
and with. onten ony! richessis. And" ne- 26 
theles thei schulen slepe togidere in dust, 
and wormes schulen hile hem. Certis Y 27 
knowe 3o0ure wickid thou3tis, and! sen- 
tensis™ ajens me. For 3e seien, Where is 2s 
the hows of the prince||? and where ben 1 prinesssthat 

° . ° 1S, JOOD 5 ane 
the tabernaclis of wickid men? Axe 3e 29 wickid men, 

ni 4 ° Beda hie dal that is, hise 
ech" of ‘the weie goeris®; and 3e schulen  sones. ‘rire 


knowe, that he vndurstondith? these same 7%“ 


x Om, AH. y ben deuyded £ pr. m. 


4 of the 1. of ans. 
€ point or sodeyzly 1s. : 


f The whiche 1. & God in here daiest. ™ woln not1. ‘it myehes. * schul preie myche tois. ! for 


thi that 1s. ™hoondiss. Mort. that is, in her s. 


onow the 1. Pbeits. uponis. tT departe with 


hemis. &chaff1. tthats. awickids. 3oldun fo him veniaunce 1s. * wite if 1. wite or kuowe 
the Lords. Ythe1s. 2 sleyng of hem. sleyng of his sonyss.  @ houshold 1. hous or meyuce left s. 
> that 1. © blesful fo fhe world 1s. 4 Om.1s. @ merowe1. fAndis. §Om.1. bOm.1s. i Om. is. 


k Om. s. ‘and eke joure 1. and joure s. 
P knowith 1s, 


™ sentence Ss. 


o Om. 1. this s. © ech weygocr 1s. 


704 


shal be kept ‘in to® the dai of perdicioun, 
and to the dai of wodnesse he shal be 
31 bro3t. Who shal vndernyme beforn hym 
his weyes ? and what he dide, who shal 
s23elde to hym? He shal be bro3t to the 
sepuleris ; and in the hipil of deade men 
33shal wake. He was sweete to the greet 
of helle flod; and after hym alle men he 
34 dro3, and beforn hym vnnonmbrable. Hou 
thanne coumforte 3ee me in vein, whan 
3oure answeris ben shewid to repugne® 
‘to the® trenthe ? 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Answerende forsothe Elifath Temanites 
2seide, Whether to God mai a man ben 
comparisound, also whan he shal be of 
3perfit kunnyng 2? What profitith to 
God, if thou shul be ri3twis? or what to 
hym bringist thou, if thi lif were vnde- 
4fonlid 2? Whether dredende he shal vn- 
dernyme thee, and come with thee in to 
sdom, and not for thi mychef malice, and 
Gthi wickidnessis vnendid ? Forsothe thou 
hast take awei the wed of thi brethern 
with oute cause; and nakid men thou 
zhast spoilid fro clothis. Water to the 
weri thou 3eue not; and to the hungri 
sthou withdrowe bred. In the strengthe 
of thin arm thou weldedestS the erthe; 
yand most my3ti thou heelde it. Widewis 
thou laftist voide; and the brawnes of 
10 moderles childer thou to-brosidist. Ther- 
fore thou art enuyround with granes; 
i,and feerli drede! disturbide* thee. Thou 
wendest thee not to seen dercnessis; and 
thur3 bire of rennynge watris not to 
i2ben opressid. Whether thenkest thon, 
that God be hejere than heuene, and 
is ouer the cop of sterres he be he3ed? And 
thou seist, What forsothe the Lord knew3? 
i4and, As bi derenesse he demeth'? A cloude 


_ to au. 4 repugnynge 4. repreuynge 1. 
' strengthe E pr. m. 


9 that is, thats. Ffandheis. sOm. 1s. 
w and he 1s. x men 3iden s. y the s. 
* withouten 1 ef s pass. 4 shal he s. 
fallen s. © Certists. i and thou 1s. 


thous. "art xow1s. POm.cs, 4 heuenes s. 


JOB. 


e of 
k disturblith 4. distourbith 1. 


t walke 1s. 

2 contrarie the 1s. 
€ schal he 1s, 
k heeld s. 


XXI. 34.——XXII. 14. 


thingis, that? an yuel man schal be kept 5+ swetes that 
in to the dai of perdicioun, and* schal be ewe 


led to the dai of woodnesse. Who schal 31 vsrable to 
wickid men, 


reprene hise weies bifor hym? and who Lice 
schal 3elde to hym tho thingis, whiche he hime ae es 


aftir his deth 
hath doon? He schal be led to the’ sepul-32 croc staat of 
eris; and he schal waket in the heep of nea 
deed men. He was swetet to the ‘stoonys, 33 pellet ae 
. . noumorutie 
ether filthis, of helle"; and drawith ech tiforhim; that 
; is, bifor hi 
man aftir hym, and vnnoumbrable men*™ géeh ful many 
‘ee i men hadden 
bifor him. Hon therfor coumforten Ze Me 34 owns this is 
in veyn, sithen joure answeris ben schewid 


seid to encreess- 

ing of his peyne 
toY ‘repugne to’ treuthe ? for as the Ulis 
of ech man in 
blis is en- 


creessid bi the 


CAP. XXII. 
felouschipe of 
Forsothe* Eliphat Themanytes answer-1 ;tiere that ben 
. . ? 
ide, and seide», Whether a man, 3he, whanne 2 he ne - 
: 5 ech dampn 
he is of perfit kunnyng, mai be compa-_ manisen- 

: ways id bi th 
risound to God? What profitith it to God,3 giouschipe of 
. . ) Ch othere dampned 
if thou art inst: ethir what schalt thou oeuging 
3yue to hym, if thi lijf is without? wem ? whaowe ea 

i ‘antour In 
Whether he schal drede, and schal® re-4 syaie Lire 
° ° were. C. 
preue thee, and schal* come with thee in + naked, aon 
0 . that is, liti] 
to doom, and not for thi ful myche malice,5 Qonid Lire 
and thif wickidnessis with out noumbre, rae 
‘these peynes bifelden’ iustli to thee ? For" 6 breed, etc. ; for 
see whi to 3yue not 
thou hast take awei with out cause the in sich a caas, 
° ° 4 ’ is to withdrawe; 
wed of thi britheren; and! hast spuylid ’ 


wherfor Austyn 
; . : seith, Feede 
nakid{ men of clothis. Thou 3auest not? thon hint tal 
watir to the feynt man; and thon with-  dieth for hun- 
gur, whom if 


In thon hast not 
fed, thou hast 
slayn. Lire 


drowist breed § fro the hungri man. 
the strengthe of thin arm thou haddist 
the lond in possessioun; and thou moost orca 


my3ti heldist* it. Thou leftist widewiso ‘tis, ofgrete 
‘ ; E tribulaciouns. 
voide!; and™ al to-brakist the schuldris of Lire here 

‘i 6 were than 
fadirles children. Therfor thou art™ cum-10 hevene; sum 


ae : . ia 

passid with snaris; and sodeyn drede dis- that God know- 
‘bh idi 1] ith certeynl 

turblith thee. And thou gessidist, that!) *. i" ee 


thou schuldist not se derknessis ; and that as va 

x z staunces an 
thou schuldist not be oppressid with the? vacorrup és 
fersnesse of watris|| flowyng. Whether 12 33 lowere anb- 
thou thenkist, that God is hizere than he- “v8 cr 


rupcioun, no 
uene’{[, and is™ enhaunsid aboue the coppe but in general. 


This errour is 
azenus hooly 
scripture and 
4. of the H. ‘fmychile £. 8 weeldist 4 sec. m. 


! schewith £ pr. m. 


u filthi erthe, and to the stones of helle 1s. 
a Thanne 1s. b seide to Job s. 

fOm.c. 8 this hath falle 1. these peynes haue 
1 voide or vnholpen 1. voide withouten helps. ™ and 


r that he is s. 


XXIL. 15-—30. 


his hidelis, ne oure thingus he beholdeth, 
and aboute the vttermostis of heuene he 
goth. Whether the sti of worldis thou 
coueitist to kepe, the whiche wicke™ men 
16treden ? The whiche ben rerid" befor 
ther time, and flod turnede vp so doun 
17the foundement of hem. The whiche 
seiden to God, Go awei fro vs; and as the 
Almy3ti mi3te do no thing, thei eymeden 
ishym, whan he hadde fulfild ther housis 
with goodis; whos sentence ferr be fro 
wme. Riz3twis men shul seen, and be 
glad; and the innocent shal scorne them. 
20 Whether is nott hewe doun the rering vp 
of hem, and fyr shall deuoure ther relikis ? 
21 Assente thanne to hym, and haue pes; 
and bi these thingus thou shalt han best 
2efrutis. Tac of his mouth the lawe, and 
23put his woordis in thin herte. If thon 
shul be turned a3een to the Almy3ti, thou 
shalt be bild vp; and aferr thou shalt make 
24the wickidnesse fro thi tabernacle. He 
shal 3iue for the erthe flint, and for the 
a5flint goldene stremes. And the Almy3ti 
shal ben ajen thin enemys; and seluer 
s¢shal ben hepid to thee. Thanne vp on 
the Almy3ti delicis thou shalt flowen; 
and thou shalt reren vp to God thi face. 
27 Thou shalt prejen hym, and he shal here 
thee; and thi vouwis thou shalt 3elde. 
28 Thou shalt beholden a thing, and it shal 
come to thee; and in thi weies 1li3t shal 
2yshyne. He forsothe that shal be mekid, 
shal ben in glorie; and he that bowith 
30his e3en, shal be saued. ‘The innocent 
shal be saued ; forsothe he shal be saued 
bi the clennesse of hyse hondys. 


m wickid an. 


8 3itf thou I. 
z The whiche 1. 


tisinc. “ cumpassith 18. 
amizts. > fulfillid 1s. 

f remenauntis 1s. & Therfor, Job 1s. 
mfors. ‘reiseupis. ° And thou ts. 

s Certisis. ¢t innocent man 1. 


VOL. II. 


Ww pathis s. 
€ the whiche 1. 
h The Lord 1s. 


P vowis fo him 1. vois fo him s. 


JOB. 705 


of sterris? And thou seist, What sotheli 13 filosofie, and for 
knowith God ? and, He demeth as bi derk- the. joc” 
nesse. A cloude ist his hidyng place, and 14 He del 
he biholdith not oure thingis, and he ee ine oe 
‘goith aboute" the herris of heuene. Whe- 15 punyschid for 
ther thou coueitist to kepe the path” of eRe 
worldis +, which* wickid men han ofte vee 
go? WhicheY weren takun awei biforiet 722 & 
her tyme, and the flood{ distriede the 


worldis ; that 
is, the liyf of 
foundement of hem. 


ie ‘ men lyuynge 
Whiche? seiden to 17 worldiyly and 


, . dissolutly. 
God, Go thon awei fro vs; and as if Lire here.c. 
. . . t the flood, etr.; 
Almy3ti God may* do no thing, thei that if the 


gessiden hym, whanne he hadde fillid® 1s frimese of ui 
her housis with goodis; the sentence of 
hem. founde- 
Iust men 19 ment; that is, 
schulen se, and schulen be glad; and an richessis, in 
innocent man schal scorne hem*. Whether 20 Wiche thei 
here. ¢. 
fier schal denoure the relifs‘ of hem? Ther- 21 
for assente thou to God, and haue thou 
haue best fruytis. Take thou the lawe of22 
his mouth, and sette thou hise wordis in 
my3ti God, thou schalt be bildid; and thou 
schalt make wickidnesse fer fro thi taber- 
s he; that is, 
and goldun strondis for a flynt. And Al-25 eae ieee 
thou haddist 
and silner schal be gaderid togidere tom _ bifore, asa 
thee. Thanne on Almy3ti God thou schalt 26 than symple 
is betere than a 
thi face to God. Thou? schalt preye hym, 27 oe ve 
and he schal here thee; and thou schalt 
thing, and it schal come to thee; and ly3t 
schal schyne in’ thi weies. For’ he that is 29 
bowith doun hise izen, schal be saued. An 30 
innocent' schal be saued; sotheli he schal 


comynge on 
whiche® men be fer fro me. 
power and 
‘ : tristiden. Lire 
the reisyng® of hem is not kit doun, and 
pees; and bi these thingis thou schalt 
thin herte. If thou turnest aj3en to Al-23 
nacle. He" schali 3ynek a! flynt for erthef, 24 t «Aynt for 
my3ti God schal be a3ens thin enemyes; [yrsy pan 
flynt is betere 
é an ‘ erthe, and gold 
flowe with delicis; and thou schalt reise” : 
3elde thi vowis?. Thou schalt deme’ a2s 
mekid, schal be in glorie; and he that 
be saued in the clennesse of hise hondis. 


N grered AEFH. 


y The whiche men 15. 
© up reisyng 1s. 
1Om. 1. thes. 
¥ to is. 


x the whiche 1. 
4 wickid men 1s. 
ischal thanne 1s.  * 3yue thee 1. 
4 deme or ave Is. 


4x 


706 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 Answerende forsothe Job seide, Now 
also in bitternesse is my woord, and the 
hond of my veniaunce is agreggid vp on 
smy weiling. Who to me 3eue°, that I 

knowe, and finde hym, and come vnto 
4the seet of hym? I shal setten beforn 
hym dom, and my mouth I shal fille with 
sblamyngis; that I wite the woordis, that 
-he answerth to me, and vnderstonde what 
6he speke to me. I wil not with myche 
strengthe he striue with me, ne with 
the peis of his mykilnesse he bere me 
7doun. He purpose euenenesse ajern me, 
sand myn dom come to victorie. If to 
the est I shal go, he apereth not; if to 
the west, I shal not vnderstonde hym; 
9if to the lift, what shal I do? I shal not 
otake hym; if I turne me to the ri3t, I 
10shal not seen hym. He forsothe wot my 
weie, and shal proue me as gold, that 

i thur3 the fyr passeth. My foot folewide 
his steppis; his weie I kepte, and I 
1: bowide not doun fro it. Fro the hestis 

of his lippis I wente not awei; and in 
my bosum I hidde the woordis of his 
i;mouth. He forsothe is alone, and no 
man mai turne awey his tho3tis; and his 
soule what thing euere it wolde?, that it 
iidide’. Whan it shal fulfille in me his 
wil, and othere manye lic thingus ben 
isredi to hym. And therfore fro the face 
of hym I am disturbid’, and beholdende 
ishym with drede I am bisy. God tein- 
prede myn herte, and the Almy3ti dis- 

17 turbideSs me. Forsothe I pershide not for 

the above comende dercnessis; and dusk- 
nesset couerede my face. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Fro the Almy3ti ben not hid the times; 
thei forsothe that knewen hym, vnknow- 
zen his da3is. Othere men translateden 
termes, breeken atwynne the flockis, 


© 3yueth 4. 


P wile £ pr. m. 
derknessis H. 


4 doth z pr. m. 


u Andis. “ynto1. Xblamynges. y wil not 1 
Cand ifis. 4 the fier1. © heestis1s. f Certis rs. 
k Om.is. 1 han take rs. 


JOB. 


XXIV, t-——XXIV. 2. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Sotheli" Joob answeride, and seide, Now} 
also ity word is in bitternesse, and the 
hond* of my wounde is agreggid on my 
weilyng. Who 3yueth to me, that Y knowe, 3 
and fynde hym, and come ‘til to” his trone? 
Y schal sette doom bifor hym, and Y schal4 
fille my mouth with blamyngis*} ; that Ys 
kunne the wordis, whiche he schal answere 
to me, and that Y vnderstonde, what’ he 
schal speke tome. Y nyleY, that he stryue6 
with me bi greet strengthe, nether? op- 
presse me with the heuynesse of his greet- 
nesse. Sette he forth equite ajens me, and7 
my doom come* perfitli to victorie. If Y8 
go to the eest, God apperith not’; if Y go 
to the west, Y schal not vndurstonde hym ; 
if Y go to the left side, what schal Y do?9 
Y schal not take hym; if¢ Y turne ine to 
the ri3t side, Y schal not se hym. 
knowith ny weie, and he schal preue me 
as gold{, that passith thorou3 fier®. 
foot suede hise steppis; Y kepte his weie, 


and Y bowide not awey fro it. Y 3ede not 12 hoe to nga 


awei fro the conaundementis® of hise lippis; 
and Y hidde in my bosum the wordis of 


his mouth. For’ he is aloone, and no man 13 8chewid to 


may turne awei hise thou3tis; and what 
euer thing he wolde, his wille§ dide this 


thing. Whanne he hath fillid his wille in14 


me, also many othere lijk thingis ben redi 


to hym.. And therfor Y am disturblid of 15 as here. ©. 


his face, and Y biholdynge hym am an- 
guyschid for drede. 
neische myn herte, and Almy3ti God hath 


disturblid me. For Y perischide not|| for 177% ee. 3 that 


derknessis neijynge"; nethir myist hilide 
my face. 


CAP xT e 


Tymes ben not hid fro Almy3ti God ;1 
sotheli thei that knowen hym, knowen not 
hise daies. 
the termes of neiz3boris eritage*, thei token! 


r disturblid 4. disturblide 4. * dusknessis a. 


b not there 18. 
i han turned Is. 


Z nether that he 1s. 2 come its. 
8 Certisis. & neizynge to me 1s. 


But he 10 coun jaf not 


My) 


God hath maad 16 


Othere men turneden! oner 2 


* the hond, 
etc. ; that is, 
the greuous- 
nesse of beting. 
Lire here. c. 
+ dlamyngis ; 
in Ebreu it is, 
with argu- 
mentis, as a 















disciple makith 
ofte argumentis 
bifor the mais- 
ter, not to striyf, 
hut to knowing 
of truthe, that 
he desirith to 
here of the 
maister ; thus 
wolde Joob do 
with God. 

Lire here. c. 


t gold; the 
fiyrthat preueth 
gold, 3yueth 
not to it the 
truthe of gold, 
but declarith 

it biforbeynge; 
therfor Joob 
seith, that the 
fier of tribula- 


ynnocence to 
him, but de- 
claride it bi 
his pacience ; 
and so God 
reuede him, 


his innocence 
ynknowun to 
him, but that 
it schulde be 


othere men; as 
also he asayede 
Abraham in 
xxii. c°. of 
Genesis, that 
his obedience 
were knowun 
to othere men. 


is wille, 
ete. ; in tur- 
mentinge me 
as his creature. 
Lire here. c. 
\| ¥ perischid 


is, Y suffride 
not turmentis 
for op 

synnes, nether 
for priuy 
synnes. Lire 
here. C. 

q hise daies; 
that is, com- 
prehenden not 
the maner of 
his euerlast- 
ingenesse. Lire 
here. ¢. 





XXIV. 3—19. 


sand fedden hem. Thei dryuen awei the 
asse" of moderles childer, and token 
awei for a wed the oxe of the widewe. 
4Thei turneden vp so doun the weie of 
pore men, and opresseden togidere the 
5debonere men of erthe’. Othere men as 
assis in desert gon out to ther were; and 
wakende at the prey, greithe bred to fre 
6childer. The feld not thers thei de- 
strojen, and his vine, whom bi violence 
thei opresseden, thei kutte the grapis. 
7 Nakid thei leue men, takende awei clothis, 
sto whom is no koueryng in cold; whoin 
wederes of hillis moisten, and not hanende 
9 Wrielys” clippe stones. Fors thei diden 
robbende moderles childer; and the comun 
100f pore men thei spoileden. To the 
nakide, and to the goende withoute cloth- 
ing, and to the hungri thei token awei 
ueris. Among the hipilis of hem thei 
resteden in mydday, the whiche thresten, 
i2the pressoures tredid. They maden men 
of citees to weilen, and the liues of 
woundid men shul crien; and God suf- 
13freth not vnuengid to gon awey. Thei 
weren rebel to li3t ; thei knewen not his 
weies, ne thei be turned ajeen bi his 
1sties. Erli first riseth* the mansleere, 
and he sleth the nedy, and tlie pore; bi 
the ny3t forsothe he shal ben as a thef. 
15 The e3e of the auoutrer waiteth derk- 
nesse, seiende, The e3e shal not see me; 
isand he shal coneren his chere. hei 
breeken thur3 housis in dercnesses, as in 
the dai thei hadde seid togidere to them- 
17 self; and thei vnknewe li3t. If feerli apere 
the morutid, thei deme the shadewe of 
deth ; and so in derenessis thei gon as in 
18]i3t. Liz3t he is vp on the face of the 
water ; cursid be his part in the erthe, ne 
19 go he bi the weie of vines. To* ful myche 
hete he shal passen fro the watris of 


JOB. 


707 


awei™ flockis", and fedden tho® Theis 
driueden? awei the asse of fadirlesse chil- 

dren, and‘ token awei the cow of a widewe 

for a wed. Thei distrieden the weie of pore 4 

men, and thei oppressiden togidere the 

mylde men of erthe. Othere men ass 

wielde assis in deseert goon out to her 

werk; and thei waken to prey, and bifor 

maken’ redy breed to her children. Theié 

kitten doun a feeldt not hern’, and thei 

gaderen grapis of his vyner, whom thei ec. ; that is, 
han oppressid bi violence. Thei leeuen7 Soe are 
men nakid, and taken awei thet clothis, to “fetes 
whiche" men is™ noon* hiling in coold; “i /ere © 
whicheY men the? reynes* of munteyuss 

weeten, and thei han noon” hilyng, and‘ 

biclippen® stoonyst. Thei diden violence, 9 Ps 
and® robbiden fadirles and modirles chil- puttinge hem 
dren; and thei spuyliden, ‘ether robbiden’, ne ee 
the comynte of pore men. Thei token 10%” © 
awey eeris of corn fro nakid men, and 

goynge with out cloth, and fro hungry 

men. Thei weren hid in myddai among 

the heepis of tho men, that thirsten, 

whanne the presses’ ben trodun. Thei 2 

maden men of citees to weile, and the 

soulis of woundid men schulen erye; and 

God suffrith it! not to* go awei vnpun- 

yschid. .Thei weren rebel to 1i3t; theiis 
knewen not the weyes therof, nether thei 

turneden ajen bi the pathis therof. At. 
inansleere risith ful eerli, and sleeth a 

nedi man’, and a pore man; sotheli™ bi 

ny3t he schal be as a ny3t theef. The ije1s 

of avouter kepith derknesse, and" seith, 

An y3e schal not se me; and he schal 

hile his face. TTheif mynen housis in 16g They; thacis, 
derknessis, as thei seiden togidere to hem “your an 
silf in the dai; and thei knewen not li3t.. “7° © 
If the morewtid apperith sudeynli, thei 17 

demen® the schadewe of deth; and so thei 

goon in derknessis as in list. He? is vn-18 


t thei killen 
doun a feeld, 


Uassis au. ‘the erthe aerm. W wriels or coueryngis a. *ariscth arrm.  Y dai thef & pr. m. 
2 At E pr. m. 

m™Om.s. “her flockists, hem self1s. Phan drijue 1s. Gand thei zs. * thei maken ts. 
Sheress. therrs, 'the whichet. Wtherist. *nors. Y¥thewhicher. 2Om.1.  4reyns, 
bnors. Cand thei 1s. 4 biclippidens. ¢andthei1. fOm.1Ls. & thilke rt. 4 presses of grapis 1s. 
iOm.is. that crytois. TOm.s. M™andis. ®andhers. °demen ifts. P? He this 1. He that 


thus doth s. 


4x2 


708 JOB. XXIV. 20—XXVI. 2. 


snowis, and vnto helle the synne of hym. _ stableref than the face of the! water ; his 
20 THis mercy be forzeten; his swetnesse a part in erthe be eursid’, and go he not bi 
werm; be he not in recording, but be to- the weie of vyneris. Passe he to® ful greet 
o1 trede as a tree ynfructuous. Forsothe he heete fro the watris of snowis, and the 
fedde the barein, that® bar not child, and = synne of hymt ‘til to" hellis. Merci forjete 
osto the widewe he dide not wel. Het hym; his swetnesse be a worm; be he 
: dro3 doun the stronge men in ther not in* mynde, but be he al to-brokun 
strengthe; and whan he shulde stonde, as ‘a tre vnfruytful®. For he fedde the 
23 he shall not trowe to hislif. God tohym — bareyn], and hir that childith not, and he 
a place of penannce 3af, and he mysuseth —dide not wel to the widewe. He drow 
it in to pride; forsothe the esen of hym doun stronge men in his strengthe; and 
2yben in his weies. hei ben rerid at a whanne he stondith iz ‘greet stateY, he 
litil, and thei shul not stonde stile; and — schal not bileue to his lijf. God 3af to hym 
thei shul be mekid as alle thinges, and _ place* of penaunce, and he mysusith that 
be do awey; and as the oouermostis of | in to pride; for* the izen of God ben? 
as corneris thei shul ben to-broosid. That if in the weies of that man. Theit ben reisid 
it is not so, who may me vndernyme to at* a Jitil®, and thei schulen not stonde; 


han lowen, and to putte beforn God my and thei schulen be maad low as alle’ 


woordys ? thingis, and thei schulen be takun awei; 
and as the hy3nessis$ of eeris of corn thei 


schulen be al to-brokun. That if it is not 25 


so§, who may repreue|| me, that Y liede, 
and putte> my! wordis bifor* God ? 


CAP. XXV. CAP. 


1 Answerende forsothe Baldac Suytes Forsothe! Baldach Suytes answeride, and 


t+ he is unsta- 
blere, etc. ; that 
is, the avouter 
19 sueth the fers- 
nesse of his 
lust, as the 
hizere part of 
a9 the water sueth 
the stiring of 
ech wind. Lire 
here. c. 
$ the bareyn ; 
2} that is, he 
“" wastide hise 
goodis in 
veyn and vn- 
99 fruytful werkis. 
Lire here. c. 
§ if itis not so, 
as Y seide, 
that is, that iny 
3 turment passith 
my synnes, and 
that Goddis 
puruyaunce 
strecchith forth 
it silf to alle 
24 thingis, and 
dilayith sum 
. tyme the pun- 
ysching of 
synnes in pre- 
sent tyme, and 
reserueth hem 
to the peyne of 
helle, bi the 
ordre of bis 
wisdom. and 
putte my wordis 
bi for God; as 
brou3t forth 
with out reue- 
rence,ether with 
blasfemye; as if 
he seie, Noon 


) of sou may do 


‘ . . - . ‘ this. Lire here. 
2seide, Power and fere anent hym is, that — seide™, Power and drede is anentis hym,2 = 


maketh acord in ther heze put thingus. that 7s, God, that” makith acordyng in 


|| who may re- 
preue, etc. ; 


3 Whether is ther noumbre of the kny3tis _ hise hize thingis. Whether® noumbre is? of 3 Eliphat con- 


of hym? and vp on whom shyneth not —hise kny3tis ? and on4 whom schyneth 
4the list of hym? Whether maia man be not his h3t 2? Whether a man compari- 
iustified comparisoun to God, or seme sound to God mai be iustified, ether” 
selene born of a womman? Lo! alsothe borun of a womman mai appere cleene ? 


4 


cludide not 
ajenus Joob, for 
Joob affermede 
not him silf 
iust bial maner, 
nether in com- 
parisoun to 
God, but onely 


mone shineth not, and the sterris ben not Lo! also the moone{[ schyneth not, and 5 that he hadde 
° . ° ° ° ° . , Hot so te 
selene in the sijte of hym; myche more _ sterris ben not cleene in ‘his si3t*; hous sate 


a man stink’, and the sone of a man a miche more at man® rot, and the sone 
werm. of a® man* a worm, 7s vncleene ‘and vile, 
if heY is* comparisound® to God. 


CAP. XXVI. CAP. AXA 


Answerende forsothe Job seide, Whos Forsothe> Joob answeride, and _ seide, 


“helpere art thou ? whether feble, and Whos helpere art thou? whether ‘of the2_ his pacience; 


wand that au. welthe 4. ¢Andu. ‘is stynke 4. 


4Om.1s.  ‘acursidis. $Stoar thym passer. hym beifs. Yuntor. intos. Win hooly 1s. 
x an unfruytful tre 1s. Yprosperitee 1s, 7heereaplaceis. ® sothly is. » ben bikoldinge s. © Theithat 
ben suich mens. Cup atis. © litil while 1. f alle vile 1s. & hiznesse 1s. © haue putt forth 1. haue put s. 
i folily my 1s. * ajens my s. } Then is. ™ seide to Jobs. "which s. © Wher ther be 1. Wher ther iss. 
POm. 1s. Guponis. Tether wher a mani. ethera mans. 8 the siz3t of God 1s. tOm.1. 4 man that 
is 1s. WOm, A see.m. * man that iss. yOm.1. 2Om. 1s. 2 in comparisoun1. » Sothely 1s. 


synnes, hou 
grete turment 
Was 30uun to 
him of God ; 
but rathere 
that he schulde 
be rewardid of 
God by the 
ordre of his 
wisdom in tyme 
1 to comynge, 
for the merit of 


and so Baldath 
seide soth to 





Po ie XVIT. 6. 


sustenest the arm of hym, that is not 
astrong? To whoin hast thou 3iue coun- 
seil? Peranenture to hym that hath no 
wisdam ; aud myche prudence thou hast 
ashewid. Or whom woldest thou techien ? 
whether not hym, that made space of° 
5 brething ? Lo! ieauntis weilen vnder wa- 
6tris, and that duellen with hem. Nakid 
is helle beforn hym, and no coueryng is 
7to perdicioun. He that streccheth out the 
north vp on vein, and hangeth vp the 
serthe vp on no3t. That! bindeth watris 
in his cloudis, that thei breke not out 
9togidere dounward. That holdeth the 
chere of his sete, and streccheth out vp 
loon it his cloude. The terme he enuy- 
rounde with watris, vn to the time that 
ilben fynysht Ji3t and derenessis. The 
pileris of heuene togidere quaken, and® 
izdreden at his bek. In the strengthe of 
hym feerli ses ben gedered, and the pru- 
13dence of hym smot the proude man. His 
spirit ournede heuenes, and his hond li3tli 
ledende out, the eche side krokende ecd- 
lidere is led ont. Lo! a part ben seid of 
his weies ; and whan vnnethe a litil drope 
of his woord wee han herd, who slial 
moun the thunder of his gretnesse be- 
holde ? 


CAP. XXVIL 


1 Also Job addede, takende his parable, 
2and seith, God lineth, that toc awei my 
dom, and the Almy3ti, that to bitternesse 
3bro3te my lif. For whil ther leueth breth 
in me, and the spirit of God in my nose 
4therlis, my lippis shul not speke wickid- 
esse, ne my tunge shal bethenke lesing. 
5Ferr be fro me, that I deme 3o0u to be 
rijtwise; to the time I faile, I shal not 
6gon awei fro myn innocence. My iusti- 
fiyng, that I haue begunne to holde, I shal 
not forsake; ne forsothe myn herte re- 


& to A. 


© thou be [art s] the helpere of a feble man 1s. 
& thei alsors, » The which 1. 14 upon ts. 
he 1s. P ther upon is. 4 terme or an ende 1. 
hath is. Wledynge himis. * Om. R. 
» doom or dampnacioun s. e jijf rs. 


& faile ijf'1s.  iustefiengis of the Lord s. 


JOB. 


f And am. 


4 and whether thou s. 
k and he 1s. 
r derknesse 1. 
y¥ the weies of the Lord 18. 
d bitternesse of sorcwe s. 
i that 1. 


709 


feble®, and4 susteyneste the® arm of hym, 
whichf is not strong? To whom hast thous 
joue counsel? In hap to hym that hath 
not wisdom: and thou hast schewid ful 
myche prudence. Ether whom woldist4 
thou teche? whether not hym, that made 
brething? Lo! giauntis* weilen vnders 
watris, and thei$ that dwellen with hem. 
Helle is nakid bifor hym, and noon hilyng 6 
is to perdicioun. Which" God stretchith7 
forth the north oni voide thing, and* hang- 
ith the erthe on! nou3t. ‘Which God™3 
byndith watris in her cloudis, that tho 
breke not out togidere dounward. ‘Whych 9 
God" holdith the cheer of his seete, and? 
spredith abrood theron? his cloude. 
hath cumpassid a terme’ to watris, til that 


He 10 


hise owne 
boost, and not 
to the purpos 
a3enus Joob. 
Lire here. c. 
¥ Lo! also the 
moone, ete. ; 
ech creature 
comparisound 
to God is derk- 
nesse and vn- 
clene. Lire 
here. c. 

* Lo! giauntis, 
etc. ; that weren 
bifor the flood 
of Noe, and 
weren dreynt 
thanne in wa- 
tris, weilen now 
in the peynes 
of helle. Lire 
here. c. 


li3t and derknessis"™ be endid. The pilerst} 11 + Me pileris, 


of heuene tremblen, and*’ dreden at his 


wille. In the strengthe of hym the sees 12 bth 


weren gaderid togidere sudeynly, and his 
prudence smoot the proudet. 
ournede heuenes, and the crokid serpent 
was led out bi his hond, ledynge out as 
a* mydwijf ledith out a child. 
thingis ben seid in partie of ‘hise weyes’; 
and whanne we han herd vnnethis a litil 
drope of his word, who may se the thun- 
dur of his greetnesse ? 


CAP. XXVII. 


Also Joob addide’, takynge his parable, 1 
and* seide, God lyueth, that hath take2 
aweyt my doom, and Almy3ti God, that 
hath brou3t my soule® to bitternesse?. For3 
as long as breeth is in me, and the spirit 
of God is® in my nose thirlis, my lippis4 
schulen not speke wickidnesse, nether my 
tunge schal thenke a leesyng. Fer be its 
fro me, that Y deme 3on just’; til Y faile%§, 
Y schal not go awei fro myn innocence. 
Y schal not forsake my iustifiyng®, which!é 
Y bigan to holde; for myn herte repreueth 


& Om. au. 


€ thou the 1. f that is. 
luponis, ™ Audheis. ® Hes. and 
sand thei 1s. ' proud princes. ¥ spirit 

z addide to 1s. a and he ts. 
eOm.1s.  f iust counceylours s. 


His spiryt™13 


Lo! these 14 


ete.; that is, 
aungels that 
nystren 

er rulen the 
styringis of 
heuene, doen 
reuerence to 
God. Lire 
here. C. 


+ tate acei, 
etc.; bithe 
errour of his 
frendis, seiynge 
that peynes In 
this liyf ben 
3ouun onely for 
synnes passid. 
Lire here. . 


§ til 1” faile ; 
that is, as longe 
as Y lyue. 

Lire here. c. 


710 


7preuede me in al my lif. As ynpitous 
myn enemye; myn aduersarie as wicke". 
8 What is forsothe the hope of an ipocrite, 
if auerously he take, and God deliuere 
anot his soule? Whether God shal here 
the cri of hym, whan shal come vp on 
iohym angnysh ? or shal moun in the Al- 
my3ti delite, and inwardly clepe God in 
i1alle tyme? I shal teche 30u bi the hond 
of God, what thingus the Almy3ti hath ; 
wand I shal not hide. Lo! alle 3ee han 
knowe, and what withonte cause veyne! 
isthingis 3ee speken? This is the part of 
the vnpitous man anent God, and the 
eritage of the violent* men!, that of the 
11 Aliny3ti thei shul take. If his sones be 
multeplied, thei shul be in swerd; and 
his sones sones shul not be fulfild with 
1s bred. That shul be laft of hym, shul be 
biried in deth; and his widewis shu] not 
16 wepe. If he shul bere togidere as erthe 
17siluer, and as clei make redi clothis ; he 
greithede forsothe, but the rijtwise shal 
be clad™ with them, and the innocent 
isshall deuyde the siluer. He bilde vp his 
hous as a mow3he, and as a kepere he 
19 made® an hilet. The riche man, whan he 
shal slepe, no thing with hym shal bern ; 
he shal opene his e3en, and no thing he 
20shal finde. Mysese shal cacchen hym as 
water; in the ny3t shal opresse hym tem- 
2tpest. Brennende wind shal take hym, 
and don awei; and as a whirlewind shal 
22raueshen hym fro his place. He shal 
senden out vp on hym, and not sparen; 
23fro his hond fleende he shal flee. He 
shal streyne vp on hym his hondis, and 
whistlen vypon hym, beholdende his place. 


h wickid 4. i and veyn 4. ‘the violent aera. } thingis B prom, man uv. ™ clothid agrHy. “ make a. 


K not heercof's. upon is, 
© wherto thanne 1. what than s. 
t Om. plures. killed s. 4% with is. 


m hide hem 1s. 
P or 1s. 
w her 1s. 


@thos. bhems. ¢gaderes. 4dandifheis. ¢ dyuerseclothis 1s. f made these thingiss. & tho 
thingis 1. } the wickid mans. ian heerd1.  kepere of beestiss. he hathis. ™itshal1. ™do 
hym A pr.m.is. ©The Lordis. Pupont. Gandheis. spare him. 8 enforse him to fle fro the 
hoond of the Lordis. tButhes. uponis, W upon is. * hym iz scorn 1. hym bi scorn s. 


he is. Zhis desert 1s. 


JOB. ‘ 


2 knowen, that is, owen fo knowe B. knowen discrescioun s. 
q And if 1. And s. 
x And thei Is. 


XXVIII. 7—23. 
me* not* in al my lijf As my wickid7 * myn herte 
O68 oe eueth me ; 
enemy** doth ; myn aduersarie is as wickid.  9¢'¥ helde 
For what'is the hope of an ypocrite, if hes ee 
i ili +] here. C. 
rauyschith gredili, and God delyuerith not *¢ i 
his soule? Whether God schal here theg9 enemy; Joobcle- 
: pith hise frendis 
cry of hym, whanne angwischf schal come _ hise enemyes, 

1 . *. in as myche as 
on’ hym ? ether whether he may delite in 10 yey ben con- 
Almy3ti God, and inwardli clepe God in al tie to him 

ie in the truthe 
tyme? Y schal teche 3ou bi the hond of 11 of liyf, of Sel 

x . 4 of teching, an 
God, what thingis Almy3ti God hath ; and of vertues. 

: Lire here. c. 
¥ schal not hide. Lo! alle 3e knowen", 124 trier God 
and what® speken 3e veyn thingis with a — 

- > 
out cause? This is the part of a wickid pion! oa 

A . gwviscn oO 

man anentis God, and the eritage of vio-  deth; as if he 
° -  seie, Nay. This 

lent men, ether? rauenours, whiche thei is seid ayenus 
schulen take of Almy3ti God. If4 hise? 4 on cll 

children’ ben multiplied, thei schulen be  s¥nmes: and 
: ; thenken in the 

slaynt in” swerd; and hise* sones sones  ende to crie to 


P : i God bi pe- 
schulen not be fillid with breed{. Thei*, 15 naunce, but 
: theyb ed 
that ben residueY of hym?, schulen be of this hone 
os : . z mh <eot : for they re- 
biried in perischyng ; and the* widewis of penice aie 


hym? schulen not wepe. If he gaderith® 16 thanne, bi 
gies 5 k . at Anstyn 

togidere siluer as erthe, and’ makith redi _ seith,a synnere 

clothis® as cley; sotheli he made® redi, 17 this peyne, that 


is smytun bi 
* “7 e whanne he 
but a iust man schal be clothid in thos, dicth, he forgete 
and an innocent man schal departe the him silfs which 
siluer. As a mou3te he" hath bildid his 1 lynede, forsat 
ee this is 
: or the drede 
dewyng place. A riche man, whanne he 19 of peyne, and 
schal die, schal bere no thing§ with hyin; ing of sya 
he schal opene hise iz3en, and he schal Mir detite; in 
blis to comynge. 
in al tyme; 
take hym; and tempeste schal oppresse if he seic, aa 
hym in the ny3t. Brennynge wynd schal 21274 thisis seide 
synneris, that 
‘ x maken hem silf 
whirlewynd it schal rauysche Aym fro _ sikur of blis to 
his place. He® schal sende out turmentis 22 seyen,Goamade 
on? hym, and‘ schal not spare’; he fleynge fennt3 
schal ‘fle fro his hond’||. Het schal streyne 23 9 be saved; for 
3 . i 4 this is not soth, 
hise hondis on" him, and he schal hisse 70 but bi snp- 
on’ hym*, and’ schal biholde his? place. 


the while he 
i k 1 ; if he re- 
hous, and as a! kepere* he! made a scha- 
not for disples- 
fynde no thing. Pouert as water schal 20 and clepe God 
; specially ajenus 
take hym, and schal™ do" awei; and as a 
comynge, and 
dampned, but 
posing of me- 


ritis. Lire 
here. c. 


Ttheis. 8 children of siche men 1s. 
ythe remnaunt 1s. ‘2 sich a man 1s. 


Yand 










XXVIUL 119, 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 Siluer hath the principlis of his veynes; 
and to gold is a place, in the whiche it is 
2blowe togidere. Iren® fro the erthe is 
taken, and a ston losid bi hete, in to bras 
3is turned. Tyme he putte to dercnessis, 
and the ende of alle thingus he beholdeth. 
4 Also the strem deuydeth the ston of dusc- 
nesse, and the shadewe of deth, fro the 
puple pilgrimagende; hem?, whom the 
foot of the nedi man for3at, in to men 
5 withoute weies. The erthe, of the whiche 
bred cam of in his place, with fyr is 
6turned vpsodoun. Place of a safyr is 
7stones, and the gluggis of hym gold. The 
brid vnknew3 the sty, ne the e3e of the 
sgripe beheeld it. The sones of mar- 
chaundis treeden it not, ne the leounesse 
9thur3 passide bi it. To the flint he stra3te 
out his hond; he turnede vpsodoun fro 
10the rootis’ the hillis. In stones riueres 
he heew3" out; and alle precious thing 
118sa3 his e3e. The depe thingus also of 
flodis he enserchide; and hid thingus he 
12 bro3te in to lizt. Wisdam forsothe, wher 
is it’ founde, and what is the place of 
13 vndirstonding ? A man wot not the pris 
of it, ne it is founde in the lond of 
14sweteli lyuende men. The depnessist of 
watris seith, It is not in me; and the se 
isspeketh, It is not with me. Shynende 
gold shal not be 3iue for it, ne siluer shal 
i¢ be peisid in the chaffaring of it. It shal 
not be comparisound to the steyned co- 
loures of Ynde, ne to the most precious 
izsardenyk ston, or" safyr. Ne shal be 
maad euene to it gold, or glas; ne for it 
isshul be chaungid vesselis of gold, he3e 
and ouerstondende’, ne shul be remem- 
brid in the comparisoun of it. Wisdam 
i9forsothe is drawen of hidde thingis ; ne 
ther shal be maad euene to it topasie of 


JOB. 


711 


CAP. XXVIII. 
Siluer hath bigynnyngis® of his veynes 51 + with breed; 
° ‘ ‘ : . that is, schulen 
aud a place is to gold, in which it is — die for hangar. 
id* id . ic _ i b Lire here. ¢. 
wellid* togidere. Irun is takun fro erthe Be Raa thing ete 
and a stoon resolued, ‘ethir meltid*, bi pact Sa 
se 1yt. 
heete, is turned in‘ to money. God hath¢s IS ee 
° . ° an € SCRA 
set tyme to derknessis, and he biholdith syne nothing; 
a f goodis of 
the ende of alle thingis. Also a stronde4 jréent liv’, 
departith a stoon off derknesse, and the  P¢ther to com- 
ynge. Lire 
schadewe of deth, fro the puple goynge in® Hopi me 
. ° . . . 8 FO. 
pilgrymage ; 7¢ departith tho hillis, whiehe his hond ; that 
is, scha) desire 


the® foot of a nedi man forjat, and Aillis to tte, if he 
with out weie. The erthe, wher of breed{ts 72%°."”" 


cam forth in his place, is destried bi fier, * “es that 
is, gendrid. c. 


The place of! saphir ben* stoonys therof,6 + ethe, wher 
and the clottis therof ben gold. A brid7 Ue ber é 
knewe not the weie, and the i3e of a vul- be earn 
tur], ethir™ rauenouse” brid®, bihelde it” 

not. The sones of marchauntis tretiden? s 

not on? it’, aud a lyonesse passide not 

therbi. God stretchide forth his hond to’9 

a flynt; he distriede hillis fro the rootis*‘. 

He hewide doun ryuers in stoonys ; and 10 

his ize si3 al precious thing*. And hell 

sou3te out the depthis” of floodis; and he 

brou3te forth hid thingis in to li3t. Bute 

where is wisdomt foundun, and whieh is + Bué wher is 
the place .of .vndurstondyng ? A* man Cra Genre 
noot’ the prijs therof, nether it is foundun He yee 
in the lond of men lyuynge swetli2, ‘ether W/sim cn 


closith grace, 
delicatli*, The depthe of watris seith, It 14 2nt ere ver- 
is not in me; and the see spekith, It is not God, and they 
with me. Gold ful cleene schal not be 15 to feily ik. ; 
jouun for wisdom, nether siluer schal be )&t%,"sn, "et 
weied in the chaungyng therof. It? schal Ieee and 
not be comparysound to the died colours ee eae 
of Iynde, not® to the moost preciouse stoon 

of“ sardius, nether to® saphir. Nether gold, 17 

nether glas schal be maad‘ euene worth 

therto®; and hijze and fer apperynge ves- 18 

sels of gold schulen not be chaungid for 


wisdom, nether’ schulen be had in mynde 


oAndyrena. Phea. ‘iudgise prem. 1 hewide an. s Om. 4. t depnes an. " of 4. 
Y or sehynyng A et E marg. F teat. 

®biginninge s. >the erthe 1s. ¢Om.1. or meltids, 4Om.s. ¢shals, ffros, & in tots. 
hOm.s. lofais. ben thegs. !vowtur plures. ™ that is, a BS. or 1. Om.v. 2 Om.v. ° fouls. 
Om.v. Ptroden i. trededen su. Guponis. ‘that wey. the ways. ‘Sint.  t rootis therof ts. 
uthingiss. Wdepnesse1. *Om.1. Ywotnoti. 2delicatlyr @Om.1, > Wisdom. © ne 1s. 
d4Om.1. ¢tothersw. fOm.1. &to wisdomr. 4 nether thei 1. 


712 


Ethiope, ne to the most clene steynyng 
20shal be comparisound’. Whennes thanne 
wisdam shal come, and what is the place 
2. of vnderstonding ? It is hid fro the e3en 
of alle liuende men; also to the foulis of 
22 heuene it is vnknowen. Perdicioun and 
deth seiden, With oure eris wee han herd 
o3the fame of it. God vnderstant* the weie 
osof it, and he knew3 the place of it. He 
forsothe looketh the endis of the world ; 
and alle thingus that ben vnder heuene 
ashe beholdeth. That made to windis pels, 
2¢and watris heengY vp in mesure. Whan_ 
he putte to reynes lawe, and weie to 
2j7sounende tempestis; thanne he sa} it, 
and tolde out, and made redi beforn, and 
egenserchide. And he seide to man, Lo! 
the drede of God, it is wisdam; and to 
gon awei fro euel, vnderstonding. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 Also Job addede, takende to his para- 
2ble, and seide, Who 3eue to me, that I 
be after the rathere monethis, after the 
da3es in the whiche God kepte me? 
3 Whanne shynede his lanterne vp on myn 
hed, and at his li3t I wente in derc- 
snessis. As I was in the dazes of my 
waxende 30uthe’, whan priueli God was 
sin my tabernacle. Whan the Almy3ti 
was with me, and in myn enuyroun my 
éehilder; whan I wesh my feet with but- 
tere, and the ston helde* to me ryueres 
7 of vile; whan I wente forth to the 3ate of 
the cite, and in the strete thei maden 
sredy a cha3er to me. 3unge men sezen 
me, and weren hid, and olde men risende 
gstoden; princis ceseden to speken, and 
10 finger putten vpon to ther mouth ; dukis 
withdrowen ther vois, and the tunge of 


JOB. 


XXVIII. 20——-X XIX. Jo. 


in comparisoun therof. Forsothe wisdom 
is drawuni of pryuy thingis} ; topasie of* 19 
Ethiope schal not be maad enene worth 
to wisdom, and moost preciouse diyngis 
schulen not be set togidere in prijs, ‘ether 
comparisound!, therto. Therfor wherof20 
cometh wisdom, and which is the place 
of vndurstondyng? It is hid fro the izen™ 2! 
of alle lynynge men; also" it is hid fro° 
briddis of heuene?}. Perdicioun and deeth§ 22 
seiden, With oure eeris we herden4 the 
fame therof*. God vndurstondith the weye 23 
therof, and he knowith the place therof. 
For’ he biholdith the endis of the world, 24 
and" biholdith alle thingis that ben vndur 
henene. ‘Which God” made wei3te to25 
wyndis, and* weiede watris in mesure. 
Whanne he settideY lawe to reyn, and weie 26 
to tempestis sownynge; thanne he si3727 
wisdom, and telde® out, and® made® redi, 
and sou3te? out. And he seide to man, 28 
Lo! the drede of the Lord, thilke® is wis- 
dom; and to go awei fro yuel, 2s vndur- 
stondyng. 
CAP. XXIX. 

Alsof Joob addide’, takynge his parable, 1 
andsé seide, Who 3yueth to me, that I be2 
bisidis the elde monethis||, bi the daies 
in whiche God kepte me? Whanne his3 
lanterne schynede on myn heed, and Y 
3ede in derknessis at his li3t. As Y was4 
in the daies of my 3ongthe, whanne in 
prinete God was in my tabernacle. Whannes 
Almy3ti God was with me, and my chil- 
dren zeren in my cumpas; whanne Y6 
waischide my feet in botere, and the! stoon 
schedde out to ime the stremes of oile; 
whanne* Y 3ede forth to the 3ate of the7 
citee, and in the street! thei maden redi 
a chaier tome. 3onge™ men, ‘that ts, wan-8 
foun", sien me, and weren hid, and elde 
men risynge vp stoden; princes ceessiden 9 
to speke, and® puttiden the? fyngur on 
her mouth; duykis refreyneden her vois, 10 


W put togidere r pr.m. * vndurstondith 4. Y hangide anru. 2 30ngth 4 passim. 4 heelded arru. 


idrawun ovf1. Kanda. a ston of 1. 
the 1. P heuene or of the eir 1. 
xand lie hath x. Y sette 1. 
ethati. f Ands. 
m™ jonge wantoun 1. 


4 haue herd 1. 
2 saw3e I passim. 
& addide to 1. 


nOm.1. © and thei 1. 


10m. 1. or comparisound s. 
r of wisdom 1. 
a telde it 1. 

eg and he x. 
P her 1. 


© fro 
w He hath x. 
4 son3te it 1. 

I stretes s. 


™ place s. and also 1. 

5 Certis1. tandher. 
bandher. © made 7é1. 
h Om. 1. iarz. and whan s. 
@ upon 3. : 


t of pryuy 
thingis ; wis- 
dom, that is, 
grace, and loue 
of God is 3ouun 
of God so pri- 
uely, that it is 
ynknowun to 
hem to whiche 
it is 3onnn ; for 
in ix. c°. of 
Ecctes, a man 
noot wher he 
is worthi of 
hatrede ether 
loue. Lire 
here. c. 

Lit ts hid fro 
briddis of he- 
uene ; that is, 
fro goode ann- 
gels, that witen 
not to what 
men, and hou 
it schal he 
3ouun, no but 
they han bi 
Goddis renela- 
cioun. Lire 
here. c. 

§ Perdieioun 
and deth ; that 
is, the deuel 
and helle. Lire 
here. C. 


\lelde monethis ; 
that is, in the 
elde prosperite, 
with so greet 
innocence $ not 
that aduersite 
castide him 
doun fro vertu, 
sithen he snf- 
fride paciently 5 
netheles it let- 
tide in parti the 
deuel (sie) of 
wisdom in con- 
templacioun of 
God, in mak- 
inge the soule 
ententif to the 
sorewe of bodi. 
Lire here. c. 


XXIX. 11—XXX, 2. 


1lhem to ther throte cleuede. The herende 
ere ‘blisful maade> me, and the seande 
12e3e witnesse 3eld to me; forthi that I 
hadde delyuered the pore man criende 
out, and the moderles child, to the whiche 
13 was noon helpere®. The blessing of hym, 
that was to pershen, vp on me cam, and 
the herte of the widewe I coumfortide. 
14 Rijtwisnesse’ I am clad*; and I clothide 
me as a vestyment, and with a diademe 
ts withf my dom. An e3e I was to blinde, 
igand a foot to the halte. Fader I was of 
pore men; and the cause that I knew 
i7not, most diligentli I enserchide. I to- 
broside the chaulis of the wicke man, 
and fro his teth I toc awei the prey. 
18 And I seide, Die I in my litle nest ; and 
19as a palme I shal multiplie da3is. My 
roote is opened beside watris, and deu 
20shal abide in my reping. My glorie euer- 
more shal be newid, and my bowe in 
21 myn hond shal be reparailid. That herden 
me,abiden my sentence; and takendeheede 
22 thei heelde stille at my counseil. To my 
woordis no thing to adden thei weren 
hardi; and vpon hem droppide my speche. 
23'Thei biden as reyn my speche; and 
mouth® thei openeden as to the late co- 
2imende weder. If any time I loow3 to 
them, thei leeneden” not; and the li3t of my 
25 chere fel not in to the erthe. If I wolde 
go to them, J sat first; and whan I sat as 
a king, the ost aboute stondende, I was 
neuerthelatere of dreri men the coum- 
fortere. 


CAP. XXX. 


i Now forsothe scorne me the 3ungere 
in time, of whom I deynede not the fadris 
2to sitte with the hondis of my floc. Of 
whom the vertue of hondis to me was 
for no3t, and thei weren trowid vnwrthi 


JOB. 


713 


and’ her tunge cleuyde to her throte. An*11 

eere herynge* blesside me, and an" i3e se- 

ynge 3eldide witnessyng to me; for Y 12 

hadde* delyueride aY pore man criynge, 

and a? fadirles child, that hadde noon* 

helpere. The blessyng of a> man ‘to pe-13 

rische*t cam on? me, and Y coumfortide — + ¢o perische ; 
the herte of a® widewe. Y was clothid 14 em 
with rijtfulnesse; and Y clothide me as erisce anoon. 
with a cloth, and with my ‘doom af dia- 

deme’. Y was i3e" ‘to ai blynde man, and* 15 

foot to a! crokyd man. Y was a fadir of is 

pore men; and Y enqueride most diligentli 

the cause, which™ Y knew not. Y al to-17 

brak the grete teeth of the wickid man], + ¥ al to-brak 
and Y took awei prey" fro hise teeth. And ing he ed 
Y seide, Y schal die in my nest°; and as a 03 that ks 


my3tis and vio- 
palm tre Y schal multiplie daies?, My ig lencess and 
roote is openyde bisidis watris, and deew prey; for ¥ 
schal dwelle in my repyng. My glorie 20 him to retare 
schal euere be renulid, and my bouwe schal a ee 
be astorid in myn hond. Thei, that herden 21 dene bee 
me, abiden my sentence; and thei weren “ve. ¢. 
ententif 4, and" weren stille to’ my counsel. 

Thei dursten no thing adde* to my wordis ; 22 

and my speche droppide on® hem. Thei23 
abididen” me as* reyn; and thei openyden 

her mouth as to theY softe? reyn ‘comynge 

late*. If ony tyme Y leiz3ide to hem, thei 24 

bileneden not; and the li3t of my cheer§  § and the tise 
felde not doun in to erthe’. If Y wolde 26 vaca 
go to hem, Y sat the firste; and whanne ba 
Y sat as kyng, while the vost stood down; as 
aboute’, netheles Y was comfortour of 


aschamed for 
the vncouena- 
hem that morenyden. 


blete of glad- 
nesse, nether for 
sorewe of heuy- 
nesse. Lire 
here. c. 


a Ne 


But? now j3ongere men in tyme scornen 1 
me, whos fadris Y deynede*|| not to sette Es Nas 

with the doggis‘ of my flok. Of whiches dedeyncam not 
men the vertu off londis was for" nou3t Enos 


of pride, but of 
. as ¢  worthi hihold- 
to me, and thei weren gessid yvnworthi fngolieiletss 


Lire here. c. 


b gladide x pr.m. Chelpe an. 4 In rijtwisnes 4. ¢@ clothed szzru. fto £ pr.m. 8 her mouth an. 
» bileneden a. 

rand for stilnesse1. ®8 Ther. tthatherde mer. "ther. Wthat size mer. *Om.1. Y ther. 
zther ®no1 ther. ¢ that schulde haue perishid 1. Cupon1, ¢ther. fOm.1. 8 diademe in 
my doom1. the izex. tofther. Kandther. Ithex. ™thatx. "the preir. © Jitil nest a sec. m. 
Pmy daiest. 4takynge heede tomer. ‘'andtheit. ‘ati. putter, “uponi. Wabedent. 
abiden s. %*as men dont. Ya sup.ras. aBcv. 2 softe sesenable 1. *® Om.1. © the erthe 1s. ¢ aboute 
met. 4Certis1. © vowchide not saafr. fhoundis1. § of her1, » Om. s. 


VOL. II. 


4y 


714 


3that lif. And thur3 nede and hunger 
barein; that gnowen! in wildernesse, wax- 
ende foul with wrecchidnesse and sorewe. 
4 And thei eeten erbis, and the rindisoftrees; 
and the roote of iunypere trees was the 
smete of hem. The whiche of the! valeis 
these thingus takende; whan alle thingus 
thei hadde founde, with cri thei rumne to 
sthoo thingus. In desertis of stremys thei 
dwelten, and in dennes of the erthe, or 
7vp on granel™. The whiche among such 
thingns gladeden, and to ben vnder busshis 
scounteden delicis. The sonus of foolis 
and of vnnoble men, and in the lond not 
ofulli perende. Now forsothe I am turned 
in to the song of hem, and I am maad to 
10hem a prouerbe. Thei wlaten me, and 
ferr floun fro me, and to spute my face 
11 they shame" not. Forsothe his arwe girdil 
he openede, and tormentide me, and he 
12putte a bridil in to my mouth. At the 
ri3t_ of the est my wrecchenesses® anoon 
risen; thei turneden vpsodoun my feet, 
and opresseden as with flodis bi ther 
issties. Thei scatereden my weies, and 
waiteden to me, and hadden the onere 
hond; and ther was not that bro3te helpe. 
14As the wal broken and the 3ate opened 
thei fellen in on me, and to my wrecchid- 
isnessis thei ben myche boowid to. I am 
bro3t in to no3t; as the wind he hath 
taken awei my desyr, and as a cloude 
1gpasside myn helthe. Now forsothe in 
myself welewith my lif, and welde me 
17the da3is of tormentinge. In? the ny3t 
my mouth is thirlid thur3 with sorewis ; 
isand that eten me, slepen not. In the 
multitude of hem my clothing is wastid, 
and as with a coler of a kote thei girten 
iyme. I am comparisound to clei, and am4 
20licned to a™ sparke and to askis*’. I shal 
crie to thee, and thou shalt not heren; 


k Om. 4. 1Om. a. 
QIlamuru. ¢ Om.c. 


i gnewen 4En. 
Pp And in «a. And #, 


ithei 1. * as beestis, and 1. 
G alle thes thingis 1. * hem 1, 
And the k sec. mR. Yons. 
€ putt. f han risen up 1. 
Mupon yr. 1 Om. sev. 
t slepten a, slepith x. 


1 thei weren 1. 
S upon I. 

Z and thei 1. 
& and thei 1. 


JOB. 


™ the grauel 4, 
§ asshen 4. 


m maad foule 1. 

' Om. 1. 

@ and thei 1. 

h me with 1. 
© a jate A pr. im. X sec. m. 

u the coler 1. a coler ¥x sec. m. 


XXX. 3-—20. 


to that lijft. Thei weren bareyn for nedy-3 ee 4 


nesse and hungur; that! gnawiden in  wickid men 
Sapte k I jen fone and makinge 
wildirnesse, and* weren' pale™ for pouert _ jestitence. 


and® wretchidnesse ; and° eeten eerbis,4 “i” ere % 
aud the ryndis of trees; and the roote of 
junyperis was her mete. Whiche? mens 
rauyschiden these thingis fro grete valeis ; 

and whanne thei hadden foundun ony of 

alle’, thei runnen with ery to tho". Theié 
dwelliden in deseertis of strondis, and in 

caues of erthe, ethir on’ grauel,‘ethir on 

cley'. Whiche weren glad among siche7 
thingis, and" arettiden delices” to be vndur 

buschis. The* sones of foolis and of vn-s 

noble men, and outirli apperynge not inY 

erthe. But now Y am turned in to theg 

song of hem, and Y am maad a prouerbe 

to hem. Thei holden me abhomynable, 10 

and? fleen fer fro me, and* dreden not to 

spete on my face. For God hath openyd1 

his arowe caas, and* hath turmentid me, 

and¢ hath set® a bridil in to my mouth. 

At the rijtside of the eest my wretchid- 12 

nessis risiden’ anoon; thei turneden vpse- 

doun my feet, and oppressiden with" her 

pathis as with floodis. Thei destrieden my 13 
weies ; thei settiden tresoun to me, andi 

hadden the maistri; and‘noon was* that 
helpide!. Thei felden in on™ me as bi a" 14 
brokun wal, and bi 3ate° openyd, andP 

weren’ stretchid forth to my wretchid- 

nessis. Yam dryuun in™ to nou3t; he%1s 

took awei my desir as wynd, and myn 

helpe passide awei as a cloude. But now16 

my soule fadith in my silf, and daies of 
turment holden me stidfastly. In ny3t my 17 7 
boon is persid with sorewis ; and thei, that 

eten me], slepent not. In the multitude of 18: dat eelen 
tho my cloth is wastid, and thei han gird Toa 
me as with coler" of a coote. Y am com-19 7 Fin Lire ) 
parisound to cley, and Y am maad lijk to ™”* © 

a deed sparcle and” aisch*. Y schal cry 20 ~ 





 shameden 4. © wrecchedenessis AEFI. 


P The whiche 1. 
X Thes weren the 1. 
Cand her. 4 and her. 
k ther was noon 1. 1 helpide me 1. 
Ghenr 'tOm.s. 8 the Lord 1. 
x aishen s. 


nin i. © and thei 1. 
and thei 1. W as delices 1. 
b Sotheli x. 
i and thei 1. 
P and thei 1. 
Ww and to I. 


XXX. 21—XXXI. 8. 


I stonde, and thou beholdest' not me. 
21Thou art chaungid to me in to cruel, 
and in the hardnesse of thin hond thou 
azart aduersarie to me. Thou hast rered 
me, and as vp on wind settende thou hast 
23hurtlid me doun my3tili. I wot, for thou 
shalt take me to deth, wher is sett an 
2thous to alle huende. Nerthelatere not 
to the wasting of hem thou puttist out 
thin hond ; and if thei falle, thou thi self 
25 Shalt saue. I wepte sum time vp on hym 
that was tormentid, and my soule hadde 
2s compassioun to the pore. J abod goodis, 
and ther camen to me euelis; I abod 
liz3t, and ther breeken oute dercnessis. 
27 Myn entrailis brenden out with oute any 
reste; befor wente me the da3es of tor- 
aament. Dreri J wente withoute wodnesse, 
29risende in the puple I criede. Brother 
I was of dragouns, and felawe of the half 
30 beste half foul. My skin is bleckid vp on 
31 me, and my bones drieden for hete. Myn 
harpe is turned in to weiling", and myn 
orgne in to the vois of weperis. 


CAP. XXXII. 


; I couenauntide a pes couenaunt with 
myn e3en, that forsothe I shulde not 
2 thenke of’ a” maiden. What forsothe part 
God fro aboue shulde han in me, and the 
3Almy3ti eritage fro he3e thingus. Whe- 
thir not perdicioun is to the wicke, 
and alienyng to men werkende wick- 
4enesse*? Whether he beholdeth not my 
weies, and alle my goingis noumbreth ? 
5IfI 3ide in vanyte, and my foot heejzide 
6in treccherieY, peise he me in a rijtwis 
balauns, and wite God my symplenesse. 
7If my going bowide doun fro the weie ; 
if* myn e3e folewide myn herte, and a 
8spot cleuede to myn hondis; I shal 


JOB. 


715 


to thee’, and thou schalt not here me; Y + ¥ stonde; 


stonde?{, and thou biholdist* not me. Thou2i 
art chaungid in to cruel>} to me, and in 
the hardnesse of thin hond thou art ad- 
uersarie to me. Thou hast reisid® me, and 22 
hast set44 as on® wynd ; and! hast hurtlid’ 
me doun strongli. Y woot, that thow23 
schalt bitake me to deeth, where an hows 
is ordeyned to ech lynynge man. Netheles 21 
thou sendist* not out! thin hond to the 
wastyng of hem; and if thei fallen doun, 


thou schalt saue*. Y wepte sum tyme on2s 


him, that was turmentid, and my soule 
hadde compassioun on a pore man. 
abood! goodis™, and ynelis" ben comun to 
me; Y abood li;t, and derknessis braken 


out®. Myn ynnere thingis buyliden out 27 


with outen my reste; daies? of turment 


contynuynge in 
preyer. Lire 
here. C. 

T in to cruel 
etc. 3 thon3 God 
is not chaung- 
able, nethelesse 
he worchith 
chaungeble 
thingis, of 
whiche he is 
nemyd dy- 
uerselis and so 
he is seid 
pitonse, whanne 
he 3yueth pro- 
sperites, hard, 
whanne he 
bringith in ad- 
uersites: and 
this is seid by 
the comyn ma- 


YY 26 ner of speking 


of men, which 
maner Joob 
suede, thou3 he 
helde stide- 
fastly, that alle 
lesingis ben 
wrou3t of God, 
pitously and 


camen bifor me. Y 3ede morenynge, and 28 instly. Lire 


Y roos1 with out woodnesse in the eum- 
penye, and" criede. Y was the brother of? 


dragouns, and the felow of ostrigis. My 30 


skyn was maad blak on’ me, and my 
boonys drieden for heete. Myn harpe is3) 
turned in to morenyng, and myn orgun in 
to the vois of weperis. 


CAP. XXXII; 


I made couenaunt with myn i3en, that) 
Y sehulde not thenke oft a virgyn||. Fore 
what part schulde God aboue haue in 
me, and" eritage Almy3tiY God of hize 
thingis* ? Whether perdicioun is not to a3 
wickidY man, and alienacioun ef God is to 
men worchynge wickidnesse? Whether4 
he? biholdith not my weies, and noumbrith 
alle my goyngis? If Y 3ede* in vanyte,5 
and my foot® hastide® in gile, God weies 
me in a iust balaunce, and knowe’ my 
symplenesse. If my step® bowide fro the7 
weie; iff myn ize] suede? myn herte, and" 
ai spotte cleuede* to! myn hondis; sowe Y™, 8 
and another ete", and my generacioun be 





t beheeldist 4. cley eprom. Yona. WOm.u. * wickidnesse su.  Y¥ treccheries c pr. m. 
Z of al. 

ythee Lord1. 2stoder. a biheldist 1. >a crucl venger'1. © up reisid r. d thou hast r. 
dd set me A pr.m. eupont, fandthour &hurlidi, + puttist 1. forth 1.  * saue hems. 
1 boode 1. —™ gode thingis 1. ™ yuel thingis 1. © out on met. Panddaies1. Groosupr. "and It. 
Snpont, tonac. “and whatt. W schulde Almy3ti1. * thingis haue in met. Y my3tis. 2 God 1. 
ahane gont. » foot hath1, Chastidetogor. 4knoweher. ¢stephauer fandifi.  & haue 


suede 1, ® consentinge to lust, andr. 1 if a1. 


ete the fruyt 1 


4x2 


k haue cleuede 1. 


lons. ™J the seed thanne 1. 


here. Cc. 
§ brother of 


9 dragouns ; for 


they that on3t 
loue me as bre- 
theren, bitiden 
in her punysch- 
ingis and bac- 
bitingis as dra- 
guns. of os- 
trigis ; for they 
that weren 
homely, and 
felowis to me, 
for3aten me as 
an ostrige for- 
3etith his brid. 
Lire here. c. 
|| not thenke of 
a virgyne ; lest 
thorou bihold- 
ing Y schnide 
falle in to de- 
lyting ether 
consent of ony 
damese}, 3he, 
most fair. 
Lire here. c. 
what part; as 
if he seie, noon. 
man, in 
whom God 
dwellith by 
grace, is the 
part and eritage 
of God, but he 
dwellith not in 
men defonlid bi 
lecherie, rathire 
he drawith silf 
fer fro hem. 
Lire here. ce 
| if myn ize ; 
biholdinge vn- 


716 


sowen, and an other ete, and my pro- 
9genye be drawe vp bi the roote. If myn* 
herte is desceyned vp on a womman, and 
if at the dore of my frend I sette spies ; 
10 the strumpet of an other be my wif, and 
vpon hir othere men be thei crookid. 
11 This forsothe is vnleeful, and most wick- 
12idnesse. Fyr is deuouring vnto wasting, 
and pullende vp bi the roote alle bur- 
isiounyngus. If I dispiside to gon vnder 
dom with my seruaunt and hond maiden, 
14 whan thei shulden pleten a3en me. What 
forsothe shal I do, whan God shal rise to 
deme? and whan he shal aske, what shal 
157 answern to hym? Whether not in the 
wombe he made me, the whiche and 
hym wro3te, and oon formede me in the 
16 wombe ? If I denyede® to pore men that 
thei wolden, and made the ejen of a 
17widewe to abide; if I eet my morsel 
alone, and the moderles child eet not of 
18it; for fro my 3outhe doing of mercy 
wex with me, and fro the woimbe of my 
19 noder wente out with me; if I dispiside 
the goere beside, for thi that he hadde 
not clothing, and the pore withoute couer- 
20 yng; if his sidis blessiden not to me, and 
210f the flees of ny shep he is chaufid ; if 
I rerede vp on the moderles child myn‘ 
hond, also whan I sa3 me in the j3ate 
22the ouerhe3ere; my shulder falle fro his 
ioynt, and myn arin with his bones be 
23to-brosid. Forsothe euermor as flodis 
swellende vp on me, I dredde God; and 
2this peis I my3te not bern. If I wendeé 
gold my strengthe, and to the shynende 
2gold I seide, My trost; if I gladede vp 
on my manye richessis, and for myn 
2¢hond fond manye thingis; if I sa3 the 
sunne, whan it shulde shyne, and the 
27mone goende clerli; and myn herte is 
gladid in hid thing, and kiste myn hond 
23fro my mouth ; the whiche is the moste 


aeny 4. »denie au. 


°Andifi. Ands. Pp hath 1. 


u Forsothe 1. Wthisthing1. * Fier of brennynge lust. Yuntol it drawith1. and with 1. 
briseup1. ¢thatthingr. ‘andifi. eandif1. f sothely 1,  & and if 1s. h forth bi me 1. 
‘werenr. Kk fleesis. 1 “reiatde up reiside ins. ™uponr. "saw3e1 pass. ©shuldrens.  P For- 
sothe 1. Guponr, ¢«Om.1. § whos birthun I my3te not berez. ¢ For cause that1. 4% richessis 1. 


Ww the which 1, 


JOB. 


© with myn 4. 


a haue sett 1. sette s. 


XXXI. g—28. 


drawun out bi the root. 
was? disseyued on a womman*, and if Y 
settide1 aspies at the dore of my frend; {203s of the 
leccherouse 
my wijf be" the hoore® of anothir man, 10 Aeisch. Lire 
here. C. 
and othir men be bowid doun ont hir, For" 11 * on a wom. 
this”} is vnleueful, and the moost wickid- ioe 
eee Nye ether tronthe 
ae Fier* is tele til toy wastyng, 12 plist to an other 
n age? vp bi . man, as the 
and drawynge* vp bi the roote alle gene- Pa»: oe 
raciouns. If Y dispiside to take doom with 1s ae Lire 
my seruaunt and* myn hand mayde, whanne + (ore that 
: is, auoutrie. 
thei stryueden a3ens me. What sotheli 14 is most wick 
schal Y do, whanne God schal rise? to ses in synnes 
deme? and whanne he schal axe, what 


If? myn herteg chastly. suede 
myn herte ; 
that is, sudeyn 


azenus the nei3- 
bore. Lire 
ETC. Cr 
schal Y answere to hym? Whether he, 1s 


that wrou3te also hym, made not me in the 

wombe, and o God formede me in the 

wombe? If Y denyede to pore men that’, 16 

that thei wolden}, and if Y made the izen $ that thei 

of a wydewe to abide ; if! Y aloone eet my 17 while hea 

mussel, and¢ a faderles child eet not therof ; ve ae 

forf merciful doyng encreesside with mes" ¢ 

fro my 3ong childhed, and’ 3ede out of 

my modris wombe with me; if Y dis-19 

piside a man passynge forth", for he hadde 

not a cloth, and a pore man with ont 

hilyng; if hise sidis blessiden not me, and 20 

was' not maad hoot of the fleeces* of my 

scheep; if Y reiside! myn hond § On™ A215 myn hond; 

fadirles child, 3he, whanne Y si3" me the ee 

hizere in the 3ate; my schuldre® falle fro 22 “#6 dere. c. 

his ioynt, and myn arm with hise boonys 

be al to-brokun. For? euere Y dredde23 

God, as wawis wexynge gret on! me; and" 

‘Y my3te not bere his birthun’. If Y gess-24 

ide gold my strengthe, and if Y seide to 

purid gold, Zhou art my trist; if Y wases 

glad on my many ritchessis, and fort myn 

hond foond ful many thingis"{|; if Y siz 26 thingies eit : 

the sunne, whanne it schynede, and the be seie, Goddis 
veniaunce come 

moone goynge clereli; and if myn herte2 27 on me. Fila 

was glad in priuyte, and if Y kisside {] if ¥ kisside 

myn hond with my mouth ; which is the 2s (733 37 Y28e 


ricki I rence due to 
moost wickidnesse, and deniyng aj3ens ¢ eee, 


Lire here. c. 


d weendide #. weenyde 4. 


t upon 1. 


tbe thanne 1. 5 strumpett 1. 





XXXII. 29—-XXKXII. 6. 


wickidnesse, and denyyng a3en the he3est 
29God ; if I iozide at his falling, that hatide 
me, and ful out iozide, that enel hadde 
30founden hym; forsothe I 3af not my 
throte to synne, that I shulde abide 
3lcursende his soule; if the men of my 
tabernacle seiden not, Who 3iueth of his 
32 fleshe, that we be fulfild? without forth 
abod not the pilgrim; my dore was open 
33to0 the weie goere; if I hidde as a man 
my synne, and hilede in my bosum my 
34 wickenesse; if I dradde at the moste 
multitude, and dispising of nee3h men 
ferede me; and not more I heeld my pes, 
35and wente not out® the dore; who 3eue 
to me an auditour‘’, that my desyr heere 
the Almy3ti? that he that demeth write 
36the boc, that in my shulder I bere it, 
37and enuyroune it as® a crowne to me? Bi 
alle my grees I shal pronouncen it, and as 
38to a prince I shal offre it. If a3en me 
myn erthe crie, and with it his forewis 
39 bewepen ; if his frutis I eet with oute 
monee, and the soule of his erthe tilieris 
49I tormentide ; for whete be sprunge to 
me a brimbil, and for barli a thorne. 


CAP. XXXIL. 


1 These thre men laften forsothe to an- 
swern to Job, forthi that rijtwis he is 
»seen to them. And Elyu, the sone of 
Barachiel Busites, of the kynrede of 
Ram, ys wroth, and endeyned; he is wroth 
a3en Job, forthi that he shulde sein hym- 
3self to be rij3twis befor God. But ajen 
the thre frendis of hym he dedeynede’, 
forthi that thei hadden not founde a 
resounable answere, but onely thei shulden 
4han condempned Job. Thanne Eliu abod 
Job spekende, forthi that eldere thei weren, 
sthat speken. Whan forsothe he hadde 
geen, that the thre my3ten not answern, 
che wrathede hugeli. And answerende 
Elyu, the sone of Barachiel Busites, 
seide, I am 3ungere in time, 3ee forsothe 


¢ without 4. fheerere £ pr. m. helpere £ see. m. 

xthe higeste 1. ¥forsothe 1. 2 do that t. 
herforer. 4Y3edec. ¢ 3yneth thanne 1. 
kKandif1. loftheis. ™and1. 
resonable s. 4 thei hadden 1. 


JOB. 


a way ferynge man 1. 
f on Is. 
n Certis BCDEFHKLMNOPQRSUVWXbf. And also 1. 
¥ thes thre 1. 8 Om. plures. 


ney: 


hizeste* God; if Y hadde ioye at the fall-29 
yng of hym, that hatide me, and if Y ioide 
fulli, that yuel hadde founde hym; forY Y30 
jaf not my throte to do’® synne, that Y 
schulde asaile and curse his soule; if thes1 
men of my tabernacle seiden not, Who 
3yueth, that we be fillidy of hise fleischis ? 

a pilgryme dwellide not with outforth ; 32 
my dore was opyn to a weiegoere®; if Y33 
as man hidde my synnej], and helide my 
wickidnesse in my bosuin®; if Y dreddesa 
at ful greet multitude, and if dispisyng of 
ney3boris made me aferd; and not imore® 
Y was stille, and 3ede? not out of the 
dore; who 3yueth® an helpere to me, that 3s 
Almy3ti God here my desire? that he that 
demeth, write a book, that Y bere it inf my 36 
schuldre, and cumpasse it as a coroun to 
me? Bi alle my degrees Y schal pronounce 37 
it, and Y schal as® offre it to the prynce. 
If my lond crieth|] a3ens me, and hise3s 
forewis wepen with it; if® Y eet fruytisi39 
therof with out money, and* Y turmentide 
the soule of! erthetileris of it; a brere 40 
growe to me for wheete, and a thorn for 
barli. 


CAP. XXXII. 


Forsothe these thre men leften of to} 
answere Joob, for he semyde a iust man 
to hem. And Helyu, the sone of Barachel 2 
Buzites, of the kynrede of Ram, was 
wrooth, and hadde indignacioun; forsothe™ 
he was wrooth ajens Joob, for he seide 
hym silf to be iust bifor God. Sotheli®s 
Helyu hadde indignacioun ajens the thre 
frendis of .hym°, for thei ladden uot 
founde resonable? answere, but oneli hadde4 
condempned Joob. Therfor Helyu abood 4 
Joob spekynge, for thei, that spaken, weren 
eldere men. But whanne he hadde seyn,s 
that thre’ men’ my3ten not answere*, he 
was wrooth greetly. -And' Helyu, thee 
sone of Barachel Buzites, answeride, and 
seyde, Y am 3ongere in tyme, sotheli" 3e 


&Om.c. » floowen doun g pr.m. + deynede a.. 

b bosum, ether herte v. © more 
handif1. i the fruytis 1. 
°Jobr. Pno 
t And thanne 3. % and 1, 


& as offryng 1. 


88 answere Job 1. 


+ be fillid ete. 3 
that is, who 
3yueth that he 
be euere al pre- 
sent with vs, 
that we be fillid 
of his felou- 
sehipe. Lire 
here. ¢. 

% hidde my 
synne 3 that 

is, in denyinge 
it vnduly, ethir 
in exeusinge 
falsly. in my 
bosum ; that is, 
herte, bi fals 
schewing of 
hoolynesse 
withoutforth. 
Lire here. e. 
if Y dredde at 


Ful greet multi- 


tude ; in go- 
ynge awey fro 
riztfulnesse, for 
the drede of 
many men. 
and tf dispising 
ete.; so that Y 
3ede awey fro 
truthe, and 
dredde lest Y 
schulde offende 
my neizbouris, 
willinge the 
eontrarie. and 
not more Y was 
stille ; heringe 
the blamyngis 
of my neizboris, 
for Y nolde as- 
sent to hem. 
and yede not 
out; todo any 
wickid thing 
for hem. Lire 
here. c. 

§ write a book ; 
in 3yuynge the 
sentence for me. 
Lire here. c. 

Wl if my lond cri- 
eth ete. ; that 
is, if Y gaderide 
outrageouse 
fruytis therof, 
and if Y with-. 
drow the hiris 
of erthetileris. 
Lire here. c. 


718 


eldere; therfore the hed leid down I am 
7shamed to shewe to 3ou my sentence. I 
hopede forsothe that the lengere age 
shulde speke, and the multitude of 3eeris 
sshulde techen wisdam. But as I see, 
spirit is in men, and the inbrething of the 
9 Almy3ti 3iueth vnderstonding. Wise men 
ben not longe liuende, ne olde men vnder- 
1ostondedom. Therfore I shal seyn, Hereth 
me, and also I shal shewe to 30u my kun- 
11nyng. Forsothe I haue abide 3oure woordis, 
herde* 3o0ure prudence, whil 3ee striuen in 
1230ure woordis. And whil I wende 3ou 
any thing to seyn, I beheeld; but as I 
see, ther is not, that mai vnderneme Job, 
i3and answern of 30u to his woordis; lest 
perauenture 3ee seyn, Wee han founde! 
wisdam ; God hath throwen hym afeerr, 
uand not man. No thing he hath spoke to 
me, and I after 30ure woordis shal not 
isanswere to hym. Thei myche dradden, 
and answerden no more, and token awey 
isspeche fro themself. Thanne for I haue 
abide, and thei speken not, stoden, and 
i7answerden no more; shal and I answere 
my partie, and shewen my kunnyng. 
isForsothe I am ful of woordis, and the 
1gspirit of my wombe artith me. Lo! my 
wombe as must withoute venting™, that 
20breketh newe litle win vesselys. I shal 
speke, and brethen ajeen a litil; I shal 
210pene my lippis, and answern. I shal not 
taken persone of man, and God to man I 
22shal not euenen. I wot neuere forsothe 
hou longe I shal stonde stille, and if after 
a litil take me my Makere. 


CAP. XXXIIIL. 


1 Here thanne, Job, my spechis, and alle 
2my woordis herene. Lo! I haue opened 

my month; my tunge in my chekis shal 
3speke. With symple herte my woordis, 


k and herde «. 


Ww haue spoke wisilier 1. 
crecioun therfor 1. 
to Job 1. 

P berstith 1. 
thou 1. 


X se now al. 
¢ perceyue 1. 
‘ondtheir. kKsithy, 1 therfor 1. 

4 answere Job 1. aaAnd Ys, 
* and my 1. 


JOB. 


1Om. au. 


¥ inspiracioun x. 
4 ther is noon 1. 
™ Om. 1. 
Tofar. 


XXXII. 7-—X XXIII. 3. 


ben eldere; therfor with heed holdun 

doun Y dredde to schewe to 30u my sen- 

tence. For Y hopide that lengere age7 

schulde speke’, and that the multitude of 

3eeris schulden teche wisdom. But as Y 8 t spiritis in 
se*, spirit is in ment, and the enspiryngY able in Soria 
‘ether reuelacioun’, of Almy3ti® God 3yueth 


men, as in elde 
men. Lire here, 
vndurstondyng. Men of long lijf ben nots © 


wise, and elde men vndurstonden not 
doom. Therfor’ Y schal seie, Here 3e me, 10 
and Y also schal schewe my kunnyng to . 
jou. For Y abood 3oure wordis, Y herde11 


joure prudence, as long as 3e dispuytiden 
in 3oure wordis. And as long as Y gesside 12 
jou to seie ony thing, Y bihelde; but as 
Y se®, ‘noon is of 30u, that may repreue 
Joob, and answere to hise wordis; lest®13 
perauenture 3e seien, We han founde wis- 
dom; God, and not man, hath cast hym 
awei. Joob spak no thing to me, and? Y14¢ sy jour ; 
not bi 30ure wordis{ schal answere hym. Flelya Acouall 
Thei dredden, and answeriden no more, 15 yi oe 
and! token awei speche fro hem _ silf.  ®ttide another 
Therfor for* Y abood, and thei spaken 16 yuel men snd 
not, thei stoden, and answeriden no more; iol moa o 
alsol Y schal answere my part, and Yu ae 
schal schewe my kunnyng. For Y am ful 13 ( 
of wordis§, and the spirit of my wombe, iene ona 
‘that is, mynde™, constreyneth me"||. Lo !19in for synne,_ 
my wombe is as must with out ‘spigot, mt a 
ether° a ventyng, that brekith? newe vessels. et “J a 

Y schal speke, and brethe a3en a litil; ¥ 203 
schal opene my lippis, and Y schal answere%, _ punyschid for 
Y49 schal not take the persoone of" man, and 21 made strongere 


synne 3 also he 
% resouns aenus 
Y schal not make God euene to man. For 92570) than aa 


Y woot not hou long Y schal abide’, and re em 
if my Makere taket me awei ‘after a® litil  § ful ofwordis; 


that is, spedeful 
resouns a3enug 
Joob. c. 


CAP. XXNIII. | constreyneth 


0 me; as if he 
Therfor, Joob, here thou my spechis, and 1 seve, The faa 
herkene’ alle my wordis. 


tyme. 


Lo! Y haueg2 of truthe to be 


defendid, con. 
openyd my mouth, my* tunge schal speke efendid, con 


streyneth me 
: : t . Li 
in my chekis. OS 


Of symple herte bex mys hore. c. 
™ quentinge AEFH, 


ZOm.1. *Om.1. © Of verry dis- 
fJobr. &and therfor1. 4 more 
"me to speke1. © Om.1. faucet ether v. 


8 abide alijue 1. t wole take 1. bes. ¥ herkene 


€ bud lest 1. 


XK. 4— 24. 


and pure sentence my lippis shul speke. 
+The spirit of God made me, and the 
brething space of the Almy3ti quykenede 
sme. If thou maist, answere to me, and 
6stond stille a3en my face. Lo! me as and 
thee made God; and of the same cley 
71 also am formed. Nerthelatere my mi- 
racle fere thee not, and my faire speche 
8 be not to thee heuy. Thou seidest thanne 
in myn eris, and the vois of thi woordis 
9I herde ; Clene I am, and withoute gilte, 
vnwemmed, and ther is not wickidnesse 
win me. For pleintis in me he fond, ther- 
ilfore he demede me enemy to hym. He 
putte in the stockis my feet, and kepte 
walle my sties. This is thanne, in the 
whiche thou art not iustified ; I shal an- 
swer to thee, for God is more than man. 
13 A3en God .thou striuest, that to alle 
woordis he shal not answer to thee. 
14Qnes God shal speke, and the secounde 
isthat same he shal not eft seyn. Bi 
sweuene in ny3t si3te, whan falle slep vp 
on men, and thei slepen in the litle bed. 
16 Thanne he openeth the eris of men, and 
enformende" them techith® discipline ; 
17 that he turne awei a man fro tho thingus 
that he dide, and deliuere hym fro pride; 
isand takende awei his soule fro corup- 
cioun, and his lif, that he go not in to 
1oswerd. He blameth also bi sorewe in the 
litle bed, and alle his bones maketh to 
20 become drie. Abhomynable to hym bred 
is maad in his lif, and to the soule of 
21hym meteP beforn desirable. His flesh 
shal become roten, and the bones, that 
22 weren couered, shul be maad nakid. The 
soule of hym shal ne3he to corupcioun, 
ag3and his lif to thingus berende deth. If 
ther were for hym an aungil spekende 
oon of the lic thingis, that he telle the 
asequite of man, he shal han reuthe, and 
seiu, Delyuere hym, that he go not doun 


8 enfourmeth au. 


Zbe itr. 8Om.1. > heeryng 1. 
eandher. f Thou, Jobr. Salle ¢hix1 2bOm. 1, 
bed x see.m. he techinge 1. P Om. 8. 


Saud that he delyuerer. tmant his i. 
z and the 1. 4 mete that bifore was to him 1. 
after 1. hifor his soule rx. 4 Om. o. 


JOB. 


6 and techith 4, 


¢ And for cause that God hath founden playnyngis 1. 
ins. 
q disciplyne. that is, lore of chastisyng i. 
W litil bed x sec. m. 

b desiderable cq. delitable r. 
© deedly thingis 1. 


719 


wordis, and my lippis schulen speke clene 

sentence. The spirit of God made me, and 4 

the brething of Almy3ti God quykenyde 

me. If thou maist, answere thou to me,s5 

and stoonde thou a3ens my face. Lo!¢ 

God made me as and thee; and also Y am 

formyd of the same cley. Netheles my7 

myraclet make thee not afeerd, and myn eae 
eloquence be? not greuouse to thee. Ther-s nyag soutin of 
for* thou seidist in myn eeris?, and Y herde Be on 
the vois of thi wordis; Y am cleene, andg %”**" © 
with out gilt, and vawemmed, and wickid- 

nesse is not in me. ‘For God foond querels* 10 

in me, therfor he’ demyde me enemy to 

hym silf. He hath set my feet in a stok 311 

he® kepte alle my pathis. Therfor thiste2 

thing it is, in which thou art not maad 

iust{; Y schal answere to thee, that God fmm | 
is more than man. Thou! stryuest ajenus 1g ul ereaiostt 
God, that not at alle’ wordis he" answer- clude thee vn- 
ide to thee. God spekith onys, and the 14 Us iio 
secounde tyme he rehersith not the saine Bs Vie 
thing. God spehkith bii a dreem in* the 1s Lire here. ¢. 
visioun of ny3t, whanne sleep fallith om 

men, and! thei slepen in the™ bed". Thanne 16 

he openith the eeris of men, aud he® tech- 

ith hemP, ‘and techith prudence; that he17 

turne awei a man fro these thingis whiche 

he made’, and delyuere hym fro pride; 
delyuerynge® his soule fro corrupciouns, tiers cas 
and his lijf, that it go not in to swerd. “ire here. & 
Also God blameth a@ synnere* bi sorewe19 

in the" bed’, and* makith alle the boonys 

of hym ‘to fadeY. Breed is maad abhio- 20 

mynable to hym in his lijf, and? mete* 

desirable> ‘bifor to his soule*||.. His4 fleisch 21 |)” ane 
schal faile for rot, and hise boonys, that Been to 
weren hilid, schulen be maad nakid. His 22 

soule schal neije to corrupcioun, and his 

lijf to thingis® ‘bryngynge deeth*. If an23 

aungel, oon of a thousynde, is’ spekynge4] 

for hym, that he telle" the equyte of man, _ his penaunse to 
God schal haue mercy on! hym, and schal 24 here. ae 


ts speking; 
that is, tellinge 


P mete forsothe £ pr. m. 


a he hath 1, 
mherr. © litil 

¥ hath made 1. 
y for to wexe rotun 1. 
¢ wlatide to his soule. 
h schewet. iof x 


Kk bis. land whanne 1. 
x and he 1. 


fOm.1. &§ Om.s, 


720 


in to corupeioun ; I haue founde in what 
251 be plesid to hym. His flesh is wastid 
of tormentis; be he turned ajeen to the 
e6dazes of his waxende 30uthe. He shal 
prese God, and be plesable to hym; and 
seen his face in io3e, and 3elde to man 
azhis ri3twisnesse. He shal beholde men, 
and sein, I haue synned, and vereli I 
haue trespasid; and as I was worthi, I 
eshaue not resceyued. Forsothe he hath 
deliuered his soule, that he go not in to 
29deth, but lyuende li3t he shal seen. Lo! 
alle these thingus wercheth God thre 
30sithes bi alle men; that he ajeen clepe 
the soulis of hem fro corupcioun, and 
31 liztne in the 1i3t of liuende men. Tac 
heede, Job, and here me, and be stille, 
32 whil I speke. If forsothe thou hast what 
thou speke, answere to me, spec; I wile 
33forsothe thee to apere rij3twis. That if 
thou hane’ not, here me; be still, and I 
shal teche thee wisdam. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 Tellende forth forsothe Elyu, thes 
2thingis also spac, Hereth, wise men, my 
3 woordis, and ta3t, herkneth me; the ere 
forsothe woordis proueth, and the throte 
4metis bi tast demeth. Dom chese we to 
vs; and among vs see wee what is betere. 
5 For thou seidist, Job, Ri3twis I am, and 
6God turnede vp so doun my dom. In‘ 
demyng forsothe me is lesing, and violent 
7is myn arewe withoute any synne. Who 
is a man, as is Job, that drinketh scorn- 
syng as water? that goth with men wirk- 
ende wickidnesse, and wendeth with vn- 
9pytous men? Forsothe he seide, A man 
shal not plese to God, also if he shul 


JOB. 


XXXIIL 25—XXXIV. 9. 


seie*, Delyuere thou hym, that he go not 
doun in to corrupcioun; Y haue founde* 
in what thing Y schal do merci to hym. 


* schal seie: to 
that aungel. 
Lire here. c. 
++ men; that 
is, synful men. 


His fleisch is wastid of! turmentis; turne™25 Live here. c. 


he a3en to the daies of his 3onge wexynge 
age. 
be quemeful to hym ; and he schal se his 
face in hertly" ioye, and he schal 3elde to 
man his ri3tfulnesse. 


t if thou hast 
what, etc. ; the 
answer of He- 


He schal biseche God, and he schal 26lyu to the 


seiyngis of Joob 
is not worth ; 
for Joob axide 
not to dispute 


He schal biholde 27 ¥ith God bi 


presumpcioun, 
men, and he schal seie, Y haue synned, yet coe 
and verili Y haue trespassid; and Y haue  Helyu puttide 
not resseyued, as Y was°® worthi. For? 28 (0 ee 
he’ delyueride his soule, that it schulde decane 
not go in to perischyng, but that he lyu-  inocence bi 


ynge schulde se 1i3t. 
alle these thingis in thre tymes bi alle 


ment; that he aj3en clepe her soulis fro 30 


corrupcioun, and liz3tne in™ the 1iz3t of lyu- 
ynge men. Thou’, Joob, perseyuet, 
here" me, and be thou stille, the” while 
Y speke. 
thou schalt speke, answere thou to me, 
speke thou’; for Y wole§, that thon ap- 
pere iust. 
thou me; be thou stille, and Y schal teche 
thee wisdom. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


And> Helyu pronounside’, and spak1 
also these thingis, Wise men, here 3e my 2 
wordis, and lerned* men, herkne® 3e me; 
for‘ the eere preueth wordis, and the throtes 
demeth metis® bi taast. Chese we doom to4 
vs; and se we among vs, what? is thei 
betere*. For Job! seide™, Y ain iust, ands 
God hath distried™ my doom®|. For whie 
lesynge is in demynge me, and myn arowe4] 
is violent? with out ony’ synne. Who is a7 
man, as Joob is, that drynkith scornyng** 
as watir? that" goith with men worchynge 8 
wickidnesse, and* goitht with vnfeithful 
men? For he" seide, A man schal not9 
plese God, 3he, thou3 he rennethY with 


q hast aery. And u. 
k founde, seith the Lordi. withs. M™Mandturnec. 2 perfijt 1. Oweres. P Forsothe 1. 4 he 
hath 1. Themins. $SOm.1, ttakeheeder, here thout. WOm.1. *Butr. y hast redy I. 
~Om.1. not fo answere1, % And sof sec.m. © schewide forth r. 4 lerud Apr.m.cpnov. © herke 3. 


f forsothe 1. 


coe mete cs. hb what thing. iOm.1  & betere than oother 1. 1 thou, Job a pr.m.s. 
seidest a pr. m. s. 0 turned 1. ° justnesse upsodoun sr. _P violent, and doont. Gmyi. * the 
whiche 1. Sandher, t goith aboute 1. 4 Jobi. Ww renne 1. ; 


Lo! God worchith 23 tence, not so 


myche for him 
silf, as for 
othere men, 
that thei schul- 
den go awey 
fro the erronr, 


and 31 bi which they 


bileuyden, that 
noon is tur- 
mentid no but 


Sotheli® if thou hasty whatt 32 for hise synness 


as also the Lord 
made to be 
knownn in the 
ende of the 


That if thou hast not*, here33 book; and 


therfor Joobs 
axing was not 
veyn. Lire 
here. c. 

§ for Y wole : 
as if he seide, 
¥ wole that 
thou my3tist 
schewe this 
verily. Lire 
here. C. 

i God hath = 
distried my : 
doom; Helyu 
took this of 
that, that Joob 
seide, God hath 
take awey my 
doom, and in 
this he rehers- 
ide Joob falsly, 
for Joob seide 
not this of his 
owne persoone, 
but as conelnd- 
inge this of the 
seiyngis of his 
aduersaries, 
And thon3 Joab 
hadde seid this 
of his owne per- 
soone, 3it He- 
lyu reportide 
him falsly ; for 





XXXIV. 10—25. JOB. 721 


iorenne with hym. Therfore, herty men, 
hereth me; ferr be fro God vnpitous- 
nesse, and fro the Almy3ti wickenesse‘. 
11 Forsothe the werk of man he shal 3elde 
to hym; and after the weies of echone 
izhe shal quite to them. Vereli forsothe 
God shal not condempne in veyn; ne 
the Almy3ti shal turne vpsodoun dom. 
13 Whom other' sette he vp on erthe? or 
whom putte he vp on the world, that he 
14forgide? If he shul dresse to it his herte, 
the spirit of it and blast he shal drawe 
isto hym. Al flesh shal faile to gidere ; 
and a man into askis shal be turned 
isa3jeen. If thou hast thanne vndirstond- 
inge, here that is seid, and herkne the 
izvois of my speche. Whether he that 
looueth not dom mai ben helid? and 
hou thou hym, that is rijtwis, in so 
ismyche condempnest? That seith to the 
king, Apostata; that clepeth dukys vn- 
19 pitous. That taketh not the persones of 
princis, ne knew3 the tiraunt, whan he 
shulde striuen ajen the pore; forsothe 
the werk of his hondis ben alle men. 
20 Feerli* thei shul die, and in mydny3t 
puplis shul be boowid ; and passen, and 
taken awei the violent withoute hond. 
21Forsothe the e3jen of hym vp on the 
weies of men, and alle the goingus of 
22hem he beholdeth. Ther ben not derc- 
nessis, and ther is not shadewe of deth, 
that ther ben hid there that werken 
23 wickidnessis ; ne forsothe more oner in 
mannys power is, that he come to God 
24in to dom. He shal to-trede manye and 
vnnoumbrable; and make to stonden 
25othere men for hem. Forsothe he knew 
the werkis of hem; and therfore he shal 
bringe in ny3t, and thei shul be to-trede. 


God. Therfor 3e men* hertid’, ‘¢hat ts, 10 other thing is 
. 2 é 4 4 to distrie doom, 
endurstonde?, here 3e% me; vunpite, ‘ethir other thing is 


«4 to take aw 
cruelte”, be® fer fro God, and4 wickidnesse dom; for vhi 


fro® Almy3ti God. For‘ he schal 3elde the 11? “strc doom 
i i is euere yuel, 

werk of man to hym; and bi the weies' and may not 
4 k be doon wel, 

of ech! man he schal restore to hym*. For 12 and therfor it 


ore . may not bifalle 
verili God schal not condempne with out Enis Waren 


cause; nether Almy3ti God schal distrie *¢’ ree 


doom!. What othere man hath he ordeyned Le pute 
on™ the" lond®? ether whom hath he set and this may’ 


‘ wel be doon, 
on? the world, which? he made’? If God 14 whanne the 


es. mia 
dressith his* herte to hym, he schal drawe  thésy and not 


ft hy i”? u a rigour, And 

to hym silft his spirit and Bt eas ee 
fleisch schal faile togidere” ; ‘and a* man cnere thing 
. . 2 elyu con- 

schal turne ajen in to aisch. Therfor if 16 cudith in this 


thouY hast? vndurstondyng, here thou that Fao ae 


: . a : tinge to him 
that is seid, and herkne the* vois of my {eo e cide 


speche. Whether he that loueth not doom? 17 that God is 
vniust, ether 
may be maad hool? and hou® condemp- _ distriere of 


. ‘ _ riztfulnesse, it 
nest thou so myche him, that is iust? — conciudith not 


Which? seith to thee kyng, Thou artisienvs him 


Lire here. c. 
apostatat ; whichf clepith the? duykis vn- Keng on 
° ° > Fe 3 . $ uss 
pitouse", ethir unfeithful', ‘Which talkith* 19 aduersite which 
° sniire, 13 
not the persoones of princes, nether knew! _ broust in to 


me bi the vio- 
a tyraunt, whanne™ he stryuede" a3ens a jence of God, 


‘ % and not bi 
pore man; for? alle men ben the werk of eines 


hise hondis. Thei? schulen die sudeyuli, 20 ie heeae: 
‘ seornyng, 
and at mydny3t puplis schulen be troblid4, ee; jane 


s : . scorneth with 
‘ethir schulen be bowid, as* othere bookis but brid and 


, . ff mesure, Goddis 
han’; and‘ schulen passe, and" schulen take Goon. Lire 


‘awei’ ‘a violent® man with out hond{. “re. ¢. 
¢ + apostata ; 
For’ the izen of God? ben on* the weies of 21 one 
a 6 . yng is apo- 
men, and® biholdith® alle’ goyngis of hem. _ stata, ether 


. brekere of re- 
No derknessis ben, and® no schadewe of 22 jjsioun,whanne 


deeth is, that thei, that worchen wickid- he kepith not 
5 Be Sane ristfulnesse and 

nesse, be hid therej; for it is ‘no mores the fue 

5 g good. Lire 

in the power of man’, that he come to here. c. 


t with out 


God in to doom||. God schal al to-breke 24 fond; that is, 
many men and ynnoumbrable ; and® schal ‘Without power 


of aduersaries 
make othere men to stonde for hem. For 25 °f the tyraunt. 
Lire here. c. 

§ be hid there; 


* wickidnes au, ouere 4. ¥ Sodeynli £ sec. m. 


xwise ment, YOm.1. 2 that is, vudirstondinge B. Om. tv. 


2Om. nosy. % Om. 1. het 


dandalsor, ¢be ferfror. {Forsother, € Om.c. 48 werkisp, iOm.n. kmansi. doom 


or rizjiwisnesse 1. ™ upon t. 


2Om.1.  erther Poother upent, 4 that. 


r hath made 1. 


smannust. tOm.1. Band hist. W togidere in diyng1. * and aftirech 1. Y thou, Jobi. 7 hanes. 
athou the 1, >iustdoomr. ¢houthanner. « [ledtisthatr. ear. fhethis1. 8 Om.1. } vupi- 
touse meni. iQOm.1. * He acceptithr. Jhe knowith1, ™ ¢o spare him, whanne1. ® stryuith 1. 


© forsothe 1. P Men 1. 


band heis. © biheldeth s. 
hand her. 


VOL. II. 


4 troblid ether bonid v. 
aungels 1. Yand their *¥ Om.s. * the cruel 1. 
dalle the rs. © neither 1. 


tandascEnupu. ‘Ss Gloss om.inivx. +t and 
y Sothely 1. 2the Lord. 4 biholdynge upon 1. 
fcertis 1, & not ouer in mannus power 1. 


4Z 


722 


26 As vnpitous, he smot hem in the place of 
27men seende. The whiche as bi studie 
wente awei fro hym, and alle his weies 
2athei wolde not vnderstonde. That thei 
make to come to hym the cri of the nedi, 
29 and he here the vois of pore men. Hym 
forsothe grauntende pes, who is that con- 
dempneth ? Sithen he hath’ hid his chere, 
who is that beholdeth hym? And vpon 
30 Jentilis and vpon alle men, the whiche 
maketh to regne an ipocrite man, for the 
sisynnes of the puple. Thanne for I spac 
32 to God, thee also I shal not forfende. If 
I haue errid, thou teche me; if wickid- 
33nesse I spac, I shal adde no mor. Whe- 
ther God of thee asketh it out, for he dis- 
pleside to thee ? Thou forsothe begunne 
to speke, and not I; that if any thing 
3ithou knewe betere, spec. Vnderstondende 
men, speke thei to me; and a wis man, 
35 here he me. Job forsothe folily spac, and 
the woordis of hym soune not disciplyne. 
36 Fader myn, be preued Job vnto the ende; 
ne lene thou fro a man of wickidnesse, 
37that addeth vp on his synnes blasfemye. 
Amongis vs euere” among be he streyn- 
ed; and thanne at the dom terre he God 
with his woordis. 


CAP. XXXV. 


Thaune Ehu these thingus eft spac, 
2Whethir euene to thee seme thi tho3t, 
that thou shuldest seyn, J am mor ri3t- 
3wis than God? Thou seidest forsothe, It 
‘pleseth not* to thee, that is good; or 
what to thee shal profite, if I shul syn- 
4nen? Also J shal answern to thi woordis, 
sand to thi frendis with thee. Behold 
heuene, and loke, and inyndefulli see the 


1 


Yshal g prom. Weft £ prim. 


iand therfor s. Kk nigt upon hem 1. 

P condempnith him 1. 4 And sith 1. 
xOm.1. Y thee fo spekex. 2% Y hanz. 
€ speke thei 1. f here he 1. & hath spoke 1. 
'blasfemye fo God 1. —™ to knowe his blasfemy, and 
thing1. Tnottos. *ifthats. ¢t biholde thou 1. 


r Om. zB. 


JOB. 


| fore castynge I. 


a hane spoke 1. 


XXXIV. 26——-XXXV. 5. 


he knowith the werkis .of hem; therfor' 
he schal brynge yn ni3tkt, and thei schu- 
len be al to-brokun. He smoot hem, 
vnpitouse men, in the place of seinge men. 

Whiche 3eden awei fro hym bi ‘castyng 27 
afore!, and nolden™ vndurstonde alle hise 

weies. That thei schulden make the ery 2s 


of a nedi man to come to hym, 


he schulde here the vois of pore men. For 29 s»deyn deth. 


whanne he grauntith pees", who is® that 


.condempneth?? Sithen4 he hidith his cheer, 


who is that seeth hym? And on folkis 
and on alle men ‘ke hath power* ‘to do 
siche thingiss. Whicht makith ‘a man 3o 
ypocrite” to regne, for the synnes of the 
puple. Therfor for Y haue spoke to God, 31 
also Y schal not forbede theeY. If Y732 
erride, teche thou me; if Y .spak? wickid- 
nesse, Y schal no more adde>. Whetheras 
God axith that wickidnesse of thee, for it 
displeside thee? For‘ thou hast bigunne to 
speke, and not Y; that if thou knowist 
ony thing betere, speke thou’. Men vndur- 
stondynge, speke® to me; and a wise man, 
heref me. Forsothe Joob spak® folili, and 35 
hise wordis sownen not techyng". My fa-36 
dir, be Joob preuede ‘til to! the ende; 
ceesse thou not fro the man of wickid- 
nesse, ‘that addith* blasfemye! ouer hise 37 
synnes. Be he constreyned among vs in 
the meene tyme; and™ thanne bi hise 
wordis stire he God to the® doom. 


CAP. XXXV. 


Therfor Helyu spak eft these thingis, 1 
Whethir thi thou3t semeth euene, ‘ethers 
ri3tful°, to thee, that thou schuldist seie, 
Y am rijtfulere than God}? For? thous 
seidist, That, that is good, plesith not* 
thee; ethir what profitith it to thee, 
ifs Y do synne? Therfor Y schal an-4 
swere to thi wordis, and to thi frendis 
with thee. Se thou, and biholdet he-s 


x shal not plesen £ pr. m. 


™m wolden not 1. " Vijf 1. o is it I. 


s Om, BY. t Het. W an ypocrite man 1. 
haddetor. c¢Certis1. 4 thou that 1. 
hchastisyng 1. iuntor © the whiche puttith 1. 
1. nOmr °Om. 1 P Forsothe x. 41 that 


that is, in 
Goddis know- 
ing; netheles 
God is seid to 
as 26 knowe not hem 
hi knowing of 
appreuyng. 


aftir that he is 
damnyd hi ful 


and that “re. ©: 


Sulere than 

seide neuere 

this, but Helyu 
34 concludide this 


stondinge of 
J 


good plesith 


lyu took yuele 
this of that, 


Lire here. c. 
{| in to doom ; 
sentence. Lire 
+ ny3t ; that is, 


Lire here. c. 


t ¥ am rizt- 


God ; Joob 










of fals vndir- 


oobs wordis. 
That that is 


not thee; He. 


that Joob seide, 
Thou; Y am 
iust, Y sbal not 
reise myn heed. 
Here Helyu vn- 
durstood him 
thus, that he 
seide, that ri3t- 
fulnesse plesith 
not God; and 
bi this that 
Joob seide to 
God, Whi suf- 
frist thou me 
not tobe cleene? 
Helyu vndur- 
stood, that Joob 
menyde thus, 
that sum profit 
encresside to 
God bi this, 
that Joob was 
holdun in 
synne, ether in 
the peyne of 
syone. Lire 
here. C. 


XXXV. 6—XXXVL 7. JOB. 723 


6cloudis, that is he3ere than thou. If thon 
shalt synnen, what shalt thou no3e to 
hym ? and if thi wickidnessesY be mul- 
tiplied, what shalt thou don aj3en hym? 
7 But if thou shalt do ri3twisli, what shalt 
thou 3iue to hym; ‘or what of thin hond 
she shal take? To man that is lic thee, 
thin vnpitousnesse shal no3e; and the sone 
9of man thi riz3twisnesse shal helpe. For 
the multitude of chalengeres thei shul 
crie, and 3elle out for the fors of the arm 
10 of tirauntis. And he seide not, Where is 
God, that made me, and that 3af ditees 
lin the ny3t? That techeth vs ouer the 
bestis of the erthe, ouer the foulis of he- 
i2uene shal lernen vs. There thei shul crie, 
and he shal not heren, for the pride of 
13euele men. Forsothe not in veyn God 
shal heren, and the Almy3ti beholde shal 
14the causis of alle men. Also whan thou 
shal sein, He beholdith? not; be thou de- 
1smed beforn hym, and abid hym. Now for- 
sothe he bringeth not in his wodnesse, 
ne the hydons gilte is vengid gretli. 
16 Thanne Job in vein openede his mouth, 
and withoute kunnynge woordis multi- 
plieth. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Also Eliu addende these thingus spac, 
2Sustene me a litil while, and I shal 
shewen to thee; 3it forsothe I haue that 

3for God I speke. I shal azeen aske my 
kunnyng? fro the bygynnyng; and my 

awerkere I shal proue ri3twis. Verili for- 
sothe and withoute lesing my woordus, 

and perfit kunnyng shal be preued to 

5thee. God my3ti men throwith not awei, 
6sithen he is my3ti; but he saueth not vn- 
pitous men, and dom to pore men he 

73yueth. He shal not take awei fro the 
ri3twis his e3en; and kingis in sete he 

setteth in to euermor, and thider thei 

ywyckidnes 4. 7 behalt c prim. 


uand wile that1. WOm.1, *dor. Y Godt. 


uene, and biholde thou the eir, that” 
God is hizere than thou. If thou synnest6 
‘azens hym”, what schalt thou anoye hym? 
and if thi wickidnessis ben multiplied, 
what schalt thou do ajens hym? Certis if7 
thou doist* iustli, what schalt thou 3yue 
to hymY; ether what schal he take of thin 
hond ? Thi wickidnesse schal anoie a man, g 
which? is lijk® thee; and thi rijtfuluesse> 
schal helpe the sone of a inan. Thei%» 
schulen cry for the multitude of fals 
chalengeris, and thei schulen weile for 
the violence of the arm! of tirauntis. And io 
Joob seide not, Where is God, that made 
me, and that 3af songist in the ny3t? t Metsu 


songis, etc. $ 


Which? God techith vs aboue the beestis 11 that is, revela- 
ciouns to the 


of erthe, and he schal teche vs aboue the _ teching of men, 
briddis of heuene. There thei schulen 12 yn Ruel 
erye, and God schal not here’, for the yrtun ofte 0 
pride of yuele men. For God schal not 13s0sis. Lire 
here with out cause, and Almy3ti God 

schal biholde the causis of ech man. 3he, 14 

whanne thou seist, He biholdith not; be 

thou' demed bifor hym, and abide thou 

hym. For now he* bryngith not in hisis 

strong veniaunce, nether! vengith ‘greetli 

felonye™. Therfor Joob openith his mouth 16 

in veyn, and multiplieth wordis with out 


kunnyug. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


Also Helyu addide, and spak these: 
thingis, Suffre” thou me a litil, and Ye 
schal schewe to thee; for 3it Y haue that, 
that Y schal speke for God. Y schals 
reherse my kunnyng fro the bigynnyng ; 
and Y schal® preue my worchere iust. For 4 
verili my wordis ben with out leesyng, 
and? perfit kunnyng schal be preued to 
thee. God castith not awei my3ti ment,5 ¢ God custith 
sithen he is my3ti; but he saueth note 7%, 738 


men}? fro her 


wickid men, and he 3yueth dom to pore power, no but 
f rote 5 for synne. Lire 

men. He takith not awei hise iz3en froz here. c. 

a iust man ; and he settith kyngis in seete 


with out ende, and thei ben reisid™ there. 
a sentence E pr. m. b Om. au. 


Zthatr. @lijkto1. > rigtwisnesse1. ¢ Men 1. 


4 power. © And the which 1. fOm.1, & here hemi, 4 Forsothet. ithon herfor1. * the Lord 1. 
‘ether he 1. ™ felonyes greetli hcere 1. " Job, snffrer. 0° Om. aprem. Pand bihkemt. in her i. 


T reisid up 1. 


4272 


724 


sben rerid vp. And if thei shul ben in 
cheynes, and ben bounde with cordis of 
9porenesse, he shal shewe to them ther 
werkis, aud ther hidous giltis; for cruel 
10they weren. Also he shal opene the ere 
of hem, that he chastise; and he shal 
speke, that thei be turned a3een fro wick- 
Nidnesse. If thei shuln here, and kepe 
wel, thei shul fille? ther dajes in goode, 
yzand ther 3eris in glorie. If forsothe 
thei shul not heren, they shul passe 
13 bi swerd, and be wastid in folie. Feyn- 
eres and felle men terren the wrathe 
of God; and thei shul not crie, whan 
14thei shul be bounden. The soule of hem 
shal die in tempest; and the lif of hem 
1samong wommanysh meu. He shal de- 
liuere the pore man fro his anguysh; and 
he shal opene his ere in tribulacioun. 
16Therfore he shal saue thee fro the 
streite month most widly, not® hauende 
a ground vnder itself’; the reste forsothe 
17 0f thi bord shal be full of fatnesse. Thi 
canse as of an vnpitous man is demed ; 
forsothe thi cause and dom thou shalt 
isfinde. Thanne ouercome thee not wrathe, 
that any man thou opresse ; ne the inulti- 
19tude of 3iftis bowe thee. Do doun thi 
mykilnesse withoute tribulacioun, and 
20alle the stronge men in strengthe. Ne 
drawe thou along the ny3t, that puplis 
21stejen vp for hem. Be war, ne bowe thou 
to wickidnesse; that forsothe thou hast 
begunne to folewe aftyr wrecchidnesse. 
22Lo! he3e God in his streugthe, and noon 
23to hym lic in lawe 3iueres. Who shall 
moun serchen his weies ? or who is hardy 
to sei to hym, Thou wro;tist wickid- 
2anesse? Ha® mynde, that thou vnknowist 
the werk of hym, of whichef men writen. 
25 Alle men seen hym; eche shal beholde$’ 
2eaferr. Lo! God gret", ouercomende onre 
kunnyng; the noumbre of the 3eris of 


> fulfilen seFun. 


© now E pr.m. and not au, 
& beholde hym an. 


b is greet a. 


8 Om.1. t chastise hem 1. 
filer. @kepens. >wraththe1. ©¢ be 1. 
handi.  iand thir. K wraththe 1. 
" strengthe, oppressinge pore men Vv. 


: ° the ny3t 1. 
* wrou3t with c. © men han 1, 


wand ech 1. 


JOB. 


d himself 2 pr.m. ¢ Haue aern. 


u speke fo hemi. W froher 1. 

@ wommiauishe men 1. 
1 greetnesse wilfully 1. greetnesse of pride v. 
P stie up 1. 


XXXVI. 8—26. 


And if thei ben in chaynes, and bens 

boundun with the roopis of pouert, he schal 9 

shewe to hem her werkis, and her grete 

trespassis; for thei weren violent, ‘ethir 

rauenours’, Also he schal opene her eere, 10 

that be chastise‘; and he schal speke", that 

thei turne ajen fro” wickidnesse. If theil1 

heren*, and kepen’, thei schulen fille? her 

daies in good, and her 3eris in glorie. 

Sotheli if thei heren? not, thei schulen 12 

passe bi swerd, and thei schulen be wastid 

in foli. Feyneris and false men stiren the 13 

ire’ of God; and thei schulen not cryet, 

whanne thei ben boundun. The soule of 1 eo aa 
hem schal die* in tempest ; and the lijf of {22 sows = 
hem among ‘men of wymmens condi- ere. ¢. 
ciouns'{. He® schal delynere a pore mam 15 + among menof _ 
fro his angwisch; and he schal opene ‘the @2younes that : 
eere of hymf in tribulacioun. 


+ and they 


Therfor he 1's: among bem ~ 


3 that moun not 
schal saue thee fro the streit mouth of the defende hem 


: ; ilf fro yuels 
broddeste ¢ribudacioun, and not hauynge fallingeon hemi 
a foundement vndur it; sothelig the rest %°""* 
of thi table schal be ful of fatnesse. Thi17 


cause is demed as the cause of a wickid 

man; forsothe® thou -schalt resseyue thi 
cause and' doom. Therfor ire* ouercome1s 
thee not, that thou oppresse ony man; 

< Pee § Putte doun 

and the multitude of 3iftis bowe thee not. ti greetnesse ; 
Putte doun thi greetnesse!§ with out tribu- 19 Pate Pade 
lacioun, and putte™ doun alle stronge men  “*hout tribu. 

: ey lacioun ; that 
bi strengthe". Dilaie thou not ny3t°, that 20 is, Neste om 

. . alle eft into 
puplis stie? for hem. Be thou war, that 21 tribulacioun. 
spe Lire here. ¢. 

thou bowe not to wickidnesse; for1 thou 3; strengthe ; 
hast bigunne to sue this wechkidnesse aftir paid an 
wretchidnesse. 
strengthe, and noon is" lijk® hym among here. c. Dix 
laye thou not 


Lo! God is hi3 in his 22 Pressing of pore 
men. Lire 
the 3yueris of lawe. Who mai seke out 23ny3; thatis, 


° . ° t 

the weies of God? ethir who dar seie to this sentenee, 
t “Ale: 9 for in sich 

hym, Thou hast wrou3tt wickidnesse : dilaiyng sel 


Haue thou mynde, that thou knowist not 24 men moun ga- 
dere to hem a 


his werk, of whom men™ sungun. Alle 25 multitude bi 
. 6 which thou 

men seen God; ech” man biholdith afer.  snaist not vse 
! 2 5 . _ 96 Ti3tfulnesse. 

Lo! Ged ts greet, ouercomynge oure kun- 2677 "ee 


f the whiche arru. 


* heren him 1. ¥ kepenhis heestis 1. 2 ful- 
© The Lord:1. fhiseere1. 8 andy. 
m putte thou 1. 


q forsothe 1. ‘theris1, * lijk tor. 


XXXVI. 27-——XXXVII. 12. 


27hym vneymable. That doth awei the 
dropis' of rein‘; and heeldeth out we- 
28deres at the licnesse of swolewis, that 
of the cloudis flowen, that before weuen 
29 alle thingus theraboue. If he wile strecche 
300ut cloudis as his tent, and leitne with 
his li3t fro aboue, also the vtmost! of the 
31se he shal couere. Bi these thingis for- 
sothe he demeth puplis, and 3iueth mete 
32to manye deadli thingus. In the hond he 
hideth 1i3t; and comaundeth to it, that 
aseft it come to. He tellith of” it to his 
frend, that his possessioun it be; and to 
it he mai ste3en vp. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


1 Vpon that mych dradde myn herte, 
zgand is moued out fro" his place. He® 
shal heren heringe in gastnesseP of his 
vois, and the soun goende out of the 
3mouth of hym. Ouer alle heuenys he be- 
holdeth ; and the 1i3t of hym vp on the 
4termes of the erthe. After hym shal rore 
sounyng, he shal thunder with the vois 
of his mykilnesse; and he shal not ben 
enserchid, whan shal ben herd the vois 
sof hym. God shal thundre in his vois 
merueilously, that doth grete thingus and 
svnserchable. That comaundeth to the 
snow3, that it ‘come doun vp on erthe', 
and to reynes of winter, and to wederes 
7of his strengthe. That marketh in the 
hond of alle men, that alle men arowe 
sshulden knowen his werkis. The beste 
shal go in to his lurking place, and in his 
ydieh he shal abide. Fro the innermor 
shal gon out tempest’, and fro the north 
iwwsterre cold. God blowende, waxeth to- 
gidere frost; and eft moost wide ben 
i) shed out watris. Whete desirith cloudis; 
igand cloudis sprengen' ther li3t. That gon 
alle thingus bi enuyroun, whider euere 
thou gost, the wil of the gouernere shal 


JOB. 


725 


nyng; the nowmbre of hise 3eeris is with 
out noumbre. Which* takith aweiY the27 
dropis of reyn; and schedith? out reynes at 
the licnesse of floodjatis, whiche* comen? 28 
doun of the® cloudis, that hilen alle thingis 
aboue. If he wole stretche forthe cloudis 29 
as lis teute, and leite with his li3t froso 
aboue, he schal hile, 3he, the herris of the 31 
see. For bi these thingis he demeth puplis, 
and 3yueth mete to many deedli men. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


In® hondis he’ hidith lijtt; and® co-32 
maundith it, that it come eft. He tellith of3: 
it to his freend, that it is his possessioun ; 
and that he may stie" to it. Myn herte1 
dredde of this thing, and is' moued out* of 
his place. It sehal here an heryng in thee 
feerdfulnesse of his vois, and a sown 
comynge forth of his mouth. He biholdiths 
ouere alle heuenes ; and his li3t 7s ouere the 
termes of erthe!. Sown™{ schal rore aftir4 
hym, he" schal thundre with the vois of 
his greetnesse ; and it schal not be sou3t 
out, whanne his vois is herd. God sehals 
thundre in his vois wondurfulli, that° 
makith grete thingis andP that moun not 
be sou;t out. Which? comaundith to® thee 
snow to come doun on‘ erthe, and to the 
reynes of wijntir, and to the reynes of his 
strengthe. Which" markith in the hond of7 
alle men, that alle men knowe her werkis. 
An vnresonable beeste schal go in to" hiss 
denne, and schal dwelle in his caue, ‘e¢hir 
derke place”. Tempestis* sechulenY go out 9 
fro the ynnere thingis, and coold fro 
Arturus?. Whanne God makith blowyng, 10 
frost? wexith togidere; and eft ful brood 
watris ben sched€ out’, Whete desirith 1 
cloudis, and cloudis spreeden abrood her 
liz3t. Whiche® cloudes cumpassen alle 12 
thingis bif cumpas, whidur euere the wil 
of the gouernour ledith tho’, to al thing 


‘droop 4. ‘ hisreyne 4. lvttermost zeru. ™Om. au. of 4, Ita. Pferdnes4. 4 steye 
vp Eprom. *theerthe 4. ‘*the tempest ser.  sprongen am. 

xHer yOm.1. Zheheeldith:. *the whicher, > camenc. cometh p. ¢Om.1. 4 Forsothe 1. 
cInhkis1. fGodi. Sandher. bstieupr. ‘itisas. ‘ therfore out 1. the erthes. ™ Greet 
sownt. M"andhes. Owhicher POm.1 4 Heitisthat1. 'Om.1s. Supontr t Her 
uOm1r ¥ Om.1. x Tempest 1. Yeschal1. 2 fro the 1. a thal is a signe of v. sterris in the 
northi marg. © frost1. Cheld1. 4 out therof'1. ¢€ The whicher. faboute biz. & hem 1. 


+ In hondis he 
hidith lizt ; 

that is, bi the 
vertu and or- 
denaunce of 
God the list of 
grace and of 
glorie is hid 

to summen, as 
to chosun men 5 
and that this is 
yndirstondun 
of goostly list, 
it is opyn bi 
this, that sueth. 
And he tellith 
af it to his 
frend ; that is, 
to chosun men, 
for charite de- 
partith bitwixe 
the sones of 
rewme and of 
perdicioun. 

he may stie to 
it; that is, to 
the li3t of glorie, 
to which a man 
may come with 
Goddis help, 
and bi meedeful 
werkis; this list 
of glorie is 
maad redi onely 
to loued men ; 
and therfor ech 
man owith for 
to drede, lest 
perauenture he 
be not of the 
noumbre of 
chosun men, 
for defaute of 
goode werkis. 
Lire here. c. 

2 Sown ; that 
is, thundur. 
Lire here. c. 


726 


lede, to alle thingus that he shal comaunde 
to them vp on the face of the round- 
isnesse of erthis; or in o lynage, or in his 
erthe, or in what euere place of his mercy 
hem he shal comaunde to be founde. 
14Herene these thingus, Job; and stond, 
isand behold the merueilis of God. Whe- 
ther thou wost, whan God comaundide to 
reynes, that thei shulden shewe the li3t of 
16the cloudis of hym? Whether thou hast 
knowen the sties of the cloudis, grete and 
17 parfit kunnyngis? Whether thi clothis 
ben not hote, whan the erthe shal be 
1s blowe thur3 with the south ? Thou per- 
auenture with hym forgedist heuenes, 
that most sad, as with bras, ben foundid. 
19 Shew3 to vs, what wee seyn to hyin ; wee 
20forsothe ben wrappid in dercnessis. Who 
shal telle to hym, that I speke? also if a 
man shal speke, he shal be deuourid. 
21 And now thei see not li3t; feerli the eir 
shal be wro3t togidere in to cloudis, and 
22 ouergoende wind shal driue them. Fro 
the north shal come gold, and fro God 
23 dredful preising. Wrthili hym finde wee 
moun not; gret in strengthe, and dom, 
and ri3twisnesse, that he mai not be told 
2tout. Therfore men shuldreden hym; and 
alle that to themself ben sen" to be wise, 
shuln not ben hardy to beholden. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


1 Answerende forsothe the Lord to Job 
2fro the whirlewind seide, Who is this, 
wrappende in sentencis with woordis vn- 
3wise ? Gird as a man thi leendis; I shal 
4aske thee, and thou answere to me. Wher 
were thou, whan I sette the founde- 
mens of the erthe? sheu to me, if thou 
shast vnderstonding. Who putte the me- 
suris of it, if thou hast knowen? or who 
6stra3te vp on it a line? Vp on what the’ 
feet of it ben sad? who dide doun the 
7corner ston of it, wlan me shulden preise 


JOB. 


XXXVII. 13—-XXXVIII. 7. 


which he comaundith ‘to tho' on* the face 


of the world; whether in o lynage, ethir in 13 


his lond!, ether in what euer place of his 
merci he comaundith tho to be foundun. 


t+ in hap thou 
madist etc.; he 
seith this in 
scorn of Joub. 
Lire here. c. 
ta man schal 
be deuourid ; 


Joob, herkene thou these thingis ; stonde 14 that is, schal 


thou, and biholde the meruels of God. 
Whethir thou: woost, whanne God co- 
maundide to the reynes, that tho schulen 


schewe the li3t of hise cloudis? Whether 16 


thou knowist the grete weies of™ cloudis, 
and® perfit kunnyngis® ? 
cloothis ben not hoote, whanne the erthe is 
blowun? with the south? 
madistt with hym’ heuenes, which moost 


In hap thou 1s 


not mow suffre; 
as the peple 
seide to Moises 


15 in xxj. ¢°. of 


Exody; ether 
thus, 3he, ifa 
man spekith, it 
schal be,de- 
uourid ; that is, 
he word schal 


Whether thi17be deuourid of 


the greetnesse of 
mater, as a litil 
flood is de- 
nourid of the 
see. Lire here. 


° Cc. 
sad ben foundid, as of bras. Schewe thow19§ and alle men 


to vs", what we schulen seie to hym; for® 


we ben wlappid in derknessis. Who schal 20 


telle to hym'‘, what thingis Y speke ? 3he, 
if he spekith, a man schal be deuouridf. 


Aud now men seen not lij3t; the eir schal2! 


be maad thicke sudenli in to cloudis, and 
wynd passynge schal dryue awei tho. 


that semen to 
hem silf to be 
wise ; of thingis 
bifor seid it is 
opyn, that He- 
lyu acordide 
with Joob in 
summe thingis, 
and in othere 
thingis he took 
not wel the yn- 
durstonding of 
Joob, and so he 


Gold schal come fro the north, and" ferdful] 22 meddlide ofte 


preisyng of God. For” we moun* 
fynde himY worthili; he 7s greet in 
strengthe, and in doom, and in ri3tfulnesse, 
and? may not be teld out. 
schulen drede hym; and alle men, that 
semen to hem silf to be wise§, schulen not 
be hardi to bibolde?. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


Forsothe> the Lord answeride fro thei 
whirlewynd to Joob, and seide, Who is2 
this man, wlappynge® sentences with vn- 
wise wordis? Girde thou as a man this 
leendis; Y schal axe thee, and answere 
thou to? me. Where were thou, whanne Y 4 
settide® the foundementis off erthe? schewe 
thou to me, if thou hast vndurstondyng. 
Who settide’ mesures" therof, if thous 
knowisti? ethir who stretchide forth a 
lyne theronne*? On! what thing ben thes 
foundementis therof maad fast ? ether who 


u Om. 4H. 
htowhicht. ihemr -uponr lhoonds. ™ofther, "andther. © kunnyngis of thot. 
Phlower. 4God1. 'God1. §* forsother. ¢tGod1 Uandther. W Om.a sec.m, Sothely 1. 
“mower. ¥ Om. a pr.m. BCEHLPUVX. iit. Zand her. ®biholde God1. > Certiss. ¢ wlappynge 
togidrer. Om.1. setter. fofther. hath setts.  ® the mesures 1. 


k therupon 1. theronne, shewe thou to me s. 


1 Up ont. 


i knowist, telle thou 1. 


dispisingis 


Not 23 a3enus Joob, 


for whiche Joob 
nolde answere 
him, but more 
be stille, and 


Therfor men 24 chees to de- 


parte himsilf 
fro chidingis, bi 
the seying of 
Paul. Therfor 
God answeride 
for Joob, and 
seide, Who is 
this man wlap- 
pinge sentensis, 
for thou3 he 
had seid many 
trewe thingis 
of the power 
and wisdom of 
God, netheles 
he seide not 
clerely, and he 
meddlide many 
dispitouse 
wordis a3enus 
Joob. And this 
felyu took the 
stide of deter- 
minynge the 
questioun of 
Goddis poruy- 
aunce, and 

to this de- 
termynacioun 
God aloone is 
sufficient; and 





XXXVIII. 8—26. 


togidere the morutid sterris, and alle- the 
ssones of God shulden io3en ? Who closede 
the se with doris, whan it brac out as 
9goende forth of the wombe? Whan I 
shuld setten the cloude his clothing, and 
with derenesse it, as with clothis of vn- 
spekende childhed, I wrappide aboute. 
10I enuyrounde it with my termes, and 
11sette the heenglis, and doris; and seide, 
Vnto’ hider thou shalt come, and no fer- 
there gon; and heer thou shalt breke to- 
12 gidere thi swellende flodis. Whether aftir 
thi rising thou comaundedist to the moru- 
tid, and hast shewid to the dai spring his 
13place? Whethir thou hast holde smyt- 
ende togidere the vtmostis” of the erthe, 
and hast smyten out the vnpitous men 
of it? The litle marke shal be restorid 
15as cley, and shal stonde as clothing. His 
liz3t shal be take awei fro the vnpitous, 
and the he3e arm shal be broke togidere. 
16 Whether thou wentist in the depthe of the 
se, and in the laste thingus of the derke 
17 depthe* of the se thou hast ful go? Whe- 
ther to thee ben opened the 3atis of deth, 
and the derke doris thou hast seen? 
is Whether thou hast beholde the breede of 
the erthe? Sheu to me, if thou hast 
i9knowen alle thingis, in what weie 1i3t 
dwellith, and of derenessis what is the 
20place; that thou lede eche man to hys 
termes, and vnderstonde the sties of his 
2zthous. Thou wistist thanne, that thou 
were to be born, and the noumbre of thi 
22da3es thou haddest knowe? Whether 
wentist thou in to the tresoris of snow3, 
or the tresoris of hail thou hast beholde ? 
23that I haue maad redi in to the time of 
the enemy, in to the dai of fi3t, and of 
21bataile. Bi what weie is sprengd 1i3t, 
25deuyded is hete vp on erthe? Who 3af 
to the most hidous weder cours, and weie 
26of the sounende thunder? That it shulde 


Y How longe r pr. m. 


JOB. 


w vttermostis “EF. 


727 


sente doun the corner stoon therof, whanne7_ therfor God re- 
eae 5 preueth his pre- 
the morew sterris™{ herieden® me togi- — sumpcioun, and 
dere, and alle the sones of God sungun? ‘fy Voi" 
ioyfuli ? Who closide togidere the see with s seide, Melyn is 
doris, whanne it brak out comynge? forth — entremete her- 
5 , of, Lire here. c. 
as of the wombe? Whanne Y settide a9 + the morewe 
cloude the hilyng therof4, and Y wlappide ate he 
it with derknesse, as with clothis of 3ong™ ‘Mt vere 
childhed. Y cumpasside it* with my termes, 19 besynn ye, 


= : i with cleer 
and Y settide' a barre, and doris"; and Y 11 heuene, bifor 


seide, ‘Til hidur® thou schalt come, and ee ae 
thou schalt not go forth* ferthere; and "* 
here thou schalt breke togidere thi bol- 

nynge wawis. Whethir aftir thi birthe 12 

thou comaundistY to the bigynnyng of 

dai*, and schewidist to the morewtid his 

place? Whethir thou heldist schakynge 13 

togidere the laste partis of erthe, and 

schakedist awei wickid men therfro? A114 

seeling schal be restorid as cley, and it 

schal stonde as a* cloth. The 1i3t of wickid 15 

men schal be takun> awey fro hem, and 

an hi3 arm¢{ schal be brokun. Whiethir 16 ¢ 274 a his 
thou entridist’ in to the depthe of the see, kee alr 
and walkidist® in the laste partis of thef Movie", 
occiané ? Whether the 3atis of deeth ben 17 fun sunyyme 
openyd to thee, and ‘siest thou" the derk alee a 
doris? Whethir thou hast bihelde theis 

brede of erthe'? Schewe thou to me, if 

thou knowist alle thingis, in what weiei9 

the lijt dwellith, and which is* the 

place of derknesse!; that thou lede™ ech 20 

thing to hise termes, and" thou vndur- 

stonde the weies of his hows. Wistist21 

thou thanne, that thou schuldist be borun, 

and knew thou the noumbre of thi daies ? 

Whethir thou entridist in to the tresours 22 

of snow, ether biheldist thou the tresours 

of hail? whiche thingis Y made redy in toe3 

the tyme of an enemy, in to the dai of 

fij3tyng and of batel. Bi what weie is the 21 

liz3t spred abrood, heete® is departid on? 

erthe? Who 3af cours to the strongeste 25 


x depnesse AEFH. 


™ that is, aungels v marg. ™ preiseden 1, © sungon thanne 1. Pgoyng1. ofthe seer. Om, s. 
sthe seer. tputtidetoit1. adores. WHidurto1 *Om.1. Y comaundidist wxf. 7 the dai 1. 
2Om.1. dons. armor proud power t. that is, power of pryde v marg. ‘hast entrid 1, © hast 
walked 1. fOm.s. & depthe 1. the greet west see Vv marg. h thou hast seen 1. i the erthe 1. 
kit is a pr. m. 1 derknessis EFULMNOSvVXbf. m Jede out s. n and that 1. © and bi what wey 
heete 1. Pup ont. 


728 


reyne vp on erthe withoute man, in 
desert wher noon of dedly men dwelleth ? 
27 That he shulde fulfille the space with- 
oute wei and desolat, and bringe forth 
2s grene erbis? Who is the fader of reyn, 
2or who gat dropis of deu? Fro whos 
wombe wente out iys, and frost fro heuene 
30 who gat? In the licnesse of a ston watris 
ben hardid, and the vtmostY of the se 
31js streyned togidere. Whether thou art 
strong to ioyne the shynende seue’ sterres, 
or thou shalt moun scatere the cumpas of 
szthe north sterre? Whether thou bringist 
forth the dai sterre in his time, and the 
euetid sterre vp on the sones of the erthe 
33thou makist to rise? Whether thou hast 
knowe the ordre of heuene, and shalt 
34putte his resoun in the erthe? Whether 
thou shalt rere thi vois in to a lytil 
cloude, and the bure of watris shal couere 
35thee ? Whether thou shalt sende leitis, 
and thei shul go, and turnende a3een 
thei shul sey to thee, Wee be nee3h ? 
36 Who putte in the entrailis of a man wis- 
dam, and* who 3af to the cok vnderstond- 
37ing? Who shal tellen out the resoun of 
heuenus, and the singing of heuene who 
38shal make to slepe? Whanne was pouder 
held in the erthe, and clottis weren 
39clunge togidere? Whether thou shalt 
take the prei of the leounesse, and the 
soule of hir whelpis thou shalt fulfille, 
4owhan thei lyn in dichis, and in dennus 
4ithei aspien? Who maketh redi to the 
crowe his mete, whan his briddis crie to 
God, hider and thider waggende, forthi 
that thei han no metis ? 


CAP. XXXIX. 


1 Whether thou hast knowen the time 
of the berthe of wilde capretis in stonys, 
or thou hast waitid hindis berende calf ? 

2 Thou hast noumbrid the monethis of con- 


JOB. 


XXXVI. 27—XXXIX, 2, 


reyn, and weie of the thundur sownynge ? 26 
That it schulde reyne on the erthe with out 
man in desert, where noon of4 deedli men 
dwellith ? That it schulde fille a lond with 27 
out weie and desolat, and" schulde brynge 
forth greene eerbis? Who is fadir’ of28 
reyn, ether who gendride the dropis of 
deew ? Of whos wombe j3ede out iys,29 
and who gendride* frost" fro heuene ? Wa-30 
tris ben maad hard in the licnesse of stoon, 
and the ouer” part of* occianY is streyned 
togidere. Whether thou schalt mowe?31 
joyne togidere schynynge sterris Pliades?, 
ethir thou schalt mowe distrie the cumpas 
of Arturis® ? Whether thou bryngist forth 32 
Lucifer, ‘that is*, dai® sterre®, in his tyme, 
and makist euenef sterre to rise on® the 
sones of erthe? Whether thou knowist the 33 
ordre of heuene, and schalt sette the resoun 
therof in® erthe? Whethir thou schalt3: 
reise thi vois in to a cloudet, and the fers- + wher thou 
nesse of watris schal hile thee? Whethir 35%? reise tt 


vois in lo a 
thon schalt sende! leitis, and tho* schulen i eae i 

SC. make the 
gol, and tho schulen turne ajen, and  voisofthundur, 


; which is gedrid 
schulen scie to thee, We ben present ? Who 36 in the cual 


puttide™ wisdoom in” the entrailis{ of man, repli 
ethir who 3af vndurstondyng to the cok? that is, soule. 
Who schal telle out the resoun of heuenes, 37 

and who schal make acordyng of heuene 

to sleep? Whanne dust was foundid® in? 3s 

the? erthe, and’ clottis weren ioyned to- 

gidere ? Whether thou schalt take prey to39 

the lionesse, and schalt fille the soulis® of 

hir whelpis, whanne thot liggen in caues, 40 

and aspien in dennes? Who makith redi41 

for" the crowe his mete, whanne hise 

briddis crien to God, and wandren aboute, 

for tho’ han not meetis ? 


CAP. XXXIX. 


Whethir thou knowist the tyme of! 
birthe of wielde geet in stoonys, ethir 
hast thou aspied hyndis bryngynge forth 
calues? Hast thou noumbrid the monethis 2 


Yvttermost 4ErN. 2seuen 4H. ® Om. c. 
190Om,s. Tand thatit1. §fadrist. +t gaat. Ufrost rs. ®ouerer nop. *Om.o. Y¥ depthe 1. 
2 Om. 1. a that is, the seuen sterris 1 marg. » Arturis, the whiche is euen northi. Cori. 4a dai Fsx. 
the dai br. © Gloss om. inv. ftheeuene ms. & upont. hons. tsende outr. & their. 1 go forth 1. 


m hath putt 1. 


t "tor. © foundun ELeu. 
ttheii. tos, 


W thei 1. 


Y on vf. 


4Om. plures. and whannet. 8 gredynesse 1. 


XXXIX. 3—21, 


ceyuyng of hem, and thou hast knowe 
3the time of the birthe of hem? Thei ben 
bowid to the frut of kinde, and beren; 
4and ‘roringns thei senden® out. The sones 
of hem ben seuered, and go to the feding ; 
thei gon out, and ben not turned ajeen 
5to them. Who lafte the asse fre, and 
éhis bondis who looside? To whom I 3af 
in wildernesse an hous, and his taber- 
znaclis in the lond of bareynte. He de- 
‘spiseth the multitude of the cite; the cry 
sof the pletere he hereth not. He be- 
holdeth aboute the hillis of hys leswe, 
and alle grene growende thingis he 
9secheth. Whether the vnycorn shal wiln 
serue to thee, or® shal dwelle at thi 
10cracche ? Whether shalt thou tie to eren 
the vnycorn with thi bridil, or’ he shal 
11 breke clottis of valeis after thee? Whe- 
ther trost thou shalt han in the grete 
strengthe of hym, and leuen to hym thi 
12trauailis? Whether takist thou to hym, 
that seed he 3eelde to thee, and thi corn 
13flor he gedere®? The fether of a stru- 
cioun is lic to the fetheris of a ierfakoun, 
14 and of a goshauk ; that leueth hir® eiren 
in the erthe, thou perauenture in pouder 
isshalt make them hot. She for3et, that 
the foot to-trede them, or beste of the 
16 feeld to-brose. She is maad hard to hir 
sones, as tho3 thei be not hiris; in veyn 
she trauailide, no drede constreynende. 
17God forsothe priuede hir wisdam, and 
183af not to hir vnderstonding. Whan time 
were, in hei3te she rerede out hir weengis; 
scorneth the hors, and the ste3ere vp of 
19it. Whether shalt thou 3iue to the hors 
strengthe, or don aboute his necke ney- 
20enge? Whether shalt thou reren hym as 
locustis? The glorie of his nese therlis 
21 ferd. The erthe the houe delueth, hardili 
he gladeth out; in to the’ ajencomyng 


> besily thei nurschen E pr.m. 


Y bowid dounr. 2 Om.1. 
© goen forth 1. fF thei 1. 

m fame asses, of a I. 
t that he schal 1. 


x Thei 1. 
Jro hem 1. 
\that wijlde asse ben 1. 
‘the valeys s. 8 trowe 1. 


ostricche 1. 2 tho eyren 1. ® hem 1. 
fhe hath not 3ouen?l. Sanr 4 the rx. 
™ reyse up 1. "an hors 1. 


VOL. II. 


© outher 4EFH. 


& so caluen 1. 
& thei turnen 1. 
n the 1. 
u ijk to 1. 
b The ostricche 1. 
i ridere upon him 1. 


JOB. 729 


of her conseyuyug, and hast thou knowe 
the tyme of her caluyng ? Tho* ben bowid’ 3 
to the? calf, and caluen*; and senden? out® 
roryngis. Her calues ben departid‘, and4 
goen® to pasture; thof goen out, and 
turnen§ not a3en to ‘tho hyndish, Who letis 
go the wielde asse fre, and who loside* 
the boondis of hym? To whom Y hanes 
3oue an hows in wildirnesse, and the taber- 
nacles of hym! in the lond of saltnesse. He7 
dispisith the multitude of citee™; he herith 
not the cry of an" axere. He lokith aboutes 
the hillis of his lesewe, and he sekith alle 
greene thingis. Whether an vnycorn schal 9 
wilne serue® thee, ethir schal? dwelle at 
thi cratche? Whether thou schalt bynde 10 
the vnicorn with thi chayne, for to ere4, 
ethir schal he breke the clottis of valeis* 
aftir thee? Whether thou schalt hauell 
trist in his grete strengthe, and schalt 
thou leeue to hym thi traueils} ? Whether 12 tees 
thou schalt bileue* to hym, that he schal _ trauelid of thee, 
3elde seed to thee, and schal' gadere to- cae 
gidere thi cornfloor? The fethere of an13""*“ 
ostriche is lijk" the fetheris of a gerfaw- 
cun, and of an” hauk; which* ostrige 14 
forsakith hise eirun in the erthe, in hap 
thou schalt make tho hoot in the dust. 
HeY for3etith, that a foot tredith tho’, 13 
ethir that a bheeste of the feeld al to- 
brekith tho?. He is maad hard to hise16 
briddis, as if thei ben® not hise; he tra- 
ueilide in veyn, while no drede con- 
streynede’. For® God hath priuned hym!7 
fro wisdom, and ‘3af not! vnderstondyng 
to hym. Whanne tyme is, he reisith the 18 
wengis an hi3; he scorneth the’ hors, and 
his" riderei. Whether thou schalt 3yue 19 
strengthe to an hors, ether schal* 3yue 
neiyng ‘aboute his necke!? Whether thou 20 
schalt reyse™ hym® as locustis ? The glorie 
of hise nosethirlis 7s drede. He diggith21 
f Om. cn. 


4 outher an. ¢ his an. 


Cout thannet. ‘ departid 
ihath let x. © hath losid 1. 
Oto serve 1s. Pschal her. 4 erie thi loond 1. 
Wanootherr. *the which 1. yY The 


¢weren 1. 4constreynede him 1. © Forsothe 1. 
k schalt thon 1. —_! to his throte 1. 


b thei senden 1. 
h her modris 1. 


5A 


730 


2z2he goth to the armed. He dispisith 
dreede, and he 3ineth not stede to the 
o3swerd, Vp on hym the arewe girdil shal 
sounen; the spere and the sheeld shal 
aibraundishen. Feruent and gnastende he 
soupeth the erthe; and rewarde he not 
25 to the trumpe sounende trumping. Where 
he shal here the trumpe, he shal seyn, 
Fy! aferr he smellith bataile ; the cleping 
26to of dukis, and 3elling® of the ost. Whe- 
ther bi thi wisdam waxeth fetherid the 
goshauk, strecchende out his weengus to 
o7the south? Whether at thi comaunde- 
ment shal be rerid the egle, and in he3e 
23thingus shal putten his nest ? In stones 
he dwellith, and in he3e sett scarri flintis 
he bidethi, and in rochis hard to come to. 
29 Thennes he behalt* mete, and fro a ferr 
3ohis ejen beliolden. His briddes licken 
blod, and wher euere shal be the careyn, 
31anoon he is neesh. And the Lord addede, 
3zand spac to Job, Whether he that striueth 
with God, so 1i3tli shal reste? Forsothe 
he, that vudernemeth God, owith to an- 
33swere to hym. Answerende forsothe Job 
34to the Lord seide, I that 113tli spac, what 
may I answern? Myn hond I shal putte 
39vp on my mouth. O thing I spac, that 
wolde God I hadde not seid; and an 
other, to the whiche thingus I shal 
adden no more. 


CAP. XL. 


1 <Answerende forsothe the Lord to Job 
afro the whirlewind, seide, Gird as a man 
thi leendis, and I shal aske thee, and 
3shen thou to me. Whether vein thou 
shalt make my dom, aud condempne me, 
4that thon be iustified ? And if thou hast 
an arm as God, and with lic vois thun- 


JOB. 


XXXIX. 22—XL. 4. 


erthe with the® foot, he ‘fulli ioieth 
booldli?; he goith a3ens™ armed men. 


+ gnastith, and 
swolewith the 
erthe ; that is, 
neyeth, and 


He dispisith ferdfulnesse, and he 3yueth 22 semeth to 


not stide to swerd. 
sowne on’ hymn; a spere and scheeld' schal 
florische". 
swolewith the erthe}; aud he arettith not 
that the crie of the trumpe sowneth”. 
Whanne he herith a clarioun, he ‘seith, 
Joie*! he smellith batel afer; the excityng 
of duykis, and the 3ellyng of the oost. 
Whether an hauk spredinge abrood hise 
wyngis to the south, bigynneth to haue 
fetheris bi thi wisdom? Whether an egle 
schal be reisidY at thi comaundement, and 
schal sette his nest in hi3 places? He 
dwellith in stoonys, and he dwellith? in 
flyntis brokun bifor, and in rochis, to 
whiche* ‘me may? not neize. Fro thennus 
he¢ biholdith mete, and hise ijen loken® 
fro fer. Hise briddis souken blood, and 
where euere a® careyn is, anoon he is 
present. And the Lord addidef, and spak 
to Joob%, Whether he, that stryueth with 
God, schal hane rest so 1i3tli? Sotheli he, 
that repreneth God, owith for to answere 
to hym. Forsothe® Joob answeride to the 
Lord, and seide, What may Y answere, 
which haue spoke 1i3tliit? Y schal putte 
myn hond on* my mouth. Yspak o! things, 
which thing Y wold, that Y hadde not 
seid; and Y spak anothir thing, to which™ 
Y schal no more adde. 


CAP. XL. 


Forsothe the Lord answeride to Joob 
fro the whirlewynd, and seide, Girde thon 
as a man thi leendis, and Y schal axe thee, 
and schewe thou to me. Whether thou 
schalt make voide my doom], and schalt™ 
condempne me, that thou be maad iust? 
And if thou hast an arm®, as God hath, 


& to 3elling & pr.m. 4 Om. aru. iabideth aru. * beholdeth azru. 
hist. Pfuloutioieth1. dandhei. ‘boldly ajenz. ‘Suponi, tascheeldex. schyne1. 
Vferuent 1. _W sowneth éo batteil 1. * ioieth 1. seith, Joie; that is, make me a signe of ioye v. Y reisid 
upi.  Zabidith1. athe whiche1. > menmowenr. C¢theegler. 4‘ loken ther tor. © Om.1. 
faddide to 1. & Joob, and seide 1. h Andi. i bud listli1n, kK upont. lax. ™the which1. ® schalt 
thou 2. © arm or power 1. 


An arowe caas schal 23 


swolewe the 
erthe, in dig- 
ginge with 
feet. Lire 


He is hoot’, and gnastith, and 24 Aere. c. 


} which haue 
spoke liztli ; 
that is, vndis- 
me 
« folily ; for thou3 
23h seide soth, 
he passide ne- 
theles the ma- 
ner of speking. 
Lire here. ¢. 
263 y spak o 
thing ; this 
was, whanne 
he seide, Y 
27 4 
coueite to dis- 
pute with God; 
and anothir 
28 thing ; this was, 
whanne in 
preisinge his 
riztfulnesse, he 
semyde to de. 
99 creesse the riz3t- 
ulnesse of God. 
Lire here. c. 
ll Wher thou 
30 shalt make 
voide my doom ; 
that is, owist 
3] thou to remem- 
bre thi riztful- 
32 nesse bi sich a 
maner, that 
herbi my doom 
seme voide, 
that is, fals to 
33 men, and 
therbi that Y 
34 se me con- 
dempnable, as 
if he seye, Nay; 
and netheles 
35 thou didist this, 
for by thi 
wordis, in 
whiche thou 
declaridist thi 
ri3tfulnesse, ¢ 


thi frendis yn- 
durstoden so, 
that thou re- 
preuedist my 
1 doom as vn- 
iust ; therfor 
2 no man schal 


iustifie him s 
bi sich a ma- 
ner, bi which 
a man may 
gesse, that si 
iustifiyng turn 
eth into de- 
creessing of 

4 Goddis ri3tful- 


nesse. Lire 
‘ 
. 
\ 


3 


here. c. 





XL. 5——24. 


sdrist, do aboute to thee fairnesse, and 
in to an! hei3 be thou rerid, and be glo- 
rious, and be thou clad™ with faire 
6clothis. Scatere proude men in thi wod- 
nesse, and beholdende eche enhaunsende 
7hymself meke thou. Behold alle proude 
men, and confounde hem; and to-brose 
évnpitouse men in ther place. Hijd hem 
in pouder togidere", and the facis of hem 
odrenche in ‘the diche®. And I shal knou- 
leche, that thi rijthond mai saue thee. 
10 Lo! bemoth, that I made with thee, hey 
11as an oxe he shal ete. His strengthe in 
his leendis, and his vertue in the nauele 
120f his wombe. He streyneth his tail as 
a ceder; and the senewis of his ballokis 
13ben wrappid togidere. His bones as 
pipis of bras; his gristil as irene platis. 
\4He is the begynyng of the weies?P of 
God; that made hym, shal lei? to his 
isswerd. To this hillis bern erbis; alle 
16the bestis of the feld pleien there. Vnder 
shadewe he slepith, in the priue place of 
17reed, in moiste placis. Shadewis coueren 
his vmbre; withiene trees of the strem 
igenuyrounen hym. He shal sonpen vp the 
flod, and he shal not wndre; he hath 
trost, that Jordan flowe in to the mouth 
i90f hym. In the ejen of hym, as with an 
hoe, he shal taken hym ; and in stakys he 
20Shal thirle thur3 his nose therlis. Whe- 
ther maist thou drawen out leuyethan 
with an hoc, and with a corde thou 
2ishalt binde his tunge? Whethir thou 
shalt putte a sercle in his nose therlis, 
or with a ring thou shalt therle thur3 
vehis cheke bon? Whether he shal multi- 
plie to thee prejeeris, or speke to thee 
assofte thingus ? Whether he shal smyte 
with thee couenaunt, and thou shalt take 
24hym euermor seruaunt? Whether thou 
shalt begile to hym as to a brid, or 


10m. an, ™ clothid szrm. 


JOB. 


n Om. a. 


731 


and if thou thundrist with lijk vois, 
‘take thou fairnesse aboute thee?, and bes 
thou reisid4 an hi3, and be thou gloriouse, 
and be thou clothid ‘in faire’ clothis. Dis-6 
tries thou proude men in thi woodnesse’, 
and biholde thou", and makeY lowe ech 


bostere. Biholde thou alle proude men,7 
and schende’ thou hem; and al to-breke 
thou wickid men in her place. Hide thous 4 jyide mou 
’ , hem in dust ; 
hem in dust} togidere, and drenche doun ** aeyivnee 
her faces* in to a diche. Andy Y schalo ee peat 
° . us yn dethe 
knowleche, that thi ri3t hond may saue and her faces 
= ° that is, soulis. 
thee. Lo! behemot?{, whom Y made with 00 jnt a viche ; 

: that is, in to 
thee, schal as an oxe ete hey. His strengthe 11 42 depthe of 
zs in hise leendis, and his vertu® zs in the ae oe 
nawle” of his wombe. He streyneth his 12 ae eee: 

Ae . ° that 1s, an ohe 
tail as a cedre®; the senewis of his ‘stones _ faunt, that sig- 
. : : fieth th 
of gendrure* ben foldid togidere. Hise 13 deuel. rire 
boonys ben as the® pipis of bras; the gristi] Mere, Tithe 
hym 7s lati run. He is the 14 vlifaunt and 
of ym zs as platis of yru toe ee ers 
bigynnyug of the weies of God ; he, that  descryueth the 
‘ ower and ma- 
made hym, schal sette his swerd§ to hym. Pee a: 
*11: . . . . and of his 
Hillis beren eerbis to this behemot ; alle 15 Tembris, and 
the beestis of the feeld pleien there. He ig how they ben 
. 5 knyt to gidere 
slepith vndur schadewe, in the pryuete of ome ae 
. . . ° ardid in 
rehed‘, in moiste places. Schadewis hilen 17 syunes and that 
his schadewe; the salewis of the ryner (Ont Oy, 
deuel and hise 
cumpassen hym. He schal soupe vp the 1a devel ane © 
flood, and ‘he sclial not wondre; he hath mena ert 
. 5 ; ut only bi 
trist, that Jordan schal flowe in to his — Goddis vertu 
. P dhelp. Lir 
mouth. He schal take hem bi ‘the i3en19 fore. 
* 2 3 * §his swerd; that 
of hym%, as bi an hook; and bi scharpe jo viwer to 
schaftis he schal perse" hise! nosethirlis. wee 
ie 
Whether thou schalt mowe drawe Out atseino but bi 
. OUdIS SUT- 
lenyathan*|| with an hook, and schalt fring. rire 
bynde with a roop his tunge ? Whethir 21 17 cinan ; 
5 . ' that is, a whal. 
thou schalt_ putte a ryng in hise nose- {pit nnenees 
thirlis, ethir schalt! perse hyse cheke the deucl. Lire 
a ere, Co 
with ‘an hook™? Whether he schal mnl-22 
tiplie preiecris to thee, ether schal speke 
softe thingis to thee? Whether he schal 25 
make couenaunt® with thee, and ‘thon 
© dichis c. 


P weie c, 4 loyne 4. 


P Environne thee with fairnesse 1. dreisid up 1. with semely 1. s And distrie 1. * feers veniaunce r. 


« thou, or tak hede t. Y make thou 1. 
that signefieth the fend v marg. 
puvx. stones of gendruris a sec. m. puNoswhf. 
i herr. 
naunt I. 


W confound 1. 
@ vertu of lusty appetyt 1. 
e Om. 1. 
k that zs, a whal, that signefieth the fend v marg. 


xX faces. Y And thannet. % that is, an elifaunt, 
bnauil 1. ¢cedre trex. 4 ballokis scrm4 
farehed1. his izgent. © perische cs, 


Ischalt thou 1. ™asercle 1. ®a coue- 


5AQ 


732 


2sbinden hym with litle hokis? Frendis 
shul hewen hym, marchaundis shul de- 

a¢uyden hym? Whether thou shalt fille" 
nettis with his skyn, and the lep of 

27fisshis with the hed of hym? Put vp on 
hym thin hond; haue mynde of bataile, 

sgand adde thon to speke no more. Lo! 
the hope of hym shal ‘maken hym® 
veyn; and alle men seende he shal ben 
kast doun. 


CAP. XLI. 


1 Not as cruel I shal reren hym; who 
forsothe mai withstonde to my chere? 
2And who befor jaf to me, that I 3eelde to 
hym? Alle thingus, that ben vnder heuene, 
3ben myne. I shal not spare to hym bi 
my3ti woordis, and to preje sett togidere. 
4 Who shal shewe the face of his clothing, 
and in to thet myddel of his mouth who 
sshal gon in? The 3atis of his chere who 
shal opene ? bi cumpas of his teth drede. 
6 His body as 30ten sheeldis, and threst 
togidere with scalis threstende doun hem- 
7self. Oon to oon is ioyned; and lest breth- 
sing" place forsothe go in bi them. Oon 
shal cleue to the tother, and holdende 
dvhemselue shul not ben senered. His 
nesing shynyng of fyr, and his e3en as 
ioe3elidis of the morutid. Of his mouth 
laumpis gon forth, as tend brondus of fyr. 
11 Of his nose therlis goth forth smnoke, as of 
wa tend pot and boilende. His breth 
maketh colis to brenne, and flanme goth 
130ut of hys mouth. In his necke shal 
dwelle strengthe, and nede shal go be- 
14forn his face. The’ membris of his flesh 
clenende to themself; he shal senden a3en 
hym’ flodis, and to an other place thei 
isshul not be born. His herte shal ben in- 
wardli harded as a ston; and shal be 


felle c. § ben made £ pr. m. 


JOB. 


t Om. au. 


XL. 25——XLI. 15. 


schalt® take him a seruaunt euerlastinge ? 
Whether thou schalt scorne hym as a24 
brid, ethir schalt? bynde hym to thin 
handmaidis’? Schulen frendis' ‘kerue25 
hym’, schulent marchauntis departe hym? 
Whether thou schalt fille nettis with his 26 
skyn, and a ‘leep of fischis" with his 
heed ? Schalt thou putte thin hond onY27 
hyin? haue thou mynde of the batel, 
and adde* no more to speket. Lo! hiss 
hope schal disseyue hym ; and in the si3t 
of alle men he schal be cast doun*. 


CAP. XLI. 


+ and adde no 
more to speke ; 
ony thing, that 
sowneth in to 
decreessing of 
Goddis ri3tful- 
nesse and wis- 
dom. Lire here. 


> C. 
J not as cruel schal reise hym; forY who*1 


may a3enstonde* my face? And who ‘3af2 
to me? bifore, that Y jelde° to hym? Alle 
thingis, that ben vndur heuene, ben myne. 
Y schal not spare hym for’ my3ti wordis, 3 
and maad faire to biseche*. Who schal4 
schewe the face of his clothing, and who 
schal entre in to the myddis of his mouth? 
Who schal opene the 3atis of his cheer ?5 
ferdfulnesse 7s bi the cumpas of hise teeth. 
His bodi zs as 3otun scheldys of bras, and 6 
ioyned togidere with scalis ouerleiynge hem 
silf. Oon is ioyned to another ; and sotheli7 
brething goith not thorou3 tho. Oon schal8 
clene to anothir, and thof holdynge? hem 
silf schulen not be departid. His fuesynge"9 
as as schynynge of fier, and hise i3en ben 
as ijelidis of the morewtid{. Laumpis'!0 
comen forth of his mouth, as trees of fier, 
that ben kyndlid. Smoke cometh forth of11 
hise nosethirlis, as of! a™ pot set on™ the 
fier ‘and boilynge®. His breeth makith !2 
colis to brenne, and flawme goith out of 
his mouth. Strengthe schal dwelle in his !3 
necke, and nedynesse schal go bifor his 
face. The membris of hise fleischis? ben 14 
cleuynge togidere to hem silf; God schal 
sende floodis ajens hym#@, and tho schn- 
Jen not be borun®? to an other place. 
whem 4. 


ubrekynge mw. VY Om. 4H. 


oschalt thou. Pschalt thou 1. 4% hand maidens 1. * thi frendis1. % kitte him awey 1. t and schul 1. 


u fishe leep 1. Y upon 1. W adde thou 1. 
bhath youen auzé1. © 3eldide #1. 4 for his 1. 
hneesyng1. i Ligtis1. k brondis 1. 
P fleische 1. 4 borun ouer 1. 


x doun hedlyng 1. 
€ biseche with 1. 
10m. a pr. m. ts. 


yOm.1. % who sothly 1. 4 withstonde 1. 
f tho platis 1.  holdynge togidere 1. 
ma boilyngei. uponi © Om.1. 


t meliddis of 
the morewtid ; 
that is, brizt- 
nesse. C. 

§ God schal 
sende floodis 
ajenus him ; 
that is, Goddis 
sentence of 
dampnacioun 
of the fend, c. 


Rito xXLil. 7. 


streyned* as the stithie of an hamer 
16 betere. Whan he shal .be taken awei, 
aungelis shul drede; and ferd thei shul 
17be purgid. Whan he shal cacchen hym, 
swerd shal not moun stonde, ne spere, ne 
isbrest plate. Forsothe he shal telle bi 
iren as chaf, and bras as rotun* tree. 
19 The man archer shal not driuen hym; 
in to stobil ben turned to hym the stones 
200f the slinge. As stobil he shal eyme 
the hamer ; and scorneY the man shakende 
21a spere. Vnder hym shul be the bemes of 
the sunne; and he shal leyn vp gold to 
22hym as clei. He shal make the depthe 
of the se to boilen as a pot; and sette, as 
23 whan oynemens boilen. Aftir hym the 
sty shal 3iue li3t; and he shal eymen 
24the se as an oldli? man. Ther is not 
vp on erthe power, that be comparisound 
to hym; that is maad, that no man he 
25Shulde drede. Alle hei3 thing? he seeth ; 
and he ys king vpon? alle the sones of 
pride. 


CAP. XLII. 


1 Answerende forsothe Job to the Lord, 
2seide, I wot, for alle thingus thou maist, 
3and no tho3t is vnknowe to thee. Who is 
this, that hilith counseil withoute kun- 
nyng? Therfore vuwisly I spak, and tho 
thingus that ouer® maner shulden passe 
smy kuomyng. Heere thou, and I shal 
speke ; J shal aske thee, and answere 
5thou to me. Bi hering of ere I herde 
thee, now forsothe myn e3e seeth thee. 
6Therfore I myself repreue me, and do 
7 penaunce in dead cole and askis‘. Af- 
tir forsothe that the Lord spac these 
woordis to Job, he seide to Elifath 
Themanythen, My wodnesse is wroth 


JOB: 


733 


His herte schal be maad hard* as a stoom 3 15* maud hard; 


and it schal be streyned togidere as the™ 


the fend is 
obstynat, and 


anefeld* of a smith. Whanne he schal be 16's 2° bowid 


takun awei, aungels schulen drede}; and 


to good, bi ony 
smyting of 
Goddis ven- 


thei aferd schulen be purgid. Whanne 17 ime. c. 


swerd takith hym, itt may not stonde®, 


nethir spere, nether haburioun. For he1s 


schal arette irun as chaffis’, and bras as 
rotun tre. 
hym awei; stoonys of a slynge ben turned 


in to stobil to hym. He schal arette an 20 


hamer as stobil; and he schal scorne a 
florischynge” spere. 
sunne schulen be vndur hym; and he schal 


strewe to hym silf gold as cley. He scha] 22 


make the depe* se to buyle as a pot; and 
he schal puttey, as whanne oynementis 


The beemys of the21 


+ aungels 
schulen drede ; 
that is, wondre 
of Goddis verti 
and ri3tful- 
nesse, in the 


A man archere schal not dryue 19 casting doun, 


and punysching 
of the fend, 
which was doon 
in parti at the 
bigynnyng of 
the fal fro 
henene, and 
schal be endid 
in the doom to 
comynge, 
whanne with 
sinful men 
dampned, he 
schal be cast 


doun into helle. 


buylen. <A path schal schyne aftir lym ; 23 sehulen be 


he schal gesse the greet occian’ as wexynge 


eld. No power is* on erthe, that schal be 24 


comparisound to hym; which is maad, 
that he schulde drede noon». 
hi3 thing; he is kyng ouer alle the sones 
of pride. 


CAP. XLII. 


Forsothe Joob answeride to the Lord,! 
and seide, Y woot, that thou maist alle2 
thingis, and° no thou3t4 is hid fro theef. 
Who is® this, that helith.counsel with out3 
kunnyng? Therfor Y spak! vnwiseli, and 
tho thingis that passiden ouer mesure my 
kunnyng. Here® thou, and Y sclial speke ; 4 
Y schal axe thee, and answere thou to 
me. Bi heryng of eere Y herde" thee, but 5 
uow myn i3e seeth thee. Therfor Y re-6 
preue' me‘, and do! penaunce in™ deed 
sparcle and® aische. Forsothe® aftir that7 
the Lord spak? these wordis to Joob, he 
seide to Eliphat Themanytes, My stronuge 
veniaunce is wrooth a3ens thee, and a3ens 


x stryued c. ¥*¥ rotec. Yscornynge an. Zold an. ®thingis an. Sof. ¢other #. ashen a. 

rani, Sanfeeld, or stithiexk. ¢ther1, U“abyder. Vchaff1. W briz3t schynynge x. ¥* grete s. 
y putte ix. 2 depthe of watir1. @therist. nothings. ¢andthatx. ‘things, Cis hes. 
fhaue spoke 1. & Loord, herer. haueherdex. ipreues. Kmyselffx. $'Idor M™inat. 
Mandinr. oOAndt.  P had spokes. 


purgid ; not of 


vnelennesse, 
but of igno- 
raunse, in as 
myche as bi 
Goddis reue- 


He seeth al 25 laciouns, ether 


wondurful 
werkis, holy 
aungels schulen 
knowe summe 
thingis, which 
they knewen 
not bifore. 
Lire here. c. 
+ Vwot that 
thou maist alle 
thingis, and no 
thou3t is hid fro 
thee ; Joob 
wiste wel, that 
in remembringe 
his ri3tfulnesse 
he suffride snm 
stiring of veyn- 
glorie, which is 
wont to come 
liztly in siche 
thingis, she, in 
men that ben 
perfit. 1” spak 
vnwisely ; in 
preisinge my 
ri3tfulnesse. 
that passiden 
ouer mesure ; 
in enqueringe 
ouer myche the 
resouns of 
Goddis domes. 
c. 


734 


in to thee, and in to thi two frendis ; 
for 3ee han not spoke befor me ri3t, 
gas my seruaunt Job. Taketh therfore 
to 3ou seuen bolis, and seuen wetheris ; 
and goth to my sernaunt Job, and 
offreth for 30u brent sacrifise. Job for- 
sothe, my seruaunt, shal pre3en for 30u 5 
his face J shal take, that folie be nott 
witid to jou; ne forsothe 3ee han spoken 
9 befor me ri3t,as my seruaunt Job. Thanne 
Elyfath Themanythes, and Baldach Suy- 
thes, and Sofar Naamatites, wenten, and 
diden, as the Lord hadde spoke to them ; 
ioand the Lord toc the face of Job. The 
Lord also is turned to the penaunce of 
Job, whan he shulde pre3e for his frendis. 
And the Lord 3af to alle thingus, that 
leuere weren of Job, double. And ther 
camen to hym alle his brethern, and alle 
his sistris, and alle that hadden knowen 
hym beforn; and thei eete with hym 
bred in his hous, and moueden vpon hym 
the hed; and cowmforteden hym vp on al 
the euel, that the Lord hadde bro3t in vp 
on hym; and thei 3eue to hym eche a shep, 
ygand a golden ere ring. The Lord for- 
sothe blisside to the laste thingus of Job, 
more than to his begynnyng; and ther 
ben maad to hym fourtene thousend of 
shep, and sixe thousend of camailis, and 
a thousend 30kis of oxen, and a thou- 
issend she assis. And ther weren to hym 
seue sones, and thre do3tris; and he 
clepide the name of the ton Diem, and 
the name of the seconde Cassiam, and 
ithe name of the thridde Cornu tibij. Ther 
ben not forsothe founde so faire wym- 
men, as the do3tris of Job, in al the 
lond; and ther fader 3af to hem eri- 
istage among ther brethern. Forsothe 
Job lyuede aftir these scourgis an hun- 
drid and fourti 3eer, and sa3 his sones, 
and the sones of his sones, in to the 


JOB. 


XLIL. 8—15. 


thi twey frendis*; for 3e ‘spaken not4 bifor 
me ri3tful thing’, as my seruaunt Joob 
dide’. Therfor take 3e to jou seuene bolis, 8 
and seuene rainmes ; and go 3e to my ser- 
uaunt Joob, and offre 3e brent sacrifice for 
jou. Forsothet Joob, my seruaunt, schal 
preie for 30n; Y schal resseyue his face”, 
that foli be not arettid to 3out; for’ 3e 
‘spaken not” bifor me ri3tful thing, as* 
my seruaunt Joob dideY. Therfor Eliphat9 
Themanytes, and Baldach Suythes, and 
Sophar Naamathites, 3eden, and? diden, as 
the Lord hedde spoke to hem; and the 


*“qzenus theeand 
thi twey frendis; 
God seith not 
azenus Helyn, 
ether ajenus 
Joob; for whi 
to do synne bi 
presnmpcioun, 
ether bi vuwar 
speking, as He- 
lyu and Joob 
diden, is not so 
grenouse synne 
as to do synne 
bi afermyng 

of falsnesse, 
which bifelde 
to these thre 
men. Y schal 
resseyue his 
face; for he 
synnede listly, 
and dide pe- 


Lord resseyuede the face of Joob. Also 10 »annce therfor 


the Lord was conuertid? to the penaunce 
of Joob, whanne he preiede for hise frendis. 
And the Lord addide® alle thingis double, 


whiehe euere weren of Joob. Sotheli® alleu 


hise britheren, and alle hise sistris, and 
alle that knewen hym bifore, camen to 
hym; and thei eeten breed with hym in his 
hows, and? moueden the® heed on! hym ; 
and thei coumfortiden hym of¢ al the yuel, 
which" the Lord hadde brou3t in on’ hym; 
and thei 3auen to hym ech man o* scheep, 


and ok goldun eere ring. Forsothe the1e2 


Lord blesside the laste thingis of Joob, 
more than the bigynnyng of hym; and 
fouretene thousynde of scheep weren maad 
to hym, and sixe thousinde of camels, 
and a thousynde 3ockis of oxis!, and a 
thousynde femal assis. 
seuene sones{, and thre doustris; and he 
clepide the name of o™ dou3tir Dai, and the 
name of the secounde dou3tir Cassia, and 
the name of the thridde dou3tir ‘An horn” 


And he hadde1is 


perfitly. Lire 
here. c. 

+ be not arettid 
to30u 3 toeuer- 
lastinge peyne. 
Lire here. c 


t he hadde 
seuene sones 
etc. ; the 
formere sones 
and don3tris 
weren in the 
weye of salua- 


of wymmens oynement®. ‘Sotheli no wym- 14 cioun, and so 


men weren foundun so faire? in al erthe4, 
as" the dou3tris of Joob; and her fadir 3af 


eritage to hem among her britheren. For- 15 


sothe’ Joob lyuede aftir these betyngist an 
hundrid_and fourti 3eer, and ‘si3 hise™ 
sones, and’ the sones of hise sones, ‘til to” 


dhaue not spoke1. ‘thingist. 8 Om.1. tSothely 1. = face preiynge for youl. —¥ certis 1. 
Whan not spoke1, *ashathi. YOm.1. Zand thei t. 4 altogidere turned 1, addide to 1. 
‘And1, dandtheir ¢heri. upon. gon. } that. mi upon1, Kaas. loxen ik. 
m the oo K, ® he clepide Cornu stibii, that is, the horn 1. © ournment1. __P And ther weren not 


founde so faire wymmen 1. 


q the loond 1. 
Yofi. Wuntor 


Tas weren 1. 


s Andi. tscourgyngis1. 9 he sauge the 1. 


not deed ontirly. 
Lire here. C. 


XLII. 15. JOB. 735 


ferthe ieneracioun; and hee diede old, the fourthe generacioun ; and* he was deed 


and ful of da3is. eld}, and ful of daies. 
Here endith the book of Job, and here Here endith the book of Joob, and 
begynneth the prolog of the Sawter. here bigynneth the Sauter, which is red 


comynli in chirchis’. 


e Om. H. f From 4. Explicit liber Job. r. No final rubric in cru. 


x and thanne1. Y Fromcpqu. Here cendith the book of Joob, which book is an opin and autentick 
kalender to alle the children of God. B. Here endith the book of Joob. Blessid be the hooly Tryuyte. 
Amen, u. Heere endith Job, and biginnith the Sauter. 1v.  Heere eendeth the booe of Joob; se now the 
prolog of the Santer. x. Here endith the book of Joob, and here bigynneth the prologe on the Sauter. mM. 
Here endith Joob, and here bigynneth the . . : .N. Here endith the book of Joob, and bigyn- 
neth the prolog on the Sauter.o. Here eendeth Joob, and bigynneth a prolog on the Sauter. rn. Here 
endith the booe of Job, and bigynneth the Sauter. x. Here endith Joob, and here bigynneth the Sauter, 
whieh is red comounli in the chirche.b. Explicit Joob. f. No tinal rubric in aELPsw. 


the was deed 
eld; that is, he 
hadde lengthe 
and prosperite 
of liyf. Lire 
here. ¢. 


PSALMS. 





[Prologue on the book of Psaims*. | 


Turs book Sauter is clepid, that is to seie, the book of songis of Dauith, and of 
Asaph, the chauntour of the temple of the Lord; wherynne is conteyned profesie of 
the comynge of Crist, of his birthe, and of his power and teching; of his passioun and 
his rising a3en fro deeth, and of his ascencioun and of his comynge a3en in the laste 
doom; whiche songis ben red in holi cherche in to wurschiping and preising of the 
Lord, knoulechinge his hei3 maieste, and hise grete werkis; and that he do merci to 
vs, whanne we trespasen a3ens him, brekinge hise comaundementis, that we perische 
not for oure synnes. 


Incipit prologus in librum Psalterij*. 


Whan it is knowe, alle the profetis to han spoke bi reuvelacioun of the Holi Gost, 
Dauid? most of profetis to han spoken sum¢ wise in wrthiere and ouer passende maner, 
as the trumpe of the Holi Gost, than othere profetis. Othere forsothe profetis profe- 
cieden bi sum maner ymagis of thingus, and withinue coueryngis of woordis, that is, bi 
sweuenes, and viseouns, and deedis, and sawis; Dauid forsothe, thur3 stiring of the 
Holi Gost alone, withoute vttermor helpe his profecie made out. Wherfor couenabli 
this boc is seid, The boc of solitarie spechis. It is also seid a Sauter, the whiche name 
it toc of a musik instrument, that Ebruli is clepid nablum, Grekli a sauter, of this 
Grek woord sallim, that is, touching ; Latinli is seid and orgne, that is of ten cordis, and 
fro the ouere part 3iueth soun, bi the touch of hondis. Of that forsothe instrument at 
the lettre therfore is* nemned ‘this boc‘, for at theS vois of that instrument Dauid song 
salinys beforn the arke in the tabernacle of the Lord ; and as alle the sweete songus of 
that instrument weren clepid salmys, so and alle the particlis of this boc, or clausis. 
Also! aftir the spiritnel vnderstonding wel of that instrument it taketh name, for as 
that instrument is of ten cordis, so this boc techeth the al aboute keping' of the ten 
hestis ; and as that instrument 3ineth soun fro the ouere part bi the touch of hondis, so 
this boc techeth wel to werche, not for ertheli thingis, but for heuenli thingus, that ben 


@ This prologue is from m. 


* me A 
From £. Proloug. F. Prologus. u. No initial rubric in ac. 


F b it is knowun Dauid on. ¢ in sum c. 
dandu, ¢itisr. fOm.r. € Om. Hn. b And pr. 


i the keping or. 


PSALMS. 737 


aboue. This boc stant* in an hundrid and fifti salmys, not biside the resoun of he3ere 
signefiyng ; this forsothe noumbre is notid to most solempne mysteries. It stant! for- 
sothe of ei3teti and seuenti. And ei3tety al oon signeficth that™ ei3te, and seuenti the 
same that seuene. Hi3te forsothe signefieth the ei3tthe age of a3een rising; for sithen 
ther ben sixe agis of men liuende, and the seuenthe of men diende, the ei3the age shal 
ben of men ajeen risende. Bi seuene forsothe is betocned the time of this lif, that is 
passid bi the oftesithes comyng of seuen dajes. Ri3tli thanne this boc is maad in such 
a noumbre of salmys, whos partyes signefien ‘the beforseid" mysteries; for it techeth 
so vs in the seuenthe® of this lif to werken and to liuen, that in the eizthe? of ajeen 
rising wee be not clad4 with the doublefold cloth of confusioun, but with the stole of 
double glorifiyng. Or therfore in that noumbre of salmys it is maad, for, as wee han 
seid, this’ noumbre stant’ of ei3teti and seuenti, that al oon betocnen that! ei3te and 
seuene. Ei3te forsothe betocneth the newe testament, the fadris® forsothe of the newe 
testament to ogdoadi, that is, to eij3te deseruen. ‘Thei kepen’ forsothe the ei3the dai 
of the resureccioun of Crist, that is, the sone dai, and the vtas of seintis, and abijden 
the eiz3te of the a3een rising. Bi seuene forsothe” is betocned the olde testament 
therfore; for the fadris* of the olde testament serueden to ebdoady, that is, to seuene. 
Forsothe thei keptenY the seuenthe dai, and the seuenthe wike, the seuenthe moneth, 
the? ‘seuenthe 3er*, and the seuenthe jer of the seuenthe, ‘that is, the? fiftithe, that is 
seid inbile. Wherfore Salomon seith, “ 3if partis seuene and also ei3te.” And Mychias, 
“Wee shul reren ‘vp on® hym seuen shepperdis, and ei3te primatis.” Weel therfore this 
bee in that noumbre of salmys is maad, whos partis betocnen the doctrine of either 
testament, that bi that be’ shewid the hestis of either testament to be contened in this 
boc. This boc forsothe is deuydid bi thre fifties; bi the whiche thre® statis of cristene 
religioun ben betocned. Of whiche the firste is in penaunce, the secounde in ri3twis- 
nessef, the thridde in preising of the® euere lastende lif. Wherfore the firste fifti is endid 
in penaunce, that is, the salm that begynneth “‘ Haue mercy of me, God ;” the secounde 
in ri3twisnesse®, that is, this salm, Mercy and dom I shal singen to thee ;” the thridde 
in preising of the! euere lastende lif, that is, this* woord “ Eche! spirit preise God™.” And 
for these thre thingus techeth Dauid in this boc, therfore this threfold distinccioun of 
salmys is maad. Also it is to be notid, this scripture mor than othere to ofte ben vsid 
in chirche® seruysis°, that therfore is don, for in this boc is the fulle ending of the hole 
boc of Godis woord. Heer forsothe ben discriued the meedis of goode men, the tor- 
mentis of euele men, the pleyne techyngus? of begynende men, the forth going of pro- 
fitende men, the perfeccioun of ful comynge? men, the lif of actif men, the" spirituel 
beholding of contemplatif men ; heer also is ta3t what synne doth awei, what penaunce 
restoreth, what the gilti of synne othenkende’ seye’, that is, “ Lord, in thi wodnesse 
vndernyme thou not me,” and in an other place, “ Haue mercy of me, God, aftir thy 
mychile’ mercy;” and what bi penaunce be’ purchasid, whan he vnderioyneth, “ I shal 
teche wicke¥ men thi weies, and vnpitous men to thee shul be conuertid ;” bi whiche 
is shewid to* no man, hou myche euere ‘trespasinge to be’, to? mystrosten of for3iue- 
nesse, and of the merci of God, taken to the mecnesse of othenking?; whan forsothe 


k stondith 4k. 1} stondith 41.  ™ the same that doith or. =" parfite x pr.m. © seuenthe age or. 
Peizthe age or. ‘clothid azruror. ‘theo. §stoondith 4.  t that same that doith o. the same that 
doith r. parties E pr.m. Vkepteno. WOm.R, *partics eprom. Ykepenepr.m. 7 and 
the 4 sec.m. Om. u. ®Om.H. bOm. cz prm. Cvpor. 4heor. ¢the thre r. f riztfulnesse or. 
& Om. anor. b rigtfulnesse o. {Om.a.  k the or. lalle & pr. m. ™ the Lord aruror. 
© chirchemennys £ pr. m. the chirchis orn. ° seruyse on. Ptechinge or. 4kunnynge or. ‘and the or. 
8 forthenkynge or. tseith anor. “miche ro. Vheor. Wwickid aror. *that or.  Y be his 


trespas or. 2 Om.on. ® forthinking ror. 
VOL. Il. 5B 


738 PSALMS. 


wee beholden Dauid, a man sleere and auoutrer, bi penaunce maad a doctour and a 
profete, to no man doende penaunce is laft place of wanhope; as of» the conuerting of 
Powil and his auaunsing in to apostil of the mercy of God pleynli wee ben certefied. 
Wherfore the chirche ysith in offisis®, as the profecie of Dauid, the epistolist of hym 
more than of¢ othere; and therfore this profecie is oftenef had in vse, for among 
othere profecies it passith in openyng of sawys; tho forsothe thingus that othere pro- 
fetis dercly and as bi figure seiden of the passion and the® resureccioun of Crist, and 
of the euerlastende geteng, and of othere mysterijs, Dauid of profetis most excellent so 
euydentli operiede, that more he be seen to euangelisen than to profecien. 


Another prolog». 


Dauyd, the sone of Jesse, whan he was in his! reume, foure he ches that salmes 
shulden maken, that is, Asaf, Eman, Ethan, and Iditym. Ei3tety and ei3te forsothe 
seiden the salmys, and two hundrid the yndersinging, and* Abiud smot the harpe. 
Whan Dauid hadde a3en! bro3t the arke, a3een clepid fro Asotis in to Jerusalem aftir 
tweuti 3er, and abod in the hous of Amynadab, this he putte™ on in a newe ‘3okid 
karte", and bro3te in to Jerusalem ; men chosen of al the kinrede of the sonis of Israel, 
seuenti thousend, of the lynage forsothe of Leuy, two hundrid seuenti and ei3te 
thousend men; of whiche foure princis he ordeynede to ben beforn to the songus, Asaf, 
Eman, Ethan, and Iditym, to eche of hem deuydende two and seuenti men, vnder 
criende preising of the songis to the Lord, And oon forsotbe of hem smot the simbal, 
an other the harpe, an other the hornene trumpe enhauncende. In the myddel for- 
sothe of hem ‘stod Dauid®, holdende hymself? a sautre; forsothe! thei wenten befor 
the arke in seuene queris, and the sacrifise, a’ calf. Forsothe al the puple folewide 
after the arke. Thanne alle the salmys of Dauid ben in noumbre an hundrid and 
fifti, of whiche’ alle forsothe nyne made Dauid himself, two and thretti han not super- 
scripcioun, fifti and two and twenti in to Dauid, twelue in to Asaf, twelue in to 
Iditym, nyne to the sones of Chori, oon to Moises, twot in to Salomon, two in to Aggie 
and Zacharie. And" so alle the salmys of Dauid ben maad in noumbre of an hundrid 
and fifti. The deuyseoun’ of salmys that ben clepid diasalmys ben in noumbre¥ of 
seuenti and fiue; the canticlis of grees ben in noumbre of fiftene. The firste salm to 
no man is asigned, for it is of alle. Therfore what other man is vnderstonde in the 
firste but the firste goten, that wrthili inscripcioun shul not be necessarie. Ferther- 
mor for that salm maketh mencioun of Crist, as ajen thi Crist expounende the persone 
‘to ben inscriuedy, vttirli thei han not withinne chaungid the ordre of storie. Wee reden 
and’ in the titlis of salmys; but the salmys not after the storie, but aftir the profecie 
ben rad, so the ordre of titlis mai not disturben* the order of salmys. Alle” the 
salmys that ben inscriued to hym Dauid, pertenen to the sacrament of Crist, for Dauid 
is seid Crist. 


Eaplicit prologus super psalterium®. 


> Om. Rr. © office on. 4 epistle o. pistil r. © Om. sor. fofteror. €ofthe 4. » From 4. Alius 
prologus. . Another prolog on the Sauter. or. No rubric in crHi. i Om. o. kon r. 1 agee c. 
mputted 1. "waync pr.m. © Dauid himsilf stood on. POm.or. and sothely on. ‘ofar. 
*the whiche aruior. tandtwoo.  Om.o. Vv diuisiounsrr. © the nonmbre amor. * Om. Aor. 
Ytranscryuedk. 20Om.or. 4distourblen uror. » Andalle or. © Here endith the prolog. a. Here 


endeth the prolog of the Sawter, se now the booc. 1. Endith prolog. 0. This seith seint Jerom, in his pro- 
logis on the Sawter. nr. No rubrie in EFt. 


Beatus vir. 


Quare fremu- 
erunt. 


I. 1—II. 6. 


The boc begynneth of ympnes and 
solitarie spechis of the* profete Dauyd, 
of Cryst, 

: PSALM I. 


1 BLisFUL the man, that went not awei 
in the counseil of vnpitouse, and in the 
wei off sinful stod not; and in the cha3er 

20f pestilence sat not. But in the lawe 
of the Lord his wil; and in the lawe of 
hym he shal sweteli thenke dai and ny3t. 

3 And he shal ben as a tree, that is plauntid 
biside the doun rennyngis* of watris ; that 
his frut shal 3iue in his time. And the 
lef of hym shal not fade ; and alle thingus 
what euere he shal don shul waxe wel- 

4sum. Not so the vnpitouse, not so; but as 
pondre, that aferr throwith the wind fro 

5the face of the erthe. Therfore eft rijsen 
not the vnpitouse in dom; ne sinful in the 

écounseil of riz3twise. For the Lord hath 
knowe the weie of the ri3twise; and the 
goyng of the vnpitouse shal pershen. 


PSALM II. 


The salm of Dauyd. 


1 Whi gruccheden Jentilis; and puplys 
sweteli tho3ten inwardli veyne thingus ? 
2Ther stode nee3h the kingus of thed 
erthe; and princis kamen togidere in to 
oon, a3en the Lord, and a3en his Crist. 
3 To-breke we the bondis of hem; and aferr 
4throwe we fro vs the 30c of hem. That 
dwelleth in heuenes shal scorne them; 
sand the Lord shal bemowe*® them. Thanne 
he shal speke to hem in his wrathe; and 
in his wodnesse disturbef them togidere. 
¢I forsothe am sett king fro hym vpon 
Sion, the holi mount of hym; prechende 


aOm.c. » From «ace. 


f distourble «. 


b From aLop. 
red comunly in the chirche. s. 
initial rubric in the other Mss. 
maad K see. m. f that 1. 


PSALMS. 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


Here bigynneth first salm of the Sauter. m. 
Here bygynnyth the Psalmes of Dauith, that is clepid the Sauter.k. No 

© Psalmus i. 0. The psalm of David. v. Om. imrs. 
& the which 1. that Ks. 


739 


Here bigynneth the Sauter, which is 
red comynly in chirchis®, 


PSALM I. 


The firste salme. 

Blessid is the man, that 3ede4 not in the1 
councel of wickid men; and stood not in 
the weie of synmeris, and sat not in the 
chaier of pestilence. But his wille zs in2 
the lawe of the Lord; and he schal bi- 
thenke in the lawe of hym dai and ny3t. 
And he schal be® as a tree, which! iss 
plauntid bisidis the rennyngis of watris; 
which ¢re' schal 3yue his fruyt in his 
tyme. And his leef schal not falle doun; 
and alle thingis which euere he schal do 
schulen haue prosperite. Not so wickid4 
men, not so; but ¢hei ben as dust, which 
thei wynd castith awei fro the face of 
erthe*. Therfor wickid men risen not a3en5 
in doom’; nethir synneres in the councel of 
iust men. For the Lord knowith™ theé 
weie of iust men; and the weie of wickid 
men schal perische. 


PSALM II. 


‘The secounde salm™+. 


Whi gnastiden with teeth hethene men 31 
and puplis thou3ten veyn thingis? Thee 
kyngis of erthe stoden togidere; and 
princes camen togidere ajens the Lord, 
and ajens his Crist ? Breke we the bondis3 
of hem; and cast we awei the 30k of 
hem fro vs. He that dwellith in heuenes 4 
schal scorne hem; and the Lord schal 


f+ A glos. The 
secounde salm, 
that hath no 
title in Ebreu, 
and in Jeromes 
translacionn, 
was maad of 
Dauith, as the 
postlis wit- 
nessen in iiij. 
chapitre of De- 
dis. ¢ e¢ alii. 
This secunde 
psalm is undir- 
stondun of Crist, 
God and man. 


bimowe hem. Thanne he schal speke tos : 


hem in his ire®; and he schal disturble 
hem in his stronge veniaunce. Forsothe? 6 
Y am maad4 of hym a kyng on™ Syon, his 
hooli hil; prechynge his comaundement. 


Crennyng 4H. 4Om.c. © mow 4. 


Here biginneth the Sauter, the which ys 


© be 


4 gooth s. 
hOmis. !Om.x. theerthe ctsik  ! doom, 


that is, to ther saluacion, but more to ther dampnaciou K text. that is, to han saluacioun, but to danrpna- 


cioun more v marg. m hath knowe 1. 


Fup ont. 


n Om, 1k. 


© wraththe 1. P Sothely r. q ordeyned 1. 


" 5BQ 


740 


zhis heste. The Lord seide to me, My 
ssone thou art; I to day gat thee. Aske of 
me, and I shal 3iue to thee Jentilis thin 
eritage; and thi possessioun the termes of 
yerthe®. Thou shalt gouerne them in an 
irene 3erde; and as a vessel of a crockere 
10breke them togidere. And now, kingus, 
vnderstondeth ; beth ta3t, that demen the 
iierthe. Serueth to the Lord in drede; and 
ful out gladeth to hym with trembling. 
i2'Taketh discipline, lest any time be wrathid 
the Lord; and jee pershe fro the ri3twis 
i3weie. Whan his wrathe shal brenne out 
in short; blisful alle that trosten in hym. 


PSALM III. 
1 Salm of Dauid, whan he shulde flee 
Jro the face of Absoton, his sone. 


Lord, wherto ben multiplied that tru- 
blen me? manye inwardli rijsen a3en me. 
3 Manye seyn to my lif*, Ther is not helthe 
4to hym in his God. Thou forsothe, Lord, 

art myn vndirtakere; my glorie, and en- 
shansende myn hed. With my vois to the 

Lord I criede; and he ful out herde me 
sfro his holi hil. I sleep, and was a slepe, 

and ful’ out ros; for the Lord vndertoc 
7me. I shal not drede thousendis of puple 
goende aboute me; rys vp, Lord; mac 
sme saf, my God. For thou hast smyte 

alle doende aduersite to me with oute 

cause; the teth of the sinful thou hast 
9to-brosid. Of the Lord is helthe; and 
vpon thi puple thi blessing. 


Domine quid, 2 


PSALM IV. 
iIn to the ende, in ditees, the salm of 
Dauid ; or, In to the ende, the saim of 
the song of Dauid. 
Whan I inwardli clepide, ful out herde 
me the God of my ri3twisnesse ; in tribu- 


Cum inueca- 2 
rem. 


& the erthe au. ) The salm a, 


*gotent. t to thin s. 
¥ lore of chastisyng 1. 
®tor1 ftherisi. 
salmes v. 


u hem to gidere 1. 
= wraththid 1. 


Srestide 1. } arijse 1. 


PSALMS. 


ito B prem, 


Vv be 3e 1k, 
a Om. 1. 
) i Om. 1. 
" clepid, that is, preiede v. © ri3tfulnesse ceteri. P full out herde 1. 


II. 7-—IV. 2. 


The Lord seide to ine, Thou art my sone; 7 
Y haue gendrid’ thee to dai. Axe thou ofs 
me, and Y schal 3yue to thee hethene 
men thin' eritage; and thi possessioun the 
termes of erthe. Thou schalt gouerne hem 9 
in an yrun 3erde; and thou schalt breke 
hem" as the vessel of a pottere. And now, 10 
je kyngis, vndurstonde; 3e that demen 
the erthe, be’ lerud’”. Serue 3e the Lord 11 
with’ drede; and make 3e ful* ioye to hym 
with tremblyng. Take 3e lore’; lest the 12 
Lord be wrooth’* sumtyme, and lest* 3e 
perischen fro iust® waie. Whanne his ‘ire 13 
brenneth* out in schort tyme; blessed ben 
alle thei, that tristen in hym. 


PSALM III. 
The title of the thridde salm. ‘The saim® 
of Dauid, whanne he fledde fro the 

Jace of Absoton, his sone. 

Lord, whi ben thei multiplied that dis-2 
turblen me? many men rysen ajens me. 
Many men seien of* my soule, Noon helthe 
is‘ to hym in his God. But thou, Lord,* 
art myn vptakere; my glorye, and en- 
haunsyng myn heed. With my vois Y5 
criede to the Lord; and he herde me fro 
his hooli hil. I slepte, and ‘was quenchidé, 6 
and Y roos vp; for the Lord resseyuede 
me. I schal not drede thousyndis of puple7 
cumpassynge me; Lord, rise’ thou vp'; 
my God, make thou* me saaf. For thou® 
hast smyte alle men beynge aduersaries 
to me with out cause; thou hast al to- 
broke the teeth of synneris. Helthe is? 
of the Lord; and thi blessyng, Lord', is 
on thi puple. 


PSALM IV. 


The title of the fourthe salm.*To the vie-\ 
torie in orguns™; the salm of Dauidt. 


Whanne Y inwardli clepid", God of my2 
ri3twisnesse® herde? me; in tribulacioun 


Kk soule 4. 1 Y ful a. 


Ww lerned p ef ali, Win. * ful out K sec. m. 
>the inst 1. ¢wraththe shal brenne 1. 4 Om. 1. 
kOm.1s. 10Om.1.  ™ the ouercomere in 


t+ 4 gios. The 
fourthe salm is 
doynge of 
thankingis to 
God bi Dauith, 
for God dely- 
ueride him fro 
Saul, cumpass- 
inge him with 
his oost, that 
he my3te not 
ascape bi man- 
nus weie, outa- 
kun the mer- 
uelouse help of 
God. c et alii. 


Verba mea. 


IV. 3—-V. 10. 


3lacioun thou spraddest out to me. Haue 
merci of me; and ful out here myn ori- 
soun. Sones of men, hon longe with 
greuous herte ? whereto looue 3ee vanyte, 
4and sechen lesing? And witeth, for the 
Lord hath maad merueilous his seynt; 
the Lord ful out shal here me, whan 
5I shal crie to hym. Wrathe 3ee, and 
wileth not synnen; that 3ee seyn in 
joure hertis and in joure couchis, have 
63ee compunccioun. Sacrifiseth sacrifise of 
ri3twisnesse, and hopeth in the Lord; 
many seyn, Who shewith to vs goode 
7thingis? Markid is vpon vs the 1i3t of 
thi chere, Lord; thou 3eue gladnesse in 
smyn herte. Of the frut of whete, win, 
gand oile of hem; thei ben multiplied. In 
pes into itself; Ishal slepe, and reste. 
10 For thou, Lord; singulerli in hope hast 
togidere set me. 


PSALM V. 


1Into the ende, for hir that getith the 
eritage. 


2 My woordis with eris parceyue thou, 
3Lord; vnderstond my cry. Tac heede to 
the vois of myn orisoun; my king, and 
amy God. For to thee I shal pre3e, Lord ; 
serli thou ful out shalt here my vois. Erly 
I shal neezh stonde to thee, and seen; 
for thou art God not willende wickid- 
énesse. Ne shal dwelle beside thee the 
shrewe; ne shul dwelle stille the vn- 
7ri3twise before thin ejen. Thou hast 
hatid alle that wirken wickidnesse; thou 
shalt leesen alle that speken lesing. The 
man of blodis and trecherous the Lord 
sshal wlate; I forsothe in the multitude 
of thi mercy. I shal entre in to thin hous; 
I shal honouren at thin holi temple in thi 
gdrede. Lord, bring forth me in thi ri3t- 
wisnesse for myn enemys; mac redi in 
lothi si3te my weie. For ther is not in the 
mouth of hem treuthe; the herte of hem 


4 full out here 1. s Om. 1. 
mosxbhk. offre 1. 
40m. 1Lm.  ® oonly 1. 
Vleese hemi. ™a gileful rx. 


T rigtwisnesse 1. * Om. 1. 


¥ seken 3e 8. 


salm X. 


PSALMS. 


-vois of my preier. 


t Om. c. 
xan pling 1. Ymany meni. 2 goode thingis 1. ® up on 1. 

& and vnderstonde 1. 
. But I schal be 1Kos. 


741 


thou hast alargid to me. Haue thous 
mercy on me; and here’ thou my preier. 
Sones of men, hou long ben 3e of heuy 
herte ? whi louen 3e vanite, and seken' a* 
leesyng ? And wite 3e, that the Lord hath4 
maad merueilous his hooli man; the Lord 
schal here me, whanne Y schal crye to 
hym. Be 3e wrothe, and nyle 3e do's 
synne; ‘and for tho thingis’ whiche 3e 
seiel in 30ure hertis and in 3oure beddis, 
be 3e compunct. Sacrifie 3e ‘the sacri-6 
fice* of riztfulnesse, and hope 3e in the 
Lord ; many’ seien, Who schewide goodis* 
to vs? Lord, the liz3t of thi cheer is narkid7 
on® vs; thou hast j3oue gladnesse in myn 
herte. hei ben multiplied of the fruit ofs 
whete, and» of wyn; and of¢ her? oile. Ino 
pees in the same thing; Y schal slepe, and 
take reste. For thou, Lord; hast set me1o 
syngulerli® in hope. 


PSALM V. 

The title of the fyuethe salm. To thei 
ouercomere on the eritagis, the song' 
Uae | rr armas 
Lord, perseyue thou my wordis with2 Hes en 

eeris ; vndurstonde® thou my cry. Mi3 dekenes schul- 

kyng, and my God; 3yue thou tent to the taece Cedi 

For, Lord, Y schal4 pee 

preie to thee; here thou eerly my vois. Goddis puple; 

Eerli Y schal stonde ny3 thee", and Y5 schuldede- 

j _  fende his pnple. 
schal se; for thou art God not willyngei cet alii. 
wickidnesse. Nethir an yuel willid mané 
schal dwelle bisidis thee; nethir vniust men 
schulen dwelle bifor thin izen. Thon? 
hatist alle* that worchen wickidnesse ; 
thou schalt leese! alle that speken leesyng. 

The Lord schal holde abhomynable a 

manquellere, aud gileful™ man. But", 8 

Lord, in the multitude of thi merci Y 

schal entre in to thin hows; Y schal wor- 

schipe? to1 thin hooli temple in thi drede. 

Lord, lede thou forth me in thi ri3tful-° 

nesse' for myn enemyes; dresse thou my 

weie in thi si3t. For whi’ treuthe is not 10 


V tho yuelis to 1. W Sacrifice nkL 
b Om. plures. ©Om. 0. 
K alle hem 1. 
q at IKS. 


u Om. 1. 


htotheer. i wilnynge 1s. 


°QOm.10. —P worschip thee 1xs. 


Domine, ne in 
furore. 


742 


iis veyn. An open sepulcre is the throte 
of hem, with ther tungis treccherousli 
thei diden; deme them, thou God. Falle 
thei doun fro ther tho3tis ; after the mul- 
titude of the vnpitousnessis of hem, put 
hem awei; for thei han terrid thee, Lord. 
And glade thei alle, that hopen in thee ; 
in to withoute ende thei shul ful out 
gladen; and thou shalt dwellen in hem. 

12 And alle shul glorien in thee that loouen 

isthi name; for thou shalt blisse to the 
ristwise. Lord, as with the sheeld of thi 
goode wil, thou hast crouned vs. 


PSALM VI. 


1In to the ende, the salm of ™ Daud, 
Jor the ei3the. 


2 Lord, in thi wodnesse vndernyme thou 
nott me; ne in thi wrathe chastise thou 
3me. Haue mercy of me, Lord, for I am 
syk; hele me, Lord, for disturbid ben 
4alle my bonys. And my soule is disturbid 
sgretli; but thou, Lord, hon longe? Be 
turned, Lord, and delyuere my soule; 
cmac me saaf, for thi grete mercy. For 
ther is not in deth, that be myndeful of 
thee; in helle forsothe who shal knou- 
7leche to thee? I haue trauailid in my 
weilinge, I shal wasshe bi alle ny3tis my 
bed; and with my teres my bedding I 
8shal watrin. Disturbid is of wodnesse 
myn e3e; I haue inwardli eldid amongis 
Yalle myn enemys. Goth awei fro me, 
alle that werken wickidnesse; for the 
Lord ful out herde the vois of my weping. 
10The Lord ful out herde my louli pre3- 
ing; the Lord myn orysoun hath vnder- 
taken. Shamen and be disturbid® hugely 
‘Nalle myn enemys; be thei turned, and 
shame thei ful swiftli. 


m™ fo E. 


PSALMS. 


« 


V. r1—VI. 1. 


in her mouth; her herte is veyn. 
throtet is an opyn sepulcre, thei diden 
gilefuli with" her tungis ; God, deme thou 
hem. Falle thei doun: fro her thou3tis, vp’ 
the multitude of her wickidnessis” caste 
thou hem doun; for, Lord, thei han terrid 
thee to ire‘. And alle that hopen in thee, 
beY glad; thei schulen make fulli? ioye 
with outen ende, and thou schalt dwelle in 


hem. And alle that louen thi name schulen 12 
haue glorie in thee; for thou schalt blesse 1s 


a* just man. Lord, thou hast corouned vs, 
as with the” scheeld of thi good wille. 


PSALM VI. 


The title of the sixte salm. To the ouer-\ 
comere in salmes, the salm of Daud, 
‘on the ei3the°t. 


Lord, repreue thou not me in thi stronge 2 
vepiaunce; nether chastice thou me in thin 
ire. Lord, haue thou merci on? me, for3 
Y am sijk; Lord, make thou me hool, 
for alle my boonys ben troblid. And my4 
soule is troblid greetli; but thou, Lord, 
hou long®? Lord, be thou conuertid‘, ands 
delyuere my soule; make thou me saaf, 
for thi merci. For noon is® in deeth, which" 6 
is myndful of thee; but in helle who schal 
knouleche to thee? I traneilide in my7 
weilyng, Y schal waische my bed! bi ech 
ny3t; Y schal moiste, ‘ether make weet, 
my bedstre with my teeris. Myn ize iss 
disturblid of woodnesse; Y waxe! eld 
among alle myn enemyes. Alle 3e that9 
worchen wickidnesse, departe™ fro me; 
for the Lord hath" herd the vois of my 


wepyng. The Lord hath herd my bi-10 


sechyng; the Lord hath resseyued® my 
preier?. 
and be* disturblid greetli; be thei turned 
togidere, and be thei aschamed ful swiftli. 


0 distourblid «. 


t herte a uini, Vvpec. after 1. W ynpiteuousnessis 1. * wraththe xs. Y be their. 2 ful out s. 
a the t. ak. ¢Om.xKw. dofi. © long fariest1. fal to gidre turnid 1. gtheris1. 1 that 1. 
ibed, or conscience1. k Om.1v.  lhaue wexe 1. wexidex. ™ departeth 1. departe je s. 


graciously 1, ° vptaken 1, P orisoun 1. 


q be thei x. 


0 hath 
¥ be thei 1. ; 


Her 11 


Alle my enemyes be’ aschamed, 0) 


+ d gios. Da- 
uide made the 
sixte salm, to * 
axe merci for 
his offence, bi 
which he co- 
maundide the 
puple to be 
noumbrid for 
pride, and 
ajens the lawe 
in xxx. chapitre 
of Exodi, with- 
out money as- 
signed there of 
God. A et alii. 


Domine Deus. 


VII. r—16. 


PSALM VIL. 


1In to the ende; the salm to Dauid, 
whom he song to the Lord for the 
woordus of Cusi, sone™ of the rizthalf, 
‘or Gemyny?. 


2 Lord, my God, in thee J hopide; mac 
me saf fro alle men pursuende me, and 
3delyuere me. Lest any time he raueshe 
me as a leoun my soule; whil ther is not 
4that a3eenbie, ne that make? saf. Lord 
my God, if I dide this, if ther is wickid- 
5nesse in myn hondis; if I quitte to the 
men 3eldende to me euelis, I shal falle doun 
thur3 desert fro myn enemys inwardli 
svoide; pursue the enemy my lif, and 
cacche, and to-trede in the erthe my lif; 
and my glorie in to poundre bringe doun. 
7Rys vp, Lord, in thi wrathe; and be 
thou enhauncid in- the coostis of myn 
senemys. And ris vp, Lord my God, in 
the heste that thon hast sent; and the 
congregacioun of puplis shal enuyroun 
9thee. And for it in to hei3 go a3een; the 
Lord demeth puplys. Deme me, Lord, 
aftir my rijtwisnesse; and aftir my in- 
lonocence vpon me. Shal ben endid the 
shreudenesse of synneres, and thou shalt 
dresse the ri3twis ; God serchende hertis 
uiand reenes. Ri3twis myn helpe of the 
Lord; that maketh saaf rijte men in 
izherte. God ri3twis demere, strong andpa- 
cient ; whether he wrathith bi alle da3es? 
13 But 3ee shul ben conuertid, his swerd he 
shal braundishen; his bowe he _ bende, 
14and made it redi. And in it he maade 
redi vesselis of deth; his arewis with 
isbrennende thingus he made out. Lo! 
he withinne wro3te vnriztwisnesse ; con- 
16 ceyuede sorewe, and bar wickidnesse. A 
lake he openede, and dalf4 it out; and 


nn the sone AEU. © Om. Au. 


2 Om. a. u Om. v. 


t the synne of the x. 
a haue do 1. 


> yuel 1. 


k wraththe 1. 
Tr upon I. 
whet. 


bh pursue her. ‘i take he 1. 
°oOm.c. Pafter1. 4 aftir 1. 
delitinges K.  ¥ wher ceteri passim. 


florische, that is, make rcedi to smyte « text. v marg. 


d he hath childid 1. 


PSALMS. 


P make me 4E pr. m. H. 


¥ word nw. 
¢ wickidnesse, that is, wille to do wickidnesse K text. Vv marg. 
€ haue 3olden yuel thingis to hem that han 3olde yuel thingis to me 1. 
1 enhaunsid 1. 
8 hertis, that is, thouztis Kv. 
x But if 1. 

§ and he 1. 


743 


PSALM VII. 


The title of the® seuenthe salm. For the‘) 
ignoraunce of Dauid, which he souge 
to the Lord on the wordis* of Ethi- 
opien, the sone of Genynyt. 


Mi Lord God, Y haue hopid in thee;2 
make thou me saaf fro™ alle that pur- 
suen me, and* delynere thou me. Lest ony3 
tyme he as a lioun rauysche my soule; 
the’ while noon is? that ajenbieth, nether 
that makith saaf. Mi Lord God, if Y4 
dide* this thing’, if wickidnesse® is in myn 
hondis’; if Y ‘3eldide to men 3eldynge tos 
me yuels®, falle Y ‘bi disseruyng‘ voide frogs 
myn enemyes; myn enemy pursue’ mys6 
soule, and take’, and defoule my lijf in 
erthe; and brynge my glorie in to dust. 
Lord, rise thou vp in thin ire*; and be7 
thou reysid! in the coostis of myn enemyes. 
And, my Lord God, rise thou™ in the co-8 
maundement, which thou ‘hast comaund- 
id"; and the synagoge of puplis schal cum- 
passe thee. And for this go thou a3en° ang 
hi3; the Lord demeth puplis. Lord, deme 
thou me bi? my ri3tfulnesse; and bid myn 
innocence on™ me. 


the hertis’ and‘ reynes", schalt dresse a 
lust man. 
that makith saaf ri3tful men in herte. 


The Lord 7s a iust inge, stronge and lz 


pacient ; whether’ he is* wrooth bi alle 
daies ? 
schal florische? his swerd; he hath bent 
his bouwe, and made it redi. 
ynne he hath maad redi the vessels of 
deth; he* hath fulli maad his arewis with 
brennynge thingis. 
sorewe; he peynfuli brou3te® forth vnri3t- 
fulnesse, and childide’ wickidnesse. 


‘d deluyde aru. 


2 ther is 1. 
4 werkis 1. 
& fro pacienee of 1. 
2 comaundidist K. 
“ reynes, that is, 
% make bri3t 1. 

¢ hath brou3t 1. 


wand fro1. *Om.1. Y Om. 1. 
f worthily 1. 
™ thou up IKs. 
t and the 1. 
y alle to gidre turnid 1. 


»b the wickid hath 1. 


The wickidnesse of 10 
- synneris be endid; and thou, God, sekyng 


Mi iust help zs of the Lord; 11 


If* 3e ben ‘not conuertid’, he13 


And ther- 14 


Lo! he® conseyuede 15 


Hele 


+ A glos. That 
is, for the 
synne of the 
ignoraunce of 
Dauid, bi which 
he was occa- 
sioun of the 
deth of prestis 
slayn of Saul, 
and Doech, for 
the helpyng of 
Dauid. a et alii. 


7A4 


i7fel in to the dich that he made’. His 
sorewe shal be turned in to the hed of 
hym; and in to his nol the wickidnesse 

ig of hym shal descenden. I shal knouleche 
to the Lord, after the rijtwisnesse of 
hym; and I shal sein salm to the name 
of the he3est Lord. 


PSALM VIII. 


iIn to the ende, the salm of Dauid, for 
the pressis. 


Domine, Do- 2 Lord, oure Lord; hou myche merueilous 
eat is thi name in al the erthe. For rerid vp 
3is thi grete doing, ouer heuenes. Of the 
mouth of vnspekende® childer and souk- 
ende thou performedist preising, for thin 
enemys; that thou destroje the enemy 
4and the veniere. For I shal see thin 
heuenes, the werkis of thi fingris; the 
mone and the sterris, that thou hast 
5foundid. What is a man, that myndeful 
thou art of hym; or the son of man, for 
éthou visitist hym? Thou lassedest hym 
a litil lasse fro aungelis ; with glorie and 
7worshipe thou crounedest hym, and set- 
tist hym ouer the werkis of thin hondys. 
8Alle thingus thou leidist vnder his feet, 
shep and oxen alle; ferthermor and the 
‘bestis of the feeld ; the foulis of heuene, 
and the fishis of the se; that thur3 gon 
the sties of the se. Lord, oure Lord; 
hou myche merueilous is thi name in al 
erthet. 


PSALM IX. 


In to the ende, for the hid thingus of the 
sone, the salm of Dauid. 


I shal knoulechen to thee, Lord, in al 
myn herte; and telle alle thi merueilis. 
3I shal gladen and ful out iozen in thee; 

I shal sey salm to thi name, thou heest. 
4In turnynge myn enemy bacward; thei 
shu be feblid, and pershe fro thi face. 


Confitebor. 2 


rhadde maad 4. 8 dhe vnspekynge 4. 


*fellex, faftirr. g& Om. K prom. L. 
avengere 1. ® the sterris 1s. 
P thou hast 1. 9 oxen 1. r the whiche 1. 


durful sec.m. cK sec. m. onxik, Om. 1. 


PSALMS. 


h reisid up 1. 
© man, that is, mankinde, in comparison of aungelis kinde « text. v mare. 
sO 
Vv Om. a. 


VII. 17-—IX. 4. 


openide a lake, and diggide it out; and he 
felde® in to the dich which he made. His 17 
sorewe scha] be turned in to his heed ; and 
his wickidnesse schal come doun in to his 
necke. JI schal knouleche to the Lord bifis 
his ri3tfulnesse ; and Y schal synge to the 
name of the hizeste Lord. 


PSALM VIII. 

The title of the eiz3the salm. To the} 
ouercomere, for pressours, the salm 
of Dauidt. 

Lord, thou art oure Lord ; thi name is2 
ful wonderful in al erthe. For thi greet 
doyng is reisid®, aboue heuenes. Of the3 
mouth of 3onge children, not spekynge 
and soukynge mylk, thou madisti per- 
fitli* heriyng, for thin enemyes; that thou 
destrie the! enemy and avengere™. For Y 4 
schal se thin heuenes, the werkis of thi 
fyngris; the moone and sterris®, whiche 
thou hast foundid. What is a man®, thats 
thou art myndeful of hym; ethir the sone 
of a virgyn, for thou visitist hym? Thoue 
hast maad hym a litil lesse than aungels ; 
thou hast corouned hym with glorie and 
onour, and hast? ordeyned hym aboue the7 
werkis of thin hondis. Thou hast maads 
suget alle thingis vndur hise feet; alle 
scheep and oxis4, ferthermore and the 
beestis of the feeld; the briddis of the eir,9 
and the fischis of the see; that passen bi 
the pathis of the see. Lord,‘thou art’ oure 10 
Lord ; thit name ‘is wondurful" in al erthe. 


PALM IX. 


The title of the’ nynthe salm. In to the. 
ende, for the pryuytees of the sone, the 
salm of Dauid t. 

Lord, Y schal knouleche to thee in al2 
myn herte; Y schal telle alle thi merueils. 
Thou hizeste’, Y schal be glad, and Y3 
schal be fulli ioieful in thee; Y* schal 
synge to thi name. For thou turnest myn4 
enemy abac; thei schulen be maad feble, 


t the erthe “EH. 


ihast maad 1. Kk perfijtr. Jans. ™ the 


m. I. t hou wondirful is thi 1. uis ful won- 


w higheste Lord1. * and Y 1. 


t+ A glos. That 
is, to Crist 
kyng ouer- 
comere, for the 
meritis of hise 
passiouns, bi 
whiche he 
hadde ful vic. 
torie, and 
coroun of glo. 
rie, and en- 
haunsyng 
aboue alle 
creaturis, this 
salm is maad 
of Dauid, to 
his glorie aud 
onour, A et alii. 


t A glos. This 
salm was maad 
of Dauid for 
the priuytees 
of the soues, 
that is, for the 
doom of dis- 
crecioun, bi 
which feithful 
men ben de- 
partid in meri- 
tis fro vnfeith- 
ful men, and 
for the doom 
of the last de- 
partyng of 
good men and 
yuel. a ef alii. 


PS. X. 
secundum 
Hebr. 


IX. pan, 


5 For thou didist my dom, and my cause ; 
thou sittist vp on the trone, that demest 
6riz3twisnesse. Thon fercdist" Jentilis’, and 
the vnpitous pershide; the name of hem 
thon didist awei in to with oute ende, 
z7and in to the world of world. Of the 
eneiny failiden the swerdis in to the ende; 
and the cites of hem thou destro3edist. 
Pershide the mynde of them with soun; 
sand the Lord in to withoute ende abit” 
stille. He made redy in dom his trone ; 
gand he shal deme the roundnesse of the 
erthe in equite; he shal deme puplis in 
jori;twisnesse. And ‘maad is the Lord* 
refut to the pore ; helpere in tho thingus 
lithat nede is, in tribulacioun. And hope 
thei in thee, that knewen thi name; for 
thou hast not forsake the sechende thee, 
12Lord. Singeth salmys to the Lord, that 
dwellith in Sion; telleth among Jentilis 
13the studies of hym. For a3een sechende 
the blod of hem he recordide; he for3at 
i4not the cry of pore men. Haue mercy 
of me, Lord; see my mecnesse fro myn 
enemys. That enhauncist me fro the 
jatis of deth; that I telle alle thi preis- 
ingus in the 3atis of the do3ter of Sion. 
16I shal ful out gladen in thi 3iuere of 
helthe; ful ficchid ben the Jentilis in the 
deth, that thei maden. In this grene, 
that thei hidden, ca3t is the foot of hem. 
17The Lord shal be knowe doende domys; 
in the werkis of his hondis ca3t is the 
igsinful. Be turned the synneres in to helle; 
igalle Jentilis, that forjeten God. For not 
into the ende forjeting shal ben of the 
pore ; the pacience of pore men shal not 
20 pershen in to the ende. Rys, Lord, be 
not coumfortid a man; be demed the 
alJentilis in thi si3te. Sett, Lord, a lawe 
3iuere vp on hem; wite the Jentilis, for 
ithey ben men. Wherto, Lord, wentist 
thon awei along? thou despisist inY ned- 


u blamedist E see. m. sed postea expunzit. 
maad is the #. Y and a. 


Yand thei 1. 
€ han failid 1. 
Kk of the 1. 
of hem 1, 
whan hid 1. 


VOL. Il. 


Z sittist up 1. sittist K. aan 
f perische 4. hath perischid 1. 
land his. ™ haue thei mK. 

Gandher. fofi Sand ser. 

* upon I. 


PSALMS. 


v the Jentilis e£. 


n and telle 1. 
t ioye fully 1. 


745 


andy schulen perische fro thi face. Fors 
thou hast maad my doom and my cause; 
thou, that demest rijtfulnesse, ‘hast sct? on 
the? trone. Thou blamedist® hethene men, ¢ 
and the wickid® perischide; thou hast do 
awel the name of lem in to the world, 
and in to the world of world". The7 
swerdis of the enemy failiden® in to the 
ende; and thou hast distried the citees of 
hem. The mynde of hem perischidef with 
sown; and the Lord dwellith with outens 
ende. He made’ redi his trone in doom; 
and he schal deme the world in equite, hes 
schal deme puplis in ri3tfulnesse. And the 10 
Lord is inaad refuyt", ‘ether helpi,‘to a‘ 
pore man; an! helpere in couenable tymes 
in tribulacioun. Aud thei, that knowen1n 
thi name, haue™ hope in thee; for thou, 
Lord, hast not forsake bem that seken 
thee. Synge 3e to the Lord, that dwellith 12 
in Syon; telle" 3e hise studyes® among 
hethene men. God for3etith not the ery 1s 
of pore men; for he hath mynde?P, and4 
sekith the blood of hem. Lord, haue thou 14 
merci on’ me; se? thou my mekenesse of 
myn enemyes. Which enhaunsist me fro 1s 
the 3atis of deeth; that Y telle alle thi 
preisyngis in the 3atis of the dou3ter of 
Syon. Y schal ‘be fulli ioyefult in thin 16 
helthe; hethene men ben fast set in the 
perisching, which" thei maden’. In this 
snare, which thei hidden’, the foot of hem 
is kau3t. The Lord makynge domes schal 17 
be knowun; the synnere is takun in the 
werkis of hise hondis. Synneris be turned is 
togidere in to helle; alle folkis, that for- 
3eten God. For the for3etyng of a pore ls 
man schal not be in to the ende; the pa- 
cience of pore men schal not perische in 
to the ende. Lord, rise thou vp, a man 20 
be not coumfortid ; folkis be demyd in thi 
sij3t. Lord, ordeine thou a lawe makere21 
on* hem; wite folkis, that thei ben men. 


wWabijdeth azn. * he is maad Ue a. 


bhast blamid 1. ¢wickid mani. 4 worldis s. 
& hath made 1. h the refuyt §. iOm.:. 
© studies, that is, the gospel K.P mynde 


uthata. Y han maad to oothere men 1. 


5c 


746 


efultces in tribulacioun. Whil proudeth 
the vupitous with inne, tend is the pore 
man; thei ben ca3t in the counseilis, bi 
3the whiche thei thenken. For preisid is 
the synnere in the desiris of his soule 3 
sand the wicke’ is blissid. The synnere 
sharpli ful out terrede the Lord; after 
the myculnesse* of his wrathe he shal 
snot sechen. Ther is not God in his si3t ; 
defoulid ben the weies of hym in alle 
time. Thi domes be taken awei fro the 
face of hym; of alle his enemys he shal 
6lordshipen. Forsothe he seide in his 
herte, I shal not be moued, fro ienera- 
cioun in to ieneracioun withoute euel. 
7 Whos mouth is ful of cursing, and bitter- 
nesse, and treccherie; vnder his tunge 
strauaile and sorewe. He sitt® in aspies 
with riche men in priuytes ; that he sle 
othe innocent. The e3en of hym beholden 
in to the pore; he waitith in hid place, 
as a Jeoun in his den. He waiteth, that 
he raneshe the pore; to raueshe the pore, 
1owhil he draweth hym to. In his grane 
he shal meken hym ; he shal bowen hym- 
self and fallen; whan he shal lordshipen 
110f pore men. Forsothe he seide in his 
herte, For3eten is God; he turneth awei 
i2his face, lest he see in to the ende. Rys 
up, Lord God, and be haunsid thin hond; 
i3ne for3ete thou of 4 the® pore. For what 
the vnpitouse terrede God? forsothe he 
seide in his herte, He shal not ajeen 
1ssechen. Seest thou, for trauaile and 
sorewe thou beholdist ; that thou take 
them in to thin hondis. T'o thee laft is 
the pore; to the faderles child thou shalt 
isben helpere. Too-brose the arm of the 
synnere, and off the malice doere; the 
synne of hym shal be so3t, and not be 
iefounde. The Lord shal regne in to with 
oute ende, and in to the world of world; 
perishe shuln 3ee, Jentilis, fro the lond 
170f hym. The desyr of pore men ful out 


Zwickyd anu. @ multitude c prem. 


¥ dispisist vs 1. 


2 couenably r. 
© Om. 1. 


a tyme a. 


PSALMS. 


> sittith 4. sett m. 


b wickid man 1. 


De een 


Lord, whi hast thou go fer awei? thou1 
dispisistY ‘in couenable* tymes* in tribula- 
cioun. While the wickid® is proud, the2 
pore man is brent; thei ben taken in the 
counsels’, bi whiche thei thenken. For-3 
whi the synnere is preisid in the desiris 
of his soule; and the wickid is blessid. The4 
synnere ‘wraththide the Lord‘; vp% the 
multitude of his ire’ he schal not seke. 
God is not in his si3t; hise weies ben de-5 
fonlid in al tyme. Godi, thi domes ben 
takun awei fro his face; he schal be lord 
of alle hise enemyes. For* he seide in his 6 
herte, Y schal not be moued, fro genera- 
cioun in to generacioun without yuel. 
‘Whos mouth! is ful of cursyng, and of7 
bitternesse, and of gyle; trauel™ and so- 
rewe 7s vndur his tunge. He sittith ins 
aspies with ryche men in priuytees; to sle 
the innocent man. Hise izen biholden® ong 
a® pore man; he settith aspies in hid? 
place, as a lioun in his denne. He settith 
aspies, for to rauysche a1 pore man; for to 
rauysche a pore man, while he drawith 
the" pore man’. In his snare he schalio 
maket meke the pore man; he schal bowe 
hym silf", and schal’ falle doun*, whanne 
he hath be lord of pore men. For* he seide 11 
in his herte, God hath for3etey; he hath 
turned awei his face, that he se? not in to 
the ende. Lord God, rise thou vp, and 12 
thin hond be enhaunsid ; for3ete thou not 
pore men. For what thing terride* thes 
wickid> man God to wraththe? for he 
seide in his herte, God schal not* seke. 
Thou seest, for thou biholdist trauel and 14 
sorewe; that thou take hem in to thin 
hondis. The pore man is left to thee; thou 
schalt be an helpere to the fadirles and 
modirles*, Al to-breke thou the arme of 15 
the synnere, and yuel willid; his synne 
schal be sou3t, and it schal not be foundun. 
The Lord schal regne with outen ende, i6 
and in to the world of world; folkis, 3e 
4 Om, 4. 


eOm.n. fto an. 


Cwexith1. 4 wickide counsels 1. 


ae f hath terrid the Lord to wraththe 1. ¢ aftir 1. ons. bwraththe1. iOm.1. Forsothe 1. 
‘ a Bee of a rr m i trauel 1. ® biholden cruelyt. Other Phis1t. ather Tay. 
0 him 1. m.s. "hym silf dounr, vheschalr. wOm.1 x Forsoth 
: . . oT el. Y forzete the pore 
man,and 1. %sehimy. ahath terrid 1, > vnpitous 1. : ” 


‘not a3jenr. 4 moderles child s. 


PS. X. 
secundum 
Hebr. 


In Domino 
confido. 


Saluum me 
fac. 


1x. *18—xXI. 6. 


herde the Lord; the befor rediyng of the 

isherte of hem herde thin ere. To deme to 
the moderles child and to the meeke; 
that no more ley tuS to magnefie hym- 
self a man vp on erthe. 


PSALM X. 
i In to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


2 In the Lord I trostne!; hou sey 3ee to 
my soule, Passe forth in to the hil, as 
3a sparewe. For loo! synneres benten* 
bowe, maden redy ther arwis in the arwe 
girdil; that thei shete in derc the ri3te 
4men in herte. For thoo thingus that 
thou parformedest, thei destrozeden ; the 
sri3twis man what dide forsothe? The 
Lord in his holy temple; the Lord, in 
heuene the sete of hym. His e3en in to 
the pore beholden; the e3elidis of hym 
easken the sones of men. The Lord ask- 
eth the rijtwis man, and the vnpitous; 
he forsothe, that looueth wickidnesse, 
zhatith hys soule. He shal reyne vp on 
synneres grenes; fyr, brunston, and the 
spiritis of tempestis, part of the chalis of 
ahem. For ri3twis the Lord, and ri3twis- 
nesse he loouede ; equite sa3 the chere of 
hym. 
PSALM XI. 


1In to the ende, the salm of Dauid, for 
the ei3the. 


2 Lord, mac me saf, for ther failith the 


holy ; for mynusht ben treuthis fro the. 


3sonys of men. Veyn thingus thei speeken, 
eche to his ne3hebore ; ther! treccherous 
4lippis™ in herte and herte speeken. The 
Lord scatere alle trecherous lippis", and 
sthe tunge gret speche®. That seiden, 
Oure tunge wee shul magnefien; oure 
élippis of vs ben; who is oure lord ? For 


8 Om. tH. hOm. n. 


© spekynge 4. 


i triste H. 


e fro Ks. f the fadirles and 1. 
l ther. ™ that thei 1. 4 the riztful 1. 
his owner. * upon. synners I. 
louith 1. Wis ex. hath seen 1. 
bOm. or. © hath failid 1.. 
I vg self 1. 


& Om. 1. 


xX euenesse I. 
4 and thei 1. 


PSALMS. 


k benden an. 


h presume 1. 
other. 

t and brymston 1. 

Y ethir euenhede wiv. Om. 1. 

¢ hauynge 1. 


TAT 


schulen perische fro the lond of hym. The 17 
Lord hath herd the desir of pore men; 
thin cere hath herd the makyng redi of 
her herte. To deme for® the’ modirles is 
‘and meke?; that a man ‘leie to" no more 
to‘magnyfie hym silf! on erthe. 


PSALM X. 


The title of* the tenthe salm. To the \ 
victorie of Dauid. 

I triste in the Lord ; hou seien je to my 2 
soule, Passe thou ouere in to an! hil, as 
a sparowe doith? For lo! synneris hans 
bent a bouwe; thei han maad redi her 
arowis in an arowe caas; ‘for to™ schete 
in derknesse ri3tful" men in herte. Fors 
thei han distryed, whom thon hast maad 
perfit; but what dide the ri3tful man ? 
The-Lord zs in his hooli temple; he zss 
Lord, his seete 2s in heuene. Hise i3en bi- 
holden on a® pore man; hise ijelidis axen 
the sones of men. The Lord axith a iust¢ 
man, and? ynfeithful man; but he, that 
loueth wickidnesse, hatith his! soule. He7 
schal reyne snaris ont ‘synful men’; fier, 
brymston', and the spirit of tempestis ben 
the part of the cuppe of hem. For thes 
Lord zs ri3tful*, and louede’ ri3tfulnessis ; 
his cheer si3” equite*, ‘ethir ewennessey. 


PSALM XI. 


The title of the? eleuenthe salm. To the 
victorie on the et3te*, the” song of Dauid. 


Lord, make thou me saaf, for the hooli2 
failide®; for treuthis ben maad litle fro the 
sones of men. Thei spaken veyn thingis, 3 
ech man to hys neiz3bore; thei! han® gile- 
ful lippis, theif spaken in herte® and herte. 
The Lord destrie alle gileful lippis; and the 4 
greet spekynge tunge. Whiche seiden, Wes 
schulen magnyfie oure tunge, our lippis 
ben of vs'; who is oure lord? For thee 


Itheiacu. ™Om.#. 4 tungis £ pra. 


i make him selff greet 1. &* Om. a. 
P and eke ar pr.m. and a1 sec. m. and an kK. 

winst EL. Vv he louedec. Joueth ev. he 
z2Om. QR. 4 e3the mxhi. 
h with her herte 1. 


fOm.1. & her herte 1. 


5c 2 


748 PSALMS. 


the wrecchidnesse of the” nedy, and the 
weiling of the pore; now J shal vp rise, 
seith the Lord. I shal putte in thin 
helthe 3inere ; trostily I shal dou in hym. 
7'The spechis of the Lord chaste speelis ; 
siluer examyned bi fyr, proued of the 
serthe, purgid seuefold. Thou, Lord, shalt 
withholden vs; and kepen vs fro this 
oieneracioun and‘ in to withoute ende. In 
enuyroun vnpitous men gon; aftir thin 
heisnesse thou hast multiplied the sones 
of inen. 


PSALM XII. 
1 In to the entde, the salm of Dauid. 


Usquequo, Hou longe, Lord, thou forjetist me in 
Downiage to the ende? hou longe thou turnest 
2awei thi face fro me? Hou myche while 
I shal putte counseilis in my soule; so- 
srewe in myn herte bi day? Hou longe 
shall ben enhauncid myn enemy vp on 
ame? Behold, and ful out here me, Lord 
my God. Li3te thou myn e3en, lest any 
styme I slepe al doun in deth; lest sum 
time sey myn enemy, I hane wonnen the 
maistri a3jen hym. That trubblen me shul 
6ful out glade, if I shul be moued; I for- 
sothe in thi mercy haue hopid. Myn 
herte shal ful out gladen in thin helthe 
jiuere; I shal singe to the Lord, that 
goodis 3af to me; and do salm to the 
name of the hei3est Lord. 


PSALM XIII. 
1 In to the ende, the salm of Dauid*. 


Dixit insi- The vnwise man seide in his herte, 
[en Ther is uot God. Corupt thei ben, and 
abhominable ben maad in ther studies ; 
ther is not that do’ good, ther is not 
2vnto oon. The Lord fro henene forth be- 
heeld vp on the sonus of men; that he 
see, if ther is vnderstondende, or ajeen 
3sechende God. Alle ben bowid doun, to- 


POm. 4en secom. %Om. «En. 


XI. 7— RTI 3. 


wretchednesse* of nedy men, and for the 

weilyng of pore men; now Y schal ryse 

vp, seith the Lord. I schal sette' inhelt he™ ; 

Y schal do tristili in hym. The spechis7 
of the Lord ben chast spechis; siluer ex- 

amynyd® bi fier, preued fro erthe®, purgid 

seuen fold. Thou, Lord, schalt kepe vs;s 
and? thou‘ ‘schalt kepe" vs’ fro this gene- 

racioun witht outen ende. Wickid" meno 
goen’ in cumpas; bi" thin Ini3nesse thou 

hast multiplied the sones of men. 


PSALM XII. 


The title of the* twelfthe salm. To the 
victorie of Dauid. 


Lord, hon long for3etist thou me in to 
the ende? lou long turnest thou’ awei 
thi face fro me? Hou long schal Y settee 
counsels" in my soule ; sorewe in my herte 
bi dai? Hou loug schal myn enemy bes 
reisid® on me? My Lord God, biholdes 
thou, and here thou me. Li3tne thou myn 
isen, lest ony tyme Y slepe in deth; lests 
ony tyme myn enemye seie, Y hadde the 
maistri ajens hym. Thei, that troblen me, 
schulen haue ioie, if Y schal be stirid; 
forsothee Y hopide in thi merci. Myne 
herte schal fulli haue ioie in thin helthe4; 
Y schal synge to the Lord, that 3yueth 
goodis to me, and Y schal scie salm® to 
the name of the hijeste Lord. 


PSALM XIII. 
The title of ' thet threttenthe salm. To the. 
victorie of Dauid. 

The vnwise man seide in his herte, God 
is not. Thei ben corrupt, and® ben maad 
abhomynable in her studies; noon is! that 
doith good, noon is til to oon. The Lorde 
bihelde fro heuene on the sones of men; 
‘that he se, if ony* is! vndurstondyuge, ethir 
sekynge™ God. Alle bowiden awei, togi-3 
dere thei ben maad vnprofitable; noon is 


' Dauid, for the ei3the a. § doth «. 


k wretchidnessis 1. 1 putte or sefte 1. ™ the helthe 3iner, andi. asaied1. © the erthes. P Om.s. 


q Om. ts. r defende 1. $ Om. s. 


fOm.s, €Om.ens. Bandtheixs. i ther is 1. 


6 1 t in to with 1. 
m. cog. YOm. ci, 2Om.1. *® counceil s. P reisid up I. 


u Vnpitouse 1. VY gon aboute 1. W aftir 1. 
¢but 1. dhelthe siuere, Crist 1. a salms. 


k ony mans. ‘ther is 1. ™ asen sekynge 1. 


Domine, quis. 


ane3hboris. 


Serie J——XTV. 5 


gidere vnprofitable ben maad ; ther is not 
that do good, ther is not vuto oon, A 
sepulcre opened is the throte of hem, with 
ther tungis treceherously thei diden; the 
venym of edderes vnder the lippis of hem. 
Whos mouth of cursing and bitternesse 
is ful; swifte the feet of hem to sheden 
out blod. To-brosing and viuwelsumnesse 
in the weies of hem, and the weie of pes 
thei knewen not; ther is not the drede of 
4God befor ther e3en. Whether alle shul 
not knowen, that werken wiekednesse ; 
that deuoure my folc, as mete of bred? 
5God they inwardli clepeden not; there 
thei trembliden bi drede, wher was not 
6drede. For the Lord is in a ri3twis ie- 
neracioun ; the counseil of the nedi 3ee 
han confoundid, for the Lord is his hope. 
7Who shall 3iue fro Sion the helthe 3iuere 
of Irae]? Whan the Lord shal take awei 
the caitifte of his puple; Jacob ful out 
shal io3en, and Jrael shall gladen. 


PSALM XIV. 
The salm of Daud. 


1 Lord, who shal duelle in thi taber- 
nacle; or who shal eft resten im thin 

2holy hil? That goth in withoute wem ; 

3and werkith ry3ttwisnesse. That speketh 
treuthe in his herte; that dide not tre- 
cherie in his tunge. Ne dide to his nezhe- 
bore eue] ; and reprof toc not to ajen hise 

To no3t is bro3t doun in his 
si3t the malice doere ; forsothe the dred- 
ende the Lord he glorifieth. That swereth 
to his ne3hebore, and desceyueth not ; 

5that his monee 3af not to vsure; and 
3iftis vp on the innocent toc not. He, that 
doth these thingus, shal not be moued in 
to without ende. 


PSALMS. 


749 


that doth good, noon is” ‘til to° oon. The 
throte of hein is an open sepulcre, thei 
diden gilefuli with her tungis; the venym 
of snakis 2s vndur? her lippis. Whos mouth 
is ful of eursyng and‘ bittirnesse ; her feet 
ben swift to schede out blood. Sorewe 
and cursidnesse is in the weies of hem, 
and thei knewen not the weie of pees; 
the drede of God is not bifor her ijen. 
Whether alle men that worchen wickid-4 
nesse schulen not knowe; that" deuowren 
my puple, as mete of breed? Thei cle-5 
peden® not the Lord ; thei treinbliden there 
for dreed, where was no drede; for theé 
Lord is in a riztful generacioun. Thou 
hast sehentt the counsel of a" pore man; 
for the Lord is his hope. Whio schal 3yue7 
fro Syon helthe to Israel? Whanne the 
Lord hath turned awei the caitifte of his 
puple; Jacob schal ‘fulli be ioifulY, and 
Israel schal be glad. 


PSALM XIV. 


The title of the” fourtenthe salm. The 
salm of Dauid 


Lord, who schal dwelle in thi taber-1 
nacle; ether who schal reste in thin hooli 
hil? He that entrith with out wem; ande 
worehith ri3tfulnesse. Whieh* spekiths 
treuthe in his herte; which dide not gile 
in his tunge. NethirY dide yuel to his 
nei3bore ; and took not schenschip? ajens* 
hise neiz3boris®. A wickid man is brou3t to4 
nou3t in his si3t; but he glorifieth hem 
that dreden the Lord. Which* swerith to 
his nei3bore, and disseyueth not*; “whiches 
jaf not his money to vsure; and took not 
3iftis on the innocent. He, that doith 
these thingis, schal not be moued with 
outen ende. 


atherisi. untor Pvndirnethes. 4Gandof1. ‘whichex. § in clepeden a sec. m, clepen o. 
t confoundid 1. Uther. ¥ ful out ioye 1. fulli ioie x. Ww Om. Q. x He that 1. y Net. 
z schenschipis p. repreef 1. @tov. > nezebore x. ¢V¥ethatr, hkimnoti.,  € the which 1. 


f upon 1. 


750 
PSALM XV. 
Of the title, the inscripcioun to hym 
Dauid. 


Conserua me. 1  Kep ime, Lord, for I hopide in thee ; 
2] seide to the Lord, My God art thou; 
for of my goodis thou nedist not. To the 

seintis that ben in the lond of hym; he 
made merueilous alle my willis in hem. 
4Ther ben multiplied the infirmytes of 
hem; aftirward thei hee3eden to. I shal 
not gadere togidere the conuenticulis of 
hem of blodis; ne I shal be myndeful of 
sthe namys of hem bi my lippis. The Lord 
the part of myn eritage, and of my chalis; 
thou art, that shalt restore myn eritage 
sto me. Cordis fellen to me in ful cleer 
thingis; forsothe myn eritage ful cler 
zis to me. I shal blisse the Lord, that 
3af to me vnderstondinge ; ouermort ‘and 
vnto" the ny3t myche’ blameden me my 
greenys. I purueiede the Lord in my si3te 
euermor; for fro the ri3t partis he is 
9to me, lest I be with moued. For that 
gladede myn herte, and ful out iojede 
my tunge; furthermor and my flesh shal 
10 a3een resten in hope. For thou shalt not 
forsake my soule in helle; ne 3iue thin 
halewe to seen corupcioun. Knowen to 
me thou hast maad the weies of lif; 
thou shalt fulfille me therto in gladnesse 
with thi chere; delitingus in thi ri3tt 
hond vnto the ende. 


PSALM XVI. 
1 The orisoun of Dauid. 


Here, Lord, my ri3twisnesse; vnder- 
stond my lowe pre3ing. With eris per- 
ceyue myn orisoun; not in treccherous 

zlippis. Fro thi chere my dom go forth ; 
3thin e3en see thei equites. Thou proued- 
est myn herte, and visytedist in the ny3t ; 


Exaudi, Do- 
mine. 


t euer more an. 


&Om.Q. 1b that he made to preising 
1 and aftirward 1 = ™ Om. 1. 
Suntothe1.  saw3e bifore 1. 
x fulfille 1. y with s. 
dOm Rr. ¢ Parceyue 1. 
thous. |! visited if 1. 


« or smale 1. 
Vat, 

Zunto 1. til to K. 
f maad to me 1. 


PSALMS. 


of the meek and symple Crist v. 
© it art 1. 
¥ thing, that is, for my rising ajen K teat V marg. 
a eende, ether til to withonten eende kK. 
& cometh cKM. come it 1. 


XV. I— XVI. 3. 


PSALM XV. 


The title of the® fiuetenthe salm, ‘Of the 
meke and symple, the salm of Dauidt. 


Lord, kepe' thou me, for Y haue hopid1 
in thee; Y seide to the Lord, Thou art2 
my God, for thou hast no nede of my 
goodis. To the seyntis that ben in thes 
lond of hym; he* made wondurful alle 
my willis in hem. ‘The sikenessis of hema 
ben multiplied; aftirward! thei hastiden. 
I schal not gadire togidere the™ conuen- 
ticulis, ‘ethir litle" couentis, of hem of 
bloodis; and Y schal not be myndeful of 
her names bi my lippis. The Lord tss 
part of myn eritage, and of my passion ; 
thou art®, that schalt restore myn eritage 
to me. Coordis felden to me in ful cleree 
thingis ; for? myn eritage is ful cleer to me. 
Ischal blesse the Lord, that 3af4 vndur-7 
stondyng to me; ferthermore and my 
reynes blameden’ me ‘til to’ ny3t. I pur-s 
ueide' euere the Lord in my si3t; for he 
is on" the ri3thalf to me, that Y be not 
moued. For this thing’ myn herte waso 
glad, and my tunge ioyede fulli; ferther- 
more and my fleisch schal reste in hope. 
For thou schalt not forsake” my soule in 10 
helle; nether thou schalt 3yue thin hooli 
to se corrupcioun. Thou hast maad knowun 
to me the weies of lijf; thou schalt fille* 
me ofY gladnesse with thi cheer; delit- 
yugis bev in thi ri3thalf ‘til in to? the ende*. 


PSALM XVI. 


The title of the® sixtenthe salm. The \ 
preier of Daud. 

Lord, here thou my ri3tfulnesse ; biholde 
thou my preier. Perseuye® thou with eeris 
my preier; not maad* in gileful lippis. 
Mi doom come? ‘forth of thi cheer; thin2 
i3en se! equite. Thou hast preued myn3 
herte, and* hast visitid! in ni3t; thou hast 


Vintoa VYOm. a. 


ito gidre kepe 1. he hath 1. 
q hath jouen 1. © han blamyd 1. 
w leue r. 
¢ Om. L. 
k and 


P forsothe 1. 


bon R. 


h bifore 1. ' see thei kK. 


t+ A glos. This 
salm is maad of 
Dauid, to the 
preysyng of the 
meke and sym- 
ple Crist. a et 
alii. 


Bey Ie 4 VAT. 2. 


bi fyr thou examynedest me, and ther is 
4not founde in me wickidnesse. That my 
mouth speke not the werkis of men; for 
the woordis of thi lippis I kepte harde 
sweies. Parforme my goingus in thi sties; 
cthat my steppis be not mened. I criede, 
for thou, God, herdest me; bowe fully 
thin ere, and ful out here my woordis. 
7 Mac merueilouse thi mercyes; that makist 
asaf the hopende in thee. Fro the with- 
stonderes to thi rijthalf” kep me, as the 
appil of the* e3e. Vnder the shadewe of 
9thi weengis defend me; fro the face of 
ynpitous men, that me han tormentid. 
10 Myn enemys my soule cumpasiden ; ther 
tal3 thei closiden togidere; theyr mouth 
11hath spoken pride. Throwende me aferr 
now thei enuyrounden me; ther e3eu thei 
ordeyneden to bowe doun in to the erthe. 
12 They toke me doun, as a leoun redy to 
the prey; and as a leoun whelp dwell- 
izende in hid placis. Rys vp, Lord, be- 
for come hym, and supplaunte hym ; tac 
awei my soule fro the vnpitous; thy 
1swerd, fro the enemys of thin hond. 
Lord, fro a fewe fro the lond deuyde hem 
in ther lif; of thin hidde thingus fulfild 
toY is the wombe of hem. Thei ben ful- 
fild with sones; and laften ther relikis to 
isther childer. I forsothe in rijtwisnesse 
shal apere to thi sij3te; I shal be fulfild, 
whan thi glorie shal apere. 


PSALM XVII. 


\In to the ende, to the child of the Lord, 
Dauid; the whiche woordus of this? 
song he space to the Lord, in the dai 
that the Lord toe hym out fro the 
hond* of the enemys of hym, and fro 
the hond of Saul; and seide: 


I shal looue thee, Lord, my strengthe; 
the Lord my fastnyng, and my refut, 


Diligam te, 2 
Domine. 


W rizt part 4H, 


massaied 1, "it 1. 
stonden:. +t Hile:. andthe. 
rey1. ®QOm.1. » ouerturne 1. 
€ feithful ment. ferthe 1. & fulfillid 1. 
mihati. too. 9° hadde delyuered x. 


© hast herd 1. 


P Om. c. 


xthyn £ pr.m. Y Om. c. 
P hem that hopen 1. 
v han cast 1. 
¢ ynpitouse man, and delyuere 1. vnpitouse man; delyuer s. 
hb han left 1. 
q Om. ci, 


PSALMS. 751 


examynyd™ me" bi fier, and wickidnesse 
is not foundun in me. That my mouth4 
speke not the werkis of men; for the 
wordis of thi lippis Y hane kept harde 
weies. Make thou perfit my goyngis ins 
thi pathis; that my steppis be not moued. 

I criede, for thou, God, herdist® me ; boweé 
doun thin eere to me, and here thou my 
wordis. Make wondurful thi mercies; that7 
makist saaf ‘men hopynge? in thee. Kepes 
thou me as the appil of the4 ize; fro™ ‘men 
aj3enstondyuge® thi ri3t hond. Keueret thou 
me vndur the schadewe of thi wyngis; fro9 
the face of vnpitouse men, that han tur- 
mentid me. Myn enemyes han cumpassid 
my soule; thei han closide togidere her fat- 10 
nesse; the" mouth of hem spak pride. Thei 11 
eastiden’ me forth’, and han eumpassid 
me now; theix ordeynedenY to bowe doun 
her i3en in to erthe. Thei, as a lioun12 
maad redi to prey’, han take me; and as 
the whelp of a lioun dwellynge in hid 
places. Lord, rise thou vp, bifor come13 
thon hym?, and disseyue thou hym; de- 
lyuere thou my lif fro the ‘vynpitouse, 
delyuere® thou thi’ swerd fro the ene-14 
myes of thin hond. Lord, departe thou 
hem fro a fewe men® of ‘the lond® in the 
lijf of hem; her wombe is fillid of thin 
hid thingis. Thei ben fillid? with soues; 
and thei leften” her relifis' to her litle 
ehildren, But Y in rijtfulnesse schal ap-15 
pere to thi si3t; Y schal be fillid, whanne 
thi glorie schal appere. 


PSALM XVII. 


The title of the seuenetenthe salm. To? 
vietorie', the word of the Lord to 
Dauid ; which” spak the wordis of this 
song, in the dai in” which the Lord 
delyuerede? hym fro? the. hond* of’ 
alle hise enemyes, and fro the houd of 
Saul ; and he seide: 

Lord, my strengthe, Y schal loue thee ; 2 
the Lord is my stidfastnesse, and my re- 


Zhis au. *% hoondis a. 


athins. ° and fro. 


s hem that azen- 
x and thei 1. 


yhan ordeyned 1. 2 his 
4 the 1. 
k Om.e. | the victorie i. 
r hondis x. Om. ci. 8% Om. i. 


Ww out 1. 


‘ relifs ether residue v. 


5D PSALMS. XVII. 3—20. 


sand my delyuerere. My God, myn help- 
ere; I shal hope in to hym. My de- 
fendere, aud the horn of myn helthe; and 
amyn vndertakere. Preisende I shal in- 
wardly clepe the Lord; and fro myn 
senemys I shal be saf. The sorewis of 
deth enuyrounden me; and the stremes 
of wickidnesse togidere sturbiden me. 
6 The sorewis of helle wenten aboute me; 
befor ocupieden me the grenes of deth. 
7In my tribulacionn I inwardly clepide 
the Lord; and to my God I eriede. And 
he ful ont herde fro his holi temple my 
yois; and my cry in his si3te wente in to 
the eris of hym. Moued is togidere, and 
togidere tremblide the erthe ; the founde- 
inens of mounteynes ben togidere sturbid, 
and togidere moued”, for he wrathide to 
ythem. Ther stez3ede vp smoke in his 
wrathe, and fyr fro his face ful out 
brente; and colis ben vndertend of hym. 
10 He ful bowide heuenes, and cam doun; 
itand dercnesse® vnder his feet. And he 
stezede vpon chernbyn, and flei3 ; he flei3 
i20n the pemues of windis. And he putte 
derenesses his hiding place, in the eum- 
pas of hym his tabernacle ; derk watir® 
i3in® the cloudis of the eir. Fro the li3ting 
in the sijte of hym cloudis passeden ; 
ishail and the colis of fyr. And in thun- 
drede fro heuene the Lord; and the 
he3est 3af his vois, hail and colis of fyr. 
15And he sente his arewis, and scaterede 
hem; leitis he multipliede, and togidere 
issturbide hem. And ther apereden the 
wellis of watris; and ben opened the 
foundemens of the roundnesse of erthis. 
Of thi blamyng, Lord; of the inbrething 
17 of the spirit of thi wrathe. He sente fro 
the hejest, and toe me; and ca3te me fro 
igmany watris. He toe me out fro my 
inost strong enemys; and fro hem that 
hatiden me, for thei ben coumfortid vpon 
ti9me., hei befor camiyn me in the dai of 
my tormenting; and the Lord is maad 
zomy defendere. And he ladde out me in 


fuyt, and mi deliuerere. Mi God is myn3 
helpere; and Y schal hope in tot hym. 
My defendere, and the horn of myn helthe; 
and myn vptakere. I schal preise, and yn-4 
wardli clepe the Lord; and Y schal be saaf 
fro myn enemyes. The sorewis of deths 
cumpassiden ine; and the strondis of wick- 
idnesse disturbliden* me. The sorewis of6 
helle cumpassiden’ me; the snaris of deeth 
‘bifor ocupieden” me. In my tribulacioun7 
Y* inwardli clepide the Lord; and Y criede 
to my God. And he herde my vois fro his 
hooli temple; and my cry in his si3t entride 
in to hise eeris. The erthe was mouedes 
togidere, and tremblede togidere’; the 
foundementis of hillis weren troblid togi- 
dere, and weren* moued togidere; for he* 
was wrooth to hem. Smoke stiede in theg 
ire of hym*, and fier brente out fro his 
face ; coolis weren kyndlid of hym. He1o 
bowide doun heuenes, and cam doun; and 
derknesse was vndur hise feet. And hel 
stiede on cherubym, and flei?; he fley 
ouer the pennes of wyndis. And he set-12 
tide derknesses his hidyng place‘, his ta- 
bernacle ‘in his cumpas‘; derk® water was 
in the cloudes of the lowere? eir. Fulis3 
cleer cloudis passiden in his si3t; hail and 
the coolis of fier. And the Lord thun-i4 
drid fro heuene; and the hizeste 3af his 
vois, hail and the? coolis of fier ‘camen 
doun*, And he sente hise arowis, and 1s 
distriede tho' men; he multipliede leytis, 
and disturblide tho men. And the wellis 16 
of watris apperiden; and the foundementis 


‘ of the™ erthe weren schewid. Lord, of thi 


blamyng; of the brething of the spirit of 
thin ire. He sente fro the hi3este place, 17 
and took me; and he took me fro many 
watris. He delyuerede me fro my strong-18 
este enemyes; and fro hem that hatiden 
me, for thei weren coumfortid on me. 
Thei camen bifor me in the dai of my 19 
turment; aud the Lord was maad my de- 
fendere. And he ledde out me in to breede ; 20 
he maad me saaf, for he wolde me. And21 


b ben moued zc. ©¢ darknessis au. 4 watris 4. © Om. A. 


tOm.1 han disturblidr.  ¥ han cumpassid 1. 


whan bifor ocupied 1. * Y hanes. Y gretly 1. 


eee Cael the Lordi, b stiede up. ¢ the Lordz. he fleix, © place of his maiestec, and 1. 
sed Sees bOm a VP Om.i KOms1. )thilke tm Omiee 





XVII. 21— 40. 


to brodnesse; he made me saf, for he 
21 woldef mes. And the Lord shal 3elde to 
me after my rijtwisnesse; and after the 
clennesse of myn hondis he shall 3elde to 
2zme. For I kepte the weies of the Lord; 
23ne vnpitously I dide fro.my God. For 
alle the domys of hym in my si3te; and 
the rij3twisnesses of hym I putte not fro 
24me awey. And I shal ben vndefoulid 
with hym; and alabouten kepe me fro 
25my wickidnesse. And the Lord shal 3elde 
to me after my ri3twisnesse; and after the 
clennesse of myn hondis in the si3te of 
26the ejen of hym. With the holy, holy 
thou shalt be; and with the innocent 
27man, an innocent thou shalt be. And 
with the chosen, chosen thou shalt be; 
and with the peruertid, thou shalt be per- 
esuertid. For thou a meke puple shalt 
make saf; and the e3en of proude men 
29thou shalt lowen. For thou li3tist my 
lanterne ; Lord, my God, 1i3te" my derc- 
3onessis. For in thee I shal be pullid out 
fro temptacioun ; and in my God I shal 
3igon ouer the wal. My God, vndefoulid 
the weie of hym, the spechis of the Lord 
bi fyr examyned; the defendere he is of 
3zalle hoperis in hym. For who God but 
the Lord ? or who God but oure God ? 
33God that befor girtei me with vertue ; 
31and sette my weye vndefoulid. That par- 
fitli made my feet as of hertes; and vp on 
35 he3e thingus settende me. That techeth 
myn hondis to bataile; and thou" settist 
36as a brasene bowe myn armys. And 
thou 3eue to me the proteccioun of thin! 
helthe; and thi ri3thond vndertoc me. 
And thi discipline amendede me in to 
the ende; and that thi discipline shal 
37teche me. Thou inadest large my goingus 
vnder me; and my steppis ben not feblid. 
381 shal pursue myn enemys, and taken 
hem; ‘and I shal not be turned, to the 
39 time thei failen. I shal breke them togi- 
dere, ne thei my3ten stonde; thei shul 
40falle vnder my feet. And thou befor 


fwelde x, € Om. nu. 4 lizstne zen. 
n aftir 1. © an innocent man 1. 
God K text v marg. $ passer. tas dhe feet 1. 
VOL. II. 


P For, Lord 1. 
u ordeynede k. 


5D 


PSALMS. 753 


the Lord schal 3elde to me bi® iny ri3tful- 
nesse; and he schal 3elde to me bi" the 
clennesse of myn hondis. For Y kepte the 22 
weies of the Lord; and Y dide not vnfeith- 
fuli fro my God. For alle hise domes ben 23 
in my si3t; and Y puttide not awei fro me 
hise ri3tfulnessis. And Y schal be vnwem- 24 
med with hym; and Y schal kepe me fro 
my wickiduesse. And the Lord schal 3elde 25 
to me bi my ri3tfulnesse; and bi" the clen- 
nesse of myn hondis in the si3t of hise 
izen. With the hooli, thon schalt be hooli; 26 
and with ‘a man innocent®, thou schalt be 
innocent. And with a chosun man, thou27 
schalt be chosun; and with a weiward 
man, thou schalt be weiward. For? thou 2s 
schalt make saaf a meke puple; and thou 
schalt inake meke the i3en of proude men. 
For thou, Lord, li3tnest my lanterne; my 29 
God, li3tne thou my derknessis. For bi4se 
thee Y schal be delyuered fro temptacioun; 
and in my God? Y schal ‘go ouer® the wal. 
Mi God, his weie 7s vndefoulid, the speches 31 
of the Lord ben examyned bi fier; he is 
defendere of alle men hopynge in hym. 
For whi, who 7s God out takun the Lord ? 32 
ethir who 7s God outakun oure God ? God33 
that hath gird me with vertu; and hath 
set my weie vnwemmed. Which made per- 34 
fit my feet ast of hertis; and ordeynynge" 
me on hize thingis. Which techith myn35 
hondis to batel; and thou hast set myn 
armys as a brasun bouwe. And thou hast 36 
3one to me the kyueryng of thin helthe; 
and thi ri3thond hath vptake me. And 
thi chastisyng amendide me in to the 
ende; and thilke chastisyng of thee schal 
teche me. Thou alargidist my paaces’ 37 
vndur me; and my steppis ben not maad 
vnstidefast. Y schal pursue myn enemyes, 32 
and Y schal take hem”; and Y schal not 
turne til thei failen. I schal al to-breke 39 
hem, and thei schulen not mowe stonde ; 
thei schulen falle vndur my feet. And 40 
thou hast gird me with vertu to batel; 
and thou hast ‘supplauntid, ether dis- 


‘girde an. * Om. 4. | myn am 


t God, that is, in the vertu of my 
w hem altogidre 1. 


qint. 
Vv pathis 1. 


Celi enarrant 
gloriam Dei. 


T54 


girtist™ me with vertue to bataile ; aud 
thou supplauntidist men risende in me 
4iynder me. And myn enemys thou 3eue 
to me bac; and the hatende me thou 
y2seateredest. Thei crieden, and ther was 
not that shulde make saf; to the Lord, 
agand he ful out herde them not. And I 
shal to-poone them into pouder befor the 
face of the wind; as elei of stretis I shal 
44do them awei. Thou shalt take me out 
fro the a3en seiyngns of the puple; thou 
shalt sette me in to the hed of Jentilis. 
45 The puple, that I knewe not, seruede to 
me; in heering" of ere it obeshede to me. 
ac Alienes sones han lied to me, alienes 
somts ben elded; and haltiden® fro thi 
s7pathis. The Lord lineth, and blessid my 
God; and God of myn helthe be en- 
ashauncid. God, that giuest veniauncis to 
me, and sogetyst puplis vnder me; my 
49 deliuerere fro my wratheful enemys. And 
fro men riseude in to me, thou shalt en- 
haunce me; fro the wicke? man thou shalt 
sotake me awei. Therfore, Lord, I shal 
knouleche to thee in naciouns ; and to thi 
siname a salm I shal seyn. Magnefiende 
the helthis of his king; and doende 
mercy to his crist Dauid, and to his sed 
vnto the world. 


PSALM XVIII. 
1 In to the eade, the selm of Dauid. 


2 Heuenes tellen out the glorie of God ; 
and the werkis of his hondes tellith the 
3firmament. Dai to thel dai bolketh out 
woord ; and ny3t to the ny3t shewith out 
ikunnyng. Ther ben not spechis, ne ser- 
mownes 3 of the whiche ben not herd the 
svoises of hem. In to al the’ erthe wente 
out the sonn of hem; and in to the endis 
of the roundnesse of erthe’ their woordis. 
6In the sunne he sette his tabernacle; and 
he as a spouse goende forth fro his priue 


™ cirdist au. girdedist x. 


PSALMS. 


Vil — Xvi 


seyued*, yndur me men risynge azens me. 
And thou hast 3oue myn enemyes abac to4! 
me; and thou hast distried ‘men hatyngeY 
me. Thei crieden, and noon was? that 42 
maad hem saaf; ‘thet crieden* to the 
Lord, and he herde not hem. And Y43 
schal al to-breke hem, as dust bifor the 
face of wynd®; Y schal do hem awei, as 
the® cley of stretis. Thou schalt dely- 44 
uere ine fro a3enseiyngis of the puple; 
thou schalt sette me in to the heed of 
folkis’, The puple, which Y knewe not, 45 
seruede® ine; in the herynge of cere it 
obeiede to me. Alien sones Heden to me, 46 
alien sones wexiden elde; and! crokiden 
fro thi pathis. The Lord lyueth, and my 47 
God be blessid; and the God of myn 
helthe be® enhaunsid. God, that 3auest® 48 
veniaunces to me, and‘ makist suget pu- 
plis vudur me; my* delyuerere fro my 
wrathful enemyes. And thou schalt en-49 
haunse me fro hem, that risen ajens me; 
thou schalt delyuere me fro a wickid man. 
Therfor, Lord, Y schal knonleche to theeso 
among naciouns; and Y schal seie salm to 
thi name. Magnyfiynge the helthis of 1 
his kyng; and doynge merci to his erist 
Dauid, and to his seed til in to the world. 


PSALM XVIII. 


The title of the! ei3teuthe salm. 
torie, the™ salm of Dauid., 


Heuenes tellen out the glorie of God; 2 
and the firmament tellith the werkis of 
hise hondis. The dai tellith™ out to thes 
dai a word; and the ny3t schewith® kun- 
nyng to the ny3t. No langagis ben, nether 4 
wordis ; of whiche the voices of hem ben 
not herd. The soun of hem 3ede out in tos 
al erthe; and the wordis of hem ‘3eden out? 
in to the endis of the world. In the sunnesc 
he hath set his tabernacle; and he as a 
spouse comynge' forth of his chaumbre. 


To vie-1 


"the heering azn. © han haltid 4. P wickid nn. @Om. 4. * Om. sen. 

8 the erthe 4EH. 
F * ouerturuid 1. Y hem that hatiden 1. 2 ther was f. a Om. 1. >the wynd rks. ¢Om.1 
pene # @hath serued 1, f and theit. 8beher. b3yuest plures. ithour. * thou ari my 1. 
mM. FQn m of the o. 4 tellith ether bolkith x sec. m. © sheweth out K. P Om. 5 q was 


comynge 1. 


XVII. 7—XI1X. 7. 


chaumbre. He ful out gladide, as a ieaunt, 
7to be runnet the weie; fro the he3est 
heuene the going out of hym. And the 
ajeencomyng of hym unto the he3este of 
hym; and ther is not that hide hymself 
sfro his hete. The lawe of the Lord vn- 
wemmed, turnende soulis; the witness- 
ing of the Lord feithful, wisdam 3iuende 
oto litle childer. The rijtwisnesses of the 
Lord euene, gladende hertis; the heste of 
10 the Lord 1i3tsum, lijtende e3en. The drede 
of the Lord holy, abit" stille in to the 
world of world; the domes of the Lord 
11 verre, iustefied in to themself. Desirable 
vp on gold, and precious ston myche; and 
swettere ouer the’ hony and the hony- 
12comb. Forsothe thi seruaunt kepeth hem; 
13in hem to be kept myche 3elding. Giltis 
who vnderstandith’’? fro myn hid thingis 
1aclense me; and fro alienes spare to thi 
seruaunt. If of me thei shul not lord- 
shipen, thanne I shal ben vnwemmed; 
and ful out clensid fro the most gilte. 
13 And the spechis of my mouth shul be, 
that thei plese; and the swete thenking 
of myn herte in thi si3te euermore. Lord, 
myn helpere; and myn a3een biere. 


PSALM XIX. 
1 In to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


Exaudiat te 2 Ful out here thee the Lord in the dai 
ed “ of tribulacioun; defende thee the name 
30f the* God of Jacob. Sende he to thee 

helpe fro the holy; and fro Sion defende 

4he thee. Myndeful be he of alle thi sa- 

crifise; and thi brent sacrifise be maad 

5fat. 3elde he to thee after thin herte; 

6and alle thi counseil conferme. We shul 

gladen in thin helthe 3iuere ; and in the 

name of oure God wee shul be magnefied. 

7 Fulfille the Lord alle thin askingus; now 

I haue knowe, for the Lord made saf his 

crist. He shal ful out heren hym fro his 


PSALMS. 


755 


He fulli ioyede, as a giaunt, to renne his 
weie; his goynge out was fro hizeste he-7 
uene. And his goyng ajen was to the 
hijeste therof; and noon is* that hidith 
hym silf fro his heet*. The lawe of thes 
Lord is with out wem, and conuertith 
soulis; the witnessyng of the Lord is 
feithful, and 3yueth wisdom to litle" chil- 
dren. The rijtfulnessis of the Lord beng 
riz3tful, gladdynge hertis; the comaunde- 
ment of the Lord is cleere, liztnynge ijen. 
The hooli drede of the Lord dwellith in to 10 
world” of world; the domes of the Lord 
ben trewe, iustified in to hem* silf. De-u 
sirable’ more than gold, and a stoou myche 
preciouse; and swettere than hony and 
honyeoomb. ‘Forwhi’ thi seruaunt kepith 12 
thoo; myche 3eldyng* is in tho® to be kept. 
Who vndurstondith trespassis ? make thou 13 
me cleene fro my priuy syunues; and of14 
alien synnes spare thi seruaunt. ‘If the 
forseid defautis® ben not, Lord, of ine, 
than Y schal be with out wem®; and Y schal 
be elensid of the mooste synne. And the 15 
spechis of my mouth schnlen be*, that 
thof plese; and the theukynge of myn 
herteS euere in thi siz3t. Lord, myn? 
helpere; and myn a3enbiere. 


PSALM XIX. 


The title of the nyntenthe satin. 
toric, the salm of Dauid+. + A gios. This 
salm was maad 


The Lord here thee in the dai of tribu-2 of Dauid to 
lacioun*; the name of God of Jaeob de- for hig oowte 
fende thee. Sende he helpe to thee fro3 *” = 
the! hooli place; and fro Syon defende he 
thee. Be he myndeful of al thi sacrifice ; 4 
and thi brent sacrifice be maad fat. 3yues 
he to thee aftir thin herte; and conferme 
he al thi counsel. We schulen be glad iné 
thin helthe; and we schulen be magnyfied 
in the name of oure God. The Lord fille? 
alle thin axyngis; nowe Y haue knowe, 
that the Lord hath maad saaf his crist. 

He schal here hym fro his hooly heuene ; 


To vic-1 


trenned an. ronned £. abijdeth az. Y Om. azn. VV vnderstant c prim. W Om. aH. * Om. 4H. 
Ttheris1. & heet, that is, charitexv. tandit1. litle, ether meke Kv. ¥ the world kK sec. m. 
*Om.s. Y Desiderable cea. % Forsothe 1. 4 3eldyng or reward 1. » thilke domes1. © fautis 8. 


4 Tf tho haue not lordschip of me, thanne I schal be vndefoulid of aliene synnes 1. ¢ be siche 1. 
4 thou art myn. 1.Om. Fai. * thi tribulacioun s. 1 his 1. 


5D2 


& herte zs 1, 


f thei 1. 


756 PSALMS. 


holi heuene; in my3tus the helthe of 
shis rijthond. These in charis, and these 
in hors ; wee forsothe in the name of the 
Lord oure God shul inwardli clepen. 
»Thei ben oblisht, and fellen; wee for- 
iosothe risen, andY ben up ri3t. Lord, mac 
saaf the king; and here us in the day 
that wee shul inwardli clepe thee. 


PSALM XX. 
1 Inu to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


Domine, in 2 Lord, in thi vertue shal the king 
cies gladen ; and vpon thin helthe 3iuere ful 
3out ioz3en hugely. The desyr of his herte 
thou 3ene to hym; and in the wil of his 
slippis thou begilidest not hym. For thou 
wentist beforn him in blessingus of swet- 
nesse; thou puttist in his hed a crowne 
sof precious ston. Lyf he askide of thee, 
and thou 3eue to hym; lengthe of da3is 
in to the world, and into the world of 
s6world. Gret is his glorie in thin helthe 
giuere; glorie and gret fairnesse thou 
7shalt ful? putte vp on hym. For thou 
shalt 3inen hym in to blessing in to 
world of world ; thou shalt gladen hym 
sin io3je with thi chere. For the king 
hopith in the Lord; and in the mercy 
9of the hejest he shal not be moued. Be 
founde thin hond to alle thin enemys; 
thi ri3thond finde alle that thee hatiden. 
10 Thou shalt putte them as a* furneis of 
fyr in the time of thi chere; the Lord 
in his wrathe shal desturbe them, and 
ifyr shal deuoure them. The frute of 
hem fro the erthe thou shalt leese; and 
izthe sed of hem fro the sones of men. For 
thei bowede> doun in to thee¢ euelis ; thei 
tho3ten counseilis, that thei my3ten not 
isstablen. For thon shalt putte them abac; 
in thi relikis thou shalt make beforn redi 
ithe chere of hem. Be thon enhauncid, 
Lord, in thi vertue; wee shul synge, 
‘and with salm seyn@ thi vertues. 


yOm. au. %Om. 4. 20m. 4. > boowe kr. ¢ the H. 


os Thes, that is, aduersaries, tristen K. 
*bigilid 1. tthins, tOm.s. vOm.1. 
> on hym the gloriev. ¢theerther. 40m. y. 


D ben in 1. 


x, Sees 


the helthe of his ri3t hond zs in poweris. 
Thes™ in" charis, and these in horsis; but 8 
we schulen inwardli clepe in the name of — 
onre Lord God. Thei ben boundun, and9 
felden doun; but we han® rise, and ben 
reisid. Lord, make thou saaf the kyng ; 10 
and here thou vs in the dai in which we 
inwardli clepen thee. 


PSALM XX. 


The title of the? twentithe salu. To vic-\ 
torie, the salm of Dauid. 


Lord, the kyng schal be glad in thi2 
vertu; and he schal ful out haue‘ ioye 
greetli on™ thin helthe. Thou hast joues 
to hym the desire of his herte; and thou 
hast not defraudid’ hym of thet wille of 
hise lippis. For thon hast" bifor come 
hym in the’ blessyngis of swetnesse; thou 
hast set” on* his heed a coroun of pre- 
ciouse stoon. He axide of thee lijf, ands 
thou 3auest toY hym; the? lengthe of daies 
in to the world, ‘and in to the world* of 
world. His glorie is greet in thin helthe 36 
thou schalt putte glorie®, and greet fayr- 
nesse on hym. For thou schalt 3yue hym7 
in to blessing in to the world of world; 
thou schalt make hym glad in ioye with 
thi cheer. For the kyng hopith in thes 
Lord; and in the merci of the hizeste 
he schal not be moued. Thyn hond beg 
foundun to alle thin enemyes; thi rijthond 
fynde alle hem that haten thee. Thouto 
schalt putte hem as a furneis of fier in the 
tyme of thi cheer; the Lord schal dis- 
turble hem in his ire, and fier schal de- 
uoure hem. Thou schalt leese the fruyt11 
of hem fro erthe®; and ‘thou schait leese 
the seed of hem fro the sones of men. 
For thei bowiden yuels* aj3ens thee; thei 12 
thou3ten counseils, whiche thei my3ten not 
stablische. For thouschalt putte hem abac; 13 
in thi relifs thou schalt make redi the 
cheer of hem. Lord, be thou enhaunsid 14 
in thi vertu; we schulen synge, and seie 
opinly thi vertues. 


4 and gladen out E pr. m. 


© haue 1. P Om. La. qOm.1. tof tr. 


Wputi. *Xnponi Yittorn Zandther ®Om.1. 
e 
yuel s. 


v_— 


Deus, Deus 
meus, respice. 


XXI. (—I9. 


PSALM XXI. 


1In to the ende, the salm of Dauid, for 
that® taking to, or, for the morutid 
ondertaking, or, for the morutid hinde. 


2 God, my God, behold in me; whi hast 
thou forsake me? ferr fro myn helthe 
3thef woordis of my giltis. My God, I 
shal crie bi dai, and thou shalt not ful 
out heren; and in the ny3t, and not to 
4vnwisdam to me. Thou forsothe in the 
sholi duellist, preising of Irael; in thee 
hopiden oure fadris, hopeden, and thou 
édeliueredest hem. To thee thei crieden, 
and thei ben maad saf; in thee thei 
7 hopeden, and ben not confoundid. I for- 
sothe am a werm, and not man; repref of 
smen, and the kasting out of fole. Alle 
seende me scorneden me; thei speeken 
9with lippis, and moueden the hed. He 
hopide in the Lord, ‘deliuere he? hym; 
make he hym saaf, for he wile hym. 
10For thou art that hast drawe me out 
from the wombe, myn hope fro the tetis 
11of my modir; in thee J am kast forth 
out® fro the wombe. Fro the wombe of 
1zmy modir my God thou art; ne go 
thou awei fro me. For tribulacioun is 
isnext ; for ther is not that helpe. Ther 
han enuyround me manye calues; fatte 
14bolis besegeden me. Thei openeden vp 
on me ther mouth; as a leoun rampaunt 
isand rorende. As watir I am held ont; 
and scatrid ben alle my bones. Maad is 
myn herte as wax meltende ; in the myd- 
isdel of my wombe. My vertue driede as 
ai shord, and my tunge cleuede to my 
chekis; and in to pouder of deth thou 
17 bro3tist doun me. For ther wenten aboute 
me manye houndis; the counseil of wari- 
eris besegide ne. Thei dolue* myn hondis 
isand my feet; and ful noumbrable maden 
alle my bones. Thei forsothe togidere 
lokeden, and inwardly beheelden me; 
19thei deuydeden to themself my clothis, 


Qe the au. £ Om. a. 


fOm. x. & Om. Fex. 


o waggiden 1. © heed, and seiden 1. P ther is 1. 


PSALMS. 


& that he deliuere z pr. m. 


h ouercomere L. thi ouercomere WX. ; 
Crist, that roos a3en in the morowtijd Kv. hynd, that is, Cristis manhede 1. 
qOm. 5 


757 


PSALM XXI. 


The ‘title of ' the® oon and twentithe salm.\ 


To ouercome, forthe morewtid' hynd*; 
the salm of Daud. 


God!, my God, biholde thou on me, whie 
hast thou forsake me? the wordis of my 
trespassis ben fer fro myn helthe. Mi God,3 
Y schal crye bi dai, and thou schalt not 
here; and bi ny3t, and not to vnwisdom 
to me. Forsothe thou, the preisyng of4 
Israel, dwellist in holynesse; oure fadriss5 
hopiden in thee, thei hopiden, and thou 
delyueridist hem. Thei crieden to thee, 6 
and thei weren maad saaf; thei hopiden 
in thee, and thei weren not schent. But7 
Y am a worm, and not man™; the schen- 
schip of men, and the ontcastyng of the 
puple. Alle men seynge me scornedens 
me; thei spaken with lippis, and stiriden® 
the heed’. He hopide in the Lord, dely-y 
uere he hym; make he hym saaf, for he 
wole hym. For thou it art that drowist1o0 
me out of the wombe, thou art myn hope 
fro the tetis of my modir; in to thee Yu 
am cast forth fro the wombe. Fro the 
wombe of my modir thou art my God; 
departe thou not fro me. For tribulacioun 12 
is next; for noon is? that helpith. Many1s 
calues cumpassiden me; fatte bolis bi- 
segiden me. Thei openyden her mouth 14 
on me; as doith4 a lioun rauyschynge and 
rorynge. I am sched" out as watir; andis 
alle my boonys ben scaterid’. Myn herte 
is maad, as wex fletynge abrood; in the 
myddis of my wombe. Mi vertu driede 16 
as a tiyl stoon, and my tunge cleuede to 
my chekis ; and thou hast brou3t forth me 
in to the dust of deth. For many doggis17 
cumpassiden me; the counsel of wickid 
men bisegide me. Thei delueden myn 
hondis and my feet; thei noumbriden alle 1s 
my boonys. Sotheli thei lokiden, and bi- 
helden me; thei departiden my clothis to19 
hem silf, and thei senten lot on my cloth. 

k delueden azn. 


hOm. 4. ¢ Om. au. 


iQm.r.  * hynd, that is, manheed of 
l Lord rw ™a mani. 


rheld 1. $ seaterid abrood 7. 


758 
20and upon my eloth thei leiden lot. Thou 
forsothe, Lord, ne awei longe thou thin 
helpe fro me; to my defending behold 
gianoon. Pul out fro the swerd my soule, 
thon God; and fro the hond of the hound 
2emyn only. Saue me fro the mouth of the 
leoun; and fro the hornes of the! vny- 
e3cornes™ my meenesse. I shal telle thi 
name to my brethern; in the myddel of 
24the chirche I shal preise thee. 3ee that 
dreden the Lord, preiseth bym; al the 
25sed of Jacob, glorifieth hym. Drede hym 
al the sed of Irael; for he spornede not, 
ne despiside the lowe pre3ing of the pore. 
Ne he turnede awei his face fro me; and 
whan I shulde crie to hym, he ful out 
26herde me. Anent thee my preising in 
the grete chirche; my vouwes I shal 
3elde in the siz3te of men dredende hym. 
27Pore men shul ete, and be fild®, and 
thei shul preise the Lord, that ajeen 
sechen hym; the hertis of hem shul liue 
28in to the world of world. Thei shul 
recorde; and be conuertid to the Lord, 
alle the coostis of erthe. And ther shuln 
honoren in his si3te; alle the meynes of 
29 Jentilis. For of the Lord is reume®; 
30and he shal lordshipen of Jentilis. Thei 
eeten, and honoureden, alle fatte men of 
ertheP; in hys sijte shul falle alle that 
31gon doun in to the erthe. And my soule 
shal to him liue; and my sed shal serue 
32to hym. Ther shal be told to the Lord 
the ieneracioun to come; and heuenes 
shul telle the ri3twisnesse of hym to the 
puple that shal be born, the whiche the 
Lord made. 


PSALM XXII. 
1 The salm of Dauid. 


Dominus regit. The Lord gouerneth me, and* no thing 
?to me shal lacke; in the place of leswe 
where he me ful sette. Ouer watir of 


3fulfilling he nurshbides me ; my soule he 


PSALMS. 


<I, 20 


But thou, Lord, delaie not thin help fro 20 
me; biholde thou to my defence. God, 21 
delyuere thou my lijf fro swerd; and dely- 
uere thot myn oon aloone fro the hond* 
of the dogge. Make thou me saaf fro the 22 
mouth of a lioun; and my mekenesse fro 
the hornes of vnycornes. I schal telle thi23 
name to my britheren; Y schal preise thee 
in the myddis of the chirche. 3e that 24 
dreden the Lord, herie’ hym; alle the 
seed’ of Jacob, glorifie 3e" hym. Al thes 
seed of Israel drede* hyin ; for he forsook 
not, nethir dispiside the preier of a pore 
man. Nethir he turnede awei his face fro 
me; and whanne Y criede to hym, he herde 
me. Mi preisyng is atY thee in a greet26 
chirche ; Y schal 3elde my vowis in the 
si3t of men dredynge hym. Pore men27 
schulen ete, and? schulen be fillid, and 
thei schulen herie the Lord, that seken 
hym; the hertis of hem schulen lyue in 
to the world of world. Alle the endis of2s 
erthe schulen bithenke; and? schulen be 
conuertid to the Lord. And alle the mey- 
nees of hethene men; schulen worsehipe in 
his si3t. For the rewme is the Lordis; 29 
and he sehal be Lord of hethene men. 
Alle the fatte men of erthe eeten and 30 
worschipiden; alle men, that goen doun 
in to erthe, schulen falle doun in his si3t. 
And my soule schal lyue to hym; and mysi 
seed schal serue him. A generacioun tose 
comyng schal be teld to the Lord; and 
heuenes schulen telle his ri3tfulnesse to 
the puple that schal be borun, whom the 
Lord made. 


PSALM XXII. 


The title of the* two and twentithe salm.\ 
‘The salm’, ether® the song® of Dauid. 


The Lord gouerneth me, and no thing 
schal faile to me; in the place of pasture2 
there he hath set me. He nurschide me 
on the watir of refreischyng; he conuert-3 


1Omn. m vnycornc, ®fulfild 4. ©%thereume 4eH. Ptheerthe 4eEH. GOm.H. ° Om. an. 
® brogte out & pr. m. 
t ‘ : ieee 
oe end or power. “herie 3e 1. _¥ seed, that is, swers in feith and werk x text v marg. © Om.s. 
Tede it I.  Yanentisr, 2 and thei 1, 8 Om. FGHPQ. b Om. onsvx. ¢Om.cv. 40m. ca. 


€ Om. c. 





XNII. 4—XMNIII. 10. 


conuertide. He bro3te doun me vpon the 
4Sties of riz3twisnesse; for his name. For 
whi and if I shal go in the myddel of the 
shadewe of deth; I shal not dreden euelis, 
for thou art with me. Thi 3erde and thy 
sstaf; tho han confortid me. Thou hast 
maad redi in thi si3te a bord; a3en hem 
that trublyn me. Thou hast myche fattid 
in oile myn hed; and my chalis makende 
6ful drunken, hou rij3t cler it is. And thi 
mercy shial vnderfolewe me; alle the da3is 
of my lif. And that I dwelle in the hous 
of the Lord; in to the lengthe of da3is. 


PSALM XXIII. 
\ The salm of Dauid, in the first of the 


wike. 


Off the Lord is the erthe, and the 
plente of it; the roundnesse of londis, 
zand alle that duellen in it. For he vpon 
the ses foundede it; and vp on the flodis 
3befor greithide it. Who shal ste3en vp 
in to the hy] of the Lord; or who shal 
4stonde in his holy place? The innocent 
in hondis, and in clene herte, that toc not 
tot in veyn his soule; rie swor in treccherie 
sto hys ne3hebore. This shal take blessing 
of the Lord; and mercy of God his helthe 
s3inere. This is the ieneracioun of men 
sechende God; of men sechende the face 
7 of God of Jacob. Doth awei 3oure 3atus, 
3ee princis; and beth rerid ont, 3ee ener 
lastende 3atis, and ther shal gon in the 
sking of glorie. Who is this king of 
glorie? a Lord strong and my3ti, a 
9 Lord my3ti in bataile. Doth awei 3oure 
jatis, 3ee princis; and beth rered vp, 3ee 
ener lastende 3atis, and ther shal gon in 
1othe king of glorie. Who is this" king 
of glorie? the Lord of vertues, he is 
king of glorie. 


Domini est 
terra. 


t Om. «a. 


f and thou3 A sec. m.1. 
k twentithe and thridde w. 
P stie up I. 
* beth 1. be je K scc. m. 


1 salm x. 


Vv beth 1. be je x sec. m. 


PSALMS. 


& that fillith me a sec. m. that filleth gretly s. 
m plentee 1. 
4 hondis, that is, in werkis « text v marg. 
w Om. Gkv. 


759 


ide my soule. He ledde me forth on the 
pathis of ri3tfulnesse; for his name. For 4 
whi thou3f Y schal go in the myddis of 
schadewe of deeth; Y schal not drede yuels, 
for thou art with ine. Thi 3erde and thi 
staf; tho han cownfortid me. Thou hasts 
maad redi-a boord in my si3t ; ajens hem 
that troblen me. Thou hast maad fat myn 
heed with oyle; and my cuppe, ‘fillinge 
greetli®, is ful cleer. And thi merci schal ¢ 
sue me ; in alle the daies of my lijf. And 
that Y dwelle in the hows of the Lord; in 
to the® lengthe of daies. 


PSALM XXIII. 


The title of the' ‘thre aud twentithe® salm.1 
The song' of Dauidt. 


The erthe and the fulnesse™ therof is 
‘the Lordis®; the world, and alle that 
dwellen therynne ‘is the Lordis®. For hee 
foundide it on the sees; and made it redi 
on floodis. Who schal stieP in to the hils 
of the Lord; ethir who schal stonde in 
the hooli place of hym? The innocent in 4 
hondis‘, and in cleene herte; whiche™ took 
not his soule in veyn, nether swoor in gile 
to his neizjbore. ‘This mans’ schal takes 
blessyng of the Lord; and mercy of God 
his helthet. This is the generacioun of ¢ 
men sekynge hym; of men sekynge the 
face of God of Jacob. 3e princes, take vp7 
joure 3atis, and 3e euerelastynge 3atis, be" 
reisid ; and the kyng of glorie schal entre. 
Who is this kyng of glorie? the Lord, 
strong and my3ti, the Lord my3ti in batel. 
je princes, take vp 3o0ure 3atis, and 3ey9 
euerlastynge 3atis, be’ reisid ; and the kyng 
of glorie schal entre. Who is this kyng of }o 
glorie? the Lord of vertues, he is the’ 
kyng of glorie. 


uthis the 4. 


b Om. 1. i Om. cenab. 
0 of the Lord 1. © Om. 1. ben the Lordis v. 
rthe whiche 1. 8 He, this1. t helthe 3iuere 1. 


+ A glos. This 
salm is seid of 
the glorifiyng 
and risyng a3en 
of Crist. a et 
alii. 


Ad te, Domine, 
leuaui animam 
meam, 


760 


PSALM XXIV. 
1 In to the ende, the salu of Dauid. 


2 To thee, Lord, I rerede my soule; my 
God, in thee I trostne’, I shal not be- 
3comen ashamed. And scorne not me myn 
enemys; forsothe alle that sustene thee 
4shul not ben confoundid. Confoundid be 
alle doende wickid” thingus ouer veynly. 
Thi weies, Lord, shew thou* to me; and 
5thi sties teclie outY me. Dresse me in thi 
treuthe, and tech me, for thou art God, 
my sauere; and thee I sustenede all day. 
6 Recorde of thi mercy deedis, Lord; and 
of thi mercies that fro the world ben. 
7The giltis of my 3o0uthe*; and inyn vn- 
kunnyngnessis*, ne> wil thou not han in 
mynde. Aftir thi mercy haue mynde of ¢ 
sme; for thi goodnesse, Lord. Swete and 
ri3t the Lord; for that lawe he shal 3iue 
gto the’ gilteris in the weie. He shal 
dresse debonere® nen in dom; he shal 
1oteche inylde men hys weies. Alle the 
weies of the Lord mercy and truthe; to 
the ajeen sechende men, the testament of 
uhym and his witnessis. For thi name, 
Lord, thou shalt be merciful to my 
lzsynne; myche it is forsothe. Who is 
the man that dredeth thef Lord? lawe 
he sette to lyin in the weie that he ches. 
i3 The soule of hym in goode thingus myche 
shal abide; and the sed of hym shal eri- 
14 tage the erthe. Fastnesse is the Lord to 
men dredende hym; and the testament of 
ishym, that it be opened to them. Myn 
e3jen euermor to the Lord; for he shal 
ispullen up fro the grenes my foot. Loke 
a3een in me, and haue mercy of me; for 
izalone and af pore manI am. Tribula- 
ciouns of myn herte ben multiplied; fro 
ismy nedis delyuere me. See my mecnesse, 
and my trauaile; and for3if alle my giltis. 


VY troste 4E. trist HW. 


Wwicke g. x Om. au. 
nesse H. > Om. c. 


© thon of c prom. 4Om. a. 


* This s. ¥ Om. cemig. % The song of ¥. Of on. 


ts, persecucions for thee K text v marg. 
flui FuLpu. superflu Rr. Om, s. 


PSALMS. 


Y thou a. 
€ the debonere £. 


¢ that don pe1km0QgRswb. 
€ be thei 1xqswh. 
thee x text vmarg. ‘ofc. * this cause rosb. 1 the doom 1. 


XXIV. r—18. 


PSALM XXIV. 


The* title of the’ foure and twentithe ) - 


salm. To? Dauid*t. 

Lord, to thee Y haue reisid my sonle;2 
my God, Y truste in thee, be Y not 
aschamed. Nethir myn enemyes scorne3 
me; for alle men that suffren thee® schu- 
len not be schent. Alle men doynge%s 
wickyd thingis superfluli4; be schent. 
Lord, sechewe thou thi weies to me; and 
teche thou me thi pathis. Dresse thous 
me in thi treuthe, and teche thou! me, 
for thou art God my sauyour; and Y suf- 
fride& thee® al dai. Lord, haue thous 
mynde of thi merciful doyngis; and of 
thi mercies that ben fro the world. Haue7 
thou not mynde on! the trespassis of my 
3ongthe; and on myn vnkunnyngis. Thou, 
Lord, haue mynde on me bi thi merei ; for 
thi goodnesse. The Lord zs swete ands 
ri3tful; for this* he schal 3yue a lawe to 
men trespassynge in the weie. He schalg 
dresse deboner men in doom!; he schal 
teche mylde men hise weies. Alle the1o 
weies of the Lord ben mercy and treuthe; 
to men sekynge his testament, and hise 
witnessyngis. Lord, for thi name thou 
schalt do merci to my synne; for it is 
myche. Who is a man, that dredith thet 
Lord? he ordeyneth to hym a lawe in 
the weie which he chees. His soule schali3 
dwelle in goodis; and his seed schal enerite 
the lond. The Lord is a™ sadnesse to men 14 
dredynge hym; and his testament is, that 
it be schewid to hem. Myn ijen bez euere 1s 
to the Lord; for he schal breide awey my 
feet fro the snare. Biholde thou on" me, 16 
and haue thou mercy on me; for Y am 
oon aloone and pore The tribulaciouns17 
of myn herte ben multiplied; delyuere thou 
me of my nedis. Se thou my mekenesse 1g 
and my trauel; and for3yue thou alle my 


Z3ongth 4. yvnkunnyngnes 4. vnelen- 
fOm.c. & grane c sec. m. 


* Dauid, for delyueraunce fro Saul v. » thee, that 

4 to veynli p¢rkmoqrwb. super- 
& susteynide 1. 4 thee, that is, for 
mOm.1. "tor. 


f Om. 1. 


t A glos. This 
is a symple 
preier, that 
Dauid made 
for his dely- 
ueraunce fro 
the pursuyng 
of Saul. a et 
alii. 


XXIV. 19-—-XXVI. 2. 


19 Behold myn enemys, for thei ben multi- 
plied ; and with wicke® hate thei hateden 
-20me. Kep my soule, and delyuere me; 
I shal not become ashamed, for I hopide 
21in thee. Innocentis and ri3te cleueden to 
22me; for I sustenede thee. Delinuere, God, 
Israel fro alle his tribulaciouns. 


PSALM XXV. 
1 . The salam of Dauid. 


Deme me, Lord, for in myn innocence 
I wente; and in the Lord hopende I shal 
2not ben vnfastned. Prof me, Lord, and 
tempte me; brenne thon my reenys, and 
3myn herte. For thi mercy is befor myn 
ezjen; and I with pleside in thi treuthe. 
4] sat not with the counseil of vanyte; and 
with berende wicke> thingus I shal not 
5gon in. I hatide the chirche of wariende 
men; and with the vnpitouse I shal not 
ssitte. I shal wasshe amongys innocentis 
myn hondis; and I shal enuyroun thin 
zauter, Lord. That I here the vois of preis- 
sing; and telle out alle thi merueilis. Lord, 
I loouede the fairnesse of thin hous; and 
the place off the dwelling of thi glorie. 
9Ne leese thou with the vnpitouse men, 
God, ny soule; and with men of blodis 
10my lif. In whos hondis wickidnessis ben ; 
the ri3thond of hem is fulfild with 3iftis. 
11] forsothe in myn innocence wente ; a3een 
12 bie me, and haue mercy of ine. My foot 
stod in ri3t‘; in chirchis I shal blisse thee, 
Lord. 


Judica me, 
Domine. 


PSALM XXVI. 


1 In to the ende, the salm of Dauid, be- 
for that’ he was enoyntid. 
The Lord my li3ting and myn helthe; 
whom I shal dreden? The Lord defendere 
2of my lif; fro whom I shal quake? Whil 
ne3hen vp on me nojeris; that thei ete 
my flesh. That trublen me, myn enemys ; 


Dominus illu- 
minatio. 


PSALMS. 


761 


trespassis. Bihold thou myn enemyes, for 19 
thei ben multiplied ; and thei haten® me bi 
wickid hatrede. Kepe thou my soule, and 20 
delyuere thou? me; be Y not aschamed, 
for Y hopide in thee. Innocent men and 21 
ri3tful cleayden to me; for Y suffride thee. 
God, delyuere thou Israel; fro alle hise22 
tribulaciouns. 


PSALM XXV. 


The title of the’ fyue and twentithe salm.\ 
‘To Dauid*t. 

Lord’, deme thou me, for Y entride in 
myn innocens ; and Y hopynge in the Lord 
schal not be made vnstidfast. Lord, preve2 
thou me, and asaie me; brenne thou my 
reynes, and myn herte. For whi thi merci3 
is bifor myn iz3en; and Y pleside in thi 
treuthe. I sat not with the counsel of 4 
vanyte; and Y schal not entre with men 
doynge wickid thingis. I hatide thes 
chirche of yuele men; and Y schal not sitte 
with wickid men. I schal waische myne 
hondis among innocentis; and, Lord, Y 
schal cumpasse thin auter. That Y here7 
the vois of heriyng; and that Y telle out 
alle thi merueils. Lord, Y hane loned thes 
fairnesse of thin hows‘; and the place of 
the dwellyng of thi glorie. God, leese9 
thou not my soule with vnfeithful men ; 
and my lijf with men of bloodis. In whose 10 
hondis wyckidnessis ben; the ri3thond of 
hem is fillid® with 3iftis. But Y entride in11 
myn innocens; a3enbie thou me, and haue 
merci on me. Mi foot’ stood in ri3tfulnesse; 12 
Lord, Y schal blesse thee in chirchis. 


PSALM XXVI. 


The title of the sixe and twentithe salm.\ 
To Dauid*}. 

The Lord 2s my li3tnyng, and myn 
helthe; whom schalY Y drede? The Lord 
ts defendere of my lijf; for whom schal Y 
tremble 2? The while noiful men neizen on 2 
me; for to ete my fleischis. Myn enemyes, 


k Om. 4. 


+ A glos. The 
xxv. salm schal 
be expowned of 
the staat of 
Dauid, whanne 
after the deth 
of Saul he en- 
tride in to the 
rewme, bi 
Goddis answer, 
and dwellide in 
Ebron, with 
men cleuynge 
to hym. a et 
alii. 


tA glos. Dauid 
made this salm 
aftir Sauls 
deth, bifor his 
anoyntyng. 

A et alii, 


8 wickid au. 4 wickid 4. ieuene riz3t £ pr.m. 
thous, that is, cristen mannes 


POm.1 9Om.cremeu. Om. kK. * Goda. 
w Om. coregh. 


Y foot, that is, affection Kprsvi. foot, that is, affecciouns oqu. 
Y schulde c. 


© hatiden K sec. m. 
soulex. 4 fullid s. 
* Dauid. The holy preour of Dauy. R. 


VOL. II. 5E 


762 


3thei arn! feblid and fellen. If they setten 
ajen me tentis ; myn herte shal not drede. 
If rijse out asen me bataile ; in that I shal 
4hope. O thing I askide of the Lord, that 
I shal ofte™ sechen; that I duelle in the 
hous of the Lord alle ‘da3is of" my lif. 
That I see the wil of the Lord ; and visite 
shis temple. For he hidde me in his taber- 
nacle in the day of euelis ; and defendede 
me in the hidde place of hys tabernacle. 
cIn the ston he enhauncide me; and now 
he hath enhauncid myn hed vp on myn 
enemys. I haue gon aboute, and offrid 
in his tabernacle an ost of criyng out ; 
I shal singe, and seyn salm to the Lord. 
7Ful out here, Lord, my vois, that I criede 
to thee; haue mercy of me, and ful out 
shere me. To thee seide myn herte, Ful 
out so3te thee my face; thi face, Lord, 
9] shal ofte® seche. Ne turne thou awei 
thi face fro me; ne bowe thou doun in 
wrathe fro thi seruaunt. Myn helpere 
be thou, Lord; ne forsake thou me, ne 
despise thou? me, God, myn helthe 3yuere. 
10 For my fader and my moder forsoken me; 
11 the Lord forsothe hath take me to. Lawe 
set to me, Lord, in thi weie; and dresse 
igme in a ri3t path for myn enemys. Ne 
thou shalt take me in to the soulis of 
men trublende me, for ther han in4 risen 
a3en me wicke™ witnessis; and wickid- 
13nesse hath lowe’ to them‘. I leeue to seen 
the goodis of the Lord; in the lond of 
14lyueres. Abiyd the Lord, manli do; and 
be coumfortid thin herte, and sustene the 


Lord. 
PSALM XXVII. 
1 The salm to this Dauid. 
Ad te, Domine, To thee, Lord, I shal crien; my God, 
clamabo. 


ne be thou stille fro me, lest ‘any time 
thou holde thi pes fro me"; and I shal be 


'hen seu. = ™ eft a. 


2 troublen x. ® and their. »asalm 5. 
aristfuli. & pathis © sec. m. RSX. 


this « h and for o. 
and to eche seit in tribulacioun. v. 


© ony tyme s. 


PSALMS. 


o the dais of 4. Om. nu. 
Sflowen u. mea. sum tyme I be stille from thee « prem, 


¢ here thou s. 
ions. 
P Om. s. 


XXXVI. 3.—XXVII. 5. 


that trobliden? me; thei weren maad sijk 
and* felden doun. Thou3 castels stondens 
togidere a3jens me; myn herte schal not 
drede. Thou} batel risith a3ens me; in 
this thing Y schal haue hope. I axide of 
the Lord o thing ; Y schal seke this thing ; 
that Y dwelle in the hows of the Lord alle 
the daies of my lijf. That Y se the wille of 
the Lord; and that Y visite his temple. 
For he hidde me in his tabernacle in thes 
dai of yuelis; he defendide me in the hid 
place of his tabernacle. He enhaunsidec 
me in a stoon; and now he enhaunside 
myn heed ouer myn enemyes. I cumpass- 
ide, and offride in his tabernacle a sacrifice 
of criyng ; Y schal synge, and Y schal seie 
salm> to the Lord. Lord, here thou my7 
vois, bi which Y criede to thee ; haue thou 
merci on me, and here® me. Myn hertes 
seide to thee, My face sou3te thee ; Lord, 
Y schal seke eft thi face. Turne thou not9 
awei thi face frome; bouwe thou not awei 
in ire’ fro thi seruaunt. Lord, be thou 
myn helpere, forsake thou not me; and, 


God, myn helthe, dispise thou not me. For 10 


my fadir and my modir han forsake ine; 
but the Lord hath take me. 
thou a lawe to me in thi® weie; and dresse 
thou me in thif path’ for® myn enemiyes. 


Bitake thou not me in to the soules of12 


hem, that troblen me; for wickid wit- 
nessis han rise a3ens me, and wickydnesse 


liede to! it silf. I bileue to see the goodis13 


of the Lord; in the lond of ‘hem that 
lyuenk. 
manli; and thin herte be coumfortid, and 
suffre thou the Lord. 


PSALM XXVII. 


The title of the™ seuen and twentithe 1 
salm. To Dauid"}. 


Lord, Y schal crye to thee; my God, be 
thou not stille® fro me, be thou not stille 
‘ony tyme? fro me; and Y schal be maad 
POm. 4arH. @&Om.c. 


© eft 4. T wyckid an. 
f 


d wraththe rks. ¢thes. fa rijt K sec. m. 
k lifing men kK. 1Om.1. ™ Om. a. 4 Dauid, 


Lord, sette 11 


Abide thou the Lord, do thou! 4 


+ A gtos. Dauid 
made this salm 


of the persecu- 


cioun of Abso- 
lon a3ens him, 
whanne Dauid 
fledde fro Jeru- 
salem for drede 
of hym. a et 
alii. 

This salm is 
the vois of Crist 


him silf. Austin 9 


here. V. 


XXVIII. 2-——X XVI. 6. 


2lic to men fallende in to the dich. Ful 
out here, Lord, the vois of my lowe pre3- 
ing, whil I pre3e to thee; whyl I poote 
sout myn hondis to thin holi temple. Ne 
take thou ine togidere with synneres ; 
and with men werkende wickidnesse ne 
leese thou me. That speken pes with ther 
ne3ebore ; euelis forsothe in the hertis of 
them. 3if to hem aftir ther werkis ; and 
after the wickidnesse of the findingus to’ 
of hem. Aftir the werkis of ther hondis 
3if to hem; 3elde ther 3elding to hem. 
5For thei vnderstoden not the werkis of 
the Lord; and in to the werkis of the 
hondis ‘of hym™ thou shalt destro3e them, 
éand not bilde them up. Blissid the Lord, 
for he ful ont herde the vois of my lowe 
7preiz3ing. The Lord myn helpere, and my 
defendere; in hym hopide myn herte, and 
Iam holpen. And a3een flourede myn 
flesh; and of my wil I shal knoulechen 
8tohym. The Lord the strengthe of his 
fole; and is the defendere of the saua- 
9ciouns of his erist. Lord, mac saf thi 
puple, and blesse to thin eritage; and 
gouerne them, and enhaunce them vnto 
with oute ende. 


PSALM XXVIII. 


The sali of Dauid, in the endynge of 
the tabernacle. 


_ 


Bringeth to the Lord, 3ee sones of 
God*; bringeth to the Lord sones of 
2wetheres. Bringeth to the Lord glorie 
and wrshipe; bringeth to the Lord 
glorie to his name ; honoureth the Lord 
3in his holi halle. The vois of the Lord 
vp on watris, God of mageste in thun- 
4drede ; the Lord vp on many watris. The 
vois of the Lord in vertue; the vois of 
5the Lord in gret doing. The vois of the 
Lord togidere brekende cedris’; and the 
Lord shal to-breke the cedris of Liban. 
6 And he shal to-poone them as the calf of 
Liban ; and the loouede as the sone of the 


Afferte Do- 


mino. 


vOm. 4a. ¥ Om. c. 
q reisede A. tT to s. 8 aftir 1. u holpen 1. 
yOm.sv. 2Om.cy. ®Om.c., the song h. 


is, the princis of the Jewis x text v marg. & 


PSALMS. 


Xmen s. 


> bryngeth 1. 
Om. 1. 


763 


lijk to hem, that goen doun in to the lake. 
Lord, here thou the vois of my bisechyng, 2 
while Y preie to thee; whyle Y reise4 
myn hondis to thin hooli temple. Bitake3 
thou not me togidere with synneris ; and 
leese thou not me with hem that worchen 
wickidnesse. Whyche speken pees with" 
her nei3bore ; but yuels ben in her hertis. 
3yue thou to hem vpe® the werkis of hem ; 4 
and vpe® the wickidnesse of her fyndyngis. 
3yue thon to hem vpe* the werkis of her 
hondis; 3elde thou her 3eldyng to hem. 
For thei vndurstoden not the werkis of5 
the Lord, and bi the werkis of hise hondis 
thou schalt destrie hem; and thou schalt 
not bilde hem. Blissid be the Lord; for6é 
he herde the vois of my bisechyng. The7 
Lord zs myn helpere and my defendere ; 
and inyn herte hopide in hym, and Y am 
helpid". And my fleisch flouride a3en ; and 
of my wille Y schal knowleche to hym. 
The Lord zs the strengthe of his puple;s 
and he is defendere’ of the sauyngis of his 
crist. Lord, make thou saaf thi puple, and» 
blesse thou thin eritage; and reule thou 
hem, and enhaunse thou hem til in to 
with outen ende. 


PSALM XXVIII. 


The title of the e23t and tweutithe salm.\ 

Thex salm’, ethir* song® of Dauidt. 

3e sones of God, brynge® to the Lord ; 
brynge 3e to the Lord the sones of rammes. 
Brynge 3e to the Lord glorie and onour ;2 
brynge 3e to the Lord glorie to his name; 
herie 3e the® Lord in his hooli large place. 
The vois of the Lord on watris, God of 
mageste thundride ; the Lord on many wa- 
tris. The vois of the Lord in vertu; the vois 4 
of the Lord in greet doyng. The vois of 
the Lord brekynge cedris!; and the Lord 
schal breke the cedris of the? Liban. And¢ 
he schal al to-breke hem to® dust as a calf 
of the Liban; and the derling was as the 
sone of an vnycorn. The vois of the Lord7 


Y cedre trees An. 


w Om. preuqu. * Om.s. 
dypons.  f cedris, that 


v the defendere s. 
¢ to the s. 
has s. 


5EQ 


+ A glos. Dauid 
made this salm 
in the endyng 
of the taberna- 
cle, which he 
made to putte 
the arke ther- 
ynne; as Jerom 
seith, on the 
prologe of the 
Sauter. a et alii. 


Exaltabo te, 
Domine. 


764 


zvnycornes. The vois of the Lord betwe* 

sbrekende the flaume of fyr, the vois of 
the Lord hurtlende togidere desert ; and 
the Lord shal to-stere the desert of Cades. 

9The vois of the Lord befor greithende 
herttys, and he shal opene the derk 
thingus ; and in his temple alle shul sey 

loglorie. The Lord maketh the flod to 
duellen in; and the Lord shal sitte king 

iwith oute ende. The Lord shal 3iuen 
vertue to his puple; the Lord shal blisse 
to his puple in pes. 


PSALM XXIX. 


i The salm of the song, in the dedicacioun 
of the hous of Dauyd. 


2 [shal enhaunce thee, Lord, for thou 
vndertoke me; and thou hast not delitid 
3imyn enemys vpon me. Lord, my God, 
J eriede to thee; and thou hast helid me. 
4 Lord, thou bro3tist out of helle my soule ; 
thou sauedist me fro men fallende doun 
sin to the lake. Doth salmus to the Lord, 
3ee halewis of hym; and knoulecheth to 
6the mynde of his holynesse. For ire in 
the indignacioun of hym; and lif in his 
wil. At the euetid longe shal abide 
zweping; and at the morutid glading. I 
forsothe seide in myn abundaunce; I shal 
snot be moued in to with oute ende. Lord, 
in thi wil; thou 3eue to my fairnesse ver- 
tue. Thou turnedist awei thi face fro me ; 
gand I am maad disturbid. To thee, Lord, 
I shal crie ; and to my God I shal lowly 
10 prez3e. What profit in my blod ; whil I go 
doun in to corupcioun ? Whethir pouder 
shal knouleche to thee; or tellen out thi 
11treuthe? The Lord herde, and rewede of 
i2me; the Lord maad is myn helpere. Thou 
turnedist my weiling in to ioje to me; 
thou to-heewe> my sac, and enuiroundest 
i3me with gladnesse. That to thee singe 
my glorie, and J shal not be pungid; 
Lord my God, in to withouten ende I 
shal knouleche to thee. 


z betwene ay. betwen E. 


i Om. eprauraqub. k Om. 1. 


4 Om. x prem. land x sec.m. Tit schal i. 


PSALMS. 


b to-hewedist aru. 


™ syngeth 1. 


XXVIII. 7—XXIX. 13. 


departynge the flawme of fier; the vois of 8 
the Lord schakynge desert ; and the Lord 
schal stire togidere the desert of Cades. 
The vois of the Lord nakynge redi hertis, 9 
and he schal schewe thicke thingis; and 
in his temple alle men schulen seie glorie. 
The Lord makith to enhabite the greet 10 
flood ; and the Lord schal sitte kyng with 
outen ende. The Lord schal 3yue vertu 11 
to his puple; the Lord schal blesse his 
puple in pees. 


PSALM XXIX. 


The title of the! nyne and twentithe salm.\ 
The salm of song, for the’ halewyng of 
the hows of Dauidt. 

Lord, Y schal enhaunse thee, for thou2 
hast vp take me; and thou delitidist not 
myn enemyes on me. Mi Lord God, Y3 
criede to thee; and thou madist me hool. 
Lord, thou leddist out my soule fro helle ; 4 
thou sauedist me fro hem that goen doun 
into the lake. 3e seyntis of the Lord, synge™ 5 
to the Lord; and knowleche 3e to the mynde 
of his hoolynesse. For ire 7s in his indig-6 
nacioun"; and lijf 2s in his wille. Wepyng 
schal dwelle at® euentid ; and gladnesse at 
the? morewtid. Forsothe Y seide in my7 
plentee ; Y schal not be moued with outen 
ende. Lord, in thi wille; thou hast joue%8 
vertu to my fairnesse. Thou turnedist 
awei thi face fro me; and Y am maad dis- 
turblid. Lord, Y schal crye to thee; and9 
Y schal preye to my God. What profit ¢s10 
in my blood ; while Y go doun in to cor- 
rupcioun ? Whether dust schal knouleche 
to thee; ethir schal telle thi treuthe? Them 
Lord herde, and hadde merci on me; the 
Lord is maad myn helpere. Thou hast 12 
turned my weilyng in to ioye to me; thou 


~ hast to-rent my sak, and hast cumpassid 


me with gladnesse. That my glorie synge 13 
to thee, and Y be not compunct; my Lord 
God, Y schal knouleche to thee with outen 
ende. 


¢ to-pungid azn. 


* dignacioun a, © at the s. P Om. cCEKL. 








+ 4 glos. Dauid 
made the xxix. 
salm to preise 
God of his 
merci and 
grace, for he 
forzaf the synne 
of anoutrie and 
of mansleynge, 
for whiche he 
disseruede to 
be slayn and 
dampned, outa- 
kun Goddis 
mercy. A et alit. 


In ie, Domine, 
speraui, 


XXX. 1—17. 


PSALM XXX. 


1In to the ende, the salm of Dauid, for 
the ecces of mynde*, 
2 In thee, Lord, I hopide; I shal not be 
- confoundid in to withoute ende; in thi 
3ri3twisnesse deliuere me. Bowe to me 
thin ere; hee3e that thou delyuere me. 
Be thou to me in to God a defendere ; 
and in to an hous of refut, that thou 
amake me saf. For my strengthe and my 
refut thou art; and® for thi name thou 
shal ful out lede me, and ful out nurshe 
sme. Thou shalt ful out lede me fro this 
grene, that thei hidden to me; for thou 
cart my defendere. In to thin hondis I 
take my spirit; thou bo3tist me, Lord 
7God of treuthe. Thou hatedist aboute 
8 waiteris, vanytes ouer veynliche. I for- 
sothe in the Lord hopide; ful out I shal 
io3en, and gladen in thi mercy. For thou 
hast beholde my mecnesse; and sauedest 
9fro nedis my soule. And thou closedest 
not me in the hondis of the enemy; thou 
10 hast sett in large place my fect. Haue 
mercy of me, Lord, for I am trublid ; dis- 
turbid is in wrathe myn e3e, my soule, 
Nand my wombe. For in sorewe hath 
failid my lif; and my 3eris in weilingus. 
Enfeblid is in porenesse my vertue ; and 
12my bones ben disturbid. Ouer alle myn 
enemys I am maad repref, and to my 
ne3hebores gretli; and drede to my 
knowen. That se3en me, outfloun fro 
i3me; to forjeting I am 3iue, as af dead 
man fro herte. I am maad as a vessel 
i4lost; for I herde blamyng of manye 
duellende in enuyroun. In that why] 
thei shulde come togidere a3en me; to 
istake my soule thei counseileden. I for- 
sothe in thee hopide, Lord, I seide, My 
16God thou art; in thin hondys my lottis. 
Tac me out fro the hondis of myn ene- 
17mys ; and fro men pursuende me. Li3tne& 
thi face vp on thi seruaunt, mac me saaf 


PSALMS. 


765 


PSALM XXX. 


The title of the® thrittithe salm. To vic-1 
torie, the salm of Dauidt. 

Lord, Y' hopide in thee, be Y not schent 2 
with outen ende; delyuere thou me in thi 
rij3tfulnesse. Bouwe doun thin eere to me;3 
haaste thou to delyuere me. Be thou to® 
me in to’ God defendere’, and in to an 
hows of refuyt; that thou make me saaf. 
For thou art my strengthe and my refuyt ;4 
and for thi name thou schalt lede me forth, 
and* schalt nurische me. Thou schalt ledes 
me out of the snare, which thei hidden to 
me; for thou art my defendere. I bitakec 
my spirit in to thin hondis ; Lord God of 
treuthe, thou hast a3en bon3t me. Thou7 
hatistY hem that kepen vanytees super- 
fluliZ. Forsothe Y hopide in the Lord; Y8 
schal haue fulli ioie, and schal* be glad in 
thi merci. For thou byheldist my meke- 
nesse ; thou sauedist my lijf fro nedis. Ands 
thou closidist not me togidere withynne 
the hondis of the enemy; thou hast sett 
my feet in a large place. Lord, haue thou 10 
merci on me, for Yam troblid; myn ise is 
troblid in ire, my soule and my wombe 
‘ben troblid». For whi my lijf failide ini 
sorewe; and my 3eeris in weilynges. Mi 
vertu is maad feble in pouert; and my 
boonys ben disturblid. Ouer alle myn ene-12 
myes Y am maad schenship greetli to my 
nei3boris ; and drede to my knowun. Thei 
that sien me with outforth, fledden fro me ; 
Yam 3ouun to forzetyng, as° a deed man 13 
fro’ herte®. I am maad as a lorun vessel ; 
for Y herde dispisyng of many men dwell-14 
ynge in cumpas. In that thing the' while 
thei camen togidere a3ens me; thei coun- 
celiden to take my lijf. But, Lord, Y1s 
hopide in thee; Y seide, Thou art my God ; 
my tymes ben in thin hondis. Delyuer is 
thou me fro the hondis of mynen enemyes ; 
and fro hem that pursuen me. Make thou 17 
cleer thi face on thi seruaunt; Lord, make 


dOmn. ¢Om.c. Om. a. & List an 
5 Om. Frenorqu. * Yhauer. tintos. YOm.s. Wadefenderex. *and thous. ¥» hast hatid : 
Zouer mesure tL. I schali. %also1. ¢of arrumpqru. asofe prm. ‘for EL. © the herte 1. 


£ Om. 1. 


+ A glos, Dauid 
mado this salm 
in the persecu- 
cioun of Saul, in 
doynge thank- 
yngis for he 
hadde ascapid 
many perelis, 
and in preiynge 
to ascape pre- 
sent perelis and 
to comynge, 
whiche he 
dredde. a ef alii. 


Beali quarwn, | 


766 


isin thi mercy; Lord, I shal not be con- 
foundid, for I inwardli clepide thee. Vn- 
pitous men shame thei, and be thei bro3t 
1odoun in to helle ; doumbe be thei" made, 
treccherous' lippis. That speken a3en the 
ri3twis wickidnesse ; in pride, and in abu- 
zosioun. Hou gret the multitude of thi 
swetnesse, Lord; that thon hiddest to men 
dredende thee. Thou performedist to hem, 
that hopen in thee; in the siz3te of the 
21sones of men. Thou shalt hide them in 
the hid place of thi face; fro the disturb- 
ing* of men. Thou shalt defende them 
in thi tabernacle; fro the ajenseiyng of 
22tungis. Blessid the Lord, for he! made 
merueilous his mercy to me; in a strength- 
23id cite. J forsothe seide in exces of my 
mynde; I am cast aferr fro the face of 
thin e3en. Therfore thou ful out herdist 
the vois of myn orisoun ; whil I shulde 
z4crie to thee. Looueth the Lord, alle 3ee 
the seintus of hym; for the Lord shal 
a3een seche the treuthe, and 3elde plen- 
25teously to men doende pride. Manli 
doth, and be counfortid 3oure herte ; alle 
3ee that hope in the Lord. 


PSALM XXXI. 
The vndirstondyng of Dauyd. 


Blissid of whom ben for3iue the wickid- 
hessis ; and of whom couered ben the 
2synnes. Blessid the man, to whom witide 

not the Lord synne; and ther is not in 
sthe spirit of hym trecherie. For I heeld 
my pes; inwardli eldeden my bones, whil 
4I shulde crie al dai. For dai and ny3t 
greued is on me thin hond; I am turned 
in my myseise, whil with ficchid is the 
thorn. My gilte knowen I made to thee; 
and myn vnriz3twisnesse I hidde not. I 
seide, I shal knowleche agen me myn vn- 
rijtwisnesse to the Lord; and thou for- 
63iue the vnpitousnesse of my synne. For 
that shal prezje to thee eche seint; in 
nedful time. Neuerthelatere in the flod of 


the c prim. Om, sec. m. 


Sbe their, babusioun:.  { ont passyng 1. 
" hondis weren a. © thorn, that is, of contricion K. 


PSALMS. 


i the treccherous E. 


k Joueth 1. 


XXX. 18—-XXXI. 6. 


thou me saaf in thi merci; be Y notis 
schent, for Y inwardli clepide thee. Unpi- 
touse men be aschamed, and be® led forth 
in to helle; gileful lippys be maad doumbe. 19 
That speken wickidnesse a3ens a iust man; 
in pride, and in mysusyng®. Lord, the 20 
multitude of thi swetnesse zs ful greet ; 
which thou hast hid to men dredynge 
thee. Thou hast maad a perfit thing to 
hem, that hopen in thee; in the si3t of the 
sones of men. Thou schalt hide hem in21 
the priuyte of thi face; fro disturblyng of 
men. Thou schalt defende hem in thi ta- 
bernacle; fro aj3enseiyng of tungis. Blessid 22 
be the Lord; for he hath maad wondurful 
his merci to me in a strengthid citee. For-23 
sothe Y seide in the passyng! of my soule ; 
Yam cast out fro the face of thin ijen. 
Therfor thou herdist the vois of my preier; 
while Y criede to thee. Alle 3e hooli men 24 
of the Lord, loue‘ hym; for the Lord 
schal seke treuthe, and he schal 3elde plen- 
teuousli to hem that doen pride. Alle 3e25 
that hopen in the Lord, do! manli; and 
joure herte be coumfortid. 


PSALM XXXI. 


The title of them oon and thrittithe saln. 
Lernyng to Dauidt. 

Blessid ben thei, whose wickidnessis ben ! 
forjouun; and whose synnes ben _hilid. 
Blessid zs the man, to whom the Lord2 
arrettide not synne; nethir gile is in his 
spirit. For Y was stille, my boonys wex-3 
iden elde; while Y criede al dai. For bi dai4 
and ny3t thin ‘hond was® maad greuonse 
on me; Y am turned in my wretchednesse, 
while the thorn® is set in. I made my synneé 
knowun to thee; and Y hidde not my vn- 
ri3tfulnesse. I seide, Y schal knouleche 
a3ens me myn vnri3tfulnesse to the Lord ; 
and thou hast for3oue the wickidnesse of 
my synne. For this thing ech hooli man6 
schal preye to thee; in couenable tyme. 
Netheles in the greet flood of many watris ; 


k distourblynge u. ! that z pr. m. 


I doth mm. doje K. ™ Om, coEFrHquwi. 


+ A glos. Dauid 
made this salm, 
whanne God 
schewide to 
hym, that his 
synne of auow- 
trie with Ber- 
sabee and of 
manquellyng of 
Vrie was for- 
jouun to hym. 
A ef alii. 


XXXI. 7—XXXII. 13. 


manye watris; to hym thei shui not 
7ne3hen. Thou art my refute fro tribu- 
lacioun, that enuyrounde me; thou, my 
ful out ioje, pul out me fro the™ enuy- 
srounende me. Vnderstonding I shal 3iue 
to thee, and ‘I shal" enforme thee in that 
weie, that thou shalt go; I shal fastne 
9vp on thee myn e3e. Wileth not be maad 
as an hors and a mule; to whom is not 
vuderstonding. In bernacle and bridil 
the chekis of hem constreyne; that ne3hen 
10not to thee. Manye scourgis of the syn- 
nere; the hopere forsothe in the Lord, 
1lmercy shal enuyroune. Gladeth in the 
Lord, and ful out io3eth, 3ee rijtwise; and 
glorieth, alle 3ee ri3t in herte. 


PSALM XXXII. 
In to the ende, the salm of Dauyd. 


Ful out iozeth, 3ee riztwise, in the Lord ; 
the ri3te men semeth togidere preising. 
2 Knoulecheth to the Lord in au harpe; in 
sautre of ten cordis doth salmys to hym. 
3Syngeth to hym a newe song; wel doth 
asalmys to hym in criende out. For ri3t 
is the woord of the Lord; and alle his 
swerkis in feith. He loueth mercy and 
dom; of° the mercy of the Lord ful is 
éthe erthe. By the woord of the Lord 
heuenes ben fastned ; and bi the spirit of 
7his mouth al the vertu of hem. Gederende 
as in a botel the watris of the se; and 
sputtende ses in tresoris. Alle the? erthe 
drede the Lord; of hym forsothe ben togi- 
dere moued alle the indwelleris the world. 
o9For he seide, and thei ben maad; he 
losente?, and thei ben formed. The Lord 
scatereth the counseilis of Jentilis, re- 
preueth forsothe the tho3tis of puplis; 
and repreueth the counseilis of princis. 
11 The counseill forsothe of the Lord with- 
oute ende abit™; the tho3tus of his herte 
in ieneracioun and in to ieneracioun. 
12 Blisful the fole of kinde, of the whiche 


Exultate,iusti, | 
in Domino, 


PSALMS. 


7607 


thoP schulen not neije to thee. Thou art7 
my refuyt fro tribulacioun, that cumpass- 
ide me; thou, my fulli ioiyng, delyuere 
me fro hem that cumpassen me. Y schals 
3yue vnderstondyng to thee, and Y schal 
teche thee; in this weie in which thou 
schalt go, Y schal make stidefast myn ijen 
on thee. Nile 3e be maad as an‘ hors and9 
mule; to whiche" is uoon vndurstondyng. 
Lord, constreyne thou the chekis of hem 
with a bernacle and bridil; that nei3en not 
to thee. Many betyngis* ben of the syn-10 
nere ; but merci schal cumpasse hym that 
hopith in the Lord. 3e iust men, bet glad, 11 
and make® fulli ioie in the Lord; and alle 
3e" ri3tful” of herte, haue glorie. 


PSALM XXXII. 
The two and threttithe salm hath no title. 


3e iust men, haue fulli ioye in the Lord ;1 
presyng togidere bicometh ri3tful men. 
Knouleche 3e to the Lord in an harpe ;2 
synge 3e to hym in* a sautre of ten 
strengis. Synge 3e to hym a newe song ;3 
seie 3e wel salm to hym in criyng. Fors 
the word of the Lord is ri3tful; and alle 
hise werkis ben in feithfulnesse. He loueths 
merci and doom; the erthe is ful of theY 
merci of the Lord. Heuenes ben maadc 
stidfast bi the word of the Lord; and ‘al 
the? vertu of tho bi the spirit of his mouth. 
And he gaderith togidere the watris* of7 
the see as in a bowge?; and settith® depe 
watris in tresours. Al erthe drede thes 
Lord ; sotheli alle men enhabitynge the 
world ben mouyd of hym. For he seide,9 
and thingis weren maad ; he comaundide, 
and thingis weren maad® of nou3t. Theo 
Lord distrieth the counsels of folkis, for- 
sothe he repreueth the thou3tis of puplis ; 
and he repreueth the counsels of prynces. 
But the counsel of the Lord dwellith with 1 
outen ende; the thou3tis of his herte 
dwellen in generacioun and into genera- 


™Om.c. 2Om. au. Oandofc. POm. agen. 4sette 4. ¥ abideth azn. 
Ptheit. @Om.1. ‘the whicher. 8 scourgiss. tbethis. make 3e 1. makeths, Vthe F, Om. vu. 
Ww riztful men cK sec.m. oRxi, x Om.s. YOm.1. Zallea, 4wawis ctr. » botel ux. ¢ he settith 1, 
dinthes. ¢ Om.s. 


768 


is the Lord his God; the puple that he 
isches in to eritage to hym. Fro heuene 
beheeld the Lord ; he sa3 alle the sones of 
ismen. Fro his duelling place befor maad 
redi; he beheeld ouer alle, ‘that duelle* the 
iserthe. That made arowe the hertis of 
hem ; that vnderstondith alle ther werkis. 
is The king is not saued bi myche vertu ; 
and the ieaunt shal not be saued in the 
i; multitude of his vertu. Desceyuable the 
hors to helthe; forsothe in abundauncet 
igof his vertu he shal not be saued. Lo! 
the e3en of the Lord vp on men dredende 
hym; and in hem that hopen on his 
igmercy. That he pulle out fro deth the 
soulis of hem; and fede them in hunger. 
20 Oure soule suffreth the Lord ; for helpere 
aiand oure defendere he is. For in hym 
shal gladen oure herte; and in his holi 
g2name wee han hopid. Be do thi mercy, 
Lord, vp on vs; as wee han hopid in thee. 


PSALM XXNXIII. 


1 The salm of Dauid, whan he chaungide 
his chere beforn Abymalech, and he 
lofte hym, and he 3ide awey. 


2 I shal blisse the Lord in alle time; 
3euermor his preising in my mouth. In 
the Lord shal ben preisid my soule ; here 
ithe debonere, and glad thei. Magnefieth 
the Lord with me; and enhaunce wee his 
sname in to itself. I so3te out the Lord, 
and he ful out herde me; and of alle my 
étribulaciouns he ca3te me out. Ne3heth 
to hym, and beth li3tid; and 3oure facis 
7shul not be confoundid. This pore man 
criede, and the Lord ful out herde hym; 
and of alle his tribulaciouns sauede hym. 
s The aungil of the Lord sendith in; in the 
enuyroun of men dredende hym, and he 
osha] deliuere them. Tastith, and seeth, 
for sweete is the Lord; blisful the man, 
lothat hopith in hym. Dredeth the Lord, 


PSALMS. 


XXXII. 13——X XXII. 10. 


cioun. Blessid zs the folk, whose Lord is 12 
his God; the puple which‘ he chees into 
eritage to hym silf. The Lord bihelde fro 13 
heuene ; he si3 alle the sones of men. Fro 14 
his dwellyng place maad redi bifor; he bi- 
helde on alle men, that enhabiten the 
erthe. Which made syngulerliS the soules15 
of hem; which vudurstondith all the werkis 
of hem. A kyng is not sauyd bi myche is 
vertu"; and a giaunt schal not be sauyd in 
the mychilnesse of his vertu. An hors 7517 
false to helthe; forsothe he schal not be 
sauyd in the! habundaunce, ‘ether plentee*, 
of his vertu. Lo! the ijen of the Lord ben 18 
on men dredynge hym; and in hem that 
hopen on! his merci. That he delyuere her 19 
soules fro deth ; and feede hem in hungur. 
Oure soule suffreth the Lord™; for he is20 
oure helpere and defendere. For oure herte 21 
schal be glad in him; and we schulen haue 
hope in his hooli name. Lord, thi merci22 
be maad on vs; as we hopiden in thee. 


PSALM XXXIII. 


The title of the" thre and thrittithe salm°.1 
To Dauid, whanne he chaungide his 
mouth® bifor Abymalech, and he ‘droof 
out? Dauid4, ‘and he 3ede forth". 

I schal blesse the Lord in al® tyme;2 
euere his heriyng zs‘ in my mouth. Mis 
soule schal be preisid in the Lord; mylde 
men here, and be" glad. Magnyfie 3e thes 
Lord with me; and enhaunse we his name 
into it silf. I soujte the Lord, and hes 
herde me; and he delyueride me fro alle 
my tribulaciouns. Neije 3e to him, ands 
be 3e li3tned; and 3oure faces schulen not 
be schent. This pore man criede, and the7 
Lord herde hym; and’ sauyde hym fro 
alle hise tribulaciouns. The aungel of thes 
Lord sendith in the cumpas of men dred- 
ynge hym; and he schal delyuere hem. 
Taaste 3e, and se, for the Lord is swete;9 
blessid 7s the man, that hopith in hym. 
Alle 3e hooli men of the Lord, drede’ 10 


® the dwelleris «4. t the haboundaunce a. 


f that r. 


. g singulerli, ether ech bi himsel, Vv. h vertu, that is, strengthe K text v marg. i Om.c. 
‘ Om. in. lin s, ca Lord, that is, abideth pacientli his wille x text v marg. n Om. cpFGoavi. 

Om. PQ. °° mouth, or his word i. P brouztes. 4Om.x. * Om. vx. 8euerix. tbe1. Om. ceteri. 
“be their. vand hei. ¥ drede je 1. 


e 


Judica, Do- 
mine, nocentes. 





XXXII, 11—XXXIV. 5. 


alle 3ee seyntis" of hym; for ther is not 
searsnesse to the’ men dredende hym. 
11 Riche men nededen, and hungriden ; for- 
sothe the inwardli seclhende the Lord 
12shul not be mynusht alle goode. Cometh, 
sonys, hereth me; the drede of the Lord 
131 shal techen 30u. Who is the man that 
14 wil lif; looueth to seen goode da3is? For- 
fende thi tunge fro euel; and thi lippis 
inthat thei speke not treccherie. Turne 
awei fro euel, and do good; inwardlyche 
igseek pes, and pursue it. The e3en of the 
Lord vp on the” riz3twise ; and the eris of 
i7hym at ‘the pre3eeris of hem*. The chere 
forsothe of the Lord vp on men doende 
euelis ; that he lese fro the erthe the me- 
ismorie of hem. The ri3twise crieden, and 
the Lord ful out herde hem; and fro alle 
ther tribulaciouns heY delivered hem. 
19Ne3h is the Lord to hem that ben with 
trublid herte ; and the meke in spirit he 
20shal sauen. Manye tribulaciouns of the 
rijtwise; and of alle these shal delyuere 
2ithem the Lord. The Lord kepeth alle 
the bones of hem; oon of hem shal not 
22 be to-brosid. The deth of synneres the 
werste ; and thei that hateden the ri3t- 
23 wise shul gilten. The Lord shal a3een 
bie the soulis of his seruauns; and ther 
shul not gilten alle, that hopen in hym. 


PSALM XXXIV. 
1 In to the ende, the salm ‘to hym* Dauid. 


Deme, Lord, the nojende me; out fizt 
2thou the inpugnende me. Tac armis and 
sheeld; and ris vp in to helpe to me. 
3 Heeld out swerd, and close a3en hem that 
pursue me; sei to my soule, I am thin 
4helthe. Be thei confoundid, and shame- 
fully drede thei, sechende my soule. Be 
thei turned awey bacward, and confound- 
sed, thenkende to me euelis. Be thei maad 
as pouder beforn the face of the wind; 
and the aungil of the Lord to torment 


u the seyntis = pr.m. VOm. aeH. W Om. 4. 
xhanher. Yandtheiz1. Zand Yr. ather 
fOm. cprHub. & Om. Ku. © Heelder. i seken c. 

VOL. II. 


PSALMS. 


769 


hym ; for no nedynesse is to men dredynge 
hym. Riche men weren* nedi, andY weren 11 
hungri; but men that scken the Lord 
schulen not faile of al good. Come, 3e 12 
sones, here 3e me; Y* schal teche 30u the 
drede of the Lord. Who is a® man, that1s 
wole? lijf; loueth® to se good daies? For-14 
bede thi tunge fro yuel; and thi lippis 
speke not gile. Turne thou awei fro yuel, 1s 
and do good ; seke thou pees, and perfitli 
sue thou it. The izen of the Lord ben on 16 
just men; and hise eeren bez to her preiers. 
But the cheer of the Lord zs on men do-17 
ynge yuels; that he leese the mynde of 
hem fro erthe. Just men cryeden, and the is 
Lord herde hem; and? delyueride hein fro 
alle her tribulacionns. The Lord is ny319 
hem that ben of troblid herte ; and he schal 
saue meke men in spirit. Many tribula- 20 
ciouns ben of iust men; and the Lord schal 
delyuere hem fro® alle these. The Lord 21 
kepith alle the boonys of hem; oon of tho 
schal not be brokun. The deth of syn-22 
neris 7s werst ; and thei that haten a iust 
man schulen ‘trespasse. The Lord schal 23 
ajenbie the soulis of hise seruauntis; and 
alle, that hopen in him, schulen not tres- 
passe. 


PSALM XXXIV. 


The title of the! foure and thrittithe salm.\ 
‘To Dauid 8+. 

Lord, deme thou hem, that anoien me; 
ouercome thou hem, that fijten ajens me. 
Take thou armeris and scheeld ; and rise2 
vp into help to me. Schede® out thes 
swerd, and close togidere a3ens hem that 
pursuen me; seie thou to my soule, Y am 
thin helthe. Thei that seken my lijf; be4 
schent, and aschamed. Thei that thenken' 
yuels to me; be turned awei bacward, and 
be* schent. Be thei maad as dust bifors 
the face of the! wynd; and the aungel of 


x her preyers azH. Y Om. AE. 7 of AH. 
b willith 1 ¢¢fhkafloueth1. dandher. ¢ ofc. 
k be their. 1 Om. xk. 


5 F 


t+ A glos. Da- 
uid made this 
salm ajens the 
persecucioun of 
Saul. a e¢ alii. 


770 PSALMS. 


6constreynende them. Be maad the weie 
of hem dercnessis, and slideri; and the 
zaungel of the Lord pursuende hem. For 
withoute cause thei hidden to me deth* 
of ther grene; and ouer veynly thei 
sacuseden my soule. Come to hym the 
grene that he knoweth not, and the tak- 
ing that he hidde cacche hym; and in 
ythe grene falle le in it. My soule for- 
sothe ful out shal gladen in the Lord ; 
and shal deliten vp on his helthe 3iuere. 
10 Alle my bones sbul seyn Lord, who? lic 
thee; takende out the helples fro the 
hond of the strengere of hym; the® nedi 
and the pore fro men brosende doun 
ithym? Risende wicke' witnessis; that I 
12knew not askeden me. Thei j3olden to 
me euelis for goodis; bareynte to my 
13soule. I forsothe whan to me thei weren 
heuy; was ‘clad in® an heire. I mekide 
in fasting my soule; and my prejeere in 
i4my bosum shal be turned. As ne3hebore 
and oure brother, so I with plesyde; as 
weilende and sorewid, so I was mekid. 
15 And a3en ime thei gladiden, and came to- 
gidere; ther ben gedered vp on mescourgis, 
isand I knew not. hei ben scaterid, and 
not ficchid with sorewe; thei tempteden 
me, thei vndermouwiden me! with vnder- 
mouwing, and gnastiden vpon me with 
ther teth. Lord, whan thou shalt be- 
holde, restore my soule fro the malice 
18 doing of hem ; fro leouns myn one. J shal 
knouleche to thee in a gret churche; in 
i9a sad puple I shal preisen thee. Ouer- 
ioje" not to me that enemyen' to me 
wickeli* ; that hatiden me withoute cause, 
zoand twincle with e3en. For to me for- 
sothe pesibly thei speeken; and in the 
wrathe of the erthe spekende, treccheries 
21 thei tho3ten. And thei 3eneden their 
mouth upon me; thei! seiden, Weu, 
22weu! oure ejen han seen. Thou hast 
seen, Lord, ne be thou stille; Lord, ne 


athe deth ge prm.  b whois 4, 


mandI3. oft. O3oldenr. Pintos. 
“aloone lijfk. ¥haue their. W seie 1. 


eae i ; f _ ©and the c. 
and in 4. Ouerioyen thei au. i enuyen nH. & wickydli aH. 1 and thei a. 


q mekid s. 


XXXIV. 6—22. 


the Lord make hem streit. Her weie bec 
maad derknesse, and slydirnesse ; and the 
aungel of the Lord pursue hem. For7 
with out cause thei hidden to me the deth 
of her snare; in veyn thei dispisiden my 
soule. The snare which he knoweth nots 
come to hym, and the takyng which he 
hidde take hym; and fall he in to the 
snare in that thing. But my soule schal9 
fulli haue ioye in the Lord; and™ schal . 
delite on™ his helthe. Alle my boonys1o 
schulen seie, Lord, who is lijk thee? Thou 
delyuerist a pore man fro the hond of his 
strengere ; a nedi man and pore fro hem 
that diuersely rauischen hym. Wickidl) 
witnessis risynge axiden me _ thingis, 
whiche Y knewe not. Thei 3eldiden® to12 
ine yuels for goodis; bareynnesse to my 
soule. But whanne thei weren diseseful 13 
to me; Y was clothid in an heire. I mekide 
my soule in fastyng ; and my preier schal 
be turned ‘with ynne? my bosum. I pleside 14 
so as oure nei3bore, as oure brother; Y 
was ‘maad mekel so as morenynge and 
sorewful. And thei weren glad, and camen 15 
togidere ajens me; turmentis weren ga- 
derid on me, and Y knew’ not. Thei weren 16 
scaterid, and not compunct, thei temptiden 
me, thei scornyden me with mowyng; thei 
gnastiden on me with her teeth. Lord, 17 
whanne thou schalt biholde, restore thou 
my soule fro the wickidnesse of hem; 
‘restore thou’ myn cont aloone® fro liouns. 
I schal knowleche to thee in a greetis 
chirche ; Y schal herie thee in a sad pu- 
ple. Thei that ben aduersaries wickidli19 
to me, haue’ not ioye on me; that haten 
me with out cause, and bikenen with ijen. 
For sotheli thei spaken pesibli to me; and 20 
thei spekynge in wrathfulnesse of erthe 
thou3ten giles. And thei maden large her 21 
mouth on me; thei seiden, Wel, wel! oure 
i3en han sien*. Lord, thou hast seen, be 22 
thou not stille ; Lord, departe thou not fro 


d wickid 4. © clothed with az. f vpon me a. 


tknew if1, 8Om.1v. toon lijfv. 


Dixit iniustus. 2 


XXXIV. 23——XXXV. Io. 


23g0 thou awei fro me. Ris, and see to 
my dom; my God, my Lord, in to my 

2icause. Deme me aftir thi rijtwisnesse, 
Lord, my God; and ouer io3e thei not to 

25me. Sei thei not in ther hertis, Weu, 
weu, to oure soule; ne sei thei, Wee 

26shul denouren hym. Waxe thei ashamed, 
and shamely drede thei togidere; that 
thanken to myn euelis. Be thei clad™ 
with confusioun, and shamefast drede;: 
that deedis of malice thenken vp on me. 

27Ful out ioje thei, and glade that wiln 
my ri3twisnesse; and sei thei euermor, 
The Lord be magnefied; that wiln the® 

2g pes of his seruaunt. And my tunge shal 
sweteli thenke thi ri3twisnesse; al dai thi 
preising. 


PSALM XXXV. 


iIn to the ende, to the seruaunt of the 
Lord, the salm of Dauid. 


The vnrijtwise seide, that he gilte® in 
himself; ther is not the drede of God be- 
3forn the e3en of hym. For treccherousli 
he dide in his si3te; that his wickidnesse 
4be founden at hate. The woordis of his 
mouth wickidnesse and treccherie; he 
wolde not vuderstonde that he do wel. 
5 Wickidnesse he swetli tho3te in his 
couche? ; he stod ne3h to eche wey not 
good, malice forsothe he hatede not. 
6Lord, in heuene thi mercy; and thi 
7treuthe vnto the cloudis. Thi ri3twis- 
nesse as the mounteynes of God; thi 
domes myche depnesse. Men and bestis 
sthou shalt saue, Lord; as thou, God, hast 
multiplied thi mercy. The sones forsothe 
of men; in the coueryng of thi wengis 
9shuln hopen. Thei shul ben inwardli 
drunken of the plente of thin hous; and 
of the strem of thi delit thou shalt 3iue 
i0them drinke. For anent thee is the welle 
of lif; and in thi lijt wee shul see li3t. 


m clothed 4kH. ® Om. c. 


xOm.c. Yioienr. 2 willenr. ®Om.s. 


PSALMS. 


b Om. cpFreHnoas. 


771 


me. Rise vp, and 3yue tent to my doom 32a 
my God and my Lord, biholde in* to my 
cause. Mi Lord God, deme thou me bi 24 
thi ri3tfulnesse; and haue thei not ioye on 
me. Seie thei not in her hertis, Wel, wel, 25 
to oure soule; nether seie thei, We schu- 
len deuoure hym. Shame thei, and drede2 
thei togidere; that thanken’ for myn yuels. 
Be thei clothid with sehame and drede; 
that speken yuele thingis on me. 
thei ful ioie, and be thei glad that wolen? 
my ri3tfulnesse; and seie thei euere, The 
Lord be magnyfied, whiche wolen the pees 
of his seruaunt. And my tunge schales 
bithenke thi ri3tfulnesse; al day thin 
heriyng. 


PSALM XXXV. 


‘The title* of the» fyue and thrittither 
salm. ‘To vietorie:, to Dauid", ‘the 
seruaunt of the Lord*t. 

The vniust man seide, that he trespasse 2 
in hym silf; the drede of God is not bifor 
hise i3en. For he dide gilefuli in the si3t3 
of God; that his wickidnesse be foundun 
to hatrede. The wordis of his mouth ben 
wickidnesse and gile, he noldef vndirstonde 
to do wel. He thou3te wickidnesse in hiss 
bed, he stood ny3 al weie not good; for- 
sothe he hatide not malice. Lord, thie 
merci 2s in heuene; and thi treuthe zs ‘til 
to® cloudis. Thi ri3tfulnesse 7s as the hillis 7 
of God; thi domes ben myche depthe of 
watris. Lord, thou schalt saue men and 
beestis; as thou, God, hast multiplied this 
merci. But the sones of men; schulen hope 
in the hilyng of thi wyngis. Thei schuleno 
be fillid gretli of the plentee of thin hows ; 
and thou schalt 3yue drynke to hem with" 
the steef streem of thi likyng. For the1o 
wel of life is at! thee; and in thi 1i3t we 
schulen se li3t. Lord, sette forth thi mercy 11 
to hem, that knowen thee; and thi ry3tful- 


° gilte not 4. P bed aen. 


¢ In Ebrew thus,To victorie, to Dauith, 


the seruaunt of the Lord. Jerom seith thus, For the victorie of Dauith, the seruaunt of the Lord, Dauith 


made this salm of him silf v. Om. consi. 


fwolde notr. &untor bofx. ianentis tr. 


4 Om. vi. 


© ajens the persecucioun of Saul s. Om. v. 


5¥Q 


Haue 27. 


t¢ A glos. Da- 
uid made this 
salm of hym 
silf azens the 
persecucionn of 
Sanl. a et alii. 


772 


11 Befor strecche thi mercy to men know- 
eude thee; and thi rij3twisnesse to hem 

i2that ben in rijt herte. Come not to me 
the foot of pride; and the hond of the 

issymere moue not me. There fellen that1 
werken wickidnesse ; thei ben put out, 
and myghten not stonden. 


PSALM XXXVI. 
1 The psalm of Dauyd. 


Wyle thou not folewe bi enuye in 
warieris ; ne folewen bi looue men doende 

2 wickidnesse. For as hei swiftli thei shuln 
waxe drie; and as wrtis of erbis soone 
3thei shul falle doun. Hope in the Lord, 
and do goodnesse; and indwelle thou 
the erthe, and thou shalt be fed in the 
4richesses of it. Delite in the Lord; and 
he shal 3iue to thee the askingus of thin 
sherte. Opene to the Lord thi weie; and 
chope in hym, and he shal do. And he 
shal bringen out as li3t thi rijtwisnesse, 
z7and thi dom as mydday; soget be thou 
to the Lord, and preje hym. Wile thou 
not folewe bi enuye in hymn that waxeth 
welsum in his wele; and in man" doende 
8 vuriz3twisnessis®. Lef of fro wrathe, and 
forsac wodnesse; wile thou not folewe 
bi enuye, that thou be maad malicious. 
9For thei, that ben maad malicious, shul 
ben outlawid; sustenende forsothe the 
10 Lord, thei shuln eritagen the erthe. And 
3it a litil, and the synnere shal not ben; 
and thou shalt seche the place of hym, 
liand not finde. The deboneret forsothe 
shuln eritagen the erthe; and deliten in 
izthe multitude of pes. The synnere shal 
waite the ri3twis; and gnaste vp on hym 
iswith his teth. The Lord forsothe shal 
scorne hym; for he beheeld forth that 
ithis day come. The synneres drowen out 
swerd; and benten" ther bowe. That thei 
desceyue the pore and the helpeles; that 


Noli emulari. 


dalle that c. aman an. 


k han falle 1. 
° and thou 1. 
¥ entride cox. 


land thei rx. 
P fynde it 1. 4 and thei 1. 
x hertis prEG1KLMPQsVWhi. 


PSALMS. 


8 vnriztwisnes AH. 


™ Om. preHreu. 


‘ther, S upon 3, 


XXXV. 1r1—XXXVI. 14. 


nesse to hem that ben of riztful herte. 
The foot of pryde come not to me; and 12 
the hond of the synnere moue me not. 
There thei felden‘ donn, that worchen13 
wickidnesse; thei ben cast out, and! my3ten 
not stonde. 


PSALM XXXVI. 


The title of the™ sixe and thrittithe salm.\ 
To Dauith. 


Nile thou sue wickid men; nether loue 
thou men doynge wickidnesse. For thei2z 
schulen wexe drie swiftli as hey; and thei 
schulen falle doun soone as the wortis of 
eerbis. Hope thou in the Lord, and dos 
thou goodnesse; and enhabite thou the 
lond, and thou schalt be fed with hise 
richessis. Delite thou in the Lord; and4 
he schal 3yue to thee the axyngis of thin 
herte. Schewe thi weie to the Lord ; ands 
hope thou" in hym, and he schal do. Ande 
he schal lede out thi riztfulnesse as li3t, 
and thi doom as myddai; be thou suget7 
to the Lord, and preye thou hym. Nile 
thou sue hym, that hath prosperite in his 
weie; a man doynge vnri3tfulnessis. Ceeses 
thou of ire, and forsake woodnesse ; nyle 
thou sue, that thou do wickidli. For thei,9 
that doen wickidli, schulen be distried ; 
but thei that suffren the Lord™, schulen 
enerite the lond. And 3it a litil, and ato 
synnere schal not be; and thou schalt seke 
his place, and°® schalt not fynde?. Buti 
mylde nen schulen enerite the lond; and‘ 
schulen delite in the multitude of pees. 
A synnere schal aspie a‘ ri3tful man; and 12 
he schal gnaste with hise teeth on’ hym. 
But the Lord schal scorne the synnere; 13 
for he biholdith that his day cometh. 
Synners drowent out swerd; thei benten" 14 
her bouwe. To disseyue a pore man and 
nedi’; to strangle ri3tful men of herte. 
Her swerd entre” in to the herte* of hems 


tbonere c. Ubende ae. 


nOm. 1. 09 Lord, (hat is, mekeli his wille « text. 


than drawer. benden rt. Ya nedi k. 


XXXVI. 15—33- 


1s thei to-hewe the ri3te men in herte. The 
swerd of hem entre in to ther hertes; and: 
16the bowe of hem be to-broke. Betere is 
a litil to the ri3twis; ouer manye richessis 
17 0f synneres. For the armys of synneres’ 
shul be to-brosid ; forsothe the Lord con- 
isfirmeth rijtwis men. The Lord knew3 
the da3is of the vnwemmed; and the” 
eritage of hem with oute ende shal be. 
19 Thei shul not ben confoundid in an euel 
time, and in the da3zes of hungir thei 
20shul be fulfild; for synneres shul per- 
shen. The enemys forsothe of the Lord, 
anoon as thei shul be maad wrshipeful, 
and enhauneid; failende as smoke thei 
2ishul faile. The synnere shal borewe, 
and not pa3en ; the ri3twis forsothe hath 
22merci, and shal 3elde. For blessende to 
hym thei shuln eritage the erthe; curs- 
ende forsothe to hym shul doun pershe. 
23 Anent the Lord the going of man shal 
be dressid*; and the weie of hym hey 
24Shal wiln. Whan the ri3twis shal fallen, 
he shal not ben hurtlid; for the Lord 
25 vnderput? his hond. 3ungere J was, and 
forsothe I eldede; and I sa3 not the ri3t- 
wise forsake, ne his sed sechende bred. 
2¢ Al dai he hath reuthe, and leeneth ; and 
27his sed shal ben in blessing. Bowe doun 
fro evel, and do good; and indwelle in to 
28 the world of world. For the Lord looueth 
dom, and he* shal not forsake his seyntus; 
thei shul be togidere kept in to with oute 
ende. Vnri3twise shul he punshid; and 
29 the sed of vnpitouse shal pershen. Ri3t- 
wise forsothe shuln eritagen the erthe; 
and indwelle in to the world of world 
zovp on it. The mouth of the ri3twis shal 
sweteli thenke wisdam; and his tunge 
31speke dom. The lawe of his God in the 
herte of hym; and his goingus shul not be 
32supplauntid. The synnere beholdeth the 
33ri3twise; and secheth to slen hym. The 
Lord forsothe shal not forsaken hym in 


Vthe synners 4. © Om.4. * destruyed a. 


Yshullens. 2 Om. A pr.m. FIOUx pr.m. 
the vnwemmed x sec.m. Dandher. ¢-hurlid 1. 
h 7i3t doom 1. !andher. & he schal 1. 


PSALMS. 


773 


silf; and her bouwe be brokun. Betere is ic 
a litil thing to a iust man; than many 
richessis of synneris. For the armes of 17 
synneris schalY be al to-brokun; but the 
Lord confermeth iust men. The Lord 1s 
knowith the daies of vnwemmed*; and 
her heritage schal be withouten ende. 
Thei schulen not be schent in the yuel19 
tyme, and thei schulen be fillid in the 
dayes of hungur; for synneris schulen pe-20 
rische. Forsothe anoon as the enemyes of 
the Lord ben onourid, and enhaunsid; thei 
failynge schulen faile as smoke. A syn-21 
nere schal borewe, and” sechal not paie; 
but a iust man hath merci, and sehal 3yue. 
For thei that blessen the Lord schulen 22 
enerite the lond; but thei that eursen hym 
schulen perische. The goyng of a man23 
schal be dressid anentis the Lord; and he 
schal wilne his weie. Whanne he fallith, 24 
he schal not be hurtlid® doun; for the 
Lord vndursettith* his hond. I was2s 
3ongere, and sotheli Y wexide eld, and Y 
siz not a iust man forsakun; nethir his 
seed sekynge breed. Al dai he hath26 
merci, and leeneth; and his seed schal be 
in blessyng. Bouwe thou awei fro yuel, 27 
and do good; and dwelle thou in to the® 
world of world. For the Lord loueth 28 
doom, and schalf not forsake hise seyntis ; 
thei schulen be kept with outen ende. 
Vniust men schulen be punyschid; and 
the seed of wickid men schal perische. 
But iust men sehulen enerite the lond ;29 
and® schulen enabite theronne in to the 
world of world. The mouth of a iust30 
man sehal bithenke wisdom; and his tunge 
schal speke doom*. The lawe of his God31 
7s in his herte; and hise steppis schulen 
nut be disseyued. A synnere biholdith 32 
aiust man; andi sekith to sle hym. But33 
the Lord schal not forsake hym in hise 
hondis; nethir scha}* dampne hym,whanne 
it schal be demed ajens hym. Abide thou 34 
a Om. 4. 


yOm.c. % vnderputtith arn. 


& men vnwemmed civ. vnwemmed men DEGKLMPQRWHi. 
4 under puttith 1. 


eOm.1. fhe wil1. § and their. 


Domine, ne in 
furore. 


774 


his hondis; ne dampne him whan it shal 
stbe demed to hym. Abyd the Lord, and 
kep his weie, and he shal enhaunce thee, 
that bi ecritage thou take the erthe; whan 
3ssynneres shul pershe, thou shalt see. I'sa3 
the vupitouse aboue hauncid; and rerid 
3évp as cedris of Libau. And I passide, 
and Jo! he was not; I so3te hym’, and 
37 ther is not founden his place. Kep inno- 
cence, and see equite; for thei ben relikis 
3sto a pesible man. The vnri3twise for- 
sothe shul doun pershe togidere; the re- 
sglikis of vupitous men shul dien. The 
helthe forsothe of the rijtwis of the Lord; 
and the defendere of hem he is in time 
goof tribulacioun. And the Lord shal 
helpen hem, and delyueren hem, and 
pullen hem out fro synneres; and sauen 
hem, for thei hopeden in hym. 


PSALM XXXVII. 


i The salm of Dauid, in remembring of 
the saboth. 


2 Lord, in thi wodnesse ne undernyme 
thon me; ne in thi wrathe chastise thou 
3me. For thin arwis ben in ficchid to 
me; and thou hast confermed thin hond 
avp on me. Ther is not helthe in my 
flesh fro the face of thi wrathe; ther is 
not pes to my bones fro the face of my 
ssynnes. For my wickidnesses ouer3iden 
myn hed; and as a greuous charge thei 
6ben heuyed vp on me. Myne woundis 
stunken, and ben roten; fro the face of 
z7myn vnwisdam*. A wrecche J am maad, 
and am crookid vnto the ende; al dai al 
sdreri I wente in. For my leendis ben 
fulfild with deceytis; and ther is not 
9helthe in my flesh. I am tormentid, and 
J¢ am meked ful myche; I rorede from 
10the weiling of myn herte. Lord, befor 
thee al my desyr; and my weiling fro 
thee is not hid. Myn herte is al dis- 


bhe a. ¢ Om. c sec. m. 


1 the pecikLupa@bi. the a s. 
1Om.s. tof i. 
y han ben 1, 


™ passide aboue c. 
§ thou not EGL. t ajens s. 


PSALMS. 


XXXVI. 34-—XXXVII. tr. 


the Lord, and kepe thou his weie, and he 
schal enhaunse thee, that bi eritage thou 
take the lond; whanne synneris schulen 
perische, thou schalt se. I si3 a! wickid 35 
man enhaunsid aboue; and reisid vp as 
the cedris of Liban. And Y passide™, and 36 
lo! he was not; Y sou3te hym, and his 
place is not foundun. Kepe thou inno-37 
cence, and se equite; for tho ben relikis 
to a pesible man. Forsothe vniust men 3g 
schulen perische; the relifs° of wickid men 
schulen perische togidere. But the helthe 39 
of iust men is of the Lord; and he is her 
defendere in the tyme of tribulacioun. 
And the Lord schal helpe hem, and schal 40 
make hem fre, and he schal delyuere hem 
fro synneris; and he schal saue hem, for 
thei hopiden in hym. 


PSALM XXXVII. 


The title of the? seuene and thrittithe. 
salm. ‘The salm4 of Daud, to bythenke 
on the sabat. 


Lord, repreue thou not me in thi stronge 
veniaunce; nether chastice thou’ me in 
thin ire. For thin arowis ben fitchid ints 
me; and thou hast confermed" thin hond 
on me. Noon helthe is in my fleisch fro’ 4 
the face of thin ire; no pees is to my 
boonys fro” the face of my synnes. Fors 
my wickidnessis ben goon ouer* myn heed ; 
as an heuy birthun, tho ben maad heuy on 
me. Myn heelid woundis weren rotun,¢ 
and ben’ brokun; fro the face of myn vn- 
wisdom. I am maad a wretche, and Y7 
am bowid doun til in to the ende; al dai 
Y entride sorewful. For my leendis beng 
fillid with scornyngis; and helthe is not 
in my fleisch. I am turmentid, and maad9 
low ful greeth; Y roride for the weilyng 
of myn herte. Lord, al my desire zs bifor 10 
thee; and my weilyng is not hid fro thee. 
Myn herte is disturblid in me, my vertu 11 


dwisdam au. ¢€ Om, 4. 


nwasi. © relikis chMoRxik. 


P Om. DFGHIOPQU. 
u maad stidefast 1. = for. 


wforc. *Xon kK. 


Dizi, custo- 
diam. 


XXXVII. 12—XXXVIII. 6. 


turbid‘ in me; my vertu hath forsake me, 
and li3tS of myn e3en, and it is not with 
izme. My frendis and my ne3hebores ; a3en 
me ne3heden and stoden. And that be- 
13Siden me weren fro aferr stoden; and 
fors thei maden that so3ten my soule. 
And that inwardli so3ten euelis to me, 
speeken vanytees ; and treecheries al day 
l4swetely thei tho3ten. I forsothe as def 
herde not; and as doumb not openende 
ismy® mouth. And I am maad as a man 
not herende; and not havende in his 
1¢émouth a3en vnderneinyngus. For in thee, 
Lord, I hopede; thou shalt ful out heren 
17me, Lord, my God. For I seide, Lest any 
time ouer io3en to me myn enemys; and 
whil al to-stirid ben my feet vp on me, 
isgrete thingus thei speeken. For I in to 
scourgis am redi; and my sorewe in my 
19siz3te euermor. For my wickidnesse I 
shal telle out ; and I shal thenken for my 
20synne. Forsothe myn enemys lyuen, 
and ben confermed vpon me; and ben 
multeplied, that wickelii hateden me. 
21 That 3elden euelis for goodis, bacbiteden 
22to0 me; for I folewede goodnesse. Ne for- 
sake thou me, Lord, ny God ; ne go thou 
23awei fro me. Tac heede in to myn helpe ; 
Lord God of myn helthe. 


PSALM XXXVIITI. 


1In to the ende, ‘the song* of Dauid, for 
YVaditym. 


2 JI seide, I shal kepe my weies; that I 
gilte not in my tunge. I putte to my 
mouth warde; whan the synnere shulde 

3stonde a3en me. I becam doumb, and 
am mekid, and heeld my pes fro! goodis; 

4and my sorewe is renewid. Myu herte 
wex al hot with inne me; and in my 
swete thenking ful out shal brenne fir. 

5] spac in my tunge; Lord, mae knowen 
to me myn ende. And the noumbre of 
my da3es, what it is; that I wite what 

6failith to me. Lo! mesurable thou hast 

f distourblid 1. 


& the lizt an. his a. 


b Om. 1. 
bh Om. DEH?. 


zZOm.1. 4 neizen c. 
& Om. crHoPQu. 


© weren I. 
i Om. o. tolden rn. 


PSALMS. 


i wickidli an. 


4 thei ben 1. 


773 


forsook me ; and the li3t of myn ijen ‘for- 
sook me*, and it is not with me. My 2 
frendis and my nei3boris neiz3iden*; and 
stoden azjens me. And thei that weren 
bisidis me stoden afer; and thei diden13 
violence, that sou3ten my lijf. And thei 
that sou3ten yuels to me, spaken vanytees ; 
and thousten gilis al dai. But Y as a deef\4 
man herde not ; and as a doumb man _ not 
openynge his mouth. And Y am imaad is 
as aman not herynge; and not hauynge 
repreuyngis in his mouth. For, Lord, 16 
Y hopide in thee; my Lord God, thou 
schalt here me. For Y seide, Lest ony 17 
tyme myn enemyes haue ioye on me; and 
the’ while my feet ben® mouyd, thei 
spaken grete thingis on me. For Y amis 
redi to betyngis; and my sorewe zs euere 
in my si3t. For Y schal telle my wickid-19 
nesse ; and Y schal thenke for my synne. 
But myn enemyes lyuen, and ben con-20 
fermed® on me; and thei ben multiplyed, 
that hatenf me wickidli. Thei that selden a1 
yuels for goodis, backbitiden me; for Y 
suede goodnesse. 
thou not me; go thou not awei fro me. 


My Lord God, forsake 22 


Lord God of myn helthe; biholde thou in 23 


to myn help. 


PSALM XXXVIII. 


The title of the’ et3te and threttithe salm».1 
For victorie, toi Iditum*, the song' of 
Dauid t. 


I seide, Y schal kepe my weies; that Y2 
trespasse not in my tunge. I settide 
kepyng to my inouth; whanne a synnere 
stood a3jens me. I was doumb, and was™3 
mekid ful gretli, and was™ stille fro goodis ; 
and my sorewe was renulid. Myn herte+ 
was hoot with ynne me; and fier schal 
brenne out in my thenkyng. I spak ins 
my tunge; Lord, make thou myn eende 
knowun tome. And the noumbre of my 
daies what it is; that Y wite, what failith 
to me. Lo! thou hast set my daiesé 


k the sones A. sonis u. | for a, 


e confortid EL. f hatiden K see. m. 


k Om. rR. lsalm a. ™I wast. 


+ A glos. Da- 
uid made this 
salm for hym 
silf, whanne he 
was pursued of 
Absolon, his 
sone, aftir that 
he herde the 
dispisyngis of 
Semey. A et 
alii. 


Exspectans. 


776 


“put my dajes; and my substaunce as 
103t befor thee. Neuerthelatere al vanyte; 
zeche man liuvende. Neuerthelatere in 
yimage passeth a man; but in veyn he 
is al™ disturbid. He tresoreth ; and vn- 
knowith, to whom he shal gedere tho 
sthingus. And now what is myn abiding? 
whether not the Lord? and my sub- 
gstaunce anent thee is. Fro alle my 
wickidnessis®" pul me awei; reprof to 
iothe ynwise man thou hast 3iue me. I 
becam doumb, and openede not my 
umouth, for thou didist ; moue awei fro 
me thi scourgis. Fro the strengthe of 
thin hond I failide in blamyngus; for 
wickednesse thou chastisidest®? a man. 
Thou madest to flowen awei as an ireyne 
his soule; nerthelatere veynli is dis- 
13turbid? eche man. Ful out here myn 
orisoun, Lord, and my lowe pre3ing ; 
uwith eris perceyue my teris. Ne be 
thou stille, for a comeling I am anent 
thee; and a pilgrim as alle my fadris. 
15 For3if to me, that I be refreshed, befor 
that I go awei; and I shal be no more. 


PSALM XXXIX. 
1 In to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


2  Abidende I abod the Lord; and he 
3beheeld to me. And he ful out herde 
my prejeeris ; and bro3te out me fro the 
lake of wrecchidnesse ; and fro the‘ clei 
of drestis. And he sette vp on a ston 
4iny feet; and dresside my goingis. And 
he ful putte in my mouth a newe song ; 
a ditee to oure God. Manye shul see, 
and dreden; and hopen in the Lord. 
5 Blisful the man, of whom the name of 
the Lord is his hope; and ajeen lokide 
not in to vanytees, and in to false wod- 
6nessis'. Manye thi merueilis thou hast 
do, Lord, my God; and in thi tho3tis 
ther is not, that be lic to thee. I tolde 


m Om. 4. 


n wickenesse £. wickiduesse u. 
T woodnes AH. 


nin an ° ymage, that is, derknesse kK text v marg. 
4 gaderith s. Tofi. Sanentis1. t Om, npau. 
x draftis 1. 


© Om. see.m. Otheris x, lijk to 1. 


PSALMS. 


: : u the victorie c. 
Y stoon, that is, Crist K text v marg. % song, ether a ditee x sec.m. ®Om.14. and thei x. 


XXXVIIL. 7-—XXXIX. 6. 


mesurable; and my substaunce is as nou3t 
bifor thee. Netheles al vanytee; ech man 
lyuynge. Netheles a man passith in™7 
ymage®; but also he is disturblid veynli. 
He tresorith ; and he noot?, to whom he 
‘schal gaderei tho thingis. And nows 
which is myn abiding ? whether not the 
Lord? and my substaunce is at thee. 
Delyuere thou me fro™ alle my wickid-9 
nessis; thou hast 30ue me schenschip to 
the vnkunnynge. I was doumbe, andio 
openyde not my mouth; for thou hast 
maad, remoue thou thi woundis fro me.1 
Fro the strengthe of thin hond Y failide12 
in blamyngis; for wickidnesse thou hast 
chastisid man. And thou madist his lijf 
to faile as an yreyne; netheles ech man 
is disturblid in veyn. Lord, here thou1s 
my preier aud my bisechyng; perseyue 
thou with eeris my teeris. Be thou not 
stille, for Y am a comelyng at* thee ; and 

a pilgrime, as alle my fadris. For3yue1s 
thou to me, that Y be refreischid, bifor 
that Y go; and Y schal no more be. 


PSALM XXXIX. 


The title of thet nyne and threttithe salm.1 
For victorie", the song™ of Dauid t. $A gloss 
Y abidynge abood’ the Lord; and he 3af2 expowned of 

tent to me. And he” herde my preieris 33 Cn 

and he ledde out me fro the lake of 

wretchidnesse, and fro the filthe of draft*. 

And he ordeynede my feet on a stoon’; 

and he dresside my goyngis. And he 

sente in to my mouth a newe song; a 

song’ to oure God. Many men schulen 

se, and schulen* drede ; and” schulen haue‘® 

hope in the Lord. Blessid zs the man, ofs 

whom the name of the Lord is his hope; 

and he bihelde not in to vanitees, and in 

to false woodnesses. Mi Lord God, thous 

hast maad thi merueils manye; and in thi 

thou3tis noon is’, that is lijk® thee. I 

P distourblid x. 


© echastiside az. q Om. 4. 


P not cL. ne wot §. wot not K sec. m. marg. 
uu salmv. ¥ haue abide +. Ww Om.c. 


XXXIX. 7--XL. 2. 


beforn, and spac; thei ben multiplied 
7ouer noumbre. Sacrifice and offring 
thou woldist not; eris forsothe thou par- 
formedist to me. Brent saerifise, and 
8for synne thou askidest not; thanne I 
seide, Lo! J come. In the hed of the 
g9boc it is write of me, that I do thi 
wil; my God, I wolde; and thi lawe in 
1omyddes of myn herte. I befortolde thi 
ri3twisnesse in a gret chirche; lo! my 
lippis I shal not forfende, Lord, thou 
llhast knowen. Thi ri3twisnesse I hidde 
not in myn herte; thi treuthe and thin 
helthe 3yuere I seide. I hidde not thi 
mercy, and thi treuthe; fro myche 
12counseil. Thou, Lord, forsothe ne do 
thou aferr thi merey doingus fro me; 
thi® mercy and thi treuthet ener mor 
13vndertoken me. For ther ennyrounden 
me euelis, of the whiche is no noumbre; 
ther ca3ten me my wickednessis, and I 
“ my3te not, that I shulde see. Thei ben 
multiplied ouer the heris of myn hed; 
14and myn herte forsoc me. Holli plese 
it to thee, Lord, that thou delynere me ; 
15Lord, to helpen me looke ajeen. Be 
thei confoundid, and shamefastli drede 
thei togidere; that sechen my soule, that 
thei do it awei. Be thei turned al bae- 
ward, and shamefastliche drede thei; 
i6that wiln to me euelis. Bere they anoon 
ther confusioun; that seyn to me, Wen! 
17weu! Ful out io3e thei, and glade vpon 
me, alle that sechen thee; and that loouen 
thin helthe 3iuere, sey thei, Euermor be 
ismagnefied the Lord. I forsothe a beg- 
gere am and pore; the Lord is bisi of 
me. Myn helpere and my defendere 
thou art ; my God, ne be thou tariende". 


PSALM XL. 


1 In to the ende, the salm‘of Dauid’; or, 
in to the ende, the vnderstonding of 
Dauid. 

Blisful that vnderstant’ vp on the 
nedi and pore; in the euele dai shal de- 


Beatus qui. 2 


PSALMS. 


777 


teld', and Y spak; and thei ben multiplied 
aboue noumbre. Thou noldist® sacrifice7 
and offryng; but thou madist perfitli ceris 
tome. Thou axidist not brent sacrifice, 
and} sacrifice for synne; thanne Y seide,8 
Lo! Y come. In the heed of the book it 
is writun of me, that Y schulde do thig 
wille; my God, Y wolde’; and* thi lawe in 
the myddis of myn herte. I telde thio 
ri3tfulnesse in a greet chirche; lo! Y 
schal not refreine my lippis, Lord, thou 
wistist. I hidde not thi ri3tfulnesse in myn 
herte; Y seide thi trenuthe and thin 
helthe. I hidde not thi mercy and thi 
treuthe; fro a myche counsel. But thou, 12 
Lord, make not fer thi merciful doyngis 
fro me; thi merey and treuthe euere 
token me vp. For whi yuels, of whiche13 
is no noumbre, cumpassiden me; my 
wickidnessis token! me, and Y my3te not, 
that Y schulde se. Tho ben multiplied 
aboue the heeris of myn heed; and myn 
herte forsook me. Lord, plese it to thee, 14 
that thou delyuere me; Lord, biholde 
thou to helpe me. Be thei sehent, and 15 
aschamed togidere; that seken my lijf, to 
take awei it. Be thei turned abac, and be 
thei schamed™; that wolen yuels to me. 
Bere thei her confusioun anoon; that seien 16 


‘to me, Wel! wel"! ‘that is°,in scorn?. Alle 17 


men that seken thee, be fulli ioyful, and 
be! glad on’ thee; and seie thei, that louen 
thin helthe, The Lord be magnyfied enere. 
Forsothe Y am a beggere and pore; the18 
Lord is bisi of me. Thou arte myn helpere 
and my defendere; my God, tarie thou 
not. 


PSALM XL. 


The title of thes fourtithe salm. For vic-1 
torie, the song of Dauid}. 4 alan pantis 
salm is expown- 
ed of Cristis 
passioun and 


rysyng agen. A 
et alti. 


Blessid 7s he that vndurstondith ‘on a‘2 
nedi man and pore; the Lord schal de- 


8Om.c. tdooma. Utaryed4. YOm. 4. W vnderstondeth scx. 

f tolde, ether schewide x. —& woldist not 1. hand oother1. i wilnyde also to do 1s. * Om. As. 
Than take 1. ™aschamed HIKXi. 1 wel! in dispijt Ka. 9% Om.1. P scorn, in dispitw. 4 be thei 1. 
Tins. 8s Om. cpenorgu. tof the 1. vponak. 

VOL. II. 5G 


778 


3lyueren hym the Lord. The Lord kepe* 
hym, and quykene hym, and blisful make 
hym in the erthe; and take hym not ‘in 
4toY the soule of his enemys. The Lord 
helpe bere to hym vp on the bed of his 
sorewe; al his bedding thou turnedest in 
shis sicnesse. I seide, Lord, haue mercy 
of me; hele my soule, for I syunede to 
cthee. Myn enemys seiden euelis to me; 
Whanne shal dien, and pershen his name? 
7And if he wente in that he see, veyne 
thingus he spac; his herte shal gedere 
swickidnessis? to hym. He wente forth 
outward; and spac in to itself. Ajen 
me priueli grucchiden alle myn enemys ; 
gazen me thei tho3ten euelis to me. A 
wicke* woord thei setteden az3en me; 
Whether he that slepeth, shal not kaste 
loto, that he ryse a3een? Forsothe the 
man of my pes, in whom I hopide; that 
eet my loues, magnefiede vp on me sup- 
uplaunting. Thou forsothe, Lord, haue 
mercy of me; and a3een rere me, and I 
i2shal 3elde to them. In that I knew, 
that thou woldist me; for ther shal not 
13103e myn enemy ouer me. Me forsothe 
for innocence thou hast vndertaken; and 
confermedist me in thi sizte in to with- 
1soute ende. Blessid® the Lord God of 
Irael; fro the world, and in to the world, 
be it do, be it do. 


PSALM XLI. 


1In to the ende, vnderstonding, or bi 
vnderstonding®, to the sones of Chore. 
What maner desireth the hert to 
wellist of watris; so desireth my soule 
3to thee, God. My soule thristide to God, 
the quyke welle; whan I shal comen, 
sand apere befor the face of God? Ther 
weren to me my teris, loues dai and 
ny3t; whil it is seid to me eche day, 
s Wher is thi God? These thingus I re- 
cordide, and helde out in me my soule; 
for I shal passen in to the place of the 
ful merueylous tabernacle, ynto the hous 


Quemadmo- 2 
dum desiderat. 


x shall kepe x. 


Yin a, 
4 the welles & pr.m. 


2 wickidnes a. 


" ende 1. 
z Om. v. 


v Om. Gx. 


prom. i. 
a Om. 1. 


» thristid pubik. 


w Om, a. 


PSALMS. 


8 wickede agen. 


x Om. cFHPQu. 
I ¢ Om. cEHLpuxik., 
C sup. ras, W sec. m, oRXik. strong, quyk u pr.m. uv. not welle v marg. 


XL. 3==XLI. 5. 


lyuere hym in the yuel dai. The Lord3 
kepe hym,and quykene hym, and make hym 
blesful in the lond; and bitake not hym 
in to the wille of his enemyes. The Lord 4 
bere help to hym on the bed of his 
sorewe ; thou hast ofte-turned al his bed 
stre in his sijknesse. I seide, Lord, haues 
thou mercy on me; heele thou my soule, 
for Y synnede a3ens thee. Myn enemyes6 
seiden yuels to ne; Whanne schal he die, 
and his name schal perische ? And if he7 
entride for to se, he spak veyn thingis ; 
his herte gaderide wickidnesse to hym silf. 
He 3ede with out forth; and spak to thes 
same thing". Alle myn enemyes bac- 
bitiden pryuyli ajens me; a3ens me thei 
thou3ten yuels to me. Thei ordeineden9 
an yuel word ajens me; Whether he that 
slepith, schal not leie to, that he rise a3en? 
For whi the man of my pees, in whom Y 10 
hopide, he that eet my looues; made greet _ 
disseit on me. But thou, Lord, haueu 
merci on me, and reise me aj3en; and Y 
schal 3elde to hem. In this thing Y knew, 12 
that thou woldist me; for myn enemye 
schal not haue ioye on me. Forsothe thou 13 
hast take me vp for ynnocence; and hast 
confermed me in thi si3t with outen ende. 
Blessid be the Lord God of Israel, fro the 4 
world and’ in to the* world; be it doon, 
be it doon. 


PSALM XLI. 


The title of thex oon and fourtithe salm.1 

To victoriey, to the? sones of Choret. 

As an hert desirith to the wellis of2 
watris; so thou®, God, my soule desirith 
to thee. Mi soule thirstide” to God, ‘thats 
ts¢ at ‘quik welle’4; whanne schal Y 
come, and appere bifor the face of God? 
Mi teeris weren looues to me bie dai and4 
ny3t; while it is seid to me ech dai, Where 
is thi God? I bithon3te of these thingis, 5 
and Y scheddef out in me my soule; for 
Y schal passe in to the place of the won- 
durful tabernacle, til to the hows of God. 


b Blesful 4. © the understondynge u. 


¥ victorie, the salm of Dauid oxs. 
4 Om. cuuvxbik. the exp. 44 welle of liyf 
@Om.1. f helde r. 


+ A glos. This 
salm is expown- 
ed of the staat 
of the puple of 
Israel, beynge 
in the caytifte 
of Babiloyne, 
and desirynge 
to come to Je- 
rusalem. A et 
alii. 


Judica me, 
Deus. 


XLI. 6—XLII. 5. 


of God. In the vois of ful out iozing 
6and confessioun; soun of the etere. Whi 
dreri art thou, my soule; and whi al 
disturbist thou me? Hope in God, for 
3it I shal knoulechen to hym; the helthe 
73iuere of my chere, and my God. To 
myself my soule is al disturbid; therfore 
I shal be myndeful of thee fro the lond 
of Jordan, and fro Ermonyum, the litle 
shil. The depnesse depnesse inwardli 
clepeth ; in the vois of thi gooteris. Alle 
thin he3e thingis; and thi flodis ouer me 
gpassiden. In the dai the Lord sente his 
lomercy ; and in the ny3t his song. Anent 
me orisoun to God of my lif; I shal sey 
to God, Myn vndertakere thou art. Whi 
for3eete thou of® me, and whi al sori I 
go; whil the enemy tormenteth me? 
11 Whil my bones ben to-broken; to me 
repreueden myn enemys, that trublen 
me. Whil thei seyn to me, bi alle da3is, 
iz Wher is thi God? My soule, whi art 
thou dreri; and whi all sturbistf thou 
me? Hope® in God, for 3it I shal 
knoulechen to hym; the helthe 3iuere of 
my chere, and my God. 


PSALM XLII. 
1 In to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


Deme me, God, and seuere my cause 
fro fole not holy ; fro a wicke® man, and 
2a treccherous pul me awei. For thou 
art God, my strengthe; whi hast thou 
put me abac, and whi dreri I go, whil 
3the enemye tormenteth me? Send out 
thi li3t, and thi treuthe; tho thingis 
bro3ten out me, and ladden to, in to thi! 
4holi hil, and in to thi tabernaclis. And 
I shal go in to the auter of God; to God 
that gladeth my 3outhe. I shal knou- 
leche to thee in an harpe, God, my God ; 
swhi dreri art thou, my soule, and whi 
al to-sturbist thou me? Hope thou in 
God, for 3it I shal knoulechen to hym ; 
the helthe 3yuere of my chere, and my 
God. 


PSALMS. 


tag 


In the vois of ful out ioiyng and knou- 
lechyng ; is the sown of the etere. Mis 
soule, whi art thou sory; and whi dis- 
turblist thou? me? Hope thou in God, 
for 3it Y schal knouleche to hym; he is 
the helthe of my cheer, and my God.7 
My soule is disturblid at” my silf ; therfor, 
God', Y schal be myndeful of thee fro 
the lond of Jordan, and fro the litil hil 
Hermonyim*. Depthe clepith depthe!; ins 
the vois of thi wyndows. Alle thin hije 
thingis and thi wawis; passiden ouer me. 
The Lord sente his merci in the dai; ando 
his song in the ny3t. At™ me zs” a° preier to 
toP thet God of my lijf; Y schal seie to 
God, Thou art my ‘takere vp". Whi for- 
3etist thou me; and whi go Y sorewful, 
while the enemy turmentith me? While1 
my boonys ben brokun togidere’; myn 
enemyes, that troblen me, dispiseden me. 
While thei seient to me, bi alle daies; 
Where is thi God? Mi soule, whi art12 
thou sori; and whi disturblist thou me ? 
Hope thou in God, for 3it Y schal knou- 
leche to hym; ‘he is" the’ helthe of my 
cheer, and my God. 


PSALM XLII. 
‘The two and fourtithe salm™. 1 
God, deme thou me, and departe thou 
my cause fro a fole not hooli; delyuere 
thou me fro a wickid man, and gileful. 
For thou art God, my strengthe; whi2 
hast thou put me abac, and whi go Y 
soreuful, while the enemy turmentith me ? 
Sende out thi lizt, and thi treuthe; thos 
ledden me forth, and bron3ten* in to thin 
hooli hil, and in to thi tabernaclis. And4 
Y schal entre to the auter of God; to God, 
that gladith my 3ongthe. God, my God, 
Y schal knowleche to thee in an harpe; 
my soule, whi art thou sory, and whis 
troblist thou me? Hope thou in God, 
for 3it Y schal knouleche to hym ; hey ts 
the helthe of my cheer, and my God. 


e Om. au. f disturbist 4. § Hope thou £ pr.m, b wickyd au. ithe a. 


&Om.1. banentis1. i Lord 1. * of Hermonym tos. 
K text v marg. ™ Anentist. %Om.o, ° ther. 
togideres. ‘seidenr, %Om.1. VY Om. b. 


salm ben al oon in Ebren, and therfore this hath no title. Krv. 


5G2 


1 depthe, that ts, oon yuel bringith in another 


Patp. 4Om.crrxi. thee b. ‘*vptakere. $ al 


w The two and fourtithe salm and the oon and fourtithe 


x brouzten me IKL. that 1. 


780 


PSALM XLII. 


1In to the ende, to the sones of Chore, 
to the wnderstonding. 


God, with oure eris wee han herd ; 
oure fadris befor tolden to vs. ‘The were 
that thou wro3tist in the da3is of hem ; 
3and* in olde! daj3is. Thin hond Jentilis 

scaterede, and thou formedest hem; thou 

tormentidest puplis, and puttist out hem. 
4Ne forsothe in ther swerd thei weldeden 
the erthe; and their arm shal not sauen 
hem. But thi rijthond, and thin arm, 
and the li;sting of thi chere; for holli 
sthou toke plesaunce in hem. Thou art 
he, my king and my God; that sendist 
chelthis to Jacob. In thee oure enemys 
we shul wynewe bi the horn; and in thi 
name we shul dispise inriseris in vs. 
7 Forsothe™ in my bowe I shal not hope; 
sand my swerd shal not saue me. For- 
sothe thou sauedist vs fro men torment- 
ende vs; and the hatende vs thou con- 
9foundedest. In God we shul be preisid 
al dai; and in thi name we shul knou- 
10 leche to thee in to the world. Nou for- 
sothe thou hast put vs abac, and con- 
foundid vs; and, God, thou shalt not 
i1gon out in oure vertues. Thou turnedist 
vs awei bacward after oure enemys; and 
thei, that hatiden vs, dyuersly ca3ten to 
12themself. Thou 3eue vs as shep of metis; 
and in Jentilis® thou scateredist vs. 
13 Thou soldist thi puple with oute pris ; 
and ther was not multitude in the togi- 
isdere chaungingus of hem. Thou hast 
put vs repref to oure ne3hebores ; vnder 
mouwing ‘and scorn®" to hem that ben in 
isoure enuyroun. Thou hast put vs in to 
licnesse to Jentilis; mouyng of the hed 
isin puplis. Al dai my shame is ajen me; 
and the confusioun of my face oner- 
i7couerede me. Fro the vois of repref ° 
puttende, and euele spekende; fro the 


Deus, auribus 2 
nostris. 


PSALMS. 


XLII. 117. 


PSALM XLIII. 


The title of they thre and fourtithe salm*.\ 
‘To victorie, lernyng to the sones of 
Chore*+. 

God, we herden with oure® eeris; oure2 
fadris telden to vs. The werk, which thou 
wrou3tist in the daies of hem; and in elde® 
daies. Thin hond lost? hethene men, and3 
thou plauntidist hem; thou turmentidist 
puplis, and castidist hem out. For thes 
children of Israel weldiden the lond not 
bi her swerd ; and the arm® of hem sauyde 
not hem. But thi ri3t hond, and thin 
arm, and thef li3tnyng of thi cheer®; for 
thou were plesid in hem. Thou art this 
silf, my kyng and my God; that sendist 
helthis to Jacob. Bi thee we schulene 
wyndewe! oure enemyes with horn; and 
in thi name we schulen dispise hem, that 
risen ajen vs. For Y schal not hope in7 
my bouwe ; and my swerd schal not saue 
me. For thou hast saued vs fro meng 
turmentinge vs; and thou hast schent men 
hatinge vs. We schulen be preisid ing 
God al dai; and in thi name we schulen 
knouleche to thee in to the world. Butio 
now thou hast put vs abac, and hast 
schent vs; and thou, God’, schalt not go 
out in oure vertues. Thou hast turned 11 
vs awei bihynde aftir oure enemyes; and 
thei, that hatiden vs, rauyschiden dyuerseli 
to hem silf. Thou hast 3oue vs as* scheep 12 
of meetis; and among hethene men thou 
hast scaterid vs. Thou hast seeld thi13 
puple with out prijs; and multitude was! 
not in the chaungyngis of hem. Thow14 
hast set vs™ schenschip to oure nei3boris ; 
mouwyng" and scorn to hem that ben in 
oure cumpas. Thou hast set vs intols 
licnesse to hethene men; stiryng® of heedP 
among puplis. Al dai my schame is a3ens 16 
me; and the schenschipe of my face hilide 
me. Fro the vois of dispisere, and yuele 17 
spekere; fro the face of enemy, and pur- 


kOm. 4, 1 the olde sen. ™ For 4. "the Gentilis an. ™ Om. a. © the repref c. 
: y Om. cprcnau. 20m. as. 8 lernyng to the victorieo. %Om.s. © the oolde x. the eelde s. 
: fordide 1. © arm or strengthe 1. f this. Om. v. & cheer sauede v. h wynewe 1. i Lord 1. 
fobeast. lther wasi. ™ yg to bet. 


q the enemy 1. 


4 and mouwyng 1. 


oand waggyng 1. P the heed k sec. m. 


t A glos. This 
salm was maad 
of the persecu- 
cionn, which 
the puple of 
Jewis suffride 
vndur Antiok, 
as the bokis of 
Machaheis 
tellen. a e¢ alii. 


Eructauit cor 
meum. 


XLIII. 18—XLIV. 7. 


face of the enemy, and the pursuere. 
is Alle these thingus camyn vpon vs; and 
wee han not for3ete thee, and wickeli? 
19 wee han not don in thi testament. And 
oure herte wente not awei bacward ; and 
thou bowidist doun oure pathis fro thi 
20weie. For thou mekedist vs in the place 
of tormenting ; and ouercouerede vs the 
21shadewe of deth. If wee han for3ete the 
name of oure God; and if wee han sprad 
22o0ut oure hondis to an alien God. Whe- 
ther God shal not ajeen sechen thes 
thingus? he forsothe knew3 the hidde 
thingis of thel herte. For wee ben mor- 
tefied for thee al dai; wee ben eymed as 
a3shep of sla3tir. Rys vp, whi al’ slepist 
thou, Lord ? ris vp, and putte thou not 
24abac in to the ende. ‘Whi thi face turn- 
est thou awei? thou for3etist of oure 
2s mayseise, and of oure tribulacioun. For 
mekid in pouder is oure soule; oure 
wombe is glued togidere in the erthe. 
26 Ris vp, Lord, and help vs; and a3een 
bie vs for thi name. 


PSALM XLIV. 


idu to the ende, for hem that shul ben 
with chaungid, to the sones of Chore, 
to vndirstondyng, the song for the 
loouede. 


2 Myn herte bowide out a good woord ; 
I sey my werkis to the king. My tunge 
the penne of a scribe, swiftli wrytende. 

3Fair in forme befor the sonus of men, 
grace is held out in thi lippis ; therfore 
blesside thee God in to with oute ende. 

4Be thon gird to with thi swerd; vp on 
5thin hipe most my3tili. In thi shap and 
thi fairnesse behold; go forth welsumli, 
and regne. For treuthe, and deboner- 
nesse, and ri3twisnesse; and thi ri3thond 
shal merueilously bringe thee thennes. 
6Thin arwis sharpe, puplis vnder thee 
shul falle; in to the hertis of the enemys 
7of the king. Thy sete, God, in to the 
world of world; the 3erde of thi gouern- 


P wickidli am, 


Shaner. tthes. 
2 teld, ethir belkid x sec. m. 


T a pursuere I. 
¥ most lernyd G. 


PSALMS. 


U not ws K sec. mM. 
a Om. K. 


781 


suere’. Alle these thingis camen on vs, 18 
and we han‘ not for3ete thee; and we 
diden not wickidli in thi testament. And 19 
oure herte 3ede not awei bihynde ; and 
thou hast bowid awei oure pathis fro thit 
weie. For thou hast maad vs lowe in20 
the place of turment ; and the schadewe of 
deth hilide vs. If we for3aten the name2i 
of oure God ; and if we helden forth oure 
hondis to an alien God. Whether God 22 
schal not seke these thingis? for he know- 
ith the hid thingis of herte. For whi we 
ben slayn al dai for thee; we ben demed 
as scheep of sleyng. Lord, rise vp, whi23 
slepist thou ? rise vp, and putte not" awei 
in to the ende. Whi turnest thou awei 24 
thi face? thou for3etist oure pouert, and 
oure tribulacioun. For onre lijf is maad 2s 
low in dust; oure wombe is glued togidere 
in the erthe. Lord, rise vp thon, and 26 
helpe vs ; and a3enbie vs’ for thi name. 


PSALM XLIV. 


The title of the’ foure and fourtithe. 
salm*. To the ouercomere for the lilies, 
the most! loued song of lernyng of the 
sones of Chore. 

Myn herte hath teld? ont* a good word ;2 

Y seie my workis ‘to the kyng>. Mi tunge 

is ‘a penne of © a writere; writynge swiftli. 

Crist, thou art fairer in schap than the% 

sones of men; grace is spred abrood in 

thi lippis; therfor God blessid thee with- 

outen ende. Be thou gird with thi swerd ; 4 

on thi hipe most my3tili. Biholde thous 

in thi schaplynesse and thi fairnesse ; 
come thon forth with prosperite, and regne 
thou. For treuthe, and myldenesse, and 
riz3tfulnesse ; and thi rij3t hond schal lede 
forth thee wondurfnli. Thi scharpes 
arowis schulen falle in to the hertis of the 
enemyes of the kyng; puplis schulen be 
vndur thee. God, thi seete is in to the7 


qOm. 4. Om. 4. 
vthou vs31. W Om. cprcupguw. * Om. L. 
bOm.s, ¢ the penne of 1, Om. s. 


+ A gles. This 
salm is seide of 
Crist and of 
hooli chirche, 
moder and vir- 
gyn; for Poul 
in i. c*%. to 
Ebreis, aleggith 
this salm seid 
of Crist, to the 
letter. a et alii. 


Deus noster, 
refugium. 


782 


yng to euenenesse, the 3erde of thi regne. 
s Thou loouedest riz3twisnesse, and hated- 
ist’ wickidnesse ; therfore enoyntide thee 
God, ‘thi God’, with oile of gladnesse 
9 befor thi" felawis. Myrre, and the swote 
gumme gutta, and the swote erbe casia, 
fro thi clothis, fro the yuer housis; of 
10the whiche deliteden thee the do3tris 
of kingus in thi wrshipe. The queen 
stod nee3h fro thi ri3t parties in cloth- 
ing ouergilt ; enuyround with dyuersete. 
11 Here, do3ter, and see, and inbowe thin 
ere; and for3et thi puple, and the hous 
ig of thi fader. And the king shal coueite 
thi fairnesse; for he is the Lord thi God, 
isand thei shul honouren hym. And the 
dostris of Tiri in 3iftis; thi chere shul 
louli preze alle the riche men of the 
iusfole. Al the glorie of hym of the do3ter 
of the king fro with imne, in goldene 
ishemmes; aboute’ wrappid with diuerse- 
tees. Ther shul ben bro3t to the king 
maidenes aftir hir; the ne3heboris of 
ishir shul be bro3t to thee. Thei shul be 
bro3te in gladnesse, and ful out io3ing ; 
thei shul be lad to in to the temple of 
i7the king. For thi fadris ben born to 
thee sones; thou shalt sette them princis 
1gvp on al erthe. Myndeful thei shul ben 
of thi name, Lord; in alle ieneracioun, 
and in to ieneracioun. Therfor puplis 
shul knoulechen to thee in to with oute 
ende ; and in to the world of world. 


PSALM XLV. 


1 In to the ende, the saim of Dauid, for 
the priue thingis. 


2 Oure God refut, and vertue; helpere 
in tribulaciouns, that founden vs ful 
3myche. Therfore wee shul not drede, 
whil the erthe shal be disturbid; and 
hillis shul be born ouer in to the herte 
4of the se. Ther souneden, and ben dis- 
turbid the watris of hem; the hillis ben 


Shatist c. tOm.c. 


4 thi r. 
1 Om. curenorevvy. 


mOm.v. ® Om. s. 


PSALMS. 


“alle thi g pr.m. 


. © ethir equite caw. or of equite 1. Om. v. 
1KMOUVX1. yuer housis G. hous yuer Ls. hous of yuer r. 


© Om. K. 


XLIV. 8—XLV. 4. 


world of world ; the’ 3erde of thi rewme 
is a 3erde of ri3t reulyng, ‘ethir of 
equite’. Thou louedist ri3tfulnesse, ands 
hatidist wickidnesse; therfor thou, God, 
thi God, anoyntide thee with the oile of 
gladnesse, more than thi felowis. Mirre,9 
and gumme, and cassia, of thi clothis’, of 
the ‘housis yuer; of whiche the dou3tris of 10 
kyngis delitiden thee'. A queen stood ny3 
on thik rizt side in clothing ouergildid ; 
cumpassid with dyuersitee. Dou3ter, here 11 
thou, and se, and bowe doun thin eere; 
and for3ete thi puple, and the hows of thi 
fadir. And the kyng schal coueyte thie 
fairnesse ; for he is thi Lord God, and thei 
schulen worschipe hym. And the dou3tris13 
of Tire in 3iftis; alle the riche men of the 
puple schulen biseche thi cheer. Al the1s 
glorye of that dou3ter of the kyng 7s with 
ynne in goldun hemmes; sche zs clothid 1s 
aboute with dyuersitees. Virgyns schulen 
be brou3t to the kyng aftir hir; hir nei3- 
boressis schulen be brou3t to thee. Theii6 
schulen be brou3t in gladnesse, aud ful 
out ioiyng; thei schulen be brou3t in to 
the temple of the kyng. Sones ben borun17 
to thee, for thi fadris ; thou schalt ordeyne 
hem princes on al erthe. Lord, theiis 
schulen be myndeful of thi name; in ech 
generacioun, and in to generacioun. Ther- 
for puplis schulen knouleche to thee with- 
outen ende; and in to the world of world. 


PSALM XLV. 


The title of the five and fourtithe satn.1 
To the ouercomere, the song of the™ 
sones ‘of Chore", ‘for 3ougthis°. 

Oure God, thou art refuyt, and vertu; 2 
helpere in tribulacions, that han? founde 
vs greetly. Therfor we schulen not drede, 3 
while the erthe schal be troblid ; and the 
hillis schulen be borun ouer in to the 
herte of the see. The watris of hem4 
sowneden, and weren troblid ; hillis weren 


val about «. 


g clothingis 1. 4 housis of yuer c sec. m. 
i thee iu thi honour K sec. m. k the c. 
P Om. 5s. 


é 


+ A glos. The 
sones of Chore — 
maden this xlvs 
salm, whanne 

thei weren 

sauid by mira- 
cle; whiche : 
Chore, her fa- 
der, perischide, 
and many 

othir ; in xvie 

c°. of Numeri. 

A et alii. 


Omnes gentes. 


XLV. 5——XLVI. to. 


sdisturbid inthe strengthe of it. The 
bure of the flod gladith the cite of God; ° 
the alther he3ist halewide his tabernacle. 
6God in the myddel of it shal not be 
stirid ; God shal helpen it erli fro the 
wmorutid. Jentilis ben disturbid, and 
reumes ben inbowid; he jaf his vois, 
gmoued is the erthe. The Lord of ver- 
tues with vs; oure vndertakere God of 
y Jacob. Cometh, and seeth the werkis of 
the Lord; the whiche he sette wndris 
1ovp on erth. Takende awei batailis vnto 
the ende of the erthe; the bowe he 
shal to-brose, and to-breke; armys and 
sheeldis he shal to-brenne with fyr. 
11 Taketh heede, and seeth, for I am God; 
I shal ben enhauncid in Jentilis, and I 
12shal ben hauncid in the erthe. The 
Lord of vertues with vs; oure vnder- 
takere” God of Jacob. 


PSALM XLVI. 


1In to the ende, the salm of Dauid, for 
the sonus of Chore. 


2 Alle Jentilis, io3e 3ee with hondis; 
gladeth to God in vois of ful out io3ing. 
3For the Lord hei3, ferful; a* gret king 
aouer al the erthe. He vnder leide puplis 
to vs; and Jentylis vnder oure feet. 
5 He ches to vs his eritage; the fairnesse 
cof Jacob, whom he louede. God ste3zide 
vp in ful io3e; and the Lord in vois of 
ztrumpe. Doth salm to oure God, doth 
salm; doth salm to oure king, doth salm. 
3For the king of al erthe God; doth 
9salm wisli. God shal regne vp on Jen- 
tilis; God sit vp on his holy sete. 
10 Prineis of puplis ben gedered with God 
of Abraham; for the stronge godis of 
ertheY hugeli ben rerid. 


w taker au, 
a 


q4Om. 1. 
Yini 


theschal1. ‘8with1. ¢ 3iueth 1. 


PSALMS. 


Xand au, 


783 


troblid togidere in the strengthe of hym. 
The feersnesse of flood makith glad thes 
citee of God; the hizeste God hath 
halewid his tabernacle. God in the myddise 
therof schal not be moued; God schal 
helpe it eerli in the grey morewtid. He-7 
thene men weren disturblid togidere, and 
rewmes weren bowid doun; God jaf 
his vois, the erthe was moued. Thes 
Lord of vertues 7s with vs; God of Jacob 
ts oure vptakere. Come 3e, and se thes 
werkis of the Lord; whiche wondris he 
hath set on the‘ erthe. He doynge awei1o 
batels til to the ende of the lond; schal al 
to-brese bouwe, and schal" breke togidere 
armuris, and schal? brenne scheldis bi 
fier. 3yuet 3e" tent, and se 3e, that Y ami 
God; Y schal be enhaunsid among he- 
thene men; and Y schal be enhaunsid in © 
erthe. The Lord of vertues 7s with vs; 12 
God of Jacob ¢s oure vptakere. 


PSALM XLVI. 


The title of the’ sixte and fourtithe salm.\ 
To victorie, a salm to’ the sones of 
Choret. 

Alle 3e folkis, make* ioie with hondis ;2 
synge 3c hertli to God in the vois of ful 
out ioiyng. For the Lord is hi3 ands 
ferdful; a greet kyng on al erthe. Hes 
made puplis suget to vs; and hethene 
men vudur oure feet. He chees his eri-5 
tage to vs; the fairnesse of Jacob, whom 
he louyde. God stiede in hertli song ;6 
and the Lord in the vois of a trumpe. 
Synge 3e to oure God, synge 3e; synge 3e7 
to oure kyng, synge 3e. For God ts kyngs 
of al erthe; synge 3e wiseli. God schalg 
regne ony hethene men; God sittith on 
his hooli seete. The princes of puplis ben 10 
gaderid togidere with God of Abraham ; 
for the stronge goddis of ertlie ben reisid 
greetli. 


Y the erthe azn. 


uOm.c. YY Om, plures. x maketh 1. 


Ww of G. 


+ A glos. The 
sones of Chore 
in this salm 
diden thank- 
yngis to God, 
bi spirit of pro- 
phecie, for vic- 
torie to com- 

nge, vndir 
Josne, of puplis 
enhabitynge 
the Jond of 
Chanaan. a e¢ 
alii. 


Magnus Do- 
minus, 


Audite hee, 


omnes gentes. 


784 


PSALM XLVII. 


1 The salm, or® the preising of the song 
of the sones, or to the sones of Chore, 
the secounde of the wike. 

2 The grete Lord, and preisable ful 

inyche; in the citie of oure God, in his 
sholi hil. It is founded in ful out iozing 
of al erthe; the mount of Sion, the side 
of the north, the cite of the grete king. 
4God in his housis shal be knowen; 
swhan he shal vndertaken it. For lo! 
the kingus of erthe ben gedered ; thei 
scamen togidere in to oon. Thei seende 
thus gretli wndreden, thei ben alle dis- 
;turbid; thei ben togidere stirid, trem- 
bling ca3te hem. There sorewis as of 
sthe berende child; in an hidous spirit 
thou shalt to-brose the shipis of Tharsis. 

» As wee han herd, so wee han seen, in the 

cite of the Lord of vertues, in the cite 
of oure God; God foundede it in to 
10 with oute ende. God, wee han vndertake 
thi mercy; in the myddel of thi temple. 
1 After thi name, God, so and thi preising 
in to the endis of the erthe; of ri3twis- 
iznesse ful is thi ri3thond. Glade the hil 
of Sion, and ful out io3e the do3tris of 
i3Jude; for thi domes, Lord. Goth aboute 
Sion, and togidere biclippeth it; tellith 
u4in the touris of it. Setteth 3oure hertes 
in the vertue of it; and delith the housis 
of it, that 3ee telle out in an other pro- 
isgenye. For this is God, oure God, in to 
withoute ende, and in to the world of 
world; he shal gouerne vs in to worldis. 


PSALM XLVIII. 


iin to the ende, to the sones of Chore, 
the salm of Dauyd. 


2 Heretli these thingus, alle Jentilis; with 
eris perceyueth, alle that dwellen the 
sworld. Alle 3ee ertheli geten, and the 


4 of H. 


2 Om. plures. 


' a There weren 1. 
plures. 


& perceyueth 1, 


PSALMS. 


> childynge 1. 


XLVIL. I—XLVII. 3. 


PSALM XLVII. 


The title of the* seuene and fourtithe. 
salm. The song of salm, of the sones 
of Choret. 

The Lord ts greet, and worthi to bee 
preisid ful myche; in the citee of oure 
God, in the hooli hil of hym. It is foundids 
in the ful out ioiyng of al erthe; the hil 
of Syon; the sidis of the north, the citee 
of the greet kyng. God schal be knowun4 
in the housis therof; whanne he schal 
take it. For lo! the kyngis of erthes 
weren gaderid togidere; thei camen into 
o place. hei seynge so wondriden 36 
thei weren disturblid, thei weren mouyd 
togidere, tremblyng took hem. There®7 
sorewis as of a womman trauelynge of 
child; in a greet spirit thou schalt al to-s 
breke the schippis of Tharsis. As weg 
herden, so we sien®, in the citee of the 
Lord of vertues, in the citee of oure God; 
God hath foundid that citee with outen 


ende. God, we hant resseyued thi mercy; 10 
Aftir thin 


in the myddis of thi temple. 
name, God, so thin heriyng 7s spred 
abrood in to the endis of erthe; thi rizt 
hond is ful of ri3tfulnesse®. 
Sion be glad, and the dou3tris of Judee 


be fulli ioiful; for thi domes, Lord. Cum-13 


passe 3e Syon, and biclippe 3e it; telle 3e 
in the touris therof. 
in the vertu of him; and departe 3e the 
housis of hym, that 3e telle out in an 
other generacioun. 
God, in to withouten ende, and in to the 
world of world; he schal gouerne vs in to 
worldis. 


PSALM XLVIII. 


The title of the! ei3te and fourtithe salm.1 
To victorie, a salm to the sones of 
Chore. 


Alle 3e folkis, here these thingis; alle2 
3e that dwellen in the world, perseyue& 
with eeris. Alle the sones of erthe and3 


> secounde day a. 


Csawjent. dhauer € xijtwisnesser. f Om. 


The hil of tz 


Sette 3e 3oure hertis 14 


For this is God, oure 15 


t+ A glos. This 
salm is expown- 
ed of Crist, to 
the lettre. a ef 
alii, 





XLVIII. 4—20. 


sones of men‘°; togidere in to oon, the 
4riche and the pore. My month shal 
speken wisdam; and the swete thenking 
50f myn herte prudence. I shal ful bowe 
in to a parable myn ere; I shal opene 
6in a sauter my proposicioun. Whi shal 
I drede in the euel dai? the wickidnesse 
7of myn heele shal enuyroune me. That 
trosten in ther? vertu; and in the mul- 
8titude of ther’ richessis glorien. A bro- 
ther a3een-bieth not, shal a man a3een- 
bien? and he shal not 3iue to God wher 
9of he be plesid. And the pris of the 
a3een-biyng of his soule; and he shal 
10trauaile in to withoute ende, and line 
113it ‘in to® the ende. He shal not seen 
deth, whan he shal seen wise men 
diende ; togidere the vnwise and the 
fool shul pershe. And thei shul leue to 
l2alienes their richessis; and the sepulcris 
of hem the hous of hem withoute ende. 
The tabernaclis of hem in progenye and 
progenye; thei clepeden ther namys in 
13ther Jlondis. A man, whan he was in 
wrshipe, vnderstood’ not; he is com- 
parisound to vnwise bestis, and lic is 
14maad to them. This weye of hem 
sclaunder to’ them; and aftir in ther 
15 mouth thei shul togidere plese. As shep 
in helle thei ben set; and deth shal to- 
gnawe them. And the ri3twise shul 
lordshipen of hem in the morutid; and 
the helpe of hem shal waxen old in helle, 
160f the glorie of hem. Neuerthelatere God 
sha] a3een-bie my soule fro the hond of 
17 helle ; whan he shal take me to. Ne thou 
shalt dreden, whan riche a man shal be 
maad; and whan shal be multiplied the 
isglorie of his hous. For whan he shal 
dien, he shal not take alle thingus; ne 
isshal go doun with hym his glorie. For 
his’ soule in the lif of hym shal be 
blessid ; he shal knouleche to thee, whan 
20thou weel dost to hym. He shal gon in 
to the progenyes of his fadris; and vnto 


©mananu. ‘thia. © in An. 


h Om. plures. 1 Om. plures. 
© the fool 1. P generacions k. 
lijf « leal v marg. * putt. 
¥ thingis with him 1. 

VOL. II. 


q4 and in. 
u shal not R. 


PSALMS. 


f ynderstond c. 


k heele, thal is, werk Kv. 
qq Om. 1. 
veld of hem a. 


785 


the sones of men; togidere the riche man 
and the pore iu to oon. Mi mouth schal4 
speke wisdom ; and the thenkyng of myn 
herte schali speke prudence. I schals 
bouwe doun myn eere in to a parable; Y 
scha] opene my resoun set forth in a 
sautree. Whi schal Y drede in the yuel6 
dai? the wickidnesse of myn hecle* sehal 
cumpasse me. Whiche! tristen in her7 
owne vertu; and han glorie in the multi- 
tude of her richessis. A™ brother a3en-8 
bieth not, schal a man a3enbie? and he 
schal not 3yue to God his plesyng. And9o 
he schal not 3yne the prijs of raunsum 
of" his soule; and he schal trauele with 
outen ende, and he schal lyue 3it in to10 
the ende. He schal not se perischyng, 11 
whanne he schal se wise men diynge ; 
the vnwise man and fool® schulen perische 
togidere. And thei schulen leeue her 
richessis to aliens; aud the sepuleris of 12 
hem ben the housis of hem with outen 
ende. The tabernaclis of hem ben in 
generaciounP and4 generacioun ; thei clep- 
iden her names in her londis. A441 man, 13 
whanne he was in honour, vndurstood 
not; he is comparisound to vnwise beestis, 
and het is maad lijk to tho. This weie14 
of hem 7s sclaundir to hem; and aftirward 
thei schulen plese togidere in her mouth’, 
As scheep thei ben set‘ in helle ; deth schial 15 
gnawe hem. And iust men schulen be 
lordis of hem in the morewtid; and the 
helpe of hem schal® wexe eld’ in helle, 
for” the glorie of hem. Netheles God 16 
schal a3enbie my soule from the power of 
helle; whanne he schal take me. Drede 17 
thou not, whanne a man is maad rielie; 
and* the glorie of his hows is multiplied. 
For whanne he sehal die, he schal not1s 
take alle thingisY ; and his glorie schal not 
go doun with him. For his soule schal1s9 
be blessid in his lijf; he schal knouleche 
to thee, whanne thou hast do wel to hym. 
He schal entre til in to the generaciouns 20 


Sofa. bthe a 

1The whicher. ™ Ther, %fory. 
‘Om.s. * mouth, thal is, bosting of lustful 
w from x. fro Lpy, * and whanne FKL. 


54H 


Deus deorun, 


786 


21 withoute ende he shal not see ijt. A 
man, whan he was in wrshipe, vnderstod 
not; he is comparisouned to vnwise bestis, 
and lic is maad to hem. 


PSALM XLIX. 
1 The salm to Asaph. 


God of godis, Lord spac; and clepide 
2the erthe, fro the rising of the sunne vn 
to the going doun. Fro Sion the shap of 
3his fairnesse, God openli shal come ; oure 
God, and he shal not be stille. Fyr in 
his si3t shal brenne out; and in his enuy- 
sroun strong tempest. He clepide to he- 
uene fro aboue; and the erthe, to seueren 
shis puple. Gadereth to hym his seyntis ; 
that ordeynen his testament vp on sacri- 
éfises. And heuenes shuln his ri3twisnes 
ibefore telle; for God is domesman. Here 
thou, my puple, and I shal speke to 
Irael; and I shal witnesse to thee, God, 
sthi God Iam. Not in thi! sacrifisis I 
shal vndernyme thee; forsothe thi brente 
gsacrifises in my si3t ben euermor. I shal 
not take to* of thin hous calues; ne of thi 
10 flockis get. For myn ben alle the wilde 
bestis of wodis; the tame bestis in hillis, 
iyand oxen. I knew3 alle the volatilis of 
heuene; and the fairnesse of the feld is 
igwith me. If I shal hungren, I shal not 
sey to thee; myn is forsothe the round- 
isnesse of erthe', and his plente. Whethir 
I shal ete flesh of bolis? or the blod 
i10f get I shal drinke? Offre to God the 
sacrifise of preising; and 3eeld to the 
ishezeste thi vouwis. And inwardli clep 
me in the dai of tribulacioun ; and I shal 
pullen out thee, and thou shalt wrshipe 
isme. To the synnere forsothe God seide, 
Whi tellist thou out my ri;twisnessis ; 
and takist to my testament bi thi mouth ? 
17Thou forsothe hatidist disciplyne; and 


iOm.c. * Om. an. 
z Om. 1. &he wasi. » Om. plures. ¢ God xx. 
fhei. ¢ Om. H sec. mn. osx sec. m. 


PSALMS. 


h domesman 8 sec. 2m. i. 


XLVUI. 21-——XLIX. 17. 


of hise fadris; and til in to with outen 


ende he schal not se 1i3t.. A% man, whanne 2! 


he was in honour, vudurstood not; he is 
comparisound to vnwise beestis, and is* 
maad lijk to tho. 


PSALM XLIX. 


The title of the nyne and fourtithe salm.\ 
The sal of Asaph. 

God, the Lord* of goddis, spak; and 
clepide the erthe, fro the risynge of the2 
sunne til to the goyng doun. The schap 
of his fairnesse fro Syon, God schal come3 
opynli; oure God, and? he schal not be 
stille. Fier schal brenne an hie in his 
si3t; and a strong tempest in his cumpas. 
He clepide heuene aloue; and the erthe, 4 
to deme his puple. Gadere 3e to hym hises 
seyntis; that ordeynen his testament aboue 
sacrifices. ‘And heuenes schulen schewe®6é 
his ri3tfulnesse®*; for God‘ is the? inge?. 
Mi puple, here thou, and Y schal speke to7 
Israel ; and Y schal witnesse to thee, Y am 
God, thi God. I schal not repreue! thee*s 
in thi sacrifices; and! thi brent sacrifices 
ben! euere bifor me. I schal not takes 
calues of thin hows; nethir geet buckis of 
thi flockis. 
of wodis ben myne; werk beestis, and 
oxis in hillis. 
tils of heuene”; and the fairnesse of the 
feeld is with me. 
Y schal not seie to thee; for the world 


and the fulnesse therof is myn. Whether 3 


Y schal eete the fleischis® of boolis? ethir 
schal Y drynke the blood of geet buckis ? 


Offre thou to God the sacrifice of heri-14 


yng?; and 3elde thin avowis to the hijeste 


God. And inwardli clepe thou me in the 1s 


dai of tribulacioun; and Y schal delyuere 


thee, and thou schalt onowre me. But God 16 


seide to the synnere, Whi tellist thon out 
my rijtfulnessis?; and takist my testament 


bi thi mouth ? Sotheli thou hatidist lore; !7 


\ the erthe sen. 


4QOm.s. ¢tellexrv. ¢¢ riz3twisnesse X sec. m. 


‘h And heuenes shul telle the ri3tfulnesse 


of him, that God is iustise ELP marg. Om. a pr.m. CFGH pr.m. IMOQUWX pr.m. iproue 1. * thee iust 1. 


! forsothe 1. 


r N ben not a pr. m. 
heriyng 1. 


4 riz3tfulnesse 1. 


m Om. s. 


Or n the firmament I. 
v lore or disciplyne 1. 


° fleishe 1. P preisyng, or of 


For alle the™ wyelde beestis 10 
T haue knowe alle the vola-11 


If Y schal be hungry, !2 


+ al glose. This 
salm is expown- 
ed of Crist to 
the lettre. i. 


: 


Miserere mei. 


XLIX. 18—-L. 10. 


isthrewe aferr my woordis hyndward. If 
thou se3e™ a thef, thou runne with hym; 
and with auoutereres" thi porcioun thou 
ig leidist. Thi mouth aboundide in malice ; 
29 and thi tunge ordeynde treccheries. Sit- 
tende az3en thi brother thou speeke, and 
-ajen the sone of thi moder thou leidest 
21 sclaunder ; these thingus thou didist, and 
Iheeld my pees. Thou eymedest wickeli°, 
that I shal be lic thee ; I shal vndernyme 
22 thee, and sette thee a3en thi face. Vuder- 
stondeth this, 3ee that for3eten God ; lest 
any tyme he raueshe, and ther be not 
23that deliuere. Sacrifise of preising shal 
wrshipen me; and there the weie, bi the 
whiche I shal shewe to hym the giuere 
of the helthe of God. : 


PSALM L. 


5 Lhe salm of Dauid ; whan cam to hym 
Nathau the profete, whan or for he 
entride to Bersabee. 


3 Haue mercy of me, God; after thi grete 
mercy. And after the multitude of thi 
grete mercy doingus; do awey my wickid- 

anesse. More ouer wash me fro wicke- 
nesse? myn; and fro my synne clense me. 

5For my wickidnesse I knowe; and my 
ssynne ajen me is euermor. To thee 
alone I synnede, and euel befor thee I 
dide; that thou be iustefied in thi woordis, 
7and ouercome whan thou art demed. Lo! 
forsothe in wickidnessis’ I am conceyued ; 
and in synnes conceyuede me my moder. 

s Lo! forsothe treuthe thou loouedist ; vn- 
certeyne and hidde thingis of thi wis- 

9dam thou madist open to me. Thou shal 
sprenge me, Lord’, with isope, and I shal 
ben clensid; thou shalt washe me, and 

10 aboue snow3 I shal be maad al whit. To 
myn heering thou shalt 3iue io3e and glad- 
nesse ; and ful out shul ioje bones mekid. 


m seest 4. ® auouteres c. 


8 rennydist 1. 88 Om. c. 
deeth of Vrie, Dauith weddide Bersabe i. 
a Om. 1. 


PSALMS. 


© wickidli an. 


t yndurstondeth 1. 
W oftir 1. 


787 


and hast cast awey my wordis bihynde. 
If thou sizest a theef, thou ‘hast runne®1s 
with hym; and thou settidist thi part with 
avowtreris. Thi mouth was plenteuouse 19 
of malice ; and thi tunge medlide togidere 
giles. Thou sittynge spakist a3ens thi2z0 
brother, and** thou settidist sclaundir ajens 
the sone of thi modir; thou didist these2! 
thingis, and Y was stille. Thou gessidist 
wickidli, that Y schal be lijk thee; Y schal 
repreue thee, and Y schal sette ajens thi 
face. 3e that for3eten God, vndurstondet 22 
these thingis ; lest sum tyme he rauysche, 
and noon be that schal delyuere. The 23 
sacrifice of heriyng schal onoure me ; and 
there is the weie, where ynne Y schal 
schewe to hym the helthe of God. 


PSALM L. 


The title of the fiftithe salm. To victorie,\ 
the salm of Danid ; ‘whaune Nathan2 
the prophete cam to hym, whaune he 
entride to Bersabee’. 


God, haue thou merci on me; bi thi3 
greet merci. And bi the mychilnesse of 
thi merciful doyngis; do thou awei my 
wickidnesse*. MoreY waische thou me fro4 
my wickidnesse ; and clense thou me fro 
my synne. . For Y knouleche my wickid-s 
nesse; and my synne is enere a3ens me. 
I haue synned to thee aloone, and Y haueg 
do yuel bifor thee ; that thou be iustified 
in thi wordis, and ouereome whanne thou 
art demed. For lo! Y was conseyued in7 
wickednessis ; and my modir conceyuede 
me in synnes. For lo! thou louedist*s 
treuthe; thou hast schewid to me the vn- 
certeyn thingis, and pryuy thingis of thi 
wisdom. Lord, sprenge thou* me withs 
ysope, and Y schal be clensid; waische 
thou me, and Y schal be maad whijt more 
than snow. 3yue thou ioie, and gladnesse to 
to myn heryng; and boonys maad meke 


P wickidnes azn. 4 wickidnes 4. ° Om. c. 


Vv that ts, whanne after the 


u Om. plures. 
z hast loued 1. 


X wicknesse 1. y More ouer 1. 


5H 2 


788 


11 Turne awey thi face fro my synnes; and 
i2alle my wickidnesses do awei. A clene 
herte forme in me, God; and a ri3t spirit 
isinwardli newe thou in my bowelis. Ne 
throwe thou me aferr fro thi face; and 
thin holy spirit ne do thou awei fro me. 
143eld to me the gladnesse of thin helthe 
siuere; and with the spirit principal con- 
isferme thou me. I shal techen wicke* men 
thi weyes; and vnpitous men to thee shul 
isben al turned. Deliuere me fro blodis*, 
God, God of" myn helthe; and ful out 
iojende shal my tunge telle thi ri3twis- 
iznesse. Lord, my lippis thou shalt opene; 
and my mouth shal beforn telle thi preis- 
ising. For if thou haddest wold sacrifise, 
I shulde han 3iuen; but forsothe in’ brent 
lgsacrifises™ thou woldest* not deliten. Sa- 
crifise to God, a spiritt holly trublid; a 
contrit herte and mekid, God, thou shalt 
20not despise. Benygnely do, Lord, in thi 
goode wil to Sion; that ful out be bild 
2ithe wallis of Jerusalem. Thanne thou 
shalt taken at worth sacrifise of rist- 
wisnesse, offringus, and brent sacrifises ; 
thanne thei shul putten in vp on thin 
auter calues. 


PSALM LI. 


1In to the ende, the vnderstonding of 

2 Dauid, whan ther cam Doech Idume, 
and hadde told to Saul, Dauyd cam 
in to the hous of Abymalech. 


3 What gloriest thou in malice; that 
4my3ti art in wickidnesse? Al dai vnri3t- 
wisnesse tho3te thi tunge; as a sharp 
srasour thou didist treccherie. Thou 
loouedist malice ouer benygnete; wickid- 
6nesse mor than to speke equite. Thou 
loouedest alle the woordis of kasting doun; 
7in a treccherous tunge. Therfore God 
shal destro3e thee in to the eude, he shal 


8 wickid au. t blood 4. t Om. 4. 


bdothour. © bloodis or synnes 1. 


h troblid, that is, sori for synne K text. v marg. 
mthatr. 9 and 1. 


PSALMS. 


vand «4. Om, c. 


4 thou schalt opene x. 
i mekid 1. 


L. 11——LI. 7. 


schulen ful out make ioye. Turne aweii 
thi face fro my synnes; and do> awei alle 
my wickidnesses. God, make thou a clene 12 
herte in me; and make thou newe a ri3tful 
spirit in my entrailis. Caste thou me not13 
awei fro thi face; and take thou not awei 
fro me thin hooli spirit. 3iue thou to mei 
the gladnesse of thyn helthe; and con- 
ferme thou me with the principal spirit. 
I schal teche wickid men thi weies; and 1s 
vnfeithful men schulen be conuertid to 
thee. God, the God of myn helthe, dely-16 
uere thou me fro bloodis®; and my tunge 
schal ioyfuli synge thi ri3tfulnesse. Lord, 17 
‘opene thou’ my lippis; and my mouth 
schal telle thi preysyng. For if thou had-1s 
dist wold sacrifice, Y hadde j3oue°; treuli 
thou schalt not delite in brent sacrifices‘, 
A& sacrifice to God is a spirit troblid" ; 19 
God, thon schalt not dispise a contrit 
herte and ‘maad meke!. Lord, do thou 20 
benygneli in thi good wille to Syon; that 
the wallis of Jerusalem be bildid. Thanne 21 
thon schalt take plesauntli the sacrifice 
of ri3tfulnesse, offryngis, and brent sacri- 
fices; thanne thei schulen putte calues on 
thin auter. 


PSALM LI. 


The title of thes oon and fiftithe salu. 
To victorie, the salm of Dauid, ‘whaune 2 
Doech Idumei cam, and telde to Saul, 


and seide to him, Dauid cam in to the 
hows of Abymelech. 


What hast thou gloriein malice; which™ 3 
art mi3ti in wickiduesse ? Al dai thi tunge4 
thou3te vnri3tfulnesse; as a scharp rasour 
thou hast do gile. Thou louedist malices 
more than benygnite; ‘thow Jlouedist™ 
wickidnesse more than to speke equite. 
Thou louedist alle wordis of casting doun; 6 
with a gileful tunge. Therfor God schal7 
distrie thee in to the ende, he schal drawe 


W sacrifise acu. * shalt 4EH. 


& Om. v. 
1 Om, x. 


© 30ue if 1K. f sacrifice a. 
k Om. plures. Achymalech v. 


LI. 8—LII. 7. 


pulle thee out, and myne thee out fro thi 
tabernacle; and thi roote fro the lond of 
aliueres. Rij3twis shul seen, and dreden; 
and vp on hym thei shul la3en, and 
gseyn, Lo! the man that putte not God 
his helpere. But hopideY in the mul- 
titude of his richessis; and hadde the 
1omaistri in his vanyte. I forsothe as an 
olive berende frut in the hous of God; 
hopide in the merci of God in to with- 
11,0ute ende, and in to world? of world. I 
shal knouleche to thee in to the world, 
for thou hast don; and I shal abide thi 
name, for it is good in the siz3te of thi 


seyntys. 
.PSALM LII. 
iIn to the ende, the vnderstonding of 
Dauid for Amalech. 
Dizit insi- The vnwise man seide in his herte; 
_ 2 Ther is not God. Thei ben corupt, and 


thei ben made abhominable in ther wick- 
sidnessis; ther is not that do good. God 
fro heuene beheeld vp on the sones of 
men; that he see, if ther is vnderstond- 
4ende, or ajeen sechende God. Alle bow- 
eden doun togidere, thei ben maad vn- 
profitable; ther is not that do good, ther 
5is not vnto oon. Whether not alle shuln 
knowen, that werken wickidnesse; that 
deuouren my puple as mete of bred ? 
¢God thei inwardli clepeden not; there 
thei trembliden bi drede, where was not 
drede. For God scaterede the bones of 
hem, that plesen to men; thei ben con- 
7foundid, for God dispiside them. Who 
shal 3iue fro Sion the helthe 3iuere to 
Trael ? whan the Lord shal holli turne 
the caitifte of his folc, Jacob shal ful out 
io3en, and Irael shal gladen. 


y he hopide aru. 


p and thei 1. 


4 puttide 1. 
| v fulli v. 


r Om. plures. 





PSALMS. 


8 maad corupt and s, 


789 


thee out bi the roote, and he schal make 
thee to passe awei fro thi tabernacle; and 
thi roote fro the lond of lyuynge men. 
Just men schulen se, and? schulen drede ; 5 
and thei schulen lei3e on hym, and thei 
schulen seie, Lo! the man that settidedo 
not God his helpere. But he hopide in 
the multitude of his richessis; and hadde 
maistrie in his vanite. Forsothe Y, as ao 
fruytful olyue tre in the hous of God; 
hopide in the merci of God with outen 
ende, and in to the world of world. Yut 
schal knowleche to thee in to the world, 
for thou hast do merey to me ; and Y schal 
abide thi name, for it is good in the si3t 
of thi seyntis. ; 


PSALM LII. 


The title of thet two and fiftithe salm.i 
Lo the ouercomer bi the quere, the 
lernyng of Dauid. i 


The vnwise man seide in his herte; 
God is not. Thei ben ‘corrupt, and maad’2 
abhomynable in her wickidnessis; noon is 
that doith good. God bihelde fro heuene3 
on the sones of men; that he se, if ‘ony 
ist vndurstondynge, ether sekynge God. 
Alle boweden awei, thei ben maad vn-4 
profitable togidre; noon is that doith good, 
ther is not til to oon. Whether alle men, 5 
that worchen wickidnesse, scliulen not 
wite; whiche deuouren my puple as the 
mete of breed? Thei clepiden not God; ¢ 
there thei trembliden for drede, where no 
drede was. For God hath seaterid the 
boones of hem, that plesen men"; thei 
ben schent, for God hath forsake hem. 
Who schal 3yue fro Syon helthe to Israel? 7 
whanne the Lord hath turned the caitifte 
of his puple, Jacob schal ‘ful out’ make 
ioie, and Israel schal be glad. 


2 the world 4. 


ttherisony 1. "to men k. 


790 PSALMS. LUI. 1—LIV. 9. 


PSALM ULIII. PSALM. LIII. 
1 In to the ende in ditees or ympnes, in The title of thev thre and fiftithe salm.1 
the titlis, or understonding of Dauid, To vietorie* in orguns, ether in salmes, 
2 whan ther hadden come Zifei to Saul, the lernyng of Dauid,\whanne Zyfeys?2 
and hadden told to Saul, Whethir is camen, and seiden to Saul, Whethir 
not Dauyd hyd anentis vs? Dauid is not hid at vs¥ ? 
Deus, inno- 3 God,in thi name mae me saaf; and in God, in thi name make thon me saaf ;3 
nase ithi vertue deme me. God, ful out here and in thi vertu deme thou me. God,4 


thou* myn orisoun; with eris perceyue here thou my preier ; with eeris perseyue 
5the woordis of my mouth. For alienes thou the wordis of my mouth. For alienss 
inwardli risen ajen me, and stronge men _ han rise a3ens me, and stronge men sou3ten 
so3ten my soule; and thei purposide not my lijf; and thei settiden not God bifor 
«God befor ther siz3te. Lo! forsothe God her si3t. For, lo! God helpith me; ands 
helpeth me ; and the Lord is vndertakere _ the Lord is vptaker? of my soule. Turne7 
zof my soule. Turne awei euelis to myn thou awei yuelis to myn enemyes; and 
enemys; aud in thi treuthe scatere them. _leese* thou hem in thi trenthe. Wilfulis 
s Wilfulli I shal sacrifice? to thee; and I Yschal make sacrifice to thee; and, Lord, 
shal knoulechen to thi name, Lord, for Y schal knouleche to thi name, for it is 
git is good. For fro alle tribulacioun thon good. For thou delyueridist me fro alg 
hast deliuered me; and vpon myn ene-_ tribulacioun; and myn ije dispiside on 


mys beheeld doun myn ee. myn enemyes. 
PSALM LIV. PSALM LIV. 
1 In to the ende, in ditees or ympnes, the The title of the foure and fiftithe sabne.\ 
ondirstonding of Dauid. ‘In Ebreu thus’, To victorie in or- 


guns, the lernyng of Dauid. ‘In Jeroms 
translacioun thus, To the ouercomer in 


salmes of Dauid lernid®t. 


Ezaudi, Deus, 2. Here thou, God, myn orisoun, and de- God, here thou my preier, and dispise2 
ie 3spise thou not my lowe prejeere; tac  thouf not my biseching; 3yue thou tents 
heede to me, and ful out here me. Iam to me, and here thou me. I am sorewful 
maad al sory in myn enhaunting; and I_— in myn exercising’; and Y am disturblid 
4am al disturbid fro the vois of the enemy, of the face of the enemye, and of the tri-4 
and fro tribulacioun of the synnere. For bulacioun of the synner. For thei bow- 
thei bowiden doun in me wickidnessis; iden wickidnessis in to me; and in ire thei 
and in wrathe thei weren heuy to me. weren diseseful to me. Myn herte wass 
5Myn herte is al disturbid in me; and disturblid in me; and the drede of deth 
6ferd® of deth fel vp on me. Drede and  felde ont me. Drede' and trembling camene 
trembling camen vp on me; and al couer- on me; and derknessis hiliden me. And7 
7eden me derenesses. And I seide, Who  Y seide, Who schal 3yue to me fetheris, 
shal 3iue to me federes as of a culuer; as of a¥ culuer; and Y schal fle, and schal! 
sand I shal flee, and a3een resten? Lo! take rest? Lo! Y 3ede fer awei, and fledde; 8 
I dro3 out me along fleende; andI duelte and Y dwellide in wildirnesse. I aboods 
yin wildernesse. I abod hym4, that made hym, that made me saaf fro the litilnesse, 


aQOm. a4. P sacrifie 4. ¢dreeda. dheme prem. 


w Om. plures. * the viclorie plures. YOm.x. 2 the vptaker1. 4 fordo or leese1. > Om. plures. 
¢Om. nc. 4 Om. ceteri preler vu. ©Om. ceteri preter vu. fOm.1. & exercising or haunlyng 1. ins, 
And drede 1. And dredinge s. k Om.s. 11 schal 1s, 


t A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salm, doinge 
thankingis to 
God, whan he 
fledde fro Ceila 
and was saued 
fro the hondis 
of Saul, that 
wolde bisege 
him in Ceila, 
and fro the 
hondis of the 
puple of Ceila, 
that disposide 
to bitraie him. 
LPasbi. 





LIV. tc—24. 


me saf; fro to litil coraiouste of spirit, 
igand fro tempest. Lord, put doun, and 
denyde the tungis of hem; for I sa3 wick- 
idnesse and contradiccioun in the cite. 
11 Dai and ny3t wickidnesse shal enuyroune 
it vpon the wallis of it; and trauaile in 
12the myddes of it, and vnri3twisnesse. 
And ther failede not fro the stretis of it; 
i3vsure and treccherie. For if myn enemy 
hadde cursid to me; I shulde also han 
suffrid. And if he, that hadde hatid me, 
ouer me grete thingis hadde spoken; I 
shulde han hid me perauenture fro hym. 
14 Thou forsothe a man of oon inwit; my 
isledere, and my knowen. The whiche 
togidere with me swete metis thou toke; 
in® the hous of God wee wente with 
igconsent. Deth come vp on hem; and 
go they doun in to helle lyuende. For 
shreudenessys in the dwelling placis of 
izhem; in the myddel of hem. I forsothe 
to the Lord criede; and the Lord shal 
igsaue me. The euentid and the moru, 
and at myddai, I shal seyn, and befor 
telle; and he shal ful out here my voys. 
i9 He shal ajeen bie my soule in pes fro 
them, that ne3hen to me; for among 
zomanye thei weren with me. God shal 
ful out heren, and meke them; that is 
befor worldis. Ther is not forsothe to 
them al hol chaunging, and thei dredde 
2inot God; he stra3te out his hond in 
a3een 3elding. Thei defouleden the testa- 
ggment of hym, thei ben deuydid fro the 
wrathe of his chere; and the herte of 
hym ne3hede to. Softid ben the woordis 
of hym vp on oile; and thei ben speris. 
23 Thro3 vp on the Lord thi bisynesse, and 
he shal nurshe thee out; and he shal not 
3iue in to with oute ende flotering to 
2athe rijtwise. Thou forsothe, God, shalt 
bringe them doun; in to the pit of deth. 
Men of blodis and treccherous shul not 
haluen ther da3es; I forsothe shal hope 
in thee, Lord. 


PSALMS. 


791 


‘ether drede, of spirit; and fro tempest. 
Lord, caste thou doun, departe thou the 10 
tungis of hem; for Y si3 wickidnesse and 
a3enseiyng in the citee. Bi dai and ny3t 1 
wickidnesse schal cumpasse it on the 
wallis therof; and trauel and vnri3tful-12 
nesse ben in the myddis therof. And 
vsure and gile failide not; fro the stretis 
therof. For if myn enemye hadde cursid 13 
me; sotheli Y hadde suffride. And if he, 
that hatide me, hadde spoke greet thingis 
on me; in hap Y hadde hid me fro hym. 
But thou art a man of o wille; my leeder, 14 
and my knowun. Which tokist togidere 15 
swete meetis with me; we 3eden with con- 
sent in the hous of God. Deth come on 16 
hem; and go thei doun quyk in to helle. 
For weiwardnessis ben in the dwelling 
places™ of hem; in the myddis of hem. 
But Y criede to thee, Lord; and the Lord 17 
sauede me. In the enentid and morewtid 18 
and in myddai Y schal telle, and schewe; 
and he schal here my vois. He schal a3en-19 
bie my soule in pees fro hem, that nei3en 
to me; for among manye thei weren with 
me. God schal here; and he that is bifore 20 
the" worldis schal make hem low. For 
chaungyng? is not to hem, and thei dred- 
den not God; he holdith? forth his hoond 21 
in 3elding. Thei defouliden his testa- 
ment, the cheris therof weren departid 22 
fro ire; and his herte nei3jede. The wordis 
therof weren’? softer than oyle; and tho™ 
ben dartis. Caste thi cure’ on the Lord, 23 
and he schal fulli nurische thee; and he 
schal not 3yue with outen ende flotering 
to a iust man. But thou, God, schalt lede 2+ 
hem forth; in to the pit of deth. Men- 
quelleris and gilours schulen not haue 
half her daies; but, Lord, Y schal hope in 
thee. 


© and in an. 


™ place a. 2 Om. K. 


T thei kK, 


© chaunging, that is, fro synne to penauns K lext. V marg. 
8 care CEFGIKLPQSsUXk. cure or thou3¢ 1. 


Pholde c. 4 ben k. 


Miserere mei. 


PSALM LV. 


iIn to the ende, for the puple that fro 
seintis is maad aferr, in the inserip- 
cioun of the title to hym, Dauid, whan 
ther shulden holden hym hethene men 
in Jeth. 


2 Haue mercy of me, God, for a man 
‘to-tradf me; al day impugnende trublide 
3me. My enemys to-treeden me al day ; 
afor manye fi3tende ajen ine. Fro the 
hei3te of the dai I shal drede ; I forsothe 
sin thee shal hopen. In God I shal preise 
my woordis; in God I hopide, I shal not 
edrede what do to me the flesh. Al dai 
thei cursiden my woordis; a3en me alle 
ztho3tis of hem in to evel. Thei shul 
duelle in and hiden; thei myn heele shul 
gwaite. As thei susteneden my soule for 
no3t; thou shalt make them saf in wrathe 
gpuplis thou shalt to-breke. God, my lif 
I ‘haue out told’ to thee; thou puttist 
my teres in thi si3te. As in thi beheste, 
10 Lord; thanne shul ben al turned myn 
enemys bacward. In what euer dai I 
shal inwardli clepe thee; lo! I knew, for 
umy God thou art. In God I shal preise 
the woord ; in the Lord I shal preise the 
sermoun. In God I hopede; I shal not 
12drede what do to me a man. In me, 
God, ben thi vonwis; the whiche I shal 
133elde preisingis to thee. For thou hast 
deliuered my soule fro deth, and my 
feet fro sliding; that I plese befor God in 
the 1i3t® of liueresi. 


f to-tredede 4En. 


t Om. prGHorev. 
Filisteis nr. 2% hadden v. 
© abideden crGHIKMOQRUVWxbi. abood ELP, 


u Om. ceteri preter vu. 


PSALMS. 


& shal tellen out E pr.m. 


Vv Om. plures. 
a make plures. ‘> Om, ccteri preter v. 
f Om. 1. 


LV. I-13. 


PSALM LV. 


The title of thet fyue and fiftithe salm.\ 
‘In Ebreu thus*, To the’ ouercomyng 
on the doumb culuer of fer drawing” 
awei, the comely song of Dauid,whanne* 
Filisteisy helden* hym in Geth. ‘In 
Jeroms transtacioun thus, To the ouer- 
comer for the doumb culuer, for it 
3ede awei fer. Dauid meke and symple 
made* this salm, whanne Palesteyns 


helden hym in Geth>+. + A gles. Ta 
uith made this 
salm whanne 
he fledde fro 
the face of 
Saul, and 
came to Agis, 
kyng of Geth; 
and whanne 
thei wolden 
kille Dauith, 
he feynede him 
wood, and so 


God, haue thou merci on ime, for a man2 
hath defoulid me; al dai he impugnyde, 
and troublide me. Myn enemyes defoul-3 
iden me al dai; for manye fi3teris weren 
ajens me. Of the hijnesse of dai Y schal4 
drede ; but God Y schal hope in thee. Ins 
God Y schal preise my wordis; Y hopide 
in God, Y schal not drede what thing 
fleisch® schal do to me. Al dai thei curs-¢ 
iden my wordis ; a3ens me alle her thou3tis 
weren in to yuel. Thei schulen dwelle, 7 
and schulen* hide; thei schulen aspie myn 
heele. As thei abiden® my lijf, for nou3ts 
schalt thou make hem saaf; in ire thou 
schalt breke togidre puplis. God, Y schew-9 
ide my lijf to thee; thou hast set my teeris 
in thi si3t. As and in thi biheest, Lord ; 
thanne myn enemyes schulen be turned 10 
abak. In what euere dai Y schal inwardli 
clepe thee; lo! Y haue knowe, that thou 
art my God. In God Y schal preise ay) 
word; in the Lord Y schal preyse a word. 
Y schal hope in God; Y schal not drede 
what thing af man schal do to me. God, 12 
thin aunowis ben in me; whiche Y schal 
jelde heriyngis® to thee. For thou hast ts 
delyuerid my lijf fro deth, and my feet 
fro slidyng; that Y pleese bifore God in 
the li3t of hem that lyuen. 


he was sanyd. 
C et alii. 


 sizste 4H. i liues H. 


x Om. x. Y the 
4 thei schulen 1. 


w drawun Cc. 
© fleisch or man 1. 
& heryinge s. 


LVI. 1-12. 


PSALM LVI. 


tIn to the ende, ne destro3e thou or shend* 
Dauid, in the inseripeioun' of the title, 
whan he flei3 fro the face of Saul in 
the den. 


Haue merci of me, God, haue merci of 
me; for in thee trosteth my soule. And 
in the shadewe of thi wengis I shal hope; 
to the tyme that wyckidnesse ouerpasse. 
3I shal crie to the heizest God; God that 
4dide weel tome. He sente fro heuene, 

and deliuerede me; he 3af in to reprof 

the tredende me. God sente his merci 
sand his treuthe, and toc awei my soule; 
fro the myddel of the leoun whelpis, I 
sleep™ al disturbid. Sones of men, the 
teth of hem armys and arwis; and the 
6tunge of hem a sharp swerd. Be thou 
enhauncid, God, vpon heuenes ; and vp on 
zalle erthe thi glorie. Thei maden redi a 
grene to my feet; and thei myche crook- 
eden my soule. Thei doluen” befor my 
gface a dich ; and thei fellen in to it. Redi 
myn herte, God, redi myn herte; I shal 
asinge and salm sein. Rys vp, my glorie ; 
ris vp, sautre and harpe; I shal risen vp 
1oerly. I shal knouleche to thee in puplis, 

Lord; and salm I shal sei to thee in 
iJentylys. For magnefied is vnto heuenes 
thi merci; and vnto the°® cloudis thi 


Miserere mei, 2 
Deus. 


12treuthe. Be thon enhauncid vp on he- 
uenes, God; and ouer alle erthe thi 
glorie. 


PSALMS. 


793 


PSALM LVI. 


The title of the sixte and fiftithe salm.\ 
‘In Ebreu thusi, To the victorie, lese 
thou not the semeli song, ‘ether the* 
‘swete song’ of Dauid, whanne he fledde 
Sro the face of Saul in to™ the denne*. 
‘In Jeroms translacioun thus, For vie- 
torie, that thou lese not Dauid, meke 
and simple, whanne he fledde fro the 
Jace of Saul in to the denne®. 


God, haue thouP merci on me, haue2 
thou merci on me; for my soule tristith 
in thee. And Y schal hope in the schadewe 
of thi wyngis; til wickidnesse passe. I3 
schal erye to God altherhijeste; to God 
that dide wel to me. He sente fro he-4 
uene, and delyuerede me; he 3af in to 
schenschip hem that defoulen? me. God 
sente his merci and his treuthe, ands 
delyuerede my soule fro the myddis of 
whelpis of liouns; Y slepte disturblid. 
The sones of men, the teeth of hem den 
armuris and arowis; and her tunge zs a* 
scharp swerd. God, be thou enhaunsidé 
aboue heuenes; and thi glorie aboue al 
erthe. TThei maden redi a® snare to my7 
feet; and thei greetly boweden my lijf. 
Thei delueden a diche bifore my face; and 
thei felden doun in to it. God, myn hertes 
is redi, myn herte 7s redi; Y schal singe, 
and Y schal seie salm. Mi glorie, rises 
thou vp; sautrie and harpe, rise thou 
vp; Y schal rise vp‘ eerli. Lord, Y schal 10 
knouleche to thee among puplis; and Y 
schal seie salm among hethene men. Fort 
thi merci is magnified til to" henenes; 
and thi treuthe til to cloudis"". God, be12 
thou enhaunsid aboue heuenes; and thi 
glorie ouer’ al erthe. 


K fo-sheende aeu. | scripcioun H. ™ slepte anu. . delueden aeu. © Om, AEH. 
h Om. plures. iOm. celeri preter vu. * ethercv. Om.s. !1Om.s. ™Om.mb. ‘2 Om. x. 
° Om. ceteri preter u. POm.1. 4 defonleden kK sec.m. '‘Om.s. *Om.s. *tOm.1. Vin tos. 
uu the cloudis a pr.m. ¥ aboue 1s. 


VOL. TI. 


51 


794 


PSALM LVII. 


1 In to the ende, ne shende thou or destro3e 
Dauid, in the inseripcioun of the title. 


Si vere utique. 2 If vereli also ri3twisnesse 3ee speke ; 
seuenli demeth, 3ee sones of men. For- 
sothe in the herte wickidnessis 3ee werken 
in the erthe; vnri3twisnesses 3o0ure hondis 
smenge? togidere. Synneres ben aliened 
fro the wombe; thei erreden fro the 
5 wombe, thei speeken false thingus. Wod- 
nesse to them, after the licnesse of an 
eddere; as of a doumb eddere, and stop- 
spende his eris. ‘The whiche shal not ful 
out heren the vois of the enchaunteres; 
and of the venym makere enchauntende 
zwisly. God shal to-brose the teth of hem 
in the mouth of hem; and the wang teth 
sof leouns the Lord shal to-breke. To 
no3t thei shul come, as water doun ren- 
nende; he bente’ his bowe, to the time 
9that ‘thei be" feblid. As wax that flow- 
ith, thei shul ben taken awei; fyr fel ouer, 
1oand thei sejen not the sunne. Befor 
that 3oure thornes shulden vnderstonde 
the theue thorne; as the lyuende, so in 
uwrathe he shal soupe them vp. The 
ri3twis shal glade, whan he seeth ven- 
iaunce; his hondis he shal washen in the 
izblod of the synnere. And a man shal 
seyn, If forsothe ther is frut to the ri3t- 
wis; forsothe God is demende them in 
erthe. 


P mengeden a. 


w Om. plures. * Om. ceteri preter vu. 
not Dauith, meek and symple. v. 
f The which 1. & to-breke cr. al to-breke pxsx, 
raveyne, cther ramne s. 


PSALMS. 


q bende “En. 


Y the ouercomere v. 
¢Om. celeri preter vu. 
h weren 1. 


LVI, 112. 


PSALM LVII. 


The title of the® seuene and fiftithe: 
salm. “In Ebreu thus*, To victoriey; 
‘lese thou not the swete song, ether the 
semely saim*, of Dauid”, ‘In Jeroms 
translacioun thus, To the ouercomere, 
that thou lese not Dauid, meke and 
simple®. 

Forsothe if 3e speken ri3tfulnesse verili; 2 
3e sones of men, deme? ri3tfuli. For ing 
herte 3e worchen wickidnesse in erthe; 
joure hondis maken redi vnri3tfulnessis®. 
Synneris weren maad aliens fro thea 
wombe; thei erriden fro the wombe, thei 
spaken false thingis. Woodnesse is tos 
hem, bi the licnesse of a serpent; as of 
a deef snake, and stoppynge hise eeris. 
Which! schal not here the vois of charmeris; 6 
and of a venym makere charmynge wiseli. 
God schal al to-breke the teeth of hem in7 
her mouth; the Lord schal breke® togidere 
the greet teeth of liouns. Thei schulens 
come to nou3t, as water rennynge awei ; 
he bente his bouwe, til thei ben’ maad 
sijk. As wexe that fletith awei, theig 
schulen be takun awei; fier felle aboue, 
and thei sijen not the sunne. 
3oure thornes vndurstoden the ramne’; he 
swolewith hem so in ire, as lyuynge men. 


The iust man schal be glad, whanne he 


schal se veniaunce; he schal waische hise 
hondis in the blood of a synner. 
man schal seie treuli, For fruyt is to a 
iust man; treuli God is demynge hem in 
erthe. 


rhe 4. 


‘b that thou leese 
¢ ynristfulnesse A. ristfulnessis Rx. 
iramne, ether theue thorn, ¥ et plures. the 


a Om. K. song ceteri. 
d demeth 1s. 


Bifore that io 


And aie 


+ A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salm, whanne 
Saul, at the tell- 
ynge of Zipheis, 
3ede ont with 
thre thousynde 
of chosun men 
to seke Dauith, 
in firste book 
of Kyngis xxvi. 
c°. and Dauith 
took awei the 
spere and the 
cuppe of Saul 
slepynge. c et 
alii. 


LVIII. 1—14. 


PSALM LVIII. 


1 In to the ende, ne destro3e thou or shend 
Dauid, in the inscripciouns of the title, 
whan Saul sente, and kepte his hous, 
that he shulde slen hym. 


2 Tac me out fro myn enemys, my God; 
and fro the inrisende in me deliuere me. 
3Tac me out fro the werkende wickid- 
nesse; and fro men of blodis saue me. 
4For lo! thei token my soule; ther fellen 
5in to me stronge men. Nouther my 
wickidnesse, ne my synne; Lord, with- 
oute wickidnesse I ran, and wel reulide. 
6 Rys vp in to a3en comyng to me, and see ; 
and thou, Lord God of vertues, God of 
Irael. Tac heede to alle Jentilis to be 
visited ; haue thou not mercy to alle that 
7werken wickidnesse. Be thei conuertid 
at euen, and hunger thei shul suffre as 
houndys; and thei shul enuyroune the 
acite. Lo! tbei shuln speke in ther 
mouth, and swerd in the lippis of hem ; 
9for who herde? And thou, Lord, shalt 
scorne them; to no3t thou shalt bringe 
loalle Jentilis. My strengthe to thee I 
11shal kepe, for God myn vndertakere ; my 
12God, his mercy shal befor come me. God 
shewide to me vp on myn enemys, ne 
sle thou hem; lest any time my puplis 
for3eten. Destro3e them in thi vertu; 
and put them doun, Lord, my defendere. 
13 The gilte of the mouth of hem, and the 
woord of ther lippis; and be thei ca3t 
in ther pride. And of cursing and les- 
14ing* thei shul be told; in the full ending. 
In the wrathe of hol eende, and thei shul 
not ben; and they shul wite, for the 
Lord shal lordshipen of Jacob, and of 


8 scripcioun H. 


PSALMS. 


795 


PSALM LVIII. 


The title of the ei3te and fiftithe salm.\ 
‘In Jeroms translacioun thus, To the 
ouercomer, that thou lese not Dauid, 
meke and simple,‘whanne Saul sente 
and kepte the hous, to slee hym™, ‘In 
Ebreu thus, To the ouercomyng, leese 
thou not the semeli song of Danid, and 
so forth®, 

Mi God, delyuer thou me fro myn? 
enemyes; and delyuer thou me fro hem 
that risen a3jens me. Delyuer thou me3 
fro hem that worchen wickidnesse; and 
saue thou me fro menquelleris. For lo!4 
thei han take my soule ; stronge men fellen 
inonme. Nethir my wickidnesse, nether 5 
my synne; Lord, Y ran with out wickid- 
nesse, and dresside ‘my werkis®. Rise vpé 
thouP in to4 my meetyng, and se; and 
thou, Lord God of vertues, art God of 
Israel. 3yue thou tent to visite alle folkis ; 
do thou not merci to alle that worchen 
wickidnesse. hei schulen be turned at7 
euentid, and thei as doggis schulen suffre 
hungir; and thei schulen cumpas' the 
citee. Lo! thei schulen speke in hers 
mouth, and a‘ swerd in her lippis; for 
who herde? And thou, Lord, schalto 
scorne hem; thou schalt bringe alle folkis 
to nou3t. I schal kepe my strengthe to 10 
thee; for God 7s myn vptaker, my God, 11 
his mercy schal come byfore me. God 12 
schewide to me on myn enemyes, slee 
thou not hem; lest ony tyme my puples 
for3ete. Scatere thou hem in thi vertu; 
and, Lord, my defender, putte thon hem 
doun. Putte thou’ doun the trespas of 13 
her mouth, and tle word of her lippis; 
and be thei takun in her pride. And of 
cursyng and of leesyng; thei schulen be 
schewid in the endyng. In the‘ ire of14 
ending, and thei schulen not be; and thei 


t of lesing 4EH. 


k Om. plures. 1 Om. ceteri preter vu. m Om, x. 2 Om. ceteri preter vu. © Om. plures. my 
werkis. Lire here. Q marg. u teat. POm.a. G@Om.c.  * that is, go a begging K marg. ‘Om. c. 
8Om.1. * Om.1. 


512 


796 


isthe coostis of the erthe. Thei shul be 
connertid at enen, and hunger thei shul 
suffre, as houndis; and thei shul gon 

isaboute the cite. Thei shul be scaterid, 
to eten; if forsothe thei shuln not be 

17 fulfild, and thei shul grucche. I forsothe 
shal singe thi strengthe; and enhauncen 
vp erly thi mercy. For thou art maad 
myn vndertakere; and my refute, in the 

isdai of my tribulacioun. Myn helpere, to 
thee I shal do salm; for God, myn vnder- 
takere, my God, my mercy. 


PSALM LIX. 

1 In to the ende, for hem that shul ben 
holli chaungid, in the inseripcioun of 
the title, to hym Dauyd, in to lernyng", 
whan he brende vp Mesopotanye of¥ 
Cirie, or Cirie Sobal, and turnede 
Joab, and smot Edom iu the valet of 
salt placis, twelue thousend. 


to 


God, thou hast put vs abac, and de- 
4stro3id vs; thou wrathedest vs. 
togidere mouedest erthe’, and disturbidist 
it; hele the to-tredingis of it, for it is to- 
sstirid. Thou hast shewid to thi puple 
hard thingis; thou hast drunken vs with 
6wyn of compunccioun. Thou hast 3iue 
to the dredende thee toknyng; that thei 
flee fro the face of the bowe. That thi 
7loouede be deliuered, mac saf in thi ri3t 
shond; and ful out here me. God spac in 
his halewe; I shal gladen, and deuyde 
Siccymam; and the valei of tabernaclis 
oI shal mesuren. Myn is Galaad, and 
myn is Manasses; and Effraym the 


Deus, repulisti. 3 


" the lernynge u. 


‘ that is, gon a beggid v marg. 
zOm.x. 22 Om.ex. 3®Om.x. 
the puple of Israel. Lire here. Q marg. vu text. 


Vv Om. plures. 


PSALMS. 


- thei 


Thou . 


V or of AEN. 


8a thousandis v. Om. x. 


DVill, 15 liees 


schulen wite, that the Lord schal be Lord 
of Jacob, and of the endis of erthe. Theiis 
schulen be turned at euentid, and thei as 
doggis schulen suffre hungur; and_ thei 
schulen cumpast the citee. Thei schulen16 
be scaterid abrood, for to eete; sotheli if 
ben not fillid, and thei schulen 
grutche. But Y schal synge thi strengthe; 17 
and eerli Y schal enhaunse thi merci. 
For thou art maad myn vptaker; and my 
refuyt, in the dai of my tribulacioun. Mynis 
helper, Y schal synge to thee; for thou art 
God, myn vptaker, my God, my mercy. 


PSALM LIX. 


The title of the’ nyne and fiftithe salm¥.1 
‘In Ebreu thus*, To victorie, on the 
witnessyng of roose, the swete song 
of Dauid, to techeY, ‘whanne he fau3te2 
ajens Aram of floodis, and Sirie of 
Soba; and Joab turnede a3en, and 
smoot Iidom in* the ‘valei of salt 
pittis, twelue® thousynde™, ‘In Jeroms 
translacioun thus, To the ouercomer 
Jor lilies, the witnessing of meke and 
parfit Daurd, to teche, whanne he fau3te 
ajens Sirie of Mesopotamye, and Soba, 
and so forth, 

God, thou hast put awei vs, and thous 
hast distried vs; thou were wrooth, and 
thou hast do merci to vs. Thou moued-4 
ist the erthe, and thou disturblidist it; 
make thou hool the sorewis therof, for it 
is moued. Thou schewidist harde thingis 5 
to thi puple; thou 3auest drynk to vs with 
the wyn of compunccioun. Thou hasté 
joue a signefiyng to hem that dreden 
thee; that thei fle fro the face of the 
bouwe. That thi derlyngis be delyuered; 
make thou saaf with thi ri3t hond ‘the7 
puple of Israel’, and here thou me. God8 
spak bi his hooli; Y schal be glad, and 
Y schal departe Siccimam‘, and Y schal 


w the erthe szu. 


wOm.r. * Om. ceteri preter v. 


b Om. eeleri preter v. 


Y teche men pd. 
¢ Om. cEGHLPVxik. 


4 Siccimam, that is, the lond of Sichem x text v marg. 


LIX. 10——LXI. 2. 


strengthe of myn hed. Juda, my king; 
10 Moab, the pot of myn hope. In to Idume 
I shal strecche my shoing; to me alienus 
11ben soget. Who shal bringe me in to 
strengthid* cite; who shal bringe me 
12in to Idume? Whether not thou, God, 
that hast put vs abac; and thou, God, 
isShalt not gon out in oure vertues? if 
to vs helpe fro tribulacioun; for veyn is 
14the helthe of man. In God wee shul do 
vertu; and he to no3t shal bringe doun 
men trublende ys. 


PSALM LX. 


1 In to the ende, in ympnes, the salm to¥ 
Dauyd. 
2 Ful out here thou, God, my lowe 
3 pre3ing ; tac heede to myn orisoun. Fro 
the endus of the erthe to thee I criede, 
whil myn herte shulde ben anguysht; in 
4a ston thou enhauncidist me. Thou 
bro3test me out, for thou art maad myn 
hope; the tour of strengthe fro the face 
50f the enemy. I shal duelle in thi 
tabernacle in to worldis; I shal be de- 
fendid in the coueryng of thi wengis. 
«For thou, my God, ‘ful out’ herdist myn 
orisoun; thou jeue the eritage to men 
7dredende thi name. Da3is vp on dais 
of the king thou shalt caste to; his 3eris 
vnto the dai of ieneracioun and of iene- 
gracioun. He abit* stille into withoute 
ende in the siz3te of God; the merci and 
ghis treuthe who shal a3een sechen? Soo 
salm I shal sey to thi name in to the 
world of world; that I 3elde my vouwis 
fro dai in to dai. 


PSALM LXI. 


iin to the ende, for Iditym, the salm of 
Dauyd. 


Exaudi, Deus. 


Nonne Deo. 2 Whether not to God soget shal be my 


x the strengthid a. 


Y of u. 


e Om. s. &QOm.s. hb thou o. 


n orguns D. 


f myn 1s. 


PSALMS. 


i of oure i 
Ojinto s. Padde ether encreese ceteri. (Om. D. 


foe 


meete the greet valei of tabernaclis. Ga-9 
Jaad is myn, and® Manasses is myn; and 
Effraym zs the strengthe of myn heed. 
Juda zs my king ; Moab és the’ pot of myn 10 
hope. In to Idumee Y schal stretche forth 
my scho; aliens ben inaad suget to me. 
Who schal lede me in to a citee maad 1 
strong; who schal leede me til® in to 
Ydumee? Whether not thon, God, that" 12 
hast put awei vs; and schalt thou not, 
God, go out in oure vertues? Lord, 3yue13 
thou to vs help of! tribulacioun; for the 
heelthe* of man is veyn. In God weus 
schulen make vertu; and he schal bringe 
to nou3t hem that disturblen vs. 


PSALM LX. 


The titil of the! sixtithe salu. To the™\ 
victorie on orgun", to Daud hym silft. 

God, here thou my biseching; 3yuee 
thou tent to my preyer. Fro the endis of 
the lond Y criede to thee; the while myn 
herte was angwischid, thou enhaunsidist 
me in® a stoon. Thou laddest me forth, 
for thou art maad myn hope; a tour of 
strengthe fro the face of the enemye. I5 
schal dwelle in thi tabernacle in to 
worldis; Y schal be keuered in the hil- 
yng of thi wengis. For thou, my God, 
hast herd my preier; thou hast 3oue 
eritage to hem that dreden thi name. 
Thou schalt adde? daies on the daies of; 
the king ; hise 3eeris til in to the dai of 
generacioun and of generacioun. eg 
dwellith with outen ende in the si3t of 
God; who schal seke the merci and 
treuthe of hym? So Y schal seie salm tog 
thi name in to the! world of world; tliat 
Y 3elde my vowis fro dai in to dai. 


PSALM LXI. 


The titil of the oon and siatithe salm'. 
To the’ victorie ont Iditum, the salm of 
Dauidt. 

Whether my soule schal not be suget, 


2Om.c. 4 bideth sen. 


k helpe g. 1! Om. plures. ™ Om. DEFILO. 
‘Om.s. §Om.c. t over CDEGHKLMORUVXDi. 


+ A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salm aftir that 
he hadde asca- 
pid the hondis 
of Saul, cnm- 
passinge him at 
the maner of a 
coroun. C e¢ alii. 


+ A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salm, whanne 
he was in the 
persecucioun of 
Sanl, and this 
aftir that he 
was COMIN ajen 
fro the lond of 
Moab to the 
lond of Juda, at 
the word of Gad 
the profete. 
Dauith made 
the x. salm in 
this comyng 
azen, but he 
inade this salm 
after that he 
had dwellid 
sumdel in the 
lond of Juda. 
cet alii. 


Deus, Deus 
meus, ad te. 


soule; of hym forsothe myn _helthe 
s3iuere. Forwhi and he my God, myn 
helthe 3iuere, myn vndertakere; I shal 
4be moued no more. Hou longe 3ee fallen 
in toa man? 3ee slen alle 3ee; as to a 
boowid woughe, ‘and to’ a ston wal put 
sdown. Neuer the latere my pris thei 
tho3ten to putte behinde, J ran in thrist ; 
with ther mouth thei blissiden, and with 
ether herte cursiden. Neuer the latere to 
God soget be thou, my soule; for of 
zhym my pacience. For lo! my God 
and my saueour; myn helpere, I shal 
snot gon out. In God myn helthe 3iuere, 
and my glorie; God of myn helpe, and 
ymyn hope is in God. Hopeth in hym, 
eche congregacioun of puple; heeldeth 
out beforn hym 3oure hertes, God oure 
lohelpere in to withoute ende. Neuer the 
latere veyne the sones of men; lieris the 
sones of men in wei3tis; that thei de- 
sceyue, thei of the vanyte in to itself. 
11 Wileth not hopen in wickidnesse, raueynes 
wileth not coueite; if richessis ‘flowe to°, 
12 wileth not leyn to the herte. Ones God 
spac, these two thingus I herde; for4 
13the power of God is, and to thee, Lord, 
mercy; for thou shalt 3elde to eche man 
aftir his werkis. 


PSALM LXII. 


1 The salm of Dauyd, whan he was in 
the? desert of Ydume. 


2 God, my God, to thee fro 1i3t I wake. 
My soule thristide in thee ; hou manyfold 
3to thee my flesh. In a desert erthe and 
withoute weie, and with oute water, so 
in holi I aperede to thee; that I shulde 
4see thi vertu, and thi glorie. For betere 
is thi mercy vpon lyues; my lippis shul 
5preise thee. So J shal blesse thee in my 
lif; and in thi name I shal reren vp myn 
shondus. As bi tal3 and fatnesse be fulfild 
my soule; and with lippis of ful out 


798 PSALMS. LXI. 3—LXII. 6. 


to God; for myn heelthe zs of hym. 
For whi he is bothe my God, and myns 
heelthe; my ‘taker vp", Y schal no more 
be moued. Hou longe fallen 3e on a man ?4 
alle 3e sleen; as to a wal bowid, and” a 
wal of stoon with out morter cast doun. 
Netheles thei thou3ten to putte awei my5 
prijs, Y ran in thirst; with her mouth 
thei blessiden, and in her herte thei 
cursiden. Netheles, my soule, be thoue 
suget to God; for my pacience zs of hym. 
For he 7s my God, and my saueour; myn7 
helpere, Y schal not passe out. Myns 
helthe, and my glorie zs in God ; God is 
the* 3yuer of myn help, and myn hope is 
in God. Al the gaderyng togidere of the9 
puple, hope 3e in God, schedeY 3e out 30ure 
hertis bifore hym; God zs oure helpere 
with outen ende. Netheles the sones of men 10 
ben veyne; the sones of men ben liers in 
balauncis, that thei disseyue of vanytee in 
to the same thing. Nile 3e haue hope init 
wickidnesse, and nyle 3e coueyte raueyns ; 
if ritchessis be plenteuouse, nyle 3e sette 
the herte therto. God spak onys, Y herde 12 
these twei thingis, that power is of God, 
and, thou Lord, mercy zs to thee; for13 
thou schalt 3elde to ech man bi? hise 
werkis. 


PSALM LXII. 


The titil of the® two and sixtithe salm.\ 
‘The salu of Dauid, ‘whanne he was 
in the® desert of Judee*+. 


God, my God, Y wake to thee ful eerli.2 
Mi soule thirstide to thee; my fleisch 
thirstide to thee ful many foold. In a3 
lond forsakun with out wei, and with out 
water, so Y apperide to thee in hooli; that 
Y schulde se thi vertu, and thi glorie. 
For thi merci is betere than lyues; my 4 
lippis schulen herie thee. So Y schals 
blesse thee in my lijf; and in thi name 
Y schal reise myn hondis. Mi soule bes 
fillid as with inner fatnesse and vttermere 


hinto au. © ouerflowen to 4. flowen H. ‘4 forsothe aH. © Om. 4. 


‘d 


m. X. 


uvptaker1. Wandas1, *Om.1. y helder, 


Zaftir1. ® Om. plures. bOm.co. ¢ Om. plures. 


+ A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salm, whanne 
he was in the 
pursuyog of 
Sanl, aftir that 
he was turned 
azen [fro the 
lond of Moab 
alii] in to the 
lond of Judee, 
and was in de- 
sert of Judee. 
Cc et alii. 


LXII. 7=——LXIIl. 10. 


7i03ing my mouth shal preise. So I was 
myndeful of thee vp on my bedding, in 
the morutidis I shal sweteli thenken in 

sthee; for thou weref myn helpere. And 
in the coueryng of thi wengus I shal ful 

gout io3e, my soule cleuede to after thee; 

tome thi rijthond vndirtoc. Thei forsothe 
in to veyn so3ten my soule, they shul go 
in to the nethermor partis of the erthe ; 

u1thei shul be taken in to the hond of 
swerd, the partis of foxis thei shul be. 

12 The king forsothe shal gladen in God, 
and ther shul be preisid alle that swern 
in hym; for stoppid is the mouth of men 
spekende wicke thingus. 


PSALM LXIII. 
1 Into the ende, the salm of Dauyd. 


Ful out here thou, God, myn orisoun, 
whan I louli preje; fro the drede of the 
3enemy tac awei my soule. Thou hast 

defendid me fro the couent of warieris ; 

and fro the multitude of men wirkende 
4wickidnesse. For thei sharpiden out as 

a swerd ther tungis; thei benten a 
sbowe, a bittere thing, that thei sheete in 
chid thingus the vnwemmed. Sodeynly 

thei shu] sheten hym, and not dreden; 

thei fastneden to hem a shreude woord. 

Thei tolden, that thei shulden hide grenes; 
7thei seiden, Who shal see them? Thei 

sercheden wickidnessis; thei serchende 

faileden in serching. Ther shal ne3hen 
sa man to an hei3 herte; and God shal 
ben enhauncid. The arwis of litle childer 
9ben maad the veniauncis of hem; and 
ther ben feblid a3en hem the tungis of 
hem. Alle that se3en hem ben disturbid; 
1oand eche man dredde. And thei beforn 


Exaudi, Deus, 2 
orationem. 


PSALMS. 


799 


fatnesse ; and my mouth schal herie with 
lippis of ful out ioiyng. Sot Y hadde7 
mynde onf thee on my bed", in morew- 
tidis' Y shal thenke of* thee; for thous 
were! myn helpere. And in the keueryng 
of thi wyngis Y schal make ‘ful out™ ioye, 
my soule cleuede after thee; thi rijthond9 
took me vp. Forsothe thei sou3ten ino 
veyn my lijf, thei schulen entre in to the 
lower thingis of erthe; thei schulen bei 
bitakun in to the hondis of swerd, thei 
schulen be maad the partis of foxis. But 12 
the king schal be glad in God; and alle 
men schulen be preysid that sweren in 
hym, for the mouth of hem, that speken™ 
wickid thingis, is stoppid. 


PSALM LXIII. 


The titil of the? thre and sixtithe salm?.\ 
‘In Ebrewe thus1, To the' victorie, the 
saim of Dauid. ‘In Jerom’ ‘thus, To 
the ouercomer, the song of Dauid'. 

God, here thou my preier, whanne Y 2 
biseche; delyuere thou my soule fro the" 
drede of the enemy. Thou hast defendids 
me fro the couent of yuele doers; fro the 
multitude of hem that worchen wickid- 
nesse. For thei scharpiden her tungis as4 
a” swerd, thei benten” a* bowe, a bittir 
thing; for to schete in priueteesY hym thats 
is vnwemmed. Sodeynli thei schulene 
schete hym, and thei schulen not drede ; 
thei maden stidefast to hem silf a wickid 
word. Thei telden, that thei schulden 
hide snaris; thei seiden, Who schal se hem? 
Thei sou3ten wickidnessis; thei sou3ten,7 
and failiden in sekinge. A man nei3he’ 
to deep* herte; and God schal be en-s 
hauusid. The arowis of ‘litle men? ben 
maad the woundis of hem; and the tungis9 
of hem ben maad sijk a3ens hem. Alle 
men ben® disturblid, that sien hem; and 10 
ech man dredde. And thei telden the 


f was al. 
eLov. fofiKus. & upon K. } bedstree ko. ‘the morewtidisc. ‘oni. !hast ber. ™ fully 1. 
1 gspaken c. © Om. plures. P Om. a. 4% Om. ceteri preter u. * Om. Girq. % In Jeroms vu. Om. ceteri. 
t Om. ceteri preter u. %Om.1s. YOm.o. Wbendenr. *heri. Y hiddels or priuetees 1. 2 had neize 


X sec. 8a deep x. 


b litle men, that is, enuiouse men « text v marg. 


© weren celeri. 


800 


tolden the werkis of God; and his deedis 
iithei vnderstoden. The ri3twise shal 
gladen in the Lord, and hopen in hym; 
and alle ri3twise in herte shul be preisid. 


PSALM LXIV. 


iIn to the ende, the salu of Dawid, the 
soug of Aggei, Jeremye, or Exechiel, 
of the woord of pilgrimagynge, or of® 
the puple of trausmygracioun, whan 
thei shulden begyune to go forth. 
Thee semeth an ympne, thou God, in 
Sion; and to thee shal ben 3olden a 
3vou iu Jerusalem. Ful out here thou 
amyn orisoun; to thee all flesh shal come. 
The woordis of wicke+ men hadden the 
maistri ouer vs; and to oure vnpitous- 
snessis thou shalt be plesid. Blisful whom 
thou hast chosen, and take to; he shal 
dwelle in thin hallis. Wee shul be ful- 
fild in goodis of thin hous; holi is thi 
stemple, merueilous in equite. Ful out 
here vs, God, oure helthe jiuere ; hope of 
alle the coostis of erthe, and in the se 
zafer. Greithende hillis in thi vertu, gird 
sto bi power; that disturbist the depthe 
oof the se, the soun of his flodis. Jen- 
tilis' shul ben sturbid*, and dreden that 
duellen the termes of thi tocnes; the 
goingus out of the morutid and the eue- 
10tid thou shalt make delitable. Thou hast 
visitid the erthe, and maad it drunke; 
and thou multipliedest to maken it riche. 
The flod of God is fulfild with watris ; 
thou greithedest the mete of hem, for so 
lis the befor greithing of it. Thou in- 
wardli makende drunke the ryueres of 
it, multiplie his buriounys; and in his 
drope fallingus shal glade the buri- 
12ounende. Thou shalt blesse to the 
croune of the 3er! of thi benyngnete; 
aud thi feldis shul be fulfild with plen- 
steuouste. The faire thingus of desert 
shul waxe fatte; and bi ful out iojing 


Te decet 2 
hymnus. 


Sloa. Ywickid un. 
4 and thei 1. 

forserdis celeri. 1 3e nu. 

 crowne ether serele y. 


m thou art 1. 
8 the plente v. 


PSALMS. 


! The Gentilis 4. 


ehim kx. f Om, plures. Om. a. * Om.rw. 1 Om. Fr. 
n hast maad 1. 


LXIII, 11—LXIV. 13. 


werkis of God ; and4 yndurstoden the dedis 


of God®. The iust man schal be glad inl 


the Lord, and schal hope in hym; and alle 
men of ri3tful herte schulen be preisid. 


PSALM LXIV. 


The titil of the! foure and sixtithe salm.\ 
‘To victorie®, ‘the saim" of i the song of 
Dauidt. 


God, heriyng bicometh thee in Syon;2 
and a vow schal be 3olden to thee in Jeru- 
salem. Here thou my preier; ech man3 
schal come to thee. The wordis of wickid4 
men hadden the maistrye ouer vs; and 
thou schalt do merci to oure wickidnessis. 
Blessid 7s he, whom thou hast chose, and 5 
hast take; he schal dwelle in thin hallisk. 
We! schulen be fillid with the goodis of 
thin hous; thi temple is hooli, wondurful ¢ 
in equite. God, oure heelthe, here thou 
vs; thou art hope of alle coostis of erthe, 
and in the see afer. And thou makest7 
redi hillis in thi vertu, and art™ gird with 
power; which disturblist the depthe of8 
the see, the soun of the wawis therof. 
Folkis schulen be disturblid, and thei that9 
dwellen in the endis schulen drede of thi 
signes ; thou schalt delite the outgoingis 


of the morewtid and euentid. Thou hast 10 


visitid the lond, and hast greetli fillid it; 
thou hast multiplied to make it riche. 
The flood of God was fillid with watris ; 
thou madist" redi the mete® of hem, for 
the mmakyng redi therof is so. 
yuge greetli the stremes therof, multiplie 
the fruytis therof; the lond bringinge 
forth? fruytis schal be glad in goteris’ of 


it. Thou schalt blesse the coroun' of the 12 


3eer of thi good wille; and thi feeldis 
schulen be fillid with plentee’ of fruytis. 


The feire thingis of desert schulen wexe 13 


fatte; and litle hillis schulen be cumpassid 


k disturbid seu. Jerthe a. 


k forserdis or hallis 1 marg. 


ometisa. POm. x. 4 the goteris plures. 


Thou fill-11 


t+ A glos. This 
salm spekith of 
the comyng 
a3en of Jewis, 
prisoneris in 
Babiloyne, in 
to the lond of 
biheest, and of 
the plentee of 
fruytis of that 
lond. c e¢ alii. 


\ 
] 
| 


Jubilate Deo. 


LXIV. 14—LXV. 17. 


litle hillis shul be gird aboute. The 
wetheres of shep ben clad”, and the valeis 
shuln abounde with whete; thei shul crie, 
and forsothe seyn ympne. 


PSALM LXV. 


1 In to the ende, the song of the salm of 
resureccioun. 
2 Io3eth to God, al erthe®, salin seith to 
his name; 3iueth glorie to his preising. 
3Seith to God, Hou ferful ben thi werkis, 
Lord.; in the multitude of thi vertu shrln 
4lie to thee thin enemys. Al erthe® hon- 
oure thee, God, and do salm to thee ; and 
ssey salm to thi name. Cometh and seeth 
the werkis of God ; ferful in counseilis vp 
6o0n the sones of men. That al turneth 
the se in to drie, in the flod thei shul 
passe thur3 afoote; ther wee shul gladen 
zin hym. That lordshipeth in his vertu 
in to withoute ende; his e3en vp on Jen- 
tilis beholden, that ful out terren shul 
snot ben enhauncid in hemself. Blesseth, 
jee Jentylis, oure God; and herd maketh 
othe vois of his preising. That putte my 
soule to lif, and 3af not in to togidere 
lostiring my feet. God, for thou hast 
proued vs; bi fyr thou examynedest vs, as 
1isiluer is examyned. Thou bro3tist vs in 
to the grene, thou puttist tribulaciouns? 
i2gin oure rig; thou puttist in men vpon 
oure hedis. Wee passiden thur3 fyr and 
watir; and thou bro3tist out vs in to re- 
i3freshing. I shal go in to thin hous in 
brent sacrifises ; I shal 3elde to thee my 
lavowis, that determyneden my _lippis. 
And my mouth spac in my tribulacioun ; 
is brent sacrifises ful of mer3 I shal offre 
to thee, with encens of wethers; I shal 
1soffre to thee oxen with get. 3ee, alle 
that dreden God, cometh and hereth; and 
I shal telle hou grete thingus he dede to 
wwmy soule. To hym with my mouth I 
eriede; and I ful out ioj3ide vnder my 


m clothid sz. 


t heriyng ceteri. u Om. plures. 


y ful dredeful ceter?. this. ®Om.1. 
f The which 1. & blesse 3e 1, 4 The whiche 1. 
here 3erx. °° Om. o. 

VOL. II. 


PSALMS. 


Othe erthe sen. © the erthe au. 


Vv Om. plures. 
b synge it 1. 
ihe jaf 1. 


801 


with ful out ioiyng. The wetheris of14 
scheep ben clothid, and valecis schulen be 
plenteuouse of wheete ; thei schulen crye, 
and sotheli thei schulen seye salmt. 


PSALM LXV. 


The titil of the fyue and sixtithe salm.1 
To the’ victorie, the song of salm*t. 


Al the* erthe, make 3e ioie hertli to2 
God, seie 3e salm to his name; 3yue 3e 
glorie to his heriyng. Seie 3e to God,3 
Lord, thi werkis ben dredefulY; in the? 
multitude of thi vertu thin enemyes schul- 
en lie to thee. God, al the* erthe worschipe 4 
thee, and synge” to thee; seie it salm to 
thi name. Come 3e and se 3e the werkiss 
of God ; ferdful in counseils on the sones 
of men. Which* turnede the see in toe 
drie lond ; in the flood thei schulen passe 
with foot®, there we schulen be glad in 
hym. Which is Lord in his vertu with-7 
outen ende, hise i3en biholden on folkis; 
thei that maken scharp be not enhaunsid 
in hem silf. 3e hethen men, blesse® oures 
God; and make 3e herd the vois of his 
preising. That hath set my soule to lijf,9 
and jaf not my feet in to stiryng. For 10 
thou, God, hast preued vs; thou hast 
examyned vs bi fier, as siluer is examyned. 
Thou leddist vs in to a snare, thou put-u 
tidist* tribulaciouns in oure bak; thoute 
settidist men on oure heedis. We passiden 
bi fier and water; and thou leddist! vs out 
in to refreschyng. I schal entre in to thin 13 
hous in brent sacrifices; Y schal 3elde to 
thee my vowis, which my lippis spaken 14 
distinctly. And my mouth spake in my 
tribulacioun; Y shal offre to thee brentis 
sacrificis ful of merow3, with the bren- 
nyng of rammes; Y schal offre to thee 
oxis with buckis of geet. Alle 3e thatie 
dreden God, come™ and here™, and®? Y 
schal telle; hou grete thingis he hath do 
to my soule. I criede to hym with my17 


+ 4 glos. This 
salm is doyng 
of thankyngis 
for delyuer- 
aunce of the 
puple of Jewis 
fro Kgipt. c et 
alii. 


P tribulacioun 4H. 


x Om. Dw. 
€ drie foot I. 
™ cometh 1. 


Ww Dauid, salm of thankingis v. 
© The which. 4 the drie 1. 
k hast putt 1. | hast led 1. 


5K 


802 PSALMS. 


igtunge. Wickedenesse if I beheeld in myn 
herte; the Lord shal not ful out here. 

19 Therfore ful out herde God; and toc 
heede to the vois of my lowe pre3ing. 

20 Blissid the God; that mouede not awei 
myn orisoun, and his merci fro me. 


PSALM LXVI. 


1 In to the ende, ‘in ympnes, the salm of 
the song to Dauyd. 


Deus miseree 2 God haue merci of vs, and blisse to vs, 
atu gous liz3te to his chere vpon vs; and haue merey 
3of ys. That wee knowe in the erthe thi 
weie; in alle Jentilis thi helthe 3iuere. 
4 Knouleche to thee puplis,God; knouleche 
sto thee alle puplis. Gladen and ful out 
io3e Jentilis, for thou demest puplis in 
equite; and Jentilis in the erthe thou 
edressist. Knouleche to thee puplis, God, 
zknouleche to thee alle puplis; the erthe 
3af his frut. Blesse vs God, oure God, 
sblesse vs God; and drede hym alle the 
coostus of erthe’. 


PSALM LXVILI. 


1 In to the ende, the salm of the’ song of 
Dauyd. 


Exurgat Deus. 2 ~Ryse vp God, and be scaterid his 
enemys; and flee thei that hatiden hymn 
3fro his face. As faileth smoke, faile thei, 
as flowith wax fro the face of fyr; so 
pershe the synueres fro the face of God. 
4And the ri3twise ete thei, and ful out 
glade thei in the si3te of God ; and delite 
5thei in gladnesse. Syngeth to God, salin 
seith to his name, maketh weiet to hym 
that ste3eth vp vp on the going doun ; 
Lord name to hym. Ful out iozeth in 


TXV18.—-UX¥ llemee 


mouth; and Y ioyede fulli vudir my tunge. 
If Y bihelde wickidnesse in myn herte; 18 
the Lord schal not here. Therfor God 19 
herde; and? perseyuede the vois of my 
bisechyng. Blessid be God ; that remeued 20 
not my preyer, and4 ‘took not awez™ his 
merci fro me. 


PSALM LXVI. 


The titil of the’ sive and sixtithe salm. 
‘In Ebreu thust, To the® victorie in 
orguns, the salm of the’ song’. ‘In 
Jerom’ ‘thus, To the ouercomer in 
salmes, the song of writing of a delit- 
able thing with metre*. 

God haue merci on vs, and_ blesse2 
vs; li3tne he his cheer on vs, and haue? 
merci on vs. That we knowe thi weie on*3 
erthe; thin heelthe in alle folkis. God, 4 
puplis knowleche to thee; alle puplis 
kuouleche to thee. Hethen men be glad, 5 
and make? fulli ioye, for thou demest 
puplis in equite; and dressist hethene men 
in erthe. God, puplis knouleche to thee, 6 
alle puplis knouleche to thee; the erthe7 
jaf¢ his fruyt. God, oure God blesse vs, 
God blesse vs; and alle the coostis of erthe 
drede hym. 


PSALM LXVIL. 


The titil of the’ seuene and sixtithe salm.\ 

To the® victorie’, the® salm‘of the song 

‘of Dauid'. 

God rise vp, and hise enemyes be2 
seaterid; and thei that haten hym fle fro 
his face. As smoke failith, faile thei; as3 
wax fletith fro the face of fier, so perische 
symneris fro the face of God. And iust4 
men eete, and make* fulli ioye in the si3t 
of God; and delite thei in gladnesse. 
Synge 3e to God, seie 3e salin to his name; 5 
make 3e weie to hym, that stieth on the 
goyng doun, the Lord zs name to! hym. 
Make 3e fulli ioye in his si3t, enemyes 


90Om.n. ‘theerthe zen. 8Om.n. ta weye 4. 


Pand her. duek. 'Om. plures. took not 1. took not awei. Lire here. vu. § Om. plures. * Om. ceteri pre- 


teru. XOm.ELP, YOm. plures. 
x Om. ceteri preter v. 
f victoric in orgunis s. 


W song, and is profecie of Cristis incarnacion Ky. ¥ Jeroms u. Om. ceteri. 
*haue he 1. in kis. > make their, Chath 3ouer. 4 Om. plures. © Om. plures. 
& Om. h. 4} of song plures. Om. vr. 1 Om.s. * make their. ofc. 


LXVII. 6—22. 


his si3te, thei shul be disturbid fro the 
6face of hym, fader of faderles childer; and 
7domes man of widewis. God in his holi 
place ; God that maketh to indwelle of o 
maner in an hous. The whiche bringeth 
out the bounden men in strengthe; also 
hem that terren, that dwellen in sepulcris. 
8God, whan thou shuldest gon out in the 
si3te of thi puple; whan thou shuldist 
9 passe in desert. The erthe is moued, for- 
sothe heuenus droppeden doun fro the 
face of God of Synay ; fro the face of God 
io of Irael. Wilful reyn thou shalt don a- 
part, God, to thi eritage, and it is feblid; 
11thou forsotle madist it parfit. Thi bestis 
shul duelle in it, God; thou madist redy 
12in thi swetnesse to the pore. The Lord 
shal 3iuen a" woord; to the euangeliseris 
13in myche vertue. The king of vertues 
of the looued of the looued; and to deuyde 
l4spoilis to the fairnesse of the hous. If 
jee slepe betweY the mene sortis, 3ee 
shul be the siluerne pennes of the cul- 
uer; and the hindermor of his ryg, in 
15 the palenesse of gold. Whil the heueneli 
denydeth kingis vp on it with snow3, thei 
i¢shul ben maad whit in Selmon; the hil 
of God a fat hil. The hil cruddid to- 
17 gidere a fat hil; wherto ouer trowe 3ee, 
the hillis cruddid togidere? The hil in 
whicheY is* wel plesid to God to duelle 
in it; forsothe the Lord shal dwelle in to 
isthe ende. The charis of God manyfold 
in ten thousendys, that ben thousandus of 
men gladende ; the Lord in hem, in Syna, 
i9in holi. Thou ste3edest vp in to hei3te, 
thou toke caitifte ; thou toke to 3iftis in 
men. Forsothe men not beleeuende; to 
20dwellen in the Lord God. Blessid the 
Lord fro dai to eche dai; welsum wei shal 
make to vs the GodY of oure helthe 
213iueres. Oure God the God of makinge 
men saf; and of the Lord Lord the going 
22out of deth. Neuerthelatere God shal 
to-breke the hedis of his enemys; the top 
of the her of men goende in ther giltus. 


u Om. an. 


min L. 


» middis s. myddil peple w. 


PSALMS. 


¥ betwen zu passim. betwene 4 ef H passim. 


° among L. 
5K 2 


803 


schulen be disturblid fro the face of hym, 
which ts the fadir of fadirles and modirles¢ 
children; and the iuge of widewis. God7 
ts in his hooli place ; God that makith men 
of o wille to dwelle in the hous. Which 
leedith out bi strengthe hem that ben 
boundun ; in lijk maner hem that maken 
scharp, that dwellen in sepulcris. God,8 
whanne thou 3edist out in the si3t of thi 
puple ; whanne thou passidist forth in the 
desert. The erthe was moued, for henenes9 
droppiden doun fro the face of God of 
Synay ; fro the face of God of Israel. God, 10 
thou schalt departe wilful reyn to thin 
eritage, and it was sijk; but thou madist 
it parfit. Thi beestis schulen dwelle ther-1!! 
ynne; God, thou hast maad redi in thi 
swetnesse to the pore man. The Lord1l2 
schal 3yue a word; to hem that prechen 
the gospel with myche vertu. The kyngis 13 
of vertues ben maad loued of the derlyng ; 
and to the fairnesse of the hous to departe 
spuylis. If3e slepen among™ the myddil" 14 
of® eritagis?, the fetheris of the culuer 
ben of siluer; and the hyndrere thingis of 
the bak therof ben in the shynyng of 
gold. While the king of heuene demeth 15 
kyngis theronne, thei schulen be maad 
whitter then snow in Selmon; the hille 16 
of God ts a fat hille. The cruddid hil zs 
a fat hil; wherto bileuen 3e falsli, cruddid 17 
hillis? The hil in which it plesith wel 
God to dwelle ther ynne; for the Lord 
schal dwelle ‘in to the ende. The chare1s 
of God is manyfoold with ten thousynde, 
a thousynde of hein that ben glad; the 
Lord was in hem, in Syna, in the hooli. 
Thou stiedist an hij, thou tokist caitiftee ; 19 
thou resseyuedist 3iftis among men. For 
whi thou tokist hem that bileueden not; 
for to dwelle in the Lord God. Blessid 20 
be the Lord ech dai; the God of oure 
heelthis schal make an eesie wei to vs. 
Oure God 7s God to make men saaf; and 21 
outgoyng fro deeth zs of the Lord God. 
Netheles God schal breke the heedis of22 


wthe whiche x. *it a. Y Lord a. 


P sortis ether erilagis plures. 4 with outen s. 


804 


23 The Lord seide, Fro Basan I shal al turne; 
I shal al turne in to the depthe of the se. 
24 That inwet? be thi foot in blood ; the tunge 
of thin houndis fro hym of the enemys. 
25 'Thei se3en thin ingoingus, God ; the in- 
going of my God, my king, that is in 
ssholy. The princis camen befor ioyned 
with the singeris; in the myddel of the 
27 ;unge wymmen tympanystris. In chirchis 
blisseth to God; to the Lord of the wellis 
os of Irael. There Beniamyn, the 3ungling; 
in the exces of mynde. Princis of Juda 
the dukis of hem; princis of Zabulon, 
29 the princis of Neptalym. Send, God, to 
thi vertue; conferme thou, God, that that 
30thou hast wro3t in vs. Fro thi temple, 
that is in Jerusalem; to thee offre shul 
sikingus 3iftis. Blame the wilde bestis of 
the reed, the gedering togidere of bolis in 
the kiyn of puplis; that thei close out 
hem that ben prened bi siluer. Scatere 
32thou the Jentilis that wiln batailis, ther 
shul come messageris fro Egipt; Ethiope 
shal befor come his hondis to God. 
33 Reumes of the erthe, singeth to God ; 
doth salm to the Lord. Doth salm to 
31God; that ste3eth vp vpon heuene ‘of 
heuene® at the est. Lo! he shal 3iue to 
3shis vois vois of vertue; 3iueth glorie to 
God vp on Irael; his grete doing and 
3éhis vertue in cloudis. Merueilous God 
in his halewis, God of Irael, he shal 
3iue vertue, and strengthe of hys puple; 
blessid be God. 


PSALM LXVIII. 


In to the end, for hem that shuln ben 
al chaungid, to hym Dauid. 


2 God, mac me saf; for watris camen in 
3vnto my soule. I am inficchid in the 


Z inweetid aH. 


: jot plures, Sthat1. tOm. plures. Om. plures. V¥Om. plures. 
a Om. ceteri preter vu. 


m.1. % roves M. roosis for sonys v. 


PSALMS. 


LXVIL. 23-——LXVIII. 3. 


hise enemyes; the cop of the heere of 
hem that goen in her trespassis. The23 
Lord seide, Y schal turne fro Basan; Y 
schal turne in to the depthe of the see. 
That thi foot be deppid in blood; the tunge 24 
of thi doggis be dippid in blood of the 
enemyes of hym. God, thei sien thi go-25 
yngis yn; the goyngis yn of my God, of 
my king, which is in the hooli. Prynces26 
ioyned with syngeris camen bifore; in the 
myddil' of 3onge dameselis syngynge in 
tympans. In chirchis blesse 3e God; blesse 27 
3e the Lord fro the wellis of Israel. There28 
Beniamyn, a 3onge man; in the rauysch- 
yng of mynde. The princis of Juda weren 
the duykis of hem; the princis of Zabulon, 
the princis of Neptalym. God, comaunde29 
thon to thi vertu; God, conferme thou this 
thing, which’ thou hast wrou3t in ys. 
Fro thi temple, which is in Jerusalem ; 30 
kyngis schulen offre 3iftis to thee. Blames 
thou the wielde beestis of thet reheed, the 
gaderyng togidere of bolis is among the 
kien of puplis; that thei exclude hein that 
ben preuyd bi siluer. Distrie thou folkis 
that wolen batels, legatis schulen come fro 32 
Egipt; Ethiopie schal come bifore the 
hondis therof to God. Rewmes of the"33 
erthe, synge 3e to God; seie 3e salm to the 
Lord. Singe 3e to God; that stiede on thes: 
heuene of heuene at the cest. Lo! he 
schal 3yue to his vois the vois of vertu, 
3yue 3e glorie to God on Israel; his greet 35 
doyng and his vertu zs in the cloudis. 
God 7s wondirful in hise seyntis; God of36 
Israel, he schal 3yue vertu, and strengthe 
to his puple; blessid be God. 


PSALM LXVIII. 

The title of the’ eizte and sixtithe salm.1 
‘In Ebreu thus’, To the* victorie, on 
the’ roosis* of Dauid. ‘In Jerom thus, 
To the ouercomer, for the sones of 
Danid. 

God, make thou me saaf; for watrise 


‘entriden til to” my soule. I am set ins 


a Om. 4H. 


Ww On. cetert preter vu. X Om.cix. 
b han entrid vnto 1. entriden to s. 


LXVIII. 4—~20. 


slim of the depthe; and ther is not sub- 
staunce. I cam in to the hei3te of the 
4se; and tempest drenchide me doun. I 
trauailide criende, horse? ben maad my 
chekis; myn e3en failiden, whil I hope 
sin to my God. Thei ben multeplied ouer 
the heris of myn hed; that hatiden me 
withoute cause. Thei ben coumfortid 
that pursueden me myn enemys vnri3t- 
wisly ; the® thingis that I raneshide not, 
cthanne I pa3ide ont. God, thou knowest 
myn vnwisdam; and my giltis fro thee 
zben not hid. Lord, shame thei not in 
me that abiden thee, Lord@; Lord of 
vertues. Be thei not confoundid vp on me, 
sthat sechen thee; God of Irael. For I 
suffride for thee repref; shenshipe co- 
guerede my face. Straunge I am maad 
to my brethern; and a pilgrim to the 
1osonus of my modir. For looue of thin 
hous eet me; and repreues of men re- 
upreuende thee fallen vp on me. And I 
couerede in fasting my soul; and it is 
12maad in to repref to me. And I putte 
my clothing an heire; and J am maad to 
isthem in toa parable. Ajen me speeken 
that seeten in the 3ate; and in me diden 
1asalm, that drunke win. I forsothe made 
myn orisoun to thee, Lord; tyme is of 
thi wel plesing, God. In the multitude 
of thi mercy ful out here me; in the 
istreuthe of thin helthe. Tac me out fro 
clei, that I be not inficchid; delinere me 
fro hem that hatiden me, and fro the 
i¢depthis of watris. Drenche me not doun 
the tempest of water; ne soupe me awei 
the depthe, ne threste vp on me the pit 
i7his mouth. Ful out here me, Lord, for 
benyngne is thi mercy; after the multi- 
tude of thi merci doingus behoold in me. 
is And ne turne thou awei thi face fro thi 
child; for I am trublid, swiftli ful out 
ighere thou me. lLoke in to my soule, 
and deliuere it; for myn enemys tac out 
zome. Thou knowist my repref; and my 


b hoos AE sec. m. H. 


¢ ther is no substaunee 1. 


& depnesse 1. depthis Fkus. 4 fro me s. 


PSALMS. 


¢ Om. au. 


4 horse cprsi. hoorse EGILOPRUX. 


805 


the sliym of the depthe; and ‘substaunce 
is not®. JI cam in to the depthe of the 
see; and the tempest drenchide me. I4 
traueilide criynge, my cheekis weren maad 
hoose?; myn i3en failiden, the while Y 
hope® in to my God. Thei that hatidens 
me with out cause; weren multiplied aboue 
the heeris of myn heed. Myn enemyes 
that pursueden me vniustli weren coum- 
fortid ; Y paiede thanne tho thingis, 
whiche Y rauischide not. God, thoné 
knowist myn vnkunnyng; and my tres- 
passis ben not hid fro thee. Lord, Lord7 
of vertues; thei, that abiden thee, be not 
aschamed in me. God of Israel; thei, that 
seken thee, be not schent on me. Fors 
Y suffride schenschipe for thee; schame 
hilide my face. I am maad a straunger9 
to my britheren; and a pilgryme to the 
sones of my modir. For the feruent lone io 
of thin hous eet me; and the schenschipis 
of men seiynge schenschipis to thee fellen 
onme. And Y hilide my soule with fast-11 
yng; and it was maad in to schenschip to 
me. And Y puttide my cloth an heire;12 
and Y am maad to hem in to a parable. 
Thei, that saten in the 3ate, spaken a3ens 13 
me; and thei, that drunken wien, sungen 
of me. But Lord, Y dresse* my preier 14 
to thee; God, Y abide the tyme of good 
plesaunce. Here thou mef in the multi- 
tude of thi mercy; in the treuthe of thin 
heelthe. Delyuer thou me fro the cley, is 
that Y be not faste set in; delyuere thon 
me fro hem that haten me, and fro depthes 
of watris. The tempest of watir drenche 16 
not me, nethir the depthe swolowe me; 
nethir the pit make streit his mouth on 
me. Lord, here thou me, for thi merci is17 
benygne; vp the multitude of thi merci- 
ful doyngis biholde thou in tome. Andis 
turne not awei thi face fro thi child; 
for Y am in tribulacioun, here thou me 
swiftli. 3yue thou tente to my soule, and is 
delyuer thou it; for myn enemyes de- 


4 Om. ce pr.m. 


ehopide 1. ¢¢ dressidecpw. fOm.s. 


806 


2iconfusioun, and my shame. In thi si3te 
* ben alle that trublen me; repref abod 
myn herte, and wrecchidnesse. And f[ 
suffride that summan togidere shulde 
with sorewen, and ther was not; and 
that shulde coumforten, and I fond not. 
22 And thei 3euen in to my mete galle; and 
in my thrist thei drunke ie with eisel. 
23 Be mad the bord of hem in to a grene 
befor them; and in to 3eldingus ajeen, 
2iand in to sclaunder. Be al to-derened 
the e3en of hem, that thei see not; and 
the rig of hem euermor crooke thon in. 
25 Heeld out vp on hem thi wrathe; and the 
26 wodnesse of thi wrathe al take them. Be 
maad the dwelling of hem desert; and in 
the tabernaclis of hem be ther not that 
27indwelle. For whom thou hast sinyten, 
thei han pursued; and vp on the sorewe 
asof my woundis thei addeden. Put to 
wickidnesse yp on the wickidnesse® of 
hem; and entre thei not in to thi rijtwis- 
gg9nesse. Be thei do awei fro the boc of 
lyueres ; and with ri3twis men be thei not 
30 write. I am a pore man, and sorewende ; 
3ithin helthe, God, vndertoc me. I shal 
preise the naine of God with song; and 
32magnefien hym in preising. And he shal 
plese to God vp on a newe calf; hornes 
33 bringende forth, and cles. See the pore, 
and glade thei; secheth God, and 3oure 
3isoule shal liue. For the Lord ful out 
herde the pore; and despiside not hise 
3s bounden. Preise hym, heuenes and erthe; 
the se, and alle crepende thingis in it. 
36 For God shal make saf Sion; and the 
cites of Jude shul be bild vp. And thei 
shuln induelle there ; and bi eritage thei 
s7sliul purchasen it. And the sed of his 
seruauns shal welden it ; and that loouen 
his name, shul duelle in it. 


PSALMS. 


LXVIII. 21—37. 


lyuere thou me. Thou knowist my20 
schenschip, and my dispysyng; and my 
schame. Alle that troblen me ben in thiai 
si3t ; myn herte abood schendschipe, and 
wretchidnesse. And Y abood hym, that 
was sory togidere, and noon was'; and 
that schulde coumforte*, and Y foond not. 
And thei 3auen galle in to my meete ; and ge 
in iny thirst thei 3auen ‘to me! drinke with 
vynegre. The boord of hem be maad bi-23 
fore hem in to a snare; and in to 3eld- 
yngis, and into sclaundir. Her izen beas 
maad derk, that thei se not; and euere 
bouwe doun the bak of hem. Schede out 2s 
thin ire on hem; and the strong veniaunce 
of thin ire take hem. The habitacioun of 26 
hem be maad forsakun ; and ‘noon be™ that 
dwelle in the tabernaclis of hem. For thei27 
pursueden hym", whom thou hast smyte"; 
and thei addiden® on the sorewe of my 
woundis. Adde thou wickidnesse on the2s 
wickidnesse of hem; and entre thei not in 
to thi ri3twisnesseP. Be thei don awei fro 29 
the book of lyuynge men ; and be thei not 
writun with iust men. I am pore and30 
sorewful ; God, thin heelthe took me yp. 
I schal herye the name of God with song; 31 
and Y schal magnefye hym in‘ heriyng. 
And it schal plese God more than a newe32 
calf; bryngynge forth hornes and clees. 
Pore men se, and bet glad ; seke 3e God, 33 
and 3oure soule schal lyue. For the Lord 34 
herde pore men; and® dispiside not hise 
boundun men. Heuenes and erthe, heryet 3s 
hyin; the se, and alle crepynge bestis in’ 
tho, herye hym. For God schal makes 
saaf Syon ; and the citees of Juda schulen 
be bildid. And thei schulen dwelle there; 
and thei schulen gete it bi eritage. And37 
the seed of hise sernauntis schal haue it 
in possessioun; and thei that louen his 
name, schulen dwelle ther ynne. 


e wickenessis e. wickidnessis ai, 


i ther was 1. k coumforte me x. 


P riztfulnesse cefer?. with1. be thei 1. 


Ime tos. 
® and he 1. 


m be ther noon 1. 
' herie 3e s. 


n hem s. 
Vin erthe s. 


© addiden to 1. 


Deus, in adiu- 
torium meum. 


In te, Domine, 
speraui. 


LXIX. 1-—LXX. 9. 


PSALM LXIX. 


1In to the ende, the salm of Dauid, in 
remembring that the Lord made hym 
Sef. 7 
2 God, in to myn helpe tac heed; Lord, 
3to helpen me heeje thou. Be thei con- 
foundid, and shameli drede thei; that 
asechen my soule. Be thei turned aweif 
hindward, and waxe thei ashamed; that 
wiln to me euelis. Be thei turned awei 
anoon and shamende; that seyn to me, 
5 Weu! wen! Ful out ioje thei, and glad 
in thee, alle that sechen thee; and sey thei 
euermor, The Lord be magnefied, that 
sloouen thi 3iuere of helthe. I forsothe 
a nedi and a pore man am; God, helpe 
thou me. Myn helpere and my deli- 
uerere, be thou; Lord, ne tarie thou. 


PSALM LXX. 


1The salm of Dauid is of the sonys of 
Jonadab, and of the rathere caitiues. 

In thee, Lord, I hopide ; I shal not be 
2confoundid in to with oute ende; im thi 
rijtwisnesse deliuere me, and tac me awel. 
Bowe thou in to me thin ere; and saue 
3me. Be thou to me in to God defendere, 
and in to a strengthid place; that thou 
make me saaf. For my fastnesse; and my 
arefute thou art. My God, tac me awey fro 
the hond of the synuere; and fro the hond 
of thedoere a3en the lawe, and of the wicke. 
5For thou art my pacience, Lord ; Lord, 
“myn hope fro my 3outhe. In thee I am 
G6confermed fro the wombe ; fro the wombe 
7of my moder thou art my defendere. In 
thee my synging euermor; as wndring I 
am maad to manye; and thou a strong 
Shelpere. Be fulfild my mouth with preis- 
ing, that I synge thi glorie; al dai thi 
ogretnesse. Ne throwe thou me aferr in 


PSALMS. 


807 


PSALM LXIX. 


The titil of the” nyne and sixtithe salm.\ 
To the* victorie ‘of Dauid’, ‘to hane 
mynde*+. 

God, biholde thou in to myn heelp;2 
Lord, hast thou to helpe me. Be thei3 
schent, and aschamed; that seken my lijf. 
Be thei turned a bak; and schame thei, 
that wolen yuels to me. Be thei turned 4 
awei anoon, and schame thei; that seien 
to me, Wel! wel! Alle men that sekens 
thee, make? fulli ioie, and be glad in thee; 
and thei that louen thin heelthe, seie? 
euere, The Lord be magnyfied. Forsothes 
Yam a nedi man, and pore; God, helpe 
thou me. Thou art myn helper and my 
delyuerere®; Lord, tarye thou not. 


PSALM LXX. 
The seuentithe salm hath no title®, 1 


Lord, Y hopide in thee, be Y not schent 
with outen ende; in thi rijtwisnessefe 
delyuere thou me, and rauysche me® out. 
Bowe doun thin eere to me; and make 
me saaf. Be thou to me in to God a de-s 
fendere; and in to a strengthid place, that 
thou make me saaf. For thou art my 
stidefastnesse; and my refuit. My God,4 
delyuere thou me fro the hoond of the 
synner; and fro the hoond of a man 
doynge a3ens the lawe, and of the® wickid 
man. For thou, Lord, art my pacience ;5 
Lord, thou art myn hope fro my 3ongthe. 
In thee Y am confermydi fro the wombe ; 6 
thou art my defendere fro the wombe of 
my modir. My syngyng @s euere in thee 37 
Yam maad as a greet wonder to many 
men; and thou art a strong helpere. Mys 
mouth be fillid with heriyng; that Y synge 


f Om. c. 


x Om. Dwx. y Om. R. 


w Om. plures. 
e defendere s. 


b seie thei K. 


z Om. 8. to haue mynde on Dauith o. 
d From xo. The lex. salm. plures. The titil of the lxx. salm. a. The 


a make thei 1. 


lxx. salm of Dauid, whanne he was in persecucioun of Absolon, his sone. R. The lxa. salm hath no tytle in 


Ebren:, nether in Jeroms translacioun. v. 


f riz3tfulnesse FGIKL. 


& Om. Fr. h the hond of the s. 


i confermyd, that is, defendid K teat, confermyd, that is, not halewid but defendid v marg. 


t -f gles. Da- 
uith made this 
salm, whanne 
he was in the 
persecucioun of 
Absolon, his 
sone. Lire here, 
cet alii, 


808 


time of elde ; whan shal faile my vertue, 
ione forsake thou me. For myn enemys 
seiden to me; and thei that kepten my 
11 soule counseil maden in to oon. Seiende, 
God hath forsaken hym, pursueth, and 
taketh hym; for ther is not that take 
wawey. God, ne be thou longid awei fro 
ine; my God, in to myn helpe behold. 
13 Be thei confoundid, and faile thei, bac- 
bitende to my soule; be thei couered 
with confusioun and shame, that sechen 
ueuelis to me. I forsothe euermor shal 
hopen; and casten to vp on alle thi 
ispreising. My mouth shal befor telle thi 
riz3twisnesse; al dai thin helthe 3iuere. 
For I knew not lettrure, I shal gon in 
isto the poweris of the Lord; Lord, I shal 
17han mynde of thi ri3twisnesse alone. God, 
thou hast ta3t me fro my 3outhe, and vn 
to now; I shal telle forth thi merueilis. 
is And vn to the laste age, and the laste 
ende of it; God, ne forsake thou me. To 
the time that I telle out thin arm; to alle 
ieneracioun that is to come. Thi power, 
igand thi riz3twisnesse, God, vn to the he- 
jeste grete thingus that thou didist ; 
20 God, who is lic to thee? Hou grete thou 
hast shewid to me tribulaciouns, manye 
and euele, and al turned thou hast quyk- 
ened me; and fro the depnessis of the 
21 erthe eft thou hast a3een bro3te me. Thou 
hast multiplied thi grete doing; and al 
22turned thou hast coumfortid me. For 
and I shal knouleche to thee in vesselis 
of salm thi treuthe, God ; I shal do salm 
to thee in an harpe, thou holi of Irael. 
23 Ful out shul io3e my lippis, whan I shal 
synge to thee; and my soule, that thou 
24a3een bo3tist. But and my tunge al dai 
shal sweteli thenke thi ri3twisnesse ; whan 
confoundid and shamefastly aferd shul 
ben that sechen euelis to me. 


k Om.s. leelde x. oaldnesse K. ™ ther is x. 


but bi Goddis reuelacion K text. v marg. P unto I. 


t depnesse 1, 


PSALMS. 


0 adde to x, 


LXX. 10——24. 


thi glorie, al dai thi greetnesse. Castes 
thou not awei me in the* tyme of eld- 
nesse!; whanne my vertu failith, forsake 
thou not me. For myn enemyes seiden of 10 
me; and thei that kepten my lif maden 
counsel togidere. Seiynge, God hath for-11 
sake hym; pursue 3e, and take hym ; for 
noon is™ that schal delyuere. God, be12 
thou not maad afer fro me; my God, 
biholde thou in to myn help. Men thatis 
bacbiten my soule, be schent, and faite 
thei; and be thei hilid with schenschip 
and schame, that seken yuels to me. Butis 
Y schal hope euere; and Y schal adde® 
enere ouer al thi preising. Mi mouth is 
schal telle thi ri3tfulnesse; al dai thin 
helthe. For ¥Y knewe not lettrure®°, Y schal 
entre in to the poweres of the Lord ; Lord, 16 
Y schal bithenke on thi ri3tfulnesse aloone. 
God, thou hast tau3t me fro my 3ongthe, 17 
and ‘til toP now; Y schal telle out thi 
merueilis. And til in to ‘the eldnesse418 
and the laste age; God, forsake thou not 
me. Til Y telle thin arm’; to eche genera- 
cioun, that schal come. Zl Y felle thi 
my3t, and thi ri3tfulnesse, God, til in to19 
the hijzeste grete dedis which® thou hast 
do; God, who is lijk thee? Hou grete20 
tribulaciouns many and yuele hast thou 
schewid to me; and thou conuertid hast 
quykenyd me, and hast eft brou3t me a3en 
fro the depthist of erthe. Thou hast mul-2! 
tiplied thi greet doyng ; and thou conuertid 
hast coumfortid me. For whi and Y schal 22 
knowleche to thee, thou God, thi treuthe 
in the instrumentis of salm; Y schal synge 
in an harpe to thee, that art the hooli of 
Israel. Mi lippis schulen make fulli ioye, 23 
whanne Y schal synge to thee; and my 
soule, which thou ajen bou3tist. But and 24 
my tunge schal thenke al dai on thi ri3t- 
fulnesse; whanne thei schulen be schent 
and aschamed, that seken yuelis to me. 


© lettrure, that is, not bi mannes teching, 
9 eelde 1. ooldnesse K. ¥ arm or power 1. § that 1. 


Deus, iudi- 
cium, 


LXXI. 1—16, 


PSALM LXXI. 


1 In to Salomon. 


2 God, thi dom 3if to the king; and thi 
rijtwysnesse to the sone of the king. To 
demen thi puple® in rij3twisnesse ; and thi 

3pore men in dom. Vndertake mounteynes 
pes to the puple; and the hillis ri3twis- 

anesse. He shal deme the pore men of 
the puple ; and saf he shal make the sonus 
of pore men; and he shal meke the false 
sacusere. And he shal abide stille with 
the sunne, and befor the mone; in ienera- 
ecioun and in to ieneracioun. He shal 
come doun as reyn in to flees; and as 
7drope falling droppende vp on erthe®. In 
his da3is shal springe ri3twisnesse, and 
aboundaunce of pes; to the time that the 
smone be don awei. And he shal lord- 
shipen fro the se vn to the se; and fro 
the flod vnto the termes of the round- 
gnesse of londis. Beforn hym shu falle 
doun Ethiopis ; and his enemys the erthe 
ioshul licken. The kingis of Tharsis and 
ylis shuln offre deserued 3iftys; the kingus 
of Arabs and Saba free 3iftis shul bringe 
i1to. And ther shuln honouren hym alle 
kingus; alle Jentilis shul serue to hym. 
i2For he shal deliuere the pore fro the 
my3ti; and the pore to whom was not 
izan helpere. He shal spare to the pore, 
and to the helpeles; and the soulis of 
i4pore men he shal make saaf. Fro vsuris 
and wickidnesse he shal a3een bie the 
soulis of hem; and wrshipeful the name 
isof hem beforn hym. And he shal lyue, 
and ther shal be 3iue to hym of the! gold 
of Arabie; and thei shul honouren of it, 
1¢al day thei shul blisse to hym. Ther shal 
be fastnyng in the erthe, in the he3est 
thingis of mounteynes; ther* shal ben 
aboue hauncyd aboue Liban his fruyt; 


8 puplis 4. 


uOm. plures. v Om. c. 
Salamon; in Jerom thus, In to Salamon. v. 
and eende Kv. 

4 place CEKLMPS. 


VOL. II. 


PSALMS. 


h the erthe a£1. 


809 


PSALM LXXI. 


The title of the" oon and seuentithe salm’.\ 
‘To Salomon”. 


God, 3yue* thi doom to the king; and2 
thi ri3tfulnesse to the sone of a king. To 
deme thi puple in ri3tfulnesse; and thi 
pore men in doom. Mounteyns resseyue3 
pees to the puple; and litle hillis resseyue 
ri3tfulnesse. He schal deme the pore men4 
of the puple, and he schal make saaf the 
sones of pore men; and he schal make low 
the false chalengere. And he schal dwelles 
with the sunne, and bifore the mooneY; in 
generacioun and in to generacioun. Hee 
schal come doun as reyn in to a flees; and 
as goteris droppinge on the erthe. Ri3t-7 
fulnesse schal come forth in hise dayes, 
and the aboundaunce of pees’; til the moone _ 
be takun awei. And he schal be lord fros 
the see ‘til to* the see; and fro the flood 
til to the endis of the world. Ethiopiens9 
schulen falle doun bifore hym; and hise 
eneinyes” schulen licke the erthe. The io 
kyngis of Tarsis and ilis schulen offre 
jiftis ; the kyngis of Arabie and of Saba 
schulen brynge 3iftis. And alle kyngisii 
schulen worschipe hym; alle folkis schulen 
serue hym. For he schal delyuer a pore i2 
man fro the mi3ti; and a pore man to 
whom was? noon helpere. He schal spare 13 
a pore man and nedi; and he schal make 
saaf the soulis of pore men. He schali4 
a3en bie the sonlis of hem fro vsuris, and° 
wickidnesse ; and the name of hem 7s 
onourable bifor hym. And he schal lyue, is 
and me schal 3yue to hym of the gold of 
Arabie ; and thei schulen euere worschipe 
of hym, al dai thei schulen blesse hym. 
Stidefastnesse schal be in the erthe, in thej¢ 
hizeste places’ of mounteyns; the frnyt 
therof schal be enhaunsid aboue the Liban; 
and thei schulen blosme fro the citee, as 


iQm. a. * thei. 


w To Salomon, profecie of Crist, verrei king K. In Ebreu thus, To 
X3yue thou 1. 
z pees, that is, gostli pees K text V marg. 


¥Y moone, that is, withoute bigynnyng 
a unto I. > ther was 1. © and fro 1. 


5.1L 


Quam bonus. 


810 


and thei shul floure fro cite, as the hei of 
izerthe!. Be his name blissid in to worldis; 
beforn the sunne abit stille his name. 
And ther shul be blissid in hyin alle the 
linagis of erthe™; alle Jentilis shul mag- 
isnefien hym. Blissid be the Lord God of 
Irael; that doth merueilous thingus alone. 
19 And blessid be the name of his maieste 
in to withoute ende; and ther shal be 
fulfild with his maieste al erthe; be it 
do, be it do. 
2 Ther faileden preisingis, or ympnes 
of Dauid, sone" of Jesse. 


PSALM LXNII. 
1 The salm of Asaf: 


Hou good the God of Irael; to hem 
2that ben in® ri3t herte. My feet for- 
sothe ben almost moued; almost ben held 
3doun? my goingis. For J enuyede vp on 
wicke men; seande the pes of synneres. 
4¥For ther is not respit to the deth of hem ; 
sand fastnyng in the wounde of hem. In 
the trauaile of men thei ben not; and 
with men thei shul not be scourgid. 
6Therfore heeld hem pride; thei ben co- 
uered with wickidnesse, and with ther 
7vupitousnesse. Wente forth as of tal3 the 
wickidnesse of hem ; thei ouerpassiden in 
sto lust of herte. Thei tho3ten and speeke 
shreudenesse ; wickidnesse in heijte they 
gspeeken. Thei putten4 in to heuene ther 
mouth; and the tunge of hem wente in™ 
inthe erthe. Therfore shal ben conuertid 
my puple heer; and fulle da3is shul be 
ii founden in hem. And thei seiden, Hou 
wot God; and whether is ther kunyng 
i2in heiz3te? Lo! tho synneres, and* abun- 
dende in the world ; weldeden richessis. 
13 And I seide, Thanne with oute cause I 
iustefiede myn herte; and wesh among in- 
14nocentis nyn hondis. And I was scourgid 
al dai; and my chastising in the moru- 


1 the erthe arm. ™ the erthe au. © the sone A. 

€ dwellith a. 
k Om. a. 
© and with.1. 
V marg. 


f And blessid cikuvx sec. m. 


P Om. xi. 
r Om. plures. % and 11. 


PSALMS. 


° of 4. 


fof 1. 
10m. a. The salin of Asaph; in Jerome thus, the soug of Asaph. tu. ™Om.1. 


LXXI. 17-—-LXXII. 14. 


the hey of erthe doith. His name be17 
blessid in to worldis; his name dwelle® 
bifore the sunne. And all the lynagis 
of erthe schulen be blessid in hym; alle 
folkis schulen magnyfie hym. Blessid be1s 
the Lord God of Israel; which aloone 
makith inerueiylis. Blessid be the name 19 
of his maieste with outen ende; and al 
erthe schal be fillid with his maieste ; 
be it doon, be it doon. 

‘The preieris of Dauid, the® sone of 20 
Ysay, ben endidi. 


PSALM LXXII. 


The ‘title of the* two and seuentithe salm.\ 
‘The salin of Asaph't. 

God of Israel zs ful good; to hem that 
ben of ri3tful herte. But my feet weren2 
moued almeest; my steppis weren sched 
out alineest. For Y louede fernentli ons 
wickid men; seynge the pees of synneris. 
For biholdyng is not to the deth of hem; 4 
and stidefastnesse in the sikenesse of hem. 
Thei ben not in the™ travel of men; ands 
thei schulen not be betun with men. Ther-6 
fore pride helde™ hem; thei weren hilid 
with her wickidnesse and° vnfeithfulnesse. 
The wickidnesse of hem cam forth as of P7 
fatnesse; thei 3eden in to desire of herte. 
Thei thou3ten and spaken weiwardnesse; 8 
thei spaken wickidnesse1 an hi3. Thei9 
puttiden her mouth in to heuene; and her 
tunge passide in erthe. Therfor my puple 10 
schal be conuertid here; and fulle daies 
schulen be foundun in hem. And theiit 
seiden, How woot God; and whether 
kunnyng is an heize, ‘that ts, in heuene™? 
Lo! thilke synneris and hauynge aboun- 12 
dance in the world; helden richessis. And 13 
Y seide, Therfor without cause Y iustifiede 
myn herte; and* waischide myn hoondis 
among innocentis. And Y was betun alia 
dai; and my chastisyng*t was in morutidis. 


Pout 4. 4 puttiden an. Tinto 4. § in 4. 


i fillid n1kLMoPRUVWxbik. ‘i Om. Ga. 
. hath holde 1. 


bh Om. Fw. 


4 wickidnesse, that is, blasfemye a3ens God K text. blasfemyng a3ens God 
t chastisyngis s. : 





+ 4 glos. Asaph 
mde this salm, 

to schewe the ‘ 
goodnesse of 
Goddis puruy- 
aunce. A et alii. 








q LXXI. 15——LXXIII. 3. 


istidis: If I seide, I shal telle thus; lo! 
the nacioun' of thi sones I haue repreued. 
16 I eymede, that I shulde knowe that; tra- 
i7uaile is befor me. To the tyine that I 
entre in to the seyntuarie of God; and 
vnderstonde in the laste thingus of hem. 
1s Neuerthelatere for treccheries thou leidist 
to hem; thou threwe hem doun, whil thei 
i9weren rerid*° vp. What maner be thei 
maad iu to desolacioun; feerli thei faileden, 
20thei pershiden for ther wickidnesse. As 
a sweuene of risende men; Lord, in thi 
cite the ymage of hem to no3t thou shalt 
21bringe. For enflaumed is myn herte, and 
22my reenys ben al chaungid; and I to 
23no03t am bro3t, and I wiste not. As a 
beeste I am maad anent thee; and I euer- 
2i4mor with thee. Thou heelde my ri3t 
hond, and in thi wil thou bro3tist me 
thennys; and with glorie thou vndertoke 
25me. What forsothe is to me in heuene; 
and of thee what wolde I vp on erthe ? 
26 My flesh failide, and myn herte ; God of 
myn herte, and my part, God in to with- 
270ute ende. For loo! that longen hem- 
self awei fro thee shu] pershen; thou 
lostist alle that don fornycacioun fro thee. 
28 To me forsothe to cleue to God is good ; 
to’ putten in the Lord God myn hope. 
That I telle out alle thi prechingus; in the 
3atis of the do3ter of Sion. 


PSALM LXXIII. 


1 The vnderstonding of Asaf: 

Vi quid, Deus. Wherto, God, hast thou put abac in to 
the ende ; thi wodnesse wrathide vpon the 
2shep of thi leswe? Myndeful be thou of 
thi congregacioun ; that thou weldedest 
fro the begynnyng. Thou hast a3een bo3t 
the 3erde of thin eritage; the hil of Sion 
3in whiche thou dwellidist in” it. Rere 
vp thin hondis in to the pridis of hem in 
to the ende; hou grete thingis wariede 


t nacionns 4H. 


8 desolacioun, ether discoumfort c et plures. ¥ weiwardnesse a. 


ts, bi v. z wilful 1. 


¢ Om. ux pr.m.i. 4 Om. plures. 


u arered EM. 


a synne. Lire here. v marg. ‘a Om. CDEFGUKLMOPQRSWXbi. 
© Asaph, of the caitifte of Babilon. x. 


PSALMS. 811 


If Y seide, Y schal telle thus; lo! Y re-1s 
preuede the nacioun of thi sones. I gess-16 
ide, that Y schulde knowe this; trauel is 
bifore me. Til Y entre in to the seyn-17 
tuarie of God; and vndurstonde in the last 
thingis of hem. Netheles for gilis thonts 
hast put to hem; thou castidist hem doun, 
while thei weren reisid. Hou ben thei 
maad into desolacioun"; thei failiden so- 
deynli, thei perischiden for her wickid- 
nesse’. As the dreem of men that risen 329 
Lord, thou schalt dryue” her ymage to 
nou3t in thi citee. For myn herte is en-21 
flaumed, and my reynes ben chaungid; and 22 
Yam dryuun to nou3t, and Y wiste not. 
As a werk beeste Y am maad at* thee; and 23 
Y am euere with thee. Thou heldist my 21 
rij3thond, and in thi wille thou leddist me 
forth ; and with glorie thou tokist me vp. 
For whi what is to me in heuene; and2s 
what wolde Y of thee on erthe? Mize 
fleische and myn herte failide; God of 
myn herte, and my part 7s God withouten 
ende. For lo! thei that drawen awei fer 27 
hem silf fro thee, ‘biY deedli? synne*, schu- 
len perische ; thou hast lost alle men that 
doen fornycacioun fro thee. But it is good 28 
to me to cleue to God; and to sette myn 
hope in the Lord God. That Y telle alle 
thi prechyngis; in the 3atis of the dou3ter 
of ¢ Syon. 


PSALM LXXIII. 
The title of the’ thre and seuentithe sali. 
The lernyng of Asaph. 

God, whi hast thou put awei in to the 
ende; thi strong veniaunce is wrooth on 
the scheep of thi leesewe? Be thouz 
myndeful of thi gadering togidere ; which 
thou haddist in possessioun fro the bigyn- 
nyng. Thou a3enbou3tist the 3erde of thin 
eritage ; the hille of Syon in which thou 
dwellidist ther ynne. Reise thin hondis3 
in to the prides of hem‘; hou grete thingis 


vand 4 sec.m. Wiginc. 


Yy that 
b preisyngis 1. 
f hem into the ende x sec. m. 


walto-dryue 1. * anentis 1. 


512 


812 


4the enemy in the holi. And thei glo- 
rieden that hateden thee; in the myddel 
30f thi solempnete. hei putten* ther 
tocnes, tocnes; and thei knewe not as in 
sthe going out vpon the he3ist. As in a 
woode of trees with axis thei heewen 
doun the jatis of it in to itself; in axis 
zand hachet thei threwen it doun. Thei 
brenden vp with fyr thi seintuarie; in 
the erthe thei defouleden the tabernacle 
sof thi name. Thei seiden in ther herte, 
the kinrede of hem togidere; T’o resten 
make wee alle the feste da3is of God fro 
sthe erthe. Oure signes wee han not secn, 
now ther is not a profete; and he shal 
ioknowen vs no more. Hou longe, God, 
the enemye shal repreue ? the aduersarie 
vnlefulli taketh thi name in to the ende. 
11 Wherto turnest thou awei thin hond, and 
thi rijthond fro thi myddel bosum in to 
12the ende? God forsothe oure king befor 
worldis; wro3te helthe in the myddes of 
isertheY. Thou hast confermed in thi vertu 
these; thou al to-trublidist the hedis of 
isdragounys* in watris. Thou hast to- 
broke the hedis of the dragoun; thou 
hast 3iuen hym mete to the puplis of 
15 Ethiope. Thou hast wastid the wellis, 
and the stremes; thou hast dried the 
16flodis of Etham. Thin is the dai, and 
thin is the ny3t; thou forgedist the 
i;morutyd and the sunne. Thou madest 
alle the termes of erthe?; somer and ver 
istime, thou formedist hem. Myndeful be 
thou of this, the enemy putte repref to 
the Lord; and the vnwise puple terrede 
i9thi name. Ne take thou to bestis soulis 
knoulechende to thee; and the soulis of 
thi pore men ne for3ete thou in to the 
soende. Behold in to thi testament; for 
thei ben fulfild, that ben dercned of erthe; 
21bi the housis of wickidnessis. Ne be 
turned awei the meke maad confundid ; 
the pore and the helpelis shul preise thi 


x puttiden an, Y the erthe g. 


& baners x. i Om. vx. 
no profete 1. q thin a. 


W the dragouns FL. 
tyme i sec. m. 


K to be signes 1. 
r Om. 1. 
x dragous kK, 


s Om. v. 


PSALMS. 


™ with a J. 


¥Y to ber. Om. kK. 


LXXIII. 4—21. 


the enemy dide wickidli in the hooli. And« 
thei that hatiden thee; hadden glorie in 
the myddis of thi solempnete. Thei set-5 
tiden her signes’, ‘ethir baneris', signes* 
on the hizeste, as in the outgoing; and 
thei knewen not. As in a wode of treese 
thei heweden doun with axis the 3atis 
therof in to it silf; thei castiden doun it 
with an ax, and a™ brood fallinge ax. 
Thei brenten with fier thi seyntuarie; thei7 
defouliden the tabernacle of thi name in 
erthe. The kynrede of hem seiden togidere 8 
in her herte; Make we alle the feest daies 
of God to ceesse fro® the® erthe. We han9 
not seyn oure signes, now ‘no profete is?; 
and he schal no more knowe vs. God, hou 10 
long schal the enemye seie dispit? the 
aduersarie territh to ire thi name in to 
the ende. Whi turnest thou awei thin 
hoond, and* ‘to drawe out’ thi ri3thond 
fro the myddis of thi bosum, til in‘ to the 
ende? Forsothe God oure kyng_ bifore 12 
worldis; wrou3te heelthe in the mydis of 
erthe. Thou madist sad the see bi" thiis 
vertu; thou hast troblidY the heedis of 
dragouns” in watris. Thou hast broke 
the heedis of ‘the dragoun*; thou hast 
3oue hym toY mete to the puplis of E- 
thiopiens. Thou hast broke wellis, and 15 
strondis; thou madist drie the flodis of 
Ethan. The dai is thin, and the nizt is16 
thin; thou madist the moreutid and the 
sunne. Thou madist alle the endis of 17 
erthe?; somer and veer tyme*, thou fourm- 
edist tho. Be thou myndeful of this thing, 18 
the enemye hath seid schenschip to the 
Lord; and the vnwijs puple hath excitid 
to ire thi name. Bitake thou not to beestis 19 
men knoulechenge to thee; and for3ete thou 
not in to the ende the soulis of thi pore 
men. Biholde in to thi testament; for thei 20 
that ben maad derk of erthe, ben fillid 
with the housis of wickidnessis. A meke 2i 
man be not turned awei maad aschamed ; 


Zz dragoun 4. 8 the erthe azn. 

nins, 

t Om. kK. uint. 
2 the erthe K. 


° Om. plures. P ther is 
¥ troublid togidere x. 
a tyme, either springinge 





—ae 


LXXIII. 22——LXXV, 4. 


2zzname. Rys vp, God, deme thou thi 
cause, myndeful be thou of thi reprenes 
of hem; that of the vnwise man ben al 

23day. Ne forj3ete thou the voisis of thin 
enemys; the pride of hem that hateden 
thee, ste3eth vp euermor. 


PSALM LXXIV. 


1 In to the ende, the salm of the song of 
Asaf, ne destro3e thou, or shend. 


Confitebimur 2 


Wee shul knouleche to thee, God, we 
tibi, Deus. 


shul knouleche; and inwardli wee shul 
3clepe thi name. Wee shul telle thi mer- 
ueilis, whan I shal take tyme; I ri3twis- 
anessis shal deme. Molten is the erthe, 
and alle that dwellen in it; I confermede 
sthe pileeris of it. I seide to the wicke> 
men, Wileth not wickidli don; and to 
the gilteris, Ne wileth not reren* vp the 
shorn. Wileth not reren up in to hei3te 
3oure horn; wileth not speken ajen God 
;7wickidnesse. For nouther fro the est, 
sne fro the west, ne fro* desert hillis ; for 
9God is the domysman. This he mekith, 
and this he enhaunceth ; for the chalis 
in the hond of the Lord of cler wyn, ful 
of mengd. And he bowide® in of that 
in to that; nerthelatere the drestef of 
it is not wastid out, ther shul drinke of 
ioit alle the synneres of erthe®. I forsothe 
shal telle out in to the world; I shal 
usynge to God of Jacob. And alle the 
hornes of synneres I shal to-breke; and 
the" hornes of the ri3twis shul ben en- 
hauncid. 


PSALM LXXV. 


1In to the ende, in ditees, the song to the’ 
Assiries, the salm of Asaf: 


Knowen is God in Jewerie; in Irael 
3gret is his name. And maad is in pes his 
4place ; and his duelling in Sion. There 


Notus in Ju- 9 
dea, 


b wickid 1. 40m. 4. 


1Om. a. 


© areren Ell. 


b gchenschipis, ether ypbreidyngis c et plures. shenshipis v. ) 
i anyntishid, either maad lesse i see. m. 


f Om. pv. g Om. c. hhis a, 


PSALMS. 


e bowith an. 


81% 


a pore man and nedi schulen herie thi 
name. God, rise vp, deme thou thi cause ; 22 
be thou myndeful of thin vpbreidyngis?, of 
tho that ben al dai of the vnwise man. 
For3ete thou not the voices of thin ene-23 
myes; the pride of hem that haten thee, 
stieth euere. 


PSALM LXXIV. 


The title of the* foure and seuentithe \ 
salm. ‘To the ouercomere; leese thou 
not the saln of the song of Asaph*. 


God, we schulen*® knouleche to thee, ‘we2 
schulen knoulechef; and® we schulen in- 
wardli clepe thi name. We schulen telle3 
thi merueilis; whanne Y schal take tyme, 
Y schal deme ri3tfulnesses. The erthe is4 
meltid, and alle that duellen ther ynne; Y 
confermede the pileris therof. I seide tos 
wickid men, Nyle 3e do wickidli; and to 
trespassouris, Nyle 3e enhaunce the horn. 
Nyle 3e reise an hij 3oure horn; nyle 3e6 
speke wickidnesse a3ens God. For nether7 
fro the eest, nethir fro the west, nethir 
fro desert hillis; for God is the inge. He? 
mekith this’ man, and enhaunsith hym; 
for a cuppe of cleene wyn ful of meddling 
ts in the hoond of the Lord. And he bow- 
ide of this in to that; netheles the drast 
therof is not anyntischid‘'; alle synneris 
of erthe schulen drinke therof. Forsothe 10 
Y schal telle in to the world; Y schal 
synge to Gad of Jacob. And Y schal breke 11 
alle the hornes of synneris; and the hornes 
of the iust man schulen be enhaunsid. 


PSALM LXXV. 

The title of the fyue and seuentithe sal. 
To the vietorie in orguns, ‘the salu 
of ™ the" song of Asaph°t. 

God is knowun in Judee; his name is2 
greet in Israel. And his place is maad in3 
pees; and his dwellyng zs in Syon. Ther4 


t d glos. Asaph 
bi the spiritt 

of prophecie 
made this salme 
of the comyng 
of the caitifte 
of Babilone,and 
of the ending 
ther of. Lire 
here, K. 


fdrestis aen. Stheerthe x. Om. a. 
¢ Om. corgHogbi. 4Om. 4. © Om. v. 
k Om. plures. 10m. k. 


™ Om. osxi. 2 Om. K. © Asaph, bifor seynge the turment of Juda to come bi Sennacherib. kK. 


Voce mea ad 
Dominum. 


814 


he al to-brac poweris; bowe, sheld, swerd, 
sand bataile. Thou art liz3tende merueil- 
ously fro the enere lastende mounteynes ; 
calle the ynwise men ben disturbid in herte. 
Thei sleepen* ther slep aslep, and no 
thing founden ; alle the men of richessis 
zin ther hondis. Fro thi blamyng, God 
of Jacob; nappeden that stie3eden vp 
ghorsis!. Ferful thou art, and who shal 
withstonde to thee? fro thanne thi 
gwrathe. Fro heuene herd thou hast 
maad dom; the erthe tremblide, and 
iorestide. Whan God shulde rise vp™ ‘In 
to" dom; that he make saaf alle® the de- 
1 bonere of erthe?. For the thenking of a 
man shal knouleche to thee ; and the re- 
likis of a1 thenking’a feste dai shul do 
12 to thee. Vouwith, and jeldeth to the Lord 
3oure God; alle 3ee that in his enuyroun 
isbringen to 3iftis. To the ferful, and to 
hym that doth awey the spirit of princis ; 
to the ferful anent alle kingus" of erthe’. 


PSALM LXXVI. 


1 In to the ende, for Iditym, the salm 
tot Asaf. 


2 In my vois to the Lord I criede, in my 
vois to God; and he tooc heede to me. 
3 In the dai off my tribulacioun God I so3te 
out with myn hondis; the ny3t forn a3en 
hym, aud I am not deseyued. My soule 
4forsoc to be coumfortid ; myndeful I was 
of God, and dilitide, and am enhauntid’, 
sand my spirit failide. Myn ezen looke 
‘to fornY wakingus; I am disturbid”, and 
oI spac not. I tho3te olde da3is ; and euere 
jlastende 3eeris in myude I hadde. And 
I sweteli tho3te in the ny3t with myn 
herte; and I was enhauntid*, and ‘I 
sswepteY my spirit. Whether in to with- 
oute ende God shal throwe aferr; or he 
shall not lei to, that he be more plesid 
93it? Or in to the ende his mercy he shal 


Kk slepten azn. Thorsc. ™Omc. 
kingis zen. 8 the erthe pr. m. t of an. 
*enhauncyd au. Y Y wepte 4. swepte n. 


P sleep, that is, weren deed v marg. 
"Om. ors. ¥ Om. a. Zo the victorie x. 


HKLMOPQRSUVWXbi. 2 Om. 1, 


PSALMS. 


Dinc. 
u enhauncid 4H. 


a ferdful rikKLMvxb. 
w Om. A. 
aende, that is, holliche. Lire here. vu. 


LXXV. 5 —LXXVI. 9. 


he brak poweris; bowe, scheeld, swerd, 
and batel. And thou, God, liz3tnest won-; 
dirfuli fro enerlastynge hillis; alle vnwise ¢ 
men of herte weren troblid. hei slepten 
her sleep? ; and alle men founden no thing 
of richessis in her hondis. Thei that sti-, 
eden on horsis; slepten for thi blamyng, 
thou God of Jacob. Thou art feerful4, and g 
who schal ajenstonde thee? fro that tyme 
thin ire. Fro heuene thou madist doomy 
herd; the erthe tremblide, and restide. 
Whanne God roos vp in to doom; to make jo 
saaf al the’ mylde men of erthe. For they, 
thou3t of man schal knouleche to thee; and 
the relifs®’ of thou3t schulen make a feeste 
dai to thee. Make 3e a vow, and 3elde 3e jo 
to 3oure Lord God; alle that bringen 3iftis 
in the cumpas of it. To God ferdful, and 13 
to him that takith awei the spirit of 
prynces; to the ferdful at the kyngis of 
erthe. 


PSALM LXXVI. 


The ‘title of the* sixte and seuentithe , 
slum". ‘To the ouercomere’ on Ydi- 
tum, ‘the salm of Asaph’ +. 


With®* my vois Y criede to the Lord; , 
with* my vois to God, and he 3af tent to 
me. In the dai of my tribulacioun Y sou3te 
God with myn hondis ; in the ny3t ‘to foreY 
hym, and Y am not disseyued. Mi soule 
forsook tobe coumfortid ; Y was myndeful , 
of God, and Y delitide, and Y was exer- 
cisid ; and my spirit failide. Myn izen bi-, 
fore took wakyngis; Y was disturblid, and 
Y? spak not. I thou3te elde daies; and Y, 
hadde in mynde euerlastinge 3eeris. And, 
Y thou3te in the ny3t with myn herte ; and 
Y was exercisid, and Y clensid my spirit. 
Whether God schal caste awei with outen g 
ende; ether schal he not lei to, that he 
be more plesid 3it? Ethir schal he kitteg 
awei his merci into the ende*; fro genera- 


°o Om. c. athe 4H. * the 


w distourblid u. 


P the erthe 4&H. 
V before 4, 


T On. 1. 
w Bi coecorarsuvwb. 


t Om. a. 
Y toward cDEFG 


8 leuyngis I. 
x bis. 


+ Gostli this 
salme mai be 
expowned of 
ech feithful 
comynte, ether 
singuler per- 
sone, wich is 
delyuered bi 
God wondir- 
fulli fro greet 
turment, tem- 
poral ether 
goostli, and for 
this is stired 
deuoutli to the 
herijng of God. 
Lire here. x. 


Attendite, po- 
pule. 


LXXVI. 1O—LXXVII. 5. 


kutte awey ; fro ieneracioun in to ienera- 
locioun? Or God shal for3ete to han merci; 
or he shal withholden in his wrathe his 
limercies ? And I seide, Now I haue be- 
gunne; this chaunging of the ri3thalf of 
lzthe heje. I was myndeful of the werkis 
of the Lord; for I shal be myndeful fro 
i3the begyunyng of thi merueilis. And I 
shal sweteli thenke in alle thi werkis; 
and in thi findingis I shal ben enhauntid?. 
14 God, iu the holi thi wey; who gret God 
15as oure God? thou art God, that dost 
merueilis. Knowen thou hast maad in 
16 puplis thi vertu; thou hast ajeen bo3t in 
thin arm thi puple, the sones of Jacob 
17and of Joseph. Ther han seen thee wa- 
tris, God, ther han seen thee watris, 
and thei dredden; and disturbid ben the 
igdepnessis. The multitude of the soun of 
watris; a vois 3euen the cloudis. Forsothe 
igthin arwis passeden thur3; the vois of 
thi thunder in a whel. Thi shynyngus 
lijteden to the roundnesse of the erthe; 
it is togidere moued; and the erthe togi- 
20dere tremblide. In the se thi weye; and 
thi sties in manye watris; and thi steppis 
21shul not be knowen. Thou bro3tist out 
as shep thi puple; in the hond of Moises 
and Aaron®. 


PSALM LXXVII. 
I The vnderstonding of Asaf. 


Taketh tente, my puple, to my lawe ; 
inwardli bowith j3oure ere in to the 
2woordis of my mouth. I shul opene in 
parablis my mouth; I shal speke propo- 
3siciouns fro the begynnyng. Hon grete 
thingis wee han herd, and han knowe 
4them; and oure fadris tolden to vs. Thei 
ben not hid fro ther sones; in an other 
ieneracioun. Tellende’ the preisingus of 
the Lord, and his vertues; and his mer- 
sueilis, that he dide. And he rerede wit- 
nessing in Jacob; and lawe he putte in 


2enhaunced un. > thundris a. 


» God hize s. 
& schewiden 1. 


cons. 


h Om. F prom. + On. A. 


PSALMS. 


- ueilis. 


d exercised, ether oecupied c et plures. 
k bowe 3e x. 


815 


cioun in to generacioun? Ethir schal God 10 
for3ete to do mercy ; ethir schal he with- 
holde his mercies in his ire? And Y seide,11 
Now Y bigan; this 7s the chaunging of the 
ri3thond of ‘the hize God». I hadde mynde !2 
on the werkis of the Lord; for Y schal 
haue mynde fro the bigynnyng of thi mer- 
And Y schal thenke in® alle thils 
werkis; and Y schal be occupied in thi 
fyndyngis. God, thi weie was in the*hooli; 14 
what God 7s greet as oure God? thon artis 
God, that doist merueilis. Thou madist 
thi vertu knowun among puplis; thou1s 
aenbou3tist in thi arm thi puple, the sones 
of Jacob and of Joseph. God, watris sien 17 
thee, watris sien thee, and dredden; and 
depthis® of watris weren disturblid. The ts 
multitude of the soun of watris; cloudis 
jauen vois. For whi thin arewis passen; the 19 
vois of thi thundir was in af wheel. Thi 
lij3tnyngis schyneden® to the world; the 
erthe was moued, and tremblid. Thi weie 20 
in the see, and thi pathis in many watris ; 
and thi steppis schulen not be knowun. 
Thou leddist forth thi puple as scheep; in2! 
the hond of Moyses and of ® Aaron. 


PSALM LXXVII. 
The ‘title of the’ seuene and seuentithe 
sala. The lernyng of Asapht. 

Mi puple, perseyue 3e my lawe; bowe* 
3oure eere in to the wordis of my mouth. 
I schal opene my mouth in parablis; Y2 
schal speke perfite resouns fro the bigyn- 
nyng. Hon grete thingis han we herd,3 
aud we han knowe tho; and oure fadris 
telden to vs. Tho ben not hid fro thea 
sones of hem; in anothir generacioun. And 
thei telden the heriyngis of the Lord, and 
the vertues of hym; and hise merueilis, 
whyche he dide. And he reiside witness-5 
yng in Jacob; and he settide lawe in Is- 


cof Aaron &. 4 Tellith a. 


€ depnesse a. fthe a pr.m. 


+ Aglos. Asaph 
made this saline 
to shewe bi 
scriptures and 
oolde stories, 
that the rewme 
of Israel per- 
teynede to Da- 
uid and to hise 
eris, bi Goddis 
chesing. Lire 
here. Ke 


816 


Irael. Hou grete thingis he sente to 
oure fadris, to make thoo thingus knowe 
¢to ther sones; that the tother ieneracioun 
knowe. The sonus, that shul be born, 
and risen out; shul tellen out to ther 
ysones. That thei putte in God ther hope, 
and thei forjete not the werkis of God ; 
gand his hestis thei out seche. Lest thei 
be maad as ther fadris ; a shreude ienera- 
cioun and a terrende out. A ieneracioun 
that dresside not his herte; and his spirit 
gis not take with God. The sones of Ef- 
fraym lokende in, and sendende® a bowe; 
1oben turned in the dai of bataile. Thei 
kepten not the testament of God; and in 
uhis lawe thei wolden not go. And thei 
for3eten his benefetis ; and his merueylis, 
12that he shewide to them. Befor the fa- 
dris of hem he dide merueilis in the loud 
130f Egipt; in the feld of Tafneos. He 
betwen vp brac the se, and thur3 bro3te 
them; and sette the watris as in a botel. 
14 And he ladde hem thennes in the cloude 
of the day; and al ny3t in the li3tnyngf 
1sof fyr. He betwe brac the ston in wil- 
dernesse ; and watride hem as in a myche 
16deep water. And he bro3te out water of 
the ston; and he ladde out watris as 
17flodis. And thei leide to 3it to synnen 
to hym; in to wrathe thei stiriden the 
18 he3e, in vnwatri place. And thei tempt- 
eden God in ther hertis; that thei aske 
i9metis to ther soulis. And euele thei 
speken of God ; thei seiden, Whether God 
shal moun make redi a bord in desert ? 
20 For he smot the ston, and ther floweden 
watris ; and the stremes maden to flowen. 
Whether and bred he shal moun 3iue; 
210r greithen a bord to his puple? Ther- 
fore the Lord herde, and lafte of; and 
fyr is tend up in Jacob; and wrathe is 
22stejed vp in Irael. For thei leeneden 
not in God; ne hopiden in his helthe 
233iuere. And he sente to the cloudes fro 
aboue; and the jatis of heuene he openede. 


® senden c. sendinge 4En. 


\serche 1. 


r min. ™ wolden not 1. 
t and ins. 


° 7t, and 1, 
™ nether thei 1, 


PSALMS. 


LX XVII. 6—23. 


rael. Hou grete thingis comaundide he to 
oure fadris, to make tho knowun to her 
sones; that another generacioun knowe.¢ 
Sones, that schulen be born, and schulen 
rise vp; schulen telle out to her sones. 
That thei sette her hope in God, and for-7 
3ete not the werkis of God ; and that thei 
seke! hise comaundementis. Lest thei bes 
maad a schrewid generacivun; and ter- 
rynge to wraththe, as the fadris of hem. 
A generacioun that dresside not his herte ; 
and his spirit was not bileued with™ God. 
The sones of Effraym, bendinge a bouwe9 
and sendynge arowis; weren turned in the 
dai of bate]. Thei kepten not the testa-10 
ment of God; and thei nolden" go in his 
lawe. And thei forj3aten hise benefices; and 11 
hise merueils, whiche he schewide to hem. 
He dide merueils bifore the fadris of hem 12 
in the loond of Egipt; in the feeld of 
Taphneos. He brak the see, and ledde13 
hem thoron ; and° he ordeynede the watris 
as in a bouge. And he ledde hem forth 14 
in? a cloude of the dai; and al ni3t in the 
lijtnyng of fier. He brak a stoon in de-15 
seert; and he 3af watir to hem as in a 
myche depthe. And he ledde watir out of 16 
the stoon; and he ledde forth watris as 
floodis. And thei ‘leiden to4 3it to doi7 
synne a3ens hym; thei excitiden hije™ God 
in to ire®, int a place with out water. And 18 
thei temptiden God in her hertis; that 
thei axiden meetis to her lyues. And thei 19 
spaken yuel of God; thei seiden, Whether 
God may make redi a bord in desert? For 20 
he smoot a stoon, and watris flowiden ; and 
streemys 3eden out in aboundaunce. Whe- 
ther also he may 3yue breed; ether make 
redi a bord to his puple? Therfor thea 
Lord herde, and delaiede; and fier was 
kindelid in Jacob, and the ire of God 
stiede on Israel. For thei bileueden not 22 
in God; nether® hopiden in his heelthe. 
And he comaundide to the cloudis aboue ; 23 
and he openyde the jatis of heuene. And a4 


f lickenes 4. ly3tnesse H. 


Pasini. 4 puttiden 1. the hizer. % the ire xz, 





LXAXVIIL. 24—42. 


24And he reynede to hem manna to ete; 
and the bred of heuene he 3af to hem. 
25 Man eet the bred of aungelis; metis he 
26sente to hem in abundaunce. He trans- 
latide the south fro heuene; and bro3te 
27in his vertue the southerne wynd. And 
he reynede vp on hem flesh as powder ; 
and federed volatilis, as the grauel of the 
esse. And thei fellen in the myddil of the 
tentys of hem; aboute ther tabernaclis. 
29 And thei eeten, and ben fulfild ful myche, 
3oand ther desir he bro3te to them; thei 
ben not bigilid fro ther desir. 3it their 
3rmetis weren in the mouth’ of hem; and 
the wrathe of God steizide vp upon hem. 
And he slo3 the fatte men of hem; and 
32the chosen men of Irae] he lettide. In 
alle these thingus thei synneden 3it; and 
33thei leeueden not in his merueilis. And 
the da3is of hem failiden in vanytee ; and 
34 the 3eeris of hem in withhee3ing. Whan 
he shulde slen hem, thei so3ten him ; and 
weren turned a3een, and the morutid thei 
35camen to hym. And thei be remembrid, 
for God is ther helpere; and the heje 
36God is the ajeenbiere of hem. And thei 
looueden hym in ther month; and in 
37 ther tunge thei lieden tohym. The herte 
forsothe of hem was not ri3t with hym; 
ne feithful thei ben had in the testament 
ssof hym. He forsothe is merciful, and 
plesid shal be maad to the synnes of 
hem; and he shal not scatere them. 
And he abundede, that he turne awei 
his wrathe ; and he teende not vp al his 
39 wrathe. And he recordide, for thei ben 
flesh ; a spirit goende, and not turnende 
4oazeen. Hou ofte sithis thei out terreden 
hym in desert; in to wrathe thei to- 
4istiriden hym in vnwatri place. And 
thei ben turned, and tempteden God; 
and holy Irael thei ful out terreden. 
42Thei ben not recordid of his hond; the 
dai that he bo3te hem fro the hond of 


& mouthis 4H. 


x and also 1. 
d and thei 1. 


vhatheet1. ¥ Om.1 
bleddes. ¢and thei 1x. 
h Om. 1s. 


VOL. II. 


PSALMS. 


y Om. 1. 
¢.-he that is hizest 1. 


817 


he reynede to hem manna for to eete ; and 
he 3af to hem breed of heuene. Man eet¥ 25 
the” breed of aungels; he sent to hem 
meetis in aboundance. He turnede ouere 26 
the south wynde fro henene; and he 
brou3te in bi his vertu the weste wynde. 
And he reynede fleischis as dust on hem ; 27 
and* ‘he reinedeY volatils fethered, as the 
grauel of the see. And tho felden doun2s 
in the myddis of her castels; aboute the 
tabernaclis of hem. And thei eeten, and 29 
weren fillid greetli, and he brou3te her 
desire to hem; thei weren not defraudid 30 
of her desier. 3it her metis weren in her 
mouth; and the ire? of God stiede on hem. 31 
And he killide the fatte* men of hem ; and 
he lettide® the chosene men of Israel. Inse 
alle these thingis thei synneden 3it; and° 
bileuede not in the merueils of God. And 33 
the daies of hem failiden in vanytee ; and 
the 3eeris of hem faleden with haste. 
Whanne he killide hem, thei sou3ten hym ; 34 
and? turneden ajen, and eerli thei camen 
to hym. And thei bithou3ten, that God is 35 
the helper of hem; and ‘the hi3 God* is 
the a3enbier of hem. And thei louedens3e 
hym in her mouth; and with her tunge 
thei lieden to hym. Forsothe the herte of37 
hem was not ri3tful with hym ; nethir thei 
weren had feithful in his testament. Butss 
he is merciful, and he schal be maad mer- 
ciful to the synnes of hem; and he schal 
not destrie hem. And! he dide greetli, to 
turne awei his yre; and he kyndelide not 
al his ire. And he bithou3te, that thei ben 39 
fleische; a spirit goynge, and not turnynge 
aj3en. Hou oft maden thei hym wrooth in 40 
desert; thei stireden hym in to ire in a 
place with out watir. And thei weren 41 
turned, and& temptiden God; and thei 
wraththiden the hooli of Israel. Thei bi- 42 
thou3ten not on his hond; in the dai in 
the which he a3en bou3te hem fro the 
hond of the trobler. As he settide hise 43 


h mercyable 4H. 


a fatte, that is, riche men v. 
€ and thei cbEFGIKLOSVb. 


2 wraththe 1. 
f But 1. 


5M 


818 


athe trublere. As he putte in Egipt his 
signes; and his wunders in the feld of 
44Thaneos. And he turnede into blod the 
flodis of hem; and ther cisternes, that 
4sthei shulde not drinke. And he sente in 
to them au hound fle3e, and it eet hem; 
and a frogge', and it destrojede them. 
46 And he 3af to rust the frutis of hem ; and 
47 ther trauailis to a locust. And he slo3 in 
hail the vynes of hem; and ther‘ mul- 
asberie trees in frost. And he toc to hail 
the bestis of hem; and the possessioun of 
aghem to fyr. He sente in to them the 
wrathe of his indignacioun; indigna- 
cioun'’, and wrathe, and tribulacionn, in 
sosendingus bi euele aungelis. A weie he 
made to the path of his wrathe, and he 
sparide not fro the deth of the lynes of 
hem; and the bestis of hem in deth he 
51 closide. And he smot alle the firste goten 
in the lond of Egipt; the first frutis of 
alle the trauayle of hem in the taber- 
senaclis™” of Cham. And he toc awei as 
shep his puple; and he ladde hem thur3 
ssas a floc in desert. And he ladde hem 
thennys in hope, and thei dreden not; 
and the enemys of hem the se couerede. 
54 And he inladde thein in to the hil of his 
halewing ; the hil that his rijthond pur- 
chaside. And he caste out fro the face 
of hem Jentilis ; and bi lot he deuydede 
to hem the erthe in the litle corde of 
ssdeling. Aud he made to dwelle in the 
tabernaclis of hem the linagis® of Irael. 
56 And thei tempteden, and sharpli terreden 
the he3e God ; and his witnessingus thei 
57 kepten not. And they turneden themself 
awei, and thei kepten not couenaunt ; as 
ther fadris ben turned in to a shreude 
ssbowe. In to wrathe thei stiriden hym in 
ther hillis; and in ther grauen thingis to 
sgielouste™ thei terreden hym. God herde, 
and despiside; and to no3t he bro3te gretli 
60 Irae]. Aud he putte abac the tabernacle 
of Silo; his tabernacle wher he dwelte in 

i frosshe 4. 


Kthe 4. lOm. a. 


i with 1. k with 1. 


1 Om. rKs prem. i. 


P the hei3 1. Gin c sup.ras. E1KLOUV. fin whiche I. 


PSALMS. 


™ tabernacle 4H. 


LXXVII. 43—60. 


signes in Egipt; and hise grete wondris 
in the feeld of Taphneos. And he turnede 44 
the flodis of hem and the reynes of hem 
in to blood; that thei schulden not drynke. 
He sente a fleisch flie in to hem, and it45 
eet hem; and he sente a paddok, and it 
loste hem. And he 3af the fruytis of hem 46 
to rust; and he 3af the trauels of hem to 
locustis. And he killide the vynes of hem 47 
bi’ hail; and the moore trees of hem bi* a! 
frost™. And he bitook the beestis of hem 4s 
to" hail; and the possessioun of hem to fier. 
He sente in to hem the ire of his indigna- 49 
cioun ; indignacioun, and ire, and tribula- 
cioun, sendingis in bi iuel aungels. Heso 
made weie to the path of his ire, and he 
sparide not fro the deth of her lyues; and 
he closide togidere in deth the beestis of 
hem. And he smoot al the first gendrid 5: 
thing in the lond of Egipt; the first 
fruytis of alle the trauel® of hem in the 
tabernaclis of Cham. And he took aweis2 
his puple as scheep; and he ledde hem 
forth as a flok in desert. And he leddess3 
hem forth in hope, and thei dredden not ; 
and the see hilide the enemyes of hem. 
And he bron3te hem in to the hil of his 54 
halewyng; in to the hil which his ri3t- 
hond gat. And he castide out hethene 
men fro the face of hem; and bi lot he 
departide to hem the lond in a cord of 
delyng. And he made the lynagis of Is-55 
rael to dwelle in the tabernaclis of hem. 
And thei temptiden, and wraththiden hei3? 55 
God; and thei kepten not hise witness- 
yngis. And thei turneden awei hem silf, 57 
and thei kepten not couenaunt; as her fa- 
dris weren turned in to a schrewid bouwe. 
Thei stiriden him in to ire in her litle 5s 
hillis; and thei terriden hym to indigna- 
cioun of 1 her grauen ymagis. God herde, 59 
and forsook ; and brouj;te to nou3t Israel 
greetl. And he puttide awei the taber- gq 
nacle of Sylo; his tabernacle where" he 
dwellide among inen. And he bitook the @ 


nlynage 4." the locuste 1. 


m forst CDFHKMQVWXxXb. 


"in to © trauels a. 


| 
| 


| Deus, venerunt 


gentes. 


63 dispiside. 
64 weilid. 


65 not wept. 
66 slepende; as my3ti drunken.of win. And 


ather was not that ‘shulde birie’. 


5in oure cumpas. 


étend' vp as fyr thi jelouste ? 


LXXVII. 61—LXXVIII. 6. 


simen. And he toc into ecaitifte the vertu 


of hem; and the fairnesse of hem in to 


62the hondus of the enemy. And he closide 


in swerd his puple; and his eritage he® 
3unge men? of hem the fyr 
eet; and the maidenes of hem ben not 
The prestis of hem in swerd 
fellen; and the widewis of hem weren 
And the Lord is rerid vp, as 


he smot his enemys in to the hindermor 
partis; euere lasting repref he 3af to 


67them. And he putte abac the tabernacle 


of Josep; and.the linage of Effraym he 


6sches not. But he ches the linage of Juda; 
69 the hil of Sion, that he loouede. 


And he 
bilde vp as vnycorn his holi making; in 
the lond, that he foundede in to worldus. 


70 And he ches Dauid his seruaunt, and he 


bar hym vp fro the flockis of shep; fro 


7\the aftir berende blet he toc hym. To 


fede Jacob his seruaunt; and Irael his 


72eritage. And he fedde hem in the inno- 


cence of his herte; and in the vnder- 
stondingus of ther hondis he ladde hem 
thenes. 


PSALM LXXVIII. 
The salm to Asaf. 


God, Jentilis camen in to thin eritage; 
thei defouleden thin holi temple, thei 
putte’ Jerusalem in to the keping of applis. 


2Thei putted the smyten to deth of thi 


seruauntis, metis to the foulis of heuene; 
flesh of thi seintis to the bestis of erthe™. 


3Thei shadden out the blod of hem, as 


water in the enuyroun of Jerusalem; and 
Wee 
be maad repref to oure ne3heboris ; 
mouwing and scornyng to them, that ben 
Hou longe, Lord, thou 
shalt wrathen in to the ende? shal be 
Heeld out 
thi wrathe in to Jentilis, that han not 
P Om. c. 


© Om. c. 4 puttiden am. 


8 biwepte L. biweiled or wept 1. tButr. 4 But 1 
Y Dauid s. 2 to be meetis1. 2 Om.s. » ther wast. 


PSALMS. 


_as fier ? 


r the erthe 4. 


819 


vertu of hem in to caitiftee; and the fair- 
nesse of hem in to the hondis of the ene- 
mye. And he closide togidere his puple in ¢2 
swerd; and he dispiside his erytage. Fier 63 
eet the 3onge men of hem; and the virgyns 
of hem weren not biweilid’. The prestis 64 
of hem fellen doun bi swerd; and the wi- 
dewis of hem weren not biwept. And thees 
Lord was reisid, as slepynge; as mi3ti 
greetli fillid of wiyn. And he smoot hise 66 
enemyes on the hynderere partis; he 3af 
to hem euerlastyng schenschipe. And hee7 
puttide awei the tabernacle of Joseph; and 
he chees not the lynage of Effraym. Butes 
he chees the lynage of Juda; he chees the 
hil of Syon, which he louede. Andt he ase9 
an vynicorn bildide his hooli place; in the 
lond, which he foundide in to worldis. 
And he chees Dauid his sernaunt, and 70 
took hym vp fro the flockis of scheep; he 
took hym fro bihynde scheep with lam- 
bren. To feed Jacob his seruaunt; and 71 
Israel his eritage. And" he fedde hem in 72 
the innocens of his herte; and he ledde 
hem forth in the vndurstondyngis of his 
hondis. 


PSALM LXXVIII. 

The ‘title of the’ ei3te and seuentithe 1 

salm®, Of * Asaph’ +. 

God, hethene men cam in to thin eri- 
tage; thei defouliden thin hooli temple, 
thei settiden Jerusalem in to the keping 
of applis. Thei settiden the slayn bodies 2 
of thi seruauntis, meetis? to the volatilis 
of heuenes; the fleischis of thi seyntis to 
the beestis of the® erthe. Thei scheddens 
out the blood of hem, as watir in the 
cumpas of Jerusalem; and noon was? that 
biriede. We ben maad schenschipe tos 
oure ueiz3boris; mowynge and scornynge 
to hem, that ben in oure cumpas. Lord,5 
hou longe.schalt thou be wrooth in to 
the ende? schal thi veniaunce be kyndelid 
Schede® out thin ire in to he-6 


s biriede aru. + temptid a. 


v¥Om.a. ¥Om. uprsx. * The salm of c et plures 
¢ Heelde 1. 


5M 2 


t Gostli this 
salm mai be 
expowned, that 
it be the preier 
of hooli chirche 
azenus vnfeith- 
ful men, de- 
fouling chirchis 
and holie places, 
and sleing cris- 
ten puple, and 
destroijng her 
lond. For wich 
thing holi 
chirche in the 
bigynnyng of 
this salm bi- 
weyleth this 
distriyng, and 
the ij. tyme it 
bisecheth de- 
uouteli and 
mekeli for re- 
storing there 
shed out, and 
in biseching 
Goddis riztful- 
nes a3enus vn- 
feithful men, 
and his merci 
anentes feithful 
men, and at the 
laste it thank- 
eth God, in the 
hope of herijng 
there. Lirehere. 
K. 


820 


knowe thee; and in to reumes, that thi 
jname han not inwardli clepid. For thei 
eete Jacob; and hys place thei han maad 
sdesolat. Ne thou shalt han mynde of 
oure olde wickidnessis, soone shul befor 
taken vs thi mercies; for pore men wee 
gben maad ful myche. Help vs, God, 
oure helthe 3inere, and for the glorie of 
thi name, Lord", deliuere vs; and plesid 
be thou to oure synnes for thi name. 
io Lest parauenture thei sey in Jentilis, 
Wher is the God of hem? and yt waxe 
ful knowen in naciouns beforn oure ejen. 
The veniaunce of the blod of thi seruauns, 
that is held out; go in to thi sizte the 
iweiling of the’ gyued men. After the 
mykilnesse of thin arm; weld the sones 
of the don to deth. And 3eld to oure 
nezheboris seuefold in the bosum of hem ; 
the repref of them, that thei repreueden 
isthee, Lord. Wee forsothe thi puple, and 
the shep of thi leswe; shul knouleche 
to thee in to the world. In ieneracioun 
and in to ieneracioun; wee shul telle 
out thi preising. 


PSALM LXXIX. 


1In to the ende, for hem that shul ben 
al holli chaungid, the salm for the 
Assiries ; the witnessing of Asaph. 
Thou that gouernest Irael, tac heed; 
that ledist as a shep Joseph. That sit- 
tist vp on cherubyn; be thou maad open 
3beforn Effraym, Beniamyn, and Manasse. 
Rere vp thi my3t, and cum; that saf thou 
4make vs. God, conuerte thou vs, and 
shen thi face; and wee shul be saf. 
sLord God of vertues; hou longe shalt 
thou wrathe vpon the orisoun of thi 
6seruaunt ? Thou shalt feden vs with 
bred of teris; and drinke thou shalt 3iue 
7to vs in teris in mesure. Thou hast 
put vs” in contradiccioun to oure ne3he- 
boris ; and oure enemys bemoweden vs. 
sGod of vertues, conuerte thou vs; and 


Qui regis Is- 2 
rael, intende. 


uOm. c. 


4 ont, be knowun among naciouns CDEF pr.m. GHKLMOPQRSWxbi. 


plures. » the wilnessing 1U. 


PSALMS. 


Vv thi c. 


i lilies, that is, for Crist and his chirche. k. 


LXXVII, 7-—-LXXIX. 8. 


thene men, that knowen not thee; aud in 
to rewmes, that clepiden not thi name. 
For thei eeten Jacob; and maden desolat7 
his place. Haue thou not mynde on oures 
elde wickidnesses; thi mercies bifore take 
vs soone, for we ben maad pore greetli. 
God, oure heelthe, helpe thou vs, and,9 
Lord, for the glorie of thi name delyuer 
thou vs; and be thou merciful to oure 
synnes for thi name. Lest perauenture 10 
thei seie among hethene men, Where is the 
God of hem? and be he knowun among 
naciouns bifore oure i3en. The veniaunce 
of the blood of thi seruauntis, which is 
sched out’; the weilyng of feterid men 
entre in® thi si3t. WVpef the greetnesse of 11 
thin arm; welde thou the sones of slayn 
men. And 3elde thou to oure neizboris12 
seuenfoold in the bosum of hem; the 
schenschip of hem, which thei diden 
schenschipfuli to thee, thou Lord. Butis 
we that ben thi puple, and the scheep of 
thi leesewe; schulen knouleche to thee in 
to the world. In generacioun and in to 
generacioun; we schulen telle thin heriyng. 


PSALM LXXIX. 


The title of thes nyne and seuentithe 
salm. To victorie ; this salm is witness- 
ing of Asaph for lilies’. 

Thou that gouernest Israel, 3yue tent ;2 
that leedist* forth Joseph as a scheep. 
Thou that sittist on cherubym; be schewid 
bifore Effraym, Beniamyn, and Manasses.3 
Stire thi power, and come thou; that thou 
make vs saaf. God of vertues, turne thou. 
vs; and schewe thi face, and we schulen be 
saaf. Lord God of vertues; hou longes 
schalt thou be wrooth on the preier of thi 
seruaunt? Hou longe schalt thou feedec 
vs with the breed of teeris; and schalt 
3yue drynke to vs with teeris in mesure ? 
Thou hast set vs in to ajenseiyng to oure7 
neiz3boris ; and oure enemyes han scornyde 
vs. God of vertues, turne thou vs; ands 


w Om. 4H. 


eintos. fAftirr. & Om.c et 


K leddist cpo. 


Exultate Deo. 


10 ist it. 
liand it fulfilde the erthe. 


12ceders of God. 


15 beste destrojide it. 


isand visite thou this vyne. 


17 confermed to thee. 


19thou hast confermed to thee. 


20 wardli clepe. 


LXXIX. 9~—LXXX. 7. 


sheu thi face, and wee shul be saf. 
9Thou translatidist a vyne fro Egipt; 
thou castidist* out Jentilis, and plauntid- 
Duke of the weie thou were in 
his si3t ; and thou plauntidist his rootis, 
His shadewe 
and his shrubbis the 
He stra3te out his 
braunchis vnto the se; and vnto the 


couerede hillis; 


13flod hisY railingus. Wherto destro3idist 


thou his wal; and pullen it alle that gon 


14beside the weie? The bor of the wode 


outlawide it; and the singuler wilde 
God of vertues, be 
thou turned, behold fro heuene, and see; 
And parfitli 
mac it, that thi ri3thond plauntide; and 
vp on the sone of man, whom thou hast 
The tend vp thingis 
with fyr, and the vnder doluen; of the 


18 blamyng of thi chere shul pershen. Thin 


hond be don vp on the man of thi ri3t- 
hond ; and yp on the sone of man, whom 
And wee 
goon not awei fro thee; thou shalt 
quykene vs, and thi name wee shul in- 
Lord God of vertues, con- 
uerte vs; and sheu thou thi face, and 
wee shul be saf. 


PSALM LXXX. 


1 In to the ende, for the pressis, sulm™ to 
that Asaf, in the fifte dai of the wtke. 


2 Ful out io3ith to God, oure helpere ; 
3iozeth to God of Jacob. Taketh salm, 
and 3yueth timbre; a merie sautre with 
4an harpe. Trumpeth in the newe mone ; 
with a trumpe in the noble dai of oure 
ssolempnete. For comaundement in Irael 
6it is; and dom to God of Jacob. Witness- 
ing in Joseph he putte it; whan he shulde 
gon out of the lond of Egipt, the tunge 
7that he hadde not knowe, he herde. He* 
turnede awei fro birthenes? his rig; his 


X castist seu. Y is c. 


™ generaciouns FKL. untor. © gaderen 1s. 
83 pressour ELP. tOm.s. Yins. V that 1. 


PSALMS. 


% the salm a. 


821 


schewe thi face, and we schulen be saaf. 
Thou translatidist a vyne fro Egipt; thou9 
castidist out hethene men, and plauntidist 
it. Thou were leeder of the weie in the10 
si3t therof; and thou plauntidist the rootis 
therof, and it fillide the lond. The scha-11 
dewe therof hilide hillis; and the braunchis 
therof jilliden the cedris of God. Itiz 
streijte forth hise siouns til to the see, and 
the generacioun™ ther of ‘til to" the flood. 
Whi hast thou destried the wal therof ;13 
and alle men that goen forth bi the weie 
gaderiden® awei the grapis therof? A14 
boor of the wode distriede it; and a sin- 
guler wielde beeste deuouride it. God of15 
vertues, be thou turned; biholde thou? fro 
heuene, and se, and visite this vyne. And 16 
make thou it perfit, which thi rijthond 
plauntide; and biholde thou on the sone 
of man, which thou hast confermyd to 
thee. Thingis brent with fier, and vndur-17 
myned; schulen perische for the blamyng 
of thi cheer. Thin hond be maad on theis 
man of thi ri3thond; and on the sone of 
man, whom thou hast confermed to thee. 
And we departiden not fro thee; thou1s 
schalt quykene vs, and we schulen in- 
wardli clepe thi name. Lord God of ver-20 
tues, turne thou vs; and schewe thi face, 
and we schulen be saaf. 


PSALM LXXX. 

The title of 4 the ei3tetithe salm. To thei 
ouercomer in’ the pressours’ of 
Asapht. 

Make 3e fulli ioye to God, ouret helpere; 2 
synge 3¢ hertli to God of Jacob. Take 3e3 
a salm, and 3yue 3e a tympan; a myrie 
sautere with an harpe. Blowe 3e with" a4 
trumpe in Neomenyef{; in the noble dai 
of 3oure solempnite. For wlii comaunde-5 
ment is in Israel; and doom zs to God of 
Jacob. He scettide that witnessing ing 
Joseph; whanne he 3ede out of the lond 
of Egipt, he herde a langage, which’ he 
knew not. He turnede a wei his bak fro7 


aBeu. » the birdens nu. 


POm:r @Om.a. 'TOm.cetalii. %ona. 


+ A glos. This 
salm was or- 
deyned to be 
songen in the 
feest of trumpis, 
to doo thank- 
inges to God 
for the fruytis 
of the 3eer 
gederid thanne. 
Lire heere. k. 
= Neomenye ; 
that is, the 
newe mone. Ac. 


Deus stetit in 
sinagoga. 


822 PSALMS. LXXX, 8—LXXXI. 8. 


shondis in the cofin serueden. In tribu- 
lacioun thou inwardli clepidist me, and 
I deliuerede thee; I ful out herde thee in 
the hid place of tempest, I preuede thee® 
ganentis the watir of contradiccioun. Here 
thou, my puple, and I shal witnesse to 
iothee, Irael, if thou shalt here me, ther 
shall. not be in thee a? fresh God; ne 
11 thou? shalt honoure an alien God. I for- 
sothe am the Lord thi God, that ladde 
thee out fro the lond of Egipt; spreed 
abrod thy mouth, and I shal fulfille it. 
122And my puple herde not my vois; and 
i3Irael toc not! heed to me. And I lafte 
them after the desiris of ther herte; thei 
i4shul gon in ther findingus. If my puple 
hadde herde me; Ivael, if in my weies 
ishadde go. For no3t perauenture the 
enemys of hem I shulde han mekid ; and 
ypon men trublende them I shulde han 
isput myn hond. The enemys of the Lord 


lieden to hym; and the time of hem shal \ 


i7ben in to worldis. And he fedde them 
of the tals of whete; and of the ston with 
hony he fulfilde hem. 


PSALM LXXXI. 
1 The salm of Asaf. 


God stod in the synagoge of godis; in 
the myddel forsothe godis he seuereth>. 
2Hou longe 3ee demen wickidnesse; and 
3the facis of synneres 3ee taken? Demeth 
to the nedy, and to the moderles child ; 
4the meke and the pore iustefieth. Taketh 
awei the pore; and the nedi fro the hond 
sof the synnere deliuereth. Thei knewen 
not, ne vnderstoden, in dercnessis thei 
gon; ther shu] be moued alle the founde- 
omens of erthe!. I seide, godis 3ee ben; 
zand the sones of the he3e alle. 3ee for- 
sothe as men shul dien; and as oon of 
gthe princys shul falle. Rys, God, deme 
thou the erthe; for thou shalt eritagen in 
alle Jentilis. 


¢Om.n. ¢@Om. 4. © Om. uw. fnoon sen. 


W thou mes. *Om.c et plures. YOm.s. Z7Oms. 
dandi. ¢€demeth more a promi. tfaceis. Bar 


k the hi3 s. 


birthens; hise hondis serueden in a coffyn. 
In tribulacioun thou inwardli clepidist me, é 
and Y delyuerede thee; Y herde thee in 
the hid place of tempest, Y preuede thee 
at the water of ajenseiyng. My puple,9 
here thou’, and Y schal be witnesse a3ens 
thee; Israel, if thou herist me, a fresche 10 
God schal not be in thee, and thou schalt 
not worschipe an alien god. For Y aml 
thi Lord God, that ladde thee out of the 
lond of Egipt; make large thi mouth, 
and Y schal fille it. And my puple herde 12 
not my vois; and Israel 3aue not tente to 
me. And Y lefte hem aftir the* desiris 13 
of herY herte; thei schulen go in her fynd- 
yngis. If my puple hadde* herde me; if14 


Israel hadde go in my weies. For now3t1s 


in hap Y hadde maad low her enemyes; 
and Y hadde send myn hond on men do- 
ynge tribulacioun tohem. The enemyesié 
of the Lord lieden to hym; and her tyme 
schal be in to worldis. And he fedde17 
hem of* the fatnesse of whete; and he 
fillide hem with hony of the stoon. 


PSALM LXXXI. 
The title of the oon and ei3tetithe salm.\ 
Of Asaph. 

God stood in the synagoge of goddis; 
forsothe’ he demeth® goddis in the myddil. 
Hou longe demen 3e wickidnesse; and2 
taken the faces‘ of synneris? Deme 3e to3 
the nedi man, and to the modirles child; 
iustifie 3e the meke man and _ pore. 
Raueische 3e out a pore man; and de-4 
lyuere 3e thes nedi man fro the hond of 
the synner. Thei knewen not, nethers 
vndirstoden', thei goen in derknessis; alle 
the foundementis of erthe schulen be 
moued. I seide, 3e ben goddis; and alles 
3e ben the sones of hi3* God. But 3e7 
schulen die as men; and 3e schulen falle 
doun as oon of the princis. Ryse, thous 
God, deme thou the erthe; for thou schalt 
haue eritage in alle folkis. 


& Om. 4. bseueride 4. ithe erthe sen. 


awiths. >Om. cet alii. * The salm of cet plures. 
h knowen cDEFHLRs, /vndurstonden cDELRS. 





Deus, quis. 


LXXXI. 1—19. 


PSALM LXXXII. 
1 The song of the salm of Asaf. 


2 God, who shal be lic to thee? ne holde 
thou thi pes, ne be thou refreyned, God. 
3 For loo! thin enemys souneden; and thei 
4that hateden thee beeren vp the hed. Vp 
on thi puple in malice ordeyneden a 
counseyl; and tho3ten a3en thi seyntis. 
5 Thei seiden, Cometh, and scatere wee 
them fro the fole; and be no mor reinem- 
ébrid the name of Irael. For thei tho3ten 
alle of oon inwit; togidere a3en thee a 
7testament disposiden the tabernaclis of 
Ydumees and Ismaelitis. Moab, and Aga- 
srienes, Jebal, and Amon, and Amelech ; 
alienes with the dwelleris of Tyrum. 
9Forsothe Assur cam with them; and 
thei ben maad in to helpe to the sones 
190f Loth. Do to them as to Madian, and 
Cisare; as to Jabyn in the strem of Cison. 
1: Thei pershiden in Endor; thei ben maad 
gas the drit of erthe. Put the princis of 
hem as Oreb and Zeb; and Zebie and 
13Zalmana. Alle the princis of hem, that 
seiden; Bi eritage welde wee the sein- 
14tuarie of God. My God, put hem as a 
wheel; and as stobil befor the face of 
iswind*, As fyr that brenneth a wode ; 
and as flaume togidere brennende hillis. 
i¢So thou shalt pursue them in thi tem- 
pest; and in thi wrathe thou shalt dis- 
i7turbe them. Fulfil the facis of hem with 
shenshipe ; and thei shul seche thi name, 
1s Lord. Waxe they ashamed, and be thei 
al disturbid in to the world of world; 
i9and be thei confoundid and pershe. And 
knowe thei, for name to thee Lord; thou 
onli he3est in al the! erthe. 


k the wynde au. 


1Om.cetalii. ™ Ofthec. 
tOm.ca. 5 to the c et plures. 


0 the song of L. 
tOm.s. tOm.1. 


PSALMS. 


823 


PSALM LXXXII. 


The title of the two and eiztetithe salm.\ 
The song of the salm of ® Asapht. 


God, who schal be lijk thee? God, be? 
thou not stille, nether be thou peesid. 
For lo! thin enemyes sowneden ; and thei3 
that haten® thee reisiden the heed. Thei4 
maden a wickid counsel on thi puple; and 
thei thou3ten azens thi seyntis. Theis 
seiden, Come 3e, and leese we hem fro 
the? folk; and the name of Israel be no 
more hadde in mynde. For thei thou3ten6 
with oon acord; the tabernaclis of Ydu-7 
meys, and men of Ismael disposiden a 
testament togidere a3ens thee. Moab, and 
Agarenus, Jebal, and Amon, and Amalech;s 
alienys with hem that dwellen in Tyre. 
For Assur cometh with hem; thei beng 
maad in to help to the sones of Loth. 
Make thou to hem as to Madian, and1o 
Sisara; as to Jabyn in the stroude of 
Sison. Thei perischiden in Endor; theiu 
weren maad as a toord of erthe. Putte12 
thou the prynces of hem as Oreb and Zeb ; 
and Zebee and Salmana. Alle the princis 
of hem, that seiden; Holde’ we bi eritage 13 
the seyntuarie of God. My God, putte14 
thou hem as a™ whele; and as stobil bifor 
the face of the wynde. As fier that bren-15 
neth a wode; and as flawme brynnynge 
hillis. So thou schalt pursue hem in thiie 
tempeste ; and thou schalt disturble hem 
in thin ire. Lord, fille thou the faces of 17 
hem with schenschipe; and thei schulen 
seke thi name. Be thei aschamed, ands 
be thei disturblid in to’ world of world; 
and' be thei schent and perische thei. 
And knowe thei, that the® Lord is nameig 
to thee; thou aloone art the’ hizeste¥ in 
ech* lond. 


1Om. agen. 


chatidenin. POm.cel plures. 4 Helde a. 


vOm.cr. WOm.c. * euery L. 


+ A glos. Gostli 
this salm mai 
be the preier of 
holi chirche 
ajens the ene- 
myes of cristen 
men, that tell. 
ith mekely bi- 
fore God the 
wickidnesse of 
hem, and axith 
deuoutli Goddis 
veriiaunse on 
this bi ensaum- 
ple of oolde 
wickide men 
punizschid of 
God. Lire here. 
K. 


824 


PSALM LXXXIII. 


1In to the ende, for the pressis, to the 
sonus of Chore, the™ salm. 


Quam dilecta. 2 How looued ben thi tabernaclis, Lord 
3of vertues; my soule coueiteth, and fail- 
ith in to the hallis of the Lord. Myn 
herte and my flesh; ful out iojeden in to 
4God alyue. Forsothe the sparowe fonde 
to hym an hous; and the turtil a nest, 
wher he leye" vp his briddis. Thin 
auteres, Lord God of vertues; my king, 
sand my God. Blisful that dwellen in 
thin hous, Lord; in to the worldis of 
sworldis thei shul preise thee. Blisful 
the man, whos helpe is of thee ; stezingus 
7vp in his herte he disposide, in the valei 
of teris, in the place that he sette. 
8Forsothe blessingus shal 3iue the lawe 
berere, thei shul go fro vertue in to 
vertue; God of godis shal ben seen in 
9Sion. Lord God of vertues, ful out here 
myn orisoun; with eris parceyue thou, 
10 God of Jacob®. Oure defendere, God, loke 
thou to, and behold in to the face of thi 
1icrist. For betere is oo dai in thin hallis; 
ouer thousendis. I ches to be cast awei 
in the hous of my God; more than to 
12 duelle in the tabernaclis of synneres. For 
mercy and treuthe looueth God; grace 
sand glorie the Lord shal 3yue. He shal 
not make them to be withoute goodis, 
that gon in innocence; Lord of vertues, 
blisful the man, that hopeth in thee. 


PSALM LXXXIV. 
1 In to the ende, to the sonus of Chore. 


2 Lord, thou hast blissid thin erthe ; 
thou hast turned awei the caitifte of 
3Jacob. Thou hast forziue the wickid- 
nesse of thi fole; thou hast couered alle 


Benedixist:, 
Domine, ter- 
ram tuam, 


PSALMS. 


LXXXIII. 1—LXXXIV. 3. 


PSALM LXXXIII. 


The title of they thre and ei3tetithe salm*.1 
The salm of the sones of Choret. 


Lord of vertues, thi tabernaclis ben2 
greetli loued; my soule coueitith, and3 
failith in to the porchis of the Lord. Myn 
herte and my fleische; ful out ioyeden in 
to quyk God. For whi a sparewe fyndith 4 
an hous to it silf; and* a turtle f/yndith a 
neste to it silf, where it ‘schal kepe” hise 
bryddis. Lord of vertues, thin auteris ; 
my king, and my God. Lord, blessid bens 
thei that dwellen in thin hous; thei 
schulen preise thee in to the® worldis of 
worldis. Blessid zs the man, whos helpé 
is of thee ; he hath disposid® stiyngis in 
his herte, in the valei of teeris, in the place7 
which® he hath set. For the 3yuer of thes 
lawe schal 3yue blessyng, thei schulen 
go fro vertu in to vertu; God of goddis 
schal be seyn in Sion. Lord God of ver-9 
tues, here thou my preier ; God of Jacob, 
perseyue thou with eeris. God, oure de-10 
fender, biholde thou; and biholdef in to 
the face of thi crist. For whi o dai init 
thin hallis is bettere ; than a thousynde. I 
chees to be ‘an out cast® in the hous of 
my God; more than to® dwelle in the 
tabernaclis of synneris. For God loueth 12 
merci and treuthe; the Lord schal 3yue 
grace and glorie. He schal not depriue!is 
hem fro goodis, that gon* in! innocence ; 
Lord of vertues, blessid is the man, that 
hopith in thee. 


PSALM LXXXIV. 
The title of the™ foure and ei3tetithe salm. 
Of® the® sones of Chore. 

Lord, thou hast blessid thi lond; thouz 
hast turned awei the caitifte of Jacob. 
Thou hast forjonue the wickidnesse of this 
puple ; thou hast hilid alle the synnes of 


mOm.4. MOleyeth a. © Israel an. 
¥ Om. c et alle 2 salm, to victorie, on the pressours c et plures. ®Om.s. >kepithr. ¢ Om, 
FHIKMSXi. ; ordeyned 1. ¢that1. fbiholde thous. & abiect, ether an outcast c et plures. 4 for to 
K sec.m, * bireue cet plures.  gooths. 10m.s. ™Om.c et alii. ™ To the ouercomere, the sung of 


c ct plures. © Om. 1. 


t+ A glos. This 
salm declareth 
the desijr of 
holi men, lifing 
in this wickid 
world, to come 
to heuen blisse. 
Lire here. x. 


t 4 glos. This 
salm is doyng 
of thankinges 
for the turnyng 
azen of Jewis 
fro the caitifte 
of Babilon ; but 
principali it is 
profecie of the 
perfitt delyuer- 
aunce to be 
maad bi Crist, 
in his incarna- 
cion and pas- 
sion. Lire here. 
x. 


Inelina, Do- 
mine, aurem 
duam, 


LXXXIV. 4—LXXXV. 8. 


4the synnes of hem. Thou hast suagid 
al thi wrathe; thou hast turned awey 
fro the wrathe of thin indignacioun. 
5 Conuerte vs, God, our helthe 3iuere; and 
6turne awei thi wrathe fro us. Whether 
in to withoute ende thou shalt wrathe to 
vs; or thou shalt streechen out thi 
wrathe fro ieneracioun in to ienera- 
7cioun ? God, thou turned shalt quykenen 
8ys; and thi fole shal gladen in thee. Sheu 
to vs, Lord, thi mercy ; and thi helthe 
9 3iuere 3if thou to vs. I shal heren, what 
speke in me the Lord God; for he shal 
speke pes in to his fole. And vp on his 
seyntis ; and in to them that ben con- 
1uertid to the herte. Neuerthelatere 
nee3h the dredende hym his helthe 3iuere ; 
11that indwelle glorie in oure erthe. Mercy 
and treuthe metten to themself; ri3twis- 
12nesse and pes ben kist. Treuthe of erthe?P 
is sprungen; and ri3twisnesse fro heuene 
13beheeld forth. Forsothe the Lord shal 
3iue benygnete ; and oure erthe shal 3iue 
i4his frute. Rij3twysnesse beforn hym4 shal 
go; and he shal putte in the weie his 
goingus. 
PSALM EXXXV. 
The orisoun of Danid. 


1 Bowe in’, Lord, thin ere, and ful out 
here me; for helpeles and a pore man I 
zam. Kepe thou my soule, for holi I am; 
mac saf thi seruaunt, my God, hopende 
3in thee. Haue mercy of me, Lord, for 
4to thee I criede al dai; glade thou the 
soule of thi seruaunt, for to thee, Lord, 
smy soule I rerede. For thou, Lord, 
sweete and mylde; and of myche mercy 
6to alle that inwardli clepen thee. With 
eris parceyue thou, Lord, myn orisoun ; 
and tae heed to the vois of my lowe 
7pre3ing. In the day of my tribulacioun 
I criede to thee; for thou ful out herdest 
sme. Ther is not lic thee’ in godis, Lord; 


PSALMS. 


825 


hem. Thou hast aswagid? al thin ire 34 
thou hast turned awei fro the ire of thin 
indignacioun. God, oure helthe, conuertes 
thou vs; and turne awei thin ire fro vs. 
Whether thou schalt be wrooth to vse 
withouten ende; ether schalt thou holde 
forth thin ire fro generacioun in to gene- 
racioun ? God, thou conuertid schalt7 
quykene vs; and thi puple schal be glad 
in thee. Lord, schewe thi merci to vs338 
and 3yue thin helthe to vs. I schal heres 
what the Lord God schal speke in me; for 
he schal speke pees on? his puple. And 
on hise hooli men; and on lem that ben 
turned to herte. Netheles his helthe 7s 10 
ni3 men dredynge him; that glorie dwelle 
in oure lond. Merci and treuthe metteni1 
hem silf; riz3twisnesse" and pees weren 
kissid. Treuthe cam forth of’ erthe; and 12 
ri3tfulnesse bihelde fro heuene. For the13 
Lord sehal 3yue benignyte; and oure erthe 
schal 3yue his fruyt. Ri3tfulnesset schal 14 
go bifore him ; and" schal sette hise steppis 
in the weie. 


PSALM LXXXV. 
The ‘title of the’ fyne and ei3tetithe salm. 
The preier of Dauid t. 

Lord, bowe doun thin eere, and here” 1 
me; for Y am nedi and pore. Kepe thou2 
my lijf, for Y am holi; my God, make 
thou saaf thi seruaunt hopynge in thee. 
Lord, haue thou merci on me, for Y criede3 
al day to thee; make thou glad the soule4 
of thi seruaunt, for whi, Lord, Y haue 
reisid my soule to thee. For thou, Lord,s 
art swete and mylde; and of myele* merci 
to alle men inwardli clepynge thee. Lord,6 
perseyue thou my preier with eeris; and 
3yue thou tente to the’ vois of my bisech- 
yng. In the dai of my tribulacioun Y7 
criede to thee; for thou herdist me. Lord, s 
noon among goddis is lijk thee ; and noon 


Ptheerthe zen, G9Om.H. 'Om. anu. § to thee a. 
Pswagidr, tor rijtfulnesse ceferi. ‘*ofthe1. + Rijtfulnesse, that is, Johan Baptist x text 
vVmarg. Yandit1. VOm.a. Where thour, *mychile. Y my s. 
VOL. Il. 5.N 


+ A glos. Gostli 
this salme mai 
be expowned of 
ech Cristen 
man sett in 
tribulacien 
bodili excited 
of men, ether 
gostli turment 
maad of fendis, 
wich man prei- 
eth God de- 
uoutli for his 
delyueraunce, 
and aleyggeth 
first the wor- 
thynesse of 
Goddis heryng, 
and on his part 
he aleyggeth his 
nedynesse, in- 
nocence, and 
continnaunce of 
preier, and on 
Goddis part he 
aleyggeth mer- 
ci, and power, 
greet doyng, 
and honour; 
and ferther he 
formeth his 
axing there, 
Lord lede me 
forth, that 1 be 
kept in good 
werk, and be 
bifore kept fro 
the yuel of 
syne, and of 
peyne, so that 
he be erowned 
at the laste in 
the rewme of 
glorie. Lire 
here. K. 


Fundamenta 
eius in mon- 
tibus. 


826 


gand ther is not aftir thi werkis. Alle 
Jentilis, what cuere thon hast maad, shul 
come, and honoure befor thee', Lord ; 
ioand thei shul glorifie thi name. For 
gret art thou, and doende imerueilis ; 
i1thou art God alone. Leed mee thenes, 
Lord, in thi weie, and I shal gon in thi 
treuthe ; glad myn herte, that it drede 
12thi name. I shal knouleche to thee, Lord 
my God, in al myn herte; and I shal 
glorifie thi" name in to with oute ende. 
is For thi mercy great is vp on me; and 
thou toke out my soule fro” the nethere 
ithelle. God, wicke’ men inrisen vpon 
me; and the synagoge of my3ti men 
so3ten my soule; and thei purposiden not 
15 thee in ther sijte. But thou, Lord God, 
ruwer, and imercyful; pacient, and of 
is myche merci, and verre. Behold in me, 
and haue mercy of me, 3if empire to thy” 
child; and saf mac the sone of thin hand- 
17maiden. Do with me a tocne in good, 
that thei see, that hateden me, and be 
confounded; for thon, Lord, hast holpe 
me, and coumfortid me. 


PSALM LXXXVI. 


1 To the sonus of Chore, the salm of the 
song. 


The foundemens of hym in holi hillis ; 
2the Lord looueth the 3atis of Syon, vp on 
salle the tabernaclis of Jacob. Gloriouse 

thingus ben seid of thee; thou cite of 
4God. Myndeful I shal be of Raab, and 
of Babiloyne; knowende me. Lo! alienus, 
aud Tiris, and the puple of Ethiopis ; 
sthese weren there. Whether a man shal 
sey to Sion, And* a man is born in it; 
sand he the most he3 foundede it? The 
Lord shal telle in the scripturis of puplis; 
zand of these princis, that weren in it. As 
of alle gladende; dwelling is in thee. 


‘the au. in thi a. 


2the s. @handmaide conrGHIKLMoPOoRSUVWXbi. 
© Om. EFHILP. 


PSALMS. 


V of AEH. 


LXXXV. 9——-LXXXVI. 7. 


is enene to thi werkis. Lord, alle folkis,9 
whiche euere thou madist, schulen come, 
and worschipe bifore thee; and thei sehulen 
glorifie thi name. For thou art ful greet, 10 
and makinge merueils; thou art God aloone. 
Lord, lede thou me forth in thi weie, andi 
Y schal entre in thi treuthe; myn herte 
be glad, that it drede thi name. Mi Lord 12 
God, Y sehal knouleche to thee in al myn 
herte; and Y schal glorifie thi name with- 
outen ende. For thi merci is greet on13 
me; and thon deliueridist my soule fro 
the lower helle. God, wickid men han rise 14 
vp on me; and the synagoge of my3ti men 
han sou3t my lijf; and thei han not set 
forth thee in her si3t. And thou, Lord is 
God, doynge merci, and merciful ; pacient, 
and of myche merci, and sothefast. Bi-16 
holde on me, and haue mercy on me, 
3yue thou the empire to thi? child; and 
make thou saaf the sone of thin hand- 
mayden*. Make thou with me a signe in 17 
good, that thei se, that haten me, and be? 
aschamed ; for thou, Lord, hast helpid® 
me, and hast coumfortid me. 


PSALM LXXXVI. 

The title of the’ sixte and ei3ztetithe saline. 
‘The salm of the song‘ of the sones of 
Chore. 

The foundementis therof ben in hooli 
hillis ; the Lord loueth the 3atis of Sion, 2 
more than alle the tabernaclis of Jacob. 
Thou citee of God, with outen ende; glo-3 
riouse thingis ben seide of thee. I schala 
be myndeful of Raab, and& Babiloyne ; 
knowynge® me. Lo! aliens, and Tyre, 
and the puple of Ethiopiens; thei weren 
there. Whether a man schal seie to Sion,5 
Andia man is born ther ynne; and that man 
altherhijeste foundide it ? The Lord schalé 
telle in the scripturis of puplis; and of 
these princis, that weren ther ynne. As*7 
the dwellyng ‘of alle! that ben glad ; is in 
thee. 


wwickid 4. * Om, a. 


bbe theiz. ¢holpeny. holpex. ¢Om.c et plures. 


fOm.a. gandofr. b kunnynge v, 1 Om.a. kOm.1. 1s of alle men. 


Domine Deus 
salutis mee. 





LXXXVI. I—19. 


PSALM LXXXVII. 

\ The song of the salm, to the sonys of 
Chore, in to the ende, for Melech, to 
auswern, the vuderstonding of Eman 
Israelyte, or Esrayte. 


to 


Lord God of inyn helthe; in the dai 
I criede and in the ny3te befor thee. 
3 Entre in thi si3te myn orisoun; bowe in 
4thin ere to my prejeere. For fulfild is 
with euelis ny soule; and my lif to helle 
sne3hede. JI am eymed with men goende 
doun in to the lake; I am maad as a man 
6withoute helpe, among deade men free. 
As woundid men slepende in sepulcris, of 
whom thou art no mor myndeful; and 
7thei of thin hond ben put ajeen. They 
putten me in the nethere lake; in derke 
sthingus, and in shadeweY of deth. Vp on 
me is confermyd thi wodnesse; and alle 
thi flodis thou bro3tist in vp on me. 
9Fer thou madest my knowen fro me; 
thei putten? me abhominacioun to them. 
101 am tra3id*, and I wente not out; myn 
ejen febleden for myseise. JI criede to 
thee, Lord; al dai I spradde out to thee 
iimyn hondis. Whether to deade men 
thou” shal do merueilis; or lechis shul 
igreren, and knoulechen to thee? Whether 
sum man shal telle in sepulcris thi mercy; 
i3and thi treuthe in to perdicioun ? Whe- 
ther shul be knowen in derenessis thi 
merueilis ; and thi rijtwisnesse in the 
14lond of for3eting? And I to thee, Lord, 
criede; and erli myn orisoun befor shal 
iscome thee. Wherto, Lord, pootist thou 
abac myn orisoun ; thou turnest awei thi 
icface fro me? A pore man I am, and 
in trauailis fro my 3outhe; enhauncid, 
meekid forsothe I am, and al disturbid. 
17In me passiden thur3 thi wrathis; and 
isthi feeris al disturbiden me. They enuy- 
rounden me as water al day ; they enuy- 
19rounden me togidere. Thou longedest 
awei fro me frend and ne3hebore; and 
my knowen fro wrechidnesse. 


ythe shadewe sen. 2 puttiden au. 


mQOm.c ef alti, © In Ebreu thus, the iv. 


see.m. 1 sec. m. 


PSALMS. 


a trayed 4. crathed £. 


° of the EL. 


827 


PSALM LXXXVII. 


The title of the™ seuene and ei3tetithei 
salm. The? song of” salm, to the sones 
of Chore, to vietorie on Mahalat, for 
to answere, the lernyng of ITeman 
Eezraite. 

Lord God of myn helthe; Y criede ing 
dai and? ny3t bifore thee. Mi preier entres 
bifore thi si3t ; bowe doun thin eere to my 
preier. For my soule is fillid with yuels ;4 
and my lijf neizede to helle. I am gessids 
with hem that goon doun in to the lake; 
Yam maad as a man with outen help, andeé 
fre among deed men. As men woundid 
slepinge in sepulcris, of whiche men noon 
ist myndeful aftir ; and thei ben put awei 
fro thin hond. hei han put me in the7 
lower lake; in derke places, and in the 
schadewe of deth. Thi strong veniaunces 
is confermed on me; and thou hast brou3t 
in alle thi wawis on me. Thou hast maad 9 
fer fro me my knowun; thei han set me 
abhomnynacioun to hem silf. I am takun, 
and Y 3ede not out; inyn i3en weren sijk 1 
for pouert. Lord, Y criede to thee; al 
dai Y spredde abrood myn hondis to thee. 
Whethir thou schalt do merueils to deed 11 
men ; ether leechis schulen reise, and thei 
schulen knouleche to thee? Whether ony 12 
man in sepulcre schal telle thi merci; and 
thi treuthe in perdicioun? Whether thiis 
merueilis schulen be knowun in derk- 
nessis ; and thi rijtfulnesse in the lond of 
for3etyng? And, Lord, Y criede to thee ;14 
and erli my preier schal bifor come to 
thee. Lord, whi puttist thou awei my 1s 
preier; turnest’ awei thi face fro me? [16 
am pore, and in traueils fro my 3ongthe ; 
sotheli Y am enhaunsid, and Y am maad 
low, and disturblid. Thi wraththis pass-17 
iden on ine; and thi dredis disturbliden 
me. Thei cumpassiden me as watir alis 
dai; thei cumpassiden me togidere. Thouis 
madist fer fro me a frend and nei3bore; 
and my knowun fro wretchidnesse. 


bhe gz pr. m. 


Pandini. 4theris1. * thou turnest 1x 


5NQ 


Misericordias 
Domini in 
eternum, 


828 PSALMS. LXXXVIII. 1—19. 


PSALM LXXXVIII. 
i The vnderstoudyng of Ethan, Israelite. 


2 The mercies of the Lord ; ‘in to® with- 
oute ende I shal synge. In ieneracioun 
and in to ieneracioun; I shal befortelle 
sthi treuthe in my mouth. For thou 
seidist, In to with oute ende mercy shal 
be bild ‘out in? heuenes; beforn shal be 
amaad redy thi treuthe in hem. I dis- 
poside testament to my chosene; I swor 
sto Dauid, my seruaunt, In to withoute 
ende I shal beforgreithe thi seed. And I 
shal bilden out; in ieneractoun and in to 
cieneracioun thi sete. Lord, heuenus shul 
kuouleche thi meruelis; forsothe thi 
7treuthe in the chirche of halewis. For 
who in cloudis shal be maad euene to 
thee Lord; lic shal ben to God in the 
ssonys of God? God, that is glorified in 
the counseil of seyntis; gret, and ferfnl 
9vp on alle that in his cumpas ben. Lord 
God of vertues, who licf to thee ? my3ti 
thou art, Lord, and thi treuthe in thi 
iocumpas. Thou lordshipist of the power 
of the se; forsothe the mouyngis of his 
iflodis thou suagist. Thou mekedist, as 
woundid, the proude; in the arm of thi 
vertue thou destro3edist thin enemys. 
12 Thine ben heuenes, and thin is the erthe; 
the roundnesse of erthe, and hys plente 
thou foundedest ; the north and the se 
thou formedist. Thabor and Ermon in 
uuthi name shul ful out io3en; thin arm 
with power. Be fastned thin hond, and 
isenhauncid be thi rijthond ; ri3twisnesse 
and dom beforgreithings of thi sete. 
Merci and treuthe shul beforgo thi face ; 
whblisful the puple that wot io3ing. Lord, 
iziu the list of thi chere thei shul go; and 
in thi name thei shul ful out iojen al 
day; and in thi ristwisnesse thei shul be 
wenhauncid. For the glorie of the vertu 
of hem thou art ; and in thi wel plesing 
19shal ben enhauncid oure horn. For of 


PSALM LXXXVIUII. 


The title of thes ei3te and ei3tetithe salm. ; 
The lernyug of ethan, Ezraitey. 

I schal synge with outen ende; the mer-2 
cies of the Lord. In generacioun and in 
to generacioun; Y schal telle thi trenthe 
with my mouth. For thou seidist, Withs 
outen ende merci schal be bildid in 
heuenes ; thi treuthe schal be maad redi 
in tho. I disposide a testament to my4 
chosun men; Y swoor to Dauid, my ser- 
uaunt, Til in to with outen ende I schals 
make redi thi seed. And Y schal bilde 
thi seete; in generacioun, and in to gene- 
racioun. Lord, heuenes schulen knoulechee6 
thi merueilis; and thi treuthe in the chirche 
of seyntis. For who in the cloudis schal7 
be inaad euene to the Lord; schal be lijk 
God among the sones of God? God,s 
whicht is glorified in the counsel of 
seyntis ; 7s greet, and dreedful ouere alle 
that’ ben in his cumpas. Lord" God of9 
vertues, who és lijk thee ? Lord, thou art 
mi3ti, and thi treuthe zs in thi cumpas. 
Thou art Lord of the power of the see; 10 
forsothe thou aswagist the stiryng of the 
wawis therof. Thou madist lowe then 
proude, as woundid; in the arm of thi 
vertu thou hast scaterid thin enemyes. 
Heuenes ben thin, and erthe’ is thin; thon 12 
hast foundid the world, and the fulnesse 
therof; thou madist of nou3t the northis 
and the see. Thabor and Hermon schulen 
make ful out ioye in thi name; thin arm 14 
with power. Thin hond be maad stide- 
fast, and thi rijthond be enhaunsid ; ri3t-15 
fulnesse and doom is the makyng redy of 
thi seete. Merci and treuthe schulen go 
bifore thi face ; blessid is the puple that 16 
kan hertliv song. Lord, thei schulen go 
in the lijt of thi cheer; and in thi name17 
thei schulen make ful out ioye al dai; and 
thei schulen be enhaunsid in thi ri3tful- 
nesse. For thou art the glorie of theis 
vertu of hem; and in thi good plesaunce 


¢Om.a. Uvpand 4. etheeu. fis hjk 4. & before greithingis 4. ) Om. sen. 


‘Om.cetalii, tthatr. Fors. vtheerthe ceteri. herty 1. 


t+ A glos. This 
salme speketh 
of the abund- 
aunce and euer- 
lastingnesse of 
the rewme of 
Danith, wich is 
filled in Crist, 
and in noon 
others and 
Ebrewes and 
Latyn doctours 
sein this aceord- 
ingli. Lire here. 


LXXXVIII. 20—41. 


the Lord is oure taking vp; and of the 
20holi of Irael oure king. Thanne thou 
speeke in viseoun to thi seintis, and thou 
seidist; I haue putt helpe in the my3ti, 
and J haue enhauncid the chosen of my 
21fole. I haue founde Dauid, my seruaunt; 
with myn holi oile I enoyntide hym. 
22 Myn hond forsothe shal helpe to hym; 
23and myn arm shal conferme hym. No 
thing shal profite the enemy in hym; and 
the sone of wickednesse shal not sette toi, 
24to no3en hym. And I shal al to-hewe fro 
the face of hym his enemys; and the 
hatende hym in to fli3t I shal al turne. 
25And my treuthe and my mercy with 
hym; and in my name shal ben en- 
26hauncid his horn. And I shal putte in 
the se his hond; and in flodis his ri3t 
2zhond. He shal inwardli clepe me, My 
fader thou art; my God, and vndertakere 
2sof myn helthe. And I the first goten 
shal sette hym ; he3 befor the kingis of 
aerthe. In to with oute ende I shal kepe 
to hym my mercy; and my testament 
30feithful to hym. And I shall sette in to 
world* of world his sed ; and his trone as 
3ithe dajis of heuene. If forsothe his 
sonys shul forsake my lawe; and in my 
32domys shul not go. If my ri3twisnessis! 
thei poote ferr awei; and myn hestis shul 
33hot kepe. I shal visite in a 3erde the 
wickidnessis™ of hem; and in betingus 
34ther synnes. My mercy forsothe I shal 
not don awei fro hym; ne nojen in my 
3, treuthe. Ne I shal not defoule my testa- 
ment; and that gon out of my lippis I 
gpshal not make vein. Ones I swor in 
37 myn holy, to Dauid I shal not lie; his sed 
3gin to withoute ende shal duelle. And his 
trone as the sunne in my si3t; and as the 
moone parfit in to withoute ende, and 
39 the witnesse in heuene feithful. Thou 
forsothe hast put abac, and dispisid; 
go tariedist thi crist. Thou turnedist awei 
the testament of thi seruaunt; thou curs- 
ajidist in the erthe his seintuarie. Thou 


iQm.u. the world «. 


xand Yk. Y putt tor. 


PSALMS. 


l riztwisnes Ar. 


2 myn it. 


829 


oure horn schal be enhaunsid. For oure 19 
takyng vp is of the Lord ; and of the hooli 
of Israel oure kyng. Thanne thou spakist 20 
in reuelacioun to thi seyntis, and seidist, 
Y haue set help in the my3ti; and Y haue 
enhaunsid the chosun man of iny puple. 
I foond Dauid, my seruaunt ; Y* anoyntide 21 
hym with myn hooli oile. For myn hond 22 
schal helpe him; and myn arm schal con- 
ferme hym. The enemye schal no thing 23 
profite in him; and the sone of wickidnesse 
schal not ‘ley to’, for to anoye him. And 24 
Y schal sle hise enemyes fro his face ; and 
Y schal turne in to fliz3t hem that haten 
hym. And my treuthe and merey schal25 
be with him; and his horn schal be en- 
haunsid in my name. And Y schal sette 26 
his hond in the see; and his ri3t hoond in 
flodis. He schal inwardli clepe me, Thou 27 
art my fadir ; my God, and the’ vptaker of 
myn heelthe. And Y schal sette him the 2s 
firste gendrid* sone; hizer than the kyngis 
of erthe. With outen ende Y schal kepe 29 
my merci to hym; and my testament feith- 
ful to him. And Y schal sette his seed 30 
in to the world of world; and his trone as 
the daies of henene. Forsothe if hises: 
sones forsaken my lawe; and goen not in 
my domes. If thei maken vnhooli mys 
ri3tfulnessis; and kepen not my comaunde- 
mentis. I schal visite in a 3erde the wickid-33 
nessis of hem; and in betyngis the synnes 
of hem. But Y schal not scatere my a1 
mercy fro hym; and in my treuthe Y schal 
not anoye hym. Nethir Y schal makess 
vnhooli my testament; and Y schal not 
make voide tho thingis that comen forth 
of my lippis. Onys Y swoor in myn36 
hooli; Y schal not lie to Dauid, his seed 37 
schal dwelle with outen ende. And his38 
trone as sunne in my si3t, and as a perfit 
mone with outen ende ; and a feithful wit- 
nesse in heuene. But thou hast put awei, 39 
and hast» dispisid; aud hast dilaied thi 
Thou hast turned awei the tes-40 
thou madist 


crist. 


tament of thi seruaunt ; 


m wickenessis E. 


abigotent. >» Om.t. 


x 


Domine, refu- 
gium factus es. 


830 


destro3idist alle the heggis of hym; thou 
s2puttist his fastnyng drede. Ther wast- 
eden hym alle men passende the weie ; he 
43is maad repref to his ne3heboris. Thou 
enhauncidist the rijthond of men berende 
hym doun; thou gladedest alle his ene- 
44mys. Thou turnedest awei® the helpe 
of his swerd; and thou helpedist hym not 
45in bataile. ‘Thou destro;idist hym fro 
his out clensing; and his sete in the erthe 
46thou hurtlidist. Thou lassedist the dajes 
of hys time; thou ful heeldedest? hym 
47 with confusion. Hou longe, Lord, thou 
turnest awei in to the ende; shal brenne 
ssout as fyr thi wrathe? Haue mynde 
what my substaunce; whether forsothe 
veyn thou hast ordeynd alle the sonus 
490f meu? Who is a man, thatP shal liue, 
and shal not see deth ; and shal pulle out 
sohis soule fro the hond of helle? Wher 
ben thin olde mercies, Lord ; as thou hast 
stsworn to Dauid in thi treuthe ? Mynde- 
ful be, Lord, of the repref of thi ser- 
uauns ; that I withheld’? in my bosum, of 
szmany Jentilis. The whiche thin enemys 
repreueden, Lord; that thei repreueden 
s3the hole chaunging of thi crist. Blessid 
the Lord in to with oute ende; be it do, 
be it do. 


PSALM LXXXIX. 
1 The orisoun of Moises, man of God. 


Lord, refut thou art maad to vs; fro 
2jeneracioun in to ieneracioun. Befor that 
hillis weren maad, or were formed the 
erthe and the roundnesse ; fro world ‘and 
3vn tol world thou art God. Ne turne 
thou a man in to mecnesse; and thou 
seidist, Beth connertid, 3ee sones of men. 
4 For a thousend 3eer befor thin e3en; as 
3isterdai that is passid. And the warde in 
the ny3t, that for no3t ben had; the 3eris 
6of hem shul ben. Erli as an erbe passe 


Om. c. © hilidist 4. P and an. 


¢ hurlid 1. 


PSALMS. 


PP withholde «4. 


4 that shal 1. 


LX XXVIII. 42——LXXXIX. 6. 


vnhooli his seyntuarie in erthe. 
distriedist alle the heggis therof; thou 
hast set the stidefastnesse therof drede. 


Alle men passynge bi the weie rauyschiden 42 


hiin; he is aad schenschipe to hise nei3- 
boris. 
of men oppressinge him; thou hast gladid 


alle hise enemyes. Thou hast turned awei 44 


the help of his swerd; and thou helpidist 
not hym in batel. 
fro clensing ; and thou hast hurtlid® doun 
his seete in erthe. 
the daies of his time; thou hast bisched 


him with schenschip. Lord, hou longe 47 


turnest thou awei in to the ende; schal 
thin ire brenne out as fier ? 
thou what zs my substaunce; for whether 
thou hast ordeyned veynli alle the sones 


of men? Who is a man, that schal lyue, 49 


aud schal not se deth; schal@ delyuere his 
soule fro the hond of helle ? 
ben thin elde mercies ; as thou hast swore 
to Dauid in thi treuthe ? 
myndeful of the schenschipe of thi ser- 
uauntis, of many hethene men; whiche Y 
helde togidere in my bosum. 
thin enemyes, Lord, diden schenschipfuli ; 
for thei dispisiden the chaungyng of thi 
crist. 
ende; be it don, be it don. 


PSALM LXXXIX. 


The title of the® nyne and ei3tetithe salm.1 
The preier of Moises, the man of God +. 
Lord, thou art maad help to vs; fro 
generacioun in to generacioun. Bifore that2 
hillis weren maad, ether the erthe and the 
world was formed; fro the world and in 
to the world thou art God. Turne thous 
not awei a man in to lownesse; and thou 
seidist, 3e sones of men, be conuertid. For 4 
a thousynde 3eer bez bifore thin izen; as 
3istirdai, which is passid, and as keping 
in the nij3t. The 3eeris of hem schulen be;5 
that ben had for nou3t. Eerli passe he, as¢é 


qin to 4, and in to EH. 


€ Om. ¢ et alii. 


Thou ai 


Thou hast enhaunsid the ri3thond 43 


Thou destriedist him 45 


Thou hast maad lesse 46 


Bithenke 48 


Lord, where 50 


Lord, be thous1 


Whiche 52 


Blessid be the Lord with outenss 


+ The preier of 
Loises, the 
man of God, 
to gete Goddis 
benefices to the 
puple of Israel, 
wiche he ladde 
out of Egipt, 
to gette bene- 
fices in tyme 
comyng. 
Lire here. x. 


LXXXIX. 7—XC. 5. 


he, erli flurshe' he, and passe; at euen falle 
he doun, inwardli harde he, and waxe drie. 
7 For we han failid in thi wrathe; and in 
8thi wodnesse wee ben disturbid. Thou 
hast put oure wickidnessis’ in thi si3t ; 
oure world in the li3ting of thi chere. 
9For alle oure da3is faileden; and in thi 
wrathe wee han failid. Oure 3eris, as an 
1oireyn, shul be betho3t; the da3zis of oure 
jeris in tho seuenti jer. If forsothe in 
my3tis ei3teti 3er ; and the more ouer of 
thein trauaile and sorewe. For ther ouer- 
cam debonernesse; and wee shul be chas- 
iltisid. Who knew3 the power of thi 
wrathe; and for thi drede thi wrathe de- 
12noumbren? Thi ri3thond so mae knowen; 
13and the ta3t with herte in wisdam. Be 
thou conuertid, Lord, hou longe; and 
louli preyable be thou vp on thi seruauns. 
14 Wee ben fulfild erly with thi mercy; wee 
han ful out io3ed, and delitid in alle oure 
1sda3zis. Wee han iozid for the da3is in 
whiche thon hast mekid vs; the 3eris in 
16whiehe wee han seen euelis. Behold, 
Lord, in to thi seruauns, and in to thi 
werkys; and reule forth the sones of hem. 
17And be the shynyng of the Lord oure 
God vp on vs; and the werkis of oure 
hondis ri3tforth reule‘vp on" vs; and the 
werk of oure hondis reule ri3tforth. 


PSALM XC. 

1 The preysing of the song, to hym Dauid. 
That woneth in the helpe of the heizest ; 

in the defending of God of heuene shal al 
zabide. He shal sei to the Lord, Myn vn- 
dertakere art thou, and my refut; my 
3God, I shal hope in to hym. For he de- 
liuerede me fro the grene of hunteres ; 
4and fro the sharpe woord. With his shul- 
dris he shal al aboute shadewe to thee ; 
and under his pennys thou shalt hopen. 
5 With the sheld shal enuyroune thee his 
treuthe; thou shalt not drede fro the ny3t 


Qui habitat in 
adiutorio Al- 
tissimi. 


PSALMS. 


831 


an ecrbe, eerli florische he, and passe; in 
the euentid falle he doun, be he hard, and 
wexef drie. For we han failid in thin ire; 7 
and we ben disturblid in thi strong ven- 
launce. ‘Thou hast set oure wickidnessis 8 
in thi si3t; oure world in the lij3tuing of 
thi eheer. For alle oure daies han failid ; 9 
and we han failid in thin ire. Oure 3eris 
schulen bithenke, as? an yreyn; the daies10 
of oure 3eeris ben in tho seuenti 3eeris. 
Forsothe, if fourescoor' 3eer* ben in my3ti 
men; and the more! tyme of™ hem is trauel 
and sorewe. For myldenesse cam aboue ; 
and we schulen be chastisid. Who knew it 
the power of thinire; and durste nounibre 
thin ire for thi drede ? Make thi rijthond 12 
so knowun; and wake men lerned® in herte 
bi wisdom. Lord, be thon conuertid sum- 13 
deel ; and be thou able to be preied on® thi 
seruauntis. We weren fillid eerli with thi14 
merci; we maden ful out ioye, and we de- 
litiden in alle oure daies. We weren glad 15 
for the daies in whiche thou inadist vs 
meke; for the 3eeris in whiehe we si3en 
yuels. Lord, biholde thon into thi ser-16 
uauntis, and in to thi werkis; and dresse 
thon the sones of hem. And the sehynyng 17 
of oure Lord God be on vs; and dresse 
thou the werkis of oure hondis on vs, and 
dresse thon the werk? of oure hondis. 


PSALM XC. 
‘The nyntithe salma. 1 
He that dwellith in the help of the 
hizeste God ; schal dwelle in the protec- 
cioun of God of heuene. He schal seie to2 
the Lord, Thou art myn vptaker, and my 
refuit ; my God, Y schal hope in him. For3 
he delynered me fro the snare of hunteris; 
and fro a scharp word. With hise sehul-4 
dris he schal make schadowe to thee; and 
thou schalt haue hope vnder hise fetheris. 
His treuthe sehal cumpasse thee with a5 
scheld; thou schalt not drede of" ny3tis 


t floure azn, § wickenessis £. wickidnesse n. ' 3eeris AEN. “vp 4. 
fwexehers. Suponasr. hOm.c. ieistic et plures. k3eerisi. 1Om.1.  ™ morcouer of 1. 
oso leerned s. © of 1. Pwerkis a prem. 4 The tijtle of the lexxx. salm. 101. The nyntithe salm Moises 


made also. K. The lexxx. salm hath no title, nether in Ebrew, nether in Jerom, vv. 


Y of the 1. 


832 


sdrede. Fro the arwe fleende in dai‘, fro 
the nede goende in dercnessis thur3; fro 
the inrennyng, and the’ myddai deuel. 
7 Ther shul falle fro thi side a thousend, 
and ten thousend* fro thi ri3t sidis; to 
sthce forsothe he shal not ne3he. Neuer- 
thelatere with thin e3en thou shalt be- 
holde; and the 3elding of synnes thou 
yshalt see. For thou art’, Lord, myn 
hope; he3est thou hast put thi’ refut. 
10 Ther shal not come to thee euel; and 
scourge shal not ne3he* to thi tabernacle. 
i1For to his aungelis he comaundide of 
thee ; that thei shulden kepen thee in alle 
12 thi weies. In hondis thei shul bern thee ; 
lest parauenture thou offende at the ston 
13 thi foot. Vp on the eddere and the koka- 
trice thou shalt go; and thou shalt to- 
istrede the leoun and the dragoun. For 
in me he hopide, I shal delyueren hym ; 
I shal defende hym, for he knew3 my 
isnaine. He criede to me, and I ful out 
shal heren hym>, with hym I am in tri- 
bulacioun; I¢ shal taken hym out, and 
isglorifien hym. In lengthe of da3is I shal 
fulfillen hym ; and shewen to hym myn 
helthe 3yuere. 


PSALM XCI. 
! The salm of the song,in the dai of 
sabot. 
Bouwm est 2 Good it is to knoulechen to the Lord; 
confiteri, 


and to do salm to thi name, thou he3est. 
3To tellen out erly thi mercy; and thi 
4treuthe by the’ ny3t. In the ten cordid 
ssautre; with song in the harpe. For 
thou hast delitid me, Lord, in thi mak- 
ing; and in the werkis of thin hondis I 
6shal ful out io3en. Hou magnefied ben 
thi werkis, Lord; ful myche deep ben 
7maad thi tho3tys. The vnwise man shal 
not knowen; aud the fool shal not vn- 
8derstonde thes thingus. Whan full out 
sprunge shul ben the synneres, as hei; 
and shuln aperen alle, that wirken wicke- 


PSALMS. 


XC. 6—XCI. 8. 


drede. Of an arowe fliynge in’ the dai,6 
oft a" gobelyn goynge in derknessis; of 
asailing, and” a myddai feend. A thou-7 
synde schulen falle doun fro thi side, and 
ten thousynde fro thi ri3tside ; forsothe it 
schal not neizje to thee. Netheles thous 
schalt biholde with thin izjen; and thou 
schalt se the 3elding of synneris. Fors 
thou, Lord, art myn hope; thou hast set 
thin help altherhizeste. Yuel schal not 10 
come to thee; and a scourge schal not 
nei3e to thi tabernacle. For God hathu 
coinaundid to hise aungels of thee; that 
thei kepe thee in alle thi weies. Theil2 
schulen beere thee in the hondis; leste 
perauenture thou hirte thi foot at a stoon. 
Thou schalt go on” a snake, and a* coca-13 
trice ; and thou schalt defoule a lioun and 
adragoun. For he hopide in me, Y schal 14 
delyuere hym; Y schal defende him, for 
he knew my name. He criede to me, and 15 
Y schal here him, Y am with him in tri- 
bulacioun ; Y schal delyuere him, and Y 
schal glorifie hym. I schal fille hym with 16 
the lengthe of daies; and Y schal schewe 
myn helthe to him. 


PSALM XCI. 

The ‘title of theY oon and nyntithe salm.\ 
‘The salm* of ‘song, in the dai of* sabath. 

It is good to knouleche to the Lord ;2 
and to synge to thi name, thou? hizeste. 
To schewe eerli thi merci; and thi treuthe3 
bi ny3t. Ina sautrie of ten cordis; with4 
song in harpe. For thou, Lord, hast de-s 
litid me in thi makyng; and Y schal make 
ful out ioye in the werkis of thin hondis. 
Lord, thi werkis ben magnefied greetli;6 
thi thou3tis ben maad ful depe. An vn-7 
wise man schal not knowe; and a fool 
schal not vndirstonde these thingis.Whanne 8 
synneris comen forth, as hey; and alle thei 
apperen, that worchen wickidnesse. That9 
thei perische in to the world of world; 


VY the daian. WOm. 4. *thousandis4. yOm.an. 2 my 4. 4nejeto4. bOm.c. ¢ and 4. 
4 Om, an. 

Sons. and of c et plures. uOm.s. Vandofa. of x. Wnponk. *onar YOma. 
ZOm.c. @Om. a.» that art 1. 


XCI. 9 —XCIII. 2. 


gnesse*, That thei dien in to the world 
of world ; thou forsothe he3est in to with- 
looute ende, Lord. For lo! thin enemys, 
Lord, for lo! thin enemys shul pershen ; 
and alle shul be scaterid that werken 
il wickidnesse. And as an vnycorn shal 
ben enhauncyd myn horn; and my laste 
izage in ‘plenteuous mercy’. And myn e3e 
lokide doun myn enemys ; and to the in- 
riseris wariende in me shal here myn ere. 
13 The ri3twis as palm shal floure; as the 
cedre of Liban he shal be multiplied. 
14The plauntid in the hous of the Lord; 
in the porchis of the hous of oure God 
isshul floure. 3it they shul be multiplied 
in the laste ‘plenteuous age®; and wel 
suffrende thei shul be, that thei telle. 
For rijt is the Lord oure God; and ther 
is not wickidnesse in hym. 


PSALM XCII. 
The preising of the song of David, in 
the dai befor the sabat, whan foundid 
ts the erthe. 
The Lord regnede, fairnesse he is clad*; 
the Lord is clad" strengthe, and befor- 
egirte! hymself. Forsothe he fastnede the 
roundnesse of erthe*; that shal not be to- 

3gidere stirid. Greithid is thi sete, God, 
fro thanne; fro the world thou art. The 
flodis rereden vp, Lord ; the flodis rereden 
vp ther vois. Flodis rereden vp ther flow- 

singis; fro the voises! of manye watris. 
Merueilonse the wawis of the se; merueil- 

sous in he3e thingis the Lord. Thi wit- 
nessingis ben maad beleeuable ful myche ; 
holynesse semeth thin hous, Lord, in to 
the lengthe of dajes. 


Dominus reg- ! 
nauit,decorem, 


PSALM XCIII. 
The salm of Dauid, the ferthe dai of 
the wike. 


God of veniauncis Lord; God of ven- 
Be thou enhauncid 


Deus vicio- 1 


num. SS e ° ° 
giauncis freeli dide. 


€ wickedenesse 4EN. 
ihe before girde 4. k the erthe azn. ! vois 4. 
© alle thei 1. 
no title. U. € han reisiden L. 
lrxxaiij. salm hath no title. v. 
VOL. Il, 


f vols A. 
hOm. 0 sec.m. 


PSALMS. 


f the mercy of the tete £ pr. m. 


833 


forsothe thou, Lord, art the hijest, with- 
outen ende. Forto! Lord, thin enemyes, 10 
for lo! thin enemyes schulen perische; and 
alle® schulen be scaterid that worchen 
wickidnesse. And myn horn schal bei 
reisid as an vnicorn; and myn eelde in 
plenteuouse merci. And myn ije dis-12 
piside myn enemyes; and whanne wickid 
men rysen aj3ens me, myn eere schal here. 
A iust man schal floure as a palm tree; 13 
he schal be multiplied as a cedre of Liban. 
Men plauntid in the hous of the Lord; 14 
schulen floure in the porchis of the hous 
of oure God. 3it thei schulen be multi-15 
plied in plenteuouse elde; and thei schu- 
len be suffryng wel. That thei telle, that 
oure Lord God is ri3tful; and no wickid- 
nesse is in hym. 


PSALM XCII. 
The two and nyutithe salm*t. 


The Lord hath regned, he is clothid! 
with fairnesse; the Lord is clothid with 
strengthe, and hath gird hym silf. For2 
he made stidefast the world; that sehal 
not be moued. God, thi seete was maad3 
redi fro that tyme; thou art fro the world. 
Lord, the flodis han reisid; the flodis han 
reisid her vois. Flodis reisideu® her wawis; 
of the voieis' of many watris. The reisyngis 4 
of the see den wondurful; the Lord 7s 
wondurful in hije thingis. Thi witness- 5 
ingis ben maad able to be bileued greetli ; 
Lord, holynesse bieometh thin hous, in to 
the lengthe of daies. 


PSALM XCIII. 
The thre and nyntithe salmst. 


God its Lord of veniauneis; God of "1 
veniauncis' dide freli. Be thou enhaunsid 2 


Sage of the tete e pr.m. -} clothed aru. 


4 The two and nyntithe salm, that Moises made, hath no title. x. The lraxatj. salm hath 
& The leacaiij. a. The title of the ixxxaiij. salm. G. The 
i veniaunce CDEFLSb. 


50 


tThissalmhath 
no tijtle, nether 
in Ebren, ne in 
Jerom, and E- 
brees seyn, that 
Moises made 
this salm. 1. 
The lettere of 
this salm is 
fillid in the 
rewme of Crist; 
and rewmes of 
the world ben 
suget to it bi 
feith. Lyre 
here. 1K. 


t This salm 
hath no tijtle, 
neither in E- 
breu, ne in 
Jerom. 1. 

In this salm 
Moises ajen- 
clepith the pe- 
ple fro errour, 
about Goddis 
purayaunce, 
and schewith 
that Geddis 
purayaunce 
strecchith forth 
to alle thingis, 
and punischith 
iustli synners. 
Lyre here. 1. 


834 


that demest the erthe ; 3eld 3elding to the 
3proude. Hou longe synneres, Lord; hou 
4longe synneres shul glorien ? Thei shul 
steringli seyn, and speke wickidnesse ; 
alle shul speke that wirchen vnri3twis- 
snesse. Thi puple, Lord, thei mekeden ; 
cand ouertrauaileden thin eritage. The 
widewe and the comeling thei sloowen ; 
and the moderles childer thei killeden. 
7 And thei seiden, The Lord shal not seen ; 
ne the God of Jacob shal vnderstonde. 
8 Vnderstondeth, 3ee vnwise men in the 
puple; and, 3ee foolis, sum tyme sa- 
guoureth. He that plauntide the ere, shal 
he not heren; or he that made the eje, 
10behalt™ not? That chastiseth Jentilis, 
shal he not vndirnyme; that techeth man 
ukunnyng? The Lord wot the tho3tis of 
1zmen; for thei ben veyne. Blisful the 
man, whom thou shalt enforme, Lord; 
and of thi lawe thou shalt techen hym”. 
13 That thou suage hym fro euele da3es ; to 
the time be dolue to the synnere a dich. 
14For the Lord shal not putte abae his 
1sfolc; and his eritage shal not forsake. For 
to ri3twisnesse be turned in to dom; and 
who beside it, alle that ben riz3twis in 
isherte. Who shal ‘al rijsen° to me a3en 
the warieris; or who shal stonde with 
me ajen the werkende? wickidnesse? 
17 But for the Lord halp1 me; parauenture 
ismy soule shulde han duellid in helle. If 
I seide, Moued is my foot; thi mercy, 
19 Lord, halp’ me. After the multitude of 
my sorewis in myn herte; thi coumfort- 
zoingis gladeden" my soule. Whether cle- 
ueth to thee the sete off wickidnesse ; that 
21formest trauaile in the heste? Thei shul 
eacchen in to the soule of the riztwis ; 
and the innocent blod thei shul con- 
2zedempne. And the Lord is maad to me 
in to refut ; and my God in to the helpe 
23 0f myn hope. And he shal jeelde to hem 
the wickidnesse of hem, and in the ma- 
liee of hem he shal destro3e them ; shal 
destro3e them the Lord oure God. 
™ beholdeth sen. 


theme. © Arijse au. 


k vndirstondeth 1. Jlerneth 1. ™ the which 1. 


PSALMS. 


XCIII. 3—23. 


that demest the erthe ; 3elde thou 3eldinge 
to proude men. Lord, hou longe synneris ; 3 
hou longe schulen synneris haue glorie? 
Thei schulen telle out, and sehulen speke 4 
wickidnesse ; alle men schulen speke that 
worchen vnriz3tfulnesse. Lord, thei hans 
maad lowe thi puple; and thei han disesid 
thin eritage. Thei killiden a widowe andé 
a comelyng; and thei han slayn fadirles 
children and modirles. And thei seiden,7 
The Lord schal not se; and God of Jacob 
schal not vndurstonde. 3e vnwise men ins 
the puple, vndirstonde*; and, 3e foolis, lerne! 
sum tyme. Schal not he here, that plaunt-9 
ide the eere; ethere biholdith not he, that 
made the i3e? Schal not he repreue, that 10 
chastisith folkis ; which™ techith man kun- 
nyng? The Lord knowith the thou3tis of 1 
men; that tho ben veyne. Blessid és the® 12 
man, whom thou, Lord, hast lerned®; and 
hast tau3t him of thi lawe. That thouis 
aswage hym fro yuele daies; til a diche 
be diggid to the synner. For the Lord14 
schal not putte awei his puple; and he 
schal not forsake his eritage. Til ri3tful-15 
nesse be turned in to dom; and who ben 
ni3 it, alle that ben of riztful herte. Who 16 
schal rise with me a3ens mysdoeris ; ether 
who sehal stonde with me a3ens hem that 
worchen wickidnesse? No but for the17 
Lord helpide me ; almest my soule hadde 
dwellid in helle. If Y seide, My foot wasis 
stirid ; Lord, thi merci helpide me. Aftir19 
the multitude of my sorewis in myn herte ; 
thi coumfortis maden glad my soule. Whe- 20 
ther the seete of wickidnesse cleueth to 
thee; that makist trauel? in eomaunde- 
ment? Thei schulen take ajens the soule 21 
of aiust man; and thei schulen condempne 
innocent blood. And the Lord was maad 22 
to me in to refuyt; and my God was maad 
in tol the help of myn hope. And he2s 
sehal 3elde to hem the wickiduesse of hem; 
and in the malice of hem he schal lese 
hem, oure Lord God schal lese hem. 


P worcher H. ‘helpede seu. * gladen x. 


n that 1. © Jered 1. 


P traueyliss. 4 Om. Ls. 





XCIV. 1—xcv. 7. 


PSALM XCIV. 
The preising of the song, to hym Dauid. 
Cometh, ful out io3e wee to the Lord ; 
inwardli ioj3e wee to God, our helthe 
23iuere. Befor ocupie wee his face in 
knouleching ; and in salmys inwardli io3e 
3wee tohym. For God a gret Lord, and 
a gret king ouer alle godis ; for the Lord 
4shal not poote abac his fole. For in his 
hond ben alle the’ coostis of erthe'; and 
sthe hei3tis of hillis ben of hym. For of 
hym is the se, and he made it; and the 
cdrie his hondis formeden. Cometh, ho- 
noure wee, and falle wee doun before God, 
wepe wee befor the Lord, for he made 
z7vs; for he is the Lord oure God. And 
wee the puple of his leswe; and the shep 
sof his hond. To dai if hys vois 3ee han 
gherd; wileth not" hardne 3oure hertis. As 
in the terring, after the day ; of tempting 
in desert. Where tempteden me 3oure fa- 
dris; proueden and se3jen my werkis. 
10 Fourti 3eer offended I was to that ienera- 
cioun; and I seide, Euermor these erren 
1lin herte. And thes knewen not my 
weyes, to whom I swor in my wrathe; 
thei shul not entre in to my reste. 


Venite, exulte- | 
mus. 


PSALM XCV. 
1 The salin of Dauid, whan the hous was 
bild wp after the caitifte. 

Syngeth to the Lord a newe song; 
2singeth to the Lord, al erthe. Syngeth 
to the Lord, and blesseth to his name; 
telleth fro dai in to dai his ‘helthe 3yuere’. 
3Tellith out among Jentilis his glorie ; in 
dalle puplis his merueilis. For the: Lord 
gret”, and preisable ful myche; ferful he 
sis ouer alle godis. For alle the godis off 
Jentilis deuelis; the Lord forsothe he- 
suens made. Knouleching and fairnesse 
in the si3te of hym; holynesse and gret 
7 doing in the halewing of hym. Bringeth 


Cantate Do- 
mino. 


8$Om. aren. tthe erthe e. 


PSALMS. 


U not ajeen AEN. 


835 


PSALM XCIV. 
The foure and nyntithe salm't. 


Come 3e, make we ful out ioie to the: 
Lord; hertli synge we to God, oure heelthe. 
Bifore ocupie we his face in knowleching ; 2 
and hertli synge we to him in salmes. For3 
God ts a greet Lord, and a greet king 
aboue alle goddis ; for the Lord schal not 
putte awei his puple. For alle the endis4 
of erthe ben in his hond; and the hi3- 
nesses® of hillis ben hise. For the see iss 
his, and he made it ; and hise hondis form- 
eden the drie lond. Come 3e, heriet we, 6 
and falle we" doun bifore God, wepe we 
bifore the Lord that made vs; for he is7 
oure Lord God. And we bez the puple of 
his lesewe ; and the scheep of his hond. 
If 3e han herd his yois to dai; nyle 3e makes 
hard 3oure hertis. As in the terryng to9 
wraththe ; bi the dai of temptacioun in de- 
sert. Where 3oure fadris temptiden me; 


+ This salm 
hath ne tijtle, 
neither in E- 
breu, ne in 
Jerom. I. 
Netheles in the 
itj. and the 

ifij. e% to E- 
breies, Poul 
seith, that this 
salm was maad 
ef Dauid, and 
it spekith not 
of the entring 
in to the lond 
of biheest vndir 
Josue, but of 
the entring in 
to the lend of 
lyuynge men, 
that schulde be 
epened bi Crist 
in the tyme of 
grace 5 for bi 
his blessid pas- 
sioun he re- 
mouyde the 
lettyng. Lyre 
here. 1K. 


thei preueden and sien’ my werkis. Fourti 10 


3eer I was offendid to this generacioun ; 
and Y seide, Euere thei erren in herte. 


And these men knewen not my weies; toll 


whiche” Y swoor in myn ire, thei schulen 
not entre in to my reste. 


PSALM XCV. 
The fyue and nyntithe sala hath no title}. 


Singe 3e a newe song to the Lord; al 
erthe, synge 3e to the Lord. Synge 3e to2 
the Lord, and blesse 3e his name ; telle 3e 
his heelthe fro dai in to dai. ‘Telle 3e hiss 
glorie among hethene men ; hise inerueilis 
among alle puplis. For the Lord zs greet, 4 
and worthi to be preisid ful myche ; he is 
ferdful aboue alle goddis. For alle thes 
goddis of hethene men ben feendis; but 
the Lord made heuenes. Knoulechings 
and fairnesse ¢s in his si3t; hoolynesse 
and worthi doyng zs in his halewing. 3e7 
cuntrees of hethene men, brynge’ to the 


Vhelthe c. W 2s greet a. 


The Ixxxaxiiij. a. The foure and nyntithe salm hath no title, whanne Dauid made it. K. The lxxx.ciizj. 


salm hath no title. v. 8 hignesse 1K. 


t and herie s. 


"Om. 8. V sauzen 1 passim. w whom I. 


x From u. The titil of the fyue and nyntithe salm. a. The lexxav. sal. c et plures. The fyue and nyntithe 
salm, the salm of Dauith, whanne the arke was brou3t in to his hous. kK. ¥ bryngeth 1. 


502 


t A glos. This 
salm hath no 
tijtle, neither 
in bren, ne 
in Jerom. 1. 
This salm spek- 
ith ef the tyme 
of Crist, that 
bigan propirly 
at the begyn- 
nyng of the 
preching of the 
gospel. Lire 
here. 1K. 


Dominus reg- 
nauit, exultet. 


836 


to the Lord, 3ee kuntres of Jentilis ; 
bringeth to the Lord glorie and wrshipe ; 
8bringeth to the Lord glorie to hys name. 
Taketh ostis, and* entreth in to his 
9porchis; honoureth the Lord in his holi 
porche. Be to moued fro his face al 
loerthe; seith in Jentilis, for the Lord 
hath regned. Forsothe he hath amendid 
the roundnesse of erthe’, that shal not 
be moucd; he shal demen puplis in 
iequite. Gladen heuenes, and ful out io3e 
the erthe, be to moued the se, and his 
12 plente; feeldis shul io3en, and alle thingus 
that in hem ben. Thanne alle the’ trees 
of wodis shul ful out iojen fro the face 
i30f the Lord, for he cam; for he cam to 
demen the erthe. He shal demen the 
roundnesse of the* erthe in equite; and 
puplis in his treuthe. 


PSALM XCVI. 


1 The salm of Dauid, whan his lond is 
restorid to hym. 


The Lord hath regned, the erthe ful 
20ut io3e it; manye ilis glade thei. Cloude 
and dercnesse in his cumpas; ri3twisnesse 
3and dom the coreccioun of his sete. Fir 
beforn hym shal go; and enflaume in the 
acumpas his enemys. His leitis li3teden 
to the roundnesse of the erthe; he sa3, 
sand the erthe is al to-moued. Hillis as 
wax floweden fro the face of the Lord; 
efro the face of the Lord al erthe. Heuenes 
tolden out his rijtwisnesse ; and alle pu- 
7plis se3en his glorie. Be thei confoundid, 
alle that honouren grauen thingus; and 
that glorien in their maumetis. Honour- 
seth hym alle 3ce his aungelis ; Sion herde, 
and gladdede. And the do3tris of Jude ful 
gout gladeden; for thi domes, Lord. For 
thou, Lord, he3est ouer alle erthe; ful 
myche thou art enhauncid ouer alle 
1 goddis. 3ee that loouen the Lord, hatith 
euel; the Lord kepeth the sonlis of hys 


xOm.c. Y the erthe u. 


PSALMS. 


XCV. 8—XCOVI. Io. 


Lord, bringe 3e glorye and onour to the 
Lord ; bringe 3e to the Lord glorie to hyss 
name. Take 3e sacrificis, and entre 3e in 
to the hallis of hym; herie 3e the Lord ing 
his hooli halle. Al erthe be moued of his 
face; seie 3e among hethene men, that the 10 
Lord hath regned. And he hath amendid 
the world, that schal not be moued; he 
schal deme puplis in equite. Heuenes be11 
glad, and the erthe make ful out ioye, the 
see and the fulnesse therof be moued togi- 
dere ; feeldis schulen make ioye, and allei2 
thingis that ben in tho. Thanne alle the 
trees of wodis schulen make ful out ioye, 
for the face of the Lord, for he cometh ; 13 
for he cometh to deme the erthe. He 
schal deme the world in equite; and pu- 
plis in his treuthe. 


PSALM XCVI. 
The sixe and nyntithe salmz+. 


-_ 


The Lord hath regned, the erthe make 
ful out ioye; many ilis be glad. Cloudez 
and derkuesse in his cumpas ; ri3tfulnesse 
and doom zs amending of his seete. Fiers 
schal go bifore him; and* schal enflawme> 
hise enemyes in cumpas. Hise leitis schyn-4 
eden to the world ; the erthe si3, and was 
moued. Hillis as wax fletiden doun fro; 
the face of the Lord; al erthe fro the 
face of the Lord. Heuenes telden his's 
ri3tfulnesse; and alle puplis sien his glorie. 
Alle® that worschipen sculptilis‘t be schent, 7 
and thei that han glorie in her symelacris; 
alle 3e® aungels of the Lord, worschipe" 
him. Sion herde, and was glad, and thes 
dou3tris of Juda maden ful out ioye; for 
‘thi domes, Lord'. For thou, Lord, arto 
the hizeste on al erthe; thou art greetli 
enhaunsid ouere alle goddis. 3e that louen 10 
the Lord, hate yuel; the Lord kepith the 
soulis of hise seyntis; he schal delyuer 


zOm. aun. 3 Om. «4. 


% lraruvi. at. The size and ayntithe salme hath no title, and it spekith of the comynge of Crist to the 


doom. Kk. The lxrxxxvi. salm hath no title. v. 
© Om. cr pra. uKPQWD. 4 her a, 
h worshipeth 1. i the domes of the Lord s. 


@ and it 1, 
e Alle their. 
k hateth 1. 


» enflawme, ether sette a fier c et plures, 
f grauen thingis or ymagis 1. & the a. 


t+ This salm 
hath no tijtle, 
neither in E- 
breu, ne in Je- 
rom. It spekith 
of the comyng 
of Crist to the 
dome of dis- 
cussioun, that 
is to reise gode 
men to blisse, 


“and to caste 


doun wickid 
men to helle, 
as the salm bi- 
fore spekith of 
his comyng to 
the doom of 
discrecioun, 
that is, to clepe 
sum men to 
faith bi grace, 
and to forsake 
othere men in 
synne. Lyre. 1. 
t That is, idols 
maad with 
hondis. Austyn 
here, k. 


XCVI. 11—XCVIII. 5. 


seintis ; fro the hond of the synnere he 
i‘shal deliuere® them. Li3t is sprunge to 
the ri3twis; and gladnesse to the ri3t 
igmen in herte. Glade, 3ee rijtwise, in the 


PSALMS. 


837 


hem fro the hond of the! synner. Lit is 11 
risun to the ri3tful man; and gladnesse to 
ri3tful men of herte. Juste men, be 3e™12 
glad in the Lord; and knouleclie 3c" to 





Cantate Do- 
mino eantieum 
nouum. 


Dominus reg- 
nauit, irasean- 
tur. 


Lord; and knoulecheth to the mynde of 
his halewing. 


PSALM XCVII. 
1 The salm of Dauid. 


Singeth to the Lord a newe song; for 
merueilous thingus he dide. His ri3t 
hond sauede to hym; and the holi arm 

2of hym. Knowen made the Lord his 
helthe 3euere; in the si3te of Jentilis he 
3shewide his rijtwisnesse. He recordide 
of his mercy ; and of his treuthe, to the 
hous of Irael. Alle the termes of erthe 
4sejen; the helthe 3euere of oure God. In- 
wardli io3e 3ee to God, al erthe’; syng- 
eth, and ful out io3eth, and doth salm. 
5 Doth salm to the Lord in harpe, and in 
Gharpe and in vois of salm; in trumpis 
beten out, and in vois of the hornene 
trumpe. Inwardli io3eth in the sizte of 
7the Lord king’; be moued the se, and 
his plente ; the roundnesse of londis, and 
salle that dwellen in it. The flodis shulg 
flappe for io3e with hond togidere; moun- 
gteynes shul ful out iojen fro the si3te of 
the Lord ; for he cam to deme the erthe. 
He shal deme the roundnesse of the erthe 
in ri3twisnesse ; and puplis in equitie. 


PSALM XCVIII. 
1 The salm of Dauid. 


The Lord regnede, wrathen the puplis; 
thou that sittist vp on cherubyn,be moued 
2the erthe. The Lord in Sion gret ; and 
3hey3 ouer alle puplis. Knouleche thei to 
thi gret name, for ferful and holi it is; 
sand the wrshipe of the king looueth dom. 
Thou hast greithid ri3tforth reulingis ; 
dom and ri3twisnesse in Jacob thou hast 


5do. Enhaunce 3ee the Lord oure God, 
b delyuered 4. delyueren u. 
10m.s. ™Om.a. "Om. s. 


lrrzxvit. salm; a salm conoqrsux. f° and in i 


e the erthe arn. 


the mynde of his halewyng. 


PSALM XCVII. 
The seuen and nyutithe salmhath no titles}. 


Singe 3e a newe song to the Lord ; for 
he hath do merueils. His rijt hond and 
his hooli arm; hath maad heelthe to hym. 
The Lord hath maad knowun his heelthe; 2 
in the si3t of hethene men he hath schewid 
his ri3tfulnesse. He bithou3te on his merci; 3 
and on his treuthe, to the hous of Israel. 
Alle the endis of erthe; sien the heelthe of 
oure God. Al erthe, make 3e hertli ioye, 
to God; synge 3e, and make 3e ful out 
joye, and seie 3e salm. Singe 3e to thes 
Lord in an harpe, in harpe and" vois of 
salm ; in trumpis betun out’ with hamer, 6 
and in vois of a trumpe of horn. Hertli 
synge 3e in the si3t of the Lord, the king ; 
the see and the fulnesse therof be imoued ;7 
the world, and thei that dwellen therynne. 
Flodis schulen make ioie with hond, to-s 
gidere hillis schnlen make ful out ioye, 
fort si3t of the Lord; for he cometh tos 
deme the erthe. He schal deme the world 
in ri3tfulnesse ; and puplis in equite. 


PSALM XCVIII. 
The ei3te and nyntithe salm“. 1 
The Lord hath regned, puplis ben 
wrooth; thou that sittist on eherubyn, 
the erthe be moued. The Lord zs greet 2 
in Sion; and hi3 aboue alle puplis. Knou-3 
leche thei to thi greet name, for it is ferd- 
ful and hooli; and the onour of the kinga 
loueth doom. Thou hast maad redi dress- 
yngis ; thou hast maad doom and ri3tful- 
nesse in Jacob. Enhaunse 3e oure Lords 


4 the king # pr. m. 


4 From x. The titil of the seuen and nyntithe salm. a. The title of 
sOm. L. 


t for the co pr.m. sx. froKk, " lexxarvilt. Al. 


The eiz3te and nyntithe salm, that Dauid made of the rewme of Crist, hath no title. x. The title lxxaxxviii. 
salm.s. The lxxxxviii, psalm hath no title, nether in Ebreu, nether in Jerom. v. 


+ But oure 
doctours sey 
comynili, that 
Dauith made 
this salme of 
the rewme of 
Crist ; but this 
expowning is 
more goostli 
than literal, 
therfore Dauith 
made it to in- 
duce the puple 
of Goddis wor- 
shiping, and 
this was attir 
that he hadde 
overcome the 
Filisteis, and 
othere aduer- 
saries rising a- 
3ens his rewme, 
and aftir that 
he hadde bron3t 
the arke of the 
Lord inte the 
hil of Syon, 
withinne the 
tabernaele wich 
he hadde araied 
therfore ; and 
there he or- 
deyned prestes 
and dekenes, 
for to herie 
God. Lire 
here. Ke 


t This salm 
hath no tijtle, 
neither in E- 
bren, ne in Je- 
rom; oure doc- 
tours seyn co- 
mounly, that 
Dauid made 
this salm of the 
rewme of Crist. 
I. 


Jubilate Deo. 


Misericordiam 
et iudicium, 


838 


and honoureth the litle ste3ing vp place 

cof his feet, for it is holi. Moyses and 
Aron in® the prestis of hym; and Sa- 
muel among hem that inwardli clepen 
his name. Thei inwardli clepeden the 
7 Lord, and he ful out herde them; in the 
piler of a cloude he spac to them. Thei 
kepten his witnessingus; and the heste 
8that he 3af to hem. Lord oure God, thou 
‘ful outf herdest hem ; God, thou merciful 
were to them, and veniende in to alle 
%the findingus of hem. Enhaunceth the 
Lord oure God, and honoureth in the 
holy hil of hym 3; for holi the Lord oure 
God. 


PSALM XCIX. 
1 The sabn in confessioun. 


2 Inwardli io3e 3ee to God, al erthe®; 
serueth to the Lord in gladnesse. En- 

3 treth in his sizte; in ful out io3ing. Witeth, 
for the Lord he is God ; he made vs, and 
we not vsself*. His puple, and the schep 

4of his leswe, goth in to his 3atys in con- 
fessioun; his porchis in ympnes, ‘knou- 
leche 3ee' to hym. Preise 3ee his name, 

5for swete is the Lord, in to withouten 
ende his mercy; and unto ieneracioun 
and ieneracioun his treuthe. 


PSALM C. 
I The salm to hym Dauid. 


Mercy and dom; I shal singe to thee, 
2Lord. I shal do salm, and vnderstonde in 
the vndefoulid weie; whan thou shalt come 
to me. I fulli 3ide in the innocence of 
myn herte; in the myddel of myn hous. 
3I purposide not befor myn ejen an vn- 
rijtwis thing ; the doende the brekingus 
of the lawe I hatide. Ther cleuede not 
4to me a shreude herte; the malice doere 


fande. fOm. an. 8 the erthe 4H. 


° a cloude x. 


P Om. K. 
t Om. c et plures. 


PSALMS. 


h oure self an. 


4 Om. c et plures. 
u knowlechynge vp. YOm.s. W Lord God i. 


XCVIII. 6—C. 4. 


God; and worschipe 3e the stool of hise 

feet, for it is hooli. Moises and Aarone 
weren among hise preestis; and Sainuel 

was among hem that inwardli clepen his 

name. Thei inwardli clepiden the Lord, 

and he herde hem; in a piler of cloude®7 
he spak to hem. Thei kepten hise wit- 

nessyngis ; and the comaundement which 

he 3af to hem. Oure Lord God?, thous 
herdist hem ; God, thou were merciful to 

hem, and thou tokist veniaunce on al her 

fyndyngis. Enhaunse 3e oure Lord God,? 
and worschipe 3e in his hooli hil; for oure 

Lord God zs hooli. 


PSALM XCIX. 


The titil of the’ nyne and nyntithe salm.\ 
‘A salm to knouleche ; ‘in brew ‘thus, 
A salm for knouleching't. 


Al erthe, singe 3e hertli to God; serue2 
3e the Lord in gladnesse. Entre 3e in his 
si3t; in ful out ioiyng. Wite 3e, that the3 
Lord hym silf is God; he made vs, and 
not we maden vs. His puple, and the 
scheep of his lesewe, entre 3e in to hise4 
j3atis in knoulechyng; entre 3e zn to hise 
porchis, ‘knouleche 3e" to him in ympnes. 
Herye 3e his name, for the Lord iss 
swete, his merci zs with outen ende; and 
his treuthe 7s in generacioun and in to 
generacioun. 


PSALM C., 
The titil of the hundrid salm.* The salm, 
of Dauidt. 

Lord”, Y schal synge to thee; merci 
and doom. I schal synge, and Y schal vn-2 
durstonde in a weie with out wem; whanne 
thou schalt come to me. I 3ede perfitli in 
the innocence of myn herte; in the myddil 
of myn hous. I settide not forth bifore3 
myn izen an vniust thing; Y hatide hem 
that maden trespassyngis. A schrewide4 
herte cleuede not to me; Y knewe not a 


i knowlecheth jee aren. 


r Om. ELP. Sin Jerom uv. Om. ¢ et plures. 


+ A glos. This 
salm was maad 
to be songen In 
the offring of 
pesible sacri- 
fices, that was 
offrid to God 
for sum bene- 
fice to be geten 
of him, to 
wiche the ples- 
ing of God is 
requyred bi- 
fore, ether for 
benefice now 
geten, to wich 
the doing of 
thankingis 
oweth to seve, 
Lire here. x. 

t A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salm, whanne 
he knew thst 
God hadde 
stabliyschid 
and confermed 
him in the 
rewme of Israel, 
and therfore he 
purposide 
thanne stide- 
fastli to vse wel 
the power of 
king, thou3 he 
felde fro this 
purpos bi his 
frelte and sti- 
ring of the 
deuel, in doing 
auowtrie, and 
mansleyng, 
and in the 
noumbring of 
the peple, ether 
summe othere 
synnes, for 
wiche he dide 
verrey pe- 
nsunce. Lire 
here. Ke 





Domine, ex- 
audi, 


evnfilable herte; with it J eet not. 


sthee; swiftli ful out here me. 
sas croote han dried. 


6for3ete to ete my bred. 


sin the hous enese. 
yinaad as a spare solitare in the rof. Al 


io Sworen. 
iiny drine with weping I mengde. 


C. 5-——CI. 13. 


bacbitende prineli to his ne3hebore; thys 
I pursuede. With the proude e3e and the 
Myn 
ejen to the feithful men of the erthe, that 
thei sytte with me; the man goende in 
the vndefoulid weie, this seruede to me. 


7 Ther shal not dwelle in the myddel of 


myn house, that doth pride; that speketh 
wicke* thingus, reulide not ri3t in the 


ssijte of yn e3en. In the morutid I slo3 


alle the synneres of erthe; that I shulde 
destro3e fro the cite of the Lord alle 
men werkende wickidnesse. 


PSALM CI. 


1 The orisoun of the pore man, whan he 


was tormentid, also befor the Lord 
he helde out his pre3eere. 


2 Lord, ful out here myn orisoun; and 
3my cry to thee come. 


Ne turne thou 
awei thi face fro me; in whateuere day 
Iam trublid, bowe in to me thin ere. 
In what euere dai I shal inwardli clepe 
For my 
da3is han failid as smoke ; and my bones 
I am smyten as 
hei3, and myn herte driede; for I haue 
Fro the vois of 
my weiling; cleuede to iny bon to my 


iflesh. Lic I am maad to a pellican of 


wildernesse ; I am maad as a ny3t rauen 
I wook!; and am 


day putten" to me repref myn enemys 3 
and thei that preisiden me ajen me 
For aske® as bred J eet; and 
Fro 
the face of the wrathe of thin indigna- 
cioun ; for rerende? vp thou hurtledest 


j2me. My da3es as shadewe boweden doun; 
izand I as hey driede. 


Thou forsothe, 
Lord, in to withoute ende‘ abidist stille; 
and thi memorial in to ieneracioun and 


k wickid an. lwakede azn, % puttiden a. 


x ¢. andi. a. hundred and firste uur. 


y Om. Rx. 
Srijng x. © Om. ¢ et plures. 


PSALMS. 


5 bowende doun fro me I knew3 not. The 


839 


wickid man bowynge awei fro me. I pur-5 
suede hym; that bacbitide priueli his nei3- 
bore. With the proude ize and an herte 
vnable to be fillid; Y ect not with this. 
Myn ijen weren to the feithful men of6 
erthe, that thei sitte with me; he that 
3ede in a weie with out wem, mynystride 
to me. He that doith pride, schal not7 
dwelle in the myddil of myn hous; he 
that spekith wickid thingis, seruede not in 
the si3t of myn izen. In the morutid Y8 
killide alle the synners of erthe; that Y 
schulde leese fro the citee of the Lord alle 
men worchynge wickidnesse. 


PSALM CI. 

The title of the ‘hundrid and o* salm. The) 
preier of a pore man, whanne he was 
auguishid, and schedde out’ his speche 
bifore the Lordy. 

Lord, here thou my preier; and my crie? 
come to thee. Turne not awei thi face fro3 
me; in what euere dai Y am troblid, bowe 
doun thin cere to me. In what euere day 
Y schal inwardli clepe thee; here thou me 
swiftli. For my daies han failid as smoke ; 4 
and my boonus han? dried vp* as critouns?. 
Tam smytun as hei, and myn herte dried 5 
vp; for Y haue for3ete to eete my breed. 
Of the vois of my weilyng; my boon clenede 6 
to my fleische. I am maad lijk a pellican7 
of wildirnesse ; Yam maad as a ni3t crowe 
in an hous. I wakide; and Y am maad ass 
a solitarie sparowe in the roof. Al dais 
myn enemyes dispisiden me ; and thei that 
preisiden me sworen ajens me. For Y eet 10 
aschis as breed ; and Y meddlide my drinke 
with weping. Fro the face of the ire of 11 
thin indignacioun ; for thou reisinge me 
hast hurtlid me doun. Mi daies boweden 12 
awei as a® schadewe; and Y wexede dric 
as hei. But, Lord, thou dwellist with 1s 
outen ende; and thi memorial in genera- 
cioun and in to generacioun. Lord, thous 
risinge vp schalt haue merci on Sion ; for 
q Om. c. 


Oo askes AEH. FP arerynge 4ENn. 


zOm.c. ®Om.1._ ? critouns, ether leefing of 


t+ A glos. This 
salm speketh of 
the tyme of ° 
Cra in the 
firste chap. to 
Ebrewis, Poul 
aleggeth the 
lettre of this 
salm seid of 
Crist ; to the 
lettre this salme 
speketh of the 
angwiss of the 
puple of Israel, 
preijng with 
desijr for the 
comyng of 
Crist; this 
angwi3ss felde 
most in the 
tyme of Antiok 
the noble. Lire 
here. Ke 
teritons; that 
is, that that 
dwellith in the 
panne of the 
friyng. ab. 


840 


iain to ieneracioun. Thou risende vp, Lord, 
shalt han mercy of Sion; for time of his 
isrewing, for ther is comen time. For 
ther pleseden to thi sernauns his stones ; 
and to his erthe they shuln han mercy. 
16 And Jentilis shul dreden thi name, Lord ; 
i7and alle kingis of erthe thi glorie. For 
the Lord hath bild vp Sion; and it shal 
isbe seen in his glorie. He beheeld in to 
the orisoun of the meke ; and he despiside 
ignot the prezeere of hem. These thingus 
be thei write in an other ieneracioun; and 
the puple that shal be formed shal preise 
20the Lord. For he beheeld forth fro his 
he3e holy; the Lord fro heuene in to 
gierthe® lokede. That he shulde here the 
weilingus of the gynede; and loosen the 
gesones of the slayne. That thei telle out 
in Sion the name of the Lord; and his 
o3preising in Jerusalem. In gedering to- 
gidere the puplis in to oon ; and kingus, 
aithat thei serue to the Lord. He an- 
swerde to hym in weie of his vertue; 
Fewenesse of my da3is shewe thou to me. 
25 Ne a3een clepe thou me in the myddil of 
my da3is; in ieneracioun and in to iene- 
2¢racioun thi 3eris. In the begynning thou, 
Lord, the erthe foundedest; and the werkis 
27 of thin hondis ben heuenus. Thei shul 
pershen, thou forsothe abidist stille; and 
alle as clothing shuln waxen old. And as 
a couertour thou shalt chaunge them, 
2gand thei shul be chaungid ; thou forsothe 
he the same art, and thi 3eeris shul not 
29faile. The sones of thi seruauns shul 
wone; and the sed of hem in to the world 
shal be ri3tforth reulid. 


PSALM CII. 
1 The salm to hym Dauid. 


Blesse thou, my soule, to the Lord; 
and alle thingus that withinne me ben, to 
2his holi name. Blesse thou, my soule, 
to the Lord; and wile thou not for3ete 


PSALMS. 


Cl14——-ealees 


the tyme ‘to hauet merci therof cometh, 
for the tyme cometh. For the stones ther-15 
of plesiden thi seruauntis; and thei schu- 
len haue merci on the lond therof. And, 16 
Lord, hethen men schulen drede thi name ; 
and alle kingis of erthe schulen drede thi 
glori. For the Lord hath bildid® Sion 317 
and he schal be seen in his glorie. He18 
bihelde on the preier of meke men; and 
he dispiside not the preier of hem. Be19 
these thingis writun in an othere genera- 
cioun ; and the puple that schal be maad 
schal preise the Lord. For he bihelde fro 20 
his hijze hooli place; the Lord lokide fro 
heuene in to erthe. For to here the weil-21 
ingis of feterid men; and for to vnbynde 
the sones of slayn men. That thei telle in22 
Sion the name of the Lord; and his preis- 
ing in Jerusalem. In gaderinge togidere 23 
puplis in to oon; and kingis, that thei 
serue the Lord. It answeride to hym in24 
the weie of his vertu; Telle thou to me 
the fewnesse of my daies. Ajenclepe thou 2s 
not me in the myddil of my daies; thi 
3eris ben in generacioun and in to genera- 
cioun. Lord, thou foundidist the erthe in 26 
the bigynnyng; and heuenes ben the werkis 
of thin hondis. Tho schulen _perische, 27 
but thou dwellist perfitli; and alle schulen 
wexe eelde as a clooth. And thon schalt 
chaunge hem as an hiling, and tho schulen 
be chaungid; but thou art the same thizs 
silf, and thi 3eeris schulen not faile. The29 
sones of thi seruauntis schulen dwelle; and 
the seed of hem schal be dressid in to the 
world. 


PSALM CII. 


The title of the ‘hundred and secounde®\ 
salm. ‘Of Dauid" +. 


Mi soule, blesse thou the Lord ; and alle 
thingis that ben with ynne me, blesse his 
hooli name. Mi soule, blesse thou the2 
Lord; and nyle thou for3ete alle the 3eld- 


T the erthe eH. 


4 of hauyng 1. 


ebild 1. ‘It, that is, the chirche of Crist K. 


& hundrid and tweithe s. 4 A salm to 


Dauid. c et plures. To Dauid. eve. A saln of Dauid. isub. A sal of Dauid to herie God. Kk. A song to 


Dauid, i. 


+ A glos. Da- 
uith made this 
salme, for to 
herie God ; and 
he exciteth men 
and aungels 
and ech crea- 
ture, for to 
herie God. Lire 
here. K. 





CII. 3-22. 


salle the 3eldingus of hym. That hath 
mercy to alle thi wickidnessis; that 
4helith alle thin infirmytees. That a3een 
bieth fro deth thi lif; that crouneth thee 
sin mercy and mercy doingis. That ful- 
filleth in goode thingus thi diseyr; shal 
be renewid® as of an egle thi 3outhe. 
6Doende mercies the Lord; and dom to 
zalle men suffrende wrong. Knowen he 
made his weies to Moises; and to the 
ssones of Irael his willis. Reewere, and 
merciful the Lord; long abidende, and 
gmyche merciful. In to euermore he shal 
not wrathen; ne in to withoute ende he 
10shal threte. Aftir oure synnes he dide 
not to vs; ne aftir oure wickidnessis he 
113eldet to vs. For after the hei3te of 
heuene fro erthe; he strengthide his 
lgmercy_vpon men dredende hym. Hou 
myche the rising stant" fro the going 
doun; aferr he made fro vs oure wickid- 
isnessisy, What maner wise the fader 
hath mercy of the sonus, the Lord dide 
14mercy to men dredende hym; for he 
knew oure britil making. He recordide 
1sfor pouder wee be, a man as hey his 
da3es; as the flour of the feld so he shal 
16floure out. For the spirit shal thur3 
passen in hym, and he shal not stonde 
stille; and he shal no more knowen his 
place. The mercy forsothe of the Lord 
fro withoute ende, and vnto withoute 
ende; vpon men dredende hym. And the 
rijtwisnesse of hym in to the sones of 
18sones; to hem that kepen his testament. 
And myndeful thei ben of his maunde- 
l9mens; to do them. The Lord in heuene 
made redi his sete; and his reume to alle 
20shal lordshipen. HBlisse 3ee to the Lord, 
alle his aungelis, mi3ti bi vertue, doende 
the woord of hym; to ben herd the vois 
21of his sermounes. Blessith to the Lord, 
alle 3ee his vertues; 3ee his seruauns that 
22don his wil. Blessith to the Lord, alle 
jee his werkis, in alle place, 3ee his do- 
mynaciouns; blesse thou, my soule, to 
the Lord. 


8 fulfild z pr.m. t3eldede azn. 


PSALMS. 841 


yngis of him. Which doith merci to alles 
thi wickidnessis; which heelith alle thi 
sijknessis. Which aj3enbieth thi lijf fro4 
deth; which corowneth thee in merci andi 
merciful doyngis. Which fillith thi desijrs 
in goodis ; thi 3ongthe schal be renulid as 
the 3ongthe of an egle. The Lord doynge ¢ 
mercies; and doom to alle men suffringe 
wrong. Hek made hise weies' knowun to7 
Moises ; hise willis to the sones of Israel. 
The Lord 7s a merciful doer, and merciful 8 
in wille; longe abidinge, and myche mer- 
ciful. He schal not be wrooth with outen 9 
ende; and™ he schal not thretne with outen 
ende. He dide not to vs aftir oure synnes; 10 
nether he 3eldide to vs aftir oure wickid- 
nessis. For bi® the hijnesse of heuene fro 11 
erthe; he made strong his merci on men 
dredynge hym. As myche as the eest is 12 
fer® fro the west; he made fer oure wickid- 
nessis fro vs. As a fadir hath merci on? 13 
sones, the Lord hadde merci on men dred- 
ynge him; for he knewe oure makyng.14 
He bithou3te that we ben dust, a man 715 
as hey; his dai schal flowre out so as a flour 
of the feeld. For the spirit schal passe in 16 
hym, and’ schal not abide; and* schal no 
more knowe his place. But the merci of 17 
the Lord zs fro with out bigynnyng, and 
til in to with outen ende; on men dredinge 
hym. And his ri3tfulnesse zs in to the 
sones of sones; to hem that kepen his 18 
testament. And ben myndeful of hise 
comaundementis; to do tho. The Lord ts 
hath maad redi his seete in heuene; and 
his rewme schal be lord of alle. Aun-20 
gels of the Lord, blesse 3e the Lord; 3e 
my3ti in vertu, doynge his word, to here 
the vois of hise wordis. Alle vertues of 21 
the Lord, blesse 3e the Lord; 3e mynys- 
tris of hym that doen his wille. Alle22 
werkis of the Lord, blesse 3e the Lord, in 
ech place of his lordschipe; my soule, 
blesse thou the Lord. ; 


" stoondith «4. Y wickidnes a. 


land ini. k Om. a pr.m. cpHu. 1 weie a. m Om. 1. D aftir 1. ° Om. s. P on his 1. 
Fandit1. and 71. 
VOL. ITI. 5p 


Benedic, 
anima, 


842 


1 


PSALM CIII. 
The salm of Dauid. 


PSALMS. 


Blisse thou, my soule, to the Lord; 
Lord my God, thou art magnefied hugeli. 


Confessionn and fairnesse thon 


hast 


2clad*; wrappid with 1i3t, as with cloth- 
sing. Srecchende out heuene as skin; that 


couerest with watris the ouermoris of it.* 


That potist the cloude thi ste3ing vp; 
that gost vp on the pennys of windis. 
s¢That makist thin aungelis spiritis; and 
5thi sernauns brennende fyr. That found- 
edest the erthe vpon hys stablenesse; it 
shal not ben inbowid into the world of 


6 world. 


wrapping ; 


The se as a clothing is his 
ouer mounteynes shul stonde 


7watris. Fro thi blamyng thei shul flee; 
fro the vois of thi thunder thei shul 


8 drede. 


Hillis stezen vp, and the feldis 


gon doun; in to the place that thou hast 
ofoundid to hem. A terme thou hast set, 
that thei shul not ouer passe; ue they 
shul ben al turned, to couere the erthe. 
10 That sendist out wellis in valeis; betwe 
the myddil of mounteynes shul passe 


i thur3 watris. 


Alle the bestis of the feld 


shul drinke; assis shul abide in ther 


12 thrist. 


Vpon tho thingus the foulis of 


heuene shul wone; fro the myddel of 
isstones thei shul 3eue voisis. 
ende the hillis fro thin ouermor; of the 
frut of thy werkis shal be fulfild the 


14 erthe. 


He watr- 


Bringende forth hei to hous 


bestis ; and erbe* to the seruyse of men. 
That thou bringe out bred fro the erthe ; 


isaud wyn glade the herte of man. 


That 


he make gladsum the face in oile; and 


bred the herte of man 


make stable. 


16 Ther shul ben fulfild the trees of the 
feld, and the cedris of Liban that he 


17 plauntede ; 


nestis. 


The hous of the 


there sparewis shul make 


ierfaucoun 


isduke is of hem; the he3e mounteynes to 
19herttis; the ston’ refut to irchounes. He 


The title of the i. 


CDEFGHKL 


W cloth 


MOPQRSWXbi. 


CDFUMOQRSWhbi. 


id AEH. 


u Om. 1. salm hath no title. Ku. 
y thirst, that is, to be filled in her thirst x. 


x erbe be au. 


CIM. 1——19. 


PSALM CIII. 
The hundrid and thridde salm*+. 1 


Mi soule, blesse thou the Lord; my 
Lord God, thou art magnyfied greetli. 
Thou hast clothid knouleching and fair- 
nesse ; and thou art clothid with 1i3t, as2 
with a cloth. And thou stretchist forth 
heuene as a skyn; and thou hilist withs 
watris the hizer partis therof. Which 
settist a cloude thi stiyng; which goest on 
the fetheris of wyndis. Which makist4 
spiritis thin aungels; and thi mynystris 
brennynge fier. Which hast foundid thes 
erthe on his stablenesse; it schal not be 
bowid in to the world of world. Thesé 
depthe of watris as a cloth is the clothing 
therof; watris schulen stonde on _ hillis. 
Tho schulen fle fro thi blamyng; men7 
schulen be aferd of the vois of thi thun- 
dur. Hillis stien vp, and feeldis goens 
doun; in to the place which thou hast 
foundid to tho. Thou hast set a terme,9 
which tho’ schulen not passe; nether tho 
schulen be turned, for to hile the erthe. 
And thou sendist out wellis inY grete10 
valeis; watris schulen passe bitwix the 
myddil* of hillis. Alle the beestis of the 
feeld schulen drynke ; wielde assis schulen 
abide in her thirst’. Briddis of the eirie 
schulen dwelle on tho; fro the myddis 
of? stoonys thei schulen 3yue voices. And 13 
thou moistist hillis of her hizer thingis ; 
the erthe schal be fillid of the fruyt of thi 
werkis. And thou bringist forth hei to14 
beestis; and eerbe? to the seruyce of men. 
That thou bringe forth breed of the erthe; 
and that wiyu make glad the herte of 1s 
men. That he make glad the face with 
oile; and that breed make stidefast the 
herte of man. The trees of the feeld 16 
schulen be fillid, and the cedris of the 
Liban, whiche he plauntide; sparewis17 
schulen make nest there. The hous of 
the gerfaukun is the leeder of tho; hije1s 


¥ stoon Is 4. 


win the c. in to 1 
Zofthec. 4erbis 1. 


Vv thei 1. x myddis 


b sparowen 


+ The c. and 
iij. salm hath 
no tijtle, neither 
in Ebreu ne in 
Jerom. The 
salm maker in- 
ducith him self 
to herie God, 
and bringith 
resouns therto, 
and eft he re- 
hersith the for- 
seid heriyng. 
Lire... 

The same glos, 
that the salme 
hifore hath. x 


CIIl. 20-——35. 


made the mone in to times; the sunne 
20knew3 his going doun. Thou hast set 
dercnessis, and maad is the ny3t; in it? 
shul thur3 passe alle the bestis of the 
21wode. The whelpis of sleouns rorende 
that thei raueshen; and sechen of God 
22mete to them. Sprungen is the sunne, 
and thei ben gadered to gider; and in 
ther ligging placis they shul be sett 
23togidere. A man shal go out to his 
werc; and to his werching, vn to euen. 
24Hou magnefied ben thi werkis, Lord, 
alle thingus in wisdam thou hast maad ; 
fulfild is the erthe with thi posses- 
25sioun. This grete se and large to hondis; 
there crepende bestis, of whiche is no 
noumbre. Little bestis with the grete; 
26there shippis shul thur3 passe. This 
dragoun that thou hast formed to begile 
27to hym; alle thingus of thee abijden, 
that thou 3iue to them mete in tyme. 
‘28 Thee 3yuende to them, thei shul gedere ; 
thee openende thin hond, alle thingis shul 
29 be fulfild with goodnesse. Thee forsothe 
turnende awei the face, thei shul be dis- 
turbid; thou shalt taken awei the spirit 
of hem, and thei shul faile; and in to 
30ther pouder thei shul turne ajeen. Send 
out thi spirit, and thei shul be formed; 
and thon shalt renewe the face of the 
sierthe. Be the glorie of the Lord in to 
the world; glade shal the Lord in his 
32werkis. That behalt? the erthe, and 
maketh it to tremble; that toucheth the 
mounteynes, and thei smoken. I shal 
33synge to the Lord in my lif; I shal do 
salm to my God, as longe as I am. 
34 Jo3eful be to hym my speche ; I forsothe 
35shal deliten in the Lord. Faile the syn- 
neres fro the erthe, and wicke men, so 
that thei be not; blesse thou, my soule, 
to the Lord. 


PSALMS. 843 


hillis ben refute’ to hertis; a‘ stoon is 
refutt to irchouns. He made the moone19 
in to tymes; the sunne knewe his goyng 
doun. Thou hast set derknessis, and ny3t 20 
is® maad ; alle beestis of the wode schulen 
go ther ynne. Liouns whelpis rorynge2i 
for to rauysche; and to seke of God meete 
to hem silf. The sunne is risun, and tho22 
ben gaderid togidere; and tho schulen be 
set in her couchis. A man schal go out23 
to his werk; and to his worching, til to 
the’ evuentid. Lord, thi werkis ben mag-21 
nefiede ful myche, thou hast maad alle 
thingis in wisdom; the erthe is fillid 
with thi possessioun. This see 2s greet 25 
and large to hondis; there ben erepinge 
beestis, of which is noon® noumbre. Litil 
beestis with grete; schippis schulen passe 26 
there. This dragoun which" thou hast 
formyd; for to scorne hym. Alle thingis 27 
abiden! of thee; that thou 3yue to hem 
meete in tyme. Whanne thou schalt 3yue 22 
to hem, thei schulen gadere; whanne thou 
schalt opene thin hond, alle thingis schulen 
be fillid with goodnesse. But whanne thou 29 
schalt turne awey the face, thei schulen 
be disturblid ; thou schalt take awei the 
spirit of them, and thei schulen faile; and 
thei schulen turne ajen in to her dust. 
Sende out thi spirit, and thei schulen be30 
formed! of the™ newe; and thou schalt 
renule the face of the erthe. The glories 
of the Lord be in to the world; the Lord 
schal be glad in hise werkis. Which"3s2 
biholdith the erthe, and makith it to 
tremble; which® touchith hillis, and tho 
smoken. I schal singe to the Lord in my 33 
lijf; Y schal seie salm to my God, as longe 
as Yam. Mi speche be myrie? to him; 34 
forsothe Y schal delite in the Lord. Syn-3s 
neris faile fro the? erthe, and wickid men 


Juile, so that thei be not; my soule, blesse 


thou the Lord. 


Zthat 4. 8 beholdeth aren. 
© refuytis c et plures. ther, wast.  fOm.ceteri fere omnes, &nonet plures, » thati. 
iabididenc. ‘this. Jrefourmeds, ™Om.1. "The whieh 1. © the which. P myrthe 1. 


4 Om. c et plures. 


5P 2 


Confitemint 
Domino, et 
inuocate. 


844 


PSALM CIV. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. 


1 Knoulecheth to the Lord, and inwardly 
clepeth his name; telleth out among Jen- 
etilis his werkis. Singeth to hym, and 
doth salm to hym, and tellith alle his 
smerueilis ; be 3ee preisid in his holi 
name. Glade the herte of 30u sechende 
athe Lord; secheth the Lord, and beth 
confermed ; secheth his face euermor. 
s Haueth” mynde of his merueilis, that he 
dide; his wonders, and the domes of his 
smouth. The sed of Abraham, his ser- 
uaunt; the sonus of Jacob, his chosen. 
7 He the Lord oure God; in al erthe his 
sdomes. Myndeful he was in to the 
world of his testament; of the woord that 
he sente in to a thousend ieneraciouns. 
»The whiche he disposide to Abraham ; 
1oand of his oth to Isaac. And he sette it 
to Jacob in to an heste; and to Irael in 
11 to enere lastende testament. Setende, To 
thee I shal 3eue the lond of Chanaan ; the 
12litle corde of 30ure eritage. Whan thei 
weren in short noumbre; most fewe and 
istilieris of it. And thei passiden thur3 
fro folc in to fole; and fro reume in to 
14an other puple. He lafte not a man to 
no3e to them; and he chastiside for hem 
iskingis. Wileth not touche my cristis; 
and in my profetis wileth not ben waried. 
i6 And he clepide hungir vp on the? erthe; 
and alle fastnesse of bred he to-ponede. 
17 He sente beforn hem a man; and® into a 
isthral Joseph is sold. Thei mekeden in 
stockis his feet, iren passide thur3 hys 
i9lif; to the time that his woord shulde 
come. The speche of the Lord en- 
20 flaumede hym; the king sente and loosede 
hym, the prince of puplis and lafte hym. 
21He sette hym lord of his hous; and 
22prince of all his possessioun. That he 


bv Hath au. 


PSALMS. 


d Om. 4. 


CIV. 1—22. 
PSALM CIV. 
The title of the hundrid and fourthe salm, 
Alleluya't. 


Knouleche 3e to the Lord, and inwardli: 
clepe 3e his name; telle 3e hise werkis 
among hethen men. Synge 3e to hym,2 
and seie 3e salm to him, and telle 3e alle 
hise merueylis ; be 3e preisid in his hoolis 
name. The herte of men sekynge the 
Lord be glad; seke 3e the Lord, and bes 
3e confermed ; seke 3e euere his face. 
Haue 3e mynde on hise merueilis, whiche 5 
he dide; on his grete wondris, and domes 
of his mouth. The seed of Abraham, his¢ 
seruaunt; the sones of Jacob, his chosun 
man. He its oure Lord God; hise domes7 
ben in al the’ erthe. He was myndefuls 
of his testament in to the world; of the 
word which he comaundide in to a thou- 
synde generaciouns. Which he disposideg 


+ A glos. This 
salm is a stir- 
yng to Goddis 
heriyng, and 
first the pro- 
phet excitith 
the puple for to 
herie God, and 
that this be don 
more spedely, 

e rehersith 
the mynde of 
Goddis beni- 
ficis. Lire here. 
Ik. 


to Abraham ; and of his ooth to Isaac. - ° 


And he ordeynede it to Jacob in to aio 


comaundement; and to Israel in to euer- 
lastinge testament. 
j3ine to thee the lond of Canaan; the cord 
of 30ure eritage. 
a litil noumbre; and the comelingis of 
hemt weren ful fewe. 
fro folk in to folk; and fro a rewme in to 
another puple. 
anoye hem; and he chastiside kyngis for 


hem. Nile 3e touche my cristis; and nyle js 
And 16 


3e do wickidli among my prophetis. 
God clepide hungir on erthe; and he 
wastide al the stidefastnesse of breed. 


He sente a man bifore hem; Joseph was 17 
Thei maden lowe 18 


seeld" in to a seruaunt. 
hise feet in stockis’, irun passide by his 


soule; til the word of him cam. Theis 
speche of the Lord enflawmede him ; the 20 


king sente and vnbond hym; the prince of 
puplis sente and delyuerede him. 
ordeynede him the’ lord of his hous; and 


e Om. an, 


® Alleluya ; the salm of Dauith, whanne he hadde brou3l the arke into his hous. k. Om. u. that is, herie 


3¢ God. 1 marg. 8 Om. c ef plures. 


‘him c e¢ plures. 


Usold KL. VY feteris w. 


w Om. c eé plures. 


And he seide, J shal 1 
Whanne thei weren in 12 
And thei passiden 13 


He lefte not a man to 


Hea 





CIV. 23——42. 


shulde enformef his princis as hymself; 
and his olde men prudence he shulde 
23teche. And Irael entride in to Egipt; 
and Jacob a tiliere was in the lond of 
24Cham. And he encrecide his puple 
hugely; and fastnede hym vpon his ene- 
2esmys. He turned the herte of hem, that 
thei hateden his puple; and treccherie 
2¢shulden do in to his sernauns. He sente 
Moises, his seruaunt; and Aron, hym 
27whom he ches. And he putte in hem 
the woordis of his tocnes; and of his 
28 wonders in the lond of Cham. He sente 
dercnessis, and made derc; and vntymely 
2ohe fullfilde not his woordis. And he 
turnede the watris of hem in to blod; 
3oaud slo3 the fisshis of hem. And the 
lond of hem 3af froggis; in the preue 
3ichaumbris of ther kingus. He seide, 
and ther cam an hound fleeje; and 
szgnattis in alle the coostis of hem. And 
he putte the reynes of hem hayl; fyr 
33 brennende in the lond of hem. And he 
smot the vynes of hem, and the fige 
placis of hem; and he to-broside the 
34 wode of the coostis of hem. He seide, 
and ther cam a locust; and worte werm 
35of the whiche was no noumbre. And it 
eet al the hei in the lond of hem; and eet 
36 al the frut of the lond of hem. And he 
smot alle the firste goten in the lond of 
hem; the firste frutis of § alle the trauaile 
azof hem. And he bro3te hem ont with 
syluer and gold; and ther was not a® syk 
38mani in the linagis of hem. Egipt 
gladede in ther forth going; for ther 
s9drede lai in vp on hem. He stra3te out 
a cloude, in to the proteccioun of hem ; 
and fyr, that he shulde li3te to hem by 
40the ny3t. Thei askeden, and ther kam a 
kurlu"; and with the bred of henene he 
4) fulfilde hem. He to-brac the ston, and 
ther flowiden watris; ther wenten awei 
s2flodis in the drie. For myndeful he 
was of his holi woord; that he hadde to 


ftechen cE pr.m. § of hem 4. 
x*Om.1. Yheme. Zand hec et plures. 
€eoutr, fthern ¢ Om.1. 


PSALMS. 


845 


the* prince of al his possessioun. That he 22 
schulde lerne hise princis as him silf; and 
that he schulde teche hise elde men pru- 
dence. And Israel entride in to Egipt; 23 
and Jacob was a comeling in the lond of 
Cham. And God encreesside his puple24 
greetli; and made hymyY stidefast on hise 
enemyes. He turnede the herte of hem, 25 
that thei hatiden his puple; and diden gile 
a3ens hise seruauntis. He sent Moises, 26 
his seruaunt; thilke Aaron, whom he chees. 
He puttide in hem the wordis of hise27 
myraclis; and of hise grete wondris in the 
lond of Cham. He sente derknessis, and 28 
made derk; and he made not bitter hise 
wordis. He turnede the watris of hem 29 
in to blood; and he killide the fischis of 
hem. And the lond of hem jaf paddoks ; 30 
in the priue places of the kyngis of hem. 
God seide, and a fleische flie cam; and 3! 
gnattis in alle the coostis of hem. He32 
settide her reynes hail; fier brennynge in 
the lond of hem. And he smoot the33 
vynes of hem, and the fige trees of hem; 
and” al to-brak the tree* of the coostis 
of hem. He seide, and a® locuste cain; 34 
and a bruk of which was* noon? noumbre. 
And it eet al the hey in the lond of hem; 35 
and it eet al the fruyt of the lond of hem. 
And he killide ech the firste gendrid thing 36 
in the lond of hem; the firste fruitis of 
alle the trauel of hem. And he ledde out 37 
hem with siluer and gold; and noon was 
sijk in the lynagis of hem. Egipt was3s 
glad in the goyng forth of hem; for the 
drede of hem lai on Egipcians. Hess 
spredde abrood a clonde, in to the hiling 
of hem; and fier, that it schynede to hem 
bi ny3t. Thei axiden, and a curlew cam ; 40 
and he fillide hem with the breed of 
heuene. He brak af stoon, and watris41 
flowiden ; floodis 3eden forth in the drye 
place. For he was myndeful of his hooli42 
word; which he hadde to Abraham, his 


child. And he ledde out his puple in ful 43 
han wz. !Om, au. * corlure x. 
atreesa. ther ¢therwasi. ‘noc et plures. 


846 


43 Abraham, his child. And he bro3te out 
his puple in ful out io3ing; and his 

44chosene in glading. And he 3af to them 
the regiouns of Jentilis; and the traualis 

4sof puplis thei weldeden. ‘That thei kepe 
his iustifiyngus; and his lawe they a3een 
seche. 


PSALM CV. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. 


Knoulecheth to the Lord, for good ; 
for in to the world the mercy of hym. 
2 Who shal speke the poweris of the Lord; 

herd! shal make alle the preisingus of 
3hym? Blisful that kepen dom; and don 
4ri3twissnesse in alle tine. Haue mynde 

of vs, Lord, in the well willing™ of thi 
puple ; visite thou vs in thi helthe 
53yuere. To seen in the goodnesse of thi 
chosene, to gladen in the gladnesse of 
thi fole; that thou be preisid with thin 
6eritage. Wee han synned with oure fa- 
dris, vnri3twisly wee han do; wickidnesse 
7wee han wro3t. Oure fadris in Egipt 
vnderstoden not thi meruelis ; thei weren 
not myndeful of the multitude of thi 
mercy. And thei in to the se ste3ende vp, 
8the rede se, terreden; and he satede 
them for his name, that knowen he 
gshulde make his power. And he in- 
bowide® the rede se, and it is dried; and 
he ladde hem in ‘the se® depnessis as in 
1odesert. Aud he sauede hem fro the hond 
of hateris ; aud he a3een bo3te them fro 
nthe hond of the enemy. And water? 
couerede the men trublende them; oon 
120f hem lafte not. And thei leeueden to 
the woordis of hym; and thei preisiden 
\3his preising. Soone thei diden, thei for- 
3eeten of the werkis of hym; and thei 
i4susteneden not his counseil. And thei 
coueiteden coueiting in desert; and thei 
tempteden God in the place with oute 
iswater. And he 3af to hem the asking 


Confitemini 1 
Domino, quo- 
niom bonus. 


Vherd he & pr.m. ™ plesyng arn. 
k Om. s. 


© in his cpFgHMoP prom. QRWxbi. 
8 and thei 1K. 


« . 
hkeper, 1 Om. a. 
A prem. 
abiden sx. 


PSALMS. 


a deuydede £ pr.m. 


1 Alleluya, Alleluya. coaHixmMoquywxbi. 
P watris A. 


CIV. 43-—CV. I5. 


out ioiyng; and hise chosun men in glad- 
nesse. And he 3af to hem the cuntreis of 44 
hethen men; and thei hadden in posses- 
sioun the trauels of puplis. That thei 4s 
kepe hise iustifiyngis; and seke his lawe. 


PSALM CV. 


The'title of the' hundrid and fifthe salm*. 
Alleluya't. 


t Alleluia is 
sett conus for 


Kouleche 3e to the Lord, for he is good; 1 Goddis heriyng 


for his mercy zs with outen ende. 
schal speke the powers of the Lord; schal 


heriyng in 


in present tyme, 
Who? ana eft for his 


heuen, 1. First 


make knowun alle hise preisyngis? Blessid 3 the prophet ex- 


citith men to 
herie God, the 
f ij time he axith 
nesse in al tyme. Lord, haue thou mynde4 Goddus grace. 


ben thei that kepen dom; and doon ri3tful- 
on vs in the good plesaunce of thi puple; 
visite thou vs in thin heelthe. To se ins 
the goodnesse of thi chosun men, to be 
glad in the gladnes of thi folk; that thou 
be heried with thin eritage. We hane 
synned with oure fadris; we han do 
vniustli, we han do wickidnesse. Onre7 
fadris in Egipt vndirstoden not thi mer- 
neils; thei weren not myndeful of the 
multitude of thi merci. And thei stiynge 
in to the see, in to the reed see, terreden 
to wraththe ; and he sanede hem™ for hiss 
name, that ‘he schulde" make knowun 
his® power. And he departide the reedg 
see, and it was dried; and he lede forth 
hem in the depthis of watris as in deseert. 
And he sauede hem fro the hond of10 
hateris; and he a3en bou3te hem fro the 
hond of the enemye. And the watir?11 
hilide men troublynge hem; oon of hem 
abood not. And thei bileueden to hise12 
wordis; and thei preisiden the heriynge of 
hym. Thei hadden ‘soone do‘, thei for-13 
3aten hise werkis; and thei abididen™ not 
his councel. And thei coueitiden coueitise 14 
in deseert ; and’ temptiden God in a place 
with out watir. And he 3af to hem thes 


axyng of hem; and he sente fulnesse in to 
Othere 4H. P the water 4. 


m Oni. L. 
q so do c. soone ido s. 


2 thei schulden 
r abeden 1. abood L. 


CV. 16—37. 


of hem; and he sente fulfilling in to the 
igsoulis of hem. And thei terreden Moises 
in the tentis; Aron, the holy of the Lord. 
17The erthe is opened, and it swolewid 
doun Dathan; and it couerede vpon the 
18 congregacioun of Abiron. And fyr brende 
vp in the synagoge’ of hem; and flaume 
19a] to-brende the synneres. And _ thei 
maden a calf in Oreb; and thei ho- 
20noureden a grauen thing. And _ thei 
chaungeden ther glorie; in to the licnesse 
210f a calf etende hey. Thei for3eeten God, 
that sauede hem, that dide grete thingus 
22in Egipt, merueilous thingus in the lond 
of Cam; ferful thingus in the rede se. And 
ashe seide, that he shulde destro3e them ; 
but Moises, his chosen, hadde stoden in 
the to-breking in his si3t. That he turne 
awei hys wrathe, that he destro3e them 
24not; and for no3te they hadden the de- 
sirable erthe. They leeuede not to his 
2;woord, and thei gruccheden in ther 
tabernaclis; thei ful out herden not the 
26vois of the Lord. And he rerede vp his 
hond vpon hem; that he shulde throwe 
27them doun in desert. And that he shulde 
caste doun the sed of hem in naciouns ; 
2sand scatere them in regiouns. And thei 
sacrifieden to Belfegor; and thei eete 
29the sacrifices of the deade. And _ thei 
terreden hym in ther findingis; and 
30 multiplied is in hem falling. And Fynees 
stod, and pleside; and the brosing 
siceside. And it is witid to hym to ri3t- 
wisnesse; in ieneracioun and ieneracioun 
32 vnto euermor. And thei terreden hym* at 
the watris of contradiccioun; and Moises 
33is ouertrauailid for hem, and thei to 
myche sharpeden the spirit of hym. And 
34 he ordeynede in his lippis; thei destro3- 
eden not the Jentilis, that the Lord seide 
soto them. And they be mengd togidere 
among Jentilis, and thei lerneden ther 
36werkis, and serueden to the grauen 
thingis of hem; and it is maad to them 
37in to sclaunder. And thei offreden ther 


4 synagogis 4. 


t fordo 1. 
y and thei 1. 


Qin CcUYV. 


PSALMS. 


Y for to cetert fere omnes. 


847 


the soulis of hem. And thei wraththiden 16 

Moyses in the castels; Aaron, the hooli of 

the Lord. The erthe was opened, and17 

swolewid Datan; and hilide on the con- 

gregacioun of Abiron. And fier brente1s 

an hize in the synagoge of hem; flawme 

brente synneris. And thei maden a calfi9 

in Oreb; and worschipiden a 30tun ymage. 

And thei chaungiden her glorie; in to the 20 

liknesse of a calf etynge hei. Thei for-21 

3aten God, that sauede hem, that dide 

grete werkis in Egipt, merueils in the22 

lond of Cham; feerdful thingis in the reed 

see. And God seide, that he wolde leeset 23 

hem; if Moises, his chosun man, hadde not 

stonde in the brekyng of" his si3t.. That he 

schulde turne awei his ire; lest he loste 

hem. And thei hadden the desirable lond 24 

for nou3t, thei bileueden not to his word, 

and thei grutchiden in her tabernaclis ; 25 

thei herden not the vois of the Lord. 

And he reiside his hond on hem; to caste 26 

doun hem in desert. And to caste awei her 27 

seed in naciouns; and to” leese hem in 

cuntreis. And thei maden sacrifice tos 

Belfagor ; and thei eeten the sacrificis of 

deed beestis. And thei wraththiden God 29 

in her fyndyngis; and fallyng’ was multi- 

plied in hem. And Fynees stood, and 30 

pleeside God ; and the veniaunce ceesside. 

And it was arrettid to hym to ri3tfulnesse; 31 

in generacioun and in to generacioun, 

til in to with outen ende. And _thei3z2 

wraththiden God at the watris* of ajen- 

selyng; and Moises was trauelidt for hem, + -4 gis. That 

for thei maden bittere his spirit, and eas en ie 

departide in his lippis. Thei losten not ss (piche thet he 

hethen men; whiche the Lord seide to God wolde de- 
P s nye hem water, 

hem. And thei weren meddlid among he-35 for her malice, 

thene men, and’ lerneden the werkis of eee 

hem, and serueden the grauen ymagis of 367 ,Coudls vord- 

hem; and it was maad to hem in to 

sclaundre. And thei offriden her sones;37 

and her dou3tris to feendis. And theiss 

schedden out imnocent blood, the blood of 

her sones and of her dou3tris; whiche thei 


raa. 8$Om.c. 


w fallyng ether deth ceteri. x watir A. 


Confilemini 
Domino, quc- 
niam bonus. 


848 


33sones; and ther do3tris to deuelis. And 
thei shadden out the innocent blod; the 
blod of ther sones and of ther do3tris, 
that thei sacrifieden to the grauen thingus 
390f Canaan. And the lond is slayn in 
blodis, and defoulid is in the werkis of 
hem; and thei diden fornycacioun in 
aother findingus. And the Lord wrathede 
in wodnesse in to his puple; and he 
ai wlatide his eritage. And toc them in to 
the hondis of Jentilis; and thei lord- 
shipeden of hem, that hatedent hem. 
42 And the enemys of them trobleden hem, 
and thei ben mekid vnder ther hondis ; 
430fte he delyucrede fem. kei orsothe 
terreden hym in ther counseil; and ben 
44mekid in ther wickidnessis". And he 
sa3, whan thei weren trublid; and herde 
45the orisoun of hem. And myndeful he 
was of his testament; and it otho3te hym 
acaftir the multitude of his mercy. And 
he 3af hem in to mercies; in the si3te of 
47alle, that hadden take them. Mac vs saf, 
Lord oure God; and gadere vs fro na- 
ciouns. That wee knouleche to thin holi 
4gname; and glorien in thi preising. Blessid 
be the Lord God of Irael fro world and 
unto world; and al the puple shal sey, 
Be it do, be it don. 


PSALM CVI. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. 


1 Knoulecheth to the Lord, for good ; 
2for in to the world his mercy. Sei thei 
now, that ben ajeen bo3t of the Lord, 
whom he a3een bo3te fro the hond of the 
enemy; fro regiouns he gederide hem. 
3Fro the sunne rising, and the going 
4doun; fro the north, and the se. Thei 
erreden in wildernesse, in vnwatri place; 
weie of dwelling place of a cite thei 
5 founde not. Hungrende and thirstende ; 
sthe soule of hem in hem failide. And 
thei crieden to the Lord, whan thei weren 


t sloowen £ pr.m. 


Zandher atook1. » Om. cercirwx. 


PSALMS. 


© Om. a. title of o. 


CV. 38.—CVI. 6. 


sacrificiden to the grauun ymagis of Cha- 
naan. And the erthe was slayn in bloodis, 39 
and was defoulid in the werkis of hem; 
and thei diden fornicacioun in her fynd- 
yngis. And the Lord was wrooth bi strong 40 
veniaunce ajens his puple; and’ hadde 
abhominacioun of his eritage. And hea 
bitook® hem in to the hondis of hethene 
men; and thei that hatiden hem, weren 
lordis of hem. And her enemyes diden 42 
tribulacioun to hem, and thei weren mekid 
vndir the hondis of enemyes; ofte he43 
delyuerede hem. But thei wraththiden 
hym in her counsel; and thei weren maad 
low in her wickidnessis. And he sie, 44 
whanne thei weren set in tribulacioun ; 
an@ jhe herde the preyer of hem. And he4s 
was mynedeful of his testament; and_ it 
repentide hyma_bi the multitude of his 
merci. And he 3at™hem in to mercies ; in 46 
the si3t of alle men, that hadden take hem. 
Oure Lord God, make ec vs saaf; and 47 
gadere togidere vs fro nacliguns. That we 
knouleche to thin hooli narnye; and haue 
glorie in thi preisyng. SBlessid be the4s 
Lord God of Israel fro the world and til> 
in to the world; and al the puple schal 
seye, Be it don, be it don. 


PSALM CVI. 
The ‘title of the® hundrid and sixte sadm. 
Alleluyas. 1 
Knouleche 3e to the Lord’, for he iis, 
good; for his merci 7s in to the world, 


_ Seif thei, that ben a3en bou3t of the Lord ; 2 


whiche he a3en bou3te fro the hond of thei 
enemye, fro cuntreis he gaderide hem to- : 
gidere. Fro the risyng of the sunne, and 3 
fro the goyng doun; fro the north, and * 
fro the see. Thei erriden in wildirnesse’, 4 
in a place with out watir; thei founden 
not weie of the citee of dwellyng place. 
Thei weren hungri and thirsti; her soules : 
failide in hem. And thei crieden to thee 


u wickidnes 4. 


4 Alleluia. - This is a stiring to 


doinge of thankinges of men delynerid by God fro perels and angwi3zsshis. x. Alleluia, Alleluia. vu. 


e Lord Gods. Om. 1. & wildirnessis s. 


CVI. 7—27. 


trublid; and fro the nedis of hem he toc 
whem out. And he bro3te hem thennus 
in to a ri3t weye; that thei shulde go in 
8to the cite of wonyng. Kuouleche to 
the Lord his mereies ; and the merueilis 
yof hym to the sones of men. For he 
fulfilde the idil soule; and the hungri 
losoule he fulfilde with goodis. The sitteris 
in derenessis, and in the’ vmbre of deth; 
and the bounden in beggeri and iren. 
11 For thei maden egre the spechis of God; 
and the counseil of the he3est thei ter- 
12reden. And mekid is in trauailes the 
herte of hem, and thei ben feblid; and 
13ther was not that .wolde helpe. And 
thei erieden to the Lord, whan thei 
weren trublid; and fro the nedis of hem 
i4he deliuerede hem. And he ladde hem 
out fro derenessis, and the shadewe of 
deth ; and the bondis of hem he to-brac. 
1s Knouleche” to the Lord his mereies; and 
1shis merueilis to the sones of men. For 
he to-broside the irene 3atis; and the 
17irene barris he to-brac. He toc hem fro 
the weie of wickidnesse of hem; for* 
ther vnrij3twisnesses forsothe thei ben 
ismekid. Alle mete the soule of hem 
wlatide; and they ne3heden to the 3atis 
i9of deth. And thei crieden to the Lord, 
whan thei weren trublid; and fro the 
2onedis of hem he delyuerede hem. He 
sente his woord, and helide hem; and 
deliuerede hem fro the dethis of hem. 
21 Knouleche to the Lord his mercies; and 
22his merueilis to the sonus of men. And 
sacrifise thei a sacrifise of preising ; and 
telle thei out his werkis in ful out io3ing. 
23 That gon doun the se in shipis ; doende 
2iwerching in many watris. Thei se3en 
the werkis of the Lord; and his mer- 
25 ueilis in depthe. He seide, and the spirit 
of tempest stod; and his flowingus ben 
gsenhauncid. Thei ste3en vp‘vn toY heuenes, 
and gon doun ‘vn toY depnessis; and the 
27soulis of hem in euelis failede. Thei ben 


vOm, an. 


h derknesse 8. iunto1. 


VOL. II. 


PSALMS. 


w Knowlechith 4. 


k and he 1. 


849 


Lord, whanne thei weren set in tribula- 
cioun; and he delyuerede hem fro her 
nedynesses. And he ledde forth hem in7 
to the ri3t weie; that thei schulden go in 
to the citee of dwelling. The mercies of8 
the Lord knouleche to hym; and _hise 
merueilis Anouleche to the sones of men. 
For he fillide a yoide man; and he fillides 
with goodis an hungry man. God de-10 
lyuerede men sittynge in derknessis", and 
in the schadowe of deth; and men prisoned 
in beggerye and in yrun. For thei madeui 
bitter the spechis of God; and wraththiden 
the councel of the hizeste. And the herte 12 
of hem was maad meke in trauelis; and 
thei weren sijk, and noon was that helpide. 
And thei crieden to the Lord, whanne theiis 
weren set in tribulacioun; and he dely- 
uerede hem from her nedynessis. And he 14 
ledde hem out of derknessis, and schadowe 
of deth; and brak the boondis of hem. 
The mereies of the Lord knouleche to1s 
hym; and hise merueils knouleche to the 
sones of men. For he al to-brak brasun ic 
jatis; and he brak yrun barris. He vp-17 
took hem fro the weie of her wickidnesse ; 
for thei weren maad lowe for her vnri3t- 
fulnesses. ‘The soule of hem wlatide al1s 
mete; and thei neizeden ‘til to! the 3atis 
of deth. And thei crieden to the Lord, 19 
whanne thei weren set in tribulacioun; 
and he delyuerede hem fro her nedynessis. 
He sente his word, and heelide hem; and* 20 
delyuerede hem fro the perischingis of 
hem. The mercies of the Lord knouleche 21 
to hym; and hise merueils to the sones of 
men. And offre thei the saerifice of heri- 22 
yng; and telle thei hise werkis in! ful out 
ioiyng. Thei that gon doun in to the see2s 
in schippis; and maken worehing in many 
watris. Thei sien the werkis of the Lord; 24 
and hise merueilis in™ the depthe. Hees 
seide, and the spirit of tempest stood ; and 
the wawis therof weren arerid. Thei26 
stien til to heuenes, and goen doun ‘til to" 


xfroa. Yin to an. 


lwiths, ™into a. Ountor. 


5Q 


850 


disturbid, and ben moued as a drunke 
man; and al the wisdam of hem is de- 
osuourid. And thei crieden to the Lord, 
whan thei weren trublid; and of the 
a9 nedis of hem he bro3te hem out. And he 
ordeynede his tempest in to fair? weder ; 
soand his flodis weren stille. And thei 
gladeden, for thei were stille ; and he 
bro3te hem out in to the hauene of the 
3iwil of hem. Knouleche to the Lord his 
mercies; and his merueilis to the sonns 
szof men. And enhaunce thei hym in the 
chirche of fole; and in the chajer of 
s3elderis preise thei hym. He sette the 
flodis of hem in to desert; and the* issue 
310f watris in to thirst. The fructuous 
erthe in to briyn®; fro the malice of men 
35dwellende in it. He putte desert in to 
pondis® of watris; and the erthe withoute 
36 water in to the issues of watris. And 
he sette there the hungry men; and thei 
37 ordeyneden a cite of wonyng. And thei 
seewen® feeldis, and plaunteden vines ; 
ssand maden the frut off birthe. And he 
blisside to hem, and thei ben multiplied 
ful myehe; and the bestis of hem he 
39lasside not. And fewe thei ben maad, 
and ben ouertrauailid; fro tribulacioun of 
4oeuelis and sorewe. Held out is strif vp 
on the princis; and to erren he made 
hem in withoute weye, and not in the 
tiweie. And he halp' the pore man fro 
myseise ; and putte as shep meynes. 
42Ri3t men shul seen, and gladen; and 
alle wickidnesse shal stoppe ther mouth. 
43Who wis man, and shal kepe thes 
thingus; and shal vnderstonde the mer- 
cies of the Lord ? 


Zafayre au. 8in the au. » salt making £ pr.m. 


fhelpede arn. 8 3it an. 


°Om.L. P fro ceteri, 4 nedynesse w. ¥ Om. ceteri, 


t the elder s. 
® sorewe celeri, 


U watir c. wawis M. 
b and he 1, 


v and the 1. 
¢ Om. A pr. m. 1. 


PSALMS. 


W to the F. 
4 Om. 1. 


CVI. 28-—+43. 


the® depthis; the soule of hem failide in 
yuelis. Thei weren troblid, and thei 27 
weren moued as a drunkun man; and al 
the wisdom of hem was deuourid. And 2e 
thei crieden to the Lord, whanne thei 
weren set in tribulacioun; and he ledde 
hem out of? her nedynessis4. And he29 
ordeynede the tempest therof in to a’ soft 
wynde’; and the wawis therof weren stille. 
And thei weren glad, for tho weren stille; 30 
and he ladde hem forth in to the hauene 
of her wille. The mercies of the Lord 3i 
knouleche to hym; and hise merueilis to 
the sones of men. And enhaunse thei him 32 
in the chirche of the puple; and preise 
thei him in the chaier of eldret men. He33 
hath set floodis in to deseert; and the out 
goingis of watris" in to thirst. He hath 31 
set fruytful lond in to saltnesse; for the 
malice of men dwellyng ther ynne. He35 
hath set deseert in to pondis of watris; 
and’ erthe with out watir in to” out- 
goyngis* of watris. And he settideY there 36 
hungri men; and thei maden a citee of 
dwelling. And thei sowiden feeldis, and 37 
plauntiden vynes; and maden fruyt of 
birthe. And he blesside hem, and thei33 
weren multiplied greetli; and he made not 
lesse her werk beestis. And thei weren39 
maad fewe; and thei? weren trauelid of 
tribulacioun of yuelis and of sorewis?. 
Strijf was sched out on princes; and he 40 
made hem for to erre without the weie, 
and not in the weie. And he helpide the41, 
pore man fro pouert; and? settide meynees® 
as at scheep bringynge forth lambren. 
Ri;tful men schulen se, and® schulen be 42 
glad; and al wickidnesse schal stoppe his 
mouth. Who 7s wijs, and schal kepe43 
these thingis; and schal vndirstonde the 
mercies of the Lord ? 


¢stremes Epr.m. 40m. 4EH. © soweden AEH. 


8 wynde ether pesiblete cOEFGHKLMOPQSUY WXbi. 
x outgoinge ELP. Ysettes. % Om. 1. 
e and thei 1. 


i 


CVII. 1—CVIII. 4. 


PSALM CVII. 
1 The song of the salm, to hym Dauid. 


Paratum cor 2 


Redi is myn herte, God, redy is myn 
meum, Deus. 


herte ; I shal synge, ‘and salm seyn® in 
smy glorie. Ris vp', sautre and harpe; I 
4shal risen vp fro the morutid li3t. I shal 
knouleche to thee in puplis, Lord; and do 
5salin to thee in naciouns. For gret vp on 
heuenus thi mercy"; and vn to the cloudis 
sthi treuthe. Be thou enhauncid vp on 
heuenes, God; and vp on alle erthe thi 
7 glorie; that thi loouede be delyuered. Mac 
saf with thi ri3t hond, and ful out here 
g thou me; God spac in his holi. I shal ful 
out iojen, aud deuyde Syccymam ; and 
the grete valey of tabernaclis I shal me- 
gsure. Myn is Galaad, and myn is Ma- 
nasses ; and Effraym the vndertaking of 
1omyn hed. Juda my king; Moab the cau- 
droun of myn hope. In to Ydume I shal 
strecchen out my sho; to me alienes 
11frendis ben maad. Who shal bringe me 
thennus in to a strengthid cite; who 
shal bringe me thennus in to Idume? 
12 Whether not thou, God, that hast put us 
abac; and thou shalt not gon out, God, 
13in oure vertues? 3if to vs helpe fro tri- 
bulacioun ; for vein is the helthe of man. 
14In God wee shuln do vertue; and he to 
no3t shal bringe doun oure enemys. 


PSALM CVIII. 
1 In to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


God, my preising holde thou not stille; 
for the mouth of the synnere, and the 
mouth of the treccherous vp on me is 
sopened. Thei speeken a3en me with a 

treccherous tunge, and with woordis of 

hate thei enuyrounden me; and thei 
4fo3ten me out with oute cause. For thi 


Deus, laudem. 2 


h to preie z prem. 


f Om. a. 
™ song vi. 


g Om. A. h Om. i. 


PSALMS. 


i vp, my glorie, ris up £ pr.m. 


i Om. c et plures. : bre 
2 Dauid ; in Jerom thus, For victorie, the salm (song v] of Dauid. 1v. No rubric in s. 


851 


PSALM CVII. 


The ‘title of thef hundrid and seuenthe i 
salm2, The song of ‘the salm of ® Dauid. 


Min herte is redi, God, myn herte ise 
redi; Y schal singe, and Y schal seie salm 
in my glorie. My glorie, ryse thou vp,3 
sautrie and harp, rise thou vp; Y schal 
rise vp eerli. Lord, Y schal knouleche tos 
thee among puplis; and Y schal seie salm 
to thee among naciouns. For whi, God,s 
thi merci is greet on heuenes; and thi 
treuthe és til to the cloudis. God, be thous 
enhaunsid aboue heuenes; and thi glorie 
ouer al erthe. That thi derlingis be dely-7 
uerid, make thou saaf with thi rijthond, 
and here me; God spak in his hooli. Is 
schal make ful out ioye, and Y schal de- 
parte Siccimam; and Y schal mete the 
grete valei of tabernaclis. Galaad is myn,9 
and Manasses is myn; and Effrayn: zs the 
vptaking of myn heed. Juda is my king; 
Moab és the caudron of myn hope. In to1o 
Ydume Y schal stretche forth' my scho; 
aliens ben maad frendis to me. Who schal 11 
lede me forth in to a stronge citee; who 
schal lede me forth til in to Idume? Whe-12 
ther not thou, God, that hast put vs awei; 
and, God, schalt thou not go out in oure 
vertues ? 3yue thou help to vs of tribula-13 
cioun; for the heelthe* of man is veyn. 
We schulen make vertu in God; and he 
schal bringe oure enemyes to nou3t. 


PSALM CVIIL 


The title of the hundrid and ei3tthe salm'. 
To victorye, the salm™ of Dauid ®t. 


God, holde thou not stille my preisyng; 2 
for the mouth of the synuer, and the mouth 
of the gileful man is openyd on me. Theis 
spaken ajens me with a gileful tunge, and 
thei cumpassiden me with wordis of ha- 
trede; and fou3ten ajens me with out 
cause. For that thing that thei schulden4 


k mercy, God, 4E£ pr.m. H. 


Kk help c. l salm ; in Ebreu thus 1. 


5Q2 


tA glos. This 
salm is seid of 
Crist to the 
lettre, for Crist 
in the xxij. e°. 
of Mt. and 
Poul in i. c®. 
and yj. c°. to 
Ebreis, aleggen 
the lettre of 
this salme seid 
of Crist, and 
so doon olde 
doctours of 
Ebreis ; and it 
mai be applied 
to Judas. Lire 
here. K. 


852 


that me thei shulden loouen, thei bac- 
sbiten! to me; I forsothe prezede. And thei 
setten™ ajen me euelis for goodis; and 
chate for ny louyng. Sett vp on hyma 
synere ; and the deuell stonde at his ri3t 
zside. Whan he is demed, go he out con- 
dempnéd ; and his orisoun be maad in to 
ssynne. His dajis be thei maad fewe; and 
gan other take his bishopriche. His sonus 
be thei maad faderles; and his wif a 
1owidewe. Wagereude be” translatid his 
sones, and begge thei; and be they cast 
irout of ther wonyngus. Enserche the 
ysurer al the substaunce of hym®; and 
igalienus take thei awei his trauailis. Be 
ther not to hym an helpere; ne be ther 
that haue mercy to his moderles childer. 
13 His sones be thei maad in to deth; in o 
uieneracioun be don awei his name. In to 
mynde turne a3een the wickidnesse of his 
fadris in the sizte of the Lord; and the 
issynne of his moder be not don awei. Be 
thei maad ajen the Lord euermor, and 
pershe awei fro the erthe the mynde of 
ighem; for thi that he hath not recordid to 
17do mercy. And he? pursuede an helpeles 
man and a beggere; and to slen the sory 
isin herte of synne?. And he loouede curs-~ 
ing, and it shal come to hym; and he 
wolde not blissing, aud it shal be longid 
awey fro hym. And he cladde" cursing 
as clothing, and it wente in as water in 
to his innermor partis; and as oile in hys 
igbones. Be it maad to hym as clothing, 
with the’ whiche he is couered; and as a 
girdil, with the’ whiche he is euermor 
20 gird beforn. This the were of hem that 
bacbiten to me anent the Lord; and that 
21 speken euelis a3en my soule. And thou, 
Lord, Lord', do with me for thi name; 
22 for swete is thi mercy. Delinere me, for 
nedi and a pore man I am; and myn 
a3herte is al disturbid with inne me. As 
shadewe, whan it bowith doun, I am 
taken awei; and am shaken out as lo- 


1 bacbiteden zn. 
¥ clothede aru. 


™ settiden 7H. 
8Om. sen. t Om. c. 


" be thei «. 


°Om.L.  P be thei z. 


10 CDEFLOYXb. 00 GKs. 
v Om. ¢ et plures. 


WOm. 1 * with s. 


PSALMS. 


CVIII. 5——23. 


loue me, thei bacbitiden me; but Y preiede. 
And thei settiden a3ens me yuelis fors 
goodis; and hatrede for my loue. Ordeyne 6 
thou a synner on him; and the deuel 
stonde on his rijt half. Whanne he is7 
demed, go he out condempned; and his 
preiert ‘be maad° in to synne. Hise daiess 
be maad fewe; and another take his bi- 
schopriche. Hise sones be maad faderles ; 9 
and his wijf a widewe. Hise sones trem-10 
blinge be born ouer, and begge; and beP 
cast out of her habitaciouns. An vsurere 11 
seke al his catel; and aliens rauysche hise 
trauelis. Noon helpere be to him; nether 12 
ony be that haue mercy on hise modirles 
children. Hise sones be maad in to pe-is 
risching; the name of him be don awei 
in oon? generacioun. The wickidnesse of 14 
hise fadris come a3en in to mynde in the 
si3t of the Lord; and the synne of his 
modir be not don awei. Be thei maad 1s 
euere ajens the Lord; and the mynde of 
hem perische fro erthe. For that thing 16 
that’ he thou3te not to do merci, and hei7 
pursuede a pore man and’ beggere; and to 
slee a man compunct in herte. And heis 
louede cursing, and it schal come to hym; 
and he nolde* blessing, and it schal be 
maad fer frohim. And he clothide cursing 
as a cloth, and it entride as water in to 
hise ynnere thingis; and as oile in hise 
boonus. Be it maad to him as a cloth, 19 
with which he is hilyd; and as a girdil, 
with which he is euere gird. This is the 20 
werk of hem that bacbiten me anentis the 
Lord; and that speke yuels ajens my lijf. 
And thou, Lord, Lord", do with me for 21 
thi name; for thi merci is swete. Dely-22 
tere thou me, for Y am nedi and pore; 
and myn herte is disturblid with ynne 
me. I am takun awei as a’ schadowe, 23 
whanne it bowith awei; and Y am schakun 
awei as locustis. Mi knees ben maad‘’2! 
feble of * fasting; and my fleische was 
chaungid for oile. And Yam maad schen- 25 


+ that is, the 
reson of Judas 
bitrayijng Crist 
to Jewis. Kv. 


Sohemcpr.m. POm.e£. his synne £ pr. m. 


rOm.s. Sandaz. twoldenot1. God orx. 


Dizit Domi- 
nus. 


CVIII. 24——CIX. 7. 


2icustis. My knes ben feblid of fasting ; 
and my flesh is ‘chaungid to betere® for 
250ile. And Iam maad repref to them; 
thei se3en me, and moueden ther hedis. 
26 Help me, Lord my God; mac me saf 
27 aftir thi mercy. And thei shul wite, for 
this is thin hond; and thou, Lord, hast 
2s‘maad it’. They shul curse, and thou 
shalt blesse, that rijsen ajen me, be thei 
confoundid; thi sernaunt forsothe shal 
29gladen. Be thei clad” with shame, that 
bacbiten to me; and be thei couered as 
with a double mantil with ther confusion. 
30I shal knouleche to the Lord ful myche 
in my mouth; and in the myddel of 
3imanye I shal preisen hym. That stod ne3h 
fro the ri3t parties of the pore; that he 
make saf fro pursueris my soule. 


PSALM CIX. 
1 The salm of Dauid. 


The Lord seide to my Lord; Sit thou* 
of ¥ my ri3t parties. To the tyme that I 
poote thin enemys; the litle steez3ing vp 

2stol of thi? feet. The 3erde of thi vertue 
the Lord shal senden out fro Sion ; lord- 
shipe thon in the myddel of thin enemys. 

3 With thee* the begynnyng in the dai of 
thi vertue, in shynyngis of seintis ; fro 
the wombe befor the dai sterre I gat 

athee. The Lord swor, and it shal not 
othinken hym; Thou art a prest in to 
withoute ende, after the order of Mel- 

schisedech. The Lord fro thi ri3tsidis ; to- 
broside® in the dai of his wrathe kingis. 

6 He shal deme in naciouns; he shal fulfille 
fallingis; he shal to-brose hedis in the 

zlond of manye. Of the strem in the 
weie he dranc; therfore he enhauncyde 
the hed. 


PSALMS. 


853 


schipe to hem; thei sien me, and moueden 
her heedis.. Mi Lord God, helpe thou me; 26 
inake thou me saaf bi thi merci. And tlhiei27 
schulen wite, that this is thin hond; and 
thou, Lord, hast do it. TheiY schulenes 
curse, and thou schalt blesse, thei that 
risen a3ens me, be schent; but thi scruaunt 
schal be glad. Thei that bacbiten me, be29 
clothid with schame; and be thei hilid 
with her schenschipe as with a double 
cloth. I schal knouleche to the Lord 30 
greetli with my mouth; and Y schal herie 
hym in the myddil of many men. Which 3! 
stood ny3 on the ri3t half of a pore man; 
to make saaf my soule fro pursueris. 


PSALM CIX. 


The ‘title ofthe? hundrid and nynthe 1 
salm. ‘The salm of Dauith*. 


The Lord seide to my Lord; Sitte thou 
on my ri3t side. Til Y putte thin enemyes; 
a stool of thi feet. The Lord schal sende2 
out fro Syon the 3erde of thi vertu; be 
thou lord in the myddis of thin ene- 
myes. The bigynnyng is with thee ins 
the dai of thi vertu, in the” brijtnessis* of 4 
seyntis; Y gendride® thee of the wombe 
before the dai sterre. The Lord swoor,4 
and it schal not repente him; Thou art a 
preest with outen ende, bi the ordre of 
Melchisedech. The Lord on thi ri3t side ;; 
hath broke kyngis in the dai of his ven- 
jiaunce. He schal deme among naciouns, 5 
he schal fille fallyngis; he schal schake 
heedis in the lond of many men. He, 
dranke of the stronde in the weie; therfor 
he enhaunside the heed. 


u gretly chaungid & pr.m. YVdon these thingis & pr.m. Wclothid azu. *Om.4, YataH. 4#my 4. 
20m. u. > Om. Hn. ¢to-brac & prim. 

yAndtheir, 2Om.a. ®Om. a. The salm of Dauith, seid of Crist. v. °Om.1. © briztnesse a. 
4 ofthiv. © gaat 1 


854 


PSALM CX. 
Alleluia. 


I shal knouleche to thee, Lord, in al 
myn herte; in counseil of rijtwis men 
gand congregacioun. Grete the werkis of 

the Lord; ful out so3t in to alle his willis. 
3Kuoulechinge and gret doing the were 

of hym; and his rijtwisnesse woneth in 
ato world of world. Mynde he made of 
his merueilis the merciful and the re- 
swere Lord; mete he jaf to men dredende 
hym. Myndeful he shal ben in to the 
eworld of his testament; the vertue of 
his werkis he shal befortelle to his 
zpuple. That he 3yue to them the eritage 
of Jentilis; the werkis of his hondis, 
streuthe and dom. Feithful alle his man- 
demens, confermed in to world of world ; 
9don in treuthe and equyte. Aj3een bi3ing 
the Lord sente to his puple; he sente in 
to withonte ende his testament. Holy and 
10 ferful his name; the begynnyng of wis- 
dam, the drede of the Lord. Good vnder- 
stonding to alle men doende it ; his preis- 
ing dwellith in to world4 of world. 


Confitebor. 1 


PSALM CXI. 


Alleluia of the a3een turnyng of Aggee 
and of Lacarie. 


Blisful the man that dredeth the Lord; 
in his maundemens he shal wilne ful 
2zmyche. My3ti in the erthe shal ben his 

sed; the ieneracioun of ry3t men shal be 
3blissid. Glorie and richessis in his hous; 
and his ri3twisnesse dwellith in to world® 
4of world. Ful out sprungen is in derc- 
nessis 1i3t to the ri3te; the merciful, and 
5the mercy doere, and the ri3twis. Jo3eful 
a man, that hath mercy, and leeneth; dis- 
6posith his woordis in dom; for in to 
7withoute ende he shal not be moued. In 


Beatus vir qui 1 
tine? Comi- 
aun, 


4 the world 4. 


fOm.a.  & Alleluia, Alleluia. Lop. » Om. s. 


PSALMS. 


its merciful s. 


CX Oxi 


PSALM CX. 


The ‘title of the! hundrid and tenthe 
salm. Alleluyas. 


Lord, Y schal knouleche to thee in al! 
myn herte ; in the counsel and congrega- 
eioun of iust men. The werkis of the2 
Lord ben greete; sou3t out in to alle hise 
willis. His werk zs knoulechyng and grete 3 
doyng ; and his ri3tfulnesse dwellith in to 
the world of world. The Lord mercifulis 
in wille, and a merciful doere, hath maad 
a mynde of hise merueilis; he hath 3oues 
meete to men dredynge hym. He schal 
be myndeful of his testament in to the 
world; he schal telle to his puple thes 
vertu of hise werkis. That he 3yue to7 
hem the eritage of folkis; the werkis of 
hise hondis ben treuthe and doom. Alles 
hise comaundementis ben feithful, con- 
fermed in to the world of world; maad in 
trenthe and equite. The Lord sente re-9 
dempcioun to hys puple; he comaundide 
his testament with outen ende. His name 
7s hooli and dreedful; the bigynnyng of 10 
wisdom és the* drede of the Lord. Good 
vndirstondyng zs to alle that doen it ; his 
preising dwellith in to the world of world. 


PSALM CXI. 


The ‘title of the' hundrid and enleuenthe 
salm™, Alleluya*. 


Blissid 7s the man that dredith the! 
Lord ; he schal wilne ful myche in hise 
comaundementis. His seed schal be my3ti2 
in erthe; the generacioun of ri3tful men 
schal be blessid. Glorie and richessis bens 
in his hous; and his ri3tfulnesse dwellith 
in to the world of world. Li3t is risun4 
vp in derknessis to ri3tful men; the Lord 
is merciful in wille, and a merciful doere, 
and rijtful. The man zs merye, thats 
doith merci, and leeneth; he disposith 
hise wordis in dom; for he schal not bes 


€ the world «. 


kOm.1 1Om.a. ™Om.s. 


0 Alleluia, This salm shewith, that blisse shal be jolden for the werkis of merci, and peyne to hem that ben 


vnmereiful. K. 


-CXI. 8—CXIII. 5. 


euere lasting mynde shal be the ri3twise ; 
of euel hering he shal not drede. Redi his 

sherte to hopen in the Lord; confermed 
is his herte, he shal not be moued, to the 

9time that he looke doun his enemys. He 
delede, he 3af to pore men; the ri3twis- 
nesse of hym dwellith in to world’ of 
world; the horn of hym shal ben en- 

1ohauncid in glorie. The synnere shal 
seen, and wrathen ; with his teth he shal 
gnasten, and wasten hymself; the desir 
of synneres shal pershen. 


PSALM CXII. 
Alleluia. 


Laudate, pu- 1 


: Preise, 3ee childer, the Lord; preise 
eri, Dominum. 


23ee the name of the Lord. Be the name 
of the Lord blissid; fro this now ‘and 
3vntos the world. Fro the rising of the 
sunne vn to the going doun; preisable the 
aname of the Lord. Hei3 vp on alle Jen- 
tilis the Lord; and vp on heuenys his 
sglorie. Who as the Lord oure God, 
6that in hese thingus dwellith; and meke 
thingus beholdith in heuene and in erthe? 
7 Vuder rerende fro erthe! the helpeles; and 
sfro drit rerende vp the pore. That he 
‘sette hymi with princis; with the princis 
9of his puple. That maketh to wone the 
bareyn in the hous; a moder of sonys 
gladende. 


PSALM CXIII. 
Alleluia. 


In exitu Israel 1 


In the going out of Irael fro Egipt ; 
de Egipto. 


of the hous of Jacob fro the straunge 
2puple. Maad is Jude his halewing ; Irael 
3the power of it. The se sa3, and flei3; 
4Jordan is al turned hindward. Moun- 
teynes ful* out io3eden as wetheris ; and 
5hillys' as lombis of shep. What is to 


f the world a. 
hillys £ pr.m. 


& and in to 4. in to H. 


rOm.a. 8 Om. ceteri. 


herie God. kK. Om. i. 4 Om. 1. 





PSALMS. 


h the erthe zen. 


855 


moued with outen ende. A iust man schal7 
be in euerlastinge inynde; he schal not 
drede of an yuel heryng. His herte és redi 
for to hope in the Lord ; his herte is con-8 
fermed, he schal not be imoued, til he dis- 
pise hise enemyes. He spredde abrood, he9 
3af to pore men; his ri3twisnesse" dwellith 
in to the world of world; his horn schal 


be reisid in glorie. A synner schal se, and’ 10 


schal be wrooth ; he schal gnaste with hise 
teeth, and schal faile?; the desijr of syn- 
neris schal perische. 


PSALM CXII. 


The ‘title of the’ hundrid and twelfthe 
salm', Alleluyat. 


Children, preise 3e the Lord ; preise 3e1 
the name of the Lord. The name of the2 
Lord be blessid; fro this tyme now and til 
in to the world. Fro the risyng of the3 
sunne til to the goyng doun; the name of 
the Lord is worthi to be preisid. The4 
Lord zs hi3 aboue alle folkis; and his glorie 
is aboue heuenes. Who 7s as oure Lords 
God, that dwellith in hije thingis; ande 
biholdith meke thingis in heuene and in 
erthe ? Reisynge a nedi man fro the’7 
erthe; and enhaunsinge a pore man fro 
drt. That he sette hym with princes;s 
with the princes of his puple. Which9o 
makith a bareyn womman dwelle in the 
hous; a glad modir of sones. 


PSALM CXIII. 


The titil of the hundrid and thrittenthe 
salm, Alleluya't. 


In the goyng out of Israel fro Egipt; of1 
the hous of Jacob fro the" hethene puple. 
Judee§ was maad the halewyng of hym;2 
Israel the power of hym. The see si3, ands 
fledde; Jordan was turned abac. Mun-4 
teyns ful out ioyeden as rammes; and litle 


hillis as the lambren of scheep. Thou see, 5 
t sitte c. 


K sce ful g prom. 1 3ee 


n riztfulnesse ceferi. Sand het. P faile, ether [shal s}] wexe rotun CDEFGHIKLMOPQRSUWXbi. 4 Om. a. 
t Alleluia. Goostli, in this salm cche synnere, that hath greet merci, is excited to 


+ This salm 
stireth men to 
herie God, for 
his greet ex- 
cellence, and 
for he reiseth 
hem, that ben 
oppresside vn- 
iustli, to greet 
honour, sum- 
tyme in this 
world, and to 
blisse of henen, 
if thei suffren 
pacientli, Lire 
here. XK. 


t A glos. Bi 
allegorie this 
salme is ex- 
powned of the 
casting awei of 
the peple of 
Jewis, for vnbi- 
lene, and of the 
reising of he- 
then peple in 
the godis of 
grace, for thei 
resceyueden 
deuoutli Cris- 
ten feith; and 
so the syna- 
goge is maad 
bareyne and 
abiect, ether 
cast out, and 
holi chirche is 
maad fruy3tful 
in the feith of 
hethen men 
conuertid to 
Cristen feith. 
Lire here. x. 
§ that is, the 
lynage of Juda 
was maad the 
halowing of 

im. Lire 
here. K. 


856 
thee, thou se, that thou flowe ; and thou 
Jordan, for thou art al turned baeward ? 

6 Hillis, 3ee ful out gladiden as wetheris ; 
and 3ee hillis, as the lombis of sheep. 
7Fro™ the face of the Lord moued is the 
erthe; from the face of God of Jacob. 
sThat turnede the ston in to poolis of 
watris; and the roche in to wellys of 
iwatris. Not to vs, Lord, not to vs; but 
2to thi name 3if glorie. Vp on thi mercy 
and thi treuthe; lest any time sey the” 
3 Jentilis, Wher is the God of hem? Oure 
God forsothe in henene; alle thingus 
awhat euere he wolde, dide®°. The mau- 
metis of Jentilis syluer and gold; the 
swerkis of the hondis of men. Mouth 
thei han, and thei shul not speke; e3en 
6they han, and thei shul not see. Eris 
thei han, and thei shul not heren; nose 
therlis thei han, and thei shul not smelle. 

7 Hondis thei han, and thei shul not grope; 
feet thei han, and they shul not go; thei 
eshul not crien in ther throte. Lyc to 
them be thei maad, that don tho thingus ; 
gand alle that trosten in hem. The hous 
of Israel hopide in the Lord; he is the 
helpere of hem, and the? defendere of 
lohem. The hous of Aron hopide in the 
Lord; he is the helpere of hem, and the 
11 defendere of hem. That dreden the Lord, 
hopiden in the Lord; he is the helpere 
1zof hem, and the defendere of hem. The 
Lord myndeful was of vs; and blissede to 
vs. He blissede to the hous of Irael; he 
13 blissede to the hous of Aaron. He bliss- 
ede to alle men that dreden the Lord ; 
14to the litle with the more. The Lord 
caste he to vp on 3ou ; ypon 30u and vp on 
15 3oure sones. Blessid be 3ee of the Lord ; 
isthat made heuene and erthe. The heuene 
of heuene to the Lord; the erthe forsothe 
ij7he 3af to the soues of men. Not the 
deade shul preise thee, Lord ; ne alle that 
is go doun into helle. But wee that lyuen, 
blissen to the Lord; fro this now and 

vn to the world. 


PSALMS. 


CXII. 6—* 18. 


what was to thee, for thou fleddist ; and 
thou, Jordan, for thou were turned abak ? 
Munteyns, 3e maden ful out ioye ase 
rammes; and litle hillis, as the Jambren 
of scheep. The erthe was moued fro’ the7 
face of ‘the Lord”; fro the face of God 
of Jacob. Which turnede a stoon in tos 
pondis* of watris; and an hard rooch in to 
wellis of watris. Lord, not to vs, not tol 
vs; but 3yue thou glorie to thi name. OnY2 
thi merci and thi? treuthe; lest ony tyme 
hethene men seien, Where is the God of 
hem? Forsothe oure God in heuene; dide3 
alle thingis, whiche euere he wolde. Thes 
symulacris of hethene men den siluer and 
gold; the werkis of mennus hondis. Tho*s 
han mouth, and schulen not speke; tho* 
han izen, and schulen not se. Tho* hans 
eeris, and schulen not here; tho* han nose 
thurls, and schulen not smelle. Tho* han7 
hondis, and schulen not grope; tho? han 
feet, and schulen not go; tho* schulen not 
erye in her throte. Thei that maken tho?s 
ben maad lijk tho; and alle that triste in 
tho®. The hous of Israel hopide in thes 
Lord; he is the helpere ‘of hem‘, and the 
defendere of hem. The hous of Aaron 10 
hopide in the Lord; he is the helpere of 
hem, and the defendere of hem. Thei that 11 
dreden the Lord, hopiden in the Lord ; 
he is the helpere of hem, and the defendere 
of hem. The Lord was myndeful of vs; 12 
and blesside vs. He blesside the hous of 
Israel; he blesside the hous of Aaron. Hes 
blesside alle men® that dreden the Lord ; 
‘he blesside® litle’ ‘men with the grettere. 
The Lord encreesse! on 30u; on 30u and on14 
3oure sones. Blessid be 3e of the Lord; that 1s 
made heuene and erthe. Heuene of ‘heuene 16 
isk to the Lord; but he 3af erthe! to the 
sones of men. Lord, not deed men schulen 17 
herie thee; nether alle men that goen doun 
in to helle. But we that lyuen, blessen1s 
the Lord; fro this tyme now and til in to 
the world. 


m For 4. 2Om.4. Chedide au. P Om. a. 
: ee c. s Gods. *apoonds. Y¥ Of1. Inu, Zofthir a Their. > tho symulacris1. *hem 1. 
mM. S. Om. a. fOm.1.  & the litle coeruKiMoprswxbi. bothe litler. band1. 1iadde ether 


enerces€ COEFGUKMOPQRSUWRXbI. adde to 1. addide ether encreeede L. 


kheuenys s. |! the erthe 1. 


Dilexi quoni- 
am exaudiet, 


Credidi prop- 


ter quod. 





CXIV. 1—CXV. 19. 


PSALM CXIV. 
Alleluia. 


1 I Joouede; for the Lord shal ful out 
2here the vois of myn orisoun. For he 
inbowide his ere to me; and in my da3is 
3I shal inwardly clepe. Ther enuyrounden 
me sorewis of deth; and the perilis of 
4helle founden me. Trybulacioun and so- 
rewe I fond ; and the name of the Lord 
I inwardli clepede. O41! Lord, ‘delyuere 
5thou myt soule; mercyful Lord, and ri3t- 
6wys, and oure God hath reuthe. The 
Lord kepende litil childer; I am meckid, 
7and he deliuerede me. My soule, be thou 
al turned in to thi reste; for the Lord 
shath wel do to thee. For he toc out my 
soule fro deth; myn e3en fro teris, my 
ofeet fro sliding. I shal plese to the Lord; 
in the regioun of men on lyue. 


PSALM CXV. 
Alleluya. 


10 JI leeuede, wherfor I spac; I forsothe 
11am mekid ful myche, I seyde in myn 
1zexcesse ; Eche man a liere. What shal I 
3eelde to the Lord; for alle thingus that 
13he 3eld’ to me? The chalis of the helthe 
3yuere I sha] take; and the name of the 
14 Lord I shal inwardli clepen. My vouwis 
to the Lord I shal 3elde befor al his pu- 
isple; precious in the si3te of the Lord the 
i¢deth of his seintis. O! Lord, for I thi 
seruaunt ; I thi seruaunt, and the sone 
of thin hond maiden. Thou hast broke 
17my bondis, to thee I shal sacrifien an 
ost of preising; and the name of the Lord 
is I shal inwardli clepe. My vouwis to the 
Lord J shal 3elde, in the si3te of al his 
19puple; in the porche of the hous of the 
Lord, in the myddil of thi Jerusalem. 


q Om. #. 


m Alleluia. 
him s. © and my s. 


PSALMS. 


t delyuere, delyuere my c. 


Dauith made this salm for his delyneraunse fro perels of Saul. K. : 
P The hundrid and fiftenthe salm. coyasumogrsxb. The titil of the hundrid and 


857 


PSALM CXIV. 


The titil of the hundrid and fourtenthe 
salm. Alleluia”. 


I louede ‘the Lord"; for the Lord schal1 
here the vois of my preier. For he bowide 2 
doun his ezere to me; and Y schal inwardli 
clepe™ in my daies. The sorewis of deths 
cumpassiden me; and the perelis of helle 
founden me. I foond tribulacioun and 4 
sorewe ; and Y clepide inwardli the name 
of the Lord. Thou, Lord, delyuere my 
soule ; the Lord és merciful, and iust ; and 5 
oure God doith merci. And the Lorde 
kepith litle children; Y was mekid, and 
he delyuerede me. Mi soule, turne thou7 
in to thi reste; for the Lord hath do wel 
to thee. For he hath delyuered my soules 
fro deth ; myn i3en fro wepingis, my? feet 
fro fallyng doun. I schal plese the Lord ;9 
in the cuntrei of hem that lyuen. 


PSALM CXV. 


The titil of the hundril and fiftenthe 
salm. Alleluya?. 


I bileuede, for which thing Y spak ; for- 10 
soth Y was maad low fnl myche. I seide 11 
in my passing; Ech man ?s a lier. What 12 
schal Y 3elde to the Lord ; for alle thingis 
which he 3eldide4 to me ? I schal take the i3 
cuppe’ of heelthe; and Y schal inwardli 
clepe the name of the Lord. I schal 3elde 11 
my vowis to the Lord bifor al his puple ; 
the deth of seyntis of the Lord zs precious 15 
in his si3t. OS! Lord, fort Y aa thi ser- 16 
uant; Y @m thi seruaunt, and the sone 
of thi handmaide. Thou hast broke my 
bondys, to thee Y schal offre a sacrifice 17 
of heriyng; and Y schal inwardli clepe the 
naine of the Lord. I schal 3elde my vowis 1s 
to the Lord, in the si3t of al his puple; in" 19 
the porchis’ of the hous of the Lord, in 
the myddil” of thee, Jerusalem. 


* geeldede sz. 


. Om. 1. on clepe 


Siftenthe salm. uupw. The c. and xv. salm hath no tijtle. ww. The hundrid salm and fiftenthe hath no litle, 
and it spekith of Dauith undir Absolon, and he bihizte thankingis to God for delyueraunse. K. ‘hath 3olde 1. 
Tcuppiso. 8 A! celerii tOm.c. UYandins. ¥ forjerdis ceteri passim. W myd a. middis cx. 


VOL. II. 5R 


858 PSALMS. CXVE 1—CXVII. 16. 


PSALM CXVI. 
Alleluia. 


LaudateDo- 1 Preise 3ee the Lord, alle Jentilis ; 

minum, omnes. » reise 3ee hym, alle puplis. For con- 
fermed is vp on ys the mercy of hym ; 
and the treuthe of the Lord dwellith in 
to with oute ende. 


PSALM CXVII. 
Alleluya. 


Confitemini 1 Knoulecheth to the Lord, for he is 
ai good ; for in to the world the merci of 
zhym. Seye now Irael, for he is good ; 
for in to the world the mercy of hym. 
3Seie now the hous of Aron; for in to the 
4world the mercy of hym. Seye now thei 
that dreden the Lord ; for in to the world 
sthe mercy of hym. Fro tribulacioun I in- 
wardli clepide the Lord; and‘ ful out 
sherde me in breede the Lord. The Lord 
to me an helpere; I" shal not drede what 
7do to me a man. The Lord to me an 
helpere; and I shal despise myn enemys. 
8Good is to trostnen in the Lord; than to 
gtrosten in man. Good is to hopen in the 
io Lord; than to hopen in princis. Alle Jen- 
tilys 3iden aboute me; and in the name 
of the Lord, for I am vengid in hem. 
11Goende aboute thei 3iden aboute me; 
and in the name of the Lord, for I am 
izvengid in hem. Thei enuyrounden me 
as bes’, and wratheden out as fyr in 
thornes; and in the name of the Lord, 
13for I am vengid in hem. Ful myche con- 
streyned I am turned vp so doun, that I 
shulde falle; and the Lord vndertoc me. 
\4 My strengthe, and my preising the Lord; 
isand he is imaad to me in to helthe. The 
vois of ful out io3ing and of helthe; in 
16 the tabernaclis of rijtwis men. The ri3t 
hond of the Lord dide vertue; the rijt 


PSALM CXVI. 


The title of the hundred and sixtenthe 
salm. Alleluyax. 


Alle hethen men, herie 3e the Lord 31 
alle puplis, herie 3e hym. For his merci2 
is confermyd on vs; and the treuthe of the 
Lord dwellith with outen ende. 


PSALM CXVII. 


The titil of they hundrid and seuententhe 
salu, Alleluia’. 


Knouleche 3e to the Lord, for he is! 
good; for his merci 7s with outen ende. 
Israe] seie now, for he is good; for his2 
merci 7s with outen ende. The hous of3 
Aaron seie now; for his merci 7s with 
outen ende. Thei that dreden the Lord, 4 
seie now; for his merci ¢s withouten ende. 
Of tribulacioun Y inwardli clepide thes 
Lord; and the Lord herde me in large- 
nesse. The Lord 7s an helpere to me; Y6 
schal not drede what a? man schal do to 
me. The Lord is an helpere to me; and7 
Y schal dispise myn enemyes. It is beteres 
for to trist in the Lord; than for to triste 
in man. It is betere for to hope in the9 
Lord; than for® to hope in princes. Alle 10 
folkis cumpassiden me; and in the name 
of the Lord it bifelde, for Y am auengide 
on hem. ‘Thei cumpassinge cumpassiden 11 
me; and in the name of the Lord, for Y 
am auengid on hem. Thei cumpassiden je 
me as been’, and thei brenten out as fier 
doith* among thornes ; and in the name of 
the Lord, for Y am avengid on hem. 113 
was hurlid, and turnede vpsedoun, that Y 
schulde falle doun; and the Lord took me 
vp. The Lord 7s my strengthe, and my 14 
heryyng; and he is maad to me in to 
heelthe. The vois of ful out ioiyng and is 
of heelthe; 6e in the tabernaclis of iust 
men. The ri3t hond of the Lord hath dois 


tandhe «4. YandIc.  v been a. 


= Om. A. salin. Alleluia, that is, to God do we heerijngis. K. y Om. rR. 2 Alleluia. This salm inducith 
men to herie God, and bringeth reson therto. K. 2 Om.s. Om. IL. C¢COm.1. 4 bees cpEFGHKLMO 


PQRsUWKbi. ¢ Om. 1. 


Beati tama- 
culali, 


CXVII. 17—CXVII. 6. 


hond of the Lord enhauncide me; the 
17ri3t hond of the Lord dide vertue. I shal 
not die, but linen; and I shal telle the 
iswerkis of the Lord. Chastisende chas- 
tisede me the Lord; and to deth he toc 
ignot me. Openeth to me the 3atis of 
rijtwisnesse, and gon in to them I shal 
20knouleche to the Lord; this the 3ate of 
the Lord, ri3twis men shul gon in to it. 
21] shal knouleehe to thee, for thou hast 
ful ont herd me; and thou art maad to 
22me iu to helthe. The ston that bildende 
thei repreueden ; this is maad in to the 
eshed of the corner. Of the Lord this is 
don; and it is merueilous in oure e3en. 
a4 This is the dai that the Lord made; ful 
25 out 103e wee, and glade wee init. O! Lord, 
mac me saf, O! Lord, weel be thou” wel- 
26sum; blissid that cometh in the name 
of the Lord. Wee han blissid to 30u fro 
a7the hous of the Lord; God the Lord, 
and he hath li3tid to vs. Ordeyne 3ee a 
solempne dai in thicke thingis; vn to the 
ashorn of the auter. My God thou art, 
and I shal knouleche to thee; my God 
thou art, and I shal enhaunce thee. I 
shal knoulechen to thee, for thou hast ful 
out herd me; and thou art maad to me 
goin to helthe. Knouleeheth to the Lord, 
for he is good; for in to the world the 
merci of hym. 


PSALM CXVIII. 

Alleluia. 

Aleph. 
1 Blisful* the vndefoulid inY the weie ; 
athat gon in the lawe of the Lord.  Blis- 
ful that enserche the witnessingus of 
hym; in al the herte ful out sechen hym. 
3Forsothe not thei that wirken wickid- 
anesse; in the weies of hym 3iden. Thou 
hast comaundid; thin hestis to be kept 
sful myche. Wolde God weren dressid 
my weies; to be kept thi iustifiyngus. 
6Thanne I shal not be confoundid; whan 
I shal parfitli loken in alle thin hestis. 


w Om. c 


© A! celeri fere omnes. £{ blessen A pr.m. 1. 


PSALMS. 


x Blessid ben a. 


& and he 1. 


859 


vertu, the ri3t hond of the Lord enhaun- 
side me; the ri3t hond of the Lord hath 
do vertu. 
lyne ; and Y schal telle the werkis of the 


Lord. The Lord chastisinge hath chastisid 18 
me; and he 3af not me to deth. Opene je 19 


to me the jatis of ri3tfulnesse, and Y schal 
entre bi tho, and Y schal knouleche te the 


Lord ; this 3ate ts of the Lord, and iust 20 
I schal knou-2! 


men schulen entre bi it. 
leche to thee, for thou herdist me; and art 
maad to me in to heelthe. 
which the bilderis repreneden ; this is maad 


in to the heed of the corner. This thing 23 


is maad of the Lord ; and it ts wonderful 
bifore oure i3en. 
the Lord made; make we ful out ioye, 


I schal uot die, but Y schal 17 


The stoon 22 


This is the dai which 24 


and be we glad ther ynne. O*! Lord, make 25 


thou me saaf, O&! Lord, make thou wel 


prosperite ; blessid 7s he that cometh in 26 


the name of the Lord. We blesseden' 3ou 


of the hous of the Lord; God is Lord, 27 


ands hath 3oue 1i3t to vs. Ordeyne 3e a 
solempne dai in thieke puplis; til to the 


horn of the auter. Thou art my God, and 28 


Y schal knouleehe to thee; thou art my 
God, and Y schal enhaunse thee. I sehal 
knouleehe to thee, for thou herdist me; 
and thou art maad to me in to heelthe. 


Knouleche 3e to the Lord, for he is good ; 29 


for his merci 7s with outen ende. 


PSALM CXVIII. 
‘The titil of» the hundrid and et3tenthe 
sala. Alleluwat. 

Blessid Je men with out wem iu thel 
weie; that gon in the lawe of the Lord. 
Blessid ben thei, that seken hise witness-2 
ingis; seken' him in al the herte. For theis 
that worchen wickidnesse; 3eden not in hise 
weies. Thou hast comaundid; that thin4 
heestis be kept greetly. I wolde that my5 
weies be* dressid; to kepe thi iustifiyngis. 
Thanne Y schal not be sehent; whanne Y 6 
sehal biholde perfitli in alle thin heestis. 


t Ad glos. This 
salm speketh 
of blisse ;_ blisse 
is in truthe 
and dede, and 
thus it is had 
oonli in be- 
uene; biisse is 
also in hope, 
and thus it is 
had in present 
lijf, bi exer- 
cise of Goddis 
werkis ; ther- 
fore this salme 
spekith of 
blisse, as it is 
had in present 
lijf. Lire here. 


I schal knowleche to thee in the dressing 7 . 


y that goon in mu. 


h Om. s. jiandseken x. *k weren1. 


5R2 


dit quo corri- 
git. 


Retribue seruo 
tuo. 


Adhesit paui- 
mento. 


860 


71 shal knouleche to thee in ri3t reuling 
of herte; in that that I haue lerned the 
sdomes of thi ri3twisnesse. Thi justifi- 
yngis I shal kepe ; ne forsake thou me on 
le sydys. 
‘sap Beth. 
9 In what amendith the 3unge man more 
waxen his weye? in keping thi woordis. 
io In al myn herte I ful out so3te thee; ne 
11 poote thou ine abac fro thin hestis. In 
myn herte I hidde thi spechis’; that I 
1zsynne “not to thee. JBlissid thou art, 
13 Lord; teche me thi iustifiyngus. In my 
lippis I tolde forth; alle the domes of thin 
14mouth. In the weie of thi witnessingis 
151 delitide; as in alle richesses. In thin 
hestys I shal ben enhauntid ; and I shal 
16 beholde thi weies. In thi iustefiyngus [ 
shal sweteli thenken; and IJ shal not for- 
3ete thi woordis. 


Gimel. 


17 3eld to thi seruaunt; quikene* thou me, 
igand I shal kepe thi woordis. Opene myn 
ejen; and I shal beholde the merueilis of 
i9thi lawe. A comeling wonere I am in 
the erthe; ne hide thou fro me thin 
20hestis. My soule coueitide to desire thi 
2liustefiyngus; in alle tyme. Thou blam- 
edist proude men; cursid ben thei, that 
22 bowen doun fro thi maundementis’. Do 
awei fro me repref and dispising ; for 
23thi witnessingus I ful out so3te. For- 
sothe ther seten princis, and a3en me thei 
speeken; thi seruaunt forsothe was en- 
2{hauntid in thi iustefiyngus. For and¢ 
thi witnessingus is my swete thenking ; 
and my counseil thi iustefiyngus. 


Deleth. 


25 Myn soule cleuede to the pament; 
26quykene thou me aftir thi woord. My 
weies I tolde out, and thou ful out herd- 
27est ne; teche me thi iustefiyngis. The 
weie of thi iustefiyngus enforme thou me; 
and I shal ben enhauntid in thi mer- 


2 speche 4. 8 quiyk a, 


lof myn1, om riz3tfulnessis s.  ™ the 1. 


PSALMS. 


b heestis azn. biddingis c pr.m. 


CXVIII. 7—27. 


of! herte; in that that Y lernyde the domes 
of thi rijtfulnesse™. I schal kepe thi iusti-s 
fiyngis ; forsake thou not me on ech side. 


In what thing amendith a" 3ong wax-9 
inge man his weie? in keping thi wordis. 
In al myn herte Y sou3te thee; putte thou 10 
me not awei fro thin heestis. In mynu 
herte Y hidde thi spechis; that Y do not 
synne a3ens thee. Lord, thou art blessid ; 12 
teche thou me thi iustifiyngis. In my 13 
lippis Y haue pronounsid; alle the domes 
of thi mouth. I delitide in the weie of 1 
thi witnessingis; as in alle richessis. 1s 
schal be ocupied® in thin heestis; and Y 
schal biholde thi weies. I schal bithenke 16 
in thi iustifiyngis ; Y schal not for3ete thi 
wordis. 


e 


3elde to thi seruaunt; quiken thou me, 1; 
and Y schal kepe thi wordis. Li3tne thous 
myn i3en; and Y schal biholde the? mer- 
ueils of thi lawe. I am a comeling ini 
erthe ; hide thou not thin heestis fro me. 
Mi soule coueitide to desire thi iustifiyngis; 20 
inal tyme. Thou blamedist the proude;21 
thei ben cursid, that bowen awei fro thin 
heestis. Do thou awei ‘fro me‘ schen-22 
schipe and dispising; for Y sou3te thi 
witnessingis. For whi princis saten, and 23 
spaken aj3ens me; but thi seruaunt was 
exercisid in thi iustifiyngis. For whi and 21 
thi witnessyngis" is my thenkyng; and my 
counsel is thi iustifiyngis. 


Mi soule cleuede to the pawment ;25 
quykine thou me bi thi word. I telde2s 
out my weies, and thou herdist me; teche 
thou me thi iustifiyngis. Lerne thou me27 
the weie of thi iustifiyngis ; and Y schal be 
exercisid in thi merueils. Mi soule nap-2s 


Cin. 


° excercisid, ether bisily ocupied cpEFGI1KLMOPQRSUWXD. 


P Om. celeri. Om. s. witnessing PM. instifiyngis rm prem. 





Legem pone 
michi, 


Et veniat 
super me. 


Memor esto 
verbi tui. 


CXVIII. 28—49. 


2sueilis. My soule nappide for no3e; con- 
29 ferme thou me in thi woordis. The weie 
of wickiduesse moue thou awey fro me; 
30and in thi lawe haue mercy of me. The 
weie of treuthe I ches; thi domes I haue 
sinot for3eten. I cleuede to thi witness- 
ingus, Lord; wile thou not me con- 
32founden. The weie of thin hestis I ran; 
whan thou spreddest abrod myn herte. 


He. 


33 Lawe set thou to me, Lord, the weie 
of thi iustefiyngus ; and I shal seche out 
34it enermor. 3if to me vndirstonding, and 
T shal enserche thi lawe; and I shal kepen 
35it in al myn herte. Bring out me in the 
36sty of thin hestis; for it I wolde. Bowe 
in myn herte in to thi witnessyngus ; and 
37 not in to coueitise. ‘Turne awei myn e3en, 
lest thei see vanytee ; in thi weie quykene 
38 thou me. Sett to thi seruaunt thi speche ; 
39in thi drede. Kut of my repref, that I 
40 ouertrowide ; for thi domys io3eful. Lo! 
Thaue coueitid thin hestis ; in thin equite 
quykene thon me. ‘ 


Vai. 


41 And thi mercy come vp on me, Lord ; 
42thin helthe 3iuere after thi speche. And 
I shal answere to the repreuende me a 
woord; for I hopide in thi sermounes. 
43 And ne take thou awei fro my mouth a 
woord of truthe on eche side; for in thi 
44domes I oner hopide. And I shal kepe 
thi lawe euermor; in to the world, and 
45in to the world of world. And I 3ide in 
46 breede ; and thin hestis I out so3te. And 
I spac in thi witnessingus in the si3te of 
47 kingus ; and I was not confoundid. And 
I sweteli tho3te in thin hestis; that I 
48loonede. And I rerede myn hondis to* 
thin hestis, that I loonede; and I shal 
ben enhauntid in thi iustefiyngis. 


Zit. 
49 Myndeful be thou of thi woord to thi 


4 thi trewth a. 


8in the s. 
the ¢ sec. m. FGHQSUW. 


PSALMS. 


t Bowe thou doun k. Bowe doun mLMsxi. 


861 


pide for anoye; conferme thou me in thi 
wordis. Remoue thou fro me the weie of 29 
wickidnesse; and in thi lawe haue thou 
merci on me. I chees the weie of treuthe ; 30 
Y for3at not thi domes. Lord, Y cleuede31 
to thi witnessyngis; nyle thou schende me. 

I ran the® weie of thi comaundementis ; 32 
whanne thou alargidist myn herte. 


Lord, sette thou to me a lawe, the weie 33 
of thi iustifiyngis; and Y schal seke it 
euere. 3yue thou vudurstonding to me, 34 
and Y schal seke thi lawe; and Y schal 
kepe it in al myn herte. Lede me forthss 
in the path of thin heestis; for Y wolde it. 
‘Bowe thout myn herte in to thi witness-36 
ingus ; and not in to aueryce. Turne thou37 
awei myn i3en, that ‘tho seen" not vanyte; 
quykene thou me in thi weie. Ordeyne3s 
thi speche to thi seruaunt; in thi drede. 
Kitte awey my schenschip, which Y sup-39 
poside; for thi domes ben myrie. Lo !40 
Y coueitide thi comaundementis; quikene 
thou’ me in thin equite. 


And, Lord, thi merci come on me; thinai 
heelthe come bi" thi speche. And Y schal 42 
answere a word to men seiynge schen- 
schipe to me; for Y hopide in thi wordis. 
And take thou not awei fro my mouths 
the word of treuthe outerli; for Y hopide 
aboue in thi domes. And Y schal kepe 41 
thi lawe euere; in to the world, and in to 
the world of* world. And Y 3ede in4s 
largenesse ; for Y sou3te thi comaunde- 
mentis. And Y spak of thi witnessyngis 46 
in the si3t of kingis; and Y was not 
schent. And Y bithou3te in thin heestis ; 47 
whiche Y louede. And Y reiside mynas 
hondis to thi comaundementis, whiche Y 
louede; and Y schal be excercisid in thi 
iustifiyngis. 


Lord, haue thou mynde on thi word to 49 


ein A. 


utheiser, VYOm.1 Waftir1. *of 


Porcio mea, 
Domine. 


Bonitatem 
Sfecisti., 


862 


seruaunt; in whiche to me hope thou 
sohast 3inen. This coumfortide me in my 
- mecnesse; for thi speche quykenede me. 
51 Proude men wickidli deden on eche side ; 
fro thi lawe forsothef I bowide not doun. 
52 Myndeful I was of thi domes fro the 
33 world, Lord; and I am coumfortid. Fail- 
ing heeld me; for the synneres forsakende 
sithi lawe. Chauntable weren to me thi 
iustefiyngus; in the place of my pilgrim- 
ssagings. Myndeful I was the ny3t of thi 
séname, Lord; and I kepte thi lawe. This 
is do to me; for thi instefiyngis I out 
so3te. 
Heth. 
57 My porcioun thou, Lord; I seide to 
stkepe thi lawe. I louli prezede thi face 
in al myn herte ; haue mercy of me aftir 
sgthi speche. I tho3te my weies; and al 
turnede my feet in to thi witnessingus. 
60 1 am redi, and am" not disturbid; that I 
ci kepe thin hestys. The cordis of synneres 
ben wounden aboute me; and thi lawe I 
szhane not forjete. At myd ny3t I ros to 
knouleche to thee; vp on the domes of thi 
s3iustefiyng. Parcener I am of alle men 
dredende thee; and of kepende thin hestis. 
64 Of thi mercy, Lord, ful is the erthe; thi 
iustefiyngus teche thou me. 


Teth. 


65 Goodnesse thou hast do to thi ser- 
csuaunt, Lord ; aftir thi woord. Goodnesse, 
and discipline, and kunnyng tech thou 
e7me; for in thin hestys I leeuede. Beforn 
that I was mekid, I trespaside; therfore 
68thi speche I kepte. Good art thou; and 
in thi goodnesse tech me thi iustefiyngis. 
69 Multeplied is vp on me the wickidnesse of 
proude men’; I forsothe in al myn herte 
70shal enserche thin hestis. Cruddid is* as 
myle the herte of hem; I forsothe thi 
7llawe sweteli tho3te. Good is to me, for 
thou hast mekid me; that I lerne thi 
72iustefiyngus, Good is to me the lawe of 


fOmc. & pilgrymage au. 


¥ lownesse maad bi turment x. that is, maad [bt tor]ment v marg. 


¢ synnes 1, 
hard v. 


4 aftir 1, 


PSALMS. 


© loore, ether chastisyng c et ceteri. f 


CXVII. 50-—72. 


thi seruaunt; in which word thou hast 
3oue hope to me. This coumfortide meso 
in my lownesse’; for thi word quikenede 
me. Proude men diden wickidli bi allesi 
thingis; but Y bowide not awei fro thi 
lawe. Lord, Y was myndeful on’ thise 
domes fro the world; and Y was cown- 
fortid. Failing helde me; for symneris for- 53 
sakinge thi lawe. Thi iustifiyngis weren 54 
delitable to me to be sungun; in the place 
of my pilgrimage. Lord, Y hadde myndess 
of thi name bi ni3t; and Y kepte thi lawe. 
This thing was maad to me; for Y sou3te se 
thi iustifiyngis. 


Lord, my part; Y seide to kepe* this7 
lawe. I bisou3te thi face in al myn herte; 58 
haue thou merci on me bi? thi speche. Is9 
bithou3te my weies; and Y turnede my 
feet in to thi witnessyngis. I am_ redi,6o 
and Y am not disturblid; to kepe thi co- 
maundementis. The coordis of synneris‘61 
han biclippid me; and Y haue not for3ete 
thi lawe. At mydny3t Y roos to knou- 62 
leche to thee; on the domes of thi iusti- 
fiyngis. I am parcener of alle that dreden 63 
thee; and kepen thin heestis. Lord, the 64 
erthe is ful of thi merci; teche thou me 
thi iustifiyngis. 


Lord, thou hast do goodnesse with thj 65 
sernaunt; bi’ thi word. Teche thou mece 
goodnesse, and loore®, and kunnyng; for 
Y bileuede to thin heestis. Bifor that Y 67 
was maad meke, Y trespasside; therfor 
Y kepte thi speche. Thou art good; and cs 
in thi goodnesse teche thon me thi iusti- 
fiyngis. The wickiduesse of hem that ben 60 
proude, is multiplied on me; but in al myn 
herte Y schalf seke thin heestis. The herte 70 
of hem is cruddidé as mylk; but Y bithou3te 
thi lawe. It is good to me, that thou hast71 
maad me meke; that Y lerne thi tustifi- 
yngis. The lawe of thi mouth is betere72 


SYamanu. iOme. k Om. c, 
Z of s. a seke s. b aftir 1. 
Om. c. & cruddid, ether maad 


CXVIII. 73—92. 


thi mouth ; vp on thousendis of gold and 
of siluer. 
Joth. 
73 Thin hondus maden me, and formeden 
me ; 3if to me vnderstonding, that I lerne 
74thin hestis. That dreden thee shul see 
me, and gladen; for in thi wordis I ouer- 
qshopide. I knew3, Lord, for equite thi 
domes; and in thi treuthe thou hast mekid 
7eme. Be don thi mercy, that it coum- 
forte me; after thi speche to thi sernaunt. 
77Come to me thi mercy doingus, and I 
shal line; for thi lawe is ny swete thenk- 
7sing. Proude men be thei confoundid, for 
vnri3twisli wickidnesse thei diden a3en 
me; I forsothe shal ben enhauntid in 
qathin hestis. The men dredende thee be 
thei al turned to me; and tho that knewe 
sothi wytnessingus. Be maad myn herte 
vndefoulyd in thi iustefiyngis; that I be 
not confoundid. 
Caf. 


st My soule failide in to thin helthe 
3iuere; and in to thi woord I ouerhopede. 
s2Myn ejen faileden in to thin speche; 
seiende, Whanne shalt thou coumforte 
s3ine ? For Iam maad as a botel in hor 
frost; thi iustefiyngus I haue not for3ete. 
84 Hou fele ben the da3is of thi seruaunt ; 
whanne shalt thou do of the pursnende 
gsme dom? Wicke men tolden to me tal- 
ssingus ;-but not as thi lawe. Alle thin 
maundemens treuthe; wicke men pursu- 
s7eden me, help thou me. A litel lasse 
thei wasteden me in the erthe; I forsothe 
88 forsoc not thin hestis. After thi mercy 
quikene thou me; and I shal kepe the 
witnessingis of thi mouth. 


Lameth. 


39 In to withoute ende, Lord; thi woord 
soabit! stille in heuene. In ieneracioun and 
to ieneracioun thi treuthe; thou foun- 
oldedist the erthe, and it abit! stille. In 
thin ordynaunce" abit! the day; for alle 
g2thingus seruen to thee. But that thi 


labideth azn. 


k aftir 31. 
rOm.1, 


hOm. tox. iand thei 1. 
PAftir y. 4 schul serue 1. 


Iknonlechen a. knewen J. 


PSALMS. 863 


to me; than thousyndis of gold and of" 
siluer. 


Thin hondis maden me, and fourmeden 71 
me; 3yue thou vidurstondyng to me, that 
Y Jerne thin heestis. Thei that dreden74 
thee schulen se me, and! schulen be glad ; 
for Y hopide more on thi wordis. Lord, 75 
Y knewe, that thi domes ben equite ; and 
in thi treuth thou hast maad me meke. 
Thi merci be maad, that it coumforte me; 76 
bi* thi speche to thi seruaunt. Thi mer-77 
ciful doyngis come to me, and Y schal 
lyue ; for thi lawe is my thenkyng. Thei7a 
that ben proude be schent, for vniustli 
thei diden wieckidnesse ajens me; but Y 
schal be exercisid in thin heestis. Thei79 
that dreden thee be turned to me; and 
thei that knowen! thi witnessyngis. Myngo 
herte be maad vnwemmed in thi iustifi- 
yngis; that Y be not schent. 


Mi soule failide in to thin helthe; anda 
Y hopide more on™ thi word, Myn ijens2 
failiden in to thi" speche ; seiynge, Whanne 
schalt thou coumforte me? For Y amg3 
maad as a bowge in frost’; Y haue not 
forjete thi iustifiyngis. Hou many benag 
the daies of thi seruaunt; whanne thon 
schalt make doom of hem that pursuen 
me? Wickid men telden to me ianglyngis; 85 
but not as thi lawe. Alle thi comaunde-ae 
mentis ben treuthe; wickid men han pur- 
sued me, helpe thou ine. Almeest theis7 
endiden me in erthe; but I forsook not thi 
comaundementis. Bi? thi mersi quikene ss 
thou me; and Y schal kepe the witness- 
ingis of thi mouth. 


Lord, thi word dwellith in heuene; with so 
outen ende. Thi treuthe dwellith in gene- 90 
racioun, and in to generacioun ; thou hast 
foundid the erthe, and it dwellith. Thegi 
dai lastith contynueli bi thi ordynaunce ; 
for alle thingis seruen’ to thee. No" but 92 


1 ordeynynge 4. 


Mini, my © forst c et plures. 


Quomodo di- 
lexi, 


Lucerna pedi- 
bus, 


Taiquos odio 
habui, 


864 


lawe is my swete thenking; thanne par- 
auenture I hadde pershid in my mecnesse. 
93In to withouten ende I shal not for3ete 
thi iustefiyngis; for in hem thou hast 
giquykened me. Thin I am, mac me saf ; 
osfor thi iustefiyngis I haue out so3t. Me 
abiden synneres, that thei shulden destrie 
9¢me; thi witnessyngus I vnderstod. Of alle 
ending I sa3 the ende; brod thin heste™ 


ful myche. 
Men. 


97 What maner I loouede thi lawe, Lord ; 
93al dai my swete thenking it is. Vp on 
myn enemys prudent thou madist me 
with thin heste; for in to withoute ende 
git is to me. Vp on alle techende me I vn- 
derstod; for thi witnessyngis" is my swete 
100 thenking. Ouer olde men J vnderstod; for 
io1thin hestis I so3te. Fro alle enel weie I 
forfendede my feet; that] kepe thi woordus. 
102 Fro thi domes I bowide not doun ; for 
103lawe thou hast put to me. Hon swete to 
myn chekis thi spechis ; ouer hony to my 
1oamouth. Of thin hestis I vnderstod; ther- 
fore I hatide eche weie of wickidnesse. 


Nun. 


105  Lanterne to my feet thi woord; and 
io¢li3t to myn pathis. I swoor; and sette 
to kepe the domes’ of thi ri3twisnesse. 
1071 am mekid on alle side; Lord, quykene 
losthou me aftir thi woord. The wilful 
thingus of my mouth wel plesing mac 
thou, Lord; and thi domys tech me. 
ioy My soule in myn® hondis euermor; and 
uothi lawe I haue not forjeten. Synneres 
setteden a grene to ne; and fro thin 
unthestis I errede not. Bi eritage I pur- 
chaside thi witnessingus in to withoute 
ende; for the ful out io3ing of myn herte 
iizthei ben. I bowede in myn herte to ben 
don thi iustefiyngis ; in to withoute ende 
for 3elding. 
Sameth. 
113. Wicke men to hate I hadde; and thi 
i4lawe I loouede. Helpere, and myn vnder- 


m heestis 4. 


‘fori, tthanne ellis1. 1 abeden 3. Vouer I. 


Ra soldi x : « 
3elding cDEFGUKLMOPeRsUVWXbi. the rewarding 1. © Therfore 11. 


PSALMS. 


D witnessis C. 


CXVIL. 93—I1T4. 


that’ thi lawe was my thenking; thannet 
perauenture Y hadde perischid in my low- 
nesse. With outen ende Y schal not for-93 
3ete thi iustifiyngis ; for in tho thou hast 
quikened me. JI am thiu, make thou megs 
saaf; for Y haue sou3t thi iustifiyngis. 
Synneris aboden" me, for to leese me; Y 95 
vndurstood thi witnessingis. I si3 these 
ende of al ende; thi comaundement zs ful 
large. 


Lord, hou Jouede Y thi lawe; al dai its7 
is my thenking. Aboue myn enemyesos 
thou madist me prudent bi thi comaunde- 
ment; for it is to me with outen ende. [99 
vudurstood aboue’ alle” men techinge me ; 
for thi witnessingis is my thenking. I vn-100 
dirstood aboue eelde men; for Y sou3te 
thi comaundementis. I forbeed my feet 101 
fro al euel weie ; that Y kepe thi wordis. 

I bowide not fro thi domes; for thou hast 102 
set lawe to me. Thi spechis ben ful swete 103 
to my cheekis; aboue hony to my mouth. 

I vnderstood of thin heestis; therfor Y 104 
hatide al* the weieY of wickidnesse. 


Thi word 7s a lanterne to my feet; and 105 
lizt to my pathis. I swoor, and purposide 106 
stidefastli ; to kepe the domes of thi ri3t- 
fulnesse. J am maad low bi alle thingis ; 107 
Lord, quykene thou me bi” thi word. 
Lord, make thou wel plesinge the wilful 108 
thingis of my mouth; and teche thou me 
thi domes. Mi soule is euere in myn 109 
hondis ; and Y for3at not thi lawe. Syn- 10 
neris settiden a snare to me; and Y erride 
not fro thi comaundementis. I pur-11 
chasside thi witnessyngis bi eritage with 
outen ende; for tho ben the fnl ioiyng 
of inyn herte. I bowide myn herte toll2 
do thi iustifiyngis with outen ende; for 
reward ®, 


I> hatide wickid men; and Y louede thi113 
lawe. Thou art myn helpere, and my 114 


othyn z. 


Wolde L. eelde s. Xalles. ¥ weyes Ss. 2 aftir 1. 





CXVII. 115~—-135. 


PSALMS. 


865 


takere thon art; and in to thi woord I - ‘taker vp*; and’ Y hopide more on® thi 


115 hopide ouer. Boweth doun fro mee, 3ee 
malice doeris; and I shal serche the 
lishestis of my God. Vndertac me aftir thi 
speche, and I shal liue; and confounde 
117thou not me fro myn abiding. Help me, 
and I shal ben saaf; and I shal sweteli 
thenken in thi iustefiyngis euertor. 
118 Thou hast despisid alle men goende doun 
fro thi domes; for vnrijtwis the thenk- 
ging of hem. Trespasende I heeld alle 
the synneres of-erthe?; therfore I loouede 
120 thi witnessingis. Pricke with thi drede 
my flesh; forsothe fro thi domes I 
dradde. 
Ayn. 
121 I dide dom and ri3twisnesse; tac thou 
122nott me to the akusende me. WVndertac 
thi seruaunt in to good; chalenge me 
123not the proude. Myn e3en faileden in to 
thin helthe 3inere ; and in to the speche 
124 of thi rijtwisnesse. Do with thi seruaunt 
after thi mercy; and thi iustefiyngis teche 
125thou me. Thi seruaunt I am; 3if to me 
vnderstonding, that I wite thi witness- 
iz6ingis. Time of doing, Lord; thei han 
127scatered thi lawe. Therfore I loouede 


thin hestis; oner gold and_ topasion.’ 


128 Therfore to alle thin hestis I was ri3t- 
forth reulyd; alle wicke weie to hate I 
hadde. 

Phee. 

129 Merueilous thi witnessingis, Lord ; 

130therfore serchede them my soule. The 


declaring of thi woordis li3tneth; vnder- 


131 stonding 3iueth to litle childer. My 
mouth I openede, and I dro3 to a spirit ; 
132 for thin hestis I desirede. Behold in me, 
and have mercy of me; after the dom of 
133men loovende thi name. My goingus 
forth ri3t reule thou after thi speche; 
that ther lordshipe not of me alle vnri3t- 


134 Wisnesse. A3een bie me fro the chalengis 


133 of men; that I kepe thin hestis. Thi face 
liz3tne™ thou’ vp on thi seruaunt; and 


word. 3ef wickide men, bowe® awei fro115 
me; and Y schal seke" the comaunde- 
mentis of my God. Vp take thou me bins 
thi word, and Y schal lyue; and schende 
thou not me fro! myn abydyng. Helpeii7 
thou me, and Y schal be saaf; and Y schal 
bithenke euere in thi iustifiyngis. Thounis 
hast forsake alle men goynge awey fro 
thi domes; for the thou3t of hem 7s vniust. 

I arettide alle the synneris of erthe.i9 
brekeris of the lawe ; therfor Y lonede thi 
witnessyngis. Naile thou my fleischis! 120 
with thi drede; for Y dredde of thi 
domes. 


I dide doom and ri3twisnesse™; bitake 121 
thou not me to hem that falsli chalengen 
me. Take vp thi seruaunt in to" good-122 
nesse; thei that ben proude chalenge not 
me. Myn ijen failiden in to thin helthe; 123 
and in to the speche of thi ri3tfulnesse. 
Do thou with thi sernaunt bi® thi merci; 124 
and teche thou me thi? iustifiyngis. I am 125 
thi seruaunt, 3yue thou vndurstondyng to 
me; that Y kunne thi witnessingis. Lord, 126 
it is tyme to do; thei han distried thi 
Jawe. Therfor Y louede thi comaunde- 127 
mentis; more than gold and_ topazion. 
Therfor Y was dressid to alle thin heestis; 128 
Y hatide al wickid weie. 


Lord, thi witnessingis ben wondirful ; 129 
therfor my soule sou3te tho. Declaring 130 
of thi wordis li3tneth ; and4 3yueth vnder- 
stonding to meke men. I openede myi3i 
mouth, and drou3 the spirit; for Y de- 
siride thi comaundementis. Biholde thou 132 
on me, and haue* merci on me; bi the 
dom of hem that louen thi name. Dresse 133 
thou my goyingis bi’ thi speche; that al 
vnri3tfulnesse haue not lordschip on me. 
A3eyn bie thou me fro the false chalengis 134 
of men; that Y kepe thin heestis. Lijtne* 135 
thi face on thi seruaunt; and teche thou 





Pthe erthe seu. 4wickid aH. list. § Om. a. 
cvptakeres. dOm.o. ¢inrt. fThes. bowethi, Bspekes. } fort. k Om. plures. 
Ifleisch 1. ™riztfulnesse ceferi. %tothir, Oaftir1. Pbethis. 4 and if1, ¥ haue thous. 
Saftir1. ¢ Liztne thou s. 
VOL. II. 5s 


Justus es, Do- 
mine, 


Clamaut in 
toto corde. 


Vide humilita- 
tem meam. 


866 


is¢tech me thi iustefiyngis. Issues of watris 
bro3ten out myn e3en; for thei kepten not 
thi lawe. 
Sade. 
137, Rij3twis thou art, Lord; and ri3t is 
i38thi doin. Thou hast comaundid ri3twis- 
nesse, thi witnessingus; and thi treuthe- 
i39ful myche. My looue made me to 
dwyne‘; for myn enemys han for3ete thi 
140 woordis. Fyrid is thi speche hugeli; and 
141thi seruaunt loouede it. A 3ung waxen 
man I am, and dispisid ; thi iustefiyngis 
12I haue not for3ete. Thi riztwisnesse, 
Lord, ri3twisnesse in to withoute ende ; 
uszand thi lawe treuthe. Tribulacioun and 
anguish founden me; thin hestis is my 
1iswete thenking. Equite thi witnessingus 
in to withoute ende; vnderstonding 3if 
thou to me, and I shal liue. 


Cof: 

I criede in al myn herte, full out here 
me, Lord; thi iustefiyngus I shal a3een 
igsseche. I criede to thee, mac me saf; 
147that I kepe thin hestis. I cam beforn 

in cesounable time of werking, and I 

criede; in to thi woordis I ouer hopede. 
14a Myn ejen camen beforn to thee the 

morutid; that I shulde sweteli thenke 
149 thi spechis. My vois here thou aftir thi 
mercy, Lord; and aftir thi dom quykene 
1sothou me. Ther ne3heden the pursuende 
me to wickidnesse; fro thi lawe ferr thei 
isiben maad forsothe. Nee3h thou art, 
1s2 Lord; and alle thi weies treuthe. Fro 
the bigynnyng I knew3 of thi witness- 
ingys; for in to withoute ende thou 
foundedest hem. 
Res. 
is3 See my mecnesse, and tac me out; for 
154thi lawe I haue not for3ete. Deme thou 
my dom, and aj3een bie thou me; for thi 
issSpeche quikene thou me. Ferr fro 
syneres helthe ; for thi iustefiyngus thei 
iscout so3ten not. Thi mercies manye, 
Lord; and aftir thi dom quikene thou 


145 


PSALMS. 


- me thi iustifiyngis. 


CXVIHI. 136—156. 


Myn izen ledden" 136 
forth the outgoynges of watris; for thei 
kepten not thi lawe. 


Lord, thou art iust; and thi dom is 137 
ri3tful. Thou hast comaundid ri3tfulnesse, 138 
thi witnessingis; and thi treuthe greetli fo 
be kept’. Mi feruent loue made me to139 
be meltid"; for myn enemys for3aten thi 
wordis. Thi speche is greetli enflawmed*; 140 
and thi seruaunt louede it. I am jong, 141 
and dispisid; Y for3at not thi iustifiyngis. 
Lord, thi riztfulnesse 7s rijtfulnesse with 142 
outen ende; and thi lawe zs treuthe. Tri-143 
bulacioun and angwische founden’ me; 
thin heestis is my thenking. Thi wit-141 
nessyngis 7s equite with outen ende; 3yue 
thou vndirstondyng to me, and Y schal 
lyue. 


I criede in al myn herte, Lord, here 145 
thou me; and? Y schal seke thi iustifiyngis. 
I criede to thee, make thou me saaf; that146 
Y kepe thi comaundementis. I bifor cam 147 
in ripenesse, and Y criede; Y hopide aboue 
on thi wordis. Myn ijen bifor eamen to 148 
thee ful eerlis; that Y schulde bithenke thi 
speches. Lord, here thou my vois bi® thi14y 
merci; and quykene thou me bi thi doom. 
Thei that pursuen me neiz3den to wickid- 150 
nesse; forsothe thei ben maad fer fro thi 
lawe. Lord, thou art ny3; and alle thiisi 
weies ben treuthe. In the bigynnyng Y 12 
knewe of thi witnessingis; for thou hast 
foundid tho with outen ende. 


Se thou my mekenesse, and delyuere 153 
thou me; for Y for3at not thi lawe. Deme 154 
thou my dom, and ajenbie thou me; 
quikene thou me for thi speche. Heelthe 155 
is fer fro synners; for thei sou3ten not thi 
iustifiyngis. Lord, thi mercies bew manye; 156 
quykene thou me bi thi dom. Thei ben1s7 


‘dwyyn 4. dwynnen z. dwynen 1. 


Uledens. Vv kept. Lire here. vu text. 


CDEGHIKLMOPQRSUVWXbi, YY han founde 1. 


w mekid a. molte 1. ether langwizsshid K marg. 
Zz Om. ceteri. 


* set a fire 


a®aftir 1, b Om. 2. 


Principes per- 
secutt sunt me. 


_ Appropinguet 
_ deprecacio 
mea. 


CXVIII. 157—176. 


1s7me. Manye that pursuen me, and tru- 
blen me; fro thi witnessingis I bowede 

isgnot doun. I sa3 lawe brekeris, and I 
dwynede awei; for thei kepten not thi 

isgyspechis. See, for thi hestis I loouede, 
Lord"; in thi mercy quikene’ thou me. 

160 The begynnyng of thi woordis treuthe ; 
into withoute ende alle the domes of thi 
ri3twisnesse. 


Sin. 
161 Princis pursueden me with oute cause; 
16zand of thi woordis dradde myn herte. I 
shal gladen vpon thine spechis; as he 
163 that findeth manye spoilis. Wickidnesse 
to hate I hadde, and wlatide; thi lawe 
161forsothe I loouede. Seuen sithes in the 
dai preising J seide to thee; vp on the 
iesdomys of thi ri3twisnesse. Myche pes 
to the loouende thi lawe; and ther is 
i6snot to them sclaundre. I bod* thin 
helthe 3iuere, Lord; and thin hestis I 
167loouede. My soule kepte thy witness- 
168ingus; and loouede them hugeli. I kepte 
thin hestis, and thi witnessingis; for alle 
my weies in thi sy3t. 


Tau. 
169 Nezhe my lowe pre3ing in thi si3te, 
Lord; aftir thi speche 3if to me vnder- 


vostonding. Entre myn asking in thin 
izisighte; aftir thi speche deliuere me. My. 
lippis shuln tellen out an impne; whan 
172thou shalt teche me thi iustefiyngus. My 
tunge shal telle forth thi speche ; for alle 
173thi maundemens equyte. Be maad thin 
hond, that it saue me; for thi maunde- 
i7amens I ches. I coueitide thin helthe 
3iuere, Lord ; and thi lawe is my sweete 
175thenking. Liue my soule, and it shal 
preise thee; and thi domys shul helpe 
176me. I errede as a shep that pershede; 
seche thi seruaunt, Lord, for thin hestis 
I haue not for3eten. 


u Om. ¢c. 


a word a. 


© ether langwizsshede K marg. 
™ seke thou 1. 


ither. kKintox land if 1s. 


PSALMS. 


v quijk 4. 


€ riztfulnesse s. 


867 


manye that pursuen me, and doen tribu- 
lacioun to me; Y bowide not awei fro thi 
witnessingis. I si3 brekers of the lawe, 158 
and Y was meltid‘; for thei kepten not thi 
spechis. Lord, se thou, for Y louede thi 1s9 
comaundementis ; quikene thou me in thi 
merci. The bigynnyng of thi wordis4 7s 160 
treuthe; alle the domes of thi ri3twisnesse® 
ben withouten ende. 


Princes pursueden me with outen cause; 161 
and my herte dredde of thi wordis. [ 162 
schal be glad on thi spechis; as he that 
fyndith many spuylis. I hatide and 163 
wlatidef wickidnesse; forsothe Y louede 
thi lawe. I seide heriyngis to thee seuene 164 
sithis in the dai; on the domes of thi ri3t- 
fulnesse. Miche pees 7s to hem that louen 165 
thi lawe; and no sclaundir is to hem. 
Lord, Y abood thin heelthe; and Y louede 166 
thin heestis. Mi soule kepte thi witness- 167 
yngis ; and louede tho greetli. I kepte thi 16a 


‘comaundementis, and thi® witnessingis; for 


alle my weies ben in thi si3t. 


Lord, my biseching come ni3 in thi si3t; 169 
bi® thii speche 3yue thou vndurstonding 
tome. Myn axing entre ink thi si3t; bi17zo 
thi speche delyuere thou me. Mi lippisi7! 
schulen telle out an ympne; whanne thou 
hast tau3te me thi iustifiyngis. Mi tunge 172 
schal pronounce thi speche; for whi alle 
thi comaundementis ben equite. Thin 173 
hond be maad, that it saue me; for Y 
haue chose thin heestis. Lord, Y coueitide 174 
thin heelthe; and thi lawe is my thenking. 


"Mi soule schal lyue, and! schal herie tliee ; 175 


and thi domes schulen helpe me. J erride 176 
as a scheep that perischide; Lord, seke™ thi 
seruaunt, for Y for3at not thi comaunde- 
mentis. 


wabood a. 


f Y wlatide a pr.m. 8Om.s. 4} aftir 1. 


582 


Ad Dominum, 
cum tribu- 
larer. 


Leuaui ocutos 
meos. 


Letatus sum 
in hiis. 


868 


PSALM CXIX. 
, The song of grees. 


To the Lord, whan I was trublid, I 
gcriede; and he ful ont herde me. Lord, 
deliuere ny soule fro wicke* lippys; and 
sfro the treccherons tunge. What be** 3iue 
to thee, or what be put to thee; a3en the 
4treccherous tunge ? Sharpe arewis of the 
smny3ti; with colis wastende. Allas to me! 
for my pilgrimaging is drawen along, 
I dwelte with men dwellende Cedar ; 
smyche wonyng as aY comeling was my 
7soule. With hem that hateden pes I was 
pesible; whan I spac to them, thei im- 
pugneden me with oute cause. 


PSALM CXX. 
1 The song of grees’. 


I rered vp myn e3en in to the* moun- 
teynes ; whennys shal come helpe to me. 
2Myn helpe of the Lord; that made 
3heuene and erthe. j3iue he not in to 
stiring thi foot; ne nappe he, that kep- 
4eth thee. Lo! he shal not nappen, ne 
sslepen; that kepeth Irael. The Lord 
kepeth thee, the Lord thi defending; vp 
con thi rijthond. By day the sunne shal 
not brenne thee; ne the mone bi the ny3t. 
7 The Lord kepeth thee fro alle euel; kepe 
sthi soule the Lord. The Lord kepe thin 
entre and thi issu; fro this now and vn 
to the world. 


PSALM CXXI. 
1 The song of grees. 


I gladide in these thingus, that ben seid 
to me; In to the hous of the Lord wee 


Xx wickid 4. ** shal be c. 


a Om. A. title on the uma. © Om. a. 


PSALMS. 


yY Om. a. 


CXIX. I-——-CXXI. 1. 


PSALM CXIX. 


The ‘title of the hundrid and nyntenthe\ 
salm. The song of greces?t. 

Whanne Y was set in tribulacioun, Y 
criede to the Lord;: and he herde me. 
Lord, delyuere thou my soule fro wickid2 
lippis; and fro a gileful tunge. What3 
schal be 3ouun to thee, ether what schal 
be leid’ to thee; to a gileful tunge ? 
Scharpe arowis of the my3ti; with colis4 
that maken desolat. Allas to me! for my 5 
dwelling in an alien lond is maad long, 
Y dwellide with men dwellinge in Cedar ; 
my soule was myche a comelyng. I was 
pesible with hem that hatiden pees ; 
whanne Y spak to hem, thei a3enseiden™ 
me with outen cause. 


PSALM CXX. 


The ‘title of the’ hundrid and twentithe) 
salm'. The song of greces™. 

I reiside myn izen to the’ hillis; fro 
whannus help schal come to me. Myn2z 
help zs of the Lord; that made heuene and 
erthe. The Lord 3yue not thi foot in to3 
mouyng; nether he nappe, that kepith 
thee. Lo! he schal not nappe, nether 4 
slepe; that kepith Israel. The Lord kep-s 
ith thee; the Lord is thi proteccioun aboue 
thi rijthond. The sunne schal not brennes 
thee bi dai; nether the moone bi ny3t. 
The Lord kepe’ thee fro al yuel; the7 
Lord kepe thi soule. The Lord kepe this 
goyng in and thi goyng out; fro this tyme 
now and in to the world. 


PSALM CXXI. 

The ‘title of the* hundrid and oon andi 
twentithe salmY. The song of the* grecis 
of Daud*, 

I am glad in these thingis, that ben 
seid to me; We schulen go in to the hous of 


“degrees u. 4&Om. A. 


P greces, either steyris. 1u. greces, ether steiers, for delyueraunce 


of Israel fro caitifie. x. greces, ether steyris, for deliueraunce of the peple of Israel fro caityfte. v. 


q 30uen 8. 
tOm.a. 4 salm x, 
greces. This is a preier for the 
w kepith cbEGHIKLOPQRSUVWxb. 


rempungneden ether azenseiden CDEFGHIKMOPQRSUVWXb. impungneden L. 


8 Om. A. 


uu greces, for the good state of the puple turned ajen fro the caitifte of Babilone. x. 
peple turned azen fro the caitifte of Babiloyne. v. 
x Om. a. fitle of v. 


v Om. CDEGIS. 


y Om. A. z Om. KLPRSWx. a Dauid, 


toijng in the Lord, for the bilding of the citee and the temple, that he bifore si; to be made bi Salomon. x. 


+ A glos. Gostli 
this salm mai 
be expowned 
of ech feithful 
man sett in tri- 
bulacion, bodili 
etber gostli, by 
temptacion of 
fendis, of wich 
he axith de- 
nontli to be de- 
lyuerid, and the 
fendisbedryuen 
awey fro im- 
pungnyng of 
feithful men, 
and be closid 
doun in helle; 
and this man 
sizjeth for delaie 
of remedie. Lire 
here. K. 


Ad te leuaut 
ocuios. 


Nisi quia Do- 
minus erat. 


CXXI. 2—OXXIII. 5. 


2shul go. Stondende weren oure feet; in 
3thi porchis, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem, 
that is bild as a cite; whos part taking 
4is in to itself. Thider forsothe ste3eden 
vp lynagis, the linagis of the Lord; the 
witnessing of Irael, to knouleche to the 
sname of the Lord. For ther seten the 
setis in dom; the setis vpon” the hous of 
6Dauid. Pre3eth that to the pes ben of Je- 
rusalem; and abundaunce to the loouende 
7thee. Be maad pes in thi vertue; and 
sabundaunce in thi touris. For my bre- 
theren® and my ne3heboris ; I spac pes of 
9thee. For the hous of the Lord oure 
God ; I so3te goode thingus to thee. 


PSALM CXXII. 
1 ‘The song of grees. 


To thee I liftide myn e3en; that dwell- 
2ist in heuenus. Lo! as the e3en of the! 
seruauns; in the hondis of ther lordis. As 


the e3en of the hondmaide®, in the hondis. 


of hir ladi; so oure e3en to the Lord oure 
Godf, to the time he haue merci of ys. 
3Haue merci of vs, Lord, haue mercy of 
vs; for myche wee be fulfild with dispis- 
4ing. For myche is fulfild oure soule; to 
the abundaunt repref, and to the proude 
men dispising. 


PSALM CXXIII. 
1 The song of grees. 


But for the Lord was in vs, sele now 
2Irael; but for the Lord was in vs. Whan 
3men shulden risen* a3en vs out; per 

auenture aliue thei hadde swolewid vs. 
Whan shulde wrathen the wodnesse of 
4hem in to vs; per auenture water hadde 
5yp sopen vs. Oure soule passide thur3 
@ Om, AEH. 


bvp a. © brether c. 


> forzerdis ceteri passim. © Om. cir. 


corn. §& Om.1. ma. !Om., a. 


PSALMS. 


© hond maydyn aren. 


4 Om. a. 
prophete for delyneraunce of the puple fro the turment of Antioche. kK. The song of the grecis. 0. 
ho k Om. a. the grecis tv. 


869 


the Lord. Oure feet weren stondynge; in2 
thi hallis®, thou Jerusalem. Jerusalem,3 
which is bildid as a citec ; whos part tak- 

ing therof is in to the same thing. For4 
the lynagis, the lynagis of the Lord 

stieden thidir, the witnessing of Israel ; 

to knouleche to the name of the Lord. 

For thei saten there on sectis in doom;s5 
seetis on the hous of Dauid. Preie 3c thos 
thingis, that ben to the pces of Jerusalem; 

and abiuidaunce be to hem that louen 

thee. Pees be maad in thi vertu; and7 
abundaunce in thi touris. For my bri-8 
theren and my nei3boris; Y spak pees of 
thee. For the hous of oure Lord* God 39 
Y sou3te goodis to thee. 


PSALM CXXII. 


The ‘title of the’ hundrid and two and\ 
twentithe salm. ‘The song of grecis®. 
To thee Y haue reisid myn ijen; that 

dwellist in heuenes. Lo! as the izen of f2 

seruauntis; bev in the hondis of her lordis. 

As the ijen of the handmajde bex in the 

hondis of her ladi; so oure izen ben to 

oure Lord God, til he haue mercy on vs, 

Lord, haue thou merci on ys, haue thous3 

merci on vs; for we ben myche fillid with 

dispisyng. For oure soule is myche fillid ; 4 

we ben schenschipe to hem that ben 

abundaunte with richessis, and dispising 
to proude men. 


PSALM CXXIII. 

The ‘title of the hundrid and thre and\ 
twentithe ‘salm. The song of grecisk 
‘of Dauith'. 

Israel seie now, No but for the Lord 
was in ys; no™ but for® ‘the Lord® was2 
in ys. Whanne men risiden? vp a3ens vs; 
in hap thei hadden swalewid vs quike.3 
Whanne the woodnesse of hem was wrooth 
a3ens vs; in hap watir hadde sope vs vp.4 
Oure soule passide thoru3 a stronde; ins 


fOm.c. ff arisen £. 


e Om. a. The song of grecis ; the preier of an holi 
f of the 


10m. a. of Dauith, doing thankingis 


for delyueraunce [of him and his peple v.) fro Filisteis ‘stijnge azens [comynge on v.] him, ‘whanne thet 


knewen him [after he was v.) anoyntid king, Kv. 


m Om. 1. 


2QOm.u. Shei. Present, risen L. 


Qui confidunt. 


In conuer- 
tendo, 


870 


the strem; per auenture oure soule shulde 
han passid thur3 the vnsuffrable watir. 

6 Blyssyd be the Lord; that 3aff not vs in 
to the cacchynge to the teth of hem. 

7Oure soule, as a sparewe, is ca3t out; fro 
the grene of huntercs’. The grene is 

8to-brosid; and wee be deliuered. Oure 
helpe in the name of the Lord; that made 
heuene and erthe. 


PSALM CXXIV. 
t The song of grees. 


That trosten in the Lord as the mount 
of Sion; he shal not be moued in to with- 
2goute ende, that dwellith in Jerusalem. 
The mounteynes in his cumpas; and the 
Lord in the cumpas of his puple, fro this 
3now and vnto the world. For the Lord 
shal not lefe the 3erd of synneres vp on 
the lot of rijtwis men; that the ri3twis 
men strecche not out to wickidnesse ther 
shondis. Wel do thou, Lord; to goode 
smen, and ri3t in herte. The boowende 
doun forsothe in to oblishingis the Lord 
shal bring to with werkende wickid- 
nesse; pes vp on Irael. 


PSALM CXXV. 
1 The song of grees. 


Lord, in turnende the caitifte of Sion; 
2wee ben maad as coumfortid. Thanne 
fild is our mouth with io3e; and oure 
tunge in ful out io3ing. Thanne thei 
shul seye among Jentilis; The Lord hath 
simagnefied to don with hem. The Lord 
hath magnefied to do with vs; wee ben 
amaad gladende. Lord, al turne oure cai- 
stifte; as a strem in the south. That 
sowen in teris; in ful out io3ing shul repe. 
6 Goende thei 3iden*, and wepten; sendende 
ther sedis. Comende forsothe thei shul 


come; berende with ful out iojing ther 
handfullis. 


& the hunteres £. 


4Om.1. "hath not jouer. $ in to ox sec. m. 
song of greces of goostli Jerusalem, 
song of Dauith. s. 
> Om. a. salm. The s. 0 


PSALMS. 


t of RX prim. 


é an holi citee and dwelling for cristen men bi feith 
There is no title to this Psalm in ur. 


CXXIII. 6—CXXV. 6. 


hap oure soule hadde passide thoru34 a 
watir vnsuffrable. Blessid be the Lord ;6 
that ‘3af not’ vs in’ taking tot the teeth of 
hem. Oure soule, as a sparowe, is de-7 
lyuered; fro the snare of hunters. The 
snare is al to-brokun; and we ben de- 
lyuered. Oure helpe 7s in the name of8 
the Lord; that made heuene and erthe. 


PSALM CXXIV. 


The ‘title of the* hundrid and foure and\ 
. twentithe salm’. ‘The song of greces™. 
Thei that tristen in the Lord ben as 
the hil of Syon; he schal not be moued 
with outen ende, that dwellith in Jeru-2 
salem. Hillis ben in the -cumpas of it, 
and the Lord zs in the cumpas of his 
puple; fro this tyme now and in to the 
world. For the Lord schal not leeue thes 
3erde of synneris on the part of iust men; 
that iust men holde not forth her hondis 
to wickidnesse. Lord, do thou wel; to4 
good men, and of* ri3tful herteY. Buts 
the Lord schal lede them that bowen in 
to obligaciouns, with hem that worchen 
wickidnesse ; pees be on? Israel. 


PSALM CXXV. 


The ‘title of the* hundrid and fyue and 
twentithe ‘salm. The song of grecis®. 
Whanne the Lord turnede the caitifte 

of Sion; we weren maad as coumfortid. 

Thanne oure mouth was fillid with ioye;2 

and oure tunge with ful out ioiyng. Thanne 

thei schulen seie among hethene men; The 

Lord magnefiede to do with hem. Thes 

Lord magnefiede to do with vs; we ben 

maad glad. Lord, turne thou® oure cai-4 

tifte; as a stronde in the south. Thei thats 
sowen in teeris; schulen repe in ful out 
iolyng. Thei goynge 3eden, and wepten ;¢ 
sendynge her seedis. But thei comynge 
schulen come with ful out ioiyng; berynge 
her handfullis. 


b wenten 4En. 


uOm. A. YOm.ac. W Om. a. The 


of Crist. Kv. The 


X tor. Zupontr &Om. a. 


Y in herte 1. 


Diagee ee ae &. and it speketh of the turnyng azen of the puple of Israel fro the caitifte of 


e 8. of g. of the turnynge azen_ fro Babiloyne. v. 


¢ thou awey 1. : 


Nist Dominus. 


Beati omnes. 


Sepe expugna- 
verunt, 


CXXVI. I=-CXXVIHI. 1. 


PSALM CXXVI. 
1 The song of grees. 


But the Lord shulde bild the hous; in 
to veyn trauaileden that bilden it. But 
the Lord shul kepe the cite; in vein 

2waketh that kepeth it. Veyn it! is to 

3ou befor 1i3t to risen; riseth aftir that 
3ee seten, that* eten the bred of sorewe. 
Whan he shal 3iuen to his loouede a slep; 
3lo! the eritage of the Lord the sones, 
4the mede the frut of the wombe. As 
arewes in the hond of the my3ty; so the 
ssones off the out shaken. Blisful the 
man that fulfilde his desir of hem; he 
shal not be contoundid, whan he shal 
speke to his enemys in the 3ate. 


PSALM CXXVII. 
1 The song of grees. 


Blisful alle that dreden the Lord; that 
2gon in his weies. The trauailis of thin 
hondis for thou shalt ete; blisful thou 
3art, and wel shal be to thee. Thi wif as 
a vine aboundende; in the sydes of thin 
hous. Thy sones as the newe braunchis 
4of oliues; in the cumpas of thi bord. Lo! 
thus shal be blissid the man; that dredeth 
sthe Lord. Blisse to thee the Lord fro 
Sion ; and see thou the goodis of Jerusa- 
clem alle the dajes of thi lif. And see 
thou the sones of thi sones; the! pes vp 
on Irael. 


PSALM CXXVIII. 
1 The song of grees. 


Ofte thei han out fo3te me, fro my 


i Om. c. 
d Om. A. 


But if 1. 
* of the 1. 


& bildith kus. 
° Om. s. 


of his temple. v. 
soner. ™QOm. x. 


PSALMS. 


k and an. 


871 


PSALM CXXVI. 


The ‘title of the hundrid and sixe and\ 
twentithe ‘sulm. The song of greces of 
Salomon®. 

‘No but! the Lord bilde? the hous; thei 
that bilden it han trauelid in veyn. No! 
but the Lord kepith the citee; he wakith 
in veyn that kepith it. It is veyn to 3ou2 
to rise bifore the li3t; rise 3e after that! 3e 
han sete, that eten the breed of sorewe. 
Whanne lie sehal 3yue sleep to his loued; 
lo! the eritage of the Lord ‘ts sones, the3 
mede is! the™ fruyt of" wombe. As4 
arowis ben in the hond of the mi3ti; so 
the sones of hem that ben sehakun out. 
Blessid zs the man, that hath fillid hiss 
desier of tho; he sehal not be schent, 
whanne he schal speke to hise enemyes in 
the 3ate. 


PSALM CXXVII. 

The title of the hundrid and seuene andi 
twentithe salm°. The song of greces?. 
Blessid ben’ alle men, that dreden the 

Lord; that" gon in hise weies. For thouz 

schalt ete the trauels of thin hondis; thou 

art blessid, and it sechal be wel to thee. 

Thi wijf as’ a plenteous vyne; in the sidis 3 

of thin hous. Thi sones ast the newe 

sprenges” of olyue trees; in the cumpas of 

thi bord. Lo! so’ a man sechal be blessid; 4 

that dredith the Lord. The Lord blesses 

thee fro Syon; and se thou the goodis of 

Jerusalem in alle the daies of thi lijf. 

And se thou the sones of thi sones; se thousé 

pees on Israel. 


PSALM CXXVIIUTI. 


The ‘title of the” hundrid and ei3te and\ 
twentithe ‘salm. The song of greces®. 


Israel seie now; Ofte thei fou3ten’ a3ens 


10m. 4. 


€ Om. a. salm. The s. of g. of S. and of Goddis help to bilding of his temple, and of holi 
chirche, bi teching of feith and vertues.K. salm. To Solomon. 8. salm. 


h Om. 1 
P greces of Daunid. ELP. greces, stiringe to Goddis drede, in 


The s. of g. of S. and of the bilding 


iOQm.r. k thanne the 1. ithe meede of the 


biheting temporal prosperitees to hem that dreden God. x. greces, of Crist and hooly chirche.v. In a is no 


title, but only cxavit. 4 be plures. 
v thus 1. w Om. as. title of v. 
fro her pursueris, wiche is offered. k. 


¥ the whiche 1. 


x Om. a. salm. The s. of g. for delyuerannse of the puple of Israel 
y han fou3te 1. 


s schal be ast. + schul be as3. " sprengingis s. 


De profundis. 


Domine, non. 


872 


25outhe; seye now Irael. Ofte thei han 
out fo;te me fro my 3outhe; forsothe 
3thei my3te not to me. Vpon my bac 
forgeden synneres; thei longeden aferr 
ather wickidnessis™. The Lord rij3twys 
sshal to-hewe the nollis of synneres; be 
thei confoundid, and al turned baeward, 
6that hateden Sion. Be thei maad as hei 
of rooues; that beforn it be pullid ont, 
7ful out driede. Of the whiche he that 
repeth, shal not fulfille his hond ; and 
hys bosum, that shal gedere handfullis. 
s And they seiden not that wenten biside, 
The blissing ofthe Lord vp on 3ou; wee 
han blissid to 30u in the name of the 
Lord. 
PSALM CXXIX. 


1 The song of grees. 


Fro depthis I criede to thee, Lord ; 
2Lord, full ont here thou my vois. Be 
maad thin eris vnderstondende; in to the 
svois of my lowe pre3ing. If wickidnessis 
thou shalt ‘al abonte" kepe, Lord; Lord, 
4who shal sustene. For anent thee is 
mercy doyng; and for thi lawe I sus- 
tenede thee, Lord. My soule sustenede 
sin the woord of hym; my soule hopide 
6in the Lord. Fro the morutyd warde 
vnto the ny3t; hope Irael in the Lord. 
7For anent the Lord mercy®; and plen- 
steous anentis hym a3een biyng. And he 
shal a3een bie Irael; fro alle the wickid- 
nessis of hym. 


PSALM CXXX. 
\ The song of grees. 


Lord, myn herte is not enhaunsid; ne 
rerid vp ben myn ejen. Ne I wente in 
grete thingis; ne in merneilis ouer me. 

2If not mekely I felede ; but IP enhaunced 
my soule. As the wened vpon his mo- 


m wickidnes 4H. 


2 Lord is just s. _@ beete togidre 1. 
nesse I. 
10m, v. 


A is no title, but only crrz, = Om. 1s. 


PSALMS. 


. alboute c. 


» be thei 1. 
£ Om. a. salm. The s. of greces, for delyucraunce of synne and caitiftee. K. 

1 susteyne ether abide cOEFGHKLMOPQRSUVWXbi. susteyne or abide 1. 
™ Om. pro. himself, for ceesing of vengeaunse. K. himself, for noumbringe of his peple. v. In 


CXXVIII. 2——-CXXX. 2. 


me fro my 3ongth. Ofte thei fou3ten2 
ajens' me fro my 3ongthe; and sotheli 
thei mij3ten not to me. Synneris forgeden3 
on my bak; thei maden long her wickid- 
nesse. The ‘iust Lord? schal beete* the4 
nollis of synneris; alle that haten Sions 
be’ schent, and tured abak. Be theie 
maad as the hey of hous coppis; that 
driede vp, bifore that it be drawun vp. 
Of which¢ hei he that schal repe, schal not7 
fille his hond; and he that schal gadere 
hondfullis, schal not fille his bosum. Ands 
thei that passiden forth seiden not, The 
blessing of the Lord be on 30u; we bless- 
iden 30u in the’ name of the Lord. 


PSALM CXXIX. 

The ‘title of the® hundrid and nyne and 
twentithe ‘salm. The song of greces'. 
Lord, Y criede to thee fro’ depthes ; 

Lord, here thou mi vois. Thin eeris be2 

maad ententif; in to the vois of my bisech- 

ing. Lord, if thou kepist wickidnessis*; 3 

Lord, who schal susteyne'? For merci is4 

at thee; and, Lord, for thi lawe Y abood 

thee. Mi soule susteynede in his word ; 
my soule hopide in the Lord. Fro the¢ 
morewtid keping til to* niz3t; Israel hope 
in the Lord. For whi merci ts at the7 

Lord; and plenteous redempcioun ts at 

hym. And he schal ajen bie Israel; fro alles 

the wickidnessis therof. 


PSALM CXXX. 


The title of the hundrid and thrittithe 
salm. The song of greces, ‘to Dauith 
himself ™. 

Lord, myn herte is not enhaunsid ; ne- 
ther myn izen ben reisid. Nether Y 3ede 
in the" grete thingis; nether in merueilis 
aboue me. If Y feelide not mekely; but2 
enhaunside my soule. As a.childe wenyde 


is mercye 4. P Om. a. 


¢the which r. 4Om.1. ¢€ Om. a. title. s. 
& fro the EL. b wicked. 
kK to the c sec. m. FIR. 


Memento Do- 
mine. 


CXXX. 3-——-CXXXI. 17. 


3der; so 3elding in my soule. Hope Irael 
in the Lord; fro‘ this now and vn to the 
world. 


PSALM CXXXI. 
1 The song of grees. 


Haue mynde, Lord, of Dauid; and of 

2al the debonernesse of hym. As he swor 
to the Lord; a vow he vouwide to the 
3God of Jacob. I" shal not entre in to 
the tabernacle of myn hous; I shal not 
stejen vp in to the bed of my bedding. 
+I shal not 3iue slep to myn e3en; and to 
smy ee lidis napping. And reste to my 
times, to the time IJ finde a place to the 
Lord; a tabernacle to the God of Jacob. 
6 Lo! wee han herd it in Effrata; wee han 
founden it in the feldis of the wode. 
7 Wee shul entre in to the tabernacle of 
hym; wee shuln honouren in the place, 
swhere stoden his feet. Ris, Lord, in to 
thi resting; thou and the arke of thin 
dhalewing. Thi prestis be thei clad® ri3t- 
wisnesse ; and thin halewis ful out io3e 
lothey. For Dauid, thi seruaunt; turne 
11 thou not awei the face of thi crist. The 
Lord swor to Dauid treuthe, and he shal 
not maken hym*‘ iu" vein; of the frute 
of thi wombe I shal putte vp on thi seete. 
12 If thi sones shul kepe my testament; and 
my witnessingis, these that I shal teche 
them’. And the sones of hem vn to the 
13 world ; shul sitte vp on thi sete. For the 
Lord ches Sion; he ches it in to dwelling 
14to¥ hym. This my reste in to the world 
of world; heer I shal dwelle, for I ches it. 
15 His widewe blessende I shal blisse; his 
iepore* I shal fulfille with loues. Hise 
prestis I shal clothe with helthe 3iuere; 
and his halewis with ful out io3ing shuln 
17ful out iojen. Thider I shal bringe forth 
the horn of Dauid; I haue maad redi a 

8 clothid arn. 


4 for H. riflic. 


* pore men AH. 


°Om.1. _ P til in celeri. 


PSALMS. 


t Om. an. 


873 


on his modir; so 3elding be® in my soule. 
Israel hope in the Lord; fro this tyme now3 
and in? to the world. 


PSALM CXXXI. 


The title of the hundrid and oon and 
thrittithe salm. The song of greces'. 
Lord, haue thou mynde on™ Dauid; and 

of al his myldenesse. As he swoor to the2 

Lord; he made a vowe to God of Jacob. 

I schal not entre in to the tabernacle of3 

myn hous; Y schal not stie in to the bed 

of ini restyng. I schal not 3yue sleep to4 
myn i3en; and napping to nyn ise liddis. 

And rest to my templis, til Y fynde a places 

to the Lord; a tabernacle to God of Jacob. 

Lo! we herden that’ arke of testament ins 

Effrata, ‘that is, in Silot; we founden it 

in the feeldis of the’ wode. We schulen7 

entre in to the tabernacle of hym; we 
schulen worschipe in the place, where hise 
feet stoden. Lord, rise thou in to this 
reste; thou and the ark of thin halewing. 

Thi prestis be clothid with ri3tfulnesse; y 

and thi seyntis make ful ont ioye. For 10 

Dauid, thi seruaunt; turne thou not awei 

the face of thi crist. The Lord swoor \; 

treuthe to Dauid, and he schal not make 

hym veyn; of the fruyt of thi wombe Y 

schal sette on thi seete. If thi sonesj2 

schulen kepe my testament; and my wit- 
nessingis, these whicle Y schal teche hem. 

And the sones of hein til’ in to the world; 

thei schulen sette on thi seete. For the). 

Lord chees Sion; he chees it in to dwell- 

ing to hym silf. This 7s my reste in toj, 

the world of world; Y schal dwelle here, 
for Y chees it. I blessynge schal blesse |, 
the widewe of it; Y schal fille with looues 
the pore men of it. J schal clothe with ,; 
heelthe the preestis therof; and the hooli 
men therof schulen make ful out ioye in” 
ful* reioisinge’. Thidir Y schal bringe ; 
W of m. 


uOm, 4. ¥ to them E pr. m. 


4 greces, of deuocion that Dauith hadde, to bilde the temple, and of biheest 


of God to him, of eritage of the rewme. x. In a is no title, but only cxraxxi. * of CDEFGHIKEMOPQRUVWXbi. 


8 the K. 
win the c. 


VOL. II. 


x ful out ceteri. 


t Om. cpEFGnk pr.m, LMopgrsvwsxbi. thal is, in Silo. Lire here. v. 
Y joiyng CDEGHKLMOPQRSsUVWXbi. 


uOm. celeri. Y¥ Om. x. 


5T 


Ecce quam 
bonum. 


Eece nune 
benedicite. 


Laudate no- 


men Domini. 


iglanterne to my crist. 


874 


His enemys I shal 
clothe with shenshipe; vp on hym for- 
sothe shal flouren out myn halewing. 


PSALM CXXXII. 
} The song of grees. 


Lo! hon good, and how io3eful ; bre- 
ethern to dwellen in toY oon. As an 
oynement in the hed; that goth doun in 
to the berd, the berd of Aaron. That 
goth doun in to the hemme of his cloth- 
sing ; as deu of Ermon, that goth doun in 
to the hil of Syon. For thider sente the 
Lord blessing; and lif vn to the world. 


PSALM CXXXIII. 
1 The song of grees. 


Lo! now blisseth the Lord; alle 3ee 
seruauns of the Lord. That stonden in 
the hous of the Lord; in the porchis of 
2the hous of oure God. In ny3tes heueth 
vp 30ure hondis in to holi thingis; and 

3blisseth to? the Lord. Blisse thee the 
Lord fro Sion; that made heuene and 
erthe. 

PSALM CXXXIV. 
1 Alleluya. 


Preise 3ee the name of the Lord; 
2preise 3ee, seruauns, the Lord. That 
stonden* in the hous of the Lord; in 
the porchis of the hous of oure God. 
3 Preise 3ee the Lord, for good is the Lord; 
doth salm to his name, for it ys sweete. 
4For the Lord ches to hym Jacob; and 
5Irael in to possessioun to hym. For I 
knew, that gret is the Lord; and oure 
6God beforn alle godys. Alle thingis 
what euere the Lord wolde, he dide in 
heuene and in erthe; in the se, and in alle 


y Om. an. 


2Qm.a. &Om. as. 
spekinge of the vnite of the 


PSALMS. 


2 Om. “En. 


CXXXI. 18--CXXXIV. 6. 


forth the horn of Dauid; Y made redi a 
lauterne to my crist. I schal clothe hise 1s 
enemyes with schame; but myn halewing 
schal floure out on hym. 


PSALM CXXXII. 

The ‘title of the? hundrid and two and) 
thrittithe salm*. The sorg of grecis®. 
Lo! hou good and hou myrie é zs; that 

britheren dwelle togidere. As oynement2 

in the heed; that goith doun in to the 

beerd, in to the beerd of Aaron. That 

goith doun in to the coler of his cloth; 

as the dew of Ermon, that goith doun in3 
to the hil of Sion. For there the Lord sente 

blessing ; and lijf til® in to the world4. 


PSALM CXXXIII. 


The ‘title of the® hundrid and thre and) 
thrittithe salut. The song of greces*. 
Lo! now blesse 3e the Lord; alle the 

seruauntis of the Lord. 3e that stonden in 

the hous of the Lord; in the hallis" of ‘the 
hous of! oure God. In ny3tis reise 3oure2 
hondis in to hooli thingis; and blesse 3e 
the Lord. The Lord blesse thee fro Syon;3 
which* Lord made heuene and erthe. 


PSALM CXXXIV. 


The title of the hundrid and foure and) 
thrittithe salm'. Alleluya®. 

Herie 3e the name of the Lord; 3e ser- 
uauntis of the Lord, herie 3e. 3e that2 
stonden in the hous of the Lord; in the 
hallis" of ‘the hous of ° oure God. Herie3 
3e the Lord, for the Lord is good; singe 
3e to his name, for it is swete. For the4 
Lord chees Jacob to him silf; Israel in to 
possessioun to him silf. For Y haues 
knowe, that the Lord is greet; and oure 
God bifore alle goddis. The Lord madeé 
alle thingis, what euere thingis he wolde, 
in heuene and in erthe; in the see, and in 


@ stondith 4. 


» grecis, to Dauith himself. coFGHIKMQRSVWXbi. grecis, of Dauith. BL. grecis, 
puple of Israel, to gidere bi charite vudir oo king, and wndir the feith of 00 God. k. 


geet to Dauith. or. ¢Omv. 4 world, that is, withouten end.v. ©Om.a. fOm.a. 8 No title in v. 
or3erdis cetcri. + Om. s. kthewhichr, 10m. nq. ™ Alleluya, that is, herie 3e God. kv. In a is 
no title, but only creaitiz. " forzerdis ceteri. © Om. s. 


Confitemint 
Domino. 


CXXNIV. 7-—CXXXYV. 7. 


7depnessis. Bringende out cloudis fro the 
vtmostis® of the erthe; leitis in to reyn 
he made. That bringeth forth windis 
sfro his tresores; that smot the first goten 
9of Egipt, fro man vn to beste. And he 
sete tocnes and wndris in the myddel 
of thee, Egipt; in to Farao and in to alle 
iohis seruauns. That smot manye Jentilis; 
liand slo3 stronge kingis. Seon, the king 
of Amorreis ; and Og the king of Basan, 
izand alle the renmys of Chanaan. And 
he 3af the lond of hem eritage; eritage 
i3to Irael, his puple. Lord, thi name in 
to with oute ende; Lord, thi memorial 
isin ieneracioun and in to ieneracioun. For 
the Lord shal demen his puple; and in 
15 his seruauns he shal be louly pre3id. The 
maumetis of Jentilis siluer and gold; the 
is werkis of the hondys of men. Mouth 
thei han, and thei shul not speke ; e3en 
17thei han, and thei shuln not see. Eris 
thei han, and thei shul not here; ne for- 
sothe spirit is in the mouth of hem. 
18 Lyc to them be thei maad, that don tho 
thingis; and alle that trosten in hem. 
i9 Hous of Irael, blesse jee to the Lord ; 
hous of Aron, blisse 3ee to the Lord. 
20 Hous of Leuy, blisse 3ce to the Lord; 3ee 
that drede the Lord, blisseth® to the 
21 Lord. Blissid be the Lord fro Sion; that 
dwellith in Jerusalem. 


PSALM CXXXV. 
Alleluya. 


1 Knouleche 3ee to the Lord, for he is 

good ; for in to the world the merci of 
zhym. Knoulecheth to the God of godis. 
* Knoulecheth to the Lord of lordis. That 
smaketh grete merueilis alone. That made 
6heuenes in vnderstonding. That fastnede 
7 the erthe vp on watris. That made grete 


b vttermostis 41. 


P ferrest A. 8 toc. 
or mynde 1. 


© to the K. 


4gotunt. "vntotl. 
Wjntos. * Tho ymagis 1. 
4 to the K see. m.o. 


PSALMS. 


t to be heritage 1. Om. R. 
y ther is no spirit 1. 
© blesse A pr. mt. cbL sec. m. Pruxbi. blesseth 1. 


875 


alle depthis of watris. He ledde out7 
cloudis fro the ferthest? part of erthe; and 
made leitis in to reyn. Which bringith 
forth wyndis fro hise tresours; whicls 
killide the firste gendrid4 thingis of Egipt, 
fro man ‘til to" beeste. He sente outo 
signes and grete wondris, in the myddil 
of thee, thou Egipt ; in to Farao and in to 
alle hise seruauntis. Which smoot many 10 
folkis; and killide stronge kingis. Seon, 11 
the king of Ammorreis, and Og, the king 
of Basan; and alle the rewmes of Chanaan. 
And he 3af the lond of* hem eritage ; 12 
eritage' to Israel, his puple. Lord, this 
name 7s" with outen ende; Lord, thi me- 
morialY be in” generacioun and in to 
generacioun. For the Lord schal deme 14 
his puple; and he schal be preied in hise 
seruauntis. The symulacris of hethene 15 
men ben siluer and gold; the werkis of 
the hondis of men. Tho* han a mouth, 16 
and schulen not speke; tho han ijen, and 
schulen uot se. Tho han eeris, and schulen !7 
not here; for ‘nether spirit isY in the 
mouth of tho%. Thei that maken tho, be 18 
maad lijk tho*; and alle that tristen in 
tho?. The hous of Israel, blesse 3e the?19 
Lord; the hous of Aaron, blesse 3e the® 
Lord. The hous of Leuy, blesse 3e the’ 20 
Lord; 3e that dreden the Lord, ‘blesse 3e* 
thef Lord. Blessid be the Lord of Syon;21 
that dwellith in Jerusalem. 


PSALM CXXXV. 


The title of the hundrid and fyue and 
thrittithe salm. Alleluyas’. 


Knouleche 3e to the Lord, for he is! 
good, for his merci 7s withouten ende. 
Knouleche 3e to the" God of goddisi.2 
Knouleche 3e to the Lord of lordis. Which? 
aloone makith grete merueils. Whichs 
made heuenes bi vndurstondyng. Whiche 
made stidefast erthe on watris. Which7 


© blesse 3e an. 
u Om. ceferi. ¥ memorial, 


ahem. » to the K sec. m. 
f to the K scc. m. 


z hem 1. 


& Alleluya. This salm, as that that goith bifore, is a stiring to herie God, for he is good. K. In a is no 


title, but only crzzv. = Om. ceteri. 


i that is, of hoolt aungelis v marg. 


5b 2 


Super flumina 
Babilonis. 


876 


alist 3iueres. ‘T’he sunne in to the? power 
9of the dai. The mone and the sterris in to 
10 the’ power of the ny3t. That smot Egipt 
with the first goten of hem. That bro3te 
oute Irael fro the myddel of hem. In 
iymyghty hond; and in hei3 arm. That de- 
14 uydede® the rede se in tof deuyseouns. And 
bro3te out Irae] thur3 the myddel of it. 
is And shoc out Farao and his vertue in the 
ierede se. That ladde ouer his puple thur3 
te the® desert. That smot grete kingis. And 
19slo3 stronge kingis. Seon, the king of 
20Amoreis. And Og, the king of Basan. 
21And he 3af the lond of hem eritage. 
2? Eritage to Irael, his seruaunt. For in 
oure mecnesse myndefull he was of vs. 
24 And he ajeen bo3te vs fro oure enemys. 
2° That 3iueth mete to alle flesh. Knou- 
lecheth to God" of heuene. Knoulecheth 
to the Lord of lordis; for in to withoute 
ende the mercy of hym. 


PSALM CXXXVI. 
The salm of Dauid, for Jeremye. 


t Vp on the flodis of Babiloyne there wee 
seten, and wepten; whil wee recordeden 
20f Sion. In withies in the myddes of it; 
3 wee heengen! vp* oure instrumens. For 
there askeden vs that eaityues bro3ten vs; 
the woordis of songis of despit. And thei 
that ‘ledden aweiel vs; An ympne sing- 
1eth™ to vs of the songis of Sion. Hou 
shul wee singe the song of the Lord; in an 
shethen™™ lond? If I shule for3eten of thee, 
Jerusalem ; to forzeting be 3iue my ri3t- 
chond. Clene my tunge to myn chekis; 
if I shul not han mynde of thee. If I 
shul not purposen thee, Jerusalem; in the 


7begynnyng of my gladnesse. Myndeful 
10m. 4. ¢denyde 4. ‘Om. 4. £ Om. an. 
E prem. ™syngen a, ™™ alien c prom. 


k the sterris urksx. 1 Om. 1. 
awei CDEF pr. m. GUKLMOPQRSUVWXbi. 
Ir nietis A prem. § the God A pr.m. 
This salm hath no tijtle, 
caitiflee of Babiloyne. 1. 
struccioun of the temple, and of the cait 
the destrueeioun of Jerusalem. v. 
Jerom.u.  t myddis s, 


PSALMS. 


h the God ar. 


m Om. DEFIKLM pr. m. i. 
@ vertu CDEF pr. m2. GIIKLMOPQRSUVWSDi. 

88 The cxxxvi. a. The titil of the hundrid and xxavi. salm. DEF. 
necther [in] Ebreu nein Jeroms it spekith of destruecioun of the temple, and of the 
The hundrid and sire and thrittithe salm hath no title, and it spekith of the de- 
iftee of Babiloyne. x. The cxxxvi. salm hath no lytle ; it spekith of 

The hundrid and xxzvi. saln hath no title, nethir in Ebreu nether in 


CXXXV. 8—CXXXVI. 7. 


made grete liz3tis. The sunne in to thes 
power of the dai. The moone and sterris* 9 
in to the! power of the™ ni3t. Which 10 
smoot Egipt with the firste gendrid thingis 
of hem. Which ledde out Israel fro thet 
myddil® of hem. In a mi3ti hond and in 12 
an hi; arm. Whiche departide the reed see 13 
in to departyngis. And ledde out Israel14 
thoru3 the myddil° therof. And he ‘caste 15 
a down? Farao and his pouer’ in thé reed 
see. Which ledde ouer his puple thoru3 16 
desert. Which smoot grete kingis. And jj 
killide strong kingis. Seon, the king of19 
Amorreis. And Og, the king of Baasan, 20 
And he 3af the lond of hem eritage’.2) 
Eritage to Israel, his seruaunt. For in3s 
oure lownesse he hadde mynde on vs. 
And he a3enbou3te vs fro oure enemyes. 24 
Which 3yueth mete’ to ech fleisch. Knou-3; 
leche 3e to God’ of heuene. Knouleche 3e 
to the Lord of lordis; for his merci zs 
with outen ende. 


PSALM CXXXVI. 
The hundrid and sixe and thrittithe salm. 


On the floodis of Babiloyne there we! 
saten, and wepten; while we bithou3ten 
on Syon. In salewis in the myddilt therof; 2 
we hangiden vp oure orguns. For thei3 
that ledden vs prisoners; axiden vs there 
the wordis of songis. And thei that ledden 
awei vs setden; Synge 3e to vs an ympne 
of the songis of Syon. Hou schulen we4 
singe a songe of the Lord; in an alien 
lond? If Y for3ete thee, Jerusalem; mys 
ri3t hond be 3ounn to for3eting. Mi tunge 6 
cleue to my chekis; if Y bithenke not on 
thee. If Y purposide not of thee, Jeru- 
salem ; in the bigymuyng of my gladnesse. 
Lord, haue thon mynde on the sones of7 


ihangeden an. k vpon nm. ! brogten 


u myddis 1. P schook 


T to be heritage 1. 


© myddis ceteri. 


Confitebar. 


Domine, pro- 
basti. 


CXXXVI. 8—CXXXVIII. 3. 


be thou, Lord, of the sones of Edom; in 
to the dai of Jerusalem. That seyn, Ful 
out wastetl®, ful out wasteth™; vnto the 

sfoundement in® it. The do3tir of Babilon 
wrecchid, blisful that shal 3elde to thee 
thi 3elding; that thou hast 3olde to vs. 

9 Blisful that shal holden; and hurtlen his 
litle childer to the ston. 


PSALM CXXXVII. 
The salm‘to hyme Dauid. 


1 I shal knoulechen to thee, Lord, in al 
myn herte; for thou hast herd ther? 
woordis of my mouth. In the si3te of 

zaungelis I shal don salm to thee, my God; 
I shal honoure at4 thin holy temple, and 
knouleche to thi name’. Vp on thi mercy 
and thi treuthe; for thou hast magnefied 

3thi seynt ouer alle name. In what euere 
day I shal inwardli clepe thee, ful out 
here me; thou shalt multeplie in my soule 
avertue. Knouleche to thee, Lord, alle 
the kingis of erthe; for thei han herd alle 
athe woordys of thi mouth. And singe 
thei in the weyes of the Lord; for gret 
sis the glorie of the Lord. For hei3 the 
Lord, and meke thingis he beholdeth; and 

7 he3e thingis fro aferr he knowith. If I shul 
go in the myddel of tribulacioun, thou 
shalt quikene me; and vp on the wrathe 
of myn enemys thou hast stra3t out thin 
hond, and saf made me thi ry3t hond. 

The Lord shal 3elde for me, Lord, thi 
mercy in to the world; the werkis of 
thin hondis ne despise thou. 


PSALM CXXXVIII. 
In to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


1 Lord, thou hast proued me, and knowen 
gme; thou hast knowe my sitting, and 
3myn a3een rising. Thou vnderstode my 


9 of a. 


P of 1. 


x the r. 


n wastid £ prim. 


uyntor V3eldithi. W the x. 


PSALMS. 


PP alle the c pr. m. 


y Om. A. 


877 


Edom ; for the dai of Jerusalem. Whiche 
seien, Anyntische 3e, anyntische 3e; ‘til to" 
the foundement ther ynne. Thou wretchid 8 
dou3ter of Babiloyne; he is blessid, that 
‘schal 3elde’ to thee thi” 3elding, which 
thou 3eldidist to vs. He 7s blessid, that9 
sehal holde; and hurtle doun hise litle 
children at a* stoon. 


PSALM CXXXVII. 


The ‘title of they hundrid and seuene and 
thrittithe salm. ‘To Dauith him silf *, 


Lord, Y schal knouleche to thee in ali 
myn herte; for thou herdist the wordis of 
my mouth. Mi God, Y schal singe to 
thee in the si3t of aungels; Y schal wor-2 
schipe to* thin hooli temple, and Y schal 
knouleche to thi® name. On thi merci and 
thi treuthe; for thou hast magnefied thin 
hooli name aboue al thing. In what3 
euere dai Y schal-inwardli clepe thee, here 
thou me; thou schalt multipli vertu in 
my soule. Lord, alle the kingis of erthe4 
knouleche to thee; for thei herden alle the 
wordis of thi mouth. And singe thei ins 
the weies of the Lord; for the glorie of 
the Lord is greet. For the Lord zs hi3,¢ 
and biholdith meke thingis; and knowith 
afer hi3 thingis. If Y schal go in® the7 
myddil* of tribulacioun, thou  schalt 
quikene me; and thou stretchidist® forth 
thin hond on the ire of myn enemyes, 
and thi rij3t liond made me saaf. Thes 
Lord schal 3elde for me, Lord, thi merci 
is‘ with outen ende; dispise thou not the 
werkis of thin hondis. 


PSALM CXXXVIII. 

The ‘title of thet hundrid and ei3te and 
thrittithe salm". ‘To victorie, the salm 
of Dauith'. 

Lord, thou hast prened me, and hasti 

knowe me; thou hast knowe my sitting, 2 

and my rising a3en. Thou hast vndir-3 


dina. F holy name £ pr. mm. 


zOm. 4. Yo Dauith him silf, the doing of 


thankinges of Dauith, after delyweraunce of the persecucion of Saul. kK. To Dauyth. s. To Dauith him self, 


doinge thankingis. v. *at1. > thin hooly 1. 
&8Om.a. 40Om.a. 


herijng, thuru3 biholding of his excellence. K. 


¢ in to X. 
iOm. au. Jo victorie, the s. of D. This is a stiring to the knowleching of Goddis 


4 myddis ceteri. ¢ strecchist s. f schal be 1. 


d 


thostis fro aferr; my path and my litle 
4corde thou enserchedist. And alle my 
weies thou beforn se3e; for ther is not 
swoord in my tunge. Lo! Lord, thou 
hast knowen alle thingis, newest and 
olde; thou hast formed me, and put vp 
son me thin hond. Merueilous is maad 
thy kunnyng of me; it is coumfortid, and 
71 shal not moun to it. Whidir shal I 
go fro thi spirit; and whidur fro thi 
8face shal I flee? If I shul ste3en vp in 
to heuene, thou art there; if I shul go 
#doun in to helle, thou art at. If I shul 
take my pennys in the morutid; and shul 
lodwelle in the vtmostis’ of the se. For- 
sothe thider thin hond shal bringe me; 
l1and shal holde me thi rij3t hond. And IJ 
seide, Parauenture dercnessis shul to- 
trede me; and ny3t' my li3ting in my 
i2delicis. For derenesses shul not ben 
derkid fro" thee, and ny3t as day shal ben 
lijtid ; as his dercnessis, so and the 1i3t of 
isit. For thou weldedest my reenes; thou 
hast vndertake me fro the wombe of my 
14moder. JI shal knouleche to thee, for 
ferfulli thou art magnefied; merueilous 
thi werkis; and my soule shal knouleche 
1sful myche. My mouth is not hid fro 
thee, the whiche thou madest in priue; 
and my substaunce is in the nethermoris’ 
igof the erthe. Myn vnparfit thing sezen 
thin e3en, and in thi boc alle shul be 
writen; dajes shul be formed, and no 
17man in hem. To me forsothe ful myche 
ben maad wrshipeful thi frendis, God ; 
ful myche is counfortid the princehed of 
shen. I shal noumbre them atwynne, 
and vpon granel thei shul be multeplied ; 
I haue risen out, and 3it I am with thee. 
19 God, for thou shalt sle synueres; 3ee men 
200f blodis, bowith doun fro me. For jee 
seyn in tho3t; Take thei” in vanyte ther 
2icitees. Whethir not thoo* that hateden 
thee, Lord, I hatede; and vp on thin 
22enemys I dwynede? With parfyt hate 


878 PSALMS. CXXXVIIL. 4—22. 


stonde my thon3tis fro fer; thou hast 
enquerid my path and my corde. And4 
thou hast bifor seien alle my weies; for 
no word is in my tunge. Lo! Lord, thous 
hast knowe alle thingis, the laste* thingis 
and elde; thou hast formed me, and hast 
set thin hond on me. Thi kunnyng is6 
maad wondirful of ine; it is coumfortid, 
and Y schal not mowe to it. Whidir7 
schal Y go fro thi spirit; and whider 
schal Y fle fro thi face? If Y schal sties 
in to heuene, thou art there; if Y schal 
go doun to! helle, thou art™ present. If9 
Y schal take my fetheris ful eerli; and 
schal dwelle in the last partis of the see. 
And sotheli thider thin hond® schal leede 10 
me forth; and thi rijt hond schal holde 
me. And Y seide, In hap derknessis11 
schulen defoule me; and the ny3t 2s my 
li3tnyng in my delicis. For whi derk-12 
nessis schnlen not be maad derk fro thee, 
aud the ni3t schal be liztned as the dai; as 
the derknessis therof, so and the 1i3t therof. 
For thou haddist in possessioun my reines;13 
thou tokist°? me vp fro the wombe of my 
modir. I schal knouleche to thee, for. 
thou art magnefied dreedfuli; thi werkis 
ben wondirful, and my soule schalP knou- 
leche? ful miche. Mi boon, whieh thous 
madist in priuete, is not hyd fro thee; and 
my substaunce in the lower partis of erthe. 
Thin iz3en sien’ myn vnperfit thing, and 16 
alle men schulen be writun in thi book’; 
daies schulen be formed, and no man zs* 
in tho. Forsothe, God, thi frendis ben17 
maad onourable ful myche to me; the 
princeheed of hem is coumfortid ful 
myche. JI schal noumbre hem, and thei1s 
schulen be multiplied aboue grauel; Y 
roos vp, and 3it Y am with thee. For1s 
thou, God, schalt slee synneris; 3e men- 
quelleris, bowe" awei fro me. For 3e¥20 
seien in thou3t; Take thei her citees in 
vanite. Lord, whether Y hatide not hema 
that hatiden® thee; and Y failide* on thin 


* vttermostis au. tthe ny3t au. Yofan. Vnethermore an. W3e 4. * that c. 


k newer Tinto ™ art there 1. “riz3thonds. © takester. POm.i. 4 knowe cDEFGKLOPQ 
Rsuvwxbi. T saw3en I passim. * book, that is, in thi kunnyng 1. tOm.1. tt aboue the c. ¥ boweth 1. 
Vthei1. Whaten coEFGLMorersuvwh,  * failide, that zs, mournyde gretly 1KV. 


CXXXVITII. 23——CXXXNIX. 14. 


I hatede hem; enemys thei ben maad to 
23me. Proue me, God, and wite thou 
myn herte; aske thou me, and knowe 
24thou my patliis. And see, if the weie of 
wickidnesse is in me; and bring me 
thennes in the euere lastende weie. 


PSALM CXXXIX. 
1 Jn to the ende, the salm of Dauid. 


Eripe me, 2 Tac me awel, Lord, fro an enel inan; 
ae sand fro a wickeY man tac me awei. That 
tho3ten wickidnessis in the herte; al dai 
4setteden batailis. Thei sharpeden ther 
tungis as serpentis; the venyin of edderes’ 
svnder the lippis of hem. Kep thou me 
fro the hond of the synnere; and fro 
wieke® men tac me awei. That tho3ten 
sto supplaunten my goingis; proude men 
hidden a grene tome. And cordis thei 
straj3ten out in to a grene; by side the 
z7weie sclaunder thei putten> to me. I 
seide to the Lord, My God thou art; ful 
out here thou, Lord, the vois of my lowe 
sprejing. Lord, Lord, the vertue of myn 
helthe; thou al aboute shadewedest on 
9myn hed in the dai of bataile. Ne take 
thou me, Lord, fro my desir to the syn- 
nere; they thojten a3en me, ne forsake 
thou me, lest parauenture thei ben en- 
10hauncid. The hed of the cumpas of hem; 
the trauayle of the. lippis of hem shal 
Ilcoueren hem. Colis shul fallen vp on 
hem, in to fir thou shalt kaste them doun; 
in wrecchidnessis thei shul not stonde. 
12A ianglende man shal not he ri3tforth 
reulid in the erthe; an vnri3twis man 
weuelis shul take in deth. I knew3, for 
the Lord shal do dom of the helpeles; and 
l4veniaunce of the pore. Neuerthelatere 
ri3twis shuln knoulechen to thi name; and 
the ri3te shul wone with thi chere. 


ywickid 4. 2 eddre an. 


y Om. 1. z Om. aru. 


PSALMS. 


a the weie ceferi preter 1v. 


879 


enemyes? Bi perfite haterede Y hatide 22 
hem; thei weren maad enemyes to me. 
God, preue thou me, and knowe thou myn 23 
herte ; axe thou me, and knowe thou’ my 
pathis. And? se thon, if weie* of wickid-24 
nesse is*8 in me; and lede thou me forth 
in euerlastinge wei. 


PSALM CXXXIX. 

The ‘title of the® hundrid and nyne and) 
thrittithe ‘salm. To victorie, the salu 
of * Dauith’. 

Lord, delyuere thou me fro an yuel?2 
man; delyuere thou me fro a wickid man. 
Whiehe thou3ten wickidnessesf in the&s 
herte; al dai thei ordeyneden" batels. Thei 4 
scharpiden her tungis as serpentis; the 
venym of snakis vndiri the lippis of hem. 
Lord, kepe thou me fro the hond of thes 
synnere; and delyuere thou me fro wickid 
men. Which thou3ten to disseyue my go- 
yngis; proude men hidden a snare to me.6 
And thei leiden forth eordis in to a snare; 
thei settiden sclaundir to me bisidis the 
weie. I seide to the Lord, Thou art mi7 
God; Lord, here thou the vois of my bi- 
seching. Lord, Lord, the vertu of myns 
heelthe; thou madist sehadowe on myn 
heed in the dai of batel. Lord, bitakeo 
thou not me fro my desire to the synnere; 
thei thou3ten a3ens me, forsake thou not 
me, lest perauenture thei ben enhaunsid. 
The heed of the cumpas of hem; the trauel 10 
of her lippis schal hile hem. Colis schulen 11 
falle on hem, thou schalt caste hem doun 
in to fier; in wretchidnessis thei schulen 
not stonde. A man ak greet ianglere schal 12 
not be dressid in erthe; yuels schulen 
take an vniust inan in perisching. I haue13 
knowe, that the Lord schal make dom of 
al nedi man; and the veniaunce of pore 
men. Netheles iust men schulen knou-14 
leche to thi name; and ri3tful men schulen 
dwelle with thi cheer. 


awickid 4. > puttiden au. 


aa ther is 1. b liyf cbEFGHIKLMOSYXb}. 


cQm.a. 4Om.a. ¢ Om. a. Dauith the king, axing to be delyuerid bi God of persecucion, whaune he was 


purswed of Saul. x. Dauith, to be delyuerid fro perseeucioun of Saul. v. Dauith, the kyng. i. 
was vndir 1, is vndir K. 


nesses. $Om.1. 4 ordeyne c. 


f wickid- 


k thatisaiw ther. 


Domine, ela- 
mani ad ie. 


Voee mea ad 
Dominum. 


880 


PSALM CXL. 
\ The salam of Dauid. 


Lord I eriede to thee, ful out here 
thou me; tac heede to my vois, whil I 
2shal crie to thee. Be forth ri3t reulid 
myn orisoun as encens in thi si3t; the 
rering vp of myn hondis euentid sacri- 
3fise. Put, Lord, warde to my mouth; 
and a dore of cireumstaunce to my lippis. 
4 Bowe thou not doun my herte in to the® 
woordis of malice; to ben excusid excu- 
saciouns in synnes. With men wirkende 
wickidnesse; and I shal not comune with 
sthe chosen of hem. The ri3twis man 
shal chastise me in mercy, and blamen 
me; the oile forsothe of the synnere shal 
not withinne fatten myn hed. For 3it 
and myn orisoun in the wel plesid thingus 
sof hem; the domes men of hem ioyned 
to the ston ben sopen awey. Thei shuln 
7 here my woordis, for thei my3ten; as the 
fatnesse of erthe’ is rerid vp ‘vp on® the 
erthe. Oure bones ben scaterid beside 
shelle, for to thee Lord, Lord, myn 
ejen; in thee I hopide, do not awei iny 
gsoule. Kep me fro the grene that thei 
setteden to me; and fro sclaundris of men 
10wirkende wickidnesse. Synneres shuln 
falle in the net of hym; syngulerli I am 
to the time I passe. 


PSALM CXLI. 


1 The onderstonding of Dauid, whan he 
was in the spelunke. 


2 With my vois to the Lord I criede; 
with my vois to the Lord I louly prejede. 
3] shedef out in his si3t myn orisoun; and 
my trybulacioun beforn hym I openli 
4telle. In failinge of me my spirit; ands 
thou hast knowe my sties. In this weie 


¢ Om. zen. 4 the erthe an. 


m Om. A. n Om. Ab. 


Gand het. ¥ thei c. 


W Dauithes «. 


x Om. cry. Y Om. Exp. 


PSALMS. 


© ypon hem 4. 


° Om. A. of Dauith, 


CXL? 1=—-CXIN As 


PSALM CXL. 


The ‘title of the hundrid and fourtithe 
salm. ‘The salm®‘of Dauith. 

Lord, Y criede to thee, here thou me; 
jyue thou tent to my vois, whanne Y schal 
crye to thee. Mi preier be dressid ase 
encense in thi si3t; the reisyng? of myn 
hondis be as the euentid sacrifice. Lord,3 
sette thou a keping to my mouth; and a 
dore of stonding aboute to my lippis. 
Bowe thou not myn herte in to wordis of 4 
malice; to excuse excusingis in synne. With 
men worchinge wickidnesse; and Y schal 
not comyne with the chosun men of hem. 
A iust man schal repreue me in mersi,5 
and‘ schal blame me; but. the oile of a 
synner make not fat myn heed. For whi 
and 3it my preier 7s in the wel plesaunt 
thingis of hem; for the domesmen of hem 6 
ioyned to the stoon weren sopun vp. Here 
thei my wordis, for tho" weren my3ti.7 
As fatnesse is’ brokun out on the erthe; 
oure bonys ben scatered ni3 helle. Lord, 
Lord, for myn izen ben to thee, Y hopides 
in thee; take thou not awei my soule. 
Kepe thou me fro the snare which thei» 
ordeyneden to me; and fro the sclaundris 
of hem that worchen wickidnesse. Syn- 
neris schulen falle in the nett therof; Y 10 
am aloone' til Y passe. 


PSALM CXLI. 

The ‘title of the* hundrid and oon and 
Jfourtithe salm*’. The lernyng of Da- 
uid; ‘his preier*, ‘whanne he was in 
the denne. 

With my vois Y criede to the Lord ;2 
with my vois Y preiede hertli to the Lord. 
I schede out my preier in his si3t; and Y3 
pronounce my tribulacioun bifor him. 
While my spirit failith of me; and thou, 
hast knowe my pathis. In this weie in 


fhelled £ pr.m. & Om. a. 


' preiyng to the Lord, that he shulde falle no more into 
the synne of tonge. K. of Dauith, Jfeelinge synne of his tunge. v. of Daith, the kyng. i. 

2 ¢ 8 of the erthe is a sec. m. of erthe is M sec. m. Ss. 
parswhi. aloone bi my self 1. syngulerli, ether aloone bi my silf uv. synguler x. 


P reisyng vp I. 
t syngulerly cobEFGHKLMO 
uOm.a. VOm. a. 


Domine, ex- 
audi oracio- 
nem. 


CXLI. 5—CXLII. 10. 


that I 3ide; proude men hidden a grene 
5to me. I beheeld at the rijt hond, and 
I sa3; and ther was not that kneu3 me. 
Fli3t pershede fro me; and ther was not 
6that ajeen so3te my soule. I criede to 
thee, Lord, I seide, Thou art myn hope; 
7my porcioun in the lond of lyueres. Tac 
heede to my lowe pre3ing; for I am 
mekid ful myche. Deliuere me fro the 
pursuende me; for thei ben coumfortid 
sypon me. Led out fro warde my soule 
to knowleche to thi name; me abijden thei 
rijtwise*, to the time that thou 3elde to 
me. 


PSALM CXLII. 
1 The orisoun of Dauid, whan pursuede 
hym Absolon, his sone. 

Lord, ful out here myn orisoun, with 
eris parceyue myn obsecracioun ; in thi 
treuthe ful out here thou me, in thi ri3t- 

2wisnesse. And entre thou not into dom 
with thi seruaunt; for ther shal not be 
3iustified in thi sijte eche lyuende. For 
the enemy pursuede my soule; mekede 
in the erthe my lif. He sette me in 
derke thingis, as the deade of the world, 
aand my spirit is anguysht vp on me; 
sin me is disturbid myn herte. Myndeful 
I was of olde da3es, I tho3te swetely in 
alle thi werkis; in the deedis of thin 
shondis I sweteli tho3te. I stra3te out 
myn hondis to thee; my soule as erthe 
7 withoute water to thee. Swiftli full out 
here thou me, Lord; my spirit failide. 
Turne thou not awei thi face fro me; 
and I shal ben lic to the goende doun in 
sto the lake. Herd mac thou to me erli! 
thi mercy; for in thee I hopide. Knowen 
mac thou to me the weie, in the™ whiche 
9go I; for to thee I rerede my soule. Tac 
awei me fro myn enemys, Lord, to thee 
101 flei3, tech me to do thi wil; for my 
God thou art. Thi goode spirit shal 


hOm.c. i Om, Aen. 


Zther wass. atheriss. % Om. a. 


PSALMS. 


k yiztwise men 4. 


¢ Om. ELP. 


881 


which Y 3ede; proude men hidden a snare 

to me. I bihelde to the rizt side, and Y5 
si3; and noon was’ that knew ine. Fli3t 

perischide fro me; and noon is® that sekith 

my soule. Lord, Y criede to thee, Y6 
seide, Thou art myn hope; my part in the 

lond of lyueris. 3yue thon tent to my7 
biseching ; for Y am maad low ful greetli. 

Delyuere thou me fro hem that pursuen 

me ; for thei ben coumfortid on me. Lede8 
my sowe out of keping to knouleche to 

thi name; iust men abiden me, til thou 

3elde to me. 


PSALM CXLII. 
The ‘title of the’ hundrid and two and\ 
Jfourtithe salm. The salm of Dauid4, 


Lord, here thou my preier, with eeris 
perseyue thou my biseching ; in thi treuthe 
here thou me, in thi rijtwisnesse®. Andf2 
entre thou not in to dom with thi ser- 
uaunt ; for ech man lyuynge schal not be 
maad just in thi si3t. For the enemy3 
pursuede my soule; he made lowe my lijf 
in erthe. He hath set me in derk placis, 
as the deed men of the world, and my 4 
spirit was angwischid on me; myn herte 
was disturblid in me. I was myndeful of s 
elde daies, Y bithou3te in alle thi werkis ; 
Y bithou3te in the dedis of thin hondis. 
I helde forth myn hondis to thee; my6 
soule as erthe with out water to thee. 
Lord, here thou me swiftli; my spirit7 
failide. Turne thon not awei thi face 
fro me; and Y schal be lijk to® hem that 
gon doun in to the lake. Make thou erlis 
thi merci herd to me; for Y hopide in 
thee. Make thou knowun to me the weie 
in which Y schal go; for Y reiside my 
soule to thee. Delyuere thou me fro myn9 
enemyes, Lord, Y fledde to thee; teche10 
thou me to do thi wille, for thou art my 
God. Thi good spirit schal lede me forth 


1Om.c. ™ Om. an, 


@ Dauith, whanne Absolon, his sone, purswede 





_ him, as a docetour tellith, for the lettre accordith wel therto. k. Dauith, whanne Absolon, his sour, pursucde 
him. v. © riz3tfulnesse ceteri. f Butr. & Om. 1. h Om. cDFHMPRUW. 


VOL. Il. 5uU 


882 


bringe me thennes in to the ry3t lond ; 
ufor thi name, Lord, thou shalt quykene 
me in thin equite. Thou shalt leden out 
i20f tribulacioun my soule; and in thi 
merci thou shalt destro3en alle myn ene- 
mys. And thou shalt leesen alle, that 
trublen my soule; for I am thi seruaunt. 


PSALM CXLIII. 
1 The salm of Dauid ; a3en Golie. 


Blissed" the Lord my God, that techeth 
myn hondis to strif; and mi fingeris to 
2bataile. My mercy, and my refut; myn 
yndertakere, and my delynerere. My de- 
fendere, and in hym I hopide ; that vndir- 

3 pooteth® my puple vnder me. Lord, what 
is a man, for thou hast myche maad 
knowen to hym; or the sone of man, for 
4thou eymest hym? A man to vanyte is 
maad lic; his da3is as shadewe passen. 
s Lord, bowe doun thin heuenes, and cum 
doun; touche the monteynes, and thei 
6shuln smoken. Leite thou leitingis’, and 
thou shalt scateren hem; send out thin 
arewis, and thou shalt al’? disturbe them. 
7Send out thin hond fro an hei3, tact me 
out, and deliuere me of many watris ; and 
sfro the hond of alien sones. Whos mouth 
spac vanyte; and the ri3thalf of hem the 
gri3thalf of wickidnesse. God, a newe song 
I shal singe to thee; in the ten cordid 
1osautre I shal do salin to thee. That 
3iuest helthe to kingis ; that a3een bo3tist 
Dauid, thi seruaunt, fro the malice do- 
linge swerd tac me awey. Aud pull me 
awei fro the hond of alienes sones, whos 
mouth spac vanyte; and the ri;thalf of 
izhem the riz3thalf of wickidnesse. Whos 
sones ; as newe plauntingis in ther 3outhe. 
The do3tris of hem maad semely; en- 
13 hourned aboute as the licnesse of the tem- 


Benedictus 
Dominus. 


° 


1 Blessid is 4. © vndir puttist 4. 


iOm.1. 


k fordo 1. 10m. 5. 


PSALMS. 


P leitynge an. 


CXLIT. 11-——CXLIIT. 13. 


in to a rijtful lond; Lord, for thi name 
thou schalt quikene me in thin equite. 
Thou schalt lede my soule out of tribu- 
lacioun; and in thi merci thou schalt 12 
scatere allei myn enemyes. And thou 
schalt leese* alle them, that troublen my 
soule; for Y am thi seruaunt. 


PSALM CXLIII. 


The title of the hundrid and thre and 
JSourtithe salm'. ‘A salm™, 


Blessid be my" Lord God, that techith 
myn hondis to werre°; and my fyngris to 
batel. Mi merci, and my refuyt; mye 
takere vp, and my delyuerer. Mi defender, 
and Y hopide in him; and thou makist 
suget my puple vnder me. Lord, what iss 
a man, for thou hast maad knowun to 
him ; ether the sone of man, for thou aret- 
tist him of P sum valu? A man is maad4 
lijk vanyte ; hise daies passen as schadow. 
Lord, bowe doun thin heuenes, and comes 
thou doun; touche’ thou hillis, and" theis 
schulen make smoke. Leite thou schyn-¢ 
yng, and thou schalt scatere hem; sende 
thou out thin arowis, and thou schalt dis- 
turble hem. Sende out thin hond fro an7 
hi3, rauysche' thou" me out, and delyuere 
thou me fro many watris; and fro the 
hond of alien sones. The mouth of which’s 
spak yanite; and the ri3thond of hem 7s 
the ri3t hond of wickidnesse. God, Y schal9 
synge to thee a new song; I schal seie 
salm to thee* in a sautre of ten stringis. 
Which 3yuest heelthe to kingis; which a3en 10 
bou3tist Dauid, thi seruaunt, fro the wickid 
swerd rauische thou out me. And delyuere 11 
thouY me fro ‘the hond of 2 alien sones; the 
mouth of whiche* spak> vanyte, and the 
ri3thond of hem zs the rijt hond of wickid- 
nesse. Whose sones ben; as new plaunt-12 
ingis in her 3ongthe. The doujtris of hem 


PP Om. c prem. and tac c. 


m™ Om. EGLMor. The salm of Dauid. ¥. The salm, whanne he stod 


a3ens Golie in bateil, bi stiring of the Holi Goost. x. A salm of Dauith. s. 4 salm, whanne he stod a3enus 


Golie. v. 
touche c. 
z Om. v. 


In a is no title but only, ¢ and xlitz. 
tTOm.s. §tho1. t and rauishe s. 
‘whom 1, » hath spoke 1. 


a the v. 
u Om. 1. 


4 and 
Y out c. 


© batel A. do werre M. 
" 
vwhomi. Wasalms. 


Ptol, 
x Om. 2. 











Exzaltabo te, 
Deus. 


CXLITI. 14—CXLIV. 12. 


ple. The celeris of hem fulle; bowende out 
fro that into it. The shep of hem ful of 
14 frut, aboundende in ther goingis; the oxen 
of hem fatte. Ther is not falling of wal, 
ne passing ouer; ne cry in the stretis of 
ishem. Blisful, thei seiden, the puple, to 
whom these thingis ben ; blisful the pu- 
ple, of the’ whiche the Lord is his God. 


PSALM CXLIV. 
1 The preising to hym Dauid. 


I shal enhaunce thee, my God king ; 
and I shal blesse to thi name in to the 
2world, and in to the world of world. Bi 
alle da3is I shal blissen to thee; and I 
shal preysen thi name in to the world, 
3and in to the world of world. Gret the 
Lord, and preisable full myche; and of 
ahis mychilnesse is noon ende. Jenera- 
cioun and ieneracioun shal preyse thi 
werkis; and thi power thei shul telle 
sforth. The grete doing of the glorie of 
thin holynesse thei shuln speke; and thi 
6merueylis thei shul telle. And the vertue 
of thi ferful thingis thei shul seyn; and 
7thi mykilnesse thei shuln telle. The 
mynde of the abundaunce of thi swet- 
nesse thei shul bowen out; and in thi 
rijtwisnesse thei shul ful out iojen. 
8Mercy doere and mercyful the Lord; 
9pacient, and myche merciful. Swete the 
Lord to alle; and his mercy doingis vp 
100n alle his werkis. Knouleche to thee, 
Lord, alle thi werkys; and thin halewis 
i1blisse thei to thee. The glorie of thi 
reume thei shul seyn; and thi my3t thei 
12shul speken. That knowen thei maken 


PSALMS. 


883 


ben arayed ; ourned about as the licnesse 
of the temple. The selers of hem den fulle; 13 
bringinge out fro this’ vessel in to that®. 
The scheep of hem ben with lambre‘, plen- 
teuouse in her® goingis out ; her kien ben 14 
fatte. ‘No falling of wal is, nether pass- 
ing ouere; nether cry ¢s in the stretis of 
hem. Thei seiden, ‘The puple 7s blessidi, 15 
that hath* these thingis; blessid! 7s the 
puple, whos Lord is the™ God of it”. 


PSALM CXLIV. 


The title of the hundrid and foure and) 
Jourtithe salm.* The ympne of Dauith. 


Mi God king, Y schal enhaunse thec; 
and Y schal blesse thi name in to the 
world, and in to the world of P world. Biez 
alle daies Y schal blesse thee; and Y schal 
herie thi name in to the world, and in to 
the’ world of the’ world. The Lord 7s3 
greet, and worthi to be preisid ful myche; 
and noon ende is‘ of his greetnesse. Gene-4 
racioun and generacioun schal preise thi 
werkis ; and thei schulen pronounset thi 
power. Thei schulen speke ‘the greets 
doyng" of the glorie of thin holynesse ; 
and thei schulen telle thi merueils. And6é 
thei schulen seye the vertu of thi ferdful 
thingis ; and thei schulen telle thi greet- 
nesse. Thei schulen bringe forth the7 
mynde of the abundaunce of thi swet- 
nesse; and thei schulen telle with ful out 
ioiyng thi ri3tfulnesse. The Lord 7s as 
merciful doere, and merciful in wille; pa- 
ciente, and myche merciful. The Lord és9 
swete in alle thingis; and hise merciful 
doyngis ben onY alle hise werkis. Lord, 10 
alle thi werkis knouleche to thee; and thi 
seyntis blesse thee. Thei schulen seie thei 
glorie of thi rewme; and thei schulen 


r Om. AEN. 


Cai. 4dones. © anothir s. 
& the s. 
blessid 1. ™ Om. L. 


f eene CFGHIMOPQRVAbi. yn D. ene EL. 3eeene K. jeene su. 3ene w. 
h Ther is no falling of her wal1. 1 hem a blessid puple 1. The puple blessid s. k han 1. | but 
nhemz. ° The salm of Dauith. v. The ympne of Dauith, to the heerijng of God, 


mith song ether ful out ioiyng. x. Alleluia. s.Om. exp. In a is no title, but only exltiij, P of the cpFoP 


qgrvw. 4@Om.L. + Om. 1ks. 8 ther is 1. 


t pronounse, ether telle fer c et eetert. 


u the (thi 11} 


magneficence, ether [or 1] the greet doyng cDEFGHIMOPQRUVWXb. the magneficence, ether g. d. x0. the 


magneficence K. thi magnificence, ether tht grete worthinesse 8. 


vVaboue 1. of k. 


5u% 


Lauda, anima, 


884 PSALMS. CXLIV. 13—CXLV. 7. 


to the sones of men‘ thi power; and the 
glorie of the grete doing of thi reume. 
is Thi reume reume of alle worldis; and 
thi lordshiping in alle ieneracionn and 
in to ieneracioun. Feithful the Lord in 
alle his woordis; and holy in alle his 
14werkis. The Lord helpeth vp alle that 
fallen; and rereth vp alle the hurtlid 
isdoun. The e3en of alle in thee hopen, 
Lord; and thou 3yuest the mete of hem 
icin thet behofful’ tyme. Thou openest 
thin hond; and fulfillist eche beste with 
i7blissing. Riztwis the Lord in alle his 
18 weies ; and holi in alle his werkis. Nee3h 
is the Lord to alle inwardli clepende hym; 
to alle inwardli clepende hym in treuthe. 
1 The wil of men dredende hym he shal 
do, and the lowe pre3ing of hem he shal 
ful out heren; and saf he shal make them. 
20 The Lord kepeth alle Joouende hym; and 
2,alle synneres he shal destro3en. The 
preysing of the Lord iny mouth shal 
speke; and blisse alle flesh to his holi 
name in to the world, and in to the 
world of world. 


PSALM CXLV. 
1 Alleluia. 


2 Preise thou, my soule, the Lord; I 
shal preise the Lord in my lif, I shal do 
salm to my God as longe as I shal be. 

3 Wileth not trosten in princis; ne in the 
sones of men, in whiche is not helthe. 

4His spirit shal gon out, and turnen ajeen 
in to his lond ; in that dai shuln pershe 
salle the tho3tus of hem. Blisful, of whom 
the God of Jacob is his helpere; his hope 
6in the Lord his God, that made heuene 
and erthe, the se, and alle thingis that 
z7ben in hem. That kepeth treuthe in to 
the world, doth dom to the suffrende 
wrong; 3yueth mete to the hungri. The 


speke thi power. That thei make thi power 12 
knowun to the sones of men; and the 
glorie of the greetnesse* of thi rewme. 
Thi rewme zs the rewme of alle worldis 313 
and thi lordschipe zs in al generacioun 
and in to generacioun. The Lord ¢s feith- 
ful in alle hise wordis; and hooli in alle 
hise werkis. The Lord liftith vp alle that 14 
fallen doun ; and* reisithY alle men hurtlid 
doun. Lord, the izen of alle beestis hopen 15 
in thee ; and thou 3yuest the” mete of hein 
in? couenable tyme. Thou openest thinic 
hond; and thou fillist ech beeste with 
blessing. The Lord és iust in alle hise17 
weies ; and hooli in alle hise werkis. Theis 
Lord is ni3 to alle that inwardli clepen 
him; to? alle that inwardli® clepen him 
in treuthe. He schal do the wille of19 
hem, that dreden him, and he schal here 
the biseching of hem; and he schal make 
hem saaf. The Lord kepith alle meng 
louynge him; and he schal leese* alle syn- 
ners. Mi mouth schal speke the heriyng 21 
of the Lord ; and ech man blesse his hooli 
name in to the world, and in to the world 
of world. 


PSALM CXLV. 


The ‘title of the® hundred and fyue andi 
fourtithesalm. Alleluyat. 

Mi soule, herie thou the Lord; Y schale 
herie the Lord in my lijf, Y schal synge 
to my God as longe as Y schal be. Nile 3e 
triste in princis; nether in the sones of3 
men, in whicheS is noon" helthe. Thea 
spirit of hymi schal go out, and he schal 
turne ajen in to his erthe; in that dai alle 
the thou3tis of hem schulen perische. Hes 
#s blessid, of whom the God of Jacob is 
his* helpere, his hope és in his Lord God, 
that made heuene and erthe; the see, andé 
alle thingis that ben in tho. Which kepith7 
treuthe in to the world, makith'! dom to 
hem that suffren wrong; 3yueth™ mete to 


Shem aH. ¢Om. an. 4% behool x. 


W magneficence CDEFGNIKLMOPQRSUVWXbi. *andher. Y reisith upk. 27Om.c. 4ina plures. 


bandtow. ¢Qm.p. ‘fordor ¢€ Om. A. 


fOm. a. salm. Alleluya ; for to stire men to triste not in 


eae but in God [oonli xo}. Kors. salm. Alleluya ; triste in God oonly. v. &§ whom 1. the whiche x. 


nol, not K. ihems. kther. 1! he makith tr. 


m he 3yueth 1. 


CXLV. 8—CXLVU. *12. 


8 Lord losneth" the gyuede ; the Lord 1i3t- 
neth the blinde. The Lord rereth vp the 
hurtlid doun ; the Lord rijtforth reulith 

9the ri3twise. The Lord kepeth the come- 
lingis, the modirles child, and the widewe 
he shal vndertake; and the weies of syn- 

1oneres he shal destrojen. The Lord shal 
regne in to worldis’; thi God, Sion, in 
ieneracioun and in to ieneracioun. 


PSALM CXLVI. 
1 Alleluia. 


Laudate Do- 


Preiseth the Lord, for good is a salm ; 
minum. 


to oure God be preising io3eful and fair. 
2The Lord bildende vp Jerusalem; the 
seateringis of Jerusalem shal gadere to- 
3gidere. That helith the contrit in herte; 
and bindeth the contriciouns” of hem. 
4 That noumbreth the multitude of sterris; 
sand to them alle clepeth names. Gret 
oure Lord, and gret the vertue of hym; 
eand of his wisdam is not noumbre. Vn- 
dertakende debonere men the Lord; mek- 
ende forsothe synneres vn to the erthe. 
7 Singeth beforn to the Lord in confessioun; 
sdoth salm to oure God in harpe. That 
couereth heuene with cloudis ; and greith- 
eth to the erthe reyn. That bringeth 
forth in hillis hey ; and erbe to the seruise 
yof men. That 3yueth to bestis the mete 
of hem ; and to briddis of crowes inwardli 
1oclepende hym. He shal not han wil in 
the strengthe of hors; ne in the leggis of 
11a man shall be wel plesid to hym. Wel 
plesid thing is to the Lord vpon men 
dredende hyin; and in hem that hopen 
on* his mercy. 


PSALM CXLVII. 
Alleluia of Agge and Zacharye. 


PSALMS. 


885 


hem that ben hungri. The Lord vnbynd- 
ith feterid men; the Lord liz3tneth blyndes 
men. The Lord reisith men hurtlid® doun; 
the? Lord loueth iust men. The Lordy 
kepith comelyngis, he schal take vp a 
modirles child, and? widewe ; and he schal 
distrie the weies of synners. The Lord 10 
schal regne in to the’ worldis; Syon, thi 
God schal regne in generacioun and in to 
generacioun. 


PSALM CXLVI. 


The ‘title of thet hundrid and sixe andi 
fourtithe salm. Alleluya’. 


Herie 3e the Lord, for the salm is good; 
heriyng be myrie, and fair to oure God. 
The Lord schal bilde Jernsalem; and'2 
schal gadere togidere the scateryngis of 
Israel. Which? Lord makith hool mens 
contrit in herte; and byndith togidere the 
sorewes of hem. Which noumbrith thes 
multitude of sterris; and clepith names to 
alle tho. Oure Lord is greet, and hiss 
vertu 7s greet; and of his wisdom is’ no 
noumbre. The Lord takith vp mylde men; 6 
forsothe* he makith low synneris ‘til to 
the* erthe. Bifore synge 3e to the Lord7 
in knoulechyng ; seye 3e salm to oure God 
in an harpe. Which hilith heueneY withs 
cloudis; and makith redi reyn to the erthe. 
Which bryngith forth hei in hillis; and 
eerbe to the seruice of men. Which 3yuetho 
mete to her werk beestis; and to the briddys 
of crowis clepinge? hym. He schal not io 
haue wille in* the strengthe of an hors; 
nether it schal be wel plesaunt to hym in 
the leggis of a man. It is wel plesaunt 
to the Lord on men that dreden hym; and 
in hem that hopen on? his mercy. 


PSALM CXLVII. 
The hundrid and seuene and fourtithe 


salm', 
Lauda, Jeru- 12 Preise thou, Jerusalem, the Lord ; Jerusalem, herie thou the Lord; Syon, 12 
salem, Domi- 
num. 
uloosith 4. Ythe worldis au.  contricioun 4. * in a. 
‘hurlid 3. Cand thec. Pandaceteri. 4 Om. eeteri. ‘Om. a. § Om. A. Alleluya ; to induce men 
lo heerie God. kors. Alleluya, that is, Herie 3e God.v. + aud her. The which i. Vtheris1. Wand. 


Xyntol. tothes. Y heuens s. 


z ynclepynge I. 


a jn tos. din In. © The title of the FMORi. 


d Om. a. salm ; [this x] spekith of the gost bilding of Jerusalem. Kons. salm hath no title in Ebren. u 


salm hath no tytle. This salm spekith of goostli Jerusalem. v. 


In 1. is no title, but only cxlvii. 


886 PSALMS. CXLVH. 13—CXLVII. 13. 


13 preise thou thi God, Sion. For he coum- 
fortede the lockis of thi 3atis ; he blissede 
14to thi sones in thee. That sette thi coostis 
pes; and with tal3 of whete fillith thee. 
1s That sendeth out his specheY to erthe ; 
isswiftli renneth his word. That jiueth 
snon3 as wile; the litle cloude as aske? 
i7he sprengeth. He sendeth his cristal* as 
musselis ; befor the face of his cold who 
1sshal susteynen ? He shal sende out his 
woord, and melte them; his spirit shal 
19 blowen, and watris shul flowen. That 
tellith out his woord to Jacob; ri3twis- 
2onesses and his domes to Irael. He dide 
not so to eche nacioun; and his domes 
he openede not to them. 


PSALM CXLVIII. 
1 Alleluia of Aggee and Zacharie. 


Preise 3ee the Lord fro heuenes; preise 
23ee hym in hei3tis. Preise 3ee hym, alle 
his aungelis ; preise 3ee hym, alle his ver- 
stues. Preise 3ee hym, the sunne and the 
moone; preise 3ee hym, alle the sterris 
4aud liz3t. Preise 3ee hym, heuenes of he- 
uenes; and watris that aboue heuenes 
sben, preise thei the name of the Lord. 
¢For he seide, and thei ben maad; he 
sente, and thei ben formed. He sette them 
in to withoute ende, and in to the world 
of world; an heste he putte, and he shal 
7not beside passe. Preise 3ee the Lord, fro 
the erthe; dragonnes, and alle depnessis. 

8 Fyr, hail, snou3, iys, the spirit of tem- 
9 pestis; that don the woord of hym. Moun- 
teynes, and alle hillis; frut berende trees, 
1oand alle cedris. Bestis, and alle vsable 
bestis ; serpentis, and fethered foulis. 
11 Kyngis of erthe®, and alle puplis ; princis, 
1zand alle domys men of erthe. 3ung men, 
and maidenes; olde men with the 3ungere, 
13preise theit the name of the Lord; for 


Yspeches 4. Zasken 4. ® cristallis an. 


eOm.cr1. fhe spredith 1. § schal mowe 1. 


herie thou thi God. For he hath coum-13 
fortid the lockis of thi j3atis; he hath 
blessid thi sones in thee. Which hath set 14 
thi coostis pees; and fillith thee with thee 
fatnesse of wheete. Which sendith out his 15 
speche to the erthe; his word renneth 
swiftli. Which 3yueth snow as_ wolle ;16 
spredith’ abrood a cloude as aische. He17 
sendith his crista] as mussels; who schal& 
suffre bifore the face of his cooldnesse ? 
He schal sende out his word, and schal 18 
melte tho; his spirit schal blowe, and 
watris schulen flowe. Which tellith his 19 
word to Jacob; and hise ri3tfulnessis and 
domes to Israel. He dide not so to ech20 
nacioun; and he schewide not hise domes 
to hem. 


PSALM CXLVIII. 


The ‘title of the’ hundrid and ei3te andi 
fourtithe salm. Alleluyai, 


3e of heuenes, herie) the Lord; herie 
3e hym in hi3e thingis. Alle hise aungels, 2 
herie 3e hym; alle hise vertues, herye 3e 
hym. Sunne and moone, herie 3e hym;3 
alle sterris and li3t, herie 3e hym. Heuenes4 
of heueues, herie 3e hym; and the watris 
that ben aboue heuenes*, herie je! thes 
name of the Lord. For he seide, ands 
thingis weren maad ; he comaundide, and 
thingis weren maad of nou3t. He ordeyn- 
ede tho thingis in to the world, and in 
to the world of world; he settide a co- 
maundement, and it schal not passe. 3e7 
of ™ erthe, herie" 3e° the Lord; dragouns, 
and alle depthis of watris. Fier, hail, 
snow, iys, spiritis of tempestis; that don 
his word. Mounteyns, and alle litle hillis; 9 
trees berynge fruyt, and alle cedris. Wielde 10 
beestis, and alle tame beestis; serpentis, 
and fetherid briddis. The kingis of erthe, 11 
and alle puplis ; the princis, and alle iugis 
of. erthe. -3onge men, and virgyns, elde 12 
men with 3ongere, herie 3e? the name of 


bmorselis 4H. the erthe 4H. 4 3e 4, 


h Om. ax. iOm. aorx. Alleluya; (this k] exciteth 


ee men fulli to herie God. Kors, Alleluya ; of the firste comyng of Crist. v. jherieth 1. * heuene kK. 
thei kK. ™Moftheg. heriethr. 9° Om. CDEFGHILOPQRSVXI. P Om. Gru. 


CXLVIII. t4—CL. 4. 


enhauncid is the name of hym alone. 

t4The knouleching of hym vpon heuene 
and erthe ; and he enhauncide the horn of 
his puple. Ympne to alle the seyntis of 
hym; to the sones of Irael, to the puple 
ne3hende to hym. 


PSALM CXLIX. 
1 Alleluia, 
Cantate Do- 


mino canlicum 
novum, 


Singeth to the Lord a newe song; hys 
2preising in the chirche of halewis. Glade 
Irae} in hym that made hym; and the 
do3tris of Sion ful out ioje thei in ther 
3kyng. Preise thei the name of hym in 
quer; in timbre and sautre do they salm 
4to hym. For wel plesid is to the Lord 
in his puple; and he enhauncide the de- 
sbonere in to helthe. Halewys shul ful 
out io3en in glorie; thei shul gladen in 
6ther bed placis. The ful out io3ingus of 
God in the throte of hem; and the 
swerdis on eithir side sharp in the hondis 
70f hem. To be do veniaunce in naciouns ; 
sand blamyngis in puplis. To ben bounde 
the kingis of hem in fettris; and the noble 
9men of hem in irene manyclis. That thei 
do in hem dom writen; glorie this is to 
alle the seintis of hym®. 


PSALM CL. 
1 Alleluia. 
Weatinte Do- Preise 3ee the Lord in his seintis; 
pent: fr preise 3ee hym in the fastnyng of his 
sanciis. 


avertue. Preise 3ee hym in the vertues 
of hym; preise 3ee hym aftir the multi- 
3tude of the gretnesse of hym. Preise 3ee 
hym in the soun of trumpe; preiseth 
4hym in sautre aud harpe. Preise 3ee 
hyin in timbre and quer; preise 3ee hym 


PSALMS. 


887 


the Lord; for the name of hym aloone is13 
enhaunsid. His knouleching be on heuene 14 
and erthe; and he hath enhaunsid the 
horn of his puple. An ympne 6e to alle 
hise seyntis; to the children of Israel, to a 
puple nei3zynge to hym. 


PSALM CXLIX. 


The ‘title of the’ hundrid and nyne andi 
Jourtithe salm. Alleluya‘. 


Synge 3e to the Lord a newe song; hise 
heriyng be in the chirche of seyntis. Is-2 
rael be glad in hym that made hym; and 
the dou3tris of Syon make ful out ioye in 
her king. Herie thei his name in a queer ;3 
seie thei salm to hym in a tympan, and’ 
sautre. For the Lord is wel plesid in his4 
puple; and he hath reisid mylde men in to 
heelthe. Seyntis schulen make ful outs 
ioye in glorie; thei schulen be glad in her 
beddis. The ful out ioiyngis of God in thes 
throte of hem ; and swerdis scharp ont ‘ech 
side" in the hondis of hem. To do ven-7 
iaunce in naciouns; blamyngis’ in puplis. 
To bynde the kyngis of hem in stockis;8 
and the noble men of hem in yrun inana- 
clis. That thei make in hem doom writun; 9 
this is glorye” to alle hise seyntis. 


PSALM CL. 


The title of the hundrid and fiftithe salm.1 
Alleluyu*. 


Herie 3eY the Lord in lise seyntis ; herie 
3e hym in the firmament of his vertu. 
Herie 3e hym in hise vertues; herie? 3e*2 
hym bi> the multitude of his greetnesse. 
Herie 3e hym in the soun of* trumpe;3 
herie 3e hym in a sautre and harpe. Herie4 
3e hym in a tympane and‘ queer; herie 
3e hym in strengis and orgun. Herie 3e5 


e hem a. 


4Om.o0. * Alleluya; is the herijng of God for parfiie victorie. Kors. Alleluya; in secunde comyng of 


Crist. vy. %andinat. 


tin C sup. ras. EFGIOPQRSUVW. 


u bothe sides K. Y aud blamyngis1. the 


glorie x. * Om.a. Alleluya ; is the conclusion of alle salmes. Kors. Alleluya. This salm is the conclusioun 


of al the book of salmes.v. ¥Om.o0. 2 herieth 1. 


a Om. 1. 


bDaftir1. cofaik. Wandin 4. 


888 PSALMS. Chgace 


sin cordis and orgne. Preise 3ee hym in hym in cymbalis sownynge wel, herye 3e 


cymbalis wel sounende, preise 3ee hym hym in cymbalis of iubilacioun; ech spirit, ¢ 


cin cymbalis of huge io3ing ; eche spirit, herye the Lord. 
preise the Lord. 


Here endith the Sawter; and now bi- Here endith the Sautere; and here bi- 
gynneth the preface of Seynt Jerom in — gynneth the Prouerbis of Salomon’. 
the book of Prouerbes'. 


f From 4. Explicit. Here endith the Sauter. z. No final rubric in cr. 


e Here endith the Sauter, and here biginnen [bigynneth v] Prouerbis (Parablis w] cruquw. Here 
endith the Sautere. p. Here endith the Sauter, and bigynneth a prolog on Prouerbis. a. Heere endith ihe 
Sauter of Dauid, the prophete.1. Here endeth the book of Salmes; blessed be the Holi Trinyte. Amen 
Amen. «x. Here endith the Sauter, but mo salnes suwen, than ben writen in the Sauter, whiche ben writen Zs 
dyuerse chapitles of the bible bifore and after, whiche tt ts no nede to writen hem twies ; therfor we enden 
here, and here bigynneth a prologe vpon Prouerbis of Salomon.m. . . . . and here bigynnen 
the Prouerbis of Salamon. x. Here endith the book of Salmes, and bigynneth the prolog on the ba of 
Prouerbis, ethir Parablis, as it sueth aftir.o. Here endeth the Sauter, and bigynneth the prolog on the 
Prouerbis of Salomon. rn. Here endith the Sauter, and bigynneth the book of Prouerbis. v. Here cadith the 
Sauter, and bigynnen the Canticlis. i. No final rubric in r. 


co. 





i 
} 








TEENA Sietetn NUY JZ Yd] 


| 
} 


Bible. English 

The Holy Bible ... from the 
Latin vulgate by Wycliffe ... 
ed. by Forshall and Madden 


























| haat orl agama fi 
a ee eee fowdule- Sone toh once arcooeds , 

a . ‘ 
tae ware OE Aad ee em aa oi a ectmerpemtytace! af 
eve were newer Pernt meters , 
al WRT yg tt pee. apriie Sets ' 
LET IR Oy wwe © by mM orp me ow eee aoe nage | 
caendiioerhasnncTndotren t EAnadk hiatiap- cates L4senieat cael ah i aes 
cee ew tine parent NO ae eee! ae Ce igh. ed tyes 
Soe ee raw Ne goer : : as ane ewer gee ore 

Ea pe ate Oe FEATS wren = wrysen yew = 
ra oe Fw BI GTN ard AE toe m=, OEY. an oe wares errr 

lowe alee Verena hs wy rime by pe one enemy ey” pal 


a 
= mee AON Sem arving STR 
rm fe PEN 8p ASE Tow eo ORT He 
eh d peated pm ete ng Ne eer = 6% Pet oe 
hanegeath-nbain ih padtee emagaalieers tots Ey pata ctl gindagh jeainaAtghiodl re 
erate ENE ere oe AT wee mare Grease 
= 



















Here na 
Steves pak 

cet 

ely airerd 

Per 


t 





' 
ow nen 





os ie 
rs 
See ogen se eee lena eae oe : tit 
1 OE 1 Be Pr rn re FOP fuacetnienthftentnesd cana an Geaconaeaheinage® srianen 4 ie 
Dahlaniarnedinawhy Ons mopgiboecmerti i anes Siodaelepnrteant Ll 5 
eta te Aegaaaengrans ps faked nctnenronest 
Fae wares Wm cep winter tee * sips 
















eer awe 
— fap ey Seen arene were 


Pi Res oe cn tee 


















serra ok 
Eoin he pe a1 * 
Se es Pee aay fa 
= Beedle tach oe] 
ne aol n 
- 








Gee Alfio whe, 
joonena oh 




















# - > 
* is 
ot - a i’ 
is ke i 
= ; 
¥ 2 eG? - 
yj 
a a Jy 
“Ug at 
Aah 
may. 
5 . 
av } 4 
nee 
. - ’ ~ —_ . ~ rr rs 4 
- ~ ~ z > - , * ~ 
ae = - ve aoa Rae : 
- - - - + ~~~ * ~ 
Fer Pure. veekane nape oe AE F 
Ce wwe wees 2-40 oe = . us 
r= Soe ere weit Ty! aes, c 
SS - SRS et eee eens se ~ 





Se ke ey 














oa ee TL Oe ee ~ 
+e ean eet 
: ran 
= 
aes 
—s 










“ree 4 Srey 
Al. 
ong ee 






wal 
Se 
~ 


5 << 


~ > 
~s salt t led Sree 
Real ante 
LA! 





= 
too as 
Sa ai 
Sore ery ah Rots 

: Ress 


Dyan 
wang yet yi 











“ 
+ hay 
4 







Pobe er as 9 ney Sah toy. - , 

Lew Sard ASS Lee ie a “ . ha & : ; 
2 et Serie onbn pind Sonat Hann beted soy aie wie ~ 
Laer Pees greeny Ses = 


mh cant 


ears oe: Save +a oy is \ 
tevey ey sori Lap shat Fs ie . Wes bat \ i 
: =~, eT € einen : as Bee Ay abress eon pay ca = ie 
= ej : 3 . z : i wr . 5 ; . 
Sr peeien Atte oF Pte tn: oe Atul 
eee mar gia = 


4, 5 7 ‘ : 
Satte es ect: Paonia Se PT 
ae ones oe 

Seer 





“ak 
Ty 


Le 
vi fy 
way 
pe 


“= THE HOLY BIBLE, 


CONTAINING 


THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS, 


' WITH THE APOCRYPHAL BOOKS, 


IN THE EARLIEST ENGLISH VERSIONS 


MADE FROM THE LATIN VULGATE BY 
JOHN WYCLIFFE AND HIS FOLLOWERS; 


EDITED BY. 
THE REV. JOSIAH FORSHALL, F.R.S. erc. 
LATE FELLOW OF EXETER COLLEGE, 
AND 


SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H. F.R.S. erc. 


KEEPER OF THE MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 


VOLUME ITI. 


OXFORD, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 
M.DCCC.L. 








PROVERBS. 





[Prologue on the book of Proverbs*.] 


In these Prouerbis of Salomon is contened myche prudence and vndurstonding, 
3ouen to Salomon bi the Spirit of God, and acordinge in many places with the 
gospel of Crist. And as Crist techith in his gospel goostli wisdom oonli, so Salomon 
techith worldli warnesse, how a man owith to gouerne him prudentli in the world, 
and to be war of perels and mescheues, and to fle nedynesse, and to schewe bi his 
gouernaunce, that the prudence of God is with him, which is arettid as lizt, and folie 
is arettid as derknesse. 


Heere bygyneth the prologe in the booc off Prouerbys*. 


‘To Cromacie and Eliodere, bishopis, Jerome sendeth greeting’. Joyne® the epistil 
whom ioyneth presthod; 3he, the chartre twynne not, whom the looue of Crist 
knytteth. Exposiciouns in Osee, Amos, Zacharie, and Malachie, the’ whiche 3ee 
asken, I shulde han write, if it hadde ben leeful for siknesse. 3ee senden solacys 
of costis, 3oure notories, and bokis writeres sustenende, that to 3ou most oure® wit 
trauaile. And lo! asidef the hauntende puple of men diuerse thingis askende, as or 
euene it be me® to trauailen, 30u hungrende, also to othere, or, in resoun of 3yuen 
thing and taken, to any, saue 3ou, I be bounde. And so thur3 long siknesse brosid, 
lest fulli this 3eer I shulde be stille, and anenti 3ou I were doumb, the werc of thre 
da3is to 3oure name I sacride; the remenyng, that is, of the) thre volumes of Salomon, 
Masloch, that Ebrues Parablis, the comun making Prouerbis clepeth; Coelech, that 
Grecli Eclesiasten, Latinli a Spekere wee moun seyn; Cirasirym, that in to oure 
tunge is turned Song of Songis. It is told and* Panarethos, the boc of Jhesu, sone of 
Cirach; and an other falsly writen, that is inwriten’ the Wisdam of Salamon. Of 
whiche™ the rathere I fond Ebru, not Ecclesiasticum, as anent the Latynes, but 
Parablis beforn notid; to whom weren ioyned Eclesiastes and the Song of Songis ; 
that he shulde euene to" the licnesse of Salamon, not onli in noumbre of bokis, but 
also in maner® of mateeris. The secounde anent the Ebrues is neuer no wher, for and 
that maner of speche sauoureth the Grekis faire speche?; and summe of olde writeres 
afermen this boc to ben of Jew Filon. As thanne Judith, and Tobie, and the bokis of 


a This prologue is from m. 


a Heer begynneth the preface of seynt Jerom in the booc of Prouerbis. Ecut. Here bigynneth the prolog 
on the Parablis of Salamon. 4. No initial rubric in ar. b Jerom sendith greetinge to Cromacie and 
to Eliodere, bischopis tr. ¢Lioyner. 4Om.r. ¢3jourex. fofthesider, &Om.R. Om. Rr. 
' anentis 4 et £ ef L passim. 1 Om.c. * Om.ir. | writen zr, ™ the whiche c pr.m.1 2 Om. 4uLr. 
Othe maner x. P spechis R. 


VOL. III. 


Q PROVERBS. 


Macabeis, redeth hem forsothe the chirche, 


I. 1—13. 


but among the reuleer scripturis 


resceyueth not ; so and these two volumes rede he’ to the edificacioun of the puple, 
not to the autorite of chirche teching® to ben confermed. If to any man forsothe 
more plese the translacioun of the seuenty remenoures, he hath it sum time amended 


of vs. 


Ne forsothe so newe thingis wee maken, that olde thingis wee destro3e. And 


‘neuer the lateret, whan most diligentli redeth he", wite he oure writen thingis to 
ben vnderstonde, that ben not coruptid held’ into the thridde vessel, but, anoon from 
the presse most pureli the vessel 3euen, han kept their sauour. 


Here endith the prolog, and here bigynnen the Parablis of Salomon. 





Here-bigynneth the Parablis of Sa- 
lomon*. 
CAP. I. 
1 Tue parablis of Salamon, sone of Da- 
guid, king of Irael; to ben koud wisdam, 
3and discipline; to ben vnderstonden the 
woordis of prudence; and to ben vudir- 
take enformyng of doctrine, rijtwysnesse, 
aand dom, and equite; that felnesse be 
jeue to litle childer, and to the 3unge 
ful waxen, kunnyng and vnderstonding. 
5 Herende the wise wisere shal ben; and 
vnderstondende gouernaile he shal welde. 
6 Take he heede the parable, and the re- 
menyng; the woordis of wise men, and 
7the derke spechis of hem. The drede of 
the Lord the’ begynnyng of wisdam ; 
swisdam and lore foolis dispisen. Here, 
my sone, the discipline of thi fader, and 
one leue thou the lawe of thi modir; that 
ther be added grace to thin hed, and a 
10 be3e” to thi necke. My sone, if thee* 
synneres fulfille with myle, ne assente 
ithou® to them. If thei sey, Cum thou 
with vs, waite wee to the blod, hide 
wee grenes a3en the innocent in veyn; 
12swolewe wee hym, as helle the liuende; 
and hol as the descendende in to the 
islake; alle precious substaunce we shul 


a hem t. t Om. xR. 8 techingis zr. 
w From &. Here endith the prolog of Prouerbis, 


t neuer lattere LR. 
se now the book.1. Here eendith the prolog, and bigynneth 


Here bigynnen the Prouerbis of Sa- 
lomon?. 

CAP. I. 

The parablis of Salomon, the sone of1 
Dauid, king of Israel; to kunne wisdom 2 
and kunnyng; to vndurstonde the wordiss 
of prudence; and to take the lernyng of 
teching ; to take ri3tfulnesse, and dom, and 
equyte; that felnesse’>* be 3ouun to litle 
childrenf, and kunnyng, and vudurstond- 
ing to a 30ng wexynge man. A wise mans 
heringe schal be wisere®; and a man vn- 
durstondinge schal holde gouernails. Hee 
schal perseynue a parable, and expown- 
yng*{; the wordis of wise men, and the 
derk figuratif spechis of hem. The® drede7 
of the Lord zs the bigynning of wisdom ; 
foolis dispisen wisdom and teching. Mys 
sone, here thon the teching of thi fadir4, 
and forsake thou not the lawe of thi 
modir ; that grace be addid, ethir en-9 
creessid’, to thin heed, and a biel] to thi 
necke. 
assente thou not to hem. 
Come thou with vs, sette we aspies to 
blood, hide we snaris of disseitis a3ens 


* felnesse; to 

eschewe yuelis. 
Lire here c. 

+ children ; that 
is, symple meu. 
Lire here. © et 

alii. 


t exporenyng ; 
that is, in se- 
inge the veri 
vudurstonding 
thereof. Lire 
here. c. 


§ fadir ; that 

is, God. and thi 
modir ; that is, 
of hooli chirche. 
Lire here. c. 

ll and a Lie, etc.; 
bi eld tyme wise 


Mi sone, if synneris flateren thee, 10 men weren 


wont to haue a 


If thei seien, 11 gotaun bie, in 


sigue of wis- 
dom, Lire ~ 
here. c. ‘ 


an innocent without cause; swolowe we 12 


him, as helle swolowith a man lyuynge; 
and al hool, as goynge doun in to a lake; 


uhem 1. Vv heeldid aeninr. 


the firste c°. u. Here eendith the prolog, and bigynneth the book of Prouerbis of Salamon. rR. No final 


rubric in the other Mss. 


yYisthe 4. 2 wrethe # pr.m. 


> From em. Here bygynnen the Prouerbis. a. Heere big 
the Prouerbis of Salomon. pg. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
f enereesse w. 


wisere 1. 


4 the expownyng 1. € Om. 2. 


x From 4. Ineipit liber Proverbiorum.G. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
® thee souken x pr. m. 


b thou not £ prem. : . 


igynnith the book of Prouerbis. 1. Here biginnith 


bb felnesse, or warnesse V. © the 
& schede blood 1. 





I. 14-32. 


finde, wee shul fulfillen oure housis with 
1spoilis; lot ley with vs, 0 bagge of 
ismonee be of vs alle; mi sone, ne go 
thou with hem; forfende thi foot fro the 
16sties of hem. Forsothe the feet of hem 
to euel rennen; and hee3en that thei 
17sheden out blod. In vein forsothe is 
throwen a net befor the e3en of the 
isfethered. Thei also a3en ther blod 
awaiten; and casten gilys a3en_ ther 
i9soulis. So the pathis of the auerous man 
raueshen the liues of the welderes. Wis- 
20dam withouteforth precheth; in stretis 
21it 3yueth his vois. In the hed of cum- 
panyes it ofte crieth; in the doris of 
the jatis of the cite he bringeth forth 
22his woordis, seiende, Hou longe, 3ee litle 
childer, loouen childhed, and foolis tho 
thingus that ben no3esum to them shul 
coueiten, and vnprudent® men shuln 
23haten kunnyng? Be 3ee conuertid at 
my correccioun ; lo! I shal bringe forth 
to 30u my spirit, and shewen my woordis. 
24 For J clepede, and 3ee forsoken; I stra3te 
out myn hond, and ther was not that 
25wolde beliolden. 3ee despiseden al my 
counseil; and my blamyngis* 3ee ro3ten 
26not of. I forsothe in 3o0ure deth shal 
law3he; and vnderinouwe 30u, whan to 
jou that, that 3ee dredden, shal come. 
27 Whan shal falle feerli wrecchidnesse, and 
deth as tempest shal ajen come; whan 
shal come vp on 30u tribulacioun and an- 
28euysh. Thanne thei shul inwardli clepe 
me, and I shal not ful out hereu; erly 
they shuln rise togidere, and not finde 
29 me. 
disciplyne, aud the drede of the Lord 
30 thei vndertoken not, ne assentiden to my 
counseil, and bacbitiden to al my correc- 
3icioun. Thei shuln ete therfore the frutis 
of ther weie; and with ther couuseilis 
32thei shul be fulfild. The turning awei 


¢ ynkunnynge 4. 


For thi that hatestu thei hadden. 


PROVERBS. 3 


|| rauyschen, 
cte.s that is, 
alien thing to 


we schulen fynde al preciouse catel, we 13 * spuylis; that 
. . f is, richessis 
schulen fille oure housis with spuylis!*; — ranyschid fro 
sendei thou lot with vs, o purs bek of vs 1a peinncents 
alle; my sone, go thou not with hem 315°. 
M 9° + net: bi the 
forbede thi foot fro the pathis of hem. phe is signefied 
tisseit of wick- 
For the feet of lem rennen to yuel; and 16id men, and 
thei hasten to schede ont blood. But Alga eee 
nett is leid in veyn{ bifore the izen§ of ie oe ae 
briddis, that han wengis. Also ‘thilke 18 ;ynes and 
5 tas : : en wyngi 
wickid disseyueris setten! aspies ajens her a 
_ ‘ eschewe it. 
owne blood; and maken redi fraudis™ Lire here. c. 
. é ty . 
asens her soulis. So the pathis of ech 19 jeg ae 
auerouse man rauyschen"|] the soulis of “jails wontis 
hem that welden®. Wisdom prechitli 20 vertnouse wise 
i fs sets i i men. Ka. 
with outforth; in stretis it 3yueth his vois. — § bifor the zen; 
i . that is, bifor 
It crieth ofte in the heed of cumpenyes ; 21 priddis seinge 
. ° . ‘ scharpeli the 
i the leeues of 3atis of the citee it jet, and 
bringith forth hise wordis, and seith, Hou 22 fae bi 
long, 3eP litle men zz wit, louen’ 3ong 
childhod**, and foolis schulen coueyte tho 

Le. : helle. Li 
thingis, that ben harmful to hem silf, jere. cna. 

T € Wisdom ; that 
and™ vnprudent men schulen hate kun- is, God, wisdom 
nyng? Be 3e conuertid at my repreu-23 with out bigyn- 

nyng. prech- 
yng; lo, Y schal profres forth to 30u my _ ith; bi profetis 

ae % and techeris. 
spirit, and Y schal schewe my wordis. in séretis; for 
For Y clepide}}, and 3e forsoken ; Y helde 2474 3a" 
forth myn hond, and noon was‘ that bi- ‘Y" techen in 
raat comyn places, 

helde. 3e dispisiden" al my councel; and 25 i pee 
y thei that han 

chargiden not my blamyngis. And  Y 26 yuel doctryn 
schal leize in 3oure perisching; and Y schal eer netine 
ae = A places; for he 
scorneY 30u, whanne that, that 3e dreden, that duithyuele, 
cometh to 30u. Whanne sodeyne wretch-27 patth lit, and 
ci Sen : : c 2 paint 
idnesse fallith in, and perisching™ bifallith te ee 
y A ise werkis ben 

as tempest; whanne tribulacioun aud an-__ repreued, but 
gwisch cometh* on jou. Thanne Pep26 Ses 
3 + to the 1i3e, that 
schulen clepe me, and Y schal not here}; uence 
thei schulen rise eerli, and thei schulen ean ontie 

a as < pen doon 1n 

uot fynde me. For’ thei hatiden? teching?, 29 Goa, as Crist 
: seith, in iij. co. 

and» thei token not the® drede of the  ofacon. Lire 

. ed ] ue here. C. 
Lord, nether® assentiden to my councel, 30 ¢¢ Gy iianods 

e . + 3) that is, wan- 
and depraueden al myn amendyng. her 
for thei schulen ete the fruytisjj of her bee: as 

ee 5 . 5 tt ¥ clepide ; 
weie; and thei schulen be fillid with her _ that is, tb? wise 


4 blamynge 4. 


hrobries r. i putter. * be ther. | thei setten 1. that setten s. ™ fraudis, or gijles 1, "rauyschen 
or taken amey1. ° that is, wisdam Kk marg. VOm.1. ‘louenjer. and hou longer.  * brynge 
ceteri. ther wast. ™haue dispisid 1. VY bymowe ny. W spillyng1. *comenz. Y¥ For cause that 1. 
zhadden 1. ®techingin hate 1. >and forr. °Om.1. 4 nether their, ¢ and their. 


BQ 


“ PROVERBS. 


of litle childer shal slen hem; and the 

33 prosperite of foolis shal leesen hem. Who 
forsothe me shal heren, withoute ferd shal 
resten; and abundaunce he shal parfitli 
vsen, the ferd of euelis taken awey. 


CAP. II. 
1 My sone, if thou vndertakest my 
woordis, and my maundementes hidist 
ganent thee; that thin ere here wisdam, 
inwardliche bowe thin herte to ben 
3knowen wisdam. If forsothe wisdam 
thou shalt inwardli clepen, and inwardli 
tbowe thin herte to prudence; if thou 
shalt sechen it as money, and as tresoris 
sdeluen it out; thanne thou shalt vnder- 
stonden the drede of the Lord, and the 
ékunnyng of God finde. For the Lord 
3yueth wisdam; and of the mouth of 
7hym prudence and kunnyng. He shal 
kepen the helthe of riz3t® men, and de- 
8 fende the goende symplely; withholdende 
the pathis of riz3twisnesse, and the weies 
9of halewis kepende. Thanne thou shalt 
vnderstonde ri3twisnesse, and dom, and 
1oequite, and eche good path. If wisdam 
shul go in to thin herte, and the kun- 
linyng to thi soule plese, counseil shal 
kepe thee, and prudence shal withholde 
12thee; that thou be pullid out fro an euel 
wey, and fro a man that speketh shreude 
isthingus. Thei that forsaken the ri3t go- 
14ing, and wenten bi derke weies ; that for- 
sothe gladen, whan thei don enele, and 
isful out io3en in werst thingus; of whom 
the weies shreude, and yuel losid the go- 
isingys of hem. That thou be take awey 
fro an alien womman, and fro a straunge, 
i7that softeth hir woordis; and forsaketh 
isthe ledere of hir childhed, and the coue- 
naunt of hir God hath for3ete. Forsothe 
inwardly bowid is to deth the hons of 
19hir, and to helle the pathis of hir. Alle 


I. 33—Il. 19. 


counseils. 
in wit schal sle hem; and the prosperite 


of foolis schal leesef hem. But he that33 


herith® me*, schal reste with outen drede; 
and he schal vse abundaunce, whanne the 
drede of yuels is takun awei. 


CAP. II. 

Mi sone, if thou resseyuest my wordis, ! 
and hidist myn heestist anentis thee; that2 
thin eere here wisdom, bowe thin herte to 
knowe prudence. For if thou inwardlis 
clepist wisdom, and bowist thin herte" to 
prudence; if thou sekist it as money],4 
and diggist it out as tresours; thannes 
thou schalt vndirstonde the drede of the 
Lord, and schalt fynde the kunnyng of 
God. For the Lord 3yueth wisdom § ;6 
and prudence and kunnyng 7s of his 
mouth. He schal kepe the heelthe of ri3t-7 
ful men, and he schal defende hem that 
goen sympli. And he schal kepe thes 
pathis of ri3tfulnesse!, and he schal kepe 
the weies of hooli men. Thanne thoug 
schalt vndirstonde ri3tfulnesse, and dom, 
and equytee, and ech good path. 
wysdom entrith in to thin herte, and kun- 


nyng plesith thi soule, good councel schal 11 


kepe thee, and prudence schal kepe thee ; 


that thou be delyuered fro an yuel weie], 12 


and fro a man that spekith weiward 


thingis. Whiche™ forsaken a ri3tful weie, 13 
and goen bi derk weies; whiche™ ben 14 


glad, whanne thei han do yuel, and maken 


The turnyng awei of litle men 32 men and pro- 


etis. noon was, 
etc.; thatis,fewe 
bihelden, in 
comparisoun of 
the multitude. 
Lire here. c. 
tischalnotheres 
for the tyme of 
merit is passid, 
as to deed men, 
ether for thei 
that synnen 
repenten not 
verily, that is, 
for the lone of 
good, but onely 
for drede, and 
hidousnesse of 
peyne. Lire 

€. Ce 

§§ele the fruytis, 
etc. ; that is, 
schulen be pu- 
nyschid bi her 
yuele werkis. 
Lire here. cv. 
* he that her- 
tth me ; that is, 
obeveth to 
Goddis heestis. 
abundaunce ; 
of goostli 
goodis, and of 
the hizeste good 
in blis. Lire 

cTenC ae 
+ and hidist 
myn heestis ¢ 
not in hidinge 
tho fro othere 
men, for siche 
owen to be 


comyned to 
If 10 neisboris, but 


in kepinge tho 
as a preciouse 
thing. thyn eere; 
that is, the eere 
of bodi and of 
soule. wisdom ; 
is propirly 
knowing of dy- 
uyn thingis, 
and prudence ; 
is knowing of 
manus thingis 
worthi to be 
doon. kunnyng; 
is of thingis tobe 


ful out ioye in worste thingis; whose 15 biholdun in wit. 


weies ben weywerd, and her goyingis ben 


of yuel fame. That thou be delyuered fro 16 


an alien womman**, and fro.a straunge 
womman, that makith soft hir wordis; 


Lire here. c. 
t as money ; 
that is, with so 
greet enforsing, 
aS an auarouse 
man sekith 
money, and as 
our sek. 


and forsakith the duyk°® of hir tyme of 17ith gold hid. 


mariage, and hath forjete the couenaunt is; 


of hir God. For the hous of hir is bowid 
to deeth, and hir pathis to helle. 
that entren to hirt+}, schulen not turne ajen, 


€ rigtwise 4. 


fF fordo 1. & wel herith 1. 
° duyk, or ledere 1. 


h ere 1. 


? rigtwisnesse 1, 


m The whiche 1. 0 the whichie 1. 


Lire here. c. 


to hem that 
desiren it. c. 


Alle 19 lech good path; 


that is, hi3 ver- 
tu, that ledith 


syueth wisdom; 


° 


II. 20——III. 17. 


that gon in to hir, shul not turne a3een, 
20ne take the sties of lif. That thou go 
in a good weye, and the pathis of ri3twis 
21men thou kepe. Who forsothe ben ri3te, 
shul dwelle in the erthe; and the symple 
2eshul parfitli wone in it. The vnpitouse 
forsothe fro the erthe shul be lost; and 
that wickidli don, shul be take fro it 
awei. 
CAP. III. 
1 My sone, ne for3ete thou my lawe ; 
zand thin herte kepe myn hestis. For- 
sothe lengthe of da3is, and 3eeris of lif, 
3and pes, thei shul ley tof to thee. Mercy 
and treuthe forsake thei not thee; cum- 
pase them to thi throte, and descryue in 
4the tablis of thin herte. And thou shalt 
finde grace, and good discipline befor 
5God and men. Haue trost in the Lord, 
of al thin herte; and ne lene thou to thi 
6prudence. In alle thi weies thence hym, 
zand he shal ri3t reulen thi goingis. Ne 
be thou wis anent thiself; dred God, and 
sgo awey fro evel. Helthe forsothe shal 
ben in thi nauele, and watring of thi 
9bones. Honoure the Lord of thi sub- 
staunce, and of the cheef of alle thi 
lofrutis 3if to pore men; and thi bernes 
shul ben fulfild with fulnesse, and with 
11win thi presses shul rebounden. The 
discipline of the Lord, my sone, ne caste 
thou awey; ne faile thou, whan of hym 
i2thou art chastisid. Whom forsothe the 
Lord looueth, he chastiseth; and as fader 
in the sone it with pleseth to hym. 
13 Blisful the man that findeth wisdam, 
1zand that flowith prudence. Betere is the 
purchasing of it, than the chaffering of 
gold and of siluer; first and most pure 
15 the frutis of it. More precious than alle 
richesses it is; and alle thingus that be 
desirid, to it moun not be comparisound. 
16 Lengthe of da3is in his ri3t half, and in 


PROVERBS. 5 


nether? schulen catche the pathis of lijf. 


schortly to blis. 
ire here. c. 


That thou go in‘ a good weie, and kepe 209 yuet wey; 


the pathis of iust men. Forsothe thei that 21 


ben riztful, schulen dwelle in the lond; 
and symple men schulen perfitli dwelle 


that is, idola- 
trie. c. 

** an alien 
twomman ; that 
is, fro idolatrie, 
that makith 


ther ynne. But vnfeithful men schulen be 2z alien fro Goa, 


lost fro the loond; and thei that doen 
wickidli, schulen be takun awey fro it. 


CAP. III. 


Mi sone, for3ete thou not my lawe; andi 
thyn herte kepe my comaundeimentis. For 2 
tho’ schulen sette to thee the lengthe of 
daies, and the 3eeris of lijf, and pees. 
Merci and treuthe forsake thee not *;3 
bynde thou tho to thi throte, and write’ 
in the tablis of thin herte. And thon4 
schalt fynde grace, and good teching bi- 
fore God and men. Haute thou trist ins 
the Lord, of al thin herte; and triste thou 
not to thi prudence. In alle thi weiese 
thenke thou" on hym, and he schal dresse 
thi goyngis. Be thou not wijs anentis thi7 
silf{; drede thou God, and go awei fro 
yuel. For whi helthe schal be in this 
nawle{, and moisting of thi boonys. 
Onoure thou the Lord of thi catel, and of 9 
the beste of alle thi fruytis 3yue thou 


ether fro a 
‘womman auou- 
tresse, as to the 
synne of fleisch. 
Lire here. c. 
that is, fro any 
womman that 
is leecherous, 
ajenus the bid. 
ding of Goddis 
lawe. Lire 
here. kK. 

tt Alle that en. 
tren to hir, ete; 
that is, for we 
schulen turne 
ajen to veri 
feith and onour 
of God. Lire 
here. c. 

* forsake thee 
not; that is, 
be not forsakun 
of thee, for whi 
vertues for. 
saken not a 
man, no but 
for he forsakith 
tho. good tech- 
ing; ether tem- 
peraunce and 
oneste in vtir- 
mere conuersa- 
eioun. Lire 
here. c. 

+ in thijn owne 
reputacioun. K. 
tin thi navle ; 
this is a figura- 
tif speche, for 


. pec 
to pore men; and thi bernes schulen be 10 ti the helthe of 


fillid with abundaunce, and pressours’ 
schulen flowe with wiyn. 
thou not awei the teching of the Lord ; 
and faile thou not, whanne thou art chas- 
tisid of him. 
hym, whom he loueth; and as a fadir in 


For the Lord chastisith 12 


the nawle, is 
vndurstondun 


My sone, caste 11 80% disposi- 


cioun of the 
soule in pro- 
sperites; and bi 
moisture of 
boonys, is vn- 
durstondun 
stidefastnesse 
in aduersites. 


the sone he plesith hym. Blessid zs thes Zire here. c. 


man that fyndith wisdom, and which’ 


* Itis a tre of 
liyf: as liyf was 
nued, bi 


flowith with prudence. The geting therof 14 nae of liyf, 


is betere than the marchaundie of gold 
and of silner; the fruytis therof ben the 
firste and clenneste*. 
than alle richessis; and alle thingis that 
ben desirid, moun not be comparisound to 


and as man, 


dwellinge in 


the staat of in- 


nocence, schulde 
1 reciousere’ 15 haue passid fro 
It is Pp the liyf of 
kynde to the 
liyf of glorie, 
without deth 


goynge bitwixe, 
so wisdom and 
prudenee leden 


this. Lengthe of daies zs in the ri3thalf16 
therof, and richessis and glorie ben in the 


the left half of it richessis and glorie. 
17 The weies of it faire, and alle the pathis 


f Om. acu. 


'their. 8 write hem :. t lene 1. ¥ thi pressours 1. 


Y more precious 1. 


P nether thei 1. qin to A. 


u Om. 1. 
Wthat 31. * the clenneste 1. ‘ 


6 PROVERBS. 


isof it pesible. The tre of lif it is to them 
that cacchen it; and that holden it, ben 
i9blisful. The Lord bi wisdam foundede 
the erthe; bi prudence stablide heuenes. 
20 Bi the wisdam of hym breeken out depe 
watris; aud the cloudis bi dew togidere 
21waxen. My sone, ne flowe these thingis 
awei fro thin ese; kep thou my lawe, and 
2counseilS; and there shal ben lif to thi 
3soule, and grace to thi chekis. Thanne 
thou shalt go trostl in thi wey; and thi 
24 foot shal not offende. If thou shul slepe, 
thou shalt not drede; thou shalt resten, 
asand sweete shal be thi slep. Ne drede 
thou with sodeyn gastnesse, and the 
poweris of the" vnpitous men fallende 
26on to thee. The Lord forsothe shal ben 
in thi side; and kepe thi foot, that thou 
27be not take. Wile thon! not forfenden 
-hym that mai wel don; if thou maist, 
2sand thiself wel-do.. Ne sey thou to thi 
frend, Go, and turne a3een, to moru I shal 
3yue to thee; whan anoon thou maist 
293iue. Ne caste thou to thi frend euel, 
30 whan he in thee hath trost. Ne striue 
thou ajen a man* in veyn, whan he no 
3ithing of euel hath don to thee. Ne 
enuye thou the vnri3twis man, ne folewe 
32thou the weies of hym. For! abhomyna- 
cioun of the Lord is eche gilour; and 
with the simple-the sermounyng of hym. 
33 Nede of the Lord in the hous of the 
vnpitouse; the dwelling placis forsothe of 
34rijtwise men shul be blessid. He shal 
desceyue the desceyueres ; and to the de- 
3sbonere he shal -3yne grace. Glorie wise 
men shul welde ; of foolis the out iozing 
shenshipe. 


o 
+ 
o 
- 


CAP. IV. 
1 Here 3ee, sones, the discipline of the 
fader; and taketh heede, that 3ee knowen 
2prudence. A good 3ifte I shal 3yuen to 
330u; my lawe ne forsake 3ee. For and I 


& my counseile 4. 4 Om. 4. 


2 with 1. 
h was also 1. 


a Om. 1. bof 1. © also 1. 


‘wickid man; but the dwelling places of 


4 And go thou x. 


ITI. 18——IV. 3. 


lifthalf therof. The weies therof tenis 5 ae 
feire weies, and alle the pathis therof the liyf of glo- 
ben pesible. It is a tre of lijf* to hem 18 Goth of dedly 
that taken it; and he that holdith it, is (ee Rat 
blessid. ‘The Lord foundide the erthe bil9ams. one 
wisdom ; he stablischide heuenes bi pru- e Bae 
dence. The depthis of .watris braken out 20 is siessia ; for 
bi his wisdom; and cloudis wexen togi- “ayn be 
dere bi? dewe. My sone, these thingis 21 Dis, seal not 
flete not awey fro thin izjen; kepe thou pee 
my lawe, and my counsel; and lijf schal 22 se Lord schat 
be to thi soule, and grace ‘sehal be* to thi Be eo 
chekis. Thanne thou schalt go tristili in 23 ee al ee 
thi weie; and thi foot schal not snapere. th ead daa 
If thou schalt slepe, thou schalt not drede; 24 is to excerciseof 
thou schalt reste, and thi sleep schal be ee 
soft. Drede thou not bi sudeyne feer, and 25900", 4” 
the powers of wickid men fallynge in on 4 diseueres 
thee. For the Lord schal be at thi side; 26 good with the 
and he schal kepe thi foot, that thou be enki oa 
not takun. Nil thou forbede to do wel27 7 
him that mai; if thou maist, and® do 4% esids 


that is, schulen 
thou wel. Seie thou not to thi frend,2s be multiplied 


in temporal 


Go4, and turne thou® ajen, and to morewe gout oa 
5 oostli. Lire 
Y schal 3yue to thee; whanne thou maist Sere. « 


§ Many Latyn 


3yue anoon. Ymagyne thou not yuel to29}o5 ban this 
the ful out ioi- 


thi freend, whanne he hath trist in thee. 2a 
‘ ynge of foolis is 
Stryue thou not ajens a man with out nO soheneioa 
‘ that is, ful oj 
cause, whanne he doith noon yuel to  sclaundre ethir 
th Ss th «8 of schenschipe, 
ee. ue thou not an vniust man, sue 31 for thei ben 
d G g glad, whanne 
thou not hise weies. For ech disseyuert 32820) 03" 
is abhomynacioun off the Lord ; and his yuclenaig 7 
: é 5 7. ‘ maken ful ow 
speking zs with simple men. Nedinesse 33 oye in worste 
. _ thingis; nethe- 
ws sent of the Lord in the hous of a’ tes in Ebrew it 
is, enhaunsing 
of foolis is 
lust men schulen be blessidt. He schal 34 s#enschipe ; 
: for thanne the 
scorne scorneris ; and he schal 3yue grace _ filthe of her foli 
° aperith more, 
to mylde men. Wise men schulen haue35as the filthe of 
. Fe > . the hyndrere 
glorie ; enhaunsing of foolis 7s schen- iariiewemd ape 
sch ipes. aperith more, 


whanne he 
stieth an hi3; 


CAP. IV. 
and oure Latyn 


Sones, here 3e the teching of the fadir||; 1 transtacioun 


° semeth corupt 
and perseiue 3e, that 3e kunne prudence. bi writer. for 


¥ schal 3yue to 30u a good 3ifte ; forsake ‘e lmesse of 
3e not my lawe. For. whi and Y was? thes wari en 


'Om.4. K mana comelyng tiliere z prem. ‘ Forsothe an. 


© Om. n. ftor 


& 30ure 1. 


IV. 424. 


was the sone of my fader, sum what ten- 
der, and the onli goten beforn my moder. 
4And he ta3te me, and seide, Take my 
woordys thin™ herte; kep thon myn 
shestis, and thou shalt line. Weld wis- 
dam, weld prudence; ne for3ete thou, ne 
bowe thou doun fro the woordis of my 
smouth. Ne leue thou it, and it shal kepe 
thee; looue it, and it shal withholde thee. 
7Begynnyng of wisdam, welde thou wis- 
dam ; and in al thi possessioun purchace® 
sprudence. Tac it, and it shal enhaunce 
thee; thou shalt be glorified of it, whan 
9thou hast clippid it. It shal 3iue to thin 
hed encrecis of gracis; and a noble crowne 
1oshal defende thee. Here thou, my sone, 
and vndertac my woordis; and be ther 
1: multeplied to thee 3eris of lif. The weie 
of wisdam I shal shewe to thee; and lede 
12 thee bi the pathys of equyte. The whiche 
whan thou shalt gon in, thi goingis shul 
not be streitid; and rennende thou shalt 
i3not han letting. Hold discipline, and ne 
i4leue thou it; kep it, for it is thi lyf. Ne 
delite thou in the pathis of vnpitous men; 
and to thee plese not the weie of euele 
ismen. Flee® fro it, and passe thou not bi 
16it; bowe doun, and forsac it. Forsothe 
they slepen not, but if thei don euele; and 
slep is not ca3t of hem, but if thei sup- 
17plaunte. Thei eten the bred of vnpi- 
tousnesse, and the win of wickidnesse? 
isdrinken. Forsothe the path of ri3twis- 
men as shynende 1i3t goth forth, and 
19 growith in to a parfit day. The weie of 
vnpitous men derk4; thei witen not wher 
20thei falle. My sone, herene my woordis ; 
21and to my spechis bowe in thin ere. Ne 
go thei awey fro thin e3en; kep thou hem 
22in the myddel of thin herte. Forsothe 
lif thei ben to the findende hem, and of 
ezalle flesh the helthe. With alle warde 
kep thou thin herte, for of it lif goth 
2iforth. Remoue from thee a shrende 
mouth; and bacbitende lippis be thei 


- Mijn thin au. 4% purchace thou c pr.m. 


k warishe 1. 
P take awey 1. 
Vv tho wordis 1. 


{ bigotun tofore 1. 
o neither a sec. m. 


Om. FHU. whemt. 


* awei, and forsake it. 


© Flee thou 4. 


' the whiche r. 
q Om. A sec. m. 
x and thei ben 1. 


PROVERBS. 7 


sone of my fadir, a tendir sone, and oon 
‘gendride bifore' my modir. And my fadirs 
tau3te me, and seide, Thin herte resseyue 
my wordis; kepe thou myn heestis, and 
thou schalt lyue. Welde thou wisdom, 5 
welde thou prudence; for3ete thon not, ne- 
thir bowe thou awey fro the wordis of my 
mouth. Forsake thou not it, and it schale 
kepe thee; loue thou it, and it schal kepe* 
thee. The bigynnyng of wisdom*, welde7 
thou wisdom; and in al thi possessioun 
gete thou prudence. Take thou it, and its 
schal enhaunse thee; thou sehalt be glori- 
fiedt of it, whanne thou hast biclippid it. 
It schal 3yue encresyngis of graces to thing 
heed; and a noble coroun schal defende 
thee. Mi sone, here thou, and take my 10 
wordis; that the 3eris of lijf be multiplied 
to thee. Y schal schewe to thee the weie1 
of wisdom; and Y schal lede thee bi the 
pathis of equyte. In to whiche! whanne 12 
thou hast entrid, thi goyngis schulen not 
be maad streit; and thon sehalt rennen, 
and schalt not haue hirtyng. Holde thou13 
teching™, and forsake it not; kepe thou 
it, for it is thi lijf. Delite thou not in the 14 
pathis of wyckid men; and the weie of 
yuele men plese not thee. Fle thou fro it, 15 
and passe thou not therbi ; bowe thou 
For thei slepen not, 16 
no but" thei han do yuele; and® sleep is 
rauyschid? fro hem, no4 but thei® han dis- 
seyued{. hei eten the breed of vnpite, 17 
and’ drinken the wyn of wickidnesse§. 
But the path of iust men goith forth asis 
li3t schynynge, and encreessith|] til to per- 
fit dai. The weie of wickid men zs derk 319 
thei witen not where thei schulen falle. 
Mi sone, herkene thou my wordis; and 20 
bowe doun thin eeris to my spechis. Go21 
not thot awei fro thyn i3en; kepe thou 
hem" in the myddil of thin herte. For 22 
tho’ ben lijf to men fyndynge thoo”, 
and* heelthe ‘of al fleischY. With al kep-23 
ing’ kepe thin herte, for lijf cometh forth 


4 


P wickenesse EG pr.m. is derk a. 
m disciplyne or feching 1. n but if 1. 
riftheir. ‘Sandthei1. ttheiz. tho cvw. 
¥Ytoech mani. #2 warde i. 


this may be 
vndurstondun 
of Dauyth, the 
fadir of Sala- 
mon ; and of 
God, cheef fa- 
dir of alle; and 
this lettre may 
vndurstond. 
un bothe of 
Salamon and 
of Crist. Lire 
here. c. 
* The bigyn- 
nyng of wis- 
dom ; that is, 
to gete wisdom. 
welde thou wise 
dom ; that is, 
at the maner 
of possessioun 
eleue thon 
stidefastly to a 
wiys techere. 
welde thou wis. 
dom ; that is, 
possessioun of 
wisdom in this 
liyf, is the bi- 
gynnyng to 
haue wisdom 
in heuenli eun- 
trey, which 
stondith in the 
cleer si3t and 
knowing ofGod. 
and in al thi 
possession ; 
that is, bifor at 
thing that may 
be getun in to 
thi possessioun. 
take thou it ; 
that is, haaste 
thou to gete it. 
In Ebreu thus, 
the bigynnyng 
of wisdom, bie 
thou wisdom ; 
that is, the bi- 
gynnyng to 
gete wisdom, is 
to bie to thee 
bi priys ether 
seruyce a 
wiys_ techere, 
which is seid 
here wisdom. 
and in al thi 
biyng, gete thou 
prudence ; that 
is, bifor alle 
thiugis that 
moun be hou3t, 
ether moun be 
had of eny man 
in eny maner. 
Lire here. c. 
+ be glorified ; 
that is, thou 
schalt be onour- 
id bifor many 
men for it. 
Lire here. c. 
T disseyned ; 
symple men. 
Lire here. cKN. 
§ of wickid- 
nesse ; that is, 


8 PROVERBS. 


osferr fro thee. Thin e3en see thei rizte 
thingis; and thin e3elidis beforgo thei thi 

26goingis. Ri3t reule the pathis to thi feet, 

2;7and alle thi weies be they stablid. Ne 
bowe thou doun to the ri3t, ne to the 
lift; turne awei thi foot fro euel. For- 
sothe the weies that ben on the ri3thalf 
the Lord knew3; shreude forsothe ben’, 
that of the lift ben. He forsothe ri3t 
shal make thi goingus; thi weies forsothe 
in pes shul be bro3t forth. 


CAP.°V. 


1 My sone, tac heed to my wisdam, and 
to my prudence bowe thou thin ere; 
2that thou kepe tho3tis, and discipline 
thi lippis withholden. Ne* wile thou not 
entende to the desceyuyng of womman ; 
3forsothe an hony comb droppende the 
lippis of a strumpet, and clerere than oile 
4the throte of hir; forsothe the laste of 
hir bitter as wormod, and the tunge of 
shir sharp as a twei bitende swerd. The 
feet of hir gon doun in to deth; and tot 
shelle the goingis of hir persen. Bi the 
path of lif thei gon not; vagaunt ben 
7 the goingus of hir, and vnserchable. Now 
thanne, my sone, here thou me, and ne 
go thou awei fro the woordis of my 
8mouth. Aferr mac fro hir thi weie, and 
ne ne3he thou to the doris ‘of hir hous. 
9 Ne 3yue thou to alienes thi wrshipe, and 
lothi 3eris to the cruel; lest perauenture 
be fulfild straungeres with thi strengthis, 
and thi trauailis ben in an" aliene hous ; 
land thou weile in’ thi laste, whan thou 
hast wastid thi flesh, and thi bodi; and 
igsey, “®Whi wariede I discipline, and to 
i3Snybbingis assentede” not myn herte; ne 
I herde the vois of men techende me, and 
14 to maistris I bowide not myn ere? Ne3h 
I was in alle euel, in the myddel of the 
ischirche, and of the synagoge. Drink 
watir of thi cisterne, and the flowingus 


tthei ben 4. § Om. 4. tin to a. 


4Om.1. > go thou 1, 


u Om. E prem. 


€ aliens ar. ¢ fleish 1. 


IV. 25-—V. 15. 


of it. Remoue thou* 
fro thee; and backbitynge lippis be fer fro 


a schrewid mouth 24 ee bi wick- 


idnesse. Lire 
here. Cc. 
and encreess- 


thee. Thin ijen se ri3tful thingis; and thin 25 its, ev.; in go- 


izeliddis go bifore thi steppis. Dresse thou 26 


pathis to thi feet*, and alle thi weies schu- 


len be stablischid. Bowe thou not to the27 


ri3tside t, nether to the leftside; turne 
awei thi foot fro yuel. For the Lordt 
knowith the weies that ben at the ri3t- 
side; but the weies ben weiward, that ben 
at the leftside. orsothe he schal make 
thi goyngis riz3tful ; and thi weies schulen 
be brou3t forth in pees. 


CAPA: 


Mi sone, perseyue thou my wisdom,1 
and bowe doun thin eere to my prudence; 
that thou kepe thi thou3tis, and thi lippis 2 
kepe teching. 3yue thou not tent to the 
falsnesse of a womman; for the lippis of3 
an hoore§ ben au hony coomb droppinge, 
and hir throte zs clerere than oile; but4 
the last thingis ben bittir as wormod, and 
hir tunge 7s scharp as a swerd kernynge 
onech side. Hir feet gon doun in to deeth; 5 
and hir steppis persen to hellis. Tho goons 
not bi the path of lijf; hir steppis ben vn- 
certeyn, and moun not be sou3t out. Now7 
therfor, my sone, here thou me, and go? 


‘not awei fro the wordis of my mouth. 


Make fer thi weie fro hir, and neize thous 
not to the doris of hirhous. 3yue thous 
not thin onour to aliens||, and thi 3eeris 


ynge forth fro 
vertu in to 
vertu, til God 
be seyen in 
Syon. tho ben 
liyf ; that is, ben 
cause of liyf of 
grace, and 
maken good 
disposicioun of 
bedi to hem 
that kepen tho. 
Lire here. c. 
* to thi feet ; 
that is, to thyn 
affecciouns, 
Lire here. cx 


Na. 

+ Bowe thou 
not ta the rizt 
side, etc. ; that 
is, be thou not 
drawun fra the 
weye of ri3tful- 
nesse [ri3twis- 
nesse k} bi 
prosperites, 
nether for faire 
XK) biheestis, 
nether be thou 
brokun bi ad- 
nersites, nether 
ma.aasis. Lire 
here. CK. 

} For the Lord, 
etc. al this ti] 
to the ende of 
the chapitre, is 
not of the text, 
for it is not in 
Ebren. Lire 
here. C 

§ af an hoore ; 
summe Ebreys, 
as Rabi Sala- 
mon, expownen 
this of idolatrie, 
signefied bi an 
hoore. Lire 
here. c. 

lj that is, to 
ribandis and 
enemyes of 
Goddis lawe. x. 


to the cruel; lest perauenture straungeris 10 q withouten 


be fillid with thi strengthis, and lest thi 


trauels be in an alien® hous; and thoun 


biweile{] in the laste daies, whanne thou 
hast wastid thi fleschis4, and thi bodi; and 


thou® seie, Whif wlatide Y teching, and 12 


myn herte assentide not to blamyngis; 


nether Y herde the voys of men techinge 13 


me, and Y bowide not doun myn eere to 


fruy3t, as 
dampned men 
doon aftir, 
deeth, Sap. vto, 
K 


water ; that is, 
if thou maist 
not, ether nylt 
lyue chast, vse 
thi wiyf. Live 
here. C. 

vse thou with 
drede thin 
owne wijf, 


maistris ? Almest Y was in al yuel, in the 14 kepe hire fro 


myddis of the chirche, and of the syna- 


goge. Drinke thou watir** of thi cisterneff, 15 


and the floodis of thi pit. 


vOm.c. W assente c. 


€Om.1. f Thanne whi 1. 


othere, bring- 
inge forth chil- 
dren in ver- 
tuous loue. K. 


Thi wellis be 16 t+ bi water of 


** Drynke thou 


V. 16—VI. 10. 


of thi pyt. Ben lad out thi wellis with- 
oute forth; and in stretis thi watir de- 
izuyde thou. Haue thou hem alone; and 
18be not alienes thi parceneres. Be thi 
veyne blissid; and glade thou with the 
19womman of thi ful waxende 3outhe. A 
most cheere* hynde; and a most kindeli 
hert calf. The tetis of hir inwardli make 
thee drunke alle time; and in the looue 
20 of hire delite thou bisili. Whi art thou 
bro3t down, sone myn, of an alien wom- 
man; and art fed in the bosum of an 
21 0there? The Lord loketh the weie of a 
man; and alle the goingis of hym be- 
eeholdithY. His wickenesses? taken the vn- 
pitouse; and with the cordis of his synnes 
ashe is togidere streyned. He shal dien, 
for he hadde not discipline; and in the 
multitude of his folie he shal ben be- 
gylyd. 
CA Paey I. 
1 My sone, if thou become bor3 for thi 
frend; thou hast pij3t doun anent a straun- 
2 ger thin hond. Thou art gnarid with the 
woordis of thi mouth; and taken with thi 
3proper woordis. Do thanne, my sone, that 
Tseie, and deliuere thi self; for thou hast 
fallen in to the hond of thi ne3hebore. 
Ren hider and thider, hee3e, rere vp thi 
4frend; ne 3iue thou slep to thin e3en, 
sand nappe not thin ejelidis: Be thou 
pullid out as a* foun fro the hond; and as 
6a brid fro the spies of the ‘foulere. Go 
to the anpte, O! thou slowe; and behold 
7the weies of it, and lerne wisdam. The 
whieche, whan it hath no ledere, ne co- 
smaundere, ne prince; it greitheth in the 
somer mete to hymself>, and gedereth 
9togidere in time of rip, that it ete. Hou 
longe, thou slowe, shalt thou slepe? 
10whanne shalt thou rise fro thi slep? A 
litil while thou shalt slepe, a litil while 
thou shalt nappe; a litil while thou shalt 
leyn togidere thin hondis, that thou slepe. 


x cleere 4. Y he beholdith acu. 
Shemy. bOm.1. iand her. 
lising 1. \spechis1. ™feld cunuy. % for R. 


mire NQUW. amte H. amte, ether the spissemire s. pismire, cther ampte Y. 


w haue 1. 
VOL. ITI. 


vnel. 


2 wickidnessis 4Gu. 


PROVERBS. 9 


stremed forth*; and departe thi watris in 
stretis. Haue thou aloone ‘tho watris$;17 
and aliens be not thi parcenerist. Thi!8 
veynet be blessid; and be thou glad with 
the womman of thi 3ong" wexynge age. 
An hynde moost dereworthe|]; and an hert 19 
calf moost acceptable. Hir teetis fille thee 
in al tyme; and delite thou contynueli in 
the loue of hir**. Mi sone, whi art thoue2o 
disseyued of an alien womman; and art 
fostrid in the bosum of an othere? The21 
Lord seeth the weie of a man; andi bi- 
holdith alle hise steppis. The wickid-22 
nessis of a wyckid man taken hym; and 
he is boundun with the roopis of hise 
synnes. He schal die, for he hadde not23 
lernyng*; and he schal be disseyued in 
the mychilnesse of his fooli. 


CAP. VI. 

Mi sone, if thou hast bihiz3t for thil 
freend ; thou hast fastned thin hoond at a 
straunger. Thou art boundun bi the wordis 2 
of thi mouth; and thou art takun with 
thin owne wordis!. Therfor, my sone, do3 
thou that that Y seie, and delyuere thi 
silf; for thou hast fallun™ in to the hond 
of thi neizjbore. Renne thou aboute, haste 
thou, reise thi freend ; 3yue thou not sleep 4 
to thin izen, nether thin i3eliddis nappe. 
Be thou rauyschidt+ as a doo fro thes 
hond; and as a bridde fro" aspiyngis? of 
the foulere. O4! thou slowe man, go to thes 
‘amte, ether pissemyre®; and biholde thou 
hise weies, and lerne thou wisdom. Which*7 
whanne’ he hath® no duyk, nethir co- 
maundour, nether’ prince; makith redis 
in somer mete to hym silf, and gaderith 
togidere in heruest that, that he schal 
ete. Hou long schalt thou, slow man,9 
slepe? whanne schalt thou rise fro thi 
sleep? <A litil thou schalt slepe, a litilio 
thou schalt nappe; a litil thou schalt ioyne 


8 Om. 4. ? it silf az. 


k lernyng ether chastising CEFe@KMNPQRSUVYaG. discipline or chas- 


r amte, ethir spisse- 


q A plures. 
t thong 1. 


P spiyngis mg. 
s The which emte 1. 


Cc 


cisterne; is s'g- 
nefied the watir 
of helthe and 

of wisdom, that 
cometh forth of 


hooly seripture. 


man owith 
to departe this 
wisdom in 
stretis, that is 
comyn places ; 
also he alone 
owith to hane 
this watir of 
wisdom, not 
excludinge 
othere feithful 
men and good 
dissiplis, but 
scorneris and 
vnfeith ful men. 
c. 
* thi wellis be 
stremed forth ; 
that is, children 
be gendrid of 
thee in matry- 
monye. Lire 
here. c. 
and departe 
thi watris, ete. ; 
that is, 3yue 
thou to mari 
thi children 
comun to age. 
Lire here. c. 
+ aliens be not 
thi parceneris ; 
that is, kepe so 
thi wiyf, that 
children borun 
of hir be thyne, 
and that aliens 
be not parce- 
neris in thi 
wiyf, nether in 
children. Lire 

ere. C. 

t thi veyne; 
that is, the 
children borun 
of veri matry- 
monye. c. 
§ with a wom- 
man of thi 30ng 
wexinge age ; 
that is, with 
Goddis lawe 
3ouun to the 
puple of Israel 
in the 3onthe 
therof. c. 
l| an hynde 
most dere- 
worthe : is 
Goddis lawe. 
an hert calf 
most accepta- 
ble ; is a studi- 
ous dissiple in 
Goddis lawe;  , 
ether bi an 
hynde is vndur- 
stonde a feith- 
ful spousesse. 
an hert calf ; 
that is, a feith- 


10 PROVERBS. 


11 And ther shal come to thee as a weie 
goere, nede; and porenesse, as a man 
armed. If forsothe vnslo3 thou shul be, 
shal come as a welle thi rip; and nede 

izferr shal flee fro thee. A man apostata, 
a mau ful of strengthe vnprofitable, goth 

iswith peruertid mouth; he twincleth with 
the ejen°, he tramplith with the foot, 

14 with the fingir he speketh, with shreude 
herte he castith euel; and alle times 

isstriues he sowith. To this anoon shal 
come his perdicioun, and sodeynli he shall 
be to-treden; and he shal han no mor 

igmedecyn. Sixe thingis ben, that the 
Lord hateth; and the seuenthe the lif of 
i7hym warieth. Hee e3en, a tunge liere, 
hondis shedende out the innocent blod, 
isthe herte castende most euel tho3tis, the 
i9swifte feet to rennen in to euel, the 
bringende forth lesingis, the desceynable 
witnesse; and hym that sowith among 
20brether discordis. Withhold, my sone, 
the hestis of thi fader; and ne leue thou 

21 the lawe of thi moder. Bind hem bisili 
in thin herte; and enuyroune to thi throte. 

22 Whan thou shalt go, go thei with thee ; 
whan thou shalt slepe, kepe thei thee; 

23and wakende speke thou with hem. For 
the maundement is a lanterne, and the 
lawe li3t*, and the weie of lif the snyb- 

2ibing of discipline; that thei kepe thee 
fro an evel womman, and fro the flater- 
ende tunge of the straunge womman. 
25Coueite not thin herte the fairnesse of 
hir; ne be thou take® with the beckis of 
2shir. The price forsothe of the strumpet 
vnethe is of o lof; the womman forsothe 

27 taketh the precious lif of a man. Whether 
mai a man hide fir in his bosum, that his 

28clothis brenne not; or gon vpon colis‘, 

29and his solis ben not brent? So he that 
goth in to the womman of his ne3hebore ; 
shal not ben clene, whan he touchith hir. 

30 Not gret is the blame, whan a man stelith; 


Ceye 4. 4 of list & pr.m. 


y And thannet. YY tsad. 
¢thei1. f their. ghemt. 


here. N sec.m. * beckis 1. 
°Ri3t sor Pp And ita. 


2 with 1. 


1 the value of 1. 
Gno Fs pr. m. 


€ not take 4E pr. m. H. 


a ther ben 1. 
h disciplyne 1. 
m forsothe 1. 


VI. 11—309. 


togidere thin hondis, that thou slepe. And¥1) ny spouse, ether 


osebonde. 


nedynesse, as a weigoere*, schal come to Lire here. c. 
** in the loue o 
thee; and pouert, as an armed man. For- hig tha of 
1 IT ir felouschi 
sothe if thou art not slow, thi ripe corn ;* pens 
schal come as a welle ; and nedynesse schal  eelde. Lire 


here. c. 
fle fer fro thee. A man apostatat, aYY man 12 ++ Be thou ra- 

* * ° uyschid ; that 
vnprofitable, he goith with a weiward jg, switlis fro 
mouth; he bekeneth with izent, he tramp- 13 hin ae 
ith with the foot, he spekith with the ee _ 
fyngur§, bi? schrewid herte he ymagyneth 14 Lire here. c. 

° ° a = 

yuel, and in al tyme he sowith dissen- Pies is, 
ciouns. His perdicioun schal come to hym 15 Goyal eed i 


*. 80 that thou 
anoon, and he schal be brokun sodeynli; Mis tron 
and he sehal no more haue medecyn|].  fende thee 


Sixe thingis ben’, whyche the Lord hatiths Where. “~ 
and hise soule cursith the seuenthe thing. une i alle 


Hige izen{], a tunge liere**, hondis sched- 17% 7e'sieun, is 
inge out innocent blood, an herte ymagyn- RE 
ynge worste® thou3tis, feet swifte to renne . bekeneth with 
in to yuel, a man bringynge forth lesingis, 19 inge to wym- 
a fals witnesse ; and him that sowith dis- ovnese® 
cordis® among britheren. Mi sone, kepe 208 the fyn- 
the comaundementis of thi fadir{{; and for- 
sake not the lawe of thi modir. 
thou tho continueli in thin herte; and cum-  aftir deth is no 


passe ‘to thi throte?. Whanne thou goist, 22 ficou 


go tho® with thee; whanne thou slepist, ahs c. 
izen ; 
kepe thof thee; and thou wakynge speke that is, coe 


: i signes of pride. 
with tho’. For the comaundement of God 23 Lire here cxy, 


. . . He 
is a lanterne, and the lawe 7s 1i3t, and the itt; nee is 
hz . ++. customable to 
Blanes of techyng” zs the weie of lijf; dedly leesing. 
that the comaundementis' kepe thee fro 24 Lire here. c. 
tt of thi fadir; 
an yuel womman, and fro a flaterynge that is God. 

2 dir ; 
tunge of a straunge womman. Thin herte 2s is, bodies 
coueite not the fairnesse of hir; nether be  (}i©:$thiz hooli 
thou takun bi the signes* of hir. For the 26% *i throte ; 

a 4 1 that is,in hold- 
prijs of an hoore is vnnethe of! 0 loof{{ 3; __ inge thoin 
. . mynde stide- 
but™ a womman takith" the preciouse fastl, and fa 
nn + 4 Spekinge of tho. 
soule of a man. Whether"® a man mai27 poe nn 
hide fier in his bosum, that hise clothis  “¢Pist, etc. ; for 
q 2 5 in slepinge in 
brenne not; ethir go on colis, and hise 2s the mynde of 
. tho. 
feet be not brent? So° he that entrith t029 slepist a the 
the wijf of his nei3bore; schal not be cleene, trond, ena 


his proteccioun, 


whanne he hath touchid hir. ItP is not930 “2 oftivfs 
that is, to hem 


f the colis 4eGuH. 
» ful wickid 1. ¢ discord 1. 4 with hem 1. 


ithat thei 1. that, ‘hai is, the comaundmentts. Lire 
® takith awey 1. ™8 Wher cefert passim. 


VI. 31-——VII. 14. 


forsothe he steleth, that he fulfille the hun- 
sigrende soule. Ca3t therewith forsothe 
he shal 3elde the® seuene fold; and al the 
substaunce of his hous he shal take, and 
32 deliueren hymself. Who" forsothe is auou- 
trer; for miseise of herte he shal lesen 
33 his soule. Filthe and shenshepe he geder- 
eth to hymself; and the repref of hym 
34shal not ben don awei. For the ielous- 
nesse and the wodnesse of the man shal 
35not sparen in the dai of veniaunce, ne 
assente to the pre3eeris of any man; and 
he: shal not take for the a3een bizing 
manye 3iftis. 


er ba ANB 


1 My sone, kep thou my woordis; and 
myne hestis ley vp to thee. Sone, ho- 
noure thou the Lord, and thou shalt fare 
wel; biside hym forsothe thou shalt not 

2dreden' an other. Kep my maundemens, 
and thou shalt liue; and my lawe as the 

3appil of thin e3e. Bind it in thi fingris; 
4wryt it in the tablis of thin herte. Sey 
to wisdam, My sister thou art; and pru- 

5 dence clep thou thi lemman. That it kepe 
thee fro'a straunge womman; and fro an 
alien, that hir woordis maketh sweete. 

¢Fro the windowe forsothe of myn hous 
bi the latys I beheeld the 3unge man; 

zand I see litle childer. I beholde the sori 
shertid 3unge man, that passeth thur3 the 
stretis, biside the corner; and ne3 the weie 
yof that hous goth in derc, the dai wax- 
ende to euen, in the ny3tis dercnessis and 
lomystynesse. And lo! a womman a3en 
cam to hym, with strumpet aray befor 
maad redi to the soulis to be desceyued, 
lla chaterere, and vagaunt of reste, vnpa- 
cient, ne mowende in the hous abide stille 
i2zwith hir feet; now withouteforth, now 
in the stretys, now beside the corneres* 
izaspiende. And the ca3te 3unge man she 
kisseth ; and with wowende chere she 
14 flatereth, seiende, Sacrifises! of victorie™ 


PROVERBS. ll 


greet synne*, whanne a man stelith; for — thatsynnen bi 
* e ignora' 
he stelith to fille an hungri soule. And he3i ether frecle. 
takun schal 3elde the seuenthe fold; and (7aunde 
he schal 3yue al the catel of his hous, and _ is; 2 noutresse, 
2 at manith bir 
schal delyuere hym silf. But he that isse eeeanig 
‘ ir hosebonde. 
avouter; schal leese his soule, for the’ po- Lire here. c. 
. tt o loof; i 
uert of hertet. He gaderith filthe, and 33 fibre, 3 y is, is 
“ag t "Lr, : vanethe a gobet 
sclaundrith to! hym silf; and his schen- (7jf0°9 
schip schal not be don aweit{. For thes mien Hive: 
3 e SOLE 6} 
feruent lone and strong veniaunce of the man is seid 
. ‘ preciouse, f¢ 
man schal not spare in the dai of ven- itis maad to 
° wee the ymage of 
iaunce, nether schal assente to the preieris 35 G54’ ant is or- 
of ony; nether schal’ take ful” many 3iftis  deyned to blis 


aboue kynde; 
for raunsum. but a womman 


as a sustir of 
the deuel tak- 
ith it to anon- 


CAP. VII. é 
trie and damp- 


Mi sone, kepe thon my wordis||; andi 73cion Lire 
kepe* myn heestis to thee. Sone, onoure{ * 
thou the Lord, and thou schalt be ‘my3ti; 
but outakun hym drede thou not an alien’. of anoutrie. 
Kepe thou myn heestis, and thou schalt2 ong oN 
lyue ; and? my lawe as the appil of thin eae is, 
ijen*. Bynde thou it in thi fyngris** ;3 vanting K) 

= oe . i resoun. CK. 
write thou it in the tablis of thin herte. schat not be 

: sas doon awey ; for 
Seie thou to wisdom, Thou art my sistir 54 the peyne of 
and clepe thou prudence thi frendesse”. pees 
That it kepe thee fro a straunge wom-5 [ire here. c. 

; § the man 3 

manff; and fro an alien womman, that be | i cd, 

. ° ° . Ce % 
makith hir wordis swete. For whi fro that is, Crist. 1 
the wyndow{t of myn hous bi the latijs Lge chs 
Y bihelde; and Y se litle children§§. I bi-7 bi werk and 


. z kepinge asa 
holde a 3ong man coward, that passith bis reggie tre: 
. e eye sour. are 
the stretis, bisidis® the’ corner; and he tere. c. 
A 7 : . . {| Sone, onoure, 
goith ni3 the weie of hir hous in derk9 ¢., this vers 
: G ‘ s is not in Ebreu. 
tyme, whanne the dai drawith to ni3t, in Pare: 
the derknessis¢ and myst off the ny3t. a Ce 
" ? gris ; that is, 
And lo! a womman, maad redi with our- 10 fille it in werk. 
5 ‘ Lire here. cxn. 
nement of an hoore to disseyue soulis, ++ @ streunge 
meetith hym, and sche is a ianglere, and 


that is, thefte 
in comparisoun 


womman ; that 
is, auoutresse. 

i Lire here. c. 
goyngeS about, and vnpacient of reste, ie ie oes 
and mai not stonde in the hous with hir  , et.; the 

° ‘< is prinyte o! 
feet; and now without forth, now in 12 consience. Lire 
: stage . tne taehh Here. ©. 
stretis, now bisidis corneris sche ‘aspieth”. Eile chi ei 

] iss] » py that is, fooli: 

And sche takith, and kissith the 3ong man ; 13 that peice 
and flaterith with wowynge cheer||||, and wi. Lire here. 
|| with wowing 


8 Om. 4. 8 Whoso 4. ‘holden e prim. ‘corner au. | Sacrifise 4. ™ victories c pr.m. 
rOm.1. *sclaundre we. *Om.c. Yheschalr. wOm.1. ~* gadre in tresour I. : myche worth, 
and drede thou noon oother but him. Zand keper. izer. Dleef1. Cbisider, Car © derk- 


nessec. finc. 8a goer1. >} spieth c. 


c QZ 


12 


for helthe I haue gretli vonwid ; to dai 
1s | haue jolde my youwis. Therfore I wente 
ont in to thin a3en comyng, desirende 
isthee to seen; and I haue founde. I haue 
ara3id with cordis my litil bed, and spred 
i7with peintid tapitis of Egipt; I ha" 
sprengd my ligging place with myrre, 
isand aloes, and canell. Cum, and be wee 
inwardli drunke with tetes, and vse wee 
the coueitid clippingis; to the time that 
i9 the dai waxe li3t.. There is not a man in 
hir hous; he 3ide awei the most ferr 
soweie. The bagge of his monee he toc 
with hym; in the dai of the® fulle moone 
athe is to turne a3een in to his hous. She 
grenede hym with manye woordis; and 
with flatering of lippis she fordro3 hym. 
22 Anoon he folewith hir, as an oxe lad to 
the sacrifise of victorie; and as a lomb 
pleiende and ynknowende, that to bondis 
23the fool is drawe, to the time that the 
arwe thirle thur3 his mawe. As if a brid 
heeje to the grene; and wot not, that of 
24theP perile of his lif me purposeth. Now 
thaime, sone myn4, here thou me; and tae 
25tente to the woordis of my mouth. Ne 
be drawen awei in the weies of hir thi 
mynde; ne be thou bigilid in the sties of 
2shir. Manye forsothe woundid she threw 
doun; and alle the strongeste™ ben slain 
270f hir. The weies of helle the housis of 
hir; persende in to the innermor thingus 
of deth. 
CAP. VIII. 
1 Whether not wisdam ofte crieth; and 
2 prudence 3iueth his vois? In the he3est 
and he3e frountis, aboue the weie, in the 
amyddel pathis, stondende biside the jate 
of the cite; in tho 3ate doris it speketh, 
aseiende, O! men, to 30u I ofte crie; and 
5my vois to the sones of men. Vnder- 
stondeth, 3ee litle childer, witnesse ; and, 
63ee vnwise men, taketh heed. Hereth, 
for of grete thingis I am to speke; and 
my lippis shul ben opened, that euene 


Dhan acu. haue ze. © this 4. 


i sacrifice a. k wente 1. 
4 to the 1. thir. 
wisdam. Lire here. x text. 


laraied if x, 
8 souereyne A see, m. 


PROVERBS. 


P Om. c. 


m Om. eeleri. 
moost souereyne 1. 


VII, 15-——VIII. 6. 


seith, Y ou3te sacrifices'* for heelthe ; 


dai Y haue 30lde my vowis. Therfor Y 15 


3ede* out in to thi meetyng, and Y desiride 


to se thee; and Y haue founde thee. Y 16 


haue maad my bed with coordis, Y haue 
arayed! with tapetis peyntid of Egipt ; 
haue bispreynt my bed with myrre, and 


tol4 cheer ; that 


is, vnresteful, 
and with out 
schame. Lire 
here. Cc. 

* Y ou3te sa- 
crifice ; thus it 
is in bokis 
amendid, but 


Y 17 summe bokis 


han, ¥ auow- 
ide. Lire here. 


aloes, and canel. Come thou, be we fillid 18 ¥ wisn tetis« 


with tetist, and vse we collyngis that 
ben™ coueitid; til the dai bigynne to be 
cleer. 
hows; he is goon a ful long weie. 
took with hym a bagge of money; he 
schal turne a3en in to his hous in the dai 
of ful moone. 
many wordis; and sche drow forth hym 
with flateryngis of lippis. 
an oxe led to slayn sacrifice sueth hir, 
and as a ioli lomb and vnkunnynge"; and 
the foo! woot not, that he is drawun to 


Anoon he as 22 


that is, with 
toching of 
tetis. Lire 
here. C 


For myn hosebonde is not in his 19+ Scke doond 
He 20 


him ; that is, 
withhelde and 
wlappide him 
in coueytise of 
fleisch, as in a 
net. Lire 


Sche boonde hym{ with 21 here. c. 


§ to boondis ; 
of synne and 
of peyne. Lire 
here. C. 

\l 2 brid hast. 
ith ; asa brid 
is takun ina 
snare, for the 
coueytise of a 
litil meete, so 


hondys§, til an arowe perse® his mawe. 23 he that is vn- 


As if a brid hastith|| to the snare; and 
woot not, that it is don of the perel of his 


contynent,ether 
a lecchour, ren- 
neth in to the 

snare of synne, 


lijf. Now therfor, my sone, here thou me; 24 and in to the 


and perseyue the wordis of my mouth. 


Lest thi soule be drawun awei in the weies 25 


of hir; nether be thou disseyued in the 
pathis of hir. 
many woundid men; and alle strongeste 


men weren slayn of hirt*, The weies of 27 


helle 7s hir hous; and persen in to ynuere 
thingis of deeth. 


CAP. VIII. 

Whether wisdom crieth not ofte; and! 
prudence 3yueth his" vois? In souereyn-2 
esteS{+ and hi3 coppis, aboue the weie, in the 
myddis of pathis, and it stondith bisidis3 
the 3ate of the citee, in thilke closyngis, 
and spekith, and seith, A! 3e men, Y crie4 
ofte to 3ou; and my vois 7s to the sones of 
men. Litle children{{, vndirstonde 3e wis-s 
dom; and 3e vnwise men, ‘perseyue wis- 
dom‘. Here 3e, for Y schal speke of grete 6 
thingis ; and my lippis schulen be openyd, 


qOm. 4cH. ' strengthid a. 


o ynknowynge 1. © perishe 1. P hath cast 1. 


t perseyueth in herte 1. perseyue 


deth of helle, 
for couetise of 
desiring of a 
woman. Lire 
here. c. 

sche castide 


For sche castide? doun{ 26 4 ; fro the 


staat of grace; 
many woundid 
men, bi the 
wounde of 
fleischli couey- 
tise. Lire 

here. c. 

** strongeste 
men weren 
slayen of hir ; 
as it is opyn of 
Adam, the 
moste man, for 
he was in the 
staat of inno- 
cence, and was 
ful of knonyng 
and vertu, and 
of Sampson, the 
strongeste mail, 
and of Dauyth, 
the holieste 
man, and of 
Salamon, the 
wiseste man, 
and of many 
mo in the Elde 
and Newe Tes- 
tament. c. 

TT in souereyn- 
este ; that is, 


VIII, 7—28. 


7thingus thei preche. Treuthe my fhrote 
shal sweteli bethenke; and my lippis shul 
gwlate the vnpitouse. Ri3twise ben alle 
my sermownes ; ther is not in hem any 
9thing shreude, ne peruertid. Rite thei 
ben to vnderstondende men; and euene to 
1omen findende kunnyng. Taketh my dis- 
cypline, and not money; doctrine mor 
11than tresor cheseth. Betere is wisdam 
than alle the most precious richessis ; and 
al desirable thing to it mai not be com- 


PROVERBS, U8: 


to preche ri3tful thingis. 
bithenke treuthe; and my lippis schulen 
curse a wickid man. My wordis ben iust ;8 
no schrewid thing, nether weiward is" in 
tho’. ‘JLy wordis” ben ri3tful to hem that 
vndurstonden; and ben* enene to hem that 
fynden kunnyng. Take 3e my chastisyng, 10 
and not money; chese 3e teching more 
than tresour. For wisdom is betere than ul 
alle richessis moost preciouse ; and al de- 
sirable thing mai not be comparisound 


My throte sehal7 in profetis and 


dren ; that is, 


therto. Y, wisdom, dwelle in counsel*;12* wisdom dwele 

in councel ; for 

and Yam among lernyd thou3tis. The 13 hoolsum coun- 
: Li bi 

drede of the Lord hatith yuel; Y curse Visdom, and 
. : : wise thoustis 

boost, and pride, and a schrewid weie, and fee ere 
a double puneie mouth. Counseil is myn, 14 Wisdom and 
encreessen it. 
and equyte ‘zs mynY; prudence is myn, Lire here. c. 

and strengthe ‘zs myn. Kyngis regnen bis 

me; and the* makeris of lawis demen iust 

thingis bz me. Prineis comaunden bi me; 16 
and my3ti men demen ri3tfulnesse bz me. 

I loue hem that Jouen ine; and thei that17 

waken eerli to me, schulen fynde me. With 18 
me ben rychessis, and glorie; souereyn 

richessis, and ri3tfulnesse. My fruyt isi9 
betere than gold, and precyouse stoon ; 
and my seedis ben betere than chosun 


1gparisound. I, wisdam, dwelle in coun- 
13seil; and am among to lerned tho3tis. The 
drede of the Lord hateth euel ; enhaunc- 
ing, and pride, and the shreude weie, 
and the mouth of the twisil tunge I wlate. 
14 Myn is counseil, and equite ; myn is pru- 
1sdence, myn is and strengthe. By me 
kingus regnen ; and makeris of lawis ri3te 
16thingus demen. Bi me princis comaund- 
17en; and my3ti men deme ri3twisnesse. I 
men Joouende me looue; and that erli 
iswaken at me,.shul finde me. With’ me 
ben richessis, and glorie; and proud plen- 
19 teuousnessis, and ri3twisnesse. Betere is 
ny frut than gold, and than precious 

| , ston; and my buriounyngis than chosen 


+ the Lord 
weldide, ete. ; 
here Salamon 


2osiluer. In the weies of rijtwisnesse I go, siluer. Y go in the weies of ri3tfulnesse, 20 epee at oe 
21int the myddel of pathis of dom; that I in the myddis of pathis® of doom; that 21 that is, of the 

make riche men loouende me, and fulfille © Y make riche hem that louen me, and Se 
gathe tresores of hem. The Lord weldide that Y fille her tresonris. The Lord weld-22 Rae a 


i i I i jes« Sone of God, 
ideT me in the bigynnyng of hise weies; Sone of Gad, 


me in the begynnyng of his weies; er any 
thing shulde be maad, of the firste cause. 
23 Of the euere lastende I am ordeyned; and 
of the olde, er the erthe shulde be maad. 
24 Not 3it weren the depthis of watir; and I 
now was conceyued. And not 3it the wellis 
2sof watris hadden broken out, ne 3it the 
mounteynes" in heuy mykilnesse hadden 
26ben maad; er the hillis I was born. 3it 
the erthe he hadde not maad; and flodis, 
and the utmost’ poyntys of the round- 
27nesse of the erthe. Whan he greithede 
heuenes, I was thereat; whan in certein 
lawe and cumpas he closide the depnesse 
28 of watris. Whan the eir he fastnede aboue; 


bifore that he made ony thing, at the ee a 
bigynnyng. Fro with out bigynnyng Y 23 of hive weyes ; 
was ordeined; and fro elde tymes, bifor ‘is % his 
a 3 y 9 werkis. 
that the erthe was maad. Depthis of wa- 2s (7se/wed: for 
. . 2, 
tris weren not 3it; and Y was conseyued a pele 
oT soule, SO alice 
thanne. The wellis of watris hadden not in dyuyn : 
. “171° thingis the 
brokun out 3it, and hillis stoden not to-25 word is the 
. . ° . eye her 
gidere 3it bi sad heuynesse; bifor litil Pima cee 
hillis Y was born. 3it he hadde not maad 2g 4rd of the 
erthe; and floodis, and the® herris’ of the eta that 
e princy- 
world. Whanne he made redi heuenes, 27 pai partis of the 
P 
- h 1 id world, that ben 
Y was present; whanne he cumpasside the cest and 
: . west, south and 
the depthis of watris bi certeyn lawe and oN S0r 
cumpas. Whanne he made stidfast the eir 23%". 


8Torx. tandinacu. “hillis ez pr.m. Y vttermoost 46H. 


vhemi. WTheit. * thei bent. yYOm.1. 2Om.1. 2 Om.1, — § the pathis 1. 


4 erthis a. 


U ther is 1. 
¢ Om. ct. 


14 


agand wejede the wellis of watris. Whan 
he cumpaside to the se his terme; and 
lawe putte to watris, that thei passe not 
there coostis. Whan he heeng’ vp the 
30 foundemens of the erthe; with hym I was, 
alle thingis puttende togidere. And I de- 
litede bi alle da3es, beforn hym alle time, 
31 pleiende in to the roundnesse of erthis; 
and my delicis to be with the sones of 
semen. Now thanne, sones, hereth me ; 
33blisful that kepen my weies. Hereth 
discipline, and beth wise men ; and wileth 
34not casten it awei. Blisful the man that 
hereth me, and that waketh at my 3ate 
dores al dai; and that waitith at the 
35 postis of my dore*. Who me shal finde, 
shal finde lif; and drawen helthe of the 
36 Lord. Who forsothe in me shal synnen, 
shal hurten his soule ; alle that hatedenY 
ine, loouen deth. Se 


CAP. IX. 


1 Wisdam bilde out to hym an hous; 
2heew? out seuen pileris, offride his sacri- 
fises of victorie, mengde win, and sette 
3forth his bord. He sente his hand wym- 
men, that thei shulde clepe to the hei3te ; 
4and to the wallis of the cite. If any is a 
litil child; come he to me. And to vnwise 
5men he® spac, Cometh, etith my bred ; 
and drinketh win, that I mengde to 3ou. 
6 Forsaketh childhed, and liueth®; and goth 
7bi the weies of prudence. Who lerneth 
a scornere, doth wrong he to hymself ; 
and who vndernemeth the vnpitouse, to 
shymself a wem gendrith. Wile thou not 
vndernyme the scornere; lest he shul hate 
thee. Vndirnym the wise man; and he 
9 shal looue thee. 3if to the wise man oca- 
sioun; and ther shal ben addid to hym 
wisdam. Tech the rij3twis man; and he 
10shall hee3e to take. The begynnyng of 
wisdam the drede of the Lord; and the 
11kunnyng of halewis prudence. Forsothe 
bi me shul be multiplied thie dazes; and 


w hangide argu. 
¢ her 4. 


xdores 4GH. Y haten an. 


4 thei 1. 
K wey 1, 


€ he schal 1. 
I take it 1. 


f handmaidens 1. 
mQOm.1. ® Forsothe 1. 


PROVERBS. 


% hewide 4EGH. 


€ litil, that is, meek. Lire here. Kwa. 


VIII, 29-—IX. 11. 


aboue; and weiede the wellis of watris. 


i, Wisdom, ete. ; 
that is, Goddis 


Whanne he cumpasside to the see his 29 sone, vnmaad, 


marke; and settide lawe to watris, that 
tho’ schulden not passe her coostis. 
Whanne he peiside the foundementis of 


with out bigyn- 
nyng and eade. 
an hous ; that 
is, holy chirche, ~ 
which he bild- 
ide bi word 


erthe; Y was making alle thingis with 30 aad ensaumple 


him. And Y delitide bi alle daies, and 
pleiede bifore hym in al tyme, 
pleiede in the world; and my delices ben 
to be with the sones of men. 


in maphed . 
takun. 


and Y3!° vit. pileris; that 


is, vii. 3iftis of 
the Hooly 
Goost, ether 


Now ther- 32 ordeynede 


vii.sacramentis, 


for, sones, here 3e me; blessid ben thet bi whicheal 
S . the chirch 

that kepen my weies. Here 3e teching, 33 porn > i 
slayn sacri- 


and be 3e wise men; and nile 3e caste it 
awei. 
and that wakith at my 3atis al dai; and 
kepith at the postis of my dore. 
fyndith me, schal fynde lijf; and schal* 


He that 35 


Jices ; that is, 
Blessid zs the man that herith me, 34 bimsilf in the 


cros, which is 
seid sacrifices, 
for it conteyn- 
eth the vertu 
of ech other 
sacrifice ; and 


drawe helthe of the Lord. But he that 36 the memorial 


synneth a3ens me, schal hurte his soule; 
alle that haten me, louen deeth. 


CAP. IX. 


Wisdom* bildide an hous to him silf3! 
he hewide out seuene pileris, he offride2 
his slayn sacrifices, he medlide wijn, and 
settide forth his table. He sente hise hand-3 
maides‘, that thei schulden clepe to the 
tour; and to the wallis of the citee. If ony 4 
man is litilé; come he tome. And wisdom 
spak to vnwise men, Come 3e, ete 3e my5 
breed ; and drynke 3e4 the wiyn, whichi 
Y haue medlid to 30u. Forsake 3e 3ong6 
childhed, and lyue 3e; and go 3e bi the 
weyes* of prudence. He that techith a7 
scorneret, doith wrong to him silf; and 
he that vndirnymmeth a wickid man, gen- 
drith a wem to him silf. Nile thou vndir-8 
nyme a scornere; lest he hate thee. Vndir- 
nyme thou a wise man; and he schal loue 
thee. 3yue thou occasioun to a wise man;9 
and wisdom schal be encreessid to hym. 
Teche thou a iust man ; and he schal haste 
to takel, 
the™ dreed of the Lord; and prudence is 
the kunnyng of seyntis. 


asche c sec.m. » cometh E pr.m. 


hOm.1. ! that 1. 


The bigynnyng of wisdom ¢s10 


Ss Sacrifice, — 

is the sacra- 
meat of the 
auter. 
medlid wyn 3 
that is, 3af to 
vs bis blood 
which i is secrid 
in wyn med- 
dlid with water. 
handmaydis ; ; 
that is, apostlis 
and othere 
meke dissiplis 
to the wallis, |_ 
etc. ; that is, 
to the feith of 
Crist, and to 
tho thingis that 
ben annexid 
to the articlis 
of the feith. 
“itil ; that is, 

meke. 
my breed ; that 
is, my bodi 
3ouun vndur 
the licnesse of 
breed. 
and wyn ; that 
is, my blood 
vndur the spige 
of wyn, wher- 
ynne water is 
mediid ; bi eld 
tyme cristen ¥ 
men comyn- 
eden in euer 7 
either spice, but 
it is ordeyned 
for perel of 
schediag out 
of the blood, 
that it is 30uun 
to Jewid men 
vndur the spice 
of breed onely. 


For" thi dates 1! pe childhed ; 


that is, vnpro- 


IX. 12——X. 9. 


12 ben added to thee the 3erys of lif. If a 
wis man thou shul be; to thiself thou 
shalt be, and to thi nejheboris. If for- 
sothe a gilere; alone thou shalt bern euel. 

13A fool womman, and crious, and ful of 
euele dra3tis to delicis, and no thing 

14 outerli kunnende, sat in the 3ate doris of 
hir hous, vpon a sete, in the he3e place 

isof the cite; that she my3te clepe men 
passende bi the weie, and men goende in 

iether gate. Who is a litil child; bowe he 
doun to me. And to the sory hertid she 

17spac, Stoln watris ben swettere, and hid 

is bred more swete. And he knew not that 
there ben ieauntis ; and in the depthis of 
helle the’ gestis of hir. Who forsothe 
shal be ioyned to hir; shal falle doun in 
to helle. For whi he that goth awey from 
hir; shal be saued. 


CAP. X 


1 A wys sone gladeth the* fader; for- 
sothe a sone fool, the sorewe is of his 
2modir. No thing shal profiten the tre- 
sores of vnpitousnesse; ri3twisnesse for- 
3sothe shal deliuere fro deth. The Lord 
shal not tormente thur3 hungir the soule 
of the rijtwise; and the spies of the 
vnpitous men he shal turn vpso doun. 
4 Nedynesse wercheth the slowe hond; the 
hond forsothe of stronge men greitheth 
richessis. Who forsothe vseth lesingis, 
this fedeth windis; the same folewith 
5fleende briddes. Who gedereth in rep, 
is a wis sone; who forsothe routeth in 
é6somer‘, is the sone of confusioun. The 
blissing of God vpon the hed of the ri3t- 
wis; the mouth forsothe of vnpitous men 
7 wickidnesse couereth. The myude of the 
rij3twise with preisingis; and the name 
of vnpitous? men shal waxe stinkinge. 
8The wise man in herte shal kepen the 
9hestis; the fool is beten with lippis. Who 
goth simpleli, goth trostli; who forsothe 


dOm. acu. ¢ his aca. 


° be wijs 1. P forsothe thou 1. 4 on cx. 


t I wiste ; I, the heerere of fals doctrin wiste. Lire here. N teat. 
Z au3t 1. ony thing. Lire here. n text. 


wit plures. Xhist. y lijf1. 


PROVERBS. 


f the somer 4zEGu. 


Tin wit 1. of wit. Lire here. w text. 


15 


schulen be multiplied bi me; and 3ceris of 


lijf schulen he encreessid to thee. If thou 12 


art wijs; thou schalt be® to thi silf*, and 
to thi neiz3boris. Forsothe if thou art a 
scornere ; thou? aloone schalt bere yuel. 


God 
A fonned womman, and ful of cry, and 13 kere. <. 


ful of vnleueful lustis, and that kan no 


fitable and 
veyn thingis. 
lyue 3e, in 
grace. of pru- 
dence 3 that is, 
of comaunde- 
mentis and 
councelis of 

. Lire 


t+ @ scornere, 
etc. ; for he 


thing outirli, sittith in the doris of hir 14 *itith the 


hous, on a seete, int an hi3 place of the 


scornere to do 
wrong to him. 
Lire here. c. 


cite; to clepe men passinge bi the weie, 15 * to thisizy; 


and men goynge in her iournei. Who is16 


a litil man ‘of wit"; bowe he to me. And 


that is, to do 
good to thi silt 
principaly, and 
aftirward to 


sche spak to a coward, Watris of thefte 17 there men. 


ben swettere, and breed hid is swettere’. 


a fonnyd wome 
man ; that is, 
fals and veyn 


And wiste' not that giauntis ben there : 18 teching. 


and the gestis" ‘of hir’ ben in the depthis 
of helle. Sotheli he that schal be applied, 
ether fastned, to hir’; schal go doun to 
hellis. For whi he that goith awei fro 
hir’ ; schal be saued. 


CAP. x. 


The parablis of Salomon. A wijs sone 
makith glad the* fadir ; but a fonned sone 
is the sorewe of his modir. Tresouris of2 
wickidnessef schulen not profite ; but ri3t- 
fulnesse schal delyuere fro deth. The Lords 
schal not turmente the souleY of a iust 
man with hungur; and he schal distrie 
the tresouns of vnpitouse men. A slow4 
hond hath wrou3t nedynesse; but the 
hond of stronge men makith redi rich- 
essis. Forsothe he that enforsith to gete 
‘ony thing” bi* leesyngis, fedith the» 
wyndis{; sotheli the same man sueth 
briddis fleynge. He that gaderith togi-s 
dere in heruest, is a wijs sone; but he 
that slepith in sominer, is a sone of con- 
fusioun. The blessing of God zs oner* thee 
heed of a iust man; but wickidnesse hilith 
the mouth of wickid men. The mynde of7 
a iust man schal be with preisingis ; and 
the name of wickid men schal wexe rotun. 
A wijs man schal resseyue comaunde-s 
mentis with herte{; a fool is betun with 


& the vnpitous 4GH. 


8 esier fo ete I. 
Vv therof plures. 


u gistis a. felawis I. 
¢ Om, crx. 


awith1. » Om. 1. 


Sul of ery ; for 
it hath not no 
but wordis. 
onleueful 
lustis s for not 
onely it graunt- 
ith, but also 
hringith to 
siche lustis. 
kan no thing ; 
for so Jitil of 
truthe is there, 
that it is aret- 
tid as nou3t. 
in the doris, 
and so forth ; 
for siche doc- 
tryne is tau3t 
sumtyme bi 
autorite. 
bi the weye ; 
that is, bi the 
brode weye of 
VICIS. 
in her iourney ; 
that is, suyng 
the fersnesse of 
her coneitise. 
@ coward ; that 
is, to him that 
sueth Justis. 
of thefte ; that 
is, fals doctryn. 
breed hid, ete. ; 
the herere of 
fals doctryne. 
geauntis, that 
is, of endis. 
tn the depthis 
Of helle ; vhat 
is, they that 
ben tau3t and 
fillid bi sich 
doctryne goen 
oun to the 
peyne of helle, 
with fendis 
that disseyuen 
hem. Lire 
here. c. 
t fresouris of 
wickidnesse s 
that is, yuele 


16 PROVERBS. 


beshrewith his weies, shal be maad opene. 
10 Who twinclith with e3e, shal 3ine so- 
rewe; the fool with lippis shal be bete. 
1 The veyne of lif the mouth of the! ri3t- 
wis; the mouth forsothe of vnpitous 
igmen couereth wickiduesse. Hate reretl 
striues; and alle giltis charite couereth. 
131In the lippis of the wis man is founde 
wisdam ; and a 3erde in the rigge of hym 
isthat is nedi in herte. Wise men hiden 
kunnyng; the mouth forsothe of the fool 
15 is next to confusioun. The substaunce of 
the riche man the cite of his strengthe ; 
the ferd of pore men the nedynesse of 
tshem. The were of the ri3twis man to 
lif; the frut forsothe of the vnpitous to 
17synne. The weie of lif to thes kepende 
discipline; who forsothe vndernemyngis 
isforsaketh, erreth. Liende lippis hiden! 
hate; who speketh™ wrongful blamyng, 
19is an vnwis nan. In myche speche shal 
not lacke syine; who forsothe temperth 
29 his lippis, is most prudent. Chosen siluer 
the tunge of the rijtwis; the herte of 
21 vnpitous men for no3t. The lippis of the 
rijtwise techen manye; who forsothe ben 
vnta3t, in the nedynesse of herte shul die. 
22The blessing of the Lord maketh riche 
men; ne shal be felashipid to them tor- 
23menting. As by lajhing the fool werch- 
ith hidous trespas ; wisdam forsothe is to 
24a man purueing. That that the vnpitouse 
dredeth, shal come vpon hym; ther® de- 
25sir to ri3twis men shal be 3iue. As tem- 
pest passende, shal be the vnpitouse; the 
ri3twise forsothe as enere durende ground. 
26 As eisel to teeth, and smoke to e3en; so 
the slowe to hem that senten hym in the 
27weie. The drede of the Lord leith to 
da3es ; and the 3eris of ynpitous men shul 
2sbe shortid. The biding of ri3twismen 
gladnesse ; the hope forsothe of ynpitous 
ga9men shal pershen. The strengthe of the 
simple the weie of the Lord; and ferd 
soto them that werken euel. The riztwis 
into withoute ende shal not be moued ; 


iOm.4. k Om. acu. Vhidith «a. 


™ speketh or bryngeth forth £ pr.m. 


X. 10-—30. 


lippis*. He that goith simpli, goith tristil; D aa 
but he that makith schrewid hise weles, — schuten not 

° le 3 
schal be opyn. He that bekeneth with tie 
the ize, schal 3yue sorewe ; a fool schal be pele 
betun with lippis. 


The veyne of lijf 2s 11 if penaunce 
. sueth not, and 
the mouth of a iust man; but the mouth 


ofte of temporal 


wey ee oa deth. Lire 
of wickid men hilith wieckidnesse. Ha- 12 tere. c. 
ee ze ae ies t fedith the 
trede reisith® chidingis ; and charite hilith syria? ile 


alle synnes. Wisdom is foundun in thEis ere Bis 
lippis of a wise man; and a 3erd inf the a ag 
A é ¥ 7; that is, 
bak of him that is nedi of herte. Wise 14 he that is idil 
; tyme of 
inen hident kunnyng; but the mouth of worching, is 
a fool is nexte to confusioun. The catel of 15 aoe 
a riche man ?s the citee of his strengthe ; “ite here. c. 
af § herte; that 
the drede of pore men zs the nedynesse of pe obey 
° . oe Oo le 
hem. The werk of a iust man is to lijf;.1Gsere. xx. 
. ° . * e 
but the fruyt of a wickid man is to synne. a ou 
The wele of lijf zs to him that kepith 17 otingh 
chastising* ; but he that forsakith blam-  wordis of his 
: . sae, 6 blamyng. Lire 
yngis, errith. False lippis hiden hatrede ; 18 here. c. 
ae. ee : hiden ; 
he that bringith forth dispisinge is vn- is, Sone ‘ 
wijs. Synne schal not faile in myche19 evs “ive here: 
spekyng; but he that mesurith hise lippis, 
is moost prudent. Chosun siluer zs the 20 
tunge of a iust man; the herte of wickid 
men is for nou3ti. The lippis of a iust 21 + for norst; 
man techen ful manye men; but thei that iene a 
ben vnlerned, schulen die in nedinesse of 7% © 
herte. The blessing of the Lord makith 22 
riche§ men; and turment schal not be fe-  § riche, etc. ; 
nics F in 
lowschipid to hem. A fool worchith wick-23 Acie. that 
idnesse as bi leizyng ; but ‘wisdom is pru- i 


dence to ab man. That that a wickid man od ee 
dredith, schal come on hym; the desire of re. © 
inst men schalbe jouun to hem. As ags 
tempeste passynge, a wickid man schal not 

be; but a iust man schal be as an euer- 
lastynge foundement. As vynegre noieth 26 

the teeth, and smoke noéeth' the izen; so 

a slow man noieth hem that senten hym 

in the weie. The drede of the Lord en-27 
creesith daies; and the 3eeris of wickid 

men schulen be maad schort. Abiding of 2s 

iust men 7s gladnesse; but the hope of 
wickid men schal perische. The strengthe 29 

of a symple man 7s the weie of the Lord; 


a his £ prom. 


freisith ups. fis foundeini. & chastisyngis E. h prudence is toa wijs 1. 1 Om, 1. 


Be lic eee 


vnpitouse forsothe shul not dwelle vp on 
sierthe. The mouth of the rijtwis shal 
bere wisdam; the tunge of shrewis shal 
3zpershen. The lippis of the rijtwis be- 
holden plesid thingis; and the mouth of 
vnpitouse peruertid thingis. 


CAP. XI. 


1 <A treccherous we3e abominacioun is 
anent God®; and an euen® wei3t the wil 
2o0f hym. Wher shal be pride, there shal 
be wrongful blamyng ; wher forsothe is 
3mecnesse, and there wisdam. Simple- 
nesse of rijtwis men shal ri3t reule them; 
and supplaunting of peruertid men shal 
awaste them. Richessis shul not profiten 
in the day of veniaunce; forsothe ri3twis- 
snesse Shal deliuere fro deth. Ri3twisnesse 
of the simple shal ri3t reulen his weie ; 
and the vnpitous in his vnpitousnesse 
cshal falle. The rijtwisnesse of rijt men 
shal delinere them; and wickeP men in 
7ther aspies shul be take. The vupytous 
_ man dead, noon hope shal ben ouer ; and 
the abiding of bisy men shal pershe. 
8The rij3twis fro anguysh is deliuered ; 
and shal be take the vnpitous for hym. 
9The feynere in mouth desceyueth his 
frend ; rijtwis men forsothe shul ben de- 
loliuered with kunnyng. In goodis of ri3t- 
wis men shal ben enhauncid the cite; 
and in the leesing of vnpitous?? men‘ shal 
ii ben preising. Thur3 the blessing of ri3t- 
wis men shal ben enhauncid the cite; 
and bi the mouth of vnpitous men it shal 
12be turned vp so doun. Who desceyueth 
his frend, is nedi in. herte; the prudent 
i3man forsothe shal be stille. Who goth 
gilendeli, shewith priue thingus ; who 
forsothe is feithful, hilith the gilte of 
14the frend. Wher is not a gouernour, the 
puple fallith; helthe forsothe, wher ben 
ismanye counselis. He shal be tormentid 


© the Lord c pr.m. © trewe c pr.m. 


‘thing 1. J ferther of him 1. 


P wickid acu. 


k men in euel A sec.m. 
VOL. III. D 


PROVERBS. 17 


and drede to hem that worchen yuel. A 30 * nol te mouyd; 
: 4 that is, fi 

iust man schal not be moued* with outen  stablevesse 2 

° ; 7 verth. CKN. 
ende; but wickid men schulen not dwelle T nolacicn 
on the erthef. The mouth of a inst man a1 fe cries that 
3 i is, on the erthe 

schal bringe forth wisdom ; the tunge of _ of hem that 

. . nett lyuen in blis. 
schrewis schal perische. The lippis of a32 plesaune thiny- 


iust man biholden pleasaunt thingis; and 20%" 


is, to God and 

t iki : + to goode men. 
he mouth of wickid men byholdith wei- (ees ning. 

ward thingis'. is, etc. ; that 


is, blasfemyes 
agenus God, and 
wrongis ajenus 
the neijbore. 
Lire here. c. 


CAP. XI. 


A gileful balaunce is abhominacioun) 
anentis God; and an euene wei3te zs his 
wille. Where pride is, there also dispis-2 
ing schal be; but where ineeknesse is, 
there also 7s wisdom. The simplenesse of3 
iust men schal dresse hem; and the dis- 
seyuyng of weiward men schal destrie 
hem. Richessis schulen not profite in the 
dai of veniaunce; but ri3tfulnesse schal 
delyuere fro deth. The ri3tfulnesse of as 
simple man schal dresse his weie; and a 
wickid man schal falle in his wickidnesse. 
The ri3tfulnesse of ri3tful men schal dely-6¢ 
uere hem; and wickid men schulen be 
takun in her aspiyngis. Whanne a wickid7 
man is deed, noon hope schal be fer- 
therj; and abidyng of bisy men*{ schal £925 men, 
perische. A iust man is delyuered from s of hem that’ 
angwisch ; and a wickid man schal be ad aoe 
jounn for hym. A feynere bi mouth dis-g 724 hopides © 
seyueth his freend; but iust men schulen him. Lire 
be deliuered bi kunnyng. A citce schal 10 that is, blamed 
be enhaunsid in the goodis of iust men; " ay 
and preysyng schal be in the perdicioun 
of wickid men. A citee schal be enhaunsid 1! 
bi blessing of iust men; and it schal be 
distried bi the mouth of wickid men. He1l2 
that dispisith his freend, is nedi in herte; 
but a prudent man schal be stille. He that 1s 
goith gilefuli, schewith priuetees ; but he 
that is feithfid, helith the priuetee of a 
freend. Where a gouernour is! not, thet 
puple schal falle; but helthe ‘of the pu- gir in, 
ple™ is™™, where ben many counsels). He 15 te. that is, 


bligacioun. 
that makith feith|] for a straunger, schal ao 


§ many coun. 
sels; bi whiche 
bothe yuels ben 
eschewid, and 
goodis ben 


PP the vnpitous 4. 4% man 4. 


Itheris1. ™ Om.1. ™m is. Lire here. n teat. 


18 PROVERBS. 


with euel, that doth feith for a stranger ; 
who forsothe shoneth grenes, shal be si- 
iskir. A gracious womman shal finden glo- 
rie; and stronge men shuln han richessis. 
17 Wel doth to his soule the merciful man ; 
who forsothe is cruel, casteth awei nee3h 
ismen. The vnpitouse maketh were vn- 
stable; to the sowende forsothe ri3twis- 
19nesse feithfull™ mede. Noble mercy shal 
greithe lif; and folewing of euelis deth. 
20 Abhominable a* shreude herte to the 
Lord ; and his wil in hem, that simply 
21gon. Hond in hond, shal not ben inno- 
cent the euele man; the sed forsothe of 
22ri3twis men shal be saued. A goldene 
cercle in the nosethirlis of a souwe, a 
23fair womman and a fool. The desir of 
ri3twis men alle good thing is ; the abid- 
24ing of vnpitous men wodnesse. Othere 
men deuyden proper thingus, and ben 
maad richere; othere reuen not their 
owne, and euermor ben in nedynesse. 
25 The lif that blisseth, shal ben inwardli 
fattid; and he that maketh inwardli 
drunken, also hymself shal ben inwardli 
2¢6maad drunken. He that hideth whete in 
time, shal be cursid in ‘puplis; blessing 
27forsothe vp on the hed of silleris. Wel 
riseth erli, that secheth goodis ; who for- 
sothe is enserchere of euelis, of hem shal 
28 be oppressid. Who trosteth in his rich- 
essis, shal falle ; ri3twis men forsothe as 
29a greene lef shul burioune. Who distur- 
bith his hous, shal han windis ; and he 
that is a fool, shal seruen to the wise 
soman. The frut of the ri3twise the tree 
of lif; and he that vndertaketh soulis, is 
sia wis man. If the ri3twise in the erthe 
resceyueth, myche more the vnpitous, and 
the synnere. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Who looueth discipline, looueth kun- 
nyng; who forsothe hateth blamyngus, is 
2zvuwis. Who forsothe is good, shal drawe 
to hym grace of the Lord; who forsothe 


Tis feithful «. 


Xyuel1. O° Om.1.) Pisa pr.m. c et plures. 
nese thorlis £. nose thirllis ¥ ef alii. thei ben 1. 


4q Om. A sec. m. F sec. m. 1. 
Vv fullith a. 


XI. 16——XII. 2. 


be turmentid with yuel; but he that 
eschewith snaris, schal be sikur. 
ciouse womman* schal fynde glorie; and 
stronge men schulen haue richessis. 
merciful man doith wel to his soule; but 
he that is cruel, castith awei, 3he, kynnes- 
men. 
werk ; but feithful mede zs to hym, that 
sowith ri3tfrlnesse. 
redi lijf; and the suyng of yuels" ‘schal 


make redi® deth. <A schrewid herte 720 


abhomynable to the Lord; and his wille 


ts in hem, that goen symply. Zhou3 hond 21 


be? in thei hond, an yuel mant schal not 
be imnocent; but the seed of iust men 
schal be sauyd. A goldun ‘sercle, ether 2 
ryng, in the ‘nose thrillist of a sowe, a 
womman fair and fool. 
men is al good ; abiding of wickid men is 


woodnesse. Sum men departen her owne 24 


thingis, and ben maad richere; other men 
rauyschen thingis, that ben not hern, and 


ben" euere in nedynesse. A soule that 25 


blessith, schal be maad fat{; and he that 


A gra-16 


A wickid man makith vnstableis 


Merci schal make ig 


The desir of iust 23 


* a graciouse 
womman ; that 


A 17 is, onest and 


schamefast. c. 


+ thou; he 
worcheth no 
thing, bnt hold. 


2 eth the too 


hond in the 
tothir, thinketh 
nel. K. 


+ bi fatnesse of 


fillith’§, schal be fillid also. He that hidith 26 Chin ale 


wheete ‘in tyme”, schal be cursid among 
the puplis; but blessyng schal come on 


the heed of silleris. Wel he risith ‘eerli, 27 


that sekith good thingis ; but he that is a 
serchere of yuels, schal be oppressid of tho. 


He that tristith in hise richessis, schal 2g werk of a inst 


falle; but iust men schulen buriowne -as 


a greene leef. He that disturblith his29 


hows, schal haue wyndis|| 7 possessioun ; 
and he that is a fool, schal serue a wijs 
man. 
tre of lijf J; and he that takith soulis**, is 
a wijs manff. 
in erthett, how miche more an vnfeithful 
man, and synnere*. 


CAP. XII. 


He that loueth chastisyng, loueth kun-! 
nyng; but he that hatith blamyngis, is 
vnwijs$§. He that is good, schal drawe to2 
hym silf grace of the Lord; but he that 


Sisa 4, 


t nostris cn. 
x a synnere 1.¢ 


r Om. 1. 
w Om. A pr. m. CU pr. m. 


The fruyt of a ri3tful man. és the 30 


If a iust man receyueth 3) 


with good tech 
ing. x. 

\| of wraththe 
and tempta- 
cioun, k. 

| the tre of 
lijf; that is, 
Crist in blisful 
si3t: for the 













man bringith 
herto. c. 

** takith soulis, 
that is, the 
cure of soulis. 
cK. 


tt is a wiys 
man; that is, 
owith to be a 


his Pastorals, 
the craft of 
craftis is the 
gouernail of 
soulis. c. 

tt erthe ; tha 
is, turmentis 
of God. Lire 
here. KN. 

§§ is unwiys ; 
for he is liyk 
a@ wood man, 
that eschewit 
heelful medi- 
cyn. Lire 
here. C. 


XI. 3——19. 


trostith in his. tho3tis, vnpitously doth. 
3A man shal not be strengthid of vnpi- 
tousnesse; and the roote of ri3twis men 
ashal not ben al moued. A bisi womman 
a croune is to hir man; and stine in the 
bones of hir, that berth thingus wrthi 
sconfusioun. The tho3tis of rij3twis men 
domes; and counseilis of vnpitous men 
egilesum. The woordis of vnpitous men 
spien to blod; the mouth of ri3twis 
7men shal deliuere them. Turne vnpitous 
men, and thei shul not be; the housis 
forsothe of rijtwis men shal abide stille. 
8 Bi his doetrine shal be knowen a man; 
who forsothe is veyn and herteles, shal 
9ben open to despising. Betere is a pore 
man, and suffisaunt to hymself, than a 
loglorious, and nedi bred. The ri3twis 
knew; the liues of his helpeli bestis ; the 
bowelis forsothe of vnpitous men eruel. 
11 Who" werketh his lond, shal be fulfild 
with loues; who forsothe folewith idel 
reste, most fool is. Who is sweete, liueth 
in tempringis ; in his monestingis he for- 
j2saketh wrongful blamyngis’. The desir 
of the vnpitous is the myndeful place of 
werst thingis ; the roote forsothe of ri3t- 
i3wis men shal profiten. For the synnes 
of lippis falling ne3heth to the euel man ; 
forsothe the ri3twis man shal flee out of 
uuanguysh. Of the frut of his mouth eehe¥ 
shal be fulfild of goodis; and after the 
werkis of his hondis it shal be 3olde to 
ishym. The weie of the fool ri3t in the 
ejen of hym; who forsothe is a wis 
isan, hereth counseilis. The fool shewith 
anoon his wrathe; who forsothe dissymu- 
17lith wrongus, is fel. Who that he knew3, 
speketh, domes man of riztwisnesse is; 
who forsothe lieth, is a gileful witnesse. 
is Ther is that behoteth, and as with a 
swerd is pungid to the conseience; the 
tunge forsothe of wise men is helthe. 
i9 The lippe of truthe shal be fast in to 
withoute ende ; who forsothe is a feerli 
witnesse, maketh a tunge of lesing. 


t Om. acu, % Who so a. 


¥ blamyng 4G pr.m. Hf. 


PROVERBS. 19 


tristith in hise thou3tis, doith wickidli. 

A man schal not be maad strong bys 
wyekidnesse; and the root of iust men 

schal not be moued. A diligent womman 4 

is a eoroun to hir hosebond; and rot is in 

the boonys of that womman, that doith 

thingis worthi of confusioun. The thou3tiss 

of iust men ben domes; and the eounselis 

of wickid inen dew gileful. The wordis6 

of wiekid men setten tresoun to blood ; 

the mouth of iust men schal delyuere hem. 

Turne thou* wiekid men, and thei schu-7 * that is, w 
len not bet; but the housis of iust men oe ee 
schulen dwelle perfitli, A man schal bes “™™** * 
knowun bi his teching; but he that is 

veyn and hertles, schal be open to dispis- 

ing. Betere is a pore man, and sufficient 9 

to him silf, than a gloriouse man, and nedi 

of breed. A iust man knowith theY soulis? 10 

of hise werk beestis{; but the* entrailis of rk beest 
wickid men ben cruel. He that worchith iiseusns 
his lond, schal be fillid with looues; but “7° *""“**- 
he that suetl idilnesse, is moost fool. He 
that is swete, lyueth in temperaunees; 
and in hise monestyngis he forsakith dis- 
pisyngis. The desir of a wickid man is 12 
the memorial of worste thingis; but the 
roote of iust men schal encreesse. For the 13 
synnes of lippis ‘falling doun® nei3eth to 
an yuel man; but a iust man schal scape 
fro angwiseh. Of the fruyt of his mouth 14 
ech man sehal be fillid with goodis; and 
bit the werkis of hise hondis it schal be 
3oldun to him. The weie of a fool zs rizt-15 
ful in hise i3en ; but he that is wijs, herith 
counsels. <A fool schewith anoon his ire 316 
but he that dissymelith wrongis, is wijs. 
He that spekith that, that he knowith, is 17 
aiuge of ri3tfulnesse ; but he that lieth, 
is a gileful witnesse. A man is that bi-1s 
hetith§, and he is prickid as with the 
swerd of eonscienee ; but the tunge of wise 
men is helthe. The lippe of treuthe selial 19 
be stidfast with outen ende; but he that 
is a sudeyn witnesse, makith redi the tunge 
of leesyng. Gile is in the herte of hem 20 


t werk beestis ; 


§ bihetith; and 
payeth not. 
Lire here. cna. 


W ech on AEGII. 


yOm.c. 2 lijues1. 2Om.4 prim. » softe or esy 1. swete, that is, mylde KNa, © ruyne or myschef't. Caftir 1. 


D2 


20 


20 Treccherie in the herte of men thenk- 
ende euelys ; who forsothe gon* in to the 
21 counseilis of pes, hem folewith io3e. Shal 
not holli sorewenY the ri3twis man, what 
euere thing shal falle to hym ; vnpitous 
meu forsothe shul be fulfild? of euel. 
22Abomynacioun is to the Lord liende 
lippis; who forsothe feithfulli don, ple- 
23sen to hym. A man turned to deceit, 
hilith kunnyng; the herte of vnwise 
24men stiretlh to folie. The hond of stronge 
men shal lordshepen; the whiche for- 
25 othe is slo3, shal serue to tributis. Morn- 
yng in the herte of the ri3twis man shal 
meken hym ; and with a good woord he 
26shal ‘be maad glad*. Who dispisith harm 
for a frend, is ri3twis; the weie forsothe 
27 of vnpitous men shal desceyue them. The 
gileful man shal not finde wynnyng; and 
the substaunce of a man shal be the pris 
gs0f gold. In the path of riztwisnesse? 
lif; the going out wei forsothe ledeth to 
deth. 
CAP. XIII. 
1 The wise sone the doctrine of the fa- 
der; who forsothe is a gilere, hereth not, 
2whan he is yndernomyn. Of the frut of 
his mouth a man shal be fild with goodis; 
the soule forsothe of ‘the lawe brekeris* 
swicke. Who kepeth his mouth, kepeth 
his soule; who forsothe is vnauysid to 
4speken, shal felen euelis. The slowe wile, 
and wile not; the soule forsothe of werk- 
ende men shal ben inwardliche fattid. 
sA lesing woord the rijtwis man shal 
wlaten; the vnpitous¢ man forsothe 
eshendeth, and shal be shent. Riztwis- 
nesse kepeth the weie of the innocent; 
vnpitousnesse forsothe supplauntith the 
7symnere. Ther is as a riche man, 
whan no thing he hath; and ther is 
as a pore man, whan in many richesses 
she is. The a3een biyng of the soule of 
a man his riehessis; who forsothe is a 
9pore man, blamyng suffreth not. The li3t 


2 fild ag. 


x goth 46m. Y serue £ pr. m. 
4 vnriztwis a1. 


© vnpitouse men xr prem. 


€ fool A sec. m. 


PROVERBS. 


a 


XII, 20—XIII. 9. 


that thenken yuels; but ioye sueth hem, 
that maken counsels of pees. 
bifallith to a just man, it schal not make 
hym sori; but wickid men schulen be fillid 
with yuel. 
to the Lord; but thei that don feithfuli, 
plesen him. 
and the herte of vnwise men stirith foli. 


What euere 21 


False lippis is abhominacioun 22 


A fel¢ man hilith kunnyng; 23 


* dispisith 
arm ; that is, 
pes not 
mporal harm 
ne the helping 
of a frend. Lire 
here. c. 
t the sub- 
staunce ; that 
is, liyf. Lire 
re. CKNa. 


he 
The hond of stronge men schal haue lord-2t + the priys of 


schip; but the hond that is slow, schal 
serue to tributis. 
of a iust man schal make hym meke; and 
he schal be maad glad bi a good word. 


He that dispisith harm* for a frend, is a26 


iust man; but the weie of wickid men 


schal disseyue hem. A gileful man schal 27 


not fynde wynnyng; and the substauncet 
of man schal be the prijs of gold}. 
is in the path of ri3tfulnesse’; but the 
wrong weie leedith to deeth. 


CAP. XHE 

A wijs sone ts the teching of the fadir ;1 
but he that is a seornere, herith not, whanne 
he is repreuyd. A man schal be fillid with 2 
goodis of the fruit of his month; but the 
soule of vnpitouse inen zs wickid. He thats 
kepith his mouth, kepith his soule; but 
he that is vnwar to speke, schal feel yuels. 
A slow man wole, and wole not}; but the 
soule of hem that worehen schal be maad 
fat. A iust man schal wlate a fals word ;5 
but a wickid man schendith, and schal be 
schent. Ri3tfulnesse kepith the weie of6 
an innocent man; but wickidnesse dis- 
seyueth a synnere. A mau is as richell,7 
whanne he hath no thing]; and a mau 
is as pore**, whanne he is in many 
richessis. Redempcioun of the soule ofs 
man ts hise richessis; but he that is 
pore, suffrith not blamyng. The 1li3t of9 
iusttf men makith glad; but the lan- 
terne of wickid men schal be quenchid. 


gladen £ pr.m. > riz3twis men sc. riztwys man 1, 


f riztwisnesse 1. 


gold ; that is, 
presiousere 


Morenynge in the herte 25 shan gold. Lire 


? Wile and 
wole not s for 
he wole hane 
good profitable, 
ether worschip- 
ful, but he nyle 
sufire the tra- 
uel which is 
axid herto, and 
so he nyle 
spedily; therfor 


Lijfesne he is iyk the 


cat that wolde 
ete fisch, ne- 
theles he es- 
chewith to 
putte hise feet 
in to the water. 
Lire here. c. 
that is, wole 
haue prosperite 
in this world 
and ioie in 
heuen, but he 
wole not tra. 
uele vertuousli _ 
therfore. k. 
|| @ man is as 
riche ; whanne 
that itil thing 
that he bath, 
which is aret- 
tid as noust, 
suffisith to 1 
ee silf. Lire 
here. c. ; 
{ that is, but 
fode and biling, 
and desireth 
noo more. K. 
**as pore, ete. 
this is an aua- ‘ 
rouse man, to 
whom no thing — 
suffisith. Lire 
here. c. > 
and kannot 
helde him * 
Pee es enere 
crieth, Bryng, 
Bring. Kk. 
tthe li3t ofiust 
men; that is, 
her prosperite. 
Lirehere.cxna. 
makith glad ; 
the peple, for 
thei vsen wel 
her prosperite. 
Lire here. c. 


XIU. 1o—XIV. 2. 


of ri3twis men maketh glad; the lan- 
terne forsothe of ynpitous men shal ben 
1oquenchid. Among proude men euermor 
ben striues; who forsothe alle thingis 
don with counseil, ben gouerned with 
uWwisdam. Substaunce hastid shal be las- 
sid; that forsothe litilmele® is gedered, 
izWith hond shal be multeplied. Hope 
that is deferrid, tormenteth the soule; 
13 the tree of lif desir comynge®*. Who bac- 
biteth to any thing, he oblisheth hymself 
in to thef time to come; who forsothe 
14dredeth the heste, in pes shal wone. The 
lawe of a wis man the welle of lif; that 
he bowe awei fro the falling of deth. 
1sGood doctrine shal 3yue grace; in the 
isweye of dispiseris a swolw3. <A witti 
man alle thingis’ doth with counseil ; 
who forsothe is a fool, shall opene folie. 
17 The messager of the ynpitous shal falle 
in to euel; the feithful sent is helthe. 
18 Nedynesse and shenshipe to hym. that 
forsaketh discipline; who forsothe as- 
senteth to the vudernymere, shal ben 
io glorified. Desir, if it be fulfild, delitith 
the soule; foolis wlaten hem that flen 
goeuelis. Who with wise goth, a wis 
man shal ben; the frend of folis lic shal 
21he maad. Synneres euel pursueth; and 
to ri3twis men goode thingis shul be 
2230lde. A good man leueth eiris sones, 
and sonys sones; and is kept to the ri3t- 
wise the substaunce of the synnere. 
23 Manye metis in the newid? feeldis of 
fadris; and to othere men thei ben ge- 
aisdered withoute dom. Whio spareth to 
the 3erde, hatith his sone ; who forsothe 
25 looueth hym, bisili techeth. The ri3twis 
eteth, and fulfillith his soule; the wombe 
forsothe of ynpitous! vnfilable. 


CAP. Xv. 


1 The wise womman bildeth vp hir hous; 
the ynwise the maad out* forsothe with 
zhondis shal destro3e. The goende in 
ri3t weie, and dredende God, is dispisid 


ee comende c pr. m. 
k Om. 4. vp Git. 


¢ with litilmel 4. 
wijs 4. the vnpitous Gu. 


& that 1. the which a. 


f Om. 4EGH. 


PROVERBS. a1 


Strynes ben euere a mong proude men; 10 

but thei that don alle thingis with coun- 

sel, ben gouerned bi wisdom. Hastid* 11 * cate? hastid; 
catel schal be maad lesse; but that that hat eae 
is gaderid litil and litil with hond, scha] cy” ether bi 
be multiplied. Hope which? is dilaied, 12204: that is, 
turmentith the soule ; a tre of lijf zs desir toner, ie 
comyng. He that bacbitith ony thing, 13°” - 
byndith hym silf in to tyme to comynge; 
but he that dredith+ the comaundement, 
schal lyue in pees. 

man 7s a welle of lijf; that he bowe awei [wits heewtis. 
fro the falling of deth{. Good teching 15 3 fees sh 
schal 3yue grace; a swolowe is in the of hell 

weie of dispiserisj. A fel man doith alle 16 § dupieri of 
thingis with counsel; but he that is a £0%4,tehing 
fool, schal opene foli. The Inessanger of Tea 
a wickid man schal falle in to yuel; a Zere-c. 
feithful messanger is helthe. Nedynesse is 

and schenschip zs to him that forsakith 

techyng ; but he that assentith|| to a 4 assentith, 
blamere, schal be glorified. Desir, if it is 19 jane Ween 
fillid, delitith the soule; foolis wlaten hem — jekely. Lire 
that fleen yuels. He that goith with wijs 20 

men4{, schal be wijs; the freend of foolis ¢ with wise 
schal be maad lijk hem. Yuel pursueth 21 formynge hin 
synneris; and goodis schwen be 30ldun> ak: 
to iust men, A good man schal leeue aftir 22 

him eiris, sones, and the sones of sones 3 

and the catel of a synnere is kept to a 

just man. Many meetis ben in the newo3 

tilid feeldis of fadris; and ben gaderid to 

othere men with ont doom**. He thats ** doom; thee 
sparith the 3erde, hatith his sone; but he ieee 
that loueth him, techith bisili. 


+ dredith, ete, ; 
c that is, the 
The lawe of a wise 4 reking of 


of helle. Lire 


A iust 25 ““"* Cc. 
man etith, and fillith his soule; but the 
wombe of wickid men 7s ynable to be 


: tt to le fillid ; 
fillid +}. for tho thingis 
that ben set 
forth suffisen 
not to hem, but, 
euere more thei 


seken delicat 
CAP. XIV. shes Ue 
A wijs womman bildith hir hous; and) 
an unwijs womman schal distrie with 
hondis{{ an hous bildid. A man goynge2 2zwith hondis; 


. * js that is, with hie 
in riz3tful weie, and dredinge God, is dis- yuele werkis. 


Lire here. cx. 


€ thing ac. 4 precions # pr.m. i the vurizt- 


h goue 1. 


29 PROVERBS. 


of hym, that goth in the euel losid weie. 
3In the mouth of the fool a 3erde of 
pride; the lippis of wise men kepen 
them. Wher ben not oxen, the cracche 
is voide; wher forsothe aperen many 
tilthis, there is open maad the strengthe 
sof the oxe. A feithful witnesse shal not 
lien ; the trecherous witnesse speketh 
slesing. ‘The scornere seketh wisdam, and 
findeth not; the doctrine of prudent men 
71iz3t. Go ajen the fol'; and he shal not 
sknowe the lippis of prudence. The wis- 
dam of the witti man is to vnderstonde 
his weie; and the™ vnprudence of foolis 
gerring. The fool scorneth synne; ainong 
lori3twis men grace shal wone. The herte 
that knew the bitternesse of his soule; 
in ioz3e to hym shal not be togidere 
limengd a straunger. The hous of vn- 
pitous men shal be don awei; the taber- 
naclis of rijtwis men shal burioune. 
12 Ther is forsothe a weie, that semeth to 
a man ri3twis; the laste thingus forsothe 
i30f it bringen? doun to deth. Law3ing 
with sorewe shal be mengd; and the 
uendis of ioje weiling ocupieth. With his 
weies shal be fulfild the fol; and aboue 
ishym shal be a good man. The innocent 
trowith to eche woord ; the witti behold- 
iseth his goingis. The wise man dredeth, 
and bowith doun fro euel; the fol ouer- 
17lepeth, and trosteth. The vnpacient shal 
werche folie; and the desseyuable man 
isis hateful. Litle childer shul welde folie; 
iyand witti men shul abide kunnyng. Euel 
men shul lyn befor good men; and vn- 
pitous men befor the 3atis of riz3twis men. 
20Also to his ne3hebore the® pore man 
hateful shal be; the frendis forsothe of 
2iriche men manye. Who despisith his 
ne3hebore, synneth ; who forsothe doth 
merci to the pore man, shal be blisful. 
Who leeueth in the Lord, looueth merci ; 
zethei erren, that werchen euel. Mercy 
a3and treuthe greithen goodis; in alle 
good werc plente shal be. Wher forsothe 


1 fol man & prem. 


ithec.  k oxen 1. 


m Om, AGH. 


l oxen a. the oxe R. 


XIV. 3-23. 
pisid of hym, that goith in a! weie of 
yuel fame. The 3erde of pride* zs in thes * that is, ma- 
Saas ee nas and proud 
mouth of a fool; the lippis of wijs men correccion. x. 
ee t+ oxis ben not; 
kepen hem. Where oxis* ben notf, the4 that is, where 
cratche is void; but where ful many ee ae 
cornes apperen, there the strengthe of pen fewe Keith. 
oxe! is opyn. A feithful witnesse schals5 Acre. cx. 
° . 2 . . @ Sscornere ; 
not lie; a gileful witnesse bringith forth a he is seid a 
. . ° that 
leesing. A scornere} sekith wisdom, and6 gispisith to se 
he fyndith™ not; the teching of prudent te seiynsis of 
‘ 9 
men is esy. Go thou a3ens a man a fool; 7 lileueth to 
, i fynde wisdom 
and he schal not knowe the lippis of pru- _ bi bis wit, but 
: f . he fyndith not, 
dencej. The wisdom of a fel man is t08 for pride blynd- 
vndirstonde his weie; and the vnwarnesse ee ie 
of foolis errith. A fool scorneth synne||;9 § that's, he 


shal not re- 
grace schal dwelle among iust men. Theo nosyue beta 
* Orn peo ° wisdom. K. 
herte that knowith the bittirnesse] of his {| scornysh 


a aies 3 thati 
soule; a straunger schal not be meddlid in {uth for nowt 

the ioie therof. The hous of wickid men 11 ‘4 syane 
schal be don awei; the tabernaclis of iust v sees 

: : saan hat is, for 

men schulen buriowne. Sotheli a weie is, 12 contricioun of 

3 id 

e synne passid. 

that semeth iust to a man; but the laste aimee 
oa ° that is, alien fro 
thingis therof leden forth to deth. Lei3-13 veri penaunee. 
yng schal be medlid with sorewe; and ee 
morenyng ocupieth the laste thingis of remyssioun = 

5 ‘ synne, ahd o 
ioye. A fool schal be fillid with hise 14 hope of glorie. 

; leden forth t 
weies; and a good man schal be aboue eo ae is, 

hym. An innocent man bileueth to eche 15 tte ere 
word; a felle man biholdith hise goyngis. semeth ae 
ce ¥ a A synnere, ledit 
A wijs man dredith, and bowith awei fro 16 todeth ofsynne 

cts * ge and of helle. 

yuel; a fool skippith** oner, and tristith. an innocent 
A man vnpacient schal worche foli; and 177275,{bat 


: an vnkunnyng 
a gileful man is odiouse. 


Litle men of18™2n, that kan 
4 a not deme bi 
wit schulen holde foli; and felle men 


twixe good 
: councel and 

schulen abide kunnyng. Yuel men schulen 19 yuet. Lire here. 
ligge bifor goode men; and vynpitouse 


c. 
** a fool skip. 
men bifor the 3atis of just men. 


peth; rennyng 
A Petes liztly fro synne 


man schal be hateful, 3he, to his nei3- in to synne. 
3 2 and tristith ; to 
bore; but many men ben frendis of riche _ gete foreue- 


men. He that dispisith his nei3bore, doith 21 ante 
synne; but he that doith merci to a pore be ™mysusitl- 
man, schal be blessid. He that bileueth ° 

in the Lord, loueth merci; thei erren22 

that worchen yuel. Merci and treuthe 

maken redi goodis ; abundaunce ‘schal23 

be® in ech® good werk. Sotheli where ful 


0 bringith 4. °a aGH. 


m fyndith itr, "Om.c. © eueri y. 


XIV. 24—-—XV. 7. 


ben manye woordis, there nedynesse ofte. 
24 The croune of wise men the richesses of 
2shein; the folie of foolis vnprudence. A 
feithful witnesse deliuereth soulis; and 
26speketh lesingus the peruertid. In the 
drede of the Lord trost of strengthe; and 
27 to the sones of hym shal ben hope. The 
drede of the Lord the welle of lif; that 
2she bowe doun fro falling of deth. In 
the multitude of puple the dignete of the 
king ; and in fewenesse of fole the shen- 
a9shipe of the prince. Who is pacient, is 
gouerned with myche wisdam ; who for- 
sothe is vnpacient, enhaunceth hys folie. 
30 The lif of flesh helthe of herte; the 
sistink of bones ennye. Who wrongful 
chalengeth the nedi, mysseith to his 
makere ; he honoureth hym forsothe, 
3zthat hath reuthe of the pore. In hys 
malice is put out the vnpitous ; the ri3t- 
33 wis forsothe hopeth in his deth. In the 
herte of the prudent man shal reste wis- 
dam; and vnta3t men also? it shal lerne. 
31 Riz3twisnesse rereth vp fole1; wreccheful 
35maketh puplis synne. Alowid is to the 
king an vnderstondende seruaunt; the 
plente of his wrathe the vnprofitable shal 
suffre. 


CAP. XV. 


1 A nesshe answere breketh wrathe ; 
gan hard woord -rereth woodnesse. The 
tunge of wise men enhourneth kunnyng ; 
3the mouth of foolis boilith™ out folie. In 
alle place the ejen of the Lord beholden’ 
4goode men, and enele. A plesable' tunge 
the tree of lif; whiche forsothe is vn- 
stemprid, shal defoule the spirit. The 
fol scorneth the discipline of his fader; 
who forsothe kepith blamyngis, shal be 
more witti. In plenteeuous ri3twisnesse is 
most vertue; tho3tys forsothe of vnpitous 
6men shul be pullid out bi the roote. The 
hous of the ri3twise myche strengthe ; 
and in the frutis of vnpitouse al dis- 
zturbaunce. The lippis of wise men shul 


Peche E pr.m. (the nedy £ pr.m. 


twith 1. 8 fleish 1. 
x ful gret 2. 


4 Om. cn. 
w that 1. 


P him 1. 
onvurith vu. 


PROVERBS. 


this 3. 


23 


many wordis ben, there nedynesse is ofte. 


The coroun of wise men 7s the richessis* 24 ° richessis; that 


of hem; the fooli of foolis 7s vnwarnesse. 


A feithful witnesse delyucreth soulis; and 25 
a fals man bringith forth leesyngis. In26 


the drede of the Lord 2s triste of strengthe; 
and hope schal be to the sones of it?. 
drede of the Lord 7s a welle of lijf; that 


is, kunnyng 
and vertue. 
enwarnesse ; 
that is, herfor 
thei hen foolis, 
for thei bifor- 
seen not thingis 
to comynge. 


The 27 Lire here. ¢. 


it bowe awei fro the fallyng of deth. The 28+ toys; thar 


dignite of the king zs in the multitude of 
puple; and the schenschipe of a‘ prince is 
in the fewnesse of puple. 
pacient, is gouerned bi’ myche wisdom ; 
but he that is vnpacient, enhaunsith his 
foli. 


that falsli chalengith a nedi man, dispisith 
his maker; but he that hath merci on a 
pore man, onourith that' makere. 
wickid man is put out for his malice; but 
a iust man hopith in his deth. 
restith in the herte of a wijs man; and 
he schal teche alle vnlerned men. 
fulnesse reisith a fole; synne makith pu- 
plis wretchis. 
ynge} is acceptable to a kyng; a myu- 
ystre vnprofitable schal suffre the wrath- 
fulnesse of .him. 


CAP. XV. 


A soft answere brekith ire; an hard) 
The tunge of2 


word reisith woodnesse. 
wise men ournethY kunnyng§; the mouth 
of foolis buylith out foli. 
the ij3en of the Lord biholden good men, 
and yuel men. 
tre of lijf; but the tunge which” is vn- 
mesurable, schal defoule the spirit. 
fool scorneth the techyng of his fadir ; 
but he that kepith blamyngis{], schal be 
maad wisere. Moost vertu schal be in 
plenteuouse ri3tfulnesse; but the thou3tis 
of wickid men schulen be drawun vp bi 
the roote. The hous of a iust man isé 
moost* strengthe; and disturbling 7s in 
the fruitis of a wickid mau. The lippis7 
8 beholdith «. 


t bolkith . t pesable c. 


Useruaunt 1. Y onuurneth A pr. m. honourith 1. 


Helthe of herte is the lijf of30 
fleischis’; enuye zs rot of boonyst. Hes! 


A 32 


In ech place3 
A plesaunt tungel| 7s the 4 


A5b 


1s, vertues ben 
corrupt bi 
enuye comyng 
on tho. Lire 


He that isgo9“erec. 


1 undursiond. 
inge ; that is, 
a good prelat 

is acceptable to 
the king Jhesu 
Crist, and an 
ynel prelat schal 
be punysehid of 
him scharply. 
Lire here. c. 

§ ourneth kun. 
nyng 5 that is, 
it bringith forth 
kunnyng in 
tyme and place 


Wisdom 33 2¢ceptable. 


buylith out 3 
that is, bringith 
forth fernently 


Ri3t- 34 and fersly. c. 


|| @ plesaunt 
tunge 3 that is, 


A mynystre" vndurstond- 35% see speche 


to the nei3bore, 
and ententif to 
preyer anentis 
God, to plese 
him. 


is a ire of liyf ; 
for as bodily 
liyf is contynu- 
ed bi the tre of 
liyf, so goostly 
liyf is contynu- 
ed bi sich a 
tunge. 
vnmesurable ; 
to speke. 
schal defuule 
the spirit ; for 
synne schal not 
faile in myche 
speche. Lire 
ere. C. 
4 that kepith 
blamyngis ; in 
amending him 
silf. 
wisere ; in 
eschewinge 
yuelis to com- 
ynge. 
in plesaunt 
riztfulnesse ; 
that is, in kep- 
ing of Cristis 
eouneels. 
strengthe : for 
the Lord schal 
defende it. 
Lire here. c. 


Q4 PROVERBS. 


sowen abrod kunnyng ; the herte of foolis 
svnlic shal ben. The sacrifise of victorie 
of vnpitous men wlatesum to the Lord ; 
the vonwis of ri3twys men _plesable. 
9» Abominacioun is to the Lord the lif of 
the vnpitous ; who folewith ri3twisnesse, 
loshal be looued of hym. Enuel doctrine 
to the forsakende the weie of lif; who 
ilblamyngis hateth, shal dien. Helle and 
perdicioun befor the Lord; myche more 
12the hertis of the sonus of men. The 
bacbitere looneth not hym that chastis- 
eth hym; ne to wise men goth. The 
jo3ende herte maketh out gladsuimn the 
face; in mornyng of inwit shal be 
iu4throwe doun the spirit. The herte of 
the wise man shal seche doctrine; and 
the mouth of foolis is fed with vnwis- 
isdam. Alle the da3is of the pore euele ; 
a sikir mynde as a contynuel feste. 
16 Betere is a litil with the drede of the 
Lord, than grete tresoris and vnfillable. 
17 Betere is to be clepid to wrtis with 
1scharite, than to a fat calf with hate. A 
man ful of wrathe stirith strines; who 
19is pacient", swageth the vprered. The 
weie of slowe men as heggis of thornes ; 
the weie of ri3twis men withoute thing 
200f hurting. A wis sone maketh glad 
the fader ; and a fool man despiseth’ his 
21moder. Folie is ioj3e to the fool; and a 
prudent man shal ri3t reulen his goingus. 
22Tho3tis ben to-scatered, wher is not 
counseil; wher forsothe ben manye 
23 counseileris, thei ben confermed. A man 
gladeth in the sentence of his mouth; 
24and the spedful sermoun is best. The 
path of lif vp on the ta3t man; that he 
25 bowe doun fro the last helle. The hous 
of proude men the Lord shal destro3e ; 
and stedefast he shal make the termes of 
26the widewe. Abominacioun of the Lord 
euele tho3tis; a pure sermoun most fair 
27shal be fastned of hym. He al disturb- 
ith his hous, that folewith auarice; who 


° 


Ythe avowis1, 2 an1 
£Om.1. 8 vnprofitable 1. 
other benz. © thei 1, 


a that forsaken 1. 


P housis 7. 


4 pacient forsothe c pr.m. bp pr.m. 


» more rather 1. 
h that weren reisid 1. 


XV. 8—27. 


of wise men schulen sowe abrood kun- 
nyng; the herte of foolis schal be vnlije. 
The sacrifices of wickyd men ben abho-8 
mynable to the Lord; avowisY of iust men 
ben plesaunt. The lijf of the* vnpitouse* 9 Pa 
man is abhomynacioun to the Lord; he _ propirte of God, 
that sueth ri3tfulnesse, schal be loued of ie aS 
the Lord. Yuel teching is of men for- 10%) heritouse; 
sakinge* the weie of lijf; be that hatith epee 
blamyngis, schal die. Helle and perdi-11 vnpitouse man, 
‘ é schal die; that 
cioun ben open bifor the Lord ; hou _ is, ti deth of 
myche more? the hertis of sones of men. Rec 
A man ful of pestilence loueth not hym 124eh. Lire 
that repreueth him; and he goith not to 
wyse men. A ioiful herte makith glad 13 
the face; the spirit is cast doun in the* 
morenyng of soule. The herte of a wijs14 
man sekith techyng; and the mouth of 
foolis is fedf with vnkunnyng. Alle the 15+ fed; that is, 
5 brio delitith in spek- 
daies of a pore man ben yuele*; a sikir  inge founed 
soule is a° contynnel feeste. Betere is alo; ,; 
litil with thef drede of the Lord, than Heol 
many tresouris and vnfillable®. It is betere 17 faute of thingis 
to be clepid to wortis with charite, than cave ie 
with hatrede to a calf maad fat. A wrath-18 that ie/tor ths 
ful man reisith chidyngis; he that is pa- pri 
cient, swagith chidyngis reisid. The weie t9 more encreesen 
of slow men 7s ani hegge of thornes; the the weye of 
weie of iust men 7s with out hirtyng. Ane 
wise sone makith glad the fadir; and a fynds inna 
fonned man dispisith his modir. Foli is ot ee 
ioye to a fool; and! a prudent man schal 
dresse hise steppis. Thou3tis ben distried, 22 
where™ no counsel is; but where many 
counseleris{ ben", tho® ben confermyd. A 23 t councelours ; 
man is glad in the sentence of his mouth; ge 
and a couenable word is best. The path 24 Pe bronst to 
of lijf 7s on a lernyd man; that he bowe ite . 
awei fro the laste helle. The Lord schal 26 that is, whanne 
distrie the hows? of proude men; and he obochere sonal 
schal make stidefast the coostis of a wi- 75,908 "8 
dewe. Juele thoustis 7s abhomynacioun 26 
of the Lord; and a cleene word moost 
fair schal be maad stidfast of hym. He27 
that sueth aueryce, disturblith his hous ; 


Vv desceyneth E pr. m. 


¢Om.3. 4d disesy 1. & asa see.m.. 
lasanasec.m Khist. but1. ™therer. 


XV. 28—XVI. 11. 


forsothe hatith 3iftis, shal liue. Bi merci 
and feith ben purgyd synnes; bi the 
drede forsothe of the Lord bowith doun 
2seche man fro euel. The mynde of the 
ri3twis sweteli thenketh wisdam; the 
mouth of vnpitous men reboundeth to 
29euelis, Ferr is the Lord fro vnpitous 
men; and the orisouns” of rij3twis men 
30he shal ful out heren. The 1i3t of e3en 
maketh glad the soule; good los in- 
31 wardli fattith bones. The ere that her- 
eth blamyngus of lif, in the myddel of 
32 wise men shal al abide. Who casteth 
awei discipline, despiseth his soule; who 
forsothe assenteth to vndirnymyngis, 
33 weldere is of herte. The drede of the 
Lord discipline of wisdam; and mecnesse 
goth befor glorie. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 Off a man is to make redy the inwit; 
and of the Lord to gouerne the tunge. 
2Alle the weies of man ben opene to the 
ejen of hym; of spiritis the peisere is 
3the Lord. Shewe to the Lord thi werkis; 
4and ri3t reulid shul ben thi tho3tis. Alle 
thingus for hymself wro3te the Lord; 
salso the vnpitouse to the euele dai. Abo- 
minacioun is of the Lord eche proud 
man; also if hond at hond were, he ‘shal 
not be* innocent. The begynnyng of the 
good wey to do ri3twyssnesse; isY alouwid 
Ganent? God, more than to offre ostis. Bi 
merci and treuthe wickidnesse is forbo3t; 
and in drede of the Lord is bowid awei 
7fro euel. Whan shul plese to the Lord 
the weies of man, the enemys forsothe 
sof hym he shal turne to pes. Betere is 
a litil with ri3twisnesse, than manye 
ofrutis with wickidnesse. The herte of 
man shal disposen his weie; but of the 
10 Lord is to rij3t reulen his goingis. De- 
uynyng in the lippis of the king; in 
uidom his mouth shal not erre. Wei3te 
and balaunce ben the domes of the Lord; 


Worisoun 4. * is not EB pr.m. 


GQisar 
u Om. 1. 


VOL. III. 


y Om. c pr. m. 


t dressid, into good issu. Lire here. w teat. 


PROVERBS. 25 


but he that hatith 3iftis schal lyue. 

Synnes ben purgid bi merci and feith; 

ech man bowith awei fro yuel bi the 

drede of the Lord. The soule of a iust2s 

man bithenkith obedience; the mouth of 

wickid men is ful of yuelis. The Lord is29 

fer fro wickid men; and he schal here the 

preyers of iust men. The li3t of iz3en30 

makith glad the soule; good fame makith 

fat* the boonys. The eere that herith3i* fut; that is, 
the blamyngis of lijf, schal dwelle in the Niel Slaefit 
myddis of wise men. He that castith 32 coyote sia 
awei chastisyng, dispisith his soule; but eG ae 
he that assentith to blamyngis, is1 pesible aera 
holdere of the herte. The drede of the 33eth his vertues, 
Lord is teching of wisdom ; and mekenesse cae ae 


here. c. 
substaunce of 
goith bifore glorie. 


the soule. x. 


CAP. XVI. 


It perteyneth to man to make redi the! 
soule; and 7 perteyneth to the Lord to 
gouerne the tunge. Alle the weies of2 
men ben opyn to the izen of God; the 
Lord is a weiere of spiritist. Schewe thi3 Unc a 
werkys to the Lord; and thi thoustis man aftir his 
schulen be dressid'. The Lord wrou3tes “™s* * 
alle thingis for hym silf; and he made 
redi a wickid man to the yuel dai. Abho-s 
mynacioun of the Lord is ech proude 
man; 3he, thou3 the hond is" to the hond, 
he schal not be innocent. The bigynnyng 
of good weie zs to do rij3twisnesse‘; for- 
sothe it is more acceptable at* God, than incense 
to offre sacrifices. Wickidnesse is ajené in hooli scrip- 
bou3t bi merci and treuthe; and me bow- ae oot Deut 
ith awei fro yuel bi the" drede of the beter falias 
Lord. Whanne the weyes of man plesen7 poo fGisds 
the Lord, he schal conuerte, jhe, hise ene- — daies of his liyf, 

Same : 2 that he lerne 

myes to pees. Betere is a litil with rizt-s for to drede 
fulnesse, than many fruytis with wickid- jot érre in 
nesse. The herte of a man schal disposes (2%) {Pe ' 
his weie; but it perteyneth to the Lord ee a 
to dresse hise steppis. Dyuynyng{ 2s in er ae 
the lippis of a king; his mouth schal not  dredith God.c. 


Z anentis E passim. 


ir be 1. 8 ristfulnesse plures. * anentis 1. 


E 


26 PROVERBS. 


and his werkis alle the stones of the 
12 world. Abominable to the king, that don 
vnpitously ; for bi rijtwisnesse is fastned 
isthe kingis dignete. The wil of the king 
ri3twis lippis ; that ri3t thingus speketh, 
shal be rist reulid. The indignacioun 
of the king messageres of deth; and a 
is wis man shal don aseeth to hym. In 
gladnesse of the chere of the king lif; 
and the noble mercy of hym as euetid’ 
ig weder. Weld wisdam, for betere it is 
than gold; and purchase prudence, for 
Wit is mor precious than siluer. The 
path of rij3twis men bowith awei euelis; 
the kepere of his soule holdeth faste his 
isweye. Pride goth befor contricioun ; 
and befor falling the spirit shal ben en- 
ighauncid. Betere is to be meke* with 
mylde men, than to deuyde spoilis with 
20 proude men. * The lerned in woord shal 
finde goodis; and that hopeth in the 
21Lord is blisful. Who is wis in herte, 
shal be clepid prudent; and who is 
sweete in fair speche, more thingis shal 
22finde. The welle of lif the lernyng of 
the weldere; the doctrine of foolis folie. 
23 The herte of the wise man shal lerne the 
mouth of hym; and to the lippis of hym 
24it shal adde grace. The comb of hony 
wel set woordis ; swetnesse of soule is 
2shelthe of bones. Ther is a weie that 
semeth to a man ri3t; and the last 
26thingis of it leden> to deth. The soule 
of the trauailere trauaileth to hymself ; 
27for hys mouth eompellide hym. An un- 
wis man delueth evel ; and in® the lippis 
28of hym fyr brenneth. A man peruertid 
rereth striues; and the man ful of 
2) Wwoordis seuereth princis. The wicke® 
man flatereth his frend ; and ledeth hym 
30 bi a weie not good. That with stone3id 
ejen thenketh shreude thingis, bitende 
1 his® hppis parformeth euel. The eroune 
of dignete elde, that in the weief of ri3t- 
s2 Wisnesse shal be founde. Betere is the 
pacient, than a strong man; and that 

2 an euctid c. 


4meked arcu. » ledith 4. 


¥Om.1, W kingis chere 1. 


¢ Om. 4. 


x Om. I. 


XVI. 12-——32. 


erre in doom. The domes of the Lord 

ben wei3te and a balaunce ; and hise werkis 

ben alle the stoonys of the world. 

that don wickidli bex abhomynable to the 

king; for the trone of the rewme is maad  } uy. iPHe 3 

stidfast bi ri3tfulnesse. The wille of13 cee ust 

kyngis és iust lippis; he that spekith riz3t- asa reyn; for 
Stget + 1% . as reyn com- 

ful thingis, sehal be dressid*. Indigna- 14 ynge late is 

cioun of the kyng 7s messangeris of deth ; Sake haa 

and a wijs man schal plese him. Lijf 8.15 or Oo the 

in the’ gladnesse of the ‘cheer of the king's good to 

a ao hem that han 

king”; and his merci 7s as a* reyn com- nee to remys- 

ynge late. Welde thou wisdom, for it ee 

betere than gold; and gete thou prudence, (278% of 

for it isY precyousere than siluer. The 17end. Lire here. 

path of iust men bowith awei yuelis; the 

kepere of his soule kepith his weie. Pride1s 

goith bifore sorewe; and the spirit schal. 

be enhaunsid byfor fallyng. It is betere 19 

to be maad meke with mylde men, than 

to departe spuylis with proude men. A 20 

lerned man in word schal fynde goodis; 

and he that hopith in the Lord is blessid. 

He that is wijs in herte, schal be clepid 2) 

prudent ; and he that is swete in speche, + ,jvisdam and 


schal fynde grettere thingis. The welle 22 Goddis ple- 
saunce, K. 


weizle and a 

, _ balaunce; that 
Thei 12 is, Goddis domes 
ben iust. 

tust lippis; that 


of lijf zs the lernyng of him that weld- : that is, sad- 
ith}; the techyng of foolis ¢s foli. The 29 ae 
herte of a wijs man schal teche his mouth ; jane 
and schal encreesse grace to hise lippis. pert 
Wordis wel set togidere 7s a coomb of24ise. x. . 
hony ; helthe of boonys{ is the swetnesse ee 
of soule. A weye is’ that semeth ri3tful 25 For al goth 
to a man; and the laste thingis therof i te the mouth 


of gloterouse 

leden to deth. The soule of a man4§ tra- 26 laborers. x. 
: : . . ** diggith yuel; 
uelinge trauelith to hym silf||; for his that is, sekith 


mouth] compellide hym. An vnwijs man 27 pie 


tooth ** . 8 5 f brenneth ; of 
diggith** yuel{}; and fier{{ brenneth in (reese. 

ise lippis. iwar isith str ; 2g and of pride. 
hise lippis A weiward man versie ryues; A ea 
and a man ful of wordis departith princis. 


tt that is, 
ee ¥ : worchith yn- 
A wickid man flaterith his frend ; and 29 wiseli and out 


ledith hym bi a weie not good. He 30 $5 or wraththe 
that thenkith schrewid thingis with izen  2"4 distemper- 
aunce. K. 


ane sae as : , a 
astonyed, bitith hise lippis, and parform ii 


eth yueljj. A coroun of dignyte 2s eelde, 31 ymagyneth to 


7 2 arforme. Lire 
that schal be foundun in the weies of }2,.c. 


dwieckyd 4. ¢ with 4, f weies secu. 


Yismorer. 2 ther is i 


XVII. 16. 





XVI. 33 


lordshipeth to his wil, than an ouer- 

33scomere of cites. Lotis ben put in to 
the bosum; but of the Lord thei ben 
temprid. 


CAP. SV11. 


\ Betere is a drie morsel with io3e, than 
an hous ful of sacrifises of victorie with 
estrif. A wis seruaunt shal lordshipen 
to sones foolis; and among bretheren 
seritage he shal deuyde. As bi fyr is 
proued siluer, and gold bi the chymney, 
4so hertes the Lord preneth. The euele 
man obesheth to the wicke tunge; and 
the desceyuable consenteth to the liende 
slippis. Who dispiseth a pore man, mys- 
seyth to his makere ; and who gladeth in 
the falling of an other, shal not ben vn- 
6punshid. The croune of olde men sones 
of sones; and the glorie of sones the 
7fadris of hem. There semeth not the 
foo] faire set woordis; ne the prinee a 
sliende lippe. Most kinde iemme the 
abiding of the abidere; whider ecuere he 
turneth® hymself, prudentli he vnder- 
gstant". Who helith the gilte, secheth 
frenshipis ; who with an other sermoun 
1oreherceth, seuereth the federedi. Mor 
profiteth correccioun anent the prudent, 
than an hundrid veniaunces anent the 
fol. Euermor striues secheth the euel 
man; the cruel forsothe aungil shal be 
y2sent ajen hym. It spedeth mor to ajen 
come to a she bere, whan hir whelpis 
ben take awey, than to a fol trostende 
isto hymself in his folie. Who 3eldeth 
euelis for goodis, shal not go awei euel 
iafro his hous. Who leueth water, hed is 
of striues ; and er he suffre wrong blam- 
isyng, dom he forsaketh. And who iuste- 
fieth the vnpitouse, and who condemp- 
neth the rijtwise, abominable is either 
iganent God. What profiteth to the fol to 
han richessis, whan wisdam bie he mai 


& turne zeEGH. »} vnderstondeth sec. 


a hath power 1. bhis owne x. ©¢ thei 1. 


letteth ka. 4b the heeda. !toc. 


d Om. 1. 


PROVERBS. ey 


ri3tfulnesse. A pacient man is betere than 32 tord of his 


a stronge man; and he that ‘is lord® of 
his® soule*, 7s betere than an ouercomere 


soule : bi re- 
‘freynyng of 
coueitisis, is 
betere. Lire 


of citees. Lottist ben sent into the bosum; 33 “ere. cxxa. 


but tho® ben temperid of the Lord §. 


CAP. XVII. 


Betere is a drie mussel with ioye, than 
an hous ful of sacrifices with chidyng. 
A wijs sernaunt schal be lord of fonned2 
soues ; and he schal departe eritage among 
britheren. As siluer is prened bi fier,3 
and gold zs preued bi a chymnei, so the 
Lord preueth hertis. An yuel man obei-4 
eth to a wickid tunge|]; and‘ a fals man 
obeieth to false lippis. He that dispisiths 
a pore man, repreueth his maker; and he 
that is glad in the fallyng of another man, 
schal not be vnpunyschid. The corouné 
of elde men 7s the sones of sones; and 
the glorie of sones zs the fadris of hein. 
Wordis wel set togidere bisemeu not a7 
fool; and a liynge lippe bicometh not a 
prince. A preciouse stoon{ moost aecept-s 
able zs the abiding** of hym that sekith ; 
whidur enere he turneth hym silf, he vn- 
durstondith prudentli. He that heliths 
trespas, sekith frenschipis ; he that re- 
hersith|||| bi an hi3 word, departith hem, 
that ben knyt togidere in pees. 
yng profitith more at a prudent man, than 
an hundryd woundis at a fool. 
yuel man sekith stryues ; forsothe a cruel 
aungel schal be sent ajens hym. 
ith more to meete a femal bere, whanne 
the® whelpis ben rauyschid ‘, than a fool 
tristynge to hym silf in his foli. 
schal not go a wei fro the hous of hym, 
that 3eldith yuels for goodis. 
leeueths watirt}, is heed® of strynes}{; and 
bifor that he suffrith wrong, he forsakith 
dom. 
man, and he that condempneth a iust 
man, euer ethir is abhomynable at! God. 


It sped- 12 


Yuel 13 


Bothe he that iustifieth a wickid 15 


° 


3 that is, vpon 
hid thingis. x. 
§ whanne God 
chesith which 
he wole. x. 


ll wiekid 
tunge ; that ix, 
to a tyraunt 
comaunding 
wickid thing. 
Lire here. c. 

© A preciouse 
sioon ; that Is, 
the thing nbe- 
dun of a de- 
sirere, is a pre- 
cious stoon in 
hise izen, and 
ech werk he 
doith prudently, 
that he be not 
defraudid of his 
desire. Lire 
here. c. 

that is, lijf 
euerlasting, for 
the wich a wijs 
marehaunt 
solde al that he 
hadde, and 
bouste it. Me. 
xiiij. Kx. 

** of ech ver- 
tuous man, that 
Poul clepeth a 
erowne of lijf. 


K. 
Il that rehers- 
ith, ete.; that 
is, pupplischith 
with out iust 
cause. Lire 
here. c. 

tt leeueth wa- 


A blam- to 47 + that is, 


drynkith ouer 
strong wyn. 
of stryues ; 


Euere ani that risen of 


drunkenesse, 
he forsakith 
doom ; in hirt- 
ing his neizhore 
with out cause. 
Lire here. c. 
tt that is, he 
that letteth wa- 
ter renne forth, 
and he that bi- 
gynneth strifes, 


He that 14 oon lijk 


thingis. x. 

§§ What profit- 
ith it, ete. as 
if he seie, no 
thing; for he 
vsith not tho 
to good but to 
yuel, and may 
not gete wis- 


ftom bi tha. 


What profitith§§ it to a fool to haue 16 Lire here. c. 


i federed or boundun in louc c sec. m,. marg. E sec. m. Marg. AGH. 


eherr. ftakeawey1. 8 leeueth, or lat got. 


E 2 


28 


not? Who hei3 maketh his hous, sech- 
eth falling ; and who shoneth to lerne, 
17falleth in to euelis. Alle time looueth, 
that is a frend; and a brother in an- 
isguysshis is preued*. A fool man shal 
for io3e flappe with hondis, whan he 
i9shal behoten for his frend. Who sweteli 
thenketh discordis, looueth striues; and 
who enhauncith his herte, secheth fall- 
20ing. Who is of peruertid herte, findeth 
not good; and who turneth the tunge, 
21shal falle in to! euel. Born is the fool 
in his shenshipe; but ne™ the fader" in 
22the fol shal glade. Io3ende inwit mak- 
eth bri3t age; a drery spirit ful out dri- 
23eth bones. 3iftis of the bosum the vn- 
pitous taketh, that he peruerte the pathis 
aiof dom. In the face of the prudent 
shyneth wisdam; the e3en of foolis in 
25the endis of erthe. The wrathe of the 
fader a sone fol; the sorewe of the mo- 
26dir that gat hym. It is not good to bern 
in harm to the rijtwis; ne to smyte a 
27 prince that ri3t demeth. Who tempreth 
his woordis, taj3t and prudent is; and of 
28precious® spirit the man lerned. The 
fool forsothe, if he holde his pes, wis 
shal ben holde; if he threste togidere 
his lippis, vnderstondende. 


CAP. XVIII. 
1 Ocasioun secheth, that wil gon awei 
fro a frend; alle time wariable he shal 
2be. A fol resceiueth not the woordis of 
prudence; but tho thingis thou? shul 
seyn, that ben ofte turned in his herte. 
3The vnpitous, whan in to depthe of 
symne? shal" come, dispiseth; and ther 
folewith hym shenshipe and_repreff. 
4 Deep water woordis of the mouth of a 
man; and a stef strem the reboundende 
5welle of wisdam. To alouwen the per- 
sone of the vnpitouse in dom, is not good, 
that thou bowe awei fro the sothfast- 


k aproued x. 10m. a. 


rhe shal c pr. m. 


m On, A, 


k sith 1 passim. 1 ethchewith 1 passim. 


PROVERBS. 


n faders 4. 


m Ou. A prem. M. 


XVIL. 17-——XVIII. 5. 


richessis, sithen* he mai not bie wisdom ? 
He that makith his hous* hi3, sekith 
falling} ; and he that eschewith! to lerne, 


schal falle in to yuels. He that is a frend, We 


loueth in al tyme; and a brother is 
preuyd in angwischis. 
schal make ioie with hondis, whanne he 
hath bihi3t for his frend. 
thenkith discordis, loueth chidingis ; and™ 


he that enhaunsitht his mouth, sekith 


A fonned man18 


He that bi-19 


’ * of yuel geten 
‘ood, K. 


+ disserueth 
alling to helle. 


t in boosting 
and other curs- 


fallyng. He that is of weiward herte, 20 ed speche. x. 


schal not fynde good; and he that turn- 
eth the tunge§, schal falle in to yuel. 
fool is borun in his schenschipe; but ne- 
ther the fadir schal be glad in a fool. 
ioiful soule makith likinge age; a sorew- 


A2l 


§ that turneth 
the tunge; that 
is, flaterith in 
presence, and 


A 22 deffameth in 


absence of a 
man. Lire here. 


ful spirit makith drie boonys. A wickid 23 || sekith occa- 


man takith 3iftis fro the bosum, to mys 


siouns; that is, 
feyneth causis. 


turne the pathis of doom. Wisdom schyn- 24 17? here. cx. 


eth in the face of a prudent man; the 


i3en of foolis ben in the endis of erthe. A 25 xa. 


fonned sone 7s the ire of the fadir, and 
the sorewe of the modir that gendride® 
hym. 
to a iust man; nether to smyte the prince 
that demeth ri3tfuli. 
his wordis, is wijs and prudent; and a 
lerud man is of preciouse spirit. 
foole, if he is stille, schal be gessid a wijs 
man ; and, if he pressith togidre hise lippis, 
he ‘schal be° gessid an vndurstondynge 
man. 
CAP. XVIII. 

He that wole go a wei fro a frend,1 
sekith occasiouns||; in al tyme he schal 
be dispisable. A fool resseyneth not the2 
wordis of prudence; ‘no but? thou seie 
tho thingis, that ben turned in his herte. 
A wickid man, whanne he cometh in to3 
depthe of synnes, dispwsith; but sclaun- 
dre and schenschipe sueth hym. Deep4 
watir** 7s the wordis of the mouth of a 
man; and a stronde fletinge ouer}t zs the 
welle of wisdom. It is not good to takes 
the persoone of a wickid man in doom, 
that thou bowe awei fro the treuthe of 


© the precious 4. Phe az prim. synnes AGH. 


obaari. Ost. P but if x. 


It is not good to brynge in harm 26 


{ hoolsam 
loore and 
amaundement., 


** deep watir ; 
that is, the 
wordis of a man 
perfit in kun- 
nyng and vertu, 
conteynen deep 
sentence, to 
which not ech 


He that mesurith 27 man may liztly 


ateyne, as ne- 
thir to the 


Also age botme of deep 


watir. CK. 
a stronde flow- 
inge ouer ; in 
to othere men 
bi good teching. 
is the welle of 
wisdom, in the 
soule of a wise 
man, fro whiche 
welle the watir 
of wisdom is 
bron3t out to 
othere men. 
chidingis; of 
othere men 
chidinge to 
gidere. double 
tunge ; that 
flaterith in pre- 
sence, and bac- 
bitith in ab- 
sence. of the 
wombe; that is, 
til to the herte. 
drede; this 
vers ti] thidur 
he that is 
neische, is not 
in Ebreu. Lire 
Té. C. 
++ into other 
men bi good 
teching. K. 


XVII. 6—22, 


enesse of dom. The lippis of the" fol 
shul menge themself with striues ; and 
7the mouth of hym debatis stireth. The 
mouth of the fool ‘to-treding* of hym ; 
and the lippis of hym the falling of his 
ssoule. The woordis of the twisil tunge 
as simplet; and tho thur3 comen vnto 
the entrailis of the wombe. The slowe 
drede threw3" doun; the soulis forsothe 
9of wommanysh men shul hungren. Who 
is nesshe, and dissolut in his werk, bro- 
ther is of the man scaterende his werkes. 
10 The most strong tour the name of the 
Lord ; to it renneth the ri3twise, and he 
11shal ben enhauncid. The substaunce of 
the riche man the cite of his strengthe ; 
and as a strong wal cumpassende hym. 
12 Er it be to-treden, is enhauncid the herte 
of a man; and er it be glorified, it is 
ismekid. Who rathere answereth than he 
hereth, a fool hymself to ben he shew- 
uith; and confusioun wrthi. The spirit 
of the man susteneth his feblenesse ; the 
spirit forsothe li3t to wrathen, who shal 
ismoun sustene? The herte of the pru- 
dent shal welde kunnyng; and the ere 
160f wise men secheth doctrine. The free 
3ifte of a man spredeth abrod his weie; 
and befor princis space to hym maketh. 
17The ri3twis rathere is the acusere of 
hymself; ther cometh his frend, and he 
isshal enserchen hym. A3enseiyngus lot 
thresteth togidere; and among my3ti 
19men’ also dyuersly demeth. The brother 
that is holpen of the brother, as a stef 
cite; and the domes as barris of cites. 
20Of the frut of the mouth of a man shal 
be fulfild his wombe; and the burioun- 
yngis of the lippis of hym shul fulfillen 
2ihym. Deth and lif in the hondis of the 
tunge; who loouen” it, shuln ete the 
22frutis of it. Who findeth a good wom- 
man, findeth good; and shal drawen 
merthe of the Lord. Who pntteth out 
a good womman, putteth out good ; who 
forsothe holdeth avoutresse, is a fool and 


Ta acu. §& the to-treding au. 
Qstirith 1. ‘their. 8 yntol. 
Yamanr. W holpun 1. 


t tormentis E pr. m. 


t dissolute, ether vnstidfast CEYGUIKMNPQRSUXYAG. 


PROVERBS. 29 


dom. The lppis of a fool medlen hemé6 
silf with chidyngis; and his mouth ex- 
citithd stryues. The mouth of a fool is7 
defoulyng of hym; and hise lippis ben 
the fallynge of his soule. The wordis of 
a double tungid man ben as symple; and 
tho" comen ‘til to* the ynnere thingis of 
the wombe*. Drede castith doun a slowe 
man}; forsothe the soulis of men turned 
in to wymmens condicioun schulen haue 


* that is, to 
the herte. x. 

+ castith outa 
slow man; thut 
is, the drede ot 


hungur. He that is neisch, and vnstid-9 pauel castith 

¥ 5 5 3 kIT. EPO 

fast' in his werk, is the brother of a man __ bigynnyng of 
‘ood werk. 


cee : : B 
distriynge hise werkis. A strongeste" tour 10 to wymmens 
. * dicioun 
7s the name of the Lord; a inst man dein 


* that ben neische 
renneth to hym, and schal be enhaunsid. 4s \syminen to 
The catel of a riche man is the citee of he 

. cate: of a 
his strengthe; and as a stronge wal cum- 


riche man, ele.; 
2 F that is, he trist- 
passinge hym. The herte of man’ is en-12ith in hise 


haunsid, bifor that it be, brokun; and it  f\yallid’cites, 
: ‘ . Ors thou3 he is 
is maad ineke, bifore that it be glorified. Beeline nist 


He that answerith bifore that he herith, 13» this. c. 
shewith hym silf to be a fool; and worthi 
of schenschipe. The spirit of a man sus- 14 
teyneth his feblenesse ; but who may sus- 
teyne a spirit 1i3t to be wrooth? Theis 
herte of a prudent man schal holde stid- 
fastli kunnyng ; and the eere of wise men 
sekith techyng. The 3ift of a man alarg-16 
ith his weie; and makith space to hym 
bifore princes. A iust man is the first 17 § ondeynyng 
accusere} of hym silf; his frend cometh, ae 
and schal serche hym§. Lot ceessith ajen- 18 *- 
is f ae || @ mannus 
selyngis ; and demeth also amoug mijti womb; that is, 
. . the kunnyng of 
men. <A brother that is helpid” of 419 vertuouse man 
brothir, is as a stidfast citee; and domes “bl been. 
. rp] 1 trewe teching. 
ben as the barris of citees. A maunus|| 20 (nee d lin 
wombeG schal be fillid of the fruit of his — thatis, deth of 
a A apts synne is in the 
mouth; and the seedis of hise lippis anysraing Ce 
e. . t ’ the 
schulen fille hym. Deth and lijf den in21 liyfof grace = 
the werkis of tunge; thei that louen it, Sate Fal 


schulen ete the fruytis therof. He that22 cians 
fyndith a good womman, fyndith a good 


t to God and 
to a te frend. 


mynde, or his 
desire, shal be 


thing; and of the Lord he schal drawe  falfilied for his 
° vertuons word. 
vp myrthe. He that puttith a wey a good jg; of thi word- 
: : : is thou shalt be 
womman, puttith awei a good thing; but jiijsea’ Me. 
xii. Ke 


he that holdith auowtresse, is a fool and 


u throwith 4. VY Om. sem. W loueth a. 


u ful strong 1. 


30 


23 vnwis. With obsecraciouns speketh the 
pore man; and a riche man shal speke out 

2iruggidli. A man amyable to felashipe 
mor a frend shal be, than a brother. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Betere is a pore man, that goth in 
simplenes, than a riche man tormentende 
2his lippis, and vnwis. Wher is not kun- 
nyng of soule, is not good; and who is 
shastif, with feett stumblith. The folie 
of a man supplauntith hise goingis ; and 
4a3en God boileth in his inwit. Richesses 
adden manye frendis; fro the pore for- 
sothe and tho that he hadde, ben seuered. 
5A fals witnesse shal not ben vupunshid; 
and he that lesing speketh, shal not 
6ascapen. Manye herien* the persone of 
the my3ti; and frendis ben of the 3iuende 
73iftis. The brethern of the pore man 
hateden hym; ferthermor and frendis 
aferr wenten awei fro hym. Who onli 
woordis folewith, no thing shal han ; 
swho forsothe weldere is of the mynde, 
looueth his soule, and the kepere of pru- 
“dence shal finde goodis. The false wit- 
nesse Shal not ben vnpunshid; and that 
1ospeketh lesing, shal pershen. Delicis 
semen not the fool; ne the sernaunt to 
i1lordshipen to princis. The doctrine of 
a man bi pacience is knowe; and the glo- 
rie of hym is to go biside wicke thingys. 
12 As the gnasting of a leoun, so and¥ the 
wrathe of the king; and as deu vpon 
iserbe, so and the gladnesse of hym. The 
sorewe of the fader, the sone a fol; and 
rooues contynuelli thur3 droppende, a 
14womman ful of strif. Housis and rich- 
essis ben 3eue of the fadris; of the Lord 
15 forsothe properli a prudent wif. Slouthe 
sendeth in slep; and a dissolut soule shal 
hungre. Who kepeth the maundement, 
kepeth his soule; who forsothe despisith 
17 his weie, shal be maad dead. He vsureth 
to the Lord, that hath reuthe of the 
pore; and his while he shal 3elde to hym. 


X worschipen 4. 


*therist1. Ythei benz. 20m. c. 


PROVERBS. 


4 sowith a, 


XVIII. 23-—XIX. 17. 


vnwijs. 
bisechingis ; and a riche man schal speke 


A pore man schal speke with 23* that is, doith 


heedli hise 
werkis. kK. 
God ; 


sterneli. A man freendli to felouschipe 24 juacis hi she 


schal more be a frend, than a brothir. 


CAP. XIX. 


Betere is a pore man, that goith in his1 
simplenesse, than a riche man _ bitynge 
hise lippis, and vnwijs. Where is note 
kunnyng of the soule, is* not good; and 
he that is hasti*, in feet hirtith. The3 
foli of a man disseyueth hise steppis ; 
and he brenneth in his soule a3ens Godt. 
Richessis encreessen ful many freendis ; 4 
forsothe also thei ben departid fro a pore 
man, whiche he hadde. A fals witnesse5 
schal not be vnpunyschid; and he that 
spekith leesingis, schal not ascapet. Manys 
men onouren the persoone of a my3ti man; 
and ben’ frendis of hym that deelith 3iftis. 
The britheren of a pore man haten hym;7 
ferthermore and the freendis 3eden awei 
fer? fro hym. He that sueth* wordis 
oonli§, schal haue no thing; but he thats 
holdith stabli the mynde||, loueth his 
soule, and the kepere of prudence schal 
fynde goodis. A fals witnesse schal not9 
be vnpunyschid; and he that spekith 


pacience he 
brekith out in 
to the blasfemye 
of God. Lire 
here. CK. 

t not aseape ; 
Goddis doom, 
in whiche he 
must 3elde re- 
soun of ech idil 
word, and 
myche more of 
a leesing. c. 

§ wordis 

oneli; that is, 
a dissiple that 
loneth more 
the fairnesse of 
wordis than the 
good sentence, 
reportith no 
thing of truthe 
of the techere, 
ethir so litil, 
that it is worthi 
to be rekenyd 
as for non3t $ 
ethir thus, a 
techere that 
hath onely 
wordis and no 
goode dedis, 
schal gete no 
mede of God. 
goodis ; of grace 
in present tyme, 
and of glorie in 
tyme to com- 
ynge. Lire 
here. C. 

l| mynde bi 
Goddis vertue. 
Lire here. Kwa. 
¥ Anowun bi 
pacience ; that 


leesyngis, schal perische. Delices bicomen 10is, the teching 


not a fool; nether ‘7¢ Dicometh? a seruaunt 


to be lord of princes. The teching of ales 


man is knowun bi pacience{{; and his 
glorie is to passe ouere wickid thingis. 


of apostlis and 
of othere tech- 
n the 

a of 
the ne was 
knowun bi this, 
that they dred- 
den not to die 


As the gnasting of a lioun, so and the ire 12 for it. to passe 


of the’ king; and as deewe on eerbe, so 


and the gladnesse of the kyng. The so-1i3 


rewe of the fadir zs a fonned sone; and 
roofes droppynge contynueli 7s a womman 


ful of chiding. Housis and richessis ben14 


jouun of fadir and modir; but a prudent 


ouer wickid 
thingis; that 
is, to do not 
wickid thingis, 
but more to 
suffre peyne. 
Lire here. c. 
** hungur ; in 
suffringe de- 
fante of goostly 
‘oodis, and 


wijf ts 30uun propirli of the Lord. Slouth1s nag eles 


bringith’ in sleep; and a negligent soule 


schal haue hungur**. He that kepith the 16 


comaundement of God, kepith his soule; 
but he that chargith not his weie, schal 
be slayn. 


y Om. «4. 


bOm.1. Car 4 sendith cEFHNPUY. 


goodis. 
his weye ; that 
is, the kepinge 
of Goddis 
heestis. 

schal be slayn; 
bi deth of synne 
and of helle. 


He that hath mercy on a pore 17 Lire here. c. 


XIX. 18—XX. 5. 


18 Lerne thou thi sone, ne despeire thou ; 
to the sla3ter forsothe of hym ne poote 
i9thou thi soule. Who forsothe is vnpa- 
eyent, shal suffre harm; and whan he 
shall cacche, other thing he shal putte 
2z0to. Here thou counseil, and vndertac 
discipline ; that thou be wijs in thi laste 
2ithingis. Manye tho3tis in the herte of 
a man; the wil forsothe of the Lord shal 
2abide stille. A man nedi is merciful ; 
and betere the pore man ri3twis, than a 
23man liere. The drede of the Lord to 
lif; and in plenteuousnesse” it shal abide 
stille, withoute: visiting of the werste. 
24The slowe hideth his?” hond vnder the 
arm pit; .ne to his mouth he leith it. 
25 The ‘man ful’ of pestilence® scourgid, a 
fool-the wisere shal ben. If forsothe thou 
chastise the wise man, he shal vnder- 
2estonde discipline. Who tormentith the 
fader, and fleeth the modir, shenful shal 
27be, and vublisful. Cese thou not, sone, 
to here doctrine; ne vnknowe thou the 
28woordis of kunnyng. The wicke wyt- 
nesse scorneth dom; and the mouth of 
vnpitous men deuoureth wickidnesse. 
29Greithid ben to scorneres domes; and 
smytende hameres to the bodies of foolis. 


CAP. XX. 


1 A’leccherous thing win, and noiseful 
drunkenesse ; who so euere in_ these 
zthingis delitith, shal not be wis. As the 
roring of a leoun, so and? the ferd of the 
king; who terreth hym, synneth ajen 
3his soule. Wrshipe is to the man that 
seuereth hym fro striues ; ‘alle® forsothe 
foolis shu) be mengd with wrong blam- 
4yngis. For eold the slowe wolde not 
eren; thanne he shal begge in somer, 
sand it shal not ben 3iue to hym. 
dep watir, so counseil in the herte of a 


As. 


PROVERBS. 31 


man, leeneth to the Lord; and he schal 
jelde his while to hym. 
and dispeire thou nott; but sette thou 


not{ thi soule to the sleyng of hym. For-19 


sothe he that is vnpacient, schal suffre 
harm; and whanne he hath rauysehid, 


* the drede of 
the Lord and 


Teche thi sone*, 18 his lawe. x. 


t+ dispeire thou 
not ; of his 


lernyng, thou3 


he takith licil 
ether nouzt in 
the bigynnyny, 
for ofte siche 
children ben 


he schal leie to anothir thing. Here thow.20 wel lemed in 


counsel, and take thou doctryn; that thou 


the ende. c. 
thoug he lerne 


be wijs in thi laste thingis. Many thoustis 21 2° % te bi- 


ben® in the herte of a man; but the wille 
of the Lord schal dwelle. 
merciful ; and betere 7s a pore iust man, 


gynnyng; but 
contynue in 
techinge, and 


A nedi man is 22 he shal lerne. 


K marg. 
2 in withdraw. 


than af man liere§. The drede of the 238 of “hne. 


Lord dedith to lijf" ‘of blis'; and he ‘that 
dredith God* schal dwelle in plentee, with 


§ a man liere ; 
that is, than a 
my3ti man that 
bowith awey 


outen visityng! ‘of the worste™. A slow 24 fro ristfulnesse, 


man hidith his hond vndur the” armpit ; 


bi leesingis. 
plente ; of blis, 


and putteth? it not to his mouth. Whanne 2s 0 wostes 
> 


a man ful of pestilence is betun, a fool 
schal be? wisere. If thou blainist a wijs 


man, he schal vndurstonde teehyng. He26 


that turmentith the’? fadir, and fleeth fro 
the! modir, scha] be ful of yuel fame, and 


schal be eursid. Sone, ceesse thou not to27 


here techyng; and knowe thou the wordis 


in no maner 
may neijze 
thidur. 
wisere; that is, 
lesse foul, for [it] 
sehal amende 
him in sum 
thing. Lire 
here. c. 

|| dexourith ; 
that is, swo- 
lewith gredily. 
Lire here. c. 


of kunnyng. A wiekid witnesse scorneth 28 ¢ jooris; that 


doom; and the mouth of vnpitouse men 


is, brekeris of 
Goddis Jawe. 


deuourith|| wickidnesse. Domes ben maad 29 Zire here. c. 


redi to scorneris ; and hameris sinytynge 
ben maad redi to the bodies of foolis4]. 


CAP. XX. 


Wiyn zs a letcherouse thing **, and! 
drunkenesse is ful of noise; who cuere 
delitith in these, sechal not be wijs. As2 
the roryng of a lioun, so and the drede 
of the’ kyng; he that territh hym to ire, 
synneth a3ens his owne lijf*. It is onours 
to a man that departith hym.- silf fro 
strynyngis; but fonned men ben medlid 
with dispisyngis. A slow man noldet ere4 
for ecoold; therfor he schal begge in 
somer, and me sehal not 3yue to hym. 
As deep watir, so counsel zs in the hertes 


2 the plenteousnesse acu. 72 the c prem. —® bacbitere E pr.m, man of pestilence c. > Om, 4. 
€ men E pr. m. 

ether bens. farichker. 8 Om.1. bthelijfa. 1Om.1. of blis. Lire here. n tert. * Om. 1, 
1 ful yuel visityng 1. ™Om.1, hist. Odressith1. Pbether 4 hist. far. $soulex. t wolde 


not 1, 


** syn is le- 


+ cherouse thing ; 


that is, makith 
lecherie ; wher- 
for Jerom 
seith, a wombe 
brennynge of 
wyn, spuecth 
out soone in 

to leccherie. 
Wherfor Loth, 
bi the drynk- 
ing of wyn, 
dide leccherie 
with hise dou3- 
tris, in xix. ¢°. 
of Gen. : 
delitith in 

these $ that is, 
drunknesse and 
leccherie. 

wiys ; for euer 
either deuour- 
ith resoun, and 
cansith dul- 
nesse. C. 


32 


man; but a wis man shal drawe it out. 
6 Manye men merciful ben clepid ; a feith- 
7ful man forsothe who shal finde? The 
riz3twis forsothe that goth in his simple- 
nesse, blisful sones aftir hym shal leuen. 
8The king that sit’ in the sce of dom, 
scatereth alle euelis® in his clere loking. 
9 Who mai sey, Clene is myn herte; pure 
10 withoute syune ? Peis and peis, mesure 
and mesure, either is abhominable‘ anent 
11God. Of his§ studies is the child vnder- 
stonde, if rijt ben and clene the workis 
izof hym. The herende ere, and the seende 
13e3e, the Lord made euer either. Wile 
thou not looue slep, lest thee nedynesse* 
opresse; opene thin e3en, and be thou 
14fulfild with loues. Enel it is, euel it is, 
seith eche biere; and whan he goth awei, 
isthanne he shal glorien. Gold, and the 
multitude of iemmes, and precious ves- 
issel, the lippis of kunnyng. Tac the cloth 
of hym, that bor3 was of the! alien; and 
for straungeres tac awei the wed fro hym. 
17Swete is to a man the bred of lesing; 
and aftir shal be fulfild the mouth of 
ishym with a litil pibbil ston. Tho3tis bi 
counseilis ben strengthid; and bi go- 
iguernailis batailis ben to be tretid. To 
hym that openeth priuetes, and goth 
gilendeli, and spredeth abrod his lippis, 
20ne be thou togidere mengd. Who cursith 
to his fader and moder, shal be quenchid 
21 his li3t in myddyl derenesses. Eritage to 
the whiche is hee3id in the begynnyng, 
22in the laste shal lacke blissing. Ne sey 
thou, I shal 3elde evel for euel; abid the 
23 Lord, and he sha) deliuere thee. Abo- 
minacioun is anent God wei3te and wei3te; 
24a treeccherous balaunce is not good. Of 
the Lord ben ri3t reulid the goingis of a 
man; who forsothe of men mai vnder- 
25stonde his wei? Falling is of men ofte 
to ‘vouwe toX seintis, and aftir the vouwis 
26a3een drawe. Scatereth vnpitous men a 
wis king; and he bowith in vpon hem 


4 sitteth azcu. € euel szcH. 
taken awei deuocioun fro £ pr. m. 


U4 anentis 1. 


PROVERBS. 


f abominacioun c. 


Yaman I. 


XX. 6—26. 


of a man; but a wijs man* schal drawe 
it out. Many men ben clepid merciful; ¢ 
but who schal fynde a feithful man? 


* a wise man ; 
that is, a dili- 
gent disciple. 
schal drawe tt 
out; in axinge 


Forsothe a iust man that goith in his7 ber as 
. . mT an 
simplenesse, schal leeue blessid sones aftir cart. Lire 
hym. A king that sittith in the seete ofs ace 
doom, distrieth al yuel bi his lokyng. Who9 ati aa 
ynge, and a 


may seie, Myn herte is clene ; Y am clene Joefle lem 
of synne? . A wei3tet and a wei3te, a me-10silling; and so 

e Cogelits oI & mesure, 
sure and a mesure, euer eithir is abhomy- 


Pistgsd Sos 
pry a : it is thefte, 
nable at God. A child is vndurstondun bill colonria i ie 
2 < ° ° . colour of ri3t- 
hise studies, yf his werkis ben ni3tful and  funcsec; wie 
cleene. An eere heringe, and an i3e See fer dete mi 
ee yned hooly- 
ynge, God made euere eithir. Nyle thou 13 nesse ether 
equyte, 1s 
loue sleep, lest nedynesse oppresse thee ; double wickid- 
opene thin izen, and be thou fillid with 368 ea) 
looues. Ech biere seith, It is yuel, it 1S 14 eee 
yuel; and whanne he hath go awey, ie; that is, 
, be thou wakir, 
thanne he schal haue glorie. Gold, and 15and diligent in 
3 . ° thi werkis. c. 
the multitude of iemmes, and a preciouse ¢ the bieoll Gh 
g leesing ; that 
vessel, ben the lippis of kunnyng. Take 16;," getun Hi a 
thou awei the cloth of hym, that was  leesing. toa 
man ; liere. 
borewe of an othere man; and for straun- Eu rikenyng ; 
< A i Littirnesse of 
geris take thou awei a wed fro hym. The 17 penaunce, He 
breed of a leesingt is sweet to a man; ji aide yeek 
and aftirward his mouth schal be fillid a a 

. e . ? =. 
with rikenyng. Thou3tis ben maad strong 18 dence, coun- 

q q ° 5 cel, and expe- 
bi counselis ; and bateils schulen be tretid rience, and not 
bi gouernals. Be thou not medlid with 19 i oe 
him that schewith pryuetees§, and goith therforat Ro- 

‘ ; Eats mayns, that 
gylefulli, and alargith hise lippis. The 20 ome 

4 % ‘ world solet to 
list of hym that cursith his fadir and mo- _ hem silf bi 

; Pos ‘ batel kny3t. 
dir, schal be quenchid in the myddis of a 

: . ° . so strong, if he 
derknessis. Eritage to which me haastith 21 jigae net wise 
A ‘ H ' dom, he was 
in the bigynnyng, schal wante blessing in oom! ine 
the laste tyme. Seie thou not, Y schal 22 with ae 

a en. ure 
3elde yuel for yuel; abide thou the Lord, here. c. 
and he schal delyuere thee. Abbomyna-23 jriujtces 
cioun at" God is wei3te and wei3te ; a gile- pre 
ful balaunce is not good. The steppis of 24 his ase 
R nesse. gilefully; 
man’ ben dressid of the Lord; who for- _ schewinge fren- 
: , ; hipe, wh 
sothe of men mai vndurstonde his weie? je i anvehedll 
. ° : priueli. alargith 
Falling of man is to make auow to seyntis, 25 hive lip pia; that 
and aftirward to withdrawe the” vowis. is bihetithgrete 
Ae : Gera thingis, and 
A wijs kyng scaterith wickid men; and 26 fillith litle ethir 


ethe 4. bthenedynes4. iOm.4. * to 


W tho c. 


XX. 27--XXI. 14. 


27a stonene bowe. The lanterne of the 
Lord the brething place of a man, that 
enserchith alle the priuetes of the wombe. 
28 Mercy and treuthe kepen the king; and 
his trone is strengthid with noble mercy. 
20The ful out io3ing of 3unge men the 
strengthe of hem; and the dignete of 
300lde men hornesse. The wannesse of 
wounde shal clense awei euelis, and 
woundis in the! priuyere™ partys of the 
wombe. ; 


CAP. XXI. 


1 As deueseouns of watris, so the herte 
of the king in the hond of the Lord; 
whider euere he wile, he shal bowe it. 

2 Eche weie of a man ri3t to hym semeth ; 

3the Lord forsothe peiseth the hertis. To 
do mercy and dom, more pleseth to the 

4Lord, than sacrifises of victorie. The 
enhauncing of e3en is the larging of the 
herte; the lanterne of vnpitous men 
ssynne. The tho3tis of the. strong man 
euermor in plente; eche forsothe slou3" 
seuermor is in nedynesse. Who gedereth 
tresores with the tunge of lesing, vein 
and herteles is; and he shal be ‘put in° 
7to the grenes of deth. Raueynes of vn- 
pitous men shul drawe them doun; for 
athei wolden not do dom. The peruertid 
weie of a man alien is fro God ; who for- 
sothe is clene, ri3t is the were of hym. 

9 Betere is? to sitte in the corner of the 
hous, than with the womman ful of strif, 

19and in the hous of feste. The soule of 
the vnpitouse’ desireth enel ; he shal not 

iihan merci to his ne3hebore. Punshid 
the bacbitere, the wisere shal be the litle 
child; and if he folewe the wise man, he 
i2shal take kunnyng. The ri3twis bethenk- 
ith of the hous of the vnpitous, that he 
i3drawe awei vnpitous men fro euel. Who 
stoppeth his ere at the cri of the pore, 
and he shal crie, and shal not ben herd. 
14 3ifte hyd quencheth wrathis; and fre 3ifte 


10m. acu. ™priuye uv. %slowe man a. 
man A. 

*a victorie a. y Om. 1. 2 leesing makere 1. 
synne c sec.m. Cand het. 


VOL. Ill, 


PROVERBS. 


© inwardly saitid Rr pr. m. 


33 


bowith a bouwe of victorie** ouer hem. 
The lanterne} of the Lord is the spirit of272 
man, that sekith out alle the priuetees of 
the wombe. Merci and treuthet kepen a2s 
kyng; and his trone is maad strong bi 
mekenesse. 
men 7s the strengthe of hem; and the 
dignyte of elde men 7s hoornessej. 
wannesse of wounde schal wipe aweie 
yuels, and woundis in the priuyere thingis 
of the wombe. 


CAP. XXI. 


As departyngis of watris, so the herte! 
of the kyng zs in the power of the Lord ; 
whidur euer he wole, he schal bowe it. 
Ech weye of a man semeth ri3tful toz 
hym silf; but the Lord peisith the hertis. 
To do merci and doom||, plesith more thes 
Lord, than sacrifices doenY. Enhaunsyng 4 
of i3en is alargyng of the herte; the lan- 
terne of wickid men 7s synne. The thou3tis5 
of a stronge man ben euere in abundaunce; 
but ech slow man is euere in nedynesse. 
He that gaderith tresours bi the tunge of¢ 
a leesing“§], is veyne, and with outen herte; 
and he schal be hurtlid” to the snaris of 
deth. The raueyns of vnpitouse men7 
schulen drawe hem doun; for thei nolden*® 
do doom. The weiward weie of a mans 
is alien fro God; but the werk of hym 
that is cleene, is riz3tful. It is betere to9 
sitte in the corner of an hous with oute 
roof, than with a womman ful of chydyng, 
and in a comyn hous. The soule of an10 
vnpitouse man desirith yuel; he schal not 
haue merci on his nei3bore. Whanne al 
man ful of pestilence is punysehid, a litil 
man 9f wit schal be the wisere ; and if he 
sueth a wijs man, he schal take kunnyng. 
A iust man of the hous of a wickid man !2 
thenkith, to withdrawe wickid men fro 
yuel. He that stoppith his eere at the1s 
cry of a pore man, schal crye also, and° 
schal not be herd. <A 3ift hid quenchith !+¢ 


Pitis 4EGH. 4 ynpitous 


zz hurlid 3. a wolden not 1. b cleene of 


pak hastith ; 
i coueitise to 
gete it viduly. 
wante bless- 
ing ; for the 
grettere schal 
suffre peyne 
or deth, and 
ynly his eir 


The ful out ioiyng of 3onge Heat not eal 


joysche It at 
the ende. Lire 


The sore. ¢. 


* that is, a 
stoon houwe. x. 
t+ The lanterne; 
for kindly lize 
of resoun is 
sum preenting 
of Goddis }i3t. 
of the wombe ; 
that is, herte. 
Lire here. c. 
+ Mercy and 
treuthe ; for 
merci without 
riztfulnesse, is 
cowardise, and 
riztfulnesse 
with ont merci, 
is ernelte, for 
tho distrien a 
king and 
rewme. Lire 
here. c. 
§ horenesse ; 
that is, the eld- 
nesse and sad- 
nesse of wittis, 
with hoornesse 
of the heed. 
The wannesse 
of wounde 3 
causith distri- 
yng of rych- 
essis in ypele 
werkis. Lire 
ere. C. 
Wl merey and 
‘oom ; that is, 
the werkis of 
merci doon to 
nedi men, and 
the werkis of 
riztfulnesse 
doon to men 
oppressid, plese 
more God than 
doen sacrefices 
for Crist in his 
membris hath 
nede to these 
werkis, as he 
seith in xxv. 
c°. of Math, 
fs synne 3 that 
is, thei kunnen 
dressa her vn- 
derstonding to 
synne, and not 
to good, as 
Jeremye seith 
in iii, ce. 
strong man ; 


that is, bi 
strengthe of 
soule and of 
bodi. Lire here. 


° tunge of 


34 PROVERBS. 


isin the bosuin most indignacioun. Io3e to 
the rijtwis is to don dom; and ferd to 
i6men werkende wickidnesse. The man 
that erreth fro the weie of doctrine, in 
17 the felashipe of ieauntis shal wone. Whot 
looueth deynte metis, in nedynesse shall 
be; who looueth win and fatte thingus, 
igshall not be maad riche. For the rij3twise 
shal ben 3oue the vnpitouse; and for the 
19rijt man the wicke. Betere is to dwelle 
in desert lond, than with a ianglende 
29 womman, and wratheful. Desyrable tre- 
sor and oile in the dwelling place of the 
ri3twis ; and the vnprudent man_ shal 
2iscateren it. Who folewith ri3twisnesse 
and mercy, shal finde lif and ri3twisnesse 
g2and glorie. The cite of stronge men the 
wise man ste3ede vp, and destro3ide the 
23 Strengthe of the trost of it. Who kepeth 
his mouth and his tunge, kepeth his soule 
24fro anguysshis. The proud man and the™ 
enhaunsende hymself is clepid vnta3t, the 
25 Whiche in wrathe wercheth pride. De- 
sires slen the slowe; wolden not forsothe 
the hondis of hym any thing werchen. 
2¢ Al dai he coueitith and desireth ; who 
forsothe is ri3twis, shal 3elde, and not 
2z7cese. The ostis of vnpitous men abomi- 
2g nable, that ben offrid of hidous gilte. A 
witnesse liere shal pershe; the obeisaunt 
29man shall speke victorie. ‘The vnpitous 
man wowendeli stablith his chere; who 
30forsothe is rijt, mendeth his weie. Ther 
is not wisdam, ther is not prudence, 
3ither is not counseil ajen the Lord. An 
hors is maad redi to the dai of bataile; 
the Lord forsothe helthe shal 3eelden. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 SBetere is a good name, than manye 
richessis ; ouer siluer forsothe and gold 
2good grace. The riche man and the pore 
metten togidere; the werkere of euer 
seither is the Lord. The felle man seeth 
euel, and hideth hymself; and the inno- 


r Who so 4. 


4 Om. 1. 
land he 1. 


€iust doom. f tot. 


m ther is 1. 


tr Om. c prem. 


& Desiderable ca. 


XXII. 15——-XXI. 3. 


chidyngis; and a 3ift in bosum quenchith 
the’ moost indignacioun. 

iust man to make doom**; aid it is drede Sse svocatis 
to hem that worchen wickidnesse. A man 6 ee 
that errith fro the weie of doctryn, schal and with outen 
dwelle in the cumpany of giauntist. He 17 suttrith defante 


leesing ; as 
a, flatereris of 
It is ioye to a l5riche men and 


herte ; for he 


that loueth metist, schal be in nedynesse; ?) $004 herte 
he that loueth wiyn and fatte thingis, he ia on 


schal not be maad riche. An vnpitouse 13 lelle. hemdoun; 
to helle. nolden 


man schal be 3ouun for‘ a inst man§; and dodoom; thats, 
eae : e instli witl 
a wickid man sehal be 30uun for a riztful the neishore. 
man. It is betere to dwelle in a desert 19 mie: fe 
lond, than with a womman ful of chidyng, “ms that is, 
a é to parforme 
and wrathful. Desirable’ tresoure and oile 20 ristfulnesse. 
are i h P drede ; for thei 
is in the dwelling places? of a iust man; dreden euere to 
. . . be & 
and an vnprudent man schal distrie it. vores a 
He that sueth ri3tfulnesse and mercy, schal 21 oe a 
fynde hjf and glorie. A wijs man stiede 22 fdoctryn; that 


A : é ss is, good doctryn. 

‘in to! the citee of stronge men, and di- Lire here. c. 
. < iauntiss that 

striede the strengthe of trist therof. He b3 tre vad 


rulid, ether of 


that kepith his mouth and his tunge, 


fendis. ¢. 
kepith his soule from angwischis. A 24+ ™etis: that is 
: ‘ vnmesurably. 
proude man and boosteere is clepid a fool, Lirehere.ckxa, 
‘ a a a Se § for a iust 
that worchith pride in ire. Desiris sleen 25 man ; that is, 
1 EF hive howtli idien* val for the yuel of 
a slow man; for hise hondis nolden*worche — peyne doon 


ony thing. Al dai he coueitith and de-26% 4 iust man, 
ae “ is an vnpitouse 
sirith ; but he that is a iust man, schal az, that dide~ 
: ae ee that yuel, schal 
3yue, and! schal not ceesse. The offringis 27 le 30uun to 
. ° . rette 5 
of wickid men, that ben offrid of greet Cente ae 
*t_on Il Of greet tres- 
trespas||, ben abhomynable. A fals wit-28 pias ee 
nesse schal perische ; a man obedient schal  oftaneyn, one 
° ° e e . a re 
speke victorie{. A wickid man makith a ae Ca 
q ri vietorie ; for 
sad his cheer vnschamefastli ; but he that he makith the 
° ° . . . . 1 i 
is ri3tful, amendith his weie. No wis-30 soit to Tost 
dom is™, no prudence is™, no connsel is™ 294 this is the 
; é moste victorie. 
azens the Lord. An hors is maad redi to sere 
A weye ; that is, — 
the dai of batel; but the Lord schal 3yue _ oflitle defautis” 
helth whiche he doith 
elthe. inthis liyf,thouz 
CAP. XXII. he be ful inst. 
Lire here. c. 
Betere is a good name, than many! ii riche ma 
° * ° 6 Clos mak- 
richessis ; for good grace 7s aboue siluer ich a pore man 
: that he bane 
and gold. A riche man** and a pore man2 merit of pa- 
"WL. ° * cience, and he 
metten hem silf; the Lord is worchere of makith a riche 
euer eithir. A felle man seeth yuel, and3 ™2 that he — 
an i : é haue merit of 
hidith him silf; and an innocent man 


mersy, in help=_ 
ingea pore man. ; 
Lire here. C. 


8 Om. «4. 


h place a sec.m.1. ivntor. * wolden not 1. 


XXIL. 4-—21. 


cent passede, and is tormentid with harm. 
4 The ende of manernesse the dred of the 
5 Lord; richessis, and glorie, and lif. Armes 
and swerdis in the weie of the proud; 
the kepere forsothe of his soule ferr goth 
6awei fro hem. A prouerbe is, A 3ung ful 
waxen man aftyr his weie, and whan he 
7eldeth, shal not gon awei fro it. The 
riche man to pore men comaundeth; and 
he that taketh borewing, seruaunt is of 
gthe vsurer. Who sowith wickidnesset, shal 
repen euelis ; and the 3erde of his wrathe 
9shal be ful endid. Who redi is to mercy, 
shal be blissid ; of his loues forsothe he 
jaf to the pore. Victorie and worshipe 
shal purchace, that 3eueth 3iftis; for- 
sothe he taketh awei the soule of the 
1oresceyueres. Cast awey the scornere, and 
with hym shal gon out strif; and causis 
ushul cese, and wrong blamyngis. Who 
looueth clennesse of herte, for the grace 
of his lippis shal han the king frend. 
12 The e3en of the Lord kepe kunnyng; 
and supplauntyd ben the woordis of the 
13 wicke. The slowe shal seyen, A leoun is 
withoute; in the myddel of the stretes 
14] am to be slain. A dep dich the mouth 
of the alien womman; to whom the Lord 
15is wroth, shal falle in to hir. Folie is 
bounde togidere in the herte of the child; 
and the 3erde off discipline shal driuen 
1g6awei it. Who wrong chalengeth the pore, 
that he eeche his richessis, he shal 3yue 
17to a richere, and neden. My sone, bowe 
in thin ere, and here the woordis of wise 
men; lei to forsothe herte to my doctrine. 
is The whiche fair shal be to thee, whan 
thou kepist it in thi wombe, and shal 
19rebounde in thi lippis. That in the Lord 
be thyn trost; wherfore and I shal shewe 
20to thee it to dai. Lo! I haue discriued 
it thre wise, in tho3tus and kunnyng, 
21that I shulde shewe to thee stedefast- 
nesse; and faire spechis of treuthe thou 
‘ shuldest answere of these thingis to them 


PROVERBS. 


35 


passid®, and he was turmentid bi’ harm. 
The ende of temperaunce 7s the drede of 4 
the Lord; richessis, and glorye, and je 
Armuris and swerdis ben in the weie of as 
weiward man; but the kepere of his soule 
goith awey fer fro tho. It is a prouerbe,6 
A 30ng wexynge man bisidis? his weie, 
and whanne he hath wexe‘ elde, he schal 
not go awei fro it. A riche man co-7 
matundith to pore men; and he that 
takith borewyng, is the’ seruaunt of the 
leenere. He that sowith wickidnes +,s 
schal repe yuels; and the 3erde of his yre 
schal be endid. He that is redi* to merci,9 
schal be blessid ; for of his looues he 3af 
to a pore man. He that 3yueth 3iftis t, 
schal gete victorie and onour; forsothe he 


* richessis, 
glorie, and liyf ; 
that is, euer- 
lastinge rich- 
essis, glorie of 
seyntis, and 
everlastinge 
liyf. 

Armuris and 
swerdis ; that 
is, the mys- 
vsyng of tho. 
fro tho ; that 
is, fro mysvsing 
of tho. 

a prouerbe ; 
that is, a word 
seid comynly. 
Lire here. c. 
+ sowith wick- 
idnesse ; that 
is, yuel tech- 
ing, dissen- 
cioun, and 
hatrede, 

yuels ; of synne 
and of peyne. 
3erde of his 
ire; that is, 
the power bi 


takith awei the soule of the takeris. Caste 10 which he dide 


thou out a scornere, and strijf schal go 
out with hym; and causis and dispisyngis 
schulen ceesse. 
nesse of herte, schal haue the kyng a 


yuele. Lire 


He that loneth the clen- 11 this vers, til 


thidur, Caste 
thou out, ete., 
is not in Ebreu. 


freend, fort the" grace of hise lippis. The !2 Lire here. c. 


zen of the Lord kepen kunnyng§; and the 
wordis of a wickid man ben disseyued. 


§ kepen kun- 

nyng ; that is, 
a man hauyng 
very kunnyng, 


A slow man schal seie, A lioun is without- 13 which is of 


forth; Y schal be slayn in the myddis of 


the helthe of 
soule, Lire 


the stretis. The mouth of an alien|| wom-}4 1 Pho weer of 


man is av deep diche; he to whom the 
Lord is wrooth, schal falle in to it. 
is boundun togidere in the herte of a 
child; and a 3erde of chastisyng schal 


dryue it awey. He that falsli chalengith 16 


a pore man, to encreesse lise owne rich- 
essis, schal 3yue to a richere man, and” 
schal be nedi. 
eere, and here thou the wordis of wise 
men; but sette thou the* herte to my 


an alien; that 
is, of fals doc- 


Foli i5 tty, for it 


ledith to the 
depthe of helle. 
wrooth ; for bi 
ire ajenus & 
man, he wi 
drawith fro 
him his grace, 
and so he fall- 
ith fro synne 
in to synne, 


My sone, bowe doun thin 17 and ofte in to 


fals doctryn 
and eresie. 
Lire here. C. 
T in thre ma- 


techyng. That schal be fair to thee, nevis: that is 


whanne thou hast kept it in thin herte, 


in thre partis 
of the Elde 
Testament, 


and it schal flowe a3en in thi lippis. That 19 that ben the 


thi trist be in the Lord; wherfor and Y 


haue schewid it to thee to dai. Lo! Y haue 20 


discryued it in thre maneres], in thou3tis 


lawe, hooly 
stories, and 
profetis ; and 
herbi Salamon 
spekith in the 
persoone of 


and kunnyng, that Y schulde schewe to 2! God, ether he 


t wickenesse E. 


n passid, bi a perclous place. Lire here. text. 
r Om. 1. 
¥ the c. 


wand het. * Om. A sec. m 


o with 1. 1 
8 enclinaunt, ether redi CEGIIKMNPQRSUXYa. enclynaunt, or bowith 1. 


q woxsen TI. 


P aftir A sec. m. marg. 1 teat. 
u Om. c. 


t fro a. 


F 2 


spekith this in 


36 


22that senten thee. Do thou not violence 
to the pore, for he is pore; ne to-trede 
23thou the nedy in the 3ate. For the Lord 
shal deme the cause of hym, and he shal 
stike them, that stekeden the lif of hym. 
24 Wile thou not be frend to a man ful of 
wrathe, ne go thou with a wood man; 
25lest parauenture thou lerne the pathis of 
hym, and take sclaunder to thi soule. 
26 Wile thou not be with them that ficche 
doun ther hondis, and that borewis offren 
27 hemself for dettis ; if forsothe thou hast 
wherof thou restore, what of cause is, 
that" thou take coueryng fro’ thi bed ? 
28Ne ouerpasse thou olde termes, the 
29 whiche thi fadris setteden. Hast thou 
seen a swift man in his werc? befor 
kingis he shal stonde, ne he shal ben 
beforn vnnoble men. 


CAP.: XXIII. 


1 Whan thou shal sitte, that thou ete 
with a prince, besili tac heede that ben 
2set befor thi face, and set a culter in thi 
throte. If ‘ner the latere’’ thou haue 
3power in to thi soule, ne desire thou of 
the metis of hym, in the whiche is the 
4bred of lesing. Wile thou not trauailen 
that thou be riche, but to thi prudence 
sput maner. Ne rere thou thin ejen to 
richessis, that thou maist not han; for 
thei make to them federis, as of an egle, 
sand thei shul flee in to heuene. Ne ete 
thou with an enuyous man, and ne de- 
7sire thou the metis” of hym; for in lic- 
nesse of a deuynour and of a fals castere, 
he eymeth that he knowith not. Et and 
drink, he shal sei to thee ; and the mynde 
gof hym is not with thee. The metes that 
thou hast eten, thou shalt spewen out; 
yand thou shalt leesen thi faire wrdis. In 
the eres of vnwise men speke thou uot ; 
for thei shul dispisen the doctrine of thi 
iospeche. Ne ateyne thou the termes of 


Vifa. VY fora. 


PROVERBS. 


vv neuerthelater 4 e¢ alii. 


XXII. 22—XXIII. 10. 


his owne per- 
soone of his 
thre bokis, 


thee the sadnesse and spechis.of trewthe ; 
to answere of these thingis to hem, that : 
z Prouerbis, Ec- 
senten thee. :Do thou not violence to a 22 clesiastes, aud 
° . Songis, that 
pore man, for he is pore; nethir defoule jeaen'what is 
. * en trewe and fals. 
thou a nedi man in the 3ate. For the Lord 23 yve oul 
schal deme his cause, and he schal tur- 


and yuel, and 

. : what is leneful 

mente hem, that turmentiden his soule. - and vnleneful. 
that senten 


Nyle thou be freend to a wrathful man, 24 ice; in Ebreu 


it is, to men 
axinge thee, 
and thns the 


nether go thou with a wood man; lest25 
perauenture thon lerne hise weies, and aie 
take sclaundir to thi soule. Nyle thou be 26 pleyn. c. 
with hem that oblischen’ her hondis, and 

that proferen hem silf* borewis for dettis; 

for if he hath not wherof he schal restore, 27 

what of cause is*, that thou take awei 

hilyng® fro® thi bed? Go thou not ouer2s 

the elde markis?, whiche thi faders han 

set. Thou hast seyn a man smert in his29 

werk; he schal stonde bifore kyngis, and 

he schal not be bifor vnnoble men. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Whanne thou sittist; to ete with the) 
prince, perseyue thou diligentli what - 
thingis ben set bifore thi. face, and sette2 
thou a withholding® in thi throte. If ne- 
theles thou hast power on thi soule, desires 
thou not of his metis, in whom is the 


breed of ‘a leesingf*. Nyle thou trauele al te 

, aa 

to be maad riche, but sette thou mesure is, getun bia 
° . ° . eesing. 

to thi prudence. Reise® not thin izen tos he ae 

dwe mesure. 


richessis, whiche thou maist not haue; 
for tho schulen make to hem silf pennes, 
as of an egle, and tho schulen flee in to 


resoun. 
to thi pru- 
dence; that is, 
sutilte ether 


henene. Ete thou not with an enuyouse 6 felnesse in 
_ 5 6 ting. Lire 
man, and desire thou not hise metis; for7 fe.°. 


at the licnesse of a fals dyuynour and of 


a coniecteret, he gessith that, that he + coniectere; 


knowith not. He schal seie to thee, Ete ee 

thou and drinke; and his soule is not fremes. /ive 
with thee{. Thou schalt brake! out thes + wis shee; 
metis*, whiche thou hast ete;, and thou eer thi 
schalt leese thi faire wordis. Speke thoug ee Lire 


not in the eeris of vnwise men; for thei 
schulen dispise the teching of thi speche. 


W meet 4GH. 


y fastnen, ether oblischen CEFGUKMNPQRSUXYa. fastnen, or bynden. %silftober. &theris1. » the 


hilyng 1. 
& Reise thou 1. » thei 1. 


¢ of 1. 4 termes, ether markis CEFGMIKMNYPQRSUXYA. 
i spue CEGHKMNPQRSUXYa. caste F pr. ml. 1. 


€cultre, or a withholding 1. 


f liynge 1. 
k mete pP. 


mesure ; of iust 


XNIT. 14—20. 


litle* childer ; and the feeld of moderles 
irchilder go’ thou not’in. The nee3h for- 
sothe of them is strong, and he shal 
j2demen ajen thee the causes of hem. Go 
in to doctrine thin herte, and thin eris 
13to the wrdis of kunnyng. Wile thou not 
withdrawe fro a child discipline; if for- 
sothe thou smyte? hym with 3erde*, he 
i4shal not die. Thou with a 3erde shalt 
smite hym, and the soule of hym fro 
ishelle thou shalt deliueren. My sone, if 
wijs were thin inwit, myn” herte shal 
isiojen with thee; and ful out shuln iojen 
my® reenes, whan thi lippis shul speke 
i7ri3t. Ne enuye’ thin herte synneres ; 
but in the drede of the Lord be thou al 
isdai. For thou shalt han hope in the 
laste, and thin abiding shal not ben taken 
igawei. Heere, my sone, and be thou wijs; 
and ri3t reule in the weie thin inwit. 
20 Wile thou not ben in the festis of drink- 
eris, ne in tle meteshipis of hem, that 
21 flesh to eten bringen. For thei tendende 
to drinkis, and 3iuende scot, shul ben 
wastid, and napping shal be clad® with 
geclothis. Heere thou thi fader, that gat 
thee; and ne dispise thou, ‘whan shal 
23eelden thi moder’. Bie treuthe, and wile 
thou not selle wisdam, and doctrine, and 
24 vnderstonding. Ful out io3eth with ioze 
the fader of the ri3twise ; that a wis man 
a5 gat, shal gladen in hymn. To3e thi fader. 
and thi moder, and‘ ful out io3e, that gat 
asthee. 3if, sone myn, thin herte to me, 
27 and thin e3en my weies kepe thei. A dep 
dich forsothe is$ a strumpet, and a streit 
aspit an alien wominan. She waiteth in 
the weie, as a thef; and whom vnslei3 
a9she seeth, she shal slen. To whom wo? 
to whos fader wo? to whom strif? to 
whom dichis? to whom withoute cause 
woundis ? to whom ‘thristing outs§ of 


Ebren it is, schal adde dispiseris in men ; that is, schal multiplie dispiseris of God among men, 
which is seid a deep dich, for many 3onge men and elde fallen in to it ; also sche is seid a streit pit ; for 
no bnt with hardnesse. And sche settith aspies, in drawinge vnchast men bi flatteringis and cossis. c. i 
that is, prisonns vndur the erthe. without cause; that is, not maad hi swerd, but bi her owne falling. putting out ; 


igen. Lire here. c. 


x thi litle c. Y ne go G sec.m. 


she shal eelde 4. {f Om. c prom. & Om. c pr.m. 


1Om. 1. 
5 gaat I. 


™ smytist CFGKMNQRUXY. 


PROVERBS. 


2 smytyst 4EGH. 


4 or folowe c sec. m. marg. E sec. m. marg. enuye or folewe AGH. 
&é stiflyng E pr. im. 


n Om. 1. 


37 


Touche thou not the ternies of litle chil-10 
dren; and entre thou not in to the feeld 
of fadirles and modirles children. For the 1 
nei3bore of hem is strong, and he schal 
deme her cause ajens thee. Thin herte 12 
entre to techyng, and thin eeris ‘be redi! 
to the wordis of kunnyng. Nile thouis 
withdrawe chastisyng fro a child; for 
thou3 thou smyte™ hym with a 3erde, he 
schal not die. Thou schalt smyte hym 1 
with a 3erde, and thou schalt delyuere his 
soule fro helle. Mi sone, if thi soule ists 
wijs, myn herte schal haue ioye with thee; 
and my reynes* sechulen make ful outis 
ioye, whanne thi lippis speken ri3tful 
thing. Thin herte sue not synneris; but17 
be thou in the" drede of the Lord al dai. 
For® thou sechalt haue hope at the laste, 1s 
and thin abidyng schal not be don awei. 
Mi sone, here thou, and be thou? wijs, 19 
and dresse thi soule in the weie. Nyle2o 
thou be in the feestis of drinkeris, nether 
in the ofte etyngis of hem, that bryngen 
togidere fleischis to ete. For men 3ynynge 21 
tent to drinkis, and 3yuyng mussels togi- 
dere, schulen be waastidt, and napping 
schal be eclothid with clothis. Here thi2z2 
fadir, that gendride’ thee ; and dispise not 
thi modir, whanne sche is eld. Bie thoues 
treuthe, and nyle thou sille wisdom, and* 
doetryn, and" vndurstonding. The fadir 24 
of a iust man ioieth ful out with ioie; he 
that gendride*’ a wijs man, schal be glad 
in hym. Thi fadir and thi modir haue2s 
ioye, and he that gendride® thee, make ful 
out ioye. My sone, 3yue thin herte} to 26 
me, and thin izen kepe my weyes. For an27 
hoore is a deep diche, and an alien wom- 
man is a streit pit. Sche settith aspie in 
the weie, as a theef; and sche schal sle 
hem, whiche sehe schal se vnwar. To29 
whom ?s wog? to whos fadir is wo? 


28 


bthyn 4z pr.m.u. © thy § prem. 


® a jeerde 4. 
f thi moder, whanne 


e clothid 4eGH. 


P Om. t. rnet. 


o And thanne 1. 9 gaat 1. 


° mi reynes ; 
that is, my 
body. Lire 
here. c. 

ft wastid ; as 
to outermere 
goodis; that ben 
spendid in 
suche thingis, 
and as to goodis 
of kynde, that 
ben peirid and 
corrupt in siche 
thingis. 

with clothis ; 
that is, with 
vile clothIs ; 
therfor in E- 
breu it is, with 
clothis to-rent ; 
as if he seye, 
no thing schal 
dwelle tu thee 
wheryine thou 
schalt slepe, na 
bat vile clothis 
and to-rent. 


Bie thou truthe; 


bi the tranel 
of studie. nyle 
thou sille wis- 
dom and tech- 
ing ; for it 
awith to be 
3ounn frely, 
and for it 
passith al priys 
of money, ne- 
theles a techere 
of wisdom may 
take liyflode 
and clothing 
for his tranel, 
ghe, it is due 
to him of the 
comynalte, for 
the prestis of 
Egipt, that 
studieden in 
filosofie, weren 
susteyned of 
the comun 
goodis. Lire 
here. c. 

2 yn herte ; 
to thenke on 
my teching. 
mi weyes ; in 
suynge my 
werkis. an 
hoore ; that is, 
fals doctryn. 

a streit pit; 
for of hard a 
man may go 
out therof. 
enwar; that 
kunnen not 
deme bitwixe 
hoolsum doc- 
tryn and yuel 
doctryn. schal 
ste ; bi deth 
of synne and 
of helle; in 


Also this Jettre mai be expowned of a bodili hoore, 
a man goith not out of the synne of leccherie, 
§ is wo ; that is, cursing and myshap. dichis ; 
that is, febling and derking of the 


’ 


38 


30e3en? Whether not to them, that dwellen 
in wil, and studien to chalices to ben 

31drunken vp? Ne beholde thou the win, 
whan it floureth, whan shal shine in the 

severr the colour of it. It shal gon in 
softe, but in' the laste it shal bite as a 
shadewe eddere, and as a kokatrice ve- 

33nymys shal heelden abrod. Thin e3en 
shul beholde straunge wymen, and thin 

siherte shal speke peruertid thingus. And 
thou shalt ben as slepende in the myddil 
se, and as the steris man al forslept, the 

soSteer staf lost. And thou shalt sey, Thei 
beeten me, but I sorewide not; thei 
drowen me, and I felide not; whanne 
shal I wake, and eft wines finden ? 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Ne enuye! thou euele men, ne desire 
2thou to ben with them. For raueynes 
sweteli thenketh the mynde of hem, and 
giles the lippis of heim speken. Bi wis- 
dam shal the* hous ben bild, and bi pru- 
adence it shul be strengthid. In doctrine 
shul be fulfild! the celeris, with alle pre- 
scious substaunce and most fair. <A wis 
man is strong, and a ta3t man is stal- 
6wrthe and my3ti. For with disposicioun 
me goth in to bataile; and helthe shal ben, 
7Wwher ben many counseilis. Ful hee3 to 
the fool wisdam; in™ the 3ate he shal 
snot openen his mouth. Who thenketh 
»euelis to don, a fool shal ben clepid. The 
thenking of the fool is synne; and abho- 
1ominacioun of men the bacbitere. If slyden 
thou despeire, in the dai of anguysh® 
i‘shal be®™ ‘maad litil® thi strengthe. Deli- 
uere hem, that ben lad to deth; and that 
ben drawen to diyng, to deliuere ne cese 


PROVERBS. 


XXIII. 30-——X XIV. 11. 


to whom ben chidingis? to whom ben 
dichis? to whom ben woundis with out 
cause? to whom ?¢s puttyng out of ijzen? 


Whether not to hem, that dwellen in30 


wyn*, and studien to drynke al of cuppis? 


* in wyn ; 
drunkun ouere 
myche. as an 
addre, etc. ; for 
it wastith tem- 
poral goodis, 
and goodis of 
kynde, and 
goodis of grace, 


Biholde thou not wyn, whanne it spar-a1 for it indusith 


clith, whanne the colour therof schyneth 


in a ver. It entrith swetli, but at the laste 32 


it schal bite as an eddre doitht, and as a 
cocatrice it schal schede abrood venyms. 


to vices, and 
most of lecche- 
rie. as &@ man 
slepinge ; for 
the couetise of 
lecherie bynd- 
ith the resoun 
and wit. of the 


Thin i3en schulen se straunge wymment, 33 see ; that is, of 


and thi herte schal speke weiwerd thingis. 


And thou schalt be as a man slepinge in34 


the myddis of the see, and as a gouernour 


this world, for 
it is hurlid with 
the watris of 
temptaciouns 
and of vices. 

a gouernour 


aslepid, whanne the steere"{ is lost. And 35 aslepid; the 


thou schalt seie, Thei beeten me, but Y 
hadde not sorewe; thei drowen me, and 
Y feelide not; whanne schal Y wake out, 
and’ Y schal fynde wynes eft ? 


CAP. XXIV. 


Sue thou not yuele men, desire thou not! 
to be with hem. For the soule of hem bi-2 
thenkith raueyns, and her lippis speken 
fraudis. An hous schal be bildid bi wis-s 
dom, and” schal be maad strong bi pru- 
dence§. Celeris schulen be fillid in tech-4 
ing, al* riches preciouse and ful fair. As 
wijs man is strong, and a lerned man is 
stalworth and mi3ti. For whi batel is bi-c 
gunnun with ordenaunce, and helthe schal 
be, where many counsels ben. Wisdom 7s7 
hi; to a fool; in the 3ate he schal not 
opene his mouth. He that thenkith to dos 
yuels, schal be clepid a fool. The thou3tes 
of a fool is synne; and a bacbitere zs 
abhomynacioun of men. If thou that’ hast 10 
slide*, dispeirist®|| in the dai of angwisch, 
thi strengthe schal be maad lesse. Dely-11 
uere thou hem, that ben led to deth; and 
ceesse thou not to delyuere hem, that ben 


bodi is the 
schip, the soule 
is the gouern- 
our; the soule 
is seid aslepid, 
whanne it is 
boundun with 
sleep ether with 
lust of lecche- 
rie. Lire here. 
c. 
+ straunge 
wymmen ; that 
is, hooris and 
auoutressis, 
Lire here. c. 
t the steere ; 
is ri3tful doom 
of resoun. schaét 
seie ; whanne 
the sleep ether 
lust is passid. 
thei beeten me, 
ete. ; for asa 
man oppressid 
bi sleep for 
ouer greet 
drunkenesse, 
perselueth not 
thanne, thou3 
e is smytun 
ether drawun, 
so he that is 
holdun with 
greet lust of 
leccherie, per- 
seyueth not 
thanne the 
yuels of synne 
and of peyne, 
in to whiche he 
renneth. schat 
¥ wake, ete. ; 
as he that is 
customable to 
drunkenesse, 
goith ajen to 


drawun to deth . If thou seist, Strengthis 12 drynking soone 


aftir waking, 


and is enclyned herto bi yuel custom, so he that is customable to leccherie, thou3 he wakith sumtyme, turneth a3en to his spuyng, for the yuel 
custom ether corrupcionn of fleisch hurlinge him therto. Lire here.c.  § prudence; that is, good gouernayl. Celeris; that is, the hertis of hereris. 
ful fair ; for goostly richessis ben euer precionse, and ful faire, but bodily richessis han sumtyme filthe knyt to tho. 4i3 ¢o a fool ; for he mai not 
ateyne therto. Lire here. c. ll dispeirist ; of ascaping of perel. Lire here. c. q to deth; vniustly. Lire here. c. 


hat au. 


i or folowe c sec.m. marg. E sec. m. marg. folewe A. enuy or folewe cu. * thin a. } fild a. 
m and in 4. 


nveniannce au. »" Om.c prim. © founden £ pr. m. 


t Om. 1. 
gouernail 1. 
dispeirist Kx. 


u steere (steerne n], ether [the EPpy] instrument of gouernail CEOFGHKMNPQRSUXYA. Steere of 
Vand whannet. Wand iti. *withal1. y Om. omnes preterc. yslide1. 8and 


XXIV. 12-—31. 


12thou. If thou shul seyn, Strengthis 
sernen not; he that is the inward be- 
holdere of herte, vnderstondith, and the 
kepere of thi soule no thing begilith, and 
shall 3elde to a man after his werkis. 
13 Et, sone, hony for good; and the most 
14swete honycomb to thi throte. So and 
the doctrine of wisdam to thi soule; the 
whiche whan thou findist, thou shalt han 
in the laste thingus hope; and thin hope 
isshal not pershe. Ne aspie thou, and 
seche vnpitousnesse in the hous of the 
rijtwis, ne waste thou the reste of hym. 
16 Seuene sithes forsothe shal falle the ri3t- 
wis, and risen; the vnpitouse forsothe 
17Shal fallen in to euel. Whan thin enemy 
fallith, ne io3e thou; and in the falling 
isof hym ful out io3e not thin herte ; lest 
perauenture the Lord see, and it displese 
to hym, and he take awei fro hym his- 
19wrathe, Striue thou not with the werste 
men, and enuye? thou not vnpitose? men. 
20 For enele men han not hope of thingus 
to come, and the lanterne of vnpitous 
21men shal be quenchid. Dreed God, sone 
myn, and the king; and with bachiteres 
22be thou not mengd. For sodeynli at 
ones shal rise the perdicioun of hem, and 
the falling of ener either who knew} ? 
23 These thingus forsothe to wise nen. To 
knowen persone in dom is not good. 
24Who seith to the vnpitous, Thou art 
ri3twis, puples shal cursen to hym; and 
25linages shul wlaten hym. Who vunder- 
nymyn, shul ben preisid ; and vp on hem 
26shal come blessing. lLippes shal kisse, 
27that rijt wrdis answerth. Greithe out 
forth thi were, and bisili enhaunte thi 
feeld, that aftir thou bilde vp thin hous. 
28 Be thon not a witnesse in idil a3en thi 
nez3hebore; and ne flatere thou any man 
29 with thi lippes. Ne sey thou, As he dide 
to me, so I shal do to hym, and I shal 
303elde to eche man after his werc. i the 
feld of the slowe man I passede, and bi 
3ithe vyne of the fool man; and lo! al 


? or folowe E sec.m. marg. folewe 4. enuye or sew GH. 


baftirr, €ther. 4 for itis fulr. © Rigt so 1. 


ners. Lire here. n teat. 


PROVERBS. 


39 


suffisen not; he that is biholdere of the 
herte, vndirstondith, and no thing dis- 

seyueth the kepere of thi soule, and he pe reat 
schal 3elde to a man bi hise werkis, Mj i3'? go#is of the 


* founde ; that 
is, in thenk- 
ing, and in fill. 


ae world to com- 
sone, ete thou hony, for it is good; and = ynge. Bipe 
. neésse ; tact 
an® honycomb ful‘ swete to thi throte. cccasioun to 
A . . 5 Hy 
So and® the techyng of wisdom is good to Wao 
thi soule; and whanne tliou hast founde* es asin 
; . seuene 
it, thou schalt haue hope in the laste ee he is, 
oy aylie ‘ : ofte, for pre- 
thingis, and thin hope schal not perische. — sent liyt ma 
P t be led wit 
= e e nol 
Aspie thou not, and sekef not wickidnesse 15 one sets 
in the hous of a iust man, nether waste Pyare 
thou his reste. For a iust man schal falle 16 ¥ithout oe 
ean 5 inge. ire fro 
seuene sithis 72 the dai, and schal rise i 
; 6 ae . turne it on 
a3en; but wickid men schulen falle in to _ thee, for the 
yuele. Whanne thin enemye fallith, haue UF tide? Rt 
thou not ioye; and thin herte haue not Sims thou 
e . e . . , ? 
ful out ioiyng in his fal; lest perauenture 18 with vneor- 
4 : rigible men bi 
the Lord se, and it displese hym, and he word of blam- 
mig vias Punas ng, but ai 
take awei his ire fro hym. Stryue thou 19 dwith oe 
ei ‘ F a with siehe men 
not with the worste® men, nether sue ;,; peynes, that 
thou wickid men. For whi yuele men han goths be refreyn- 
opine ‘o yuel, an 
not hope of thingis to comynge!, and the other men be 
pets A maad aferd. to 
lanterne of wickid men sclial be quenchid. wise men ; that 
; eae ee 
My sone, drede thou God, and the kyng; as coon ae 
and be thou not medlid with bacbiteris. PS Py3 hee 
For her perdicioun schal rise togidere 22+ ! ‘owe « 

. 2 persoone in 
sudenli, and who knowith the fal of euer doom; that is, 
: appa to fauore hi 
either? Also these thingis that sven ben 23 more than is. 
to wise men. It is not good to knowet+ a een 
persoone in doom. Puplis schulen curse 24 iss Uppis + 

. e . 2 
hem, that seien to a wickid man, Thou __ reforme pees, 
2 3 whos signe is 
art iust; and lynagis schulen holde hem _ kissing to gi- 
° - ge, dere. Mak 
abhomynable. Thei that repreuen dwstli25 reai ii werk ; 
synners', schulen be preisid; and blessing man. 
schal come on hem. He that answerith poo of vate 
3 : 3 7 R vyneris, 
ri3tful wordis, schal kisse lippis. Make 27 and othere ne- 
. . ° ° cessaries to 
redi thi werk with outforth, and worche _ jiys. biide syn 
thi feelde dilygentli, that thon bilde thin (403 
hous aftirward. Be thou not a witnesse 28 4nd gendre 
: . yi children; ether 
with out resonable cause a3ens thi nei3- a ee pe 
5 ie thou hooly 
bore; nether flatere thou ony man with writ, and se the 
SE nace ° ° losis of ti 
thi lippis. Seie thou not, As he dide to29fcrouris, and 
. : aftirward make 
me, so Y schal do to him, and Y schal eee 
3elde to ech man aftir his werk. I passide30 ely eee 
bi the feeld of a slow man, and bi the Lire here. ¢. 


4 to vnpitose E pr. m. 


fseke thou a. &fulwickid1. comer. ! syn- 


40 


netlis hadden fulfild, thornes hadden co- 
uered the vtmost* of it, and the wal of 
sastones was destrojed. The whiche whan 
I hadde see, I putte in myn herte, and 
s3bi exsaumple lernede discipline. Hou 
longe, slowe, thou slepist ? hou longe 
fro slep thou shalt rise? A litil forsothe 
thou shalt slepe, a litil while thou shalt 
nappe, a litil thin hondis thou shalt lei 
31 togidere, that thou reste; and ther shal 
come to thee as a corour thi nedynesse, 
and thi beggingnesse as a man armyd. 
1 These forsothe theY Parablis of Salamon, 
the whiche translateden the men of Eze- 
chie, king of Juda. 


CAP. XXV. 
2 The glorie of God is to hilyn a wrd; 
and the glorie of kingis to enserclien a 
3sermoun. Heuene aboue, and erthe’ be- 
nethe, and the herte of kingus vnserch- 
sable. Do awei rust from siluer, and 
ther shal gon out a most pure vessel. 
5Do awei vnpitousnesse fro the chere of 
the king, and bi ri3twisnesse shal ben 
sfastned the trone of hym. Ne glorious 
apere thou befor the king, and in place* 
7of grete men stonde thou not. JBetere 
is forsothe, that it be seid to thee, Steze 
yp hidir, than that thou be mekid_be- 
sforn a prince. That thin ejen sezen, ne 
speke thou soone in strif; lest parauen- 
ture thou mowe not amende, whan thou 
hast dishonestid thi frend. Thi cause 
trete with thi frend, and priuyte to a 
19 straunger opene thou not; lest perauen- 
ture he asaile to thee, whan he shal 
heren, and to repreuen cese not. Grace 
and frendshipe delyueren, the whiche 
kepe thou to thee, lest thou be maad 
iirepreuable. A goldene cheke bon in sil- 
uerene beddis, that speketh a wrd in his 
iztyme. A goldene erering, and a mar- 
garite shynende, that vndernemeth a wis 
i3man, and an ere obedient. As cold of 
sno3 in the dai of rep, so® an feithful 
messager to hym that sente hym; the 


x vttermoost 4GH. Ybenthe «a. 2 the erthe en. 


K and thannez. 1 ther shal x. 


PROVERBS. 


a the place acu. 


™ saw3en I. 


XXIV, 32—XXV. 13. 


vyner of a fonned man; and, lo! nettlis3 
hadden fillid al, thornes hadden hilid the 
hijere part therof, and the wal of stoonys 
with out morter was distried. And whanne3 
Y hadde seyn this thing, Y settide in myn 
herte, and bi ensaumple Y lernyde tech- 
yng*, Hou longe slepist thou, slow man ? 33 dur 
whanne schalt thou ryse fro sleep? Sotheli 
thou schalt slepe a litil, thou schalt nappe 
a litil, thou schalt ioyne togidere the 
hondis a litil, to take reste; 
nedynesse as a currour schal come to thee, 
and thi beggerie as an armed man. 


CAP. XXV. 


Also these den the Parablis of Salomon, 1 
whiche the men of Ezechie, kyng of Juda, 
translatiden. The glorie of God is to hele2 
a wordt; and the glorie of kyngis zs to 
seke out a word. Heuene aboue, and the3 
erthe bynethe, and the herte of kyngis zs 
vnserchable. Do thou a wei rust fro sil-4 
uer, and a ful cleene vessel schal! go out. 
Do thou awei vnpite fro the cheer of thes 
kyng, and his trone schal be maad stidfast 
bi ri;tfulnesse. Appere thou not glori-6 
ouset bifore the kyng, and stonde thou 
not in the place of grete men. For it is7 
betere, that it be seid to thee, Stie thou 
hidur, than that thou be maad low bifore 
the prince. Brynge thou not forth soones 
tho thingis in strijf, whiche thin izen 
sien™; lest aftirward thou maist not 
amende, whanne thou hast maad thi frend 
vnhonest §. Trete thi cause with thi9 
frend, and schewe thou not priuyte to a 
straunge man; lest perauenture he haue} 
ioye of thi fal, whanne he hath herde, 
and ceesse not to do schenschipe to thee. 
Grace|| and frenschip delyueren, whiche" 
kepe thou to thee, that thou be not maad 
repreuable. A goldun pomel in beddis of} 
siluer zs he, that spekith a word in his 
time. A goldun eere ryng, and a° schin-1 
ynge peerle 7s he, that repreueth a wijs 
man, and an eere obeiynge. As the coold1 
of snow] in theP dai of heruest, so a 


bit is EG seem. © Om. 4G prim. H. 


t. 


n the whiche 1. © Om. ec. POm.1r 


1 * teching ; wise 
men seynge the 
ner of 
slowe men, and 
of foolis, ben 

g more bisi to 
kepe and tile 
her posses- 
siouns; ether 
bi ese feeld and 

, is vn- 

3 cata the 
consience of a 
man, which 
whanne it is 
not kept bisily, 
is fillid with 
dyuerse vices ; 


and* thi 34 and wise men 


that biholden 
this, ben bisiere 
to purge her 
owne con- 
sience. Lire 
here. C. 
t The glorie of 
God is to hele a 
word ; that is, 
the priuyte of 
hooly scripture. 
The bigyn- 
nyngis of Ge- 
nesis and of 
Esechiel ben 
3ounn priuely, 
ether bi heling, 
that vnfeithful 
men be scorned, 
and Cristen 
men ful of stu- 
die be ocupied, 
and wondre on 
the depthe of 
Goddis wisdom. 
seke out a word; 
that is, the sen- 
tence of Guddis 
word, tau3t 
priuely. Lire 
here. c. 

+ gloriouse, 
Hing in press- 
ynge forth thee 
ouere dwe me- 
sure, lest thi 
schame sue. 
Lire here. c. 

§ wnhonest ; 
that is, telle 
thou not soone 
to othere men 
the pryuy ynels 
of thi neizhore, 
lest thou maist 
9 not jelde good 
fame to thi 
neizbore, which 
fame thou hast 
hirt. Lire here. 


C 
{| Grace ; this 
vers til thidur, 
a goldun pomel, 
1 etc., is not in 
Sbreu. Lire 
here. c. 
q the coold of 
2 snow ; that is, 
wynd kelinge 
reperis, at the 
an on of coold 
snow. Live 
nee Cc 


XXV. 14—XXVI. 1. 


soule of hym to resten he maketh. 
14Cloud and wind, and reines not folew- 
ende, a man glorious, aud the behestes 
isnot fulfillende. Bi pacience shal ben 
maad softe the prince; and a nesshe 
i¢tunge shal to-breke hardnesse. Hony 
thou hast founden, ett that suffiseth to 
thee; lest parauenture fulfild thou spewe 
17it out. Withdra3 thi foot fro the hous 
of thi ne3hebore; lest any time fulfild, he 
isshul hate thee. Spere, and swerd, and 
sharp arwe, a man that speketh a3en his 
ione3hebore fals witnesse. A roten toth, 
and a foot sliden, that hopith vpon the 
govnfeithful in the dai of anguysh, and 
leeseth the mantil in the dai of cold. 
Hisel in glas, that singeth dites with 
peruertid herte. As a mo3he? to the 
cloth, and a werm to the tree, so sorewe 
210f a man no3eth to the herte. 
enemy shul hungren, feed hym; if he 
aethristith, 3if hym watir to drinke; for- 
sothe colis thou shalt gadere togidere vp 
on the hed of hym; and the Lord shal 
23 3elde to thee. A northerne wind scater- 
eth reynes; and a dreri face the bac- 
2abitende tunge. Betere is to sitte in a 
corner of a roof, than with a womman 
25ful of strif, in the hous of a feste. Cold 
watir to the threstende soule; aud a good 
a¢messager fro a ferr lond. A welle tru- 
blid bi foot, and a veyne corupt, the 
27vi3twis fallende beforn the vnpitous. As 
he that etith myche hony, and it is not 
to hym good; so that® is a serchere of 
2s mageste, shal ben opressid of glorie. As 
an opyn cite, and withoute enuyrounyng 
of wallis; so a man that mai not in 
speking chastisen his spirit. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 What maner sno3 in somer, and reyn 
in rep time; so vnsemende is to the fool 


hem that wolen entre, so the priuytes of sich a man ben opyn to othere men. Lire here. c. 


If thin - 


PROVERBS. re 


feithful messanger to hym that sente ‘ be fillid ¢ 
thilke messanger’, makith his soule to {ie oO 
haue reste. A cloude and wind, and reyn i BA 
. a ie 
not suynge, 7s a gloriouse man, and not Srsiee ih a 
fillynge biheestis. A prince schal be maad 15 brekith and 
° ° iy rothith 
soft bi pacience; and a soft tunge schal — whanne vyoe- 
breke hardnesse. Thou hast founde hony, 163.902 thot ig 
ete thou that that suffisith to thee; lest ne orga 
€ Lawe an 
perauenture thou be fillid, and brake" it at profetis. to 
‘ F the worste 
out. Withdrawe thi foot fro the hous of 17 herte; that is, 
; . . P to a man of 
thi neizbore; lest sum tyme he be fillids*, stynat in ayn 
and hate thee. A dart, and a swerd, and 19 0" eis "0 | 
a scharp arowe, a man that spekith fals ™07 is wroth, 
, i 3 Ei and is stirid to 
witnessing a3ens his neiz3bore. A rotun bg Sipyapee 
‘ . Lire here. c. 
tooth, and a feynt foot zs he, that hopith — t fede shou 
; . . him ; that is 
on an vnfeithful man in the dai of an- jelpe thi nen 
; . . Sed +, bore set in 
gwisch, and leesith his mentil in the dai 20 en. sete 
of coold. WVynegre in a vessel{ of salt is that is, thon 
es 2 sc induce 
he, that singith songis to the worste herte. _ him to do re. 
A ‘oth loth pentaunceof the 
S a mou3te woreth a cloth, and a worm _ ynel which he 
noieth* a tree, so the sorewe of a man {ie tothe 
noieth the herte. If thin enemy hungrith, 21 2. sha! selde 
a : ee to thee; that is, 
feede thou himt; if he thirstith, 3yue — meede for the 
; ss charite of the 
thou watir to hym to drinke; for® thou 22 neisbore; in 
. : . Ebren thi 
schalt gadere togidere coolis on his heed; and the Lord 
2 schal make him 
and the Lord schal 3elde to thee. The 23 bie lg 
north wind seateretl” reynes; and a sorew- oF thon SE 
ful face distrieth a tunge bacbitinge. It 24 tia tesith fir 
. . ‘ nesse bi a htt 
is betere to sitte in the corner of an hous  meuyng, a 
i q kun vey 
without roof, than with a womman ful of pe se 
- . 5 80 18 a iust man 
chidyng, and iiacercom ya hous. Coold 2s Feige (ike 
watir to a thirsti man; and a good mes- egos frane 
. ifor a wicki 
sanger fro a fer lond. A welle§ dis-26 man, for he ae- 
. . fameth him 
turblid with foot, and a veyne brokun,  inyche fora 
. . “s litil fal, and of 
a iust man fallinge bifore a wickid man. y"p.c0he mak- 
GrbeG ; 97 ith a beem. 
hony ; so he that is a serchere of maieste||, _ Il aware of 
is ‘ maieste ; that 
schal be put doun fro glorie. As a citee 28 is, wole mesure 
@arith t f -Wallisese is dyuyn thingis 
opyn, and with out cumpas of wallis; so 28 ij his owne wit 
a man that mai not refreyne his spirit in pee 
. ie; that is 
speking. NGL > 
schal falle in to 
CAP. XXVI. errour. @s @ 
x . cilee opyn, ete.; 
As snow in somer, and reyn in her-1 chat e ms thie 
ite : . snnere thingis 
uest; so glorie is ynsemeli to a fool. For? Le vculteene 
ben opyn to 
{ as saow ; is vnsemely. iu somer; fer it is azenus the 


kynde of the tyme. ia heruist; for it peirith the ripe corn, and disposith to corrupcioun. gtorie ; that is, onour, to be 3ouun in opyn ie This 
word forwhi is not in Ebren, but it sueth thus, as @ brid, ete. so cursiag brou3zt forth with out resonable cause schal not come ; that is, on him in to 
whom it is breu3t ferth, as a bird vnstable of abiding, that flecth oner to a certeyn place, turneth net ajen- Lire here. c. 


4 mou3th 4. mow3te E. 


q him 1. 


VOL. ITI. 


T spue CEF pr. m. GUIKMNPQRSUXYA, 


8 full therof 1. 


¢ he that 4. 


t Om.1. 4 for so1. Yseaterith abrod 1. 


G 


42 


eglorie. For as a brid to he3e thingus 
ouerfleende, and a sparewef whider hym 
list goende; so curs in veyn spoken in 
3to sum man shal comen ouer. A scourge 
to an hors, and a bernacle to an asse 5 
and a 3erde in the reg of vnprudent men. 
4Answere thou not to a fool aftir his 
folie, lest thou be maad out lic to hym. 
s Answere to a fool aftir his folie, lest he 
6seme to ben wis to hymself. Halt in 
feet, and drinkende wickidnesse, that 
7sendith wordus bi a fool messager. What 
maner the halte hath in veyn faire 
leggis; so vnsemende thing is in the 
smouth of foolis a parable. As he that 
sendith a ston in to an hep of monee; so 
he that 3iueth to an vnwis man wrshipe. 
9What maner if a thorun be growen in 
the hond of the drunken; so a parable in 
10the mouth of foolis. Dom determyneth 
causes; and he that puttith silence to a 
i1fool, swageth wrathis. As an hound 
that tourneth aj3eeu to his vome; so an 
vnprudent man, that reherseth his folie. 
12 Hast thou seen a man wis to be seen to 
hymself? more than he an ynwis man 
i3shal han hope. The slowe seith, A leoun 
is in the weie, and’ a leounesse is in the 
i4gatis. As a dore is turned in his heeng ; 
18s0 a slo3 man in his litle bed. A slo3 
man hidith his" hondis vnder his arm 
pit; and tranailith, if to his mouth he 
16shal turne! them. Wisere to hymself the 
slowe semeth, than seuene men spekende 
17sentences. As he that cachith bi the 
eres a dogge; so he that passeth, and 
vnpacient shal be mengd with* to the 
isstrif of an other. As gilti he is, that 
igsendith speres and arwes in to deth; so 
the man that gilendeli nojeth to his 
frend, and whan he were ca3t, shal sey, 


** semeth wisere ; in sekinge the reste of his fleisch, than excelent wise men. Lire here. c. 


PROVERBS. 


XXVI. 2—19. 


whi as a brid fliynge ouer to hi3 thingis, 
and” a sparowe goynge in to vncerteyn ; 
so cursing brou3t forth with out resonable 
cause schal come aboue in to sum man. 
Beting* to an hors, and a bernacle to an3 
asse; and a 3erde inY the bak of vnpru- 
dent men. Answere thou not* to a fool 
bivY his foli, lest thou be maad lijk hym’. 
Answere thou a fool bi? his fooli, lest hes 
seme to him silf to be wijs. An haltinges 
man in feet, and drinkinge wickidnesset, 
he that sendith wordis by a fonned mes- 
sanger. As an haltinge man hath faire7 
leggis in veyn; so a parablet is vnsemeli 
in the mouth of foolis. As he that cast-s 
eth a stoon in to an heep of mercurie}; 
so he that 3yueth onour to an vnwijs man. 
As if a thorn growith in the hond of ao 
drunkun man; so° a parable in the mouth 
of foolis. 
and he that settith silence to a fool, swag- 
ith iris’. 
to his spuyng; so zs an vnprudent man, 


As a dogge that turneth ajen11 


* Answere thot 
not; that is, 
foly, as he spal 
folily. answer 
thou a fool,ete., 
in declaringe 
resonably. Lin 
here. c. 

+ drynkinge 
wickidnesse ¢ 
that is, drynk 
noyful to bim 
silf. Lire here 
Cc 

{ 30 @ para- 
ble; that is, 
teching, for 
foolis techen 
vnsemely. Lin 
here. c. 

§ sendith a 
stoon in to the 
heep of mer- 
curte ; that is 
to bielde a ten 
ple in the ono 
of this idol. - 
onour to an w 
wise man ; for 
euer either 
onour is Jost; 
in Ebreu thus 
He that sendi 
a stoon in to bi 


Doom determyneth causis || ; 10 brood place of 


the slynge, ete 
that is, a stoo 
is leid there, 

be sent an hij 
ajenus the kim 
of the stoon 5 


that rehersith his foolif. Thou hast seyn 120 onour jou 


aman seme wijs to hym silf; an vnkun- 
nyng man schal haue hope more than he. 


to an vnwise 
man, is a3enu 
resoun, sither 
it owith to be 


A slow man seith, A lioun is in the weie, 133" %2™ 


a liounnesse is in the foot pathis. 
dore is turned in his® hengis‘; so a slow 


man onely. @ 


AS aja thorn; asa 


drunkun mai 
hauynge a 
thorn in his 


man in his bed. A slow man hidith hise 15 hone, prickid 


hondis vndur his armpit; and he trauelith, 
if he turneth tho’ to his mouth. <A slow) 
man semeth wysere** to hym silf, than 
senene men spekynge sentensis. 
that takith a dogge bi the eeris; so he 
that passith, and 7s vnpacient, and is med- 
dlid with the chiding of anothir manff. 


him silf and 
othere men, | 


g doith a fool 


techinge ethi 
prechinge. 


mcd 
As hei7z | causis; th 


is, plees. Li 


Ce 

q his folys 
that is, greet 
foly, ether 
lice, that ma 


As he is gilti, that sendith speris and 1sith him abh 


mynable toG 


arowis in to deth; so a man that anoi-19 and men. @ 


eth gilefuli his frend, and whanne he is 
takun, he schal seie, Y dide pleiynge. 


unkunnyng 
man; that i 
knowinge hit 
ignorannee. 

Lire here. c. 


+t chiding of anothir man; that is, he that 8 


rith no wrong of an othir man, excitith him with whom he chidith with out cause, to bite him bi word ether dede. Y dide pleynge; whanné 
may not excuse the opyn mulice of dede, he denyeth the malice of entent which is hid. to the ynneste thingis of the herte ; that is, he feyneth him 
speke for the loue of ri3tfulnesse, ether for the good of him to whom he spekith, ether of whom he spekith; but he purposith to anoye til to the 
with foul siluer ; that is, with the dros of siluer, as it isin Ebreu. lolnynge lippis; that is, spekinge with bolnyng of pride. for vii. wickid 


fsparec. €Om.c. 6b Om, «eu. 
w and ast. *Beting beni. Ytow YY aftir 1. 
©soisi. wraththis 1. ¢ the r. 


i chaungen & pr.m. 


f herre, ether heengis CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXYA, 


k Om. 4G prim, H. 


b sendith CEFHNPUY. 
& hem up 1. 


Z to him Ka. 4a aftir ¢. 


XXXVI. 20—XXVII. 9. 


20 Pleiende I dide. Whan wodis sluln 
failen, the fyr shal ben queynt!; and 
the groynere withdrawen, striues togi- 

2idere resten. As deade colis to quyke 
colis, and wode to fyr; so a wratheful 

22man rereth striues. The wrdis of a 
groynere as simple; and thei comen thur3 

23to™ the inmostis of the herte. What 
maner as with foul siluer thou wilt ho- 
noure britil vessel; so swellende lippis 

24with werst herte felashipid. In his 
lippis is vndirstonde the enemy, whan in 

asherte he hath tretid treceheries. Whan 
he shal vndirputte his vois, ne 3iue thou 
eredence to hym; for seuene wickid- 

26énesses ben in the herte of hym. Who 
eouereth hate gilendeli, shal ben opened 

e7the malice of hym in counseil. Who 
delueth a dich, shal falle in to it; and 
who ouirturneth a ston, it shal ben a3een 

2eturned to hym. A deseyuable tunge 
looueth not the treuthe; and the slideri® 
mouth werchith fallingis. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 Ne glorie® thou in to the moru, vn- 
knowende what the dai to ouercome 
2bringe forth. Preise thee an alien, and 
not thi mouth; a straunger, and not 
3thi lippis. Heuy is the ston, and chari- 
ous is the grauel; but the wrathe of the 
4fool is heuyere than either. Wrathe 
hath not mercy, ne brekende out wod- 
nesse ; and the bure of the stirid spirit 
sbern who shall moun? Betere is open 
6amending, than hid looue. Betere ben 
the woundis of the loouere, than the 
zgileful kosses of the hatere. The soule 
fulfild shal to-trede the hony comb; the 
soule forsothe hungrende also bitter for 
ssweete shal take. As a brid ouerpass- 
ende fro his nest, so a man that forsak- 
geth his place. With oynement and di- 
uers smellis deliteth the herte; and with 
goode counseilis of the frend the soule is 


PROVERBS. 


43 


Whanne trees failen, the fier schal be 20 
quenchid ; and whanne a priuy bacbitere 
is withdrawun, strynes resten. As deed2i 
coolis at quie coolis, and trees at the fier; 
so a wrathful man reisith chidyngis. The 22 
wordis of a pryuei bacbitere ben as syin- 
ple; and tho comen til' to the ynneste! 
thingis of the herte. As if thou wolt*23 
ourne! a vessel of erthe with foul siluer ; 
so ben bolnynge lippis felouschipid with 
‘the werste™ herte. An enemy is vndir-21 
stondun bi hise lippis, whanne he tretith 
giles in the" herte. Whanne he ‘makith 2s 
low® his vois, bileue thou not to hym ; 
for seuene wickidnessis ben in his herte. 


The malice of hym that hilith hatrede26 


gilefuli, schal be sehewid in a counsel. 
He that delueth a diche, schal falle in to27 
it; and if a man walewith a stoon, it 
schal turne a3en to hym. A fals tunge 2s 
loueth not treuth; and a slidirP mouth 
worchith fallyngis. 


CAP. XX IT, 


Haue thou not glorie on’ the morewe*, i 
‘not knowynge™ what thing the dai to® 
comynge schal bringe forth. Another 
man, and not thi mouth preise thee; a 
straunger, and not thi lippis ‘preise thee'. 
A stoon is heuy, and grauel is chariouse ;3 
but the ire of a fool is heuyere than euer 
eithir. Ire hath no merci, and" wood-4 
nesse brekynge out ‘hath no merci’; and 
who mai suffre the fersnesse of a spirit 
stirid’? Betere is opyn repreuyngt, thans 
loue hid. Betere ben the woundis of hym¢ 
that loueth, than the gileful cossis of hym 
that hatith. A man fillid sehal dispise7 
an hony coomb; but an hungri man schal 
take, 3he, bittir thing for swete. As as 
brid passinge over fro his nest, so is a 
man that forsakith his place. The hertes 
delitith in oynement, and dyuerse odours ; 
and a soule is maad swete bi the good 


ben in his 
herte ¢ that is, 
the vnyuersite 
of malice, ethir 
af wickidnease. 
a dich telueth ; 
that is, makith 
redy falling ta 
another man. 
slidur mouth ; 
that kepith nat 
priuyte. tcor- 
chith fallingis ; 
in openynge 
councel to ad- 
uersaries. Lire 
here. c. 


* Uaue thou 
not glorie on 
the morewe ; 
that is, dilaye 
thou not a goud 
werk, vndur 
hope of tyme to 
comynge more 
able. stirid ; bi 
ire, ethir wood- 
nesse; no man 
may suffre this, 
no but ful wiys 
and pacient. 
Lire here. c. 
Tt opyn repret. 
yng; bi which 
repreuyng 
good cometh to 
him that is re- 
prenyed. éhan 
loue hid; that 
is, not schewid 
in werk, for no 
good cometh 
therof to him 
that is loued. 
woundis of the 
louyere 5 that 
ben doon to 
amending of 
him that is 
Joued. gileful 
cossis ; than 
ben maad to 
disseyuing af 
im that is 
kissed. forsak- 
ith his place ; 
that is, hows, 
and meynee, 
and chargith 
not of the cure 


of hem; and bi ‘ 


this is vndur- 
stondun the 
malice of a pre- 
lat, dispisynge 
the cure ether 
helthe of soulis, 
for bisynessis 
and offices of 
erthely thingis. 
Lire here. c. 


Iquenchid arc. ™ unto 4eGH. "slyper 4. © ioye 4. 


ma ful wickid 1. ® dis 1. 
t that knowist not 1. 


' onoureu py. honoure a. 


h Om.a. | ynnere m. innerest ry. k woldist 1. 
Psliperm. oft. 


© sendith doun, ether makith low chFGHIKMNPQRSUXYa. 
*Om.cq:r. tOm.1 Y%nerw YOm.1.  yuel stirid 1. 


Ga 


44 


ioswetid. Thi frend, and the frend of thi 
fader, ne leue thou; and the hous of thi 
brother go thon not in, in the dai of thi 
tormenting. Betere is a ne3hebore bi- 
uside, than a brother aferr. Studie to 
wisdam, sone myn, and glade thou myn 
herte; that thou mowe to the repreuere 
wanswern a wrd. The felle seende enel 
is hid; litle childer forth passende suf- 
isfreden harmys. Tac the clothing of 
hym, that behotith for a straunger ; 
and for an alien tac awei to hym a wed. 
14Who blissith to his ne3hebore with a 
gret vois, fro ny3t risende, to the cursere 
isshal be lic. Rooues thur3 droppende in 
the dai of cold, and a womman ful of 
isstrif ben comparisound togidere. Who 
holdith hir, as he heelde wind; and the° 
izoile of his ri3t side he auoide out. Iren 
with iren is whettid out; and a man 
is whettith out the face of his frend. Who 
kepith a fige tree, shal ete the frutis of 
it; and who kepere is of his lord, shal 
i9ben glorified. What maner wise in wa- 
tris a3jeen shinen the cheres of men lok- 
ende; so the hertes of men ben opened 
20to prudent men. Helle and perdicioun 
neuere ben fulfild; and the ej3en of inen 
21vnfillable. What maner wise siluer is 
preued in the 3eting vessel, and gold in 
the furneis ; so is preued a man in the 
month of preiseris. The herte of the 
wicke sechith out enelis; the ri3t for- 
zesothe herte secheth out kunnyng. If 
thou bete togidere a fool in a morter, as 
hoolid barli smytende there vp on the 
pestel; shal not ben take awei fro hym 
23his folie. Bisili knowe thou the chere 
of thi beeste; and thi flockis behold. 
24 Forsothe thou shalt not han continuelli 
power; but acroune shal be 3olde to thee 
25in ieneracioun of ieneraciouns. Opened 
ben the medwis, and apereden greene 
erbis; and gedered ben heys fro the hillis. 


amendid, hi what euer chastising ethir beting moun. Lire here. c. 


PROVERBS. 


XXVIT. 19——25. 


counsels of ‘a frend. Forsake thou not10 
thi frerid, and the frend of thi fadir; and 
entre thou not in to the hous of thi bro- 
thir, in the dai of thi turment. Betere is 
a nei3bore ny3, than a brothir afer. Miu 
sone, studie thou a boute wisdom, and 
make thou glad myn herte; that thou 
maist answere a word to a dispisere*. 
A fel man seynge yuel was hid; litle men 12 
of wit passinge forth suffriden harmes. 
Take thou awei his clooth, that bihizte 13 
for a straunger; and take thon awei a* 
wed fro hym for an alien man. He that 14 
blessith his} nei3bore with greet vois ; 
and risith bi ni3t, schal be lijk hym that 
cursith. Roouys droppynge in the dai of 1s 
coold, and a womman ful of chidyng ben 
comparisond’. He that withholdith{ hir, ie 
as if he holdith? wynd; and auoidith the 
oile of his rijt hond. Yrun is whettid bi®17 
irun; and a man whettith the face of his 
frend. He that kepith a fige tre, schal 1s 
ete the fruytis therof; and he that is a 
kepere of his lord, schal be glorified. 
the cheris of men biholdinge schynen in 
watris; so the hertis of men ben opyn 
to prudent men. Helle and perdicioun 20 
schulen not be fillid; so and the ijen of 
men§ moun not be fillid. As siluer isi 
preuyd in a wellyng place, and gold ‘zs 
preued” in a furneys; so a man is preued 
bi the mouth of preyseris. The hertel 
of a wickid man sekith out yuels; but a 
ri3tful herte sekith out kunnyng. Thou3 22 
thon beetist® a fool in a morter, as with 
a pestel smytynge aboue dried barli; his 
foli schal not be don awei fro him. 
Knowe thou diligentli the cheere of thi23 
beeste**; and biholde thou thi flockis. For 24 
thou schalt not hane power contynueli; 
but a coroun schal be 3ouun to thee in 
generacioun and in to generacioun. Mede-25 
wis ben openyd, and greene eerbis apper- 
iden; and hey is gaderid fro _hillis. 


i 
Asi9 


* answere a 
word to a dis- 
pisere ; that is, 
to him that dis- 
pisith truthe, in 
conuyctinge 
ether ouercom- 
ynge him re- 
sonahly. Lire 
here. c. 

+ that blessith 
his, etc.; that 
is, flaterith him 
opynli. and 
risith bi ny3t ; 
that is, doith 
this hisili. Lire 


here. c. 

t with holdith ; 
that is, enfors- 
ith to with- 
holde fro her 
nysete. holdith 
wynd; and this 
is inpossible, 
ether ful hard. 
the oile of his 
rizthond ; for 
oile holdun in 
the ri3t hond, 
be it streyned 
neuere so 
harde, goith 
out; soa nyse 
womman, how 
myche euer 
sche be re- 
streyned, fynd- 
ith weyes to do 
yuele. Lire 
here. C. 

§ so and the 
izen of men, 
etc. 3 coueyt- 
ouse men moun 
not be fillid ; 
for whi coueyt- 
ise is not de- 
creessid, but 
encreesid bi 
thingis getun. 
bi the mouth of 
preiseris ; for 
herbi it apper- 
ith, wher he is 
verili vertuonse, 
ether nay, if he 
is not enhauns- 
id, ether proud, 
bi the preissing 
in ony maner, 
lt is maad 
hetere, the 
truthe of the 
vertu apperith, 
which preisid, 
encreesith ; if 
he is enhaunsid, 
the falsnesse 
aperith. Lire 
here. C. 

ll the herte ; 
this vers is not 
in Ebrev. Lire 
here. c. 

{| thou; thou 
betist a fool, 
etc.; that is, he 
schal not be 


** the cheer of thi beeste ; this is expowned of prelatis that han cure of 


soulis thus. knowe thou diligently the cheer of thi beeste ; that is, the liyf and condiciouns of men suget to thee. for thou schalt not haue power to 
amende hem contynuely ; that is, aftir deth. but a coroun, of glorie, schal be 30uun to thee, if thou vsist well the power bitakun to thee. Lire here. 


© as the E pr.m. 


*the1. Ylikned to gidrer. Zholder. @withr. bOm.1. © beestist a, pownedist 1. 


| 


XXVIII. 26—XXVIII. 14. 


26 Lombis ben to thi clothing ; and geet to 
27the pris of the feeld. Suffise to thee the 
myle of got in to thi metes; in to the 


thin hond wymmen. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 The vnpitouse fleeth, no man pursu- 
ende; the rij3twis forsothe as a leoun 
2trostende without ferd shal be. For the 
synnes of the erthe manye princis of it; 
and for the wisdam of a man, and the 
kunnyng of these thingus that ben seid, 
3the lif of a duk shal ben lengere. A 
man pore chaleugende pore men, lic is 
to hidous weder, in whiche is greithid 
ahunger. Who forsaken the lawe, preisen 
the vnpitous ; who kepen, shul ben tend 
5vp a3jen hym. Euele men thenken not 
dom ; 
6 Lord, taken to heed alle thingus. Betere 
is a pore man goende in his simplenesse, 
than a riche man in his shreude weies. 
7 Who kepith the lawe, a wis sone is; 
who forsothe glotounes fedith, shendith 
shis fader. Who kepith togidere richesses 
with vsures, and with free wynnyng of 
ysure, In to pore men he gedereth hem 
9togidere. Who bowith doun his eres, 
that he here not the lawe; his orisoun 
toshal be maad cursful. Who desceyueth 
ri3te men in an euel weie, in his deth 
shal falle; and simple men shulnu welden 
ithis goodis. A wis man to hymself is 
seen a riche man; the pore forsothe 
12 prudent shal enserchen hym. In the ful 
out iojing of ri3twis men myche glorie? 
is; regnende vnpitous men, fallingus ben 
130f men. Who hidith his hidons giltis, 
shal not ben ri;t reulid; who forsothe 
knoulechith and forsakith, mercy shal 
lagete. Blisful.the man, that euermor is 


sience; for it cometh of greet lust to do synne, that a man nyle kunne the lawe, lest bi kunnyng therof he be lettid of synne, 
therfro. in an yuel weye ; that is, drawith hem to yuel, bi his councel. perisching; of dedly synne, and of helle. Lire here. c. 4 , 
||| that hidith his grete trespassis ; in the doom of consience, that is confessioun. Lire 


him ; that is, schal knowe his councel. Lire here. C. 
here. C. 6 


: of geete suffice to thee for this meetis; in 
necessaries of thin hous, and to liflode to. : 


who forsothe a3een sechen the 


PROVERBS. 45 


Lambren be to? thi clothing; and kidis 26 pane ais lo 
=e the prys of the 
be to the® prijs off feeld*. The mylke 27 feel ee is, 
that thou bie 
feeldis hi the 
priys of tho, 
ethir that thou 
tile feeldis now 
had ; and bi 
lambren and 
kidis ben vn- 
durstondun 


CAP. XXVIII. 

A wickid man fleeth, whanne no mani ee 
pursueth ; but a just man as a lioun  }2sMule. Lire 
tristynge{ schal be with out ferdfulnesse, — t Minfode to 
For the synnes of the lond ben many2 mayiis; that 


lhyn hand. 
need . is, if thou hast 
princis therof!; and for the wisdom of a inthyn hows 


to the necessarie thingis of thin hous, and 
to lijflode to" thin handinaidis'}. 


man, and for the kunnyng of these fests that suf 
inet i : liyflode, and of 
thingis§ that ben seid, the lijf of the ea 


duyk schal be lengere™. A pore man3_ thou not bisi 
. = ae to seke othere 
falsli calengynge pore men, is lijk a thingis more 

: delicat. Li 

grete reyn, wherynne hungur is maad her c. 

was . ° 3 as a lioun 
redi. Thei that forsaken the lawe, preisen 4 denienelg she the 

a" wickid man; thei that kepen ‘the Lord. Lire 


A ae ere. Ce 
lawe®, ben kyndlid?|| a3ens hym. Wickid 5 § for the kun. 
is, of mannus 
thingis worthi 
‘ D s to be doon. 
Betere is a pore man goynge in his sym-6 7, oo 
pilnesse, than a riche man in schrewid NO 
f - at is, ben 
He that kepith the lawe, is a7 moued bi fer. 
wijs sone; but he that fedith** glotouns, awe, and of 
schendith his fadir. He that gaderiths [ijnes. 
9 perseyuen 
F : alle thingis ; 
crees}{, gaderith tho" togidere ajens pore He 
ds % ul to execu- 
men. His preyer schal be maad cursid,9 sioun, ethir 
rijtfulnesse. 
not the lawe. ee, 
men in an yuel weye, schal falle in his im spending his 
catel therynne. 
hise goodis. A ryche man semeth wijs to11 ereess in res- 
. e ynge or 
him silf; but a pore man prudent schal ty. cok ether 
netheles with- 
out couenaut. 
regnen, fallyngis’ of men ben‘. He that137+ that bosith 
cook K i awey his eere ; ° 
hidith hise grete trespassis|||], schal not be 
lawe more lene- 
outremorsether 
biting of con- 


A nyng of these 
men thenken not? doom; but thei that — thingis; that 
seken the Lord, perseyuen alle thingis]. 

fl ben kyndlid ; 
weies. 
uent loue of the 
Lire here. c. 
togidere richessis bi vsuris, and fre en- 
that ben nede- 
. . ° arform of 
that bowith awei his eerett; that he here |}, ee 
He that disseyueth iust 10%. 07 faith ; 
perisching ; and iuste men schulen welde = Lire here. c. 
tt and fre en- 
the stok, ether 
serche him{{. In enhaunsing of iust men 12 et heel dette, 
is miche glorie; whanne wickid men 
Lire here. c. 
that so he do 
: : th ie of 
maad ri3tful; but he that knoulechith and j,\emore lene 
forsakith tho", schal gete merci. Blessid 14 fly, and with 
ether withdrawun 
§§ sehal serehe 


P ioje E pr.m. 


e€ Om. Mm. 
lofits. ™ the lengere 1. 
tther ben 1. “hem 1. 


din to 1. 
« there ben 1. 
* myscheues 1. 


f of the 1nq pr. m, of thi Kx. 
"the 1. 


i hond maidens 1ksa. 
qnot ont Om. 1. 


¢Om.s. oft, 


Oit1. P leendid or stirid 1. 


46 PROVERBS. 


ferdful ; who forsothe is of hard mynde, 
1sshal falle in to enel. A leoun rorende, 
and a bere hungrende, an vnpitous prince 
160n41 a pore puple. A nedi duk of pru- 
dence manye shal opresse bi chalenge; 
who forsothe hatith auarice, long shul 
17be made the dajes of hym. The man 
that wrongfulli chalengith to the soule, 
the blod of hym, if vn to the lake he 
isshul flee, no man susteneth". Who goth 
simpleli, shal ben saaf; who in peruertid 
weies shal go, shal falle togidere at ones. 
19 Who werchith his erthe, shal be fulfild 
with loeues; who folewith idil reste, shal 
20 ben fulfild with nedynesse. A man feithful 
myche shal ben preisid; who forsothe hee3- 
eth to be maad riche, shal not ben inno- 
21cent. Who’ knowith in dom face, he this 
doth not wel; and for a morsel of bred 
22he forsaketh the treuthe. The man that 
heejeth to be maad riche, and to othere 
men enuyeth ; vnknowith that nedinesse 
23come vp on to hym. Who chastiseth a 
man, grace aftir shal find anent hym; 
more than he that bi flateringus of tunge 
aibigilith, Who withdrawith any thing 
fro his fader and moder, and seith that 
not to ben synne, parcener is of a man 
25sleere. Who bostith of hymself, and 
spredeth abrod, sterith strines ; who for- 
sothe hopeth in the Lord, shal be saned. 
26 Who trostith in his herte, is a fool; who 
forsothe goth wisly, het shal ben preisid. 
27 Who 3iueth to the pore, shal not neden ; 
who dispiseth the preiere louli, shal suf- 
2sfre scarnesse. Whan vnpitous men shuln 
risen, men shul ben hid; and whan thei 
han pershid, the ri3twise shul ben mul- 
tiplied. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 To the man, that the chastisere with 
hard noll dispisith, feerli deth shal come 


XXVIII. 15--—-XXIX. 1. 


* euere dred- 
ful s lest he 
offende God in 


is the man, which is euere dredeful* ; 
but he that is ‘harde of soule’, schal fallet > God i 
in to yuel. A rorynge lioun}, and an ine ee 
hungry bere, 7s a wickid prince on a pore | eae 

puple. A duyk nedi of prudence schal 16/7 e-s that 
oppressej many men bi fals chalenge ; 
but the daies of hym that hatith aueryce, 


chargith not of 
trespas a3enus 
Goddis lawe, 
schal falle in tu 


schulen be maad longe. No man_ sus-17 yuel of synne 
teyneth” a man that falsly chalengith the "g"Panec 


lioun, etc. ; as 
a lioun denour- 


blood|| of a man, if he fleeth ‘til to* the 
lake. He that goith simpli, schal be 12 ith beestis, soa 
‘ : e . wickid king 
saaf; he that goith bi weiward weies,  spulith hise 
schal falle doun onys**. He that worch- ley pte 
ith his lond, schal be fillid with looues ; ee 
he that sueth ydelnesse, schal be fillid Zire here. c. 
with nedynesse. <A feithful man schal be 50 eee 
preisid myche; but he that hastith++ to “7 Pehy 
be maad riche, schal not be innocent’. ing 


tris indusinge 
He that knowith a face in doomft{, doith 21 lice, and hekan 


him to this ma- 
2 : not perseyue, 
not wel; this man forsakith treuthe, 3he, Lire kere. c. 
the blood 3 
for a mussel of breed. A man that hast-22 ae eeah 
. . vniustli the 
ith to be maad riche, and hath enuye to deth of a man. 
othere men; woot not that nedinesse schal enna a 
come on hym. He that repreueth a man, 23is, innocent. 
; : Lire here. CN. 
schal fynde grace aftirward at? hym; more ** schal falle 
* : ° doun onys ; 
than he that disseyueth bi flateryngis of that is, with 
: ; ; ; ; out rising a3en 
tunge. He that withdrawith ony thing a ie 
fro his fadir and fro his modir, and seith pile ae J 
a 5 4 at hastit, 
that this is no synne, is parcener of a ctc.; coueytinge 
: he her- 
manquellere. He that auauntithjj hym 25 40. Live ae 
: . + tba oo, tt a face in 
silf, and alargith, reisith® stryues ; but he oom aa 
that hopith in the Lord, schal be sauyd. fauetith s man 
pee. 3 i ‘4 or singuler fa~ 
He that tristith in his hertel]||, is a fool ; 26 myliarite, more 
. Go 5 than is ri3tful. 
but he that goith wiseli, schal be preysid. 27 Lire here. c. 
He that 3yueth toa pore man, schal not be #3 pi 
nedi; he that dispisith ‘a pore man? bi- over mesure 
Ise selyngis 
sechynge, schal suffre nedynesse. Whanne 28 Se 
<i G . ire here. C. 
vnpitouse men risen, men schulen be hid; ji ¢ristin in 
O 6 his herte; that 
whannet tho! ‘vzpitouse men® han perisch- is, oueenel 
° * ste in his owne wit. 
id, iust men schulen be multiplied. is a fool; $0 


he is presump- 
tuouse and 
proud, and 


CAP. XXIX. 
Sodeyn perischyng4/{j schal come ont iva el 
that man, that with hard nol dispisith a doy 


Lire here. c. 
{9 Sudeyn pe- 


rischyng ; of body and of soule. with hard nol; that is, an obstynat soule. helthe schal not sue him; for his synne is vncurable, for it is a spice of 
synne ajenus the Hooly Goost, which synne is seid vnable to be forzjouun, that is, is not able to be forzounn eseli, ethir of ful hard to be forjouun. 


Lire here. c. 


@ up on AEGH. 


Vv of hard herte 1. 


 susteyne 1. 
¢ and whanne 1. 


4 thei 1. the s. 


xvn tol. 
¢ Om. 1. 


¥ shal susteynen £ pr. m. 


¥ giltlees 1. 


8 Who forsothe x pr.m. t Om, 4. 


Zanentis1. reisithup1. > Aim. 


X XIX, 2——19. 


yp on to hym; and hym helthe shal not 
2folewe. In the multepliyng of ri3twis 
men shal gladen the comun; and whan 
vnpitous men han taken princehed, the 
3puple shal weilen. The man that loou- 
eth wisdam, gladith his fader; who for- 
sothe nurshith an hoore, shal leese sub- 
4staunce. A ri3twis king rereth vp the 
lond ; an auerous inan shal destrojen it. 
5 The man that with flateryng and feyned 
wrdis spekith to his frend; a net spred- 
6ith to his goingis. The sinnende wicke 
man a grene shal inwrappe; and the 
7ri3twise shal preisen, and iojen. The 
rijtwise kne3 the cause of pore men; 
the vnpitous vnknowith kunnyng men. 
8 Bacbitende scateren the cite; wise men 
vforsothe turnen awei wodnesse. <A wis 
man if witb a fool shul striue; whethir 
he lajhe, or wrathe, he shal not finde 
ioreste. Men of blodis hateden the sim- 
ple; ri3twis men forsothe sechen the 
isoule of hym. Al his spirit bringeth 
forth the fool; a wis man berth ouer, 
izand kepith vnto afterward. A prince 
that gladli hereth the wrdis of lesing ; 
isalle the mynystris hath vnpitouse. The 
pore and the creaunsour metten togi- 
dere; of either the lijtnere is the Lord. 
The king that demeth in treuthe pore 
men; the trone of hym in to withoute 
isende shal be fastned. 3erde and correc- 
cioun shal 3elde wisdam; the child for- 
sothe, that is laft to his wil, confoundith 
ishis modir. In the multipliyng of vnpit- 
ous men shuln ben multiplied hidous 
giltis; and the fallingis* of hem ri3twis 
i7men shul see. Lerne thi sone, and he 
shal refreshen thee; and he shal 3iue 
isdelices to his soule. Whan prophecie 
shal faile, the puple shal ben scaterid ; 
who forsothe kepith the lawe, is blisful. 
i9 The seruaunt in wrdis mai not ben 
lerned; for that that thou seist, he vn- 


releeue the pore man; and wille to the pore man, to preye for the riche man. Lire here. c. 


PROVERBS. 


47 


blamere; and helth schal not sue hym. 
The comynalte schal be glad in the multi-2 
pliyng of inst men; whanne wickid men 
han take prinshod, the puple schal weyle. 
A man that loueth wisdom, inakith glad 3 
his fadir; but he that nurschith ‘an 
hoore‘, schal leese catelé. A iust kings 
reisith the lond; an auerouse man schal 
distrie it. A man that spekith bi flater-s 
ynge and feyned wordis to his frend; 
spredith abrood a net* to hise steppis. 
A snare schal wlappe a wickid man do-6 
ynge synne; and a iust man schal preise, 
and schal* make ioye. A iust man know-7 
ith the cause of pore men; an' vnpitouse 
man knowith not kunnyng. Men ful ofs 
pestilence distryen a citee; but wise men 
turnen awei woodnesse. If a wijs mang 
stryueth with a foolt; whether‘ he be! 
wrooth, ‘ether he lei3ith™, he schal not 
fynde reste. 
man; but iust men seken his soule. 
fool bringith forth al his spirit; a wise 
man dilaieth, and reserueth in to tyme 


* a net, elc.; 
for he lettith 
his going forth 
in hise werkis, 
in withdraw. 
inge fro him the 
bibeest in which 
he tristide. 4 
snare; of many 
fold synne and 
of helle. A iust 
man knowith ; 
that is, enfurs- 
ith to knowe, 
that he may 
helpe. kun. 
nyng; to du 
wel, for wickid 
men kunnen 
net do wel. 
Lire here. c. 


t Ifa wise 
man stryueth 
with a fool ; 
that is, trauel- 
ith to amende 
the fool. wher 
he; that is, the 
wise man. is 
wrooth ; in 
repreuynge 
scharply the 
fool. leizith ; in 


Menquelleris haten a simple 19 ™enestinge him 


swetely. reste; 


A 11 that is, amend- 


ing of the fool. 
Menquelleris ; 
ether men pf 
bloodis, that is, 


comynge afterward. A prince that herith 12 %bederis out of 


wilfuli the wordis of a" leesyng{; schal 
haue alle mynystris® vnfeithful?. 
man and a leenere metten hem silf; the 
Lord is li3tnere{ of euer ethir. If ai 
kyng demeth pore men in treuthe; his 
trone schal be maad stidfast with outen 
ende. <A 3erde and chastisyng schal 3yue1s 
wisdom; but a child, which is left to his 
wille’, schendith his modir. Grete tres-16 
passis schulen be multiplied in the mul- 
tipliyng of wickid men; and iust men 
schulen se the fallyngis of hem. Teche17 
thi sone, and he schal coumforte thee; 
and he schal 3yue delicis to thi soule. 
Whanne prophesie faylith, the puple schal 18 
be distried ; but he that kepith the lawe, 
is blessid. A seruaunt|| mai not be tau3t19 
bi wordis; for he vndirstondith that that 
thou seist, and’ dispisith fort to answere. 


u falling a. 


fa strumpett ¥. & his catel 1. 2 Om.1. 
KMNPQRSUX pr. m. Ya. is X Sec. m. 
ith sa. 2 Om.1. © Ais seruauntis 1. 


tOm.1. 


i and an cs. as Q. : 
m wher he leizith crenrkmNpgruxy. or leize 1. whether he lei3- 
P ynpitous X sec. m. marg. 


k wher CEGHMNPQRUXY. is not cEGH 


athat 1. ‘owen willer. 8s and hex. 


mychie blood. 
haten a symple 
man; that is, 


A pore 13 goynge with out 


donblenesse of 
gile. seken his 
soule; that is, 
to saue his liyf. 
alle mynystris 
onfeithful ; for 
they seken to 
plese him, and 
sne him of siche 
werdis of flater- 
yng and of bac- 
hitiag; as it is 
opyn of kyng 
Saul, that pur- 
suede Dauyth, 
for the flater- 

is of Doech, 
and ethere men 
liyk him, Lire 
here. C. 
t of leesing ; ' 
that is, of flater- 


ing aad of bac- 
bitieg. Lire 


here. c. 
§ the Lord is 


liztnere, etc. § 
for he enspirith 
wille to the 
riche man, te 

|| A seruaunt ; vnbuxum and rebel. 


Lire here. c. 


48 


dirstant”, and to answern he dispisith. 
20Hast thou seen a man swift to speken? 
folie more is to ben hopid than the cor- 
2ireccioun of hym. Who delicatli fro 
childhed* nurshith his seruaunt; after- 
22 ward shal feelen hym vnobeisaunt. The 
man wratheful stireth striues; and he 
that is liz3t to han indignacioun, shal be 
23to synnes more redi. The proude man 
lounesse folewith’; and the meke man in 
24 spirit glorie shal resceyue. Who with a 
theef is parcener, hatith his soule ; the 
adiurere he hereth, and not shewith. 
25 Who dredith a man, soone shal falle; who 
hopith in the Lord, shal ben vp rerid. 
26 Manye sechen the face of the prince ; 
and dom of eche” shal gon out fro the 
27 Lord. Riztwis men wlaten the vnpitous 
man; and vnpitous men wlaten hem, 
that ben in the rijt weie. The sone 
kepende the wrd shal ben out of perdi- 
lcioun. The wrdis of the gederere, vo- 
mende sone. 


CAP. XXX. 


The viseoun that a man spac, with 
whiche is God, and that, God with hym 
2wonende, coumfortid, seith, Most fool I 
am of men; and the wisdam of men is 
snot with me. I lernede not wisdam ; and 
4I knew3 the kunnyng of seintus. Who 
stejide vp in to heuene, and who cam 
doun? Who with heeld spirit in his 
hondis ? who bond togidere watris as in 
a cloth? Who rerede alle the termes of 
the erthe? What name is of hym? and 
what name of the sone of hym, if thou 
sknewe? LEche sermoun of God fivid4, a 
6sheld it is to alle hoperis in itself. Ne 
adde thou any thing to the wordis of 
hym>; and thou be vndernome, and 


wisdom gaderid in him, and the excelence of his teching. Lire here. c. 


PROVERBS. 


XXIX. 20—XXX. 6. 


Thou hast seyn a man swift to speke; foli20 


schal be hopid more than his amendyng. 


He that nurschith lis seruaunt delicatli21 


fro childhod; schal fynde hym rebel aftir- 


* He that tak- 
ith part with a 
theef, etc.; in 
ix. maneris is 
maad part tak- 
ing ether con- 
sent of theftes 


ward. A wrathful man territh chidingis ; 22 firste whanne a 


and he that is li3t to haue indignacioun, 


man comaund- 
ith his seruaunt 
ether suget to 


schal be more enclynaunt to synnes. Low- 23 do thefte; the 


nesse sueth a proude man; and glorie schal 
vp take a meke man of spirit. 
takith part with a theef*, hatith his 
soule; he herith a man chargynge t 
greetli, and schewith not. 
ith a man, schal fatle soon"; he that 


He that dred-25 


ii. in eouncel- 
inge a straun- 


He that 24 gere todothefte; 


iii. in consent- 
inge, where 

it schulde not 
be don with out 
his consent ; 
iii, in flater- 
ynge ether 
preisinge a 


hopith in the Lord, shal be reisid. Many 26 thet, ether a 


men seken the face of the prince; and the 
doom of alle nien schal go forth of the 
Lord. 
a wickid man; and wickid men han abho- 
mynacioun of hem, that ben in a ri3tful 
weye. A sone kepynget a word, schal 
be out of perdicioun. 


CAP. XXX. 


The wordis of hym that gaderith$, of! 
the sone spuynge. The prophesie’ which’ 
a man spak, with whom God was, and* 
which manY was* coumfortid bi God 
dwellyng with hym, and® seide, Y am2 
the moost fool|| of men; and the wisdom 
of men is not with me. Y lernede not3 
wisdom ; and Y knew not the kunnyng of 
hooli men. Who stiede in to heuene, and4 
cam doun? Who helde togidere the spirit 
in hise hondis? who bonde togidere wa- 
tris as in a cloth? Who reiside alle the 
endis of erthe? What is name” of hym? 
and what is the name of his sone, if thou 
knowist ? Ech word of God zs a schelds5 
set. afiere, to alle that hopen in hym. 


Iust men han abhomynacioun of 27 


raueynour; y. 
in ressettinge a 
theef, ether his 
thefte; vi. in 
beynge stille, 
whanne he 
seeth thefte 
doon, which he 
my3te lette bi 
speking, ether 
ery; vii. in not 
putting forth 
him silf and 
lettinge not 
thefte, whanne 
he is holdun 
herto, as a iuge, 
ether kepere of 
the lond; viii. 
whanne, aftir 
thefte don, en- 
quering is maad 
therof, that it 
be foundnn, and 
he knowith sum 
thing therof, 
and schewith 
not; the ix. in 
takinge part of 
the thefte. Lire 
here. c. 

t charginge; 
that is, enquer- 
ing thefte, vn- 
dur the peyne 
of curs, ether in 
other maner. 
Lire here. c. 

£ a sone kep- 
ing, etc.; this 
vers is not in 
Ebreu. Lire 
here. C. 

§ that gader- 
ith, etc.; Salo-— 
mon is seid a@ 
sone gaderinge — 
and spuynge, to ~ 
signefie the 
greetnesse of 


{| am the moste fool; Salomon hi the Hooly Goost bifor siz, that 


simple men not lettrid schulden be lijtned of God in thingis that perteynen to helthe of soulis; and this in the tyme of Crist; and of sich a 
symple man seith Salomon, Y am the moste fool of men, that is, vnlettrid and symple. and the wisdom of men; that is, wisdom of tempo 

gouernail of mennus thingis, is not with me. Y lernede not wisdom; that is, kunnyng of filosofie. and Y knew not the kunnyng of seyntis ; that 
disposith to euerlastinge helthe. Who stiede in to heuene and cam doun; that is, it is God that gouerneth heuenly thingis and erthli thingis, and God 
the Fadir, and God his Sone, ben with ont bigynnyng and ende. And a filosofore may not knowe this bi worldly wisdom, bnt this is knowun oneli 


by Goddis wisdom. Lire here. c. 


w vndurstondith an. x his childhed = pr. m. 
dit zB pr.m, 
u soone fro riztfulnesse N. 


Yamanapr.my. 27Om.1. 28 Om. 1. 


Y visioun ether profecie CEF@HKMNPQRSUXYs. Visioun 1. 
> the name 1. 


y hatith & sec. m. Z echon AEGH. a is firid a. 


wthat1. * ther. 


XXX. 7-——23. 


7founde a liere. Two thingus I prejede 
to thee ; ne denien thou to me, er I die. 
sVanyte and lesing wrdis® fer do awei 
fro me; beggerie and richessis ne 3iue 
thou to me; 3if onli to my liflode nede- 
9ful thingus ; lest par auenture I fulfild, be 
drawen to denyen, and seie, Who is the 
Lord? and thur3 nede constreyned, stele, 
ioand forswere the name of my God. Ne 
acuse thou a seruaunt to his lord, lest 
par auenture he curse to thee, and thou 
iifalle. Jeneracioun is, that to his fader 
cursith, and that to his moder blisseth 
ignot. Jeneracioun that to hymself clene 
is see, and neuer the latere it is not 
13 wasshe fro his filthis. Jeneracioun of the 
whiche ben the ej3en and the e3e lidis of 
sit in to he3e thingus vp rerid. Jenera- 
cioun that for teth hath swerdis, and 
chewith with his wang teth; that he ete 
helpeles®® fro the erthe, and pore men 
fro men. Waterlechis two ben do3tris, 
seiende, Bring on, bring on. Thre 
thingus ben vnfillable, and the ferthe, 
that seith neuermore®, It suffisith ; 
ihelle, and the mouth of a womman 
wombe, and the erthe that neuer is fild 
with water; fijr forsothe neuermor® 
17seith’, It suffiseth. The e3e that scorn- 
eth the fader, and that dispiseth the 
birthe of his moder, pecken hym out 
crowis of the stremes; and ete hym the 
issonus of the egle. Thre thingus ben 
hard to me, and the ferthe outerli I 
19knowe not; the weie of an egle in he- 
uene, the weie of the shadewe eddere 
on® a ston, the weie of a ship in the 
myd" se, and the weie of a man in his 
20 waxende 30uthe!. Such is the weie of thei 
womman auoutresse, that etith, and wip- 
ende hir mouth, seith, I haue not wro3t 
z1euel. Bi thre thingus is moued the erthe, 
g2and the ferthe it* mai not sustene; bi a 
seruaunt, whan he regneth; bi a fool, 
23whan he were fulfild with mete; bi an 


© wordis c sec. m. ¢¢ the helpeles a. 
on 4EGH. b myddel seen. '30ngth 4 passim. 


eandsor. 4Om.1. f thou hem 1. 


1Y ber. ™and stele r. 


VOL. UT. 


© preie BPY. 
1 two I passim. 


PROVERBS. 


4 euermore 4. 
Ja 


° that 1. 


i 


Adde thou not* ony thing to the wordise 
of hym, and® thou! be repreued, and be 
foundun a liere. I preiede’ thee twei7 
thingis ; denye not thouf to me, bifor that 
Y die. Make thou fer fro me vanytes 
and wordis of leesyng; 3yue thou not to 
me beggery®} and richessis; 3yue" thou 
oneli necessaries to my lijflode; lest per-9 
anenture Y be fillid', and be drawun to 
denye, and‘ seie, Who is the Lord ? and 
lest Y! compellid bi nedynesse, stele™, and 
forswere the name of my God. Accuse1o 
thou not{ a seruaunt to his lord, lest per- 
auenture he curse thee, and thou falle 
doun. A generacioun that cursith hisi 
fadir, and that blessith not his modir. A 12 
generacioun that semeth cleene to it silf, 
and netheles is not waischun fro hise 
filthis. A generacioun whose ijen ben13 
hi3§, and the ize liddis therof ben reisid 
in to hi3 thingis. A generacioun that 14 
hath swerdis for teeth, and etith with hise 
wank teeth; that it ete nedi men of erthe, 
and the porails of men. The watir leche 15 
hath twei"™ dou3tris ||, selynge, Brynge, 
bringe. Thre thingis ben vnable to be 
fillid, and the fourthe, that seith neuere, 
It suffisith; helle{, and the mouth of the is 
wombe, and the erthe which® is neuere 
fillid with water; but fier seith neuere, It 
suffisith. Crowis of the stronde picke out 17 
thilke ize, that scorneth the fadir, and 
that dispisith the child beryng of his 
modir; and the briddis of an egle ete 
that ise. Thre thingis ben hard to me, Is 
and outirli Y knowe not the fourthe 
thing ; the weye of an egle** in heuene,19 
the weie of a serpent on a stoon, the weie 
of aschip in the myddil of the see, and 
the weie of a man in 3ong wexynge age. 
Siche is the weie of a womman auow-20 
tresse, which? etith, and wipith hir mouth, 
and seith, Y wrou3te not yuel. The erthe21 
is moued bi thre thingis, and4 the fourthe 
thing, which it may not susteyne; bi a22 


e Om. £ prim. f that seith not £ prom. 8 up 
4Ecu. * that it £ prom. 
Sbeggyng1. bduczyuer. | fulfillid:. kand Yc, 
Pthatr. and i 1. 
H 


* Adde thou 
nol, ele.; con- 
trarie, nethelus 
tho thingis that 
declaren Goddis 
word, moun be 
addid wel and 
meedefuly. 
Lire here. c. 


+ beggeri ; he 
spekith this in 
the persoone of 
a siyk man, 
that kan not 
wel vse prospe- 
rites with out 
pride, nether 
aduersite with 
ont grucching. 
Lire here. c. 

I Accuse thou 
not, etc.; that 
is, no but for a 
iust cause. Lire 
here. c. 


§ t3en ben his, 
ete.; that is, 
whos pride of 
herte apperith 
opinli with out 
forth, in the 
iz3en and lippis. 
Lire here, c. 

I fwei douztris, 
etc.; that is, 
auarice and 
leccherie, that 
ben neuere fill- 
id. Lire here. c. 
that is, anerice 
and couetise. Kx. 
{ helle, ete. 3 
that is, the de- 
uel, that euere 
enforsith more 
and more to 
drawe synneris 
to himsilf. of 
the wombe ; 
that is, of a 
leccherouse 
womman. Lire 
here. €. 

** weye of an 
egle; that is, 
of Crist, in his 
assencion. tweye 
of a serpent; 
that is, of Crist, 
in his rising 
ajen. of a schip 
in the myddis of 
the see; that is, 
of Crist, in his 
conuersacioun - 
in the world. 
of aman, that 
is, of Crist, per- 
fit man in kun- 
nyng and ver- 
tues. tn @ jong 
weringe wom- 
man ; that is, 
in the blessid 
Virgyn. Lire 


here. ¢. 


50 


hateful womman, whan she were taken 
in to matrimoyne; and bi an hand wom- 
man, whan she were eir of hir ladi. 
24Foure thingus ther ben the leste of 
erthe!, and thei ben wisere than wise 
25men; amptis, a feble puple, that greithen 
26in rep time mete to them; a litil hare, a 
fole vnmy3ti, that in a ston his bed set- 
27tith; a king the locuste hath not, and it 
28g¢oth out alle bi cumpanyes; a lisard 
with hondis cleneth, and he dwellith in 
29 the housis of aking. Thre thingus ben”, 
that weel gon, and the ferthe, that goth 
30 welsumly. A leoun, most strong of bestes, 
at ‘a3en coomyng” of noon shal dreden ; 
3ia cok gyrd vp the leendis, and a ram, 
and ther is not that withstonde to hym. 
32 And that fool shal seme, aftir that he is 
rerid vp in to hee3; if forsothe he hadde 
vnderstonden, to his mouth he hadde put 
330n hond. Who forsothe strongli threst- 
eth tetes, to drawen out myle, threstith 
out buttere; and who hugeli sinyteth, 
drawith out blod; and who terreth 
1wrathis, bringeth forth discordis. The 
wrdis of Lamuel, the°® king; the si3te in 
2 whiche? his? moder ta3te hym. What my 
leef ? what my leef of my wombe ? 
what my leef of my vouwis ? 


CAP. XXXI. 


3 Ne 3ine thon to wimmen thi sub- 
staunce, and’ thi’ richesses to ben don 
4awei kingus. Wile thou not to kingus, 
O! Lamuel, wile thon not to kingus 3iue 
win; for no priuyte is, where drunke- 
snesse regneth. Lest par anenture thei 
drinken, and for3eten domes,and chaungen 
éthe cause of the sonus of the pore. jineth 
cither to mornende men, and win to hem 
7that ben in bitter inwit. Drinke thei, 
and for3ete thei of ther nedynesse ; and 
of ther sorewet recorde thei no more. 
sOpene thi mouth to the doumbe, and to 


and this acordith betere to the lettre suynge. Lire here. c. 
that is, drynk able to make drunkun. Live here. c. 


1 the erthe 4eGH. m there ben a. 


fisc. Tne ag prom.u. 8 Om. 4. 
Tani. 8 ther ben 1. 
“ther isi. Vv ther is 1. 


PROVERBS. 


** wyn, ete. ; that is, to drynke ouer mesure. Lire here. c. 


1 the ajen comyng AGH. 
t sorewis 4. sorewen Gu. 


XXX. 24-—-XXXI. 8. 


seruaunt, whanne he regneth; bi a fool, 
whanne he is fillid with mete; 
hateful womman, whanne sche is takun 
in matrymonye; and bi an handmaide, 
whanne sche is eir of hir ladi. 
the leeste thingis of erthe, and tho ben 


* A lioun 
strongeste of 


bi an 23 beestis ; that is, 


the rewme of 
Babiloyne. a 
eok gird the 

leendis ; that 


Foure ben 21s, the rewme 


of Perseys, ne- 
theles cok is not 
in Ebreu. a 


wisere than wise men; amtis, a feble25;am; that is, 


puple, that maken redi mete in heruest to 
hem silf; a™ hare, a puple vnmy3ti, 


Alisaundre the 
Grete, ether 


that 26 the rewme of 


Grekis. and a 


settith his bed in a stoon; a locust hath 27 ting azenus 


no kyng, and al goith out bi cumpanyes ; 


whem no man 
schal reise the 
hond ; thus it 


an euete enforsith with hondis, and dwell-28 j, js, zhreu, 


ith in the housis of kingis. 
ben’, that goon wel, and the fourthe thing, 
that goith richeli*. 
beestis*, schal not drede at the meetyng 


of ony man; acok gird the leendis, ands1 


a ram, and noon is" that schal a3enstonde 
him. 
he is reisid an hi3; for if he hadde vn- 
durstonde, he hadde sett hond on_ his 


mouth. Forsothe he that thristith stronglis3 


teetis, to drawe out mylk, thristith out 
botere{; and he that smytith greetli, 
drawith out blood; and he that stirith 
iris, bringith forth discordis. 


CAP. XXXI. 


The wordis of Lamuel, the king §; the1 
visioun|| bi which his modir tau3te hym. 
What my derlyng? what the derlyng of2 
my wombe? what the derlyng of my 
desiris? 3yue thou not thi catel to wym-3 
men, and thi richessis to do awei kyngis{]. 
A! Lainuel, nyle thou 3iue wyn** to4 
kingis; for no pryuete is’, where drunke- 
nesse regneth. Lest perauenture theis 
drynke, and for3ete domes, and chaunge 
the cause of the sones of a pore man. 
3vue 3e sidurftt to hem that morenen, and 6 
wyn to hem that ben of bitter soule. 
Drinke thei, and for3ete thei her nedi-7 


nesse; and thenke thei no more on her 


© Om. c. P the whiche 4EGH. 


t richeli, ether bi prosperile ChEFGHKMNPQRSUXYa. richeli, or welsumly 1. 


Thre thingis 29 


that is, a3enus 
whom no man 
schal moun 
a3enstonde $ 


A lioun, strongeste of 30 and this signe- 


fieth the rewme 
of Romayns, 
that was 
strongere than 
the rewmes bi- 
forgoinge. ap- 


Hef that apperith a fool, aftir that 32 perwth a fool; 


foli apperith 
more in a fool, 
whanne he is 
set in an hi3 
staat; and if he 
hadde wist this, 
he hadde be 
stille vnauauns- 
id. Lire here. c. 
t+ He; thou3 
Latyn bookis 
han here and 
he, in Ebreu is 
not and; for 
the sentence of 
this vers is not 
couplid to that, 
that goith bi- 
fore. Lire here. 
(a 

t botere ; that 
is, mater sad- 
dere than mylk, 
that schulde not 
be thristid out. 
Lire here. c 

§ Lamuel, the 
king ; that is, 
Salomon. La- 
muel is in- 
terpretid, with 
whom God is, 
for God was 
with Salomon 
in the bigyn- 
nyng of his 
rewme. Lire 
here. Cc. 

\| the visoun ; 
that is, teching 
ether blamyng. 
Lire here. ©. 

q do awey 
kyngis ; Ebreys 
seyen, to make 
fatte kingis 5 


t+ 3yue se sidur; 





XXX1. 9—28. 


9 the causes of alle sones that passen, opene 
thou thi mouth. Deme that is ri3twis, 
and venge the helpeles and the pore. 

10 Aleph. A strong womman who shal 
finde? aferr and" fro the utmost’ endis 

lithe pris of hir. Beth. Trosteth in hir 
the herte of hir man; and spoiles he 

12shal not neden. Gimel. She shal 3elde 
to hym good, and not euel, alle the dajes 
1i30f hir lif. Deleth. She so3te wlle and 
flax; and wro3te bi the counseil of hir 
1shondis. Ze. She is mad as a ship of 
a marchaund, fro aferr bringende hir 
isbred. Vau. And fro the ny3t she ros, 
and 3af prei to hir homli men, and metis 
isto hir hand wymmen. Zay. She beheeld 
a feeld, and bo3te it; of the frut of hir 

17 hondis” she plauntide a vyne. Heth. She 
girde to with strengthe hir leendis, and 

ismade stalwrthe hir arm. Teth. She 
tastide, and sa3, for good is the chaffar- 
ing of hir; shall not ben quenchid in the 

igny3t the lanterne of hir. Joth. Hir 
hond she putte to stronge thingus, and 
2ohir fingris cajten the spindle. Caf Hir 
hond she openede to the helpeles, and 
hir paumes she stra3te out to the pore. 
at Lameth. She shal not drede to hir hous 
of coldys of sno3; alle forsothe hir 
homli* men benY clad* with double. 

22 Men. <A rai cloth she made to hir; 
bijs and purpre the clothing of hir. 

23 Num. Noble in the 3ates the man of hir, 
whan he shal sitte with the senatoures 

240f the erthe. Sameth. Sendel she made, 
and solde; and a litil girdil she toc to 

asCanane. Ayn. Strengthe and fairnesse 
the clothing of hir; and she shal la3hen 
agin the laste dai. Jee. Hir mouth she 
openede to wisdam; and the lawe of 
noble merci in the tunge of hir. Sade. 

27 She beheeld the pathis of hir hous; and 

2sidil bred she eet not. Cof Ther risen 
the sones of hir, and most blisful prech- 


dire here. c. 


tQOm. 4. VY vttermoost acu. WY hond c. 


y handmaidens 1. 
da lynun c. 


whe. * robries 1. 
silk CEFGUKMNPQRUXYA. 


x deboner E pr.m. 


2 girdide 1. 
€ solde it 1. 


2 


PROVERBS. 51 


sorewe. Opene thi mouth* for a doumbs * Opene ui 


8 auth, ele. ¢ 
man, and opene thi mouth for the causes9 ins roca 


0 thou riztful- 
f alle sones that passen forth{. Deme joer. for him 
thou that that is iust, and deme thou a share 
é plete in his 
nedi man{ and a pore man. Who schal jocause. Lire 


ee here. C 
fynde a stronge womman§? the prijs of + that passen 
3 of straungeris 
herte of hir hosebond tristith in hir; and — ge therou 
sche¥ schal not haue nede to spuylis*. ere. 
3 deme thou a 
. . ef te that is, do tho 
in alle the daies of hir lijf. Sche souzte 13 execueioun of - 
nedi men and 
sel of hir hondis. Sche is maad as the [4 Pore that han 
Lire here. c. 
6 § 
breed fro fer. And sche roos bi ny3t, and 15 womman; Cris. 
: : d 
3af prey|| to hir meyneals, and metis to fwacnn 
: mynly this let- 
Sche bihelde a feeld, ora oe 
and bou3te it; of the fruyt of hir hondis AL 
i a chirche, whic! 
Sche girde” hir 17 bi figuratif 
leendis with strengthe, and made strong a strong wom- 
hir arm. Sche taastide, and si3*, that hiris}irq. LE eed 
hir sones and 
dou3tris ben 
not be quenchid in the ni3t. 
k : Re ten 5 and wymmen ; 
hir hondis to stronge thingis4], and hir and this is the 
g sis'|l> 
Sche openyde 20 sronding, as 
hir hond to a? nedi man, and stretchide te! sevens and 
forth hir hondis to a pore man. Schea1is resonable, 
Be aay 
. ° Os. UL ahi 
of snow; for alle hir meyneals ben clothid § 
. . * yy that bi a strong 
with double clothis. Sche made to hir22 yonman is van 
L : hooli Scripture 
of hir. Hir hosebonde zs noble in the 25 the hosebonde 
jatis, whanne he sittith with the senatours — man, is a stu- 
diouse techere 
A * as Ch *%% ture, bothe men 
selde*; and 3af a girdil to a Chananet™”. joa’ ymmen; 
; 2 i: é summe 
hir; and sche schal lei3e in the laste dai. wymmen weren 
Sche openyde hir mouth to wisdom ; and 26 hooly Seripture. 


her és fer, and fro the laste endis. Theis/7s thatis. 
the lond. Lire 
Sche schal 3elde to hym good, and not yuel, (2 nedi man, ete.: 
wolle and flex; and wrou3te bi the coun- fines, for 
i 3 : a just cause. 
schip of a marchaunt, that berith his 
a strong 
expownen co- 
hir handmaidisy, 
ende, of hooly 
sche plauntide a vyner. 
speche, is seid 
bonde is Crist, 
marchaundie was good; hir lanterne schal 
Sche putte1y Cee 
: é literal vndur- 
fyngris token the spyndil. acingom) 
this exposicioun 
: . i and set opinly 
schal not drede for hir hous of the cooldis 
Salomon seith, 
a ray cloth; bijs® and purpur 7s the cloth durtendua 
of this wom- 
of erthe. Sche made lynnun® cloth, and 24 jn hooly Serip- 
Streugthe and fairnesse zs the® clothing of 25 nee Jeroms 
fal studiouse in 
ep Ep Lire here. c. 
the lawe of merci is in hir tunge. Sche27 j yor pre 


I Pare 
7 iy ‘ . le.3 
bihelde the pathis of hir hous; and sche 443 infil, 
eet not breed idili. Hir sones risiden’,2s as 
and prechiden hir moost blessid ; hir — chingis ; in 


she . Ebreu it is, ¢o 

hosebonde roos, and preiside hir. Many 29 the where; 
S . ° and the lettre 
dou3tris gaderiden richessis; thou pass-  guynge acord- 
ith wel herto. 


*2 to a Cananey ; Ebreys seyen, to a marchaunt; and this acordith more to the lettre hiforgoinge. Lire here. c. 


yshe 4. % clothide acu. 


asau31 passim. ther © bijs, ether whiyt 
eeinthe rx. f risen FE. resen up tT. 


De PROVERBS XXX. 29—-31. 


eden ; and the man of hir preiside hir. 
29 Res. Manie do3tris gedereden richesses ; 
30 thou ouerpassedist alle. Syn. Desceyu- 
able grace and veyn is fairnesse; the 
wominan dredende the Lord, she shal be 
sipreisid. Zhau. 3iueth to hir of the 
frut of hir hondis; and preisen hir in 
the 3ates hir werkis. 


idist® alle. Fairnesse is disseiuable grace, 30 
and veyn; thilke womman, that dredith 
the Lord, schal be preisid. 3yue 3e tos: 
hir of the fruyt" of hir hondis; and hir 
werkis preise hir in the jatis. 


Here endith the book of Prouerbis, and 
here biginneth Ecclesiastesi. 


Shast ouer passid1. bfrutise. iFromcunsx. Here enden Prouerbis, and herc bygynneth Ecclesiastes.¥. 
Here endith the book of Prouerbis, and bigynneth a prolog on Ecclesiastes. G. Heere endith the book of 
Prouerbis, and biginnith Ecclesiastes. 19. Here eendeth the booc of Prouerbis ; se now the prolog in the 
booc of Ecclesiastes, that is to seie, booc of talkere to the puple, or togidcre calle[re].x. Here endith the book 
of Prouerbis, and herc bigynneth the book of Ecclesiastes, that tretith also of wisdom and prudence, and 
nedith noon other prologe.m. Here endith the Prouerbis, and here bigynneth Ecclesiastes. vu. Here eend- 
ith the Parablis, and bigynneth the prolog on Ecclesiastes. a. No final rubric in arpry. 





ECCLESIAST ES. 


Heere gynneth* the prologe in the boc of Ecclesiastes, that is to sey, boc” of 
talker to the puple, or togidere clepere. 


Tuis almost the fifte 3eer, whan 3it I was at Rome, that Eclesiasten I shulde reden 
to Seint Blesill, that hir I-shulde stire to the° dispising of thes? world, and that she 
shulde sett al that in the world she beholdith’, to ben for no3t, I¢* haue mynde, me 
pre3id of! hir, that in to® maner of a? short exposicioun alle the hard thingus I shulde 
clerli expoune, that, withoute me, she my3te vnderstonde thati she radde ; and so forj 
in the firste greithing of oure werc, she withdrawen with sodeyn deth, and‘, O! Paule 
and Eustoche, wee deserueden not to! ha™ such a felawe of oure lif, and with so myche 
wounde smyten, thanne I becam doumb. Now in Bethlem set, that is, in® a streitere® 
cite, I 3eelde that I owe and to the mynde of hir and to 3ou; this shortli doende to 
witen, that the autorite of no man I folewede, but translatende? fro Ebru most I con- 
foormede me to thé custum of the Senenti Remenoures, in these thingus onli that not 
myche fro Ebrues’ they discordeden’. Otherwhile also I recordid of Aquile, also and 
of Simake, and of Theodocian’, that I shulde not ferent the studi of the redere with to 
myche newenesse, ne, on" the other’ side, the welle of treuthe left, a3en my concience 
I shulde togidere folewen the stremes of opinyouns. 


Here endeth the prolog of Ecclesiastes ; se now the booe. 


a begynneth arcu. » the book a. ©Om.c. 4thecpr.m. ¢behaltc prim. ee andI x, £ for rr. 
Stwor. hOm. er. ithatthatr. ifron, kOmr. 1Om. 4. ™han azcu. hanetir. © Om. 1. 
© streiz3t 1. -P ful translatynge r. 4 Ebrew 4. ‘discorden1. § Theodosit,  ‘seeter, 4 in R. 
v tother acmiitr. ™ From 1. Here eendith the prolog, and biginneth the firste chapitre. L. Heere eendith 
the prolog, and bigynneth Ecclesiastes. r. No final rubric in the other Mss. 


54 


FTeer gyuneth the booe*. 
CAP. I. 


1 The wrdis of Ecclesiastes, sone of 
2Dauid, king of Jerusalem. Vanite of 
vanites, seide Eclesiastes ; vanite of va- 
snytes, and alle thingus vanyte. What 
hath a man more ouer of® al his tra- 
uaile, that he trauaileth vnder the sunne? 
4 Jeneracioun goth, and ieneracioun cometh; 
the erthe forsothe in to with oute ende 
sstant®. The sunne risith vp, and goth 
doun, and to his place turneth a3een ; 
cand there a3een risende goth aboute bi 
the south, and turneth aj3een to the north. 
Enuyrounende alle thingus the spirit in 
ciumpas passeth, and in to his cercles 
7turneth a3een. Alle flodis entren in to 
the se, and the se redoundith not; to 
the place whemnes the flodis wenten out, 
thei turnen ajeen, that eft thei flowen 
sout. Alle thingus harde, and a man inai 
not them tellen out pleynli with wrd; 
the eje is not fild with si3te, ne fulfild is 
“the ere with heering. What is that was, 
it that is to come? What is that is 
iomad, it that is to be maad? No thing 
vnder the sunne newe, ne any man mai 
seyn, Lo! this is fresh newe; now for- 
sothe it wente beforn in worldis, the 
1whiche weren beforn vs. Ther is not 
mynde of the rathere thingus, but and of 
tho thingis fursothe, that ben aftir to 
come, sha] not ben recording anent® hem 
i2that be to come in the laste time. I 
Kclesiastes was king of Irael in Jerusa- 
islem; and I purposide in myn inwit to 
seche and enserchen wisli of alle thingus, 
that ben mad vnder sunne®. This werste 
ocupacioun 3aff God to the sonus of men, 


§ The spirit, etc. ; that is, the sunne ; not for * hath a soule, but for it causith liyf in these lowere thingis. Lire here. c. 


vndurstondun. Lire here. c. 
forsetun. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


I, 1—13. 


Here bigynneth Lcelesiastes*. 


CAPE 


The wordis* of Ecclesiastes}, sone of! 
Dauid, the’ kyng of Jerusalem. Theb>2 
vanytet of vanytees, seide Ecclesiastes ; 
the’ vanyte of vanytees, and alle thingis 
ben vanite. What hath a man more of alles 
his trauel, bi which he traueilith vndur 
thee sunne? Generacioun? passith awei,4 
and® generacioun cometh; but the erthe 
stondith with outen ende. The sunnes 
risith, and goith doun, and turneth a3en 
to his place; and there it risith ajen, and 6 
cumpassith bi the south, and turneth a3en 
to the uorth. The spirit) cumpassynge 
alle thingis goith ‘in cumpasf, and turneth 
ajen in to hise cerclis. Alle floodis entren7 
in to the see, and the see fletith not ouer 
the markis set of God ; the floodis turnen 
a3en to the place fro whennus tho’ comen 
forth, that tho" flowe! eft. Alle thingiss 
ben hard||; a man may not declare tho 
thingis bi word; the ize is not fillid bi 
siz3t, nether the eere is filid bi hering. 
What is that thing that was4], that thato 
schal come? What is that thing that is 


maad, that that schal be maad? No thing 10 


vndir the sunne 7s newe, nether ony man 
may seie, Lo! this thing is newe ; for now 
it 3ede hifore in worldis, that weren bifore 
vs. Mynde of the formere thingis is not,1 
but sotheli nether thenkyng of tho thingis, 
that schulen come afterward, schal be at 
hem that schulen come in the last tyme. 


I Ecclesiastes was king of Israel in Jeru- 12 


* The wordis ; 
for many men 
erriden in the 
inater of blis of 
man, and sum- 
men seiden, 
that mannus 
blis stondith in 
richessis, othere 
men Seiden in 
delices, othere 
men seiden in 
onours, and so 
of many othere 
goodis, that 
moun be getun 
in present tyme 
bi mannus tra- 
uel ; therfor 
Salomon schew- 
ith in this book, 
that mannus 
blis stondith not 
in siche goodis, 
but in God, 
which is good 
with outen 
endes and in 
i. c°. he preueth 
that mannus 
blis stondith not 
in kunnyny, for 
kunnyng getun 
bi mannus weye 
is vnprofit and 
diseseful, and 
quyetith not 

a mannus desir. 
Lire here. c. 

t of Ecciesi- 
astes ; that is, 
of Salomon, for 
Ecclesiastes is 
seid a spekere 
to the puple. 
Lire here. ¢. 

t The vanyte, 
ete. ; that is, 
the moste va- 
nyte. and alle; 
thingis in 
whiche false 
men setter blis. 
ben vanyte ; 


1 that is, ful 


veyne. wndur 
the sunne ; 
that is, in pre- 
sent liyf; as if 
he seye, ech 
man may preue 
bi experience, 
that he getith 


salem; and Y purposide in my soule to 13 not of his tra- 


seke and enserche wiseli of alle thingis, 
that ben maad vndur the sunne. God 3af 
this werste ocupacioun** to the sones of 


uels no but 
vnstable good 
and able to be 
lost, nameli, bi > 
deth, which he 
may not ascape. 
Lire here. c. 


|| ben harde ; to he 
{| that was ; bothe in thingis and in opynyouns of men. schal come ; thou3 in the meene tyme it ceessith and is 
** this worste ocupacioun ; in Ebreu it is yuel ecupacioun ; for thou; kunnyng getun bi mannus weye is good in it silf, 


netheles it is yuel, in as myche as it hath tranel and turment of studie knyt therto, and for sumtyme it is a letting of more good, that is, of denocioun 


and of preyer. Lire here. c. 


a Ecclesiastes. a. Heer begynneth the book. x. No initial rubric in eu. 


d anentis E passim. © the sunne 4EeGn. 


@ From ac. Here biginneth the bok of Ecclesiastes. spy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
€ an oother 1. 


bb Om. 1. 
out c. 


¢ Om. plures. 4 A generacioun 1. 


b Om. acH. ¢stondith an. 


bOm. 1. 


fabouter. &theis. bthetr. i flowe 


1. (4——IL. 8. 


l4that thei shulden ben ocupied in it. I 
sa3 alle thingus that ben mad vnder the 
sunne, and, lo! alle thingus vanite and 

istormenting of spirit. Peruertid men of 
hard ben amendid; and withoute ende 

16is the noumbre of foolis. I spac in myn 
herte, seiende, Lo! gret Iam mad, and 
I wente beforn alle in wisdam, that weren 
beforn me in Jerusalem ; and my mynde 
beheeld manye thingus wisli, and I lern- 

izede. And I 3af myn herte, that I knewe 
prudence and doctrine, and errouris and 
folie. And I knew3¢ that in these thingis 
also was trauaile and tormenting of spi- 

isrit; for thi that in myche wisdam is 
myche indignacioun, and that addith kun- 
nyng, addeth and trauaile. 


CAP. II. 


1 I seide in myn herte, I shal go, and 
flowef delices®, and I shal take the frutis 
in® goodis ; and I sa3 also that that was 

avanyte. And lazhing I heeld errour, and 
to ioje I seide, Wherto in veyn thou art 

sbigilid ? I tho3te in myn herte to with- 
drawe fro wyn iy flesh, and myn inwit 
to bern ouer to wisdam, and that I shulde 
eschewe folie, to the tyme that I shulde 
seen, what were profitable to the sonus of 
men ; the whiche thing don, nede is to 
ther lif in the noumbre of da3es vnder 

4the sunne. I magnefiede my werkis, I 
bilde to ine houses, and plauntide vynes ; 

5I made gardynes and appil gardynes, 
and I plauntide them with the trees of 

Galle kinde; and I made out to me cys- 
ternes' of watris, that I shulde watren 

7the wode of the buriounynge tres. I 
weldide seruauns and hand wymmes,: 
and myche* meyne I hadde; droues Also, 
and grete flockis of sheep, ouer alle men 

sthat weren befor me: in Jerusalem. I 
hepede to me siluer and gold, and sub- 
staunces of kingus and of prouynces; I 
made to me singeris and singeresses, and 
the delices of sonus of men, cuppis and 


ECCLESIASTES, 55 


men, that thei schulden be ocupied ther- 
ynne. I si3 alle thingis that ben imaad 14 
vndur the sunne, and lo! alle thingis ben 
vanyte and turment of spirit. Weiward 1s 
men ben amendid* of hard; and the noum- 
bre of foolis is greet with outen ende. T1¢ 
spak in myn herte, and Y seide, Lo! Y 
am made preet, and Y passide in wisdom 
alle men, that weren bifore ine in Jerusa- 
lem; and my soule si3 many thingis wiseli, 
and Y lernede. And Y 3af myn herte, that 17 
Y schulde knowe prudence* and doctryu, * that ¥ 
and errours and foli. And Y knew that in ee ilat 
these thingis also was trauel and turment By A wae 
of spirit; for in myche wisdomt+ is myche 1s bi a 
indignacioun, and he that encressith kun- ; 
nyng, encreessith also trauelt. 


tryn 3 that is, 
the vertu of 


Goddis lawe. 
and errours ; 
CAP. IL. eee 
foly ; abonte 
Therfor Y seide in myn herte§, Y schali ye el 
go, and Y schal flowe in delicis, aud Y — impyngce siche 
schal vse goodis; and Y si3 also that this fhe oa 
was vanyte. And lei3yng Y arrettide er-2 Yn myche wis. 
rour, and Y seide to ioye, What! art thou oe Dk 
disseyued in veyn? I thoujte in myn xucioun ; for 
herte to withdrawe my fleisch fro wyn, Bae ane 
that Y schulde lede ouer my soule to wis- Pry 8. 
dom, and that Y schulde™ eschewe foli, til Huon 
Y schulde se, what were profitable to the Lire here. c. 
sones of men; in which dede the noumbre po 
of daies of her" lijf vndur the sunne is ne Hees 
nedeful. Y magnefiede® my werkis, Y bild-4 ae eeaen 
ide housis to me, and Y plauntide vynes ; Sree ir 
Y made jerdis and orcherdis, and Y set-5 Lire here. c. 
tide? tho’ with the™ trees of al kynde; andé ein 
Y made cisternes of watris, for to watre BENS 
thé wode of trees growynge. I hadde inz maunes Wiss 
possessioun seruauntis and handmaidiss ; eee Lire 
aud Y hadde myche meynee, and droues 
of grete heestis, and grete flockis of scheep, 
ouer alle men that weren bifore me in 
Jerusalem. Y gaderide togidere to me sil-3 
uer and gold, and the castels of kingis and 
of prouyncis; Y made to me syngeris and 
syngeressis', and delicis of the sones of 
men, and cuppis and vessels in seruyce, 


ekne3c, f folewe 4. & with delices accu. lof ac prim.n. i fishpondis c pr. m. E pr. mi. k mychel rE. 


1 Wherto 1. m wolde 1. 


r Om. cr. 


k mendid 1. 
P setter. Them nN. 


n Om. ¢. 
$8 handmaidens in. 


© magnefiede, ether made greet ¢ et plures. 
' syngsters 1. : 


56 ECCLESIASTES. 


pottis in seruise, to wynes to ben held; 
sand I passede in richesses alle, that be- 
forn me weren in Jerusalem. Wisdam 
ioalso abod stille with me, and alle thingus 
that desireden myn e3en, I denyede not 
to them; ne I forfendide! myn herte, but 
that of alle voluptuouste he shulde take 
frut, and al delicen hym self in these 
thingus that I hadde greithid ; and this 
I alouwide my part, for I shulde vsen 
iimy trauaile. And whan me I hadde 
turned to alle the werkis that myn hondis 
hadden don, and to the™ trauailes in 
whiche in veyn I hadde swat, I sa3 in 
alle thingus vanyte and tormenting of 
inwit, and no thing to dwelle stille vnder 
i2the sume. I passede, and to ben be- 
holden wisdam, and erroures, and folie ; 
what is forsothe a man, that he mowe 
13folewen the king, his makere? And I 
sa3, that so myche wisdam wente beforn 
folie, hou myche 1i3t is in difference fro 
isdercnesses. Of the wise man tlie e3en in 
his hed, the fool goth in derenesses ; and 
I lernede, that o diyng was of euere 
iseither. And I seide in myn herte, If 
oon and of the fool and my diyng shal 
be, what to me profiteth, that more bisy- 
nesse I 3af to wisdam ? And spoken with 
my mynde, I toc heed, that that also was 
1vanyte. Forsothe ther shal not be the™™ 
inynde of the wise man, lic maner as of 
the fool in to withoute ende, and the 
times to come with for3eting alle thingus 
shul couere togidere ; the ta3t man dieth 
ijalso and the vnta3t. And therfore it 
no3zede ine of my lif, seende alle euelis to 
ben vnder the sunne, and alle thingus va- 
isnytes" and tormenting of spirit. Eft I 
wlatede alle my bisynesse, that vnder the 
sunne most studiausli J trauailede, to han® 
19an eir after me, whom I knowe?P not, whe- 
ther wis or fool he be to ben; and shal 
lordshipen in my trauailes, in the whiche 


Il, g-——19. 


to helde ont wynes; and Y passide 
richessis alle men, that weren bifor me in 
Jerusalem. Also wisdom dwellide* stabli 


with me, and alle thingis whiche" myn 10 


i3en desiriden, Y denyede not to hem; 
nether Y refreynede myn herte, that ne it 
vside al lust, and delitide it silf in these 
thingis whiche I hadde maad redi; and 
Y demyde this my part}, if Y vside my 
trauel. 
to alle werkis’ whiche myn hondys had- 
den maad, and to the trauels in whiche Y 
hadde swet” in veyn, Y si3 in alle thingis 
vanyte and turment of the* soule, and 
that no thing vndir sunne dwellith stabli. 


in9 * wisdom dwell- 


ide, ete. ; til 
that he was 
disseiued hi 
wymmen. Lire 
here. C. 

t and Y de- 
nyde this my 
part; that is, 
lustful liyf. 

my part ; that 
is, blis; for he 
was disseyued 
by wymmen, 
and felde in to 
this errour. 


And whanne Y hadde turned me]?1 Hire here. c. 


t Y passide ta 
biholde wisdom; 
that is, Y bi- 
helde that tra- 
uel is aboute 
the geting of 
kunnyng, and 
most in dynyn 
thingis, which 
is seid wisdom 


I passideY to biholde wisdom, errours’, 12 propirly. Of 


and foli; Y seide, What is a man, that he 
may sue the king, his maker? And Y si3,1 
that wisdom 3ede so mych bifor foli, as 
miche as li3t is dyuerse fro derknessis. 


The izen of a wijs man ben in his heed§,14 


a fool goith in derknessis||; and Y lernede, 
that o perisching was of ever either. And1 
Y seide in myn herte, If o deth schal be 
bothe of the fool and of me, what pro- 
fitith it to me, that Y 3af more bisynesse 
to wisdom? And Y spak with my soule, 
and perseynede, that this also was vaniyte. 





this place and 
othere liyk, 


3 sunl men seyen, 


that Salomon 
dide penaunice 
in the endes 
but it semeth 
that this pe- 
naunce was not 
sufficient and 
perfit, for he 


» distriede not 


the idols 
whiche he 
hadde maad, 
as Y seide ful- 
liere in xxx. ¢°. 
of Prouerbis. 
what is a man, 
ete. ; that is, of 
what vertu, 
that he may 


For mynde® of a wijs man schal not be, in 16ateyne to God 


lijk maner as nether of a fool with outen 
ende, and tymes to comynge schulen hile 
alle thingis togidere with for3etyng; a 
lerned man dieth in lijk maner and? an 
vnlerned man. 
of my lijf, seynge that alle thingis vndur 
sunne ben yuele, and that alle thingis 


ben vanyte and turment of the spirit. Eft 18 


Y curside al my bisynesse, bi which Y 
trauelide 1uoost studiousli vndur sunne, 


and Y schal haue an eir after me, whom 19 


Y knowe>» not, whether he schal be wijs 
ether a fool ; and he schal be lord in my 
trauels, for whiche’ Y swatte greetli, and 
was bisi; and is’ ony thing so veyn? 


bi the knowing 
of creaturis. 
Salomon spek- 
ith ofte in this 
book, in the 
persoone of 
othere men, 
not oneli that 


And therfor it anoiede me 17 seyen truthe, 


but also that 
erren, that the 
truthe appere 
more bi con- 
traries leid to- 
gidere. Lire 
here. c. 

§ ben in his 
heed ; that is, 
in the hijere 
part of soule 
that 3yueth 
tent to con- 
templacionn of 
dyuyn thingis. 
Lire here. c. 
Win derk- 
nessis 3 for 

he thenkith 


erthely thingis aloone and sensible, whiche comparisound to God ben derknessis. was of ever either ; that is, of the wise man and of the fool. 
Salomon seith this in the persoone of hem that denyeden vndedlynesse of mannus soule. ben yuel ; that is, defantif. and turment of the spirit ; Salomon 
asoilith not here this obieccioun maad_ajenus the truthe, for obieccioun takith opinli fals, and for a wiys man and iust schal hane meede, and a fool 


schal haue peyne with outen ende. Lire here. c. 


| forfendide not E pr.m. ™ Om. a. 


u that 1. 
mynde 1. 


v the werkis r. 
basi. >b knew zs. 


Ww swat I. 
€ the whiche 1. 


mm Om. c pr. m. 


x Om. 1. 


" vanyte 4GH. © haunge £ pr.m. P knewe 4Gu. 


y passide forth 1. % and errours A sec.m. 4 the 


dis ther 1. 


II. 20—Ill. 6. 


I haue myche swat, and ben bisy; and 
20 alle thing? ‘is sol veyn. Wherfore I cesede, 
and myn herte forsoc more to trauailen 
21vnder the sunne. For whan an other 
shal trauailen in wisdam, and doctrine, 
and besynesse, and to an idil man the 
purchasid thingus lefeth ; and that thanne 
2zvanyte’, aud gret euel. What forsothe 
shal profite to a man of al his trauaile, 
and of the tormenting of spirit, that vnder 
23 the sunne he is tormentid? Alle the dajes 
of hym of sorewes and myseyse*® ben 
ful, and bi the ny3t in mynde he resteth 
not; and whether is not that vanyte ? 
24 Whether is itt not betere to eten and 
drinke", and to shewe to his lif the goodis 
of his trauailes? and that is of the hond 
250f God. Who shal so’ deuouren, and de- 
26licis flowen, as 1? To a good man in his 
sijte God 3af wisdam, and kunnyng, and 
vnderstonding; to the synnere forsothe 
he 3af tormenting, and wast bisynesse, 
that he adde, and gedere togidere, and 
take to hym that shal plesen to God; 
but and this vanite, and wast” besynesse 
of mynde. 
CAP. iil. 
1 Alle thingus han time, and in ther 
spaces passen alle thingus vnder the 
zsunne. Time of hauyng birthe, and time 
of diyng; time of plaunting, and time of 
3pulling vp that is plauntid. Time of 
sleying, and time of heling ; time of de- 
astro3ing, and time of bilding. Time of 
weping, and time of laz3hing; time of 
sweiling, and time of leping. Time of 
sprenging abrod stones, and time of ga- 
dering togidere; time of clipping, and 
time to ben maad aferr fro clippingus. 
6 Time of purchasing, and time of leesing ; 
time of keping, and time of casting awei. 


ECCLESIASTES. 57 


Wherfor Y ceesside, and myn herte for-20 ° vanyte ; thac 


sook for to trauele ferthere vnder sunne. 


For whi whanne another man tranelith ine 


wisdom, and techyng, and bisynesse, he 


is, veyn trauel, 
and with ont 
frnyc, as if he 


seie, 3is. Lire 
here. c. 


t to ele and 


leeueth thingis getun to an idel man; and @yxkes that 


therfor this 7s vanyte, and greet yuel. For 22 


whi what schal it profite to a man of al 
his trauel, and turment of spirit, bi¢ which 


is, to lyue co- 
uenabli bi 
thingis getun. 


goodis of hise 


trauels s in 
spendingea part 


he was turmentid vndur sunne? Alle hise 23% the gomis 


daies ben ful of sorewis and meschefs, 
and bi ny3t he restith not in sonle; and 


whether this is’ not vanyte*? Whether2s 


it is not betere to ete and drynkef, and 
to schewe to hise soule goodis of  hise 
trauels® ? and this thing is of "the hond of 


in the werkis 
of pitee and of 
liberalte. and 
this is of the 
hoond of God : 
that is, good 
grauntid of 
God, and is not 
80 greet good, 
that it is man- 
nus blis, Lire 
ere. C. 


God. Who schal deuoure so, and schales + in delices, 


flowe in delicis{, as Y dide'? God 3afe6 


wisdom, and kunnyng, and gladnesse§ to 
a good man in his si3t; but he 3af tur- 
ment, and superflu bisynesse toa synnere, 
that he encreesse, and gadere togidere, 
and 3yue to hym that plesith God||; but 
also this 7s vanyte, and veyn bisynesse of 
soule. 


CAP. III. 


Alle thingis han tyme, and alle thingis 1 
vndur sunne passen bi her spaces. Tyme2 
of birthe, and time of diyng; tyme to 
plaunte, and tyme to drawe vp that that 
is plauntid. Tyme to sle**, and tyme to3 
make hoo]; tyme to distrie, and tyme to 
bilde. Tyme to wepe, and tyme to leize ; 4 
tyme to biweile, and tyme to daunse. 
Tyme to scatere stoonys, and tyme tos 
gadere togidere; tyme to colle*+{, and 
tyme to be fer fro collyngis. Tyme tos 
wynne!, and tyme to leese; tyme to kepe, 
and tyme to caste awei. Tyme to kitte,7 
and tyme to sewe togidere; tyme to be 


is wont to be destrid of men, outakun feweste men and ful perfit, as Poul desiride to be deed, and to be with Crist. Lire here. c. 


adversaries of ri3tfulnesse ether of comynalte. Lire here. c. 


Tt 
weddid. tyme to be fer ; that is, in eelde, whanne the vertu of gendring failith, an 


weren chast in the arke in the grete flood of Noe, as Ebreys seyen. Lire here. c. 


Pthingusc. also 4. * gret vanyte E pr.m. 
drinke £. Vv thanne 4. Ww brosed £ pr. m. 
ewith1. fbeys. 8 trauels. 


colle eithir to-clippe a. | gete 1. 


VOL. III. 


hin m. Om. £ et plures. 


8 of miseyse ¢ pr. m. t Om. 4¢ pr.m.u. "to 


ihaue1. * colle ether bielippe c et plures. 


ete. ; that is, 
wymmen, as if 
he seide, no 
man. Lire 
here. c. 

§ and glad. 
nesse ; that is, 
glad liyf in 
vsinge wel 
temporal 
goodis. Lire 
here. C. 

|| and 3yue lo 
him that plesith 
God ; not that 
he 3yueth wil- 
fuly to goode 
men ; but for 
whanne he is 
deed, siehe 
goodis ben 
3ouun to goode 
men fol ofte, 
as whanne Na- 
bal was deed, 
hise goodis 
camen to Da- 
uyth, in III. 
book of Kingis, 
xxv. c®. but 
also this ; that 
is, bisynesse in 
sich gadering 
of goodis, 
whiehe goodis 
the getere vsith 
not, but ben 
3ouun to othere 
men. Lire here. 


CH 
{| han tyme; 
in iti. e°. Salo- 
mon remoueth 
long liyf fro 
mannus blis, 
which long liyf 
**Tyme to sle; 


+ tyme to colle; that is, to 3yue tent to generacioun, in 3ong age of hem that ben 
d whanne comyn turment is of the puple; therfor men and beestis 


58 ECCLESIASTES. 


7Time of kutting, and time of souwing to- 
gidere; time of holding pes, and time of 
sspeking. Time of loouing, and time of 
hate; time of bataile, and time of pes. 
9 What hath a man more of his trauaile ? 
101 sa3 the affliccioun, that God 3af to the 
sonus of men, that thei be tormentid in it. 
11 Alle thingus he made goode in ther time, 
and the world he toc to* the’ disputisoun’ 
of them, that a man finde not the were 
that God wro3te fro the bigynnyng to 
12the ende. And I kne3 that ther was 
“not® betere, but to gladen, and to do good 
i3in ther lif. Eche man forsothe that 
etith and drinketh, and seeth good of his 
14 trauaile; that the 3ifte of God is. I lern- 
ede that alle werkis, that God made, 
dwellen stille in to with oute ende; wee 
moun not to them any thing adden, or 
taken awei, that God inade, that he be 
isdrad. That is maad, it dwellith stille; 
that ben to come, now weren; and God 
igrestoreth that, that 3ide awei. I sa3 
vnder sunne? in the® place of dom vupi- 
tousnesse; and in the place of ri3twis- 
17nesse wickidnesse. And I seide in myn 
herte, The rijtwise and the vnpitouse the 
Lord shal demen; and tyme of alle thing 
isthanne shal be. I seide in myn herte of 
the sonus of men, that God shulde prouen 
hem, and shewen to ben lic to bestis. 
i9 Therfore oon is the diyng of men and of 
bestis, and eueue the condicioun of euere 
either; as a man dieth, so and tho dien; 
lic maner brethen alle thingus, and no 
thing hath a man more than a beste. 
20 Alle thingus ynderlin to vanyte, and alle 
‘thingus gon to o* place; of erthe thei 
ben maad, and in to erthe togidere thei 
2iturnen a3een. Who kne3, if the spirit‘ 
of the sonus of Adam ste3e vp aboue, and 


apayed with the terme of oure liyf, and to be not hisi of encreessing bi the lengthe of liyf. Lire here. c. 


If. 7—~21. 


stille, and tyme to speke. Tyme of™ loue,s i 

and tyme of hatredé ;°tyme of batel, and ieee 
oO uunyng, 

tyme of pees. What hath a man more*9 his tramit an 


, iS a . long bisyn 
of his trauel? I si3 the turment, which 10 of ctudiny as if 


God 3af to the sones of men, that thei be’ be seve, Htil 
: ‘ yuen neuere 
good in her tymet{, and 3af the world to 
perfit know- 
bigynnyng ‘til in to® the ende. And Y 12 ¥ 8 the tur. 
studie. which 
sones of men ; 
vndurstonding, 
this is the 3ifte of God. 
Lire here. c- 


. i , ether noust ; 
occupied therynne. God made alle thingis 11 for thou; men 
so longe, they 
disputyng of hem, that a man fynde not ree ae 
the werk which" God hath wrou3t fro the pai 
ment ; in ocu- 
knew that no thing was betere ‘to @ manP, _ pacioun of 
‘no but? to be glad, and to do good werkis God 3af to the 
in his lijft. For whi ech man that etith 1355 as myche as 
and drinkith, and seeth good of his trauel; hegal te aa 
I haue lerned 14 enquere | 
‘ f siche thingis. 
that alle werkis’, whiche* God made, Jasten 


‘ sie saat ‘ God made 
stidfastli ‘til in tot with outen ende; we i thingis 
moun not adde§ ony thing to tho", nether aca 

‘. : 1 ONS . of creacioun. 
take awei fro tho thingis, whiche God of ion ; al 


made, that he be dred." That thing that 15's, of men. 

ee Z . E Synde not, ete. ; 
is maad, dwellith perfitli ; tho thingis that in knowynge 
schulen come, weren bifore; and God re- fly, toons 
storith that, that is goon. I si3 vodur 16 531 fing gyme. 
sunne|| vnfeithfulnesse in the place of Live here. c. 
doom; and wickidnesse in the place of that is, to lyue 


t in his liyf; 
: . : couenabli and 
rij3tfulnesse. And Y seide in myn herte, 17 vertuously, bi 


‘ the cours of 
The Lord schal deme a inst man, and an kynde, so that 
3 F he be apayed 
vnfeithful man; and the tyme of ech with the Co 


thing schal be thanne. I seide in myn 18 of liyt, whi 
herte of the sones{] of men, that God to i, etith 
schulde preue hem, and schewe that thei ina 
ben lijk vzresonable’ beestis. Therfor oon 19 Uety and 

is the perisching of man and of beestis, _ Perf bisy- 

and euene condicioun zs of euer eithir ; as 


nesse. good of 
his trauel ; in 
aman dieth, ‘so and tho beestis dien; alle 


3yuynge tho 
thingis that he 


beestis* brethen in lijk maner, and a man Heeraly all 
hath no thing more than a beeste. Alle 20 Party merci: 


ees fuly. 3ifte of 
thingis ben snget to vanyte, and alle God, a 
wi cgte good in pre- 
thingis goen to” o place; tho ben maad _ sent tyme. Lire 
: : here. C. 
of erthe, and tho turnen ajen togidere in on mown 
rT ° ° ome adde, etc. 3 
to erthe. Who knowith, if the spirit of21 #30? 
owen to be 
ll ¥ st3 vndur sunne, etc. ; that is, in 


the dwellinge place of men. vnfeithfulnesse in the place, etc. ; that is, where ri3tful doom was wont to be 3ouun, is 3onun wickid doom. Lire here. C. 
| ¥ seide in myn herte of the sones, etc.; Salomon spekith this in the persoone of vnfeithful men, that denyen liyf to comyn in blis ether peyne aftir 


deth. Lire here. c. 


xin to 4GH. y Om. a. 


% disposicionn £. 


dQm. e. oon £ passim. f spiritis 4GH. 
Mtor Othati. Ovntor POm.1. to mann. 
tho werkis1. ¥Om.1. Wristso1. * thor. 


&no AEGH. 


b the sume G sec. m. ¢ Om. «GH. 


4thani. ‘the werkis1. ‘thats. tyntor. 


ytil x. 


III. 22——IV. 11. 


if the spirit of. bestis.go doun,bynethe ? 

22 And I parceyuede no thing to ben betere, 
than.a man to gladen in his werc, and 
that to ben the part of hym; who for- 
sothe hym shal.leden to, that aftir hym 
he knowe thingis to come’ ? 


CARat V. 


1 I turnede me to othere thingus, and I 
sa3 chalenges, that vnder the sunne ben 
don, and the teres of innocens, and no 
man coumfortende; ne to moun! with- 
stonde the violence of them, benomen the 

2helpe of alle. And I preisede more the 

3deade than the liuende; and J demede 
hym welsumere than either, that 3it is 
not born, ne sa3 the euelis that ben don 
avnder the sunne. Eft J beheeld ‘alle the 
trauailis of men, and the besynesses I 
tooc heed to ben opened to the enuye of 
ne3hebore!; and in that thanne vanyte, 
sand wast besynesse is. The fool foldeth 
togidere his hondis, and eteth his* flesh, 
eseiende, Betere is a litil handful with 
reste, than ful either hond with trauaile 
z7and tormenting of inwit. Beholdende 
I.founde and an other vanyte vndir the 
gsunne; oon is, and the secunde hath not; 
nonther sone, ne brother; and ner the 
latere to trauailen he ceseth not, and 
ner the latere his ejen ben not fild 
with richesses; ne he thenketh ajeen, 
seiende, To whom trauaile I, and begile 
my soule of goodis? In! that also ys 
9vanyte, and werst tormenting. Betere 
is ‘that two™ ben togidere than oon ; 
forsothe thei han auauntage of ther fela- 
1shipe. If oon shul fallen, of the tother 
he shal ben holden vp; wo to the alone, 
for whan he shal fallen, he hath not a 
1iman rerende hym vp. If two shul slepe, 
thei shul ben nurshid togidere ; oon, what 


schip and felouschipe. Lire here. c. 


& comynge acu. ) mow E passin. 


‘ECCLESIASTES. 


ithe ueijbour 4. 


59 


the sones of Adam.-stieth vpward, and if 
the spirit of beestis goith* dounward ? 


* in his werk ; 
that is, in ver- 
tuouse werkis. 


And Y perseyuede that no thing is betere, 22 ee ae 
than that a man be glad in his werk*, and %™4ur the . 
sunne ; in ili. 


that this be his part; for who schal brynge 
hym, that he knowe thingis that schulen 
come after hym ? 


CAP. IV. 


I turnede me to othere thingis, and Y1 
si3 fals chalengis, that ben’ don vndur the 
sunnef, and the teeris of innocentis®, and 
no man coumfortour; and that thei for- 
sakun¢ of the help of alle men, moun not 
a3enstonde the violence of hem. And Y2 
preiside more deed men than lyuynge 
men; and Y demyde hym, that was not3 
borun 3it, and si34 not the yuels that ben 
don vndur the sunne, fo be blisfulere® than 
euer eithirt. Eft Y bihelde alle the tra-4 
uelis of men, and bisynesses; and Y per- 
seyuede that tho ben opyn to the enuye 
of nei3bore®; and therfor in this is va- 
nyte, and superflu bisynesse. A fool fold-5 
ith togidere hise hondis, and etith hise 
fleischis" §, and seith, Betere is an handfuls 
with reste, than euer either hondful with 
trauel and turment of soule. I bihelde7 
and foond also another vanytee || vndir 
thei sunne; oon isk, and he hath not as 
secounde ; not! a sone, not™ a brother; 
and netheles he ceesith not for" to trauele, 
nether hise i3en ben fillid with® richessis ; 
nether he bithenkith?, and seith, To whom 
trauele Y, and disseyue my soule in goodis? 
In this also is vanyte, and the% worste™ 
turment. Therfor it is betere, that tweyne’ 9 
be togidere than oon; for thei han profite 


c°. he preueth 
that mannus 
blis stondith not 
in lordschip, for 
it hath myche 
disese and tra- 
uel and perel 
of synne. Lire 


here. c. 
1 than euer 
eithir ; that is, 
lesse wrecchid 
than an yuel 
man deed, and 
au yuel man 
ynge ; for 
he ‘et is deed 
borun and 
dieth in ori- 
genal synne 
onely, bath no 
peyne of feel- 
ing, but he 
hath more de- 
litable liyf, 
than he my3te 
haue in present 
liyf, as alle 
doctours seyen, 
that speken of 
hem that dien 
in origenal 
synne onely. 
Lire here. c. 


§ etith hise 
Jeischis ; for 
whi for he 
eschewith tra- 
uel, he bath 
litil to ete, and 
80 hise fleischis 
tal maad 
thynne. Lire 
ee Cc 

|| an other va- 
nyte,ete.; that 
is, the wrecchid- 
nesse of an 
auarouse man. 
hath not a se- 
cunde ; for he 
fleeth to hane 
meynee and 
frenschipe with 
ony man, lest 
it bihoueth him 
spende sum- 
thing, and ne- 
theles he cees- 


of her felouschipe. If oon fallith doun, he 10 sith not to gete 


schal be vndurset of the tothere'; wo to 
hym that is aloone{], for whanne he fallith, 
he hath noon reisynge” him’. 
tweyne slepen”, thei schulen be nurschid 


! And c. 


k Om. AGH. m thanne two to c. 


¢ destitut, ether forsakun c et plures. destitute, or _failinge 1. 


zOm.c. goons. ” the giltlees 1. ( ‘ : 
4 Y siz cag. © more blessid 1. {Om.1. & the neizbore 1. h fleishe 1. | Om. 1N pr.m. ses is 1. 
Inether 1. ™ner. "Om.1. oft. P dithenkith him1. @Om.1, ‘fulyuelt. 8 twot. that 
oother1. ¥toreiser. Vhimupt. ® slepen éo gidre 1. 


12 


catel, with 
greet turment 
of bodi and of 
soule. that 


And if 11 “eeyne be to 


gidere ; that is, 
that many men 
be ioyned togi- 
dere in fren- 


4 wo to him that is aloone ; that is, hath not felouschipe and frenschip with ony man. Lire here. c. 


60 


12maner shal he be maad hot? If any man 
haue the ouere hond a3en oon, two™ with- 
stonden to hym; a thre fold corde hard 

13is to-broken. Betere is a child pore and 
wis than a king old and fool, that can- 

14not seen beforn in to aftir. That and 
fro prisoun and cheynes otherwhile sum 
man goth out to a reume; and an other 
born into a reume with myseise is wastid. 

15 1 sa3 alle liuende men that gon vnder the 
sunne, with the 3unge ful waxynge the 

~igsecunde, that shal rise for hym. With 
oute ende is the noumbre of puple®, of 
alle that weren beforn hym, and that 
aftir® ben to comen, shu] not gladen in 
hym; but and this vanyte and torment- 

ving of spirit. Kep thou thi foot, goende 
in to the hous of God, and ne3he that 
thou heere; forsothe myche betere is 
obeisaunce than victorie sacrifises? of 

_foolis, that .wite not what thei don of 

euel. 
CAP. V. 

1 And speke thou not folili any thing, 
ne thin herte be swift to bringe forth a 
wrd beforn God; God forsothe in heuene, 
and thou yp?? on erthe, and therfore fewe 

2be thi wrdis. Sweuenus folewen manye 
besynesses, and in manye wrdis shal ben 

3founde folie. If any thing thou hauei 
vouwid to God, ne tarie thou to 3elde; 
forsothe displesith to hym vnfeithful and 
fool beheste; but what enere thou auouw- 
4ist, 3eeld; and myche betere it is to not 
auouwen, than aftir the vow the bihestis 
sto not 3elde. Ne 3iue thon thi mouth, 
that thou make thi flesh to synnen; ne 
sey thou biforn the aungil, There is not 
purueying; lest parauenture the Lord, 

_wroth vp on thi wrdis, scatere alle the 

ewerkis of thin hondis. Wher many 
sweuenes ben, many vanytes, and wrdis 


l| Speke thou not ony thing folili; of God ether of hise domes, in repreuynge tho. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


IV. 12—V. 6. 


togidere* ; hou schal oon be maad hoot?  * nurschid wo. 
. ee gidere ; herbi 
And if ony man hath maistri a3ens oon, 12 in figuratif 
tweyne ajen stonden hym; a-threfolde Pureisy™ 
. the reste of 
corde is brokun of hard. A pore mat 13 ony men in 
and wijs is betere than an eld kyng and fee hoot in 
3 i charite. a thre 
fool, that kan not bifore se in to tyme to fold coorde, 
: etc.; that i 
comynge. For sum tyme a man goith 1425 myche as” 
mo men and 
out bothe fro prysoun and chaynes to a good bal 
rewme; and anothir borun in to a rewme ‘yned togidere 
is wastid bi nedynesse. 


* in frenschipe, 
I siz alle ment 15 bi so myche the 
lyuynge that goen vndur the sunne, with 


staat of hem is 
amendid. Lire 


here. c. 
the secounde 3ong wexynge inan, that 4° 4 om 
schal rise for hym. The noumbre of pu-16™” é het 
ple, of alle that weren bifore hym, is greet ith the se- 


cunde ; that is, 
the sone of the 
king that schal 
regne aftir him. 


with outen mesure, and thei that schulen 
come aftirward, schulen not be glad in 
Lire here. c. 


hym ; but also this 7s vanyte and turment 4 jose thi foot, 
of the spirit. Thou that entrist in to the 17 a tha 
hous of God, kepe thi foot{, and neize thou __ fuly nether 
. P proudly, as 
for to here; for whi myche betere is obe-  mysty men of 
dience*{ than the sacrifices’ of foolis, that pos “gaa that 
witen not what yuel thei don. Speke thou1 in ber ea 
not ony thing folily||, nether thin herte do nee tal 
1 e prestis an 
be swift to brynge forth a word bifore techeris ofthe 
ee fe 
God; for? God is in heuene, and thou here Goddis 
art on erthe, therfor thi wordis be fewe. go echtaiiin 
Dremes suen many bisynessis, and foli2 jerk: Mire 
schal be foundun in many wordis. If thou3 § Setere is abe. 


heestis, to fille 
dience ; in the 


hast avowid ony thing to God, tarie thou kepinge of 

not to 3elde"; for an vnfeithful and fonned (7221s heestis 

biheest§ displesith hym; but ‘3elde thou? fava 

what euer thing thou hast avowid*; and4 be 

ya a0 awe, thai 

it is myche betere to make not a vowe,  dreden not to 
breke Goddis 


than aftir a vowe to 3elde not biheestis®. heestis bi her 
3yue thou not thi mouth**, that thou makes Pon? naan 
thi fleisch to do synne; nether seie thou 


hym bi of- 
F fringis and sa- 
bifor an aungel, No puruyaunce is®; lest 


crifices. wilen 


. not what yuel 
perauenture the Lord be wrooth on! thi sei doen; 
at Z i bi this that 
wordis, and distruye alle the werkis of thei ben proude, 


G i they ben blynd- 
thin hondis. Where ben many dremes, 6 dae ' he 
ben ful many vanytees, and wordis with pee” knowe 

the uOns< 
out noumbre; but drede thou God. If7 new of 
synne. Lire 
here. C. 
{ unfeithful and fonned Liheest ; it ts seid 


vnfeithful, whanne aftir a vow maad in the tyme of nede, the purpos is chaungid anoon whanne the nede ceessith; it is seid a fonned biheest, whanne 
it is of a thing vnleueful ether vndifferent, as if a man makith a vow, to reise a stre fro erthe, for this turneth not in ony thing to the onour of God, 


ethir if a vow is maad of a good thing, netheles impossible to him that makith a vuw. Lire here. c. 
to glotenye. fo do synne ; bi the vice of leccherie. Lire here. c. 


™ tweyne AEGH. "the puple a. © after hym a. 


x the obedience mu. 
thou if 1. 


Y sacrifice a. 


4 the biheestis 1. ¢theris1. fof 1s. 


P sacrifise c. PP Om. c pr.m. 


z sothly 1. 


** thi mouth ; in openynge it ouer myche 


GQ hast 42ecH. * Om. a. 


aselde it1. %Om.1. © auowid fo God, 3elde 


Vv. 7—19. 


vnnoumbreable ; thou forsothe dred God. 
7If thou shalt seen wronge® chalengis of 
‘nedi men, and violent domes, and ri3t- 
wisnesse to be turned vpso doun in pro- 
uynce’, wndret thou not vp on this nede ; 
for than the hee3 an other is he3ere, and 
vp on these othere also ben hejere stond- 
sende; ‘and ferthermore the king of al 
serthe comaundith to the seruende. The 
auerouse shall not ben fulfild with monee; 
and that looueth richesses, frut shal not 
take of them; and this thanne vanyte. 
10 Wher ben many richesses, and manye 
that eten hem; and" what profiteth to 
the weldere; but that he seeth the rich- 
liesses with his e3en? Swete is slep to the 
- werchere, whether litil or myche’ he ete ; 
fulnesse forsothe of the riche man suf- 
i2frith hym not to slepen. Ther is and 
an other infirmyte werst, that I sa3 vndir 
the sunne; richesses kept in to euel¥ of 
13his lord. Forsothe thei pershen in the 
werste tormenting; ‘he gat* a sone, that 
i4in hezest nedynesse shal be. As he wente 
out nakid of the wombe of his moder, so 
he sha] turne a3een; and no thing he 
shal take with hym of his trauaile. 
15 Wreccheful forsothe infirmyte; what 
ianer he cam, so he shal turne ajeen. 
What thanne profiteth toy hym, that he 
16trauailede in to wind? Alle the da3es of 
his lif he eet in dercnesses, and in many 
besynesses, and in myseise, and sorewe. 
17And so this to me is seen good, that a 
man ete, and drinke, and vse gladnesse 
of his trauaile, that he trauailede ynder 
the sunne, in noumbre of the dajes of his 
lif, ‘the whiche? God 3af to hym ; and this 
isis his part. And to eche man, to whom 
God 3af richesses, and substaunce, and 
power he 3af to hym, that he ete of hem, 
and take the frut of his part, and glade 
of his trauaile; this is the 3ifte of God. 
19 Forsothe not ‘a seeth* he shal recorde of 
the dajes of his lif, ther thur3 that God 
ocupie in delicys his herte. 
rOm.cpr.m. 8 prouyncis 4. 
AE S€C. mm. marg. Gil. 


hemi. 1 ther bent. 
nessisa. Gofc. *thenke1. 


iQOm.1.  *Kete1. 


t ne wondre E pr.m. 
x Om. c pr.m. thei iendren £ pr.m. he begat ak sec. m. Git. 


1 that 1. 


ECCLESIASTES. rol 


thou seest false chalengis of nedi men, and 
violent domes, and that rijtfulnesse is dis- 
tried in the prouynce, wondre thou not on 
this doyng ; for another is hizere than an 
hi3 man, and also othere men ben more 
hizje aboue these men; and ferthermores 
the kyng of al erthe comaundith to the 


seruaunt*™. * to the sera 


uaunt; that is, 
to ech creature 


CAP. V. 
: soict to hi 
An auerouset man schal not be fillid of 9 Silt. Lire here. 


monei; and he that loneth richessis schal + en 
etc. ; here hi- : 
ginneth the 


Where ben® many richessis, i0 v. c°. bi Jerom, 
and in this ¢°. 


not take fruytis of tho’; and therfor this 
is vanyte. 
also many men ben, that eten tho; and — Salomonschew- 
what profitith it to the haldere, no! but 1h iat mare 
that he seeth richessis with hise ijen? Det in temporal 
3 : richessis. schal 
Slepe is swete to hym that worchith, whe- 11 OC te ates 
° eye at Is, a 
ther he etith* litil ether myche; but the loveth richessis 
° as an auarouse 
fulnesse of a ryche man suffrith not hym  jnan doith, 
to slepe. Also anothir sijknesse is ful lea ctemhe, 
yuel, which! Y si3 vndur the sunne; rich- eeaieats 
essis ben kept in to the yuel™ of her lord{. _ not to vse tho. 
: . . ire here. c. 
For thei perischen in the worste turment; 13+ in to the yuet 
he gendride” a sone, that schal be in soue- lags cea 
reyn nedynesse. As he 3ede nakid out of 14 vevnours and 
s A couetouse men 
his modris wombe, so he schal turne ajen; __ setten tresoun 
Saotauh’s 5 to riche men, 
and he schal take awei with hyin no thing and thei ben 
‘ a . stranglid f 
of his trauel. Outirli ¢ 7s a wretchid 15 jo Tileeee 
sijknesse ; as he cam, so he schal turne gC Gag TS 
ajen. What therfor® profitith it to hym, 
that he trauelide in to the wynde§? Tnis§ i jo te 
alle the daies of his lijf he eet in derk- Ree 
° ee . . $ 1S 
nessis, and in many bisinessis, and in nedy- __ trauel profitith 
i not to him silf, 
nesseP, and? sorewe. Therfor this semyde 17 nethir to hise 
good to me, that a man ete, and drynke, hoe re 
and vse gladnesse of his trauel, in which 
he trauelide vndir the sunne, in the noum- 
bre of daies of his lijf, which God 3af to 
hym; and this is his part. And to echis 
man, to whom God jaf richessis, and catel, 
and 3af power to hym to ete of tho, and 
to vse his part, and to be glad of his 
trauel; this is the 3ifte of God. For hes . 
schal not bithenke™ miche on the daies of 
his lijf, for God ocupieth his herte with 
delicis. 


w the evel 4GH. 
a ynow3 


¥ mychel e. 
z that c pr. m. 


u Om. c@ sec. m. 
y Om. c prem. 


mharmi. ®gaatr. 9 Om.c. P nedi 


62 ECCLESIASTES. 


CAF... Vie 


1 Ther is and an other euel, that I sa3 
vnder the sunne; and forsothe ofte anentis 
emen. A man to whom God 3af richesses, 
and substaunce, and wrshepe; and no 
thing lacketh to his soule of alle thingis 
that he desireth; and God 3yueth not 
power to hym, that he ete of it, but a 
straunge man shal deuouren it. This is 
3vanyte, and gret wrecchidnesse. If any 
man geete an hundred free childer, and 
liue many 3eris, and many da3es of his 
age hadde, and the soule of hym vse nott 
the goodis of his substaunce, and lacke 
sepulture; of that I pronounce, that 
betere than he be maad ‘a dead born’. 
4In veyn forsothe he cam, and wente to 
dercnesses; and bi for3eting shal be don 
sawei the name of hym. He? sa3 not the 
sunne, ne kne3 the distaunce of good and 
seuel ; also if two thousend 3eer he shulde 
liue, and hadde not ful vsid the goodis ; 
7whether not to o place gon alle? Al the 
trauaile of man in the mouth of hym, 
but the sowe of hym shal not be fulfild 
swith goodis. What more hath a wis 
man than a fool? and what a pore, but 
9 that he go thider, wher is lif? Betere is 
to seen that thou coueitist, than to desire 
that thou wost not; but and this is va- 
1onyte, and presumpcioun of spirit. Who 
is to come, now is clepid the name of 
hym, and is knowen, that he be a man, 
and mai not a3en a strengere than hym- 
uiself striuen with inb dom. Wrdis ben 
manye, and myche in disputing vanyte 
hauende. 
CAP. VII. 
1 What nede is to a man more thingus 
than hymself to sechen; whan he vn- 
knowith, what it bringe to hym in his 


VI, 1—VIT. 1. 


CAPA VT. 


Also another yuel is*, which' Y si31 * Godsyuem 
Py a . not power, ele. ; 
vndur the sunne; and certis z2¢ 7s oft vsid for God draw. 
anentis men. A" man 7s’, to whom God2 


ith him awey 
5 ‘ sudeynly fro 
jaf richessis, and catel, and onour; and 


present liyf. 


. oye . Lire here. c. 
no thing failith* to his sowleY of alle +f a man 
thingis which? he desirith; and God 3yueth fundrid, etc. 

defaute that 


not power* to hym, that he ete therof, cometh of ana- 
rice makith a 


but a straunge man shal deuoure it. This Tent: 4, 


i e*, and a greet wretchidnesse. she, thou3 he 
Is vanyte’, as sse. If's hath richessis 


aman gendrith> an hundridf fre sones, and many 
. d i h othere thingis 
and lyueth many 3erls, an ath many that ben de- 
daies of age, and his soule vsith not the ive oa 
i i i iT ¢ soule; that i 
goodis of his catel, and wantith biriyng ; mae 


oe nol, in 
is owne per- 
For he4 soone, then 


Y pronounce of this man, that a deed 
borun child is betere than he. 


, ‘ oO: aa 
cometh in veyn{, and goith to derknessis ; ea a fis 
and his name schal be don awei bi for- 7%” child; 


that asayede 
3etyng. He si3 not the sunne, nether 5 20 yuel of 
knew dyuersyte’ of good and of yuel; ond bed a 
also thou3 he lyueth® twei thousyndes then in tile 
3eeris, and vsith not goodis§; whether resent lyf: 


alle thingis hasten not|| to o place? A]7 betere than an 
auarouse man, 


the trauel of a man zs in his mouth§, but for in al his 
the soule of hym schal not be fillid with ah fe 
yuel, and an- 


goodis. 
than a fool? and what hath a pore man, 
nof but that he go thidur, where is lijf**? 3 Ae cometh in 
‘ Bao veyn ; to birthe, 
It is betere to se that, that thou coueitist,9 and goith to 
than to desire that, that thou knowist not; 7e°puere: 
but also this is vanyte, and presumpcioun §2%4 vsith nat 
of spirit. The name of hym that schal 10 sere yuels, as 


What hath a wijs man mores gwisch of bodi 


and soule. Lire 
here. c. 


goodis ; but 
@ sel Cy 


come, is clepid now, and it is knowun, _ long liyf pro- 
c 9 fitith no thing 

that he is a man, and he mai not stryueff  tohim, but 

in doom ajens a strongere than hym silf. 7242.70 


Wordis ben ful manye, and han myche1 | wher alle 
thingis hasten 


vanyte in dispuytinge. What nede is iti 74, etc.; that 


to a man to seke grettere thingis than wpa cla 
hym silf; sithen® he knowith not, what oe 
schal bifalle to hym in his lijf, in the bennus the 
noumbre of daies of his pilgrimage, and are — 


of a man is in 


his mouth ; that is, for couenable sustenaunce of mannus liyf. bud the soule of him; that is, of the auarouse man bifor seid. schal not be fillid 
with goodis ; for he schal not vse his richessis, and therfor he hath richessis in veyn. Lire here. c. ** where is liyf; that is, to blis to 
comynge, where deth hath no place. Lire here. c. ++ he may not stryue, etc.; that is, alegge resonably azenus God, that it perteyneth to 
man to knowe thingis to comynge that ben vncerteyn, and not teld in hooly writ. wordis ben ful, ete.; of dyuynyngis aboute thingis to comyng, 
to seke grettere, etc.s that is, kunnyng that passith his vndurstonding. sithen he knowiih not, etc.; that is, what is profitable to him in present liyf. 


Zan abortif eprom. @lacprmu. > Om. 4. 
Stheris1, ¢thatr. Sumi. vtheris1. Whath30uer. *ther failithr. ylijfr. 2 that 1. 
aavanyte a. b getithr. Coffre1. 4 the dyuersite1. @lyner. fOm.1. @andc. 4 sith 1 passin. 


VII. 2—15. 


lif, bi nonmbre of dajes of his pilgrim- 
age, and bi time that as shadewe passede? 
or who to hym shal moun shewen, what 
after hym be to come vnder the sunne ? 
2Betere is a good name than precious 
oynementes ; and the dai of deth than 
3the dai of birthe. Betere is to go to the 
hous of weiling, than to the hous of a 
feste ; in it forsothe the ende of alle men 
is warned, and liuende he thenketh, what 
4be to come. Betere is wrathe than la3h- 
ing; for bi sorewe of the chere the wil 
30f the trespasere is amendid. The herte 
of wise men where is sorewe; and the 
cherte of foolis where is gladnesse. Betere 
is to be chastisid of a wis man, than bi 
7flatering of foolis to be desceyued ; for as 
the soun of brennende thornes vnder a 
gpot, so the la3hing of a fool. But and 
this vanyte. Chaleng disturbeth the wise 
man, and shal leesen the strengthe of his 
gherte. Betere is forsothe the ende of ori- 
soun’ than the begynnyng. Betere is a4 
pacient man than the enhauncende hyin- 
io self. Be thou not swift to wrathen; for 
wrathe in the bosum of a fool restith. 
i Ne seye thou, What wenest thou of cause 
is, that the rathere tymes betere weren 
than now ben? folie forsothe is such a 
igmaner asking. Profitablere forsothe is 
wisdam with richesses, and more pro- 
13 fitith to men seende the sunne. Forsothe 
as wisdain defendith, so® monee; this 
forsothe more hath lernyng and wisdam, 
14 that lif thei 3eelden to ther weldere. Be- 
hold the werkes of God, that no man mai 
i;amende, whom he despiside. In the 
goode dai vse goodes, and the euele dai 
be war biforn; as forsothe this, so and 


ECCLESIASTES. 


63 


in the tyme that passith as schadowe ? 
ether who may schewe to hym, what thing 
vndur sunne schal come aftir hym ? 


CAP. Vit. 


A good name* is betere than preciouse2 
oynementis; and the dai of deth zs betere 
than the dai of birthe. It is betere to gos 
to the hous of morenyng}, than to the 
hous of ai feeste; for in that hous ‘of 
morenyng* the ende of alle men is mo- 
nestid', and a man lynynge thenkith, what 
is to comynge. Yre is betere than leizyng ; 4 
for the soule of a trespassour is amendid™ 
bi the" heuynesse of cheer. The herte ofs 
wise men 7s where® sorewe is; and the 
herte of foolis zs where gladnesse? is. Ite 
is betere to be repreued of a wijs man, 
than to be disseyued bi the" flateryng of 
foolis; for as the sown of thornes bren-7 
nynge vndur a pot, so zs the lei3yng of a 
fool. But also this zs vanyte. Fals cha-s 
lenge} disturblith a wijs inan, and it schal 
leese’ the streugthe) of his herte. For-9 
sothe the ende of preyer is betere|| than 
the bigynnyng. <A pacient man. is betere 
than a proud man. i 
be wrooth; for ire‘ restith in the bosum"g- 
of a fool. Seie thou not, What gessist. 
thou is of’ cause, that the formere tymes. 


weren betere than ben now? for whi. 


siche axyng is fonned. Forsothe wisdom} 
with richessis is more ; profitable**, and 
profitith more to men seynge{{ the sunne. 
For as wisdom defendith, so money de-} 


Jendith{{; but lernyng and wisdom§) hath” 


this more, that* tho 3yuen lijf to ‘her 
weldereY. Biholde thou the werkis of Gad, ! 
that” no man may amende hym, whom 


that is, greuouse wrong. disiurbiith, ete.; netheles it castith not him doun anoon fro the vertu of stidefastnesse. Lire here. c. 
the strengthe, etc.; that is, the vertu of stidefastnesse, if the trobling wexith strong; therfor a wiys man owith to arme him silf bi preyer. Lire 


here. c. 
man is maad pacient in aduersites. Lire here. c. 


ether who may, 
etc. ; God ‘ 
aloone. Lire 
here. C 
*A good name ; 
that cometh of 
onest liyf. is 
betere than pre- 
ciouse oyne~ 
mentis ; here 
Salomon tech - 
ith of veri 
blis, that stond- 
ith in God 
aloone, and in 
his cleer sist, 
and knowing, 
and lone; and 
the disposicioun 
of blis stondith 
in meedeful 
werk, for whi 
hope is certeyn 
abiding of blis 
to conlynge, 
that risith of 
grace and good 
werkis, and 
sich vertuouse 
liyf is a maner 
of bigynnyng 
of parfit blis. 
day of deth s of 
just men; for 
in the day of 
deth they by- 
gynen to lyue 
verily, and 
therfor the day 
of deth of hooly 
men is clepid 
the birthe of 
hem. Lire 
here. C. 

tf hows of 


“mornyng 


Be thou. not swift to 10 where moren- 


yng is maad 
for deed men. 
to the hows of 
1 feeste; wher- 
ynne the synne 
of gloteny is 
ofte doon, and 
the synne of 
2 leccherie sueth 
ofte. Ire is 
betere ; the 
fadir, that 
loneth the sone, 
3 is wrooth, 
whanne he 
seeth him do 
folily ; but a 
straunger, that 
reckith not of 
4 him, leizith of 
his foly. Lire 


~ here. c. 


t Fals caieng;- 
§ it schal leese 


lj the ende of preyer is betere, ete. ; for it bigynneth of sorewe for wrong doon, and it is endid in coumfort 3onun of God, bi which a 
qin the bosum; that is, in his herte. Lire here. c. 
therfor Ambrose on Lik seith, As richessis ben lettingis to yuele men, so to goode men tho ben helpis. Lire here. c. 


** wisdom with richessis is more profitable; 
tt and profitith more to men 


seynge, etc.; that is, wisdom is betere with richessis, than with out richessis ; and this is soth, whanne othere vertues ben evene in a riche man and 
a pore man; for a wise man hauynge richessis may do werkis of pitee and of liberalte, whiche lie that hath no richessis, may not do. Lire here. c. 
tt so money defendith ; that is, mynystrith spensis azenus visible enemyes, and it defendith a3enus vnuysible enemyes, by meedeful werkis of pitee and 
of liberalte. Lire here. c. 8§ bud lernyng and wisdom, etc.; that is, liyf of grace, and of glorie to a wiys man, and without richessis, but richessis 
without wisdom moun not 3yne this. c. 


© the orisoun acu. the «a. ¢&soand cpr.m. so defendith c sec. m. 
toc. kOm.1. !warned1. ™corectid:. "Om.1. ° where that1. P foly gladnesse 1. 4 Om, vu. 
rOm. crx. 8fordo1. +t wraththe 1. a herte 1 fect. or bosumi1 marg. Y the c sec. m. EFGHIKMPQ 
Rsuxyag. Whani. *ounerthat1. Yhemthat hanhemi. 2 aad se that tr. 


64 


it God made, that a man finde not a3en 
16 hym ri3twis pleyntes. These thingus also 
I saw3 in the da3jes of my birthe; the 
ri3twis pershede in his rij3twisnesse, and 
the vnpitous myche time liueth, and in 
izhis malice. Wile thou not ben myche 
ri3twis, ne more sauouren than is nede ; 
islest thou become stoneid. Ne myche vn- 
pytousli do thou, and wile thou not ben 
a fool; lest thou die in the time not thin. 
19Good is, thee to sustenen the ri3twis ; 
but,and fro hym ne withdrawe thou thin 
hond; for who dredeth God, no thing 
20necgligentli leueth. Wisdam coumfortede 
the wise, ouer ten princes of the cite. 
21Ther is not forsothe a rij3twis man in 
the erthe, that do good, and not synne. 
22 But and to alle wrdis, that ben seid, ne 
leeue thoué thin herte; lest parauenture 
thou heere a seruaunt cursende to thee; 
23 thi conscience forsothe wot, for and thou 
21ofte sithes cursedist to othere. Alle 
thingis I sa3ede" in wisdam ; I seide, Wis 
I shal be maad, and it ferthere wente 
25awei fro me, myche more than it was; 
26and hee3 depnesse, who shal finde it? I 
cumpassede alle thingus in myn inwit, 
that I shulde witen, and beholde, and 
sechen wisdam and resoun, and that I 
shulde knowe the vnpitousnes of the fool, 
27 and the errour of vnprudent men. And 
I fond a womman bitterere than deth, 
the whiche is the grene of hunteres, and 
a net the herte of hir, bondis ben the 
hondis of hir; who plesith to God, shal 
ascapen hir, who forsothe is a synnere, 
asshal be ca3t of hir. Lo! this I fond, 
seide Eclesiastes, oon and other, that I 
29shulde finde resoun, that 3it sechith my 
soule ; and J fond not. A man of a thon- 
send oon I fond, a womman of alle I fond 


prynces ; that is, more than eny power of man. Lire here. c. 
here. C 


man bi mannus seking. Lire here. c. tt @ womman biterere, 


the body. of hunteris ; that is, of fendis. Lire here. c. 
wit to ech thing. Lire here. c. 


f sauere £. sauere thou GH. 


assim. » birthe 1. 
1 to beholde 1. 


© saw3 © 


a € ouer myche I. 
b with 1. 


k Om.c. | the which 1, 


ECCLESIASTES. 


** the depthe is hiz ; that is, the kynde of God, as to the knowing of persoones is au hi3 depthe. who schal fynde it; 


ff Om. c. pr. m. 


4 ther is 1. 


VII. 16—29. 


God hath dispisid*. 
thou goodis, and bifore eschewe thou an 


In a good day vse1s* whom God 
hath dispisid ; 
that is, hath 


ae: forsake hi 
yuel day; for God made so this dai as fynaty; and a 
that dai, that a man fynde not iust oe 


playnyngis aj3ens hym. . Also Y si3* these 16 the hardnesse 


ee & in yuel ; bro- 
thingis in the daiest of my natyuyte?;  theris repren- 
° . ° 5 . . yng ether priny 

a iust man perischith in his ri3tfulnesse, — ijlamyng ow- 

ith to ceesse, 


and a wickid man lyueth myche tyme in 
his malice. Nyle thou be iust myche°f, 17 
nether vndurstonde thou more than is 


whanne a man 
seeth his bro- 
ther obstynat 
in synne, but 


thei ith 
nedeful ; lest thou be astonyed. Do thous not to ee 
not wickidli myche§, and nyle thou be a eee 
fool ; lest thou die in a tyme not thin. It19 ayia 


by deth, if his 
trespas axith 
this, that the 
comyn good 
and pees be 
not disturblid 
bi him. Lire 
here. c. 


is good, that thou susteyne a iust man; but 
also withdrawe thou not thin hond from 
hym ; for he that dredith God, is not necli- 
gent of ony thing. Wisdom hath coum-20 
fortid a wise man, ouer ten pryncis|| of a tin the dala 
citee. Forsothe no iust man is‘ in erthe, 21 c.; that is, 
that doith good, and synneth not. Butiss nd aatael 
also 3yue thou not thin herte to alle 


here. Cc. 
cursid ofte othere men. I asayede alle 24 scharply. nether 


sone awey, so 
it is not no but 
wordis®, that ben seid; lest perauenture Yay. Lire 
thou here thi seruaunt cursynge thee; for 23? Nyle thai 
i ‘ iust myche $ 
thi conscience woot, that also thou hast that is, in pu. 
nysching over 
eo . . (ae endurstonden 
thingis in wisdom]; Y* seide, I schal be etc. ; of thi 
maad wijs, and it 3ede awei ferthere fro  tfulnesse. 
i astonyed 3 in 
me, myche more than it was; and the 25 syuyngea cruel 


A Z i sentence, and 
depthe zs hi38**, who schal fynde it? I 26not inst. Lire 
: ee here. C. 
cumpasside alle thingis in? my soule, to  ¢ ns shou not 
kunne, and biholde', and seke wisdom and  “*#idly myches 
se for cruelte is a 
resoun, and to knowe the wickidnesse of greet wickid- 
k nesse, and for 
a fool, and the* errour of vnprudent men. it makitha 
man to erre, 


And Y foond a womman bitterere}+ than 27 
deth, which! is the snare of hunteris, and 
hir herte #s a net, and hir hondis ben 
boondis; he that plesith God schal ascape 
hir, but he that is a synnere, schal be 
takun of hir. Lo! Y foond{{ this, seide 2s 
Ecclesiastes, oon and other, that Y schulde re 
fynde resoun, which™ my soule sekith Zits a9 Resse. Lire 


and to gete to 
him silf dedly 
enemytes, it 
sueth, nyle 
thou be a fool, 
etc, not thyn; 
in hastinge thi 
deeth bi ene- 
mytes a iust 


man ; in dee 


|| ouer ten 
{| in wisdom ; that is, for wisdom to be getun. it 3ede; in my reputacioun. Lire 
as if he seye, no 


ete,; for a womman departith the soule fro his Creatour, but deth departith oneli fro” 
tt Lo! ¥ foond; that is, enqueride deligentli. oon and other ; that is, in appliynge my 


& thou not £ pr.m. 4} asaijede c. 


€the wordisr. fand Y:. 8 lower. 


™m that 1. 


VII. 30—VIII. 12. 


sonot. Onli this I fond, that God made 
man ri3t; and he hymself mengde with 
questiouns with oute ende. Who such? 
oon as the wise is? and who kne}3 the 
solucioun of the! wrd ? 


CAP. VITI. 


1 The wisdam of a man li3tnethj in the 
chere of hym; and the most my3ti the 
2face of hym shal chaungen. I the mouth 
of the king kepe, and hestes and the othis 
30f God. Ne heje thou to gon awei fro 
the face of hym, ne abide thou stille in 
euel were. For al that he wille, he shal 
4do; and the sermoun of hym is ful of 
power, ne any man mai sey to hym, Whi 
sdost thou thus? Who kepeth the hest, 
shal not ben expert* any thing ‘of euel**; 
time and answering the herte of the 
g wise man vnderstant!. To alle nede time 
is™ and couenablenesse; and myche tor- 
7mentyng of a man, that vnknowith the 
passide thingus, and the" to comen bi no 
smessager he may wite. It is not in a 
mannys power to defende the spirit, ne 
he hath power in the dai of deth, ne it is 
suffrid to resten, bataile a3encomende ; 
ne vnpitousnesse shal saue the vnpitouse. 
9 Alle these thingus I beheeld, and 3af myn 
herte in alle werkis, that ben mad vnder 
sunne™, Otherwhile a man lordshipeth to 
10a man, in to his euel. I sa3 vnpitous men 
biried, that alsoo, whan 3it thei liueden, 
‘in holi place® weren; and thei weren 
preised in the cite, as of rijtwis werkis ; 
1ibut and this is vanyte. Forsothe for 
ther is not bro3t forth anoon®® azen euele 
men sentence, withoute any drede the 
12sones of men werchen eueles. And ner 
the latere the synnere, of that, that an 
hundrid sithes he doth euel, and bi pa- 


he schal 3yue to him a glorionse face. Lire here. c. 


and this is seid in the persoone of a trewe obeiere to God. Lire here. c. 
{| spirid ; that is, his soule, fro goyng out fro the bodi. Lire here. c. 
** the sentence ; of Goddis punyschyng. Lire here. c. 
lustis, that ben the sones of men, and not of God. Lire here. c. 


azenus God. Lire here. c. 


h sechith a. i Om. c pr.m. 


1 ynderstondeth zen. m Om. 4. 
00 Om. c pr. m. 
0 foond itr, Cand Yc. Pooy. 


3 of ony c. 
VOL. III. 


t eyther s. 


Jlizteth & pr.m. 
0 the thingis 4. tho e. 


u leiser, ether cesoun ¢ et celeri. 


ECCLESIASTES. 65 


and Y foond™ not*. I foond o man of ‘and ¥ fond 
ts that j 
a thousynde; Y° foond not aP womman ti to ecto 


of alle. I foond this oonli, that God made 30 eco 
a man ri3tful; and he medlide hym silf 4“ ne 
; 5 3 is, fu 
with questiouns with out noumbre. Who _ fewe men ben 
ps f Ae 5 : foundun ver. 
is siche as a wijs man? and who knowith _ tuouse in com- 
é parisoun of 
the expownyng! of a word}? The wisdom} nen failing fro 
$ . ‘ vertu, for the 
of a man schyneth in his cheer; and the noutnbre of 
my3tieste schal chaunge his face. foolis is greet 
with out noum. 
bre. ¥ foond 
nol a womman 
CAP. VIII. all Ga 
18, not oon ver- 
I kepe the mouth of the kyngt, and the2 ticnses not 
. ° that no wom. 
comaundementis and sweryngis of God en 
Haste thou not to go awei§ fro his face, 3 CRS Letter 
5 ewe in com- 
and dwelle thou not in yuel werk. For _ parisoun of 
: men bei i 
he schal do al thing, that he wole; and4 tuonse, a8 # is 
his word is‘ful of power, and no man mai 4. ™ynly, 


that no man is 


seie to hym, Whi doist thou so? He thats in the chirche, 


> io whanne ful 
kepith the comaundement of God ‘in this fewe men ben 
ee ‘ there, in com- 
lijf", schal not feele ony® thing of yuel; - parisoun of the 
the herte of a wijs man vndurstondith jg wont to come 
to gidere thi- 
: dur. with ques- 
to ech werk; and myche turment 7s of a ie eae 
5 2 Y % sy SSIS 
man, for he knowith not thingis passid,7 aboute the get- 
Z ‘ ing of sienees 
and he mai not knowe bi ony messanger 
Whoa is sich ; 
that is, so wor- 
power of man to forbede the spirit |], thi tobe preisid 
nethir he hath power in the dai of deth, 4 wiys man; 
7 A wae that is, a ver- 
nethir he is suffrid to haue reste, whanne  tuouse man bi 
oye * that atteyneth 
schal sane a wickid man. I bihelde alleo to vartuense 
thes thingis, and Y 3af myn herte in alle _ liyfand trewe 
werkis, that ben don vndur the sunne. 


multitude that 
tyme and answer. Tyme and cesoun” isc 
tiauns ; that 
and vertues. 
thingis to comynge’. It is not in thes 
among men, &3 
5 * ae vertues and vn- 
the batel nei3eth”; nethir wickidnesse durstonding; he 
vndurstonding, 
is ful exeelent 


A ‘ among men. 
Sum tyme a man is lord of a man, to his Lire hares Gs 
yuel(]. Y si3 wickid men biryed, which, Ue ak me 
whanne thei lyueden 3it, weren in hooli 7775 that is, 
of a priny 


word, as if be 
seye, noon, no 
but a wiys man 
in vndurstond- 


place; and thei weren preisid in the citee, 
as men of iust werkis; but also this is 


vanyte. Forsothe* for the sentence™* is 11 ing and ver- 
tuose liyf. 

not brou3t forth soone a3ens yuele men, Chirings his 

the sones of ment} doon yuels with outen faves that is, 
in the rising 


aj3en, whanne 


t V kepe the mouth, etc. ; that is, the comaundement is bron3t forth of his mouth, 


§ ta go awey; that is, in brekinge his heestis. Lire here. c. 
G to his yuel ; that is, to the yuel of the Lord, whanne herbi he is reisid 
tt the sones af men ; that is, that ben nurschid in fleisly 


kk Om. c pr.m. 


k expert, or fecle aEGU. . 
© Om. c prim. 


nn the sunne c pr. m. 


4 soilyng, ether [the 1s] expownyng c et ceteri. * Om. 1. in his lijfa. 


Ycomer. Wneizeth niz1. * Sothly r. 


K 


66 


cience is sustened, I kne3 that ther was 
good to men dredende God, that reue- 
isrentli dreden the face of hym. Be ther 
not good to the vnpitouse, ne be ther 
aferr longid the daj3es of hym; but as 
shadewe passe they, that dreden not the 
usface of the Lord. Ther is and an other 
vanyte, that is don vp? on erthe. Ther 
ben ri3twis men, to the?P whiche eueles 
comen forth, as werkes thei diden of vn- 
pitous men; and ther ben vnpitous men, 
that ben so sikir, as tho31 thei hadden 
the deedis of ri3twis men; but and this 
ismost veyn I deme. I preisede therfore 
gladnesse, that ther was not to man 
good vnder sunne, but that he ete, and 
drinke, and io3e; and that onli with hym 
he take of his% trauaile, in the dajes of 
his lif, that God 3af to hym vnder the 
iesunne. And I leide to myn herte, that 
I wite wisdam, and vnderstande distin- 
cioun, that goth™ on erthe. Ther is a 
man, that da3es and ni3tus slep taketh 
ynot to his e3en. And I vnderstod, that 
of alle the werkis of God, no resoun of 
them mai a man finde, that ben mad 
vnder the sunne; and hon myche more 
he trauailede to sechen, so myche lasse 
he shal finde; also if the wise man™ shal 
sei hymself to han knowen, he shal not 
,moun finde. Alle these thingus I tretede 
in myn herte, that J vndirstonde cury- 
ously. 
CAP. IX. 

Ther ben ri3twise and wise men, and 
the werkis of hem in the hond of God; 
and ner the latere a man wot not, whe- 

ether looue or hate he be wrthi. But 
alle thingus in to time to come ben kept 
vneerteyn ; for thi that alle thingus euenli 
comen to the rijtwis and to the vnpitous, 
to the goode and to the euele, to the 
clene and to the vnclene, to the offrende 
ostis and victorie sacrifises, and to the 
despisende sacrifises; as a good man, 


chosun men ; wherfor God schal be glorified in alle thingis, and it is worthi to obeye to hise comaundementis. Lire here. c. 
q ether of hatrede ; of God. Lire here. c. 


the ix. c°: in Ebreu. Lire here. c. 


P Om. c prim. PP Om. prim 


Y yuelis a. % 7¢ shal x. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


4 thof z passim. 


VIW. 13-—IX. 2. 


ony drede. 
nere doith yuelY an hundrid sithis, and is 
suffrid bi pacience, Y knew that good 
schal? be to men dredynge God, that re- 
uerensen his face*. 
wickid man, nethir hise daies be maad 
longe; but passe thei as schadewe, that 
dreden not the face of the Lord. 
another vanyte is’, which¢ is don on erthe. 
Tust men ben’, to whiche® yuels comen, as 
if thei diden the werkis of wickid men; 
and wickid men ben‘, that ben so® sikur, 
as if thei han" the dedis of iust men; but 


Netheles of that, that a syn-12 


Also 14 


* Good be not, 
ete. ; that is, 
temporal pro- 
sperite, for he 
mysvsith it. 
maad longe ; 
for it is to him 


Good be not* to the 13 occasioun of 


multipliyng of 
synnes. Lire 
here. c. 
+ moost veyn ; 
that is, moost 
vuresonable ; 
and he spekith 
here in the 
persoone of a 
fleisly man and 
vnfeithful, that 
thenkith not 
on peynes and 
meedis to com- 
ge. Y preis- 


: yn 
Y deme also this moost veyn{. Therfor 15 14 etc. that 


Y preysid gladnesse{, that no good was 
to a man vndur the sunne, no! but to ete, 
and drynke, and to be ioiful; and that he 
schulde bere awei with hym silf oneli this 
of his trauel, in the daies of his lijf}, whiche 
God 3af to hym vudur the* sunne. 
Y settide myn herte to knowe wisdom, 
and to vndurstonde the departing, which 
is turned in erthe. A man is, that bi daies 


is, Instful hiyf. 
to undurstonde 
the departing ; 
aboute the tri- 
bulacioun of 
vniust men, 
and the pros- 
perite of wickid 
men. Lire 
here. c. 


And 16 t gladnesse ; 


that is, lustful 
liyf. Lire here. 
c. 
§ of his trauel 
in the dayes of 
his liyf, ete. 3 


and ni3tis takith not sleep with! izen. And 17 of this it is 


Y vndurstood, that of alle™ the werkis of 
God, a man may fynde no resoun of tho 
thingis, that ben don vndur the sunne; 
and in as myche as he traueilith more to 
seke, bi so myche he schal fynde lesse ; 
she, thon3 a wijs man seith" that he 
knowith, he schal not mow fynde. 


CAP. IX. 


||I tretide alle these thingis in myn herte, | 
to vndirstonde diligentli. Just men, and 
wise men® ben?, and her werkis ben in the 
hond of God; and netheles a man noot4, 
whether he is™ worthi of loue ors of ha- 
trede'€[. But alle thingis ben kept vncer-2 
teyn in to tyme" to comynge; for alle 
thingis bifallen euenli to a iust man and 
to a wickid man, to a good man and to 
an yuel man, to a cleene man and to an 
vnelene man, to a man offrynge offryngis 
and sacrifices, and to a man dispisynge 


ag al his £ prom. "gon cpr.m. Om. GH. 


a face or presence 1. btheris1. ¢that1. ther beni. € whom. f ther 
beni. Basi Bhaddent Omen kOm. 1. J with dist. ™Om.c. 8sey1. 9 Om.s. P ther 
bent. 4 woot not 1. not s pr.m. wot nots sec.m. "bei. Sether ceferi. thate m. ™ the tyme c. 


opin, that Sa- 
lomon spekith 
here in the per- 
soone of a fleisly 
man, that 
thenkith of 
present liyf 
onely. And Y 
settide myn 
herte, etc.; this, 
that God snf- 
frith inst men 
to be set in tri- 
hulacioun in 
present liyf, 
and vniust men 
to hane pro- 
sperite, per- 
teyneth to the 
inst domes of 
God, but priuy 
to vs; and 
therfor siche 
thingis owen 
not to be sou3t 
of vs, bnt it 
suffisith to 
knowe in ge- 
neral, bi feith 
and hooly 
scripture, that 
siche thingis 
that bifallen 
here, be ordeyn- 
ed bi Goddis 
wisdom, to the 
glorie of him, 
and also of 


ll Here bigynneth 


IX. 3-——12. 


so and a synnere; as a forsworn, so and 
3he that soth swerth. This is the werste 
among alle thingis, that vnder the sunne 
ben don, for the same thingus to alle men 
fallen; wherfore and the hertes of the 
sonus of men ben fulfild with malice and 
with dispising in ther lif; and aftir 
these® to helle thei shul ben bro3t doun. 
4No man is, that euermor liue, and that 
of this thing haue trost ; betere is a quyc 
sdogge thanne a leoun dead. Lyuende 
men forsothe witen themself to be to 
dien; deade forsothe no thing knewen 
more, ne han ouer meede; for to for- 
63eting taken is the mynde of hem. Looue 
also, and hate, and enuyes togidere per- 
sheden; and thei han not part in this 
world, and in the werk that vnder the 
7sunne is don. Go thanne, and ett in 
gladnesse thi bred, and drinc with io3e 
thi win; for to God plesen thi werkis. 
sAlle times be thi clothis white, and oile 
gfro thin hed faile not. VParfitli vse lif 
with the wif that thou loouest, alle the 
da3es of thi lif of thin vnstablenesse, that 
ben 3yue to thee vnder sunnet, al the 
time of thi vanyte; this is forsothe part 
in lif, and in thi trauaile, that thou 
1otrauailist vnder sunne’, What euere 
thing mai thin hond don, besili werc ; 
for nouther werc, ne resoun, ne wisdam, 
ne kunnyng is anent helle, whider thou 
ugost. I turnede me to an other thing, 
and" I sa3 vnder sunne neither cours to 
ben of swifte men, ne bataile of stronge 
men, ne bred of wise men, ne richesses 
of ta3t men, ne grace off craftis men; but 
12time and chauns in alle thingus. A man 
wot not his ende; but as fisshis ben take 
with the hoc, and as briddes ben’ ca3t 
with the grene, so ben taken men in euel 


ECCLESIASTES. 67 


sacrifices ; as a good man, so and a syn- * Letere isa 
ke d 
nere; as a forsworun man, so’ and” he ie, eae 


‘ : ° : : and dogge ben 
that greetli swerith treuthe. This things thauntndnn 
is the worste among alle thingis, that ben jue te that 
eke) quyk syn- 
don yndur the sunne, that the same thingis nere is of betere 
: é condicioun 
bifallen to alle men; wherfor and the hertis than a decd 
ean i , fe 
of the sones of men ben fillid with malice {> thae ayaerh 
and* dispisyng in her lijf; and aftir these thy a? 
thingis thei schulen be led doun toY hellis. se, her 
: my; is 3ouun 
No man is’, that lyueth euere, and that4 to forseting ¢ 
° 5 : % that is, bifor 
hath trist of this thing; betere is a quik — God, for he 
; ; h 
dogge* than a deed lioun. For thei thats (on viace of 
lyuen witen that thei schulen die; but Penunce,thous 
‘ y they ben in his 
deed men knowen no thing more, nether mynas ta pie 
5 nysche hem. 
han meede ferthere; for her mynde is and they know- 


en no thi 
3ouun to forjetyng. Also the loue, and 6 Wherti they 
. . . Bee moun turne 
hatrede, and enuye perischiden togidere;  S3en to gids 
and thei han no part} in this world, and — thos they 


in the my3tis of 
I turnede me to11 the soule; that 
is, lyue thou so, 
that God with- 
drawe not his 
grace fro thee. 
with the wiyf 
which thou 
louest ; that-is, 
with the wis- 
dom of Goddis 
lawe, as Ehreys 
seyen; fora 
good man ches- 
ith this wisdom 
to be his wiyf, 


= knowen many 
in thle werk that is don vndur the® sunne. _ there thingis. 
Therfor go thou, iust man, and ete thi7 and thet 
breed in gladnesse, and drynke thi wiyn nace 
with ioie; for thi werkis plesen God. Ins pe ay 
ech tyme thi clothis be white{, and oile faile “Imes Maks 
not fro thin heed. Vse thou lijf with the9 men doen for 
wijf which thou louest, in alle the? daies caaeneene 
of lijf¢ of thin vnstablenesse, that ben 32,/02em.""t 
3ouun to thee vndur sunne’, in al the hare Lire 
tyme of thi vanyte; for this is thi part + “i clothis be 
A penta A 5 white; that is, 
in thi lijf and trauel, bi which thou tra-__ thiliyf be hooly 
uelist vndur the sunne. Worche thou 10 ne Gnas 
bisilij, what euer thing thin hond mai do; #4, J“ie nm 
for nether werk, nether resoun, nethir® kun- _— thatis, fro thyn 
vndurstonding, 
nyng, nether® wisdom schulen be at hellis, — which is heed 
whidir thou haastist. 
another thing, and Y si3 vndur sunne, that 
rennyng is not of swift men, uethir batel 
is of stronge men, nether breed 7s of wise 
men, nether richessis ben of techeris, nef 
grace 7s of crafti men; but tyme and hap 
7s in alle thingis||. A man knowith not12 
his ende; but as fischis ben takun with 


as it is seid in viii. c®. of Wisdom, in the dayes of liyf of thyn unstableness ; that is, of present liyf, which is vnstable, and owith to be spendid in the 
ocupacioun of Goddis lawe. this is thi part, etc.; that is, thou schalt bere these thingis with thee fro present liyf, and not temporal goodis. Lire 


here. c. 


§ Worche thou bisili, ete. ; that is, as myche as thou maist, do thou bisili meedeful werkis. Lire here. c. 


l| hap is in alle thingis ; 


that is, vneerteynte, that owith refreyne a man fro pride. Lire here. c. 


® Om. c pr.m,. 


x and with 1. 
f nether ceteri. 


vri3t sor W Om. 1, 
d the sunne cGsa. © net. 


t the sunne c pr. m. 


Yintoc. 


uthat 4. ¥Om.c pr.m. 


ztherisr. ®Om.1. > Om.ceteri. © the lijf 1. 


K 2 


68 


time, whan to them sodeynli it cometh 
i30uer. This also vnder sunne I sa3 wis- 
14dam, and prouede the moste. A litil cite, 
and fewe men in it; ther cam ajen it a 
gret king, and besegede it, and made out 
strengthis bi enuyroun; and ful mad is 
isthe sege. And ther is founden in it a 
pore man and a wis; he delyuerede the 
cite bi his wisdam, and no man therafter 
16 recordede of that pore man. And I seide, 
betere to ben wisdam than strengthe ; 
what maner thanne the wisdam of the 
pore man is despisid, and the wrdis of 
17hym ben not herd? The wrdis of wise 
men ben herd in silence, more than the 
iscri of a prince among foolis. Betere is 
wisdam than armes for bataile; and 
who in oon shal synnen, many goodis 
shal leese. , 


CAPR. X: 


1 File3is diende leesen the swotnesse of 
the oynement. More precious is wisdam 
zand litil glorie at tyme, than folie. The 
herte of the wise man in the ri3thalf of 
hym; and the herte of the fool in the 
slifthalf of hym. But and in the weie a 
fool goende, whan he be an vnwis man, 
dalle foolis eymeth. If the spirit of the 
hauende power ste3e vp vp on thee, thi 
place ne lefe thou; for kuring maketh to 
scese most synnes. Ther is euel, that I 
sa3 vnder the sunne, as bi errour goende 
eout fro the face of the prince; a fool set 
in hee3 dignete, and riche men to seete 
7benethe. I sa3 seruauntiy in hors, and 
princes goende as seruauns vp on erthe. 
8 Who delneth a dich, fallith in to it; and 
who scatereth the hegg, shal biten hym 
ythe shadewe eddere. Who berth ouer 
stones, shal be tormentid in hem; and 


wisdom and glorie to be vile ofte in a famouse persoone. Lire here. c. 
§ If the spirit; that is, the violent stiring. 


than foli at a tyme. c. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


IX. 13-=X. 9. 


an hook, and as briddis ben takun with 
a snare, so men ben takun in yuel tyme*, 


whanne it cometh sudeynli on hem. Also13 


Y si3 this wisdom vndur the sunne, and 


* in yuel tyme; 
that is, in the 
tyme of deth, 
that priueth fro 
liyf. Lire here. 
c. 

t A itil citee, 


Y preuede i¢ the mooste. A litil citeey, 14 clos this myste 


and ab fewe men ther ynne; a greet kyng 
cam ajens it, and cumpasside it with palis, 
and he bildide' strengthis* bi cumpas; and! 


bisegyng was maad perfit™. And a pore1s 


man and a wijs was foundun ther ynne; 
and he delyuerede the citee bi his wisdom, 
and no man bithou3te aftirward on that 
pore man. 
betere than strengthe; hou therfor is the 
wisdom of a pore man dispisid, and hise 


wordis ben not herd ? The wordis of wise 17 


men ben herd in silence, more than the 
cry of a prince among foolis. 


CAP. X. 


And Y seide, that wisdom is 16 


doon to the 
lettre, as a wiys 
womman sau- 
yde the citee 
Abela in 11. of 
Kingis xx. e°.; 
netheles Cris. 
ten doctours 
expownen this 
comynli of 
Crist and hooly 
chirche; bi the 
citee is vndur- 
stondun hooli 
chirche ; the 
kyng bisegin, 
it, is the iene 
and his malice; 
the pore man 
and wiys, is 
Crist, that 
ledde a pore 
liyf, and as 
myche as per- 
teyneth to him, 
he bi his wis- 
dom delyueride 
his puple fro 


Betere is wisdom than armuris of batel ; 18 the fendis 


and he that synneth in o thing, schal 
leese many goodis. Flies ‘that dien, leesen™ 1 
the swetnesse of oynement. Litil° foli at 
a? tyme is precionsere’ than wisdom and 
glorie. The herte of a wijs man 7s in his2 
ri3t side ; and the herte of a fool zs in his 
left side. But also a fool goynge in thes 
weie, whanne he is vnwijs, gessith alle 
men foolis. If the spirit) of hym, that 
hath power, stieth on™ thee, forsake thou 
not thi place; for heeling* schal make 
gretteste synnes to ceesse. An yuel is',s 
which" Y si3 vndur the sunne, and goith” 
out as bi errour fro the face of the prince; 
a fool set in hi3 dignyte, and riche mene 
sitte bynethe. I si3 seruauntis on horsis,7 
and princes as sernauntis goynge on the 
erthe. He that diggith a diche, schal falles 
in to it; and an eddre|| schal bite hym, 
that distrieth an hegge]. He that berith9 


power. and no 
man bithouzte 
on that pore 
man ; that is, 
ful fewe ben 
kynde in com- 
parisoun of 
vnkynde men, 
and this vn- 
kyndenesse 
cometh of foly. 
Lire here. c. 

} that synneth 
in o thing, ete. s 
for bi o dedly 
synne al the 
heelp of me- 
ritis biforgo. 
inge is lost. 
Litil foly ata 
tyme, ete.; this 
lettre must be 
takun thus bi 
the Ebreu, 
where it is 
writun thus, 
litil foly is 
heuyere than 
wisdom and 
glorie, that is, a 
litil defaute in 
vertues that is 
seid foly, is 
heuyere than 
wisdom and 
glorie, which 
defaute makith 


Netheles oure Latyn lettre is thus, wisdom and litil glorie is preciousere 
of him that hath power ; that is, of the fostring of synne, ether of the fend. 


stieth on thee ; in hurlinge ether stiringe thee violently to synne. forsake thou not thi place ; that is, stidefastnesse of vertu. and heeling ; that is, 


my3ty withstonding azenns temptaciouns, which is seid helthe of soule, schal make moste synnes to ceesse. Lire here. C. 
{| an hegge ; that is, the lore of oneste, tau3t of wise men. Lire here. c. 


deuel. Lire here. c. 


i bildide it with c. 
° A litil 1. 


h Om. ceteri. 
2 diynge fordon 1. 


£ Om. c. 
m full 1. 


P sum 1, 
heelyng c et plures. curyng, or takyng hede i. t ther is 1. 


1 and the 1. 
8 curyng, ether 


K strengthis, ether engyns c et ceteri. 
4 more precions 1. =f upon 1. 
uthat 1. ¥ goynge 1. 


|| an addre ; that is, the 


X. 1O——XI. 2. 


who hewith trees, shal be woundid of 
1ohem. If aj3een smyten’ were the iren, 
and that not as bifore, but were bluntid, 
with myche trauaile shall be whettid 
out; and aftir the besynesse shal folewe 
11wisdam. If the eddere bijte in silence, 
no thing lasse than he hath, that priueli 
12 bacbiteth. The” wrdis of the wise mouth 
grace; and the lippis of the vnwise shuln 
13Stumblen hym doun. The bigynnyng of 
the wrdis of hym folie; and the last thing 
140f the mouth of hym werst errour. A 
fool multeplieth wrdes ; a man vnknowith 
what beforn hym was, and what after 
is to come, who to hym shal moun 
isshewe? The labour of foolys shal tor- 
menten hem, that kunnen not in to the 
iscite gon. Wo to thee, thou lond, whos 
king is a child, and whos princes erli 
izeten. Blisful the lond, whos king is 
noble; and whos princes eten in ther* 
igtime, to fillenY, and not to leeccherie. In 
slouthis shal be mekid the ioynyng of 
sparres ; and in infirmyte’ of hondis the 
19 hous shal droppe thur3. In lajhing thei 
make bred and wyn, that* thei ete drink- 
ende; and to monee obeshen alle thingus. 
20In thi thenking ne bacbite thou to the 
king, and in the priuyte of thi bed, ne 
curse thou to the riche man; for and 
the foulis of heuene shuln bern thi vois, 
and that hath federes, shal telle out sen- 
tence. 


CHSP. Xa 
1 Send thi bred vp on men passende 
watris, for after manye times thon shalt 
2finden it. 3if partis seuene, and also 
ei3te; for thou knowist not, what be to 


distrien doom for the 3iftis of riche men. Lire here. c. 
Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


69 


ouer stoonys, schal be turmentid in tho; 
and he that kittith trees *, schal be 
woundid of tho. 
and this” zs not as bifore, but is maad 
blunt, it schal be maad scharp with 
myche trauel; and wisdom schal sue aftir 
bisynesset. 
in silence ; he that bacbitith priueli, hath 
no thing lesse than it. 
mouth of a wijs man 7sY grace; and the 
lippis of an vnwijs man schulen caste 
hym doun. 
wordis is foli; and the laste thing of 
his mouth zs the worste errour. 
multiplieth wordis; a man noot?, what 
wast bifore hym, and who mai schewe 
«to hym that, that schal come aftir hym? 


The trauel of foolis shal turment hem, 1s 
Lond , 16 reuelacionn, 


that kunnen not go in to the citee. 
-wo to thee, whos kyng is a child, and 
whose princes eten eer'li. 
lond, whos kyng is noble; and whose 
princis eten in her tyme, to susteyne the* 
_kynde, and not to waste’. 
of housis schal be maad low in slouthis; 
and the hous schal droppe§ in the feble- 
nesse of hondis. In lei3zyng thei dis-1 
posen || breed and wyn, that thei drynk- 
ynge ete largeli; and alle thingis obeien 
to monei]. 
not the kyng, and in the priuete of thi 
bed, curse thou not a riche man; for the 
briddis** of heuene schulen bere thi vois, 
and he that hath pennystf, schal telle the 
sentence. 
CAP. XI. 

Sende thi breed on watris{{ passynge1 
forth, for aftir many tymes thou schalt 
fynde it. 3yue thou partis seuene§}, and2 
also ei3te ; for thou woost not, what yuel 


If a serpent bitith, 2¢* bitith 


The bigynnyng of hise13 


Blessid is the17 


In thi thou3t bacbite thou 20 


* that kiltith 


‘trees; so he 
that puttith 

‘ ° forth him silf 
If yrun is foldid ajen, 10 4) gccasiouns 
of synnes, schal 
suffre peyring 


of soule. Lire 


here. C. 


t aftir bisy- 


nesse ; that is, 


the staat of a 
vertuouse man 
schal come a3en, 


The wordis of the 12 2ftir myche di- 


ligense to reky- 
uere vertu. Lire 
here. C. 

ta man noot 
what was, ete.; 
that is, a fon- 
ned man, for 
he dispisith to 


A fool 14 hiholde the 


dedis of wise 
men biforgoinge. 
that that schal 
come, etc.; that 
is, God aloone 
may do this, hut 
the fool] is not 
worthi to sich 


Lire here. c. 
in to the citee; 
that is, to the 
reste of seyntis. 
whos king is a 
child ; in wit 
and yuele con- 
dicioun; for 


The hiznesse 18 herbi sugetis 


ben wantoun, 
and vices ben 
encreessid 
many fold. efen 


g cerli; that is, 


out of du ordre. 
is noble; that 
is, in vertues 
and kyn. Lire 
here. C 

§ the hows 
schal droppe, 
etc.; that is, 
in the slouthe 
of hondis fro 
goode werkis, 
Lire here. c 

|| fn leizing thet 
disposyn, etc. 3 
that is, vnco- 
uenablemyrthe. 
Lire here. c 

{| obcien to mo- 
ney; that is, 
for thei han ’ 
nede ta myche 
money for greet 
meynee and 
large table, 
therfor thei 


** the briddis, etc.; that is, telleris of wordis. schulen bere thi vois ; to thyn accusing. 
+t he that hath pennes; that is, a swift tellere of wordis. schal telle the sentence; that is, thi wordis, to thi dampnyng; ether 


bi him that hath pennes, is vndurstondun an yuel inge, which is ouer swift to brynge forth hard sentenco azenus symple men spekinge lizili. Lire 


here. C. 
and sum tyme in present liyf. Lire here. c. 


tt Sende thi breed on watris ; that is, 3yue thou mete and drinke to nedi men. fynde it; in resseyuynge mecde in tyme to comynge, 
§§ 3yue thou partis vii. etc.s that is, 3yue thon largeli of thi goodis to nedy men. yuel schal come 


on erthe ; that is, in present liyf, and thou maist be delynerid therfro bi werkis of pyttee 3ouun to nedi men. if @ ére failith down to the south ; that 
is, if a man dieth, and goith to the part of chosun men. ether to the north; that is, to the part of repreuable men. there it schal be; that is, vn- 


chaungably ; and therfor in present liyf a man owith to be bisi aboute the werkis of pitee, as myche as he may disserue. Lire here. c. 


Y bluntid z prim. In the a, 


Wit. Sher Y¥ bent. 


x Om. 4. 


2 wot not I. 


¥ fulfillen acu. 7 infirmytes c. 8 and 4. 


ahernt  ?P leccherie a sec. m. marg. 1 


70 


scomen of euelis vp on erthe. If the 
cloudis weren fulfild, weder vp on erthe 
thei shul heelden out; if the tree shul 
falle to the south, or to the north, in 
what euere place it shul falle, there it 
4shal be. Who waiteth wind, sowith not ; 
and who biholdith cloudis, neuermore 
sshal repe. What maner wise thou know- 
est not, what be the weie of the spirit, 
and bi what resoun bones ben ioyned in 
the wombe of the womman with childe, 
so thou wost not the werkes of God, that 
eis forgere of alle thingus. Erli sowe thi 
seed, and at eue> ne cese thin hond ; for 
thou wost neuer, whiche more growe, 
this or that; and if either togidere, thee 
7betere shal be. Sweete the tree, and de- 
slitable is to ezen to seen the sunne. If 
manye 3eres a ‘man lynede, and in alle 
these thingus were glad, he owith to han 
mynde of the derke tyme, and of many 
da3es ; the whiche whan thei shul come, 
of vanyte shu) ben vndernomen the pass- 
ged tymes. Thanne glade thou, 3unge 
man, in thi waxende age, and in good 
be thin herte in the da3es of thi 3outhe, 
and go in the weies of thin herte, and in 
the siz3te of thin e3en; and wite thou, 
that for alle these thingus God shal 
10 bringe thee in to dom. Do awei wrathe 
fro thin herte, and put awei malice fro 
thi flesh ; forsothe waxende age and vo- 
luptuouste ben veyn. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Haue mynde of thi creatour in the 
da3is of thi 3outhe, and er time’ come of 
tormenting, and ne3hen the 3eres, of the 
whiche thou seye, Thei plesen not to me. 

2Er the sunne waxe dere, and li3t, and® 
sterres, and moonef; and the clondis 


ing of coueitise. Lire here. c. 


hauutinge lecchery, passen awey soone, and leden to au yuel ende. Lire here. c. 


ymage and licuesse. Lire here. c. 


beuen acu. ¢ Om. 4EGH. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


4 the tyme a. 


Ki. 4-1. 2. 


schal come on erthe. If cloudis ben fill-3 
ed, thot schulen schede out reyn on the 
erthe; if a tre fallith doun to the south, 
ether to the north, in what euer place it 
fallith doun, there it schal be. He that4 
aspieth the wynd*, sowith not; and he 
that biholdith the cloudis, schal neuere 
repe. As thou knowist not, which is thes 
weye of the spirit, and bi what resoun 
boonys ben ioyned togidere in the wombe 
of a womman with childe, so thou know- 
ist not the werkis of God, which is makere 
of alle thingis. Eerli sowet thi seed, andé 
thin hond ceesse not in the euentid ; for 
thou woost not, what schal come forth 
more, this ethir that ; and if euer eithir 
cometh’ forth togidere, it schal be the 
betere. The li3t ¢s sweet, and delitable7 
to the izen to se the sunne. If a mans 
lyueth many 3eeris, and is glad in alle 
these, he owith to haue mynde of derk 
tyme}, and of many daies; and whanne tho 
schulen come, thingis passidj schulen be 
repreued of vanyte. Therfor, thou 3onge9 
man, be glad|| in thi 3ongthe, and thin 
herte be in good® in the daies of thi 
jongthe, and go thou in the weies{ of thin 
herte, and in the biholdyng of thin izen; 
and wite thou, that for alle these thingis 


God shal brynge thee in to doom. Doe 


thou awei ire fro thin herte, and remoue 
thou malice** fro thi fleisch ; for whi 
3ongthe and lust ben veyne thingis. 


CAP. XII. 


Haue thou mynde on thi creatourff in! 
the daies of thi 3ongthe, bifore that the 
tyme of thi turment come, and the 3eris 
of thi deth neize, of whichef thou schalt 
seie, Tho plesen not me’. ‘Haue thou2 
mynde on thi creatour, bifor that the 


© Om. 4. f the mone au. 


their. comet. © goodnes cratkmNeRsxag. f the which i. 8 tomer. »Om.1. 


* He that aspi- 
eth the wynd ; 
that is, dilayeth 
to sawe, for the 
wynd, and di- 
layeth to repe, 
for the schew- 
ing of cloudis, 
so thei that 
abiden an 
ablere tyme and 
lengthe of liyf, 
ben lettid ofte 
to do the werkis 
of pitee. Lire 
here. C. 

+ Eerli sowe, 
ete. ; that is, 
bigynue thou 
the werkis of 
pitee at the 
tyme of 3ongthe. 
and thyn hond 
ceesse not; to 
do werkis of 
pitee. in the 
euentid ; that 
is, eelde, wher- 
ynue men ben 
wont to be more 
hard. thou 
woost not what 
schal come forth 
more ; that is, 
schal be maad 
more acceptable 
to God. ever 
either tagidere ; 
that is, is ac- 
ceptable to God. 
the betere ; bi 
the fruyt of 
meede. Lire 
here. c. 

t of derk tyme; 
that is, of deth. 
af many daies ; 
that is, of tyme, 
that hath noon 
ende after deth. 
Lire here. c. 

§ thingis pass- 
fd; that is, de. 
litable thingis 
of this liyf, that 
passiden as 
schadewe. Lire 
here. c. 

ll thou 30ng 
man, be glad, 
etc.; Ebreys 
seyen, that this 
is seid by scorn, 
aud this semeth 
wel bi the lettre. 
Lire here. c. 

4 ga thou in the 
weies, etc.s that 
is, bi the maner 
of thyn owne 
wille. biholding 
of thyn izen ; 
that is, in su- 
yuge the styr- 


** remoue thou malice; that is, lecherie. 3ongthe and lust; that is, 3ongthe sekinge veniaunce, and lust 
tt thi creatour; that is, God, that made thee of uou3t to his 


XII. 3-—-13- 


3turnen ajeen after reyn. Whan shul be 
moued the keperes of the hous, and the 
most strong men wageren; and idil 
shuln ben the wymmen grindende in a 
litil nonmbre, and seende bi holes shul 
4waxe dere; and closen the dores in the 
strete, in the meknesse of the vois of hir 
grindende; and thei shul rise at the vois 
of the brid, and alle the do3tris of the 
ssong shul become doumb. He3e thingus 
also shul dreden, and quaken in the 
weie; the almaunder shal flonren, and 
the locust shal be mad fat, and the erbe 
caperis shal be scatered ; for a man shal 
gon in to the hous of his euerlasting- 
nesse, and men weilende shul gon aboute 
cin the strete. Er be to-broke the sil- 
ueren corde, and a3een come the goldene 
filet, and the stene be to-brosid vp on 
the welle, and to-broke be the wheel vp 
70n the cisterne ; and pouder turne a3een 
in to his erthe, whenes he was, and the 
sspirit go a3een to God, that 3af it. Va- 
nyte of vanytes, seide Eclesiastes, va- 
nyte of vanytes, and alle thingus vanyte. 
9 And whan Eclesiastes was most wis, he 
ta3te the puple, and tolde out what ‘he 
10 hadde® do, and enserchende made manye 
parablis ; he so3te profitable wrdis, and 
wrot most rijt sermounes, and ful of 
litreuthe. The wrdis of wise men as 
prickes, and as nailes in to hei3te pi3t, 
that bi the counseiles* of maistris ben 
123iuen of oon! shepperde. More than 
these, sone myn, ne seche thou; of 
making manye bokis is noon ende, and 
ofte bethenking is tormenting of the 
13flesh. Eende of speking alle heere wee 
togidere. Dred God, and his _hestis 


dere of othere membris on the herte. the sisterne ; that is, the heed on the herte. and dust; that is, the body. Lire here. c. 
most wiys; that is, Salomon was wiseste of ulle men of his tyme. Lire here. c. 


Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTES. 71 


sunne be derk, and the li3t, and sterrys, |.* «fer reyn ; 
A i k that is, aftir the 
and the mone; and! cloude* turne a3en  tribulacionn 
: of eelde. the 
after reyn*. Whanne the keperis of the3 jeneris: that 
1 is, izen, keperis 
hous schulen' be mouyd, and strongeste atti elvan’ 
men schulen tremble; and grynderis schu- 
f and to be dullid. 
len be idel, whanne the noumbre schal be and strongeste 
men ; that is, 
wexe derk; and schulen close the doris4 Gn ae 
s, teeth, 
in the street, in the lownesse of vois of a  @n4sceris; that 
gryndere ; and thei schiulen rise at the vois _ twixe the holis 
of the heed. the 
a sueagice street ; that is. 
schulen wexe deef. And hi3 thingiss jippis’set in the 
schulen drede, and schulen be aferd in Pley» place of 


gynnen to faile, 
maad lesse, and seeris bi the hoolis schulen _ jipisana lege. 

is, izen, set bi- 
of a bridt, and alle the dou3tris of song doris in the 

the face. Lire 


the weiet ; an™ alemaunde tre schal floure, “ere.c. 
‘ . + vois of a brid; 
a loeuste schal be maad fat, and capparis§ that is, the cok. 
dou3tris of song; 


schal be distried; for a man schal go  thatis, eeris, 
. : that deliten in 
in to the hous of his euerlastyngnesse, (iii. 
and weileris schulen go aboute in the ieee 
° 3 thai 
street. HZaue thou mynde on thi creatour,e is, the here 
i part of soule, 
byfore that a siluerne roop|| be brokun, and and the lowere 
° t that hath 
a goldun lace renne ajen, and a watir pot competaioun a0 
be al to-brokun on the welle, and a wheele {hi Pods for | 
be brokun togidere on the cisterne; and7 Rynul yids 
_ 3 3 neiginge, an 
dust turne a3en in to his erthe, wherof it to go out of the 
os weye of present 
was, and the spirit turneP ajen to God, ivf. an ate- 

. 0 maund, ete. 
that 3af it. The vanyte of vanytees, seides8 that is theleed 
Ecclesiastes, the vanyte of vanytees, and schal wexehoor, 

ee locuste ; that is, 
alle thingis ben vanyte. And whaineg the snes 
: ee copparts ; that 
Ecclesiastes was moost wijs{j, he tau3te — is, cuucitise of 
»  s flech. gos bi 
the puple, and he telde out the thingis deth. eae 
whiche he dide, and he sou3te out wisdom, 19 mgrese 5 for 
’ : he schal nenere 
and made many parablis; he sou3te pro- ture Beno 
3 ‘ present liyf. 
fitable wordis, and he wroot moost ri3tful Lire here. c. 
° . capparis 18 an 
wordis, and ful of treuthe. The wordis 11 {42 x 
of wise men ben as prickis, and as nailis iS eee 
fastned deepe, whiche? ben 3ouun of o  2rding in the 
aK: Rate hodi lyuynge, 
scheepherde** bi the counsels of maistristf. bebrokun 
eth. @ goldun 
My sone, seke thou no more than these 312 iacc ; that is, 
de ist I booki d liyf to comynge. 
noon ende is’ to make many bookis, and 6p the welle ; 
that is, on the 
ioynyng togi- 
4 Ecclesiastes was 
** 0 schepparde; that is, God, that rulith and feedith ulle thingis. 


+t maistris ; that is, of the persoones in Trynyte, ether of hooli aungels, seke thou nomore than these ; that is, than the bokis of 


hooli scripture; netheles herbi ben not excludid othere bokis, that ben nedeful to the vndurstonding of hooly seripture, but oneli tho bokis that ben 
not nedeful to helthe ; of whiche bokis it sueth, noon ende is to make many bokis, for newe hardnessis risen enere in siche thingis. ofte thenking ; 
aboute sich thingis. is curment of fleisch; that is, makith tnrment of ficisch, and is with out profit, sithen it is of thingis that ben not nedeful to 
helthe, and lettith the knowing of nedeful thingis; therfor a man owith with alle my3tis and bisynessis 3yue tent to tho thingis that ben nedeful to 


the helthe of soule. Lire here. c. 


8 it shulde £ pr.m. 


land the epr. ¥clondis ceteri. !1Om.s. 


t ther is 1. 


h counseile acu. 


m and an c. 


iOm. 4. 


P go CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXa. 4 the whiche 1. 


72 ECCLESIASTES. XI. 14. 


Wkep; that is, eche man. Alle thingus  ofte thenkyng is turment of fleisch. Alle13* sie és at 


man ; that is, 


that ben* mad, he shal bringe in to we here togydere the ende of spekyng. pert man 
dom; for eche errid thing, whether good Drede thou God, and kepe hise heestis;  twey partis, to 
or euel it be. ‘that is to sete, ech man**. God schal 14 {rots God and 


brynge alle thingis in to dom, that ben 
don; for ech thing don bi errour, whether 
it be good, ether‘ yuel. 


Here endith Ecclesiastes, and here Here endith Ecclesiastes, and here 
bigynneth the book, that is clepid bigynneth the Song of Songis™. 
Soongis of Soongis, of the bridalis of 
Crist and of the Chirche'. ; 


Khe a. 1 From a. Explicit £. Explicit Ecclesiastes. cu. No final rubric in c. 


S this is, al man ceuxmngsuxa. this is, eueri man EP. that is to wite, euery mani. this al man rR. 
tor1 passim.sa. % Here endith the book af Ecclesiastes, and herc bygynneth the book of Sangis. ¥. Here endith 
Ecclesiastes, and bygynneth the pralog an Song of Songis.c. Heere endith Ecclesiastes, and bigynneth Song 
of Songis. isxa. Here endeth the booc of Ecclesiastes; se now the book of Sang of Songis. x. Here endith the 
book of Ecclesiastes, and here bigynneth the book of Song of Songis, that weren maad of Salomon, to be 
sungen in the temple of the Lord, in to euerlastinge wurschiping, and nedith noon other prologe. ma. Here 
endith Ecclesiastes, and here bigynneth the book af Songis of Sangis. N. Heere eendith the book of Eccle. 
stastes, and bigynneth the book of Songes. Rr. Here endith Ecclesiasticus, and here bigynneth the book of 
Songis. vu. Here endith Ecclesiastes, and bigynneth Song of Songis, of the bridales of Christ and of the 
Chirche. x. No final rubric in Ev. 


heestis, maken 
a man parfit in 
vertu. that ben 
doon ; that is, 
of men that 
moun do wel 
and yuele, bi 
fredom of wille, 
ech thing doon 
bi errour s in 
Ebreu it is, for 
ech thing helid 
ether priny ; 
but thing doon 
bi errour is 
vndurstondun 
trespas by ma- 
lice ether bi ig- 
morauce. good ; 
in kynde, ne- 
theles yuel bi 
circumstaunce 
ether entent. 
Lire here. c. 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 





Heer gynneth* the booc that is clepid 
Songus” of Songis, of the bridalis of 
Crist aud of the Chirche®. 


CAR. I. 


The Chirche, of the comyng of Crist 
ispekith, serende, Kisse he me with the 
cos of his mowth. The vois of the Fa- 
der. For betere ben thi tetes than wyn, 
2smellende with best oynemens. The vois 
of the Chirche. Oile held out, thi name; 
therfore the j3unge waxende wymmen 
looueden thee ful myche. Zhe vois of 
3 the Chirche to Crist. Dra3 me aftir thee; 
wee shul rennen in the smel of thin 
oynemens. The Chirche seith of Crist. 
Bro3te me in* the king in to his celeris ; 
wee shul ful out iojen, and gladen in 
thee, myndeful of thi tetes, vp on wyn; 
ri3t men loouen thee. The Chirche of 
shir tribulaciouns. O! 3ee do3tris of Je- 
rusalem, blac I am, but shapli, as the 
tabernacles of Cedar, as the skynnes of 
sSalamon. Wileth not beholden, that I 


Here biginneth the bok of the Songes 
of Songes*. 


CAP ol, 


>Kisse he me with the cos of his1 
mouth*. ‘For thi tetist ben betere thane 
wyn, and 3yuen odour with beste oyne- 
mentis. “Thi name és oilet sched out; 
therfor 3onge damesels loueden thee. 
*Drawe thou me after thee; we schulen3 
renne in tof the odour of thin oyne- 
mentis. §&.The kyng ledde me in to 
hise celeris}; we myndeful of thi teetis 
aboue wyn, schulen make ful out ioye, 
and" schulen be glad in thee ; ri3tful men 
louen thee. +3e dou3tris of Jerusalem, 4 
Y am blak, but fair, as the tabernaclis 
of Cedar, as the skynnes of Salomon. 
Nyle 3e biholde me, that Y am blak, fors 
the sunne hath || discolourid me; the 
sones of my modir fou3ten ajens me, thei 
settidenj me a kepere in vyners; Y kepte 
not my vynerG. *Zhou spouse, whome 


* In this book 
the spouse is 
God; the spous- 
esse is hooli 
chirche, that 
comprehendith 
the staat of the 
Elde Testament 
aod Newe; the 
chirche for the 
staat of the Elde 
Testament, is 
diseryued in the 
vj. firste cha- 
pitris, and aftir- 
ward the staat 
of the Newe 
Testament, in 
vij. and viij. 
chapitris. ‘This 
chirche is maad 
of dyuerse 
folkis, that is, 
of Jewis and 
hethen men, of 
just men and 
of synneris, of 
prelatis and of 
sugetis. Hooli 
ebirche took 
specialy the 
name of spous- 
esse, first In the 
3yuyng of the 
lawe, in the hil 
of Synay. The 
puple of Israel, 
signefied bi the 
name of spous- 
esse, seith to 
God, Kissc he 
me with the cos 
of his mouth § 


that is, Y wolde, that God schewe hym silf frendful to me bi signes and werkis, as a spouse to the spousesse. c. + thi tetis, etc.; that is, 
the fulnesse of Goddis mersi is swettere to mannus soule, than wyn most sauery among bodili thingis is swete to the tast. In Ebreu it is, 
for thi loues ben betere than wyn, etc.; that is, the lone of God is more sauery to a deuont soule, than ony bodili thing to bodili tast. Lire here. c. 
~ oyle; that is, good fame ; for bi the meruels that God dide to the sones of Israel in Fgipt, and in the Reed Sce, the fame of his name and good- 
nesse was spred abrood to othere puplis, for which many men weren connertid to the feith of Jewis. 3onge damesels; that is, othere folkis weren 
conuertid to thi loue. odour of thyn oynementis ; that is, we schulen be drawun bi affeeciouns of thi goodnesse; netheles these wordis in /o the 
odour of thyn oynementis, is not of the text; for it is not in Ebreu. Lire here. c. § celeris ; that is, the kyng of heuens shewide to me hise 
prinytes, bi Moises. of thi tetis; ether of thi loues, as Ebreys seyen. ¢abernaclis of Cedar, etc.; bi Cedar ben vndurstondun Agarenus, that ben 
seid now Saracenus. Bi Salomon is vndurstondun God ; hise skynnes ben seid the hizere hiling of the tabernacle. c. || the sunne hath, etc.; 
ae is, brennyng of tribulacioun, c. @ ¥ kepte not my vyner ; that is, Y my3te not 3yue tent to my werkis, for ocupacioun in the werkis 
of Egipcians. c. 


a begynneth Ect. »> Songcpr.m. © No initial rubricin 4. 4 Om. a. 
® From ep. Here bigynneth the Song of Songes.c. No initial rubric in the other Mss. b The 
Chirche of the comynge of Christ spekith, and seith. x marg. © The vois of the Fadir. x marg. 4 The 
vois of the Chirche. x marg. © The vois of the Chirche to Crist. x marg. fOm.1. & Lhe Chirche 
seith of Crist. x marg. and wer. i The Chirche, of hir tribulaciouns. x marg. isettent. & The 


voice of the Chirche to Crist, x marg. 
VOL. Ill. L 


74 


be broun, for discoloured me hath the 
sunne; the sonus of my moder fo3ten 
ajen me, thei setteden me kepere in 
vyues; my vyne3erd I kepte not. The 
svois of the Chirche to Crist. Shew thou 
to me, whom looueth my soule, wher 
thou 3inest leswe, wher thou ligge® in 
myddai ; lest to gon vagaunt I bygynne, 
aftir the flockis of thif felawis®. The 
ivois of Crist to the Chirche. If thou 
knowest not thee, O! thou most fair 
among wymmen, go out, and go awei 
after the steppis of thi flockis; and feed 
thi got, biside the tabernacle® of shep- 
aperdis. To my riding in charis of Farao 
91 licnede thee, O! my leef. Faire ben 
thi cheekes, as of! a turtil*; thi necke 
1oas brooches. Goldene ribanes wee shul 
make to thee, mad fijr red with siluer. 
11 The vois of the Chirche of Crist. Whan 
the king was in his liyng place, my 
i2mad encens 3af his smel. A bundelet! 
of myrre my lemman is to me; betwe™ 
ismy tetes he shal dwelle. The clustre of 
cipre tree my lemman to me, i the 
vynes of Engaddy. The vois of Crist 
14to the Chirche. Wo! thou art fair, my 
leef; lo! thou fair, thin ejen of culueres. 
is The vois of the Chirche to Crist. Lo! 
thou art fair, my lemman, and semeli ; 
isoure bed shynende. The trees of oure 
houses cedre; oure couplis cipresse. 


CAP. IL 
The vois of Crist, of hym and of the 
1 Chirche. I the flour of the feeld, and the 
2lilie of aleyes®. As a lilie among thornes, 
so my leef among do3tres. The vois of 
sthe Chirche of Crist. As an appil tree 
among the trees of wodis, so my lemman 


that 3yuen hem silf to idolatrie. Lire herc. c. 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


I. 6—II. 3. 


my soule loneth, schewe to me, where 
thou lesewist, where thou restist in myd- 
dai*; lest Y bigynne to wandre, aftir the 
flockis of thi felowis. ‘A! thou fair-7 
est among wymmen, if thou knowist 
not thi silf, go thou out, and go forth 
aftir the steppist of thi floekis; and feede 
thi kidis, bisidis the tabernaclis of scheep- 
herdis. Mi frendesse’, Y lienede thee tos 
myn oost of kny3tis in the charis of Fa- 
rao. Thi chekis ben feire, as of a tur-9 
tle; thi necke zs as brochis. 
make to thee goldun ournementis, departid 


We schulen to 


* in mydday ; 
that is, in the 
heete of tribu- 
lacioun. the 
Jiockis of thi 
felows; that 
is, where thou 
feedist thi feith- 
ful men, and 
restist bi feith 
formed with 
charite. aftir 
the flockis ; that 
is, othere vn- 
feithful folkis. 
of thi felowis ; 
that is, of hooli 
aungels, assign- 
ed to the keep- 
ing of vnfeith- 
ful men. 4/ 
thou fairest, 
etc.; that is, 


and maad dyuerse with silver. ®*Whannel ae puple of 
ri 6 


the kyng was in his restyng place, my 
nardef jaf his odour. 
bundel of myrre to me; he schal dwelle’ 
bitwixe® my tetis. 
a cluster of cipre tre, among the vyneres 
of Engaddi. 
art fair; lo! thou aré fair, thin izen ben 
the i3en of culueris. 
thon art fair, and schapli; oure bed zs fair 
as flouris. 
of cedre; oure couplis ben of cipresse. 
'T am a flour of the feeld, and a lilye of: 
grete valeis. As a lilie among thornes, so2 
ts my frendesse} among dou3tris. ™As3 
an apple tre among the trees of wodis, so 
my derlyng among sones. 


CAP. IL 


I sat vndur the shadewe§ of hym, whom 
Y desiride; and his fruyt was swete to 
my throte. The king ledde me in to the4 
wyn celer; he ordeynede charite in me. 
Bisette 3e me with flouris||, cumpasse 3e5 
me with applis; for Y am sijk for lone. 


My derlyng is ai2 


kLo, my derling, is 


Trael 

knowist not 
that is, if thou 
dredist for thi 
sike men to 
bowe awey fro 


My derlyng zs to me13 Fema 


ire here. c. 
t aftir the step- 
pis, etc.; that 


Lo! my frendessei, thou 14 is, of symple 


men bilyuynge; 
and siche weren 


Abel, Seth, E- 
nok, Noe, and 
liyk men. 

thi chekis ben 


The trees of oure honsis ben 16 faire, etc.; in 


Ebreu it is, thi 
chekis ben faire 
in ordris, that 
is, in ourne- 
mentis disposid 
in due ordre in 
thi face. restyng 
place; that is, 
propiciatorie. 
my narde, etc.3 
that is, encense 
of good odour. 
my ietis; that 
is, withinnemyn 
herte, by con- 
tynuel thenk- 
ing. a clustre, 
ete.; that is, he 
delitith me 
more goostli, 
than ony sa- 
uery thing and 
swete delitith 
bodili. Lire 
here. Ce 

tf my frendesse, 
ete. ; that is, 
the puple of 
Israel among 
othere folkis, 


§ Y sat undur the schadewe ; that is, Y dwellide vndur the piler of fier and of clonde, that 


3af li3t in the nij3t, and temperide the heete of sunne in the day. his fruyf; that is, manna 30uun in desert fro heuene. eyn celer; that is, to 


the auter of brent sacrifices, for wyn was sched out in moist sacrifices. Lire here. c. 


|| with flouris, ete.; bi these ben vndurstondun Goddis 


coumfortingis, that ben 3ounn to men hopinge in him; thou3 God is had bi charite in this liyf; this bi hope, and not in blisful si3t ; therfor the 
absence of this good makith turment, which turment is seid here the siknesse of the spousesse. 


€ liggist 4. 
AE SCC. mM. G, 


f my E pr.m. 


& lesewis 4. 
1 bundel a. 


™ betwen E passim. 


¢ The vois of Crist to the Chirche. x marge. 
t or oynement boxe 1 marg. & bitwene I. 
vois of the Chirche to Crist. x marg. 
vois of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg. 


b tabernaclis acu. 


4 leef 1. 
h The vois of Crist to the Chirche. x marg. 
1 The vois of Crist, of him and of the Chirche. x marg. 


iOm.e pr.m.  * tour £ pr.m. turtir 


n alle valeys aGH. 


© The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg. 
ileefr. & The 
m The 


Il. 4—17. 


among sones. Vnder the shadewe of 
hym, whom I hadde desirid, I sat; and 
4his frut sweete to my throte. The king 
ledde me in his win celer; he ordeynde 
5in me charite. WVnder ley 3ee me with 
floures, setteth me aboute with appelis ; 
for I languyshe for looue. The vois of 
6the Chirche of Crist. The lift hond of 
hym vider myn hed; and his ri3t hond 
shal clippe me. The vois of Crist, of the 
7Chirche. I adiure 30n, 3ee do3tris of 
Jerusalem, bi the capretes, and the hertes 
of feeldis, ne rere 3ee, ne maketh my°® 
leef to waken, to the time that she wile. 
8 The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. The 
vois of my lemman; lo! this cometh 
lepende in mounteynes, and ouer lepende 
9hillis. Lic is my lemman to a capret, 
and to an hert calf of hertis; lo! he 
stant? bihynde oure wal, biholdende bi 
the windowes, aferr lookende thur3 the 
10latises. Lo! my lemman speketh to me, 
Ris, go thou, my leef, my culuer,. my 
iishapli, and cum; now forsothe wintre 
passede, weder 3ide fro, and is gon awei. 
12Floures apereden in oure lond, time of 
kutting is come; the vois of the turtil4 
13is herd in oure lond, the fige tree bro3te 
forth his first figus; the vynes flourende 
3iuen ther smel. The vois of Crist to 
the Chirche. Ris, go, my leef, myn 
ushapli, and cum thou. My culuer in the 
holis of the ston, in the chyne of a" ston 
wal. Shewe thou to me thi face, soune 
thi vois in myn eres; thi vois forsothe 
is swete, and thi face semeli. The vois 
of Crist to the Chirche, a3en eretikis. 
15 Take 3ee to vs litle foxes, that destro3en 
vynes; for oure vyne flourede. The vois 
160f the Chirche of Crist. My looned to 
me, and I to hym, that is fed among 
i7lilies; to the time that the dai springe, 
and shadewes be bowid in. Turne a3een; 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


75 


fHis left hond zs vndur myn heed; andé 
his ri3t hond schal biclippe me. %3e dou3-7 
tris of Jerusalem, Y charge 30u greethi, 
bi capretis, and hertis of feeldis, that 3e 
reise not, nether make to awake" the 
dereworthe spousesse, til sche wole. !The 
vois of my derlyng*; lo! this der-s 
lyng cometh leepynge in mounteyns, and 
skippyuge ouer litle hillis. My derlyngs 
is lijk a capret, and a calf of hertis; lo! 
he stondith bihynde oure walt, and bi- 
holdith bi the wyndows, and _lokith 
thorou3 the latisis*. Lo! my derlyng1o 
spekith to me, My frendesse!, my culuer, 
my faire spousesse, rise thou}, haaste 
thou, and come thou; for wyntir is pass-1) 
id now, reyn is goon, and is™ departid 
awei. Flouris apperiden® in oure lond, 12 
the tyme of schridyng is comun; the 
vois of a turtle is herd in oure lond, the 13 
fige tre hath brou3t forth hise buddis ; 
vyneris flourynge han 3one her odour. 
My frendesseP, my fayre spousesse, rise 
thou, haaste thou, and come thou. My14 
culuer is in the hoolis of stoon, in the 
chyne of a wal with out morter. Schewe 
thi face} to me, thi: vois.sowne in myn 
eeris; for thi vois is swete, and thi.face 
is fair. 4Catche 3e litle foxis to vs, that 15 
destrien the vyneris ;. for oure vyner hath 
flourid. ‘My derlyng zs to me, and Y16 
am to hym, which is fed among lilies; til17 
the dai sprynge, and schadewis be bowid 
doun. My derlyng, turne: thou ajen; be 
thou lijk a capret, and a calf of hertis, on 
the hillis of Betel|j. 


3e douztris 

of Jerusalem ; 
that is, sike 
men of the pu- 
ple of Irael. 

bi capretis, 
ete.; that is, 
bi patriarkis, 
reise nots that 
is, that 3¢ bowe 
not to ony orible 
synne, for which 
the coumfort of 
God schal be 
withdrawun, 
and al the pu- 
ple schal be 
disturblid. 

til sche wole ; 
that is, the 
spousesse schal 
neuere wilne 
this. Lire here. 


c 

* my derling ; 
pronounsinge 
x. heestis in the 
hil of Syna. 
Lire here. c. 

+ wal; that is, 
the thicke 
clonde. Lire 
here. C. 

t rise thou ; 
that is, reise 
thi soule to my 
wordis. come 
thou; to serue 
me aloone. 
wynter ; that 
is, the hidouse 
tyme of thral- 
dom of Egipt. 
Flouris; that 
is, the myry 
tyme of fredom 
is comun, in 
which thou 
maist serue me 
frely. Lire here. 
Cc. 

§ Schewe thi 
face; in res- 
seyuynge gladli 
my lawe. thi 
vois sowne 3 in 
knoulechinge to 
kepe my lawe. 
Catche 3e litil 
Soxes, etc.; that 
is, sle 3e per- 
soones that in- 
dusen bi gile 
the puple to 
idolatrie, for 
the puple of 
Israel hath’ 
flourid in de- 
uont resseuyng 
of Goddis lawe. 
Lire here. c. 

Wi @ calf of 
hertis on the 
hillis of Betel; 
that is, on the 
hil of Synay, 
where the Lord 
spak to Moyses. 


Betel; that is, Goddis hows, for he dwellide there with Moises; in Ebreu it Is on the hillis of Bathar, that is, of departing; for there God was 
departid fro the puple, for idolatrie, hut he was plesid fynaly, at the preyeris of Moyses. Lire here. c. 


© the £ pr. m. 


f The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg. 
! The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg, 
of Crist to the Chirche. x marg. P leef 1. 
The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg. 


P stoondith «. 


K Jatijs 1. i; 
4 The vois of Crist to the Chirche, azens heretikis. x marg. 


dturtre 4eG. 1 the an. - 
& The vois of Crist, of the Chirche. x marg. » wake 1. 
lleefr, ™itis1. ™ han apperid 1. © The vois 


LQ 


76 


lic be thou, O! my lemman, to a capret, 
and to the hert calf of hertis, vpon the 
mounteynes of Bethel. 


CAP, 1h. 


The vois of the Chirche, gedered to- 
igidere of Jentiles. In my litle bed by 
ni3tis I so3te, whom loouede my soule ; 
2I so3te hym, and I fond not. I shal rise, 
and gon aboute the cite, bi townes and 
stretis; I shal seche, whom looueth my 
3soule; I so3te hym, and fond’ not. There 
founden me the waccheres, that kepe 
the cite. The Chirche seith of Crist to 
the Apostolis, Whether whom looueth 
4my soule, 3ee sejen? A litil whan I 
hadde passed them, I fond, whom loou- 
eth my soule; I heeld hym, and I shal 
not lefe, to the time that I bringe hym 
in to the hous of my moder, and in to 
the bed of hir that gat me. Zhe vois of 
5 Crist, of the Chirche. I adiure 30u, 3ee 
do3tris off Jerusalem, bi capretis, and 
hertis of feeldis, ne rere 3ee, ne make 3ee 
my leef to wake, to the time that she 
wile. The sinagoge of the Chirche. 
6What is she, this that stejeth vp bi de- 
sert, as a lytil 3erde of smoke of the 
swote spices, of myrre, and of encens*, 
and of alle pymentarie poudre? The 
7vois of the Chirche of Crist. Lo! the litle 
bed of Salamon sixty stronge men cum- 
passen, of the most stronge men of Irael; 
gthe whyche alle ben holdende swerdis, 
and to batailes" best ta3t ; of ‘eche on’ the 
swerd vp on his hipe, for the ny3t dredes. 
Of’ Crist, and of the Chirche, chosen of 
oJentilis. A chaz3er king Salamon made 
io to hym, of the trees of Liban; his pileris 


is set noon answer to the forseid axing. Lire here. c. 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


Til, 1——10. 


CAP. ITI. 


2In my litle bed* Y sou3te hym bil 
ni3tis, whom my soule loueth; Y sou3te 
hym, and Y foond not. I shal rise, and2 
Y schal cumpasse the citee, bi litle stretis 
and large stretis; Y schal seke hym, 
whom my soule loueth; I sou3te hym, 
and Y foond not. Wakeris®, that kepen3 
the citee, founden me. PWhether 3e sien 
hym, whom my soule loueth? A litil4 
whanne Y hadde passid hem, Y foond 
hym, whom my soule loueth; Y helde 
hym, and Y schal not leeue hyms, til Y 
brynge him in to the hous of my modir, 
and in to the closet of my modir. *3es 
doustris of Jerusalem, Y charge you greetli, 
bi the capretis, and hertis of feeldis, that 
3e reise not, nether make to awake the 
dereworthe spousesse, til sche wole. *Whoc 
is this womman, that stietht bi the deseert, 
as a 3erde of smoke} of swete smellynge 
spices, of mirre, and of encence, and ‘of 
al poudur of an oynement makere ? "Lo!7 
sixti stronge men of the strongeste men 
of Israel cumpassen the bed of Salomon ; 
and alle thei holden swerdis, and bens 
moost witti to batels; the swerd of ech 
man zs on his hipe, for the drede of ny3tis. 
YKyng Salomon} made to hym a seete, of9 


the trees of Liban; he made the pilers 10 


therof of siluer; he made a goldun rést- 
yng place, a stiyng’ of purpur; and he 
arayede the myddil thingis with charite, 
for the dou3tris of Jerusalem. 
tris of Sion, goY out, and se? kyng Salo- 


X 3e dou3-11 


* Tn iij.c’.is set 
theletting of the 
puple, that bi- 
felde bi aspieris 
of the lond of 
biheest, that 
maden the pn- 
ple so myche 
aferd, that thei 
wolden forsake 
Moises, and the 
arke of the 
Lord, and turne 
ajen in to E- 
gipt; and the 
sponsesse bi- 
weilith this 
letting, and 
seith, in my 
litle bed; that 
is, in the taber- 
nacle of Moises. 
Gi ny3tis ; that 
is, in the tyme 
of tribulacioun, 
reisid bi thilke 
aspieris. Moises 
and Aaron in 
the tabernacle 
preyeden the 
Lord for the 
puple, that the 
forseid sentence 
schulde be tem- 
perid, ether re- 
uokid, but for 
thei weren not 
herd, it sueth, 7 
sou3te him, and 
foond not. cum- 
passe the citee ; 
that is, the de- 
sert bi xl. 3eer. 
the wakeris ; 
that is, Moises 
and Aaron. 
founden me; 
and tolden the 
sentence of 
God ; and for 
the puple re- 
pentide of that 
rebelte, and 
was redi to stie 
in to the lond 
of biheest, and 
so thei sou3ten 
the good wille 
of God, it sueth, 
wher 3€ sien 
him, ete. where 
the sponsesse 
spekith to Moi- 
ses and Aaron, 
and for they 
answeriden not 
to her desir, 
bnt more to the 
contrarie, and 
seiden, Nyle 3e 
stie,therfor here 


+ as a 3erde of smoke, ete.; that is seid for encence maad of many swete smellinge 


spices, that signefiede denocioun of the puple, bi which thei desserneden to be hron3t in to the lond of hiheest. sizti stronge men; that is, sixti 
sithis ten thonsinde that maken vj. hundrid thousynde of werriours, abonte the bed of Salomon, that is, the tabernacle of pees of the Lord. 


Lire here. c. 
piciatorie, that was the seete of God was al of pure gold. 


I Kyng Salomon; that is, God a king to 30n, specialy in the 3ynyng of lawe. «@ goldun resting place; that is, the pro- 
stiyng of purpur; that is, a veil of purpur hanginge bitwixe the pileris, and was 


reisid vp, whanne me entride in to the hooly of hooli places. the myddil thingis with charite; for in the hooli of hooli places on the pawment 
was the arke of testament, with the tablis of lawe, and manna, and the 3erde of Aaron, that weren signes of Goddis charite to the puple. 


Lire here. c. 


8 I foond acu. tcense szegu. 4% bataile agu. VYechec pr.m, echon ceteri. W The vois of a. 


2 The vois of the Chirche, gaderid togidere of Gentilis. x marg. 


seith of Crist to the Apostlis. x marg. 


4 Om. c. 
synagoge, of the Chirche. X marg. 


t stieth up 1. 


Crist, and of the Chirche, chosen of Gentilis. x marg. 


Crist. x marg. Ygoth1, 2 se 3e1. 


t The vois of Crist, of the Chirche. xX marg. 


© Wacche men 1. P The Chirche 


8 The 
u The vois of ihe Chirche, of Crist. x marg. Of 
Ww stiyng up I. x The vois of the Chirche, of 


TI. 11—IV. 10. 


he made siluerene, the lenyng place gol- 
dene, the stez3ing vp purper; the myddes* 
he enournedeY with charite, for the 
do3tris of Jerusalem. The vois of the 
1) Chirche, of Crist. Goth out, and seeth, 
3ee do3tris of Sion, king Salamon in the 
diademe, in the whiche crounede hym 
hys moder, in the dai of spousing of hym, 
and in the dai of gladnesse of his herte. 


CAP. IV. 


1 The vois of Crist to the Chirche. Hou 
fair art thou, my leef, hou fair art thou; 
thin ejen of culueres, withoute it that 
withynne forth is hid; thin heres as the 
flockes of get, that stez3eden vp fro the 

2hil? of Galaad. Thi teth as the flockys 
of clippid sheep, that stejeden vp fro the 
wasshing place; alle with double lombis 
in the wombe, and bareyn ther is not 

3samong hem. As a fyr red silkene filet 
thi lippes, and thi faire speche sweete ; 
as the breking of a poumgarnet, so thi 
chekes, withoute it, that withinne forth 
asit® hid. As the tour of Dauid thi necke, 
that is bild out with pynacles; a thou- 
send sheldis hangen of it, al the armoure 
sof stronge men. Thi two tetes as two 
3unge capretes, twynlingus? of the capret, 
gthat ben fed in lilies, to the time that 
the dai brethe out, and the shadewes ben 
inbowed. I shal go to the mount: of 
z7mirre, and to the hil of cens. Al fair 
thou art, my leef, and wem is not in 
thee. Cum thou fro Liban, my spouse; 
cum’ from Liban, cum; thou shalt be 
crouned fro the hed of Amana, fro the 
frount of Samur and of Ermon, fro the 
couches of leouns, and the hil of pardis. 
9Thou hast woundid myn herte, my sis- 
ter; my spouse, thou hast woundid my 
herte, in oon of thin e3en, and in oon 
ioher of thi necke. Hou faire ben thi 
tetes, my sister, my spouse; fairere ben 


myrre and encense. Lire here. c. 
izen; that is, Moises. heer; that is, Joseph. Lire here. c. 


Xytmost £. Yenuyrounede ac. 7 hillis 4. 
twithi, °° Om. a. v Om. cm. 
‘ful fair ¢. 3% stteden up1. YOm.c. 4 schorn 1. 
etheris1, fant. 


ll heed of Amana ; in Ebreu it is, biholdinge fro the heed of Amana. Lire here. c. 


4 sittith «. 


w The vois of Crist to the Chirche. x marg. 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 77 


mon in the diademe, bit which his modir* 
crownede hym, in the dai of his spous- 


* his modir; 
’ that is, the pu- 


; z ple of Jewis. 

yng, and in" the dai of the’ gladnesse of  ¢f #is spous- 
7 ing; that is, in 

his herte. 3yuyng of the 


lawe. Lire here. 


c 
+ In iiij. e°. 


the goostli 
fairnesse of the 
spousesse is sig- 
nefied by this 
parable; the 
heed of the 
spouseésse was 
the patriark 
CAP. IV. Jacob; the 
heeris ben xij. 
“Mit frendesse, thou art ful fair*; thin1 ee 
iz3en Sex of culueris, with outen that that and pees nus 
. . . . . jnge the puple ; 
is hid with ynne; thin heeris ben as the she teeth ben 
flockis of geete, that stieden** fro the il <chapli to de- 
of Galaad. Thi teeth bez as they flockis2 pia eee 
of clippid’ sheep, that stieden® fro waisch- jrat poaeen 
. 01 swe' 
yng; alle ben with double lambren, and _ speche, ben 
+b Ween A dekenes and 
no bareyn is® among tho. Thi lippis ben  singeris,seiynge 
as a reed lace, and thi speche 7s swete ; pei Ne 
4 4 chekis ben 
as the relif of an appil of Punyk, so ben Err eed 
thi chekis, with outen that, that is hid myraeame 
5 S e ; aboute the au- 
with ynne. Thi necke 7s as the tour of4 ter of brent sa- 
: Aire gM oie : .— erifices 5 th 
Dauid, which is bildid with strengthis thrate bon “a 
maad bifore for defense; a thousynde ‘House men in 
4 : the lawe, liened 
scheldis hangen on it, al armure of i ee gp 
S e ° e ail maa: 
stronge men. Thi twei tetis ben as twey 5 strong with 
nae scheeldis s f 
kidis, twynnes of a capret, that ben fed whi aru 
$e V7: 6 . : ajenus impyng- 
in¢ lilies, til the dai sprynge, and shadewise Fer ete 
ben bowid doun. Y schal go to the jave,ben bad 
one Z UdIe 5 
mounteyn of myrre{, and to the litil hil — ¢wey tetis ben 
: d twey tablis of 
of encense. My frendesse’, thon art al7 witnessing, of 
: ° . hie) 
faire, and no wem is® in thee. Mys SEE ne 
spousesse, come thou fro the Liban; come "6 and deno- 
‘ cioun is sokun 
thou fro the Liban, come thou; thou au til the day, 
0! é newe tes- 
schalt be corowned fro the heed of A-  tament; seha- 
dewis, for th 
manal|, fro the cop of Sanyr and Hermon, es Brae 
: sane elde lawe cees- 
fro the dennys of liouns, fro the hillis of (ot in the newe 
pardis. My sister spousesse, thou hast9 ‘stament, of 


% é which thei 
woundid myn herte; thou hast woundid — weren scha- 
. P ‘ A dewe. Lire 

myn herte, in oon of thin iz3en§], and in here. c. 


/ o ge. f to the moun- 
Why? SGLIT 10 fey of omproms 
etc.; that is, to 
the lond of Ju- 
dee, that is ful 
of hillis, and 
hath myche 

G oon of thin 


oon! heer of thi necke. 
spousesse, thi tetis ben ful faire; thi tetis 
ben feirere than wyn, and the odour of 


b jemeus E prem, © cum thou a. 


x fair, thou art 


astieden up1. > therisy. Camenge. 4 leef 1, 


78 


thi tetes than win, and the smel of thin 
11 oynemens ouer alle spices. A droppende 
honycomb thi lippes, spouse; hony and 
myle vnder thi tunge, and the smel of 
i2thi clothingus as the smel of cens. A 
closid gardin, my sister spouse ; a closid 
13 gardyn, a welle selid. Thin outsendingus 
paradis of poungarnetes, with the frutis 
140f appilis, of cipre tre, with narde; and 
narde, and safrun, fistula, and canel, with 
alle the trees of Liban, inyrre, and aloes, 
18 with alle the firste oynemens. The welle 
of gardynes, the pit of liuende watris, 
i6that flowen with bire fro Liban. Ris, 
north, and cum, south; blo3 thur3 my 
gardyn, and ther shul flowe swote spices 
of it. 


CAP. V. 


1 he Chirche seith of Crist. Come, 
my leef, in to his gardyn; and ete he 
the frut of his appelis. Crist setth to 
the Chirche. Cum in to my gardin, my 
sister, my spouse. I haue gedered my 
mirre, with my swoote spices; I eet 
myn honycomb, with myn hony; I dranc 
my wyn, with my myle. Crist to the 
Apostolis seith. Eteth, 3ee frendes, and 
drinketh; and 3ee most derwrthe, beth 
2inwardli maad drunke. I slepe, and myn 
herte waketh. Zhe vois of the Chirche 
of Crist. The vois of my lemman knock- 
ende; opene thou to me, myn sister, my 
leef, my culuer, myn vnwemed ; for myn 
hed is ful of dew, and my temple heres 
30f the dropis of ny3tis. I spoilede me 
my coote; hou shal I be clade it? I 
weshf my feet; hou shal I defoule them ? 
4My lemman putte his hond bi the hole; 
my wombe inwardli tremblede at the 


ynne ; for the puple nolde turne ajen to Goddis religion, at the monestingis of profetis. waische my feet 
puple, that dide idolatrie, and arettide the worschipinge of God to be wnceitee t ve 


hond of his ri3tfulnesse, to punysche me. tremblide ; 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


Jrendis, be 3e fillid greetli. 


IV. 11—V. 4. 


thi clothis és aboue alle swete smellynge 
oynementis. 
hony* coomb droppynge; hony and mylk 
benf vndur thi tunge, and the odour of thi 
clothis zs as the odour of encence. 
sister spousesse, a gardyn closid togidere ; 
a gardyn closid togidere, a welle aseelid. 


Thi sendingis out ben paradis of applist 13 


of Punyk, with the fruytis of applis, cipre 


trees, with narde; narde, and saffrun, az 14 


erbe clepid fistula, and canel, with alle 
trees of the Liban, myrre, and aloes, with 
alle the beste’ oynementis. 
gardyns, a pit of wallynge" watris, that 
flowen with fersnesse fro the Liban. 
thou north wynd, and come thou, sonth* 
wynd ; blowe thou thoron3 my gardyn, 
and the swete smellynge oynementis { 
therof schulen flete. 


CAP. V. 


IMi derlyng, come" in to his gardyn, 1 
to ete the fruyt) of hise applis. ™Mi 
sister spousesse, come thou in to my gar- 
dyn. Y have rope" my myrre, with my 
swete smellynge spices; Y haue ete an 
hony combe, with myn hony; Y haue 
drunke my wyn, with my mylk. °F rendis, 
ete 3e, and drynke?; and derewortheste 
Y slepe||,2 
and myn herte wakith. 'The vois of 
my derlyng knockynge ; my sister, my 
frendesse*’, my culuer, my spousesse vn- 
wemmed, opene thou to me; for myn 
heed is ful of dew, and myn heeris ben 
ful of dropis of ni3tis. I have vnclothid3 
me of my coote; hou schal Y be clothid 
ther ynne? I haue waische my feet ; 
hou.schal Y defoule thot? Mi derlyngs 
putte’ his hond bi an hoole; and my 
wombe tremblide at the touchyng therof. 
Y roos, for to opene{[ to my derlyng; myns 


to opene, etc.s that is, Y sou3te to be recouncelid to him, and so to be delyuerid of peyne. 


€ clothid szGn. 


f£Om.c pr.m.  & beste, ether firste x marg. 
k southerne a sec. m. 
X marg. Drepet. © Crist seith to the Apostelis. x marg. 


of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg. ® leef 1. 


h wellynge, ether quike K marg. 


t hem 1. 


f washide 1Gu. 


i northerne A sec. m. 


1 The Chirche seith of Crist. x marg. “come he1. ™ Crist seith to the Chirche. 


P drinketh 1. 4 most dere 1. 
U sente CEF pr. m. GHIKMNPQRSUXag. 


r The vois 


A welle of 15 


* thi lippis ben 
as hony; this is 


Spousesse, thi lippis ben an 11 seid of denout 


preyeris of the 
hijeste prest,and 
of dekenes, that 
weren maad in 


Mi 12 the persoone of 


al the chirche. 
Lire here. c. 

+ paradiys of 
applis, ete. ; 
that is, strondis 
flowinge forth 
therfro maken 
the lond myrie, 
at the maner 
of paradiys of 
pumgranatis. 
Lire here. c. 

+ oynmentis, 
etc. alle these 
thingis ben seid 
in preising of 
the lond of bi- 


Rise 16 heeste, to reise 


the desir of the 
apousesse. Lire 
here. c. 

§ to ete the 
Sruyt, etc.; that 
is, make me to 
ete in pees the 
fruyt of the lond 
grauntid to me. 
Lire here. c. 

il ¥ slepe; that 
is, punysche 
not sytines at a 
tyme. wakith ; 
that is, Y bifor 
se du tyme of 
punysching. 
knockinge ; 

bi profetis and 
techeris, toclepe 
me to penaunce 
aftir idolatrie 
doon. frendesse; 
in tyme passid 
of thyn inno- 
cence. opene 
to mes bi cone 
sent of good. 
myn heed is 
Sul, etc.; God 
spekith here bi 
the maner of a 
spouse, desiring 
to be recoun- 
celid to the 
spousesse, and 
sparith not for 
hardnesse of 
trauel; but the 
vnkynde spous- 
esse, yuele for- 
sakinge, this 
answerith. ¥ 
haue vnclothid, 
etc. ; that is, 
Y haue left 
Goddis reli- 
gioun. hou 
schal Y be 
clothid ther 


3 this is seid bi the gessing of the 
and the worschiping of au idol to be clene. his hond; that is, the 
for the puple that was smytun of God, conseyuede drede. Lire here. c. 


q Y roos for 


V. 5—16. 


stouching of hym. I ros, that I shulde 
' opene to my lemman; myn hondis drop- 
peden mirre, and my fingres ful of best 
6proued myrre. The lach of my dore I 
openede to my lemman; and he hadde 
bowid aside, and passede. My soule is 
molten, as my& lemman spac); I so3te, 
and I fond not hym; I clepede, and he 
zanswerde not tome. Ther founden me 
the! keperes that gon aboute the cite; 
thei smyten me, and woundeden me; 
token my mantil the keperes of the 
swallis. I adiure 30u, 3ee do3tris of Je- 
rusalem, if 3ee shul finde my lemman, 
that 3ee telle to hym!', for I languysshe 
for looue. The vois of frendis seith to 
athe chirche. Whiche is thi lemman of 
the looued, O! thou most fair of wym- 
men? whiche is thi lemman of the loou- 
ed? ‘for so™ thou hast adiurid vs. Zhe 
vois of the chirche of Crist seith to the 
10 frendis™™, My lemman whit and roody; 
11 chosen of thousendis. His hed best gold; 
his her as braunchis of palmes_thicke 
12lefed, blac as a crowe. Hys e3en as cul- 
ueres vp on litle ryueres of watris, that 
ben wasshe® with mylc, and sitten bi the 
13 most ful flowingus of watris. The chekes 
of hym as litle flores of swote spicis, 
plaunted® of pymentaries ; his lippis° 
14 droppende the first myrre. The hondis 
of hym able to turnen aboute, goldene, 
and ful of iacynctis; his wombe is 
is yuerene, departid bi safiris. His hipis? 
marbil pileres, that ben foundid vpon 
goldene feet; his fairnesse as of Liban, 
icand chosen as of cedre. The throte of 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


79 


hondis droppiden myrre, and my fyngris 
weren ful of myrre moost preued. Y6 
openede the wiket of my dore to my 
derlyng; and he hadde bowid awei, and 
hadde passid’. My soule was meltid*, as 
the derlyng spak; Y sou3te, and Y foond 
not hym; Y clepide, and he answerde 
not to me. Keperis't that cumpassiden7 
the citee founden me; thei smytiden® me, 
and woundiden me; the keperis of wallis 
token awey my mentil. 3e dou3tris of8 
Jerusalem, Y biseche 30u bi an hooli 
thing, if 3e han founde my derlyng, that 
3e telle to hym, that Y am sijk for 
loue. A! thou faireste of wymmen,9 
of what manner condicioun is thi der- 
lyng’ ‘of the louede”? of what manner 
condicioun is thi derling of a derling? 
for thou hast* bisou3t vs bi an hooli thing. 


droppiden 


-myrre ; that is, 


Y dresside me 
to penaunce. 
the wiket of 
my dore ; herbi 
it is signefied, 
that penaunce 
in the begyn- 
nyng is ynper- 
fit; therfor it 
sueth, and he 
bowide awey ; 
for not anoon 
at the ery of 
the puple he de- 
lyueride hem 
fro peyne. Lire 
here. C. 

* My soule was 
meltid 3 as 
fatnesse in a 
panne; therfor 
it is seid of a 
man left in tur- 
ment, he is fried 
in his blood. 
foond not; for 
he delyueride 
not the puple 
anoon, but suf- 
fride hem to be 
turmeutid of 
aduersaries. 


*XMy derling 7s whyt and rodit; chosun 10 Lire here. c. 


of thousyndis. 
hise heeris ben as the bowis of palm trees, 
andy ben blake as a crowe. Hise ijen1 
ben as culueris on the strondis of watris, 
that ben waischid? in mylk, and sitten be- 
sidis fulleste ryueris. 
as gardyns of swete smellynge spices, set 
of oynement makeris; hise lippis dex 
lilies, droppynge doun the best* myrre|j. 


Hise hondis ben able to turne aboute, 14 


goldun, and ful of iacynctis; his wombe 
is of yuer, ourned with safiris. 
lippis bex pilers of marble, that ben 
foundid on foundementis of gold; his 
schapplinesse 7s as of the Liban, he zs 
chosun as cedris. 


swete, and he zs al desirable. 3e dou3- 


His heed zs best gold ;1! 


Hise chekis ben 13 


His throte zs moost 16 


+ Keperis; that 
is, the princes 
of hethen men, 
that weren in 


2 the eumpas of 


Jude. smytiden; 
in doynge anoye 
to persoones. 
tokun awey 3 in 
spuylynge me 
of my goodis. 
douztris of 
Jerusalem ; 
that is, deuout 
persoones of the 
puple of Israel. 
han founde 
my derling ; 
gracious to 300 
in 3oure prey- 


Hise 15 etis: that 3e telle 


to him ; in bi- 
seching for me. 
that Y am siyk 
Jor loue; that 
is, for desir to 
be recouncelid 
to him. derling 
of a derling ; 
that is, worthi 
to be loued, 
more than alle; 


ether this is seid to signefie the comyng forth of dyuyn persoones; for the Sone cometh forth of the Fadir, as the derling of a derling, and the 
Hooli Goost of euer either to other cometh forth of bothe. Lire here. c. t whit and rody; that is, benygne to iust men, and wroth to 
repreuable men. chosun of thousindis ; in Ebreu it is, banerid in thousyndis, that is, hanynge many thousyndis of aungels in his oost. [His heed 
is best gold ; that is, maad fair, with a goldun coroun, to signefie that he is King of kingis, and Lord of lordis. hise heeris ; this signefieth, 
that his wisdom, and goodnes, and strength failen neuere. fiudleste ryueris ; that bi o symple loking he seeth alle thingis, and his vndirstonding 
wexith not foul, bi the knowing of tho thingis that ben with out him. J/ise ehekis ; that is, his vertu, to drawe to him bi feith and loue ehosun 


men. Lire here. c. 


{| the beste myrre; this signefieth his vertu to open priuytes, and that his wordis ben eleene, and kepen fro eorrupcioun 


of synne. Ifise hondis ; signefien his power of worching; and alle the workis of God ben perfit. ful of iacyntis; that is, of sterris, that ben of 
the colour of iacynt. his wombe ; is whiyt and eleene, that is, the biholding of Goddis preuytes makith the coold of drede withdrawen meu fro 
synne. ise lippis, etc.; that is, ben stronge, as siche pileris, and ben set on feet schood with gold, in the hijere part of sehoon ; this signefieth, 
that his power berith vp alle thingis. Ais schaplinesse, ete.; for his fairnesse is word delitable, and hiznesse vncomprehensible. fis throte is moost 
swete, ete. ; as Goddis vertu, bi which he makith feithful men his membris bi grace, is signefied bi his ehekis, so his vertu bi which he makith 
ehosun men membris of his bodi bi glorie, is signefied bi his throte. 


&the ze pr.m. he spac ie m 
mM seyntus C pr.m. © washed 4EGu. 
thijs 1 sec. m. 


8 passid forth 1. ¢ The keperis 1. 

p P 
Y of a derlyng ceminrarsuvxe. 
Sfrendis. x marg. Y and thei t. 


w Om. EM. 
2 weishe 1. 


1 Om. ac sec. m. GH. 
© maad E pr. m. 


u smeten 1. : 
xhast sor. %* The vois of the Chirche of Crist seith to the 
4 thei firste x marg. 


m forsothe 4G. 
P lippis 4c. 


* the acu. lme ez pr.m. 
00 lippis as lilies x sec. m. marg. 


uu The vois of frendis seith to the Chirehe. X marg, 


bOm,1. ¢€ Om.c, 


80 


hym most sweete, and he al desirable. 
Such is my looued, and this is my lem- 
man, 3ee do3tris of Jerusalem. The vols 
i70f holi soules, of the Chirche. Whider 
3ide awei thi leinman, O! thou most fair 
of wymmen? whider bowede doun thi 
leef ? and wee shul sechen hym with 
thee. 
CAP. VI. 

1 The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. My 
leef wente doun in to his gardeyn, to the 
flor of swote spices, that there he be fed 

2in the gardynes, and lilies he gedere. I 
to my leef; and myn leef to me, that is 
fed among lilies. The vois of Crist to 

3the Chirche. Fair thou art, my leef, 
sweete and fair as Jerusalem, ferful as 

athe sheltrun of tentes ordeyned. ‘Turne 
awey thin e3en fro me, for thei maden 
me to fleen awei; thin heres as the 
flockis of she got, that aperede fro Ga- 
slaad. Thi teth as a floc of shep, that 
stez3eden vp fro the wasshing place; alle 
with double frut of wombe, and barein 
there is not in hem. As the rinde of 
poungarnet, so thi chekes, withoute thin 
vhid thingus. Sixty ben quenes, and ei3eti 
ben secundarie wifes; and of 3unge 
waxen wymmen ther is no noumbre. 
8Qon is my culuer, my parfit, oon is to 
hir moder, chosen of hir that gat hir; 
ther see3en hir the do3tris of Sion, and 
most blisful precheden; the quenes, and 
9the secundarie wifes preyseden hir. What 
is she this, that goth forth as morutid 
risiug, fair as the moone, chosen as the 
sunne, ferful as of tentes sheltrun or- 
deyned? The vois of the Chirche, of the 
ostnagoge. I wente doun in to my gar- 
dyu, that I shulde seen the appelis of 
aleiesP, and beholde, if the vynes hadden 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


Vv. 17——VI. 10. 


tris of Jerusalem, siche is my derlyng, faireste of 


and this is my freend. 
of wymmen, whidur 3ede thi derlyng? 
whidur bowide thi derlyng ? and we 
schulen seke hym with thee. 


CAP. VI. 


4My derlyng 3ede doun in to his or-1 
cherd*, to the gardyn of swete smellynge 
spices, that he be fed there in orcherdis, 
and gadere lilyes. Y to my derlyng ;2 
and my derlyng, that is fed among the® 
lilies, be to me. f Mi frendesse’, thous 
art fair, swete and schappli as Jerusalein, 
thou art ferdful as the scheltrun of oostis 
set in good ordre. Turne awei thina 
izen fro me, for tho® maden me to fle 
awei; thin heeris bex as the flockis of 
geet, that apperiden fro Galaad. This 
teeth' as ak flok! of scheep, that stieden 
fro™ waischyng; alle bex with double 
lambren, ‘ether twynnes", and no bareyn 
is? among tho?. As the rynde of a pum- 
granate, so ben thi chekis, without thi 
priuytees. Sixti ben‘ queenysT, and ei3ti7 
ben secundarie wyues; and of 3ong dame- 
sels is‘ noon noumbre. Oon is my cul-s 
uer, my perfit spousesse, oon is to hir 
modir, and 2s the chosun of hir modir ; 
the dou3tris of Syon sien* hir, and prech- 
iden hir moost blessid; queenys, and secun- 
darie wyues preisiden hir. Who is this,9 
that goith forth, as the moreutid risynge, 
fair as the moone, chosun as the sunne, 
ferdful as the scheltrun of oostis set in 
good ordre ? 
orcherd{, to se the applis of grete valeis, 
and to biholde, if vyneris hadden flourid, 
and if pumgranate trees hadden_buri- 


eThou faireste 17 


wymmen; that 
is, of alle folkis, 
in tyme of thi 
pe toGod, 
i resseyuyn 
of thi wee 
whidur 3ede 
thi derling ; 
this lettre is re- 
ferrid to the 
tyme of taking 
of the arke bi - 
Filisteis, and 
of translating 
ther of in to 
the lond of 
Filisteys. 
we schulen 
seke, etc.; this 
is referrid to 
the tyme wher- 
ynne Danyth 
brouste the arke 
of the Lord so- 
lempneli in to 
Jerusalem. Lire 
here. c. 
* my derling 
3ede doun in to 
his orcherd,ete.; 
that is, in to 
the tahernacle, 
that Danyth 
arayede to the 
settyng of the 
arke. in or- 
chardis, that is, 
in sacrifices 
and offringis 
offrid hi feith 
and deuocionn. 
lilies ; that is, 
dresse cleene 
mynystris to 
his seruyce. 
¥ to my der- 
tyng ; that is, 
Y wole serue 
him aloone. to 
mes in help- 
inge my nedis. 
Turne owey; 
this is declaring 
of loue of ech 
to other; ether 
this is seid of 
studionse men 
in the Jawe, 
whiche sam 
tyme enqueren 
ouer curiously 
dyuyn thingis, 
and so God with 
drawith bim fro 
hem ; therfor bi 


*Y cain doun in to myn 10 this that is seid, 


lurne awey, ete. 
is forbedun cu- 
rionse seking of 
dyuyn thingis. 
Lire here. c. 

tT queenes; that 
is, synagogis of 


citees, wher ynne the puple cam togidere, to here the lawe of God, and to make preyeris. secundarie wyues; that is, synagogis in lesse townes. 
Bi oon which is seid cuduer and spousesse, is vndirstondun the tabernacle in Jerusalem, wherynne was the arke, and in Jerusalem oneli was maad 
the offryng of sacrifices ; the modir of Jerusalem is the chirche hauyng victorie. Lire here. c. } in to myn orcherd ; that is, in to the temple 
of Salomon. epplis, ete.; that is, goode werkis of meke men. vyneris; that is, the hows of Israel. pumgranate trees; that is, prestis and dekenes. 


P valeyes G sec. v. H Sec. v. 


© The vois of hooli soulis, of the Chirche. x marg. 
e Om. plures. 


kthe ev. | flockis v. 
8 saw3en I passin, 


Mupfror 1 Om. ctr. 


f The vois of Crist to the Chirche. x marg. 


d The vois of the Chirche, of Crist. x marg. 
Sleef1. btheit. it teeth den c sec. m. Iv. 
°therist.. Phemy. 4therbenr. '° ther ist. 


' The vois of the Chirche, of the synagoge. x marg. 


VI. r1—VII. 8. 


floured, and the poungarnetis hadden 
1 buriouned. I wiste not; myn soule dis- 
turbide me, for the foure horsid cartis of 
Amynadab. The vois of the Chirche, 
120f% the feith of the natiuite. Turne 
aeen, turne ajeen, Sunamytis ; turne 
a3een, turne ajeen, that wee byholde thee. 


CAP. VII. 


The vois of Crist to the Chirche, of the 
synagoge. What shalt thou seen in Su- 
namyte, but queres of tentes? The vois 

10f Crist to the Chirche. Hou faire ben 
thi goingus in shon, thou do3ter of the 
prince ; the ioyntures of thin hipes” as 
brooches, that ben forgid with the hond 
2of the craftisman. Thi nauele a turned 
cuppe, neuere nedende drinkes; thi 
wombe as an hep of whete, set aboute 
swith lilies. Thi two tetus as two 3unge 
4capretis, iemews of the she capret. Thi 
necke as an yuerene tour; thin ejen as 
the cysternis* in Esebon, that ben in the 
3ate of the do;ter of the multitude; thi 
nose as the tour of Liban, that beholdith 
sajen Damasch. Thin hed as Carmel; 
thin heres of thin hed as the purper of 
éthe king, ioyned to water pipes. Hou 
fair thou art, and hou semeli, thou most 
7derwrthe in delices. Thi stature is licned 
to a palm, and thi tetes to clustris. 
8 Crist of the holi cros seith. 1 seide, I 
shal ste3en in to a palm tree, and I shal 
take the frutis of it. The vois of Crist 
to the Chirche. And thi tetes shul ben 
as the clustris of a vyne; and the smel 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


81 


owned. Y knew not; 
turblide me’, for the charis of Amyna- 
dab. 
namyte; turne ajen, turne ajen, that we 
biholde thee. ‘What schalt thou se in 
the Sunamyte, no" but cumpenyes of 
oostis ? 


CAP. VI. 

‘Dou3tir of the prince*, thi goyngis1 
ben ful faire in schoon; the ioyncturis 
of thi heppis bez as brochis, that ben 
maad bi* the hond of a crafti man. Thi2 
nawle* is asY a round cuppe, and wel 
formed, that hath neuere nede to drynkis ; 
thi wombe 7s as an heep of whete, biset 
aboute with lilies. Thi twei teetist bens 
as twei kidis, twynnes of a capret. Thi4 
necke zs as a tour of yuer; thin ijen 
ben as cisternes in Esebon, that ben in 
the 3ate of the dou3ter of multitude; thi 
nose is as the tour of Liban, that bihold- 
ith a3ens Damask. Thin heed zs as Car-5 
mele; and the heeres of thin heed ben as 
the kyngis purpur, ioyned to trow3is*. 
Dereworthe* spousesse, thou art ful fairt, 6 
and ful schappli in delices. Thi stature is7 
licned to a palm tree, and thi tetis to 
clustris of grapis. "I seide, Y schals 
stie® in to a palm tree||, and Y schal take 
the fruytis therof. “And thi tetis schulen 
be as the clustris of grapis of a vyner ; 
and the odour of thi mouth as the odour 
of pumgranatis; thi throte schal be aso 
beste wyn. *Worthi to my derlyng for 
to drynke, and to hise lippis and teeth to 


*Tnrne ajen, turne a3en, thou Su-1e 


my soule dis-11 ¥ knew not ; 


here is set the 
state aftir the 
tyme ef Sale. 
men, til to the 
caitifte of Ba- 
biloyne. Y knew 
not; that is, Y 
koude net bi- 
holde Geddis 
benefices 3cuun 
te me in tymes 
passid. my 
soule distur. 
blide me, ete.; 
that is, Jero- 
heam induside 
the ten lynagis 
te idolatrie, fer 
drede of leesing 
of the rewme, 
if the puple 
jede te Jerusa- 
lem, leste it 
welde turne 
azen te the 
rewme of Juda, 
signefied bi A- 
mynadab. E- 
breis seien, this 
is theveri lettre, 
My soule hath 
set me the car- 
tis of the puple 
hauing prinse- 
hed, that is, 
my wille, that 
breu3t me in te 
do idelatrie, fer 
whiche Y was 
cenquerid, 
made me the 
cartis of Assi- 
riens and of Ba. 
bileynes, that 
ledden the sones 
of Israel in te 
caitifte, and 
leiden en hem, 
as cartis charg- 
id, greueuse 
hirthuns te bere 
in the weye, 
turne ajen; 
that is, fre cai- 
tifte, in te the 
hool staat of thi 
feith. 
Sunamyte ; 
ether Sulamyte, 
bi Ebreu lettre, 
that signefieth 
hool ether per- 

t. Lire here. 
c. 


* Dou3tir of the prince ; here is deseryued the leue of the speuse and ef the spensesse for the staat of the newe testament. Douster of the prince ; 
that is, hooli chirche, which is the spousesse and douster ef Crist. thi goingis; bi the councels of the gespel. in scheon ; that is, in the myndis 
ef Crist and martris. the ioyncturis of thyn hipis ; that is, the ieynyng togidere ef Jewis and of hethen men in o chirche of Crist, maad bi the hend 
of Crist. Bi nawle and wembe is vndurstendun the plenteouse childbering ef the chirche, te bringe ferth the children ef Crist geostly, not fleisly ; 
therfor it sueth, biset with lilies ef charite. a reund cuppe; in Ebreu it is, as a cleer basin. Lire here. c. + twei tetis; ben twey testamentis, 
of whicbe mylk is sckun, wherynne children, gendren in Crist, ben nurschid and enereessid. thi necke ; that is, feith formed with charite. the izen ; 
ben Cristis vertu of knewing, bi which he biheldith hise senes bi appreuyng. as cisternes ; for the isen ben full of watris ef mersy. the nose; is 
doom ef discrecioun. the heed ; is Crist; the hijnesse of his bed is Cristis Gedhed. the heeris; ben apestlis. as purpurs for thei weren maad reed 
in her blood, for the loue of Crist. toyned to trow3is ; that is, put-in treu3is te be waischid, aftir dryingis. Lire here. c. t ful fair; hi feith 
and eneste of cenuersacicun. a@ palme tree; in streiztnesse ef ri3tfulnesse, and in heiz3the ef deneut contemplacieun. clustris of grapis; fer 
abnndaunce of goostly mylk, ether doctryn. Lire here. c. || ¥ schal stie in to a palm tre, etc.; that is, seith the speuse, Y schal make parfit 
men in the chirche, te stie in to the hijnesse of contemplacioun, and make hem to take swetnesse and deliting, which is feelid in the hiznesse of 
contemplacioun. thi tetis echulen be, ete.; that is, bi abundaunce of mylk ef heeli dectryn. edeur af thi mouth; that is, the fame of teching. 
Live here. c. 


to aEGH. * lippis 4. ® fishpondis z pr. m. 

rOm.1. *® The vois of the Chirche, to the feith of the natyuyte. x marg. t The vois of Crist to the 
Chirche, of the synagoge. x marg. “Om.1. — ¥ The vois of Crist to the Chirche. x marg. w with 1. 
x lippis a pr.m. nable £. naule Grq. nauele nca. nauel s. y Om. a. 2 to be bathid ynne ¥ marg. 
sec. m. a Most dere 1. b Crist of the hooli crosse seith. x marg. © stie up 1. d The vois of Crist 
to the Chirche. x marg. © The Chirche seith of Crist. x marg. 


VOL. III. M 


82 


gof thi mouth as the smel of appelis, and 
thi throte as best wyn. The Chirche 
seith of Crist. Wrthi to my leef to 
drinken, to the lippes and to the teth of 

1ohym to chewen. ‘I tot my leef, and to 
me the turnyng of hym. The vois of 

11 the Chirche to Crist. Cum, my leef, go 
wee out in to the feeld; dwelle wee to- 

izgidere in tounes. Erli rise wee to the 
vyne; see wee, if the vyne flourede, if 
the floures frutes bringe forth, if the 
poumgarnetes floureden; there I shal 

iz3ziue to thee my tetes. The mandrages 
jeuen ther smel in oure 3ates; alle 
appelis, newe and olde, my leef, I kepte 
to thee. 


CAP. VIII. 

1 The vois of patriarkis, of Crist. Who 
to me 3yueth thee, my brother, soukende 
the tetes of my moder, that I finde thee 
alone withoute forth, and kisse thee, 

zand now me no man dispise? I shal 
take thee, and leden in to the hous of 
my moder, and in to the bed place of hir 
that gat me; there thou shalt teche me, 
and I shal 3yue to thee drinken" of spiced 
win, and of the must of my poumgar- 

snetes. The lift hond of hym vnder myn 
hed, and the ri3t hond of hym shal clippe 
me. The vois of Crist, of the Chirche. 

4I adiure 30u, 3ee do3tris of Jerusalem, ne 
rere 3ee, ue inaketh™ to waken my leef, 
to the time that she wile. The vois of 

sthe sinagoge, of the Chirche. What is 
she this, that ste3eth vp fro desert, flow- 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


VII. g-—-VIII. 5. 


chewe”. Y schal cleue by loue to my der-10 
lyng, and his turnyng schal be to me. 
aCome thou, my derlyng, go we out in toll 
the feeld*; dwelle we togidere in townes. 
Ryse we eerli to the vyner; se we, if the 12 
vyner hath flourid, if the flouris bryngen 
forth fruytis®, if pumgranatis han flourid; 
there I schal 3yue to thee my _ tetis. 
Mandrogoris han 3oue her odour in oure®13 
3atis; my derlyng, Y haue kept to thee 
alle applis, new and elde. 


CAP. VIII. 


4Who ‘mai grantet to me‘ thee’, my! 
brother, soukynge the tetis of my modir, 
that Y fynde thee aloone without forth, 
and‘ that Y kisse thee, and no man dis- 
pise me thanne? Y schal take thee, and2 
Y schal lede thee in to the hous of my 
modir, and in to the closet of my modir ; 
there thou schalt teche me, and Y schal 
3yue to thee drink of wyn maad swete, 
and of the must of my pumgranatis. 
His lefthond vndurs myn heed, and his3 
ri3thond schal biclippe me. '3e dou3tris 4 
of Jerusalem, Y charge 3ou greetli, that 
3e reise not, nether make the dereworthe 
spousesse to awake, til sche wole"*. ‘Whos 
is this spousesse, that stieth) fro desert, 
and flowith in delices, and restith on hir 
derlynge? *Y reiside thee vndur a pum- 


* go we out in 
to the feeld; bi 
spreding abrood 
of feith in to the 
world. dwelle 
we togidere, 
ete.; in bild- 
inge chirchis 
in citees and 
townes. Jtise we 
erly, ete.; that 
is, to conuerte 
hethen puple. 
if the vyner 
hath flourid ; 
that is, for he- 
then puple hath 
flourid in res- 
seyuynge ioy- 
fulli Goddis 
word. if pum- 
granatis, ete; 
that is, the 
fulnesse of 
martris in the 
firste chirche. 
¥ schai 3eue 
to thee my tetis; 
that is, Y schal 
ordeyne the 
teching of ener 
ether testament 
to thi glorie. 
Mandragoris 
han 30ue, ete.; 
that is, excel- 
ent men in 
Cristis chirche 
han 30ue the 
odour of good 
fame, bi hooli 
liyf and hool- 
sum techyng in 
the chirche of 
God. alle applis, 
newe und elde 3 
that is, Y haue 
ordeynd to thyn 
onour the wit- 
nessingis of the 
elde and newe 
testament. Lire 
here. c. 

+ Hooly chirche 
axith here to be 
delyuerid fro 
schenschepis 
and dispitis 
doon therto, in 
the bigynnyng 
therof, aftir 
Cristis ascen- 
cioun. my bro- 
ther; for the re- 
soun of manhed 


takun. sowkinge the tetis of my modir ; that is, of the Virgyn Marie, whiche is seid modir, hathe of Crist and of al hooli chirche. Y fynde thee 
aloone ; onourid with onour, that perteyneth oneli to Gods bi this word thee alone, the Fadir and the Hooli Goost ben not excludid, but the 
seruyce of idols is excludid herbi. without forth ; that is, opinly, with out the drede of vnfeithful men. Y schad take thee; bi deuocioun of feith. 
schai lede ; that is, bi preyeris Y schal make thee to come, bi condessending of thi goodnesse. in to the hows of my modir; that is, in to chirchis 


halewid to the blessid Virgyn and othere seyntis. there thou schali teche me; in schewinge priuy mysteries to the mynystris of the chirche. 
of wyn; that is, of deuocionn of feithful men. must ; that is, deuocioun of meu newly conuertid. dis left hond, ete.; thanne he schal schewe 
frenschip te me, as a spouse doith to a ful dereworthe spousesse. nether make the derworthe to awake; that is, whanne the spouse hath gete 
reste and pees, 3e do not ony thing wherbi the spouse be offendid, and the reste of the spousesse be brokun. that stieth fro desert; that is, fro 
the scharpnesse of persecucioun fro tirauntis. Y reiside thee undur a pumgranate tre; thus it is in Ebreu, tho summe doctours taken 


t And to au pr.m. 4 drinke 4. 09 make 4. 


2 schewe A pr. m. MRU. 
¢ 30ure CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXaC. 
upuv. ¢€ Om.crerkmnorsxac. f Om.c. & shal be vnder I. 


bh en : 3 
wiler. i The vois of the synagoge, of the Chirche. x marg. 
synagoge, of the hooli crosse. x marg. 


a The vois of the Chirche to Crist. x marg. 


‘ irche aa Om. cv. b fruy3t as. 
d The vois of patriarkis, of Crist. x marg. 


dd shal 3eue to E. schal 3iue 
bh The vois of Crist, of ihe Chirche. x marg. 
Jstieth up1. * The vois of Crist to the 


VITE. 6—tr1. 


ende delices, faste cleuende vpon’ hir 
leef ? The vois of Crist to the sina- 
goge’’, of the holi cros. Vnudir an apil 
tree I rerede” thee; there shent is thi 
moder, there defoulid is she that gat 
6thee. Put me as a brooche vpon thin 
herte, as a brooche vpon thin arm; for 
strong is as deth looue, hard as helle ie- 
lousnesse*; the laumpis of it the laumpes 
70f fir, and of flaumes. Manye watris 
shul not moun quenchen out charite, ne 
flodis shul not throwen it doun. If a 
man 3eue al the substannce of his hons 
for loone, as no3t he dispisith it. The 
vois of Crist to the sinagogey, of the 
sholi* Chirche. Oure? sister a litil child, 
and tetes she hath not; what shul wee 
do to oure sister, in the dai whan she is 
gto ben spoken to? Ifa wal she is, bilde 
wee vp ‘on it? silnerene pynaclis; if a 
dore she is, ioyne wee it with ceder tables. 
10 The vois of the Chirche answerende. I 
a wal, and my tetes as a tour; sithen I 
am mad befor thee as pes resceynende. 
11 The sinagoge of the Chirche seith. A 
vyne she was to the pesible ; in hir that 
hath puples, she toc it to the keperes; 
a man taketh awei for® the frut of it a 
thousend siluer? plates. Crist to the 


thyn arm; in defendinge me hi the arm of thi power. Lire here. c. 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


83 


granate tre; there thi modir was corrupt, 
there thi modir was defoulid. Set thous 
me as a signet on thin herte, as a signet 
on thin arm; for loue is strong as deth*, 
enuy @s hard as helle; the laumpis ther- 
of ben laumpis of fier, and of flawmes. 
Many watris moun not quenche charite,7 
nether floodis schulen oppresse it. Thon3 
aman 3yueX al the catel of his hous for 
loue, he schal dispise’ ‘that cate/™ as 
nou3t. "QOure sistir zs litil, and hath nos 
tetys; what schulen we do to oure sistir, 
in the dai whanne sche sehal be spokun 
to? If it is a wal, bilde we theronnes 
siluerne touris""; if it is a dore, ioyne 
we it togidere with tablis of cedre. °F 10 
am a wal, and my tetis bex as a tour; 
sithen Y ain maad as fyndynge pees} 
bifore hym. PA vyner was to the pesi-11 
ble; in that ecztee, that hath puplis, he 
bitook it to keperis; a man bryngith a 
thousynde platis of siluer for the fruyt 
therof. The vyner is bifore me; a12 
thousynde ben of thee pesible, and two 
hundrid to hem that kepen the frnytis 
therof. Frendis herkene thee, that dwell-13 
ist in orchertis; make thou me to here 
thi vois. *My derlyng, fle thout; bets 
thou maad lijk a capret, and a calf of 


this vnkun- 
nyngly of the 
tre forebodun 
to Adam and 
Eue; that is, 
Y clepide thee 
inwardly, hi the 
vertu of the 
hooly cros, and 
of thi passion. 
there thi mo- 
dir was cor- 
rupt; in Ebreu 
it is, there thi 
modir childide 
thee. there ; 
that is, bisidis 
the cros. thi 
modir childide 
thee ; that is, 
the blessid Vir- 
gyn Marie 
hadde sorewe 
for thee, as a 
woman beringe 
child hath so- 
rewe; for there 
sche was persid 
with the swerd 
of sorewe for 
her sone, as 
Symeon bifor- 
seide, in ij. ¢°. 
of Luyk. there 
thi modir was 
defoulid ; that 
is, the syna- 
goge, seid the 
modir of Crist, 
for he took 
inankynde of 
the puple of 
Jewis. was cor- 
rupt there; for 
the obsernaun- 
ces of Moises 
lawe ceessiden, 
as slayn in the 
passion of Crist. 
as a signet on 
thyn herte ; in 
louynge me 
perfitly. on 


* fone is strong as deth ; that is, thou3 thi lone is so strong in the 


perfit sones of hooli chirche, that they dreden not to suffre deth for thee, as it is opyn in martris, netheles enuye, that is, persecucioun of 
tirauntis, that cometh forth for enuye and hatrede of Cristen men, is hard as helle to feble men; and therfor thei han nede of the help of thi 
proteccioun, and to the benefice of pees. the laumpis therof; that is, of thi loue, in the soulis of perfit men. of fer; that is, so strong, that 
it may not be borun doun bi the persecuciouns of tirauntis, but not so in fcble men. many watris; that is, persecuciouns of tirauntis. he schal 
despise that catel as now3t ; as if he seye, men, 3he, feble men, moun dispise outermere goodis for thi loue, but thei moun not so dispise her owne 
liyf, in suffringe martirdom. Oure sister is fitil, and hath no tetis; that ts, hooli chirche is meke, and cast out among men of this world, and 
hath not fredom to schede out the mylk of hooli doctryn, bi preching of Cristen feith. be spokun to; of princes, as of Constantyn, and 
other princes in his tyme, that grauntiden pees to hooli chirche. siluerne touris ; in Ebreu it is, a siluerne paleis, that is, ioyne we to it the 
princes of the world, bi resseyuyng of feith to the defence of syke men. ioyne we it to, etc.; that is, make we it strong with hooli techeris, 
clepid cedris; for the hiznesse of liyf and kunnyng, and for the hoolnesse of feith. Lire here. c. + FY am maud as fyndynge pees, ete.; 
that is, Y haue fredom to preche Cristis feith opinly, for Constantyn, in the iij. day of his baptym, pupliselide his lawe, that who euer dide 
wrong toa Cristen man, he schulde lease the half of his goodis. to keperis; that is, to Petre and hise successours. @ man, eic.; that is, Con- 
stantyn jaf many costis for the frnyt of chirche. The vyner is bifor me; that is, seith Crist, Y stonde ny3 bi my presence, to kepe the chirche 
principaly. and ij. hundrid, etc.; that is, myche mo thankingis ben due to Crist pesible, for the keping of hooly chirche, than to prelatis, that 
ben keperis of the chirche vndur him. ¢o here; that is, aungels herken thee, spousesse, in chirchis spred abrood bi the world. thi vois; that 
Is, the declaring of thi desir. Lire here. c. t My dirling, fle thou; bi this flizt is not vndurstondun departing of the spouse fro the 
spousesse, but bi this flizt is vndurstondun swift translating of the spouscsse with the spouse to henenly blis; which the spousesse desirith 
souereynly ; therfor the spousesse seith, my derling, fle thou, that is, lede thou me with thee, out of wrecchidnesse of present world. be thou 
maad liyk u caperet, etc.; that is, do this swiftly. on the hillis of swete smellinge spices; that is, in beringe me ouer with thee to heuenys, 
where is swetteste feeding of chosun men. Lire here. c. 


¥ to E pr. m. 
a My £ pr. m. 


v sinage au. linage G. z Om. AEGH. 


wherdec. ¥* gloriousnes 4. 
btohir a, © fro a. 


Y sinage AGU. 
d siluerene AEGH. 

k 3yueth c et ceteri. | dispise, or rette it 1. 
Chirche. x marg. —_™© touris, ethir britagis v. 
synagoge of the Chirche scith. x marg. 
to Crist. x marg. 


mQOm.1.  ® The vois of Crist to the synagoge of hooli 
° The vois of the Chirehe answerynge. x marg. _P The 
4 Crist to the Chirche seith. x marg. * The vois of the Chirche 


M2 


84 SONG OF SOLOMON. VIII. 12-14. 


12 Chirche seith. My vine bifor me is; a  hertis, on the hillis of swete smellynge 
thousend thi pesiblis, and two hundrid _ spices. 
to them that kepen the frutis of it. 

13 The whiche dwellist in gardynes, frendis Here endith the Songe of Songis, and 
herknen thee¢; mac me to heren thi here bigynneth Sapiens?. 
vois. The vois of the Chirche to Crist. 

14 Flee thou, my leef; be thou licned to a 
capret, and to an hert calf of hertes, vp 
on the mounteynes of swote spices. 


Here endith the Songis of Songis*. 


eme a. f From a. Explicit. x. Explicit Canticum. cu. No final rubric in c. 


b Here endith the book of Songis, and here bigynneth the book of Wisdom. cux. Here endith the book 
of Songis, and here bygynneth Wisdom. ru. Here endith the book of Songis, and bigynneth a prolog on 
the book of Wysdom. Gc. Heere endith the book of Songis, and biginnith the book of Wisdom. ras. Here 
endeth the book of Songis; se now the booc of Sapiens or Wisdom. x. Here endith the book of Songis, and 
here bigynneth the book of Wisdom, which is red in holi cherche in lessouns of the masse ; for the mater 
therof is goostli, and profecie of thingis to comynge. m. Here endith Songis of Songis, and bigynneth 
Sapiens. x. Here endith the book of Song of Songis, and bigynneth the book of Wysdom or Sapiens. v. 
Here eendith Cantica Canticorum, and biginneth the prolog on Sapiens. a. No final rubric in epry. 


WISDOM. 


Heer gynneth® the prolog in the 
booc of Wisdam. 


THE booc of Wisdam anent® Ebrues 
no3her’> is; wherfore and that diting* 
the more’ smelleth fair® Grec spechef. 
Thys booc the Jewis afermen to ben of 
Filon, that therfore Wisdam is nemned, 
for in it the8® comyng" of Crist, that is 
the wisdam of the Fader, and the pas- 
sion, diligentli is opened", 


Here eendith the prolog, and bigyn- 
neth Sapiens, 


Heer gynneth* the boocl. 


1 Looue 3ee ri3twisnesse, that demen the 
erthe; feeleth of the Lord in goodnesse, 
and in simplenesse of herte secheth hym. 


8 begynneth Accu, » anentis sEL. 
f speche the more fair n. € clepid x. 
No final rubric in the other Mss. 


a This prologue is from R. 


other Mss. b loueth 7. ¢ Om. cr. 


bb nowhere 4. 
gs Om. c prim. 
k begynneth az. 


A prolog upon Sapience*. 


The book of Wisdom is not hadde 
among Ebreuys; wherfore the writyng 
therof sowneth moost in Greke speche. 
This book the Jewis affermen to be of 
Philonys, and it is clepid the book of 
Wisdom, for in it the comyng of Crist, 
which is the wisdom of the Fader, and 
his passioun, opinli ben schewid. 


Here biginneth the bok of Sapience or 
Wysedom*™. 


3e that demen the erthe*, loue® ri3tful-1 


nesse; feele 3e of the Lord in goodnesse, 


and seke 3e hym in the* symplenesset 


Ceendinge tr. 'Om.c. ©¢ the fair aren, the ut. 
h kunnynge 4, bb expowned scuz. i: From 1, 
1 book of Wisdam. a. No initial rubric in cu. 


a8 From eepy. Heere bigynneth Sapience. R. No initial rubric in the 


* the erthe ; 
that is, men 
dwellinge in 
erthe. c. 

+ symplenesse ; 
that is, clen- - 
nesse. dustyn 
and Lire here. 
G 


86 


2 For?’ he is founden of hem, that tempten 
hym not; he apereth forsothe to them, 
3that feith han in toc hym. Shreude for- 
sothe tho3tis seueren fro God; preued 
forsothe vertu chastiseth vnwise men. 
4For in to an euell willi soule shal not 
gon in wisdam ; ne shal dwelle in a bodi 
ssoget to synnes. An holi spirit forsothe 
shal flee the feynere® of discipline, and 
shal taken hymself awei fro tho3tis, that 
ben without vnderstonding ; and he shal 
be chastisid fro the ouercomende wickid- 
cnesse. Benyngne is the spirit of wisdam, 
and he shal not delinere the cursid fro 
his lippis; for of the reenus of hym wit- 
nesse is God, and of the herte of hyin he 
is verre’ serchere, and of the tunge of 
7hym herere®. For the Spirit of the Lord 
fulfilde’ the rondnesse of londis; and that, 
that conteneth alle thingus, kunnyng hath 
sof vois. For that ‘he that® speketh wicke 
thingus, mai not lurke; ne chastysende 
9dom shal beside passen hym. In the 
tho3tis forsothe of the vnpitous asking 
ioshal be. Of the sermounes forsothe of 
hym heering to God shal come, and to 
the correcciouns" of the wickidnesses of 
hym; for the ere of the ielous hereth 
alle thingis, and the noise of grucchingus! 
11shal not ben hid. Kepe 3ee thanne 30u 
fro grucching, that no thing profiteth, 
and fro bachiting ‘spareth to the* tunge ; 
for a dere sermoun in veyn shal not go; 
the mouth forsothe that lieth, sleth the 
1gsoule. Wileth not loouen deth, in errour 
of 3oure lif, ne purchase 3ee perdicioun 


WISDOM. 


I. 2—12. 


of herte. For he is foundun of hem,2 
that tempten not hym; forsothe he ap- 
perith to hem, that han feith in to hym. 
For whi weiward thou3tis departen fros 
God; but preued* vertu repreueth vnwise 
men. For whi wisdom schal not entre in4 
to an yuel willid soulef; nethir schal¢ 
dwelle in a bodi suget to synnes. For-s 
sothe the Hooli Goost of wisdom schal 
fle awei fro ‘a feyned man®, and he schal 
take awei hym silf fro thou3tis, that ben 
with out vnderstondyng; and ¢he man‘ 
schal be punyschid of wyckidnesse com- 
ynge aboue. For the spirit of wisdom isé 
benyngne, and he schal not delyuere a 
cursid man fro hise lippis®; for whi 
God is witnesse of hise reynes, and the 
serchere of his herte is trewe, and the 
herere of his tunge. For whi the Spirit7 
of the Lord hath fillid the world; and this 
thing, that conteyneth alle thingis, hath 
the kunnyng of vois. For> this he thats 
spekith wickid thingis, may not be hid; 
and doom punyschynge! schal not passe 
hym. For whi axyng schal be in theo 
thou3tis of a wickid man. 
heryng of hise wordis schal come to God, 
and to the punyschyng of hise wickid- 
nessis; for the eere of feruent loue herith 
alle thingis, and the noise of grutchyngis 
schal not be hyd. 
fro grutchyng, that profitith no thing, 
and fro bacbityng spare 3e the tunge; for 
a derk word schal not go in to veyn; 
forsothe the mouth that lieth, sleeth the 
soule f. 


Forsothe the 10 


Therfor kepe 3e 30n11 


Nyle 3e coueyte deth, in thels 


* prened ; that 
is, vertu ap- 
preued of God. 
onwise men 3 
that is, hem 
that synnen bi 
ignoraunce. 
Lire here. c. 

+t yuel willed 
soule ; that is, 
to whom malice 
plesith for vi- 
ciouse custom. 
suget to synnes; 
that is, in a 
man snget to 
fleisli vices, that 
maken dulnesse 
of vndurstond- 
ing. Goost of 
wisdom ; that 
is autour of 
wisdom in the 
dissiple. a feyn- 
ed man; that is, 
him that sekith 
in vertues not 
truthe, but 
oneli apperith. 
without vun- 
durstondyng ; 
that is, with out 
resoun. @ cursid 
man, ele.; that 
is, a man ob- 
stynat in syn- 
nes, fro blasfe- 
myes and othere 
yuels, doon bi 
stiring of lippis. 
reynes ; that is, 
of yuele affec- 
ciouns. herte s 
that is, of thou3t 
and entent. 
conteyneth ; 
that is, the 
Hooli Goost, 
that kepith alle 
thingis in be- 
ing. kunnyng 
of vois; that is, 
knowing of ech 
selyng. @ derk 
word, ete.s that 
is, colourid bi 
the semyng of 
hoolynesse, 
whanne it hath 
the venym of 
wickidnesse 
withynne. Lire 
here. c. 
 sleeth the 
soule ; this is 


vndurstondun of a dedly leesing, not of a bourdeful leesing, and profitable. in the errour of 30ure liyf ; that is, bileaynge bi this to ascape al 
peynefulnesse. nether gete 3¢ perdicioun ; that is, dampnacioun of helle. in the werkis of 3owre hondis; that is, in sleynge 30u bi 30ure hondis. 
God made not deth s of man, whom he made my3ty to die not, bi the 3ifte of origenal rijtfulnesse; and if man had kepte that 3ifte, he schulde 
haue passid with out deth to the glorie of bodi and of soule. Lire here. c. 


bb Forsothe c pr. m. ¢ Om. c prim. 


herere x prom. f fulfillith acu. & Om. a. 
k of the twisel pr. m. 


4 the verre 4GH. € he is 
i the grucchingis 4. grucchinge 4. 


ce feyned thyng E£ pr.m. 
b correccioun 4Gi. 


ditschalr ¢ feynynge thing 1 fext, or a feyned man i marg. 


f unwijs man 1. 
stynatv, > Therfor 1. i and punyschynge 1. f 


& lippis, that is, ob- 


I. 13—II. 6. WISDOM. 87 


13in the werkis of 30ure hondis; for God 
made not deth, ne gladeth! in the leesing 

140f men ‘of liue™. Forsothe God made, 
that alle thingus weren; and able to 
helthe he made the naciouns of the 
roundnesse of londis. Forsothe ther is 
not in hem leching of destruccioun, ne 

15 the reume of helle is in the erthe. Ri3t- 
wisnesse forsothe is perpetuel, and vn- 
deadli ; vnri3twisnesse forsothe purchas- 

16ing of deth. Vnpitous men forsothe with 
hondis and wrdis haunteden it, and 
eymende it a frend, floweden” doun, and 
behestes they putteden to it; for deth 
thei ben wrthi, that beu of the part° 
of it. 


CAP. IT. 


1 Forsothe vnpitouse men seiden, thenk- 
ende anent® hemselue not ri3t, Litil and 
with noje is the time of oure? lif; ther 
is not refreshing in the ende of a man, 
and ther is not, that be knowen turned 

za3een fro helle. For of no3t wee ben 
born, and aftir these thingus wee shul 
be, as tho31 wee hadden not ben; for 
smoke and blast is in oure nose therles, 
and sermoun of a sparcle to stirn togi- 

3dere oure herte. For quenchyd ashen™ 
shal ben oure bodi, and the spirit shal 
be held abrod as ‘softe eir’; and oure lif 
shal passe as the step of a clonde, and 
as a litil cloude ben vnknyt, that is 
dryuen of the bemes of the sunne, and 
sof the hete of it agreggid. And oure 
name for3eting shal take by tyme; and 
no man shal han mynde of oure werkis. 

5 Forsothe the passing of thet shadewe is 
oure tyme, and ther is not® turning 
ajeen of oure ende; for it is al closid, 

cand no man turneth a3een. Cometh 


errour of 3oure lijf, nether gete 3e per- 
dicioun in the werkis of 3oure hondis ; 
for God made not deth, nether is™ glad 13 


in the perdicioun of lyuynge men. Fort lees 
4 ae at is, remedi 
whi God made of nou3t alle thingis, that een 
idnessis Is not 

tho schulden be; and he made the na-_ bi distriyng of 


ciouns of the world able to be heelid, 2%cvneete 


t the rewme 
s . . s ° of hellis is in 
Forwhi medecynt} of distriyng is not in Dike Mele ia: 
tho men, nether the rewme of hellis is in pe His 
x i e lawe o 
erthe{. For ri3tfulnesse is euerlastynge, 15 helleis this, that 
. 7 . toon may go 
and vndeedli; but vnri3tfulnesse zs getyng — asen fro syune 


“saat . a 3b 
of deeth. Forsothe wickid men clepiden 16 jy \.ecme liv? 


rot > 1 1 “dy men moun be 
that vnri3tfalnesse bi hondis and wordis, pe," 


and thei gessiden it a frendesse", and flet- — synne bi pen- 

7 bs “ P F ¥ aunce,and come 

iden awei, and thei puttiden biheestis to to glorie. iz. 
Sfulnesse; which 


it; for thei ben worthi the deth), that 4s bi grace. 


ef e geting of deth ; 
ben of the part therof. ult 6, of bells 


bi dedly synne. 
hondis ; that is, 
werkis. fletiden; 
bi dyuerse vices. 
CAP. II. puttiden bi- 


Ceres . heestis to it ; 
Forsothe wickid men seiden, thenkynge? that - Ais 


ee ° ° yden to vnri3t- 
anentis® hem silf not ri3tfuli, The tyme Flees 


of oure lijf is litil, and with anoye; no ene: 
a LIS 
refreisching is in the ende of a man, and __ cleueth to his 
: : sponsesse. Lire 
noon is?, that is knowun, that turnede here. c. 


: the deth ; of 
azen fro hellis. For we weren borun of2 }oi¢“@2i ° 


1 : here. c. 
nou3t, and aftir this ¢yme we schulen be, eee 


as if we hadden not be; forwhi smoke|| wre oca 
: . Auer rething in 
is blowun out in oure nose thirlis, and a and brething 


2 ajzen of the eir. 
word of sparcle to stire oure herte. For3 @ word of spar. 


r . hia _ ele; that is 
oure bodi schal be quenchid aische, and Lilly Rescate 


the spirit schal be scaterid abrood as soft _ in oure bodi, 
3 i aud first and 
eir; and oure lijf schal passe as the step last in the 
3 . herte. as soft 
of a cloude, and it schal be departid as a cir; ‘that is, 
xi he soule schal 
myst, which is dryuun awey of the beemys {iivche awe 


vanysche awey, 


‘ as the soule of 
of the sunne, and is greued of the heete ee 


therof. And oure name schal take for-4 beestis. Lire 
ere. C. . 

3eting bi tyme4]; and no man schal haue = § i wme; 
7 ‘ that is, bi pass- 

mynde of oure werkis. Forwhi oure tymes jng oe tee 


i ire here. Co 
is the’ passyng of a schadewe, and no aCe 


g ist s * Jt ig  astoon put on 
turnyng aj3en of oure ende is"; for it is paper rab ont 
aseelid**, and no man turneth a3en. Ther-¢ dees raat 

. ried. wre 
for come 3e, and vse we the goodis that here. c. 


! pladeth not 4e pr.m. cau. “™aliue acu. foleweden 4. © parti azcu. © anentis 4 ef alii passim. 


P this £ prom. 4thof £ passim. * asken EGH. 


mheisr. "freendr. © at1. 


8 neshe wax cE pr.m. Om. arc. “no AH. 


ptherigs1. @Om.c. ° ther is 1. 


88 


thanne, and vse wee’ the goodis that 
ben, and vse wee creature”, as im oure 
730uthe, swiftli. With precyous win and 
oynemens fille wee vs; and passe not vs 
sthe flour of tyme. Crowne wee vs with 
roses, er thei welewen; no medwe be, 
that oure leccherie passe not thur3. 
9 Noon of vs be withoute lot of oure lec- 
cherie; ouer al lefe wee* signes of glad- 
nesse; for this is oure part, and this is 
iolot’. Oppresse wee the ri3twis pore man, 
and spare wee not to the widewe, ne 
wrshipe wee hoere heres of the olde 
iiman of myche time. Be forsothe oure 
strengthe the lawe of vnrijtwisnesse ; 
forsothe that that is feble, vnprofitable 
i2is founde. Bigile wee thanue the ri3twis 
man, for vuprofitable he is to vs, and 
contrarie to oure werkis; and repreuendeli 
puttith to vs the synnes of lawe, and 
defameth ajen vs the synnes of oure 
isdisciplyne. He behoteth hym the kun- 
nyng of God to han, and the sone of 
14God he nempneth hymself. He is mad 
to vs in to ouerleding of oure tho3tis. 
15 Heuy he is to vs also to seen; for vulic 
to othere is the lif of hym, and myche 
ischaungid ben the weies of hym. As 
trifleres wee ben eymed of hym, and he 
absteneth hymself fro oure weies, as fro 
vnclennesses*; and he tellith biforn the 
laste thingus of rij3twis men, and he glo- 
i7vieth hymself to han God to fader. See 
wee thanne, if the wrdis of hym ben 
trewe; and asa3e wee, what ben to comen 
to hym; and wee shul wite, what shul 
ig8ben the laste thingis of hym. If for- 
sothe he is verre> sone of God, he shal 
vndertaken hym, and delyuere hym¢ fro 
i9the hondis of the contrariose. With 
wrong vndernymyng and torment aske 
wee hym, that wee wite the reuerence of 


Vv Om. acu. 
¢ Om. c prim, 


Wa creature a. x Om. AGH. 


8 thei 1, 
Y his 1. 


t that 1. "not bir. 
2 contrarie to hint 1. 


Vv be ther 1. 
4 most foul 1. 


WISDOM. 


y oure lot a. 


IL, 7-—19. 


ben, and vse we a creature, as in 3ongthe, 
swiftli*. Fille we vs with preciouse wyn7 
and oynementis; and the flour of tyme 
passe not vs. Corowne we vs with roosis, s 
bifor that tho* welewen ; no medewe be, ‘bi 
which‘ oure letcherie passe not". No mang 
of vs be’ with out part of oure letcherie; 
euery where leeue we the signes of glad- 

nesse; for this is oure part{, and this is femutily ah, 
oure eritage. Oppresse we a pore iusto moun do. vx 
man, and spare we not a widewe, nether pital 7 
reuerence we hoor heeris of an old man 


* swiftli; that 
is, as soone as 
we moun. Lire 
here. ©. 

ft oure part; 
that is, we 
moun no thing 
more bere of 
the goodis of 
this liyf. Lire 
here. C. 

tT lawe of ri3t- 
Suinesse ; that 
is, gesse we 


Lire here. c. 
§ Therfor dis- 


of myche tyme. But oure strengthe bet ee oe ks 
the lawe of rijtfulnesset; forwhi that is expownyd 
that is feble, is foundun vnprofitable. Joris, pale 4 


agyneden 
man§, for hei2{p ge Crist, 


thou; the wise 
men of Jewis 
hadden first the 
knowing of 


Therfor disseyue we a iust 
is vnprofitable to vs, and he ¢s contrarie 
to oure werkis; and he vpbreidith” to vs 

the synnes of lawe, and he defameth on vs __ Crist, as it is 
the synnes of oure techyng. He biheet-13 pedir 
ith that he hath the kunnyng of God, and _j60" he Prech- 


he nemeth hym silf the sone of God. He 14 vives thei con- 


. é seyueden enuye 
is maad to us in to schewyng of oure and hatrede 


: A ajenus him, bi 
thou3tis||. He is greuouse to vs, 3he, t0 15 whiche the 
ae , "a knowi 
se; forwhi his lyf is vnlijk to other men, Whiche thei 


hadden of Crist, 
We ben ic was maad derk, 


and thei bigun- 
nen to expowne 
weywardly the 
profesies of 

him. Lire here. 


and hise weies ben chaungid. 
gessid of hym ¢o be triffleris{], and he 
absteyneth* hym silf fro oure weies, as 
fro vnclenessis; and he bifore settith** the 


. . . Cc. 
laste thingis of iust men, and he hath lof oure thoust- 
glorie, that he hath God aY fadir. Ther-17 ae Bir sie 
s 
for se we, if hise wordis ben trewe; and many men 
diden, bi the 


asaie we, What thingis schulen come to spirit of pro. 

hym; and we schulen wite, what schulen ise a 
be the laste thingis of hym. For if he 18 Aare nce 
is the very sone of God, he schal vp take no vert. Lire 
hym, and schal delyuere hym fro the 


ere. C. 
**® biforsettith : 
hondis of hem that ben contrarie?. 


that is, he set. 
AXe 19 tith bifor alle 


eye goodis of pre- 

we lym bi dispisyng and turment, that 30" liye on 
we knowe his reuerence, and that we  800dis abedun 
of iust men. 


preue his pacience. Bi fouleste? deth con-20 Lire here. c. 
dempne we hym; for whi biholdyng schal 


a ynclennes GH. > the verrei «. 


W vpbreidith, ether edwiteth c et ceteri. X withholdith Ts 





f 


Ti, 20— III. ro. 


hym, and proue the pacience. of hym. 
20 Bi most foul deth condempne wee hym; 
forsothe respit shal be of the wrdis of 
2thym. These thingus thei tho3ten, and 
erreden; and the malice of hem blendede 
22them. And thei knewen not the sacra- 
mens of God, ne hopeden the meede of 
ri3twisnesse, ne demeden the wrshepe of 
23holi soules. For God made man‘ yn- 
deadli, and to the yimage of his licnesse 
24made hyin. Forsothe thur3 the enuye 
of the deuel deth cam in in to the round- 
2snesse of erthis; forsothe thei folewen 
hym, that ben of the part of hym. 


CAP. IIL. 


1 The soules of ri3twis men ben in the 
hond of God; and torment of deth shal 
2not*4 touche them. Thei ben seen to the® 
e3en of vnwisef men to dien; tormenting 
3is eymed the issue of hem. And fro a 
ri3twis weie thei wenten in to destruc- 
cioun, and that of vs ys weie of destruc- 
acioun; thei forsothe ben in pes. And 
if befor men thei suffreden tormentis, the 
shope of hem is ful of vndeadlynesse. In 
fewe thingus trauailid, in manye thingus 
thei shul be weel disposid ; for God 
temptede them, and fond hem wrthi 
chymself. As gold in furneis he prouede 
them, and as brent sacrifise of ost he 
loouwede$ them; and in time shal ben 
7the biholding of hem. hei shul shyne 
ri3twis, and as sparcles in reeddy places 
8thei shuln renne hider and thider. Thei 
shul deme naciouns, and lordshipen to 
puples; and the Lord of hem shal regne 
9in to withoute ende. Who trosten in 
hym, shuln vnderstonde treuthe; and 
feithful in looue thei shul assente to 
hym; for free 3ifte and pes is to the 
1ochosen men of hym. Vnpitous men for- 


WISDOM. 


89 


be of hise wordis*. Thei thou3ten these2! 
thingis, and thei erriden; for whi her 
malice blyndide hen. And thei knewen22 
not the sacramentis of God{, nethir thei 
hopiden the meede of ri3tfulnesse, nether 
thei demyden the onour of hooli soulis. 


* of his 
wérdis; for the 
Jewis bileu- 
yden, that 
whanne Crist 
was deed, hise 
wordis bifor go- 
inge schulden 
be arettid fals, 
but the con- 
trarie bifelde. 


For whi God made man vnable to be dis-23 Lire here. c. 


tried, and God made man to the yinage 
of his licnesse. 


But bi enuye of the24 


t the sacra- 
mentis of God 3 
that is, priuy 


deuel{ deth entride in to the world ; for 25 gdis, whiche 


sothe thei suen hym, that ben of his part. 


CAP. III. 


Forsothe the soulis of iust men ben ini 
the hond of God; and the turment of 
deth§ schal not touche hem. Thei sem-2 
yden to the ijen of vnwise men to die; 
and turment was demed the outgoyng of 
hem. And fro inst weiel] thei 3eden ins 
to distriyng, and that that? is of vs the 
weie of distriyng4[; but thei ben in pees. 
Thou3 thei sufriden turmentis bifore men, 4 
the hope of hem is ful of vndeedlynesse. 
Thei weren trauelid in a fewe thingis,s 
and thei schulen be disposid wel in many - 
thingis; for whi God asaiede hem, and 
foond hem worthi to hym silf. He preu-6 
ede hem as gold in a furneis, and he took 
hem as the offryng of brent sacrifice; and 
the biholdyng of hem schal be in tyme 
of 3elding. Tust men schulen schyne,7 
and® schulen renne aboute as sparclis in a 
place of rehed. Thei schulen deme na-s 
ciouns, and® schulen be lordis of puplis; 
and the Lord of hem schal regne with 
outen ende. Thei that trusten on hyin,9 
schulen vnderstonde treuthe ; aud feithful 
men in loue schulen assente to hym; for 
whi 3ifte** and pees is to hise chosun 


e made redi 
to hem that 
loven him. 
undistriable ; 
that is, vndedly 
as to the saule, 
and to be dis- 
tried ayenus the 
corrupcioun of 
the bodi, for it 
is maad of con- 
trarie elementis; 
he 3af the 3ifte 
of origenal 
ri3tfulnesse, bi 
whiche the 
soule my3te 
kepe his bodi 
fre corrupcioun. 
to the ymuge 
of his licnesse ; 
for he made 
man able to 
take God, bi 
knowing and 
lone. Lire here. 
G 


t bi enuye of 
the deuel; for 
bi his tempta- 
cioun the firste 
fadir and modir 
braken Goddis 
comaundement, 
and losten ori- 
genal ri3tful- 
nesse, and en- 
triden into nede 
to die. c. 


§ of deth ; that 
is, of helle. Lire 
ere. Ca 


ll And fro inst 
wete, etc.; that 
is, fro the weie 
of ri3tfulnesse, 
that they helden: 
truly in this 
world. in to dis- 
triyng; bi the 
errour of vn- 
wise men. Lire 
here. Cc. 


q wey of distri- 


z . + 1d. . fe ee yng; that is, 

sothe, aftir that thei tho3ten, vndernym- men. But wickid: men, bi tho thingis 10 (7% eroor, 
. that seith, that 

men that dien, ben distried outirli. Lire here. c. ** sifte ; of grace in present tyme. and pees; in tyme to comynge. Lire here. c. 


damanepr.m. noc. 


> Om. c. 


VOL. Tl. 


e Om. 4Gn. 


fwijs 4G pr.m. & alouwid a. 


¢ and thei 1. 


N 


90 


ynges" shuln han; that dispiseden the 
rijtwis, and fro the Lord wenten awel. 
11 Wisdam forsothe and discipline who 
casteth awei, is vnseli; and voide is the 
hope of hem, and trauailes withoute frut, 
and vnprofitable the werkis of them, and 
i2ynable to dwelle in. The wymmen of 
them ben vuwise, aud most wicke the 
1ssonus of hem. Cursid the creature of 
them; for seli is the bareyn, and the 
vudefoulid, that kne3 not the bed in tres- 
pas, shal han frut in beholding of holi 
1ssoulis. And the gelding, that wro3te not 
bi his hondis wickidnesse, ne tho3te ajen 
the Lord most wicke thingus; forsothe 
ther shal ben 3iue to hym the chosen 
fre 3ifte of the beleeue, and lot in the 
1stemple of God most aloowid. Forsothe 
of goode trauailes glorious is the frut, 
and the whiche the roote of wisdam al 
16to-stereth not. The sones forsothe of 
auoutreres in ending shul ben, and fro 
the wicke bed the seed shal ben out- 
lawid. And if forsothe of long lif thei 
shu] be, in no3t thei shul be countid; and 
withoute wrshipe shal be the laste eelde 
isof hem. And if swiftliere thei shul ben 
dead, thei shul not han hope, ne in the 
i9dai of knouleching speche. Forsothe 
wicke naciouns ben of hard ending. 


CAP. IV. 

1 O§! hou fair is chast ieneracioun with 
clerte; vndeadli forsothe is the mynde of 
it, for anent God it is knowe, and anent 

2men. Whan present it is, thei folewe; 
and desiren it, whan ‘it hath* lad ont 
itself!, and it crouned in to withoute 
ende berth the victorie, takende bi vic- 
torie the meede of the vudefoulid striues. 

3Forsothe the manyfold goten multitude 
of ynpitouse men shal not ben profitable; 
and auoutrie plauntingis shul not 3iue 
hee3e rootis, ne stable stedefastnesse set- 


h correcciouns F prom. iQOm. acen. 


4 vnable for to dwelle 1, 


: © the 1. 
1Om.1a. ka chaast ga. 


1 ynknowun A. 


WISDOM. 


k thei han & pr. am. 


fhath not knowen the 1. 
™ thei schal 1. 


II, 11-—IV. 3. 


that thei thou3ten, schulen haue punysch- 
yng ; whiche dispisiden* just thing, and 
3eden awei fro the Lord. 
castith awei wisdom and lore, is cursid ; 
and the hope of wickid men is voide, and 
her trauels ben without fruyt, and her 
werkis ben vnhabitable*, and vnprofit- 


* dispisiden, 
etc.; that is, 


For he that 11 nolden do iust 


werkis. 
onhabitable ; 
that is, vnable 
to dwelle ynne. 
alowing ; 

that is, excus- 
ing of her 


pene yuels. 
able. The wymmen of hem ben vnwitti, 12 in ie dai 


and the sones of hem ben ful weiward. 


The creature of hem 7s cursid ; for whi a®13 


womman bareyn and vndefoulid is blessid, 
that ‘knew not' bed in trespas; sche schal 
haue fruyt in the biholdyng of holy soulis. 


And a man vnmy3ti to gendre® is blessid, 14 


that ‘wrou3te not wickidnesse bi hise 
hondis, nether thou3te moost weiward 
thingis a3ens the Lord; for whi a chosun 


3ifte of feith schal be jouun to hym, and © 


a most acceptable eritage in the temple of 


of knowing ; 
that is, of ge- 
neral doom. 

of hard end- 
ing ; that is, 
of hard dampn- 
yng to the 
peyne of helle. 
Lire here. c. 


God. For whi the fruyt of good trauels 1st “as gene- 


is gloriouse, and the roote of wisdom that 
fallith not doun. 
treris schulen be in distriyng, and the seed 


of a wickid bed schal be destried. And1i7 


sotheli thou3 thei schulen be of long lijf, 
thei schulen be arettid in to nou3t; and 
the laste eelde of hem schal be withouten 
onour. 
thei schulen not haue hope, nether alow- 


yng in the dai of knowyng. Forsothe19 


wickide naciouns ben of hard ending. 


CAP. IV. 


Ai! hou fair is chast* generaciount 1 
with clerenesse ; for the mynde therof 
is vndeedli, for it is knowun!, both 
anentis God, and anentis men. Whannez 
it is present, thei suen it; and thei desiren 
it, whanne it hath led out{ it silf, and it 
ouercomyng getith bi victorie the mede 
of batels vndefoulid, and is corouned with 
outen ende. But the many fold gendrid3 
multitude of wickid men schal not be 
profitable; and plauntyngis of auoutrie 
schulen™ not 3yue deepe rootis, nether 


I themself £ pr. m. 


& gete 1. bh hath not wron3t I. 


And if thei ben deed swiftliere, 18 


racioun; that is, 
the multitude of 
iust men, which 


But the sones of avow- 16is chast in bodi, 


in refreynynge 
voleneful 

lustis of fleisch, 
and also chast 
in soule, in 
eschewynge the 
synne of vn- 
feithfulnesse 
and of idolatrie. 
with clernesse ; 
of wisdom, 
which is 3o0uun 
to iust men. 

it is knowun; 
bi knowing of 
appreuyng $ 
sotheli ve for- 
3eting fallith in 
God. Lire here. 
c 


t led out; 
that is, fro pre- 
sent bi kyndl 
deth. ™_ 
ouercom- 
ynge; the 
flesch, and the 
world, and the 
deuel, that ben 
ouercomun per- 
fitli of iust men 
in her deth. 
ire here. c. 
§ of auoutrie; 
that is, alle 
wickid men, 
that ben the 
fendis sones bi 
goostly auou- 
trie. Lire here, 
Cc 


IV. 4—17. 


aten. And if in the braunchis in the tyme 
buriounen, vnstabli set of the wind thei! 
shul ben al to-stirid, and of the mychil- 
nesse of windis pullid vp bi the rootis. 
5Forsothe braunchis vnendid shul be to- 
broken; and the frutis of them vnprofit- 
able, and soure to ete, and to no thing 
cable. Forsothe alle the sonus, that shul 
ben born of wicke™ men, witnesses ben 
of shreudenesses a3en fader and moder, 
zin ther asking. The ri3twis forsothe, if 
he were beforn ocupied bi deth, in re- 
sfreshing shal ben. The laste age for- 
sothe wrshipeful is" not longe durende, 
ne in noumbre of 3eres countid ; hoere® 
9ben the wittis of man, and the age of 
10 eelde lijf vndefoulid. The plesing to God 
mad looued, and lyuyng among syn- 
i1neres is translatid; he is raueshid, lest 
malice shulde chaunge the vnderstonding 
of hym, or lest feynyng shulde begile 
i2the soule of hym. Forsothe priue de- 
sceyuyng of trifling derkneth goode 
thingus, and vnstablenesse of coneiting 
130uerturneth wit withoute malice. The 
ful endid in short fulfilde manye tymes; 
14plesid forsothe to God was the soule of 
hym; for that he wente to bringen hym 
out fro the myddel of shreudenesses® ; 
puples forsothe seende and not vnder- 
stondende, nouther ben puttende in ther 
ishertes suche thingis. For grace of God 
and mercy is ‘in to? his seyntis, and fer- 
thermor respit in to the chosyn of hym. 
1¢Forsothe the rijtwis dead condempneth 
the vnpitous men on liue; and 3outhe 
swifthere endid, the longe lif of the4 
17 vnri3twis. Forsothe thei shul see the 
ende of the wise man, and thei shul not 
vnderstonde, what God hath tho3t of 


it be schort ether long. Lire here. c. 


WISDOM. 


91 


schulen sette stable stidfastnesse. Thou34 
thei buriounen* in bowis in” time, thei 
set vnstidfastli schulen be moued of the 
wynd, and® schulen be drawun out} bi 
the roote of the greetnesse of wyndys. 
For whi bowis vnperfit schulen be brokun 5 
togidere; and the fruytis of hem ben vn- 
profitable, and soure to ete, and couenable 
to no thing. For whi alle sones, that bens 
borun of wickid men, ben witnessist of 
wickidnesse a3eus fadirs and modris, in 
her axyng. But a iust man, thou3 he be7 
bifore ocupied§ bi deth, schal be in re- 
freischyng||. For whi worschipful eeldes 
is not of long tyme, nether is? rikened bi 
the noumbre of 3eeris; the wittis of a 
man ben hoore, and the age of eelde is9 
lijf withouten wem. He pleside God,! 
and was maad dereworth, and he lyu- 
yhge among synneris was ‘borun ouer? ; 
he was rauyschid, lest imalice schulde1 
chaunge his vnderstondyng, ethir lest 
feynyng schulde disseyue his soule. 


* buriownen ; 
that is, lan 
prosperite in 
temporal good- 
dis, Zire here.c. 
+ schulen be 
drawun out, 
ete.; that is, hi 
Goddis sen- 
tence, fallinge 
on hem, thei 
schulen be 
drawun out fro 
goodis of pre- 
sent liyf, in 
whiche thet 
hadden set 
roote. Lire 
here. c. 

t ben witnessis, 
ete.; for hi this 
that thei suen 
the trespassis of 
fadris, thei 
witnessen her 
malice. Lire 
here. C. 

§ bifor occu- 
pied, etc.; that 
is, bifore that 

0 he come to 
ende. Lire 
here. C. 
|| schad be in 
refreisching ; 

1 that is, in reste 
fra wrecchid- 
nessis of pre- 
sent liyf; and 
so a iust man 


that lyueth litil 


For whi disseyuyng of trifelyng makith 12 tyme, is of 


derk goode thingis, and the’ vnstable- 
nesse of coueitise turneth oner the wit 
without malice. 
tyme, and fillide many tymes ; for whi his) 
soule was plesant to God; for this thing 
God hastide to lede hym out fro the 
myddis of wickidnesses ; but puplis ** 
sien and vndurstoden not, nether settiden 
siche thingis in’ ‘the inwardnessest. For"1 
whi’ the grace and merci” of God is on 
hise seyntis, and biholdyng of ‘Goddis 
coumfort* ts on hise chosun men. For-1 
sothe a inst man deed{{t condempneth 
quyke wickid men; and 30ngthe endid 
swiftliere condempneth longY lijf of an 
vniust man. 


betere condi- 
cioun than a 
wickid man, 
that lyueth 


He was endid in schort 13 longe, and that 


fallith in tribu- 

4 laciouns of bodi 
and of soule. 
worschipful ; 
that is, worthi 
to be worschip- 
id, is not in 
multitude of 
3eris, but in 

_ Fipenesse of 

® vertues, which 
a iust man get- 
ith, thou3 he be 
jong in age. 
the wittis of 

6 aman; iust. 
ben heore ; for 
tho ben ripe 
and oneste. 
and the age, 
of eelde ; wor- 
thi to be wor- 


For thei schulen se the ende 17 schipid. 


is liyf without 
wem; whether 


{ was borun ouer ; that is, fro present liyf, and fro the felouschipe of wickid men, of whiche he my3te be 


peirid. lest mulice; that is, apertly ynele men. schulde chaunge ; bi violence of turmentis. feynyng ; that is, ipocritis. schulde disseyue ; bi apperyng 
of good. of trifeling ; that is, of iangling of many wordis, ourned ether faire enditid. makith derke goode thingis ; for ofte it makith tho to appere 
els. contynuance of couetise, etc.; for whi the greetnesse of lust mysturneth the doom of resoun, and most in simple men, in whiche resoun is 


esse strong. Lire here. c. 


+t a iust man deed; for the mynde of his ri3tfulnesse schewith, that wickid men ben worthi to be dampned. Lire here. c. 


10m. csec.m. ™ wickid acu. 


q Om. «acH. 


® fora tl. in a Ksa. 9 and thei 1. 
t the entrailis rumpuvy. her hertis 1. 
y the long 1, 


P it is 1. 


« shul ben £ pr. m. 


u Om. ac. 


olde & pr.m. °° shrewidnes a. P to 4. 
4 translatid, or born ouer 1. rOm.1. %Om.a. 
Vv Om. 1. while ¢. w the merci 8a. x God 1. 


N 2 


** but puplis; that is, vnwise men. in the entrailis; that is, in the ynnere thingis of soule. Lire here. c. 


92 


hym, and whi the Lord mynushte, ‘ov 

ismade lytil® hym. Thei shul seen, and 
dispisen hym; hem forsothe the Lord 

i9shal scorne. And thei shul ben after 
these thingus falling doun with oute 
wrshipe, and in wrong blamyng among 
the deade in to withoute ende. For 
them inwardli blowen he shal to-breke 
withoute vois, and stern hem fro the 
foundemens ; and vito the he3est thei 
shul ben desolat. And thei shul be 
weilende, and the mynde of hem shal 

20pershen. Thei shul comen in the thenk- 
ing of ther synnes dredful; and shuln 
ouerleden hem forn a3en the wickidnesses 
of hem. 


CAP. V. 


1 Thanne shul stonde ri3twis men in gret 
stedefastnesse ajen hem that anguyssh- 
eden hem, and that token’ awei the tra- 

2uailes of hem. Seende thei shul ben dis- 
turbid' with orritble drede, and shul 
merueilen in the sodeynesse of the vn- 
hopid helthe", weilende for anguysh of 

3spirit, seiende, withinne themself pen- 
aunce doende, and for anguysh of spirit 
weilende, These ben, whom wee hadden 

‘sum tyme’ in to scorn, and in to licnesse 

4of repref. Wee vnwise eymeden the lif 
of hem wodnesse, and the ende of them 

swithout wrshipe; hon thanne ben thei 
countid among the sonus of God, and 
6among seyntis the lot of hem is? Ther- 
fore wee erreden fro the weie of treuthe, 
and the 1i3t of ri3twisnesse li3tede not to 
vs, and the sunne off vnderstonding is 
7not sprunge to vs. Weri wee ben in the 
weie of wickidnesse, and of perdicioun ; 
sand wee han gon harde weies. The 
wei forsothe of the Lord wee knewen 
not; what profitede to vs pride, or bost 


WISDOM. 


Iv. 18—vV. 8. 


of a wise man*, and thei schulen not vn- 
durstonde, what thing God thou3te of 
hym, and whi the Lord made hym lesse. 


For thei schulen se, and schulen dispise 18 


hym; but the Lord schal scorne hem. 


* a wise man 
that is, bifor 
takun with 
deth, 

made him 

lesse ; in mak- 
ing schort his 
liyf. schalscorne 
hem ; that is, 


And aftir these thingis thei schulen be 19 schal schewe 


fallynge doun withouten onour, and in 
dispisyng among deed men with outen 
ende. For he schal al to-breke hem 
bolnyd with out vois, and he schal moue 
hem fro the foundementis ; and_ thei 
schulen be desolat til to the laste thing. 
And thei schulen be weilynge, and the 
mynde of hem schal_perische. 
schulen come ferdful in the thou3t of her 
synnes; and her wickiduessis on the con- 
trarie side schulen lede hem ouer f. 


CAP. V. 


Thanne§ iust men schulen stonde int 
greet stidfastnesse a3ens hem that an- 
gwischiden? ‘iast men*, and whiche” token 
awei her trauelis. Thei schulen se, and2 
schulen® be disturblyd with orrible drede, 
and thei schulen wondre in the sudeynte 
of heelthe’ vnhopid ; and thei schulen 
weile for angwisch of spirit, and thei3 
schulen seie, doynge penaunce|] withynne 
hem silf, and weilyng for the® angwysch 
of spirit, These men it ben, whiche we 
hadden sum tyme in tof scorn, and in to 
licnesse of vpbreidyng®. We woode mena 
gessiden her lijf woodnesse, and the ende 
of hem with oute onour®; hou therfor bens 
thei rekened among the sones of God, and 
her part is among seyntis? Therfor wee 
erriden fro the weie of treuthe, and the 
liz3t of riz3tfulnesse schynede not to us4, 
and the sunne of vndurstondyng roos not 
vp to us. We weren maad weri in the7 
weie of wickidnesse and of perdicioun ; 
and we 3eden hard weies, But wes 
knewen' not the weie of the Lord; what 


Thei 20 


hem worthi to 
be scorned in 
deth, for thei 
aretten iust 
men foolis and 
woode, that 
putten forth 
hem silf to deth 
for ri3tfulnesse. 
aftir these; 
that is, aftir 
delices and 
onours of this 
liyf. 

with oulen 
onour ; in the 
power of fendis. 
swith out vois; 
for thei schulen 
not mowe de- 
fende hem silf, 
nether excuse. 
Sro founde- 
mentis ; that 
is, fro fleisli 
frendis, and 
ertheli goodis, 
in whiche thei 
tristiden. Lire 
here. c. 


+ schal tede 
hem ouer; that 
is, fro temporal 
prosperite in tu 
euerlastinge 
wrecchidnesse. 
Lire here. c. 

§ thanne ; that 
is, in the tyme 
of doom. Lire 
here. c 


Ml penaunce ; 
vnfruytful, for 
thei schulen be 
out of the staat 
of merit, and 
for the pen- 
aunce schal not 
be for the of- 
fence of God, 
but for the 
hardnesse of 
turment. Lire 
here. C. 


G schynede not 
to vs; thon; it 
schyneth to 
alle men, as 
myche as is of 
it silf, for whi 
Goddis stiringis 
to good, ben 
maad comynly 
to alle men, but 
sumimen res- 


seynen tho stiringis, and othere men putten awey tho; and so tho ben not maad to hem, that is, to her profit, hut more to her dampnacioun. 


Live here. c. 


'Om.cel eprom. § taken 4. 


2 anguischen sa. ahem 1. 
& vpbreiding, ether edwilyng c el ceteri. 


t disturblid eau. 


b the whiche 1. 
h ony honour c sec. m. 


thelpe c. YOm.c. ¥ forsothe fro a. 


4 herheelthe1, @Omr f Om. nN. 


i knowen cnn. 


¢ Om. 1. 


Vv. 9—21. 


90f* richesses what 3af it to vs? Alle 
tho thingus passeden as shadewe, and as 
10a messager rennende biforn. And as a 
ship, that passeth thur3 the flowende 
water, of the whiche whan it is passid, 
a step is not to finde, ne a path of his 
11 botme in the flodis. Or as a brid, that 
ouerfleth in the eir, of the whiche noon 
euydence is founden of his weie, but onli 
the soun of weengis betende the 1li3t 
wind, and kuttende bi fors the eir of the 
weie, and togidere stirid the weenges 
ouerflethY, and aftir that no signe is 
12founden of his weie. Or as an arwe 
sent out in to the ordeyned place, the 
eir deuydid contynueli is reclosid in it, 
13that the passing of it be vnknowen. So 
and wee born contynueli lefen to ben, and 
of vertue noon forsothe signe wee my3ten 
shewe; in oure wariedhed forsothe wee 
14 ben wastid. Such thingus seyden in helle 
1sthese that synneden. For the hope of 
the vnpitous is as a wile’ loke,‘or thistil- 
doun® that of the wind is taken awei, 
and as a smal fome* that® of tempest® is 
sprengd awei, and as smoke that of the 
wind is held abrod, and as the mynde of 
16a geste of o dai, passende biside. Ri3t- 
wise men forsothe in to withoute ende 
shul lyne, and anent’ the Lord is the 
meede of hem; and the tho3t of hem 
iyanent the hejest. Therfore thei shul 
take the reume of wrshipe, and the dia- 
deme of fairnesse of the hond of the 
Lord; for ‘with his ri3t hond he shal 
couere them, and with his holi arm de- 
isfenden hem. And the ielouste of hym 
shal taken armure, and armen creature 
1yto the veniyng of enemys. He shal 
clothen for the brest plate ri3twisnesse, 
and he shal take to for the helin certein 
2z0odom ; he shal take the sheeld vnuenkus- 
2iable equite ; he shal sharpe forsothe 
hard wrathe in to a spere, and the round- 


Xx or c. ¥ ouerfleiz aren. 


yy Om. ¢ ef E prim. 


WISDOM. 93 


profitide pride to vs, ethir what brou3te* 
the boost of richessis to vs ? 
thingis passiden as schadewe, and as a 
messanger bifore rennynge. 
schip, that passith thorou the flowynge 
watir, of which whanne it hath passid, it 
is not to fynde a step, nethir the path of 
the botme therof in wawys. 
bryd, that flieth ouer in the eir, of which! 
no preef is foundun of the weie therof, 
but oneli the sown of wengis betynge 1i3t 
wynde, and keruynge the eir by the™ 
my3t of weie, and with wyngis moued 
togidere it flei ouer, and aftir this no 


All thog 


And as aio 


Ethir as all 


* we weren 
wastid in cure 
malice, ether 
yuel willid- 
nesse ; is seid 
yuel firyng, 
that stondith 
in the bren- 
nyng of co- 
ueytise, wher 
ynne wickid 
men ben wast- 
id; for whi 
lecherouse men 
ben wastid bi 
the tier of fleisly 
coueitise, co- 
ueytouse men 


signe is foundun of the weie therof. Ethir 12 ben wastid bi 


as an arowe shot" out in to a place or- 
deyned, the cir is® departid, and? is4 closid 
a3en anoon, that the passyng therof be 


the fier of co- 
ueitise, and 
proude men 
ben wastid bi 
the fier of 
worldly hi3- 


not knowun. ‘So and" we borun ceessiden 13 vets 


anoon to be, and sotheli we my3ten schewe 
no signe of vertu; but we weren wastid 
in oure malice’ *. 
seiden siche thingis in helle. For the hop 
of a wickid man is as the flour of a brere 
which is takun awei of the wynd, and as 
smal froth which is scaterid‘ of a tempest, 
and as smoke which" is spred abrood of 
wynd, and as the mynde of ‘an herborid 


Thei that synneden, 14 
els be rewardid, 


schulen liue ; 
in liyf glorie. 
anentis the 
Lord; of whom 
thei hopen to 


not of the 
world. 

anentis the 
hizeste ; to 
whose onour 
thei ordeynen 
her dedis. 

the rewme of 
JFairnesse ; that 
is, of heuenly 


man’ of o dai, that passith forth. But 16glorie, where 


just men schulen lyne withouten ende, 
and the meede of hem is anentis the 
Lord; and the thou3t of hem ¢@s anentis 
the hijeste. 
of the hond of the Lord the rewme of 
fairnesse, and the® diademe of comely- 
nesse; for he schal gouerne hem with his 
rijthond, and he schal defende hem with 


no vile thing is. 
with his rizt 
hond ; in kep- 
ing hem in blis, 
that is signefied 
bi the rizthond. 


Therfor thet schulen take 17 with his hooli 


arm; in this is 
signefied the 
sikirnesse of 
blis, that may 
not be takun 
awey bi ony 
creature. Lire 
here. c. 


his hooli arm. And his feruent louet 18+ fervent love; 


schal take armure, and he schal arme the 
creature to the venieaunce of enemyes. 


He schal clothe rijtfulnesse for an ha-1 


burioun, and he schal take certeyn doom 


for a* basynet; he schal take a scheeld 20 


that may not be ouercomun, equyte’; 


2 Om.c ef £ pr.m. or thistles donne Gu. 


athorn Epr.m. %Om.acu. © the tempest se see.m. Git. 4 anentis 4 ef E passim. 

* hath brou3t 1. 1 whos wey1, ™Om.1. 4 sentcelerii © Om.cv. POm.cv. ‘itisr * Rizt 
sor. * malice, ether yuel willidnesse cnreukmasuvyac. + scaterid abrod 1. © the which 1. Va giste 1. 
War. Xther. ¥ equyte, ether euenesse cFGHKMNQSUVXag. equyte, ether euenchede EPY. 


for bi feruent 
loue of ri3tful- 
nesse he goith 
forth, to the 


g punysching of 


yuele men. c. 


94 WISDOM. 


nesse of erthis shal fi3te with hym a3en 
22the vnwise. The sendingus out of leitis 
shul gon euene ri3t, aud as at the teis- 
ing the bowe of cloudis bent, thei shul 
ben outlawid; and to a certeyn place thei 
23shul lepen in. And fro the stony wrathe- 
ful hailes shul ben sent, and water of the 
se shal teenden in to them, and flodis 
24shul renne togidere hard. Aj3en hem the 
spirit of vertue shal stonde, and as a 
whirle puff of wind deuyden® hem; and 
to wildernesse he shal fulli bringen al 
the lond of the wickidnessef of hem, and 
wariedhed shal turne awei the setis of 
:my3ti men. Betere is wisdam than 
strengthis, and a man prudent more than 
a strong man. 


CAP. Vi. 


2 Herethé thanne, 3ee" kingis, and vndir- 
stondith ; lerneth, 3ee domes men of the 
seoestes of the erthe. 3iueth eres, 3ee 
that holden togidere multitudis, and 
plesen to 3ou in cumpanyes of naciouns ; 
4for ther is 3ouen of the Lord power to 
3ou, and vertue of the heijeste, that shal 
aske j3oure werkis, and tho3tis serchen. 
5For whan 3ee weren mynestres of his 
reume, not ri3tli 3ee demeden, ne kepten 
the lawe of ri3twisnesse, ne aftir the wil 
6of God 3ee wenten. Orribleli and soone 
he shal apere to 30u; for most hard dom 
shal ben don in hem, that ben biforn. 
7 Forsothe ‘to the’ litle* is grauntid mercy; 
my3ty men forsothe my3tili tormentis 
sshul suffre. Forsothe he shal not with- 
drawe the persone of any man, the Lord, 
that is lordshipere of alle thingus, and 
he shal not drede the mykilnesse! of any 
man; for litil and gret he made, and 
geuenli cure is to hym of™ alle. To the 
strengere forsothe strengere stant® in 
i0tormenting. ‘To 30u thanne, kingus, ben 
these my wrdis, that 3ee lerne wisdam, 
11and° that 3ee falle? not of 4. Who for- 


e denydeth 4. f wickenesse E. 
Eprom.  \mykil sen. 
9 Om. £ pr. m. 


2 yndurstondeth 1. 8 lerneth 1. 


& Here 3ee arGu. 
™ Om. c sec. m. E sec. m. 


5 siueth to 3onre 1. 


V. 22——VI. 11.” 


forsothe he schal whette hard wraththe* 21 * herd 


in to a spere, and the world schal fizte 
with him ajens vnwitti men. 
sendyngis out of leytis schulen go, and as 
the sidis of a reynbouwe, whanne the 
bouwe of cloudis is crokid, thei schulen 
be destried ; and thei schulen skippe in 
to a certeyn place. 
schulen be sent fro a stony wreththef, 
and the watir of the see schal wexe 
whijt ajens hem, and floodis schulen 


renne togider harde. The spirit of vertu 2s 


schal stonde a3ens hem, and as the whirl- 
yng of wind it schal departe hem; and 
the wickidnesse of hem schal brynge al 
the lond to desert, and malice schal distrye 
the seetis of my3ti men. 


CAP. VI. 


Wisdom is beter than strengthis, and ai 
prudent man dotth more than a strong 
man. Therfor, 3e kyngis, here, and vn-2 
durstonde?; and 3e iugis of the coostis of 
erthe, lerne*. 3e that holden togideres 
multitudis, and plesen 3out in the cum- 
penyes of naciouns, 3yue® eeris; forwhia 
power is 3ouun of the Lord to 3ou, and 
vertu is 30uun of the hizeste, that schal 
axe 3oure werkis, and schal serche thou3tis. 
For whanne 3e weren mynystris of hiss 
rewme, 3e demeden not ri3tfuli, nether 3e 
kepten the lawe of ri3tfulnesse, nether 3e 
jeden bi the wille of God. Hidouslic 
and soone) he schal appere to 30u; for- 
whi hardeste doom schal be maad in 
hem, that ben souereyns. Forsothe merci7 
is grauntid to a litil man; but mi3ti 
men schulen suffre turmentis mi3tili. 
For the Lord, which is lord of alles 
thingis, schal not withdrawe the per- 
soone of ony man, nether he schal 
drede the greetnesse of ony man; for he 
made the® litil man and the greet man, 
and charge|| is to hym euenli of alle men. 
But strongere turment nei3eth to strongere9 


k a litle while 
P passe E pr. im. 


bh Om. arcu. 


i Om. £ pr. m. 
n stondith 4. 


° Om. 4. 


¢ bothe the 1. 


Streijte 22 


And fulle hailstones 23 


wraththe ; that 
is, his ven- 
iaunce, which 
noon mai with- 
stonde. Lire 
here. C. 
+ a stony 
wraththe ; that 
is, of Goddis 
ire, that makith 
heuye hail 
stones. 
wezre whiyt; 
that semeth 
whiyt, whanne 
the see is tro- 
lid. 
The spir-t of 
vertu 3 that is, 
strong wynd. 
Lire here. c. 
¥ plesen 30u ; 
that is, deliten 
in the gouernail 
of hem. 
of the Lord; 
whose vikeris 
je ben in this. 
Lire here. c. 
§ and soone; 
in deth, that 
tarieth not. c. 
hardeste 
doom ; that is, 
greuouseste 
peyn. 
to a litil man; 
that is, toa 
man of litil 
staat, and of 
litil kunnyng, 
for sich a roan 
synneth co- 
mynly bi igno- 
raunce. 
my3ty men 3 
bi dignete of 
staat, and bi 
greetnesse of 
kunnyng. 
turmentis 
my3tily ; that 
is, greuouseste 
turmentis; for 
in as myche as 
the staat is 
hijere, in so 
myche the fal 
is greuousere, 
and worthi of 
more peyne. 
withdrawe 
the persoone 3 
fro good to him, 
be he neuere so 
pore. 
the greetnesse 
of ony man 3 
that ne he pun 
yschith him 
duly. Lire here. 
c 


\| charge, ete.; 
that is, puruy- 
aunce, for he 
purueyeth for 
ech creature, 
bi the couena- 
blete of his 
kynde. Lire 
here. c. 


Vi. 12-—27. 


sothe shul kepe rijtwisnesse, rijtly shul 
be demed ; and that shul lerne ri3t 
thingus, shul fiude, what thei answere. 
12Coueiteth thanne my wrdys, and loou- 
eth hem; and 3ee shuln han disciplyne. 
13 Wisdam is cler, and that neuere wele- 
with ; and 1i3tli is seen of hem that 
loouen it, and is fonnde of hem that 
14sechen it. It beforn ocupieth that co- 
ueyteth it, that to them ratliere he shewe 
ishymself. Who fro 1li3t shal wake to it, 
shal not trauailen; forsothe he shal finde 
16it sittende in his jates. Thanne to 
thenken of it is ful endid wit, and he 
that shal wake for it, soone shal be sikir. 
17For it goth aboute sechende the wrthi 
jtself; and in his weis it shal shewe itself 
to them, and gladsumli in alle prouy- 
dence ‘or bifore ordeynyng® it shal ajen 
1scome to them. The bigynnyng forsothe 
of it is most verre coueityng of disci- 
iwpline. Thanne cure of discipline is 
loouyng; and loouyng is keping of his 
lawis. Keping forsothe of lawes is ful 
2zvending of yncornpcioun ; vncorupcioun 
forsothe makith next to God to ben. 
21 And so coueiting of wisdam shal lede 
22forth to the euerlastende kingdam. If 
thanne 3ee deliten in setes, and in kingus 
dignetees, O!.3ee kingis of the puple, 
looueth wisdam, that in to withoute ende 
233¢ee regne. Looueth the list of wisdam, 
2talle 3ee, that ben toforn to puplis. What 
is forsothe wisdam, and hou it be mad, 
I shal telle; and I shal not hide fro 3ou 
the sacramentis of God; but fro the bi- 
gynnyng of birthe I shal enserche, and 
putten in to 1i3t the kunnyng of it, and 
25I shal not passe biside the treuthe. Ne 
with the quyterende enuye weie I shal 
han; for such a man shal not ben par- 
26cener of wisdam. The multitude for- 
sothe of wise men’ helthe is of the round- 
nesse of erthis; and a wis king is the 
27stablete of the puple. Thamue takith 


© Om. c ef & pr. m. 


4 of canikMNQRsUVxXaCG. its. 


WISDOM. 


95 


men. Therfor, 3e kyngis, these my wordis 10 

ben to you, that 3e lerne wisdom, and that 

3e falle not doun. For thei that kepenn 
ri3tfulnesse, schulen be deemed ri3tfuli ; 

and thei, that lernen iust thingis, schulen ieee 
fynde, what thei schulen answere. Ther- 12 Lire here. . 
for coueite 3e my wordis, and loue je tho; that doy rake 
and 3e schulen haue techyng. Lec 
is cleer, and that sehal neuer fade; and it 


fhis s. 


Wisdoin 13 thingis of man, 
that ben worthi 
to be doon. Lire 

is seyn 1i3tli of hem that louen it, and it 47e © 

is foundun of hem that seken it. It bi-14 

fore ocupieth hem that coueyten it, that 

it schewe it silf the formere to hem. Hes 

that wakith bi li3t to it, schal not tranele ; 
forsothe he schal fynde it sittynge ny3 
hise 3atis. Therfor to thenke* on‘ wis-16 
dom¢ is parfit wit, and he that wakith for 
it, schal soone be sikir. For whi it goith 17 
aboute, and sekith men worthi to it; and 
in her‘ weies it schal schewe it silf gladli 
to hem, and in al purnyauncet it schal 
meete hem. For whi the bigynnyng of 18 
wisdom is the verieste coueytise of lern- 
yng. Therfor the bisynesse of lernyng is !9 
loue; and loue is the kepyng of lawis 
therof. Sotheli the kepyng of lawis is 
perfeccioun of vncorrupciount ; forsothe 20 
vneorrupcioun makith to be next to Gid. 
Therfor the coueitise of wisdom schal2i 
brynge to euerlastynge rewme. Therfor22 
if 3e, kyngis of the puple, deliten in seetis, 
and in kyngis 3erdis, ‘ether regaltcesé, 
loue 3e wisdom, that 3e regne with outen 
ende. Alle 3e, that ben souereyns to pu-23 
plis, lone’ the 1i3t of wisdom. Sotheli 24 
what is wisdom, and hou it is maad, Y 
schal telle; and Y schal not hide fro jou 
the sacramentis|| of God ; but fro the bi- 
gynnyng of birthe Y schal seke, and Y 
schal sette in to the li3t the kunnyng 
therof, and Y schal not passe treuthe. 
And Y schal not haue weye with enuye 25 
wexynge rotun; for siche a man schal not 
be parcener of wisdom. Forsothe the 26 
multitude of wise men is the helthe of 


8 Om. 4. 


Bor regalies1. 88 loueth 1. 4 tho,1. 


f wreorrup- 
cioun; that is, 
of goostly vn- 
corrupeioun, bi 
eschewing of 
synne. vncor- 
rapeioun ; is 
clennesse fro 
synne. Lire 
here. G 
§ what is wis- 
dom ; here the 
autour of this 
book spekith in 
the persoone of 
Salomon, that 
hadde double 
kunuyng ; the 
irste was 
knowing of 
creaturis of this 
world, that may 
he getun bi sek- 
ing of resoun, 
and bi trauele 
of studie, ne- 
theles in party, 
and vuperfitli, 
and with er- 
rouris, #8 Ari- 
stotle, fa- 
mousere among 
othere filoso- 
foris, erride in 
many thingis, 
as of the euer- 
lastingenesse of 
the world, with 
out bigynnyng, 
and of the 
noumbre of yn- 
durstondingis, 
and of the 
blis of tho, as 
it is opin, in 
xij. of Meta- 
fisikis ; but Sa- 
lomon hadde 
this wisdom, bi 
the 3ifte of God, 
perfitly, and 
sodeynly, and 
with out er- 
rours and he 
hadde also kun- 
nyng of pro- 
esie. Lire 
here. c. 
Il sacramentis ; 
that is, hise 
prinytees 
schewid to me. 
Lire here. 


96 


discipline bi myt wrdis, and it shal pro- 
fite to 30u. 


CAP. VII. 


} Lam forsothe and a deadli man, lic to 
men, and of ‘the erthi" kinde of hym 
that rathere is mad, and in the wombe 

eof the modir figured I am flesh. In 
time of ten monethis cruddid I am in to 
blod, of the sed of man, and of couena- 

3ble™ deliting of slep. And I born toc 
comun eir, and lic maner fel doun in to 
the mad erthe; and the firste vois, lic 
salle, I putte out weping. J was nurshid 
in swathing clothis, and in grete besy- 
snesses; no man forsothe of kingis other 
shath bigynnyng of birthe. Oon entre 
zis to alle to lif, and lijc issue. For that 

I desirede, and there is 3iue to me wit ; 
and I inwardli clepide, and there cam in’ 

sme the spirit of wisdam. And IJ putte it 
biforn to reumes, and setes; and rich- 
esses I seide no thing to ben in com- 

yparisoun of it, ne I comparisounede to 
it a precious ston ; for alle gold in com- 
parisoun of it is a litil grauel, and as 
clei siluer shal ben eymed in the si3te 
io of it. Ouer helthe and fairnesse I loonede 
it; and I purposide for lij3t to han it, 

11 for vnquenchable is the ly3t of it. For- 
sothe there camen to me alle goodis togi- 
dere with it; and vnnoumbrable honeste 

i2by the hondis of it. And I gladede in 
alle thingus ; for this wisdam wente befor 
me, and I kne3 not, for of alle goodis 
sit is moder. For withoute feynyng I 
lernede, and withoute enuye I comune ; 
usand the oneste of it I hidde not. For- 
sothe tresor it is withoute ende to men, 
the whiche who useden, parcener ben 
mad of the frenshipe of God, com- 
ismendid for the 3iftis” of discipline. To 
me forsothe God 3af to seyn of sentence, 
and to take bifore the wrthi thingis of 
these that ben 3iue to me; for he is duk 


WISDOM. 


VII. 1—15. 


the world; and a wijs kyng* is the sta- 
blischyng of the puple. 
techyng bi my wordis, and it schal profite 
to 30u. 

CAP. VII. 

Forsothe and Y' am a deedli man, lijk¥1 
men, and of erthli kynde of hym that 
was maad first, and in the wombe of the! 
modir Y was fourmed fleische. In thee 
time of ten monethis Y was cruddid togi- 
dere in blood, of the seed of man, and bi 
acordynge delit of sleep. And Y was3 
borun, and™ took comyn eir, and in lijk 
maner Y felle doun in to the erthe maad ; 
and Y wepynget sente out the firste vois, 
lijk alle men. Y was nurschid in wrap-4 
pyngis, and in greet bisynesses; for whi nos 
man of kyngis{ hadde othere bigynnyng 
of birthe. Therfor oon entryng to lijf ise 
to alle men, and lijk goyng out. Her-7 
for Y desiride, and wit was jouun to 
me; and Y inwardli clepide, and the spirit 
of wisdom cam into me. And Y settides 
wisdom bifore rewmes, and seetis; and Y 
seide, that richessis ben nou3t in com- 
parisoun therof, and Y comparisonede not9 
a preciouse stoon to it; forwhi al gold in 
comparisoun therof is a litil grauel, and 
siluer schal be arettid as cley in the 
si3t therof. Y louyde wisdom more thant 
helthe and fairnesse ; and Y purposide to 
haue it for li3t, for the li3t therof may 
not be quenchid. Forsothe alle goodis1 
camen togidere to me with it; and vn- 
noumbrable oneste 7s by the werkys 
therof. And Y was glad in alle thingis ;1 
for this wisdom 3ede bifore me, and Y 
knew not, for it is the modir of alle 
goodis. Which" wisdom Y lernyde with1 
out feynyng, and Y comyne® without en- 
uye; and Y hide not the oneste therof. 
For it is tresour with out noumbre tol 
men, aud thei, that vsiden that tresour, 
weren maad parceneris of Goddis fren- 
schip, and weren preisid for the 3iftis of 
kunnyng. Forsothe God 3af to me to seie1 


tmanye 4. “that lond z£ pr.m. 4 the couenable c pr.m. vto a. W 3ift 4. 


1 Om. ta prim. * lijk othere 1. 1 my 1. 


mandI1. " The which. ° comyne iti. 


* a wiys kyng; 
for as an heed 


Therfor take 3e 27 wel disposid 


3yueth wit, and 
stiring wel or- 
deyned to the 
membris, so a 
wiys king rul- 
ith hise sugetis 
to comyn good. 
Lire here. c 
+ weping ; for 
a knaue child 
borun seith in 
weilinge A! and 
a maide child 
seith E! as 
pleyninge of 
the trespas of 
Adam and of 
Ene, for which 
thei ben borun 
the sones and 
dou3tris of ven- 
iaunce, and of 
wrecchidnesse. 
Lire here. c. 

} of kyngis; for 
thei ben borun 
vnamy3ty in 
bodi, and vn- 
kunnynge in 
the sonle, and 
also othere 
men. 

oon entring ; as 
to noun power 
and vnkun- 
nyng. 

lijk goyng 

out; as to 
angwische and 
nakidnesse of 
alle temporal 
thingis. 

Herfor ; that 
is, for Y was 
borun al yne 
knnnynge. 

Y desiride ; 
the 3ifte of wis- 
om. and wit, 

0 that is, the 3ifte 
of wisdom and 
of vndurstond- 

ing. 
was 30uUn 3 

j the spirit of 
wisdom, that 
is, the Hooli 
Goost, that 3yu- 
eth wisdom. 

2 siluer schal 
be arettid as 
cley ; that is, 
alle temporal 
thingis that 

n comyn to 

3 goode men and 
yuele, and ben 
oftenere graunt- 
id to yuele 
men than to 

4 goode men, 
schulen be 
arettid of no 
valu, in come 
parisoun of 
wisdom, with 
charite, that 

5 is 3ouun to 

ode men 
onely. Lire 
here. c. 


VII. 16——27. 


of wisdam, and the mendere of wise men. 
i6In the hond forsothe of hym and wee, 
and oure wrdis, and alle wisdam, and 
diseiplyne of the kunnyng of werkes. 
17 He forsothe 3af to me verre kunnyng of 
these that ben, that I wite the disposi- 
cioun of the roundnesse of erthis, and 
18the vertues of elemens ; the begynnyng, 
and the” ende, and the myddil of tymes ; 
the chaungingus* of whilemelis, and the 
endingus of times; the chaungingus’ of 
19maneris, and deuyseouns? of times; the 
coursis of the 3eer, and the disposicioun 
20 of sterres; the kindis of bestes, and the 
wrathis of nojous bestis*; the strengthe 
of windis, and the tho3tis of men; the 
differences of 3unge trees, and vertues? of 
21rootis. And what euere thing be hid and 


vnpurueid, I lernede ; forsothe the craftus 


man of alle thingus tajte me bi wisdam. 
22 Forsothe ther is in it the spirit of vnder- 
stonding, hoeli, many fold, onli, sotile, 
manerli, faire spekende, mouable, vnde- 
foulid, certeyn, sweete, loouende good 
deede, that no thing forfendith® to do 
2s weel ; manli, benygne, stable, sikir, alle 
hauende vertue, alle thingus beholdende, 
‘and that taketh alle intelligible spiritis, 
24clene, sotile. Thanne® alle forsothe mou- 
able thingis nor mouable is wisdam ; 
forsothe it ateyneth ouer al, for his clen- 
asnesse. Forsothe the humour of the vertu 
of God it is, and the maner going out is 
a clene clernesse of the Almy3ti God ; 
geéand therfore no thing defoulid renneth 
in to it. Forsothe whitnesse it is of the 
euerlastende 1i3t, and a merour withoute 
wem of the maieste of God, and an 
a7ymage of the goodnesse of hym. And 
sithen it is oon, alle thingus it mai; and 
abidende stille in itself 4, alle thingus it® 
neweth, and bi naciouns to hoeli soules 


WISDOM. 


97 


of sentence*, and to bifore take worthi 
thingis of these thingis that ben 3ouun to 
me; for he is the ledere of wisdom, and 
amendere of wise men. For whi bothe1s 
we, and oure wordis, and al wisdom, and 
lernyng of kunnyng of werkis ben in his 
hond. Forsothe he 3af to me the veri17 
kunnyng of these thingis that ben, that 
Y knowe the disposicioun of the world, 
and the vertues of elementis; the bigyn-1s 
nyng, and the endyng, and the myddil of 
tymes; the chaungyngis of whilis, and 
the endyngis of tymes; the chaungyngis 
of maneres, and departyngis of tymes ; 
the coursis of the 3eer, and the disposi-19 


* of sentence ; 
that is, to speke , 
to the onour of 
God, and to 
the edifiyng of 
neizbore, bi 
grace 3onun of 
God to me. 
and amendere 
of wise men; in 
encreessing lise 
3iftis to hem, 
for her good 
vss. ben in his 
hond; for ne- 
ther we moun 
do, nether 
speke, nether 
thenke ony 
good, with out 
him. Lire 
here. C. 

+ the thou3ztis of 
men; mennus 
thou3tis moun 
be knowun 
certeynly onely 


ciouns of sterris; the kyndis of beestis, 20 bi Gaddis reue- 


and the wraththis of wielde beestis; the 
strengthe of wyndis, and the thou3tis of 
ment}; the differences of trees, and the 
vertues of rootis. And Y lernede what21 
ener thingis ben hid and vnpurueyed ; for 
whi wisdom, the crafti maker of alle 
thingis, tau3te me. For in that wisdom 22 
vumaad is the spirit of vndurstonding, 
hooli, many fold {, oon aloone, sutil, 
temperat, wijs, mouable, vndefoulid, cer- 
teyn, swete, louynge a good dede, which? 
spirit forbedith no thing to do wel; cur-23 
teis 1, benynge, stable, sikur, hauynge al 
vertu, biholdynge alle thingis, and which" 
takith alle spiritis able to vndurstonde, 
and fe zs clene, and sutil. For whi wis- 3 
dom is more mouable than alle mouable 
thingis ; forsothe it stretehith forth euery 
where, for his clennesse. For it is a25 
brethingy of Goddis vertu, and it is sum 
cleene comyngforth of the clerenesse of 
Almi3ti God; and therfor no defoulid 26 
thing renneth in to it. For it is bri3t- 
nesse of euerlastynge li3t, and 7 is a 
myrrour with out wem of Goddis ma- 
ieste, and 7¢ 7s an ymage of his goodnesse. 


Jacioun, but 
wise men 
knowen the 
thou3tis of 
othere men bi 
coniecting, 
ether suppos- 
ing of outer- 
mere signes ; 
and of this 
knowing spek- 
ith Salomon 
here. Lire 
here. C 
t hooly, many 
fold ; that is, 
in 3iftis. 
oon aloone ; 
in him silf ; 
therfor Poul 
seith, Oon in 
e same spirit 
worchith alle 
these thingis, 
and departith 
to ech man as 
he wole. sutil ; 
that is, persinge 
alle thingis bi 
his vertu. 
mouable : in 
worching, for 
he makith men 
mouable and 
swift to sue his 
good stiring. 
manly ether 
eurteis ; in 
hauynge com: 
passioun on 
oure defautis. 
benygne ; 
that is, wel 
louynge, in en- 
flawmynge vs 
to Gaddis loue. 
more mauable, 
ete. ; this mou- 


yng is seid hi licnesse, in as myche as Goddis wisdom strecchith forth to dispose alle the werkis of God, til to the leste thingis. Lire here. c. 
§ For it is a brething, ether vapour; vapour is a thing reysid vp, and cometh forth of water, and is of the kynde of water; so Goddis Sone, which 
is seid the wisdom of the Fadir, cometh forth of him, and is of the same kynde with him. briztnesse of euerlastinge li3t ; for Goddis Sone is ]i3t 
of li3t. @ myrour ; in which alle thingis schynen most clerely. and ymage of his yoodnesse ; for it is propir of Goddis Sune, that le is the ymage of 
the Fadir, for whi aungels and men ben seid to ben his ymage. Lire here. c. 


~QOm.cpr.m. *chaungynge an. Y chaungis a. 
¢ shone £ pr.m. 


bestis £ pr. m. © the vertues azGu. 


P the which 1. 
FOLe Hi. 


q manli, ether curteis c ct ceteri. it is mauli, ether curteis 1. 


4 bestis, and of helpely 


% the deyuysiouns 4H. 
e Om. 4. 


ce Om.cpr.m. 4 hymself azcu. 


r the which 1, 


98 


it berth ouer itself; the frendis of God 

2sand profetes it ordeyneth. No man for- 
sothe God looueth, but hym that dwellith 

29with wisdam. Forsothe this is fairere 
than the sunne, and ouer al disposicioun 
of sterres; to li3t comparysouned, it is 

30founde rathere. To it forsothe ny3t goth 
doun; wisdain forsothe malice ouercom- 
eth not. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Therfore it ateyneth from ende vnto 
ende strongli, and disposeth alle thingus 
2sweeteli. This I ioouede, and so3te it out 
fro my 3o0uthe; and I so3te to taken it a 
spouse to me, and loouere J am mad of 
3the foorme of it. It hauende the cum- 
panye of God, glorifieth the ientilnesse 
of it; but and of alle thingis® the Lord 
4loouede it. Forsothe the techeresse it is 
of the discipline of God, and‘ the cheser- 
sesse of the werkis of hym. And if rich- 
esses ben desirid in thef lif, what richere 
than wisdam, that wercheth alle thingis? 
elf forsothe wit wercheth, who of these 
that ben, more is crafti man than it? 
7And if ri3twisnesse a man looueth, the 
trauailes of this® han grete vertues ; so- 
brenesse forsothe and prudence it techeth, 
and ri3twisnesse, and vertue; than the 
whiche more profitable no thing is in lif 
sto men", And if multitude of kunnyng 
desireth a man, it knowith the passid 
thingus, and of the to comen it eymeth ; 
it knowith the felnesse' of wrdis, and the 
soilingis off argumentis ; the toknes and 
wndris it knowith, er thei ben don; and 
the chaunsis of tymes and of worldis. 
9 Thanne I purposide this to bringe to me, 
to festeye* with me; witende for with me 
it shal comune of goodis, and ther shal 
be togidere speche of thenking, and of 
lomyn ano3e. I haue for this to cumpa- 
nyes clernesse, and wrshipe anent the 
ielderes ; 31ng and sharp I shal be founde 
in dom, and in the si3te of my3ti men 


© Om.c prem. £Om. 4. Om. c prim. 
festene a. 
sOm.1. 8 Om. 1. 


WISDOM. 


Shym a. 


* spousse c.  chesister 1. techeresse s sup. ras. chesere Vv. 
*alle a prm. Y felnesse cro. falsnessis nEruy. falsnesse mv. % thei n. Om. co. 


VII. 28—VIII. 11. 


And whanne it is oon, it may alle thingis; 27 


and it dwellith in it silf, and renulith alle 
thingis, and bi-naciouns it berith ouer it 
silf in to hooli soulis ; it makith the frendis 
of God* and profetis. 
no man, no’ but hym that dwellith with 


For God loueth 28 * frendis of 


God ; bi feith 
formed with 


5 5 ‘ : x . charite. 
wisdom. Forwhi this wisdom is fairere 29 profetis ; bi 


than the sunne, and is aboue al the* dis- 
posicioun of sterris; wisdom comparisound 
to li;t, is foundun the formere. 
ni3t cometh aftir that 1i3t; but wysdom 

ouercometh malice. TTherfor wisdom! 
stretchith forth fro the ende til to the 

ende strongli, and disposith alle thingis 

swetly. 

CAP. VIII. 

I louede this wisdom maad, and Y2 
sou3te it out fro my 3ongthe; and Y sou3te 
to take it a spousesse't to me, and Y am 
maad a louyere of the fairnesse therof. 
He that hath the felouschip{ of God, glo-3 
rifieth the gentilnesse therof; but also 
the Lord of alle thingis louede it. For it 
is the techeresse of the lernyng of God, 
and cheseresse" of hise werkis. And ifs 
richessis ben coueitid in lijf, what is 
richere than wisdom, that worchith alle 
thingis? Sotheli if wit worchith, who is6 
a crafti maker more than wisdom, of these 
thingis that ben? And if a man loueth7 
ri3tfulnesse, the trauels of this e«isdom 
han grete vertues; for it techith sobre- 
nesse§, and prudence, and ri3tfulnesse, and 
vertu; and no thing is profitablere than 
these in lijf to men. And if a man de-3 
sirith multitudeY of kunnyng, wisdom 
knowith thingis passid, and gessith of* 
thingis to comynge; it kan the felnessisY 
of wordis, and asoilyngis of argumentis ; 
it kan signes and schewyngis of thingis to 
comynge, bifore that tho* ben maad ; and 
the bifallyngis of tymes and* of worldus. 
Therfor Y purposide to brynge to me thiso 
wisdom, to lyue togidere; witynge that it 
schal comyne with me of goodis, and 
spekyng|| togidere of my thou3t, and of 


hme a. i felnesses £. 


Kk ete E pr.m. € pr.m. 


w the multitude r. 


knowing aboue 
kynde. 

that dwellith 
with wisdom 3 


Forwhi 30 that is, no but 
one 


e@ be in cha- 
rite, for thanne 
God dwellith 
with him, and 
he with God. 
the formere s 
this lettre sem- 
eth to speke of 
wisdom vn- 
maad, without 
bigynnyng and 
ende; wisdom 
maad is formere 
thau list bi 
dignete, not bi 
during. Lire 
here. c. 

+ @ spousse ; 
that is, to 
cleue in the 
thou3tis therof, 
with out de- 
parting. Lire 
here. c. 

t felouschip ; 
bi charite. 
glorifieth ; that 
is, knoulech- 
ith and preisith 
it gloriouse. 
Lire here. c. 


§ sobrenesse ; 
that is, tem- 
peraunce. 
vertu; that 
is, goostly 
strengthe. 
Lire here. c. 


ll spekinge, 
etc. ; for siche 
thou3tis ben 
the wordis of 
soule. 


VIII. 12—IX. 2. 


merueilous I shal be, and the faces of 
12 princes shul merueilen me. Thei shul 
sustene me, beende stille, and me spek- 
ende, beholden; and me sermounende 
manye thingis, hondis to ther mouth thei 
i3shul putte. Ferthermor J haue bi this 
vndeadlynesse; and euere lastende mynde 
to them, that after me ben to come, I 
14shal lefe. I shal dispose puples; and 
isnaciouns to me shul ben soget. Ferful 
kingus herende me shul dreden ; and in 
multitude good I shal be seen, and in 
1s bataile stronge. Entrende in to myn 
hous, I shal reste with it; forsothe the 
conuersacioun of it hath not bitternesse, 
ne noje the! with lyuyng of it, but 
17 gladnesse and io3e. These thingus thenk- 
ende anent me, and togidere membrende 
in myn herte; for vndeadli is wisdam in 
isthenking, and in the frenshipe of it good 
delitende; and in the werkus of the hondis 
of it honeste with oute failing, and in the 
strif of the speche of it wisdam; and 
‘gret openyng in comunycacioun™ of" the" 
wrdis of it; I wente aboute, sechende 
19that to me it I shulde take. A child 
forsothe I was witti, and bi lot hauende 
20a good soule. And whan I was more 
21 good, I cain to a bodi vndefoulid. And as 
J wiste, for other wise I mai not ben con- 
tenent®, but God 3eue, and that selue was 
wisdam, to knowen of whom was that 
3ifte ; I wente to the Lord, and pre3ede” 
hym, and seide, of alle the entrailis of 
myn herte. 


CAP. IX. 


1 God of my? fadris, and Lord of mercy, 
that madest alle thingus with thid wrd, 
gand with thi wisdam ordeynedest man, 
that’ he shulde lordshepen of creature’, 


I thou «4 sec. m. 
2 Om. cpr.m. Om, 4. 


© conteyned «4. 
that 4. in that ou. 


5 the creature c pr. m. 
4 took 1. 


beomyngeg. ¢ Om. c. 


h that 1. 


WISDOM. 


m greet openynge and communycacioun 4. 
00 J prejede secu. 


© contynent, ether chast c et celeri. 


22 


myn anoi schal be. For this wisdom Y 10 
schal haue clerenesse at cumpenyes, and 
onour at eldre men; Y schal be foundunu 
3ong and scharp in doom, and in the si3t 
of my3ti men Y schal be wondurful, and 
the faces of princes schulen worschipe me. 
Thei schulen abide me, beynge stille, and 12 
thei schulen biholde me, spekynge ; and 
the while I speke many thingis, thei schu- 
len sette hondis* on her mouth. Ferther- 13 
more bi this wzsdom Y schal haue vnded- 
lynesse ; and Y schal leeue euerlastynge 
mynde to hem, that schulen come aftir 
me. I schal dispose puplis; and naciouns 14 
schulen be suget to me. Hidouse kyngis 15 
herynge me schulen drede; and in mul- 
titude Y schal be seyn good, and strong 
in batel. Y schal entre in to myn housf, 16 
and Y schal reste with wisdom; for the 
conuersacioun t therof hath no bitternesse, 
and the dwellynge togidere therof hath 
noon anoye, but gladnesse and _ ioye. 
Y thon3te these thingis at me, and Y re-17 
membride in myn herte ; 
is vndeedli in thou3t, and good delityng 1s 
7s in the frendschipe therof; and onestce 
without defaute zs in the werkis of hondis 
therof; and wisdom zs in the strijf of 
speche therof; and greet clerenesse 7s in 
the comyning> of wordis therof; Y 3ede 
aboute, sekinge to take wisdom to me. 
Forsothe Y was a witti child, and Y¢ gat? 19 
a good soule. And whanne Y was more 20 
good, Y cam to a bodi vndefoulid. And 21 
as Y knew, that ellis Y mai not be chaste®, 
no butf God 3yue’, and this same thing 
was wisdom, to wite whos this 3ifte was 3 
Y 3ede to the Lord, and Y bisou3te hym, 
and Y seide, of alle myn entralis§. 


CAP. IX. 


God of my fadris||, and Lord of merci, 1 
that madist alle thingis bi thi word, and 2 
ordeynedist man bi thi wisdom, that he 
schulde be lord of creature, which ® is 


noblenesse in the chaungyng E pr.m. 
Poure £ pr.m. @Om. 4. © in that 


fbutif1. 8 3yue i 1. 


o 2 


anoie ; to he 
excludid, for 
siche thoustis 
excluden al 
anoye. Lire 
here. C. 


* sette hondis, 
ete. ; that is, 
ou myche ever 
Y drawe along 
a sermoun, thei 
schulen herkne 
with reverence. 
Lire here. c. 
+ myn hous ; 
that is, con- 
sience. Lire 
here. Cc. 
{ conuersa- 
cioun ; that is, 
thon3t, that 
cometh forth 
of vndurstond- 
ing, and cns- 
tom of wisdom. 
werkis of 
hondis ; that 
is, in werkis 
comynge forth 
of wisdom. 
¥ gat a good 
soule ; bi clen- 
nesse of loue. 
more good 3 
that is, encress- 
inge in vertues. 
a bodi vnde- 


forwhi wisdom fou/id ;_ that is, 


kept bi con- 
tynence of ma- 
trimonye. Lire 
here. c. 

§ myn en- 
trailis ; that 
is, of al myn 
vndirstonding 
and loue. Lire 
here. C. 

ll God of my 
fadris; which 
thou chesidist 
mercifuly, as 
Abraham, 
Isaac, and Ja- 
cob, and spe- 
cialy Danyth, 
my fadir, whom 
thou chesidist 
to the rewme. 
Lord of mer- 
si; that hast 
for3oue to my 
fadir the synne 
of the deth [of] 
Vrie. that he 
schulde be 

lord ; for if 
man hadde 
stondo in the 
staat of kynde 
maad, he 
schnide haue 
had ful lord- 
schip on crea- 
turis lowere 
than him silf. 


100 


sthat of thee is mad, that he dispose 
the roundnesse of londis in equyte and 
ri3twisnesse, and in rijt reuling of herte 
she deme dom; 3if to me wisdam, the 
nee3h stondere of thi setis; and wile 
sthou not me repreuen of thi childer. For 
Iam thi seruaunt, and the sone of thin 
hand woman; a feble man, and of litil 
time, and lasse to the vndirstonding of 
e6dom and of lawes. And if any man shul 
ben ful endid of the sonus of men, if fro 
hym flee wisdam, in to no3t he shal be 
zcountid. Thou forsothe chose me king 
to thi puple, and domysman of thi sonus 
sand do3tris; and thou seidist, me to 
bilden a temple in thin holi hil, and in 
the cite of thi dwelling an auter; the 
licnesse of thin holi tabernacle, that thou 
9 greithedist fro the begynnyng. And with 
thee thi wisdam, that kne3 thi werkis, 
the whiche and was at thanne, whan the 
roundnesse of erthis thou shuldist make, 
and he wist that, that was plesaunt to 
‘thin ejen‘, and that, that is ri3t in thin 
10hestis. Send fro thin holi heuenes it, 
and fro the sete of thi mychilnesse, that 
with me it be, and with me trauaile ; 
and I wite what be aloouwid anent thee. 
11 Forsothe it wot alle thingus, and vndir- 
standith ; and shal leden me forth in my 
werkes sobrely", and kepen me in his 
12power. And my werkys shul ben aloou- 
wid, and IY shal disposen thi puple ri3t- 
wisly, and I shal ben wrthi the setes of 
ismy fader. Who forsothe of men shal 
moun wite the counseil of God ? or who 
i4shal moun thenke, what God wile? The 
tho3tis forsothe of deadli men dredful, 
isand vncerteyn oure purueauncis”. For- 
sothe the body that is corumpid, gree- 
ueth the soule; and ertheli indwelling 
presseth doun the wit, manye thingus 
iéthenkende. And of hard wee eymen, 
that ben in the erthe; and that in ferr 
178i3te ben, we finden with trauaile. That 
forsothe in henenus ben, who shal en- 


tthe ejen of hym x pr.m. %Om. acu. ¥ Om. An. 


WISDOM. 


IX. 3—-17. 


maad of thee, that he dispose the world: 
in equite and ri3tfulnesse, and deme doom 
in ri3t reulyng of herte; 3yue thou to me4 
wisdom, that stondith ny3 thi seetis; and 
nyle thou repreue me fro thi children. 
For Y am thi seruaunt, and the sone ofs 
thin hand mayde; Y am a sijk man, and 
of litil tyme, and Jesse* to the vndur- 
stondyng of doom and of lawis. And ife 
ony man is perfit among the sones of men, 
if thi wisdom fleeth awei fro hym, he 
schal be rikenyd in to nou3t. Forsothe7 
thou hast chose ne kyng to thi puple, 
and a iuge of thi sones and dou3tris; ands 
thou seidist, that Y schulde bilde a tem- 
ple in thin holi hil, and an auter in the 
citee of thi dwellyng place; the licnesse 
of thin hooli tabernacle, which thou madist 
redi at the bigynnyngt. And thi wisdom9 
is with thee, that knowith thi werkis, 
whichi also was present thanne, whanne 
thou madist the world, and wiste what 
was plesaunt to thin ijen, and what was 
dressid in thi comaundementis. 
thou that zisdom fro thin hooli heuenes, 
and fro the seete of thi greetnesse, that it 
be with me, and trauele with me; and that 
Y wyte what is acceptable anentis thee. 


Forwhi thilke wisdom knowith and vndir-11 


stondith alle thingis ; and it schal lede me 
forth in my werkis sobrely, and it schal 
kepe me in his power. 
schulen be acceptable, and Y schal] dispose 
thi puple iustli, and Y schal be: worthi of 


the seetis of my fadir. For who of men is 


mai knowe the counsel of Godt? ether 


who mai thenke, what wole God? For14 


whi the thou3tis of deedli men ben dreed- 
ful, and owre purnyaunces ben vncerteyn. 


Sende 10 


And my werkis 12 


in equite ; in 
disposinge crea- 
turis to that, 
that tho ben 
maad. of thi 
seetiss Salomon 
spekith of God, 
as of an hizeste 
iuge; aboute 
whom stonden 
wise men, and 
fro whom wis- 
dom is teld 
forth to lowere 
iugis; and in 
this maner Sa- 
lomon, as a 
lowere iuge, 
axith, that God 
3yue wisdom 
to him. Lire 
here. C. 

* and lesse 3 
that is, vnsuf- 
ficient. Live 
here. c. 


+ at the begyn- 
nyng ; of the 
goyng out of 
Egipt. Lire 
here. C. 


t may knowe 
the councel of 
God ; as if he 
seye, noon, no 
but bi wisdom 
3ouun of God 
to him. Lire 


For whi the bodi that is corrupt, greueth 15 “ere. c. 


the soule; and ertheli dwellyng pressith 


doun the wit, thenkynge many thingis. 


§ But who schal 


And of hard we gessen tho thingis, that 16 serche; as if he 


hen in erthe; and we fynden with trauel 


seie, no man, 
no but bi wis- 


tho thingis, that ben in biholdyng. But 173 


who schal serche) tho thingis, that ben in 


w purueaunce 4. 


i the which I. 


ee. Lire here. 
Ce : 


IX. 18—X. 10. 


serche ? Thi wit forsothe who shal 
knowe, but if thou shul 3yue wisdam, 
and sende thin Holi Spirit fro he3est 
18thingus? And soY amendid ben the pathis 
of hem, that ben in erthis?, and that to* 
19thee pleseden®, men lerneden. For whi 
bi wisdam thei ben helid, who so euer 
pleseden® to thee, Lord, fro the bygyn- 
nyng. 
CAP Xx. 
1 This hym, that first is foormed of God, 
thee fader of the roundnesse of erthis, 
2whan alone he was foormed, kepte. And 
ladde hym out fro his gilte, and bro3te 
hym out of the slym of erthe’, and 3af 
to hym vertue of hauynge alle thingus. 
3Fro this as the vnrijtwise wente awei in 
his wrathe, bi the’ wrathe of mansla3- 
4ter pershede fraternyte. For the whiche 
whan water shulde don awei the erthe, 
‘he helede eftsoone bi wisdam; bi the dis- 
pisable® tree gouernende the 1i3twis man. 
5 This and in‘ the consenting of pride, whan 
naciouns rereden hemself, knew the ri3t- 
wis, and kepte withoute blame to God; 
cand in& the sones gret" merci kepte. This 
the ri3twis fro the pershende vnpitous 
men deliuerede fleende, fijr descendende 
zin to the regioun of fiue citees. To the 
whiche, in to the! witnessing of shreude- 
nesse, the desert erthe is knowen ful of 
smoking, and in certeyn time the trees 
hauende frutes ; and of the mysbeleeued 
soule the mynde stondende is the foorm- 
syng of salt. Forsothe passende biside 
wisdam, not onli in that ben slyden, that 
thei vnknowen gode thingis, but and of 
ther vnwisdam thei han laft to men 
mynde, that in tho) thingus, that thei 
9synneden, thei my3ten not lurken. Wis- 
dam forsothe them, that it kepen, al aboute 
10fro sorewes shal delyuere. This forsothe 
the ferr fugitif, or fleynge* riz3twis fro 
the! wrathe of the brother, ladde awei bi 


WISDOM. 


101 


heuenes? But who schal knowe thi wit, 
‘no but* thou 3yue wisdom, and sende 


thin Hooli Spirit fro hijeste thingis? Andis . 


if the pathis* of hem, that ben in londis, 
ben amendid, and if men han lernyd tho 


thingis, that plesen thee. For whi, Lord, 19 


whiche ener plesiden thee fro the bigyn- 
nyng, weren maad hool bi wisdom. 


CAP. X. 


This wisdom ‘of God! kepte hym, that 
was formed first of God, the fadir of the 
worldt, whanne he aloone was maad of 
nou3t. And ‘this wisdom™ ledde hym oute 
of his trespas, and ledde hym out of the 
sliym of erthe", and 3af to hym vertu to 
holde togider alle thingist. As the vn-3 
just man in his ire 3ede awei fro this 
wisdom, brotherhed perischide bi° the ire 
of manquellyng. For which thing whamne 4 
watir? dide awei the erthe§, wisdom heel- 
ide eft ; gouernynge a4 iust man bi a dis- 
pisable tre. This wesdom also in the con-5 
sent of pride, whanne naciouns hadden 
reisid hem silf, knew|| a iust man, and 
kept with out playnt to God; and this wis- 
dom kepte strong merci in sones. ‘Thise 
wisdom deliuerede a iust man fleynge fro 
wickid men perischinge, whanne fier cam 
doun in to the place of fyue cytees. For7 
whiche’ wickid’ men the lond smokynge 
is maad deseert, in to witnessyng of wei- 
wardnesse{], and trees hauynge fruytis in 
vneerteyn tyme; and the inynde of an 
vnbileueful soule stondynge an ymage of 
salt. For whi men passynge wisdom, nots 
oneli fellen’s in this, that thei knewen not 
goodis, but also thei leften to men the 
mynde of her vnwisdom, that in these 
synnes, whiche thei diden, thei mi3ten not 
be hid. Forsothe wisdom delyuerede hem 9 


* if the pathis; 
vndurstonde 
thou, no man 
may wite, no 
but bi thi wis- 
dom and spirit 
schewinge. 
Lire here. ¢. 


+ of the world 
that is, of alle 
men. Lire 
here. c. 
t alle thingis ; 
for it 3af to him 
the lordschip 
oner alle lowere 
thingis. Lire 
here. C. 
§ the erthe ; 
that is, alle 
men dwellinge 
in erthe. c. 
|| Knew, ete. ; 
that is, Ahra- 
ham, whom it 
made to he 
knowun bi ap- 
preuyng. 
a@iust man 3 
that is, Loth. 
Lire here. c. 
q witnessing 
of weiward- 
nesse ; that is, 
of synne a3enus 
kynde. 
in vneerteyn 
tyme ; that is, 
out of comyn 
cours of kynde, 
in to witness- 
ing, that the 
dwelleris of 
that lond syn- 
neden ajenus 
kynde. 
vnbileueful 
soule, ete. 3 
that is, of 
Lothis wiyf, 
that bileuyde 
not to the aun- 
gel, comaund- 
inge that sche 
schulde not: 
loke bihynde 
hir bak. Lire 
here. Cc. 
** that kepen 
it; bi hooly 
yng and de- 


fro sorewis, that kepen it**. Sotheli this lonanre preyer. 


wisdom \edde forth a iust man bi ri3tful 
weies, that fledde fro the ire of his bro- 


Y 3if e prem. z the erthis arn. the erth c. a Om. 4. b plesen arGH. c plese £ prem. 
c¢Om.cpr.m. ‘the erthe azcu. 4 Om.c prim. ¢disseyable 4. fOm. ac. Om.c. & Om. 4. 
hoof gret acu. !Om.a4. jthee. *Om.ceteprm 1Om a. 

kbutifs. 10m.1% ™itr, “theerthes. ©thorews. Pthewatirs. ‘ther. 44 And itr. 
‘the whiche 1, * Om. 1. 88 felden 1 pass. 


ledde forth « 
dust man ; that 
is, Jacob, that 
was iust, and 
sede into Me- 
sopotamy, and 
fledde the ire 
of Isau, his 
brother. 


102 


ri3t weies; and shewede to hym the king- 
dam of God, and 3af to hym the kun- 
nyug of seyntis; it honestede hym in 
trauailes, and fulfilde the trauailes of 
ilhym. In the gile of the men comende 
aboute to hym, it was ny3, and honest 
1zmade hym. It kepte hym fro enemys, 
and fro desceyueres defendide hym ; and 
a strong strif it 3af to hym, that he 
shulde ouercome, and wite, for of alle 
i3sthingis” the my3tiere is wisdam. This 
this olde rijtwis man forsoc not, but fro 
synneres deliuerede hym; and it descend- 
“ide with hym in to the dich; and in 
bondis forsoc not hym, to the time that 
it shulde bringe to hym the dignete of 
the reume, and my3t a3en hem that hym® 
thresteden doun; and lieres he shewide, 
that defouleden hym, and he 3af to hym 
yseuere lastende clernesse. ‘This the ri3t- 
wis puple, and hoely withoute blame, 
delyuerede fro naciouns, that it" opress- 
ieden®. It entride in to the soule of the 
seruaunt of God, and stod a3en grisful 
17 kingus, in grete wndris and signes. And 
it 3eeld to the” ri3twis men the meede of 
ther? trauailes, and bro3te thein thennes 
in a merueylous weie; and it was to 
them in the coueryng of the day, and in 
islizt of sterres bi the ny3t. And he bar 
them ouer thur3 the rede se; and he 
ouercariede them thur3 ful myche water. 
19 The enemys forsothe of hem he drench- 
ide in the se; and fro the? depnesse4 of 
helle he ladde them out. Therfore ri3t- 
wis men token awei the spoiles of vnpi- 
20 tous men ; and hee3li sungen, Lord, thin 
holi name, and thin hond ouercomere thei 
21 preiseden togidere. For wisdam openede 
the mouth of doumbe men, and the 


him. @ stronge batel to him 3 wrastlinge with the aungel. overcome ; Esau, his aduersarie. Lire here. c. 
whanne hise bretheren seelden to men of Ismael. a diche ; that is, to the prisoun of the king of Egipt. Lire here. c. 


puttinge auowtrie to him. Lire here. c. 


WISDOM. 


X. 1i-—21. 


ther; and it schewide to hym the rewme 
of God, and 3af to hym the kunnyng of 
seyntis; it made hym onest in trauels, 
and fillidet hise trauelis. It helpide. 
hym in the fraude of disseyueris, and 
made hym onest. It kepte hym fro. 
enemyes, and defendide hym fro dis- 
seyueris; and it 3af to him a strong ba- 
tel, that he shulde ouercome, and wite, 
that wisdom is the my3tieste of alle. This1 
wisdom forsook not a" iust man seeld*, 
but delynerede hym fro synneris; and it1 
3ede doun with hym.in to a diche; and 
it forsook not hym in boondis, til it 
bron3te to hym the ceptre’ of the rewme, 
and power a3ens hem that oppressiden 
hym; and it schewide hem lieris, that 
defouliden hym}, and it 3af to hym euer- 
lastynge clerenesse. This wisdom dely-1 
uerede a iust puple, and hooli{ without 
pleynt, fro naciouns that oppressiden it. 
Wisdom’ entride in to the soule of Goddis1 
sernaunt, and he stood ajens hidouse 
kyngis, in grete wondris and myraclis. 
And it 3eldide to iust men the meede of1 
her trauelis, and ledde hem forth in a 
wondurful weie; and it was to hem in 
hilyng of the dai, and in the li3t of sterris 
bi ny3t. And it ‘ledde ouer* hem thoron31 
the reede see; and bar’ hem ouer thoru3 
ful myche watir. But it drenchide doun) 
the enemyes of hem in to the see; and 
Jedde hem out fro the depthe of hellis§. 
Therfor iust men taken awei the spuylis 


the rewme of 

God ; whanne 
he siz the Jad- 
dre, whos hi3- 
nesse tonchide 

1 henene, and 
the Lord fast- 
ned to the Jad- 
dre, in xxviij. 

2c°. of Genesis, 
for thanne he 
hadde reuela- 
cioun of he- 
uenly Jerusa- 
lem. 
the kunnyng 

3 of seyntis ; that 
is, knowing of 
hooly aungels, 
whiche he si3, 

4 stiynge and 
goinge doun hi 
that Jaddre. 
made hym 
onest in tra- 
uels 3 that is, 
made hym 
riche and no- 
ble, for hise 
trauelis, in 
kepinge the 
scheep of La- 

5 ban. 
fillide hise 
trauels ; 
whanne hi 
God defend- 

6 inge hym, he 
gede awey fro 
Mesopotamye, 
with hise 
wyues, ebil- 
dren, and rich- 

7 essis. 
helpide hym; 
in multipliynge 
flockis, that 
ou3ten come in 
to the meede of 
Jacob bi coue- 

8 naunt. 

of disseyueris; 

that is, of 

Laban and of 

hise sones, 

that ymagyn- 
eden to dis- 
seyne him, in 
chaunginge 
ofte his meed. 


9 


sas : de hi 
of wickid men; and, Lord, thei magne-20 nest; in 


fieden in song thin hooli name, and preys- 


onest ; in mak- 
inge riche, in 
temporal and 


eden togidere thin hond onercomer. For-21 go0stly rich- 


whi wisdom openyde the mouth of doumbe 
men, and made the tungis of 3onge chil- 
dren not spekynge to be wise. He dress-1} 


essis. 

Sro enemyes; 
that is, Laban 
and bise sones, 
pursuynge Ja- 
cob, goynge 
awey to robbe 


* a iust man secid ; that is, Joseph, 
+ that defouliden him ; in 
t a iust puple and hooly; that is, the puple of Israel worschipinge God. fro naciouns; of Egipcians, 


that oppressiden it ouer greuously. Goddis wisdom entrede in to the seule of Goddis seruaunt ; that is, Moises. a3enus hidouse kyngis ; that is, Farao 

and hise princes. the meede of her trauelis ; for bi Goddis comaundement the sones of Israel goynge awey spuyliden Egipt, and axiden, bi borewing 

of neisboris, vessels of gold and of siluer, in xij. c°. of Exodi ; and this in quyting of trauels, in whiche the men of Egipt bigiliden hem vniustly. Lire 

ay a re) depthe of hellis ; that is, fro the botme of the see. the spuylis, etc. ; that is, of Egipciens, drenchid, and cast up to the brinke of 
. Lire here.c, 


m Om. ¢ prim, 


: n Om. c pr. m. 
thin. PP Om. 4, 


dheigte £ pr.m. c pr. m. 


t fulfillide 1 4 the 1. 
ouer CEFGUKMNPQRSUVxXyYac. translatide 1. 


on hym AEGH. 


V ceptre, ether the kyngis 3erde c et ceteri, 
Yat bar 1. 


© ouer presside 4GH. 


00 Om. c pr.m. P the a. 


witii1. * translatid, ether ledde 


XI. 1-15. 


tunges of vnspekende childer made faire 
1spekende. It ri3t reulede the werkis of 
hem, in the hondus of the holi profete. 


CAP. XI. 


2  Weie thei maden bi desertis, that ben 
not dwellid in; and in desert’ places thei 
3maden litil'T cotes. Thei stoden a3en ene- 
mys, and of the enemys thei venieden 
4hemself. Thei thristeden, and inwardli 
clepeden thee ; and ther is 3oue to them 
water of the hejest ston, and reste of 
sthrist of the harde ston. Bi tho thingis 
forsothe that the enemys of hem suf- 
freden peynes, fro the* defauting of ther 
drine, and whan the sones of Irael had- 
éden plente, gladeden; bi these thingus, 
whan to them hadden failid, wel with 
7them is don. Forwhi forsothe for the 
welle of thet euerlastende flod, mamys 
sblod thou 3eue to vnri3twis men. The 
whiche whan thei weren mynusht, in the 
ouerleding of the slayne litle childer, thou 
jeue to them abundende water in maner 
9not hopid ; shewende bi the thrist, that 
thanne was, hou thine thou shuldest en- 
hatncen, and the aduersaries of hem slen. 
i0 Whan forsothe thei weren temptid, for- 
sothe and with mercy disciplyne thei 
token; thei wisten, hou with wrathe vn- 
pitous" men demed, tormentis shulden 
isuffre. These forsothe as a fader warn- 
ende, thou prouedest; hem forsothe as an 
hard king askende, thou condempnedist. 
12 Forsothe the absent men and the present 
13lic maner weren tormentid. Forsothe 
double no3e hadde taken hem, and weil- 
ing with the mynde of the passid thingis. 
\ Whan forsothe thei herden, bi ther tor- 
mentis wel with them to ben do, thei 
membreden the Lord, merueilende in to 
isthe ende of the going out. Whom for- 
sothe in a shreude putting out thei 
scorneden cast aferr, in’ to the ende of 
that that fel, merueileden”; not lic maner 


tthe desert au. 'Om.cpr.m * Om. 4. 


w thei inerueileden £ pr. m. 


WISDOM. 


103 


ide the werkis of hem, in the hondis of an 
hooli profete. 


CAP. XI. 


Thei maden iourney bi desertis, that2 
weren not enhabitid; and thei maden litle 
housis? in desert places. Thei stoden3 
a3ens kyngis, aud vengiden hem of ene- 
myes. Thei thirstiden, and thei inwardli4 
clepiden thee; and watir of a ful hi3 stoon 
was 3outin to hem, and reste of thirst was 
30uun to hem of an hard stoon. For bis 
whiche thingis the enemyes of hem suf- 
friden peynes, for defaute of her drink, 
and the sones of Israel weren glad, 
whanne thei hadden plentee; bi theses 
thingis, whanne these* failiden to tho? 
enemyes, it was don wel with hem*. For? * with hem; 
sotheli for the welle of euerlastynge flood, He eaiiof 
thou 3auest mannus blood to vninst men. ae 
And whanne thei weren maad lesse, in thes 
leding awei of 3onge children slayn, thou 
3auest sudeynli plenteuouse watir to hem; 
and schewidist bi the thirst, that waso 
thanne, hou thou woldist enhaunse thi 
seruauntis, and woldist sle the aduersa- 
ries of hem. For whanne thei weren1o 
asaied, sotheli thei token chastisyng with 
merci; thei wisten, hou wickid men demed 
with ire, schulden suffre turmentis. So-11 
theli thou amonestynge® as a fadir, pre- 
uedistt} these men; but thou as an hard + preuedist, 
kyng axynge condempnedist hem. Korie. 
whi men absent and men present weren ae 
turmentid in lijk maner. For whi double i3i¢s tat is, 
anoye hadde take hem, and weilyng with ie erat in 
the mynde of thingis passid. Sotheliu 
whanne thei herden,:that it was don wel 
with hem silf bi her turmentis, thei bi- 
thou3ten on the Lord, and wondriden on 
the ende of the out goyng. For at thes 
ende of the bifallyng, thei worschipiden 
him, whom thei scorneden cast out in 
schrewid puttyng forth; and thou didist 


t Om. acu, 4 the vnpitous azn. Vand in 4. 


z housis, ether hulkis cerFGHKMN?QRSUVxyYa. housis, or cotis x sec.m. marg. housis, either helkis ¢. 


athisc. » thilke 1. 


e monestynge CGUKMQSUVXae. 


104 


isto rijtwis men doende. For vnwis* tho3tis 
forsotheY the wickidnessis? of hem, that 
siunme errende heriedeu doumbe edderes, 
aud ouer veyue bestes, thou sentist in to 
them a multitude of doumbe bestes, in to 
ijveniaunce; that thei shulden witen, for* 
bi tho thingus that a man synneth, bi tho 
isthingus also he shal be tormentid. For- 
sothe not inpossible was thin almy3ti 
hond, that made the roundnesse of erthis 
of mater viseen, to senden in to them a 
19 multitude of beres, or hardi leouns, or of 
newe kinde vnknowen® bestes, and ful of 
wrathe, or spittende brething of fires, or 
bringende forth smel of smoke, or put- 
2otende out grisful sparkes fro e3en; of 
whiche not onli the hurting’ hadde mou3t 
destro3ed them, but and the looking bi 
21 drede slen. But and withoute these with 
© spirit thei my3ten ben slayn, suffrid 
perseeucioun of ther deedis self, and 
scatered bi the spirit of hys vertue. But 
and alle thingus in mesure, and noum- 
22bre, and peis thou disposedist ; forsothe 
myche to moun, to thee alone ouer was 
euermore ; and to the vertue of thin arm 
23who shal ajenstonde? For as a poynt 
of a balaunce, so is befor thee the round- 
uesse of erthis; and as a drope of mo- 
rutid dew, that goth doun in to the 
g+erthe. And thou hast merci of alle, for 
alle thingus thou maist; and thou for- 
berist the synnes of men, for penaunce. 
25 Forsothe thou loouest alle thingus that 
ben, and no thing thou hatedest of hem, 
that thou madist; ne forsothe hatende any 
26thing thou ordeynedest, or madist. Hou 
forsothe my3te any thing abide stille, but 
thou haddest wold? or that of thee were 
27 not clepid, shulde ben kept? Thou sparist 
forsothe to alle; for thine thei ben, Lord, 
that loouest soulis. 


* the vnwis £ pr. m. 
> hurtling 4. 


Y¥Om. a. 


¢ Sothly 1. © these same 1. fof rE. 
berist x sec. m. marg. Vbutifr. ™ thous. 


WISDOM. 


2 wickidnes a. 


& the whiche 1. 


XI. 16—27. 


not in lijk maner to iust men. Forsothe416 
for vnwise thou3tis the wickidnessis of 
hem weren punyschid ; for summen err- 
ynge worschipiden doumbe serpentis, and 
superflu beestis, thou sentist in to hem 
a multitude of doumbe beestis, in to ven- 
iaunce; that thei schulden wite, that bi17 
what thingis a man synneth, he is tur- 
mentid also bi these® thingis. For whits 
thin hond almy3ti, that made the world 
of mater vnseyn, was not vnmy3ti to sende 
in to hem a multitude of beeris, ether 
hardi liouns, ether beestis of newe kynde 19 
ful of ire, and vnknowun beestis, ether 
beestis frothinge heete of firis, ethir bryng- 
yuge forth the odour of smoke, ethir send- 
ynge out! fro the ijen hidouse sparclis ; of 20 
whiche® beestzs not oneli the hirtyng my3te 
distrie hem, but also the si3t my3te sle 
bi drede. For whi and with oute these 21 
beestis thei my3ten be slayn bi o spirit, 
and suffre perseeucioun of tho! her owne 
dedis, and be seaterid by the spirit of thi 
vertu. But andi thou hast disposid alle 
thingis in mesure, and in noumbre, and 
in wei3te; for it was left euere to thee 22 
aloone to mow do myche; and who schal 
a3enstoude the vertu of thin arm? For as23 
the tunge of a balauuce, so is the world 
bifore thee; and as a drope of dew rys- 
yuge bifore the 1i3t, that cometh doun in 
to erthe. And thou hast merci of alle2s 
thingis, for thou maist alle thingis; and 
thou dissyimelist* the synnes of men, for 
penaunce. For thou louest alle thingis 2s 
that ben, and thou hatist no thing of 
tho, that thou madist; for thou not hat- 
ynge ony thing ordeynedist, ether madist. . 
But hou my3te ony thing dwelle, ‘no but! 26 
thou woldist ? ether hou schulde a thing 
be kept, that were not clepid of thee? 
But, Lord, that™ louest soulis, thou sparist 27 
alle thingis; for tho thingis ben thine. 


a that for acu. a8 of vnknowen c pr. m. 


h thilke 1. ‘also 3. k ether for- 


XII. I—13. 


CAP. XII. 


1 QO! hou good, and hou swete, Lord, is 
2thi Spirit in vs; therfore them that out 
erren in parties, thou chastisist ; and of 
the whiche thingus thei synnen, thou 
warnest, and spekest to, that, the malice 
3laft, thei leeuen in thee, Lord. Forsothe 
tho® olde dwelleris of thin holi Jond, ‘the 
4which® thou grisedist; for hateful werkis 
thei diden to thee, bi lechingus, and sacri- 
5fises vnri3twise; and the sleeres of ther 
sonus, withoute mercy, and the eteres of 
the boweles of men, and the’ deuoureres 
of blod; and the fadris and modris*, au- 
toures of the soules vnholpen’, leese thou 
6 woldist not fro thi myddel sacrament, bi 
the hondis of ther fadris and modris; 


7that the wrthi pilgrimaging of the chil-- 


der of God thei shulden parceyue, the 
whiche is a lond more cheere’ to thee of 
salle. But and to these as to men’® thou 
sparedist, and sentist waspis, beforgo- 
eres of thin ost, that ‘them litilmel® thei 
9shulden destro3en. Not for thou were 
vnmy3ti in bataile to sogeten vnpitous!" 
men to ri3twis men, or bi cruel bestes, 
ioor bi hard wrd to destro3e togidere ; but 
bi parties demende, thou 3aue place of 
penaunce, not vuknowende, for shreude 
is the nacioun of hem, and kindely the 
malice of them, and for the tho3t of them 
my3te not ben chaungid in to euermor. 
11 The sed forsothe was cursid fro the bi- 
gynnyng. Ne dredende any man, for3yue- 
nesse thou 3eue to the synnes of them. 
12 Who forsothe shal sey to thee, What 
madist thou? or who shal stonde a3en 
thi dom? or who in thi si3te shal comen, 
veniere of wicke men? or who shal wijte 
to thee, if naciouns pershen, that thou 
13hast mad? Forsothe there is noon other 


WISDOM. 


CAP. XII. 


Lord, hou good, and hou swete is thil 
Spirit in alle thingis; and therfor* thou2 
chastisist bi partis these men that erren; 
and thou monestist, of whiche thingis thei 
synnen, and thou spekist fo hem, that 
whanne thei han forsake malice, thei bi- 
leue in thee, Lord. For thou woldist leese"s 
thilke elde dwelleris of thin hooli lond, 
whiche thou wlatidist; for thet didena 
werkis hateful to thee, bi medicynes +t, 
and vniust sacrifices; and the slears ofs 
her sones, with out merci, and eteris of 
entrailis of men, and*edeuowreris of blood ; 
and bi the hondis of oure fadris thou 
woldist leese fro thi myddil sacrament{ 
fadris and modris, autours of soulis§ vn-6 
helpid; that oure fadris schulden take7 
the worthi pilgrymage of Goddis children, 
which is to thee the derewortheste™ lond 
of alle. But also thou sparidist these ass 
men, and thou sentist waspis, the bifore 
goeris of thin oost, that tho schulden de- 
strie hem litil and Htil. Not for thous 
were ynmy3ti to make wickid men suget 


* and therfor; 
that is, for thi 
goodnesse. 
chastisidist bi 
partis ; that is, 
punyschist cur- 
teisly, and bi 
dyuerse tymes, 
and not togi- 
dere in takinge 
hem awey fro 
lyf, that they 
haue tyme to 
do penannce. 
spekist to hem 3 
sumtyme bi 
ynward ster- 
Ing, sumtyme 
bi trauel of 
bodi, that 
3yneth vndir- 
stonding. 
of thyn hooly 
fond ; that is, 
of Judee, which 
is seid hooly, 
for Goddis wor- 
schiping throof 
there in the 
tyme of the 
elde testa- 
ment ; and the 
mysterie of 
Crist was fillid 
there in the 
tyme of the 
newe testa- 
ment. 
haicful; that is, 
orible synnes. 
Lire here. c. 
bi medecynes, 
etc. ; that is, 
bi wicchecraftis, 


to iust men in batel®; but thon demydist® 10 and false dy- 


bi partis, and 3auest place? to penaunce, 
and wistist, that the nacioun of hem was 
weiward, and her malice was kyndlil|, and 
that her thou3t my3te not be chaungid 


uynyngis, and 
sacrifices offrid 
to fendis. Lire 
here. C. 
t myddil sacra- 
ment ; that is, 
fro Judee. Lire 
Te, Ce 


5 . A he 
with outen ende. For it was a cursid 11 ¢ of soutis, etc.; 


seed at the bigynnyng. And thou not 
dredynge ony man, 3auest for3yuenesse to 
the synues of hem’. 
seie to thee, What hast thou do? ether 
who schal stonde a3ens thi doom? ethir 
who schal coine in thi si3t, fo be auen- 
gere of wickid men? ether who schal 
arette :to thee, if naciouns perischen, 
whiche thou madist ? For whi 
than thou is God, to whom is charge of 


that is, of her 
children, desti- 
tute of du help. 
Lire here. c. 


For whi who schal 12 Il was kindeli ; 


that is, maad 
hard bi long 
custum, which 
is a maner 
kynde. Lire , 
here. C. 

{| my3te not 
be chaungid ; 
this is not 
outirli noun- 


noon other 13 power ; but in 


party, for as 
longe as a man 
Tyueth, he may 


turne a3en to good ; but this nounpower js in parti, for siche men moun turne ajen with hardnesse, for the custom of synne enclynynge bi mazer of 
kynde: wherfor in v. book of Metafisikis, a thing is seid impossible in o maner, which thing is hard, as it is seid also in comyn speche of a man, 
seynge yuele, that he may not se. af the bigynnyng ; ia ix.c°. of Genesis, Cursid be Canaan ; he schal be seruaunt of seruauntis. Live here. c. 


Cthe a. ¢¢thatcpr.m. 4Om. 4. 


h them men litilmelum c pr. m. 


€ the modris 4GH. 
bh ynrijtwis £ pr. m. 


fynhelpid acu. &cleer 4. 88 man 4. 


2 fordo1. ®" dereworste c. © ether to distrie at oonys, bi crnel beestis, ether bi an hard word A sec. m. 


marg. © dyuydist c. 
VOL. III. 


P places 8. 4 men 8. 


P 


106 


God than thou, to whom is cure of alle, 
that thon shewe, for not vnri3twisly thou 
1sdemest dom. Ne! forsothe king ne ti- 
raunt in thi si3te shu) enserche of these 
15 thingus*, that thou hast destro3ed. Sithen 
thanne thou art ri3twis, alle thingis ri3t- 
wisly thou disposist ; hym also, O! fader, 
that owith not to be punshid, condemp- 
nende, and straunge thou eymest fro thi 
igvertue. Forsothe thi vertue is the bi- 
gynnyng of riztwisnesse; and for that, 
that of alle thou art lord, to alle thou 
i7makest thee to sparen. Forsothe vertue 
shewist thou, that art not beleeued to 
ben in vertue ful endid; and hem that 
knowen not thee, in hardynesse thou 
isouerledist. Thou forsothe, lordshipere 
of vertne, with pesiblenesse demest, and 
with gret reuerence disposist vs ; forsothe 
ther vnderlith to thee, whan thou wilt, 
19to moun. Forsothe thou ta3tist thi puple 
bi suche werkis, for it behoueth to ben 
ri3twis, and manly; and thou madist thi 
sones of ! good hope, for demende thou 
20 3ynest place of penaunce in synnes. If 
forsothe the enemys of thi seruauns, and 
due to deth, with so myche tentifnesse™ 
thou tormentedist, and delineredest, 3iu- 
ende time and place, bi the" whiche thei 
21my3ten be chaungid fro malice; with hou 
myche diligence demest thou thi sones, 
to whos fadris and modris, othis and co- 
uenauntis thou 3eue of goode behestes ? 
22Thanne whan thou 3inest to vs disci- 
pline, oure enemys manyfold thou scourg- 
ist, that thi goodnesse demende, wee 
thenken ; and whan of vs is demed, wee 
23 hope thi merci. Wherfore and to® them, 
that in ther lif vuwisly and vnri3tfulli 
lyueden, bi tho thingus, that thei: heri- 
24eden, thou 3eue grettest tormentis. For- 
sothe in the weie of errour lengere thei 
erreden, eymende goddis tho thingis that 
in bestes ben ouer veyne, liuende bi ma- 
25ner of vnwise 3unge childer. For that 


1 Nether 4. * Om. uen. 


t thou shewedist s. s Om. s. 
tentifnesse X sec.m. marg. to be goddis t. 


WISDOM. 


l of men of z pr. m. 


XIL. 14——25 


alle thingis, that thou schewe, that thou 
demest doom not vniustli. Nether king14 
nether tiraunt in thi si3t schulen enquere 
of these men, whiche thou hast lost. Ther-15 
for sithen thou art iust, thou disposist 
iustli alle thingis; also, fadir, thou con- 
dempnest* hym, that owith not to be 
punyschid, and thou gessist hym a 
straunger fro thi vertu. For whi thie 
vertu is the bigynnyng of ri3tfulnesse ; 
and for this, that thou art lord of alle 
men, thou makist thee to spare alle men. 
For thou, that art not bilened to be per-17 
fit in vertu, schewist™ vertu; and thon 
ledist ouert theses men, that knowen‘t not 
thee, in hardynesse. But thou, lord ofts 
vertu, demest with pesiblenesse, and dis- 
posist vs with greet reuerence ; for it is 
suget to thee to mow, whanne thou wolt. 
Forsothe thou hast tau3t thi puple bi siche 19 
werkis, that it bihoueth a iuge to be iust, 
and benygne"; and thou madist thi sones 
of good hope, for thou demest, and 3yuest 
place to penaunce in synnes. For if thou 20 
turmentidist the enemyes of thi seruauntis, 
and men due to deth with so greet per- 
seyuyng Y, and delyueridist, and 3auest 
tyme and place, bi which thei my3ten 
be chaungid fro malice; with hou greet 2i 
diligence demest thon thi sones, to whos 
fadris thou 3auest othis and couenauntis 
of good biheestis? Therfor whanne thou 22 
3yuest chastisyng} to vs, thou betist many 
fold oure enemyes, that we demynge thenke 
thi goodnessej ; and whanne it is demyd 
of vs, that we hope thi merci. Wher-23 
for and to hem, that lyueden vnwiseli, and 
vniustli in her lijf, thou 3auest souereyn 
turmentis, bi these thingis whiche thei 
worschipiden. For thei erriden ful longe 24 
in the weie of errour, and gessiden goddis” 
these thingis that ben superflu in beestis]|, 
and lyueden bi custom of 3onge children 
vnwitti. For this thing thou 3auest doom, 25 
in to scorn, as to children vnwitti; but26 
© Om. «4. 


™ ententifnes 4. "Om. c pr.m. 


tknewen ceGHKNePsxyag. 4% benygne, ether merciful c et ceteri. Vethir 


* thou con- 
dempnest ; that 
is, punyschist 
sum tyme, to 
preuyng of his 
pacience, it is 
opyn of seynt 
Joob. 
owith not to 
be punischid ; 
in biholdinge 
his innocence. 
gessist ; that 
is, suffrist to 
he gessid. 
thi vertu ; that 
is, thi power. 
ire here. Cc. 
+ thou ledist 
ouer ; that is, 
suffrist to be 
led ouer fro 
synne in to 
syne. 
in hardy- 
nesse ; for by 
this that they 
knowen not 
God, they syn- 
nen hardili. 
reuerence 3 
not punysch- 
ynge syunes 
auoon, but 
abidiuge to 
penaunce, 
to mow ; that 
is, punysche 
synnes. 
Lire here. c. 


1 chastising ; 
that is, betist 
vs, to oure 
amending. 
Lire here. c. 

§ thenke thi 
goodnesse ; that 
is, whanne we 
punyschen 
othere men, 
that we do this 
myldely, bi 
saumple of thi 
gooduesse. 
demed of vs ; 
that is, peyne 
is 3ouun to vs. 
thi mercy ; 
turnyng a3en 
to thee, bi pe- 
naunce. Lire 
here. c. 

I] superfiu in 
beestis ; that 
is, vnprofitable 
to men, but 
more uoyeful. 
Lire here. c. 


XI. 26——XIII. 9g. 


as to vnwise childer thou 3eue dom, in to 

26scorn; who forsothe with repreues and 
blamyngus? ben not mendid4, the wrthi 
dom of God ben expert ‘or feliden". 

27 In these thingus forsothe that thei suf- 
freden, heuyli thei beeren, in the whiche 
suffring thei endeyneden ; bi tho’ thingis 
that thei wenden goddis, in hem whan 
thei weren distro3id, seende hym, whom 
sum tyme thei denyeden hem to han 
knowen, verre God thei knewen; for the 
whiche and the ende of the condempnyng 
of hem shal come ont hem. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Veyne forsothe ben alle men, in whiche 
vnderlith not the kunnyng of God; and 
of tho that ben seen goode thingus, thei 


my3ten not vndirstonde hym, that is, ne- 


to the werkis takende heed, knewen who 
2was craftis man; but or fyr, or spirit, or 
swift eir, or cumpas of sterres, or ful 
myche watir, or sunne, or moone, thet 
gouernoures of the roundnesse of londis 
3 goddis wenden; in whos fairnesse delitid, 
if thei wenden" goddis, wite they, hou 
myche ‘than these’ the lordshipere of 
hem is the” fairere* ; the getere forsothe 
of fairnesse alle these thingus ordeynede. 
4QOr if theY vertue and werkis? of them 
thei wndreden, vnderstonde they of tho 
thingis, for he that made these thingis, 
sis strengere than tho; forsothe of the 
mykilnesse of fairnesse, and of crea- 
ture®, knowendeli shal moun the creatour 
6of these ben seen. But ‘ner the latere®4 
3it in these lasse pleynt is; and these 
forsothe parauenture erren, sechende God, 
7and willende to finden. And forsothe in 
the werkys of hym whan thei ben often 
turnende, and sechen’, and ful shewid 
han, for goode thingis ben, that ben seen. 
8 Eft forsoothe ne to these owith to be for- 
930uen. If forsothe so myche thei my3ten 


WISDOM. 


107 


thei, that weren not amendid bi scorn- 
yngis and blamyngis, feeliden the worthi 
doom* of God. 
in these thingis, whiche thei suffriden, in 
whiche thingis thei suffrynge hadden in- 
dignacioun; thei seynge hym, whom thei 
denyeden sum tyme hem to knowe, knewen 
hym veri God, bi these thingis whiche 
thei gessiden goddis among hem, whanne 
tho weren destried ; for which thing and 
the ende of her condempnaciount schal 
come on hem. 


CAP. XIII. 


Forsothe alle men ben veyn}, in whiche1 
the kunnyng of God is not; and of these 
thingis that ben seyn goode, thei my3ten 
not vndurstonde him, that is, and thei 
perseyuynge the werkis knewen not, who 
was the worchere; but thei gessidene 
goddis§ gouernours of the world, ethir 
the fier, ether the wynd, ethir the eir 
maad swift, ether the cumpas of sterris, 
ether ful myche watir, ethir the sunne 
and moone; and if thei delitiden in thes 
fairnesse of tho thingis, and gessiden tho* 
goddis, wite thei|], hou myche the lord 
of tho’ is fairere than tho; for whi the 
gendrere of fairnesse made alle these 
thingis. Ethir if thei wondriden on the4 
vertu and werkis of tho thingis, vndur- 
stonde thei{{ of tho, that he that made 
these thingis, is strongere than tho; fors 
bi the greetnesse of fairnesse and of crea- 
ture the creatour of these thingis my3te 
be seyn knowyngli%. But netheles 3it ine 
these men** is lesse playnt ; for thei erren, 
in hap sekynge God, and willynge to 
fynde. For whanne thei lyuen in hise7 
werkis, thei seken, and holden for a soth, 
that tho thingis ben goode, that ben seyn. 
Eft sotheli it owith not to* be for3ouuns 
to these men. For if thei mij3ten wites 


For thei baren heuyli 27 


* worthi doom; 
that is, ener- 
lastinge peyne. 
heuyly ; that 

is, vnpaciently. 
Lire here. cy 

+ condempna- 
cioun, ele. ; 
that is, euer- 
lastinge peyne 
schal come on 
hem in the 
final doom, 
whanne thei 
schulen be tur- 
mentid in body 
and soule, in 
the peyne of 
helle. Lire 
here. c. 

t ben veyn ; 
that is, voide 
of truthe. 

the kunnyng of 
God ; these ben 
idolatrours, that 
wanten the 
kunyng of veri 
God. 


him that is ; 
good, ether bi 
kynde ether 
beyng. Lire 
here. Cc. 

§ gessiden. 
goddis ; that 
is, thei bileu- 
yden, that tho 
weren goddis, 
gouernynge the 
world. Lire 
here. Cc. 

|| wite thei ; as 
if he seide, thei 
ou3ten wite 
this anoon. 
Suirere ; for 
his fairenesse 
passith with 
outen ende, 
Sor the gen- 
drere of fair- 
nesse 3 that is, 
God, autour of 
al fairenesse. 
made alle these 
thingis; and bi 
suyng of re- 
soun the fair- 
nesse of tho 
thingis is bifore 
in him, more 
excelently with 
out noumbre. 
Lire here. c. 
{ vndursionde 
thei ; that is, 
thei owen to 
vndurstonde. 
Lire here. c. 
**in these men; 
that worschip- 
iden excelent 
creaturis, as 
the snnne and 
moone, for 
goddis. 


ts lesse playnt ¢ than in hem that worschipiden serpentis, and vile beestis. Lire here. c. 


P blamynge 4. damendid 4. * Om. c pr.m. Epr.m, § thee 4.thecu. tupon 4£Gn. tt Om. c pr. m, 


¥than tho c pr.m. more E pr.m. 
a the creature c pr.m. 


uweneden FE. 
z the werkis 1GH. 


Xhemi. Y¥ thilke thingis 1. 


w Om. 4. 
aa neuer the latere sxc. 


z knowyngli, ether my3le be knowun bi hise werkis v. 


PQ 


x fairere of theme pr.m. Y Om, 4xGu. 


> sechynge 4. 


a Om. 1. 


108 


kunne, that the world thei my3ten eymen, 
hou the lord of this li3tliere thei founden 
10not ? Vuseli forsothe thei ben, and among 
the deade the hope of them is, that® cle- 
peden! goddis the werkis of the hondis 
of men, gold, and siluer, the finding of 
craft, and the licnesses of bestes, or vn- 
profitable ston, the were of the olde hond. 
Or if any crafti man, forgere, hewe of 
the wode an euene tree, and of this 
ta3tli pare awei al the rinde, and, vsid 
his craft diligentli, forge a vessel vnpro- 
12fitable in to conuersacioun of lif; the 
tother forsothe of his werk to the mak- 
ising of mete vse; and the tother of these 
thingis, that to noon vse, a crokid tree, 
and ful of knarres, he maketh, that he 
graue diligentli bi his voidenesse, and bi 
the kunnyng of his craft figure it, and 
uuliene it to an ymage of man, or to sum 
of bestes it he comparisoune, thur3 draw- 
ende with a reuler, and make the colour 
of it with red, and broun, and eche spot, 
isthat is in it, fule ‘daubende with erthe’, 
and make it a wrthi dwelling, puttende 
it in a wal, and fastnende$ with iren, 
iglest parauenture it falle; beholdende to 
it, witende, for it mai not helpen the- 
self"; forsothe an ymage it is, and nede 
i7is to Gt helpe. And of his substaunce, 
and of his sones, and of sposailes, mak- 
ende auow, ensercheth ; he shameth not 
to speke with it, that withoute soule is ; 
igand for helthe forsothe the feble he be- 
secheth, and for lif he prejeth the deade, 
and in to helpe he inwardli clepeth the 
i9 vnprofitable. And for the! going asketh 
of it*, that may not go; and of purchas- 
ing, and of werching, and of the chauns 
of alle thingus he asketh of it, that in 
alle thingys ys vnprofitable. 


¢ thei 4. 4 clepen acm. 
1 Om. 4z sec. m. GH. 


€ ful of 4. 
k Om. ¢ pr.m, 


b residue, or the lewing 1, 


WISDOM. 


NIM. (o——19. 


so myche, that thei mizten gesse the 
world*, hou founden thei not li3tliere the 


af dae the 
3 that is, 


lord therof? forsothe thei ben cursid, hes theron 


and the hope of hemy is among deed men, 
that clepiden goddis the werkis of mennus 
hondis, gold, and siluer, the fyndyng of 
craft, and licnessis of beestis, ether a stoon 
vnprofitable, the werk of an eld hond. 


Ethir if ony crafti man, a carpenter, hew-11 


ith doun of the wode a strei3t tre, and 
rasith awei perfitli al the riynde therof, 
and vsith his craft diligentli, and makith 
a vessel ful profitable in to conuersacioun 
of Tits 
this werk to the makyng redi of mete ; 
and the residue’ of these thingis, 
he makith to no werk, a crokid tre, and 
ful of knottis, he graueth diligentli bi his 
voidnesse§, and bi the kunnyng of his 
craft he figurith it, and licneth it to the 


sotheli he vsith the relifs of1i2 


dre of creaturis, 
Lire here. c. 
+ the hope of 
hem, ete. ; for 
noon hope is of 
her helthe, as 
long as thei 
ben siche. 
werkis of 
mennus hondis 
for whi idols 
as to the figure, 
ether schap, 
ben maad bi 
craft, but the 
n_ is thing 
of kynde; as 
gold, and sil. 
uer, and othere 
thingis, wherof 
tho ben maad. 
the werk of 


which 13 @7 ecld honda ; 


for whi idols 
maad of eld 
tyme weren 
had in more 
reuerence ; 
wherfor and 
summe symple 
Tisten men 


ymage of a man, ether makith it lijk to 14 doen more re- 


sum of beestis, and anoyntith with reed 
colonr, and makith the colour therof rodi 
with peynture, and anoyntith eche spotte 


uerence to 
summe elde 
ymagis of the 
crucifix, that 
ben seid maad 
of Nycodeme. 


which? is in it, and makith to it a worthiis “ive here. c. 


dwellyng place, and settith it in the wal, 


to conuersa- 


ae of liyf ; 
t is, to 


and he fastueth it with irun, lest per- 167s prod 


auenture it falle doun; and he purueyeth 
for it, and woot, that it may not helpe it 
silf; for it is an ymage, and help is nede- 
ful therto. 
enquerith of his catel, and of hise sones, 
and of weddyngis ; he is not aschamed to 
speke with hym, that is with out soule; 


And he makith auowe||, and 17 


to whos liyf 
many vessels 
of tre ben nede- 
ful. 


vsith the re- 
ifs ; that is, 
the hewingis 
of this werk, 
to get mete. 
Lire here. c. 
§ bi his void- 
ales that is, 
d of hym 


and sotheli for helthe he bisechith a thing 181i Ui his granyng. 


vnmy3ti, and for lijf he preieth a thing 
with out lijf, and he clepith an vnpro- 
fitable thing in to help. 
he axith of that thing, that mai not go; 
and of getyng, and of worchyng, and of 
bifallyng of alle thingis he axith of hym, 
which is vnprofitable in alle thingis. 


f peynting © pr.m. & fastne it a. hit self a. 


© that 1. 


Lire here. c. 
|| makith a- 
uow ; to the 
idol, that it 


And for iourney 19 here him. 


and enquer~ 
ith ; that is, 
axith of the 
idol richessis, 
and sones, and 
weddingis of 
sones. Lire 
here. C. 


XIV. 1—13. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Efti an other thenkende to seilen, bi 
hidous flodis bigynnende to make weie, 
the tree berende hym, inwardli* clepeth 

2a more frele tree. That forsothe co- 

ucitise of wynnyng! tho3te™ out; and a 

3craftisman forgede bi his wisdam. Thou 
forsothe, fader, governest bi prouydence, 
for thou hast 3oue in the se weie, and 

4among flodis most" stedefast path; shew- 
ende, for thou art my3ti of alle thingus 
to helen, also if withoute ship a man go 
sto® the se; but that the werkis of thi 
wisdam weren not voide, for that also 
men takende ther liues to a litil tree, 
and passende the se, bi a ship ben deli- 
cuered. .But fro the bygynnyng, whan 
proude ieauntis persheden, the hope of 
the roundnesse of erthis to a ship fleende, 
sente aj3een to the world sed of birthe, 
7that bi thin hond was gouerned. Blissid 
forsothe is the tree, bi theP whiche is do 
sri3twisnesse. The maumet forsothe, that 
is maad bi hondys, is cursid, and it, and 
he that made it, for he forsothe wro3te 
vnleefulnesse ; that forsothe, whan it was 
9britil, is nempned God. Lic maner for- 
sothe to hate ben™ to God the vnpytouse, 
1oand the ynpitousnesse of hym. Forsothe 
that is mad, with hym that made, tor- 
i1mentus shal suffre. For that and to the 
maumetis of naciouns shal not ben re- 
ward ; for the creaturis of God in to hate 
ben mad, and tempting to the soule of 
men, and in to a mouscacche to the feet 
120f ynwise men. The bigynnyng forsothe 
of fornycacioun is the outseching of mau- 
metis, and the finding of hem is corup- 
iscioun of lyf. Forsothe thei weren not 


WISDOM. 


109 


CAP. XIV. 


Eft an other man thenkynge to seile ini 
schip*, and bigynnynge to make iournei 
thorou3 ferse wawis*, inwardli clepith' a 
tre* frelereS than the tre that berith hym. 
For whi couetise to gete money fooud that2 
idol; and a crafti man made it bi his 
wisdom. But thou, fadir, gouernest bis 
puruyaunce, for thon 3auest weie in the 
see, and a most stidfast path among 
wawis; schewynge that thou art mi3ti to4 
make hool of alle thingis, 3he, if a man 
goith to the see with out schip; but thats 
the werkis of thi wisdom} schulden not 
be voide, for this thing men bitaken her 
lyues, 3he, to a litil tre, and thei passen 
the see, and ben delyuered bi a_ schip. 
But at the bigynnyng, whanne proudec 
giauntis perischiden, the hope of the 
world fledde to a schip, and sente efte 
seed of birthe to the world, whicli{ was 
gouerned bi thin hond. For whi blessid7 
is the tree, bi which ri3tfulnesse was 
maad. But the idol which is maad bis 
hond is cursid, bothe it, and he that 
made it, for sotheli he wrou3te grete 
trespas; sotheli that ¢do/, whanne it was 
freel, was nemyd God. Forsothe in lhiko 
maner the wickid man§ and his wickid- 


* atre; thatis, 
an idol of tre. 
Srelere than 
the tre; that 
is, the schip. 
thou fadir ; 

of henene. 
gourrnest s the 
seiling of men, 
but thilke idol 
doith not this. 
Lire here. c. 
t+ werkis of thi 
wisdom, ete. ; 
God made low- 
ere creatnris 
for man, and 
therfor if tho 
sernede not to 
the nedis of 
man, tho 
schulden seme 
to be veyn as 
to this, in hise 
profitis ; so- 
thely these pro- 
fitis ben maad 
bi seiling, bi 
which mar- 
chauntis carien 
tho thingis, 
that ben plen- 
teouse in o 
lond, to an 
other, where 
is scarsite of 
siche thingis ; 
and thus the 
nedynessis of 
londis ben re- 
Teenyd. 

But at the 
bigynnyng 5 
that is, in the 
firste age of 
the world, that 
duride fro A- 
dam til te the 
grete flood. 

the hope of 


nesse ben hateful to God. For whi that10 sre word; that 


that is maad schal suffre turmentis, with 


is, Noe, and his 
wiyf, and hise 


hym that made 7é*. For this thing and 11 8ne: and her 


to the idols of naciouns schal not be 
biholdyng ; for the creaturis of God ben 
maad in to hatrede, and in to tempta- 
cioun to the soule of men, and in to a 
trappe to the feet of vnwise men. 
the bigynnyng of fornycacioun|| is the sek- 
yng out of idols, aud the fynding of tho 


wyues. 
sced of birthe; 
for whi man- 
kynde was 
multiplied bi 
him and hise 
sones, aftir the 
greet flood. 


For je Lire here. . 
“t which ; sehip. 


the tre : that 
is, thilke schip 
maad of trees. 
Lire here. c. 


§ the wickid man ; that is, the maker of an idol, and the idol maad of him. that is maad ; that is, the deuel, that was worschipid in the idol, and 3af 
answeris there sum tyme. ¢o the idolis of naciouns; that is, to fendis dwelling in idolis. not be biholding ; that is, of Goddis mersi, for whi the synne 
of fendis may not be for3ouun. the creaturis of God ; that is, fendis maad of God, as to the kynde. ben maad in to hatrede ; for her synne, which is not 
of God autour, but of defaute of fre wille. and in to temptacioun; for thei that ben easte doun fro heuene, studien to lette men fro her helthe. and in to 
a trappe to the feet of unwise men ; that ben ouercomun bi temptaciouns of fendis, but to wise men, that a3enstonden manly ; siche temptaciouns ben 
not in to a trappe, but more in to vietorie and in toa coroun. Lire herc. c. || of fornycacioun ; that is, idolatrie, which is goostly fornicacioun. 


j Also 4. © in to AGH. 


P Om. aecn. 


k he inwardli aren. ! purchasynge x pr.m. ™so3tec. "a most Cpr. m. 


(thei ben to £ prom. * thei ben £ pr.m. 


4aships. ¢watrisc. ‘heclepithi. & more freel 1. & Om. CEF pr.m. GIIMNPQRSUVXYAag. 


110 


fro the bigynnyng, ne shul ben in to 
la with oute ende. The oueruoidenesse for- 
sothe of men these thingis fond in to the 
roundnesse of erthis; and therfore short 
isthe ende of hem is founden. Forsothe 
with bitter weiling the fader sorewende, 
soone’ of the raueshid sone made an 
ymage; and hym, that thanne as a man 
was dead, now as god* he begynneth to 
herien ; and ordeynede" among his ser- 
16 uauns templis’ and sacrifises. Aftirward 
in the mene comende time waxende 
shreude custum, this errour as lawe™ is 
kept, and bi maundemens of tirauntis 
17false werkis ben heried. These whom 
ju opene men my3ten not wrshipen, for 
that aferr thei weren, from aferr the 
figure of them is bro3t; the euydent 
ymage of the king, whom wrshipen thei 
wolden, thei maden; that hym that was 
aferr, as present thei shulden herien with 
is ther* bisynesse. Forsothe the grete dili- 
gence of they craftis man dro3 to the 
heriyng of hem and hem, that vnknewen. 
19 He forsothe wilnende more to plesen to 
hym, that hym toc, trauailede out bi his 
craft, that the licnesse in to betere he 
20shulde figuren. Forsothe the multitude 
of men, disceyued bi the fairnesse of the 
werk, hym that bifor time as a man was 
2iwrshipid, now god thei eymeden. And 
this was disceyuyng of mannys lif; for 
to afeccioun, or to kingus men deseruyng, 
the vncomunycable name to stones and 
22trees thei putten’. And it suffisede not, 
them to han erred aboute the kunnyng 
of God; but and in gret bataile of vnkun- 
nyng* liuende, so fele and so grete eucles 
23pes thei clepen. Or forsothe ther sones 
sacrifiende, or derke sacrifises makende, 
240r hanende ful wacchis of wodnesse, ne 
lif, ne clene sposailis now thei kepen ; 
but an other an other bi enuye sleth, or 
2,auoutrende sorewith. And alle thingus 


8 the soone 4GH. 
y Om. 4. 


ta God a. 


2 puttiden acu. 


iin schort c. & Om. Fixsa. 
Apr.m. 4QOm,s. 


1 bitwene 1. 


WISDOM. 


u ordeyne acu. 
@ ynkunnyng of God a. 


™m wurship s. 


XIV. 14—25. 
idols is the corrupcioun of lijf. Forsothe 13 crrupeioun | 
: of liyf ; that is, 
tho weren not at the bigynnyng, nethir 
EF aii that stondith in 
OL WHI 14 onyng to God, 
the voidnesse of men foond these zdo/s in trokan bi ddl 
to the world; and therfor the ende of tho te. 
For whi the fadir 15 of men; that 
‘i : Gino is, defaute of 
makinge sorewe with bittir morenyng, be 
made soone to hym an ymage* of the sone * peeps 
the deth of the 
schipe hym now as a god, that was deed  fadir. 
thanne as a man; and he ordeynede hooli _ to be jouun to 
the ymage. 
auntis. Aftirward in tyme comynge bi-16 
twixe!, whanne the wickid custom was 
and ymagis weren worschipid bi lordschip 
of tirauntis. The figure of hem was17 
onoure in opyn, for thei weren fer; and 
thei maden an opyn ymage of the kyng, 
bisynesse thei schulden worschipe hym as 
present, that was absent. Forsothe the1s 
also hem, that knewen not, to the wor- 
schipyng™ of thes kyngis®. For he will-19 


of goostli liyf, 
tho schulen be with out ende. 

which onyng is 

: the voidnesse 

is foundun schort'. 

her wisdom. 
‘that was* rauyschid ; and bigan to wor- ‘tis, hifor 

hooli thingis ; 
thingis and sacrifices among hise seru-  Ziré here. c. 
strong, this errour was kept as a lawe, 
brou3t fro fer, whiche the men mi3ten not 
whom thei wolden onoure; that bi her 
noble diligence of a crafti man brou3te in 
ynge more to plese that? yng, that took 


hymf, trauelide perfitli? bi his craft, to + took him; 
: ; . that is, ch 
make a% licnesse in to betere. Sotheli20 him temake 
the multitude of men, disseyued bi the jXing 
fairnesse of werk, gessiden hym now a_ ¢ “ienesse; 
that is, ymage. 


god, that was onourid as a man bifore in to betere; 

: es in makinge the 
that tyme. And this was the disseit of 21 king fairere. 
mannys lijf; for whi men seruynge "7% 
greetli, ethir to affeccioun, ethir to kyngis, 
puttiden to stoonys and trees the name 
that mai not be comynyd. And it suffiside 22+ may not be 
not, that thei erriden aboute the kunnyng oe 
of God; but also thei lyuynge in greet ae be 
batel of vnkunnyng, clepen so many and Age 
so grete yuels pees. For ethir thei sle-23 but to God 
yuge her sones in sacrifice, ethir makynge to 
derk sacrifices, ethir hauynge wakyngis #i7ameara 
ful of woodnesse, kepen now nether cleene 24 men- Lire hem 
x Om. 4. 


Vv behestis = pr. m. wa lawe AGH. 


Dthingis 1. thea. P more perfitli 


XIV. 26—XV. 5. 


ben mengd togidere, blod, mansla3ter, 
thefte, and feynyng, corupcioun, vnfeith- 
fulnesse, disturbing, and forswering, strif, 
26the vnmynding of the goodes of the 
Lord, the defouling of soules, the mis- 
chaunging of birthe, the vustablenesse 
of bridales, the vnordeynyng of leccherie 
27and of vnclennesse. Forsothe the heri- 
yng of cursid maumetis is the cause of 
2salle® euel, and bigynnyng, and ende. Or 
forsothe, whil thei gladen, thei waxen 
wod; or certis thei profecien false 
thingus, or linen vnri3twisly, or forswern 
ggsoone. Whil forsothe thei trosten in 
maumetus, that ben withoute soule, euele 
swerende, thei hopen not themself to 
30 ben no3ed. Hithir thanne to them comen 
wrthili; for euele thei feleden of God, 
takende heed to maumetis, and sworen 
vnri3twisly in the maumet, dispisende 
31 ri3twisnesse. Forsothe of men swerendef 
is not vertue, but the peyne of synneres 
thur3 goth euermor, in to the lawe brek- 
ing of ri3twis thingus. 


CAPS XV. 


1 Thou forsothe, oure God, sweete, and 
verre, and pacient, and in mercy dispos- 
2ende alle thingis. Forsothe if wee syn- 
nen, thine wee ben, witende thi mykil- 
nesse; and if wee synnen npt, wee witen, 
3for anent thee wee ben countid. For- 
sothe to han knowen thee, is ful endid 
riz3twisnesse; and to witen ri3twisnesse 
and thi vertu, roote is of vndeadlynesse. 
4Forsothe not in to errour inladde vs the 
oute thenking of the euele craft of men, 
ne the shadewe of peynting trauaile 
withoute frut, the grauen licnesse bi dy- 
suers coloures ; whos si3te to the vnwise 


WISDOM. 


111 


lijf, nether cleene weddyngis; but also o 
man sleeth another man bi enuye, ethir 
doynge auowtrie makith sory his nei3bore. 
And alle thingis ben medlid* togidere, 25 
blood{, mansleyng, thefte, and feynyng, 
corrupcioun, vnfeithfulnesse, disturblyng, 
and forsweryng, noise, for3etyng of goodis 26 
of the Lord, defoulyng of soulis, chaung- 
yng of birthe, vnstidfastnesse of wed- 
dyngis, vnordeyning of letcherie and of 
vnchastite. For whi the worschipyng of 27 
cursid idols is the cause, and the bigyn- 
nyng, and the ende of al yuel. For whi2s 
ethir thei wexen woode, while thei ben 
glad ; ether certis thei profecien false 
thingis, ethir thei lyuen vniustli, ethir 
thei forsweren soone. For the" while thei 29 
tristen in idols, that ben with out soule, 
thei sweren yuele, and hopen not, that 
thei schulen be anoyed. Therfor euer30 
eithir{t schulen come to hem worthili; 
for thei demeden yuele of God, and 3auen 
tent to idols, and thei sworen vniustli in 
an idol, and thei® dispisiden ri3tfulnesse. 
For whi an ooth is not vertug, but thes) 
peyne of synneris goith forth euere, in to 
the breking of inst thingis. 


CAP. XV. 


Forsothe thou, oure God, art swete,1 
and trewe, and pacient, and disposist alle 
thingis in merci. For if we syinen, we2 
ben thin, and knowen thi greetnesse; and 
if we synnen not||, we witen, that we ben 
acountid at thee. For whi to knowes3 
thee, is parfit ri3tfulnesse; and to kunne 
thi riz3tfulnesse and vertu, is the root of 
vndedlynesse. Forsothe the thenkyng out 4 
of yuel craft of men brou3te not ys in to 
errour, nether the schadewe of peynture 
trauel without fruyt, an ymage gravun bi 
dyuerse colours; whos biholdyng 3yueths 
coueytise to an vnwise man, and he lou- 


* medlid ; that 
is, schent, and 
put out of ordre 
of resoun. Lire 
here. C. 

+ blood; in 
wounding of 
the nei3bore. 


Seynyng ; that 


is, ipocrisie. 
corrupcioun ; 
that is, defoul- 
ing of virgyns. 
noyse;in stiring 
of dissencioun. 
chaunging of 
birthe s that is, 
synne of Sodom. 
onstidfasinesse 
of weddingis ; bi 
which summen 
chaungiden to- 
gidere her owne 
wyues. Lire 
here. C. 

t Therfor euer 
either ; that is, 
it is iust, that 
thei hen pun- 
ischid for euer 
eithir synne, 
that is for idol- 
atrie, and for 
swering. Lire 
here. ©. 

§ an ooth is not 
vertu 3 that is, 
an ooth owith 
not to be de- 
sirid as good bi 
i¢ silf, but it is 
to vse it onely 
in nede; to the 
stidefastnesse 
of truthe and of 
feithfulnesse 
among men, 
going forth 
euere ; that is, 
wexith and is 
encreessid. 

in to the brek. 
ing of iust 
thingis ; that 
is, of Goddis 
heestis, that 
ben iust; for 
no thing no but 
iust may come 
forth of God. 
Lire here. c. 

{| synnen not ; 
dedly, for whi 
venyal synne 
may not be 
eschewid hool, 
liche. 

ben acountid; 
that is, bothe 
in noumbre and 
merit, with 
chosnn men, 
for whi venval 
synne doith not 
awey grace. 

to know thee ; 
bi feith, formed 


with charite. and vertu; that is, bi parformyng in werk. in to errour; of idolatrie, and Philo, autour of this book, spekith here for his tyme 3 
for bifor the caitifte of Babiloyne, the Jewis dide nmyche idolatrie. 3yueth couetise, etc.; that is, drawith his soule to do renerence to the idol. 


€ Om. 4. 


rOm.1. 


f sweringe the oth E pr. m. 


8 Om. cv. 


112 


3yueth coueiting, and looueth the licnesse 
cof the deade ymage withoute soule. The 
looueres of euelis ben wrthi deth, that 
hope han in suche thingus ; and that don 
hem, and that loouen, and that herien. 
7 But and the crockere, the nesshe erthe 
threstende, trauailously maketh to oure 
vses eche vessel; and of the same clei 
he made that ben clene vesselis in to vse, 
and also that to them ben contrarious ; 
forsothe of these vesselis what is the vse, 
sdomesman is the crockere. And with 
veyn trauaile god he maketh of the same 
cley, he that a litil biforn of erthe was 
mad; and aftir a litil he ledith hym- 
selfe whennes he is taken, a3een askid 
the dette of the sonle that he hadde. 
»But and ther is cure to hym, not for 
he is to trauailen, ne for his lif is short, 
but that me spute’ with gold smythis, 
and siluer smythis; but and metal ma- 
keres he folewith, and glorie he berth 
biforn ; for thingus ouervoide he mak- 
weth®, Askeni forsothe is the herte of 
hym, and erthe ouervoide the hope of 
hym, and foulere than cley the lif of 
ilhym. For he kne3 not that made hym, 
and that enspirede to hym a soule; and 
looueth that he wro3te; and that* ble3 
in to hym a lifli spirit. But thei eym- 
eden a pleiyng place to ben the lif of 
hem, and the conuersacioun of lif mad 
to wynnyng, and to bihouen also on eche 
13side, of euel to purchasen. This forsothe 
wot hymself oner alle men to trespassen, 
that of the mater of erthe britel vesselis 
i4and grauen maketh. Forsothe alle the 
vuwise men and vnsely ouer maner of 
ther sonle ben proude, enemys of thi 
15 puple, and mysseiende to it; for alle the 
maumetis of naciouns godis thei eym- 
eden, to the whiche nouther si3te of ezen 
is to seen, ne nose therlis to parceyue 


WISDOM. 


XV. 6—r15. 


eth the licnesse of a deed ymage with out 
soule. The louyers of yuels ben worthié 
the deeth, that han hope in siche; and 
thei that maken tho, and thei that louen, 
and thei that worschipen ben worthi the 
deth. But also a pottere, thristynge7 
neische erthe, bi greet trauel makith ech 
vessel to oure vsis; and of the same clei 
he makith vessels that ben clene to vss, 
and in lijk maner tho that ben contrarie 
to these; forsothe what vss is of these 
vessels, the pottere is luge. And he thats 
was maad of erthe a litil biforet, inakith 
a god of the same clei with veyn trauel ; 
and the pottere, axid to 3e/de the dette of 
soule* which he hadde, ledith hym silf 
aftir a litil tyme ¢o the erthe, fro whennus 
he was takun. But he hath care, not for9 
he schal trauele, nether for his lijf is schort, 
but he stryueth with gold smythis and sil- 
uer’ smythis; but also he sueth* worcheris 
of bras, and settith bifore glorie; for he 
makith superflu thingis. For the herte1o 
of hymt is aische, and superflu erthe is 
his hope, and his lijf is vilere than clei. 
For he knew not God, that made bim,1!! 
and that enspiride a soule to hym; and 
he loueth tho thingis whiche he hath 
wrou3t{; and he knew not God, that 
blowide in hym a spirit of lijf. But thei 12 
gessiden fleischli delityng to be oure lijf, 
and the conuersacioun of lijf ¢o be maad 
to wynnyng", and that it bihoueth to gete 
on ech side, 3he, of yuel. Forsothe this 13 
man that makith freele vessels, and granun 
ymagis of the mater of erthe, woot$ that 
he trespassith abone alle men. Forsothe, 14 
Lord, alle vnwise men aud cursid ben 
proude ouer the mesure of her soule, and 
ben enemyes of thi puple, and vpbreyden* 
it; for thei gessiden alle the idols of15 
naciouns fo be goddis, that han nethir 
sij3t of i3en to se, nethir nose thirlis to 


* he sueth ; in 
makinge idols 
of erthe liyk 

tho of bras. 
settith bifore 
glorie ; of his 
craft, for the 
multitude of 

men renneth te 
him to haue \ 
idols. 

superfiu 

thingis ; that 

is, idols of no 
priys, ether 

licil, in compa- 
risoun of 

othere. Lire 

here. c. 

t+ the herte of 
him; that is, 

of the pottere. 

is aisches bi ‘ 
loue, for Austyn — 
seith, If thou 
louest erthe, 
thou art erthe; : 
but this pot- . 
tere settith al 

his bisynesse 

to the formyng 
oferthe; and 
if the erthe 

were priued fro” 
meddling of wa-_ 
ter, it schulde 

be dryuun in to — 
dust, ether in to 
aische; wherfor 
the herte of a 
pottere is seid 
aische. 

superfiu erthe ; 
wher he mak- 

ith idols. 

ts his hope; for 

he hopith to 

lyue herof. } 
and his liyf is 
vilere than cley; 


which liyf is ; 


lonyeris of 
yuels ; that is, 
of idols. 
tho that ben con- 
trarie ; that is, 
vessels to serue 
to vnonest vsis. 
he that was 
maad ; that is, 
the pottere. 
Lire here. c. 

i 


ordeyned to the 
wynnyng of 
cley,as to the 
ende, and to the 
ende betere ; 
than these 
thingis, that 

ben to the ende 
Lire here. c. j 
t hath wrou3t 
that is, idols. 

|| But thet; that 
is, the for-eid 
idolatrouris. 

Lire here. c. 

@ woot ; that is, 


awith to wite. above alle; makeris of idols. entwise men; that ben idolatrouris, and erren fro veri blis. proude, etc.; that is, presumen of hem silf, 


more than they moun do. Lire here. c. 


& togidere spute £ pr. m. 


' bifore to cEFHKMNPQRSUVXYag¢. 


h made E pr. m., 


t u the soule 1. 
* edwiten CFGHIMNoPQRSUVXYA. comaunden, ether edwiten K. 


i Asshen «4. * Om. c pr. m. 


Ysiluerne c. W wyunyng, ether coueitise c et ceteri. 


XV. 16—XVI. 8. 


spirit, ne eres to heren, ne fingris of 
hondis to gropen, but and! the feet of 
1¢6hem slowe to gon. A man forsothe made 
them, and that the spirit borewide, he 
feynede them; no man forsothe mai 
17maken a god lic to hym. Whan for- 
sothe he be deadli, the deade he makith 
with wicke hondis; betere forsothe is he 
than these, that he herieth; for he for- 
sothe liuede, whan he was deadli, thei 
18forsothe neuere. But and thei most 
wrecchid herien bestes ; witles forsothe, 
comparisouned to these, ben wers than 
i9tho. But neither with si3te any thing of 
these bestes mai beholden goode thyngis; 
forsothe they fledden the preisyng of 
God, and the blessing of hym. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 For these, and lic thingus to these, 
wrthily thei suffreden tormentis, and bi 
multitude of bestes thei ben destro3ed. 
2For whyche™ tormentis thou disposid- 
ist wel thi puple, bi whiche thou 3eue 
coueiting of ther delit a newe sauour, 
3greithende curleen mete to them. That 
thei forsothe coueitende mete, for tho 


thingus that to them ben shewid, and - 


sent, also fro nedeful coueiting thei 
shulden be turned awei; these forsothe 
nedi mad in short, tasteden newe mete. 
4Forsothe it bihouede to them, hauntende 
tiraundise, deth to® comen on with oute 
excusacioun ; to them forsothe onli to 
shewen, hou the enemys of them weren 
sdestro3id. Forsothe whan to them cam 
on the cruel wrathe of bestis, bi the bit- 
yngis"™" of shreude shadewe edderes thei 
éweren distro3id. But not in to euermor 
thi wrathe abod stille; but to the cor- 
reccioun in short thei ben disturbid, 
tocne hauende of helthe, to the remem- 
bring of the maundement of thi lawe. 
7 Who forsothe is turned, not bi that that 
he sa3, he was heled, but bi thee®, saueour 
sof alleP. In that forsothe thou shewdist 


WISDOM. 


113 


perseyue a spirit, ethir wynd, nether eeris 
to here, nethir fyngris of hondis to touche, 
but also her feet ben slowe to go. 
whi a man made tho, and he that borewide 
a spirit, made tho; forwhi no man mai 


make a god lijk hym silf. For sithen he17 


is deedli, bi wickid hondis he makith a 
deed tdol; for he is betere than these 
goddis, whiche he worschipith; for so- 
theli he liuyde, whanne he was deedli, 
but thei Zyweden neuere. 
wretchid men worschipen beestis ; for whi 
vnresonable beestzs, comparisound to these 
men, ben worse than thei. 
si3t ony man mai of these beestis biholde 
goodis ; forsothe thei han dryue awei the 
heriyng* of God, and his blessyng. 


CAP. XVI. 


For these thingist, and thingis lijk: 
these, thei suffriden turmentis worthili, 
and thei weren destried bi multitude of 
beestis. For whiche? turmentis{ thou dis-2 
posidist wel thi puple, to whiche thou 
jauest coueitise of her delityng a new 
sauour, makynge redi mete to hem a cur- 
lew§. That sotheli thei coueitynge mete, 3 
weren turned awei, 3he, fro nedeful coueit- 
yng, for tho thingis that weren schewid, 
and sent to hem; but these men|| maad 
pore in schort tyme, tastiden newe mete. 
For sotheli it bihofte perischyng to come4 
on hem with outen excusyng4, vsynge ti- 
rauntri; but to schewe oneli to* these 
Ebries, hou her enemyes weren destried. 
Forsothe whanne the feers ire of beestiss 
cam on hem, thei weren destried bi the 
bityngis of weiward serpentis. But, Lord, « 
thin ire dwellide not with outen ende; 
but thei weren troblid in schort time to 
amendyng, and hadden a signe of helthe, 
to remembryng** of the comaundement of 
thi lawe. For he that was conuertid, was7 
heelid not bi that that he si3, but bi thee, 
sauyour of alle men. Forsothe in thiss 
thou schewidist to oure enemyes, that thou 


1Om. 4. ™the whyche c pr.m. ® forsothe toc. ""bitescpr.m. the acu. P alle thingis z pr.m. 


z the whiche 1. 
VOL. III. 


a Om. A pr. m. C. 
Q 


But also moost 18 


For 16 * @7yve awei 


the heriyng, 
ete.s and jaune 


i¢ to vnreson- 


able beestis. 

his blessing; 
that is, the 3ifte 
of his grace. 
Lire here. c. 

t these thingis; 
that is, the for- 
seid idolatries. 
thei ; that is, 
Egipcians, 
idolatrouris. 
Lire here. c. 

+ For which 
turmentis : that 
is, in the stide 
of turmentis 


But nether bi 19 doon to Egip- 


cians. 

coueytise of 
her delityng ; 
that is, delitable 
men coueitid of 
hem, in xj. c®. 
of Numery. 
thei caueit- 
inge mete; that 
is, Egipcians, 
coueytinge 
mete to her 
nursching. 
turned awey 


fro nedeful co- 


ueiting; that 
is, of nedeful 
mete, hanynge 
hidousnesse to 
ete metis de- 
foulid and 
venemyd. 
sent ta hem; 
that is, for pad- 
dokis and 
venemouse flies, 
defoulinge and 
venemynge the 
metis of Egip- 
cians. Lire 
here. c. 
§ a curlew ; 
that is, a mul- 
titude of cur- 
lewis. Lire 
here. Cc. 
ll these men; 
that is, Ebreys. 
Lire here. c 
excusing 3 
that is, with 
outen remedy. 
on hem; that 
is, Ebreis, 
bitun of ser- 
pentis, in xxj. 
c*. of Numery. 
Lire here. c. 
** to remem- 
bryng ; that 
is, that thei 
smytun’and 
heelid, schulden 
be myndeful of 
thyn heestis, 
and do tho. Lire 
here. © 


114 


to oure enemys, for thou art, that de- 
slyuerest fro alle euel. Hem forsothe the 
bityngis of flejes and of locustis slowen, 
and ther is not founden helthe to the 
soule of hem; for wrthi thei weren of 
iosuche thingus to ben destroz3ed. Thi 
sonus forsothe, nouther the teth of dra- 
gounes, ne of venymed thingus ouer- 
camen; forsothe thi mercy comende to, 
iihelede them. Inthe mynde forsothe of 
thi wrdis thei weren distro3id, and swiftli 
thei weren saued; lest in to hee3 for- 
jeting fallende, thei my3ten not vse thin 
i2zhelpe. Forsothe neither erbe, ne plastre 
helde’ them; but thi wrd, Lord, that 
i3heleth alle thingus. Thou art, Lord, 
that of lif and deth hast power; and 
bringest doun to the 3atis of deth, and 
14a3een bringest. A man forsothe" sleth 
bi malice forsothe’ his soule; and whan 
the spirit goth out, he shal not turne 
a3een, ne the soule, that is resceyued, 
15shal aj3een clepen; but thyn hond to 
16 fleen ist vnpossible. Vupitouse men for- 
sothe, denyynge" to han knowen thee, bi 
the strengthe of thin arm ben scourgid ; 
with newe watris, and hailis, and reynes, 
they suffreden persecucioun, and bi fijr 
17ben wastid. That forsothe was mer- 
ueylous, in water, that alle thingis 
quencheth, more the fir my3te; the 
world forsothe is veniere of ri3twis men. 
18 Forsothe sum tyme the fyr was tamed, 
that the bestes, that weren sent to vn- 
pitous men, weren not brent; but that 
thei seende shulden witen, for bi the 
dom of God thei suffren’ persecucioun. 
19 And sum tyme in water, aboue vertue, 
fyr brende out on either side, that the 
wicke nacioun of the lond it shulde de- 
20stro3en. For the whiche with the mete 
of aungelis thou nurshedist thi puple, 
and thou 3eue to them bred mad _ redi 


WISDOM. 


XVI. 9-—-20. 


it art, that delyuerist fro al yuel. .For-9 
sothe the bityngis of locustis and of flies 

killiden hem*, and heelthe of her lijf was 

not foundun ; for thei weren worthi to be 

destried of siche thingis. 
teeth of dragouns, nethir of venemouse 
beestis ouercamen thi children; for whi 
thi merci cam, and heelide hem. 
weren turmentid in myndet of thi wordis, 
and thei weren heelid swiftli; lest thei 
fallynge in to deep for3etyng of God, 


mi3ten not vse thin help. For nethir eerbe, 12 


nethir plastere heelide hem; but, Lord, 


thi word, that heelith alle thingis. Lord, 13 


thou art, that hast power of lijf and of 
deth; and ledist forth to the 3atis of detht, 
and ledist ajen. 
his soule bi malice; and whanne the spirit 
is goen out, it schal not turne ajen, 
nether the bodi schal a3en clepe the soule, 


But nether the 10 


* killiden hem ; 
that is, Egip- 
cians. Lire 
here. C 

t in mynde ; 
that is, that 
they schulden 
be myndeful of 
thyn heestis. 
Lire here. c. 

t 3atis of deth ; 
that is, of bodili 
deth; but he 


For thei 11 ledith not to 


the 3atis of 
goostly deth, 
tor he is not 
autour ofsynne, 
but man, bi 
defaute of his 
fre wille, is au- 
tour of synne. 
sleeth his soule 
bi malice ; of 
dedly synne ; 
the soule is vn- 
dedly bi deth of 
kynde. 

gon out; of 


But sotheli a man sleeth 14 the bodi. it 


schal not turne 
wen; bi weye 
of kynde. 
resseyued ; 
that is, depart- 
id fro the bodi. 


which is resseyued ; but it is vnpossible? 15 impossitle to 


to ascape thin hond. Forwhi 
men, denying to knowe thee, weren tur- 
mentid bi strengthe® of thin arm; thei 
suffriden persecusioun bi newe watris, and 
hailis, and reines, and weren wastid bi 
fier. 
fier hadde more mi3t in the’ watir, that 
quenchith alle thingis; for whi the world 
was venierej of iust men. 
tyme the fier was mylde, lest the beestis 
schulden be brent, that weren ‘sent to 
wickid men||; but that thei seynge{ 
schulden wite, that thei suffren persecu- 


ascape thyn 


wickid 16 hond ; for whi 


the soulis of 
iust men ben 
resseyued in the 
hond of Goddis 
mersi, but the 
soulis of syn- 
neris ben res- 
seyued in the 


For whi that was wondurful, the 17 hond of his rizt- 


fulnesse, ether 
iust punysch- 
ing. Lirehere.c. 
§ the world was 


For whi sum 18 %niere, ete. ¢ 


that is, creature 
of the world. 
of iust men; 
that is, of E. 
breys turment- 
id of Egipcians 
vniustly. Lire 
here. c. 


cioun bi the doom of God. . And sum 1o ll wickid men; 


tyme the fier brente an hi3'on ech side 
in the water, aboue the vertu of fier, to 
destrie the wickid nacioun of the lond. 


For whiche thingis** thou nurischidist2 


thi puple with mete of aungels, and thou. 
jauest fro heuene breed maad redi to hem, 
with out trauel; hauynge al delityng in 
it silf, and the swetnesse of. al sanour. 


that is, Egip- 
cians. Lire here. 


cs 
{| thei seynge ; 
that beestis 

noyful to hem 


9 Weren not 


brent, and that 
beestis profit- 
able to hem, a8 
weren oxis and 
werk beestis, 
weren wastid 
with the same 
fier. 

of God; to 


whom the creature obeyeth at his wille. with mete of aungels; that is, that cam doun bi the seruyce of aungels, that eten not bodily mete. 


hauynge al deliting ; for it saueride to goode men, as eche man wolde. thi cafel; that is, the richessis of thi goodnesse.- Lire here. C. 


whiche thingis; that is, for the forseid turmentis of Egipcians. Lire here. Cc. 


dhelide acu. * Om. 6 sec.m. 8 Om. 4. 


b impossible 7. 


titis 4. 


udemynge acu. Y suffreden cz pr. m. 


¢ the strengthe 1. - 


** For 


XVI, 21——-XVII. 3. 


fro heuene, with oute tranaile ; hauende 
alle deliting in itself, and swetnesse of 
2ialle sauour. Forsothe thi substaunce, 
and thi swetnesse, that in. to sones thou 
hast, thou shewedist ; and deseruende to 
the wil of echone, to what eche wolde, 
22it was conuertid. Sno3 forsothe and ijs 
suffreden the strengthe of fyr, and flow- 
eden not; that thei shulden witen, for 
bremnende fyr, leiting in hail and reyn, 
destrojede the frutes of the enemys. 
23 That forsothe eft, that the ri3twis man 
shulde ben nurshid, the fyr also for3at 
ethis vertue. Forsothe the creature to 
thee makere deseruende, brenneth out in 
to torment .ajen .vnri3twis men, and 
softere® is mad to weel don, for them 
esthat trosten in thee. For that and 
thanne thi graces deserueden in to alle 
thingus, transfigured to the vertue of alle, 
at the wil of them, that of thee ben de- 
2esired; that thi sones, whom thou loou- 
edyst, Lord, shulden wite, for not the 
frut of birthe fedde men, but thi wrd 
27 kepte them, that in thee leeueden. That 
forsothe that of fijr my3te not ben de- 
stro3ed, anoon of a litil bem of sunne 
eschaufid, flowede; that it were knowen 
to alle, for it byhoueth to comen beforn 
the sunne to thi* blessing, and at the 
29springing of 1i3t to honoure thee. For- 
sothe the hope of the vnkinde as cold 
ijs shal flowen, and dispershen as watir 
ouer voide. é 
CAP. XVII. 
1 Forsothe grete ben thi domes, Lord, 
and vntellableY thi wrdis; for these the 
2vudiseiplyned soulis erreden. Whil for- 
sothe wieke men han ful preued, to moun 
lordshipen to the holy nacioun, in bondis 
of derenesses, and of long ny3t gyued, 
enclosid vnder rooues, fugitif to perpetuel 
3prouydence, pleseden. And whil thei 
wenen them to lurken in derk synnes, bi 
the dere veil of for3eting thei ben sea- 


w ligtere £ pr. m. 


4d thanne, thal is, chaungid fro the properte of her kynde v. 


& sugetis A sec. m. 


WISDOM. 


x the 4. 


115 


For thou’ schewidist thi catel, and thi2i - 
swetnesse, which thou hast, to sones; and 

the breed seruynge to the wille of eche 

man*, was turned to that, that ech man. * so the wille of 
wolde. Forsothe snow and iys suffriden 2207773 


; ynge of the 
the mi3t of fier, and meltiden not; that een Se 
thei schulden wite, that fier brennynge, * was vnsauery 
° . mete to wicki 
in hail and reyn leytynge, destryede the men. Lire 
fruytis of enemyes. Sotheli eft this was23 °°“ 
wondirful, also fier for3at his vertut, that fae force 
° 6 5 tu; in the 
iust men schulden be nursehid. For Wi 2d olivinenay of 

thre children. 
the creature seruynge to thee the makere, 3, jij. c°. of 
wexith whijt in to turment a3ens vniust Paryeand 
men, and is maad liztere to do wel, for the beestis of 
A - * 3 reys, In the 
hem that tristen in thee. For this thing 2s lond of Gessen. 
eS é ire here. C. 
and alle thingis transfigurid{ thanne®4 £ haan 
j s that is, chaung- 
seruyden to thi grace, nurischere of alle ja fro the pro- 
thingis, to the wille of hem, that ben de- es Used 
oe 5 e Ive 
sirid of thee; that, Lord, thi sones264ere.c. 
sehulden wite, whiche thou louedist, that 
not the fruytis of birthe{ feeden men, but per a 
. . “. trthe ; that 
thi word kepeth hem, that bileuen in thee. _ is, not onely 
: : creak fruytis com- 
For whi that that mi3te not|] be distried 27 gino 
of fier, meltide anoon as i¢ was maad hoot eae 
of a litil beem of the sunne; that it were 28 ll at art 
e ; nol, ete.; tha 
knowun to.alle men, that it bihoueth to _ is, manna that 
‘ A . hardid at 
come bifore the sunne to thi blessing, the fire, and 
p ° meltide at the 
and to a thee at the risyng of the hecte of the 
1i3t®. r 99 sunne. 
3 orsothe the hope of an vakynde GO Wieeiug 
man schal melte awei as iys of wyntir, that is, to ga- 
f 6 i lere manna, 
and! sehal perische as superflu watir. Lire here. ¢. 


CAP. XVII. 


Forsothe, Lord, thi domes ben greet,1 
and thi wordis4] moun not be fulli teld — ¢ si wordis ; 
out ; vnlerned soulis erriden for these, {Dtis‘cts ° 
For the while wickid men holden for stid-2 *°*: ; 
‘ : onlerned soulis; 
fast, that thei moun be lordis of hooli  ‘hatis, mennot 
a ° n a 3 lonynge truthe. 
nacioun, thei weren feterid with boondis Lire here. c. 
of derknessis, and of long ni3t, and weren 
elosid vndur rooues; and thei fugityues 
weren suget® to euerlastinge puruyaunce. 
And the while thei gessen hem to be hids 


y vnwlatable a. 
€ list, thad is, sunne v. fand it 1. 


Q2 


116 


tered, dredende grisfulli, and with ful 
4myche wndring disturbid. Ne forsothe 
the den that heeld? hem, with oute drede 
kepte; for descendende soun disturbide* 
them, and dreri persones aperende to 
5them, 3euen inward” fere to them. And 
no strengthe forsothe of the?» fijr my3te 
to them 3yuen li3t, ne the cleer flaumes 
of sterres® my3ten li3ten that grisful ny3t. 
6Forsothe ther aperede to them sodeyn 
fyr, ful of drede®; and smyten with the 
drede of that face, that was not seen, 
thei eymeden werse to ben, that weren 
zseen. And of deuyning craft the scornes 
weren leid to, and the glorie of wisdam 
seorreccioun with strif. Thei forsothe, 
that bihij3ten dredes and perturbaciouns 
them to putten out fro the languysshende 
soule, these with scorn ful, of drede lan- 
gguyssheden. For and if no thing hem 
of the wndris disturbide, bi passing of 
bestis, and hissing of edderes stirid, fer- 
ful thei persheden*; and the eir, that bi 
no resoun a man my3te flee, denyende 
themself seezen; ofte forsothe they be- 
forn ocupien werst thingis, the concience 
10vndernemende. Whan forsothe ther is 
ferful shreudenesse, it is 3ouen in to the 
condepnacioun of alle thingus ; euermor 
presumeth cruel thingis a conscience dis- 
iiturbid. No thing forsothe is drede®’, but 
helpe of presumpcioun, betra3yng! of 
12the helpis of tho3t. And whil fro with- 
inne lasse is the abiding, the more it 
weneth the power of his cause, of the 
iswhiche torment it 3yueth. Thei for- 
sothe, that verreli the vnmy3ti ny3t, and 
slepende the same slep, ouercomende from 
i4the lowest, and fro the he3est, otherwhile 
thei weren stirid hider and thider, bi 
the drede of the wndris, otherwhile the 
lyues faileden bi ouerleding ; forsothe to 


of cloudis, lettinge the listnyng of the eir. slepynge ; Egipcians, that slepten sum deel in tho thre dayes, 
myche that summe of hem dieden. bi leding ouer ; that is, bi departing of the soule fro the body. Lire here. c. 


zhilyde 4. 


! a disturblid «. 
4 perishen scn. 


e dredeful . 


b inwardli 4. 


h and thei 1. 


WISDOM. 


bb Om. c pr. m. 
f betraizingis ac. 


XVl.4——94. 


in derk synnes, thei weren scaterid bi 
derk hidyng of for3etyng, dredynge hid- 
ousli, and disturblid with ful greet won- 
dryng. For the denne that withhelde hem, 4 
kepte not with out drede; for whi sown 
comynge doun disturblide hem, and soreu- 
ful persoones apperynge to hem, 3auen 
drede to hem. And sotheli no my3t ofs 
fier my3te 3yue lizt to hem, and the cleer 
flawmes of sterris my3ten not liz3tne that 
hidouse ny3t. Sotheli sodeyn fier* ful of¢ 
drede apperide to hem; and thei weren 
smytun with the drede of that face, that 
was not seyn, and gessiden tho thingis to 
be worse, that weren seyn. And scornest7 
of whitche craft weren leid to, and the 
glorie of wisdom was chastisyng with 
dispisyng. For thei, that bihijten hems 
silf to putte awei dredis and disturb- 
lyngis fro a sijk soule, weren ful with 
scorn, and weren sijk for drede. For whis 
thou3 no thing of the wondris a3ens kynde 
disturblide hem, thei weren mouyd bi 
the passyng of beestis, and bi the hiss- 
yng of eddris, and" trembliden, and pe- 
rischiden ; and denyeden, that thei sien the 
eyr, which a man my3te not ascape bi 
ony resoun; for whi worste thingis bifore 
ocupien ofte, while the conscience repreu- 


* sudeyn fier ; 
that is, apper- 
yng at a mo. 
ment, not to 
coumfort of 
hem, but more 
to discoumfort, 


c. 

+ And scornes ; 
that is, scorn 
of the wicchis 
of Farao, nei3- 
ede to the for- 
seid yuels. 

and the glorie - 
of wisdom, ete; 
that is, wisdom, 
of which the 
wicchis hadden 
glorie, was 
cbastisid with 
dispit, for they 
weren smytun 
with othere 
men, so that 
they my3ten not 
helpe hem silf, 
nether othere 
men. 

of wondris 
a3enus kynde ; 
for thei weren 
customable to 
siche wondris. 
passing of 
beestis, ete.s for 
whi drede mak- 
ith to forme 
ymage of ferd- 
ful thingis bi 

a litil noyse, as 
he that dredith 
myche, bileueth 
that enemyes 
comen, bi the 
sowne of leeuys, 
ether ony sich 
thing. Lire 
here. C. 

¢ wickidnesse is 
dredeful ; for it 
makith men 


eth. For sithen wickidnesse is dreedfult, 10 aredeful. Zire 


it is 30ouun in to condempnacioun of alle 
men; for whi a conscience disturblid pre- 
sumeth§ euere wickid thingis. 
drede is no thing, no! but help of pre- 
sumpcioun, and schewyng of thou3t of 
helpis. 
fro with ynne, it gessith gretter power 
of that cause, of which it 3yueth turment. 


And the while lesse abydyng is 12 


here. © 

§ presumeth ; 
that is, bi for- 
gessing grete 


For whi it yuels to com- 


ynge on it silf. 
of presump- 
cioun; that is, 
encressing of 
gessing of peyne 
neizinge. 
abidyng ; that 
is, lesse hope of 
help is in the 
oule of him 


Forsothe thei, that camen in to a my3ti ni3t||, 13 that dredith, 


and comynge aboue fro loweste thingis, 
and fro hizeste thingis, thei slepynge the 


grettere ; for 
he hileueth, 
that more yuels 
schulen come. 


same sleep, weren hurlid sum tyme bi14 Lire here. c. 


{ in to a mizti 


J , Z . ny3t : that is. 
in to thicke derknessis, that ben seid a my3ty ny3t bi long duryng, that is, of thre dayes, and bi thicknesse, for which thei my3ten not stire hem 
silf fro ber place. fro loweste ; that is, fro erthe and water, fro whiche stieden smokis, makinge greet the eir. fro hizeste; that is, fro thickenesse 


© the sterres 4. ce dreden c. 


i Om. 1. 


suffriden anoon ferdful dremys, in so 


XVII. 1§5——XVIII. 5. 


them sodeyn and vnhopid drede ouer- 
iscam. Theraftir if any of hem hadde 
falle doun, he was kept in prisoun, with 
16oute iren, reclosid; if forsothe a cher} 
who were, or a shepperde, or a werch- 
ere of feeldis, were beforn ocupied, 
vnscapable, ‘or that my3t not be fled®, 
iwynede he suffrede. With oon forsothe 
cheyne of dercnesses alle thei weren 
bounde togidere; or puffende wind, or 
sweet soun of briddes among thicke! 
braunchis of tres, or* strengthe of ful 
ismyche rennende doun water, or strong 
soun of stones fallid doun, or the vnseen 
cours of pleiende bestes, or the stronge 
vois of loowende bestes, or the aj3een 
sounende rebounding of soun fro! the 
he3est hillis, maden them failende for 
19 drede. 
erthis was li3tid with cler li3t, and con- 
20tened in werkis not lettid. Forsothe 
only to them was ouerset a greuous ny3t, 
ymage of derenesses, that was to come 
‘on to™ them; thanne thei to themself 
weren mor greuous than the dercnessis. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 To thi seyntes forsothe was most 1i3t, 
and the vois forsothe of these the enemys 
herden, but the figure thei sejen not; 
and® for not and thei bi the same thingus 
hadden ‘suffrid, thei magnefieden thee. 

2And for biforn hurt thei weren, for thei 
weren not hurt, graces thei diden to 
thee; and that ther were difference, 

3thee, God, thei askeden. For the whiche 
thei hadden to the vnknowe lif ledere, a 
brennende piler of fyr; and thou 3eue 
the sunne, withoute hurting of good her- 
4berewe. Wrthi forsothe thei® to? lacken 
li3t, and to? suffrin prisoun of dercnesses, 
that enclosid kepten thin holi sones; bi 
whom the vucorupt li3t of lawe bigan to 
sben 3ouen to the world. Whan thei 


WISDOM. 


Forsothe al the roundnesse of - 


117 


drede of wondris a3ens kynde, sum tyme 
the soulis failiden bi ledyng ouer; for 
why sudeyn drede and vnhopid, cam on 
hem. Afterward if ony of hem hadde felis 
doun, he was kept closid in prisoun, with 
out yrun; for if ony cheerl* was, ethiris 
scheepherd, ethir a* werk man of feeldis, 
and was bifore ocupied, he suffride nede 
that mi3te not be ascapid. For whi alle17 
men weren boundun togidere bi o chayne 
of derknessis; ether a wynd hissynge, 
ether swete sown of briddis bitwixe the 
thicke bowis of trees, ethir the feersnesse 
of watir rennynge doun greetli, ethir ais 
strong soun of stoonys cast doun, ethir 
the rennyng vnseyn of beestis pleiynge, 
ethir the strong vois of beestis lowynge, 
ethir eccot sownynge a3en fro hizeste 
hillis, maden hem failynge for drede. 
Forsothe al the world{ was 1i3tned with 19 
cleer li3t, and was! not™ withholdun in 
werkis lettid. But a greuouse ni3t, the2o 
ymage of derknessis, that was to comyng 
on hem, was set on hem aloone; therfor 
thei weren greuousere to hem silf than the 
derknessis. — 


CAP. XVIII. 


But ful greet 1i3t was" to thin hoolit 
seruauntis, and sotheli enemyes herden 
the vois) of hem, but thei sien not the 
figure, ethir schap; and for also thei® 
suffriden not bi the same thingis, thei 
magnefieden thee. And for thei werene 
hirt bifore|], thei diden thankyngis to thee, 
for thei weren not hirt; and that dif- 
ference schulde be bitwive hem and [’gip- 
cians, thei axiden thee, God. For whichs 
thing thei§[ hadden a brennynge piler of 
fier, the ledere of vnknowun weie; and 
thou 3auest the sunne, with out hirtyng of 
good herbore. Forsothe thei weren wor-4 
thi to wante 1i3t, and to suffre the prisoun 
of derknessis, whiche helden thi sones 
enclosid** ; bi whiche sores the vncorrupt 


gOm.cetrpr.m. bouther azan. ithoozr prom. ‘kaa. bieprm. Jofa. ™vnto ac. Om. 4. 


othei ben a4. P Om. £ sec. m. 


kOm.1. litwasr ™Om.1. 


2 ther was I. 


9 thei, that is, Ebreis v. 


* ony cheerl ; 
where enere 
ony man was 
ocupied in feeld, 
ether in hows, 
whanne the 
derknessis 
camen on hem, 
he dwellide 
there thre 
dayes. Lire 
here. c. 


+ ether ecco ; 
that is, a soun 
foldid a3en. 

ire here. c. 
that Is, a vois 
rebonndynge 
ajen. V. that is, 
a soun sownyng 
ajen, K. 
t al the world, 
etc.; out of the 
place of Egip- 
cians. 
liztned ; in 
sa myche, that 
no man was 
lettid fro hise 
werkis. 


ymage, ele. 3 
for it fyguride 
the derknessis 
of helle, in to 
which thei dis- 
serueden ta go, 
for her synnes. 
Live here. c. 


§ the voiss that 

is, of Ebreys. 

Lire here. c. 

| Aire dbifor ; 

that is, of E- 

gipcians, bi 

harde tranelis, 

in i. c°. of Ex- 

odi. 

not hirt ; in 

x. veniaunces, 

as Egipeians 

weren. Lire , 
ere. Ce 

q thei ; that is, 

Fgipcians. Lire 

here. C. 


** enclosid; and 
snffriden not 
hem ga out of 
Egipt, ta make 
sacrifice to the 
Lord. Lire 
here. C. 


118 


tho3ten to slen the fauntis of riz3twis 
men; and oon sone leid out, and deli- 
uered, and in to the ouerleding of them, 
thou tooke awei the multitude of sones, 
and togidere thein thou spildist in strong 
é6water. That forsothe ny3t is knowen 
biforn of 9 oure fadris, that verreli wit- 
ende bi what othis thei leeneden, thei 
z7shulden ben mor stedefast. Forsothe 
ther is taken of thi puple helthe, for- 
sothe of ri3twis men; of vnri3twis men 
sforsothe destro3ing. Forsothe as thou 
hurtedest oure aduersaries, so and vs 
gsterende, thou magnefiedist. Hidendely 
forsothe the ri3twis childer of goode men 
sacrifieden, and the lawe of ry3twisnesse 
thei disposeden to" acord; lic maner ri3t- 
wis men goodes and eueles to resceyuen, 
noble preisingus to the fader of* alle 
iosingende. Forsothe the vncouenable vois 
of enemyes sounede, and wepful weiling 
i10f bewepte 3unge childer was herd. Lic 
peyne forsothe the seruaunt with the 
lord is tormentid; and a man of the 
puple to the king lic thyngis suffrede. 
12Thanne lic maner alle with o name of 
’ deth hadden vnnoumbrable deade men, 
ne the quyke forsothe suffiseden to birien; 
for 0 moment the nacioun of hem, that 
13 was mor cler, is distroj3ed. Of alle for- 
sothe they not leeuende for the bene- 
fetes, thanne whan first was the deth of 
the first goten, thei bihiz3ten hemself the 
\puple of God to ben. Whan forsothe 
quyete silence contenede alle thingus, and 
the ny3t in his cours hadde the mene 
isweie, thin almy3ti wrd, Lord, goende 
out fro heuene, fro the kingus setes cam ; 
i6an hard ouercomere it is, in to the myd- 
del lond of deth; leep forth a sharp swerd 
berende in to thi licned empire; and 
stondende fulfilde alle thingus with deth, 


that is, knoulechen Moises and 


thi word almy3ti ; that is, 


.@Om. a4. 


P sones, the firste gendrid v. 


WISDOM. 


T into 4aGn. 


Ghem, thal is, Ebreis oui of Egipl v. 


XVII. 6-—16. 


lijt of lawe bigan to be 3ouun to the 
world. Whanne thei thou3ten to sle thes 
3onge children of iust men; and whanne 
o sone was put forth, and delyuered, thou 
tokist* awei the multitude of sones? t+, for 
the ledyng ouer of hem4, and thou lost- 
ist hem togidere in strong watir. For-6 
sothe thilke ny3t was knowun bifore of 
oure fadris, that thei witynge verili to 
whiche othis thei bileuyden, schulden be 
more paciente. Forsothe helthe of iust7 
men was resseyned verili of thi puple, ‘and 
also’ distriyng of vniust men. For ass 
thou hirtidist® oure aduersaries, so thou 
excitidist also vs, and magnefiedist vs. 
For whi iust children of goode men{o 
maden sacrifice priueli, and disposiden 
the lawe of rij3tfulnesse in to acordyng ; 
thei disposiden iust men to resseyue 
goodis and yuels in lijk maner, and 
sungen heriyngis to the fadir of alle 
men. 
sownede, and wepeful weilyng of bi- 


But vnsemeli vois of enemyes to 


* tokist : fro 
present liyf. 
Lire here. c. 
+t of sones; that 
is, of the firste 
gendride of 
Egipt. 

leding ouer ; 
that is, in the 
leding of Ebreys 
out of Egipt. 
lostist hem 3 
that is, Egip- 
cians, fadris of 
the children 
slayn. 

whiche othis s 
that is, to God- 
dis affermyngis 
maad to hem 
and to her fa- 
dris. Lire here. 
Cc. 


t tust children 
of goode men, 
etc.; that is, 
Ebreys, the 
sones of patri- 
arkis. 
disposiden, 
ete.; that is, 
resseyueden 
acordingly. 
the lawe of 
riztfulnesse 3 
3ounn in the 
hil of Synay. 
to resseyue 
goodis and 
yuels; that is, 
disposide to res- 


weperis of jonge children was herd. For- 11 seyue paciently, 


sothe the seruaunt was turmentid bi lijk 
peyne with the lord; and a man of the 
puple suffride thingis lijk the kyng. 


Therfor in lijk maner alle men bi o name 12 


of deth hadden deed men vnnoumbrable, 
for nether quyke men suffiseden to birie; 
for whi the nacioun of hem, that was 
clerere than othere, was destried in 0 mo- 
ment. 
not bileuynge§ for benefices, bihijten hem 
thanne to be Goddis puple, whanne the 
distriyng of the firste gendryd thingis was 


for the loue of 
God, prosperites 
and aduersites 
sent, and to he 
sent, bi Goddis 
wille. 
heriyngis ; in 
prosperites and 
aduersites, 

to the fadir of 
alle ; that is, 
to God. 
weilyng of bi- 
weperis; that 
is, which wepten 


Forsothe of alle Zgipcians men 13 for the sleyng 


of 3onge chil- 
dren. Lire here. 


c. 

§ men not bi- 
leuyng; to God 
and to Moyses. 


first. Forsothe whanune alle thingis helden 14/7 Senefices ; 


restful silence, and the ny3t hadde the 


myddil weie in his cours, Lord, thi word 15 


almy3ti|| comynge swiftli fro heuene, cam 
fro the kyngis seetis; a scharp swerd ber-1 
ynge thi comaundement not feyned, cam 


: Ebreys. to be the puple of God; for thanne thei leeten hem go, as the seruauntis of God ; 
bihy3ten hem silf ta be Goddis puple ; bi this, that thei obeyeden to Goddis heeste, 3 


thi comaundement of the sleyng of the first gendrid thingis. 


8 Om, a. 


T but c ef cetcri. § hurtist s. 


3ouun in the 
doing awei of 
veniaunces ; for 
whanne the 
veniaunces 
weren doon 


gawey, they 


turneden a3en 
to her hard- 
nesse in synne. 
bihizten hem ; 


ether Egipcians 
of the sendynge out of Ebreys. Lire here. c. 
swerd beringe; that is, tillinge. Lire here. c. 


|| Lord, 


XVIII. 17—25. ‘WISDOM. 119 


and vnto heuene ateynede, stondende in 
17the erthe. Thanne anoon the si3te of 
euele sweuenes disturbide them, and 
isdredes oncamen vnhopid. And an other 
elleswher cast forth half on lyue, for 
what' cause of deth he diede, he shewede. 
19 Forsothe the viseouns that disturbeden 
hem, these thingus biforn warneden, that 
thei shulden not pershen vnkunnynge, 
20 whi thei suffreden eueles. Thanne for- 
sothe touchede and ri3twismen the tempt- 
acioun of deth, and ther is mad of the 
multitude a stiring in wildernesse; but 
21not longe abod stille thi wrathe. A man 
forsothe goende withoute blame to prejen 
for puples, bringende forth of hys seruyse 
the sheeld an" orisoun, and bi encens 
prezing aleggyng, withstod to the wrathe, 
and ende putte to the nede, shewende for 
22thi seruaunt he is. Forsothe he ouer- 
_cam cumpanys, not in vertue of body, ne 
in’ armure of power; but in wrd hym 
that ouertrauailede hym, he vndircaste”, 
remembrende the othis of fadris, and tes- 
23tament. Whan forsothe now hipyllmelum 
thei hadden fallen dead, either vp on 
other, he stod betwen, and kutte awei 
the bure, and deuydede that* weie, that 
24to the men. on lyue Jadde. Forsothe in 
the clothing of the preest coepe, that he 
hadde, was al the roundnesse of erthis; 
and the grete thingus of fadris weren 
granen in foure ordres of stones; and 
thi grete doyng in the** dyademe of hys 
25hed was writen. ‘To theseY forsothe ‘he 
jaf stede’, that distro3ede”*, and these 
thingus he ful out dredde ; forsothe ther 
was alone suffycyent temptyng of wrathe. 


forth, ouercomere in to the myddil of the * Thane anoon; 
lond of destriyng ; and it stood, and fillide bifore’ yuele 


alle thingis with deeth, and it stood in be i 


erthe, and stretchide forth til to henene, £2"! sleing of 
the firste gen- 


Thanne anoon* the si3tis of yuel dremes 17 ong children. 


. P 5 ire here. c. 
disturbliden hem, and dredis not hopid + tempracioun 


a of deth ; that 
camen aboue. And another man cast forth 18 te sangachid’ 


half quyk in an other place, schewide for bide). 

what cause of deth he diede. For whitghere fon set is. 
are e 5 i mouyng togidere 
si3tis that disturbliden heim, bifore warn- of dissencioun, 


ae : isid hy Cl 
eden these thingis, that thei schulden  gndhisefelowis. 


i ; . . a man with- 
perische not vnwityngli, why thei suf- jC humts 


friden yuels. Forsothe temptacioun of 20 that is, cpr 
s be yuynge feith- 
deth} touchide thanne also iust men, and _ fuli anentis 
r . God, and iustly 
mouyng togidere of multitude was maad  anentis the 


in desert ; but thin ire dwellide not longe. ee 


For a man without pleynt hastide to2itynee 
; @ azen stood ire ; 
biseche for puplis, and he brou3te forth _ in plesinge God 
‘ . bi his preyer. 
preier the scheld of his seruyce, and he — ouercam cum- 
‘ . . 3 that 
aleggide preier bi encence, and azen stood 1 Vitnessis of 


ire ¢ . disturblinge the 
ire; and he settide an ende to the nedef, Se are 
and schewide that he was thi seruaunt. “ere. c. 

+ t éo the nede; 
Forsothe he ouercam cumpenyes, not bi 22 that is, to deth. 


vertu of bodi, nether bi armure of power ; Raa a 


but he remembride the othis, and the tes- apiicue preiee. 
tament of fadris, and bi word he made ide him sil 

: "| that is, t 
hym suget, that trauelide hym silf. For 23 brennyng. 


: : h th 
whanne deed men fellen doun bi heepis, pupte. of whos 


ech on other, he stood bitwixe ‘deed men  >rennyng Aa- 


fits i ron was tra- 

and lyuynge', and kittide't awei the feers- a 
e ETE. Co 

nesse of brennyng, and departide that 4 ihe wort 


. +94 was 3 bi signe- 
weie, that ledde to quyke men. For whi2s fee ether A. 


al the world was|] in the cloth lastynge to as 
the heelis, which he hadde; and the af facile pit 
grete thingis of fadris weren grauun in ie AU lates: 


foure ordris of stoonys; and, Lord, thi cohen 


magnyficence* was writun in the dia- eaten SS 


deme of his heed. Forsothe he that dis- 95 here. c. 


triede, jaf stide to these thingis, and dredde Be ee 


INOS ° ; 4 temptacioun of 
these thingis; for whi the temptacioun gh tion 


aloone was sufficient to ire {. ae ae 
of Goddis 


veniaunce ajenns al the puple; nobut the bischop hadde plesid. Lire here. c. 


tthe what e prem. ofancpr.m.u. VOm.c. Wouercastec. *it that eprom. ** Om. G. 
Ythis E pr.m. % wente awei EB pr.m. 2 distrojeden c. : 


t the deede and the quyke1. ‘tkitte1, % magnyficence, that is, thin hiz name tetragramaton v. 


120 


CAP. XIX. 


1 To the vnpitouse forsothe and to the 
laste withoute mercy wrathe cam vpon ; 
forsothe he knew biforn and the thingis 

2to comen of hem. For whan thei weren 
turned, and hadden suffrid, that thei 
shulden lede them, and with gret bisy- 
nesse thei hadden sent them? beforn, ther 
folewede forsothe them the deede of pe- 

3naunce. 3it forsothe among the hondys 
hauende weiling, and weping at the mo- 
numentes of the deade, an other thynk- 
ing of vnkunnyng thei® token to them ; 
and whom pre3ende thei hadden throwen 
awei, them as fugitifes thei pursueden. 
4Forsothe ther ladde them to that ende 
wrthi necessite, and of these thingis that 
hadden fallen, the mynde thei losten, that 
that lackeden of tormentis, punshyng 
sshulde fulfillen, and thi puple forsothe 
merueylously shulde passe; thei forsothe 


6newe deth shulden fynde. Eche creature 


forsothe to his kinde fro the bigynnyng 
was azeen figured, deseruend to thin 
hestes, that thi childer shulden be kept 
z7vnhurt. For a cloude shadewede the 
tentes of hem, and in the water that was 
biforn, the erthe aperede drie; and in the 
rede se weie with oute lettyng, and a 
8buriounende feeld of ful gret depthe ; bi 
the whiche alle nacioun passede, that was 
couered with thin hond ; seende forsothe 
9thi merueiles and wndris. As hors for- 
sothe thei gnowen mete, and as lombis 
thei ful out io3eden, magnefiende thee, 
10 Lord, for thou delyueredest hem. For- 
sothe myndeful they weren 3it? of tho 
thingus, that were don in the comeling 
wonyng of hem; as for the nacioun of 
bestes, the erthe bro3te out flee3es, and for 
the>» fisshes, the flod bolkede* out mul- 
11 titude® of frogges. At the laste forsothe 


@QOm.c prom, athe ac. > Om. c pr.m, 


v Om. A sec. m. 


WISDOM. 


bb Om. c prim. 


XIX. I—1I. 


CAP. XE : 


Forsothe ire with out merci cam on1 
wickid men til’ in to the laste*; forwhi 
God bifore knew also the thingis to com- _ the drenching 
: = of hem. Lire 
ynge of hem. For whanne thei weren2 tere.c. 
turned, and hadden suffrid, that thei 


* to the laste ; 
that is, til to 


schulden Jede out hem}, and hadden bifor +t /ede cut hem; 
sent hem with greet bysynesse, the dedis that Egipoull 


of repentyng sueden hem. For thei hau-3 0%? Sue 


ynge 3it morenyng bitwixe the hondis, tan of 
and thei biwepynge at the sepulcris of  ‘epenting, 
deed men, token to hem anothir thou3t Setcleal Bs 
of vnkunnyng} ; and thei pursueden tho ating ouell 
Ebreis, as fleeris awei, whiche thei prei- re Puvle.of 


ynge hadden sent forth. For whi worthi /r.c- 


,  Leonkunnyng; 
nede ledde hem to this ende, and thei thatis, of led- 


losten remembryng of these thingis, that ie of 
hadden bifeld”, that punyschyng schulde chat fs, aa 
that schulde be 


fille tho thingis, that failiden of tur- 

‘ 3 3 3ounn to hem 
mentis, and that sotheli thi puple schuldes pee y 
passe wondurfuli ; forsothe that thei here. a 
schulden fynde a newe deth. For whie 
ech creature seruynge to thin heestis, was 
refourmed§ to his kynde at the bigyn-  § was refourm. 


nyng, that thi children schulden be kept sige to oa 


of whom ech 


vnhirt. For whi a cloude bischadewide7 creature is 
the castels of hem, and drie erthe apperide [2s /#e 
in watir that was bifore; and a weie with 

out letting apperide in the reed see, and 

a feeld buriownynge fro ful greet depthe||; a depilia 


bi which fee/d al the nacioun passide, that 8 botme of the 
was hilid with thin hond; forsothe thei “° "de 
sien thi merueilis and wondris. For theis (3/4 
" F uriownynge. 
as horsis deuouriden mete{, and as Jam- “ee here 
. oO euouriaen 
bren thei maden ful out ioye, magnefiynge mete ; thatis, 
: token the ar- 
thee, Lord, that delyueredist hem. For 10 mais of Egipa 
thei weren myndeful 3it of tho-thingis, G2y%,v>iche 


thei sien deed 

that weren don in the dwellyng of hem © the brinke 
ser of the see. 

among Egipcians; hou the lond brou3te — Lire here. ¢. 


forth flies, for the nacioun of beestis, and 
the flood brou3te forth multitude of pad- 
dokis, for fischis. Forsothe at the lasti1 


¢ bowede cu. ¢¢ the multitude «. 


w bifalle 1. 


XIX. 12—20. 


they sejen a newe creature of briddes, 
whan, lad bi lust, thei askeden metes of 
12delicious eting. In the speche forsothe 
of the desir, stez3ede vp to them fro the 
se a curlu; and trauailes to synneres 
camen vp on, not withoute tho euydences, 
that weren mad bi the fors of flodis. 
Ri3twisly forsothe thei suffreden, aftir 
13 their shreudenesses; forsothe in to abho- 
minable hospitalite thei stoden in. Othere 
forsothe vnknowen comelingus resceyu- 
eden not; othere forsothe goode gestes 
i4in to seruage token. And not onli these 
thingus, but an other forsothe respit of 
hem was, for maugre theires thei re- 
1ssceyueden straungeres. Who forsothe 
with gladnesse resceyueden them, that 
hadden vsid the same enformyngus, with 
most cruel sorewes thei tormenteden. 
ie Smyte forsothe thei ben with blindnesse, 
as thei in the® 3ates of the ri3twise, with 
sodeyn dercnesses, whan thei ben couered; 
eche oon® so3te the passing out of his 
17dore. In to them self forsothe whil the 
elemens ben turned, as in an orgne of 
qualite the soun is chaungid, and alle 
kepen ther soun; wherfore of that ser- 
18teyn si3te it may be eymed. Feeldi wilde 
thingus in to watrif ben turned ; what- 
euere weren swymmende, in the erthe 
19passeden. Fyr in the watir hadde 
strengthe ouer his vertue; and water 
20 forzat® his quenchende kinde. Flaumes 
ajeenward trauaileden uot the flesh of 
the coruptible bestes goende togidere; ne 
dissoluede it, that li3tli was dissolued as 
ijs, good mete. In alle thingus forsothe 
thou magnefiedist’ thi puple, Lord, and 
wrshepedist ; and dispisedist not, in alle 


WISDOM. 


121 


thei sien a newe creature of briddis, 
whanne thei weren led bi coueitise, and 
axiden metis of feeste. For in the spek- 
ynge to* of her desir, a* curlew stiede 


* in the spek- 
ing to, ete. ; 
that is, at the 
axing of hem, 
12 bi her desir. 
aecurlu; that 
is, a greet mul- 


to hem fro the see; and diseesis camen__ titude of cur- 
‘ - = lewis. Lire 
on synneris, and not with out preuyngis here. c. 
+ ajenus her 


of tho thingis, that weren don bifor bi theY wille; that is, 

. : ° with hardnesse 
feersnesse of floodis. For thei suffriden lust- fF cheer and of 
li, bi? her wickidnessis; for thei ordeyneden 13 ¥°"4is. 


Pon ,  resseyueden 
more abhomynable vnospitalite. Sotheli — straungeris; 


to herbore, as 


summe resseyueden not vnknowun come- _ it bifallith sum- 
Bs . tyme, that thei 
lyngis; sotheli othere token good men her- that 3ynen 
borid in to thraldom. And not oneli thei 14 Bimess ah 
diden these thingis, but sotheli also an- _ pisingis foie 
A 5 .  axeris, that 
other biholding of hem was, that thei theisillen to 
if : = dere to hem. 
a3ens her wille} resseyueden straungeris. Lire here. c. 


: : - t thei that 
Forsothe thei that vsiden the same or-15 7 0 me 


dynaunces }, turmentiden with cruelest °denaunces; 


8 s that is, Egip- 
sorewis hem, that resseyueden with glad- cians, that 


t _ vsiden orde- 
nesse. Forsothe thei weren smytun with 16 nannces asenus 
ate . £5 the good of 
blyndnesse, as thei in the 3atis of the iust Gspitaite. 
man, whanne thei weren hilid with su- “4 7esseyu- 
eden with glad- 


nesse ; that is, 


deyne derknessis; ech man sou3te the 
Ebreys resseyn- 


passyng of his dore. Forsothe while ele- 17 ynge straun- 
i. z < eris gladly. 
mentis ben turned in to hem silf, as the oth biynd. 
nesse; thre 


sown of maner is chaungid in orgun, and - gavesin derk- 
nessis, that 


alle thingis kepen her sown§; wherfor it 

‘ Z ¥ é my3ten be 
mai be gessid of that certeyn si3t. Beestis 18 gropid, r 
of the feeld|| weren turned in to beestis seo tie 


is, Sodomytis. 
1 in th ta 
of watir; what euer weren swymmynge facing 


the iust man ; 


thingis4], 3eden in the lond. Fier in watir 19 thatis, of Loth. 
; Lire here. c. 
hadde power aboue his vertu; and water eee 
sown; that is 
for3at the kynde quenchynge. A3enward 20 bi the disposi- 
oe a8 8 4 % cioun of him 
flawmes of corruptible beestis disesiden that makith 
melodie, so 


not the fleischis of Hbreis goynge togi- 
dere; nethir departiden that good mete, 
that was departid li3tly as iys. Forsothe, 
Lord, thou magnefiedist thi puple in alle 
thingis, and onouridist; and dispisidist 


the doyng of 
creature was 
chaungid, in 
the punysch- 
yng of Egip- 
cians, bi dispo- 
sicioun of the 
creatour. Lire 
here. Cc. 

| beestis of the 


feeld; that is, beestis dwellinge in feeldis, as oxis and werk beestis. weren turned; not bi substannce, but bi goyng, that is, Ebreys with her 


beestis 3eden thoron the depthe of the see, which is the dwelling of fischis. Lire here. c. 


G swymmynge thingis ; as it is opyn of paddokis, 


entringe in to the honsis of Egipcians. fier and water hadden power ; in brennyng strongly, aboue his kyndly vertu. flawmes of corruptible 
beestis ; that is, of eddris and draguns, brethinge out fier. disesiden not the fleischis, of the sones of Israel. goynge togidere ; bi desert, wher ynne 
was & serpent brennynge bi blast, in viij. c°. of Deutronome, that is, many siche serpentis weren there. Lire here. ¢. 


€Om. zr. ¢¢ Om.c prim. 


x the 1. 
VOL. III. 


f 


y Om. 1. 


R 


watir ce. 8 forjat of arc, 


2 aftir 1. 


122 WISDOM. 


tyme and in alle place stondende ny3 to _ not, and helpidist hem in ech tyme and 
them. in ech place’. ; 


Here endith the book of Sapiens, and 
now bigynneth the prolog of Ecclesias- 
ticus», 


b From 4. Explicit cen. No final rubric in a. 


a Here endith the book of Wisdom, and here bigynneth the book of Ecclesiastici. crusxa. Here endith the 
book of Wysdom, and bigynneth a prolog on Ecclesiastici. G. Here endith the book of Wisdom, and bigynneth 
Ecclesiasticus. nu. Heere endith the book of Wisdom, and bigynnith the book of Ecclesiasticus. 1nq. Here 
endith the booc of Sapiens or Wisdom; se now the prolog of the booc of Ecelesiastici. x. Here endith the 
book of Wisdom, and here bigynneth the book of Ecclestastict, that tretith also of wisdom and prudence in 


many degrees of the world. m. Heere eendith Sapience, and bigynneth the prolog upon the book of 


Ecclestastici. R. Here endith Sapiens, and bigyn{neth] the book of Ecclesiasticus. v. No final rubric 
in AEPY. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 





Heer gynneth*® the prologe in the 
booe of Ecclesiastict®. 


OFF manye and grete bi the lawe, and 
profetes,-and othere, that foleweden hem, 
wisdam to vs is shewed. In the whiche 
it behoueth to preisen Irael, bi cause of 
doctrine and of* wisdam; for not onli 
hem spekende, nedful it is to be wis, 
but also straungeres to moun, and seiende 
and writende, to be mad most wis. Myn 
elde-fader Jhesus, aftir that hymself he 
jaf more to besynesse of lessoun of lawe, 
and of profetes, and of othere bokis, that 
to vs of oure fadris ben taken, and he 
wolde write sum what of these, that to 
wisdam and doctrine pertenen, that men 
desirende to lernen, and to be mad 
wise men, of hem more and more thei 
taken heed in inwit, and ben confermed 
to the lawful lif. Also I moneste? 30u 
to comen with wel® willingnesse, and 
with mor bisy studi to do lessoun, and 
to han for3yuenesse in tho! thingus, in 
whiche wee ben seen folewende the 
yinage of wisdam, and to defauten® in 
the making togidere of wrdys. For Ebru 
wrdis failen*, whan thei weren trans- 
latid to! an other tunge. Forsothe not 
oneli this, but and that lawe, and pro- 
fetes, and othire thingis of bokes, han 
not a litil difference, whan betwen* hem- 
self thei ben seid. For in the ei3te and 
threttithe! 3er, in the tymes of king 


b From ru. Prologus c. 


& bygynnith 1. 
€Om.c,  f thes acu. 


d amoneste AEGHI. 
I the threttithe Ez. 


No initial rnbric in the other Mss. 
& faile 1. 


[Prologue to Ecclesiasticus.] 


Wispom is schewid to us of fele and 
greet bi the lawe, and prophetis, whiche 
folewide hem. In which thingis it bihou- 
eth to preise Israel, bi cause of doctrine 
and wisdom; for not which it is neces- 
sarie thilke spekers to be wise, but also 
strangers mouje, and reders and writers, 
be also imade best itau3te. My graun- 
fadir Jhesus, bisiloker to diligence of red- 
yng of the lawe, and prophetis, and of 
othir bokes, that beth of oure fadris itake 
to us, thanne wolde he write sum thing 
here of, which that perteynid to doctrine 
and wisdom, as desires to lerne and of 
hem to be made wijs, more and more in 
biholdyng in inwitt, and to be confermed 
to laweful lyf. Therfore I warne 3ou to 
come with goode wille with the more 
bisili stodie the lesson to make, and haue 
in hem forzeuenesse, in which as semeth 
folwynge the ymage of wisdom, and lack- 
ide compassionn of wordis. For Ebrewe 
wordis lackide, whanne thei weren trans- 
latid to an alien tunge. Not oonli thei, but 
also the self lawe, and the prophetis, and 
othre thingis of bokis, haueth not a litil 
difference, whanne thei ben ispoken bi- 
twixe hemself. For the ei3te and the 
thrittenthe 3eer of the tyme of Tolomeye 
Euergete king, aftir that he came in to 
Egipt, and I hadde there abide longe 


¢ Om. c pr.m. 


hfajlideny. iinto acu.  * bitwixe 1, 


RQ 


124 


Ptholome Euergeet™, aftir that I cam 
in to Egipt, and whan myche of tyme 
I hadde ben there, I fond there bokes 
laft, not of litil doctrine, ne to ben dis- 
pisid. And soo good and necessarie trow- 
ede and I myself to adden sum dili- 
gence and trauaile of" remenyng® this 
bok, and with myche waking I leide to? 
‘besynesse of 4 doctrine, in space of tyme 
to 3yue this boc to tho thingus that leden 
to an ende, and to them that wiln the 
inwit bisiyn, and lernen, hou it behoueth 
to enformen maneres, that after the lawe 
of the Lord purposen lif™ to leden. 


Here endith the prolog, and now be- 
gynneth the book of Ecclesiasticus*. 


Here begynnith the boke of Eccle- 


siastici, 
CAP. I. 


1 Allie wisdam of the Lord God is, and 
with hym was euermor, and is biforn 
zaungelis during. The grauel of the se, 
and the dropis of reyn, and the dajes of 
the world, who distinctli hath” noum- 
brede? The heizte of heuene‘, and the 
brede of erthe, and the depthe of the 
3se, who distinctli mesurede? The wis- 
dam of God goende beforn alle thingus, 
4who enserchede? First of alle formed is 
wisdam, and the vnderstonding of pru- 
sdence, fro the during of aungelis. The 
welle of wisdam the wrd of God in 
hei3tes; and the ingoyng of it euecre 
6jastende maundemens. The roote of wis- 
dam to whom is it shewyd? and the ‘sutil 
7wittis® of it who kne3? The discyplyne 
of wisdam, to whom is it shewid, and 
Din A. 


™ eueri 3eer I. ° renewing 1. 


booc. =. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


a This prologue is taken from r. 


withouten ende v. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


P Om. 1. 
endeth the prolog ; se now the booc. 1. No final rubric in the other Mss. 
: b Om. c pr. m. 
e sutil wittynesses & pr. m. aGH. witnesses C pr. m. 


: b From Ecpy. Ecclesasticus. r. 
© deth enserchide c pr. m. nu. hath enserchide a sup. ras. doth encerche sy. doth encerchede Pp. 


i 


tyme, I fonde there bokes ilefte not of 
schrewid, neithir of dispiseable doctrine. 
So I thou3te good and necessarie to putte 
therto diligence and labour to expowne 
these bokes, and with grete wakyng I 
brou3te the doctrine, in the space of tyme 
to thilke thingis that ledeth to the eend 
to 3eue this boke, to hem that wolen 3eue 
her inwitt, and lerne hou it bihoueth to 
lerne vertues, the which purposide to lede 
her lyf aftir the Lordis lawe?. 


Here bigynneth the book of Ecclesi- 


astici®, 
CAP. I. 


Al wisdom* is of the Lord God, and1 
was euere with hym, and is bifore the 
world. Who noumbride the grauel of the2 
see, and the dropis of reyn, and the daies 
of the world? Who mesuride the hi3- 
nesse of heuene, and the breed of erthe, 
and the depthe of the see? Who enserch-3 
ide® the wisdom of God, that goith bifore 
alle thingis? Wisdom was formedt firste 4 
of alle thingis, and the vndurstonding of 
prudence, fro the world*t. The welle ofs 
wisdom) zs the sone of God in hi3 thingis ; 
and the entryng of that wisdom is euer- 
lastynge comaundementis||. ‘To whom was6é 
the roote of wisdom schewid? and who 
knewe the sutilites therof? To whom7 
was the lore of wisdom shewid, and inaad 
opyn? and who vndurstood the multi- 


4 Om. & sec.m. Ther lijf4. 8 From a4. Here 


a From 4. Heer gynneth the 
¢ heuenes c pr. m. dq of the c pr. m. 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
d world 


* wisdom; that 
is, Goddis Sone, 
that conteyneth 
ful hi3li alle 
maneris of wis- 
dom maad, is 
of the Fadir, 
and cometh 
forth of him, 
with out bi- 
gynnyng. Lire 
here. c. 
+ was formyd ; 
that is, brou3t 
forth hi euer- 
lastinge gene- 
racioun. Lire 
here. c. 
t fro the world; 
that is, fro 
without bigyn- 
nyng. Lire 
here. c. 
§ The welle of 
wisdom ; that 
is, wherof the 
werk of wisdom 
is spred forth 
as streemes. 
in hize thingis ; 
for it flowith ta 
hooli aungels, 
and aftirward 
to othere crea. 
turis. the en- 
tring ; the en- 
tringis of wis. 
dom to men 
ben seid reue- 
laciouns therof. 
Lire here. c. 
|| euerlastinge 
comaunde- 
nae sin the 
il of Syna 
God ath 
maundementis 
mete seid 
euerlastin: 
for tho bet 
weye to come 
to euerlastynge 
liyf. 


the roote of 


wisdom schew- 


id ; that is, 
knowun per- 
fitly, as if he 
seye, to no crea~ 
ture. schewid 
and maad 
opyn; that is, 
perfitly know- 
ull, as if he 
seye, to no 
creature. Lire 
here. c. 





I, 8—24. 


opened? and the multepliyng of the 
s‘incomyng’ of it who vnderstod? Oon 
is the heizest makere of no3t of alle 
thingus, al my3ti, and a my3ti king, and 
wrthi to be drad ful myche, sittende vp 
on the trone of hym, and Godd lord- 
gshipende. He formede it in the Hoeli 
Goest, and sa3, and distinctli noumbrede, 
ioand mesurede; and helde out it vpon alle 
his werkes, and vp on alle flesh aftir his 
3ifte ; he 3yueth it to men loouende itself. 
i1 The drede of the Lord glorie, and io3yng, 
and gladnesse, and coroun of outward 
12i03yng. The drede of the Lord shal de- 
lyten the herte; and shal 3yue gladnesse 
13and io3e in to the lengthe of dajes. To 
the dredende God, wel shal be in the 
laste endys; and in the dai of his diyng 
i4he shal be blissid. To whom forsothe it 
shal aperen in si3t, thei loouen it in see- 
yng, and in the knowing of his grete 
iothingus?. The loouyng of God wrshepe- 
i¢ful wisdam. The bigynnyng of wisdam 
drede of the Lord; and with feithful men 
in the wombe he is togidere formed, and 
with chosen wymmen he goth, and with 
ri3twis and feithful men he is knowen. 
17 The drede of the Lord religiosite of kun- 
isnyng. Religiosite shal kepen, and iuste- 
fien the herte; ful myrthe and io3e it 
i9shal 3yue. To the dredende God wel 
shal be; and in the da3es of endynge® 
200f hymi he shal be blessid. Plente of 
wisdam to dreden God; and plente of 
2ithe frutes of it. Eche hous of hym it 
shal fulfille fro ieneraciouns, and the 
resceyuyng places fro“ the tresores of 
2hym. The croune of wisdam drede of 
the Lord, fulfillende pes, and the frut of 
23helthe. And it sa3, and distinctli noum- 
brede it; bothe! forsothe ben the 3iftis 
24of God. Kunnyng and vnderstonding of 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


125 


pliyng of the entryng therof *? Oon is thes * of the entring 
hiz3este creatour of alle thingis, almy3ti, beg Oda 
and a my3ti kyng, and worthi to be dred je" “7 
ful miche, sittynge on the trone of that  f//efourmyde; 
. 5 e, that is, the 
wisdom, and God hauynge lordschipe. Heg Fadir mesuride. 
fourmyde} ‘that wisdom® in the Hooli pee ts 
Ghost, and he si3, and noumbride, and he fa" 
mesuride. And he schedde out it on alle 10 5 7%@iu of 
hise werkis, and on ech fleischf bi his pea ees raat 
3ifte ; he 3yueth it to hem that louen hymn. Terie ere c 
The drede of the Lord ¢s gloriet, andl ee aie 
gloriyng, and gladnesse, and a coroun of oe 
ful out ioiyng. The? drede of the Lord 121 en i 
? ype Un 
schal delite the lerte; and schal" 3yue _ si; thatis, bi 
So oc g renelacioun of 
gladnesse and ioie in to lengthe of daies§. _ profesie. Lire 
To hym that dredith God, it schal be wel isetene tie; 
in the laste thingis'; and he schal be  ‘hatis, in bap- 
ies is y tym, which is 
blessid in the dai of his deth. Forsothe 14 goostly gene- 
° ° e ° ° ° racioun, m 
thei to whiche* wisdom apperith in si3t||, —whiche the 


ones . . : ace of the 
louen! it in si3t, and in knowyng of hise Tinely Geert is 
grete thingis. The loue of God ts onour- 1572", 1”? 


able wisdom. The bigynnyng of wisdom 16 /* The drede of 


rd is 


as the™ drede of the Lord ; and it is formyd eRe 

6 O b 6 that is, bynd- 
togidere in the wombe4] with feithful men, ing SrIRine 
nyng abont 


and it goith with chosun wymmen, and is" — God, lest it 

knowun with iust men and feithful. The®17 ghee 
drede of the Lord 7s religiouste** of kun- _ delitable thingis 
uyng. Religiouste schal kepe, and schal? 18 myrthe; in pre- 


of the world. 
e . sent tyme, bi 
iustific the herte; and schal 3yue myrthe ae eee 


00 consience. 
and ioie. It schal be wel to hym that19 ora ioe; in 
dredith God ; and he schal be blessid in Ro ee: 
the daies of his coumfort. The finesse 20 geting of glorie. 

schal be wel ; 


of wisdom zs for to drede God; and ful- for in henene 
schal be noon 


nesse 7s of the frnytis therof. It schal 21 \.c, 
fille ech 3iftet{ of hym of generaciouns, <a? te blessids 
and reseitis of the tresouris therof. The ee 
° ° ts COUM= 
coroun of wisdom zs the drede of the fart; that is, 
° of blisful vsing 
Lord, and fillith pees, and the fruyt of in heuene. The. 
heelthe. And he si3, and noumbride it ; 23/jnew Ye 
forsothe euer eithir{t ben’ the 3iftis of ROE 
God. Wisdom schal departe the kunnyng 24 rie, wherynne 
5 is fulnesse of 
and vndurstondyng of prudence; and it en- 


wisdom in 
blisful si3t. 
Lire here. c. 


+t schal fille ech 3ifte ; for whi the 3iftis of God ben fillid in heuenly cuntrey, to which the drede of God bryngith. and reseitis ; that is, my3tis of 


the soule, that schulen be fillid with sonereyn perfeccioun in heuene. Lire here. c. 


f inwit E pr.m. comyng E sec. m. 


kof a. leither c et £ pr.m. 
eit1. f fleisch ether man v. & Om.1, 
mOm.1 ®itist OOm.1. POm.4. 


& hable thingis £ pr.m. 


h it schal 1. 
4 thal is, wijsdom and drede ben v. 


++ euer either ; that is, wisdom and drede. Lire here. c. 


h the coumforting cet Eprom. 1lit Eprom. 


idaiess. kwhoms.  ! that is louen v. 


126 


prudence wisdam shal with departen; and 
the glorie of men holdende itself it en- 
2shaunceth. The roote of wisdam is ‘to 
dreden™ God; the braunches forsothe" 
2cof it long lyuyng. In the tresores of 
wisdam vnderstonding, and religiosite of 
kunnyng ; kursyng forsothe to synneres 
27 wisdain®, The drede of the Lord putteth 
ggawei synne, for? who withoute drede is, 
shal not moun be iustefied; wrathefulnesse 
forsothe of4 wilfulnesse ‘ov hardynesse® of 
2za9hym is his turnyng vp so doun. Vn to 
tyme’ the pacient shal suffre; and aftir- 
30 ward ist 3eldynge" a3een of ful myrthe. 
Good wit vuto time shal hide his wrdis; 
and the lippis of manye shuln tellen out 
3ithe wit of hym. In the tresores of wis- 
sedam is toenyng of discyplyne; cursing 
forsothe to the synuere is the’ heriyng of 
33God. Sone, coueitende wisdam, kep ri3t- 
wysnesse, and God shal 3yue it to thee. 
34 Wisdam forsothe and disciplyne the drede 
of the Lord, and that weel plesid is to 
3shym, feith and debonernesse ; and it shal 
36fulfille the tresores of hym. Be thou 
not rebel, and ‘mys leeful” to the dred 
of the Lord; and ne ne3he thou to hym 
37 with double herte. Ne be thou an ipo- 
crite in the siz3te of men ; and be thou not 
38 sclaundred in thi lippes. T'ac heed in tho 
thingus, lest parauenture thou falle, and 
sobringe to thi soule vnwrsheping ; and 
God openeth in hid thingus, and* in the 
myddel of the synagogeY he hurtle thee ; 
4ofor thou ne3hedist maliciously to the 
Lord, and thin herte is ful of treccherie 
and desceyt. 
CAP. II. 
1 Sone, ne3hende to the seruage of God, 
stond in ri3twisnesse, and drede; and 
2greithe thou thi soule to tempting. Ber 
doun thin herte, and suffre, and bowe 


ll the synagoge ; that is, of gadering togidere of feithful men. Lire here. c. 


vupatience. Lire here. c. 


™ the dreed of 4. "Om.c. js wisdam 4. 
‘the tyme E prem. tOm. acu. 4 turnyngc ef EB prom. 
Y lynage a. 
rOm. x. & braunchis, that is, vertues v. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


P and a. for whi G. 





I. 25—II. 2. 


haunsith the glorie of hem, that holden  * the braunchig 
b é é therof ; that is, 
it. The roote of wisdom is for to drede 25 vertues, that 
x f : * comen forth of 
God ; forsothe thet braunchis’ therof* ben  \isdom. Lire 
. . ; og Here. C. 
longe durynge. Vndurstonding, and Be 
ligiouste of kunnyng Jez in the tresouris arece ; ot 
‘ ; re here. Cy 
of wisdom; but wisdom 7s abhomynacioun _ ¢ a pacient 
man schal sufe 
to synners. The‘ drede of the Lord put-27 fre; the leo 
: : A ° ‘ of a proud man. 
tith awei synne, for he that is with OUt 28 Orn eithe : for 


drede}, mai not be iustified; for whi the the mede of 
by 5 < glorie schal be 
wrathfulnesse of his pride is the destriyng  3oldun toa 


of hym. A pacient man schal suffre{ til 29 and the peyne 
Good wit sehal hide the 309? wits that 
wordis of hym til in to a tyme; and the good diets 
In the tresouris of wisdom 31 jg, of a proud 
is signefiyng of kunnyng; but the wor-32 
beynge stille 
‘ le tyme. 
kepe thou ri3tfulnesse, and God schal 3yue 2 eee 
paciently, as 
that is wel plesaunt to hym 2s feith and 35 wit many men 
ciently the 
ouerthewertly 
nei3je thou not to hym in double herte. 
ciouse thingis 
lippis. Take thou kepe to tho, lest thouss 
kunnyng ; bi 
e ‘ tly disesis, 
hurtle thee doun in the myddis of the ns the sco 
ing of God ; 
and of falsnesse. 
hope, and cha- 
CAP ul. 
Sone, nei3ynge to the seruyce of God,1 jum Me 
of goostly 
Bere doun thin herte{[, and suffre, and2 God. Lire 


pacient man, 
in to tyme; and aftirward sehal” be 3eld- of Pelle 8 
A, es © 3 proude man. 
ing of mirthe. os 
good discre- 
lippis of many men schulen telle out the hide the wordis 
Saitek hym of him; that 
man and ouer- 
thewert, in 
; ; : 
schipyng of God is abhomynacioun to renee 
a synnere. A! sone, coueitynge wisdom, 33 fa ¢o a couena- 
the wit of him; 
° : th firi 
it to thee. For whi the’ drede of the sa ‘tatsuim 
ei her ; it is opyn of 
Lord #s wisdom, and kunnyng, and that Danie ai 
comeuden, for — 
myldenesse; and God schal fille the tres- he herd pa- 
Yi; 3 p 
sours of hym§. Be thou not rebel, and 36 wordis of See 
vnbileueful to the drede of the Lord; and ™Y ceynge 
a3enus hym. 
. z In the tresours 
Be thou not an ypocrite in the si3t of 37 ofwisdoms that 
yi . ° . 18, amon, T= 
men; and be thou not selaundrid in thi ce 
therof. 
signefiyng of 
falle, and brynge disonour to thi soule; ; 
5 ‘ which a man 
and lest God sehewe thi priuytees, and 39 suffrith pa- 
as the scourgis 
Bee ee of God, as of 
synagoge||; for thou neizidist wickidli to 404 tadir chastise 
the Lord, and thin herte was ful of gile 72° worse 
which is wor- 
schipid bi feith, 
rite, as Austyn 
seith in En- 
here. C. 
stonde thou in ri3tfulnesse, and drede;  §iMé tresouris; 
and make redi thi soule to temptacioun.  g004is. of hym; 
that dredith 
here. C. 
Q bere doun thyn herte; in refreyninge the stiringis of 


4 of the cpr. m. 
¥Om.c prom. ¥ mysbileneful ac. 


tT Om. € et E pr.m, 
xOm. c. 


{Om.1. ther schali. ¥Om.1. 


Il. 3—18. 


in thyn ere, and vndertac the wrdis of 
vndirstonding, and hee3e thou not in 
3tyme of opressing. Sustene the susten- 
yngus of God; be thou with ioyned to 
God, and suffre, that thi lif waxe in the 
4laste. Alle” that* to thee shul ben leid 
to, tac, and in sorewe sustene, and in thi 
smecnesse haue pacience. For in fyr is 
preued gold and siluer; men forsothe 
resceyuable in the chymne of mecnesse. 
6 3if feith to God, and he shal rekure* thee; 
and dresse thi weye, and hope in to hym. 
Kep the drede of hym, and in hym wax 
7old. 3ee dredende the Lord, susteeneth 
the mercy” of hym, and bowith not doun 
8fro hym, lest 3ee falle. 3ee that dreden 
the Lord, 3yueth feith to hym, and there 
gshal not be voidid awei joure meede. 3ee 
that dreden the Lord, hopeth in to hym, 
and in to liking shal come to 3ou mercy. 
103ee that dreden the Lord, looueth hym, 
liand 3oure hertes shul be liztned. Be- 
holdeth, 3ee sonus, the naciouns of men, 
and witeth, for no man hopide in the 
12 Lord, and is shent; abod® stille in his 
hestes, and is forsaken ; or who inwardli 
i3clepede hym, and he dispisede hym? For 
piteuous, and mercyful is God, and he 
shal for3yue in the day of tribulacioun 
synnes; and defendere he is to alle men, 
14ful out sechende hym in treuthe. Wo to 
the double in herte, and to the lippis of 
the ‘hidously giltende’, and to the hondes 
euele doende; and to the synnere goende 
15in to the erthe two weies. Wo to the dis- 
_ solut ‘or wnstable® in herte, that 3yuen not 
feith to God; and therfore thei ‘schul not 
isben‘ defendid of hym. Wo to them that 
han lost suffring, and that han forsake ri3t 
weies, and han turned aside in to shreude 
17 weies. And what shul thei do, whan the 
Lord shal begynne to inwardli looken ? 
18 Who dreden the Lord, shul not ben of 
mysfeith to the wrd of hym; and who 


% And alle c ef £ pr.m. 
4 hidous gilter acu. ¢ Om. c et £ prim. 


a that is, E pr.m. 


w abideth 1. Y his merci c. 


x hopeth 1. 
£¢ two 1 passim. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


. 58 resceyuen C pr. m. 
f ben not c et £ pr.m. 


2 loueth 1. 


127 


bowe doun thin eere, and take the wordis 
of vndirstonding, and haaste thou not in 
to the tyme of deeth*. Suffre thou thes 
susteynyngis of God; be thou ioyned to 
God, and abide thou, that thi lijf wexe iu 
the last tyme. ake thou alle thing that 
is set to thee, and suffre thou in sorewe, 
and haue thou pacience in thi lownesse. 
For whi gold and siluer is preued in fier ; 5 
forsothe men worthi to be resseyued ben 
preued in the chymeney of lownesse. 
Bileue thou to God, and he schal rekeuere 6 
thee ; and dresse thou thi weie, and hope 
thou in to hym. Kepe thou his drede, and 
wexe thou eld ther ynne. 3e that dreden7 
the Lord, abide” his merci, and boowe 3e 
not awei fro hyim, lest 3e falle doun. 3es 
that dreden the Lord, bileue to hym, and 
3oure mede schal not be auoidid. 3e that9 
dreden the Lord, hope* into hym, and 
merciY schal come to 3ou into delityng. 


3e that dreden the Lord, loue? hym, and 10 
3oure hertis schulen be liz3tned. Sones, 11 


biholde 3e the naciounst of men, and wite 
3e, that no man hopide in the Lord, and 


was schent ; 200% dwellide in hise heestis, 12 


and was forsakun; ether who inwardli 
clepide hym, and he despiside hym ‘that 


clepide? ? For whi God is pitouse, andis 


merciful, and he schal forjyue synnes in 
the dai of tribulacioun; and he is de- 
fendere to alle men, that seken hym in 


treuthe. Woo fo the ‘man with double‘ 14 


herte, and with cursid lippis, and mis- 
doyiuge hondys; and to a synnere en- 


to hem that ben dissolute} of herte, that 
bilenen not to God; and therfor thei sehu- 


len not be defendid of him. Wo to hem 1c 


that han lost pacience, and that han for- 
sake ri3tful weies, and han turned awei 
in to schrewid weies. 
thei do, whanne the Lord schal bigynne 


to biholde§? Thei that dreden the Lord, 1s 


b drede z pr.m. © or abod a. 


b Om. 1. 


a Om. 1. ¢ double in 1. 


* haste thou 
not in to the 
tyme of deth; 
that is, be thou 
not brokun for 
the lengthe of 
aduersite, and 
desire deth. 
Suffre thou the 
susteynyngis of 
vod 3 that is, 
suffre paciently 
aduersites, in 
whiche God 
schal susteyne 
thee. haue thou 
pacience wm thi 
lownesse 3 that 
is, temporal 
casting douit. 
he schal re- 
kyuere thee ; 
fro temporal 
turment to 
euerlastinge 
coumfort. 
Lire here. c. 


+ diholde 3e the 
naciouns, ete. ; 
biholding of 
hooly bokis, 

in whiche the 
dedis of fadris, 
that is, of Abra- 
ham, of Isaac, 
aud of Jacob, 
and othere men 
ben writun. 
Lire here. c. 


° ° e . + Soc 
trynge in to the lond bi tweit* weies. Wo 1s * at ben dis 


solute ; that is, 
whos herte is 
vnboundun and , 
departid fro 
God, bi vnfeith- 
fulnesse. Lire 
here. C. 

§ to biholde 
that is, ta pu- 
nysche ; the 


And what schulen 17 Lord is seid to 


biholde synues, 
whanne he pu- 
nyschith tho. 
Lire here. c. 


128 


loouen hym, shuln holli kepe the weie 
igof hym. Who dreden the Lord, shuln 
inwardli sechen, that ben wel plesid 
thingus to hym; and that loouen hym, 
shul be fulfild with the lawe of hym. 
20 Who dreden the Lord, shul greithe ther 
hertes, and in the si3te of hym thei shul 
2ihalewen ther soules. Who dreden the 
Lord, shul kepen the hestis of hym, and 
pacience shuln han vnto the inwardly 
22 looking of hym; seiende, If penaunce wee 
shul not do, wee shul falle in to the 
hondus of the Lord, and not into the 
23hondis of men. Forsothe aftir the my- 
kilnesse of hym, so and his mercy is® 
with hym. 


CAPRI 


1 The sonus of wisdam the chirche of 
ri3twis men, and the nacioun of hem 
2obeisaunce and loouyng. The dom of 
the fader hereth, 3ee looued sones; and 
3so doth, that 3ee be saf. God forsothe 
wrshepede the fader in sonus, and the 
dom of the moder ful out sechende he 
afastnede in to the sonus. Who looueth 
God, shal full out pre3en for synnes, and 
shal withholden hym fro them, and in 
the orisoun of dajzes he shal be ful out 
5herd. And as he that tresoreth, so and 
G6he that wrshepith his moder. Who 
wrshepith his fader, shal be mad merie 
in sones, and in the dai of his orisoun 
7he shal be full out herd. Who wrshipith 
his fader, with lengere lif shal lyue; and 
who obesheth to the fadir, shal refreshe 
8the moder. Who dredeth the Lord, 
wrshepith fader and moder; and as to 
lordis he shal serue to them that geeten 
Shym, in were, and wrd, and in alle pa- 
locience. Wrshipe thou thi fader, that 
ther come vpon to thee blissing fro God ; 
and the blessing of hym in the laste 
11dwelleth. The blissing of the fadir fast- 
neth the houses of sones; the cursing 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Il. 19-—III, tt. 


schulen not be vnbileueful to his word; 

and thei that louen hym, schulen kepe his 

weie. Thei that dreden the Lord, schulen19 

enquere tho thingis, that ben wel plesaunt 

to hym; and thei that louen him, schulen 

be fillid with his lawe. hei that dreden 20 

the Lord, schulen make redi her hertis, 

and schulen halewe her soulis in his si3t. Bet rey 

Thei that dreden the Lord, schulen kepe 21 pacient men, 
‘ 5 at whanne he de- 

hise comaundementis, and* schulen haue _ tyuerith hem, 

pacience til to the biboldyng* of hym 5 and 22 hem joyeful. 


and makith 
schulen seie, If we doon not penaunce, 7/e doen not 
penaunce ; for 


* haue pacience 
til to the bihold. 


we schulen falle in to the hondis of the  synnes, fro 
4 whiche a man 
Lord, and not in to the hondis of men. may not be 


: - al vngiltii 
For bi the greetnesse of hym, so and his23 present svrerl 
Sle texut in to the hondis 
merci is® with hym. of the Lord ; 
that is, in to 
Goddis pu- 


CAP. ITI. nysching ful 
greuouse. bi 


The sones of wisdom ben the chirche1 ihe greemesse 
is, his power to 

obedience and loue. Dereworthe sones,2 Punysch hem, 
here 3e the? doom of the fadir; and do 3e _ stynatinsynne, 
as merst In 


of iust men, and thef nacioun of hem is v5 that 
that ben oh- 
so, that 3e be saaf. For whi God onourides sparinge hem, 


the fadirt in sones, and he sekith, and mua ie 
hath maad stidfast the doom of the! %: for whi 


euer either is 


modir in to sones. He that loueth God, 4 the same thing 


f with Goddis 
schal preie for synnes, and he schal ab- _ being. of wis- 
° dom ; that i 
steyne hym silf fro tho, and he schal be of Goa, whieh 
‘ olen , is wisdom, 
herd in the preier of daies. And as hes theron beyng 


that tresourith, so andi he that onourith — ether kynde. 
obedience and 


his modir. He that onourith his fadir,¢ ove; as aman 

Set liberal excel- 

schal be maad myrie in sones, and he ently is seid 
schal be herd in the dai of his preier. jetans abo 
He that onourith his fadir, schal lyne biz jberalte. Lire 
lengere lijf; and he that obeieth to the e pete 
° se é€ fadir 5 that 
fader, schal refreische the modir*t. He8 is, comaundide, 

3 : . that the fadi 

that dredith the Lord, onourith fadir and be onourid bi 
hs p a sones. sekith ; 

modir; and he schal serue in werk,and word, for he sekith 
and al! pacience to hem that gendriden™ 9 ie 
. . . 1S 

hym as to lordis. Onoure thi fadir, that 10 pt ee 

b warde hem 

the blessyng of God come to thee; and his and the tres- 
blessing dwellith" in the laste. The bless-1! pile oe 
yng of the fadir makith stidfast the housis /4¢ here. co. 
of sones; but the cursyng of the modir 


t the modir ; 
that is, schal 
drawith out the° foundementis. 


coumforte hir. 
Haue 12 rire here. c. 


& Om. c, 


4 and thei 1. 


. €Om.n. f Om. c. 
hirv. linal sg, 


m bigaten 1. 


& Om. 1. 
n dwelle ca. 


bh Om. ceteri. 
° Om. 1. 


iOm.1. & modir, that is, shal coumforte 


Ill. 12——28. 


forsothe of the moder drawith out foun- 
12demens bi the roote. Ne glorie thou in 
the wrong of thi fader; forsothe it is not 
13to thee glorie, but shenshepe. The glorie 
forsothe of a man, of the wrshepe of his 
fadir; and the vylenye of the sone, the 
isfader withoute wrshepe. Sone, mekeli 
tac the laste age of thi fader, and ne 
15 sorewe thou hym in his lif; and if he faile 
in wit, 3if for3yuenesse, and dispyse thou 
not hym in thi" vertue; forsothe the 
almesse deede of the fader shal not be 
isin forjetyng. For whi for the synne of 
the moder shal be restored to thee good, 
17and in ri3twisnesse it shal ben bild vp to 
thee; and in the dai of tribulacioun it 
shal be remembrid of thee, and as iys in 
18 cleer, thi synnes shul ben loosed. Of hou 
euel loos is he, that forsaketh the fader ; 
and he is cursid of God, that terreth to 
1y wrathe the moder. Sone, in debonernesse 
thi werkes parforme, and ouer the glorie 
20 of men thou shalt be looued. Hou myche 
thou art gret, meeke thee in alle thyngus, 
and byforn God thou shalt fynde grace ; 
2ifor gret my3t is of God alone, and of 
22meeke men he is wrshipid. He3ere 
thyngus than thiself seche thou not, and 
strengere thingus than thiself ne serche 
thou; but the thingus that God comaund- 
ide to thee, thenk hem euermor; and in 
manye werkes of hym ‘ne be thou! kuri- 
230us. Forsothe it is not nedeful to thee, 
tho thingus that ben hid, to seen with 
2ithin e3en. In oueruoide thingus wile 
thou not enserchen manyefold; and in 
manye werkes of hym thou shalt not be 
25curious; manye forsothe thyngus ouer 
the wit of men ben shewid to thee. 
26 Manye forsothe supplauntede the suspi- 
sioun of hem, and in vanytee heeld doun 
aj7the wittis of hem. The harde herte 
shal han euel in the laste; and that 
28looueth perile, in it shal pershen. The 


here. c. 


h Om. a. 


P the dai a pr.m. 
VOL. III. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


4 clerenesse, ether heele CEFGIIMNPQRSUVXYG. 


129 


* if he failith 


thou not glorie in the dispisyng of thi 
in wit ; for it 
is not his synne, 


fadir ; for it is not glorie to thee, but con- 

fusioun. For whi the glorie of a man és13 qu,ty7ndel 
of the onour of his fadir; and the schen- Joe, ae 
schip of the sone zs a fadir with out onour. ae 
Sone, resseyue the elde of thi fadir, and 14 fadir. 

make thou not hym sori in his lijf; and lke fee 
if he failith in wit*, 3yue thou for3yue- Mo cae 
nesse, and dispise thou not hym in thi ‘oun of her 
vertu; for whi the almes of the fadir Aerec. 
schal not be for3etyng. For whi good Woabmen, inks i 
schal be restorid to thee for the synne of © 727% the 
the modir, and bildyng schal be maad_ to 17 Se “hou not, 


: ete. ; as ben the 
thee in ri3tfulnesse ; and it schal remembre 


synne. Lire 


pines of 
“ z " S odhed. Lire 
of thee in dai? of tribulacioun, and thi here . 
‘ ° . é thou not 
synnes schulen be releessid, as iys in clere- curiouse, ete. ; 
nesse1 of the sunne. He is of ful yuelis See ade 
fame, that forsakith the fadir; and he ee ook 
that wraththith™ the’ modir, is cursid of aay eagle 
is iene aboue the wi 
God. Sone, performe thi werkis in mylde-19 of men ; that 
is, tho that 
nesse, and thou schalt be Joued ouer the  weren schewid 
1 2 to the hooly 
glorie of men. In as myche as thou art20 oortis to the 
greet}, make thee meke in alle thingis, felthe a! men, 
and thou schalt fynde grace bifore God; _ to assente 
. o mekely or 
for whi the power of God aloon is greet, 21 stidefastly. 
and he is onourid of meke men. Seke 22 forthey that 
. Sore presumen of 
thou not hizere thingis than thou, and fONie ie 
enquere thou not strongere thingis than  posen that they 
moun come to 


thou; but euere thenke thou tho thingis, the knowing 
whiche God comaundide to thee; and be  thingis. in 


‘i . ass vanyte ; for bi 
thou not curiouset in ful many werkis of find selaen 


hym. For it is not nedeful to thee to se 23/n to erronrs, 
with thin izen tho thingis, that ben hid. An herd herte; 
Tn superflu thingis nyle thou seke many- 24 ith Goddis stir- 


that azenstond- 
° ° ing to good. 
fold; and be thou not curiouse in many jn ine foot 
3 Austyu seith, 
aboue the wit of men|| ben schewid to 
For the suspecioun of many men 26 centis, a syn- 
wittis in vanytee. An hard herte schalo72ysching thst 
3ete him silf, 
. : : . while he lyu- 
herte that entrith bi tweie weies§, schal 
that is, occa- 


in the laste 
werkis of hym ; for whi ful many thingis 25 ‘77 for, as 
in a sermonn 
of the Inno- 
thee. 
5 . nere 1s smytun 
hath disseyued hem, and withhelde her 5; :nis ee 
whanne he 
haue yuel in the laste tyme; and he that ‘eth, be for- 
loueth perel, schal perische ther ynne. An 28 which the 
ede, forzat God. 
; loueth perel ; 
not haue prosperitees, ether reste; anda y 
siouns of 
synnes. Lire 


§ bi tweie weyes ; that is, that hath the knowing of good in yndurstonding, and malice in wille. Lire here. ¢ 


i be thou not 4cu. 


t or whettith 1 marg. $ his 1. 


s 


130 


herte goende in to two weies, shal not 
han welsum chaunces; and the shrewde 
oyherte in them shal be sclaundred. A 
wicke* herte shal ben greeued in so- 
rewes ; and the synnere shal lei to to 
gosynnen. To the synagoge of proude 
men shal not be helthe; forsothe the 
thicke! bush of synne in hem shal ben 
taken vp bi the™ roote, and it shal not 
sibe vnderstonde. The herte of the wise 
man is vnderstonde in wisdam, and the 
goode ere shal heren with alle coueitende 
szwisdam. The wis herte and vnderstand- 
able shal abstenen hymself from synnes, 
and in werkes of ri3twisnesse welsum 
s3aftercomyngus shal han. Brennende fyr 
water shal quenche, and almes deede 
s4ajenstandeth to synnes. And God is 
the forlookere" of hym that 3eldeth 
grace; he hath mynde in to afterward, 
and in time of his falling he shal finde 
fastnyng. 
CAP. IV. 
1 Sone, the almesse deede of the pore man 
ne begile thou, and ouerturne thou not 
ethin ejen fro the pore. The hungrende 
soule ne dispise thou, and terre thou not 
out to wrathe the pore in his myseise. 
3The herte of the helpeles ne tormente 
thou, and drawe thou not a long 3ifte to 
athe man° put in streit. The pre3ing of 
the troblid ne caste thou awei, and turne 
thou not awei thi face fro the nedi. Fro 
5 the helpeles ne turne thou awei e3en? for 
wrathe, and ‘leene thou not, ‘or 3if thou 
not cause., to men sechende to curse bi- 
shynde to thee. Forsothe of the man 
cursende to thee in bitternesse of soule, 
ful out herd shal be the prejeere of hym; 
forsothe he shall here hym, that made 
7hym. To the congregacioun of pore men 
mac thou thee homli to speken, and to the 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Ill. 29—IV. 7. 


man of schrewid herte schal be sclaundrid 
in tho. 
in sorewis; and a synnere schal ‘hepe to 
dot synne. 
syuagoge" of proude men; for whi the 
thicke wode of synne schal be drawun 
out bi the roote in hem, and it schal not 


be vndurstondunf. The herte of a wise31 


man is vndurstondun in wisdom, and a 
good eere schal here wisdom with al co- 
ueitise. 
stonde schal absteyne it silf fro synnes, 
and schialY haue prosperitees in the werkis 


A wickid herte schal be greuyd 29 


* Helthe schat 
not be ; that is, 
goostly helthe, 
that stondith 
in good dispo- 


Helthe schal not be* to theo ‘icioun of ver- 


tues. wode ; 
that is, al exeu- 
sacioune lous- 
ing synne. Lire 


here. C. 

f it schal not be 
undurstondun ; 
of synneris that 
nylen thenke 
on Goddis 
domes. Lire 
here. c. 


A wijs herte and able to vndur-32 that seldith 


grace ; that is, 
doith almes, 
of the goodis 
3ouun of God 


of ri3tfuluesse. Watir quenchith fier bren-33 to hise mem- 


bris. hath 


nynge, and almes a3enstondith synnes. And 34 mynde ; in en- 


God, the biholdere of hym that 3eldith 
grace {, hath mynde aftirward; and he 


schal fynde stidefastnesse in the” tyme of 
his fal. 


CAP. IV. 


Sone, defrande thon not the almes of a} 
pore man, and turne not ouere thin izen§ 
fro a pore man. Dispise thou not an2 
hungri man, and wraththe thou not a 
pore man in his nedynesse. Turmente3 
thou not the herte of a nedi man, and 
tarie thou not the 3ifte toa man that is 
set in angwisch. Caste thou not awei the4 
preiyng of a man set in tribulacioun, and 
turne not awei thi face fro a nedi man. 
Turne not awei thin i3en fro a pore mans 
for ire|], and 3yue not occasioun to men 
axynge to curse thee byhynde. For thes 
preyer of hym that cursith thee in the* 
bitternesse of soule, schal be herd; for- 
sothe he that inade hym, schal here hym. 
Make thee eesi to speke to the congrega-7 
cioun of pore men, and make meke thi 
soule to a preest€], and make meke thin 


creessinge his 
good. in the 
tyme of his fal; 
that is, of his 
deth, for as 
Austyn seith, 
mersi aloone is 
the felow of 
deed men. 
defraade thou 
not the almes 
of a pore man ; 
in withholdinge 
to thee that, 
that is bitakun 
to 3yue to pore 
men, ether in 
denyinge of 
thyn owne 
good in the 
tyme of nede, 
in which it is 
due to a pore 
man. Lire 
here. C. 

§ turne not 
ouer thyn izen; 
that is, that 
thou3 thou 
maist not 3yue 
almes bi the 
hond, thou 3yue 
namely the 
wille, and be- 
nygne loking. 
Lire here. c. 

tl Durne not 
awei thin t3en 
fro a@ pore man 
for ire ; that 
is, thon3 he 
wraththide 
thee bifore, 
leeue thou not 
herfore to do 
good to him. 
cursith ; that 
is, wischith to 
thee yuel of 
peyne, that 


syueth vndurstonding to him to whom ft is wischid, that so hi bis owne turment he be stirid to hane compassioun of othere men. Lire here. c. 
{i 40 a preest ; that is, do thon du renerence to an eld man, Lire here. cv- 


k wicked 4. 10m. c pr.m. 


m Om. 4. 
4 Om. c et E pr.m, 


tadde totos. & synage 1. 


® forth loker 4rGH. 


V it schal 1. 


°anguyssh £ prem. P thin e3en 4. 


wOm.1 * Om. 1. 


Iv. 8——22. 


prest meeke thou thi soule, and to the 
smad gret meeke thou thin hed. Bowe 
doun to the pore thin ere’ withoute 
drerynesse, and 3eld thi dette, and an- 
9swere pesibli in debonernesse. Delyuere 
hym that wrong suffreth fro the hond of 
the proude man, and egreli, ‘or heuyly’, 
10 bere thou not in thi soule. In demende 
be thou to thet fadirles childer merciful as 
a fadir, and for a man,‘or husbonde®, to 
11 the moder of hem; and thou shal be as an 
obeisaunt sone of the hei3est, and he shal 
han merci of thee more than a moder. 
12 Wisdam to his sonus inbrethede lif, and 
receyueth the men out sechende him, and 
he shal go beforn in the weie of ri3twis- 
i3nesse; and he that looueth it, looueth lif, 
and that waken to it, shul clippe togidere 
the’ ‘gladnesse, or pesiblenesse™”, of it. 
14 Who holden it, shuln eritagen lif; and 
whider it shal gon in, God shal blissen*. 
15 Who seruen to it, obeshende shul ben to 
the hoeli man; and hem that loouen it, 
1¢6God looueth. Who hereth it, demeth 
folkis of kinde; and who biholdeth it, shal 


izabide stille trostende. If he schal¥ 3yue- 


feith to it, he shal abide stille, and erit- 
agen it; and the creatures of hem shul 
18 be in fastnyng togidere. For in tempta- 
cioun it goth with hym, and in the first 
i9 thyngus it chees hym’. Drede, and ferd, 
and prouyng it shal bringe in vp on 
hym, and schal* tormenten hym in tribu- 
lacioun of his techyng, to the tyme that 
it tempte hyim in his tho3tis, and he leeue 
20to his soule. And it shal fastne hym, 
and a ri3t euene weie bringe to hym, 
ziand gladen hym; and nakenen his hidde 
thingus to hym, and tresoren vp on hym 
kunnyng, and vnderstonding of ri3twis- 
aenesse. If forsothe he schal® ful* erre, 
it shal forsaken hym, and it shall taken 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 131 


heed to a greet man. Boowe doun withs * Wisdom ; 


: vamaad, that 
out sorewe thin eere to a pore man, and je GodgeSene. 


3elde thi debt, and answere thou pesibli | 7s?iri? huss 


a that is, purpos 
in myldenesse. Delyuere thou hym thatg 2nd desir of 


betere lyif, bi 


suffrith wrong fro the hond of a proude _ his teching. 
eas ‘ and resseyueth 
inan, and bere thou not heuyli in thi soule. — men sekinge 


A ; him ; in en- 
In demynge be thou merciful as a fadir 10 creessinge to 
to fadirles children, and be thou for an plies 
hosebonde to the modir of hem; and thou 119 bifore iP 
2 5 e weye 3 0: 
schalt be as an obedient sone of the hi3- ristfulnesse, in 
fs h it. 
este, and he schal hane merci on thee Lire hers. « 
+ thei that 
waken to it : 
child. Wisdom* enspirith lijf to hise sones, 12»! studie of 
‘ reding, and of 
and resseyueth men sekinge hym, and __ preyer. holden 
2 i : : J tt; bi hert and 
schal* go bifore in the wei of ri3tfulnesse ; werk. dif; of 
glorie. 
lijf, and thei that waken to it}, schulen ‘Ra HhoWih 
biclipe the pesiblene a, meditacioun. 
P p sse, ether swetnesse?, pe a 
6 es AA 0G yng ; that is 
herite lijf ; and whidir it schal entre, God the wonuinat 
confermed in 
be obeiynge to the hooli; and God loueth 84 4” 
hem, that lonen it. He that herith it,16$ it chesith | 
ym ; that is, 
woes . with chosun 
scha] dwelle tristili. Ifa man bileueth to 17 men, that ben 
it, he schal dwelle, and enherite it; and the ‘e ftste and 
God. drede; of 
i . i : i offence, and 
yngt. For in temptacioun it goith with 18 feer of hello. 
6 5 rynge in 3 that 
hym, and among the firste it chesith is, schal suffre 
hym§. It schal brynge in on hyin drede, 19 go: nis good. 
tempte him ; 
that is, make 


Lire here. c. 
more than a modir ‘hath merciY on hir 
and he that loueth that ewésdom, loueth 13 fore us 
that is, bi hoely 
therof. Thei that holden it, schulen en-141 in conferm- 
schal blesse. Thei that seruen it, schulen 1s 27 Suen b 
here. c. 
demeth folkis; and he that btholdith it, — arettith him 
é beste anentis 
creaturis of hem schulen be in conferm- 
to be brou3t in 
and feer, and preuyng, and it schal tur- 


mente hym in the tribulacioun of his doc- knowun to 
ae ‘ : - othere men the 
tryn, til it tempte hym in hise thou3tis, — goodnesse of 


. ‘ : his soule. 
and bileue to his soulel]. And it schal 20 sire pee. 


S P ° ll and dileue to 
make hym stidefast, and schal brynge ri3t his soule ; that 
weie to hym, and it schal make hym glad; make that 

" ‘ : credence be 
and schal¢ make nakid hise priuytees to21 a a 
wordis 5 that 
hym, and schal tresore on hym kunnyng, — comen forth of 
° h i 
and vndurstondyng of ri3tfulnesse. For-22 eer oy 
; cr bringe, etc. ; 
sothe if he errith, God schal forsake hym, Chat inf we 
and schal bitake hym in to‘ the hondis — bringe him to | 
. rizt weie. scha 
of his enemy. Sone, kepe thou tyme, and 23 make nakid, 
etc.; that is, 
schal schewe 


the priuytes of his kunnyng. kunnyng and undurstonding of riztfulnesse ; that he kunne dresse him silf and othere men in to the weye of riztfulnesse. 


Freeze H. eye AG. 8 Om. c et £ pr.m. 
3 Pp 


2QOm.cpr.m. 20m. c pr.m » Om. c pr.m. 


yOm.1. Zit schal 1. the swetnesse G. 


t Om. sEGH. 
nesse c pr.m. E pr.m. pesiblenesse E sec. m. marg. AGH. 


b it bi hooli meditacioun v. 


$2 


a Om. c ef E prim. 


vina.  W glad. 
x ben blessed £ pr.m. AGH, 


y Om. c prem. 


¢ ful out c pr. m. 


cit schal 1. ¢¢ Om. 1. 


132 


23hym in the hond of his enemy. Sone, 
waite tyme, and shone awei fro euel. 
24 For thi soule,‘or Ziyf'4, be thou not con- 
foundid® to seyn soth; ther is forsothe 
25 confusioun ‘bringende tof synne, and ther 
is confusioun bringende to glorie and 
26grace. Ne take thou to face ajen thi face, 
27ne ajen thi soule lesing. Ne shame thou 
28 thi nejhebore in his falling, ne a3een holde 
thou a woord in time® of helthe. Hide 
thou not thi wisdam in the fairnes of 
2vhit; in the tunge forsothe wisdam is 
knowen, and wit, and kunnyng, and 
techyng, in the wrd of the weel feel- 
ende; and fastnynge in the werkis" of 
30ri3twisnesse. Ajzensey thou not to the 
wrd of treuthe any maner ; and of lesing! 
of thi myslernyng be thou confoundid. 
31 Be thou not confoundid to knoulechen 
thi synnes; and/ ne sochete thou thee to 
32eche man for synne. Wile thou not with- 
stonde* a3en the face of the my3ti, ne 
enforce thou a3en the stroc of the flood. 
33 For ri3twisnesse fiz3t for thi soule, and 
vnto deth strif for rijtwisnesse ; and God 
shal outfizten, ‘o7 ower come', for thee 
34thin enemys. Wile thou not be swift in 
thi tunge, and vnprofitable and slo3 in thi 
30 werkis. Wile thou not ben as a leoun 
in thin hous, turnende awei thin homli 
men, and opressende to men soget to 
sethee. Be not thin hond put forth to 
taken, and to 3yuen™ drawen togidere. 


CAR. V. 


1 Wile thou not taken heed to wickide” 
possessiouns, and ne seye thou, Ther is to 
me suffisaunt lif; no thing forsothe it shal 
profiten in the tyme of veniaunce, and 

2 of opressing, ‘or deth®. Ne folewe thou in 
thi strengthe the coueiting of thin herte, 

gand ne sey thou, What maner my3te I, 
or who me shal subiecten for my deedis ? 

4God forsothe veniende shal venien. Ne 


vnonestly. Lire here. c. 


4Om. cet Ee pr.m.  @ offendid a. 
lesynge acu. J Om. agen, 
° Om. cet £ prom. 


k stonde aqu. 


- 4d ethchewe 1, 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


** Sufficient liyf, etc.; that is, long is to comynge to me 
¥ my3te ; vndurstonde thou, so Y schal be my3ty aftirward. Lire here. ee ‘ 


f Om. c pr. m. 
1Om. ce £ pr. m. 


© suget CNV. 


IV. 23-—V. 4. 


eschewe’ thou fro yuel. 
aschamed for thi lijf* to seie treuthe ; for 
whi ther is schame that bryngith synne, 


and ther is schame that bryngith glorie 25 
Take thou not a face ajens 26 sufre schame 


and grace. 
thi face}, nethir a leesyng a3ens thi soule. 


Be thou not 24 schume that 


bringith synne; 
that is, schame 
bi which a 
techere ceess- 
ith to seye 
truthe, lest he 


of grettere pre- 
latis in the si3t 
men. schame 


o 5 3 . f 
Schame thou not thi neizbore in his fal, 27 that bryngith 


nether withholde thou a word in the tyme 28 


of helthe. Hide not thi wisdom} in the 


glorie and 
grace ; that is, 
schame, which 
is suffrid pa. 


fairnesse therof; for whi wisdom is knowun 29 ciently for 


in tunge, and wit, and kunnyng, and tech- 
yng in the word of a wijs man; and stid- 
fastnesse 7s in the werkis of ri3tfulnesse. 


truthe. Lire 
here. c. 

* Be thou noi 
aschamed for 
thi liyfs to be 
set forth to 


Ajenseie thou not the word of treuthe in3o baa 


ony maner; and be thou aschamed of the 


leesyng of thi mislernyng. Be thou not31 


aschamed to knouleche thi synnes§; and 
make thee not suget to ech man for synne. 


Nyle thou stonde a3ens the face of the 32 


my3ti, nethir enforse thou aj3ens the strok 


of the flood. For ri3tfulnesse fiz3te thou33 


for thi soule|], and til to the deth stryue 
thou for ri3tfulnesse ; and God schal ouer- 
come thin enemyes for thee. 
be swift in thi tunge, and vnprofitable 
and slak in thi werkis. 
a lioun in thin hous, turnynge vpsedoun 
thi meneals, and ‘oppressynge hem that 
ben sugetis® to thee. 
redi to take], and closid togidere to 3yue. 


CAF eV 


Nile thou take heed to wickid posses-1 
siouns, and seie thou not, Sufficient lijf** 
is to me; for it schal no thing profite in 
the tyme of veniaunce,..and of failynge, 
ether deth’. Sue thou not the coueitise of 2 
thin herte in thi strengthe, and seie thou3 
not, As Y my3tet}, ether who schal make 
me suget for my dedis? For whi God veng- 
ynge schal venge. Seie thou not, Y haue 


Sthetime eEpr.m. 4wrdiscpr.m. ithe 


™ 3yue thingis £ pr.m. " wicke ex. 


f of deth c. 


Nyle thon be as 35 


therfor Y must gete many thingis. Lire here. c. 


+ ajenus thi 


face ; that is, 


agenus thi soule. 
Lire here. c. 

} Hide not thi 
wisdom ; in 
makinge derk 
the truthe bi 
curiouse wordis. 
Lire here. c. 

§ thi synnes; 

to him that can 
and may 3yue 
remedy. to ech 
man for synne ; 
to be curid, but 


Nyle thou 34 onely to him 


that kan and 
may sette re- 
medy. af the 
my3ti 3 that is, 
of God. of the 


Jlood ; that is, 


of Goddis ri3t- 
fulnesse, azenus 


Thin hond be not 36 which they 


withstonden, 
that ben ob- 
stynat in 
synnes. Lire 
here. C. 

ll for thi soule ; 
that is, for the 
helthe of thi 
soule. di? to 
deth ; for good 
deth is worthi 
to be chosun 
more than the 
trespassing of 
ri3tfulnesse. 
swift in thi 
tunge ; that is, 
heediy to bringe 
forth sentence. 
slak in thi 
werkis ; that 
is, in parfourm- 
ynge the sen- 
tence 3ouun 
iustly. Lire 
here. c. 

q to take; 3iftis 
vniustly, ether 


tt As 


Vv. 5—18. 


sey thou, I synnede, and what to me 
falleth sorewy? ? Forsothe the hei3este is 
5a pacient 3eldere. Of the for3yuenesse 
of synnes, wile thou not4 be withoute 
drede, ne ley thou to synne vp on synne. 
6And sey thou not, The merci of God is 
gret; of the multitude of my synnes he 
7shal han mercy. Mercy forsothe and 
wrathe fro hym soone ne3heth, and in to 
synneres beholdeth the wrathe of hym. 
8Ne tarie thou to be conuertid to the 
Lord, and ne putte’ thou it of fro dai in 
9to day. Sodeynli forsothe shal come the 
wrathe of hym, and in time of veniaunce 
10 he sha] distroje thee. Wile thou not ben 
anguysht in vnri3t richesses; forsothe 
thei shul not profiten in the dai of deth 
11and of veniaunces. Ne throwe thou’ thee 
out in to eche wynd, and go thou not in 
to eche wei; so forsothe a synnere-is 
12 proued in double tunge. Be thou stede- 
fast in the weie of the Lord, and in the*s 
treuthe of thi wit and kunnyng; and 
parfitli folewe thee the wrd of pes and 
130f ri3twisnesse. Be thou debonere to 
heret the wrd of God, that thou vnder- 
stonde, and with wysdam thou schalt® 
14bringe forth ‘a soth’ answere. If ther 
is to thee vnderstonding, answere to thi 
ne3hebore ; elles forsothe thin hond be 
vp on thi mouth, lest thou be take in an 
vndisciplined wrd, and thou be con- 
isfoundid. Wrshipe and glorie in the wrd 
of the weel felende; the tunge forsothe 
of the vnprudent is the turnyng vp so 
i¢doun of hym. Be thou not clepid a 
twisil tunge’, ‘or a priue bacbiter’™, in 
thi lif, and be thou not take in thi 
iztunge, and confoundid. Forsothe vp on 
a theef is confusioun, and peyne taking, 
and werst repref vp on the twisel tunge. 
To the priue grucchere forsothe* hate, 
igand enemyte, and strif.’ Iustefie thou 
lic maner the’ litle and the’ grete. 


P sorew A SEC. Mm. EG. q Om. a. 
uQOm.cpr.m. VYOm. acu.  W¥ tungid a. 


Y bere E pr.m. 
ww Om. ¢ ef £ pr. m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 133 


synned, and what sorewful thing bifelle to 

me? For the hijeste is a pacient 3eldere. 

Of the for3yuenesse of synnes, nyle thous * ye thou be 
be without drede*, nether heepe thou ee mg 
synne on’ synne. And seie thou not, Thee einer 26 
merciful doyng of God is greet; he schal a aa 
haue merci on the multitude of my synnes. eae 
For whi merci and ire neiz3eth soone fro7 synne, netheles 
hym, and his ire biholdith on synneris. rie 
Tarie thou not to be conuertid to thes 

Lord, and dilaie thou not fro dai in to dai. 

For whi his ire schal come sodeynli, and9 

he schal leese thee in the time of ven- 

iaunce. Nyle thou be angwischid in vn-10 

iust richessist ; for tho schulen not profite 

in the dai of failing, ether of» deth', and of ether to with- 
veniaunce. Wyndewet thee not in to ech il {yon 


+ richessis ; to 
be getun yuele, 


wynd, and go thou not in to ech weie; })Vundewe. 
for so a synnere is preved in double tunge. ing boostfully 


. " ‘ and presumptu- 
Be thou stidfast in the weie of the Lord, 12 ously. in to ech 


A ‘alin’ weye ; that is 
and in treuthe and kunnyng of thi wit; Ta renennnee 
and the word of pees and of ri3tfulnesse aoe 


now to this 
Be thou mylde to here 1370" fo tis, 


in double tunge; 
in techinge now 
the truthe, and 


sue thee perfitli. 
the word of God§, that thou vndurstonde, 
and with wisdom brynge thou forth a 

trewe answere. If thou hast vndirstond-14 oe Ta 
yng, answere thi neizbore ; ellis thin hond Meee 
be on thi mouth, lest thou be takun in pic aie 
a word vnwiseli tau3t, and be aschamed. _ stidefast in 
Onour and glorie zs in the word of a wijs oie 


th 
man; but the tunge of an vnprudent man 720724, 
, Re . feith. in the 
is his distriyng. Be thou not clepid al6 jie and 

preuy yuel spekere in thi lijf, and be thon kunnaiger thi 
4 wit ; that is. 

not takun in thi tunge, and be aschamed. _ in the stiring 
of kyndly re- 


Schame and penaunce is on a theef, and 17 soun as to ver- 
worst* schenschip! és on a man of double {42 heve- 
tunge. Forsothe hatrede and enemytee 
and dispisyng zs to a preuy bacbitere. in heringe 

‘ ae swetly an axing 
Iustifie thou a litil man and a greet man 18 of feith, ether 


in ijk maner. ies sk 
that thou vn- 
durstonde ; the 
entent of the 
axere. Lire 
here. c. 


§ to here the 
word of God ; 


8QOm.4. 8 Om.cprm tOmc pr.m. 


xOm. 4. Ytoa. 


8vpon1. hOm.s. 'deed vy. & ful yuelr. ! schenschip, ether cursyng c et cetert. 


134 


CAP. VIL. 


1 Wile thou not be mad for a frend 
enemy to thi ne3hebore ; repref forsothe 
and strif the euel man shal eritagen, 
and eche synnere enuyous and twisil 
2tungid. Ne enhaunce thou thee in the 
thenking of thi soule, as a boole; lest 
perauenture be hurtlid awei thi strengthe 
3bi folie, and thi lefes it ete, and thi 
frutes it leese, and thou be laft as a drie 
4tree in wildernesse. A shreude forsothe 
soule shal destro3en hym that hath it, 
and in to ioje of his enemy it 3yneth 
hym, and shal bringe doun in to the lot 
sof vnpitous men. A sweete wrd multe- 
plieth frendis, and swagith enemys; and 
a gracious tunge in a good man shal 
cabounde. Manye pesible ben to thee, and 
counseilour be to thee oon of a thousend. 
7If thou weldist a frend, in temptacioun 
weld hym, and ne li3tli opene, ‘ov trowe*, 
sthou thiself to hym. Ther is forsothe a 
frend aftir his tyme, and ‘schal not abide? 
9 stille in the dai of tribulacioun. And ther 
is a frend that is turned to enemyte ; and 
ther is a frend, that hate, and strif, and 
loreprefes shal discoueren. Ther is for- 
sothe a frend, felawe of the bord, and 
Nabidith not stille in the dai of nede. A 
frend if he® abide stille stablid, he shal 
be to thee as euene with, and in thin 
12homli thingus trostli he shal do. If he 
shal meeken hymself ajen thee, and hiden 
hymself fro thi face, thou shalt han good 
13frenshepe of 0 wil. Fro thin enemys be 
thou seuered, and of thi frendis tac heed. 
14A ‘feithful frend a strong? proteccioun ; 
who forsothe fyndeth hym, fyndith tresor. 
15To a feithful frend is no comparisoun ; 
ther is not wrthi peising of gold and of 
siluer a3en the goodnesse of the feith of 
shym. A feithful frend® leching of lif, 
and of vndeadlynesse; and who dreden‘ 


®Om.cetE pr.m. > abidith not c pr. m. B pr. m. 
freend is a stroong feithful 4. stronge frende and a feithful c. 


m thi 1, 


; 1 edwityng c et ceteri. 
silf A pr. m. 


© Om. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


P Om. 1. 


VI. 1-16. 


CAP. VI. 


Nile thou for a freend be maad enemye1 
to the™ nei3bore; for whi an yuele man 
schal enherite vpbreidyng™ and dispisyng, 
and ech synnere enuyouse and double 
tungid. Enhaunse thee not in the® thou3t2 
of thi soule, as a bole doith; lest thi vertu* 
be hurtlid doun bi foli, and it ete this 
leeues, and leese thi fruytis, and thou be 
left as a drye tree in deseert. Forsothes 
a wickid soule schal leese hym that hath 
it, and it 3yueth hym in to the? ioie of the 
enemye, and it schal leede forth in to the 
part of wickid ment. A swete word mul-5 
tiplieth frendis, and swagith enemyes ; and 
a tunge wel graciouse schal be plenteuouse 
in a good man. Many pesible men be toc 
thee, and oon of a thousynde be a coun- 
selour to thee. If thou hast a frend, haue7 
hym in temptacioun}, and bitake not 1i3tli 
thi silf to hym. For ther is a frend bi hiss 
time, and he schal not dwelle in the dai of 
tribulacioun. And ther is a frend which9 
is turned to enemytee; and ther is a 
freend, that schal schewe opynli hatrede, 
and chiding, and dispisyngis. 
ther is a frend, felowe‘ of table, and dwell- 
ith not in the dai of nede. 
dwellith stidfastj, he schal be as a man 
euene with thee, and he schal do tristili 


* thi vertu ; 
that is, sutilte 
of thi wit. di 
foli ; that is, 

bi mysusing of 
thi kunnyng ; 
and this foli 
ete thi leeues ; 
that is, distrie 
thi faire wordis. 
Lire here. c. 

+ in to the part 
of wickid men ; 
that is, in to 
helle, which is 
the eritage of 
wickid men. c. 


t haue him in 
temptacioun ; 
that is, preue 
thou him in 
thyn aduersite. 
bitake, etc.; in 
schewinge thi 
priuytes to him, 
bifor that thou 
hane prened 
him. bi his 
tyme ; that is, 
tyme of pros- 
erite, coue- 


P 
Forsothe 10 nable to his 


wynnyug. Lire 
here. C. 


If a frend 11 § 4 frend 


dwellith stide- 
fast; with thee 
in frenschip to 
God. mekith 
him ; that is, 


in thi meyneal* thingis. If he mekith hym 12 consentith with 


silf bifore thee, and hidith hym' fro thi 
face, thou schalt haue good frendschip of 
oon acord. 
enemyes, and take heede of thi frendis. 


thee in alle 
goodis. hidith 
hym ; in pro- 
curinge thi 


Be thou departid fro thin 13 good more in 


thyn ahsence 
than in pre- 


A feithful frend zs a strong defendyng 314 jee. Loe 


forsothe he that fyndith him, fyndith tre- 
sour. 
frend ; weiyng of gold and of siluer is not 
worthi a3ens the goodnesse of his feithful- 
nesse. 
lijf ||, and of vrideedlynesse ; and thei that 


here. c. 
ll is medecyn of 
lyif ; for he 


No comparisoun is to a feithful 15 loueth bi cha- 


rite, and pro- 
curith to his 
frend the goodis 
of grace, that 


A feithful frend is medicyn of 16 %*eneth 


goostly, and 
bryngith to 
vndedlynesse 


dreden the Lord, schulen fynde hym. He17of glorie. c. 


¢Om.cpr.m. 4 frend a strong feithful c pr.m. 


€ freend is 4. f dredith «. 


4 to felowe c.  ™ memoreal c. 


Ir hym 


VI. 17-—34. 


17the Lord, shul finden hym. Who dredeth 
the Lord, euenly shal han good fren- 
shipe; for after hym shal ben his frend. 
isSone, fro thi 3outhe tac doctrine, and 
vn to hoore® heris thou shalt finde wis- 
i9dam. As he that ereth, and that sowith, 
ne3he thou to it, and sustene the goode 
20frutes of it. In the werk forsothe of it 
a litil thou shal trauailen, and soone thou 
aishalt ete of® the getingus of it. Hou 
sharp ful myche is wisdam to vnwise men, 
and ther shal not abide stille in it the 
22herteles. As the vertue of a ston, prou- 
yng shal be in them; and thei shul not 
ezabide to throwe it afer. The wisdam 
forsothe of doctrine is' after the name of 
it, and not to manye it is opened; to 
whom forsothe it is knowen, it abiti 
24stille, vnto the si3te of God. Here, sone, 
and tac counseil of vnderstondyng, and 
25 caste thou not awei my counseil. Thro3 
in thi feet in to the gyues of it, and in to 
26the coleris of it thi necke. Vnderlei thi 
shulder, and ber it, and ne bere thou 
27heuysumli in* the bondis of it. In al 
thin inwit ne3he to it, and in al thi ver- 
2stue kep the weies of it. Enserche it, and 
it shal be mad open to thee; ‘and thou! 
mad withholding, ne forsake thou™ it. 
29In the laste thingus forsothe thou shalt 
finde reste in it, and it shal be turned to 
30thee in to liking. And the gyues of it 
shul be to thee ‘in to" proteccioun of 
strengthe, and the feet of vertue, and the 
sicoleris of it in a stoele of glorie. The 
fairnesse forsothe of lif is in it, and the 
32bondis of it holsum binding. Stoele off 
glorie thou shalt clothen it, and a crowne 
of thanking thou shalt putte aboue to 
33 thee. Sone, if thou schalt® take heed to me, 
thou shalt lerne it; and if thou lenest to, 
‘or dressist?, thin inwit, thou shalt be wis. 
31]f thou bowest in thin ere, thou shalt 
take doctrine; and if thou looue to heren, 


h Om. 4. 
m Oni. ¢ sec. m. E sec. m. 


& thyn hoore £ pr. m. 
that ac. that thou n. 
leuest dressist AGH. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


10m. ¢ prim. 


135 


that dredith the Lord, schal haue euenli 

good frendschip; for whi his frend schal 

be at the licnesse of hym. Sone, fro thiis 
3ongthe take thou doctryn, and til to hoor 

heeris thou schalt fynde wisdom. As he 19« an herties 


that erith, and that sowith, neize thou to ™% 5 that 
outen herte, 


: ; is, a man with 
it, and abide thou the goode fruytis therof. ey 
Soe s which Is necgi = 
For thou schalt trauele a litil in the werk 20 gent in the 
dom. the vertu 
generaciouns therof. Wisdom is ouer’ a1 % 00s that 
the siz3t of God ; 
% in ledinge hem 
man™ schal not dwelle there ynne. As the aa naheneat at 
z glorie. Lire 
vertu of a stoon, preuyng schal be in hem; 
+ of vndur- 
stonding ; that 
° * : is, bi which 
came the wisdom of techyng is bi the 23 12.) Shute rede 
name therof, and it i 
3 1s not opyn to many encieane 1 
and yuel to fle 
it is knowun, til to the sijt of God. Sone, 24 that is, affec- 
here thou, and take the counsel of vndur- ou ether 
stockis therof ; 
that is, of wis- 
counsel. ee 
2 E - ynge to it with- 
therof, and thi necke in to the bies therof. out departing. 
: * ‘ gladly, and 
be thou not anoied in the boondis therof. 2,27; Koy: 
i a : geting of wis- 
kepe the weies therof. Enquere thou it, 9g dom. in ai thi 
ynge al thyn 
thon made holdinge wisdom forsake not Y>{ystonding 
it. For in the laste thingis thou schalt 29 “sdom. in 
is, good werk. 
‘ ok ; the stockis 
to thee in to deliting. And the stockis 30 therof, etc. ; 
- that i - 
therof schulen be to thee in defence of  jarabl cles. 


ting of wis- 
therof, and thou schalt ete soone of the Gomewhe ver 
is, weizte. to 
scharp to vntau3t men, and an hertles 
here. c. 
and thei schulen not tarie to caste awei it. 
with ynne thee, 
men ; but it dwellith with hem, of whichet 
it. thi foot ; 
desir. in to the 
stondyng}, and caste thou not awei my 
Set in thi foot in to the stockis 25 40m, in cleu- 
. 0 a d thi ke 3 
Make suget thi schuldir, and bere it, aud 26 that i bei 
In al thi wille go to it, and in al thi vertu gz uel in the 
% soule 3 i li- 
and it schal be maad opyn to thee; and eeaMinee 
and loue to 
¥ thi vertu; that 
fynde reste ther ynne, and it schal turne 
parable cleu- 


. . yng with wis- 
strengthe, and the foundementis of vertu, 338 “y' tied 
and the bie therof in a stoole of glorief. 9 stvengihes 

for he that 


For whi the fairnesse of lijf is in wisdom, 31 stondith on 
and the boondis therof ben heelful" bynd- Tanruae 
yng. Thou schalt ‘were it as aY stoole of sy; ee 
glorie, aud thou schalt sette on thee a Seer 
coroun of thankyng. Sone, if thou takist 33 se ornel inthe 
heede to me, thou schalt lerne wisdom; tere. c. 

and if thou 3yuest thi wille, thou schalt Hotes the an: 
be wijs. If thou bowist doun thin eere, 31 @eyble slorie | 
thou schalt take teching ; and if thou louest — ssule is getun 
for to here, thou schalt be wijs. 


biwisdom. Lire 


Stonde 35 kere. c. 


kK to AGH. 
° Om. c pr. m. 


J abideth secu. 


land c pr.m. E pr.m. 
2 in AGH. 


P Om. c et E pr.m. 


8 ful c et ceteri. twhom1. “heltheful c. v clothe it in ac pr.m. x. clothe it a Hpuvy. clothe, ether 
weere it in a C sec. m. GKMNQRSXaG. clothe it as a 1 text. or were I marg. were it a F. 


136 


35thou shalt be wis. In the multitude of 
prudent prestis stond thou, and to the 
wisdam of hem of herte be thou ioyned ; 
that al the telling of God thou mowe 
heren, and the prouerbis of preisyng 

seascape not fro’ thee. And if thou see 
the wel felende mau, wake out to hym, 
and thi foot ofte trede the grees ‘of the 

37dores of hym’. Thenking haue thou in 
the hestes of God, and in the maunde- 
mens of hym most bisi be thou; and he 
shal 3yue to thee an herte, and coueyt- 
inge of wisdam shal ben 3oue to thee. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Wile thou not don eueles, and thei 
2shul not cacche thee. Go awei fro the 
wicke, and ther shul failen eueles fro 
3thee. Sowe thou not eueles in foorewes 
of vnri3twisnesse’, and thou shalt not 
repent them in to the seuethe" fold. 
4Wile thou not sechen of a man the dig- 
nete of a ledere, ne of a- king the cha3er 
sof wrshepe. Iustefie thou not thee bifor 
God, for he ys knowere of the herte’; and 
anent the king wile thou not wilne to 
6ben seen wys. Wile thou not sechen to 
be mad a domes man, but if thou mowe 
bi vertue breken wickidnesses ; lest par- 
auenture thou out drede the face of the 
my3ti, and putte sclaunder in thin hider 
7and thider deliuernesse. Synne thou not 
in the multitude of the cite, ne poote 
&thee in to the puple; ne bynde thou to 
double synnes, ne forsothe thou shalt be 
9iu oon gilteles. Wile thou not ben a 
10couward in thi soule, to pre3jen; and to 
11don almesse deede, ne dispise thou. Ne 
sei thou, In the multitude of my 3iftus 
God shal beholde; and me offrende to the 
i2he3est God, my 3iftis he shal take. Scorne 


it in the tyme of nede, as Austin seith. Lire here. c. 
thee, etc.; in consentinge to it in yuel. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


VI. 35——VII. 12. 


thou in the multitude of prudent* preestis, 
and be thou ioyned of herte to the wisdom 
of hem; that thou maist here ech telling 
of God, and the prouerbis of preisyng fle 
not awey fro thee. And if thou seest a36 
wijs man, wake thou to hym, and thi foot 
trede on the greeces’’ of his doris. Haue37 
thou thou3t in the comaundementis of God, 
and be thou most bisi in his heestis; and 
he schal 3yue to thee hertet, and coueitise 
of wisdom schal be 3ouun to thee. 


CAP. VII. 


Nile thou do yuels, and tho schulen not 
take thee. Departe thou fro wickidnesse, 2 
and yuels schulen faile fro thee. Sowes 
thou uot yuels in the forewis{ of vnri3t- 
fulnesse, and thou schalt not repe tho in 
seuene fold. Nyle thou seke of a man4 
ledyng, nethir of a kyng the chaier of 
onour. Iustifie thou not thee bifore God, 5 
for he is the” knowere of the herte; and 
nyle thou wilne to be seyn wijs anentis 
the king. Nile thou seke to be maad ac 
juge, no* but thou maist breke wickid- 
nessis bi vertu; lest thou drede the face of 
a my3ti man, and sette sclaundre§ in** thi 
swiftnesse. Do thou not synne in the7 
multitude of a cytee, nether sende thee 
in to the puple; nether bynde thou doubles 
synnes||, for thou schalt not be giltles in 
oon. Nyle thou be a coward in thi soule,9 
to preie; and dispise thou not to do almes.10 
Seie thou not, God schal biholde in the1! 
multitude of my 3iftis; and whanne Y 
schal offre to God alther hijeste, he schal 
take my 3iftis. Scorne thou not a man in 12 
the bitternesse of sonle; for whi God is 
the biholdere, that makith meke, and en- 


-* of prudent ; 


bi this ben ex- 
cludid vnwise 
elde men and 
faylinge in ver- 
tues; for whi 
othere vertues 
ben knyt to 
prudence. 
prestis ; that 
is, elde men ; 
and this may 
be expowned 
of good prestis, 
that ben hold. 
un to kunne 
Goddis lawe, 
and teche it. 
Lire here c. 
+3yue to thee 
herte; to vn- 
durstonde and 
worche tho. 
Lire here. c. 
tin the forew- 
is; that is, 
3yue thou not 
ensaumple of 
yuel doing to 
meu enclyn- 
aunt herto. not 
repe tho ; in 
peyne to be 
3ouun to thee 
seuenfold, that 
is, manyfold ; 
for whi to hou 
many men 4 
man is cause 
of synne, bi so 
many peynes 
he schal be 
punyschid, bi 
the ordre of 
ri3tfulnesse. 
Nyle thou seke 
of a man led- 
ing ; that is, 
that thou be 
maad ledere 
of othere men 
in goostly 
thingis, ether 
temporal 
thingis ; for 
whi vertues 
owen to be 
more excelent 
in souereyns 5 
but it is pre- 
sumptuause 
thing, that a 
man arette 
him silf to be 
more vertuouse 
than othere, 
and therfor it 
is viciouse to 
coueite, ether 
to seke prinse- 
hed outirly ; 
netheles it is 
leueful and 
good to take 


§ and sette sclaundir 3 that is, sclaundre the puple bi thyn vnstidfastnesse. nether sende 
\| double synnes ; that is, thi synne, with the synne of the puple. gilteles; of peyne, but 


thou schalt be punyschid for euer either, for a iuge is holdun to Jette the dede of the puple in siche thingis. Myle thou be coward, etc.; as if he seye, 
Be thon not so bisy of the gouernail of the puple, that thou dispise to do the helthe of thi soule, bi preyeris and werkis of mersi. in the multitude of 
my 3iftis ; in so myche, that he schal not punysche my synnes ; for whi this is fals. Greg. seith, he that 3yueth mete ether clothis to a pore man, 
and is netheles defoulid bi wickidnesse of soule, ether of bodi, 3yueth hise goodis to God, and him silf to the deuel. Lire here. c. 


@ Om. c pr.m. 


u seuenthe ceteri. Vv hertes c pr. m. 


WV grees I. 


t Om. a. of the house of him en, 


Ww Om. 1. 


S vnriztwijs acu. t gedere c pr.m. E pr.m. 


*Om1. %* tor 


VII. 13—31. 


thou not a man in the bitternesse of 
soule; God forsothe the lokere aboute is, 
isthat enhaunceth and meketh. Wile thou 
not looue lesing a3en thi brother; and in 
14to a frend lic maner do thou not. Wile 
thou not wilne to lien eche lesing ; the 
besynesse forsothe of hem is not good. 
15 Wile thou not be ful of wrdis in the 
multitude of prestus ; and reherse thou not 
16a wrd in thin orisoun. Hate thou not 
trauailous werkes, and cherlish doing 
17 foormed of the heizest. Ne acounte thou 
thee in the multitude of men withoute 
1sdiscipline. Haue mynde of wrathe, for 
i9it shall not tarie. Meeke gretli thi spirit, 
for veniaunce of the flesh of the vnpitous, 
zofyr and werm. Wile thou not trespasen 
‘in to¥ thi frend delajende* monie; ne 
dispise thou thi derwrtheY brother for 
zigold. Wile thou not* gon awei fro a wel 
felende womman, and a good, whom thou 
hast goten in the drede of the Lord ; for- 
sothe the grace of the shamefastnesse of 
2zhir ouer gold. Hurte thou not a ser- 
uaunt in treuthe werchende, ne an hired 
23man 3yuende his lif. A wel felende ser- 
uaunt be to thee looued as thi soule; 
bygile thou not hym fro®* fredam, ne 
24forsake thou hym helpeles. Beestis® to 
thee ben? tac heed to them; and if thei 
ben profitable, abide thei stille anent 
25thee. Sonus® ben to thee ? tech hem, and 
26 bowe hem fro the childhed of hem. Do}3- 
tris’ ben to thee ? keep the body of hem, 
and shewe thou not thi face glad to them. 
27 Bytac® a do3tir, and a gret werk thou 
shalt do; and to a wel felende man 3if f 
28hyr. A womman if she is to thee aftir 
thi soule, thro3 hir not awei; and to an 
hateful tac thou not thee in al thin herte. 
29 Honoure thi fader ; and the weilingus of 
30thi moder forjete thou not. Haue mynde 
for but bi them thou haddest not ben, 
and 3eeld to them what maner and thei 
31to thee. In al thi soule dred God, and 


* to c pr. m. 


x for delaying F pr. m. 
b If beestis 4. 


eIfsones 4. 4 If do3tris «4. 


y Om. plures. 2 Om. 1. 


VOL. III. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Y derworthist £ sec.o. AGH. 
e Tac c pr.m. 


22 weilyng A pr.m. 


T 


137 


haunsith. Nyle thou loue a leesyng ajensi3 

thi brother ; nether do thou in lijk maner 

a3ens a frend. Nyle thou wilne to lie ony 14 

leesing ; for whi the contynuaunce therof 

is not good. Nyle thou be a ianglere ins 

the multitude of preestis; and reherse thou 

not a word in thi preier*. Haate thou not 16 * in shi preyer; 
trauelouse werkis, and erthetilthe maad Pryier pay be 
of the hijeste. 


Haue 18 and this owith 
thou mynde on ire, for it schal not tarie. 
and reasonably, 


Arette thouY not thee in172" *xing maad 
2 to wise men, 
the multitude of vnlernyd men. 
to be set forth 
so distinctly 
Make thou mneke greetli thi spirit, for whi 1s that it bihoneth 
the veniaunce of the fleisch of an vnpi- Dotit be re- 


hersid ; ether 
touse man 7s fier, and worm. Nyle thou 20 thins, ae 
owith no 
trespasse ajens thi frend dilaiynge monei; _ be maad to 
od in myche 


nether dispise thou a ful dereworth bro- 
ther for gold. Nyle thou departe fro a21; 
wijs womman, and good, whom thou hast 
gete in the’ drede of the Lord; for whi 
the grace of hir schamefastnesse is aboue 
gold. Hirte thou not a seruaunt worch-22 
ynge in treuthe, nether an hirid man 3yu- 


Rte ieee : hi 
ynge his lijff. A witti seruaunt be dere-2 mr Poteet a. 


speche, in bi- 
lenynge that it 
is herd herbi. 
Arette not thee, 
etc.s in suynge 
the felouschipe 
and maneris 
oe hem. Lire 
here. C. 


worthe to thee as thi soule; defraude sede 
in thi ser- 
thou not hym of fredom, nether forsake tyce. Lire 


thou hym nedi. Beestis ben to thee? take 24°” 
thon heede to tho; and if tho ben pro- 
fitable, dwelle tho stille at thee. Sones 25 

hen to thee? teche thon hem, and bowe 


thout hem fro her childheed. Dou3tris 26? lowe thous 
vndur chastis- 
ben to thee? kepe thou the bodi of hem, _ ing. te bodi 


of hem ; that 

and schewe thou not glad face to hem. thei renne not 
: . aboute, and 

Byue thi dow;ter fo mariage, and thou27}ecorpt. 


doist a greet werk; and 3yue thon hir to 9/74 face: lest 


thei be wan- 
a wijs man. If a womman is to thee aftir28 ae ris, 
thi soule§, caste hir not awei; and bitake here. c. 
thou not thee in alle thin herte to an hate- ae one is, 
ful womman. Onoure thi fadir; and for-205 sPeonsere 
3ete thou not the weilyngis” of thi modir. see 
Haue thou mynde that thou haddist sei ee aa 
be, no? but bi hem, and 3elde thou to hem _ hir the priuyte 
as and? thei diden to thee. In al thi soule si oe gyn Nenes 
drede thou God, and halewe thou hise {0 Dalida. Lire 
preestis. In al thi vertu lone thou him 32 
that made thee ; and forsake thou not hise 


z Om. ¢ pr. m. 8 bi «GH. 


f thou shalt 3yue 4. 


aOm.1. > Om. ci, 


138 


szthe prestes of hym halewe. In al thi 
vertue looue hym that made thee; and 
the seruauns of hym forsac thou not. 
33 Wrshepe thou God of al thi soule; and 
wrshipe prestus, and purge thee forth 
sawith armes. 3if to them part, as and 
maundement is? to thee, of first frutes, 
and of purging; and of thi? necgligence 
3s purge thee with fewe. The 3ifte' of thin 
armes, and the sacrifise of halewing, thou 
shalt offre to the Lord, the bigynyngus 
3¢of hoeli thingus. And to the pore put 
forth thin hond, that plesing be parform- 
37ed, and thi blessyng. Grace of 3ifte in 
the siz3te of alle lyuyng; and to the deade 
3s forfende thou not grace. Fayle thou not 
to wepende men to ben in coumforting ; 
39and with weilende men go thou. Noje 
it not thee to visiten the sike; of these 
thingus forsothe in louyng* thou shalt 
4obe fastned. In alle thi werkes haue in 
mynde thi laste thyngus; and withoute 
ende thou shalt not synne. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Stryue thou not with a my3ti man, 
lest’ parauenture thou falle in the hondys 
2of hym. Striue thou not with a riche 
man, lest parauenture ajenward he sette 
sstrif to thee. Manye men forsothe gold 
and siluer hath lost ; and vnto the herte! 
4of kingus it streccheth, and turneth. 
Striue thou not with a tungy man, and" ne 
greithe thou in to the fir of hym wode. 
5Comune thou not to a man vuta3t, lest 
che speke euele™ of thi progenye. Dis- 
pise thou not a man turnende awei hym- 
self fro synne, ne putte thuu repref to 
hym; haue mynde, for alle in corup- 
7cioun wee ben. Ne dispise thou a man 
in his elde; forsothe of vs thei waxen 
solde. Wile thou not of thin enemy dead 
iojen, witende for alle wee dien, and in 
9to i03e wee wiln come. Dyspise thou 
not the telling of wise prestis, and in the 


prouerbis of hem togidere dwelle thou; 
b the c. 


fit is a i first 4. 


¢Om.1. 4 partis c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


K Jooue c pr.m. 


€ ende, that is, neuere v. 


VII. 32—VIII. 9. 


mynystris. 
soule; and onoure thou preestis, and clense 


thee with armes*. 3yue thou to hem the°3s 


part? of the firste fruytis, and of purgyng, 
as also it is comaundid to thee; and of 
thi negligence purge thou thee with fewe 
men. 
3yfte of thin armes, and the sacrifice of 
halewyng, the bigynnyngist of hooli men. 


Onoure thou God of al this3* with armes; 


that is, bi of- 
fringis getun 
with thi trauel. 
of purging ; 
that is, of 
tithe, that was 
ins to dekenes, 
0 xviij. c°. of 
Nuteg with 


Thou schalt offre to the Lord thes ee Bet 


fante owith not 
to be schewid 
to many men. 
Lire here. c. 


And dresse thin hond to a pore man, that 36+ the digyn- 


thi merci and blessyng be performyd. 


Grace is 30uun in the si3t of ech that37 


lyueth ; and forbede thou not grace to a 
deed man. 
hem that wepen; and go thou with hem 
that morenen. 
a sijk man; for bi these thingis thou 
schalt be maad stidfast in loue. 
thi werkis haue thou mynde on thi laste 
thingis; and thou schalt not do synne 
withouten ende®. 


CAP. VIII. 


Chide thou not with a mi3ti man, leste1 
thou falle in to hise hondis. Stryue thou2 
not with a riche man, lest perauenture he 
make ple a3enward to thee. For whi golds 
and siluer[ hath lost many men; and it 
stretchith forth til to the herte of kyngis, 
and turneth’§. Chide thou not with aa 
man, a ianglere, and lJeie thou not trees in 
to his fier. Comyne thou not with ans 
vntau3t man, lest he speke yuele of thi 
kynrede. Dispise thou not a man turn-6 
ynge awei hym silf fro synne, nether vp- 
breides thou hym; haue thou mynde, that 
alle we ben in corrupcioun. Dispise thou7 
not a man in his eelde ; for whi of vs men 
wexen eld. Nyle thou make ioye of thins 
enemy deed, witynge that alle we dien, 
and wolen not come in to ioie of oure 
enemys. Dispise thou not the tellyng of9 
wise preestes, and be thou conuersauut in 
the prouerbis of hem] ; 
Om. a. 


Vhertis 4. m eueles c pr. m. 


fturneth doom v. & edwite ceteri. 


nyngis, ete; 
that is, the 
firste fruytis 
and dymes 
and siche of- 
fringis be the 


Faile thou not in coumfort to 3s bigynnyngis of 


lewyng of 
pe 


be parformyd ; 


Be thou not slow to visite 39 ghat is, the re. 


myssionn of thi 
synnes, and the 


In “alleao $82 Slane 


ces. grace is 
jouun ; that is, 
schal be 3onun 
in the general 
doom, for it 
schal be seid 
thanne for the 
werkis of pitee, 
Come 3e the 
blessid of my 
fadir, etc. Lire 
a G 

t gold and sil- 
uer, ete.3 that 
is, coneitise of 
gold and of 
siluer. Lire 
here. c. 

§ and turneth ; 
that is, doom 
fro truthe into 
falsnesse, and 
so ful many 
inocent men 
ben damned in 
thingis and bo. 
dies bi money 
of riche men, 
leie thou not 
trees, efc. ; that 
is, mater to 
kyndle his 
woodnesse bi 
thi striuyng. 

in corrupcioun; 
that is, goen to 
corrupcioun, 
ether deth ; for 
we ben maad 
of contrarie 
elementis. Lire 
here. Cc. 

ll prouerbis of 
em ; that is, 
notable wordis 
of hem. of el. 
dere men ; in 
whiche is wis- 
dom and expe- 


for of hem thou 10 rence of long 


tyme. Lire 
here. c. 


VIII. 10— IX. 2. 


1oof hem forsothe thou shalt lerne wisdam, 
and doctrine of vndirstonding, and fruc- 
tuousli vse grete men withoute pleynt. 
11 Passe not biside thee the telling of el- 
deres; thei forsothe lerneden of ther fa- 
12dris. For of hem thou shalt lerne vnder- 


stonding ; and in tyme of nede thou shalt: 


13 3yue an answere. Teende thou not colis 
of synneres, vndirnymende hem; and lest 
thou be tend with the flaume ‘of the" fyr 

1s0f the synnes of hem. Stonde thou not 
a3en the face of the strifful; lest he sitte 

15as a spiere to thi mouth. Wile thou not 
leenen to a man strengere than thiself; 
i¢ that if thou leenest, haue it as lost. Be- 
hote thou not ouer thi vertue; that if 
17thou behote, as 3elding bethenk. Deme 
thou not a3en the inge; for after that ys 
1sriztwis, he demeth. With a fool hardy 
man go thou not in the weie, lest par 
auenture he gregge his eueles in thee ; 
he forsothe aftir his wil goth, and togi- 
dere with the folie of hym thou shalt 

19 pershen. With the wratheful man make 
thou not ianglyng, and with the fool° 
hardy go thou not in to desert; for as 
no3t is? anent hym blod, and where is 
not helpe, he shal hurtle thee doun. 

20 With fooles haue thou not counseil ; for- 
sothe they shul not moun loouen, but 

21tho thingus that plesen to them. Beforn 
a straunger make thou not counseil ; for- 
sothe thou wost not, what he bere out. 
To alle men thin herte opene thou not ; 
lest par auenture it bringe in to thee fals 
grace, and yt poote reproof to thee. 


CAP. IX. 


1 Be thou not gelouse to the womman 
of thi bosum ; lest she shewe vp on thee 
2the malice of shreude doctrine. 3yue 
thou not to a womman power of thi 
soule ; lest she go in to thi vertue, and 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


139 


. not, ete. 3 
durstondyng, and to serue without pleynt —whanne thei 
to grete men. The tellyng of eldere MENU ether ben set 
passe not thee; for thei han lerned of her ™ raththe 

For of hem thou schalt lerne Wil= 12 for thse 
“ en not amend- 
durstondyng ; and in the tyme of nede 
d e 
thou schalt 3yue answere. Kyndle thow 13 necheles this 
ff stondun of bro- 
hem; and be thou not brent with the — theris repreu- 
yn 
flawme of fier of her synnes. Stonde thou 14 ordeyned to the 
him that is 
yng; lest he sitte as a spiere tothi mouth, prenvé, but 
Nyle thou leenet to a man strongere than 1s Y"s m22d bi 
repreuyng is 
° . : .  ordeyned to . 
it as lost. Biheete’ thou not aboue thi 16 the good of 
° “Ve . Ititud g ay 
power  ; that if thou hast bihizt, bithenke {hay a malt 
tude is amendid 
a iuge; for he demeth vp that, that is iust. blamyng and 
punysching of 
: obstynat and 
mang, lest perauenture he agregge hise rc Live 
yuels in thee; for he goith aftir his wille, "Nye mou 
leene, ete.; that 
his foli. Make thou not chidyng with a 19 nesse an pe 
: strengthe. Lire 
wrathful man, and go thou not in to de- 
+ as 3eldynge; 
for thou art 
is as nou3t bifore hym, and where noon gine Tire 
help is, he schal hurtle thee doun. Haue 20 re. c. 
that is, stirid 
ee heedly bi the 
not loue, no! but tho thingis that plesen f 
hem. Make thou not a counsel bifore aati’ M7e*r. 
i 4 is, schedinge 
bringe forth. Make not thin herte knowun out of innocent 
to ech man]; lest perauenture he brynge tere. c. 
{| to ech man; 
a very frend 
and preued. 


schalt lerne wisdom, and techyng of vn-  * Kyndle thou 
+ ben obstynat, 
5 out of mesure, 
fadris. 
id, but ben 
not* the coolis of synneris, and repreue ‘ch! be vndur- 
g, which is 
Gan amending of 
not a3ens the face of a man ful of dispis- 
not of repreu- 
k a iuge, for that 
thou; that if thou hast lent, haue thou 
thely a multi- 
thou as 3eldynget. Deme thou not ajensi7)i{7 0 Wein 
Go thou not in the weie with an hardi1s him that is 
here. c. 
and thou schalt perische togidere with [0 os ' 
here. c. 
sert with an hardi man; for whi blood|| 
holdun to do 
- . ; § hardi man ; 
thou not councel with foolis ; for thei moun 
fersnesse of 
straunger; for thou noost™, what he schal _ |i od; that 
blood. Lire 
to thee fals grace, and dispise thee. but onely to 
fals grace ; that 


is, feyned fren- 
schipe. Lire 
here. c. 

** Loue thou 


CAPS ES. 
nat gelously, 


Loue thou not gelousli** the womman)! gi.) that ix, 
of thi bosum ; lest sche schewe on thee the ' the not 


suspiciouse 
malice of yuel doctryn. 3yue thou not to2 over myche of 
a womman the power of thi soule; lest 


the chastite of 
thyn owne 
sche entre in thi vertu, and thou be schent. 


wiyf, and arte 
hir, ether make 
hir streit herfor 


vnduly. the malice of yuel doctryn ; in ymaginynge thi deth, as siche wymmen ben tau3t of yuele elde wymmen. power of thi soule; that is, that 
sche be lord of thee. entre in thi vertu ; that is, mystake to hir that that is propir to the hosebonde. Lire here. c. 


1 Om. c prim. 


hOm.1. i Bihote 1. 


°Om. ¢ pr.m. 


k vertu EGHIKMNPQRSUVXYac. 


P Om. 4Gn. 


1Om.1. ™ woost not 1. 


TQ 


140 


3thou be confoundid. Behold not a wom- 
man myche wilnende; lest par auenture 
4thou falle in to the snares of hir. With a 
leperesse, ‘or tumbler’, be thou not besy, 
ne here hir; lest par auenture thou pershe 
sin the delyuere doyng of hir. A maiden 
beholde thou not; lest par auenture thou 
6 be sclandred in the fairnesse of hir. 3yue 
thou not tot lecchoures’ thi soule in any 
-thing; lest thou leese thee, and thi soule, 
zand thin eritage. Wile thou not beholden 
abonte in the weies of the cite; ne erre 
sthou aboute in the stretis of it. Turne 
awei thi face fro a gai womman ; and be- 
holde thon not aboute straunge fairnesse. 
9For the fairnesse of a womman manye 
men persheden; and of it lust as fyr 
10brenueth out. Eche womman that is 
leccherous, as a thost in the weie shal 
i1 ben ‘to-tredent.: The fairnesse of an alien 
womman many men wndrid ben mad 
repreuable ; forsothe the togidere speche 
of hir as fyr brenneth out. With an 
alien womman outerli sitte thou not, ne 
13ly thou with hir vp on the arm; and 
striue thou not with hir in wyn, lest 
par auenture she bowe doun thin herte in 
to hir, and bi thi blod thou slyde in to 
14perdicioun. Forsake thou not an old 
frend ; forsothe the newe shal not he lic 
isto hym. Newe wyn a newe frend; it 
shal waxen old, and with swetnesse thou 
ieshalt drinke it. Looue thou not the glo- 
rie and the richessis of the synnere ; for- 
sothe thou wost not, what be to come 
17the turnyng vp so doun of hym. Plese 
not to thee the wrong of vnrijtwis men, 
witende for ynto helle the vnpitous shal 
isnot plesen. Aferr" be thon awei fro a 
man hauende power of sleyng, and not 
of rering, and thou shalt not ouertrowen 
19the dred of deth ; and if thou ne3hest to 
hym, wile thou not any thing don amys, 
lest par auenture he take awei thi lif. 


men thei dreden to he poisoned in ech mete and drynke, and that tresouns hen set to hem in ech place. Lire here. c. 


be in dwellinge with a tiraunt. Lire here. c. 
10m.ceEprm. t Om. c. 


a daunstere 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


8 letcherous 4H. 


° gay 1. Pan oother mannus wif 1. 


IX. 3——19. 


Biholde thou not a womman of manys 
willis*; lest perauenture thou falle in to 
the snaris of hir. Be thou not customable 4 
with a daunseresse", nethir here thou hir; 
lest perauenture thou perische in the spedi 
werk of hir. Biholde thou not a virgyn;5 
lest perauenture thou be sclaundrid in the 
feirnesse of hir. 3yue not thi soulet tos 
hooris in ony thing; lest thou leese thee, 
and thi soule, and thin eritage. Nyle thou7 
biholde aboute in the lanys of the cytee ; 
nethir erre thou in the large streetis ther- 
of. Turne awei thi face fro a wommans8 
‘wel arayed°t ; and biholde thou not aboute 
the fairnesse of othere?P. Many men hang 
perischid for the fairnesse of a womman ; 
and ‘herbi couetise? brenneth ‘an hi3" as 


* a womman 

of many willis ; 
that coneitith 
now this man, 
now that man. 
a daunseresse 3 
for sich strecch- 
ing forth of 
wommans 
membris ex- 
citith the desir 
of lecherie. 
Lire here. c. 

+ thi soule ; 
that is, thi con- 
sent. Lire 
here. c. 

t wel aruied ; 
for sich arai is 
a snare, to take 
men. and herbi; 
that is hi vn- 
chast lokingis 
and spechis 
and signes. 
Lire here. c. 

§ defoulid ; of 
alle men, for 
sche is ful 
myche suget to 


fier. Ech womman which is an hoore, 1 Lire 


ethir customable to fornycactoun, schal be 
defoulid§ as a fen* in the weie. 
men wondrynge on the fairnesse of ant 
alien womman" weren maad reprewable, 
for whi the speche of hir brenneth an hi3 


\|a newe frend; 
as me noot of 


Many 11 newe wyn,what 


maner wyn it 
schal be in the 
ende ; 80 of a 
newe frend, me 
noot what feith- 
fulnesse he 


as fier. Sitte thou not in ony maner with 12schal haue. 


an alien womman, nether reste thou with 


hir on a bed; and iangle thou not with 13 


hir in wyn, lest perauenture thin herte 
boowe in to hir, and thou falle in to per- 


dicioun bi thi blood. Forsake thou not an 14 


eld frend ; for a newe frend|| schal not be 


lijk hym. Newe wijn zs a newe frend ; it 15 


schal wexe eld, and thou schalt drinke it 
with swetnesse. 
glorie and richessis of a synnere ; for thou 
noost’, what distriyng of hym schal come. 


The wrong of vniust men plese not thee, 17 


and wite thou that a wickid man schal 


Lire here, c. 

q til to hellis ; 
for thanne and 
not bifore he 
in peyne schal 
plese seyntis, 
as he displeside 
hem in synne. 
Lire here. c. 
**fer froa man 
that hath power 
to sle ; that is, 
fro a cruel ty- 
raunt. drede of 
deth ; that is, 


Coueyte thou not the 16inmakinge thee 


fer frohim, - 
thon schalt do 
awey fro thee 
the drede of 
deth. of snaris; 
for whi ti- 
rauntis enere 
setten forth 


not plese til to hellis]. Be thou fer fro 18 snaris to su- 


a man that hath power to sle**, and thou 
schalt not haue suspicioun of the drede of 


deth ; and if thou neijest to hym, nyle19 


thou do ony trespasse, lest perauenture 


getis, that they 
haue oceasioun 
to ranysche 
her goodis 

of hem that 
sorewen ; that 
is, of tirauntis 
that ben euere 


he take awei thi lijf. Knowe thou the 20 in sorewe, for 


comynyng of detht{; for thou schalt entre 


t troden acu. 4 Ferr c pr.m. 


4 herof concupiscence 1. ‘out 1. 8 toord ceteri. 


t Om. a pr.m. et plures. % wommen asv. VY wost not 1. 


whi for the 
yuels that thei 
diden to othere 


+r of deth ; that is, to 


TX. 20——X. 9g. 


20 The comunyoun of deth wite thou; for in 
the myddil of grenes thou shalt gon in, 
and vp on the armes of men sorewende 

2ithou shalt gon. Aftir thi vertue war thee 
fro thi ‘nexte, or ney3bore"; and with wise 

22men and prudent men’ trete thou. Ri3t- 
wis men be thei™ to thee imetefelawes* ; 
and in the drede of God be to thee glori- 

23 yng. And in theY wit be to thee thenk- 
ing of Ged; and al thi telling out in the 

athestes of the hejest. In the hond of 
‘craftis men2 werkes shul ben preisid, 
and the prince of a puple in wisdam off 
his sermoun; in the wit forsothe of el- 

asderes a wrd. Ferful is in his cite a 
tungy man; and the fool hardy in hys 
woord hateful shal ben. 


CA Ns 


1 A wis domesman shal demen his puple; 
and the princehod of the ‘wel felende, ‘or 
2witti, shal ben stable. Aftir the domesman 
of the puple, so and the seruauutis of hym; 
and whiche maner? is the gouernour of 
the cyte, suche and the dwelleris in® it. 
3 An vnwis king shal leesen his puple; and 
cites shul ben enhabitid bi the wit of 
sprudent men. In the hond of God the 
power of the erthe, and abhominable alle 
wickidnesses of the? Jentiles; and a pro- 
fitable gouernour in tyine he shal reren vp 
sonit. In the hond of God is* the power of 
man; and vp on the face of the ‘scribe, or 
man of lawe', he shal putte vp on his 
swrshipe. Of alle the wrong of thi ne3he- 
bore haue thou not mynde; and no thing 
7do thou in the werkes of wrong. Hate- 
ful biforn God and men is pride; and 
cursful alle wickidnessis® of Jentiles. 
3s Rewme! fro fole in to fole is born ouer, 
for vnrijtwisnesses, and wrongus, and 
¢Striues, and dyuers treccheries. Forsothe 
than the auerous man no thing is! more 


unexte c el E pr.m. Au. nexte nejebore Gc. 
¥ Om. c pr. m. 2 crafti men 4. 
€ Om. AEGH. 


nesse E. wickidnes Gu. 4 A rewme 4. 


w Aftir 3. X or I pass. xx and thi 4. 


b word schal be preised 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


¥Om.c pr.m. 
8 Om. c ef £ prom. 
f scribe c pr.m. E pr.m. cit. scribe or maister of lawe a. 
i Om. c pr. m. 


y Om. 1. 
¢ translatid, ether takun awey CEFGHKMNPQRSUXYa¢. 


141 


in to the myddis of snaris, and thou schalt 
go on the armuris of hein that sorewen. . 
Bi" thi vertu kepe thee fro thi nei3bore*; 21 
and trete thon with wise men and pru- 
dent men. Just men be gestis, cthir*22 
mete feris, to thee ; and** gloriyng be ‘to 


thee in the dreed of God. And the thou5t 23 


of God be to thee in witt; and al thi tell- 
ynge be in the heestis’ of the hieste. 
Werkis schulen be preisid in the hond of 24 
crafti men, and the prince of the puple in 
the wisdom of his word; forsothe in the? 
wit of eldere men a word>t. 
ianglere, is dredeful in his citee ; and a fool 
hardi man in his word schal be hateful. 


CAP. X. 


A wijs iuge schal deme his puple; and! 
the prinshed of a witti man schal be stid- 
fast). Aftir the iuge of the puple, so and2 
hise mynystris; and what maner man is 
the gouernour of the citee, siche ben also 
men dwellinge ther ynne. An vnwijs king3 
schal leese his puple; and citees schulen be 
enhabitid. bi the wit of prudent men. The4 
power of erthe 7s in the hond of God, and 
al the wickidnesse|| of hethene men zs abho- 
mynable; and he schal reise a profitable 
gouernour at a tyme on it. The power ofs 
man ts in the hond of God ; and he schal 
sette his onour on the face of a wijs man 
in the lawe. Haue thou not mynde on ale 
the wrong of the neizbore; and do thou no 
thing in the werkis of wrong. Pride is7 
hateful bifore God and men; and al the 
wickidnesse of hethene men 7s abhomyna- 
ble. A rewme is translatid® fro a folk ins 
to folk, for vnrijtfulnessis, and wrongis, 
and dispisyngis, aud dyuerse gilis. Nog 
thing is cursidere than an auerouse man™. 
What art thou proude, thou erthe and 


wOm. c pr.m. x wacchis £ pr. m. 
c of 4. d Om. 4GH. 


b Om. c prom. : 
& the wickidnes 4. wicke- 


% heest 1. a Om. 4 pr. m, EFHNPUVXY. 


A man, a25 


* neizbore 3 
that may speke 
a3enus thee to 
a tiraunt. Lire 
here. c. 


t in wit; that 
is, applie thi 
wit to thenke 
on God. Lire 
here. C. 


3 aword ; that 
is, a schort 
word, seid of 

a wise man, 
schal be preisid 
more than a 
greet telling 
seid of an other 
man. Lire here. 
c. 


§ be stidfast ; 
summe hokis 
han ferdful ; 
that is, to yuele 
men. Lire here. 
Cs 


{| wiekidnesse ; 
that is, the fe- 
lonye of idola- 
trie. Lire 
here. ¢. 


{| do thou no 
thing, etc.; that 
is, do thou no 
wrong to no 
man for thi 
power. Lire 
ere. C. 
** querouse 
man ; not that 
auarice is greu- 
ousere synne 
than othere, 
but for rich- 
essis gaderid bi 
auerice 3yuen 
nursching to 
alle vices. c. 


142 


ful of hydous gilte. What pridist thou‘, 
ioerthe and asken'? No thing is more 
wicke, than to loouen moone; this for- 
sothe hath his soule sillable, ‘or able to 
be sold™, for in® his lif he thre; awei 
ithis® inward thingus. Of eche my3tihed 
short lif; lengere infyrmyte greeueth the 
leche. Short sicknesse the leche kut- 
teth of ; so and a king to dai is, and to 
ismoru shal die. Whan forsothe a man 
shal dien, he shal eritagen serpentes, and 
14 bestes, and wermes. ‘The bygynnyng of 
the pride of man to go baeward fro God ; 
isfor fro hym that made hym his herte 
wente awey. For the bygynnyng of alle 
synne is pride ; who ‘schal holde? it, shal 
be fulfild with cursis, and it shal turne 
ishym vp so doun in to the ende. Ther- 
fore the Lord dispisid4 the couentis of 
euele men, and destro3ede them ‘in to™ 
17the ende. The setes of proude dukes 
God distro3ede ; and made mylde men to 
18ssitte for hem. The rootis of proude folkis* 
God driede ; and plauntide meke men of 
19tho folkis. The londis of Jentiles the 
Lord turnede awei; and destro3ede them 
20 vn to the foundement. He made drie of 
them, and scaterede them; and made to 
cesen the mynde of hem fro the erthe. 
21 God lostt the mynde of proude men; and 
lafte the mynde of meke men in wit. 
22There is not shapen" to men pride; ne 
wrathefulnesse to the nacioun of wym- 
23men. ‘The sed of men shal be wrshipid, 
that that dredeth God ; that sed forsothe 
shall ben put out of wrshipe, that passeth 
24the maundemens of ‘the Lord’. In the 
myddel off brethern the gouernour of 
them in wrshipe; and that dreden” God, 
25shul ben in the e3en of hym. The glorie 
of wrshepid riche men and of pore is the 
26drede of God. Wile thou not dispisen 
the ri3twis pore man; and not magnefien 
27the riche synful man. Gret is a iuge, 
and the my3ti is in wrshipe; and he is 


k thou thanne £ pr.m. ashen a. 


1 enournede out £ pr.m.c pr.m.  * vnto E. 
¥ God £ pr.m. — W dredith acu. 
d3her. €longer. famang. & vnton. 


™ he is 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


m Om. c ef £ prim. 
S fole c. 


h and he 1. 


X. 10——27. 
aische*? No thing is worse, than for to 10* erthe and 
is, thou man 
, ° °. yee schalt be turn- 
his soule set to sale, for in his lijf he ea soonein to 
hath cast awei hise ynneste thingis. Ech 11 “the nd 
soule set to 
oe A sale; and sill- 
greueth the leche. A leche kittith aweif 12ith it tw the 
; . ¢ »  deuel for mo. 
schort siknesse; so and a king is to dai, 
neste thingis ; 
that is, vertues, 
whanne a man schal die, he sclia] enherite 3 
2 3 trarie to tho, 
serpentis, and beestis, and wormes. The 14 of which vicis 
bigynnyng of pride of manf was to be  roote. whanne 
aman ; that 
. ¢ power. schal 
awei fro hym that made hym. For whi Jory; M0 
ride is the bigynnyng of al synne; he 
B By ne y Q pentis; that is, 
fendis, as to the 
yngis, and it schal distrye hym in to the beestis; that is, 
: frendis ] 
ende. Therfor the Lord hath schent the 16 jeosdy, 3s to” 
age: . warmes 5 as to 
hem til ‘in to® the ende. God destriede 17 the bodi; ana 
the seetis of proude duykis; and made _ ismaad couena- 


“3 Me : aische ; that 
loue monei; for whi this man hath also@ 
¢ i aschis, his 
power 7s schort lijf ; lengere® siknesse 
ney. hise yn- 
and to morewe he schal die. Forsothe13 
bi vicis con- 
coueitise is the 
apostatat fro God; for his herte jede 15 mysvsith his 
enherite ser- 
that holdith it, schal be fillid with curs- 
soule. and 
couentis of yuele men, and hath destried  "e catel. and 
this departing 
ld t Res rata Gad del bly, for the 
mylde men to sitte for hem. od made 18 part of ech 


drie the rootis of proude folkis; and* ar A ee 
plauntide meke men of tho folkis. The 19 eee ee 
Lord destriede the londis of folkis; and __ ith not of 


poe a 
loste tho ‘til to' the foundement. He made 20 Peg oh: 


drie the rootis of hem, and loste* hem; aca 
and made the mynde of hem to ceesse fro a 
the erthe. God loste the mynde of proude 21 synne is curid 
men; and lefte the nynde of meke men in re 
wit. Pride was not maad to men; nether 222, Ugo™ but 
wrathfulnesse to the nacioun of wym- idea a 
men§j. This seed of men that dredith God, 23 pee bien 
schal be onourid; but this seed schal be the comaunde- 
disonourid, that passith' the comaunde- Teele 
mentis of the Lord. In the myddis of2«§% cv? 
britheren the gouernour of hem 7@s in ™en borun of 
onour; and thei that dreden God, schulen 


wymmen. Lire 
here. Cc. 
be in hise ijen||. The glorie of riche men 25 || schulen be 
in hise ijen : 


onourid and of pore men is the drede of  thatis, schulen 
seis Q + op be onorable 
God. Nyle thou dispise a iust pore man 3 26 514 diese him. 
Lire here. c. 


and nyle thou magnefie a riche synful 
man. The iuge is greet, and is™ mi3ti in 27 
onour; and he is not grettere than that 
man that dredith God. Fre children 2 
seruen a witti seruaunt; and a prudent 


P holdith ac pr. m. 
u shapid 4zGH. 


Pand 4. © Om.-4. 
t spilde x pr. im. c pr.m. 


ivntor. fordider.  ! ouer passith 1. 


X. 28——XI, 10, 


2snot more than he that dredeth God. To 
the seruaunt wel felende shul seruen fre 
men; and a man prudent and lerned shal 
not grucchen chastisid, and the vnkun- 
2y9nende shal not be wrshipid”. Wile thou 
not enhaunce thee in thi werk to be do; 
and wile thou not dispeire* in the time 
300f anguysh. Betere is that wercheth, 
and aboundeth in alle thingis, than that 
31 glorieth, and nedeth bred. Sone, in de- 
bonernesse kep thi soule; and 3if to it 
32 wrshepe, aftir his dissert. The synnende 
in to his soule, who shal iustifien? and 
who shal worschip the puttere his soule 
3sout of wrshipe? The pore glorieth bi 
disciplyne and his drede; and ther is a 
man that is wrshipid for his substaunce. 
34 Who forsothe glorieth in porenesse, houY 
myche more in substaunce? and who glo- 
rie? in substaunce, porenesse ‘shame he®, 


CARs xt 


1 The wisdam of the mekid shal en- 
hauncen the hed of hym; and in the 
myddel of grete men to sitten shal 
2maken hym. Preise thou not a man in 
his fairnesse; ne dispise thou a man in 
3his sijt. Short in foules is a bee; and the 
bigynnyng of swetnesse the frut of hym 
4hath. Inu clothing glorie thou neuermor, 
ne in the dai of thi wrshipe be thou en- 
hauncid ; for merueilous the werkes of 
the he3est alone, and glorious, and hid, 
sand vnseen the werkes of hym. Manye 
tirauntis seten in trone; and the vn- 
6trouable, ‘or of whom was no suspi- 
cioun”, bar the diademe. Manye my3ti 
ben opressid gretly; and the glorious ben 
taken in ‘to the® hondis of othere men. 
7 Beforn that thou aske, ne blame thou 
any man; and whan thou shalt asken, 
schastyse thou rij3tly. Beforn that thou 
here, ne answere thou a wrd; and in the 
myddel of eldere men ne ley thou to to 
gspeken. Of that thing that greeueth not 
thee, striue thou not; and in the myddel 
10 of synneres ne abide thou. Sone, be not 
in manye thingis thi deedus ; and if thou 


w chastisid c pr.m. * abide c pr.m. 


eCE prem. © Om. 4. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


yOm. c prim. 


143 


man and lerned schal not grutche, whanne 
he is blamed, and an vnkunnynge man* 


. * unkunnyng 


man; that 


schal not be onourid. Nyle thou cuhaunse 29 takith not 


thee in thi werk to be don; and nyle thou 


be slow in the tyme of angwisch. He is30 


betere that worchith, and hath plente in 
alle thingis, than he that hath glorie, and 
nedith breed. Sone, kepe thi soule in3i 
myldenesset ; and 3yue thou onour to it, 
aftir his merit. 
that synneth a3ens his soule? and who 
schal onoure hym that disonourith his 


soule? A pore man hath glorie bi his3s 


lernyng and drede; and ther is a man that 
is onourid for his catel. 
man hath glorie in pouert, hou myche 
more in catel? and he that hath glorie 
in catel, drede pouerte. 


CAP. XI. 


The wisdom of a man maad meke schal! 
enhaunse his heed; and schal make hym 
to sitte in the middis of grete men. Preise2 
thou not a man in his fairnesse; nether 
dispise thou a man in his si3t. A bee is3 
litil among briddis; and his fruyt hath 
the bigynnyng of swetnesse. Haue thou4 
neuere glorie in clothing, and be thou not 
enhaunsid in the dai of thin onour; for 
whi the werkis of the hizeste aloon ben 
wondurful, and hise werkis ben gloriouse, 
and hid, and vnseyn. Many tyrauntiss 
han sete in trone; and a man of whom 
was no supposyng bar the diademe. Many 6 
my3ty men ben oppressid strongli; and 
gloriouse men ben 3ouun in to the hondis 
of othere men. Bifore that thou axe,7 
blame thou not ony man; and whanne 
thou hast axid, blame thou iustli. Bifors 
that thou here, answere thou not a word; 
and in the myddis of eldere men{ adde 
thou not to speke. Stryue thou not, of9 
that thing that disesith not thee; and 
stonde thou not in the dom{ of synnes. 
Sone, thi dedis be not in many thingis ; to 


and if thou art riche, thou schalt not be 
b Om. c 


2 glorieth azGH. 3 schameth G. 


Who schial iustifie bym 32 


blamyng. that 
worehith ; 3he, 
cherlis werk. 
in alle thingis ; 
that is, in 
liyflode and 
clothing suf- 
ficient to his 
staat. hath glo- 
rie; in boostinge 
of hiskyn. Lire 
here. c. 

Tin mylde- 
nesse ; that 
holdith du me- 
sure and re- 
freyneth exces. 
aftir his me- 
rit; in mak- 
inge suget the 


Forsothe if a 34 fleisch and de- 


sir of wittis, as 
it becometh. 
that synneth 
ajenus his 
soule : in set- 
ting the fleisch 
hifor it, no man 
schal iustifie 
him, for of the 
handmayde he 
makith a ladi, 
and a3enward, 
and this is most 
vnriztful. for 
his catel; that 
is, for richessis, 
and not for 
vertu, and this 
is fals onour. 
Lire here. c. 


t of eldere 
men ; another 
lettre hath, in 
the myddis of 
wordis, that is, 
in brekinge the 
wordis of him 
that spekith. 
Lire here. c. 

§ stonde thou 
not in the doom, 
ete.; that is, of 
hem that per- 
uerten doom, 
apprene thou 
not her sen- 
tence, nether 
consente therto. 
thi dedis ben 
not in many 
thingis ; for 
oon lettith an- 
other, whanne 
many thingis 
hen bigunnun, 
bifor that ony 
of tho be endid. 
if thou art 
riche ; that is. 


144 


were riche, thou shalt not ben gilteles 
fro’ trespas. If forsothe thou shalt fo- 
lewe, thou shalt not ouertaken; and if 
thou shul renne biforn, thou shalt not 
useapen®. Ther is a man trauailende, 
and hejende, and sorewende vnpitous ; 
and so myche more he shal not abounde. 
12 Ther is a man welewid, nedende rekur- 
ing, more failende in vertue, and abun- 
isdende in porenesse; and the e3e of God 
beheeld hym in goode, and rerede hym 
fro his lownesse, and enhauncide his 
hed; and manye merueileden in hymn, 
14and wrshepiden God. Goodis and eueles, 
lif and deth, porenesse and honeste, ben 
isof God. Wisdam, and disciplyne, and 
kunnyng of the lawe anent the Lord ; 
loouyng and the weies of goode men 
isanent hymn. Errour and dercnesses to 
synneres ben foormed ; who forsothe ful 
out iojen in to euell, waxen old togidere 
17in to enelis. The 3yuyng of God abidith 
stille to rijtwis men; and the profitus of 
it welsum aftireomyngus shuln han in to 
iswithoute ende. Ther is that is mad 
riche scarsly doende, and this the part of 
i9the meede of hym, in that that he seith, 
I fond reste to me, and now I shal eten 
200f my goodis alone. And he wot not 
that tyme passe biside hymn, and deth 
ne3heth, and he’ forsaketh alle thingus to 
21othere men, and die. Stond in thi testa- 
ment, and iu it spec togidere; and in the 
22werk® of thin hestis wax old. Abide 
thou not in the werkes of synneres ; 
troste forsothe in God, and dwel in thi 
23 place. Li3t is forsothe in the e3en of God, 
24sodeynly to honesten the pore. The bliss- 
ing of God in to the meede of the ri3t- 
wise hee3eth; and in swift wrshipe the 
25forth goyng of hym maketh fruyt. Ne 
sey thou, What to me is nede? and what 
26 godis ‘sehulen be to me her aftiri? Ne 


yngis, etc; that is, heepingis of meritis. prosperites; for whi gloriouse meede schul come aftir tha. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XI. 11—26. 


coueytouse of 
richessis vn- 
mesurably. 

7 ° if thou suest ; 
Ther is a" ll in sekinge rich- 
essis vnmesura- 
bly. thou schalt 
not toke ; that 
is, thou schalt 
Ther 12 not gete suf. 
ficience, for 


with out part of gilt. For if thou suest, 
thou sehalt not take; and thou schalt not 
ascape, if thou rennist bifore. 
man trauelynge, and hastynge, and sorew- 
ynge, and vnpitouse; and bi so myche 


more” he schal uot haue plentee. 
is aP man fade*, nedi of rekyueryng, fail- — whiche rich- 
i . sis b iQ 
ynge more in vertu, and plenteuouse in Peouconse> 
of + i i man hath not 
pouert ; and the ize of God bihelde hymns a 
in good, and reiside hym fro his lownesse, __richessis, but 
4 ‘ more nedinesse; 
and enhaunsid his heed; and many men for in as myche 
° . . a sa God as he sekith 
wondriden in him, and onouriden God. 46 haue moa 
See on thingis coueyt- 
Goodis?? and yuelsf, lijf and deth, ponert 14 ously, helt 
and oneste, ben of God. Wisdoni, and 15ith money 
ingis. u 
lernyng, and kunnyng of the lawe ben schait not 
E ° ascape; nedy- 
anentis the Lord; loue and the weies of nese. if thou 
: . . ist bifores 
goode men ben at him. Errour and derk- 16 o vakings rch. 
} 1 ice _ essis of thi fa- 
nessis ben maad togidere to Sy haste for- aan sy 
sothe thei that maken ful out ioye in yuel, for if thou art 
0 : coneytonse, 
wexen eld togidere in to yuels. The 3ifte 17 thow schalt 
: ; ot be apaied 
of God dwellith to iust men; and encreess-  Vith things 
‘ . ag had, but ouer- 
yngist of hym schulen haue prosperitees pi) Yane mo 
without ende. A‘ man is™ that is maad 18 hingiss sas 
‘ . : awe marta 
riche in doynge scarsli, and this 7s the preset gy 
. ‘ . schalt soone 
part of his mede, in that that he seith, 19 waste thi 


i goodis, and 

Y haue founden reste to me, and now Y schalt be nedy. 

aloone schal ete of my goodis. And he 20/7 here. c. 
*aman fade; 


noot that tyme passith hym, and deth  thatis, faule, 
failinge more 


neizeth, and he schal leeue alle thingis to jh ine more. 
othere men, and schal die. Stonde thou 2! vertus of bodi. 
2 F 4 in pouert ; for 
in thi testament, and speke thou togidere 


whi that itil 
Pea ° thing that he 
in it; and wexe thou eld in the werk of irate wutbarth 
: : . o to him. bihelde 
thin heestis. Dwelle thou not in the 22 ioc, SOM, 
werkis of synneris ; but triste thou in frhis pacience, 
f i é iagje, and sumtyme 
God, and dwelle in thi place. For it is 23 also in tempo- 
° . . ral good. Lire 
esy in the ijen of God, sudeynli to make ere. c. 
onest a pore man. The blessing of God 24+ Soothe 
° ° ° yuels ; that is, 
haastith in to the meede of a inst mans; _ prosperites and 
: : duersites. 
and the going forth of hym makith fruyt Souert and 
in swift onour. Seie thou not, What is 25 °ses that is, 
; sufficience of 
nede to me||? and what goodis schulen be — goodis. ben of 
. . ¥ God ; that is, 
me her aftir? Seie thou not, Y am suf- 26 ben jouun to 
5 men. Lire 
ficient, and what schal Y be maad worse here c. 


+ encreess- 
§ in thi testament ; that is, in 


Goddis heest, which is ordeyned to thee, to he kept of thee, heestis ; that is, of Goddis heestis put to thee. of synneris ; in consentinge to hem. direlle 
in thi place ; that is, bi lone in God, which is a place for to quyete the smile. onest; a pore man, in translatinge him to glorie. Lire here. c. 
|| IV hat is nede to me s to triste on another man, for Y suffice to me for power, and wisdom, and siche temporal thingis; they that bileuen onely 


present liyf, doen this moost, what goodis etc. heraftir ; that is, 


? dofia. & ascape AEGH. / arerede E. 
‘ shulm ben to me of this goodes c pr. m. 
n sum 1. 


othe more ri. P sum 1. 


Pp Good a pr. m. 


aftir this liyf, as if he seye, noone. c. 


ff Erroures c pr.m. 8 Om. sEGH. © werkis £ prom. C pr. m, 


Gsumt1. f ther isi. 


XI. 27——XII. 4. 


sey thou, I am suffisaunt, and what of 
27 this I* shall be mad! werse? In the day 
of goodis be thou not vumyndeful of 
eueles, and in the dai of eveles be thou 
28not vnmyndeful of goodis; for li3t is bi- 
for God in the day of deth to 3elden to™ 
29eche aftir his weies. ‘The malice of oon 
hour maketh for3etynge" of most lecche- 
rie; and in the ende of a man ful nake- 
sonyng® of the werkis of hym. Bifor deth 
preise thou not any man; for in his sonus 
31is? knowen a man. Not eche man bringe 
thou in to thin hous; manye forsothe 
32 ben the spies of the treccherous. As for- 
sothe the entrailes of stinkende thingus 
bolken4 out, and as the partrich is bro3t 
in to the pit falle, aud as a capret in to 
the grene, so and the herte of proude 
men; and as the forlookere seende the 
33 falling of his nejhebore. Forsoothe goode 
thingus in to euel’ turnyng he aspieth, 
and in chosen men he leith vp a wem. 
34 Of oo sparcle fyr is eechid, and of oon 
treccherous blood is encresid; a man 
35forsothe synnere waiteth to blood. Tac 
heed to thee fro the deth berere, forsothe 
he forgeth eueles; lest perauenture he 
bringe vp on thee scornyng in to with 
36oute ende. Resceyue to thee an alien 
womman, and she shal turne thee vp so 
doun in a whirlewynd, and alienen thee 
fro thi propre weies. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Iff thou shul wel do, wite thou to 
whom thou shalt wel do; and ther shal 
2be myche grace in thi goodys. Wel do 
to the ri3twis, and thou shalt finde gret 
3elding ; and if not of hym, certes of the 
3 Lord. It is not’ weel to hym that is besi 
in eneles, and to the not 3yuende almes 
deede; for and the heijest to hate hath 
syneres, and hath merci to penaunce doeres. 
43if to the merciful, and vndertake ‘or 
resseyue thou not the synnere ; and to 


k Om. 4G pr.m. iu. \tretid £ prim. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


m Om. AGH. 


145 


heraftir ? In the dai of goodis be thowey maad worse ; 
not vnmyndeful of yuels, and in the dai ee 
of yuels be thou not vnmyndeful of goodis; perce a 
for it is esi bifor God to 3elde in the dais They vndur- 
of deth to ech man aftir hise weies. The gg that bileuen 
malice of oon our* makith for3eting of diet with the 
moost letcherie; and in the ende of a man ag es 


i day of goodis ; 
#s makyng nakid of hise werkis. Preise 30 pt ae et 
thou not ony man bifore his deth; for whi — this liyf. en- 
2 myndeful of 
aman is knowun in hise sones. Brynge ai yuels; that is, 
: : of punyschin, 
thou not ech man in to thin hous; for in Onber Ie 
whi many tresouns ben of a gileful man. Lannie 
For whi as the entrailis of stynkynges2}% of amen 
thingis breken out, and as a partrich is ane rage 
i myndeful ; that 
led in to a trap, ether net, and as a capret _ is, of reward- 
. : ing in heuenly 
is led in to a snare, so and the herte of  blisse, for whi 
. . this mynde 
proude men; and as a biholdere seynge makith to suf- 
the falf of his neizbore. For he turneth 33 f ey 
tas e ta ss Ce 
goodis in to yuels, and settith tresouns, * Me malice of 
ti 2 oon hour ; that 
and puttith a wem on chosun men. Fier 34 is, schort tur- 
: ° : t ith 
is encreessid of a’ sparcle, and blood is ep made leit 
z . oe: . passid, and 
encreessid of a’ gileful man; for whi a fiche more 
synful man settith tresoun to blood. Take3s ee 
: or 18. 
heede to thee fro a gileful man, for he _ preise chou not; 
ih 1s: i : outirly and 
makith yuels; lest perauenture he bringe _ tynaly. hise 
yn on thee scornyng with outen ende. {273 ‘hatis 
Resseyue thou an alien to thee, and he 36 477, she 
schal distrie thee in" whirlwynd, and he fa! that is, 
: is wakith dili- 
schal make thee alien fro thin owne _ gently tose the 
. fal of his nei3- 
weles, bore, to haue 
ioye therof. c. 
t Uf thow doist 
wel 3 in 3yu- 
ynge thi goodis. 
wite thou to 


CAP. XII. whom ; that he 
be worthi to 

If thou doist welt, wite thou” to whom! j.,°6. zine 
thou doist”; and miche grace schal be to § 37ueth not 


almes ; and 


thi goodis. Do thou wel to a iust man,2 met eles rayeey 
and thon schalt fynde greet 3elding ; thou3 here. c. 
not of hym, certis of the Lord. It is nots ee 
wel to hym that is customable in yuels, {at's obsdnat 
and to hym that 3yueth not almes§; for 

whi the hijeste bothe hatith synneris, and 


in synnes, that 
wolde be nurs- 
doith merci to hem that doen penaunce. 


chid in synnes 
bi thi goodis. 
kepinge, etc.3 
that is, reseru- 


s hem t 
3yue thou to a merciful man, and resseyues {io eyne of 
thou not a synnere||; God schal 3elde ven- pelle Mire 


1 to forjeten E pr.m. c pr.m. to forzetynge AGH. 


© openynge F pr.m. Pshalbe £ pr.m.cpr.m. bollenc. ‘euels acu. $ not forsothe x pr.m, 
t Om. c el £ prem. 
8 0 plures. oon BE. to plures. Yinar YOm.Gn.  doist wel 4 see, m. 
P P 


VOL. ITI. 


U 


146 


vnpitouse and synneres he shal 3elde ven- 
iaunce, kepende them in the day of ven- 
siaunce. 3if to the goode, and resceyue 
6thou not the synnere. Weel do to the 
meeke, and 3yue thou not to the vnpi- 
tous ; forfende" to 3yuen to hym loeues, 
lest in hem he be my3tiere than thou. 
7For double eueles thou shalt fynde in 
alle goodus, what euere thou shalt’ do to 
hym; for and the heizeste to hate hath 
synneres, and to the vnpitous he shal 
s3elde veniaunce. A frend shal not be 
knowen in goodis, and an enemy shal 
gnot ben hid in eueles. In the goodes of 
aman the enemys of hym; and in the 
sorewe and in the malice of hym thie 
1ofrend is knowen. Ne trowe thou to thin 
enemy vuto withoute ende; forsothe as 
bras rusteth out the shreudenesse of 
uhym, And if meckid he go crookid, 
thro3 awei thi wil, and keep thee fro 
ihym. Set not hym biside thee, and sitte 
he not at thi ri3t half, lest turned he 
stonde in thi place; lest perauenture 
turned in to thi place he inwardli seche 
thi chaizer, and in the laste thon knowe 
my wrdes, and in mi wrdis thou be 
i3prickid. Who shal lechen to the en- 
chauntere smyten of the eddere, and to 
alle that ne3hen to bestes, and that folew- 
ith with the wicke man, and is aboute 
14 wrappid in his synnes? Oon hour with 
thee he shal abide stille; if forsothe thou 
15bowe doun, he shal not vnderbern. In 
his lippis the enemy putteth” in swet- 
nesses*, and’ in his herte he spieth, that 
he turne thee vp so doun in to the dich. 
i¢In thin ej3en the enemy wepith; and if 
he shul fynde tyme, he shal not be ful- 
17fild with blod. If? ther shul falle to thee 
eueles, thou shalt finde hym there rathere, 
18 ‘or former*. In thin e3en the enemy shal 
wepen, and as helpende he shal vnder- 
19delue thi plantes. His hed he shal moue, 
and flappe for io3e with the hond; and 
many thingus grucchendeli whistrende> 
shal with chaunge his chere. 


U forfende thou 4. —-V hast c. 


x yuels ether aduersitces v. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


: w by puttith & pr. m. 
7 Andif4. Om. c et £ prim. 4. rathere formere cu. > whistringe E. 


XH. 5—19. 


iaunce bothe to vnfeithful men and to 
symneris, kepynge hem in the dai of ven- 
iaunce. 3yue thou to a good man, ands 
resseyue thou not a synnere. Do thous 
good to a meke man, and 3yue thou not 
to an ynpitouse man; forbede thou to 
3yue looues to hym*, lest in tho he be 
my3tiere than thou. For thou schalt fynde7 
double yuels in alle goodis, whiche euere 
thou doist to hym; for whi the hijeste 
bothe hatith synneris, and schal 3elde ven- 
iaunce to vnfeithful men. A frend schals 
not be knowun in goodis, and an enemy 
schal not be hid in yuels*}. In the goodis9 
of a man hise enemyes ben sori; and a 
frend is knowun in the sorewe and malice 


* looues ta 
hym y here he 
spekith of syn- 
neris obstynat. 
double yuels ; 
that is, yuels 
passid, whiche 
he dide, and 
to comynge, 
which he schal 
do, susteyned 
bi thi goodis. 
Lire here. c. 
+ in yuels; that 
is, aduersites. 
Lire here. c. 
~ malice of 
him ; that is, 
in aduersite of 
him. nenere to 
thin enemy ; 
that is, whom 


of himt. Bileue thou neuer to thin ene- 10 thou hast pre- 


my ; for his wickidnesse roustith as irun. 


ued an enemy. 
roustith ; that 
is, kepith the 


Thou3 he be maad mieke, and go lowe, 1! mist of hatrede, 


caste awei thi soule, and kepe thee fro 
him. 
nether sitte he at thi rijtside, lest he turne 
and stonde in thi place; lest perauenture 
he turne in to thi place, and enquere thi 
chaier, and in the laste tyme thou know 
mi wordis, and be prickid in my wordis. 


thou3 he schew- 
ith the contra- 


Sette thou not him bisidis thee, 127 with out 


forth. go lowe ; 
in doinge greet 
reverence to 
thee. thi soule; 
in no maner 
bileue thon to 
him. bisidis 
thee ; in mak. 
inge him famy- 
lyar, ether 


Who schal dg medecyn to an enchauntere 13 hoomely to 


smytun of a serpent, and to alle men that 
neizen to beestis, and fo him that goith 
with an yuel man, and is wlappid in the 
synnes of him ? 
dwelle with thee; sotheli if thou bowist 


awei, he schal not bere vp. The enemy 15 


makith swete in hise lippis, and in his 
herte he settith tresoun to ouerturne? thee 


thee. Lire here. 
c 


§ in oon our; 
that is, while 
prosperite 

durith. dowist 


In oon our§ he schalisavey; fro 


prosperite. 
schal not bere 
vp; that is, 

he schal not 
helpe thee. 
makith swete ; 
in disseynynge 
bi swete wordis. 


in to the dich. The enemy wepith in hise 16 in hise tippis ; 


ijen; and if he fyndith tyme, he schal not 
be fillid of blood. If yuels bifallen to thee, 
thou schalt fynde hym the formere tliere. 


whanne he bi- 
leueth, that he 
schal be re- 


7 leeuyd herhi. 


as helpinge ; 
that is, he schal 


The enemy schal wepe bifore thin i3en, 18 feyne to helpe 


and he as helpynge schal vndurmyne thi 
feet. 
schal beete with hond; and he schal 
speke priuyli many yuels of thee, and 
schal chaunge his chere. 


X swetnes 4GH. Y desseyueth and & pr. m. 


Zz yndurturne 4 pr. m. et ceteri. 
P 


He schal stire his heed, and he1g 


thee, and schal 
ymagyne to thi 
gretter falling. 
schal chaunge ; 
fro frenschipe 
feyned bifore, 


XIN. r—r14. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Who shal touche pich, shal be defoulid 
of it; and who shal comunen to the 
2proude man, shal clothin pride. Berthen 
vp on hym he taketh, that comuneth to 
the honestere than hymself; and to the 
richere than thou, thou shalt not ben fe- 
3lawe. What shal comune the caudron 
to the pot? whan forsothe thei shuln 
hurtle themself, it shal ben to-broken. 
4 The riche man vnri3twisly dide, and shal 
gnaste; the pore man forsothe hurt shal 
sholde his pes. If thou shul 3yue, he shal 
take thee; and if thou haue not, he shal 
6forsake thee. If thou haue, he shal lyue 
with thee, and auoide thee out; and he 
7shal not sorewen vpon thee. If thou 
were necessarie to hym, he shal bigile 
thee; and vnder lajhende hope he shal 
3yue, tellende to thee alle goodes; and 
sshal* seyn, What nede is to thee? And 
he shal confounde thee in his metes, to 
the tyme he neentishe thee twies or 
thries, and in the laste he shal scorne 
thee; aftirward seende he shal forsake 
gthee, and hys hed moue to thee. Be 
thou mekid to God, and abid his hondis. 
10 Tac heed, lest desceyued in folie thou be 
imekid. Wile thou not be meeke in thi 
wisdam, and lest lowid in to folie thou 
12be lad aside. Clepid to of the my3tyere, 
go awey ; of that forsothe more he shal 
13clepe thee to. Be thou not ‘to gredi®, lest 
thou be put a3een ; and be thou not fer 
14fro hym, lest thou go in to for3eting. Ne 
withholde thou of euene to speken with 
hym, and trowe thou not to the manye 
wrdis of hym; forsothe of myche speche 
he shal tempte thee, and vnder la3hende 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


147 


CAP XII. 


He that touchith pitch, schal be de-1 
foulid of it; and he that comyneth with 
a proude man, scha] clothe pride*. He2 
reisith a wei3te on hym silf, that comyn- 
eth with a more onest man than hym silf; 
and be thou not felowe to a man richere 
than thou. What schal a cawdroun comyne 3 
to a pot? for whanne tho hirtlen hem silf 
togidere, the pot schal be brokun. A riche 
man schal do vniustli, and schal gnastet} ; 
but a pore man hirt schal be stille. If; 
thon 3yuest, he schal take thee; and if 
thou hast not, he schal forsake thee. If, 
thou hast, he schal lyue togideret with 
thee, and schal make thee voide; and he 
schal not haue sorewe on thee. If thou7 
art nedeful to hym, he schal disseyue 
thee ; and he schal flatere, and schal 3yue 
hope, tellinge to thee alle goodis; and 
schal seie, What is nede to thee ? And hes 
schal schende thee in hise metis), til he 
anyntische thee twies and thries, and at 
the laste he schal scorne thee; aftirward 
he schal se, and schal forsake thee, and 
he schal moue his heed|| to thee. Be thous 
maad meke to God, and abide thon hise 
hondis. 
seyued, and be maad lowe in foli. 
thou be lowe in thi wisdom, lest thou be 
maad low, and be disseyued in to foli. 
Whanne thou art clepid of a mi3tiere man, 1 
go thou awei*@; for bi this he schal more 
clepe thee. 
yng>**, lest thou be hurtlid doun ; and be 
thou not fer fro hym, lest thou go in to 


for3etyng. Witholde thou not to speke 14 


with hym euenlif{, and bileue thou not to 
hise many wordis; for of myche speche 


* clothe pride ; 
for whi men 
ben enclynaunt 
to vndu desir 
of her owne 
excelence,wher- 
ynne pride 
stondith, wher- 
for it cleueth 
liztly to a man. 
with a more 
onest man ; 
that is, with a 
my3tiere man, 
for he wole 
euere haue the 
betere for him- 
silf, and the 
tother may not 
wel ajenstonde 
him. a caw- 
drun; of bras. 
to a pot; of 
erthe. schal be 
brokun ; that 
is, the pot, 
which is freel, 
schal he hro- 
kun. Lire here. 
Cs 


tT gnaste 3 as 
redie 3it to do 
worse. 3yuest ; 
3iftis to the 
riche man. 
schal take ; 
that is, onour 
and sette thee 
hisidis him. 
Lire here. c. 

It lyue togidere; 
in clepinge thee 
to his table. 
make thee 
voyde ; that 

is, make thee 


Take heede, lest thou be dis- 10 pore, bi pre- 


sentis maad to 


Nyle 11 him. sorewe on 


thee ; of thi 
pouert. Lire 


here. c. 
§ schende thee 


9 in his metis ; 


in clepinge thee 
to his table, to 
ane presentis 


Be thou not greetli press-13of thee. unyn- 


tische thee ; 
that is, brynge 
to pouert. 
twyes and 
thries ; that is, 
fynethis, for in 
v. maneris pore 
men ben maad 
voyde of coueit- 


ouse riche nen; 
first, in takinge 
awey violently 
the goodis of pore men; the ij., in withholdinge du hire; the thridde, in disseyunge bi double wordis ; the iiij., in weiynge yuele to hem, bothe in 
absence of pore men that tristen in riche men, and in presence of hem that doren not ajenseye. Lire here. c. || moue his heed; in reprenynge 
thee of foly. be maad low; thatis, a coward. in thi wisdom; that is, 30uun of God to thee. Lire here. c. go thou awey; that is, excuse 
thee sumdel. Lire here. c. ** presing ; in preessinge forth thee ouer myche. hurtlid doun ; that is, put awey schamefastly. Lire here. ©, 
tt with hym evenli; that is, speke thon to him with out reuerence. Lire here. c. 


the vnmylde inwit of hym shal aske thee he schal tempte thee, and he schal leize 


¢Om.ce pr.m dmoued 4. © nedeles c ef E pr. m, 


a awel, or excuse y. > ethir to gredi x sec. m. marg, 


u 2 


148 


isof thin hid thingus. And he shal ‘to 
gedir‘ kepe thi wrdis, and not sparen fro 
16malice, and fro® bondis. War to thee, 
and tac heed bisili to thin heering ; for 
with thy turnyng vpsodoun thou gost. 
17 Heerende forsothe tho thingus, as in 
issweuenes see, and thou shalt waken. In 
al thi lif looue God, and inwardli clep 
i9hym in thin helthe. Eche beste looueth 
lic to hym; so and eche man the nexte 
20to hym. Eche flesh to his lijch shal be 
ioyned, and eche man to his lic shal be 
2ifelashepid. As a wlf shal comune to a 
lomb otherwhile, so a synnere to a ri3t- 
22wis. What comunycacioun to an hoeli 
man at a dogge? or what good parti to 
23a riche man at a pore? Hunting of ab 
leoun an asse in wildernesse ; so pore 
24men ben the leswe of riche men. And 
as abhominacioun to a proud man is mek- 
nesse, so and cursing of the riche is the 
2spore. The riche man stirid is confermed 
of his frendis; the meeke forsothe, whan 
he shal falle, shal be put out also fro 
2éknowen. To the riche desceyued manye 
ben rekureres'; le spac proudli, and thei 
27iustefieden hym. The meeke is desceyu- 
ed, ferthermor and vndirnomyn ; he spac 
felendely,‘or wisely*, weel, and ther is not 
28 30ue to hym a place. The riche spac, and 
alle heelden ther pes; and the wrd of 
20 hym vnto the cloudys thei shul bern. The 
pore spac, and thei seyn, Who is this? 
and if he schal! offende, thei shul turne 
30hym vp so doun. Good is substaunce, to 
whom is not synne in concience; and 
most wicke is porenes in the mouth of 
3ithe vnpitous. The herte of a man 
chaungeth the face of hym, or in good 
3zor in euel. The step of a good herte, 
and a‘good face, hard thou shalt fynde, 
and with trauaile. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XIII. 15-——32. 


priuyli, and schal axe thee of thin hid  * hid shingis ; 
that is, if thou 


thingis*. His cruel sonle schal kepe thi 15 hast take in 
. ° hid place 

wordis, and he schal not spare of malice, thing of his. 

and of bondis. repeal ore 

5 i _ ao " thee. and thou 
goist with thi distriyng. But thou heringe 17 oe 

. ‘ e that 1s, feyne 
tho thingis, se as in sleep, and thou schalt thee to vidur- 
wake. In al thi lijf loue thou God, ands ‘ine that” 
inwardli clepe thou him in thin heelthe}. ben seid of the 

oe * e . » ? 
Ech beeste loueth a beeste lijk it silf; so ig thi kings and 
e . fe in this thou 
and ech man owith to loue his neizbore. _ schalt haue 
: . . So thee wakingli 
Ech fleisch schal be ioyned to fleisch lijk 20 ana aligent 
it silf, and ech man schal be felouschipid pares te 7 
to a man lijk hym silf. As a wulf schal 2i “thes that is, 
‘ for thyn helthe 
comyne sum tyme with a lomb, so a syn- temporal and 

. : ey oo euerlastinge. 
nere with a iust man. What comininge 2s 22 his neisbore ; 

‘ hte for he is maad 
of an hooli man to a dogge}? ethir what —jn'the ymage 
good part 7s of a riche man to a pore Ce + 
man?’ The huntyng of a lioun 7s a wielde23 Ne 
asse in desert; so the lesewis of riche #4 dogge; 

A G that is, toa 
men ben pore men. And as mekenesse is 24 doggische man, 
abhomynacioun to a proude man, so and sae ee 
a pore man is abhomynacioun of a riche 7thful man, 

s ci and a glotoun ; 
man. A riche man moued) is confermed 25s if he seye, 

. ‘ no good com- 
of hise frendis; but a meke man, whanne yng is there. 

‘ in desert ; 
he fallith, schal be cast out, she, of knowun — ‘herynne the 
men. Many rekyuereris ben to a riche 26 {youn pusueth 

2 
is ed; he spak proudli, and thei 
ee disseyu ? P P . eh n bym. of riche 
iustifieden hym. A meke man is disseiued, 27 men;coueitouse. 

: ben pore men; 
ferthermore also he is repreuyd; he spak whos goodis 

they rauischen 
The riche man spak, and alle men weren2s Zit¢ here. c. 

5 5 5 § A riche man 
stille; and thei schulen brynge his word moved ; that 
til to the cloudis. A pore man spak, and 29 ether hurlid. 

el 

. ° és part of hise 
fendith, ad schulen destrye hym. Catel30 er as. in con- 

i to hym whom is s i 

is good to hym, to who no symne In ee ole 
geting, nether 

the mouth of a wickid man. The herte of31 ther bi hise 
a man chaungith his face, ethir in good 34" and mo: 
Of hard and with trauel327@"5, that bi 


Be war to thee, and take 16 of ™alices that 
heede diligentli to thin heryng; for thou be sown to 
to deuoure 
wiseli, and no place was 3ouun to hym. ith out eause. 
is, disturblid 
‘eal : : . dis 3h 
thei seien, Who is this? and if he of. {dei bop 
science that 
conscience ; and ‘the worste pouert’ is in 
bi himsilf, ne- 
dir. of a wickid 
ethir in yuel. 


vnpacience 
thou schalt fynde the step of a good _ blasfemeth 

God. Lire 
hertel], and a good face. here. C. 


|| the step of a 
good herte; that 


is, thou schalt fynde in fewe men the ynnere goodnesse of soule, and of outermere conuersacioun togidere. Lire here. c. 


£Om. c prem 


& Om. c. 
k Om. c ef & prim, 


10m. ¢ pr. m. 


© to A pr.m. et ceteri. 


4 Om. 46 pr. m1. 


i rekeueris e. rekuuers 4. rekuuerers GH. 


d pouert worste A sec. m7. 


XIV. 1—17. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Bilisful the man, that is not sliden in wrd 
fro his mouth, and is not prickid in sorewi 
2slouthe of gilte. Sely,‘or blessid™, that 
hadde not sorewi slouthe of his inwit, and 
3falleth not awei fro his hope. To the co- 
ueitous man, and hard, withoute resoun 
is substaunce ; and to an enuyous man, 
4wherto gold? Who hepith® of his inwit 
vnri3twisly, to othere men gedereth ; and 
in the goodis of hym an other shal don 
sleccherie. Who to hymself is shreude, to 
what other shal he ben good? and he shal 
6not ben merie in his goodus. No thing is 
wers, than he that enuyeth to hymself; 
and that is the 3elding® of his malice. 
7And if he shul weel don, vnwitendely, 
and not wilnende he doth; and in the 
slaste he shewith his malice. Shreude is 
the eje of the pale, and turnende awei 
ofaceP, and dispisende his soule. Vnfill- 
able‘ the e3e of the coueitous ; in to the 
part of wickidnesse he shal not be fild, 
to the tyme that he fulli ende vnri3twis- 
1onesse, makende drie his soule. The euele 
e3e to eueles, and nedy shal not ben fild 
with bred ; and in™ sorewi slouthe he shal 
iibe vp on his bord. Sone, if thou hast, 
wel do with’ thee, and offre to God wrthi 
120ffringis. Be thou myndeful for deth 
shal not tarien, and the testament of 
helle, that is shewid to thee; the testa- 
ment forsothe of this world bi deth shal 
i3dien. Biforn deth wel do to thi frend, 
and aftir thi strengthis puttende out 3if 
14to the pore. Be thou not bigilid fro the 
good day, and the parcel of the goode 
isday passe' thee not. Whether not to 
othere thou shalt lefe thi sorewis, and 
igthi trauailes? In departing of lot 3if, and 
17tae; and iustefie thi soule. Bifor thi deth 
werch ri3twisnesse ; for" to finde mete is 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


149 


CAP. XIV. 


Blessid 7s the man, that stood not bil 
thee word of his mouth, and was not 
prickid* in the sorewe of trespas. He is2 
blessid, that hath not sorewe of his soulet, 
and fallith not doun fro his hope. Catel{3 
is with out resoun to a coueitouse man, 
and hard nygard ; and wherto is gold to 
an enuyouse man? He that gaderith of4 
his wille vniustli, gaderith to othere men; 
and another man schal mak wast in hise 
goodis. To what othere man schal he be5 
good, which is wickid to hym silf? and 
he schal not be myrye in hise goodis. Nog 
thing is worsej, than he that hath enuye 
to hym silf; and this is the 3elding of his 
malice. And if he doith good, he doith7 
vnwityngli, and not wilfuli; and at the 
laste he schewith his malice. The ize ofs 
an enuyous man is wickid, and turnynge 
awei the face, and dispisynge his soule. 
The ize of the coueitouse man ¢s neuereg 
fillid; he schal not be fillid in to the part 
of wickidnesse, til he performe vnri3tful- 
nesse, and make drie his soule. 
ize to yuels, and the nedi man schal not 
be fillid of breed; and he sclial be in 
sorewe on his table. 
do wel with thi silf, and offre thou worthi 


Sone, if thou hast, 11 


* was nat 
prickid bi re- 
mors of con- 
sience for vi- 
ciouse stilnesse. 
Lire here, C. 
t+ sorewe of his 
soule; in good 
werkis to be 
fillid. Lire 
here. C. 

t Catel ; that 
is, richessis, 
that profiten 
not to him, for 
as wel that 
that an aua- 
rouse hath fail- 
ith to him silf, 
as that that he 
hath not, as 
Jerom seith, in 
his pistle to 
Paulyn. fo @ 
eoucitouse 
man ; in get- 
inge yuele. 
hard nygard ; 
in holdinge 
yuele, therfor 
richessis noyen 
to an auarouse 
man, bothe to 
bodi and soule. 
do an enuyouse 
man ; to his 
yuel. of his 
wille ; that is, 
getinge vn- 
iustly, witingli, 
and of purpos. 


An yuel 10 gaderith to 


othere men ; 
for ofte tho ben 
priued of the 
vss of richessis, 
and tho ben 
wastid yuele of 
othere men. 
Lire here. c. 


offryngis to God. Be thou myndeful that 12 § wo thing is 


deth schal not tarie, and the testament of 
hellis||, which is schewid to thee; for whi 
the testameut of this world schal die bi 


worse 3 for he 
turmentith 
him silf, bothe 
to bodi and 
soule. enuwye to 
him silf ; siche 


deth. Bifore deth do thou good to thi !3is an auarouse 


frend, and bi thi mi3tis stretche thou forth, 


man, that with- 
drawith of his 


and 3yue to a pore man. Be thon uot dis-'4 orice, Lire 


seyued of a good dai, and a litil part of a 


good day passe not{| thee. Whether® thon 1s 


schalt not Jeene to othere men thi sorewis, 


saries. Lire 
here. C. 

| the testament 
of hellis ; that 
is, the orden- 
aunce of God, 
of the deth of 


and trauels? In the departyng of lot®** 16 coh man; itis 


3yue thou, and take; and instifie thi soule. 


seid the testa- 


ment of hellis, 


Bifore thi deth worche thou rijtfulnesse ; 17 for whanne 


this book was 

; maad, iust men 
3eden doun to helle. this world schal die bi deth ; that is, worldli eritage, biquethun of fadris to children, schal faile sone. Lire here. c. 
not; that is, leeue not thee voide and idil fro good werkis. Lire here. c. 


{| passe 


** In the departing of lot; for God hath ordeyned that 


summen be pore, and othere men be riche, that riche men 3yue temporal thingis to pore men, and resseyue cuerlastinge thingis for tho. 


m™Om.cetzupr.m kepith acu. 


u Om. c pr.m. 


e Om. 8. 


© turnyng £ pr. m. 3elding ageen sec. m. 
fillable, or that may not be fulfild £ sec.m. marg, Gu. 


P the face 4. 4 Vn- 


TOm.c prim. tos, +t beside passe E pr.m. 


ee Wher cetert fere passin. 


150 


isnot anent helle. Eche flesh as hei3 shal 
waxe old, and as a lef beryng frut in a 
lggrene tree. Othere ben iendred, and 
othere fallen doun; so ieneracioun of 
flesh and of blod, an other is endid, 
20and an other is born. LEche coruptible 
were in the ende shal faile; and he that 
21 wercheth it, shal go with it. And eche 
chosen were shal be iustefied; and he that 
22 wercheth it, shal be wrshipid in it. Blis- 
ful the man, that shal dwelle in wisdam, 
and that in rijtwisnesse sweteli shal 
thenke, and in wit shal thenke the look- 
23ing aboute of God. Who thenketh out 
the weies of hym in his herte, and in 
hid thingus of it vnderstonding shal be ; 
goende aftir it as enserchere, and in the 
24 weies of it beende stille. Who byholdeth 
bi the wyndowes of it, and in the 3atis of 
25it is herende; who resteth bisideY the 
hous of it, and in the walles of it ‘pic- 
cheth a pale’. He shal ordeyne his litle 
hous at the hondis of it, and ther shuln 
reste in the litle houses of it* goodis, bi 
26aungelis during; he shal setten his sonus 
vnder the roof of it, and vnder the 
27 braunchis of it he shal wone; he shal 
be defendid vnder the roof of it fro bren- 
nende hete, and in the glorie of it he 
shal reste, 


CAP. XV. 


1 Who dredeth God, shal do goode 
thingus; and who withholding is of ri3t- 
2 wisnesse, shal taken it. And it shal meete 
to hym as a moder wrshipid, and as a 
womman fro maidynhed it shal vndir- 
3take hym. It shal feede hym with the 
bred of lif, and of vnderstonding ; and 
with the’ water of holsum wisdam it shal 
3yue drinke to hym; and it shal be fast- 
aned in hym, and not ben bowed. And it 
shal withholden hym, and he shal not be 
confoundid ; and it shal enhaunce hym 


with grace of the Hooly Goost. Lire here. c. 


¥ bisedes c pr. m, 
yOm. acu. | 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


W he is, piccheth a pale c sec. m. he is, picching a pole agcu. 


XIV. 18—XV. 4. 


for at hellis it is not to fynde mete. Ech i8fynde mete; 


man schal wexe eld as hey, and as a leef 
bryngynge fruit in a greene tree. Othere 19 
ben gendrid, and othere ben cast doun; 
so the generacioun of fleisch and blood, 
another is endid, and another is borun. 
Ech corruptible werk schal faile in the 20 
ende; and he that worchith it, schal go 
with it. And al chosun werk schal be2! 
iustified ; and he that worchith it, schal be 
onourid in it. Blessid is the man, that 22 
schal dwelle in wisdom, and that schal 
bithenke in ri3tfulnesse, and schal thenke 
in wit the biholding of God. Which f23 
thenkith out, ether fyndith out, the weies 
of hym in his herte, and schal be vndur- 
stondynge in the hid thingis of hym; 
goynge as a serchere aftir it, and stond- 
ynge in the weies of it. Which biboldith 2+ 
bi the wyndows therof, and herith in the 
jatis therof; which restith ny3 the hous2s 
therof, and settith a stak in the wallis 
therof. He schal sette his litil hous at the 
hondis of hym, and goodis schulen reste 
in his litil hous, bi duryng of the world ; 
he schal sette hise sones vndur the hilyng 26 
therof, and he schal dwelle vndur the 
boowis therof; he schal be kyuerid vndur 27 
the hilyng therof fro heete, and he schal 
reste in the glorie therof. 


CAP. XV. 


He that dredith God, schal do goode1 
werkis ; and he that holdith ri3tfulnesse, 
schal take it*. And it as a modir onourid 2 
schal meete hym, and as a womman fro 
virgynyte it schal take hym. It shal feedes 
hym with the breed of lijf, and of vndur- 
stonding; and it schal 3yue drynke to 
hym with watir of heelful wisdomt+; it 
schal be inaad stidfast in hym, and he 
schal not be bowid{. And it schal holde4 
hym, and he schal not be schent; and it 
schal enhaunse hym at his nei3boris. Ands 


x hym c pr.m. 


f The which 1. 


that is, place 
of merit. of 


fleisch and 
blood ; that is, 


of men. cor- 
ruptible ; that 
is, ledinge to 
corrupcioun, 
that is, to 
Gidea Saile ; 
at is, schal 
make to faile 
of blis. al 
chosun werk, 
etc.; that is, 
meritorie werk 
schal be ap- 
preued of God, 
as inst werk. 
thenke in wit s 
that is, wittily. 
weyes ; that is, 
the werkis 
of God, that 
ben weyes to 
come in to his 
knowyng. 
3atis ; that is, 
in the fiztinge 
chirche, bi 
which is en- 
tring to the 
chirche hau- 
ynge victorie. 
biholdith bi the 
wyndows ; that 
is, bi reuela- 
cioun, maad in 
the elde and 
newe testa- 
ment. restith 
in the hows ; 
in bileuynge 
stidefastly, and 
dwellinge in 
contemplacioun 
swetely. at the 
hondis of him ; 
that is, of God, 
in abidinge 
contynuely the 
3iftis of his 
grace. of the 
world ; an 
other lettre 
hath di him, 
that is, God. 
hise sones; that 
is, hise dissi- 
plis. wndur the 
hiling therof ; 
in teching hem 
in the forseid 
thingis. vndur 
the boowis ; in 
thenkinge and 
worchinge vn- 
dur the tech- 
ingis therof. 
fro the heete ; 
of vices. Lire 
here. C. 
* take it ; that 
is, wisdom. 
Lire here. ©. 
+ with water 
of heelful wis- 
dom ; that is, 


} bowid; fro the enennesse of riztfulnesse. Lire here. c. 


XV. 5-21. 


sanent his ne3hebores. And in the myd- 
del of the chirche it shal opene his mouth, 
and shal fulfille hym with spirit? of wis- 
dam, and of vnderstonding; and with 
stoele of glorie it shall clothin hym. 
6Myrthe and ful out io3ing it shal tre- 
soren vp on hym; and in euerlastende 
7name it shal eritagen hym. Men foolis 
shul not take it, and men wel feelende 
shul meete to it. Men foolis shul not 
seen it; ferr forsothe it is, ferre awei fro 
8 pride, and fro treccherie. Men lieres shul 
not be myndeful of it, and sothfast men 
ben? founden in it; and welsum aftir com- 
yng thei shul* han vnto the looking in 
9o0f God. Feir® preising is not in the 
mouth of the synnere, for he is not sent 
wof the Lord. For gon forth is wisdam 
of God; forsothe to the wisdam of God 
preising shal stonden at, and in“ the 
feithful mouth shal abounde, and the 
1 lordshipere shal 3yuen it to hym. Thou 
shalt not seyn, Bi God it is awey; tho 
thingis forsothe that it hateth, thou shalt 
ignot do. Ne sey thou, He me? disceyu- 
ede; forsothe vnpitous men ben not nede- 
isful tohym. The Lord hateth alf cursing 
of errour, and it shal not ben looueful to 
i4men dredende hym. God fro the bygyn- 
nyng ordeynede man, and lafte hym in 
isthe hond of.his counseil. He leide to 
14;maundemens, and his hestes; if thou 
wilt the maundemens kepen, thei shul 
kepe thee, and to kepen plesid feith in to 
i7withoute ende. He putte to thee watir 
and fyr; to what thou wilt, put forth 
isthin hond. Bifor man is lif and deth, 
good and euel; that plesith to hym, shal 
19‘be 30ue" to hym. For myche is the 
wisdam of God, and strong in my3t, and 
20seende alle meni withoute cesing. The 
ejen of the Lord to the dredende hym; 
and he knowith al the besynesse* of inan. 
21 To no man he comaundide vupitously to 
do; and to no man he 3af space of syn- 


@shuln ben c e¢ E pr.m. 


z the spirit acH. 
€ Om. € pr. m. 


4 Om. c pr.m. 
k werk E pr.m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


falle c prim. 


151 


in the myddis of the chirche he schal 
opene his mouth; and God schal fille hym 
with the spirit of wisdom*, and of vndur- 
stonding, and schal clothe hym with the 
stoole of glorie. God schal tresore on hym6 
myrthe, and ful out ioiyng; and schal 
enherite hym with euerlastynge name. 
Fonned men schulen not take that wis-7 
dom, and witti men schulen meete it. 
Fonned men schulen not se it; for whi it 
goith awey fer fro pride, and gile. Mens 
leesynigmongeris schulen not be myndful 
therof, and sothefast men ben foundun 
ther ynne; and schulen haue prosperite 
‘til to® the biholding of God. Preisyng9 
is not fairf in the mouth of a synnere, 


* of wisdom ; 
to taaste dy- 
nyn thingis. 
and of undur- 
stonding; to 
declare tho 
clereli in the 
chirche. Lire 
here. ¢. 


+ is not fair ; 
that is, plesaunt 
to God. Lire 
here. C. 

Tt goith awet 
bi, ete.; that is, 
vertu to es~ 
chewe synne 

is not 3onun 

of God to men. 
Lire here. c. 


for he is not sent of the Lord. For whi 10¢ «xd lefte 


wisdom 3ede forth fro God; forsothe heri- 
yng schal stonde ny3 the wisdom of God, 
and it schal be plenteuouse in a feithful 
mouth, and the Lord schal 3yue it to him. 


him, ete. ; nat 
that God with- 
drow his kep- 
ing and ruling 
fro man, bnt 
made him fre 
in wille, and 
jaf to him 


Seie thou not, It goith awei bit God ; for 11 power to kepe 


whi do thou not tho thingis, whiche God 


hatith. Seie thou not, He made me for to tz 


erre; for whi wickid men ben not nedeful 


ri3tfulnesse. 
Lire here. c. 
\| Ze hath set 
to thee water ; 
that is, re- 
freisching of 


to hym. The Lord hatith al cursidnesse 13 glorie. and 


of errour, and it schal not be amyable to 


hem, that dreden tym. At the bigynnyng 14 


God made man, and lefte him§ in the 
hond of his councel. 


fier; that is, 


peyne of helle. 
he bihiste glo. 
rie, and ma- 
naasside peyne, 
that men schnl- 


He addide hise co- 15 ¢en do good, 


and fle synne. 


maundementis, and lawis; if thou wolt t6 dys; of grace. 


kepe the comaundementis, tho schulen 
kepe thee, and kepe plesaunt feith with 
outen ende. 
and fier; dresse thin hond to that, that 


deth; of synne. 
good ; of merit. 
andyuel; of yuel 
disseruyng. 


He hath set to thee watir|| 17 “at “et plesith 


hym; that is, it 
is in his power 
go to good, 


thou wolt. Bifor man is lijf and deth, 18 and to Ne fro 


good and yuel; that, that plesith hym, 


schal be 3ouun to hym. For whi the wis-19 


dom of God is myche, and he is strong in 
power, and seeth alle men without ceess- 


yuel. strong 
in power; to 
reward hem 
that stonden in 
vertu, and to 
punysche hem 
that fallen 
therfro. Lire 


ing. The iz3en4] of the Lord ben to hem, 20 ere. c. 


that dreden hym; and he knowith al the 


trauel of man. He comaundide not to ony 21 


man to do wickidli; and he 3af not to ony 


9 The izens that 
is, of his mersi. 
space ; that is, 
licence. to do 
synne, but 
euere forbeed. 


man space to do synne. For he coueytith 22c. 


b Om. c sec. m. 
& leueful «4. 


¢ Semly c pr. m. E pr.m. AGH. 
h he 5yue a. i Om. c prim. 


& ynto I. 


152 


z2nyng. Forsothe he coueiteth not the 
multitude of vnfeithful sonus and vnpro- 
fitable. 
CAP. XVI. 

1 Mac thou not myrie! in ynpitous sonus, 
if thei ben multeplied ; ne delite thou vp 
on hem, if ther is not the drede of God 

2in™ hem. Ne 3yue thou feith to the lif 
of hem, and ne biholde thou in to the 

3trauailes of hem. Betere ys forsothe oon 
dredende God, than a thousend vnpitons 
4sonus. And profitable it is to die with- 
oute sonus, than to lefen vnpitous sones. 

5 Of oon weel felende man shal ben enha- 
bitid the cuntre": and of thre vnpitous it 

6shal be forsaken. Manye othere thingis 
myn e3e sa3, and the strengere thingus 

7of these myn ere herde. In the synagoge 
of synnende men fyr shal out brenne, and 
in the vnbileeueful fole of kinde wrathe 
sshal waxe ful out tend. Olde ieauntis 
that ben destro3id, trostende to ther ver- 
tue, fulli prejeden not for ther synnes ; 
dand he sparede not to the pilgrimaging 
of hem, but smot lem, and wariede hem, 
i0 for the pride ‘of the word® of hem. He 
dide not mercy to them, destro3ende al 
the fole of kinde and enhauncende itself 
11in his synnes. And as sixe hundrid thou- 
send of footmen, that ben gadered in the 
hardnesse of ther herte; and if oon were 
rered vp the nol, wnder if he hadde ben 
12harmles. Mercy forsothe and wrathe is 
with hym ; my3ty is the ful out orisoun, 
izand heeldende out wrathe. After his 
mercy, so the chastising of hym; he 
14demeth a man aftir his werkes. The 
synnere shal not scapen out in to raueyn; 
and ‘the suffryng of the doynge mercy 
isschal not tary by hynde?. Eche mercy 
shal make place to echon, aftir the desert 
of his werkis, and after the vnderstond- 

\ing of the pilgrimaging of hym. Sey 
thou not, Fro God I shal ben hid; and 
fro the heizest, who of me shal han 


age; that is, 
Lire here. c. 


Imyrthe c. ™ vpon 4. 


2 cite c pr. m. 
of the doende mercy c pr. m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


aftir the entent which he hath in present liyf, which liyf is seid the pilgrymage of man. Lire here. c. 


° Om. ¢ prem. 


not the multitude of sones vnfeithful* and 
vnprofitable. 


CAP. XVI. 


Be thou not glad in wickid sones, if1 
thei ben multiplied; nether delite thou on 
hem, if the drede of God is not in hem. 
Bileue thou not to the lijf of hemt+, and2 
biholde thou not in to the trauels of hem. 
For whi betere is oon dredynge God, thans 
a thousynde wickid sones. And it is more4 
profitable to die with out sones, than to 
leeue wickid sones. A cuntrei shal bes 
enhabitid of o witti man; and it schal be 
maad desert of thre wickid men. Myne 
i3e si3 many othere thingis, and myn eere 
herde strongere thingis than these. Fier7 
schal brenne an hi3 in the synagoge of 
synneris, and yre schal brenne an hi3 in a 
folk vnbileuful. Elde giauntis that werens 
distried, tristynge on her vertu, preieden 
not for her synnes ; and God sparide not9 
the pilgrymage}t of hem, but he killide 
hem, and curside hem, for the pride of her 
word. 
he loste al the folk enhaunsynge hem silf 
in her synnes. 
hundrid thousynde of foot men, that weren 
gaderid togidere in the hardnesse§ of her 
herte; and if oon hadde be hard nollid, 
wondur if he hadde be giltles. 
merci and ire is with hym; preier is 
my3til|, and schedynge out ire. 
merci, so 7s the chastisyng of ech man; 
he is demyd bi hise werkis. 
in raueyn schal not ascape; and the suf- 
feraunce of hym that doith merci schal 
not tarie. 
ech man, aftir the merit of his werkis, 
and aftir the vndurstonding of his pil- 
grymage. 
fro God; and fro the hijeste||, who schal 


haue mynde on me? Seie thou not, Y17 


schal not be knowun in a greet puple; for 
whi which is my soule in so greet a crea- 


P shal not tarie bihynde the suffraunce 


XV. 22——-XVI. 16. 


He hadde not merci on hem, and 10, 


A synnere 14 


q the hizeste ; 


* unfeithful ; 
that is, seru- 
inge the fadris 
in vnfeithful- 
nesse. vnpro- 
fitable; that is, 
noyful to nei3- 
horis. Lire 
here. c. 

+ Bileue thou 
not to the liyf 
of hem; that is, 
bileue thou not 
that thei schu- 
Jen be amendid 
in eelde, for 
whi this is ful 
seeldene; in 
xxij. c°. of 
Prouerbis. 
Lire here. c. 
t the pilgrym- 
age; that is, 
her livf, which 
is a pilgrymage 
on ertbe. Lire 
here. Cc. 

§ in the hard- 
nesse ; that is, 
rebelte ajenus 
God. if oon, 
etc.; that is, 
if oon aloone 
hadde berebel to 
God. gilteles ; 
of peyne. Lire 
here. C. 

|| preyer is 
my3ti ; that is, 
the preyer of 
inst men is 
my3ti anentis 
God ; that re- 
eessith peyne, 
ether namelj 
temperith 


And as he killide sixe 11 peyne ma- 


naassid. and 
schedinge out 
ire ; that is, 
makinge to 
bringe in peyne. 


bi his mersi ; 


For whi lg that is, with 


temperure of 
Goddis mersi. 
chastisyng ; 


Bi his 13 that is, pu- 


nisching of 

ech man. és 
demed ; that 

is punyschid. 

@ synnere in 
raueyn ; that 
is, a cruel man, 
vsinge the 


Al merci schal make place to 15 synne of ra- 


neyn. schal not 
ascape ; the 
punysching of 
God. the suf- 


Seie thou not, Y schal be hid 16fraunce, etc.; 


that is, the 
pacience of a 
merciful man, 
that suffrith 
aduersites, for 
it is rewardid 
of God in co- 
uenable tyme. 
of his pilgrim- 
that is, heuene. 


XVI. 17-39. 


wzmynde? In a gret puple I shal not be 
knowen; what forsothe is my soule in so 
gret a creature? with oute mesure? Loo! 
18 henene, and heuenus of heuenus, the se, ‘ov 
depnesse',and al erthe,and that in hem ben, 
in the si3te of hym shul be moued togidere; 
19mounteynes togidere, and hilles, and the 
foundemens of the’ erthe ; and whan God 
shal biholde them, bi trembling thei shul be 
20smyte togidere. And in alle these thingus 
mys felende, or vnwittie',is the herte, and" 
21eche herte is vnderstonden of hym. And 
the weyes of hym who vnderstondith? 
and the tempest, that nouther the e3e sa3 
22‘of man’? For whi manye werkis of hym 
ben in hid thingus, but the werkis of the 
rijtwisnesse pf bym who shal tellen out, 
or who shal suffren? Fer forsothe is the 
testament fro summe; and the asking of 
23men is in the ful ending. Who is lassid 
in herte, thenketh idil thingus; and the 
vnprudent man and errende thenketh 
21folies. Heere me, sone, and lerne disci- 
plyne of wit, and in my wrdis tac heed 
in thin herte ; and I shal seyn in equite 
diseyplyne, and enserchen to tellen out 
wisdam. And in my wrdis tac heed in 
25thin herte; and I sey in equyte of spi- 
rit vertues, that God putte in to his 
werkes fro the bigynnyng, and in treuthe 
261 telle out the kunnyng of hym. In the 
dom of God his werkis fro the bigyn- 
nyng; and fro the ordeynyng of tho men 
he seuerede the partes of them, and the 
bigynnyngus of them in ther” folkis of 
27kinde. He enournede in to withoute ende 
the werkis of hem; and thei hungreden 
not, ne trauaileden, and lefeden not of fro 
28ther werkis. Eche the ne3hebore to* hym 
shal not anguysshen, vnto the spirituel 
29 world ‘or aungelus duryng’. Be tliou not 
30 ynleeuable to the wrd of hym. Aftir these 


bodies and lewere to be gauerned of aungelis distant, ether assigned in special places. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


153 


ture? Lo! heuene*, and the® heuenes of 18* Lo! heuene; 
; f the cir. and 
heuenes, the greet occian, and al erthe, Naleagtt he. 
* ° uenys ; that is. 
and tho thingis that ben in tho, schulen heuene of ster. 
be mouyd in his si3t ; munteyns togidere, 19 Ts snd of eris- 
. . e . an ri3 
and litle hillis, and the foundementis of — heuene. Lire 
erthe; and whanne God biholdith tho, 
. " . a man that de- 
tho schulen be schakun togidere with nyeth that God- 
tremblyng. And in alle these thingis the 20 4s rstfulnesse 


here. C. 
+ the herile; of 
: zt and kunnyng is 
hertef is vnwijs, and ech herte is vndur-_ *trecchid forth 


E to the pu- 

stondun of hym. And who vndurstondith 21 nysching of 
° ‘ s synnes. Li: 
hise weies? and ‘who vndurstondith® a trea 
a a ‘ t who schal 
tempest, which the ize of man si3 not? japres as if 


For whi ful many werkis of hym_ ben 22heseye fewe, 
a A. : 4 for whi just 
in hid! thingis, but who schal telle out the — men that moun 
: i 7 snffre ben in 
werkis of his ri3tfulnesse, ether who schal _ the lesse noum- 
. . bre. the testa- 
suffret ? For whi the testament is fer fro see das 
“ es the elde testa-~ 
summe menj; and the axyng of men is in ment and newe. 
the endyng. He that is maad litil in herte, 23 § * fer fro 
x : P summen ; as 
thenkith veyn thingis; and a man vnpru- to worching, 
. ° . thou3 not as 
dent and a fool thenkith fonned thingis. to knowing. 
rs S in the ending ; 
Sone, here thou me, and lerne thou tech- 24 thatis,isresern- 
° ed to the fynal 
yng of Wit, and 3yue thou tent to TY Goom,Ahere 
wordis in thin herte; and Y schal seie men schulen 
5 3elde resoun of 
techyng in equyte, and Y schal seke to ech word, and 
myehe strong- 
telle out wisdom. And 3yue thou tent to tee Seda 
my wordis in thin herte; and Y seie ins 


maad litil in 
herte ; he is 


equyte of -spirit|] the vertues, whiche God — taad liti, 
hath set on hise werkis at the bigynnyng, _ his ende in 


: temporal 
and in treuthe Y telle out the kunmyng of — goodis, that are 
lesse than man. 


him. In the doom of God ben hise werkis 26 >) xi, tan 
. ] . 1 . thingis ; for 
fro the bigynnyng; and in the ordynaunce ene 


thou3tis failen 
fro du ende, 
and so the ben 

. veyne, as mede- 
He ournede with outen ende27 cynic seid ee 
veyn, that fail- 
ith ta brynge 
in helthe. Lire 
here. 


of tho he departyde the partis of tho, and 
he departide the bigynnyngis of tho in 
hise folkis. 
the werkis of hem]; thei hungriden not, 
nether traueliden, and thei ceessiden not 
of her werkis, Ech schal not make streit 28 | in equyte of 
the nexte to hym, til in to with outen RE REE g 
ende. Be thou not vnbileueful to the word 29 Peringe doun’ 
of him. Aftir these thingis God bihelde 30 ji ass 
‘in tok the erthe, and fillide it with hise mages a 
goodis. Forsothe the soule of ech lyuynge 3! andhiseknystis; 
for whi God 
q the werkis of ee ee ae 


elementis ben the werkis of aungelis, not for sungels ben makeris of tho, but ben mynystris ether gonernours, bi that maner of speking bi 
which a vyner is seid the werk of a vyntiler, and an hows to be gouerned is seid the werk of the dispendere. this word with oulen ende is 
set here propirly as to heuenes, whos ournyngis schulen dwelle stably, as ta thingis gendrable and corrnptible, that schulen ceesse in the 


ende of the world. 


tr Om. c e £ prim. 
Whis acu. * of 4. 


4 creatour Cc. 
AG pr. mt. H. 


€Om. 4 prom ) Om. 1 


VOL. Ill. 


this word withouten ende is takun for long tyme, as hillis ben seid uerlastinge. 


8 Om. c pr.m. 
y Om. c et E prom. 


lhid in 4 pr.m.c pr.m. et plures. 


x 


the soule of ech lyuynge 


tOm.cetepr.m "%Om.cprm. Om, 


K to 4 pr.m, 


154 


thingus God biheeld in to the? erthe, and 
sifulfilde it with his goodis. Eche forsothe 
soule ful of lif told of bifor the face of 
hym ; and it eft* the turnyng a3een of 
hem. 
CAP. XVII. 
1 God with the rijt hond foormede man ; 
gand after his ymage made hym. And 
eft turnede hym in to it; and after hym- 
3self clothide hym with vertue. Noumbre 
of daj3es and time he 3af to hym; and 
jaf to hym power of them that ben vpon 
4erthe. He putte the drede of hym vpon 
alle flesh, and lordshipide> of bestes and 
sof foules. He foormede of hym helpe lic 
to hymself; counseil, and tunge, and e3en, 
and eren, and herte, he 3af to them, of 
thenking out ; and the discyplyne of vn- 
6derstonding fulfilde them. He foormede 
to them kunnyng of the spirit, bi wit he 
fulfilde the herte of hem; and eueles 
z7and goodis he shewide to them. He 
putte the e3e of hem vpon the hertes of 
hem, to shewen to them the grete thingus 
sof his werkis, that the name of his ha- 
lewing thei preise togidere; and to glo- 
rien in the merueilous thingus of hym, 
that thei telle out the grete thyngus of 
9his werkis. He addede to them disci- 
plyne; and the lawe of lif he eritagede 
lothem. Euerlastende testament he sette 
with them; and rij3twisnesse and his 
11domes he shewide to them. And the 
grete thingus of his wrshipe the e3e of 
hem sa3, and the wrshipe of vois herden 
the eres of hem; and he seide to them, 
12 Taketh heed fro alle° wicke thing. And 
he comaundide to them, to eche of his 
i3ne3hebore. The weies of hem biforn hym 
ben euermor; and thei ben not hid fro 
14the e3en of hym. In to eche folc of kinde 
1she beforn sette a gouernour; and Irael 
16the part of God is mad open. And alle 
the werkes of hem as the sunne in the 
si3te of God; and the ejen of hym with 
oute cesing biholdende in the weies of 
i7hem. The testamentis ben not hid for4 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XVI. 31—XVII. 17. 


thing teld bifore his face; and thilke soule 
zs eft the turnyng a3en of tho thinges. 


CAP. XVII. 


God formede tnan of erthe; and aftir1 
his ymage he made man. And eft hee 
turnede man in to that ymage*; and aftir 
hym silf he clothide hym with vertu. Hes 
3af to hym the noumbre of daies, and 
tyme; and he 3af to him power of tho 
thingis that ben on erthe. He settide thea 
drede of man on al fleisch, and he was 
lord of beestis and! fliynge briddis. 
formyde of man an help lijk hym; he 3af 
to hem councel, and tunge, and izen, and 
eeris, and herte to thenke ont; and he 
fillide hem with techyng of vndurstond- 
yng. He made to hem the kunnyng ofe 
spirit, he fillide the herte of hem with 
wit; and he schewide to hem yuels and 
goodis. He settide the ize of hem on the7 
hertes of hem, to schewe to hem the grete 
thingis of hise werkis, that thei preise to-s 
gidere the name of halewyng{; and to 
haue glorie in hise meruels, that thei 
telle out the grete thingis of hise werkis. 
He addide to hem techyng; and he enhe-9 
ritide hem with the lawe of lijf. 
deynyde an euerlastynge testament with 
hem; and he schewide to hem hise ri3tful- 


nesse, and domes. And the i3e of hem si311 


the grete thingis of his onour, and the 
eeris of hem herden the onour of vois; 
and he seide to hem, Take heede to 30u 


fro al wickid thing. And he comaundide 12 
The 13 


to hem, to ech man of his nei3bore. 
weies of hem ben ‘euere bifore hym; tho 
ben not hid fro hise ijen. 
he made souereyn a gouernour; and Israel 


Hes. 


He or-10 


On ech folk14 
5 kyngis in the 


thing; bothe of 
thing that hath 
resoun, and 

of thing that 
hath feeling. 
telde bifor his 
Jace; that is, 
schewide in 
dede that tho 
goodis weren 
maad of God 
for thilke soule, 
for it vside tho 
goodis. turn. 
yng azen; for 
whi tho thingis 
ben brou3t a3en 
in to God bi 

a resonable 
soule, in heri- 
ynge hym for 
hise goodis, and 
bi soule that 
3yueth feeling 
in his maner, 
for it is mater 
of Goddis heri- 
yng. Lire here. 
@ 


* that ymage ; 
in 3yuynge to 
man actuel 
knowing of 
God. aftir hym 
silf; that is, as it 
bicometh man- 
kynde. councel; 
that is, power 
of anysement. 
herte ; that is, 
vndurstonding. 
to thenke out ¢ 
tho thingis that 
hen nedeful 
and spedeful 
to hem silf. 
Lire here. c. 
the name of 
halewyng; that 
is, the name of 
the Lord, in 
whiche alle 
thingis ben 
blessid and ha- 
lewid. Lire 
here. C. 


t Testamentis ; 
thou3 many 


puple of Israel 


was maad the opyn part of God. And 16 diden idolatrie, 


alle the werkis of hem ben as the sunne 
in the si3t of God; and hise ij3en biholden 
with out ceessyng in the weies of hem. 


and enforsiden 
to distrie the 
lawe, netheles 
the lawe and 
Goddis wor- 
schip weren 


Testamentist weren not hid fro the wick- 17a in 
en. 


idnesse of hem; and alle the wickydnessis 


2Om.c prim. 4 eftson c sec.m. he lordschipide c pr.m. lordschiper c. a aon. 4 fro 4c. 


Vand of 1. 


Lire here. c. 


ee eal aeeiliieenemae 


XVII. 18——31. 


the wickidnesse® of hem; and al the 
wickidnesse ° of hem in the si3t of God. 
18 The almes deede of a man as‘ a litil sac 
with hym, and the grace of man as the 
19e3e appil it shal kepen; and aftirward it 
shal rise ajeen, and 3elde to them 3eld- 
ing, to eche iu to the hed of hem; and 
turnen in to the lowere partus of erthe®. 
20T’o men doende penaunce forsothe het 
jaf the weie of rij3twisnesse, and con- 
fermede men failende to suffren, and or- 
deynede to them the lot of treuthe. 
21Turne thou to the Lord, and lef thi 
22synnes; prej3e thou bifor the face of the 
Lord, and make lasse the occasiouns of 
a3giltis. Turne ajeen to the Lord, and 
turne awei fro thin* vnrijtwisnesse, and 
24myche hate thou cursing. And knowe 
thou riz3twisnesses, and the domes of 
God; and stond in the lot of putting 
forth, and of! orisoun of the heizest God. 
25‘In to™ the partes go of the hoeli world, 
with men on lyue, ‘and 3yuyng* knou- 
26leching to God. Ne fast abide thou in 
the errour of vnpitous men. Bifor deth 
kuouleche; fro the deade® as no3t persh- 
27eth confessioun. Thou shalt knonlechen 
lyuende, lyuende and hoel thou shalt 
knouleche, and preisen God; and glorien 
28in the mercy doyngus of hym. Hou gret 
the merci of God, and the mytigacioun, ‘or 
29 helpe?,of hym to men conuertende to hym. 
Ne forsothe alle thingus mown ben in 
men; for the sone of man is not vndeadly, 
and ‘in to vanyte of malice thei pleseden. 
30 What’ more cleer* than the sunne? and 
this shall faile; or what wers than that 
flesh tho3te out, and blod? and thatt shal 
3iben vndernomen. The vertue of the 
heijnesse of heuene he biholdith; and 
alle men erthe and asken". 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


155 


of hem weren in the si3t of God. The 18 * as @ tagge 

. ; % with hym; that 
almes of a man 7s as a bagge with hym*, ig, as a scrippe, 
and it sclial kepe the grace of a man as 


‘wher ynne a 
man puttith 
. Os ley vp liyflode to 
the appil of the i3e; and afterward maz is Shit geea 


schal rise a3en, and it schal 3elde to hem a_ in nede, so 

: : almes helpith 
3elding, to ech man in to the heed of in the deth of 
hem; and schal turne in to the lower jo” /’” 


ere partis of 
repentinge the weie of ri3tfulnesse, and erties for whi 
confermede men failynge to suffre, and to hem that 
hen in purga- 
« ,, hooly doctours 
Turne thou to the Lord, and forsake thi21 .yeh, is the 
ete helle, which is 
Lord, and make thou lesse_hirtingis. vacur ae a 
erthe; for Greg. 
Turne thou aj3en to the Lord, and turne 23 seith, as gold 
schyneth in 
thou greetli cursyng}. And knowe thou 24 same fer, 
the ri3tfulnessis, and domes of God; and __ ith, s0 the same 
fier is that tur- 
and of preier of the™ hiz3este God. Go 25 ana purgith 
: ; ; b : 
thou in to the partis of the hooli world§,  i¢3a7; that 
weye of riztful- 
eee posinge to it. 
errour of wickid men. Knouleche thou  faylinge; that 
bifore deth; knouleching perischith fro 
trauel of pe- 
naunce. Lire 
schalt knowleche, and schalt herie God ; — greetli cursyng; 
and thou schalt haue glorie in the mer-  synne. Lire 
hooli world ; 
conuerten to hym. 
iust men, that 
of man is not vndeedli, and malices ples-  conuerten; that 
thingis ; that 
what zs worse than that, that fleisch and t ener 
satisfaccioun of 


partis of erthet. Forsothe it 3af to men 20 t 1/0 the low. 
almes auaylith 
ordeynede to hem the part of treuthe. toric, which, as 
synnes; preye thou bifore the face of the 222m Place with 
: i , d sil 
thou awei fro thin vnri3tfulnesse, and hate — Schyneth | 
and chaf smok- 
stonde thou in the part of good purpos,  mentith re- 
preuable men, 
tf 3af; that is, 
with men lyuynge, and 3yuynge knou- *mes af. the 
leching to God. Dwelle thou not in the 26nesse; in dis. 
is, feble men, 
to suffre the 
a deed man, as no thing. Lyuynge thou27 
here. c. 
schalt knouleche, lynynge and hool thou igen 
that is, cursid 
: : : here. ©. 
ciful doyngis of hym. The merci of God 28 6% 16 ime 
is ful greet, and his help to hem that partis of the 
For whi not alle 29 that is, with 
thingis moun be in men; for whi the sone _ ben seid the 
hooly world. 
iden in to vanyte. What @s clerere than 30 (2 j)P no: alle 
the sunne? and this schal faile|/; ethir { 
48, a man May 
not euere make 
blood thou3te out? and of this he schal be _ allehise synnes. 
malices; that 


reprened. He? biholdith the vertu of31 jg synnes, Lire 
i . here. c. 
hiznesse of heuene; and alle men ben hi. chat 


faile ; not bi 


erthe and aische. 
substaunce, but 


bi apperyng, 


whanne it suffrith eclips. fleisch and blood ; that is, a synnere. Lire here. c. | We; that is, God. bikoldith the vertu, ete.; that is, the vertu 
of aungels, beynge ia bri3t heuene, as noon in comparisoun of his vertu. Lire here. c. ; 


¢ wickenesse x. f is 4, 
1Om. 4. ™ And in to az. 
qtoc. t What is 4. 


ff eche c pr.m. 


8 ligt c prom. E pr.m. 


m Om. 1. 


€ the erthe aren. 
0 Om. c pr.m. E prem. 
* Om. c. of that it e pr.m. 


hitcpr.m i1Om.cpr.m. k Om. c. 
© deed man 4. deed men Gu. P Om. c ef E pr. m. 
a ashen 4. askes c pr.m. 


a He, thai is, God v. 


x 2 


156 


CAP. XVIII. 


) He that lyueth in to withoute ende, 
made of no3t alle thingus togidere; God 
alone shall be iustefied, and dwelleth 
2vnuenkushid king withoute ende. Who 
shal suffise to telle out” the werkis of 
shym? who shal enserche the grete” 
awrthi thingis of hym? The vertue for- 
sothe of his gretnesse who shal telle out? 
or who shal leyn to to tellen out the 
smerci of hym? There is not to lassen, 
ne to echen; ne ther is to fynde the 
6grete” wrthi thingus of God. Whan a 
man hath ful endid, thanne he bigyn- 
neth; and whan he hath restid, he shal 
zwerchen. What is a man, and what is 
the glorie of hym? and* what is good, 
sor what the wicke thing of hym? The 
noumbre of the dajes of men, as myche 
an hundrid 3er, as dropis toY the watir 
of the se thei ben ordeyned; and as a 
litil ston of? grauel, so fewe 3eres in the 
gdai of the* spirituel world. For that 
pacient is God in them, ‘and he schal> 
10heelde out vpon hem his mercy. He sa3 
the presumpcioun, ‘or pride®, of the herte 
of hem, for it ys euel; and he kne3 the turn- 
yng vp so doun of liem, for it is shreude. 
ul Therfore he fulfilde hys mercy in hem, 
and shewede to them the weie of equyte. 
iz2The mercy doyng of man aboute his 
ne3hebore; the merci forsothe of the 
13 Lord vp on alle flesh. He that hath 
mercy, and lerneth, and techeth as’ a 
14shepperde his floc, haue he mercy, tak- 
ende out doctrine of mercy doyng*; and 
1s that hiejen in the domes of hym. Sone, 
in goode thingus 3yue thou not pleynt, and 
in alle 3ifte 3yue thou not sorewi slouthe, 
16 or heuynesse', of an euel wrd. Whether 
not brennende hete the dew shal ajeen 
keelen? so and a wrd betere than a 


Yon c. w Om. c prem. 
b that he c prom. & prem. 
et E prom. 


Xora. Yofc. 
¢ Om. c et & prim. 


Ponce. 4 doth Ep pr.m. do he 1KMX sec. m. marg. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


2 to the c pr.m. E pr.m. of the acu. 
4 and serueth as £ pr. m. 


XVIII. 1—16. 


CAP. XVIII. 


He that lyueth with out bigynnyng1 
and ende, made of nou3t alle thingis to- 
gidere ; God alone schal be iustified, and 
he dwellith a king vnouercomun with 
outen ende. Who schal suffice to telle2 
out his werkis? for whi who schal seke3 
the grete thingis of hym? But who schal4 
telle out the vertu of his greetnesse ? 
ether who schal leie to for to telle out his 
mercy? It is not to make lesse, nethers 
to leie to; nethir‘it is to fynde the grete 
thingis of God. Whanne a man haths 
endid*, thanne he schal bigynne; and 
whanne he hath restid, he schal worche. 
What is a man, and what is the glorie of7 
him? aud what is good, ether what is the 
wickid thing of him? The noumbre of8 
the daies of men, that ben comynli an 
hundrid 3eer, ben arettid as the dropis of 
the watir of the see; and as the stoon of 
grauel, so a fewe 3eeris in the dai of euer- 
lastyngnesse. For this thing God is pa-9 
cient in hem, and schedith out on hem his 
merci. 
herte, for it was yuel; and he knew the 
distriyng of hem, for it was wickid. 


Therfor he fillide his merci in? hem, and 1 


schewide to hem the weie of equite. 
merciful doyng of man zs aboute his nei3- 
bore; but the merci of the Lord zs ouer 
ech fleisch. 
techith, and chastisith as a scheepherde 


his floc, do’ merci, takynge the techyng*t 14 


of merciful’ doyng; and he that hastith 


He si3 the presumpcioun of her 10 


He that hath merci, andi3 


* Whanne a 
man hath end- 
id; the serch- 
ing of God. 
bigynne ; that 
is, he schal per- 
seyue that he 
is in the higyn- 
nyng. hath 
restid, ete. 3 
that is, whanne 
he schal be in 
eld age, which 
is tyme of rest- 
ing, he schal be 
more hertid to 
good werk. 
what is good ; 
as if he seye, of 
him silf he hath 
no good of 
grace, nether 
of kynde. 
wickid thingis ; 
what ever thing 
of wickidnesse 
is in hym, al is 
of him silf. 
euerlasting- 
nesse; the 
Latin word 
here signefieth 
euerlasting- 
nesse; but pro- 
pirly it signe- 
fieth the dur- 
inge of vncor- 
ruptiblethingis. 
schewith out ; 


The 1217 syuynge 


largeli his 
grace. Lire 
her 


Bs Gh 
+ takinge the 
techyng; that 
is, confermynge 
his techinge bi 
excercise of 
workis. 
3 hastith in the 
domes ; that is, 
mersi, desir- 


in the domes} therof. Sone, in goodis 3yue 15 ings enate 


thou not pleynt, and in ech 3ifte 3yue thou 


not heuynesse of an yuel word. Whether 16 


dew schal not kele heete? so and a word 
ts betere than 3ifte. 
7s not aboue a good 3ifte? but euer ethir 
ts with a man iustified. A fool schal vp- 


a Om. c pr. me. 
€Om.c prim fOm.c 


r doctrine K.  § the merciful K. 


thilke sentence 
in the fynal 

doom, Come 3e, 
the blessid, and 
take the rewme. 


playnt ; in bi- 
Lo! whether a word 17 weiling that 


that thou 3auest 
to releeue thi 
neisbore. Lire 


18 here. oc. 


= a 


XVIII. 17-—33- 


173ifte. Lo! whether not a wrd ouer a 
good 3ifte? but either with a iustefied 
18man. The fool sharpli shal 3yue repref ; 
and the 3ifte of the vndisciplyned mak- 
i9eth e3en to waxe failende. Bifor dom% 
greithe rijtwisnesses to thee; and er that 
20thou speke, lerne. Bifor sicnesse tac 
medicyne ; and bifor dom! aske thou thi- 
self, and in the sijte of God thou shalt 
2i finde mercy. SBifor siknesse meeke thee, 
and in tyme! of infirmyte shew thou thi 
22 conuersacioun, ‘or dyuyng*. Be thou not 
lettid to prejen euermor, and drede thou 
not vnto the dead to be iustefied ; for the 
meede of God dwellith in to withoute 
azende. Biforn orisoun greithe thou thi 
soule; and wile thou not be as a man that 
2i1tempteth God. Haue mynde of wrathe 
in the day of endyng; and tyme of 3eld- 
ing in contersacioun thou shalt make. 
25Haue mynde of pouert in tyme! of 
plente; and the nede of pouert in the 
2¢dai of richesses. Fro erli vnto euen the 
tyme shal ben chaungid; and alle these 
2jthingus hastid in the ejen of God. A 
wys man in™ alle thingis dredeth"; and 
in the da3es of giltes shal taken heed fro 
zsslouthe. Eche witti knowith wisdam; 
and to hym that fyndeth it, it shal 3yue 
29knoulechyng. The wel felende in wrdus 
and thei wisly diden, and vnderstoden 
treuthe, and rijtwisnesse ; and biso3ten 
30prouerbes and domes. After thi lustis 
go thou not; and fro thi wil turne thee 
31awei. If thou 3yue to thi soule his lustis, 
it shal make thee in to io3e to thin ene- 
szmys. Ne delite thou in cumpanyes, ne 
in smale thyngus ; sotheli the trespasing 
a30f hem is contynuel. Ne be thou mene 
in strif® for monee, and ther is not to 
thee no thing in the world; forsothe 
thou shalt be enuyous to thy soule. 


= 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


157 


ide” i: i _ * makith gen 
breide" scharpli; and the 3ifte of an vn- [| SE aan 


tau3t man makith izen to faile*. Bifore 19 resseyuere, 
e ‘s Which Is 

the doom make thou redi riztfulnesse to — aschamed of 

: ' edwitingis d 
thee; and lerne thou, bifore that thou to hin Hae 
iM s . the doom, ete.; 

speke. Bifore sikenesse 3yue thou medi-20{)<; fie 
cyn; and bifore the doom axe thi silf, that thon deme 

. < another man 
and thou schalt fynde merci in the si3t of of ony defaute, 
se that thou be 


God. Bifore sikenesse make the meke, 21 gilteles therof, 
2 5 . ellis th 
and in the tyme of sikenesse schewe thi  Schuldist con- 


: demne thi silf; 
lyuyng. Be thou not lettidt to preye 22 Oi et, wo Ro- 
eulere, and drede thon not to be iustified we yoe tb what 
. ‘i ing thou 
til to deth; for whi the meede of God  demest another 

. . ‘ . man, th - 

dwellith with outen ende. Bifore preier23 dpnest thi 
ade . F silf, for thou 

make redi thi soule; and nyle thou be as doist the same 

a man that temptith God}. Hane thou 2s thingis whiche 
f x = thou demest. 

mynde of ire in the dai of endyng; and pte cies 

< 5 a maister. bifor 

make thou in lyuyng the tyme of 3elding. that show speke; 

. : in techi 
Haue thou mynde of pouert in the dai of25 there men. 
abundauuce ; and the nede of pouert in 2% sikenesse, 
the tyme of richessis. Fro the morewtid 26 siknesse is 
ae 3 maad vneurable 
til to” the enentid the tyme schal be bi long during; 
chaungid; and alle these thingis ben swift  nesse bi cus- 

tom, which is 
drede in alle thingis; and in the daies of 2ve here. c. 

5 + Be thou not 
trespassis he schal fle fro vnkunnyng, “tid; bi tem- 
ether slouthe. Ech fel man § knowith 28 to preye euere ; 

that is, in tymes 
ordeyned ther- 
schal 3yue knouleching. ; Witti er eee 
wordis also thet diden wiseli, and vndur- Ms us feet, 
7 at is, that a 
stoden” trenthe, and riztfulnesse ; and i 
silf to perel,and 

. . eas A he may do re- 
not aftir thi coueitises; and be thou turned Sinabls and 
awei fro thi wille. If thou 3yuest to this abide to be de- 
soule the coueitisis therof, it schal make Lire here. c. 

§ Ech fel man; 
5 . ° t 
thou not in cumpenyes, nether in litle jes, ti Goddis 
cumpenyes ; for whi the synnyng of hem Sede Anowith 
is contynuel. Be thou not meene in the 3s3is; getith and 


ete.; as hodili 
so goostly sik. 
in the izen of God. A wise man schal 27 40S kynde. 
poral bisynessis. 
wisdom; and to hym that fyndith it, he 
men ine Lire here. c. 
man bitake him 
bisou3ten|| prouerbis and domes. Go thou 30 teeue that that 
lyuerid of God. 
thee in to ioie to thin enemyes. Delite se that is, ententif 
wisdom ; that 


Z loueth it. 
stryuyng of looue, and sum thing is to knenoleching 
° ° 0 reising. 
thee in the world /; for whi thou schalt erie Sm 
that is, in hi- 


be enuyouse to thi soule. ehineeaties 


knewen the yn- 
durstonding of 
priuy thingis. 


Delite thou not in cumpenyes; that is, in multitude of meynee. Lire here.c. Be thou nat meene; that is, necgligent ether slow. in stryuyng of loouc ; 
that is, that thou stryue to ouercome sum men in the 3yuyng of almes; he that 3yueth almes, makith loone to God, in xix ¢°. of Prouerbs. enuy- 
ouse to thi soule ; in withdrawinge fro it the good of mersi, if thou art necgligent in the 3yuyng of almes: thus it is expownyd comynly, but it 
may be expowned neer the lettre thus, Be thou not meene, etc.; that is, not onely stryue thou not myche, but nether litil, in axinge hard the 
dette, which thon hast lent to thi nedy neiz3bore. and sum thing is to thee; that is, while thou hast wheraf thou maist lyue in an other side, thou 
owist not to axe ajen harde the dette. enuyouse to thi soule ; in withdrawinge fro it the goodis of mersi; if thou axist ouer harde the dette ajenus 


Goddis heest, in xxij. c°. of Exodi. Lire here. c. 


h the dom secu. 
a dradde £ pr.m. © the strif Ez. 


& the dom 4EH. 
m Om. c pr.m. 


4 edwite celeri. 


ithe tyme z. 


Vv vnto I. 


§ in the world; another lettre hath, in the bagge. Lire here. c. 


k Om. cet e. pr.m. lthe tyme 456 sec, m. HL. 


w yndurstonden ces. 


158 


CAP. XIX. 


1 The drunkelew wereman shal not be 
mad riche; and who dispisith lytle 
2thingis, litil mele doun falleth. Wyn 
and wymmen maken also wise men to 
go bacward; and shuln vndernyme weel 
3felende men. And who hymself ioyneth 
to lecchoures, shal be wicked; roten- 
nesse and wormes shuln eritagen hym, 
and his soule shal be taken awei fro the 
4noumbre. Who leeueth soone, is 1i3t in 
herte, and shal be lessid; and who tres- 
paseth in to his soule, ferthermor shal 
sben had. Who io3eth in wickidnesse, 
shal ben vndernomen; and who hateth 
correccioun, shal be lassid in? lif; and 
who hateth myche speche, quenchith 
6malice. And who synneth in to his 
soule, shal not’do penaunce; and who 
is merie in malice, shal be repreued. 
7 Reherce thou not an hard wrd, and a 
shreude; and thou shalt not be lassid. 
8'To frend’ and enemy wile thou not telle 
thi wit; and if ther is to thee gilte, 
9 wile thou not nakenen. Forsothe he shal 
heren thee, and kepe thee, and as de- 
fendende synne he shal hate thee; and 
10so he shal be nee3h to thee. Euermor 
hast thou herd a wrd a3en thi ne3hebore; 
abide it stille in thee, trostende for it 
itshal not to-breke thee. Fro the face of 
the wrd berth out the fool, as the weil- 
izing of the birthe of a child. An arewe 
ficchid ‘in to™ the hipe of an hound, so 
13a wrd in the herte of a fool. Chastise 
a frend, lest par auenture he vnderstond® 
not, and seye, I dide not; or if he haue 
14 do, lest eftsoone he adde to do. Chastise 
a ne3hebore, lest par auenture he shal 
not seyn; and if he seide, lest par auen- 
isture he reherse. Chastise a frend, ofte 
16 forsothe is don trespas; and not to eche 
wrd leeue' thou. Ther is that slideth in 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XIX. 1—16. 


CAP. XIX. 


A drunkelew* werk man schal not bei 
maad riche; and he that chargith not litle 
synnes, fallith doun* litil and litil. Wyne 
and wymmen maken to be apostataas, 3he, 
wise men; and thei reprenen witti men. 
And he that ioyneth hym silf to hooris,3 
schal be wickid; rot and wormes schulen 
enherite hym, and he schal be set an hi3 
in to more ensaumple, and his soule schal 
be takunt awei fro noumbre. He thata 
bileueth soone, is vnstable in herte, and 
schal be maad lesse; and he that trespass- 
ith a3ens his soule, schal be had ferther- 
more. He that ioieth in wickidnesse, schal 5 
be cursid; and he that hatith blamyng, 
schal be maad lesse in lijf; and he that 
hatith ianglyng, quenchith malice. Hee 
that synneth a3ens his soule, schal repente; 
and he that is myrie in malice, schal be 
cursid. Reherse thou not an hard word,7 
and wickid; and thou schalt not be maad 
lesse. Nyle thou telle thi wit to frends 
and’ enemye; and if trespas is to thee, 
nyle thou make nakid. For he schal heres 
thee, and schal kepe thee, and he as de- 
fendynge the synne schal hate thee; and 
so he schal be euere with thee. 
hast herd a word a3ens thi nei3bore; die. 
it togidere in thee, and triste thou that it 
schal not breke thee. 
greetli of the face of a word, as the sorewe 
of beryng of a 3ong child. 
fastned in the hipe of a dogge, so a word 
in the herte of a fool. 
frend}, lest perauenture he vndurstonde 
not, and seie, Y dide not; ether if he 
hath do, lest he adde to do eft. 
thou a neizbore, lest perauenture he seie 
not; and if he seith, lest peranenture he 
reberse. 


trespassynge is don ofte; and _ bileue16é 


thou not to ech word. Ther is a man that 


Thou lo 


An arowe12 


Repreue 14 


* fallith doun ; 
in to greuousere 
synoes. re- 
preuen; that 
is, maken him 
worthi to be 
reprenyd. 

set an hiz; 
that is, schal he 
takun out of 
the felouschipe 
of goode men. 
in fo more en- 
saumple; that 
is, make aferd 
both litil men 
and greete. 
Lire here. c. 

T his soule schal 
be takun, ete.; 
that is, schal be 
ranyschid of 
fendis fro the 
noumbre of 
chosun men. 
He that bileu- 
eth soone s that 
is, yuele of his 
neizbore. schal 
be maad lesse ; 
in liyf and 
fame, for he is 
vnstable in 
good, and able 
to falle to yuel. 
that trespassith 
ajenushissoules 
that is, defoul- 
ith it bi priny 
synnes. schal 
be had ferther- 
more ; that is, 
schal be maad 
opyn with ont 
forth. Te. 
herse thou 

not an hard 
word ; of re- 
buking. and 
wickid; of 
bacbiting. 
lesse; in fame 


A fool trauelith 11 and vert. 


wit; that is, 
thi prinete. 
make nakid ; 
that is, schewe 
opinly thi 
preny trespas, 


Repreve thou a 13 4nd most to 


thyn enemy. 
schal kepe 

thee ; that is, 
aspie thi wordis 
to take thee. 
the synne ; 
that is, thi 
synne, excus- 
ynge it gilefuly 
bifor thee, that 


Repreue thou a frend, for whi l5he may more 


knowe thee, 
and distrie thee. 
Lire here. c. 
+ Repreue thou 
a frend; that 


is, lest he knowe not that he dide yuel, and for thi repreuyng he schal knowe and eschewe. ether if he hath do; wrong witingly, repreue thou him. 
he seie not ; that is, denye stidefastly, in encressinge his synne. and if he seith ; that is, knoulechith the synne. Lire here. c- 


Pthe © pr.m. 4 the frend z. 


x drunke c. 


rin a. 


8 ynderstod c._t bileue G sec. m. 


y and to 1. 


XIX. 17——XX. 3. 


i7his tunge, but not of inwit. Who is 
forsothe, that gilteth not in his tunge ? 
Chastise a ne3hebore, er that thou threte; 
isand 3if place to the drede of the heiest. 
For eche wisdam the drede of God, and 
in it to dreden God; and in alle wisdam 
19 the disposing of the lawe. And wisdam 
is not the disciplyne of shreudenesse; and 
good thenking is not the prudence of 
2zosynnes. Ther is shreudenesse of pru- 
dence, and in it cursing; and ther is an 
ynwis man, that is lassid in wisdam. 
21 Betere is a man that is lassid in wisdam, 
and failende wit in the drede of God, 


than that aboundith in wit, and cuer- | 
Ther - 


22passith the lawe of the heijest. 
is certeyn’ sleeynesse, and it is wicke. 
23 And ther is, that sendeth out a certeyn 
wrd, tellende out the treuthe. Ther is, 
that shreudely meketh hymself; and the 
entrailes of hym ben ful of treccherie. 
24And ther is a ri3twis", that myche vn- 
derputtith hymself of myche meknesse ; 
and ther is a ri3twis, that bowith in the 
face, and feyneth hym not to seen that 
25is vnknowen. And if of infirmyte ‘of 
strengthis’ he ‘is forbeden” to synnen ; 
if ‘he shal fynde* tyme of enel doyng, he 
26shal euele do. Of the si3te is knowen a 
man; and of the ajeen comyng of the 
27face is knowén the weel felende. The 
clothing of the body, and the la3hing of 
teth, and the goyng in of a man, tellen 
2sout of hym. Ther is liyng correccioun 
in wrathe of the wrongful; and ther is 
dom that is not preued to ben good; and 
ther is a beere stille, and he is prudent. 


CAP. XX. 


1 Hou good is to vndernymyn, than to 
wrathen, and to not forbedenY the knou- 
2lechere in orisoun. The lust of the gelding 
deflourede the 3unge womman, ‘or birefte 
shir meydenhed’, so he that doth bi fors 


Lire here. c. 


* ri3twis man 4. v Om. c pr. mn. 
Epr.m. Y defenden c pr.m. E pr. m. 


2 whiche a sec. m,. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


w eschewe C pr.m. E pr.m. 
z or bereuith hir meydenhed a. Om. c ef E pr. m. 


a Om. € sec. m. V. 


159 


fallith bi his tunge, but not of wille*, 
For ‘whi who? is he, that trespassith not 17 
in his tunge? Repreue thou a neizboret, 
bifore that thou manaasse; and 3yue thou 1s 
place to the drede of the hijeste. For 
whi al wisdom 7s the drede of God, and 
in that wisdom for to drede God; and the 


* not of wille ; 
that is, witingly 
and of purpos. 
Lire here. c. 

+ Repreue thou 
a neizbore ; hi- 
twix thee and 
him. éifor that 
thou manaasse; 
that is, de- 
nounce to the 
iuge him to be 


ordynaunce of lawe 7s in al wisdom. And 19 Punyschid. a 


the teching of wickidnesse is not wisdom; 
and the prudence of synnes is not good 
thou3t. 
and cursidnesse zs ther ynne; and ther is 
an vnwijs man, which is maad litil in 
wisdom. Betere is a man that hath litil2i 
in* wisdom, and failynge in wit in the 
drede of God, than he that hath plentee 
of wit, and brekith the lawe of the hizeste. 


wisdom, etc. 3 
that is, cometh 
forth of the 
drede of God ; 
for it is the 


Ther is wickidnesse of prudence, 20 bigynnyng of 


wisdom. and in 
that; that is, 
wisdom. for to 
drede Gods for 
as wisdom com- 
eth of drede, so 
it techith more 
for to drede 
God. teching of 
wickidnesse 3 

hi which a man 


Ther is certeyn sutilte, and it is wickid, 22*™ 4 ye 


warly. is not 


And ther is a man, that sendith out a cer- 23 wisdom, very. 


teyn word, tellynge out treuthe. Ther is 
a man, that mekith hym silf wickidly{; 
and hise ynnere thingis ben ful of gile. 


vnwise man 3 
that is, symple 
and litil knn- 
nynge. is maad 
litil in wisdom ; 
that is, kan litil 


And ther is a iust man, that makith low 24 > sutiltees, and 


greetli hym silf of myche mekenesse; and 
ther is a iust man, that bowith the face, 
and feyneth hym to se not that, that is 
vnknowun. 
feblenesse of strengthis to do synne; if he 
fyndith tyme to do yuele, he schal do 
yuel. 
witti man is knowun bi meetyng of face. 


The clothing of bodi, and the lei3syng of27 


teeth, and the entring of a man, tellen 


A man is knowun bi si3t; and a26 


netheles kan 
sufliciently of 
thingis that per- 
teynen tohelthe. 
Live here. c. 

t that mekith 


Thou3 he is> forbodun of 25 tim silf wick 


idly ; to dis- 
seyue men the 
more. makith 
low greetly, etc.s 
to peeris and 
lower men. 
and ther is a 
iust man 3 
feynyngly. 
bowith the face, 
éte.y as turn- 
awey hise 


. «ng YRBe 
out of hym. Ther is fals repreuyng in 28 isen fro a fair 


the ire of a man ful of dispisyng; and 
ther is dom which is not preued § to be 
good; and ther is a stille man, and he is 
prudent. 


CAP. XX. 


It is ful good to repreue||, move than to 
be wrooth, and to forbede not a man 
knoulechyng in preiere. The coueitise of2 
a geldyng hath defoulid the maidynhed of 
a 30ng womman, so he that makith wickids 


x ther shal come c. it shal come 


b ber, 


womman, 
whom he co- 
neitith hren- 
nyngly, but this 
is ynknowun of 
othere men. 
Lire here. c. 

§ ther is doom 
which is not 
preued,; that 
is, whanne a 
man demeth bi 
li3t. signes, that 
his neizbore is 
ynel. ther is a 
stille man; that 
is, not demynge 
yuel of his nei3- 
bore, til cer- 
teynte be had. 


|| to repreue ; swetely and charitably him that trespassith. forbede not; that is, induse him therto. Lire here. c. 


160 


swicke dom. Hou good is, the chastisid to 
schewe® penaunce; so forsothe thou shalt 
sfleen awei wilful synne. Ther is a stille 
man, that is found wis; and ther is an 
chateful, that is gredy to speken. Ther is 
forsothe a stille man, not hauende wit of 
speche; and ther is a stille man, witende 
ztyme of couenable tyme. A wys man 
shal be stille vnto tyme; the reccheles® 
forsothe and the vnprudent shul not 
skepe time. Who vseth manye wrdis, 
hurteth his soule; and who taketh to 
hym power wrongfulli, shal ben hatid®. 
9Ther is goyng forth in euelis to a man 
vndisciplyned ; and ther is finding in to 
ioharm. Ther is 30uen thing, that is not 
profitable; and ther is 3oue thing, whos 
i3elding is double. Ther is lassing for 
glorie; and ther is, that fro mecnesse 
12shal rere the hed. There is, that manye 
thingis a3een bie for litil pris, and re- 
izstorende them in to seuen fold. A wys 
man in wrdis maketh hym self loouable ; 
the graces forsothe of foolis shul ben 
14held out. The 3ifte of the vnwise shall 
not be profitable to thee; the e3en for- 
issothe of hym ben seuennfold. Fewe 
thingus he sha] 3yue, and many thingus 
he shal vpbreiden; and the openyng of 
16the mouth of hym is enflaumyng. To 
day leeneth a man, and to moru he ask- 
eth it bi ple; and hateful is such a 
i7maner man. To a fool shal not ben a 
frend, and ther shal not be grace to the 
isgoodis of hym. Who forsothe eten? the 
bred of hym, ben of fals tunge; hou ofte 
sithes and hou fele shu) thei scorne hym? 
19Ne forsothe that were to ben had, with 
euene ri3t wit he delede; lic maner and 
20that, that were not to ben had. The 
slidyng of the false tunge ‘as he that® is 
falling in the pament; so the fallingus 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XX. 4-—20. 


dom bi violence. It is ful good, that a4 
man ‘that is® repreued schewe opynli* 
penaunce; for so thou schalt ascape wil- 
ful synne. 
foundun wijs; and /he is hateful, which is 
fool hardit to speke. Sotheli ther is ac 
stille man, not hauynge wit of speche; 
and ther is a stille man, knowynge the 
sesoun of couenable tyme. A wijs man7 
schal be stille til to tyme; but a ioli man 
and vnprudent man schulen not kepe 
tyme. He that vsith many wordist, lirt-8 
ith his soule; and he that takith power 
to hym silf vniustli, schal be hatid. Ther9 
is goyng forth in ynels toa man vnlernyd; 


Ther is a stil man, which iss ;, 


* schewe apin- 
ly, ete.; that is, 
to schewe bi 
word and deed, 
that he repent- 
ith verily. Lire 
TE. C. 

+ fool hardi; 
that is, cometh 
bifore du tyme. . 
Lire here. c. 

= many wordis; 
that is, superflu 
and veyn 
wordis. Lire 
here. c. 

§ not profit- 
able ; for it is 
doon for veyn- 
glorie, ether for 
ynel entent. 
Lire here. c. 

|| a3endieth 
many synnes 
Sor litil priys ; 
that is, bi litil 
penaunce, in 


and ther is fyndyng in to peiryng. ‘Ther 10 comparisoun of 


is a 3ifte, which is not profitable); and 
ther is a 3ifte, whos jeldyng is double. 


Ther is makyng lesse for glorie ; and ther 0 


is a man, which schal reise the heed fro 


mekenesse. Ther is a man, that a3en bieth 12 


many syznes for litil prijs|], and restorith 
tho in seuenfold. A wijs man in wordis! 
makith hym silf amyable; but the graces 
of foolis schulen be sched out. 
of an vnwijs man schal not be profitable 


to thee; for hise ijen ben sevenfold. Hes 


schal 3yue litle thingis, and he scha) vp- 
breide’ many thingis; and the openyng 
of his mouth is enflawming. 
man leeneth, and to morewe he axith; and 


synnes, that 
disserueden 
euerlastinge 
peyne, but pen- 
aunce chaung- 
ith it to tem- 
poral peyne. 
seuenfold; that 
is, manyfold, 
ether bi senen- 
fold of graces 


3 of the Hooly 


Goost. amy- 
able; for he 
eschewith to 


The 3ifte 14 seye hateful 


thingis, and 
studieth to 
bringe forth 
thingis accept- 
able to God and 
to men. sched 
out ; bi vndis- 
creet speking, 


To dai a 16bi which the 


ben maad hate- 
ful to God and 


siche a man is hateful. A frend schal not 17 a ee 


be to a fool, and grace scha] not be to hise 
goodis. 


strengthe, and 
fairuesse of 


For thei that eten his breed, ben 18 bodi, and no- 


bley of kyn. 
of fals tunge**; hon ofte and hou many Liroveates 
men schulen scorne hym? For he de- 19 eae ti 


partith not bi enene wit that, that was 
worthi to be had; in lijk maner and that, 
that was not worthi to be had. 
ing of a fals tunge zs as he that fallith in 
the pawment; so the fallis of yuele men 
schulen come hastili. 


is, his entent is 
manyfold and 
dyuerse, and 
therfor he wole 


The fall-20 hane many 


seruyces to 
vanytes, and 
othere yuels, 
for a litil 3ifte. 


A man with outa Zire here. c 


**of fals tunge; 
that is, flatereris 


Hac hise folies. soorne hym; as if he seye, alle wise men and goode. departith not, etc.; that is, he delith yuele hise thingis, and tho 
thingis that he ranyschide of othere men. come hastily ; that is, sudeynly, as a man that slidith, and fallith in the pawment. Lire here. c. 


ado c prim. E£ pr.m. 


E sec.m. marg. au. © blamed r pr. m. 


¢ Om. ceteri. 


» reccherous Bose m. reccheles, or wiylde c sec. m. marg. wijlde, or reccheles 
eetith a. 


e€ Om. c pr.m. 


a edwite ceteri. 


XX. 21——XXI. 2. 


210f euele men hastili shal come. An vn- 
kinde man as a veyn fable; and it shal 
be ofte in the mouth of the vndisciplyned. 
22Of the mouth of the fool shal ben re- 
preued a parable; forsothe he seith it‘ 
not in his tyme. Ther is, that is for- 
bedung for myseisete to synnen; and in 
23his reste shal he prickid. And ther is, 
that shal leese hys soule for confusioun ; 
and of vnprudence of persone he shal 
24leesen it. Forsothe bi excepcioun of per- 
25sone he shal leese hymself. Ther is, 
that for confusioun bihotith to a frend; 
and hath woonnen hym an enemy wil- 
26fully. Wicke repref in a man a lesyng; 
and in the mouth of the vndisciplyned 
27it shal be besily. Betere is a thef than 
the besynesse of a man liere; forsothe 
28bothe shuln eritagen perdicioun. Ma- 
neres of men lieres withoute wrshipe ; 
and the confusioun of hem with them 
29 withoute cesing. A wys man in wrdis 
shal bringe forth hymself; and a prudent 
3oman shal plesen to grete men. Who 
wercheth his lond, shal myche he3en the 
hep of frutes; and who wercheth ri3t- 
wisnesse, he shal myche> ben enhauncid. 
Who forsothe pleseth to grete men, shal 
31 fleen awei, or ascape', wickidnesse*. Pre- 
sentes and 3iftes ful out blenden the ejen 
of domysmen; and as a doumb in the 
mouth he turneth awei the chastisingus 
320f hem. Hid wisdam, and tresor! vnseen, 
s3what profit in eithir? Betere is, that 
hilith his vnwisdam, than a man that 
hidith his wisdam. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 Sone, hast thou synned? ne adde thou 
to eftsoone; but of thi rathere louly 
preye™, that to thee thei be for3yuen. 
2As fro the face of a shadewe eddere flee 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


161 


grace 7s as a veyn fable; and it schal be 
customable in the mouth of vnlerned men. 


* A parable ; 
that is, a trewe 


* sentence and 


greet. Lire 


A parable* schal be reprened of the mouth 22 ere. c. 


of a fool; for he seith not it in his tyme. 
Ther is a man, that is forbodun to do 
synne, for pouert; and he schal be 
prickidt in his reste. Ther is a man,23 
that schal leese his soule for schame; and 
for the vnprudence of a persoone he schal 
leese it. 
for the takyng of a persoone. 
man, that for schame biheetith to a frend ; 
and he hath gete hym enemy with out 
cause. 
a mans; and it schal be customabli in the 
mouth of vnlerned men. 
theef{ than the customablenesse of a man, 
a leesyngmongere ; forsothe bothe thei 
schulen enherite perdicioun. The ma-28 
neres of men leesyngmongeris ben with 
outen onour; and her schenschype zs with 
hem with out ceessyng. A wijs man in29 
wordis schal brynge forth} hym silf ; and 
a prudent man schal pleese grete men. 
He that worchith his lond, shal make hi330 
the heep of fruytis; and he that worchith 
rij3tfulnesse, schal be enhaunsid. Sotheli 
he that plesith grete men, schal ascape 
wickidnesse. Presentis and 3iftis blynden3i 
the i3en of iugis; and as doumb|| in the 
mouth it turneth awei the chastisyngis 


t he schal be 
prickid, ete. 3 
that is, schal be 
maad hittir in 
ceessing fro 
yuel, for he 
may not fille 
his malice. 
leese his soule 
for schame 3 
that is, for the 


Forsothe he schal leese hym silf 24 ‘ede of 


schame, if he 


Ther is a 25 apperith pore, 


wherfor he 
turneth to 
theftis. for the 
vnprudence of 


Leesyng zs a wickid schenschip in 26 @ P¢rsoone : 


that is, for the 
councel of an 
yuel man, to 


Betere is a27 whom he con- 


sentith liztly in 
theftis. leese 
him silf; as to 
the soule, hi 
dedly synne, 
and as to the 
bodi, ofte bi 
hanging, ether 
hi heeding. for 
the taking of a 
persoone 3 that 
is, in taking 
the councel of 
an yuel per- 
soone. for 
schame; that 
is, dredinge 
schame to be 
holdun vn- 
mi3ty, ether 
auarouse. bi- 
heetith ; that 
that he may 
not paye. ene- 
my without re- 
sonable cause 
of biheeting. 


of hem. Wisdom hid, and tresour vnseyn, 32 27 “ere. 


what profit zs in euer eithir ? 
betere, that hidith his vnwisdom, than a 
man that hidith his wisdom. 


CAP. XXI. 


Sone, thou hast do synne? adde thou! 
not eft; but biseche thou for the formere 
synnes, that tho be forjouun to thee. As2 
fro the face of a serpent fle thou synnes ; 


t Betere isa 


He is 33 theef; that is, 


lesse yuel than 
& man custom- 
able to lees- 
yngis, for he 
sclaundrith 
good fame, 
which is hetere 
than ertheli 
goodis. Lire 
here. G. * 

§ schal brynge 
forth, ete. that 
is, schal schewe 
his wisdom. 
worchith rizt- 
JSulnesse ; as 
heete encreess- 
ith fruytis, so 


the onours of him that worchith riztfulnesse encreessen. plesith grete men; for his ri3tfulnesse, as Joseph and Danyel diden. Lire here. c. 
|| as doumb ; that is, a spice of a paddok, which cast in to the mouth of a dogge, makith him stille, and vnm‘3ty to berkes so present 3ouun for 
the distriyng of riz3tfulnesse, makith the inge to he stille, and to ceesse fro punyschyng of yucl. what profit is in euer either; as if he sey, noon ; 
and this is soth, as to the profit of othere men, but not as to his owne profit; forwhi tresour vnseyn profitith not to it silf, nether to othere men ; 
bunt wisdom hid profitith as to the hanere, as to the dedis of contemplatif liyf, thou3 it profitith not to othere men, bi werkis of actif liyf. 


Lire here. c. 
fit is vz. & eschewith c pr. m. E pr.m., 
1Om.c pr.m. profit 2 pr.m. ™ beseech azGu. 
VOL. III. 


bh Om. secu. 


iOm.cetzpr.m. wickenesse z. 


x: 


162 


synnes; and if thou schalt™ ne3he to 
3them, thei shul take thee. The teeth of 
a leoun the teth of it, sleende the soules 
4of men. As a swerd two® bitende eche 
wickidnesse?; of the wounde of it is no 
shelthe. A3een chiding and wrongis to 
no3t shul bringe substaunce; and the 
hous that ful myche is riche, shal be 
bro3t to no3t bi pride; so the substaunce 
of the proude shal be taken vp bi the 
sroote. The lowe pre3yng of the pore fro 
the mouth vnto the ere shal come; and 
7dom hastili shal com to hym. Who hat- 
eth chastising, the step is of a synnere ; 
and who dredeth God, shal ben conuertid 
sto his herte. Knowen fro aferr is the 
my3ty in fool hardy tunge; and the 
weel felende woot hym‘% to slyde fro 
g9hym. Who bildith his hous with" other 
mennes costes, as that gedereth his 
1ostonus in wynter’. A flax top gedered 
togidere the synagoge of synneres; and 
the ful ending of them flawme of fyr. 
11 The weie of synneres togidere plauntid 
with stones; and in to the ende of them 
12helle, and peynes', and derknesses. Who 
shal kepe ri3twisnesse, shal withholde 
i3the wyt of hym. Ful ending of the 
14drede of God wisdam and wit. He shal 
not be lerned, that is not wis in goode. 
15Ther is forsothe vnwisdam, that abund- 
eth in euel; and there is not wit, where 
16is bitternesse. The kunnyng of the wise 
man as flowing shal abunde; and the 
counseil of hym as a" welle of lif abit’ 
17stille. The herte of the fool as a vessel 
to-broken ; 
holden. A wis wrd what euer he” shal 
heren, the kunnyng shal preisen, and 
echen. The leccherous herde, and it shal 
displesen hym; and he shal throwe it 
lgbihinde his bac. The telling of a* fool 


thus, And the wit of him schal not be tau3t, which is nat wijs in good ¢ and this lettre is pleyn. Lire here. c. 


in herte, and fille in werk. c. 


"Om. cprm. © twei AEGH. 


tpeynec. 4Om.4. Vv abideth azcn. 


‘them1. dOm.s. & Chidyng cv. 


and alle wisdam shal not 


P wickenesse E. 
Wit AGH. 


vnto I. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXI. 3—19. 


and if thou neizest to ‘tho* synnes*, tho 
schulen take thee. The teeth of a lioun3 
ben the teeth therof, that sleen the soulis 
of mey. Al wickidnesse zs as‘ a scharp4 
swerd on either syde; heelthe is not to 
the wounde+ therof. Chidyngis® ands 
wrongis schulen distrie catel; and an 
houe that is ouer riche, schal be distriede 
bi pride; so the catel of a proude man 
schal be drawun vp bi the roote. Thes 
preyer of a pore man{ schal come fro the 
mouth ‘til to® eeris?; and doom schal come 
to hym hastili. He that hatith repreuyng, 7 
is a step of the synnere; and he that 
dredith God, schal be turned to his herte §. 
A mi3ti man with an hardi tunge iss 
knowun afer; and a witti man kan kepe 
him silf fro that man. He that bildiths 
his hous with othere mennus costis||, zs as 
he that gaderith hise stonys in wyntir. 


* neizist to thos 
bi consent. 

take thee; in 
wlappinge and 
byndynge bi 
dede and cus- 
tom. teeth 
therof ; for it 
denourith hool- 
lyche the good 
of grace, and 
decreessith the 
good of kynde. 
Lire here. c. 

t helthe is not 
to the wounde ; 
for whi synne 
hirtith bodi 
and soule, and 
withdrawith 
grace in pre-~ 
sent tyme, and 
bryngith to the 
peyne of helle. 
Lire here. c. 

1 @ pore man; 
that snffrith 
wrong bi 
wordis and 
dedis of a proud 
man. to the 
eeris; of God. 
is a step, ete.3 
that is, a suere 
of the deuel. 


Schenys® gaderid togidere ts the synagoge 10 Lire here. c. 


of synneris; and the endyng of hem is 
the flawme of fier. 
is set togidere with stoonys; and in the 
ende of hem ben hellis{[, and derknessis, 
and peynes. 


cioun of Goddis drede zs wisdom and wit. 


He that kepith ri3tfulnesse, 12 
schal holde the wit therof**. The perfec- 13 


§ herte; in 
resseyliynge, 


The weie of synneris 11 Pamyng, and 


in fleyng fro 
synnes. an 
hardi tunge ; 
that is, a proud 
man, that gess- 
ith grete thingis 
of himsilf, and 
spekith }i3tli 
and proudli. 
Lire here. c. 


He schal not be tau3t, which is not wijs 14 tt mennus 


in good. Forsothe vnwisdom is, 
plenteuouse in yuel; and wit is not, where 
is bittirnesse. 
man schal be plenteuouse as flowyng; and 
the councel of hym dwellith as a welle of 


costis ; gaderid 


which is 15 togidere bi 


raueyn. Lire 
here. c. 


The kunnyng of a wijsis %./llis; itis 


seid hellis in 

plurel noumbre, 
for many places 
ben there. Lire 


~ ae here. c. 
lijf. The herte of a fool zs asa brokun 17 ** holde (Pech 


vessel; and it schal not holde ony wisdom. 


What euer wijs word a kunnynge mans 


herith, he schal preise, and leie tof{. A 
letcherouse man herde, and it schal dis- 
plese hym; and he schal caste it awei 


bihynde his bak. The tellynge of a fool ig 


ts as a birthun in the weie; for whi 


Qtohymezprim ‘ofa. 


8 the wynter E pr. m. 
x the «. 


& the eeris cva. bStobyl a sec. m. Stubbil 1. 


therof ; that is, 
schal holde 
stidefastly the 
stiring of re- 
soun in his 
werkis. wis- 
dom; bi which 
a man is wel 
disposid to God. 
and wit; bi 
which a man is 
wel disposid to 
his neiz3bore. 
Rahan poyntith 


tt and ley to; that is, halde 


XXI. 20-—-XXi1. 4. 


as berthen in the weie ; for in the lippes 
of the wel felende shal be founde grace. 
20The mouth of the prudent is’ so3te in 
the chirche; and the wrdis of hym thei 
21shul thenke in ther hertes. As an hous 
set out of termes, so a wisdam to a fool; 
and the kunnyng of the mys felende vn- 
22 tellable wrdis. Gyues in feet doctrine to 
a fool; and as bondis of hondis vpon the 
23ri3t hond. The fool in la3hing enhaunceth 
his vois; forsothe a wis man vnnethe 
24stilleli shal lajhen. A goldene ourne- 
ment doctrine to the prudent; and as an 
2sarmeercle in the rijt arm. The foot of 
the fool li3t in to the hous of the ne3he- 
bore; and a wis man shal be confoundid 
26of the persone of the my3ty. The fool 
fro the wyndowe biholdith in to the 
hous; the Jered man forsothe withoute 
27sha] stonde. The folie of a man to herk- 
nen thur3 the dores?; and the prudent 
28shal be greued with strif. The lippes of 
vnprudent men folies shul tellen*; the 
wrdis forsothe of prudent men in a ba- 
29 launce shu] ben peisid. In the mouth of 
foolis the herte of hem; and! in the herte 
300f wise men the mouth of hem. Whan 
the vnpitouse curseth the deuel, he curs- 
31 eth his owne soule. The rownende® gruc- 
chere shal defoule his soule, and in alle 
thingus he shal ben hatyd, and that 
abideth, shal ben hatid; the stille and 
the wel felende shal ben wrshipid. 


CAP. XOX. 


1 In a ele3y ston shal ben stoned the 
slowe ; and alle shuln speke of the grete 
2dispising of hym. Of the drit of oxen 
stoned is the slowe; and eche that 
toucheth hym, shal shaken out hondes. 
3The confusionn of the fader is of the 
vndisciplyned sone; forsotle a foo] do3tir 
4in gret mynushing shal be. A prudent 
do3tir eritage to hir husbonde*; for she 
that confoundith, in repref is mad of the 


yshal be c pr.m. E pr.m.  % dore AEGH. 


Cel E pr.m, 


‘liz3t fo gov. & Om.c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


a speke E pr. m. 


!an vnprudent man A pr.m. 
¥ 2 


163 


grace schal be foundun in the lippis of 
a wijs man. 
man is sou3t in the chirche; and men 
schulen thenke hise wordis in her hertis. 


As an hous distried, so zs wisdom to a21 


fool* ; and the kunnyng of an vnwijs man 
is wordis that moun not be teld out. 


_Stockis in the feet 2s techyng to a fool ; 22 


and as bondis of hondis on the ri3t hond. 


A fool enhaunsith his vois in lei3yng ; 23 


but a wijs man schal leize vnnethis stilli. 


The mouth of a prudent20 


* wisdom to u 


fool ; for if he 


hath ony know- 
ing of trnthe, 
he schal leese 
it, for vndu 
maner of sei- 
yng. teld out ; 
for he h ith 
forth tho bor 
that tho moun 


Techyng 7s a goldun ournement to a pru-24 not be vndur- 


dent man; and as an ournement of the 


arm in the rijt arm. The foot of a fool és 25 


li3ti in to* the hous of a neiz3bore; and a 
wijs man schal be aschamedt} of the per- 
soone of a mi3ti man. 
fro the wyndow in to the hous; but a 
lerned man schal stonde with out forth. 


A fool biholdith 26 


stondun. Lire 
here. c. 

+ @ wijs man 
schal be scham- 
ed; that is, 
schal be 
aschamed to 
speke bifor 
him, no bat 
nede ether 
opyn profit 
axith this. The 
herte af foolis ; 


It zs foli of a man to herkene bi the dore ; 27 for anoon thei 


and a prudent man schal be greuyd bi 


tellen out her 
conseit. éhe 
mouth of wise 


dispisyng. The lippis of ‘vnprudent men! 28 men, etc; for 


schulen telle fonned thingis; but the wordis 
of prudent men schulen be weied in a ba- 
launce. 
mouth; and the mouth of wise men is 


in her herte. Whanne a wickid man curs-30 


ith the deuel, he cursith his owne soule. 


they pro- 
nounsen no 
thing, no but 
bi good auyse- 


The herte of foolis zs in her 29 ment biforgo- 


ynge. cursith 
the deuel ; 
dampned iust- 
ly. cursith his 
soule ; for in 
his dedis he 


A priuy bacbitere schal defoule his soule, 31 sueth the deuel, 


and in alle thingis he schal be hatid, and 
he that dwellitht, schal be hatid; a stil 
man and wijs schal be onourid. 


CAP. XXII. 


A slow man is stonyd in a stoon of! 
cley; and alle men schulen speke on the 
dispisyng of him. A slow man is stonyd2 
of the dung of oxis; and ech man that 
touchith hym, schal schake the hondis. 
The schame of a™ fadir is of a sone vn-3 
lerned ; but a fonned dou3ter schal be in 
decreessyng}. A prudent dou3ter ¢s eritage 4 
to hir hosebonde; for sche that schendith 


hir hosebonde, is in dispisyng of the fadir. 


d man 


bOm. 4. © rownynge E. 


m Om, 1. 


and so he de- 
nounsith, that 
he owith to be 
dampned. Lire 
here. C. 

t dwellith ; 
with a priny 
bacbitere, and 
is defoulid bi 
his synne. 
stille man; in 
du tyme, and 
spekinge in co- 
uenable tyme. 
Lire here. c. 


§ in decreess- 
ing; of the 
onour of fadir 
and modir. 
Lire here. c. 


164 


sgetere. The fader and man she fool 
hardi confoundeth, and of the vnpitous 
man she shal not be lassid ; of either for- 
6sothe she shal® be vnwrshipid’. Melodie 
in weiling vukouenableé telling; scourges 
zand doctrine in alle tyme wisdam. Who 
techeth a fool, as that -glueth togidere a 
ssherd. He that telleth a wrd to the not 
herende, as that rereth a slepende man 
ofro an heuy slep. With the slepende! he 
speketh, that telleth to the fool wisdam ; 
and in the ende of the telling he shal 
iosey, Who is this? Ouer the deade weepe 
thou, forsothe the li3t of hym failede ; 
and ouer the fool weepe thou, forsothe 
ithe failede wit. A litil weep vp on the 
i2deade, for he restede. Forsothe of the 
most wicke! most wicke! lif, on the deth 
130f a fool. The weiling of the deade 
seuene dajes; of the fooll forsothe and 
of the vnpitous alle the dajes of the lif 
of hem. With a fool ne speke thou 
myche, and with a mys felende go thou 
isnot awey. Kep thee fro hym, that thou 
hane not greef; and thou shalt not ben 
igdefoulid in the synne of hym. Boowe 
awei fro hym, and thou shalt finde reste; 
and thou shalt not be maad sorewi™ slo3 
17in the folie of hym. Ouer leed what shal 
ben heuy ? and what othir name to hym 
isthan a fool? Liztere is to bern grauel, 
and salt, and a gobet of iren, than an 
inprudent” man, and a fool, and vnpitous. 
i9As ioynyng of tres, bounde togidere to 
the foundement of the bilding, shal° not 
ben vuloosid,so and the herte fastned to- 
20 gidere in the thenking of counseil. The 
thenking of the wel felende in alle tyme, 
210r drede, shal not be beshrewid. As chaf 
in he3e thingus, and morter withoute due 
cost, sett a3en the face of the wynd, shul 
g2not abide; so and the dredeful herte in 
the thenking of a fool a3en the bure of 
23 drede a3en stont? not. As grauely enourn- 


© shal not c pr. m. E prem. 
hslepi acu. i slepi a. 
shal c. P stondeth szcu. 


k Om. AEGH. 


m hoold womman, that is, schameles, c et ceteri. 
drede 4 sec. m2, 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


* wrshipid c pr. m. 
l wickede 4EGH. 


. couenable a pr. m.1s. 


XXII. 5—23. 


A ‘schameles womman™ schendith the fa-s 

dir and hosebonde, and schal not be maad 

lesse* than vnfeithful men; forsothe sche  * desse; that 
schal not be onourid of euer either. Melo-6 ae aoe 
die in morenyng zs vncouuenable® tellyng; Ret 
betyngis® and techyng in al tyme with 


lence. wis- 
5 dom ; that is, 
He that techith a fool, as he7 chastising, bi 


wisdom. 


: beting ether bi. 
.that glueth togidere a tiel stoon. He thats sword alti 


euere to be 
doon wisely 
and with du 


tellith a word to hym that herith not, zs 
as he that reisith a man slepynge fro a Ar ee ies. 
greuouse sleep. He that tellith wisdom9 mee a 
to a fool, spekith with a man slepynge; tc. that is, 
and in the ende of the tellyng he schal ea of 
seie, Who is this? Wepe thout on a deed 10 a ote 
man, for whi his li3t failide; and wepe urea 
thou on a fool, for he failide of wit. Wepe 11 failide. Lire 
thou a litil on a deed man, for he hath 3 the li ofa 
restid. Forsothe the lijf of a fult wickid 1240 Siena Lit 
man is ful wickid, more than the deth of ihe 

a fool. The morenyng of a deed man zs Boos 
seuene daies ; but the morenyng of a fool _ thedeth of bim 
and of a wickid man ?s alle the daies of hae 
her lijf. Speke thou not myche with a1470?i thet is 
fool, and go thou not with an vnwijs man. pieces ee 
Keep thee fro hym, that thou haue not 1550 it was in the 
disese; and thou schalt not be defoulid waters eat 
in the synne of hym. Boowe thou awei 16 om Ya fh 
fro hym, and thou schalt fynde reste; {seid not he 
and be thou not anoied by his foly. What 1 
schal be maad heuyere than leed? and bi defante of 
what othere name than a fool is to it? “oa,vh,he 
It is lijtere to bere grauel, and salt, and tg Chmalices eee 
a gobet of yrun, than a man vnprudent, 

and a fool, and vnfeithful. As an heep of 19 doith idolatrie. 


in liyk maner 
an vnfeithful 
alle"the dayes 


trees, boundun togidere in the foundement of her dif; 
aa durstond 

of the bilding, schal not be vnboundun, so thou, ben wor- 
00 . . thi to be bi- 
and an™ herte confermed in the thou3t of las i" 


counsel§. The thou3t of a wijs man shal we Cae 
5 6 of counceél 3 
not be maad schrewid In ony tyme, ne- that is, of good 
: ¥ coun and of 
ther drede?. As chaffis in hize places, 21 prudence, is 
and soond with out medling of hym, set Tisely oe geo : 
s . : *«  nesse. drede- 
ajens the face of wynd, schulen not dwelle; Jal bi wonly 
so and a dreedful herte in the thon3t of a22 = 
3 stondith out; 
fool a3enstondith not a3ens the feersnesse  yuel, but con- 
sentith anoon. 
Lire here. c. 
& nedeles c pr.m. E pr.m. vnkonable c sec. m. 
mOm.cpr.m. ™vnprudent acu. © that 


obetyng As. ther. Pin 


man is he, that ~ 


__ EEE 


XXII. 24——X XIII. 2. 


yng? in a bri3t wal, so and the trem- 
blende herte in the thenking of a fool, 
alle time he shal not dreden™; so and 
that in® the hestis of God abit' stille 
24 euermor. The prickende the e3e leteth out 
teres ; and that pricketh the herte, bring- 
25eth forth wit. Throwende a ston in to 
foules, ‘schal throwe® hem doun; so and 
that putteth reprof to a frend, looseth 
26frenshipe. To the frend and if thou 
bringe forth a swerd, thou shalt not dis- 
peiren ; ther is forsothe a3eengoyng to a 
27frend. If he shul opene a drery mouth, 
ne drede thou; ther is forsothe acord- 
ing, out take putting to of vice, and dis- 
pit, and pride, and openyng of priuyte, 
and treccherous veniaunce ; in alle these 
2ethingus shal flee awei a frend. Feith 
welde thou with a frend ‘in the’ pore- 
nesse of hym, that and in the goodis of 
29hym thou glade. In tyme of tribula- 
cioun of hym abid stille to hym feithful, 
that and in the eritage of hym thou be 
30 togidere eir. Biforn fir of the chymnee, 
moiste issue, and the smoke of fyr, is 
enhauncid ; so and befor blod cursis, and 
31 wrongis, and thretes. A frend to saluten 
J shal not be confoundid, and fro the 
face of hym I shal not hiden me; and 
if eueles schulen” comen to me bi hym, 
32] shal suffre. “Eche that shal heren, shal 
33shonen hymself fro hym. Who shal 3yue 
to my mouth warde, and vpon* my lippis 
aY certeyn marke, that I falle not fro 
them, and my tunge leese me? 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 Lord, fader, and lordshipere of my lif, 
ne forsake thou me in the thenking and 
the counseil of them ; and suffre thou me 

2not to fallen in that reprouyng. Who 
puttith vp on in my’ thenking scourgis, 
and in myn herte doctrine of wisdam, 
that to the vnknowyngus of them he 
spare not to me, and apere not the giltis 


4 enuyrownynge 4. 
~Om.c pr.m. * to 4GH. 


rrepen E pr.m. 
y Om. a. 


q4Om.c. ‘sendith1. §& brynge 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


s Om. c. 
2 the £ pr.m. 


t Vapour, ether heete, c et ceteri. 


165 
of drede. As ournyng, ether pargetyng, 2 


ful of grauel in a cleer wal*, so and a ° Bog hc 4 
i that is, of har 

ferdful herte in the thou3t of a fool schal _ stonys,and 
maad smethe. 


not drede in ony tyme; so and‘ he that — scial not drede; 
dwellith euere in the heestis of God}. He 24!i Gods 
that prickith the ize, schal leede out teeris; pee. f 
and he that prickith the herte, bryngith God; vndur- 
forth wit. He that castitht a stoon toosagdlah ore 
briddis, schal caste doun tho; so and he jithe lueand 
that doith wrong to a frend, departith “7. ¢ 
frenschipe. Thou3 thou bryngist® forth a2 

swerd to a frend, dispeiret thou not; for + dispeire, ete.s 


ther is going a3en to the frend. If he 27 of Resear 


openeth a soreuful mouth, drede thou not; {ipiing: that 
. . . . “? . 
for whi ther is acordyng, outakun dispis- 0 him grev- 
Y * ouse cr yme, 38 
ynge, and schenschipe, and pride, and thatheisa 
theef. schen- 


schewyng of preuyte, and a tretcherouse  schipe; that is, 
wounde; in alle these thingis a frend schal fp.Pyte on him 
fle awei. Haue thou feith with a frend ae an 
in his pouert, that thou be glad also in he’s boonde 
hise goodis. In the tyme of his tribula-29 cherouse 
cioun dwelle thou feithful to hym, that {7m et, 
also thou be euene eir in the eritage of jour Hire 
hym. MHeetet and smook of fier 7s maad 30 

hi3 bifore the fier of a" chymenei; so and 

cursyngis, and dispisyngis, and manaassis, 

comen bifore blood. I schal not bes: 

aschamed for to grete a frend, and Y 

schal not hide me fro his face; thou3 

yuels comen to me bi hym, Y schal suffre. 

Ech man that schal here, schal kepe warli§ 32 § kepe warly; 
hym silf fro hy. Who schal 3yue keping 33 offence af 

to my mouth, and a certeyn ceelyng on jen”? 
my lippis, that Y falle not bi tho, and 

that my tunge leese not me ? 


CAP. XXIII. 


Lord, fadir, and lordli gouernour of my 

lijf, forsake thon me not in the thou3t and 

counsel of hem||; nether suffre thou me to Hey, 
falle in that schenschipe. Who settith2 of foolis and’ 
aboue in my thou3t beetyngis, and in myn eithil 
hert the techyng of wisdom, that in the 
vnkunnyngis of hem he spare not me, and 

that the trespassis of hem appere not ? 


tabideth arcu. throwith c prem. ¥ and in a. 


uthe F. Om. eeéeri. 


166 


3o0f them? Lest waxen to myne vnkun- 
nyngnesses, and ben multeplied iny giltis, 
and my synnes abunden ; and I falle in 
the sijte off myn aduersaries, and myn 
4enemy io3e. Lord, fader, and God of my 
lif, ne forsake thou me in the thenking 
sof hem. The enhauncyng of myn e3en 
ne 3yue thou to me; and al desyr turne 
gawei frome. Do awei fro me lustis of 
the wombe, and the liggyngus of lust ne 
take thei me; and to vnreuerent inwit 
z7and vndiscreet ne take thou me. The 
doctrine of the mouth here 3ee, sonis ; 
and that shal kepen it, shal not pershen 
in his lippis, ne shal be sclaundrid in 
‘the werste* werkes. In his vanyte is 
ca3t the synnere and the proude man”; 
and the cursid shal be sclaundred in 
ghem. To swering vse not thi mouth; 
iomanye forsothe fallingus in® it. The 
nemnyng forsothe of God be not con- 
tynuel in thi mouth, and to the names of 
seyntus be thou not nengd; for thou shalt 
11not ben harmles of hem. As forsothe a 
seruaunt askid bisily, fro wannesse, ‘or 
enuye’, is not mynusht ; so eche swerere 
and nemnyng, in al fro syne shal not be 
12purgid. A man myche swerende shal be 
fulfild with wickidnesse® ; and ther shal 
not gon awei fro the hous of hym ven- 
iiaunce. And if he shul bigile the bro- 
ther, the gilte of hym vpon hym shal be ; 
and if he shul feyne, he shal trespasen 
i4double. And if in veyn he shul swern, 
he shal not be iustefied; forsothe with 
werst 3elding shal be fulfild the hous of 
ishym. Ther is and an other speche 
a3eenward in to deth; ‘be it not founde 
léin the eritage of Jacob. Forsothe of 
mercyful men alle these thingus shul be 
don awey; and in giltis thei shul not 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


SME acgsas. 


Lest myn vnkunnyngis encreesse, and my 3 none ese 
e * Oo meé ennauns- 
trespassis be multiplied, and my synnes be _ inge, etc.; that 
d lest Y falle in th fot is, suffre thou 
plenteuouse ; and les alle in the sizt not chat pride 
i be lord ouer 
of myn aduersaries, and myn enemy haue yrs 
ioie. Lord, fadir, and God of my lijf, for-4 that is, of glo- 
° tenye. 3yue 
sake thou not me in the thou3t of hem. sou noi, ete.s 
* that is, suffre 
3yue thou not to me enhaunsyng* of 5 thou not my 
myn izen; and turne thou awei fro me al sould Lo eae 
schrewid desijr. Do thou awei fro mee and into 


es vnwisdom. 
the coueitisis’ of the” wombe, and the Lire here. c. 
Bvt t proude man 
coueitisis of letcherie take me not; and  schal te takun; 
of the deuel, 


3yue thou not ‘me to* a soule vnreuerent 
and vndiscreetY. Sones, here 3e the tech-7 
yng of mouth; and he that kepith it, schal 

not perische bi hise lippis, nether schal be te oe 
sclaundrid in worste werkis A synneres notghag of Gade 
and proude man schal be takunt in his yee oyee 


that settith to 
him a snare. 
sclaundrid in 
tho ; that is, 
schal falle in 


bi him, nethe- 
vanite; and a cursid man schal be sclaun- [2s ‘towith to 
drid in tho. Thy mouth be not custom-9 meuth, to pote 
: R " and preche. 
able to swering ; for whi many fallyngis names of 


lis; i 
ben ther ynne. Forsothe the nemyng of lOrgeveriiigigett 
. : bi hem. yiléles 
God be not customable in thi mouth, of hem ; that 
and be thou not meddlid to the names of 1 ene 
° AL 
seyntis ; for thou schalt not be giltles of  Jisili; that is, 
9 6 8640 constreyned bi 
hem. For as a seruaunt that is axid bisili, 1 teat Sel 
i telle. wannesse; 
schal not wante wannesse; so ech man of ayn, for the 
beting of his 
swerynge } and nemynge schal not be tied 
purgid of synne in al. A man swerynge 12 inges bi God. 
5 : RA and nemynge ; 
myche schal be fillid with wickidnesse ; that is, swer- 
é ° c inge bi th 
and veniaunce schal not go awei fro his Ba oa 
aq a + 72 Seyntis, and 
hous. And? if he disseyueth a brother, 13 3° c?om. 
his trespas schal be aboue hym; and if sly. Lire 
ere. C. 
he feyneth, he schal trespasse doubli. And 14 3 ech man 
« , . r sweringe, ete.; 
if he swerith in veyn, he schal not be ius- for bi Sch yuel 
q 4 . . p custom he fall- 
tified; for whi his hous schal be fillid iit into enleue- 
with worst 3elding. Also ajenward an- 1S ami 
other speche is in to deth; be it not found — is, harmith him 
2 4 ; bi a fals ooth. 
in the eritage of Jacob. For whi alle 16 aboue him; for 
ees : he is hold 
these thingis schulen be don awei fro to restore, and 
merciful men ; and thei schulen not delite pep 
in trespassis. Thi mouth be not custom- 17 bert if itis 
preued a3enus 
him. feyneth ; 


in holdinge stille the truthe, for whos deelaring he is brou3t forth a witnesse, and swerith that he knowith not. doudli; that is, az3enus himsilf, in 
eaatEe ats and ae the neizhore in harmynge him, in conscience that holdith another mannus thing, and another man in the purs. his hous ; 
oe een thee ee en punyschid bi temporal peynies, for fadris and modris, and most whanne thei suen the fadris synne; as it is doon ofte in 

. sone that herith ofte his fadir sweringe in veyn, takith bi this a liyk maner. another speches contrarie to the formere; this speche is 
blasfemye, that disserueth deth, as God seith in xxiitj. c°. of Leuitici. Lire here. c. 


4 wickedest 4EGH, 


>’ Om. ¢ prem. 
f but acu. £ 


¥ coueityse s. W Om. ceferi. * to mes. 


¢ ben in «. 


Y vnsaueri, ether undisereet, c et ceteri. 


4 Om. c et £ prem. e wickenesse E. 


aOm. A pr. m. 1. 


XXIIL. 17—32. 


170ften turnes. To the vndisciplynous 
speche vse not thi mouth ; forsothe ther 
isis in it the wrd of synne. ° Haue mynde 
of fader and thi moder; in the myddel 
19forsothe of grete men thou stondist. Lest 
parauenture God for3ete thee in the si3te 
of hem; and thur3 thi bisynesse gretli 
maad foul, repref thou suffre', and had- 
dest leuere not to be born, and the dai of 
20thi birthe thou curse. A man vsid in 
wrdys of repref, in alle his dajes shal not 
2i be lered'. Two kindis abundyn in synnes, 
and the thridde bringeth to wrathe and 
22perdicioun. A fel soule as fyr brennende 
shal not be quenchid, to the tyme sum 
23 what he swolewe; and a shreude man in 
the mouthe of his flesh shal not leuen, to 
24the time he teende fyr. To a leccherous 
man eche bred sweete; he shal not be 
zs weri, trespasende vnto the ende. Eche 
man that ouergoth his bed, dispisende in 
to his soule, and seiende, Who seeth me ? 
26 Dercnesses cumpassen me, and the walles 
coueren me aboute, and no man aboute 
biholdeth me. Whom drede I? Of my 
giltis the heizest shal not han mynde. 
27 And* he vndirstont! not, for alle thingus 
the e3e of hym seeth, for he putte awei 
fro hym the drede of God; of such a 
maner man is drede, and the e3en of men 
2adredende hym. And he kne3 not, for 
the e3en of the Lord ben myche more 
liztere ouer the sunne, biholdende aboute 
alle the weies of men, and the depthe of 
the se, and the hertes of men biholdende 
29in to the hidde partis. To the Lord God 
forsothe, er thei weren™ foormed, alle 
thingis ben knowen; so and aftir the 
30 parformed he biholdith alle thingus. This 
in the stretes of the cite shal be vengid ; 
as an horse colt he shal be dryue, and 
31 wher he hopeth not, he shal be ca3t. And 
he shal ben vileny to alle; forthi that he 
32 vnderstod not the drede of the Lord. So 
and eche womman forsakende hir man’, 


& turne them £ pr.m. aGH. h suffrist «. 
m ben c pr.m.E pr.m. ® husbonde aEGH see. m. 


b schenschipe, ether scornyng, c et cetert preter Y. 
God, v. & and thei 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Vlerned szGu. 


4 tho CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXYa. 


167 


able to vnreuerent speche ; for whi a word _ 
of synne is in it. Haue thou mynde onis 
thi fadir and modir ; for thou stondist in 
the myddis of grete men. Lest perauen-1i9 
ture God for3ete thee in the si3t of hem; 
and lest thou maad a fool bi thi custom- 


ablenesse, suffre schenschipe”, and haddist 
leuere to be not borun, and curse the dai 
of thi birthe. A man customable in the‘20 

wordis of schenschipe, in alle daies schal? 6 purgy pyndis; 
not be tau3t. Twei kyndis* ben plenten-21 oy ee 
ouse in synnes, and the thridde bringith  tenye. and the 
ire and perdicioun. An hoot soule bren-22 iy, auostrie, : 
nynge as fier schal not be quenchid, til it ie Pe omctly 
swolewe sum thing; and a wickid man in 24 ee 
the mouth of his fleisch schal not faile, ti] belle. dren- 
he kyndle fier. Ech breed zs swete to a24 Ge ie 
letcherouse man; he schal not be maad nha 
weri, trespassynge ‘til to® the ende. Echos nie 
man that passith his bed}, doith dispit  s0otis of othere 
ajens his soule, and seith, Who seeth me? = a2; that is, 
Derknessis cumpassen me, and wallis onan Coes) 
kyueren me, and no man biholdith me. nue ee esa 
Whom drede Y? The hijeste schal not er ee 
haue mynde on my synnes. And he vie e7 ae tne 
dirstondith not, that the ize of him‘ seeth aad weri, ete; 
alle thingis; for whi the drede of siche a nee 


not ceesse to 


man puttith awei fro him the drede of ik eee 
God, and the izen of men that dreden Pedi! mow 
hym putien awei fro hym Goddis drede.  ende; of his 


liyf. Lire here. 


And he knew not, that the izen of theesc. 
Lord ben myche more clerere than the fi jain” 


his bed ; bi 
sunne, and biholden alle the weies of men, aa 


aman; that is, 


and the depthe of the see, and® biholden Coa 
the hertis of men in to hid partis. For 29 which he dred- 
whi alle thingis weren knowun to the THe ent ie 
Lord, bifore that thei® weren maad of BOY" 
nou3t; so and aftir the makyng he bi- pen‘ 
holdith alle thingis. This man schal be 30 *»outrie, and 
seruen him 


punyschid in the stretis of the citee; he — therynne, for 
5 drede of his 
schal be drynun awei as an horse colt, offence, and 


preisen him. 
and he schal be takun, where he hopith ra iisschen 


not. And he schal be schenschip to alles; him in hise 
ynels, putten 

men; for he vndurstood not the drede of avey bie 
yoddis arede. 

the Lord. So and ech womman forsak- 32 Lire here. c. 


k Om. a. 1 ynderstondeth aren. 


cOm.1. dheshals. eynte1 fhim, that is, of 


168 


shal synnen, and settende eritage of an 
33aliene matrimoyne. First in the lawe of 
the he3est she was vnleeneful®, and the 
secunde hir man? she forsok; the thridde 
in auoutrie she dide leccherie, and of an 
34 othir man sonus she sette to hirself. This 
in to the chirche shal be bro3t, and in to 
3sthe sonus of hir shall ben lookid. The 
sonus of hir shul not taken rootis, and 
the braunches of hir shul not 3yuen 
ssfruyt. Thei shul leuen’ in to curs the 
mynde of hir, and the vilenye of hir shal 
37not be dou awei. And thei shul knowe, 
for thei ben forsaken; for no thing be- 
tere than the dred of God, and no thing 
swetere than to biholden in the maunde- 
3smens of the Lord. Gret glorie is™ to fo- 
lewe the Lord; lengthe forsothe of da3es 
shal ben taken to of hym. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Wisdam shal preisen his soule, and in 
the Lord he shal ben wrshepid; and in 
the myddel of his* puple he shal glorien. 

2 And in the chirches of the he3est he shal 
opene his mouth; and in the si3te of the 

‘svertue of hym he shal glorien. And in 
the myddel of his puple he shal ben 
enhauncid ; and in hoeli' plente he shal 

4myche wndren". And in the multitude 
of chosen men he shal han preising ; and 
among blissid men he shal ben blessid, 

sseiende, I of the mouth of the he3est 
cam forth, first goten biforn eche crea- 
eture. I made in heuenus, that vnfailende 
liz3t shulde spriuge, and as a litil cloude 

7I coueryd’ eche flesh. I in the he3est 
thingus dwellede, and my trone in a piler 
sof a cloude. The cercle of heuene I cum- 
passide alone, and the depthe of the se 
I thirlede; and in the flodis of the se I 

13 wente, and in al erthe I stod. And in 
alle puple, and in alle fole of kinde the 

Ul firsthed: I hadde; and of alle he3e and 


© vnbeleeful eG sec. m. 


rOm. 4. Sthea. tthe hooli a. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXIII. 33—-XXIV. 11, 


ynge hir hosebonde schal do synne, and 
ordeynynge eritage* of an alien matri- 
monye. 
in the lawe of the hijeste, and the se- 
counde tyme sche forsook hir hosebonde ; 
and the thridde tyme sche was defoulid 
in auowtrie, and ordeynede to hym sones 


* eritage; that 
is, eir of hir 


For firste sche was vnbileueful 33 hosebonde. 


matrymonye; 
whanne hir 
auouter was 
weddid. to him; 
that is, to hir 
hosebonde. 
rootis; for thei 
schulen not be 


of another man. ‘This womman' schal be 34 stabtischid in 


brou3t in to the chirche, and me schal bi- 
holde on hir sones. 
3yue rootis, and hir braunchis schulen not 


Hir sones schulen not 35 


the eritage of 
the hosebonde. 
sue the Lord; 
bi the weye of 
riztfulnesse. 
lengthe of 


3yue fruyt. Thei schulen leeue the mynde36 dayes ; that 


of hir in to cursyng, and the schenschipe 
of hir schal not be don awei. 
that ben left schulen knowe, that no thing 
zs betere than the drede of God, and no- 
thing zs swettere than to biliolde in the 
comaundementis of the Lord. 
glorie to sue the Lord; for whi lengthe 
of daies schulen be takun of hym. 


CAP. XXIV. 


Wisdom schal preiseft his soule, and hei 
schal be onourid in God; and he schal 
haue glorie in the myddis of his puple. 
And he schal opene his mouth in thee 
chirchis of the hijeste ; and he schal haue 
glorie in the si3t of his vertu. And hes 
schal be enhaunsid in the myddis of his 
puple; and he schal wondre in hooli plentee*. 
And in the multitude of chosun men he4 
schal haue preisyng; and among blessid 
men he schal be blessid, and seie, I, thes 
firste gendrid bifore ech creature, cam forth 
fro the mouth of the hizeste. I made ine 
heuenes, that li3t neuere failynge roos vp, 
and as a cloude Y hilide al erthe. Y dwell-7 
ide in hizeste thingis, and my trone in a 


piler of cloude. Y aloone 3ede aboute thes 


cumpas of henene, and Y perside the 
depthe of the see; and Y 3ede in the wawis 


It is greet 38 


is, euerlastinge 
liyf. Lire here. 


And thei37“ 


t Wisdom schal 
preise, ete; 
that is, God 
the Sone schal 
preise him silf. 
onourid in 
God ; the Fa- 
dir. haue glorie 
in the si3t of 
his vertus that 
is, in merueil- 
ouse werkis, 
doon bithe vertu 
of the higeste. 
¥ the firste 
gendrid ; that 
is seid in the 
persoone of 
God the Sone. 
of the mouth 
of the hizeste; 
that is, of the 
vertu of gen- 
dring of God 
the Fadir. 
Lire here. c. 


P husbonde 4 sec. m. ent. or hosebonde c sec. m. marg. 
u ben wundred xz pr. m. 


of the see, and Y stood in al the lond.9 
And Y hadde the firste dignite in! ech pu-10 
ple, and in ech folk; and Y trad bi vertui 
on the neckis of alle excelent men and 


4 forsaken E pr. m. 
Vv made c pr.m. E pr.m. 


i Sche this 1. fulnesse, ether plentee, © et celeri preter x. \of c. 


XXIV. 12—27. 


lowe the hertes bi vertue J trad; and in 
alle these thingus reste I so3te, and in 
12the eritage of hym¥ I shal wone. Thanne 
comaundide, and seide to me, the foorm- 
ere of alle thingus ; and he that foormede 
i3me, restede in my tabernacle; and seide 
to me, In Jacob dwelle thou, and in Irael 
eritage thou, and in my chosene put 
u4rootes. Fro the bigynnyng and bifor 
worldis* I am foormed, and vnto the 
world to come J shal not cesen to ben; 
and in hoeli wonyng beforn hym I 
issernede. And so in Sion I am fastned, 
and in an halewid cite lic maner I rest- 
igede, and in Jerusalem my power. And 
I rootedeY in a puple wrshipid; and in 
to the parties of my God the eritage of 
hym, and in plente of halewes my with- 
i7holding. As a cedre I am enhauncid in 
Liban, and as a” cipresse in the hil of 
18Sion. And as a palm I am enhauncid in 
Cades, and as the plaunting of a? rose in 
19 Jericho. As a fair olyue in feeldis; and 
as a platan® Iam enhauncid biside the 
20 water in stretes. As canel and balsam 
smellende, I 3af smel; and as chose 
zimyrre J 3af swotnesse of smel. And as 
torax, and galban, and vngula, and gut- 
ta, and as Liban not kut, I smekede* my 
dwelling; and as balsame not mengd is? 
2zmy sinel. I as terebynt strei3te out my 
braunchis; and my braunchis of wrshipe, 
23and of grace. I as a vyne frutede swot- 
nesse of smel; and my floures frutes of 
2ahonour, and of honeste. I modir of fair 
loouyng, and of drede, and of knowing, 
2sand of hoeli hope. In me alle grace of 
weie, and of treuthe; in me alle hope of 
26lif and® of vertue. Passeth to me, alle 
that coueiten me; and of my ienera- 
27ciouns ‘be 3ee' fulfild. My spirit for- 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


169 


meke; and in alle these men Y sou3te  * of the bigyn- 


reste, and Y schal dwelle in the eritage [207 ve 
of the Lord. Thanne the creatour of alle 12° tyme may 


% 5 not be vndur- 
comaundide, and seide to me; and he that __ stondun herbi, 


: . but the bigyn- 
formyde me, restide in my tabernacle; nyng tee 
and he seide to me, Dwelle thou in Jacob, 13 “13h e 4” 

: ° bigynnyng of 
and take thou eritage in Israel, and sende eens (oR 
thon rootis in my chosun men. Y was 15 of eer in 

2 i e Trynyte. 
gendrid of ™ the bigynnyng* and bifore nd ifor 
5 a F worldis ; that 
worldis, and Y schal not faile ‘til to" the — is, enerlasting- 
: . . ly, without bi- 
world to® comynge ; and Y mynystride in gyanyng of 


15 tyme. not faile 
And 80 V3 ey he wtd 


an hooli dwellyng bifore hym. 


was maad stidfast in Syont, and in lijk ae cae 

* e e 5 at 18 scha. 

maner Y restide in a citee halewid, and  dwelle perfitly 
with outen 


my power was in Jerusalem. And Y rootid '6 onde. mynys- 
j sd- C tride; that is 
ina puple onourid; and the eritage therof 773 5 a 
in to the partis of my God, and my with- ala |e 
. e . Te 
oldingt in the plentee? of seyntis. Y was 17 good prestis. 
° . 2 Lire here. c. 
enhaunsid as a cedre in Liban, and as a + ¥ was maad 
« ° ° tide, i 
cipresse tree in the hil of Syon. Y was 18 Sion this 
enhaunsid as a palm tree in Cades, and as__ ‘tidefastnesse 
‘ seith not ony 
the plauntyng of roose in Jeryco. As a 19 chaunging in 
x i; od, but in a 
fair olyue tree in feeldis; and Y was en- crenture wher- 
. o eae oir ne Goddis 
haunsid as a plane tree bisidis watir in jis ben stab- 
stretis, As canel and bawme 3yuynge greet 20 
smelle, Y 3af odour; as chosun myrre Y _ tis wisdom is 
- seid maad stide- 
jaf the swetnesse of odour. And as storax, 21 fast in the hil 


lischid stide- 
fastliere. God- 
of Sion, for the 


and galban, and vngula§, and gumme, and __ temple was 
‘ ; ildid there, i 
as Liban not kit doun, Y made hoot my Say tence. 


: the arke and 
dwellyng place; and myn odour as bawme srupletetariG, 


not meddlid. Y as a terebynte stretchide 22 which repre- 
sentide the 


forth my boowis; and my boowis ben _ seete of God, 
pace “ hadden stable 
boowis' of onour, and of glorie. Y %23 dwelling, and 


weren no more 


as a vyne made fruyt the swetnesse of  jorin aboute 


odour; and my flouris ben the fruytis of  ‘° Place to 
ds place. Y root- 
onour, and of oneste. J am a modir of 24 ide; that is, 
stablischide 


fair loue, and of drede, and of knowyng, _ stidefastliere 
my 3iftis. in 


and of hooli hope. In me és al grace of 25% juple onour- 

i : j ; id; that is, in 
weie, and of trenthe; in me ¢s al hope of | ih3 jupte of 
lijf and of vertu. 


Alle 3e that coueiten 26 Israel, that was 
aa enourid of God 
me, passet to me; and be 3e fillid of my — more than 
othere puplis. 


eritage therof ; 


that is, of the puple onourid. in to the partis of my God ; that is, at the Fadir, which is my God, in as myche as Y am man; ether the Fadir is seid 
God of the Sone, for the Sone is seid God of God. in to the partis of my God; that is, of the Fadir, which is God, of whom Y am; nethelesse Y am 


the same God with him in being, and am departid onely in persoone. Lire here. c. 


in the congregacioun of seyntis. Lire here. c. 


w the Lord c pr.m. E pr.m. 


+ plaunt 4. © putte out E prom. 4 Om. c pr.m, 


m fro N sec. m. a. °Om. 1. 


t passeth 1. 
VOL. III. 


0 ynto i. 


X the woorldis 4. 
€ Om. c pr. m. 


P fulnesse CEGHIV. 


y hadde roote arcu. z Om. 4. a Om. AGH. 
f 3e shulen ben az pr. m. Gil. 


aAndasi "Om. $8 And Ya. 


Z 


+ my withholding, etc.; that is, my dwelling bi grace is - ,; 
§ ungula; that is, a tre of greet odour, and is liyk a mannus nayl. Lire here. cv. 


170 


sothe ouer. hony sweete; and myn eri- 
estage ouer hony, and hony comb. My 
mynde in the ieneracioun of worldis. 
209 Theif that eten me, 3it shul hungrin; 
and that drinken me, 3it shuln thristen. 
30 Who hereth me, shal not be confoundid ; 
and who werchen in me, shul not synnen; 
31and who declaren me, euere lastende lif 
szshuln han. Alle these thingus the boc 
of lif, and the testament of the he3est, 
33and the knouleching of treuthe. Moises 
comaundide the lawe in the hestus of 
ri3twisnesses, and the eritage ‘to the hous 
340f& Jacob, and the behestus to" Irael. He 
sette to Dauid, his child, to reren vp a 
king of hym most strong, and in the 
trone of wrshipe sittende in to euer mor. 
35 The which fulfillith, as Fison, wisdam ; 
and as Tigris. in the da3es of newes. 
36 That fulfilleth, as Eufrates, wit; that 
multeplieth, as Jordan in the tyme of 
37rip. That sendeth disciplyne as li3t ; and 
stondynge to, as Jyon in the dai of vyn- 
3sdage. That parformeth first to knowen 
it; and the feblere shal not enserchen it. 
39Fro the se forsothe shal abunde the 
thenking of hym; and the counseil of 
4ohym in the grete depnesse. I wisdam 
4iheelde out floodis; I as an ouerthwert 
weie of watir with oute mesure fro the 
flood. I as the flood Dorex, and as watir 
42kundute wente out fro paradis. I seide, 
I shal watrin the gardyn of my plaunt- 
ingus ; and J shal make drunke’ the frut 
430f my birthe. And lo‘! he is mad to 
me a plenteuous path; and my flood 
44ne3hede to the se. For doctrine as moru- 
tid 1i3t I 1iz3te to alle; and I shal tellen 
45out it vnto aferr. I shal persen alle the 
nethere partis of the erthe, and I shal 
biholde alle slepende; and I shal lijtnen 
46alle hopende in the Lord. 3it doctrine 
as profecie I shal heelden out, and I shal 
leuen it to men sechende wisdain; and 
I shal not cesen in to the progenyes of 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXIV. 28— 46. 


generaciouns. For whi my spirit zs swete 27 
abone hony; and myn eritage zs abone 
hony, and hony comb. My mynde ts ings 
the generacioun of worldis. Thei that29 
eten me, schulen hungre 3it; and thei that 
drynken me, schulen thirste 3it. He thats3o 
herith me, shal not be schent; and thei 
that worchen in me, schulen not do synne; 
and thei that declaren" me, schulen haue31 
enere lastynge lijf. Alle these thingis 2s 32 
the book of lijf, and the testament of the 
hizeste, and the knowyng of treuthe. 
Moises comaundide a lawe in the co-33 
maundementis of ri3tfulnessis, and eritage 
to the hous of Jacob, and biheestis to Is- 


* He settide to 
Dauyth ; that 
is, ordeynede, 


. + 4% ° ° ether bihi3zte. 
rael. He settide to Dauid*, his child, to34 ign healt 
i n Crist, that cam 
reise of hym a kyng moost strong, and Cot, Coa 
sittynge with outen ende in the trone of Dauyth vpe 
: ‘ A _ fleisch, bi the 
onour. Which kyng fillith wisdom, as 35 virgyn Marie. 


in the daies of newe thingis. Which, as 36 Het oe 

EKufrates, fillith wit; which multiplieth, as o 
2 more plen 

Which 37 ouse ian the 

sendith techyng as li3t; and is ni3 alle  councet; is vne 
men, as Gion in the dai of vendage. Which 3g omPrehensi- 
makith perfitli first to knowe that wisdom; ea 
and a feblere man schal not enserche it. ‘ 

rennyng. Lire 

tenouse of the see; and his counsel in the ee Semis 
‘ A ‘ood and 

floodis; Y as a weie{ of ful greet watir 41 al swetnesse. 


Phison schedith out watir; and as Tigris ¥ ihe house 
knowing is 
Jordan in the tyme of heruest. 
see. and his 
ble. Lire here. 
that is, a stroog 
For whi the thou3t theroft schal be plen-39 kere. cv. 
greet occian. Y wisdom schedde out 40 Fadir, in whom 
watere my gare 


of the flood. Y as the flood Dorix, and as dyn; that is, 
a watir cundit Y 3ede out of paradis(. Y 42 ie ae 
seide, I schal watir my gardyn of plaunt- ¢iithe. the 


yngis; and Y schal greetli fille the fruyt tga 


of my child beryng. And lo! a plenteu-43 cumpenye of 


A eae apostlis, and of 
ouse weie of watir is maad to me; and my  Gthere men bi- 
: . leuynge, that 
flood neizede to the see. For Y li3tne44 resseyueden the 
techyng as the cheer morewtid to alle _ zftis ofthe 
Hooly Goost 


men; and Y schal telle out it ‘til toW fer. _ plenteously in 
the day of Pen- 


Y schal perse alle the lowere partis of 45 tecost. Lire 
erthe, and Y schal hbiholde alle that hes 


slepen ; and Y schal li3tne alle that hopen ie ee 
in the Lord. 3it Y schal schede out tech- 46 teching, as pro- 
i , F fesie schewid of 
ing as profesie||, and Y schal leeue it to God. Y schat 


£Om.c¢ pr.m. & of the Lord of z pr.m. bof xz pr.m. idrunke, or fulfille acu. * Om. 4c pr. m. nH. 


4 declaren, ether shewen, K marg. 


w ynto 1. 


XXIV. 47—XXV. 17. 


them, vnto the hoeli! spirituel world. 
47Seeth, for not to me alone I trauailede, 
but to alle sechende out the treuthe. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Jn thre thingus plesid is to my spirit, 
that ben proued bifor God and man; 
2the acord™ of brethern, and the looue of 
ne3hebores, and man and womman wel 
3to themself consentende. Thre spices 
hatede my soule, and I am greued gretli 
4to the soule of them ; a pore man proud, 
and a riche man a® liere, and an old 
5man a° fool and dotid. What thingis? in 
thi 3outhe thou hast not gedered, hou 
éshalt thou finde in thin eelde? How fair 
the dom in’ hoornesse, and to prestis to 
7knowe kounseil. How fair to olde men 
wisdam, and glorious vnderstonding, and 
scounseil. The coroun of olde men myche 
wisdam; and the glorie of them dred of 
9God. Nyne vnouertrowable’ thingus of 
the herte I magnefiede ; and the tenthe 
iol shal telle in tunge to men. A man 
that is io3id in sones lyuende, and seende 
the turnyng vpsodoun of his enemys. 
11 Blisful that dwellith with a womman 
weel felende, and that in his tunge is 
not slyden, and that seruede not to the 
izvnwrthi hymself. Blisful that findith a 
yerre frend, and that telleth out rij3twis- 
ignesse to the herende ere. Hou gret that 
findith wisdam and kunnyng; but not 
1souer the dredende God. The drede of 
God ouer alle thingus hymself sett aboue. 
is Blisful the man to whom it is 3oue to 
han the drede of God; who holdith it, 
16to whom shal he be licned ? The dred of 
God the bigynnyng of his looue ; the by- 
gynnyng forsothe of feith is to be ioyned 
i7to hym. Alle veniaunce is the drery 
slowthe of herte; and eche malice the 


Lhool 4. ™cord secu. 2 Om. a. © Om. c. 


Xand at. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


171 


hem that seken wisdom; and Y schal not ‘eve it to hem; 
faile in to the generaciouns of hem, til in ~ no fujle, to 


to the hooli world. Se 3e, that Y trauelide 47 “he he™ » 


writing. hooli 

not to me aloone, but to alle that seken 7/4; that is, 
to comyng in 

out treuthe. blis. Lirehere.c. 


* to the soule 
of hem; that is, 
malice of hem. 
eld man; that 


CAP. XXV. 
SE ae May aye 5 sss is, vnkunnynge 
In thre thingis it 18 plesid to my spirit,1 [Vor dedure 
which ben appreued bifore God and men ; ee ae 
: K ; PB ‘or he dispiside 
acordyng of britheren, and loue of nei3-2 tolerne. Lire 
5 1 ere. C. 
boris, a man and womman wel consent- t Doom is ful 
: * ° air; that is, 
ynge to hem silf. My soule hatide thres doom of discre- 
spicis, and Y am greued greetli to the cium is ful fair 
in an hoor 
soule of hem*; a pore man proud, and a4 heed, ae eld 
* . man. and to 
riche man liere, and an eld man a fool and __ prestis; that 
me . f k 
vnwitti. Hou schalt thou fynde in thins ppt ig 
Sie 8 . G God. to knowe 
eelde tho thingis, whiche thou gaderist councel ; that 
not in thi 3ongthe ? Doom ¢s ful fair} ing ‘is % haue good 
S councel ani 
hoornesse, and to preestis to knowe coun-_ certeyn. ensus- 
4 ‘ . , ct of herte; 
cel. Wisdom zs ful fair to eelde men, and7 Te y of 
: : oodnesse, of 
gloriouse vndirstondyng, and councel. Thes Baidh aningts 
° IS 1 . - noon owith for 
coroun of eelde men @s in myche kunnyng; po) oe 
and the glorie of hem zs the drede of God. worthi; that 
. ° 1s, Co synneris 
I magnefiede nyne thingis vnsuspect of the 9 ire eee ae 
: . - tohemi 1. 
herte; and Y schal seie the tenthe thing bi ae ee 
‘ . a techere. to 
tunge to men. A man which lyuynge isi0¢ ry, 
7e1n| sty] inge; that is, to 
myrie in'sones, and seynge the distriyng: Cl es ieee 
hise enemyes. He ts blessid that dwellith 11 in herte, and 


i ; fillinge in werk. 
with a witty womman, and he that felle bane hee e 
not bi his tunge, and he that sernyde not to Ben ee 


men vnworthi to hym silf. He is blessid 12 dese of God 
that fyndith a very frend, and he that 

tellith out ri3tfulnesse to an eere heringe. _ biforseid. 
He is ful greet that fyndith wisdom and iste Ghai 
kunnyng; but he is not aboue him that ‘ede for whi 


drede makith 
dredith Godt. The drede of God hath set 14 ine | ~ 
itY silf aboue alle thingis. Blessid zs the 15 doith feith. 
man to whom it is 3ouun to have the cee Cpe of 
drede of God; to wiom schal he be licned, 


herte is ech 
that holdith that drede? The drede of God 16% 4s the so- 


wounde; that 
rewe of herte 


good, and pass- 
ith alle goodis 


is the bigynnyng of his loue; forsothe the _ passith ech 
wonnde 

bigynnyng of feith is to be faste ioyned _ bodi, so the 
malice of a 


therto. The sorewe of herte is ech ?7 yomman pass- 


wounde§ ; and the wickidnesse of a wom-  fLaWe me 


POm.c pr.m. Gofcpr.m. * ouertrowable 4. 


y hym 1. 


Zi 


172 


18 wickidnesse’ of a womman. And eche 
wounde, and not wounde she shal seen 
190f herte; and al shreudenesse, and not 
20 shreudenesse of a womiman; and al hid 
thing, and not hid thing of hatende men; 
2i1and al veniaunce, and not veniaunce of 
gzenemys. There is not an hed wickidere 
23 quer the hed of a shadewe eddere; and 
there is not wrathe ouer the wrathe of 
a womman. ‘To dwelle with a leoun 
and a dragoun more shal* plesen, than 
24to wone with a shreude womman. The 
shreudenesses of a womman chaungeth‘ 
hir face; and she" azeen blendide’ hir 
cheere as a bere, and as a sac she shal 
shewen in the myddel of ne3hebores. 
25 The housebond’ of hir gretli weilede; 
2¢and herende, siz3hede a litil. Short alle 
malice ouer the malice of a womman ; 
27the lot of synnes falle vpon hir. As a 
graueli stee3ing vp in the feet of an old 
man, so a tungy womman to a quyete 
esman. Ne beholde thou the fairnesse of 
a woman, and coueite thou not a wom- 
29man in fairnesse. The wrathe of a wom- 
man and the mysreuerence, gret shen- 
30shipe. A womman if she haue maistrie, 
ai she is contrarie to hir housebond*. A loe3 
herte, and a dreri face, and a wounde of 
32deth, a shrende womman. Feble hondis 
and vnloosid knees, a womman that mak- 
33 eth not blisful hir housebond*. Of a wom- 
man is mad the bigynnyng of synne; 
3iand bi hir alle wee die. 3yue thou not 
to thi watir issue, neY a litil; ne to a 
shreude womman for3yuenesse, ‘or leeue, 
33 or fredam*, of goyng out. If she ‘schal 
not go* to thin hond, she shal con- 
36founde thee in the si3te of enemys. Fro 
thi flesh kut hir awei, lest® euermore sche 
mysvset thee. 


here. c. 


F wickenesse x. 8 it shal a. 
Wiman C pr.m. E prem. 


x man CE pr.m. 
Epr.m. >into a, 


¢ Om. E pr.m, 


y hilyng, that is, colouringe of malice, v. 
grete c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


* whan she chaungeth £ pr. m. 
y Om. ¢ pr. m. 
d vse not EB pr. m. 


z the hiling y. 


XXV. 18—36. 


man is al malice. -A leche shal se eclii8 A leche schal se 
ech wounde ; of 
wounde, and not the wounde of herte 3; __ bodi. and not 
eS. ieee the wounde ; 
and al wickidnesse, and not the wickid-19 that is, heuy- 
. . esse of herte. 
nesse of a womman ; and ech hilyngY, and 20 Besse of herve. 


. 2 ewe , Q] nesse, etc.; as 
not hilyng? of hateris ; and ech veniaunce, Page ie. 


and not the veniaunce of enemyes. Noon 22 ly 8 men ig 
e erseyue mae 
heed is worse than the heed of an eddre fice out 


lice outakun 
: + +c 9 the mali 
dwellynge in schadewe ; and noon ire is Boe amie 
aboue the ire of a womman. It schal ee s 
plese more to dwelle with a lioun and a pause 
: + a +4 — Schipe to hir 
dragoun, than to dwelle with a wickid _hosebonde. and 
ogni ech hiting; that 
womman. The wickidnesse of a womman 21s, colouring of 
° . I ° malice, ech a 
chaungith hir face; and sche blyndide her hin may per- 
cheer asa beer doith*, and sche schal schewe —8e¥¥ outaknn 
: 7 ‘ " the traiterouse 
as a sak in the myddis of nei3boris. Hir25 eoltae a 
“ye ° ° . on ateris an: 
hosebonde weilide; and his wickid wijf  enemyes, soit 
ance ane 5 é is of a wickid 
herde, and si33ide a litil. Al malice 7526 \omman, that 


schort on the malice of a womman; the oafreneal tte 
parte of synneris* falle on hir. As a27 ee ee 
stiynge ful of grauel in the feet of an _ w birhose- 
elde man, so 7s a womman a greet ian- pena 


Biholde thou not 28° Part of 


glere to a pesible man. erupete 


‘the fairnesse of a womman, and coueyte the peyne of | 
‘ helle, which is 

thou not a womman for fairnesse. The 29 tbe part of syn- 
. + heris, as the 
ire and vnreuerence of a wommant 7s? _ liyf of glorie 
grete® schenschipe. If a womman hath 30's 23" pi ius 
the firste dignyte, ethir cheef gouernail, "7% © 
sche is contrarie to hir hosebonde. A low 31 man; to hir 

hosebonde. 


herte, and soreuful face, and wounde of Lire here. c. 
t Feble hondis; 


deeth, zs a wickid womman. Feble hondist 32% worche wel. 
and knees vnboundun, a womman that *%e enbound- 


uns that is, 
blessith not hir hosebonde. The bygyn-33 red todo 


auontrie. bless- 
nyng of synne was maad of a womman;__ ith not; that is, 
. Ce st.8 dispisith. a¢ 
and alle we dien bi hir. 3yue thou not34 tiyn hond; 
. : : oyker Ite that is, bi thi 
issu to thi watir§, 3he, not a litil issu; ne- ruling’ kite 
eae _ hir awey; bi 
ther to a wickid womman fredom of goyng 4c, arene 
forth. If sche goith not at thin hond, 35 bed; ve this 
Ss Is Seid of a 
sche schal schende thee in the si3t of ene- womman vn- 
. : ‘ ° gS D corrigible, ether 
myes. Kitte hir a wei fro thi fleischis, lest 36 that wole ne- 
. uere be amend- 
euere sche mysvse thee. id, for eB 
holde hir, is to 
consente to hir 
synne. Lire 


§ water ; that is, to a river, for he will ouerflowe that place, be his yssu neuer so lyttill. c sec. m. 


u she hath al z pr.m. ¥ blyndith sen. 
zOm.c pr.m. BE prem. 8 go not ¢ pr. m. 


2Om.1.  » to hir hosebondisv. Ca 


XXVI, 1—109. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 Blissid is the man of a good womman; 
the noumbre forsothe of the 3eres of hym 
2double. A strong womman delytith hir 
man®; and the 3eres of ‘the liyf off hym 
3she shal fulfille in pes. A-good part® a 
good womman; in good part of men 
dredende God, she shal be 3oue to a man 
4for goode" deedis. Of riche forsothe and 
pore the goode herte; in alle tyme the 
5 chere of them gladsum. Of thre thingus 
dradde myn herte, and in the ferthe my 
6face was aferd. The dyuyseoun' of the 
cite, and the gederyng togidere of the 
7puple, and lesing chaleng; vp on deth 
salle thingus heuye. Sorewe of herte, and 
9weiling, a ielous womman. In a ielous 
womman scourge of tunge, to alle co- 
1omunende. As a 30k of oxen that is 
moued, so and* a! shreude womman; 
who holdith hir, as he ca3te a scorpioun. 
11A drunkelew womman gret wratlie and 
strif; and the filtheed of hir shal not be 
1zcouered. The fornycacioun of a womman 
in the hauncing out of e3en; and in the 
13 e3elidis of hir she shal be knowen. Ina 
do3tir not turnende awey hirself fastne 
warde; lest, ocasioun founde, she mysuse 
i4hirself. Fro™ alle irreuerence of the ejen 
of hir waar; and ne wndre thou, if she 
1sdispise thee. As a weie goere at a welle 
threstende the mouth shal opene, and of 
alle next water shal drinke; and ajen 
eche pale” shal sitte, and ajen alle arewe 
shal opene quyuere®, to the tyme that 
isshe? faile. The grace of a bisi womman 
shal deliten hir man?; and the boenes of 
17hym she shal fatten’. The discipline of 
ishir is the 3ifte of God. A wel felende 
womman and a stille is not the chaung- 
ving of the ta3t soule. Grace vpon grace 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


173 


CAP. XXVI. 


The hosebonde of a good womman is! 
blessid; for whi the noumbre of her 3eeris 
ts double. <A strong womman*? delitith2 
hir hosebonde; and shal fille in pees the 
jeeris of his lijf. A good womman ts a3 
good part}; in the good part of hem that 
dreden God, sche schal be 3ouun to a man for 
goode dedis. Forsothe the herte of a riche4 
man and of a pore} man zs good*; in al 
tyme her cheer zs glad. Myn herte dreddes 
of thre thingis, and my face dredde in 
the fourthe thing. Bitraiyng of a citee,« 
and the gadering togidere of puple§, and7 
fals chaleng; alle thingis greuouse on 
deth. The sorewe of herte, and moren-s 
yng zs a ielouse womman||. In a gelouse9 
womman 7s betyng of tunge, and sche 
comyneth with alle men. As a 30k of10 
oxis which is mouyd, so and a wickid 
womman; he that holdith hir, zs as he 
that takith a scorpioun. A drunkelew1! 
womman és greet ire, and dispisyng; and 
hir filthe schal not be hilid. The forny-12 
cacioun of a womman ?s in the reisyng of 
y3en; and schal be knowun in the i3e 
liddis of hir. Make thou sad kepyng® in13 
a dou3tir not turnynge a wei hir silf; lest 
sche mysvse hir silf, if sche fyndith oc- 
casioun. Be thou war of al vureuerence 14 
of hir izen; and wondre thou not, if sche 
dispisith thee. As a weiegoere thirstynge 15 
schal opene the mouth at a welle, and 
schal drynke of ech watir next; and the 
Jforseid dou3tir schal sitte a3ens ech pale{, 
and schal opene the arowe caas a3ens ech 
arowe, til sche faile. The grace of a bisii¢ 
womman schal delite hir hosebonde; and 
schal make fat hise boonus. The kun-17 
nyng of hir is the 3ifte of God. A wijs18 
womman aud stille is not chaungyng of 


* A strong 
womman ; that 
is, ajenus 
synnes. Lire 
€. Ce 
+ @ good part; 
that is, of ma- 
trymenye. Lire 
here. C 
tof aricheman 
and of a pore, 
etc.; that is, if 
he hath a good 
wiyf. Lire 
here. Cc. 
§ the gadering 
togidere of pu- 
ple; that is, 
conspiring of 
the puple a3e- 
nus the prince. 


a 


|| @ gelouse 
womman; isa 
contynuel so- 
rewe to hir 
hosebonde, of 
whom sche sup- 
posith to be 
disseyued, and 
so sche yma- 
gyneth conty- 
nuely a3enus 
him. beting of 
tunge; azenus 
hir hosebonde. 
comynyth with 
alle men ; that 
is, settith forth 
hirsilf to othere 
men. @ scor- 


pioun; that 


makith fair 
semelaunt with 
the face, and 
prickith with 
the tail; soa 
wickid wom. 
man drawith 
by flateryngis, 
and prickith til 
to deth, as 
Dalida dide to 
Sampsen, in 
xvij. c°. of Ju- 
dicum. greet 
ire; that is, 
cause of greet 
ire to hir hose- 
bonde, for sche 
wastith hise 
goodis, and 
schewith hise 
prinytes. not 
turnyng awey 3 
fro 30nge men 
dissolute, and 
vnonest specta- 
clis. occasioun; 
that is, leiser. 
Lire here. c. 
@ ech pale ; 


that is, ech place couenable to fernycacioun. opene the aruwe caas, etc.; that is, schal schewe hir schamefast membris to ech that axith; mannus 


3erde is clepid an arowe at Ebreys. fuile; til to hir deth. 


© husbonde 4k sec. m. Gu, 
k Om. 4. !Om. x. 
E sec. m. marg. GH. 


f Om. ¢ prim. 
m For 4. " pole £ pr. m. 
P it G sec. m. 


d womman ajenus synnes Vv. 


& partie AEGH. 
© the quyuer 4. quyuere, or arow caas C sec. m. marg. 
q husbonde 4E sec. mt. GH. 


dd that is, if thei han goode wyues. v marg. 


h his goode z pr.m. ienuyouste E pr.m. 


r fastnen a. fasten HH. 


e the kepyng 1. fandat.. 


174 


20 an hoeli womman, and a shamefast. Eche 
forsothe peising is not wrthi a contenent 
2isoule. As the sunne risende in the world 
in the he3est thingus of God, so the fair- 
nesse of a good womman in to the en- 
zzournyng of hir hous. A shynende lan- 
terne vpon an hoeli candilsticke, and the 
fairnesse of the face vpon the stable age. 
23 Goldene pileris vpon silueren feet, and fast 
feet upon the plauntes, ‘or soulis’, of a sta- 
24 ble womman. Euere lastende foundemens 
vp on a‘ sad ston, and the maundemens 
of God in the herte of an hoeli womman. 
25In two thingus myn herte is maad so- 
rewful", and in the thridde wrathing to 
e¢6me cam. AY man fi3tere failende bi 
myseise, and a nan wel felende dispisid. 
27 And that ouergoth fro ri3twisnesse to 
synne, God greithede hym to a two 
asbitende swerd. ‘Two spices harde and 
perilous to me semeden ; hard is delyuer- 
ed the chaffarere” fro his necgligence, 
and the* tauerner shal not be iustified fro 
synnes’ of lippis. 


CAP. XXVII. 


i For myseiste’’ manye trespaseden ; 
and he? that secheth to be maad riche, 
2turneth awei his e3e. As in the myddel of 
a ioynyng of stones a paele, ‘or «a stake”, 
ficchid is, so bitwen the myddel of biyng 
and silling he shall ben anguysht with 
ssynnes. He shal ben to-treden with 
4giltende® gilte. If not in the drede of 
the Lord thou shul holde® thee bisili, 
anoon shal ben turued vpsodoun thin 
shous. As in the smyting of a cyue shal 
abide stille pouder, so the porenesse of a 
6iman in the thenking of hym. The ves- 
selis of the krockere preueth the furneis ; 
and ri3twis men temptacioun of tribula- 
zcioun. As the erthe werching of a tree 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXVI. 20—-XXVII. 7. 


a lernyd soule. 


Grace on grace 1$ aM19< lerned soule; 


i that is, of 
hooli womman, and schamfast. Forsothe 20 jernea hose. 
al weiyng is not worth a contynent soule. bende for be 


As the sunne risynge in the world in the2i bf “a ony 


hizeste thingis of God, so the fairnesse of 
a good womman 7s in to the ournement 
of hir hous. 
hooli candilstike, and the fairnesse of a 
face* on stidfast age. 
siluerne foundementis, and stidfast feet on 
the soolis of a stidfast womman. 
lastynge foundementis on a sad stoon, and 
the heestis of God in the herte of an hooli 
womman. 


CAP. XXVII. 


A lanterne schynynge on an 22 


nolde chaunge 


Lire 
here. C. 
* fairnesse of 
the face, ete. 3 
that is, as sicha 
lanterne li3t- 
neth the 
chirche, and 


Goldun pileris on 23 sich a face 


makith fair 


ripe age, so a 
womman 


g 
Euer- 24 makith fair hir 


hows. stidefast 
womman; in 
vertu, that is, 
which renneth 
not aboute fro 
hows to hows, 
is ensanmple 
of goostli fair- 
nesse, and of 


In twei thingis myn herte was maad sori, 25 Cutermere 


and in the thridde thing wrathfulnesse 
cam to me. 


bi nedynesse, and a wijs man dispisid. 


A man a& werriour failynge 26 


oneste. Lire 
here. Cc. 

+ a marchaunt 
is delyuerid, 
etc. 3 of his 
helthe, for he 


And God hath maad hym redi to the 27 coueytith ouer- 


swerd, that passith ouer fro ri3tfulnesse 


myche ertheli 


goodis. Lire 


: . 0 here. C. 
to synne. T'wei? spices apperiden harde 28 + he that sek- 


and perilouse to me; a marchaunt is de- 
lyueredt of hard fro his necgligence, and 
a tauerner schal not be iustified of synnes 
of lippis. Many men han trespassid for1 
nedynesse; and he that sekith{ to be 
maad riche, turneth a wei his ije. As a2 
stake is fastned in the myddis of a heep 
of stoonys, so and @ man schal be an- 
gwischid§ bi syrnes bitwixe the middis of 
sillyng and biyng. Trespas schal be als 
to-brokun with hym that trespassith. Ifs 
thou holdist not thee diligentli in the 
drede of the Lord, thin hous schal soone 
be turned vpsedoun. As dust schal dwelles 
in the hoolis of a riddil, so the angwisch of 
a man schal dwelle in the thou3t of hym. 
A furneis preueth the vessels of a pottere;6 
and the temptacioun of tribulacioun preu- 
eth iust men. As cherliche trauel aboute7 


for whi remors of synne, which is seid the worm of consience, dwellith in his consience, thou3 the dede of synne is passid. 


8 Om. ¢ et £ prem. t Om. 4z@ pr.m. H. 


Ww marchaund 4. chaffarere, or marchaunde E sec.m. GH. 


AEGH, 


YY myseise c pr. m. 
4 beholde a, 


2 Om. c pr.m, 


g Om.1. 


a to-broosid c pr.m. E pr. m. 
x the false c pr.m. EB prim. 
22 Om. c et E pr.m. 


v Toa E pr.m. 
Y the synnes 
a the giltynge 4nGH. 


bh Two 1. 


ith; bi vnre- 
sonable desir. 
turne awei ; 

fro ri3tfulnesse. 
Lire here. c. 

§ schal be an- 
guwischid; that 
is, the sillere, 
that enforsith 
to decreesse 

of the iust 
priys. with him 
that trespass- 
ith; for in deth 
the synnere is 
al to-brokun, 
and thanne the 
doyng of synne 
is endid, for the 
tyme of merit 
and of trespass- 
ing ceessith 
thanne. thin 
hows; that is, 
bilding of ver- 
tues. dust ; 
that is, vile 
thingis, as 
stonys, metis, 
and livk 
thingis. an- 
gwisch of a 
man; that is, 
synnere. in 
thou3t of him; 
Lire here. c 


XXVIII. 8—24. 


shewith the frute of hym, so a wrd of 
sthenking the herte of aman. Biforn a 
wrd ne preise thou a man; that forsothe 
gtempting is of men. If thou folewe® ri3t- 
wisnesse, thou shalt taken it; and thou 
shalt clothen it as an aube of wrshipe, 
and thou shalt dwelle with it, and it shal 
defende thee in to euer mor, and in the 
dai of knouleching thou shalt finde fast- 
1onyng. Foules to the lic to them comen 
togidere ; and treuthe to them that wer- 
lichen it shal turne aj3een. A leoun to 
hunting waitith euermor; so synnes to 
y2men werchende wickidnesse. An hoeli 
man in wisdam woneth, as the sunne3 
for the fool as the moone is‘ chaungid. 
13In the myddel of mys felende men kep a 
wrd to tyme; in the myddel forsothe of 
men thenkende the lawe of God be thou 
14besi. The telling of synneres hatesum ; 
and the lajhing of them in the giltis of 
issynne. The myche swering speclie shal 
sette stonding of heer, for fer, to the hed ; 
and the irreverence of it is stopping of 
iseres. Sheding out of blod in iangling of 
proude men; and the cursing of them 
i7grenous heering. Who nakeneth pri- 
uytes, leeseth the feith of a frend; and 
he findeth not a frend to his inwit. 
18s Looue a nejhebore, and be thou ioyned 
igin feith with hym. That if thou shul 
nakene the hidde thingus of hym, ‘thon 
2oschalt not pursue® aftir hym. As a 
man forsothe that leeseth his frend, so 
that leeseth the frenshipe of his ne3he- 
21bore. And as he that leteth a brid out of 
his hond, so thou that hast forsake thi 
ne3hehore, and thou shalt not taken hym. 
22 Thon shalt not folewe hym, for ferr he is 
awei; forsothe he fley3 out as a capret 
fro the grene, for woundid is the soule 
230f hym. Thou shalt not moun mor ouer 
hym binde togidere; but of the cursid 
241is acording togidere. To nakenen for- 
sothe the priuytes of a frend, is the dis- 


© folewist AEGH. 


aman tI. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


d shal be ¢ pr.m. E pr. m. 


k kunning a. 


175 
a tree schewith the fruyt therof, so a word 
of thou3t schewith the herte of mani. 


Preise thou not a man bifore a word*;8 * tifor a word; 
for whi this is the temptacioun of men. ‘yeni. 


temptacioun 3 
If thou suest rijtfulnesse, thou schalt take g ‘tis, prevyns- 
and it scha] defende thee with outen ende, 
and in the dai of knowing* thou shalt 
treuthe schal turne ajen to hem that 
worchen wickidnesse. An hooly manoj. i 
synne, setten 
moone. In the myddis of vnwise men 13wickidnesse, ~ 
Lire here. c. 
the lawe of God. The tellyng of synneris 14 
myche schal make stondyng up of heeris, 
schedyng ‘out of blood zs in the chidyng 
opynli the priuytees of a frend, leesith ?277g, for in 
ofte, and it is 
and be thou ioyned with hym in feith. here sich blas- 
femye of God. 
hym. For as a man that leesith his frend, 20 {5,3 Sa ee 
And as a man that latith go aa sche ee 
brid fro his hond, so thou that hast forsake frends ‘bi deth 
thi neizbore, and thou schalt not take 9, imbemy 
: : “* leesith fren- 
is fer absent; for he ascapid as a capret  schipe ete. s 
fro a snare, for the soule of hym is 
siche frenschipe 
here. c. 


; ‘ Lire here. c. 
it; thou schalt clothe it as a long cloth 
of onour, and thou schalt dwelle with it, 
fynde stidfastnesse. Volatilis comen to-10 
gidere to briddis lijk hem silf; and 
worchen it. A lioun settith aspies enere11 
to huntyng; so synnest to hem that + so synnes, 
: , e fendis that in- 
dwellith in wisdom, as the sunne dwellith ‘sen men to 
stabli!; for whi a fool is chaungid as the spies to hem 
that warchen 
kepe thou a word to tyme; but be thou Hepple 
bisi in the myddis of hem that thenken 
ts hateful; and the lei3yng of hem és in 
the trespassis of synne. Speche sweringe 15° 
for astonying, to the heed; and vnreuer- 
ence therof is stoppyng of eeris. Thei¢ 
of proude men; and the cursyng of hem 
2s greuouse heryng}. He that schewith 17+ is grevouse 
her chiding thei 
feithfulnesse; and he schal not fynde a__ Plasfemen God 
frend to his soule. Loue thou a nei3bore, 18 ful grenouse to 
feithful eeris to 
For if thou schewist opynli the prinytees 19 rire here. c. 
of hym, thou schalt not perfitli sue§ aftir — § not perf 
so he that leesith the frenschipe of his the kyuering of 
, perfit fren- 
nei3bore. 
no more re- 
hym. Thou schalt not sue hym, for he 22 Xevere him. 
bi schewing of 
his pryuyte, for 
woundid. Thou schalt no more mow 23is not rekyuer- 
bynde hym togidere; but of yuel seiyng id pert 


€ pursue thou not ¢ ef E pr.im. 


1Om. 1. 


176 


espeiring of the vnfeithful soule. The 
twynclere with the e3e forgeth wicke 
e6thingus; and no man hym shal casten 
awei. In the si3te of thin e3en he shal 
defoule thi mouth, and vp on thi wrdus 
he shal wndre; at the laste he shal per- 
uerte his mouth, and in thif wrdis he 
27shal 3yue sclaundre. Manye thingus I 
haue herd, and I haue not euened to 
eshym; and the Lord shal hate hym. Who 
in to hei3 sendeth a ston, vp his hed it 
shal falle; and the wounde of the trec- 
29 cherous shal deuyde woundis. And that 
delueth a dich, shal falle in to it; and 
that setteth a ston to a ne3hebore, shal 
stumble in it; and that setteth a grene to 
30 another, shal pershe in it. To the do- 
ynge most wicke counseil, vpon hym it 
shal be turned a3een; and he shal not 
knowe whennes it shal come to hym. 
31 Ilusioun, ‘ov scorne’, and repref of proude 
men and veniaunce as a leoun ‘schal aspie" 
sztohym. In a grene thei shul pershen, that 
deliten the falling of ri3twis men; sorewe 
forsothe shal waste them, er thei dien. 
33 Wrathe and wodnesse, either ben wari- 
able; and the man synnere, withholdere 
shal be of them. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 Who wile taken veniaunce, of the Lord 
shal finde veniaunce; and the synnes of 
2hym kepende he shal kepe. For3if to 
thi ne3hebore nozende to thee, and 
thanne to thee lowli pre3ende synnes 
3shul ben for3joue. A man to a man kep- 
ith wrathe; and of God he sechith lech- 
aing!, In toa man lic to hymself he hath 
not mercy; and of his synnes he shal 
sprejen. He whil he is flesh, reserueth 
ire, and mercy asketh of God; who shal 
6 preje for the giltis of hym? Hane mynde 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXVil. 2:—Xxviws, 


is acordyng. Sotheli to schewe opynliz4 


the pryuytees of a frend, is dispeir* of a 
soule vnblessid. 
the ize, makith wickid thingis ; 
man schal caste hym awei. In the si3t 
of thin izen he schal defoule his mouth, 
and he schal wondre on thi wordis; but 
at the laste he schal turne weiwerdli his 
mouth, and in his wordis he schal 3yue 
sclaundre. 
made not euene to hym; and the Lord 
schal hate hym. 
stoon an®™ hi3, it schal falle on his heed ; 
and the gileful wounde of a gyleful man 
schal departe woundis. 
gith a diche, schal falle in to it; and he 
that settith a stoon to a nei3bore, schal 
offende therynne; and he that settith a 
snare to a nother man, schal perische ther 
ynne. 
schal be turned on hym; and he schal 
not knowe fro whennus it schal come to 
him. 
proude men{ and veniaunce schal sette a 
spie to hym, as a lioun doith. 
deliten in the fal of inst men, schulen 
perische bi a snare; forsothe sorewe schal 
waste hem, bifore that thei dien. 
woodnesse, euer either ben abhomynable; 
and a synful man schal holde tho. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


He that wole be vengid, schal fynde of! 
the Lord veniaunce ; and he kepynge schal 
kepe hise synnesj. For3yue thou to thi2 
neijbore that anoieth thee, and thanne 
synnes® schulen be releessid to thee prei- 
ynge. A man kepith ire to man; and3 
sekith he of God medicyn? He hath no4 
merci on a man lijk hym silf; and bisech- 
ith he the hizeste for hise owne symnes ? 
He the while he is fleisch, reserueth ire ;5 
and axith he of God merci? who schal 
preie for hise synnes? Haue thou myndeé 


He that twynclith with 2s 
and no 2¢ that schewith 


If a man throwith™ a 28 


If a man makith worst councel, it 30 


Thei that 3: 


“ to to arette hize 


Tre and 33 


* to schewe 
opynli the pry- 
uyles of a frend 
is dispeir ; that 
is, of a man 


priuyte, for he 
owith not to 
hope perfit re- 
formyng of the 
firste frenschip, 
that twynclith 
elc, makith 
yuels ; a3zenus 
that man that 
bileuecth him a 


Y herde mani thingist, and Y 27 veri frena. 


caste him awey; 
for he bileueth 
that he is his 
frend, and 
holdith him 
with himsil£ 
defoule his 
mouth ; spek- 


And he that dig- 29 inge ptesaunt 


thingis to thee. 
schal wondre ; 
that is, schal 
feyne him for 
to wondre, as 
if thou hast 
seid wordis of 
deep wisdom, 
and so he schal 
more disseyue 
thee. sette 
sclaundir ; in 
dispisinge tho 


The scornyng and dispisyng of31 thingis as fon- 


ned, and yuele 
thingis, whiche 
hesemyde bifor- 


and goode, Lire 
here. © 


+ Y herde 
many thingis ; 
that is, yuels, 
and Y arettyde 
not another 
malice euene to 
the malice of 
this man. 
wounde of a 
gileful man ; 
that is, what- 
euer yuel pro- 
curid of a gile- 
ful man to an. 
other gileful 
man schal mul- 
tiplie ynels on 
him. Lire here. 
Ge 


 scornyng and 
dispisyng of 
proude men ; 
that is, which 
ben doon of 
proude men in 
wordis and 
dedis to meke 
men and pore. 
sette aspie to 
him ; to the 
peyne of helle. 
bi a snare ; of 
the deuel, for 


whi sich gladnesse is streiztly contrarie to the charite of neizbore. holde tho; that is, schal holde euer either with ynne himsilf, for he is a vessel able 


to conteyne yuel. Lire here. c. 


§ schal kepe hise synnes; to be punyschid hardere hi his ri3tfulnesse. for3ywe thou to thi neizbore ; the offence 


which owith enere to be forzouun, but to forz3yue the wrong is not of nede; but of excelent perfeccioun, and sumtyme it spedith not to for3yue the 
wrong, that is, whanne he that doith wrong takith more booldnesse to do wrong, and othere men taken occasioun to do liyk thingis. Lire here. c. 


this ¢ prom. § prem. 


m sendith CEFGHIKNPQRSUVxa. castith m. 


& Om. c ef E prem. 


haspieth c pr.m. 1 medicyne E pr.m. 


non a, © the synnes I. 


XXVIII. y—~23. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


of thi laste thingus, and lef to ben" ene- ' 


7my. Rotenese! forsothe and deth stonden 
son in the hestes ‘of hym™. Remembre 
the drede of the Lord, and thou shalt not 
9 wrathe to the ne3hebore. Remembre the 
testament of the hejest, and dispise the 
loignoraunce of thi ne3hebore. Abstene 
thee fro strif, and thou shalt lassen 
iisynnes. A man forsothe wratheful teend- 
ith strif; and a man synnere shal dis- 
turbe frendis, and in the myddel of men 
12 hauende pes he sendith in enemyte. Af- 
tir forsothe the trees of the wode, so the 
fier brenneth"; and aftir the vertue of a 
man, so the wrathe of hym shal be, and 
aftir his substaunce he shal enhaunce his 
wwrathe. An hastid strif shal teende fyr, 
and hastende chidyng® shal sheden out 


‘ 


blod; and a tunge witnessende shal bringe - 


u4to deth. If it shul blowen, as fyr it shal 
brenne; and if thou shul spitten vpon 
it?, it shal ben queynt; either fro the 
ismouth gon forth. The whistrende gruc- 
chere, and the twisil tunge cursid ; for- 
sothe manye hauende pes disturbide4. 


16 The thridde tunge manye men stirede, . 


and scaterede them fro fole in to fole. 
17 Wallid cites of riche men it stro3ede", and 


the housis of grete men it mynede out. - 


is The vertues of puples it to-heew3%, and 
i9stronge folkys of kindeit vnknytte. The 
thriddé tunge stronge, ‘or weddid', wym- 
men caste out, and shal bynyme them ther 
20 trauailes. Who biholdith it, shal not han 
reste; ne shal han a frend, in which he 
2irest. The wounde of a scourge maketh 
wannesse; the wounde forsothe of a 
zetunge shal to-broosen boenes. Manye 
fellen in the mouth of swerd; but not 
23as thei dieden by" ther tunge. Blisful 


. 


177 


on the’laste thingis, and ceesse thou to be 
enemy. For whi failyng and deth neizen7 
not in the comaundementis of God. Haues 
thou mynde on the drede of the Lord, and 
be thou? not wrooth to the neizbore. 
Haue thou mynde on the testament of thes 
hi3este, and dispise thou the ignoraunce* 

é i celence demed 
of thi neizjbore. Absteyne thee fro strijf, 10 of him. ser ; 

, _ of wrathful- 

and thou schalt abregge™ synnes. For whi 1 nesse and wood- 


* ignoraunce ; 
that is, offence 
doon to thee, 
and for3ete thou 
it. Lire here. c. 
Tt a synful 
man; that is, 
a sowere of dis- 
cordis. the ver- 
tu of a man; 
that is, his ex- 


a wrathful man kyndlith strijf; and a ee” 

° i * t a tunge, ete; 
synful mant schal disturble frendis, and j,i ee. 
he schal sende in enemyte in the myddis  Vense thee on 

5 Im, he aise 
of men hauynge pees. For whi aftir the 12sernede wel. 
Lire here. c. 


trees of the’ wode, so fier schal brenne an 
hi3; and after the my3te' of a" man, so his 
wrathfulnesse schal be, and aftir his cate] 4. } 
phe. stiring of him, 
he schal enhaunse his ire. Hasti stryu-13 that is wrooth, 


br 3 th 
yng schal kyndle fier, and hasti chidyng teenies 
schal schede out blood; and a tunge} ber- 
witnessinge 
: : 2 ether excitinge 
hi3; and if thou spetist theron, it schal be 
quenchid ; euer either comen forth of the — schewinge that 
thilke tunge is 
that is, the ire 
many men hauynge pees. The thridde1¢rthtulnesse 
tunge hath stirid many men, and hath 
quenchid. ever 
kyndlinge ire, 
hath myned doun the housis of grete men, 2242 werd re- 
It’ hath kit doun the vertues of puplis, 18 “e “ridde 
thridde tunge hath cast out weddid wym- eee 
men, and hath priued hem of her tra- 


§ If thou blow- 
ist; that is, 
bryngist forth 
a word at the 


spetist ther- 

on the tunge, 
thou blowist§, as fier it schal brenne an 

jaunce,.in 
tungid man|| 7s cursid; for he disturblide % genchids 

nesse schal be 
distried wallid citees of riche men, and {P's 2 word 

The 19 sowith dis- 


the ire more. 
ynge witnessing schal brynge deth. If 1475 thatis, 
to take ven- 
mouth. A preuy bacbiter, and a double }5 yuel. it schat 
and ef wead- 
seaterid hem fro fole in to fole. It hath 17 either, etc. s 
freyninge it. 
* : i tunge ; that 
and hath vnknit strong folkis. 
ether the myddil 


tunge among 


uelis. He that biholdith the’ thridde 20 the tngis of, 
hem, whiche it 
tuuge, schal not haue rest; nether scha] — makith to dis- 
4 corde. Lire 
haue a frend, in whom he schal reste. tere. c. 
|| aduwble 


The wounde of betyng makith wannesse 3 21 guigid man sis 
but the wounde of tunge schal make lesse he ‘hat spekith 


fayre bifore a 
the boonys. Many men fellen doun bi22™2, and yuel 
bihynde him $ 


and se a preuy 


bachiter, that dar not avow that that he spekith hifore the persone that he spekith ynel bi, isa dowble tungid man, and he that flaterith his 
nei3bore bifore him, and spekith yuel bihynde hym, is a dowble tungid man. Also the tunge of the preuey bacbiter is clepid the thridde tunge; 
for he that the flaterer flatereth, hath o tunge, and he that he tellith the tale of bachityng to, hath rhe secunde tunge, and the bacbiter him silf 


hath the thridde tunge, for he, as the thridde, makith debate bitwen a man and his neijzbore. a. 


q weddid wymmen ; summe bekis han onest 


wymmen, ether dredinge schame. in whom he schal reste ; that is, triste verily. bi her éunge ; fer these men dien bi the deth of synne, and if they 


repenten not, bi the deth of helle. Lire here. c. 


k thyn £ pr.m. 
© c. super ras. strijf £ pr.m. 
G seeom. tOm.c et £ prim. 


P Om. a. 


q Om. 1. 
power F see. m. 


VOL. ITH. 


u Om. eeferi. Vand AF see. m. 


1 Blisfulnesse c pr. m. £ pr.m. 
@ he disturbide £ pr.m. _ 
u for ¢ prem. E pr. im. 


r decreesse, ether abregge CEFGHIKMNPQRUVXA,. 
w that c. 


m Om. € sece.m. E see.m. 1 shal brennen & pr. m. 
T distruyede aren. § hew3 doun 


’ 


8 Om. cv. t vertu. CEGIIKMNPQRSUVXa, 


Aa 


178 


that is couered fro a shreude tunge; ‘the 
which’ in the wrathe of it passide not, 
and ‘the which’ dro3 not at the 3oc of it, 
and in the bondis of ‘it is” not bounde. 
21The 30c forsothe of it is an irene 3oc, 
and the bond of it is a brasene bond. 
25The deth of it the werste* deth; and 
26 profitable helle more than it. The stede- 
fastnesse of it shal not abide stille, but 
shal holde the weies of vuri3twis men ; 
in his flaume he shal not breune ri3twis 
27men. Thei that forsaken God, shul falle 
in to it; and it shal brenne out in them, 
and it shal not be queynt; and it shal 
be sent in to them as a leoun, and as a 
2sparde it shal hurte them. Hegge thin 
eres with thornes, and wile thou not 
heren the shreude tunge; and to thi 
mouth mac thou dores, andy lokes to thin 
2veres. Thi gold and thi seluer melt to- 
gidere; aud to thi wrdis mac thou a 
balaunce, and ri3t bridelis to thi mouth. 
30 And tac heed, lest parauenture thou slyde 
in the tunge, and thou falle in the. si3te 
of the? enemys, waitende to thee, and thi 
fallyug be vnheleable in to the’ deth. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 Who doth mercy, leeneth to his ne3he- 
bore; and he that is more wrth in hond, 
2kepeth the hestis. Leene to thi ne3he- 
bore in tyme of his neede; and eft 3eld 
3to a nez3hebore in his tyme. Conferme a 
wrd, and feithfulli do with it; and m 
alle tyme thou shalt finde that is needful 
sto thee. Manye as finding eymeden 
vsure, and 3eeuen gref to them that 
shelpeden to* them. To the time that 
thei taken, thei kissen® the hondis of the 
3yuere ; and in behestis® thei meken 
6ther voys. And in tyme of 3elding ‘he 
shal aske’ delazing, and he shal speke 


V that c pr. m. 
zZ Om. acu. 


wOm. «a. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


x wickedest aEGH. 
®Om. arcu. » kissen not c pr.m. & pr.m. © the biheestis acu. 4 thei £ pr.m. 


XXVHI. 24—XXIX. 6. 


the scharpnesse of swerd; but not so as 
thei that perischiden bi her tunge. He23 
is blessid that is kyuerid fro a wickid 
tunge; and he that passide not in the 
wrathfulnesse therof, and he that drow 
not the 30k therof, and was not boundun 
in the bondis therof. For whi the 3o0k24 
therof is an irun 30k, and the boond ther- 
of is a brasun boond. The deth therof zs 25 
the worste deth; and helle 7s more* profit- 
able than it. 


* helle is more, 
etc.; that is, 
The perseueraunce therof 26 the peyne of 


schal not dwelle, but it schal holde the aL 
weiest of vniust men; in his flawme it ‘dy synne, 


signefied bi the 


Thei that 27 name of the 


schal not brenne iust men. 
wickid tunge. 


forsaken God, schulen falle in to it; and Lire here. c. 

; om : holde th 

it schal brenne greetli in hem, and it schal ae ae 
Oe lc S * i going doun to 

not be quenchid ; and as a lioun it schal Giethstinge 


be sent in to hem, and as a parde it schal  j7ment. -_ 
. é 


hirte hem. Bisette{ thin eeris with bopiely 
thornes, and nyle thou here a wickid in eschew 
tunge; and make thou doris to thi mouth, 


bacbitingis, and 
in repreuynge_ 
and lockis to thin eeris. Welle thou to-29 pees 


gidere) thi gold, and thi siluer; and make “ris; of dis- 
sullen 
thou a balaunce to thi wordis, and ri3tful _ that thou spel 


: : d be stile, i 
bridels to thi mouth. -And take heede, 20 conena hele 


lest perauenture thou slide in tunge, and nine 
falle in the si3t of enemyes||, settynge tre- ders, ete. 
soun to thee, and thi falle be vncurable 


that is, tempere 
thou, and dis- 
in to deth. 


pose thi wisdom 
and fair speche, 
that thou holde 
stille thingis, 

that ben worthi 


CAP. XXIX. 
; 5 , ' to be holdun 
He that doith merci, leeneth to his nei3-1 eae 
bore; and he that is ful my3ti in hond4], chin wortht 
kepith the comaundementis. Leene thou2 art wht aii, 
to thi neizbore in the tyme of his nede; Tirehere o. 
and eft 3elde thou to a nei3bore in his Kenwmser 44 
tyme. Conferme thou a word, and do3 ip ns 
e . . . o 2. e, ro 
thou feithfuli with hym; and in al tyme which is no re- 
thou schalt fynde that, that is nedeful to Teea 
thee. Many men gessiden borewyng as {i i7u4 
fyndyng, and jauen disese to tho* men Seeely. ket 
that helpiden hem. Til thei taken, theis te comaunde- 
mentis ; not 


kissen the hondis of the 3yuer; and in onely leenynge, 
biheestis thei maken meke her vois. And6 sige, hire 


in the time of 3elding he schal axe tyme, ’7*“ 


Y and soowe thou E pr. m. z Om, c prim. 


x thilke 1. 


XXIX. 7—~-23. 


wrdis of noy3e*, and of grucchingus, and 
7the tyme he shal pleten. If forsothe he 
shu] moun 3eelde, he shal be enemy ; 
vnnethe of the hoele he shal 3elde the 
half, and he shal counte it as finding. 
8Ellys forsothe he shal bigile hym his 
monee, and shal han hym enemy wil- 
9fully. And reprenes and cursis he shal 
3elde to hym; and for wrshipe and bene- 
10 fet he shal 3elde to hym wrong. Manye, 
not bicause of shreudenesse, ‘lenten not*, 
but to be’ bigilid® wilfulli, thei dradden. 
11 Neuer the latere ouer the meke in! inwit 
be thou strengere; and for almes* deede 
igdrawe thou not hym. For the heste tac 
to the pore; and for the myseise’ of 
ishym ne lefe thou hym voide. Lees 
monee for™ brothir and frend, and hide 


thou not it vnder a ston, in to perdi-. 


14cioun. Put thi tresor in the hestes of the 
hejeste; and it shal profite to thee more 
isthan gold. Close almes deede in the 
bosum of the pore; and that for thee 
1¢Shal ful out pre3en fro alle euel. The 
almes deede of a man as a litil sac with 
hym; and the grace of a man as the e3e 
izappil it shal kepen. And afterward it 
shal ajeen risen, and 3elde to them 3eld- 
ising, to eche in to the hed of hem. Oner 
the sheld of the my3ti, and ouer spere 
igazen thin enemy it shal fi3te. A good 
man maketh feith to his nejhebore; and 
he that hath lost, confusioun shal lene to 
2ohym. The grace" of the bor} ne forgete 
thou; forsothe he 3af for thee his soule. 
21 The synnere and the vnelene® the a3een 
22 bihotere fleeth. Goode wrdis of the ajeen 
bihotere the synnere wijteth to hym; 
and the vnkinde in the? wit forsaketh 
23 the delyuerende hym. A man a3een bi- 
hoteth of his ne3hebore; and whan he 
hath lost reuerence, he shal be forsaken 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


179 


and he schal speke wordis of anoie, and 
of grutchingis, and heY schal calenge falsli 
the tyme*. Forsothe if he mai 3elde, he7 
schal be aduersarie; of a schilling vnne- 
this he schal 3elde the half, and he schal 
rekyn that as fyndyng. Ellis he schal de-s 
fraude him in his monei, and the leenere 
schal haue him an enemy with outen 
cause. And he schal 3elde to hym, thats 
7s, to the leenere, wrongis and cursyngis; 
and for onour and benefice he schal 3elde 
to hym dispisyng. Many men lenten not 10 
‘to pore neizborisz, not for cause of wick- 
idnesse, but thei dredden to be defraudid 
with onten cause. Netheles on a mekeil 
man in soulet be thou strongere; and for 
almes drawe thou not hym. For thei 
comaundement* 9@f God take thou a pore 
man; and for his nedynesse leeue thou not 
hym voide. Leese thon monei for a bro- is 
ther and frend, and hide thou not it vndur 
a stoon, in to perdicioun. Putte thi tre-14 
sour in the comaundementis of the hi3este; 
and it schal profite to thee more than gold 
‘schal profite’. Close thou almes in the1s 
bosum of a pore man; and this almes schal 
preye for ‘thee ‘to be delyuered of God 
fro al yuel. The almes of a man ts as a6 
bagge with hym; and it schal kepe the 
gracet of man as the appil of the ije. 
And aftirward it schal rise a3en, and schal 17 
jelde to hem a 3elding, to ech man in to 
the heed of hem. Aboue a® scheld of the® 18 
my3ti man, and aboue a spere it schal fi3te 
a3ens thin enemye. A good man makith 19 
feith} to his neijbore; and he that leesith, 
schal leeue schame to hym. For3ete thou 20 
not the grace of the borewe; for he jaf 
his lijf for thee|]|. A synful man and vn-2) 
cleene fleeth the biheetere. A synnere ar-22 
retteth to hym silf the goode wordis of the 
borowe ; and the vnkynde man in wit for- 


*® ealenge falsly 
the tyme; and 
seie that it was 
ouerdere, ether 
sum such thing, 
to tarie the pai- 
yng of dette. as 
Syndyng ; that 
is, as if he were 
not holdun to 
restore. llis ¢ 
that is, if he 
may not with- 
holde that, that 
is lent to him. 
defraude him 
in his money ; 
in 3elding to 
him fals money 
for trewe, ether 
in denyinge 
hoolliche the 
dette. Lire 
here. c. 

+ on a meke 
man in soule ; 
that is, a ful 
pore dettour. be 
thou strongere ; 
in largenesse. 
and for alnies ; 
that is, for 
dette, that 
owith to be 
turned into 
almes in sich a 
caas. drawe 
thou not him ; 
to doom, that 
he be compellid 
to 3elde the 
dette. For the 
comaundement ; 
of the Lord, 
that comaund- 
ide ech man to 
helpe his nei3- 
bore. take thou 
@ pore man; in 
helpinge him. 
Leese thou mo- 
ney, etc.; in 
spendinge it 
aboute the 
nedis of hem, 
for thon3 it be 
wastid in this 
caas, netheles 
more good schal 
be 30ldun for it. 
undur a stoon : 
in gaderinge 
tresour in erthe, 
hut in heuene 
bi syuyng of 
almes. Lire 
here. C. 

t the grace; 
that is, Goddis 
grace 30nun to 
man. rise azen; 
bi resseuyng of 
meede in an 
other liyf. Lire 
here. c. 

§ makith feith ; 


in bicomynge borow for him in nede. that leesith ; feith anentis the neizbore, and tristith not to him to bicome borow for him. schame; that is, 
Il 3¢f his liyf for thee; in oblischinge that is nedeful to him to susteyne 
his liyf. fleeth the biheetere ; that is, the borow, and nyle delyuere him. Lire here. c. 


schal suffre his nei3bore be schamed, ether schent. Lire here. c. 


€joje c pr.m.  f vsureden £ pr.m. 


& Om, E pr.m. G pr.m. 


b begile x pr.m Om. 4. & the 


almes 4. 1 myseisete £ sec.m. ™forthicpr.m.  ™ grace,or love G sec.m. 9 enuyous C pr. m. 
Epr.m. POm. Cc pr.m. G. 
yOm. a. 7Om.1. ®comaundementis a pr.m.a. >Om.1 ¢Om.1. Uther far 


AagQ 


180 


aiof hym. Most shreude a3een bihoting 
spilde manye loouende men, and‘ ‘togi- 
dere sterede1 them as the flodis* of the 
25se. Cumpasende it made my3ti men to 
gon out; and wandreden in aliene folkis. 
26 The synnere ouer passende the maunde- 
ment of the Lord shal fallen into 
shrende* biheste; and he that forseth 
inanye thingus to do, shall fallen in to 
27dom. Recouere thi ne3hebore after thi 
vertue; and tac heed to thee, that thou 
oginfalle not. The bigynnyng of the lif of 
man watir, and bred, and clothing, and 
29 bous defendende filthehed. Betere is the 
liflode of the pore vwnder the roof of 
stoodes', than plenteuous shynende metes 
30in pilgrymaging withoute hous. The 
leste thing for grete plese to thee; the 
repref of pilgrimaging thou shalt not 
3iheren. A shreude lif, of herberewing 
fro hous in to hous; and wher he shal 
ben herberewid, he shal not feithfulli 
sedon, ne openen the mouth. He shal 
herberewen, and feeden, and 3yue drinke 


the vnkinde; and to these bittere thingus © 
Go, gest", and enourneY * 


ashe shal heren, 
the bord; and tho ‘thingis that’’ in thin 
34hond thou hast, feed other. Go out fro 
the face of wrshipe of my frendis, for 
nede of myn hous; to herberewe to me, 
35 brothir thon art maad. 
thingus to a man hauende wit; vnder- 


nymyng of the hous, and repref of the 
leenere. 


CAP. XXX. 


1 Who looueth his sone, bisily 3eneth to 
hym scourgis, that he glade in his laste, 
and that he grope not the dores of ne3zhe- 


clepid triwauntis and lozels. Lire here. c. 
an vsurer, for he sillith hise thingis to gestis, 


“and in 4, 49 to-sterede ¢ pr. m. 


fbihotith 1. gher. »Om. 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Greuous these . 


ae tere T flodis, or wawis & sec.m. Gu. 8 the shrewid 4. 
Sparres C sec. m. marg. E sec.m. marg. GH. ™ ost c pr.m. E pr.m. 


i plesith cereniKMNPQRSUXa. 


XXIX. .24—-XXX. 12° 
. p * lost reuer- 
sakith a man delyuerynge hym. A Man 23 oes that hy 
biheetithf for his nei3bore; and whanne pees eae 
r 
‘the neiz3bore® hath lost reuerence*, the. ae forsaleun 
of him; that is. 
borew schal be forsakun of hym. Worst 24 susringe his 
. borow to b 
biheestt hath lost many louynge men, and (2) pardi of 
hath moued hem as the wawis of the see. te bps 
nge in cumpas made my3ti men to 25 tWorstbiheest; 
It goyng pate ge, hi which the 
passe ouer; and thei wandriden aboute  neisbore bihiste 
; ; falsly to dely- 
among? alien folkis. A synnere brekynge26 \erehis hocow. 
Lire here. c. 
the comaundement of the Lord schal falle tin to a vale 
in to a wickid biheest}; and he that eet ae 
OA rewrede, wher- 
enforsith to do many thingis, schal falle _ ynne he biheet- 
3 : 6 . ¢ *.1 ¢ 5. ith that he schal 
in to dom. Rekiuere thi neizbore bi thi 27 paye for an 
au hi ; 
vertu; and take heed to thi silf, lest thon failith. "This 
falle. The bigynnyng of lijf of a man is26 ae 
watir, and breed§, and clothing, and hons re me bie 
: e De 21 en im 
hilynge filthe. Betere is the lijflode of a 29 therbi. teky- 
he Ml f : uere,ete.; in bi- 
pore man vndur the hilyng of sparris,  comynge borow 
. C . for him, so that 
than schynynge feestis in pilgrymage thou falle not 
with outen hons. The leeste thing pleese! 30 in t tribula- 
‘ cioun. lest thou 
thee for a greet thing; and thou schalt not fate; in to the 
. 6 Tee forseid yuels. 
here the schenschipe of pilgrymage. I¢ 2831 Lire here. c. 
2 . ee . rf 
wickid lijf to seke herbore fro hous in to j,as thet ts 


hous; and where he schal be herborid, ee 
Rpt. : tynke and 
he schal not do tristili, nethir he schal mete; thus 


z breed and wa- 
opene the mouth. He schal be herborid, 32 ter is takun 
0 for mete and 
and he schal feede, and 3yue drinke to aryilerstieal 
: q ss + 44s rally, in Iv. 
vnukynde men; and 3it he schal here bittir book of Kyngis, 
thingis. Passe, thou that art herborid, 3327), a 
and araye a table; and 3yue thou meetis ple to nede and 
we not to curiouste. 
to othere men, tho thingis that thou hast  hitinge fume; 
é », that is, tho 
in the hond. Go thou out fro the face 34 thingis whiche 
of the onour of my frendis, for the frend-  ‘ were foul to 
E B A do opinli, thou; 
schipe, ethir affinyte, of myn hous; bi 
herboryng thou art maad a brother to me.. to elde dette to 
Te 3 the wiyf, and 
These thingis ben greuouse to a man hau-35 sche thingis. 
Oe A, endur the hil- 
ynge wit; the repreuyng|| of hous, and 7) of sparriss 
the dispising of the vsurer*. cio A 


tho ben not 
yuele thingis, as 
hows of thyn 
owne. in pil- 


CAP. XXX grimage; thatis, 
se H in another lond. 
; e eye, the schenschi 

He that loueth his sone, 3yueth bisili1 of Higimces 


that is, of vn- 
stable going 
aboute in the 
lond, for ofte 
siche men ben 


betingis to hym, that he be glad in hise 
laste thing, and that ¢he sone touche not 


ll the repreuing; that is, chawnging of herbor. the vsurer ; that is, of the usteler, which is seid here 
ahoue iust priys bi comyn cours. Lire here. c. 


{ touche, etc.; to do fornycacioun. Lire here. c- 


t stoodes, or 


Yenuyroune 4. VY Om. c prim. 


k that is, osteler. v marg. 


XXX. 2—18, . 


2bores. Who techeth his sone, shal be 
preisid in hym; and in the myddel of 
3homli men in hym he shal glorien. Who 
techeth his sone, in to enuye sendith” 
the enemy; and in the myddel of frendus 
4he shal glorien in hym. Dead is the 
fader of hym, and he is as not dead; lic 
forsothe to hym he hath laft aftir hym. 
5In his lif he sa3, and gladide in hym; 
and in his deth he sorewede not, ne ‘is 
econfoundid* bifor the enemys. Forsothe 
he hath laft the defendere of the hous 


a3en the enemys; and to frendus the 3eld- 


zing ofY grace. For the soulis of the 
sonus he shal binde togidere his woundis; 
and ouer al vois shul be disturbid the 
sboweles of hym. The vntame hors shal 
scapen hard, and the slowe sone shal 
gscape stumbling doun. Flatere the sone, 
and he shal make thee dredende; pley 
with hym, and he shall sorewen? thee. 
10Ne with la3he thou to hym, ne with 
sorewe, and in the laste thi teth shal 
i1waxe stoneyd. 3yue thou not to hym 
power in 3outhe, and ne dispise thou the 
iztho3tus of hym. Crooke the nol of hym 
in 30uthe, and bet the sidis of hym, whil 
he is a faunt; lest parauenture he in- 
wardly hardne, and leeue not to thee, and 
13 he shal be to thee sorewe of soule. Tech 


thi sone, and werk in hym; lest in to’ 


14 the filthehed of hym thou gilte. Betere 
is a pore man hool, and strong in 
strengthis, than a riche man feble, and 

isscourgid with malice. Helthe of soule 
in hoelynesse of ri3twisnesse, and betere 
is than alle gold and siluer; and a 
strong body than monee withoute me- 

i¢sure. Ther is not monee ouer the mo- 
nee of the helthe of body; and ther is 
17not liking ouer the ioje of herte. Betere 
is deth than bittere lyf, and euere last- 
1g ende reste than durende sicknesse. Goodis 
hid in a mouth closid, as leiyngis* to of 
plenteuous metes, set aboute with a se- 


W putteth c pr.m. E pr.m. 
G sec.m. ®leiynge 4. > to G sec. m. 


1 Om. 1. 


x knoulechede ¢ pr.m. E pr.m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 181 


the doris of neiz3boris. He that techith2 
his sone, schal be preisid in hym; and’ 
schal haue glorie in hym in the, myddis 
of menyals. He that techith his sone,3 
sendith the enemye in to enuye; and in 
the myddis of frendis he schal haue glorie 
in that sone. The fadir of hym is deed,4 
and he is as not deed; for he hath left 
aftir hym a@ sone lijk hym. He si3 in hiss 
lijf, and was glad in hym; and in his deth 
he was not sori, nether was aschamed bi- 
fore enemyes. For he lefte a defendereé 
of the hous a3ens enemyes; and 3eldynge 
grace to frendis. For the soulis* of sones7 *or the soulis, 
0 ‘i 2 etc. ; that is, 
he schal bynde togidere hise woundis ; _ he schal putte 
and hise entrails schulen be disturblid on See 
ech vois. An hors vntemyd, ‘ether vn-s (eth, to defende 
chastisid', schal ascape hard, and a sone _ bedily liyf, and 
ai r goostly, as to 
vnchastisid schal ascape heedi™. Flatere9 serial ied 
thou the sone, and he schal make thee pi leds, 
dredinge; pleie thou with hym, and he ph eee 
schal make thee sory. Leij3e thou Hott 10 ee ea 
with hym, lest thou haue sorewe togidere, _ inge him, and 
s he schal conm- 
and at the laste thi teeth schulen be _ forte hem of 
his siyknesse, 
astonyed. 3yue thou not power to hy 11 ether deth nei3- 
in jongthe, and dispise thou not hise ins “i here. 


thou3tis.. Boowe thou his necke inl2 lgeie e 
cry nge 

jongthe, and bete thou hise sidis, while Hae ae 
im 0} ise 


he is a 3ong child; lest perauenture he 
wexe hard, and bileue not to thee, and he fever thyn 


folies. astony- 
ed; for bitter- 


scha] be sorewe of soule to thee. Teche 13 bere. hive 
: thoustis ; that 
thi sone, and worche in hym; lest thou is Le imely 
° < ete thau lim 
offende in to the filthe of hym. Betere is 14 for yuele dedis, 
5 ' but also for 
a pore man hool, and strong in my3tis, —yucle thoustis, 
. : whanne they 
than a riche man feble, and betun with appere to thee 
malice. The helthe of soule zs in the 1s bony signes. 
p ne Lire here. c. 
hoolynesse of ri3tfulnesse, and it is betere 
than ony gold and siluer; and a strong ' 
bodi is betere than ful myche catel. No 16 4 suerlastinge 
‘ reste; that is, 
catel is aboue the catel of helthe of bodi; _ reste of boai in 
: . nate the sepulere 
and no likyng is aboue the ioie of herte. 2; ibe ore 
; ASCCAErE sent liyf durith. 
Betere is deth than bittir lijf, and euer-17 Cae 
lastinge reste{ zs betere than siknesse  § Godis hid in 
: a és E a elosid mouth ; 
dwellynge contynueli. Goodis hid in a jg that is, kun 
6 . nyng in @ man 
closid inouth§ ben as settyngis forth of sow to teche. 
y Om, accu, z make thee dreri 


m heedi to visis v. 


182 


19 pulere®. What shal profiten sacrifise to 
the manmet ? and‘ forsothe he shal not 
20eten, ne sauouren®. So he that is dryuen 
awei fro the Lord, and berende meedis 
2tof shrendenesse, seende with e3en and 
weilende, so a geldyng clippende a 
g2maiden, and sizjhende. Sorewi idilnesse 
3yue thou not to thi soule, ne tormente 
23thou thiself in thi counseil. Myrthe of 
herte, that is the lif of man, and tresor 
withoute failing of hoelynesse; and ful 
out iojing of a man ys long lyuyng. 
24Haue merey to thi soule, plesende to 
God ; and withhold and gedere togidere 
thin herte in the holynesse of hym, and 
sorewi idilnesse fer put awei fro thee. 
25 Manye forsothe sorewy idilnesse sleth ; 
2¢and ther is not profitf in it. Enuye 
and wrathe shuln lassen da3es; and bifor 
27tyme thenking shal bringe to elde. A 
bri3t herte good in meteshipes ; the 
meteshipis forsothe of hym diligentli ben 
made. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 The waking of honeste shal dwyne 
the flesh; and the thenking of it shal 
2don awei slep. The thenking of bifor 
kunnyng turneth awei wit; and heuy 
3infirmyte sobre maketh the soule. The 
riche man trauailede in the gedering of 
substaunce; and in his reste he shal be 
4fulfild with his goodus. The pore man 
trauailede in lassing of liflode; and in the 
sende he is mad helpeles, ‘or pores. Who 
looueth gold, shal not ben iustefied ; and 
who folewith wasting, shal be fulfild of 
sit. Manye ben 3yuen in to the fallingus 
of gold; and the los of them is mad in 
ithe fairnesse of it. The tree of offen- 
cioun is gold of men sacrefiende ; wo to 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXX. 19—-XXXI. 7. 


metis set aboute a sepulere. What schali9 
sacrifice profite to an idol? for whi it 
schal not ete, nether schal smelle. So he20 
that is dryuun awei fro the Lord, and 
berith the medis of wickidnesse, seynge21 
with ijen and weilynge imwardli, as a 
geldynge biclippynge a virgyn, and _ si3- 
3ynge. 3yue thou not sorewe to thi22 
soule*, and turmente not thi silf in thi 
counsel. Mirthe of herte, this is the lijf23 
of man, and @s tresour of hoolynesse with 
outen failyng; and ful out ioiyng of a man 
is long lijf. Haue thou mercy on thi24 
soule, and plese thou God; and holde to- 
gidere and gadere togidere thin herte in 
the hoolynesse of hym, and putte fer awei 
sorewe fro thee. For whi sorewe hath 25 
slayn many men; and noon heelthe is ther 
ynne. Enuye and wrathfulnesse schulen 26 
make lesse daies; and thou3tys schulen 
brynge eldnesse bifore the tyme. A27 
schynynge herte 7s good in metis; for whi 
meetis therof ben maad diligentli. 


CAP. XXXI. 


Wakyng of onestef schal make fleischis ! 
to faile; and thou3t. therof schal take awei 
sleep. Thou3t of bifore knowyng turneth 2 
awey wit; and grenouse siknesse makith 
sobre the soule. A ryche man{ trauelide3 
in the gaderyng of catel; and in his reste 
he schal be fillyd with hise goodis. A pore4 
man trauelide in decreessyng of lijflode ; 
and in the ende he is maad nedi. He thats 
loueth gold, schal not be iustified ; and he 
that sneth wastyng, schal be fillid therof. 
Many men ben 3ouun in to the fallyngiss 
of gold); and the perdicioun of hem was 
maad in the feirnesse therof. A tre of7 
offencioun is the gold of hem that maken 
sacrifice ; wo to hem that suen it, and ech 


dryuun awey, 
etc.; fro whom 
kunnyng is 
takun awey of 
the Lord in his 
deth, and is 
dryunnawey fro 
the felouschipe 
of lyuynge men, 
the meedis of 
wickidnesse ¢ 
that is, the 
synnes of leeun- 
yng of good. 
seynge with 
jen ; his nec. 
ligence passid, 
for peyne open- 
yde hise i3en, 
which synne 
closide bifore. 
weilinge ; of 
the leenyng of 
multipliyng of 
kunnyng. as 
gelding ; that 
may not gendre 
bodily, so this 
man may not 
gendre goostly 
bi kunnyng. 
Lire here. c. 

* 3yue thou not 
to sorewe thi 
soule; that is, 
vnresonable 
sorewe, that 
anoyeth bathe 
bedi and soule. 
and turmente 
not thi silf, ete.; 
as they doen 
that dispeiren 
thorou sorewe, 
and sleen hem 
sil the liyf of 
man; that is, 
kepith mannus 
liyf. 4 schyn- 
ynge herte ; 
that is, glad 
and large. is 
good in metis ; 
whiche it syu- 
eth to pore men 
and onest pers 
soonys. 

maad dili- 
gentli; that fs, 
ben maad redy 
clenly, and 
schynyngly, for 
the forseid per- 
soones. Lire 
here. ©. 

+ Waking of 
oneste ; that is, 
in preyer and 
reding of hooly 
scripture. schal 
make fleschis 
to faile ; that 
is, it schal re- 
freyne tho fro 


fleiscly vices. Jerom seith in his pistle to Rustik, the munk, Loue thon the studies of hooly scripturis, and thou schalt not lone the vices of fleisch. 


take awey sleep; of slouthe and idilnesse. 


hifor the izen of the iuge seynge alle thingis. Lire here. c. 


ps ¢ Thou3zt of Goddis biforknowing ; bi which God seeth apertly all thingis. turneth awey the wit; fro al 
yuel. Boys seith in the v. book of Consolacioun, A! 3e men, grect nede of goodnesse is set to yon, if 3e nylen dissymele; for 3e doen alle thingis 


} A riche man; a good riche man traueilide to lyue onestly aftir his staat, and to do 


the werkis of mersi. tm his reste; that is, elde age, ether deth, he schal resseyne euerlastinge goodis for temporal goodis. in decrcessing; that is, 


a fool in spending ; 
auarice is seruyce of idols, in iij. c°. to Coloc. Lire here. c. 


¢ sepulture c. 
E prem, 


d Om. 4. 


é for he spendith more than he wynneth. that loueth gold ; that is, ouermesnrably. Lire here. c. 
is, many men felden in to synnes for gold. tre of offensioun is the gold, ete.; 


© ben honourid £ pr. m. 


fhelthe £ pr. m. 8 Om. c et 


§ fallingis of gold; that 
for whi a coueytouse man loueth his gold as his God, and therefor 


XXXI. 8—2s, 


them that folewen it, and eche vnpru- 
sdent shal pershe in it. Blisful is the 
riche man, that is founde withoute wem; 
and that aftir gold 3ide not, ne hopide in 
9monee, and in tresores. Who is this, and 
wee shul preisen hym? forsothe he dyde 
1omerueilis in his lif. Who is preued in 
it, and perfit is founde, and shal be to 
hym euere lastende glorie? that my3te 
trespasen, and trespaside not, and» don 
11 euelis, and dide not. Therfore stablid ben 
the goodis of hym in the Lord; and the 
almes deedis of hym shal out telle ali the 
i2chirche of halewis. Aboue* the grete 
bord thou hast siten; ne opene thou 
13 out! thi cheeke rathere™. Sei® thou not, 
whethir® manye thingus ben, that vp on 
y4it ben. Haue mynde, for euel is the 
15Shreude e3e. Shreudere thing than the 
e3e, what is foormed? therfore fro al his 
face he shal weepe, whan he hath seen. 
16 Ne strecche thon out thin hond rathere ; 
1zand bi enuye defoulid, thou shame. Ne 
be thou thrist togidere in the feste with 
igwyn. Vnderstond what ben of thi 
1one3hebore, of thiself. Vse as a temperat 
man these thingis that ben leid to thee; 
and not whan thou etist, myche to hate 
2o0thou be had. Cese rathere bicause of 
disciplyne; and wile thon not be to 
myche, lest parauenture thou offende. 
21 And if in the myddel of manye thou 
seete, rathere than thei ne strecche thou 
out thin hond; ne rathere aske thou to 
22drinke. Hou suffisaunt is to a tajt man 
a litil wyn; and in sleping thou shalt 
not tranailen of it, and thou shalt not 
23 feelen tranaile. Waking, and colere, and 
2ianguysh to an vndiscreet man. Slep of 
helthe in a scars man; he shal slepe vnto 
the morutid, and the lif of hym with 
2shym shal deliten. And if constreyned 
thou were in etyng to myche, ris from 
the myddel, and spew; and it shal re- 
freshe thee, and thou shalt not bringe to 


hOm.c. !Om. 4. 


O if E pr. ms. 


k Bi £ pr. m. 


n yndiscreet man s. 
prom, P vnto 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


I vp on it 4E sec.m. GH. 


© and vntemperat man CEGMIMNPQRUVXYA. and vutemperaunt s. 
4 A super ras, spue CEGHIKMNPQRSUVXYa. 


183 


vnprudent man schal perische ther ynne. 
Blissid is a riche man, which is founduns, 


with out wem*; and that 3ede not aftir * with ow 
gold, nether hopide in money, and tre- pe 


anarice. aflir 


souris. Who is this, and we schulens gill sbi eal 
geting, but 


preyse hym? for he dide merueils in his 8 eld ta 
hijf. Which is preued ther ynne, and is to pitouse and 

onest werkis. 
foundun perfit, and euerlastynge glorye Lire here. c. 
schal be to hym? which my3te trespasse, 
and trespasside not, and do yuels, and dide 
not. Therfor hise goodis ben stablischid 11 
in the Lord; and al the chirche of seyntis 
schal telle out hise almesdedis. Thouiz 
hast sete at a greet boordt; opene thou 
not firste thi cheke on it. 

is, whanne thou 


t Thou hast 
5 sele al a greet 
Seie thou not, 13 doord, etc.; that 


whether tho ben many thingis, that ben sy: clepid to the 
on it. Haue thou mynde, that an yueli ah ic 
33e is weiward. What thing worse, than ioe pero 
an ize is maad? therfor of al his face he co. — : 
schal wepe{, whanne he seeth. Stretche 1¢t he schat 
thou not forth first thin hond ; and thou PRE aa fee 
defoulid bi enuye, be aschamed. Be thon i; pee, y2""" 
not oppressid of wyn in a feeste. Vier ie ge otis 
stonde of thi silf the thingis, that ben of for tho ben not 
thi nei3bore. Vse thou as a discreet and ae defould 
temperat man these thingis that ben set Bee 
forth to thee; and be thou not hatid, ‘77° 
whanne thou etist myche. Ceesse thon 20 

first bicause of lernyng, ethir nurture; and 

nyle thou be outrageouse, lest perauenture 

thou offende. And if thou hast sete ina 

the myddis of many men, stretche not 

forth thin hond sunnere than thei; and axe 

thou not firste for to drynke. A litil wyn 22 

is ful sufficient to a lerned man; and in 

slepynge thou schalt not trauele for that 

wyn, and thou schalt not feele trauel. 

Wakyng, and colre, ether bittir moisture, 2 

and gnawyng to an vndiscreet ‘either un- 

temperat man°®. But the sleep of heelthe 24 

is in a scars man; he® schal slepe ‘til to? 

the morewtid, and his soule schal delite 

with hym. And if thou art constreyned 25 

in etyng myche, ryse thon fro the myddis, 

and brake thou; and it schal refreische 


m firste £ pr.m. % And sey 4GH. 


00 ‘he that A 


184 


26thi body siknesse. 
dispise thou not me; and in the? laste 
27 thou shalt fynde my wrdis. In alle thi 
’ werkis be thou swift; and alle infirmyte 
2gshal not meete with thee. The shynende 
in loeues ‘the lippis of PP manye shul 
blissen ; and the witnessing of the 
2gtreuthe of hym feithful. In the most 


wycke bred grucchide the cite; and the . 


witnessing of the wickidnesse4 of it is 
soverre. Bisi men in wyn wile thou not 
stiren ; forsothe many men outlawide 
3] Wyn.. Fyr proueth hard iren; so wyn 
drunken in drunkinhed shal vndernyme 
32 the hertes of proude inen. Euene lif to 
men wyn in’ sobrenesse ; if thou drinke 
33 it mesurably, thou shalt ben sobre. What 
34is the lif that is lassid with wyn? What 
35 bigilith the lif? deth. Wyn in myrthe 
is foormed, not in drunkenhed, fro the 
36 bigynnyng. The ful out io3yng of soule 
and of herte’, wyn mesurably drunken. 
37 Helthe is of soule and of body, sobre 
38drink. Wyn myche drunke terring, and 
wrathe, and manye fallingus maketh. 
39 Bitternesse of soule wyn myche drunken. 
40 The wilsumnesse of drunkenhed the of- 
fensioun of the vnprudent, lassende ver- 
4itue, and makende woundis. In the feste 
of wyn vndernyme thou not a ne3hebore; 
and dispise thou not hym in the myrthe 
420f it. Wrdis of repref sey thou not to 
hym; and bere thou not hym doun in 
ajee*s asking. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 A gouernour thee theit han sett, wile 
thou not ben enhauncid; be thou in hem 
2as oon of hem. The cure of hem haue 
thou, and so bihold; and al thi* cure 
3mad out, reste. That thou glade for 
hem, and the ournement of grace thou 
take; coroun, and dignete of the congre- 
agacioun thou gete. Spec thou more 


* P thi. 
agen E. 


PP Om. c pr.m. 4 wickenesse x, 
tmen gz pr. m. thei c sec. m. sup. Tas. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Here me, sone, and * 


XXXI. 26—XXXIL 4." 


thee, and thou schalt not brynge sikenesse’ 
to thi bodi. Sone, here thou me, and di- 26 
spise thou not me; and at the laste thou 
schalt fynde my wordis. In allée thi27 
werkis be thou swift; and al sikenesse* ae 
ee, ele.; that is 
schal not come to thee. The lippis of 28 defaute of werk. 
of many men ; 
many men schulen blesse a schynynge  wischinge good 
man in looues ; and the witnessyng of his. j,i, or his 
treuthe és feithful. The citee schal grutche 29 msi. worst 
: : breed ; that is, 
in the worste breed; and the witnessyng een 
e . e and 3o0un 
of wickidnesse therof is soth. Nyle thou 30 yuele. Lire 
‘ es : here. ¢. 
excite hem that .ben diligent in wynf;. aye 
: . © to? cite hem that 
for whi wyn hath distried many men.- §.. ditigend th 
Fier preueth hard irun; so wyn drunkun pak pee 
in drunkenesse schal repreue the hertis of — drynke, for 
op E with out this, 
proude men. Euene lijf to men ts wyn32 thei ben ouer 
drunkun in sobrenesse; if thou drynkist it 220yéu™ 
mesurably, thou schalt be sobre. What is 33¢ther nyle thou 
the lijf which ist maad lesse bi wyn? What 34 Pigs a 
. te or ther ben 
defraudith lijf? deth. Wyn was maad 35stirid soone to 
° . mansleing. 
in gladnesse, not in drunkenesse, at the hard irun ; in 
bigynnyng. Wyn drunkun mesurabli is 36 ™3kinge it 
ful out ioiyng of soule and of bodi. Sobre 37 Preve the hertis 
: A of proude men ; 
drynk is helthe of soule and of bodi, in rauyschinge 
A om em hoolliche, 
Wyn drunkun myche makith avoiding, 38 and castinge 
A . d A 
and ire, and many. fallyngis". Wyn39 opin of Olofer- 
drunkun myche ¢s bitternesse of soule. yes cua 
Strengthe of drunkenesse and hirting of 40 at ae 
5 eth of kynde 
an vnprudent man makith vertu lesse, and 


defraudith 
makynge woundis. 


kynde, deth of 
In the feeste of wymn 4! synne defrand- 

repreue thou not a nei3bore; and dispise 

thou not hym in his mirthe. 


* al siyknesse, 


tNyle thou ex- 


ith lyif of grace, 
deth of helle 


g defraudith lyif 
Seye thou 42 of glorie. Lire 


not wordis of schenschipe to hym; and heres Geers 
? 24 at is the 

oppresse thou not hym in axyngef. liyf which is, 
etc.s as if he 


seye, it is not 
mannus liyf, 
but hoggis liyf. 
Lire here. c. 


CAP. XXXII. 
§ oppresse thou 


Thei han set thee a gouernour, nyle1 not him in az. 
thou be enhaunsid: be thou among hem mace 
as oon of hem. Haue thou cure of hem, 2 Se ieee 
and so biholde thou; and whanne al thi pated 
cure is fillid, sitte thon to mete. That3 yuel for good. 
thou be glad for hem, and take the ourne- 
ment of grace; and gete coroun, and dig- 


Lire here. c. 
nyte of congregacioun. Speke thou the4 


risin E prom. 8 body c pr. m. E pr. m. 88 aeyn AG,. 
uthe a. 


or myscheues 1 marg. 


XXXII. 5—21. 


sthur3 birthe ; forsothe ther semeth thee 
ferst the wrd of loouende kunnyng ; and 
Glette thou not musik. Where is not heer- 
ing, heelde thou not out a sermoun; and 
vncouenabli wile thou not’ ben enhauncid 
7in thi wisdam. A litil iemme of kar- 
buncle in the ournement of gold; and 
comparisoun of musikes in the feste of 
swyn. As in forging of gold signe is of 
a smaragd, so the noumbre of musikis in 
ymyrie and temperat wyn. Here thou 
beende* stille, and for reuerence shal falle 
10to thee good grace. Thou a 3ung ful 
Waxen man, spec in thin owne cause 
1) ynnethe, whan nede shul be. If twies 
thou were askid, hane the hed thin an- 
1zgswere. In manye thingus be thou as vn- 
kunnende, and here* thou beende stille 
13togidere and sechende. ToY speken in 
the myddel of grete men ne bifor take 
thon ; and wher ben olde men, not myche 
14spec thou. Biforn hail shal go leiting, 
and biforn shamefastnesse shal go grace, 
and for reverence shal fallen to thee good 
isgrace. And* in the hour of rising ‘tyff 
thou thee not?; ren biforn forsothe first 
in to thin hous, and there be thou clepid 
16to, and there pleye. And do thi con- 
ceyuyngus, and not in giltis, and in™ 
17proud wrd. Vp on alle these thingus 
blisse thou the Lord, that made thee, 
and inwardli drunkinge thee of alle his 
isgoodis. Who dredeth God, shal take” the 
doctrine of hym; and who shul wake 
19to0 hym, shul finde blessing. Who sech- 
eth the lawe, shal be fulfild of it; and 
who aspiendeli doth, shal be sclaundrid 
20in it. Who dreden God, shul finde ri3t- 
wis dom; and ri3twisnesses as 1i3t thei 
21shul teende. A man synnere shal schone 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


185 
gretter* man in birthe; for whi the words 
of hym that loueth kunnyng bicome thee 
first ; and lette thou not musik. Wheres 
heryng is not}, schede thou not out a 
word ; and nyle thou be enhaunsid vnco- 
uenabli in thi wisdom. A iemme of car-7 
buncle in the ournement of gold; and 
comparisoun of musikis in the feeste of 
wyn. As in the makyng of gold is as 
signe of smaragde, so the noumbre of 
musikis 7s in myrie and mesurable wyn. 
Here thou stille, and good grace schalg 
come to thee for reuerence. 3onge man, 10 
speke thou vnnethis in thi cause, whanne 
nede is. If thou art axid twies, the heed 11 
haue thin answere. In many thingis be t2 
thou as vnkunnyng, and here thou stille 
togidere and axynge. And presume thous 
not to speke in the myddis of grete men; 
and where elde men ben, speke thou not 
myche. Leityng schal go bifore hail, and 14 
grace schal go bifore schamfastnesse, and 
good grace schal come to thee for reuer- 
ence. And in the our of risyng tifle thee 15 
not; forsothe renne thou bifore first in to 
thin hous, and there clepe thou thee to 
answer, and there pleie thou. And do thi16é 
conseitist, and not in synnes, and in a 
proud word. On alle these thingis blesse !7 
thou the Lord, that made thee, and fill- 
ynge thee greetli of alle hise goodis. He18 
that dredith God, schal take his techyng ; 
and thei.that waken to hym, schulen fynde 
blessyng. He that sekith the lawe, schal 19 
be fillid therof; and he that doith tretour- 
ousli’, schal be sclaundrid ther ynne. Thei 20 
that dreden God, schulen fynde iust dom ; 
and schulen kyndle rijtfulnesse as lit. 
A synful man§ schal eschewe' blamyng ; 21 
and aftir his wille he schal fynde com- 


* Speke thou 


the gretter, 


ete.; that is, 
thou prelat, 
that owist to 
be ripe in ver- 
tues, and so 
eeld, bi wor. 
schipful age. 
the word of 
him, etc. ; that 
is, of God, who 
loueth kun- 
nyng, and kun- 
nynge men. 
bicome thee 
first; that is, 
principali. und 
lette thou nat 
musik ; that is, 
acording of 
word to liyf; 
for, as Greg. 
seith, in xxxviij. 
Omely, Whos 
liyf is dispisid, 
his preching 
shal be dispisid. 
Lire here. C. 
+ Where hering 
is not, etc.; for 
it were more 
dispising of 
Goddis word, 
than encres- 
ing therof. en- 
haunsid vn- 
couenabli in 
thi wisdom ; in 
auanntinge 
thee hoostfuly 
therof. Leityng 
schal ga bifor 
hayl ; for whi 
hail fallith 
doun in thun- 
dur sum tyme, 
and leyting go- 
ith bifor the 
sown of thun- 
dur. grace ; of 
God. schal go 
bifor schame- 
fastnesse; that 
cometh forth of 
reuerence, for 
whi Goddis 
grace is the 
bigynnyng of 
that renerence. 
tifle thee nat ; 
that is, make 
thee no tari- 
yug in araiyng, 
ether tiflyng of 
heeris, as wym- 
men doon. ¢o 
thyn hows 3 in 
rennynge ajen 
to thyn owne 
consience. cle pe 
thee ¢ to an- 


swer, as to answere of thi dedis bifor the hizeste inge. and there pleye thou ; that is, whanne answer is maad bi this, that thou art not gilti of dedly 


synne, pleye thou with wisdom, bi goode thoujtis that ben delitable. Lire here. c. 
conseyued there, and ocupie thee not in synnes. Lire here. c. 


vOm.cpr.m. © and beynge a. 
not a slo3 wil ¢ pr. m. E pr.m. 


8 traitourli kK. tretourli m. ether aspiyngli x marg. 


Bb 


VOL. ITI. 


x Om. 4. there GH. 
aa Om. c pr.m. 


+ do thi conseitis ; that is, parforme thi good purpos 


§ A synful man ; that is, obstynat in synne. blamyng; xs abhomynuble to him. 


y And to c. z Om. c. 8 haue thou 


b han c prom. 


t ethchewe tr. 


186 


correccioun’; and after his wil he shal 
22 finde comparisoun. A man of counseil 
shal not distro3e vnderstonding ; and an 
alien and a proud shal not ful® dreden 
23drede. Also aftir that he dide with hym 
withoute counseil, and in his infolew- 
24ingis? he shal ben vndernome. Sone, 
withoute counseil no thing do thou; and 
aftir thi deede thou shalt not othynke. 
25 In the weie of falling go thou not, and 
thou shalt not offende ajen stones. Ne 
betake thou thee to a trauailous wey, ne 
26 poote thou to thi soule sclaunder ; and of 
thi sones be war, and of thi homli men 
27tac heed. In al thi werk leeue“ of the 
feith of thi soule; this is forsothe the 
eskeping of the hestes. Who leeneth* to 
God, taketh heed to the hestes; and who 
trosteth in hym, shal not be lassid. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


1 To the dredende God eueles shul not 
meete ; but in tempting God shal kepen 
hym, and delyueren hym fro euelys. 

2The wise man hateth not hestes, and 
rijtwisnesses ; and he shal not ben hurt- 

3lid, as in the tempest of a ship. A weel 
felende man leeueth® to the lawe of God, 
4and the lawe feithful to hym. Who the 
asking maketh open, shal greithe a wrd ; 
and so louli prezende he shal be ful ont 
herd, and he shal kepe disciplyne, and 
5thanne he shal answern. The entrailes 
of a fool as the whel of a carre, and as a 
turnende ful axtre®e the thenkingus’ of 
shym. An hors courser,so and a frend priue 
scornere, vnder eche man vpon sittende 
7ne3eth. Whi dai the dai ouercometh, aud 
eft 1i3t the liz3t, and 3er the ser, sunne the 
ssunne? Of the kunnyng of the Lord 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXXIL 22—XXXIII. 8. 


parisoun. 
leese vndirstonding ; a man alien and 


proud schal not drede* dredyng. 3he, 23 


aftir that he hath do with that drede 
with out councel, and he schal be repreued 
bi hise suyngis. 
with ont councel; and aftir the dede thou 
schalt not repente. 
weie of fallyng, and offende thou not ajens 
stoonys. Bitake thou not thee to a tra- 
uelouse weie, lest thou sette sclaundir to 


thi soule; and be thou war of thi sones, 26 
In al 27 aftir that he 


and perseyue thou of thi meyneals. 
thi werk bileue thout bi feith of thi soule; 
for whi this is the keping of comaunde- 
mentis. He that bileueth to God, takith 
heede to the" comaundementis; and he 
that tristith in hym, schal not be maad 
lesse’. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


Inelis schulen not come to hym that: 
dredith God; but God schal kepe hym in 
temptacioun, and schal delyuere fro yuelis. 
A wijs man hatith not the” comaunde-2 
mentis, and rijtfulnessis; and he schal not 
be hurtlid{ doun, as in the teinpest of a 
schip. A wijs man bileeueth to* the lawe3 
of God, and the lawe is feithful to hym. 
He that makith opene axyng, schal make 
redi a word; and so he schal preie, and 
schal be herd, and he schal kepe techyug, 
aud thanne he schal answere. The en-5 
traylis of a fool ben as a wheel of a 
carte, and his thou3tis as an extre able 
to turne aboute. An hors a stalonn, soc 
and a frend a scornere§, nei3eth vndur ech 
sittynge abone. Whi a dai ouercometh a7 
dai, and eft the li3t owercometh li3t, and 
a jeer ouverconteth a jeer, the sunne ower- 


Sone, do thou no things 


A man of counsel schal not 22 comparisoun; 


that is, au other 
man liyk him, 
ether worse, in 
alegginge that 
man to his ex- 
cusing and de- 
fence. 4 man 
af councel ; that 
is, assenting to 
good councel, 
ondurstondings 


Go thou not in the 25 ofcouncelzouun 


to him, but 
schal bringe to 
execucioun. 
alien ; fro God. 
and proud ; 
dispisynge the 
counce] of an 
other man. 3he, 


hath do with 
that; that is, 
with the drede 
of God, for whi 
a man alien fro 


28 God and proud, 


whanne he is 
set in perel of 
deth, doith sum 
tyme sum good 
thing of kynde, 
for that drede. 
without coun- 
cel; that is, 
stable purpos of 
soule, schal be 
repreued, etc.; 
for whanne the 
dredc is passid, 
he turneth a3en 
to the formere 
yuele custom, 
and so he is 
maad worthi 
to be repreued. 
Lire here. c. 

* schal not 
drede ; that is, 
the manaassing 
of Goddis be- 
tingis. Lire 
here. C. 

+n al thi werk 
bileue thon; 
that is, sette 
thi foundement 
of feith, with 
out which no 
werk plesith 
God. of thi 
soule s that is, 
of thyn herte, 
and not onely 
of thi mouth. 
not be maad 
lesse ; that is, 
schal faile not 
of meede abe- 
dun. Lire here. 


a . . . cy 
$ he schal not be hurtlid; that is, schal not be brokun bi vnpatience. éecking; that is, conenable maner to teche disciplis. The entraylis of a fool ; 


that is, the vndurstonding and desir of au yuel prelat. as aa eztre ; for he hath no stablenesse in good. Lire here. c. 


§ a frend a scornere; 


that is, an yuel prelat, that owith to lone God, and putte forth him silf til to deth for the helthe of the puple; and netheles he scorneth God, and 
takith the office of his vikeried, and chargith not of his onour. neizith ; bi wantownesse of vices. undur ech sittinge aboue him; that is, vndur 
God and hise aungels. /i3¢ ouercometh Ji3¢; for the Jiz3t of the sunne is more than the lizt of the moone, and of othere sterris. ¢he sunne 


b correceioun, or chastisinge & sec. m. marg. Gi. 
€ bileeueth & sec. m. 
f thenkynge seu. 


o Om. CEF pr. m. G@ukMNPQsUXa. his R. 


¢Om. c pr.m. 
€€ or a nathe c sec. m. marg. or a naaue E sec.m. marg. H. axtree, or naaue G. 


¥ lesse, ether desccyued v. 


4 folewingus c. 44 bileeue @ sec. m. 


wOm.cv. *inc. 


XXXII. 9-—22. 


thei ben seuered, the sunne mad, and 
kepende the heste; bi® the wisdam of 
9God thei ben deuydid. And he shal 
chaunge the tymes and the feste dajes 
of hem, and in hem the feste da3es thei 
lohaleweden at the hour. Of hem God 
enhauncede and magniefiede; and of them 
he putte in to the noumbre of da3es and 
3eres; and alle men of the soil®, and of 
the erthe, wherof Adam was foormed. 
11 In the multitude of the disciplyne of the 
Lord he seuerede them, and chaungide 
12the weies of them. And of them he 
blissede, and enhauncede; and of hem 
he halewide, and to hymself he pre- 
sentede ; of hem he curside, and mekede, 
and turnede them to the seueryng of 
13hem. As the cley of the crockere in the 
hond of hym, to foormen and to! dis-~ 
14posen it, alle the weies of it aftir his 
disposicioun ; so a man in his hond that 
made hym; and he shal 3eelde to them 
isaftir his dom. Agen euel is good, and 
ajen lif deth; so and ajen the rijtwis 
man the synnere. And so bihold in to 
alle the werkis of the hejest; two a3en 
16two, oon azjen oon. And I the* laste 
wakide!, and as that gedereth clustris™, 
\7aftir the grape kutteres. In the blessing 
of God and I myself hopede; and as he 
that grapes kutteth", I fulfilde presse®. 
18 Beholdeth, for not to me alone I tra- 
uailede, but to alle men sechende out 
i9disciplyne. Hereth me, 3ee grete men, 
and alle puples; and 3ee gouernoures of 
20the chirche, with eres parceyueth. To 
sone, and wif, brother, and frend, 3if thou 
not power vp on thee in thi lif; and 3yue 
thou not to an other thi possessioun, lest 
it othinke thee, and thou louli preje for 
21 hem. Whil 3it thou art aboue?, o7 dyuest??, 
and brethest, shal not channgen thee alle 
22 flesh. Betere is forsothe, that thi sonus 
thee prejen, than thee to beholden in to 


bh suenel 4. soule rz. i Om. acu. 


© cutte 4G pr. m. It. 


SIna. 
™ pepynes E pr. m. 
el E prem. 


¥ comaundementis a pr. m. a. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


omy presse E pr. m. AGH. 


Z tweyne c. two G. 


187 


cometh the sunne? Tho ben departid of ouercometh the 
, sunne; not that 
the kunnyng of the Lord, bi the sunne  twey sunnes 
ben, but fe 

maad, and kepynge the comaundement? of the same sunne 
God. And it schal chaunge tymes ando pa*sith him silf 

5 = m causinge 

the feeste daies of hem, and in tho tymes _heet, fur in 
. ei ‘a ) somer he catus- 

the Jewis halewiden hali daies at an our. 


ith more heete 
. in oure dwell- 
God enhaunside and magnyfiede of tho 10 ing place, than 


> pee Ce in wynter. the 
hali daies; and of tho he settide* in to Nhe paoment: 
the noumbre of daies; and God made alle ‘>t is sl 
ance 3 18, 
men of sad erthe, and of neische erthe, that is addid 


in summe 
whereof Adam was formed. In the mul-11 bokis, sen de- 


; artid bi th 

titude of kunnyng of the Lord he depart- dom Of Cod, 
ide hem, and chaungide the weies of hem. 5.70! te 

. e 7 

Of hem God blesside, and enhaunside; and Vea Ae 
é " ana it, that 

of hem he halewide, and chees to hym silf; _ is, the sunne, 

cal h sil ‘j schal chaunge 
of hem he curside, and made lowe, and — tymes. Lire 

turnyde hem fro the departyng of hem. 2760 ie sen 

As cley of a pottere 7s in the hond GOS ites 
eS GO) 

hym, to make and dispose, that alle the 14 Pee ee 
: 4 that is addi 

weies therof ben aftir the ordynaunce of in sum bokis, 

and in to jeris, 


hym; so a man ?s in the hond of hym js not of the 
that made hym; and he schal 3elde to (ft Cwatt 


hym bi his dom. Agjens yuel is good, and 15 ®lowis. fro the 
nea Ray R departyng of 
a3ens lijf zs deth ; so and a synnere is hem; iy 
ajens a just man. And so biholde thou in weren depardd 
to alle the werkis of the hijeste; twey? 
thingis a3ens tweyne, and o thing ajens ee 
oon. And Y the laste wakide”, and as he 16 #ere.c. 
that gaderith draf of grapis, aftir the ga- 
dereris of grapis. And Y hopide in the17 
blessyng of God ; and as he that gaderith 
grapis, Y fillide the pressour. Biholde 3e, 1s 
for Y trauelide not to me aloone, but to 
alle that seken kunnyng. Grete men, and ig 
alle puplis, here 3e me; and 3e gouernouris 
of the chirche, perseyne with eeris. 3yue 20 
thou not power ouer thee in thi lijf to a 
sone, and to a womman, to a brothir, and 
to a freend; and 3yue thou not thi pos- 
sessioun to another man, lest perauenture 
it repente thee, and thon biseche for thot. chaps i: 
While thou art alyue, and brethist 3it, ech 21 that is, as long 
fe a as thou lyuest, 
man schal not chaunge thee. For it is 22 noon stire thee 
betere, that thi sones preye thee, than 


fro othere men, 
he turnede hem 


+ biseche for 
tho ; that is, 
for the nedis 


fro this purpos. 
Lire here. c 


1 wallide an. wakid out Gc. 


k to the £ pr.m. 
Pon £ pr.m. pp Om. c 


2z walkide m. 
e 


Bb 


188 


23the hondus of thi sonus. 
2iwerkes beforn passende be thou; ne 
syue thou a wem in to thi glorie. In 
the dai of the ful endyng of the da3es of 
thi lif, and in tyme of thi deth dele thin 
25eritage. Metes, and 3erde, and berthene 
to an asse; bred, and disciplyne, and 
26 werk to a seruaunt. He werketh in dis- 
ciplyne, and the largid’ hond to hym 
secheth ‘to resten™, aud secheth’ fredam. 
27 3oc and brydil't reyne crooken the harde 
necke; and the seruaunt bowen besy 
28werkis. T'o the euel willi sernaunt tor- 
menting and gyues; put hym into werch- 
20ing, lest he be voide; forsothe myche 
30 malice idilnesse ta3te. In werk set hym, 
so forsothe it semeth hym; that if he 
here not, bowe hym with gyues, and 
make thou not large ‘vp on’ alle flesh, 
but with oute dom noo thing do thou 
siheuy. If ther is to thee a feithful ser- 
uaunt, be he to thee as thi lif; as a” 
brother so trete hym, for in blod of lif 
s2thou bo3tyst hym. If thou ‘schalt hurte* 
hym vnri3twisly, in to flizjt he shal ben 
33 turned ; and if enhauncende he schalY go 
awei, whom schalt’’ thou seche, and in 
what weie thou? schalt”* seche hym, thou 
wost not. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 Veyn hope and lesyng to the mys 
felende man; and vnprudent men en- 
2haunsun* sweuenes. As he that caccheth 
shadewe, and pursueth wynd, so and? he 
that taketh heed to the seen lesingus. 
3 Aftir that thing® the sijte of sweuenes ; 
beforn the face of a man the licnesse of 
gan other man. Of the vnclene what shal 
ben clensid, and of the liere what soth 
sShal ben seid? Deuynyng of errour, and 
‘diuynyng bi chiteryng of briddis‘, lesing- 
us,‘o7r false’, and sweuenes of euel doynge 


q large a sec. m. 
hym 4acH. W thi a. 
2% Om. AC pr. m. GH. 
4 cel E sec. m. sup.ras. 


4 the tyme CEFGHIKMNPQRUVX¥a, > Om. G. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 
In alle thi . 


T for to a3en resten G see. m. 

* hurte c pr.m. hurtist z pr.m. 
aherien out c pr.m. £ pr.m. enhaunsinge of H. 
© Om. c ef £ pr.m. G sec. m. 


¢ qa birthun 1. 


XXXIII. 23——XXXIV. 5. 


that thou biholde in to the hondis of thi 
sones. 


glorie. In the day of endyng of daies of 
thi lijf, and in tyme* of thi> goyng out 
departe thin erytage. Metis, and a 3erde,2 
and birthun‘ to an asse; breed, and chas- 
tisyng, and werk to a_ sernaunt. 
worchith in chastisyng*, and sekith to 
hane reste; slake thou hondis to hym, 
and he sekith fredom. 
bowen doun an hard necke; and bisi worch- 
ingis bowen doun a seruaunt. 
and stockis to an yuel willid seruaunt ; 
sende thou hym in to worchyng, lest he 


In alle thi werkis be thou soue-23 
reyn; 3yue thou not a wem in to this 


A 30k and bridil 27 


* He worchith 
in chastising; 


, that is, as long 


as he is holdun 
vndur chas- 
tisyng. 


He 26 Turment and 


stockis, ete.; 
that is, rebel 
and vnfeithful.’ 
idilnesse 3 of 
seruauntis. 
myche malice ; 
to ymagyne 
azenus lordis. 


Turment 28 with out doom; 


of du discre- 
cloun. greu- 
ouse; to thi 
seruauntis. 


be ydel; for whi idilnesse hath tau3te 29 “ire here. c. 


miche malice. Ordeyne thon hym in werk, 30 


for so it bicometh hym ; that if he obeieth 
not, bowe thou doun hym in stockis, and 
make thou not hym large} ouer ony man, 
but with out dom do thou no thing greu- 
ouse. 
he as thi soule to thee; trete thou him so 
as a brother, for thou hast bou3t hym in 


+ make thou 
not him large, 
ete.; that is, 
3yue thou not 
to him power 
ouer ony man, 
for he owith 
not to be soue- 
reyn, but to be 
vnudurlowt ; 


If a feithful seruaunt is to thee, be 31 and this is 


azenus summe 

Cristen princes, 
at maken 

Jewis bailies 


the blood of lijf. If thou hurtist hym a i 


vniustli, he schal be turned in to fleyng 


men. bou3t him 
in the blood of 


awei ; and if he enhaunsynge goith awei, 33 lif; thatis, 


thou noost* whom thou schalt seke, and 
in what weie thou schalt seke hym. 


CAP. XX 


Veyn hope and a leesyng to an vnwijs! 
man; and dremes enhaunsen vnprudent 
men. As he that takith® schadewe, and2 
pursueth wynd, so and he that takith 
heede§ to leesyngis seyn. Vpe-this things 
is the si3t of dremes; bifore the face of a 
man 7s the licnesse of another man. What4 
schal be clensid of him that is vnelene, 
and what trewe thing schal be seid off 
a liere? Fals dyuynyng of errour, ands 
fals dyuynyngis bi chiteryng of briddis, 
and dremes of witchis, is vanyte. And as6 


8 he sechith G sec. m. 


t the brydil £. 
y Om. c pr.m. 


yy Om. c pr. m. 
b Om. «4. 


¥v vypon 
2 Om. GH. 
¢Om. ¢ pr. m. 


4newost1. ¢takithaapr.m. ftoc. 


for nede of thi 
liyf, that stond- 
ith in blood, in 
xij. c°. of Le- 
uytici, the liyf 
of ech fleisch 

is in blood. 
Lire here. c. 

§ takith hede, 
ete.; in veyn 
dremys. what 
schal be clensid, 
ete.; as if he 
seye, no thing, 
but it schal be 
defoulid more. 
of a liere; as if 
he seye, no 
thing ; for if 
the deuel seith 
trewe thingis 
sumtyme, this 
isforto desseyue 
more aftirward, 
and so that 
truthe may be 
seid a leesing 
bi the ende. 
Lire here. c 


XXXIV. 6—21. 


6men is vanyte. And as! of the womman 
berende child, thin’ herte suffreth fanta- 
sies; no" but of the he3est were sent 
out visityng ne 3yue thou in hem thin 
7herte. Manye men forsothe sweuenus 
_maden to erre, and fellen awei hopende 
sin hem. With oute lesing shal be ful 
endid the wrd of the lawe ; and wisdam 
in the mouth of the feithful shal be maad 
gpleyn. Who is not temptid, what kan 
he? A man in manye thingus expert, 
shall thenke manye thingus; and he that 
manye thingus lernede, shal tellen out 
10 vndurstonding. Who is not expert, fewe 
thingus knowith; who forsothe in manye 
thingus is a fool, shal multeplien malice. 
1 Who is not temptid, what maner thingus 
kan he? Who is vnplauntid, shal abound 
12Shreudenesse. Manye thingus I sa3 in 
tellinge out, and manye customes of 
13 wrdis. Other while vn to the deth I was 
in perile, bi the enchesoun of these; and 
I was delyuered bi the grace of God. 
14 The spirit of men dredende God is so3t, 
and in respyt of ‘hym it! shal be blissid. 
1sThe hope forsothe of them in to the 
sauende hem; and the e3en of the Lord 
icin to men loouende hym. Who dredeth 
God, no thing shal quaken, and he shal 
not inwardly dreden ; for he is his hope. 
17 Of the dredende the Lord, blissid is his 
issoule. To whom biholdith he, and who 
19is the strengthe of hym? The e3en of 
the Lord vp on men dredende hym. De- 
fendere of my3t, firmament of vertue, 
coueryng of brennyng, and the hilet, 
‘or the schadowyng place*, of the myd- 
20day; louli pre3ende of gilte, and helpe 
of falling, enhauncende the soule, and 
liztnende e3en, 3yuende helthe, and lif, 
2iand blessing. Of the offrere of the 
wicke thing the offring is defoulid ; and 


plauntid ; that is, hath not set roote of vndurstonding and desir in good. plenteuouse, etc.; multipliynge vices. Lire here. c. 
he ; as if he seide, God is he, to wham he dressith his entent and of whom he hath my3ti ‘defending. Lire here. c. 


that i is, heringe biseching for offensis. Lire here. c. 


f Om. c pr.m. 
et E prom, 


inc pr.m. E pr.m, 


£ Om. I. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


h Om. ce prim. ne £ sec. m. 


b ynto 1. 


189 


the herte of a womman trauelynge of 
child, thin herte suffrith fantasies; no but 
visitacioun is sent out of the hieste, 
3yue thou not thin herte in tho dremes. 
For whi dremes han maad many men for 7 
to erre, and men hopynge in tho fellen 
doun. The word of the lawe ‘of Gods 
and of hise profetis®, schal be maad_per- 
fit with out leesyng ; and wisdom in the 
mouth of a feithful man* schal be maad 
pleyn. What kan he, that is not asaied ?9 
A man asaied in many thingist, schal 
thenke many thingis; and he that lernyde 
many thingis, schal telle out vndirstond- 


* wisdom in the 


* mouth of a 


Seithful man, 
ete.; that is, 
wisdom con. 
teyned in hooly 
scripture schal 
be tan3t pleynly 
in the mouth 
of a feithful 
techere, for he 
kan opene 
and declare the 
hid thingis of 
hooly scrip- 
turis. Lire 
here. C. 
+ A man asay- 
ed in many 
thingis ; that 
is, excercisid 
ether trauelid 
in many scrip- 
turis. thenke 
many thingis, 


yng. He that is not asaied, knowith 10 for bio place 


fewe thingis; forsothe he that is a fool 
in many thingis, schal multiplie malice. 


of scripture he 
declarith an- 
other place 
more hid. 


What maner thingis kan he, that is not 11 2nede many 


asaied ? He that is not plauntidt, schal be 
plenteuouse in wickidnesse. 
thingis in tellyng out, and ful many cus- 
toms of wordis. Sum tyme Y was in! 
perel ‘til to" deth, for the cause of these 
thingis; and Y was delyuered bi the grace 
of God. 
God is sou3t, and schal be blessid in the 
biholding of hym. For whi the hope of! 
hem zs in to God sauynge hem; and the 
izen of the Lord ben in to hem, that loueu 
hym. 
tremble for ony thing, and he! schal not 
drede; for whi God is his hope. 
soule of hym that dredith the Lord, is 
blessid. 


thingis ; hi 
ocupacioun of 
studie. schal 


I siz many 12 ¢etle out ; the 


veri vndirstond- 
ing of scrip- 


g ture. Te that 


is not asaied ; 

in scripturis. 

knowith fewe 

thinyis; for he 
may fynde fewe 


The spirit of hem that dreden l4 thingis bi him 


silf, wherfor 
thei that dey- 


5 Hen not to se 


the seiyngis of 
othere men, ben 
foundun voide 
of truthe. he 
thatis a fool in 


He that dredith God, schal NOt 16 many thingis; 


in appliynge 
his vndurstond- 


Thel7 ing to many 


thingis veyn 
and curiouse. 
schal multiplie 


To whom biholdith he §, and 18 matice; for 


ofte he makith 


who is his strengthe? The izen of the 19s. doctryn. 


Lord ben on hem that dreden hym. God 
ts a defendere of my3t, stidfastnesse of 
vertu, hilyng of heete, and a schadewyng 


place of myddai; bisechyng of offendyng||, 20 


and help of fallyng, enhaunsynge the 
soule, and li3tnynge the izen, and 3yuynge 


Summe hokis 
han, he that is 
maad rennynge 
aboute in many 
thingis, to ’ 
nowe many 
thingis, and 
vndirstondith 
no. sufficiently 
in ony o thing, 
schal muttiplie, 


heelthe, and lijf, and blessyng. The Of- ew, Lire here. 


iitme ge pr.m kOm,.c 


iOm, c. 


: ‘He that is not 


§ To whos biholdits 
|| Bisechinge of offending ; 


190 


the scornyng of vnriz3twis men ben not 
22wel plesende. The Lord alone to men 
sustenende hym in the weie of treuthe, 
23and of ri3twisnesse. The 3iftus of wicke! 
men proueth not the he3est, ne biholdeth 
in the offringus of wicke men, ne in the 
multitude of sacrifises of hem he shal 
24han mercy to synnes. Who offreth sa- 
crifises of the substaunce of pore men, as 
he that sleth to sacrifise the sone in the 
25 siz3te of his fader. The bred of nedy men 
is the liff of the pore™; who bigilith 
26hym, is a man of blod. Who doth awei 
in swot bred, as he that sleth his ne3he- 
27bore. That shedeth" blod, and that doth 
28 gile to the hirid man, ben brethern. Oon 
bildende, and oon distro3ende; what pro- 
29fiteth to them, no°® but trauaile? Oon 
prejende, and oon cursende ; whos vois 
30shal the Lord ful out heren? That is 
baptisid fro the deade, and eft towcheth 
the deade, what profitith his washing ? 
31So a man that fasteth in his synnes, and 
eft the same thingus doende, what pro- 
fitith he mekende hymself ? the orisoun 
of hym who shal ful out heren ? 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 Who kepeth the wrd, multeplieth ori- 
2soun. Holsum sacrifise is to taken heed 
to the maundemens, and to gon awei fro 
3alle wickidnesse. And to sacrifien ples- 
ing of sacrifise vp on vnri3twisnesses, and 
louli prezing for synnes, to gon awei fro 
4ynri3twisnesse. He shal 3elde grace, that 
offreth tried flour; and that? doth’ mercy, 
5 offreth sacrifise™. ‘Weel plesid thing’ is to 
the Lord, to gon awei fro wickidnesse ; 
and louly pre3ing to gon awei fro vnri3t- 
6wisnesse. Thou shalt not aperen bifor 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXKIV. 22—-XXXV. 6. 


fryng of hym that offrith of wickid thing*, 
is defoulid ; and the scornyngis of vniust 
men ben not wel plesannt. 
aloonet 7s to hem that abiden hym in the 
weie of treuthe, and of ri3tfulnesse. 
hizeste appreueth not the 3iftis of wickid 
men, nethir biholdith in the offryngis of 
wickid men, nether in the multitude of 
her sacrifices he schal do mercy to synnes. 


The Lord 22 


* offriih of 
wickid thing; 
that is, of thing 
getun vniustly. 
the scorn- 
yngis, ete. ; 
that is, her 


The 23 offringe of an 


other mannus 
thing, bi whiche 
thei scornen 
God, that ow- 
ith to be onour- 
id of a mannus 
owne good, in 
iij. c°. of Pro. 


He that offrith sacrifice) of the catel of 24uerbis. Lire 


pore men, 7s as he that sleeth the sone in 


the si3t of his fadir. The breed of nedi2s 


men is the lijf of a pore man; he that 


ere. Ce 

t The Lord 
aloone, ete.3 
that is, thei 
that stonden, 
in the weye of 


defraudith hym, is a man of blood. He 200i maw 
° ° « ° BL ULMESSE, 

that takith awei breed in swoot}, 7s as he _ han onely veri 

God for God, 


that sleeth his nei3bore. He that schedith 27 


out blood, and he that doith frande to an 


and he accept- 
ith the jiftis of 
hem. Rauen- 


hirid man, ben britheren. Oon bildynge, 28 0u"s and auer- 


and oon distriynge ; what profitith it to 


hem‘, no but trauel? Oon preiynge, and 29 


oon cursynge; whos vois schal the Lord 


here? What profitith the waischyng of 30 


hym, that is waischun fors* a deed bodi, 


ouse men han 
gold and rich- 
essis for God, 
a glotoun hath 
delices, a lec- 
chour hath Inst 
of touching, 
and siche 
thingis for 
God, wherfor 


and touchith eft a deed bodi? So a man 3t her sacrifices 


that fastith in hise synnes, and eft doynge 
the same synnes, what profitith he in 
mekynge hym silf? who schal here§ his 
preyer ? 

CAP. XXXV. 

He that kepith the word', multiplieth ! 
preier||. Heelful sacrifice is to take heede2 
to the comaundementis, and to departe fro 
al wickidnesse. And to offre the plesyng of3 
sacrifice for vnri3tfulnesses, and bisechyng 
for synnes, is to go awey fro vnri3tful- 
nesse. He that offrith purest flour of4 
wheete, schal 3elde grace{[; and he that 
doith merci, offrith a sacrifice. It is wels 
plesaunt to the Lord, to go awei fro wickid- 
nesse; and preier is to go awei fro vnri3t- 
fulnesse. Thou schalt not appere voide** ® 


ben not accept- 
able to God. 
The breed; that 
is, what ever 
maner mete. is 
the liyf of a 
pore man; that 
is, the susten- 
yng of his liyf. 
man af blood ; 
Austyn seith, 
Feede thon a 
man diynge 
for he 
and if thou 
feedist not him, 
thou hast slayn 
him; myche 
more if thou 
withdrawist 
his liyflode fro 
him. c. 

+ breed in 
swoot ; that is, 
breed getun in 
swoot of tra- 
uelours. ben. 
britheren ; that 
is, ben liyk in 
synne. whos 
vois; as if he 
seye, NO Vvoys$ 


but sich a rauenour schal be punyschid of God for his ynels. Oon preiynge ; for a rauenour, that is, he preiynge to whom the rauenour hath 3oue 
good. and oon cursinge; the rauenour, for he took awey hise goodis. whos voys; as if he seie, noon, for whi the hering of the tirst is lettid for the 
malice of him for whom he preyeth, and the hering of the cursere is lettid for his owne synne, for he synneth in cursinge his neizbore. fastith 
in hise synnes ; that is, for hise synnes to be forjonun. in mekynge him silf; that is, in turmentinge him silf bi fastingis and siche thingis, he 
proftith no thing to remyssyoun of synne doon, far he repentith not verily. Lire here. c. § who schal here, etc.; as if he seye, God schal not 
here. Lire here. c. || multiplieth preiers for he preyeth bi soule and month. for vnrizifulnessis; to be forjouun. Lire here. c. I 3elde 
grace ; that is, schal 3yue a plesaunt seruyce to God. Lire here. c. ** voide; of offring thries in the eer, in xxiij. c°. of Exodi. c. 


l wickid acm. 
q don un. 


1 sechith 4GH. P he that a. 


8 Wel plesynge 4. 


m pore man E pr. m. 


4 ° Om. c prom. ne C sec. m. marg. 
r sacrifises c. 


J sacrificis cnc. & meng. kk fro a sec.m. word of God cr marg. vy. 


XXXV. 7—23. 


7the siz3te of the Lord voide ; forsothe alle 
these thingus for the hestus of God ben 
smad. The offring of the ri3twis fatteth 
the auter; and the sme] of swotenesse is 
9in the siz3te of the hejest. The sacrifise 
of the ri3twis is acceptid, and the mynde 
100f hym the Lord shal not for3ete. With 
good wil 3elde* glorie to God, and lasse 
thou not the cheef frutis of thin hondis. 
11 In alle 3ifte® glad mac thi chere, and in 
‘i2ful out iojing halewe thi dymes. 3if 
to the he3este aftir the free 3ifte of hym ; 
and in good e3e mac thou the finding" of 
isthin hondis. For 3eldende is the Lord, 
and seuensithe as myche he shal 3elde to 
14thee. Wile thou not offren shreude 3iftus; 
1sforsothe he shal not taken hem. And 
wile thou not biholden the vnrijtwis sa- 
crifise; for the Lord is domes man, and 
ther is not anent hym glorie of persone. 
16 The Lord shal not taken a persone in to 
pore; and the pre3ing of the hurt he shall 
17ful out heren. He shal not dispise the 
prejeres of the faderles child, ne the wi- 
dewe, yff she heelde out the speche of 
isweiling. Whether not the teres of the 
widewe at the cheeke gon doun, and the 
outery of hir vp on the ledyng doun of* 
19hem? Fro the cheke forsothe thei ste3en 
vp to heuen, and the Lord herere shal 
2zonot delyten in them. Who honourith 
God in liking, shal ben resseyued’; and 
the lowe pre3yng of hym vnto the cloudis 
2ishal ne3he. The orisoun of the meekende 
hymself shal persen cloudis, and to the 
tyme that it ne3he, he shal not be coum- 
fortid, and not gon awei, to the tyme that 
22the he3est beholde. And the Lord shal 
not longen awey, but demen rijtwis men, 
and don dom; and the strengeste shal 
not han in hem pacience, that he to-tru- 
23 ble the rigge of hem. And to Jentiles he 
shal 3elde veniaunce, to the tyme that he 
take awei the plente of proude men, and 
the kingus dignetees of wicke men he to- 


tgif a. Ugifiis 4. ¥ thou cu. 


m schede c. 


-ECCLESIASTICUS. 


W findingus c. 


a ynto I, 


191 


bifore the si3t of God; for whi alle thesez 

thingis ben doon for the heestis of God. 

The offryng of a iust man makith fat thes 

auter, and is odour of swetnesse in the 

si3t of the hizeste. The sacrifice of a iust9 

man is acceptable, and the Lord schal not 

for3ete the mynde of hym. With good io 

wille 3elde thou glorie to God, and make 

thou not lesse the firste fruytis of thin 

hondis. In ech 3ifte make glad thi cheer, 11 

and in ful out ioiyng halewe thi tithis. 

3yue thou to the hizeste aftir his 3ifte*; 12+ aftr his 
and with good ize make thou the fynd- are 
yng of thin hondis. For whi the Lord is 1 ets oleh 
a 3eldere, and he schal 3elde seuene fold so thou hast of 
myche to thee. Nyle thou offre schrewid 14 with good ise, 
3iftis ; for he schal not resseyue tho. And 15 with Brel 
nyle thou biholde an vniust sacrifice; for cibseives, 
the Lord is iuge, and glorie of persoonet ei as a 
is not at hym. The Lord schal not Gellseagalwen, Lire 
@ persoone ajens a pore man; and he schal + géorie of per- 


° 6 : s 5 etc. that 
here the preier of hym that is hirt. He!vis, taking of : 


schal not dispise the preyeris of a fadirles scone; of @ ea 
child, nether a widewe, if sche schedith™ ™y3ti man. 


i 2 hirt ; vniustly. 
out speche of weilyng. Whether the teeris 18 on hym; that 


: the op- 
of a widew goen not doun to the cheke, preseere, that 
and the criyng of hir on hym that ledith eee 


forth tho ¢eeris? For whi tho stien fro19 © 
the cheke ‘til to® heuene, and the Lord 

herere schal not delite in tho. He that20 
worschipith God in delityng, schal be res- 

seyued ; and his preyer schal neije ‘til to° 

the elowdis. The preier of hym that2! 
mekith hym silf schal perse clowdis, and 

til it neizetht, he schal not be coumfortid, 

God, in get- 


t neigith s to 
and he schal not go awey, til the hizeste — inge effect. 
biholde. And the Lord schal not be fer, 22 ee 
but he schal iuge iust men, and schal Ec eacee 
make doom; and the strongeste schal not _ effect, no but to 
haue pacience in tho, that he troble the as hee 
bak of hem. And he schal 3elde ven-237Pr9S"* 
iaunce to folkis, til he take awei the ful- 

nesse of proude men, aud troble togidere 

the ceptris of wickid men ; til he 3elde to24 

men aftir her dedis, and aftir the werkis 


x Om. accu. Y vndirtaken c pr.m. E pr. m. 


9 ynto IL. 


192 


24truble; to the tyme that he 3elde to men 
aftir ther deedus, and aftir the werkis of 
Adam, and aftir the presumpcioun of 

2shym; to the tyme that he deme the dom 
of his fole, and ‘he schal* delite ri3twis 

2¢6men with his mercy. Fair* the mercy of 
God in tyme of tribulacioun, as a cloude 
of reyn in tyme of dro3te. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Haue mercy of vs, God of alle thingus; 
and behold vs, and shew to vs the ly3t of 
ethi merey doyngus. And send in? thi 
drede vp on Jentilis, that so3ten not thee, 
that thei knowe for ther is not God, but 
thou; that thei telle out thi grete wrthi 
sdeedis. ere vp thin hond vp on aliene 
4folkis, that they see thi my3t. As for- 
sothe in the sijte of hem thou art ha- 
lewed in vs, sO in oure si3te thou shalt be 
5magnefied in hem; that thei knowe thee, 
as and© wee han knowe, for ther is noon 
6other God, saue thee’, Lord’. Ennewe 
7thou signes, and chaunge merueiles ; glo- 
srifie the hond, and® the ri3t arm. Rere 
vp wodnesse, and heeld oute wrathe ; 
genhaunce’ the aduersarie, and tormente 
lothe enemye. Heeze thou the tyme, and 
haue mynde of the ende, that thei telle 
11out thi merueilis. In the ire of flaume 
be he deuoured that is saued; and that 
werst treten thi folc, finde thei perdi- 
12cioun. To-brose thou the hed of princes, 
and of the enemy, seiende, Ther is noon 
13 other, saue wee. Gedere togidere alle the 
lynagis of Jacob, and knowe thei for ther 
is no God but thou, that thei telle out 
thi grete wrthi deedis; and thou shalt 
eritage them, as fro the bigynnyng. 
it Haue mercy to® thi puple, vp on the" 
whiche is inwardli clepid thi name ; 
and to Irael, whom thou hast euened to 
isthi first goten. Haue mercy to Jerusa- 
lem, the cyte of thin halewing, the cite 
160f-thi reste. Fulfil Syon with thin vn- 


b Om. acu. 
h Om. 4EGH. 


2 Om. c pr.m. 
out E pr. nm. 


a Fayr is a. 
&8on HH. 


P Om. 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


c Om. 


XXXV. 24-—XXXVI. 16. 


of Adam*, and aftir the presumpcioun of  * of Adam; the 
: 0 lettre hath of 
hym; til he deme the dome of his puple, 25 Adam, but bi 
é : : : +  Ebreys this 
and schal delite 1st men in his merci.  \ora’ adam 
: , too signefieth man 
The merci of God zs fair in the tyme of 2¢ fen aiyaesa 
tribulacioun, as clowdis of reyn in the 


so it is set here. 
the presump- 
tyme of drynesse. 


cioun of him; 
bi which he 
oppressith vn- 
justly a man 
liyk him silf in 
kynde. Lire 
here. c. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


God of alle thingis, haue thou merci on1 
vs; and biholde thou vs, and schewe thouP 
to vs the li3t of thi merciful doyngis. 
And sende thi drede on hethene men, that2 
sou3ten not thee, that thei knowe that no 
God is, no but thou; that thei telle out 
thi grete dedis. Reise thin hond on he-3 
thene men aliens, that thei se thi power. 
For as thou were halewid in vs in the si3t 4 
of hem, so in oure si3t thou schalt be mag- 
nefyed in hem; that thei knowe thee, ass 
and we han knowe, that noon othere is God, 
outakun thee, Lord. Make thou newee 
signes, and chaunge thou merueilis ; glo-7 
rifie the hondt, and the ri3t arm. Reises + the hond; 
thou stronge veniaunce, and schede out tae 
ire; take awei the aduersarie, and tur-9 page Ie 
mente the enemye. Haaste thou the tyme, 10 eae 
and haue thou mynde on the ende, that ere. c. 
thei telle out thi merueils. And he thati 
is sauyd, be deuourid in the ire of flawme; 
and thei that treten worst thi puple, fynde 
perdicioun. Al] to-breke thou the heed of 12 
princis, and of enemyes, seiynge, Noon 
othere is, outakun vs. Gadere thou togi-13 
dere alle the lynagis of Jacob, and knowe 
thei that no God is, no4 but thou, that 
thei telle out thi grete dedis; and thou 
schalt enherite hemf, as at the bigynnyng. 1 ee 
Haue thou merci on thi puple, on which 14 whanne thet 
thi name is elepid in to help; and on Is- pars aoe 
rael, whom thou madist euene to thi firste ea oe 
gendrid sone. Haue thou merci on J: eru- 15 2 we ae 
salem, the citee of thin halewyng, on the  chesing of the 
citee of thi reste. Fille thou Syon with 16 rire here. c. 


the lond of bi- 


puple of Israel. 


AGH. thee. e¢alone a. ¢€ of a. f enhaunce 


q Om. 1. 


XXXVI. 17—-XXXVII. 3. 


tellable vertues, and thi puple with thi 
izglorie. 3if witnessing, for fro the bigyn- 
nyng thi creatures thei ben; and rere the 
prejeres, that the rathere profetes speeken 
isin thi name. 3if meede, Lord, to men 
sustenende thee, that thi profetes feithful 
bee founden; and heere thou the orisoun 
19of thi seruauns. Aftir the blissing of 
Aron 3if to thi puple, and ri3te reule vs 
in to the weie! of riz3twisnes; that thei 
alle wite, that dwellen the* erthe, for 
20 thou art God, biholdere! of worldis. Eche 
mete the wombe schal ete, and ther is 
21mete betere than mete. Cheekes touchen 
ne3h™ the mete, and the mysfelende herte 
22lesyng wrdys. The shreude herte shal 
3yue sorewy slouthe, and the wise man 
23shal withstonde to it. The womman 
schal® taken eche male child, and ther is 
21a do3ter betere than the sone. The fair- 
nesse of a womman gladith out the face 
of hyr man, and ouer alle lust of the 
2sman she® shal ‘ouer leden? desyr. If 
ther is tunge of curing, ther is and of 
swaging, and of mercy; the man of hir 
26is not aftir the sonus of men. Who weld- 
ith a good womman, bigyneth posses- 
sioun; helpe aftir hym she is, and a 
27 piler as reste. Wher is not hegge, shal 
ben to-broken4 the possessioun ; and 
where is not a womman, weileth the 
28nedy. To? whom byleeueth’ he‘ that hath 
not a nest, and bowing doun wher euere 
shal ben derk, as a gird vp thef, lepende 
out fro cite in to cyte? 


CAP. XXXVII. 


1 Kche frend shal seyn, And I frenshipe 
couplede; but ther is a frend, bi only 
name a frend. Whether not sorewe is 

2in vnto deth? A mete felawe forsothe 
and a frend to enemyte shul ben turned. 

30! most shreude presumpcioun, whennus 


kin the u. 
r Om. ¢ pr.m. 


'hond £ pr.m. 
Pledenc. 4 not broken u. 


T oon Cc sec.m. 1. Om. A prem. C pr.m. 
VOL. If. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


land beholder 4. ™ almest E pr.m. 
8 leeueth c pr.m. E pr. m. 


8 Om. A pr.m. C pr.m. 
cc 


193 


thi vertues, that noun not be teld out, 
and fille thi puple with thi glorie. 
thou witnessyng, that at the bigynunyng 
thei weren thi creaturis*; and reise thou 
preieris, whiche the formere profetis spaken 
in thi name. 
hem that abiden thee, that thi prophetis 
be foundun trewe; and here thou the 
preier of thi seruauntis. 
yng of Aaron 3yue thou to thi puple, and 
dresse thou vs in to the weie of ri3tful- 
nesse ; that alle men wite, that dwellen in 
erthe, that thou art God, the biholdere of 
worldis. 
and of mete is betere than another* mete. 


3yue 17 


Aftir the bless- tg 


* thi creaturis ; 
that is, special 
sores of Israel. 


Lord, 3yue thou meede tois/*7 "ere &: 


+t louchen mete; 
in taking it, 
and ehewen not 
sufficiently, but 
swolewen ouer 
with out du 


The wombe schal ete alle mete, 20 chewing and 


prenyng. knaue 
child ; for sche 
wolde euer bere 


Chekis touchen mete} almest, and an vn-21a knave child. 


wise herte vesseyucth false wordis. 
schrewid herte schal 3yue heuynesse, and 
a wijs inan schal a3eustonde it. 
man schal take ech knaue child, and a 


Lire here. c. 


A 22 + If ther is a 


tunge of heel- 
ing; that is, of 


A Wome 23 Feprettyng in 


the hosebonde, 
in reprenynge 
the outrageouse 


dou3tir is betere than a sone. The fair- 24 aray of the 


nesse of a womman makith glad the face 
of hir hosebonde, and sche schal brynge 


wiyf, ether vn- 
stable mouyng 
of hir. aftir the 
sones of men ; 


desir ouer al the coueitise of man. If ther 25 that is, he is 


is a tunge of heelyng}, ther is also of 
swagyng, and of merci; the hosebonde of 


hir is not aftir the sones of men. He that26 


hath in possessioun a good womman, bi- 
gynneth possessioun ; sche is an help lijk 


not manly and 
disereet, but 
neische and 
fonnyd. bigyn- 
neth posses- 
sioun ; that is, 
higynneth to 
be riche, thou3 
he hadde no 
more good. no 


hym, and a piler as reste. Where an hegge 27 nest; that is, 


is not, the possessioun schal be rauyschid 
awei; and where a womman is not, a nedi 


stidefast dwell- 
ing, as if he 
seie, he bi- 
leueth not to 


man weilith. To whom bileueth he that 2s ony wise man, 


hath no nest, and bowith doun where euer 
it is derk, as a theef girt, skippynge out 
fro citee in to citee? 


CAP. XXXVIL. 


Ech frend schal seie, And Y haue cou-1 
plid frenschip; but that is a frend, a frend 
bi name aloone. Whether sorewe is§ not 
til to deth? Forsothe a felowe of tablee 
and a frend schulen be turned to enemyte. 
A! thet worste presuinpcioun, wherof art3 


" wile c pr.m. EB pr.m. ° Om. Gi. 
t Om. c pr.m. E prem. 


t thou c sec. m. V. 


and therfor he 
failith in dis- 
crecioun of 
good, and of 
yuel. as a theef 
girt; that is, 
maad redy to 
do yuele. Lire 
here. C. 

§ Wher sorewe 
és, etc.; hi sieh 
frenschipe, as 
if he seide, 3is3 
for whi no 
pestilence is 
my3tiere to 
anoye, than is 
an homely 
enemye. Lire 
here. c. 


194 


art thou foormed to coueren drie ma- 
slice, and the treccherie of it? The mete 
felawe to the frend shal be merie in lik- 
ingus, and in the dai of tribulacioun he 
5shal be aduersarie. A mete felawe to the 
frend sorewith with, bi cause of the 
wombe; and a3en the enemy he shal 
6take sheld. For3ete thon not of thi frend 
in thin inwit, and be thou not vynmynde- 
7ful of hym in thi werkis. Wile thou nott 
counselen with thi wyues fader ; and fro 
8 men enuyende to thee hyd counseil. Eche 
counseiler disconereth counsel, but ther 
9is a counseiler in hymself. Fro an" euel 
counseiler kep thi soule ; first wite thou, 
what be the nede of hym, and what he in 
10his inwit shal thenken ; lest par auenture 
he poote a pol,‘o7' a stake’, in to the erthe, 
land sey to thee, Good is thi wey, and 
stonde a3eenward, to seen what falle to 
12thee. With an vureligious man trete of 
hoolynesse”, and with the vnri3twis man of 
ri3twisnesse, and with a womman of tho 
thingus that she enuyeth. Wile thou not 
counseilen with hym that hath thee sus- 
pect, and fro men enuyende to thee, hid 
thou thi counseil. With the dredful trete 
of bataile, and with the marchaund, ‘of 
castinge out of schyppe*; with the biere, 
of silling, with the enuyous man, of 
isgraces to be don; with the vnpitouse, of 
pite, with the vnhonest, of honeste, with 
lathe werkere’, of alle werk; with the an- 
nuel werker’, of the ful endyng of the 
3er, with the slowe seruaunt, of myche 
werchyng. Tac thou not heed to ‘these 
isin al* counseil, but with an hoely man 
be thou bysy, whom euere thou shalt 
i¢éknowe kepende the drede of God, whos 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXXVI. 4—16, 


thou maad* to hile drie malice, and the 
gilefulnesse therof? <A felowe of tables 
schal be myrie with a frend in delityngis, 
and in the dai of tribulacioun he schal be 
aduersarie. A felowe of table schal haues 
sorewe with a frend, for cause of the 
wombe ; and he schal take scheeld ajens 
an enemye. For3ete thou not thi frend ine 
thi soule, and be thou not vnmyndeful of 
hym in thi werkis. Nyle thou take coun-7 
cel with the fadir of thi wijf; and hide 
thou councel fro hem that han enuye to 
thee. Ech councelowrt schewith councel,s 
but ther is a councelour to hym silf. Kepeo 
thi soule fro an yuel counselour ; firste 
wite thou, what is his nede, and what he 
schal thenke in his soule; lest perauen-10 
ture he sede a stake in to the erthe, and 
seie to thee, Thi weie is good, and heit 
stonde a3enward, to se what schal bifalle 
to thee. With an vnreligiouse man trete 12 
thou of holynesse{, and with an vniust 
man of ri3tfulnesse, and with a womiman 
of these thingis whiche sche hatith. With 
a ferdful man trete thou of batel, with a 
marchaunt, of cariyng ouer of marchaun- 
dies to chepyng* ; with a biere, of sillyng, 
with an enuyouse man, of graces to be 
don; with an vupitouse man, of pytee, with 13 
an vnonest" man, of oneste, with a werk 
man of the feeld, of ech werk; with a werk 14 
man hirid bi the 3eer, of the endyng of 
the 3eer, with a slowe sernaunt, of nryche 
worchyng. 3yue thon not’ tent to these 
men in al councel, but be thou bisi with ts 
au hooli man, whom euere thou knowist 
kepynge Goddis drede, whos soule is aftir 16 
thi sounle. Who euer doutith in derknessis, 
schal not haue sorewe with thee. And17 


ta the restoring of thi wiyf, for whi enere he schal stonde for his dougter, and turne awey fro truthe, for Aeisli affeccioun. Lire here. c. 
celour; vnteithtul. schewith cauncel ; as vndur the coluur of his good, that axith conncel. to him silf; that is, purposinge his owne profit, and not 


his profit to whom he 3yueth councel. Lire here. c. 


* A! thou 
worstle pre- 
sumpcioun, 
wher of art 
thau maad ; as 
if he seye, of 
noon ; for whi 
ech creature is 
maad good of 
God 3 but 
synne is de- 
faute, and hath 
no cause of be- 
yng bi it silf. 
Denyis seith 
thus, in his 
book of Dyuyn 
Namys. Noon 
that purposith 
yuel, worchith 
wel. ta hile; bi 
feynyng of 
reuschipe, 
drie malice; 
with outen 
vinour of good- 
nesse. in delit~ 
ingis; that is, 
in the tyme of 
prosperite. in 
the tyme of tri- 
bulacioun; 
whanne pro- 
sperite failith, 
for which he 
feynede him 
for to loue. 
hath sorewe; 
that is, feyneth 
him to haue 
sorewe. with a 
Jrend ; in tyme 
of his siknesse. 
for cause of the 
wombe; that is, 
of glotenye. 
take scheeld 
wzenus an 
enemy; of the 
frend, as for to 
defende the 
frend; that is, 
if he doith this 
ony tyme, he 
ith it for 
glotenye, and 
not for veri 
freuschipe. For- 
3ele thow not 
thi very frend 
in thi soule; so 
that thou love 
not him onely 
bi mouth, but 
also with herte 
and werk. with 
the fadir of thi 
wiyf; that is, 
of these thingis 
that perteynen 
+ Ech coun- 


tiuirete thou of hoolynesse; the autour of this book spekith here in scorn, and vndur- 


stondith the coutrarie of his seiyng; as if he seye, siche an vnreligionse man schal councele thee yuele. and with an oniust man of ri3iful- 
nesse; liyk speche is here, vndurstondinge the contrarie, as it schal be opyn bi the ende of this part. of graces, etc.; that is, to 3yue frely 
to othere men. be thou bisi with an haoly man; that is, stable and sad in goodnesse and mesure, and trete thou with him of thi prinytees. 
knowist ; bi werkis. whos soule, etc.; that is, that loueth thee as him silf, and aj3enward. douwtith in derknessis; of iguoraunce, ether of 


“aman c prom. E prem. VY Om. c et & pr.m. 


t shiping P. 


W homlynesse c. 
¥ feeld werkere c pr.m. e pr.m. acu. % werke c pr. m. 


Uonest A pr.m. 


x trete of chaunging c pr. m. E pr.m. 
4 alle these in c. 


VYnoc, 


XXXVIL. 17—34. 


soule is aftir thi soule. Who euere shal 
wageren in dercnesses, shal not togidere 
i7sorewen” to thee. And herte of good 
counseil sette thou with thee; ther is not 
18forsothe to thee other more than it. The 
soule of an hoely man telleth out other 
while sothis; more than seuene lookeres 
aboute sittende in to hei;te to beholden. 
19 And in alle these thingus louliche pre3e 
the he3est, that he rij3t reule in treuthe thi 
20wey. Biforn alle werkes a verre wrd go 
bifor thee; and biforn alle deede stable 
21counseil. A shreude wrd ‘schal chaunge® 
the herte, of the whiche foure partis 
springen ; good and euel, lif and deth; 
and the lordshipere of these is a bysy 
2tunge. A wys man many men ta3te, and 
23to his soule is sweete. Who sofistically 
speketh, is hateful; in? alle thing he shal 
2tben bigilid. Forsothe ther is not 3yuen to 
hym of the Lord grace, forsothe he is 
2sbigilid of alle wisdom. Ther is a wys 
man wiys to his soule, and the frutes of 
26the® wit of hym ben preisable. A wis 
man techeth his fole, and the frutis of 
27the wit off hym ben feithful. A wys 
man shal be fulfild with blissingus, and 
2smen seende hym shul preisen. The lif 
of a man in the noumbre of dajes; the 
dajes forsothe of Irael ben vnnoumbre- 
2g9able. A wis man in puple shal eritagen 
wrshipe, and the name of hym shal ben 
solyuende in to withoute ende. Sone, in 
thi lif tempte thou thi soule; and if it 
were shreude, 3if thou not to it power ; 
31 forsothe not alle thingus to alle speden’, 
and ne to eche soule eche kinde pleseth. 
32 Wile thou not ben gredy in alle plen- 
teuous mete 3yuyng, and heeld thee not 
330ut ypon eche mete. In manye forsothe 
metus shal ben infirmyte, and gredynesse 
34shal ne3hen vnto colre. For glotonye 
manye men dieden ; who forsothe is ab- 
stenent, shal eechen lijf. 


b seruen c pr.m. E pr.m. 


f the frute of E pr.m. GH.  & gode 4. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


¢ chaungeth c pr, m. 


195 


synne. soretre 
with thee ; that 
is, verily, and 


stablische thou the herte of good councel 
with thee; for whi another thing is not 

more than it to thee. The soule of ani pore snd 
hooli man tellith out treuthis sum tyme;  37¥¢ 820d comn- 


. si x cel to thee in 
more than seuene biholderis sittynge an a nede. the 
‘ . é herte of gout 
hij for to biholde. And in alle these ig councel; that 
RO OF : is, will 
thingis biseche thou the hijeste, that he god councel., 
o ‘ G ‘i 5 OF a not more; that 
dresse thi weie in treuthe. Bifore NG. tacos. Lire 
werkis a sothefast word* go bifore thee; 7. © 
é . * a sothfast 
and a stidfast councel go bifore ech dede. — word, ete.; in 
aus biheestis and 
A wickid word schal chaunge the herte, 21 answeris. wick- 
d i . .  tdword; that 
of which herfe foure partis comen forth; j,, Sfue word. 
good and yuel, lijf and deth; and a bisi pe aie ae 
tunge is lord of tho. A wijs man hath 22to peel ae 
Z ’ and yuel ; 0 
tan3t-many men, and he is swete to his kynde. digf; of 
‘ ‘ ; . and 
soule. He that spekith ‘bi soffym*, iS 25 deth; of synne. 
hateful; he schal be defraudid in ech Bee ee 
thing. For whi grace is not 30uun of the 24 of the herte bi 
Z : disposing ; but 
Lord to hym, for he is defraudid of al aakit 
‘ fait G AG 3 that h rut 
wisdom. A wijs man is wijs to his soule, 25 deh Bere 
: . . : th forth 
and the fruytis of his wit ben worthi to  ¢¢mannus 
“en he * . herte, and is not 
be preisid. A wijs man techith his puple, 26 maad of God. 
and the fruytis of his wit ben feithful. Us ‘ge eles 
a ‘ is “s 8, Me OISy- 
A wijs man schal be fillid with blessyngis, 27 nesse of good 
6 - ching, that 
and thei that seen hym schulen preise  refreyneth yuel, 
hym‘. The lijf of a man is in the noum-28 ioe iene 
bre of daies; but the daies of Israel ben 24 pe a 
vnnoumbrable. A wijs man in the puple 29 iynde ane lint 
if é of grace. Lire 
schal enherite onour, and his name schal tere. c. 
be lynynge with outen ende. Sone, asaie 30 
thi soule in thi hjf; and if it is wickid, 
3yue thou not power to it; for whi not31 
alle thingis speden to alle men, and not 
ech kynde plesith ech soule. Nyle thous2 
be gredi in ech etyng, and schede thou 
not out thee on ech mete. For in many 33 
metis schal be sikenesse, and gredynesse 
schal neize ‘til to” colrye. Many mens 
dieden for glotenye; but he that is absti- 
nent, schal encreesse lijf. 
e Om. GH. 


d and in a. dd Om. c pr.m. 


u gofisticali, ether bi soffym [to deceive V] cEFGuUKMNPQRUVXa. sophisticali 1. sofisticaly, ethir bi 


soffemys 8. ethir deisseyuably to God x marg. 


v Om. 1. 


Ww vnto I. 


ce 2 


196 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


1 Honoure the leche, for nede; forsothe 
zhym foormede the he3est. Of God for- 
sothe is alle leching; and fro the king he 
3schal take 3yuyng. The disciplyne of 
the leche shal enhaunse the hed of hym; 
and in the siz3te of grete men he shal ben 
spreisid. The he3est foormede of the 
erthe medycyne; and the prudent man 
sshal not agrisen it. Whether not of the 
etree is mad sweete the bitter water? At 
the knowleching of men the vertue of 
them; and the hejest 3af to men kun- 
nyng, to be wrshipid in his merueiles. 
7In these thingus he" curende shal swage 
sorewen, and the oynement makere shal 
make pymentis of swotenesse, and enoynt- 
ingus' he shal. make of helthe; and the 
werkis of hym shul not ben ful endid. 
8The pes forsothe of God vpon the face 
9of the erthe. My sone, in thin infirmytee 
ne dispise thou thiself; but prei the Lord, 
1oand he shal cure thee. Turne awei fro 
gilte, and dresse thou the hondis, and fro 
ialle gilte clense thin herte. 3if* swet- 
nesse, and mynde of tried flour, and mac 
fat the offring; and 3if stede to the 
12leche. Forsothe the Lord foormede hym, 
and go he not awei fro thee; for his 
iswerkis ben nedeful. Ther is forsothe 
tyme, whan thou renne in to the hondis 
140f hem. Thei forsothe the Lord shul 
louly preizen, that he ri3t renle the reste 
of hem, and helthe for ther conuersa- 
iscioun. Who gilteth in his si;t, that made 
hym, shal falie in to the hondus of the 
isleche. Sone, in to the deade bringe forth 
teris, and as harde thingus suffrid bigyn 
to wepe; and aftir dom touche his body, 
and dispise thou not the biriyng of hym. 
17For the acusing forsothe bitterly ber 
weilyng ‘of hym! o dai; and tac coum- 
isfort for heuynesse. And do weilyng 
after the deseruyng of hym o dai, or two, 


h Om. a. 


x oynementis 1, 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


i onementis 4, oynementis & sec. m. 


XXXVIII. 1—18. 


CAP. XXXVIIL. . 


Onoure thou a leche, for nede; for whi! 
the hi3este hath maad hym. For whi2 
al medicyn is of God; and he schal take 
of the kyng a 3ifte. The kunnyng of a3 
leche schal enhaunse his heed; and he 
schal be preisid in the si3t of grete men. 
The hizeste hath maad of the erthe medi-4 
cyn; and a prudent man schal not wlate 
it. Whether bittir watir was not maads 
swete of a tre? The vertu of tho thingisé 
cam bi experience to the knowing of men; 
and the hizeste 3af kunnyng to men, for 
to be onourid in his merueils. A man7 
heelynge in these thingis schal aswage 
sorewe, and an oynement makere schal 
make pymentis of swetnesse, and schal 
make anoyntyngis* of heelthe; and hise 
werkis schulen not* be endid. For whis 
the pees of God zs on the face of erthe. 
Mi sone, dispise not thi silf in thi sike-9 
nesset ; but preie thou the Lord, and he 
schal heele thee. 
synne, and dresse thinY hondis, and clense 
thin herte fro al synne. 
nesse, and the mynde of cleene flour of 
wheete, and make thou fat offryng; and 
3yue thou piace to a leche. 
made hym, and departe he not fro thee; for 
hise werkis ben nedeful to thee. 
tyme is, whanne thou schalt falle in to 


the hondis of hem. Forsothe thei sehulen 14 


biseche the Lord, that he dresse the werk 


Turne thou awei fro 1o 


* werkis schu- 
len not, ete.; 
that is, schulen 
not haue effect 
purposid bi the 
leche and ipote- 
carte, for whi 
the doing of 
God, which is 
principal Jeeche, 
is nedeful herto. 
Lire here. c. 

t dispise not 
thi silf in thi 
goostly syk- 
nesse; in dis- 
pisinge to seke 
remedy, as 
summen dis- 
pisen. preye 
thou the Lord ; 
denoutly. schal 
heele thee 3 
with oynement 
of grace. dresse 
hondis; that is, 
thi werkis to 
God. clense 
thyn herte; bi 
veri and cleene 
contricionn. 


3yue thou swet- 11 syve thaw place 


to a leche; in 
onouringe the 
prest preiynge 
for thee. the 


For the Lord 12 207 made him; 


that is, anann- 
side him to the 
office of prest- 


For whi 13 hood. departe 


he nat fro thee; 
that is, fro thyn 
herte, for thou 
owist euere for 
to loue and 
worschipe him. 


of hem, and helthe for her lyuyng. He ts hise werkis,ete.; 


that trespassith in the si3t of hym, that 
made hym, schal falle in to the hondis of 
the leche. 
on a deed man, and thou as suffrynge 
hard thingis bigynne to wepe; and bi 
doom hile thou the bodi of hym, and 
dispise thou not his biriyng. 
bacbityng bere thou bittirli the morenyng 
of hym o dai; and be thou coumfortid for 


But for17 


that is, to offre 
sacrifices, and 
to preye for the 
synnes of the 


Sone, brynge thou forth teeris 1¢PuPle Hou 


schalt faile in 
to the handis of 
hem; for whi 
present liyf is 
not passid with 
out synnes. 
Lire here. c. 
t be thou 
coumfortid for 
sarewe : that 
is, lest oner 
sorewe 


; greet 
sorewe{. And make thou morenyng aftir 18 anoye thee. 


k 3if thou acu. 10m. c prom. 


y Om. A pr.m. 


XXXVI. 19—32. 


19for bacbiting. Of™ sorewi slouthe for- 
sothe hee3eth deth, and couereth vertue ; 
and sorewi slouthe of herte boowith the 
2onol. In ledyng awei dwellith stille so- 
rewy slouthe; and the substaunce of the 
2t helpeles aftir the herte of hym. Ne 3yue 
thou thin herte in sorewy slouthe, but 
putte it awei fro thee; and haue mynde 
of the laste thingus, and wile thou not 
22for3eten. Ne forsothe ther is conuersa- 
cioun, and to this thou schalt no thing 
profiten; and thi self thou shalt werst 
23treten. Myndeful be thou of my dom; 
so forsothe it shal ben and thin, to me 
243istay", and to thee to day. In the reste 
of the deade mac to resten the mynde of 
hym; and coumforte hym in the goyng 
25 out of his spirit. Wisdom wrijt in tyme 
of voydenesse; and who is lassid in deede, 
wisdom shal parceyue; for with wisdoin 
26 he shal be fulfild. Who holdeth the plo3, 
and who glorieth in the spere, with the 
pricke stereth the oxen, and woneth in 
the werkis of hem; and the telling of 
27hym in the sonus of booles. His herte 
he shal 3yue ‘to ben turned the forewis® ; 
and the wach of it in the fatnesse of kyn. 
28So eche smythe, and cheef werkere, the 
whyche the ny3t as the? day ouerdoth; 
the whyche grauede grauen broochis, and 
the bysynesse of hym varieth‘ the peyn- 
ture; his herte he shal 3yue into the 
licnesse of peynture, and his waking par- 
29formeth the werk. So the iren smyth 
sittende biside the stithie, and biholdende 
the werk of the iren, the humour of the 
fyr brenneth his flesh; and in the hete of 
the furneys he trauailith with stryif. 
30 The vois of hamer™ ennewith’ his ere; 
and a3en the licnesse of the vessel the 
s1e3e of hym. His herte he shal 3yue in 
to the ful ending of the werkis; and his 
waking shal enourne the inparfitnesse. 
s2So0 the crockere sittende at his werk, 
turnende with his feet the whel, the 


m Big prem. % jisterdai celeri passim. 


c pr.m. 


y Om. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


9° to the plowis to ben turned c pr.m. E pr.m. 
4 varieth, or makith dyuerse AE see. m. GH. 


2 is fro deeth to this present liff v. 


197 


his merit o dai, ether tweyne, for bacbit- — Aiith vertu; 
yng. For whi deth hastith of sorewe, 19 serach the 
and hilith vertu; andy the sorewe of herte joing duce 
bowith the heed. Sorewe dwellith in 20 g0d-Sorewe 
ledyng awei; and the catel of a nedi man* and soule, and 
ts aftir his herte. 


bringith sum- 
Zyue thou not thin 21 tyme to dispeir 
herte in sorewe, but put it awei fro thee; 


and othere 


cl no turn- 
ne yng is; that is, 
and haue thou mynde on the laste thingis, (7 sca, i 
and nyle thou for3ete. For whi no turn- appeal liyf. 
ré. C. 


ing is’, and thou schalt no thing profite * te cute! of « 
nedi man, ete.; 
to this deed man; and thou schalt harme® for if he had, a 
ae +o. ioyeful herte 
worste thi silf. Be thou myndeful of mi23 and manli, he 
dom; for also thin schal be thus, to me Phe Ba, O 
3istirdai, and to thee to dai. In the reste 24 maa siyk, that 
is, sori, is seid 
of a deed man make thou hys mynde to 
haue reste; and coumforte thou hym in 


pore. 3yue thou 
not thyn herte 
in ouermyehe 
. °° » Sorewe; fora 
the goyng out of his spirit. Write thou25 co. ,. 
wisdomt in the tyme of voidenesse; and ie a 
. f ingisy 
he that is made lesse in dede, schal per- that is, of thi 
n F F deth, and of alle 
seyue wisdom; for he schal he fillid of  othere men, fro 
. . which no man 
wisdom. He that holdith the plow, and 26 tumeth ajen to 
aes . present liyf. 
he that hath glorie in a gohode, dryueth pribiona hing 
oxis with a pricke, and he lyueth in the  % his Si : 
‘ if eat man ; that is 
werkis of tho; and his tellyng zs in the ei thi turment 
. 6 thon schale not 
sones of bolis. He schal 3yue his herte 27 ctepe ajen that 


eer . deed man. of 

to turne forewis; and his wakyng schal my doom; that 

be aboute the fatnesse of kien. So ech 28's of my deeth. 
€ 

carpenter, and principal werk man, that thus j a9 if he 
. a g seide, haste 

passith the ni3t as the dai; that graueth — thou to worche 
good, while 


ymagis grauun, and the bisynesse of hym 
dyuersith the peynture; he schal 3yue his 
herte to the licnesse of peynture, and bi 

his wakyng he perfourmeth the werk. + Write thou 

So a smyth sittynge bisidis the anefelt, Bocce Nica 
and biholdynge the werk of yrun, the *ns¢,wistom. 


thou lyuest, for 
thou schale not 
more aftir 
ae Lire 


of voidnesse 5 
heete of fier brenneth hise fleischis; and vrone, Zee 
e e 2 ce 
he stryueth in the heete of the furneis. thou art voide 
of othere werkis 
The vois of a hamer makith newe his 30 of nedes ether 
of voidnesse ; 
eere; and his ize 2s a3ens the licnesse of that is, mince 


a vessel. He schal 3yue his herte in to31 ert ether 
: ars whanne tlion 
the> perfourmyng of werkis; and bi his mses of 
s mete an 
wakyng he schal ourne vnperfecciount.  drynk. Lire 


So a potter sittynge at his werk, turnynge 52 ee enper- 


Seccioun ; that 
a wheel with hise feet, which is put euere ce bic 


in bisynesse for his werk; and al his he bringith to 
perfeccioun of 
forme. Lire 
here. C. 
P Om. 


tT the hamer acu. 8 euen with 1. 


8 © super ras. trete EMPUVY. b Om. c. 


198 


whiche in besynesse is put euermor for 
his werk; and with oute noumbre is al 
33 the werking of hym. In his arm he shal 
foormen the cley; and bifoorn his feet he 
3ishal crooken his vertue. His herte he 
shal 3yue, that he ful ende the daubing ; 
and his waking shal clense the furneys. 
35 Alle these in ther hondis hopeden; and 
3éechont in ther ‘craft is" wys. Withoute 
37alle these ‘is not bildY vp the cyte. And 
thei shul not wonen in, ne gon in; and 
in to the chirche thei shul not ouerlepen. 
38 Vpon the sete of the domys man thei 
shul not sitte; and the testament of dom 
thei shul not vnderstonde, ne maken 
opene disciplyne, and dom; and in para- 
39blis thei shul not ben founde. But the 
creature of spirituel tyme thei shul con- 
fermen, and the lowe pre3ing of hem in 
werking of craft; leeuende to ther soule, 
and togidere sechende in the lawe of the 
he3este. 
CAP. XXXIX. 
1 The wisdom of alle olde men the wise 
man shal ful out sechen; and in profetes” 
2he shal take heed. The telling of the 
nemmed men he shal kepen; and in to the 
slei3tes of parables togidere he shal entre. 
3The hid thingus of prouerbis he shal 
sechen out; and in the hid thingus of 
4parables he shal dwelle. In the myddel 
of grete men he shal mynystre; and in 
the si3t of the chef domes man he shal 
sapere. In to the lond of alien folkys he 
shal passe; goodus forsothe and euelis in 
salle thingus he shal asa3e. His herte he 
shal take to wake the morntid to the 
Lord that made hym; and in the si3t of 
7the he3este he shal louli prezen. He 
shal opene his mouth in orisoun; and for 
shis giltus he shal louli preze. If forsothe 


stondith not. in profetis; in biholdin 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXXVIIL. 33-—XXXIX. 8. 


worchyng is vnnoumbrable. In his arms3s 
he schal fourme clei; and bifore hise feet 
he schal bowe his vertu*. He schals4 
3yue his herte to ende perfitli sum* thing ; 
and bi his wakyng he schal clense the 
furneis. Alle these men hopiden in her3s 
hondis; and ech man is wijs in his craft. 
A citee is not bildid with outen alle these 36 
men. And thei schulen not dwelle, ne-37 
ther got; and thei schulen not skippe ouer 
in to the chirche. Thei schulen not sittess 
on the seete of a iuge; and thei schulen 
not vndirstonde the testament of 4 doomt, 
nether thei schulen make opyn techyng 
and doom; and thei schulen not be 
foundun in parablis. But thei schulenss 
conferme the creature of the worldj, and 
her preyer 7s in the worching of craft; 
and thei 3yuen her soule, and thei axen 
togidere in the lawe of the hi3este. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


A wijs man schal seke out the wisdom | 
of alle elde men||; and he schal 3yue tent 
in profetis. He schal kepe the tellyng of2 
named men; and he schal entre togidere 
in to the hard sentensis of parablis. Hes 
schal seke out the pryuy thingis of pro- 
uerbis; and he schal be conuersaunt in the 
hid thingis of parablis. He schal my-4 
nystre in the myddis of grete men; and 
he® schal appere in the si3t of the cheef 
iuge. He schal passe in to the lond ofs 
alien folkis; for he schal asaie goodis, and 
yuels in alle thingis. Hef schal 3yue hise 
herte to wake eerli to the Lord that made 
hym; and he schal biseche in the si3t of 
the hijeste. He schal opene his mouth7 
in preier; and he schal biseche for hise 
trespassis. For if the grete Lord wole,8 


* bowe his ver- 
tu; that is, 
howe him silf 
strongly to 
stire the wheel. 
hopiden in her 
hondis; that is, 
to gete liyflode 
and clothing, 
hi the werkis 
of her hondis. 
Lire here. c. 
+ they schulen 
nat dwelle, ne- 
ther go; that 
is, the forseid 
crafti men 
schalen not 
dwelle among 
princes and 
councelours of 
the citee, ne- 
ther schulen go 
to her councels 
among hem. 
and thei schu- 
len not skippe 
ouer in to the 
chirche ; that 
is, the cleping 
togidere of wise 
men ; for thei 
ben not able 
therto. Lire 
here. c. 

} testament of 
doom; that is, 
diffynytif sen- 
tence. Lire 
here. c. 

§ thei schulen 
conferme the 
creature of the 
world ; that is, 
the age of man, 
which is kept 
bi the werkis 
of the forseid 
craftis, that ben 
nedeful to the 
keping of 
maunus liyf. 
they 3yuen her 
soule; to the 


cure of prestis. 


axen togidere, 
etc.; for thei 
axen of hem of 
the maner of 
her helthe, 
wherof it is 
opyn, that 
prestis owen to 
be onourid of 
alle the forseid 
men. Lire 
here. c. 

|| seke out the 
wisdom af alle 
elde men; in 
heringe dili- 
gently her sei- 
yngis, and en- 
queringe of 
othere men tho 
that he vndur- 


ge her selyngis. schal kepe ; in holdinge in mynde. the telling of named men; in stences and vertues. entre 


tagidere ; to vndurstonde with hem that brousten forth tho parablis. the harde sentensis of parabtis; that is, priui and dyuerse sentences nf tho. 
the priuy thingis of prouerbis ; that is, goostly vndurstondyngis and hid. in the hid thingis of parablis; that is, figuratif vndurstondingis. 


Lire here. c. 


t Om. a. 
phetis AGH. 


® craftis mm. 


¢ Om. v. 


Vv shal not ben bild c pr.m. & pr.m. is not bildede & sec. m. 


dofac. 


W the pro- 


eOm.e. f Andhec. 


XXXIX. 9—24. 


the grete Lord wile*, with the spirit of 
9 vnderstondyng he shal fulflle hym. And 
he, as reynes’, shal sende the speches of 
his wisdam; and in orisoun he shal knou- 
ioleche to the Lord: And he shal ri3t 
reule the counseil ‘of hym*, and dyscy- 
plyre ; and in his hid thingus shal* coun- 
useilen>. He open shal make the disci- 
plyne of his lore; and in the lawe of the 
testament of the Lord he shal glorien. 
12 Manye shal preise the wisdain of hym; 
and ynto the world he shal not be don 
iawey. The memorie of hym shal not go 
awei; and the name of hym shal be so3t 
i4fro ieneracioun in to ieneracioun. His 
wisdam folkis of kynde shul telle out; 
and his preising the chirche shal shewen 
}sout. If his name schal* abijde stille, he 
shal leue more® than a thousend ; and if 
he shul resten, it shal profiten to hym. 
16 3it I shal counseilen that I telle out, as 
17 with wodnesse forsothe I am fulfild; and 
in voys he seith, Al aboute hereth me, 
jee Goddus frutes, and as roses plauntid 
vpon ryueres of watris, maketh frutes. 
isAs Liban, smel of swotenesse hate 3ee. 
19 Floureth floures, as lilie; 3yueth smel, 
and brauncheth in to grace. And preisith 
togidere the song dite; and blisseth the 
20 Lord in his werkis. 3yueth to his name 
gret doyng, and knoulecheth to hym in 
the vois of 3oure lippis, in song dites of 
lippis, and in harpis; and thus 3ee shuln 
2iseyn in knoulechyng, The werkis of the 
22 Lord, alle thei ben ful goode. In the 
wrd forsothe of hym stood the water as 
an hep; and in the wrd of the mouth of 
23 hym as resceyuyng places of watris. For 
in the heste of hym a pes makere is mad; 
and ther is not lassyng in the helthe of 
24hym. The werkes of alle flesh biforn 
hym; and ther is not any thing hid fro 


odour of swetnesse ; that is, deuocioun. Lire here. c. 


x schal wile 4k sec. m. GH. 
conseiled G sec.m. © Om. c pr.m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Y wederes c pr. m. EB pr. m. 
d imo c prem. 


199 

he schal fille hym with the spirit of vn- gt a that 
is, the Lord. 

durstondyng. And he schal sende theo councele; in 

wordis of his wisdom, as reynes; and in jim fal Slerely 

preier he schal knouleche to the Lord.  4'% Hingis 

And he* sehal dresse his counsel, and 10 t visdom ; 

: F 7 herd of hem 
techyng ; and schal counecele in hise hid _ bi prechingis. 
ns 5 the ehirche ; 
thingis. He schal make opene the wis-11 that is, congre- 

. : we gacioun of inst 
dom of his techyng; and he schal hane fen vein: 
glorie in the lawe of the testament of the op pied 

hn with 
Lord. Many men schulen preyse his Wis- 12 deth. AG al to * 
° or im ; for he 
dom; and it schal not be don awey til in schal passe 
: sunnere to the 
to the world. His mynde schal not $0 13 glorie of para- 
awei; and his name schal be son3t fro (i: “ir? 
generacioun in to generacioun. Folkis 143 1/his name 
wee ele; 
schulen telle out his wisdom}; and the that is, if he 
Hae A 2 ‘ lyueth long, he 
chirche schal telle his preisyng. If his 15 sehat leene 
: a more than a 
name dwellith{, he schal leeue more than thousynde dis- 
a thousynde; and if he restith, it schal  <“plis wel euse, 
; that moun teche 
profite tohym. 3it Y schal take councel 164ftir it Lane 
i eouncel; that 
to telle out, for Y am fillid as with wood- _ is, Y schal bi- 
ae ; 6 thenke. ¢o telle 
nesse; and myn ynnere spirit scith 117 out; profitable 
7 9 : F 5 thingis to con- 
vois, 3e fruytis of God, here me, and make stem plitionn, 
je fruyt, as roosis plauntide on the ryuers gee en 
j Celis Ss 
of watris. Haue 3e odour of swetnesse, 18 feruent wille to 
. ° 6 speke that ma 
as the Liban hath. Bringe forth flouris, 19:10 be with. 
fs holdun, in xx. 
as a lilee; 3yue 3e odour, and make 3€ | chapter of Jere- 
oe a nee $ i mye, The word 
boowis in to grace. And preise 3e togidere of heLoedi nny 
a song; and blesse 3e the Lord in hise — here was maad 
as her bren- 
werkis. 3yue 3e greet ononr to his name, 20 nynge; pies 
. . jij. c°. of Dedis, 
and knouleche 3e to him in the vois of We moun not 
‘ Pane = 4 : Alea . speke tho 
joure lippis, in songis of lippis, and in thingis that we 
harpis; and thus 3e schulen seie in knou- nay Uae 
leching, Alle the werkis of the Lord ben 21 are tts bi 
f : whos vertu the 
ful goode. Forsothe watir as au heepe 22 outermere voys 
é is formed. seith 
of stoonys® stood at his word; and as in wois; out- 
4 fs wot : ward. 3¢ fruylis 
resettis of watris in the word of his of God ; that 
mouth. For whi pesiblenesse is maad in 2 a 
his comaundement; and no defaute is in fake Eto 
F i werkis 
the heelthe of hym . The werkis of ech 24 of contemplatif 
fs 5 . . liyf. OSE $ 
fleisch bee bifore hym; and no thing is ye ee 
* : Q * . : . and cleene; for 
hid fro hise izen. He biholdith fro the 25 contemplatif 
world til in to the world; and no thing is _ liyf is fairere 
and clennere 
than actif liyf. 
§ no defaute is in the helthe of him; that is, in sanyng maad bi him. 
z Om. AGH. a Om. c pr. m. > be 


& in a wal c marg. Vv marg. 


200 


25 his ejen. Fro the world vnto the world 
he biholdith ; and no thing is merueilous 
26in the si3t of hym. Ther is not to sey, 
What is this, or, What is that? forsothe 
alle thingus in ther tyme shul be so3t. 
27 The blissing of hyin as a flod shal flowe; 
egand as the vnyuersel flod drunkede® the 
erthe, so the wrathe of hym shal eritagen 
29 Jentyles, that so3ten hym not out. What 
manere he turnede watris in to dro3te, and 
the erthe is dried, and the weies of it to 
the weies of them ben forth! stra3t; so 
to synneres offenciouns in the wrathe of 
sohym. Goodis to goode men ben foormed 
fro the bigynnyng; so to most wicke 
3imen goodis and eueles. The bygynnyng 
of necessarie thing to the lif of men, 
water, fyr, iren, and salt, and myle, and 
bred of tried flour, and hony, and clustre 
szof grape, and oile, and clothing. Alle 
these to hoely men in to goodus ; so and 
to vnpitous men and to synneres in to 
33eueles thei shul ben al® turned. Ther 
ben spirites that to veniaunce ben form- 
ed; and in ther wodnesse thei conferm- 
saeden ther tormentes. And in tyme of 
ful endyng thei shul heelden out vertue ; 
and the wodnesse of hym that made 
3othem thei shul shende. Fyr, hail, hun- 
gir, and deth; alle these to veniaunce 
36ben foormed ; teeth of bestes, and scor- 
piouns, and serpentes, and two bitende 
swerd veniende in to outlawyng vupit- 
37ous men. In the hestes of hym thei 
shul plenteuously eten, and vpon erthe" 
in nede thei shul be greithid'; and in‘ 
ther tymes thei shul not passe biside a 
sswrd. Therfore fro the bygynnyng I am 
confermede; and I counseilede, and tho3te, 
39 and scrites! lafte. Alle the werkes of the 
Lord good; and ech werk in his hour 
4oshal yndermynestren. Ther is not to 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXXIX. 25——40. 


wondurful in his si3t. 
What is this thing, ether, What is that : 

thing? for whi alle thingis schulen be eet this 
sou3t in her tyme. The blessyng of hym 27 ‘hing worth, 


It is not to seie, 26 it és not to seye, 
it spedith not to 
axe, whatis this, 


ether that 
schal flowe as a flood; and as the grete 28 hg Lire 
. . ie ere. Co 

flood fillide greteli the erthe, so his yre  * hise weyes ; 

« : - that is, w 
schal enherite in folkis, that sou3ten- not ge 
Ge offensiouns ; 
hym. As he turnede watris in to dry-29 hr ine watts 
nessis, and the erthe was dried, and hise ‘nnen to E- 
gipeians, and 


weies* weren dressid to the weies of hem; — drenchiden 
5 6 owe é hem. Lire 
so offenciouns in his ire ben dressid to here.c. 


; “. a b d 
synneris. Goode thingis weren maad at30 hmmm that 
the bigynnyng to goode men; so goode +» ssignyd bi 
thingis and yuele bex maad to worste mba 
% . nhesse sullre 
men. The bigynnyng of nedeful thing to 31 peyne, and to 
ee ° turmente syn- 
the lijf of men, watir, fier, and yrun, and _ neris, cht ae 
salt, and mylk, and breed of cleene flour fae nee 
of whete, and hony, and a elustre of ae 
grape, and oile, and cloth. Alle these 32 wilfuly to hem 
oe, . " in peyne. in 
thingis schulen turne to hooli men in to her woodnesse; 
é é bi which th 
goodis; so and to vnfeithful men and"  sebelliden ajone 
e148 4 3 att ay us God. con- 
synneris in to yuels. Spiritis ben that ben 33 uen her 
maad to veniaunce +; and in her wood- ‘mentis; for 
: 5 as her synne is 
nesse thei confermyden her turmentis. Marien 
° 3 and her tur- 
And in the tyme of endyng thei schulen 34 ment is with- 
fs ° outen ende. 
schede out vertu; and thei schulen con-  gchede out ver- 
foundet the strong veniaunce of hym that 4 te turmente 
4 if dampned men, 
made hem. Fier, hail, hungur, and deth; 35 that schulen be 
awe ts : cast doun with 
alle these thingis ben maad to veniaunce; hem in to hele. 
‘ _ Lire here. c. 
the teeth of beestis, and scorpiouns, and 36 ¥ confounde 
. ‘ . . that is, do bi 
- pentis, and a swerd punyschynge wick- yor vitle, 
id men in to destriyng. In the comaunde-37 Fie: pease o> 
: o schulen 
mentis of hym tho schulen etej, and tho ete; thatis, 

. . deuoure wiekid 
schulen be maad redi on the erthe in nede; men, in mr- 
and in her tymes tho schulen not passe 0° ;, ner fymes; 
word. Therfor fro the bigynnyng Y was 3s dispisid of God. 
confermed; and Y counselide, and thou3te, : : 

. ampnyd men. 
Alle the werkis of the 39 fro ae 
2 Y was conferm- 
Lord ben goode; and ech werk schal serue 1; that is, fro 
" : S Scouis , the tyme in 
in his our. It is not to sele, This 1S WOYSE 40 hick ¥ yndur- 
than that; for whi alle thingis schulen ; 
r punysching of 
And now in al 4} synneris schal 
y 
be most fers, 


menting hem. 

the turment of 
and lefte writun. 

stood that the 
be preued in her tyme. 

Y purposide 


stidefastly to eschewe synnes, as myche as Y may. Jt is not to seie ; in Goddis werkis, for whi no thing is yuel, in as myche as it is maad of God. 


Lire here. c. 


© drunkede, or fulfild c sec. m. marg. E sec. m. marg. GH. fulfillide 4. 
k in to 4. 


erthe arcu. 5 greithid, or maad redi AEGH. 


hand tor. 


fout agH. &Om.4. OBthe 


l writen £G sec. m. 


ia ceteri. 


XXXIX. 41—XL. 13. 


seyn, this than™ that is werse"; forsothe 
alle thingus in ther tyme shul be proued. 
41 And now in alle herte and mouth preys- 
eth togidere, and blisseth the name of 
the Lord. 
CAP. XL. 

1 Gret ocupacioun is shape to alle men, 
and a grenous 30¢ vp on the sous of 
Adam, fro the day of the goyng out fro 
the wombe of the moder of hem, vn to 
the day of the biriyng in to the moder 

2of alle thingus. The tho3tis of hem, and 
the dredes of herte, the fyndyngus of 
abidyng, and the dajes° of endynge?; 

3fro’ the cheef sitteres’ ‘vp ont the glo- 
rious sete, vn to the meekid vn to the" 
4erthe and asken’; fro hym that vseth 
blu sile, and berth the* eroune, vn to 
hym that is couered* with raw lynen, 
wodnesse, enuye, noyse, wagering, and 
dred of deth, wrathefulnesse stedefastly 
sbidende, and striuyng; and in tyme of 
repast in the bed, slep of ny3t chaungeth 
chis kunnyng. Litil forsothe as no3t in 
reste; and of hyi in slepes as in the 
jday respit. He ys disturbid in the si3te 
of his herte, as he that is seapid in the 
dai of bataile. In the tyme of his helthe 
he ros out, and wndrende at no drede, 
swith alle flesh, fro man vn to beste, and 
9vp on the synneres seuenfold. To these 
thingus, deth**, blod, strif, and two bit- 
ende swerd, opressiouns’, hungres, and to- 

10 treding, and scourges ; vp on wickid men 
ben formed alle these thingus, and for 

ishem was mad the ieneral flod. Alle 
thingus forsothe that of the erthe ben, in 
to erthe? shul ben turned; and alle wa- 

i2tris in to the se shuln he turned. Alle 
3ifte and wickidnesse* shal ben don awey; 
isand feith in to world shal stonde. The 
substaunees of vnri3twis men as a flod 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


201 


the herte and mouth preise 3e togidere, 
and blesse 3e the name of the Lord. 


CAP. XL. 


Greet oecupacioun is maad to alle men, | 
and an heuy 3ok onj the sones of Adam, 
fro the dai of the goyng out of the wombe 
of her modir, til in to the dai of biriyng 
in to the modir* of alle men. The2 
thou3tis of hem, and the dredis of herte, 
fyndyngis of abidyng, and the dai of end- 
yng; fro hym that sittith bifore on a glo-3 
riouse seete, ‘til tok a man maad lowe in 
to erthe! and aische; fro hym that vsith4 
lacynet, and berith a coroun, ‘til to™ hym 
that is hilid with raw lynnun cloth, wood- 
hesse, enuye, noise, doutyng, and drede of 
deth, wrathfulnesse dwellynge contynueli, 
and strijf; and in the" tyne of restyng ins 
the bed, the sleep of ny3t chaungith his 
kunnyng. Forsothe a litil 7s as nou3t inc 
reste; biholdyng zs of hymt+ in sleep as 
in the dai. He is disturblid in the si3t of7 
his herte, as he that ascapith in the dai 
of batel. He roos vp in the dai of his® 
helthe, and dredynge not at ony drede, 
with al fleisch, fro mau ‘til to” beeste, and 8 
seuenefold{ schal come on synneris. At9 
these thingis, deth, blood, stryuyng, and 
swerd, oppressyngis, hungur, and sorewe, 
and beetyngis; alle these thingis ben to 
maad on wickid men, and the greet flood 
was inaad for hem. For whi alle thingis 11 
that ben of the erthe, seliulen turne in to 
the erthe; and alle watris schulen turne 
in to the see. Al 3ifte) and wickidnesse 12 
sehal be don awei; and feith schal stonde 
in to the world. The riehessis of vniust 13 
meu schulen be maad drie as a flood; and 
schulen sowne as a greet thundur in reyn. 


* in to the mo- 
‘dir, ete.; that 
is, in to erthe, 
to which thei 
turnen a3en in 
angwisch and 
nakidnesse, 
Syndyngis of 
abiding, ete.; 
that is, feyn- 
yngis of more 
yuels of tyne 
to comynge, 
than sehulen 
eome, and the 
day of deth 
turmenten men. 
Lire here. c. 
t biholding is 
of him, ete.; 
for whi dremes 
ben maad tohim 
of these thingis, 
whiche {he} 
siz in the day. 
of his helthe ; 
that is, of his 
prosperite. at 
ony drede; that 
is, at ony ferd- 
ful thing, be it 
man, be it 
beeste. Lire 
ere, Ce 
t and seuen- 
fold, schal come 
on synneris ; 
that is, greu- 
ouse punyseh- 
ing schal come 
on synneris, 
obstynat bi 
pride. at these 
thingis; that 
is, for thingis 
bifor seid. deth; 
violent. Lire 
here. C. 
§ Al 3ifte ; 
3ouun for dis- 
triyng of ri3t- 
fulnesse, ard 
wickidnesse 
doon for 3ifte. 
sehal be doon 
awey; that is, 
the 3yneris of 
3iftis, and the 
distrieris of 
ri3tfulnesse for 
3iftis, sehulen 
be doon awey 
fro present liyf, 
so that no thing 
sehal appere of 
her posses- 
siouns and, 
boost, as no 
thing apperith 
in tablis doon 
awey. and feith ; 
that is, feith- 
fulnesse of inst 
men. schal 
stonde ; in bis 
effect. as a 


flood ; a flood is takun here for a stronde, that wexith greet sudeynly bi watris of snow, and soone is maad drie, so the richessis of vnivst men 
be getun swiftly, and ben takun awey from hem ofte swiftliere. as greet thundur in reyn; that ceesith soone bi the reyn, so the hoost of yuele 
riche men is takun awey soone of princes, bi a litil oceasionn. Lire here. c. 


™ or E pr.m. B wickider 4EGH. © day a. 
of ce pr.m. § juge E pr. m. 


xx Om. C pr. m, y oppressioun AGH, 


jtoc. kvntor. ! the erthe c. 


VOL. Ill. 


P the berende c pr.m. the beringe E pr. m. 
tvp uw. 4QOm. AE sec. m. 
2 the erthe 4cu. 


Mm vnto F. 


rT offis 
vasshen 4. ~Om, accu. * crownyd £ pr. m. 
@ wickenesse E. 

P vnto 1, 


»Om. 1. ° Om. v. 


Dd 


202 


shul ben dried; and as gret® thunder in 
l4reyn thei shul sowne ful. As the ri3twis 
man in openyng his hondis shal gladen ; 
so the lawe brekeres in the ende shuln 
15 wanen® awey. The sonus sonus of vnpit- 
ous men shul nott multeplie braunches ; 
and vnelene rootes vp on the cop of the 
1éston sounen. Vp on eche water grene- 
nesse; and at the hour of the flod biforn 
17al the hey4 it shal be pullid vp. Grace 
as paradis in blissingus ; and mercy in to 
18 the world abit® stille. The lif of the suf- 
fisaunt werkere to hymself shal be mad 
swete ; and in it thou shalt fynde tresor. 
19 The bilding vp of the cite shal confermen 
the name; and ouer this an vndefoulid 
20womman shal be countid. Wyn and 
melodye gladen the herte; and ouer 
aieither the loouyng of wisdam. 'Trumpes 
and sautre maken swete melody; and 
22ouer eithir the swete tunge.. Grace and 
fairnesse® the e3e shal desyren; and ouer 
23these grene tilthis. A frend and a mete 
felawe in tyme comendef togidere; and 
ouer either a womman with a man. 
24Brethern in to help in tyme of tribula- 
cioun; and ouer them mercy shal dely- 
gsueren. Gold and siluer, and setting of 
feet; and ouer either® counseil wel 
26plesid. Facultes and vertues enhauncen 
the herte; and ouer these the drede of 
2j7the Lord. Ther is not in the drede of 
the Lord lassing; and ther is not in it 
2ato seche helpe. The drede of the Lord 
as paradis of blessing; and ouer alle 
20glorie thei couereden it. Sone, in the 
tyme of thi lif ne nede thou; betere is 
30to dyen, than to neden. A man bihold- 
ende in to an other mannes bord, the lif 
of hym is nott in the thenking of liflode; 
forsothe he nursheth his lif with other 
3imennus metes. A man forsothe disci- 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


‘counforten myche*; and merci schal de- 


XL. 14——3!. 
Au vuiust man scha\ be glad in openynge14* outa m 
5 a 5 ‘ rootis, etc.; that 
hise hondis ; so trespassouris schulen faile _ is, the fadris 
: d d modris of 
in the ende. The sones of sones of wick-15 hem fallen doun 
j pli "ae soone, as a tre 
id men schulen not multiplie braunchis; {erp {ne 
and vncleene rootis* sownen on the cop deep root, for 
o oye ° stoon. 
of a stoon. Grenenesse bisidis ech watir; 16 tee = c. 
5 + aboue this ; 
and at the brynk of the flood it schal be for whi hir 
. ‘ stidefastnesse 
drawun out bi the roote bifor al hey. jac) stonde 
radic 1 tae withouten ende. 
Grace as paradiss in blessyngis ; and 1 rele ante 
merci dwellith in to the world. The lijfis pete 
; : of a techere o! 
of a werk man sufficient to hym silf schal  feith and ver- 
tues. Li 
be maad swete; and thou schalt fynde joc co 
* . ; 4 t comynge togi- 
tresour ther ynne. Bildyng of a citee is iene: 
schal conferme a name; and a womman ere ' 
with out wem schal be rikenyd aboue wih anonea 
. i . efc.; that 1s, ben 
thist. Wyn and musik maken glad _ the 20 more detitable 
: : h thei 
herte ; and loue of wisdom gladith’ aboue Wivien in 
euer either. Pipis and sawtree maken 21 soodnesse, for 
swete melodie; and a swete tunge aboue see we 
sehulen no 
euer either. An y3e schal desire grace 22 departid bi al 
S . her liyf. setting 
and fairnesse; and greene sowyngis aboue Rae that f, 
aliens helthe of bodi 
these thingis. A frend and felowe com-23jc7 accoptable 
ynge togidere in tyme}; and a womman ‘men. aid 
° ° # 3 
with mant aboue euer either. Britheren 24 is, strengthe of 
. . o : hodi, Making 
in to help in the tyme of tribulacioun ‘esse; that is, 
defaute of good. 
help ; of man, 
. i x . ~ for he that 
lyuere more than thei. Gold and siluer, 25 jean God, 
and settyng of feet; and counsel wel ples- ei 
s) . . . ekpe 
ing zs aboue euer either. Richessis and 26 os here. : 
§ Sone, in the 
vertues enhaunsen the herte; and the drede tyme of thi liyfs 
, ° . that is, in tyme 
of the Lord more than this. Making 27 5 present tye, 
lesse is not in the drede of the Lord; and Ce ae 
in that drede it is not to seke help. Thetes te ee 
° oe neay; at 5. 
drede of the Lord zs as paradijs of bless- te thou not — 
: idil, for whi 
yng ; and ‘the blessyngis of God" kyuer- othe goostly 
° : ° nedinesse and 
iden hym abone al glorie. Sone, in the 2s temporal auf 
tyme of thi lijf) be thou not nedi; for it {> jMilnesse. it 
is betere to die, than to be nedi. A man 30 baal are to 
: : . e nedy; that 
biholdinge in to another mannus boord, _ is, to be idil, bi 
HeeeGariss 5 ee shich 
his lijf is not in the thou3t of lijflode; for  gicth goostly. 
he susteyneth his lijf with othere mennus 12 =*xi. 
. . nie ifore, Idilnesse 
metis. Forsothe a chastisid man and 31 bath tau3t 
myche malice ; 
and sum tyme 


for idilnesse a man dieth bodily, for’ ofte for idilnesse a man is turned to thefte, for which he is hangtd. bikoldinge in to another mannus boord 
as ben mynstrels and stronge beggeris, idil of goode werkis. in the thou3t of liyficde ; that is, he thenkith not to do ony thing, wherof he owith 


to lyne resonably. Lire here. c. 


ba gret 4GH. 


¢ wanyon EGH. 
& these £ pr. m. 


4Om.r. * aman v. 


dhei3 £ prom. ¢ abideth azen. 


sOm. 1 


ee hope x. f of cummynge ac 


€Om.1. % Om. v. 


XL. 32——XLI. 15. 


32 plyned and ta3t, shal kepe hymself. In 
the mouth of the vnprudent shal be 
maad" myseise'; and in the wombe of 
hym fyr shal brenne. 


CAP. XLI. 


1 O! deth, hou bitter is thi mynde to 
an vnrij3twis man, and hauende pes in 
2his substaunces; tok a quyete man, and 
whos weies ben ri3t stra3t iu alle thingus, 
sand 3it my3ti to taken mete. O! deth, 
good is thi dom to a man nedy, and that 
4is lassid in strengthe, failende! thur3 age, 
and to whom of alle thingus is cure, and 
to the™ vnbeleeueful, that leeseth wisdam. 
5 Wile thou not dreden the dom of deth ; 
haue mynde what biforn thee weren, and 
what vp on ben to come to thee; this 
é6dom fro the Lord to alle flesh. And 
that shuln ouercomen to thee in the 
wel plesid thing of the he3est ; whether 
ten, or an hundred, or a thousend 3er". 
7Forsothe ther is not in helle acusing of 
slif. The sonus of abhominaciouns ben 
mad the sonus of synneres ; and that wo- 
nen biside the housis of vnpitous men. 
9 The eritage of the sonus of synneres shal 
pershen; and with the sed of hem the 
10 besynesse of repref. Of the vnpitouse fader 
pleynen®, or wezlen®”’, sonus?, for? for hym 
11thei ben in repref. Wo to 3ou, vnpitous 
men, that han forsaken the lawe of the 
ig2he3est Lord. And if 3ee shul ben-born, in 
cursing 3ee shul ben born; and if 3ee shul 
i3dien, in cursing shal be 3oure part. Alle 
thingus that of the erthe ben, in to erthe 
shul ben turned; so vnpitouse men fro 
lacursing in to perdicioun. The weylyng 
of men in the body of hem; the name 
forsothe of vnpitous men shal ben don 
isawey. Cure hane thou of a good name; 
that forsothe more shal abide stille with 


liyf, and seiynge ajenus God, If Y hadde lyued longe, Y hadde do many goodis. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


203 


lernd schal kepe him  silf. 
schal be defoulid in the mouth of an 


vnprudent man*; and fier schal breune in 
his wombe. 


CAP. XLI. 


AW! deth, thi mynde is ful bittir to ani 
vniust man, and hauynge pees in hise 
richessis; to a restful man, and whose2 
weies ben dressidt in alle thingis, and 3it 
my3ti to take mete. A! deth, thi dooms 
is good to a nedi man, and which is maad 
lesse in strengthis, and failith for age, and 4 
to whom is care of alle thingis, and vnbi- 
leueful, that leesith wisdom. Nyle thous 
drede the doom of deth{; hane thou 
mynde what thingis weren byfore thee, 
and what thingis schulen come on thee; 
this dom zs of the Lord to ech man. Aude 
tho thingis that schulen come on thee in 
the good plesaunce of the hizeste; whe- 
thir ten 3eer, ether an hundrid, ether a 
thousynde. For whi noon accusyngy of7 
lijf is in helle. The sones of abhomyna-s 
ciouns ben the sones of synneris; and thei 
that dwellen bisidis the housis of wickid 
men. The eritage of the sones of syn-9 
neris schal perische; and the contynu- 
aunce of schenschipe with the seed of 
hem. Sones playnen of a wickid fadir ; 
for thei ben in schenschip for hym. Wot 
to 30u, je wickid men, that han forsake 
the lawe of the hijeste. 
borun, 3e schulen be borun in cursidnesse ; 
and if 3e ben deed, 3oure part schal be in 
cursidnesse. 
erthe, schulen turne in to the erthe; so 
wickid men schulen turne fro cursyug| 
in to perdicioun. 
is in the bodi of hem; but the name of 
wickid men schal be doon awei. 
thou bisynesse of a good name; for whi 


The morenyng of men 14 


Nedynesse 32* enprudent 


man; that is, 
slow and idil. 
Jjier ; that is, 
hungur. Lire 
here. C. 
t ben dressid ; 
that is, hach 
prosperite in 
al temporal 
thingis. to a 
nedi mun; and 
iust. care of 
alle thingis ; 
nedeful to liyé, 
for to gete tho. 
Lire here. c. 
t Nyle thou 
drede the doom 
of deth ; that 
is, sette thou 
thee in sich a 
staat, that the 
doom of deth 
be good to thee. 
what thingis 
weren bifor 
thee, ete.; for 
bi the minde of 
hooli fadris chat 
3eden bifore,and 
of the meedis of 
just men, and 
of peynes of 
wickid men, 
that schulen 
come, a man is 
disposid to 
abide sikirly 
the doom of 
deth. the sones 
of abhomyna- 
cioun ; that is, 
worthi to be 
wlatid, for thei 
ben abhomyn- 
able in the size 
of God, and of 
inst men. he 
sones of syn- 
neris ; that is, 
sneris of the 


10 fadris synnes, 
 bisidis the 


honsis of wickid 
men, for they 
snen the dedis 


And if 3e* be 12 of wickid men. 


Sones playnen ; 
in helle. thei 
ben in schen- 
schip for him ; 


Alle thingis that ben of the 1s ‘Bat is ben 


dampned, for 
thei weren 
yuele enformed 
of him, which 
he was holdin 
to teche wel. 
Lire here. ¢. 

§ noon accus- 


Haue 15 i2# efe-3 no 


man may ex- 
cuse him there, 
in alegginge 
goodnesse of 


\| fro cursing; of synne, which is of the 


denel. in to perdicioun; of helle. of good name; that is, of inst lynyng. of good liyf; that is, the meritorie liyf of a good man is sehort. Lire 


here. c. 


h to.troden c pr.m. EB pr. m. 
D 3eris AEG. 


© ben sou3t £ pr. m. 
sonis E pr. m. i. 


q Om. 


w OQ! ta. 


i sweet myseise E sec. m. GI. 
00 Om. ¢ ef E pr. m. 


k and to 4. ! fallynge acu, ™ Om. 4. 


P the vnpitous sonis 4. vupitous 


x thei c. 


Dd2 


204 


thee, than a thousend grete tresores and 
is precious. Of good lif the noumbre of 
da3es; forsothe good name shal abide stille 
17in to the spirituel world. Disciplyne in 
pes kepeth, 3ee sonus ; hid forsothe wis- 
dam, and tresor vnseen, what profit in 
isenere either? Betere is a man that hid- 
ith hys folie, than a man that hidith his 
19 wisdam. ‘Ner the latere™ turneth a3een in 
these thingus that gon out of my mouth. 
20 Forsothe it is not good to waiten aboute, 
‘or to kepen’, alle vnreuerence, and not 
21 alle thingus in alle plesen in feith. Shame 
3ee of the fader, and of the moder, of 
fornycacioun ; and fro the cheef sittere, 
gzand of the my3ty, of lesyng; and of the 
prince, and of the domes man, of* gilte ; 
of the synagoge, and of the folc, of wick- 
23idnesse¥; of felawe, and of frend, of vn- 
2iri3twisnesse; and of the place in the 
whiche thou dwellist, of thefte; of the 
treuthe of God, and the testament; of 
sitting doun in loeues, and of the derk- 
nyng of the 3oue thing, and of taken ; 
25 fro’ men salutende, of stillnesse”; fro 
biholdyng* of a fornycarie womman, and 
fro the turnyng awei of the chere of the 
26cosyn. Ne turne thou awei faceY fro thi 
neshebore; and fro taking awei part, 
27and not restoring. Bihold thou not a 
womman of an other man; and ne en- 
serche thou the hand womman of hym, 
and? stonde thou not at the bed of hir. 
28 Bewar of frendus, of wrdus of repref ; 
and whan thou hast 3yue, ne vpbreide 
thou. 
CAP. XLII. 

1 Ne double thou the sermoun of heer- 
ing, of the openyng of the hid wrd; and 
thou shalt ben verrely withoute confu- 
sioun, and thou shalt fynde grace in the 
si3t of alle men. Ne for alle these thingus 
be thou confoundid ; and ne accepte thou 


t Neuerthelatere 4EGH. 
E prem. 


8Om. c ef EB prom. 
x reward c prim. E pr. m. 


yOm.a. YY vnriztfulnesse c ef ceteri. 


¢ Om. CFGHIKMNPQRSUVX4a. d thy A Sec. mt. F. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


t and of 4. 
Y the face a. 


z the testament s. 
e Om. v. 


XLIL 16——XLII. 1. 


this schal dwelle more with thee, than a 

thousynde tresouris grete and preciouse. 

The noumbre of daies ts the terme of 16 

good lijf; but a good name schal dwelle 

with outen ende. Sones, kepe 3e techyng 17 

in pees; for whi wisdom hid, and tresour 

vnseyn, what profit is in euer either ? 

Betere is a man* that hidith his foli, than 13 * Betere is « 
a man that hidith his wisdom. Netheles 19 fave yuck 
turne 3eY a3en in these thingis that comen Bn se F 
forth of my mouth. For it is not good to20 pane 8 
kepe alle vnreuerence, and not alle thingis — thou; tho acor- 
plesen alle men in feith. Be 3e ascham- 21 fen feith, plesen 
ed of fornycacioun, bifor fadir, and bifor 72 4siPhs 
modir ; and of a leesyng, bifore a iustice, 

and bifore a my3ti man; and of trespas, 22 

bifor a prince, and bifore a iuge; and of 
wickidnesse, bifore a synagoge, and a pu- 

ple; and of vnri3twisnesse'’, bifore a felow, 23 

and a frend; and of theftet, in the place2 + Pe 
where ynne thou dwellist ; of the treuthe ment; tobe 
and testament? of God; of* sittyng at the? be coca 
mete in looues, and of the blemyschyng ofthe fiste | 
of 3ifte, and takyng; of stilnesse, bifore 88 entan a? 
hem that greeten; of the biholdyng of a site, ete.; that 
letcherouse womman, and of the® turnyng whee Hee 
awey of the cheer of a cosyn. Turne 26 {ties 3 for 
thou not awey the’ face fro thi nei3bore ; 

and be thou war of takyng awei® a part, 


leccherie, ether 
ony sich thing, 
and not restorynge. 


ether is takun 
with out kynde- 
nesse, ether for 
Biholde thou not the 27a foul cause. 

enserche thou 
womman of an othere man; and enserche not hir hand- 
thou not her hand maide, nether stonde 774s i sek- 
thou at hir bed. 


inge how thou 
Be thou war of frendis, 28 he tia 

of the wordis of vpbreidyng; and whanne c. 

thou hast 3oue, vpbreide thou not. 


y bi hir. 


CAP. XLII. 


Double thou not a word of heryng, of1 
the schewyng of an hid word; and thou 
schalt be verily with out schame, and 
thou schalt fynde grace in the si3t of alle 
men. Be thou not schent for alle these 
thingis; and take thou not a persoone, 


« wickenesse £E. Y for 4. W priuyte c pr.m. 


Z2ne AGH. 


a and of a. b Om. CEFHKNPQRUVX., 


XLII. 2—-14. 


2persone, that thou gilte of the lawe of 
the he3est, and of the testament of dom, 
3to lustefien the vupitouse; of the wrd of 
felawes, and of weie goeres, and of the 
43yuyng of the* eritage of frendis; of the 
euenes of balaunces, and of wei3tes, of 
purchasyng of manye thingus, and of 
sfewe; of the corrupcioun? of biyng’, 
and‘ of marchaundis, and of myche® dis- 
ciplyne of sonus; and of the werst ser- 
6 uaunt, to make the side to bleden. Vp on a 
7shreude womman good is a signe. Where 
ben many hondis, close thou’; and what 
euere thou shalt take, ‘noumbre thon, 
and® peise; the 3yuen thing forsothe, and 
sthe taken, ali diskryue,‘o7 wryte*. Of the 
disciplyne of the mysfelende, and of the 
fool, and of the elderes, thatt ben demed, 
of the 3unge waxen men; and thou shalt 
ben lerned in alle thingus, and prouable 
gin the siz3te of alle men. The do3ter of 
the fader is hid, the wache and the 
bysynesse of hir shal don awey slep; 
lest par auenture in hir 3unge waxen 
age auoutresse she be mad, and with a 
man dwellende!, hatefull she™ be mad; 
iolest any tyme she be pollutid in hir 
maydenhed, and in hir fader keping she 
be founde with child; lest par auenture 
with hir man dwellende, she trespasse, 
tor certus bareyn she be mad. Vp on a 
leccherous do3tir set warde, lest any 
tyme she make thee in to repref to 
comen to thin enemys, of bacbiting In the 
citee, and of casting awey of the puple; 
and she confounde thee in the multitude 
120f the puple. To alle men wile thou not 
‘taken heed" in the fairnesse; and in the 
myddel of wyinmen wile thou not dwellen. 
13 Forsothe of clothis cometh the mo3he°, 
and of a womman the wickidnesse? of a 
14man. Betere forsothe is the wickidnesse?P 
of a man, than a womman doende bene- 


2 Om. 4cH. » correccioun E pr. m. 
& Om. AGH. h and the 3iftis £ pr. m. 
© looken E pr.m, © mowe A, mow3je E. 


© world omnes prater vu. f thi EFHIKMQRSUa. 


i woman A sec. m. C sec. m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


c biyngis E prem. 
1 Om. 4. 
P wickenesse &. 


205 


that thou do trespas. Be thou war of the 
lawe and testament* of the hijeste, of doom 
to iustifie a wickid man; of the word® of3 
felowis, and of weigoeris, and of the 3yu- 
yng of eritage of frendis; of the euen-4 
nesse of balaunce, and of wei3tis, of the 
getyng of many thingisf, and of fewe 
thingis; of corrupcioun of biyng, and of 5 
marchauntis, and of myche chastising of 
sones 5; and of a worste seruaunt, to make 
thef side to® bleede. A seelyng" is goods 
on a wickid man!. Where ben many7 
hondis, close thou; and what euer thing 
thou schalt bitake, noumbre thou, and 
weie thou; forsothe discryue thou, ether 
write, ech 3ifte, and takyng. Adsteines 
thou fro the techyng of an vnwitti man, 
and fool, and of eldere men that ben dem- 
ed of 3onge men; and thou schalt be 
lernd in alle thingis, and thou schalt be 
comendable in the si3t of alle men. An9 
hid dou3ter of a fadir is wakynge and 
bisynesse of hym; sche schal take awei 
sleep; lest perauenture sche be maad 
auowtresse in hir jong wexynge age, and 
lest sche dwellynge with the hosebonde, 
be maad’ hateful; lest ony tyme sche be10 
defoulid in hir virginytee, and be foundun 
with child in the kepyng of hir fadir; 
leste perauenture sche dwellynge with the 
hosebonde, do trespasse, ether certis be 
maad bareyn}. Ordeyne thou kepyng on11 
a letcherouse don3ter, lest ony tyme sche 
make thee to come in to schenschipe to 
elemyes, of bacbityng in the citee, and of 
castyng out of the puple; and sche make 
thee aschamed in the multitude of puple. 
Nyle thou take heed to ech man in the12 
fairnesse§; aud nyle thou dwelle in the 
myddis of wymmen. For whi a mou3te13 
cometh forth of clothis, and the wickid- 
nesse of a man cometh forth of a wom- 
man. 


f Om. cu. 
in shal #. 


4 Om, Hn. 


€ to myche E pr.m. 
k Om. c e¢ § prim. ! 


Om. 4. 


& Om. Es. h seelyng, ether closyng c et ceteri. 


“ *and testa ment; 


to be brokun.c. 


+ geting of 
many thingis ; 
bi thi raneyn. 
of fewe thingis; 
bi thi slouthe. 
of myche ; that 
is, oner hard. 
ehastising; bi 
which thei fleer 
awey. to bleede; 
that is, to Lete 
til to greet 
scheding out of 
blood, for this 
is a signe of 
ouer greet cru- 
elte. of eldere 
mens in ver- 
tues, be thou 
hisi that this 
abusionn be 
doon awey: 
Lire here. ¢. 


+ bareyn ; for 
ouer greet vs- 
ing of lecherie, 
and therfor 
comyn hooris 
ben with childe 
ful seeldene. 
Lire here. c. 

§ in the fair. 
nesse; in delit- 
inge in the bi- 
holding of his 
fayrnesse 3 ‘he 
seith this to 
eschewe the 
synne a3enus 


kynde, to which 
many men 
weren enclyn- 
° oe aunt. Lire 
For whi the wickidnesse of a man }4 here. c. 


206 


fet, and a womman confoundende in to 
rsrepref. Myndeful be ‘Y shal4 therfore 
of the werkes of the Lord; and which" 
I sa3, I shal shewen out, in the wrdis of 
isthe Lord, his werkus. The sunne shyn- 
ende thur3 alle thingus biheeld ; and of 
the glorie of the Lord ful is his werk*. 
17 Whether not the Lord made seyntes to 
tellen out alle his merueiles, the whiche 
the Lord almy3ty shal confermen stable 
18in his glorie? The depthe of the se, and 
the herte of men he shal enserchen; and 
in the ‘sly3e wit, o7 gile', of hem he shal 
igout thenke. The Lord forsothe kne3 al 
kunnyng, and beheeld in to the tocne of 
the spiritueell world ; shewende out that 
ben passid, and that ben ouer" to come; 
openende the’ steppis of hid thingus. 
20 And ther passeth not biside hym any 
thenking, and any wrd hidde not it self 
21fro hym. He made faire the grete wrthi 
werkes of his wisdam, the whiche is bi- 
forn the world, and vnto the world; ne 
22it is echid, ne it is lassid, and it nedeth 
e3not the counseil of any man. Hou de- 
sirable ben alle the werkes of hym, and 
24as a sparcle that is, to beholden. Alle 
these thingus lynen, and dwellen in to 
the world; and in alle nede alle thyngus 
2,0beshen to hym. Alle thingus double, 
oon a3en oon; and he made not any 
thing to failen. Of euery thing he shal 
conferme the goodus; and who shal be 
fulfild, seende the glorie of hym, and who 
witende shal conferme the strengthe of 
hym ? 
CAP. XLII. 
t The firmament of the hei3te is the 
fairnesse of hym; and the fairnes of 
2heuene in the si3te of glorie. The sunne 
in the si3te, shewende out in the issue, a 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XLIT. 15 —XLIII. 2. 


* the wickid- 
nesse of a man 
is betere, ete.; 
that is, lesse 
yuel. than a 
womman doyng 
wel; that is, to 
dwelle togidere, 


is betere* than a womman doynge wel, 
and a womiman schendyng in to schen- 
schipe. Therfor be thou myndeful of the 15 
werkis of the Lord; and Y schal telle™ 
the" werkis of the Lord, whiche Y si3, <dvelle « cong 
in the wordis of the Lord. The sunne 6referrid to that 
liztnynge bihelde by alle thingis; and the nite pee 
werk therof is ful of the® glorie of the (2% muidisof 
Lord. 


wymmen ; for 
Whether the Lord made not hoolij 17‘ % ™ore perel- 
men to telle out alle hise merueilis, whiche 
the Lord almy3ti stidfast in his glorie 


ouse to a man 
to dwelle togi- 
dere with a 
straunge wume- 
man, 3he, a 
schal conferme? He schal enserche the 18,04 4. 


good womman, 
i than with a 
depthet+, and the herte of men; and he \itiiamecs 
schal thenke in the felnesse of hem. For 19 Te suane tizt- 
nynge bihelde 


the Lord knew al kunnyng, and bihelde 
in to the signe of the world ; tellynge tho 


bi alle thingis ; 
that is, made 


alle thingis to 

ue é ace, Sener 
thingis that ben passid, and tho thingis (f.1Syi% & 
henene and of 


that schulen come ; schewynge the steppis erthe leanne 
of hid thingis. And no thou3t passith 20 of the sunne. 


fe. A 4 the werk thercf 
hym, and no word hidith it silf fro hym. — ie ful of the 
‘ . lorie of the 
He made fair the grete werkis of bieber ey ae is, 
: * * Cys the gloriouse 
wisdom, which is bifore the world, and power Gale 
ili he world: neth i i sehyneth in the 
til in to the world; nether ony ting) ee 
encreessid 1, nether is decreessid, and he 2zsunne, “del ben 
to lijtne othere. 
hath no nede to the counsel of ony. Alle 23 todies, to make 
a ° ° * newe the erthe 
hise werkis ben ful desirable", and to bi- With erbis and 
holde, as a sparcle§ which is. Alle these 24 fouris: and 


ues ‘ trees with 

thingis lyuen, and dwellen in to the world; pairs ot 
. . . A ruyuis. Lrre 

and alle thingis obeien to hym in al nede. here. c. 


<P depthes that 
Alle thingis ben double, oon ajens oon 325), fe desl 


- in the felnesse 
and he made not ony thing to faile. He of hen MEER 
schal conferme the goodis of ech; and ead 
who schal be fillid, seynge his glorie ? wille, in draw- 
inge ont good 
of the. Lire 
here. c. 

t nether ony 
thing is leid to, 
etc.; for whi 
Goddis wisdom 


CAP. XLII. 
may not be de- 


The firmament|| of hiznesse is the fair-1 creessid nether 
J i eneresid, for it 
nesse therof; the fairnesse of heuene in 


is greet with 
the si3t of glorie. The sunne in bihold-2 (en mesure 


Lire here. c. 
: ; . § asa sparele; 
yng, tellynge in goyng out, zs 2 woundur cape 


goode to biholde 


that these werkis of God, then3 these ben wondurful, ben not but a litil sparcle of Goddis goodnesse and excelence. lyuen and dwellen; for whi 
alle creaturis Iyuen in God, in as myehe as tho ben in God bi maner of vndurstonding. alle thingis ; that is, elementis. ben double; for the erthe 


is cold and drie, the water is cold and moist, the eir is hoot and moist, the fier is hoot and drie. Lire here. c. 


\| The firmament; that is, heuene 


of sterris; the sunne is fairnesse therof, that is, makith the fairnesse therof. in the si3t of glorie ; that is, ful gloriouse and wondurful. Lire here. c. 


° 


athoucpr.m. 'that cpr.m. Swerkusc. t wittynesse c pr.m. E pr.m. Om. acu. Y of the 
c prem. 
™ telle of c pr.m. theen, ° Om.ck. POm.c. dleid to, ether encressid c et celeri. * desi- 


derable c. 8 Om. c. 


XLII. 3-—20. 


merueilous vessel, the werk of the heje. 
3In the myddai it brenneth out the erthe ; 
and” in the si3te of his brennyng who 
shal moun suffre? Kepende the furneys 
4in the werkis of brennyng; thre maner 
the sunne brennende oute hillis, blast- 
ende out fyrene bemes, and a3een shyn- 
ende with his bemes, blendeth the e3en. 
5 Gret® the Lord, that made it; and in the 
ewrdis of it he heejede the weye. And 
the moone in alle thingus in his tyme 
shewende of tyme, and tokne of the spi- 
7rituely world. Of the moone the signe 
of the holy” day; a* li3t 3yuere that is» 
slassid in the ending. The mooneth aftir 
his name is waxende, merueylously in to 
gthe® ful endyng. A vessel of tentes in 
‘heije thingis’, in the firmament of he- 
1ouene shynende gloriously’. The fair- 
nesse of heuene glorie of sterres; the 
11 Lord li3tnende the world in hei;tes. In 
woordis hoely men shuln stonden at the 
dom; and thei shul not failen in ther 
12wacches. See the bowe, and blisse hym 
that made it; ful fair it is in his shyn- 
i3yng. He cumpaside heuene in the cir- 
cuyt of his glorie; the hondus of the 
14he3e openeden it. Bi his maundement 
hee3edef the sno3; and he hee3eth? lizt- 
1s nyngus to senden out of his dom. Ther- 
fore opened ben the tresores, and flowen 
isawey the litle cloudys as briddes. In his 
mykilnesse he putte the cloudus; and ben 
17 to-broke the stones of the hail. In his si3te 
shul ben stired togidere the? hillis ; and 
in his wil shal spiren', or bretheni, out the 
issouth. The vois of his thunder ‘schal 
beten* the erthe ; and the tempest of the 
l9north, and the gederyng of wynd. And 
as a brid puttende doun to sitten spreng- 
eth the sno3, and as a locust drenchende 
20 the descendingus of it. The fairnesse of 
the shynyng of it the e3e shal merueilen ; 


wOm. 4. * Greet is 4. Y age of the £ sec. m. 
bisnot Eprom. Chis acu. 4 heijtus c pr. m. 
heezeth, or enhaunsith & sec. m. GU. 


tOm.v. tOm.cv. ¥Om.v. ® hastide c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


h Om. c prem. 


xX bees CEFGUIKMNPQRSUV Xi. 


207 


ful vessel, the werk of hi3 God. In thes 
tyme of myddai it brenncth the erthe; — 
and who schal mow suffre in the si3t of 
his heete? _Kepynge a furneis in the werkis 
of heete; the sunne brennynge hillis ins 
thre mancris, sendynge out beemys of fier, 
and schynynge a3en with hise bcemys, 
blyndith izen. The Lord is greet, thats 
made it; and in the wordis of hym* it 
hastide iourney. And the moone in alles 
men in his tyme zs shewing of tyme, and 
a‘ signe of the world. A signe of the7 
feeste dai is takun of the® moone; the 
li3t which is maad litil in the ende. Thes 
monethe is encreessynge bi the name 
therof, wondirfuli in to the euding. Ao 
vessel of castels in hi3 thingis, schynynge 
gloriousli in the firmament of heuene. The 10 
fairnesse of hcuene és the glorie of sterris; 
the Lord an hi3 li3tneth the world. Ini 
the wordis of the hooli tho schulen stonde 
at the doom; and tho schulen not faile in 
her wakyngis. Se thou the bouwet, and 12 We ae oa 
blesse thou hym that made it; it is ful _ the reynbowe, 
fair in his’ schynyng. It 3ede aboute ren ft 
heuene in the cumpas of his glorie; the Bering therel 
hondis of hiz3 God openyden it. Bi hist4 
comaundement he hastide the snow; and 
he hastith” to sende out the lei3tyngis of 
his dom. Therfor tresouris weren opened, 15 
and clowdis fledden out as been*. In his 16 
greetnesse he settide clowdis; and stoonys 
of hail weren brokun. Hillis schulen be 17 
moued in his si3t; and the south wynd 
schal blowe in his wille. The vois of his 1s 
thundur schal beete the erthe; the tem- 
pest of the north, and the gaderyng}{ to- Se us 
gidere of wynd. And as a brid puttynge 19 awellynge ther- 
doun to sitte sprengith snow, and the rahi anhs 
comyng doun of that snow is as a locust Nswynel. 
drenchynge doun. The ize schal wondre 20 down; that is, 
on the fairnesseY of whitnesse therof; and 

an herte dredith on the reyn therof. 


* in the wordis @ 
of him, eles 
that is, bi the 
ordenaunce of 
God the sunne 
hastide his 
cours. Lire 
here. c. 


2 tempest of the 
north and the 
gadering, ete.; 
is of God, and 
hetith the 


comynge doun 

on greene erbis, 
to deuoure tho. 
He 21 hire here. c. 


zOm.c prem. 4 thou hast mad ac pr. m. E prom. 
€Om.cpr.m. fhe heejid Gc.  & enhannsith 4. 
Ishyne 4. JOm.cet er pr.m. * heteth ¢ pr.m. 


y or colour K marg. 


208 


and vp on the weder of hym the herte 
21quaketh', Frost as salt he shal heelden 
out vp on the erthe; and whil he blow- 
ith™, he shal be mad as the coppis of 
athe brembil. The cold northerne wind 
blee3, and the cristal freesede fro the 
watyr; vp on al the gederyng of watris” 
it resteth, and as an habirioun, it® clothide 
23hymself watris. And it shal deuouren 
hillis, and brennen out the desert; and 
24quenchen out the greene as fyr. Mede- 
cyne? of alle thingus in the hee3yng’ of 
the litle" cloude ; the’ dew, metende to the 
comende brennyng, low3' sha] maken it. 
25In his wrd the wynd heeld his pes; bi 
his thenking he shal pese" the se; and 
26the Lord Jhesus plauntide yt. Who 
seilen the se, shuln tellen out the periles 
of it; and herende with oure eres wee 
27shuln wndre. There ful cleer werkis, 
and merueilous, and dyuers kindis of 
no3ouse bestes, and of alle helpely bestes, 
28and the creature of bestes. For hym is 
confermed the ende of the wey ; and in 
the wrd of hym alle thingus ben mad 
29togidere. Many thinges we seyn, and 
failen in wrdis; ful endyng forsothe of 
30 wrdis he is. In alle thingus gloriende, 
to what shul we be mny3ty ? he forsothe 
3ialmy3tiY ouer alle his werkes. Ferful 
the Lord, and gret hugely ; and merueil- 
szous the power of hym. Glorefiende the 
Lord hou myche euere 3ee schul* moun, 
he shal ben ouer wrthi 3it ; and ful mer- 
33 ueilous the gret doyng of hym. Blissende 
the Lord, enhaunce 3ee hym as myche as 
jee moun; more forsothe he is than alle 
34preising. Enhauncende hym 3ee shulx 
be fulfild with vertue; ne trauaile 3ee, 
35forsothe 3ee shul not ful comen. Who 
sa3 hym, and shal tellen out ? and who 
shal maguefien hym, as he is fro the bi- 
36 gynnyng’? Many hid thingus ben more 


knowe bi creaturis, as if he seye, We moun atteyne to ful litil thing. Lire here. c. 


whi this is vnpossible. c. 


1 shal quake c pr.m. # prom. AGH. 
P Medecynes c pr. m. 


2 closeth 1. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


™ schal blowe 4c sec. m. E sec. m. GH. 
a hastyng 4c sec. m. E sec. m. GH, 
ulowen ¢ pr.m. re prim, peese 4GH. ¥ is almizti.1. W Om. c prom 


XLII. 21—36. 


* it restith ; 
the cooldnesse 
of the northrun 
The coold 22 wynd makith 


schal schede out frost as salt on the erthe; 
and while the wynd blowith, it schal be 
maad as coppis of a brere. 
9 : watris to be 
northun wynd blew, and cristal of watir  frozun togidere. 
i it} 1 deuoure hillis ; 
frees togidre ; it restith*, on al the geder-  Goatt ertis. 
ing togidere of watris, and it clothith? it  wexinge in 
: : hillis. quenche ; 
silf with watris, as with an haburioun. pee ate 
: nad - medicyn of alle 
And it schal denoure hillis, and it schal 23 shingis; brent 
5 } a a At Wal ] bi the northrun 
renne the desert; and it schal quenche — wynd. is in the 
s hasting of a 
grene thing as fier. ‘The medicyn of alle 24 loudest 
thingis 7s in the haasting of a cloude; haeaee 
a deewe, meetynge the heete comynge of rol if mee 
: that is, schal 
brennyng, schal make it low. The wynd 25 tempere the 
i . ‘ ° f heete. c. 
was stille in the word of God; bi his ie rod 
thou3t he made peesible the depthe of Ziaus that is, 
2 
watris; and the Lord Jhesut plauntide it. ane of fle 
men, for whi 
Thei that seilen in the see, tellen out the 26 Jhesu is inter- 
3 6 pretid helthe, 
perels therof; and we heeringe with oure thon; the au- 

: : 7 tour of this 
eeris schulen wondre. There ben ful cleer27 faci, that 
werkis, and wonderful, dyuerse kindis of an Eee 

00) 
beestis, and of? alle litle beestis, and the a Gee ne- 
. theles he set- 
creature of wondurful fischis. The ende 28 tide in here an 
ie: : Eb 
of weie is confermyd for itt; and alle Fihere « 
thingis ben maad in the word of hym, }/ its thatis, 
r Pass f or the occian, 
We seien many thingis§, and we faylen in 29 ee et 
. . be re: rey * 
wordis ; forsothe he is the endyng of Lire here. c. 
. : We s 
wordis. To what thing schulen we be30 ee pa 
* Same Oe eee of God bi hise 
my3ti, that han glorie in alle thingis? for werkis, and 
he 7s al my3ti aboue alle hise werkis. The 31 /eien in 
4 wordis ; for 
Lord zs ferdful, and ful greet; and his whi his excel- 
: i ence may not 
power is wondurful. Glorifie 3¢ the Lord 32 be compre. 
é hendid 
as myche as euere 3e moun, 3it he schal sna ee 
sas . 5 not be teld out 
be my3tiere; and his grete doynge ts won-  Bp\ 0° fell 
durful. 3e blessynge the Lord, enhaunse a3 “e a of 
5 wordis; for he 
hym as myche as 3e moun; for he is more alone compre- 
of hendith him. 
than al preisyng. 3e enhaunsynge hym 34 siif perfitly, 
schulen be fillid with vertu; tranele 3e ?"¢ demerit 
3 
not||, for 3e schulen not take perfith. Who3s pe ye 
re iens 
siz hym, and schal telle out? and who _ staunce, and 
; ih euene euerlast- 
schal magnefie hym, as he is fro the _ inge with him. 
< ‘ sa agete To what thing, 
bigynnyng? Many thingis gretter than 36 oy..7 to atteyne 
} . , of Goddis ma- 
these ben hid Jro Us; for we han seyn 7s eins 
fewe thingis of hise werkis. Forsothe the 37 *e in ave 
thingis ; which 
we monn 
|| traucte 3e not ; to knowe God perfitly in this liyf; for 
n water c. © Om. «4. 


‘ low3, or mylde G sec.m. 
x Om. AE sec.m. GH. 


rOm.H. sOm. 4GH. 


2 Om. a. 


XLII. 37-—XLIV. 17. 


than these; forsothe fewe thingus wee 

37han seen of his werkes. Alle thingus 
forsothe the Lord made; and to men 
pitously doende he 3af wisdam. 


CAP. XLIV. 


1 ‘Preisen weY glorious men, and oure 
fadris and modris in ther generacioun. 
2Myche glorie the Lord dide in his grete 
3doyng. Fro the world? ben men® lord- 
schipende in® ther poweres, grete men 
in vertue, and bi ther’ prudence biforn 
othere mad riche; tellende in profetes the 
adignete of profetes, and comaundende in 
the present puple, and bi vertue of pru- 
dence of¢ the’ puple, most hoely wrdis. 
5In ther wisdam sechende the’ musyk 
manerys, and tellende the dytes of scrip- 
e6tures. Riche men in vertue, hauende the 
study of fairnesse, pes makende in ther 
7houses. Alle these in the ieneraciouns of 
their fole han taken glorie; and in ther 
8dajes ben® had in preisyngus. Who of 
hem ben born, laften the name of telling 
9the preisingus of hem. And ther ben, of 
whom is no mynde; thei persheden as 
thatf weren not, and ben born as noté 
born; and the sonus of hem with hem. 
10 But they men of mercy ben, of whom 
11the! pitoustees faileden not; and with 
the seed of hem dwellide stille good eri- 
l2tage. And the sed of the sonus sonus of 
i3hem stod in the testament, and the eri- 
tage of the sonus of hem for hem, in to 
with oute ende dwelleth ; the sed of 
hem, and the glorie of hem, shal not be 
14forsaken. The bodies of hem in pes ben 
biried ; and the name of hem shal lyue 
15in to ieneraciouns and ieneraciouns. The 
wysdam of hem puples shul tellen ; and 
the preising of hem the chirche* shal 
isshewen!. Enoc plesede to God, and is 
translatid in to paradis, that he 3yue wis- 
17dam to fole™ of kynde. Noe is founde a 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


209 | 


Lord made alle thingis ; and he 3af wis- 
dom to men doynge feithfuli. 


CAP. XLIV. 


Preise we gloriouse men, and oure fa-1 
dris in her generacioun. The Lord made2 
myche glorie bi his greet doyng, fro the 
world. Grete men in vertu weren? lordis3 
in her poweris, and riche in her prudence ; 
tellynge in profetis the dignete of pro- 
fetis, and comaundynge in present puple, 4 
and tellynge hoolieste wordis to puplis, bi 
the vertu of prudence. Sekynge maneress 
of musik in her childhod*, and tellynge 47)"7,h"" 
songis of scripturis. Riche men in vertu, 6 ares 
hauynge the studie of fairnesse, makynge “ed, thou _ 
pees in her housis. Alle these men gaten7 ne 
glorie in the generaciouns of her folk; "”"”"% 
and ben had in preysyngis in her daies. 
Thei that weren borun of hem, leften az 
name to telle the preisyngis of hem. Ando 
summe ben’, of whiche is no mynde; thei 
perischiden as thei that weren not, and 
thei weren borun as not borun; and her 
sones perischiden with hem. But also to 
tho men of mercy ben, whose pitees fail- 
iden not; and good eritage dwellide con- 11 
tynueli with the seed of hem. And the12 
seed of her sones sones‘ stood in testa- 
ment, and the eritage of her sones dwell-13 
ith for® hem, til in to with outen ende; 
the seed of hem, and the glorie of hem, 
schal not be forsakun. The bodies of hem 14 
ben biried in pees; and the name of hem 
schal lyue in to generaciouns and genera- ieee 
ciouns. Puplis tellen the wisdom of hem ; 15 sehal come a3en 
and the chirche tellith the preysyng of ee 
hem. Enok pleside God, and was trans-16 Non Mie 
latidt in to paradis, that he 3yue wisdom eo ea 
to folkis. Noe was foundun parfit and TN 
iust, and he was maad recouncelynge in _ the world, to be 
the tyme of wrathfulnesse. Therfor re- 18}? ae. 


parfit ri3twis man, and in tyme of wrathe — sidue seed was left to erthe, whanne the feet Hire 
y We preisen c pr.m. % Lord 4, @maad 4. Y bi zen. >” Om.c pr.m. ¢Om.c prim. e¢Om. 4. 
dQOm.4en. © shul ben £ pr.m. fthei that 4. that not cpr.m.  hmercyes 4. 1 Om. acu. 
k puple c pr.m. | shewe out 4. telle of c pr.m. ™ the folk a. 
bOm.v. ¢therbenr. 4@OUm.ec.  ® biforc. 


VOL. HE. Ee 


210 


ishe is mad recounsylyng. Therfore is laft 
the remnaunt of the® erthe, whan the 
19 flod was do. The testaments of the world 
ben put anent hym, ne‘my3te be do awey™ 
20 with the flod eche flesh. Abraham the 
grete fader of the multitude of the fole 
of kinde; and ther is not founde lije to 
hym in glorie, that kepte the lawe of the 
he3est®, and was in testament with hym. 
21 In? his flesh he made to stonde the testa- 
ment; and in tempting he is founde 
22feithful. Therfore by oth he 3af to hym 
glorie in his fole of kinde, to encresen 
23hym as an hilloc of erthe; and to en- 
hauncen ‘the sed of 1 hym as the sterres, 
and to eritagen hym fro the se vn to the 
se, and fro the flod vnto the termes of 
atthe erthe. And to Isaac he dide the 
same maner, for Abraham, his fader. 
25 The blissing of alle fole of kinde the 
Lord 3af to hym; and his testament he 
26 confermede vp on the hed of Jacob. He 
kne3 hym in his biessingus, and 3af to 
hym the eritage; aud he deuydede to 
27hym part in the twelue lynagis. And 
he kepte to hym sonus of mercy, findende 
grace in the si3t of al flesh. 


CAP. XLV. 


1 Moises looued of God and of men; 
2whos mynde is in blessyng. Lic he made 
hym in the glorie of seyntes, and he 
magnefiede hym in the drede of enemys ; 
and in his wrdis he cesede hidous won- 
3dris. He gloretiede hym in the sizt of 
kyngus, and he comaundide to hym bi- 
forn al his puple, and he shewede to hym 
4his glorie. In feith and softenesse of 
hym he made hym hoely ; and he chees 
shym of alle flesh. Forsothe he herde 
hym, and the vois of hym; and he ladde 
6hym in a cloude. And he 3aff hym an 
herte to the hestes, and to the lawe of 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XLIV. 18——XLV. 6. 


greet flood was maad. Testamentis of the 19 
world weren set anentis hym, lest al fleisch 
my3te be doon awei bi the greet flood. 


Abraham was the greet fadir of the mul-20 


titude of folkis; and noon was foundun 
lijk hym in glorie*, which kepte the lawe 
of hiz3 God, and was in thef testament 
with hym. He made a testament to stonde 21 
in his fleisch ; and he was foundun feith- 
ful in temptacioun. 
an ooth 3af to hym glorie in his folk; 
God made hym to eucreesse, as an heep 


of erthe, and to enhaunse his seed as23 


sterris, and to enherite hem fro the see 
‘til to’ the see, and fro the flood ‘til to® 
the endis of erthe. And to Isaac God dide 24 
in the same maner, for Abraham, his fa- 
dir. 
of alle folkist; and confermyde his testa- 


The Lord 3af to hym the blessing 2s 


* noon was 
Soundun liyk 
him in glorie; 
that is, in ver- 
tuouse werk, 
and this in 
twey thingis, 
for he prechide 
first opinli the 
feith of o God, 
whanne aftir 
the grete flood 
puplis bowiden 
to idolatrie; and 
in this that he 
wolde affre so 


Therfor God with 22 redily his oon 


oone gendrid 
sone and derl- 
ing, for to fille 
Goddis co- 
maundement. 
the lowe af hi3 
God ; that is, 
the lawe of 
kynde preeant- 
id in maanns 
soule. @ testa- 
mend, etc.; that 
is, circumci- 
sioun. in temia- 
cioun ; bi which 
the Lord temt- 
ide him, to 


ment on the heed of Jacob. He knew 26schewe to 


hym in hise blessyngis, and 3af eritage to 
hym; and departide to hym a part in 
twelue lynagis. And he kepte to hym 27 
men of merci, fyndynge grace in the si3t 
of eche man. 


CAP. XLV. 


Moises was loued of God and of men;1 
whose mynde is in blessyng. He madez2 
him lijk in the gloriet of seyntis, and he 
magnefiede hym in the drede of enemyes ; 
and in his wordis he made peesible the 
wondris a3ens kynde. He glorifiede hym3 
in the si3t of kyngis, and he ‘comaundide 
to hym! bifore his puple, and schewide 
his glorie to hym. In the feith andi 
myldenesse of hym God made hym hooli; 
and chees him of alle men. For he herdes 
hym, and his vois; and ledde in* hym in 
a cloude. And 3af to hym an herte to6 
comatundementis, and to the lawe of lijf, 


othere men 

his obedience. 
fro the see, ete.; 
these ben the 
endis of the 
lond of biheest, 
that is, the 
myddil see of 
erthe at the 
west, and the 
deed see at the 
eest ; the flood 
Eufrates at the 
north, and the 
desert of Egipt 
at the south. 
dide in the same 
maners that is, 
blesside him, 
and bihizte to 
him that he 
bihizte to Abra- 
ham. Lire 
here. c. 

t the blessing 
of alle folkis ; 
that is, God 3af 
to him and not 
to Ismael, that 
Crist schulde 
be borun of 
him, in which 
Crist alle folkis 
of erthe schulen 
be blessid. his 
testament; that 
is, conenaunt, 
which he made 
to Abraham. 
He knew him; 
that is, appre- 
uyde him, as 
worthi to hise 


blessingis. om the heed of Jacob ; and uot on the heed of Esan, thou3 Isaac wolde first do the contrarie, men of merci; that is, his sones patriarkis, 
that, goten mersi of the sillyng of Josep. grace in the siz3t af ech man ; grace in the si3t of Farao and of Egipcians. Lire here. c. 
glorie, etc. in seynge Goddis beyng; as Austyn seith to Paulyn, in his book of God to be seyn. In the feith; that is, in feithfulnesse, for he was ful 
feithful. chees him; to lede the children of Israel out of Egipt, and to be the lawe 3yuere of the elde testament. fo comaundementis ; to fille tho in 


werk, and to teche tho to othere men. Lire here. c. 
20m. 4. "9 be do awey my3te c. 


f Om. ¢ sec. m. v. 


oheeze 4EGH. 


8vntor. 4 ether sende him K marg. 


P And in acu. 40Om.c pr.m. x. the heuede of H. 


iofv. kOm.1. 


t liyk in the 


XLV. 7—21. 


lif, and of disciplyne; to techen Jacob 
the" testament, and Irael his domes. 
7 Hee3 he made Aaron, his brother, and 
8a lic to hym of the lynage of Leny. He 
sette to hym an euere lastende testament, 
and he 3af to hym the presthod of the 
folc of kinde; and he made hym bDilisful 
9in glorie. And he girde hym aboute with 
the girdil of ri3twisnesse, and he clothide 
hym the stoele of glorie, and crounede 
1ohym in vesselis off vertue. Shon, and 
breches, and coepe he putte to hym, and 
girde hym aboute with manye litle gold- 
uiene belles in cumpas; to 3yne soun in 
his goyng in, and to make the soun herd 
in the temple, in to mynde to the sonus 
i20f hys fole. An’ hoely stoele, with gold, 
and blyu vyolet sile, and sanguyn sile, 
the werk wouen, thur3 the’ dom of the 
wise man, and thur3 the treuthe of the 
enourned; with fyr red silc foldun" a3een, 
13 the werk of the craftis, with precious iem- 
mes figured in binding of gold, and with 
werk of the’ lapidarie grauen, in to the 
mynde, after the’ noumbre of the lynagis 
140f Irae]. A* goldeneY croune vp on the 
mytre of hym, expressid with the tocne 
of hoelynesse, the glorie of wrshipe, and 
the were of vertue, ‘to the? desir of e3en 
isenourned. So faire bifor hyin weren not 
is‘suche thingus*, vnto the est. Ther is nott 
clad» with it any alyen, but only alone 
the sonus of hym, and the cosynes of 
17hym, bi alle tyme. The sacrifices of hym 
18ben ful endid with fyr eche day. Moises 
. fulfilde the hondis of hym, and enoynt- 
19ede® hym with his hoely oile. It is mad 
to hym an euerelastende testament, and 
to his sed as the da3es of heuene, to vsen 
the offis of presthed, and to han preys- 
yng, and his? puple to be glorified in his 
20oname. Hym he chees of alle lyuende, to 
offre sacrifice to God, encens, and good 
smell, in to mynde, to make pes for his 
2ipuple. And he 3af to hym power in his 


this 4. 8 And a pr.m. H. 
<Withasr pr.m. Ygold a. 7 with E prem. 
din his c prom. to his @ pr. m.u. 


lan enerlastinge x sec. m. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


t Om. c pr.m. 


™ Om. CEFGIHKMNPQRUVXA. 


211 


and of techyng; to teche Jacob a testa- 
ment, and Israel hise domes. He made7 
hi3 Aaron, his brother, and lijk hym of 
the lynage of Leuy. He ordeynede tos 
hym euerlastynge! testament*, and 3af to 
hym the preesthod of the” folk”. And he 
made hym blissful in glorie, and girtes 


* euerlastinge 
testament ; that 
is, the coue- 
naunt of prest- 
hod, whieh is 


= Seale G ‘. seid euerlast- 
hym with a girdil of ri3tfulnesse; and  iiee in as 
clothide hy with a stoole of glorie, and mayne ait 
. 5 guride the 
crownede hym in the ournementis of vertu. _ presthod of 


6 3 Crist, whic] 
He settide on hyin sandalies, aud breeches, 10 presthod is ; 


: everlastinge. 
and a clooth on the schuldur, and girte Fi hin ii 


hym aboute with ful many small goldun iz glorie; 
7 ae 7 i that is, made 
bellis in cumpas; to 3yue soun in his1 int We seid 
. Isiu. or 
goyng, to make soun herd in the temple, _ glorie of prest- 
in to mynde to the sones of his folk. God 12 girdit of rigte 


hod. with a 
’ ‘ ® Sulwesse; that 
3¢f to hym an hooli stoole, a wouun werk, 46, Sitka grail 


with gold, and iacynet, and purpur, the ™aad goes 
Be, : i uerse colours, 
werk of a wijs man, maad riche with which is seid 


. _ a girdil of rizt- 
doom and treuthe; the werk of a crafti 13 fines, ait 


man, in writhun reed threed, with pre- ane ae 
ciouse iemmes grauun in the byndyng of _ ¢letlis, asthe 
gold, and grauun bi the werk of a® crafti lawe scence 
man of stoonys, into mynde, bi the noum- _ teris. c. 

bre of the lynagis of Israel. A goldunis 

coroun on his mytre, set forth with the 

signe of hoolynesse, the glorie of onour, 

and the werk of vertu, ourned to desijr of 

i3en. Siche thingis so faire weren not bi-15 

fore hym, ‘til to? the eest. Noon alien was 16 

clothid ther ynne, but oneli hise sones, 

and hise sones sones aloone, bi al tyme. 

Hise sacrifices weren endid ech dai bi17 

fyer. Moises fillidet hise hondis, and 18 + atoise fuiae; 
anoyntide hym with hooli oile. ee ae 


It was 19% have preis~ 
maad to hym in to euerlastynge testa- {2% that ie te 


have the office 


ment, and to his seed as the daies of  ® preise God, 
as it acordith 
heuene, to vse presthod, and to haue toa comyn 


‘ ° . > : persoone. in 
preisyng, and to glorifie his puple in his his name; that 
is, in th 
name. God chees hym of ech lyuynge 20 of God. aliens; 
man, to offre sacrifice to God, encense, ? the kyn of 
: prestis, as were 
and good odour, in to mynde, for to plese Chore and his 
= P copgreyacioun $ 
for his puple. And he 3af to hym power 21 in xvi. c*. of 
. . . : Numery. Lire 
in hise comaundementis, and in the testa- — jere. ¢ 
mentis of domes, to teche Jacob witness- 


w Om, 4GHu. 
© enoyntynge 4, 


4 falt c pr. m. ¥ Om. c. 
aOmcpr.m. > clothid arcu. 


n folkiss. ©° Om.c. P vnto 1. 


EeQ 


212 


hestes, in testamentes of domes, to teche 
Jacob witnessingus, and in his lawe 113t 
22to 3yue to Irael. For a3en hym stoden 
alienus, and for enuye ther cumpasseden 
hym men in desert, that weren with Da- 
than and Abiron, and the congregacioun 
230f Chore, in to ful wrathe. The Lord 
sa3, and it plesede not to hym; and thei 
ben wastid in the bure of ful® wrathe. 
24 He made to hem hidous veniaunces, and 
he wastede them in the flanme of fyr. 
25 And he eechede to Aron glorie, and he 
3af to hym eritage ; and the chef of the 
frutes of the erthe he deuydide to hym. 
26 The bred of hym ‘in the firste‘, in to ful- 
nesse he greithede; for whi and the sa- 
crifiseS’ of the Lord thei shul ete, the 
whiche he 3af to hym, and to the sed of 
27hym. ‘For whi® in thel ond he shal not 
eritagen Jentiles, and part is not to hym 
in the fole; he is forsothe the part of 
28hym, he is and the eritage. Fynees, the 
sone of Eleasar, the thridde is! in glorie, 
folowende hym in the* drede of God, 
29and to stonde in reuerence of the fole; 
in goodnesse and gladnesse of his soule 
30he pleside to God of Irael. Therfore he 
sette to hym a testament of pes, and a. 
prince of seyntes, and of his fole; that 
ther be to hym and to his sed dignete of 
31 presthed, in to with oute ende. And the 
testament of Dauid, ‘the king**, sone of 
Jesse, of the lynage of Juda, eritage to 
hym, and to the sed of hym; that he 
schuld! 3yue wisdam in to oure herte, to 
demen his fole in ri3twisnesse, lest were™ 
don awei the goodis of hem; and the 
glorie of hem, in to the fole of hem, he 
maade euere lastende. 


CAP. XLVI. 


1 Strong in bataile Jesus Nauee, the suc- 
cessour of Moises in profetes, that was 
2gret aftir his name. Most in to the 
helthe of the chosen men of God, to 


€ wilful a. 
kk Om. c prem. 


f Om. c prem. & sacrifices 4. 


1Om. c prem 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XLV. 22——XLVI. 2. 


yngis, and in his lawe to 3yue 1i3t to 
Israel. For aliens stooden a3ens hym, and 22 
men that weren with Datan and Abiron, 
and the congregacioun of Chore, in wrath- 
fulnesse cumpassiden hym for enuye, in 
desert. The Lord si3, and it pleside notes 
hym ; and thei weren wastid in the feers- 
nesse of wrathfulnesse. He made to hem 24 
wondris ajens kynde, and in the flawme 
of fier he wastide* hem. And he encreess- 25 
ide glorie to Aaron, and 3af eritage to 
hym ; and he departide to Aaron the firste 
thingis of fruytis of the erthe. He made26 
redi his breed in the firste thingis, in to 
fulnesse ; for whi and thei shulen ete the 
sacrifices of the Lord, whiche he 3af to hym, 
and to his seed. But in the lond of his 27 
folk he schal not haue eritage, and no part 
is to hym among the folk; for whi God 
is the part and eritage of hym. Fynees, 28 
the sone of Eleazarus, was the thridde in 
glorie, in suynge hym in the% drede of 
God, and to stonde in the reuerence of 29 
folk; in the goodnesse and gladnesse of 
his soule he pleside God of Israel. Ther- 30 
for God ordeynede to hym the testament 
of peest, and made hym prince of hooli 
men, and of his folk; that the dignete of 
presthod be to hym and to his seed, with 
outen ende. And the testament of Dauid, 31 
the sone of Jesse, of the lynage of Juda, 
was eritage to hym, and to his seed; that 
he schulde 3yue wisdom in to oure herte, 
to deme his folk in rijtfulnesse, lest her 
goodis schulen be don awei; and he made 
the glorie of hem to be euerlastinge, in the 
folk of hem. 


CAP. XLVI. 


Jhesus Naue, the successour of Moises 1 
in profetis, was strong in batel, that was 
greet bi his name. The gretteste in to2 
the helthe of chosun men of God, to ouer- 


h Therafter £ pr. m. i Om. a. k Om. u. 


™ be c pr.m. E pr.m. 


qOm. 1. 


* wastide ; for 
the erthe swo- 
lewide hem, 
and thei 3eden 
doun quyke in 
to helle. 3af 
eritage; that 
is, the firste 
fruytis. in the 
lond ; of hi- 
heest. Lire 
here. c. 


t testament of 
pees’; that is, 
the dignitee of 
presthod, to be 
had in posses- 
sioun pesibly to 
him and to hise 
sones. prince of 

ooly men 3 
that is, of 
prestis, that 
weren seid 
hooly, for they 
weren assigned 
to Goddis ser- 
uyces. the tes- 
tament of Da- 
uyth ; that is, 
his ordenaunce, 
of alarging of 
Goddis wor- 
schipyng, which 
ordenaunce he 
settide vndur 
the gouernai) 
of the hizeste 
hischop. the 
glorie of hem; 
that is, dignete 
of presthod in 
hem and in her 
sones. euerlast. 
inge; that is, to 
dwelle longe, as 
hillis ben euer- 
lastinge. Lire 
here. C. 


4 


XLVI. 3-17. 


fiz3ten out the enemys aj3enrisende, that 
he shulde han afterward the eritage of 
3Irael. What glorie he hadde in taking 
vp his hondis, and in castynge a3en the 
4cites twey bitende swerdis. Who biforn 
hym so withstod ? for whi the enemys 
5the Lord smot. Or not in wratheful- 
nesse of hym is lettid the sunne, and o 
6dai is mad as two? He inwardli clepede 
the he3est, my3ti" in ajenfizting his ene- 
mys on either side; and the grete and 


hoely God herde hym, in the grete stones ~ 


7of hail of ful gret vertue. A bure® he 
made a3en the enmyable? fole; in the 
goyng doun he distro3ede the contrari- 
sous; that the Jentilis knowe the my3t of 
hym, for ajen the Lord to fi3te is not 
liz3t ; and he folowede the my3ti men‘ 
9bihinde. And in the dajes of Moisy 
mercy dide he, and Calef, the sone of 
Jefone; to stonde ajen the enemy, and 
to forfende the folc fro" synnes, and to 
drawen awei the grucching of the malice. 
10And thei two ordeyned fro the perile 
ben deliuered, fro the noumbre of six 
hundrid thousend foot men, to bringe 
them in to the eritage, in to the lond 
that flowith myle and hony. And the 
Lord 3af to’Calef strengthe, and vnto 
eelde abod stille to hym vertue; that’ he 
shulde ste3e in to the he3e place of the 
erthe, and the sed of hyin heeld the 
l2eritage. And alle the sonus of Irael 
sejen, for it is good to obeshe to the 
i3hoeli God. And alle the iugis bi ther 
name, of whom the herte is not corrupt, 
the whiche ben not turned awei fro the 
14 Lord; that the mynde of hem be in 
blessing, and the boenes of hem buri- 
1sounen fro ther place; and the name of 
hem abit' stille in to with oute ende, the 
glorie of hoely" men abidende stille to 
1éthe sonus of hem. Samuel, the profete 
of the Lord, looued of the Lord his 
God, renewede the empire, and enoynt- 
1vede princes in his fole. In the lawe of 


2 Om. c pr.m. © bure forsothe E pr.m. 
Sand 4. tabideth szen. 
t Om. ora. 


rQOm.1. 8 of footmen c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


P enemy able c. eymable 4. 
u tho hooli a£ sec. m. GH. 


"to Ais 1. to the cFUQ pr. m. sva. 


213 


come enemyes risynge ajens hem, that he 
schulde gete the erytage of Israel. Which3 
glorie he gat in reysynge his hondis, and 
in castynge scharpe arowis ajens citees. 
Who bifore hym a3enstood so? for whi4 
the Lord hym silf smoot the enemyes. 
Whether the sunne was not lettid in thes 
wrathfulnesse of hym, and o dai was maad 
as tweyne? He clepide to help the hizeste 5 
God*, my3ti in ouercomynge enemyes on 
ech side; and God, greet and hooli, herde 
hym, in stoonys of hail of ful greet vertu. 
He made asau3t a3ens the folk enemy, and 7 
in the comynge doun he loste the aduer- 
saries ; that hethene men knowe the my3ts 
of hym, for it is not esy to fi3te a3ens the 
Lord ; and he suede my3ti men at the bak. 
And in the daies of Moises he and Caleph, 9 
the sone of Jephone, diden merci; to stonde 
a3ens the enemye, and to forbede the folk 

fro synnes, and to refreyne the grutchyng PS {"05, 


* was not cor- 

rupt ; bi aua- 

rice, but weren 
stronge in 


of malice. And thei tweyne weren stid-10 te. Me glories 
that stondith — 
fast, and weren delyuered fro perel, of the _ not in richessis 
° . onours, an 
noumbre of sixe hundrid thousynde ‘foot — delices, but ir: 
z, vertnouse 
men’, to brynge hem in to the eritage, in verkis. Lire 
to the lond that flowith mylk and hony. 1° 6 ewe 
And the Lord 3af strengthe to thilke Ca-11 ce : 
ran: 
leph, and til int to" elde vertu dwellide the Ae frm 
s . . the lynage 0. 
perfitli to hym; that he stiede in to the Tenia to 
: ‘ he I f 
hi3 place of the lond, and his seed gat jiae bf eco. 
eritage. And alle the children of Israel 12™anndenent. 
sien, that it is good to obeie to hooli God. eee ve 2 
‘acob; 
And alle iugis bi her name, the herte of 13he knew in — 
1 Vv * ig J reuelacioun of 
whicheY was not corrupt*, weren strong _ profecie, for he 
, i ° . herde ofte the 
zn batel, which weren not turned awel fro Lord syeking 
the Lord; that the mynde of hem be ini4 Gaetgeee: 
blessyng, and her boonys apperen fro her pee lela 
. < in his feith; 
place; and her name dwellith with outen 15 that is, feith- 

; ‘ . fulnesse. in the 
ende, for the glorie of hooli men dwellith Gping ofa 
at the sones of hem. Samuel, the profete 16% rndefow’- 

LY fae 
of the Lord, that was louyd of his Lord _ his owne of. | 
. ring. Samu 
God, made newe the empiref, and anoynt- _ is seid a man 
° . . f vndefoulid, for 
ide prynces in his folk. In the lawe Of 17 he sede not 
waet awey fro ri3t- 
the Lord he demyde the congregacioun, (VY co ui aua- 
and he si3 the Lord of Jacob, and in his ort 
feith he was preued a profete. And he 18 Lire here. c. 


qOm.cprom "of 4. 


v whom 1. 


214 


the Lord he demede the congregacioun, 
and he sa3 the Lord of Jacob, and in his 
isfeith he is proued a profete. And he is 
knowen in his wrdis feithful, for he sa3 
i9the Lord of li3t. And he inwardly clep- 
ide the almy3ty Lord, in ajenfiz3ting the 
enemys aboute stondende on eche side, in 
20the offring of the man vndefoulid. And 
the Lord thundrede in fro henene, in a 
2igret soun his vois he made herd. And 
he to-trad the princes of Tyres, and alle 
22the dukes of Filisteys’. And bifore the” 
tyme of the ende of his lif, and he 3af 
witnessing of the world, in the si3t of 
the Lord, and of Crist; monees and vnto 
the shon, of alle flesh he toc not; and 
23 ther acuside hym not aiman. And aftir 
that¥” he slepte, and made knowen to 
the kyng, and shewede to hym the ende 
of his lif; and enhauncede his vois fro 
the erthe in profecie, to don awey the 
vnpitouste of the fole. 


CAP. XLVI. 


1 Aftir these thingus ros Nathan, the 
2profete, in the dajes of Dauid. And as 
tal3 senered fro the flesh, so Dauid fro 
3the sonus of Irael. With leouns he pley- 
ede, as with lombis ; in beres lije maner 
she dide, as in* lombis of shep. In his 
3outhe whether he slo3 not a ieaunt, and 
5toc awei repref fro the fole? In takinge 
the hond in the ston of the slynge, he 
6thre3 doun the io3e of Golie, where he 
inwardly clepede the Lord almy3ty ; and 
he 3af in his ri3t hond to don awey a 
strong man in bataile, and to enhaunce 
7the horn of his fole. So in ten thou- 
sendis he glorifiede hym, and _preisede 
hym in the blessingus of the Lord, in 
soffringe to hym a croune of glorie. For- 
sothe he to-brosede the enemys on eche 
side, and distro3ede FilisteysY contrarious, 
vnto the day that is now; he to-brosede 
the horn of hem, vnto with oute ende. 
“In alle werk he 3af knouleching to? the 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XLVI. 18—-XLVI. 9. 


was knowun feithful in hise wordis, for he 
si3 the Lord of li3t. And he clepide in to19 
help the Lord almy3ti, in ouercomynge 
enemyes stondynge aboute on ech side, in 
the offrynge of a man vndefoulid. And 20 
the Lord thundride fro heuene, and in 
greet soun he made his vois herd. And2i 
he al to-brak the princes of men of Tyre, 
and alle the duykis of Filisteis. And bi-22 
fore the’ tyme of ende of his lijf, and of 
the world, he 3af witnessyng in the si3t 
of the Lord, and of Crist*; he took not dof 

of ony man richessis, 3he, til to schoon”; eat ia eee 
and no man accuside hym. And after2s}%78 Ze 
this he slepte, and he made knowun to 

the kyng{, and he schewide to hym the 
ende of his lijf; and he enhaunside his 
vois fro the erthe in profesie, to do awei 
the wickidnesse of the fole. 


* and of Crist; 


+ to the kyng; 
that is, Sanl, 
to whom he 
seid, that his 
deth neizede in 
the morewe. 
Lire here. c. 


CAP. XLVII. 


Aftir these thingis Nathan, the profete, 1 
roos, in the daies of Dauid. And as yn-2 
nere fatnesset departide fro the fleisch, so 
Dauid fro the sones of Israel. 


tas ynnere fat- 
nesseé, ele. ; 


He pleiede3 thou; al the 


6 6 ‘ ; é uple of Israel 
with liouns, as with lambren ; he dide in rerude God, 
He sean 8 +e netheles Da- 
lijk maner with beris, as with lambren of jyth seruede 


scheep. Whether in his 3ongthe he killide4 more deuontly 
is e 

not a giaunt, and took awei schenschip roen. Sihe 

fro the folk? In reisynge the hond in as oa 

stoon of a slynge, he castide doun the ful 

out ioiyng of Golias, where he clepide to6 

help the Lord almy3ti; and he jaf in his 

ri3t hond to do awei a stronge man in 

batel, and to enhaunse the horn of his 

folk. So he glorifiede hym§ in ten thou-7 Po a 

synde, and he preiside hym in the bless- is, made to be 

yngis* of the Lord, in offrynge to hym 


preisid. preiside 

him, etc.; that 
the coroun of glorie. For he al to-brak s made him 

preisable, of 


enemyes on ech side, and drow out bi the ee ape 
ae SG os z : e 3af to him. 
roote Filisteis contrarie, ‘til in toY this dai; Lire here. c. 


he al to-brak the horn of hem, ‘til in toY 
with outen ende. Dauid in ech werk 3af9 


¥ Philistiym acu. * Om. 4. YY Om. c prem. *andin acu. Y Philisteym aze. the Philisteym He 


2 vnto AGE. 


v Om. 1. 


W the schoon a pr. m. 


x blessing v. ¥ vnto 1. 


XLVII. 10—24. 


hoely, and to the heeje in the* wrd” of 
1oglorie. Of alle his herte he preisede God, 
and loouede the Lord that made hym, 
and 3af to hym ajen the enemyes my3t. 
1) And he made to stonde syngeres a3en the 
auter; and in the soun of hem he made 
12sweete motetes. And he jaf wrshepe in 
solempnysingus, and ournede the tymes 
vnto the ful endyng of lyf; that thei 
shulden preisen the hoely name of the 
Lord, and make large erly the hoelynesse 
i30f God’. Crist purgede the synnes of 
hym, and enhauncede in to with outen 
ende the horn of hym; and he 3af to 
hym the testament of kingus, and a sete 
110f glorie in Irael. After hym ros a son 
weel felende; and for hym he cast doun 
isalle the my3te of enemys. Salomon co- 
maundide in da3es? of pes, to whom God 
sogetede alle the enemyes, that he shulde 
maken an hous in his name, and greithen 
hoelynesse in to euermor, as he was ta3t 
isin his 30uthe. And he is fulfild as a flod 
with wisdam; and his soule a3een co- 
17uerede® the erthe. And thou fulfildist 
in comparisouns derk prouerbis; to ylis 
aferr is pupplisht thi name, and thou art 
islooued in thi.pes. In songus, and in pro- 
uerbis, and comparisouns, and in remen- 
i9 yngus wndreden the® londis; and in the 
name of the Lord, to whom is the toname 
20 God off Irael. Thou gederest as latoun 
gold, and as led thon fulfildist syluer. 
21And thou bowedistf in thin hipes to 
wymmen; power thou haddest in thi 
22body. Thou 3eue a wem in thi glorie, 
and cursedest thi sed, to bringen in 
wrathefulnesse to thi free childer, and in 
23 Othere thingus thi folye; that thou shul- 
dist make the empire partid on two, 
and of ® Effreym" to comaunden an hard 
24inaundement. God forsothe shall not 
leuen his mercy, and he shal not spille, 
ne don awey his werkes, ne leese fro the 
stoc his chosun sonus sonus; and the sed 


© the God c. 
& to 4, Om. #. 


b werk a. 
f bowest ¢ pr.m. 


a Om. 4ci. 
ee Om. c pr. m. 


Z ynto 2. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


ec see C prem. 


a Om. cv 


215 


knouleching to hooli God, and hi3 in the 
word of glorie. Of al his herte he heriede to 
God, and he louyde the Lord that made 
hym, and 3af to hym power ajens ene- 
myes. And he made syngeris to stondel 
ajens the auter; and he made swete 
motetis in the soun of hem. And he 3af 12 
fairnesse in halewyngis*, and he ournede 
tymes ‘til to” the endyng of lijf; that thei 
schulden preise the hooli naine of the Lord, 
and make large eerli the hoolynesse of 
God. 


* he 3af fair- 
nesse in halew- 
ingis; for he 
encreesside 
Goddis wor- 
schiping in 
prestis,dekenes, 


Crist purgide the synnes of hym, 13 and singeris. 
tymes that is, 
solemnytees, 


and enhaunside his horn with outen ende ; 

and he 3af to hym the testament of kyngis, td 

and the seete of glorie in Israel. Aftir 14} pes of 

hym roos a witti sone; and for hym he “ere. c. 

castide doun al the power of enemyes. 

Salomon regnede in the daies of pees, to 15 

whom God made suget alle enemyes, that 

he schulde make an hous in the name of 

God, and make redi hoolynesse with outen 

ende, as he was lerned in his 3ongthe. 

And he was fillid with wisdom as a flood 16 

is fillid ; and his soule vnhilide the erthe. 

And thou, Salomon, fillidist derk figuratif 17 

spechis} in licnessis ; and* thi name was 

pupplischid to ilis afer, and thou were is figus 

louyde in thi pees. Londis wondriden in it deere: 

songis, and in prouerbis, and in licnessis, {he queen ‘a 

and interpretyngis, ether exposiciouns ; ee 

and in the® name of the Lord, to whom 19 londis. Lire 

the surname is God of Israel. Thou ga- cee 

deridist togidere gold as latoun, and thou 

fillidist siluer as leed. And thou bouwidist 21 

thi thies to wymmen; thou haddist power 

in thi bodif. Thon hast 30ue a wem in thi 223 ia thi dodi; 
: 5 : to fille the list 

glorie, and madist vuhooli thi seed, to of thi bodi. 

brynge in wrathfulnesse to thi children, “°"* © 

and thi foli in othere men; that thous 

schuldist make the rewme departid in to 

tweyne, and of Effrem to comaunde an 

hard comaundement. But God schal not24 

forsake his merci, and schal not distrie, 

nether do awei hise werkis, nether he 

schal leese fro generacioun the sones sones 


t+ and thou, 
Salomon, jillid- 
ist derk figura- 


d fewe dajes B prom. © made E pr.m. 


h withoute bridil 2 pr. m. 


b Om. 1. 


216 


of hym that looueth the Lord he shall 
gsnot shende. He 3af forsothe an other 
26 Jacob, and Dauid of that lynage. And 
Salomon hadde ende! with his fadris. 
27 And he lafte after hym of his sed the 
26folie of the folc, and the mynusht fro 
prudence*, Roboam ; the whiche turnede 
29 awey the fole bi his counseil. And Jero- 
boam, the sone of Naboth, that made to 
synnen Irael, and 3af the weie of syn- 
nyng to Effraym; and ful** manye re- 
30doundeden the synnes of hem gretli, for- 
sothe thei turneden hem! awei fro ther 
silond. And he so3te alle wickidnesses", 
vnto the tyme that defending ful cam to 
them; and fro alle synnes he delyuerede 
them. ; 


CAP. XLVIII. 


1 And Helie, the profete, ros as fyr; 
2and his wrd as a brond brende. The 
whiche bro3te in to hem hunger, and 
folewende hym bi ther enuye ben mad 
fewe; forsothe thei my3ten not suffre 
3the hestes of the Lord. Thur3 the wrd 
of the Lord he withheeld heueue, and 
4cast doun fro hym fyr™ to the erthe. So 
mad large is Helie in his merueiles; and 
swho mai lic maner glorien to thee, ‘the 
whiche" hast” borne? vp the deade fro 
helle, fro the lot of deth, in the wrd of 
sthe Lord God? The whiche thre} doun 
kingus to deth, and thou breeke li3tli the 
my3t of hem, and the gloriouse fro ther? 
ibed. Thatt herdist in Syna dom, and in 
8 Oreb domes of defensioun. That enoyntist 
kingus to penaunce, and profetes makest 
“successoures after thee. That art res- 
ceyued in whirlewynd of fyr, in a char 
wof fyrene hors’, That art inwrite in 
domes of tymes, to swage the wrathe of 


le made fier to come doun fro henene. Lire here. c. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XLVIT. 25—XLVIII. 10. 


of his chosun kyng Dauid ; and he scha} 
not distrie the seed of hym that loueth 
the Lord. Forsothe God 3af remenaunt25 
to Jacob, and to Dauid of that genera- 
cioun. And Salomon hadde an ende with 26 
hise fadris. And he lefte aftir hym of his27 
seed Roboam, the foli of the folk, and 28 
made lesse fro prudence; which Roboam 
turnede awei the folk bi his councel. And 29 
Jeroboam, the sone of Nabath, that made 
Israel to do synne, and 3af to Effraym 
weie to do synne; and ful many synnes 
of hem* weren plentenouse, for thei turn-30 
eden hem awei greetli fro her lond. Andsi 
the lynage of Eiffraym sou3te al wickid- 
nessis, til defence cam to hem; and dely- 
uerede hem fro alle synnes. 


CAP. XLVIII. 


And Elie, the profete, roos as fiert; for! 
whi his word brente as a brond. Which2 
brou3te yn hungur on hem, and thei 
suynge hym weren maad fewe for enuye®; 
for thei my3ten not suffre the comaunde- 
mentis of the Lord. Bi the word of thes 
Lord he held togidere heuene, and castide 
doun fro it fier{ to the erthe. So Elie4 
was alargid in his merueils; and who 
iay haue glorie in lijk maner with thee, 
which tokist awei a deed man fro hellis,5 
fro the eritage of deth, in the word of the 
Lord God? Which castidist doun kyngise 
to deth, and hast broke togidere 1i3tli the 
power of hem, and gloriouse men fro her 
bed§. Which herdist dom in Syna, and in7 
Oreb domes of defence||. Which anoyntist s 
kyngis to penaunce, and makist prophetis 
successouris aftir thee. Which were re-9 
seyued in a whirlwynde of fier, in a chare 
of horsis of fier. Which art writun in the 10 
domes of tymes, to plese the wrathfulnesse 


* many synnes 
em, ele.s 
that is, synnes 
grete and orri- 
hie maden hem 
to be prisoneris 
fer fro her lond. 
defence; that 
is, licence of 
Cirijs, kyng of 
Persis, that 
thei my3ten 
turne a3en in 
to the lond of 
Jnda. fro alle 
synnes ; that 
is, prisonyng 
bron3t in on 
hem for her 
synnes. Lire 
here. c. 
+ as fier; that 
is, brennynge 
in the fervent 
lone of God. 
brente as a 
brond ; in kyn- 
dling the nae 
reris to Goddis 
lone. suynge 
him, ete.; that 
is, the prestis 
of Baal, that 
sou3ten to be 
herd bi fier in 
the ending of 
her brent sa- 
crifice, us Elie 
did, in the 
11. book of 
Kyngis, xviij, 
c°. and for thei 
my3ten not, 
thei weren 
slayn of the 
puple. co- 
maundementis 
of the Lord; 
that is, thei 
my3ten not 
ajenstonde his 
wille, that co- 
maundide her 
deth hi Elie. 
Lire here. c. 
t castide doun 
JSro it fier ; that 
is, bi the vertu 
of his preyer 
he made fier 
come donn fro 
henene, on his 
brent sacrifice. 
Lire here.c. 
§ fro her bed ; 
summe hokis 
han for her 
trespas; that 
is, twey princes 
of fifti men 
sent of Ocosie 
ligginge in his 
bed, to take 
Elie, on which 


ll in Oreb domes of defence ; that is, of Goddis veniaunce, whanne God comaundide to 


Elie, to anoynte Elisee in to a profete, and Asacl in to king of Sirie, and Hien, the sone of Namsi, in to king of Israel, to the sleyng of idolatronris. 


to penaunce; that is, to the punysching of idolatrouris. in the domes of tymes 3 
falsnesse of Antecrist, in the laste ¢°. of Malachie, Y schal sende Elie, the profete, 


the hertis of fadris to the sones. that sien thee ; that is, sien thyn hooly conuersacioun, and herde thi teching. Lire here. c. 


3 endid c. Om. G pr.a.u. the prudence a. 
wickidnesse 4. m the fyr z pr. m. 
c sce. m,. thou hast E sec. m. 4G prem. Be 


kk Om. c pr. m. 
1 Om. c. for E prim. 
P beere cE pr. m. 


10m. c pr.m. 4" wickeduesses £. 
© thou c pr.m. E prom. hast thou 
dhiszpr.m. * horsis arcu. 


¢ her enuye c sec. m. 


that is, to come in tymes bifor the doom, to schewe opinly the 
bifor that the grete and orible dai of the Lord come, that he turne 


XLVITI. 131-—25. 


the Lord, and to ioynen, ‘or acorde’, the 
herte of the fader to the sone, and to re- 
11 storen‘ the lynagis of Jacob. Blisful ben 
thei, that thee han herd, and in thi fren- 
12Shepe ben mad faire; ‘for why" wee’ with 
lijf lyuen only, after deth forsothe such 
i3shal not ben oure name. Helie forsothe 
in a whirlewynd is couered; and in 
Helyse fulfild is his spirit. In his dajes 
he dradde not a prince, and bi my3t no 
14man ouer cam hym; ne ouercam hym 
any wrd, and his body dead_profe- 
isciede. In his lif he dide huge won- 
dris; and in deth merueilouse thingus 
ishe wro3te. In alle these thingus the” 
puple dide not penaunce, and thei wenten 
not awey fro ther synnes, vn to the tyme 
that thei ben cast awey fro ther lond, 
17and ben scatered in to eche lond. And 
ther is laft ful fewe folc, and a prince in 
18 the hous of Dauid. Summe of hem dyden 
that shulde plesen to God; othere for- 
i9sothe diden manye synnes. Esechias 
strengthede his cite, and bro3te in to the 
myddel of it water ; and dalf* with iren 
the roche, and bilde vp to the water a 
20pit. In his da3es stezede vp Senacherub, 
and sente Rapsacen ; and vnderputte his 
hond ajen hem, and putte out his hond 
in to Sion, and proud is mad in his my3t. 
21Thanne moued ben the hertes and the 
hondis of hem; and thei soreweden as 
22wymmen trauailende with child. And 
thei inwardly clepeden the mercyful 
Lord, and strechende out hondis thei re- 
reden ‘vp toY heuene ; and the hoely Lord 
23God herde anon the vois of hem. He 
remembrede’ not the synnes of hem, ne 
3af hem to ther enemys; but purgede 
hem in the hond of Ysaye, the hoely 
24 profete. He thre3 doun the teutes of 
Assiries, and hem to-brosede the aungil 
250f the Lord. For whi Ezechie dide that 
plesede to the Lord, and strongli he wente 
in the weie*® of Dauid, his fader; that 
Isaie, the grete profete, and feithful in 


8 Om. cE pr.m. t store GH. 
the ge pr.m. *deluede secu.  Y vntoc. 
dOm.c,. ¢Om.v. 


VOL. III. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


U now C pr.m, E pr.m. 
2 membride «. 


f and he 1. 


217. 


of the Lord, to recounsele the herte of the - 

fadir to the sone, and to restore the 

lynagis of Jacob. Thei ben blessid, that11 

sizen thee, and weren maad feir* in thi * weren maad 
frenschipe ; for whi we lyuen oneli in lijf, 1s'newee apres 
but after deth oure name schal not® be > ae 
siche. Elie, that was hilid in a whirle-13 front, event 
wynd; and his spirit was fillid in Elisee. _liyf « 
Elisee in hise daies dredde not the prince, 

and no man ouercam hym bi power; ne-14 

ther ony word ouercam hym, and his deed 

bodi profesiede. In his lijf he dide won-15 

dris ajens kynde ; and in deth he wrou3te 

merueilis. In alle these thingis the puple 16 

dide not penaunce, and 3eden not awei fro 

her synnes, til whanne thei weren cast 

awei fro her lond, and weren scatered in 

to ech lond. And a ful fewe folk was left, 17 

and a prince in the hous of Dauid. Summe is 

of hem diden that, that pleside God; but 

othere diden many synnes. Ezechie maad 19 

strong his citee, and brou3te watir in to 

the myddis therof ; and‘ diggide a rooche 

with irun, and bildide a pit to watir. In 20 

hise daies Senacherib stiede, and sente 

Rapsaces; and he reiside his hond a3ens 

hem, and he reiside his hond ajens Syon, 

and was maad proud in his power. Thanne 2 

the hertis and hondis of hem weren moued; 

and thei hadden sorewe as wymmen tra- 

uelynge of child. And thei clepiden to22 

help the merciful Lord, and thei spredden 

abrood the hondis, and reisiden to heuene; 

and the hooli Lord’ God herde soone the 

vois of hem. He hadde not mynde on her 23 

synnes, nether 3af lem to her enemyes; 

but he purgide hem in the hond of Isaiet, + in the nona 
the hooli profete. The aungel of the Lord 24 gv he 
castide doun the castels of Assiriens, and  Preiynse for 


hem, at the 


al to-brak hem. For whi Ezechie dide 25 xing of Ese- 
chie. pleside 


that that pleside the Lord, and 3ede se Lord + in 
strongli in the weie of Dauith, his fadir ; pie ag 


idolatrie, and 


which weie Isaie, the grete profete, and in exeitinge the 
prestis and de- 


feithful in the si3t of God, comaundide to prests ana se 
hym. In the daies of hym the sunne 3ede 2a Pople gold 
a3en abak; and God encreesside lijf to cab 


v Om. c sec.m. AG prom.H. — ® tho3te 


ahond £ pr. m. 


£ Om. c. 


¥f 


218 


26the siz3te of God, sente to hym. In his 
da3es bacward wente a3en the sunne; and 

27 addede to the king lif. With a gret spirit 
he sa3 the laste thingus; and coumfortede 
the weilende men in Sion, vn to euermor. 

28 He shewide thingus to come, and hid, er 
that thei fellen. 


CAP. XLIX. 


1 The mynde of Josie mad in a making 
of smell, is a werk of a> pyinent makere. 
2In eche mouth as hony shal be inwardly 
sweete the mynde of hym, and as melody 
3in the feste of wyn. He is euene ri3t 
godly in the penaunce of fole; and he 
took awey the abhomynaciouns of vnpi- 
4tousnesse. And he gouernede to the Lord 
his herte; and in the da3es of synnes he 
sstrengthede pite. Saue Dauid, and Ese- 
chie,and Josie, alle the kingus diden synne 
6For whi the kyngus of Juda laften the 
lawe of the my3ty, and dispiseden the 
7drede of God. Forsothe thei 3euen ther 
kingdam to othere, and ther glorie to and 
salien fole. Thei brenden vp the® chosen 
cite of hoelynesse ; and desert thei maden 
9‘weies of itf in the hond of Jeremye. For 
whi euele thei treteden hym, that fro the 
wombe of the moder is sacrid a profete, 
to turnen vpsodoun, and to leesen, and 
loeft to bilden vp, and to renewen. Ese- 
chiel, that sa3 the si3te of glorie, that he 
shewede to hym in the char of cherubyn. 
11 For whi he remembrede of the enemys 
in weder, to wel don to them, that shew- 
12eden ri3t weies. And the boenes of the 
twelue profetes springen oute fro ther 
place; for whi thei strengtheden Jacob, 
and a3eenbo3ten themself in feith of his 
13 vertue. What maner shul wee make large 
Zorobabel? for whi and he as a toene in 
i4the ri3¢ hond of Irael; and Jesum, the 
sone of Josedech? the whiche in ther 
da3es bildun vp the hous, and enhaunc- 
eden the hoely temple to the Lord, mad 
isredy in to euermor glorie. And Neemye 
in the mynde of myche tyme, that rerede 


bOm. 4. 4 Om. 46 sec. m. H. 


‘ 


& Ezechie a sec. m. marg, 


h he sange 1. 
kalmy3tiv. 1} lond a. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


e ther £. 


; i Om. c. 
™ that is, preise hym worthily v marg. 


XLVI, 26ers. 


the laste thingis ; and he! coumfortide the 
moreneris in Sion,‘in toi with outen ende. 


‘the kyng. With greet spirit Vsate® siz" 27 


* in the pe- 
naunce of folk; 
for he brou3t 
the puple of 


He schewide thingis to comynge, and hid 28 his rewme to 


thingis, bifore that tho camen. 


CAP. XLIX. 


The mynde of Josie maad in the mak-1 
yng of odour, is the werk of a pyment 
makere. In ech mouth his mynde schal2 
be maad swete as hony, and as musik in 
the feeste of wyn. He was dressid of God3 
in the penaunce of folk*; and he took 
awei the abhomynaciouns of wickidnesse. 
And the herte of hymt gouernede to the4 
Lord; and in the daies of synnes he 
strengthide pitee. Outakun Dauid, Eze-5 
chie4i and Josie, alle kyngis diden synne. 
For whi the kyngis of Juda leften thes 
lawe of my3tik God, and dispisiden the 
drede of God. For thei 3auen her rewme7 
to othere men, and her glorie to an alien 
folk. Thei brenten the chosun citee of8 
hoolynesse; and thei maden the weies 
therof forsakun in the hond! of Jeremye. 
For thei tretiden yuel hym, which from9 
the wombe of the modir was halewid a 
profete, to turne vpsedoun}, and to leese, 
and efte to bilde, and make newe. 
chiel, that siz the si3t of glorie, which the 
Lord schewide to hym in the chare of 
cherubyn. 
myes in reynj, to do wel to hem, that 
schewiden ri3tful weies. 
of twelne profetis apperen fro her place ; 
and thei strengthiden Jacob, and ajen- 
bou3ten hem in the feith of her vertu. 


penaunce for 
her synnes, and 
to the worschip- 
ing of veri God, 
and distriede 
idolatrie. Lire 
here. c. 
+ the herte of 
him, ete.; that 
is, the herte of 
Josie ordeyn- 
ede the gouern- 
aance of the 
rewme hoolliche 
to the onour of 
God. in the 
daies of synnes; 
that is, the 
tyme in which 
the synne of 
idolatrie regn- 
ede. strengthide 
pitee; that is, 
restoride the 
worschiping of 
God, and ar- 
deynede it to 
be kept stide- 
fastly. thei 
jauen her 
rewme 3 that 
is, disserueden 
for synne, that 
it was 30uun to 
men of Babi- 
loyne. brenien; 
that is, Jeru- 
salem was brent 
for her synnes. 
in the hond of 
Jeremye ; that 
is, bi his pro- 
fesie. Lire 
here. c. 
t fo turne vpse- 
doun, etc. 

erto he was 


E.Ze- 10 halewid a pro- 


fete, tu de- 
noance the 
turnyng vpse- 
doun of the 


For he made mynde of ene- 11 citee and of the 


puple, and the 
distriyng of the 
paple bi Cal- 


And the boonys 12 geys, and the 


bilding a3en bi 
the kyngis of 
Perseys. c. 

§ in reyn; that 
is, in word of 
his profesie. 


Hou schulen we alarge Zorobabel™? for 13 Jacos; that is, 


whi and he was a signe in the ri3t hond 


the puple of 
Israel, in feith 


of God to Israel; and Jhesu, the sone ane vertues, bi 


of Josedech ? whiche in her daies bildiden 
an hous, and enhaunsiden the hooli tem- 
ple to the Lord, maad redi in to euerlast- 
ynge glorie. And Neemye in the mynde! 
of myche tyme, that reiside to vs the 


f his weies c pr. m. E pr. m. 


J til in to a pr. m Jj and Ezechie a pr. m. 


er hooli en- 
saumplis and 
techingis. a3en- 
bou3len; fro 
peyne and 
synne of syn- 
5 ek bi the 
feithfulnesse of 
her preching. 
Lire here. c. 


XLIX. 16—L. 12. 


vp to vs the turned vpsodoun walles, and 
made to stonde 3ates and lokes; that 
16 rerede vp oure houses. No man is born 
in the® erthe such as Enoch; for whi 
i7and he is resceyued fro the erthe. And 
Joseph, that is born of man, prince of 
brethern, fastnyng of fole of kynde, go- 
uernour of brethern, stablyng of puple; 
isand the bones of hym ben visitid, and 
19 aftir the deth thei profecieden. Seth and 
Sem, these%8 anent" men hadden gote glo- 
rie, and ouer alle lif in the springyng of 
. Adam. 


CAP. L. 


i ‘Symon, Onyes sone, the grete prest, 
that in his lif vndersette the hous, and in 
2 his dajes strengthede the temple. Also the 
hei3te of the temple of hym is foundid, 
the double bilding, and the he3e walles 
3of the temple. In his da3es sprungen 
out the pittes of watris; and as the se 
4thei ben fulfild ouer maner. That curede 
his folc, and delyuerede it fro perdicioun. 
5 That hadde the maistrie to make large 
the cite; that gat glorie in to the lyu- 
ynge! of fole; and the* incomyng of the 
hous, and of the porche he! niade large. 
6 As:the morutid sterre in myddel™ of the® 
litle cloude, and as the fulle moone in his 
7da3es he li3tueth® ; and as the shynende 
sunne, so he shyneth out in the temple 
sof God; as the az3enshynende bowe be- 
twene the litle cloudis of glorie, and as 
the flour of roses in the dajes of ver, and 
as lilies, that ben in goyngus? of water, 
and as? cense smellende in the dajes of 
gsomyr; as fyr shynende out, and sens 
io brennende in fyr; as a massee vessel of 
gold, enourned with alle maner precious 
11ston; as a™ buriounende olyue, and' ci- 
presse in to hei3te puttende out itself’ ; 
in takynge hym the stoele of glorie, and 
tot be clad" hym in the ful endyng of 
izvertue. In the ste3yng vp of the hoely 


gOm. acu. && Om.c. 4 anentis secu. 
E prom. K in the c pr. m. Om. ¢ pr. m. 
00 betwe c pr.m. P the goyngis eau. 
uclothid secu. 


n Om. celeri. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


bh Symeon Onyes, son of the c pr. m. 
™ the myddel eau. 
9 Om. 1. 


219. 


wallis, ‘that weren"® cast doun, and made 
the. 3atis and lockis to stonde; which 
Neemye reiside oure housis. No manié 


borun im erthe was such as Enok*; for  * was sich as 
Enok; Nye man 


whi and he was resseyued fro the erthe. was sich as E- 
And Joseph, that was borun a man, the Tee 
prince of britheren, the stidfastnesse of ‘guts for whi 
k ch hooly man 
folk, the gouernour of britheren, the sta- a sum spe- 
2 si cial grace of 
blischyng of puple ; and his boonys weren 18 Go which an 
omaeyte ’ ' other hath not 
visitid, and profesieden after deth. Seth 19: cnene de. 
and Sem, these gaten glorie anentis men, 8re® bi alle 
i ; thingis. Lire 
and ouer ech man in the® generacioun of “ere. c. 
Adam. 


CAP. LD. 


Symount, the sone of Onyas, was ai 
greet preest, which in his lijf vndursettide 
the hous, and in hise daies strengthide the 
temple. Also the hi3nesse of the temple2 
was hildide of hymt, the double bildyng, +. i 
and hi3 wallis of the temple. In the daies3 Ceaetre it 
of hym the pittis of watris camen forth; joint of 
and as the see tho weren fillid abone me- Jhew te 
sure. Which Symount helide his folk, and 4 ech, in the 

z . me . e of Cyrus, 

delyuerede it fro perdicioun. Which was5 and parformed 
my3ti to alarge the citee; which gat glorie orscane 
in the conuersacioun of folk; and alargide #X%@3er of | 
the entryng of the hous, and of the large ere. ¢- 
cumpas aboute. As the dai sterre in thee 
myddis of a cloude, and as a ful moone 
schyneth in hise daies; and as the sunne7 
schynynge, so he schynede in the temple 
of God; as a reyn bouwe schynynges 
among the cloudis of glorie, and as a flour 
of rosis in the daies of veer, and as lilies, 
that ben in the passyng of watir, and as 
encense smellynge in the daies of somer ; 
as fier schynynge, and ensence brennynge9 
in fier; as a sad vessel of gold, ourned io 
with ech preciouse stoon ; as an olyue tree 11 
spryngynge forth, and a cipresse tree reis- 
ynge it silf an hi3; while he took the stoole 
of glorie, and was clothid in the perfec- 
cioun of vertu. In the stiyng of the hooli 12 
auter, the clothing of hoolynesse 3af glorie. 


+ was bildid of 


i connerting c pr. m, 
© lizteth c. 
t Om. 4, 


n Om, ¢ sec. m. 


TOm.au. ‘inc. 8 hymself acu, 


© Om. v. 


Ff2 


220 


auter’, glorie he 3af the amyse of hoely- 
izsnesse. In takynge forsothe partes of the 
hond of prestes, and he stondendeW biside 
the auter. Aboute hym the croune of 
brethern, as the plaunting of a ceder in 
14 Liban hil; so aboute hym thei stoden as 
palm braunches, and alle the sonus of 
is Aron in ther glorie. The offring for- 
sothe of the Lord in the hondis* of hem, 
biforn al the gedering of Irael; and the 
ful endyng vsyng in to the auter, to 
make large the offring of the he3e king, 
ishe stra3te out his hond in the sacrifiyng 
of likoures; and he sacrifiede in the blod 
170f a grape. He helde out in the founde- 
ment of the auter, godly smel to the he3e 
is prince. Thanne‘crieden out the sonus of 
Aron ; in beten out trumpes thei soun- 
eden, and herd thei maden a gret vois in 
19to the mynde bifor God. Thanne al the 
puple togidere wenten forth, and fellen 
in to the face vp on theY erthe, to ho- 
noure the Lord ther God, and to 3yue 
20 pre3eeres to the? almy3ty he3e God. And 
thei largeden synging in ther voises ; and 
in the grete hous is mad a vois* ful of 
21swetnesse. And the puple prejede the 
he3e Lord in prejere, vn to the tyme that 
ful don is the honour of the Lord, and 
22his 3ifte thei parformeden. Thanne com- 
ende doun, his hondis he putte out in to 
al the congregacioun of the sonus of Irael, 
to 3yue glorie to God of his lippes, and 
23in his name to glorien. And he rehercede 
his orisoun, willende” to shewe the vertue 
240f God. And aftir eft more he prejede 
the God of alle, that grete thingus dide in 
al erthe; that encreside oure da3es fro 
the wombe of oure moder, and dide with 
25 vs aftir his mercy. 3yue he to vs inward 
io3e of herte, and to be mad pes in oure 
dajes in Irael bi euere lastende dajes; 
26 Trael to leeuen, with vs to ben the mercy 
of God, that he deliuere them in ther 
27da3es. Two folkis hateth my soule; the 
thridde forsothe is, that noon more folc 


V auteris EF prem, 
nynge 4EGH. 


W stode a4. x housis 4. 


P the takinge v. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


y Om, 4k. 


q Om. v. 


L. 13—-27. 


Forsothe in takynge? partis* of the hoond 13* ix taking 
part is, ett.s 


of prestis, and he stood bisidis the auter. that is, the 
: of 
The coroun of britheren, as a plauntyng ite ae 
. G H prestis token 
of cedre in the hil Liban, was aboute ies ne 


; is n aboute hym as 14and of tho 
hym; so thei stode boute hy SU aa 


boowis of palm tree, and alle the sones fran the 
° . tenthe part to 

of Aaron stoden in her glorie. Sotheli15 the Wiebke 
prest, as God 


the offryng of the Lord was in the hondis 
of hem, bifore al the synagoge of Israel ; 
and he vside ful endyng on the auter, to 
alarge the offryng of the hi3 kyng. And 16 
he dresside his hond in moiste sacrifice ; 
and sacrifiside in the blood of grape. He17 
schedde out in the foundement of the 
auter, the odour of God to the hi3 prince. 
Thanne the sones of Aaron crieden lowde; 18 
thei sowneden in trumpis betun out with 
hameris, and maden a grete vois herd in 
to mynde bifore God. Thanne al the pu-19 
ple hastiden togidere, and fellen doun on 
the face on the erthe, for to worschipe her 
Lord God, and‘ to 3yue preyers to almy3ti 
God an hi3. And men syngynge in her 20 
voices alargident; and a soun ful of swet- bing Be 
nesse was maad in the greet hous. And 21 eden God 
the puple preiede the hi3 Lord in preier, (2S, 
til that the onour of the Lord was doon 

perfitli, and thei parformeden her 3ifte. 

Thanne Symount cam doun, and reiside 22 

hise hondis in to al the congregacioun of 

the sones ‘of Israel, to 3yue glorie to God 

bi hise lippis, and to haue glorie in the aftirard eft : 
name of hym. And he reherside his preier, 23's not in bokis 


seid, in xviij. 
c°. of Numery. 
Lire here. c. 


+ alargiden; 


t vertu of God ; 
this that is seid 


amendid. Lire 
willynge to schewe the vertu of Godt. peas ; 
lyuere hem, 
And he preyede more the Lord of alle, 242: ; fro the 
fh 
that made grete thingis in ech lond; which then men. Lire 
‘ G here. C. 
encreesside oure daies fro the wombe of W tohom ¥ hates 
oure modir, and dide with vs bi’ his mercy. that is, Y hate 
no folk so 


3yue he gladnesse of herte to vs, and that 2s Ee ic as ay 
pees be maad in Israel bi euerlastynge ‘fotos oy. 


daies; that Israel bileue, that Goddis merci 26 bse a 
is with vs, that he delyuere hem in her Worchipinge 
idols, and 


dayes. Mi soule hatith twei folkis ; but 27 summe of hem 
wellide 

the thridde is not a folk, whom Y hatel]. Sree 

Thei that sitten in the hil of Seir, aivtdl28 onete concrark 

the Filisteis, and the fonned puple, that ble thas 

z Om. H. 


4 sown E sec. m. d wil- 


T aftir 1. 


_L, 28—LI. 13. 


28I shulde haten. That sitten in the hil of 
Seir, and Filisteym, and the fool puple, 

29that dwellith in Sichemys. The doctrine 
of wisdam, and of disciplyne wrot in this 
boc Jhesus, the sone of Sirac, Jerosolo- 
mytane; that renewede the wisdam of 

30his herte. Blisful that in these goodus*® 
abit’; that putteth tho thingus in his 

3iherte, wys shal ben euermor. If for- 
sothe these thingus he shul do, to alle 
thingus he shal ben my3ty ; for the li3t 
of God is the step of hym. 


CAPs Li. 


1 I shal knoulechen to thee, Lord king; 
and I shal al preisen thee, God my sa- 
2ueour. I shal knoulechen to thi name, 
for helpere and defendere thou art mad 
3to me; and thou hast delyuered my 
body fro perdicioun, fro the gnare of a® 
wickef tunge, and fro the lippes of men 
werkende lesyng; and in the si3t of men 
stondende nee3 thou art mad to me an 
4helpere. And thou hast delyuered me, 
after the multitude of the mercy of thi 
name, fro the rorende men greithed to 
smete; fro the hondis of men sechende 
my soule, and of manye tribulaciouns 
6that enuyrouneden me; fro the torment- 
ing of flaume that cumpasede me, and in 
the’ myddel of the fyr I am not brend 
7out; fro the hei3te of the wombe of helle, 
and fro the defoulid tunge, and fro the 
wrd of lesing; fro a wicke king, and fro 
san vnri3twis tunge. Shal preisen vn to 
9the deth my soule the Lord; and my lif 
1one3hende was in helle benethe. Thei 
cumpasseden me on eche side, and ther 
was not that wolde helpen; biholdende 
I was to the helpe of men, and ther was 
irmot. I hadde mynde of thi mercy, Lord, 
and of thi with werching, that fro the 
12world ben; for thou takest out men 
sustenende thee, and delyuerest hem fro 
13the hond of Jentiles. Thou enhancedest 


¢thingis 4. 4 abideth aren. 


8 aftir 1. 


€ Om. c pr. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


mM. 


221 


dwellith in Sichemys. 
Sirach, a man of Jerusalem, wroot in this 
book the techyng of wisdom, and of kun- 
nyng; and he renulide wisdom* of his 


Jhesus, the sone of 29 


: Re: renulide 
OM, les; 


herte. He zs blessid, that dwellith in these 30 rece is, bi the 


goodis; he that settith tho in his herte, 
schal euere be wijs. For if he doith these 3: 
thingis, he schal be mi3ti to alle thingis ; 
for whi the li3t of God is the step of hym. 


CAP. LI. 7 


Lord kyng, Y schal knouleche to thee; 1 
and Y schal togidere herie thee, my sa- 
uyour. Y schal knouleche to thi name, e 
for thou art maad an helpere and de- 
fendere to me; and thou hast delyuered 3 
my bodi fro perdicioun, fro the snare of 
a wickid tunge, and fro the lippis of hem 
that worchen a leesyng; and in the si3t 
of hem that stonden ny3 thou art maad 
an helpere to me. And thou hast dely-4 
uered me, bi the multitude of merci of 
thi name, fro roreris maad redi to mete; 
fro the hondis of hem that sou3ten mys 
soule, and fro many tribulaciouns that 
cumpassiden me; fro ouerleiyng of flawmet 6 
that cumpasside me, and in the myddis of 
fier Y was not brent; fro the depthe of7 
the wombe of helle, and fro a tunge de- 
foulyd, and fro a word of leesyng; fro 
a wickid kyng, and fro a tunge vniust. 


‘Til tot the deth my soule schal preises + 


thee, Lord ; and my lijf was nei3ynge ing 
helle bynethe. Thei cumpassiden me on 10 
ech side, and noon was that helpide; Y 
was biholdynge to the help of men, and 
noon was. Lord, Y hadde mynde on thi 
merci, and on thi worchyng togidere, that 
ben fro the world; for thou delyuerst hem 12 
that abiden thee, and thou delyuerst hem 
fro the hond of hethene men. Thou en-13 
haunsidist my dwellyng on erthe; and 


8 Om. 4. bh wel £ pr.m. 


f wickid aGu. 


t Vnto 1. 


studie of his 
herte, ether for 
he was not ex- 
citid of an 
other man 
herto, but bi 
his owne wille 
he dide this, 
with Goddis 
help. dwellith 
in these goodis ; 
in thenkinge 
and worching 
tho. my3ti to 
alle thingis ; 
that is, in alle 
thingis that 
parteynen to 
his helthe, and 
also of othere 
men bi his 
teching. the 
lizt of God ; 
that is, wisdom 
writun in this 
book, which 
wisdom is sum 
preenting of 
Goddis 1i3t. 
the step of 
him; that is, 
weye ledinge 
perfitly to hym. 
Lire here. c. 


+ ouerleiynge 
of flawme; that 
is, of stiringe 
of lecherie. in 
the mydais of 
Jier; that is, 
of lecherouse 
heete. not 
brent ; bi con- 
seyt of dedly 
synne. Lire 
eres C. 


222 


vp on the erthe my dwelling; and for' 
thek deth flowende doun I louly pre3ede. 
14°I inwardly! clepede the Lord, fader of 
my Lord, that he forsake not me in day™ 
of my tribulacioun, and in tyme of proude 
ismen, with oute helpe. I shal preisen thi 
name bysyly, and I shal withpreisen it 
in confessioun ; and ful out herd is myn 
16orisoun. And thou hast delyuered me fro 
perdicioun, and thou hast ca3t me out fro 
17the™™ wicke" tyme. Therfore I shal knou- 
lechen, and preisyng I shal sey to thee ; 
and I shal blisse the name of the Lord. 
18 Whan 3it 3ungere® I am, bifor that 
aboute I shulde erre, I so3te wisdam 
190penly in myn orisoun. Biforn tyme 
I askede for it,'and ‘vn to in? the laste 
thingus I shal gretli sechen it; and it 
-20shal floure as a first rip grape. Myn 
herte gladide in it, my foot wente a ri3t 
weye; fro my 3outhe I enserchede’ it. 
211 bowede in a litil myn ere, and I toc it. 
22Myche I fond in myself wisdam, and 
23myche I profitede in it. To the 3yuende 
24to me wisdam I shal 3yue glorie. I coun- 
seilede forsothe to" don it; gretly I loou- 
ede good, and I ‘schal not be* confoundid. 
25‘My soule wrastled‘ in it; and in doing 
26it [am confermed. My hondis I stra3te 
out in to hei3; and in the wisdam of 
hym weilede my soule, and myn vnkun- 
27nyngus he li3tede. My soule I ri3t reul- 
28ede to it; and in knowyng I fond it. I 
weldede with hem herte fro the bigyn- 
nyng; for that I shal not ben forsaken. 
29My wombe is disturbid in sechyng: it ; 
therfore good possessioun I shal welde. 
30 The Lord forsothe 3af to me a tunge my 
meede; and in it I shal preisen hym. 
31 Cometh ny3 to me, 3ee vnta3t; and ge- 
dereth 3ou togidere in the hous of dis- 
32 ciplyne. What 3it 3ee tarien? and" what 
sey jee in these thingus? 3oure soules 
s3thristen hugely. I openede my mouth, 
and I spac, Bieth to 30u withoute siluer 


ifroa,  kOm. acu. 
© 30nge G pr. m, H. 
E prem. 


land inwardli se. 


uynto I. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


. m the day & pr. m. 
Pvn into c pr.m. vnto G pr. mm. H. 
t Al to-wrastled is my soule c pr.m. E pr.m. 


LI. 14——33- 


Y bisou3te for deth fletynge doun. Yu 

clepyde to help the Lord, fadir of my 

Lord, that he forsake not me in the dai 

of my tribulacioun, and forsake not me 

with outen help, in the tyme of hem that 

ben proude. Y schal preise thi name con-1s 

tynueli, and Y schal herie it togidere in 
knoulechyng ; and my preier is herd*. iy pena 
And thou hast delyuered me fro perdi- 16 fast hope. per- 
cioun, and thou hast delyuered me fro the Szeursothelle 


wickid tyme; 


wickid tyme. Therfor Y schal knouleche, 17‘ ene 


and Y schal seie heriyng to thee; and Y Hea ores 
schal blesse the name of the Lord. Whanne ts Lire here. c. 
3it Y was 3ongere, bifore that Y erride, 

Y sou3te wisdom opynli in my preier. 

Bifore the tyme of eelde Y axide for it, 19 

and ‘til in to" the laste thingis Y schal 


enquere it; and it schal flour as a grape 


ripe bifore othere. Myn herte was glad 20 
ther ynne, my foot 3ede a ri3tful weye; 
fro my 3o0ngthe Y sou3te it. Y bowide2i 
doun a litil myn eere, and Y took it. Y22 
€ J 0 ‘ + myn hondis; 
oonde myche wisdom in my silf, and  thatis,Ydress- 
Y profitide myche ther ynne. Y schal 23 }",fuuinese 
a i of entent in to 
3yue glorie to hym, that 3yueth wisdom Gal ee ee 
tome. For whi Y took councel to do it ;24¢. 
e t an herte with 
Y loued feruentli good, and Y schal not tho; that is, 
; ; kis e 
be schent. My soule wrastlide togidere 25 themvngie of 
ther ynne; and Y was confermyd in do- rook tine 
ynge it. Y stretchide forth myn hondisf 26 eens ae 
» 
an hi3; and my soule seliynede in the wisdom; this 
é 3 that is addid 
wisdom of hym, and he liz3tnyde myn in summe 
vukunnyngis. Y dresside my soule to it; 27,0 “nes 
and YY foond it in knowyng. Y hadde 2s tx for it is 
Ro K a glos enter- 
pesibli fro the bigynnyng an herte with hpi = 
. ‘ e text br 
thot; for this thing Y schal not be for-  writeres. Lire 
; Re here. €. 
sakun. My soule was disturblid in sek-29 ¢ my mede ; 
ynge it; therfor Y schal hane pesibli a {ati binbch 
good possessioun. For whi the Lord jabsoceerbae ire 
ae eede, in tech- 
to me a tunge my meede§; and in it Y _ inge othere 
j 6 men feithfuly, 
schal preise hym. 3e vntau3t men, nel3e 31 and in preiynge 
to me; and gadere 3e 3ou in to the hous pa 
of techyng. What tarien 3e 3it? and what 32 ‘row, Hos as 
seien 3e in these thingis? j3oure soules am redi to 
. , teche 30n frely 
thristen greetli. Y openyde my mouth, 33 for Goa. : 


n wickid 4EGH. 
Sam not C pr. m. 


mm Om. c. 
4serchide «4. © for to AEGH. 


u Om. AGH. 


v Om. y. 


LI. 34——38. 


34wisdam, and 3oure necke vnderleith to 
the 30c of it, and 3oure soule vndertake 
heY discyplyne; in the nexte forsothe is 

35to fynden it. Seeth with 3oure e3en”, for 
a litil I trauailede, and I fond to me 

36inyche reste. Taketh* to discyplyne in 
myche noumbre of syluer, and plenteuous 

37 gold weldeth in it. Glade 3oure soule in 
the mercy of it; and ‘3e schul not bey 

3s confoundid in the preising of it. Werketh 
3oure werk bifor tyme; and it shal 3yue 
to 30u 3oure meede in his tyme. 


Here endith Ecelesiasticus*. 


ECCLESIASTICUS. 


223. 


Here endith the book of Ecelesiastici, 


and here bigynneth the prolog of Ysaie 


s a litil; in 
out siluer, aud make 3oure necke suget 34 
nesse of good 
to fynde it. Se 3e with 3oure ijen, that 3s nye sa 
is, sette 3¢ kun- 
noumbre of siluere, and welde 3e plen- 
° : betere than 
len not be schent in the preysing of hym. 
* in the merci 
his tyme. 
maad. bifor the 
liyf, in tyme 
and of othere profetis”. 


comparisoun 
to the 30k therof, and 3oure soule res- 
getun. myche 
. Ses lom. welde 3¢ 
Y trauelide a litil, 
nyng bifor 
teuouse gold ther ynne. 3oure soule be 37 esis, and the 
myche gold to 
af him; that is, 
tyme; of deth. 
ordeyned of 


and Y spak, Bie 3e wisdom to 30u with — ¥ trauelide 
of the greet- 
seyue techyng; for whi it is in the nexte oe ane 
and Y foond myche _ plenteouse yold 
5 therynne; that 
reste tome. Take 3e techyng in mychese 
many rich- 

* . . possessioun 
glad in the merci of hym*; and 3e schu- _ therof schai he 
Worche 3e 3oure werk bifore the tyme ;38%" “”*’"* 
and he schal 3yue to 30u 3oure meede in 

of God, which 
is wisdom vn- 
meede; that is, 
euerlastyng 
God. Lire 
here. C. 


vOm. acu. *Om.c. * Take acu. y beth notc pr.m. 4% From a. Here endith Ecclesiasticus, and 


bigynneth a prolog on Ysaye. x. 


No final rubric in the other Mss. 


w Here endith Ecclesiastici, and [here es] bigynneth a prologe of Isaie and othere profetis. cFGIMQSUX. 
Here endith Ecclesiasticus, and bigynneth a prologe on Ysaie. u. Heere endeth the book of Ecclesiastici ; 
se now a prolog of Isaye, the profete. K. Here endith the book of Ecclesiastici, and here bigynneth a prolog 


on the book of Isaye, the profete. n. 
suynge. P. 


endith Ecclesiasticus. a. No final rubric in ry. 


Here biginnith a general prolog for alle the bookis of profctis 
Heere eendith the book of Ecclesiastici, and heere sueth a prolog upon the book of Ysaie. nr. 
Here endith the book of Ecclesiasticus, and bigynneth the prolog on Isaye and othere profetis. v. 


Here 


ISAIAH. 





Here begynneth the prolog in the book of Ysaye, the prophete*. 


No man, whan the profetes he shal seen with versis® to ben discriued, in metre eyme 
he® hem anent? the Ebrues to ben bounden, and any thing® lic to han of Salmes, or of 
the werkus of Salomon ; but that in Demostene and Tullio it is wont to ben do, that bi 
dyuyseouns, and vnder distincciouns thei ben writen, the whiche forsothe in prose, and 
not in vers‘ wryten. Wee forsothe, to the profit of rederes purueyende, the newe re- 
menyng with a newe maner of writing han ‘distinctly write®. And first, of Isaie it is 
to wite®, that in his sermoun he is wys; forsothe as! a noble man, and of curteis fair 
speche, ne any thing is mengd of cherlhed in his faire speche. Wherfore it falleth, that 
the translacioun shal not moun kepe the flour of his sermoun, biforn othere. Theraftir 
also this is to be leid to, that not more‘ he is to be seyd a profete, than euaungelist. 
So forsothe alle the mysteries of Crist! ‘and the™ chirche™™ to cleer,‘or cleerli", he pur- 
suede, that not hym thou weene of thyng to come to profecien, but of the® thingis? 
passid@ storie to weue. Wherfore I eyme the Seuenty Remenoures that tyme not to 
han’ wold the sacramens of ther beleeue to shewe ful clerly to the hethene, lest hoeli* 
to dogges, and margarites to swyn thei 3eeue. The whiche whan this making 3ee 
shul rede, of hem" 3ee shul taken heed’, ‘or perceyue”, hid thingy. Ne I vnknowe 
of hou myche trauaile it be the profetes to vnderstonden, ne li3tly any man to moun 
demen of the remenyng, but if he schal* vnderstonden’* byfore he schal reden ; wee also 
to ben opene to the bitingus of manye men, the whiche bi enuye styrende, that that 
thei moun not han, thei dispisen*. Thanne I witende and slee3, in to the flaume putte 
the hond; and nerthelatere® this of no3esum rederes I pre3e, that as Grekes after the 
Seuenty translatoures, Aquylam, and Symachum, and Theodocian thei reden, or for 
studie of ther doctrine, or that the Seuenty more they vnderstonde of the togidere 
leiynge* of hem, so and these namely oon" remenour aftir the rathere vouche thei saf to 
han. Rede thei rathere, and aftirward dispise they ; lest thet ben seen not of dom, but 
of presumpcioun of hate ynknowen thyngus to dampnen. Forsothe Isaie profeciede in 
Jerusalem and in Jewerie, not 3it the ten lynages led in to caitifte; and off euer either 
rewme, now togidere, now® seuerendely, he ordeynede the profecie. And tho3‘ other 
while he bihold to the present storie, and aftir the caitifte of Babiloyne he betocne® the 
ajeencomyng of the puple in to Jewerie, nerthelatere al his bisynesse is of the cleping 


From 4. Prologus cu. Prolog to Isaye and othere prophete. x. No initial rubric in eG. > vers c. 
c m.c. 4 anentis ceteri passim. ©Om. a. fbic. ff metrecpr.v. &deuydid = prom. write 4. 
ithat x pr.m. kas more £ pr.m. sed exp. 1Cristis =e pr.m.  ™Om. Ez pr.m. mm Crist c pr. m. 
2 Om. cE pr.m. ° Om. cH. P thing c. 4 of passid 4. r the storie GH. shac. ' hooli 
thingis 4K sec.m. "tho thingus c pr.m. thoo thingis rE pr.m. vVOm.£Epr.m. W Om. c et E pr.m. 
Xto ben hid ce pr.m. yOm.cetEpr.m. %Om.cet ez pr.m, 7% ynderstoden c. ® dispiseden A. 


» neuer the latere ceteri passim, ©] i 
: ynynge a. leiyngus c. oc. &nowto E pr.m. sed exp. f thof Ex. 
& betokneth 4x sce. m. ame " 


ISAIAH. 225- 


of Jentiles', and of the comyng of Crist, whom hou myche more 3ee loouen, o Paule 
and Eustoche, so myche more of hym asketh, that for the present bacbityng ‘by 
which* me enemys vncesendely to-tern, he to me 3elde meede in tyme to come, 
that wot me for that thing to han swat in the lernyng of a straunge tunge, lest the 
Jewis lengere shulden ‘put repreue! to the chirchis of hym, of the falshed of 
scriptures. 


Here endith the prolog, and now begynneth the book of Ysaie, the prophete™. 





Here bigynneth a general prolog for alle the bokis of profetis suynge’. 


As seynt Jerom seith in the prolog of Ysaie, Isaie is ful witti and ful opyn in his 
writyng in Ebreu, thou3 the translacioun in to Latyn mi3te not kepe the? fairnesse 
of speche. Isaye is worthi to be seid_not oneli a profete, but more, a gospellere, for 
he declarith so opynli the mysteries*.of Crist and of hooli chirche, that thou gesse 
hym not oneli4 to ordeyne a® profesie of thing to comynge, but to ordeyne a storie 
of thingis passid. Ysaie profesiede in Jerusalem and in Judee, whanne the ten 
lynagis of Israel weren not 3it led in to caitiftee; and he ordeyneth af profesie of 
euer either rewme, sum tyme of both togidere, sum tyme of ech bi it silf. And 
whanne Ysaie biholdith sum tyme to the present storie, and signefieth the comynge 
a3en of the puple in to Judee aftir the caitifte of Babiloyne, netheles al his bisynesse, 
that is, principal entent, is of the clepyng of hetlene men, and of the comyng of 
Crist. Al this is the sentence of Jerom in the prolog of& Ysaie. Here it is to 
vudurstonde, that Isaie bigan to profesie bifore that the ten lynagis weren led in to 
caitiftee of Assiriens, as Jerom seith here; but he profesiede aftir this caitiftee, aftir 
Ezechies deth, in the tyme of Manasses, as it is seid in the fourthe book of Kyngis 
the" twentithe chapitre', and in many mo places. This seith ‘a postille* on Jeroms 
prolog on Ysaie. For as Ebreis seien, and Lire witnessith on the firste chapitre 
of Isaie, Manasses ordeynede and demyde Isaye to be sawid with ynne a cedre tree, 
that closid hym with ynne it silf bi myracle, whanne Manasses hadde demed hym 
vniustli to deth'. Also alle profetis that ben not teld opynli in the text, whanne and 
in what tyme thei profesieden, profesieden in the same tyme in which the profetis 
goynge next bifore profesieden, that ben teld in the text vndur whiche kyngis and 
tymes thei profesieden, as Jerom seith in his prologe-on the twelue Profetis, and it 
is sette in the bigynnyng of Osee. Comynli alle the derk places of the™ profetis 
moun be vndurstondun 1i3tli bi thre reulis. The firste is this, that the principal entent 
of the profetis is to declare the mysterie of Cristis incarnacioun, passioun, resurrec- 
cioun, ascensioun, and the” comyng to’ the general doom, and the pupplischyng of 
the gospel, and the conuercioun of hethene men, and the tribulacioun of hooli chirche 
in this lijf, and the blis of heuene therfor?. The secounde reule is this, that the 
profetis warnen the puple of Jewis of her grete synnes, and exciten hem to do 


ithe Jentilis x. * Om. cer prom. lasaile c pr.m. asailen # pr.m. ™ From a. Here endith the 
prolog, and bigynneth the book of Isaye. x. No final rubric in ceau. 


® From epy. Prologe.1. Another prolog on Isaye and othere profetis. kK. Prolog orn Ysaye. N. Prolog 
on the profetis. v. No initial rubric in the other Mss. b Om. 1. ¢ misteries, ether priuetees EPY. 
1 Om. a promt. ¢Om. Ey. fOm.c ef ceterii &onx. »Om.¥s, icapitle K. * the apostle x. 
apostle Fr. Ithe deeths. ™Om.s. ofthe1. ofr. P therof Ey. 


VOL. Ill. Gg 


226 ISAIAH. 


penaunce; and thanne thei schulen gete remyssioun of her synnes, and grace in present 
tyme, and glorie with outen ende ; ellis thei schulen haue tribulacioun in this lijf, 
and peyn with outen ende. The thridde reule is this, that the profetis rehersen 
ofte benefices 3ouun of God bifor to the Jewis, to coumforte hem to 3yue credence 
to goodis bihi3t in her profesies ; and thanne the stories of Moises lawe, ether® of 
Josue, Judicum, Regum, and Paralipomenon, and of othere historial* bookis schulen 
be wel lokid; and schortli to seie, the profetis schulen be expouned bi the text of 
Moises lawe, and of othere historial bookis of the Elde Testament, ether bi the text 
of the Newe Testament. The literal vndurstondyng of hooli scripture is the ground 
of al gostli vndurstondyng therof, that is, of allegorik, of moral, and of anagogik. 
No goostli vndurstondyng is autentik", no” but it be groundid in the text opynli, ether 
in opyn resoun, suynge of principlis, ether reulis of feith”, as seynt Austin witnessith* 
opynli in his pistle to Vincente, Donatiste, and in his book of Soliloquies, and Jerom 
on Jonas, and Lire on the bigynnyng of Genesis, and in many placis of hooli scripture, 
and Ardmakan in his book of Questiouns of Armenyes. Therfor men moten seke 
the treuthe of the text, and be war of goostli vndurstondyng, ether moral fantasie, 
and 3yue not ful credence therto, no but it be groundid opynly in the text of hooli 
writ, in o place orY other, ethir in opyn resoun, that may not be anoidid; for ellis 
it wole as likyngli be applied to falsnesse as to treuthe, and it hath disseyued grete 
men in oure daies, bi ouer greet trist to? her fantasies. Literal ether historial 
vndurstondyng techith what thing is don; allegortk techith what we owen for* to 
bileue; moral ether tropologik techith what we owen to do to fle vices, and kepe 
vertues ; anagogik techith what we owen to” hope of euerlastynge meede in heuene. 
Of these foure vndurstondyngis ‘schal be‘ seid pleynlier, ‘if God wole4, on the bigyn- 
nyng of Genesis. Also it is to wyte, that the profetis speken sum tyme bi figuratif 
speche, and® liknen men to vnresonable beestis, and clepen men bi figuratif' speche, 
liouns, beris‘, culueris, and ofte® othere vnresonable beestis, for certeyn synnes whiche 
thei vsen acordynge with, the kyndis of vnresonable beestis; as men ben clepid 
liouns for pride, ether raueyn, ether sum other synne; and sum tyme a lioun signe- 
fieth Crist, for his power, and sum tyme a lioun signefieth the deuel, for tirauntrie 
and raueyn; and men ben clepid beeris, for gredynesse ether glotonye, and mulis, 
for letcherie; and so of othere beestis and othere synnes. Men ben clepid culueris 
sum time for madnesse, and suin tyme for innocence, symplenesse, and charite. Bi 
these reulis and bisi studiyng of the text, men moun 1i3tli vndurstonde the derk 
placis of profetis ; and algatis loke wel that the sentence takun of the text be trewe, 


‘and acorde® with charyte, and thamne it is the sentence of the Hooli Goost, as seynt 
Austyn seith. 


Here endith the prolog on Ysaye'. 


T ofte tymes 8. Sand s. t historials Ks pr. m. u autentik, ether preuable EPy. v Om. 1. 
Wthe feith s. *seyths. y ether rexmNrqrsvuxy. Zin ka. 20Om.R. » for to Fs. © is KS sec. m. 
4 Om. sec.m. ¢and their. fand beriss. & Om.c et ceteri. 4 acoording Ks sec.m. 4 Here endith 
the prologe on Isaie, and here bigynneth the text of Isate.c. Here endith the prologe on Ysaie, and here 
bigynneth the book of Ysaie.rmnu. Here endith the prolog, and here bigynneth the book of Ysaie. ca. 
Here endeth the prologe on Ysaie, and on othere profetis, and here bigynnethe the book of Ysaie. x. 
Heere endith the prologe, and biginnith Ysaie the prophete.1. Here eendeth the prolog ; see now Isaie, x. 
Heere eendith the prolog, and bigynneth the firste ¢. of Ysaie. x. Here endith the prolog.........profetis ; 
and bygynneth the text of Isaie.s. Here endith the prolog on Isaye, and here bigynneth the text of Isaye. 
With a short glose on the derke wordis ; and loke ech man, that he mryte the text hool bi itsilf, and the 


glose in the margyn, ether leue it al out.v. Here endith the prolog on the profetis, and bigynneth the 
booc of Isaie. x. No final rubric in ery. 


I. 18. 
Here bigynneth the Profecie of Ysaye°. 


CARe f. 


1 The viseoun of Isaie, sone of Amos, 
that he sa3 vp on Judam and Jerusalem, 
in the dazes of Osie, Joathan, Acha3, 

2Esechie, kingus of Juda. Hereth, jee 
heuenus, and with eres parceyue, thou 
erthe, for the Lord spac. Sonus I nursh- 
ede out and enhauncede; thei forsothe 

3dispiseden me. The oxe kne3 his wel- 
dere, and the asse the? cracche of his 
lord; Irael forsothe me kne3 not, and 
4my puple vnderstod! not. Wo to syn- 
ful' folc, to the puple heuy with wickid- 
nesse, to the shreude sed, to the sonus ful 
of hidous giltes; thei forsoken the Lord, 
thei blasfemeden’™ the hoeli of* Irael, 
sthei ben aliened awei bacward. ‘Vp on 
what thingt I shal smyte 3ou", ferther- 
mor addende lawe breche, ‘or trespassing 
azeyns the lawe’? Eche ‘hed ful of lan- 
gour”, and eche ‘herte ful of mornyng*. 
6Fro the plante of the foot vnto the top, 
ther is not in hymY helthe; wounde, and 
wannesse, and siknesse swellende is not 
bounden aboute, ne curid with leching, 
7ne nurshid with oile. 3oure lond is 
desert, j3oure cites ben brend vp with 
fyr; j3oure regioun? deuouren biforn 3ou 
alienus, and it shal be desolat as in ene- 
smyful wastete*. And the do3ter of Sion 
shal ben forsaken as a shadewy place in 
a vynejerd’, and as an® hylet in a place 
of goordes, and as a cite that is wastid. 


ISAIAH. 


227 


Here bigynnith the bok of Ysaie 
profete*. 


CAP. 1. 


The visioun*, ether profesie, of Ysaie,1 
the sone of Amosf{, which he si3’ on Juda 
and Jerusalemt{, in the daies of Osie, of 
Joathan, of Achas, and of Ezechie, kyngis 
of Juda. 3e heuenes§, here, and thou erthe, 2 
perseyue with eeris, for the Lord spak. 
Y haue nurschid and Y haue enhaunsid 
sones; sotheli® thei han dispisid me. An3 
oxe knew his lord, and an asse knew 
the cratche of his lord; but Israel knewe 
not me, and my puple vndurstood not. 
Wo to the synful folk, to the puple heuy 4 
in wickidnesse, to the weiward seed, to® 
the cursid sones; thei han forsake the 
Lord, thei han blasfemyd the hooli of 
Israel, thei ben aliened bacward. Ons 
what thing schal Y smyte 3ou more||, that 
encreessen trespassyng? Ech heed 7s sijk, 
and ech herte 7s morenynge. Fro the soleé 
of the foot til to the nol, helthe is not ther 
ynne; wounde, and wannesse, and betyng 
bolnynge is not boundun aboute, nether 
curid bi medicyn, nether nurschid with 
oile. 3oure lond is forsakun, 3oure citees7 
ben brent bi fier; aliens deuouren 3oure 
cuntrei bifore 30u, and it schal be disolat 
as in the distriyng of enemyes. And thes 
dou3tir of Sion, ‘that is, Jerusalem®, schal 
be forsakun as a schadewynge place in a 
vyner‘, and as an hulke in a place where 
gourdis wexen, and as a citee which is 
wastid. If the Lord of oostis hadde nots 


* The visioun ; 
that is, profesie. 
Visioun is pro- 
pirli the know- 
ing of a profete, 
which knowing 
is in waking. 
CEPQSUY, 

+ of Amos; this 
Anos, as Rabi 
Salomon seith, 
was the brother 
of Amasie, 
kyng of Juda; 
this Amos was 
not thilke A- 
mos, that is the 
thridde among 
xii. profetis, as 
Hebreu lettris 
schewen opinly. 
Lire here. CEG 
Pausy. 

+ on Juda and 
Jerusalem ; bi 
Jerusalem ben 
vndurstonde 
kingis, prestis, 
and noble men, 
and othere men 
dwellinge there; 
bi Juda is vn- 
durstondun the 
residue puple of 
therewmeofJu- 
da. Lire here.c. 
§ heuenes, etc.; 
that is, aungels. 
erthe; that is, 
men dwellinge 
therynne. 
sones; that is, 
the puple of 
Israel. dispisid 
me; in seru- 
ynge to idolis. 
knew not me; 
in seruynge to 
me for so many 
beneficis. vn- 
durstood not ; 
in redinge with- 
ynne him silf, 
and remem- 
bringe my bene- 
ficesand heestis. 
Wo to, etc. ; that 
is, customable 
to synne. Lire 
here. C. 

|| On what thing 
schal Y smyte 
30u more, elc.; 
as if heseide, 3a 
ben not amend- 


id bi mi chastisingis, but more 3e be maad worse, as Farao was. ech heed is siyk; that is, the king and princes ben vncorigible. ech herte; that is, 
techeris and prestis. mornynge ; not for syune, but failinge in teching and vertu. fro the sole, etc.; bi this is vndurstondun the residne puple. 
helthe; of grace and of vertu. toownde; that is, opin synne. and wannesse; that is, ennye hid. beting ; that is, the synne of pride. not boundun 
aboute; that is, with the bynding of Goddis lawe, withdrawinge fro synne. nether curid bi medicyn; that is, bi word and ensanmple of prestis and 
techeris. with ile; that is, workis of mersi, that geten remyssioun of synne. 3oure lond ; that is, the lond of ten lynagis, that was dua to rewme 
of Juda bi rizt. distrying of enemyes; that is, enemyes schulen dwelle therynne; in Ebreu it is as in distrying of straungeris, for this lond was 
turned outirli to straungeris, and the sones of Israel camen nenere ajen therto. Lire here. c. 


© From ec. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
tr forsoken A. * Om. E pr. im. 


bvyne c pr.m. Epr.m. ©€ Om.c. 


8 From epy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


¢ Om. Kvx. f vynjerd 1. 


P Om. c. 
t Vp the whiche £ pr. m. 
w languysshinge heued £ pr.m. * mornyng herte © pr.m. Yhem acux. %regiouns E pr. 7m. 


4 vndirstonde 4. 


t the synful £ pr. m. 
u Om. 4G pr.m. H. 


v Om. ¢ ef E prom. 
& wasted 4. 


b sanze 1 passim. ¢ forsothe c et ceteri, 4 of a. 


Gg2 


228 


9 But 3if¢ the Lord of ostes hadde laft to 
vs sed, as Sodom wee hadden ben, and 
i0as Gomorra lije wee shulden ben*®. Her- 
eth the wrd of the Lord, 3ee princes of 
Sodom; and parceyueth with eres the 
lawe of 3oure God, 3ee puple of Gomorre. 
11 What to me the multitude of 3oure slayn 
sacrifise? seith the Lord. Ful J am; the 
brent sacrefises of wetheres, and the tal3 
of fatte bestus, and the blod of calues, 
aud of lombes, and off goet, I wolde not. 
12 Whan 3ee shulden come biforn my si3te, 
who so3te these thingus of 3oure hondis, 
isthat 3ee shulden go in my porches? Ne 
bringe 3ee to more sacrifises in veyn; 
encens abhominacioun is to me; the 
newe moone, and sabot, and othere festus 
141 shal not bern. Wickef ben j3oure cum- 
panyes; 3oure kalendis and 3oure so- 
lempnetees hatede my soule; thei ben 
mad to me greuous, I trauailede suff- 
isrende. And whan 3ee shul strecche out 
3oure hondis, I shal turne awei myn e3en 
fro 3ou; and whan 3ee slml multeplien 
orisoun, I shal not heren ; forsothe 3oure 
ighondis ben ful of blod. Be 3ee washen, 
beth clene; taketh awei the euel of 
joure tho3tes fro myn e3en; resteth to do 
i7shreudely, lerneth to do wel. Secheth 
dom, helpeth to the opressid, demeth to 
the faderles child, defendeth the widewe. 
is And cometh, and vndernemeth mee, seith 
the Lord. If 3oure syimes weren as 
flaume red sile, as sno3 thei shuln ben 
mad white; and if thei weren rede as 
blod red sile, as whit wlle thei shul be. 
i9If 3ee wiln, and shuln heren me, the 
20 goodis of the erthe 3ee shuln ete. That 


acioun. Lire here. c. 


ISAIAH. 


I. 9g—20. 
left seed to vs*, we hadden be as Sodom, 
and we hadden be lijk as Gomorre. 3e10 


princes of men of Sodom, here the word 
of the Lord; and 3e puple of Gommorre, 
perseyue® with eeris the lawe of 3oure 
God. Wherto offren 3e to me the multi-11 
tude of 3oure sacrifices? seith the Lord. Y 
am fult; Y wolde not the brent sacrifices 
of wetheris, and the ynnere fatnesse of. 
fatte beestis, and the blood of calues, and 
of lambren, and of buckis of geet. Whanne 12 
3e camen bifore my si3t, who axidet of 
3oure hondis these thingis, that 3e schulden 
go in myn hallys*? Offre 3e no more sa-13 
crifice in veyn; encense is abhomynacioun 
to me; Y schal not suffre neomenye, and 
sabat, and othere feestis. 3oure! cumpe-14 
nyes ben wickid; my soule hatith 3oure 
calendis) and 3oure solempnytees; tho ben 
maad diseseful to me, Y trauelide suf- 
frynge. And whanne 3e stretchen forth 1s 
3oure hondis, Y schal turne awei myn ijen 
fro 30u; and whanne 3e multiplien preyer, 
Y schal not here; for whi 3oure hondis 
ben ful of blood. Be 3e waischun, be 3e 16 
clene; do 3e awei the yuel of j3oure 
thou3tis fro myn izen ; ceesse 3e to do wei- 
wardli, lerne 3e to do wel. Seke 3e doom, 17 
helpe 3e hym that is oppressid, deme 3e|| 
to the fadirles and modirles child, defende 
3e a widewe. And come 3e, and repreueX 3e!1s 
me, seith the Lord]. Thou3 3oure synnes 
ben as blood reed, tho schulen be maad 
whijt as snow; and thou3 tho™ ben reed 
as vermylioun, tho™ schulen be whijt as 
wolle. If 3e" wolen, and heren me, 3e19 
schulen ete the goodis of erthe. That if20 
3e nylen, and 3e terren me to wrathful- 


* If the Lord 
of oostis hadde 
not left seed ta 
vs, etc.3 that is, 
if God, Lord of 
aungels, hadde 
not left to vs 
summen turn- 
ynge a3en fro 
the caitifte of 
Bahiloyne, vn- 
dur Sorobabel, 
that bildiden 
azen the temple 
and citee aftir- 
ward, in the 
tyme of Nee- 
mye, we hadden 
be distried, with 
out rekynering, 
as saan pier 
Gomore, and 
other thre citees 
weren distried, 
without repa- 
reling, in xix 
ce’. of Genesis. 
3e princes, 
ete.; that is, 
liyk men of So- 
dom, for these 
princes diden 
opinli, and with 
out schame, the 
forseid ynels, 
as Sodomytis 
diden. Lire 
here. C. 

+ Yam ful; 
as if he seide, 
3e offren in 
veyn, if 3e 
kepen not the 
lawe. The glos 


here. c. 


1 who axide 3 
as if he seide, 
Y axide not. 
sacrifice in 
veyns as if he 
seide, Sych 
offring is not 
worth to 30u, 
but anoyeth 
more, for 3e de- 


foulid in synnes, 
neizen to hooly 


places. neo- 


menye; that is, 


the feeste of the 
newe moone, 
which feeste the 


Jewis kepten 


for the benefice 
of Goddis go- 
uernail. and 
sabat; in the 
mynde of 
benefice of cre- 


§ kalendis ; that is, the bigynnyngis of monethis; and neomenye signefieth the same. strecchen forth 3oure hondis ; 


to hiseche me. Y schal not here; and the resoun of alle thingis biforseid sueth. 30ure hondis; that is, werkis. ben fulle of blood; that is, of 
orrible synnes, for thei weren menquelleris and oppresseris of pore men, and diden idolatre. be 3¢ wasch; that is, fro the spottis of synnes, bi the 
teeris of contricioun, ether ynward sorewe of herte. be 3e cleene; that is, eschewe 3e fro turnyng azen to synue. the yuel of 30ure thoustis ; 
for whi outirmere clennesse suffisith not, withouten ynnere cleunesse. seke 3¢ doom; that is, execucioun of riztfulnesse. oppressid ; in releu- 
ynge him. Lire here. c. || deme 3e, ete.; that is, for the fadirles and modirles child, in his iust cause. widewe; a3enus him that 
falsly calengith hir. repreue 3e me; that is, if 3e doen these thingis, thanne 3e moun playne, if 3e ben not releeuyd of God. as blood reed, ete.3 bi 
these twey colours, that ben ful holdinge and opyn, it is signefied, that synnes, be tho neuere so greuouse in kynde, and neuere so harde rootid bi 
custom, tho schulen be purgid, bi Goddis grace. und heren me; in obeyinge to myn heestis. goodis of erthe; bi these ben vndurstoodun also 
goostly goudis. Lire here. c. q that is, but if he thanne helpe hem. n. that is, if 3e ben not releeued. Ksvx. 


40m. cet Ee prom. haue ben x. f Wickid aecux. & Om. c. 


& perseyueth 1. 


h forzerdis c et ceteri. 
1 Om, Ekvx. 


i For 30ure EGIP sec. m. MNQRSUY. 
mthei nN, 4 thei x. 


k preue F sec. m. 


I, 21——~31. 


if 3ee wiln not, and me to wrathe jee 
shulden terren, swerd shal deuoure 30u; 
2ifor the mouth of the Lord spac. What 
maner is mad a strumpet the feithful 
cite ful of dom? ri3twisnesse dwellede 
22in it; now forsothe mansleeres. Thi 
syluer is turned in to dros; thi wyn is 
azmengd' with water. Thi princes vn- 
feithfull, felawes of theues; alle thei 
loouen 3iftus, folewen 3eldyngus; to the 
faderles child thei demen not, the cause 
210f the widewe goth not in to them. For 
that, seith the Lord God of ostes, strong 
of Irael, Allas! I shal be coumfortid vp 
on my straunge enemys, and I shal be 
vengid vp on myn enemys, that shulden 
25 be frendis. And I shal turne myn hond 
to thee, and I shal sethen* ont to the 
pure thi! dros, and I shal taken awei al 
26thi tyn. And I shal restoren thi domes- 
men, as they weren biforn, and thi coun- 
seileris, as bi old tyme. Aftir these 
thingus thou shalt ben clepid the cite of 
the riz3twis, the cheef citee of the feith- 
27ful. Syon in dom shal ben a3ee" bo3t, 
and thei shul bringe it a3een in to ri3t- 
28 wisnesse ; and he shal to-trede the hyd- 
ous gilteres and the synneres togidere, 
and thatt forsoken the Lord, shul ben di- 
29stro3id. Thei shul ben confoundid for- 
sothe of the maumetes, to the whiche thei 
sacrifieden; and 3ee shuln ben shamed™ 
vp on the gardynes, that 3ee hadden 
z0chosen. Whan 3ee shul ben as an oek, 
the leues fallende doun, and as a gardyn 
31 with oute water. And 3oure strengthe 
shal ben as a® ‘deed sparke® of a. flax top, 
and 3oure werk as a sparcle; and eithir 
shal be brend vp togidere, and ther shal 
not ben that quenche. 


§ myn hond ; that is, my power punysehinge. fo thee ; to punysche thee duly. Lire here. c. 


ISAIAH. 


229, 


nesse, swerd schal deuoure 30u; for whi 


the mouth of the Lord spak. Hou is the21 


feithful citee ful of dom maad an hoore*? 
ri3tfulnesse dwellide ther ynne; but now 
menquelleris dwellen ther ynne. 
uer is turned in to dros, ether filthe ; thi 


wyn is medlid with watir. Thi princes ben 23 


vnfeithful, the felowis of theuys+; alle lonen 
jiftis, suen’ meedis?; thei demen not to a4 
fadirles .child, and the cause of a widewe 
entrith not to hem. 
the Lord God of oostis, the stronge of 
Israel, Alas! Y schal be coumfortidt on 
myn enemyes, and Y schal be vengid on™ 
myn enemyes. 
hond§ to thee, and Y schal sethe out thi 
filthe to the cleene||, and Y schal do awei 


For this thing, seith 24 


* maad an 
hoore ; that is, 
ful of hordom 
bi the synne of 
anoutrie, which 
cite kepte feith- 
fulnesse of ma- 


Thi sil-22 trymonye bi- 


fore. thi siluer; 
that is, the 
tunge of 
techeris and of 
prestis is turn- 
ed fro truthe in 
to falsnesse, hi 
yuel expown- 
yag of the lawe. 
thi wyn; that 
is, amending 
ether chastising 
of the puple, bi 
techeris and 
prestis. is 
medlid with 
water; that is, 


And Y schal turne myn 25is slakid fro du 


correccioun ; for 
whi techeris 
worthi to be 
blamed, han 


al thi tyn. And Y schal restore thi iuges, 26 not forbed to 


as thei weren bifor to’, and thi counselours, 
as in elde tyine. Aftir these thingis thou 
schalt be clepid' the citee of the ri3tful, a 
feithful citee. 
in dom, and thei schulen bringe it ajen 


Sion schal be a3en bou3t 27 


apiende syn- 
neris. Lire 
here. C. 


+ felowis of 
theuys ; we 
owen to he war, 
lest we taken 
3iftis of hem, 
that gaderen 


in to" ri3tfulnesse ; and God schal al to-28 richessis of the 


breke cursid men and synneris togidere, 
and thei that forsoken the Lord, schulen 
be wastid. 
of idols, to whiche thei maden sacrifice; 
and 3e shulen be aschamid on the or- 


For thei schulen be aschamed 29 


teeris of pore 
men, lest we 
hen feluwis of 
thenys, and lest 
it he seid of vs, 
if thou suest a 
theef, thon ren-. 
nedist with him, 
The glos here. 
Ether felowis af 


cherdis, whiche 3e chesiden**, Whanne 3¢ 30 sheuys; that is, 


schulen be as an ook, whanne the leeues 
fallen doun, and as an orcherd with out 
watir. 
deed sparcle of bonys’, ‘ether of herdis of 
Jflex*, and 30ure werk schal be as aX quyk 
sparcle; and euer either schal be brent 
togidere, and noon schal be that schal 
quenche. 


susteynynge 
hem, for thei 
han part of her 
thefte. Lire 


And 3oure strengthe schal be as a 31 ere. c. 


t schal be coum- 
fortid ; bi ven- 
iaunce; he is 
coumfortid on 
hise enemyes, 
while thei that 
deynen not to 
knowe Goddis 
benefices in 
prosperite, ben 
amendid bi tur- 
mentis and 
peynes. Glos 
here. c. 


|| thi filthe to the cleene 3 as gold and siluer 


is purgid fro al filthe bi the fier, so Gad purgide the synnes of the puple of Jewis bi the fier of tribulacioun, maad bi Nalugodonosor ; and 


whanne it was purgid so, it was brou3t a3en fro Babiloyne. Lire here. c. 
the weye of ri3tfulnesse, in as myehe as it sutfride iust peyne for synne. Lire here. c. 


there in myry places, and to do lecherie there, in the worschip of idole. Lire here. c. 


h 3oure E pr.m. 4 meng E pr.i. 
2 Om. kK. %gnast c pr.m. £ pr. m. 


© and swen K. 
t of coFuineRuU. *% Om.1. 
herdis mu,  * Om. CrPY. 


kK sechen ce. 'the ge pr.m. Uagen a et alii. 


P 3iftis, ether meedis c. 3eldingis, elher medis HFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 
t clepid to 8 sce. m. vx. 


m ashamed AEGUK. 


q Om. EPpy. 


uQm. ery, Ystobilsvx. Ww Om. 1vx. either of 


{ Sion; that is, the puple of Sion. a3enbou3t ; fro Babiloyne, bi 
** whiche 3¢ cheseden; that is, for to worschipe idols 


230 


CAP, Al. 


1 The wrd that sa3 Isaie, the sone of 
2 Amos, vp on Judam and Jerusalem. And 
ther shal be in the laste da3es beforn mad 
redi the mount of the hous of the Lord 
in the cop of mounteynes?, and it shal be 
rered out vp on hillys. And ther shul 
3flowe to it alle Jentilis; and ther shul go 
many puples, and seyn, Cometh, steje 
wee vp to the mount of the Lord, and 
to the hous of God of Jacob; and he shal 
teche vs his weyes, and wee shul go in 
his sties, ‘or pathes’. For fro Sion shall 
go out the lawe, and the wrd of the Lord 
4tro Jerusalem. And he shal deme Jen- 
tiles, and vndernymen many puples; and 
thei shul bete togidere their swerdes in 
to shares, and ther speres in to sithes; 
. ther shal not reren fole ajen fole a swerd, 
ne thei shul ben enhauntid more to 
sbataile. 3ee hous of Jacob, cometh, and 
go wee in the li3t of the Lord oure God. 
6 Forsothe thou hast throwen afer thi pu- 
ple, the hous of Jacob, for thei ben ful- 
fild as sum tyme; and deuynoures thei 
hadden, as Filisteis", and to alien® childre 
7thei cleueden. Fulfild is the erthe of 
siluer and gold, and ther is noon ende of 
the tresores of it; and fulfild is his lond 
with hors, and vnnoumbreable the foure 
shorsid carres of it. And fulfild is his lond 
with maumetes, the werk of ther hondis 
thei honoureden, that ‘ther fingris maden‘s; 
9and at man bowede hymself, and meekid 
is the stronge man. Thanne ne for3yue 
10thou to them. Go" in to the ston, be 
thou hid in a dich with erthe, fro the 
face of the dreede of the Lord, and fro 
i1the glorie of his mageste. The e3en of 
the heje man ben meekid, and ther shal 


Babiloyne. Lire here. c. 


her wyues, that worschipiden idols, and her sones diden idolatrie. Lire here. c. 


ISAIAH. 


IT, tmrd yd. 


CAP. II. 


The word which Ysaie, the sone of1 
Amos, si3 on Juda and Jerusalem. And2 
in the laste daies* the hil of the hous of 
the Lord schal be maad redi in the cop of 
hillis, and schal be reisid aboue litle hillis. 
And alle hethene men schulen flowe to 
hym; and many puplis schulen go, and’3 
schulen seie, Come 3e, stie we to the hil of 
the Lord, and to the hous of God of Ja- 
cob; and he schal teche vs hise weies, and 
we schulen go in the pathis of hym. For 
whi the lawe schal go out of Syon, and 
the word of the Lord fro Jerusalemf. 
And he schal deme hethene men, and he4 
schal repreue many puplis; and thei schulen 
welle togidere her swerdes in to scharris, 
and her speris in to sikelis, ether sithes; 
folk schal no more reise swerd} ajens 
folk, and thei schulen no more be exer- 
cisid? to batel. Come 3e, the hous ofs 
Jacob, and go we in the li3t of the Lord. 
Forsothe thou hast cast awei thi puple,6 
the hous of Jacob, for thei ben fillid as 
sum tyme bifore; and thei hadden false 
dyuynouris bi the chiteryng of briddis, as 
Filisteis, and thei cleuyden to alien chil- 
dren§. The lond is fillid with siluer and7 
gold, and noon ende is of the tresouris 
therof; and the lond therof is fillid with 
horsis, and the foure horsid cartis therof 


ben vnnoumbrable. And the lond therofs 


is fillid with ydols, and thei worschipiden* 
the werk of her hondis, which her fyngris 


maden; and a man bowidel| hymsilf, and9 


a man of ful age was maad low. Therfor 
for3yue thou not to hem. 
puple of Juda, in to a stoon, be thou hid 
in a diche in erthe, fro the face of the 
drede of the Lord, and fro the glorie of 


* in the laste 
daies ; that is, 
in the tyme of 
grace. the hil, 
ete.s that is, 
hooli chirche, 
that passith ech 
congregacioun 
ordeyned to 
Goddis onour 
fro the bigyn- 
nyng of the 
world. aboue 
litle hillis; that 
is, princes of 
the world. alle 
hethen men s 
that is, summe 
of alle hethen 
men. Lire 
here. Cc. 
t fro Jerusa- 
lem ; apostlis 
and othere dis- 
siplis 3eden out 
fro Jerusalem 
and Judee, to 
preche the feith 
of Crist to he. 
then men. Lire 
here. c. 
t folk schal no 
more reise 
swerd, ete. 3 
not that no 
batel schal be, 
aftir the com- 
yng of Crist, 
but that greet 
pees schal be in 
the tyne of his 
comyng. no 
more be excer~ 
cisid, etc.; this 
is seid to sig- 
nefie the long 
uring of pees. 
the hows of Ja- 
cob; this is seid 
of the conner- 
sioun of Jewis, 
that schulen 
resseyue gene- 
raly the feith 
of Crist, aboute 
the ende of the 
world, and in 
parti fro Cristis 
ascencionn. in 
the list of the 
Lord; that is, 
in the list of 
Cristen feith. 


Entre thou, 10 rath cast awey; 


that is, schalt 
caste aweys 
and this was 
fillid, whanne 
Nabugodonosor 
ledde the Jewis 
prisoneris in to 


§ thei cleuyden to alien children ; that is, vsiden in hem the synne of Sodom; ether Jewis token alien wymmen to 
|| bowide him ; in bowinge to idols. in to a@ stoon, etc.s 


many men of the puple hidden hem in caues of stoonys, and in dichis of erthe, for the drede of Nabugodonosor. of the drede of the Lord; that 
is, of Nabugodonosor, sent of God to punysche the forseid synnes. Lire here. c. 


P the mounteynes 4. 


j 4 Om. c ef E prom. 
fingris c pr.m. E pr. m. 


t Om. ack. 


Vand thei i. 


r Philisteym szGHK. 
u Go thou ¢ pr.m. 


% hauntid c. exercised, ether hauntid EFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


s the alien x, 88 maden ther 


® worschipen 1. 


i. tee—MMla 1. 


ben inwardly crookid the heizte of 
stronge men; forsothe the Lord alone 
12shal ben enhauncid in that dai. For the 
dai of the Lord of ostes vp on eche proud 
man and hee3, and vp on eche enhaunc- 
ende’ hymself, and he shal be mekid ; 
13and vp on alle the cedres of Liban he3e 
and vpri3t, and vp on alle the oekis of 
14 Basan, and vp on alle the he3e moun- 
teynes, and vp on alle the ‘rered vp” 
15 hilles; and vp on eche he3 tour, and vp on 
16eche strengthyd wal; and vp on alle the 
shipis of Thars, and vp on alle thing 
17that is fair in sij3t. And ther shal be 
inwardly bowid al the* hei3nesse of men, 
and ther shal be meekid the hei3te of 
stronge men; and ther shal be rered vp 
18the Lord alone in that day, and the 
19 maumetes hoelly shul be to-brosid. And 
thei shul go in to dennes of stones, and 
in to swolewes of the erthe, fro the face 
of the dredeY of the Lord, and fro the 
glorie of his mageste, whan he shal rise 
20to smyten the erthe. In that day shal 
a man throwe awey the maumetes of 
his siluer, and the symulacris of his gold, 
that he hadde mad to hym, that he 
shulde honoure moldewerpes and _ rere- 
21imees. And he shal go in to the chynes’, 
‘or creuessis*, of stones, and in to the 
dennes of huge stones, fro the face of the 
drede of the Lord, and fro the glorie of 
his mageste, whan he shal risen to smyte 
22the erthe. Resteth thanne fro a man, 
whos spirit is in his nose therles, for hei3 
holden is he. 


CAP. III. 


1 Loo! forsothe the lordshepere, Lord 
- of oestes, shal do awei fro Jerusalem and 
fro Juda the stalwrthe, and the stronge, 
and al the strengthe of bred, and al the 


ISAIAH. 


231 


his mageste. 
maad low, and the hij3nesse of men schal 
be bowid doun; forsothe the Lord aloone 
schal be enhaunsid in that dai*. For the: 
dai of the Lord of oostis schal be on ech 
proud man and hi3, and on ech boostere, 


and he schal be maad low; and on alle 13 yout 


the cedres of the Liban hize and reisid, 
and on alle the ookis of Baisan, and on1 
alle hi3 munteyns, and on alle litle hillis, 


The izen of an hi3 man ben ge te 


e enhaunsid in 
that day; that 
is, thanne his 
my3t schal ap- 


g Pere, in pun- 


yschinge syn- 
neris, For the 
day of the Lord; 
that is, the 

e of his 
iaunce. and 
hi3 ; man, that 
is, auannsid bi 


4 ambicioun. on 


eche boostere ; 
that is, spek- 
inge proudly 


‘that ben reisid; and on ech hi3 tour, and 15 asenus God. on 


on ech strong wal; and on alle schippis 16 


of Tharsis, and on al thing which is fair 
in si3t. And al the hi3nesse of men schali 
be bowid doun, and the hijnesse of men 
schal be maad low; and the Lord aloone 


schal be reisid in that dai, and idolsis 


schulen be brokun‘ togidere outirli. 
thei schulen entre in to dennes? of stoonys, 
and in to the® swolewis of erthe, fro the 
face of the inward drede of the Lord, and 
fro the glorie of his maieste, whanne he 


alle cedris of Li- 
ban,ete.; that is, 
engynes made 
of siche trees 


7 schulen not 


mow defende 
hem. on alle 
hize munteyns ; 
that is, forselet- 
tis, ether cas- 
tels, in rochis 


And 19 of stoon, and in 


places to whiche 
me may vnne- 
this neize, 

alle schulen be 
distried bi Na- 
bugedonosor, 
be tho neuere 
so stronge in 


schal ryse to smyte the londt. In’ that 20 wallis. ee 


dai a man schal caste awei the idols of his 
siluer, and the symylacris of his gold, 
whiche he hadde maad to hym silf, for to 
worschipe moldewarpis and backis, ‘ether 
rere myis», 
chynnis', ethir crasyngis, of stoonys, and 
in to the* caues of hard roochis, fro the 
face of the inward drede of the Lord, and 
fro the glorie of his mageste, whanne he 


+ rise to smyte 
the lond; of 
Judee, bi Na- 
bugodonosor, as 
bi his scourge. 
muldewerpis, 
ete.; in siche 


And he schal entre in to21 ymagis maad bi 


nygromaunce, 
fendis 3anen 
answeris sum- 
tyme. fro a 
man; that is, 
fro God, in 
eschewinge his 
offence. in hise 


schal ryse to smyte the lond. Therfor 22 novethirtis ; as 
1 


ceesse 3e fro a man, whos spirit is in hise 
nose thirlis{, for he is arettid hi3. 


~ CAP. III. 


For lo! the lordli gouernour, the Lord1 
of oostis, schal take awei fro Jerusalem 
aud fro Juda a my3ti man, and strong, 
and al the strengthe of breed, and al the 


ven 
iaunce. he is 
arettid hiz; of 
anngels, that 
renerence him 
souereynly, and 
myche more 
men schulden 
drede him, and 
eschewe his 
offence. Lire 
here. c. 

¢ Bi Ebreys 
thus, whos spi- 
rit is in his 
nosethirlis ¢ 
that is, that 
lyueth bi breth. 


ing a3en of the eir, and so he is freel and dedli. for in what thing he is set at valu; as if he seye, in no thing, in comparisoun to God, and 


jit idolis maad of him ben of lesse priys. Lire here. c. 


v haunsynge 4EGH. W vp rered c pr. m. 


b Om. ¢ ef ceferi. ¢ takun N. 


h Om. x. 


x Om. AGHK. 
a Om. c ef E pr.m. or creuase E sec. m. or creueis AGHK. 


4 the dennes EFG pr.m. KPVX. 
! chynnis a sec.m.FPRS. chynis GKN sec. m.Qquvx. chymeneis M. 


¥Y strengthe E pr. m. * skynnys H. 


fOm.n. & AndN. 
k Om. c pr.m. GNVX. 


e Om. v. 


232 


2strengthe of water; the stronge, and the 
man fi3tere, and domesman, and _profete, 
3and deuynonr, and the olde prince vp on 
fifty, and the wrshepeful in cheere, and 
counseilor, and wis man of cheef crafty 
thingus, and the prudent of priue speche. 
4And I shal 3yue childer the princes of 
hem, and the mad wommanysh men shuln 
slordshipen to them. And the puple shal 
falle, mau to man, eche to his ne3hebore ; 
ther shal striue the child a3en the old 
6man, and the vnnoble ajen the noble. A 
man forsothe shal take his brother, the 
homli man of his fadir, and seyn, Cloth- 
ing is to thee, oure prince be thou; this 
7forsothe falling vnder thin hond. And 
he shal answern in that day, seiende, I 
am not a leche, and in myn hous is not 
bred, ne clothing; wileth not sette me 
sprince of> the puple. Ther fel doun 
forsothe Jerusalem, and Juda fel with; 
for the tunge of them, and the findingus 
‘of hem¢ ajen the Lord, that thei shulden@ 
9 terre the e3en of his mageste. The know- 
ing of ther chere shal answere to them; 
and ther synne as Sodom thei precheden, 
and hidden not. Wo to the soule of hem, 
10 for 30lden ben to them eueles. Seith to® 
the rijtwis, for weel; for the frute of hys 
ifyndyngus he shal ete. Wo to the vn- 
pytous ian in to euel; 3elding forsothe 
120f his hondis shal be do to hym. My 
puple his pleteres, ‘or wrong axers', 
spoileden, and wymmen lordshipeden of 
it. My puple, that blisful thee seyn, thee 
thei disceyuen, and the weie of thi go- 
isyngus scateren. The Lord stant8 to 
deme, and he stant® to the puples to be 
14demed; the Lord to the dom shal come, 
with the elderes of his puple, and with 
his princes. 3ee forsothe han distro3ed 
my vyniejerd; and the raueyn of the pore 
isin 3oure hous’, Whi to-brose 3ee my 


ajenus the king of Babiloyne, and so it perischede with the citee. with the eldere men, etc.; that is, 


> vp on z pr. m. ¢ Om. 4. 
hvyne c ef E pr.m. 4 houses c. 


1 fo be the 1. 


ISAIAH. 


4d Om. ce pr. m. 


m Om, plures, 


Tl. 2—15. 


strengthe of watir; a strong man, and ae 
man a werriour, and a domesiman, and a 
profete, and a false dyuynour in auteris, 
and an elde man, a prince ouer fifti men, 3 
and a worschipful man in cheer, and a 
counselour, and a wijs man of principal 
crafti men, and a prudent man of mystik, 
ethir goostli, speche. And Y schal 3yue4 
children* the! princes of hem, and men of 
wymmens condiciouns schulen be lordis of 
hem. And the puple schal falle doun, a5 
man to a™ man, ech man to his nei3bore; 
a child schal make noyse ajens an eld 
man, and an vnnoble man a3ens a noble 
man. Fora man schal take his brother, 6 
the meneal of his fadir, and schal seie, A 
clooth is to thee, be thou oure prince; 
forsothe this fallyng be vndur thin hond. 
And he schal answere in that dai, and7 
seie, Y am no lechef, and nether breed, 
nether cloth is in myn hous; nyle 3e make 
me prince of the puple. For whi Jeru-s 
salem felle doun, and Juda felle doun to- 
gidere; for the tunge of hem], and the 
fyndingis of hem weren ajens the Lord, 
for to terre to wraththe the i3en of his 
mageste. The knowyng of her cheers 
schal answere to hem; and thei prechiden 
her synne, as Sodom dide, and hidden not. 
Wo to the soule of hem, for whi yuels 


ben joldun to hem. Seie 3e to the iust10 


man, that zt schal be to hym® wel; for he 
schal ete the fruyt of hise fyndyngis. 
to the wickid man in to yuel; for whi the 
3eldyng of hise hondis schal be maad to 
hym. 
robbiden it, and wymmen weren lordis 
therof. Mi puple, thei that seien thee 
blessid, disseyuen thee, and distrien the 
weie of thi° steppis. 
for to deme, and ‘the Lord? stondith for 
to deme puplis; 
doom, with the eldere men of his puple, 


e Om. x. f Om. ¢ ef £ prom. & stondith a. 


Shens. Omyyn. Phe. 


The wrongful axeris of my puple12 


* children 5° 
that is, 30ng 
in age, and 
3ongere in ver- 
tues, for thei 
weren ful yuele 
men. wym- 
mens condi- 
ciouns; that is, 
vnkunnynge 
and chauniable. 
Lire here. c. 


+ ¥ am no 
leche ; that is, 
Y haue nether 
power nether 
kunnyng to 
saue you. C. 


t the tunge of 
hem ; here it is 
schewid, that 
thei weren blas- 
femeris. the 
Syndingis of 
hem; here it is 
schewid, that 
thei synneden 
not bi passioun, 
ether sudeyn 
lust, nether bi 
ignoraunce, but 
of purpos, and 
of certeyn 
knowing, 
which is most 
greuouse. 

The knowing of 
her cheer, etc. ; 
that is, thei 
schulen be so 
excercisid in. 
yuels, that 
malice schal 
schyne in her 
cheris, as the 
lecherie of an 
hoore schyneth 
in hir face. 
prechiden her 
synne, ete.: in 
doynge synne 
withoutschame, 
and opynly. 
schal ete, etc.s 
that is, he schal 
take the selding 


Won of hise gooddis. 


wrongful 
axeris, etc. 
that is, the 
souereyns that 
weren tirauntis, 
not princes. 
wymmen weren 
lordis therof ; 
for thei drowen 
her hosebondis 
to idolatrie. 

hei that seyen 


The Lord stondith 13 thee bessid 


etc.; these 
weren false 


the Lord schal come to 14 Proftis, bihet- 


inge prosperites 
to hem, bi whos 
biheest the pu- 
ple rebellide 


for to deme hem of her tyrauntyes. 


iI. 16—IvV. 2. 


puple, and the faces of pore* men 3ee 
confounden ? seith the Lord God of 
igostes. And the Lord God seide, For thi 
that arered ben the do3tris of Sion, and 
thei wenten with stra3t out necke, and 
in beckes of ej3en 3iden, and flappeden 
with hondis for io3e, and 3iden, and with 
i7ther feet in curious goyng 3iden!, the 
Lord shal fully maken ballid the top of 
the do3tris of Syon, and the Lord the 
her of hem shal nakenen; and for ourne- 
isment™ shal be shenshipe. In that dai 
the Lord shal don awei the ournement 
ig9of shon, and boces", and bejes, and 
brooches, and armeercles, and mytris, 
zoand combys®, and ribanes, and ‘reuerses 
at the hemmis?, and ‘oynement boxes 4, 
2iand ere ringus, and ryngus, and iemmes 
22in the frount hangende, and chaunging 
clothis, and litil palles, and shetes, and 
23 pynnes, and sheweres, and ‘necke couer- 
24cheues’, and filetes, and roketes. And 
ther shal be for swote smel stync, and 
for girdil a litil corde; and for crisp her 
ballidnesse, and for the brest bond an 
asheire. Also this most faire men with 
swerd shuln falle, and thi* stronge men 
2¢6in bataile. And thei shuln sorewen, and 
weilen shuln hir 3ates; and desolat* in 
the erthe she shal sitten. 


CARLY. 


1 And seven wymmen shul taken o man 
in that dai, seiende, Oure bred we shul 
ete, and with oure clothis wee shul be 
couered; onli be inwardly clepid thi 

2name vp on vs, do awei oure repref. In 


k the pore K. 1 thei 3eeden 4. 


dris £ pr.m. ‘neckercheuys 4cux, 8 ther x. 


a vynjerd 1., 7 Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRUVX. the s. 


sec.m. Wand thes. 
VOL. WI. 


ISAIAH. 


m ournemens c. 
P reuerses ¢ pr.m. reuerses at tho hemmus c sec. m. calles x pr.m. reuerses at the hem 1. 
t the desolat x. 


233, 


and with hise princes; for 3e han wastid — my vyner; that 
4 atta is, the puple of 
my vyner3, an e raueyn of a pore man Israel. al to- 
Ge " ° we: . breken 3¢ my 
ts in 30ure hous. Whi al to-breken 3e 15 7 ie: with 
1 angwischis 
my puple, and grynden togidere the faces onw ila 
of pore men? seith the Lord God of and ones 
is a grynden togi- 
oostis. And the Lord God seide, For that 16 dere; that is, 
Z By ken th 
that the dou3tris of Syon weren reisid*, Allaire fr 
and 3eden with a‘ necke stretchid forth, [be t™ysch- 
sla : 3 iden so myche 
and 3eden bi signes of i3en, and flappiden ee donee’ 
; d 5 puple, that suf- 
with hondis, and jeden, and with her feet ficient liyflode 
: A lefte not to 
jeden in wel araied goyng, the Lord schal 17 hem. Lire 
* here. c. 
make ballyd the nol of the dou3tris of * sweren reisid ; 
Sion, and the Lord schal make nakid the PPrdeo! soule. 
heer of hem. In that dai the Lord schal 1g strecchid forth ; 
: which is signe 
take awei the ournement of schoon, and __ of ynnere pride. 
belliemlnitemel signes of izen ; 
goldun litle bellis lijk the moone, and 19 in tiholdinge 


° ¥ : . vnchastly. 
ribans, and brochis, and ournementis of flapplten, ete. 
armes ny3 the schuldris, and mytris, ether _ in pleiynge dis- 


4 F : solutly, ether 
chapelettis, and coombis, and ournementis 20 wantonly. 


: « and with her 
of armes ni3 the hondis, and goldun oure- feet seden, ete.; 
nementis lijk laumpreis, and litil vessels Qucly and iolily, 

° ‘ wherbi men 
of oynementis, and eere ryngis, anda2i Vi" dgpld tn 
ryngis, and preciouse stoonys hangynge _ leccherie. Lire 
ryngis, and p ys hangynge _Jeecer 
in the forheed, and chaungynge clothis, 22 
and mentils, and schetis, ether’ smockis, 
and needlis, and myrouris, and smal lynun 23 
clothis aboutet the schuldris, and ker- 
cheues, and roketis. And stynk shal be a4 
for swete odour, and a corde for the gir- 

dil; ballidnesse schal be for crispe" heer, “raf, etc.; 

F ee . _ that is, ingis, 
and an heire for a brest girdil. Also this kinges, and 

, ; rinces, that 
faireste men schulen falle bi swerd, and weren wount 
thi stronge men schulen falle in batel. ‘stem the 
And the 3atis therof} schulen weile, and 26 “re ¢- 


gatis. The glos 
4 : jeacche 0 man; 
morene ; and it schal sitte desolat in erthe. _ sekinge to hane 


him hosebonde. 
ele our breed, 
etc.; that is, we 
schulen pur- 


CAP IV. 
ueye necessa- 


And seuene wymmen schulen catches ries for vs and 

: : ; . hildren. 

o mant in that dai, and" schulen seie, We oe 
schulen ete oure breed, and we schulen be 


t And the 3atis 


that is, that we 


‘ i i ben thy wyues. 
hilid with oure clothis; oneli thi name be pai a of 
: areynesse. 
clepid on ys, do thou awei oure schen- Lire here. c. 


0 filetis B pr. m. 
q nedle fod- 


0 hoosis 4. boosis GHK. 


SotherF. tabouen. "the crispen. Vv take F 


mah 


234 


that dai shal be the buriounyng of the 
Lord in gret doyng and glorie; and frut 
of the erthe hee3, and ful out io3ing to 
‘3them that shul be saf of Irael. And it 
shal be, eche that shal be laft in Sion, 
and residue in Jerusalem, hoeli shal be 
clepid ; eche that is writen in lif in Jern- 
asalem. For the Lord shal washen awey 
the filthes of the do3tris of Sion, and the 
blod of Jerusalem shal wasshen" fro the 
myddes of it, in spirit of dom, and spirit 
sof breunende looue. And the Lord bro3te 
forth vp on eche place of the mount of 
Sion, and wher he is inwardli clepid, a 
cloude bi dai, and smoke, and shynyng 
of fyr flaumende in ny3t ; vp al forsothe 
6the glorie ouercoueryng. And a taber- 
nacle shal ben in to a shadewe hilet of 
the dai, fro brennyng, and in to’ sikir- 
nesse and hiding, from whirlewynd and 
from reyn. 


CAPs NV. 


1 Ishal synge to my looued a song off 
‘myn emes sone”, of his vyne3zerd*. ‘TheY 
vyne3erd* is mad to my looued, in the 
2horn ‘to the’ sone of oile. And he heggede 
it, and stones he ches of it, and plauntede 
a chosen vyne3erd*; and he bilde vp a 
tour in the myddel of it, and a presse 
he rerede vp in it; and he abcd, that it 
shulde bringe forth grapes, and it bro3te 
3forth wilde vynes. Now thanne, 3ee 
dwelleris of Jerusalem, and men of Juda, 
demeth betwe’ me and my vynejerd*. 


ISAIAH. 


IV. 3—V. 3. 


schip. In that dai* the buriownyng of2 
the Lord schal be in greet worschip and 
glorie; and the fruyt of erthe schal be hi3, 
and ful out ioye ‘schal be* to hem that 
schulen be sauyd of Israel. And it schal3 
be, ech that is left in Sion, and zs resydue 
in Jerusalem, schal be clepid hooli; ech 
that is writun in lijf in Jerusalem ; if the4 
Lordt{ waischith awei the filthis of the 
dou3tris of Sion, and waischith the blood 
of Jerusalem fro the myddis therof, in the 
spirit of doom, and in the spirit of heete. 
And the Lord madet on ech place of thes 
hille of Sion, and where he was clepid to 
help, a cloude bi dai, and smoke, and bri3t- 
nesse of fier flawmynge in the ni3jt; for 
whi hilyng’ schalz be aboue al glorie. 
And a tabernacle schal be in to a schadew-6 
ynge place of the dai, fro heete, and in to 
sikirnesse and in to hidyng, fro whirle- 
wynd and fro reyn. 


CAP. V. 


I schal synge for my derlyng the song! 
of myn vaclis sone, of his vyner*. A 
vyner§ was maad to my derlyng, in the 
horne in the sone of oile. And he heg-2 
gide it, and chees stoonys therof, and 
plauntide a chosun vyner; and he bildide 
a tour in the myddis therof, and rerede a 
presse ther ynne; and he abood, that it 
schulde bere’ grapis, and it bare® wielde 
grapis. Now therfor, 3e dwelleris of Je-3 
rusalem, and 3e men of Juda, deme bitwixe 
me and my viner. Whit is it|| that Y4 


* Here bigyn- 
neth the iiij. 
chapitre [capi- 
tle GPauy] in 
Ebreu. co1kM 
PARUY. In that 
day; that is, in 
the tyme of 
grace. the bu- 
riownyng of 
the Lord ; that 
is, Crist, that 
was not con- 
seyued of man- 
nus seed, but 
hi vertu of the 
Hooly Goost. 
glorie; in 
worching of 
myraclis, in 
his rising a3en, 
and assencioun. 
Sruyt of erthe; 
that is, of the 
Virgyn Marye. 
to hem that 
schulen be 
saued of Is- 
rael; that is, 
to apostlis and 
othere feithful 
men, that had- 
den ioye 
whanne thei 
sien Crist 
risun a3en, 
and in Wit- 
sunday, whanne 
thei resseyu- 
eden the Hooly 
Goost. left in 
Sion; that is, 
hooly chirche, 
bi noumbre 
and merit. Lire 
here. C. 

+ Uf the Lord ; 
that is, For the 
Lord. of the 
dou3tris of 
Sioun; that 
is, of hooly 
chirche. of 
doom, ete.; for 
Crist made sa- 
tisfaccioun for 
vs bi the weye 
of riz3tfulnesse, 
and of most 
charite. Lire 
here. C. 

t the Lord 
made; that is, 


pls make. Ysaye spekith of thing to comynge, bi the maner of thing passid, for the certeynte of profesie. of Sion; that is, of hooly chirehe, 
pee ajenus synnes. a cloude bi day, etc.; that is, the grace of the Hooly Guost, that hilith ether defendith ajenus the heete of couetise, and 
ball azenus derknesse of ignoraunce. aboue al glories of the piler of fier, and of the clowde 3ouun to the sones of Israel, in the goyng out of 

git Ailing; that is, the grace of the Hooly Goost; and the grace of the Hooli Goost schal be in to a schadewinge place a3enus the heete of coneytise. 
frow miviend 3 of pride, ether of persecucioun, which men strengthid of the Hooly Goost, dredden not. fro reyn; of fleisly lust, ether of temporal 
pr 6 diag lest bi it a man be maad neische to vices. Lire here. c. § A vyner; that is, the puple of Israel. tcas maad to my derling; that is, 
fe oe in the horn; that is, in an hi3 place and excelent, as was Jerusalem. in the sone of oile; that is, in a place ful of olyues, of whos 
ruyt is wrongen ont oile. heggide ts; with hise comaundementis, and with the keping of him silf, and of aungels. chees stoonys therof; in 
ange an a Cananeys, worschiperis of stoonys. plauntide a chosun vyner; that is, chees the puple of Israel to his worschiping bifor othere 
pel ie and p poms in the lond of biheest. a tours; that is, the temple maad at the maner of a tour. a@ presses that is, the anter of brent 
; ep dail ‘ at ry good werkis in heriynge God. wilde grapis; that is, vnprofitable werkis and noyful, in bowinge to idolatrie. Lire here. cK. 

at ts it, etc.; as if he seide, no thing faylide of my part, that ne it ou3te to make the beste werkis, and it dide the worste thingis. c. 


« be wasshen c pr. m. v Om. E prim. 
emesone GUK. * vyne c eé E pr.m. 
» betwix 4. betwen eaux. 


W my nemesone E sec. m. sup. ras. myn eem sone 4A. myn 
y¥Myepr.m. 2Om. cet x prim. ofthe 4. 4vyne cet E pr.m. 
Cvyne c et E pr.m. 


é : 5 
Om.1. yhilyng, ether defending cerauikmnpgqrsuvxy. 7 Om.1. ®vynzerd 1. >-make CEFGHIK 
MNPQRSUVX. © made CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


ve 


V. 4-——~1(4. 


4 What is that I aw3te mor’ to do to my 
vynezerd“*, and dide not to it? whether 
that I abod, that yt shulde bringe forth 
grapes, and bro3te forth wilde vynes ? 

5And now I shal shewen to 30u, what I 
shal do to my vyne3erd**. I shal do awei 
his heg, and it shal be in to destruc- 
cioun; I shal breke doun his wal, and it 

6shal ben in to ‘to-tredyng®; and If shal 
setten it desert. It shal not be kut, and 
it shal nott be doluen, and ther shul 
stej3e vp vp on it breres and thornes ; and 
to& the cloudis I shal comaunde, that thei 

7reyne not vp on it weder. Forsothe the 
vynezerd" of the Lord of hostes is the 
hous of Irael, and the men of Juda his 
delytable! buriounyng. I abod, that it 
shulde do dom, and lo! wickidnesse; and 
sriz3twisnesse, and lo! cry. Wo that ioynen 
hous to hous, and feeld to feeld coupleth, 
vn to the terme of a place. Whether 
dwellen 3ee shuln alone in the myddel 
gof the’ erthe? In myn eres ben these 
thingus, seith the Lord of ostes; but 3if! 
manye houses grete and faire shul be 
1odesert, and withoute dwellere. Forsothe 
ten acris of vyne3erdis™ shul maken o® 
potell wyn, and thretti bussheles of sed 
11shul make thre bussheles. Wo that risen 
erly to drunkenhed to be folewid, and to 
drinken yn to euen, that with wyn 3ee 
12brenne. Harpe, and syngende instru- 
ment, and tymbre, and trumpe, and wyn 
in 30ure festes ; and the werk of the Lord 
3ee biholden not, ne the werkes of his 

\hondis 3ee waiten. Therfor lad caitif is 
my puple, that hadde not kunnyng; and 
his noble men dieden thur3 hunger, and 
his multitude thur3 thirst al out driede. 

14Therfore helle spredde abrod his soule, 
and openede his mouth with oute any 


ISAIAH. 


235 


ou3t to do more to my vyner, and Y dide 
not to it? whether that Y abood, that it 
schulde bere’ grapis, and it bare® wielde 
grapis? And now Y schal schewe to 30u,5 
what Y schal do to my vyner. Y schal 
take awei the hegge therof, and it schal 
be in to rauyschyng* ; Y schal caste doun 
the wal therof, and it schal be in to de- 
foulyng ; and Y schal sette it desert, ether 6 
Jforsakun. It schal not be kit, and it schal 
not be diggid, and breris and thornes 
schulen ‘growe vp‘ on it; and Y schal co- 
maunde to cloudis, that tho$ reyne not 
reyn on it. Forsothe the vyner of the7 
Lord of oostis is the hous of Israel, and 
the men of Juda ben the delitable buri- 
ownyng of hym. Y abood, that it schal 
make doom, and lo! wickidnesse; and 
that it schulde do ri3ztfulnesse, and lo! 
cry. Wo Zo 30u that ioynen hows to hous, s 
and couplen feeld to feeld, ‘til to! the ende 
of place. Whether‘ 3e aloone schulen dwelle 
in the myddis of the lond? These thingis9 
ben in the eeris of me, the Lord of oostis ; 
if many housis ben not forsakun, grete 
housis' and faire, with outen dwellere, 
bileue 3e not to™ me. 
of vynes schulen make a" potel, and 
thretti buschels of seed schulen make thre 
buschels. Wo ¢o 30u that risen togidere11 
eerli to sue drunkennesse, and to drinke 
‘til to® enentid, that 3e brenne with wyn. 


For whi ten acris10 


* rauysching ; 
for herbi fendis 
hadden power 
on hem, to ra- 
uysche her 
goostli goodis, 
and disposi- 
ciouns to tho. 
caste doun the 
wal; that is, 
withdrawe my 
proteccioun, 
and the keping 
of aungels. in to 
defouling; that 
is, oppressing 
of aduersaries, 
and most of 
Babiloyne, that 
distrieden the 
lond, and kill- 
iden the puple 
in parti, and 
token prison- 
eris in parti. 
men of Juda, 
ete.s this is 
seid most for 
Crist, that 
schulde be 
borun bi fleisch 
of that lynage. 
cry; of wrongis 
oon doynge 
wrong to an 
other. Lire 
here. C. 

+ 3e biholde not, 
etc.; doynge 
no thing to his 
onour ether 
seruyce, whanne 
3e han of him 
abundaunce 

of temporal 
thingis. werkis 
of his hondis; 
that is, hou 

he punyschide 
scharply fleisli 
synne, in 
drenchinge the 
world for it, 
and in bren- 
nynge V. citees 
with fier of 
brunstoon. 


Harpe, and giterne, and tympan, and pipe, 12 #s ¢ed; that is, 


and wyn den in 30ure feestis; and 3e bi- 
holden not} the werk of the Lord, nether 
3e biholden the werkis of hise hondis. 
Therfor my puple is led prisoner?, for 
hadde not kunnyng; and the noble men 
therof perischiden in hungur, and the mul- 
titude therof was drye in thirst. Therfor14 
helle alargide4 his soule}, and openyde his 


schal be Jed, for 
he spak of 
thing to com. 
ynge, bi the 
maner of thing 
passid, for the 


it 19 certeynte of 


profesie. Lire 
here. C. 
tTherfor helle 
alargide his 
soules that is, 
his caitifte, 
ether prison- 
yng; aud this 
is figuradif 


speche, for whi helle hath no soule propirli. Helle in scripture is takun bothe for a diche, where the bodies of deed men ben put, and for a place 
where the soulis of hem that ben dampned and of hem that schulen be purgid goen doun, and generali of hem that ben not resseyued anoon to 
glories and thanue alle deed men 3eden doun to helle in her soulis. Jowid doun; that is, schal be cast doun al fro his pride. enhaunsid in doom; that 


dQOm.c. 44 vynec e¢ x prim. 
Idilectable szcnx. * Om. c pr.m. 


€ tredynge an. 
10m. c et £ prem. 


fOm. x. €Om.c pr.m.u. 4h vynec et E prem. 
mvyynecelEpr.m. "oon EF. 


d make CEFGNIKMNPQRSUVX. © made CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. f stie CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. & thei I.no 5s. 


hOm.s. ! vnto1. 


° vnto fr. 


k Wher ceteri fere passim. 


10m. 1. hous s. 
P caityf, ether prisoner CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


uh 2 


m Om. s. 
4 hath alargide 1. 


1 0 CEFIIIMNUV. 00 GKPQ. 


236 


terme; and ther shul falle doun his 
stronge men, and his puple, and heeje, 
sand his gloriouse to it. And ther shal 
be ful crookid a man, and meekid a 
strong man; and the e3en of ‘he3e men® 
isshul be threst doun. And ther shal be 
enhauncid the Lord of ostes in dom, and 
the hoeli God shal be halewid in ri3twis- 
iznesse. And lombis shul be fed aftir ther 
order, and desertes in to plente turned 
iscomelingus shul ete. Wo that drawen 
wickiduesse in the? litle cordes of vanyte, 
igand as the bond of a wayn synne; that 
seyn, Hee3e,‘or haaste’, he, and soone 
come his werk, that wee see; and ne3he, 
and come the counseil of the hoeli of* 
20 Ivael, and wee: shul witen’ it. Wo that 
seyn euel good, and good euel; puttende 
derknesses }i3t, and 1i3t derknesses ;_put- 
tende bitter in to swete, and sweete in to 
21 bitter. Wo that wise ben in 3oure e3en, 
22and bifor jouself slee3e. Wo that my3ty 
ben to drinke wyn, and stronge men to 
23be mengd drunkynhed ; that iustefien the 
vnpitous for 3iftes, and the ri3twisnesse 
of the rijtwyse 3ee taken awey fro hym. 
24For that, as deuoureth the tunge of fyr 
stobil, and the hete of flaumme brenneth 
out, so the roote of hem as a‘ gnast" shal 
be, and’ the buriownyng” of hem as 
pouder shal ste3e vp; forsothe thei 
casten awei the lawe of the Lord of 
ostes, and the speche of the hoeli of * 
25Trael thei blasfemeden. Therfor wrath- 
ede the wodnesse of the Lord in his 
puple, and stra3te out his hond vp on it, 
and smot it; and the mounteynes ben dis- 
turbid, and mad ben the ‘deed carensY 


ISAIAH. 


‘schulen go doun to it. 


V. 15-25. 


is, hls hignesse 
schal be schew- 
id hi this, that 
he schal make 
the forseid 
doom of syn- 
And a man schal 15 jeris, teibren, 
ete.; that is, 


be bowid doun, and a man of age schal be ich anbren of 
the sones of 


maad low; and the i3en of hi3 men schulen 
- é : Israel schnlen 
be pressid doun. And the Lord of oostis 16 be etun of ene- 
° ° ° myes, as oure 
schal be enhaunsid in doom, and hooli  dectours ex- 
God schal be halewid in ri3tfulnesse. And 17 gonetingis; that 


mouth with outen ony ende; and" strong 
men therof, and the puple therof, and* 
thet hij men, and gloriouse" men therof, 


pownen. and 
iv . is, enemyes 
lambren schulen be fed biv her ordre, and Te cnenys 
comelyngis schulen ete desert places turn- 
eledesert places, 
s ‘ g eeten the heestis 
wickydnesse in the cordis of vanyte, and and the fruytis 
drawen synne as the boond of a wayn3 Salomon seith 
that is, inst 
and come soone, that we se; and the men of Israel, 
counsel of the hooli of Israel nei3, and te led in to 
— ° . bi her ordre; 
30u that seien yuel good, and good yuel; thoris echulen 
and putten derknessis li i - 
p hi3t, and 1i3t derk igbetier 
staat; and 
swete, and swete thing in to bittir. W021 that is, the 
to 30u that ben wise men in 30ure izen, yen of is: 
and ben prudent bifor 3ou silf. Wo Zo 302 22 %3en fro Babi- 
i loyne, schulen 
that ben my3ti to drynke wyn, and bex 
places. turned 
0 : cae Oro that is, the 
iustifien a wickid man for 3iftis, and 3e — fruytis of the 
taken awei the ri3tfulnesse of a iust man prt Oa. eset 
. . the tyme of 
fier deuourith stobil, and the heete of  caititte. of va- 
flawme brenneth, so the roote of hem schal of pride, which 
is canse of 
schal stie as dust; for thei castiden awei  @ “e Soond of 
. @ wayn; in go- 
the lawe of the Lord of oostis, and blas- 
there to grenu- 
ousere synnes. 
Therfor the strong veniaunce of the Lord 25 ip scornynge 
was wrooth ajens his puple, and he stretch-  Geddis rsttnl- 
that is, the 
peyne which 


loyne. schulen 
ed in to plentee. Wo fo 30u that drawen 18 etc.; for thei 
of Jewis. Rahy 
and 3e seien, The werk of hym_haaste, 19 ‘hus. #mbrens 
that schulen 
a hil k i Babiloyne, 
come, and we schulen knowe it. 0 £020 schulen be fed 
hane sufficient 
nessis ; and putten bittir thing in to 
comelingis; 
rael, turnynge 
ete desert 
stronge to meddle drunkenesse; and 3¢ 23 in to fainesse; 
lond of Israel, 
frohym. For this thing, as the tunge of 24 4nd vntilid in 
nyte; that is, 
be as a deed sparcle, and the seed of hem there synnes. 
ynge forth fer- 
femyden the speche of the hooli of Israel. 
and 3e seyen; 
nesse. his werk; 
ide forth his hond on it, and smoot it; 
3e manassen to 


vs. Thei seiden in scorn, Haaste, and come soon; asif thei seiden, We dreden not its for they felden in to this errour, that God hadde not 
puruyaunce of lowere thingis in erthe, and that he schulde nat 3yue peyne for thingis doon in erthe. ywel; that is, the worschiping of idolis. good; 
that is, profitable to men. and good ; that is, Goddis worschiping. yuel; that is, of no profit. derknessis; of errour to be. li3t; of truthe. /i3t; of feith 
to be. derknessis; of ignoraunce. dittir thing; that is, idolatrie. in to szwetes as if a man gete the ende desirid bi it. and swete thing; that is, Goddis 
worschip onely. in to biltir thing; as if vnprofitable trauel and cost is there. prudent bifor 30u silf; that is, that setten 30ure kunnyng of Goddis 
profetis, seiynge the contrarie of 3uure errour. sfobi/; whanne fier touchith a litil the stobil, anoon it is brent up, as in lickyng, so the peyne of 
synneris hifor seid, schal come soone of God. the roote, etc.; that is, thei schulen be distried al out. the seed of hem; that is, the children of hem. schal 
stie as dust; for as dust reisid in the eir, is scaterid abrood bi the wynd to an other place, so the sones of hem weren led ont of her lond in to 


caitifte. Lire here.c. 


© the hee3 man xk. POm.c., 
bronde E sec. m. marg. AGUK. 
deth ef © pr.m. 


v Om. 4. in Gu. 


rand the 1. 8 Om. E. 


4 Om, cE pr.m. 


ttho a. 


u dead 


rOm. c prom. “aches: 
allen to 


w brennynge 4. 


Sweyte 4. t Om. un. 
x Om. c prim. 


uthe glorious wm. Vv with s. 


V. 26—VI. 5. 


of hem as drit in the myddel of stretes. 
In alle these thingus is not turned awei 
his wodnesse, but 3it his hond stra3t out. 
26 And he shal rere vp a signe in naciouns 
aferr, and he shall whistle to hym fro 
the coestes of the erthe; and lo! hastid 
27 he shal come swiftli. Ther is not failing 
ne trauailyng in hym; he shal not nap- 
pen, ne slepen, ne shal ben loosid the 
girdil of his renes, ne shal be to-broke 
28the thowng of his sho3yng. His arwis 
sharpe, and alle his bowes bent ; the cles 
of the horses? of hym as flynt, and his 
29wheles as the* byre of tempest. His 
roring as off a leoun; he shal roren as 
the whelpis of leouns; he shal gnasten, 
and holden the prei, and” biclippen, and 
30 ther shal not be, that delyuere out. And 
ther shal sowne vp on hym in that day, 
as the soun of the se; wee shul biholde 
in to the erthe, aud lo! derknesses of 
tribulacioun, and 1i3t al to-derked is in 
the derknyng of hym. 


CAEP av 1. 

1 In the 3er ‘in which® diede king Osias, 
I sa3 the Lord sittende vp on an_ hei3 
sete, and rered vp; and ful was* the hous 
of his mageste, and tho® thingus that 
vnder hym weren, fulfilden the temple. 

2Serafyn stoden vp on it, sixe wenges to 
the oon‘, and sixe to the other’; with two 
they couereden the face of hym, and with 
two thei couereden the feet of hym, and 

swith two thei flown. And thei criedeu 
the tother" to the tother, and seiden, 
Hoeli, hoely, hoeli, Lord God of ostes ; 
ful is al' the’ erthe of the glorie of hym. 

4 And to-moued ben the thresholdes of the 
heenglis fro the vois of the criende, and 

5the hous fullfild is with smoke. And I 
seide, Wo to me, for I heeld my pes; for 


a Om. acuKx. Om. 4. 
f toon AGUK. ton E. 


z hors 4. 
Eprm @ Om. 4. 


w ther schal 1. * oother1, Y two. 


¢ oother 1. 


vy Om. 1. 
oon FP. the oother 1s. 


ISAIAH. 


© that c cf & pr.m, in the whiche F sec. m, marg. 
& tother szGHK. 


2 Om. I. 


237. 


and hillis* weren disturblid, and the deed 
bodies of hem weren maad as a toord in 
the myddis of stretis. In alle these thingis 
the stronge vengeaunce of him was not 
turned awei, but 3it his hond was stretchid 


forth. And he sehal reise a signe among 26 


naciouns afer, and he schal hisse to hym{ 
fro the endis of erthe; and lo! he schal 
haaste, and schal come swiftli. 
failynge nethir trauelynge in that oost; 
he schal not nappe, nether slepe, nether 
the girdil of his reynes selial be vndo, 
nether the lace of his seho schal be brokun. 


Hise arowis ben scharpe, and alle hise2s 


bowis ben bent; the houys of hise horsis 
ben as a¥ flynt, and hise wheelis ben as the 


feersnesse of tempest. His roryng schal be 29 


as of a lioun; he schal rore as the whelpis 
of liouns ; and he schal gnaste, and schal 
holde prey, and schal biclippe, and noon 
schal” be, that schal delyuere. 
schal sowne on it in that dai, as doith the 
soun of the see; we schulen biholde in to 
the erthe, and lo! derknessis of tribula- 
cioun, and 1i3t is maad derk in the derk- 
nesse therof. 


CAP wv I 


In the 3eer in which the kyng Osie was1 
deed{, Y si3 the Lord sittynge on an hi3 
seete, and reisid; and the hous was ful of 
his mageste, and tho thingis that weren 
vndur hym, filliden the temple. Serafyne 
steden on it, sixe wyngis weren to oon, 
and sixe wyngis to the tothir™; with 
tweiY wyngis thei hiliden the face of hym, 
and with tweiY wyzgis? thei hiliden the 
feet of hym, and with twei* wyugis thei 
flowen. And thei crieden ‘the toon? tos 
the tother*, and seiden, Hooli, hooli, hooli 
is the Lord God of oostis; al erthe is ful 
of his glorie. And the lyntels aboue of4 
the herris were moued togidere of the vois 
of the criere, and the hous was fillid with 
smoke. And Y seide, Wo to me, for Ys 


4 Om, c et 


htoon az. iOm. a. & Om. ecu. 


a two 1. > tother CFHKMNQRUVX. that 


And he30 


* hilliss that is, 
princes. in ad! 
these thingis, 
ete.; that is, in 
the forseid 
peynes 5 for 
the puple was 
not amendid bi 
tho peynes, but 
more obstynat 
in yuel. c. 

+ he schal hisse 
to him, ete.; 
that is, God 


Noon is 27 schal make Na- 


bugodonosor 
and his oost to 
come ajenus 
Jerusalem. 
Lire here. C. 


t was deed; 
not bi depart- 
ing of the soule 
fro the hodi, 
but in which 
3eer he was 
smytun of God 
with Jepre, for 
he wolde take 
amys to him 
the office of 
prest; for fro 
that tyme he 
was arettid 
deed to the 
world, as Rabi 
Salomon seith. 
the hows; that 
is, the temple 
bildid of Salo- 
mon; netheles 
this clause, and 
the hows was ful 
of his maigste, 
is not in Ebreu, 
nether in bokis 
amendid. and 
tho thingis that 
weren vndur 
im, ete.; in 
Ebren thus, 
and hise hem- 
mes fillide the 
temple, 
the faee of him; 
in Ebreu it is, 
the face of hem 
silf and the 


Seet of hem silf. 


Lire here. c. 


238 


a man defoulid in lippis I am, and in 
the! myddel of the puple defoulid lippes 
hauende I dwelle, and the king Lord of 
gostes I sa3 with myn ejen. And ther 
flei3 to me oon of™ the” serafyn, and in 
his hond a cole, that with the toenge he 
7toe fro the auter. And he touchede my 
mouth, and seide, Lo! I haue touchid 
with this thi lippes™, and ther shal be 
don awei thi wickyduesse, and thi synne 
gshal be clensid. And I herde the vois of 
the Lord, seiende, Whom shal I sende, 
and who shal go to jou? And J seide, 
9Lo! Iam; send me. And he seide, Go, 
and thou shalt sey to this puple, Hereth 
herende, and wileth not vnderstonde; and 
seeth a viseoun, and wileth not knowen. 
10 Blynde out the herte of this puple, and 
his eres agregge, and his e3en close ; lest 
par auenture he see with his e3en, and 
with his eres here, and with his herte 
vndyrstonde, and he conuertid, and I 
uhele hym. And I seyde, Hou longe, 
Lord ? And he seide, To the tyme that 
ben desolat the citees with oute dwellere, 
and houses with oute man. And the lond 
12shal be laft desert, and aferr shal make 
the Lord men. And ther shal be multe- 
plied that was laft in the myddel of the 
13 erthe, and 3it in it® tithing®®; and it shal 
be conuertid, and it shal be in to shew- 
yng as a terebynt, and as an oek, that 
spredeth out his braunches; hoely sed it 
shal ben, that that shal stonden in it. 


CAP. VII. 

1 And it is don in the dajes of Achaz, 
sone of Joathan, sone of Osie, king of 
Juda, ther ste3ede vp Rasyn, king of 
Cyrie, and Fascee, the? sone of Romelie, 
king of Irael, in to Jerusalem, to fizte 
ajen hym; and thei my3te not ouercome 

2it. And thei tolden to the hous of Dauid, 


seid in xij. c°. of Joon. Lire here. c. 


ISAIAH. 


§ Lord, hou longe; schal this blyndnesse and hardnesse laste. Lire here. c. 


VI. 6——VII. 2. 


was stille*; for Y.am a man defoulid in 
lippis, and Y dwelle in the myddis of the 
puple hauynge defoulid lippis, and Y si3 
with myn izen the kyng Lord of oostis. 
And oon of serafyn flei to me, and ac 
brennynge cole was in his hond, which? 
cole he hadde take with a tonge fro the 
auter. And he touchide my mouth, and7 
seide, Lo! Y haue touchid thi lippis with 
this cole, and thi wickidnesse schal be don 


awei, and thi synne schal be clensid. Ands™ 


Y herde the vois of the Lord, seiynge, 
Whom schal Y sende, and who schal go 
to30u? And Y seide, Lo! Y{; sende thou 
me. And he seide, Go thou, and thou9 
schalt seie to this puple, 3e herynge here®, 
and nyle 3e vndurstonde{; and se 3e the 


* was stille; fro 
repreuyng of 
king Osie. 
brennynge cole; 
this was not a 
material cole, 
nether material 
auter, but yma- 
gynarie, etber 
in licnesse. 
Lire here. c. 
+ Lo! ¥Y; am 
redi to obeie. 
sende thou mes; 
he synnede not 
in profringe 
him silf, for he 
si3 him silf dis. 
posid bifore bi 
the forseid 
purging. Lire 
here. ¢. 

t nyle 3e vn- 
durstonde; that 
is, 3¢ nylen vn- 
durstonde, for 
the profete ex- 
citide not hem 
for to vndur- 
stonde not, and 


profesie, and nyle 3e knowe. Make thou 10 obeye not, but 


blynde the herte of this puple, and aggrege 
thou the eeris therof, and close thou the 
iz3en therof; lest perauenture it se with . 
hise i3zen, and here with hise eeris, and 
vndurstonde with his herte, and it be con- 
uertid, aud Y make it hool. 
Lord, hou long? And he seide, Til citees 
ben maad desolat with out dwellere, and 
housis with out man. And the lond schal 


And Y seide, 11 


he biforseide 
this thing to 
comynge, in 
bifortelling the 
hardnesse of 
the puple in 
yuel. Make thou 
blynd, etc.; that 
is, denounce 
thon, that the 
eeris schulen 
be agreggid bi 
obstynacye, 
ether hard- 
nesse in yuel. 
Sich blynd- 
nesse and hard- 


be left desert, and the Lord schal make !2 ing in ynel is 


men fer€. And that that was forsakun|| in 
the myddil of erthe, schal be multiplied, 


and 3it tithing! schal be ther ynne; and it13 


schal be conuertid, and it schal be in to 
schewyng, as a terebynte 7s, and as an ook, 
that spredith abrood hise boowis; that 
schal be hooli seed, that schal stonde ther 
ynne. 

CAP. VII. 

And it was don in the daies of Achas,1 
the sone of Joathan, the sone of Osias, 
kyng of Juda, Rasyn, the kyng of Sirie, 
and Facee, the sone of Romelie, the kyng 
of Israel, stieden to Jerusalem, for to fi3te 
a3ens it; and thei my3ten not ouercome it. 
And thei telden to the hous of Dauid, and2 


not of God 
ontirly, bnt of 
defaute of fre 
wille 5 for whi 
a man that 
turnyth awey 
him silf fro 
God, disserueth 
that God with- 
drawe his grace 
fro him, whos 
worching is to 
liz3tne the vn- 
durstonding, 
and to make 
neische the 
wille; and ther- 
for whanne 
grace is with- 
drawnn, @ man 
is blyndid and 
hardid bi his 
malice. This 
was fillid to the 
lettre, whanne 
at the preching 
of Crist, Jewis 
weren hardid in 
synne, for greet 
party, as it is 


|| chad was forsakun; 


that is, the chirche of Cristen men, that weren in Judee, and weren forsakun of othere Jewis, schal haue prosperite aftirward; ether the lond of 
Juda forsakun in the caytifte of Babiloyne, schal haue prosperite in the tyme of Macabeys. Lire here. c. 


1Om., 4EK. 
> P Om. 4GHK. 


m frog pr.m. Om, 4EGHK. ™ mouth c pr.m, © Om.c pr.m.  dymy E pr.m. 


Athe which 1. ¢€hereth 1. @aferrs. b that vyner 1. ithe tithing, ether tenthe part 1. 


VII. 3—15- 


seiende, Siria restede vp on Effraym, and 
to-moued is his herte and the herte of 
his puple, as ben moued the trees of 
3wodis fro the face of the wynd. And 
the Lord seide to Isaie, Go out in to ajen- 
comyng of Achaz, thou, and that is laft, 
Jasub, thi sone, to the ende of the water 
condute of the ouere pond’, in the weie 
aof the feeld of the fullere. And thou 
shalt sey to hym, See, that thou holde™ 
thi pes; wile thou not dreden, and thin 
herte be not ferd of the two tailes of these 
smokende fyr brondis in to the wrathe 
of the wodnesse, of Rasyn, king of Sirie, 
sand sone of Romelie. For thi that euel 
counseil he wente in ajen thee, Ciria, and 
Effraym, and the sone of Romelye, sei- 
cende, Steye wee vp to Judam, and rere 
wee hym, and pulle wee hym vp to vs; 
and putte wee a king in his myddel, the 
7sone of Thabel. These thingus seith the 
Lord God, This shal not be, and shal not 
sstonde; but the hed’ of Sirie Damasch, 
and the hed of Damasch Rasyn ; and 3it 
sixti and fyue 3er, and Effraym shal cese 
9to ben a puple; and the hed of Effraym 
Samarie, and the hed of Samarie, the 
sone of Romelie. If 3ee shul not leeuen, 
19 3ee shul not abide stylle. And the Lord 
li leide to to speke to Achaz, seyende, Aske 
to thee a tokne fro the Lord thi God, in 
to the depthe of helle, or in to hei3tet 
1zaboue. And Achaz seide, I shal not aske, 
izand I shal not tempte the Lord. And 
he seyde, Hereth thanne, 3ee the hous of 
Dauid; whether litil to 3ou is to ben 
greuous to men, for 3ee ben greuous and 
14to my God? For that he the Lord shal 
3yue to 3ou a tocne. Lo! a mayde shal 
conceyue, and bern a sone; and thou 
1sshalt clepe his name Emanuel. Butter 
and hony he shal ete, that he kunne re- 


tyme of Josue, in x. c°. of Josue. Lire here. c. 


trour, and nolde that ony thing were schewed to the glorie of God. Lire here. c. 


ISAIAH. 


239 


seiden, Sirie hath restid* on Effraym, and 
the herte of hym and of his puple was 
mouyd togidere, as the trees of wodis ben 
mouyd of the face of the wynd. And thes 
Lord seide to Isaie, Go thou out, and Ja- 
sub, thi sone, which is left, in to the meet- 
yng of Achas, at the laste ende of the 
water cundijt of the hijere cisterne, in the 
weie of the feeld of the fullere. And thou4 
schalt seie to hym, Se thou, that thou be - 
stillef; nyle thou drede, and thin herte 
be not aferd of* twei tailis of these 
brondis smokynge in the wraththe of 
woodnesse, of Rasyn, kynge of Sirie, and 
of the sone of Romelye. For Sirie, ands 
Effraym, and the sone of Romelie, han 
bigunne yuel councel a3ens thee, and seien, 
Stie we! to Juda, and reise we hym, andé 
drawe we hym out to vs; and sette we a 
kyng in the myddis therof, the sone of 
Tabeel{. The Lord God seith these7 
thingis, This schal not be, and it schal 
not stonde;: but Damask schal be thes 
heed of Sirie, and Rasyn ‘schal be™ the 
heed of Damask; and 3it sixti 3eer and 
fiue, and Effraym schal faile to be a puple; 
and Samarie shal fuile to be the heed of9 
Effraym, and the sone of Romelie ‘schal 
Jaile® to be heed of Samarie. Forsothe 
if 3e schulen not bileue, 3e schulen not 
dwelle. And the Lord addide to speke to 10 
Achas, and seide, Axe thou to thee a signe! 
of thi Lord God, in to the depthe of helle, 
ethir in to hei3the aboue. And Achas 12 
seide, Y schal not axe, and Y schal not 
tempte§ the Lord. And Ysaie seide, Ther- 1s 
for® the hous of Dauid, here 3e; whether 
it is litil to jou to? be diseseful to men||, 
for 3e ben diseseful also to my God? Fors 
this thing the Lord hym silf schal 3yue a 
signe to 30u. Lo! a virgyn schal conseyue, 
and schal bere a sone; and his name schal 


* Sirte hath 
reisid, etc., that 
is, the king of 
Sirie and the 
king of Israel 
ben confederid, 
to come togidere 
ajenus the 
rewme of Juda. 
Lire here. c. 

+ that thou he 
stille; that is, 
that thou be in 
good pees and 
reste. tayliss 
that is, oostis 
snynge kyngis. 
smokinge; he 
seith this, for 
the glorie of 
these kingis 
schulde be 
quenchid, as 
he tellith in 
this capitle. 
Lire here. c. 

t of Tabeel; 
that is, of Ro- 
melie, which 

is clepid here 
Tabeel,as Raby 
Salomon seith. 
These Ixy. 3eer 
higannen in the 
secunde 3eer 
bifor the erthe- 
mouyng, 


whanne kyng 
Osias wolde 


offre encense, 
in which tyme 
Amos bigan to 
profesie, for 

in the sixte 3eer 
of kyng Ese- 
chie, Samarie 
was takun, in 
xviij. c% of 
il. book of 
Kyngis. schulen 
not dwelle; in 
truthe. Ysaye 
seide this, for he 
knew that A- 
chas, the worste 
idolatour, wolde 
not bileue to 
hise wordis. 

@ signe; of thi 
delyueraunce, 
and of thi pu- 
ple. of thi Lord 
God; and not 
of idols, whicle 
thon worschip- 
ist. in to the 
depthe of helle; 
that is, axe a 
signe to thee, 
bi the reising 
of sum deed 
man. in to he. 
uene; as it was 
doon bi the 
stonding of the 
sunne, in the 


§ not tempte; this was a feyned accusacioun, to coloure his yuel, for he was the worste idola- 
|| diseseful to men; that is, to profetis, whiche thei diseseden 


ofte, in scornynge and turmentinge hem, and sum tyme in sleynge hem. disesefut also to my God; in forsakinge a signe profrid of him, lest his name 
be glorified. for this thyng; that is, to the declaring of his name principaly. « signe; of 3oure delyuerannee. @ virgyn; that is, Seynt Marie, which 
conseyuede, and childide, and dwellith euere a virgyn. Emanuel; that is, God with vs, for whi Crist is bothe God and man. eée botere and hony; 


q fishpond & pr. m. 


k of the 1. m Om, 1. 


to CEPFHIKNPSVX. 


1 we upt. 


t holde not £ pr. m. 


n Om. 1. 


8 heued £ ef K passim. +¢ the hei3t x. 


© Thou therfor a pr.m.c prom, EFU.  P for 


240 


16 preuen euel, and chesen good. For er 
the child kunne repreuen euel, and chesen 
good, the lond shal be forsaken, the 
whiche thou hast abhominacioun of, fro 

i7the face of ther two kingus. The Lord 
shal bringe to vp on thee, and vp on thi 
puple, and vp on the hous of thi fader, 
dazes that camen not fro the daes of the 
seueryng of Effraym fro Juda, with the 

is king of Assiries. And it shal be, in that 
day the Lord shal whistle to the fle3e, 
that is in the" vtmostes’ of the flodus of 
Egipt; and to the bee, that is in the lond 
wof Assur; and thei alle shuln come, and 
resten in the stremes of valeys, and caues 
of stones, and in alle busshi” places, and 
20in alle holis. In* that dai the Lord shal 
shauen in a sharp rasour in hem, that 
be3unde the flood ben, in the king of 
Assiries, hed, and the heres of feet, and 
21eche berd. And it shal be, in that day 
aman shal nurshen a cow of oxen, and 

22 two shep, and for plente of myle he shal 
eten butter; butter and hony shal ‘ete 
eche man’, that shal be laft in the myd- 

23del of the lond. And it shal be, in that 
day eche place wher shul be a thousend 
vynes for a thousend syluer penys, and 
in to thornes and in to breres they shul 

2ibe, with arwes and bowe thei shul go 
in thider; forsothe breres and thornes 

2sshul be in al the lond. And alle hilles 
that in a wode bil shul be purgid, ‘or 
kytt off?, ther shal not come thider ferd 
of thornes and® of breres ; and it shal be 
in to oxe® leswe, and in® treding of feld 
beste. 


CAP. VIII. 
1 And the Lord seide to me, Tac to 


ISAIAH. 


VU. 16—VHUl. 1. 


He schal ete botere 15 this is seid to 


be clepid Emanuel. t i 
signefie his very 
manhed, which 


and hony, that he kunne repreue yuel, 
Pa is nurchid bi 
and cheese good. For whi bifore that the 16 siche thingia, 
: most in child- 
child kunne repreue yuel, and chese good, 23" that he 
the lond, which thou wlatist, schal be for- ae aa 
. ry 3 sake te 
sakun of the face of her tweil kyngis. “al oe sig- 
neheth not 
The Lord schal brynge on thee, and on 17 cause, but su- 
; : . z, for fro hi 
thi puple, and on the hous of thi fadir, 3ifnca and 
daies that camen not fro the daies of de- ssoevayne ™ 
partyng of Effraym fro Juda, with the woke 
yes 2 #4 adde ie tui- 
kyne of Assiriens*. And it schal be, in 18 nesse of man- 
o > 


: ; , k : 

that dai the Lord schal hisse to a flie,  % repreue yudl, 
i is i 8 and to chese 
which is in the laste parte of the floodis joca and for 
of Egipt; and to a bee, which is in the he hadde this 
kunnyng of 


lond of Assur; and ‘alle so" schulen come, 19 man fro the 


ss . ts firste tyme of 
and schulen reste in the strondis of valeis, _ his conseyuyng 
‘ = A in his modri 
and in caues’ of stoonis, and in alle places Wombe, and 
A : p ° not hifore, it 
of buyschis, and in alle hoolis. And in 20 onan sitor that 
that dai the Lord schal schauef with a pi 
i 2 . Lire here.c. 
scharp rasour in these men, that ben bi-  * Ayng of As 
6 . bo siriens; for Teg- 
3endis the flood, int the kyng of Assiriens, lath Fora; 
kyng of Assi- 


the heed, and” heeris’ of the feet, and al” jyens, wastide 
the beerd. And it schal be, in that day 21 Sig lond of 
: : chas, whanne 
a man schal nurische a cow of oxis, and no man ajen- 
; stood. schal 
twei scheep, and for the plentee of mylk 22 hisse; that is, 
: enspire wille to 
he schal ete botere; for whi ech man that coke eas 
schal be left in the myddis of the lond, owes 
> > 
schal ete boter and hony. And it schal 23 the puple of 
i : Libie, that cam 
be, in that dai ech place where a thousand _ with greet uu 
° peny. to @ bes 
vyneris schulen be worth a thousynde time fay thee 
platis of siluer, and schulen be in to Lay Co 
thornes and breeris, men schulen entre 24 '4e,and pur- 
thidur with bouwis and arowis; for whi  ciouns in cum- 
a é pas. Lire here. 
breris and thornes schulen be in al the . 
oone schal schaue, 
lond. And alle hillis that schulen be2s an cae ; 
a 4 PAS 3 whanne Sena- 
purgid with a sarpe*, the drede of thornes Geri schal 
and of breris schal not come thidir; and pe pee 
it schal be in to lesewe of oxen’, and in distrie it, the 
‘ Lord schal sle 
to treding of scheep. this kyng and 
his oost. the 
heed; that is. 
CAP. VIII. the king, that 
; was slayn of 
And the Lord seide to me, Take to thee 1 bise sones, in 
hise owne lond. 
* - the heeris o, 
feet; that is, footmen of his oost. al the beerd; that is, alle horsemen, for the anngel of God killide an hundrid thousynde and ifij. score and v. ae 
ae Spee ni3t, rues ee eds ce ¢ cow of oxis; that is, a cow aloone dwellinge to him, of a greet droue of neet. ech man; 
lat 1S, 3 4 lyuynge bi mannus liyf, and not beestli liyf. bolere and hony; that is, abund . eel 4 " 
wielde beestis and serpentis hid there, ee defaute of Bee ees Cy onys that is, sbundiunce 96 coeds uh a of 


. 


a. \ oe ; 
Om. Gu. vttermostis 4GHK. x And in K sec. m. 


Ww the busshi 4zeGHK. 
2 Om. cE pr,m. ane Eg prem. 


y eche man ete E sec. m. 
Db oxen 4GHK. Cin to 4. 


4two1. ‘alle thocn sec. m. Fs. alleku. alsom. &thecauest. tofusec.m. ofcer. Y the 


heeri w any : : i 
moe N. Wofale. Xa breer hook 1 marg. sarpe, id est,a meod hook K sec. m. wodebil, ether a sarpe vu. 
oxe CFGHKMPQRSsUVX. oxis E. 7 the treding FK. the dredynge s. 


VIII. 2—14. 


thee a gret boc, and writ in it with the 
poyntel of a man, Swiftli spoiles tac 
2awey, soone refe. And J toc to me feith- 
ful witnesses, Vrie, the prest, and Sacha- 
3rie, the sone of Barachie. And I wente 
to a prophetesse; and she conceyuede, 
and bar a sone. And the Lord seide to 
me, Clep his name Haste thon spoiles to4 
4tac awey, heeje thou to refen. For er the 
child kunne® clepe his fader and his mo- 
der, shal be taken awei the strengthe of 
Damasch, and the spoiles of Samarie, bi- 
sfor the king of Assiries. And the Lord 
sleide to to speke to me, seiende, For thi 
that this puple hath cast awey the watris 
of Siloe, that gon with cilence, and more 
toc to Rasyne, and® the sone of Romelie, 
7for that lo! the Lord shal bringe to vp 
on hem watres of the flod stronge and 
manye, the king of Assiries, and al the 
glorie of him; and he shal ste3en vp 
vp on alle his ryueres, and flowen vp 
zon alle his stremes’. And he shal gon 
thur3 Judam flowende, and passende ‘vn 
to® the necke he shal come; and ther 
shal be the spredyng out of his -wenges, 
fulfillende the breede of thi lond, O! 
9Emanuel. Beth gedered, 3ee puples, and 
beth bounde togidere; and hereth!, alle 
jee londis aferr. Beth coumfortid, and be 
3ee onercomen*; ‘girdeth 3ou!, and beth™ 
190 ouercomen” ; goth in counseil, and it shal 
be scatered ; speketh a wrd, and it shal 
1not be do, for with vs is God. These 
thingus forsothe seith the Lord to me, as 
in a strong hond he ta3te me, lest I shulde 
go in to the weie of this puple, seiende, 
12Seith® not, Coniuracioun, alle thingis for- 
sothe that? speketh this puple is coniura- 
cioun; and his drede ne drede 3ee, ne 
i3takith ferd. The Lord of hostes him 
halewith, and he joure inward drede, and 
he’ 3oure outward drede ; and he shal be 
i4to 30u in to halewing; in to a ston for- 
sothe of offencioun, and in to a ston of 
selaunder, to the two houses of Irael ; 


and in to a grene, and in to falling, to 
4 Om. ce pr.m. © shal kunne a. 
bhis ¢ pr.m. ‘here acux. 
3e AKE sec.m™, G Se, m. 
Pit Kk. 40m. 4. 
VOL. HI. 


ISAIAH. 


ee Om. c pr. m. 

k ouercomen, or bounden togidere G see. m. 

2 bounde togidere & pr.m. ouercomen, or fo gidir gird G sec. m. 
Pp 2 8 8 


241 


a greet book, and write ther ynne with 
the poyntil of man*, Swiftli drawe thon 


* with the 


awei spuylis, take thou prey soone. And2 fer canny : 
Y 3af to me faithful witnessis, Vrie, the ae a 
prest, and Sacarie, the sone of Barachie. are 
And Y nei3ede to the profetesse ; and sche3 acne 
conseyuede, and childide a sone. And the — This was not 
Lord seide to me, Clepe thou his name ca eee 
Haste thou to drawe awei spuylist, haaste "é*") Dether 


thou for to take prey. For whi bifor that 4 
the child kan clepe his fadir and his .mo- 
dir, the strengthe of Damask schal be doon 
awei, and the spuylis of Samarie, bifor 
the kyng of Assiriens. And the Lords 
addide to speke 3it to me, and he seide, 
For that thing that this puple hath casteé 
awei the watris of Siloe, that goen with 
silence, and hath take more Rasyn, and 
the sone of Romelie, for this thing lo!7 
the Lord schal brynge on hem the stronge 
and many watris of the flood, the king of 
Assiriens, and al his glorie; and he schal 
sti3e on alle the stremes therof, and he 
schal flowe on alle the ryueris therof. 
And he schal go flowynge bi Juda, and hes 
schal passe til to the necke, and schal 
come; and the spredyng forth of hise 
wyngis schal be, and schal fille the breede 
of thi lond, thou Emanuel. Puplis, be 3e9 
gaderid togidere, and be 3e ouercomun ; 
and alle londis afer, here 3e. Be 3e coum- 
fortid, and be 3e ouercomun; gird 3e 
jou, and be 3e ouercomun ; take 3e coun-10 
ce], and it schal be destried; speke je a 
word, and it schal not be doon, for God is 
with vs. For whi the Lord seith these 11 
thingis to me, as he taujte me in a stronge 
hond, that Y schulde not go in to the weie 
of this puple, and seide, Seie 3e not, Jt zs 12 
sweryng togidere, for whi alle thingis 
which this puple spekith is sweryng togi- 
dere; and drede 3e not the ferdfulnesse 
therof, nether be 3e aferd. Halowe 3e the13 
Lord hym silf of oostis; and he schal be 
3oure inward drede, and he schal be 3oure 
ferdfulnesse, and he schal be to 30u in to 
halewyng. Forsothe he schal be in to ais 
f roeches c pr.m. rochis E pr.m. & tok pr.m. 


I girde 3e G sec.m. ™ be 
© Sey 4Guk. 


Ti 


present tyme ; 
but it was 
goostly, and of 
tyme to com- 
ynge longe 
aftir. This Vrie 
profesiede bifor 
the tyme of 
Jeremye, in 
xxvi. c’. of 
Jerem., ajenus 
Jerusalem and 
Judee. Sacarie 
is the xi. among 
xij. profetis. to 
the profetesse; 
that is, the Vir- 
gyn Marie. his 
name; that is, 
the name of 
the child borun. 
Lire here. ¢. 

+ Iaaste thou 
to drawe awey 
spuytis, etc.3 
this acordith to 
Crist rysinge 
agen, that 
spuylide helle 
in that tyme. 
bifor that the 
child kan clepe, 
ete.; bi mannus 
kunnyng, that 
is, bifor that he 
be maad man. 
Lire here. . 


24.2 ISAIAH. VIII. 15—IX. 3. 


ismen dwellende Jerusalem. And manye 
of hem shul offenden, and fallen, and 
ben to-brosid, and grened, and ben taken. 
16 Bind the witnessing, marke the lawe in 
izmy disciples. I shal abide the Lord, that 
hidde his face fro the hous of Jacob, and 
181 shal sechen hym. Lo! I* and my chil- 
der, whom 3af to me the Lord in to tocne, 
and in to wunder to Irael, fro the Lord 
of ostes that dwelleth in the hil of Sion. 
io And whan thei shul sey to 30u, Secheth 
of deuel cleperes, and of’ deuynoures, that 
sounen strongli in their chauntingus, whe- 
thir not a puple of his God shal seche 
a viseoun for the quyke and the deade? 
20 To the lawe more and to thi witnessing, 
that if thei ‘s¢éhul not sei’ aftir this" 
wrd, shal” not be to them morutid 1i3t. 
21And he shal passe thur3 it, and it shal 
falle, and hungre. ‘And when it shal 
hongre”, it shal wrathen, and cursen to 
his kyng and to his God, and it shal be- 
2zholden vp. And to the lond it shal loken, 
and lo! tribulacioun, and dercnesses, ‘and 
vnbyndyng*, and anguysh, and derk myst 
pursuende; and it shal not moun flee 
awei fro his anguysh. 


CAP. IX. 


i The firste tyme is aleggid, ‘or maad 
fi3tY, the lond of Zabulon and the Jond of 
Neptalym ; and the laste tyme agreggid 
is the weie of the se bejunde Jordan of 

2Galilee of Jentiles. The puple that wente 
in derknesses sa3 a gret li3t; to the men 
dwellende in the regioun of the shadewe 

3 of deth, li3t sprungen is to them. Thou 
hast multeplyed the fole of kinde, not 
magnefiedist gladnesse; thei shul glade 
bifor thee, as thei that gladen in rip, as 


r Om. ack, 8 Om. 4. t sei not c prim. 
shal c pr. m. this shal 2 pr.m. ther shal z sec. m, 
cloun E prem. Y Om. ¢ et E prim. 


stoon of hirtyng, and in to a stoon of 
sclaundre, to tweyne housis of Israel; in 
to a snare, and in to fallyng, to hein that 
dwellen in Jerusalem. And ful many of 1s 
hem schulen offende, and schulen falle, 
and thei schulen be al to-brokun, and thei 
schulen be boundun, and schulen be takun. 
Bynde thou witnessyng, mark thou thei¢ 
lawe in my disciplis. Y schal abide the17 
Lord, that hath hid his face fro the hous 
of Jacob, and Y schal abide hym. Lo!is 
Y and my children, whiche the Lord 3af 
to me in to a signe, and greet wondur to 
Israel, of the Lord of oostis that dwellith 
in the hil of Sion. And whanne thei seien i9 
to sou, Axe 3e of coniureris, and of false 
dyuynouris, that gnasten in her enchaunt- 
yngis, whether the puple schal not axe of 
her God a reuelacioun for quyke men and 
deed ? Jt is to go to the lawe more* and 20 
to the witnessyng, that if thei seien not 
after this word, morewtide 1i3t schal not 
be to hem. And it schal passe bi that, 2: 
and it scha] falle doun, and it schal hun- 
gre. And whanne it schal hungre, it schal 
be wrooth; and schal curse his kyng and 
his God, and it schal biholde vpward. And 22 
it schal loke to the erthe, and lo! tribu- 
lacioun, and derknessis, and vnbyndyng, 
ether discoumfort, and angwisch, and 
myist pursuynge ; and it schal not mow 
fle awei fro his angwisch. 


CAP. IX. 


In the firste tyme the lond of Zabulon1 
and the lond of Neptalym was releessid>; 
and at the laste the weie of the see bi3ende 
Jordan of Galile of hethene men was maad 
heuy. The puple that 3ede in derknessis2 
si3 a greet 1i3t; whanne men dwelliden in 
the cuntre of schadewe of deth, li3t roos 
vp to hem. Thou multipliedist folk, thous 
magnefiedist not gladnesse; thei schulen be 
glad bifore thee, as thei that ben glad in 
heruest, as ouercomeris maken ful out ioie, 


seyn not £ pr. m. u thi c pr.m. E pr. m. ¥ ther 
w Om. c. x desolacioun c pr.m. and desola- 


* more rather 1. > alizted [liztid xs sec. m.vx], ether releessid CEGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


IX. 4—16. 


ful out io3en ouercomeres, the prey taken, 
4 whan thei deuyden spoiles. The 30c for- 
sothe of his charge, and the 3erde? of 
his* shulder, and the kingus power of his 
‘wrong asker? thou ouercame, as in the 
sdai of Madian. For eche violent reuyng 
with noise, and clothing mengd with blod 
shal be* in to brennyng, and mete of fyr. 
6A litil child forsothe is born to vs, and 
a sone is 30ue" to vs, and mad is prince- 
hed vp on his shulder; and his uame shal 
be clepid Merueilous, Counseiler, God, 
Strong, Fadir of the world to come, Prince 
7of pes. His empire shal be multeplied, 
and of pes ther shal not ben ende ; vp on 
the see of Dauid, and vpon his regne he 
shal sitte, that he conferme it, and 
strengthe in dom ard ri3twyssnesse, fro 
now and unto withoute ende. The 
huge looue of the Lord of ostes shal don 
sthis. A wrd the Lord sente in to Jacob, 
gand it fel in® Irael. And al the puple 
of Effraym shal wite, and the men dwell- 
ende Samarie, in pride and gretuesse ‘of 
10 herte! seiende, Sclattes fellen, but with 
square stones wee shul bilden vp; sico- 
more’ trees thei hewen doun, but ceder 
trees wee shul newen, ‘or chaungen». 
11 And the Lord shal reren enemys Rasyn 
vpon hym, and his enemys in to noise he 
12shal turne, Cirie fro the est, and Filisteyn 
fro the west; and thei shul deuoure 
Irael with al the mouth. In alle thes 
thingus is not turned awei the wodnesse 
of hym, but jit his hond stra3t outi; 
i3and the puple is not turned a3een to the 
smytende hym, and the Lord of ostes thei 
14inwardlyche so3ten not. And the Lord 
shal scatere fro Irae] the hed and the 
tail, the inbowende and the shrewende, in 
150 day. The longe lynende and the wrshepe- 
full, he is the hed, and the profete tech- 
isende lesyng, he is the tail. And thei shul 
be, that maken blisful this puple, bigil- 
ende; and that ben mad blisful, throwe 


ISAIAH. 


243 - 


whanne thei han take a prey, whanne thei 
departen the® spuylis. For thou hast ouer-4 
come the 30k of his birthun, and the 3erde 
of his schuldre, and the ceptre of his 
wrongful axere, as in the day of Madian. 
For whi al violent raueyn with noise, ands 
a cloth meddlid with blood schal be in to 
brennyng, and ‘sehal be the® mete of fier. 
Forsothe a litil child is borim to vs, andé 
a sone is 30uun to vs, and prinsehod is 
maad on his schuldre; and his name schal 
be clepid Wondurful, A counselour, God, 
Strong, Af fadir of the world to comynge, 
A prince of pees. His empire schal be7 
multiplied, and noon ende schal be of hes 
pees; he schal sitte on the seete of Dauid, 
and on the rewme of hym, that he con- 
ferme it, and make stronge in doom and 
ri3tfulnesse, fro hennus forth and til in to 
with outen ende. The feruent loue of the 
Lord of oostis schal make this. The Lords 
sente a word in to Jacob, and it felle in 
Israel. And al the puple of Effraym schal9 
wite, and thei that dwellen in Samarie, 
seiynge in the pride and greetnesse of 
herte, Tijl stoonys fellen doun, but we1o 
schulen bilde with square stoonys; thei 
han kit doun sicomoris, but we schulen 
chaunge cedris. And the Lord schal reise 11 
the enemyes of Rasyn on hym, and he 
schal turne the enemyes of hym in to 
noyse; God schal make Sirie to come fro12 
the eest, and Filisteis fro the west; and 
with al the mouth thei schulen deuoure 
Israel. In alle these thingis the stronge 
veniaunce of the Lord is not turned avwei, 
but 3it his hond és stretchid forth; and the 13 
puple is not turned ajen to the Lord 
smytynge it, and thei sou3ten not the 
Lord of oostis. And the Lord schal leese® 14 
fro Israel the heed and the tail, crokynge 
and bischrewynge, ether refreynynge, in 
o dai. An elde man and onourable, he is 15 
the heed, and a profete techynge a" lees- 
yng, he is the tail. And thei that blessen 16 


% kingis jerde gE pr. m. ® Om, £ prem. b pletere c et & pr.m. c¢ Om. £ pr.m. d 3yuen E. 
€ in to AG sec.m. H. f Om. c. & wilde mulberie c e¢ £ pr. m. h Om. c et E pr. m. i Om. c 
prom. 
¢Om.x. 4Om.1 ¢Om.e. f Om. F sec.m.n. & fordor bOm. 1. 


112 


944 ISAIAH. IX. 17-—X. 5. 


i7doun. For that vp on the 3unge* waxen 
men of hym the Lord shal not deliten, 
and of his faderles childer and widewis 
he shal not han mercy; for eche! ipocrite 
is™ and a shrewe, and eche mouth spac 
folie. In alle thes thingus is not turned 
awei his wodnesse, but 3it his hond 
isstra3t out; and the puple is not turned 
ajeen to the smytende hym. Tend vp 
is forsothe as fyr vnpitousnesse; thoo 
breres and the thorne it shal deuoure, 
and it shal be brend vp in the thickenes 
of the wilde wode, and it shal be al to- 
19 wrappid in the pride of the smoke. In 
the wrathe of the Lord of ostes al dis- 
turbid shal be the lond, and the puple 
shal be as the mete of fyr; a man to 
20 his brother shal not spare. And he shal 
bowe doun to the ri3t, and hungren, and 
he shal ete at the lift, and not be fulfild ; 
eche the flesh of his arm shal deuoure. 
Manasses Effraym, and Effraym Ma- 
nasses, and togidere thei ajen Judam. 
21In alle these thyngus is not turned awei 
his wodnesse, but 3it his hond stra3t out. 


CAP. X. 


1 Wo that maken shreude lawes, and 
2wrytende vnri3twisnesse writen, that thei 
oppresseden" in dom pore men, and vio- 
lence diden® to the cause of meke°® men 
of my puple; that widewes were the prei 
of hem, and faderles childer thei de- 
3strozeden?, What shul 3ee do in the day 
off visiting, and of wrecchidnesse fro a 
ferr comende? To whos helpe shul jee 
flee? and wher shul 3ee lefe 3oure glorie, 
4'lest 3ee1 bowid vnder bond, and with 
slayn men falleth"? Vp on alle these 
thingus is not turned awei his wodnesse, 
s but 3it his hond stra3t out. Wo to Assur, 


his puple, schulen be disseyueris, and thei 
that ben blessid, schulen be cast doun. 
For this thing the Lord schal not be glad 17 
on the 3onge men therof, and he schal not 
haue merci on the fadirles children and 
widewis therof; for ech man is an ypo- 
crite and weiward, and ech mouth spak 
foli. In alle these thingis the stronge 
veniaunce of hym is not turned awei, but 
3it his hond is stretchid forth; and theis 
puple is not turned ajen to the Lord 
smytynge it. For whi wickidnesse is 
kyndlid as fier; it schal deuoure the 
breris and thornes, and it schal be kyn- 
dlid in the thickenesse of the forest, and 
it schal be wlappid togidere in the pride 
of smoke. In the wraththe of the Lord 19 
of oostis the lond schal be disturblid, and 
the puple schal be as the mete of fier; 
aman schal not spare his brothir. And 20 
he schal boowe to the ri3t half, and he 
schal hungre, and he schal ete at the left 
half, and he schal not be fillid; ech man 
schal deuoure the fleisch of his arm. Ma- 
nasses schal deuoure Effraym, and Ef- 
fraym ‘schal deuoure! Manasses, and thei 
togidere a3ens Juda. In alle these thingis a: 
the strong veniaunce of hym is not turned 
awei, but 3it his hoond 2s stretchid forth. 


CAPSX. 


Wo to them that maken wickid lawis, ; 
and thei writynge han wryte vnri3tful- 
nesse, for tooppresse pore men in doom,2 
and to do violence to the cause of meke 
men of my puple; that widewis schulen 
be the prey of them, and that thei schulden 
rauysche fadirles children. What schulens 
3e do in the dai of visitacioun, and of 
wretchidnesse comynge fro fer? To whos 
help schulen 3e fle? and where schulen 3e 
leeue 3oure glorie, that 3e be not bowid4 
doun vndur boond, and falle not doun 
with slayn men? On alle these thingis 
his strong veniaunce is not turned awei, 


k Om. aeux. leche is nsec.m. ™Om. 8 sec.m. 9 oppresse c pr.m. oppressen E pr.m. © don c 
el E prim, 0 the meke x pr.m. P destro3e ce pr.m. ne be jee cet E pr.m. ¥* fallen a. 


i Om, 1. 


xX. 6—16. 


the 3erde of my wodnesse, and a staf he 
is; in the hond of hem, myn indignacioun. 
6To a fole gilesum I shal senden hym, 
and a3en the puple of my wodnesse I 
shal bidde to hym; that he take awei 
spoiles, and deuyde prey, and poote it in 
7to tredyng, as the cley of stretes. He 
forsothe uot so shal demen, and his herte 
not so shal eymen, but to ‘to-treden® shal 
ben his herte, and to sleyng of fole not 
3 fewe. Forsothe he shal sey, Whether 
not my princes togidere kingist ben ? 
Whethir not as Karchamys, so Chalan- 
no; and as Arfath, so Emath? whethir 
1onot as Damasch, so Samarie? What 
maner myn hond fond the reumes of 
mawmet, so aud" the symulacris of hem 
uof Jerusalem and of Samarie. Whethir 
not as I dide to Samarie, and his mau- 
metes, so I shal do to Jerusalem, and his 
izsymulacris? And it‘shal be, whan the 
Lord shall fulfelle alle’ his werkis in the 
mount of Sion and in Jerusalem, I shal 
visite vp onthe fruyt of * the gret do- 
ende herte of the king of Assur, and vp 
on the glorie of the heizte* of his e3en. 
is Forsothe he seide, In the strengthe of 
myn hond I dide, and in my wisdam I 
vnderstod; and I toc awei the termes of 
puples’, and the princes of them I rob- 
bede, and I dro3 awey as my3ti the sit- 
14tende men in hee3. And myn hond fond 
as a nest the strengthe of puples, and as 
ben gedered eren’ that ben laft, so al the 
lond I gederede; and ther was not that 
mouede a federe, and openede mouth, and 
1s berkyd*. Whethir shal glorien the ax 
a3en hym that hewith in it ? or shai ben 
enhauncid the sawe a3en hym of whom 
it is drawen? what maner wise if be 
rered a 3erde a3en the rerende it, and be 
hauncyd? a staf, that forsothe is a tree. 
16 For that shal sende the lordshepere, Lord 
of ostes, in his fatte thyngus thynnesse, 
and vnder. his glorie ‘brend shal* brenne 


8treden acux. + princis E pr. v. 


peplis x. % eyren K. 
shal £ pr. m. 


*‘intoaprm 10m Nn. 


ISAIAH. 


2 Om, E pr. m. 
8 grucchide c cf E pr.m. 


Q45 © 


but 3it his hond 7s stretchid forth. Wo tos 
Assur, he is the 3erde and staf of my 
strong veniaunce; myn indignacioun is 
in* the hond of them. Y schal send hyme 
to a fals folk, and Y schal comaunde to! 
hym a3ens the puple of my strong ven- 
iaunce; that he take awei the spuylis, and 
departe prey, and that he sette that puple 
in to defouling, as the fen of stretis. For-7 
sothe he schal not deine so, and his herte 
schal not gesse so, but his herte schal be 
for to al to-breke, and to the sleynge of 
many folkis. For he schal seie, Whether? 
my princes ben not kyngis to gidere? 
Whether not as Carcamys, so Calanno; 
and as Arphat,so Emath? whether not as 
Damask, so Samarie? As myn hond foond 10 
the rewmes of idol, so and the™ symyla- 
cris of hem of Jerusalem and of Samarie. 
Whether not as Y dide to Samarie, andi 
to the idols therof, so Y schal do to Jeru- 
salem, and to the simylacris therof? And 12 
it schal be, whanne the Lord hath fillid 
alle hise werkis in the hil of Syon and in 
Jerusalem, Y schal visite on the fruit of 
the greet doynge herte of the kyng of 
Assur, and on the glorie of the hij3nesse 
of hise ijen. For he seide, Y haue do inis 
the strengthe of myn honde, and Y haue 
understonde in my wisdom; and Y haue 
take awei the endis of peplis, and Y haue 
robbid the princes of them, and Y as a 
my3ti man have drawun doun them that 
saten an hi3. And myn hond foond thei 
strengthe of puplis as a nest, and as eirun 
ben gaderid togidere that ben forsakun, so 


‘Y gaderid togidere al erthe; and noon was" 


that mouyde a fethere, and openyde the 
mouth, and grutchide. Whether an axjs 
schal haue glorie ajens hym that kittith 
with it? ether a sawe schal be enhaunsid 
aj3ens hym of whom it is drawun? as if 
a 3erde is reisid a3ens hym that reisith it, 
and a staf is enhaunsid, which sotheli is a 
tre. For this thing the lordli gouernour, 16 


xherte c pr.m. — ¥ the 
¢ the brend vp thingus - 


vOm.c. YW On. c. 
b enhaunsid aeuKx. 


mOnm.1. © ther was I. 


246 


iz7as brennyng of fyr. And ther shal be 
the list of Irael in fyr, and his hoeli in 
flaume; and shal be brend ont and de- 
uoured his thorn and breres in o day. 
is And the glorie of his wilde wode and of 
his Carmel, fro® the soule vn to the flesh 
he shall be wastid; and he shal be for 
19ferd ferr fleende. And the releef of the 
wode of the wilde wode for fewenesse 
shul be noumbred, and a child shal write 
20them. And it shal be in that dai, shal 
not ley to the remnaunt of Irael, and 
thesef that shul flee fro the hous of Ja- 
cob, to leuen vp on hym that smytith? 
hem; but it shal leue vp on the Lord, 
21hoeli of Irael, in treuthe. The rem- 
naunt shul be’ conuertid, the remnaunt 
forsothe of Jacob, to the stronge Lord. 
22If forsothe shul ben thi puple, Ivael, as 
the" grauel of the se, the remnaunt shul 
be conuertyd of it; ending abreggid shal 
23 flowe ri3twisnesse. Ending forsothe and 
abreggyng the Lord God of ostes shal 
2imake in the myddel of al erthe. For 
that these thingus seith the Lord God of 
ostes, Wile thou not drede, my puple, 
dwellere of Sion, of Assur, in a 3erde 
forsothe he shal smyte thee, and his staf 
he shal reren vp on thee in the weie of 
25Egipt. 3it forsothe a litil while, and a 
litil, and shal be ful endid myn indigna- 
cioun and myn wodnesse vp on the hi- 
26dous gilte! of hem. And the Lord of 
ostes shal reren ‘yp onk it a scourge aftir 
the veniaunce of Madyan! in the ston of 
Oreb, and his 3erde vp on the se; and he 
27shal reren it the! weie of Egipt. And it 
shal be in that dai, shal be don awey his 
berthene fro thi™ shulder, and his 30e fro 
thi necke; and the 3oc shal waxen al 
2sroten fro the face of oile. It shal come 
in Ayot, it shal passe in Magron, anent” 
Magmas it shal commende his vesseles. 
29 Thei wenten a cours, Gaba oure seete, 
Rama ‘was stonyed°, Gaba of Saul flei3. 


Vand ther 4, ¢ and fro z prem. 


f thei. 
1 Madyanytes c. Uinthe x. ™ ther c. 


° Om. A pr. m. breuning of a sec. m. 


ISAIAH. 


& smot c ef E pr.m, 
" anentus £ ef alii. 


X. 17-——29. 


Lord of oostis, schal sende thinnesse in 
the fatte men of hym, and his glorie kyn- 
dlid vndur schal brenne as ‘the brenning 
of° fier. And the 1i3t of Israel schal be17 
in fier, and the hooli of it in flawme; and 
the thorn of him and brere schal be kynd- 
lid and deuourid in o dai. And the1s 
glorie of his forest and of his Carmele 
schal be wastid, fro the soule ‘til toP 
fleisch ; and he schal be fleynge awei for 
drede. And the relifs of the tree of hisig 
forest schulen be noumbrid for fewnesse, 
and a child schal write hem. And it schal2o 
be in that dai, the remenaunt of Israel, 
and thei that fledden of the house of Jacob, 
schal not adde for to triste on hym that 
smytith hem; but it schal triste on the 
hooli Lord of Israel, in treuthe. The re-21 
lifs, Y seie, the? relifs of Jacob, schulen 
be conuertid to the stronge Lord. For-22 
whi, Israel, if thi puple is as the grauel 
of the see, the relifs schulen be turned 
therof ; an endyng maad schort schal make 
ri3tfulnesse to be plenteuouse. For whi23 
the Lord God of oostis schal make an 
endyng and a breggyng in the myddis of 
al erthe. For this thing the Lord God of24 
oostis seith these thingis, My puple, the 
dwellere of Sion, nyle thou drede of Assur, 
for he schal smite thee in a 3erde, and he 
schal reise his staf on thee in the weie of 
Egipt. Forwhi 3it a litil, and a litil, and 2s 
myn indignacioun and my strong ven- 
iaunce schal be endid on the greet tres- 
pas of hem. And the Lord of oostis schal 26 
reise a scourge on hym bi the veniaunce 
of Madian in the stoon of Oreb, and dz 
his 3erde on the see; and he schal reise 
that 3erde in the wei of Egipt. And it27 
schal be in that dai, his birthun schal be 
takun awei fro thi schuldre, and his 30k 
fro thi necke; and the’ 30k schal wexe 
rotun fro the face of oile. He schal come 28 
in to Aioth, he schal passe in to Magron, 
at Magynas he schal bitake his vessels to 


hOm. x. i giltes c. 


Kk vp H. 
° becam doumb c ef £ pr. m. 


Pyntol @tor thi. 


X. 30——-XI. 8. 


30 Neje with thi vois, thou’ do3ter of Ga- 
lyn; tae heed, Laisa, thou porelet A- 

3inathot. Wente forth Medemena; _ 3ee 

s2dwelleris of Jebyn, taketh coumfort. 3it 
dai is, that in Nobe me stonde; he shal 
shake his hond vpon the mount of the 

33do3ter of Sion, hil of Jerusalem. Lo! 
theP lordshepere, Lord of ostes, shal to- 
breke the litil wyn vessel in ferd, and 
the hee3e men in stature shul ben hewe 

34doun. And the ful hee3e shul be lowed, 
and the thicke thingus of the wilde wode 
shul ben turned vpsodoun with iren; and 
Liban with hee3e thing shall falle. 


CAP. XI. 


1 And ther shal gon out a 3erde fro the 
roote of Jesse, and a flour of his roote 
2shal stez3en vp. And ther shal resten vp 
on hym the Spirit of the Lord, spirit of 
wisdam and of vnderstondyng, spirit of 
couuseil and of strengthe, spirit of kun- 
snyng and of pite; and shal fulfille hym4 
the spirit of drede of the Lord. Not 
aftir the seyng of ejen he shal deme, ne 
after the heering of eres he shal vnder- 
anyme; but he shal deme in ri3twisnesse 
pore men, and vndernymen in equyte, for 
the debonere of the’ erthe. And he shal 
smyte the erthe with the 3erde of his 
mouth, and with the spirit of his mouth® 
she shal sle the vnpitous. And ther shal 
be riz3twisnesse the litil girdil of his 
lendes, and feith the girdil of his reenes. 
6 Ther shal dwelle the wif with the lome, 
and the parde with the kide shal leyn; 
the calf, and the leoun, and the shep to- 
gidere shul dwelle, and a lytil child shal 
7dryue them. The calf and the bere 
shul be fed togidere; ther shul resten 
the whelpus of hem, and a leoun as an 
soxe shal ete chaf. And the faunt, ‘or a 
soukande childe, shal deliten of the tete 
vp on the hole of the eddere, and in the 


P Om. £ prom. hem E prem. 


8 Om. cE pr. m. 


8 Om.1. 


ISAIAH. 


tr Om. AE sec. Mm. GUK, 


t reprene, ether conuicle CRFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


247 - 


kepyng. Thei passiden swiftli, Gabaa is29 
oure seete, Rama was astonyed, Gabaa of 
Saul fled. Thou dou3tir of Gallym, weile3o 
with thi vois; thou Laisa, perseyue, thou 
pore Anatot. Medemena passide; the3i 
dwelleris of Gabyn jfledden; be 3e coum- 
fortid. 3it it is dai, that me stonde inze 
Nobe; he schal dryue his hond on the hil 
of the dou3ter of Syon, on the litil hil of 
Jerusalem. Lo! the lordli gouernour, the 33 
Lord of oostis, schal breke a potel in drede, 
and hi3 men of stature schulen be kit doun. 
And proude men schulen be maade low, 34 
and the thicke thingis of the forest schulen 
be distried bi irun; and the Liban with 
hi3 thingis schal falle doun. 


CAP. XI. 


And a 3erde schal go out of the roote1 
of Jesse, and a flour schal stie of the roote 
of it. And the Spirit of the Lord schale 
reste on hym, the spirit of wisdom and of 
vndurstondyng, the spirit of counsel and 
of strengthe, the spirit of kunnyng and of 
pitee; and the spirit of the’ drede of thes 
Lord schal fille him. He schal deme not 
bi the si3t of izen, nether he schal repreuet 
bi the heryng of eeris; but he schal deine 
in ri3tfulnesse pore men, and he schal re- 
preue in equyte, for the mylde men of 
erthe. And he schal smyte the lond with 
the 3erde of his mouth, and bi" the spirit 
of his lippis he schal sle the wickid man. 
And ri3tfulnesse schal be the girdil of hises 
leendis, and feith schal be the girdyng of 
hise reynes. A wolf schal dwelle with aé 
lombe, and a parde schal reste with a 
kide; a calf, and a lioun, and a scheep 
schulen dwelle togidere, and a litil child 
schal dryue hem. A calf and a beere7 
schulen be lesewid togidere ; the whelpis 
of hem schulen reste, and a lioun as an 
oxe schal ete stre. And a jonge soukyngs 
child fro the tete schal delite on the hole 
of a snake, and he that is wenyd schal 
putte’ his hond in the caue of a cocatrice. 


Slippis azemx. * And ther ar pr.m, GuK. 


wwith 1. VY sende CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


248 ISAIAH. XI. 9—XII. 2. 


caue of the kokatrice that shal be taken 
awei fro sok, ‘or wenyd”, he shal putte 
ghis hond. Thei shuln not nojen, and 
thei shuln not sleyn in al myn hoeli 
monnteyn; for fulfild is the erthe of 
the” kunnyng of the Lord, as the watir 
1oof the se couerende. In that dai the 
roote of Jesse, that stant* in to tocne of 
puples ; hym Jentiles shuln louli pre3en, 
and shal be the sepulcre of hym glorious. 

11 And it shal be in that dai, the Lord the 

“ secunde tyme shal ley to his hond to welde 
the residue of his puple that shal be 
lafte, of the Assiries, and of Egipt, and 
of Fecros, and of Etheope, and of Elan, 
and of Sennar, and of Emath, and of theY 

lzislis of the se. And he shal reren a tocne 
in to naciouns, and gedere togidere the 
ferr floun of Irael; and the to-scatered? 
of Juda he shal gedere fro the foure 
i3coestes of the? erthe. And ther shal be 
taken awey the enuye of Effraym, and 
the enemys of? Juda shul pershe; Ef- 
fraym shal not enuyen Judam, and Juda 
1ashal not fi3te a3jen Effraym. And thei 
shul flee in to the shuldres of Filisteys‘, 
bi the se togidere thei shul robbe the 
sonus of the est; Ydnme and Moab the 
heste of the hond of hem, and the sonus 
150f Amon obeisaunt shul be. And the 
Lord shal make desolat the tunge of the 
se of Egipt, and he shal rere his hond 
vpon the flod in the strengthe of his 
spirit ; and he shal smyte hym in seuene 
ryueres, so that thei passe thur3 hym 
isshod men’. And ther shal be a weye 
to my residue puple that shal be lafte, of 
the Assiries, as was to Irael, in the dai 
that he ste3ede vp from the lond of 
Egipt. 
CAP. XII. 

1 And thou shalt sei in that day, I shal 
knouleche to thee, Lord, for wroth thou 
art to me; turned is thi wodnesse, and 

2thou coumfortedest mee. Loo! God my 
saneour, feithfulli I shal do, and not 


Thei schulen not anoye, and schulen not9 
sle in al myn hooli hil; forwhi the erthe 
is fillid with the’ kunnyng of the Lord, 
as watris of the see hilynge. In that dailo 
the roote of Jesse, that stondith in to the 
signe of puplis ; hethene men schulen* bi- 
seche hym, and his sepulchre schal be 
gloriouse. And it schal be im that day,11 
the Lord schal adde the secounde tyme 
his hond to haue in possessioun the re- 
sidue of his puple that schal be left, of 
Assiriens, and of Egipt, and of Fethros, 
and of Ethiope, and of Elan, and of Sen- 
nar, and of Emath, and of ylis of the see. 
And he schal reise a sygne to naciouns, 12 
and schal gadere togidere the fleeris awei 
of Israel ; and he schal gadere togidere the 
scaterid men of Juda fro foure coostis of 
erthe. And the enuye of Effraym schali3 
be don awei, and the enemyes of Juda 
schulen perische; Effraym schal not haue 
enuye to Juda, and Juda schal not fizte 
a3ens Effraym. And thei schulen flie inia 
to the schuldris of Filisteis bi the see, thei 
schulen take prey togidere of the sones of 
the eest; Ydume and Moab schulen be 
the comaundement of the hond of hem, 
and the sones of Amon schulen be obe- 
dient. And the Lord schal make desolat 1s 
the tunge of the see of Egipt, and he schal 
reise his hond on the flood in the strengthe 
of his spirit; and he schal smyte, ethir 
departe, it in seuene ryueris, so that schood 
men passe bi it. And a weie schal be to16 
my residue puple that schal be left, of 
Assiriens, as it was to Israel, in the dai 
in which it stiede fro the lond of Egipt. 


CAP. XII. 

And thou schalt seie in that dai, Lord,1 
Y schal knouleche to thee, for thou were 
wrooth to me; thi strong venieaunce is 
turned, and thou hast coumfortid me. Lo!2 
God is my sauyour, Y schal do feithfuli, 


4 Y Om. c et E prom. or mwenyng C sec. m. wOm. E sec. m. K. x stondith 4K. y Om, GHK. 
scatered c seem. ®Om. acu. Om. ac. ¢ Philisteym ancux. Om. c et £ prom. 


w Om. 1. 


x schulen not Nn. 


XII. 3—XIII. 9. 


drede. For my strengthe and® my preis- 
ing the Lord, and he is mad to me in 
3to helthe. 3ee shul drawe watris in io3e 
4of the welles of the saueour. And 3ee 
shul.seyn in that dai, Knoulecheth to 
the Lord, and inwardly clepith his name; 
knowen make 3ee in puples the findingus 
of hym; hath mynde, for hee3 is his 
sname. Syngeth to the Lord, for gret 
doendely he dide; telleth out this in al 
6thef erthe. Ful out io3e, and preise, thou 
dwelling of Sion; for gret in the myddel 
of thee the hoeli of Irael. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 The charge of Babilon, that sa3 Isaie, 
2the sone of Amos. Vp on a mysti moun- 
teyn rereth vp a tokne, and enhaunceth 
out® the vois; rereth the hond, and gon 
3in to the 3ates the dukes. I comaundide 
to myn halewid men, and I clepede my 
stronge men in iny wrathe, ful out io3- 
aende in my glorie. The vois of the mul- 
titude in mounteynes, as of besy puples ; 
the vois of the soun of kingus, and of 
Jentilis gedered to gidere. The Lord of 
ostes comaundide to the kny3thod of 
sthe bataile, to the men comende fro the 
lond aferr. Fro the ouermost of heuene 
the Lord, and the vesseles of his wod- 
nesse", that he scatere al the: erthe. 
6 Jelleth, for nee3 is the dai of the Lord; 
7as wastite fro the Lord shal come. For 
that alle hondis shul be vnloosid, and 
eche herte of a man shal wane, ‘or 
3 faylen*, and ben to-brosid. Tormentingus 
and sorewes thei shul holde; as wymmen 
trauailende of! child, thei shul sorewen. 
Eche to his ne3hebore shall stone3e; brent 
9faces the cheeres of hem. Loo! the day 
of the Lord shal come, cruel, and of in- 
dignacioun ful, and of wrathe, and of 
wodnesse; to be put the erthe in to wil- 
dernesse, and his synneres to ben al to- 


€ and my strengthe and £ pr. m. 
k Om. c ct eprom. | with acu. 


ISAIAH. 


f Om. AEGIUK. 


249 


and Y schal not drede. For whi the Lord 

as my strengthe and my preysyng, and he 

is maad to me in to helthe. 3e schulen3 
drawe watris with ioie of the wellis of the 

sauyour. And 3e schulen seie in that dai,4 
Knouleche 3e to the Lord, and clepe 3e 

his name in to help; make 3e knowun hise 

fyndyngis among puplis; haue 3e mynde, 

that his name is hi3. Synge 3e to thes 
Lord, for he hath do worschipfuli; telle 

je this in al erthe. Thon dwellyng ofe 
Syon, make ful out ioie, and preise; for 

whi the hooli of Israel 7s greet in the 

myddis of thee. 


CAP. XIII. 


The birthun of Babiloyne, which bir-1 
thun Ysaie, the sone of Amos, si3. Reise2 
3e a signe on a myisti hil, and enhaunse 
je vois; reise 3e the hond, and duykis 
entre bi the 3atis. Y haue comaundid to3 
myn halewid men, and Y clepid my 
stronge men in my wraththe, that maken 
ful ont ioie in my glorie. The vois of4 
multitude in hillis, as of many puplis; the 
vois of sown of kyngis, of hethene men 
gaderit togidere. ‘The Lord of oostis co- 
maundide to the chyualry of batel, to mens 
comynge fro afer lond. The Lord com- 
eth fro the hijnesse of heuene, and the 
vessels of his strong veniaunce, that he 
distrie al the lond. elle 3e, for the dai ofs 
the Lord is ni3; as wastyngY it schal come 
of the Lord. For this thing alle hondis7 
schulen be vniny3ti, and eche herte of 
man schal faile, and schal be al to-brokun. 8 
Gnawyngis and sorewis schulen holde 
Babiloyns ; thei schwen haue sorewe, as 
they that travelen of child. Ech man 
schal wondre at his nei3bore; her cheris 
schulen be brent faces. Lo! the dai of9 
the Lord schal come, cruel, and ful .of 
indignacioun, and of wraththe, and of 
woodnesse; to sette the lond into wildir- 
nesse, and to al to-breke the synneris 
i Om, aEGHK. 


& Om. azecuK. 4 wrathe £ pr.m. 


Y wastyng, ether dtstriyng CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY, 


VOL. If. 


Kk 


250 


10brosid of it. For the sterres of heuene 
and the shynyng of hem shul not spreden 
out ther liz3t ; al to-derkned is the sunne 
in his rising, and the moone shal not 
lishyne™ in his ly3t. I shal visiten ‘vp on 
the eueles of" worlde, and ajen the vn- 
pitouse the wickidnesses® of them; and 
to resten I shal maken the pride of the 
vnfeithful men, and the proude haunc- 
izgyng of stronge men I shal meeken. More 
precious a ful? man shal be than gold, 
and a man than’ clene most shynende 
isgold. Vp on this heuene I shal dis- 
turben, and shal be moued the erthe fro 
his place; ford the indignacioun of the 
Lord of ostes, and for the dai of the 
uzwrathe of his. wodnesse. And he shal 
ben as a foun fleende, and as a sheep, 
and ther shal not be that gedere; eche 
to his puple shal be turned, and a rowe 
isto ther lond thei shul flee. Eche that 
were founde, shal be slayn; and eche that 
16ouer shal come, shal falle in swerd. The 
fauntes of hem shul ben hurtlid doun in 
ther ejen; to-broke doun shul be the 
houses of hem, and the wyues of them 
17shul be defoulyd. Loo! I shal reren vp 
on hem Medos, that siluer sechen not, ne 
1sgold wiln; but with arwis the litle chil- 
der thei shul slen, and to the wombis 
3yuende souke thei shul not han mercy, 
and vp on the sones shal not spare the 
19e3e of hem. And that cite, Babilon, shal 
be glorious in rewmes, noble in pride of 
Chaldeis, turned, as God turned vp so 
20doun Sodom and Gomorr. It shal not 
be dwellid vn to the ende, and shal* not 
be foundid vnto the’ ieneracioun and ie- 
neracioun ; ne shalt sette there tente" a 
man of Arab, ne shepperdes shul reste 
2ithere. But shul reste there bestes, and 
shul be fulfild the houses of them with 
dragownes; and ther shul dwelle there 
ostriches, and wodewoses shul lepe there. 
22And ther shul answern there 3ellende 


™ rise 4. 


P feithful 4x see. m. 


dfroc. Fit shal a. 


Z the n. 


ISAIAH. 


on the worldes eueles ¢ pr. m. vp on the worldis euelis z pr. m. 
8 Om. 4GHK. 


ahem n. 


XITI. 10-—22. 


therof fro that? Zond. For whi the sterris 10 
of heuene and the schynyng of tho? 
schulen not sprede abrood her 1i3t; the 
sunne is maade derk in his risyng, and 
the moone schal not schine in hir 1i3t. 
And Y schal visite on the yuels of theli 
world, and Y schal visite ajens wickid 
men the wickidnesse of hem; and Y schal 
make the pride of vnfeithful men for to 
reste, and Y schal make low the boost of 
stronge men. A man of ful age schal be 12 
preciousere than gold, and a man schal be 
preciousere than pure gold and schynyng. 
On this thing I schal disturble heuene, 13 
and the erthe schal be moued fro his 
place; for the indignacioun of the Lord of 
oostis, and for the dai of wraththe of his 
strong veniaunce. And it schal be as al4 
doo fleynge, and as a scheep, and noon 
schal be that schal gadere togidere; ech 
man sclial turne to his puple, and alle bi 
hem silf schulen fle to her lond. Ech1s 
man that is foundun, schal be slayn; and 
ech man that cometh aboue, schal falle 
doun bi swerd. The 30nge children of !6 
them schulen be hurtlid doun bifore the 
iz3en of them; her housis schulen be ra- 
uischid, and her wyues schulen be de- 
foulid. Lo! Y schal reise on them Me-17 
deis, that seken not siluer, nethir wolen 
gold; but thei shulen sle litle children is 
bi’ arowis, and thei schulen not haue 
merci on wombis 3yuynge mylk, and the 
ize of them schal not spare on sones. 
And Babiloyne, thilke gloriouse citee in 19 
rewmes, noble in the pride of Caldeis, 
schal be destried, as God destried Sodom 
and Gomore. It shall not be enhabitid 20 
til in to the ende, and it schal not be 
foundid til to generacioun and genera- 
cioun; a man of Arabie schal not sette 
tentis there, and scheepherdis schulen not 
reste there. But wielde beestis schulen 2} 
reste there, and the housis of hem schulen 
be fillid with dragouns; and _ostrichis 


© wickidnes AGHK. 


t shal not kK. U tentiy EK. 


b with 1 


XIV. 1——11. 


foules in the houses of it, and wengid 
edderes in wasshing maumet templis of 
foul delit. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Nee3 is that come the’ tyme of hym, 
and his da3es shul not be longid; shal 
han rewthe forsothe the Lord of Jacob, 
and cheese 3it of Irael, and to resten 
hem” he shal make vp on ther* erthe; 
‘shalY be ioyned to a” comeling* to them, 

zand cleue to the hous of Jacob. And 
shuln® holden hem puples», and bringe 
them in to ther place. And shal welden 
hem the hous of Irael vp on the lond of 
the Lord in¢ to thralles and thrallesses; 
and thei shu] be takende hem that hem4 
hadden taken, ‘and sugeten“4 ther ‘casteres 

3out®. Aud ther shal be in that dai, 
whan reste shal 3yue to thee God! fro&® 
thi trauaile, and fro thin hurting, and fro 
thin harde seruage, that thou beforn 
aseruedist, thou shalt take this parable 
a3en the king ot Babiloyne, and seyn, 
What manere cesede the ‘wronge asker, 
srestede the tribute? The Lord to-brosede 
the staf of vnpitous men, the 3erde of 
elordshipende men, betende puples in in- 
diguacioun, with an vnheleable plage, the 
sogetende in wodnes the folkes of kynde, 
jzand the pursuende cruelly. Togidere 
restede, and was stille al erthe; io3ede, 
gand ful out gladede. Fyrre trees also 
gladeden vp on thee, and the cedris of 
Liban; sithen thou sleptest, ther ste3ede 
gnot vp that heewe' vs doun. Helle vn- 
dere thee is disturbid in to the ajen 
comyng of thi comyng; it shal rere to 
thee ieauntes; alle the princes of the 
erthe ther risen fro ther setes, alle the 
io princes of naciouns. Alle shuln answern, 
and seyn to thee, And thou art woundid 
11as and wee, lic vs thou art mad. Drawe 


ISAIAH. 


251 © 


schulen dwelle there, and heeri* beestis * heery; that 

schulen skippe there. And bitouris schu-22 vile es 

len answere there in the housis therof, ye yet i, 

and fliynge serpentis in the templis of  peerewondurful 

lust. pert _ the 

CAP. XIV. aadin jaa 

It is ni3 that the tyme therof come, and 2 yaqe"s 

the daies therof schulen not be maad fer; 7% °*9v- 

for whi the Lord schal haue merci of Ja- 

cob, and he schal chese 3it of Israel, and 

schal make them for to reste on her lond; 

a comelyng schal be ioyned to them, and 

schal cleue to the house of Jacob. And2 

puplis schulen holde hem, and schulen 

brynge hem in to her place. And the hous 

of Israel schal haue hem in possessioun 

in to seruauntis and handmaidis on the 

lond of the Lord; and thei schulen take 

tho men that token hem, and thei schulen 

make suget her wrongful® axeris. And3 

it schal be in that dai, whanne God schal 

jyue to thee reste of thi trauel, and of thi 

shakyng, and of hard seruage, in which 

thou seruedist bifore, thou schalt take this4 

parable aj3ens the kyng of Babiloyne, and 

thou schalt sei, Hou ceesside the wrongful 

axere, restide tribute? The Lord hath als 

to-broke the staf of wickid men, the 3erde 

of lordis, that beet puplis in indignacioun, 6 

with vneurable wounde, that sugetide 

folkis in woodnesse, that pursuede cruely. 

Ech lond restide, and was stille; it was7 

ioiful, and made ful out ioie. Also fir treess 

and cedris of the Liban weren glad on 

thee; sithen thou sleptist, noon stieth that 

kittith vs doun. Helle vndur thee is dis-9 

turblid for the meeting of thi comyng ; 

he schal reise giauntis to thee; alle the 

princes of erthe han rise fro her seetis, 

alle the princes of naciouns. Alle theilo 

schulen answere, and thei shulen seie to 

thee, And thou art woundid as and? we, 

thou art maad lijk vs. Thi pride isu 

drawun doun to hellis, thi deed careyn 


v Om. a. that cu. Om. & prim. * the 4G pr.m.uK. Yacumlinge shal £ sec.m, %Om. Ax sec.m. 


G pr.m. HK. 
¢ and inc. 
casters out E tert. m. 


d Om. 4G pr.m. HK. 


fthe Lord 4. & for a. 


¢ wondirful n. 


KkQ 


‘a Om. E Sec.m. a comenng shal be ioyned toc sec.m. » puplis shul £ sec.m., bb Om. x sec.m. 
id Om. c pr.m. 
h pletere c ef EB pr. m. 


e pleteres £ pr.m. or wrong askers E sec.m. marg. 
i heweth E sec, m. 


d Om. 1. 


252 


doun is to helle thi pride, he to-hew3 thi 
careyn; vnder thee strouwed ‘shal be* a 
mo3te, aud thi coueryng! shal be wermes. 
12 Hou felle thou, Lucyfer, fro heuene, the 
whiche erli sprunge; thou felle in to the 
erthe, that woundedest the folkes of 
iskynde. That seidest in thin herte, In to 
heuene I shal stejen vp", vp on the 
sterres' of heuene I shal enhaunce my 
see; I shal sitte in the hil of testament, 
14in the sides of the north. I shal ste3en 
vp vp on the heizte of cloudis; lic I shal 
1sbe to the hejest. Nerthelatere to helle 
thou shalt be drawe doun, in to the 
icdepthe of the lake. That thee shul see, 
to® thee shul be bowid, and thee shuln 
aferr bihold. -Whether this is the man, 
that disturbide the erthe, that smot to- 
17 gidere rewmes? that putte the world de- 
sert, and his grete cites distro3ede, to® 
his gyuede openede not the prisoun ? 
1s Alle the kingus of Jentilis, eclie slepten 
19in glorie, eche in his hous. Thou for- 
sothe art cast aferr fro thi sepulcre, as 
a stoc vuprofitable, as with quyture de- 
foulid; and aboute wrappid with hem 
that ben slayn with swerd, and wenten 
doun to the foundement of the lake. As 
20a stynkende careyn, thou shalt not han 
felashepe, ne with hem in biriyng thou 
shalt be, thou forsothe thi lond distro3- 
edist, thou the puple sloow ; ether shal 
not be clepid into withoute ende the sed 
21of theP werste men. ‘Greithe 3e4 his™ 
sones to sla3ter, for the wickidnesse of 
ther fadris; thei shul not togidere rise’, 
ne eritagen the erthe, ne fulfille the face 
2zof the roundnesse of the cite. And I 
shal with rise vp on hem, seith the Lord 
of ostes, and I shal destro3e Babyloynes 
name, and relikes, and progenye, and 
23 buriounyng, seith the Lord. I shal puttet 
it in to the possessioun of an irchoun, 
and in to myres of watres; and I shal 
sweepen it in a besme, treding, seith the 


Kise prem 1 coueryngis 4G pr.m.HK. 


4 Greitheth c e¢ & prem Om. AE prom.GHK. 


e fellist Fr. 


ISAIAH. 


™ and 4. 
8 go K. 


f woundidist CcEFGHIMNPQRSUVX. 


XIV. 12—23. 


felle doun; a mou3te schal be strewyd vn- 
dur thee, and thin hilyng schal be wormes. 
A! Lucifer, that risidist eerli, hon feldist® 12 
thou doun fro heuene; thou that woundistf 
folkis, feldist doun togidere in to erthe. 
Which seidist in thin herte, Y schal stie13 
in to heuene, Y schal enhaunse my seete 
aboue the staris of heuene; Y schal sitte 
in the hil of testament, in the sidis of the 
north. Y schal stie on the hijnesse of 14 
cloudis; Y schal be lijk the® hijeste. 
Netheles thou schalt be drawun doun to1s 
helle, in to the depthe of the lake. Theis 
that schulen se thee, schulen be bowid 
doun to thee, and schulen biholde thee. 
Whether this is the man, that disturblid 
erthe, that schook togidere rewmes? that 17 
settide the world desert, and distried the 
citees therof, and openyde not the prisoun 
to the boundun men of hym? Alle theis 
kyngis of hethene men, alle slepten in 
glorie, a man in his hous. But thou artis 
cast out of thi sepulcre, as an vnprofitable 
stok, as defoulid with rot; and wlappid 
with hem that ben slayn with swerd, and 
jeden doun to the foundement of the lake. 
As a rotun careyn, thou schalt not haue 20 
felouschipe, nethir with hem in sepulture, 
for thou hast lost thi lond, thou hast slayn 
the puple; the seed of the worst men 
schal not be clepid with outen ende. Make: 
3e redi hise sones to sleying, for the wick- 
idnesse of her fadris; thei schulen not rise, 
nether thei schulen enherite the lond, ne- 
ther thei schuleu fille the face of the 
roundenesse of citees. And Y schal rise 22 
on hem, seith the Lord of oostis, and Y 
schal leese the name of Babyloyne, and 
the relifs, and generacioun, and seed, seith 
the Lord. And Y schal sette that Babi-23 
loyne in to possessioun of an irchoun, and 
in to mareisis of watris; and Y schal 
swepe it with a beesme, and Y schal 
stampe, seith the Lord of oostis. The2 
Lord of oostis swoor, seiynge, Whether it 


othat toK. ©°Om.z pr.m. P Om, AEGHK. 


t not putten E pr. m. 


& to the x sec. m. 


XIV. 24-——XV. 3. 


24 Lord of ostes. The Lord of ostus swoor, 
seiende, If not as I wende, so shal be, 
2,and hou in mynde I tretede, so shal 
come? That J al to-brose Assirie in my 
lond, in my mounteynes to-trede it; and 
ther shal be take awey fro hem his 30k, 
and his berthene fro the shnlder of them 
26shal be don awey. This the" counseyl 
that I tho3te vpon al erthe, and this is 


the hond stra3t out vpon alle Jentiles. 


27 The Lord forsothe of ostes demede, and 
who shal moun vufastnen? and _ his 
hond stra3t out, and who shal turne 

asawey it? The charge of Filisteym. In 
the 3er that diede king Achaz, don is this 

29charge. Ne glade thon, al’ Filistee, for” 
to-mynusht is the 3erde of thi smytere; 
of the roote forsothe of the shadewe 
eddere shal gon out a kocatrice, and his 

30sed* soupende awei a foul. And ther 
shul be fed the first goten of pore men, 
and pore men trostly shul resten ; and 
to dien I shal make in hunger thi roote, 

siand thi relikes J shal slen. 3elle, thou 
jate; crie, thou cite; throwe doun is 
eche Filiste; fro the north forsothe 
smoke shal come, and ther is not that 

seflee out of his kumpanye. And what 
shal ben answerd to the messageres of 
the fole of kinde? for the Lord foundede 
Sion, and in hym shuln hopen the pore 
men of his puple. 


CAP. XV. 


1 The charge of Moab. For in’ ny3t 
wastid is Ar, Moab heeld his pes; for 
inY the ny3t wastid is the wal, Moab 
2heeld his pes. Ther ste3ede vp the hous, 
and Debon to* hee3e thingus, in to weil- 
ing; vpon Nabo, and vp on Medaba Moab 
shal 3ellen. In alle his hedys ballidnesse, 
3and eche berd shal be shaue. In his 
thre weied places thei ben gird with a 
sac, vp on his rooues and in his stretes 
al? weiling ; he shal go doun in to wep- 


uOm. E pr.m. 


Epr.m *Om. 4. Y Om. £ prem. 


h Om. CFEGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


ISAIAH. 


v Om. cpr.m. & pr.m. eche al £ see. m. marg. al & tert. m. 
2 in to E prom. 


253 - 


schal not be so, as Y gesside, and it schal 
bifalle so, as Y tretide in soule? That Yes 
al to-breke the kyng of Assiriens in my 
lond, and that Y defoule hym in myn 
hillis ; and his 30k schal be takun awei 
fro hem, and. his birthun schal be takun 
awei fro the schuldur of hem. This is2c¢ 
the councel which Y thoujte on al the 
lond, and this is the hond stretchid forth 
on alle folkis. For whi the Lord of oostis 27 
hath demed, and who mai make vnstid- 
faste? and his hond és stretchid forth, and 
who schal turne it awei? The birthunes 
of Filisteis. In the 3eer wheryne kyng 
Achas diede, this birthun was maad. <Alaz9 
thou Filistea, be not glad, for the 3erde 
of thi smytere is maad lesse; for whi a 
cocatrice schal go out of the roote of an 
eddre, and his seed schal soupe up a brid. 
And the firste gendrid of pore men schu-30 
len be fed, and pore men schulen reste 
feithfuli; and Y schal make thi throte to 
perisch in hungur, and Y schal sle thi 
relifs. 3elle, thou 3ate; cry, thou citee, si 


.al Filistea is cast doun; for whi smoke 


schal come fro the north, and noon is that 
schal ascape his oost. And what schal bese 
answerid to the messangeris of folk? for 
the Lord hath foundid Sion, and the pore 
men of his puple schulen hope in hym. 


CAP. XV. 


The birthun of Moab. For Ar was1 
destried in ni3t, Moab was stille; for the 
wal was distried in the" ni3t, Moab was 
stille. The ings hous, and Dybon stieden 2 
to hi3 places, in to weilyng ; on Nabo, and 
on Medaba Moab schal 3elle. In alle hedis 
therof schal be ballidnesse, and ech beerd 
schal be schauun. In the meetyng! ofs 
thre weies therof thei ben gird in a sak, 
alle 3ellyng on the housis therof and in 
the stretis therof; it schal go doun in to 


w eche thou, for c pr.m. 
aalde £ pr.m. 


i meetingis CEFHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


254 


4yng. Ther shal crie Esebon and Eleale, 
vn to Jasa herd is the vois of hem; vpon 
this the redi men of Moab shul 3elle, his 

ssoule shal 3elle to itself. Myn herte to 
Moab shal crien, his bareres vnto Segor, 
a she> calf al throwende doun. Bi the 
ste3ing vp forsothe of Luyth wepende he 
shal stezen vp, and in the weie of Oro- 
naym the cri of contricioun thei shul 

srere. The watris forsothe of Nemrym 
shul ben desert; for driede® ‘the erbe*, 
failede® the buriounyng, eche grenenesse 

7diede. Aftir the mykilnesse of werk, 
and the visiting of hem, to the streme of 

gs withies thei shul Jeden hem. For ‘eri 
cumpaside® the terme of Moab; vnto Ga- 
lym his 3elling, and vnto the pit of Elym 

ghis cry. For the watris of Dibon ben 
fulfild with blod; forsothe I shal putte 
vpon Dibon ecchingus, to them that shul 
fleen of Moab a leoun, and to the relikis 
of the lond. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 Send out, ‘Lord, the lomb*, lordshipere 
of the erthe, fro the ston of desert to the 
2mount of the do3ter of Sion. And he 
shal ben as a brid fleende, and 3unge 
briddes fro the nest fleende to, so shul 
be the do3tris of Moab in the ouerste3- 
3yng of Arnon. Go in! counseil, con- 
streyne counseil; put as ny3t thi sha- 
dewe in mydday, hide thou the men 
fleende, and the vagaunt ne betra3e thou. 
4Ther shul dwelle anent thee my ferr 
fugityues. Moab, be thou the lurkyng 
place of hem fro the face of the wastere. 
Endid is forsothe the pouder, ful endid 
is the wrecche; failide that to-trad the 
slond. And ther shal be befor mad redy 
in mercy the see, and he shal sitte vpon 
it in treuthe, in the tabernacle of Dauid, 
demende, and sechende dom, and swiftli 
63eldende that is ri3twis. Wee han herd 
the pride of Moab, proud he is gretli; 


>Om.£ prim. the erbe driede cet x sec.m. 4Om.c et £ sec.m. 


8 ther cumpaside cri c prom. E prem. 


ISAIAH. 


h the lomb, thou Lord, the £ pr.m. 


XV. 4—XVI. 6. 


wepyng. Esebon schal crie, and Eleale, 4 
the vois of hem is herd ‘til to* Jasa; on 
this thing, the redi men of Moab schulen 
3elle, the soule therof schal 3elle to it silf. 
Myn herte schal crie to Moab, the barriss 
therof ‘til to! Segor, a cow calf of thre 
jeer. For whi a wepere schal stie™ bi the 
stiyng" of Luith, and in the weie of Oro- 
naym thei schulen reise cry of sorewe. 
For whi the watris of Nemrym schulen be 6 
forsakun; for the eerbe dried up, buriown- 
yng failide, al grenenesse perischide. Bi7 
the greetnesse of werk, and the visityng of 
hem, to the stronde of salewis thei schulen 
lede hem. For whi cry cumpasside the8 
ende of Moab; ‘til to® Galym the 3ellyng 
therof, and the cry therof ‘til to° the pit of 
Helym. For the watris of Dibon ben9 
fillid with blood; for Y schal sette encrees- 
syngis on Dibon, to tho men of Moab that 
fledden fro the lioun, and to the relifs of 
the lond. 


> CAP. XM 


Lord, sende thou out a lomb, the lordli! 
gouernour of erthe, fro the stoon of desert 
to the hil of the dou3ter of Sion. And it2 
schal be as a foule fleynge, and briddis 
fleynge awei fro the nest, so schulen be 
the dou3tris of Moab in the? passyng ouer 
of Arnon. Take thou councel, constreyne 3 
thou councel; sette thou as ni3t thi schadewe 
in myddai, hide thou hem that fleen, and 
bitraye thou not men of vnstidfast dwell- 
yng. My fleeris awei schulen dwelle at4 
thee. Moab, be thou the hidyng place of 
hem fro the face of distriere?. For whi dust 
is endid, the wretchid is wastid ; he that 
defoulide the lond failude. And the kyngis5 
seete schal be maade redi in merci, and he 
schal sitte on it in treuthe, in the taber- 
nacle of Dauid, demynge, and sekynge 
doom, and 3eldynge swiftli that that is 
iust. We han herd the pride of Moab,6 
he is ful proud; his pride, and his boost, 


€ fagide & prim. £ wederes kK sec.m. 
i Om. £ pr.m. 


K til a prem. vnto1. lvnto1 ™ stie upi. Ostiyngup1. %vntor1 POm.N. 4 the distriere 1. 


XVI. 7-—XVII. 3. 


his* pride, and the proude enhauncing of 
hym, and also his indignacioun more 
7than his strengthe. Therfore shall jelle 
Moab to Moab, al shal 3elle to hem that 
gladen vp on the walles of anelid tyil; 
sspeketh ther veniaunces. For the sub- 
urbes of Esebon ben desert, and the 
vyne3erd! of Sabama. The lordis of Jen- 
tiles hewen doun his scourges; vnto Ja- 
ser thei ful camen, thei errede in desert. 
His railing braunches ben forsaken, thei 
9passeden the se. Vp on this I shal 
weepen in wepyng Jaser, and the™ vyne- 
jerd" of Sabama. I shal drunkne thee 
with my tere, Esebon and Eleale, for 
vp on thi vyntage, and vp on thi rep the 
10 vois of men tredende fel on. And ther 
shal be don awey gladnesse and ful out 
io3ing fro Carmel; and in vyne3erdis° 
he shal not ful out io3en, ne inwardli 
io3en. Wyn in the presse he shal not 
trede, that to treden was wont?; the 
ll vois of the trederes I toc awey. Vp on 
this my wombe to Moab as an harpe shal 
sounen, and my boweles to the wal of 
i2the anelid tyl. And it shal be, whan he 
shal apere, that trauailede Moab vp on 
his hee3e thingus, he shal go in to his 
hoeli places, that he inwardly beseche, 
i3and he shal not moun. This the wrd 
that the Lord spac to Moab fro thennys. 
14 And now spac the Lord, seiende, In thre 
3er? as ‘the 3eres‘ of an hirid man, shal 
be don awei the glorie of Moab vpon 
eche myche* puple; and ther shal be lafte 
in it as a litil branch of* a cluster of 
grapes, and fewe, not fele. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 The charge of Damasch. Lo! Damasch 
shal cesen to ben a cite, and it shal be as 
2an hypil of stones in falling. The for- 
saken citees of Aroer to flockes shul be; 
and thei shul resten there, and ther shal 
3not be that afere awey. And ther shal 


k and the © pr.m. lvyne c pr. m. E pr. m. 
Eprom. P Om. E pr. m. 
t Om. 4. 


¥ ynto I. 


ISAIAH. 


m Om. cu. 
4 3eeris, 3eeris 4G pr. m. 


8 rasyn, dha is, a litil boom, with litil fruyt n. 


255 


and his indignacioun 7s more than his 
strengthe. TTherfor Moab schal jelle to7 
Moab, al Moab shal 3elle to hem that ben 
glad on the wallis of bakun tijl stoon; 
speke 3e her woundis. For whi the sub-s 
arbis of Esebon and the vyner of Sabama 
ben forsakun. The lordis of hethene men 
han kit doun the siouns therof; thei 
camen ‘til to" Jaser, thei erriden in desert. 
The bowis therof ben forsakun, thei pass- 
iden the see. On this thing Y schal wepes 
in the weping of Jaser, and on the vyner 
of Sabama. Esebon and Eleale, Y schal 
fille thee with my teer; for the vois of 
defouleris fellen on thi vyndage, and on 
thi heruest. And gladnesse and ful out10 
loiyng schal be takun awei fro Carmele; 
and noon schal make ful out ioye, nether 
schal synge hertli song in vyneris. He 
that was wont to wringe out, schal not 
wrynge out wyn in a pressour; Y haue 
take awei the vois of wryngeris out. Onu 
this thing my wombe schal sowne as an 
harpe to.Moab, and myn entrails to the 
wal of bakun tiel stoon. And it schal be, 12 
whanne it schal appere, that Moab hath 
trauelid on hise places, it schal entre to 
hise hooli thingis, that it biseche, and it 
schal not be worth. This is the word 13 
which the Lord spak to Moab fro that 
tyme. And now the Lord spak, seiynge, 14 
In thre 3eer that weren as the 3eeris of an 
hirid man, the glorie of Moab schal be 
takun awei on al the myche puple; and 
ther schal be left in it as a litil rasyn’, 
and a litil, and not myche. 


CAP. XVII. 


The birthun of Damask. Lo! Damask1 
schal faile to be a citee, and it schal be as 
an heep of stoonys in fallyng. The for-2 
sakun citees of Aroer schulen be to flockis; 
and thot schulen reste there, and noon 
schal be that schal make aferd. And help3 


Ryyne C prem. E prem. © vynes C pr. m, 


T Om. 4G prmux.  § fele c pr.m. & pr.m. 


t thei Nn. 


256 


cesen helpe fro Effraym, and rewme fro 
Damasch; and the relikes of Cirie as the 
glorie of the sonus of Irael shul be, 
aseith the Lord of ostus. And it shal be, 
in that day shal be maad thynne the 
glorie of Jacob, and the fatnes of his 
sflesh shal become welewid awey. And 
he shal be as the gederere in rip that is 
laft, and his arm eres shal gedere, and 
he shal be as sechende eres in the valey 
sof Rafaym. And ther shal ben laft in it 
as the braunche of a cluster, and as the 
shaking out of the oile berie, as of two 
or of thre olyues in the cop of the 
braunch, or of foure or of fyue; in the 
coppis of it his frutes, seith the Lord 
7God of Irael. In that dai shal ben bowid 
a man to his makere, and his e3en to the 
shoeli of Irael shul beholden. And he 
shal not be bowid to the auteres, that 
his hondis maden, and that his fyngris 
ywrou3ten"; he shal not biholden maumet 
9 wodes, and the wasshing templis. In 
that dai the citees of his strengthe shul 
be forsaken as plowes, and’ the tilthis 
that ben laft fro the face of the sonus of 
10 Irae]; and thou shalt ben desert. For 
thou for3ete of the God, thi saueour, and 
of the” stronge, thin helpere, thou art 
not recordid; therfor thou shalt plaunten 
a feithful plaunting, and alien burioun- 
uyng thou shalt sowen. In the dai of thi 
plaunting bareyne vynes, and erli thi sed 
shal flouren; don awei is the rip in the 
dai of eritage, and he shal weilen greu- 
wously. Wo to the multitude of many 
puples, as the multitude of the se sound- 
ende, and the nois of cumpanyes as the 
issonn of manye watris*. ‘Puplis schulen 
sownen as the sown of flowyng watris**, 
and he shal blame it; and aferr it shal 
flee, and it shal be raueshid as the pou- 
der of mounteynes fro the face of the 
wynd, and as a whirlewynd bifor they 
14tempest. In tyme of enen, and lo! dis- 
turbing; in the morutid, and he shal not 


ISAIAH. 


XVIL. 4—14. 


schal ceesse fro Effraym, and a rewme fro 
Damask; and the relifs of Sirie schulen be 
as the glorie of the sones of Israel, seith 
the Lord of oostis. And it schal be, in4 
that dai the glorie of Jacob schal be maad 
thinne, and the fatnesse of his fleisch shal. 
fade. And it schal be as gaderyng togi-5 
dere that that is left in heruest, and his 
arm schal gadere eeris of corn, and it schal 
be as sekynge eeris of corn in the valei of 
Raphaym. And there schal be left in ite 
as a rasyn*, and as the schakyng doun of 
the fruyt of olyue tre, as of tweyne" ether 
of’ thre olyue trees in the hiznesse of a 
braunche, ether of foure ether” of fyue; in 
the cooppis therof schal be the fruyt 
therof, seith the Lord God of Israel. In7 
that dai a man schal be bowid to his 
maker, and hise ijen schulen biholde to 
the hooli of Israel. And he schal not bes 
bowid to the auteris, whiche hise hondis 
maden, and whiche hise fyngris wrou3ten; 
he schal not biholde wodis, and templis 
of idols. In that dai the citees of strengthe9 
therof schulen be forsakun as plowis, and 
cornes that weren forsakun of the face of 
the sones of Israel; and thou schalt be 
forsakun. For thou hast for3ete God, thio 
sauyour, and haddist not mynde on thi 
stronge helpere; therfor thou schalt plaunte 
a feithful plauntyng, and thou schalt sowe 
an alien seed. In the dai of thi plauntyng it 
schal be a wielde vyne, and erli thi seed 
schal floure; ripe corne is takun awei in 
the dai of eritage, and Israel schal make 
sorewe greuousli. Wo to the multitude le 
of many puplis, as the multitude of the 
see sownynge, and the noise of cumpenyes 
as the sown of many watris. Puplisi3 
schulen sowne as the sown of flowynge 
watris, and God schal blame hym; and 
he schal fle fer, and he schal be rauyschid 
as the dust of hillis fro the face of the 
wynd, and as a whirlewynd bifor tem- 
pest. In the time of euentide, and lo!14 
disturbling; in the morewtid, and he schal 


* rasyn; isa 
lytil bow, with 
a lytil fruyt. 
A et alii. 


u . « 5 
Wrou3ten 4C pr.m.EGHK. Vin. Wthic. *watris flowende c pr.m. **Om.c prom. YOm. 4EGHK. 


2 Om. £ prom. 


U two 1. 


v Om. ENP. 


Wort. 


XVIII. 1-——-XI1X. 1. 


stonde stille. This is the part of hem 
that wasteden vs, and the lot of men to- 
brekende vs. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Wo to the lond, cymbal of weengus, 
2that is be3unde the flod of Etheope; that 
sendeth in the se messageres, and in 
resshi vesseles vp on watris. Goth, 3ee 
swift aungeles, to the fole al to-pullid 
and torn; to a ferful puple, after whyche 
is not an other; fole abidende and to- 


troden, whos flodes rauesheden awei his . 


lond; to the mount of the name of the 
3 Lord of ostus, mount of Sion. Alle 3ee* 
dwelleris of the world, that dwellen in 
erthe, whan shal ben rered vp a tokne 
in mounteynes, 3ee shuln seen, and the 
4noise of the trumpe 3ee shul heren. For 
these thingus seith the Lord to me, I shal 
resten, and beholden in my place, as the 
mydday 1i3t is cleer, and as the cloude of 
sdew in the day of rip. Bifor rip forsothe 
al flourede out, and vnriyp perfeccioun 
buriownede; and ther shul ben hewe doun 
the litle braunches of it with sithis, and 
that weren laft, shul be kut awey. Thei 
6shul ben shaken out, and forsaken to- 
gidere to? the briddes of mounteynes, 
and to the bestes of erthe; and in euere- 
lastende somer shul ben vp® on hym 
foules, and alle the’ bestes of erthe vp on 
zhym shul dwelle al wynter. In that 
tyme shal be bro3t 3ifte to the Lord of 
ostes, fro the puple to-pullid and to-torn; 
fro the ferful® puple, after whom was 
not an other; fro the fole abidende and 
to-troden, whos flodus rauesheden awei 
his lond; to the place of the name of the 
Lord of ostus, mount of Sion. 


CaP. XE 


1 The charge of Egipt. Lo! the Lord 
shal stez3e vp vp on a 1i3t cloude, and gon 
in to Egipt; and ther shul be moued the® 


athe £ prom. > in to K sec. m. 


& Om. AGuk. 


x rauishin EP. 
Li 


VOL. III. 


ISAIAH. 


¢ Om. AGHK. 


not abide. This is the part of hem that 
destrieden vs, and the part of hem that 
rauyschiden* vs’. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Wo to the lond, the cymbal of wyngis,1 
which is hijende the flood of Ethiopie; 
that sendith messangeris bi the see, and2 
in vessels of papirus* on watris. Go, 3e 
messangeris, to the folk drawun up and 
to-rent; to a ferdful puple, aftir which is 
noon other; to the folk abidynge and de- 
foulid, whos lond the flodis han rauyschid; 
to the hil of the name of the Lord of 
oostis, to the hil of Sion. Alle 3e dwelleriss 
of the world, that dwellen in the lond, 
schulen se whanne a signe schal be reisid 
in the hillis, and 3e schulen here the cry 
of a trumpe. For whi the Lord seith these 4 
thingis to me, Y schal reste, and Y schal 
biholde in my place, as the myddai 1i3t is 
cleer, and as a cloude of dew in the dai of 
heruest. For whi al flouride out bifores 
heruest, aud vnripe perfeccioun buriown- 
ede; and the litle braunchis therof schulen 
be kit doun with sithis, and tho that ben 
left, schulen be kit awei. Thei schulen be 
schakun out, and schulen be left togidere 6 
to the briddis of hillis, and to the beestis 
of erthe; and briddis schulen be on hym 
by a somer euerlastinge, and alle the beestis 
of erthe schulen dwelle bi wyntir on hym. 
In that tyme a 3ifte schal be brou3t to the7 
Lord of oostis, of the puple drawiun up 
and to-rent; of the puple ferdful, aftir 
which was noon other; of the folk abid- 
ynge and defoulid, whos lond floodis ra- 
uyschiden; the 3ifte schal be brou3t to the 
place of the name of the Lord of oostis, to 
the hil of Sion. 


CAP. XIX. 


The birthun of Egipt. Lo! the Lordi 
schal stie on a 1i3t cloude, and he schal 
entre in to Egipt; and the symilacris of 
f Om. 4. 


40m. arenk. © feithful c pr.m. 


y Om. Nn. 


257 * 


* papirus; isa 
kynde of spier, 
so greet, that 
botis mowen be 
maad therof, as 
summen seye. 
Lire here. a et 
alii. 


258 ISAIAH. XIX. 2—14. 


symulacris of Egipt fro the face of hym, 
and the herte of Egipt shal wane in the 
2myddel of hym. And to meete togidere 
I shal make Egipcienus aj3en Egipcienus, 
and fiz3te shal a man ajen his brother, 
and a man ajen his frend, cite a3en cite, 
3and reume ajeu reume. And to-broken 
shal be the spirit of Egipt in his boweles, 
and his counseil I shall stumble doun; 
and thei shul aske ther symulacris, and 
ther deuynoures, and ther deuel cleperes, 
sand ther deuel sacrifieres. And I shal 
take Egipt in to the hond of cruel lordis, 
and a strong king shal lordshipen of 
shem, seith the Lord God of ostes. And 
the water shal waxe drie fro the se, and 
6the flod shal be desolat, and dried. And 
faile shul the flodes, and thynned and 
dried shul be the ryueres of water hepes; 
the reed and the resshe shal welewen. 
7Nakened shal be the flod wombe, and 
the® ryueres fro ther welle; and‘ of* 
‘eche sowende the watri place! shal be 
dried, and welewen, and it shal] not be. 
sAnd™ mowrne” shul the fissheres, and 
weilen alle into the flod puttende the 
angil hoc; and spredende out the net 
vpon the face of watris, shul waxe feble. 
9 And confoundid® shul ben, that wro3ten 
flax, plattende and weuende sotile thingus. 
io And ther shul ben his ‘watri placis? dri- 
ende; alle that maden pondis to be ca3t 
iifisshes. Fooles the princes of Thaneos, 
wise counseileres of Farao 3eeuen vnwys 
counseil; what maner shul jee seyn to 
Farao, I9 the sone of wise men, the™ sone 
i20f olde kingys? Where now ben thi wise 
men? ‘Telle thei® to thee, and shewe, 
what tho3te the Lord of ostus vp on 
13Egipt. Fooles ben mad the princes 
of Thaneos; gretli languyssheden the 
princes of Memfeos; begileden Egipt, the 
14corner* of his puples. The Lord mengde 
in his myddel the spirit of turnegidy ; 


‘Egipt schulen be mouyd fro his face, and 


the herte of Egipt schal faile in the myd- 
dis therof. And Y schal make Egipcians2 
to renne togidere a3ens Egipcians, and a 
man schal fi3te a3ens his brother, and a 
man a3ens his frend, a citee a3ens a citee, 
and a rewme ajens a rewme. And the3 
spirit of Egipt schal be brokun in the 
entrailis therof, and Y schal caste doun 
the councel therof; and thei schulen axe 
her symylacris, and her false diuinouris, 
and her men that han vneleene spiritis 
spekinge in the wombe, and her dyuyn- 
ouris bi sacrifices maad on auteris to 
feendis. And Y schal bitake Egipt in to4 
the hond of cruel lordis, and a strong 
kyng schal be lord of hem, seith the Lord 
God of oostis. And watir of the see schal5 
wexe drie, and the flood schal be desolat, 
and schal be dried. And the floodis schu-6 
len faile, and the strondis of the? feeldis 
schulen be maad thynne, and schulen be 
dried ; a rehed and spier schal fade. The7 
botme of watir schal be maad nakid, and 
stremys fro her welle; and the moiste place 
of al seed schal be dried, schal* waxe drie, 
and schal* not be. And fischeris schulens 
morne, and alle that casten® hook in to 
the flood, schulen weile; and thei that 
spreden abrood a net ou the face of wa- 
tris, schulen fade. Thei schulen be schent,9 
that wrou;ten flex, foldynge and ordeyn- 
ynge sutil thingis. And the watir places to 
therof schulen be drye; alle® that maden 
poondis to take fischis, schulen be schent. 
The fonned princes of Tafnys, the wise l) 
counselouris of Farao, jauen vnwise coun- 
sel; hou schulen 3e seie to Farao, Y am 
the sone of wise men, the sone of elde 
kyngis? Where ben now thi wise men? 12 
Telle thei to thee, and schewe thei, what 
the Lord of oostis thou3te on Egipt. The 13 
princes of Tafnys ben maad foolis; the 
princes of Memphis fadiden; thei disseyu- 


bhera, 'Om.c. Om. 2 pr.m. ‘alle moiste seed £ pr.m. ™Om. 4GHK. 1% sorewe dreden 
cet E pr.m. © confoundyn acux.  P moiste thyngus c et E pr.m. 9Om.e prim. ‘I the £ prom. 


8 Thei shul telle z prim. t aungeles c et E pr.m. 


2 Om. c ef ceteri. it schal1. »% senden cEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. ¢ and alle 1. 


XIX. 15——25. 


and to erren thei maden Egipt in al his 
werk, as erreth a drunke man and a vo- 
ismende. And ther shal not be to Egipt 
werke", that it make hed and tail in 
isboowing and refreynyng. In that dai 
Egipt shal be as wymmen, and thei shul 
stone3en, and dreden fro the face of the 
stering togidere of the hond of the Lord 
170f ostes, that he mouede vp on it. And 
shal be the lond of Juda to Egipt in to 
inward ferd; eche that of it recordede, 
shal inwardly dreden fro the face of the 
counseil of the Lord of ostes, that he 
18tho3te vp on it. In that dai shul be fyue 
citees in the lond of Egipt, spekende Ca- 
naneY tunge, and swerende bi the Lord 
of ostes; the cyte of the sunne shal ben 
i9clepid oon. In that day shal ben the 
auter of the Lord in the myddel of the 
lond off Egipt, and the title of the Lord 
20 biside his terme; and thei shul be in to 
tocne and to witnessing to the Lord of 
ostes, in the lond of Egipt. They shul 
crien to the Lord fro the face of the 
trublere, and he shal sende to them a 
saueour, and a forfi3tere, that delyuere 
21them. And the Lord shal ben knowen 
of Egipt, aud knowen shuln the Egip- 
cienus the Lord in that day; and thei 
shul herien hym in ostes and 3iftes, and 
thei shul vouwe vouwes to the Lord, and 
223eelde”. And smyte shal the Lord Egipt 
with a veniaunce, and helen it; and 
turnen a3een shuln the Egipcienus to the 
Lord, and he shal be plesid to them, and 
23helen hem. In that day shal ben a weie 
fro* Egipt ‘in toY Assiries, and seruen 
shul the? Egipcienus to Assur; and entren 
shal Assirie Egipt*®, and Egipt in to As- 
aisiries. In that day shal ben Irael the 
thridde to? Egipt and to Assirie, blessing 
2ain the middel of the erthe; to whom 
blissede the Lord of ostus, seiende, Bliss- 
id my puple of Egipt, and the werk of 


Ynede cet epr.m, ¥ Canaan 4GHK. 
zOm. 4, into Egipt @ see.m. K sec. m. 


ISAIAH. 


w thei shul gelden z pr, m. 
» of a. 


259 


eden Egipt, a corner of the puplis therof. 
The Lord meddlid a spirit of errour in14 
the myddis therof; and thei maden Egipt 
for to erre in al his werk, as a drunkun 
man and spuynge errith. And werk schal 15 
not be to Egipt, that it make an heed and 
tail bowynge and refreynynge. In that 6 
dai Egipt schal be as wymmen, and thei 
schulen be astonyed, and schulen drede 
of the face of the mouynge of the hoond 
of the Lord of oostis, which he mouede 
on it. And the lond of Juda schal be to1!7 
Egipt in to drede; ech that schal thenke 
on it, schal drede of the face of the counsel 
of the Lord of oostis, whiche he thou3te 
on it. In that dai fyue citees schulen be 18 
in the lond of Egipt, and’ schulen speke 
with the tunge of Canaan, and schulen 
swere bi the Lord of oostis; the citee of 
the sunne schal be clepid oon. In that19 
dai the auter of the Lord schal be in the 
myddis of the lond of Egipt, and the title 
of the Lord schal be bisidis the ende 
therof; and it schal be in to a signe and 20 
witnessyng to the Lord of oostis, in the 
lond of Egipt. For thei schulen crie to the 
Lord fro the face of the troblere, and he 
schal sende a sauyour to hem, and a for- 
fiztere, that schal delyuere hem. And the2i 
Lord schal be knowun of Egipt, and 
Egipcians schulen knowe the Lord in that 
dai; and thei schulen worschipe hym in 
sacrifices and 3iftis, and thei schulen make 
vowis to the Lord, and thei schulen paie. 
And the Lord schal smyte Egipt with a22 
wounde, and schal make it hool; and 
Egipcians schulen turne a3en to the Lord, 
and he schal be plesid in hem, and he 
schal make hem hool, In that dai a wei23 
schal be fro Egipt in to Assiriens, and 
Egipcians schulen serue Assur; and Assur 
schal entre in to Egipt, and Egipt in to 
Assiriens. In that dai Israel schal be the 24 
thridde to Egipt and to Assur, the bless- 


xintogpr.m. Y fro B prem, 


d and tho 1, 
L12 


260 


myn hondis to Assirie; be forsothe myn 
eritage Israel. 


CAP. XX. 


1 In the 3er that Tharthan wente into 
Assote, whan hadde sent hym Sargon, 
king of Assiries, and hadde foo3te azen 

2 Asote, and hadde taken it; in that tyme 
spac the Lord in the hond of Isaie, sone 
of Amos, seiende, Go, and loosne® the sac 
fro’ thi leendis, and the shon tak fro thi 
feet. And he dide so, goende ‘nakid and 

3vnshod*. And the Lord seide, As wente 
my seruaunt Isaie nakid and vnshod, of 
thre 3eer tocne and wuder shal ben vp on 

4 Egipt, and vp on Ethiope; so dryuenf shal 
the king off Assiries the caitifte of Egipt, 
and the transmygracioun of Etheope, 
3ung and old, nakid womman and vn- 
slhiod, discouered the ersis, to® the shen- 

sShepe of Egipt. And thei shul drede, 
and ben confoundid of Etheope, ‘ther 

shope, and of Egipt, ther glorie. And 
the dwellere of that yle shal seyn in that 
day, Whether this was oure hope, to 
whom wee floun in to helpe, that thei 
shulden delyueren vs fro the face of the 
king of Assiries; and what maner shul 
Wwe moun scapen ? 


CAP. XXI. 


1 The charge of the desert se. As 
whirlewyndus fro Affrich comen, fro the! 
2desert cam, fro the orrible lond. An hard 
viseoun told is to me; that vnleeuende is, 
vnfeithfully doth*; and he! that ‘is dis- 
trozere™, wasteth. Steejh vp, Elam, and 
bisege, Medeba; al his weilyng I made to 
scesen. Therfore ben fulfild my lendys 
with sorewe; anguysh weldide me, as 


¢ ynbynde E Sec. m.marg. AGHK. 
marg. €& Om. & prem. 
pr.m. that he x. 


d of 4. 


fon Nn, 


ISAIAH. 


e€ Om. £ pr.m. 
h bi ther fairnesse £ pr. m. 
7A, distro3ere is c prom. E prem, 


f the which 4. 


XX. I—XXI. 3. 


yug in the myddil of erthe; whom the2s 
Lord of oostis blesside, seiynge, Blessid 
be my puple of Egipt, and the werk of 
myn hondis be to Assiriens; but myne 
eritage be to Israel. 


CAP. XX. 


In the 3eer wherynne Tharthan entride1 
in to Azotus, whanne Sargon, the kyng of 
Assiriens, hadde sent hym, and he hadde 
fou3te ajens Azotus, and hadde take it; 
in that tyme the Lord spak in the hond2 
of Isaye, the sone of Amos, and seide, Go 
thou, and vnbynde the sak fro thi leendis, 
and take awei thi schoon fro thi feet. 
And he dide so, goynge nakid and vn- 
schood. And the Lord seide, As mys 
seruaunt Ysaie 3ede nakid and vnschood, 
a signe and greet wondur of thre 3eer 
schal be on Egipt, and on Ethiopie; so4 
the kyng of Assiriens schal dryue the cai- 
tifte of Egipt, and the passyng ouer of 
Ethiopie, a 3ong man and an eld man, 
nakid and vuschood, with the buttokis 
vohilid, to the schenschipe of Egipt. Ands 
thei schulen drede, and schulen be schent 
of Ethiopie, her hope, and of Egipt, her 
glorie. And a dwellere of this ile schalé 
seie in® that dai, This was our hope, to 
whichf we fledden for help, that thei 
schulden delyuere vs fro the face of the 
kyng of Assiryens; and hou moun we 
ascape ? 

CAP. XXI. 

The birthun of the forsakun see. Asi 
whirlewyndis commen fro the southwest, 
it cometh fro desert, fro the orible lond. 
An hard reuelacioun ts teld to me; he that2 
is vnfeithful, doith vnfeithfuli; and he that 
is a distriere, distrieth. Thou Helam, 
stie’, and thou, Meda, biseche; Y made al 
the weilyng therof for to ceesse. Therfors 
my leendis ben fillid with sorewe; an- 


‘Om. c sec.m. AGHK. threten E sec.im. 
1Om. zecuK. * shal ge pr.vice 1Om.ce Ee 


& stie up 1. 


XXL 4—17. 


anguysh of the trauailende with child; 
I fel doun, whan I herde; Iam disturbid, 
4whan I sa3. Myche languysshede myn 
herte, dercnesses stoneid maden me; Ba- 
bilon, my looued, put is to me ‘in to® 
amyracle. Sett the bord, bihold in? a 
toothil; etende and drinkende riseth, 
63ee princes, taketh to the terget. These 
thingus forsothe seide the Lord to me, 
Go, and put a tootere; and what euere 
7thing he shal see, telle he. And he sa3 
a char of two horse men, a ste3ere of" an 
asse, and a ste3ere vp of a camayle; and 
8he beheeld bisily by* myche looking, and 
he criede as a leoun, Vp on the toothil 
of the Lord I am stondende contynuelly 
bi day, and vp on my warde I am stond- 
9ende alle ny3tus. Lo! this cam, a man 
stejere of the carte of horse men. And 
he answerde, and seide, Is falle, is falle 
Babilon; and alle‘ grauen thingus of hys 
10 godus ben to-brosid in to the erthe. My" 
thressing, and the do3ter of my cornflor, 
the thingus that I herde of the Lord of 
tiostes, God of Irael, IY tolde to 30. The 
charge of Duma. To me he crieth fro 
Seir, O! kepere, what of the ny3t? O! 
i2kepere, what of the ny3t? The kepere 
seide, Ther cometh morutid, and ny3t ; 
if 3ee sechen, secheth, and beth conuertid, 
is3and cometh. The charge in Araby. In 
the wilde wode at euen 3ee shul slepen, 
14in the sties of Dodanym. A3encomende 
to the thristi berth water, that dwellen 
the” lond of the south; with loeues ajen- 
is cometh to the fleende. Fro the face for- 
sothe* of swerdes thei fledden, fro the 
face of the swerd stondende on, fro the 
face of the bowe bend, fro the face of the 
1sgreuous bataile. For these thingus seith 
the Lord to me, 3it in o 3er, as in the 3er 
of an hirid man, and ther shal ben take 
1zawey al the glorie of Cedar. And the 
relikis of the noumbre of the stronge 


Oin «A 
his £ pr.m. 


Pin to c pr. m. 


u With £ pr.m. ¥ Om. £ prem. 


ltwor khethisr. 1Om. 1 
P Om. CEFGIIIKMNPQRSUV, 
ucometh to met. VY of 1. 


hat 
° Om. cur. 
morwetijd Kvx. 


4 seith ax. Om. G pr. m. a. 
Win the K. 


m Om. CEFGIKMNNPQRSUVX. 
q Om. cur. 


ISAIAH. 261: 


gwische weldide me, as the angwisch of 
a womman trauelynge of child; Y felle 
doun, whanne Y herde; Y was disturblid, 
whanne Y si3. Myn herte fadide, derk-4 
nessis astonieden me; Babiloyne, my der- 
lyng, is set to me in to myracle. Settes 
thou a boord, biholde thou in to a toting 
place ; rise, 3e princes, etynge and drynk- 
ynge, take 3e scheeld. For whi the Lord« 
seide these thingis to me, Go thou, and 
sette a lokere; and telle he, what euer 
thing he seeth. And he si3 the® chare of7 
tweyne! horse men, the stiere of an asse, 
and the stiere of a camel; and he bihelde 
diligentli with myche lokyng, and criedes 
as a lioun, Y stonde contynueli bi dai on 
the totyng place of the Lord, and Y stonde 
bi alle ny3tis on my kepyng. Lo! this*9 
cometh, a man stiere of a carte of horse 
men. And Jsaie criede, and seide, Babi- 
loyne felle doun, felle doun; and alle the 
grauun ymagis of goddis therof ben al to- 
brokun in to erthe. Mi threschyng, and 10 
the dou3ter of my! cornfloor, Y haue teld 
to 3ou what thingis Y herde of the Lord 
of oostis, of God of Israel. The birthun 11 
of Duma. It crieth fro Seir to me, Kepere, 
what our™ of the" ni3t? ‘kepere, what° 
our? of 4 the’ ni3t?? The kepere seide, 12 
Morewtidt cometh, and ni3t; if 3e seken, 
seke 3e, and be 3e conuertid, and ‘come 3e". 
The birthun in’ Arabie. In the forest at 13 
euentid 3e schulen slepe, in the pathis of 
Dodanym. 3e that dwellen in the lond'4 
of the south, renne, and bere watir to the 
thristi; and renne 3e with looues tohym - 
that fleeth. For thei fledden fro the face 15 
of swerdis, fro the face of swerd nei3ynge, 
fro the face of bouwe bent, fro the face of 
greuouse batel. For the Lord seith these 16 
thingis to me, 3it in o 3eer, as in the 3eer 
of an hirid man, and al the glorie of Ce- 
dar schal be takun awei. And the reme-17 
nauntis of the noumbre of stronge archeris 

t alle 


? vp GUK. vp vpon 4. § Om. 4GHK. 


x Om, 4. 


n Om, CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


r Om. CEFGUKMNEQRSUVX. § Om.cur. ' The 


262 


archeres fro the sonus of Cedar shul be 
mynusht; the Lord forsothe, God of Is- 
rael, spac. 
CAP. XXII. 
1 The charge of the valey of viseouny. 
What forsothe and? to thee is*, for thon? 
stejedist vp, and thou al* in to the 
2rooues, ful of cry, myche vsid cite, cite ful 
out iojende? thi slayne not slayn‘ with 
swerd, ne ‘thi deade® deadef in batayle. 
3 Alle thi princes floun togidere, and harde 
ben bounde; alle that ben founde, ben 
4bounde togidere, aferr floun. Therfore 
I seide, Goth awei fro me, bitterli I shal 
weepe; wileth not ben bisy, that 3ee 
coumforte me vp on the wastite of the 
sdo3ter of my puple. Dai forsothe of sla3- 
ter, and of to-treding, and of wepingus, 
fro the Lord God of ostes, in the valey 
of viseoun; serching the wal, and ‘the gret 
6doyng® vp on the mounteyn. And Elam 
toc ani arewe caas, and the char of an 
hors man; and the target naknide* the 
z7wal. And chosen shul be thi valeis ful 
of foure horsid carres; and kny3tes shul 
ssette ther setes in the 3ate. And dis- 
coueryd shal be the coueryng! of Jude ; 
and thou shalt seen in that dai the ar- 
mourie place of the ‘house of the™ wilde 
9wode ; and the cliftus of the cite of Da- 
uid 3ee shul see, for thei ben multeplied. 
And 3ee han gedered the watris of the 
lonethere pond™™, ‘or sisterne™, and the 
houses® of Jerusalem 3ee han noumbred, 
and 3ee han distro3ed the housis, to 
ustrengthe the wal; and a lake 3ee han 
mad betwe? two walles, and the watyr of 
the olde fishpond??, ‘or systerne1; and 3ee 
beheelden not to" hym, that hadde mad 
it, and his werkere’ fro aferre 3ee sezen 
iznot. And the Lord God of ostus clepede 
in that dai to weping, and to weiling, 
and to ballidnesse, and to girding of at 
issac; and lo! joje and gladnesse to slen 


y the visioun szenk. 2Om.celE prem. 
4Om.cr. Ome pr.m, f not dead x. 
prem. \citees 4. ™Om.c prem. 
c ef alii. bitwixe 4. 


Eprom. Swerk a. t Om. anGuK. 


ISAIAH. 


® forsothe is E pr.m. 
h magnetied £ pr. m. 
mm fishpond c¢ pr. m. 
PP cysterne EF sec.m. marg. AGHK. 


ah 113. 


of the sones of Cedar schulen be maad 
lesse; for whi the Lord God of Israel spak. 


CAP. XXII. 


The birthun of the valei of visioun.} 
What also is to thee, for and al thou 
stiedist in to roouys, thou ful of ery,2 
a citee of myche puple, a citee ful out 
ioiynge ? thi slayn men weren not slayn 
bi swerd, nether thi deed men werer deed 
in batel. Alle thi princes fledden togidere, 3 
and weren boundun harde; alle that weren 
foundun, weren boundun togidere, thei 
fledden fer. Therfor Y seide, Go 3e awei4 
fro me, Y schal wepe bittirli; nyle 3e be 
bisie to coumforte me on the distriyng of 
the dou3ter of my puple. For whi a dais 
of sleyng, and of defoulyng, and of wep- 
yngis, 7s ordeined of the Lord God of 
oostis, in the valei of visioun; and he 
serchith the walle, and 7s worschipful on 
the hil. And Helam took an arowe caas,¢6 
and the chare of an horse man; and the 
scheeld made nakid the wal. And thi7 
chosun valeis, Jerusalem, schulen be ful 
of cartis; and kny3tis schulen putte her 
seetis in the 3ate. And the hilyng ofs 
Juda schal be schewid ; and thou schalt se 
in that dai the place of armuris of the 
hous of the forest; and 3e schulen se theo 
crasyngis of the citee of Dauid, for tho 
ben multiplied. 3e gaderiden togidere the 
watris of the lowere cisterne, and 3e noum- 10 
briden the housis of Jerusalem, and 3e dis- 
trieden housis, to make strong the wal; 
and 3e maden a lake bitwixe twei wallis,11 
and 3e restoriden the watir of the elde 
sisterne; and 3e biholden not to” hym, that 
made ‘thilke Jerusalem*, and 3e sienY not 
the worchere therof afer. And the Lord 12 
God of oostis schal clepe in that dai to 
wepyng, and to* morenyng, and to ballid- 
nesse, and to a girdil of sak; and lo! ioie1s 
and gladnesse is to sle caluys, and to 


b Om. x. 
ia Eprom. 
1 Om. cel E prim. 

4Om.c pr. m. E pr.m, AGHK. 


¢ Om. c ef E prom. 
k nakinde c. nakide E 
© hows aGuk. P betwen 
T Om. c prim. 


¥ Om, py. * it 1 ¢ert. thilke Jerusalem 1 marg. Y¥ sauzen 1 passim. © Om. 1. 


XXII. 14——24. 


calnes, to kutte wetheres" throtes, to ete 
flesh, and to drinke wyn; ete wee, and 
drinke wee, to moru forsothe wee shul 
11dien. And opened is in myn eres the 
vois of the Lord of ostes, Ther shal not 
be for3yue this wickidnesse to 3ou, to’ 
the tyme that 3ee die, seith the Lord 
15God of ostus. These thingus seith thie 
Lord God of ostus, Go, and weend in to 
hym that dwelleth in the tabernacle, to 
Sobnam, prouost of the temple; and thou 
1éshalt sey to’ hym, What thou heer, or 
as” who heer? for thou heewe out to thee 
heer a sepulcre, thou* heewe in an hee3, 
a memorial bisily in a ston a tabernacle 
17to thee. Lo! the Lord shal make thee 
to ben born awei, as is born awei a ca- 
poun, and as an amyse, so he shal vnder 
igreren thee. Crounende he shal crowne 
thee with tribulacioun; as a bal he shal 
sende thee in to a brod lond and spa- 
cious’; there thou shalt dien, and there 
shal be the char of thi glorie, and the 
19shenshipe of the hous of thi Lord. And 
I shal putte thee out fro thi stonding, 
and fro thi seruyse I shal depose thee. 
20 And it shal be, in that dai I shal clepe 
my seruaunt Eleachym, the sone of El- 


2ichie; and clothin hym with thi coete, and’ 


with thi girdil I? shal coumforten hym, 
and*® thi power I shal 3yne in to his 
hondus; and he shal ben as a fader to 
men dwellende Jerusalem», and to the 
22hous of Juda. And I shal 3yue the ke3e 
of the hous of Dauid vp on his shulder ; 
and he shal openen, and ther shal not be 
that close; and he shal closen, and ther 
23shal not be that opene. And I shal 
ficchen hym as a stake in the ‘feithfnl 
place, and he shal be in to the see of 
24a glorie of the hons of his fader. And I 
shal hangen vp on hym al the glorie of 
the hous of his fader, off vesseles dyuers 
kindis, eche litil vessel, fro the vesseles of 
wyn chalices vnto alle vessel of musikes. 


vfor kK. WOm. 4. 
b in Jerusalem 4k sec. m. 


u wedre AGHK. 
Om. kK. ®in n. 


aOm.a sec.m. 4 ther schal 1. 


ISAIAH. 


x that z pr.m. 
¢ place of feithful men F pr. m. 


b stake, ether a perche CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


263° 


strangle wetheris, to ete fleisch, and to 
drynke wyn; ete we, and drynke we, for 
we schulen die to morewe. And the vois 14 
of the Lord of oostis is schewid in myn 
eeris, This wickidnesse schal not be for- 
jouun to 30u, til 3e dien, seith the Lord 
God® of oostis. The Lord God of oostis 1s 
seith these thingis, Go thou, and entre to 
hymn that dwellith in the tabernacle, to 
Sobna, the souereyn of the temple; and 
thou schalt seie to hym, What thou here, 16 
ethir as who here? for thou hast hewe to 
thee a sepulcre here, thou hast hewe a 
memorial in hi3 place diligentli, a taber- 
nacle in a stoon to thee. Lo! the Lord17 
schal make thee to be borun ont, as a 
kapoun is borun out, and as a cloth, so 
he shal reise thee. He crowninge schal 18 
crowne thee with tribulacioun; he schal 
sende thee as a bal in to a large lond and 
wijd; there thou schalt die, and there schal 
be the chare of thi glorie, and the schen- 
schipe of the hous of thi Lord. And Y1y 
schal caste thee out of thi stondyng, and 
Y schal putte thee doun of thi seruyce. 
And it schal be, in that dai Y schal clepe 20 
my seruaunt Eliachim, the sone of Hel- 
chie; and Y schal clothe hym in thi coote, 21 
and Y schal coumforte hym with thi gir- 
dil, and Y shal 3yue thi power in to the 
hondis of hym; aud he schal be as a fadir 
to hein that dwellen in Jerusalem, and to 
the hous of Juda. And Y schal 3yue the 22 
keie of the hous of Dauyd on his schuldre; 
and he schal opene, and noon schal be that 
schal schitte; and he schal schitte, and 
noon schal** be that schal opene. And Y 23 
schal sette hym a stake” in a feithful place, 
and he schal be in to the® seete of glorie 
of the hous of his fadir. And thou schalt 2s 
hange on hym al the glorie of the hous of 
his fadir, diuerse kindis of vessels, eche 
litil vessel, fro the vesselis of cuppis ‘til tot 
ech vessel of musikis. In that dai, seith 25 
the Lord of oostis, the stake that was set 


Ya spaciouse Gpr.m.ux. %and Y 4, and GH. 


Caz, dyntol. 


264 


23 In that dai, seith the Lord of ostes, ther 
shal ben taken awey the stake that was 
ficchid in a feithful place, and be to- 
broken, and fallen ; and‘ pershe shal that 
that he hadde hangyd in it, for the Lord 
spac. 

CAP. XXIII. 

1 The charge of Tyry. elleth, 3ee 
shippes of the se, for wastid is the hous, 
whennus to® comen ‘thei werenf wont; fro 
the lond of Sethym it is opened to them. 

2Beth stylle, 3ee that dwellen in the ile, 
the chaffaring of Sidon; the men seilende 

souer the se fulfilden thee with manye 
watris; the sed of Nyli, the rip of the 
flod his frutes, and mad is the chaffare 
aof Jentiles. Ashame thou, Sidon, seith 
the se, the strengthe of the se, seiende, 
I trauailide not with child, and bar not, 
and nurshede not out 3ung childer, ne to 
sfulf waxing bro3te forth maidenes. Whan 
herd it shal be in Egipt, thei shuln so- 
rewen, whan thei shuln" heren of Tiro. 

6 Passeth the ses; 3elleth, that dwellen in 

7the ile. Whether not this 3o0ure is, that 
gloriede fro the rathere da3es in his eelde? 
leden shuln it aferr hir feet to pilgrym- 

sagen. Who tho3te this vp on Tirun sum 
tyme crouned, whos nededoeres princes, 
his marchaundus noble men of the erthe? 
9The Lord of ostes tho3te this, that he 
drawe doun the pride of alle glorie, and 
to shenshipe bringe doun alle the noble 
1omen of erthe. Passe ouer thi lond as the 
flod, thou do3ter of the se; ther is no 
lmore girdil to thee. His hond ouer the 
se he ‘strecchide, and disturbede! reumes. 
The Lord sente ajen Canaan, that he to- 
2trede his stronge men; and seide*, Thou 
shalt no mor leyn to, that thou glorie, 
chalengis sustenende, thou maden do3- 
ter of Sidon'. In Sichym risende ouer- 
seile thou™; there forsothe shal not ben 
izreste to thee. Lo! the lond of Caldeis such 
a puple was not; Assur foundide it; in 
to caitifte thei ouerladden the stalwrthe 


4that and x pr.m. © Om. £ pr.m. 


strecchen and disturben cz pr.m. * he seide 4. 


© selleth 1. 


ISAIAH. 


-turblide rewmes. 


f he was E pr.m. 
1 Sion c. 


XXII. 25——-XXIII. 13. 


in the feithful place, schal be takun awei, 
and it schal be brokun, and schal falle 
doun; and schal perische that hangide 
therynne, for the Lord spak. 


CAP. XXIII. 

The birthun of Tire. 3e schippis of1 
the see, 3elle®, for the hous is distried, fro 
whennus coumfort was wont to come; fro 
the lond of Cethym, and was schewid to 
hem. Be 3e stille, that dwellen in the ile, 2 
the marchaundie of Sidon; men passynge 
the see filliden thee in many watris; thes 
seed of Nylus is heruest, the flood «zs the 
corn therof, and it is maad the mar- 
chaundie of hethene men. Thou, Sidon, 4 
be aschamed, seide the see, the strengthe 
of the see, and seide, Y trauelide not of 
child, and Y childide not, and Y nurschide 
not 3onge men, and Y bron3te not fulli 
virgyns to encreessyng. Whanne it schals 
be herd in Egipt, thei schulen make so- 
rewe, whanne thei heren of Tire. Passee 
3e the sees; 3elle 3e, that dwellen in the ile. 
Whether this cifee is not 30ure, that hadde7 
glorie fro elde daies in his eldnesse? the 
feet therof schulen lede it fer, to go in pil- 
grymage. Who thou3te this thing on Tires 
sum tyme crownede, whos marchauntis 
weren princes, the selleris of marchaundie 
therof weren noble men of erthe? Theg 
Lord of oostis thou3te this thing, that he 
schulde drawe doun the pride of al glorie, 
and that he schulde bringe to schenschipe 
alle the noble men of erthe. Thou dou3-10 
ter of the see, passe thi lond as a flood; a 
girdil is no more to thee. It stretchide1 
forth his hond aboue the see, and dis- 
The Lord sente a3enes 
Canaan, for to al to-breke the stronge men 
therof; and he seide, Thou maide, the dou3- i2 
ter of Sidon, that suffrist caleng, schalt no 
more adde, that thou haue glorie. Rise 
thou, and passe ouer the see in to Sechym; 


there also no reste schal be to thee. Lo !13 
& the ful a. hOm. z prem. ishal 
m Om. c. 


f Wher ceteri fere passim. 


Rice K XIV, 6. 


men of it; thei vnderdoluen his houses, 
14thei putten it in to falling. 3elleth, 3ee 
shipes of the se, for doun wastid is 3oure 
15strengthe. And it shal be, in that dai in 
forjeting thou shalt be, O! Tire, seuenti 
jer, as the da3es of o king; after" seuenti 
jer forsothe to° Tiro shal be as a song 
16of a strumpet. Tac harpe, go aboute the 
cite, thou strumpet, to for3eting taken ; 
weel syng, ofte vse song, that mynde of 
1;thee be. And it shal be, after seuenti 
3er, the Lord shal visite Tirum, and 
bringen it a3een to his meedes ; and eft? 
it shal ben, whan it shal do fornyca- 
cioun with alle the reuines of the erthe, 
isvp on the face of the erthe. And his 
nede doyngus and his meedus shuln ben 
halewid to the Lord; thei shuln not ben 
hid4, ne leid vp; for to them that dwell- 
ede bifor the Lord shal be his nede do- 
yng, that thei ete into fulnesse, and be 
clad’ vn to oldnesse. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Loo! the Lord shal nakenen the erthe, 
and scateren it, and tormenten his face, 
zand distrozjen his dwelleris. And ther 
shal be, as the puple, so the prest ; and as 
the seruaunt, so his® lord; as the hand 
woman, so hir lady; as the biere, so he 
that sillith; as the vsurer,so he that taketh 
borewing ; as he that ajeen asketh, so he 
3that owitht. Bi scateryng shal be sca- 
tered the lond, and bi robbing shal be 
robbid ; the Lord forsothe spac this wrd. 
4Weilede and doun flowede the erthe, 
and it is feblid ; flowede doun the world, 
feblid is the hei3te of the puple of the 
slond, and the lond is slayn of his dwell- 
eris. For thei ouerpasseden the lawes, 
chaungeden the ri3t, scatereden the euere 
sdurende bond. For that cursing shal de- 


ISAIAH. 


265 


the lond of Caldeis, sich a puple was not; 
Assur foundide that Tyre; thei ledden 
ouer in to caitifte the strong men therof; 
thei myneden the housis therof, thei set- 
tiden it in to fallyng. 3elle, 3e schippis 14 
of the see, for 3oure strengthe is distried. 
And it schal be, in that dai, thou Tire, is 
schalt be in for3etyng bi seuenti 3eer, as 
the daies of o king; but aftir seuenti 
3eer, as the song of an hoore schal be to 
Tyre. Thou hoore, 3ouun to for3etyng, take 16 
an harpe, cumpasse the citee; synge thou 
wel, vse thou ofte a song, that mynde be 
of thee. And it schal be, aftir seuenti 3eer, 17 
the Lord schal visite Tire, and schal brynge 
it ajen to hise hiris; and eft it schal be, 
whanne it. schal do fornycacioun with alle 
rewmes of erthe, on the face of erthe. Andis 
the marchaundies, therof and the meedis 
therof schulen be halewid to the Lord; 
tho® schulen not be hid, nethir schulen be 
leid vp; for whi the marchaundie therof © 
schal be to hem that dwellen bifore the 
Lord, that thei ete to fulnesse, and be 
clothid ‘til to® eldnesse. 


CAP. XXIV. 


Lo! the Lord schal distrie the erthe,1 
and schal make it nakid, and schal tur- 
mente the face therof; and he schal scater 
abrood the dwelleris therof. And it schal2 
be, as the puple, so the preest ; as the ser- 
uaunt, so his lord; as the handmaide, so 
the ladi of hir; as a biere, so he that 
sillith; as the leenere, so he that takith 
borewyng; as he that axith ajen, so he 
that owith. Bi distriyng the lond schals 
be distried, and schal be maad nakid by 
rauyschyng; for whi the Lord spak this 
word. The erthe morenyde, and_ fleet 
awei, and is maad sijk; the world fleet 
awei, the hiz3nesse of the! puple of erthe is 
maad sijk, and the erthe is slayn of hises 
dwelleris. For thei passiden lawis, chaung- 
iden ri3t, distrieden euerlastynge boond of 


Mand after x. °Om. Eprom. Pofitx. 4confoundid s pr.m. ‘clothid azcux. § the 4cHK. 
£ borewith c pr. m. 
Sthein. bvntor iQOm.1. 
VOL. III. Mm 


266 


uoure the lond, and synnen shuln his 
dwelleris; and" therfore waxen woode 
shul his tilieres, and ther shul be lafte 
zfewe men. Weilede the vyndage, feblid 
is the vyne; inwardli weileden alle that 
sgladeden in herte. Cesede the io3e of 
tymbris, restide the soun of men glad- 
ede; al stille was the swetnesse of the 
sharpe. With song thei shul not drinke 
wyn; bitter shal be the drinke to men 
10 drinkende it. Al defouled is the cite of 
vanyte; closid is eche hous, no man en- 
iitrende. Cry shal ben vp on the wyn in 
the stretes, desert is alle gladnesse, trans- 
i2latid is the io3e of the lond. Laft is in 
the huge cite wildernesse, and wrecchid- 
isnesse shal opressen the 3ates. For these 
thingus shul be in the imyddel of the lond, 
in the myddel of puples, what maner if 
fewe oile beries that lefen ben shaken out 
of the olyue tree, and cluster braunches, 
14whan were endid the vyndage. These 
shul reren vp ther vois, and preisen, 
whan shal be glorified the Lord; thei 
15shul ne3en fro the se. For that in tech- 
ingus glorifieth the Lord; in iles of the 
se, the name of the Lord God of Irael. 
16Fro the endes of the erthe preisingus’ 
wee han herd, the glorie of the ri3twis. 
And I seide, My priue thing to me, my 
priue thing to¥ me. ‘Wo to me*, the 
lawe breking thei breeken, and in lawe 
breking of the ouer don thingus thei 
17breeken the lawe. Ferd, and dich, and 
grene vp on thee, that dwellere art of 
isthe erthe. And it shal be, he that shal 
flee fro the face of dredeY, shal falle in 
to the dich ; and he that taketh hymself 
out? of the dich, sha) be holden with the 
grene ; for the gooteres fro he3e thyngus 
ben opened, and smyte togidere shul ben 
19the foundemens of the erthe. With to- 
breking shal ben to-broken the erthe, 
20 with to-brosing shal be to-brosid the 
lond, with to-stering shal be to-stired the 
erthe, with shaking shal be ‘to-shaken* 


u Om. E pr.m. 


Vv preisynge 4, 
® shaken 4c pr. m. Pee 


* translatid, ether takun awey CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


SUVXY. 


ISAIAH. 


w Om. E prom. 


XXIV. 7—~20. 


pees. For this thing cursyng schal deuoure 6 
the erthe, and the dwelleris therof schulen 
do synne ; and therfor the louyeris therof 
schulen be woode, and fewe men schulen 
be left. Vyndage morenyde, the vyne is7 
sijk; alle men that weren glad in herte 
weiliden. The ioie of tympans ceesside, 8 
the sowne of glad men restide; the swet- 
nesse of harpe with song was stille. Theis 
schulen not drynke wyn; a bittere drynk 
schal be to hem that schulen dryuke it. 
The citee of vanyte is al to-brokun; ech to 
hous is closid, for no man entrith. Cry 
schal be on wyn in streetis, al gladnesse 
is forsakun, the ioie of erthe is ‘takun 
aweik. Desolacioun! is left in the citee, 12 
and wretchidnesse schal oppresse the 3atis. 
For these thingis schulen be in the myddis 13 
of erthe, in the myddis of puplis, as if a 
fewe fruitis of olyue trees that ben left 
ben schakun of fro the olyue tre, and 
racyns, whanne the vyndage is endid. 
These men schulen reise her vois, and 4 
schulen preise, whanne the Lord schal be 
glorified ; thei schulen schewe signes of 
gladnesse fro the see. For this thing glo-15 
rifie 3e the Lord in techyngis; in the ilis 
of the see glorifie 3e the name of the 
Lord God of Israel. Fro the endis ofis 
erthe we han herd heriyugis, the glorye 
of the iust. And Y seide, My priuyte 
to me, my pryuyte to me. Wo to me, 
trespassours han trespassid, and han tres- 
passid bi trespassyng of brekeris of the 
lawe. Ferdfulnesse, and a diche, and aij 
snare on thee, that art a dwellere of erthe. 
And it schal be, he that schal fle fro theis 
face of ferdfulnesse, schal falle in to the 
diche ; and he that schal delyuere hym silf 
fro the dich, schal be holdun of the snare ; 
for whi the wyndows of hijze thingis ben 
openyd, and the foundementis of erthe 
schulen be schakun togidere. The erthe 19 
schal be brokun with brekyng, the erthe 20 
schal be defoulid with defoulyng, the erthe 
schal be mouyd with mouyng, the erthe 


xOm.cpr.m. Ythe drede 4EGHK. 2 Om. 4. 


1 Soleyntee, ether desalacioun CEFGHIKMNPQR 


XXIV. 21—XXvV. 7. 


2ithe erthe, as a drunken man. And it 
shal be don awey, as the tabernacle of o 
ny3t, and greuen it shal his wickidnesse>; 
and it shal falle, and it shal not leyn to, 
that it rise a3een. And it shal be, in that 
dai visite® shal the Lord vp on the kny3t- 
hod of heuene in® he3, and vp on the 
kingus of the lond, that ben vp on erthe. 

22And thei shul ben gedered togidere in 
the gederyng togidere of a bundel in to 
the lake, and thei shul ben closid there 
in prisoun; and aftir many da3es thei 

23shul be visitid. And the moone shal 
shamen, and confoundid shal be the 
sunne, whan shal regne the Lord of 
ostes in the hil of Sion, and in Jerusa- 
lem; and in the si3t of ther olde men he 
shal ben glorified. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Lord, my God thou art, I shal en- 
haunce thee, and I shal knouleche to 
thi name; for thou hast do merueilous 
2thingus, olde feithful tho3tus. Amen. For 
thou hast set the cite in to noyse‘, the 
huge stronge cite in to falling, the hous 
of alienes, that it be not cite, and in to 
3euermor it shal not ben bild® vp. Vp on 
this shal preise thee a strong puple, the 
cite of stalwrth fole of kinde shal drede 
4thee. For thou art mad strengthe to 
the pore, strengthe to the helpeles in his 
tribulacioun, hope fro the whirlewynd, 
a shadewe hilet fro hete; the spirit for- 
sothe of stalwrthe men as a whirlewind 
sputtende doun a wal. As with hete in 
thrist, the noise of alienes thou shalt 
meken; and as with hete vnder the cloude 
feerly brennende, the braunches of stronge 
é6men thou shalt make to welewyn. And 
the Lord of ostes shal make to alle pu- 
ples in this hil a feste of fatte bestes, a 
feste of vyndage of merewi fatte thingus, 
zof vyndage most pure. And he shal 
stumble doun in this hil" the face of the 
bond, bounde togidere vp on alle puples’, 
and the web that ‘he hath* weuede vp 


b wickenesse x. © areren E pr.m. 
& bildid 4, » hiz £ prim. 


din £ prom. 
i the peplis x. 


m shent, ether ashamid CEFGHKMNPQRSUVXY. schent 1. 


ISATAH. 


267 — 


schal be schakun with schakyng, as a 
drunkun man. And it schal be takunat 
awei, as the tabernacle of o ny3t, and the 
wickidnesse therof schal greue it; and it 
schal falle down, and it schal not adde, for 
to rise ajen. And it schal be, in that dai 
the Lord schal visite on the kny3thod of 
heuene an hi3, and on the kyngis of erthe, 
that ben on erthe. And thei schulen be 22 
gaderid togidere in the gadering togidere 
of a bundel in to the lake, and thei schulen 
be closid there in prisoun ; and aftir many 
daies thei schulen be visited. And thee 
moone schal be aschamed, and the sunne 
schal be confoundid™, whanne the Lord of 
oostis schal regne in the hil of Sion, and 
in Jerusalem, and schal be glorified in the 
si3t of hise eldre men. 


CAP. XXV. 


Lord, thou art my God, Y schal en-1 
haunse thee, and Y schal knouleche to thi 
name; for thou hast do marueils, thin elde 
feithful thou3tis. Amen. For thou haste 
set the citee in to a biriel, a strong citee 
in to fallyng, the hous of aliens, that it be 
not a citee, and be not bildid with outen 
ende. For this thyng a strong puple schals 
herie thee, the citee of strong folkis schal 
drede thee. For thou art maad strengthe 4 
to a pore man, strengthe to a nedi man in 
his tribulacioun, hope fro whirlwynd, a 
schadewyng place fro heete; for whi the 
spirit of stronge men zs as a whirlewynd 
hurlynge the wal. As bi heete in thirst,s 
thou schalt make meke the noise of aliens ; 
and as bi heete vndur a cloude brennynge, 
thou schalt make the siouns of stronge men 
to fade. And the Lord of oostis schal make 6 
in this" hil to alle puplis the feeste of 
fatte thingis, the feeste of vyndage of fatte 
thingis ful of merow, of vyndage wel 
fyned. And he schal caste doun in this?7 
hil the face of boond, boundun togidere on 
alle puplis, and the web which he weuyde 
on alle naciouns. And he schal caste douns 
deth with outen ende, and the Lord God 


© Om. £ prim. fa mynde ston hipil c e¢ £ pr. m. 


k it c prom. E p.m. 


nhis1t. © his t. 


M in 2 


268 


son alle nacyouns. He shal stumble doun 
deth! in to euere lasting, and™ don awei 
shal the Lord God eche tere fro alle face; 
and the repref of his puple he shal don 
awey fro al erthe; for the Lord spac. 
9 And they shul sey in that day, Lo! the 
Lord oure God this; wee han abiden hym, 
and he shal sauen vs; this the Lord; wee 
han suffryd" hym, and wee shul ful out 
iojen, and gladen in his helthe 3yuere. 
10 For the hond of the Lord shal reste in 
this hil, and threschid® shal ben Moab 
vnder hym, as ben to-treden strawes in a 
i1wayn. And he shal strecchen out his 
hondis vnder hym, as a swymmiere 
streccheth out to swymmen 3; and he shal 
meeken his glorie with the ‘hurling toP 
i20f his hondis. And the forsemens, ‘or 
strengthis\, of thin he3e walles shul to- 
gidere falle, and be lowid, and drawen 
un to the erthe, vnto poudere. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 In that day shal ben sungen this song 
in the lond of Juda. The huge cite of 
oure strengthe™ Sion; a saueour shal be 
set in it, the wal and the bifor walling. 
2Qpeneth the 3ates, and ther shal go in 
3a ri3twis fole’, kepende treuthe. The olde 
errour 3ide awei; thou shalt kepe pes, 
pes‘, for in ‘thee, Lord", wee han hopid. 
4 3ee han hopid in the Lord, fro the’ euere 
lastende worldus, in the Lord God, strong 
5in to withoute eude. For he shal in- 
bowe the dwelleris in heizte, the he3e 
cite he shal meeken“; he shal meke it 
vn to the erthe, drawen it doun in to 
6pouder. To-trede it shal the foote of the 
7pore, the goyngus of helpeles men. The 
sty of the ri3twis is euene, euene the path 
sof the ri3twis to gon. And in the sty of 
thi domes, Lord, wee han sustened thee ; 
thi name, and thi mynde, in desyr of 
gsoule. My soule shal desire thee in ny3t, 
but and with my spirit in myn herte in- 
ward thingus; fro erly I shal wake* to 
1Om. £ pr.m. 


hartlynge x. 
u the Lord c. 


Phis1. 4 vnto dust 1. 
biforwal vx. S$ vntor. + 


m deth and £ prem. 
4 Om. c et & pr.m. 


v Om. kK. W meken it x. 


Om. 1. 


ISAIAH. 


1 sustened c pr. m. 
" prete strengthe c pr. m. 
* maken x. 


XXV. 8—XXVI. 9. 


schal do awey ech teer fro ech face; and 
he schal do awei the schenschipe of his 
puple fro ech lond; for the Lord spak. 
And thei schulen seie in that dai, Lo's 
this 7s oure God; we abididen hym, and 
he schal saue vs; this is the Lord; we 
suffriden him, and we schulen make ful 
out ioie, and schulen be glad in his helthe. 


For whi the hond of the Lord schal reste 10 


in this? hil, and Moab schal be threischid 
vadur hym, as chaffis ben stampid in a 
wayn. 
hondis vndur hym, as a swymmere stretch- 
ith forth to swymmie; and he schal make 
low the glorye of him with hurtlyng doun 


ofhise hondis, And the strengthingis of 12 


thin hi3 wallis schulen falle donn, and 
schulen be maad low, and schulen be 
drawun doun to the erthe, ‘til to the 
dust4. 


CAP. XXVI. 


In that dai* this song schal be sungun1 
in the lond of Judat. The citee of oure 
strengthe{; the sauyour schal be set ther 
yune, the wal and the ‘fore wal". Opene2 
3e the 3atis, and the iust folk schal entre, 
kepynge treuthe. The elde errour is gon3 
awel; thou schalt kepe pees, pees, for thou, 
Lord, we hopiden in thee. 3e han hopids 
in the Lord, in euerlastynge worldis§, in 
the Lord God, strong with outen ende. Fors 
he schal bowe doun hem that dwellen an 
hi3, and he schal make low an hi3 citee|] ; 
he schal make it low ‘til to’ the erthe; he 
schal drawe it doun ‘til to’ thet dust. Thee 
foot of a pore man schal defoule it, and 
the steppis of nedi men schulen defoule it. 
The weie of a inst man is ri3tful, the path7 
of a inst man zs ri3tful to go. And in thes 
weie of thi domes, Lord, we suffriden thee ; 
thi name, and thi memorial 7s in desir of 
soule. My soule schal desire thee in thes 
ni3t, but also with my spirit in myn en- 
trails; fro the morewtid Y schal wake to 


° wynewid c e¢ E pr.m. 


P hurlynge 4. 
8 fole of kinde £ pr.m. 


t Om. 4x sec. m. 


* fore wal [biforwal ck], ether a strengthe bifore the wall CEFGHIKMNPQRSUY. 


And he schal stretche forth hisei1 


* dai; that is, 
whanne the 
doom is endid. 
Lire here. x. 

t+ Juda; that 
is interpretid 
knowlechinge 
of Goddis heer- 
ijng. Lire here. 
K. 


t Sion; that is, 
heuenli citee, 
whois excel- 
lence mai not 
be declarid bi 
mannus wordis; 
this word Sion 
is nether in 
Ebrew nether 
in bokis amend- 
id. Lire here. 


K. 

§ worldiss that 
is, to gete to 
him euerlasting 
lijf. x. 

Il citee; that is, 
citees in wiche 
pride and 
othere vicis ben 
plenteuous. 
Lire here. X. 


XXVI. 10——21. 


thee. Whan thou shalt don thi domes in 


the erthe, ri3twisnesse shul lernen alle . 


1o0the dwelleris of the world. Haue wee 
mercy to the vnpitouse, and he shal not 
lerne to do rij3twisnesse ; in the lond of 
halewis wicke thingus he dide, and he 
shal not see the glorie of the Lord. 
11 Lord, be enhauncid thin hond, that thei 
seeY not; see and be confoundid the en- 
uyende? puples, and fyr thin enemys de- 
y2uoure. Lord, thou shalt 3yuen pes to vs, 
alle forsothe oure werkes thou wro3tist 
13in? vs. Lord oure God, lordis weldeden 
vs, with oute thee; only in thee recorde 
14 wee of thi name. Diende lyue thei uot, 
and ieauntis ryse thei not a3een. Ther- 
fore thou hast visityd, and to-brosedest 
hem, and lost al the mynde of them; and 
thou hast for3yne to the fol of kinde, 
1s Lord, thou hast for3oue to the fole of 
kynde. Whether glorified thou art? thou 
hast ‘drawen along® alle the termes of 
isthe erthe. Lord, in anguysh thei so3ten 
thee; in tribulacioun of grucching thi lore 
17to them. As she that conceyuede, whan 
she shulde nezhe to the trauailing of 
child, sorewende crieth® in hir sorewes, 
so weet ben maad fro thi face, Lord. 
18 Wee han conceyued, and as wee han 
born, and bro3te forth the spirit of helthe; 
rij3twisnesse wee han not don in erthe, 
therfore fellen not the dwelleris of the 
19erthe. Lyuen shul thi deade, my® slayne 
men shuln a3een rise. Beth wakid, and 
preiseth, 3ee that dwellen in ponder; for 
the dew of 1i3t thi dew, and the lond of 
ieauntus thou shalt drawe donn in to 
20falling. Go, my puple‘, entre in to thi 


bed places, close thi dores vp on thee, be . 


hid a litil while, to the tyme that passe 

2imyn& indignacioun. Lo! forsothe the 
Lord shal go out fro his hoely place, that 
he visite the wickidnesse® of the dwell- 
ere of the erthe a3en hym; and the erthe 
shal opene his blod, and shal no more 
koueren his slayn men. 


y Om. £ sec.m.  enuyying see £ sec.m. 


4 thei £ pr.m. 
££ wickenesse £. 


riztwisnesse 1. 


ISAIAH. 


- hast maad fer fro thee all the endis of 


2 Om. kK. 
€ thin Ac pr. m. K sec. m. thi E pr.m. 


uu forziue 1. 


269 . 


thee. Whanne thou schalt make thi domes 
in erthe, alle dwelleris of the world schu- 
len lerne ri3tfulnesse. Do we merci to the 10 
wickid man, and he schal not lerne to do 
ri3tfulnesse"; in the lond of seyntis he 
dide wickid thingis, and he schal not se 
the glorie of the Lord. Lord, thin hond 11 
be enhaunsid, that thei se not; puplis 
hauynge enuye se, and be schent, and fier 
deuvoure thin enemyes. Lord, thou schalt ie 
3yue pees to vs, for thou hast wrou3t alle 
oure werkis in vs. Oure Lord God, lordisi3 
hadden vs in possessioun, withouten thee ; 
oneli in thee haue we mynde of thi name. 
Thei that dien, lyne not, and giauntis14 
risen not a3jen. Therfor thou hast visityd, 
and hast al-to broke hem, and thou hast 
lost al the mynde of hem; and Lord, thou 
hast forjoue” to a folc, thou hast for3oue"™ 1s 


to a fole. Whether thou art glorified*? thou — * glorified ; 


that is, of hem 
bi penaunce ? 
nay, for thei 


erthe. Lord, in angwisch thei sou3ten 16, \usiden the 
thee; in the tribulacioun of grutchyng thi tyme of pe. 
doctryn tohem. As sche that conseyuede, 17 “ere. x. 
whanne sche neizeth sorewful to the child 
beryng, crieth in her sorewis, so we ben 

maad, Lord, of thi face. We han con-is 
seyned, and we han as trauelid of child, 

and we han childid the spirit of helthe ; 

we diden not ri3tfulnesse in erthe. Therfor 

the dwelleris of erthe fellen”’ not doun; 

thi deed men schulen lyue, and my slayn 19 

men schulen rise ajen. 3e that dwellen 

in dust, awake, and herie; for whi the deew 

of li3t 7s thi deew, and thou schalt drawe 

doun the lond of giauntis in to fallyng. 

Go thou, my puple, entre in to thi beddis, 20 

close thi doris on thee, be thou hid a litil 

at a moment, til indignacioun passe. For 21 

lo! the Lord schal go out of his place, to 

visite the wickidnesse of the dwellere of 

erthe ajens hym; and the erthe schal 
schewe his blood, and schal no more hile 


hise slayn mel. 


¢ she erieth AEGHK. 


b longid out c ef & pr. m. is 
& Om. E pr. m. 


f puple with me z pr.m. 


v felden 1 passim. 


270 ISAIAH. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 In that dai viseten shal the Lord in 
his harde swerd, and gret, and strong, 
vp on leuyathan, an eddere, ab Jeuonr, 
and vp on leuyathan, a‘ crookid wounde 
serpent*; and he shal sle the whal, that 
2is in the se. In that day the vyne3erd! 
3of good cleer wyn shal synge to hym. I 
the Lord that kepe it, feerli shal heelden 
out to it, lest par auenture it be visitid 
4azen it; ny3t and dai I kepe it, indigna- 
cioun is not to me. Who shal 3yue me a 
thorne, and a brere? In bataile I shal go 
svp on it, I shal brennen it togidere. Or 
more I shal holde my strengthe? He shal 
do pes to me, pes he shal don to me. 
6 Who shal go out with bure fro Jacob? 
Flouren and burioune shal Irael, and 
they shul fulfille the face of the world 
7 with sed. Whether after the plage of the 
smytende hymself he smot hym? or as he 
sloo3 the slayne men of hym, so he is 
sslayn? In mesure a3en mesure, whan leid 
to it shal be, he shal deme it; he bitho3te 
in his harde spirit, by the day of hete. 
9Therfor vp on this shal ben forjouen 
wickidnesse to™ the hous of Jacob, and 
this al the frute, that be don awei his 
symne, whan he shal leyn alle the stones 
of the auter as the"hurtlid stones of askes®. 
Stonde shul not the maumet wodes, and 
10the maumet wasshing temples. Forsothe 
the strengthid cite shal be desolat, the 
faire sha] ben forsake, and lafte as desert; 
there? shal be fed the calf, and there shal 
he lyn, and waste the ouermostes of it. 
i1In the dro3te of his rip to-treden shul 
ben wymmen, comende and techende it. 
Forsothe ther is not the puple wys, ther- 
fore shal4 not han mercy of it, that made 
it; and that" foormede it, shal not spare 
i2to it. And it shal be,in that dai shal the 
Lord smyte, fro the wombe of the flod 
vuto the strem of Egipt ; and 3ee shul be 
gedered togidere oon and oon, 3ee sonus 
130f Irael. And it shal be, in that dai 


hand acux. iOm.r prem. 


° asshen 4. asken EGH. P wher £ pr.m. 


k Om. E prem. 
G he schal 4G sec. m. K sec. m. 


XXVIII. I—13. 


CAP. XXVII. 


In that dai the Lord schal visite in his1 
hard swerd, and greet, and strong, on 
leuyathan, serpent, a barre, and on leuy- 
athan, the crookid serpent; and he schal 
sle the whal, which is in the see. In that 2 
dai the vyner of cleen wyn and good schal 
synge tohim. Yam the Lord that kepe3 
that vyner; sudeynli Y schal 3yue drynke 
to it, lest perauenture it be visitid a3zens 
it; ny3t and dai Y kepe it, indignacioun4 
is not to me. Who schal 3yue me a thorn 
and brere? In batel Y schal go on it, Y 
schal brenne it togidere. Whether ratheres 
Y schal holde my strengthe? It schal make 
pees to me, it schal make pees to me, for 
the merit of hem that schulen go out withs 
fersnesse fro Jacob. Israel schal floure and 
brynge forth seed, and thei schulen fille 
the face of the world with seed. Whether? 
he smoot it bi the wounde of the puple 
of Jewis smytynge hym? ether as it killide 
the slayn men of hym, so it was slayn ? 
In mesure ajens mesure, whanne_ it schals 
be cast awei, he schal deme it; he bi- 
thou3te in his hard spirit, bi the dai of 
heete. Therfor on this thing wickidnesse 9 
schal be forjouun to the hous of Jacob, 
and this schal be al the fruyt, that the 
synne therof be don awei, whanne it hath 
set all the stoonys of the auter as the 
stoonys of aische hurtlid doun. Wodis 
and templis schulen not stonde. Forsothe 10 
the strong citee schal be desolat, the fair 
citee schal be left, and schal be forsakun 
as a desert; there a calf schal be lesewid, 
and schal ligge there, and schal waste the 
hiznessis therof. In the drynesse of ripe 1! 
corn therof wymmen comynge, and thei 
that techen it, schulen be al to-brokun. 
Forsothe it is not a wijs puple, therfor he 
that made it, schal not haue mercy on it ; 
and he that formyde it, schal not spare it. 
And it schal be, in that dai the Lord schal 12 
smyte thee, fro the botme of the flood ‘til 


‘to’ the stronde of Egipt; and 3e sones of 


IvynecctEpr.m. ™vponepr.m. hex. 


T he that . 


W vnto 1. 


XXVIII. 1—g. 


shal be trumpid in a gret trumpe, and 
ther shul comen that weren lost, fro the 
lond of Assiries, and that weren cast 
awei, fro the lond of Egipt; and thei 
shul honouren the Lord, in the hoeli hil 
in’ Jerusalem. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 Wo to the crowne of pride, to the 
drunke men of Effraym, and to the flour 
fallende doun of the glorie of his ful out 
io3yng, that weren in‘ the cop of the 

2valei most fat, errende of wyn. Lo! the 
stalwrthe and the stronge Lord, as the 
bure of hail, the tempest al brekende, as 
the bure of manye flowende watris, and 

3sent" out vp on the spaciouse erthe. With 
feet shal be to-trede’ the croune of pride 
sof the drunke men of Effraym, and the 
flour shal be doun fallende of the glorie 
of his ful out io3ing, that is vp on the 
cop of the valei of fatte thingus, as the 
biforn rijp frute bifor the rijpnesse of 
heruest ; the whiche thing whan shal be- 
holde the seere, anoon as with hond he 
sshal holden, hé shal deuoure it. In that 
dai shal be the Lord of ostes the croune 
of glorie, and the garlond of ful¥ out 
6io3ing, to the residue of his puple; and 
the spirit of dom to the sittere vp on the 
trone, and strengthe to ther men turn- 
ende a3een fro the bataile to the 3ate. 
7These also for wyn* knewen not treuthe’, 
and for drunkenesse thei erreden ; preest 
and profete knewen not for drunkenesse ; 
thei ben sopen awei of? wyn, thei err- 
eden in drunkenesse; thei knewe not the 
sseere, thei vnknewe dom. Alle forsothe 
boordis ben fulfild with the? vome® and¢ 
filthis, so that ther were no more place. 

9 Whom shal he teche kunnyng, and whom 
to vnderstonde shal he make the her- 
yng? The wened from myle, the put awei 


Sof acuK. tto A. 


u the sent £ pr.m. 
prom. ¥Y Om. E pr. m. 


Zwith 4. ® Om. senK, 


x erride 1. 


ISAIAH. 


Vv to-troden £. 
b vomes c pr. m. 


Yand a. 


o71 


Israel, schulen be gaderid oon and oon. 
And it schal be, in that dai me schal come13 
with a greet trumpe, and thei that weren 
lost, schuien come fro the lond of Assi- 
riens, and thei that weren cast out, schulen 
come fro the lond of Egipt; and they 
schulen worschipe the Lord, in the hooli 
hil in Jerusalem. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


Wo to the coroun of pride, to the: 
drunkun men of Effraym, and to the flour 
fallynge doun of the glorie of the ful out 
ioiyng therof, that weren in the cop of 
the fatteste valei, and erridenx of wyn. 
Lo! the my3ti and strong Lord, as thee 
feersnesse of hail, aY whirlwynd brekynge 
togidere, as the fersnesse of many watris 
flowynge, and sent out on a large lond. 
The coroun of pride of the drunken men3 
of Effraym schal be defoulid with feet, 
and the flour of glorie of the ful out ioi-4 
yng of hym, that is on the cop of valei? 
of fat thingis, schal be fallyng doun, as a 
tymeli thing bifore the ripenesse of her- 
uest ; which whanne a man seynge bi- 
holdith, anoon as he takith with hond, he 
schal deuoure it. In that dai the Lord ofs 
oostis schal be a coroun of glorie, and a 
garlond of ful out ioiyng, to the residue of 
his puple; and a spirit of doom to* hyine 
that sittith on the trone, and strengthe to 
hem that turnen a3en fro batel to the 3ate. 
But also thei knewen not for wyn, and7 
erriden for drunkenesse; the preest and 
profete knewen not for drunkenesse; thei 
weren sopun up of wyn, thei erriden in 
drunkenesse; thei knewen not a profete, 
thei knewen not doom. For whi alles 
bordis weren fillid with spuyng and filthis, 
so that ther was no more place. Whoms 


_ schal he teche kunnyng, and whom schal 


he make to vndurstonde heryng? Men 
wenyd fro mylk, men drawun awei fro 
tetis. For whi comaunde thou, comaunde 10 


x Forsothe thise also first £ 
¢ of E pr.m. 


w the ful a. 


2 the valei 1. © 8 of N. 


279 ISAIAH. 


iofro tetes. For send, eft? send; send, eft4 
send; abyd, eft* byde; abijd, eft? bijd ; 
ii litil there, litil there. In the speche for- 
sothe of the lippe, and in an othir tunge 
igshal ben spoke to this puple, to whom 
he seide, This is my reste; releeueth the 
wery, and that is my refreshing; and thei 
is wolden not heren. And ther shal be to 
them the wrd of the Lord, Send, eft 
send; send, eft send; abijd, eft bijd*; 
abijd, eft bijd®; litil there, litil there ; 
that thei go, and falle baeward, and be 
isto-brosid, and gnared, and taken. For 
that hereth the wrd of the Lord, 3ee 
men gileris, that lordshipen vp on my 
ispuple that is in Jerusalem. 3ee seiden 
forsothe, Wee han smyte pes bond with 
deth, and with helle wee han maad co- 
uenaunt; scourge flowend whan shal 
passe, shal not come vp on vs, for wee 
han set lesyng oure hope, and with les- 
isyng we ben couered. Therfor these 
thyngus seith the Lord Gods, Lo! I shal 
senden in the foundemens of Sion a cor- 
ner ston precious, proued, in the founde- 
ment foundid; who shal beleeuen, hee3e 
iz7he not. And I shal putte in peis dom, 
and ri3twisnesse in mesure; and the hail 
shal to-turne vpsodoun the hope of les- 
yng, and the proteccioun watris shul 
flowe. And don awey shal be 3oure pes 
isbond with deth, and 3oure couenaunt 
with helle shal not stonde; scourge flow- 
ende whan shal passe, 3ee shul be to it 
19in to treding. Whan euere it shal passe, 
it shal take 30u awey ; for erly the moru- 
tid it shal passe, in® day and ny3t; and al 
onli the alone greuous birthene vnder- 
20stonding shal 3yue to the herende. Al 
to streit forsothe is the beddyng, so that 
an other falle doun ; and the shorte man- 
2itil either mai not couere. As forsothe 
in the hil of deuyseouns shal stonde the 
Lord, so in the valei, that is in Gabaon, 
he shal wrathe, that he do his werk; 


4 and eft £ pr.m. 


b Om. n. 4 wolden not 1. 


P © the which 1. 
iandt, 


k oothir 1. 


© abijd £ sec.m. abyde aux. fOm.c pr.m. E pr.m. 


e of nN. 


XXVIII. 10——21. 


thon’ a3en; comaunde thou, comaunde 
thou a3en; abide thou, abide thou a3en ; 
abide thou, abide thon ajen; a litil there, 
a litil there. For whi in speche of lippe, 1) 
and in other langage he schal speke to 
this puple, to which® he seide, This is my 12 
reste; refreische 3e a weri man, and this is 
my refreischyng; and thei nolden’ here. 
And the word of the Lord schal be to13 
hem, Sende thou, sende thon a3en; send 
thou, sende thou ajen; abide thou, abide 
thou a3en; abide thou, abide thou a3en; 
a litil there, a litil there; that thei go, and 
falle backward, and be al to-brokun, and 
be snarid, and be takun. For this thing, 14 
3e men scorneris, that ben lordis ouer® my 
puple which is in Jerusalem, heref the 
word of the Lord. For 3e seiden, We hané 15 
smyte a boond of pees with deth, and we 
han maad couenaunt with helle; a scourge 
flowynge whanne it schal passe, schal not 
come on vs, for we han set a leesyng oure 
hope, and we ben kyuered with a leesyng. 
Therfor the Lord God seith these thingis, 16 
Lo! Y schal sende in the foundementis of 
Sion a corner stoon preciouse, preuyd, 
foundid in the foundement; he that bi- 
leueth, schal not haaste. And Y schal 17 
sette doom in wei3te, and® ri3tfulnesse int 
mesure ; and hail schal distrie the hope of 
leesyng, and watris schulen flowe on pro- 
teccionn. And 3oure boond of pees with 
deth schal be don awei, and joure coue- 18 
naunt with helle schal not stonde; whanne 
the scourge flowynge schal passe, 3e schu- 
len be to it in to defoulyng. Whanne euer 19 
it schal passe, it schal take awei j3ow; 
for whi erli in the grey morewtid it schal 
passe, in dai and ni3t; and oonli trauel 
aloone schal 3yue vndurstondyng to her- 
yng. Forsothe the bed is streit, so that 20 
the tother* falle doun; and a schort mentil 
schal not hile ever either. For as in the a1 
hil of departyngis the Lord schal stonde, 
as in the valei, which is in Gabaon, he 


Om. x. b Om. c prim. 


fhereth 1. & haue1 passim. 4 and int. 


XXVHI. 22——XXIX. 4. 


alyen is the werk of hym, that he werke 
his werk; straunge is his werk fro hym. 
22And now wileth not bigilen, lest par 
auenture be streitid 3oure bondis; ful 
ending forsothe and abregging I haue 
herd of the Lord God of ostus, vp on al 
agerthe. With eres parceyueth, and her- 
eth. my vois; taketh heed, and hereth 
2amy fayre speche. Whether al day shal 
ere! the erere, that he sowe, and forth 
25 kutten, and) purge his erthe? Whether 
not, whan lie shal euenen therto his face, 
he shal sowe the sed gith, and the comyn 
sprengen, and sette the whete bi order, 
and barly, and myle, and ficche* in ther 
26coestes? And shal teche hyin his God, in 
27dom shal! Jeren™ hym. Forsothe not in 
sawes shal be throsshe gith, ne the wheel 
of a wayn vp on the comyn shal gon 
aboute; but in 3erde shal" ben shaken 
2sout gith, and the comyn in a staf. Bred 
forsothe shal be to-mynusht, but not in 
to euermor the thresshere shal thresshen 
it, ne shal trauaile it the whecl of the 
wayn, ne with his cles shal° to-mynushe 
agit. And that fro the Lord God of ostes 
wente out, that merueilous shulde make 
counseil, and magnefyen the? rightwys- 
nesse. 


CAP. XXIX. 
1 Wo! Ariel4, Ariel’, ‘that ts, Jerusalem, 
and auter*, cite that Dauid ouercam ; 
added is 3er to 3er, solempnetees ben 
gouerturned. And‘ I shal besette aboute 
Ariel, and it shal be dreri and sorewy; 
3and it shal be to me as Aryel. And I 
shal cumpasse as a bal in thi cumpas, 
and I shal kaste a3en thee an hep, and 
the strengthis I shal sette in to thi? 
aseging. Thou shalt be meeckid, of the 
erthe thou shalt speke, and of the loewe’ 
erthe shal ben herd thi speche; and shal 


J that he c pr m. 
P Om. AEGHK. 
u Om. c pr. m. 


leren ¢ pr.m, 
© Om, cE pr.m. 
E prm. * Om. £ prom. 


lwerk is A see.m. ™eryes. 2 OmR. 


ether engynnes CEFGIIIKMNPQRSUVXY. 
VOL. HI. 


ISAIAH. 


k vicia c ef E pr.m. 
4 to Ariel c prim. B pr.m. 
v Om. E pr.m. 


© speere, clher trendil CEI GHIKMNPQRSUY. 
4 bisechyng a. bysekynge s. 
Nn 


273 


schal be wroth, that he do his werk; his 
werk! alien, that he worche his werk; his 
werk is straunge fro hym. And now nyle22 
3e scorne, lest perauenture 3oure boondis 
be maad streit togidere; for Y herde of 
the Lord God of oostis, endyng and a- 
breggyng on al erthe. Perseyue 3e with 23 
eeris, and here 3e my vois; perseyue 
3e, and here 3e my speche. Whether24 
he that erith, schal ere™ al dai, for to 
sowe, and schal be kerue, and purge his 
londe? Whether whanne he hath maad 2s 
euene the face therof, schal he not sowe 
gith*, and sprenge abrood comyn? and he 
schal not sette wheete bi ordre, and barli, 

and mylium, and fetchis in his coostis? He ae 
And his God schal teche hym, in doom he 264 & ¢. 
schal teche hym. Forsothe gith schal not 27 

be threischid in sawis, and a wheel of a 

wayn schal not cumpasse on comyn; but 

gith schal be betun out with a 3erd, and 

comyn with a staf. Sotheli breed schal2s 

be maad lesse, but he that threischith 

schal not threische it with outen ende, ne- 

ther schal tranele it with a wheel of a 

wayn, nether schal make it lesse with hise 

clees. And this thing 3ede out of thes 

Lord God of oostis, that he schulde make 

wondirful councel, and magnefie ri3tful- 

nesse. 


* gith; isa 
kynde of erbe, 
able to potage, 


CAP. XXIX. 

Wo! Ariel, Ariel"}, the citee which + Ariel; that 
Dauid ouercam; jeer is addid to jeer, 7oysem 
solempnytees ben passyd. And Y schal2 eae 
cumpasse Ariel, and it schal be soreuful 
and morenyuge; and Jerusalem schal be 
to me as Ariel. And Y schal cumpasse3 
as a round trendil® in thi cumpasse, and 
Y schal caste erthe ajens thee, and Y schal 
sette engynes? in to thi bisegyng!. Thous 
schalt be maad low, thou schalt speke of 
erthe, and thi speche schal be herd fro the 
erthe; and thi vois schal be as the vois of 


no Om. 4. 
sOm. ¢ et 


lhe shal ak. ™ lerne acuK. 
F Om. c. woo! Ariel 4k sec. m. 


P strengthis, 


O74 


be as of a deuel clepere fro the erthe thi 
vois, and fro the loewe" erthe shal groyne 
5thi speche. And shal be as thynne pou- 
der the multitude of men wynewende* 
thee; and as ‘a gnastY thurgh passende, 
the multitude of hem that ajen thee 
shadden maistri. And it shal be feerly, 
‘or sudenly*, anoon fro the Lord of 
ostus it shal be visitid, in thunder, and 
quauyng of erthe, and gret vois of whirle- 
wind, and of tempest, and of flaume of 
7fijr denourende. And shal be as a®* 
drem? of a* ny3t viseoun the multitude 
of alle Jentiles that fo3ten a3en Ariel ; 
and alle that a3en riden, and bisegeden, 
sand hadden the maistri a3en it. And as 
sweueneth the hungrende, and eteth, 
whan forsothe he were wakid, voide is 
his soule; and as sweueneth the thrist- 
ende, and drinketh, and aftir that4 he 
were waken, weri 3it he thristeth, and 
his soule is voide, so shal be the multi- 
tude of alle Jentiles, that fo3ten ajen the 
ohil of Sion. Bicometh alle stoneid, and 
wudreth; flotereth, and wagereth; ‘be 3e° 
drunken inwardli, and not of wyn; 3ee be 
1omoued, and not with drunkenesse. For 
mengd hath the Lord to 30u the spirit 
of slep; he shal closen 3oure e3en, the 
profetes, and 3oure princes that seen vi- 
11seouns, he shal couere. And ther shal 
be to 3ou the viseoun of alle as the wrdis 
of the boe sealid; whom whan thei shul 
jyue to the kunnende lettris, thei shul 
sey, Reed this; and he shal answern, I 
12mai not, forsothe it is sealid. And the 
boe shal be 3yue to the not kunnende 
lettris, and it shal be seid to hym, Reed ; 
and he shal answern, I kan not lettris. 
is And the Lord seide, ‘For thi that’ this 
puple ne3heth with his mouth, and with 
his lippes glorifieth me, his herte for- 
sothe fer is fro me; and thei dradden me 


w Om. & prem. 
Zz Om. ¢ et E prem. 
C prom. E pr. m. 


x wynnynge kK. 
a Om. 4GHK, 
f For that 4. 


TOm. a prom Om. Nn. 8 wondreth 1. 


ISAIAH. 


: f t the CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVS. 
Qrsuvx. herte of it 1. Y comaundementis a prem. M. 


XXIX. 5—13. 


a deed man reisid bi coniuring, and thi 
speche schal ofte grutche of the erthe. 
And the multitude of hem that wyndewen5 
thee, schal be as thynne dust; and the 
multitude of hem that hadden the maistrie 
ajens thee, schal be as a‘ deed sparcle 
passynge. And it schal be sudenli, anoon6é 
it schal be visitid of the Lord of oostis, in 
thundur, and in mouyng of the erthe, and 
in greet vois of whirlwynd, and of tem- 
pest, and of flawme of fier deuowrynge. 
And the multitude of alle folkis that7 
fou3ten ajens Ariel schal be as the dreem 
of a ny3tis visioun; and alle men that 
foujten, and bisegiden, and hadden the 
maistrie a3ens it. And as an hungry man’ 
dremyth, and etith, but whanne he is 
awakid, his soule is voide; and as a thirsti 
man dremeth, and drynkith, and after that'™ 
he is awakid, he is weri, and thirstith jit, 
and his soule is voide, so schal be the 
multitude of alle folkis, that foujzten ajens 
the hil of Sion. Be 3e astonyed, and9 
wondre’; wake 3e, and dou3te 3e; be 3e 
drunken, and not of wyn; be 3e moued, 
and not witb drunkenesse. 
hath meddlid to 30u the spirit of sleep; 
he schal close 3oure i3en, and schal hile 
joure profetis, and princes that sien vi- 
siouns. And the visioun of alle profetis it 
schal be to 3ou as the wordis of a book 
aseelid ; which whanne thei schulen 3yue 
to hym that kan lettris, thei schulen seie, 
Rede thou this book; and he schal an- 
swere, Y may not, for it is aseelid. 
the book schal be 30uun fo him that kan 
not lettris, and it schal be seid to hym, 
Rede thou; and he schal answere, Y kan 
no lettris. And the Lord seide, For thati3 
this puple neizeth with her mouth, and 
glorifieth me with her lippis, but hert 
herte" is fer fro me; and thei dredden 
me for the comaundement’ and_tech- 


¥ or dede bronde c sec.m. marg. deade bronde x sec.m. AGHK. 
b slep c prom. E prom. 


¢Om.acux. 4Om.4. © 3ee shul be 


uherte therof CEFGNKMNP 


For the Lord 10 


And 12 


XXEX. [4-——-24. 


in maundement of men and doctrines, 
l4therfore loot! I shal adde, that gret 
wondring I do to this puple, with gret 
myracle and hidous; forsothe pershe shal 
wisdam fro his wise men, and the ynder- 
stonding of his prudent men shal be hid. 
15 Wo, 3ee that deep ben ini herte, that 
fro the Lord 3ee hide counseil; of whom 
the werkes ben in dercnesses, and seyn, 
Who seeth vs, and who kne3 vs ? 
1¢Shreude is this 3oure thenking, as if the 
cley a3ens the crockere thenke, and the 
werk sey to his makere, Thou hast not 
mad me; and the making sey to his 
17makere, Thou vnderstondist* not. Whe- 
ther not 3it in litil and in short shal be 
turned Liban ‘in to! Chermel, and Cher- 
mel in to a wilde wode shal ben holde? 
18And heren shu] in that day dene men 
the wrdis of the boc, aud fro dercnesses 
and mystynesses the e3en of blynde™ 
i9men shul seen; and mylde men shuin 
adde in the Lord gladnesse, and pore 
men in the hoeli Irael ful out shul 
20i03en. For he" hath failid, that hadde the 
maistri, ful endid is the gilere, and hewen 
doun ben alle that wakeden ‘vp on® wick- 
2lidnesse™®; that-to synnen maden men in 
wrd, and the vndernymere in the 3ate 
thei supplaunteden, and boweden doun 
22in veyn fro the ri3twis. For that these 
thingus seith the Lord to the hous of 
Jacob, that aj3eebo3teP Abraham, Not now 
shal be confoundid Jacob, ne now his 
23 chere shal shame; but whan he shal seen 
his sones, the werkys?? of myn hondis, in 
his myddel halewende my? name. And 
thei shul halewen the hoeli of Jacob, and 
the hoeli God of Irael thei shul prechen ; 
2esand knowen shul the errende in spirit 
vnderstonding, and the musures_ shul 
lerne? the lawe. 


ISAIAH. 


275 


yngis of men, therfor lo! Y schal adde, t4 
that Y make wondryng to this puple, in 
a greet myracle and wondurful ; for whi 
wisdom schal perische fro wise men ther- 
of, and the vndurstondyng of prudent men 
therof schal be hid. Wo ¢o 30u that ben 1s 
hi3e” of herte, that 3e hide counsel fro the 
Lord; the werkis of whiche ben in derk- 
nessis, and thei seien, Who seeth vs, and 
who knowith vs? This thou3t of jou is 16 
weiward, as if cley thenke a3ens a pottere, 
and the werk seie to his makere, Thou 
madist not me; and a thing ‘that is* 
maad, seieY to his makere, Thou vndur- 
stondist not. Whether not 3it in a litil17 
tame and schort the Liban schal be turned 
in to Chermel, and Chermel schal be 
arettid in to the forest? And in that dai!s 
deef men schulen here the wordis of the 
book, and the izen of blynde men schulen 
se fro derknessis and myisty; and mylde 1 
men schulen encreesse gladnesse in the 
Lord, and pore men schulen make ful out 
joie in the hooli of Israel. For he that 20 
hadde the maistrie, failide, and the scornere 
is endid, and alle thei ben kit doun that 
walkiden on wickidnesse; whiche? maden 2) 
men to do synne in word, and disseyu- 
eden a repreuere in the 3ate, and bowiden 
awey In veyn fro a iust man. For this 22 
thing the Lord, that a3en bou3te Abra- 
ham, seith these thingis to the hous of 
Jacob, Jacob schal not be confoundid now, 
nether now his cheer schal be aschamed ; 
but whanne he schal se hise sones, the23 
werkis of myn hondis, halewynge my 
name in the myddis of hym. And thei 
schulen halewe the hooli of Jacob, and 
thei schulen preche God of Israel; and 24 
thei that erren in spirit, schulen knowe 
vndurstondyng, and idil men® schulen. 
lerne the lawe. 


hOm. 4. 1Om.cpr.m.  vnderstodist x. Jandinto x. ™ the blynd kK. ® Om. c prim, E pr.m. 


Sto Epr.m, © wickenesse E. 


w deep cKVX. deepe, ether hize EFGHIMNPQRSU. 
whiche 1. 


P ajen bou3gt .4 ef alii. 


PP werk K. din my E prem. 44 leren x. 


x Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRUVX. y seith s. z the 


a men, ether gruccheris CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 
NnQ 


276 


CAP, XXX. 


1 Wo! 3ee sonus forsakeres, seith the 
Lord, that 3ee schulden' do counseil, and 
not of me; and wefen a web, and not bi 
my spirit, that’ 3ee adde syune vp on 

gsynne. The whiche gon, that 3ee de- 
scende in to Egipt, and my mouth 3ee 
han*s not askid; hopende helpe in the 
strengthe of Farao, and hauende trost in 

3the shadewe of Egipt. And shal be to 
jou the strengthe of Farao in to con- 
fusioun, and the trost of the vmbre of 
4Egipt in to shenshepe. Wenten forsothe 
in Thampnys thi princes, and thi messa- 
sgeres vnto ‘Anes* citet ful camen. Alle 
thei ben confoundid vp on the puple, 
that to" hem my3te no than profited’ ; 
thei weren not in to helpe, and in to any 
profit, but in to confusioun and repref. 
6The charge of the bestes of the south. 

In the lond of tribulacioun and of an- 
guysh, a leounesse, and a leoun, of hem 
a violent eddere, and a kokatrice fleende; 
berende vp on the shuldris of bestes ther 
richesses, and vp on the bocche of camailes 
ther tresores, to the puple that to them 

7my3te not han profited. Egipt forsotlie 
wastli, and in veyn shal helpen. Ther- 
fore I criede vp on this, Pride onli it is; 

éreste thou. Now thanne gon in, wryt to 
it vp on a box table, and in a boc bisili 
graue it; and it shal be in the laste day 
9in to witnessyng, vn to euermore. The 
puple forsothe to wrathe ys terrende, and 
sones lieres, sones not willende to heren 
lothe lawe of God. That seyn to men 
seende, Wileth not see; and to men bi- 
holdende, Wileth not biholde to vs tho 
thingus that ben ri3te; speketh to vs ple- 
usaunt thingus, seeth to vs erroures. Doth 
awei fro me the weie, bowith doun fro 
me the sty; cese fro oure face the hoeli 
izIrael. Therfore these thingus seith the 


rOm.cetreprem. Sanda. sshac. 
C prem. E prom,  V profit aGuK. 
bLos. 


ISAIAH. 


t the briddes z pr. m. 


¢ Om. cFHMNQU. 


XXX. I—12. 


CAP. ee 


Wo?! sones forsakeris, seith the Lord,1 
that 3e schulden make a councel, and not 
of me; and weue a web, and not bi my 
spirit, that 3e schulden encreesse synne 
on synne. Whiche goen, to go doun in2 
to Egipt, and 3e axiden not my mouth; 
3e hopynge help in the strengthe of Farao, 
and 3e hauynge trist in the schadewe of 
Egipt. And the strengthe of Farao schal3 
be to 30u in to confusioun, and the trist of 
the schadewe of Egipt in to schenschipe. 
For whi thi princes weren in Taphnys, 4 
and thi messangeris camen til to Anes. 
Alle thei weren schent on the puple, thats 
my3ten not profite to hem; thei weren not 
in.to help, and in to ony profit, but in to 
schame and schenschip. The birthun of6 
werk beestis of the south. In the lond of 
tribulacioun and of angwisch, a lionesse, 
and a lioun, of hem a-serpent, and a‘ 
cocatrice; thet weren berynge her richessis 
on the schuldris of werk beestis, and her 
tresours on the botche of camels, to a pu- 
ple that my3te not profite to hem. For7 
whi Egipt schal helpe in veyn, and idili. 
Therfor Y criede on.this thing, It is pride 
oneli; ceesse thou. Now :therfor entres 
thou, and write to it on box, and write 
thou it diligentli in a book; and it schal 
be in the last dai in to witnessyng, til in 
to with outen ende. For it is a pupleo 
terrynge to wrathfulnesse, and sones lieris, 
sones that nylen* here the lawe of God. 
Whiche seien to profetis, Nyle 3e prophe-10 
sie; and to biholderis, Nyle 3e bibolde to 
vs tho thingis, that ben ri3tful; speke 3e 
thingis plesynge to vs, se 3e errouris to vs. 
Do 3e awei fro me the weie, bowe 3e aweill 
fro me the path; the hooli of Israel ceesse 
fro oure face. Therfor the hooli of Israel 12 
seith these thingis, For that that 3e re- 
preuiden this word, and hopiden on fals 


tt Om. cpr.m. eprom, % Om. 


4 wolen not 1. 


XXX. 13-—22. 


hoeli of Irael, For thi that 3ee han re- 
preued this wrd, and han hopid in to 
wronge” chaleng, and in to noise, and han 


13lened vp on it, therfore shal be to jouw 


this wickidnesse’™ as betwe* brosure fall- 
ende, and a3een so3t in an hee3 wal; for 
sodeynly whil me hopeth not, shal come 
14the to-brosingY of it?. And shal be to- 
mynusht, as is to-brosid the galoun of 
the crockere with ful strong to-brosyng ; 
and ther shal not be founde of his bros- 
ingus a shord, in whiche be born a itil 
fyr fro the brennyng, or be drawe a litil 
150f water fro the dich. For these thingus 
seith the Lord God, hoeli of Irael, If 
jee turnen ajeen, and resten, 3ee shul be 
saaf; in scilence and in hope shal be 
joure strengthe. And 5ce wolden not. 
is And 3ee seiden, Nai, but to hors we 
shul flee; therfor 3ee shul flee. And vp on 
swift wee® shul ste3en vp; therfor more 
i7swift shul be, that shul pursue 3ou. A 
thousend men fro the face of the ferd of 
oon; and fro the ferd of the face of fyue 
jee shul fleen, to the tyme ‘that 3ee be 
laft as the mast of a ship in the cop of 
a mounteyn, and as tocne” vp on an 
ishil. Therfor abideth the Lord, that he 
haue mercy of 3ou, and therfore shal ben 
enhauucid the sparende to 30u; for God 
of dom the Lord, blisful alle that abijden 
ighym. The puple forsothe of Sion ‘shal 
dwelle® in Jerusalem; wepende thou shalt 
not wepe, rewende, ‘or doyng mercy, he 
shal han mercy of thee; at the vois of thi 
cry, anoen as he hereth, he shal an- 
20swern to thee. And the Lord shal 3yue 
to thee streit bred, and short water, and 
he shal not make to fleen awey fro thee 
more thi techere®; and thin e3en shiul be 
21seende thi comaundere, and thin eres 
shuln heren the wrd bihinde the bac of 
the monestere ; This‘ the weie, goth in it, 
z2nouther to the ri3t ne to the lyft. And 


ww wickenesse E. 
2 that puple & pr. m. 
€ fairnesse E pr.m. 


w Om. CE pr.m. 
AGHK. 
CE pr. m. 


@ 3ee CE pr. m. 


¢ gobetis, etthir relefs FGMIKMNQRSUVX. 


ISAIAH. 


X betwene 4. betwen £ passim. bytwene K passim. 


f wolden uot 1. 


oe 


caleng, and on noise, and tristiden on it, 
therfor this wickidnesse schal be to 30 as13 
a brekyng fallynge doun, and soun3t in an 
hi3 wal; for sudeynli while it is not hopid, 
the brekyng therof schal come. And it14 
schal be maad lesse, as a galoun of a pot- 
tere is brokun with ful strong brekyng; and 
a scherd schal not be foundun of the gobe- 
tise therof, in which scherd a litil fier schal 
be borun of brennyng, ethir a litil of watir 
schal be drawun of the diche. For whiis 
the Lord God, the hooli of Israel, seith 
these thingis, If 3e turnen a3en, and resten, 
3e schulen be saaf; in stilnesse and in 
hope schal be 3oure strengthe. And 3e nol- 
den’. And 3e seiden, Nai, but we schulen 16 
fle to horsis; therfor 3e schulen fle. And 
we schulen stie on swifte horsis; therfor 
thei schulen be swiftere, that schulen pur- 
sne 30u. A thousynde men schulen flei7 
fro the face of the drede of oon; and 3e 
schulen fle fro the face of drede of fyue, 
til 3e be left as the mast of a schip in the 
cop of a munteyn, and as a-signe on a 
litil hil. Therfor the Lord abidith, that 18 
he haue mercy on 30u, and therfor he 
schal be enhaunsid sparynge 30u; for whi 
God is Lord of doom, blessid bez alle thei 
that abiden hym. Forsothe the puple of 19 
Sion schal dwelle in Jerusalem; thou 
wepynge schal not wepe, he doynge merci 
schal haue merci on thee; at the vois of thi 
cry, anoon as he herith, he schal answere 
to thee. And the Lord schal 3yue to thee 20 
streyt breed, and schort watir, and schal 
no more make thi techere to fle awei fro 
thee; and thin ijen schulen be seynge thi 
comaundour, and thin eeris schulen here 21 
a word bihynde® the bak of hym that 
monestith ; This is the weie, go 3e ther- 
ymne, nether to the ri3t half nether to the 
left half. And thou schalt defoule the 22 
platis of the grauun ymagis of thi siluer, 
and the cloth of the 30tun ymage of thi 


y brosynge 


batocne cpr.m.u.  ¢dwellede £ prem. ¢ Om. 


f This is 4. And this K sec. m. 


€ aftir cEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


278 


thou shalt al to-foule the plates of the 
grauen thing of thi siluer, and the cloth- 
ing of thi 3oten gold; and thou shalt di- 
stro3e them, as the vnelennesse of the 
blod flux of wymmen; Go out, and thou 
23 shalt sey to it. And ther shal be 3o0ue 
reyn to thi sed, wher euere thou shalt 
sowe in the erthe, and the bred of the 
frutus of the erthe shal be most plen- 
teuous ‘and fatt?; ther shul be fed in thi 
possessioun ing® that day the lomb spa- 
2sciously, ‘or largly". And thi bolis and 
thin asse coltes, that werken the erthe, 
inengd barly thei shul ete, as in the 
zscornflor it is wynewid. And ther shul 
be vp on alle hee3 mounteyn, and vp on 
alle rered hil, ryueres of rennende watris, 
and in the dai of sla3tir of manye, whan 
26shul falle toures. And the 1i3t of the 
moone shal be as the li3t of the sunne, 
and the li3t of the sunne shal be seuene 
fold, as the 1i3t of seuene da3es, in the 
dai that the Lord shal bynde the wounde 
of his puple, and the smyting of his 
27wounde shal helen. Lo! the name of 
the Lord cami fro afer; his wodnesse 
brennende and heuy to bern; his lippis 
ben fulfild with indignacioun, and his 
2stunge as fyr deuourende. His spirit as 
a swift strem, flowende vnto* the myddel 
of the hyl, to be lost Jentiles in to no3t, 
and the bridil of errour, that was in the 
29chekes of puples. A song shal be to 30u, 
as the vois of the halewid solempnete ; 
and the gladnesse of herte, as he that 
goth with a trumpe, that he entre in to 
the hil of the Lord, to the stronge of 
-30Trael. And herd the Lord shal make 
the glorie of his vois, and the ferd of his 
arm he shal shewe in threting of wod- 
nesse, and in! flaume of fyr deuourende; 
he shal hurtle in whirlewind, and in the 
3iston of hail. Fro the vois forsothe of 
the Lord shal dreden Assur smyte with 
32a 3erde; and the passing of the 3erde 
shal be founded, that the Lord shal make 


ISARAH. 


XXX. 23-32. 


gold; and thou schalt scatere tho, as the 
vnclennesse of a womman in vncleene 
blood; Go thou out, and thou schalt seie 
to it. And reyn schal be jouun to this 
seed, where euere thou schalt sowe in 
erthe, and the breed of fruytis of! erthe 
schal be moost plentenouse and fat; im that 
dai a lomb schal be fed largeli in thi pos- 
sessioun. And thi bolis and coltis of assis, 24 
that worchen the lond, schulen ete barli 
with chaf meynd togidere, as it is wynde- 
wid* in the cornfloor. And strondis of 25 
rennynge watris schulen be on ech hi3 
munteyn, and on ech litil hil reisid, in the 
dai of sleyng of many men, whanne touris 
fallen doun. And the li3t of the moone zc 
schal be as the li3t of the sunne, and the 
li3t of the sunne schal be seuenfold, as the 
]i3t of seuene daies, in the dai in which ° 
the Lord schal bynde togidere the wounde 
of his puple, and schal make hool the 
smytynge of the wounde therof. Lo! the 27 
uame of the Lord cometh doun fro fer; 
his strong veniaunce zs brennynge and 
greuouse to bere; hise lippis ben fillid of 
indignacioun, and his tunge 7s as fier de- 
uouringe. His spirit 7s as a stef streem, 28 
flowynge ‘til to! the myddis of the necke, 
to leese folkis in to nou3t, and the bridil 
of errour, that was in the chekis of puplis. 
Song schal be to 30u, as the vois of an 29 
halewid solempnyte; and gladnesse of 
herte, as he that goth with a pipe, for 
to entre in to the hil of the Lord, to the 
stronge of Israel. And the Lord schal so 
make herd the glorie of his vois, and he 
schal schewe the ferdfulnesse of his arm 
in manassyng of strong veniaunce, and in 
flawme of fier brennynge; he schal hurtle 
doun in whirlewynd, and in stoon of hail. 
For whi Assur smytun with a 3erde schal31 
drede of the vois of the Lord; and the32 
passyng of the 3erd schal be foundid, 
which 3e7de the Lord schal. make for to 
reste on hym. In tympans, and harpis, and 
in souereyn batels he schal ouercoime hem. 


8 Om. az prim. 88 Om. £ prom. ) Om. cet eprom. ishal come £ prom. *in to acuKx.: 1Om. 4. 


bhem nw. iof thin i. 


k wynewid 1. winwed Ep. 


lynto 1. 


XXX. 33—XXXI. 8. 


to resten vp on hym. In tymbris, and 
harpis, and in eheef batailis he shal ouer- 
3scome them. Greithid is forsothe fro 
3istai™ Tofeth, fro the kyng greithid; his 
nurshemens deep and spred, fyr and 
myche wode; the blast of the Lord as a 
strem of brunston vp brennende it. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 Wo! that gon doun in to Egipt to 
helpe, in hors hopende, and hauende trost 
vpon foure horsid carres, for thei ben 
manye, and vp on hors men, for bifor® 
stalwrthe thei ben ful myche; and thei 


han not trosted vp on the hoely of Irael, - 


2and the Lord thei han not out® so3t. He 
forsothe wijs, bro3te to euel, and his 
wrdis he toc not awey; and he shal rise 
ajen the hous of the werste men, and 
ajen the helpe of men wirkende wickid- 
3nesse. Egipt a man, and not God; 
and? his hors flesh, and not4 spirit; and 
the Lord shal boowen his hond, and to- 
gidere falle shal the helpere, and falle 
shal he, to whom ment 3yueth helpe, and 
salle togidere shul be wastid. Jor these 
thingus seith the Lord to me, What 
maner if a leoun rore, and the whelp of 
a leoun vp on his prey, whan a3en com- 
eth to hym the multitude of shepperdus, 
fro the vois of hem he shal not drede, 
and of the multitude of hem he shal not 
inwardly ben aferd; so shal come doun 
the Lord of ostus, that he fi3te vp on the 
smount of Sion, and vp on his hilles. As’ 
briddes fleende, so defende shal the Lord 
of ostus Jerusalem; defendende and de- 
slyuerende, passende and sauende. Beth 
eonuertid, as in to depthe wenten awei, 
73ee sonus of Irael. In that dai forsothe 
casten awey shal a man the maumetes 
of hys siluer, and the maumetes of his 
gold, that maden to 30u 3oure hondus in 
sto synne. And falle shal Assur in swerd, 
not of a man, and the swerd, not of a 


™ gisterday ceferi passim, preter c et E. 
POm.ce prom. noc, me AEG. 


m thei Nn. 


ISATAH. 


n ful AE sec.m. GK. 


s And uw. And as kK. 


279 © 


For whi Tophet, that is, helle, deep and 33 
alargid, is maad redi of the kyng fro 3is- 
tirdai; the nurschyngis therof ben fier and 
many trees; the blast of the Lord as a 
streem of brymstoon kyndlith it. 


CAP. XXXI. 


Wo fo hem that goon doun in to Egipt) 
to help, and hopen in horsis, and han trist 
ou cartis, for tho™ ben manye, and on 
kny3tis, for thei ben ful stronge; and thei 
tristiden not on the hooli of Israel, and 
thei sou3ten not the Lord. Forsothe he2 
that zs wijs, hath brou3t yuel, and took 
not awei hise wordis; and he sehal rise 
togidere a3ens the hous of worste men, 
and a3ens the helpe of hem that worchen 
wickidnesse. Egipt 7s a man, and not3 
God; and the horsis of hem bez fleisch, 
and not spirit; and the Lord schal bowe 
doun his hond, and the helpere schal falle 
doun, and .he schal falle, to whom help is 
3ouun, and alle schulen be wastid togidere. 
For whi the Lord seith these thingis to4 
me, If a lioun rorith, and a whelp of a 
lioun on his prey, whanne the multitude 
of schipherdis cometh a3ens hym, he sehal 
not drede of the vois of hem, and he schal 
not drede of the multitude of hem; so the 
Lord of oostis schal come doun, for to 
fiz3te on the mounteyn of Sion, and on the 
litil hil therof. As briddis fleynge, so thes 
Lord of oostis schal defende Jerusalem ; 
he defendynge and delyuerynge, passynge 
forth and sauynge. 3e" sones of Israel,¢ 
be conuertid, as 3e hadden go awei in to 
depthe. Forsothe in that dai a man schal7 
caste awei the idols of his siluer, and the 
idols of his gold, whiche 3oure hondis 
maden to 3ou in to synne. And Assure 
schal falle bi swerd, not of man, and a 
swerd, not of man, schal deuoure hym; and 
he schal fle, not fro the face of swerd, and 


° Om. c pr.m. 00 wickenesse E. 


t the 4. 


n The x. 


280 - ISAIAH. 


man, shal deuoure hym; and he shal flee, 
not fro the face of the swerd, and his 
»3unge men shul be tributaries; and his 
strengthe of the ferd shal passe, and in- 
wardly dreden shul his princes fleende. 
The Lord seide, whos fyr is in Syon, and 
hys chymne in Jerusalem. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 Lo! in rijtwisnesse regne shal a king, 
z2and princes in dom shul beforn beu. And 
a inan shal be, as that is hid fro the 
wynd, and coouereth hymself fro tempest; 
as ryueres of watris in thrist, and sha- 
dewe of the ston ouerstondende in the 
3desert lond. Daswen shul not the" e3en 
of men seende, and the eres of men 
sherende bisily shul herknen; and the 
herte of fooles shal vnderstonde kun- 
nyng, and the tunge of bufferes swiftli 
sshal speke, and pleynly. Ther shal no 
more be clepid he that is vnwis a prince, 
ene the gylere shal be clepid a meyr. The 
fool forsothe fool thingtts shal speke, and 
his herte shal do wickidnesse’, that he 
fulfille feynyng, and speke to the Lord” 
gilendely ; and voide he shal inake the 
soule of the hungrere, and drinc to the 
7thristere he shal don awei. Of* the 
gilere werst vesseles ben; he forsothe 
tho3tus dideY, to be lost inylde men in 
wrd of lesing, whan the pore shulde 
sspeke dom. A prince forsothe thoe 
thingus that ben wrthi a? prince shal 
thenke, and he vp on dukes shal stonde. 
93ee plenteuous wymmen, riseth, and 
hereth my voys; 3ce trostende do3tris, 
io parceyueth with eres my speche. Aftir 
da3es forsothe and a jer, and 3ce shul be 


disturbid trostende; full endid is forsothe: 


the vyndage, gedering togidere no more 
shal come. Stonezeth, 3ee plenteuous 
wymmen, and beth disturbid, jee trost- 
ende; vnclothe jou, and beth confoundid; 


U jee E pr.m, 
E pr, m 


VY wickenesse x. 
2toaeE pr.m 


 seeris, that is, profelis CRYGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


w hous c pr. m. E prom. 


XXXL 9—XXXIL 11. 


hise 3onge men schulen be tributaries ; 
and the strengthe of hym schal passe frog 
ferdfulnesse, and hise princes fleynge schu- 
len drede, The Lord seide, whos fier is in 
Sion, and his chymeney zs in Jerusalem. 


CAP. XXXII. 


Lo! the kyng schal regne in ri3tful-1 
nesse, and prinees schulen be souereynus in 
doom. And aman schal be, as he that is2 
hid fro wynd, and hidith hym silf fro 
tempest; as stremes of watris in thirst, 
and the schadewe of a stoon stondynge 
fer out in a desert lond. The izen of pro-3 
fetis® schulen not dasewe, and the eeris of 
heereris schulen herke diligentli; and thea 
herte of foolis schal yndurstonde kunnyng, 
and the tunge of stuttynge men schal speke 
swiftli, and pleynli. He that is vnwijs,s 
schal no more be clepid prince, and a gile- 
ful man schal not be clepid the grettere. 
Forsothe a fool shal speke foli thingis, and 6 
lis herte schal do wickidnesse, that he 
performe feynyng, and speke to the Lord 
gilefuli; and he schal make voide the soule 
of an hungry man, and schal take awei 
drynke fro a thirsti man. The vessels of7 
a gileful man ben worste; for he schal 
make redi thou3tis to leese? mylde men 
in the word of a leesyng, whanne a pore 
man spak doom. Forsothe a prince schals 
thenke tho thingis that ben worthi to a 
prince, and he schal stonde ouer duykis. 
Riche wymmen, rise 3e, and here? my9 
vois; dou3tris tristynge, perseyue 3e with 
eeris my speche. For whi aftir daies and 10 
a 3eer, and 3e that tristen schulen be dis- 
turblid; for whi vyndage is endid, gader- 
yng schal no more come. 3e riche teym-11 
men, be astonyed; 3e that tristen, be" 
disturblid ; vnelothe 3e 3ou, -and be 3e 
aschamed ; girde3oure leendis;- weile 3e 12 


xTocpr.m.xpr.m.  Y shal doc pr.m. 


P fordo1. Ghereth 1. * beth 1. 


XXXII. 12—XXXIII. 5. 


lzgirdeth 3oure leendus; vp on the tetes 
weileth, vp on the desirable regioun, vp 
130n the plenteuous vyne3erd*. Vpon the 
loewe erthe of my puple thornes and 
brieres schul” stejen vp; hou® myche more 
vp on alle the houses of io3e of the cite 
uful out iojende? The hous forsothe is 
left, the multitude of the huge cite is for- 
sake; dercnesses and groping ben mad vp 
on the dennes, yvnto with oute ende. The 
io3e of feeld’ asses, the leswe of flockes® ; 
isto the tyme that be held out vp on us 
the spirit fro an hei3, and ther shal be 
desert in Chermel, and Chermel in to 
16 wilde wod shal ben holde. And ther shal 
dwelle in wildernesse dom, and ri3twis- 


17nesse in Chermel shal sitte; and ther shal- 


be the werk of rijtwisnesse pes, and the 
heriyng of ri3twisnesse scilence and sikir- 

1snesse, vnto enermore. And sitte shal my 
puple in fayrnes of pes, and in taber- 
nacles of trost, and in reste plentenous. 

19 Hail forsothe in the goyng doun of the 
wilde -wode, and bi meknesse shal be 

2zo0mekid the cite. Blisful 3ee, that sowen 
vp on alle watris, puttende in the foot of 
the oxe and of the asse. 


CAP, XXXIII. 


1 Wo! thou that robbest; whether and 
thi self shalt not be robbid? and thou 
that dispisist, whethir and thiself shalt 
not be dispised ? Whan thou shalt hanf 
ful endid robbing, thou shalt be robbid ; 
whan ‘weeried thou® lefest to dispise, thou 

2Shalt be dispisid. Lord, haue merci of 
vs, thee forsothe wee han abide; be thou 
oure arm in erly, and oure helthe in tyme 

30f tribulacioun. Fro the vois of the 
aungil floun® puples; of thin enhauncing 
ascatered ben Jentiles. And gederede to- 
gidere shul be 3oure spoiles, as is gedered 
brush, as whan the diches fulle shul be 
sof it. Magnefied is the Lord, for he 


ISAIAH. 


281 


on brestis, on desirable cuntrei, on the 
plenteuouse vyner. Thornes and _ breris1s 

schulen stie-on the erthe of my puple; 

hou myche more on alle the housis of 

ioie of the citee makynge ful out ioie? 

For whi the hous is left*, the multitude 14 * sy; that is, 
of the citee is forsakun; derknessis and cn a 
gropyng ben maad on dennes, ‘til in tos \hanne Sede- 
with outen ende. The ioie of wield assis 7s Lire here. x. 
the lesewe of flockis ; til the spirit be sched 15 

out on us fro an hi3, and the desert schal 

be in to Chermel, and Chermel schal be 

arettid in to a forest. And doom schal16¢ 

dwelle in wildirnesse, and rijtfulnesse schal 

sitte in Chermel; and the werk of ri3tful-17 

nesse schal be pees, and the tilthe of ri3t- 

fulnesse schal be stilnesse and sikirnesse,” 

‘til in tot with outen ende. And my pu-18 

ple schal sitte in the fairnesse of pees, and 

in the tabernaclis" of trist, and in riche 

reste. But hail schal be in the coming 19 

doun of the foreste, and bi lownesse the 

citee schal be maad low. Blessid ben 3e, 20 

that sowen on alle watris, and putten’-yn 

the foot of an oxe and of an asse. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


Wo fo thee, that robbest; whether and) 
thou schalt not be robbid? and that dispisist, 
whether and thou schalt not be dispisid? 
Whanne thou hast endid robbyng, thou 
schalt be robbid; and whanne thou maad 
weri ceessist to dispise, thou schalt be dis- 
pisid. Lord, haue thou merci on vs, for2 
we abiden thee; be thou oure arm in the 
morewtid, and oure helthe in the tyme of 
tribulacioun. Puplis fledden fro the voiss 
of the aungel; hethene men ben scaterid 
of thin enhaunsyng. And 3oure spuylis4 
schulen be gaderid togidere, as a” bruke*t PB oes is fie 
is gaderid togidere, as whanne dichis ben ees 
ful therof. The Lord is magnefied, for hes 


avynec prom Epr.m. » Om.cpr.m.E prem. ©Om. Eprom. ¢Om.cpr.meEpr.m, © folkis k. 
y P Pp P P p L P H 


f Om. £ pr. m. 


svntor. tynto1 U the tabernaclis n. 
Sruit of locustis CEGKINPQSUXY. 
VOL. ITI. 


% thou maad werie E sec. m. AGHK,. 


Vv senden CEFGUIKMNPQHRSUYVX. 


h fledden £ sec... AGHK. 


wOm.r. * bruke, that is, 


00 


282 


dwelte ‘in hei3*, he! fulfld™ Sion with 
é6dom and” ri3twisnesse. And feith shal 
ben in thi tymes; richesses of helthe, 
wisdam and kunnyng; the drede of the 
7Lord, it° the tresor of hym. Lo! the 
seeres shul crien withouteforth, the aun- 
sgeles of pes bitterli shul wepe. Scatered 
ben the weies, ceside the passid bi the 
sty; voyde mad is the couenaunt, he 
caste awei the’ cites, he heeld ‘of no 
y pris not" nen. Weilede, and languysshede 
the lond; confoundid is Liban, and becam 
doumb; and mad is Saron as desert, 
and smyte togidere is Basan, and Carmel. 
10 Now I shal rise’, seith the Lord, now I 
shal ben enhauncid, now I shal ben vp 
irered. 3ee shul conseyue brennyng, 3ee 
shul bern stobil; 3oure spirit as fyr shal 
12deuoure 30u. And ben shul puples as of 
thet brennyng askes"; thornes gedered 
13 togidere in’ fyr shul be brent. Hereth, 
3ee that ben aferr, what I haue do: and 
knowith, jee ne3hebores, my strengthe. 
14 Al to-brosid ben in Sion synneres, trem- 
blyng weldede ipocrites ; who shal moun 
dwelle of 30u with fyr deuonrende? who 
shal dwelle of 3ou with euere durende 
1s brennyngus? That goth in rijtwisnesses, 
and speketh treuthe ; that throwith awei 
coueitise of wrong* chaleng, and shaketh 
out his hondis fro alle 3ifte; that stop- 
pith his eres, lest he here blod, and 
isclosith his e3en, lest he see euel¥. This 
in hei3tus shal dwelle, the strengthys of 
huge stones his he3te; bred to hym is 
17 30ue’, his* watris ben feithful. The king 
in his fairnesse seen shuln his e3en; bi- 
18 holden schul? the lond fro afer. Thin herte 
sweteli shal thenke drede; wher is the 
lettrid ? Wher is the wrdus of the lawe 
chargende? wher is the doctour of litil 
ig9childer 2? Vnprudent® puple he shal not 
see, puple of hei3 sermoun, so that thou 


k an he3 £ pr. m. 10m. c pr.m. & prem. 
4 Om. 4, T not of pris c prom. not E pr. im. 
asken EF sec.m. GHK. asshen 4. 


*3yuen &., and hisc pr. m. £ pr.m. AGHK. 


Yhereth 1. 2 He this 1. 


ISAIAH. 


m fulfild is g pr.m. 


Vas of the EB pr.m. 
b Om. cE pr.m. 


aOm.1. 


XXXII. 6—19. 


dwellide an hi3, he fillid Sion with doom 
and ri3tfulnesse. And feith schal be ine 
thi tymes; the ritchessis of helthe zs wis- 
dom and kunnynge; the drede of the 
Lord, thilke zs the tresour of hym. Lo!7 
seeris withoutenforth schulen crye, aun- 
gels of pees schulen wepe bittirli. Weiess 
ben distried, a goere bi the path ceesside ; 
the couenaunt is maad voide, he castide 
doun citees, he arettide not men. Theos 
lond morenyde, and was sijk; the Liban 
was schent, and was foul; and Saron is. 
maad as desert, and Basan is schakun, and 
Carmele. Now Y schal ryse, seith the to 
Lord, now I schal be enhaunsid, and now 
I schal be reisid vp. 3e schulen conseyue 11 
heete, 3e schulen brynge forth stobil; 3oure 
spirit as fier schal deuoure 3ou. And pu-12 
plis schulen be as aischis of the brennyng ; 
thornes gaderid togidere schulen be brent 
in fier. 3e that ben fer, hereY what thingis 13 
Y haue do; and, 3e neiz3boris, knowe my 
strengthe. Synneris ben al to-brokun ini 
Syon, tremblyng weldide ipocritis ; who 
of 30u mai dwelle with fier deuowringe ? 
who of 30n schal dwelle with euerlastinge 
brennyngis? He that goith in ri3tful-1s 
nessis, and spekith treuthe ; he that castith 
awei aueryce of fals calenge, and schakith 
awei his hondis fro al 3ifte; he that stop- 
pith his eeris, that he heere not blood, and 
closith his ijen, that he se not yuel. This? 16 
man* schal dwelle in hi3 thingis, the 
strengthis of stoonys bex the hiznesse ‘of 
hym ; breed is 3ouun to hym, hise watris 
ben feithful. Thei schulen se the kyng in17 
his fairnesse ; the izen of hym schulen bi- 
holde the londe fro fer. Ediachym, thin 18 
herte schal bithenke drede; where is the 
lettrid man ? Where is he that weieth the 
wordis of the lawe? where is the techere 
of litle children? Thou schalt not se aig 
puple vnwijs, a puple of hi; word, so that 


n of Epr.m. Ohe £ pr.m. 
8 arijse AGHK. t Om. 4. u of asken E pr. 7m. 
x Om. ¢ pr.m. E prem. ¥ blod c pr. m. 
¢ And vnprndent E pr. m. 


b deep CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


XXXII 20—XXXIV. 6. 


mowe not vnderstonde the sleeynesse of 
20his tunge, in whiche is no wisdam. Bi- 
hold Sion, the cite of oure solempnete ; 
thin e3en shul see Jerusalem, a plenteuous 
cite, a tabernacle that shal not moun ben 
ouerborn, ne his nailis shul ben take 
awei in to euermor; and alle his litil 
21cordes shul not be to-broken. For onli 
there the grete doyng, Lord oure God; 
the place of flodes ryueres most brod and 
opene ; ther entride not bi it the ship of 
roweres, ne the grete ship of thre stagis4 
22shal not ouergon it. The Lord forsothe 
oure domes man, the Lord oure lawe 
3yuere, the Lord oure king; he shal 
23come, and sauen us. Slakid® ben thi litil 
cordes, but thei shul not han the maistri; 
so shal be thi mast,,that thou mow not 
sprede abrod a tocne. Thanne shul be 
deuydid spoiles of f many preyes, halte 
24mens shul take awey raueyn. Ne the 
ne3hebore shal sey, I languyshede; the 
puple that dwellede in it, ther shal be 
don awei fro hym wickenesse". 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 Ne3heth, 3ee Jentiles, and hereth; tak- 
eth heed, 3ee puples; here! the lond, and 
his fulnesse, the world, and al his buri- 

zownyng. For the indignacioun of the 
Lord vp on alle Jentiles, and wodnesse 
vp on al the chyualrie of hem; he slo3 

3hem, and 3af them in to sla3ter. The 
slayne of hem shul be throwe afer, and 
of the careynes of hem shal ste3en vp 
stinc ; whlaten* shul mounteynes! of the 
4blod of hem. And wlate shal al the 
kny3thed of heuenes, and ‘heuenes shu- 
len™ be foldid togidere as a" boc®, and al 
the kny3thed of hem shal fade?, as fadeth 
awey a lef of the vyne and of the fige 
5tree. For inwardli drunken is in heuene 
my swerd; lo! vp on Ydume it shal come 
doun, and vp on the puple of my sleyng", 
6todom. The swerd of the Lord fulfild 


d mastes ¢ pr. m. E pr. m. 
nes AGHK. Thereth c pr.m. — * waken £ pr. m. 
athe ge pr.m. © boc of heuene ¢ pr.m. E pr.m. 


€the which 1, 4ton. 


ISAIAH. 


€ Loosid c pr. m. E pr. m. 


P fade awey AGHK, 


€ hereth 1. 
002 


283 - 


thou maist not vndurstonde the fair spek- 
ing of his tunge, in which® puple is no 
wisdom. Biholde thou Sion, the citee of 20 
joure solempnyte; thin izen schulen se Je- 
rusalem, a riche citee, a tabernacle that 
mai not be borun ouer, nether the nailis 
therof schulen be takun awei withouten 
ende; and alle the cordis therof schulen 
not be brokun. For oneli the worschipful 2) 
doere oure Lord God is there; the place of 
floodis 7s strondis ful large and opyn; the 
schip of roweris schal not entre bi it, ne- 
thir a greet schip schal passe ouer it. For 22 
whi the Lord zs oure iuge, the Lord is 
oure lawe 3yuere, the Lord zs oure kyng ; 
he schal save vs. Thi roopis ben slakid, 23 
but tho schulen not auaile ; thi mast schal 
be so, that thou mow not alarge a signe. 
Thanne the spuylis of many preyes 
schulen be departid, crokid men schulen 
rauysche raueyn. And a nei3bore schal 24 
sele, Y was not sijk; the puple that 
dwellith in that Jerusalem, wickidnesse 
schal be takun awei fro it. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


Nei3ze, 3e hethene men, and@ here®; and 1 
3e puplis, perseyue; the erthe, and the ful- 
nesse therof, the world, and al buriown- 
yng therof, here 3e.. For whi indigna-2 
cioun of the Lord zs on alle folkis, and 
strong veniaunce on al the chyualrie of 
hem; he killide hem, and 3af hem in to 
sleyng. The slayn men of hem schulen3 
be cast forth, and stynk schal stie of the 
careyns of hem; hillis schulen flete of the 
blood of hem. And al the chyualrie of4 
heuenys schal faile, and heuenys schulen 
be foldid togidere as a book, and al the 
kny3thod of tho schal flete doun, as the 
leef of a vyner and of a fige tre fallith 
doun. For my swerd is fillid in heuene 55 
lo! it schal come doun on Ydumee, and 
on the puple of my sleyng, to doom. Thesé 
swerd of the Lord is fillid of blood, it is 


£Om.c pr.m.rpr.m. © wickid- 
m thei shul c pr. m. E pr.m. 
4 Ya. 1? fleynge 4cuK. 


f and E pr. m. 
1 mounteyne K. 


f Om. CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


284 


is of blod, innerly fattid it is with tal3 of 
blod of lombis and of get, of the blod 
of merewi wetheres; forsothe victorie 
sacrifises of the Lord in Bosra, and gret 
zsla3ter in the lond of Edom. And doun 
shul come vnycornes with hem, and booles 
with the my3ty; inwardli drunken shal 
be the lond of hem with blod, and the 
loewe erthe of hem with tal3* of fatte 
8thingis'; for the dai of the veniaunce of 
the Lord, 3er of ® 3eelding of the dom of 
9Sion. And turned shuln ben his stremes 
in to pich, and his loew3 erthe in to 
brunston; and his erthe shal be in to 
19 brennende pich, ny3t and day. It’ shal 
not be queynt in to euermor, his smoke 
shal stezen vp-fro ieneracioun in to iene- 
racioun, and desolat shal be in to worldus 
of worldis; ther shal not ben a passere 
ithur3 it. And welden shul it the foul 
in face lic an asse, and the irchoun; and 
the snyte, and the crowe dwelle shul in 
it; and” stra3t out vp on it shal ben a 
mesure, that it be bro3t to no3t, and ‘a 
lyne* enene doun pi3t in to desolacioun. 
12 His noble men shul not be there; the 
king more thei shul inwardly clepen, and 
ben shuln alle his princes in to no3t. 
13 AndY ther shul springe in his houses 
thornes and netles, and tasil in the 
strengthis of it; and it shal be the bed 
place of dragownes, and the leswe of 
14ostriches. And ajen come shul deueles, 
the beste party”Y an asse and ‘a party 
a man’, and the wodewose; the tothir® 
isshal crie to the tother. There shal lyn 
‘lamya, that is, a” thirs’, or a beste 
hanende the bodi lic a womman and 
horse feet; and he fyndeth to himself 
reste; there hadde diches the yrchoun’, 
and nurshede out litle chittes, and aboute 
dalf‘, and nurshede in his shadewe; 


8 the talw3 4EGHK. 


Om. c prim. E pr. m. 
x Om. c prom. E pr.m. 


y Om. E pr.m. 


f deluede acuKx. 


& brunston rs. 4 stie up 1. 
whiche ben lijk apis, but thei han tailis n. 
feet bynethe, and sleeth his owne whelpis Nn. 


ISAIAH. 


YY party of ¢ pr.m. E prim. AGIK. 
Be C pr. m.Epr.m. party of a man 4x, the party of a man GH. 
the wilde cruel beste z pr. m. lamya, that is, thirs, a beste E sec. m. marg. 


i fendis, as wodewosis n. 


XXXIV. 7—15. 


maad fat of the ynner fatnesse of the blood 

of lambren and of buckis of geet, of the 

blood of rammes fil of merow; for whi 

the slayn sacrifice of the Lord zs in Bosra, 

and grect sleyng 7s in the lond of Edom. 

And vnycornes schulen go doun with hem, 7 

and bolis with hem that ben my3ti; the 

lond of hem schal be fillid with blood, and 

the erthe of hem with ynnere fatnesse of 

fatte beestis; for it is a dai of veniaunce of s 

the Lord, a 3eer of 3eldyng of the dom of 

Sion. And the strondis therof schulen be9 

turned in to pitche, and the erthe therof in 

to brymstoon®; and the lond therof schal 

be in to brennyng pitch, ni3t and dai. It 10 

schal not be quenchid withouten ende, the 

smoke therof schal stie’ fro generacioun 

in to generacioun, and it schal be desolat 

in to worldis of worldis ; noon schal passe 

therbi. And onocrotalus*, and an irchoun 1 
schulen welde it; and a capret, and a ee 
crowe schulen dwelle therynne; and a_ asse. Lire here. 
mesure schal be stretchid forth theronne, a’ 
that it be dryuun to nou3t, and an hang- 

ynge plomet in to desolacyoun. The12 

noble men therof schulen not be there ; 

rathere thei schulen clepe the kyng in to + fendis; that is, 
help, and alle the princes therof schulen [pais incubl, 
be in to now3t. And thornes and nettlis 13 Ss 8 docours 
schulen growe in the housis therof, and a Raa ns 
tasil in the strengthis therof; and it schal _ éeien, manyn- 
be the couche of dragouns, and the lesewe deities ena 
of ostrichis. And fendis'+, and wondurful 14 ieee a 


ne : — but thei x] be 
beestis*t, /ijk men in the hizere part and Ketties a a 


lijk assis in the nethir part, and an heeri  croxrasy. 
: § Lamya is a 
schulen meete; oon schal erie to an other.  wondirful 
1 o - beest, lijk a 
Lamya'§ schal ligge there, and foond rest 15 \ommanaboue, 
there to hir silf; there an irchoun hadde  2”¢ bath horse 
aces . ‘4 feet bynethe, 
dichis, and nurschide out whelpis, and and gine 
« . . e owne W! 1S. 
diggide aboute, and fostride in the scha- as the is bs 
wn , ith, Li 
dewe therof; there kitis weren gaderid ite, aan 


togidere, oon to another. Seke 3e dili-16 


uofthe x. Vv And itcepr.m. ¥ Om. E pr. m. 
2 of a boole and 
© thrisse AGHK. 


€ evel spel c pr.m. E pr. m. 


aoon 4K. © Om. 4GHK. 


k beestis, as mijlde cattis, and martynapis, 


1 Lamya, that is, a beest lijk a womman aboue, and hath hors 


XXXIV. 16—XXKXV. Io. 


there ben gedered kites, the tother& to 
16the tother. Secheth besily in the boc of 
the Lord, and redeth; oon of hem failyde 
not, the tother at the tother so3te not; 
for that of my mouth 3ide forth, he co- 
maundide, and his spirit he gederede 
17tho thingus. And he sente to them lot, 
and his hond deuydede it to them in to 
mesure ; vnto euermore thei shul welden 
it, in ieneracioun and ieneracioun thei 
shul dwellen iti. 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 Gladen shal desert, and the with oute 
weie, and* ful out shal iojen the wilder- 
2nesse, and flouren as a lilie. Buriown- 


ynge it shal burioune, and ful out io3en, _ 


io3eful and preising. The glorie of Liban 
is 30ue to it, the fairnesse of Carmel and 
of Saron; thei shul see the glorie of the 
Lord, and the fairnesse of oure God. 
3Coumforteth the hondes loosid atwynne, 
aand the feble knees strengtheth. Seith, 
3ee ‘of litil corage!, taketh coumfort, and 
wileth not dreden; lo! oure God ven- 
iaunce of 3elding shal bringe, God he 
5shal come, and sauen vs. Thanne shul 
ben opened the e3en of blynde imen, and 
6 eres of deue men shul ben opened. Thanne 
shal lepe as an hert the halte, and opened 
shal be the tunge of doumbe men; for 
kut ben in desert watris, and stremes in 
7wildernesse. And that was drie in toa 
pond, and the thristende in to welles of. 
watris. In the couches, in the™ whiche 
biforn dwelten" dragounes, shal springe 
the grenenesse of the reed, and of the 
sresshe. And it shal be there in the sty, 
and in the weie, and an hoely weie it 
shal be clepid, passe shal not bi it a de- 
foulid; and this shal be to you a stra3t 
ri3t weie, so that foolys erre not by it. 
9Ther® shal not be there a leoun, and 
euel beste shal not ste3en vp bi it, ‘ne be 
10founden there?. And gon shul thei‘ that 


& toon 4. oon K. htoon 4. oon kK. Jin it ze. 


‘corage E sec.m.marg. couwardis, or of litil corage acu. 


POm.c prim, 4Om. c prem. E prem. 


mhemwn. © thei n. © thei Nn. 


ISAIAH. 


k Om. £ pr.m. 


285 . 


gentli in the book of the Lord, and rede 
3e; oon of tho thingis failide not, oon 
sou3te not another; for he comaundide 
that thing, that goith forth of my mouth, 
and his spirit he gaderide tho™ togidere. 
And he sente to hem eritage, and his hond 17 
departide it in mesure; til in to withouten 
ende tho" schulen welde that Jond, in ge- 
neracioun and in to generacioun tho® 
schulen dwelle ther yunne. 


CAP. SX XV, 


The forsakun Judee and with outen1 
weie schal be glad, and wildirnesse schal 
make ful out ioye, and schal floure as a 
lilie. It buriownynge schal buriowne, and 2 
it glad and preisynge schal ‘make ful out 
joie. The glorie of Liban is 3ouun to it, 
the fairnesse of Carmele and of Saron; 
thei schulen se the glorie of the Lord, and 
the fairnesse of oure God. Coumforte 3e3 
comelid? hondis, and make 3e strong feble 
knees. Seie 3e, Men of litil coumfort, be4 
3e coumfortid, and nyle 3e drede; lo! oure 
God schal brynge the veniaunce of 3eld- 
yng, God* hym silf schal come, and schal 
saue vs. Thanne the ijen of blynde mens 
schulen be openyd, and the eeris of deef 
men schulen be opyn. Thanne a crokid6é 
man schal skippe as an hert, and the tunge 
of doumbe men schal be openyd ; for whi 
watris ben brokun out in desert, and 
stremes in wildirnesse. And that that7 
was drie, 7s maad in to a poond, and the 
thirsti is maad in to wellis of watris. 
Grenenesse of rehed, and of spier schal 
growe in dennes, in whiche dwelliden 
dragouns bifore. And a path and a weie 
schal be there, and it schal be clepid an8 
hooli weie, he that is defoulid schal not 
passe therbi; and this schal be a strei3t 
weie to 30u, so that foolis erre not therbi. 
A lioun schal not be there, and an yuel9 
beeste schal not stie therbi, nether schal 


1 couwardis £ pr. m. text. or of litil 


mOm. secH. ® dwelleden z. © And there 4. 


P elumsid, ether comelid cuFaurmngrsu. clumsid, ether cumblid py. 
clumsid kvx. clumsid, eéhir loosid atwynne x sec. m. 


* that is, Crist. 
A et alii, 


286 


shul ben delyuered; and the bo3t of the 
Lord shul be conuertid, and comen in to 
Sion with preising ; and euere durende 
gladnesse vp on the hed of hem ; io3e and 
gladnesse thei shul welde, and flee shal 
sorewe and weiling. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 And don it is in the fourtenthe 3er of 
king Ezechie, stezede vp Senacherib, king 
of Assiries, vp on alle the strengthid cites 

2of Juda, and toc hem. And the king of 
Assiries seute Rapsacen fro Laches in to 
Jerusalem, to king Ezechie, in an heny 
hond; and stod in the water kundute of 
the ouere pond’, in the weie of the ful- 

3leris feeld. And wente oute to hym Elya- 
chym, sone of Elchie, that was vpon the 
hous, and Sobna, scribe, and Joae, the 
asone of Asaf, chaunceler. And Rapsaces 
seide to them, Seith to Eizechie, These 
thingus seith the grete king, king of 

Assiries, What is this trist, that thou 

strostest? or of counseil® or strengthe to 
rebellen thou disposist? vp on whomt 
hast thou trost, for thou hast gon awei 

6fro me? Lo! thou trostist vp on this 

‘staf of reed" to-broken,'vp on Egipt’, to 
whom if a man shul lene, it shal go in to 
his hond, and therlen it; so Farao, king 
of Egipt, to alle men that trosten in hym. 

7That if thou answere” to me, In the 

Lord oure God wee trosten; whether not 
he is, whos he3e thyngus and auteres toc 
awei Ezechie, and seyde to Jude and to 
Jerusalem, Beforn this auter 3ee shul 

shonoure? And now ‘tac thee* to my 
lord, the’ king of Assiries, and I shal 
3yue to thee two thousend hors, and thou 
shalt not moun 3yuen of thee ste3eres vp 

gof hem. And? what maner sustene shal 
the face of a domes man of o place of 


t fish pond c prim. £ prem. 
¥ Om. € prom. E prem 


2 OF £ pr.m. 


W answerist AEGHK. 
a Om. £ prom. 


chem n. 4 Om. narsvu. 


£ Om. Q. 
fullere, ether toukere ¥s. 


e hi3 a. 


ISAIAH. 


8 what connseil 4EGIIK. 


3 & Om. ceteri. 
ijeneth, ether restith cRFGUIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


XXX Vigo. 


be foundun there. And thei schulen go, 10 
that ben delyuered and a3enbou3t of the 
Lord ; and thei schulen be conuertid, and 
schulen come in to Sion with preisyng ; 
and euerlastynge gladnesse schal be on 
the heed of hem; thei schulen haue ioie 
and gladnesse, and sorewe and weilyng 
schulen fle awei. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


And it was don in the fourtenthe 3eer 1, - 
of kyng Ezechie, Sennacherib, the kyng 
of Assiriens, stiede on alle the stronge 
citees of Juda, and took tho’. And thee 
kyng of Assiriens sente Rapsases fro La- 
chis to Jerusalem, to kyng Ezechie, with 
greet power; and he stood at the watir 
cundit of the? hijere® sisterne, in the weie 
of thef feeld of ® a fullereb, And Elia-3 
chym, the sone of Elchie, that was on the 
hous, 3ede out to hym, and Sobna, the 
scryuen, and Joae, the sone of Asaph, the 
chaunceler. And Rapsases seide to hem, 4 
Seie 3e to Ezechie, The greet king, the 
king of Assiriens, seith these thingis, What 
is the trist, in which thou tristist ? ethir bis 
what councele ether strengthe disposist 
thou for to rebelle? on whom hast thou 
trist, for thou hast go awei fro me? Lo!é 
thou tristist on this brokun staf of rehed, 
on Egipt, on which if a man restith', it 
schal entre in to his hoond, and schal 
perse it; so doith Farao, the kyng of 
Egipt, to alle men that tristen in hym. 
That if thou answerist to me, We tristen 7 
in oure Lord God; whether* it is not he, 
whose hije places and auteris Esechie dide 
awei, and he seide to Juda and to Jerusa- 
lem, 3e schulen worschipe bifore this auter? 
And now bitake thee to my lord, the kyngs 
of Assiriens, and Y schal 3yue to thee twei! 
thousynde of horsis, and thou maist not 
3yue of thee stieris of tho horsis. And hous 
schalt thou abide the face of the iuge of 


t whan kK. 
* taketh heede z pr.m. tac 3ee x. 


treed staf c pr.m. reedi staf zpr.m. 
Y Om. ack. 


h fullere, or toukere CEGIIKMNPQRUXY. 
k wher 1 passim. ' two 1, 


XXXVI. 10—20. 


the lasse seruauns of my lord? That if 
thou troste in Egipt, and in the foure 
10 horsid carre, and in the horse men; and 
now whether withoute the Lord I ste3ede 
vp to this lond, that I shulde destroje it ? 
The Lord seide to me, Ste3e vp vp on 
this lond, and destroje it. Aud Elea- 
chym seide, and Sobna, and Joae, to 
Rapsacen, Spec to thi seruauntis in Si- 
rie tunge, wee vnderstonden forsothe; ne 
speke thou to vs Jewly, in the eres of the 
12puple, that is vp on the wal. And seide 
to them Rapsaces, Whether to ‘thi lord 
and to thee sente me my lord, that ‘I 
schuld* speke alle these wrdys, and not 
more to the men that sytten in the wal, 
that thei ete ther toordes, and drinke 
13 ther? vryne of their feet with 30u? And 
Rapsaces stod, and criede with a gret 
vois Jeuly, and seide, Hereth the wrdes® 
of the grete king, king of Assiries. These 
thyngus seith the king, Bigile not 3ou 
Esechie, for he shal not moun delyueren 
1530u out; and not to 30u trost 3yue Eze- 
chie vp on the Lord, seiende, Delyuer- 
ende the Lord shal delyueren vs; shal 
not be 30uef this cite in’ the hond of the 
isking of Assiries. Wileth not heren Eze- 
chie. These thingus forsothe seith the 
king of Assiries, Doth with me blessyng, 
and goth out to me; and eteth eche his 
vyne, and eche his fige tree, and drinketh 
izeche the water of his cisterne, to the 
tyme that I come, and take 30u awei to 
the lond that is as 30ure lond; lond of 
whete and of wyn, lond of locfes and of 
isvynes. Ne disturbe" 30u Ezechie, seiende, 
The Lord shal delyuere vs. Whether de- 
lyuereden the godes of Jentiles eche his 
lond fro the hond of the king of Assiries? 
19 Wher is the god of Emath, and of Ar- 
fath? Wher is the god of Sefaruaym ? 
Whether thei deliueredenSamarie fromyn 
20hond? Who is of alle the godes of these 
londis that delyuerede! his lond fro myn 


> thyn hous E pr. m. 
3yue E passim. §& in to AE sec.m. GHK. 


ISAIAH. 


¢ Om. c pr.m. he £ pr. m. 
b distruye a. 


287 


o place of the lesse seruauntis of my lord? 
That if thou tristist in Egipt, and in cartis, 
and in kny3tis ; and now whethir Y stiede 10 
to this lond with out the Lord, that Y 
schulde distrie it? The Lord seide to me, 
Stie thou on this lond, and distrie thou it. 
And Eliachym, and Sobna, and Joae, seiden 11 
to Rapsaces, Speke thou to thi seruauntis 
bi the langage of Sirie, for we vndur- 
stonden; speke thou not to vs bi the Jan- 
gage of Jewis in the eeris of the puple, 
which is on the wal. And Rapsaces seide 12 
to hem, Whether mi lord sente me to thi 
lord, and to thee, that Y schulde speke 
alle these wordis, and not rathere to the 
men that sitten on the wal, that thei ete 
her toordis, and drynke the pisse of her 
feet with 3ou ? And Rapsaces stood, and 13 
criede with greet vois in the langage of 
Jewis, and seide, Here 3e the wordis of 
the greet kyng, the kyng of Assiriens. 
The kyng seith these thingis, Esechie dis-14 
seyue not 3ou, for he may not delyuere 
3ou; and Ezechie 3yue not to 30u trist on 15 
the Lord, and seie, The Lord delyuerynge 
schal delyuere vs; this citee schal not be 
3ouun in to the hoond of the kyng of 
Assirieus. Nyle 3e here Ezechie. For whi1é 
the kyng of Assiriens seith these thingis, 
Make 3e blessyng with me, and go 3e out 
to me; and ete 3e ech man his vyner, and 
ech man his fige™ tre, and drynke 3e ech 
man the water of his cisterne, til Y come, 17 
and take awei 3ou to a lond which is as 
joure lond; to a lond of whete and of 
wyn, to a lond of looues and of vyneris. 
Ezechie disturble not jou, and seie, The 1s 
Lord schal delyuere vs. Whether the god- 
dis of folkis delyuereden ech his lond fro 
the hond of the kyng of Assiriens? Where 19 
is the god of Emath, and of Arphat? 
Where is the god of Sepharuaym ? Whie- 
thir thei delyueriden Samarie fro myn 
hond? Who is of alle goddis of these 20 
londis, that delyueride his lond fro myn 


athe acuK. © grete wrdes c prim, f synen vel 


1 shulde delyueren & pr. m. 


m vyne N. 


288 


hond, that the Lord delyuere Jerusalem 
aifro myn hond? And thei heelden ther 
pes, and answerden not to hym a wrd. 
Forsothe the king hadde comaundid to 
them, seiende, Ne answere 3ee to hym. 
22 And wente in Elyachym, the sone of 
Elchie, that was vp on the hous, and 
Sobna, scribe, and Joae, sone of Asaf, 
chaunceler, to Esechie, kut the clothis, 
and tolden to hym the wrdes of Rapsaes. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


1 And it is do, whan hadde herd king 
Ezechie, he kutte his clothis, and wrap- 
pid is with a sac, and wente in to the 
2hous of the Lord. And he sente Elea- 
chym, that was vp on the hous, and 
Sobnam, scribe, and the elderes of the 
preestus, coouered with sackus, to Isaie, 
3thek sone of Amos, profete. And thei 
seiden to hym, These thingus seith Eze- 
chie, The dai of tribulacioun, and of an- 
guysh, and of correccioun, and of blas- 
femye, this day ; for ther camen sones to 
the berthe, and vertue was not of bering. 
4If any maner here the Lord thi God the 
wrdus of Rapsaces, whom sente the king 
of Assiries, his lord, to blasfemen the 
God lyuende, and to repreue with wrdis, 
whiche herde the Lord thi God, rere vp 
thanne orisoun for the relikes that ben 
sfounde. And ther camen seruauns of 
éking Esechie to Isaie; and Isaie seide to 
them, These thingus 3ee shul seyn to 3oure 
lord, These thingus seith the Lord, Ne 
drede thou of the face of the wrdus that 
thou hast herd, with whiche blasfemeden 
the childer of the king of Assiries me. 
7Lo! I shal 3yue to hym a spirit, and he 
shal heren a messager; and he shal be 
turned a3een to his Jond, and to fallen I 
shal maken hym with swerd in his lond. 
8 Rapsaces! forsothe is turned ajeen, and 
he fond the king of Assiries fiztende ajen 
Lobnam; forsothe he hadde herd, for™ he 
gwas go fro Lachis. And he herde of 


k Om. «4, 


ISAIAH. 


1 And Rapsaces xk. 


XXXVI. 21I——XXXVII. 9. 


hond, that the Lord delyuere Jerusalem 
fro myn hond? And thei weren stille, 21 
and answeriden not to hym a word. For 
whi the kyng comaundide to hem, and 
seide, Answere 3e not to him. And Elia-2 
chym, the sone of Eichie, that was on the 
hous, and Sobna, the scryueyn, and Joae, 
the sone of Asaph, chaunceler, entriden 
with to-rent clothis to Ezechie, and telde 
to hym the wordis of Rapsaces. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


And it was don, whanne kyng Ezechie1 
hadde herd, he to-rente hise clothis, and 
he was wlappid in a sak, and entride in 
to the hous of the Lord. And he sente2 
Eliachym, that was on the hous, and 
Sobna, the scryuen, and the eldre men of 
prestis, hilid with sackis, to Isaie, the pro- 
phete, the sone of Amos. And thei seiden3 
to hym, Ezechie seith these thingis, A dai 
of tribulacioun, and of angwisch, and of 
chastisyng, and of blasfemye ¢s this dai; 
for children camen ‘til to" childberyng, 
and vertu of childberyng is not. Therfor4 
reise thou preier for the relifs that ben 
foundun, if in ony maner thi Lord God 
here the wordis of Rapsaces, whom the 
king of Assiriens, his lord, sente, for to 
blasfeme lyuynge God, and to dispise bi 
the wordis, whiche thi Lord God herde. 
And the seruauntis of kyng Esechie camen 5 
to Isaie; and Isaie seide to hem, 3e schulens¢ 
seie these thingis to 3oure lord, The Lord 
seith these thingis, Drede thou not of the 
face of wordis whiche thou herdist, bi 
whiche the children of the kyng of Assi- 
riens blasfemyden me. Lo! Y schal 3yue7 
to hym a spirit, and he schal here a mes- 
sanger; and he schal turne ajen to his 
londe, and Y schal make hym to falle 
doun bi swerd in his lond. Forsothe Rap-s 
saces turnede a3en, and foond the kyng of 
Assiriens fi3tynge ajens Lobna; for he 
hadde herd, that the kyng was gon fro 
Lachis. And the kyng herde messangeris 9 


™ that E pr. m. 


* vnta t 


XXVIII. 10o—22. 


Theraeha, king of Ethiope, seiende, He 
wente out, that he fizjte ajen thee. The 
whiche thing whan he hadde herd, he 
sente messageres to Esechie, seiende, 
10 These thingus 3ee shul sey to Esechie, 
king of Jude, spekende, Not thee disceyue 
thi God, in whiehe thou trostest, seiende, 
Jerusalem shal not be 3yue in the hond 
llof the king of" Assiries. Lo! thou hast 
herd what dide alle the kingus of Assi- 
ries to alle londes that thei turneden vpso 
doun; and ‘shalt thou® moun be dely- 
izuered ? Whether delyuereden hem the 
godis of Jentiles, whom turneden vpso 
doun my fadris; Gosam, and Aran, and 
Resef, and the sones Eden, that weren in 
13 Thalasar ? Wher is the king of Emath, 
and the king of Arfath, and the king of 
the huge cite Cefaruaym, and Ana, and 
tsAua? And Esechie toc the bokes of the 
hond of the messager, and radde them ; 
and he stej3ede vp in to the hous of the 
Lord, and spredde out hem bifor the 
15 Lord; and? pre3ede the Lord, seiende, 
16 Lord of ostes, God of Irael, that sittist 
vp on cherubyn, thou art God alone of 
alle the reumes of erthe1; thou madist 
i7heuene and erthe. Boowe doun, Lord, 
thin ere, and here; opene thin e3en, Lord, 
and see; and here alle the wrdus of Sena- 
cherub, that he sente to blasfemen God 
iwlyuende. Verely forsothe, Lord, desert' 
maden the kingis of Assiries londus, and 
19 the regiouns of them, and 3euen the god- 
dis of hem to fyr; forsothe thei weren not 
goddus, but were of the hondus of men, 
tree and stonus; and thei to-mynushten 
20hem. And now, Lord oure* God, saue 
vs fro the hond of hym; and knowen alle 
the reumes of erthe, for*thou art Lord 
21God alone. And Isaie, the sone of Amos, 
serte to Esechie, seiende, These thingus 
seith the Lord God of Jrael, For the 
whiche thou prejedest me of Senaeherub, 
22 king of Assiries, this is the wrd that the 


2 Om. x pr.m. % thou shalt c. 


P did 1 sec. m. 


Oo kyng a pr. m. F pr. m. UP. 
whem n. 


sec.m. Qu. them wn. ¥ 3ede up i. 
VoL. Hl. 


ISAIAH. 


P Om. E pr. m. 


4 mizten E. 
x Om. N. 


Pp 


289 — 


seiynge of Theracha, kyng of Ethiopiens, 
He is gon out to fizte ajens thee. And 
whanne he hadde herd this thing, he 
sente messangeris to Ezechie, and sceide, 
3e sehulen seie, spekynge these thingis to 10 
Ezechye, kyng of Juda, Thi God disseyue 
not thee, in whom thou tristist, and seist, 
Jerusalem schal not be 3ouun in to the 
hond of the kyng of Assiriens. Lo! thou 
herdist alle thingis whiche the kynges® of 
Assiriens diden? to alle londis whiche thei 
distrieden: and maist‘ thou™ be delyuered? 
Whethir the goddis of folkis delynereden 12 
hem, whiehe iny fadris distrieden ; Gosan,- 
and Aran, and Reseph, and the sones of 
Eden, that weren in Thalasar? Where is 13 
the kyng of Emath, and the kyng of Ar- 
phath, and the kyng of the citee of Se- 
pharuaym, and of Ana, and‘ of Aua? And j4 
Ezechie took the bookis fro the hond 
of messangeris, and redde tho"; and he 
stiede’ in to the hous of the Lord, and 
spredde abrood tho™ bifore the Lord ; and 15 
preiede to the Lord, and seide, Lord of ig 
oostis, God of Israel, that sittist on eheru- 
byn, thou art God aloone of alle the rewmes 
of erthe; thou madist heuene and erthe. 
Lord, bowe doun thin eere, and here ;,, 
Lord, open thin iz3en, and se; and here 
thou alle the wordis of Sennacherib, whiche 
he sente for* to blasfeme lyuynge God. 
For verili, Lord, the kyngis of Assiriens ,, 
maden londis dissert, and the cuntreis of 
tho", and 3auen the goddis of tho’ to fier ; 15 
for thei weren not goddis, but the werkis 
of mennus hondis, trees and stoonys ; and 
thei al to-braken tho goddis. And now, o 
oure Lord God, saue thou vs fro the hond 
of hym ; and alle rewmes of erthe knowe, 
that thon art Lord® God aloone. And,, 
Isaie, the sone of Amos, sente to Ezechie, 
and seide, The Lord God of Israel seith 
these thingis, For whiche thingis thou 
preidist me of Sennacherib, the kyng of 
Assiriens, this is the word whieh the,, 
8 Om. 4. 


4the erthe 4zeGHK. *° Om. E pr.in, 


t Om. F sec. m. IKNP 
@ the Lord 1s. 


T not CEFGHIN’QU. 
yYhem Nn. # hem nN. 


290 


Lord spac vp on hym, He dispiside thee, 
he vndermouwede thee, thou maiden do3- 
tir of Sion; aftir thee the hed he mouede, 
23thou maidet do3ter of Jerusalem. To 
whom hast thou repreued, and whom 
hast thou blasfemed ? and vp on whom 
hast thou rered thi vois, and hast rered 
the hei3te of thin e3en? To the hoeli of 
24Irael. In the hond of thi sernanns" thou 
hast repreued to the Lord, and seidist, 
In the multitude of my foure horsed 
carres J ste3ede vp the” hei3tus of moun- 
teynes, 30kes of Liban; aud I shal to- 
hewen the he3e thingus of his cedris, and 
the chosene firres of it; and I shal go in 
to the hei3te of his” cop, the wilde wode 
»5 of the Carmel of it. I dalf*, and drank 
the water of it; and I driede with the 
step of my foot alle the ryueres of the 
26 waterhepes. Whether thou hast not herd 
what thingus sum tyme I dide to hym¥? 
Of olde da3es I foormede it, and now I 
haue bro3t to; and it is do ‘in to’ the 
drawing out bi the roote of hilles togi- 
27 dere fiztende, and of strengthid cites. The 
dwelleris of them with an .houd shortid 
togidere* trembleden, and ben confoundid ; 
thei ben mad as hei of the feld, and corn 
of the leswe, and erbe of rooues, that out 
28 driede er it wex ryp. Thi dwelling, and 
thin entre, and thi going out Y knew, and 
29thi wodnesse ajen me. Whan thou ‘were 
wod? a3en me, thi pride stejede vp in to 
myn eres; I shal putte thanne a cercle 
in thi nose thirles, and a bridil in thi 
lippis; and I shal bringe ajeen thee in 
to the weie, bi the® whiche thou came. 
30 To thee forsothe this shall ben a toene; 
et this 3er that freeli ben sprunge, and 
in the secunde 3er et appelis; in the 
thridde forsothe 3er soweth, and repith, 
aud plaunteth vynes, and eteth the frut 
31of hem. And he shall putte it, that were 
saued of*¢ the hous of Juda, and that is 


t maydyn 4. 
Zin K, 


U sernaunte AGHK. 
ato x pr.m. > woodedist-© pr. m. 


ISAIAH. 


VY to the aE prem. 
¢ Om. Ar. 


XXKVIL. 23-—31. 


Lord ‘spak on hym, Thou virgyn, the 
dou3ter of Sion, he dispiside thee, he scorn- 
ede thee ; thou virgyn, the dou3ter of Jeru- 
salem, he ‘moued his heed aftir thee». 
Whom despisist thou, and* whom _ blas- 2s 
femedist4 thou? and on-whom reisidist 
thou thi vois, and reisidist the hi3nesse of 
thin izen? To the hooli of Israel. Bi the 24 
hond of thi seruauntis thou dispisidist the 
Lord, and seidist, In the multitude of my 
cartis Y stiede on the hijnesses of hillis, on 
the 3ockis of Liban; and Y schal kitte doun 
the hi3 thingis of cedris therof, and the 
chosun beechis therof; and Y schal entre 
in to the hi3nesse of the cop therof, in to 
the® forest of Carmele therof. Y diggide, 25 
and drank watir; and Y made drie with 


‘the step of my foot all the strondis of 


feeldis. Whether thou, Sennacherib, herd- 2 
ist not what thingis Y dide sum tyme? Fro 
elde daies Y fourmyde that thing, and 
now Y haue brou3t; and it is maad in to8 
drawyng vp bi the roote of litle hillis fi3t- 
ynge togidere, and of strong citees. The27 
dwelleris of tho cifees trembliden togidere 
with hond maad schort, and ben aschamed; 
thei ben maad as hei of the feeld, and the 
gras of lesewe, and as erbe of roouys', that 
driede vp bifore that it wexide ripe. Y 28 
knew thi dwellyng, and thi goyng out, 
and thin entryng, and thi woodnesse a3ens 
me. Whanne thou were wood a3ens ‘me, 29 
thi pride stiede in to myn eeris ; therfor 
Y schal sette a ryng in thi nosethirlis, and 
a bridil in thi lippis; and Y-schal .lede 
thee ajen in to the weie, bi which thou 
camest. Forsothe to thee, Lxechie, this 30 
schal be a signe; ete thon in this jeer tho 
thingis that growen bi her fre wille, and 
in the secunde 3eer ete thou applis; but 
in the thridde 3eer sowe 3e, and repe 3e, 
and plaunte 3e vyneris, and ete 3e the 
fruyt of thok. And that that is sauyd of21 
the hous of Juda, and that, that is left, 


WOm.E prem. *X deluede aeauK. Yit E prom. 


ec Om. A. 


> these apr.m. © Om. a. 4 blasfemist yr. ¢ Om. crGHKNPQRSVX prem.  & to the CEFGHIKM sec. m. 


NPsquy. = h.as the 1. 


i hous rooues, ether rigges 1. 


k hem n. 


XXXVIL. 32——-XXXVIII. 5. 


laft setten the roote’ benethe, and shal 
32 make frute aboue; for fro Jerusalem shul 
gon out relikes, and saluacioun® fro the 
mount of Sion; the inward loue of the 
33 Lord’ of ostes. shal do this. Therfore 
these thinges seith the Lord, of the king 
of Assiries, He shal not go in to this cite, 
and he shal not throwe there an arwe; 
and ther shal not ocupie it’ a'sheld, and 
he shal not putte? in his enuyroun an 
34 hep ‘of erthe®. In the weie that he cam, 
bi it he shal be turned ajeen; and this 
cite he shal not: gon in, seith the Lord. 
33 And J shal defende this cite, that I saue 
it, for me, and for Dauid, my seruaunt. 
36 Wente out forsothe the aungil of the 
Lord, and smot in the tentus of Assiries 
an hundrid and fyue and ei3teti thou- 
send; and thei risen erli, and lo! alle 
37the! careynes of thet deade men. And 
he wente out, and 3ide awei. And turned 
a3een is Senacherub, king of! Assiries, 
ssand dwelte in Nynyue. And don is, 
whan he shulde honoure in the temple 
of Mesrach, his god, Aramalech and Sa- 
razer, his sones, smyten hym with swerd, 
and floun in to the lond of Ararath; and 
regnede for hymAsaradon, his sone. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


1 In tho dazes sicnede Ezechie vnto™ 
the deth; and wente in to hym Isaie, the 
soun of Amos, the" profete, and seide to 
hym, These thingus seith the Lord, Dis- 


pose to® thin house, for die shalt thou, * 


zand not lyuen. And Ezechie turnede his 
face to the wal, and honourede the Lord, 
3and seide, I ‘ynwardli pre3e?, Lord; haue 
mynde, I beseche, what mater I 3ide bi- 
for thee in treuthe, and in parfit herte, 
and that is good in thin e3en, I dide. 
And Ezechie wepte with gret weping. 
4 And don is the wrd of the Lord to Isaie, 
sseiende, Go, and sei to Ezechye, These 
thingus seith the Lord God of Dauid, thi 


ISATAH. 


291 


schal sende roote bynethe, and schal make 
fruyt aboue; for whi relifs schulen go outs2 
of Jerusalem, and saluacioun fro the hil of 
Sion; the feruent loue of the: Lord of 
oostis schal do this thing. Therfor thess 
Lord seith these thingis of the kyng of 
Assiriens, He’ schal not entre in to this 
citee, and he schal not schete there an 
arowe ; and a scheeld schal not ocupie it, 
and he schal not sende erthe in the cum- 
pas therof. In the weie in which he cam, 34 
he schal turne ajen bi it; and he schal not 
entre in to this citee, seith the Lord. And 3s 


- Y schal defende this citee, that Y saue it, 


for me, and for Dauid, my sermiunt. For-36 
sothe the aungel of the Lord 3ede out; and 
killide an hundride thousynde and four- 
scoor and fyue thousynde in the tentis of 
Assiriens ; and thei risen! eerli, and lo! 
alle men weren careyns.of deed men. And 37 
Sennacherib 3ede out of Jude, and wente 
awei. And Sennacherib, the kyng of 
Assiriens, turnede aj3en, and dwellide. in 
Nynyue. And it was don, whanne he3s 
worschipide Mesrach, his god, in the 
temple, Aramalech and Sarasar, hise sones, 
killiden hym with swerd, and fledden in 
to the lond of Ararath™; and Asaradon, 
his sone, regnyde for hym. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


In tho daies Esechie was sijk ‘til to"! 
the deth; and Isaie, the profete, the sone 
of Amos, entride to hym, and seide to 
hym, The Lord seith these thingis, Dis- 
pose thi hous, for thou schalt die, and thou 
schalt not lyue. And Esechie turnede his 2 
face to the wal, and preiede the Lord, 
and seide, Lord, Y biseche; haue thous 
mynde, Y biseche, hou Y 3ede bifore thee 
in treuthe, and in perfit herte, and Y dide. 
that that was good bifore thin izen. And 
Ezechye wept with greet wepyng. And4 
the word of the Lord was maad to Isaie, 
and seide, Go thou, and seie to Ezechye,s 
The Lord God of Dauid, thi fadir, seith 


dyotis 4. sanaciounc. fOm.a. &sendenepr.m bOm.eprm iOm.a. k Om. acu. 
1Om. K. ™to kK. "Om. secuK. © for 4. P beseche £ pr. m. 
lyisiden a prom. cuKMNVX. resin P, ™ Ararath, thal is, Armenye K. ™ vnto 1. 


Pp2 


292 ISAIAH. 


fader, I haue herd thin orisoun, and seen 
thi teres. Lo! I shal ley to vp on thi 
6 dajes fiftene 3er; and fro the hond of the 
king of Assiries I shal delyuere thee and 
7this cite, and I shal defenden it. This 
forsothe to thee shal ben a tocne fro the 
Lord, for the Lord shal do this wrd that 
she spac. Loo! I shal inake to turne a3een 
the shadewe of lynes%, bi the" whiche it 
hadde go doun in the oriloge of Acath, 


in the sunne, bacward by ten lynes. And - 


the sunne is turned a3een bi ten lynes, bi 
the grees that it hadde go doun. 

9 The’ scripture of Exechie, king of Ju- 
da, whan he hadde be syc, and hadde 
couered of his sycnesse. 


10 =I seide, in the myddel of my dajes I, 


11 shal go to the 3ates of helle. I so3te the 
residue of my 3eres; I seide, I shal not 
see the Lord God in the lond of lyueres ; 
I shal not biholde a man more ouer, and 

iza dwellere of reste. My ieneracioun is 
taken awei, and al folden* vp fro me, as a 
tabernacle of shepherdes. Kut of is as of 
a weuere my lif; whil 3it I weuede, he 
under kutte me. Fro erli vnto euen thou 

isshalt ende me; I hopede vuto the moru ; 
as a leoun, so” he to-brosede alle my 
bones. Fro erli ‘vn to* euen thou shalt 

i4ende me; as the brid of a swalewe, so I 
shal crien; sweteli I shal thenke as a 
culuer. Al to-feblid ben myn e3en, bi- 
holdende vp in hei3te. Lord, fors I suf- 

isfre, answere thou for me; what shal I 
sey, or what shal answere to me, whan 
I myself haue do? I shal eft thenkeY to 
thee alle my 3eres, in the bitternesse of 

isiny soule. Lord, if thus it is lyned, and 
in suche thingus the lif of my spirit, thou 

i7st:alt chastise me, and quykene me; lo! 
in pes my bitteruesse inost bitter. Thou 
forsothe hast deliuered out my _ soule, 
that it shulde not pershe; thou hast 
thvowe aferr bihinde thi bac alle my 
issynnus. For helle shal not knouleche to 


4 Fynees k sec. m. 
Vv falt c prem, 


t Om. AEGHK. 
wOm. 4. *into K. 


° hath spoke 1. P ynto 14. 


8 This is the a. 
y hithenke sEGHK. 


@ schal I erxs. schal he GrmnQrx sec. m. 


XXXVIIL 6—78. 


these thingis, I haue herd thi preier, and 

Y si3 thi teeris. Lo! Y schal adde on thi 

daies fiftene 3eer; and Y schal delyueres 
thee and this citee fro the hond of the 

kyng of Assiriens, and Y schal defende it. 
Forsothe this schal be to thee a signe of7 
the Lord, that the Lord schal do this 

word, which he spak®. Lo! Y schal makea 
the schadewe of lynes, bi which it 3ede 

doun in the orologie of Achas, in the 

sunne, to turne a3en backward bi ten 

lynes. And the sunne turnede a3en bi ten 

lynes, bi degrees bi whiche it hadde go 

doun. 

The scripture of Eixechie, kyng of Ju-» 
da, whanune he hadde be sijk, and hadde 
rekyuered of his sikenesse. 

I seide, in the myddil of my daies Y io 
schal go to the 3atis of helle. Y soujtei 
the residue of my 3eeris; Y seide, Y schal 
not se the Lord God in the lond of 
lyueris; Y schal no more biholde a mau, 
and a dwellere of reste. My generacioun 12 
is takun awei, aud is foldid togidere fro 
ine, as the tabernacle of scheepherdis zs 


foldid togidere. Mi lijf is kit doun as of 


a webbe; he kittide doun me, the while Y 
was wouun 3it. Fro the morewtid ‘til to? 
the euentid thou schalt ende ine; Y hop- 13 
ide til to the morewtid; as a lioun, so he 
al to-brak alle my boonys. Fro the morew- 
tid til to the euentid thou schalt ende me ; 
as the brid of a swalewe, so Y schal crie; 14 
Y schal bithenke as a culuer. Myu ijen 
biholdynge an hi3, ben maad feble. Lord, 


-Y suffre violence, answere thou for me ;- 


what schal Y seie, ether what schal4 an-15 
swere to me, whanue ‘I inysilf haue™ do? 
Y schal bithenke to thee alle my 3eeris, in- - 
the bitternisse of my soule. Lord, if meis 
lyueth so, aud the lijf of my spirit is in 
siche thingis, thou schalt chastise me, and 
schalt quykene me. Lo! my bitternesse 17 
ts moost bittir in pees; forsothe thou hast 
delyuered my soule, that it perischide not; 


u The entire rubric omitted Iu GH. 


t Om. ak. 


t he hath cEGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


XXXVIIL. 19—XXXIX. 6. 


thee, nor? deth shal preise thee; and thei 
shul not abyden thi* treuthe, that gon 

i9doun in to the lake. 
he shal knouleche to thee, as and I to 
dai; the fader to the sonus knowe shal 

2zomake thi treuthe. Lord, mac me saf, 
and oure salmes wee shal singe alle the 
dajes of oure lif in the hous? of the® 
Lord. 

21 And Isaie comaundide, that thei shul- 
den taken an hep of fyges, and thei 
shulde make an enplastre vp on the 

22 wounde; and-he shulde ben hoel. And 
Ezechye seide, What shal be the tocne, 
for I shal ste3e vp ‘in to’ the hous of the 
Lord ? 


CAP. XXXIX. 


1 In that tyme sente Marodoch Bala- 
dan, the sone of Baladan, the king of 
Babiloyne, lettris and 3iftes to Ezechie; 
forsothe he hadde herd, that he hade be 

2syc, and was coouered. Forsothe Ezechie 
gladede vp on tho thingus, and he shew- 
ede to them the selle of spices, and of 
siluer, and of gold, and of swote thingus, 
and of the beste oynement, and al the 
cofres of his necessarie thingus, and alle 
thingus that ben founde in his tresories ; 
ther was not a wrd, that Ezechie shew- 
ede not to them® in his hous, and in al 

3his power. Forsothe Isaie, the profete, 
wente in® to Ezechie, the king, and 
seide to hym, What seiden these men, 
aud whennes camen thei to thee? And 
Ezechie seide, Fro a ferr lond thei camen 
ato me, fro Babyloyne. And he seyde, 
What sezen thei in thin hous? And 
Ezechie seide, Alle thingus that in myn 
hous ben, thei sejen’; ther was uot a 
thing, that I shewede not to them in ny 
stresories. And Isaie seide to Esechie, 

6 Here the wrd of the Lord of ostes. Lo! 
dajes shnl come, and alle thingus shul be 
don awei, that ben in thin hous, and that 
thi fadris han tresored vn to this dai, in 


a On. AG pr.m. HK. 
f han seen 4. 


Zne AEGHK. 
ee Om. £ pr.m. 


ISAIAH. 


Lyuende, lyuende, - 


D daiys E prim. 


293 © 


thou hast caste awey bilyide thi bak alle 
my synnes. For not helle schal kuow- 1s 
leche to thee, nethir deth schal herie thee; 
thei that goon doun in to the lake, schulen 
not abide thi treuthe. A lyuyuge man, aiy 
lyuynge mau, he schal knouleche to thee, 
as and Y to dai; the fadir schal make 
knowun thi treuthe to sones. Lord, make 20 
thou me saaf, and we schulen synge oure 
salines in all the daies of oure lijf in the 
hous of the Lord. 

And Ysaie comaundide, that thei schul-21 
den take a gobet of figus, and make a 
plaster on the wounde; and it schulde be 
heelid. And Ezechie seide, What signe 22 
schal be, that Y schal stie in to the hous of 
the Lord? 

CAP. XXXIX. 

In that tyme Marodach Baladan, the1 
sone of Baladam, the kyng of Babiloyne, 
sente bookis and 3iftis to Ezechie; for he 
hadde herd, that Izechie hadde be sijk, 
and was rekyuerid. Forsothe Ezechie2 
was glad.on®’ hem, and schewide to hem 
the selle of swete smellynge spices, and of 
siluer, and of gold, and of smellynge 
thingis, and of best oynement, and alle 
the schoppis of his purtenaunce of hous- 
hold, and alle thingis that weren foundun 
in hise tresours; no word was, which Eze- 
chie schewide not to hem in his hous, and 
in al his power. Sotheli Ysaie, the pro-s 
phete, entride to kyng Ezechie, and seide 
to hym, What seiden thes inen, and fro 
whennus cainen thei to thee? Aud Hze- 
chie seide, Fro a fer loud thei camen to 
me, fro Babiloyne. And Ysaie seide, What 4 
sijen thei in thin hous? And Ezechiie 
seide, Thei sien alle thingis that ben in 
inyn hous; no thing was in my tresours, 
which Y schewide not to hem. <Ands 
Ysaie seide to Ezechie, Here thou the 
word of the Lord of oostis. Lo! daiesé 
schulen come, and alle thingis that ben in 
thin hous, and whiche thingis thi fadris 
tresoriden til to this dai, schulen be takun 
din xk, 


© oure E pr.m. ¢hym £ pr. im, 


Sin N. 


204 " ISALAH. 


to Babiloyne; ther shal not be laft any 

7thing, seith the Lord. And of thi& sonus, 
that shul gon out of thee, the whiche 
thou shalt gete, thei shul take awei; and 
thei shul be geldingus in the paleis of the 

aking of Babiloyne. And Ezechie seide 
to Isaie, Good is the wrd of the Lord, 
that he spac. And he seide, Be ther do 
onli pes and treuthe in my da3es. 


CAP. XL. 


1 Beth coumfortid, beth coumfortid, 3ee 
2my puple, seith 3oure God. Speketh to the 
herte of Jerusalem, and clepeth to it, for 
ful endid" is his malice, for3yuen is his 
wickidnesse!; he toc of the hond of the 


Lord double thingus for alle his synnus. . 


3The vois of the criende in desert, Mak- 
eth redy the weie of the Lord, ri3t* mak- 
eth in wildernesse the sties of oure God. 
4Eche valei shal be enhaunced, and eche 
monteyn ‘and hil! shal be mekid; and 
ther shul be shreude thingus in to euene 
ri3t thingus, and sharpe thingus in to 
spleyne weies. And ther shal be opened 
the glorie of the Lord, and seen shal 
eche flesh togidere, that the mouth of 
sthe Lord spac. The vois of the Lord, 
seiende, Cry. And I seide, What shal I 
crien? Kche flesh hei, and al his glorie 
7as the flower of the feld. Ful out dried 
is the hei, and the flour fel, for the spirit 
of the Lord ble3 in it. Verely the™ hei is 
sthe puple; ful out dried is the hei, and 
the flour fel; the wrd forsothe of the 
9 Lord dwelleth in to withouten ende. Vp 
on an hi3 hil ste3 vp, thou that euange- 
lisist to" Sion; enhaunce in strengthe 
thi vois, thou that euangelisist to® Jeru- 
salen; enhaunce, and wile thou not drede; 
sel to the cites of Jude, Lo! 3oure? God. 
10 Lo! the Lord God in strengthe shal come, 
and his arm shal lordshipen; lo! his 
meede with hym, and his were biforn 


&the eg pr.m. Om. 4. i wickenesse Ee. 
°Om. z prim. Poure £ prem. 


‘and the a prom. 


2 “Om.x. WwOm.a prem, 
dwelle, ethir stonde s. 


W stie vp 1. 


k ristful a. 


XXXIX. 7——XL. 10. 


awei in to Babiloyne; not ony thing schal 

be left, seith the Lord. And thei schulen7 
take of thi sones, that schulen go out of 

thee, whiche thou schalt gendre; and thei 

schulen be onest seruauntis and chast in 

the paleis of the kyng of Babiloyne. Andé 
Ezechie seide to Ysaie, The word of the 

Lord is good, which he spak. And Exe- 

chie seide, Pees and treuthe be maad oneli 

in my daies. 


CAP. XL. 


My puple, be 3e coumfortid, be 3e coum-1 
fortid, seith 3oure Lord God. Speke 3e to2 
the herte of Jerusalem, and clepe 3e it, 
for the malice therof is fillid, thet wickid- 
nesse therof is forjouun ; it hath resseyued 
of the hond of the Lord double thingis for 
alle hise synnes. The vois of a crier ins 
desert, Make 3e" redi the weie of the 
Lord, make 3e"" ri3tful the pathis of oure 
God in wildirnesse. Ech valey schal be4 
enhaunsid, and ech mounteyn and litil hil 
schal be maad low; and schrewid thingis 
schulen be in to strei3t thingis, and scharpe 
thingis schulen be in to pleyn weies. Ands 
the glorie of the Lord schal be schewid, 
and ech man schal se togidere, that the 
mouth of the Lord hath spoke. The voise 
of God, seiynge, Crie thou. And Y seide, 
What schal Y crie? Ech fleisch zs hei, 
and al the glorie therof zs as the flour of 
the feeld. The hei is dried vp, and the flour7 
felle doun, for the spirit of the Lord bleew 
therynne. Verely the puple is hey; the heys 
is dried vp, and the flour felle doun; but the 
word of the Lord dwellith’ with outen ende. 
Thou that prechist to Sion, stie” on an hi39 
hil; thou that prechist to Jerusalem, en- 
haunse thi vois in strengthe; enhaunse thou, 
nyle thou drede; seie thou to the citees of 
Juda, Lo! 3oure God. Lo! the Lord God 10 
schal come in strengthe, and his arm schal 
holde lordschipe; lo! his mede zs with hym, 
and his werk zs bifore hym. As a scheep-11 
10m. 4GuK,. 


mOm.cpr.m. 9 Om. Epr.m. 


¥ dwellith, ether schal stonde CEFGHKMNPQRUVX. schal 


XL. 11—~-24. 


ithym. As a shepperde ‘shal feede4 his 
floc, in his arm he shal gedere the 
lombis, and in his bosuin shal reren; ‘the 
izshep" ful of frut he shal bern. Who 
mesurede with handful watris, and he- 
uenes with the paume peisede? Who 
heeng* vp with thre fingris the heuy- 
nesse’ of the" erthe, and wej3ede in peis 
the mounteynes, and the hilles in a bal- 
i3launce? Whov helpede” the Spirit of the 
Lord, or who* his counseiler was, and 
14Shewede to hym? With whom wente 
he in counseil, and enformede hym, and 
ta3te hym the sti3 of ri3twisnesse, and 
lerede hym with kunnyng, and the weie 
1s of prudence shewede to hym? Lo! Jen- 
tiles as a drope of a boket, and as mo- 
ment of a balaunce ben holden; lo! iles 
igas litil pouder, and Liban shal not suf- 
fisen to brenne, and his bestus shuln not 
17suffisen to brent sacrifice. Alle Jentiles 
as thei ben not, so thei ben bifor hym; 
and as no3t andY inwardli voide thei ben 
isholden to hym. To whom thanne lic 
hast thou mad God? or what ymage 
ig9shul 3ee putte to hym? Whether the 
grauen thing shal the smith 3eete, or the 
craftis* man with gold shall figure it,.and 
with? siluerene plates the siluer smyth ? 
20 The stronge tree, and the vnable to roten 
ches the wise craftes> man; he secheth 
what maner he sette the symulacre, that 
21it moue.not. Whether 3ee shul not wite? 
whether 3ee han not. herd ? whether not 
told ‘to 30u it is.fro the bigynnyng ? 
whether 3ee han not vnderstonde the 
22foundemens of the erthe? That sitteth 
vp on the cumpas of the erthe, and his 
dwelleris ben as locustes ; that streccheth 
out as no3t heuenus, and spredeth abrod 
23hem as tabernacle to indwelle®. That 
3yueth the sercheres of priuytees, as tho3 
thei be uot, the domes men of the erthe 
2i4as voide’ he made. And forsothe ne 


4 fedeth £ pr.m. Tr Om. £ prem. 
Eprom. Om, AE See. m. GUK. 
veyn BE prom. 2% craftic. ® Om. £ pr.m., 


ISAIAH. 


8 weide £ pr.m. hongide x sec.m. AGIK. 
¥ Whom eux. 
b crafty K. 


295 


herd he schal fede his flok, he schal ga- 
dere lambreen in his arm, and he schal 
reise in his bosom; he schal bere scheep 
‘with lomb*. Who mat watris in a fist, 12 
and peiside heuenes with a spanne? Who 
peiside the heuynesse of the erthe with 
thre fyngris, and weide mounteyns in a 
weihe, and litle hillis in a balaunce? Whois 
helpide the Spirit of the Lord, ether who 
was his councelour, and schewide to hym ? 
With whom took he councel, and whois 
lernyde hym, and tau3te hym the path of 
ri3tfulnesse, and lernyde hym in kunnyng, 
and schewyde to him the weie of pru- 
dence? Lo! folkis ben as a drope of ais 
boket, and ben arettid as the tunge of a 
balaunce; lo! ylis dex as a liti] dust, and 16 
the Liban schal not suffice to brenne his 
sacrifice, and the beestis therof schulen 
not suffice to brent sacrifice. Alle folkis17 
ben so bifore hym, as if thei ben not; and 
thei ben rettid as no thing and veyn thing 
to hym. To whom therfor maden 3e God ts 
lijk ? ether what ymage schulen 3e sette to 
hym? Whether a smyth schal welle to-19 
gidere an ymage, ether a gold smyth schal 
figure it in gold, and a worcliere in siluer 
schal di3te it with platis of siluer? A 2 
wijs crafti man chees a strong tre, and 
vnable to be rotun; he sekith how he 
schal ordeyne a symylacre, that schal not 
be mouyd. Whether 3e witen not? whe-21 
ther 3e herden. not? whether it was not 
teld to 30u fro the begynnynge? whether 
3e vndurstoden not the foundementis of 
erthe? Which sittith on the cumpas of 22 
erthe, aud the dwelleris therof ben as 
locustis; which stretchith forth heuenes 
as nou3t, and spredith abrood tho as a 
tabernacle to dwelle. Which 3yueth the23 
sercheris of priuytees, as if thei be not, 
and made the iugis of erthe as a veyn 
thing. And sotheli whanne the stok of 24 
hem is nether plauntid, nether 7s sowun, 


t gobbe c pr. m. 
x who is BE pr. m. Y and in 


wherde £ pr.m. 
4 inwardli voide & pr. m. 


© dwellen g pr. m. 


x ene, ether with lonb cerGutkMPVxy. yeene, ether mith lomb ns. - 


296 


plauntid, ne sowen, ne rootid in the 
erthe the stoc of hem, feerli he ble3 im 
to them, and thei drieden, and a whirle- 
25 wind as stubil shal take them awei. And 
to whom han 3ee licned me, and euened 
2shan me? seith the hoeli. Rereth vp in 
to hei3 30ure e3en, and seeth, who ‘made 
of no3t® these thingus; that bringethf out 
in noumbre the kny3thod of hem, and 
alle bi name he clepeth, for multitude of 
strengthe, and of stalwrthenesse, and of 
27 his vertue; ne oon was laft. Whi seist 
thou, Jacob’, and spekest, Irael", Hid is 
my wey fro the Lord, and fro my God 
28my dom passede? Whether wost thou ~ 
not, or hast not herd, God euere durende? 
The Lord that foormede the termes of the 
erthe, he shal not faile, ne trauaile, ne 
29 ther is enserching ‘of his wisdam. That 
3yueth to the weri vertue, and to them 
that ben not, strengthe and stalwrthe- 
z0nesse multeplieth. Failen shul childer, 
and trauailen, and 3unge men in ther 
sifeblenesse fallen. Who forsothe hopen 
in the Lord, shul chaunge streugthe, 
take to tederes as of an egle; rennen, and 
not trauailen; gon, and not faylen. 


CAP. XLI. 


1 Bee stille to me, yles, and Jentyles 
strengthe chaunge thei; ne3hen, and 
thanne speke thei; togidere to dom ny3 
2come wee. Who rerede fro the est the 
ri3twis, clepede hym, that he shulde fo- 
lewe hymself ? He shal 3yue in his si3te 
Jentyles, and kingus he shal welde; he 
shal 3yue as pouder to his swerd, asi 
stubil with the wind raueshid to his 
’bowe. He shal pursue hem, ‘he shalk 
passe in pes; the sty in his feet shal not 
tapere. Who these thingus wro3te and 
dide? clepende ieneraciouns! fro the bi- 
gynnyng. I a Lord; first and the last 
5T am. Iles seejen, and trembleden; the 


© foormede c pr.m. £ prim. 


f brozte & pr. m. 
E pr.m. 10m. c prim. E prom. 


k Om. £ pr.m. 


Zhaue jer. 22 hem n. 


ISAIAH. 


XL. 25——XLI. 5. 


nether 7s rootid in erthe, he bleew sudenli 
on hem, and thei drieden vp, and a whirle 
wynd sclial take hem awei as stobil. And 25 
to what thing ‘3e han? licned me, and han 
maad euene? seith the hooli. Reise 3oure26 
ijen an hi3, and se 3e, who made these 
thingis of nou3t; which ledith out: in 
noumbre the knijthod of tho”, and clepith 
alle bi name, for the multitude of his 
strengthe, and stalworthnesse, and vertu; 
nether o residue thing was. Whi seist 27 
thou, Jacob, and spekist thou, Israel, My 
weie is hid fro the Lord, and my doom 
passide fro my God? Whether thou2s 
knowist not, ether herdist thou not ? God, 
euerlastynge Lord, that made of nou3t the 
endis of erthe, schal not faile, nether schal 
trauele, nether enserchyng of his wisdom 
is. That 3yueth vertu to the weeri, and 29 
strengthe to hem that ben not, and mul- 
tiplieth stalworthnesse. Children schulen 30 
faile, and schulen trauele, and jonge men 
schulen falle doun in her sikenesse. But31 
thei that hopen in the Lord, schulen 
chaunge strengthe, thei schulen take fe- 
theris as eglis; thei schulen renne, and 
schulen not trauele; thei schulen go, and 
schulen not faile. 


CAP. XLI. 


Ties, be stille to me, and folkis chaunge } 
strengthe; neije thei, and thanne speke thei; 
nei3e we togidere to doom. Who reiside2 
the iust man fro the eest, and clepide hym 
to sue hym silf ? He schal 3yue folkis in his 
si3t, and he schal welde kyngis; he schal 
3yue as dust to his swerd, and as stobil 
‘that is* rauyschid of the wynd, to his 
bowe. He schal pursue hem, he schal gos 
in pees; a path schal not appere in hise 
feet. Who wrou3te and dide these thingis ? 4 
clepynge generaciouns at the bigynnyng. 
Y am the Lord; and Y am the firste and 
the laste. Ilis sien, and dredden; thes 
laste partis of erthe were astonyed; thei 


& to Jacob £ pr.m. 4 thou Israel scux. to Irael 


1 generacioun AGHK. 


8 Om. CEFGHIKNPSVX. 


XLI. 6—17. 


vtmostus™ of the erthe becamen stoneid, 
6thei ne3heden, and wente to. Eche to 
his ne3hebore shal helpen, and to his 
7brother seyn, Tac coumfort. Coumforten 
shal the metal smyth smytende hym 
with an hamer that forgede that tyme, 
seiende to the glyu, It is good; and he 
coumfortide hym with nailes, that it 
sshulde not be moued. And thon, Irael, 
my seruaunt, Jacob, whom I ches, the 
gsed of Abraham, my frend, in whom I 
toc thee fro the vtmostes" of the erthe, 
and fro his ferre coestes I clepede thee, 
and seide to ‘thee, My seruaunt thou art; 
I ches thee, and I caste not awei thee. 
io Ne drede thon, for I am with thee; ne 
bowe thou-donn, for I° thi God. I haue 
coumfortid thee, and holpen thee; and 
vndertoe thee the ri3thond of my ri3twis. 
11 Lo! shul be confoundid, and shamen alle 
that fijten ajen thee; thei shul be as 
tho3? thei be not, and pershe shul the 
izmen, that ajenseyn to thee. Thou shalt 
sechen hem, and not finden; thi rebel 
men thei shul ben, as tho3 thei ben not, 
and as the wasting of a man _ fi3tende 
izajen thee. For I the Lord thi God, 
takende thin hond, and seiende to thee, 
Ne drede thou, for I haue holpen thee. 
14 Wile thou not drede, thou! werm of Ja- 
cob, that dead 3ee ben of Irael. I haue 
holpen thee, seith the Lord, and thin 
1sa3zeen biere, the hoeli of Irael. I haue%4 
set- thee as a newe wayn thresshende, 
hauende pikede poeles sawende; thou 
shalt thresshe mounteynes, and to-my- 
nushen, and putten as pouder hillis. 
16 Thou shalt wynewe them, and the wind 
shal take awei, and the whirlewind shal 
scatere them; and thou ful out shalt 
iojen in the Lord, and in the hoeli of 
17Irael shalt’ glade. Nedi and pore men 
shul seche watris’, and ther ben not; 
the tunge of them with thrist driede. 


I the Lord shal out heren hem, I God of — 


n yttermostis 4GHK. 
r thou schalt 4G sec. m. K sec. m. 


™m yvttermost 4GUK. 
449 ha c. 


b coumfortide CEFGIIKMNPQRSUVX. 


VOW. Ill. 


ISAIAH. 


oT am 4K sec. m. 
8 Om. £ pr.m. 


297 


camen ni3, and nei3iden. Ech man schalé 
helpe his neizbore, and schal seie to his 
brother, Be thou coumfortid. A smyth of7 
metal smytynge with an hamer coumn- 
fortide him that polischyde, ethir made 
Jair, in that tyme, seiynge, It is good, to 
glu; and he fastenede> hym with nailis, 
that he schulde not be mouyd. Ande 
thou, Israel, my seruaunte, Jacob, whom 
Y chees, the seed of Abraham, my frend, 
in whom Y took thee; fro the laste partis» 
of erthe, and fro the fer partis therof Y 
clepide thee; and Y seide to thee, Thou 
art my seruaunt; Y chees thee, and cast- 
ide not awei thee. Drede thou not, for Y Ww 
am with thee; boowe thou not awei, for 
Y am thi God. Y coumfortide thee, and 
helpide thee; and the ri3thond of my iust 
man vp took thee. Lo! alle men schulen11 
be schent, and schulen be aschamed, that 
fizten azens thee; thei schulen be as if 
thei ben not, and men schulen perische, 
that a3en seien thee. Thou schalt seke 12 
hem, and thou schalt not fynde thi rebel 
men; thei schulen be, as if thei ben not, 
and as the wastyng of a man fi3tynge 
a3ens thee. For Y am thi Lord God, tak- 1s 
ynge thin hond, and seiynge to thee, Drede 
thou not, Y helpide thee. Nyle thou, worm 14 
of Jacob, drede, 3e that ben deed of Israel. 
Y helpide thee, seith the Lord, and thin 
ajen biere, the hooli of Israel. Y haue set js 
thee as al newe wayn threischynge, hau- 
ynge sawynge bilis ; thou schalt threische 
mounteyns, and schalt make smal, and 
thon schalt sette litle hillis as dust. Thou j; 


-schalt wyndewe hem, and the wynd schal 


take hem awei, and a whirlewynd schal 
scatere hem; and thou schalt make ful out 
ioie in the Lord®, and thou schalt be glad 
in the hooli of Israel. Nedi men and pore j7 
seken watris, and tho ben not; the tunge 
of hem driede for thirst. Y the Lord 
schal here hem, I God of Israel schal not 
forsake hem. Y schal opene floodis in hi3 13 


Pthof £ passim. 4 of the E pr. m. 


cthen. @Om.n. ¢€ word 1 


aq 


298 


isIrael shal not forsake them. I shal 
‘opene in he3e hillis flodys, and in the 
myddel of feeldis welles; I shall sette de- 
sert in tot pondis of watris, and the lond 
withoute weie in to riueres of watris. 
i9] shal 3yue in wildernesse ceder, and’ 
thorne, and myrt® tree, and oline tree; 
Iv shal sette in desert fyrr tree, and vim 
a0tree, and box togidere. That thei see, 
and wite, and bethenke, and vnderstonde 
togidere ; for the hond of the Lord dide 
this, and the hoeli of Irael foormede it. 
21Ny3 doth 3oure dom, seith the Lord; 
bringeth to, if any thing parauenture 
223ee han, seith the king of Jacob. Come 
thei ny3, and telle thei to vs, what euer 
thingus ben to come; the rathere thingus 
that weren, tellith, and wee shul putte 
oure herte, and wite; the laste thingis of 
hem, and that ben to come, shewith to vs. 
23 Telleth that ben to come in to tyme to 
come, and wee shul wite, for goddis 3ee 
ben; well also or euele, if 3ee moun, doth; 
and speke wee’, and see wee togidere. 
21Lo! 3ee ben of no3t, and 3our were ‘of . 
that thyng* that is not; abhominacioun 
ashe is, that ches 30u. I rerede fro the 
north, and he shal come from the rising 
vp’ of the sunne; clepe he shal my name. 
He shal bringe to the cheef maistris as 
clei, and as a daubere, ‘or a pottery’, to- 
26 tredende the lowe erthe”. Who tolde fro 
the bigynnyng, that wee witen, and fro 
the begynnyng, that wee sey, Thou art 
ri3twis? ther is not a tellere, ne a biforn 
27 seiere, ne herere 3oure wrdis. ‘The firste 
to Sion shal sei, Lo! I am ny3; and to 
Jerusalem an euangelist I shal 3yue. 
28 And I sa3, and ther was not of these* 
any man that 3ide in counseil, and ‘askid 
29 answerde? a wrd. Lo! alle vnri3twise, 
and veyne the werkes of hem; wynde, 


and with ynne voide the symulacris of 
them. 


tOm.4. myrreacux. Vandle pr. Ma 
yy Om. ce pr.m. or as a potter K. 


z Om. c pr. m. 
answere AGIIK. . 


f mirre Gx. 


ISAIAH. 


Ww Om. £ pr.m. 


XL{I. 18—a2g. 


hillis, and wellis in the myddis of feeldis ; 
Y schal sette the desert in to poondis of 
watris, and the lond without weie in to 
ryuers of watris. Y schal 3yue in wildir- 19 
nesse a cedre, and a thorn, and a myrte 
tre’, and the tre of an olyue; Y schal sette 
in the desert a fir tre, an elm, and a box 
tre togidere. That thei se, and knowe, and 20 
bithenke, and vndurstonde togidere; that 
the hond of the Lord dide this thing, and 
the hooli of Israel made that of nou3t. 
Make 3e ni3 30ure doom, seith the Lord ;21 
brynge 3e, if in hap 3e han ony thing, seith 
the kyng of Jacob. Nei3 tho, and telle to 22 
vs, what ever thingis schulen come; telle 
3e the formere thingis that weren, and we 
schulen sette oure herte, and schulen wite; 
schewe 3e to vs the laste thingis of hem, 
and tho thingis that schulen come. Telle23 
3e what thingis schulen come in tyme to 
comynge, and we schulen wite, that 3e ben 
goddis; al so do 3e wel, ethir yuele, if 3e 
moun; and speke we, and see we togidere. 
Lo! 3e ben of nou3t, and 3oure werk 7s of 24 
that that is not; he that chees 3ou, is 
abhomynacioun. I reiside fro the north, 95 
and he schal come fro the risyng of the 
sunne; he schal clepe my name. And he 
schal brynge magistratis as cley, and as a 
pottere® defoulynge erthe. Who tolde frog 
the bigynnyng, that we wite, and fro the 
bigynnyng, that we seie, Thou art iust ? 
noon is tellynge, nether biforseiynge, ne- 
ther herynge 3oure wordis. The firste 27 
schal seie to Sion, Lo! Y am present ; 
and Y schal 3yue a gospellere to Jerusa- 
lem. And Y si3, and noon was of these, 2% 
that token councel, and he that was axid, 
answeride a word. Lo! alle men ben vn- 29 
iust, and her werkis ben wynd and veyn; 
the symylacris of hem ben wynd, and voide 
thing. 


y Om. 4. 
b askide 


x Om. c pr.m. E pr.m. 
@ these then c pr.m. hem E pr.m. 


~& potter, ether a foormer kK. 


XLII. 1—14. 


CAP. XLII. 


1 Lo! my seruaunt, I shal vndertaken 
hym, my chosen, al plesede to hym in 
hym my soule. I 3af my spirit vp on 
hym, dom to Jentiles he shal bringe forth. 
2He shal not crien, ne take persone, ue 
shal ben herd his* voys withouteforth. 
3A reed brosid? he shal not to-trede, and 
flax smokende he shal not quenechen; in 
4treuthe he shal bringe out dom. He 
shal not be dreri, ne trublid, to the tyme 
he pute® in the erthe dom, and his lawe 
siles shul abiden. These thingus seith 
the Lord God, formende heuenes, and 
strecchende out- hem, fastuendef erthe, 
and that buriounen of€ it, 3yuende breth 
to the puple, that is vpon it, and spirit 
6to men tredende it. I the Lord clepede 
thee in ri3twisnesse, and toc thin hond, 
and kepte thee, and 3af thee in to coue- 
naunt of the puple, in to li3t of Jentiles. 
7That" thou shuldist opene the e3en of 
blynde men; that thou shuldyst bringe 
out fro closing the bounde, fro the hous 
sof prisoun the sitteres in dercnesse. I a 
Lord, this is my name; my glorie to 
an other I shall not 3yue, and my preis- 
ging to grauen thingus. That first weren, 
lo! ben comen, newe thingus also I telle; 
er thei ben sprunge, herd I shal maken 
loto 30u. Syngeth to the Lord a newe 
song; his preising fro the vtmostesi of 
the* erthe; 3ee that gon doun in to the 
se, and the plente of it, iles, and the 
11dwelleres of hem. Be rered vp the! de- 
sert, and the cites of it; in his houses 
shal dwelle Cedar; preiseth, 3ee dwelleris 
of the ston; fro the top of mounteynes 
12thei shul crien. Thei shul sette to the 
Lord glorie, and his preising in iles thei 
i3shul telle. The Lord as strong shal gon 
out, as a man fijtere he shal reren enuye; 
he shal crien out, and crien; vp on his 
i4enemys he shal be coumforted. Y heeld 


4 smyten togydir £ sec. m. AGUK. 
i vttermostis 4cHxK. k Om, «Ec. 


¢ Om. K. 
h And that 4. 


bhhem wn. ! blast ceEF@uIKMNPQRSUVX. 


ISAIAH. 


© poote E pr.m. 
Ito E prem. 


k Om. crinrau. 


aq 2 


299 - 


CAP. XLII. 


Lo! my seruaunt, Y schal vptake hymn, 1 
my chosun, my soule pleside to it silf in 
hym. I 3af my spirit ou hym, he schal 
brynge forth doom to hetheue men. Hee 
schal not crie, nether he schal take a per- 
soone, nether his vois schal be herd with- 
outforth. He schal not breke a schakuns 
rehed, and he schal not quenche smok- 
ynge flax; he schal brynge out doom in 
treuthe. He sehal not be sorewful, nether 4 
troblid, til he sette doom in erthe, and ilis 
schulen abide his lawe. The Lord Gods 
seith these thingis, makynge heuenes of 
no3t, and stretchynge forth tho', makynge 
stidfast the erthe, and tho thingis that 
buriownen of it, 3yuynge breeth' to the 
puple, that is on it, and 3yuynge spirit to 
hem that treden on it. Y the Lord hauee 
clepid thee in ri3tfulnesse, and Y took thin 
hond, and kepte thee, and Y jaf thee in to 
a boond of pees of the puple, and in to 1i3t 
of folkis. ‘That thou schuldist opene the7 
izen of blynde men; that thou schuldist 
lede out of closyng togidere a boundun 
man, fro the hous of prisoun men sit- 
tynge in derknessis. Y am the Lord, thiss 
is my name; Y schal not 3yue my glorie 
to an othere, and my preisyng to grauun 
ymagis. Lo! tho thingis that weren the» 
firste, ben comun, and Y telle newe thingis; 
Y schal make herd to 30u, bifore that tho 
bigynnen to be maad. Synge 3e a newe10 
song to the Lord; his heriyng zs fro the 
laste partis of erthe; 3e that goon doun in 
to the’ see, and the fulnesse therof, ilis, 
and the dwelleris of tho. The desert bel 
reisid, and the citees therof; he schal 
dwelle in the housis of Cedar; 3e dwel- 
leris of the stoon, herie 3e!; thei sechulen 
erie fro the cop of hillis. Thei sehulen 12 
sette glorie to the Lord, and they sehulen 
telle his heriyng in ilis. The Lord as a13 
strong man schal go out, as a man a wer- 


f formynge E pr.m. — & out of K, 


1 Om. CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


300 ISAIAH. 


my pes, euermor I was stille; patient I 
was, as the trauailende with child I shal 
speke; I shal scateren, and soupen awei 
istogidere. Desert I shal make hije moun- 
teynes and hillys, and alle the burioun- 
yng of hem I shal out™ drien ; and I shal 
sette flodis in to iles, and pondis I shal 
ismake drie. And IJ shal bringe out blynde 
men in to the weie, that thei knowe not, 
and in the sties that thei vnaknowen, hem 
to gon I shal make; I shal putte the 
derknesses of hem beforn hem in to 1i3t, 
and shreude thingis in to euene ri3t; 
these wrdus I dide to them, and I forsoc 
i7not hem. Turned thei ben baeward; be 
thei confoundid with confusioun, that 
trosten in grauen thing"; that seyn to 
isthe® 3oten thing, 3ee oure goddis. 3ee 
dene men, hereth; and 3ee blinde?, bi- 
igholdeth to seen. Who blinde, but? my 
seruaunt? and def, but? to whom my 
messageres I sente? Who blind, but’ 
he that is sold? who blind, but! the ser- 
zouaunt of the Lord? That seest many 
thingus, whether thou shalt not kepe ? 
That opened hast the eres, whether thou 
21 shalt not here? And the Lord wolde, 
that he shulde halewen hym’, and mag- 
ye nefie the lawe, and euhauncen. He for- 
sothe a puple ‘drawen awei’, and wasted; 
a grene of 3unge men alle togidere”, and 
in houses of prisouns thei ben hid. Thei 
ben maad in to raueyn, and ther is not 
that delyuere; ‘in to* taking awei, and 
23 ther is not that ‘seie, 3eeldy. Who is in 
30u, that here this, takeYy heed, and herkne 
zithingus to come? Who 3af Jacob in to 
pulling awei, and Irael to wasteres ? 
Whether not the Lord? He is, to whom 
thei synneden; and thei wolden not in 
his weies gon, thei herden not his lawe. 
25 And he helde out? vp on it the indigna- 
cioun of his wodnesse, and* strong bataile; 


™ ful out aGuK. 3 thingis acu. 
Sno but 4E sec. m. Gu. non bot K. 
Eprom WOm.c primp prem, 
2Om. £ prem. and of g pr. m. 


™m hem N. Nhym rin. OOm.n. Pinton. 
’ ther is 1. 


o Om. en. 


t non bot x. no but AE séc. m. GH. 
x and into 4rEciK. 


Pp biholdeth 1. 


XLII. 15—25. 


ryour he schal reise feruent loue; he 
schal speke, and schal crie; he schal be 
coumfortid on hise enemyes. Y was stille, 14 
euere Y helde silence; Y was pacient, Y 
schal speke as a womman trauelynge of 
child; Y schal seatere, and Y schal swolowe 
togidere. Y schal make desert hi3 moun-15 
teyns and litle hillis, and Y schal drie vp 
al the buriownyng of tho™; and Y schal 
sette floodis in to ilis, and Y schal make 
poondis drie. And Y schal lede outi6 
blynde men in to the weie, which thei 
knowen not, and Y schal make hem® to® 
go inP pathis, whiche thei knewen not ; 
Y schal sette the derknessis of hem bifore 
hem in to 1i3t, and schrewid thingis in to 
ri3tful thingis; Y dide these wordis to 
hem, and Y forsook not hem. Thei ben17 
turned abac; be thei schent with schen- 
schipe, that trusten in a grauun ymage ; 
whiche seien to a 3o0tun ymage, 3e ben 
oure goddis. 3e deef men, here; and 3e18 
blynde men, biholde?? to se. Who zs19 
blynd, no but my seruaunt? and deef, no! 
hut he to whom Y sente my messangeris ? 
Who zs blynd, no? but he that is seeld? 
and who zs blynd, no? but the seruaunt of 
the Lord? Whether thou that seest 20 
many thingis, schalt not kepe? Whether 
thou that hast open eeris, schalt not here? 
And the Lord wolde, that he schulde21 
halewe it, and magnefie the lawe, and 
enhaunse 7¢99, But thilke puple was ra- 22 
uyschid, and wastid; alle thei ben the 
snare of 3onge men, and ben hid in the 
housis of prisouns. Thei ben maad in to 
raueyn, and noon is that delyuereth; in to 
rauyschyng, and noon is* that seith, 3elde 
thou. Who is among 3oun, that herith 23 
this, perseyueth, and herkneth thingis to 
comynge? Who 3af Jacob in to rauysch-24 
yng, and Israel to distrieris? Whether 
not the Lord? He it is, ajens whom thei 


P blynde men 4. dno but E sec. m. AGHK. 
«Om. £ pr.m. VY to-broken 


¥ lerne to 3elden £ pr.m. YY take he c pr.m. 


q4Om.1. 99 Om. cEFGIKMNPQRSUVX. 


XLII. 1-10. 


and he to-brende it in cumpas, and it 
kne3 not ; he® tende it vp, and it® vndir- 
stod not. 


CAP. XLIII. 


i And now these thingus seith the Lord 
God‘, shapende® thee, Jacob, and foorm- 
ende thee, Irael, Wile thou not drede, 
for I haue azeenbo3t thee, and I clepede 
thee bi thi name; my sernaunt thou art. 

2Whan thou shalt passe by watris, with 
thee I shal be, and flodus shul not couere 
thee; whan thou shalt go in fyr, thou 
shalt not be brent, and flaume shal not 

3brenne in thee. For J the Lord thi God, 

-hoeli off Jrael, thi saueour. I 3af thin 
helping? Egipt; and Etheope and Saba 

afor thee. Sithen wrshepeful thou art 
mad in myn e3en, and glorious; I louede 
thee, and I shall 3yue men for thee, and 

spuples for thi soule. Wile thou not 
drede, for I am with thee; fro the est I 
shal bringe to thi sed, and fro the west 

61 shal togidere -gedere thee. I shal sei 
to the north, 3if*, and to the south, Wile 
thou not forfende ; ‘bring to! my sones 
fro aferr, and* my do3tris fro the vt- 

zmostus! of the.erthe. And eche that in- 
wardli clepeth my name, in to my glorie 
I shop hym, foormede hym, and maad 

shym. Bring outforth the blinde puple, 
and the hauende ejen; def, and eres ben 
gto hym™. Alle Jentilis ben gedered togi- 
dere, and gedered ben lynagus. Who in 
30u shal telle this, and that first thingus 
ben to here 30u'shal make? 3iue thei the 
witnesses of hem, and be thei iustefied, 
1oand heren, and sei thei. Vereli 3ee my 
witnesses, seith the Lord, and my: ser- 
uaunt, whom I ches; that 3ee wite, and 
leeuen to me, aud vnderstonde, for I the 


b and he Ax sec. m. GHK. 
thi mekinge £ pr. m. 
™ it Epr.m. 


chee pr.m. 
h 3if thou 4& sec.m. GuK. 


8 wolden not 3. t he c sec. m. KMRV. 


stonde a. 


ISAIAH. 


4 Om. acuk. 
ido awei Epr.m. 


u brente c sec.m. KMRV. brou3ten EFGHINPQUX. 


301 


synneden; and thei nolden* go in hise 
weies, and thei herden not his lawe. And os 
he schedde out on hem the indignacioun 
of his strong veniaunce, and strong batel ; 
and theit brenten" it in cumpas, and it 
knewe not; and he brente it, and it vn- 
durstood™ not. 


CAP. XLIITI. 


And now the Lord God, makynge of1 
nou3t thee, Jacob, and formynge thee, Is- 
rael, seith these thingis, Nyle thou drede, 
for Y a3enbou3te thee, and Y clepide thee 
bi thi name; thou art my seruaunt. 
Whanne thou schalt go bi watris, Y schal 2 
be with thee, and floodis schulen not hile 
thee; whanne thou schalt go in fier, thou 
schalt not be brent, and flawme sclal not 
brenne in thee. For Y am thi Lord God,3 
the hooli of Israel, thi sauyour. I 3af thi 
merci Egipt; Ethiopie and Saba for thee. 
Sithen thou art maad onourable, and glo-4 
riouse in myn iz3en; Y louyde thee, and 
Y schal 3yue men for thee, and puplis for 
thi soule. Nyle thou drede, for Y ams 
with thee; Y schal brynge. thi seed fro 
the eest, and Y schal gadere thee togidere 
fro the west. Y schal seie to the north, ¢ 
3yue thou, and to the south, Nyle thou 
forbede ; brynge thou my sones fro afer, 
and my dou3tris fro the laste partis of 
erthe. And ech that clepith my name to7 
help, in to my glorie Y made hym of 
nou3t; Y fourmyde hym, and made hym. 
Lede thou forth the blynde puple, ands 
hauynge izjen; the deef puple, and eeris 
ben to it. Alle hethene men ben gaderid» 
togidere, and lynagis be gaderid togidere. 
Who among 3ou, who schal telle this, and 
schal make 3ou to here tho thingis, that 
ben the firste? 3yue thei witnessis of hem, 
and be thei iustified, and .here thei, and 
seie. Verili 3e ben my witnessis, seith 10 
the Lord, and my seruaunt, whom Y cliees ; 
that 3e wite, and bileue to me, and vndur- 


€makinge z prom. f Om, © pr.m & If 3af 
k Om. acuk. | vttermost aGux. 


Ww yndur- 


302 


selue am; biforn me is not foormed God, 
1iand aftir me shal not be. I am, I am 
the Lord, and ther is not withoute me 
ig2a saueour. I tolde, and sauede; herd I 
made, and ther was not in 3o0u an alien. 
13 3ee my witnesses, seith the Lord; and 
I God" fro the bigynnyng, I the selue, 
aud ther ys not that of myn hond dely- 
uere; I shal werchen, and who shal turnen 
usawel it? These thingus seith the Lord, 
3oure a3eenbiere, hoeli of Irael, For 30u 
I sente out in to Babilone, and to-dro3 
alle the barres, and the Caldeis in ther® 
1shondis gloriende. I the Lord, joure hoeli, 
i6shapere? of Irael, 3oure king. These 
thingus seith the Lord, that 3af in the see 
ail weie, and in watris swiftli rennende 
17a sty; that bro3te out the foure horsid 
carre, and the hors, the cumpany, and 
the stalwrthe; togidere thei aboute slept- 
en, and shul not rise; thei ben to-treden 
isas flax, and ben ful out queynt. Ne han 
3ee" mynde of the rathere, and olde thingis 
i9ne beholde 3ee. Lo! I do newe thingus, 
and now shul spriuge; also 3ee shul 
knowe them. I shal putte in desert a‘ 
weie', and in the withoute weye flodus. 
20 And glorifien me shal the beste of the 
feeld, dragounus, and ostricches ; for I 
jaf in desert watris, and flodis in the 
withoute weie, that I 3yue drine to my 
2\puple, my chosene. This puple I foorm- 
22 ede to me, iny preising it shal telle. Not 
me thou inwardly clepedist, Jacob; ne 
23trauailedest in me, Irael. Thou offer- 
edist not to me the wether of tht brent 
sacrifise, and in thi victorie saerifises thou 
glorefiedest not me. Not thee to seruen 
I made in offring, ne trauaile I 3af in ces. 
24 Thou bo3test not to me with siluer a reed, 
and with the tal3 of thi vietorie sacrifises 
thou inwardly drunkedest not me; ner- 
thelatere to serue me thou madest in thi 
synmnes, thou 3eue to me trauaile in thi 
25 wickidnesses". I am, I am he, that doY 
awei thi” wickidnesse* for me, and of thi 


0 goure God E£ pr.m. © 30ure Epr.m. 
*Om. £ prim. ¢ feelde weye x. 
* wickenesse £. wickidnessis 4GHK. 


2Om. Nn. 4 ther ist. 


ISAIAH. 


P the shapere z pr.m. 
u wickenesses £. wickidnesse H. 


aa Om. 1, 


XLUE. 1r1—25. 


stonde, for Y mysilf am; bifore me is no 
God formere, and after me schal noon be. 
Y am, Y am the Lord, and with out meu 
is no sauyour. I telde, and sauyde; Y12 
made heryng, and noon alien God was 
among 30u. 3e bex my witnessis, seith 
the Lord; and? Y am God fro the bigyn-13 
nyng, Y my silf @m, and noon is® that 
delyuerith fro myn hoond; Y schal worche, 
and who scha] distrie it? The Lord, 3oure 14 
ajenbiere, the hooli of Israel, seith these 
thingis, For 3ou Y sente out in to Babi- 
loyne, and Y drow doun alle barris, and 
Caldeis hauynge glorie in her schippis. 
Y am the Lord, 30ure hooli, 30ure king, 15 
makyuge Israel of nou3t. The Lord seith t6 
these thingis, that 3af weie in the see, and 
a path in rennynge watris; which ledde17 
out a™ carte, and hors, a cumpany, and 
strong man; thei slepten togidere, nether 
thei schulen rise ajen; thei ben al to- 
brokun as flex, and ben quenchid. Thenke 18 
3e not on the formere thingis, and biholde 
3e not olde thingis. Lo! Y make newe19 
thingis, and now tho schulen bigynne to 
be maad;-sotheli 3e schulen know tho?. 
Y schal sette weie in desert, and floodis 
in a loud without weie. And a beeste of20 
the feelde schal glorifie me, dragouns and 
ostrigis schulen glorifie me; for Y 3af 
watris in desert, and floodis in the lond 
without weie, that Y schulde 3yue drynk 
to my puple, to my chosun puple. Ya 
fourmyde this puple to me, it schal telle 
my preysyng. Jacob, thou clepidist not22 
me to help; and thon, Israel, trauelidist 
not for me. Thou offridist not to me the2s 
ram of thi brent sacrifice, and thou glori- 
fiedist not me with thi slayn sacrifices. 
Y made not thee to serue in offryng, ne- 
thir Y 3af to thee trauel in encense. Thou 24 
bou3tist® not to ine swete smellynge spice- 
rie for siluer, and thou fillidist not me 
with fatnesse of thi slayn sacrifices; ne- 
theles thou madist me to serue in thi 
synnes, ‘thou 3auest trauel to me in thi 


1 Om, 4E pr. m. GHK. 


¥ thou E pr. m. 
Vv doth 4GHK. 


w Om. ¢ prom. E pr.m. 


bhem nN. © brou3tist a pr. m. 


XLIII. 26—-XLIV. 10. 


26synnes I shat not recorde. Bring me in 
to thi* mynde, and be wee demed togi- 
dere; tel, if any thing thou hast, that thou 

27be iustefied. Thi firste fader synnede, 
and thi remenoures breeken the lawe 

28a3en me. And I defoulede hoeli princes, 
I 3af to slaj3ter Jacob, and Israel in to 
blasfemye’. 


CAP. XLIV. 


: And now here thou, Jacob, my ser- 
guaunt, and Irael, whom J ches. These 
thingus seith the Lord, makende and 
foormende thee fro the woombe, thin 
helpere, Wile thou not” drede, my ser- 
uaunt Jacob, and thou most ri3t, whom 
3] ches. I shat heelden out forsothe* wa- 
tris vp on the threstende, and flowingus 
vp on the drie; I shall heelden out my 
spirit vp on thi sed, and my blessing vp 
40n thi stoc. And buriowne thei shuln 
among erbes, as withies, ‘or salewis >, 
sbisyde the syde flowende watris. This 
shal seyn, Of the Lord I am, and he shal 
inwardly clepen in the name of Jacob; 
and this shal write with his hond to the 
Lord, and in the name of Irael he shal 
ebe licned to. These thingus seith the 
Lord, king of Irael, and his a3een biere, 
Lord of ostes, I the firste and I the laste, 
zand with oute me is not God. Who lic of 
me? clepe he, and telle, and the ordre ex- 
poune to me, sithen I ordeynede the olde 
puple; thingus to come, and that ben to 
gcome,telle he to them. Wileth not dreden, 
ne beth? disturbid; fro thennus to heeren 
thee I made, and tolde; 3ee ben my wit- 
nesses. Whether is God withoute me, and 
a foormere, whom I haue not knowe®? 
9The foormeres of the mawmet alle no3t 
ben, and the most loued thingus of them 
shul not profiten to them; thei witnesses 
of hem ben, for thei seen not, ne vnder- 
iostonde, that thei be confoundid. Who 


xx Om. zecuK. Y Babiloyne aguK. 
beth not x. © moued £ pr. m. 


ce sith 1. 


ISAIAH. 


2 Om. c pr.m. 


d hem n. 


303 


wickidnessis. Y am, Y my silf am, thates 
do awei thi wickidnessis for me, and Y 
schal not hane mynde on thy synnes. 
Brynge me a3en in to mynde, and be wee 
demyd togidere; telle thou, if thou hast 
ony thing, that thou be iustified. Thi27 
firste fadir synnede, and thin interpre- 
tours trespassiden a3ens me. And Y made2s 
foul hooli princes, and Y 3af Jacob to deth, 
and Israel in to blasfemye. 


CAP. XLIV. 


And now, Jacob, my seruaunt, here! 
thou, and Israel, whom I chees. Thee - 
Lord makynge and for3yuynge thee, thin 
helpere fro the wombe, seith these thingis, 
My sernaunt, Jacob, nyle thou drede, and 
thou moost ri3tful, whom Y chees. Fors 
Y schal schede out watris on the thirsti, 
and floodis on the dry lond; Y schal schede 
out my spirit on thi seed, and my bless- 
yng on thi generacioun. And thei schulen 4 
buriowne among erbis, as salewis bisidis 
rennynge watris. This man schal seie,s 
Y am of the Lord, and he schal clepe in 
the name of Jacob; and this man schal 
write with his hoond to the Lord, and 
schal be licned in the name of Israel. Theg 
Lord, kyng of Israel, and ajenbiere therof, 
the Lord of oostis seith these thingis, Y 
am the firste and Y am the laste, and 
with outen me is no God. Who ¢s lijk7 
me? clepe he, and telle, and declare ordre 
to me, sithen®° Y made elde puple; telle he 
to hem thingis to comynge, and that schu- 
len be. Nyle 3e drede, nether be 3e dis-» 
turblid; fro that tyme Y made thee for to 
here, and Y telde; 3e ben my witnessis. 
Whethir a God is with out me, and a 
formere, whom Y knew not? Alle thes 
fourmeris of an idol ben no thing, and the 
moost louyd thingis of hem schulen not 
profite; thei ben witnessis of tho*, that tho® 
seen not, nether vndurstonden, that thei 
be schent. Who fourmyde a god, and 3et-10 
ide an ymage, not profitable to ony thing? 
¢Om. a4. 4 ben a, 


aOm. 4. > Om. cE prim. 


e thei Nn. 


304 


foormede God, and a grauen thing 5etede, 
ito no thing profitable? Lo! alle his parc- 
eneres shul be confoundid; the forgeres 
forsothe ben of men. Thei shuln come to- 
gidere, alle thei shul stonde, and inwardli 
12 dreden, and ben confoundid togidere. The 
yren smyth with the file wro3te ; in coles, 
and in hameres foormede it, and wro3te 
in the arm of his strengthe. He shal 
hungren, and failen ; he shal not drinke 
is water, andf he shal waxe weri. The 
crafti man tree werkere stra3te out the 
reule, and foormede it in a grauyng iren ; 
he maade it in corneres, and in a cumpas 
turnede it abouten; and made an ymage 
of a man, as a fair man wonende in hous. 
it He hee3 doun the cedris, and toc the 
kesteyn tree, and the oek, that hadde 
stonde among the trees of the wilde 
wode; he plauntede the pyne tree, that 
is with rein’ he nurshede, and made is to 
men in to fyr. He toc of hem, and is 
chaufed, and brende vp, and booc loeues ; 
of the remnaunt forsothe he wro3te a! 
god, and honourede, and made grauen 
ig thing, and is bowid biforn it. The myd- 
del of it he brende with fyr, and of his 
myddel, flesh he sethede, and eet; he 
sethede potage, and is fild; ‘and is chaufid', 
and seide, Vah*, ‘or weed}, I am hat; Y™ 
178a3 the fyr. The remnaunt forsothe of it 
a" god he made, and a granen thing to 
hym; he is bowid biforn it, and honour- 
eth® it, and inwardli besecheth, seiende, 
is Delyuere me, for my god thou art. They 
knewen not, ne vnderstoden, forsothe thei 
for3eeten, lest ther e3en seezen, and lest 
19 thei vuderstoden in ther herte. Thei be- 
thenken not in ther mynde, ne knowen, 
ne felen, that thei sey, The myddel of it 
I brende with fyr, and I book? vp on his 
coles loenes, and seth flesh, and eet; and 
of his remnaunt a maumet I shal make, 
ao biforn the stoc the tree I shal kutte. His 
part is askus; the vnwise herte shal ho- 


£Om. a. & the reyn 4. 


4 Om. £ pr.m. 
mandI eprom. 2 Om. e prim. 


© he honoureth x. 


f alle, ether a toynours hook K sec. m. 


& book 1. 
10m. N, 


ISAIAH. 


1 Om. cpr. m. 


XLIV., 1I—20. 


Lo! alle the parteneris therof schulen be 11 
schent; for the smythis ben of men. Whanne 
alle schulen come, thei schulen stonde, and 
schulen drede, and schulen be schent to- 
gidere. A smith wrou3te with a file; hee 
fourmyde it in coolis, and in hameris, and 
he wrou3te with the arm of his strengthe. 
He schal be hungri, and he schal faile; 
he schal not drynke watre, and he schal 
be feynt. A carpenter stretchide forth a13 
reule, he fourmyde it with au adesef; he 
made it in the corner places, and he turn- 
ede it in cumpas; and he made the ymage 
of a man, as a fair man, dwellynge in’ the 
hous. He kittide doun cedris, he took an14 
hawthorn, and an ook, that stood among 
the trees of the forest; he plauntide a 
pyne apple tre, which he nurschide with 
reyn, and it was maad in to fier to men. 1s 
He took of tho, and was warmed, and he 
brente, aud bakide® looues; but of the 
residue he wrou3te a god, and worschip- 
ide z¢", and he made a grauun ymage, 
aud he was bowid bifore that. Heis 
brente the myddil therof with fier, and 
of the myddil therof he sethide fleischis, 
and eet; hei sethide potage*, and was 
fillid; and he was warmed, and he seide, 
Wel! Y am warmed; Y si3 fier. Forsothe 17 
the residue therof he made a god, and a 
grauun ymage to hym silf; he is bowide 
bifore that, and worschipith that, and bi- 
sechith, and seith, Delyuere thou me, for 
thou art my god. Thei knewen not, ne-18 
ther vndurstoden, for thei han for3ete, that 
her ize se not, and that thei vndurstonde 
not with her! herte. Thei bythenken not19 
in her soule, nether thei knowen, nether 
thei feelen, that thei seie, Y brente the 
myddil therof in fier, and Y bakide looues 
on the coolis therof, and Y sethide fleischis, 
and eet; and of the residue therof schal Y 
make an idol? schal Y falle doun bifore 
the stok of a tree? A part therof is aische; 29 
an vnwijs herte schal worschipe it, and he 


« vath EK. 1Om.c et £ pr. m. 


P bakide 4GHK. 


4 Om. ceFGHKMNPQrsUVx. iand hen. * potagis k. 


XLIV. 21—XLV. 3. 


nouren it, and yt shal not delyuere his 
soule,-ne seyn, A strong lesyng is4 in my 
2iri3thond. Haue mynde of these, Jacob 
and Irael, for my seruaunt thou art; 
I foormede thee, my seruaunt thou art, 
22Irael; thou shalt not for3ete me. IJ dide 
awei as a cloude thi wickednesses', and 
as a litil cloude thi synnes ; turne a3een 
23to me, for I a3een bo3te thee. 3ee he- 
uenus, preiseth, for mercy dide the Lord ; 
inwardli iojeth, jee vtmostus' of thet erthe; 
azensouneth, 3e¢ hillis, preising ; the wilde 
wode, and eche tree of it; for the Lord 
aj3een bo3te Jacob, and Irael shal glorien. 
24 These thingus seith the Lord, thin a3een- 
biere, and thi foormere of the wombe, I 
ain the Lord, doende alle thingus, streccl- 
ende out heuenus alone, stablende the" 
2,erthe, and no man with me; voide mak- 
ende tocnes of deuynoures, and the deuel 
sacrifyeres in to wodnesse turnende; al- 
turnende wyse men bacward, the kun- 
26nyng of them folie makende; rerende 
the wrd of his seruaunt, and the counseil 
of his messageres fulfillende; that sey, 
Jerusalem, thou shalt be dwellid; and to 
the cites of Juda, 3ee shul ben bild vp, 
27 and his desertes I shal rere; that sey to 
the depthe, Be thou desolat, and thi 
28flodys I shal make drie; that sey to 
Ciro, My shepperde thou art, and al my 
wil thou shalt fulfille; that sey to Jeru- 
salem, Thou shalt be bild vp; and to 
the temple, Thou shalt be foundid. 


CAP. XLV. 


1 These thingus seith the Lord to my 
crist, Ciro, whos ri3t hond IJ toc, that I 
soogete bifor his face Jentiles, and the 
reggus of kingus I turne; and opene biforn 
hym the fyrste entrees, and the 3ates 

2shuln not be closid. J byfor thee shal 
go, and the glorious men of erthe I shal 
meeken; the brasene 3ates I shal to- 
brose, and the irene barres IJ shal to- 

3breke. And J shal 3yuen to thee tre- 


4 Om. E prom.  * wickenesses £. 


m of N. 


VOL, III. 


ISAIAH. 


8 vttermostis AGHK. 


0 sele to CFGHIKMNPQRSUX,. seide to FE. 
Rr 


305 


schal not delyuere his soule, nether he 
schal seie, A strong leesyng is in my ri3t- 
hond, Thou, Jacob, and Israel, hane mynde 2: 
of these thingis, for thou art my seruaunt; 
Y formyde thee, Israel, thou art my ser- 
uaunt 5; thou schalt not for3ete me. Y dide 22 
awei thi wickidnessis as a cloude, and thi 
synnes as a myist; turne thou a3en to me, 
for Y a3jenbou3te thee. 3¢ heuenes, herie, 23 
for the Lord hath do merci; the laste 
partis of erth, synge 3e hertli song ;_hillis, 
sowne 3e preisyng; the forest and™ ech 
tre therof, herie God; for the Lord a3en- 
bou3te Jacob, and Israel schal haue glorie. 
The Lord, thin a3enbiere, and thi fourmere 24 
fro the wombe, seith these thingis, Y am 
the Lord, makynge alle thingis, and Y 
aloone stretche forth heuenes, and stablische 
the erthe, and noon és with me; and Y 25 
make voide the signes of false dyuynours, 
and Y turne in to woodnesse dyuynours, 
that dyuynen by sacrifices offrid to feendis; 
and Y turne wise men hacward, and Y 
make her seience fonned. And the Lord 25 
reisith the word of his seruaunt, and fillith 
the councel of hise messangeris; and Y seie”, 
Jerusalem, thou schalt be enhabitid®; and 
to the citees of Juda, 3e schulen be bildid, 
and Y schal reise the desertis therof; and 97 
Y seie to the depthe, Be thou desolat, and 
Y shal make drie thi floodis; and Y seie2s 
to Cirus, Thou art my scheepherde, and 
thou schalt fille al my wille; and Y seie 
to Jerusalem, Thou schalt be bildid; and 
to the temple, Thou schalt be foundid. 


CAP. XLV. 


The Lord seith these thingis to my. 
crist, Cirus, whos rij3thond Y took, that Y 
make suget folkis bifor his face, and turne 
the backis of kyngis; and Y schal opene 
j3atis bifore hym, and 3atis schulen not be 
closid. Y schal go bifore thee, and Y schal2 
make lowe the gloriouse men of erthe ; Y 
scha] al to-breke brasun 3atis, and Y schal 
breke togidere irun barris. And Y schal 3 


3yue hid tresours to thee, and the priuy 
tOm,. 4EGK. Om, AEGH. 


© enhauncid E. 


306: 


sores hid, and the priue thingus of priuy- 
tees, that thou wite, for I the Lord, that 
iclepe thi name, God of Ivael, for my 
seruaunt Jacob, and Irael my chosen, 
and’ I clepede thee in thi name ; T lic- 
nede thee, and* thou knewe not me. 
5I the Lord, and ther is not more ouer ; 
out of me is not God. I girde thee to, 
sand thou knewe not me; that thei wite*, 
that fro the rising of the sunne, and that 
fro the west ben, for withoute me is not 
za‘God. I the Lord, and ther is not an 
othir ; foormende li3t, and shapende derc- 
nesses, makende pes, and shapende euel ; 
al the Lord, doende alle these. Deweth, 
3ee heuenus fro aboue, and cloudis reyne 
thei the ri3twis; be opened the erthe, and 
burioune it a saueour, and ri3twisnesse 
springe togidere ; I the Lord shop hym. 
9 Wo that ‘with seithy to his makere, the 
shord of the? to3 clei of erthe. Whether 
seith the clei to his crockere*, What dost 
thou, and thi were withoute hondus is ? 
10 Wo that seith to the fader, What getest 
thou? and to the womman, What berest 
1thou? These thingus seith the Lord, hoeli 
of Irael, his® foormere, Thingus to come 
asketh me vp on my sonus, and vp* the 
12 werkes of myn hondus sendeth to me. I 
made the! erthe, and man vp on it I shop; 
myn hondis stra3ten out heuenus, and to 
13al the kny3thod of hem I sente. I rerede 
hym to rijtwisnesse, and alle his weies I 
shal ri3t reulen; he® shal bilde vp iny 
cite, and my caitifte he shal for3yue, not 
in pris, ne in 3iftes, seith the Lord of 
110stes. These thingus seith the Lord God, 
The trauaile of Egipt, and the nede 
doing, ‘or marchaundise‘, of Ethiope, 
and of Sabaym; the he3e men to thee 
shul passe, and thin shul be; after thee 
thei shul go, bounde in manycles thei 
shul wende, and thee® thei shuln ho- 
noure, and thee louli prejen®. Onli in 
thee is God, and ther is not withoute 

¥ Om. 4GHK. 


sec. m. marg, 
8 
¢ Om. cpr.m. 


w Om. 4. 
» see his £ pr.m. 


4 knew x. 
u Om. kK. 


rhem n. 


ISAIAH. 


x wite thei £ pr. m. 
© vpon 4eGHK. 4 Om. 4EGHK. 
4 schulen preye k sec. m. thei shulen preye 4. 


8 caitiftee, ether prisoneris CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


XLV. 4——~14- 


thingis of priuytees, that thou wite, that 
Y am the Lord, that clepe’' thi name, God 
of Israel, for my seruaunt Jacob, and4 
Israel my chosun, and Y clepide thee bi 
thi name; Y licnyde thee, and thou knew- 
ist not me. Y am the Lord, and ther iss 
no more; with out me is no God. Y haue 
gird thee, and thou knewist4 not me. That6 
thei that ben at the risyng of the sunue, 
and thei that ben at the west, know, that 
with out me is no God. Y am the Lord,7 
and noon other God is; fourmynge 1i3t, 
and makynge derknessis, makynge pees, 
and fourmynge yuel; Y am the Lord, 
doynge alle these thingis. Heuenes, sendes 
3e out deew fro abone, and cloudis, reyne 
a iust man; the erthe be openyde, and 
brynge forth the sauyour*, and ri3tful- 
nesse be borun togidere ; Y the Lord haue 
maad hyin of nou3t. Wo fo Aym that a3en» 
seith his maker, a tiel stoon of erthe of 
Sannys. Whether clei seith to his pottere, 
What makist thou, and thi werk is with- 
outen hondis? Wo ¢o Aym that seith to10 
the fadir, What gendrist thou? and toa 
womman, What childist thou? The Lord,11 
the hooli of Israel, the fourmere therof, 
seith these thingis, Axe 3e me thingis to 
comynge on my sones, and sende 3e to me 
on the werkis of myn hondis. Y made i2 
erthe, and Y made a man on it; myn 
hondis helden abrood heuenes, and Y co- 
maundide to al the kny3thod of tho". Ys 
reiside hym to ri3tfulnesse, and Y schal 
dresse alle hise weies; he scha] bilde my 
citee, and he schal delyuere my prisoneris’, 
not in prijs, nether in 3iftis, seith the Lordt 
of oostis. The Lord God" seith these 14 
thingis, The trauel of Egipt, and the mar- 
chaundie of Ethiopie, and of Sabaym; hi3 
men schulen go to thee, and schulen be 
thine; thei schulen go aftir thee, thei schu- 
len go boundun in manyclis, and schulen 
worschipe thee, and schulen biseche thee. 
God is oneli in thee, and with out thee is 


yseith x. 2Om.4GHK. 4 crockere, or pofler E 


€Om.epr.m. f Om. c ef & prim. 


t Lord God kK scc. m. 


* that is, Crist. 
a et alii. 


XLV. 15-——XLVI. 1. 


15 thee a God. Vereli thou art God, an hid 
1¢6God, of Irael the saueour. Thei ben 
confoundid, and ful out shameden ; togi- 
‘dere wenten' awey in to confusioun the 
17forgeres of erroures. Trael is saued in 
the Lord, in euere lastende helthe ; 3ee 
shul not be confoundid, and not shamen, 
isvntok the world of world. For these 
thingus seith the Lord shapende heuenus; 
he God foormende erthe, and makende it, 
he foormere of it; not in veyn he shop 
it, but that it be dwellid, he foormede it; 
19] the Lord, and ther is not an other. Not 
in hid place I spac, in the dere place of 
erthe; I seide not to the sed of Jacob, In 
veyn secheth me. I the Lord spekende 


rijtwisnesse, tellende out ri3t thingus.~ 


20 Beth gedered, and cometh, and ne3heth 
togidere, for 3ee be saued fro the Jentiles ; 
thei wisten not, that rereden vp a tocne 
of ther grauyng, and prejen the god not 

zisauende. Telleth out, and cometh, and 
counseilith togidere. Who herd made 
this fro the biginnyng? fro thanne I bi- 
forn seide it. Whether not I a Lord, and 
ther is not! more ouer a God withoute 
me? a ri3twis God and sauende is not, 

22beside me? Beth conuertid to me, and 
saaf shul be, alle 3ee coestes of erthe ; for 

23 I the Lord, and ther is not an other™. In 
myself I swor, ther shal gon out of my 
mouth the wrd of ri3twisnesse, and shal" 

24not be turned a3een; for to me shal be 
bowid eche kne, and swern shal eche 

2tunge. Therfor in the Lord thei shul 
seyn, Myne ben ri3twisnesses® and em- 
pire; to hym thei shul come, and con- 
foundid shul ben alle that a3enstonde to 
2éhym. In the Lord shal be iustefied and 
.preisid a] the sed of Irael. 


CAP. XLVI. 
1 To-broken is Bel, to-brosid is Nabo ; 
broke ben the symulacris of them, with 
feeld bestes, and hous bestes; oure chargis 


ithei wenten & pr.m. in to acuK. 


° riztwisnes 4GHK. 


¥ errours, thal ts, idolis CEGIKNPQRUY. 


ISAIAH. 


Ino AEGHK. 


307 


no God. Verili thou art God hid, God, 1s 
the sauyour of Israel. Alle makeris of 1 
errours’ ben schent, and weren aschamed ; 
thei 3eden togidere in to confusioun. Israel 17 
is sauyde in the Lord, bi euerlastynge 
helthe; 3e schulen not be schent, and 3e 
schulen not be aschamed, til in to the 
world of world. For whi the Lord mak- 1s 
ynge heuenes of nou3t, seith these thingis; 
he 2s God fourmynge erthe, and makinge 
it, he zs the makere therof; he made it of - 
no3t, not in veyn, but he formyde it, that 
it be enhabitid; Y am the Lord, and noon 
other is. Y spak not in hid place, not in19 
a derk place of erthe; I seide not to the 
seed of Jacob, Seke 3e me in veyn. Y am 
the Lord spekynge ri3tfulnesse, tellynge 
ri3tful thingis. Be 3e gaderid, and come20 
3e, and neize 3e” togidere, that ben sauyd 
of hethene men; thei that reisen a signe 
of her grauyng, knewen not, and thei 
preien a god that saueth not. Telle 3e, 21 
and come 3e, and take 3e councel togidere. 
Who made, this herd fro the bigyunyng ? 
fro that tyme Y bifor seide it. Whether 
Y am not the Lord, and no God is* fer- 
there with out me? God ri3tful and sau- 
ynge is noon, outakun me. Alle the coostis 22 
of erthe, be 3e conuertid to me, and 3e 
schulen be saaf; for Y am the Lord, and 
noon other is’. Y swoor in my silf, a word 23 
of ri3tfulnesse schal go out of my mouth, 
and it schal not turne ajen; for ech kne 21 
schal be bowid to me, and ech tunge schal 
swere. Therfor thei schulen sei in the2s 
Lord, Ri3tfulnessis and empire ben myne ; 
alle that fi3ten ajens hym schulen come 
to hym, and schulen be aschamed. Al the 24 
seed of Israel schal be iustified and preysid 
in the Lord. 


CAP. XLVI. 


Bel is brokun, Nabo is al to-brokun; 1 
her symylacris ijk to wielde beestis and 
werk beestis ben brokun ; j3oure birthuns 


m other beside me 4E pr.m.GHK. %Om.4. 


wOm.t. *Om.1. Y ther is 3 


Rr@ 


308 ISAIAH. 


with heuy? berthene vnto werynesse 
2stunken, and to-brosyd ben togidere ; 
thei my3ten not sauen the berere, and 
the soule of them in to caitifte shal go. 

3 Hereth me, the hous of Jacob, and al the 
residue of the hous of Irael, that ben 
born of my wombe, that ofte ben born 

4fro my priue wombe. Vnto the laste 
elde’ I the selue, and vnto the hoere heris™ 
I shall bern ; I made, and I shal bringe; 

51 shal bern, and I shal sane. To whom 
licneden 3ee me, and eneneden, and com- 

6 parisounden me, and maden lic? 3e* that 
togidere bringen gold fro the bagge, and 
siluer * with a balaunce peisen, hirende 
the" ‘craftis man’, that he make a god, 
and thei fallen doun, and honouren ; 

7bern it in the shuldris, berende and set- 
tende in his place; aud shal stonde, and 
fro his place shal not be moued ; but and 
whan thei shul erie to it, he shal not” 
heren, fro tribulacioun he shal not saue 

8them. Remembreth this, and beth found- 
id; turneth a3een, 3ee lawe brekeres, to 
9the herte. Recordeth of the rathere world, 

for I am God, and ther is not ouer me a 

10 God, ne lic me; tellende out fro the bi- 
gynnyng the laste, and fro the bigyn- 
nyng that not 3it ben maad, seiende, My 
counseil shal stonde, and al my wil shal 

ibe don; clepende fro the est a brid, and 
fro the ferr lond the man of my wil; 
and* I spac, and bringe to shal it; I shop, 

izand maken I shal it. Hereth me, 3ee 
with hard herte, that aferr ben fro ri3t- 

13 wisnesse. Ny3I made my ri3twisnesse, 
and it shal not be longed awei, and myn 
helthe shal not be tariedY; I shal 3yue in 
to Sion helthe, and in to Jerusalem my 
glorie. 

CAP. XLVII. 

1 Go doun, sit in pouder, thou maiden 
do3ter of Babilon, sit in the erthe; ther 
is not a kingus see of. the do3tir of Cal- 
deis, for no more thou shalt be* clepid 


P heuyng & pr.m. 4 Om. cpr. m. 
uthenne £ sec. m.K. them ag. hem un. 
Yturneid & pr.m. 2 Om. E prem. 


Zyntol 


r Om. cel E pr.m. 
¥ goldsmyth £ sec. m. AGHK. 


XLVI. 2——XLVI. 1. 


with heuy charge ‘til to? werynesse weren 2 
rotun, and ben al to-brokun togidere ; tho 
mi3ten not saue the berere, and the soule 
of hem schal go in to caitifte. The houss 
of Jacob, and al the residue of the hous of 
Israel, here 3e me, whiche ben borun of 
my wombe, whiche ben borun of my 
wombe. Til to eelde Y my silf, and4 
til to hoor heeris Y schal bere; Y made, 
and Y schal bere, and Y schal saue. Tos 
whom han 3e licned me, and maad euene, 
and han comparisound me, and han maad 
lijk ? Whiche beren togidere gold fro thes 
bagge, and peisen siluer with a balaunce, 
and hiren a goldsmyth to make a god, 
and thei fallen doun, and worschipen ; 
thei berynge beren in schuldris, and set-7 
tynge in his place; and he schal stonde, 
and schal not be mouyd fro his place; but 
also whanne thei crien to hym, he schal 
not here, and he schal not saue hem fro 
tribulacioun., Haue 3e mynde of this, ands 
be 3e aschamed ; 3¢ trespassouris, go “a3en 
to the herte. Bithenke 3e on the formere» 
world, for Y am God, and no.God is over 
me, nether #s ijk me. And Y telle fro the 10 
bigyunyng the laste thing, and fro the 
bigynnyng tho thingis that ben not maad 
3it ; and Y seie, My councel schal stonde, 
and al my wille schal be don. And Y clepe!t 
a brid fro the eest, and the man of my 
wille fro a ferr lond; and Y spak, and Y- 
schal brynge that thing; Y haue maad of 
nou3t, and Y schal make that thing. 3e1l2 
of hard herte, here? me, that ben fer fro 
ri3tfulnesse. Y made ny3 niyn ri3tfulnesse, 13 
it schal not be drawun afer, and myn 
helthe shal not tarie; Y schal 3yue helthe 
in Sion, and my glorie in Israel. 


CAP. XLVII. 


Thou virgyn, the dou3tir Babiloyne, go! 
doun, sitte thou in dust, sitte thon in 
erthe ; a kyngis seete is not to the dou3ter 
of Caldeis, for thou schalt no more be 


8 Om. c ef E prom. t sylueren Gx. 


Wno £ prem. x Om. 4. 


3 hereth 1. 


XLVII. 2—13. 


2nesshe and tender. Tac a grind ston, 
‘or queerne stoon*, and grind me” mele; 
nakene thi filthed, discouere the shulder, 
opene the thees, passe ouer the flodis. 
3QOpened shal. be thi shenshipe, and seen 
shal be thi repreef; a veniaunce I shal 
take, and ther shal not withstonde to me 
4a man. Oure ajeen biere the Lord of 
ostes; the name of hym the hoeli of 
sIrael. Syt, be stille, and® go into derc- 
nesses, thou do3ter of Caldeis, for thou 
shalt no more be clepid the ladi of 
ereumes.. Iam wroth vp on my puple, 
I defoulede myn heritage, and I 3af hem 
in thin hond; thou settest not to them 
mercies vp on the olde; thou agreggedist 
7 the 30c gretli, and seidist, In to euermor 
I shal ben a ladi; thou puttist not these 
thingus vp on thin herte, ne recordedist* 
sof thi laste.’ And now here thou these 
thingus, thou delicat, and dwellende tros- 
teli, that seist in thin herte, I am, and 
ther is not biside me more ouer; I shal 
not sitte a® widewe, and I shal vnknowe 
9bareynete. Comen shul to thee these 
two sodeynli im o dai, bareynesse, and 
widewehed ; alle thingus' camen vp on 
thee for the multitude of thi sorceries, 
and for the huge hardnesse of thi deuel 
1ocleperes. And trost thou haddest in thi 


malice, and seidist, Ther is not that see - 


me; thi wisdam, and this thi kunnyng 
disceyuede thee; and thou seidist® in thin 
herte, I am, and biside me is not an other. 
11 Ther shal come vp on thee euel, and thou 
shalt not wite his rysing; and ther shal 
feerli falle vp on thee wastnesse, that 
thou shalt not moun purge; ther shal 
come vp on thee wrecchednesse feerli®®, 
12that thou wost not. Stond with thi deuel 
cleperes, and with the multytude of thi 
sorceries, i111 whiche thou hast trauailid 
fro thi waxende 3outhe; if par auenture 
any thing it profite to thee, or if thou 
i3mowe" be mad strengere. Thou hast 


a Om. CE pr.m. or a queerne sloon Hi. 
f these thingus c pr.m. & seide 4. 


b éreytours 8. 


ISAIAH. 


b Om. AEGHK. 
ge Om. c pr.m. 


309 


clepid soft and tendir. Take thou az 
queerne stoon, and grynde thou mele; 
make thou nakid thi filthe, diskeuere the 
schuldur, schewe the hippis, passe thou 
floodis. Thi schame schal be schewid,: 
and thi schenschipe schal be seen; Y 
schal take veniaunce, and no man schal 
a3enstonde me. Oure ajen biere, the Lord 4 
of oostis is his name, the hooli of Israel. 
Dou3ter of Caldeis, sitte thon, be thous 
stille, and entre in to derknessis, for thou 
schalt no more be clepid the ladi of 
rewmes. I was wrooth on my puple, Y¢ 
defoulid myn eritage, and Y 3af hem in 
thin hond, and thou settidist not mercies 
to hem; thou madist greuouse the 30k 
greetli on an eld man, and thou seidist,7 
With outen ende Y schal be ladi; thou 
puttidist not these thingis on thin herte, 
nether thou bithou3tist on thi laste thing. 
And now, thou delicat, and dwellynges 
tristili, here these thingis, which seist in 
thin herte, Y am, and outakun me ther 
is no more; Y schal not sitte widewve, 
and Y schal not knowe bareynesse. These » 
twei thingis, bareynesse and widewhod 
schulen come to thee sudenli in o dai; alle 
thingis camen on thee for the multitude 
of thi witchecraftis, and for the greet 
hardnesse of thin enchauntours, ether tre- 
getours®, And thou haddist trist in thio 
malice, and seidist, Noon is that seeth 
me; this thi wisdom and thi kunnyne 
disseyuede thee; and thou seidist in thin 
herte, Y am, and outakun me ther isi 
noon other. Yuel schal come on _ thee, 
and thou schalt not knowe the bigynning 
therof; and wrecchidnesse® schal falle on 
thee, which thou schalt not mowe clense ; 
wretchidnesse which thou knowist not, 
schal come on thee sudenly. Stonde thou 12 
with thin enchauntours, and with the 
multitude of thi witchis, in whiche thou 
trauelidist fro thi 3ongthe; if in hap thei 
profiten ony thing to thee, ether if thou 


cOm. 4. ‘recordist cux. ¢ Om. c pr.m. 


bh mou c. 


¢ wickidnesse a pr.m. myschef A sec. m. marg. I. 


310 


failid in the multitude of thi counseilis ; 
stonde, and saue thee the deuynoures of 
henene, that biheelde sterres, and noum- 
bre monethis, that of hem thei telle 

14 thingus tu come to thee. Lo! thei ben 
mad as stobil, fyr to brende them ; thei 
shul not delyuere ther soule fro the hond 
of flaume; ther ben not coles, with the 
whiche thei ben made hot, ne fyr, that 

isthei sitte at it. So mad ben to thee in 
‘what euere! thingus thou haddest tra- 
uailid; thi marchandes fro ther 3outhe, 
eche in ther weie erreden; ther ys not, 
that saue thee. 


CAP. XLVIII. 


1 Hereth these thingus, the hous of Ja- 
cob, that ben cleped bi the name of Irael, 
and of the watris of Juda ‘went out!, that 
swern in the name of the Lord God of 
Irael, and recorden not in treuthe ne in 
2ri3twisnesse. Fro the hoeli cite forsothe 
thei ben clepid, and vp on the God of 
Trae] thei ben stablid; the Lord of ostes 
shis™ name. The rathere thinges fro 
thanne" I tolde out, and of my mouth 
thei wenten out, and herd I made them; 
4feerli J wro3te, and thei camen. I kne3 
forsothe for thou art hard, and an irene 
senewe thin haterel, and thi frount bra- 
ssene. I befornseide to thee fro thanne, 
er thei camen I shewede to thee, lest par 
auenture thou shuldist sey, My mau- 
metes diden these thingus, and my grauen 
thingus and 30te senten these thingus 
«that thou hast herd. See alle thingus®, 
3ee forsothe han not told out. Herd I 
made to thee newe thingus fro thanne, 
and kept ben that thou knowist not; 
7uow ‘thei ben shapen’, and not fro 
thaune4, and befor day, and thou herdest 
not hem; lest par anenture thou sey, Lo! 
eI kne3 them. Ne thou hast herd, ne 


b beholden x. 
E prom. AGHK. 
© thes thingis . 


bh Om. 4EGK. 


P shape ben E pr. im. 


dhemw. © housis v. 


ISAIAH. 


ialle c pr.m. E prom. what c sec.m. 
ben c pr. m. £ pr.m. 3e wenten out E sec. m. AGHK. 
4 Om. £ pr. m. 


f hem n. 


XLVI. t4——XLVIII. 8. 


inaist be maad the strongere. Thou fail- 1s 
idist in the multitude of thi councels; the 
false dyuynours of heuene stonde, and 
saue thee, whiche bihelden staris, and 
noumbriden monethis, that thei schulden 
telle hi tho! thingis to comynge to thee. 
Lo! thei ben maad as stobil, the fier hath 14 
brent hem; thei schulen not delyuere her 
lijf fro the power of flawme; colis ben 
not, bi whiche thei schulen be warmed, 
nether fier, that thei sitte at it. So thols 
thingis ben maad to thee in whiche euere 
thou trauelidist; thi marchauntis fro thi 
jongthe erriden, ech man in his weie; noon 
is, that schal saue thee. 


CAP. XLVIII. 


The hows® of Jacob, that ben clepid bi! 
the name of Israel, and 3eden out of the 
watris of Juda, here these thingis, whiche 
sweren in the name of the Lord, and han 
mynde on God of Israel, not in treuthe, 
nether in ri3tfulnesse. For thei ben clepid 2 
of the hooli citee, and ben stablischid on 
the God of Israel, the Lord of oostis is 
his name. Fro that tyme Y telde thes 
former thingis, and tho 3eden out of my 
mouth; and Y made tho! knowun; su- 
denli Y wrou3te, and tho thingis camen. 
For Y wiste that thou art hard, and thi4 
nol is a senewe of irun, and thi forhed is 
of bras. Y biforseide to thee fro thats 
tyme, bifore that tho thingis camen, Y 
schewide to thee, lest perauenture thou 
woldist seie, Myn idols diden these thingis, 
and my grauun ymagis and my 3otun 
ymagis senten these thingis whiche thous 
herdist. Se thou alle thingis, but 3e telden 
not. Y made herd newe thyngis to thee 
fro that tyme, and thingis ben kept whiche 
thou knowist not; now tho ben maad of7 
nou3t, and not fro that tyme, and bifor 
the dai, and thou herdist not tho thingis ; 
lest perauenture thou seie, Lo! Y knew 


k in whiche thou c pr. m. 
mishis 4. © thennes £ pr. m. 


& knew not a pr.m. 1 sec. m. 


SLVWL.o—2r. 


thou hast knowe, ne sithen opened is 
thin ere; I wot forsothe, for lawe breking 
thou shalt lawe breke, and a trespasere 
9fro the wombe I clepede thee. For my 
name ferr I shal make my wodnesse, and 
in my preising I shal bridele thee, lest 
10thou die. Lo! I haue out ‘bake thee’, 
but not as siluer; I ches thee in the 
iichyune of porenesse. For me I shal do 
that I be not blasfemed, and my glorie 
12to an other J shal not 3yue. Here thou 
me, Jacob, and Irael, whom I clepe, Y 
the selue; I the firste and J* the laste. 
13 Myn hond also foundedet the" erthe, and 
-my ri3thond mesurede heuenus; I shal 
clepe them, and thei shul stonden togi- 
14dere. Beth gedered, alle 3ee, and hereth ; 
who of hem tolde out these thingus? The 


Lord louede hym, and shal don his wil - 


15in Babilon, and his arm in Caldeis. I, 
Y’ spac, and clepede hym; bro3te to hym, 
isand ri3t renlid is his weie. Cometh ny3 
to me, and hereth these thingus ; not fro 
the bigynnyng in hid thing I spac; of 
tyme, er tbei shulden be mad, I was 
there’, and now the Lord God sente me, 
i7and his Spirit. These thingus seith the 
Lord, thin a3eenbiere, the hoeli of Irae], 
I the Lord thi God, techende thee profit- 
able thingus, gouernende thee in the wei 
isthat thou gast. Wolde God thou haddest 
taken heed to* myn hestes, mad hadde 
be as a flod thi pes, and thi ri3twisnessesY 
igas the swolewes of the se; and hadde” 
ben as grauel thi sed, and the stoe of thi 
womhe, as his tle stones; he shulde not 
han died, and shulde not han he de- 
20foulid his name fro my face. Goth out 
fro Babylon, fleeth fro Caldeis; in vois 
of ful oute io3yng telleth out ; herd mak- 
eth this, and berth it vnto* the vtmostus” 
of the erthe; seith, A3eenbo3te the Lord 
21his seruaunt Jacob. Thei thristeden not 
in desert, whan he shulde Jede them out; 
water of aston he bro3te forth to them, 


trand aquK. §& Om. AGHK. 


t Om. c pr.m. 
z Om. G pr.m. 1, 


xXof a, Y riztwisnes 4GuK. 


hnee. ihemn. < thei n. 


t fourmede a. 
ain to K. 


1 hidlis, ether prinylee CRFGHIKMNIQRSUVX. 


ISATAH. 311 


tho thingis. Nether thou herdist, nether" s 
thou knewist, nether thin eere was openyd 
fro that tyme; for Y woot, that thou tres- 
passynge schal trespasse, and Y clepide 
thee a trespassour fro the wombe. Fors 
my name Y schal make fer iy strong 
veniaunce, and with my preysyng Y schal 
refreyne thee, lest thou perische. Lo! Y 10 
haue sode thee, but not as siluer; Y chees 
thee in the chymeney of pouert. Y schal ii 
do for me, that Y be not blasfemyd, and 
Y schal not 3yue my glorie to another. 
Jacob and Israel, whom Y clepe, here thou iz 
me; Y iny silf, Y am the firste and Y am 
the laste. And myn hond foundide thei: 
erthe, and my ri3t hond mat heuenes; Y 
schal clepe tho, and tho* schulen stonde 
togidere. Alle 3e be gaderid togidere, and 14 
here ; who of hem telde these thingis? The 
Lord louyde hym, he schal do his wille in 
Babiloyne, and his arm in Caldeis. Y, 15 
Y spak, and clepide hym; Y brou3te hym, 
and his weie was dressid. Neijze 3e tos 
me, and here 3e these thingis; at the bi- 
gvunyng Y spak not in priuete'; fro 
tyme, bifore that thingis weren maad, Y 
was there, and now the Lord God and his 
Spirit sente me. The Lord, thin a3en17 
biere, the hooli of Israel, seith these 
thingis, Y am thi Lord God, techynge 
thee profitable thingis, and Y gonerne 
thee in the weie, wher ynne thou goist. 
Y wolde that thou haddist perseyued my 18 
comaundementis, thi pees hadde be maad 
as flood, and thi ri3tfulnesse as the swo- 
lowis of the see; and thi seed hadde be as 19 
grauel, and the generacioun of thi wombe, 
as the litle stoonys therof; the name of it 
hadde not perischid, and hadde not be al 
to-brokun fro my face. Go 3e out of Ba-20 
biloyne, fle 3e fro Caldeis; telle 3e in the 
vois of ful out ioiying; make 3e this herd, 
and bere 3e it ‘til to™ the laste partis of 
erthe ; seije 3¢, The Lord ajenbou3te his 
seruaunt Jacob. Thei thirstiden not in2 


Uthat. YOm. an. W Om. £ prem. 


> vttirmostis 4GUK. 


m ynto I. 


312 


and be kutte the ston, and ther floweden 
22watris. Ther is not pes to vnpitous® 
men, seith the Lord. . 


CAP. XLIX. 


1 Hereth, 3ee iles, and taketh heed, 3ee 
puples fro aferr ; the Lord fro the* con- 
ceyuende wombe clepede me, and fro the 
wombe of my moder recordede of my 

2naine. And he putte my mouth as a 
sharp swerd, in the shadewe of his hond 
he defendede me, aud® putte me as a 
chosen arwe; in his arwe cas he hiddet 

3me, and seide to me, My seruaunt thon 

tart, Irael, for in thee I shal glorie. I 
seide, In veyn J trauailede withoute cause, 
and veynlich my strengthe I wastede ; 
therfore my dom with the Lord, and my 

swere with my God. And now these 
thingus seith the Lord, foormende me fro 

the wombe a seruaunt to hym, that I 
bringe a3een Jacob to hym. And Irael 
shal not be gedered togidere; and I am 
glorefied in the e3en of the Lord, and 

6iny God mad is my strengthe. And he 
seide, Litil is, that thou be to me a ser- 
uaunt, to be rered the lynages of Jacob, 
and the drestus of Irael to be conuerted ; 

I 3af thee in to li3t of Jentiles, that thou 
be myn helthe vnto the vtmost® of the 

zerthe. These thingus seith the Lord, 
the a3eenbiere of Irael, his hoeli, to the 
despisable soule, and to the wlated folc 
of kinde, to" the seruaunt of lordis, 

Kingus shul seen, and togidere shul rise 
princes, and honoure, for the Lord, for 
feithfull he is, and the hoeli of Irael, 

sthat ches thee. These thingus seith the 

Lord, In plesaunt tyme Y ful out herde 
thee, and in the dai of helthe I halp 
thee, and kepte thee, aud 3af thee in to 
pes coouenaunt of the puple, that thou 
shuldest rere the lond, and welden eri- 


¢ the vnpitous a. 


4 Om. £ prem. 
band to 4. 


1 the desert cFGII1KMINP sec. m. QUVX. 


ISAIAH. 


ehec. 


° Om, N. 


XLVIIL 22—XLIX. 8. 


desert", whanne he ladde hem out; he 
brou3te forth to hem watir of a stoon, 
and° he departide the stoon, and watris 
flowiden. 
seith the Lord. 


CAP. XLIX. 


Tlis, here 3e, and puplis afer, perseyue! 
3e; the Lord clepide me fro the wombe, 
he thou3te on my name fro the wombe of 
my modir. 
as a scharp swerd, he defendide me in the 
schadewe of his hond, and settide me as a 
chosun arowe; he hidde me in his arowe 
caas, and seide to me, Israel, thou art my 3 
seruaunt, for Y schal haue glorie in thee. 
And Y seide, Y trauelide in veyn, Y wast-4 
ide my strengthe with out cause, and 
veynli; therfor my doom 7s with the 
Lord, and my werk ts with my God. Ands 
now the Lord, formynge me a seruaunt 
to hym silf fro the wombe, seith these 
thingis, that Y brynge ajen Jacob to hym. 
And Israel schal not be gaderid togidere ; 
and Y am glorified in the ijen of the 


’ Lord, and my God is maad my strengthe. 


And he seyde, It is litil, that thou be a6 
seruaunt to me, to reise the lynages? of 
Jacob, and to conuerte the drastis of 
Israel; Y 3af thee in to the 1i3t of hethene 
inen, that thou be myn helthe ‘til to4 the 
laste part of erthe. The Lord, a3enbiere7 
of Israel, the hooli therof, seith these 
thingis to a dispisable soule, and to a 
folk had in abhomynacioun, to the ser- 
uaunt of lordis, Kyngis schulen se, and 
princes schulen rise togidere, and schulen 
worschipe, for the Lord, for he is feithful, 
and for the hooli of Israel, that chees 
thee *. The Lord seith these thingis, Ing 
a plesaunt tyme Y herde thee, and in the 
dai of helthe Y helpide thee; and Y kepte 
thee, and 3af thee in to a bonde of pees 
of the puple, that thou schuldist reise the 
erthe, and haue in possessioun eritagis, 


f putte 4k sec. m. dide GH. & vttermost 4GHK. 


Plynage a. 4 vuto 1. 


Pees is not to wickid men, 22 


And he hath set my mouth2 


* that is, Crist 
mnan, to the 
werk of mannis 
redempcion. K. 


XLIX. 9——21. 


gtages scatered; that thou sey to them 
that ben bounde, Goth out, and to them 
that in derenesses, Beth opened. Vp on 
weies thei shul be fed, and in alle 
10pleynes the leswes of hem. Thei shul 
not hungre, ne thristen more ouer, and 
smyte shal not them gret hete, and the 
sunne ; for the rewere of them shal go- 
uerne them, and at the! welles of watris 
113yuen hem to drinke. And I shal putte 
my mounteynes in to a weie, and my 
i2pathis shul ben enhauncid. Lo! these 
fro aferr shul come, and lo! tho fro 
the north, and the se, and these fro the 
13south lond. Preise, 3ee heuenes, and ful 
out io3e, thou erthe; inwardli glade, 3ee 


hillis, preising; for coumfortid hath the- 


Lord his puple, and of his pore shal han 
i4mercy. And Sion seide, Forsaken hath 
me the Lord, and the Lord hath for3ete 
sme. Whether for3eten mai the womman 
hir faunt, that she do not mercy to the 
sone of hir wombe? and if she shul 
forjeten, I nerthelatere shal not for3ete 
16thee. Lo! in myn hondis J haue dis- 
criued thee; thi wallis bifor myn e3en 
izeuermor. Thi bilderes camen distro3ende 
thee, and scaterende fro thee shul gon 
isout. Rere vp in cumpas thin e3en, and 
see; alle these ben gederede togidere, 
camen to thee. I lyue, seith the Lord, 
for with all these as with an ournement 
thou shalt be clad‘, and cumpasen aboute 
19to thee hem as a spouse. For thi de- 
sertes, and thi wildernesses, and the lond 
of thi falling now streit shul ben for the 
dwelleris of the erthe; and aferr shul be 
dryue awei that soupeden awei_ thee. 
20 3it shul! seyn in thin eres sones of thi 
bareynte, Streit is to me a place, mac a 
2ispace to me that I dwelle. And thou 
shalt seyn in thin herte, Who gat to me 
these? I bareyn, not child berende; trans- 
latid and caitif; and these who nurshede 
out ? I priued™, and solitarie; and these 


iOm. x. * clothid szenkx. 


s Om. celeri. tinn, 


VOL. II. 


ISAIAH. 


thei shul £ pr.m. 


u fro the see 1. 


313 


‘that ben® distried; that thou schuldists 
seie to hem that ben boundun, Go 3e out, 
and to hem that ben in derknessis, Be 3e 
schewid. Thei schulen be fed ont weies, 
and the lesewis of hem schulen be in alle 
pleyn thingis. Thei schulen not hnngre, 10 
and thei schulen no more thirste, and 
heete, and the sunne schal not smyte hem; 
for the merciful doere of hem schal go- 
uerne hem, and schal 3yue drynk to hem 
at the wellis of watris. And Y schal sette11 
alle myn hillis in to weie, and my pathis 
schulen be enhaunsid. Lo! these meniz 
schulen come fro fer, and lo! thei schulen 
come fro the north, and see”, and these fro 
the south lond. Heuenes, herie 3e, and, 13 
thou erthe, make ful out ioie;_hillis, 
synge 3e hertli heriyng; for the Lord 
coumfortide his puple, and schal haue 
merci on hise pore men. And Syon seide, 14 
The Lord hath forsake me, and the Lord 
hath for3ete me. Whether a wommants 
may for3ete hir jonge child, that sche 
haue not merci on the sone of hir wombe? 
thou3 sche for3etith"’, netheles Y schal not 
for3ete thee. Lo! Y haue write thee inié 
myn hondis; thi wallis ben euer bifore 
myn i3en. The bilderis ben comun; thei 17 
that distrien thee, and scateren, schulen go 
awei fro thee. Reise thin ijen in cumpas, 18 
and se; alle these men ben gaderid togi- 
dere, thei ben comun to thee. Y lyue, 
seith the Lord, for thou schalt be clothid 
with alle these as with an ournement, 
and thou as a spousesse schalt bynde hem 
to thee. For whi thi desertis, and thi wil-19 
dirnessis, and the lond of thi fallyng now 
schulen be streit for enhabiteris; and thei 
schulen be drynun awei fer, that swolew- 
iden thee. 3it the’ sones of thi bareynesse 20 
schulen seie in thin eeris, The place is 
streit to me, make thou a space to me for 
to dwelle. And thou schalt seie in thin 2i 
herte, Who gendride these sones to me? 
Y am bareyn, not berynge child; Y am 


™ sor priued E pr. m. 


uu forzeter = ¥ thi t. 


ss 


314 ISAIAH. XLIX. 22—L. 3. 


2ewher weren? ‘These thingus seith the 
Lord God, Lo! I rere to Jentilis myn 
hond, and shal enhaunce to puples myn 
tocne; and thei shul bringe to thi sones 
in armys, and thi do3tris vp on shuldris 

23thei shul bern. And kingis shul be thi 
nursheres, and queenes thi nurses; the 
chere in to the erthe put doun thei shul 
honoure thee, and the pouder of thi feet 
thei shul licke; and thou shalt wite, for 
I a Lord, vp on whom shuln not be con- 

24founded, that abijden hym. Whether 
shal be taken awei fro the stronge a prei? 
or that shal be take fro the stalwrthe 

25shal moun be saaf? For these thingus 
seith the Lord, Forsothe and the caitifte 
fro° the stronge shal ben taken awei, and 
that were taken awei fro the stalwrthe 
shal be saued. Hem forsothe that demeden 
thee I shal deme, and thi sonis I shal 

2ssauen. And I shal fede thin enemys 
with ther flesh, and as with must with? 
ther blod shul be drunke; and knowen 
shal eche flesh, for I the Lord, sauende 
thee, and thin a3een biere, the stronge of 
Jacob. 


CAP. L. 


1 These thingus seith the Lord, What is 
this boc of the forsaking of 30ure moder, 
that I lafte hix? or who is my creauncer, 
to whom I solde 30u? Lo! forsothe in 
3oure wickidnesses’ 3ee be sold, and in 
joure hidous giltes I lafte 3oure moder. 

2¥For I cam, and there was not a ful man; 
I clepide, and ther was not that herde. 
Whether abreggid, and ful litil maad is 
myn hond, that I mai™ not a3eenbien‘? or 
is not to me vertue to delyuere? Lo! in 
my blamyng desert I shal make the se, 
I‘ shal putte flodis in to dro3te; stinke 
shul fisshes withoute watir, and dien in 

3thrist. I shal clothin heuenes with derc- 


led ouer, and prisoner; and who nurschide 
these sones? Y am destitute, and aloone; 
and where weren these? ‘The Lord God 22 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y reise myn hond 
to hethene men, and Y schal enhaunce my ° 
signe to puplis; and thei schulen brynge 
thi sones in armes, and thei schulen bere 
thi dou3tris on shuldris. And kingis shu-23 | 
len be thi nurseris, and quenys shulen’ be 
thi¥ nursis; with cheer cast doun in to 
erthe thei schulen worschipe thee, and 
thei schulen licke the dust of thi feet ; and 
thou schalt wite, that Y am the Lord, on 
whom thei schulen not be schent, that 
abiden hym. Whether prey schal be takun 24 
awei fro a strong man? ether that that is 
takun of a stalworthe man, mai be saaf ? 
For the Lord seith these thingis, Sothelis 
and caitifte schal be takun awey fro the 
stronge man, and that that is takun awei* 
ofY a stalworthe man, schal’ be saued. - 
Forsothe Y schal deme hem, that dem- 
yden thee, and Y schal saue thi sones. 
And Y schal fede thin enemyes with her 26 
fleischis, and thei schulen be greetli fillid 
with her blood as with must;- and eche 
man schal wite, that Y am the Lord, sau- 
ynge thee, and thin a3jenbiere, the strong 
of Jacob. 

CAP. L. 

The Lord seith these thingis, What: ist 
this book of forsakyng of 3oure modir, bi 
which Y lefte her? ether who is he, to 
whom Y owe, to whom Y seeld 30u? For 
lo! 3e ben seeld for 3oure wickidnessis, 
and for 30ure grete trespassis Y lefte 3oure 
modir. For Y cam, and no man was; Y2 
clepide, and noon was that herde. Whe- 
ther myn hond is abreggid, and maad litil, 
that Y mai not a3enbie? ether vertu is not 
in me for to delyuere? Lo! in my blam- 
yng Y schal make the see forsakun, ‘ether 
desert*, Y schal sette floodis in the drie 
place; fischis without watir schulen wexe 
rotun, and schulen dye for thirst. Y schal3 


Sof 4. Pofxsec.m. 4 wickidnes acux. wickenesse x. ° my3te Az pr.m.GHK. ageebien c. 


tand I scukx. 


wOm. a. *Om.&. 


Yfronx. 2 Om. &. 


L. 4-—LlI. 3. 


nesses, and a sac Y shal putte the couer- 
4yng of hem. The Lord 3af to me a ta3t 
tunge, that I kunne hym susteyne, that 
is weri iu wrd; he" rereth vp the moru- 
tyd, the morutyd rereth vp to me an ere, 
sthat I here as a maister. The Lord God 
openede to me an ere; I forsothe a3ensei 
énot, bacward I 3ide not awei. My bodi 
I 3af to the smyteres, and my chekes 
to the pulleris; my face I turnede not 
awei fro the blameres, and the spitteres 
z7in me. The Lord God myn helpere, and 
therfore I am not confoundid; therfore 
I putte my face as a most hard ston, and 
I wot for I shal not ben confoundid. 
8Ny3 is, that iustefieth me; who with 
seith to me? stonde wee togidere. Who 
is myn aduersarie? come he ny3 to me. 
9Lo! the Lord God myn helpere; who 
thanne is that condempneth me? Lo! 
alle as a cloth shul be to-trede’, and a¥ 
10mo3te shal ete them. Who of 3ou dred- 
ende the Lord, herende the vois of his 
seruaunt ? Who 3ide in dercnesses* and 
ther is not li3t to hym, hope he in the 
name of the Lord, and leene he vp on 
11his God. Lo! 3ee alle teendende vp fyr, 
and gird with flawmes, goth in the 1i3t 
of 3oure fyr, and in the flaumes that 3ee 
teenden vp to 3ou. Of myn hond don is 
this to 30u, in sorewis 3ee shul slepe. 


CAP. LI. 


1 Hereth me, 3ee that folewen that is 
ri3t, and sechen the Lord. Taketh heed 
to the ston, whenus 3ee ben kut out, and 
to the kaue of the lake, of theY whiche 
23ee ben kut of. Taketh heed to Abra- 
ham, 3oure fader, and to Sara, that bar 
30u; for oon I clepede hym, and blissede 
shym, and multepliede hym. Coumforten 
shal thanne the Lord Sion, and coum- 
‘forte he shal alle the fallingus of it; and 
putten his desert as delices, and his wil- 
dernesse as the gardyn of the Lord; io3e 


ISAIAH. 315 © 


clothe heuenes with derknessis, and Y 
schal sette a sak the hilyng of tho®, Thes 
Lord 3af to me a lerned tunge, that Y 
kunne susteyne hym bi word that failide ; 
erli the fadir reisith, erli he reisith an 
eere to me, that Y here as a maister. Thes 
Lord God openede an eere to me; for- 
sothe Y ajenseie not, Y 3ede not abak. 
I 3af my bodi to smyteris, and iny chekis¢ 
to pulleris; Y turnede not awei my face 
fro men blamynge, and spetynge on me. 
The Lord God 7s myn helpere, and ther-7 
for Y am not schent; therfor Y haue set 
my face as a stoon maad hard, and Y 
woot that Y schal not be schent. He iss 
ni3, that iustifieth me; who a3enseith me? 
stonde we togidere. Who is myn aduer- 
sarie? nei3je he to me. Lo! the Lord God» 
ts-myn helpere; who therfor is he that 
condempneth me? Lo! alle schulen be de- 
foulid as a cloth, and a mou3te schal ete 
hem. Who of 3o0u dredith the Lord, and 10 
herith the vois of his seruaunt? Who 3ede 
in derenessis and 1i3t is not to hym, hope 
he in the name of the Lord, and triste he 
on his God. Lo! alle 3e kyndlynge fier, 11 
and gird with flawmies, go® in the 1li3t of 
joure fier, and in the flawmes whiche 3e 
han kyndlid to 30u. This is maad of myn 
hond to 3ou, 3e schulen slepe in sorewis. 


CAP. LI. 


Here 3e me, that suen that that is iust,1 
and seken the Lord. Take 3e hede to the 
stoon, fro whennys 3e ben hewun doun, 
and to the caue of the lake, fro which 3e 
ben kit doun. Take 3e heede to Abra-2 
ham, 3oure fadir, and to Sare, that childide 
jou; for Y clepide hym oon, and Y bless- 
ide hym, and Y multipliede hym. Therfor3 
the Lord schal coumforte Sion, and he 
schal coumforte alle the fallyngis therof ; 
and he schal sette.the desert therof as 
delices, and the wildirnesse therof as a 


u Om. cpr.m. £E pr.m. Vto-troden &. Wasa 4aGpr.m.uk. *dercnes 4EGK. Y Om, AGHK. 


> hem n. 


¢ goth 1. 


ss 2 


316 


and gladnesse shal be founde in it, grace- 
4doing and vois of preising. Taketh heed 
to me, my puple, and, my lynage, me 
hereth; for lawe fro me shal gon out, 
and my dom in to li3t of puples shal 
sresten. Ny3 is my ri3twis, gon out is 
my saueour, and myn armes puples shul 
demen; me iles shuln abide, and myn 
6arm sustenen. Rereth in to heuene joure 
e3en, and seeth vnder erthe benethe; for 
heuenes as smoke shul melte, and the 
erthe as a cloth shal be to-trede, and his 
dwelleris as these shul dien; myn helthe 
forsothe in to euermor shal be, and my 
7riztwisnesse shal not faile. Hereth me, 
that knowen the ri3twis, 3e” puple, my 
lawe in the herte of hem; wileth not 
drede repref of men, and the blasfemes 
sof them dredeth not. As forsothe cloth- 
ing so shal ete them a werm, and as 
wlle so shal deuoure them the mo3te ; 
myn helthe forsothe in to euermor shal 
be, and my rijtwisnesse in to ienera- 
9ciouns of ieneraciouns. Rys, rys, clothe 
thou strengthe, the arm of the Lord; rys, 
as in the® olde dayes, in ieneraciouns of 
worldis. Whether not> thou smyte® the 
10 proude, woundedest‘ the dragoun? Whe- 
ther not thou driedist the se, water of 
the huge depthe, the whiche puttest the 
depthe of the se weie’, that gon ouer 
11 shuldenf the® delyuered? And now that 
ben a3eenbo3t of the Lord, shul turnen 
a3jeen, and comen in to Sion preisende, 
and euerlastende gladnesse ‘vp on® the 
hedis' of them; io3je and gladnesse thei 
shul holden, fleen shal sorewe and weil- 
wing. Lo! I the selue shal coumforte 
jou; who thou, that thou drede of a 
deadly man, and of the sone of man, that 
i3as hei so shal waxe drie; and “hast 
for3ete* the Lord, thi! shapere, that bente 
heuenes, and foundede the™ erthe; and 
inward]i dreddest contynuelli al dai of 


® thou c pr.m. E pr.m. 8 Om. 4. 
€aweye 4, £ thei shulden c e¢ & pr. m. 
prom lhis eprom. © Om. 4eGnK. 


4Om.n. ¢ to bears, f Om. ceteri. 


Iam he, that shal coumforte 3ou. kK marg. 1 who x. 


ISAIAH. 


b Om. E pr.m. 
& Om. cE pr.m. kK. 


& and sorewe A pr.m. 


LI. 4-—13.- 


gardyn of the Lord; ioie and gladnesse 
schal be foundun therynne, the doyng of 
thankyngis and the vois of heriyng. Mia 
puple, take 3e heede to me, and, my lynage, 
here 3e me; for whi a lawe schal go out 
fro me, and my doom schal reste in to the 
li3t of puplis. My iust man is ny3, mys 
sauyour is gon out, aud myn armes schu- 
len deme puplis; ilis schulen abide me, 
and schulen suffre myn arm. Reise 3oure6é 
i3en to heuene, and se 3e vndur erthe by- 
nethe; for whi heuenes schulen melte awei 
as smoke, and the erthe schal be al to- 
brokun as a cloth, and the dwelleris therof 
schulen perische as these thingis; but myn 
helthe schal be withouten ende, and my 
ri3tfulnesse schal not fayle. 3e puple, that7 
knowen the iust man, here me, my lawe 
is in the herte of hem; nyle 3e drede the 
schenschipe of men, and drede je not the 
blasfemyes of hem. For whi a worms 
schal ete hem sof as a cloth, and a mou3te 
schal deuoure hem so as wolle; but myn 
helthe schal be withouten ende, and my 
ri3tfulnesse in to generaciouns of genera- 
ciouns. Rise thou, rise thou, arm of theg 
Lord, be thou clothyd in strengthe; rise 
thou, as in elde daies, in generaciouns of 
worldis. Whether thou smytidist not the 
proude man, woundidist not the dragoun? 
Whether thou driedist not the see, the1o 
watir of the greet depthe, which settidist 
the depthe of the see a® weie, that men 
‘that weren' delyuered, schulden passe ? 
And now thei that ben a3enbou3t of the11 
Lord schulen turne ajen, and schulen come 
heriynge in to Syon, and euerlastynge 
gladnesse on the heedis of hem; thei schu- 
len holde ioie and gladnesse, sorewe® and 
weilyng schal fle awei. ‘Y my silf® schal ie 
coumforte 3ou; what! art thou, that thou 
drede* of a deedli man, and of the sone of 
man, that schal wexe drie so as hei? Andi3 
thou hast for3ete ‘the Lord, thi! crea- 


4 woundist 4HK. 
iheuedis £ passim. * forzat E 


¢ hast smyte G sec. m. 
hyp 4, 


h J, I myself K text. that is, I am he, 
k dredist ep. thi Lord ceEFGHKMNPQRSUX. 


LI. 14——23. 


the face of his wodnesse, that thee troo- 
blede, and hadde mad redi to leese? 
Where is now the wodnesse of the tro- 
14blere? Soone shal come the goere to 
openen, and shal not slen vnto the weie 
15 Sla3ter, ne failen shal his bred. I for- 
sothe am the Lord thi God, that disturbe 
the se, and swellen” his flodis; the Lord 
16of ostis my name. I sette my wrdis in 
thi mouth, and in the shadewe of myn 
hond I defende® thee; that thou plaunte 
heuenus, and founde erthe, and sey to 
17Sion, My puple thou art. Be rered, be 
rered, ris thou, Jerusalem, that? thoun4 
drunke% of the ‘hond of the’ Lord the 
chalis of his wrathe; vn to the ground of 
the chalis of slep thou drunke, and thou 
18drunke it vp’ vntot the drestes. Ther" 
is not that susteyne hir’, of alle the sonus 
that she gat; and ther is not that take 
hir hond, of alle the sonus that she* 
19 nurshede vp. Two thingus ben that a3en- 
camen to thee; who shal sorewen vp on 
thee ? wastite, and to-brosing, and hun- 
ger, and swerd. Who shal coumforten 
20 thee? Thi sones ben aferr cast,thei slepten 
“in the hed of alle weies, as the vnclene 
beste grened, that is clepid orix; ful of 
the indignacioun of the Lord, blamyng 
21of thi God. Therfore here thou these 
thingus, thou porelet, and drunken, not of 
22wyn. These thingus seith the lordshipere, 
thi Lord, and thi God, that fa3t for his 
puple, Lo! I toc of thin hond the chalis 
of slep, the ground of the chalis of myn 
indignacioun ; J shal not lei to, that thou 
23drunke it more. And I shal putte it in 
the hond of hem that thee mekeden, and 
seiden to thi soule, Be thou bowid in 
that wee passe; and thon puttist as erthe 
thi bodi, and as a weie toY goeres. 


2 swellynge x. © defendide szcuK. 


sOm.epr.m. ttox. 


™m Om. CEFGIIKMNPQRS Sec, m. UX. 2 ynto I. 


swith 1. tthe blamyng n. 


ISAIAH. 


P for AE pr.m. GHK. 
uAnd ther K sec.m. Vit x prom. whe # prom. 


u The CEFGHIKMNPQHRSUVX. 


317 


tour, that stretchide abrood heuenes, and 
foundide the erthe; and thon dreddist con- 
tynueli al dai of the face of his woodnesse, 
that dide tribulaeioun to thee, and made 
redi for to leese. Where is now the wood- 
nesse of the troblere? Soone he schali4a 
come, goynge for to opene; and he sehal 
not sle til to deth, nether his breed schal 
faile. Forsothe Y am thi Lord God, that 15 
disturble the see, and the wawis therof 
wexen greet; the Lord of oostis 7s my 
name. Y haue put my wordis in thile 
mouth, and Y defendide thee in the scha- 
dewe of myn hond; that thou plaunte 
heuenes, and founde the™ erthe, and seie 
to Sion, Thou art my puple. Be thou17 
reisid, be thou reisid, rise thou, Jerusa- 
lem, that hast drunke of the hond of the 
Lord the cuppe of his wraththe; thou 
hast drunke ‘til to" the botme of the 
cuppe of sleep, thou hast drunke of ‘til 
to° the drastis. Noon is? that susteyneth 18 
it, of alle the sones whiche it gendride; 
and noon is‘ that takith the hond therof, 
of alle the sones whiche it nurshide. Twei19 
thingis ben’ that cainen to thee; who 
schal be sori on thee? distriyng, and de- 
foulyng, and hungur, and swerd. Who 
sehal coumforte thee? Thi sones ben cast 20 
forth, thei slepten in the heed of alle 
weies, as the beeste orix*, takun bis’ a 
snare; thet ben ful of indignacioun of the 
Lord, of blamyng' of thi God. Therfor, 21 slepeth al wine 
ter, and lifeth 
thou pore, and drunkun, not of wyn, here — ajen in somer. 
these thingis. Thi" lordli gouernour, the’ 22 ~ 
Lord”, and thi God, that fau3t for his pu- 
ple, seith these thingis, Lo! Y haue take 
fro thyn hond the euppe of sleep, the 
botme of the cuppe of myn indignacioun ; 
Y schal not leie to, that thou drynke it 
ony more. And Y schal sette it in the23 
hond of hem that maden thee low, and 
seiden to thi soule, Be thou bowid that we 
passe; and thou hast set thi bodi as erthe, 
and as a weye to hem that goen forth. 


* chat is, a 
beest lijk a wa- 
ter mous, that 


4Om.cpr.m. 44 drunken c. * Om. c. 


xheE pr.m. Ytother pr.m. 
ovntor Ptheris1. theriss. ther benz. 
Y thi cEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. W Lord God s. 


318 


CAP. LII. 


1 Rys, ris, be clad’, thou Sion, with thi 
strengthe ; be thou clad* with the clothis 
of thi glorie, thou Jerusalem, cite of the 
hoeli; for he shal not lei to more, that 
ther passe bi thee an vucircumcidid and 

evnclene. Be thou shaken out of the 
pouder; ris, sit thou, Jerusalem ; loose? 
the bondis of thi necke, thou caitif do3tir 

30f Sion. For these thingus seith the 
Lord, Freeli 3ee ben sold, and withoute 
4siluer 3ee shul be ajeen bo3t. For these 
thingus seith the Lord God, In to Egipt 
eam doun my puple in the bigynnyng, 
as a comeling tiliere he was there, and 

Assur withoute any cause chalengede 

shym. And-now what to me is this? seith 
the Lord; for taken awei is my puple 
withoute cause; his lordshiperes wickidli® 
diden, seith the Lord, and bisili al dai 

6my name is blasfemed. For that wite 
shal my puple my name in that dai, for 

71 the selue that spac, lo! Iam ny3. Hou 
faire vp on mounteynes the feet of the 
tellende, and prechende pes, tellende good, 
prechende helthe, seiende, Sion, regnen 

sshal thi God. The vois of thi tooteres ; 
thei rereden a vois, togidere thei shul 
preisen; for with e3e to eje thei shul see, 

9 whan conuerte shal the Lord Sion. Io3- 
eth, and preiseth togidere, 3ee desertes of 
Jerusalem; for coumfortid hath the Lord 
his puple, a3eenbo3t he hath Jerusalem. 

10Redi made the Lord his hoeli arm in 
the e3en of alle Jentiles, and seen shul 
alle coestes of erthe the helthe 3yuere of 
11oure God. Goth awei, goth awei, goth 
out thennes; the defoulid thing wileth 
not touche, goth out fro the myddel of 
mit; “be 3e¢ clensid, that bern the vesseles 
120f the Lord. For not in noise 3ee shul 
gon out, ne in flizt 3ee shul gon forth; 
forsothe gou bifor 30u shal the Lord, 
and gedere togidere jou shal tlie God of 


ISAIAH. 


LIL. 112. 


CAP. LII. 


Rise thou, Sion, rise thou, be thoui 
clothid in thi strengthe; Jerusalem, the 
citee of the hooli, be thou clothid in the 
clothis of thi glorie; for a man vncircum- 
cidid and a man yncleene schal no more 
leie to, that he passe by thee. Jerusalem, 2 
be thou schakun out of dust; rise thon, 
sitte thou; thou dou3ter of Sion, prisoner, 
vnbynde the boondis of thi necke. For thes 
Lord seith these thingis, je ben seeld 
without cause, and 3e schulen be ajen- 
bou3t with out siluer. For the Lord God4 
seith these thingis, Mi puple in the bi- 
gynnyng 3ede doun in to Egipt, that it 
schulde be there ‘an erthe tiliereY, and 
Assur falsli calengide it with out ony 
cause. And now what is to me here?5 
seith the Lord; for my puple is takun awei 
with out cause; the lordis therof doen wick- 
idli, seith the Lord, and my name is blas- 
femyd contynueli al dai. For this things 
my puple schal knowe my name in that 
day, for lo! Y my silf that spak, am pre- 
sent. Ful faire ben the feet of hym that7 
tellith, and prechith pees on hillis, of hym 
that tellith good, of hym that prechith 
helthe, and seith, Sion, thi God schal 
regne. The vois of thi biholderis; theis 
reisiden the vois, thei schulen herie togi- 
dere; for thei schulen se with ij3e to ije, 
whanne the Lord hath conuertid Sion. 
The forsakun? thingis of Jerusalem, make 9 
3e ioie, and herie 3e togidere; for the 
Lord hath coumfortid his puple, he hath 
a3enbou3t Jerusalem. The Lord hath maad 10 
redi his hooli arm in the ijen of alle folkis, 
and alle the endis of the? ertle schulen se 
the helthe of oure God. Go 3e awei, gol 
3e awei, go 3e out fro thennus; nyle 3e 
touche defoulid thing, go 3e out fro the 
myddis therof; be 3e clensid, that beren 
the vessels of the Lord. For 3e schulen12 
not go out in noyse, nether 3e schulen 


2 thou clothid acuK, clothe £ pr.m. clothed & sec.m. ®clothid zegux. » Jouse thou 4. © wickeli E£. 


4the acux. © beth c pr.m. E pr.m. 


Yan erthe tiliere, ether a comelyng CEFGHIMNPQRSUY. 1 desert, ether Jforsakun CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


a Om. cEFNIKNPsYX. 


LI. 13——LIII. 9. 


isIrael. Lo! vnderstonde shal my ser- 
uaunt, and ben enhauncid, and rered, and 
14ful hee3 he shal be gretly. As stone3e- 
den vp on hym manye, so vnglorious 
shal ben among men his si3te, and the 
foorme of hym among the sonus of men. 
is He shal springe manye Jentiles; vp on 
hym togidere holden shuln kingis ther 
mouth; for to whom is not told of hym, 
shul see, and that herden not, beheelden. 


CAP. LIII. 


1 Who leeuede to oure heering ? and the 
arm of the Lord to whom is it shewyd ? 
2And it shal ste3en vp as a quyk hegge 
biforn hym, and as a roote fro the threst- 
endef erthe. Ther is not shap to hymé, 
ne fairnesse; and wee sejen hym, and 
he was not of sijte; and wee desireden 
3 hym, dispisid, and the laste of men, man 
of sorewes, and witende infirmyte. And 
as hid his chere and dispisid; wherfore 
4ne wee setteden by hym. Vereli oure sic- 
nesses" he tooci, and oure sorewes he bar; 
and wee heelden hym as leprous, and 
ssmyten of God, and mekid. He forsothe 
woundid is for oure wickidnesses*, de- 
foulid is for oure hidous giltes ; the dis- 
cyplyne of oure pes vp on hym, and with 
6his wannesse! we ben heled. Alle wee 
as shep erreden, eche in to his weie bow- 
ede doun, and the Lord putte in hym 
7the wickidnesse!! of vs alle. He is offred, 
for he wolde, and he openede not his 
mouth; as a shep to sleyng he shal be 
lad, and as a lomb bifor the clippere it- 
self he shal become doumb, and he opened 
snot his mouth. Fro anguysh and fro dom 
he is take awei; the ieneracioun of hym 
who shal tellen out? For kut awei he is 
fro the lond of lyueres. For the hidous 
9gilte of my puple I smot hym. And 
3yuen he shal vnpitous men for biriyng, 


ISAIAH. 


319 


haaste in fleynge awei; for whi the Lord 
schal go bifore 30u, and the God of Israel 
schal gadere'30u togidere. Lo! my ser-13 
uaunt schal vndirstonde, and he schal be 
enhaunsid, and he schal be reisid, and he 
schal be ful hi3;. As many men wondriden 14 
on hym, so his biholdyug schal be with 
out glorie among men, and the fourme? of 
hym among the sones of men. He schal 1s 
bisprenge many folkis; kyngis schulen 
holde togidere her mouth on him; for thei 
schulen se, to whiche» it was not teld of 
hym, and thei that herden not, bihelden, 


CAP. LIII. 


Who bileuyde to oure heryng? and toi 
whom is the arm of the° Lord schewide? 
And he schal stie’ as a 3erde bifore hym, 2 
and as a roote fro thirsti lond. And ne- 
ther schap nether fairnesse was to hym; 
and we sien® hym, and no‘ biholdyng 
was; and we desiriden hym, dispisid, ands 
the laste of men, a man of sorewis, and 
knowynge sikenesse. And his cheer was 
as hid and dispisid; wherfor and we aret- 
tiden not hym. Verili he suffride oure4 
sikenessis, and he bar oure sorewis; and 
we arettiden hym as a mesel, and smytun 
of God, and maad low. Forsothe he wass 
woundid for oure wickidnessis, he was de- 
foulid for oure greet trespassis ; the lern- 
yng of oure pees was on hym, and we 
ben maad hool bi his wannesse. Alle wee 
erriden as scheep, ech man bowide in to 
his owne weie, and the Lord puttide in 
hym the wickidnesse of vs alle. He was7 
offrid, for he wolde, and he openyde not 
his mouth ; as a scheep he schal be led to 
sleyng, and he schal be doumb as a lomb 
bifore hym that clippith it, and he schal 
not opene his mouth. He is takun aweys 
fro angwisch and fro doom; who schal 
telle out the generacioun of hym? For he 
was kit doun fro the lond of lyueris. Y 
smoot hym for the greet trespas of my 
puple. And he schal 3yue vnfeithful men 9 


{thristinge 2. ite prem. Dsikenesacux, ‘ike pr.m. * wickidnes 4cH. wickenesses £. 
lwanne wounde £ sec. m. acuxk. 1 wickenesse E. 
b fourme, ether schap CEFGHIKMNPQRsUVXY. >b whom: ¢ oure1. 4stieup I. © sauzen 1 passim. 


320 


and riche men for his deth; for thi that 
wickenesse™ he dide not, ne treccherie 

10 was in his mouth; and the Lord wolde® 
to-trede hym in infirmytee. If he shal 
putte his soule for synne, he® shal seen 
sed of long age, and the wil of the Lord 

iin his hond shal be ri3t reulid. For thi 
that he trauailede, his soule shal seen, 
and ben fulfyld. In his kunnyng he my 
ri3twis seruaunt shal iustefien manye, and 
the wickidnesses? of hem he shal bern. 

12 Therfore I shal dele to hym manye, and 
of stronge men he shal deuyde spoiles ; 
for thi that he toc in to deth his lif, and 
with hidous gilteres is holden; and he 
the synne’ of manye toc, and for tres- 
paseres pre3ede. 


CAP. LIV. 


1 Preise, thou bareyne, that berst not; 
gretli sing preising", and ympne’, that 
beere uot; for manye sones of tlie for- 
sakent more than of hir that hadde the 

2man®, seith the Lord. Alarge’ the place 
of thi tente, and the skynnes of thi taber- 
nacle strecche out; ne spare thou, longe 
maac thi litle cordis, and thi nailes mac 

3fast. At the ri3t forsothe and at the lift 
thou shalt persen; and thi sed Jentiles 
shal eritagen, and desert cites wonen in. 

4 Wile thou not dreden, for thou shalt not 
be confoundyd, ne shamen. Forsothe it 
shal not shamen thee; for of the confu- 
sioun of thi 30uthe thou” shalt forjete, 
and of the repref of thi widewhed thou 

sshalt recorde no more. For lordshipen 
shal of thee that made thee; the Lord of 
ostes hys name; and thin ajeen biere, the* 
holi of Irael, the God of al erthe shal be 
6clepid. For as a womman forsaken and 
moornende in spirit, clepede thee the 
Lord, and a wif fro the 3outhe cast awei. 
7The Lord thi God seide, At a poynt in 
a litil I forsoe thee, and in grete mercy 


m wickidnes acuk. 1Om.4. © thou £ prim. 
prom. ¥ Om. K sec.m. 8 neye E pr.m. 
Opene £ pr.m. aGHK. W® that kK. X Om. aGHK. 


thee s. 


ISAIAH. 


desert = pr.m. 


& Om. ceteri. 


LI. 10——-LIV.°7. 


for biriyng, and riche men for his deth; 
for he dide not wickidnesse, nether gile 
was in his mouth; and the Lord wolde10 
defoule hym in sikenesse. If he puttith 
his lijf for synne, he schal se seed long 
durynge, and the wille of the Lord schal 
be dressid in his hond. For that that hisit 
soule trauelide, he schal se, and schal be 
fillid. Thilke my iust seruaunt schal ius- 
tifie many men in his kunnyng, and he 
schal bere the wickidnessis of hem. Ther- 12 
for Y schal 3elde, ethir dele, to hym ful 
many men, and he schal departe the 
spuilis of the stronge feendis; for that 
that he 3af his lijf in to deth, and was 
arettid with felenouse meu; and he dide 
awei the synne of many men, and he 
preiede for trespassouris. 


CAP. LIV. 


Thou bareyn, that childist not, herie;1 
thou that childist not, synge heriyng, and 
make ioie ; for whi many sones ben of thef 
forsakun ‘womman® more than of hir that 
hadde hosebonde, seith the Lord. Alarge2 
thou the place of thi tente, and stretche 
forth the skynnes of thi tabernaclis ; spare 
thou not, make longe thi roopis, and make 
sad thi nailis. For thou schalt perse to3 
the riz3tside and to the leftside; and thi 
seed schal enherite hethene men, and schal 
dwelle in forsakun citees. Nile thou drede, 4 
for thou schal not be schent, nether thou 
schalt be aschamed. For it schal not schame 
thee; for thou schalt for3ete the schen- 
schipe of thi 3ongthe, and thou schalt no 
more thenke on the schenschipe of thi 
widewehod. For he that made thee, schals 
be lord of thee; the Lord of oostis zs his 
name; and thin ajenbiere, the hooli of 
Israel, schal be clepid God of al erthe. 
For the Lord hath clepid thee as a wom-6 
man forsakun and morenynge in spirit, 
and a wijf, ‘that is cast awei fro 30ngthe. 
Thi Lord God seide, At a poynt in litil7 


P wickidnes 4GuK. wickenesses E. 


q@ synnes E 
u husbonde £ sec. m. AGHK. 


Vv Large c pr.m. 


h Om. ceteri. 


LIV. 8—LV. 1. 


me is, to whom I swor, that I shulde no 
mor bringen in the> watris of flod vp 
ou erthe; so I swor, that I wrathe not to 
10thee, and blame not thee. Mounteynes 
forsothe shul be to-stered, and hillis shul 
tremblen ; my mercy forsothe shal not 
gon awei fro thee, and the bond of my 


pes shal not be moued, seide® the Lord, . 


11thi reewer. Thou porelet, with tempest 
al to-pullid, with oute any coumfort, lo! 
I shal araie bi order thi stones, and 
12founde thee in safires; and I shal sette 
iasp thy pynacles, and thi 3ates in to 
grauen stones, and alle thi termes in to 
i3desirable stones. Alle thi sones ta3t of 
the Lord; and iultitude of pes to thi 


14sones, and in rijtwisnesse thon shalt be- 


foundid. Go awei aferr fro chalenge’, for 
thou shalt not drede; and fro inward ferd, 

isfor it shal not nej3he to thee. Lo! an 
earth tiliere shal come, that was not with 
me; thi comeling sumtyme® apassid‘ shal 

16 be ioyned to thee. Lo! I shop a smyth 
blowende in the fyr coles, and bringende 
forth a vessel in to his werk; and I shop 

17the sleere, to destrozjen. Tche vessel that 
is mad a3en thee, shal not be ri3t reulid ; 
and eche tunge withstondende to thee, in 
dom thou shalt deme. This is the eri- 
tage of the seruauns of the Lord, and 
the ri3twisnesse of hem anent me, seith 
the Lord. 


GAP. LY. 


1 Alle 3ee thristende, cometh to watris, 
and 3ee that han not siluer, goth forth, 


y dide au. 2 seith az pr. ni. GK, 
ehalenge 4x scc.m. K. the wronge ehalenge cu. 


lin my iN pr. im. 


© sette in safiris, and I schal sette 1. °° Om. c. 


9 haasteth 1. 
MOL, 1A, 


a dai a. 
© the sum tyme E pr. m. 


ISATAH. 321. 


édoinges I shal gedere thee. In a moment . 
of indignacioun I hiddeY my face a litil : 
fro thee, and in euerlastende mercy I . 
hadde mercy of thee, seide? the Lord, thi . 

9forbiere. As in the da3es* of Noe, this to: 


tyme Y forsook thee, and Y schal gadere 
thee togidere in greete merciful doyngis. 
In a moment of indignacioun Y hidde mys 
face'a litil fro thee, and in! merci euer- 
lastynge Y hadde merci on thee, seide thin 
a3enbiere, the Lord*. As in the daies of9 
Noe, this thing is to me, to whom Y swoor, 
that Y schulde no more bringe watris of 
the greet flood on the erthe; so Y swoor, 
that Y! be no more wrooth to thee, and 
that Y blame not thee. Forsothe hillis10 
schulen be mouyd togidere, and litle hillis 
schulen tremble togidere; but my merci 
sehal not go awei fro thee, and the boond 
of my pees schal not be monyd, seide™ 
the" merciful doere, the Lord. Thou litle1 
and pore, drawun out bi tempest, with 
outen ony coumfort, lo! Y schal strewe 
thi stoonys bi ordre, and Y schal founde 
thee in safiris; and Y schal sette® iaspis 12 
thi touris, and thi 3atis in to grauun 
stoonys, and alle thin eendis in to desirable 
stoonys. ‘Y schal make? alle thi sones 1s 
tau3t of the Lord; and the multitude of 
pees to thi sones, and thou schalt be1s 
foundid in ri3tfulnesse. Go thou awei fer 
fro fals caleng, for thou schalt not drede; 
and fro drede, for it schal not neije to 
thee. Lo! a straunger sehal come, that 1s 
was not with me; he, that was sum tyme 
thi comelyng, schal be ioyned to thee. Lo!16 
Y made a smyth blowynge coolis in fier, 
and bringynge forth a vessel in to his 
werk; and Y haue maad a sleere, for to 
leese. Heh vessel which is maad ajens17 
thee, scha] not be dressid; and in the dooin 
thou schalt deme ech tunge a3enstondynge 
thee. This is the eritage of the seruauntis 
of the Lord, and the ri3tfrlnesse of hem at: 
me, seith the Lord. 


CAP MEY . 
Alle that thirsten, come 3e to watris,1 


and 3e that han not siluer, haaste4, bie 3e, 


¢ seith az pr.m.GuKx. 4 wronge 
f Om. c prim. E pr.m. 


b Om. aGux. 


k Lord, ad a point in litel iyme I forsook thee, for al the tribulacion of this present 
liif is as duringe in a moment, in comparisoun of heuenli coumfort. K. 


Y schali. ™seith x." thi vx. 


P Y schal setié ceakunrpqrsvuy. And Y schal sctte Fuixy. 


Tt 


322 


bieth®, and eteth; cometh, bieth, with- 
oute siluer and withoute any chaffaring", 
2wyn and myle. Whi poote 3ee vp siluer, 
not in loeues, and 30ure trauailing, not 
in filling? Hereth 3ee herende me, and 
eteth good thing, and delite shal in fat- 
snesse 30ure soule. Bowith in 3oure ere, 
and cometh to me; hereth, aud lyuen 
shal 3oure soule; and I shal smyte with 
3ou euere lastende couenaunt, the feith- 
aful mercies of Dauid. Lo! witnesse I 
3af hym to puples, duke and comaundere 
sto Jentiles. Lo! the fole of kinde, that 
thou knewe not, thou shalt clepen; and 
the fole of kinde, that! thee kne3 not, to 
thee shul rennen; for the Lord thy God, 
and the hoeli of Israel, for he glorifiede 
gthee. Secheth the Lord, whil he mai be 
founde; inwardli clepeth hyin, whil he 
7is ny3. Forsake the vnpitous his weie, 
and the wicke man his tho3tes; and turne 
a3een to the Lord, and he shal haue! mercy 
of hym, and to oure God, for myche he 
sis to for3yue. Forsothe not my thenk- 
ingus 30ure thenkingus, ne my weies 3oure 
9 Weies, seith the Lord. For as enhauncid 
ben henenus fro erthe, so enhauncid ben 
iny weies fro 3oure weyes, and my tho3tus 
10 fro 3oure tho3tus. And what maner com- 
eth doun weder and sno3 fro henene, and 
thider no mor is turned a3een, but drunk- 
neth the erthe, and heeldeth in to it, and 
to buriowne maketh it, and 3yueth sed 
11to the sowere, and bred to the etere, so 
shal be my wrd, that shal gon out of 
my mouth. It shal not be turned ajeen 
voide to me, but shal do what euere 
thingus I wolde, and shal be welsuim in 
12tho thingus to whiche I sende it ; for in 
gladnesse 3ee shul gon oute, and in pes 
3ee shul be lad thennus. Mounteynes and 
hilles shul singe bifor 30u preising, and 
alle the trees of the regioun shal flappe 
13 for i03e with hond. For the thorny erbe 
that is clepid saliunka, shal stee3en vp™ 


and bieth acnrK. 
lhac. ™mQOm. acur. 


T cometh 1. 8 filleth, or makith moist x, 
firse CRYGUIKMNPQRSUVXY, V mir R, 


ISAIAH. 


h chaungynge 4rE sec, m. GK, 


t stie CEFGUKMNPQRSUVX. stie up 1. 


LV. 2—13. 


and ete 3e; come 3e, bie je, with out sil- 
uer and with outen ony chaungyng, wyn 
and mylk. Whi peisen 3e siluer, and not2 
in looues, and 3oure trauel, not in fulnesse? 
3e herynge here me, and ete 3e good, and 
3oure soule schal delite in fatnesse. Bowes 
3e 30ure eere, and ‘come 3e™ to me; here 
3e, and 3onre soule schal lyue; and Y sehal 
smyte with 3ou a couenaunt euerlastynge, 
the feithful mercies of Dauid. Lo! Y jaf 
hym a witnesse to puplis, a duyk and a 
eomaundour to folkis. Lo! thou schalts 
clepe folkis, whiche thou knewist not; and 
folkis, that knewen not thee, schulen renne 
to thee; for thi Lord God, and the hooli 
of Israel, for he glorifiede thee. Seke 3e6 
the Lord, while he mai be foundun ; clepe 
3e hym to help, while he is ni3. An vn-7 
feithful man forsake his weie, and a wickid 
man forsake hise thou3tis; and turne he 
ajen to the Lord, and he schal haue merci 
on hym, and to oure God, for he is myche 
to for3yue. For why my thou3tis. bez nots 
3oure thou3tis, and my weies bez not 3oure 
weies, seith the Lord. For as heuenys beng 
reisid fro erthe, so my weies ben reisid fro 
joure weies, and my thou3tis fro joure 
thou3tis. And as reyn and snow cometh 10 
doun fro heuene, and turneth no more 
ajen thidur, but it fillith’ the erthe, and 
bischedith it, and makith it to buriowne, 
and 3yueth seed to hym that sowith, and 
breed to hym that etith, so schal be my it 
word, that schal go out of my month. It 
schal not turne a3en voide to me, but it 
schal do what euer thingis Y wolde, and 
it schal haue prosperite in these thingis 
to whiche Y sente it. For 3e schnlen got2 
out in gladnesse, and 3e schulen be led 
forth in pees; mounteyns and litil hillis 
schulen synge heriynge bifore 3ou, and alle 
the trees of the cuntrei schulen make ioie 
with hond. A fir tre schal grow' for ais 
firse", and a mirte’ tre schal wexe for a 
nettil; and the Lord schal be nemyd in 


? Om. 6 prim. u. 


k Om. c prom. thou 4GHK. 


u gorst, ether 


LVI. 1—10. 


a firr tree", and for the nettle shal growe 
the tre that is clepid myrt; and the Lord 


shal be nemned in to an°® euer lastende. 


tocne, that shal not ben don awei. 


CAP. LVI. 


1 These thingus seith the Lord, Kepeth 
dom, and doth rijtwisnesse, for ny3 is 
myn helthe, that it come, and my ri3t- 
2 wisnesse, that it be opened. Blisful the 
man, that doth that, and the sone of man, 
that shal take this; kepende the sabot, 
lest he defoule it, kepende his hondis, lest 
she do any euel. And seye not the sone 
of the comeling, that cleueth to the Lord, 
seiende, Bi seueryng shall deuyde me the 
Lord fro his puple; and sey not the geld- 
sing, Lo! Ia drie tree. For these thingus 
seith the Lord to geldingus, who kepen? 
my sabates, and chesen‘ that I wolde, and 
sholden my pes couenaunt. I shal 3yue to 
them in myn hous and in my wallis a 
place, and a betere name of sones and 
do3tris; an euere lastende name I shal 
63yue to them, that shal not pershen. And 
the sonus of the comeling, that cleuen to 
the Lord, that thei herien hym, and 
loouen his name, that thei be to hym in 
to seruauns"; eche man’ kepende sabot*, 
lest he defoule it, and the holdende my 
7pes conenaunt; I shal bringe them in to 
myn hoeli hil, and gladen hem in the 
hous of myn orisoun; the brent sacrifises 
of hem and ther victorie sacrifises shul 
plesen to me vp ou myn auter ; for myn 
hous the hous of orisoun shal be clepid 
&to alle puples, seith the Lord God, that 
gadereth" the’ scatered of Irael. 3it I 
shal gedere to hym alle his gedered to- 
ogidere. Alle bestus of the feeld, cometh 
to deuotren, alle 3ee bestus of the wilde 
10 wode. His tooteres alle blinde, alle thei 
vnknewen; doumbe dogges not mowende” 
berken, seende veyne thingus, slepende, 


° Om. GH. 
u paderide 4. 


"Om, AE pr. m. GHK. 


t the saboth G sec. m. v Om. «4. 


ISAIAH. 


P kepith ag pr.m, tk. 
Ww mowing E. 


323 


to a signe cuerlastynge, that schal not be 
doon awei. 


CAP. LVI. 


The Lord seith these thingis, Kepe 3e1 
doom, and do 3e ri3tfulnesse, for whi myn 
helthe is ni3, that it come, and my ri3tful- 
nesse, that it be schewid. Blessid zs thez 
man, that doith this, and the sone of man, 
that schal take this; kepynge the sabat, 
that he defoule not it, kepynge hise 
hondis, that he do not ony yuel. Ands 
seie not the sone of a comelyng, that 
cleueth faste to the Lord, seiynge, Bi de- 
partyng the Lord schal departe me fro 
his puple; and a geldyng, ether a chast 
man, seie not, Lo! Y am a drie tree. Fors 
the Lord seith these thingis to geldingis, 
that kepen my sabatis, and chesen what 
thingis Y wolde, and holden my boond of 
pees. Y schal 3yne to hem a place in myns 
hous, and in my wallis, and the beste 
name of sones and dou3tris; Y schal 3yne 
to hem a name euerlastynge, that schal 
not perische. And Y schal brynge in toc 
blis the sones of a comelyng, that cleuen 
faste to the Lord, that thei worschipe 
hym, and love his name, that thei be to 
hym in to seruauntis; ech man kepynge 
the sabat, that he defoule it not, and hold- 
ynge my boond of pees; Y schal brynge7 
hem in to myn hooli hil, and Y schal 
make hem glad in the hous of my preier ; 
her brent sacrifices and her slayn sacri- 
fices schulen plese me on myn auter; for 
whi myn hous schal be clepid an hous of 
preier to alle puplis, seith the Lord God,s 
that gaderith togidere the scaterid men of 
Israel. 3it Y schal gadere togidere to hym 
alle the gaderid men therof. Alle beestis9 
of the feeld, come 3e to deuoure, alle beestis 
of the forest. Alle the biholderis therof bez 10 


G4 cheseth 4. ‘seruaunt K. %Om.E prem. 


wOm. c e¢ celeri. 


Tt 


324 ISAIAH. 


11and loouende sweuenus; and most vn- 
shamefast doggus knewen* not. fulnesse. 
Thei shepperdes knewe not vnderstond- 
ing; alle in to ther owne weie boweden 
doun, eche to his auarice, fro the hiest 

1zyn to the laste. Cometh, take wee wyn, 
and be wee fulfild with drunkenesse ; and 
it shal be as to dai, so and to moru, and 
‘Imyche more. 


CAP <LVIT. 


1 The ri3twis man persheth, and ther is 
not, that bethenke in his herte; and men 
‘of mercy ben gedered, forY ther is not 
that ynderstonde; fro the face forsothe 
2of malice gedered is the ri3twis. Come 
pes, reste it in his bed, that 3ide in his 
3ri3t reuling. 3ee forsothe nezheth hider, 
sonus of a wicche, sed of auouteresse, and 
4of a fornycarie. Vp on whom pleieden 
3ee ? vp on whom spredden 3ee abrod the 
mouth, and ‘3ee casteden” out the tunge ?. 
Whether not 3ee sonus hidous gilteres, 
5sed liere ? that ben coumfortid in goddis, 
vider eche braunchy tree, offrende litle 
childer in stremes, vnder stonus stondende 
couer. In partes of the strem thi part, 
this is thi lot; and to them thou heeld- 
edest* out sacrifice? of lykoures, offredist 
sacrifice’. Whether vp on these thingus 
7I shal not endeyne*? Vp on an hi3 hil 
aud enhauncid thou puttest thi bed, and 
thider thou stejedest that thou offre 
‘sostes; and bihynde the dore, and _ bi- 
hynde the post thou settedest thit mynde 
tocne. For biside me thou discoueredist, 
and toke the auoutrer; thou spreddest thi 
- bed, and couenauntedest with them a pes 
--couenaunt; thou loouedist the beddyng 
9of hem with opened hond, and enourn- 
edest thee with the kingus oynement, and 
multepliedest thi pymentus; and seutist 


x and knewen a. 


*Thilke 1 Yvntor 23en, ®3eNn, 


Y and for c sec. m. and E prem. 
fices 4GuK. © sacrifices cu. 4 dedeyne acux. ¢ Om. 4G pr.m. UK. 


b ther is 1. 


LVI. 11—LVII.-9. 


biinde, alle thei knewen not ; doumbe dog- 
gis, that moun not berke, seynge veyn 
thingis, slepynge,. and’ louynge dremes ; 
and moost vnschamefast doggis knewen 11 
not fulnesse. Tho* scheepherdis knewen 
not vndurstondyng ; alle thei bowyden in 
to her weie, ech man to his aueryce, fro 
the hijeste ‘til toY the laste. Come 3e, take 12 
we? wyn, and be we? fillid of drunkenesse; 
and it schal be as to dai, so and to morewe, 
and myche more. ° 


CAP. LVI. 


A iust man perischith, and noon is, that} 
thenkith in his’ herte; and men of merci 
ben gaderid togidere, for noon is” that 
vndurstondith ; for whi a iust man is ga- 
derid fro the face of malice. Pees come,2 
reste he in his bed, that 3ede in his dress- 
yng. But 3e, sones of the sekere of fals3 
dyuynyng bi chiteryng of briddys, nei3ze 
hidur, the seed of auowtresse, and of an 
hoore. On whom scorneden 3e? on whom4 
maden 3e greet the mouth, and puttiden® 
out the tunge? Whethir 3e ben not cursid 
sones, a seed of leesyngis? which ben coum-5 
fortid in goddis, vndur ech tree ful of 
bowis, and offren litle children in strondis, 
vndur hiz3e stoonys. Thi part zs in thes 
partis of the stronde, this is thi part ;~and 
to’ tho® thou scheddist out moist offryng, 
thou offridist sacrifice. Whether Y schal 
not haue indignacioun on these thingis ? 
Thou puttidist thi bed on an hi3 hil and7 
enhaunsid, and thidur thou stiedist to offre 
sacrifices ; and thou settidist thi memorials 
bihynde the dore, and bihynde the post. 
For bisidis me thou vnhilidistf, and tokist 
auouter; thou alargidist thi bed, and 
madist a boond of pees with hem; thou 
Jouedist the bed of hem with openyd 
hond, and ournedist thee with kyngis9 
oynement, and thou multipliedist thi py- 
mentis; thou sentist fer thi messangeris, 


2 thou casti E pr.m. 8 heeldist acux.  sacri- 


¢ castiden CEFGHIKMNPQRsUVX. 4 Om. E. 


© Om. A pr. m.c prem. EH pr.m. hem N, ~ +f ynhilidist thee 1. 


-LVII, 1o—21. 


thi legates aferr, and! mekid thou art 
‘io vnto helle. In the multitude of this weie 
thou trauailedest, and seidest not, I shal 
resten; the weie of thin hond thou hast 
11 founde, therfore thou pre3edest not. For 
the whiche thou bisi' dreddest, for thou 
hedest, and of me thou recordedest not, 
ne tho3test in thin herte, for I stille, 
.and as not seende; and of me thou for- 
i23ete. I shal tellen out thi ri3twisnesse, 
and thi werkus shul not profiten to thee. 
13 Whan thou shalt crien, delyuere thee thi 
gedered ; and alle them shal bern awei 
the wynd, and shal taken awei the 
- weder; who forsothe hath trost of me, 
shal eritagen the erthe, and welden myn 
tshoeli mounteyn. And I shal seyn, Weie 
* maketh, 3yueth goyng, bowith doun fro 
the path, taketh awei hurtinge thingus 
usfro the weie of my puple. For these 
thingus seith the hese Lord, and en- 
hauncid, wonende the euerelastingte, and 
his hoeli name in he3, and in hoeli dwell- 
' ing, and with the contrit and mekid spi- 
rit, that he quykene the spirit of meke 
men, and quykene the herte of contrit 
is6men. Forsothe not in to euermor I shal 
striue, ne vnto the ende I.shal wrathe; 
- for a spirit fro my face shal gon out, and 
17blastis I shal maken. For the wicked- 
nesse* of his auarice I wrathede, and 
-smot hym. ‘I hidde fro thee my face, 
and endeynede ; and he 3ide awei vagaunt 
isin the weie of his herte. His weies I sa3, 
and helede hym, and bro3te hym ajeen ; 
and! I 3eeld coumfortingus to hym, and 
i9to his weileris. I shop frut of lippis 
pes, pes to hym that is aferr, and that. 
ny3, seide™ the Lord; and I helede hym. 
20 Vupitous men forsothe as the boilinge se, 
that resten mai not; and redounden his 
21flodis in to to-treding, and cley. Ther 
is not pes, seith the Lord God, to vnpy- 
touse” men. 


f for £ pr.m. 


& ther g pr.m. 
™ seith x pr. m. 


1 the vnpitous 4. 


Evntor hhemyn. iOm. ceteri. 
ful sori CEFGHIKMNPQSUVX. n ynto I. 


ISAIAH. 


h Om. 4EGUK. 


se 


and thou art maad low ‘til to’ hellis. Thou 10 
trauelidist in the multitude of thi weie, 
and seidist not, Y schal reste; thou hast 
fonnde the weie of thin hond, therfor1 
thou preiedist not. For what thing dreddist 
thou bisy, for thou liedist, and thou3tist 
not on me? And thou thou3tist not in thin 
herte, that Yam stille, and as not seynge ; 
and thou hast forjete me. Y schal telle 12 
thi ri3tfulnesse, and thi werkis schulen not 
profite to thee. Whanne thou schalt crie, 13 
thi gaderid ¢resours delyuere thee; and the 
wynd schal take awei alle tho", a blast 
schal do awei hemi; but he that hath trist 
on* me, schal enherite the lond, and ‘schal 
haue in possessioun myn hooli hil. And 14 
Y schal seie, Make 3e weie, 3yue 3e iurney, 
bowe 3e fro the path, do 3e awei hirtyngis 
fro the weie of my puple. For the Lord is 
hi3, and enhaunsid, seith these thingis, 
that dwellith in euerlastyngnesse, and his! 
hooli name in hi3 place, and that dwell- 
ith in hooli, and with a contrite™ and 
meke spirit, that he quykene the spirit of 
meke men, and quykene the herte of con- 
trit men. For Y schal not stryue with ie 
outen ende, nether Y schal be wrooth ‘til 
to" the ende; for whi a spirit schal go 
out fro my face, and Y sehal make blastis. 
Y was wrooth for the wickidnesse of his 17 
aueryce, and Y smoot hym. Y hidde my 
face fro thee, aud Y hadde indignacioun ; 
and he 3ede with out stidfast dwellyng, in. 
the weie of his herte. Y si3 hise weies, 1s 
and Y helide hym, and Y brou3te hym 
ajen; and Y jaf coumfortyngis to hym, 
and to the moreneris of hym. Y madeis 


- the fruyt of lippis pees, pees to hym that 


is fer, and to hym that zs ni3, seide the 
Lord; and Y heelide hym. But wickid2o 
men ben as the buyling see, that may not 
reste; and the wawis therof fleten ajen 
in to defoulyng, and fen. The Lord God 2 
seide, Pees is not to wickid men. 

k wickenesse FE. 


i Om. £ pr.m. I Om. £ prim. 


K of CEGIKMN sec. m. PQRSUVX. lin his x.  ™ contrit, cther 


326 


CAP. LVIII. 


1 Crye, ne cese thon; as a trumpe en- 
haunce thi vois, and tel out to my puple 
the hidous giltes of hem, and to the hous 

2of Jacob ther synnes. Me forsothe fro 
dai in to dai thei sechen, and witen my 
weies thei wiln; as a fole of kynde, that 
ri3twisnesse hadde® do, and that the dom 
of his God ‘forsoken not?; thei prejen? 
me domes of ri3twisnesse, and ne3hen to 

3God thei wiln. Whi han wee fastid, and 
thou hast not biholden; wee han mekid 
oure soules, and thon hast not knowen ? 
Lo! in the dai of joure fasting is founde 
joure owne wil, and alle 3oure detoures 
a3ee pleten. Lo! to ples and to striues 3ee 
fasten, and smyten with the fist vnpi- 
tously. Wileth' not fasten, as vnto this 
dai, that herd be in heizte 3oure cry. 

5 Whether such is the fasting that I chese, 
bi® thet dai*® a man to tormenten his 
soule? whether to binde togidere as a 
cercle his hed, and sac and asken to 
arajen ? Whether this I clepede fasting, 

«and an acceptable dai to the Lord? Whae- 
ther not this is more fasting that I ches ? 
Vubind thou the togidere bindingus of 
vnpitousnesse, loose the bundeles doun 
berende; lete hem that ben to-broke, 

7free, and eche charge to-brec. Bree to 
the hungri thi bred, and the helpeles and 
vagaunt bring in to thin hous; whan 
thou shalt see the nakid, couere hym, 
and thi flesh thou shalt not dispise. 

8 Thanne shal breken out as morutid thi 
1i3t, and thin helthe sunnere shal springe ; 
and bifor thi face shal go thi ri3twis- 
nesse, and the glorie of the Lord shal 

9gedere thee. Thanne thou shalt inwardly 
clepen, and the Lord shal heren; thou 
shalt crien, and he shal sey, Lo! I am 
ny3, for merciful I am, the Lord thi God. 
If thou take’ awei fro thi myddel the 


° wolde & pr. m. 


$Om.£ prim. ' Om. Ar sec.m. GHK. 


© thei wolen 1. 
Rsuvxy. ther. 
Wther *thix. 


P 3¢ han vuto 1. 


ISAIAH. 


P wolde not forsoken 4x pr. mt. GHK. 
uQOm. £ pr.m. 


c q soule, ether his lijf 1. 
u fleisch, that is, [thi pore v] brother or sister KGHIKNPQRSUVXY. 


LVIII, 1—9. 


CAP. LVIII. 


Crye thou, ceesse thou not; as a trumpe! 
enhaunse thi vois, and schewe thou to my 
puple her grete trespassis, and to the hous 
of Jacob her synnes. For thei seken me2 
fro dai in to dai, and thei wolen knowe 
my weies; as a folk, that hath do ri3tful- 
nesse, and that hath not forsake the doom 
of her God; thei preien me domes of ri3t- 
fulnesse, and wolen® nei3 to God. Whis 
fastiden we, and thou biheldist not; we 
mekiden oure soulis, and ‘thon knewist 
not? Lo! 3oure wille is foundun in the 
dai of 3oure fastyng, and 3e axen alle joure 
dettouris. Lo! 3e fasten to chidyngis and 4 
stryuyngis, and smyten with the fist wick- 
idli. Nyl 3e fast, as ‘til to? this dai, that 
3oure cry be herd an hi3. Whether sich iss 
the fastyng which Y chees, a man to tur- 
mente his soule? bi dai? whether to bynde 
his heed as a sercle, and to make redi a 
sak and aische? Whethir thou schalt clepe 
this a fastyng, and a dai acceptable to the 
Lord ? Whether not this is more the fast- 6 
yung, which Y chees? Vnbynde thou the 
byndingis togidere of vnpitee’, releesse 
thou birthuns pressynge doun; delyuere 
thon hem free, that ben brokun, and breke 
thou ech birthun. Breke thi breed to ant7 
hnngri man, and brynge in to thin hous 
nedi men and herborles; whanne thon 
seest a nakid man, hile thou hym, and 
dispise not thi fleisch". Thanne thi 1i3ts 
schal breke out as the morewtid, and thin 
helthe schal rise ful soone; and thi ri3t- 
fulnesse schal go bifore thi face, and the 
glorie of the Lord schal gadere thee’. 
Thanne thou schalt clepe to help, and thes 
Lord schal here ; thou schalt erie, and he 
schal seie, Lo! Y am present, for Y am 
merciful, thi Lord God. If thou takist 
awei a“ chayne fro the myddis of thee, 
and ceessist to holde forth the* fyngur, 


4 preieden £ pr. m. r And wileth x. 
Vv shalt take sz sec. m. GHK. 


8 vnpitee, ether of cruelle CEFGHIKMNPQ 
V thee ¢o resi 1. 


LVIIf. 10—~LIX. 4. 


cheyne, and cese the fynger to strecchen 
out, and to speken that profiteth not; 
10whaun thou shalt heelden out to the 
hungri thi soule, and the tormentid lijf 
thou shalt fulfillen, springe shal in derc- 
nesses thi 1i3t, and thi dercnesses shul 
11 ben® as myddai. And reste 3yue to thee 
shal the Lord thi God euermor, and ful- 
fillen he shal in shynynges thi soule, and 
thi bones delyueren ; and thou shalt ben 
as a watri gardyn, and as a welle of 
watris, whos watris ‘schul not failen*. 
izAnd bild vp shul ben in thee the’ de- 
sertes of worldus, the foundemens of iene- 
raciouns and of ieneraciouns thou shalt 
reren; thou shalt ben clepid a bildere vp 
of hegges, turnende awei the pathis of 
13 wickidnesses. If thon schalt* turne awei 
fro the sabot thi foot, to do thin owne 
wil in myn hoely dai, and clepist a delicat 
sabot, and the hoely of the Lord, glorious, 
and glorifiest hym, whil thou dost not 
thi weies, and is not founde thin owne 
14 wil, that thou speke a wrd; thanne thou 
shalt delyten vp on the Lord, and I shal 
rere thee vp vp on the heijtus of erthe®, 
and shal* fede thee with the eritage of 
Jacob, thi fader.; the mouth forsothe of 
the Lord spac. 


CAP. LIX. 


1 Lo! ther is not abreggid the hond of 
the Lord, that sauen he mai not, ne 
agreggid? is his ere, that he ful out here 

2not; but 3oure wickiduesses® deuydeden 
betwe' jou and 3oure God, and 3oure 
synnes hidden his face fro 3ou, that he 

sful out here not. Forsothe 3oure hondis 
ben defoulid with blod, and 3oure fingris 
with wickidnesse’ ; 30ure lippes speeken 
lesing, and joure tunge wickenesse" spek- 
aeth. Ther is not, that inwardly clepe ri3t- 
wisnesse, ne ther is, that deme verreli; 
but thei trosten in thing of no3t, and 


w be maad 4qik. 
b the erthe sGcuK. 
h wickidnes aGuk. 


¢Y shal scx. 4 greggid «, 


Y that that crisec.m. IKMNRSUVX. 
¢ ther is 1. 


ISAIAH. 


x failen not ue m,E pr. im. 
e wickenesses E. 


z soule, ether thi rrille 1. 


327 


and to speke that¥ profitith not; whanne io 
thou schedist out thi soule* to an hungri 
man, and fillist a soule,‘¢hat ¢s* turmentid, 
thi li3t schal rise in derknessis, and thi 
derknessis schulen be as myddai. And thet 
Lord thi God schal 3yue euere reste to 
thee, and schal fille thi soule with schyn- 
yugis, and schal delyuere thi boonys; and 
thou schalt be as a watri gardyn, and as a 
welle of watris, whose waters schulen not 
faile. And the forsakun thingis of worldis 12 
schulen be bildid in thee, and thou schalt 
reise the foundementis of generacioun and 
generacioun ; and thou schalt be clepid a 
bildere of heggis, turnynge awei the pathis 
of wickidnessis. If thou turnest awei thi13 
foot fro the sabat, to do thi wille in myn 
hooli dai, and clepist the sabat delicat, and 
hooli, the gloriouse of the Lord, and glo- 
rifiest him, while thou doist not thi weies, 
and thi wille is not foundun, that thou 
speke a word; thanne thou schalt delite14 
on the Lord, and Y schal reise thee on 
the hiz3nesse of erthe, and Y schal fede 
thee with the eritage of Jacob, thi fadir ; 
for whi the mouth of the Lord spak. 


CAP. LIX. 


Lo! the hoond of the Lord is not abreg- 1 
gid, that he mai not saue, nether his eere 
is maad hard, that he here not; but 3ouree 
wickidnessis han departid bitwixe 3ou and 
joure God, and 3oure synnes lian hid his 
face fro 30u, that he” schulde not here. 
For whi 3onre hondis ben defoulid withs 
blood, and 30ure fyngris with wickid- 
nesse ; 30ure lippis spaken leesyng, and 
3oure tunge spekith wickidnesse. Noon4 
is®, that clepith rijtfulnesse to help, and 
noon is, that demeth verili; but thei 
tristen in nou3t, and speken vanytees ; 


8 Om. c pr.m. E prem, AK Sec. m. 
fbetwene 4EGUK. & wickenesse E. 


yOm. 4Guxk. 


a Om. celeri. b3e NVX. 


328 


speken vanytees; thei couceyueden tra- 
suaile, and beeren wickidnesse', The eiren 
of edderes thei to-breeken*, and the web- 
bis of an! attercop™ thei wouen®; who 
shal eten of the eiren of hem, shal dien, 
and that is hacchid, shal breken out in to 
sa cokatrice. The webbis of hem shul not 
ben in to clothing, ne thei shuln ben co- 
uered with ther werkis; the werkus of 
hem werkus vnprofitable, and the were of 


; wickydnesse™ in ther hondus. The feet- 


of them to euel rennen, and hee3en, that 
thei sheden out innocent blod; the tho3tus 
of them tho3tus vnprofitable; wastite® and 
sto-treding °° in the weies of hem. The 
weie of pes thei knewen not, and ther 
ys not dom in the goyngus of hem; the 
pathis of them inbowid ben to them ; 
eche that tredeth in them, vnknowith pes. 
uFor that longid oute is fro vs dom, and 
shal not take vs ri3twisnesse; wee han 


biden 1i3t, and lo! dercnessis; shynyng,. 


10 and in dercnesses wee han? gon. Wee han 
gropid as blinde men the wall, and as 
withoute ejen wee han felid; wee han 
stumblid in mydday, as in derenesses, in4. 

i mysti thingus, as deade. Wee shul roren 
as beres alle, and as culueres bethenkende 
wee shul weilen; wee han biden dom, 
and ther is not; helthe, and it is longid 

awei fro vs. Multeplied ben forsothe oure 
wickenesses" bifor thee, and oure synnes 
answerden to vs; for oure hidous giltes 
with vs, and oure wickenesses' wee han 

13 knowen, to synnen, and to lien a3en the 
Lord. And wee ben turued awei, that wee 
go not bihynde the bac of oure God, that 
wee speke wrong’ chalenge, and trespas- 
ing. Wee conceyuedent, and speeken of 

isherte wrdys of lesing ; and turned is 
baeward dom, and rijtwisuesse aferr stod; 
for fallen hath in the strete treuthe, and 


isequyte my3te not gon" in. For maad is 


i wickenesse E. * breken 4. 
nesse EF. © waastid K. 
8 Om. ¢ prem. E prem. 


°0 to-treden K. 
t conseyuen 4. 


d was 1. € or hacehid x see.m. mare. 
i ubooden wp. abiden n. 4 
nessis N.  ™m bihynde a pr.m. 
ether eneuhede Evy. 


ISAIAH. 


10m, se pr.m. Gu. 
P Om. £ prem. 
“Ventre AGIK, 


fin ton. 
k abooden gee. abiden ens. 
= Lord a pr. mw, 


LIX. 5——15. 


thei conseyneden trauel, and childiden 
wickidnesse. Thei han broke eiren ofs 
snakis, and maden webbis of an yreyn; - 
he that etith of the eiren of hem, schal 
die, and that that is¢ nurschid, ether 
brou3t forth®, schal breke out in to a 
cocatrice. The webbis of hem schulene 
not be in to cloth, nethir thei schulen be 
hilid with’ her werkis; the werkis of hem 
ben vnprofitable werkis, and the werk of 
wickidnesse 7s in the hondis of hem. The7 
feet of hein rennen to yuel, and haasten to 
schede out innocent blood; the thou3tis of - 
hem ben vuprofitable thou3tis; distriyng 
and defouling ben in the weies of hem. 
Thei knewen not the weie of pees, ands 
doom is not in the goyngis of hem; the 
pathis of hem ben bowid to hem; ech 
that tredith in tho, knowith not pees. 
Therfor doom is made fer fro vs, and9 
ri3tfulmesse schal not take vs; we abid- 
iden® liz3t, and lo! derknessis ben; we 
abididen' schynyng, and we 3eden. in 
derknessis. We gropiden as blynde men 1o 
the wal, and we as with outen i3en touch- 
iden; we stumbliden in myddai, as in 
derknessis, in derk places, as deed men. 
Alle we schulen rore as beeris, and wei 
schulen weile thenkynge as culueris; we 
abididen* doom, and noon is!; we abid- 
iden helthe, and it is maad fer fro vs. 
For whi oure wickidnessis™ ben multiplied 12 
bifore thee, and oure synnes answeriden 
to vs; for our grete trespassis ben with vs, 
and we knewen oure wickidnessis, to do13 
synne, and to lie ajens the Lord. And we 
ben turned awei, that we 3eden not aftir™™ 
the bak of oure God*, that we speken fals 
ealeng, and trespassyng. We conseyueden, 
and spaken of herte wordis of leesyng; 
and doom was turned abak, and ri3tful-14 
nesse stood fer; for whi treuthe felle doun 
in the street, aud equite®” mi3t not entre. 


bo wicke- 
¥ wickidnessis 4GHK. 


™ attircoppis 4. ® weueden 4EGHK. 
qand in E pr.m, 


h ther ben 1. 
lt abooden Ep. abiden N. ™ wit- 


€ aboodin xp. abiden as. 
lV ther is 1. 


on eqnyte, efher enenesse CFGHKMNQRSUVX. equitee, 


LIX. 16—LX. 4. 


treuthe in to for3eting, and he that wente 
awei fro euel, to prei was open. And the 
Lord sa3, and euel aperede in his e3en, 
16for ther is not dom. And God sa3, for 
ther is not a man, and sorewede, for ther 
is not that ajeen come. 
saue to hym his arm, and his rij3twisnesse 
17it shal confermen hym. ‘He is” clad* 
with rijtwisnesse as with an habirioun, 
and the helm of helthe in his hed; ‘he 
isY clad? with the clothingus of veniaunce, 
and* couered with the mantil of ielouste. 
18S0 to veniaunce as to 3eelding of indig- 
nacioun to his ferr enemys, and while to 
his ny3 enemys, to the ilis while he shal 
193elde. And dreden shul that ben fro the 


west the name of the Lord, and that fro: 


the rising of the sunne his glorie; whan 
he shal come as a violent flod, whom the 

20spirit of the Lord constreyneth. And 
comen shal the ajeenbiere of Sion, and to 
them that turnen a3een fro wickidnesse® 

21in Jacob, seith the Lord. This my pes 
couenaunt with them, seith the Lord; 
My spirit that is in thee, and my wrdus 
that I‘haue set® in thi mouth shul not 
gon awei fro thi mouth, and fro the 
mouth of thi sed, seith’ the Lord, fro 
now and vnto® euermore. 


CAP. LX. 


1 Rys, be thou li3tid, Jerusalem, for 
comen is thi li3t, and the glorie of the 
2Lord vp on thee is sprunge. For lo! 
dercnesses shul coueren the erthe, and 
mystinesse puples; vp on thee forsothe 
shal springe the Lord, and his glorie in 
3thee shal be seen. And gon shul Gen- 
tiles in thi li3t, and kingus in the shyn- 
ayng of thi rising. Rere in cumpas thin 
ejen, and see; alle these ben gedered to- 
gidere, camen to thee; thi sonis fro aferr 


vOm.cpr.mou. Om. £ prim. 


he is z pr.m, » wickenesse £. 


© prei, ether robbinge CEFGHKMNPQRSUVXY. 
Uu 


VOL. III. 


And he’ shal . 


x clothid sGEx. 


© settede E pr.m.  seide cz. 


ISAIAH. 329 


And treuthe was maad in to forjetyng,15 
and he that 3ede awei fro yuel, was opyn 
to robbyng®. And the Lord si3, and it ap- 
peride yuel in hise .i3en, for ther is no 
doom. And God si3, that a man is not, 16 
and he was angwischid, for noon is? that 
renneth to. And his arm schal saue tohym 
silf, and his ri3tfulnesse it silf schal con- 
ferme hym. He is clothid with ri3tful-17 
nesse as with an harburioun, and the 
helm of helthe zs in his heed; he is 
clothid with clothis of veniaunce, and he 


_is hitid as with a4 mentil of feruent 


worchyng. As to veniaunce, as to 3eld-18 
yng of indignacioun to hise euemyes, and 
to quityng of tyme to hise aduersaries, he 
schal 3elde while to ylis. And thei that19 
ben at the west, schulen drede the name 
of the Lord, and thei that ben at the 
risyng of the sunne, schulen drede the 
glorie of hym; whanne he schal come as 
a violent flood, whom the spirit of the 
Lord compellith. Whan a3en biere schal 20 
come to Syon, and to hem that goen a3en 
fro wickidnesse in Jacob, seith the Lord. 
This 7s my boond of pees with hem, seith 21 
the Lord; My spirit which is in thee, 
and my wordis whiche Y haue set in thi 
mouth, schulen not go awei fro thi mouth, 
and fro the mouth of thi seed, seith the 
Lord, fro hennus forth and til into with 
outen ende. 


CAP. LX. 


Rise thou, Jerusalem, be thou lijtned,1 
for thi li3t is comun, and the glorie of the 
Lord is risun on thee. For lo! derknessis2 
schulen hile the erthe, and myist schal 
hile puplis; but the Lord schal rise on thee, 
and his glorie schal be seyn in thee. And3 
hethene men schulen go in thi 1i3t, and 
kyngis ‘schulen go* in the schynyng of 
thi risyng. Reise thin i3en in cumpas, 4 
and se; alle these men ben gaderid togi- 
dere, thei ben comun to thee; thi sones 
Sand. 


yOm.e prem #7 clothid 4eGuK. 


€ into K. 
rQOm. 1, 


P ther isi. 4 Om, FNS. 


330 


shul come, and thi do3tris fro a syde shul 
srise. Thanne thou shalt seen, and haue! 
plente; and merueilen, and -ben spred 
abrod shal thin herte, whan conuertid 
‘ shal be to thee the multitude of the se, 


the strengthe of Jentiles shal come to . 


6thee; the flowyng of camailes shal couere 
thee, dromedaries of § Madiau and Effa ; 
alle fro Saba shul come, gold and encens 
bringende", and preising to the Lord 
ztellende. Eche beste of Cedar shal be 
gedered to thee, wetheres of Nabaioth 


shuln serue to thee; thei shul ben offrid - 
vpon my plesable auter, and the hous of © 


siny mageste I shal glorifien‘: Who ben 
these, that as cloudus fleen, and as cul- 
gueres to ther wyndowes? Me forsothe 
abijden iles, and shipes of the se in the 
bigynnyng; that I bringe thi sonus fro 
aferr, the seluer of them, and the gold 
of hem with them, to the name of the 
Lord thi God, and to the hoeli of Irael ; 
1ofor he shal glorifien thee. 
shul sonus of pilgrimes thi wallis, and 
the kingus of hem serue shul to thee. In 
inyn indignacioun forsothe I smot thee, 
and in my recounsiling I hadde reuthe of 


uthee. And opened* shul be thi 3ates con- : 


tynueli, dai and ny3t thei shul not be 
closid; that born be to thee the strengthe 
of Jentilis, and the kingus of them be lad 
izto. Forsothe the fole of kinde and reume 
that shal not serue to thee, shal pershe, 
and Jentiles in wildernesse shul be wastid. 
13The glorie of Liban to thee shal come, 
the! fyrr tree, and box, and pyne tree to- 
gidere, to enourne” the place of myn ha- 
lewyng; and the place of my feet I shal 
14glorifien. And come shul to thee the 
sonus of hem bowid, that mekeden thee, 
and honoure shul the steppis of thi feet, 
alle that bacbiteden" to° thee ; and clepen 
‘shul thee The cite of the Lord, Sion of 
isthe hoeli of Irael. Forthi that thou 
were forsaken, and to hate had, and ther 


fhac. 8 Om. £ prim, 


5 Effra Ep, 
Ww and thei 1, 


t beest 1, 


ISAIAH. 


And bilden — 


 bringen ac pr. m. UK. 
m honourennen £ prem. ™ bacbiten £ prom. ° Om, a. 


u quemeful, ether acceptable CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


LX. 5—15. 


schulen come fro fer, and thi dou3tris. 
schulen rise fro the side. Thanne thous 
schalt se, and schalt flowe; and thin herte 
schal wondre, and schal be alargid, whanne 
the multitude of the see is conuertid to 
thee, the strengthe of hethene men is 
comun to thee; the flowyng of camelse 
schal hile thee, the lederis of dromedis of 
Madian and of Effa’; alle men of Saba 
schulen come, bryngynge gold and en- 
cense, and tellynge heriyng to the Lord. 
Ech scheept of Cedar schal be gaderid7 
to thee, the rammes of Nabaioth schulen 
mynystre to thee; thei schulen be offrid 
on myn acceptable" auter, and Y schal 
glorifie the hous of my maieste. Who bens 
these, that fleen as cloudis, and as culueris 
at her wyndowis? Forsothe ilis abideng 
me, and the schippis of the see in the 
bigynnyng; that Y brynge thi sones fro 
fer, the siluer of hem, and the gold of 
hem 7s with hem, to the name of thi Lord 
God, and to the. hooli of Israel; for he 
schal glorifie thee. And the sones of pil-10 
grymes schulen bilde thi wallis, and the 
kyngis of hem schulen mynystre to thee. 
For Y smoot thee in‘ myn indignacioun, 
and in my recounselyng Y hadde merci 
on thee. And thi 3atis schulen be openyd!! 
contynueli, day and 113t tho schulen not 
be closid; that the strengthe of hethene 
men be brou3t to thee, and the kyngis of 
hem be brou3t. For whi the folk and12 
rewme that serueth not thee, schal pe- 
rische, and hethene men schulen be dis- 
tried bi wildirnesse. The glorie of the13 
Liban schal come to thee, a fir tre, and 
box tre, and pyne appil tre togidere, to 
ourne’ the place of myn halewyng; and Y 
schal glorifie the place of my feet. And 14 
the sones of hem that maden thee lowe, 
schulen come lowe to thee, and alle that 
bacbitiden thee, schulen worschipe the 
steppis of thi feet; and“ schulen clepe thee 
A citee of the Lord of Sion, of the hooli 


i glorien k sec.m. ‘open x. land the acux. 


Yonour A pr. m. 


LX. 16——LXI. 3. 


-was not that bi thee shulde passe, I 
shal putte thee in to the pride of worldus, 
. 1o3e in ieneracioun and ieneracioun. And 
16thou shalt souke the myle of Jentiles, 
. and with the tete of kingis thou shalt be 
mylkid4; and thou shalt wite for I the 
. Lord, sauende thee, and thin a3een biere, 
i7the strong of Jacob. For metal" I shal 
bringe to gold, and for iren I shal bringe 
_to seluer; and for trees metal, and for 
stones iren; and I shal putte thi visitinge 
18 pes, and thi prouostes ri3twisnesse. Ther 
shal no mor ben herd wickidnesse® in thi 
lond, ne wastite and to-treding in thi 
termes ; and ocupie shal helthe thi wallis, 
19and thi 3ates preising. Ther shal ben no 
more to thee the sunne to li3ten bi dai, 
ne the shynyng of the moone li3ten shal 
thee; but shal be to thee the Lord ‘in tot 
euerlastende 1li3t, and thi God in to thi 
20glorie. Go doun no mor shal thy" sunne, 
_and thi® moone shal not be mynusht ; for 
.the Lord shal be in to euerlastende 1i3t, 
and fulfild shul be the da3es of thi weil- 
ziing. Thi puple forsothe alle ri3twise, in 
to enermor thei shul eritagen the erthe, 
buriownyng of my plaunting, were of 
22myn hond to glorien. The leste shal be 
in to a thousend, and the litle child in 
to a’ fole of kinde most strong. I, the 
Lord, in his time sodeynli shal do this. 


CAP. LXI 


1 The spirit of the Lord vp on me, for 
that enoyntede me the Lord; to tellen 
out to debonere men he sente me, that I 
shulde leche the contrit men in herte, 
and prechen to caitif men for3yuenesse, 

2and to closid men openyng; and prechen a 
3er plesable to the Lord, and a dai of ven- 
jaunce to oure God; that I shulde coum- 

3forten alle weilende men; that I shulde 


4 nurischid with mylke £ see. . AGHK. 
vy Om. An. 


w pryde, that is, glorie and honour CuGIKNPQSUVXY, 


t the metal £ pr. m. 


ISAIAH. 331 


of Israel. For that that thou were for-15 
sakun, and hatid, and noon was _ that 
passide bi thee, Y schal sette thee in to 
pryde” of worldis, ioie in generacioun and 
in to generacioun. And thou schalt souke 16 
the mylke of folkis, and thou schalt be 
soclid with the tete of kyngis; and thou 
schalt wite that Y am the Lord, sauynge 
thee, and thin a3en biere, the stronge of 
Jacob. For bras Y schal brynge gold, and 17 
for irun Y schal brynge siluer; and bras 
for trees, and yrun for stoonys; and Y 
schal sette thi visitacioun pees, and thi 
prelatis* ri3tfulnesse. Wickidnesse schal no 18 
more be herd in thi lond, nether distriyng 
and defoulyng in thi coostis; and helthe 
schal ocupie thi wallis, and heriyng schal 
ocupie thi 3atis. The sunne schal no more 19 
be to thee for to schyne bi dai, nether 
the bri3tnesse of the moone schal 1i3tne 
thee; but the Lord schal be in to euerlast- 
ynge li3t to thee, and thi God schal be in 
to thi glorie. Thi sunne schal no more20 
go doun, and thi moone schal not be de- 
creessid; for the Lord schal be in to euer- 
lastynge li3t to thee, and the daies of thi 
mourenyng schulen be fillid. Forsothe21 
thi puple alle iust men, withouten ende 
schulen enherite the lond, the seed of my 
plauntyng, the werk of myn hond for to 
be glorified. The leeste schal be in to a22 
thousynde, and a litil man schal be in to 
a ful stronge folk. Y, the Lord, schal make 
this thing sudenli, in the tyme therof. 


CAP, LXI, 


The spirit of the Lord zs on me, fori 
the Lord anoyntide me; he sente me to 
telle to mylde men, that Y schulde heele 
men contrite in herte, and preche for3yue- 
nesse to caitifs, and openyng to prisoneris; 
and preche a plesaunt 3eer to the Lord, 
and a dai of veniaunce to oure God; that 
Y schulde coumforte alle that mourenen ; 
thaty Y schulde sette coumfort to thes 


‘swickenesse x. tin x. the 4. 


x prelatis, ether souereins K. Y and that n. 


ung 


332 


putte coumforting to the weilende men 
of Sion, and 3yue to them a crowne for 
askes", oile of io3e for weiling, a mantil 
of preising for the spirit of mornyng. 
And ther shul be clepid in it stronge men 


of ri3twisnesse, plaunting of the Lord to - 


sglorifien. And thei shul bilden vp the 
desertus fro the world, and olde fallingus 
thei shul rere*, and thei shul restore cites 
forsaken and scatered, in to ieneracioun 
sand ieneracioun. And stonde shul alienus, 
and fede joure bestus ; and the sonus of 
pilgrimes erthe tilieres and 3oure vyne 
s6wercheres shul be. 3ee forsothe prestus 
of the Lord shul ben clepid ; Seruauns of 
3oure God, it shal ben seid to 3ou. The 
strengthe of Jentiles 3ee shuln ete, and in 
the glorie of them 3ee shul ben proud. 
7 For 3oure double confusioun and shame 
preise shul thei ther part ; for that in ther 
lond double fold thingus thei shul welden, 
seuermor gladnesse shal be to them. For 
I the Lord, louende dom, and to hate 
hhauende raueyn in to brent sacrifise. And 
I shal 3yue the werk of hem in treuthe, 
and pes couenaunt ‘enere durende’ I shal 
ysinyte with them. And shal* be wist? in 
Jentilis the sed of hem, and the buriown- 
yng of them in the myddel of puples. 
Alle that shul seen hem, shul knowe them, 
for these ben the sed, to whom blisside 
10the Lord. Jozende I shal iojen in the 
Lord, and ful out io3en shal my soule in 
my God. For he clothide me with the 
clothing of helthe, and with the clothing 
of ri3twisnesse he cumpassede me, as an 
husbonde wrshipid> with a crowne, and 
11as a wif enourned with hir broches. As 
forsothe the erthe bringeth forth his bu- 
riownyng, and as a gardyn his sed buri- 
owneth, so the Lord God shal buriowne 
ri3twisnesse, and preising bifor alle fole 
of kinde. 


Wasken AEGUK, 
E prem. 


* arere AEGIK. 


2 Om. ceteri. 


ISAIAH. 


y endurynge x. 


LXI. 4—31. 


moureneris of Sion, and that Y schulde 
3yue to them a coroun for aische, oile of 
joie for mourenyng, a mentil of preysyng 
for the spirit of weilyng. And stronge 
men of ri3tfulnesse schulen be clepid ther — 
ynne, the plauntyng of the Lord for to 
glorifie. And thei schulen bilde thingis4 
‘that ben* forsakun fro the world, and 
thei schulen reise elde fallyngis, and thei 
schulen restore citees ‘that ben* forsakun 
and distried, in generacioun and in to ge- 
neracioun. And aliens schulen stunde, and 5 
fede 3oure beestis; and the sones of pil- 
grymes schulen be 3oure erthe tilieris and 
vyn tilieris. But 3e schulen be clepid thes 
preestis of the Lord; it schal be seid to 
jou, 3e ben mynystris of oure God. 3e 
schulen ete the strengthe of hethene men, 
and 3e schulen be onourid in the glorie 
of hem. For 3oure double schenschip and 7 
schame thei schulen preise the part of 
hem; for this thing thei schulen haue pesi- 
bli double thingis in her lond, and euer- 
lastynge gladnesse schal be to hem. Fors 
Y am the Lord, louynge doom, and hatynge 
raueyn in brent sacrifice. And Y schal 3yue 
the werk of hem in treuthe, and Y schal 
smyte to hem an euerlastynge boond of 
pees. And the seed of hem schal be knowun9 
among folkis, and the buriownyng of hem 
in the myddis of puplis. Alle men that 
seen hem, schulen knowe hem, for these 
ben the seed, whom the Lord blesside. [10 
ioiynge schal haue ioie in the Lord, and 
my soule schal inake ful out ioiyng in my 
God. For he hath clothid me with clothis 
of helthe, and he hath compassid me with 
clothis of ri3tfulnesse, as a spouse made 
feir with a coroun, aud as a spousesse 
ourned with her brochis. For as the erthe 11 
bryngith forth his fruyt, and as a gardyn 
buriowneth his seed, so the Lord God 
schal make to growe ri3tfulnesse, and 
preysyng bifore alle folkis. 


ZI shal k sec.m. ®Om. £ prom. » honourid 


8 Om. ceteri. 


LXIT. 111. 


CA Palit: 


1 For Sion I shal not be stille, and for: 


Jerusalem I shal not resten, to the tyme 


that go out as shynyng the rijtwis of - 


hym, and his saueour as a laumpe be 
2tend. And seen shul Jentiles thi ri3twis, 
and alle kingus thi noble; and clepid shal 
be to thee a newe name, that the mouth 
3of the Lord nemnede. And thou shalt 
be a crowne of glorie in the hond of the 
Lord, and a diademe of the rewme in the 
shond of thi God. Thou shalt not* more 
be elepid forsakun, and thi lond shal no 
mor be clepid desolat; but thou shalt be 
clepid My wil in it, and thi lond shal 
-ben enhabitid; for it plesede to the Lord 
in thee, and thi lond shal ben enhabited. 
5 Dwelle forsothe shal the 3unge man with 
the maide’, and dwelle shuln in thee thi 
sonus; and iojen shal the husbonde vp on 
the wif, and io3en vp on thee shal thi 
6God. Vp on thi wallis, Jerusalem, I 
sette keperes, al dai and al ny3t euermor 
thei shul not be stille. 3ee that remem- 
7bren the Lord, ne beth stille, and ne 
3yueth scilence to hym, to the tyme that 
he stablishe, and to the tyme that he 
sette Jerusalem preising in the erthe. 
8The Lord swor in his rij3thond and in 
the arm of his strengthe, I shal not 
3yuen thie whete more in to mete to thin 
enemys, and drinke shul not alien sonus 
thi wyn, in whiche thou trauailedist. 
9 For thei that shul gederen it’, shuln ete, 
and preise the Lord; and that ‘with 
bern’ it, shul drinken in myn_hoeli 
10 porehes. Passeth, passeth thur3 the jates; 
greitheth weie to puple®, pleyn maketh 
the goyng ; and gedereth awei the stones, 
liand rereth vp a tocne to puples. Lo! 
the Lord herd made in the vtmostus' of 
erthe*. Seith to the do3ter of Sion, Lo! 
thi saueour cometh; lo! his meede with 


© no AEGHK. 
beren AE sec. m. GUK. 


b tend x. teendid therofs. ¢ Om. ns. 
CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. & Om. celeri. 


ISAIAH. 


4 mayden AEG pr.m. uk. virgine G sec. m. 
h the puple acux. the Lord £ pr.m. 


@ Om. CEFGHIMNPARSU. 


333 


CAP. LXII. 


For Sion Y schal not be stille, and for1 
Jerusalem Y schal not reste, til the iust 
man therof go out as schynyng, and the 
sauyour therof be teendid® as a laumpe. 
And hethene men schulen se thi inst man, 2 
and alle kyngis schulen se thi noble man; 
and® a newe name, which the mouth of 
the Lord nemyde, schal be clepid to thee. 
And thou schalt be a coroun of glorie ins 
the hond of the Lord, and a diademe of - 
the’ rewme in the hond of thi God. Thou 
schalt no more be clepid forsakun, and thi 
lond schal no more be eclepid desolat ; but 
thou schalt be clepid My wille in that, 
and thi lond schal be enhabitid; for it 
plesid the Lord in thee, and thi lond schal 
be enhabited. For a 3ong man _ schals 
dwelle with a virgyn, and thi sones sehu- 
Jen dwelle in thee; and the spouse schal 
haue ioie on the spousesse, and thi God - 
schal haue ioie on thee. Jerusalem, Y6 
haue ordeyned keperis on thi wallis, al dai 
and al ni3t with outen ende thei schulen 
not be stille. 3e that thenken on the Lord, 
be® not stille, and 3yue 3e uot silence to7 
him, til he stablische, and til he sette Je- 
rusalem ‘preisyng in erthe®’. The Lords 
swoor in his ri3t hond and in the arm of 
his strengthe, Y schal no more 3yue thi 
wheete mete to thin enemyes, and alien 
sones schulen not drynke thi wyn, in 
which thou hast trauelid. For thei thats 
schulen gadere it togidere, schulen ete 7, 
and schulen herie the Lord; and thei that 
beren it togidere, schulen drynke in myn 
hooli hallisf. Passe 3e, passe 3e bi the lo 
3atis; make 3e redi weie to the puple. 
make 3e a playn path; and chese 3e 
stoonys, and reise 3e a signe to puplis. 
Lo! the Lord made herd in the laste partis 11 
of thes erthe. Seie 3e to the dou3tir of 
Sion, Lo! thi sanyour cometh; lo! his 


fOm. acuKx.  & togidir 


emy E pr. m. 
k the erthe AGHK.-. 


i yttermoostis 4GHK. 


ee Om. N. 


e beth 1. f forzerdis 


334 ISAIAH. LXII. 12—-LXUI. 9. 


izhym, and his were biforn hym. And 
thei shul clepen hem an hoeli puple, 
ajeenbo3t of the Lord.’ Thou forsothe 
shalt be clepid a so3t cite, and not for- 
saken. 


CAP. LXIII. 


1 Who is this that cam! fro Edom, with 
steyned clothis fro Bosra? this shapli in 
his stole, goende in the multitude of his 
vertue? I that speke rijtwisnesse, and a 

2forfy3tere am to sauen. Why thanne red 
is thi clothing? and thi clothis™ as of men 

3tredende in the presse? The presse I 
trad alone, and of the fole of kinde ther 
is not a man with me; Y trad hem in 
my wodnesse, and togedere trad hem in 
my wrathe; and sprengd is the blod of 
hem vp on my clothis, and alle my cloth- 

4ingus I defoulid. Dai forsothe of ven- 
jaunce in myn herte, 3er of my 3elding 

scam. I beheeld aboute, and ther was not 
an helpere; I so3te, and ther was not 
that halp; and myn ‘arm sauede to me, 
and myn indignacioun itself" halp to° 
6me. And I al to-trad puples in my 
wodnesse ; and I druiknede them in myn 
indignacioun, and dro3 doun the vertue 
7of them into erthe. Of the mercy do- 
yngus of the Lord I shal recorden, the 
preising of the Lord vp on alle thingus 
that 3eeld? to vs the Lord, and vp on the 
multitude of the? goodis to the hous of 

Trael, the whiche he largeli 3af to them 
after his for3yuenesse, and aftir the mul- 

atitude of his" mercies. And he seide, 

Nerthelatere ‘my puple is, sonus’ not de- 
nyende, and‘ mad is to them a saueour. 

9In alle the tribulacioun of hem he is not 
trublid, and the aungil of his face sauede 
hem". In his loue and in his indulgence 
he a3een bo3te them, and bar hem’, and 
rerede them alle the da3es of the world. 


meede is with hym, and his werk zs bifore 
hym. And thei schulen clepe hem the12 
hooli puple, a3enbou3t of the Lord. For- 
sothe thou schalt be clepid a citee sou3t, 
and not forsakun. 


CAP. LXIII. 


Who is this that cometh fro Edom, in} 
died clothis fro Bosra? this fair man in 
his ‘long cloth’, goynge in the multitude 
of his vertu? Y that speke ri3tfulnesse, 
and am a forfi3tere for to saue. Whi2 
therfor is thi clothing reed? and thi clothis 
ben* as of men stainpynge! in a pressour ? 
Y aloone stampide the presse, and of3 
folkis™ no man is" with me; Y stampide 
hem in my stronge veniaunce, and Y de- 
foulide hem in my wraththe; and her 
blood is spreynt on my clothis, and Y made 
foul alle my clothis. For whi a dai ofa 
veniaunce 7s in myn herte, and the 3eer 
of my 3eldyng cometh. I lokide aboute,s 
and noon helpere was; Y sou3te, and noon 
was that helpide; and myn arm sauyde 
to me, and myn indignacioun, that help- 
ide me. And Y defoulide puplis in mys 
stronge veniaunce; and Y made hem 
drunkun in myn indignacioun, and Y 
drow doun her vertu in to erthe™. I schal7 
haue mynde on the merciful doyngis of 
the Lord, Y schal preche the heriyng of 
the Lord on alle thingis whiche the Lord 
3eldide to vs, and on® the multitude ‘of 
goodis? of the hous of Israel, whiche he 
jaf to hem bi his for3yuenesse, and bi the 
multitude of hise mercies. And the Lords 
seide, Netheles it is my puple, sones not 
denyynge, and he was maad a sauyour to 
hem in al the tribulacioun of hem. Its 
was not4 set in tribulacioun, and the 
aungel of his face sauyde hem. In his loue 
and in his for3yuenesse he ajenbou3te hem, 
and he bar hem, and reiside hem in alle 


_ leometh £ prem. — ™ clothinge ax. clothinges G sec.m. © indignacioun sanede to me, myn arm and 
it AE pr.m. G pr.m, HK. aarm sauede to me, and myn indignacioun it G sec.m. 9Om.cpr.m.K. P hath 


jeeldide 4. hath 3eld & sec.m.cuK. 4 Om, 4EGHK. 


*Om. £ prom. “hym xk prom. ¥Om.c prem 


t Om. Gpr.m.H. 5 my sones peple is G pr. m. H. 


! stole, ether long cloth cuyquikmnegrsuvxy. kOm. celeri. . | stappinge N, ™ folkis, ether Gentil 1. 


Bis, ether wast, 0 the erthe a pr.m. ° Om, 1. 


P Om. A prem. 4 Om. 1, 


LXIII. 10o-—LXIV. 2. 


io Thei forsothe to wrathe terreden”, and 
tormenteden the spirit of his hoeli; and 
turned he is to them in to enemy, and 
ithe fa3t them doun. And he recordide 
of the dajes of the world, of Moises, and 
of his puple. Wher is, that ladde them 
out fro the se, with the shepperdis of his 
floc? Where is, that sette in his myddel 
12the spirit of his hoeli; that ladde oute at 
the ri3tside Moisen* in the arm of his 
mageste? that kutte watris bifor them, 
that he make to hym a name euere dur- 
iende; that ladde out them bi water 
depthis, as an hors in desert not fallende, 
14as a beste in the feeld goende doun? 
The Spirit of the Lord his ledere was; 
so thou bro3tist to thi puple, that thou 
1smake to thee a name of glorie. Loke 
to fro heuene, and see fro thin hoely 
dwelling, and fro the se of thi glorie. 
Wher is thin inward loue, and thi 
strengthe, multitude of thi boweles, and 
of thi mercy doyngus? Vp ou me thei 
16 withheelden hem. Thou forsothe oure 
fader, and Abraham kne3 not vs, and 
17 Irael vnkne3 vs. Thou, Lord, oure fader, 
and oure a3eenbiere; fro the world thi 
name. Whi to erren vs thou madist, Lord, 
fro thi weies? thou hardedist oure herte, 
that wee dredde not thee? be turned, for 
isthi seruauns, lynages of thin eritage. As 
no3t thei weldeden thin hoeli puple, and 
oure enemys al to-treeden thin halewyng. 
19 Wee ben maad as in the bigynnyng, 
whan thou lordshipedist not of vs, ne 
inwardli was clepid thi name vp on ys. 


CAP. iexiy. 
1 Wolde God thou shuldist to-breke he- 
uenus, and comen doun, fro thi face hillis 
2shulden flowe doun, as out brennyng of 
fyr they shulden vanshe awei, watris 


shulden brenne with fyr; that knowen 


W terreden hym E pr. m. 


POm.1 4 Thein. 


ISAIAH. 


335 


daies of the world. Forsothe thei excit-10 
iden hym? to wrathfulnesse, and turment- 
iden the spirit of his hooli; and he was 
turned in to an enemye to hem, and he 
ouercam hem in batel. And he haddei 
mynde on the daies of the world, of Moi- 
ses, and of his puple. Where is he, that 
ledde hem out of the see, with the scheep- 
herdis of his floc? Where is he, that set- 
tide the spirit of his holi in the myddil 
therof; whiche ledde out Moises to thesz 
ri3t half in the arm of his maieste ? which 
departide watris bifore hem, that he 
schulde make to hym -silf a name euer- 
lastynge ; whiche ledde hem out thoru3 13 
depthis of watris, as an hors not stnin- 
blynge in desert, as a beeste goynge doun 14 
in the feeld ? The Spirit of the Lord was 
the ledere therof ; so thou leddist thi puple, 


that thou madist to thee a name of glorie. 


Biholde thou fro heuene, and se fro thin1s 
hooli dwellyng place, and fro the seete of 
thi glorie. Where is thi feruent loue, 
and thi strengthe, the multitude of thin 
entrailis, and of thi merciful doyngis? 
Tho? withelden hem silf on me. Forsothe 16 
thou aré oure fadir, and Abraham knew 
not vs, and Israel knew not vs. Thou, Lord, 17 
art oure fadir, and oure a3enbiere; thi name 
is fro the world. Lord, whi hast thou 
maad vs to erre fro thi weies? thou hast 
made hard oure herte, that.we dreddeu 
not thee? be thou conuertid, for thi ser- 
uauntis, the lynages of thin eritage. Thei 1a 
hadden as nou3t thin hooli puple in pos- 
sessioun, and oure enemyes defouliden thiu 
halewyng. We ben maad as in the bi-19 
gynnyng, whanne thou were not Lord of 
vs, nethir thi name was clepid to help on 
VS. 
CAP. LXIV. 

I wolde that thou.brakist heuenes, andr 
camest doun, that hillis fletiden awei fro 
thi face, and failiden as brennyng" of fier, 2 
and brente in fier; that thi name were made 
knowun to thin enemyes, and folkis weren 


x of Moises z pr. m. 


r the brennyng CEFGUKMNPQRSUVX, 


336 


were maad thi name to thin enemys, fro 
thi face Jentilis shulden ben disturbid. 
3 Whan thou shalt do merueiles, wee shuln 
not sustene. Thou descendedest, and fro 
4thi face mounteynes floweden’ doun. Fro 
the world thei herden not, ne with eres 
parceyueden; the eje sa3 not, thou God, 
withoute thee, what thingus thou hast 
smad redi to men abidende thee. Thou 
a3jen came to the gladere, and to the 
doende ri3twisnesse; in thi weies’ thei 
shul recorden of thee. Lo! thou wrath- 
edist, and wee han synned; in hem wee 
weren euermor, and wee shul ben saaf. 
sAnd wee ben mad as vnclene, alle wee; 
as* the cloth of the womman roten blod 
flowende, alle oure ri3twisnesses; and 
wee fellen as a lef alle, and oure wickid- 
zuesses® as wind token awei vs. Ther is 
not, that inwardly clepe thi name, that 
rise, and holde thee; thou hast hid thi 
face fro vs, and thou hast hurtlid vs in 
3sthe hond of oure wickidnesse®*. And 
now, Lord, oure fader thou art; wee 
forsothe clei, and oure makere thou, and 
9the werkus of thin hondus, alle wee. Ne 
wrathe thou, Lord, ynou3, and no more 
have thou mynde of oure wickidnesse®. 
10 Lo! Lord, bihold, thi puple alle wee. The 
cite of thin®¢ hoeli mad is desert® Sion, 
11 desert mad is Jerusalem, desolat is® the 
hous of oure halewing and of oure glo- 
rie, where preiseden thee oure fadris, 
mad is in out brennyng of fyr; and alle 
ouref desirable thingus ben turned in to 
12fallingus. Whether vp on these thingus 
thou shalt withholden thee, Lord? stille 
shalt thou be, and tormenten vs hugeli? 
1 Thei so3ten me, that biforn askeden not ; 
thei founden that so3ten not me. 


CAP. LXV. 


I seide, Lo! I, lo! Y, to the Jentilis that 
knewe not me, and that inwardli clep- 
zeden not my name. I spredde out myn 


Y flowende c. 2 weie a. 


Band as AGHK. 
4 the desert x pr. im. 


€Om. 2 prim fOm. 4. 


Om. 4 prim. 


: 8 menstrue, or unclene blood 1. 
Vis maad gs. 


ISAIAH. 


b wickenesses E. 


LXIV. 3-——LXV. 2. 


disturblid of thi face. Whanne thou schalt 3 
do merueils, we schulen not abide. Thou 
camest doun,and hillis fletiden awei fro thi 
face. Fro the world. thei herden not, nethir4 
perseyueden with eeris; God, non i3e si3, 
withouten thee, what thingis thou hast 
maad redi to hem that abiden thee. Thous 
mettist hym that is glad, and doith ri3t- 
fulnesse; in thi weies thei schulen bi- 
thenke on thee. Lo! thou art wrooth, 
aud we synneden; in tho syunes we weren 
euere, and we schulen be saued. Andé 
alle we ben maad as an™ vncleene man}; 
alle oure ri3tfulnessis bez as the cloth of 
a womman in vncleene’ blood ; and alle we 
fellen doun as a leef, and our wickid- 
nessis as wynd han take awei vs. Noon7 
is, that clepith thi name to help, that 
risith, and holdith thee; thou hast hid 
thi face fro vs, and thou hast hurtlid 
doun vs in the hond of oure wickidnesse. 
And now, Lord, thou art oure fadir; for-8 
sothe we ben cley, and thou art oure 
maker, and alle we ben the werkis of 
thin hondis. Lord, be thou not wrooth9 
ynow, and haue thou no more mynde on 
oure wickidnesse. Lo! Lord, biholde 
thon, alle we ben thi puple. The citee 10 
of thi seyntuarie' is forsakun, Sion is 
maad deseert, Jerusalem is" desolat; the 
hous of oure halewyng and of, oure glorie, 
where oure fadris herieden thee, is maad 
in to brennyng of fier; and alle oure de- 
sirable thingis ben turned in to fallyngis. 
Lord, whether on these thingis thou schalt 12 
witholde thee? schalt thou be stille, and 
schalt thou turmente vs greetli ? z 


CAP. LXV. 


Thei sou3ten me, that axiden not bifore; 1 
thei that sonjten not me, founden we. Y 
seide, Lo! Y, lo! Y, to hethene men that 
knewen not:me, and that clepiden not mi 
name to help. I stretchide forth myne 


© wickenesse E, °¢hym K sup. ras. 


t hooly, ether seyntuarie CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


LXV. 3—14. ISAIAH. | 337 


hondis al dai to a puple mystrouful, that 
goth in a wei not good, after ther thenk- 
3ingus. The puple that to wrathe terreth 
me, bifor my face euermor; that offren in 
4gardynes, and sacrifien vp on tyles; that 
dwellen in sepulcris, and in wasshing 
temples of mawmetis slepen; that eten 
souwe flesh, and cursid broth in the ves- 
5Seles of hem; that seyn, Go awei fro me, 
ne3he thou not to me, for thou art vn- 
clene; these smoke shul ben in my wod- 
énesse, fyré brennende all dai. Lo! it is 
write befor me; I shal not be stille, but 
I shal jelde, and quyte in to the bosum 
7of them ther wickidnesses", and the wick- 
idnesses" of 3oure fader togidere, seith 
the Lord, that sacrifieden vp on moun- 


teynes, and ‘vp on hilles repreueden to. 


me; and J shal a3jeen mesuren the werc 
sof hem first in the bosum of hem. These 
thingus seith the Lord, What maner if 
ther be founde a corn in the cluster, and 
be seid, Ne scatere thou it, for blissing it 
is; so I shal do for my seruauns, that I 
gscatere not al. And I shal leden out fro 
Jacob sed, and of Juda the! weldende 
myn hoeli mounteynes; and eritagen it 
shul my chosene, and my sernauns dwelle 
1othere. And ben shul the wilde feeldis 
in to foldys of flockis, and the valei of 
Achor in to the couche of droues, to my 
lipuple that a3een so3ten me. And 3ee 
that forsoken the Lord, that for3eeten 
myn hoely mounteyn, that putten the 
bord of fortune, and offren* licoures vp 
120n it, I shal noumbre jou in swerd, and 
alle in sla3ter 3ee shul falle; for thi that I 
clepede, and 3ee answerden not; I spac, 
and 3ee herden not; and 3ee diden euel 
in myn e3en, and that I wolde not, 3ee 
ischosen!. For these thingus, seith the 
Lord God, lo! my seruauntis shuln ete, 
and jee shul hungren; lo! my seruauns 
i4shul drinke, and 3ee shul thristen; lo! 
my seruauns shul gladen, and 3ee shul be 


@ and fier 4. » wickenesses x. i Om. kK pr.m. 


hondis al dai to a puple vunbileueful, that 
goith in a weie not good, aftir her thoustis. 
It is a puple that stirith me to wrathful-3 
nesse, euere bifore my face; whiche offren 
in gardyns, and maken sacrifice on tiel 
stoonys; whiche dwellen in sepulcris, and 4 
slepen in the templis of idols; whiche 
eten swynes fleisch, and vnhooli iwisch’ 
is in the vessels of hem; whiche seien fo5 
an hethene man, Go thou awei fro me, 
nei3 thou not to me, for thou art vncleene; 
these schulen be smoke in my stronge 
veniaunce, fier brennynge al dai. ‘Lo! ite 
is writun bifore me; Y schal not be stille, 
but Y schal jelde, and Y schal quyte in to 
the bosum of hem 3oure wickidnessis, and7 
the wickidnessis of 3oure fadris togidere, 
seith the Lord, whiche maden sacrifice on 
mounteyns, and diden schenschipe to me 
on litle hillis; and Y schal mete ajen 
the firste werk of hem in her bosum. 
The Lord seith thes thingis, As if a grapes 
be founduu in a clustre, and it be seid, 
Distrie thou not it, for it is blessyng; so 
Y schal do for my seruantis, that Y leese 
not al. And Y schal lede out of Jacobs 
seed, and of Juda a man hauynge in pos- 
sessioun myn hooli hillis; and my chosun 
men schulen enherite it, and my ser- 
uauntis schulen dwelle there. And the to 
feeldi places schulen be into floodis of 
flockis, and the valei of Achar in to a 
restyng place of droues of neet, to my 
puple that son3ten me. And Y schalit 
noumbre 30u in swerd, that forsoken the 
Lord, that for3aten myn hooli hil, whiche 
setten a boord to fortune, and maken sa- 
crifice theronne, and alle 3e schulen falle 12 
bi sleyng; for that that Y clepide, and 3e 
answeriden not; Y spak, and 3e herden 
not; and 3e diden yuel” bifor myn i3en, 
and 3e chesiden tho thingis whiche ne 
nolde*. For these thingis, the Lord God13 
seith these thingis, Lo! my seruauntis 
schulen ete, and 3e schulen have hungur ; 


k offreden acux. 'cheseden 4£ sec. m. GHK. 


viwce &. which u. iuyshe 1. iwissh K text. ether water, thot smynes fleizss was sothen inne K marg. 
wisch R. fysh s. ether broth X sec. m. marg. wyuel thing 1. * wolde not 1. 


VOL. III. 


xX xX 


338 


confoundid; lo! my seruauns shul preise, 
for ful out iozinge of herte, and 3ee shul 
crien, for sorewe of herte, and for the to- 
is treding doun of spirit 3ee shul 3elle. And 
3ee shul leue 3oure name in to oth to my 
chosene; and sle shal thee the Lord God, 
and his seruauns he shal clepe bi an 
isother name. In whiche who so is blissid 
vp on erthe, shal ben blissid in God 
amen; and who swerth in erthe, shal 
swern in God amen; for to for3eting 
ben take the rathere anguyshes, and™ for 
17hid thei ben fro oure ezen. Lo! forsothe 
I shape newe heuenus and newe erthe, 
and ben shul not in mynde the rathere, 
and stezen shul thei not vp vp on herte. 
18 But 3ee shul io3en, and ful out iojen 
vnto® euermor, in these thingus that I 
shape; for lo! I shape Jerusalem ful out 
19 glading, and his puple io3e. And I shal 
ful out gladen in Jerusalem, and io3en in 
my puple; and ther shal ben herd in it 
no more vois of weping and vois of eri. 
20 And ther shal no mor be the® faunt of P 
da3es, and the olde that fulfillith not his 
dazes; for the child of an hundrid 3er 
shal dien, and the synnere of an hundrid 
213er shal be cursid. And thei shul bilden 
vp houses, and dwellen in, and plaunte 
“‘vyne 3erdis?, and ete the frute of hem. 
22 Thei shul not bilden vp houses, and an 
other dwelle, ne plaunten, and an other 
ete; after the dazes forsothe of the 
tree shul be the da3es of my puple, and 
23the werkes of ther hondus. My chosen 
vnto ful’ eelde shal vse; thei shul not 
trauaile in veyn, ne ben gendrid* in dis- 
turbing ; for the sed of the blissid men 
of the Lord it is, and the cosynes of hem 
24with hem. And it shal be, er thei crien, 
I shal ful out heren; 3it heim spekende, 
25] shal ful out heren. The wif and the 
lomb shul he fed togidere, and the leoun 
and the oxe shuln ete chaf, and to the 
serpent pouder his bred; thei shul not 


m Om. a. 


Dinto 4Gpr.mu. ° Om. G6 pr. m. 
ful acur. 


8 geten c pr.m. goten E pr. m, 


Y to ioie 1. 


ISAIAH. 


2 Om. ceteri. 


LXV. 15-25. 


lo! my seruauntis schulen drynke, and 3e 
schulen be thirsti; lo! my seruauntis schu-14 
len be glad, and 3e schulen be aschamed ; 
lo! my seruauntis schulen.herie, for the 
ful ioie of herte, and 3e schulen crie, for 
the sorewe of herte, and 3e schulen 3elle, 
for desolacioun of spirit. And 3e schulen 15 
leeue 3oure name in to an ooth to my 
chosun men; and the Lord God schal sle 
thee, and he schal clepe hise seruauntis bi 
another name. In which he that is blessid 16 
on erthe, schal be blessid in God amen ; 
and he that swerith in erthe, shal swere 
in God feithfuli; for the formere an- 
gwischis ben 30uun to for3etyng, and for 
tho ben hid fro 3oure izen. For lo! Y17 
make newe heuenes and a newe erthe, and 
the formere thingis schulen not be in 
mynde, and schulen not stie on the herte. 
But 3e schulen haue ioie, and make fulis 
out ioiyng til in to with outen ende, in 
these thingis whiche Y make; for lo! Y 
make Jerusalem ful out ioiynge, and the 
puple therof ioiey. And Y schal make ful 19 
out ioiyng in Jerusalem, and Y schal haue 
ioie in my puple; and the vois of weping 
and the vois of cry schal no more be herd 
ther ynne. A 3ong child of daies schal] no 20 
more be there, and an eld man that fillith 
not hise daies; for whi a child of an hun- 
drid 3eer schal die, and a synnere of an 
hundrid 3eer schal be cursid. And thei21 
schulen bilde housis, and schulen enhabite 
hem*, and thei schulen plaunte vynes, and 
schulen ete the fruytis of tho. Thei22 
schulen not bilde housis, and an othir 
schal enhabite hem, thei schulen not 
plaunte, and an othir schal ete; for whi 
the daies of my puple schulen be after 
the daies of the tree, and the werkis of 
her hondis schulen be elde to my chosun 23 
men. Thei schulen not trauele in veyn, 
nether thei schulen gendre in disturblyng; 
for it is the seed of hem that ben blessid 
of the Lord, and the cosyns of hem ben 
t the 


POm. £ prem. vynes c pr.m. E pr. m. 


2 Om. celeri. 


LXVI. 1—7. ISAIAH. 839 


no3en, ne slen, in al myn hoeli mounteyn, 
seith the Lord. 


CAP. LXVI. 


1 These thingus seith the Lord, Heuene 
my sete, and erthe the stonding vp place 
of my feet. What is this hons, that 3¢e 
shul bilde to me, and what is this place 

2of my reste? Alle these thingus myn 
hond dide, and mad ben alle these 
thingus, seith the Lord; to whom for- 
sothe shall I beholde, butt to my‘ porelet 
and contrit in spirit, and tremblende" 

3my wrdis? That offreth’ an oxe, as that 
sle¥ a man; that sleth a beste, as that 
brayne* a dogge; that’ offreth offring, 
as that souwe blod he offre; that record- 
eth of encens’, as that blisse* to the maw- 
met ; alle these thei chosen in ther weies, 
and in ther abominaciouns the soule of 
4them delitede. . Wherfore and I shal 
chesen the illusiouns of hem, and that 
thei dredden I shal brenge to them; for 
I clepede, and ther was not that shulde 
answern ; I spac, and thei herden not ; 
and thei diden euel in myn ejen, and 
5sthat I wolde not, thei chosen. Hereth 
the wrd of the Lord, that tremblen at 
his wrd; 3oure brethern seiden hatende 
jou, and castende awei for my name, 
Glorified be the Lord, and wee shul see 
in 3oure gladnesse; thei forsothe shul be 
econfoundid. Vois of the puple fro the 
cite, vois fro the temple, vois of the 
Lord 3eldende 3elding to his enemys. 
7 Er sche trauelide with peyne as wym- 


with hem. And it schal be, bifor that 24 
thei crien, Y schal here; 3it while thei 
speken, Y schal here. A wolf and a lomb25 
schulen be fed togidere, and a lioun and 
an oxe schulen ete stree, and to a serpent 
dust schal be his breed; thei schulen not 
anoie, nether schulen sle, in al myn hooli 
hil, seith the Lord. 


CAP. LXVI. 


The Lord seith these thingis, Heuene1 
is my seete, and the erthe zs the stool of 
my feet. Which is this hous, which 3e 
schulen bilde to me, and which is this 
place of my reste? Myn hond made alleeg 
these thingis, and alle these thingis ben 
maad, seith the Lord; but to whom schal 
Y biholde, no but to a pore man and 
contrit in spirit, and greetli dredynge my 
wordis? He that offrith> an oxe, 7s as he3 
that sleeth a man; he that sleeth a scheep, 
ts as he that brayneth a dogge; he that 
offrith an offryng, is as he that offrith 
swynes blood; he that thenketh on en- 
cense, 7s as he that blessith an idol; thei 
chesiden alle thes thingis in her weies, 
and her soule delitide in her abhomyna- 
ciouns. Wherfor and Y schal chese the 
scornyngis of hem, and Y schal brynge to 
hem tho thingis whiche thei dredden ; for 
Y clepide, and noon was that answeride; 
Y spak, and thei herden not; and thei 
diden yuel? bifor myn izen, and chesiden 
tho thingis whiche Y nolde®. Here 3e thes 
word of the Lord, whiche quaken at his 
word; 3oure britheren hatynge 3ou, and 
castynge awey for my name, seiden, The 
Lord be glorified, and we schulen se in 
3oure gladnesse; forsothe thei schulen be 
schent. The vois of the puple fro thee 
citee, the vois fro the temple, the vois of 
the Lord 3eldynge a reward! to hise ene- 


tno but az sec.m.GHK. ttthe x. % tremlynge, or dredynge 4K. VY sleeth 4. sleth z sec.m. ® sleeth 


AGHK. * brayneth sz sec.m.GHK, Y as that a. 


Zcense AEGHK. 8 blesseth acuk. blesse E. 


» offreth, that is, in tyme of the gospel to do sacrifice x. ¢ ther was. 4 yuel thing 1. © wolde not 1. 


f 3eldyng chFGuiKMNPQRSUVX,. 


xxQ 


340 ISAIAH. LXVI. 8—17. 


men don, sche bar® withoute; er shulde 
come his birthe®® ‘wyth peyne’, sche*4 
sbar a male child. Who herde euere 
such a thing, and who sa} to this lic ? 
Whether shal with ynne bern the erthe 
in o dai, or shal be born a fole of kinde 
togidere? For with ynne bar and with- 
9oute bar Sion his sones. Whether I that 
othere men make to bern child*, I my 
self shal not bern’? seith the Lord. If I 
that ieneracioun to othere men 3yue, ba- 
reyn shal be? seith the Lord thi God. 
10Gladeth with Jerusalem, and ful out 
iojeth® in it, alle that louen it; io3eth 
with it with io3e, alle that weilen vp on 
iit; that and 3ee souke, and be fulfild of 
the tetes of -his coumforting, that 3ee 
mylke, and with! delices flowen, of alle 
i2maner glorie of hym. For these thingus 
seith the Lord, Lo! I shal bowe doun 
vp on it, as the flod of pes, and as strem 
flowende the glorie of Jentilis, that 3ee 
shul souke;, to the tetes 3ee shul be born, 
and vp on the knes men shul daunte 
1330u. What maner if to whom a moder 
daunte!, so I™ shal coumforte 3ou, and 
i4in Jerusalem 3ee shul be coumfortid. 3ee 
shul seen, and iojen shal 3oure herte, and 
joure boenes as an erbe shul buriowne. 
Aud knowe shal ben the hond of the 
Lord in his seruauns, and endeyne he 
ishal to his enemys. For lo! the Lord 
in fyr shal come, aud as a whirlewyud 
his foure horsid carres, to 3elde" in to 
indignacioun his woduesse, and his blam- 
isyng in a° flawme of fyr. For in a fyr 
the Lord shal be dyuersly demed, and 
in? his swerd to alle flesh; and multe- 
plied shul be the slayne of the Lord, 
17that weren halewid, and cleene weenedeu 
themself, in gardynes bihynde‘ the firste 
tree, ‘or the 3ate", with ynne forth; that 
eeten souwe flesh, and abominacioun, 


myes. Bifor that sche trauelide of child,7 
sche childide; bifor that the sorewe of hir 
child beryng eam, sche childide a sone. 
Who herde euere suche a thing, and whos 
si3 a thing lijk this? Whether the erthe 
schal trauele of child in o dai, ether whe- 
ther" a folk schal be childide togidere ? 
For whi Sion trauelede of child, and 
childide hir sones. Whether that Y ‘myg- 
silf thati make othere to bere child, schal 
not ber child*? seith the Lord. Whether 
Y that 3yue generacioun to othere men, 
schal be bareyn? seith thi Lord God. Be1o 
3e glad with Jerusalem, and alle 3e that 
louen that, make ful out ioye ther ynne; 
alle 3e that mourenen on that Jerusalem, 
make 3e ioye with it in ioie; that bothe1 
3e souke, and be fillid of the tetis and 
coumfort therof, that 3e mylke, and flowe 
in delicis, of al maner glorie therof. For 12 
whi the Lord seith these thingis, Lo! 
Y schal bowe doun on it, as a flood of 
pees, and as a flowynge streem the glorie 
of hethene men, which 3e schulen souke ; 
3e schulen be borun at tetis, and on knees 
thei schulen speke plesauntly to jou. Asis 
if a modir spekith faire to ony child, so Y 
schal coumforte jou, and 3e schulen be 
coumfortid in Jerusalem. 3e sehulen se, i 
aud 3oure herte schal haue ioie, and 3oure 
boouys schulen buriowne as an erbe. And 
the hond of the Lord schal be knowun in 
hise seruauntis, and he schal haue indig- 
nacioun to hise enemyes. For lo! theis 
Lord schal come im fier, and as a whirl- 
wynd hise charis, to 3elde in indignacioun 
hise strong veniaunce, and his blamyng in 
the flawme of fier. For whi the Lord ic 
schal deme in fier, and in hys swerd to 
ech fleisch ; and slayn men of the Lord 
schulen be multiplied, that weren halewid, 17 
and gessiden hem cleene, in gardyns aftir 
o 3ate with yime ; that eten swynes fleisch, 


¢ Er he bar child with ynne, he bar c pr.m. £ pr.m. With peyne she beer x. °C vois 4. ¢ Om. c et 
: pr. mt. er she traueilide with peynas wymmen don K. 4 hec prem Eprom © Om. Cprom. E prom. 
Om. 4. & bern childe £ sec.m. marg. Kk. bioyen kK. ‘Om. £pr.m.  * daunte £ pr. m. or cherische 


sec. m. marg. daunten, or chirshen aGK. daunsen H. 


or chirishe acux. dauncen, or chirshe u sec. m. 


1 daunte & pr.m. or cherische sec.m.marg. daunte, 


m Om. kK. n turnen azeell E pr. ne. © Om. AGHK. 


P Om. c prim. & prom. WVafter BE pr.vice. tOm.ced sz prem. 


hOm1t i Om... 


k child my silif 1, 


LXVI. 18—24. 


and a mous, togidere shuln ben wastid, 
igseith the Lord. I forsothe® the werkys 
of hem and the tho3tus of hem, comme that 
I gedere, with alle folkis and tungus ; and 
thei shul comen, and seen my glorie. 
19And I shal putte in them a tocne, and 
seudent of hem that shul® be saf to the 
Jentiles, in to the se, in to Affrich, and 
in to Liddiam, men holdende an arwe, in 
to Italie, and Grece, to’ iles aferr, to 
hem that herden not of me, and se3en 
not my glorie.’ And thei shul tellen out 


zomy glorie to Jentilis, and bringen alle ° 


joure brethern fro alle Jentilis a free 
3ifte to the Lord, in hors, and in foure 
horsid carres, and in literes, and in mu- 
lys, and in cartus, to myn hoeli mounteyn, 
Jerusalem, seith the Lord; as if the sonus 
of Irael bringen in a 3ifte in a clene 
21 vessel in to the hous of the Lord. And 
I shal taken of them in to prestus and 
22 Leuytus, seith the Lord. For as newe 
heuenus and newe erthe, whiche I make 
to stunde bifor me, seith the Lord, so 
stonde shal 3oure sed, and 3oure name. 
23 And ther shal be monyth of monyth, and 
sabot of saboth; comen shal eche flesh 
to honoure byfor my face, seith the Lord. 
21And ‘gon out shuln”, and seen the ca- 
reyunes of men, that trespasiden a3en me; 
the werm of them shal not die, and the 
fir of hem shal not be quenchid; and 
thei shul be in to filling* of si3t to alle 
flesh. 


Here endith the boke of Ysaie, and 
now begynneth the prolog of Jeremye’. 


ISAIAH. 341 


and abhomynacioun, and a mows, thei 
schulen be waastid togidere, seith the 
Lord. Forsothe Y come to gadere togi-1s 
dere the werkis of hem, and the thou3tis 


‘of hem, with alle folkis and langagis ; 


and thei schulen come, and schulen se my 
glorie. And Y schal sette a signe in hem, 19 
and Y schal sende of hem that ben sauyd 
to hethene men, in to the see, in to Af- 
frik, and in to Liddia, and to hem that 
holden arowe, in to Italie, and Greek lond, 
to ilis fer, to hem that herden not of me, 
and sien not my glorie. And thei schulen 
telle my glorie to hethene men, and thei 20 
schulen brynge alle 3oure britheren of alle 
folkis a 3ifte to the Lord, in horsis, and 
charis, and in literis, and in mulis, and in 
cartis, to myn hooli hil, Jerusalem, seith 
the Lord; as if the sones of Israel bryngen 

a 3ifte in a cleene vessel in to the hous of 
the Lord. And Y schal take of hem inai 
to preestis and dekenes, seith the Lord. 
For as newe heuenes and newe erthe,22 
whiche Y make to stonde bifore me, seith 
the Lord, so 3oure seed schal stonde, and 
3oure name. And a monethe schal be ofe3 
monethe, and a sabat of sabat; ech man 
schal come for to worschipe bifore my face, 
seith the Lord. And thei schulen go out, 2s 
and schulen se the careyns of men, that 
trespassiden ajens me; the worm of hem 
schal not die, and the fier of hem schal 
not be quenchid; and thei schulen be ‘til 
to" fillyng of si3t to ech man. 


Here endith Ysaie, and here bigiuneth 
Jeremye?. 


8Om. 4. tI schal sende & see.m. tI shal a. Vthe £ prim. Ww thei schul gon out £ see. m. AGHK. 


x fulfillinge a. 


book of Isaye, and bigynneth the prolog to Jeremie. K. 


n ynto I. 


y From a. Here endith Ysaye, and bigynneth a prologe on Jeremye. &. Here endith the 


No final rubric in cen. 


o From crguimansux. Heere eendeth Isaye ; se now Jeremye. K. Here endith the book of 


Isaye, the profete, and bigynneth the book of Jeremye. nv. No final rubric in azry. 


JEREMIAH. 





[Prologue on Jeremiah] 


This profete Jeremye tolde openli thingis to comynge, and not in derk speche, as 
Ysaie and othere profetis; for he telde vtterli the destruccioun of Jerusalem to be doon 
of Caldeis, and the cite and the hous of God to be brent with fijr; but warnynge hem 
bifore to leue her synnes, and her idolatrie, and to come a3en to the trewe wurschiping 
of God, schewinge the grete merci of God, not willinge ony man to perische, that wole 
come to amendement. 


Prolog to Jeremie, prophete*. 


JEREMYE, the profete, to whom this prologe is ascriued, as anent® the Ebrues is 
seen to ben booistousere than the sermoun of I[saie, and of Osee, and than® othere 
profetes; but in wittes he is euene, sithen that in the same spirit he profeciede; but 
the symplenesse of speche fel to hym of the place in whiche he was born. Forsothe he 
was of Anatoth, that vnto this dai is a litil town, bi thre myle beende fro Jerusalem ; 
a prest of prestus, and in his moder wombe halewid ; thur3 his maidenhed halewende 
to the chirche of Crist a gospel man. This a child bigan to profecien; and the caitifte 
of the chef cite, and of Jewerie, not only in spirit, but and with e3en of 4 flesh beheeld. 
Now forsothe Assiries hadden translatid the ten lynagis of Irael in to Meedis ; now 
the townes of Jentiles weldeden the londis of them. Wherfore in Jewere onli® and 
Beniamyn he profeciede; and of his cite the fallingus with fourefold abece, he weilede, 
the whiche wee‘ han 3olden® to the" mesure of metre ‘and vers’. Therfore the ordre of 
viseouns, that anent Grekes and Latynes outerli is confoundid, to the rathere feith wee 
han amendyd. The boc forsothe of Baruch, his notorie, that anent the Ebrues is not 
rad, ne had, wee han laft; for alle these thingus curses of enemys abidende, to whom 
nede is me to answern bi my werkis a rowe. And this I suffere, for 3ee constreynen, 
O! Paule and Eustoche; but more ri3t it were, to the shorting of euel, to putte mesure 
to the wodnesse of them bi my silence, than to eche dai sum what of newe thing 
writende, to* terre! the wodnesse of the enuyouse. 


Another Prolog™. 


God is redi to 3yue good, to punshen a tariere; whan forsothe he my3te gilti men 
withoute witnessing ‘of thing" to come to be punshid, no wher that he doth; but also 


& This prologue is from M. 


a Srp . . . » . 
bs From x. Prologus. an. Prologe. «. No initial rubric in cz. » anentis celeri passim. © of 4, 
oi a . 
: ae E prom. Soon a. fF and weec pr.m. £ pr.m. AGHK. & jolden with vers c pr. m. E pr. m. 
m. c sec. m. E sec.m. Om. c prime prem *Om.c prim. lfeere x sup. ras. ™ No rubric 


inc. Ome prem, 


JEREMIAH. 843 


if he shul condempne, that he seith biforn, that thei be delyuered by penaunce, that 
weren dampned bi gilte. Nynyuytes weren dampned synneres of° God; 3it for- 
sothe thre da3es, and Nynyue was to be turned vp so doun; God wolde not with 
silence punshe condempned men, but, 3yuende to them place of penaunce, sente an 
Ebru profete, that shulde seyn, 3it thre dajes; and Nynyue shal be turned vp so 
doun; lest persheden, that is, that weren dampned, but doende penaunce, thei 
shulden purchacen mercy. Sodomytes also? and Gomorreis now to hard torment 
weren ordeyned, as the sermoun of God to? Abraham shewide; nerthelatere™ that 
theiris'’ was, the aungelis diden, wylnende hem to sauen, that sheweden hemself 
vnwrthi helthe; and seiende to Loth, Is ther any man to thee heer sone in lawe, or 
sones, outher*® do3tris? ne thei vnknewen hem not ‘to bent to folewen Loth, but thei 
sheweden hern" to gidere and his benygnete and loue that hem hadde sent. Lijec sum 
what in Jeremye wee finden. Notid is forsothe the tyme of his profecye, whan he gan’, 
or hadde endid to” profecyen. Seith therfore sum man, What to me the tyme of the 
storie? for he began to profecien in the da3es of Josie, sone* of Amos, theY king of Juda, 
vnto the threttenthe? 3er in his regne*. Ther after he profeciede in the da3es of Joachym, 
sone of Josie, the king of Juda; and bi thre kingus his profecie is stra3t out, ynto the 
caitifte of Jerusalem. In the fifte monyth condempnede God Jerusalem for his synnes, 
and that was the laste sentence, that caitif thei shulden be forsake; but sithen God is 
the® makere of men, ne any man wile to pershen, bifor that’ the tyme of destruccioun 
shulde stonden in, he sente and this profete, that shulde bidde to penaunce. He sente the 
same also vnder the secounde king® after the puple; he sente also vnder the thridde. 
Now the caitifte stod on, and 3it to helthe God stirede, 3yuendef and biforn o dai place 
of penaunce; wherfore it is write, ynto the caitifte of Jerusalem, and vnto the fifte 
moneth, to han profecied to Jerusalem. Now the® bondis" of the enemys hadden streyned 
the hondis, and nerthelatere this God seide, Lo! caitif 3ee ben mad, doth penaunce ; 
tho3 late, prezeth me, and I shal spare to 3ou; I mai delyuere fro the caitifte, that I haue 
take 30u, vn to the ful ending of the elleuenthe 3er of Sedechie, sone of Osie, king of 
Juda. This also of vs wee moun vnderstonde, a synnere forsothe! to be taken to Sathan; 
no thing is ferr fro it, that Jewis ben taken to Nabugodonosor, that as* hem God 
grauntide to the! aduersarie for ofte vsid vnpitousnesse, so wee ben taken for oure 
synnes to spirituel Nabugodonosor, that whom he hath take to Sathan, thei lerne to 
not blasfemen. Weenest thou hou myche euel it is to synnen, that he take to Sathan, 
caityuende the soules of them that ben forsaken of God? not withoute cause, that is, ne 
with oute dom. Whan forsothe he shal sende reyn vp on the vyne, and that reyn shal 
bringe forth thornes, what shal he do, but that he comaunde to the™ wederes, that thei 
reyne not vp on the" vyne weder? Ny3 therfore® is and oure caitifte, if wee do not 
penaunce, that wee be take to Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, whiche now liende? 
ny3, the wrdis of profetis, of the lawe, of the apostolis, and of the selue Crist’ ‘ful 
out biden vs* to penaunce, stern to helthe. If wee heren, wee leeuen to hym that seide, 
I shal do penaunce of alle thet euelis, that I spac to do to them. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth the book". 


oto K. POm.Epr.m. 4Om.x. neuer the latere ceteri passim. ‘™ theriscpr.m. *or seen. *Om. 
Epr.m. “here 4. therisc pr.m. ‘began arcux. Whis £pr.m. *thesone 4eEx. Y Om, 4GuK. 
zthritithe s4enK. ®rewme cx. > Om. arcux. ¢Om.acuK. 4Om.c prim. © Om.c prim. 
fand 3yuendec. &tothe 4. bhondis aux. 1Om. acux. kis acux. | thee and the aa pr. m. UK. 
mQOm.4. "Om. 4. © forsothe 4. P longe 4 sup. ras. lynynge u. 4 the prophetis x. * Crist, ben c. 
Crist, wee ben E pr.m. * ful out bede £ pr.m. bidden vs ful out x.‘ Om. G pr.m. HK. u From k. 
Here endith the prolog, and now sueth the booc of Jeremye. £. No rubric in acau. : 


344 JEREMIAH. . ees. 


Here begynneth the boke of Jeremye, 
the prophete’. 


CAP. I. 


1 TuE wrdis of Jeremye, sone of Elchie, 
of the prestus that weren in Anathot, in 
athe lond of Beniamyn. That maad is the 
wrd of the Lord to hym in the da3es of 
Josie, sone of Amon, king of Juda, in the 
3threttenthe 3er of his regne. And don it 
is in the dajes of Joachym, sone of Josie, 
king of Juda, vn to the ful ending of the 
elleuenthe 3er of Sedechie, sone of Josie, 
king of Juda, vnto the transmygracioun 
4of Jerusalem, in the fifte monyth. And 
don is the wrd of the Lord to me, seiende, 
5 Bifor that I foormede thee in the wombe, 
Y knew thee; and er thou wentest out of 
the priue wombe, I halowede thee”; and 
aX profete in folkis of kinde I 3af thee. 
cAnd I seide, A! A! A! Lord God, lo! 
71 kan not speke, for a child Iam. And 
the Lord seyde to me, Wile thou not 
seyn, for a child I am; for to alle thingus 
that I shal sende thee, thou shalt go, and 
alle thingis, what euere I shal sende to 
8thee, thou shalt speke. Ne drede thou 
fro the face of them, for I am with thee, 
9that I delyuere thee, seith the Lord. And 
the Lord sente his hond, and touchide 
my mouth; and the Lord seide to me, 
Lo! I haue 3oueY’ my wrdis in thi mouth; 
1olo! I haue set thee to dai vp on folkis of 
kinde, and vp on reumes, that thou pulle 
vp, and destro3e, and? springe abrod, and 
11 waste, and bilde vp, and plaunte. And 
don is the wrd of the Lord to me, seiende, 
What seest thou, Jeremye? And Y seide, 
12A wakende 3erde I see. And the Lord 
seide to me, Wel thou hast seen, for I 
shal waken vp on my wrd, that I do it. 
i3And don is the wrd of the Lord the 
secounde tyme to me, seiende, What 
seest thou? And I seide, A pot tend vp 


Here biginnith the book of Jeremie, the 
profete*. 


CAP. I. 


TuE wordis of Jeremye, sone of Helchie, 1 
of the preestis that weren in Anathot, in 
the lond of Beniamyn. For the word of2 
the Lord was maad to hym in the daies 
of Josie, the sone of Amon, kyng of Juda, 
in the threttenethe 3eer of his rewme. 
And it was don in the daies of Joachym, 3 
the sone of Josie, the king of Juda, til to® 
the endyng of the enleuenthe 3eer of Sede- 
chie, sone of Josie, kyng of Juda, til® the 
passyng ouer, ether caitifte, of Jerusalem, 
in the fyuethe monethe. And the word of 4 
the Lord was maad to me, and seide, Bi-s 
for that Y fourmede thee in the wombe, Y 
knewe thee; and bifor that thou 3edist 
out of the wombe, Y halewide thee; and 
Y jaf thee’ a profete among folkis. Ande 
Y seide, A! A! A! Lord God, lo! Y kan 
not speke, for Y am a child. And the7 
Lord seide to me, Nyle thou seie, that Y 
am a child; for thou schalt go to alle 
thingis, to whiche Y schal sende thee, and 
thou schalt speke alle thingis, what euer 
thingis Y schal comaunde to thee. Dredes 
thou not of the face of hem, for Y am 
with thee, to delyuere thee, seith the Lord. 
And the Lord sente his hond, and touch-9 
ide my mouth ; and the Lord seide to me, 
Lo! Y haue 3oue my wordis in thi mouth; 
lo! Y haue ordeynede thee to day on folkis, 10 
and on rewmes, that thou drawe vp, and 
distrie, and leese, and scatere, and bilde, 
and plaunte. And the word of the Lord 
was maad to me, and seide, What seest 
thou, Jeremye? And Y seide, Y se a 3erde 12 
wakynge. And the Lord seide to me, Thou 
hast seen wel, for Y schal wake on my 


word, to do it. And the word of the Lord 13 


was maad the secounde tyme to me, and 
seide, What seest thou? Y se a pot buyl- 


¥ From acu. No initial rubric in cex. Ww Om. £ prom. xTagpr.m. Y 3yuen vel 3yue E pass. 
zOm.E prim. 4 scatere ze pr.m. > Om. c pr.m. E pr. m. 


« From ery. Here bigynneth the book of Jeremye. m. No initial rubric in the other Mss. vynto r. 


Ctiltor. 4 thee to ber, 


a a all re —— — a ————— 


I. 14—IL. §. 


I see, and his face fro the face of the 
l4north. And the Lord seide to me, Fro 
the north shal be schewid* euel* vp on 
isalle the® dwelleris of erthe. For lo! I 
shal clepe togidere alle the kinredis of 
the rewmes of the north, seith the Lord, 
and thei shul come, and setten eche his 
see in thef entre of the 3atis of Jerusalem, 
and yp on alle his wallis in enuyroun, 
and vp on alle the chef cites of Juda. 
is And I shal speke my* domes with hem 
vp on al the malice of hem, that forsoke 
me, and offreden to aliene goddis, and 
honoureden the were of ther hondis. 
17Thou thanne gird vp thi leendis, and 
ris, and spec to them alle thingus that I 
comaunde to thee; ne be thou aferd fro 
the face of them, ne forsothe Y shal make 
i8thee to dreden the chere of them. Y for- 
sothe haue 3oue thee to dai in to a 
strengthid cite, and in to an irene pilere, 
and in to a brasen wal, vp on al erthe, 
to the kingus of Juda, and to his princes, 
and to his prestes, and to al the puple of 
19the lond. And thei shul fi3te a3en thee, 
and noti han the maistri; for I with 
thee am, seith the Lord, that I delyuere 
thee. ; 
CAP. II. 
1 And don is the wrd of the Lord to me, 
2seiende, Go, and cri in the eres of Jeru- 
salem, seiende, These thyngus seith the 
Lord, I recordide of thee, rewende thin 
waxende 3outhe, and the charite of thi 
weddyng, whan thou folewedist me in 
desert, in the lond that is not sowen. 
3‘Hoeli Irael* to the Lord, the chef of his 
frutus; alle that deuouren hym, gilten ; 
euelis shul come vp on hem, seith the 
4Lord. Hereth the wrd of the Lord, 3ee 
hous of Jacob, and alle the kinredis of 
5the hous of Irael. These thingns seith 
the Lord, What founde 3oure fadris in 
me of wickidnesse!, for thei longeden 


© opened & pr.m. stra3t out c pr. m, E sec. m. marg. schewid & éert. m. 
& thi 2 pr. m. 
| wickenesse cE. 


Eprmc. © Om. AEGHK. f Om. K pr. m. 


Trael £ pr.m. a, Irael hooli # sec. m. 


¢ whiche 1. 
VOL, III. 


JEREMIAH. 


345 


ynge, and the face therof fro the face of 
the north. And the Lord seide to me, Fro 14 
the north schal be schewid al yuel on alle 
the dwelleris of the lond. For lo! Y schalis 
clepe togidere alle the naciouns of rewmes 
of the north, seith the Lord, and thei 
schulen come, and sette ech man his seete 
in the entryng of the 3atis of Jerusalem, 
and on alle the wallis therof in cumpas, 
and on alle the citees of Juda. And Yie 
schal speke my domes with hem on al 
the malice of hem, that forsoken ime, and 
maden sacrifice to alien goddis, and wor- 
schipiden the werk of her hondis. Ther-17 ° 
for girde thou thi leendis, and rise thou, 
and speke to hem alle thingis whiche Y 
comaunde to thee; drede thou not of the 
face of hem, for Y schal not make thee for 
to drede the cheer of hem. For Y 3af thee is 
to dai in to a strong citee, and in to an 
yrun piler, and in to a brasun wal, on al 
the lond, to the kyngis of Juda, and to the 
princis therof, and to the preestis therof, 
and to al the puple of the lond. And theiis 
schulen fijte ajens thee, and thei schulen 
not haue the maistrie; for Y am with thee, 
seith the Lord, that Y delyuere thee. 


CAR. II. 


And the word of the Lord was maadi 
to me, and seide, Go thou, and crye in the2 
eeris of Jerusalem, and seie, The Lord 
seith these thingis, Y hadde mynde on 
thee, and Y hadde merci on thee in thi 
jong wexynge age, and on the charite of 
thi spousyng, whanne thou suedist me in 
desert, in the lond which is not sowun. 
Israel was hooli to the Lord, the firste of3 
fruytis of hym; alle men that® deuouren 
that Israel, trespassen ; yuelis schulen come 
on hem, seith the Lord. The lous of Ja-4 
cob, and alle thef lynagis of the hous of 
Israel, here 3e the word of the Lord. Thes 
Lord seith these thingis, What of wickid- 


dal yuel aux. alle euel c et 


hgyue x. inoxepr.m. * The holi of 


‘Om, plures. 
Yy 


346 JEREMIAH. 


awei fro me, and 3iden aftir vanyte, and 
sveyn thei ben mad? And thei seiden 
not, Wher is the Lord, that made vs to 
stezen vp fro the lond of Egipt, that 
ladde vs ouer by desert, bi the lond vnha- 
bitable and withouten weie, bi the lond 
of thrist, and ymage of deth, bi the lond 
in whiche 3ide not a ful man, ne wonde 
zaman. And I ladde 30u in to the lond 
of Carmel, that 3ee shulden ete his frute, 
and the ‘beste thingis! of it; and gon in 
3ee defouleden my lond, and myn eritage 
83ee putten™ in to abhominacioun. Prestes 
seiden not, Wher is the Lord? and hold- 
-ende the lawe, thei knewen not me; and 
shepperdis breeken the lawe a3en me, 
and profetes profecieden in Baal, and 
9 foleweden mawmetes. Therfore 3it Y shal 
striuen in dom with 30u, seith the Lord, 
and with 3oure sones Y shal dispute. 
io Passeth to iles" of Sithym, and seeth ; 
and in to Cedar sendeth, and heholdeth 
hugeli; and seeth, yf don is such a maner 
thing, if chaungid hath the fole of kinde 
his goddis; and certes thei ben not god- 
dis; my puple forsothe chaungede his 
i2glorie in to a mawmet. Waxeth stone3id, 
3ee heuenus, vp on this, and, 3ee 3atus 
of heuene, beth desolat hugeli, seith the 
13 Lord. Two forsothe euelis diden my 
puple; me thei forsoken, welle® of quyc 
watir, and doluen to them wastid cis- 
ternes, that contenen watris moun? not. 
14 Whether a thral4 is Irael, or a ‘born 
15 bonde nan'? Whi thanne mad he is in 
to prei? Vp on hym roreden leouns, and 
3euen ther vois; thei setteden his lond in 
gto wildernesse, his cites ben brend vp, 
and ther is not that dwelle in them. The 
sonus also of Memfeos and of Thamnes 
17‘defouliden thee bi lecherie, 07 mawme- 
trie’, ‘vp on tot the top". Whether not 
this is do to thee, for thou hast forsaken 
the Lord thi God, that tyme that he 


II. 6—17. 


nesse founduu 3oure fadris in me, for thei 
jeden fer awey fro me, and 3eden after 
vanyte, and weren inaad veyn? And thei 
seiden not, Where is the Lord, that made 
vs to stie fro’ the lond of Egipt, that 
ledde vs ouer thorou desert, bi the lond 
vnabitable and with out weie, bi the lond 
of thirst, and bi the ymage of deeth, bi 
the lond in whiche a man 3ede not, nether 
a man dwellide. Aud Y brou3te 30u in to7 
the lond of Carmele, that 3e schulden ete 
the fruyt therof, and the goodis therof ; 
and 3e entriden, and defouliden my lond,and 
settiden myn eritage in to abhomynacioun, 
Preestis seiden not, Where is the Lord?s 
and thei that helden the lawe, knewen not 
me; and scheepherdis trespassiden ajens 
me, and profetis profesieden in Baal, and 
sueden idols. Therfor 3it Y schal stryues 
with 3ou in doom, seith the Lord, and Y 
schal dispute with 3oure sones. Go 3e toto 
the ilis of Cethym, and se 3e; and sende 
3e in to Cedar, and biholde 3e greetli; and 
se 3e, if siche a thing is doon, if a folk1 
chaungide hise goddis ; and certeynli thei 
ben no goddis; but my puple chaungide 
hise glorie in to an ydol. Heuenes, be 3e12 
astonyed on this thing, and, 3e 3atis of 
heuene, be 3e desolat greetli, seith the 
Lord. For whi my puple hath don tweyne 13 
yuels; thei han forsake me, the welle of 
quyke watir, and han diggid to hem cis- 
ternes, ‘that weren™ distried, that moun 
not holde watris. Whether: Israel is ais 
boond man, ether is borun boonde? Whi15 
therfor is he maad in to prey? Liouns 
roriden on hym, and 3auen her vois; thei 
han set the londe of hym in to wilder- 
nesse, the citees of him ben brent, and 
noon is* that dwellith in tho. Also the16 
sones of Menfis and of Tafnys han de- 
foulid thee, ‘til to! the cop of the heed. 
Whether this is not don to thee, for thou 17 
forsokist thi Lord God, in that tyme in 


1 goodis ¢ pr.m.E prom, ™ puttiden E sec.m. kK. ®the ylis x. © the welle 2eGuHK. P my3ten F pr. m. 


mayen séc.m. mown tert. m. 


Svp fro, h Om. cercuikunparsuvx. 


4 thral seruaunt £ pr. m, 
thee c pr.m. E prom. t vnto AGHK. vp vnto cpr.m. "cop GH. 


t proper born seruaunt £ pr.m. — § stripeden 


i Wher ceteri passim. *theriss. | vnto1. 


Il. .18-—28. 


isladde thee bi the wey? And now what 
to thee’ wilt thou in the weye of Egipt, 
that thou drinke water troublid ? And 
what to thee with the weie of Assiries, 
19that thou drinke water of the flod? Vn- 
dernyme thee shal thi malice, and thi 
turnyng away shal blame thee; wite and 
see, for euel and bitter it is thee to han 
forsaken the Lord thi God, and his drede 
not to ben anent thee, seith the Lord God 
200f ostes. From the world thou hast al 
to-broste my 30c, to-broke my bondis, and 
seidist, I shal not serue. In eche forsothe 
hy3 hil, and ynder eche braunchy tree 
2ithou were throwe doun a strumpet. I 


forsothe plauntede thee a chosen vyne- ° 


jerd*, al. verre sed; what maner thanne 
thou art turned to me in to a¥ shreude 
22thing, an aliene vyne? If thou wasshe% 
thee with ‘clensing cley*, and multeplie to 
thee ‘the clensende’ erbe boreth*, thou 
art defoulid with thi wickidnesse® bifor 
231me, seith the Lord God. What maner 
seist thou, I am not defoulid, after Baa- 
lym I haue not go? See thi weies in the 
hole valey, wite what thou hast do; a 
241i3t corour tellende out thi weies. ‘A 
feld asse® vsid iri wildernesse in.the de- 
syr of his soule dro3 wind of his loue; 
noon shal turne it awey. Alle that seech- 
en hir, shul not failen; in hir rote blod 
25 flowingus thei shu] finden hir. Forfende 
thi foot fro nakidhed, and thi throte fro 
thrist ; and thou seidest, I dispeirede, I 
shal not do; I louede forsothe alienus, and 
2eafter them I shal go. What maner is con- 
foundid a thef, whan he is ca3t, so con- 
foundid ben the housis of Irael; thei, 
and the kingus of hem, princes, and 
27 prestes, and profetes of them, seiende to 
the tree, My fader thou art; and to the 
ston, Thou me hast goten. They turn- 
eden to me bac, and not face; in tyme 
of ther tormenting thei shul sey, Rys, 
28and delyuere vs. Wher ben thi goddus, 


Wasa. 
5 Om. £ pr, m. 


Vv Om. E pr. m. 


3 sope E pr.m. ¢ dorech aGuK. 


lan alien a pr.m. 


JEREMIAH. 


x vyne Cpr.m, E pr. m. 


347 


which he ledde thee bi the weie? Andis 
now what wolt thou to thee in the weie 
ef Egipt, that thou drynke troblid watir ? 
And what zs to thee with the weie of As- 
siriens, that thou drynke water of the 
flood? Thi malice schal repreue thee, and 19 
thi turnyng awei schal blame thee; wite 
thou and se, that it is yuel and bittir that 
thou hast forsake thi Lord God, and that 
his drede is not at thee, seith the Lord 
God of oostis. Fro the world thou hast 20 
broke my 30k, thou hast broke my bondis, 
and seidist, Y schal not serue. For thou 
hoore didist hordom in ech hi3 litil hil, 
and vndur ech tree ful of bowis. Forsotheai 
Y plauntide thee a chosun vyner, al trewe 
seed; hou therfor art thou, alien! vyner, 
turned to me in to a schrewid thing? 
Thou3 thou waischist™ thee with fulleris 22 
clei, and multypliest to thee the erbe 
borith, thou art defoulid in thi wickid- 
nesse bifore me, seith the Lord God. Hou23 
seist thou, Y am not defoulid, Y 3ede not 
aftir Baalym? Se thi weies in the greet 
valei, wite thou what thou hast do; a 
swifte rennere ordeynynge hise weies. A 24 
wielde asse customable in wildirnesse drow 
the wynd of his loue in the desire of his 
soule; no man schal turne awei it. Alle 
that seken it, schulen not faile; thei schu- 
len fynde it in the flux of vncleene blood 
therof. Forbede thi foot fro nakidnesse, 25 
and thi throte fro thirst; and thou seidist, 
Y dispeiride, Y schal not do; for Y louede 
brennyngli alien goddis, and Y schal go 
aftir hem. As a theef is schent, whanne 26 
he is takun, so the hous of Israel ben 
schent ; thei, and kyngis of hem, the 
princes, and prestis, and the prophetis of 
hem, that seien to a tree, Thou art my 27 
fadir ; and to a stoon, Thou hast gendrid 
me. Thei turneden to me the bak, and 
not the face; and in the tyme of her tur- 
ment thei schulen scie, Ryse thou, and 
delyuere vs. Where hen thi goddis, whiche 28 


y Om, AEGHK. 2 schalt washe E sec. m. 
d wickenesse ce. © An asse c ct E pr.m. 


™ waische 1. 


Yy2 


348 JEREMIAH. 


whom thou hast maad to thee? Rise 
thei, and delyuere thei thee in the dai 
of thi tormenting; after the noumbre 
forsothe of thi cites weren thi goddus, 

29Juda. What wile 3ee with me in dom 
strine? Alle see han forsake ime, seith the 
30 Lord. In veyu I haue smyte 3oure 
sonus, disciplyne thei resceyueden not; 
3oure swerd deuourede 3oure profetes, as 
31a leoun is wastid joure ieneracioun. Se- 
eth the wrd of the Lord, whether wilder- 
nesse I am mad to Irael, or a lond late 
berende frute? Whi thanne seith my 
puple, Wee han gon awei, wee shul no 
32 mor come to thee? Whether for3ete shal 
the maiden of hir enournement ? and the 
womman spouse of hir brest bundel ? 
My pnuple forsothe! forz3at me in dajes 
33ynnowmbred. What enforcest thou to 
shewe thi weie good to ben so3t loue, 
that ouermor and thi malices thou hast 
sita3t thi weies, and in thi wengus is 
founde blod of pore soules and inno- 
centus? Not in dichis Y fond them, but 
in alle thingus that aboue I membrede. 
3s And thou seidist, Withoute synne and 
ynnocent I am; and® therfore be turned 
awei thi wodnesse fro me. Lo!! Y in dom 
shal strine with thee; for thi that thou 
36seidist, I synnede not. Hou foul art 
thou mad ful myche, rehercende thi 
weies? and of * Egipt thou shalt be con- 
foundid, as thou art confoundyd of As- 
37sur. For whi and of this thou shalt gon 
out, and thin hondis shul ben vp on 
thin hed; for al to-troden hath the Lord 
thi trost, and no thing thou shalt ‘han 
welsum!. 
CAP. III. 

i Comunly me seith, If a man lefe™ his 
wif, and she goende awei fro hyin wedde 
an other mau, whether shal she turne 
ajeen any mor to hym? whether not 
pollut and defoulid shal be that wom- 
man? Thou forsothe hast do fornyca- 
cioun with many loueres; nerthelatere 


fOm.c prem, gina »Om. eprom iAnd lo! a 


leue E£ sec. m. AGHK. 


° Om. 1. 


Il. 29—III. 1. 


thou madist to thee? Rise thei, and dely- 
uere thee in the tyme of thi turment ; for 
aftir the noumbre of thi citees weren thi 
goddis, thou Juda. What wolen 3e stryue29 
with me in doom? Alle 3e han forsake 
me, seith the Lord. In veyn Y smoot30 
joure sones, thei resseyueden not chastis- 
yng; 3oure swerd deuouride 3oure pro- 
phetis, 3oure generacioun is distried as a 
lioun. Se 3e the word of the Lord, whe-31 
ther Y am maad a wildirnesse to Israel, 
ether a lond late bryngynge forth fruyt ? 
Whi therfor seide my puple, We han go 
awei, we schulen no more come to thee ? 
Whethir a virgyn schal for3ete hir ourne-32 
ment ? and a spousesse ‘schal for3ete° hir 
brest girdil? But mi puple hath for3ete 
me bi daies with out noumbre. Whats3 
enforsist thou to schewe thi weie good to 
seke lone, which ferthermore bothe hast 
tau3t thi malices thi weies, and the blood 34 
of pore men and innocentis is foundun in 
thi wyngis? Y fond not hem in dichis, 
but in alle thingis whiche Y remembride 
bifore. And thou seidist, Y am with out3s 
synne and innocent; and therfor thi 
stronge veniaunce be turned awei fro me. 
Lo! Y schal stryue with thee in doom; 
for thou seidist, Y synnede not. Hou vijl36 
art thou maad, rehersynge thi weies ? and 
thou schalt be schent of Egipt, as thou 
were schent of Assur. For whi and thou37 
schalt go out of this /ond, and thin hondis 
schulen be on thin heed; for whi the Lord 
hath al to-broke thi trist, and thou schalt 
haue no thing to prosperite. 


CAP. II. 


It is seid comunli, If a man forsakith: 
his wijf, and sche go? awei fro hym, and 
be weddid to an othere hosebonde, whe- 
ther he schal turne ajen more to hir? 
whether thilke womman schal not be de- 
foulid, and maad vneleene? Forsothe 
thou hast do fornycacioun with many 


k fro eprom. hano welsum x. ™ shal 


P goith 1. 


Til. 2—11. 


turne ajeen to me, seith the Lord, and I 
2shal resceyue" thee. Rere vp thin .ejen 
in to euene ri3t, and see, where now thou 
art leid doun. In weies thou seete, abid- 
ende them as a thef in wildernesse, and 
thou defouledist the lond in thi fornyca- 
3ciouns and in thi malices. For what 
thing® ben defendid dropis of reynes, and 
the late comende weder was not. The 
forhed of a strumpet womman is maad 
to thee; thou woldest not shamen. 
4Thanne namely fro now clep me, My 
fader, duk? of my maydenhed thou art. 
5 Whether thou shalt be wroth in to euer- 
mor, and abyde stille in to the ende? 
Lo! thou speeke, and didist enelis, and 
my3tist. And for wrdis of penaunce with 
wrdis of pride thou blasfemedist; and thou 
fulfildist thin euel thenking, and shew- 
edist aj3en the husbonde thi strengthe, 
that thou mow4 don that in wrd thou 
étretedist. And the Lord seide to me, 
in the da3es of kyng Josie, Whether thou 
hast not seen what thyngus hath do the 
aduersarie, Irae] ? She 3ide awei to hir- 
self vp on eche he3 mounteyn, and vnder 
eche braunchi tree, and dide fornyca- 
7cioun there. And Y seide, whan she 
hadde don alle these thingus, To me turne 
azeen; and she is not turned a3een. And 
the brekeresse of lawe, Juda, hir sister, 
8sa3, for thi that ‘Irael, aduersarie, hadde 
do leccherie’, I shulde haue® left her, and 
3oue" to her a libel of forsaking; and 
the lawe brekeresse, Juda, hir sister, 
dradde not, but 3ide awei, and dide 
9fornycacioun also she. 
hed of hir fornycacioun defoulede the 
lond, and dide fornycacioun with ston, 
ioand with tree. And in alle these thingus 
is not turned aj3een to me the lawe 
brekeresse, hir sister, Juda, in al hir 
herte, but in lesing, seith the Lord God. 
i1And the Lord seide to me, The aduer- 
sarie, Irael, iustefiede hir soule, bi com- 


n yndertake Epr.m.  ° things E pr.m. 
leccherie, aduersarie Irael = prom. hac. 


4 Om, a pr. nt. CEFGHKEMNPQRSUVX pr. in. 


JEREMIAH. 


And thur3 1i3t- - 


P the duke £ pr.m. 
t Om. 4. 


349 


loueris; netheles turne thou ajen to me, 
‘seith the Lord%, and Y schal resseyue 
thee. Reise thin ijen in to streiz3t, and se,2 
where thou art not cast doun. Thou hast 
sctun in weies, abidynge hem as a theef 
in wildirnesse, and thou hast defoulid the 
erthe in thi fornicaciouns and in thi ma- 
lices. Wherfor the dropis of reynes weren3 
forbodun, and no late reyn was. The 
forhed of a womman hoore is maad to 
thee; thou noldist’ be aschamed. Nameli4 
fro this tyme forth clepe thou me, Thou 
art my fadir, the ledere of my virginyte. 
Whether thou schalt be wrooth withs 
outen ende, ether schalt contynue in to 
the ende? Lo! thou hast spoke, and 
hast do yuels, and thou were my3ti. And 
for wordis of penaunce thou blasfemydist 
bi wordis of pride; and thou fillidist thin 
yuel thou3t, and schewidist thi strengthe 
ajens thi hosebonde, that thou maist do 
that thing that thou tretidist bi word. 
And the Lord seide to me, in the daiess 
of Josie, the kyng, Whether thou hast 
seyn what thing the aduersarie, Israel, 
hath do? Sche 3ede to hir silf on ech 
hi3 hil, and vndur ech tre ful of boowis, 
and dide fornycacioun there. And Y7 
seide, whanne sche hadde do alle these 
thingis, Turne thou ajen to me; and sche 
turnede not ajen. And hir sistir, Juda, 
brekere of the lawe, si3, that for the ad-8 
uersarie, Israel, dide anowtrie, Y hadde left 
hir, and Y hadde 3oue to hir a libel of 
forsakyng; and Juda, hir sistir, brekere 
of the lawe, dredde not, but also sche 
3ede, and dide fornycacioun. And bi 1i3t-9 
nesse of hir fornicacioun sche defoulide 
the erthe, and dide anowtrie with a stoon, 
and with a tree. And in alle these thingis 19 
hir sistir, Juda, brekere of the lawe, turn- 
ede not a3en to me, in al hir herte, but in 
a leesyng, seith the Lord God. And thei 
Lord seide to me, The aduersarie, Israel, 
hath iustified hir soule, in comparisoun of 


r she hadde do 


qd now G pr.m. Hu. 
U3yue E. 


¥ woldist not 1. 


350 


parisoun of the lawe brekeresse, Juda. 
12Go, and cry these wrdus ajen the north; 
and thou shalt sey, Turne ajeen, thou 
aduersarie, Irael, seith the Lord’, and I 
shal not turne awei my face fro 30u; for 

I am hoeli, seith the Lord, and I shal 
isnot wrathen in to withoute ende. Ner 
the latere wite thou thi wickednesse™; 
for in to the Lord thi God thou hast do 
lawe breche, and thou hast scatered thi 
weies to alienus vnder eche braunchi tree ; 
and my vois thou herdist not, seith the 
14 Lord. Beth conuertid, 3ee sonus, turnende 
a3een, seith the Lord, for J 3oure* house- 
bondeY ; and shal take 50u to oen of the 
cite, and two of the kinrede, and bringe 
1530u in to Sion; and 3iue 30u shepperdus 
aftir myn herte, and thei shul fede 3ou 
i6with kunnyng and doctryne. And whan 
3e shul be multeplied, and encresyn in 
the lond, in tho dajes, seith the Lord, 
thei shul sey no more, The arke of the 
testament of the Lord; ne it shal ste3en 
vp vp on herte, ne thei shul recorde of 
it, ne it shal be visitid, ne be mad eft 
i7more. In that tyme thei shuln clepe 
Jerusalem The see of the Lord, and ge- 
dered shul be to it alle Jentiles, in name 
of the Lord, in to Jerusalem; and thei 
shu] not gon after the shreudenesse of 
isther werste herte. In tho dajes gon shal 
the hous of Juda to the hous of Irael; 
and come thei shuln togidere fro the 
lond of the north to the lond that I 3af 
19to 3oure fadris. I forsothe seide, Hou 
shal I putte thee in sonus, and 3elde to 
thee the desirable lond, the ful cler eri- 
tage of the ostis of the folc of kinde? 
And I seide, A fader thou shalt clepe me, 
and after me to gon? thou shalt not? cese. 
20 But what maner if a womman dispise 
hir louere, so dispisede me the hous of 
21Trael, seith the Lord. <A vois in weies 
is herd, weping and 3elling of the sonus 
of Irael; for wicke thei maaden their 
weie, forjeeten of the Lord ther God. 
v Lord God a, 


w wickenesse ©. * Om. kK. 


JEREMIAH. 


Yman ¢ prom. E prom. 


Ill. 12——21. 


Juda, brekere of the lawe. Go thou, and t2 
crye these wordis a3ens the north; and 
thou schalt seie, Thou aduersarie, Israel, 
turne ajen, seith the Lord, and Y schal 
not turne awei my face fro 30u3 for Y am 
hooli, seith the Lord, and Y schal not be 
wrooth with outen ende. Netheles knowe 13 
thou thi wickidnesse; for thou hast tres- 
passid ajens thi Lord God, and thou hast 
spred abrood thi weies to aliens vndur 
ech tre ful of bowis 3; -and thou herdist not 
iny vois, seith the Lord. Be 3e conuertid, 14 
sones, turnynge a3en, seith the Lord, for 
Y am 3joure hosebonde; and Y schal take 
jou oon of a citee, and tweyne of a kyn- 
rede, and Y schal lede 30u in to Sion; 
and Y schal 3yue to 30u scheepherdis 15 
after myn herte, and thei schulen feede 
jou with kunnyng and teching. And 16 
whanne 3e schulen be multiplied, and en- 
creesse in the lond, in tho daies, seith the 
Lord, thei schulen no more seie, The arke 
of testament of the Lord; nether it schal 
stie on’ the herte, nether thei schulen 
thenke on it, nether it schal be visitid, 
nether it schal be ferthere. In that tyme !7 
thei schulen clepe Jerusalem The seete of 
the Lord, and alle hethene men schulen 
be gaderid togidere to it, in the name of 
the Lord, in Jerusalem; and thei schulen 
not go aftir the schrewidnesse of her 
worste herte. In tho daies the hous of 18 
Juda schal go to the hous of Israel; and 
thei schulen come togidere fro the lond of 
the north to the loud which Y 3af to 
3oure fadris. Forsothe Y seide, Hou schal 19 
Y sette thee among sones, and schal 3yue 
to thee a desirable lond, a ful cleer eritage 
of the oostis of hethene men? And Y 
seide, Thou schalt clepe me fadir, and 
thou schalt not ceesse to entre aftir me. 
But as if a woniman dispisith hir louyere, 20 
so the hous of Israel dispiside me, seith 
the Lord. A vois is herd in weies, the21 
weping and 3ellyng of the sones of Israel ; - 
for thei maden wickid her weie, thei for- 


Z goo in aGHK. ® Om. E prim, 


sin N. 


lll, 22—IV. 6. 


22 Beth conuerted, 3ee sonus, turnende ajeen, 
and I shal helen 3oure turnyngus awei. 
Lo! wee han come to thee; thou forsothe 

a3art the Lord oure God. Verreli lyeres 
weren the hillis, the multitude of moun- 
teynes; verrely in the Lord oure God the 

2thelthe” of Irael. 


jouthe; the floekes of them, and the 
droues of hem, the sonus of them, and 
25the do3tris of them®. Wee shul slepe in 
oure confusyoun, and eoueren shal vs 
oure shenshipe ; for to the Lord oure God 
wee han synned, and wee and our fadris, 


fro oure waxende 3outhe vn to this dai ;. 


and wee han not herd the vois of ‘the 
Lord oure God‘, , 


CieP onl 


1 If thou shalt turne a3een, Irael, seith 
the Lord, to me be eonuertid; if thou 
shalt take awei thin hurtende thingus 
fro my faee, thou shalt not be to-stirid. 
2 And thou shalt swern, The Lord ‘lyueth, 
in treuthe and in dom and in rijtwisnes ; 
-and blissen shul hyim fole of kinde, and 
3hym preisen. These thingus forsothe 
seith the Lord to the man of Juda and 
to the dwellere of Jerusalem, Newith. to 
jou a newe tilid lond, and wileth not 
4sowen vp on thornes. Beth circumeidid 
to the Lord, and doth awei the vtmost® 
3erde felles of 30ure hertes, 3ee men of 
Juda, and dwelleris of Jerusalem; lest 
parauenture go out as fyr myn indigna- 
cioun, and be tend vp, and ther be not 
that quenche, for the malice of 3oure 
stho3tus. Telleth out in Juda, and in 
Jerusalem maketh herd; speketh, and 
syngeth with a trumpe in the lond ; eri- 
eth strongli, and seith, Beth gedered, and 
6go wee in the strengthid eites. Rereth 
a toene in Sion, beth® eoumfortid, and 
wileth not stonde; for euel J bringe® to 
fro the north, and a gret to-treding. 


b hooli a. ¢ hem ech confusioun E pr. m. 
& and beth az pr.m. GHK. 


t vuto 1. 
x ther be I. 


u Om. 1. 
y Om. I. 


Confusioun eet the. 
trauale of our fadris, fro oure waxende. 


4 our Lord God x. 
h shal bringe ze prem. . 


v newe, ether a falowe 1. 
Z stie up I. stie CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


JEREMIAH. 351 


3aten her Lord God. Be 3e eonuertid, 22 
sones, turnynge a3en, and Y schal heele 
3oure turnyngis awei. Lo! we comen to 
thee; for thou art oure Lord God. Verili23 
litil hillis weren lieris, the multitude of 
mounteyns was fals; verili in oure Lord 
God is the helthe of Israel. Schensehipe 24 
eete the trauel of oure fadris, fro oure 
3ongthe ; schenschipe eet the flockis of 
hem, and the droues of hem, the sones of 
hem, and the dou3tris of hem. We schu-25 
len slepe in oure sehensehipe, and oure 
selaundir sehal hile vs; for we synneden 
to oure Lord God, bothe we and oure fa- 
dris, fro oure 30ngthe ‘til tot this dai; and 
we herden not the vois of oure Lord God. 


CAP. IV. 


Israel, if thou turnest ajen, seith the! 
Lord, turne thou to me; if thou takist 
awei thin offendyngis fro my faee, thou 
sehalt not be mouyd. And thou schalt2 
swere, The Lord lyneth, in treuthe and 
in doom and in ri3tfulnesse ; and alle 
folkis sehulen blesse hym, and sehulen 
preise hym. For the Lord God seith3 
these thingis to a man of Juda and to a 
dwellere of Jerusalem, Make 3e newe to 


.30u a lond tilid of the" newe’, and nyle 


3e sowe on thornes. Men of Juda, and 4 
dwelleris of Jerusalem, be 3e eireumeidid 
to the Lord, and do 3e awey the filthis” 
of 30ure hertis; Jest perauenture myn in- 
dignaeioun go out as fier, and be kyndlid, 
and noon be* that quenche, for the malice 
of 30ure thou3tis. Telle 3e in Juda, and5 
make 3e herd in Jerusalem; speke 3e, and 
synge 3e with a trumpe in the lond; erye 
3e strongli, and seie 3e, Be 3e gaderid to- 
gidere, and entre we in to stronge citees. 
Reise 3e a signe in Sion, coumforte 5e,¢ 
and nyle 3e stonde; for Y bringe yuel fro 
the north, and a’ greet sorewe. A lioun7 
schal ‘rise vp? fro his denne, and the rob- 
fin to AGHK. 


€ vttermost AGHK. 


W prepucies, ether fillhis CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


352 


7Stezede vp a leoun fro his couche, the 
reuere! of Jentilis hymself* shal reren!. 
He wente out fro his place, that he pute 
thi lond ‘in to™ wildernesse; thi citees 
shul be wastid, abidende stille withoute 
sdwellere. Vp on this gird 3ou aboute 
with heires; weileth, and 3ellith, for 
turned awei is not the wrathe of the 
9 wodnesse of the Lord fro 30u°. And it 
shal be, in that dai, seith the Lord, per- 
shen shal the herte of the king, and the 
herte of princes; and become stoneid shul 
the prestis, and profetes in mynde shul 
10be disturbid. And I seide, Allas! allas! 
allas! Lord God; thanne whether hast 
thou not bigilid this puple and Jerusa- 
lem, seiende,-Pes shal be to 30u, and lo! 
iiful comen is swerd vn to the soule? In 
that tyme shal be seid to this puple and 
to Jerusalem, Brennende wynde in the 
weies that ben in desert, weies of thie 
do3ter of my puple, not to wynewen, and 
izto purgen. A spirit ful of these shal 
come to me; and now Y, but I shal speke 
ismy domes with them. Lo! as a° cloude 
he shal stejen vp, and as tempest his 
chares ; swiftere than eglis his hors ; wo 
14to vs, for wastid wee ben. Wash fro 
malice thin herte, thou Jerusalem, that 
thou be mad saaf. Hou longe shuln 
\Sabyde in thee no3ous tho3tes? The vois 
forsothe of the tellende fro Dan, and of 
the knowen makende the mawmet fro 
16the hil of Effraym. Stereth, 3ee Jentiles; 
lo! herd it is in Jerusalem keperes to 
come fro a ferr lond, and to 3yue vp on 
17 the cites of Juda ther vois?. As keperes 
of feeldis thei ben mad vpon it in cum- 
pas; for me to wrathe it terrede, seith 
‘the Lord. Thi weies and thi tho3tus 
diden to thee these thingus; this thi ma- 
lice for bitter, for it touchede thin herte. 
19 My wombe I ake, my wombe I ake; the 
wittus of myn herte ben disturbid in me. 
I shal not be stille, for the vois of the 


i yener, or a prest takere G sec. m. 


k him e pr. 
9Om. Eprom. P voicis K pr. m. 


b ynto 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


-H. larere 4EGH, 


IV. 7—19. 


bere of folkis schal reise hym silf. He is 
goon out of his place, to sette thi lond in 
to wildirnesse; thi citees schulen be dis- 
tried, abidynge stille with out dwellere. 
On this thing girde 30u with heiris;s 
weile 3e, and 3elle, for the wraththe of the 
strong veniaunce of the Lord is not turned 
awei fro 30u. And it schal be, in that dai,9 
seith the Lord, the herte of the king schal 
perische, and the herte of princis; and the 
prestis schulen wondre, and the prophetis 
schulen be astonyed. And Y seide, Alas !10 
alas! alas! Lord God; therfor whether 
thou hast disseyued this puple and Jeru- 
salem, seiynge, Pees scha] be to 3ou, and 
lo! a swerd is comun ‘til to” the soule ? 
In that tyme it schal be seide to this pu-1! 
ple and to Jerusalem, A breunynge wynd 
jn the weies that ben in desert, ben the 
weies of the dou3tir of my puple, not to 
wyndewe’, and not to purge. A spirit !2 
ful of hem schal come to me; and now Y, 
but Y schal speke my domes with hem. 
Lo! he schal stie as a cloude, and hise1s3 
charis as a tempest; hise horsis ben 
swifter than eglis; wo to vs, for we ben 
distried. Thou Jerusalem, waische thin 14 
herte fro malice, that thou be maad saaf. 
Hou long schulen_ noiful thou3tis dwelle 
in thee? For whi the vois of a tellereis 
fro Dan, and makynge knowun an idol 
fro the hil of Effraym. Reise, 3e folkis; 16 
lo! it is herd in Jerusalein that keperis 
ben comun fro a fer lond, and 3yuen her 
vois on the citees of Juda. As the keperis 17 
of feeldis thei ben maad on it in cumpas ; 
for it stiride me to wrathfulnesse, seith 
the Lord. Thi weyes and thi thou3tis1s 
han maad this to thee; this malice of thee, 
for i¢ is bittir, for it touchide thin herte. 
Mi wombe akith, my wombe akith; the19 
wittis of myn herte ben disturblid in me. 
Y schal not be stille, for my soule herde 
the vois of a trumpe, the cry of batel. 
Sorewe is clepid on sorewe, and al the20 


mOm,c prem. PP vs E pr.m. 


€ wynewe I. 


IV. 20—31. 


trumpe herde my soule, cry of the bataile. 
20 To-treding vp on to-treding is clepid, and 
wastid is al erthe; feerli ben wastid my 
21tabernacles, sodeynly my skynnes. Hou 
longe shal I seen a1 man fleende, heren 
22Shal Y the vois of the trumpe? For my 
foo] puple me kne3 not; vnwise sonus 
thei ben, and couwardus; wise thei ben 
that thei do eueles, wel forsothe do thei 
23kunne not. I beheeld the erthe, and lo! 
voide it was, and of no3t; and heuenus, 
2tand ther was not 1i3t in them. I sa3 
mounteynes, and lo! thei weren moued, 
23 and alle hillis ben disturbid. Y beheeld, 
and ther was not a man, and eche foul 
260f heuene wente awey. I beheeld, and 
lo! Carmel desert, and alle hys cites ben 
destrozed fro the face of the Lord, and 
fro the face of the wrathe of his wodnes. 
27 These thingus forsothe seith the Lord, 
Desert shal ben eche Jond, but nerthe- 
2slatere ful ending Y shal not do. Weile 
shal erthe, and sorewen shul heuenus fro 
aboue, for thi that Y spac; I tho3te, and 
it otho3te not me, ne Y turned awei fro 
29it. Fro the vois of the horse man, and of 
the sendende an arwe flei3 al the cyte; 
thei wenten in hard thingus, and ste3eden 
vp on roches; alle the chef cites ben for- 
saken, and dwellith not in them a man. 
30 Thou forsothe wastid, what shalt thou 
do? Whan thon shalt clothe thee with 
rede’ sile, whan thou shalt be enourned 
with the goldene broche*, and schalt 
peynte thin e3en with strumpetes oyne- 
ment, in veyn thon ‘shalt ben" araied ; 
dispiside thee han thi loueres, thi lif thei 
31shul sechen. A vois forsothe as of the 
trauailende with child JI herde, an- 
gitysshes as of the child berere; vois of 
the do3ter of Syon among men diende, 
and strecchende out ther hondus ; Wo to 
me, for failide my lif for the slayne. 


JEREMIAH. 


353 


lond is distried ; my tabernaclis ben wastid 
sudeynli, my skynnes ben wastid sudeynii. 
Hou longe schal Y se hem that fleen, schal 21 
Y here the vois of-a clarioun? For my 22 
fonned puple knew not me; thei ben vn- 
wise sones, and cowardis; thei ben wise 
to do yuels, but thei kouden* not do® wel. 
Y bihelde the Jond, and lo! it was void,es 
and nou3t; and Y bihelde heuenes, and no 
1i3t was’ in tho’. Y si3 munteyns, and 24 
lo! thoi weren mouyd, and all litle hillis 
weren distnurblid. Y lokide, and no manos 
was‘, and ech brid of henene was gon 
awey. Y bihelde, and lo! Carmele is2« 
forsakun, and alle citees therof ben dis- 
tried fro the face of the Lord, and fro the 
face of the ire of his strong veniaunce. 
For the Lord seith these thingis, Al the 27 
lond schal be forsakun, but netheles Y 
schal not make an endyng. The erthe2s 
schal mourne, and heuenys aboue schulen 
make sorewe, for that Y spak; Y thou3te, 
and it repentide not me, nether Y am 
turned awei fro it. Ech citee fledde fro29 
the vois of a! kny3t, and of a™ man schet- 
ynge" an arowe; thei entriden in to hard 
places, and stieden in to roochis of stoon ; 
alle citees ben forsakun, and no man 
dwellith in tho®, But what schalt thou30 
‘destried do? ? Whanne thou schalt clothe 
thee with reed scarlet, whanne thou schalt 
be ourned with a goldun broche, and 
schalt anoynte thin i3en with wommans 


* oynement, thou schalt be araied in veyn; 


thi louyeris han dispisid thee, thei schu- 
len seke thi soule. For Y herd a voissi 
as of a womman trauelynge of child, the 
angwischis as‘ of aT woman childynge; 
the vois of the dou3ter of Sion among hem 
that dien, and spreden abrood her hondis; 
Wo to me, for my soule failide for hem 
that ben slayn. 


4Om. £ prom. * flawme cpr.m. £ pr,m. ®brochesc. ¢ Om. c prem, Eprom. Wart E pr.m, 
dknowent. ¢todor ftherwasi. &hemyn. bsaujer passim. ithei n.  * ther wast. 
10m.c. ™Om.r. "sendinge chrGuikmNPQRsUVX. O%hemN.  Pdistriethon. 4 Om. Kx. 


F Om. CEFGHMNPQSUV, 
VOL. III, 


ZZ 


354 JEREMIAH. 


CAP. V. 


1 Goth aboute the weies of Jerusalem, 
and looketh, and beholdeth, and secheth 
in his stretes, whether 3ee fynde a man 
doende dom, and sechende feith; and 
2merciful Y shal be to hem. That if also, 
The Lord lyueth, thei ‘shul sey", and 
3that falsly thei shuln swern. Lord, thin 
e3en biholden feith; thou hast smyte them, 
and thei soreweden not; thou to-treede 
them, and thei forsoken to taken disci- 
pline; thei inwardli hardeden ther faces 
vp on the ston, and wolden not be turned 
4a3een. I forsothe seid, Par auenture pore 
men thei ben, and foolis, vynknowende the 
weie of the Lord, the’ dom of ther God. 
5I shal go therfor to the cheef men, and 
speke to them; thei forsothe knewen the 
weie of the Lord, and the dom of ther 
God. And lo! more these togidere al to- 
breeken the 30c, and brosten out the 
6bondis. Therfore hath smyte them a 
leoun of *” the wode; a wif at euen wast- 
ede them, a parde wakende vp on the 
cites of them. Eche that shal gon out 
of them, shal be take; for multeplied ben 
the lawe brekyngus of them, coumfortid 
7ben™ the turnyngus* awei of them. Vp 
on what thing to thee plesid shal Y** 
moun be? Thi sonus forsoken me, and 
swern in tho thingus that ben not godis. 
I fulfilde them, and thei diden fornyca- 
cioun, and in the hous of the strumpet 
8thei diden leccherie. Horses loueres in to 
wymmen, and courseres thei ben mad ; 
eche to the wif of his nez3hebore ney3ede. 
9 Whether vp on these thingus Y shal not’ 
visite, seith the Lord, and in such a fole 
of kinde shal not be vengid my soule ? 
10 Stezeth vp his wallis, and seatereth; ful 
wasting forsothe wileth not do. Doth 
awei his forthgetingus, for thei ben not 
11 the Lordis. Thur3 lawe breking forsothe 
‘tresspasede ajen me*’ the hous of Irael 


Vand the z. 
y¥ lawe brac ajen £ pr. m. 


u seyden E£ pr.m. 
y Om. kK pr.m. 


8 wolden not 1. 


vw fro Epr.m. 


ton xn, 


V. Imei. 


CAR ave 


Cumpasse 3e the weies of Jerusalem, | 
and Joke, and biholde 3e, and seke 3e in 
the stretis therof, whether 3e fynden a 
man doynge doom, and sekynge feith ; 
and Y schal be merciful to hem. That if2 
also thei seien, The Lord lyueth, 3he, thei 
schulen swere this falsli. Lord, thin iz3en3 
biholden feith ; thou hast smyte hem, and 
thei maden not sorewe ; thou hast al to- 
broke hem, and thei forsoken to take 
chastisyng ; thei maden her faces hardere 
than a stoon, and nolden® turne ajen. 
Forsothe Y seide, In hap thei ben pores 
men, and foolis, that knowen not the weie 
of the Lord, and the doom of her God. 
Therfor Y schal go to the principal men, and 5 
Y schal speke to hem; for thei knewen the 
weie of the Lord, and the doom of her God. 
And lo! thei han more broke togidere the 
3ok, aud han broke boondis. Therfor ac 
Houn of the wode smoot hem ; a wolf at 
euentid wastide hem, a parde wakynge 
on the citees of hem. Ech iman that goith 
out of hem, schal be takun; for the tres- 
passyngis of hem ben multiplied, the 
turnyngis awei of hem ben coumfortid. 
On what thing mai Y be merciful to thee?7 
Thi sones han forsake me, and sweren bi 
hem that ben not goddis. Y fillide hem, 
and thei diden auowtrie, and in the hous 
of an hoore thei diden letcherie. Theis 


ben maad horsis, and stalouns, louyeris to 


wymmen ; ech man neijede to the wijf of _ 
his nei3bore. Whether Y schal not visite 
on these thingis, seith the Lord, and 
schal not my soule take veniaunce int 
siche a folk? Stye 3e on" the wallis ther-19 
of, and distrie 3e; but nyle 3e make an 
endyng. Do 3e awei the siouns therof, 
for thei ben not seruauntis of the Lord. 
For whi the hous of Israel and the hous1 
of Juda hath trespassid bi trespassyng 
ajens me, seith the Lord; thei denyeden 12 
whem acuK. 


*turnynge 4. ** Om. E prim, 


Uupont. 


V. 12-23. 


and the hous of Juda, seith the Lord; 
12thei denyeden ‘the Lord’, and seiden, It 
is not he, nether shal come vp on vs 
euel; swerd and hunger wee shul not see. 
13 The profetus speeken in to the wind, and 
answere was not in them; these thingus 
4 therfore out come shul tothem. These 
thingus seith the Lord God of ostis, For 
3ee speeken this wrd, lo! Y 3yue my 
wrdus in thi mouth in to fyr, and this 
puple in to trees, and it shal deuonre 
isthem. Lo! Y shal bringe to vp on 30u”” 
a fole of kinde fro aferr, of the hous of 
Irae], seith the Lord; a stalwrthe folc 
of kinde, an old fole of kinde, a fole of 
kinde, whos tunge thou shalt vnknowe?, 
iéne vnderstonde what it speke. His 
arewe cas as a sepulcre opene’; alle stronge 
izmen. And it shal ete thi cornes, and 
thi bred deuoure, thi sonus and thi do3tris; 
it shal ete thi floc, and thi droues, and 
shal eten thi vyne, and thi fige tree; and 
to-brose thi strengthid cites, in whiche 
1sthou hast trost, with swerd. Nerthela- 
tere in tho dajes, seith the Lord, Y shal 
i9not make 3o0u in to ful ending. That if 
3ee shul seye, Whi to vs dide the Lord 
oure God alle these thingus? thou shalt 
sei to them, As 3ee han forsake mee, aud 
seruede to an alien god in 3our lond, so 
3ee shul serue to alien goddis in the lond 
z0not 3oure. Telleth this to the hous of 
Jacob, and herd maketh in Juda, seiende, 
21 Here, thou fool puple, that hast not herte; 
that hauende e3en, 3ee seen not, and eres, 
22and herein not. Me therfor 3ee shul not 
drede, seith the Lord, and fro my face 
not sorewen? Which ‘Y putte4 grauel 
terme to the se, euere durende _heste, 
that it shal not passe; and thei shul be 
to-moued, and thei shul not moun; and 
to-swelle shul his flodis, and shul not 
23 passen it. ‘To this puple forsothe is mad 
an herte mystrowende and oute sharp- 
ende; thei wente bacward, and 3iden 


ZmeEprm. 2% hem c et £ prim. 
G see.m. 4 puttyng G prom. Hn. 


yOm. i. 


JEREMIAH. 


@ not knowen kK. 


w Om. crema. 


355 


the Lord, and seiden, He is not, nether 
yuel schal come on vs; we schulen not se . 
swerd and hungur. The profetis spaken 13 
ajeus the wynd, and noon answer was in 
hem; therfor these thingis schulen come 
to hem. The Lord God of oostis seith 14 
these thingis, For 3e spaken this word, 
lo! Y 3yue my wordis in thi mouth in to 
fier, and this puple in to trees, and it 
schal deuoure hem. Lo! thou hous ofts 
Israel, seith the Lord, Y schal brynge on 
jou a folk fro fer; a strong folk, an eeld 
folk, ‘a folkY whos langage thou schalt not 
knowe, nether schalt vndurstonde what it 
spekith. The arowe caas therof is as” 16 
an opyn sepulcre; alle ben stronge men. 
And it schal ete thi cornes, and it schal17 
denoure thi breed, thi sones and_ thi 
dou3tris; it schal ete thi flok, and thi 
droues, it schal ete also thi vyner, and thi 
fige tre; and it schal al to-breke thi 
stronge citees bi* swerd, in whiche thou 
hast trist. Netheles in tho daies, seith 18 
the Lord, Y schal not make 3ou in to 
endyng. That if 3e seien, Whi hath oure 19 
Lord God do alle these thingis to vs? 
thou schalt seie to hem, As 3e forsoken 
me, and serueden an alien god in 3oure 
lond, so 3e schulen serue alien goddis in a 
lond not 3oure. ‘Telle 3e this to the hous 20 
of Jacob, and make 3e herd in Juda, and 
seie 3e, Here, thou fonned puple, that hast 21 
noou herte; whiche han ijen, and seen 
not, and eeris, and heren not. Therfor 22 
schulen not 3e drede me, seith the Lord, 
and schulen not 3e make sorewe for my 
face? Whiche haue set grauel aY terme, 
ether ende, to the see, an euerlastynge 
comaundement, whiche it schal not passe ; 
and the wawis therof schulen be mouyd, 
and schulen not haue power ; aud schulen 
wexe greet, and schulen not passe it. 
Forsothe an herte vnbileueful and ter- 23 
rynge to wraththe is naad to this puple; 
thei departiden, and 3eden awei, and thei 24 


b openynge G See. Mm. ¢ For c prem. E pr. mm. 


xwith1. Yéobeat. 


Lo? 


356 


24awei, and seiden not in ther herte, Drede - 


wee the Lord oure God, that 3yueth to 
vs tymeli rein, and late comende in his 
cesoun, plentenesse of 3eres rip comende 
2sto vs. Oure wickenesses* boweden doun 


these thingus, and oure synnes defend- 


2¢eden good fro vs. For ther ben founden 
in my puple vnpitous men, waitende as 


fouleres, grenes puttende, and feet gyn-’ 


27nes, to ben ca3t men. As af pit falle ful 
of briddes, so the hous of hem ful of 
treccherie. Therfore thei ben imagnefied, 

2sand richid inwardli, grecid, and fattid, 
and thei passeden biside ny wrdus alther 
werst; the cause of the widewe thei dem- 
eden not, the cause of the faderles child 
ri3t renleden not, and the dom of pore 

29men demeden not. Whether vp on these 
thingus I shal not visiten, seith the Lord, 
or ‘vp on& such maner fole shal not be 

3ovengid my soule? Stoneyng and mer- 

siueiles ben mad in the erthe; profetis 
profecieden lesing, and" prestus flappeden 
for ioje with ther hondus, and my puple 
louede suche thingus. What thanne shal 
ben don in his laste ? 


CAP. V1. 


1 Beth couimfortid, 3ee sonus of Benia- 
myn, in the myddil of Jerusalem, and 
in Thecua trumpeth with a trumpe, and 
vp on Bethacharein rereth a baner; for 
euel is seen fro the north, and gret to- 

2treding. To a fair womman and a deli- 

3cat Y licned the do3ter of Sion. To hir 
shul come shepperdis and the flockis of 
them; thei ficcheden in it tentus in enuy- 
roun; feden shal eche them, that vnder 

this hond ben. Halewith vp on hir a 
bataile. Riseth, and ste3e wee vp in the 
myddai. Wo to 3ou, for doun bowide 
the dai, for lengere ben mad ‘shadewes 

sthan toeuen. Riseth, and steje wee vp 
in the ny3t, and to-scatere wee ther 

éhouses. For these thingus seith the Lord 


e wickidnessis aGik. 


z ther. 


JEREMIAH. 


f Om. £ prom. K. 


V. 24——VI. 6. 


seiden not in her herte, Drede we oure 
Lord God, that 3iueth to vs reyn tymeful, 
and lateful in his tyme; that kepith to vs 
the plente of heruest of the 3eer. 3oure25 
wickidnessis diden awei these thingis, and 
joure synnes forbediden good fro jou. For 26 
ther ben foundun in my puple wickid 
men, settynge tresoun, as fouleres settynge 
snaris and trappis, to take men. As a27 
net, ether a trap, ful of briddis, so the 
housis of hem ben ful of gile. Therfor 
thei ben magnefied, and maad riche, maad 28 
fat with ynne, and maad fat with out- 
forth, and thei passiden worst my wordis; 
thei demyden not a? cause of a widewe, 
thei dressiden not the cause of a fadirles 
child, and thei demyden not the doom of 
pore men. Whether Y schal not visite 29 
on these thingis, seith the Lord, ether 
schal not my soule take veniaunce on sich 

a folk? Wondur and inerueilouse thingis 30 
ben maad in the lond; profetis profesi-3: 
eden leesyng, and prestis ioieden with her 
hondis, and iny puple louyde siche thingis. 
What therfor schal be don in the laste 
thing therof ? 


CAP. VI. 


Sones of Beniamyn, be 3e coumfortid in 
the myddil of Jerusalem, and make 3e 
noise with a clarioun in Thecua, and reise 
3e a baner on Bethecarem; for whi yuel 
and greet sorewe is seyn fro the north. 
Y haue licned the dou3tir of Sion to ae 
fair womman and delicat. Scheepherdis3 
and her flockis schulen come to it; thei 
han pi3t teutis in it in cumpas; ech man 
schal feede hem, that ben vndur his hond. 
Halewe 3e batel on it. Rise 3e togidire, 4 
and stie we in myddai. Wo to vs, for the 
dai is* bowid doun, for shadewis ben 
maad lengere in the euentid. Rise 3e,5 
and stie we in the ni3t, and distry we 
the housis therof. For the Lord of oostis¢é 
seith these thingis, Kitte 3e doun the tre 


Sona. hOm. & prom 


8 hath CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


_ VI. 7—16. 


of ostus, Hewith ‘tree of hir', and delueth 
aboute Jerusalem an erthe hilloc; this is 
the cite of visitacioun; eche false* cha- 
7lenge in his myddel. As thanne cold 
maketh the cisterne his watir, so cold 
she hath mad! hir malice; wickenesse™ 
and wastyte" shal ben herd? in hir befor 
sime euermor, infirmyte and wounde. Be 
ta3t, Jerusalem, lest par auenture go awey 
my soule fro thee; lest par auenture I sette 
g9thee desert, a lond yndwellable. These 
thingus seith the Lord of ostus, Vuto the 
cluster braunch thei shul gedere?, thei 
shul gedere as in a vyne3erd! the relikes 
cf Irael; conuerte thin hond, as a grape 
10kuttere to a basket. To whom shal Y 
speke, and whom shal Y witnessen, that 
he’ here? Lo! vucireumcidid the eres 
of hem, and heren thei moun not; lo! 
the wrd of the Lord don isto them in 
to repref, and thei shuln not taken it. 
11 Therfore of the wodnesse of the Lord Y 
am ful,and Y trauailede sustenende. Heeld 
out wodnesse® vp on the litil child with- 
oute forth, and vp on the counseil of 
junge men togidere; a man forsothe with 
the wif shal be ca3t, and the olde with the 
i2fnl of dajes. And ‘passe shul' the houses 
of them to othere men", feldis and wyues 
togidere; for I shal streeche myn hond vp 
on men dwellende the loud, setth the Lord. 
13 Fro the lasse forsothe vnto the more, alle 
to auarice studien; and fro the profete vn- 
14 to the prest, alle don treccherie’. And thei 
eureden, ‘or heliden”, the to-treding of the 
do3ter of my puple with shenshipe, seiende, 
15 Pes, pes, and ther was not pes. Thei ben 
confoundid, for abhoniy nacioun thei didyn; 
but more with confusioun thei ben not 
confoundid, and shamen thei kouthen not. 
Wherfore thei shul falle among the men 
fallende ; in tyme of ther visitacioun thei 
isshul falle togidere, seith the Lord. These 
thingus seith the Lord, Stondeth vp on 


I ther tree z prom. k Om. c prim. £ prom. 
cpr.m. hid x. P gederen eftsone £ pr. ia. 
t thei shul passe e pr.m. YOm. E pr.m. 


Ydon E pr.m. 
a vyne c pr.m. £ prem. 
v letcherie 4. 


JEREMIAH. 357 


therof, and schede 3e erthe aboute Jeru- 
salem; this is the citee of visitacioun; al ° 
fals caleng 7s in the myddis therof. As7 
a cisterne makith his water ecoold, so it 
made his malice coold; wickidnesse and 
distriyng schal euer be herd ther ynne 
bifore me, sikenesse and wounde. Jeru-s 
salem, be thou tau3t, lest perauenture my 
soule go awei fro thee; lest perauen- 
ture Y sette thee forsakun, a loond vnha- 
bitable. The Lord of oostis seith theses 
thingis, Thei schulen gadere til to a ra- 
cyn, thei schulen gadere the remenauntis 
of Israel as in a vyner; turne thin hond, 
as a gaderer of grapis to the baseat. To10 
whom schal Y speke, and to whom schal 
Y seie witnessing, that he here? Lo! the 
eeris of hem den vncircumceidid, and thei 
moun not here; lo! the word of the Lord 
is maad to hem in to dispit, and thei 
schulen not resseiue it. Therfor Y amu 
ful of the strong veniaunce® of the Lord, 
and Y trauelide suffrynge. Schede thou 
out on” a litil child with outforth, and on 
the counsel of 3onge men togidere; for a 
man with his wijf schal be takun, and an 
eeld man-with him that is ful of daies. 
And the housis of hem, the feeldis and iz 
wyues¢ togidere, schulen go to othere men; 
for Y schal stretche forth myn hond on 
the dwelleris of the lond, seith the Lord. 
For fro the lesse ‘til to’ the grettere, alle 13 
studien to auerise; and alle doon gile, fro 
the profete ‘til to’ the preest. And theit 
heeliden the sorewe of the dou3ter of my 
puple with yuel fame, seiynge, Pees, pees, 
and no pees was. Thei ben schent, that is 
diden abhomynacioun ; 3he, rathere thei 
weren not schent bi confusioun, and thei 
kouden not be aschamed. Wherfor thei 
schulen falle doun among hem that schu- 
len falle doun; thei schulen falle doun in 
the tyme of her visitacioun, seith the Lord. 
The Lord seith these thingis, Stonde 3e16 


m wickidnes AGHK. 
t she E pr.m. 
wOm. ce pr.m. 


n wastynesse 
8 Om. £ pr.m. 


8 wodenesse A sec. m. marg. b ventaunce on 1 marg. c vynes A pr. m. the vines EGP. d vuto 1. 


358 


weies, and seeth, and asketh of the olde 
pathis, what is the goode weie ; and goth 
in it, and 3ee shul fynde refreshinge to 
3oure soules. And thei seiden, Wee shul 
iznot go. And Y sette vp on 30u tooteres, 
and seide, Hereth the vois of the trumpe. 
And thei seiden, Wee shuln not heren. 
18 Therfore hereth*, 3ee fole of kinde, and 
knowith, jee congregacioun, hou grete 
19thingus Y shal do to them. Here, thou 
erthe, lo! Y shal bringe to eueles yp on 
this puple, frut of ther’ tho3tus; for my 
wrdus thei herden not, and my lawe thei 
20threwen aferr. Wherto to me cens of 
Saba 3ee bringen, and the spices calamy* 
swote smellende fro a ferr lond? 3oure 
brente sacrifises ben not acceptid, 3oure 
victorye sacrifises pleseden not to me. 
21Therfore these thinges seith the Lord 
God, Lo! Y shal 3yue in to this puple 
fallyngus, and shul falle in them faderes 
and sonus togidere, ne3hebore and cosyn, 
zzand pershen. These thingus seith the 
Lord God, Lo! the puple cam from the 
lond of the north, and a gret fole of 
kinde shal togidere rise fro the costes of 
23 the lond. Arwe and sheld it shal take; 
cruel it is, and it shal not han® mercy ; 
his vois as the se shal sowne, and vp on 
hors stejen vp thei shul beforn mad 
redy as a man to bataile ajen thee, thou 
24do3ter of Sion. Wee han herd the loes? 
of it, losid atwynne ben oure hondus ; 
tribulacioun ca3te vs, sorewis as° the tra- 
2suailende with childe. Wileth not gon 
out to’ the feeldis, and in weie goth not, 
for the swerd of the enemy, the ferd® of 
26the enemy in enuyroun. Thou do3tir of 
my puple, be thou gird with an heire, 
and to-sprengd with asken; weilende of 
the onli geten mac to thee bitter morn- 
yng, for feerli shal come the wastere vp 
270n vs. A stalwrthe prouere Y 3af thee 
in my puple, and thou shalt wite, and 


y his 4EGHK. 
Cand K. 


x Om. Ez prem. 


aha kx. » vois 4. 4 Om. £ pr. m. 


© aspieris, ether bikolderis CHFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 
'gotun rt. ™ to beat. 


JEREMIAH. 


VI. 17-—27. 


on weies, and se je, and axe 3e of elde 
pathis, which is the good weie; and go 3e 
ther ynne, and 3e schulen fynde refreisch- 
yng to joure soulis. And thei seiden, We 
schulen not go. And Y ordeynede aspi-17 
eris® on 30u, and Y seide, Here 3e the vois 
of a trumpe. And thei seiden, We schulen 
not here. Therfor, hethene men, here 3e,18 
and, thou congregacioun, knowe, hou grete 
thingis Y schal do to hem. ‘Thou: erthe, 19 
here, lo! Y schal brynge yuels on this 
puple, the fruit of her thou;tis; for thei 
herden not my wordis, and castiden awei 
my lawe. Wherto bryngen 3e to me en-20 
cense fro Saba, and a tre of spicerie 
smellynge swetli fro a fer lond? 3oure 
brent sacrifices ben not acceptid, and 3oure 
slayn sacrifices plesiden not me. Therfor21 
the Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! Y 
schal 3yue fallyngis in to this puple, and 
fadris and sones togidere, a nei3bore and 
kynesman, schulen falle in. hem, and schu- 
len perische. The Lord God seith these 22 
thingis, Lo! a puple cometh fro the lond 
of the north®, and a greet folk schal rise 
togidere fro the endis of erthe. It schal23 
take an® arowe and scheld; it is cruel, and 
schal not haue merci; the vois therof schal 
sowne as the! see, and thei maad redi as a 
man to batel schulen stie on horsis a3ens 
thee, thou dou3ter of Sion. We herden 24 
the fame therof, oure hondis ben ‘aclum- 
sid‘; tribulacioun hath take vs, sorewis 
han take vs as a womman trauelinge of 
child. Nyle 3e go out to the feeldis, and 25 
go 3e not in the weie, for the swerd of the 
enemye, drede in cumpas. The dou3tir of 26 
my puple, be thou gird with heire, and be 
thou spreynt togidere with aische; make 
to thee mourenyng of oon aloone gendrid! 
sone, a bitter weilyng, for whi a wastere _ 
schal come sodenli on 30u. I 3af thee a™ 27 
strong preuere in my puple, and thou 
schalt knowe, and preue the weie of hem. 


2 calamimi 4. calam £ pr.m.uH. calamyny 6 sep. ras. calaminum Kk, 
€ feer 4G sec. m. fer E sec.m. G pr, m. H. 


g Lord 1. bhOm. 1 ian. k acumblid rp, 


VI. 28—VIL. 11. 


2spreue the weie of them. Alle these 
princes of men boweden‘ doun goende 
gilendely, bras® and yren; alle ben shent. 
20 Failede the meltende” vessel, in fyr 
wastid is the led, in veyn meltide togi- 
dere the 3eetere; forsothe the malices of 
3othem ben not wastid. Repreued siluer 
clepeth hem, for the Lord thre3 hem 
aferr. 
CAP. VII. 
1 The wrd that is mad to Jeremye of 
2the Lord, seiende, Stond in the 3ate of 
the hous of the Lord, and preche there 
this wrd, and sey, Hereth the wrd of 
the Lord, al Juda, that gou in thur3 
these 3atus, that 3ee honoure the Lord. 
3These thingus seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, Good maketh joure weies, 
and 5o0ure studies, aud I shal dwelle with 
4300 in this place. Wileth not trosten in 
wrdis of lesyng, seiende, Temple of the 
Lord, temple of the Lord, temple of the 
5 Lord is. For if jee ‘wil euene ri3t reulen' 
3oure weies, and 3oure studies; if 3ee do* 
6dom betwe! man and his ne3hebore; to 
the comeling, and to the faderles child, 
and to the widewe 3ee do not wrong™ 
chaleng ; ne ynnocent blod 3e sheden out 
in this place, and after aliene goddis 3ee 
7g0 not out, in to euel to 30u self, Y shal 
dwelle with 3ou in this place, in the lond 
that Y 3af to 30ure faders, fro the world 
sin to the world. Lo! 3ee trosten to 30u 
in wrdus of lesing, that shul not profite 
gto 30u; to steln, to slen, to don auoutrie, 
to swern liendely, to ‘offre to Baalym, 
and to gon after aliene godus, whom 3ee 
10knowe not. And 3ee camen, and stoden 
bifor me in this hous, in whiche is in- 
wardly clepid my name ; and 5ee seiden, 
-Delyuered wee ben, for thi that wee ‘han 
11do® alle these abhominaciouns. Whether 
thanne a spelunke, or denne°, of theues mad 
is this hous, in whiche is inwardly clepid 


f bouwen 4. boowen E sec. m. bowynge Gu. 
ing E sec. m. 
sbul do Gu. 
°Om. cE pr.'m. 


1 betwix 4cuK. betwen E. 


n bely a sec. m. lesu G. belw Kupv. belu, ether blower x sec. m. marg. 


JEREMIAH. 


& as brasse AGHK. 
i wel euene riz3t rewlen c ef £ pr.m. schul blesse z sec. m. AGUK. 
m Om. ¢ pr.m. E prem. 


359 


Alle these princis bowynge awei, goynge 28 
gilefuli, ben metal and irun; alle ben cor- 
rupt. The belu" failide, leed is waastid in 29 
the fier, the wellere wellide in veyn; for 
the malices of hem ben not wastid. Clepe 30 
3e hem repreuable siluer, for the Lord 
hath cast hem awei. 


CAP. VII. 


The word that was maad of the Lord: 
to Jeremye, and seide, Stonde thou in thee 
3ate of the hous of the Lord, and preche 
there this word, and seie, Al Juda, that 
entren bi these 3atis for to worschipe the 
Lord, here 3e the word of the Lord. Thes 
Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith these 
thingis, Make 3e good joure weies, and 
joure studies, and Y schal dwelle with 3o0u 
in this place. Nyle 3e triste in the wordis4 
of leesyng, and seie, The temple of the 
Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple 
of the Lord is. For if 3e blessen joures 
weies, and 3o0ur studies; if 3e doon doom 
bitwixe a man and his nei3bore; if je6 
maken not fals caleng to a comelyng, aud 
to a fadirles child, and to a widewe; ne- 
ther scheden out innocent blood in this 
place, and goen not after alien goddis, in 
to yuel to 30u° silf, Y schal dwelle with? 
3ou in this place, in the lond which Y 3af . 
to j3oure fadris, fro the world and til in to 
the world. Lo! je trusten to 3ou in thes 
wordis of leesyng, that shulen not profite to 
30u; to stele, to sle, to do auowtrie, to swere9 
falsli, to make sacrifice to Baalym, and to 
go aftir alien goddys, whiche 3e knowen 
not. And 3e camen, and stoden bifor me 10 
in this hous, in which my name is clepid 
to help; and 3e seiden, We ben delyuered, 
for we han do alle these abhomynaciouns. 
Whether therfor this hous, wherynne my 1 
name is clepid to help bifore joure izen, is 
maad a denne of theuest ? I, Y am, Y si3, 


h belie melting £ pr.m. melt- 
k schulde do £ sec. m. 
® alle shulde do & pr. m- 


© 3our EP. 


+ Thes synnes 
shewen, that in 
veyn thei had- 
den trist in the 
temple. What 
protitith it to 
entre booldli 
into Goddis 
hous, and 
stonde with 
reysid nol, and 
to haue not 
oonly the herte 
defoulid, but 
also the hondis? 
As if he seide, 
It profitith no- 
thing. No man 
doutith, that 
this bifallith 
goosdi in the 
chirche,whanne 
men biholden 
the prosperite 
of present 
tyme, and 
amenden not 
her synnes, but 
thei gessen that 
God seeth not, 
for veniaunce 
sueth not 
anoon 3 and 
thei breken out 
in to so greet 
woodnesse, that 
thei boosten 
hem silf dely- 
uerid, that han 
go awei fro the 
verie worship- 
ing of God. 
The glose here. 
V lext. 


360 


my name in 3oure ejen? I, YP am, Y sa3, . 


izseith the Lord. Goth to my place in 
Silo, wher dwellide my name fro the bi- 
gynnyng, and seeth what J dide to it, for 
13the malice of my puple Irael. And now, 
for 3ee han don alle these werkis, seith 
the Lord, and Y spac to 3ou, erly risende, 
and spekende, and 3ee herden not, and Y 
uclepede 30u, and 3ee answerden not; Y 
shal do to this hous, in whiche is clepid 
my name, and4 in whiche™ 3ee han trost, 
and to the place that Y 3af to 30w and to 
1s30ure faders, as Y dide to Silo. And Y* 
shal throwe 30u aferr fro my face, as Y 
thre3 aferr alle 3oure brethern, alt the sed 
icof Effraym. Thou" thanne wile thou not 
pre3e for this puple, ne take thou to for 
them preising and orisoun; and ne with- 
stonde thou to me, for Y shal not here 
17thee. Whether seest thou not, what these 
don in the cites of Juda, and in the 
1sstretes of Jerusalem? Sonus gederen 
trees, and faders brennen vp fyr; and 
wymmen sprengen togidere tal3, that 
thei make sweete cakis to the quen of 
heuene, and sacrifien to aliene goddis, 
i9and me to wrathe thei terre’Y. Whether 
me to wrathe thei terre“? seith the 
Lord; whether not themself in* the 
20 confusioun of ther chere? Therfore these 
thingus seith the Lord God, Lo! my 
wodnes and myn indignacioun is molten 
vp on thys place, vp on the wallis, and 
vp on the bestes, and vp on the tree of 
the regioun, and vp on the frutus of the 
erthe; and it shal be tend vp, and not 
2tbeY quenchid. These thingus seith the 
Lord of ostes, God of Irael, 3oure brent 
sacrifises addeth to 3oure victorie sacri- 
22 fises, and eteth flesh. For Y spac not 
with 3oure faders, and I comaundide not 
to them, in the dai that I ladde them out 
fro the lond of Egipt, of the wrd of brent 
23 sacrifises, and of victorie sacrifises. 
this wrd I comaundide to them, seiende, 
Hereth my vois, and Y shal be to 30u a 


P Om, 4 sec.m.G pr.m.H. 9Om. A. 


JEREMIAH. 


But. 


t the which «. 
VY terreden 4. Wterreden 4. *in to £ sec.m. Y Om. 4GHK. 


VII. 12—23. 


seith the Lord. Go 3e to my place in Silo, 12 
where my name dwellide at the bigyn- 
nyng, and se 3e what thingis Y dide to it, 
for the malice of my puple Israel. And 13 
now, for 3e han do alle these werkis, seith 
the Lord, and Y spak to 30u, and roos 
eerli, and Y spak, and 3e herden not, and 
Y clepide 30u, and 3e answeriden not; Y!4 
schal do to this hous, wherynne my name 
is clepid to help, and in which hous 3e 
han trist, and to the place which Y 3af to 
3ou and to 3oure fadris, as Y dide to Silo. 
And Y schal caste 3ou forth fro my face, 15 
as Y castide’ forth alle 3oure britheren, al 
the seed of Effrayn. Therfor ny] thou1é 
preie for this puple, nether take thou 
heriyng and preier for hem; and a3en- 
stonde thou not me, for Y schal not here 
thee. Whether thou seest not, what these 17 
men dou in the citees of Juda, and in the 
stretis of Jerusalem? The sones gaderen 1s 
stickis, and the fadris kyndlen a fier; and 
wymmen sprengen togidere ynnere fat- 
nesse, to make kakis to the queen of he- 
uene, to make sacrifice to alien goddis, 
and to terre me to wrathfulnesse. Whe-19 
ther thei stiren me to wrathfulnesse? seith 
the Lord; whether thei stiven not hem 
silf in to schenschip of her cheer? Ther- 20 
for the Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! 
my strong veniaunce and myn indigna- 
cioun is wellid togidere on this place, on 
men, and on beestis, and on the tree of 
the cuntrei, and on the fruitis of erthe; 
and it schal be kyndlid, and it schal not 
be quenchid. The Lord’ of oostis, God of2t 
Israel, seith these thingis, Heepe 3e 30ure 
brent sacrifices to 3oure slayn sacrifices, 
and ete 3e fleischis. For Y spak not with 22 
3oure fadris, and Y comaundide not to 
hem of the word of brent sacrifices, and 
of slayn sacrifices, in the dai in which Y 
ledde hem out of the lond of Egipt. But23 
Y comaundide this word to hem, and Y 
seide, Here 3e my vois, and Y schal be 
God to 3ou, and 3e schulen be a puple to 


$Om.e pr.m. tandalzeprm. %Om. k, 


q cast I. 


VII. 24—34. 


God, and 3ee shul be to me a puple; and 
goth in eche weie that Y comaunde to 
2430u, that it wel be to 30u. And thei 
herden not, ne boweden ther ere, but 
wenten awei in ther foule delites, and in 
shreudenes of ther euele herte ; and thei 
25ben mad bacward, and not beforn, fro 
the day that the fadris of them wenten 
out fro the lond of Egipt vn to this dai. 
And I sente to jou alle my seruauns pro- 
fetus”, bi dai risende® erli, and sendende. 
26 And thei herden not me, ne boweden in 
ther ere; but inwardli hardeden ther nol, 
27 and werse wro3ten than ther fadris. And 
thou shalt speke to them alle these wrdys, 
and thei shul not here thee; thou shalt 
clepe them, and thei shul not answern to 
28thee. And thou shalt sey to them, This 
is the? fole, that herde not the vois of the 
Lord ther God, ne resceyuede discipline ; 
feith pershede, and is taken awei fro the 
29mouth of them. Dodde thin her, and 
thro3 aferr, and in euene ri3t tac weil- 
ing; for the Lord hath throwen aferr, 
and forsaken the ieneracioun of his wod- 
zonesse. For the sonus of Juda diden euel 
in myn e3en, seith the Lord; thei set- 
teden ther offendende thingus in the hous, 
in whiche ys inwardly clepid my name, 
3ithat thei defoule® it; and thei bilden vp 
the he3e thingus of Tofeth, that is in the 
valey of the sone of Ennon, that thei 
brenne ther sones and ther do3tris with 
fyr, the whiche thingus I comaundide not, 
sene tho3te in myn herte. Therfore lo! 
da3es comen, seith the Lord, and it shal 
not be seid no mor Tofeth, and the valey 
of the sone of Ennon, but the valey of 
sla3ter; and thei shul birien in Tofeth, 
for thi that ther was not place to birie 
sa for the multitude of careynes. And ben 
sha] the moreyn of this puple in to mete 
to the foules of heuene, and to the? bestus 
of erthe; and ther shal not be that dryue 
3sawey. And to resten I shal make fro 
the chef cytes of Juda, and fro the stretes 


z and prophetis x. ® Y rysynge acu. I rising E sec.m. Va a, 


r maad CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


VOL. III. 


8 Om. Nn. 


JEREMIAH. 361 


me; and go 3e in al the weie which Y 
comaundide to 3ou, that it be wel to 30u. © 
And thei herden not, nether bowiden doun 21 
her eere, but thei 3eden in her lustis, and 
in the schrewidnesse of her yuel herte; 
and thei ben put" bihynde, and not bifore, 
fro the dai in which her fadris 3eden out 2s 
of the lond of Egipt til to this dai. And 
Y sente to 3ou alle my seruauntis profetis, 
and Y roos eerli bi the dai, and Y sente. 
And thei herden not me, nether bowiden 26 
doun her eere; but thei maden hard her 
nol, and wrou3ten worse than the fadris 
of hem. And thou schalt speke to hem 27 
alle these wordis, and thei schulen not 
heere thee; and thou schalt clepe hem, and 
thei schu] not answere to thee. And thou 2s 
schalt seie to hem, This is the folc, that 
herde not the vois of her Lord God’, 
nether resseyuede chastysyng ; feith pe- 
rischide, and is takun awei fro the mouth 
of hem. Clippe thin heer, and cast awei, 29 
and take thou weilyng strei3tli; for the 
Lord hath cast awei, and hath forsake the 
generacioun of his strong veniaunce. For 30 
the sones of Juda han do yuelt bifor myn 
ijeu, seith:the Lord; thei han set her of- 
fendyngis in the hous, in which my name 
is clepid ‘to help, that thei schulden defoule 
that hous; and thei bildiden hize thingiss: 
in Tophet, which is in the valei of the 
sone of Ennon, that thei schulden brenne 
her sones and her dou3tris bi fier, whiche 
thingis Y comaundide not, nether thou3te 
in myn herte. Therfor lo! daies comen, 32 
seith the Lord, and it schal no more be 
seid Tophet, and the valei of the sone of 
Ennon, but the valey of sleyng; and thei 
schulen birie in Tophet, for ther is no 
place. And the deed careyn of this puple 33 
schal be in to mete to the briddis of he- 
uene, and to the beestis of erthe; and noon 
schal" be that schal dryue awei. And Y 34 
schal make to ceesse the vois of ioye, and 
the vois of gladnesse, and the vois of 
spouse, and the vois of spousesse fro the 


c defouliden x. 4 Om, AEGHK. 


t yuel thing 1, 4 ther schal 1, 


362 


of Jerusalem, vois of ioje, and vois of 
gladnesse, vois of the spouse man, and 
vois of the spouse womman ; in desola- 
cioun forsothe shal ben the erthe. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 In that tyme, seith the Lord, thei shul 
caste out the bonus of the king of Juda, 
and the bones of his princes, and the 
bones of prestus, and the bones of pro- 
fetes, and the bones of hem that dwell- 

2iden® Jerusalem fro ther sepulcris ; and 
sprede them abrod to the sunne, and the‘ 
moone, and al the kny3thed of heuene, 
whiche’ thei loueden, and to whom thei 
serueden, and after whiche thei 3iden, and 
whiche thei so3ten, and honoureden; thei 
shul not be gedered, and not biried; in 
to a dunghil vp on the face of erthe thei 

3shul be. And thei shul chesen more deth 
than lif, alle that residue shul be of this 
werste kinrede, in alle places that ben 
laft, to whiche I thre; hem doun, seith 
4the Lord of ostis. And thou shalt sey 
to them, These thingus seith the Lord, 
Whether he that shal falle, shal not risen 
ajeen? and he that is turned awei, shal 
snot be turned ajeen? Whi thamne turned 
awei is this puple in to Jerusalem with 
striuous turnyng awei? Thei ca3ten les- 
sing, and wolden not turne a3een. Y tooc 
heed, and herknede ; no man that good is 
speketh, no man is that do penaunce ‘vp 
oni his synne, seiende, What haue Y do? 
Alle ben turned to ther cours, as an hors 
zin bure goende to bataile. The kite in 
heuene kne3 his tyme; the turtir, and the 
swalewe, and the somer foul that is 
clepid cyconye, kepten the time of ther 
comyng; my puple forsothe kne3 not the 
8dom of the Lord. Hou sey jee, Wise men 
wee ben, and the lawe of the Lord is 
with vs? Verely lesing wro3te the lyende 
9 poyntil of the scribis. Confoundid ben 


€ dwelliden in «4. dwellen in aux. 
ic sup. ras. for E pr.m. 


V thei n. 
& kepen n. 


JEREMIAH. 


f Om. 6 pr.m. to the H. 


w residue, ether left CEFGHTKMNPQRSUVRXY. 
b styl, ether writing CBFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


VIII. Ig. 


citees of Juda, and fro the stretis of Jern- 
salem; for the lond schal be in desola- 
cioun. 


CAP. VIII. 


In that tyme, seith the Lord, thei schu-1 
len caste out the boonys of the kingis of 
Juda, and the boonys of princes therof, 
and the boonys of prestis, and the boonys 
of profetis, and the boonys of hem that 
dwelliden in Jerusalem fro her sepulcris ; 
and thei schulen leie abrood tho boonyse 
to the sunne, and moone, and to al the 
kny3thod of heuene, which thei louyden, 
and which thei seruyden, and aftir whiche 
thei 3eden, and whiche thei sou3ten, and 
worschipiden; tho’ schulen not be gaderid, 
and schulen not be biried ; tho’ schulen be 
in to a dunghil on the face of erthe. And3 
alle men schulen cheese deth more than 
lijf, whiche ben left” of this worst kyn- 
rede, in alle places that ben left, to whiche* 
places Y castide hem out, seith the Lord 
of oostis. And thou schalt seie to hem,4 
The Lord seith these thingis, Whether he 
that schal falle, schal not rise ajen? and 
whether he that is turned awei, schal not 
turne a3en? Whi therfor is this puple ins 
Jerusalem turned awei bi turnyng awei 
ful of strijf? Thei han take leesyng, and 
noldenY turne ajen. Y perseyuede, andé 
herknede; no man spekith that that is 
good, noon is’ that doith penaunce for his 
synne, and seith, What haue Y do? Alle 
ben turnede togidere to her cours, as an 
hors goynge bi fersnesse to batel. A kite7 
in the eir knew his tyme; a turtle, and a 
swalewe, and a siconye, kepten* the tyme 
of her comyng; but my puple knew not the 
doom of the Lord. Hou seien 3e, We bens 
wise men, and the lawe of the Lord is 
with vs? Verili the fals writyng> of 
scribis wrou3te leesyng. Wise men ben9 


& the whiche seux. 5 Om. E pr.m. 


xthe whiche 1. Ywolden not 1. 7 ther ist. 


VIII. 10—20. 


the wise men, gast and ca3t thei ben. 
The wrd forsothe of the Lord thei casten 
1oaferr, and no wisdam is in hem. Ther- 
fore Y shal 3iue ther wymmen to straun- 
geres, and ther feeldis to alien eires; for 
fro the leste vnto* the moste auarice alle 
folewen, fro the! profete vnto the prest 
salle don™ lesing; and heleden the to- 
brosing of the do3ter of my puple to 
shenshipe, seiende, Pes, pes, whan - ther 
12 was not® pes. Confoundid thei ben, for 
abhomynacioun thei diden; but myche 
more by confusioun thei ben not con- 
foundid, and shamen thei kouthen not. 
Therfor thei shul falle among men fall- 
ende, in tyme of ther visitacioun thei 
isshul falle togidere, seith the Lord. Geder- 
ende Y shal gedere them togidere, seith 
the Lord; ther is not grape in the vynes, 
and ther ben not fyges in the fige jerd°; 
the lef flowede doun, and I 3af to them 
14theP ‘thingus that? ben go bisidis. Whi 
sitte wee ? cometh togidere, go wee in to 
the strengthid cite, and holde wee oure 
pes there ; for our Lord hath maad vs to 
be stille, and drinke 3af to vs watir of 
galle; wee han synned forsothe to the 
is Lord. Wee han abide pes, and ther was 
not good ; tyme of leching, and lo! dred. 
16 Fro Dan is herd the fnesting* of his hors ; 
fro the vois of his" neizende® fi3teres to- 
stirid is alle the lond; and thei camen, 
and deuoureden the lond, and his‘ plente, 
17the chef cite, and his dwelleres. For lo! I 
shal sende to 301 werst edderes, to whiche 
is not enchaunting; and thei shu] bite 
1830u, seith the Lord. My sorewe vp on 
sorewe, in me myn herte mournende. 
i9 And lo! the vois of the cry of the do3ter 
of my puple fro a ferr lond. Whether the 
Lord is not in Sion, or his king is not 
in it? Why thanne me to wrathe thei 
stereden in ther grauen thingus, and in 
20alyene vanytes? Ryp passede, endid is 


k to 4. into G pr.m.u. 10m. EK. 


JEREMIAH. 


m dide z£ pr. m. 


363 


schent, ben® maad4 aferd and takun. For 
thei castiden® awei the word of the Lord, — 
and no wisdom is in hem. Therfor Y 1 
schal 3yue the wymmen of hem to straun- 
geris, and the feeldis of hem to alien eiris ; 
for fro the leeste ‘til to the mooste alle 
suen aueryce, fro a profete ‘til tof the 
preest alle maken leesyng ; and thei heel-11 
iden the sorowe of the douj3tir of my pu- 
ple to schenschipe, seiynge, Pees, pees, 
whanne no pees was. Thei ben schent, 12 
for thei diden abhomyuacioun; 3he, rather 
thei weren not schent bi schenschipe, and 
kouden not be aschamed. Therfor thei 
schulen falle among falleris, in the tyme 
of her visitacioun thei schulen falle, seith 
the Lord. I gaderynge schal gadere hem, 13 
seith the Lord; no grape is in the vynes, 
and figis ben not in the fige tre; a leef 
felle doun, and Y 3af to hem tho thingis 
that ben go out ouer. Whi sitten we? 14 
come 3e togidere, entre we in to a strong 
citee, and be we stille there; for oure Lord 
hath maad vs to be stille, and 3af to vs 
drynk the watir of galle; for we han 
synned to the Lord. We abididen® pees, ts 
and no good was; we abididen® tyme of 
medicyn, and lo! drede 7s. Gnastyng of 16 
horsis therof is herd fro Dan; al the lond 
is moued of the vois of neiyngis of hise 
werriours ; and thei camen, and deuonr- 
iden the lond, and the plente therof, the 
citee, and the dwelleris therof. For lo!17 
Y schal sende to 3ou the werste serpentis, 
to whiche is no charmyng ; and thei schu- 
len bite 30u, seith the Lord. My sorewe1s 
is on sorewe, myn herte 7s mourenynge in 
me. And lo! the vois of cry of the dou3- 19 
ter of my puple cometh fro a fer lond. 
Whether the Lord is not in Sion, etbir 
the kyng therof is not therynne? Whi 
therfor stiriden thei me to wrathfulnesse 
bi her grauun ymagis, and bi alien vany- 
tees? Heruest is passid, somer is endid ; 20 


P tho AE sup.ras. GHK, 


Nno GHK. © treecpr.m. 


4Om. x prom. or noyse C sec. m. marg. noyse Esec.m.AGHK, ' Om.c.  § nei3ynge AEGHK. tal 
his ze pr.m.x. “and the 4. 
ctheiben:. Om. Nn. casteny. fvntor. & abiden ts. 


3A 


364 


21somer ; and wee ben not saf’. Vp on the 
to-treding of the do3tir of my puple Y am 
to-treden, and sorewid ; stoneyng with- 

oxheeld me. Whether gumme is not in 
Galaad, or a leche is not there? Whi 
thanne the hid wounde of the do3ter of 
my puple is not al helid ? 


CAP. IX. 


1 Who shal 3yue to myn hed watir, and* 
to myn e3en a welle of teres? And I shal 
Wwepe dai and ny3t the slayne men of the 

2do3ter of my puple. Who shal 3yue me 
in to wildernesse of dyuers weie goeres ? 
And I shal forsake ny puple, and gon 
awey fro them. For alle auoutreris thei 
ben, and cumpanye of lawe brekeres ; 

3and thei bentenY out ther tunge as ther 
bowe of lesyng, and not of treuthe. Thei 
ben coumfortid in erthe, for fro euel to 
euel thei wenten out, and me thei knewe? 
snot, seith the Lord. Eche* kepe hymself 
fro his ne3hebore, and in eche brother of 
hym haue he not trost ; for eche brother 
supplauntende shal supplaunte, and eche 
sfrend gilendely shal go. And a man his 
brother shal seorne, and treuthe shal not 
speke; thei tajten forsothe ther tunge 
to speke lesing; that wickely® thei schul- 
6den® don, thei trauaileden. Thi4 dwell- 
ing in the myddel of treccherie ; in trec- 
cherie thei forsoke me to knowen, seith 
7the Lord. Therfore these thingus seith 
the Lord of ostus, Lo! I shall 3eete and 
preue them’; what forsothe other thing 

‘shal Yf do fro the face of the sone’ of my 

spuple? An arwe woundende the tunge 
of hem, treccherie it spac; in his! mouth 
pes with his frend he speketh, and pri- 

gueli he putteth to hym aspies. Whether 
vp on these thingus I shal not visite, seith 
the Lord, or in to such a maner fole shal 
1onot be vengid my soule? Vp on moun- 
teynes Y shall take to weping and mourn- 
yng’, and! vp on the faire thingus of 


Vv saued FE see. mi. AGHK. 
man FE sec. 7m. AGHK,. 
f E shal « pr. am. 
1Om. ¢ prom. 


w stopped E pr.m. 
> wickidly acuK. 
€ douzter 1GHK. 


JEREMIAH. 


x Om. c pr. m. 
© Om. c pr.m. E prem. 
h woundide amr. 


VII, 21—IX. 10. 


and we ben not sauyd. Y am. turmentid,2i 
and sori on the sorewe of the dou;ter of 
my puple; astonying helde me. Whether 22 
resynt is not in Galaad, ether a leche is 
not there? Whi therfor the wounde of 
the dou3tir of my puple is not heelid 
perfitli ? 


t resyn, is a 
gumme of greet 
odour, and me- 
dicynable. a ef 
plures. 


CAP. IX. 


Who schal 3yue watir to myn heed,1 
and a welle of teeris to myn i3en? And 
Y schal biwepe dai and ni3t the slayn men 
of the dou3ter of -my puple. Who schalz 
3yue me in to a wildirnesse of dyuerse 
weigoeris ? And I schal forsake my puple, 
and Y schal go awei fro hem. For whi alle 
ben auowteris, and the cumpenyes of tres- 
passouris ajens the lawe ; and thei heldens 
forth her tunge as a bouwe of leesyng, 
and not of treuthe Thei ben coumnfortid 
in erthe, for thei 3eden out fro yuel to 
yuel, and thei knewen not me, seith the . 
Lord. Ech man kepe hym fro his nei3-4 
bore, and haue no trist in ony brother of 
hym; for whi ech brother disseyuyng 
schal disseyue, and ech frend schal go 
gilefuli. And a man schal scorne hiss 
brother, and schal not speke treuthe; for 
thei tau3ten her tunge to speke leesyng ; 
thei traueliden to do wickidli. Thi dwell-6 
yng 7s in the myddis of gile; in gile thei 
forsoken to knowe me, seith the Lord. 
Therfor the Lord of oostis seith these7 
thingis, Lo! Y schal welle togidere, and 
Y schal preue hem; for whi what other 
thing schal Y do fro the face of the dou3- 
ter of my puple ? The tunge of hem 7s ans 
arowe woundynge, and spak gile; in his 
mouth he spekith pees with his frend, 
and priueli he settith tresouns to hym. 
Whether Y schal not visite on theseo 
thingis, seith the Lord, ether schal not 
my soule take veniaunce on siche a fole? 
On hillis Y schal take wepyng and mourn- 10 
yng, and weilyng on the faire thingis of 


y benden arcu. Zknowen x. ® Eche 
4Ther x. © jou £ pr. m. AGHK. 
ither gE prom.  * lamenting c pr.m. £ pr.m. 


\ 
IX. 11—20, 


desert weilende, for thei ben brend vp; 
for thi that ther was™ not a man _pass- 
ende thur3, and thei herden not the vois 
of the weldere; fro the foul of heuene vn 
to the bestes, thei ‘siden ouer", and wenten 
iiawei. And Y shal 3yue Jerusalem in to 
hepes® of grauel, and in to couches of 
dragounes; and? the cites of Juda Y shal 
3yuen in to desolacioun, for thi that ther 
izis not a dwellere. Who is a wis man 
that vnderstant4 this, and to whom the 
wrd of the mouth of the Lord be mad, 
that he telle this"? Whi pershede the 
lond,; ful out is brend as desert, for thi 
i3that ther ys not that thur3 passe? And 
the Lord seide, For thei forsoken my 
lawe, that I 3af to them, and thei herden 
i4not my vois, and thei 3ide not in yt; and 
3iden® awei after the shreudenesse of ther 
herte, and aftir Baalym, whom thei hadde 
islerned of thert fadris; therfore these 
thingus seith the Lord of ostus, God of 
Irael, Lo! I shal fede this puple with 
wrmod, and drinke Y shal 3yue to them 
16 water of galle". And Y shal scatere them 
in Jentilis, that knewe not thei and the 
fadris of hem; and Y shal sende vpon 
hem swerd, to the tyme that thei be ful 
17 wastid. These thingus seith the Lord of 
ostus, God of Irael, Beholdeth, and clep- 
eth weilende wymmen, and come thei; 
and’ to them that wise ben sendeth, and 
isgo thei forth. Hee3e thei, and take thei 
to vp on vs mournyng”; leden out oure 
ejen teres, and oure e3e lydis flowe thei 
igdoun with watris; for the vois of la- 
menting* herd is fro Sion. What maner 
wastid wee ben, and confoundid hugely ? 
for we han forsake the lond, for throwen 
20doun ben oure tabernacles. Hereth ther- 
fore, 3ee wymmen, the wrd of the Lord, 
and taken to 3oure eres the sermoun of 
his mouth; and techeth 3oure do3tris la- 
menting, and eche womman hir ne3he- 


2 ouer 3iden E. 
$ thei 3eden 4GuK. 


Mm ig AEGH. 
rit BE prem. 
E prom. 


t thi x. 


hthein. ivnto1r * thei n. 


JEREMIAH. 


Ohipelis F pr.m aGuK. 
u gallys aK. 
x mournynge AK. the mournynge E sec. m. Gil. 


365 


desert, for tho" ben brent; for no man is 
passynge forth, and thet herden not the 
vois of hym that weldith; fro a brid of 
the eir ‘til to! scheep, tho* passiden ouer, 
and 3eden awei. And Y schal 3yne Jeru-11 
salem in to heepis of granel, and in to 
dennes of dragouns ; and Y schal 3yue the 
citees of Juda in to desolacioun, for ther 
is no dwellere. Who is a wise man that12 
schal vndurstonde these thingis, and to 
whom the word of the mouth of the Lord 
schal be maad, that he telle this? Whi 
the erthe perischide, it is breut as desert, 
for noon is that passith? And the Lord i3 
seide, For thei forsoken my lawe, which 
Y 3af to hem, and thei herden not my 
vois, and thei jeden not therynne; ands 
thei 3eden aftir the schrewidnesse of her 
herte, and aftir Baalym, which thei lern- 
eden of her fadris; therfor the Lord of 1s 
oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal fede this puple with wermod, 
and Y schal 3yue to hem drynke the watir 
of galle. And Y schal scatere hem among is 
hethene men, whiche thei and her fadris 
knewen not; and Y schal sende swerd 
aftir hem, til thei ben wastid. The Lord 17 
of oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Biholde je, and clepe 3e wymmen ‘that 
weilen!, and come thei; and sende 3e to 
tho wymmen that ben wise, and haste 
thei. Haste thei, and take thei weilynge 1s 
on jou; 3oure i3en brynge doun teeris, and 
j3oure i3elidis flowe with watris; for the 1s 
vois of weilyng is herd fro Sion. Hou 
ben we distried, and schent greetli? for we 
han forsake the lond, for oure tabernaclis 
ben forsakun. Therfor, wymmen, here 3e 20 
the word of the Lord, and 3oure eeris take 
the word of his mouth; and teche 3¢ 3oure 
dou3tris weilyng, and ech womman feche 
hir neijbore mournyng. For whi deth2! 
stiede bi 30ure wyndows, it entride in to 
3oure housis, to leese litle children with 


q vnderstondith 4rGHuk. 


P for E pr.m. 
w lamenting c pr. m. 


VOn. £ prem, AGUK. 


1 weileressis CEFGHUKMNPQRSUVX. Weilstcris 1. 


366 JEREMIAH. 


21 bore weiling. For stezede vp deth bi 3oure 
wyndowes, gon in is to 3oure houses, to 
seatere the litle childer withoutforth, 

zzand the j3umge men of the stretis. Spec, 
These thingus seith the Lord, And ther 
shal falle the ‘dead careyn’ of man? as 
drit vp on the face of the regioun, and 
as hey bihynde the bac of the mowere, 

23and ther is not that gedere. These 
thingus seith the Lord, Glorie not a wis 
man in his wisdam, and glorie not a 
strong man in his strengthe, and* glorie 

24not® a riche man in his richesses; but 
in this glorie he® that glorieth, to witen 
and to knowe me, for I am the Lord, 
that do mercy and dom and ri3twisnesse 
in erthe’. These thingus forsothe plesen 

25to me, seith the Lord. Lo! da3es comen, 
seith the Lord, and Y shal visite vpon 
eche that hath the vtmost® skyn of the 

263erde vneircumcidid; vp on Egipt, and 
vp on Juda, and vp on Edom, and vp on 
the sonus of Amon, and vp on Moab, and 
vp on alle tho that ben dodded in to the 
her, dwellende in desert; for alle Jen- 
tiles han the vtmostf skyn of the 3erde, 
al forsothe the hous of Irael ben vneir- 
cumcidid the® herte. 


CAP: X. 


'Hereth the wrd that the Lord spac 
2vp on 30u, the" hous of Irael. These 
thingus seith the Lord, Aftir the weies 
of Jentiles wileth not lerne, and fro the 
signes of heuene wileth not drede, that 
3dreden Jentiles, for the lawis of puples 
ben veyne. For the tree of the wilde wode 
kut of the were of the hondus of the 
4craftes man in an hachet; with siluer 
and gold he enourneth it; with nailes 
and hameres ioynede it, that it ‘be not! 
slosid atwynne. In licnesse of a formed 
ymage thei ben forgid, and thei shul 
not speke; born thei shul be taken awey, 
for thei moun not go; wileth not thanne 


¥ deth smyting © pr. m. 2a man AGHK. 


dthe erthe £ pr.m. © vttermost 4GHK. 
not ben x pr.m. shulde bin K. 


™ aftir CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. ° ther is 1. 


&Bne AE pr.m. GHK. 
f vttermost 4GHK. 


© circumcidid n. 


IX. 21— =X. 5. 


outforth, and 3onge men fro the stretis. 
Speke thou, the Lord seith, these thingis, 22 
And the deed bodi of a man schal fal 
doun as a toord on the face of the cun- 
trei, and as hei bihynde™ the bak of the 
mowere, and noon is" that gaderith. The»: 
Lord seith these thingis, A wise man haue 
not glorie in his wisdom, and a strong 
man haue not glorie in his strengthe, and 
a riche man have not glorie in hise rich- 
essis; but he that hath glorie, haue glorie 24 
in this, to wite and knowe me, for Y am 
the Lord, that do merci and dom and 
ri3tfulnesse in erthe. For whi these thingis 
plesen me, seith the Lord. Lo! daiesas 
comen, seith the Lord, and Y schal visite 
on ech man that hath prepucie vncircum- 
cidid; on Egipt, and on Juda, and one26 
Edom, and on the sones of Amon, and on 
Moab, and on alle men that ben clippid 
on long heer, and dwellen in desert; for 
whi alle hethene men han prepucie, for- 
sothe al the hous of Israel ben vncircum- 
cidid° in herte. 


CAP. X. 


The hous of Israel, here 3e the word 
which the Lord spak on jou. The Lordz 
seith these thingis, Nyle 3e lerne aftir the 


‘weies of hethene men, and nyle 3e drede 


of the signes of heuene, whiche signes 
hethene men dreden. For the lawis of3 
puplis ben veyn, for whi the werk of 
hondis of a crafti man hath kit doun with 
an axe a tre of the forest. He made it faira 
with siluer and gold; with naylis and 
hameris he ioynede 7¢? togidere, that it be 
not loosid. Jdols ben maad in the lic-s 
nesse of a palm tree, and schulen not 
speke; tho schulen be takun and he bo- 
run, for tho moun not go; therfor nyle 


> Om. E pr.m. 


¢ Om, £ pr.m. 
& in AGHK. 


bof the epr.m. ishulde 


P Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


X. 6—18. 


drede them, for neither euele thet moun 
6do, ne wel. Ther is not lic of* thee, 
Lord ; gret thou', and gret thi” name in 
7strengthe. Who shal not drede thee, O! 
thou king of Jentilis? thin is forsothe 
wrshipe among alle the wise men of Jen- 
tilis, and in alle the reumes of hem noen 
8is lic of® thee. Togidere vnwise men and 
foolis shul be preued, the doctrine of the 
9vanyte® of them a tree is with siluer en- 
wrappid. Fro Tarsis it is bro3t, and the 
gold fro? Ofir; the were of the craftus4 
man, and the hond of the inetal werkere; 
‘iacynet, or as men seyn*, violet blyw sile 
and purpre the clothing of them; the were 
ioof craftus men alle these thingus. The 
Lord forsothe is verre God; he’ is God lyu- 
ende, and king euermor Jastende; of his 
indignacioun shal be moued the erthe, and 
11 suffren shul not Jentiles his threting. Thus 
thanne 3ee shul sey to them, The goddis 
that ‘maden not heuene and erthe, pershe 
thei" fro the erthe, and fro these thingus 
12that ben vnder heuene. That maketh 
the erthe in his strengthe, maketh redi 
biforn the world in his wisdam, and in 
13his prudence streccheth out henenus. At 
his vois he 3yueth multitude of watris in 
heuene, and rereth vp litle cloudus fro 
the vtmostus’ of erthe; leitus in to reyn 
he maketh, and bringeth out wind of his 
l4tresores. Fool mad is eche man of his 
kunnyng, confoundid is eche craftes man 
in his grauen thing”; for fals is that he 
3etede, and ther is not spirit in hem. 
is Veyn thei ben, and the were wrthi la3h- 
ing; in tyme of ther visiting thei shul 
igpershe. Lic is not to these* the part of 
Jacob, who forsothe formede alle thingus 
he is, and Irael the 3erde of his eritage ; 
17 Lord of ostus name is to hym. Gedere 
fro the erthe thi confusion, that dwell- 
is ist in seging ; for these thingus seith the 
Lord, Lo! Y ferr shal throwe the dwel- 


k Om. cpr.m. E pr.m. ert thou 4K sec. m, 
E pr.m. Pof ax. crafty K. 


maden not, pershe thei £ pr. 2m. 


athein. vhemwn.  $ the erthe 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


™m jg thi aK sec. m. 
r Om. c et E prom. 
Vv vttermostis 4GUK. 


367 


3e drede tho, for tho? moun nether do 
yuel, nethir wel. Lord, noon is lijk thee; 6 - 
thou art greet, and thi name ¢s greet in 
strengthe. A! thou king of folkis, who7 
schal not drede thee? for whi onour is 
thin among alle wise men of hethene men, 
and in alle the rewmes of hem noon is lijk 
thee. Thei schulen be preued, vnwise ands 
foolis togidere; the techyng of her vanyte 
is a tre. Siluer wlappid is bron3t frog 
Tharsis, and gold fro Ophaz; it is the 
werk of a crafti man, and of the hond of 
a worchere in metel; iacynct and purpur 
ben the clothing of tho"; alle these thingis 
ben the werk of werk men.  Forsothe io 
the Lord is veri God; he is God lyuynge; 
and a kyng enerlastynge; the erthe schal 
be mouyd togidere of his indignacioun, 
and hethene men schulen not suffre the 
manaassing of hym. Therfor thus 3e1) 
schulen seie to hem, Goddis that maden 
not heuene and erthe, perische fro erthe’, 
and fro these thingis that ben vndur he- 
uene. He ts God, that makith the erthe 12 
in his strengthe, makith' redi the world 
in his wisdom, and stretchith forth he- 
uenes bi his prudence. At his vois he1s 
3yneth the multitude of watris in henene, 
and he reisith mystis fro the endis of 
erthe; he makith leitis into reyn, and 
ledith ont wynd of his tresouris. Echi4 
man is maad a fool of kunnyng, ech crafti 
man is schent in a grauun ymage; for 
whi that that" he wellide togidere is fals, 
and no spirit is in tho’. Tho ben veyn, 15 
and 2a werk worthi of scorn; tho schulen 
perische in the tyme of her visitacioun. 
The part of Jacob is not lijk these, for he 16 
that formede alle thingis is God of Jacob, 
and Israel zs the 3erde of his eritage; the 
Lord of vostis is name to hym. Thout7 
that dwellist in bisegyng, gadere fro the 
lond thi schenschipe; for the Lord seith 1s 
these thingis, Lo! Y schal caste awei fer 


1 Om. c prom. prom. © hirthe 


Sandhe x prom. This 4. ™ beuene and erthe 
W thinges kK. X hein a. 
t that makith 1. %Om.Nn. Vhem nN. 


368 


leris of the lond in this while?; and tro- 
blen hem, so that thei be not founden. 
19 Wo to me vp on my to-treding, my werst 
veniaunce ; I forsothe seide, Pleynli this 
20myn infirmyte is, and Y shal bern it. My 
tabernacle is wastid, alle my litle cordis 
ben to-broke; my sonus wenten out fro 
me, and stonde* not stille; ther is not 
that strecche out more my tent, and rere 
2ivp my skynnes. For folili diden shep- 
perdis, and the Lord thei so3ten not ; 
therfor thei vnderstode not, and eche floc 
220f hem is scatered. Vois of heering lo! 
is comen, and gret stiring fro the lond of 
the north, that thei sette the cites of 
Juda in to wildernesse, and a dwelling 
23 place of dragounus. I wot, Lord, for of 
man is not his weie, ne of man is that 
24he go,.and rijt reule hys goingus. Chas- 
tise me, Lord; ner the latere in dom 
and not in? thi wodnesse, lest par auen- 
25 ture to no3t thou bringe me. Heeld out 
thin indignacioun vp on Jentyles that 
knewen not thee, and vp on prouynces 
that thi name inwardli clepeden not ; 
for thei eeten Jacob, and deuoureden 
hym, and wasteden hym, and his wor- 
shepe destrojeden. 


CAP. XI. 


1 The wrd that is do to Jeremye of the 
2 Lord, seiende, Hereth the wrdus of this 
couenaunt, and speketh to the men of 
3Juda, and dwelleres of Jerusalem; and 
thou shalt sey to them, These thingus 
seith the Lord God of Irael, Cursid® the 
man that shal not here the wrdus of this 
4couenaunt, that Y comaundede to 3oure 
fadris, in the dai that Y ladde hem out 
fro the lond of Egipt, fro the irene fur- 
neys ; seiende, Hereth my vois, and doth 
alle thingus that Y comaundide? to 3ou, 
and 3ee shul be to me in to a puple, and 
5 Y shal be to 30u in to a God; that Y rere 
the oth that Y swor to 3oure fadris, me to 
3yue to them a lond flowende myle and 


Z2wyse K. ®stooden K sec. m. 


w Heelde 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


> after x prim. 


x thou Nn, 


X. 19——XI. 5. 


the dwelleris of the loond in this while; 
aud Y schal 3yue tribulacioun to hem, so 
that thei be not foundun. Wo to me on19 
my sorewe, my wounde 7s fu) yuel; for- 
sothe Y seide, Pleynli this is my sike- 
nesse, and Y schal bere it. My tabernacle 20 
is distried, alle my roopis ben brokun ; 
my sones 3eden out fro me, and ben not; 
noon is that schal stretche forth more my 
tente, and schal reyse my skynues. For 21 
the scheepherdis diden folili, and sou3ten 
not the Lord; therfor thei vndurstoden 
not, and alle the flok of hem is scaterid. 
Lo! the vois of hering cometh, and a22 
greet mouynge togidere fro the lond of 
the north, that it sette the citees of Juda 
in to wildirnesse, and a dwellynge place 
of dragouns. Lord, Y woot, that the weie 23 
of a man is not of hym, nether it is of a 
man that he go, and dresse hise steppis. 
Lord, chastise thou me; netheles in doom 24 
and not in thi strong veniaunce, lest per- 
auenture thou dryue me to nou3t. Schede’ 25 
out*® thin indignacioun on hethene men 
that knewen not thee, and on prouynces 
that clepidenY not thi name to help; for 
thei eeten Jacob, and deuouriden hym, and 
wastiden hym, and destrieden the onour 
of hym. 
CAP. XI. 

The word that was maad of the Lordi 
to Jeremye, and seide, Here 3e the wordis2 
of this couenaunt, and speke 3e to the men 
of Juda, and to the dwelleris of Jerusa- 
lem; and thou schalt seie to hem, The3 
Lord God of Israel seith these thingis, 
Cursid be the man that herith not the 
wordis of this couenaunt, which Y co-4 
maundide to 3oure fadris, in the dai in 
which Y ledde hem out of the lond of 
Egipt, fro the irone furneis; and Y seide, 
Here 3e my vois, and do 3e alle thingis 
whiche Y comaundide to 3ou, and 3e schu- 
len be in to a puple to me, and Y schal be 
in to God to 30u; that Y reise the ooths 
which Y swoor to 3oure fadris, that Y 


¢ Cursid is 4K sec.m. « comaunde K. 


¥ clepen 1. 


XI. 6——15. 


hony, as is this dai. And Y answerde, 
eand seide, Amen, Lord. And the Lord 
seide to me, Crye out alle these wrdus.in 
the cites¢ of Juda, and withouteforth Je- 
rusalem, seiende, Hereth the wrdus of 
7this couenaunt, and doth them; for wit- 
nessende Y witnessede 3oure faders, in 
the dai that Y ladde them out fro the 
lond of Egipte, vnto this day; erly ris- 
ende Y‘ witnessede, and seide, Hereth my 
svois. And thei herden not, ne boweden in 
ther ere, but wenten awei eche& in to the 
shreudenesse of his® euele herte; and Y 
bro3te in vp on hem alle the wrdus of this 
couenaunt, that Y comaundide that thei 
1oshulden do, and thei diden not. And 
the Lord seide to me, Ther is founde 
coniuracioun in the men of Juda, and in 
the dwelleris of Jerusalem; thei ben 
turned a3een to! the rathere wickid- 
nesses* of ther faders, that wolden not 
here my wrdus; and these thanne aftir 
aliene goddis 3iden awei!, that thei serue™ 
to them; all voide maden the house of 
Irae] and the hous of Juda my coue- 
naunt, that Y couenauntede with ther 
11faders. Wherfore these thingus seith the 
Lord, Lo! Y shal bringen in vp on hem 
eueles, of whiche gon out thei shul not 
moun; and thei shul crien to me, and Y 
128ha] not heren hem. And gon shul the 
cites of Juda and the dwelleris of Jeru- 
salem, and crien to them, to whom thei 
offren; and thei shul not sane them in 
istyme of ther tormenting. After the 
noumbre forsothe of thi cites weren thi 
godis, Juda, and after the noumbre of 
thi weies, Jerusalem, thou settedest au- 
teres of confusion, autres to offre to Ba- 
ulim. Thou thanne, wile thou not pre3e 
for this puple, and ne take thou too for 
them preising and orisoun; for Y shal 
not heren in the" time of ther cry to me, 
15in tyme of ther torment. What is, that 
my loued in myn hous doth many hid- 
f Om. G pr.m. H. 


€ citee 4. & echone E pr.m. 


AG pr. m. HK. 


zhemn. ynto1. 


VOL. HI. 


JEREMIAH. 


m schulde seruen £ sec. m. G sec. m. 


b wolden not 1. 


369 


schulde 3yue to hem a lond flowynge with 
mylk and hony, as this dai is. And Y ° 
answeride, and seide, Amen, Lord. Ande 
the Lord seide to me, Crye thou alle these 
wordis in the citees of Juda, and with out 
Jerusalem, and seie thou, Here 3e the wordis 
of this couenaunt, and do 3e tho’; for Y7 
witnessynge haue witnessid to 3oure fa- 
dris, in the dai in which Y ledde hem out 
of the lond of Egipt, ‘til to* this dai; Y 
roos eerli, and witnesside, and seide, Here 
3e my vois. And thei herden not, nethers 
bowiden doun her eere, but thei 3eden 
forth ech man in the schrewidnesse of his 
yuel herte; and Y brou3te in on hem alle 
the wordis of this couenaunt, which Y 
comaundide that thei schulden do, and 
thei diden not. And the Lord seide to1o 
me, Sweryng togidere is foundun in the 
men of Juda, and in the dwelleris of Je- 
rusalem ; thei turneden ajen to the for- 
mere wickidnessis of her fadris, that nol- 
den> here my wordis; and therfor these 
men 3eden aftir alien goddis, for to serue 
hem; the hous of Israel and the hous of 
Juda maden voide my couenaunt, which 
Y made with the fadris of. hem. Wher-11 
for the Lord seith these thingis, Lo! Y 
schal bringe in on hem yuels, of whiche 
thei schulen not mow go out; and thei 
schulen crie to me, and Y schal not here 
hem. And the citees of Juda and theie 
dwellers of Jerusalem schulen go, and 
schulen crye to hem, to whiche thei offren 
sacrifices; and thei schulen not saue hem 
in the tyme of her turment. For thou, 13 
Juda, thi goddis weren bi the noumbre 
of thi citees, and thou settidist auters of 
schenschipe, bi the noumbre of the weies 
of Jerusalem, auters to offre sacrifices to 
Baalym. Therfor nyle thou preie for this i1 
puple, and take thou not heriyng and 
preier for hem; for Y schal not here in 
the tyme of the cry of hem to me, in thee 
tyme of the turment of hem. What is it, 1s 
k wickenesses E. | awei shulde 


hher «. iin to a. 


D Om. 4. 


¢ Om. 1. 


3 3B 


370 


_ ous giltus? whether hoeli flesh ‘shul don 
aweiP fro thee thi malices, in whiche 
i6thou gloriest?? An olyue plenteuous, 
fair, fructuous, semeli, clepede the Lord 
thi name; at the vois of the grete speche 
brende out fyr in it, and to-brend ben 
17alle his busshy places. And the Lord 
of ostus that plauntede thee, spac vp on 
thee euel, for the euelus of the hous of 
Irael, and of the hous of Juda, that thei 
diden to themself, offrende to Balim, to 
isterre me. Thou forsothe, Lord, hast 
shewid to me, and Y kne3; thou hast 
i9shewid to me the studies of hem. I' as 
a debonere lomb, that is born to. slayn 
sacrifise; and Y kne3 not, for thei tho3ten 
vp on me counseil, seiende, Sende wee a 
tree in to his bred, and shaue wee hym 
out fro the lond of lyueres, and his name 
20be no more membred. Thou forsothe, 
Lord of Sabaoth, that demest ri3twisly, 
and prouest reenes and hertes, see Y thi 
veniaunce of thein; to thee forsothe Y 
21 shewede my cause. Therfor these thingus 
seith the Lord to the men of Anatoth, 
that sechen my soule, and seyn, Thou 
shalt not profecien in the name of the 
Lord, and thou shalt not die in oure 
22hondus. Therfor these thingus seith the 
Lord of ostus, Lo! Y shal visite vp on 
hem; 3unge men shul die in swerd, the 
sonus of them and the do3tris’ of them 
23shul dien in hunger; and relikes shul 
not ben of hem; I shal leden in forsothe 
euel vp on the men of Anatoth, a 3er of 
the visitynge of hem. 


CAP. XII. 

1 Riztwis forsothe thou art, Lord; if Y 
dispute with thee, nerthelatere ri3te 
thingus I sha] speke to thee. Whi the 
weie of vnpitous men is maad welsum ? 
Well is to alle that thet lawe breken, and 

2 wickeli* don? Thou hast plauntid hem, 


P bringe don awei shul £ pr. m. 
u wickidly acuK. 


4 fro 1, 


JEREMIAH. 


4 art gloried & pr.m. 


€ left 1. 


XI. 16—XII. 2. 


that my derlyng doith many greet .tres- 
passis in myn hous? whether - hooli 
fleischis schulen do awei:fro thee thi ma- 
lice, in which thou hast glorie? Theis 
Lord clepide thi name an olyue tre, fair, 
ful of fruyt, schapli; at the vois of a greet 
speche fier brent an hi3 ther ynne, and the 
buyschis therof ben brent. And the Lord 17 
of oostis that plauntide thee, spak yuel on 
thee, for the yuels of the hous of Israel, 
and of the hous of Juda, whiche thei 
diden to hem silf, and offriden to Baalym, 
to terre me to wraththe. Forsothe, Lord, is 
thou schewidist to me, and Y knew; thou 
schewidist to me the studies of hem. And 19 
Y am as a mylde lomb, which is borun to 
slayn sacrifice; and Y knew not, that thei 
thou3ten counsels ou me, and seiden, Sende 
we a tre in to the brede of hym, and rase 
we hym awei fro the lond of lyueris, and 
his name be no ‘more hadde in mynde. 
But thou, Lord of oostis, that demest 20 
iustli, and preuest reynes and hertis, se 
Y thi veniaunce of hem; for to thee Y 
schewide my cause. Therfor the Lord 21 
seith these thingis to the men of Anathot, 
that seken thi lijf, and seien, Thou schalt 
not prophesie in the name of the Lord, 
and thou schalt not die in oure hondis. 
Therfor the Lord of oostis seith these 22 
thingis, Lo! Y schal visite on hem; the 
3onge men of hem schulen die bi swerd, 
the sones of hem and the dous3tris of hem 
schulen die for hungur; and no relifs, 23 
ether children abidynge*, schulen be of 
hem; for Y schal bringe ynne yuelf on the 
men.of Anathot, the 3eer of the visitacioun 
of hem. 
CAP. XII. 

Forsothe, Lord, thou art iust; if Y dis-1 
pute with thee, netheles Y schal speke iust 
thingis to thee. Whi hath the weie of 
wickid men prosperite? It is wel to alle 
men that breken the lawe, and doen wick- 
idi? Thou hast plauntid hem, and thei2 


tAndI x. sdou3terx. ¢ Om. £ pr. im. 


f yuel thing 1. 


XII. 3-—13. 


and roote thei senten’; thei profiten, and 
maken frute; ny3 thou art to the mouth 
of them, and ‘aferr” fro the reenes of 
3them. And, thou, Lord, hast* knowe 
me, seen me, and proued myn herte with 
thee. Gedere them as a floc to slayn 
sacrifise, and halewe them in the dai of 
4sla3ter. Hou longe weilen shal the erthe, 
and the erbe of alle regioun shal be 
dried, for the malice of men dwellende 
in it? Wastid is the beste, and foul, for 
thei seiden, He shal not seen oure laste. 
5If with ‘foot menY rennende thou tra- 
uailedest, hou shalt thou moun striue 
with hors? whan forsothe in the lond of 
pes siker thou ‘were not?, what shuldest 
6thou do in the pride of Jordan? For 
whi and thi brethern and the hous of 
thi fader, also thei fo3ten ajen thee, and 
crieden after thee with pleyn vois; ne 
leeue thou hem, whan thei shul speke 
7to thee goode thingus. I haue forsake 
myn hous, ‘Y lafte myn eritage>; Y¢ 3af 
my Joued soule ‘in to’ the hondus of his 
senemys. Mad is to me myn eritage as 
a leoun in the wode; he jaf ajen me ‘a 
9 vois®, and therfore Y hatede it. Whether 
a brid of dyuers coloures myn eritage to 
me? whether a brid died thur3 out ? 
Cometh, beth gedered, alle 3ee bestes’ of 
10 theS erthe; ‘haste 3ee" to denouren. Manye 
shepperdis wasteden my vyne3erd', to- 
treeden ny part, 3auen my desirable por- 
licioun in to desert of wildernesse, putten 
it in to wasting, and it weilede vp on 
me; with desolacioun desolat is al the 
lond, for no man is that a3een thenke in 
izherte. Vp on alle the weies of desert 
camen alle the wasteres of the lond, for 
the swerd of the Lord shal deuoure fro 
the vtmostus* of the erthe vnto the vt- 
inost! of it; ther™ is not pes to alle flesh. 
13 Thei sewen whete, and repeden thornes ; 
the erytage thei token, and to them it 


¥ putten c pr.m. E prom.  ™ ferr c pr. m. 
shuldist ben sec. 2. marg. were not tert. m. 
eritage in to E prom. © the ny3t & pr.m. 
Om. £ sec.m. ivyne c pr.m. E prom. 


& hatide A sec.m. 


3B2 


* thou hast E pr. m. 

a shalt aGHK. 
f Om. E£ pr.m. 
k vttermostis 4GiK. 


JEREMIAH. 371 


senten roote; thei encreessen, and maken 
fruyt; thou art ni3 to the mouth of hem, 
and fer fro the reynes of hem. And thou,3 
Lord, hast knowe me, thou hast seyn me, 
and hast preued myn herte with thee. 
Gadere thou hem togidere as a flok to 
slayn sacrifice, and halewe thou hem in 
the dai of sleyng. Hou long schal thes 
erthe mourne, and ech eerbe of the feeld 
schal be dried, for the malice of hem that 
dwellen ther ynue? A beeste is wastid, and 
a brid, for thei seiden, Te Lord schal not 
se oure laste thingis. If thou trauelists 
rennynge with foot men, hou schalt thou 
mow stryue with horsis? but whanne 
thou art sikur in the lond of pees, what 
schalt thou do in the pride of Jordan ? 
For whi bothe thi britheren and the housé 
of thi fadir, 3he, thei fou3ten ajens thee, 
and crieden with ful vois aftir thee; bileue 
thou not to hem, whanne thei speken 
goodis to thee. I haue left myn hous, Y7 
haue forsake myn eritage ; Y 3af my loued 
soule in to the hondis of enemyes therof, 
Myn eritage is maad as a lioun in thes 
wode to me; it 3af vois a3ens me, therfor 
Y hate® it. Whether myn eritage is a9 
brid of dyuerse colours to me? whether 
it is a brid died thorou out? Alle beestis 
of the feeld, come 3e, be 3e gaderid togi- 
dere; haste 3e for to deuoure. Many to 
seheepherdis distrieden my vyner, defoul- 
iden my part, 3auen my desirable porcioun 
in to desert of wildirnesse; thei settiden 11 
it in to scateryng, and it mourenyde on 
me; al the lond is desolat bi desolacioun, 
for noon is that a3enthenkith in herte. 
Alle distrieris of the lond camen on alle 12 
the weies of desert, for the swerd of the 
Lord schal deuoure fro the laste part of 
the lond ‘til to" the laste part therof; no 
pees is to al fleisch. Thei sowiden wheete, !5 
and repiden thornes; thei token erytage, 
and it schal not profite to hem. 3e sehu- 


ya foote £ pr.m. 7 were E pr.m. 
6 Om. epr.m Cand acux. 41 lafte myn 
g Om. aecuK. 4 goth forth c prom. E prom. 
] vttermost 4GHK.: ™ and ther k sec. m. 


h ynto 1. 


372 


shal not profiten. 3ee shul be confoundid 
of 3oure frutus, for the wrathe of the 

14 wodnesse of the Lord. These thingus 
seith the Lord a3en alle my werste 
ne3hebores, that touchen the eritage that 
Y delide to my puple Irael, Lo! Y shal 
pullen vp them fro ther lond, and the 
hous of Juda Y shal pullen vp fro the 

1smyddes" of them. And whan Y shal 
pullen vp them, Y shal be turned, and 
han® merci of them; and Y shal bringe 
them a3een, a man to his eritage, and a 

16man to his Jond. And it shal be, ifP 
ta3t men lerneden the weies of my puple, 
that thei swere in my name, Lyneth the 
Lord, as thei tajten my puple to swern 
in Baal, thei shuln be bild vp in the 

17myddel of my puple. That if thei ‘schul 
not heren’, Y shal pulle awei that folc 
with pulling awei and perdicioun, seith 
the Lord. 

CAP. XIII. 

1 These thingus seith the Lord to me, 
Go, and haue to thee a lynene bregirdil ; 
and put it vp on thi lendus, and in to 

2water thou shalt not puften it in. And 

Y hadde the bregirdil, aftir the wrd of 
the Lord; and Y putte it™ aboute my len- 

3dus. And don is the wrd of the Lord 

4the secounde tyme to me, seiende, Tac 
the bregirdil that thou haddest, that is 
aboute thi lendus; and risende go to Eu- 

fraten, and hid it there, in the hole of a 

sston. And Y 3ide, and hidde it in Eu- 
fraten, as comaundide to me the Lord. 

6 And don is after manye dajes, seide the 
Lord to ime, Ris, and go to Eufraten, 
and tac thennes the brigirdil, that I co- 
maundide to thee, that thon shuldist 

zhiden it there. And Y 3ide to Eufraten, 
and dalf out, and toc the bregirdil fro 
the place wher’ Y hadde hid it; and lo! 
rotid hadde the bregirdil, so that to noon 

svse it was able. And don is the wrd of 
gthe Lord to me, seiende, These thingus 


nmydil acux. Chak. 
8 there wher E prem. . 


LOm. c ef ceteri. 


JEREMIAH. 


P as if ACGHK. 8 E pr.m. 


« and I c e ceteri. 


XII. 14—=-XIII. 9. 


len be schent of 3oure fruytis, for the 
wraththe of the stronge veniaunce of the 
Lord. The Lord seith these thingis ajens 14 
alle my worst nei3boris, that touchen the 
eritage which Y departide to my puple 
Israel, Lo! Y schal drawe hem out of her 
lond, and Y schal drawe the hous of Juda 
out of the myddis of hem. And whanne 1s 
Y schal drawe out thilke Jewis, Y schal 
conuerte, and haue merci on hem; and Y 
schal lede hem a3en, a man to his eritage, 
and a man in to his lond. And it schal ie 
be, if thei ‘that ben' tau3t lernen the weies 
of my puple, that thei swere in my name, 
The Lord lyueth, as thei tau3ten my puple 
to swere in Baal, thei schulen be bildid in 
the myddis of my puple. That if thei17 
heren not, Y schal drawe out that folk by 
drawyng out and perdicioun, seith the 
Lord. 


CAP. XIII. 

The Lord seith these thingis to me, Go, 1! 
and take in possessioun to thee a lynnun 
breigirdil ; and thou schalt putte it on thi 
leendis, and thou schalt not bere it in to 
watir. And Y took in possessioun a brei-2 
girdil, bi the word of the Lord; and Y 
puttide aboute my leendis. And the word3 
of the Lord was maad to me in the se- 
counde tyme, and seide, Take the brigir-4 
dil, which thou haddist in possessioun, 
which is aboute thi leendis; and rise thou, 
and go to Enfrates, and hide thou it there, 
in the hoole of a stoon. And Y 3ede, ands 
hidde it in Eufrates, as the Lord co- 
maundide to me. And it was don aftir6 
ful many daies, the Lord seide to me, Rise 
thou, and go to Eufrates, and take fro 
thennus the brigirdil, whiche Y comaund- 
ide to thee, that thou schuldist hide it 
there. And Y 3ede to Eufrates, and*7 
diggide out, and Y took the breigirdil fro 
the place, where Y hadde! hidde it; and lo! 
the breigirdil was rotun, so that it was not 


r Om. EGHK. 


q heren not ¢ pr.m. & pr.m. 


10m. «. 


XI. 1o—18. 


seith the Lord, Thus to roten Y shal 
‘make the pride of Juda, and the myche 
10 pride of Jerusalem, and this werste pu- 
ple, that wile not here my wrdus, and gon 
in the shreudenesse of ther herte; and thei 
wenten after aliene godus, that thei serue 
to them, and honoure them; and thei 
shul be as this bregirdil, that to noon 
11 vse is able. As forsothe cleueth the bri- 
girdil to the lendus of a man, so Y ioyn- 
ede to me al the hous of Irael, and al 
the hous of Juda, seith the Lord, that 
thei were to me in to a puple, and in to 
name, and in to preising, and in to 
12glorie; and thei herde not. Thou shalt 
seie therfore to them this wrd, These 
thingus seith the Lord God of Irael, 
Eche litil wyn vessel shal be fulfild with 
wyn. And thei shul sei to thee, Whether 
wee knowe not, that eche litil wyn vessel 
i3shal be fulfild with wyn? And thou 
shalt seyn to them, These thingus seith 
the Lord, Lo! Y shal fulfillen alle the 
dwelleris of this lond, and kingus that 
sitten of' the stoc of Dauid vp on his 
trone, and” prestus, and profetus, and alle 
the dwelleris of Jerusalem with drunke- 
ranesse. And Y shal scatere them, a man 
fro his brother, and faders and sonus to- 
gidere, seith the Lord; IY shal not spare, 
and Y shal not graunte, ne han” mercy, 
isthat Y scatere them not. Hereth, and 
with eres parceyueth; wileth not be rered 
1svp, for the Lord spac. 3yueth to the 
Lord 3oure God glorie, er it waxe dere, 
and er offenden 30ure feet at the derc 
hillis; 3ee shul abide li3t, and he shal 
putte it in to shadewe of deth, and in to 
wymystynesse. That if this* 3ee shul not 
heren, in hid shal wepe my soule fro the 
face of pride; wepende itY shal wepe, 
and leden out shal myn e3e tere, for 
igtaken is the floc of the Lord. Sei to the 
king, and to the lordshipende woimman, 
Beth mekid, sitteth?, for fro j3oure hed 


typonepr.m %Om. £ prem. 
pr.m.Guk. and sitteth £ pr.m. 


mM wole not I. 


vand I gz pr. m. 


JEREMIAH. 373 


able to ony vss. And the word of thes 
Lord was maad to me, and seide, Theo - 
Lord seith these thingis, So Y schal make 
rotun the pride of Juda, and the myche 
pride of Jerusalem, and this worste puple, 10 
that nylen™ here my wordis, and goen in 
the schrewidnesse of her herte; and thei 
3eden aftir alien goddis, to serue hem, and 
to worschipe hem; and thei schulen be as 
this breigirdil, which is not able to ony 
vss. For as a breigirdil cleueth to thei 
leendis of a man, so Y ioynede faste to me 
al the hous of Israel, and al the hous of 
Juda, seith the Lord, that thei schulden 
be to me in to a puple, and in to name, 
and in to heriyng, and in to glorie; and 
thei herden not. Therfor thou schalt seie 12 
to hem this word, The Lord God of Israel 
seith these thingis, Ech potel schal be fill- 
id of wyn. And thei schulen seie to thee, 
Whether we witen not, that ech potel: 
schal be fillid of wyn? And thou schalt 13 
seie to hem, The Lord seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y shal fille with drunkenesse alle 
the dwelleris of this lond, and the kyngis 
of the generacioun of Dauith, that sitten 
on his trone, and the prestis, and profetis, 
and alle the" dwelleris of Jerusalem. And 14 
Y schal scatere hem, a man fro his bro- 
ther, and the fadris and sones togidere, 
seith the Lord; Y schal not spare, and Y 
schal not graunte, nether Y schal do mer- 
cy, that I leese‘not hem. Here 3e, and15 
perseyue with eeris; nyle 3e be reisid, for 
the Lord spak. 3yue 3e glorie to 3oure 16 
Lord God, bifore that it wexe derk, and 
bifor that 3oure feet hirte at derk hillis ; 
3e schulen abide li3t, and he schal sette it 
in to the schadewe of deeth, and in to 
derknesse. That if 3e heren not this, my 17 
soule schal wepe in hid place for the face 


* of pride; it wepynge schal wepe, and myn 


ize shal caste ont a teer, for the floc of 
the Lord is takun. Seye thou to thets 
kyng, and to the ladi, Be 3e mekid, sitte 


yIuar 


whax. *Om.c pr.m. G prom. H. 


n Om. c sec. m. FGHKMNPQRSUVY. 


374 


shal go doun the croune of 3oure® glorie. 
19 The cites of the south ben closid, and 
ther is not that opene?; translatid is al 
20 Juda with parfit transmygracioun. Rer- 
eth 3oure ejen, and seeth, that comen fro 
the north; where is the floc that is® 3oue 
21 to thee, thi noble feeld beste? What shalt 
thou seyn, whan he shal visite thee? 
thou forsothe hast ta3t them a3een thee, 
and lerned a3en thin hed. Whether not 
sorewis ca3ten thee, as a womman ber- 
zzende child? That if thou shalt sey in 
thin herte, Whi camen to me these 
thingus ? for the multitude of thi wicke- 
nesse? opened ben thi more shamefast 
23 thingus, defoulid ben thi foot solis. Yf 
‘ chaunge mai an Ethiope his skyn, or a 
parde his dyuersetes, and 3ee shul moun 
24wel do, whan 3ee han lerned euel. And 
Y shal sowe them abrod, as stobil that 
with the wynd is raueshid in desert. 
25 This thi lot, and the part of thi mesure 
of me, seith the Lord; for thou for3eete 
26me, and trostedist in lesing. Wherfore 
and Y nakenede thin hipes a3en® thi face, 
27and aperede thi shenshepe, thi vouteries, 
and thi ne3ingus‘, the hidous gilte of thi 
fornycacioun vpon hillis; in the feeld Y 
sa3 thin abhominaciouns. Wo to thee, 
Jerusalem, thou shalt not be clensid after 
me; how longe 3yt? 


CAP..XIV; 


1 That don is the wrd of the Lord to 
2Jeremye, of the wrdis of dro3te. Weilede 
Jewerie, and his 3atus fellen doun, and 
ben dercnedé in the erthe, and the cri of 
3Jerusalem stejede vp. The more senten 
ther lasse to water; thei camen to drawe, 
and thei founde not" water, thei beeren 
a3een ther vesselis voide; thei ben con- 
foundid and tormentid, and thei couerden 
4ther hedis for the wastite of the lond, 


a8 Om, E prem. eY a, 


b apere E pr.m. 
& derkid acu. 


h no 4EGH. 


Pofi. 4 ranyschid, or take awei 1. 
¥ stiede vp 1. : 


JEREMIAH. 


d wickidnes 4GuK. 


? Om. cFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


XIII. 196 — XIV. 4. 


3e, for the coroun of 3oure glorie schal go 
doun froP 3oure heed. The cities of the 19 
south ben closid, and noon is that open- 
ith; al Juda is translatid bi perfit pass- 
yng ouere, ether goynge out of her loud.- 
Reise 3e 3oure i3en, and se 3e, what men 20 
comen fro the north; where is the floc 
which is 30uun to thee, thi noble scheep ? 
What schalt thou seie, whanne he schal 21 
visite thee ? for thou hast tau3t hem a3ens 
thee, and thou hast tau3t ajens thin heed. 
Whether sorewis han not take thee, as 
a womman trauelynge of child? That 22 
if thou seist in thin herte, Whi camen 
these thingis to me? for the multitude of 
thi wickidnesse thi schamefulere thingis 
ben schewid, thi feet ben defoulid. If a23 
man of Ethiopie mai chaunge his skyn, 
ether a pard maz chaunge hise dyuersitees, 
and 3e moun do wel, whanne 3e han lerned 
yuel. And Y schal sowe hem abrood, as 24 
stobil which is rauyschid’ of the’ wynd 
in desert. This zs thi® lot, and the part 2s 
of thi mesure of me, scith the Lord; for 
thou for3etidist me, and tristidist in a 
leesyng. Wherfor and Y made nakid thin 26 
hipis a3ens thi face, and thi' schenschipe 
apperide, thin auowtries, and thin neyyng, 27 
and the felonye of thi fornycacioun on 
litle hillis in the feeld; Y si; thin abho- 
mynaciouns. Jerusalem, wo to thee, thou 
schalt not be clensid after me til 3it. 


CAP. XIV. 


The word of the Lord, that was maad1 
to Jeremye, of the wordis of dryenesse. 
Jude weilide, and the 3atis therof fellen2 
doun, and ben maad derk in erthe, and 
the cry of Jerusalem stiede’. Gretteres 
men senten her lesse men to water; thei 
camen to drawe wati7, and thei foundun 
no water, thei brou3ten a3en her vessels 
voide; thei weren schent and turmentid, 
and thei hiliden her heedis for distriyng4 


e and ajen 4. 


f neynge E sec. m. 


Sthe1. ¢ the a pr.m.cFGHIMNPQRU. 


XIV. 5—I5. 


for ther cam not reyn in’ erthe. ~ Con- 
foundid ben the erthe tilieres, thei co- 
suereden ther hedis. For whi and the 
hynde in the feld bar, and lafte hir 
6frutes*, for ther was not erbe; and the 
feeld! asses stoden in roches, and drowe 
wind as dragounes; ther e3en faileden, 
7for ther was not erbe. Yf™ oure wicke- 
nesses" ‘schul answere® to vs, Lord, do for 
thi name, for manye ben oure turnyngys 
sawei; to thee wee han synned. Thou 
biding of Irael, his saueour in tyme of 
gtribulacioun, whi as a comeling tiliere 
thou art to come in the lond, and as 
“‘weie goere? bowende doun to dwelle? whi 
art thou to come as a man vagaunt, as a 
strong mat that mai not saue? Thou for- 
sothe in vs art, Lord, and thin hoely 
name is inwardly clepid vp on vs; ne for- 
1osake thou vs. These thingus seith the 
Lord to this puple, that louede to moue 
ther feet, and restede not, and to the 
Lord pleside not; now recorden he shal 
‘wickidnesses of them4, and visite ‘syunes 
of them’. And the Lord seide to me, 
Wile thou not pre3e for this puple in to 
12good. Whan thei shul faste, Y shal not 
here ther prejeres; and if thei offre 
brent sacrifises and slayn sacrifises, I shal 
not take them, for with swerd and hun- 
ger and pestilence Y shal waste them. 
13 And Y seide, A! A! A! Lord God, ther® 
profetus seyn to them, 3ee shul not' see 
swerd, and hunger in 30u shal not be, 
but verre pes he shal 3yue in this place. 
14And the Lord seide to me, Falsly the 
profetus profecien in my name; I sente 
them not, and comaundide not to them, 
ne spac to them; a lying viseoun, and a 
gilesnm denynyng, and the" deseit’ of 
1sther herte thei profecien to 3ou. Ther- 
fore these thingus seith the Lord of the 
protetus that profecien in my name, whom 
Y sente not, seiende, Swerd and hungir 
shal not be in this lond; In swerd and 


Jona. <kfrnyt eprom. acuK. |! Om. & pr.m. 
Pa wele goer AGNK. 
u Om. 4gu. VY leding doun £ pr. m. 


swere C pr.m. answerden E pr. m. 
synnes E prim, ‘the acux. tOm.c prim. 


wther wast. * hem Nn. 


JEREMIAH. 875 


of the lond, for reyn cam not in the lond. 
Erthe tilieris weren schent, thei hiliden her 
heedis. For whi and an hynde caluyde ins 
the feeld, and lefte her calues, for noon 
eerbe was”; and wield assis stoden ine 
rochis, and drowen wynde as dragouns ; 
her ijen failiden, for noon eerbe was. If7 
oure wickidnessis answeren to vs, Lord, 
do thou for thi name, for oure turnyngis 
awei ben manye; we han synned ajens 
thee. Thou abidyng of Israel, the sauyour 8 
therof in the tyme of tribulacioun, whi9s 
schalt thou be as a comelyng in the lond, 
and as a weigoere bowynge to dwelle ? 
whi schalt thou be as a man of vnstable 
dwellyng, as a strong man that mai not 
saue? Forsothe, Lord, thou art in vs, and 
thin hooli name is clepid to help on vs; 
forsake thou not vs. The Lord seith these 10 
thingis to this puple, that louede to stire 
hise feet, and restide not, and pleside not 
the Lord; now he schal haue mynde on 
the wickidnesses of hem, and he schal 
visite the synnes of hem. And the Lord11 
seide to me, Nyle thou preie for this puple 
in to good. Whanne thei schulen faste, Y 12 
schal not here the preieris of hem ; ‘and if 
thei offren brent sacrifices and slayn sacri- 
fices, Y schal not resseyue tho*, for Y schal 
waste hem bi swerd and hungur and 
pestilence. And Y seide, A! A! A! Lord 1s 
God, profetis seien to hem, 3e schulen not 
se swerd, and hungur schal not be in 3ou, 
but he schal 3yue to 3ou veri pees in this 
place. And the Lord seide to me, The1s 
profetis profesien falsli in my name; Y 
sente not hem, and Y comaundide not to 
hem, nether Y spak to hem; thei profe- 
sien to 30u aY fals reuelacioun, and a gile- 
ful dyuynyng, and the disseyuyng of her 
herte. Therfor the Lord seith these thingis 15 
of the profetis that profesien in my name, 
whiche Y sente not, and seien, Swerd and 
hungur schal not be in this lond; Tho’ 
profetis schulen be wastid bi swerd and 


m For eprem.  ® wickidnessis AGHK. © an- 
4 oure wickenesses E pr. 7. r oure 


yOm.1. 2 Thilke 1. 


376 


hunger shul be to-wastid tho” profetus. 
1s And puples, to whom thei profecieden, 
shul be throwen aferr in the weies of 
Jerusalem, for hungir and swerd, and 
ther shal not ben, that birie them; thei 
and the wyues of them, sonus and do3- 
tris of them; and Y shal heelden* out 
17vp on hem ther evel. And thou shalt 
sei to them this wrd, Leden doun myn 
ejen terY by ny3t and dai, and be thei 


not stille, for with gret to-treding to- - 


treden is the maiden do3ter of my puple, 
ishugeli with the werste veniaunce. If Y 
shul gon out to? the feeldus, loo! the 
slayn with swerd; and if Y shul go in to 
the citee, lo! the to-wastid with hunger ; 
the profete forsothe and prest 3iden awei 
i9in to the lond that thei knewe not. Whe- 
ther throwende aferr thou threwe awei* 
Judam, or thi soule wlatede Sion? whi 
thanne hast thou smyten vs, so that ther 
is noon” helthe? Wee han abide pes, and 
ther is not good; and tyme of curing, and 
20lo! disturbing. Wee han knowe, Lord, 
oure vnpitousnesses, and the wickenesses° 
of oure faders, for wee han synned to 
2i thee. Ne 3yue thou vs in to repref, for 
thi name, ne do thou to vs repref; of 
the see of thi glorie recorde, ne al voide 
make thou thi pes couenaunt with vs. 
22 Whether ben in grauen thingus of Jen- 
tilis that reynen, or heuenus moun 3yue 
wederes? whether not thou art Lord 
oure God, whom wee han abide? Thou 
forsothe didist alle these thinges. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And the Lord seide to me, If Moises 
shulde stonde, and Samuel bifor me, my 
soule is not to this puple; thro3 out 

2them fro my face, and go thei out. That 
if thei shul sey to thee, Whider shul wee 
go out? thou shalt sei to them, These 
thingus seith the Lord, Who to deth, to 
deth, and who to swerd, to swerd, and 


Wthe agux. X*lede «a. Ycrie K. 


@ ther schal 1. 
abeden 1. 


bOm.1. ©¢ betty. 
h abooden Ep. abeden 1. abyden s, 


JEREMIAH. 


z Om. £ pr.m. 


a with 1. 
i haue 1 pass. 


XIV. 16—xXvV. 2. 


hungur. And the puplis, to whiche thei16 
profesieden, schulen be cast forth in the 
weies of Jerusalem, for hungur and swerd, 
and noon schal* be, that schal birie. hem; 
they and the wyues of hem, the sones and 
the dou;tris of hem ‘schulen be cast forth; 
and Y schal schede out on hem her yuel. 
And thou schalt seie to hem this word, 17 
Myn izen lede doun a teer bi ni3t and dai, 
and be® not stille, for the virgyn, the dou3- 
ter of my puple, is defoulid bi greet de- 
foulying, with the worste wounde greetli. 
If Y go out to feeldis, lo! men ben slayn 1s 
bit swerd ; and if Y entre in to the citee, 
lo! men bex maad leene for hungur ; also 

a profete and a prest 3eden in to the lond 
which thei knewen not. Whether thou 19 
castynge awei hast cast awei Juda, ether 
thi soule hath wlatid Sion ? whi therfor 
hast thou smyte vs, so that noon® heelthe 
is'? We abididen® pees, and no good is; 
and we abididen time of heeling, and lo! 
disturbling zs. Lord, we han‘ know oure20 
vnfeithfulnessis, and the wickidnessis of 
oure fadris, for we han synned to thee. 
3yue thou not vs in to schenschip, for thi2i 
name, nether do thou dispite to vs; haue 
thou mynde on the seete of thi glorie, 
make thou not voide thi boond of pees with 
vs. Whether in grauun ymagis of hethene 22 
men ben thei that reynen, ethir heuenes 
moun 3yue reynes? whether thou art not 
oure Lord God, whom we abididen*? For 
thou madist alle these thingis. 


CAR. XV. 


And the Lord seide to me, Thou3 Moi-1 
ses and Samuel stoden bifore me, my soule 
is not to this puple; caste thou hem out 
fro my face, and go thei out. That if thei2 
seien to thee, Whidur schulen we go ont ? 
thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord seith 
these thingis, Thei that to deth, to deth, 
and thei that to swerd, to swerd, and thei 


aafer 4. not a. ¢ wickidnessis AGHK. 


enor ‘ftheris1. 8 abooden Ep. abyden rs. 


k abooden Ep. abyden s. 


XV.3-—15. 


who to hunger, to hunger, and who to 
3caitifte, to caytifte. And Y shal visete 
vp on hem foure spices, seith the Lord ; 
swerd to sla3ter, and houndis to tern, and 
foules of heuene, and bestus of erthe to 
4deuouren and wasten. And Y shal 3yue 
them in to gret hete to alle reumes of 
erthe, for Manassen, the sone of Ezechie, 
king of Juda, vpon alle thingus that he 
sdide in Jerusalem. Who forsothe shal 
han merci of thee, Jerusalem, or who 
shal sorewe for thee, or who shal go to 
6 preze for thi pes? Thou hast forsake me, 
seith the Lord, baeward thou jidist awei ; 
and I shal strecchen out myn hond vp on 
thee, and sle thee; I trauailede pre3ende. 
7 And Y shal scatere them with a fan in 
the jatus of the lond; I slo3, and loste 
my puple, and nerthelatere fro ther weies 
sthei be not turned ajeen. Multiplied ben 
to me his widewes vp on the grauel of 
the se; and Y bro3te in to them vp on the 
moder of the 3unge waxen a wastere in 
mydday, Y seute vp on the cites feerli 
oferd. Feblid ys she that bar seuene, 
failede hire soule; fel doun to hir the 
sunne, whan 3it to hir was day. Con- 
foundid she is, and ful out shamede; and 
hir remnauntus in to swerd Y shal 3yue 
in the si3te of hir® enemys, seith the 
io Lord. Wo to me, my moder; whi geete 
thou me, a man of strif, a man of dis- 
cord in eche lond? I vsurede not, ne to 
me vsurede any man; alle cursen to me, 
iseith the Lord. If not thi relikes in to 
good, if Y a3jen cam not to thee in tyme 
of affliccioun, and in tyme of tribulacioun 
izand of anguysh, a3jen the enemye. Whe- 
ther shal be ioyned‘ iren$ to iren fro the 
isnorth, and bras? Thi richesses and thi 
tresores in to taking awei Y shal 3yue 
freely, in alle thi synnes, and in alle thi 
i4termes. And I shal bringe thin enemys 
fro the lond that thou knowist not; for 
fyer tend vp is in my wodnesse, vp on 
i530u it shal brenne. Thou wost, Lord, 


dha xk. €inyn 2 prem. 


! arecche 1. 
VOL. HI. 


JEREMIAH. 


f bounde c pr.m. £ pr. m. 


377 


that to hungur, to hnungur, and thei that 
to caitiftee, to caitifte. Y schal visite ons 
hem fonre spices, seith the Lord; a swerd 
to sleeynge, and doggis for to reende, and 
volatilis of the eir, and beestis of the erthe 
to deuoure and to distrie. And Y sehal4 
3yue hem in to fernour to alle rewimes of 
erthe, for Manasses, the sone of Ezechie, 
king of Juda, on alle thingis whiche he 
dide in Jerusalem. For whi who schals 
haue merci on thee, Jerusalem, ethir who 
schal be sori for thee, ether who schal go 
to preie for thi pees ? Thou hast forsake ¢ 
me, seith the Lord, thou hast go abac ; 
and Y schal stretche! forth myn hond on 
thee, and Y schal sle thee; Y trauelide 
preiyng. And Y schal scatere hem with; 
a wyndewynge™ instrument in the 3atis 
of erthe; Y killide, and loste my puple, 
and netheles thei turneden not ajen fro 
her weies. The widewis therof ben mul-s 
tiplied to me aboue the grauel of the see; 
and Y brou3te in to hem a distriere in 
myddai on the modir of a 3onge man, Y 
sente drede sudeynli on citees. Sche was» 
sijk that childide seuene, hir soule fail- 
ide; the sunne 3ede doun to hir, whanne 
dai was 3it. Sche was schent, and was 
aschamed ; and Y schal 3yue the residue 
therof in to swerd in the si3t of her ene- 
myes, seith the Lord. Mi modir, wo toto 
me; whi gendridist thon me a man of 
chidyng, a man of discord in al the lond ? 
Y lente not, nether ony man lente to me; 
alle men cursen me, the Lord seith. Nou 
man bileue to me, if thi remenauntis be 
not in to good, if Y ranne not to thee in 
the tyme of turment, and in the tyme of 
tribulacioun and of anguysch, a3ens the 
enemye. Whether yrun and metal schal 12 
be ioyned bi pees to irun fro the north ? 
And Y schal 3yue freli thi ritchessis and 13 
thi tresouris in to rauyschyng, for alle thi 
synnes, and in alle thin endis. And Y 14 
schal brynge thin enemyes fro the lond 
which thou knowist not; for fier is kyndlid 


g Om. ¥ pr.m. 


m wynewynge I. 


3c 


378 JEREMIAH. 


recorde thou of me, and visite me, and 
delyuere me fro them that pursuen me; 
wile thou not in thi pacience take me, 
wite thou, for" for thee Y suffrede repref. 
16 Found ben thi wrdys, and Y eet hem; 
and don is to! me thi wrd in to io3e, and 
in to gladnesse of myn herte; for inwardli 
clepid is thi name vp on me, Lord God 
17of ostis. I sat not in counseil of pleieres, 
and gloriede fro the face of thin hond ; 
alone I sat, for of bitternesse thou hast 
isfulfild me. Whi mad is my sorewe per- 
petuel, and my wounde despeirable for- 
soc® to be cured? mad she is to me, as 
19 lesing of vnfeithful watris. For this these 
thingis seith the Lord, Yf thou art con- 
uertid, Y sha] conuerte thee, and befor iny 
face thou shalt stonde; and if thou seuere! 
precious thinge fro foul, as my mouth 
thou shalt be; thei shul be conuertid to 
thee, aud thou shalt not be conuertyd to 
20them. And I shal 3yue thee to this pu- 
ple in to a strong brasene wal, and thei 
shul fi3te a3en thee, and thei shul not han 
the maistry; for I am with thee, that I 
saue thee, and delyuere thee, seith the 
21 Lord. And Y shal delyuere thee™ fro the 
hond of the werst men, and ajeen bie 
thee fro the hond of stronge men. 


CAP. XVI. 


i And don is the wrd of the Lord to 
2me, seiende, Thou shalt not take a wif, 
and ther shul not be to thee sonus and 
3do3tris in this place. For these thingus 
seith the Lord vp on sonus and do3tris, 
that ben goten in this place, and vp on 
the moders of them, that geeten them, 
and vp on the faders of hem, of whos 
4stoc thei ben born in this lond. With 
dethes of siknyngus thei shul die, thei 
shul not be weilid, ne ben biried; in to 
a dunghil vp on the face of the erthe 
thei shul be, and with swerd and hunger 


hOm. acu. 
2 Om. AEK. 


XV. 16—XVI. 4. 


in my strong veniaunce, and it schal brenne 


on 30u. Lord, thou knowist, haue thou 1s 
mynde on me, and visite me, and delynere 
me fro hem that pursuen me; nyle thou 
take me in thi pacience, knowe thou, that 
Y suffride schenschipe for thee. Thi wordis 16 
ben foundun, and Y eet tho; and thi word 
was maad to me in to ioye, and in to glad- 
nesse of myn herte; for thi name, Lord 
God of oostis, is clepid to help on me. Y17 
sat not in the counsel of pleieris, and Y 
hadde glorie for the face of thin hond ; 
Y sat aloone, for thou fillidist me with 
bittirnesse. Whi is my sorewe maad euer- 18 
lastinge, and my wounde dispeirid forsook 
to be curid ? it is maad to me, as a leesyng 
of vnfeithful watris. For this thing the.» 
Lord seith these thingis, If thou turnest, 
Y schal turne thee, and thou schalt stonde 
bifore my face ; and if thou departist pre- 
ciouse thing fro vijl thing, thon schalt be 
as my mouth; thei schulen be turned to 
thee, and thou schalt not be turned to 
hem. And Y schal 3yue thee im to a2 
brasun wal and strong to this puple, and 
thei schulen fiz3te a3ens thee, and schulen® 
not haue the victorie; for Yam with thee, 
to saue thee, and to delyuere thee, seith 
the Lord. And Y schal delyuere thee fro 2i 
the hond of the worste men, and Y schal 
a3enbie thee fro the hond of stronge men. 


CAP. XVI. 


And the word of the Lord was maad to1 
me, and seide, Thou schalt not take a wijf,2 
and sones and dou3tris schulen not be to 
thee in this place. For the Lord seiths 
these thingis on sones and dou3tris, that 
ben gendrid in this place, and on the 
modris of hem, that gendride hem, and on 
the fadris of hem, of whos generacioun 
thei ben borun in this lond. Thei schulen4 
die bi dethis of sikenessis, thei schulen not 
be biweilid, and thei schulen not be biried ; 
thei schulen be in to a dunghil on the face 
of erthe, and thei schulen be wastid bi 


ivntox. kit forsoke az sec. m. G.pr.m.Hk. ‘shalt seuere 4E sec.m.Gux, ™Om.£ prim. 


0 thei schul 1. 


XVI. 5—14. 


thei shul be wastid; and be shal the 
careyn of them in to mete to the foulis 
of heuene, and to the bestes of erthe. 
5 These thingus forsothe seith the Lord, 
Thou shalt not gon in to the hous of the® 
feste, ne go to weilen?, ne coumforte thou 
them; for Y haue taken awey my pes fro 
this puple, seith the Lord, mercy and 
6mercy doyngis. And dien shul the grete 
and the litle in this lond; thei shul not 
be biried, ne be weilid ; ‘and thei shul 
not? kutte themself, ne ballidnesse shal 
7ben do for hem. And thei shul not breke 
among hem bred to the weilende, to coum- 
forte vp on the deade, and thei shul not 
3yue to them drinc of the chalis, to™ coum- 
sforten vp on ther fadir and’ modir. And 
the hous of feste thou shalt not gon in, 
that thou sitte with them, and ete, and 
gdrinke. For these thingus seith the Lord 
of ostus, God of Irael, Lo! Y shal don 
awey fro this place, in 3oure e3jen and in 
j3oure da3es, vois of io3e, and vois of glad- 
nesse, and vois of man spouse, and vois 
100f womman spouse. And whan thou hast 
told to this puple alle these wrdus, and 
thei sey to thee, Whi spac the Lord vp 
on vst al this grete euel? what oure 
wickenesse", and what oure synne’ that 
wee han synned to the Lord oure God ? 
11thou shalt sey to them, For forsoken me 
3oure fadris, seith the Lord, and 3iden 
awel aftir aliene goddis, and serueden to 
them, and honoureden hem, and me for- 
izsoken, and my lawe kepten not. But 
and 3ee wers wro3ten than 3oure fadris ; 
lo! forsothe eche goth after the shreude- 
nesse of his euel herte, that me he here 
isnot. And Y shal caste 3ou" out fro this 
loud, in to the lond that 3ee and 3oure 
fadris knowe* not; and 3ee shul serue 
there to alien goddis dai and ny3t, that 
14shul not 3iue to 30u reste. Therfore lo! 
da3es comen, seith the Lord, and it shal 
be no mor seid, Lyueth the Lord, that 
ladde out the sonns of Irael fro the lond 


P to the weile x. 
VY greet synne 4. 


9 Om. AEGIK. 
a wickidnes 4GHK. 
P Om. 2. 


° the erthe 1s. 4 and merci I. 


qneeE prem. 
whem £ pr.m. 


r Om. N. 


JEREMIAH. 379 


swerd and hungur; and the careyn of hem 
schal be in to mete to the volatilis of he- 
uene, and to beestis of erthe®. For thes 
Lord seith these thingis, Entre thou not 
in to an hous of feeste, nethir go thou to 
biweile, nether comfourte thou hem; for 
Y haue take awei my pees fro this puple, 
seith the Lord,‘ Y haue take awei? merci4 
and merciful doyngis. And greete andé 
smalle schulen die in this lond; thet 
schulen not be biried, nethir schulen be 
biweilid ; and thei schulen not kitte hem 
silf, nethir ballidnesse schal be maad for 
hem. And thei schulen not breke breed7 
among hem to hym that mourneth, to 
coumforte on a deed man, and thei schu- 
len not 3yue to hem drynk of a cuppe, to 
coumforte on her fadir and modir. Ands 
thou schalt not entre in to the hous of 
feeste, that thou sitte with hem, and ete, 
and drynke. For whi the Lord of oostis, 9 
God of Israel, seith these thingis, Lo! Y 
schal take awei fro this place, bifore 3oure 
i3en and in 30ure daies, the vois of ioie, 
and the vois of gladnesse, and* the vois of 
spouse’, and the vois of spousesse. And 10 
whanne thou schalt telle alle these wordis 
to this puple, and thei schulen seie to thee, 
Whi spak the Lord al this greet yuel on 
vs? what 7s oure wickidnesse, ether what 
is oure synne which we synneden to oure 
Lord God? thou schalt seie to hem, For1! 
joure fadris forsoken me, seith the Lord, 
and 3eden aftir alien goddis, and seruyden 
hem, and worschipiden hem, and thei for- 
soken me, and kepten not my lawe. Butz 
also 3e wrou3ten worse than 3oure fadris ; 
for lo! ech man goith aftir the schrewid- 
nesse' of his yuel herte, that he here not 
me. And Y schal caste 30u out of this13 
lond, in to the lond which 3e and joure 
fadris knowen not; and 3e schulen serue 
there to alien goddis dai and ni3t, whiche 
schulen not 3iue reste to 30u. Therfor Jo! 14 
daies comen, seith the Lord, and it schal 
no more be seid, The Lord lyueth, that 


Om. E prom. 
x knewen K. 


8 Om. £ prim. + Om. £ prem. 


8 the spouse s pr.m.  schrewisnesse A. 


3c 2 


380 


15 0f Egipt; but lyueth the Lord, that ladde 
out the sonus of Irae] fro the lond of the 
north, and fro alle londus to whiche I 
caste them out ; and Y shal bringe them 
a3een to ther lond that I 3af to the fadris 

isof them. Lo! Yshal senden many fissh- 
eres, seith the Lord, and thei shul fisshen 
hem ; and after these thingus I shal sende 
to them manye hunteres, and thei shul 
hunte them fro eche mounteyn, and fro 

17eche hil, and fro the caues of stones. For 
myn e3en vp on alle the weies of them ; 
thei ben not hid fro my face, and hid 
was not the wickenesseY of them fro 

iwmyn ejen. And Y shal 3elde first the 
double wickenesses? and the synnes of 
hem, for thei defouleden my lond in dead 
smyten thingus of ther maumetus, and 
with ther abhominaciouns thei* fulfilden 

iomyn heritage. Lord, my strengthe, and 
my stalwrthenesse, and my refute in the 
dai of tribulacioun, to thee Jentiles shuln 
come fro the vtmostus® of erthe, ard seyn, 
Vereli lesing weldeden oure fadris, va- 

2vnyte that to them profitede not. Whe- 
ther a man shal maken to hym goddis ? 

airand thei ben not goddis. Therfore lo! 
Y shal shewe to them bi this while, I 
shal shewe to them myn hond and my 
vertue; and thei shul wite, for name to 
me is Lord°. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 The synne of Jude writen is with 
an irene pointel, in an adamantyue nail, 
grauen ont vp on the brede of ther herte, 

zand in the hornes of their auteres. Whan 
recorde shul the sonus of them of ther 
auteres, and of ther maumet wodus, and 
of ther braunching trees in hee3e moun- 

3 teynes, sacrifiende in the feld, thi strengthe 
and alle thi tresores in to taking awei Y¢ 
shal 3yue, thin heeze thingus* for the 

asynues in alle thi coestes. And thon shalt 
be forsake alone of thin eritage that Y 


¥Y wickidnes 4GuK. 


2 wickidnessis AGHK. 
dhe g pr. m. 


€ Om. £ prem, 


t thilke 1. the n. 


JEREMIAH. 


a Om. a. 


XVI. 15—XVIL. 4. 


ledde the sones of Israel out of the lond 
of Egipt; but the Lord lyueth, that ledde 1s 
the sones of Israel fro the lond of the 
north, and fro alle londis to whiche Y 
castide hem out; and Y schal lede hem 
az3en in to her lond which Y 3af to the 
fadris of hem. Lo! Y schal sende many 16 
fischeris to hem, seith the Lord, and thei 
schulen fische hem ; and aftir these thingis 
Y schal sende many hunteris to hem, and 
thei schulen hunte hem fro ech mounteyn, 
and fro ech htil hil, and fro the caues of 
stoonys. For myn izen ben on alle the17 
weies of hem; thot wees ben not hid fro 
my face, and the wickidnesse of hem was 
not priny fro myn i3en. And Y schal 3elde 18 
first the double wickidnessis and synnes of 
hem, for thei defouliden my lond in the 
slayn beestis of her idols, and filhiden myn 
eritage with her abhomynaciouns. Lord, 19 
my strengthe, and my stalworthnesse,.and 
my refuyt in the dai of tribulacioun, he- 
thene men schulen come to thee fro the 
fertheste places of erthe, and schulen seie, 
Verili oure fadris helden a leesyng in pos- 
sessioun, vanyte that profitide not to hem. 
Whether a man schal make goddis to hym 20 
silf? and tho ben no goddis. Therfor lo! 21 
Y schal schewe to hem bi this while, Y 
schal schewe to hem myn hond, and my 
vertu; and thei schulen wite, that the 
name to me is Lord. 


CAP. XVII. 


The synne of Juda is writun with ani 
irone poyntel®, in a nail of adamaunt; é7 és 
writun on the breede of the herte of hem, 
and in the hornes of the auteris of hem. 
Whannue the sones of hem bithenken one2 
her auteris, and woodis, and on the trees 
ful of boowis, makynge sacrifice in the 
feld in hizje munteyns, Y schal 3yue this 
strengthe and alle thi tresouris in to ra- 
uyschyng, thin hize thingis for synnes in 
alle thin endis. And thou schalt be left 
aloone fro thin eritage which Y 3af to 


b vttermostis 4eHK. © the Lord c pr.m. 


u poynte N. 


2G s—16. 


3af to thee; and to seruen’ Y shal make 
thee? to thin enemys, in the lond that 
thou knewest not; for fyr thou brendist 
vp in my wodnesse, vnto euermor it shal 
Sbrenne. These thingus seith the Lord, 
Cursid" the man that trostith in man, 
and putteth flesh his arm, and fro the 
6 Lord his herte goth awei. Forsothe it 
shal ben as ‘iencian trees' in desert, and 
he shal not see, whan shal come good ; 
but he shal dwelle in dro3te in desert, in 
7 the lond of briyn, and vnabitable. Blessid* 
the man that trosteth in the Lord, and 
8the Lord shal ben his trost. And he 
shal be as a tree, that is ouer plauntid 
vp on watris, that at the humour send- 
ith' his rootes; and he shal not drede, 
whan shal come gret hete; and his lef 
shal be grene, and in tyme of dro3te shal 
not be bysy, ne any tyme shal cese to 
omake frut. Shreude is the herte of man, 
‘0and vnserchable; who shal knowen it? I 
the Lord serchende™ herte, and prouende 
reenes, that 3yue to eche man after his 
weie, and after the frut of his findingus. 
11The partrich nurshede" that she bar® 
not, made richesses, and not in dom; in? 
the myddil of ther da3es she shal forsake 
them, and in hir laste she sha] ben vnwis. 
12The dignete see of glorie of hei3te fro 
the bygynnyng, place of oure halewing, 
13 abiding of Irael. Lord, alle that thee for- 
saken, shul be confoundid; goende awei 
fro thee in the erthe shul be writen, for 
thei forsoken the‘ veyne of lyuyng watris, 
14the Lord. Hele me, Lord, and Y shal ben 
helid ; saf mac me and Y shal be saf; for 
ismy preising thou art. Lo! thei seyn to 
me, Wher is the wrd of the Lord? come 
isit. And Y am not disturbid, thee shep- 
perde folewende, and the dai of man I 
disirede not, thou wost. That" that is 
gon out fro my lippis ri3t in thi> sizte 


f seruen thee £ pr. in. § Om. E pr.m. 


or bromes E sec. m. marg. ientian tree, or broom aGuK. 
2 haccheth £ pr.m. 
8 the K. 


teth # pr. m. 
q Om. ¢ sec. m. FE pr. m. 


™ sechynge AGUK. 
T Om. Epr.m. 


v ynserchable 1. vnserchable, ether mai not be souzt CEFGHKMNPQRSUVXY. 
y the a pr. m. 


CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. * hem n. 


h Cursid is 4K sec. m. 


JEREMIAH. 381 


thee; and Y schal make thee to serne thin 
enemyes, in the lond which thou knowist 
not; for thou hast kyndlid fier in my 
strong veniaunce, it sehal brenne til in to 
with outen ende. The Lord seith theses 
thingis, Cursid 7s the man that ‘trestith in 
inan, and settith fleisch his arm, and his 
herte goith awei fro the Lord. For hes 
sehal] be as bromes in desert, aud he schal 
not se, whanne good scha} come; but he 
schal dwelle in drynesse in desert, in the 
lond of saltnesse, and vnabitable. Blessid7 
is the man that tristith in the Lord, and 
the Lord schal be his trist. And he sehal# 
be as a tre, whieh is plauntid over watris, 
which sendith hise rootis to moisture ; and 
it schal not drede, whanne heete schal come; 
and the leef therof schal be greene, and it 
seha] not be moued in the tyme of dry- 
nesse, nether ony tyme it schal faile to 
make fruyte. The herte of man is sehrew-» 
id, and ‘may not be sou3t’; who schal 
knowe it? Yam the Lord sekynge the10 
herte, and preuynge the reynes’, and Y 
3yue to ech man after his weye, and aftir 
the fruyt of his fyndyngis. A partriche1 
nurschide tho thingis whiche sche bredde 
not; he made richessis, and not in doom; 
in the myddis of hise daies he schal forsake 
tho*, and in hise laste tyme he schal be 
vnwijs. The seete of glorie of hi3nesse 12 
was at the bigynnyng the place of oure 
halewyng, the abidyng of Israel. Lord, 13 
alle thei that forsaken thee, schulen be 
schent ; thei that goen aweie fro thee, 
schulen be writun in erthe, for thei han 
forsake the Lord, a veyne of quyk watirs. 
Lord, heele thou me, and Y schal bet 
heelid ; make thou me saaf, and Y sehal 
be saaf; for thou art myn heriyng. Lo!1s 
thei seien to me, Where is the word of 
the Lord? eome it. And Y am not dis-16 
turblid, suynge theeY scheepherd, and Y de- 


i or broom c sec. m. marg. 
1 putteth out c pr. m. put- 
Om. £ pr.m. 


k Blessid is 4. 
© boor EF sec. m. P 


w reynes, ether kydeneris 


382 


17was. Be thou not to me to ferd; myn 
\ishope thou in the dai of tormenting. Be 
thei confoundid, that me pursuen, and 
confoundid be not Y; inwardly drede thei, 
and inwardly drede not Y; bring in vp 
on hem dai of tormenting, and with 
igdouble to-treding to-tred hem. These 
thingus seith the Lord God to me, Go, 
and stond in the 3ate of the sonus of the 
puple, bi whiche gon in kingus* of Juda 
and gon out, and in alle the 3atus of Je- 
20rusalem. And thou shalt sei to thei, 
Hereth the wrd of the Lord, 3ee kingus 
of Juda, and al Jewerie, and alle the 
dwelleris of Jerusalem, that gon in bi 
21 these 3atus. These thingus seith the Lord 
God, Kepeth 3oure soules, and wilith not 
berthenus bern in the dai of sabat, ne 
bringe 3ee in bi the 3atus of Jerusalem. 
22 And wileth not caste out burthenns" fro 
3oure houses in the dai of sabat, and 
eche werc 3ee shul not do; halewith the 
day of sabat, as Y comaunde’ to 3oure 
23fadris. And thei herden not, ne bow- 
eden in ther ere, but inwardly hardeden 
ther nol, lest thei herde me, and lest thei 
21toke discyplyne. 
shul* heren me, seith the Lord, that 
3ee bringe not in birthenus bi the 3atus 
of this cite in the day of sabat, and if 
3ee halewe the dai of sabat, ‘that 3ee don 
25not* in it alle’ were, gon in shul bi the 
3ates of this cite kingus and princes sit- 
tende vpon the see of Dauid, and ste3ende 
vp in chares and hors; thei, and the 
princes of them, men of Juda, and the 
dwelleris of Jernsalem ; and dwellid? shal 
26 be this cite in to euermor. And ‘comen 
shul* fro the cite> of Juda, and fro the 
cumpas of Jernsalem, and fro the lond of 
Beniamyn, and fro the wilde feldus, and 
fro the mountnous® places, and from the 
south, berende® brent sacrifise, and slayn 
offring, and sacrifise, and encens; and 
‘thei shul® bringe in offring in to the 
2Thous of the Lord. If forsothe 3ee shul 


‘the kyngis aeGuK. =" bernus c pr. m. 
not don E pr. m. y Om. E prem. 
© mounteynous 4GK. mounteyns iH. 


JEREMIAH. 


And it shal be, if 3ee: 


¥ comaundide 4EGH. 
2 dwellid, or inhabite a. 


(beringe e. © Om. £ pr.m. 


XVI. 17——27. 


siride not the dai of man, thou woost. 
That that 3ede out of my lippis was ri3tful 
in thi si3t.. Be thou not to drede to me317 
thou art myn hope in the dai of turment. 
Be thei schent, that pursuen me, and bes 
Y not schent; drede thei, and drede not 
Y; brynge in on hem a dai of turment, 
and defoule thou hem bi double defouling. 
The Lord seith these thingis to me, Go1s 
thou, and stonde in the 3ate of the sones 
of the puple, bi whiche the kingis of Juda 
entren and goen out, and in alle the jatis 
of Jerusalem. And thou schalt seie to20 
hem, Here the word of the Lord, 3e kingis 
of Juda, and al Judee, and alle the dwell- 
eris of Jerusalem, that entren bi these 
3atis. The Lord God seith these thingis, 21 
Kepe 3e 30ure soulis, and nyle 3e bere 
birthuns in the dai of sabat, nether bringe 
in bi the 3atis of Jerusalem. And nyle 3e 22 
caste birthuns out of 3oure housis in the 
dai of sabat, and 3e schulen not do ony 
werk; halewe 3e the dai of sabat, as Y 
comaundide to 3oure fadris. And thei2s 
herden not, nether bowiden doun her eere, 
but thei maden hard her nol, that thei 
schulden not here me, and that thei schul- 
den not take chastisyng. And it schal be, 24 
if 3e heren me, seith the Lord, that 3e bere 
not in birthuns bi the 3atis of this citee 
in the dai of sabat, and if 3e halewen the 
dai of sabat, that 3e do not werk ther 
ynne, kingis and princes sittynge on the2s 
seete of Dauid schulen entre bi the 3atis 
of this citee, and stiynge in charis and 
horsis; thei, and the princis of hem, the 
men of Juda, and the dwelleris of Jeru- 
salem; and this citee schal be enhabitid 
withouten ende. And thei schulen come 26 
fro the citees of Juda, and fro the cumpas 
of Jerusalem, and fro the lond of Benia- 
myn, and fro feeldi places, and fro hilli 
places, aud fro the south, beringe brent 
sacrifice, and slayn sacrifice, and encense ; 
and thei schulen bringe offring in to the 
hous of the Lord. Forsothe if 3e heren 27 


w Om. c prim. E pr. m. 
@ men shulen come 4. 


x 3ee shul 
b cites E. 


XVIII. 1——12. 


not here me, that 3ee halewe the day of 
sabat, and that jee bere not berthenef, 
and ne bringe in bi the jatus of Jerusa- 
lem in the dai of sabat, Y shal tende vp 
fyr in his 3atus; and it shal deuoure the 
housys® of Jerusalem, and shal] not be 
quenchid?. 


CAP. XVIII. 


i The wrd that don is to Jeremye fro 
2the Lord, seiende, Ris, and cum doun in 
to the’ hous of the crockere, and there 
3thou shalt here my wrdis. And Y cam 
doun in to the hous of the crockere, and 
4lo! he made a were vp on a whel. And 
seatered is the vessel, that he made of 
clei with his hondus; and turned he made 
that vessel other, as it pleside his* e3en 
sthat he shulde make. And don is the 
ewrd of the Lord to me, seiende, Whether 
as maketh this crockere, shal not Y moun 
make to 30u, hous of Irael? seith the 
Lord. Lo! as the cley in to the hond! 
of the crockere, so 3ee in myn hond, the 
7hous of Irael. Sodeynli Y shal speke 
azen folc, and a3en reume, that Y drawe 
vp bi the roote, and destro3e, and scatere 
sit. If penaunce shul do that fole of his 
euel, for whiche I spac a3en it, don shal 
and Y othenking vp on the euel, that Y 
9tho3te that I shulde do to it. And so- 
deynli Y shal speken of the fole, and of 
the rewme, that Y bilde vp, and plaunte™ 
loin it. If it shul don euel in myn ejen, 
that it here not my vois, othinking Y shal 
do vp on the good that Y spac, that Y 
1shulde do to it. Now thanne sei to the 
man of Jewerie, and to the dwellere of 
Jerusalem, seiende, These thingus seith 
the Lord, Lo! Y make ajen 30n euel, and 
thenke ajen 30u thenking; be turned a3een 
eche" fro his euel weie, and right reulith 
1230ure weies and 3oure studies. The 
whiche seiden, Wee han dispeired, after 
oure tho3tus forsothe wee shul go, and 
eche® aftir the shreudenesse of his euel 


Shous 4. 1) queynt anGHK. 
n eche man AEGHK. 


f birthens 4. 
m plauntide x. 


JEREMIAH. 


ithis aciK. 
© eche man AEGHK. 


383 


not me, that 3e halewe the dai of sabat, 
and that 3e bere not a birthun, and that 
3e bringe not in bi the 3atis of Jerusalem 
in the dai of sabat, Y schal kyndle fier 
in the jatis therof; and it schal deuoure 
the housis of Jerusalem, and it schal not 
be quenchid. 


CAP. SV Ill: 


The word that was maad of the Lord: 
to Jeremye, and seide, Rise thou, and go2 
doun in to the hous of a pottere, and 
there thou schalt here my wordis. And Y3 
3ede doun in to the hous of a pottere, and 
lo! he made a werk on a wheel. And thes 
vessel was distried, which he made of clei 
with hise hondis; and he turnede it, and 
made it another vessel, as it pleside in hise 
izen to make. And the word of the Lords 
was maad to me, and he seide, Whether s 
as this pottere doith, Y mai not do to 3o0n, 
the hous of Israel? seith the Lord. Lo! 
as cley 7s in the hond of a pottere, so 3e, 
the hous of Israel, ben in myn hond. Su-7 
denli Y schal speke a3ens a folk, and a3ens 
a rewme, that Y drawe out, and distrie, 
and leese it. If thilke folk doith penaunces 
of his yuel, which Y spak ajens it, also Y 
schal do penaunce on the yuel, which Y 
thou3te to do to it. And Y schal spekes 
sudenli of a folk, and of a rewme, that Y 
bilde, and plaunte it. If it doith yuel bi-10 
fore myn ijen, that it here not my vois, 
Y schal do penaunce on the good whieh Y 
spak, that Y schulde do to it. Now ther-11 
for seie thou to a man of Juda, and to 
the dwellere of Jerusalem, and seie, The 
Lord seith these thingis, Lo! Y make 
yuel ajens 30u, and Y thenke a thou3te 
ajens jou; ech man turne ajen fro his 
yuel weie, and dresse 3e 3oure weies and 
joure studies. Whiche’ seiden, We han tz 
dispeirid, for we schulen go after oure 
thou3tis, and we schulen do ech man the. 
schrewidnesse of his yuel herte. Therfor ts 
the Lord seith these thingis, Axe 3e he- 


k in his 4eGuk. 1 hoondis acuK. 


2 The whiche 1. 


384 


13 herte wee shul do. Therfore these thingus 
seith the Lord, Asketh fole of kinde, who 
herde such orrible thingus, the whiche 

ifto myche dide the maiden Irael? Whe- 
ther of the ston of the feld shal faile the 
sno3 of Liban? or ben pullid awei moun 
watris brekende out, colde and ful myche 

1s flowende doun? ? For for3at me my puple, 
in veyn offrende licoures, and stumblende 
in ther weies, and in the styes of the 
world, that thei go? bi them in a weye 
ignot berdid'; that be®’ mad the lond of 
hem in to desolacioun, and in to whist- 
ling euere durende; eche forsothe that 
passeth bi it, shal become stoneid, and 

17mouen his hed. As a brenende wind Y 
shal scatere them bifor the enemy; bac 
and not face Y shal shewe to them, in the 

is dai of * perdicioun of hem. And thei seid- 
en, Cometh, and thenke wee ajen Jeremye 
tho3tus ; forsothe pershe shal not the 
lawe fro the prest, ne counseil fro the 
wise man, ne sermoun fro the profete; 
cometh, and smyte wee hym with tunge, 
and take wee not heed to alle the ser- 

ismouns of hym. Tac heed, Lord, to me, 
and here the vois of myn adversaries. 

20 Whether jolden is for good euel, for thei 
deluen a dich to my soule; recorde, that 
Y stod in thi si3t, that I schuld® speke for 
them good, and turne awei thin indigna- 

21 cioun fro them. Therfore 3if’ the sonus of 
them in to hunger, and bring doun hem 
in to the hondus of swerd"; mad be the 
wifes of them withoute free childer, and 
widewes, and the men of hem be slayn 
with deth; the 3unge of them be thei 

22stikid with swerd in bataile. Herd be 
the cri fro the houses of them, thou shalt 
bringe to forsothe vp on hem a thef so- 
deynly ; for thei doluen a dich that thei 
take* me, and grynes thei hidden to my 

23feet. Thou forsothe, Lord, wost al the 
counseil of hem a3en me in to deth; ne 
he thou plesid to the wickidnesseY of 


P Om. ¢ prim. £ prem. 4 shulden goo aenK. 
tofthe eprom. Om. c pr.m. E pr. m. 
take 4 sec.m.GHK. Y wickenesse E. 


8 thei offridens. © Om. N. 


JEREMIAH. 


T berid c pr. m. B prom. H. 
V3if thou 4H see.m.GHK. Wtheswerd epr.m. * shulden 


XVITI. 13——23. 


thene men, who herde siche orible thingis, 
whiche the virgyn of Israel hath do greetli? 
Whether snow of the Liban schal fail fro 14 
the stoon of the feeld? ether coolde watris 
brekynge out, and fletynge doun moun be 
takun awei? For my puple hath forjete 1s 
me, and offriden* sacrifices in veyn, and 
snaperiden in her weies, and in the pathis 
of the world, that thei jeden bi tho in a 
weie not trodun; that the lond of hem ie 
schulde be in to desolacioun, and in to 
an hissyng euerlastinge ; for whi ech that 
passith bi it, schal be astonyed, and schal 
moue his heed. As a? brennynge wynd 17 
Y sclial scatere hem bifor the enemy; Y 
schal schewe to hem the bak and not the 
face, in the dai of the perdicioun of hem. 
And thei seiden, Come 3e, and thenke wes 
thou3tis a3ens Jeremye; for whi the lawe 
schal not perische fro a preest, nether coun- 
cel schal perische fro a wijs man, nether 
word schal perische fro a profete ; come 
3e, and smyte we hyin with tunge, and 
take we noon heede to alle the wordis of 
hym. Lord, 3yue thou tent to me, and ig 
here thou the vois of myn aduersaries. 
Whether yuel is 30ldun for good, for theizo 
han diggid a pit to my soule; haue thou 
mynde, that Y stoode in thi si3t, to speke 
good for hem, and to turne awei thin in- 
dignacioun fro hem. Therfor 3yue thou2i 
the sones of hem in to hungur, and lede 
forth hem in to the hondis of swerd; the 
wyues of hem be maad with out children, 
and be maad widewis, and the hosebondis 
of hem be slayn bi deth; the 3onge men 
of hem be persid togidere bi® swerd in 
batel. Cry be herd of the housis of hem, 22 
for thou schalt bringe sudenli a theef on 
hem; for thei diggiden a pit to take me, 
and hidden? snaris to my feet. But thou, 23 
Lord, knowist al the councel of hem a3ens 
me in to deth ; do thou not merci to the 
wickidnesse of hem, and the synne of hem 
be not doon awei fro thi face; be thei 


S were E sec.m. AGHK. 


Cwith:. 4 thet hidden 1. 


XIX. I-—g. 


them, and the synne? of hem fro thi face 
be not don awei; be thei mad togidere 
fallende in thi si3t, in tyme of thi wod- 
nesse ; awei fro good vse them. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 These thingus seith the Lord, Go, and 
tac the erthene litil wyn vessel of the 
crockere, and fro the elderes of the puple, 

2and fro the elderes of the* prestus. And 
go out to the valei of the sonus of Ennon, 
that is biside the entre of the britil 3ate ; 
and thou shalt preche there wrdys> that 

3Y shal speke to thee; and seyn, Hereth 
the wrd of the Lord, 3ee kingus of Juda, 
and dwelleris of Jerusalem. These thingus 
seith the Lord of ostus, God of Irael, 
Lo! Y shal bringe in tormenting vp on 
this place, so that eche that shal heren it, 
4tyncle hys eres. For thi that thei for- 
soke me, and alien maden this place, and 
offreden to alien godis, in that that 
knewen not thei, and ther faders, and the 
kingis of Juda; and fulfilden this place 
swith blod* of innocentus, and bilden vp 
the he3e thingus of Baalym, to ben brent 
ther sonus with fyr, in to brent sacrifise 
to Balim; whiche thingus Y comaundide 
not, ne spac, ne ste3ede vp in to myn 
cherte. Therfor seith the Lord, Lo! da3es 
comen, and elepid shal no mor be this 
place Tofeth, and the valei of the sone 
z7of Ennon, but the valei of sla3ter. And 
Y shal seatere the counseil of Jude and 
of Jerusalem in this place, and Y shal 
turne them vpsodoun with swerd, in 
si3tee of ther enemys, and in the hond 
off men seehende ther lyues; and Y shal 
jyue the careynes of them mete to the 
foules of heuene, aud to® the bestus of 
serthe. And Y shal sette this cite in to 
stoneyng, and in to whistling ; and ecbe 
that shal passe by it, shal stoneyn, and 
whistlen vp on al the veniaunce of it. 
9 And Y shal fede them with the flesh of 


2 Om. AEGHK. 


2 synnes GUK. 
f£ Om. £ pr. m. 


¢ the sizte 4euK. & Om. 4. 


e¢ Om. 1. 


VOL. II. 


b the woordus E sec. m. 


f the prestis F pr. m, 1, 


3D 


JEREMIAH. 385 


maad fallynge doun in thi si3t, in the tyme 
of thi stronge veniaunce ; vse thou hem to 
othir thing than thei weren ordeyned. 


CAP. XIX. 


. The Lord seith these thingis, Go thou, 1 
and take an erthene potel of a pottere, of 
the eldre men of the puple, and of the® 
eldre men of preestis’£. And go thou out2 
to the valei of the sones of Ennon, which 
is bisidis the entring of the erthene 3ate; 
and there thou schalt preche the wordis 
whiehe Y schal speke to thee; and thous 
schalt seie, Kyngis of Juda, and the dwel- 
leris of Jerusalem, here 3e the word of 
the Lord. The Lord of oostis, God of 
Israel, seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
bringe in turment on this place, so that 
ech man that herith it, hise eeris tyngle. 
For thei han forsake me, and maad alien4 
this place, and offriden’ sacrifices to alien 
goddis ther ynne, whiche thei, and the 
fadris of hem, and the kingis of Juda, 
knewen not; and thei filliden this place 
with the blood of innocentis, and bild-5 
iden hi3 thingis to Baalym, to brenne her 
sones in fier, in to brent sacrifice to Baa- 
lym; whiche thingis Y comaundide not, 
nether spak, nether tho stieden in to myn 
herte. Therfor the Lord seith, Lo! daies« 
comen, and this place schal no more be 
clepid Tophet, and the valei of the sone 
of Ennon, but the valei of sleyng. And7 
Y schal distrie the councel of Juda and of 
Jerusalem in this place, and Y schal dis- 
trie hem bi swerd, in the si3t of her ene- 
myes, and in the hond of men sekynge 
the lyues of hem; and Y schal 3yue her 
deed bodies mete! to the briddis of the eir, 
and to beestis of erthe. And Y schals 
sette this citee in to wondring, and in to 
hissing ; ech that passith bi it, schal won- 
dre, and hisse on al the veniaunce therof. 
And Y schal feede hem with the fleischis9 
d sones AE pr.m. GHK. 


¢ the blod £ pr. m. 


& thei offriden 1.‘ to be mete 1. 


386 


ther sonus, and witb the flesh of ther 
do3tris; and eche the flesh of his frend 
shal ete in segyng and in anguysh, in 
whyche close them shul ther enemys, 
iwand that sechen their lyues. And thou 
shalt to-brose the litle wyn vessel in the 
e3en of the men, that shul go with thee. 
11 And thou shalt sei to them, These thingus 
seith the Lord of ostus, Thus Y shal to- 
brose this puple, and this cyte, as is to- 
brosid the vessel of the crockere, that 
mai no more be restored ; and in! Tofeth 
thei shul ben biried, for ther is not 
i20ther place to birie in. So Y shal do 
to this place, seith the Lord, and to his 
dwelleris, that Y sette this cite as Tofeth. 
13And ben shul the houses of Jerusalem, 
and the houses of the kingus* of Juda, 
as the place Tofeth; vnclene alle the 
houses, in whos rooues thei sacrifieden to 
al the kny3thed of heuene, and offreden 
i4sacrifise! of licoures to alien godus. Cam 
forsothe Jeremye fro Tofeth, whider 
hadde sent hym the Lord to profecien ; 
and stod in the porche of the hous of the 
15 Lord, and seide to al the puple, These 
thingus seith the Lord of ostes, God of 
Irael, Lo! Y shal bringen in vp on this 
cite, and vp on alle his cheef citees, alle 
the euelis that Y spac a3en it; for thei in- 
wardly hardeden ther nolles™, and herde 
not my sermouns. 


CAP. XX. 

1 And ther herde Fassur, the sone of 
Emyner, prest®, that was ordeyned prince 
in the hous of the Lord, Jeremye profe- 

2ciende these sermownus. And Fassur 
smot Jeremye, profete, and putte® hym in 
to the stockes, that was in the ouere j3ate 
of Beniamyn, in the hous of the Lord. 

3 And whan it hadde li3tid in to the moru, 
Fassur ladde out Jeremie out of the 
stockus. And Jeremye seide to hym, Not 
Fassur clepede the Lord thi name, but 


iin to HK. 
° sente AE sec. m. GHK. 


h thei that 4K sec. m. 
E prem. 


JEREMIAH. 


k kyng 4GHK. 


XIX. 10-——XX. 3. 


of her sones, and with the fleischis of her 
dou3tris; and ech man schal ete the fleischis 
of his frend in the bisegyng and angwisch, 
in which the enemyes of hem, and thei 
that seken the lyues of hem, schulen close 
hem togidere. And thou schalt al to-10 
breke the potel bifore the i3en of the men, 
that schulen go with thee. And thou1 
schalt seie to hem, The Lord of oostis 
seith these thingis, So Y schal al to-breke 
this puple, and this citee, as the vessel of 
a pottere is al to-brokun, which mai no 
more be restorid; and thei schulen be 
biried in Tophet, for noon other place is 
to birie. So Y schal do to this place, 12 
seith the Lord, and to dwelleris therof, 
that Y sette this citee as Tophet. And13 
the housis of Jerusalem, and the housis of 
the kingis of Juda, schulen be as the place 
of Tophet; alle the vncleene housis, in 
whose roouys thei sacrifieden* to al the 
chyualrie of heuene, and offriden moist 
sacrifices to alien goddis. Forsothe Jere- 14 
mye cam fro Tophet, whidur the Lord 
hadde sente hym for to profesie; and he 
stood in the porche of the hous of the 
Lord, and seide to al the puple, The Lord 15 
of oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal bringe in on this citee, and 
on alle the citees therof, alle the yuelis 
whiche Y spak ajens it; for thei maden 
hard her nol, that thei herden not my 
wordis. 
CAP. XX. 

And Phassur, the sone of Emyner, thei 
preest, that was ordeyned prince in the 
hous of the Lord, herde Jeremye profesi- 
ynge these wordis. And Phassur smoot2 
Jeremye, the profete, and sente hyin in to 
the stockis, that weren in the hizere 3ate 
of Beniamyn, in the hous of the Lord. 
And whanne it was cleer in the morewe,3 
Phassur ledde Jeremye out of the stockis. 
Aud Jeremye seide to hym, The Lord 
clepide not Phassur thi name, but Drede 


1 sacrifices 4cHkK. ™nolle £ sec.m. ™ the preest 


k sacrifiseden CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


XX. 4—I11. 


4Inwardli ferd on eche side. For these 
thingus seith the Lord, Lo! Y shal 3yue 
thee in to inward ferd, thee and alle thi 
frendus, and to gidere thei shul falle with 
the? swerd of ther enemys; and thin 
ejen shul see; and al Juda? Y shal 3yue 
in the hond of the kyng of Babiloyne, 
and he shal ouer lede them in to: Babi- 
sloyne, and smyte them with swerd. And 
Y shal 3yue al the substaunce of this cite, 
and al his trauaile, and al the pris; and 
al the tresores of the king of Juda I shal 
3yue in the hond of the enemys of them; 
and they shul reue them, and taken, and 
6bringe them in to Babyloyne. Thou 
forsothe, Fassur, and alle the dwelleris of 
thin hous, shul gon in to caitifte; and in 
to Babyloyne thou shalt come, and there 
thou shalt die; and there thou shalt be 
biried, and alle thi frendus, to whyche 
7thou profeciedist™ lesing. Thon leddest’ 
me asyde, Lord, and Y am lad aside; 
strengere than Y thou were, and thou 
haddest the maistrie; I am mad in to 
ascorn al day. Alle scorneden me, for now 
3ore Y speke, criende out the wickidnesse®, 
and the wastite I ofte crie. And don is 
the sermoun of the Lord to me in to 
grepref, and in to scornyng al day. And 
Y seide, I shal not recorden of it, ne 
speke more in .the name of hym. And 
mad it is in myn herte, as fyr gretly 
hetende, and closid in my bones; and Y 
10 failede, to bern not sustenende. I herde 
forsothe the wroug blainyngus of manye, 
and the ferd in enuyroun, Pursueth, and 
pursue wee hym, of alle men that weren 
my pesible, and kepende my side; if any 
maner he he bigilid, and wee haue the 
maistri a3en hym, and wee gete veniaunce 
10f hym. The Lord forsothe is with me 
as a strong fi3tere, therfor that’ pursuen 
me shul falle, and sye shu) be; and thei 
shul be shent hugeli, for thei vnder- 
stoden not the euere durende repref, that 


P Om. AE sec, m. GUK. 


88 wickenesse E. ¢.thei that 4K sec. m. 


lwithr. ™hemn. 


JEREMIAH. 


4 Jewerie c pr.m,. E pr.m, 


n Om. 1. 


3D2 


387 


on ech side. For the Lord seith these 
thingis, Lo! Y schal 3yue thee and alle 
thi freendis in to drede, and thei schulen 
falle doun bi the swerd of her enemyes; 
and thin izjen schulen se; and Y schal 
3yue al Juda in the hond of the king of 
Babiloyne, and he schal lede hem ouer in 
to Babiloyne, and he schal smyte hem bi! 
swerd. And Y schal 3yue al the catel ofs 
this citee, and al the trauel therof, and al 
the prijs; and Y schal 3yue alle the tre- 
sours of the kingis of Juda in the hond of 
her enemyes; and thei schulen rauysche 
tho™, and schulen take, and lede forth in 
to Babiloyne. Forsothe thou, Phassur, 6 
and alle the dwelleris of thin hous, schu- 
len go in to caitifte ; and thou schalt come 
in to Babiloyne, and thou schalt die there; 
and thou schalt be biried there, thou and 
alle thi freendis, to whiche thou profesied- 
ist a® leesyng. Lord, thou disseyuedist7 
me, and Y am disseyued; thou were 
strongere than Y, and thou haddist the 
maistrie; Y am maad in to scorn al dai. 
Alle men bymowen me, for now a whiles 
ago Y speke criynge wickidnesse, and Y 
criede distriynge. And the word of the 
Lord is maad to me in to schenschip, and 
in to scorn al dai. And Y seide, Y schals 
not haue mynde on hym, and Y schal no 
more speke in his name. And the word 
of the Lord was maad, as fier swalynge 
in myn herte, and cloosid in my boonys ; 
and Y failide, not suffryng to bere. For to 
Y herde dispisyngis of many men, and 
drede in cumpas, Pursue 3e, and pursue we 
hym, of alle men that weren pesible to me, 
and kepynge my side; if in ony maner he 
be disseyued, aud we haue the maistrie 
ajens hym, and gete veniaunce of hym. 
Forsothe the Lord as a strouge werriour 11 
is with me, therfor thei that pursuen me 
schulen falle, and schulen® be sijk; and 
thei schulen be schent greetli, for thei 
vndurstoden not euerlastynge schenschip, 
T propheciede acuk. 


8 begiledest & pr. m. 


© thei schul 1. 


388 


12neuer shal be don awei. And thou, Lord 
of ostus, prouere of the ri3twis, that 
seest the reenes and the herte, ‘see I®, Y 
beseche, thi veniaunce of hem; to thee 

13forsothe Y shewide my cause. Syngeth 
to the Lord, preiseth the Lord, for he 
hath’ delyuered” the soule of the pore 

14fro the hond of euelis. Cursid the dai 
in the* whiche Y am born, the dai in 
whiche bar me my moder, be not blessid. 
15Cursed the man, that tolde to my fader, 
seiende, Born is to thee a knaue child, 
1éand as with: io3e gladide hym. Be that 
man as ben the cites, thatY the Lord 
turnede vpsodoun, and it? otho3te hym 
not; here he ery erly, and 3elling in 
17mydday tyme, that me slo3 not fro the 
priue wombe; that mad were to me my 
moder a sepulcre, aud hir priue wombe 
isconceyuyng etierlastende. Whi fro the 
priue wombe Y 3ide ont, that Y shulde 
seen trauaile and sorewe, and wast ben 
in confusioun my dajes ? 
CAP. XXTI. 

1 The wrd that don is to Jeremye fro 
the Lord, whan sente to hym king Sede- 
chie Fassur, the sone of Melchie, and 
Sofonye, the sone of Masie, prest*, sei- 

zende, Aske for vs the Lord, for Nabugo- 
donosor, king of Babiloyne, fi3teth azen 
vs; if par auenture the Lord do with vs 
after alle his merueyles, and he go awei 

3fro vs. And Jeremye seide to them, 
4Thus 3ee shul sey to Sedechie, These 
thingus seith the Lord God, Lo! Y shal 
turne the vesselis of the bataile that in 
3oure hondus ben, and with> whom 3ee 
fizten, ajen the king of Babiloyne, and 
Caldeis, that besegen 30u in cumpas of 
the wallis; and Y shal gedere them in 
sthe myddes of this cite. And Y shal 
ouercome 30u in a stra3t out hond, and 
in a strong arm, and in wodnesse, and in 
6indignacioun, and in® gret wrathe; I shal 


v Om. u. 
bto E prim. 


U see H. seer K. 
preest E sec, m. 


w lyuerede iz. 


P an euerlastinge 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


x Om. AGHK. 
e Om. c. in a AGHK. 


XX. 12—XXI. 6. 


that schal neuere be don awei. And thou, 12 
Lord of. oostis, the preuere of a iust man, 
which seest the reynes and herte, Y bi- 
seche, se Y thi veniaunce of hem; for Y 
haue schewid my cause to thee. Syngei3 
3e to the Lord, herie 3e the Lord, for he 
delyueride the soule of a pore man fro the 
hond of yuel men, Cursid be the dai* 14 * cursed te the 
¢ dai, etc. ‘1 
where ynne Y was borun, the dai where (222 Chee 
ynne my modir childide me, be not bless- eal sue 
id{. Cursid be the man, that telde to my is ite ee in 
i ' s é is he ar- 
fadir, and seide, A knaue child is borun _ eth the hidous- 
b ; nesse of sensu- 
to thee, and made hym glad as with ioye.  atite, in compa- 
é ° . rismin of euil 
Thilke man be as the citees ben, Whiche 16 jeisinge, whech 
the Lord distriede, and it repentide not  °m#, that is, 
a peyne, the re- 
hym; he that killide not me fro the 17 sun suffrede 
° 6 pacientli, as 
woinbe, here ery eerli, and 3ellynge in the — seint Joob, 
é : ler of 
tyme of myddai; that my modir were a  jacience, seide, 
° ; . The dai pershe 
sepulcre to me, and hir wombe were euer- in wheek ee 
lastingeP conseyuyng. Whi 3ede Y out of 1s bom: and this 
dD ? 2 is the sentence, 
the wombe, that Y schulde se trauel and  Cursid be the 
d 6 dai, etc.; that 
sorewe, and that mi daies schulen be 5s, iti suede 
re china 2 the hidonsnesse 
waastid in schenschipe : ofoctisuall eat 
shulde curse 
the time of my 
birthe. Lire 


CAP. XXI 
here. EGHKLYP 


The word which was maad of the Lordt avy. 

to Jeremye, whanne king Sedechie sente ee 
to hym Phassur, the sone of Helchie, and fer 
Sofonye, the preest, the sone of Maasie, cure the tyme 
and seide, Axe thou the Lord for vs, for2 mee 
Nabugodonosor, the kyng of Babiloyne, 

fiz3tith azens vs; if in hap the Lord do 

with vs bi alle hise merueilis, and he go 

awei fro vs. And Jeremye seide to hem,3 

Thus 3e schulen seie to Sedechie, The4 

Lord God of Israel seith these thingis, 

Lo! Y schal turne the instrumentis of 

batel that ben in 3oure hondis, and with 

which 3e fizjten a3ens the king of Babi- 

loyne, and a3ens Caldeis, that bisegen 30u 

in the cumpas of wallis;.and Y schal ga- 

dere tho togidere in the myddis of this 

citee. And Y schal ouercome 30u in honds 

stretchid forth, and in strong arm, and in 

stronge veniaunce, and indignacioun, and 


YofaGHK. 20m. 4EGHK. 4 the 


q in indignacioun a pr. m. 


XXI. 7-——14. 


smyte the dwelleris of this cite, men and 
bestus with gret fpestylence shul dien. 
7And after these thingus, seith the Lord, 
Y shal 3yue Sedechie, king of Juda, and 
his seruauns, and his puple, and that ben 
laft in this cite of pestylence, and swerd, 
and hunger, in the hond of Nabugodo- 
nosor, king of Babiloyne, and in the 
hond of ther enemys, and in the hond of 
men sechende ther lif; and he shal smyte 
them in mouth? of swerd; and he shal 
not be bowid, ne sparen, ne han® reuthe. 
8 And to this puple thou shalt sey, These 
thingus seith the Lord God, Lo! Y 3yue 
bifor 30u weie of lif, and weie of deth. 
9 Who ‘shal dwellef in this cite, shal die 
with swerd, and hunger, and pestilence ; 
whe forsothe shul go out, and flee to the 
Caldeis that besegen 30u, shal lyue, and 
10 be shal to hym his soule as spoile. For- 
sothe Y hauef set my face vp on this cite 
in to evel, and not in to good, seith the 
Lord; in the hond of the king of Babi- 
loyne it shal be 3oue%, and brenne it out 
ithe shal with fyr, and the hous of the king 
of Juda. Hereth the wrd of the Lord, 
12°3e the? hous of Dauid. These thingus 
seith the Lord, Demeth erli dom, and de- 
lyuereth out the oppressed with force fro 
the hond of the wrong! chalengere; lest 
par auenture ge out as fir myn‘ indigna- 
cioun, and be tend vp, and be not that 
quenche, for the malice of 3oure studies. 
13Lo0! Y to thee, dwelleresse of the sadde 
valey and wilde feld, seith the Lord, 3ee 
that seyn, Who shal smyten vs, and who 
14shal go ‘in to! oure houses? And Y shal 
visite vp on 3ou after the frute of 3oure 
studies, seith the Lord; and Y shal tende 
vp fyr in his wilde wode, and deuoure it 
shal alle thingus in his cumpas. 


dthe mouth secuK. ¢&ha Kk. 


Cpr.m. E prom 3e AGHK. 


¥ spuyl, ether prey CRFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 
w dwelstere 1, 


f dwellith e pr. m. 
i Om. c pr.m. £ prim. 


JEREMIAH. 389 


in greet wraththe; and Y schal smytes 
the dwelleris of this citee, men and beestis 
schulen die bi greet pestilence. And after7 
these thingis, seith the Lord, Y schal 3yue 
Sedechie, kyng of Juda, and hise ser- 
uauntis, and his puple, and that ben left 
in this citee fro pestilence, and swerd, and 
hungur, in the hond of Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, and in the hond of 
her enemyes, and in the hond of men 
sekynge the lijf of hem; and he schal 
smyte hem bi the scharpnesse of swerd; 
and he schal not be bowid, nether schal 
spare, nether schal hane mercy. And thous 
schalt seie to this puple, The Lord God 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y 3yue bifore 30u 
the weie of lijf, and the weie of deth. Heo 
that dwellith in this citee, sehal die bi 
swerd, and hungur, and pestilence; but he 
that goith out, and fleeth ouer to Caldeis 
that bisegen 30u, schal lyue, and his lijf 
schal be as a prey’ tohym. For Y haue to 
set my face on this citee in to yuel, and 
not in to good, seith the Lord; it schal 
be 3ouun in the hond of the king of Ba- 
biloyne, and he schal brenne it with fier. 
And thou.schalt seie to the hous of the1 
king of Juda, the hous of Dauid, Here 3e 
the word of the Lord. The Lord seith12 
these thingis, Deme 3e eerli doom, and 
delyuere 3e hym that is oppressid bi vio- 
lence fro the hond of the’ fals chalenger‘; 
lest perauenture myn indignacioun go out 
as fier, and be kyndlid, and noon be that 
quenche, for the malice of 3oure studies. 
Lo! Y to" thee’, dwelleresse’ of the sad 13 
valet and pleyn, seith the Lord, which 
seien, Who schal smyte vs, and who schal 
entre in to oure housis? And Y schal1 
visite on 30u bi the fruyt of 30ure studies, 
seith the Lord; and Y schal kyndle fier in 
the forest therof, and it schal deuoure alle 
thingis in the cumpas therof. 


'f ha K pr.m. han sec.m. & 3yuen E pass. h the 
kOm.c prim. lin 4G pr.m. HK. 
5 Om.t. t caleng F. u do to I. Vv the F. 


390 JEREMIAH. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 These thingus seith the Lord,Cum doun 
in to the hous of the king of Juda, and 
2 thou shalt speke there this wrd, and seyn, 
Here thou the wrd of the Lord, thou! 
king of Juda, that sittest vp on the see 
of Dauid, thou, and thi sernauntis, and 
thi puple, that gon in bi these 3atus. 
3 These thingus seith the Lord, Doth dom, 
and ri3twisnesse, and delyuereth the 
opressid bi force fro the hond of the 
wrong™ chalengere; and the comeling, 
and faderles® child, and the widewe wil- 
eth not® sorewen, ne opresseth wickeli?, 
and the innocent blod ne shedeth out in 
4this place. If forsothe doende 3ee shul 
do this wrd, gon in shul bi the 3atus of 
this hous kingus sittende of the kinrede 
of Dauid vp on his trone, and the ste3ing 
men vp? chares and hors, thei, and ser- 
suauns, and the puples of them. That 
if 3ee shul not here these wrdus, in my- 
self Y swor, seith the Lord, for in to wil- 
6dernesse shal be this hous. For these 
thingus seith the Lord vp on the see of 
the king of Juda, Galaad, thou ‘to me" 
hed of Liban; yf Y shal not sette forth 
thee wildernesse, cheef citees vnabitable. 
7And Y shal halewe* vp on thee the 
sleende man‘, and his armes; and thei 
shul ‘kutte doun" thi chosen cedris, and 
8throwe doun in to fyr. And passen shul 
manye Jentiles thur3 this cite, and sei 
shal eche to his nej3hebore, Whi dide the 
9Lord thus to this grete cite? And thei 
shul answern, For thi that thei forsoke 
the couenaunt of the Lord ther God, and 
honoureden alien godis, and serueden 
1oto them. Wileth not wepe the deade, 
ne weilen vp on hym with weping; weil- 
eth hym that goth out, for he shal no 
mor be turned a3een, ne seen he shal the 
iilond of his birthe, For these thingus 
seith the Lord to Sellum, sone of Josie, 


1Om.c pr.m. eprm. ™ Om, c¢ pr.m. £ prem. 


XXII. (——-11. 


CAP. XXII. 


The Lord seith these thingis, Go thou1 
doun in to the hous of the kyng of Juda, 
and thou schalt speke there this word, 
and schalt seie, Thou kyng of Juda, thate 
sittist on the seete of Danid, here the 
word of the Lord, thou, and thi ser- 
uauntis, and thi puple, that entren bi these 
j3atis. The Lord seith these thingis, Do3 
3e doom, and ri3tfulnesse, and delyuere 3e 
hym that is oppressid bi violence fro the 
hond of the fals chalenger; and nyle 3e 
make sori, nether oppresse 3e wickidli a 
comelyng, and a fadirles child, and a wi- 
dewe, and schede 3e not out innocent blood 
in this place. For if 3e doynge don this4 
word, kyngis of the kyn of Dauid sit- 
tynge on his trone schulen entre bi the 
j3atis of this hous, and schulen* stie on 
charis and horsis, thei, and the seruauntis, 
and the puple of hem. That if 3e herens 
not these wordis, Y swoore in my silf, 
seith the Lord, that this hous schal be in 
to wildirnesse. For the Lord seith theseé 
thingis on the hous of the kyng of Juda, 
Galaad, thou a7zt to me the heed of the 
Liban ; eredence be not 30uun to me, if 
Y sette not thee a wildirnesse, citees vn- 
habitable. And Y schal halewe on thee a7 
man sleynge, and hise armuris; and thei 
schulen kitte doun thi chosun cedris, and 
schulen caste doun in to fier, And many s 
folkis schulen passe bi this citee, and ech 
man schal seie to his nei3bore, Whi dide 
the Lord thus to this greet citee? Ands 
thei schulen answere, For thei forsoken 
the couenaunt of her Lord God, and wor- 
schipiden alien goddis, and serueden hem. 
Nyle 3e biwepe hym that is deed, nether 10 
weile 3e on hym bi wepyng; biweile 3e 
hym that goith out, for he schal no more 
turne a3en, nether he schal se the lond of 
his birthe. For the Lord seith these 
thingis to Sellum, the sone of Josie, the 


0 the faderles 4eGukK. © Om. £E pr.m. P wick- 


idli 4gHK. Qvpon 4GHK. "my AGHK. §3yue E pr.vice. ‘char Epr.m. teenden vp E pr.m. 


x thei schul 1. 


XXII. 12-——23. 


king of Juda, that regnede for Josie, his 
fader, That is’ gon out fro this place, he” 
12shal not turne ajeen hider more* ; but in 
- the place to theY whiche Y translatide 
hym, there he shal die, and this lond he 
i3shal see no more. Wo that bildeth vp 
his hous in vnri3twisnes, and his souping 
places uot in dom; his frend he shal 
opresse in veyn, and his meede he shal 
isnot j3elde to hym. The whiche seith, I 
shal bilde vp to me a large hous, and 
spacious souping places; that openeth to 
hym wyndowes, and maketh cedre cou- 
15 ples, and peynteth with cynoper. Whe- 
ther shalt thou regne, for thou licnest? 
thee to a ceder? thi fader, whether he eet 
not, and dranc, and dide dom and ri3t- 
wisnesse, thanne whan wel it was to 
ishym? He demede the cause of the pore, 
and of the helpeles, in to his* good ; 
whether not therfor for he kne3 me? seith 
i7the Lord. Thine forsothe ej3en and herte 
to auarice, and to innocent blod to be shed, 
and to wronge® chalenge, and to the end- 
ising of euel werc. Therfore these thingus 
seith the Lord to Joachym, sone of Josie, 
king of Juda, Thei shu! not weilen hym, 
Wo brother! and wo sister! thei shul not 
togidere trumpe to hym, Wo lord! and 
i9 wo glorious! In‘ the biriyng of an asse 
he shal be hbiried, roten, and throwen 
zoaferr out of the 3atis of Jerusalem. Ste3 
thou vp Liban, and crye, and in to Ba- 
san 3if thi vois, and crie to the passeres, 
21 for to-trode® ben alle thi loueres. I spac 
to thee in thi plenteuousnesse, and‘ thou 
seidist, [ shal not heren; this is thi weie 
fro thi waxende 3outh, for thou herdist not 
2zmy vois. Alle thi shepperdus wind shal 
fede, and thi loueres in to caitifte shul 
go; and thanne thou shalt be confound- 
23yd, and shamen of al thi malice, that 
sittist in Liban, and nestlist in cedris. 
Hou togidere weiledist thou, whan comen 
hadde to thee® sorewes, as sorewis of the 


v Om. E pr.m. 
a ther cpr. m. E pr.m. 
& the £ pr.m. 


w Om. c pr.m. E pr.m. 
© Om. c ef E. 


y Y hane r. 


x Om. c prim. 
4 Om. &£ prim. 


z The which 1. 


JEREMIAH. 391 


kyng of Juda, that regnede for Josye, his 
fadir, He that 3ede out of this place, schal 
no more turne azen hidur; but in thee 
place to which YY translatide him, there 
he schal die, and he schal no more se this 
lond. Wo ¢o him that bildith his housi3 
in vnri3tfulnesse, and his soleris not in 
doom; he schal oppresse his freend in 
veyn, and he schal not 3elde his hire to 
hym. Which? seith, Y schal bilde to mei 
a large hous, and wide soleris; which 
openeth wyndows to hym silf, and makith 
couplis of cedre, and peyntith with reed 
colour. Whether thou schalt regne, for 1s 
thou comparisonest thee to a cedre? whe- 
ther thi fadir eet not, and drank, and dide 
doom and ri3tfulnesse thaune, whanne it 
was wel to hym? He demyde the cause of 16 
a pore man, and nedi, in to his good; 
whether not therfor for he knew me? 
seith the Lord. Forsothe thin ijen and 17 
herte ben to aueryce, and to schede inno- 
cent blood, and to fals caleng, and to the 
perfourmyng of yuel werk. Therfor theis 
Lord seith these thingis to Joachym, the* 
sone of Josie, the kyng of Juda, Thei 
schulen not biweile hym, Wo brother! and 
wo sistir! thei schulen not sowne togidere 
to hym, Wo lord! and wo noble man! He1g 
schal be biried with the biriyng of an 
asse, he schal be rotun, and cast forth 
without the jatis of Jernsalem. Stie thou 20 
on the Liban, and cry thou, and 3yue 
thi vois in Basan, and cry to hem that 
passen forth, for alle thi louyeris ben al 
to-brokun. Y spak to thee in thi plentee, 21 
and thou seidist, Y schal not here; this is 
thi weie fro thi 3ongthe, for thou herdist 
not my vois. Wynd schal feede alle thi2e 
scheepherdis, and thi louyeris schulen go 
in to caitifte; and thanne thou that sittist 23 
in the Liban, and makist nest in cedris, 
schalt be schent, and be? aschamed of al 
thi malice. Hou weilidist thou, whanne 
sorewis weren comun to thee, as the so- 


y Om. 4EGHK. 
€ to-treden K. 


2 3yuest E pr. m. 
f Om. CE sec. m. 


8OmNn. > Om. 1. 


392 JEREMIAH. XXII 24—XXIII. 4. 


2atrauailende with childe? I lyue, seith 
the Lord, for if shul be Jeconyas, the 
sone of Joachym, king of Juda, a ring in 
my ri3t hond, thennus I shal pullen hym 
2sawey. And Y shal 3yue thee in the hond 
of men sechende thi soule, and in the 
hond of hem whos face thou dredist, and 
in the hond of Nabugodonosor, king of 
Babiloyne, and in the hond of Caldeis. 
26 And Y shal sende thee, and thi moder that 
gat thee, in to an alien lond, in whiche 
3ee ben not born, and there 3ee shul die; 
27and in to the lond to whiche thei reren 
ther soule, that thei turne a3een thider, 
2gand thei turne a3een shul not. Whether 
a britil vessel and a brosid this man Je- 
conyas ? whether a vessel withoute al 
voluptuouste? Whi throwen awei ben he 
and his sed, and cast aferr in to the 
29lond that thei knewe not? Erthe, erthe, 
erthe, here the sermoun of the Lord. 
30 These thingus seith the Lord, Writ this 
man a bareyn man, that in his dajes shal 
not be welsum; ne forsothe ben shal of 
his sed a man, that sitte vp on the see of 
Dauid, and power haue more yn Juda. 


CAP. XXIII. 
1 Wo to the shepperdis, that scateren 
and to-tern the floc of my leswe, seith the 
2Lord. Therfore these thingus seith the 
Lord God of Irael to the shepperdus, that 
feden my puple, 3ee scatereden* my floc, 
and threwen out hem», and han not 
visitid hem; lo! Y shal visite vp on 30w 
the malice of 3oure studies, seith the 
3 Lord. And Y shal gedere the remnauntus 
of my floc fro alle londis, to whiche Y 
shal caste hem out thider; and Y shal 
turne them to ther wilde feldus, and thei 
ashul growe, and be multepliede. And Y 
shal rere vp on hem shepperdus, and thei 
shul fede them; thei! shuln no mor ben 
aferd, ne inwardly dreden; and no man 
shal be so3t of the noumbre, seith the 


rew of a womman trauelynge of child ? 

I lyue, seith the Lord, for thou3 Jeconye, 24 
the sone of Joachym, kyng of Juda, were 

a ring in my ri3t hond, fro thennus Y 
schal drawe awei hym. And Y schal 3yue2s 
thee in the hond of hem that seken thi 
lijf, and in the hond of hem whos face 
thou dredist, and in the hond of Nabugo- 
donosor, kyng of Babiloyne, and in the 
hond of Caldeis. And Y schal sende thee, 26 
and thi moder that gendride thee, in to 
an alien lond, in which 3e weren not 
borun, and there je schulen die; and 27 
thei schulen not turne a3en in to the lond, 
to which thei reisen her soule, that thei 
turne ajen thidur. Whether this man28 
Jeconye 7s an erthene vessel, and al to- 
brokun? whether a vessel withouten al 
likyng? Whi ben he and his seed east 
awei, and cast forth in to a lond which 
thei knewen not? Erthe, erthe, erthe, 29 
here thou the word of the Lord. The30 
Lord seith these thingis, Write thou this 
man bareyn, a man that schal not haue 
prosperite in hise daies; for of his seed 
schal be no man, that schal sitte on the 
seete of Dauid, and haue powere ferthere 
in Juda. 
CAP Axi. 

Wo to the scheepherdis, that scateren1 
and to-drawen the floe of my lesewe, seith 
the Lord. Therfor the Lord God of Is-2 
rael seith these thingis to the scheepherdis, 
that feeden my puple, 3e han scaterid my 
floc, and han cast hem out, and han not 
visitid hem; lo! Y schal visite on 3ou the 
malice of 3oure studies, seith the Lord. 
And Y schal gadere togidere the reme-3 
nauntis of my floc fro alle londis, to 
whiche Y schal caste hem out thidur; and 
Y schal turne hem to her feeldis, and thei 
schulen encreesse, and schulen be multi- 
plied. And Y schal reise’ schepherdis on4 
hem, and thei schulen feede hem; thei 


‘schulen no more drede, and schulen not 


be aferd; and noon schal be sou3t of the 


h seateren acu. 4» hem out £. ‘and thei 4= pr.m.GHK. 


Con N. 


d reise vp 1. 


eT 


XXIII. 5—15. 


sLord. Lo! dajes comen, seith the Lord, 
and I shal rere Dauid a rij3twis buriown- 
yng; and regne he shal king, and wys he 
shal be, and don he shal dom and ri3t- 
6Wwisnesse in erthe. In tho da3es saued 
shal ben Juda, and IJrael shal dwelle 
trostili; and this is the name that thei 
7shul clepen hym, Oure ri3twis Lord. For 
this lo! da3es comen, seith the Lord, and 
thei shul sei no more, The Lord lyueth*, 
that ladde out the sonus of Irael fro the 
slond of Egipt; but, The Lord lyueth, that 
ladde out, and bro3te to the sed of the 
hous of Irael fro the lond of the north, 
and fro alle londus to the! whiche Y 
hadde cast them oute thider; and thei 
9shul dwelle in ther owne lond. To the 
profetus ; To-brosid is my herte in the™ 
myddel of me, al to-trembleden alle” my 
bonus; I am mad as a drunke man, and 
as a man drunken of wyn, fro the face of 
the Lord, and fro the face of his hoeli 
towrdus; for of anoutreres fulfild is the 
lond. For fro the face of cursing weilide 
the lond; dried® ben the wilde feldus of 
desert, mad ys the cours of them euel, 
i1and the strengthe of hem vnlic?. The 
profete forsothe and the prest ben de- 
foulid ; and in myn hous I fond the euel 
20f hem, seith the Lord. Therfore the 
weie of hem shal be as‘ slydery in derc- 
nesses’, thei shul be put doun forsothe‘, 
and falle togidere in it; for I shal bringe 
to vpon hem eueles, a‘ 3er of the visiting 
isof them, seith the Lord. And in the 
profetis of Samarie Y sa3 folie, and thei 
profecieden in Baal, and disceyueden my 
14 puple Irael. And in the profetus of Je- 
rusalem Y sa3 licnesse auoutreres, and 
weie of lesing; and thei coumforteden 
the hondus of werst men, that conuertid 
were not eche fro his malice; ‘alle thei 
ben mad to-me Sodome’, and alle hyse 
15dwelleris as Gomorre. Therfore these 


k lyued E pr.m. 1 Om, 4EGHK. 
4 Om. £ pr.m. * dercnesacuKx. ®Om.c pr.m. 

© buriouning, ether seed EFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 
brokun for sorewe CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 
k thei schul 1. 


VOL. TIT. 


JEREMIAH. 


m Om. AGUK. 
tina a. 


£ Om. CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 
b slidur thing 1. 


393 


noumbre seith the Lord. Lo! daiess 
comen, seith the Lord, and Y schal reise © 
a iust buriownyng® to Dauid; and he 
schal regne af kyng, and he schal be 
wijs, and he schal make doom and ri3t- 
fulnesse in erthe. In tho daies Juda schale 
be sauid, and Israel schal dwelle tristili ; 
and this is the name which thei schulen 
clepe hym, The Lord oure ri3tful. For7 
this thing lo! daies comen, seith the Lord, 
and thei schulen no more seie, The Lord 
lyueth, that ledde the sones of Israel out 
of the lond of Egipt; but, The Lord lyueth, s 
that ledde out, and broujte the seed of the 
hous of Israel fro the lond of the north, 
and fro alle londis to whiche Y hadde cast 
hem out thidur; and thei schulen dwelle 
in her lond. To the prophetis; Myn hertes 
is contrit®’ in the myddis of me, alle my 
boonys trembliden togidere; Y am maad 
as a man drunkun, and as a man weet of 
wyn, of the face of the Lord, and of the 
face of the hooli wordis of hym; for the 10 
lond is fillid with auowteris. For the erthe 
mourenede of the face of cursyng; the 
feeldis of desert ben maad drie, the cours 
of hem is maad yuel, and her strengthe 7s 
vnlijk. For whi the profete and the prest u 
ben defoulid; and in myn hous, seith the 
Lord, Y foond the yuel of hem. Therfor 12 
the weie of hem schal be as slidur' in 
derknessis, for thei schulen be hurtlidi, 
and schulen* falle doun therynne; for Y 
schal bringe on hem yuels, the 3eer of 
visitacioun of hem, seith the Lord. And 13 
in the profetis of Samarie Y si3 founed- 
nesse, and thei profesieden in Baal, and 
disseynueden my puple Israel. And in the1s 
profetis of Jerusalem Y si3 licnesse, auon- 
trie, and the weie of leesyng; and thei 
confortiden the hondis of the worste men, 
that ech man schulde not conuerte fro his 
malice; alle thei ben maad as Sodom to 
me, and alle the dwellers therof ‘ben 


Oand dried K.P my lije E prem. 


n Om. E pr.m 
d Valle Sodom E pr. m. 


UE sup. ras. sec. Mm. 


£ contrit, ether al to- 
i hurtlid, ether schounn CHFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


3E 


394 JEREMIAH. 


thingus seith the Lord of ostus to pro- 
fetis, Lo! Y shal fede hem with wrmwed, 
and drunken hem with galle; fro the pro- 
fetus forsothe of Jerusalem is gon out 
isdefouling vp on al erthe. These thingus 
seith the Lord of ostus, Wileth not heren 
the wrdus of the profetes, that profecien 
to 30u, and desceyuen 30u; the viseoun 
of ther herte thei speken, not of the 
17mouth of the Lord. They seyn to them 
that blasfemen me, The Lord spac, Pes 
shal be to 3on; and to eche that goth in 
the shrendnesse of his herte thei seiden, 
is Ther shal not come vp on 3ou enel. Who 
forsothe was ny3 in the counseil of the 
Lord, and sa3, and herde the sermoun of 
hym ? who biheeld his wrd, and herde ? 
19 Lo! the whirlewind of the Lordus indig- 
nacioun shal gon out, and tempest brek- 
eude out vp on the hed of vupitous men 
20shal come. The wodnesse of the Lord 
shal not turne a3een, vnto the tyme that 
he do, and vnto the tyme that he fulfille 
the thenking of his herte. In hise laste 
da3es 3ee shu] vnderstonde his counseil. 
211 sente not the profetes, and thei runnen; 
Y spac not to them, and thei profecieden. 
22If thei hadden stonde in my counseil, 
and knowen hadden mad my wrdis to 
my™ puple, I shulde han* turned awei 
hem forsothe fro ther euel weie, and fro 
23ther werst thenkingus. Wenest thou, 
whether a Lord fro any3 Y am, seith the 
21 Lord, and not God fro afery? If hid 
shal be a man in hid thingus, and Y shal 
not seen hym ? seith the Lord. Whether 
not heuene and erthe Y fulfille?? seith 
25the Lord. Y herde what thingus seiden 
profetus, profeciende in my name lesing, 
26and seiende, Swenenes Y sweuenede. Hou 
_longe this is in the herte of profetes, pro- 
feciende lesing, and profeciende the be- 
27 giling of ther herte? The whiche wiln 
make, that the puple’for3ete of? my name 
for ther sweueues, whiche.telleth eche to 
his ne3hebore, as for3eeten ther fadris of 


Wthe «a. Xhak. 
fulfille 2 pr.m. a Om. a. 


10m.1. ™ Om. 1. 


XXIII. 16—27, 


maad' as Gommorre. Therfor the Lord 1s 
of oostis seith these thingis to the pro- 
phetis, Lo! Y schal feed hem with wermod, 
and Y schal 3yue drynke to hem with 
galle; for whi defoulyng is goen out of the 
profetis of Jerusalem on al the lond. Theis 
Lord of oostis seith these thingis, Nyle 3e 
here the wordis of profetis, that profesien 
to 30u, and disseyuen 3ou; thei speken 
the visioun of her herte, not of the mouth 
of the Lord. Thei seien to hem that 1t7 
blasfemen me, The Lord spak, Pees schal 
be to 3on; and thei seiden to ech man 
that goith in the schrewidnesse of his 
herte, Yuel schal not come on 30u. Foris 
whi who is present in the councel of the 
Lord, and si3, and herde his word? who 
bihelde, and herde the word of hym? Lo! 19 
the whirlewynd of the Lordis indigna- 
cioun schal go out, and tempest brekynge 
schal come on the heed of wickid men. 
The strong veniaunce of the Lord schal2o 
not turne a3en, til that he do, and til that 
he fille the thou3t of his herte. In the 
laste daies 3e schulen vndurstonde the 
councel of lym. Y sente not the pro-21 
fetis, and thei runnen; Y spak not to 
hein, and thei profesieden. If thei hadden 22 
stonde in my councel, and hadde maad 
knowun my wordis to my puple, forsothe 
Y hadde turned hem awei fro her yuel 
weie, and fro her worste thou3tis. Gessist 23 
thou, whether Y am God of ni3, seith the 
Lord, and not God afer? A mau schal 24 
not be priuy in hid places, and Y schal 
not se hym, seith the Lord. Whether Y 
fille not heuene and erthe? seith the Lord. 
Y herde what thingis the profetis seiden, 25 
profesiynge a™ leesyng in my name, and 
seiynge, Y dremede dremes. Hou longe26 
is this thing in the herte of profetis, pro- 
fesiynge a™ leesyng, and profesiynge the 
disseite of her herte ? Whiche® wolen2; 
make, that my puple for3ete my name for 
the dremes of hem, which" ech man tell- 
ith to his neizjbore, as the fadris of hem 


¥ afer alle thingis I kneme? a. aferr alle thingis I knowe? E pr.m.GK. 2 shal 


0 the whiche 1. 


XXII. 28—4o. 


28my name for Baal. The profete that 
hath a sweuene, telle he the sweuene; 
and that® hath my sermoun, speke he my 
sermonn verely. What to the chaf at 
29the whete ? seith the Lord. Whether 
not my wrdus ben? as fyr brennende, 
seith the Lord, and as an hamer to- 
30 brekende the ston? Therfor lo! Y to the 
profetes, seith the Lord, that stelun my 
31 wrdus, eche fro® his nezhebore. Lo! Y to 
the profetys, seith the Lord, that taken tof 
their tunges, and seyn, The Lord seith. 
32 Lo! Y to the profetys, sweuenende lesing, 
seith the Lord; that tolden® them, and 
bigileden my puple in ther lesing, and in 
ther myracles, whan Y haddé not sent 
hem, ne beden hem; the whiche no thing 
profiteden to this puple, seith the Lord. 
33If therfore shul aske thee this puple, or 
profete, or prest, seiende, What is the 
charge of the Lord? thou shalt sey to 
them, 3ee ben the charge, forsothe Y shal 
31throwe 30u aferr, seith the Lord; and 
profete, and prest, and puple, that seith, 
The charge of the Lord, Y shal visite 
vp on that man, and vp on his hous. 
35 These thingus 3ee shuln seyn, eche to his 
ne3hebore, and to his brothir, What shal 
answern the Lord? and what spac the 
36Lord? For the charge of the Lord no 
more shal abide, and charge shal be to 
eche man his wrd; and 3ee han mys- 
turned the wrdus of lyuende* God, Lord 
370f ostus, oure God. These thingus thou 
shalt seyn to the profete, What answerde 
to thee the Lord? and what spac the 
38Lord? If forsothe, The charge of the 
Lord, 3ee shul sey, for this these thingus 
seith the Lord, For 3ee seiden this ser- 
moun, The charge of the Lord, and Y sente 
to 30u, seiende, Wileth not seyn, The charge 
svof the Lord; therfore ‘lo! Y beryng 
shal take 3ou/, and forsake 3ou, and this 
cite that Y 3af to 3ou, and to 30ure fadris, 
aofro my face. And Y shal 3yue 3o0u in to 


che that 4x sec.m. 40m. c pr.m. £ pr.m. 


Esec.m. » the lyuende E pr. 1m. 


° Om. 1. 


& to 4. 
1 I shal taken 30u berende c e¢ £ pr.m. 


JEREMIAH. 395 


for3aten my name for Baal. A_profete2s_ 
that hath a dreime, telle a dreem; and he 
that hath my word, speke verili my word. 
What is with chaffis to the wheete? seith 
the Lord. Whether my wordis ben not29 
as fier brennynge, seith the Lord, and as 
an hamer al to-brekynge a stoon? Therfor 30 
lo! Y am redi to the profetis, seith the 
Lord, that stelen my wordis, ech man fro 
his nei3bore. Lo! Y to the profetis, seith 31 
the Lord, that taken her tungis, and seien, 
The Lord seith. Lo! Y to the profetis, 32 
dremynge a° leesyng, seith the Lord; 
which telden tho?, and disseyueden my 
puple in her leesyng, and in her myraclis, 
whanne Y hadde not sente hem, nether 
hadde comaundide to hem; whiche pro- 
fitiden no thing to this puple, seith the 
Lord. Therfor if this puple, ether pro-33 
fete, ether prest, axith thee, and seith, 
What is the birthun of the Lord? thou 
schalt seie to hem, 3e hen the birthun, for 
Y schal caste 30u awel, seith the Lord; and 34 
a profete, and a prest, and the puple, that 
seith, The birthun of the Lord, Y schal 
visite on that man, and on his hons. 3e35 
schulen seie these thingis, ech man to his 
nei3bore, and to his brother, What an- 
sweride the Lord? and what spak the 
Lord? For the birthun of the Lord schal 36 
no more be remembrid, and the word of 
ech man schal] be birthun to hym; and 3e 
han peruertid the wordis of lyuynge God, 
of the Lord of oostis, 3joure God. Thous37 
schalt seie these thingis to the profete, 
What answeride the Lord to thee? and 
what spak the Lord? Forsothe if 3e38 
seien, The birthin of the Lord, for this 
thing the Lord seith these thingis, For 3e 
seiden this word, The birthun of the Lord, 
and Y sente to 30u, and Y seide, Nyle 3e 
seie, The birthun of the Lord; therfor lo !39 
Y schal take 3ou awei, and schal bere, and 
Y schal forsake 30u, and the citee which 
Y 3af to 30u, and to 3oure fadris, fro my 


fOm. 4H prim. & tellen z pr. m. tellende 


P tho lesyngis 1. hem N. 


BE 


396 JEREMIAH. 


euermor repref, and in to euermor shen- 
shipe, that neuer bi! for3etynge shal ben 
don awey. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 The Lord shewede to me, and lo! two 
basketus ful of figus put bifor the temple 
of the Lord, aftir that Nabugodonosor, 
king of Babiloyne, translatede Jeconye, the 
sone of Joachym, king of Juda, and his 
princes, and the? smyth, and his iueler 
fro Jerusalem, and bro3te them in to Babi- 

2loyne. And oe fraiel hadde good figus ful 
myche, as ben wont figys to be of the 
firste tyme; and the oe fraiel hadde euele 
figis ful myche, that my3ten not ben ete, 

3for thi that thei weren euele. And the 
Lord seide to me, What seest thou, Jere- 
mye? ‘And Y seide®, Figis, figes goode, 
goode gretli, and euele, euele gretly, that 
moun not be ete, forthi that thei ben 
seuele. And don is the wrd of the Lord 
5to me, seiende, These thingus seith the 
Lord, God of Irael, As these figis goode, 
so Y shal knowe the transmygracioun of 
Juda, that I sente fro this place in to the 
élond of Caldeis, in to good. And Y shal 
putte myn ejen vp on hem to plesen, and 
Y shal bringe them ajeen in to this lond; 
aud Y shal hilde them vp, and not de- 
stro3e, and plaunte them?, and not pullen 
zawei. And Y shal 3yue to them an herte, 


that thei knowe’ me, for Y am a Lord; 


and thei shul be to me in to puple’, and 
Y shal be to them in to a God, for thei 
shul turne a3een to me in al ther herte. 
8 And as the werst figus, that moun not 
ben ete, forthi that thei ben euele, these 
thingus seith the Lord, So Y shal 3yue 
Sedechie, king of Juda, and his princes, 
and the remnaunt of Jerusalem, that 
abiden in this cite, and that dwellen in 
9the lond of Egipt. And’ Y shal 3yue 
them in to werit trauailing and torment- 
ing to alle rewmes of erthe, in to repref, 


1be 4. Om. 1 sec. m. n his 4, 


Ta puple 4. § Om. 4GHK. 


1 Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


°Om. £ pr. m. 
ta wery GK. the weery H. 


r dwellen c. 


. XXIV. 1—~g. 


face. And Y schal 3yue 30u in to euer-40 
lastynge schenschipe, and im to euerlast- 
ynge sclaundir, that schal neuere be doon 
awei bi for3etyng. 


CAP. XXIV. 


The Lord schewide to me, and lo! twei1 
panyeris ful of figys weren set bifor the 
temple of the Lord, aftir that Nabugodo- 
nosor, kyng of Babiloyne, translatide Je- 
conye, the sone of Joachym, the kyng of 
Juda, and the princes of hym, and a sutil 
crafti man, and a goldsmith fro Jerusalem, 
and brou3te hem in to Babiloyne. And2 
o panyere hadde ful good figis, as figis of 
the firste tyme ben wont to be; and o 
panyere hadde ful yuel figis, that mi3ten 
not be etun, for tho weren yuel figis. And3 
the Lord seide to me, Jeremye, what thing 
seest thou? And Y seide, Figis, goode figis, 
ful goode, and yuele jigzs, ful yuele, that 
moun not be etun, for tho ben yuele figis. 
And the word of the Lord was maad to4 
me, and seide, The Lord God of Israel seith 5 
these thingis, As these figis ben goode, so 
Y schal knowe the transmygracioun of 
Juda, which I sente out fro this place in 
to the lond of Caldeis, in to good. Ande 
Y schal sette myn i3en on hem to plese, 
and Y schal brynge hem ajen in to this 
lond; and Y schal bilde hem, and Y schal 
not distrie Aem4; and Y schal plaunte 
hem, and Y schal not drawe vp bi the 
roote. And Y schal 3yue to hem an herte, 7 
that thei knowe me, for Y am the Lord; 
and thei schulen be in to a puple to me, 
and Y schal be in to God to hem, for thei 
schulen turne a3en to me in al her herte. 
And as the worste figis ben, that mouns 
not be etun, for tho ben yuele figis, the. 
Lord seith these thingis, So Y schal 3yue 
Sedechie, the kyng of Juda, and the princes 
of hym, and other men of Jerusalem, that 
dwelliden' in this citee, and that dwellen® 
in the lond of Egipt. And Y schal 3yue9 
hem into trauelyng and turment in alle 


P hem vp E pr. m. q wite C pr. m. E pr.m. 


8 dwelliden nr pr. m. 


XXIV. 10——XXV. 9. 


and in to parable, and in to pronerbe, 
and in to cursing, in alle places to whiche 
10I caste out them. And I shal sende in 
hem swerd, and hunger, and pestilence, 
to the tyme thei" be wastid from the lond 
that I 3af to them, and to their fadres. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 The wrd that is do to Jeremye, of al 
the puple of Jude, in the ferthe 3er of 
Joachym, sone of Josie, king of Juda, 
aftir that Jeconye is translatyd in to 
Babiloyne ; it is the firste 3er of Nabu- 
2godonosor, king of Babiloyne; that spac 
Jeremye, the profete, to al the puple of 
Juda, and to alle the .dwelleris of Jeru- 
3salem, seiende, Fro the threttenthe 3er of 


the regne of Josie, sone of Amon, king of_ 


Juda, vuto this dai, this is the thre and 
twentithe 3er, don is the wrd of the Lord 
to me; and Y spac to 3o0u, fro ny3t risende 
4and spekende, and 3ee herden not. And 
the Lord sente.to 30u alle his profetus 
seruauns, risende’ the morutid, and send- 
ende, and 3ee herden not, ne boweden in 
5 30ure eres, that 3ee here”; whan he shulde 
seyn, Turneth a3een, eche fro his euel 
weie, and fro 3oure werste tho3tus, and 
jee shul dwelle in the lond that the Lord 
3af to 30u, and ‘to 3oure fadris, fro the 
6world and* vnto the world. And wileth 
not gon aftir alien godis, that 3ee serue 
to them, and honoure them, ne me to 
wrathe 3ce terre, in the werkes of 3oure 
7hondus, and Y tormente 3ou not. And 
jee herden not me, seith the Lord, that 
me to wrathe 3ee terredenY in the werkus 
of 3oure hondus, in to 3oure owne euel. 
8 Therfore these thingus seith the Lord of 
ostus, For thi that 3ee herden not my 
9 wrdus, lo! Y shal sende, and taken to alle 
the kinredus of the north, seith the Lord, 
and Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, 
my seruaunt; and Y shal bringe them vp 
on this lond, and vpon his dwelleris, and 


u that thei «4. 


xOm. 4. Y terre c et E prim. 


s Om. 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


t Om. 1. 


397 


rewmes of erthe, in to schenschipe, and 
in to parable, and in to a* prouerbe, and 
in to cursyng, in alle places to whiche Y 
castide hem out. And Y sehal sende ino 
hem at swerd, and hungur, and_ pestilence, 
til thei be wastid fro the lond which Y 
3af to hem, and to the fadris of hem. 


CAP. XXV. 


The word of the Lord, that was maad1 
to Jeremye, of al the puple of Juda, in the 
fourthe 3eer of Joachym, the sone of Josie, 
the king of Juda, aftir that Jeconye was 
translatid in to Babiloyne; thilke is the 
firste 3eer of Nabugodonosor, kyng of Ba- 
biloyne; which word Jeremy, the pro-2z 
phete, spak to al the puple of Juda, and 
to alle the dwelleris of Jerusalem, and 
seide, Fro the threttenthe jeer of thes 
rewme of Josie, the sone of Amon, the 
kyng of Juda, ‘til to" this dai, this is the 
three and twentithe jeer, the word of the 
Lord was maad to me; and Y spak to 
jou, and Y roos bi ni3t and spak, and 3e 
herden not. And the Lord sente to 30u4 
alle hise seruauntis profetis, and roos ful 
eerli, and sente, and 3e herden not, nether 
3e bowiden 3oure eeris, for to here; whannes 
he seide, Turne 3e a3en, ech man fro his 
yuel weie, and fro 30ure worste thou3tis, 
and 3e schulen dwelle in the lond whiche 
the Lord 3af to jou, and to 3oure fadris, 
fro the world and til in to the world. Andé 
nyle 3e go aftir alien goddis, that 3e serue 
hem, and worschipe hem, nether terre 3e 
me to wrathfulnesse, in the werkis of 3oure 
hondis, and Y schal not turmente 3ou. And7 
3e herden not me, seith the Lord, that 3e 
terreden me to wratlifulnesse in the werkis 
of 30ure hondis, in to 3oure yuel. Therfors 
the Lord of oostis seith these thingis, For 
that that 3e herden not my wordis, lo! ,Y 9 
schal sende, and take alle the kynredis of 
the north, seith the Lord, and Nabugodo- 
nosor, my seruaunt, the kyng of Babi- 
loyne; and Y schal bringe hem on this 


vhe rysynge AGHK. risende x pr. m. he risende £ sec. m. W schulden here & see. m. AGHK. 


u vnto tL. 


398 


vp on alle his naciouns, that in his cum- 
pas ben; and Y shal slen hem, and sette 
them in to stoneyng, and in to whistling, 
10 and in to wildernesse euerdurende. And 
Y shal leese fro them vois of io3e, and vois 
of gladnesse, vois of the womman spouse, 
and vois of the man spouse, vois of the 
liquerne, and 1i3t of the launterne. And 
ben shal al his lond in to wildernesse, 
and in to stoneyng; and seruen shuln 
alle these folkis to the king of Babiloyne 
12seuenty 3er. And whan shul be fulfild 
seuenti 3er, Y shal visite vp on the king 
of Babiloyne, and vp on that folc, seith 
the Lord, the wickenesse? of them, and 
vp on the lond of Caldeis, and putten it 
13in to enermor wildernesses*. And Y shal 
bringe vpon that lond alle my wrdus that 
Y spac a3en it, al that ys write in this 
boe; what euere thingus profeciede Jere- 
l4mye a3en alle Jentilis ; for they serueden 
to'them, whan thei weren many Jentiles, 
and grete kingus; and Y shal 3elde to them 
after ther werkes, and aftir the deedus of 
isther hondus. For thus seith the Lord of 
ostus, God of Israel, Tac the chalis of the 
wyn of this wodnesse fro myn hond, and 
thou shalt heelde drinc of it to alle Jen- 
16tilis, to whiche Y shal senden thee. And 
thei shul drinke, and be disturbid, and 
waxe wod fro the face of the swerd, that 
17 Y shal sende among hem. And Y toc the 
chalis of the hond of the Lord, and Y 
helde oute drinc to alle Jentilis, to whiche 
issente.me the Lord; to Jerusalem, and to 
alle the cites of Juda, and to his kingus, 
and to his princes; that Y shulde 3yue 
them?» in to wildernesse, and in to stone- 
yng, and in to whistling, and in to curs- 
iging, as is this dai; to Farao, king of 
Egipt, and to his seruauns, and to his 
20 princes, and to al his puple; and to alle 
men ienerali, to alle kingus of erthe of 
the est kuutree, that is clepid Hus, ‘or 
Ansitidis®, and to alle kingus* of the 
Jond of Filisteym, and of Ascalon, and of 


2 wickidnes 4cux. ® wildernes 4GHK. 


Vv querns S sec. m. 


JEREMIAH. 


bOm. x. 


XXV. 10—20. 


lond, and on the dwelleris therof, and on 
alle naciouns, that ben in the cumpas 
therof; and Y schal sle hem, and Y schal 
sette hem in to wondryng, and in to hiss- 
yng, and in to euerlastynge wildirnessis. 
And Y schal leese of hem the vois of ioye, 10 
and the vois of gladnesse, the vois of 
spouse, and the vuis of spousesse, the vois 
of queerne’, and the li3t of the’ lanterne. 
And al the lond therof schal be in tou 
wildirnesse, and in to wondring ; and alle 
these fulkis schulen serue the king of Ba- 
biloyne seuenti 3eer. And whanne seuenti 12 
3eer ben fillid, Y schal visite on the kyng 
of Babiloyne, and on that folc the wickid- 
nesse of hem, seith the Lord, and on the 
lond of Caldeis, and Y schal set it in to 
euerlastynge wildirnesses. And Y schalis3 
brynge on that lond alle my wordis whiche 
Y spak a3ens it, al thing that is writun in 
this book; what euer thingis Jeremye pro- 
feside ajens alle folkis; for thei serueden 14 
to hem, whanne thei weren many folkis, 
and grete kingis; and Y schal 3elde to 
hem aftir the werkis of hem, and aftir 
the dedis of her hondis. For the Lord of 1s 
oostis, God of Israel, seith thus, Take thou 
the cuppe of wyn of this woodnesse fro 
myn hond, and thou schal birle therof to 
alle hethene men, to whiche Y schal sende 
thee. And thei schulen drynke, and schu-16 
len be disturblid, and schulen be woode of 
the face of swerd, which Y schal sende 
among hem. And Y took the cuppe fro 17 
the hond of the Lord, and Y birlide to alle 
folkis, to whiche the Lord sente me; to18 
Jerusalem, and to alle the citees of Juda, 
and to the kyngis therof, and to the princes 
therof; that Y schulde 3yue hem in to wil- 
dirnesse, and in to wondring, and in to 
hissyng, and in to cursing, as this dai is; 
to Farao, the king of Egipt, and to hise19 
seruauntis, and to hise princes, and to al 
hise puple; and to alle men generali, to 20 
alle the kyngis of the lond Ansitidis, and 
to alle the kyngis of the lond of Filistiym, 


¢Om.cetEpr.m. 4 the kyngis 4. 


w Om. celeri. 


XXV. 21—32. 


21 Gaze, and of Accharon, Ydume®, Asote, 
and to othere; and‘ to Moab, and to the 


2zsonus of Amon; and to alle kingus? of © 


Tiri, and to alle kingus* of Sidon, and 
to kingus of the lond. of iles that ben 
23 bi3unde the se; and to Dedan, and to 
Theman, and to Bus‘, and to alle that 
21 ben dodded* in to! the™ her; and to alle 
kingus of Arabie, and to alle kingis of 
25 the west, that dwellen in desert ; and to 
alle kingus of Samri", and to alle kingus 
of Elam, and to alle kingus of Medus; 
2g6and to alle kingus of the north, and fro 
ny3 and fro aferr, to eche a3en his bro- 
ther; and to alle reumes of erthe, that 
ben vp on his face; and king Cesac shal 
27 drinke aftir hem. And thou shalt sei to 
them, These thingus seith the Lord of 
ostus, God of Irael, Drinketh®, and beth 
drunken, and vometh, and falleth, and 
wileth not rise fro the face of the swerd 
2s that Y shal sende among 30u. And whan 
thei wiln not take the chalis fro thin 
hond, that thei drinke, thou shalt sei to 
them, These thingus seith the Lord of 
zgostus, Drinkende 3ee shul drinke; for 
lo! in the cite in whiche is inwardliche 
clepid my name, Y bigynne to tormente, 
and 3ee as ynnocentus harmles shul be ? 
3ee shul not ben harmlis, forsothe I clepe 
a swerd vp on alle dwelleris of erthe, 
30seith the Lord of ostus. And thou shalt 
profecien to them alle these wrdus, and 
sei to them, The Lord fro an hi3 shal 
rore, and fro his hoeli dwelling place 
shal 3yue his vois; rorende he shal roren 
vp on his fairnesse; a merie faring song, 
as of men tredende in presses, ‘shal be 
sunge? togidere a3en alle the dwelleris 
siof erthe. The soun ful cam vnto the 
vtmostus' of erthe’, for dom to the Lord 
with Jentylis, he is demed with alle 
flesh ; vnpitous men I toc to swerd, seith 
32the Lord. These thingus seith the Lord 
of ostus, Lo! torinenting shal gon out fro 


f to Ydume, and £ sec. m. 
10m. «4. 


¢ Om. E sec. m. 
k gadered and dodded E pr. m. 
make £ pr.m. | ¥ vttermostis acux. 


y Om. CEFGHIKMNPQR6UX prem. 
¢ ynto 1. 


x Om. 8. 
ghe ENPs sec. m. U. 


JEREMIAH. 


m Om. H. 
s the erthe arcu. 


399 


and to Ascalon, and to Gaza, and to Aco- 
ron, and to the residues of Azotus; to21 _ 
Idumee, and to Moab, and to the sones of 
Amon ; and to alle the kyngis of Tirus, 22 
and to alle the kingis of Sidon, and to the 
kingis of the lond of ilis that ben bi3endis 
the see; and to Dédan, and Theman, and 23 
Buz, and to alle men that ben clippid on 


' the long heer; and to alle the kingis of 2s 


Arabie, and to alle the* kingis of the west, 

that dwellen in desert; and to alle the’ 25 

kingis of Zambri, and to alle the kingis 

of Elam, and to alle the kyngis of Medeis; 

and to alle the kingis of the north, of ni326 

and of fer, to ech man ajens his brothir ; 

and to alle the rewmes of erthe, that ben 

on the face therof; and kyng Sesac schal 

drynke after hem. And thou schalt seie27 

to hem, The Lord of oostis, God of Israel, 

seith these thingis, Drynke 3e, and be 3e 

drunkun, and spue 3e, and falle 3e doun, 

and nyle 3e rise fro the face of swerd 

which Y schal sende among 30u. And 28 

whanne thei nylen? take the cuppe fro 

thin hond, that thei drynke, thou schalt 

seie to hem, The Lord of oostis seith these 

thingis, 3e drynkynge schulen drynke*; for 29 

lo! in the citee in which my name is clepid 

to help, Y bigynne to turmente, and schu- 

len 3e as innocentis be with out peyne? 3e 

schulen not be with out peyne, for Y clepe 

swerd on alle the dwelleris of erthe, seith 

the Lord of oostis. And thou schalt pro- so 

fesie to hem alle these wordis, and thou 

schalt seie to hem, The Lord schal rore 

fro an hi3, and fro his hooli dwellyng 

place he schal 3yue his vois; he rorynge 

schal rore on his fairnesse ; a myry song*, * celewma; a 

& myri fairing 

as of men tredynge in pressouris, schal be _ song, ethir 
. customable. 

sungun a3ens alle dwelleris of erthe. Sown 1 x marg. see. m. 

is comun til to® the laste partis of erthe, 

for whi doom is to the Lord with folkis, 

he is demed with ech fleisch; the Lord 

seith, Y haue 3oue wickid men to the 


swerd. The Lord of oostis seith these se 
& the kyngis acux. h the kyngis a. i Hus acu. 
" Samarie aux. © Drynke 4, 4 thei shul 
2 wolen not I. a drinkynge 1. b be a pr.m. 


400 


fole in to fole, and a gret whirlewind shal 
gon out fro the ouermostus of erthe*. 
33 And ther shul be the slayne of the Lord 
in that day fro the ouermost of erthe 
‘vn to" the ouermost of it; thei shul not 
be weilid, ne be gedered, ne be biried ; 
in to a dunghil vp on the face of the’ 
sserthe thei shul lyn. 3elleth, 3ee shep- 
perdus, and crieth, and sprengeth 30u 
with askes, 3ee most wrshepeful of the 
floc*; for fulfild ben 3oureY da3es, that 3ee 
shul’ be slayn, and 3oure scateringus*, and 
353ee shul falle as precious vesseles. And 
pershe shal fli3t> fro the shepperdus, and 
3esauyng fro the best of the floc. Vois of 
the cri of shepperdus, and 3elling* of the 
best of the floc, for the Lord wastede* 
37the leswes of hem. And al stille weren 
the ‘wilde feldis® of pes, fro the face ‘of 
the wrath‘ of the wodnesse of the Lord. 
38 He forsoc as a leoun his tabernacle, for 
mad is the lond of hem in to desola- 
cioun, fro the face of the wrathe of the 
culuer, and fro the face of the wrathe 
of the wodnesse of the Lord. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 In the bigynuyng of the regne of Joa- 
chym, sone of Josie, king of Juda, don is 
2this® wrd fro the Lord, seiende, These 
thingus seith the Lord, Stond in the 
porche of the hous of the Lord, and 
thou shalt speke to alle the cites of Juda, 
whiche" comen that theit honoure in the 
hous of the Lord, alle wrdus that I co- 
maundek to thee, that thou speke to them ; 
3wile thou not withdrawen a wrd ; if par 
auenture thei here, and be conuertid, eche 
fro his euel weie, and it othenke me of 
the euel that I tho3te to do to them for 
4the malices! of ther studies. And thou 
shalt sei to them, These thingus seith the 
Lord, If 3ee shul not here ine, that 3e™ 


tthe erthe 4. tintoGH. VY Om. &. 
2 Om. 4EGHK. ® scaterynge AGHK. 
f Om. ¢ prem. & the a4. 
l malice acu. ™ Om. c. 
d ynto 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


W ashen 4. asken EGHK. 
b liste pr.m. ¢the gelling ex. waastGpr.m.H. ¢ wildusc pr.m. 
h of whiche aeGu. of the whiche x. 


© forzerd CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


XXV. 93— "eve 


thingis, Lo! turment schal go out fro folk 
in to folk, and a greet whirlwynd schal go 
out fro the endis of erthe. And the slayn3s 
men of the Lord schulen be in that dai 
fro the ende of the erthe ‘til to’ the ende 
therof; thei schulen not be biweilid, ne- 
ther schulen be gaderid togidere, nether 
schulen be biried; thei schulen ligge in 
to a dunghil on the face of erthe. 3elle, 3e 34 
scheepherdis, and crye, and, 3e princypals 
of the floc, bispreynge 3ou with aische; for 
3oure daies ben fillid, that 3e be slayn, and 
j3oure scateryngis ben fillid, and 3e schulen 
falle as precious vessels. And fleyng schal 3s 
perische fro scheepherdis, and sauyng sehal 
perische fro the principals of the floc. The 36 
vois of the crye of scheepherdis, and the 
3ellyng of the principals of the floc, for 
the Lord hath wastid the lesewis of hem. 
And the feeldis of pees weren stille, for 37 
the face of wraththe of the strong ven- 
iaunce of the Lord. He as a lion hath3s 
forsake his tabernacle, for the lond of hem 
is maad in to desolacioun, of the face of 
wraththe of the culuer, and of the face 
of wraththe of the strong veniaunce of 
the Lord. 


CAP. XXVI. 


In the bigynnyng of the rewme of Jo-1 
achym, .the sone of Josie, kyng of Juda, 
this word was maad of the Lord, and 
seide, The Lord seide these thingis, Stonde 2 
thou in the porche® of the hous of the 
Lord, and thou schalt speke to alle the 
citees of Juda. fro whiche thei comen for 
to worschipe in the hous of the Lord, alle 
the wordis whiche Y comaundide to thee, 
that thou speke to hem; nyle thou with- 
drawe a word; if perauenture thei heren,3 
and ben conuertid, ech man fro his yuele 
weie, and it repente me of the yuel which 
Y thou3te to do to hem for the malices of 
her studies. And thou schalt seie to hem, 4 
The Lord seith these thingis, If 3e heren 


* fole E pr.m. YY oure E pr.m. 


i Om. H. k comanndide 4EGHK. 


f comaunde n. 


XXVI. 5—15. 


5go in my lawe that Y 3af to 30u, that 3ee 
here the sermounus of my seruauns, pro- 
fetus, that Y sente to 3ou, the ny3t risende", 
éand rij3t reulende, and 3ee herde not; Y 
shal 3yuen this hous as Cilo, and this cite 
I shal 3yue in to cursing to alle folkus of 
zerthe. And ther herden the prestus, and 
profetus, and al the puple Jereniye® spek- 
ende these wrdus in the hous of the Lord. 
sAnd whan fulfild hadde Jeremye spek- 
ende alle these thingus?, that comaundid 
hadde to hym the Lord, that he shulde 
speke to al the puple, token hym the 
prestus, and the false‘ profetus, and al the 
9puple, seiende, Bi deth die he; whi pro- 
feciede he in the name of the Lord, sei- 
ende, As Cylo shal be this hous, and this 
cite shal be desolat, for thi that ther is 
not a dwellere? And gedered is al the 
puple a3en Jeremye, in the hous of the 
10 Lord. And herden the princes of Juda 
alle these wrdis; and thei stezeden vp fro 
the hous of the king in to the hous of 
the Lord, and thei seeten in the entre of 
the newe 3ate of the hous of the Lord. 
1: And speeken the prestus and the profetus 
to the princes, and to al* the® puple, sei- 
ende, Dom of deth is to this man, for he 
profeciede ajen this cite, as 3ee han herd 
12 with 3oure eres. And Jeremye seith to 
alle the princes, and to al‘ the puple, sei- 
ende, The Lord sente me, that Y shulde 
profecien to this hous, and to this cite, 
i3alle the wrdus that 3ee han herd. Now 
thanne goode maketh 3oure weies, and 
joure studies, and hereth the voys" of 
the Lord 3o0ure God; and it shal othinke 
the Lord of the enel that he spac a3en 
1s30u. I forsothe lo! in 3oure hondis 
am; doth to me that good is and ri3t in 
is30ure ejen. Nerthelatere witeth, and wel 
knowith, that if 3ee shul sle me, an ynno- 
cent blod 3ee shul betra3e a3en 30u self, 
and ajen this cite, and his dwelleris ; in 
treutlie forsothe sente me the Lord to 
_30u, that Y shulde speke in 3oure eres 


» Y rysynge 4 pr.m.EGHK. © propheciende Jeremye £ pr.m. 


rOma. *Omu. tOm. a. Uwrd cpr.m.x. 


& ther is 1. 
VOL. III. 3 F 


JEREMIAH. 


h seiynge 1. 


401 


not me, that 3e go in my lawe which Y 
3af to 30u, that 3e here the wordis of mys — 
sernauntis, profetis, whiche Y risyuge bi 
ni3te, and dressynge, sente to 3ou, and je 
herden not; Y schal 3yue this hous as Silo, ¢ 
and Y schal 3yue this citee in to cursyng 
to alle folkis of erthe. And the prestis,7 
and profetis, and al the puple herden Je- 
remye spekynge these wordis in the lous 
of the Lord. And whamne Jeremye haddes 
fillid spekynge alle thingis, whiche the 
Lord hadde comaundid to hym, that he 
schulde speke to al the puple, the prestis, 
and profetis, and al the puple token hym, 
and seiden, Die he bi deeth; whi profesiede 9 
he in the name of the Lord, and seide, 
This hous schal be as Silo, and this citee 
schal be desolat, for no dwellere is’? And 
al the puple was gaderid togidere ajens 
Jeremye, in the hous of the Lord. And 10 
the princes of Juda herden alle these 
wordis; and thei stieden fro the kyngis 
hous in to the hous of the Lord, and saten 
in the entryng of the newe 3ate of the 
hous of the Lord. And the prestis andi) 
profetis spaken to the princes, and to ‘al 
the puple, and seiden, Doom of deth is to 
this man, for he profesiede a3ens this citee, 
as 3e herden with 3oure eeris.. And Jere-12 
mye seide to alle the princes, and to al 
the puple, ‘and seide*, The Lord sente me, 
that Y schulde prophesie to this hous, and 
to this citee, alle the wordis whiche 3e 
herden. Now therfor make 3e good 3oure 13 
weies, and 3oure studies, and here 3e the 
vois of 3oure Lord God; and it schal re- 
pente the Lord of the yuel which he spak 
a3jens 30u. Lo! forsothe Y am in 3o0ure14 
hondis; do 3e to me, as it is good and 
ri3tful bifore 3oure izen. Netheles wite 3e, 15 
and knowe, that if 3e sleen me, 3e schulen 
bitraie innoceut blood a3ens 30u silf, and 
azens this citee, and the dwelleris therof; 
for-in trewthe the Lord sente me to 3ou, 
that Y schulde speke in 3oure eeris alle 
these wordis. And the princes and al the.16 


P woordis £ pr. vice. 4 shrewde E pr.m. 


402 


16alle these wrdus. And seiden the princes 
and al the puple to’ the prestys and pro- 
fetus, Ther is not to this man dom of 
deth; for in the name of the Lord oure 
17God he spae to vs. Risen thanne the 
men of the elderes of the lond, and seiden 
to al the cumpanye of the puple, spek- 
isende, Michie of Morasten was a profete 
in the da3es of Ezechie, king of Jude; 
and he seith to al the puple of Jude, sei- 
ende, These thingus seith the Lord of 
ostus, Sion as a feeld shal ben ered, and 
Jerusalem in to an hep of stonus shal be, 
and the mount of the hous of the Lord 
iin to heijtus of wodus. Whether bi deth 
condempnede hym Ezeehie, king of Juda, 
and al Juda? Whether not thei dredden 
the Lord, and louli pre3eden the face of 
the Lord, and it otho3te the Lord of the 
euel that he ‘hadde spoke” a3en hem? 
And so do we not gret euel ajen oure 
20soules. Also ther was a man profeciende 
in the name of the Lord, Vrias, the sone 
of Semmei, of Cariathiarym; and he pro- 
feciede ajen this cite, and ajen this lond, 
aiaftir alle the wrdis of Jeremye. And 
herde king Joachym, and alle the my3ti 
men, and his prinees these wrdus; and 
the king so3te to slen hym; and Vrie 
herde, and dredde, and flei3, and wente 
zzin to Egipt. And king Joachym sente 
men in to Egipt, Elnathan, the sone of 
Achabor, and men with him, in to Egipt; 
gzand bro3ten out Vrie fro Egipt, and 
bro3ten hym to king Joachym; and he* 
smot hym with swerd, and thre3 aferr 
his eareyne in sepuleris’ of the? vnnoble 
23comun. Therfore the hond of Aicham, 
sone of Safan, was with Jeremye, that 
he shulde not be take in to the hondus 
of the puple, and it* schulde slen hym. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 In the bigynnyng of the regne of Joa- 
chym, sone of Josie, king of Juda, don 
is this wrd to Jeremye fro the Lord, 


Yand 4. Wspacc pr.m. * Om. E prom. 


JEREMIAH. 


y the sepulcris GHK. 


XXVIL 16—XXVII. 1. 


puple seiden to the preestis and profetis, 
Doom of deth is not to this man; for he 
spak to vs in the name of oure Lord God. 
Therfor men of the eldere men of the lond 17 
rysiden! vp, and seiden to al the eampanye 
of the puple, and spaken, Mychee of Mo-1s 
rasten was a profete in the daies of Eze- 
ehie, king of Juda; and he seide to al the 
puple of Juda, and* seide!, The Lord of 
oostis seith these thingis, Sion schal be 
erid as a feeld, and Jerusalem schal be in 
to an heep of stoonys, and the hil of the 
hous of the Lord schal be in to hi3 thingis 
of woodis. Whether Ezechie, kyng of Juda, 19 
and al Juda eondempnede hym bi deth? 
Whether thei dredden not the Lord, and 
bisou3ten the faee of the Lord? and it re- 
pentide the Lord of the yuel which he 
spak a3ens hem. Therfor do we not greet 
yuel ajens oure soulis. Also Vrye, the2o 
sone of Semey, of Cariathiarym, was a 
man profesiynge in the naine of the Lord ; 
and he profesiede a3ens this eitee, and 
ajens this lond, bi alle the wordis of Jere- 
mye. And kyng Joaehym, and alle thea. 
my3ti men, and princes of heim, herden 
these wordis; and the kyng sou3te to sle 
hym; and Vrye herde, and dredde, and 
he fledde, and entride in to Egipt. And 22 
kyng Joachym sente men in to Egipt, 
Elnathan, the sone of Achobor, and men 
with hym, in to Egipt; and thei ledden23 
Vrye out of Egipt, and brou3ten hym to 
kyng Joachym; and the kyng killide hym 
bi™ swerd, and eastide forth his careyn in 
the sepuleris of the comyn puple vnnoble. 
Therfor the hond of Aiecham, sone of Sa-e4 
phan, was with Jeremye, that he was not 
bitakun in to the hondis of the puple, and 
that it killide not hym. 


CAP. XXVII. 


In the bigynnyng of the rewme of Joa-1 
chym, the sone of Josie, kyng of Juda, 
this word was maad of the Lord to Jere- 


zQOm. 4cH. & Om. c. 


iresenr, kK Om. 1. Iseiynce1. ™ with 1. 
yng 


XXVIII. 2——11. 


2seiende, These thingus seith the Lord to 
me, Mac to thee bondis and cheynus, and 
3thou shalt putte them” in thi necke; and 
sende them to the king of Edom, and to 
the king of Moab, and to the king of the 
sonus of Amon, and to the king of Tiri, 
and to the king of Sidon, in the hond of 
the messageres that camen to Jerusalem, 
4and to.Sedechie, king of Juda. And thow 
shalt comaunde to them, that to ther 
lordys they speke, These thingus seith 
the Lord of ostys, God of Irael, These 
sthingus 3ee shul sey to 3oure lordus, I 
made erthe, and man, and bestus that ben 
vp on the face of al erthe, in my grete 
strengthe, and in myn arm stra3t out; 
and Y 3af it to hym that plesede in myn 
se3jen. And now also Y 3af alle these 


londus in the hond of Nabugodonosor, - 


king of Babiloyne, my seruaunt ; ferther- 
mor and the bestus of the feld Y 3af to 
zhym, that thei serue to hym. And serue 
shul to hym alle fole of kinde, and to his 
sone, and to the sone of his sone, to the 
tyme that come the tyme of his. lond, 
and of hym; and seruen shul to hym 
manye fole of kinde, and grete kingns. 
sFole forsothe and rewme that serue shal 
not to Nabugodonosor, king of Baby- 
lonye, and ‘whoso euere® shal not bowe 
his necke vnder the 30¢ of the king of 
Babilonye, in swerd, and hunger, and 
pestilence Y shal visite vp on that fole, 
seith the Lord, to the tyme Y¢ waste 
9them in his hond®. 3ee forsothe wileth 
not heren 3oure profetus, and deuynoures, 
and sweueneres, and brid deuyneres, and 
deuel cleperes, that seyn to 30u, jee shul 
1onot serue to the king of Babiloyne; for 
thei profecien to 3ou lesing, that aferr 
thei make 3o0u fro 3oure lond, and caste 
1130u out, and 3ee pershe. But the folc 
that shal vnderleyn his nol vnder the 
3oc of the king of Babiloyne, and serue 
to hym, Y shal leven‘ it in his lond, seith 
the Lord; and yt shal tiln it, and dwelle 


JEREMIAH. 


403 


mye, and seide, The Lord seith these2 
thingis to me, Make thou to thee boondis 
and chaynes, and thou schalt putte tho" 
in thi necke; and thou schalt sende tho"3 
to the kyng of Edom, and to the kyng of 
Moab, and to the kyng of the sones of 
Amon, and to the kyng of Tyre, and to 
the kyng of Sidon, bi the hond of mes- 
sangeris that camen to Jerusalem, and to 
Sedechie, kyng of Juda. And thou schalt4 
comaunde to hem, that thei speke to ler 
lordis, The Lord of oostis, God of Israel, 
seith these thingis, 3e schulen seie these 
thingis to 3oure lordis, Y made erthe, ands 
man, and beestis that ben on the face of 
al erthe, in my greet strengthe, and in 
myn arm holdun forth; and Y 3af it to 
hym that plesyde bifore myn isen. Ande 
now therfor Y 3af alle these londis in the 
hond of Nabugodonosor, my seruaunt, the 
kyng of Babiloyne; fertherniore and Y 3af 
to hym the beestis of the feeld, that thei 
serue hym. And alle folkis schulen serue7 
hym, and his sone, and the sone of his 
sone, til the tyme of his lond and of hyin 
come; and many folkis and grete kyngis 
schulen serue hym. Forsothe the folk ands. 
rewme that serueth not Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, and whoeuer bowith 
not his necke vndur the 30k of the kyng 
of Babiloyne, Y schal visite on that folk 
in swerd, and hungur, and pestilence, seith 
the Lord, til Y waaste hem in his hond. 
Therfor nyle 3e here 3oure profetis, and 9 
false dyuynouris, and dremeris, and dy- 
uyneris bi chiteryng and fleyng of briddis, 
and witchis, that seien to 3ou, 3e schulen 
not serue the kyng of Babiloyne; for thei 10 
profesien a leesyng to 30u, that thei make 
jou fer fro 3oure lond, and caste out 3ou, 
and 3e perische. Certis the folk that mak-11 
ith suget her nol vndur the 30k of the 
kyng of Babiloyne, and serueth hym, Y 
schal dismytte® it in his lond, seith the . 
Lord; and it schal tile that /ond, and schal 
dwelle therynne. And Y spak bi alle these 12 


bOm. £ pr.m. ¢whoeuere 4. 4thatI 4. ¢londc, f 3yue 4. 


« hem nN, 


© Jeeue, ether dismitte CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


3F2 


404 


12in8 it. And to Sedechye, king of Juda, 
Y spae after alle these wrdus, seiende, 
Vnderleith 3oure neckus vnder the 30c of 
the king of Babyloyne, and serueth to 
hym, and to his puple, and 3ee shul lyue. 
13 Whi shul 3ee die, thou and thi puple, 
with swerd, and hunger, and _ pestilence, 
as spac the Lord to the fole, that wile 
not serne to the king of Babiloyne ? 
14 Wileth not heren the wrdus of profetys 
seiende to 3o0u, 3ee shul not serue to the 
king of Babiloyne; for lesing they speken 
isto 30u, for Y sente them not, seith the 
Lord; and thei profecien" in my name 
liendely, that I throwe 30u! out, and 3ee* 
pershe, bothe 3ee and the profetes that 
16 profecien to 30u. And to the prestus, 
and to this! puple I spae, seiende, These 
thingus seith the Lord God, Wileth not 
heren the wrdus of joure profetus, that 
profecien to 30u, seiende, Lo! the ves- 
selis of the Lord shul turne a3een fro 
Babiloyne now soone; lesyng forsothe 
17 thei profeecien to3ou. Wileth not thanne 
heren hem, but serueth to the king of 
Babiloyne, that 5ee lyue; whi 3ouen ys 
18this™ cite im to wildernesse ? And if pro- 
fetes thei ben, and the wrd of God is in 
hem, ajeen come thei to the Lord of ostis, 
that come not the vesselis, that weren laft 
in the hous of the Lord, and in the hous 
of the king of Juda, and in Jerusalem, 
win to Babiloyne. For these thingus seith 
the Lord of ostus to the pileres, and to 
the se, and to the feet, and to the rem- 
naunt of the vesselis, that laften in this 
20 cite, the whiche bar not Nabugodonosor, 
king of Babiloyne, whan he shulde trans- 
late Jeconye, the sone of Joachym, king 
of Juda, fro Jerusalem in to Babiloyne, 
and alle the best inen of Juda and of 
aiJerusalem. For these thingus seith the 
Lord of ostis, God of Irael, to the ves- 
selus that ben laft in the hous of the 
Lord, and" in the hous of the king of 
22 Juda, and in Jerusalem, In to Babiloyne 


8 Om. £ pr.m. 4} profecieden c pr.m. 


P lord omnes preter c sup. ras et X. 


JEREMIAH. 


ihem 4cuxk, 


PP wolde not 1. 
CFGIKMNPQRSUVX. SOm.1. tremenauntc. ¥ the kyng cEFGNIKMNPQRSUVX, 
ether led ouer c. translatid, ether born ouer EFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


XXVII. 12-——22. 


wordis to Sedechie, kyng of Juda, and Y 
seide, Make 3e suget 3oure neckis vndur 
the 30k of the kyng of Babiloyne, and 
serue 3e hym, and his puple, and 3e schulen 
lyne. Whi sehulen 3e die, thou and thil3 
puple, bi swerd, and hungur, and pesti- 
lence, as the Lord spak to the folk?, that 
noldePP serue to the kyng of Babiloyne ? 
Nyle 3e here the wordis of profetis seiynge !4 
to 30u, 3e schulen not serue the kyng of Ba- 
biloyne; for thei speken’ leesyng to 30u, 
for Y sente not hem, seith the Lord; and 15 
thei profesien falsly in my name, that thei 
caste out 30u, and that 3e perische, bothe 
3e and the profetis that profesien to jou. 
And Y spak to the preestis, and to this 16 
puple, and Y seide, The Lord God seith 
these thingis, Nyle 3e here the wordis of 
3oure profetis, that profesien to jou, and 
seien, Lo! the vessels of the Lord schulen 
turne ajen now scone fro Babiloyne; for 
thei profesien a’ leesyng to 30u. Therfor17 
nyle 3e here hem, but serue 3e to' the 
kyug of Babiloyne, that 3e lyue; whi is 
this citee 3ounn in to wildirnesse? And if !8 
thei ben profetis, and if’ the word of God 
is in hem, renne thei to the Lord of oostis, 
that the vessels whiche weren left in the 
hous of the Lord, and in the hous of the 
kyng of Juda, and in Jerusalem, come not 
in to Babiloyne. For the Lord of oostis19 
seith these thingis to the pilers, and to 
the see, that is, a grect waischyng vessel, 
and to the foundementis, and to the re- 
menautis' of vessels, that weren left in 
this citee, whiche Nabugodonosor, king of 20 
Babiloyne, took not, whanne he translatide 
Jeconye, the sone of Joachim, king" of Ju- 
da, fro Jerusalem in to Babiloyne, and alle 
the principal men of Juda and of Jerusa- 
lem. For the Lord of oostis, God of Israel, 21 
seith these thingis to the vessels that ben 
left in the hous of the Lord, and in the 
hous of the king of Juda, and in Jerusa- 
lem, Tho” schulen be translatid” in to Ba-22 
biloyne, and schulen be there ‘til to* the 


kthei a. Ithe 4. ™Om.c. 2Om. £ pr.m. 
Qspaken a. a leesingc. *Om.1. ™ Om. 
v Thei vn. © translatid, 


x ynto I. 


XXVIII. 1——10. 


thei shul be translatid, and there thei 
shul be vnto the dai of ther visitacioun, 
seith the Lord; and I shal make them 
to be bro3t to, and to ben restored to° 
thisP place. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 And don it is ‘in that 3er4, in the bi- 
gynnyng of the regne of Sedechie, king 
of Juda, in the ferthe 3er, in the fifte 
moneth, seide to me Ananye, the sone of 
Asur, a profete of Gabaon, in the hous 
of the Lord, befor the prestes, and al the 

2puple, seiende, These thingus seith the 
Lord of ostus, God of Irael, I haue™ to- 
brosid the 30c of the king of Babiloyne. 

3 3it two 3er of da3es, and Y shal make to 
be born ajeen to this place alle the ves- 
selis of the Lord, that toc Nabugodono- 
sor, king of Babiloyne, fro this place, and 

4translatede them in to Babiloyne. And 
Jechonye, the sone of Joachym, king of 
Juda, and al the transmygracioun of 
Juda, that wenten in to Babiloyne, Y 
shal turne to this place, seith the Lord ; 
I shal to-trede forsothe the 30c of the 

sking of Babiloyne. And Jeremye, the 
profete, seide to Ananye, the profete, in 
the e3en of prestus, and in the e3en of al 
the puple that stoden in the hous of the 
6Lord. And Jeremie, the profete, seith 
to Ananye, Amen! thus do the Lord; 
rere the Lord thi wrdus that thou hast 
profecied, that bro3t a3een be the vesselis 
in the hous of the Lord, and al the 
transmygracioun fro Babiloyne, to this 
zplace. Nerthelateret here thou this wrd, 
that Y speke in thin eres, and in the eres 
sof al the puple. Profetus that weren bi- 
for me, and bifor thee, fro the bigynnyng, 
and profecieden vp on manye londus, and 
vp on manye rewmes, of bataile, and of 
ytormenting, aud of hunger. The profete 
that profeciede pes, whan shal comen his 
wrd, shal be wist a profete whom sente 
iothe Lord in treuthe. And Ananye, the" 


Cin aecuk. P ther e prom. Om. £ prim. 


Yseiynge rt. 7% twor, 


JEREMIAH. 


tha x. 


405 


dai of her visitacioun, seith the Lord ; and 
Y schal make tho to be brou3t, and to be 
restorid in this place. 


eae 
v 


CAP. XXVIII. 

Aud it was don in that 3eer, in thei 
bigynnyng of the rewme of Sedechie, kyng 
of Juda, in the fourthe:3eer, in the fyuethe 
monethe, Ananye, the sone of Azur, a 
profete of Gabaon, seide to me in the hous 
of the Lord; bifor the preestis, and al the 
puple, ‘and seide’, The Lord of oostis, God 2 
of Israel, seith these thingis, Y haue al 
to-broke the 30k of the kyng of Babiloyne. 
Zit twei* 3eeris of daies ben®, and Y schal3 
make to be brou3t a3en to this place alle 
the vessels of the Lord, whiche Nabugo- 
donosor, kyng of Babiloyne, took fro this 
place, and translatide tho” in to Babiloyne. 
And Y schal turue to this place, seith the 4 
Lord, Jeconye, the sone of Joachym, the 
kyng of Juda, and al the passyng ouer of 
Juda, that entriden in to Babiloyne; for 
Y schal al to-breke the 30k of the kyng of 
Babiloyne. And Jeremye, the profete,s 
seide to Ananye, the profete, bifore the 
i3en of preestis, and bifore the izen of al 
the puple that stoden in the hous of the 
Lord. And Jeremye, the profete, scide to6 
Ananye, Amen! so do the Lord; the Lord 
reise thi wordis whiche thou profesiedist, 
that the vessels be brou3t a3en in to the 
hous of the Lord, and al the passyng ouer 
fro Babiloyne, to this place. Netheles7 
here thou this word, which Y speke in 
thin eeris, and in the eeris of al the puple. 
Profetis that weren bifore me, and bifors 
thee, fro the bigynnyng, and profesieden 
on many londis, and on many rewmes, of 
batel, and of turment, and of hungur. Theo 
profete ‘that profesiede pees, whanne his 
word cometh, shal be knowun the pro- 
fete whom the Lord sente in treuthe. And 10 
Ananye, the profete, took the chayne fro 


t Neuer the later celer? passim. Om. EK. 


ether beni. > hem nN. 


406 


profete, toc the cheyne of the necke of 
uJeremye, profete’, and brac it. And 
Ananye, the profete, seith in the si3te of 
al the puple, seiende, These thingus seith 
the Lord, Thus Y shal to-breke the 30c 
of Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, 
after two 3eris of da3es, fro the necke of 
alle Jentilis. And Jeremye, the profete, 
wente awei in to his weye. And don is 
the wrd of the Lord to Jeremye, aftir 
that Ananye, the profete, brac the cheyne 
13fro the necke of Jeremye, seiende, Go, 
and sey to Ananye, These thingus seith 
the Lord, Treene cheynes thou hast to- 
broke, and thou shalt make for them 
l4irene cheynes. For these thingus seith 
the Lord of ostis, God of Irael, An irene 
3oc Y haue” set vp on the necke of alle 
these Jentilis, that thei serue to Nabugo- 
donosor, king ‘of Babiloyne, and thei shul 
seruen to hym; ferthermor and the bestus 
isof erthe* Y 3af to hym. And Jeremye, 
the profete, seide to Ananye, the profete, 
Here thou, Ananye; the Lord sente not 
thee, and thou madist this puple to troste 
Gin lesing. Therfore these thingus seith 
the Lord, Lo! I shal throwen out thee 
fro the face of the’ erthe; this 3er thou 
shalt die, forsothe ajen the Lord thou 
17speeke. And dead is Ananye, the pro- 
fete, in that 3er the senenthe moneth. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 And these ben the wrdus of the boc, 
that sente Jeremye, the profete, fro Je- 
rusalem to the remnaunt of the elderes of 
the transmygracioun, and to the prestus, 
and to the profetes, and to al the puple, 
whom ouerlad hadde Nabugodonosor 

2fro Jerusalem in to Babiloyne, after that 
wente out Jechonye, the king, and the 
lady, and the geldingus, and the princes 
of Juda, out? of? Jerusalem, and the 

ssmyth, aud the” iueler fro Jerusalem, in 
the hond of Elaasa, sone of Safan, and of 
Gamaliel, sone of Elchie, whom sent Se- 


v the prophete 4. Wha x. * the erthe a. 


¢ spak Nn. 


JEREMIAH. 


y Om. AEGHK. 


4 seiynge 1. * © two I. 


XXVUI. 11-—-XXIX. 3. 


the necke of Jeremye, the profete, and 
brak it. And Ananye, the profete, seide® 11 
in the si3t of al the puple, ‘and seide’, The 
Lord seith these thingis, So Y schal breke 
the 30k of Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babi- 
loyne, aftir twei® 3eeris of daies, fro the 
necke of alle folkis. And Jeremye, the 12 
profete, 3ede in to his weie. And the word 
of the Lord was maad to Jeremye, aftir 
that Ananye, the profete, brak the chayne 
fro the necke of Jeremye; and the Lord 
seide, Go thou, and seie to Ananye, The 13 
Lord seith these thingis, Thou hast al to- 
broke the chaynes of tre, and thou schalt 
make yrun chaynes for tho’. For the Lord 14 
of oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Y haue set an yrun 30k on the necke of 
alle these folkis, that thei serue Nabugo- 
donosor, the king of Babiloyne, and thei 
schulen serue hym; ferthermore and Y 
3af to hym the beestis of erthe. And Je-1s 
remye, the profete, seide to Ananye, the 
profete, Ananye, here thou; the Lord 
sente not thee, and thou madist this puple 
for to triste in a& leesyng. Therfor the 1s 
Lord seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
sende thee out fro the face of erthe; in 
this 3eer thou schalt die, for thou spakest 
az3ens the Lord. And Ananye, the pro-17 
fete, diede in that 3eer, in the seuenthe 
monethe. 


CAP. XXIX. 


And these ben the wordis of the book, 1 
whiche Jeremye, the profete, sente fro Je- 
rusalemn to the residues of eldere men of 
passyng ouer, and to tlie preestis, and to 
the profetis, and to al the puple, whom 
Nabugodonosor hadde ledde ouer fro Je- 
rusalem in to Babiloyne, after that Jeco-2 
nye, the kyng, 3ede out, and the ladi, and 
the onest seruauntis and chast, and the 
princis of Juda 3eden out of Jerusalem, 
and a sutel crafti man, and a goldsmyth 
of Jerusalem, in the hond of Elasa, sone3 
of Saphan, and of Gamalie, the sone of 


z2Om. £ prom 4fro 4. > Om. z. 


Fhemn, & Om. 1. 


XXIX. 4—15. 


dechie’, king of Juda, to Nabugodonosor, 
king of Babiloyne, in to Babiloyne, sei- 
aende, These thingus seith’ the Lord of 
ostus, God of Irael, to al the transmygra- 
cyoun, that Y translatede fro Jerusalem 
sin to Babiloyne, Bildeth vp houses, and 
dwelleth, and plauuteth gardynes, and 
seteth the frute of hem; taketh wyues, 
and geteth sonus and do3tris, and 3yueth 
to 30ure sonus wyues, and 3oure do3tris 
3yueth to men, and bere thei sonus and 
do3tris; and ‘be 3ee multeplied® there, 
and wileth not be fewe in noumbre. 
7 And secheth the pes of the cyte, to thef 
whiche Y made 3ow gon ouer; and pre3- 
eth for it the Lord, for in his pes shal 
sbe pes to 30u. These thingus seith the 
Lord of ostus, God of Irael, Bigile not 
jou 30ure profetus, that ben in the myd- 
del of 3ou, and 3oure dyuynours®; ands 
ne taketh heed to 3oure sweuenes, that 
93ee sweuenen®; for thei falsly profecien 
to 30u in my name, and Y sente them 
1onot, seith the Lord. For these thingus 
seith the Lord, Whan schal bigynne to 
be fulfilid in Babiloyne seuenti 3eer, Y 
shal visite 3ou, and reren vp! 3ou my 
good wrd, and bringe 30u a3een to this 
i1place. I forsothe wot the tho3tus that Y 
thenke vp on 30u, seith the Lord, tho3tus 
of pes, and not* of tormenting, that Y 
123yue to 3ou ende and pacience. And! 3ee 
shul inwardly ‘clepe me", and gon, and 
honoure me, and Y shall ful out here 30u; 
133ee shul seche me, and finden, whan 3ee 
i4han so3t me in al 3o0ure herte. And Y 
shal be founde of 30u, seith the Lord, 
and Y shall bringe a3een 3oure caitifte, 
and gedere 30u fro alle Jentiles, and fro 
alle places, to whiche I putte 3ou out, 
seith the Lord; and to turne a3een I shal 
make 3ou™ fro the place, to whiche Y 
ismade 30u to gon" ouer. For 3ee seiden, 
Reren shal to vs the Lord profetus in 


JEREMIAH. 


407 


Elehie, whiche’ Sedechie', the kyng of 
Juda, sente to Nabugodonosor, the kyng 
of Babiloyne, in to Babiloyne. And Je-4 
remye seide, The Lord of oostis, God of 
Israel, seith these thingis to al the pass- 
yng ouer, which Y translatide fro Jeru- 
salem in to Babiloyne, Bilde 3e housis,5 
and enhabite, and plaunte 3e orcherdis, 
and ete 3e! fruyt™ of tho"; take 3e6 
wyues, and gendre 3e sones and dou3tris, 
and 3yue 3e wyues to 30ure sones, and 
3yue 3e 3oure dou3tris to hosebondis, and 
bere® thei sones and dou3tris; and be 3e 
multiplied there, and nyle 3e be fewe in 
noumbre. And seke 3e pees of the citees,7 
to whiche Y made 30u to passe ouer; and 
preie 3e the Lord for it, for in the pees 
therof schal be pees to 30u. The Lord ofs 
oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Zoure profetis, that ben in the myddis of 
jou, and 3oure dyuynours disseyue 30u 
not; and take 3e noon heede to 3o0ure 
dremes, whiche 3e dremen; for thei pro-9 
fesien falsli to 30u in my name, and Y 
sente not hem, seith the Lord. For theio 
Lord seith thes thingis, Whanne seuenti 
3eer bigynuen to be fillid in Babiloyne, Y 
schal visite 30u, and Y schal reise on 30u 
my good word, and Y schal brynge 30u 
a3en to this place. For Y knowe the 
thou3tis whiche Y thenke on 3ou, seith 
the Lord, the thou3tis of pees, and not of 
turment, that Y 3yue to 30u an ende and 
pacience. And 3e schulen clepe me to12 
help, and 3e schulen go, and schulen wor- 
schipe me, and Y schal here 30u; 3e schu-is 
len seke me, and 3e schulen fynde, whanne 
3e seken me in al 3oure herte. And Yu 
schal be foundun of 3ou, seith the Lord, 
and Y schal brynge ajen 3oure caitifte, 
and Y schal gadere 3ou fro alle folkis, and 
fro alle places, to whiche Y castide out 
3ou, seith the Lord; and Y schal make 3ou 
to turne a3en fro the place, to which Y 


© Om.cpr.m. 4Om.c prom. © 3e shulen multiplie acux. 3ce shul be SU Epr.m. f Om. AE. 
8Om.cpr.m. 88 Om. 4a. 4 han swenened z pr. m. i vpon AEG sec. mt. K. non K. ! Om. £ pr.m. 
NOm.c prom, ™Om.c, 2 Om. a. 

bhthe whiche r. $iEzechier &kOm.1.  / ete 3e the crv. mfrnytisc. Shemyn. ° childe 


CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


408 


16 Babiloyne. For these thingys seith the 
Lord to the king, that sit? vp on the see 
of Dauid, and to al the puple, dwellere 
of this cyte, to 3oure brethern, that ben 
not gon out with 3ou in to transmygra- 

17cioun, These thingus seith the Lord of 
ostus, Lo! Y shal sende in hem swerd, 
and hunger, and pestilence; and putten 
hem as the euel figus, that moun not ben 

18 ete, for thi that they ben werst. And Y 
shal pursue them in swerd, and in hun- 
ger, and in pestilence; and Y shal 3yue 
them in to wery trauailing to alle rewmes 
of erthe, in to cursing, and in to stone- 
yng, and in to whistling, and in to re- 
pref to alle Jentilis, to whiche I caste 

i#hem out. For thi that they herden not 
my wrdys, seith the Lord, whiche Y 
sente to them by my seruauns, profetes, 
fro? ny3t risende, and sendende’, and 3ee 

20 herden not, seith the Lord. 3ee therfore 
hereth the wrd of the Lord, al transmy- 
gracioun", that Y sente out fro Jerusalem 

21in to Babiloyne. These thingus seith the 
Lord of ostys, God of Irael, to Achab, 
sone of Cholie, and to Sedechie, sone of 
Maasie, that profesiens to 30u in my 
name lesinget, Lo! Y shal taken hem" 
in the hond of Nabugodonosor, king of 
Babiloyne, and he shal smyte them in 

2230ure ejen. And ther shul ben taken of 
them cursing to al the transmygracioun 
of Jude, that is in Babiloyne, of men 
seiende, Putte thee the Lord as Sedechie, 
and as Achab, whom friede the king of 

23 Babiloyne in fyr, for thi that thei diden 
folie in Irael, and diden auoutre in to 
the wyues of ther frendus; and speeken 
wrd in my name liendely, that Y co- 
maundide not to them; I am domesman 

2iand witnesse, seith the Lord. And to 
Semeiam Neelainytem thou shalt seyn, 

25 These thyngus seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, For thi that thou sentest 
bokes in my name to al the puple that 
is in Jerusalem, and to Sofonye, sone of 


PI fro AE sec. m. GK. 
u Om. AGiK. 


© sittith 4. satt Gu. 
cyede 4. ¢ lesingus c. 


P Om. nN. 


JEREMIAH. 


q seiynge AGHK. 


XXIX. 16—25. 


made 30u to passe ouer. For 3e seiden, 15 
The Lord schal reise profetis to vs in 
Babiloyne. For the Lord seith theset6 
thingis to the kyng, that sittith on the 
seete of Dauid, and to al the puple, 
dwellere of this citee, to 30ure britheren, 
that 3eden not out with jou in to the 
passyng ouer, The Lord of oostis seith17 
these thingis, Lo! Y schal sende among 
hem swerd, and hungur, and pestilence ; 
and Y schal sette hem as yuele figis, that 
moun not be etun, for tho ben ful yuele. 
And Y schal pursue hem in swerd, aud is 
in hungur, and in pestilence; and Y schal 
3yue hem in to tranelyng in alle rewmes 
of erthe, in to cursyng, and in to won- 
dryng, and in to scornyng, and in to 
schenschipe to alle folkis, to whiche Y 
castide hem out. For thei herden not my 19 
wordis, seith the Lord, which Y sente to 
hem bi my seruauntis, profetis, and roos 
bi ny3t, and sente, and 3e herden not, seith 
the Lord. Therfor al the passyng ouer, 20 
which Y sente out fro Jerusalem in to 
Babiloyne, here 3e the word of the Lord. 
The Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith2t 
these thingis to Achab, the? sone of Chu- 
lie, and to Sedechie, the? sone of Maasie, 
that profesien to 30u ai leesyng in my 
name, Lo! Y schal bitake hem in to the 
hond of Nabugodonosor, kyug of Babi- 
loyne, and he schal smyte hem bifore 
joure ijen. And cursyng schal be takun 22 
of heim to al the passyng ouer of Juda, 
which is in Babiloyne, of inen selynge, 
The Lord sette thee as Sedechie, aud as 
Achab, whiche the kyng of Babiloyne 
friede in fier, for thei diden foli in Israel, 23 
and diden auowtrie on the wyues of her 
frendis; and thei spaken a word falsli in 
my name, which Y comaundide not to 
hem; Y am iuge and witnesse, seith the 
Lord. And thou schalt seie to Semei 24 
Neelamyte, The Lord of oostis, God of 25 
Israel, seith these thingis, For that that 
thon sentist bookis in my name to al the 


r the transmigracioun K. 


8 prophe- 


q Om. 1. 


XXIX. 26—XXX. 5. 


Maasie, prest, and to alle the prestus, 
z6seiende, The Lord ‘3af thee prest’ for 
Joiade, prest, that thou be a duke in the 
hous of the Lord vp on eche man ca3t 
with wodnesse, and profeciende, that thou 
sende hym in to the stockus, and in to 
27 prisoun. And now whi blamest thou not 
Jeremye of Anatoth, that profecyeth to 
2830u" ? For vpon this he sente to vs* in 


to Babiloyne, seiende, Longe it is; bild- - 


eth out houses, and dwelleth, and plaunt- 
eth gardynes, and eteth the frute of 
29them. Radde thanne Sofonye, the prest, 
this boc in the eres of Jeremye,.the pro- 
30 fete. And don is the wrd of the Lord 
3ito Jeremye, seiende, Sendeth to al the 
transmygracyoun, seiende, These thingus 
seith the Lord to Semeie Neelamyte, 
For thi that profeciede to 30u Semeie, and 
Y sente hym not, and made 3on to trosten 
s2in lesing; therfore these thingus seith the 
Lord, Lo! Y shal visite vp on Semeie 
Neelamyte, and vp on his sed; therY shal 
not be to hym a man sittende in? the 
myddel of this* puple; and he shal not 
seen the good, that Y shal do to my pu- 


ple, seith the Lord, for lawe breking he. 


spac a3en the Lord. ; 


CAP. XXX. 


1 This is® the wrd, that is do to Jere- 
2mye fro the Lord, seiende, These thingus 
seith the Lord God of Irael, seiende, 
Writ to thee alle these wrdus that Y 
3spac to thee, in the boc. Loo! forsothe 
da3es comen, seith the Lord, and Y shal 
turne the conuerting of my puple of Irae] 
aud of Juda, seith the Lord; and Y shal 
turne them to the lond that Y 3af to the 
fadris of them, and thei shul welde it. 
4 And these the® wrdus, that the Lord spac 
5to Irael, and to Juda. For thes thingus 
seith the Lord, Voys of huge drede wee 
han herd; ferd, and ther ys not pes. 


v sente thee a preest E pr.m. 
E pr.vice. *his AE pr.m GIK. 


Wvs F prem. 


rOm.n. §Om.N, 


VOL. III. 


JEREMIAH. 


X 50U AE prem. 
b Om. c sec. m. E. 


t Om. ¢€ ef ceteri. 


3G 


409 


puple, which is in Jerusalem, and to So- 
fony, the’ sone of Maasie, the preest, and 
to alle the prestis, and seidist, The Lord 26 
3af thee the* preest for Joiada, the preest, 
that thou be duyk in the hous of the 
Lord on ech man ‘that is‘ trauelid of the 
fend, and profesiynge, that thou sende hym 
in to stockis, and in to prisoun. And now 27 
whi blamest thou not Jeremye of Anathot, 
that profesieth to 30u? For on this thing 2: 
he sente to vs in to Babiloyne, and seide, 
It is long ; bielde 3e housis, and enhabite, 
and plaunte 3e orcherdis, and ete 3e the 
fruit of tho". Therfor Sofonye, the preest, 29 
redde this book in the eeris of Jeremye, 
the prophete. And the word of the Lord 30 
was maad to Jeremye, and seide, Sende3! 
thou to al the passyng ouer, and seie, The 
Lord seith these thingis to Semeye Nee- 
lamite, For that that Semeye profesiede 
to 30u, and Y sente not hym, and he made 
30n to triste in a leesyng; therfor the Lord 32 
seith thes thingis, Lo! Y schal visite on 
Semeye Neelamyte, and on his seed; and 
no man sittynge in the myddis of this 
puple schal be to_hym; and he schal not 
se the good; which Y schal do to my puple, 
seith the Lord, for he spak trespassyng - 
a3ens the Lord. 


CAP. XXX. 


This is the word, that was maad of the! 
Lord to Jeremye, and seide, The Lord2 
God of Israel seith these thingis, and 
spekith, Write to thee in a book, alle 
these wordis whiche Y spak to thee. For3 
lo! daies comen, seith the Lord, and Y 
schal turne the turnyng of my puple Is- 
rae] and Juda, seith the Lord; and Y schal 
turne hem to the lond which Y 3af to the 
fadris of hem, and thei schulen haue it 
in possessioun. And these den the wordis, 4 
whiche the Lord spak to Israel, and to 
Juda, For the Lord seith these thingis,5 
We herden a word of drede; inward drede 


yand ther 45 pr.m.GHxK. 2 vpon his 


¢ Om. ¢ pr.m. 


uhem n. 


410 


6 Asketh, and seeth, if the male geteth; 
whi thanne sa3 Y of eche man the hond 
vpon his leende, as of the trauailende 
with childe, and turned ben alle ther 
7faces in to 3el13? Wo! for gret that day, 
ne ther is his lyc; and tyme of tribula- 
cioun is to Jacob, and of it he shal ben 
ssaued. And it shal be, in that dai, seith 
the Lord of ostus, Y shal to-brose his 30c¢ 
fro thi necke, and his bondus Y shal to- 
breke; and no mor shul lordshipen to 
9hym alienus, but ‘thei shul4 serue to the 
Lord, ther God, and to Dauid, ther king, 
10whom Y shal rere to them. Thou ther- 
fore ne drede thou, my seruaunt Jacob, 
seith the Lord, ne inwardly drede thou, 
Irael; for lo! Y shal saue thee fro a ferr 
lond, and thie seed fro the lond of the 
caitifte of them. And turned’ shal ben 
ajeen® Jacob, and resten, and with alle 
goodus flowen; and ther shal not be whom 
ithe shal dreden. For Y with thee am, 
seith the Lord, that Y saue thee. For- 
sothe Y shal don ful ending in alle Jen- 
tiles, in which Y scaterede thee; thee 
forsothe Y schal not make in to ful end- 
ing, but Y shal chastise thee in dom, 
that thou be not seen to thee gilteles. 
12 For these thingus seith the Lord, Vnhele- 
sable thi brosure, werst thi wounde. Ther 
is not, that deme thi dom to bynde to; 
140f! curingus* ys not profit to thee. ‘Alle 
thi loueres forj3eeten thee, thee shul not 
sechen; with! the wounde forsothe™ of 
the" enemy Y smot thee, by® cruel chas- 
tising; for the multitude of thi wycke- 
is nesse?, hard ben mad thi synnes. What 
criest thou vp on thi to-treding? vnhele- 
able is thi sorewe; for the multitude of 
thi wickidnesse1, and for thin harde 
synnes, Y dide these thingus to thee. 
16 Therfore alle that eten thee, shul ben 
deuoured, and alle thin enemyes in to cai- 
tyfte shul be lad; and that thee" wasten, 
shuln ben wasted, and alle thi robberes 
17 Y shal 3yue in to prei. Forsothe Y shal 


¢ thine c. 
k curing E pr.m. 
P wickidnes 4GHK. 


4 Om. £ prom. 
Om. cE sec. m. 
° Om. E pr. m. 


JEREMIAH. 


f turned ajein £ sec. m. 
10m. £ prom, 
q wickenesse E. 


XXX. 6—~17. 


is, and pees is not. Axe 3e, and se, if a6 
male berith child; whi therfor si3 Y the 
hond of ech man on his ‘leende, as of a 
womman trauelynge of child, and alle 
faces ben turned in to 3elow colour? Wo!7 
for thilke day zs greet, nether ony is lyk 
it; and it is a tyme of tribulacioun to 
Jacob, and of hym schal be sauyd. And 
it schal be, in that dai, seith the Lord of 
oostis, Y schal] al to-breke the 30k of hym 
fro thi necke, and Y schal breke hise 
boondis ; and aliens schulen no more be 
lordis of it, but thei schulen serue to hery 
Lord God, and to Dauid, her kyng, whom 
Y schal reyse for hem. Therfor, Jacob, 10 
my seruaunt, drede thou not, seith the 
Lord, and Israel, drede thou not; for lo! 
Y schal saue thee fro a fer lond, and thi 
seed fro the lond of the caitiftee of hem. 
And Jacob schal turne a3en, and schal 
reste, and schal flowe with alle goodis; 
and noon schal be whom he schal drede. 
For Y am with thee, seith the Lord, for 1 
to saue thee. For Y schal make endyng in 
alle folkis, in whiche Y scateride thee; 
sotheli Y schal not make thee in to end- 
yng, but Y schal chastise thee in doom, 
that thou be not seyn to thee ¢o be gilteles. 
For the Lord seith these thingis, Thi 12. 
brekyng 7s vocurable, thi wounde is the 
worste. Noon is, that demeth thi doom to 13 
bynde togidere; the profit of heelyngis is 
not to thee. Alle thi louyeris han forjete 14 
thee, thei schulen not seke thee; for Y 
haue smyte thee with the wounde of an 
enemy, with cruel chastisyng; for the 
multitude of thi wickidnesse, thi synnes 
ben maad hard. What criest thou on this 
brekynge? thi sorewe is vncurable; for 
the multitude of thi wickidnesse, and for 
thin hard synnes, Y haue do these thingis 
to thee. Therfor alle that eeten thee, 16 
schulen be devourid, and alle thin ene- 
myes schulen be led in to caitifte; and 
thei that distrien thee, schulen be distried, 
and Y schal 3yue alle thi robberis in to 


& Om. £. 
m Om. £ pr.m. 
Pr 3e€ AGH. 


hhaue x. iof thy £ pr.m. 
0 Om. 4k, thyn £ pr.m. 


XXX. 18-—XXXI. 3. 


helen parfitly thi felle wounde to thee, 
and of thi woundus Y shal hele thee, 
seith the Lord; for cast awei thei clep- 
eden thee, Sion; this’ is she‘ that hadde 
18 not ‘a3een serchere*. These thingus seith 
the Lord, Lo! I shal conuerte the con- 
uerting of the tabernacles of Jacob, and 
to his rooues Y shal han’ mercy; and 
bild vp shal be the cite in his hei3te, and 
the temple after his order sha] be foundid. 
i9And gon out shal preising of hem and 
vois of pleieres, and Y shal multeplie 
them, and thei shul not ben lassid; and 
Y shal glorifie them, and thei shuln not 
20be thynned. And the sonus ‘of it” shul 
ben as fro the bygynnyng, and the cum- 
panye ‘of it* before me shal abide stille ; 
and I] shal visete ajen alle that troblen 
2thym. And ther shal ben his duke of 
hym, and a’ prince from his myddel 
shal? be bro3t forth; and Y shal pre- 
senten hym, and he shal ne3he* to me; 
who forsothe is this, that ‘leye to° his 
herte, that he nejhe to me? seith the 
22Lord. And 3ee shul be to me in to pu- 
ple, and Y shal be to 3ou in to God. 
23LLo! in Jentilis the whirlewind of the 
Lord, wodenes goende out, tempest fall- 
ende’, in the hed of vnpitous men thei 
24shul alle togidere resten. Shal not turne 
awei the wrathe of indignacioun the Lord, 
to the tyme he do, and fulfille the thenk- 
ing of his herte; in the laste of da3es 
jee shul vndurstonden thoe® thynges. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 In that tyme, seith the Lord, If shal 
be God to® alle the kinredus of Irael; and 
2thei shul be to me in to puple. These 
thingus seith the Lord, Founde grace in 
desert the puple that lafte fro swerd ; 
3go shal to his reste Irael. Aferr the 
Lord aperede to me, and in euere last- 
ende charite Y louede thee; therfore Y 


8 that 4. 
Bg prem. ¥ Om. E pr.m. 
fillinge acHx. © hem £ pr.m. 


t Om. E pr.m. 
z Om. kK. 
£Om. c. 


V laste tyme 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


wan ajeen sechere EK. a3ein secher GH. 
4 neje to E pr. m. 
§ E sup. ras. sec.m. 


411 


raueyn. For Y schal heele perfitli thii7 
wounde, and Y schal make thee hool of 
thi woundis, seith the Lord; for thou, 
Sion, thei clepeden thee cast out; this is 
it that hadde no sekere. The Lord seith 1s 
these thingis, Lo! Y schal turne the turn- 
yng of the tabernaclis of Jacob, and Y 
schal haue merci on the honsis of hym; 
and the citee schal be bildid in his hi3- 
nesse, and the temple schal be foundid bi 
his ordre. And heriyng and the vois of 19 
pleiers schal go out of hem, and Y schal 
multiplie hem, and thei schulen not be 
decreessid; and Y schal glorifie hem, and 
thei schulen not be maad thyune. And the 20 
sones therof schulen be as at the bigyn- 
nyng, and the cumpeny therof schal dwelle 
bifore me; and Y schal visite ajens alle 
that doon tribulacioun to it. And thez! 
duyk therof schal be of it, and a prince 
schal be brou3t forth of the myddis ther- 
of; and Y schal applie hym, and he schal 
neizje to me; for who is this, that schal 
applie his herte, that he nei3e to me? 
seith the Lord. And 3e schulen be in to22 
a puple to me, and Y schal be in to God 
to 30u. Lo! the whirlewynd of the Lord, 23 
a strong veniaunce goynge out, a tempest 
fallynge doun, schal reste in the heed of 
wickid men. The Lord schal not turne24 
awey the ire of indignacioun, til he do, 
and fille the thou3t of his herte; in the 
lasteY of daies 3e schulen vndurstonde 
tho thingis. In that tyme, seith the Lord, ! 
Y schal be God to alle the kynredis of 
Israel; and thei schulen be in to a puple 
to me. 
CAP. XXXI. 

The Lord seith these thingis, The puple2 
that was left of swerd, foond grace in de- 
sert; Israel schal go to his reste. Fer the3 
Lord apperide to me, and in euerlastynge 
charite Y louede thee; therfor Y doynge 
merci drow thee. And eft Y schal bilde 


x Om. 


vha xk. W Om, £ pr.m. 
d fy]. 


b Om. 4. © presente c pr.m. E pr.m. 


w Om. 8 sec. m. 


38a2 


412 


4rewende dro3 thee. And eft Y shal bilden 
vp thee, and bild vp shal thou be, maiden 
Irael; 3it thou shalt ben enourned with 
thi tymbris, and thou shalt gon out in 
sthe daunce of pleieres. And 3it thou 
shalt plaunte vynes in the mount of Sa- 
marie; plaunte shul plaunteres, and for 
to tyme come thei shul not pulle grapes. 
«For the dai shal ben, in whiche crien 
shul keperes in the mount of Samarie, 
and in the mount of Effraym, Riseth, 
and steye wee vp in to Sion, to the Lord 
zoure God. For these thingus seith the 
Lord, Ful out iojeth in gladnesse of Ja- 
cob, and ney3eth a3en the heued of Jen- 
tilis; parfitly sowneth, and singeth, and 
seith, Saf, Lord, thi puple, the remnauntis 
sof Irael. Lo! Y shal bringe them fro 
the lond of the north, and gedere them 
fro the vtmostus! of erthe*; among’ whom 
shal be the blinde, and the lame, and the 
womman with childe, and the trauailende 
with childe togidere, a gret cumpanye of 
g9men turnende! ajeen hider. In weping 
thei shul come, and in mercy Y shal 
bringe them ajeen; and Y shal lede them 
bi stef stremes of watris in a ri3t weie, 
thei shul not stumble in it; for Y am 
mad to Jrael a fader, and Effraym my 
iofirst goten is. Hereth the wrd of the 
Lord, 3ee Jentiles, and telleth in ilis that 
ben aferr, and seith, Who scaterede Irael, 
shal gaderen hym, and kepen hym, as a™ 
ushepperde his floc. Forsothe the Lord 
bo3te a3een Jacob, and delyuerede hym 
i2fro the hond of the my3tiere. And thei 
shul come, and preisen in the mount of 
Sion; and togidere flowen to the goodus 
of the Lord, vp on whete, wyn, and oile, 
and frut of bestes, and of droues; and 
the soule of them shal be as a watri 
gardyn, and no more thei shul hungre. 
13 Thanne gladen shal the maiden in the 
daunce, 3unge men and imaidenus togi- 
dere; and Y shal turne ther weiling in 


hOm.cpr.m. 1 vttermostis acuK. 


x queer, ether cumpeny CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


JEREMIAH. 


k the erthe nx. 


“XXXL. 4—13. 


thee, and thou, virgyn Israel, schalt be 
bildid ; 3it thou schalt be ourned with thi 
tympans, and schalt go out in the cum- 
penye* of pleieris. 3it thou schalt plauntes 
vynes in the hillis of Samarie; men 
plauntyuge schulen plaunte, and til the 
tyme come, thei schulen not gadere grapis. 
For whi a dai schal be, wherynne keperis6 
schulen crye in the hil of Samarie, and in 
the hil of Effraym, Rise 3e, and stie we in 
to Sion, to oure Lord God. For the Lord7 
seith these thingis, Jacob, make 3e ful out 
ioye in gladnesse, and neye 3e ajens the 
heed of hethene men; sowne 3e, synge 3e, 
and seie 3e, Lord, sane thi puple, the resi- 
dues of Israel. Lo! Y schal brynge hems 
fro the loond of the north, and Y schal 
gadere hem fro the fertheste partis of 
erthe; among whiclie schulen be a blynd 
man, and crokid, and a womman with 
childe, and trauelynge of child togidere, 
a greet cumpeny of hem that schulen 
turne -ajen hidur. Thei schulen come ing 
wepyng, and Y schal brynge hem a3en in 
merci; and Y schal brynge hem bi the 
strondis of watris in a ri3tful weie, thei 
schulen not spurne therynne; for Y am 
maad a fadir to Israel, and Effraym is my 
gendrid sone. 3e hethene men, here 3e¥ 10 
the word of the Lord, and telle 3e in ylis 
that ben fer, and sete, He that scateride 
Israel, schal gadere it, and schal kepe it, 
as a scheepherde ‘epith his floc. For the11 
Lord ajenbou3te Jacob, and delyuerede 
hym fro the hond of the my3tiere. And 12 
thei schulen come, and herye in the hil of 
Sion; and thei schulen flowe togidere to 
the goodis of the Lord, on wheete, wyn, 
and oile, and on the fruyt of scheep, and 
of neet; and the soule of hem schal be as 
a watri gardyn, and thei schulen no more 
hungre. TThanne a virgyn schal be glad 13 
in a cumpenye, 3onge men and elde togi- 
dere; and Y schal turne the morenyng of 
hem in to ioie, and Y schal coumforte 


lturnede 4. turneden cu. ™ Om. xk. 


y Om. c sec. m. EFGHIMNPQRVX. 


XXXI. 14—23. 


to io3e, and coumforte them, and gladen 
i4fro ther sorewe. And Y shal inwardly 
drunkne the soule of the prestus with 
fatnesse, and my puple with my goodus 
15shal be fulfyld, seith the Lord. These 
thingus seith the Lord, Vois in hei3te is 
herd of lamentaeioun, and weping, and 
weiling, of Rachel wepende hir sonus, 
and not willende® to be coumfortid vp on 
iéhem, for thei ben not. These thingus 
seith the Lord, Reste thi vois fro wep- 
ing, and thin e3en fro teres; for ther is 
‘meede to thi were, seith the Lord; and 
thei shul be turned ajeen fro the lond of 
17the enemy. And ther is hope in thi 
laste, seith the Lord, and ben turned 
ajeen shul the sonus to ther termes. 
is Herende Y herde Effraym ouergoende ; 
thou chastisedist me, and Y am lerned as 
a 3ungling vntamed; conuerte me, and 
Y schal be conuertid, for thou Lord my 
i9God. After forsothe that thou haddest 
conuertid me, Y dide penaunce; and after 
that thou haddest shewid to me, Y smot 
my hipe; I am confoundid, and Y sham- 
ede, for Y suffrede the repref of my 3unge 
20waxen age. If a wrshypeful sone to me 
Effraym, if a child delieat; for sithen Y 
spac of hym, 3it Y shal recorden of hym; 
therfore ben disturbid my bowelis vpon 
hym, rewende Y shal han? mercy of hym, 
2iseith the Lord. Ordeyne to thee a toting 
placed, sett to thee" bitternesses; ri3t reule 
thin herte in to an enene weie, in whiche 
thou hast go; turne a3een, thou maide* 
Irae], turne ajeen to these thi cites. 
22 Hou longe with delices ‘shalt thon bet 
loosid atwynne, thou do3ter vagaunt? for 
shapen hath the Lord newe thing vp on 
erthe, the womman shal go abouten the 
asman. These thingus seith the Lord of 
ostis, God of Irael, 3it thei shul sey this 
wrd in the lond of Juda, and in his cheef 
cites, whan Y shal connerte the caitifte of 
hem, Blesseth to thee the" Lord, the fayr- 


o wilnynge acuK. Pha x. 42 place F prom. 


2a weilyng A pr.m. 


JEREMIAH. 


t thi a. 


a yntemyd, ether wiclde CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


413 


hem, and Y schal make hem glad of her 
sorewe. And Y schal greetli fille the soule14- 
of prestis with fatnesse, and my puple 
schal be fillid with iny goodis, seith the 
Lord. The Lord seith these thingis, A 15 
vois of weilyng’, and of wepyng, and of 
mourenyng, was herd an hi3; the vois 
of Rachel biwepynge hir sones, and not 
willynge to be coumfortid on hem, for 
thei ben not. The Lord seith theseis 
thingis, Thi vois reste of wepyng, and 
thin izen veste of teeres; for whi mede is 
to thi werk, seith the Lord; and thei 
schulen turne azen fro the lond of the 
enemy. And hope is to thi laste thingis, 17 
seith the Lord, and thi sones schulen 
turne a3en to her endis. I heringe herdeis 
Effraym passinge ouer; thou chastisidist 
me, and Y am lerned as a 30ng oon vu- 
temyd*; turne thou me, and Y schal be 
conuertid, for thou arv¢ my Lord God. 
For aftir that thou conuertidist me, Y 19 
dide penaunce; and aftir that thon schew- 
idist to me, Y smoot myn hipe; Y am 
schent, and Y schamede, for Y suffride 
the schensehipe of my jongthe. For Ef-20 
fraym 7s a worsehipful sone to me, for he 
is a delicat child; for sithen Y spak of 
hym, 3it Y schal haue mynde on hym; 
therfor myn entrails ben disturblid on 
him, Y doynge merci seha] haue merci on 
hym?, seith the Lord. Ordeyne to thee! 
an hi3 totyng place, sette to thee bitter- 
nesses; dresse thin herte in to a strei3t 
weie, in which thou 3edist; turne ajen, 
thou virgyn of Israel, turne a3en to these 
thi citees. Hou longe, dou3ter of vnstid-22 
fast dwellyng, art thou maad dissolut in 
delices? for the Lord hath maad a newe 
thing on erthe, a womman schal cumpasse 
aman. The Lord of oostis, God of Israel, 23 
seith these thingis, 3it thei sclulen seie 
this word in the lond of Juda, and in the 
citees therof, whane Y sehal turne the 
eaytifte of hem, The Lord blesse thee, 


8 maiden ex. * thou art E prom. %Om.c. 


b hem n. 


414 


nesse, of rijtwisnesse the hoeli mount. 
24 And dwelle shul in it Juda, and alle his 
cites, togidere erthe tilieres, and .men 
zsdryuende flockes. For Y haue’ mad 
drunke the weri soule, and eche hun- 
2égrende soule Y haue’ fulfild. Therfore 
as fro slep I am rered, and sa3; and my 
27slep sweete is to me. Lo! dazes comen, 
seith the Lord, and Y shal sowen the 
hous of Irae] and the hous of Juda with 
the sed of men, and with the sed of 
28bestus. And as Y woc vp on hem, that 
Y schulde pullen out, and destrozen, and 
wasten, and scateren, and tormenten ; so 
Y shal waken vp on hem, that Y bilde 
29vp, and plaunte, seith the Lord. In tho 
da3es men shul seyn no more, Fadris 
eeten the soure grape, and the teeth of 
3othe sonus stonejeden; but eche iu his 
wickenesse” shal die, eche man that shal 
ete the soure grape, shul stone3e the teeth 
siof hym. Lo! dajes comen, seith the 
Lord, and Y shal smyte to the hous of 
Irael, and to the hous of Juda newe pes 
32 couenaunt; not* after the couenaunt that 
Y couenauntede with joure fadris, in the 
day that Y toc the hond of hem, that Y 
shulde bringe them out fro the lond of 
Egipt, couenaunt that thei maden voide ; 
and Y lordshepede of hem, seith the 
33 Lord. But this shal be the couenaunt, 
that Y shal smyte with the hous of Irael 
after tho da3es, seith the Lord; Y shal 
3yue my lawe in the boweles of hem, 
and in the herte of hem Y shal write it, 
and Y shal be to them in to God, and 
31thei shal be to me in to a puple. And 
techen shul no more the man his ne3he- 
bore, and the man his brother, seiende, 
Knowe thou the Lord; alle forsothe shul 
knowe ine, frothe leste vnto the moste, seith 
the Lord; for Y shal han’ mercy to the 
wickenes? of them, and of the synne of 
35hem Y shal no mor be myndeful. These 
thingus seith the Lord, that 3yueth the 
sunne in the liz3t of the dai, ordre of the 


vhak. W wickidnes agux. 


¢ the citees 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


X and not 4. 


d ynto 1. 


XXXI. 24——35. 


thou fairnesse of ri3tfulnesse, thou hooli 
hil. And Juda, and alle citees® therof24 
schulen dwelle in it togidere, erthetilieris, 
and thei that dryuen flockis. For Y fill-2s5 
ide greetli a feynt soule, and Y haue fillid 
ech hungri soule. Therfor Y am as reisid 26 
fro sleep, and Y si3; and my sleep was 
swete tome. Lo! daies comen, seith the27 
Lord, and Y schal sowe the hous of Israel 
and the hous of Juda with the seed of 
men, and with the seed of werk beestis. 
And as Y wakide on hem, to drawe vp bi2e 
the roote, and to distrie, and to scatere, 
and to leese, and to turmente; so Y schal 
wake on hem, to bilde, and to plaunte, 
seith the Lord. In tho daies thei schulen 29 
no more seie, The fadres eeten a sour 
grape, and the teeth of sones weren asto- 
nyed ; but ech man schal die in his wick-30 
idnesse, ech man that etith a sour grape, 
hise teeth schulen be astonyed. Lo! daies31 
comen, seith the Lord, and Y schal smyte 
a newe boond of pees to the hous of Is- 
rael, and to the hous of Juda; not bi these 
couenaunte which Y made with 3oure 
fadris, in the dai in which Y took the 
hond of hem, to lede hem out of the lond 
of Egipt, the couenaunte which thei made 
voide; and Y was Lord of hem, seith the 
Lord. But this schal be the couenaunte, 33 
which Y schal smyte with the hous of 
Israel aftir tho daies, seith the Lord; Y 
schal 3yue my lawe in the entrails of hem, 
and Y schal write it in the herte of hem, 
and Y schal be in to God to hem, and thei 
schulen be in to a puple to me. And a3s 
man schal no more teche his nei3bore, and 
a man his brother, and seie, Knowe thou 
the Lord; for alle schulen knowe me, fro 
the leeste of hem ‘til to’ the mooste, seith 
the Lord; for Y schal be merciful to the 
wickidnessis of hem, and Y schal no more 
be nyndeful on the synne of hem. The3s 
Lord seith these thingis, that 3yueth the 
sunne in the 1i3t of dai, the ordre of the 
moone and of sterris® in the li3t of the 
Yhaue x. 2 wickidnes 1cuK. 


€ the sterris N. 


XXXI. 36—XXXIL 5. JEREMIAH. 415 


moone and of the* sterres in li3t® of the 
ny3t, that disturbeth the se, and his flodis 
sownen, the Lord of ostus name to hym. 
36 If failen shuln these lawes bifor me, seith 
the Lord, thanne and the sed of Irael 
shal faile, that ther be not fole bifor® me 
37 alle daz3es. These’ thingus seith the Lord, 
Yf ‘heuenus shul moun be mesured® fro 
aboue, and be serched the foundemens of 
thef erthe bynethe, and Y shal casten 
awei al the sed of Irael, for alle thingus 
38that thei diden, seith the Lord. Lo! 
da3es comen, seith the Lord, and bild vp 
shal be a cyte to the Lord fro the tour 
of Ananeel vn to the j3ate of the corner. 
39 And it shal gon out ouer the reule of the 
mesure, in his siz3te, vp on the hyl of 
Gared, and it shal gon aboute Goacha, 
40and al the valei of § careynus, and the 
askes, and al the regioun of deth, vnto 
the stef strem:of Cedron, and vnto the 
corner of the est 3ate of hors; the hoeli 
of the Lord shal not be pullid vp, and no 
mor be destro3ed in to euermore. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 The wrd that is do to Jeremye fro the 
Lord, in the tenthe 3er of Sedechie, king 
of Juda; it is the eiz3tetenthe 3er of Nabu- 

2godonosor. Thanne the ost of the king 
of Babiloyne besegede Jerusalem; and 
Jeremye, the profete, was closid in the 
porche of the prisoun, that was in the 

3hous.of the king of Juda. Closed hadde 
forsothe hym Sedechye, king of Juda, 
seiende, Whi profeciest thou, seiende, 
These thingus seith the Lord, Lo! Y shal 
3yuen this cite in to! the hond of the 
king of Babiloyne, and he shal taken 
4it; and Sedechie, king of Juda, shal not 
scape fro the hond of Caldeis, but he shal 
be taken in the hond of the king of Ba- 
biloyne; and speken shal his mouth with 
the mouth of hym, and his e3en the e3en 
sof hym shul seen; and in to Babiloyne 


ni3t, whiche disturblith the see, and the 
wawis therof sownen, the Lord of oostis 
is name to hym. If these lawis failen3s 
bifore me, seith the Lord, thanne and the 
seed of Israel schal faile, that it be not a 
folk bifore me in alle daies. The Lord37 
seith these thingis, If heuenes aboue moun 
be mesurid, and the foundeimentis of erthe 
bynethe be sou3t out, and Y schal caste 
awei al the seed of Israel, for alle thingis 
whiche thei diden, seith the Lord. Lo!3s 
daies comen, seith the Lord, and a citee 
schal be bildid to the Lord, fro the tour 
of Ananeel ‘til tof the 3ate of the corner. 
And it schal go out ouer the reule of me-39 
sure, in the si3t therof, on the hil Gareb, 
and it schal cumpasse Goatha, and al the 40 
valei of careyns, and it schal cumpasse 
aischis, and al the cuntrei of deth, ‘til to® 
the stronde of Cedron, and til® to the cor- 
ner of the eest 3ate of horsis; the hooli 
thing of the Lord schal not be drawun 
out, and it schal no more be destried with 
outen ende. 


CAP. XXXII. 


The word that was maad of the Lord! 
to Jeremye, in the tenthe 3eer of Sedechie, 
kyng of Juda; thilke is the ei3tenthe 3eer 
of Nabugodonosor. Thanne the oost of2 
the kyng of Babiloyne bisegide Jerusalem; 
and Jeremye, the profete, was closid in 
the porche of the prisoun, that was in the 
hous of the kyng of Juda. For whi Sede-3 
chie, the kyng of Juda, hadde closid hym, 
and seide, Whi profesiest thou, seiynge, 
The Lord seith these thingis, Lo! Y 
schal 3yue this citee in the hond of the 
kyng of Babyloyne, and he schal take it ; 
and Sedechie, the! kyng of Juda, schal not 4 
ascape fro the hond of Caldeis, but he 
schal be bitake in to the hond of the kyng 
of Babiloyne; and his mouth schal speke 
with the mouth of hym, and hise i3en 
schulen se the izen of hym; and he schal5 


aQOm.z. » the li3te x. © Om.£ pr.m. if ben mesured. These £ pr.m. © ben mesured shul moun 
hevenes £ pr.m. !Om. azcuK. & of the fallingus of x pr.m. take ze pr.m. 1Om. z prim. - 


fynto1. §& vnto 1. 


hOm.1. 1} Om. 1. 


416 


he shal lede Sedechie, and there he shal 
be, to the tyme Y* visite hym, seith the 
Lord ; yf forsothe 3ee shul fi3te a3en the 
Caldeis, no thing welsum 3ee shuln han ? 
6And Jeremye seide, Don is the wrd of 
7the Lord to me, seiende, Lo! Ananeel, 
the sone of Sellum, thin ‘emys sonel!, shal 
come to thee, seiende, Bye to thee my 
feld, that is in Anathoth; to thee for- 
sothe falleth of ny3 kinrede, that thou 
sbie it. And cam to me Ananeel, the sone 
of myn em™, after the wrd of the Lord, to 
the porche” of the prisoun, and he seith 
to me, Weld my feld, that is in Anatot, 
in the lond of Beniamyn; for to thee 
fallith the eritage, and thou art the neer 
kin, that thou welde. Y vnderstood for- 
sothe, that it was the wrd of the Lord. 
» And Y bo3te the feld of Ananeel, the 
sone of myn em®, that is in Anatot. And 
Y peisede to hym siluer, seuene halue 
10 ounces, and ten siluerne platys; and wrot 


JEREMIAH. 


XXXII. 6—16. 


lede Sedechie in to Babiloyne, and he 
schal be there, til Y visyte hym, seith the 
Lord; forsothe if 3e fi3ten a3ens Caldeis, 
je schulen haue no thing in prosperite ? 
And Jereimnye seide, The word of the Lord ¢ 
was maad to me, and seide, Lo! Ananeel,7 
the sone of Sellum, the sone of thi fadris 
brothir, schal come tc thee, and seie, Bi 
thou to thee my feeld, which is in Ana- 
thot; for it bifallith to thee by ni3 kyn- 
rede, that thou bie it. And Ananeel, thes 
sone of my fadris brothir, cam to me, bi 
the word of the Lord, to the porche of 
the prisoun, and seide to me, Welde thou 
my feeld, which is in Anathot, in the lond 
of Beniamyn; for whi the erytage bifallith 
to thee, and thou art the next of blood, 
that. thou welde 7¢. Forsothe Y vndirstood, 
that it was the word of the Lord. And Yo 
bou3te the feeld, which is in Anathot, of 
Ananeel, the sone of my fadris brothir. 
And Y paiede to hym siluer, seuene sta- 


in the boc, and selede, and toc witnesses. 
i. And Y peisede seluer in a balaunce; and 
Y toc the boe of the possessioun selid, 
and the behestus to the askingus, and the 
fermed thingus, and the tocnes withoute- 


teris*, and ten platis of siluer; and ers ee 

‘ G f an ounce, 
wroot in a book, and Y seelide, and Y jaf as Isidere seith, 
witnessis. And Y weiede siluer in a ba- 


in the xviij. 
book of Ethy- 
launce; and Y took the book aseelid of 11 mologies. a e¢ 


plures. 


ieforth. And Y 3af the boc of the posses- 
sioun to Baruch, the sone of Nery, sone 
of Maasie,-in the ejen of Ananeel, myn 
‘emys sone?, and in the e3en of wytnesses 
that weren writen in the boc of the4 
biyng, in® the e3en of alle Jewis, that 
1sseeten in the porche of the prisoun. And 
Y comaundide to Baruch befor them, sei- 
14 ende, These thingus seith the Lord of ostis, 
God of Irael, Tac these bokis, this seled 
boc of biyng, and this boc that is opened, 
and put them in a britel vessel, that abide 
isstille thei moun manye dajes. These 
thingus’ forsothe seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, 3it weldid shul be houses, 
and feldus, and vyne3erdis‘, in this lond. 
is And Y pre3ede to the Lord, aftir that 
Y hadde take the boe of possessicun to 


possessioun, and axingis and answerys of 
the seller and bier, and couenauntis, and 
seelis withoutforth. And Y 3af the book 12 
of possessioun to Baruc, the sone of Neri, 
sone of Maasie, bifore the i3en of Ananeel, 
the sone of my fadris brother, aud bifore 
the i3en of witnessis that weren writun in 
the book of biyng, bifore the izen of alle 
Jewis, that saten in the porche of the 
prisoun. And Y comaundide to Baruc bi- 13 
fore hem, and Y seide, The Lord of oostis, 14 
God of Israel, seith these thingis, Take 
thou these bookis, this seelid book of bi- 
yng, and this book which is opyn, and 
putte thou tho in an erthen vessel, that 
tho moun dwelle bi! many daies. For whi1s 
the Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith 
these thingis, 3it housis, and feeldis, and 
vynes schulen be weldid in this loud. And 16 


k that I enx. | vnelene sone 4. vncle sone GHK. em E pr.m. emes sone E Sec. m. 
vnele GuxK. 4% vestiarie E pr.m. © vnclene 4 pr.m. vncle GHK. 
4QOm. aecuxK. Tandin acux. § Om. £ prim. 


m vnelene 4 pr. m. 
P vnclene sone 4 pr. m. vncle sone GHK. 
t vynes c pr.m. E pr. m. AGHK. 


Kthein, !Om.n. 


XXXII. 17—27. 


17Baruch, the sone of Neery, seiende, 
Allas! allas! allas! Lord God, 10"! 
thou madest heuene and erthe -in thi’ 
grete strengthe, and in thi stra3t out 
arm; shal¥ not be to thee hard eche 
iswrd ; that dost mercy in thousendus, 
and* 3eldist wickenesseY of faders in to 
the bosum of the sonus aftir hem. O7! 
thou’ most strong, gret,‘and my3ty*, Lord 
i90f ostus name to thee; gret in counseil, 


and incomprehensible in thenking, whos: 


ejen ben opened vp on alle the weies of 
the sonus of Adam, that thou 3elde to 
eche after his weies, and after the frute 
200f his fyndingus; that® settedest tocnes 
and wnders in the lond of Egipt, vn to 
this dai, and in Irael and in men; and 
thou madist to thee a name, as is this 
2iday. And thou laddest out thi puple 
Irael fro the lond of Egipt, in tocnes 
and in wndris, and in stalwrthe hond, 
and in stra3t oute arme, and in gret ferd; 
22and 3eue to them this lond, that thou 
swore to ther faders, that thou shuldist 
3yue to them,.the lond flowende myle 
23and hony. And thei wenten in, and 
weldeden it; and obesheden not to thi 
vois, and in thi lawe 3iden not; alle 
thingus that thou comaundedest to them, 
that they shulde do, thei diden not; and 
ther camen to them alle these eueles. 
24Lo! strengthingus? ben mad out ajen 
this cite®, that it be take, and the’ cyte 
- is 30uen® in to the hondus of Caldeis, and 
in to the hondus of the king of Babi- 
loyne, that fizten ajen it, fro the face of 
the swerd, and of hunger, and of pesti- 
lence; and what euere thingus thou speeke, 
25 thei fellen, as thiself biholdist. And thou 
seidist® to me, Lord God, Bie thou' the 
feeld with syluer, and tac witnesses, 
whan the cheef cite is 3ouen in the 
26 hond* of Caldeis. And don ys the wrd 
270f the Lord to Jeremye, seiende, Lo! Y 
the Lord God of alle flesh. Whether to 


wand lo! c. 
Z of E pr.m. 
f this 2 pr.m, 


vthec. Wand shal & pr.m, 
&® power E pr.m. 


€ 3yuen £ pass. } seist AEGUK. 


m ynto I. 
VOL. III. 


JEREMIAH. 


x Om. E prom. 
b ther £ prim. 
iOm. x pr.m. 


n Om. 1. 


3 H 


417 


Y preiede to the Lord, aftir that Y bitook 
the book of possessioun to Barué, the sone 
of Nery; and Y selde, Alas ! alas ! alas !17 
Lord God, Lord, thou madist heuene and 
erthe in thi greet strengthe, and in thin 
arm: stretchid forth; ech word schal not 
be hard. to thee; which doist merci in1s 
thousyndis, and 3eldist the wickidnesse of 
fadris in to the bosum of her sones aftir 
hem. Thou strongeste, greet, my3ti, Lord 
of oostis 7s name to thee; greet in coun-19 
cel, and vncomprehensible in thou3t, whose 
izen ben open on alle the weies of the 
sones of Adam, that thou 3elde to ech aftir 
hise weies, and aftir the fruyt of hise fynd- 
yngis; which settidist signes and greet 20 
woundris in the lond of Egipt, ‘til to™ 
this dai, bothe in Israel and in men; and 
madist to thee a name, as this daiis. Andai 
thou leddist thi puple Israel out of the 
lond of Egipt,-in signes and in greet 
woundris, and in a® strong hond, and in 
an arm holdun forth, and in greet dreed ; 
and thou 3auest to hem this lond, which 22 
thou sworist to the fadris of hem, that 
thou woldist 3yue to hem, a lond flowynge 
with milk and hony. And thei entriden, 23 
and hadden it in possessioun; and thei 
obeieden not to thi vois, and thei 3eden 
not in thi lawe; alle thingis‘whiche thou 
comaundidist to hem to do, thei diden 
not; and alle these yuels bifellen® to hem. 
Lo! strengthis ben bildid ajens the citee, 21 
that it be takun, and the citee is 3ouun in 
to the hondis of Caldeis, and in to the 
hondis of the kyng of Babiloyne, that 
fi3ten ajens it, of the face of swerd, and 
of hungur, and of pestilence; and what 
euer thingis thou spakest, bifellen, as thou 
thi silf seest. And Lord God, thou seist 25 
to me, Bie thou a feeld for siluer, and 
3yue thou witnessis, whanne the citee is 
3ouun in the hondis of Caldeis. And the 26 
word of the Lord was maad to Jeremye, 
and seide, Lo! Y am the Lord God of ‘al 27 


y wickidnes 4x. wickidnessis GH. 
© thou AGUK. 4 strengthus GH. ¢ Om. c. 
k hoondis a. 


© bifelde cr et alii passim. 


418 


2smee hard shal ben eche wrd? Therfore 
these thingus seith the Lord, Lo! Y shal 
take this cite in to the hondus of Caldeis, 
and in the hond of the king of Babi- 
29 loyne, and they shul taken it. And come 
shul Caldeis fi3tende ajen this cite, and 
thei shul teende it vp with fyr, and 
brenne it, and the houses, in whos rooues 
thei sacrifieden to Baal, and offreden to 
alien godis sacrifises of licoures, to! terre 
30me™, Weren forsothe the sonus of Irael 
and the sonus of Juda contynueli doende 
euel in myn e3en, fro ther waxe" 3outhe, 
the sonus of Irae] that® vnto? now sharp- 
eden out me in the werkes of ther 
31 hondus, seith the Lord. For in wodnes 
and in myn indignacioun mad is to me 
this cyte, fro the dai that thei bilden it 
vp, ‘in to! this day, ‘in whiche" it shal be 
32don awei fro my si3t; for the malice of 
the sonus of Irael, and of the sonus of 
Juda, that thei diden, to wrathe me ter- 
rende, thei, and ther kingus, ther princes, 
and prestes, and ther profetus, men of 
33 Juda, and dwelleris of Jerusalem. And 
thei turneden to* me backes, and not faces, 
whan Y shulde teche them the morutid, 
and lernen; and thei wolden not heren, 
34that thei shulden take disciplyne. And 
thei setteden ther mawmetes ‘in to‘ the 
hous, in whiche is inwardly clepid my 
35 name, that thei schulden" defoule it.. And 
thei bilden vp he3e thingus of Baal, that 
ben in the valey of the sone’ of Ennon, 
that thei sacrifie ther sonus and ther do3- 
tris to Moloch, that Y comaundide not to 
‘them, ne ste3ede vp in to myn herte, that 
thei shulde do this abhominacioun, and 
36in to synne bringe doun Judam. And 
now for these thingus, seith the Lord 
God of Irael to this cite, of whiche 3ee 
seyn, that it be taken in to the hondus of 
the king of Babiloyne in swerd, and in 
37hunger, and in pestilence, Lo! Y shal 
gedere them fro alle londus, to whiche Y 


land to a. 
8 fro E prom. 


mmen K. " waxynge AK. 

tin kK. 
P ech man, wher 1. 

not1. VOm. a. 


JEREMIAH. 


© Om. AGHK. 
u Om. ¢ pr.m, £ prim. GHK. 


4 sacrifiseden CEFGHKNPQRSUVX. 


XXXIE. 28—37. 


fleisch. Whether? ony word schal be hard 
to me? Therfor the Lord seith these ze 
thingis, Lo! Y schal bitake this citee in 
to the hondis of Caldeis, and in to the 
hond of the kyng of Babiloyne, and he 
schal take it. And Caldeis schulen come, 29 
and fi3te ajens this citee, and thei schulen 
brenne it with fier, and thei schulen brenne 
it, and housis, in whose rooues thei sacri- 
fieden’ to Baal, and offriden moist sacrifices 
to alien goddis, to" terre me to wraththe. 
For whi the sones of Israel and the sones 30 
of Juda diden yuel contynueli, fro her 
jonge waxynge age, bifore myn i3en, the 
sones of Israel, whiche’ ‘til tot now wrath- 
then me bi the werk of her hondis, seith 
the Lord. For whi this citee is maad tos1 
me in my strong veniaunce and indigna- 
cioun, fro the day in- which thei bildiden 
it, ‘til tot this dai, in which it schal be 
takun awei fro my sij3t; for the malice 3e 
of the sones of Israel, and of the sones of 
Juda, which thei diden, terrynge me to 
wrathfulnesse, thei, and the kyngis of hem, 
the princes of hem, and the prestis, and 
profetis of hem, the men of Juda, and the 
dwelleris of Jerusalem. And thei turn-33 
eden to me the backis, and not the faces, 
whanne Y tau3te, and enformede hem erli; 
and thei nolden® here, that thei schulden 
take techyng. And thei settiden her idols 34 
in the hous, in which my name is clepid 
to help, that thei schulden defoule it. And3s 
thei bildiden hi3 thingis to Baal, that ben - 
in the valei of the sones of Ennon, that 
thei schulden halewe her sones and her 
dou3tris to Moloc, which thing Y comaund- 
ide not to hem, nether it stiede in to myn 
herte, that thei schulden do this abhomy- 
nacioun, and brynge Juda in to synne. 
Aud now for these thingis, the Lord Ged 36 
of Israel seith these thingis to this citee, 
of whiche 3e seien, that it schal be bitakun 
in to the hondis of the kyng of Babiloyne, 
in swerd, aud in’ hungur, and in pestilence, 


Pinto GH. 4vyn to AGH. 
VY sones AE pr. m.. GHK. 


r that E pr.m. 


Trandtor. Sthe whicher tvynto1. Uwolden 


XXXII. 38—XXXIII. 4. 


caste them out in my wodnesse, and in 
my wrathe, and in my great indigna- 
cioun; and Y shal bringe hem a3een to 
this place, and to wonen hem Y shal 
3smake trostily. And thei shul be to me 
in to puple, and Y shal be to them in to 
39God. And Y shal 3yue to hem oen herte 
and o soule, that thei drede me alle dajes, 
and wel be to them, and to ther sonus 
soafter hem. And Y shal smyte with them 
couenaunt euere durende, and Y shal not 
cese to wel do to them, and my drede Y 
shal 3yne in ther herte, that thei go not 
41awei frome. And Y shal gladen up on 
hem, whan wel to them I shal do; and Y 
shal plaunte hem in this lond in treuthe, 
42in myn herte, and in al my soule. For 
these thingus seith the Lord, As Y haue* 
bro3t in to this puple al this grete euel, 
so Y shal bringe to vp on hem al the 
43 good, that Y shal speke to them. And 
'  weldid shul be feldus in this lond, of 
whiche 3ee seyn, that desert it is, for thi 
that ther shal not leuen a man and beste; 
and 3ouen is* in to the hondus of Caldeis. 
44 Feldus with monee shal be bo3t,and writen 
in boc, and prented in shal be the sel; 
and witnesses shul be take to, in the lond 
of Beniamyn, and in the cumpas of Jeru- 
salem, and in the cites of Juda, and in 
the mountewous: cites, and in the feldi 
cites, and in the cites that at the south 
ben; forY Y shal turne the caitifte of 
hem, seith the Lord. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


1 And don is the wrd of the Lord to 
Jeremye, the secounde tyme, whan 3it he 
was closid in the porche of the prisoun, 

2seiende, These thingys seith the Lord, 
that is to make and to foorme it, and to 

3greithe, Lord the name of hym; Crie to 
me, and Y shal ful out here thee, and 
Y shal telle to thee grete thingus, and 
afaste, that thou wost not. For these 


wha kK. 


JEREMIAH. 


x Om. c pr.m. 


419 


Lo! Y schal gadere hem fro alle londis,37 
to whiche Y castide hem out in my strong 
veniaunce, and in my wraththe, and in 
greet indignacioun; and Y schal brynge 
hem a3en to this place, and Y schal make 
hem to dwelle tristili. And thei schulen be3s 
in to a puple to me, and Y schal be in to 
God to hem. And Y schal 3yue to hem oon 39 
herte and o soule, that thei drede me in 
alle daies, and that it be wel to hem, and 
to her sones aftir hem. And Y schal smyte 40 
to hein a couenaunt euerlastynge, and Y 
schal not ceese to do wel to hem, and 
Y¥ schal 3yue my drede in the herte of 
hem, that thei go not awey frome. And4i 
Y schal be glad on hem, whanne Y schal 
do wel to hem; and Y schal plaunte hem 
in this lond in treuthe, in al myn herte, 
and in al my soule. For the Lord seith42 
these thingis, As Y brou3te on this puple 
al this greet yuel, so Y schal brynge on 
hem al the good, which Y schal speke to 
hem. And feeldis schulen be weldid ins 
this lond, of which 3e seien, that it is de- 


_sert, for no man and beeste is left; and 


it is 3ouun in to the hondis of Caldeis. 
Feeldis schulen be bou3t for money, and 44 
schulen be writun in a book, and a seel 
schal be preentid; and witnessis schulen 
be 3ouun, in the lond of Beniamyn, and in 
the cumpas of Jerusalem, and in the citees 
of Juda, and in the citees in hilli places, 
and in the citees‘in feeldi places, and in 
the citees that ben at the south; for Y 
schal turne the caitiftee of hem, seith the 
Lord. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad! 
to Jeremye, in the secounde tyme, whanne 
he was closid 3it in the porche of the pri- 
soun, and seide, The Lord seith these2 
thingis, The Lord is name of hym, that 
schal do, and fourme, and make redi that 
thing; Crye thou to me, and Y schals 
here thee, and Y schal telle to thee grete 
thingis, aud stidfast, whiche thou knowist 


Yand cE pr.m. 


3H 2 


420 JEREMIAH. 


thingus seith the Lord God of Irael to 
the houses of this cite, and to the houses 
of the king of Juda, that ben destro3ed, 
and to the® strengthingus, and to the 
sswerd of men comende, that thei fi3te with 
the Caldeis, and: fulfille hem» with’ the 
careynes of men, the whiche Y smot in 
my wodnesse,:and in myn indignacioun ; 
and Y hidde my face fro this cite, for alle 
6the malice of hem. «Lo! ‘Y shal close 
ajeen® to' them the wounde and helthe, 
and helen hem; and Y shal opene to 
them the lowely? pre3yng of pes, and of 
7treuthe ; and turne the turnyng of Juda, 
and turne the turnyng of Jerusalem, and 
¥ shal bilde-vp hem, as fro the bigyn- 
snyng. And Y shal ’clense’ out hem fro 
ther wickednesse*, in whiche thei syn- 
neden to me, and mercifull Y shal be to 
alle the wickenesses! of hem, in whiche 
thei ‘trespasiden to% me, and dispisiden 
g9me. And’ it shal be to me in to name, 
and in to io3e, and in to preising, and in 
to ful out iozing, to alle Jentiles of erthe, 
that herden alle goodis that Y am to do 
to them ; and thei shuln inwardly dreden, 
and ben disturbid in alle goodus, and in 
10alle pes, that Y shal do to them. ' These 
thingus seith the Lord, 3it shal ben herd 
in this place, whom 3ee seyn to be de- 
sert, for thi that ther is not a man ne 
beste in the cites of Juda, and withoute- 
forth Jerusalem, that ben desolat with- 
oute man, and withoute’ dwellere, and 
11 Withoute beste, vuis of io3e, and vois of 
gladnesse, vois of man spouse, and vois 
of womman spouse, vois of men, seiende, 
Knoulecheth to the Lord of ostus, for 
good’ the Lord, for withoute ende his 
mercy, and of men berende vouwis in to 
the hous of the Lord; forsothe Y shal 
bringe a3een the turnyng of the lond, as 
i2fro the bigyunyng, seith the Lord. These 
thingus seith the Lord of ostus, 3it shal 
be in this desert place, withoute man 


Om. x. b Om. c. 
f wickidnessis acux. & forsoken c pr.m. F pr.m. 


w Om. N. 


XXXII. 5—12. 


not. For the Lord God of Israel seith4 
these thingis to the housis of this citee, 
and to the housis of ‘the kyng of Juda, 
that ben distried, and to the strengthingis, 
and to the swerd of men comynge to fiztes 
with Caldeis, and to fille tho: housis with 
careyns of men, which Y smoot in my 
strong veniaunce, and in myn’ indigna- 
cioun ; and Y hidde my face fro this citee, 
for al the malice of'hem. Lo! Y schale 
close togidere to hem a wounde and helthe, 
and Y schal make hem hool, and Y ‘schal 
schewe to hem the bisechyng of pees and 
of treuthe ; and Y schal conuerte the con-7 
uersioun of Juda, and Y schal conuerte the 
conuersioun of Jerusalem, and Y schal bilde 
hem, as at the bigynnyng. And Y schals 
clense hem fro al her’ wickidnesse, in 
which thei synneden to me, and Y schal be 
merciful to alle the wickidnessis of hem, 
in which thei trespassiden to me, and for- 
soken me. And thei schulen be to me in tog 
a name, and in to ioye, and in to heriyng, 
and in to ful out iviyng to alle folkis of 
erthe, that herden alle the goodis whiche 
Y schal do to hem; and thei schulen drede, 
and schulen be disturblid in alle goodis, 
and in al the pees, which Y schal do to 
hem. The Lord seith these thingis, 3it in 10 
this place, which 3e seien to be forsakun, 
for no man is* nether beeste in the citees 
of Juda, and in the 3atis of Jerusalem, that 
ben desolat, without man, and with out 
dwellere, and with out beeste, the vois of 11 
ioye schal be herd, and the vois of glad- 
nesse, the vois of spouse, and the vois of 
spousesse, the vois of men, seiynge, Kuow- 
leche 3e to the Lord of oostis, for the Lord 
ts good, for his merci ¢s with outen ende, 
and of men berynge vowis in to the hous 
of the Lord ; for Y schal brynge a3en the 
conuersioun of the lond, as at the bigyn- 
nyng, seith the Lord. The Lord of dostis 12 
seith these thingis, 3it in this forsakun 
place, with out man, and with out beeste, 


¢ I shal don awei I shal setten ajeen & pr.m. ‘lowe 4. © wickenesse E. 


h good is a. 


x ther is 1. 


XXXIIE. 13-—24. 


and withoute beste, and in alle his cites, 
a dwelling place of shepperdus, of lig- 
isgende! flockus. And in the mountewous* 
cites, and in the feldi cites, and in the 
cites that at the south ben, and in the 
lond of Beniamyn, and in the cumpas of 
Jerusalem, and in the cites of Juda, 3it 
shul passe flockes, at the hond of the 
14noumbrere!, seith the. Lord. Lo! dajes 
comen, seith the Lord, and Y shal rere 
a good wrd, that Y spac to the hous of 
15 Jrael, and to™ the hous of Juda. In tho 
da3es, and in that tyme, to buriowne Y 
shall make Dauid, a buriownyng of ri3t- 
wisnesse; and he shal do dom and ri3t- 
16 wisnesse in the lond. In tho da3es shal 
be saued Juda, and Irael shal dwelle 
trostili; and this is the name that they 
shul eclepen hym, The Lord oure ri3twis. 
17For these thingus seith the Lord, Dien 
shal not of Dauid a man, that sit® vp on 
isthe trone of the hous of Irael; and of 
the prestus and Leuytus shal not die.a 
man fro my face, that offreth® brent sacri- 
fices, and brenne sacrifise, and sle victorieP 
19 sacrifise alle dajes. And don is the wrd 
200f the Lord to Jeremye, seiende, These 
thingus seith the Lord, Yf voide mai. be 
2imad my couenaunt with? dai, and my 
couenaunt with ny3t, that’ ther be not 
dai and ny3t in his tyme; and my coue- 
naunt voide shal moun be with Dauid, 
my seruaunt, that ther be not of hym a 
sone, that regne in his trone, and Leuytus, 
22and prestus, my seruauns ; as noumbred 
out moun not be the sterres of heuene, 
and mesured the grauel of the se, so Y 
shal multeplie the sed of Dauid, my ser- 
23uaunt, and Leuytus, my seruauntys. And 
don is the wrd of the Lord to Jeremye, 
24 Whether thou’ haue‘ not seen, that this 
puple spac, seyende, Two kinredus that 
the Lord hadde chose, ben cast awei, and 
my puple thei dispiseden, for thi that ther 
is no more a fole of kinde biforn hem. 


i lyynge x pr.m. liggynge E sec. m. AG. 
bred scux. ™Om, 4. 
t hast aGuk. 


Y sacrifices 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


k mounteynous 4G. mountuous E. mounteyns H. 
n sitteth 4, ° offre aEGH, Pa victorie 4. 4 bi E pr.m. 


421 


and in alle citees therof, schal be a dwell- 
yng place of scheepherdis, of flockis lig- 
gynge. And in the citees in hilli places, 13 
and in the citees in feeldi places, and in 
the citees that ben at the south, and in 
the lond of Beniamyn, and in the cumpas 
of Jerusalem, and in the citees of Juda, 
3it flockis schulen passe, at the hond of 
the noumbrere, seith the Lord. Lo! daies14 
comen, seith the Lord, and Y schal reise 
the good word, which Y spak to the hous 
of Israel, and to the hous of Juda. In thois 
daies, and in that tyme, Y schal make the 
seed of ri3tfulnesse to buriowne to Dauid; 
and he schal make doom and ri3tfulnesse. 
in erthe. In tho daies Juda schal be.6 
sauyd; and Israel schal dwelle tristili; 
and this is the name which thei schulen. 
clepe.hym, Oure ri3tful Lord. For: theiz 
Lord seith these. thingis, A man of Dauid 
schal not perische, that shal sitte on the 
trone of the hous of Israel; and-of preestis1s 
and dekenes a man schal not perische fro 
my face, that schal offre brent sacrifices, 
and brenne sacrifice’, and sle sacrifice, in 
alle daies. And the word of the Lord: was 19 
maad to Jeremye, and seide, The Lord 20 
seith these thingis, If my couenaunt with 
the dai and my couenaunt with the ni3t. 
mai be maad voide, that the dai and the? 
ni3t. be not in his tyme; and my couenaunt 2! 
with. Dauid, my seruaunt, mai be voide, 
that of: hym be no sone, that schal regne 
in his trone, and no dekenes, and _ preestis, 
my mynistris; as the sterris of heuene22 
moun not be noumbrid, and the grauel of 
the see maz not be metun, so Y schal mul- 
tiplie the seed of Dauid, my seruaunt, and 
dekenes, my mynystris. And the word of 23 
the Lord was maad to Jeremye, and seide, 
Whether thou hast not seyn, that this pu- 24 
ple spak, seiynge, Twei kynredis whiche 
the Lord chees, ben cast awei, and: thei 
dispisiden my puple, for it is no more a 
fole bifore hem. The Lord seith these 2 


Ynoum- 
rand 4.” ®lepr.m. 


2 Om. CEFGIIIKMNPQRSUVX. 


422 


25 These thingus seith the Lord, If my coue- 
naunt betwe" dai and ny3t, and lawes to 

2¢heuene and erthe Y sette not; forsothe 
and the sed of Jacob and of Dauid, my 
seruaunt, Y shal throwe aferr, that Y take 
not of his sed princes, of the sed of Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and of Jacob; I shal bringe 
forsothe’ a3een the turnyng of hem, and 
han’ mercy to them. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 The wrd that is do to Jeremye of the 
Lord, whan Nabugodonosor, king of Ba- 
biloyne, and al his ost, and alle’ reumus 
of the* erthe, that weren vnder the power 
of the hond of hym, and alle puples fo3ten 
aj3en Jerusalem, and ajeny alle his cites, 

2seiende, These thingus seith the Lord God 
of Irael, Go, and spec to Sedechie, king 
of Juda; and thou shalt sey to hym, 
These thingus seith the Lord, Lo! Y shal 
take this cyte in the hond of the king of 
Babiloyne, and he shal brenne it vp with 

3fyr. And thou shalt not? scape fro his 
hond, but with taking thou shalt be take, 
and in his hond thou shalt be take; and 
thin ejen the e3en of the king of Babi- 
loyne shuln see, and his mouth with thi 
mouth shal speke, and Babiloyne thou 
4shalt go in. Nerthelatere* here the wrd 
of the Lord, thou, Sedechie, king of Juda, 
These thingus seith the Lord to thee, 

5 Thou shalt not die in swerd, but in pes 
thou shalt die, and aftir the brennyngus 
of thi fadris rathere kingus that weren 
bifor thee, so thei shal brenne togidere® 
thee, and with Wo! lord, thei shul weile 
thee ; for the wrd Y spac, seith the Lord. 

6 And Jeremye, the profete, spac to Sede- 
chie, king of Juda, alle these wrdus in 

7Jerusalem. And the ost of the king of 
Babiloyne fa3t ajen Jerusalem, and ajen 
alle the cites of Jude, that weren laft; 
a3en Lachis, and ajen Azecha; these for- 
sothe laften ouer of the cites of Jude 


U betwen 4EGHK. VY forthe 4G pr.m. H. 
the later ceteri passim. _» aboute x pr. m. 


JEREMIAH. 


wha kK. 


XXXIII. 25——-XXKIV. 7. 


thingis, If Y settide not my couenaunt bi- 
twixe dai and ni3t, and if Y settide not 
lawis to heuene and erthe; sotheli and Y 26 
schal caste awei the seed of Jacob, and of 
Dauid, my seruaunt, that Y take not of 
the seed of hym princes, of the seed of 
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; for Y 
schal brynge a3en the conuersioun of hem, 
and Y schal haue merci on hem. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


The word that was maad of the Lord: 
to Jeremye, whanne Nabugodonosor, kyng 
of Babiloyne, and al his oost, and alle the 
rewmes of erthe, that weren vndur the 
power of his hond, and alle puplis fou3ten 
ajens Jerusalem, and a3ens alle citees ther- 
of; and he seide, The Lord God of Israel 2 
seith these thingis, Go thou, and speke to 
Sedechie, kyng of Juda; and thou schalt 
seie to hym, The Lord seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal bitake this citee.in to the 
hond of the kyng of Babiloyne, and he 
schal brenne it bi fier. And thou schalt3 
not ascape fro his hond, but thou schalt 
be takun bi takyng, and thou schalt be 
bitakun in to his hond; and thin ijen 
schulen se the ijen of the kyng of Babi- 
loyne, and his mouth schal speke with 
thi mouth, and thou schalt entre in to 
Babiloyne. Netheles Sedechie, the kyng4 
of Juda, here thou the word of the Lord ; 
the Lord seith these thingis to thee, Thou 
schalt not die bi swerd, but thou schalts 
die in pees, and bi the brennyngis of thi 
fadris, the formere kyngis that weren bi- 
fore thee®, so thei schulen brenne thee, 
and thei schulen biweile thee, Wo! lord; 
for Y spak a word, seith the Lord. Ande 
Jeremye, the profete, spak to Sedechie, 
kyng** of Juda, alle these wordis in Jeru- 
salem. And the oost of the kyng of Babi-7 
loyne fau3t a3ens Jerusalem, and a3ens alle 
the citees of Juda, that weren left»; a3ens 
Lachis, and a3ens Azecha; for whi these - 


x Om. 4EGH. YOm. kK. %no Ez pr.m. 4 Neuer 


®Om.N, 4 the kyng is. » residue, ether left cBFGHIKMNPQRSUVXY. 


XXXIV. 8—r7. 


sstrengthid cites. The wrd that is do to 
Jeremye fro the Lord, aftir that king 
Sedechie smot pes couenaunt with al the 
9puple in Jerusalem, prechende that eche 
shulde leuen his thral, and-eche his thral 
womman, Ebru man and Ebru womman 
free, and not lordshipen to them, that is, 
10in Jew, and in his brother. Herden ther- 
fore alle the princes and al the puple, that 
wenten in couenaunt, that thei shulden 
leue eche his thral, and eche his thral 
womman free, and no more thei shulden 
lordshipen to them; herden thanne thei, 
uand laften ; and ben turned theraftir, and 
drowen ajeen thrallis, and ther thrallessis, 
that thei hadden laft free, and vnder3ok- 
eden in to seruauns, and in to wymmen 
jgseruauns. And don is the wrd of the 
Lord to Jeremye fro the Lord, seiende, 
13 These thingus seith the Lord God of 
Irael, I smot pes couenaunt with 3oure 
fadris, in the dai that Y ladde them out 
fro the lond of Egipt, fro the hous of 
14thraldam, seiende, Whan shul be fulfild 
seuene 3er, lefe eche his Ebru brother, 
that is sold to hym, and he shal serve to 
hym sixe 3er, and thou shalt lefe hym 
fro thee free; and herden not 3oure- fa- 
15 dris me, ne boweden in ther ere. And 
3ee ben turned to day, and diden that is 
ri3t in myne e3en, that 3ee shulden preche 
eche fredam to his frend, and wenten in 
couenaunt in my si3t, in the hous in 
whiche is inwardly clepid my name vp 
ison it. And 3ee ben turned a3een, and 
defouleden my name, and 3ee han bro3t 
a3een eche his thral, and eche his thrall- 
esse, the whiche jee hadden laft, that 
thei were free, and of ther power; and 
jee han vnder3okid hem, that thei ben 
17 to 30u thralles and thrallesses. Therfore 
these thingus seith the Lord, 3ee han not 
herd me, that jee shulden preche free- 
dam, eche to his brother, and eche to his 
frend ; lo! Y preche? to 30u freedam, seith 
the Lord, and to swerd and to hunger 


JEREMIAH. 


423 


strong citees weren left of the citees of 
Juda. The word that was maad of thes 
Lord to Jeremye, aftir that kyng Sedechie 
smoot boond of pees with al the puple in 
Jerusalem, and prechide, that ech mang 
schulde delyuere his seruaunt, and ech 
man his handmaide, an Ebrev man and 
an® Ebru womman fre, and that thei 
schulden not be lordis of hem, that is, in 
a Jew, and her brothir. Therfor alle the 10 
princes and al the puple herden, whiche@ 
maden couenaunt, that thei schulden dely- 
uere ech man his seruaunt, and ech man 
his handmaide fre, and schulde no more 
be lordis of hem; therfor thei herden, and 
delyueriden; and thei weren turned aftir-11 
ward, and drowen ajen her seruauntis, 
and handmaidis, whiche thei hadden left 
fre, and thei maden® suget in to seruauntis, 
and in to seruauntessis. And the word of 12 
the Lord was maad of the Lord to Jere- 
mye, and seide, The Lord God of Israelis 
seith these thingis, Y smoot a boond of 
pees with 3o0ure fadris, in the dai in which 
Y ledde hem out of the lond of Egipt, 
out of the hous of seruage; and Y seide, 
Whanne seuene 3eeris ben fillid, ech man 14 
delyuere his brother, an Ebrev man, which 
is seeld to hym, and-he schal serue thee 
sixe jeer, and thou schalt delyuere hym 
fro thee ; and 3oure fadris herden not me, 
nether howiden her eere. And 3e ben con-15 
uertid to dai, and 3e diden that, that is 
ri3tful bifore myn i3zen, that 3e prechedenf 
ech man fredom to his frend, and 3e maden 
couenaunt in my si3t, in the hous wher- 
ynne my name is clepid to help on that 
Jredom. And 3e turneden ajen, and de-16 
fouliden? my name, and 3e brou3ten a3en 
ech man his seruaunt, and ech man his 
handmaide, whiche 3e delyueriden, that 
thei schulden be fre,.and of her owne 
power; and 3e maden hem suget, that 
thei be seruauntis and haundmaidis to 
30u. Therfor the Lord seith thes thinigis, 17 
3e herden not me, that 3e prechiden fre- 


4 shal preche x pr.m. 


¢Om.a. the whiche 1. ¢€ maden hem 1. 


f prechen « pr. m. 


& 3e defouliden ceFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


424 


and to pestilence I shal 3yue 30u, in to 
ig quauyng® to alle rewmus of erthe. And 
Y shal 3yue the men, that breeke my pes 
couenaunt, and kepten not the wrdus of 
the pes couénaunt, to whiche thei ben 
assentid in my si3t, a calf that thei to- 
19 heewenf in to two parties; and passeden 
bitwen® his denyseouns the princes of 
Juda, and the princes of Jerusalem, and 
geldingus", and prestus, and al the puple 
of the lond, that! passeden bitwene* the 
20deuyseouns of the calf; and Y shal 3yue 
them in to the hond of ther enemys, and 
_ in to the hond of men sechende ther lif ; 
and shal ben the deth smyting of hem 
in to mete to the foulis of heuene, and 
21to the bestus of erthe. And Sedechie, 
king of Juda, and his princes Y shal 3yue 
in to the hond of ther enemys, and in to 
the hond of men sechende ther lif, and 
in to the hond of the ostus of the king of 
22 Babiloyne, that wenten awei fro 30u. Lo! 
Y comaunde, seith the Lord, and Y shal 
bringe them a3een! to™ this cite"; and 
thei shul fi3ten ajen it, and taken it, and 
brenne it vp with fyr; and the cites of 
Juda Y shal 3yue in to wildernesse, for 
thi that ther is not a dwellere. 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 The wrd that is do to Jeremye fro the 
Lord, in the da3es of Joachym, sone of 
2Josie, king of Juda, seiende, Go to the 
hous of Rechabitus, and spec to them; 
and thou shalt bringe them in to the 
hous of the Lord, in to o pryue chaumbre 
of the tresores, and thou shalt 3yue them 
3to drinke wyn. And Y toc Jeconye, sone 
of Jeremye, sone of Absenye, and his 
brethern, and alle his sonus, and al the 
4hous of Rechabitis. And I bro3te them 
in to the hous of the Lord, to the tresorie 


£ Om. 4G prim. H. 
10m.4. ™ in to AEGHK. 


© quakynge 4k. 
betwe c pr.m. BE. 


h bitwene 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


& betwix a. 


i thei schulen 1. 


XXXIV. 18—XXXV. 4. 


dom, ech man to his brothir; and éch man 
to his freend; lo! Y preeche to 30u fre- 
dom, seith the Lord, and to swerd, and 
to hungur, dnd to pestilence, and Y schal 
3yue 30u in to stiryng to alle rewmés of 
erthe. And Y schal 3yue the men, thatis 
breken my boond of pees, and kepten not 
the wordis of boond of pees, to whiche thei 
assentiden in my sij3t, and keptén not the 
calf, which thei kittiden in to twei partis ; 
and the princes of Juda, and the princes 19 
of Jerusalem, and the onest seruauntis, 
and preestis 3eden bytwixe® the partyngis 
therof, and al the puple of the lond, that 
3eden bitwixe the departyngis of the calf ; 
and Y schal 3yue hem in to the hond of20 
her enemyes, and in to the hond of hem 
that seken her lijf; and the deed careyn of 
hem schal be in to mete to the volatilis of 
the eir, and to the beestis of erthe. And21 
Y schal 3yne Sedechie, the kyng of Juda, 
and hise princes, in to the hond of her 
enemyes, and in to the hond of hem that 
seken her lijf, and in to the hond of the 
oostis of the kyng of Babiloyne, that 3eden 
awei fro 30u. Lo! Y comaunde, seith ,the 22 
Lord, and Y:schal brynge hem ajen in to 
this citee, and thei schulen fizte a3ens it, 
and schulen take it, and schuleni: brenne 
it with fier; and Y schal 3yue the citees 
of Juda in to’wildirnesse, for ther is no 
dwellere. 


CAP. XXXV. 


The word that was maad of the Lordi 
to Jeremye, in the daies of Joachym, sone 
of Josie, kyng of Juda, and seide, Go thou2 
to the hous of Recabitis, and speke thou 
to hem; and thou schalt brynge hem in to 
the hous of the Lord, in* to o! chaumbre 
of tresouris, and thou schalt 3yue to hem 
to drynke wyn. And Y took Jeconye, thes 
sone of Jeremye, sone of Absanye, and 
hise britheren, and alle the sones of hym, 
and al the hous of Recabitis. And Y leddes 
hem in to the hous of the Lord, to the 
Kk betwix 4. 


h geldyng K. i Om. £ prim. 


n Om. £ prim. 


Kandin F, !a im. 


XXXV. 5-14. JEREMIAH. 4.25 


hous of the sonus of Eman, sone of Jeze« 
delie, man of God; that was biside the 
tresorie hous of the princes, vp on the 
tresor of Maasie, sone of Sellum, that 
5 was kepere of the vestiarie. And Y sette 
bifor the sonus of the hous of Recabitis 
cuppis ful of wyn, and chalices; and Y 
6seide to them, Drinketh wyn. The whiche 
answerden, Wee shul not drinke wyn®; 
for Jonadab, the sone of Rechab, oure fa- 
der, comaundide to vs, seiende, 3ee shul 
not drinke wyn, 3ee and 3oure sonus, in 
7to euermor ; and hous 3ee shul not bilde, 
and sed 3ee shul not sowe, and vyne? 3ee 
shul not plaunte, ne han, but in taber- 
nacles 3ee shul dwelle alle 3oure dajes, 
that 3ee lyue manye da3es vp on the face 
of the lond, in whiche 3ee pilgrimagen. 
8 Wee han obeshid therfore to the vois of 
Jonadab, sone of Rechab, oure fader, in 
alle thingus that he comaundide to vs; so 
that wee drunke not wyn alle oure dajes, 
and wee, and oure wyues, Sonus, and oure 
9do3tris ; and wee bilde not vp houses to 
dwelle, ard vyne", and feld, and sed wee 
19hadde not; but we dwelleden in taber- 
nacles, and obeisaunt wee weren, after alle 
thingus that comaundede to vs Jonadab, 
11 oure fader. - Whan forsothe shulde ste3en 
vp Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, to 
oure lond, wee seiden, Cometh, and go 
wee inl to Jerusalem, fro the face of the 
ost of Caldeis, and fro the face of the ost 
of Cirie; and we dwelten in Jerusalem. 
12 And don is the wrd of the Lord to Jere- 
ismye, seiende, These thingus seith the 
Lord of ostus, God of Irael, Go, and sei 
to the men of Juda, and to the dwelleres 
of Jerusalem, Whether 3ee shul not take 
disciplyne, that 3ee obeshe to my wrdus, 
14seith the Lord ? Hadden the maistrie the 
wrdus of Jonadab, sone’ of Recab, whiche 
he comaundide to his sonus, that thei 
shulde not drinke wyn; and thei drunke 
not, vntot this dai; for thei obesheden 
to the heste of ther fader; lo! forsothe 


treserie of the sones of Eman, sone of 
Godolie, the man of God; which™ treserie 
was bisidis the treserie of princes, aboue 
the tresour of Maasie, sone of Sellum, that 
was kepere of the vestiarie. And Y set-5 
tide bifore the sones of the hous of Recab- 
itis pecis, and grete cowpis ful of wyn; and 
Y seide to hem, Drinke 3e wyn. And theie 
answeriden, We schulen not drinke wyn; 
for whi Jonadab, oure fadir, the sone of 
Recab, comaundide to vs, and seide, 3e 
schulen not drinke wyn, 3e and 3o0ure 
sones, ‘til in to" withouten ende; and 3e7 
schulen not bilde an hous, and 3e schulen 
not sowe seed, aud 3e schulen not plaunte 
vynes, nether schilen haue, but 3e schulen 
dwelle in tabernaclis in alle 3oure daies, 
that 3e lyue many daies on the face of 
erthe, in which 3e goen in pilgrymage. 
Therfor we obeieden to the vois of Jona-8 
dab, oure fadir, the sone of Recab, in alle 
thingis whiche he comaundide to vs; so 
that we drunken not wyn in alle cure 
dayes, we, and oure wymmen, oure sones, 
and dou3tris ; and we bildiden not housis9 
to dwelle, and we hadden not a vyner, and 
a fecld, and seed; but we dwelliden in ta-10 
bernaclis, and weren obeiynge, and diden 
bi alle thingis, whiche Jonadab, oure fa- 
dir, comaundide to vs. But whanne Nabu- 11 
godonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, hadde stied 
to this lond, we seiden, Come 3e, and entre 
we in to Jerusalem, fro the face of the 
oost of Caldeis, and fro the face of the 
oost of Sirie; and we dwelliden in Jeru- 
salen. And the word of the Lord was12 
maad to Jeremye, and seide, The Lord of 13 
oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Go thou, and seie to the men of Juda, and 
to the dwelleris of Jerusalem, Whether® 3e 
schulen not take techyng, that 3e obeie to 
my wordis, seith the Lord? The wordis 14 
of Jonadab, sone of Rechab, hadden the 
maistrie, whiche he comaundide to hise 
sones, that thei schulden not drynke wyn; — 
and thei drynken not, ‘til to? this dai; for 


° Om. c prom. PP vynes E pr.m. aGHK. vyne 3erde £ sec.m. 40m. 4EK.  * vyne 3erdis E£ sec. m. 


sthe sone k. ttok. 


m the whiche 1. "vntor,. © Wherr. P vnto tf. 


VOL. III. 


31 


426 JEREMIAH. XXXV. 15-——-XXXVI. 3. 


Y spac to 3o0u, fro erly risende, and spek- 
isende, and 3ee obesheden not to me. And 
Y sente to 30u alle my seruauns pro- 
fetis, Y" risende erly, and sendende, and 
seiende, Beth conuertid, eche fro his werst 
wey, and goode maketh 3oure stndies, and 
wileth not folewe alien godis, ne herien 
hem, and 3ee shul dwelle in the lond, that 
Y 3af to 30u, and to 3oure fadris; and 3ee 
boweden not in 3oure ere, ne herden me. 
16 Fastneden therfore the sonus of Jonadab, 
sone of Recab, the heste of ther fader, 
that he hadde comaundid to them ; this 
17 puple forsothe obeshede not’ to me. Ther- 
fore these thingus seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, Lo! Y shal bringe vp on 
Juda, and vp on alle dwelleres of Jeru- 
salem, al the tormenting that Y spac 
azen hem, aud thei herden* not; I clepede 
ishem, and thei answerden not to me. To 
the hous forsothe of Recabitis seide Jere- 
mye, These thingus seith the Lord of 
ostus, God of Irael, For thi that 3ee obe- 
sheden to the heste of Jonadab, 3oure 
fader, and kepten alle his hestus, and 
diden alle thingus, that he comaundide to 
19 30u; therfore these thingus seith the Lord 
of ostus, God of Irael, Ther shal not faile 
a man of the stoc of Jonadab, sone of 
Recab, stondende in my si3t alle dajes. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 And don it is, in the ferthe 3er of Joa- 
chym, sone of Josie, king of Juda, don is 
this’ wrd to Jeremye fro the Lord, sei- 

2 ende, Tac the volum of the boc, and thou 
shalt write in it alle the wrdus, that Y 
spac to thee a3en Irael and Judam, and 
a3en alle Jentilis, fro the day that Y spac 
to thee, of the dajes of Josie vnto this 

3day. If par auenture herende’ the ‘hous 
of Juda alle the eneles that Y thenke> 
to do to them, ben turned eche fro his 


uOm. cele pr.m. YnoEpr.m, W the dwellers azcux. *herdenme «4cux. Ythec. here 4. 


a Lord x pr.m. » thojte c pr. m. E prim. 


@ vnto I. 


thei obeieden to the comaundement of her 
fadir ; but Y spak to 3ou, and Y roos ful 
eerli, and spake, and 3e obeieden not to 
me. And Y sente to 3ou alle my ser-is 
uauntis profetis, and Y roos ful eerli, and 
Y sente, and seide, Be 3e conuertid, ech 
man fro his worste weye, and make 3e 
good 3oure studies, and nyle 3e sue alien 
goddis, nether worschipe 3e hem, and 3e 
schulen dwelle in the lond, which Y 3af 
to 3ou, and to 30ure fadris; and 3e bow- 
iden not 3oure eere, nether herden me. 
Therfor the sones of Jonadab, sone of Re- 16 
cab, maden stidfast the comaundement of 
her fadir, which he comaundide to hem; 
but this puple obeiede not to me. Therfor 17 
the Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith 
these thingis, Lo! Y schal bringe on Juda, 
and on alle the dwelleris of Jerusalem, al 
the turment which Y spak a3ens hem; for 
Y spak to hem, and thei herden not; Y 
clepide hem, and thei answeriden not to 
me. Forsothe Jeremye seide to the hous 1s 
of Recabitis, The Lord of oostis, God of 
Israel, seith these thingis, For that that 
3e obeieden to the comaundement of Jona- 
dab, 3oure fadir, and kepten alle hise co- 
maundementis, and diden alle thingis, 
whiche he comaundide to 30n; therfor the i9 
Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith these 
thingis, A man of the generacioun of Jo- 
nadab, sone of Recab, schal not faile stond- 
ynge in my si3t in alle daies. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


And it was don, in the fourthe 3eer of 1 
Joachym, sone of Josie, kyng of Juda, 
this word was maad of the Lord to Jere- 
mye, and seide, Take thou.the volym of2 
a book, and thon schalt write therynne 
alle the wordis, whiche Y spake to thee 
a3ens Israel and Juda, and ajens alle 
folkis, fro the dai in whiche Y spak to 
thee, fro the daies of Josie ‘til to4 this dai. 
If perauenture whanne the hous of Jnda3 
herith alle the yuels whiche Y thenke to 


XAXVI. 4—I12. 


werst weie,and mercyful Y shal be? to the 
wickenesse® and to the synne of them. 
4Clepede therfore Jeremye Baruch, the 
sone of Nery; and Baruch wrot of the 
mouth of Jeremye alle the wrdus of the 
Lord, that he spac to hym, in the volume 
sof the boc. And Jeremye comaundide 
to Baruch, seiende, I am closid, and mai 
snot gon in to the hous of the Lord. Go 
in therfore thou, and rede of the volum, 
in whiche thou hast write of my mouth 
the wrdus of the Lord, herende the puple, 
in the hous of the Lord, in the dai of 
fasting; ferthermor and herende al Juda, 
that comen fro ther cites, thou shalt rede 
7to them; if par auenture falle the orisoun 
of them in the si3t of the Lord‘, and be 
turned eche fro his werste weie; for 
grete is the wodnesse, and the indigna- 
cioun, that the Lord spac a3en this puple. 
8 And Baruch, the sone of Nery, dide aftyr 
alle thingus, that hadde comaundid to 
hym Jeremye, the profete; redende of 
the volume the wrdus of the Lord, in the 
9hous of the Lord. Don is forsothe, in 
the fifte 3er of Joachym, sone of Josie, 
king of Juda, in the nynthe moneth, thei 
precheden fasting in the si3t of the Lord, 
to al the puple in Jerusalem, and to al 
the multitude, that hadde come togidere 
fro the cites of Juda in to Jerusalem. 
10And Baruch radde of the volume the 
wrdus of Jeremye, in the hous of the 
Lord, in the tresorie place of Gamarie, 
sone of Safan, scribe, in the ouere ves- 
tiarie, in the entre of the newe 3ate of 
the hous of the Lord, herende al the 
upuple. And whan herd had Michie, the 
sone of Gamarie, sone of Safan, alle the 
i2sermownus of the Lord, of the boc, he 
wente doun in to the hous of the king, 
to the tresorie place of the scribe. And 
lo! alle the princes seeten there, Elisama, 
scribe, and Dalaias, sone of Semye, and 
Elnathan, sone of Achabor, and Gamarie, 
sone of Safan, and Sedechie, sone of Ana- 


b Om. c pr.m. 


r Om. Nn. 
312 


JEREMIAH. 


¢ wickidnes 4GHK. 


427 


do to hem, ech man turne ajen fro his 
worste weye, and Y schal be merciful to 
the wickidnesse and synne of hem. Ther-4 
for Jeremnye clepide Baruk, the sone of 
Nerye; and Baruk wroot of the mouth of 
Jeremye in the volym of a book alle the" 
wordis of the Lord, whiche he spak to 
hym. And Jeremye comaundide to Ba-s 
ruk, and seide, Y am closid, and Y may 
not entre in to the hous of the Lord. 
Therfor entre thou, and rede of the book, 6 
in which thou hast write of my mouth 
the wordis of the Lord, in hering of the 
puple, in the hous of the Lord, in the dai 
of fastyng; ferthermore and in heryng of 
al Juda, that comen fro her citees, thou 
schalt rede to hem; if perauenture the7 
preier of hem falle in the si3t of the Lord, 
and eche man turne ajen fro his worste 
weie; for whi the strong veniaunce and 
indignacioun is greet, which the Lord 
spak a3ens this puple. And Baruk, thes 
sone of Nerie, dide aftir alle thingis, 
which Jeremye, the prophete, comaundide 
to hym; and he redde of the book the 
wordis of the Lord, in the hous of the 
Lord. Forsothe it was doon, in the fyu-9 
eth 3eer of Joachym, sone of Josie, kyng 
of Juda, in the nynthe monethe, thei 
prechiden fastynge in the si3t of the 
Lord, to al the puple in Jerusalem, and 
to al the multitude, that cam togidere fro 
the citees of Juda in to Jerusalem. Ando 
Baruc redde of the volym the wordis of 
Jeremye, in the hous of the Lord, in the 
treserie of Gamarie, sone’ of Saphan, 
scryuen, in the hijere porche, in the en- 
tring of the newe 3ate of the hous of the 
Lord, in audience of al the puple. Andu 
whanne Mychie, the sone of Gamarie, 
sone of Saphan, hadde herd alle the wordis 
of the Lord, of the book, he 3ede doun in 12 
to the hous of the kyng, to the treserye 
of the seryuen. And lo! alle the princes 
saten there, Elisama, the scryuen, and 
Dalaie, the sone of Semeye, and Elnathan, 


d Om. £ pr.m. 


8 the 1. 


428 


i3nye, and alle the princes. And tolde to 
them Mychie alle the wrdus, that he 
herde Baruch redende of the volume, in 
isthe eres of the puple. And so alle the® 
‘princes senten to Baruch Judy, sone of 
Nathatie, sone of Selemye, sone of Cusy, 
seiende, The volume, of the whiche thou 
reddest herende the puple, tac in thin 
hond, and cum. Toc thanne Baruch, the 
sone of Neri, the volum in his hond, and 
iscam to them. And thei seiden to hym, 
Sit, and red these thingus in oure eres ; 


and Baruch radde in the eres of hem.. 


is Thanne whan thei hadden herd alle the 
wrdus, thei stoneieden eche to his ne3he- 
bore, and seiden to Baruch, ‘Owe wee to 
17 telle to the king alle these wrdus? And 
thei askeden hym, seiende, Shew to vs, 
hou thou hast write alle these wrdus of 
ighis mouth. Baruch forsothe seide to 
them, Of his mouth he spac, as redende 
to me, alle these wrdus"; and Y wrot in 
i9the volun with enke. And alle the 
princes seiden to Baruch, Go, and be 
hid, thou and Jeremye; and no man 
20 wite wher 3ee be. And thei wenten in 
to the king, in to the porche; but the 
voluine thei leiden vp in to the tresorie 
hous of Elisame, scribe. And thei tolden, 
2iherende the king, alle the wrdus. And 
so the king sente to Judi, that he shulde 
take the volum. The whiche takende it 
fro the tresorie place of Elisame, scribe, 
radde, herende the king and alle the 
22 princes, that stoden aboute the king. The 
king forsothe sat in the winter hous, in 
the nynthe moneth; and put was the 
herth, ‘or chymney', biforn hym ful of 
escolys. And whan Judi hadde rad thre 
litle pagens*, or foure, he kutte it with a 
scraping knyf of the scribe, and thre} it 
in to the fyr, that was vpon the herth, to 
the tyme that were wastid al the volum 
2iwith fyr, that was in! the herth. And 
thei dradde not, ne kutte™ ther clothis, 


f Om. 4rGuk. 
lyp on £ prim. 


e Om. AGHK. 
k pagentis E pr.m. 


sOm.n. * pagync pr. m. F prom. H. 


JEREMIAH. 


g Telle we owen E pr. m. 
m kutte not c pr. m. 


u Om. s. 


XXXVI. 13-——24. 


the sone of Achabor, and Gamarie, the 
sone of Saphan, and Sedechie, the sone of 
Ananye, and alle princes. And Mychee13 
telde to hem alle the wordis, whiche he 
herde Baruc redynge of the book, in the 
eeris of the puple. Therfor alle thei 
princes senten to Baruc Judi, the sone of 
Nathathie, sone of Selemye, sone of Chusi, 
and seiden, Take in thin hond the book, 
of which thou reddist in audience of the 
puple, and come thou. Therfor Baruc, 
the sone of Nereie, took the book in his 
hoond, and cam to hem. And thei seidenis 
to hym, Sitte thou, and rede these thingis 
in oure eeris; and Baruc redde in the 
eeris of hem. Therfor whanne thei had-16 
den herd alle the wordis, thei wondriden 
ech man to his neiz3bore, and thei seiden 
to Baruc, Owen we to telle to the kyng 
alle these wordis ? And thei axiden hym, 17 
and seiden, Schewe thou to vs, hou thou 
hast write alle these wordis of his mouth. 
Forsothe Baruc seide to hem, Of his mouth 18 
he spak, as redynge to me, alle these 
wordis ; and Y wroot in a book with enke. 
And alle the princes seiden to Baruc, Go, 19 
be thou hid, thou and Jeremye; and no 
man wite where 3e ben. And thei en-20 
triden to the kyng, in to the halle; for- 
sothe thei bitoken the book to be kept in 
to the treserie of Elisame, the scryuen. 
And thei telden alle the wordis, in audi- 
ence of the kyng. Therfor the kyng sente21 
Judi, that he schulde take the book. 
Which took the book fro the treserie of 
Elysame, the scryuen, and redde in audi- 
ence of the kyng, and of® alle the princes, 
that stoden aboute the kyng. Forsothe 22 
the kyng sat in the wyntir hous, in the 
nynthe monethe; and a panne ful of coolis 
was set bifore hym. And whanne Judiz3 
hadde red thre pagyns', ethir foure, he 
kittide it with the knyf of a seryueyn, 
and castide in to the fier, ‘that’ was" in’ 
the panne, til al the book was wastid bi 


bh Om. £ pr. m. i Om. c et £ prom. 


Vv on CEFGHIKMNPQRUVX. of s. 


XXXVI. 25—~32. 


the king and alle" his seruauns, that 
25 herden alle these wrdus. Nerthelater El- 
nathan, and Alaias, and Gamarie with- 
seiden to the king, lest he shulde brenne 
26the boc; and he herde not hem. And 
the king comaundide to Jeremyel, sone 
of Amalech, and to Saraie, sone of Es- 
reel, and to Selemye, sone of Abdehel, 
that thei schulden take Baruch, scribe, 
and Jeremye, the profete ; forsothe the 
27 Lord hidde them. And don is the wrd 
of the Lord to Jeremye, the profete, after 
that the king hadde brent the volum and 
the wrdus, that Baruch hadde write of the 
2smouth of Jeremye, seiende, Eft tac an 
other volum, and writ in it alle the ra- 
there wrdus, that weren in the first vo- 
lum, the whiche brende Joachym, king of 
zo Juda. And to Joachym, king of Juda, 
thou shalt sey, These thingus seith the 
Lord, Thou hast brend this volum, se- 
ynde, Whi hast thou writen in it, tellende, 
Hastif shal come the king of Babiloyne, 


and waste this lond, and to cesen shal — 


30 make of it man and beste? Therfor these 
thingus seith the Lord a3en Joachym, 
king of Juda, Ther shal not be ‘of hym», 
that sitte vpon the see of Dauid; and his 
careyn shal be cast forth at the hete bi 
the dai, and at the frost bi the ny3t. 

3tAnd Y shal visite ajen hym, and a3en 
his sed, and a3en his seruauns, * ther 
wickednesses?. And Y shal bringe vpon 
hem, and vpon the dwelleres of Jerusa- 
lem, and vp on the men of Juda, al the 
yuel that Y spac to them, and thei 

szherden not. Jeremye forsothe toc an 
other volum, and 3af it to Baruch, sone 
of Neri, scribe, that wrot in it of the 
mouth of Jeremye alle the wrdus of the 
boc, whiche Joachym, king of Juda, 
hadde brent with fyr; and ferthermor 
added ben wrdus many mo than befor 
weren. 


2 Om. £ prem. 


w in CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


JEREMIAH. 


° in it E prem. 


x the kyng a pr. m. 


429 


the fier, that was on” the panne. And 2 
the kyng and alle hise seruauntis, that 
herden alle these wordis, dredden not, ne- 
thir to-renten her clothis. Netheles El-25 
nathan, and Dalaie, and Gamarie a3en- 
seiden, the kyng, that he schulde not 
brenne the book; and he herde’ not hem. 
And the kyng comaundide to Jeremyel, 2¢ 
sone of Aimalech, and to Saraie, sone of 
Esreel, and to Selemye, sone of Abdehel, 
that thei schulden take Baruc, the writer, 
and Jeremye, the profete; forsothe the 
Lord hidde hem. And the word of the27 
Lord was maad to Jeremye, the profete, 
aftir that the kyng hadde brent the book 
and wordis, whiche Barue hadde write 
of Jeremyes mouth; and he seid, Eft take 2s 
thou another book, and write therynne 
alle the former wordis, that weren in the 
firste book, which Joachym, the kyng of 
Juda, brente. And thou schalt seie to29 
Joachym, kyng* of Juda, The Lord seith 
these thingis, Thou brentist that book, 
and seidist, What hast thou write ther- 
ynne, tellynge, The kyng of Babiloyne 
schal come hastynge, and schal distrie this 
lond, and schal make man and beeste to 
eeesse therof? Therfor the Lord seith 30 
these thingis a3ens Joachym, king of Juda, 
Noon schalY be of hym, that schal sitte on 
the seete of Dauid; and his careyn schal 
be cast forth to the heete bi dai, and to 
the forst bi ni3t. And Y schal visite a3ens 31 
hym, and ajens his seed, and a3ens hise 
seruauntis, her wickidnessis. And Y schal 
bryng on hem, and on the dwelleris of 
Jerusalem, and on the men of Juda, al 
the yuel which Y spak to hem, and thei 
herden not. Forsothe Jeremye took an 32 
other book, and jaf it to Baruc, the writer, 
the sone of Nerie, which? wroot therynne 
of Jeremyes mouth alle the wordis of the 
book, which book Joachym, the* kyng of 
Juda, hadde brent bi fier; and ferther- 
more many mo wordis weren addid than 
weren bifore. 


P wickenesses E. 


y ther schal 1. 2 the which 1. 8 Om. 1. 


430 


CAP. XXXVIL. 


1 And regnede king Sedechie, sone of 
Josie, for Jeconye, the sone of Joachym, 
whom Nabugodonosor, king of Babi- 
loyne, sette king in the lond of Juda. 

2 And obeshede not he, and his seruauns, 
and his puple of the lond, to the wrdus 
of the Lord, that he spac in the hond of 

sJeremye, the profete. And king Sede- 
chie sent Jothal, the sone of Selemye, and 
Sofone, sone of Maasie, prest, to Jeremye, 
the profete, seiende, Prei for vs the Lord 

4oure God. Jeremye forsothe freeli 3ide 
in the myddel of the puple; forsothe thei 
hadden not put hym in to warde of pri- 
soun. Thanne’ the ost of Farao wente 
out fro Egipt, and herende the Caldeis, 
that besegeden" Jerusalem, such a maner 

5 messager wenten awei froJerusalem. And 
don is the wrd of the Lord to Jeremye, 

éthe profete, seiende, These thingus seith 
the Lord God of Irael, Thus 3ee shul 
sei to the king of Juda, that sente 30u to 
aske me, Lo! the ost of Farao, that is 
gon out to 3o0u to’ helpe, shal turne a3een 

7in to his lond, in to Egipt. And Caldeis 
shul turne a3een, and fijten ajen this 
cite, and taken it, and brenne it vp with 
afyr. These thingus seith the Lord, Wil- 
eth not disceyue joure soulus, seiende, 
Goende ont Caldeis shul go awei, and 
turne a3een fro vs; for thei shul not gon 
gawei. But and if 3ee shul smyte al the 
ost of Caldeis, that fijten a3en jou, and 

‘shul bet laft of them summe wound- 
id, eche" fro his tent shal rise, and 

10brenne vp this cite with fyr. Thanne 
whan hadde gon awey the ost of Caldeis 
fro Jerusalem, for the oost of Farao, 

11 wente out Jeremye fro Jerusalem, that 
he shulde go in to the lond of Beniamyn, 
and deuyde there possessioun in the si3te 

120f the citeseynus. And whan he hadde 
comen to the 3ate of Beniamyn, was 
there the kepere of the 3ate bi whiles, bi 


q Therfore £ pr. m. 


JEREMIAH. 


tT hadde besegid & pr. m. 


XXXVII. (——12. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


And kyng Sedechie, the sone of Josie, 1 
regnede for Jeconye, the sone of Joachym, 
whom Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, 
made kyng in the lond of Juda. And he,2 
and hise seruauntis, and his puple obei- 
eden not to the wordis of the Lord, whiche 
he spak in the hond of Jeremye, the pro- 
fete. And kyng Sedechie sente Jothal,3 
the sone of Selemye, and Sofonye, the 
preest, the sone of Maasie, to Jeremye, 
the profete, and seide, Preie thou for vs 
oure Lord God. Forsothe Jeremye 3ede4 
freli in the myddis of the puple; for thei 
hadden not sente hym in to the kepyng of 
the prisoun. Therfor the oost of Farao 
3ede out of Egipt, and Caldeis, that biseg- 
iden Jerusalem, herden sich a message, and 
jeden awei fro Jerusalem. And the words 
of the Lord was maad to Jeremye, the 
profete, and seide, The Lord God of Israel 6 
seith these thingis, Thus 3e schulen seie 
to the kyng of Juda, that sente 3ou to 
axe me, Lo! the oost of Farao, which 3ede 
out to 30u in to help, schal turne ajen in 
to his lond, in to Egipt. And Caldeis7 
schulen come a3en, and schulen? fizte a3ens 
this citee, and schulen take it, and schulen 
brenne z¢° bid fier. The Lord seith theses 
thingis, Nyle 3e disseyue 3oure soulis, sei- 
ynge, Caldeis goynge schulen go awey, 
and schulen departe fro vs; for thei schu- 
len not go awei. But thou3 3e sleen al9 
the oost of Caldeis, that fizten a3ens 30u, 
and summe woundid men of hem be left, 
ech man schal rise fro his tente, and thei 
schulen brenne this citee bi‘ fier. Therfor 10 
whanne the oost of Caldeis hadde goon 
awei fro Jerusalem, for the oost of Farao, 
Jeremye 3ede out of Jerusalem, to go ini! 
to the lond of Beniamyn, and to departe 
there the possessioun in the sij3t of cite- 
seyns. And whanne he was comun to the 12 
jate of Beniamyn, ther was a kepere of 
the 3ate bi whiles, Jerie bi name, the sone 
u and eche c. 


Sin to AGHK. t weren E prem. 


> thet schulent. ¢ Om.-cEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 4 with 1. 


XXXVIF. 13—XXXVII. 2. 


name Jerias, sone of Selemye, sone of 
Ananye, and toc Jeremye, the profete, 
i3seiende, To the Caldeis thou fleest. And 
Jeremye answerde, It is fals; Y flee 
not to the Caldeis. -And he herde hym 
not, but Jereias toc Jeremye, and bro3te 
lshym to the princes. For what thing 
wroth the princes a3jen Jeremye, beten 
putten hym in to prisoun, that was in 
the hous of Jonathe, scribe; he forsothe 
15 was prouost vp on the prisoun. And so 
Jeremye wente in to the hous of the 
lake, and in to the hardere’ prisoun; 
isand Jeremye sat there manye da3es. And 
so king Sedechie sendende toc hym, and 
askede hym in his hous hidli, and seide, 
Wenest thou, whether ther is not a wrd 
17fro the Lord? And Jeremye seide, Ther 
is. And he seith, In the hond of the 
king of Babiloyne thou shalt be take. 
And Jeremye seide to¥ Sedechie, the 
king, What haue Y synned to thee, and to 
thi seruauns, and to thi puple, for thou 
hast sent me in to the hous of the pri- 
issoun ? Wher ben 3oure profetus, that 
profecieden to 30u, and seiden, The king 
of Babiloyne shal not come vpon vs, and 
19 vpon this lond? Now thanne here thou, Y 
beseche, lord my king, vaile my pre3eres* 
in thi si3t, and ne sende thou me ajeen 
in to the hous of Jonathe, scribe, lest Y 
20 die there. Thanne Sedechie comaundide, 
that Jeremye shulde be take in to the ves- 
tiarie of the prisoun, and that ther shulde 
be 30ue to hym a cake of bred echie dai, 
out take sowylY, to the tyme that shulde 
be wastid alle the loeunes of the cyte; 
and Jeremye bod in the vestiarie of the 
prisown. 
CAP, XXXVHI. 

1 Herden forsothe Safacie, sone of Na- 
than, and Jedelias, sone of Fassur, and 
Jochal, sone of Selemie, and Fassur, sone 
of Melchie, the wrdus that Jeremye spac 

2to al the puple, seiende, These thingus 
seith the Lord, Who so euere shal abide 


vhard kK. Ww Om.c. 


© thei beeten1. fAndeft1, & toN. 


JEREMIAH. 


x lowe preyinge arGuK. 


h withouten 1. 


431 


of Selemye, sone of Ananye; and he took 
Jeremye, the prophete, and seide, Thou 
fleest to Caldeis. And Jeremye answeride, 13 
It is fals; Y fle not to Caldeis. And he 
herde not Jeremye, but Jerie took Jere- 
mye, and brou3te hym to the princes. 
Wherfor the princes weren wrooth ajens 14 
Jeremye, and beeten® hym, and senten 
hym in to the prisoun, that was in the 
hous of Jonathas, the scryuen; for he 
was souereyn on the prisoun. Therfor ts 
Jeremye entride in to the hous of the 
lake, and in to the prisoun of trauel; and 
Jeremye sat there manye daies. Therfor 16 
kyng Sedechie sente, and took hym a wei, 
and axide hym priuyli in his hous, and 
seide, Gessist thou, whether a word is of 
the Lord? And Jeremye seide, Ther is. 
And Jeremye seide, Thou schalt be bi- 
takun in to the hond of the kyng of Babi- 
loyne. And‘ Jeremye seide to Sedechie, 17 
the kyng, What haue Y synned to thee, 
and to thi seruauntis, and to thi puple, 
for thou hast sent me in to the hous of 
prisoun ? Where ben 3oure profetis, that 18 
profesieden to 3o0u, and seiden, The king 
of Babiloyne schal not come on® jou, and 
on this lond? Now therfor, my lord the !s 
kyng, Y biseche, here thou, my preier be 
worth in thi si3t, and sende thou not me 
a3en in to the hous of Jonathas, the 
scryuen, lest Y die there. Therfor Sede-20 
chie comaundide, that Jeremye schulde be 
bitakun in to the porche of the prisoun, 
and that a cake of breed schulde be 30uun 
to hym ech dai, outakun® seew, til alle! 
looues* of the citee weren wastid; and 
Jeremye dwellide in the porche of the 
prisoun. 
CAP. XXXVIII. 

Forsothe Safacie, sone of Nathan, and! 
Jedelie, sone of Fassur, and Jothal, sone 
of Selemye, and Fassour, sone of Melchie, 
herden the wordis whiche Jeremye spak — 
to al the puple, ‘and seide', The Lord scith2 
these thingis, Who euer dwellith in this 


y the souwil £ prom. 7 fro EB prom. 


iOm.s. the looues1. ! seiynge 1. 


432 


in this cite, shal die bi swerd, and hun- 
gur, and pestilence; who forsothe shal 
flee to the Caldeis, ‘shal lyue*, and his lif 
3shal ben hoel and lynynge. These thingus 
seith the Lord, To be take shal be take 


this cite in to the hond of the ost of the ~ 


king of Babiloyne, and he shal taken it. 
4And the princes seiden to the king, Wee 
presen, that be slayn this man; of purpos 
forsothe he looseth atwynne the hondus 
of the fi3teres, that han abide? in the cite, 
and the hondus of al the puple, spekende 
to them alle these wrdus. Forsothe this 
man secheth not pes to this® puple, but 
seuel. And king Sedechie seide, Lo! he 
in 3oure hondns is, ne forsothe leeful is 
the king any thing to jou to denye. 
6Thanne thei toke Jeremye, and threwen 
hyin in to the lake of Elchie, sone of 
Ainalech, that was in the vestiarie of the 
prisoun; and thei putte doun Jeremye 
in cordis and@ in to the lake, in whiche 
was not water, but clei; and so Jeremye 
7 descendide in to the foule cley. Forsothe 
Abdemelech Ethiope, a man gelding, that 
was in the hous of the king, herde that 
thei hadden put Jeremye in to the lake ; 
but the king sat in the 3ate of Beniamyn. 
sAnd Abdemelech wente out fro the hous 
of the king, and spac to the king, sei- 
gende, My lord king, enele han do these 
men alle thingus, what euere thei diden® 
ajsen Jeremye, the profete, sendende hym 
in to the lake, that he die there for hun- 
gir; ther ben no mo loeues in the cite. 
10 And so the king comaundide to Abde- 
melech Etheope, seiende, Tac with thee 
hennus thretti men, and rere vp Jeremye, 
the profete, fro the lake, er he die. 
uThanne Abdemelech take to with hym 
men, wente in to the hous of the king, 
that was vnder the celer; and toke 
thennus olde clothis, and olde vestemens, 
that hadden rotid; and he putte doun 
hem to Jeremye, in to the lake, bi litle 
12cordis. And Abdemelech Ethiope seide 


8Om. £ prom. » Jaft E prom. 


™ and he 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


¢ thi 2 prem. 


n the sone 1. 


XXXVI. 3—12. 


citee, schal die bi swerd, and hungur, and 
pestilence; but he that flieth to Caldeis, 
shal lyue, and his soule schal be hool and ~ 
lyuynge. The Lord seith these thingis, This 3 
citee to be bitakun schal be bitakun in to the 
hond of the oost of the kyng of Babiloyne, 
and he schal take it. And the princes seiden 4 
to the kyng, We preien, that this man be 
slayn; for of bifore castyng he disconm- 
fortith the hondis of men werriours, that 
dwelliden in this citee, and the hondis of 
al the puple, and™ spekith to hem bi alle 
these wordis. For whi this man sekith not 
pees to this puple, but yuel. And kyngs 
Sedechie seide, Lo! he is in 3oure hondis, 
for it is not leueful that the kyng denye 
ony thing to 30u. Therfor thei token Je-6 
remye, and castiden hym doun in to the 
lake of Elchie, sone® of Amalech, which 
was in the porche of the prisonn; and 
thei senten doun Jeremye bi cordis in to 
the lake, wherynne was no watir, but fen; 
therfor Jeremye 3ede doun in to the 
filthe. Forsothe Abdemalech Ethiopien,7 
a chast man and oneste, herde, that was 
in the kyngis hous, that thei hadden sent 
Jeremye in to the lake; sotheli the king 
sat in the 3ate of Beniamyn. And Abde-s 
malech 3ede out of the kyngis hous, and 
spak to the kyng, and seide, My lord thes 
kyng, these men diden yuele alle thingis, 
what euer thingis thei diden a3ens Jere- 
mye, the profete, sendynge hyim in to the 
lake, that he die there for hungur; for 
whi loones ben no more in the citee. 
Therfor the kyng comanndide to Abde-10 
melech Ethiopien, and seide, Take with 
thee thretti men fro hennus, and reise 
thou Jeremye, the profete, fro the lake, 
bifor that he die. Therfor whanne Abde-!1 
melech hadde take men with hym, he 
entride in‘ to the hous of the kyng, that 
was vndur the celer; and he took fro 
thennus elde clothis, and elde ragges, that 
weren rotun; and he sente tho® doun to 
Jeremye, in to the lake, bi cordis. And 12 


d Om. 4. © greitheden E pr.m. : 


° hem x. 


XXXVI. 13-—22. 


to Jeremye, Put the olde clothis, and 
these kut and roten vnder the arm of 
thin hondus, and vp on the cordis. Thanne 
isJeremye dide so. And thei drowen out 
Jeremye with cordus, and bro3ten hym 
out fro the lake. Jeremye forsothe abod 
i4in the vestiarie of the prisoun. And king 
Sedechie sente, and toc to hym Jeremye, 
the profete, at the thridde dore that was 
in the hous of the Lord. And the king 
seide to Jeremye, Y aske thee a wrd; ne 
ishide thou fro me any thing. Jeremye 
forsothe seide to Sedechie, If. Y shal 
tellen to thee, whether thou shalt not 
slen me? And yf Y schul 3yue coun- 
seil to thee, thou shalt not here me. 
i¢é Thanne king Sedechie swor to Jeremye, 
priuyli seiende, The Lord lyueth, that 
dide to vs this lyf, Y shal not slee thee, 
and Y» shal not take thee in to the 
hondus of these men, that sechen thi lif. 


i7And Jeremye seide to Sedechie, These 


thingus seith the Lord of ostus, God of 
Irael, If gon forth thou shalt gon out to 


the princes of the king of Babiloyne, lyue : 


shal thi soule, and this cite shal not be 
brend-vp with fyr, and saaf thou’ shalt 
is be, and thin hous. If forsothe thou shalt 
not gon out to the princes of the" king of 
Babiloyne, take shal be this cite in to the 
hondus of Caldeis; and thei shul brenne 
it vp with fyr, and thou shalt not scape 
i9fro the hond of them. And king Sede- 
chie seide to Jeremye, I am bisy for the 
Jewes that ouerfloun to the Caldeis, lest 
par auenture Y be take in! to the hondus 
200f hem, and thei bobbe to me. Answer- 
ende forsothe Jeremye seide to hym, Thei 
shul not take thee; here, Y beseche, the 
vois of the Lord, that Y shal speke to 
thee, and weel shal be to thee, and lyue 
2ishal thi soule. That if thou wilt not go 
out, this is the wrd that shewede to me 
22the Lord, Lo! alle the wymmen, that 
abiden in the hous of the king of Juda, 
shul be bro3t out to the princes of the 
king of Babiloyne; and thei shul sey, 
Han bigilid thee, and hadden the mais- 


‘Om. Eprom. & Om. c pr.m. 


VOL. HI. 


JEREMIAH. 


bh Om. Eprom. 
3K 


433 


Abdemelech Ethiopien seide to Jeremye, 
Putte thou elde clothis, and these to-rent 
and. rotun thingis vndur the cubit of thin 
hondis, and on the cordis. Therfor Jere- 
mye dide so. And thei drowen out Jere-13 
mye with cordis, and ledden hym out of 
the lake. Forsothe Jeremye dwellide in 
the porche of the prisoun. And kyng1 
Sedechie sente, and took hym Jeremye, 
the profete, at the thridde dore that was 
in the hous of the Lord. And the kyng 
seide to Jeremye, Y axe of thee a word; 
hide thou not ony thing fro me. Forsothe 1s 
Jeremye seide to Sedechie, If Y telle to 
thee, whether thou schalt not sle me? 
And if Y 3yue councel to thee, thou schalt 
not here me. Therfor Sedechie the king 16 
swoor to Jeremye priueli, and seide, The 
Lord lyueth, that maad to vs this soule, 
Y schal not sle thee, and Y schal not bi- 
take thee in to the hondis of these men, 
that seken thi lijf. And Jeremye seide 17 
to Sedechie, The Lord of oostis, God of 
Israel, seith these thingis, If thon goest 
forth, and goest out to the princes of the 
kyng of Babiloyne, thi soule schal lyue, 
and this citee schal not be brent with fier, 
and thou schalt be saaf, thou and thin 
hous. Forsothe if thou goest not out tos 
the princes of the kyng of Babiloyne, this 
citee schal be bitakun in to the hondis of 
Caldeis; and thei schulen brenne it with fier, 
and thou schalt not ascape fro the hond of 
hem. And kyng Sedechie seide to Jeremye, 1% 
Yam angwischid for the Jewis that fledden 
ouer to Caldeis, lest perauenture Y be bi- 
takun in to the hondis of hem, and thei 
scorne me. Forsothe Jeremye answeride, 20 
and seide to hym, Thei schulen not bitake 
thee; Y biseche, here thou the vois of the 
Lord, which Y schal speke to thee, and it 
schal be wel to thee, and thi soule schal lyue. 
That if thou wolt not go out, this is the word 21 
which the Lord schewide to me, Lo! alle 22 
the wymmen, that weren left in the hous 
of the kyng of Juda, schulen be led out to 
the princes of the kyng of Babiloyne; and 
tho wymmen schulen seie, Thi pesible men 


bhthic. !Om.z pr.m. 


434 


tri ajen thee thi pesible men; thei han 
drenchid thee doun in the myre, and in 
the sledery thing thi feet, and thei wenten 
23awei fro thee. And alle thi wyues and 
thi sonus shul be lad out to the Caldeis, 
and thou shalt not scape the hondus of 
hem; but in to the hondus of the king of 
Babiloyne thou shalt be take, and this cite 
24thei shul ‘to-brenne* with fyr. Thanne 
Sedechtie seide to Jeremye, No man wite 
25 these wrdus, and thou shalt not die. If 
forsothe heren shul the princes, for! Y 
haue™ spoke with thee, and thei shul 
come to thee, and sei to thee, Shew® to 
vs what thou hast spoke with the king, 
ne hile thou vs, and wee shul not sle 
thee ; and what spac with thee the king, 
aé6thou shalt sei to them, I haue® throwe 
doun my pre3eres befor the king, lest he 
comaundede? me to be bro3t a3een in to 
the hous of Jonathan, and there Y shulde 
27die. Camen thanne alle the princes to 
Jeremye, and askeden hym; and he spae 
to them after alle the wrdus that the 
king hadde comaundid to hym, and thei 
ceseden fro hym; no thing forsothe was 
28herd. Thanne Jeremye abod in the ves- 
tiarie of the prisoun, vnto the dai that 
taken is Jerusalem; and don it is, that 
Jerusalein shulde ben taken. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


1 The nynthe 3er of Sedechie, king of 
Jude, the tenthe moneth, cam Nabugo- 
donosor, king of Babiloyne, and al his 
ost to Jerusalem, and thei besegeden it. 
2The elleuenthe 3er forsothe of Sedechie, 
the ferthe moneth, the fifte dai of the 
3moneth, opened is the cite; and wenten 
in alle the princes of the king of Babi- 
loyne, and seeten in the myddel j3ate, 
Neregel, Fererer, Semegar, Nabusarra- 
chym, Rapsaces, Neregel, Ferezer, Reby- 


nag, and alle the othere’ princes of the 


4king of Babiloyne. And whan hadde 
seen hem Sedechie, king of Juda, and 


k brenne c pr.m.cx. Ithat ax. ™ha x. 


AEGUK, 


JEREMIAH. 


2 Shew thou a. 


XXXVIII. 23——XXXIX. 4. 


disseyueden thee, and hadden the maistrye 
ajens thee; thei drenchiden thee in filthe, 
and thi feet in slidirnesse, and 3eden awei 
fro thee. And alle thi. wyues and thi23 
sones schulen be led out to Caldeis, and 
thou schalt not ascape the hondis of hem; 
but thou schalt be bitakun in to the hondis 
of the kyng of Babiloyne, and he schal 
brenne this citee bi? fier. Therfore Sede-24 
chie seide to Jeremye, No man wite these 
wordis, and thou schalt not die. Sothelies 
if the princes heren, that Y spak with 
thee, and comen? to thee, and seien to 
thee, Schewe thou to vs what thou spak- 
est with the kyng, hide thou not fro vs, and 
we schulen not sle thee; and what the 
kyng spak with thee, thou schalt seie to 26 
hem, Knelyngli Y puttide™ forth my preiris 
bifore the kyng, that he schulde not co- 
maunde me to be led a3en in to the hous 
of Jonathan, and Y schulde die there. 
Therfor alle the princes camen to Jere-27 
mye, and axiden hym; and he spak to 
hein bi alle the wordis whiche the kyng 
hadde comaundid to hym, and thei ceess- 
iden fro hym; for whi no thing was herd. 
Therfor Jeremye dwellide in the porches 
of the prisoun, til to the dai wherynne® 
Jerusalem was takun; and it was don, 
that Jerusalem schulde be takun. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


In the nynethe 3eer of Sedechie, kyngi 
of Juda, in the tenthe monethe, Nabugo- 
donosor, kyng of Babiloyne, and al his 
oost cam to Jerusalem, and thei bisegiden 
it. Forsothe in the enleuenthe 3eer of2 
Sedechie, in the fourthe monethe, in the 
fyuethe day of the monethe, the citee was 
opened ; and alle the princes of the kyngs 
of Babiloyne entriden, and saten in the 
myddil 3ate, Veregel, Fererer, Semegar, 
Nabusarrachym, Rapsaces, Neregel, Sere- 
ser, Rebynag, and alle othere princes of the 
kyng of Babiloyne. And whanne Sede-« 
chie, the kyng of Juda, and alle the men 
4 tothere 


ohak. P comaunde z pr. m. 


P with 1. 4 thei comeni1. T° settide CEFGHIKMNPQRSUYX. § in whiche 1 


Sete 16. 


alle the men fi3teres floun’, and wenten 


out the ny3t fro the cite, bi the weie of’ 


the gardyn of the king, and bi the 3ate 
that was betwe® two wallis; and thei 
5 Wwenten out tot the weie of desert. For- 
sothe pursuede them the ost of Caldeis, 
and toke Sedechye in the feld of wilder- 
nesse of the kuntre of Jerichon; and 
taken thei bro3ten to Nabugodonosor, 
king of Babiloyne, in to Reblatha, that 
is in the lond of Emath; and he spac to 
shym domes. And the king of Babiloyne 
slo3 the sonus of Sedechie in Reblatha, 
in his e3en; and alle the noble men of 
7Juda slo3 the king of Babiloyne. Also 
the e3en of Sedechie he pullide out, and 
bond hym in gyues, that he shulde be 
sladde in to Babiloyne. The hons also 


of the king and the hous of the comun. 


brenden vp the Caldeis with fyr, and the 
wal of Jerusalem thei turneden vpso- 
gdoun. And the remnaunt of the puple, 
that abiden in the cite, and the ferr floun, 
that hadden ouerfloun to hym, and the 
wast of the comun, that hadde abiden, 
Nabusardan, maister of kny3tes, translat- 
1oede in to Babiloyne. And of the fole of 
pore men, that no thing vnnethe hadde, 
Nabusardan, the maister of kny3tus, lafte 
in the lond of Juda, and 3af to them 
li vynes" and cesternes in that dai. For- 
sothe Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, 
of Jeremye hadde comaundid to Nabu- 
sardan, maister of the chyalrie, seiende, 
12 Tac hym, and put vp on hym thin ejen, 
and no thing of euel to hym do thou; 
but as he shal wiln, so do thou to hym. 
13Sente thanne Nabusardan, prince of the 
chyualrie, and Lesban, and Rapsaces, and 
Meregel, and Seresel, and Rebynag, and 
alle the beste of the king of Babiloyne, 
l4senten, and toke Jeremye fro the ves- 
tiarie of the prisoun, and token hym to 
Godolie, sone of Aicham, sone of Safan, 
that he shulde gon in to the hous, and 
isdwelle in the puple. To Jeremye for- 


¥ thei flowen 4. 


t with r. 4% thei distrieden 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


8 betwen ceferi passim. 


Vv the chyualrie 1. 


3K 2 


435 


werriouris hadden seien hem, thei fledden, 
and 3eden out bi ni3t fro the citee, bi the 
weie of the gardyn of the kyng, and bi 
the 3ate that was bitwixe twei wallis ; 
and thei 3eden out to the weie of desert. 
Forsothe the oost of Caldeis pursnedens 
hem, and thei token Sedechie in the feeld 
of wildirnesse of Jericho; and thei token 
hym, and brou3ten to Nabngodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, in Reblatha, which is 
in the lond of Emath; and Nabugodo- 
nosor spak domes tot hym. And the kyng¢ 
of Babiloyne killide the sones of Sedechye 
in Reblatha, bifor hise izen ; and the kyng 
of Babyloyne killide alle the noble men of 
Juda. Also he puttide out the izen of7 
Sedechie, and boond hym in feteris, that 
he schulde be led in to Babiloyne. Ands 
Caldeis brenten with fier the hous of the 
kyng, and the hous of the comun puple, 
and distrieden® the wal of Jerusalem. 
And Nabusardan, the maister of kny3tis, 9 
translatide in to Babiloyne the residues of 
the puple, that dwelliden in the citee, and 
the fleeris awei, that hadden fled ouer to 
hym, and the superflue men of the comyn 
puple, that weren left. And Nabusardan, io 
the maistir of kny3tis, lefte in the lond of 
Juda, of the puple of pore men, and 3af 
to hem vyneris and cisternes in that dai. 
Forsothe Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babi-u 
loyne, hadde comaundid of Jeremye to 
Nabusardan, maister of chyualrie’, and 
seide, Take thou him, and sette thin ijen t2 
on hym, and do thou no thing of yuel to 
him; but as he wole, so do thou to hym. 
Therfor Nabusardan, the prynce of chy- 1s 
ualrie, sente Nabu, and Leshan, and Rap- 
sases, and Veregel, and Sereser, and Re- 
bynag, and alle the principal men of the 
kyng of Babiloyne, senten, and token Je-14 
remye fro the porche of the prisoun, and 
bitokun” hym to Godolie, the sone of 
Aicham, sone of Saphan, that he schulde | 
entre in to the hous, and dwelle among 
the puple. Forsothe the word of the Lord ts 


t bice prom.  ™ vyne jerdis & sec. m. 


w thet bitokun 1. 


436 


sothe don is the wrd of the Lord, whan 
he was closid im the vestiarie of the pri- 

isoun, seiende, Go, and sey to Abdema- 
lech Ethiope, seiende, These thingus seith 
the Lord of ostus, God of Irael, Lo! Y 
shal bringe in my wrdus vp on this cite 
in to euel, and not in to good; and thei 

17shul be in thi si3t in that dai. And Y 
shal delyuere thee in that dai, seith the 
Lord, and thow shalt not be take in to 
the hondus of the men, that thou dredist; 

isbut delyuerende Y shal delyuere thee, 
and bi swerd thou shalt not falle; but 
shal ben to thee thi soule in to helthe, 
for in me thou haddest trost, seith the 
Lord. 


CAP. XL. 


1 The wrd that ys maade’ to Jeremye 
fro the Lord, aftir that he is laft of Na- 
busardan, maister of the chyualrie, fro” 
Rama, whan he toc hym bounde with 
cheynes, in the myddel of alle that pass- 
eden fro Jerusalem, and fro Juda, and 

2thei weren lad in to Babiloyne. Thanne 
the prince of the chyualrie, takende Jere- 
mye, seide to hym, The Lord thi God 

3spac this euel vp on this place, and the 
Lord bro3te to, and dide, as he spac; for 
3ee synneden to the Lord, and herden not 
the voys of hym, and don is to 3ou this 
4wrd. Now thanne lo! Y hane loosid thee 
to dai of the cheynes that ben in thin 
hondis; yf it plese to thee that thou come 
with me in to Babiloyne, cum, aud Y 
shal putte myn e3en* vp on thee; yf for- 
sothe it displese to thee to come with me 
in to Babiloyne, sit stille heer; lo! al the 
lond in thi si3te is, that thou shalt cheese, 
and whider shal plese to thee that thou 
5g0, thider go, and with me wile thou not 
come. But dwel anent Godoliam, sone 
of Aicham, sone of Safan, whom befor- 


sette the king of Babyloyne to the cites. 


of Juda; dwel therfore with: hym in the 
myddel of the puple, or whider ever it 


¥ doc et E pr.m., 


JEREMIAH. 


w of EB pr.m. 


XRXIX, w6—- ese 


was maad to Jeremye, whanne he. was 
closid' in the porche of; the prisoun,’ and 
seide, Go thou, and seie to Abdemelech 16 
Ethiopien, and speke thou, The Lord of 
oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal brynge my. wordis on..this 
citee in to yuel, and not in to good; and 
tho schulen be in thi si3t in that dai. And.17 
Y schal delyuere thee in that day, seith 
the Lord, and thou schalt not be bitakun 
in to the hondis of men, whiche thou 
dreddist ; but Y delynerynge schal dely- 1s 
uere thee, and thou schalt not falle doun 
bi swerd; but thi soule schal be in to 
helthe to thee, for thou haddist trist in 
me, seith the Lord. 


CAP. XL. 


The word that was maad of the Lord1 
to Jeremye, aftir that he was delyuered 
of Nabusardan, maister of chyualrie*, fro 
Rama, whanne he took hym boundun with 
chaynes, in the myddis of alle men that 
passiden fro Jerusalem, and fro Juda, and 
weren led in to Babyloyne. Therfor the2 
prince of chyualrie* took Jeremye, and 
seide to hym, Thi Lord God spak this 
yuel on this place, and the Lord haths 
brou3t, and hath do, as he spak; for 3e 
synneden to the Lord, and herden not the 
vois of hym, and this word is doon to 3ou. 
Now therfor lo! Y haue releessid thee to4 
dai fro the chaynes that ben in thin 
hondis; if it plesith thee to come with 
me in to Babiloyne, come thou, and Y. 
schal sette myn izen on thee; sotheli if it 
displesith thee to come with me in to 
Babiloyne, sitte thou here; lo! al the 
lond is in thi si3t, that that thou chesist, 
and whidur it plesith thee to go,’ thidur 
go thou, and nyle thou come with me.s 
But dwelle thou with Godolie, sone of 
Aicham, sone of Saphan, whom the kyng 
of Babiloyne made souereyn to the citees 
of Juda; therfor dwelle thou with hym 
in the myddis of the puple, ether go thou, 


x eye 4. 


x the chyualrie 1. 


XL. 6—13. 


shal plese to thee that thou go, go. The 
maister of the chyualrie 3af also to hym 


metus, and litil 3iftus, and’ lafte hym.: 


eJeremye forsothe cam to Godolie, sone ‘of 
Aicham, in to Masfa, and dwelte with 
hym, in the myddel of the puple that 


7was laft in the lond. . And whan herd’ 


hadden alle the princes of ‘the ost, that 


weren scatered bi- regiownus, thei and’ 


ther felawis, that the king of Babiloyne 


hadde bifor maad..Godolie, sone of Ai-’ 


cham, to the lond, and that hadde bitake* 
to hym men, and wymmen, and litil chil- 
der, and of the pore men of the lond, 
that weren not translatid in to Babiloyne, 
scamen to Godolie in to Masfa; and Is- 
mael, the sone of Nathanye, and Johan- 
nan, the sone of Caraie, and Jonathan, 


and Sareas, the sone of Thenoemeth, and. 


the sonus of Offi, that weren of Nethofati, 
andy Jeconye, the sone of Mechati, and 
9thei and the men of hem. And swor to 
them Godolie, the sone of Aicham, sone of 
Safan, and to the felawes of hem, seiende, 


Wileth not drede to serue to the Caldeis ; 


dwelleth in the lond, and serueth to the 
king of Babiloyne, and weel shal be to 
yo30u. Lo! Y dwelle in Masfath, that Y 
answere to the heste of the Caldeis, that 
ben sent to vs; 3ee forsothe gedereth vyn- 


dage, and rep, and oile, and leith vp in. 


3oure vesselis, and dwelleth in joure cites 
11 that 3ee holden. : But and alle.the’* Jewis,. 
that weren in Moab, and in the sonus of 
Amon, and in Ydume, and in alle the re- 
giouns, herd that the king of Babiloyne 
hadde 3oue the remnaunt in Jewerie, and 
that he hadde mad prouost vp on hem 
Godoliam, sone of Aicham, sone of Safan, 
12turneden ajeen forsothe alle the Jewis of 


all the places, to whiche thei hadde floun, ' 


and camen to the lond of Juda, to Godo- 
lie in to Masfath, and gedereden wyn 
i3and rep ful myche. Johanna forsothe, 
the sone of Charaie, and alle the princes 
of the ost, that weren scatered in the re- 


x be take x. 


Y the 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


y Om. x. 


437 


whidir ever it plesith thee to go. And 
the maister of chyualrie 3af to hym metis, 
and 3iftis, and lefte hym. Forsothe Jere-6 
mye cam to Godolie, sone of Aicham, in 
to Masphat, and dwellide with hym, in 
the myddis of the puple that was left in 
the lond. And whanne alle princes of the7 
oost ‘hadden herd, that weren scatered bi 
cuntreis, thei and the felowis of hem, that 
the kyng of Babiloyne hadde maad Go- 
dolie souereyn of the lond, the sone of 
Aicham, and that he hadde bitake to Go- 
dolie men, and wymmen, and litle children, 
and of’ pore men of the lond, that weren 
not translatid in to Babiloyne, thei camens 
to Godolie in Masphat; and’ Ismael, the 
sone of Nathanye, and Johannan, the sone 
of Caree, and Jonathan, and Sareas, the 
sone of Tenoemeth, and the sones of Offi, 
that weren of Nethophati, and Jeconye,; 
the sone of Machati; bothe thei and her 
men camen to Godolie. And Godolie,» 
sone? of Aicham, sone of Saphan, swoor 
to hem, and to the felowis of hem, and 
seide, Nyle 3e drede to serue Caldeis; but 
dwelle 3e in the lond, and serue 3e the 
kyng of.Babiloyne, and it schal be wel to 
jou. Lo! Y¥ dwelle in Mesphath, for to 10 
answere to the comaundement of Caldeis, 
that ben sent to vs; forsothe gadere 3e 
vyndage, and ripe corn, and oile, and kepe 
3e in.3oure vessels, and dwelle 3e in 3oure 
citees whiche 3e holden. But also alle thei 
Jewis, that weren in Moab, and in the 
oostis of Amon, and in Ydumee, and in 
alle the cuntreis, whanne it is herd, that 
the kyng of Babiloyne hadde 3oue resi- 
dues, ether remenauntis, in Judee, and 
that he hadde maad sonereyn on hem Go- 
dolie, the sone of Aicham, sone of Saphan, 
sotheli alle Jewis turneden ajen fro alle 12 
places, to whiche thei hadden fled; and 
thei camen in to the lond of Juda, to Go- 
dolie in Masphat, and gaderiden wyn and . 
ripe corn ful myche. Forsothe Johannan, 13 
the sone of Caree, and alle the princes of 


2 Om. cE pr. m. 


2 the sune CFHIKMNQSUVX. 


438 


giouns, camen to Godolie in to Masfa, 

i4and seiden to hym, Wite thou, for Bahalis, 
king of the sonus of Amon, sente Ysmael, 
the sone of Nathanye, to smyte thi lif. 
And Godolie, sone* of Aicham, trowede 

wnot to them. Johannan forsothe, sone* 
of Chare, seide to Godolie, aside in Mas- 
fath spekende, I shal go, and smyte Is- 
mael, the sone of Nathanye, no man 
witende, lest he sle thi lif, and be scatered 
alle the Jewes, that ben gedered to thee, 
and pershe shul the® relikes of Juda. 

16And Godolie, the sone of Aicham, seith 
to Johannan, the sone of Chare, Wile 
thou not do this wrd, fals forsothe thou 
spekist of Ismael. 


CAP. XLI. 


1 And don is in the seuenthe moneth, 
cam Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, sone 
of Elisame, of the kingus sed, and the 
beste men of the king, and ten men 
with hym, to Godolie, sone of Aicham, 
in Masfa; and thei eete there loeues ‘to 

agydere? in Masfa. Rysen forsothe Is- 
mael, the sone of Nathanye, and the ten 
men that with hym weren, and smyten 
Godolie, the sone of Aicham, sone of Sa- 
fan, with swerd, and slowen hym, whom 
bifore hadde mad the king of Babiloyne 

3to the lond. Also alle the Jewis that 

“‘weren with Godolie in Masfa, and the 
Caldeis, that ben founde there, and the 

4men fi3teres, Ismael smot. The secounde 
forsothe dai, after that he hadde slayn 

5Godolie, no man 3it witende, camen men 
of Sichym, and of Silo, and of Samarie, 
eiz3teti¢ men, shauen the berd, and the 
clothis kut, and defoulid; 3iftus and en- 
cens hadden in the hond, that thei shul- 
éden offre in the hous of the Lord. Gon 
out thanne Ismael, the sone of Natanye, 
in to ajen comyng to them fro Masfath, 
goende and wepende wente. Whan for- 
sothe he hadde a3en come to them, he 


@ the sone E pr.m. 


: b Om. £ pr. m. 
eigteti E pr. am. 


a resin BE, risen F. resen 1. 


' JEREMIAH. 


¢ alle the £ pr.m. 


XL.a9=—«LI-6. 


the oost, that weren scaterid in the cun- 
treis, camen to Godolie in Masphath, and 14 
seiden to hym, Wite thou, that Bahalis, 
kyng of the sones of Amon, hath sent 
Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, to smyte 
thi lijf And Godolie, the sone of Aicham, 
bilenyde not to hem. Forsothe Johannan, 1s 
the sone of Caree, seide to Godolie asidis 
half in Masphath, and spak, Y schal go, 
and sle Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, 
while no man knowith, lest he sle thi lijf, 
and alle the Jewis ben scatered, that ben 
gaderid to thee, and the remenauntis of 
Juda schulen perische. And Godolie, the 16 
sone of Aicham, seide to Johannan, the 
sone of Caree, Nyle thou do this word, 
for thou spekist fals of Ismael. 


CAP. XLI. 


And it was don in the seuenthe monethe, 1 
Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, sone of Eli- 
sama, of the kingis seed, and the principal 
men of the kyng, and ten men with hym, 
camen to Godolie, the sone of Aicham, in 
Masphath ; and thei eeten there looues to- 
gidere in Masphath. Forsothe Ismael, thee 
sone of Nathanye, and the ten men that 
weren with hym, risiden® vp, and killiden 
bi> swerd Godolie, the sone of Aicham, sone 
of Saphan ; and thei killiden hym, whom 
the kyng of Babiloyne hadde maad soue- 
reyn of the lond. Also Ismael killide alles 
the Jewis, that weren with Godolie in 
Masphath, and the Caldeis, that weren 
foundun there, and the men werriours. 
Forsothe in the secounde dai, aftir thata 
he hadde slayn Godolie, while no man 
wiste 3it, foure scoor men with schauens 
beerdis, and to-rent clothis, and pale men, 
camen fro Sichem, and fro Silo, and fro 
Samarie; and thei hadden 3iftis and en- 
cense in the hond, for to offre in the hous 
of the Lord. Therfor Ismael, the sone of¢ 
Nathanye, 3ede out of Masphath in to the 
metyng of hem; and he 3ede goynge and 
wepynge. Sotheli whanne he hadde met 


40m. c pr.m. gydere x. e and 


b> with 1. 


XLI. 7—16. 


seide to them, Cometh to Godolie, sone 
zof Aicham; the whiche whanne hadden 
comen to the myddel of the cite, sloo3 
hem Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, aboute 
the myddel of the lake, he and the men 
sthat weren with hym. Tenf men for- 
sothe ben founden among hem, that seiden 
to Ismael, Wile thou not® slen vs, for 
wee han tresor in the feld, of whete, and 
of barly, and of oile, and of hony. And 
he cesede, and slo3 hem not with ther 


9brethern. The lake forsothe in to whiche’ 


Ismael thre3 alle the careynus of the? 
men, whom he smot for Godolie, it is 
whiche made Asa the king for Basa, the 
king of Irae]; Ismael’, the sone of Nata- 
lonye, ‘fulfilde it* with slayn men. And 
Ismael bro3te caitif alle the relikis of the 
puple, that weren in Masfath, the do3- 
tris of the king, and al the puple that 


abiden in Masfath, whom Nabusardan, . 


prince of the chyualrie, hadde betake to 
Godolie, sone of Aicham. And Ismael, 
the sone of Nathanye, toc them, and 
wente awei, that he shulde go to the 
11 sonus of Amon. Herde forsothe Johanna, 
the sone of Carae, and alle the princes 
of fi3teres, that weren with hym, al the 
euel that don hadde Ismael, the sone of 
12 Natanye. And taken to alle the men, thei 
wente forth, that thei schuld! fijte ajen 
Ismael, the sone of Natanye; and found- 
en™ hym at manye watris, that ben in 
13Gabaon. And whan seen hadde al the 
puple, that was with Ismael, Johannan, 
sone® of Carae, and al the princes of 
fijteres, that weren with hym, gladeden. 
14And turned a3een is al the puple, that 
Ismael hadde taken in Masfath; and 
turned a3een, it 3ide awei to Johannan, 
isthe sone of Carae. Ismael forsothe, the 
sone of Nathanye, flei3 with ei;3te men 
fro the face of Johanna, and 3ide awei 
1gto the sonus of Amon. Toc thanne Jo- 
hanna, the sone of Carae, and alle the 
princes fijteres, that weren with hymP, 


{The ten ze pr.m. £& Om. c. 


10m. c pr.m. £ pr.m. 


¢Qm.1. 


JEREMIAH. 


h Om. E sec. m. AGHK. 
m thei founden E sec. m. K. 


439 


hem, he seide to hem, Come 3e to Godolie, 
the sone of Aicham; and whanne thei7’ 
weren comun to the myddis of the citee, 
Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, killide hem 
aboute the myddis of the lake, he and 
the men that weren with hym ‘killiden 
hem’, But ten men weren foundun among s 
hem, that seiden to Ismael, Nyle thou sle 
vs, for we han tresour of wheete, and of 
barli, and of oile, and of hony, in the 
feeld. And he ceesside, and killide not 
hem with her britheren. Forsothe thes 
lake in to which Ismael castide forth alle 
the careyns of men, whiche he killide for 
Godolie, is thilke dake, which kyng Asa 
made for Baasa, the kyng of Israel; Is- 
mael, the sone of Nathanye, fillide that 
lake with slayn men. And Ismael ledde1o 
prisoneris alle the remenauntis of the pu- 
ple, that weren in Mesphath, the dou3tris 
of the kyng, and al the puple that dwell- 
iden in Masphath, whiche Nabnsardan, 
the prince of chyualrie, hadde bitakun to 
kepyng to Godolie, the sone of Aicham. 
And Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, took 
hem, and 3ede to passe ouer to the sones 
of Amon. Forsothe Johannan, the sone of 11 
Caree, and alle the princes of werriouris, 
that weren with hym, herden al the yuel, 
which Ismael, the sone of Nathanye, hadde 
do. And whanne thei hadden take alleiz 
men, thei 3eden forth to fijte a3ens Ismael, 
the sone of Nathanye; and thei foundun 
hym at the many watris, that ben in Ga- 
baon. And whanne al the puple, that was 13 
with Ismael, hadden seyn Johannan, the 
sone of Caree, and alle the princes of wer- 
riouris, that weren with hym, thei weren 
glad. And al the puple, whom Ismael 14 
hadde take in Masphath, turnede ajen; 
and it turnede ajen, and 3ede to Johannan, 
the sone of Caree. Forsothe Ismael, the 15 
sone of Nathanye, fledde with eij3te men 
fro the face of Johannan, and 3ede to the 
sones of Amon. Therfor Johannan, the‘ té 
sone of Caree, and alle the princes of wer- 


! it fulfilde Ismael z pr.m. * Om. £ pr. m. 


© the sone £ pr.m. POm. £ pr.m. 


4 Om. n. 


440 


al the remnaunt of the comun, that he 
hadde bro3t ajeen fro Ismael, the sone of 
Nathanye, fro Masfa, aftir that he hadde 
smyte Godolie, sone! of Aicham, stronge 
men to bataile, and wymmen, and chil- 
der, and geldingus, that he hadde bro3t 

17a3een fro Gabaon. And thei wenten awei, 
and seten pilgrimagende in Canaan, that 
is byside Bethlem, that thei shulde go, 

isand weende in to Egipt fro the face of 
Caldeis; forsothe thei dredden hem, for 
smyten hadde Ismael, sone’ of Natanye, 
Godolie, sone’ of Aicham, whom biforn 
hadde put.the king of Babiloyne in the 
lond of Juda. 


CAP. XLII. 


1 And wenten ny3 alle princes of fiz3teres, 
and Johanna, sone’ of Carae, and Jeco- 
nye, the sone of Josie, and the tother 
2comun, fro litil vnto myche; and seiden 
to Jeremye, the profete, Falle oure ori- 
soun in thi si3t, and pre3e thou for vs to 
the Lord thi God, for alle these rem- 
nauns; for wee ben laft fewe of manye, 
3as thin e3en biholden vs; and telle to 
vs the Lord thi God the weie, bi whiche 
4Wwee go, and the wrd that wee do. Seide 
forsothe to them Jeremye, the profete, I 
haue herd ; lo! Y pre3e to the Lord oure 
God, after alle 3oure wrdus; eche wrd, 
what euere he shal answere to me, Y 
shal shewe to 30u, ne Y shal hile 30u 
sany thing. And thei seiden to Jeremye, 
Be thet lord among vs witnesse of treuthe 
and of feith; and if not after eche wrd 
in whiche shal sende thee thi God to vs, 
680 wee shal do, whether good or euel. To 
the vois of the Lord oure God, to whom 
wee sende thee, wee shul obeshie, that wel 
be to vs, whan wee shul here the vois of 
7the Lord oure God. Whan forsothe ful- 
fild weren ten dajes, don is the wrd of 
8the Lord to Jeremye. And he clepide 
Johannan, the® sone of Carae, and alle 


4 the sone Epr.m 1? the sone E prom 


€ ynto I. to RV. 


JEREMIAH. 


8 the sone E prim. 


XLI. 17—XLIl. 8. 


riours, that weren with hym, token alle 
the remenauntis of the comyn puple, 
whiche thei brou3ten ajen fro Ismael, the 
sone of Nathanye, that weren of Masphat, 
aftir that he killide Godotie, the sone of 
Aicham ; he took strong men to batel, and 
wymmen, and children, and geldyngis, 
whiche he hadde brou3t ajen fro Gabaon. 
And thei 3eden, and saten beynge pil-17 
gryms in Canaan, which is bisidis Beth- 
leem, that thei schulden go, and entre in 
to Egipt fro the face of Caldeis; for thei 1s 
dredden thilke Caldeis, for Ismael, the sone 
of Nathanye, hadde slayn Godolie, the sone 
of Aicham, whom the kyng Nabugodono- 
sor hadde maad souereyn in the lond of 
Juda. 
CAP. XLII. 

And alle the princes of werriours nei3-1 
iden, and Johannan, the sone of Caree, 
and Jeconye, the sone of Josie, and the 
residue comyn puple, fro a litil man ‘til 
to® af greet man. And thei seiden to Jere-2 
mye, the profete, Oure preier falle in thi 
sijt, and preie thou for vs to thi Lord God, 
for alle these remenauntis; for we ben left 
a fewe of manye, as thin ijen biholden vs; 
and thi Lord God telle to vs the weie, bi3 
which we schulen go, and the word which 
we schulen do. Forsothe Jeremye, the4 
profete, seide to hem, Y haue herd; lo! Y 
preye to oure Lord God, bi 3oure wordis; 
Y schal schewe to 3ou ech word, what euere 
word the Lord schal answere to me, ne- 
ther Y schal hide ony thing fro jou. Ands 
thei seiden to Jeremye, The Lord be wit- 
nesse of treuthe and of feith bitwixe vs; 
if not bi ech word, in which thi Lord God 
schal sende thee to vs, so we schulen do, 
whether it be good ether yuel. We schulené 
obeie to the vois of oure Lord God, to 
whom we senden thee, that it be wel to 
vs, whanne we hau herd the vois of oure 
Lord God. Forsothe whanne ten daies7 
weren fillid, the word of the Lord was 
maad to Jeremye. And he clepide Johan-8 


tOm.c. 2 Om. 4GHK. 


f Om. FHNQRSU. 


XLIL 9—18. 


the princes of fiz3teres, that weren with 
hym, and al the puple fro the leste to 
9the meste; and seide to them, These 
thingus seith the Lord God of Irael, to 
whom 3ee han sente me, that Y shulde 
lei forth 3oure preieres in the si3t of 
10hym. If restende 3ee schulen’ abide. in 
this lond, I shal bilde 30u vp, and not 
destro3en ; Y shal plaunte, and not pulle 
vp; now forsothe Y am plesid vpon the 
lteuel that Y dide to 30u. Wileth not 
drede fro the face of the king of Babi- 
loyne, whom 3ee aferd” dreden; wileth 
not dreden hym, seith the Lord, for with 
jou Y am, that Y make 3ou saf, and de- 
12lyuere* fro his hond. And Y shal 3yue 
to 30u mercies, and hanY reuthe of 30u, 
and to dwelle 3ou Y shal make in 3oure 
i3lond. If forsothe 3ee shul sei, Wee shul 
not dwelle in this lond, ne wee shul here 
14the vois of the Lord oure God, seiende, 
Nai, but to the lond of Egipt wee shul 
go, where wee shul not see bataile, and 
noise of trumpe wee shul not heren, and 
hunger wee shul not suffre, and there 
15 wee shul dwelle ; for that now hereth the 
wrd of the Lord, 3ee remnaunt of Juda. 
These thingus seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, If 3ee shul* sette 3oure face, 
that 3ee go in to Egipt, and 3ee shul gon 
isin, that there 3ee dwelle, swerd that 3ee 
drede shal there take 30u in the lond of 
Egipt, and hunger for whiche 3ee be 
besy shal cleue to 30u in Egipt; and there 
173ee shul die. And alle the men that set- 
teden ther face, that they go in to Egipt, 
and dwelle there, shul die with swerd, 
and hunger, and pestilence ; no man of 
hem shal lefe, ne scape fro the face of 
the euel, that I shal bringe to vp on hem. 
is For these thingus seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, As 30ten out is ‘my wood- 
nesse and* myn indignacioun vp on the? 
dwelleres of Jerusalem, so shal be 30ten 
out myn indignacioun vpon 30u, whan 


W ferd aGuKk. 


v Om. c pr.m. E prem. 
b alle the = pr. m. 


8 Om. c. 


I feerful p. 
0 for to CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX, 


8 vntor © Om. plures. 
m Om. 1. 


VOL. Ill. 31 


JEREMIAH. 


x delyuere 3ou 4K sec. m. 


K vois K leat sec.m. ether soun K marg. sec. m. 


441 


nan, the sone of Caree, and alle the princes 
of werriours, that weren with hym, and al 
the puple fro the leste ‘til to® the mooste ; 
and he seide.to hem, The Lord God of Is-9 
rael seith these thingis, to whom 3e senten 
me, that Y schulde mekeli sette forth j3oure 
preyeris in his si3t. If 3e resten, and 10 
dwellen in this lond, Y schal bilde 3on, 
and Y schal not distrie; Y schal plaunte, 
and Y schal not drawe out; for now Y am 
plesid on the yuel which Y dide to jou. 
Nyle 3e drede of the face of the kyng of 1 
Babiloyne, whom 3e ‘that ben ferdfuli, 
dreden ; nyle 3e drede hym, seith the Lord, 
for Y am with 30u, to make 3o0u saaf, and 
to delyuere fro his hond. And Y schal iz 
3yue mercies to 30u, and Y schal haue 
merci on 30u, and Y schal make 30u dwelle 
in 3oure lond. Forsothe if 3e seien, We 13 


‘ schulen not dwelle in this lond, nether we 


schulen here the vois of oure Lord God, 
and seie, Nai, but we schulen go to the14 
lond of Egipt, where we schulen not se 
batel, and schulen not here the noise* of 
trumpe, and we schulen not suffre hungur, 
and there we schulen dwelle; for thisis 
thing, 3e remenauntis of Juda, here now 
the word of the Lord. The Lord of oostis, 
God of Israel, seith these thingis, If 3e 
setten 3oure face, for to entre in to Egipt, 
and if 3e entren, to! dwelle there, the swerd 16 
whiche 3e dreden schal take 30u there in 
the lond of Egipt, and the hungur for 
which 3e ben angwischid schal cleue to 
jou in Egipt; and there 3e schulen die. 
And alle™ the men that settiden her face, 17 
to" entre in to Egipt, and to dwelle there, 
schulen die bi swerd, and hungur, and 
pestilence ; no man of hem schal dwelle 
stille, nether schal aschape fro the face of 
yuel, which Y schal brynge on hem. Forts 
why the Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith 
these thingis, As my strong veniaunce and 
myn indignacioun is wellid togidere on 
the dwelleris of Jerusalem, so myn indig- 


yhak. *%3ee shul not c pr.m. 


1 for to NV pr. m. 


442 


3ee shul go in to Egipt; and 3ee shul 
ben ‘in to an oth of ri3t°, and in to stone- 
yng, and in to cursing, and in to repref ; 
iyand 3ee shul no more see this place. The 
wrd of the Lord vp on 3ou, 3ee’ rem- 
nauns of Juda; wileth not go in to 
Egipt ; witende 3ee shul wite, that a3en- 
20 witnessid Y haue to 30u this day ; for 3ee 
han disceyued 3oure soules, 3ee forsothe 
han sente me to the Lord 3oure God, 
seiende, Preje thou for vs to the Lord 
oure God, and after alle thingis what 
enere shal sei to thee the Lord oure God, 
2iso tel to vs, and wee shul don. And Y 
haue® told to 3ou to day, and 3ee han 
not herde the vois of the Lord oure God, 
vpon alle thingus for whiche he sente me 
z2to 30u. Now therfore witende 3ee shul 
wite, for with swerd, and hunger, and 
pestilence 3ee shul die, in the place to 
whiche 3ee wolde gof in, that 3ee dwelle 
there. 
CAP. XLII. 
1 Don is forsothe, whan fulfild hadde 
Jeremye spekende to the puple alle the 
wrdus of the Lord God of hem, for whiche 
sente hadde hym the Lord God of hem 
2to them, alle these wrdis, seide Azarye, 
sone of Josie, and Johanna, sone of Ca- 
rae, and alle the proude men, seiende® to 
Jeremye, Lesing thou spekest ; sente not 
thee the Lord oure God, seiende, Ne go 
jee" in to Egipt, that 3ee dwelle there ; 
3but Baruch, the sone of Neri, stireth 
thee ajen vs, that he take vs in the 
hondus of Caldeis, that thei sle vs, and 
4make' to ben ouerlad into Babiloyne. And* 
herde not Johanna, sone! of Carae, and 
alle the princes of fi3teres, and al the 
puple, the vois of the Lord, that thei 
5shulden dwelle in the lond of Juda. But 
takende Johanna, sone™ of Carae, and 
alle the princes of fizteres, alle the men 
of the remnauntis of Juda, that weren 
turned a3een fro alle Jentiles, to whiche 
thei weren befor scatered, that thei shulde 


© rizt of oth c pr.m. E pr.m. 


JEREMIAH. 


qd Om. cE pr. m. 


XLII. 19—XLIII. 5. 


nacioun schal be wellid togidere on 3ou, 
whanne 3e han entrid in to Egipt; and 
3e schulen be in to sweryng, and in to 
wondring, and in to cursyng, and in to 
schenschipe ; and 3e schulen no more se 
this place. The word of the Lord zs onis 
jou, 3e remenauntis of Juda; nyle 3e entre 
in to Egipt ; 3e witinge schulen wite, that 
Y haue witnessid to 30u to dai; for 3e han 20 
disseyued 3oure soulis, for 3e senten me to 
joure Lord God, and seiden, Preye thou 
for vs to oure Lord God, and bi alle 
thingis what euer thingis oure Lord schal 
seie to thee, so telle thon to vs, and we 
schulen do. And Y telde to 3ou to dai,21 
and 3e herden not the vois of 3oure Lord 
God, on alle thingis for whiche he sente 
me to 30u. Now therfor 3e witynge schu-22 
len wite, for 3e schulen die bi swerd, and 
hungur, and pestilence, in the place to 
which 3e wolden entre, to dwelle there. 


CAP. XLIII. 


Forsothe it was don, whanne Jeremye | 
spekinge to the puple hadde fillid alle the 
wordis of the Lord God of hem, for whiche 
the Lord God of hem sente hym to hem, 
alle these wordis, Azarie, the sone of Josie, 2 
seide, and Johanna, the sone of Caree, and 
alle proude men, seiynge to Jeremye, Thou 
spekist a° leesyng ; oure Lord God sente 
not thee, and seide, Entre 3e not in to 
Egipt, to dwelle there; but Baruc, thes 
sone of Nerie, stirith thee azens vs, that 
he bitake vs in the hondis of Caldeis, that 
he sle vs, and make to be led ouer in to 
Babiloyne. And Johanna, the sone of 
Caree, and alle the princes of werriours, 
and al the puple, herden not the vois of 
the Lord, that thei dwellen? in the lond of 
Juda. But Johanna, the sone of Caree,5 
and alle the princes of werriours, token 
alle of the remenauntis of Juda, that turn- 
eden ajen fro alle folkis, to whiche thei 
weren scatered bifore, that thei schulden 
dwelle in the lond of Juda; thei tokens 


eha x. f wiln gon £ pr.m. 8 seiden 4GHK. 


nthou 4. $Om. x prim. make. And xz pr.m. the sone £ pr.m. ™ the sone 4GHK. 


° Om. 1. 


P dwelliden CEFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 


XLII. 6—XLIV. 2. 


Gdwelle in the lond of Juda; men, and 
wymmen, and litil childer, and the do3- 
tris of the king, and eche soule, that laft 
hadde Nabusardan, prince of the chyual- 
rie, with Godolie, sone" of Aicham, sone 
of Safan ; and toc Jeremye, the profete, 

7and Baruch, the sone of Neri, and wenten 
in to the lond of Egipt; for thei obesh- 
iden not to the vois of the Lord, and 

scamen ‘in to° Tapnys. Don is the wrd 
of the Lord to Jeremye in Tapnys, sei- 
gende, Tac to thee in thin hond grete 
stones, and hyd hem in the caue, that is 
vnder the tily wal, in the 3ate of the 
hous of Farao, in Tapnys, byholdende the 
iomen Jewis. . And thou shalt sei to them, 
These thingus seith the Lord of ostus, 
God of Irael, Lo! Y shal sende, and take 
Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, my 
seruaunt, and setten his trone vp on 
these stonus, that Y haue hid; and he shal 
1lsette his see vp on hem. And comende 
he shal sinyte the lond of Egipt, whom 
in deth in to deth, and? whom in‘ ecai- 

‘tifte in to caitifte, and whom in swerd 

1z2in to swerd. And he shal teende fyr 
in the washing templis of the godus of 
Egipt, and to-brenne them, and caitif he 
shal lede them; and shal ben coouered 
the lond of Egipt, as is coouered a shep- 
herde with his mantil; and he shal gon 

13 0ute thennus in pes. And he shal alto- 
brose the ymages of the hous of the 
sunne, that ben in the lond of Egipt; 
and the wasshing templis of the godus of 
Egipt he shal to-brenne with fyr. 


CAP. XLIV. 


1 The wrd that is do to Jeremye, and to 
alle the Jewis, that dwellen' in the lond 
of Egipt, dwellende in Magdalo, and in 
Tannys, and in Memphis, and in the 

2lond of Fatures, seiende, These thingus 
seith the Lord of ostus, God of Irael, 3ee 
han seen al thys euel, that Y haue® bro3t 
vp on Jerusalem, and vp on alle the citest 


n the sone £ prim. ° yn to AGHK. 


t men £ pr.m. 


qvntoy. * the Jewis 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


Pp Om. kK. 


8 seen if I. 


443 


men, and wymmen, and litle children, and 
the dou3tris of the kyng, and ech persoone, 
whom Nabusardan, the prince of chyual- 
rie, hadde left with Godolie, the sone of 
Aicham, sone of Saphan. And thei token 
Jeremye, the profete, and Baruc, the sone 
of Nerie, and thei entriden in to the lond7 
of Egipt; for thei obeieden not to the vois 
of the Lord, and thei camen ‘til tol Taph- 
nys. And the word of the Lord was maad 8 
to Jeremye in Taphnys, and seide, Takeo 
in thin hond grete stoonys, and hide thou 
tho in a denne, which is vndur the wal of 
tiil stoon, in the 3ate of the hous of Farao, 
in Taphnys, while alle Jewis’ seen’. And 10 
thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord of oostis, 
God of Israel, seith these thingis, Lo! Y 
schal sende, and Y schal take Nabugodo- 
nosor, my seruaunt, the kyng of Babi- 
loyne; and Y schal sette his trone on these 
stoonys, whiche Y hidde; and he schal 
sette his seete on tho stoonys. And heii 
schal come, and smyte the lond of Egipt, 
whiche in deth in to deth, and whiche 
in caitiftee in to caitiftee, and whiche in 
swerd in toswerd. And he schal kindle 12 
fier in the templis of goddis of Egipt, and 
he schal brenne tho femplis, and schal lede 
hem prisoneris; and the lond of Egipt schal 
be wlappid, as a scheepherd is wlappid in 
his mentil ; and he schal go out fro thennus 
in pees. And he schal al to-breke the1s 
ymagis of the hous of the sunne, that ben 
in the lond of Egipt ; and he schal brenne 
in fier the templis of the goddis of Egipt. 


CAP. XLIV. 


The word that was maad to Jeremye, | 
and to alle the Jewis, that dwelliden in 
the lond of Egipt, dwellinge in Magdalo, 
and in Taphnys, and in Memphis, and in 
the lond of Phatures, and seide, The Lord 2 
of oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
3e sient al this yuel, which Y brou3te on 
Jerusalem, and on alle the citees of Juda ; 
Sha kK. 


Gin to gE. r dwelleden £ pr. m. 


t saugen 1 passim. 


3LQ 


444 


of Juda; and lo! thei ben desert to dai, 
3and ther is not in hem a dwellere; for 
the malice that thei diden, that me to 
wrathe thei shulde terre, and gon, and 
sacrifien, and herien alien godus, that thei 
knewe not, and 3ee, ‘and thei", and 30ure 
4fadris. And Y sente to 30u alle my ser- 
uauns and profetus, fro ny3t risende’, and 
sendende, and seiende, Wileth not do the 
swrd of this maner abhominacioun. And 
thei herden not, ne boweden in ther ere, 
that thei were conuertid fro ther eueles, 
sand sacrifieden not to alien godis. And 
3ot” out is myn indignacioun and wod- 
nesse, and tend vp it is in the cytes of 
Juda, and in the stretus of Jerusalem ; 
and turned thei ben in to wildernesse, 
zand wastite, after this day. And now 
these thingus seith the Lord of ostus, God 
of Irael, Whi do 3ee* this grete euel ajen 
joure soulus, that die of 30u man and 
womman, litil child and soukende, fro 
the myddel of Jude, ne be laft to 3ou 
sany thing residue, terrende me im the 
werkes of 3oure hondus, in sacrifiende to 
aliene godus in the lond of Egipt, in to 
whiche 3ee ben come, that 3ee dwelle 
there, and pershe, and be in to cursing, 
and in to repref to alle Jentilis of erthe ? 
9Whether 3ee han for3ete the euelis of 
3oure fadris, and the euelis of the kingus 
of Juda, and the euelis of theY wyues of 
hem, and 3oure eueles, and the euelys of 
3oure wyues, that thei diden in the lond 
of Juda, and in the regiouns of Jerusa- 
1olem? Thei ben not elensid vnto? this 
day, and thei dredde not, and wente not 
in the lawe of the Lord, and in myn 
hestus, that Y 3af bifor 3ou, and_ bifor 
11 30ure fadris. Therfore these thingus seith 
the Lord of ostus, God of Irael, Lo! Y 
shal sette my face in 3ou in to euel, 
t2and destro3en al Juda, and take the rem- 
nauns of Juda, that setteden ther faces, 
that thei shulden go in to the lond of 
Egipt, and dwelle there; and thei shul 


u Om. acHK. YI risende x sec. m. AK. 


Utheris1. VY hem Nn, 


JEREMIAH. 


W 3o0ten E. 


W thei n. 


XLIV. 3—12. 


and.lo! tho ben forsakun to dai, and no 
dwellere is"in tho’; for the malice which 3 
thei diden, to terre me to wrathfulnesse, 
and that thei 3eden, and maden sacrifice, 
and worschipiden alien goddis, whiche 
thei knewen not, bothe 3e, and thei, and 
3oure fadris. And Y sente to 30u alle my 4 
seruauntis profetis; and Y roos bi ny3te, 
and sente, and seide, Nyle 3e do the word 
of sich abhomynacioun. And thei herdens 
not, nether bowiden doun her eere, that 
thei schulen be conuertid fro her yuels, 
and schulden not make sacrifice to alien 
goddis. And myn indignacioun and mys 
strong veniaunce is wellid togidere, and is 
kindlid in the citees of Juda, and in the 
stretis of Jerusalem ; and tho” ben turned 
in to wildirnesse, and wastnesse, bi this 
dai. And now the Lord of oostis, God of7 
Israel, seith these thingis, Whi doou 3e 
this greet yuel a3ens 3oure soulis, that a 
man of 30u perische and a womman a 
litil child and soukynge perische*, fro the 
myddis of Juda, nether ony residue thing 
be left in 30u, that terre me to wraththes 
bi the werkis of 30ure hondis, in makynge 
sacrifice to alien goddis in the lond of 
Egipt, in to which 3e entriden, that 3e 
dwelle there, and that 3e perische, and be 
in to cursyng, and in to schenschipe to 
alle the folkis of erthe? Whether 3e hano 
for3ete the yuels of 3oure fadris, and the 
yuels of the kingis of Juda, and the yuels 
of her wiues, and 3oure yuels, and the 
yuels of 3oure wyues, whiche thei diden 
in the lond of Juda, and in the cuntreis 
of Jerusalem? Thei ben not clensid ‘til1o 
toY this dai, and thei dredden not, and 
thei 3eden not in the lawe of the Lord, 
and in myn heestis, whiche Y 3af bifore 
3ou, and bifore 30ure fadris. Therfor thei 
Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith these 
thingis, Lo! Y schal sette my face in 3ou 
in to yuel, and Y schal leese al Juda, and 12 
Y schal take the remenauntis of Juda, that 
settiden her faces, to go in to the lond of 


x Om, £ pr.m. ¥ Om. 4. 2 in to a. 


xOm.1. Yvnto1. 


XLIV. 13-—20. 


be wastid alle in the lond of Egipt, ‘and 
thei shul falle in swerd*, and in hunger 
shul® be wastid, fro the leste ‘vn to® the 
meste, in swerd and in hunger thei shul 
die, and thei shul be in to ‘ri3t of swer- 
ing4, and in to myracle, and in to cursing, 
i3and in to repref. And Y shal visite vp on 
the dwelleres of the lond of Egipt, as Y 
visitede vp on Jerusalem, in swerd, and 
ishunger, and pestilence. And ther shal 
not be that scape, and be the residue of 
the remnaunt of Jewis, that gon that thei 
pilgrimage in the lond of Egipt, and be 
turned ajeen to the lond of Juda, to 
whiche thei reren vp ther soules, that 
thei be turned a3een, and dwelle there; 
thei shul not be turned ajeen thidur, no® 
isbut thei that floun. Answerendef for- 
sothe to Jeremye alle theé men, witende 
that ther" wyues shulden sacrifien to alien 
godus, and alle the wymmen, of whiche 
stod a gret multitude, and al the puple 
of dwelleris in the lond of Egipt, in Fa- 
16 tures, seiende, The wrd that thou speeke 
to vs in the name of the Lord oure God, 
17 wee shul not heren of thee, but doende 
wee shul do eche word that ‘shal gon! 
oute of oure mouth, that wee sacrifie to 
the queen of heuene, and offre to hir 
sacrifise of licoures, as diden wee, and 
oure fadris, oure* kingus, and oure princes, 
in the cheef cites! of Juda, and in the 
stretus of Jerusalem; and we weren ful- 
fild with loeves, and wel it was to vs, 
igand euel wee se3en not. Fro that forsothe 
tyme, that wee ceseden to sacrifien to the 
queen of heuene, and to offre to hir sa- 
crifises of lieoures, wee nededen alle 
thingus, and with swerd and hunger wee 
19ben wastid. That™ if wee saerifien to" 
the queen of heuene, and offre to hir 
sacrifises of licoures, whether withoute 
oure men°® wee shul do to hir plesaunt 
cakes, ‘for to herie? hir, and saerifises of 
20licoures to ben offred? And Jeremye 


bOm. £ prim. ¢ to aGnK. 
f Answerden &. 


m Om. c pr.m. 


8 Om. E prem. 
¢ Om. ¢ prim. £ prem. 
our AGHK. 1 cite K. 
heried c pr.m. £ pr.m. 


2 vnto 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


€ Om. c. 
1 not to E pr. m, 


® myracle, or wondir EPY. 


445 


Egipt, and to dwelle there; and alle schu- 
len be waastid in the lond of Egipt, thei 
sehulen falle doun bi swerd, and schulen 
be wastid in hungur, fro the leeste ‘til to’ 
the mooste, thei schulen die bi swerd and 
hungur, and schulen be in to swering, and 
in to myracle*, and in to eursyng, and in 
to schenschipe. And Y schal visite on the 13 
dwelleris of Egipt, as Y visitide on Jeru- 
salem, in swerd, and in hungur, and in 
pestilence. And noon schal® be, that schal 14 
ascape, and be residue of the remenauntis 
of Jewis, that goen to be pilgrimys in the 
lond of Egipt, and to turne ajen to the 
lond of Juda, to whieh thei reisen her 
soulis, that thei turne ajen, and dwelle 
there ; thei schulen not turne ajen thidir, 
noe but thei that fledden. Forsothe alleis 
men answeriden to Jeremye, and wisten, 
that her wynes maden sacrifice to alien 
goddis, and alle wymmen, of whieche a 
greet multitude stood, and alle the puple 
of dwelleris in the lond of Egipt, in Fa- 
tures, and seiden, We sehulen not here of 1% 
thee the word whieh thou spekist to vs 
in the naine of oure Lord God, but we1i7 
doynge schiilen do ech word that schal go 
out of oure mouth, that we make sacrifice 
to the queen of heuene, and that we offre 
to it moist sacrifices, as we diden, and oure 
fadris, oure kingis, and oure princes, in 
the citees of Juda, and in the stretis of 
Jerusalem; and we weren fillid with loones, 
and it was wel to vs, and we sien noon 
yuel. But fro that tyme, in which weia 
ceessiden to make sacrifice to the queen 
of heuene, and to offre to it moist sacri- 
fices, we hadden nede to alle thingis, and 
we weren wastid bi swerd and hungur. 
That if we maken sacrifiee to the queens 
of henene, and offren to it moist saerifices, 
whether withouten oure hosebondis we 
maden to it cakis, to worschipe it, and 
looues to be offrid? And Jeremye seide to 20 
al the puple, ajens the inen, and a3ens the 


4 swering of rizt 1c sce.m # sec. m. of rizt swering GH. 


igoth BE prem.  * and 


h thei shulde & pr. vice. 
P to ben 


© husbondis £ sec. m. AGIUK. 


b ther schal i. ¢ Om. 1. 


446 JEREMIAH. XLIV. 21-28. 


seide to al the puple, ajen’ the men, and 
a3en the wymmen, and ajen al the folc, 
that answereden to hym the wrd, seiende, 
21 Whether not the sacrifise that 3ee sacri- 
fieden in the cites of Juda, and in the 
stretus of Jerusalem, 3ee, and 3oure fadris, 
3oure’ kingus, and 3oure princes, and the 
puple of the lond, of these thingus re- 
cordide the Lord, and it stezede vp vpon 
22his herte; and the Lord my3te no mor 
bern, for the malice® of 3oure studies, and 
for the abhomynaciouns that 3ee diden ? 
And don is 3oure lond in to desolacioun, 
and in to stoneing, and in to cursing, 
for thi that ther is not a dwellere, as ys 
o3this dai. Therfore ‘fort 3ee sacrifieden" 
to maumetus, and synneden’ to the Lord, 
and 3ee herden not the vois of the Lord, 
and in the lawe, and hestus, and in his 
witnesses* 3ee han* not gon, therfore 
camen to 3ou these eueles, as is this dai. 
zi Jeremye forsothe seide to al the puple, 
and to alle the wymmen, Hereth the wrd 
of the Lord, al Juda, that ben in the lond 
2,0f Egipt. These thingus seith the Lord 
of ostus, God of Irael, seiende, 3ee and 
3oure wyues speeken with 3oure mouth, 
and with 3oure hondus fulfilden, seiende, 
Do wee oure vouwis that wee vouweden, 
that wee sacrifie to the quen of heuene, 
and offre to hir sacryfises of licoures ; 
3ee han fulfild 3oure vouwis, and in werc 
263ee han do them. Therfore hereth the 
wrd of the Lord, al Juda, that dwellen in 
the lond of Egipt; Lo! Y swor in my 
gret name, seith the Lord, for no mor 
shal be clepid my name of the mouth of 
eche man Jew, seiende, The Lord God 
27 lyueth, in the lond of Egipt. Lo! Y shal 
waken vp on hem in to euel, and not in 
to good; and to-wastid shul ben alle the 
inen of Juda, that ben in the lond of 
Egipt, with swerd and hungur, to the 
23tyme that fulli thei ben wastid. And 
they’ that shul flee swerd, shul turne 
a3een fro the lond of Egipt.in to the lond 


Vand agen Epr.m. ‘and 3ourec. $ malices a. 
‘ syune E pr.m. W® witnessyngis 4. * Om. E pr. m. 


wymmen, and ajens al‘ the puple, that an- 
sweriden to hym the word, and he seide, 
Whether not the sacrifice® which 3e sacri-2) 
fisiden in the citees of Juda, and in the 
stretis of Jerusalem, 3e, and 3oure fadris, 
3oure kyngis, and 3oure princes, and the 
puple of the lond, ferriden God to ven- 
zaunce ? The Lord hadde mynde on these 
thingis, and it stiede on his herte; and 22 
the Lord my3te no more bere, for the 
malice of 3oure studies, and for abhomy- 
naciouns whiche 3e diden. And 3oure lond 
is maad in to desolacioun, and in to won- 
dryng, and in to curs, for no dwellere is, 
as this dai is. Therfor for 3e maden sacri- 23 
fice to idols, and synneden to the Lord, 
and herden not the vois® of the Lord, and 
jeden not in the lawe, and in the co- 
mandementis, and in the witnessis of 
hym, therfor these yuels bifellen to 3ou, 
as this dai is. Forsothe Jeremye seide to 24 
al the puple, and to alle the wymmen, Al 
Juda, that ben in the lond of Egipt, here 
3e the word of: the Lord. The Lord ofes 
oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
and spekith, 3e and 3oure wyues spaken 
with 3oure mouth, and filliden with 3oure 
hondis, and seiden, Make we oure vowis 
whiche we vowiden, that we make sacri- 
fice to the queen of heuene, and offre to 
it moist sacrifices; 3e filliden 3oure vowis, 
and diden tho in werk. Therfor, al Juda, 2¢ 
that dwellen in the lond of Egipt, here 3e 
the word of the Lord; Lo! Y swoor in my 
greet name, seith the Lord, that my name 
schal no more be clepid bi the mouth of 
ech man Jew, seiynge, The Lord God 
lyueth, in al the lond of Egipt. Lo! Yo7 
schal wake on hem in to yuel, and not in 
to good; and alle the men of Juda, that 
ben in the lond of Egipt, schulen be 
waastid, bi swerd and hungur, til thei be 
wastid outerli. And a fewe men that fled-2s 
den the swerd, schulen turne a3en fro the 
lond of Egipt in to the lond of Juda; and 
alle the remenauntis of Juda, of hem that 


t for that x. ‘Ut that 3ee shulde sacrifie £ pr. m. 
y Om. E pr. m. 


4Om.nx. €sacreficess. f the abhomynaciouns 1. & word n. 


XLIV. 29—XLVI. 2. 


of Juda, fewe men; and wite shul al the 
remnaunt of Juda, of the men goende in 
to the lond of Egipt, that thei dwelle 
there, whos sermoun be fulfild, myn or 

2otheris. And this to 3ou a tocne, seith 
the Lord, that Y visite vp on 3ou in this 
place, that 3ee wite, for verrely shul be 
fulfild my wrdus ajen 30u in to euel. 

30 These thingus seith the Lord, Lo! Y shal 
take Farao, king of Egipt, in the hond 
of his enemys, and in the hond of men 
sechende the soule of hym, as Y toc Sede- 
chie, king of Juda, in the hond of Nabu- 
godonosor, king of Babiloyne, his enemy, 
and sechende his soule?. 


¢ Gude Pn LN, 


1 The wrd that spac Jeremye, the pro- 
fete, to Baruch, the sone of Neri, whan 
he hadde write these wrdus in the boc, of 
the mouth of Jeremye, the ferthe jer of 
Joachym, sone of Josie, king of Juda, 

2seiende, These thingus seith the Lord 

3God of Irael to thee, Baruch. Thou seid- 
ist, Wo to me wrecche, for addid hath 
the Lord sorewe to my sorewe; I tra- 
uailede in my weiling, and reste Y fond 

4not. These thingus seith the Lord, Thus 
thou shalt sei to hym, Lo! whom Y bild- 
ide*, Y destro3e, and whom Y plauntede, 

5Y pulle vp, and al this lond. Aud thou 
sechest to thee grete thingus; wile thou 
not seche, for lo! Y shal bringe euel vp 
on eche flesh, seith the Lord, and Y shal 
3yue to thee thi soule in to hele, in alle 
places, to whiche euer thou shalt go. 


CAP. XLVI. 


1 The? wrd of the Lord ‘that is do® to 
2Jeremye, profete, ajen Jentiles ; to Egipt, 
az3en the ost of Farao Nechao, king of 
Egipt, that was biside the flod of Eufra- 
ten, in Carkainys, whom smot Nabugo- 
donosor, king of Babiloyne, in the ferthe 
3er of Joachym, sone of Josie, king of 


2 soule, or lijf acuK. soule, or his lyf £ sec.m. 


h Om. 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


a bilde «. 


447 


entren in to the lond of Egipt, to dwelle 
there, schulen wite, whos word schal be 
fillid, myn ether hern. And this schal be 29 
a signe to 30u, seith the Lord, that Y schal 
visite on jou in this place, that 3e wite, 
that verili my wordis schulen be fillid 
a3ens 30u in to yuel. The Lord seith these 30 
thingis, Lo! Y schal bitake Farao, the kyng 
of Egipt, in to the hond of hise enemyes, 
and in to the hond of hem that seken his 
lijf, as Y bitook Sedechie, the’ kyng of 
Juda, in to the hond of Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, his enemye, and sek- 
ynge his lijf. 


CAP. XLV. 


The word that Jeremye, the profete,i 
spak to Baruc, the sone of Nerie, whanne 
he hadde write these wordis in the book, 
of the mouth of Jeremye, in the fourthe 
3eer of Joachym, the sone of Josie, kyng 
of Juda, and seide, The Lord God of Israel 2 
seith these thingis to thee, Baruc. Thou3 
seidist, Wo to me wretche, for the Lord 
encreesside sorewe to my sorewe; Y tra- 
uelide in ty weilyng, and Y foond not 
reste. The Lord seith these thingis, Thus 4 
thou schalt seye. to hym, Lo! Y distrie 
hem, whiche Y bildide, and Y drawe out 
hem, whiche Y plauntide, and al this lond. 
And sekist thou grete thingis to thee? nyles 
thou seke, for lo! Y schal brynge yuel on 
ech man, seith the Lord, and Y schal 3yue 
to thee thi lijf in to helthe, in alle places, 
to whiche euer places thou schalt go. 


CAP. XLVI. 


The word of the Lord, that was maad1 
to Jeremye, the profete, a3ens hethene 
men ; to Egipt, ajens the oost of Farao2 
Nechao, kyng of Egipt, that was bisidis 
the flood Eufrates, in Charchamys, whom 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, smoot, 
in the fourthe 3eer of Joachym, sone of 


¢ Om. E pr.m. 


b That don is the # prom. 


10m. x, 


448 


3Juda. Greitheth sheeld and target, and 
4goth forth to bataile. Ioyneth hors, and 
stezeth vp, 3ee hors men; stondeth in 
helmes, pulsheth speres, clotheth 3ou with 
shabiriownus. What thanne? I sa3 hem 
ferd, and the backes turnende, the’ stronge 
men of hem hewen doun; and thei floun 
togidere hastid, ne thei beheelden; ferd on 
seche syde, seith the Lord. Flee shal not 
the swifte, ne the stronge weene hymself 
to be saued; to the north, biside the 
flod of Eufraten, thei ben ouercome, and 
7felden® doun’. Who is this, that as the 
flod ste3eth vp, and as of flodis swellen 
shis swolewis? Egipt at licnesse’ of a flod 
stejeth vp, and as flodus shul be moued 
his flowingus ; and ‘he shal” sey, Stezende 
vp Y shal ‘conere the erthe! destro3e cite’, 
gand his dwelleres. Ste3eth vp hors, and 
ful out io3e thin chares; and go forth, 
stronge men, Ethiope and Libie, holdende 
sheeld, and Liddy,.takende and throwende 
ioarwis. That dai forsothe of the Lord 
God of ostus, dai of veniaunce, that he 
take veniaunce of his enemys; deuouren 
shal the swerd, and be fulfild, and be to- 
drunke with the! blod of hem™; victorie® 
sacrifise forsothe of the Lord of ostus in 
the lond of the north, biside the flod of 
11 Eufraten. Ste3e° vp in to Galaad, and tac 
the gumme, that is clepid recyne, thou 
maiden do3ter of Egipt. In veyn thou 
hast multeplied medecynes; helthe shal 
12not be to thee. Herden Jentiles thi shen- 
shepe, and thi 3ellinge fulfilde the erthe ; 
for? the stronge man putte a3en the 
stronge man, and bothe togidere fellen. 
13'The wrd that the Lord spac to Jeremye, 
the profete, vp on that that to come was 
Nabugodonosor, king of Babyloyne, and 
l4to smyte the lond of Egipt. Telleth to 
Egipt, and herd maketh in Magdalo, and 
eft sowne it1in Memfys, and in Tapnys 
seith, Stond, and greithe thee, for de- 


“andthe az pr.m. © fellen x prem. 


"Om.cpr.m. © Steieth 4. Pand prem. 


« helines, ether basynelis CBFGHKMNPQRSUVX. 
” stie up 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


f Om, AEGHK. 
couerende erthe £ pr.m. coueren erthe E sec. m. G pr.m. AK. 
4 Om. E prem 


ldredeful, ether aferd CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVE. 


XLVI. 318 


Josie, kyng of Juda. Make 3e redi scheelds 
and targat, and go 3e forth to batel. Ioyne4 
3e horsis, and stie, 3e kny3tis; stonde 3e in 
helmes*, polische 3e speris, clothe 3e 3ou 
in haburiowns. What therfor? Y si3 hems 
dredeful', and turnynge the backis, the 
stronge men of hem slayn; and thei fled- 
den swiftli. and bihelden not; drede was 
on ech side, seith the Lord. A swift mane 
scha] not fle, and a strong man gesse not 
hym silf to be saned; at the north, bisidis 
the flood Eufrates, thei weren over comun, 
and fellen doun. Who is this, that stieth7 
as a flood, and hise swelewis wexen greet 
as of floodis? Egipte stiede at the Jic-8 
nesse of a flood, and hise wawis schulen 
be mouyd as floodis; and it schal seie, Y 
schal stie, and hile the erthe; Y schal leese 
the citee, and dwelleris therof. Stie 3e9 
on™ horsis, and make 3e ful out ioie in — 
charis; and stronge men, come forth, E- 
thiopie and Libie, holdynge scheeld, and 
Lidii, takynge and schetynge arowis. For-10 
sothe that dai of the Lord God of ocostis 
as a dai of veniaunce, that he take ven- 
iaunce of hise enemyes; the swerd schal 
deuoure, and schal be fillid, and schal 
greetli be fillid with the blood of hem; 
for whi the slayn sacrifice of the Lord of 
oostis 7s in the lond of the north, bisidis 
the flood Eufrates. Thou virgyn, the dou3-11 
ter of Egipt, stie" in to Galaad, and take 
medicyn. In veyn thou schalt multiplie 
medecyns ; helthe schal not be to thee. 
Hethene men herden thi schenschipe, and 12 
thi 3ellyng fillide the erthe; for a strong 
man hurtlide a3ens a strong man, and 
bothe fellen doun togidere. The word 13 
which the Lord spak to Jeremye, the pro- 


‘fete, on that that Nabugodonosor, kyng 


of Babiloyne, was to comynge, and to 
smytynge the lond of Egipt. Telle 3e to14 
Egipt, and make 3e herd in Magdalo, and 
sowne it in Memphis, and seie 3e in Taph- 


® the lickenes x. 


h Om. £ pr.m. 
k citees 4. 


i steze, 
10m. 4GH. 


mmen 4AGHK. 


m upon tI. 


XLVI. 15——27. 


uoure shal swerd tho thingus that in™ 
isthin enuyroun ben. Whi ‘to-rotide® thi 
stronge'? He stod not, for the Lord 
isturnede hym vp so doun. He multe- 
pliede men fallende, and the ian fel to 
his ne3hebore; and thei shul seyn, Ris“, 
and turne wee a3een to oure puple, and 
to the lond of oure birthe, fro the face 
170f the swerd of the culuer. Clepeth the 
name of Farao, king of Egipt; tyme" 
ishath bro3t noise. I lyue, seith the king, 
Lord of ostus his name; for as Thabor 
in mounteynes, and as Carmel in the se, 
i9he shal come. Vesseles of transmygra- 
cioun mac to thee, thou dwelleresse, do3- 
ter of Egipt; for Memfys in wildernesse 
shal ben, and be forsoken and vnhabit- 
2oable’. The she calf fair and shapli Egipt; 
the priekere fro the north shal come to 
2ihir¥. Also his hirid men, that woneden* 
in his myddel as fattyd calues, ben turn- 


ed, and floun togidere, ne my3te stonde; - 


for the dai of the sla3ter of them shal 
come vp on hem, tyme of ther visiting. 
22 His vois as of bras shal sowne, for with 
the ost thei shul go forth, and with axes 
thei shul come to hym. As fallende doun 
e3trees thei heeweY doun his wilde wode, 
seith the Lord, that mai not be noum- 
bred; they ben multeplied aboue locustus, 
21and ther is not in them noumbre. Con- 
foundid is the do3ter of Egipt, and take 
in the hond of the puple of the north, 
25 seide the Lord of ostus, God of Irael. Lo! 
Y shal visite ‘vp on’ the noise of Alisaun- 
dre, and vp on Farao, and vp on Egipt, 
and vp on his godus, and vp on his kinges, 
ac¢and vp on hem that trosten in hym. And 
Y shal 3yuen hem in* the hond of men 
seehende the lif of hem, and in to the 
hondus of Nabugodonosor, king of Babi- 
loyne, and in to the hondus of his ser- 
uauns; and after these thingus it shal 
be dwellid, as in the rathere dajes, seith 
27the Lord. And thou, my seruaunt Jaeob, 
ne drede thou, ne take ferd, thou Irael ; 


JEREMIAH. 


449 


nys, Stonde thou, and make thee redi, for 
a swerd schal deuoure tho thingis that 
ben bi thi cumpas. Whi hath thi strong 15 
man wexe rotun? He stood not, for the 
Lord vndurturnede hym. He inultipliede 16 
falleris, and a man felle doun to his nei3- 
bore; and thei schulen seie, Rise 3e, and 
turne we ajen to ouwre puple, and-to the 
lond of oure birthe, fro the face of swerd 
of the culuer. Clepe 3e the name of Farao, 17 
kyng of Egipt; the tyme hath brou3t 
noise. Y lyue, seith the kyng, the Lord 1s 
of oostis 7s his name; for it sehal come 
as Thabor in hillis, and as Carmele in the 
see. Thou dwelleresse®, the? don3ter of 19 
Egipt, make to thee vessels of passyng 
ouer ; for whi Memfis sehal be in to wil- 
dirnesse, and sehal4 be forsakun vuhabit- 
able. Egipt 7s a schapli cow calf, and fair; 20 
a prickere fro the north schal come to it. 
Also the hirid men therof, that liueden as 2) 
caluys maad fatte in the myddis therof, 
ben turned, and fledden togidere, and 
mi;ten not stonde; for the dai of sleynge 
of hein schal come on hem, the tyme of 
the’ visityng of hem. -The vois of hem 22 
sehal sowne as of bras, for thei schulen 
haste with oost, and with axis thei schulen 
come to it. As men kittynge doun trees 
thei kittiden doun the forest therof, seith 23 
the Lord, which mai not be noumbrid ; 
thei ben multiplied ouer locustis, and no 
noumbre is in hem. The dou3tir of Egipt 24 
is schent, and bitakuu in to the hond of 
the puple of the north, seide the Lord of25 
oostis, God of Israel. Lo! Y schal visite 
on the noise of Alisaundre, and on Farao, 
and on Egipt, and on the goddis therof, 
and on the kyngis therof, and on hein 
that tristen in hym. And Y sehal 3yne26 
hem in to the hondis of men that seken 
the lijf of hem, and in to the hondis of 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, and 
in to* the hondis of hise seruauntis ; and, 
aftir these thingis it schal be enhabitid, 
as in the formere daies, seith the Lord. 


T bi se sec.m. K sec.m. *® to-stank epr.m. t stronge man Gsec.m. tt Rijse we K prim. ¥ and tyme 4. 


Vv ynhabitable shal ben £ pr.m. W thee £ pr.m. 


© dwellere c. dwelstere 1. 
VOL. Il. 


x moueden 4. 


P thou Gc. 
3M 


yheweden 4. 7 vp. into Gi. 


ait schali, ‘Om. 1 § Om, N. 


450 


for lo! Y saaf shal make thee fro aferr’, 
and thie sed fro the lond of his caitifte ; 
and turnen aj3een shal Jacob, and resten, 
and be mad welsum, and ther shal not 

28 ben, that fere hym. And wile thou not 
drede, thou my seruaunt Jacob, seith the 
Lord, for Y am with thee; for’ Y shal 
‘waste alle Jentiles, to whiche I caste thee 
out; thee forsothe I shal not waste, but 
Y shal chastise thee in dom, ne as to an 
ynnocent Y shal sparen to thee. 


CAP. XLVII. 


1 ‘That don is the wrd of the Lord to 
Jeremye, profete, a3en Palestynus, er Fa- 
2rao shulde smyte Gasam. These thingus 
seith the Lord, Lo! watris shul ste3en 
vp fro the north, and ben shul as a styff¢ 
strem flowende, and couere shul the lond, 
and his plente, the chef citef and his 
dwelleris. Crie shul men, and 3elle sliul 
3alle the dwelleris of the lond, fro& the 
noise of the bost of the armede men, aud 
of his fi3teres, and fro the stiring of his 
foure horsid carres, and fro the multi- 
tude of his whelis. Beheelden" not the 
fadris the sonus with hondus losid a- 
4twynne, for the comyng of the dai in 
whiche shul be wastid alle Filisteis ; and 
ben scatered Tirus and Sidon, with alle 
his othere helpes'. The Lord forsothe 
destro3ede Palestynes, the remnauns* of 
athe yle of Capadoche. Ther cam ballid- 
nesse vp on Gasam ; al stille was Ascalon, 
and the remnauns of the valei of hein. 
Hou longe thou shalt be throwe doun, 
6O! thou swerd of the Lord, hou longe 
shalt thou not reste? Go in to thi shethe, 
7be thou refreshid, and be stille. What 
maner shal it reste, whan the Lord shal 
comaunde to it a3en Ascalon, and ajen 
his regiouns ny3 the se, and there he 
shal withsei! to it ? 


JEREMIAH. 


XLVI. 28—XLVII. 7. 


And thou, Jacob, my seruaunt, drede thou 27 
not, and Israel, drede thou not; for lo! 
Y schal make thee saaf fro fer place, and 
thi seed fro the lond of his caitiftee; and 
Jacob schal turne ajen, and schal reste, 
and schal haue prosperite, and noon schal 
be, that schal make hym aferd. And Ja-28 
cob, my seruaunt, nyle thou drede, seith 
the Lord, for Y am with thee; for Y schal 
waste alle folkis, to whiche Y castide thee 
out; but Y schal not waste thee, but Y 
schal chastise thee in doom, and Y schal 
not spare thee as innocent. 


CAP. XLVII. 


The word of the Lord, that was maad1 
to Jeremye, the profete, ajens Palestyns, 
bifor that Farao smoot Gaza. The Lordz 
seith these thingis, Lo! watris schulen stie 
fro the north, and thot schulen be as a 
stronde flowynge, and thot schulen hile 
the lond, and the fulnesse therof, the citee, 
and the dwelleris therof. Men schulen crie, 
and alle the dwelleris of the lond schulen 
3elle, for the noise of boost of armed men, 3 
and of werriours of hyin, and for mou- 
yng of hise cartis, and multitude of hise 
wheelis. Fadris bihelden not sones with 
clumsid hondis, for the’ comyng of thea 
dai in which alle Filisteis schulen be de- 
stried; and Tirus schal be destried, and 
Sidon with alle her othere helpis. For the 
Lord hath destried Palestyns, the reme- 
nauntis of the ile of Capadocie. Ballid-s 
nesse cam on Gaza; Ascolon was stille, 
and the remenauntis of the valei of tho’. 
Hou louge schalt thou falle doun, O's 
swerd of the Lord, hou long schalt thou 
not reste? Entre thou in to thi schiethe, 
be thou refreischid, and be stille. Hou7 
schal it reste, whanne the Lord comaund- 
ide to it ajens Ascalon, aud ajens the see 
coostis therof, and there hath seide to it? 


bfer acux. Chis acuK. ‘and £ pr.m. 44 The word of the Lord that is don 4c. © stem c pr. m. 
fcitees 4. & for ack. 4 and beheelden x. ‘helpers 4. ‘ remnaunt 4. ! comaunde E pr. m. 
tthein. UOm.1. Vhemn. WA! CEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


XLVI. i—13. 


CAP. XLVIII. 


1 To Moab these thingus seith the Lord 
of ostus, God of Jrael. Wo vp on Nabo, for 
wastid she is, and confoundid; taken is 
Cariathiarym, confoundid is the stronge, 

gand tremblede™; and ther is no mor ful 
out io3ing in Moab, a3en Esebon thei 
tho3ten evel. Cometh, and scatere wee it 
fro the fole of kynde. Therfore stille thou 
shalt be stille, and swerd shal folewe thee; 

3vois of the cry fro Oronaym, wastite, and 
agret to-treding. To-treden is Moab, tell- 
seth out the" cry to his litil childer. Bi 
the ste3ing vp forsothe Luyth wepende® 
ste3ede vp in? weping, for in the going 
doun of Oronaym the enemys the 3elling 
eof to-treding herden. Fleeth, saueth4 


3oure soulis; and 3ee shul be as ‘iencian. 


7trees’ in desert; for thi forsothe that 
thous haddet trost in thi" strengthingus, 
and in thi tresores, thou also shalt ben 
take. And Camos shal go in to transmy- 
gracioun, his prestus and his princes to- 
sgidere; and the robbere shal come to 
eche cheef cite, and no cheef cyte shal 
be saued; and pershen shul valeys, and 
wastid shul be wilde feldis, for the Lord 
gseyde. 3yueth flour to Moab, for flour- 
ende he shal gon out; and his cites shul 
10 be desert, and vnhabitable. Cursid that 
doth the were of God” gilendeli; and 
cursid, that forfendeth his swerd fro blod, 
11 or repreuynge of synne*. Fructuous was 
Moab fro his waxende 3outhe, and he 
restede in his drestis’, ne is ouerheld fro 
vessel in to vessel, and ‘in to” transmy- 
gracioun he 3ide not ; therfore abod stille 
his tast in hym, and his smel is not 
izchaungid. Therfore lo! dajes comen, 
seith the Lord, and Y shal sende to hym 
ordeyneres, and araieres of litle wyn ves- 
selus; and thei shul araien hym, aud his 
vesseles heelden out, and the litil wyn 
isvesselis of hem hurtlen togidere. And 


JEREMIAH. 451 


CAP. XLVIII. 


To Moab the Lord of oostis, God of1 
Israel, seith these thingis. Wo on Nabo, 
for it is destried, and schent; Cariathia- 
ryin is takun, the stronge cite is schent, 
and tremblide. And ful out ioiyng is noz 
more in Moab, thei thou3ten yuel a3ens 
Esebon. Come 3e, and leese we it fro folk. 
Therfor thou beynge stille, schalt be stille, 
and swerd schal sue thee. A vois of crys 
fro Oronaym, distriynge, and greet sorewe. 
Moab is defoulid, telle 3e cry to litil chil-4 
dren therof. For a man wepynge stiedes 
with wepyng bi the stiyng of Luyth, for 
in the comyng doun of Orunaym enemyes 
herden the 3ellyng of sorewe. Fle 3e, saue6é 
3e 3oure lyues; and 3e schulen be as bromes 
in desert. For that that thou haddist trist 7 
in thi strengthis, and in thi tresouris, also 
thou schalt be takun. And Chamos schal 
go in to passyng ouer, the preestis therof 
and the princes therof togidere. And as 
robbere schal come to ech citee, and no 
citee schal be sanyd; and valeis schulen 
perische, and feeldi places schulen be dis- 
tried, for the Lord seide. 3yue je the flours 
of Moab, for it schal go out flourynge; 
and the citees ‘therof schulen be forsakun, 
and vuhabitable. He zs cursid, that doith 10 
the werk of God gilefuli; and de zs cursid, 
that forbedith his swerd* fro bloodt. Moab 11 * ewerd; that 
was plenteuouse fro his jong wexynge age, Se 
and restide in hise drastis, nether was ra ee = 
sched out fro vessel in to vessel, and j3ede sy". v- 
not in to passyng ouer; therfor his taaste 
dwellide in hym, and his odour is not 
chaungid. Therfor lo! daies comun, seith 12 
the Lord, and Y schal sende to it ordeyn- 
ours, and arayeris of potels; and thei 
schulen araye it, and thei schulen waste 
the vessels therof, and hurtle togidere the 
potels of hem. And Moab schal be schent 13 
of Chamos, as the hous of Israel was 
schent of Bethel, in which it hadde trist. 


™ troblid 4. 2 Om. £ pr.m. © Om. au. °° stiynge 4G pr.m.K. P Om. 4G pr.m. xk. into G sec. m. 


q and saueth £ pr. m. 
hadden c pr.m. 4 30ure c pr. m. E pr. m. 
Y wombe frutus c pr.m.Epr.m. in the E pr.m. 


¥ brome AGiK. broom trees E sec. m. 
w the Lord 4. the God c¢ sup. ras. 


t haddest £ pr. m. AGH. 


§3ee Cpr.m,. Epr.m. 
xOm. c et E prom. 


3M 2 


452 


confoundid shal be Moab fro Camos, as con- 
foundid is the hous of Irael of * Bethel, in 
14 whiche it hadde trost. What maner sey 
3ee, Stronge men wee ben, and stalwrthe 
ismen to fi3te? Wastid is Moab, and his 
cites thei brenden vp, and hys chosen 
junge mien wente doun ia to sla3ter, seith 
isthe king, Lord of ostus his name. Ny3 
is the deth of Moab, that it come, and his 
17euel swiftli cometh ny3 ful myche. Coum- 
forteth hym, alle 3ee that ben in his eum- 
pas; alle 3ee that witen his name, seith, 
What maner is to-broke the stronge jerde, 
18 the glorious staf? Cun doun fro glorie, 
sit in thrist, thou dwelling of the do3ter 
of Dibon ; for the wastere of » Moab shal 
steze vp to thee, shal¢ scatere thi strength- 
wingus’. In the weie stond, and bihold 
thou the dwelling of Aroer; aske hyin 
20 fleende that scapede; sei, What fel? Con- 
foundid is Moab, for he is ouercome®; 
3elleth, and crieth ; telleth in Arnon, for 
21 wastid is Moab. And dom eam to thef feldi 
lond, vp on Elon, and vp on Jesa, and 
22vp on Mefath, and vp on Dibon, and vp 
on Nabo, and vp on the hous of Debal- 
23thaym, and vp on Cariathiarym, and vp 
2100 Bethgamul, and vp on Bethmaon, and 
vp on Searioth, and vp on Bosra, and 
vp on alle the cites of the lond of Moab, 
asthat aferr and that ny3 ben. Kut awei 
is the horn of Moab, and his armes to- 
26 brosid, seith the Lord. Drunkneth hym 
with the ehalus of the wrathe of the 
Lord, for a3en the Lord he is rered out ; 
and he shal hurtle the hond of Moab in 
his vomyng, and be shal in to seornyng? 
gz7and he. Forsothe he was in to seorn- 
yng to thee, Irael, as among thenes thou 
shuldist han founde hym; therfore for 
thi wrdus that a3en hym thou speeke, 
eseaitif thou art Jad. lLefeth cites, and 
dwelleth in a ston, 3ee dwelleris of Moab, 
and beth as a culuer bildende in the 
og ouerest mouth of the hole. Wee han 


a fro AGK. > Om. £ prim. 
& stoneing c pr.m. 


€ and shal a. 


x ond a pr. m. CEFGHMNPQRSVX. 


JEREMIAH. 


XLVIII. 14—29. 


Hou seien 3e, We ben stronge, and stal-14 
worthe men to fiz3te? Moab is distried, 1s 
and thei han brent the citees therof, and 
the chosun 3onge men therof 3eden doun 
in to sleynge, seith the kyng, the Lord of 
oostis is his name. The perischyng of16 
Moab is ny3, that it come, and the yuel 
therof renneth ful swiftli. Alle 3e that 17 
ben in the cumpas therof, coumforte it ; 
and alle 3e that knowen the name therof, 
seie, Hou is the stronge 3erde brokun, the 
gloriouse staaf? Thou dwellyng of the 18 
dou3tir of Dibon, go doun fro glorie, sitte 
thou in thirst; for the distriere of Moab 
schal stie to thee, and he schal destrie 
thi strengthis. Thou dwellyng of Aroer, !9 
stonde in the weie, and biholde; axe thou 
hym that fleeth, and hym that aseapide; 
seie thou, What bifelle? Moab is schent, 2° 
for he is ouercomun ; 3elle 3e, and crye; 
telle 3e in Arnon, that Moab is destried. 
And doom is comun to the lond of the?! 
feeld, on Elon, and on Jesa, and on Me- 
phat, and on Dibon, arid on Nabo, and on 22 
the hous of Debalthaym, and on Cariathia- 23 
rym, and on Bethgamul, and on Beth- 
maon, and on Scarioth, and on Bosra, and 24 
on alle the citees of the lond of Moab, that 
ben fer, and that ben ni3. The horn of25 
Moab is kit awei, and the arm therof 7s 
al to-brokun, seith the Lord. Fille 3e him 26 
greetli, for he is reisid a3ens the Lord; 
and he schal hurtle doun the hond* of 
Moab in his spuyng, and he also selial be 
in to scorn. For whi, Israel, he was in to 27 
scorn to thee, as if thou haddist founde 
hym among theues; therfor for thi wordis 
whiche thou spakist a3ens hym, thou sehalt 
be led prisoner. 3e dwelleris of Moab, for- 28 
sakeY citees, and dwelle” in the stoon, and 
be 3e as a culuer makynge nest in the 
hizeste mouth of an hool. We han herd 29 
the pride of Moab; he is ful proud. -Y 30 
knowe, seith the Lord, the hijnesse therof, 
and pride in word, and pride in beryng, 
4 strengthis 17. 


© bounden £ pr.m. f Om. c. 


Y forsaketh 1. 2 dwelle ge 1. 


XLVIN. 30—41. 


herd the pride of Moab; proud ‘he is 
gretli; his hei3te forsothe, and his owne 
enhaunsyng, and pride, and the hei3te 
300f his herte, Y wot, seith the Lord; his 
bost, and his owne enhauncing, and thati 
ther is not biside it his vertue, ne* after 
31 that he my3te, it! foreede to do. Therfore 
vp on Moab I shal weile™, and to al Moab 


Y shal crien, to the men of the britil wal _ 


32 weilende. Of the weiling of Jaser Y shal 
wepe to thee, thou vyne of Sabama®; thi 
railingus passeden the se; vn to the se of 
Jaser thei ful camen vp on thi rep, and 

33 thi vyndage thi renere fel. Don awei is 
ful out io3ing and glading fro? Carmel, 
and fro the lond of Moab, and wyn fro 
the presses Y toc doun; the tredere of the 
grape the wont myrie song shal not 

sisynge. Of the cri of? Esebon vnto 
Eleale and JeesaPP 3eeuen ther vois, fro 
Segor vnto Oronaym the4 stoneid she’ 
calf; the watris forsothe of Nemrym 

35shul be werst. And Y shal take awey fro 
Moab, seith the Lord, the offrende in 
heeje thingus, and the sacrifiende to* his 
sé6godus. Therfore myn herte to Moab as 
a trumpe of bras shal sowne, and myu 
herte to the men of the tilit wal shal 
3yue soun of trumpis; for more he dide 
than he my3te, therfore thei persheden. 

37 Eche forsothe hed ballidnesse, and eche 
berd shauen shal be; in alle hondus the 
binding" togidere, and vp on eche bac 

38heire. And vp on alle the rooues of 
Moab, and in alle his stretus alle weil- 
ing, for he to-brosede Moab as a vessel 

39vuprofetable, seith the Lord. What 
maner she is ouer come, and thei 3ell- 
eden? hou Moab thre3 doun the noll, and 
is confoundid? And Moab shal be in to 
scornyng, and in to exsaumple’ to alle 
4omen in his cumpas. These thingus seith 
the Lord, Lo! as an egle he shall fleen 
out, and strecchen out his wengus to 
41 Moab. Taken is Carioth, and strength- 


i Om. acne. 
pp Leesa c. 
Vejen E pr.m. 


h thou art £ pr.m. 
Sof kK. P Om. 4EGK. 
toEpr.m. ttilid c pr.v. 


k and ne £ pr. m. 
4 and the E pr. m. 
Vv ensample G. 


JEREMIAH. 453 


and the hijnesse of herte, and the boost 
therof, and that the vertu therof is not 
ni3, ethir lik it, nethir it euforside to do 
bi® that that it mi3te. Therfor Y schals 
weile on Moab, aud Y schal crie to al 
Moab, to the men of the erthene wal, that 
weilen. Of the weilyng of Jaser Y schals2 
wepe to thee, thou vyner of Sabama; thi 
siouns passiden the see, tho camen ‘til to” 
the see of Jazer; a robbere felle in on thi 
ripe corn, and on thi vyndage. Ful outs 
ioye and gladnesse is takun awei fro Car- 
mele, and fro the lond of Moab, and Y 
haue take awei wyn fro pressouris; a 
stampere of grape schal not synge a cus- 
tomable myri song. Of the cry of Esebon 34 
‘til tot Eleale and Jesa thei 3auen her vois, 
fro Segor ‘til to® Oronaym a cow calf of 
thre 3eer ; forsothe the watris of Nemryin 
schulen be ful yuele. And Y schal take3s 
awei fro Moab, seith the Lord, him that 
offrith in hi3 places, and. him that makith 
sacrifice to the goddis therof. Therfor 36 
myn herte schal sowne as a pipe of bras 
to Moab, and myn herte schal 3yue sown 
of pipis to the men of the erthene wal; for 
it dide more than it my3te, therfor thei 
perischiden. For whi ech heed schal be37 
ballidnesse, and ech beerd schal be scha- 
uun; in alle hondis schal be bindyng to- 
gidere, and an heir schal be on ech bak. 
And al weilyng schal be on alle the roouys3s 
of Moab, and in the.stretis therof, for Y 
haue al to-broke Moab as an vnprofitable 
vessel, seith the Lord. Hou is it ouer-39 
comun, and thei jelliden¢? hou hath Moab 
cast doun the nol, and is schent? And Moab 
schal be in to seorn, and in to ensaumple 
to alle men in his cumpas. The Lord 40 
seith these thingis, Lo! as an egle he 
schal fle out, and he sehal stretche forth 
hise wyngis to Moab. Carioth is takun, 4! 
and stronge holdis ben takun; and the 
herte of stronge men of Moab schal be in . 
that dai, as the herte of a womman trauel- 


n Gabama 4GHK. 


The nw.) ™ wake E pr. m. 
8 in hethingus 


tT destrozende she £ pr, m. 


aaftir1. bvnto1 ¢vntor 4 3eldiden n. 


454 


ingus ben ca3te; and ben shal the herte 
of stronge men in that dai, as the herte 
of a womman trauailende with child. 
42 And cese shal Moab to ben a puple, for 
43a3en the Lord it gloriede. Inward ferd, 
and dich, and grene vp on thee, O! dwell- 
44ere of Moab, seith the Lord. Who shal 
flee fro the face of the ferd, shal falle in 
to the dich; and who shul ste3e vp fro 
the dich, shul be take with grene. Y 
shal bringe to forsothe vp on Moab the 
3er of visiting” of hem, seith the Lord. 
45In the shadewe of Esebon stode thei fro 
the grene fleende, for fyr wente out fro 
Esebon, and flaume from the myddel of 
Sion; and deuoure it shal the parte* of 
Moab, and the top of the sonus of noise. 
46 Wo to thee, Moab; pershedist, thou puple 
of Camos, for ca3t ben thi sonus, and thi 
7do3tris in to caitifte shul be lad. And Y 
shal turne theY caitifte of Moab in the 
last da3es, seith the Lord. 


CAP. XLIX. 


i Hyderto the domes of Moab. Also to 
the sonus of Amon these thingus seith 
the Lord. Whether ben not the sonus of 
Trael, or eir is not to it? whi thanne the 
eritage weldith Melchon Gad, and his 

2 puple in? his ‘cheef cites* dwellide? Ther- 
fore lo! da3es comen in thee, seith the 
Lord, and herd Y shal make vp on Ra- 
bath of the sonus of Amon the gnasting® 
of bataile; and he® shal be in to noyse® 
scatered, and his do3tris with fyr shal be 
brend, and Irael shal welde his welderes, 

3seith the Lord. j3elle thou, Esebon, for 
wastid is Hai; crieth, 3ee do3tris of Ra- 
bath, girdeth 3ou with heires, weileth, and 
goth aboute bi hegges; for Melchon in 
to transmygracioun shal be bro3t, his 

4prestus and his princes togidere. What 
gioriest thou in valeis? Flowede doun 
thi valei, thou do3ter delicat, that trost- 
‘edist in thi tresores, and seidist, Who 


Ww the visiting e. * paard 4x. parde 6 pr. m. 
marg. E sec.m.marg.K. gnastynge, or noise G. 
E sec. m,. an noyse AK. 


JEREMIAH. 


y Om. x. 
C it _AGHK. 


XLVI. 42——XLIX. 4. 


ynge of child. And Moab schal ceesse to 42 
be a puple, for it hadde glorie aj3ens the 
Lord. Drede, and diche, and snare 7s on 43 
thee, thou dwellere of Moab, seith the 
Lord. He that fleeth fro the face ofa 
drede, schal falle in to a diche; and thei 
that stien fro the dyche, schulen be takun 
with a snare. For Y schal brynge on 
Moab the 3eer of the visitacioun of hem, 
seith the Lord. Men fleynge fro the snare 4s 
stoden in the schadewe of Esebon, for whi 
fier 3ede out of Esebon, and flawme fro 
the myddis of Seon; and deuouride a part 
of Moab, and the cop of the sones of 
noise. Moab, wo to thee; thou puple of 46 
Chamos, hast perischid, for whi thi sones 
and thi dou3tris ben takun in to caitiftee. 
And Y schal conuerte the caitiftee of Moab 47 
in the laste daies, seith the Lord. Hidur 
to ben thee domes of Moab. 


e 


CAP. XLIX. 


‘Go 3e' to the sones® of Amon. The1 
Lord seith these thingis. Whether no sones 
ben of Israel, ether an eir is not to it? 
whi therfor weldide Melchon the eritage 
of Gad, and the puple therof dwellide in 
the citees of Gad? Lo! daies comen,2 
seith the Lord, and Y schal make the 
gnaisting of batel herd on Rabath of the 
sones of Amon; and it schal he distried 
in to noise, and the vilagis therof schulen 
be brent with fier, and Israel schal welde 
hise welderis, seith the Lord. 3elle 3e,3 
Esebon, for Hay is distried ; crie, 3e dou3- 
tris of Rabath, girde 30u with heiris, 
weile 3e, and cumpasse? bi heggis; for whi 
Melchon schal be lad in to passyng ouer, 
the prestis therof and princes therof to- 
gidere. What hast thou glorie in valeis ? 4 
Thi valeis fleet! awei, thou delicat dou3ter, 
that haddist trist in thi tresours, and seid- 
ist, Who schal come to me? Lo! Y schals 


Zandc. ®Om.Eepr.m. » or noysec sec.m. 
da mynde hipil c pr. m. E pr. m. a noyse 


€Om.1. £Om.1. & sonesalso1 2» cumpasseth 1. i fletiden 1. fleetith s. 


XLIX. 5—16. 


5shal come to me? Lo! Y shal bringen 
in ferd vp on thee, seith the Lord God 
of ostus, God of Irael, of alle that ben in 
thi cumpas; and 3ee shul be scatered, eche 
fro 30ure sizt, ne shal be, that gedere the 
sfleeres. And after these thingus Y shal 
make to turne ajeen the fleeres and the 
caitifes of the sonus of Amon, seith the 
7Lord. To Idume ‘these thingus® seith 
the Lord God of ostus. Whether no mor 
is wisdam in Theman? Pershede counseil 
frof sonus, vnprofitable mad is the wisdam 
sof hem. Fleeth, and turneth backus; 
goth doun in to a swolewe®, 3ee dwelleres 
of Dedan, for the perdicioun of Esau Y 
haue® bro3t vp on hym, tyme of his visit- 
9ing. Yf grape kutteres hadden come, vp 
on thee thei shulden han lafti a cluster 
braunch ; if theues in ny3t hadden stoln, 
1othat shulde han suffisid to them. I for- 
sothe discouerede Esau, and openede his 
hid thingus, and he shal not moun be 
coouered ; wastid is his seed, and his bre- 
thern, and his ne3hebores, and he shal 
not be. Lef thi faderles childer, and Y 
shal make them to lyue, and thi widewis 
i2in me shul hope. For these thingus seith 
the Lord, Lo! to whom was not dom, 
that thei shulde drinke chalis*, drink- 
ende thei shul drinke; and thou as inno- 
cent shalt be laft? thou! shalt not be in- 
nocent, but drinkende thou shalt drinke. 
13For bi myself Y swor, seith the Lord, 
for in to wildernesse and in to repref, 
and in to desert, and in to cursing shal 
be Bosra; and alle his cites shul ben™ in 
14to euere lJastende wildernessis". Herd 
thing? Y herde of the Lord, and a legat 
to Jentilis is sent; beth gedered, and 
cometh a3en it, and rise wee togidere to? 
isbataile. Lo! forsotlie a litil child Y 3af 
thee in Jentilis, despisable among men. 
16 Thin owne hauncyng desceyuede thee, 
and the pride of thin herte, that dwellist 
in cauys of the ston, and4 to cacche 


f of 4. 
5 wildernesse c. 


& swol3 c pr. m. 


¢ Om. E pr. m. 
9 thingis 4 


land kx, ™ Om. c. 


k the backis 1. 


JEREMIAH. 


hha x. 
. Om, £ pr. m. 


lwhoms. !! thou selialt c. 


455 


bringe in drede on thee, seith the Lord 
God of oostis, God of Israel, of alle men 
that ben in thi cumpasse; and 3e schulen 
be scaterid, ech bi hym silf, fro 3oure si3t, 
and noon schal be, that gadere hem that 
fleen. And after these thingis Y schalé 
make the fleeris and prisoneris of the 
sones of. Amon to turne a3en, seith the 
Lord. To Ydumee the Lord God of oostis7 
seith these thingis. Whether wisdom is no 
more in Theman? Councel perischide fro 
sones, the wisdom of hem is maad vnpro- 
fitable.. Fle 3e, and turne 3e backis*; gos 
doun in to a swolowe, 3e dwelleris of De- 
dan, for Y haue brou3t the perdicioun of 
Esau on hym, the tyme of his visitacioun. 
If gadereris of grapis hadden come ono 
thee, thei schulden haue left a clustre; 
if theues in the ni3t, thei schulden haue 
rauyschid that that suffiside to hem. For- 10 
sothe Y haue vnhilid Esau, and Y haue 
schewid the hid thingis of hym, and he 
mai not mow be hid; his seed is distried, 
and hise britheren, and hise nei3boris, and 
it schal not be. Forsake thi fadirles chil-11 
dren, and Y schal make hem to lyue, and 
thi widewis schulen hope in me. For the 12 
Lord seith these thingis, Lo! thei drynk- 
ynge schulen drynke, to whiche! was no 
doom, that thei schulden drynke the cuppe. 
And ‘schalt thou! be left as innocent? thou 
schalt not be innocent, but thou drynk- 
ynge schalt drynke. For Y swoor bi my 13 
silf, seith the Lord, that Bosra schal be 
in to wildirnesse, and in to schenschipe, 
and in to forsakyng, and in to cursyng ; 


_ and alle the citees therof schulen be in to 


euerlastynge wildirnessis. I herde ania 
heryng of the Lord, and Y am sent a 
messanger to hethene men; be 3e gaderid 
togidere, and come 3e a3ens it™, and rise 
we togidere in to batel. For lo! Y haueis 
joue thee a litil oon among hethene men, 
despisable among men. ‘Thi boost, and 16 
the pride of thin herte, hath disseyued 


TJaft vpon thee gE pr.m.  * chalicis acux. 
Pinto aecuk. 4 Om. E prim. 


m hem Al. 


456 


forcest the hei3te of the hil; whan thou 
shalt enhaunce as an egle thi nest, then- 
nus Y shal drawe thee, seith the Lord. 
17And be shal Idume desert; eche" that 
shal passe bi it, shal stoneyn, and whistle 
18 vp on alle his veniaunces ; as turned vp 
so doun is Sodom and Gomor, and his 
ny3 wonyngus, seith the Lord. Ther shal 
not dwelle there a man, and ther shal 
wnot tiln it the sone of man. Lo! as a 
leoun he shal ste3e vp, and of the pride 
of Jordan to a stalwrthe fairnesse ; for 
sodeynli to renne Y shal make hym* to 
it; and who sha) be the chosen, whom 
Y shal bifor pute tot hym? Who for- 
sothe lic* me, and who shall susteyne 
me, and who is this’ shepperde, that 
20 withstant to my chere? Therfore hereth 
the counseil of the Lord, that he” wente 
in of* Edom, and his tho3tus, that he 
tho3te of the dwelleres of Theman. Yf 
the litle childer of the flocY shul not 
throwe them doun, no? but they shuln® 
ziscatere with them ther dwelling. Fro 
the vois of the falling of hem to-stirid is 
the erthe; cry in the rede se ‘is herd 
20f his vois. Lo! as an egle he shal 
ste3jen vp, and fleen awei, and he shall 
spreden out his wengus vp on Bosra; and 
shal® ben the herte of stronge men of 
Tduine in that dai, as the herte of a 
23womman trauailende with childe. To 
Damasch. Confoundid is Emath and Ar- 
fath, for werst heering thei herden ; thei . 
ben disturbid in the se, for bisynesse thei 
zumy3ten not reste. Losid atwynne is Da- 
masch, turned is in to fliz3t; trembling 
ca3te it, anguysshes and sorewis heelden 
g5it, as a trauailende with childe. Hou 
thei forsoke the preisable cyte, the’ chef 
ascite of gladnesse? Therfore fallen shul 
his 3unge men in his stretes, and alle the 
men of bataile shul become stille in that 
27 dai, seith the Lord of ostus. And Y shal 
teende vp fyr in the wal of Damasch, 


JEREMIAH. 


XLIX. 17—27. 


thee, that dwellist in the caues of stoon, 
and enforsist to take the hijnesse of a litil 
hil; whanne thou as an egle hast reisid 
thi nest, fro thennus Y schal drawe thee 
doun, seith the Lord. And Ydumee schal 17 
be forsakun; ech man that schal passe bi 
it, schal wondre, and schal hisse on alle 
the woundis therof; as Sodom and Gom-18 
mor is distried, and the ni3 citees therof, 
seith the Lord. A man sclhal not dwelle 
there, and the sone of man schal not en- 
habite it. Lo! as a lioun he schal stie,19 
fro the pride of Jordan to the strong fair- 
nesse; for Y schal make hym renne sudenli 
to it; and who schal be the chosun man, 
whom Y schal sette bifore hym? For who 
ts lijk to me, and who schal suffre me? 
and who is this scheepherde, that. schal 
aj3enstonde my cheer? Therfor here 3e20 
the councel of the Lord, which he took 
of Edom, and his thou3tis, whiche he 
thou3te of the dwelleris of Theman. If the 
litle of the floc caste not hem doun, if thei 
distrien not with hem the dwellyng of 
hem, ellis no man 3yue credence to me. 
The erthe was mouyd of the vois of fall-2) 
yng of hem; the cry of vois therof was 
herd in the reed see. Lo! as an egle he22 
schal stie, and fle out, and he schal sprede 
abrood hise wynges on Bosra; and the 
herte of the strong men of Idumee schal 
be in that dai, as the herte of a womman 
trauelynge of child. To Damask. Emath 23 
is schent, and Arphath, for thei herden a 
ful wickid heryng; thei weren disturblid 
in the see, for angwisch thei mi3ten not 
haue reste. Damask was discoumfortid, 24 
it was turned in to fli3t; tremblyng took 
it, angwischis and sorewis helden it, as 
a woman trauelynge of child. How 25 
forsoken thei a preisable citee, the citee of 
gladnesse? Therfor the 3onge men therof 26 
schulen falle in the stretis therof, and alle 
men of batel schulen be stille in that dai, 
seith the Lord of oostis. And Y schal27 


Tandeche eEpr.m. 8 Om.cprm tOm x. thjktoa. Vthec. WOm.epr.m.  ~ fro 
Eprom. Yking eprom 2Om.cpr.m.e£ prom. aGHK. ®Om. 4, Pheeringis Epr.m.  ¢ he shal 
eEprem. Om. £ prom, 


XLIX. 28—38. 


2sand deuoure the wallis of Benadab. To 
Cedar, and‘ to the. reumys of Asor, that 
Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, smot, 
these thingus seith the Lord. . Riseth, and 
ste3eth vp to Cedar, and- wasteth the 
29sonus of the est. Ther tabernaelis and 
ther flockes thei shul taken; ther skynnus, 
and allef ther vesseles, and ther eamailes 
thei shul gedere to them; and thei shul 
‘clepe vp on hem ferd in his cumpas. 
30 Fleeth, goth awei hugeli in swolewes, 
sitteth, that dwellen Asor, seith the Lord. 
Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, wente 
in forsothe a3en 30u eonseil, and tho3te 
31a3en 3ow tho3tis. Riseth, and ste3eth vp 
to a quyete fole of kinde, and dwellende 
trostili, seith the Lord; not dores ne his 
32 barres, alone dwellen. And ben shul ther 
eamailes in to reuyng, and the multitude 
of bestus in to prei; and Y shal scatere 
them in to eche wind, that ben dodded in 
to the her®, and of eche eoest of hem Y 
shal bringe deth vp on hem, seith the 
33Lord. And Asor shal be in to dwelling 
of dragounus, desert vnto withoute ende ; 
ther shal not dwelle there a man, ne tiln 
34it the sone of man. That don is the 
wrd of the Lord to Jeremye, the profete, 
ajen Elam, in the bigynnyng of the regne 
35 of Sedechie, king of Juda, seiende, These 
thingus seith the Lord of ostus, God of 
Irael, Lo! I shal to-breke the bowe of 
36 Elam, and take ther strengthe. And Y 
shal bringe in vp on Elam foure wyndus 
fro the foure coestus of heuene, and Y 
shal wynewe them in to alle these windus; 
and ther shal not be fole of kinde, to. 
whiche come not the" ferr fleende of 
37 Elam. And Y shal make Elam to dreden 
biforn alle his, enemys, and in the si3te 
of men sechende the soule of hem; and Y 
shal bringe in vp on. hem euel, the wrathe 
of my ,wodnesse, seith the Lord, and Y 
shal sende vp on hem swerd, to the tyme: 
38that Y to-waste them. And Y shal sette 
my see in Elam, and leese thennus kingus 

f Om. a. 


Cin EB. & hed ce prim. 


a stieth 1. © sitteth 1. 


VOL. Ii. 


Pnet. 


JEREMIAH. 


4 and thei a pr. m. 


457 


kyndle fier in the wal of Damask, and it 
schal deuoure the bildyngis of Benadab. 
To Cedar, and to the rewme of Azor,28 
which Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, 
smoot, the Lord seith these thingis. Rise 
3e, and stie" to Cedar, and distrie 3e the 
sones of the eest. Thei schulen take the29 
tabernaclis of hem, and the flockis of hem; 
thei sehulen take to hem the skynnes of 
hem, and alle the vessels of hem, and the 
eamels of hem; and thei schulen clepe on 
hem inward drede in eumpas. Fle 3e, go30 
3e awei greetli, 3e that dwellen in Asor, 
sitte° in swolewis, seith the Lord. For whi 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, hath 
take councel a3ens 30u, and he thou3te 
thou3tis a3ens 30u. Rise 3e togidere, and stie 31 
3e to a pesible folk, and dwellinge tristili, 
seith the Lord; not doris nether? barris 
ben to it, theid dwellen aloone. And 22 
the camels of hem schulen be in to ra- 
uyschyng, and the multitude of her beestis 
in to prey; and Y schal schatere hem in to 
ech wynd, that ben biclippid on the long 
heer, and bi ech coost of hem Y schal 
brynge perischyng on hem, seith the Lord. 
And Asor schal be in to a dwellyng place3s3 
of dragouns; it schal be forsakun ‘til in 
to’ withouten ende; a man schal not 
dwelle there, nether the sone of man schal 
enhabite it. The word of the Lord thats 
was maad to Jeremye, the profete, a3ens 
Elam, in the bigynnyng of the rewme of 
Sedechie, kyng of Juda, and seide, The3s 
Lord of oostis, God of Israel, seith these 
thingis, Lo! Y schal breke the bowe of 
Elam, and Y sehal take the strengthe of 
hem. And I schal bringe on Elam foure 36 
wyndis; fro foure eoostis of henene, and 
Y schal wyndewe* hem in to alle these 
wyndis, and no fole schal be, to which' 
the fleeris of Elam schulen not come. And 37 
Y-schal make Elam for to drede bifore 
her enemyes, and in the si3t of men sek- 
ynge the lijf of hem; and Y schal brynge 
on hem yuel, the wraththe of my strong 


bh Om. 4E sec.m.GuK. fro aGuK. 


rynto1. § wynewel. * whom 1. 


3.N 


458 JEREMIAH. XLIX. 39-—L. 9. 


39 and princes, seith the Lord: In the laste 
forsothe dajes Y shal make to be turned 
ajeen the caitifes of Elam, seith the 
Lord. 


CAP. L. 


1 The wrd that the Lord spac of Babi- 
loyne, and of the lond of Caldeis, in the 
zhond of Jeremye, profete. Telleth in 
folkus of kinde, and herd maketh; rereth 
vp a tocne; precheth, and wileth not 
hilyn; seith, Taken is Babilon, confound- 
id is Bel, ouercomen is Maradac; con- 
foundid ben his grauen thingus, ouercome 
3ben ther mawmetes. For stejen vp shal 
aj3ens it fole of kinde fro the north, that 
shall setten his lond in to wildernesse ; 
and ther shal not be that dwelle in it, 
fro man vn to beste; and thei ben moued, 
aand wenten awei. In tho dajes, and in 
that tyme, seith the Lord, comen shul 
the sonus of Irael, they and the sonus of 
Juda togidere, goende and wepende shul 
go forth; and the Lord ther God thei 
sshul seche in Sion, and aske the weie. 
Hider ther faces shul come, and ben set 
to* the Lord with euere durende pes co- 
uenaunt, that with no for3eting shal be 
s6don awey. The floc! lost mad is my 


puple, ther shepperdus bigiliden hem, and, 


_ maden to be vagaunt in mounteynus; fro 
mounteyn in to hil thei passeden, thei 
7for3eeten of ther couche. Alle that 
founden, eete them, and _ ther enenlys 
seiden, We han not synned, for thi that 
thei” han synned to the Lord, to the 
fairnesse of ri3twisnesse, and to the abid- 
sing of ther fadris, to the Lord. Goth 
awei fro the myddel of Babiloyne, and 
fro the lond of Caldeis; goth out, and 
9 beth as goet bifor the floc. For loo! Y 
shal rere, and bringe in to Babiloyne 
the congregacioun of manye Jentilis, fro 


Kin a. 1] folk ae. 


veniaunce, seith the Lord; and Y schal 
sende after hem a swerd, til Y waste hem. 
And Y schal sette my kyngis seete inss 
Elam, and Y schal leese therof kyngis, 
and princes, seith the Lord. But in thes9 
laste daies Y schal make the prisoneris of 
Elam to turne ajen, seith the Lord. 


CAP. L. 


The word which the Lord spak of Ba-1 
biloyne, and of the lond of Caldeis, in the 
hond of Jeremye, the profete. Telle 3e2 
among hethene men, and make 3e herd; 
reise 3e a signe; preche 3e, and nyle 3e 
holde stille; seie 3e, Babiloyne is takun, 
Bel is schent, Maradach is ouer comun; 
the grauun ymagis therof ben schent, the 
idols of hem ben ouer comun. For a folks 
schal stie fro the north a3enus it, which 
folk schal sette the lond therof in to wil- 
dirmesse ; and noon schal be that schal 
dwelle therynne, fro man ‘til to" beeste; 
and thei ben moued, and 3eden awei. In4 
tho daies, and in that tyme, seith the 
Lord, the sones of Israel schulen come, 
thei and the sones of Juda togidere, go- 
ynge and wepynge; thei schulen haaste, 
and seke her Lord God in Sion, and theis 
schulen axe the weie. Hidur the faces of 
hem schulen come, and thei schulen be set 
to the Lord with boond of pees euerlast- 
ynge, which’ schal not be don awei by 
ony for3etyng. My puple is maad a losté 
floc, the scheepherdis of hem disseyneden 
hem, and maden” to go vnstabli in hillis ; 
thei passiden fro mounteyn in to a litil 
hil, thei for3aten her bed. Alle men that7 
founden, eeten hem, and the enemyes of 
hem seiden, We synneden not, for that 
thei synneden to the Lord, the fairnesse 
of ri3tfulnesse, and to the Lord, the abid- 
yng of her fadris. Go 3e awei fro thes 
myddis of Babiloyne, and go 3e out of the 
lond of Caldeis, and be 3e as kydis bifore 
the floc. For lo! Y schal reise, and9 
brynge in to Babiloyne the gaderyng to- 


m Om. E pr. m. 


Uyntor. Vthe whiche 1. W maden hem 1. 


LL. 10——20, 


the lond of the north; and thei shul be 
greythed" a3en it, and in dai it shal be 
taken; his arewe as of the most strong 
man sleere, shal not be turned a3een 
10 voide. And Caldee shal be in to prei, 
and alle men wastende it shul be fulfild, 
useith the Lord. For 3ee ful out io3en, 
and grete thingus speken, reuende awei 
myn eritage; for heeld out 3ee ben as 
calues vpon® gres, and 3ee looweden as 
izboolis. Confoundid ys 3oure moder ful 
myche, and euened to pouder that gat 
jou; lo! the laste? she shal be in folkes 
of kinde, and desert with oute weie, and 
i3driende. Fro the wrathe of the Lord it 
shall not ben enhabitid4, but be turned 
al in to wildernesse; eche that shal passe 
bi Babiloyne, shal stoneyn, and whistlen 
14 vp on alle his veniaunces. Beth redi a3en 
Babilon bi enuyroun, alle that beenden 
bowe to fi3ten it doun; spareth not to 
is dartes, for to the Lord it synnede™. Cri- 
eth ajen it, oueral it 3af hond; fellen his 
foundemens, and destro3ed ben his wallis; 
for the veniaunce of the Lord ‘it is’. 
Veniaunce taketh of it; as it dide, doth 
i6to it. Seatereth the sowere fro Babilon, 
and the holdende sikel in thet:tyme of 
rip, fro the face of the swerd of the cul- 
uer ; eche to his puple shal be turned, and 
17eche to ther" lond shal fleen. Scatered’ 
is the floc of Irael, leownus threwen hym 
out; first eet hym king Assur, this the 
laste thre3 ont his boenns, Nabugodono- 
issor, king of Babiloyne. Therfore these 
thingus seith the Lord of ostus, God of 
Trae], Lo! I shal visite the king of Ba- 
biloyne, and his lond, as Y visitede king 
is Assur; and Y shal bringe ajeen Irael to 
his” dwelling. And be fed shal Carmeel 
and Basan, and the* mount of Effraym 
20and Galaad shal be fulfild his soule. In 
tho da3is, and in that tyme, seith the 
Lord, shal be so3t the wyckenesseY of 
Irael, and shal not be; and the synne of 


n gedered c prim. vpe. 
synned acuk. §Om.c. ¢ Om. 4eGH. 
Xinthe ge. Y wickidnes scik. 

y Om. nN. 


Xis s. z and shal n. 


JEREMIAH. 


P laste thingus c pr.m,. E pr.m. sed exp. 
uhis c prom. E pr. m. 


4 Jowiden, ether [or £] bellewiden cEFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. 


459 


gidere of grete folkis, fro the lond of the 
north; and thei schulen be maad redi ‘ 
a3ens it, and it schal be takun in the dai; 
the arowe therof as* of¥ a strong man a 
sleere, schal? not turne ajen voide. And 10 
Caldee schal be in to prey, alle that distrien 
it, schulen be fillid, seith the Lord. Fori 
3e maken ful out ioye, and speken grete 
thingis, and rauyschen inyn eritage; for 3e 
ben sched out as caluys on erbe, and low- 
iden* as bolis. j3oure modir is schentJ2 
greetli, and sche that gendride 30u, is 
maad euene to dust; Io! sche schal be 
the last among folkis, and forsakun, with 
out weie, and drie. For the wraththe of 13 
the Lord it schal not be enhabitid, but it 
schal be dryuun al in to wildirnesse; ech 
that schal passe bi Babiloyne, schal won- 
dre, and schal hisse on alle the woundis 
therof. Alle 3e that beenden bowe, be®14 
maad redi a3ens Babiloyne bi cumpas; 
ouercome 3e it, spare 3e not arowis, for it 
synnede to the Lord. Crye 3e ajens it, 15 
euery where it 3af hond; the foundementis 
therof fellen doun, and the wallis therof 
ben distried; for it is the veniaunce of 
the Lord.- Take 3e veniaunce of it; as it 
dide, do 3e to it. Leese 3e a sowere of 16 
Babiloyne, and hym that holdith a sikil 
in the tyme of-heruest, fro the face of 
swerd of the culuer; ech man schal be 
turned to his puple, and ech man schal 
flee to his lond. Israel is a seaterid flok, 17 
liouns castiden out it; first kyng Assur 
eete it, this laste Nabugodonosor, kyng of 
Babiloyne, dide awei the bonys_ therof. 
Therfor the Lord of oostis, God of Israel, 18 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal visite the 
kyng of Babiloyne, and his lond, as Y 
visitide the kyng of Assur; and Y schal19 
brynge ajen Israel to his dwellyng place. 
Carinele and Baasan schal be fed, and his 
soule schal be fillid in the hil of Effrayim, 
and of Galaad. In tho daies, and in that 20 
tyne, seith the Lord, the wickidnesse of 


® hath 
w his own K. 


4 abited E pr. mi. 
v The scatered £ pr.m. 


> beth 1. 


3N 2 


460 


Juda, and shal not be founde; for mercy- 
ful Y shal be to them, whom I shal 
21leeue2. Vp on the lond of the lordship- 
ende stee3 thou* vp, and vp on his dwel- 
leres visite; waste, and sle, that after hem 
ben, seith the Lord; and do aftir alle 
22thingus that Y comaunde? to thee. Vois 
of bataile in the lond, and gret to-bros- 
23ing. Hou to-broke and to-brosid is the 
hamer of al erthe? what maner is turned 
24in to desert Babilon, in Jentilus? I gren- 
ede thee, and take thou art, Babilon, and 
wistist not; founde thou art, and ca3t, 
25for the Lord thou terredist. The Lord 
openede his tresor, and bro3te forth ves- 
selis of his wrathe; for were is to the 
Lord God of ostus in the lond of Caldeis. 
26Cometh to it fro vtmost4 coestus, open- 
eth, that thei go out that® to-treden it; 
taketh fro the weie stones, and doth in 
to hepes, and sleth it, ne be ther any 
27 thing laft. Scatereth alle his stronge men, 
come thei doun in to sla3ter ; wo to them, 
for comen is the dai of hem, tyme of 
ether visiting. Vois of the fleeres’, and 
of hem that scapeden fro the lond of Ba- 
biloyne, that thei telle in Sion the ven- 
iaunee of the Lord oure God, veniaunce 
20f his temple. Telleth out in to Babilon 
to manye, to alle that- beenden bowe. 
Stondeth togidere a3en it bi cumpas, and 
no man scape; 3eldeth to it after his 
were, after alle thingus that it dide, doth 
to it; for a3en the Lord it is rered, a3en 
30the hoeli of Irael. Therfore falle shuln 
his junge men in his stretus, and alle his 
men fiz3teres shul bicome stille in that 
31 dai, seith the Lord. Lo! Y¥ to thee, thou 
proude, seith the Lord God of ostus, for 
thi dai is come, tyme of thi visiting. 
32And falle shal the proude, and at ones 
falle, and ther shal not be that rere hym; 
and Y shal teende vp fyr in his cites, 
and deuoure it shal alle thingus in his 
33cumpas. These thingus seith the Lord 


2 forsake c pr.m. E pr.m. 
4 vttermost 4x. the vttermoste GH. 


¢ Om. s. 


dleue x sec. m.marg. © the lordis F. 


JEREMIAH. 


8 Om. AE pr. m. GHK. 
e that thei E pr.m. 


f on alle a sec. m. 


L. 21-33. 


Israel schal be sou3t, and it schal not’ be ; 
and the synne of Juda schal be sou3t, and 
it® schal not be foundun; for Y schal be 
merciful to hem, whiche Y schal forsake‘. 
Stie thou on the lond of lordis®, and. visite 21 
thon on! the dwelleris therof; scatere 
thou, and sle tho thingis, that ben ‘aftir 
hem, seith the Lord; and-do thou bi ‘alle 
thingis which Y comaundide to thee. The 22 
vois of batel and greet® sorewe in ‘the 
lond. Hou is the hamer of al erthees . 
brokun and al defonlid ? hou is Babiloyne 
turned in to desert, among hethene men ? 
Babiloyne, Y haue snarid thee, and thou 24 
art takun, and thou wistist not ; thou art 
foundun, and takun, for thou terridist the 
Lord to wraththe. The Lord openide his 25 
tresour, and brou3te forth the vessels of 
his wraththe; for whi a werk is to the 
Lord God‘of oostis in the lond of Caldeis. 
Come 3e to it fro the fertheste endis, opene 26 
3e, that thei go out, that schulen defoule 
it; take 3e awei stoonys fro the weie, and 
dryue 3e in to heepis, and sle 3e it, and 
nothing be residue. Distrie 3e alle the27 
stronge ‘men therof, go’ thei’ doun in to 
sleynge; wo to hem, for the ‘dai of hem 
cometh, the tyme of visityng of hem, The 28 
vois of fleeris, and of hem that ‘ascapiden 
fro the lond of Babiloyne, that thei telle 
in Sion the veniaunce of oure Lord God, 
the veniaunce of his temple. Telle 3e29 
a3ens Babiloyne to ful many men, to alle 
that beenden bowe. Stonde 3e togidere 
a3ens it bi cumpas, and noon? ascape ; 
jelde 3e to it aftir his werk, aftir alle 
thingis whiche it dide, do 3e to it; for it 
was reisid ajens the Lord, a3ens the hooli 
of Israel. Therfor 3onge men_ therof30 
schulen falle doun in the stretis therof, 
and alle men werriours therof schulen be 
stile in that dai, seith the Lord. Lo!s 
thou proude, Y to thee, seith the Lord 
God of oostis, for thi dai is comun, the 
tyme of thi visitacioun. And the proude3e 


b comaundede 4EGHK sec. m. 


¢ For & pr. m. 
f sleers 4GH. 


& the greet x. 5 late noon a pr. m. 


L. 34—44. 


of ostus, Chalenge® suffren the sonus of 
Irael and the sonus of Juda togidere; alle 


that token hem, holden, thei ‘wiln lefe>’ 


3inot them. Ther ajeenbiere strong, Lord 
of ostus his name; bi doni’ he shal ‘de- 
fende ther cause, that he fere the lond, 
and to-stere the dwelleris- of: Babiloyne. 
35 Swerd to the Caldeis, seith the Lord, and 
to the dwelleris of Babilon, and to the 
36 princes, and to his wise men. Swerd to 
his deuynoures, that foolis shul be; swerd 
37 to his stronge men, that shul drede. Swerd 
to his hors, and to his chares, and to al 
the comun that is in his myddel, and 
thei shul be as wymmen; swerd to! ‘his 
tresores, for thei shul be reued awei. 
38 Dro3te vp on his watris shal be, and thei 
shul become drie; for the lond of grauen 
thingus it is, and in wndris ‘glorieth. 
so Therfore dwelle shal dragounus with 
‘fonned woode thenes*, and dwelle in it 
shul ostricchis; and me shal no more 
dwelle in it ‘vn to! euermore, ne shal be 
‘mad vp vn to ieneracioun and ienera- 
4ocioun; as the Lord turned vp so doun 
Sodom and Gomor, and ‘his ny3 townes, 
seith the Lord. Ther shal not dwelle a 
4iman, ne tiln it the sone of man: Lo! a 
puple cam fro the north, and a gret fole of 
kinde, and manye -kingus™ shul rise fro 
42the coestus of the lond. Boewe and sheld 
thei shul take, cruel thei ben and vnmer- 
ciable; the vois of them as the se shal 
sowne, and vp on hors shul ste3en vp as 
a man redi to bataile, a3een thee, thou 
43 do3ter of Babilon. The king of Babiloyn 
herde the loes of hem, and loosed a- 
twynne ben his hondus; anguysh ca3te 
hym, sorewe as the trauailende with 
44childe. Lo! as a leoun ste3eth vp fro 
the pride of Jordan to a stalwrthe fair- 
nesse, for to renne sodeynli I shal make 
hym® to it; and who shal -be the chosen, 
whom. Y shal bifor putte to hym? Who 
forsothe lije me°? and? who shal sustene 


& Wronge chalenge AE sec. m. GIIK sec. m. 
E pr.m, fonnyd woode wosys G sec.m. 
P Om. £ pr.m. 


h wolen not 1. 


4 Jeuen wiln & pr.m. 
lin to 4K. to Gi. 


ithe: y. Jj men, ethir fendis in licnesse of wodewosis a et plures. 


JEREMIAH. 461 


schal falle, and schal falle doun togidere, 
and noon ‘schal be, that schal reise hym; 
and Y‘schal kyndle fier in the citees of 
hym, and it schal deuoure alle thingis in 
cumpas of it. The Lord of oostis seithss 
these thingis, The sones of Israel and the 
sones of Juda togidere suffren fals caleng; 
alle that token hem, holden, thei nylen* 
delynere hem.. The a3enbyere of hem iss 
strong, the Lord of oostis és his name; bi 
dom he schal defende the cause of hem, 
that he make the lond aferd, and stire 
togidere the dwelleris of Babiloyne. Aas 
swerd to Caldeis, seith the Lord, and to 
the dwelleris of Babiloyne, and to the 
princes, and to the wise men therof. A 36 
swerd to the false dynynours therof, that 
schulen be foolis; a swerd to the stronge 
men therof, that schulen drede. Swerd37 
to the horsis therof, and to the charis 
therof, and to al the comyn puple whiche 
is in the nyddis therof, and thei schulen 
be as wymmen; a swerd to the tresours 
therof, that schulen be rauyschid. Dry-3s 
nesse schal. be on the watris therof, and 
tho! schulen be drye; for it is the lond of 
grauun ymagis, aud hath glorie in false 
feynyngis. Therfor dragouns  schulen 39 
dwelle with fonned wielde menj, and os- 
trigis schulen dwelle therynne; and it 
schal no more be enhabitid ‘til in to* with 
outen ende, and it ‘sclial ‘not be bildid ‘til 
to! generacioun ‘and generacioun; as the 40 
Lord distriede Sodom and Gomorre, and 
the ni3 citees therof, seith the Lord. A 
man schal not dwelle there, and the sone 
of man schal not dwelle in it. Lo! aa: 
puple cometh fro the north, and a greet 
fole, and many kyngis schulen rise togi- 
dere fro the endis of erthe. Thei schulen 42 
take bowe and swerd, thei ben cruel and 
vumerciful; the vois of hem schal sowne 
as the see; and thei schulen stie on horsis 
as a man maad redi to batel, aj3ens thee, 
thou dou3ter of Babiloyne. The kyng of 43 


i vpon EB prom. 
mQm.c. 9 Om. c pr. m. 


k wodewoses c pr.m. 
° to me AK sec. m. 


k ynto1, J vnto1, 


462 


me? and who is this? shepperde that 
45 withstant to my chere? Therfore hereth 
the counseyl of the Lord, that in mynde 
he conseyuede™ aj3en Babylon, and his 
tho3tis, that he tho3t vpon the lond of 
Caldeis, no’ but with drawen hem the 
litil childer of flockus, no’ but scateredt 
46with them ther dwelling. Fro the vois 
of the caitifte of Babilon stirid is the 
lond, and cry among Jentiles is herd. 


CAR egal. 
1 These thingus seith the Lord, Lo! Y 
shal reren vp on Babilon, and vp on his 
dwelleris, that ther herte rereden a3en 
me", as a wind bringende in pestilence. 
2And Y shal sende in to Babilon wynew- 
eres, and thei shul wynewe it, and de- 
strojen his lond; for they camen vp on it 
on eche side in the dai of his tormenting. 
3 And’ he shal not wone, that beendith his 
bowe, and stejen vp shal not the clothide 
with an habirioun; wileth not spare to 
his 3unge men, sleth al his chyualrie. 
4 And falle shuln the slayne in the lond of 
Caldeis, and the woundid in his regeouns. 
5 For Irael was not ‘forsake, or maad wy- 
dow’, and Juda fro the Lord ther God, 
Lord of ostus; the lond forsothe of hem 
folfild is of gilte fro the hoely of Irael. 
6Fleeth fro the myddel of Babilon, that 
eche man saue his soule; wileth not be 
stille vp on his wickenesse*, for tyme of 
his veniaunce is toY the Lord; his while 
7he shal 3elde to hym. A goldene chalis 


“the BE prem. ¥ conseyue & prem. 
v Om. AE sec. m. GHK. 
nes AGHK. Yin A. 


m Om. ¥. 


JEREMIAH. 


8 Om. c pr. m. F pr. m. 
wmaad widewe 4. forsake c et E pr.m. maad widu, or forsake GuK. 


1 wyneweris I. 


L. 45-—-LI. 7. 


Babiloyne herde the fame of hem, and 
hise hondis ben aclumsid; angwisch took 
hym, sorewe took hym, as a womman tra- 
uelynge of child. Lo! as a lioun he schal 44 
stie fro the pride of Jordan to the stronge 
fairnesse, for Y schal make hym to renne 
sudenli to it; and who schal be the chosun 
man, whom Y schal sette bifore him? For 
who ts lijk me? and who schal suffre me? 
and who is this scheepherde, that schal 
a3enstonde my cheer? Therfore here 3e 45 
the councel of the Lord, which he con- 
seyuede in mynde ajens Babiloyne, and 
hise thou3tis, whiche he thou3te on the 
lond of Caldeis, no™ but the litle of the 
flockis drawen hem doun, no™ but the 
dwellyng place of hem be destried with 
hem, ellis no man 3yue credence to me. 
The erthe is mouyd of the vois of caitiftee 46 
of Babiloyne, and cry is herd among hethene 
men. 
CAPA) 

The Lord seith these thingis, Lo! Yu 
schal reise on Babiloyne, and on the dwel- 
leris therof, that reisiden her herte a3ers 
me, as a wynd of pestilence. And Y schalz 
sende in to Babiloyne wyndeweris", and 
thei schulen wyndewe?® it, and thei? schu- 
len destrie the lond of it; for thei camen 
on it on ech side, in the dai of the tur- 
ment therof. He that beendith his bowe,3 
beende not, and a man clothid in habu- 
rioun, stie not; nyle 3e spare the 3onge 
men therof, sle 3e al the chyualrie therof. 
And slayn men schulen falle in the lond4 
of Caldeis, and woundid men in the cun- 
treis therof. For whi Israel and Juda wass 
not maad widewe fro her God, the Lord 
of oostis ; but the lond of hem was fillid 
with trespas of the hooli of Israel. Flee 
je fro the myddis of Babiloyne, that ech 
man saue his soule; nyle 3e be stille on 
the wickidnesse therof, for whi tyme of 
veniaunce therof is to the Lord; he schal 
3elde while to it. Babiloyne 7s a goldun7 


t scatered were acuxk. Om. c pr.m. 


* wickid- 


owynewer P Om. 1. 


LI. 8—19. 


of Babiloyne in the hond of the Lord, 
drunknende al the lond; of his wyn 
druuke the Jentilis, and thennus thei ben 
8to-stirid. Sodeynly fel Babilon, and is 
to-brosid; 3elleth vpon yt, taketh recyne 
gumme to his sorewe, if parauenture he 
9be helid. Wee han cured Babilon, and 
he is not helid; forsake wee it, and go 
wee eche in to his lond; ‘for ful? cam ‘vn 
to* henenus® hys dom, and vp rered is 
iovn to the cloudus. The Lord bro3te forth 
oure® ri3twisnesses; come‘, and telle wee 
in Sion the were of the Lord oure God. 
11Sharpeth arwes, fulflleth® arwe eases; 
the Lord rerede his spirit of kingus of 
Medes, and a3en Babilon is his imnynde, 
that he leese it, for the veniaunce of the 
Lord is, the veniaunce of his temple‘. 


The king of Medus a3en Babilon of the . 


12Lord is rered. Vp on the wallis of Ba- 
bilon rereth a tocne, eecheth the warde, 
rereth the keperes, greithith busshemens; 
for the Lord tho3t, and dide, what euere 
thingus® he spac a3en the dwelleris of 
13Babilon. ‘That dwellist vp on manye 
watris, riche in tresores, comen is thin 
ende, the foot mesure of thi kutting of. 
14 The Lord of ostus swor bi his lyf, for Y 
shal fulfille thee of men, as with bruce 
werm, and vp on thee a merie faring 
issong shal be sunge. That made the 
erthe in his strengthe, biforn made redi 
the world in his wisdamn, aud bi his pru- 
i¢ denee stra3te out heuenus. Hym 3yuende 
vois, ben multeplied watris in heuene; 
that rereth cloudus fro the vtmost of the 
erthe, leitus ‘in to! reyn* made, and bro3te 
17forth wind of his tresores. Fool is mad 
eche man of kunnyng, confoundid is eche 
3eetere in grauen thing; for ‘fals is his! 
is3eting, ne ther is spyrit in hem. Veyne 
ben the werkus, and wrthi seornyng ; in 
tyme of ther visityng thei shul pershe. 
39 Not as this the part of Jacob; for that™ 


2 ferful GH. ®in to acuzx. » heuen G pr. m.n. 
eand fulfillith 4. fpeple acux. & thing ax. 
Eprom. ™he that £ pr. 2m. 

Qvntor Vitisr. S8vntor1 tonn, 
whemadet. * thei n. 


JEREMIAH. 


¢ his 4 sup. ras. c prom. E pr.m. 
h vttermost aGHuK. 


«hath reisid 1, 


463 


cuppe in the hond of the Lord, and fillith 
al erthe; hethene men drunken of the 
wyn therof, and therfor thei ben mouyd. 
Babiloyne felle doun sudenli, and is al to-s 
brokun; 3elle 3e on it, take 3e reeyn to 
the sorewe therof, if perauenture it be 
heelid. We heeliden Babiloyne, and it iss 
not maad hool; forsake we it and go we 
ech in to his lond; for the doom therof 
cam ‘til tod henenes, and is" reisid ‘til to* 
cloudis, The Lord hath brou3t forth oure 10 
ri3tfulnessis; come 3e, and telle we int 
Sion the werk of oure Lord God. Scharpe 11 
3e arowis, fille 3e arowe caasis; the Lord 
reiside" the spirit of the kyngis of Me- 
deis, and his mynde is a3en Babiloyne, 
that he leese it, for it is the veniaunce of 
the Lord, the veniaunce of his temple. 
The kyng of Medeis is reisid of the Lord 
a3ens Babiloyne. Reise 3e a signe on the 12 
wallis of Babiloyne, encreesse 3e kepyng, 
reise 3e keperis, make 3e redi buysche- 
mentis; for the Lord thou3te, and dide, 
what euer thing he spak a3ens the dwel- 
leris of Babiloyne. A! thou Babiloyne, 3 
that dwellist on many watris, riche in thi 
tresours, thin ende cometh, the foote me- 
sure of thi kittyng doun. The Lord of14 
oostis swoor bi his soule, that Y schal fille 
thee with men, as with bruke, and a myry’ 
song sehal be sungun on thee. Zhe Lords 
swoor, whieh made erthe bi his strengthe, 
made redy the world bi his wisdom, and 
stretchide forth heuenes bi his prudence. 
Whanne he 3yueth vois, watris ben mul-16 
tiplied in heuene; which Lord reisith 
cloudis fro the laste of erthe, made” leitis 
in to reyn, and brou3t forth wynd of hise 
tresouris. Ech man is maad a fool of 17 
kunnyng, ech wellere togidere is schent in 
a grauun ymage; for his wellyng togidere 
is fals, and a spirit is not in tho. Theis 
werkis ben veyn, and worthi of scorn; 
tho* schulen perische in the tyme of her 


4 cometh 4EGHK. 


‘ink. the reyne a. ! izing is 


v faring, ethir customable x marg. sec. m. 


464 


made alle thingus he is, and Irael the 
kingus dignete of his eritage; the Lord of 
20 ostus his name. Thou hurtlist to me the 
vesselis_ of bataile, and Y shal hurtle in 
thee Jeutilis, and scatere in thee reumus ; 
2iand Y shal hurtle in thee the hors, and 
his" hors man; and Y shal hurtle in thee 
22the char, and his ste3ere ; and I shal hur- 
tle in thee the man and the woman ; 
and I shal hurtle in thee the old man 
and the child; and I shal hurtle in thee 
a3the 3unge man and the maide®; and I 
shal hurtle in thee the shepperde and his 
floc; and Y shal hurtle in thee the erthe 
tiliere and his 30c oxen; and I shal hurtle 
24in thee dukes and the? maister 3ugis. And 
I shal 3eelde to Babilon, and to alle the 
dwelleris of Caldee, alle his euel, that he 
dide in Sion, in 3oure e3en, seith the 
25Lord. Lo! Y to thee, thou hil berende 
pestilence, seith the Lord, that corumpist 
al the erthe. I shal strecche out myn 
hond vp on thee, and turne out thee fro 
stonus, and Y shal 3yue thee in to mount 
260f brennyng. And Y shal not take of thee 


a ston in to a corner, and a ston in to, 


foundemens; but lost thou shalt be in to 
27 with oute ende, seith the Lord. Rereth 
a tocne in the lond, crieth with a trumpe 
in mounteynes; halewith vp on it Jen- 
tilis, telleth out a3en it? to the kingus of 
Ararath, of Menny, and of Ascheneth; 
noumbreth a3en it Thasor, bringeth to" 
vp on it hors, as bruke hauende tonge. 
28 Halewith vp on it Jentilis, kingus of 
Mede, his dukus, and alle his maister 
iugis, and al the lond of lis power. 


29 And al to-moued shal he the lond, and. 


disturbid; for wakide out a3en Babilon 
the tho3t of the Lord, that he poote the 
lond of Babilon desert, and vnabitable. 
30 Ceseden the stronge men of Babilon fro 
bataile, thei dwelten iu places of refut; 
denoured is’ ther stalwrthenesse, and made 
theit ben as wymmen; brend yp ben his 
31 tabernaclis, to-brosid ben his barres. The 


othe x. ©mayden 4eGHK. P Om. aGHkK. 
G promo Hu. 
yOm.p. 270m. p. 20m. np. > Om. P. 


JEREMIAH. 


4 Om. 4G prim. n. 


Li. 20—31. 


visityng.. The part of Jacob zs not asis 
these thingis ; :for he that made alle 
thingis is the. part. of Jacob, and Israel 
is the septre of his eritage; the Lord of 
oostis 7s his name. Thou hurtlist doun2e 
to me the instrumentis of batel, and Y 
schal hurtle doun folkis in thee,.and Y 
schal leese rewmes in thee; and Y schalai 
hurtle down in thee an hors, and the 
ridere therof; and Y schal hurtle doun in 
thee a chare, and the stiere therof; and 22 
Y schal hurtle doun in thee aY man and 
womman; aud Y schal hurtle doun in thee 
an’ elde man and a®* child; and Y schal 
hurtle doun in thee a> 30ng man and a> 
virgyn; and Y schal hurtle doun in thee 23 
a> scheepherde and his floc; and Y schal 
hurtle doun in thee an® erthetiliere and 
his 30k beestis; and Y schal hurtle doun 
in thee duykis and magistratis. And Y 24 
schal 3elde, seith the Lord, to Babiloyne, 
and to alle the dwelleris of Caldee, al her 
yuel, which thei diden in Sion, bifore 
joure izen. Lo! Y, seith the Lord, to2s 
thee, thou hil berynge ‘pestilence, which 
corrumpist al erthe. Y schal stretche 
forth myn hond on thee, and Y schal 
vnwlappé thee fro stoonys, and Y schal 
3yue thee in to.an hil of brennyng. And 26 
Y schal. not take of thee a stoon in to a 
corner, and a stoon in to foundementis ; 
but thou schalt be lost with outen ende, 
seith the Lord. Reise 3e a signe in the27 
lond, sowne. 3e with a. clarioun in hillis; 
halewe 3e4 folkis on it, telle 3e to the’ 
kyngis of Ararath, of Menny, and of: 


Ascheneth ajens it; noumbre 3e Tapser+: + that is, oost 


ajens it, and bringe.3e an hors, as a bruke 
hauynge a pricke. Halowe 3e folkis a3eris 28 
it, the kyngis of Medey, the duykis ther- 
of, and alle. magistratis® therof, and al. the 
lond of his power. And the erthe schal29 
be mouyd, and schal be disturblid; for 
the thou3t of the Lord schal fulli wake 
a3ens Babiloyne, that he sette the lond of 
Babiloyne desert, and vnhabitable. Theo 


rOm. 4. %Om.c. 


t Om. 


¢cOm. pr. 4Om.N, © the magistrates rx. 


Li. 32.— 44. 


rennere to meete with the rennere shal 
come, and the messager to meete with 
the tellere, that he telle out to the king 
of Babiloyne, for taken is his cite fro the 
32 ouermost to the ouermost; and the forthis 
ben bifor ocupied, and the mershis ben 
brend vp with fyr, and the men fi3teres 
33 ben disturbid. For these thingus seith 
the Lord of ostis, God of Irael, The 
do3ter of Babilon as a corn floor, tyme 
of his thresshing ; 3it a litil, and come 
34shal the tyme of his reping®. Eet me, 
deuourede’ me Nabugodonosor, king of 
Babiloyne; he 3eeld me as a voide ves- 
sel, soupede me vp as a dragoun; he 
fulfilde his woinbe with my tendernesse, 
35 and caste me out. Wickenesse” aj3en me, 
and my flesh vp on Babiloyne, seith the 
dwelling* of Sion; and my blod vp on 
the dwelleres of Calde, seith Jerusalem. 
36 Therfore these thingus seith the Lord, 
Lo! Y shal deme thi cause, and venge 
thi vengyng; and desert shal make his 
37se, and shal drien his veyne. And Ba- 
bylon shal be in to mynde hepis, the 
dwelling of dragounus, stoneing and 
whistling, for thi that ther is not a dwel- 
38lere togidere. And leouns shul rore, 
and shake out shul her’ lockus, as the 
39 whelpus of leouns. In the” hete of hem Y 
shal putte ther drine; and Y shal drunkne 
them, that thei ben greeued with slep, 
and slepen an euere durende slep, that 
4othey rise not, seith the Lord. I* shal 
lede them doun as lombis to slayn sacri- 
fise, and as wetheris with kidus. Hou 
taken is Cisac, and ca3t is the glorious 
4.of al erthe? What maner mad is in to 
azstoneyng Babilon among Jentilis? And 
stejede vp vp on Babilon the se, with 
the multitude of his flodus it is couered. 
43 Mad ben his cites in to stoneyng, the 
lond vnabitable and desert; the Jond in 
whiche no man dwelle, ne passe thur3 it 
44the sone of man. And Y shal visite vp 
on Bel in to Babilon, and throwen awei 


u visiting H pr.m. VY deuoure K. 


a And I acuk. 
b Om. plures. 


f Om. plures. & vnto 1. 


VOL. Il. 


JEREMIAH. 


w Wickidnes 1Guk. 


465 


stronge men of Babiloyne ceessiden of 
batel, thei dwelliden in stronge holdis ; 
the strengthe of hem is deuourid, and 
thei ben maad as wymmen; the taber- 
naclis therof ben brent, the barris therof 
ben al to-brokuh. A rennere schal comes 
ajens a rennere, and a messanger ajens a 
messanger, to telle to the kyng of Babi- 
loyne, that his citee is takun fro the toon 
ende ‘til to® the fother® ende; andi these 
forthis ben bifore occupied, and the ma- 
reisis ben brent with fier, and the men 
werryours ben disturblid. For the Lord 33 
of oostis, God of Israel, seith these thingis, 
The dou3ter of Babiloyne ts as a corn 
floor, the tyme of threischyng therof; 3it 
a litil, and the tyme of repyng therof 
schal come. Nabugodonosor, the kyng of3s4 
Babiloyne, eet me, and deuouride me; he 
made me as a voide vessel, he as a dra- 
goun swolewide me; he fillide his wombe 
with my tendirnesse, and he castide me 
out. Wickidnesse a3ens me, and my35 
fleisch on Babiloyne, seith the dwellyng 
of Sion; and my blood on the dwelleris of 
Caldee, seith Jerusalem. Therfor the Lord 36 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal deme thi 
cause, and Y schal venge thi veniaunce; 
and Y schal make the see therof forsakun, 
and Y schal make drie the veyne therof. 
And Babiloyne schal be in to biriels, z¢37 
schal be the dwellyng of dragouns, won- 
dryng and hissyng, for that no dwellere 
is. hei schulen rore togidere as liouns, 33 
and thei schulen schake lockis, as the 
whelpis of liouns. In the heete of hem 39 
Y schal sette the drynkis of hem; and Y 
schal make hem drunkun, that thei be 
brou3t asleepe, and that thei slepe euer- 
lastynge sleep, and rise, not, seith the 
Lord. Y* sehal lede forth! hem, as lam- 40 
bren to slayn sacrifice, and as wetheris 
with kidis. Hou is Sesac takun, and the 
noble ci¢ee of al erthe is takun? Hou isa 
Babiloyne made in to wondre among he- 
thene men? And the see stiede on Babi-42 


2 Om. c. 


x dweller acux. * Om. FE pr.m. 


1Om x. & And Yaprom 10m. s. 


30 


466 


that, that it hadde soupid vp fro his 
mouth, and shul no mor flowe to it 
Jentilis; forsothe and the wal of Babi- 
45loyne shal at ones? falle. Goth out fro 
his myddel, my puple, that eche man saue 
his lif fro the wrathe of the wodnesse of 
4cthe Lord; and lest par auenture waxe 
nesshe 3oure herte, and 3ee drede the 
heering,that shal be herd in the lond; and 
come shal in a 3eer heering, and after this 
3er heering and wickenesse® in the lond, 
s7and lordshipere vp on lordshipere. Ther- 
fore lo! da3es comen, seith the Lord, and 
Y shal visite vp on grauen thingus of 
Babiloyne; and al hys lond shal be con- 
foundid, and alle his slayne shuln falle in 
4shis myddel. And preise shul vp on 
Babiloyne heuenus, and erthe, and alle 
thingus that in hem ben; for fro the north 
shul come to it reueres, seith the Lord. 
49 And hou dide Babilon, that fallen shulde 
slayn men in Irael, so fro Babylon falle 
50Shul slayn men in al the lond. 3ee that 
fledden4 the swerd, come®, and wileth 
not stonde; recordeth aferr of the Lord, 
and Jerusalem steje vp on joure herte. 
51Confoundid wee ben, for wee han herd 
repref; couerede shenshype oure faces, for 
ther camen alienus vp on the halewing of 
52the hous of the Lord. Therfore lo! dajes 
comen, seith the Lord, and Y shal visite 
vp on the grauen thingus of Babiloyne, 
and in al his lond loowen shal the 
53 woundid. If ste3en shul Babilon in to 
heuene, and fastne in hei3te his stalwrthe- 
nesse, to me shul come his wasteres, 
s4seith the Lord. Vois of the criende fro 
Babilon, and gret to-treding fro the lond 
550f Caldeis, for the Lord wastide Babilon, 
and lost of it a gret vois; and sowne 
shuln his flodus as many watris. 3af soun 
s6the vois of hem, for ther cam vp on it, 
that is, vp on Babilon, the reuere; and® 
ca3t ben his stronge men, and driede out 
the bowe of them, for a stronge vengere 
the Lord; 3eldende a3eyn" he shal 3elde. 


boone K. ¢ wickidnes 4GHk. 
h Om. c pr. m. & prom. 


m workis nN. 


JEREMIAH. 


4 flown £ pr. m. 


LI. 45—56. 


loyne, it was hilid with the multitude of 
hise wawis™. The citees therof ben maad 43 
in to wondryng, the lond 7s maad vnha- 
bitable and forsakun; the lond wherynne 
no man dwellith, and the sone of man 
schal not passe bi it. And Y schal visite 44 
on Bel in to Babiloyne, and Y schal caste 
out of hise mouth that, that he hadde 
swolewid, and folkis schulen no more 
flowe to it; for also the wal of Babiloyne 
schal falle doun. Mi puple, go 3e out fro4s 
the myddis therof, that ech man saue his 
soule fro the wraththe of the strong ven- 
iaunce of the Lord; and lest perauen-46 
ture 3oure herte wexe neisclie, and lest 3e 
dreden the heryng, that schal be herd in 
the lond; and heryng schal come in a 3eer, 
and aftir this 3eer schal come heryng and 
wickidnesse in the lond, and a lord on a 
lord. Therfor lo! daies comen, seith the 47 
Lord, and Y schal visite on the grauun 
ymagis of Babiloyne; and al the lond therof 
schal be schent, and alle slayn men therof 
schulen falle doun in the myddis therof. 
And heuenes, and erthis, and alle thingis 48 
that ben in tho, schulen herie on Ba- 
biloyne; for rauynours schulen come fro 
the north to it, seith the Lord. And49 
as Babiloyne dide, that slayn men felle 
doun in Israel, so of Babiloyne slayn men 
schulen falle doun and in al the lond. 
Come 3e¢, that fledden the swerd, nyle 3e50 
stonde; haue 3e mynde afer on the Lord, 
and Jerusalem stie on 3oure herte. Wesi 
ben schent, for we herden schenschipe ; 
schame hilide oure faces, for aliens comen 
on the halewyng of the hous of the Lord. 
Therfor lo! daies comen, seith the Lord,s2 
and Y schal visite on the grauun ymagis 
of Babiloyne, and in al the lond therof 
a woundid man schal loowe. If Babiloyness 
stieth in to heuene, and makith stidfast 
his strengthe an hi3, distrieris therof 
schulen come on® me, seith the Lord. 
The vois of a criere of Babiloyne, ands4 
greet sorewe of the lond of Caldeis, forss 


©cometh arcux. ‘steivp 4. & Om.z prim. 


2 of CEFHKMNPRS Sec. m. UVX. 


LI. 57——64. 


s7And Y shal drunkne' his princes, and 
his* wise men, his dukis, and his maister 
iugis, and his stronge men; and thei 
shu] slepen an euere lastende slep, and 
thei shul not ben wakid, seith the king, 
58 Lord of ostus his naine. These thingus 
seith the Lord God of ostus, The wal of 
Babilon he the heiest with vndermynyng 
shal be vndermyned, and his hej3e 3atus 
shul be brend with fyr; and the trauailis 
of puples at no3t, and! of ™ Jentilis ‘in to 
sofyr thei” shul ben, and pershen. And 
the wrd that Jeremye, the profete, co- 
maundide to Saraie, sone of Nerie, sone 
of Masie, whan he shulde go® with king 
Sedechie in to Babiloyne, in the ferthe 
jer of his regne; Saraie forsothe was 
60 prince of profecie. And Jeremye wrot 
al the euel, that was to com vp on Babi- 
lon, in o bac, alle these wrdus that ben 
61 write ajen Babilon. And Jeremye seide 
to Saraie, Whan thou shalt come in to 
Babilon, and seen, and reden alle these 
62 wrdus, thou shalt sei, Lord, thou speeke 
ajen this place, that thou shuldist de- 
stroje it, that ther be not that in it 
dwelle, fro man vn to beste, and that ther 
63 be perpetuel wildernesse. And whan thou 
hast ful endid to rede this boc, thou 
shalt binde to it a ston, and throwen it 
in to the myddel of Eufraten; and sey, 
64So shal be dreynt Babilon, and not rise 
fro the face of the tormenting, that Y 
bringe vp on it, and it shal be loosed. 
Hiderto the wrdus of Jeremye. 


ldrynche kK. k Om. ze pr.m. 7Om. x. 


P OO CPFGHIMNPQRSUVX. On E. 


JEREMIAH. 


m and into fijr of £ pr. m. 


467 


the Lord distriede Babiloyne, and lost of 
it a greet vois; and the wawis of hem 
schulen sowne as many watris. The vois 
of hem 3af sown, for a rauenour cam onsé 
it, that is, on Babiloyne ; and the stronge 
men therof ben takun, and the bouwe of 
hem welewide, for the stronge vengere 
the Lord 3eldynge schal 3elde. And Y57 
schal make drunkun the princis therof, 
and the wise men therof, the duykis ther- 
of, and the magistratis therof, and the 
stronge men therof; and thei schulen 
slepe euerlastynge sleep, and thei schulen 
not be awakid, seith the kyng, the Lord 
of oostis ¢¢ name of hym. The Lordss 
God of oostis seith these thingis, Thilke 
brodeste wal of Babiloyne schal be mynyd 
with mynyng, and the hi3ze 3atis therof 
schulen be brent with fier; and the trauels 
of puples schulen be to nou3t, and the 
trauels of hethene men schulen be in to 
fier, and schulen perische. The words9 
which Jeremye, the profete, comaundide 
to Saraie, sone of Nerie, sone of Maasie, 
whanne he 3ede with Sedechie, the kyng, 
in to Babiloyne, in the fourthe 3eer of his 
rewme; forsothe Saraie was prynce of 
profesie. And Jeremye wroot al the yuel, 60 
that was to comynge on Babiloyne, in a? 
book, alle these wordis that weren writun 
ajens Babiloyne. And Jeremye seide toi 
Saraie, Whanne thou comest in to Babi- 
loyne, and seest, and redist alle these 
wordis, thou schalt seie, Lord, thou spak- ce 
ist a3ens this place, that thou schuldist 
leese it, that noon be that dwelle therynne, 
fro man ‘til to beeste, and that it be an 
euerlastynge wildirnesse. And whanness 
thou hast fillid to rede this book, thou 
schalt bynde to it a stoon, and thou schalt 
caste it forth in to the myddis of Eu- 
frates; and thou schalt seie, So Babiloyne 64 
schal be drenchid, and it schal not rise fro 
the face of turment, which Y brynge on — 
it, and it schal be distried. Hidurto ben 
the wordis of Jeremye. 


aOm. £ prem. ° go out K. 


4 vnto I. 


302 


468 


CAP. LII. 


1 The sone of oon and twenti 3er was 
Sedechie, whan he to regnen hadde bi- 
gunne, and elleuene 3er he regnede in 
Jerusalem ; and name of his moder 
Amycal, do3ter of Jeremye of Lobna. 

2And he dide in the ejen of the Lord 
euelis, after alle thinges that don hadde 

3Joachym. For the wodnesse of the Lord 
was in Jerusalem, and in Juda, for to 
that he shulde aferr throwe them fro hys 
face. And Sedechye wente awei fro the 
4king of Babiloyne. Don is forsothe in 
the nynthe 3er of his regne, in the tenthe 
moneth, the tenthe dai of the moneth, 
cam Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, 
he and al his ost, ajen Jerusalem; and 
besegeden it, and bilden a3en it strength- 
singus’ in cumpas. And the cite was be- 
segid, vnto the elleuenthe 3er of the regne 
sof Sedechie. The ferthe forsothe monyth, 
the nynthe dai of the moneth, hunger 
withheeld the cite; and ther were not 
7foodis to the puple of the lond. And 
broken is the cyte, and alle his men 
fizteres floun"; and thei wenten out of 
the cite the ny3t, bi the’ weie of the 3ate, 
that is betwen" two wallis, and ledeth to 
the gardyn of the king, the Caldeis he- 
segende the cite in cumpas; and thei 
wenten awei bi the wey that ledeth in 
sto wildernesse. Forsothe the ost of Cal- 
deis pursueden the king, and ca3ten Se- 
dechie in desert, that is biside Jericho; 
gand al his ost flei3 awei frohym. And 
whan thei hadden take the king, thei 
bro3ten hym to the king of Babiloyne 
in Reblatha, that is in the lond of 
Emath; and he spac to hym dorus. 
ioAnd the king of Babiloyne kutte the 
throtus of the sonus of Sedechie in his 
ejen; but and al the princes of Jude he 
11slo3 in Reblatha. And the e3en of Sede- 
chie he putte’ out, and bond hym in 
gyues; and the king of Babiloyne bro3t 
hym in to Babiloyne, and putte hym in 
to the hous of the prisoun, vnto the dai 


4 strengthis aH. ¥ fledden 4& sec. m. GHK. 


Y pullide azauK, 


JEREMIAH. 


LII. 1-11. 


CAP. LII. 


Sedechie was a sone of oon and twenti: 
3eer, whanne he bigan to regne, and he 
regnede enlenene 3eer in Jerusalem; and 
the name of his modir was Amychal, the 
dou3ter of Jeremye of Lobna. And hee 
dide yuels bifore the i3en of the Lord, bi 
alle thingis whiche Joachym hadde do. 
For the stronge veniaunce of the Lords 
was in Jerusalem, and in Juda, til he 
castide hem awey fro his face. And 
Sedechie 3ede awei fro the kyng of Babi- 
loyne. Forsothe it was don in the nynthes 
jeer of his rewme, in the tenthe monethe, 
in the tenthe dai of the monethe, Nabu- 
godonosor, the kyng of Babiloyne, cam, 
he and al his oost, a3ens Jerusalem ; and 
thei bisegiden it, and bildiden a3ens it 
strengthis in cumpas. And the citee wass 
bisegid, til to the enleuenthe jeer of the 
rewme of Sedechie. Forsothe in thes 
fourthe monethe, in the nynthe dai of the 
monethe, hungur helde the citee; and 
foodis weren not to the puple of the lond. 
And the citee was brokun, and alle men7 
werriouris therof fledden; and thei 3eden 
out of the citee in the ni3t, bi the weie of 
the 3ate, which is bitwixe twei wallis, and 
ledith to the gardyn of the kyng, while 
Caldeis bisegiden the citee in cumpas ; and 
thei 3eden forth bi the weie that ledith in 
to desert. Sotheli the oost of Caldeiss 
pursuede the kyng; and thei token Sede- 
chie in desert, which is bisidis Jerico, and 
al his felouschipe fledde awei fro hym. 
And whanne thei hadden take the kyng,9 
thei bron3ten hym to the kyng of Babi- 
loyne in Reblatha, which is in the lond 
of Emath; and the kyng of Babiloyne 
spak domes to hym. And the kyng of1o 
Babiloyne stranglide the sones of Sede- 
chie bifore hise iz3en; but also he killide 
alle the princes of Juda in Rablatha. Andi 
he puttide out the izen of Sedechie, and 
boond hym in stockis; and the kyng of 
Babiloyne brou3te hym in to Babiloyne, 
and puttide hym in the hous of prisoun, 


8 Om. E pr.m. 


£ Om. G pr.m. nu. u betwix 4, 


LII. 12—~-22. 


120f his deth. In the fifte forsothe moneth, 
in the tenthe dai of the moneth, it is the 
nyntenthe 3er of Nabugodonosor, king of 
Babiloyne, cam Nabusardan, prince of 
the chyualrie, that stod bifor the king 
1i30f Babiloyne, in to Jerusalem. And he 
brende vp the hous of the Lord, and the 
hous of the king, and alle the houses of 
Jerusalem; and ‘eche gret hous” with fyr 
ishe brente. And al the ost of Caldeis, 
that was with the maister of chyualrie, 
destro3ede al the wal of Jerusalem bi 
1;enuyroun. Of the pore men forsothe of 
the puple, and of* the tother comun, that 
hadde abiden in the cite, and’ of the fugi- 
tifes, that floun to the king of Babilon,and 
the tothere of the multytude, translatede 
16 Nabusardan, prince of the chyualrie. Of 
the pore men forsothe of the lond, lafte 
Nabusardan, the’ prince of the chyualrie, 
in to vyne tilieres, and in to feld tilieres. 
17 Also the brasene pileeres, that weren in 
the hous of the Lord, and the feet, and 
the brasene se, that was in the hous of 
the Lord, Caldeis to-breeken; and token 
igal the bras of hem in to Babiloyne; and 
cawdrones, and fleshokes, and sautrees, 
and violis, and litil morteres, and alle the 
brasene vesselis, that weren in seruyse; 
igand thei toke the stenes, and the sense 
vesselis, aud the ‘water vesselis, and ba- 
cynes, and candilstickes, and litil mor- 
teres, and cuppes; hou fele goldene, 
goldene, and hou fele siluerene, siluerene. 
29 Toc the maister of chyualrie two pileres, 
and o se, and the twelue brasene calues 
that weren vnder the feet, that king Sa- 
lamon hadde mad in the hous of the 
Lord. Ther was no peis of the bras of 
atalle thes vesselus. Of the pileres for- 
sothe, ei3tetene cubitis of heijte weren in 
the o piler, and a litil corde of twelue 
eubitus wente aboute it; but his gret- 
nesse of foure fingris*, and with ynne 
a2forth ‘it was> hol3. And the hedus vp 


w alle the grete housis 4£ pr.m. GUK. 
b Om. E pr.m. 


$ brou3te 1. 
pollis CEFHGIKMNPQRSUVX. 


JEREMIAH. 


x Om. G pr.m. H, 


469 


til to the dai of his deth. Forsothe in the 12 
nynthe monethe, in the tenthe dai of the 
monethe, thilke is the nyntenthe 3eer of 
the kyng of Babiloyne, Nabusardan, the 
prince of chyualrie, that stood bifore the 
kyng of Babiloyne, cam in to Jerusalem. 
And he brente’ the hous of the Lord, and 13 
the hous of the kyng, and alle the housis 
of Jerusalem; and he brente with fier ech 
greet hous. And al the ost of Caldeis, \4 
that was with the maistir of chyualrie, 
distriede al the wal of Jerusalem bi cum- 
pas. Sotheli Nabusardan, the prince of {5 
chyualrie, translatide of the pore men of 
the puple, and of the residue comyn puple, 
that was left in the citee, and of the fleeris 
ouer, that fledden ouer to the kyng of Ba- 
biloyne; and he translatide other men of 
the multitude. But Nabusardan, the prince 16 
of chyualrie, lefte of the pore men of the 
lond vyne tilers, and erthe tilers. Alsoi; 
Caldeis brakun the brasun pilers, that 
weren in the hous of the Lord, and the 
foundementis, and the brasun waischyng 
vessel, that was in the hous of the Lord ; 
and thei token al the metal of tho in to 
Babiloyne. And thei tokun cawdruns, and 1s 
fleischokis, and sautrees, and violis, and 
morteris, and .alle brasun vessels, that 
weren in seruyce; thei token also ‘watir 19 
pottis', and vessels of encense, and pottis, 
and basyns, and candilstikis, and morters, 
and litle cuppis ; hou manye euere goldun, 
goldun, and hou manye euere siluerne, 
siluerne. The maister of chyualrie took 2 
twei pilers, and o waischyng vessel, and 
twelne brasun caluys, that weren vndur 
the foundementis, whiche kyng Salomon 
hadde maad in the hous of the Lord. No 
wei3te was of the metal of alle these ves- 
sels. Forsothe of the pilers, eiz3tene cubitis 21 
of heiz3the weren in o piler, and a roop of 
twelue cubitis cumpasside it; certis the 
thickenesse therof was of foure fyngris, 
and was holowe withynne. And _ brasun 22 


z Om, A. 


y Om. c. a cubitus £ pr. m. 


t stoondis [strondys ¢ pr. m. GHMQX pr.m. steenys VX sec. m.], ether [other B water 


470 


on either bra3ene; and the he3te of oen 
hed of¢ fyue cubitus; and the litil nettus 
and the poumgarnetus vp on the crowne® 
in cumpas, al was brasene. Lic maner was 
the secounde piler, and the poumgarnetus; 
aud ther weren vp on the hed in cumpas 
alle® brasene, lic maner of the tother pi- 
a3ler. And ther weren nynty pouingar- 
netes and sixe hangende, and alle the 
poumgametus weren cumpassid with an 
24 hundrid litil nettus. And the maister of 
chyualrie toc Saraiam, the first prest, 
and Sofonyam, the secounde prest, and 
25the thre keperes of the vestiarie. And 
of the cite he toe o gelding, that was 
prouost vp on the men fijteres; and the 
seuen men of hem that sejen the face of 
the king, that ben founde in the cite; 
and the scribe, prince of the kny3tus, that 
proneden the newe maad kny3tus; and 
the sixti men of the puple of the lond, 
that ben founde in the myddel of the 
2écite. Toc forsothe them Nabusardan, 
maister of thef chyualrie, and bro3te hem 
to the king of Babiloyne in Reblatha. 
27And smot hem the king of Babiloyne, 
and slo3 hem in Reblatha, in the Jond of 
Emath; and translatede is* Juda fro his 
28lond. This is the puple, whom translat- 
ede Nabugodonosor, in the seuenthe 3er ; 
Jewis, thre thousend and thre and twenty. 
2v9In the ei3tetenthe 3er, Nabugodonosor 
translatede fro Jerusalem eij3te hundrid 
3olynes and two and thretty. The thre 
and twentithe 3er of Nabugodonosor, 
translatide Nabusardan, maister of the" 
chyualrie, of Jewes seuene hundrid lyues 
and fyue and fourty. Alle thanne the 
lyues foure thousend and sixe hundred. 
31 And don is, in the seuene and threttithe 
3eer of the transmygracioun of Joachym, 
king of Juda, the twelfthe moneth, the 
fyue and twentithe dai of the moneth, 
rerede vp Euilmeredoc, king of Babi- 
loyne, that 3er of his regne the hed of 
Joachym, king of Juda; and bro3te hym 
s2'out of! the hous of the prisoun, and 


¢ Om. r prem. 4 crownus c. 


out fro GHK. 


u pileris F. 


JEREMIAH. 


¢ alle nettus £ pr.m. 


¥ 0 CFGHIKMNPQRSUVX. the E. W in the cumpas F. aboute 1. 


LI. 23—32. 


pomels" weren on euer either; and the 
heiz3the of aY pomel was of fyue cubitis; 
and werkis lijk nettis and pumgranatis 
weren on the coroun ‘in cumpas*. And 23 
the* pumgranatis weren nynti and sixe 
hangynge doun, and alle pumgranatis 
weren cumpassid with an hundred werkis 
hijk nettis. And the maister of the chy- 24 
ualrie took Saraie, the firste preest, and 
Sophonye, the secounde preest, and three 
keperis of the vestiarie. And of the citee 25 
he took o chast seruaunt and onest, that 
was souereyn on the men werriours; and 
seuene men of hem that sien the face of 
the kyng, whiche weren foundun in the 
citees; and a scryuen, prince of kny3tis, 
that preuyde 3onge kny3tis; and sixti men 
of the puple of the lond, that weren 
foundun in the myddis of the citee. For-26 
sothe Nabusardan, the maistir of chyualrie, 
took hem, and brou3te hem to the kyng 
of Babiloyne in Reblatha. And the kyng 27 
of Babiloyne smoot hem, and killide hem 
in Reblatha, in the lond of Emath; and 
Juda was translatid fro his lond. This 28 
is the puple, whom Nabugodonosor trans- 
latide in the seuenthe jeer; Jewis, thre 
thousynde and thre and twenti. In the29 
ei3tenthe 3eer, Nabugodonosor translatide 
fro Jerusalem ei3te hundrid and two and 
thritti persoones. In the thre and twen-30 
tithe 3eer of Nabugodonosor, Nabusardan, 
the maister of chyualrie, translatide seuene 
hundrid and fyue and fourti persoones of 
Jewis. Therfor alle the persoones weren 
foure thousynde and sixe hundrid. And3! 
it was doon, in the seuene and threttitlie 
jeer of the passyng ouer of Joachym, 
kyng of Juda, in the tweluethe monethe, 
in the fyue and twentithe dai of the mo- 
nethe, Euylmerodach, kyng of Babiloyne, 
reiside in that jeer of his rewme the heed 
of Joachym, kyng of Juda; and ledde hym 
out of the hous of the prisoun, and spak 32 
good thingis with hym. And he settide 
the trone of him aboue the trones of 
kyngis, that weren after hym in Babiloyne, 


fOm.4. € Om. cE pr.m. b Om. 4. } fro a. 


x Om. 1. 


LH. 33, 34- 


spac with hym goode thingus ; and putte 
his trone vpon the tronus* of kingis, 
33that weren after hym in Babiloyne, and 
chaungede the clothis of his prisoun; and 
eet bred bifor hym euermor, alle da3es of 
3this lif. And his metus, metus perpetuel 
weren 30ue to hym of the king of Babi- 
lon, ordeyned bi ‘daj3es arewe!, vnto the 
dai of his deth, alle the dajes of his lif. 
And don is, after that in to caitifte is 
bro3t Irael, and Jerusalem is destro3ed, 
sat Jeremye, the profete, wepende, and 
weilede with this lamentacioun Jerusa- 


lem; and with bitter inwit si3hende, and 


criende Weile awei! seide. 


kK trone AGHK. 


JEREMIAH. 


47) 


and chaungide the clothis of his prisoun.33 


And Joachym eet breed bifore hym euere, 


in alle the daies of his lijf; and hise metis, 34+ And it was 


euerlastynge metis weren 30uun to hym 
of the kyng of Babiloyne, ordeyned bi ech 
dai, til to the dai of his deth, in alle the 
daies of his lijf. And it was dont, aftir 
that Israel was led in to caitiftee, and Je- 
rusalem was distried, Jeremye, the pro- 
fete, sat wepinge, and biweilideY Jerusalem 
with this lamentacioun; and he si33ide, 
and weilide with bitter soule, and seide. 


l alle daiys & pr.m. 


y biweilynge nv. 


donn, ete.; al 
this, til in to 
the ende of the 
chapetre, sem- 
ith addid of 
summe exposi- 
touris to con- 
tinue the sen- 
tence to the 
chapetris sew- 
inge; for it is 
not in Ebru, 
nethir in bokis 
amendid. Lire 
here. EGXP 
Quy. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


Her gynneth® the Lamentactoun of Je- 
remye>, that is in title Cenoth, with 
the soylinge out of Ebru lettris®. 


CAP. I. 


1 Aleph. Hou sitteth alone the cite ful 
of puple? mad is as a‘ widewe the ladi 
of fole of kinde; prince* of prouynces 

2mad is vnder tribute. eth. Wepende 
she wepte in the ny3t, and the teres of 
hir in hir chekus; ther is not that coum- 
forte hir, of alle hir derwrthe; alle her 
frendus dispiseden‘ hir, and ben mad to 

shir enemys. Guimel. Passyde Juda for 
the affliccioun and the multitude of seru- 
age, dwellide among Jentiles, ne she® fond 
reste; alle hir pursuerus ca3ten hir among 
sanguysshis. Deleth. The weies of Sion 
weilen, for thi that ther ben not, that 
come to the solempnete; alle hir 3atus 
ben strojed, hir prestys weilende, hir 
maidenus foule, and she opressed with 
sbitternesse. Ze. Mad ben hir enemys 
in the hed, and hir enemys ben richid, 
for the Lord spac vp on hir. For the 
multitude of hir wickenesses? hiri litil 
childer ben lad in to caitifte, bifor the 
éface of the trublende. Vaz, And wente 
out fro the do3ter of Sion ‘al hir* fair- 
nesse; mad ben hir princes as wetheres 
not fyndende leswis, and thei wenten 


a bigynneth aEK. 
AEGHK, 


b Jeremye, the prophete a. 
She x pr.m. » wickidnesses scux. 


¢ lettres of reed. k. 
i Om. c. 


The Lamentacioun of Jeremye*. — - 


CAP. I. 


Aleph» +. Hou sittith aloone the citee1 
ful of puple? the ladi of folkis is maad as a 
widewe; the prince of prouynces is maad 
vndir tribute. Beth. It wepynge wepte2 


_in the? ni3t, and the teeris therof® ben‘ in 


‘the chekis therof&; ‘noon is® of alle the 
dereworthe' therof, that coumfortith it; 
alle the frendis therof forsoken it, and ben 
maad enemyes to it. Gymel. Juda pass-3 
ide fro turment and multitude of seruage, 
it dwellide among hethene men, and foond 
no reste; alle the pursueris therof token 
it among angwischis. Deleth. The weies4 
of Sion mourenen, for no men comen to 
the solempnytee; alle the 3atis therof ben 
distried, the prestis therof weilen; the 
vergyns therof ben defoulid, and it is op- 
pressid with bitternesse. He. The ene-s 
myes therof ben maad in the heed, and 
the enemyes therof ben maad riche, for 
the Lord spak on it. For the multitude 
of wickidnessis therof the litle children 
therof ben led in to eaitiftee, bifore the 
face of the troblere. Vau. And al thes 
fairnesse of the dou3ter of Syon 3ede out 
fro the dou3ter of Sion; the princes therof 


d Om. x. 


f spiseden 
k Om. aGcux. 


© princis 4. 


a Here bigynneth the Lamentacioun of Jeremye. cFGKMNQUVX. The book of Trenorum, that is seid La- 
mentacionns of Jeremye. Epy. Hecre biginnen the Lamentaciouns of Jeremye. ut. Heere bigynneth the 


book of Lamentaciouns. x. Lamentaciouns of Jeremye. s. 


the Hebrew are omitted in ceGHIKMNPQRSUVY. 
preter}. & in his cheke s sec. m. 


e princesse F. 
b ther is noon s. 


b Thronghout this book, the initial letters of 
€QOm.1. ¢ofhims. f Om. ceteri 
i dwellere Fr. 


+ Lettris of 
Ebru ben set 
in the bigyn- 
nyng of versus 
in the Latyn 
translacioun, 
for in Ebru the 
versis bigynnen 
bi [with y] let- 
tris of the A- 
bice. Lire here. 
CEGKPQUY. 


I, 7-—15.- 


awei withoute strengthe bifor the face of 
7the folewere. Sai. And recordide Jeru- 
salem of the daies of hir affliccioun and 
trespas, and of alle hir desirable thingus 
that she hadde fro the olde daies; whan 
shulde falle hir puple in the enemys 
hond, and ther was not an helpere ; se3en 
hir the! enemys, and scorneden hir saba- 
stus. 2Heth. A synne synnede Jerusalem, 
therfore™ vnstable she is mad; alle that 
glorifieden hir dispiseden hir, for thei 
sejen hir shenshipe; she forsothe weil- 
gende, and is turned bacward. Jeth. The 
filthis of hir in hir feet, and she record- 
ide not of hir ende; do doun she is 
hugeli, not hauende a comfortour; see, 
Lord, my tormenting, for rered vp is the 
ioenemy. Joth. His hond sente” the ene- 
my to alle hir® desirable thingus; for she 
sa3 Jentilis gon in to hir? seyntuarie, of 
whiche thou haddist comaundid, that thei 
ishulde not‘ go in to thi chirche. Caf. Al 
hir puple weilende and sechende bred, 
and 3eeuen eche preciouse thingus for 
mete to be refreshid the soule; see, Lord, 
yzand behold, for mad Y am foul. Lameth. 
O! alle 3ee that passén bi the weie, tak- 
eth heed, and seeth, if ther is sorewe as 
my sorewe; for to-pullid me it hath, as 
the Lord spac in the dai of the wrathe 
i30f his wodnesse. - Jfen. Fro an hei3 he 
sente fyr in my bonus, and lernede me; 
spredde out a net to my feet, turnede me 
bacward ; he sette me desolat, al dai 
14 with mournyng defacid’. Nun. Wakide 
the 30ct of my wickenesses" in his hond, 
wrappid thei ben togidere, and leid on 
my necke ; feblid is my vertu; 3af me the 
Lord in the hond, of whiche Y shal not 
tsmoun rise. Sameth. Toc awei the Lord 
alle my grete wrthi doeres fro my myd- 
del; he clepede a3en me tyme, that he’ 
to-brose my chosene; the presse trad the 
Lord to” the maide*, do3ter of Juda. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


473 


ben maad as rammes not fyndynge lese- 
wis; and 3eden forth withouten strengthe 
bifore the face of the suere. Zai. And7 
Jerusalem bithou3te on the daies of hir 
affliccioun* and of trespassyng, and on alle 
hir desirable thingis whiche it hadde fro 
elde daies; whanne the puple therof felle 
doun in the hond of enemyes, and noon 
helpere was; enemyes sien** it, and scorn- 
eden the sabatis therof. Heth. Jerusalems 
synnede a synne,therfor it was! maad vnstid- 
fast; alle that glorifieden it forsoken it, for ° 
thei sien the schenschipe therof; forsothe 
it weilide, and was turned abak. Theth.9 
The filthis therof ben™ in the feet therof, 
and it hadde no mynde of hir ende; it 
was putte doun greetli, and hadde no 
coumfortour ; Lord, se thou my turment, 
for the enemye is reisid. Joth. The ene-10 
mye putte™ his hond to alle desirable° 
thingis therof; for it si3? hethene men 
entride in to thi seyntuarie, of which thou 
haddist comaundid, that thei schulden not 
entre in to thi chirche. Caph. Al thei1 
puple therof was weilinge and sekynge 
breed, thei 3auen alle preciouse thingis 
for mete, to-coumforte the soule; se thou, 
Lord, and biholde, for Y am maad vijl. 
Lameth. A! alle 3e that passen bi the12 
weie, perseyue, and se, if ony sorewe is as 
my sorewe; for he gaderide awei grapis 
fro me, as the Lord spak in the day of 
wraththe of his strong veniaunce. Men.13 
Fro an hij he sente fier in my boonys, 
and tau3te me; he spredde abrood a net 
to my feet, he turnede me abak; he set- 
tide me desolat, meddlid togidere a] dai 
with mourenyng. Nun. The 30k of my 14 
wickidnessis" wakide in the hond of hym, 
tho ben foldid togidere, and put on my 
necke; my vertu is maad feble; the Lord 
jaf me in the hond, fro which Y schal not 
mowe rise. Sameth. The Lord took aweits 
alle my worschipful men fro the myddis 


10m. ux. ™and therfor 4x. ® putte c prom. Ee prom. °Om. a. the kK. Pthigz prm. Qnon x, 
Om. 4. § destro3id x prom. thour 4. 4% wickidnes 4. wickidnessis Gux. be £. W Om. E pr.m. 
x maiden E. 

k afficciouns uv. &k saujen 1. —! is m Om. a pr.m., et ceteri. © sente ceteri, © the desirable 1. 
Psaujer. thiepy. * wickidnesse a. 


VOL. III. 3P 


474 LAMENTATIONS. 


1s Ayu. Therfore Y wepende, and myn e3eY 
ledende doun water; for ferr mad ‘fro me? 
is the coumnfortour, turnende my soule ; 
mad ben my sonus lost, for mor my3ti 
17was the enemy. Jee. Stra3te out Sion 
hir hondus, ther is not that coumforte 
hir; the Lord sente ajen Jacob, in the 
cumpas of hir, hir enemys; mad is Jerusa- 
len as defoulid with wymmen flux blodis 
isamong hem. Sade. Ri3twis is* the Lord, 
for his mouth to wratle Y terrede; her- 
* eth, Y beseche, alle puplis, and seeth my 
sorewe ; my maidenes and my 3unge men 
i9wenten in to caitifte. Cof. I clepede 
my frendus, and thei bigileden me; my 
prestus and myn olde men in the cite ben 
wastid ; for thei so3ten mete> to them- 
20 self, that thei refreshee ther soule. Fes. 
See, Lord, for Y am trublid, al disturbid 
is my wombe; turned vp so doun is myn 
herte in myself, for of bitternesse ful Y 
am; withouteforth sleeth4 the sword, 
zland at home deth is lyc. Syn. Thei 
herden, for Y inwardli weile, and ther 
is not that coumforteth me; alle myn 
enemys herden myn euel, gladiden, for 
thon didist; thou bro3tist to dai of coum- 
forting, and® mad thei shul be lic me. 
22 Tau. Go yn al the euel of hem bifor 
thee, and to-pulle hem, as thou to-pulled- 
ist me for my wickydnesses‘; manye 
forsothe my weilingis, and myn herte 
moornende. 


CAP. II. 

1 Aleph. Hou aboute couerde with mys- 
tynesse the Lord in his wodnesse the 
do3ter of Sion? thre3 aferr fro henene in 
to the glorious lond of Irael ; and record- 
ede not of his litil ste3ing stol of his feet, 

2in the dai of his wodnesse. Beth. ‘The 
Lord thre3 doun®, and sparede not, alle 


Yeyen 4c. eejen Hu. 2% Om. E prem. 
c prem. slew; 4E prm.GuKx. © Om. 4, 
E prom. 


8 sette y. 


a Om. c pr. im. 
f wickidnes 4. wickenesses EF. 


t Om. xv. 


I. 16—II. 2. 


of me; he clepide tyme ajens me, that he 
schulde al to-foule my chosun imen; the 
Lord stampide a pressour to the virgyn, 
the dou3tir of Juda. dyn. Therfor Y amis 
wepynge, and myn ize ts ledynge doun 
watir; for a coumfortour, conuertynge my 
soule, is maad fer fro me; my sones ben 
maad lost, for the enemye hadde the 
maistrie. Phe. Sion spredde abrood hise 17 
hondis, noon is that coumfortith it; the 
Lord sente* a3enus Jacob enemyes therof, 
in thet cumpas therof; Jernsalem is maad 
as defoulid with vncleene blood among 
hem. Sade. The Lord is iust, for Vie 
terride his mouth to wrathfulnesse; alle 
puplis, Y biseche, here 3e, and se my so- 
rewe; my virgyns and my 3onge men 
3eden forth in to caitiftee. Coth. I clepide is 
my frendis, and thei disseyueden me; my 
prestis and myn elde men in the citee ben 
wastid; for thei soujten mete to hem silf, 
to coumforte hir lijf. Hes. Se thou, Lord, 20 
for Y am troblid, my" wombe is distur- 
blid; myn herte is distried in my silf, for 
Yam ful of bittirnesse; swerd sleeth with 
outforth, and lijk deth is at hoome. Syn. 21 
Thei herden, that Y make ynward weil- 
yng, and noon is that coumfortith me; 
alle myn enemyes herden myn yuel, thei 
ben glad, for thou hast do; thou hast 
brou3t a dai of coumfort, and thei schulen 
be maad lijk me. Zax. Al the yuel of22 
hem entre byfore thee, and gadere thou 
grapis awei fro hem, as thou hast gaderid 
grapis awei fro me; for my wickidnessis, 
for my weilyngis ben manye,and myn herte 
7s mornynge. 
CAP. IL. 

Aleph. Hou hath the Lord hilid the 
dou3ter of Sion with derknesse in his 
strong veniaunce? he hath caste doun fro 
heuene in to erthe the noble cétee of Is- 
rael ; and bithou3te not on the stool of hise 
feet, in the dai of his strong veniaunce. 
Beth. The Lord castide doun, and spar-2 


bmeede c. ¢refresheden x sec.m. 4 sloo3 


g Stumblede doun the Lord 


u for my I pr.m. 


Il. 3-——1o. 


the faire thingus of Jacob; destrojede in 
his wodnesse the strengthingis* of the 
maiden of Juda, thre3 doun in to erthe!; 
defoulide the reume, and his princes. 
3Gimel. He to-brac in the wrathe of his 
wodnesse eche horn of Irael; turnede 
awey bacward his ri3t hond fro the face 
of the enemy ; and brende vp in to Jacob, 
as fyr of deuourende flawme in cumpas. 
4 Deleth. He beute his bowe as an inward 
enemy, and he fastnede his ri3t hond as 
an vttermor eneiny ; and slo3 al that was 
fair in si3t in the tabernacles of the do3- 
ter of Sion; heeldide out as fyr his in- 
sdignacioun. Ze. Mad is the Lord as 
an enemy ; tumblede* doun Irael, he tum- 
blede doun alle his walles; wastede his 
strengthingus', and fulfilde in the do3ter 
of Juda the lowid man and the lowid 
6womman. Vaz. And he wastide as a 
gardyn his tent, destrojede his taber- 
nacle; to for3eting toc the Lord in™ 
Sion feste dai, and sabat; and repref, and 
‘indignacioun of his wodnesse, king and 
7prest. Sai. Putte abac the Lord his 
auter, cnrsede to his halewing; toc in to 
the hondus of the" enemy® the wallis of 
his toures; vois thei 3eeuen in ‘the hous 
sof? the Lord, as in solempne dai. Heth. 
Tho3te the Lord to scateren the wal of 
the do3ter of Sion; he stra3te out his 
litil corde, and turnede not awei his hond 
fro perdicioun ; and he weilede biforn the 
walling, and the wal‘ togidere is scatered. 
9 Teth. Doun pi3t in the erthe ben hir 
3atus, he loste and to-broside hir barres ; 
his kingis and hys* princes in Jentiles; 
ther is not lawe, and his profetis founden 
10not viseoun of the Lord. Jo¢h. Seten in 
the erthe’, alle stille weren the olde men; 
the do3tris of Sion springden with askus 
ther hedis', ben gird" to with heires; 
threwen awei in the erthe ther hedust 
the matdenus of Jerusalem, gird to thei 
ben with heires; threwen awei in the 


LAMENTATIONS. 


475 


ide not alle the faire thingis of Jacob; 
he distried in his strong veniaunce the 
strengthis of the virgyn of Juda, and 
castide doun in to erthe; he’ defoulide 
the rewme, and the princes therof. Gy-3 
mel. He brak in the ire of his strong 
veliaunce al the horn of Israel ; le turn- 
ede abak his rijt hond fro the face of the 
enemy; and he kyndlide in Jacob, as fier 
of flawie deuowrynge in cumpas. Dedeth. 4 
He as an enemye bente his bouwe, he as 
an aduersarie made stidfast his ri3t hond; 
aud he killide al thing that was fair in 
si3t in the tabernacle of the dou3tir of 
Sion; he schedde out his” indignacioun 
as fier. Ze. The Lord is maad as ans 
enemy ; he castide doun Israel, he castide 
doun alle the wallis therof; he destriede 
the strengthis* therof, and fillide in the 
dou3terY of Juda a man maad low, and a 
womman maad low. Vau. And he sca-6 
teride his tent as a gardyn, he distried 
his tabernacle; the Lord 3af to for3etyng 
in Sion a feeste dai, and sabat%; and the 
kyng and prest in to schenschipe, and in 
to the indignacioun of his strong ven- 
iaunce. Za. The Lord puttide awei his7 
auter, he curside his halewyng; he bitook 
in to the hondis of enemy* the wallis of 
the touris therof; thei jauen vois in the 
hous of the Lord, as in a solempne dai. 
Ffeth. The Lord thou3te to distrie thes 
wal of the dou3ter of Sion; he stretchide 
forth his coorde, and turnede not awei his 
hond fro perdicioun; the forwal, ether 
the» outerward, mourenyde, and the wal 
was distried togidere. Zeth. The 3atiso 
therof ben pi3t in the erthe, he loste and 
al to-brak the barris therof; the kyng 
therof and the princes therof among he- 
thene men; the lawe is not, and the pro- 
fetis therof founden not of the Lord a 
visioun®. Joth. Thei saten in erthe, the1o 
elde men of the dou3tir of Sion weren | 
stille; thei bispreynten her heedis with 


hstrengthis 4. ithe erthe 4. ktumble x. ‘strengthis 4. “into zprm. “hisacu. °enemyes 4. 
POm. xk. (walling 4. ' Om. 4. 8% jaat 4. theuedus £. 4% girdid K. 

vandhev. *Om.vu. *strengisa. Ywatirrsup. ras. Zasabat ns sec.m. ® the enemy 1. 
b Om. cen. ¢ visioun, cther reuelacioun CEFGHIMNPQRSUVXY. 


3P 2 


476 


erthe ther hedust the maidenus of Juda. 
11 Caph. Faileden for teres myn e3en, dis- 
turbid ben my bowelis; held ont is in 
the erthe my mawe vp on the" to-treding 
of the do3ter of my puple; whan shulde 
faile the litil child and the soukende in 
12the stretus of the bur3toun. Lameth. To 
ther imodris thei seiden, Wher is the 
whete, and wyn? whan thei shulden faile 
as wouudid in the stretus of the cite; 
whan thei shulde brethen out ther soulis 
13in the bosuin of ther modris. Jen. To 
whom shal Y comparisoune thee? or to 
whom shal Y licnen thee, thon do3ter of 
Jerusalem? to whom shal Y euenen thee, 
and coumforte thee, thou maiden* do3ter 
of Sion? gret forsothe as the se thi con- 
l4tricioun; who shal lechen thee. Nz. 
Thi profetts seejen to thee false, and fool 
thingus; and openeden not thi wicke- 
nesseY, that thee to penaunce thei shulde 
stere; thei se3jen forsothe to thee fals 
15 takingis to, and throwingis out. Sameth. 
Flappeden ‘vp on? thee with hondus alle 
the passeres bi the wey; whistleden, and 
moueden ther hed vp on the do3ter of 
Jerusalem; seiende, Whether this is not 
the cheef cite of parfit fairnesse, the io3e 
16of al erthe? .d4yx. Openeden vp on thee 
ther mouth alle thin enemyes; whistleden, 
and gnasteden with ther teeth, and seiden, 
Wee shul denoure; lo! this is the dai 
that wee abiden, wee han founde, and seen. 
17 Fee. The Lord dide that he tho3te, he 
fulfilde his wrd that he comaundide fro 
the olde dajes ; he destro3ede, and sparede 
not; and gladide vp on thee the enemy, 
and enhauncede the horn of thin enemys. 
18 Sade. Criede the herte of hem to the 
Lord, vp on the wallis of the do3ter of 
Sion ; bring doun as a stef strem teres, bi 
dai and ny3t; 3yue thou not reste to thee, 
19 ne be stille the appil of* thin e3e. Coph. 
Ris, preise thou in the ny3t, in the bi- 
gynnyng of wacchis; heeld out as water 
thin herte, byfor the si3t of the Lord ; 


theuedns &. v heeldid aecux. W Om. K. 


€ashens. ‘the erthe rs. & and their. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


X maide EK. 


h sauzen 1. seiden N. seyen s. 


II. ri—19. 


aische®, the eldere men of Juda hen girt 
with hairis; the virgyns of Juda castiden 
doun to erthe' her heedis. Caph. Mynis 
iz3en failiden for teeris, myn entrails weren 
disturblid; my mawe was sched out in- 
erthe on the sorewe of the dou3ter of my 
puple ; whamne a litil child and soukynge 
failide in the stretis of the citee. La-12 
meth. Thei seiden to her modris, Where is 
wheete, and wyn? whanne thei failiden 
as woundid men in the stretis of the citee; 
whanne thei senten out her soulis in the 
bosum of her modris. Men. To whom1is 
schal Y comparisoun thee ? ether to whom 
schal Y licne thee, thou douj3ter of Jern- 
salem? to whom schal Y make thee 
euene, and schal Y coumforte thee, thou 
virgyn, the dou3ter of Sion? for whi 
thi sorewe 2s greet as the see; who schal 
do medicyn to thee? Mun. Thi profetis14 
sien to thee false thingis, and fonned ; and 
openyden not thi wickidnesse, that thei 
schulden stire thee to penaunce; but thei 
sien’ to thee false takyngis, and castyngis | 
out. Sameth. Alle men passynge oni the 1s 
weie flappiden* with hondis on thee; thei 
hissiden, and mouyden her heed on the 
dou3ter of Jerusalem; and seiden, This is 
the citee of perfit fairnesse, the ioie of al 
erthe. Ayn. Alle thin enemyes openyden 16 
her mouth on thee; thei hissiden, and 
gnaistiden with her teeth, and _ seiden, 
We schulen deuoure; lo! this is the dai 
which we abididen, we founden, we sien. 
Phe. The Lord dide tho thingis whiche 17 
he thou3te, he fillide hise word which he 
hadde comaundid fro elde daies; he dis- 
triede, and sparide not; and made glad the 
enemy on thee, and enhaunside the horn 
of thin enemyes. Sade. The herte of is 
hem criede to the Lord, on the wallis of 
the dou3ter of Syon; leede thou forth 
teeris as a stronde, bi dai and ni3t; 3yue 
thou not reste to thee, nether the appil of 
thin i3e be stille. Coph. Rise thou togi-19 
dere, herie thou in the ny3t, in the begyn- 

a Om. c. 


Y wickidnes acHx. % vp 4. 


i bi rixs. 


k biflappeden F. 


II. 20—ITI, rr. 


rere to hym thin hondus for the soule of 
thi litil childer, that for hunger pershen 
‘in the hed> of alle many weies ‘in to 
2x000n®. Res. See, Lord, and behold, whom 
thou hast to-pullid ; so therfore lest shuln 
ete wymmen ther frut, litil? childer at 
the mesure of a spanne; for slayn is in 
the seyntuarie of the Lord the prest, and 
2ithe profete. Syn. Lejen in the erthe 
withouteforth the child and the olde 
man; my maidenes and my 3unge men 
fellen in swerd slayn; in the dai of thi 
wodnesse thou smyte, ne thou shalt han 
zereuthe. Tau. Thou clepedest, as® to a 
solempne day‘, that shulden fere me$ of 
the cumpas ; and ther was not that shulde 
scape in the dai of the wodnesse of the 
Lord, and be laft; whom Y bro3te forth 
and nurshede, myn enemy wastede them. 


CAP. III. 


1 Aleph. 1 ‘a man" seende my _ pore- 
nesse in the 3erde of his indignacioun. 
2 Aleph. Me he drof, and bro3t in to derc- 
snessis, and not in to li3t. dleph. Onli 
in to me turnede!, and conuertede his 
thond al dai. Beth. For eldid he made 
my skyn, and my flesh; he to-brosyde 
smny bonus. Beth. He bilde vp* in my 
cumpas, and cumpassede me with galle 
sand with trauaile. Beth. In derke thingus 
he sette me, as deade men euere durende. 

7 Gimel. He bilde aboute a3en me}, that 
Y go not out; he agreggede myn gyues. 

8 Gimel. But and whan Y shal erien and 
pre3e, he closede™ out myn _ orysoun. 
9 Gimel. He closede my weyes with squar 
stonus ; my styes he turnede vp so doun. 
10 Deleth. A waitende bere maad he is to 
11 me, a leoun in hid thingus. Deleth. My 
pathis he turnede vp so doun, and to- 
¢ Om. £ 


b Om. £ pr.m. rm. 


ham kx. ‘he turnede £. 
E pr. Mm. 
I the 1. m wher ceteri passim. 


didist cermi1kmasu. neither dide r. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


d and litle £ prim. 
me Vp AE pr.m. G sec.m, OM. G pr.m. I. 


a felden passim fere 1Ks. 


477 


nyng of wakyngis; schede out thin herte 
as watir, bifore the si3t of the Lord; reise 
thin hondis to hym for the soulis of thi! 
litle children, that failiden for hungur in 
the heed of alle meetyngis of weies. es. 20 
Se thou, Lord, and byholde, whom thon 
hast maad so bare; therfor whether™ 
wymmen schulen ete her fruyt, litle chil- 
dren at the mesure of an hond ? for a prest 
and profete is slayn in the seyntuarie of 
the Lord. Syn. A child and an elde mana 
laien on the erthe withoutforth ; my vir- 
gyns and my 3onge men fellen® doun bi 
swerd; thon hast slayn hem in the dai of 
thi strong veniaunce, thou smotist® ‘and 
didist no? merci. Zhau. Thou clepidist, 22 
as to a solempne dai, hem that maden me 
aferd of cumpas ; and noon was that ascap- 
ide in the dai of the strong veniaunce of 
the Lord, and was left; myn enemy wast- 
ide hem, whiche Y fedde, and nurschide 


up. 
CAP. IIL 


Aleph. IY am a man seynge my pouert! 
in the 3erde of his indignacioun. Adeph.2 
He droof me, and brou3te in to derk- 
nessis, and not in to li3t. Adeph. Oneli3 
he turnede in to me, and turnede togidere 
his hond al dai. Beth. He made eld my 4 
skyn, and my fleisch ; he al to-brak my 
boonys. Beth. He bildid in my cumpas, 5 
and he cumpasside me with galle and tra- 
uel. Beth. He settide me in derk places, 6 
as euerlastynge deed men. Gymel. He7 
bildide aboute ajens me, that Y go not 
out; he aggregide my gyues. Gymel.s 
But and whanne Y crie and preye, he 
hath execludid my preier. Gymel. Hes 
closide togidere iny weies with square 
stoonus; he distriede my pathis. Dedeth. 1 
He is maad a bere settinge aspies to me, 
a lioun in hid places. Deleth. He dis-11 
triede my pathis, and brak me; he set- 


Emen kK. 


€ me us E pr. m. f Om. c. 
m throwith 


10m. E£ prem. 


© smitidist CFHIKQRSU. P neither 


478 


12 brac me"; he putte me desolat. Deleth. 
He bente his bowe, and sette me as a 
issigne to the arewe. He. He putte in 
my reynes the do3tris of his arewe cas. 
11 Hee. Y am mad in to scorne to al puple, 
isthe song of them al dai. He. He ful- 
filde me with bitternesses; he drunknede 
isme with wrmod. Vau. He to-brac at 
noumbre my teeth; he fedde me with 
izaskus. Vau. And® put a bac is my soule; 
18 Y forz3at of goodus. Vau. And Y seide, 
Pershede myn ende, and myn hope fro 
isthe Lord. Sat. Recorde? of porenesse 
and of myn onergoing, and of wrmod 
2vand of galle. Say. Bi mynde Y shal 
be myndeful; and failen in me shal my 
zisoule. Sai. These thingus thenkende in 
22myn herte, in God Y shal hope. Heth. 
The mereyes of the Lord manye, for- 
sothel wee ben not wastid; for his mer- 
ascyest faileden not. Heth. Y kne3 the® 
zimorutid ; myche is thi feith. Zeth. My 
partie the Lord, seide my soule; ther- 
25fore Y shal abiden hym'. TZeth. Good 
is the Lord to men hopende in hym, to 
26the soule sechende hym. Teth. Good is 
to abide with silence the helthe 3ynere 
270f God. Teth. Good is to the man, that" 
hath born the’ 30c of the Lord fro his* 
28 waxende 3outhe. Joth. He shal sitte soli- 
tarie, and be stille; for he rerede hymself 
2z9aboue hymself. Joth. He shal sette in 
pouder his mouth, if par auenture ther 
30be hope. Joth. He shal 3yne to the 
smytende hym the cheke ; he shal be ful- 
3ifyld with repreues. Caph. For putten 
abae shul not the Lord in to euermor. 
32 Caph. For if he haue cast awei, andY he 
shal haue mercy after the multitude of 
33his mercies. Caph. Forsothe he? loewede 
not of his herte; and caste awei the sonus 
34of man. Lameth. That he shulde to- 
brose vnder his feet alle the gyuede of 
35thelond. Lamneth. That he shulde boowe 


a Om. E pr.m,. 
Sin the AE sec.m. GH. 
x the AE pr.m. GHK. 


© Om. E pr.m. 
t Om, £ pr.m. 
y Om. acux. 


q bithenke erp. "J shal wns. 8 of Nn. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


P Recordide «. 
u whan he “AE sec. m. GUK. 
2 Om. E pr.m. 


t solitarie, ether aloone c et cetcri. 


1 t1—=4er 


tide me desolat. Deleth. He bente his 12 
bowe, and settide me as a signe to an 
arowe. He. He sente in my reynes theis 
dou3tris of his arowe caas. He. Y amis 
maad in to scorn to al the puple, the song 
of hem al dai. He. He fillide me with 1s 
bitternesses; he gretli fillide me with 
wermod. Vau. He brak at noumbre my 16 
teeth; he fedde me with aische. Vau..7 
And my soule is putte awei; Y haue for- 
3ete goodis. Vau. And Y seide, Mynis 
ende perischide, and inyn hope fro the 
Lord. Zai. Haue thou mynde on ‘my is 
ponert and goyng ouer, and on wermod 
and galle. Zat. Bi mynde Y schal be 20 
myndeful ; and my soule schal faile in me. 
Zai. Y bithenkynge’ these thingis in myn2i 
herte, sechal™ hope in God. Heth. The22 
mercies of the Lord ben manye, for we 
ben not wastid; for whi hise merciful 
doyngis failiden not. 7Zeth. Y knew in23 
the morewtid; thi feith is miche. JZeth.24 
My soule seide, The Lord is my part; 
therfor Y schal abide hym. TZeth. The2s 
Lord is good to hem that hopen in to 
hym, to a soule sekynge hym. TZeth. Ite 
is good to abide with stilnesse the helthe 
of God. Teth. It is good to a man,27 
whanne he hath bore the 30k fro’ his 
jongthe. Joth. He schal sitte aloonet, 28 
and he schal be stille; for he reiside hyin 
silf aboue hym silf. Joth. He schal sette29 
his mouth in dust, if perauenture hope is. 
Joth. He schal 3yue the cheke to a man30 
that smytith hym; he schal be fillid with 
schenschipis. Caph. For the Lord schalsi 
not putte awei with outen ende. Caph.s2 
For if he eastide awei, and he schal do 
merci bi® the multitude of hise mercies. 
Caph. For he makide not low of his herte ; 33 
and castide not awei the sones of meu. La- 
meth. That he schulde al to-foule vndur hise 34 
feet alle the boundun men of erthe. La- 
meth’ ..That he schulde bowe doun the dom of 35 


q for 4EGHK, ‘' mercy doyngus 4E sec. m. GHK. 


v Om. £ prem. W Om. E prim. 


uaftir:. ¥ From x. Om. A. 


II. 36—59. 


‘doun the dom of man, in the si3te of the 
scchere of the he3est. Lameth. That he 
schuld* mysturne a man in his dom, the 
37 Lord kne3 not. zen. Who ys this that 
seide, that® shulde be don, the Lord not 
sscomaundende? Men. Of the mouth of 
the hejest shul not go out ne goode 
so thingus ne euele. Jfen. What grucchede 
a man lyuende, a man for his synnes ? 
so Nun. Serche we oure weies, and seche, 
and be wee® turned ajeen to the Lord. 
41 Nuz.>Rere wee oure hertus with hondus, 
42to the Lord in to heuenus*. Mun. Wee 
wickeli¢ diden, and to wrathe terreden ; 
astherfore thou art vnpreiable. Sameth. 
Thou coueridist in wodnesse, and smyte 
44vS; thou slowe, and sparedist not. Sa- 
meth, Thou puttest ajen a cloude to thee, 
4s lest passe the preieer. Sameth. Pulling vp 
bi the roote, and casting awei, thou put- 
agtist me, in the myddel of puplus’. Ain. 
Myn e3e is tormentid, and was not stille; 
47forthi that ther was not reste. Ayn. To 
the tyme that shulde biholde and looke 
asthe Lord fro heuenus. Ayu. Myn e3e 
robbede" my soule in alle the do3tris of 
so9my cheef cite. 2e. Openeden vp on vs 
sother mouth, alle the enemys. Je. Ferd 
and gren don ‘is to vs, profeciyng and 
sicontricioun. Je. My e3en bro3ten doun 
deuyseouns of watris, in the contricioun 
s20f the do3ter of my puple. Sade. Bi 
hunting thei token me as a brid, myn 
s3enemys freeli. Sade. Slyden is in to a 
grene my lyf; thei! setten a ston vp on 
s4me. Sade. Floweden watris vp on myn 
3s hed; Y seide, Y pershede. Cops. I in- 
wardli clepede thi name, Lord, fro the 
s¢laste grene. Cof. My vois thou herdest ; 
ne turne thou awei thin ere fro my sob- 
s7bing* and cries. Coph. Thou ne3zhedist 
in the dai, whan Y inwardli clepede thee ; 
58 thou seidist, Ne drede thou. es. Thou 
demedest, Lord, the cause of my soule, 


a Om. c prom. E prem. G prom, ANK, 
fthe puples 4. & Om E pr.im. 


t From x. Lameth. a. 
¥ From x. Sameth, a. 
a From x. Phe. a. 


b perishe N. 
Coph. a. 


f suuzest 1. 


vit & pr.m. 


h preiede & pr.m. iand thei aze sce.m. K. 


$ comaundith CEFGIIKMNPQRSUVX. 
w From x. Ayw. a. * From x. Om. a. Y Til cerirKMQrsux. 
© From x. Sade. a. 


LAMENTATIONS. gD 


man, in the si3t of the cheer of the hi3este. 
Lameth, That he sehulde peruerte a mans 
in his dom, the Lord knew not. Men*.37 
Who is this that seide, that a thing sehulde 
be don, whanne the Lord comaundide® not? 
Men, Nether goodis nether yuels schulen3s 
go out of the mouth of the hizeste. DZen.39 
What grutchide a man lyuynge, a man 
for hise synnes? Nun. Serche we oure 40 
weies, and seke we, and turne we a3en to 
the Lord. Nun. Reise we oure hertis 4 
with hondis, to the Lord in to heuenes. 
Nun, We han do wickidli, and han terrid 42 
thee to wraththe; therfor thou art not able 
to be preied. Sameth". Thou hilidist inas 
stronge veniaunce, and smitidist vs; thou 
killidist, and sparidist not. Saaeth. Thou 44 
settidist a clowde to thee, that preier passe 
not. Sameth. Thou settidist me, drawing 45 
vp bi the roote, and castynge out, in the 
myddis of puplis. Ayn’. Alle enemyes 46 
openyden her mouth on vs. Ayn. In-47 
ward drede and snare is maad to vs, pro- 
fesie and defoulyng. -dyz. Myn ijen led- 48 
den doun’ departyngis of watris, for the 
defoulyng of the dou3ter of my puple. 
Phe". Myn i3e was turmentid, and was 49 
not stille; for no reste was. Phe*.VntilY the so 
Lord bihelde, and si3? fro heuenes. Phe. 51 
Myn i3e robbide my soule in alle the don3- 
tris of my citee. Sade*. Myn enemyes token 52 
me with out eause, bi huntyng as a brid. 
Sade*, My lijf slood in to a lake; and theiss 
puttiden a stoon on me. Sade. Watris 54 
flowiden ouer myn heed; Y seide, Y pe- 
rischide®. Coph*. Lord, Y clepide to helpss 
thi name, fro the laste lake. Coph*. Thou 56 
herdist my vois; turne thou not awei thin 
eere fro my sobbyng? and cries. Coph. 5; 
Thou nei3idist to me in the dai, wherynne 
Y clepide thee to help; thou seidist, Drede 
thou not. J?es*. Lord, ajenbiere of my ss 
lijf, thou demydist the cause of my soule. 
Res*. Lord, thou siest’ the wickidnesse 


d jieuene a. e wickidly acm. 
k soxyng E pr. m. 


¢ Om. 4. 


u From x. Nan. A. 
% sau3 1 fere passim. 
¢ From x. 


t From x. Men. a. 


d snobhyng CFGIIKMNPQRSUYX. 


480 


s9thou a3een biere of my lif. tes. Thou 
see3e, Lord, the wickenesse! of them ajen 
sone; deme thou my dom. Fes. Thou se3e 
eche wodnesse, alle the tho3tus of hem 
srajens me. Synz. Thou hast herd the re- 
preues of hem, Lord ; alle the tho3tus of 
szhem azen ime. Siz. The lippis of men 
inrisede to me, and the bithenkingus of 
63hem ajen me al day. Siz. The sitting 
of hem and the ajeen rising of hem see ; 
6sY am the salm of hem. Zau. Thou 
shalt 3elde to them the while, Lord, after 
6sthe werkis of ther hondus. Zaz. Thou 
shalt 3yue to them the sheld of herte™, 
«é6thi trauaile. Zax. Thou shalt pursue 
in thi wodnesse, and to-trede them vnder 
heuenus, Lord. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Aleph. Hou bicome dere is gold, 
chaungid is the best colour? scatered ben 
the stonus of the seyntuarie in the hed 

2of alle stretus. Beth. The sonus of Sion 
glorious, and wrappid with the chef gold, 
in" to erthene vesseles, werk of the hondis 

sof a crockere. Gimel. But and the cruel 
beestis clepid lamya®, nakeden ther tetes, 
3eeuen ther whelpus souken; the do3ter 
of my puple cruel, as an ostrich in desert. 

1 Deleth. Cleuede to the? tonge of the 
soukende to his palet in thrist; the litil 
childer askeden bred, and ther was not 

5that shulde breke to them. He. That 
eeten voluptuously, dieden in weies; that 
weren nurshid in ‘faire clois of saffroun4, 

6han clippid’ thostus. Vau. And more 
mad is the wickednesse’ of the do3ter of 
my puple than the synne of Sodoinys, 
that is turned vp so doun in a moment, 
7and toc not in to it hondus. Saz. Whit- 
tere is Nazareis than sno3, shynendere 
than mylc; reddere than old yuer, than 
ssafyr fairere. Heth. Gretli blakid is 
abone colis the face of hem, and thei 
ben not knowen in stretus; cleuede tot 
the skyn to the bonus of hem, it driede, 


1 wickidnes seHK. m thyn herte £ pr.m. 
rE pr.m. faire clathis of saffroun E sec. m. marg. 


a From x. Om. a. > From x. Res. a. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


n hou ben thei holden in seizx. 
E prom. cruel bestis that ben clepid lamya £ sec. m. marg. AGHK. 


t biclippid 4& sec. m. K. 


© am mad PNS sec. m. 


Ill. 60—IV. 8. 


of hem aj3ens me; deme thou my doom.s9 
Res. Thou siest al the woodnesse, alle the 60 
thou3tis of hem a3enus me. Syn*. Lord, 61 
thou herdist the schenshipis of hem; alle the 
thou3tis of hem a3ens me. Syz. The lippis 62 
of men risynge a3ens me, and the thou3tis 
of hem ajens me al dai. Syz. Se thouss 
the sittynge and risyng aj3en of hem; Y 
am the salm of hem. Thaw", Lord, thou 64 
schalt 3elde while to hem, bi the werkis 
of her hondis. Zu‘. Thou schalt 3yue to6s 
hem the scheeld of herte, thi trauel.. Tau. 66 
Lord, thou schalt pursue hem in thi strong 
veniaunce, and thou schalt defoule hem 
vndur heuenes. 


CAP. IV. 


Aleph. How is gold maad derk, the! 
beste colour is chaungid? the stonys of 
the® seyntuarie ben scaterid in the heed 
of alle stretis. Leth. The noble sones of2 
Sion, and clothid with the best gold, hou 
ben thei arettid in to erthene vessels, in 
to the werk of the hondis of a pottere ? 
Gimel. But also lamyes* maden nakid3 
her tetis, 3auen mylk to her whelpis; the 
dou3ter of my puple zs cruel, as an ostrig 
in desert. Deleth. The tonge of the souk-4 
ynge childe cleued to his palat in thirst ; 
litle children axiden breed, and noon was 
that brak to hem. He. Thei that eeten® 
lustfuli, perischiden in weies; thei that 
weren nurschid in cradels, biclippiden 
toordis. Vau. And the wickidnesse of theé 
dou3ter of my puple is maad more than the 
synne of men of Sodom, that was distried 
in a moment, and hondis token not ther- 
ynne. Zai. Nazareis therof weren whitere 7 
than snow, schynyngere than mylk; ro- 
dier than elde yuer, fairere than safire. 
Heth. The face of hem was maad blackere 8 
than coolis, and thei weren not knowun in 
stretis; the skyn clenyde to her boonys, 
it driede, and was maad as a tre. Jeth. It9 


© mermynes C pr. m. 
q safrouned thingus 
t Om. 4. 


Pmy E pr.m. 
8 wickenesse E. 


4 From x. Syn. a. ¢ Om. Fiks. 


* lamyes ben 
cruel beestis 
that sleen her 
whelpis. v. 


IV. 9—20. 


gand mad is asatree. Teth. Betere was 
to the slayn men with swerd, than to the 
slayn men with hungir; for thei anoen 
ben dead, these" ful out failederi, ben to- 
wastid of the bareynesse of the’ erthe. 
10 Joth. The hondus of merciful wymmen 
setheden ther sonus; mad thei ben the 
metus of hem in the contricioun of the 
11do3ter of my puple. Caf. The Lord ful- 
filde his wodnesse, helde out the wrathe 
of his indignacioun ; and the Lord tende 
vp fyr in Sion, and denourede his founde- 
1zmens. Lameth. Leeueden not the kingis 
of the lond, and’ alle the dwelleris of the 
world*, that gon in shulde the ferr ene- 
my and the ny3 enemy bi the jatus of 


i3Jerusalem. Jen. For the synnes of - 


his profetus, and the wickidnessis’ of his 
prestus, that heeldeden out in his myddil 
14the blod of ri3twis men. Nun. Erreden 
the blinde in stretus, defoulid ben in 
blod ; and whan thei my3te not entre, 
1sthei heelden ther swolwis. Sameth. Goth 
awei, 3ee defoulid, thei crieden to them, 
departeth awei, goth awei, wileth not 
touche; forsothe thei iangleden, and ben 
to-stired; seiden among Jentiles, He shal 
no more lei to, that he dwelle in hem. 
16 Ain. The face of the Lord deuydede 
them, he shal not adde, that he beholde 
them; the faces of prestus thei shameden 
not, ne of the olde men thei reweden. 
17 Fee. Whan 3it wee shulde stonden alyue, 


faileden oure ejzen to oure veyn help’; . 


whanne wee bihelden takende heed to 
the fole of kinde, that saue vs my3te not. 
is Sade. Thei maden slidery oure steppis 
in the weie of oure stretes; nejhede oure 
ende, fulfild ben oure da3es, for comen is 
i9oure ende. Cof. Swiftere weren oure 
pursueres than egles of heuene vp on the 
mounteinus; thei pursneden vs, in desert 
20thei setteden aspies to vs. Hes. The 
spirit of oure mouth; Crist Lord, taken is 
in oure synnes; to whom we seiden, In 


a Om. £ pr.m. vOm. aecux. ~ Om.c. 


2 hoope 4. 


bthilke 1. ¢ Om. 1 sec.m. 


VOL. III. 


4 the dwellers 1 sec, m. 
3Q 


LAMENTATIONS. 481 


was betere to men slayn with swerd, than 
to men slayn with hungur; for these men 
wexiden rotun, thei weren wastid of the 
bareynesse of erthe. Joth. The hondis of 10 
merciful wymmen sethiden her children ; 
thei weren maad the metis of tho? wym- 
men in the® sorewe of the dou3ter of my 
puple. Caph, The Lord fillide his strong 11 
veniaunce, he schedde out the ire of his 
indignacioun; and the Lord kyndlide a fier 
in Sion, and it deuouride the foundementis 
therof. Lamet. The kyngis of erthe, and 12 
alle dwelleris’ of the world bileueden not, 
that an aduersarie and enemy schulde en- 
tre bie the 3atis of Jerusalem. fen. For 1s 
the synnes of the profetis therof, and for 
wickidnessis of preestis therof, that sched- 
den out the blood of iust men in the 
myddis therof. Maz. Blynde men erryden 14 
in stretis, thei weren defoulid in blood ; 
and whanne thei mi3ten not go, thei helden 
her hemmes. Samet. Thei crieden to hem, 15 
Departe awei, 3e defoulide men, departe 
3e, go 3e awei, nyle 3e touche; forsothe 
thei chidden, and weren stirid; thei seiden 
among hethene men, God schal no more 
leief to, that he dwelle among hem. Ayn. i6 
The face of the Lord departide hem, he 
schal no more leie to, that he biholde hem; 
thei weren not aschamed of the faces of 
preestis, nether thei hadden merci on eld 
men. Phe. The while we stoden 3it, oure 17 
izen failiden to oure veyn help; whanne 
we bihelden ententif to a fole, that my3te 
not saue vs. Sade. Oure steppis weren 18 
slidir in the weie of oure stretis; oure 
ende neiz3ede, oure daies weren fillid, for 
oure ende cam. Coph. Oure pursueris 19 
weren swiftere than the eglis of heuene; 
thei pursueden vs on hillis, thei settiden 
buschementis to vs in desert. tes. The 20 
spirit of oure mouth, Crist the Lord, was 
takun in oure synnes; to whom we seiden, 
We schulen lyue in thi schadewe among 
hethene men. Syz. Thou dou3ter of Edom, 21 


Xerthe £ pr.m. _¥ wickidnesse c. wickenesses F. 


ein bins. f addet. 


482 


thi shadewe wee shul lyue in folkus of 

2ikinde. Syn. Io3e, and glade, thou do3ter 
of Edom, that dwellist in the lond of 
Hus; to theé also shal come the chalis, 

22 thou shalt be drunke, and nakened. Taw. 
Fulfilde is thi wickenesse*, thou do3ter of 
Sion; he shal no more adde, that he ouer- 
passe thee; he shal visite thi wickenesse®, 
thou” do3ter of Edom, discouere he® shal 
thi synues. : 


The Orisoun of Jeremye, profete*. 


1 Recorde, Lord, what hath falle to vs; 
inwardly looke, and behold oure repref. 
2Qure eretage turned is to alienes, oure 
3houses to straungeres. Faderles childer 
we® ben mad with oute fader; oure mo- 
aders as widewis. Oure water in monee 
wee han drunke, oure trees for pris wee 
shan bo3t.’ Bi oure nollis we were dryue, 
sand to the weri was‘ not 3oueé reste. To 
Egipt wee 3eeuen hond, and to Assiries, 
that wee shulde be fulfild with bred. 
7Oure faders synneden, and ben not, and 
wee the wickidnesses* of hem han born. 
sSeruauns lordshipeden of vs, and ther 
was not, that ajeen shulde bie fro the 
ghond of hem. In oure lyues we! bro3ten 
to bred to vs, fro the face of the swerd 
1gin desert. Oure skin as an ouene is to- 
brent, fro the face of tempestus of hunger. 
11 Wymmen in Sion thei* meekiden, and 
12 maidenus in the cites of Juda. Princes bi 
the hond ben hangid vp; faces of olde men 
13 thei! shameden not. The 3unge wymmen 


b the AE sec. m. GHK. 
e Om. £ pr. m. 
i Om. £ prom. 


a wickidnes aqux. 
the prophete. aEGUK. 
nesses E. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


© she cE. 
f Om. 4G prom. HK. 
k Om. c pr.m. E prem. 


IV. 21——V. 13. 


make ioye, and be glad, that dwellist in 
the lond of Hus; the cuppe schal come 
also to thee, thou schalt be maad drunkun, 
and schalt be maad bare. Thau. Thouz2 
dou3ter of Sion, thi wickidnesse is fillid ; 
he schal not adde more, that he make thee 
to passe ouer; thou dou3ter of Edom, he 
schal visite thi wickidnesse, he schal vnhile 
thi synnes. ; ‘ 


Here endith the Lamentaciouns and 
here bigynneth the Preier of Jeremye, 
the profetes. 


Flere bigynneth the Preier of Jeremye*. 


Lord, haue thou mynde what bifelle to1- 
vs; se thou, and biholde oure schenschipe. 
Oure eritage is turned to aliens, oure housis 2 
ben turned to straungers. We ben maad3 
fadirles children with out fadir; oure mo- 
dris ben as widewis. We drunken oure4 
watir for monei, we bou3ten! oure trees 
for siluer. We weren dryuun bi oures 
heedis, and reste was not 3ouun to feynt 
men. We 3auen hond to Egipt, and toe 
Assiriens, that we schulden be fillid with 
breed. Oure fadris synneden, and ben*7 
not, and we baren the wickidnessis of 
hem. Seruauntis weren lordis of vs, and 8 
‘noon was, that a3enbou3te fro the hond of 
hem. In oure lyues we brou3ten breed tog 
vs, fro the face of swerd in desert. Oure1o 
skynne is brent as a furneis, of the face 
of tempestis of hungur. Thei maden lowu 
wymmen in Sion, and virgyns in the citees 
of Juda. Princes weren hangid bi thee 
hond; thei weren not aschained of the 
faces of elde men. Thei mysusiden 3onge 13 


4 Here begynneth the Orisoun of Jeremye, 
S3yue £. 4 wickidnes «cu. wicke- 
Om. 4e pr.in. 


& From c. Here enden the Lamentaciouns, and here bygynneth the [a GQ] preter of Jeremye, the pro- 
fete. Famqu. Here enden the Lamentaciouns of Jeremye, and here bigynneth the preier of Jeremye. H. 
Heere enden [endith x] the Lamentaciouns, and heere biginnith the preier of Jeremye, the prophet. 1. 
Here enden the Lamentaciouns ; se now the preier of Jeremye, the profete. K. Here enden the Lamenta- 
ciouns, and here bigynneth the preier of Jeremye. nx. Here [enden] the Lamentaciouns of Jeremye, and 
bigynneth the preier of Jeremye.s. Here endith the Lamentacioun, and bigynneth the preier of Jeremye. v. 


No final rubric in aEpy. 


i brou3zten ar see.m. —_- thei ben 1. 


h This is the preizer of Jeremie. vy. 


No initial rubric in the otlier Mss. 


Ve 4m 22. 


vnchastli thei inysvseden, and the childer 
14in tree togidere fellen. Olde men faileden 
of the 3atus; 3unge men of the quer of 
1ssyngeres. Failede the ioze of oure herte; 
16 turned is in to weiling oure™ quer. Fel 
the croune of oure hed; wo to vs! for 
17 wee han synned. Therfore dreri mad is 
oure herte, therfore to-derened ben oure 
isejen. For the mount of Sion, for it dis- 
19 perisht® ; wlues 3iden in it. Thou, for- 
sothe, Lord, in to with oute ende shalt 
abide stille; thi see in to ieneracioun and 
20to ieneracioun. Whi in to with oute 
ende thou shalt for3eten vs, thou shalt 
forsake vs in to the lengthe of da3is? 
21 Conuerte vs, Lord, to thee, and we shul 
be conuertid; newe thou oure dajes, as 
22fro the bigynnyng. But castende awei 
thou® hast put vs out; thou wrathedist 
a3en vs hugely. 


Her endeth Jeremye, and gynneth the 


prolog in the boc clepid Baruch?. 


™ their £ pr.m. 4 pershede £ pr.m. 


1 fro 1. 
of Jeremie ; se now.the prolog of Baruk. x. 


LAMENTATIONS. 


© thee thou E pr.m. 


m queer, ether song CEFGHIKMPQRSUVXY. 
No final rubric in the other Mss. 


483 


wexynge men vnchastli, and children fellen 
doun in tree. Elde men failiden fro 3atis; 14 
3onge men failiden of' the queer of sing- 
eris. The ioie of oure herte failide; oure is 
song™ is turned in to mourenyng. The 16 
coroun of oure heed fellen doun; wo to 
vs! for we synneden. Therfor oure herte 17 
is maad soreuful, therfor oure izen ben 
maad derk. For the hil of Sion, for itis 
perischide ; foxis 3eden in it. But thou, 19 
Lord, schal dwelle with outen ende; thi 
seete schal dwelle in® generacioun and in 
to generacioun. Whi schalt thou for3ete 20 
vs with outen ende, schalt thou forsake vs 
in to lengthe of daies? Lord, conuerte2! 
thou vs to thee, and we schal be con- 
uertid; make thou newe oure daies, as at 
the bigynnyng. But thou castynge awei 22 
hast cast awei vs; thou art wrooth ajens 
vs greetli. 


Here endith the Preier of Jeremye, and 
bigynneth the prolog of Baruch°. 
P No final rubric in secu, 


Dinto EG. © From nsv. Here endeth the book 


8aQ2a 


BARUCH. 





Prologe to the book of Baruch, the 
prophete*. 


‘Tus boe, that® Baruch bi name is 
bifor notid, in Ebru canoun is not had, 
but onli in the comun translacioun ; lyc 
maner and the epistil of Jeremye; for 
the knouleching forsothe of rederes heer 
ben write; for many thingus of Crist and 
of the laste tymes thei shewen. 


Here endith the prologe, and bigynneth 
the book of Baruch'. 


Here bigynneth the prolog of the book 
of Baruk?. 


Tus book, which is titlid bi the> name 
of Baruk, is not had in the autorite® of 
Ebrew, but oneli in the comyn transla- 
cioun; in lijk maner and the pistle’ of 
Jeremye is not in the canoun of Ebreu; 
netheles for the knowyng of rederis, these 
ben writun here; for these schewen many 
thingis of Crist, and of the laste tymes. 


Here endith the prologe, and here by- 
gynneth the book of Baruk. 





Heer gynneth the boc*. 


CAP. 1. 


1 And these ben the wrdus of the boc, 
that wrot Baruch, the sone of Neri, sone 
of Masy, sone of Sedechie, sone of Sedei, 

zsone of Elchie, in Babilon; in the fifte 
3er, in the seuenthe dai of the moneth, 
in the tyme that Caldeis token Jerusa- 

3lem, and brenden it vp with fyr. And 
Baruch radde the wrdus of this boc at 
the eres of Jeconye, sone of Joachym, 


Here biginnith the book of Baruk'. 


CAP. I. 


And these ben the wordis of the book, 1 
which Baruk, the sone of Nerie, sone of 
Maasie, sone of Sedéchie, sone of Sedei, 
sone of Helchie, wroot in Babilonye; ine 
the fyuethe 3eer, in the seuenthe dai of 
the monethe, in the tyme wherynne Cal- 
deis token Jerusalem, and brenten it with 
fier. And Baruk redde the wordis of this3 
book to the eeris of Jeconye, sone of Joa- 


@ From x. The prolog of Baruch. a. Prologe in Baruch. ex sec.v. The prologe in Baruch. cu. No 


initial rubric inc. » The boke of «. 


¢ and in £ pr.m. 


¢ Here 


4 From x. No final rubric in aceGu. 


begynneth the boke of Baruch, prophete. a. Incipit liber Baruch. r. Here bigynneth the boke of Baruch. a. 


No initial rubric in x. 


8 The prologe of Baruk. cumau. This is the prolog on Baruk. epy. The prologe. ¥. Heere biginnith 


the prologe on Baruk. 1. 
bOm.F. ¢canoun, ether autorite c et ceteri. 
prologe, and bigynneth the book. 1. 

prolog of Baruk; se now the booc. K. 
Baruk. Gar. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


A prolog vpon Baruck. Rr. 
q epistil Ervy. 
Heere endith the prologe, and biginnith Baruk. 1. 

No final rubric in the other Mss. 


Prolog of Baruk.s. The prolog on Baruk. x. 
€ From ceFrmnsuvx. Here endith the 
Herc endeth the 


f Baruk. a. Herc bigynneth 


I. 4-—14. 


king of Juda, and at the eres of al the 
4puple comende to the boe; and at the eres 
of the my3ti men of the sonus of kingus, 
and at the eres of prestus, and at the eres 
of the puple, fro the leste vnto the meste 
of hem, alle dwellende in Babyloyne, and 
sat the flod of Sodi. The whiche herende 
wepten, and fasteden, and pre3eden in 
ethe si3t of the Lord. And thei geder- 
eden monee, after that my3te of eche the 
z7hond. And thei senten in to Jerusalem 
to Joachym, sone of Elchie, sone of Sa- 
len, the prest, and to the prestus, and to 
al the puple that ben founde with hymf 
sin Jerusalem; whan thei shulde take the 
vesseles of the temple, that weren take 
awei fro the temple, to a3een clepe ‘in to8- 
the lond of Juda, the tenthe dai of the 
moneth Cybam; the siluer vesselis, that 
Sedechie, sone of Josie, king of Juda, 
gmade, after that Nabugodonosor, king of 
Babiloyne, hadde take Jeconye, and his! 
princes, and alle the* my3ti, and the! 
puple of the lond fro Jerusalem, and 
10 bro3te them gyued in to Babiloyne. And 
thei seiden, Lo! wee han sent to 30u 
mones, of whiehe bieth brent sacrifise, and 
cens, and maketh manaa, and offreth for 
synne at the auter of the Lord oure 
11God. And pre3eth for the lif of Nabugo- 
donosor, king of Babiloyne, and for the 
lif of Balthasar, his sone, that the da3es 
of them be as the da3es of heuene vp on 
izerthe; that the Lord 3yue vertue to vs, 
and li3tne oure e3en, that wee lyue vnder 
the shadewe of Nabugodonosor, king of 
Babiloyne, and vnder the shadewe of 
Balthasar, his sone; and serue wee to 
hem manye da3es, and fynde wee grace 
13in the sy3te of hem. And for vs™ self 
prejeth to the Lord oure God, for wee 
han synned to the Lord onre God, and 
turned awei is not his wodnesse fro vs, 
14yn to this dai. And redeth this boc, that 
wee han sent to jou, to be reherced in 


fhem x. fina, 4 the sone £ pr.m. 
Asup.ras. ™oure AGHK. 
vOm.1. Wleeste F. * ton. vntol. til nN. 


b May a marg. ¢ Om. G. 4 oure self EPY. vs 8. 


BARUCH. 


ithe 4z sec.m. cnx. Om. £ pr. m. 


¥ moste F. 


485 


chym, kyng of Juda, and to the eeris of 
al the puple comynge to the book; and toa 
the eeris of the’ my3ti sones of kyngis, 
and to the eeris of prestis, and to the eeris 
of the puple, fro the mooste” ‘til to* the 
leesteY of hem, of alle dwellynge in Ba- 
biloyne, and at the flood Sudi. Whiches 
herden, and wepten, and fastiden, and 
preieden in the si3t of the Lord. Ande 
thei gaderiden monei, bi that that ech 
mannus hond my3te; and senten in to7 
Jerusalem to Joachym, the prest, sone? of 
Helehie, sone* of Salen, and to the preestis, 
and to al the puple that weren foundnn 
with hym in Jerusalem; whanne he tooks 
the vessels of the temple of the Lord, that 
weren takun awei fro the temple, to a3en 
clepe in to the lond of Juda, in the tenthe 
dai of the monethe Siban>; the siluerne 
vessels, which Sedechie, the kyng of Juda, 
the sone of Josie, made, aftir that Nabu-9 
godonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, hadde take 
Jeconye, and princes, and alle my3ti men, 
and the puple of the lond fro Jerusalem, 
and ledde hem boundun in to Babiloyne. 
And thei seiden, Lo! we han sent to 3ou 10 
richessis, of whiche bie 3e brent sacrifices, 
and encense, and make 3e sacrifice, and 
offre 3e for synne at the auter of 3oure 
Lord God. And preye 3e for the lijf ofi 
Nabugodonosor, king of Babiloyne, and 
for the lijf of Balthasar, his sone, that 
the daies of hem ben on erthe as the daies 
of heuene; that the Lord 3yue vertu to 
vs, and li3tne oure ijen, that we lyue 
vndur the sehadewe of Nabugodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, and vndur the scha- 
dewe of Balthasar, his sone; and that we 
serue hem bi many daies, and fynde grace 
in the sij3t of hem. And preye 3e° for ‘vs 13 
silf4 to our Lord God, for we han synned 
to oure Lord God, and his strong ven- 
iaunee is not turned awei fro¢ vs, ‘til in tof 
this dai. And rede 3e this book, which 14 
we senten to 30n, to be rehersid in the 


k andthe zg. ‘Jal the 


z the sone cFUIKMQRSU. Om. £. 4 the sone Q. 


€ for Fury. f vnto 1. 


486 BARUCH. 


the temple of the Lord, in a solempne 
isdai, and in a couenable day". . And 3ee 
shul sey, To the Lord oure God ri3twis- 
nesse®, to vs forsothe confusioun of oure 
face, as is this dai to al Juda, and to the 
i¢dwelleris in Jerusalem, to oure kingus, 
and to oure princes, to oure prestus, and 
17to oure profetus, and to oure faders. We 
han synned bifor the Lord oure God, and 
wee han not leeued, mystrostende? in to4 
ishym. And we wer not soietable ‘to hym’, 
and wee wel herden not the vois of the 
Lord oure God, that wee shulde go in 
i9his maundemens that he 3af to vs; fro 
the dai that he ladde out oure faders fro 
the lond of Egipt, vn to this dai, we 
weren mystrowable to the Lord oure 
God; and scatered we wenten awey, lest 
20 wee shulde heren the vois of hym. And 
ther cleueden to vs many euelis, and 
cursingus, the whiche the Lord sette to 
his sernaunt Moises; that ladde out oure 
faders fro the lond of Egipt, to 3yue to 
vs the lond flowende myle and hony, as 
2lin this day. And wee herden not the 
vois of the Lord oure God, after alle the 
wrdus of profetus, that he sente to vs, and 
22to oure iugis; and we wenten awey, eche 
in to’ the wit of oure shreude herte, to 
werche to alien godus, doeude euelus bifor 
the e3en of the Lord owre God. 


CAP. II. 


1 For whiche thing ordeynede the Lord 
oure God his wrd, that he spac to vs, 
and to oure iuges that demeden Jerusa- 
lem‘, and to oure kingus, and to oure 

2 princes, and to al Irael and Juda; that 
the Lord shulde bringe to vp on vs grete 
euelis, that ben not do vnder heuene, as 
ben do in Jerusalem; after that ben write 

3in the lawe of Moises, that a man shulde 
ete the flesh of his sone, and the flesh of 

shis do3ter. And he 3af hem in the hond 
of alle kingus, that ben in oure cumpas, 
in to repref, and in to desolacioun in alle 


n Om. c pr.m. 


© oure riztwisnesse C pr. m. 
8 Om. £ prem. 


tin Jerusalem 4GHK. 


& Om. CFGHMNPQRUVY. 


P mystrowande 4GHK. 


I. 15——Il. 4. 


temple of the Lord, in a solempne dai, 
aud in a8 couenable.dai. And.3e schulen 1s 
seie, Ri3tfulnesse zs to oure Lord God, 
but schenschipe of oure face is to vs, as 
this dai is, to a] Juda, and: to dwelleris in 
Jerusalem, to oure kyngis, and. to oure16 
princes, to oure preestis, and to oure pro- 
fetis, and to oure fadris. We synneden 17 
bifor oure Lord God, and bileuyden not, 
and tristiden not in hym. And we? weren 1s 
not redi to be suget to hym, and we 
obeiden not to the vois of oure Lord God, 
that we 3eden in hise comaundementis, 
whiche he 3af to vs; fro the dai in which 19 
he ledde oure fadris out of the lond. of 
Egipt, til in to this dai, we weren vnbi- 
leueful to oure Lord God; and we weren 
scaterid, and jeden awei, that we herden 
not the vois of hym. And many yuels20 
and cursyngis, whiche the Lord ordeynede 
to his seruaunt Moises, cleuyden to vs; 
which Lord ledde oure fadris out of the 
lond of Egipt, to 3yue to vs a lond flow- 
ynge mylk and hony, as in this dai. Andai 
we herden not the vois of oure Lord God, 
bi alle the wordis of prophetis, whiche he 
sente to vs, and to oure iugis; and we22 
jeden awei, ech man in to the wit of his 
yuel herte, to worche to alien goddis, and 
we diden yuels bifore the i3en of oure 
Lord God. 


CAP. II. 


For which thing oure Lord God settide1 
stidfastli his word, which he spak to vs, 
and to oure iugis, that demyden in Israel, 
and to oure kyngis, and to oure princes, 
and to al Israel and Juda; that the Lord 2 
schulde brynge on vs grete yuels, that 
weren not don vudur heuene, as tho ben 
doon in Jerusalem; bi tho thingis that ben 
writun in the lawe of Moises, that a mans 
schulde ete the fleischis of his sone, and 
the fleischis of his dou3ter. And he 3af4 
hem in to the hond of alle kyngis, that 
ben in oure cumpas, in to schenschipe, and 


qOm. Eprom. * Om. c pr. m. 


h Om. epvy. thei ns sec. m. 


II. 5—18. 


puplis, in whiche scaterede vs the Lord. 
sAnd wee ben mad vndernethe, and not 
aboue; for we han synned to the Lord 
oure God, not wel herende the vois of 
shym. To the Lord oure God ri3twis- 
nesse, to vs forsothe and to oure faders 
7shenshipe of the face, as is this dai. For 
the Lord spac vp on vs alle these euelis, 
sthat camen vp on vs. And wee louli 
prejeden not the face of the Lord oure 
God, that wee shulden turne a3een, eche 
gof vs fro oure werst weies. And the 
Lord woc in euelis, and bro3te them vp 
on vs; for ri3twis is the Lord in alle his 
10 werkus that he sente to vs. And wee 
herden not the vois of hym, that we 
shulde go in the hestes of the Lord, that 
ithe 3af bifor oure face. And now, Lord 
God of Irael, that bro3tist out thi puple 
fro the lond of Egipt in a strong hond, 
and in signes, and wndris", and in thi 
grete vertue, and in an hy3 arm, and 
madist to thee a name, as is this day; 
- 12wee han synned, ynpitously wee han 
born vs, wickeliY wee han’ do, Lord oure 
13 God, in alle thi rijtwisnesses. Be turned 
awey thy wrathe fro vs; for wee ben laft 
a fewe among Jentilis, wher thou hast 
1ascatered vs. Heere, Lord, oure preieeres, 
and oure orisounus, and bring vs out for 
thee; and 3if to vs to finde grace bifor 
the face of hem, that ladden vs awey ; 
isthat al erthe wite, for thou art Lord 
oure God, and for thi name is inwardli 
clepid vp on Irael, and vp on the kinde 
isof hym. Bihold, Lord, fro thin hoeli 
hous in to vs, and bowe in thin ere, and 
17ful out here vs. Opene thin een, and 
see; for not the deade that ben in helle, 
whos spirit is taken fro* ther bowelis, 
shul 3yue wrshipe and iustefiyng to the 
is Lord; but the soule that is sori vp on 
the mykilnesse of euel, and goth bowid, 
and meekid, and the e3en failende, and 
the soule hungrende, 3yueth to thee glorie 


win wondris 4eGK. in thi wondris u sup. ras. 


i hast scaterid 1. 


BARUCH. 


k Om. 1 pr. m. 


487 


in to desolacioun in alle puplis, among 
whiche the Lord scateride vs. And wes 
ben maad bynethe, and not aboue; for we 
synneden to oure Lord God, in not obei-, 
ynge to the vois of hym. Ri3tfulnesse is 
to oure Lord God, but schenschipe of face 
zs to vs and to oure fadris, as this dai is. 
For the Lord spak on vs alle these yuels, 7 
that camen on vs. And we bisou3téns 
not the face of oure Lord God, that we 
schulden turne a3en, ech of vs fro oure 
worste weies. And the Lord wakide ing 
yuels, and brou3te tho on vs; for the Lord 
is iust in alle hise werkis, whiche he co- 
maundide to vs. And we herden not the 10 
vois of hym, that we schulden go in the 
comaundementis of the Lord, whiche he 
3af bifore oure face. And now, Lord God 1 
of Israel, that leddist thi puple out of the 
lond of Egipt in a strong hond, and in 
myraclis, and in grete wondris, and in thi 
greet vertu, and in an hi3 arm, and madist 
to thee a name, as this dai is; we haniz 
synned, we han do vnfeithfuli, we han do 
wickidli, oure Lord God, in alle thi ri3t- 
fulnessis. Thi wrath be turned awey fro13 
vs; for we ben left a fewe among hethene 
men, where thou scateridist' vs. Lord, 14 
here thou oure axyngis, and oure preyeris, 
and lede vs out for thee; and 3yne thou to 
vs to fynde grace bifore the face of hem, 
that Jedden vs awei; that al erthe knowe, 15 
that thou art oure Lord God‘, and that 
thi name is clepid to help on Israel, and 
on the kyn of hym. Lord, bihold thou 16 
fro thin hooli hous on vs, and bouwe doun 
thin eere, and here vs. Opene thin i3en, 17 
and se; for not deed men that ben in helle, 
whos spirit is takun fro her entrails, schu- 
len 3yue onour and iustefiyng to the Lord; 
but a soule which is sori on the greetnesse 12 
of yuel, and goith bawid, and sijk, and 
izen failynge, and an hungri soule, 3yueth 
glorie to thee, and ri;tfulnesse to the Lord. 
For not bi the ri3tfulnesses! of oure fadris i9 


vwickidly acux. Whak. * for c. 


1 ri3twisnesses 1. 


488 


19and ri3twisnesse, Lord’. Whiche not after 
the ri3twisnesse of oure faders heelden 
out mercy bifor thi sij3t, Lord oure God ; 
20but for thou sentist thi wrathe and thi 
wodnesse vp on vs, as thou speeke in the 
hondus of thi childer profetus, seiende, 
21 Thus seith the Lord, Bowith doun 3oure 
shuldris, and 3oure nol, and doth trauaile 
to the king of Babiloyne; and 3ee shul 
sitte in the lond, that Y 3af to 3oure fa- 
22ders. That if 3ee shul not don, ne here 
the vois of the Lord oure God, to werche 
to the king of Babiloyne, 3oure failing Y 
shal make fro the cites of Juda, and fro 
23the 3atus of Jerusalem; and Y shal take 
awei fro 30u the vois of merthe*, and 
the® vois of io3e", and vois of the>> man 
spouse, and vois of the womman spouse; 
and ben shal al the lond with oute step 
24from the dwelleres in to it. And thei 
herden not thy vois, that thei shulde 
wrche to the king of Babiloyne; and 
thou settedest thi wrdus, that thou speeke 
in the eres of thi childer profetus, that 
translatid shulde be the bonus of oure 
kingus, and the bonus of oure faders fro 
25this place. And lo! thei ben cast forth 
in the hete of the sunne, and in the frost 
of the ny3t; and thei ben dead in werst 
sorwes, in hunger, and in swerd, and in 
2¢sending out. And thou settedist thi¢ 
temple, in whiche is inwardli clepid thi 
name in it, as this dai, for the wickenes® 
of the hous of Irael, and of the hous of 
27 Juda. And thou hast don in vs, Lord 
oure God, after thi goodnesse, and after 
2sal that thi grete mercy doing, as thou 
speeke in the hond of thi child Moises, 
in the dai that thou comaundedist‘ to 
hym to write thi lawe bifor the sonus of 
29 Irael, seiende, If 3ee shul not here my 
vois, this grete multetude shal be turned 
in to the leste fole of kinde, for them Y 
30Sshal scatere; for Y wot, that mee shal 


BARUCH. 


II. 19—30. 


we ‘scheden merci™ bifore thi® si3t, oure® 
Lord God; but for thou sentist thi20 
wraththe and thi stronge veniaunice on vs, 
as thou spakest in the hondis of thi chil- 
dren profetis, and seidist, Thus seith the21 
Lord, Bowe 3e 3oure schuldur, and 3oure 
necke, and do 3e trauel to the kyng of 
Babiloyne; and 3e schulen sitte in the lond, 
which Y 3af to 30ure fadris. That if 3e22 
don not, nethir heren the vois of 3oure 
Lord God, to worche to the kyng of Ba- 
biloyne, Y schal make 3oure failyng fro 
the citees of Juda, and fro the jatis of 
Jerusalem; and Y schal take awei fro 30u 23 
the vois of gladnesse, and the vois of ioye, 
and the vois of spouse, and the vois of 
spousesse; and al the lond schal be with 
out step of hem that dwellen therynne. 
And thei herden not thi vois, that thei24 
schulden worche to the kyng of Babi- 
loyne; and thou hast set stidfastli thi 
wordis, whiche thou spakist in the hondis 
of thi children, prophetis ; that the boonys 
of oure kyngis, and the boonys of oure 
fadris schulen be borun ouer fro her place. 
And lo! tho? ben cast forth in the heete of 25 
the sunne, and in the frost of ni3t™; and 
men ben deed in the worste sorewis, in 
hungur, and in swerd, and in sending out. 
And’ thou hast sett the temple in which 26 
thi name was clepid to help, as this dai 
schewith, for the wickidnesse of the hous 
of Israel, and of the hous of Juda. And 27 
thou, oure Lord God, hast do in vs bi al 
thi goodnesse, and bi al that greet mer- 
ciful doyng of thee, as thou spakest in2s 
the hond of thi child Moises, in the dai 
in which thou comaundidist to hym to 
write thi lawe bifore the sones of Israel, 
and seidist, If 3e heren not my vois, this 29 
greet ournyng and myche schal be turned 
in to the leest among hethene men, whi- 
dur Y schal scatere hem. For Y woot, 30 
that the puple schal not here me, for it is 


yto the Lord & pr.m. Zio3ec. %Om.Ec. %merthec. »>>Om.c. ¢thes. 4 inward c. 
¢wickidnes acux. f comaundist 4GHK. 
™ heelden out preieris, and axen mercy 1. 0 the N. © of oure N, P thei v. t the nist N, 


8 Alson. t Om n. 


II, 3t-——III. 7. 


not® here the puple. The puple is for- 


sothe with an hard nol, and -shal be- 


turned to his herte, in the lond of his 
31 caitifte ; and thei schul wite, for Y am 
the Lord God of hem. And Y shal 3yue 
to them an herte, and thei shul vndir- 
32stoude, and eres, and thei sliul here. And 
thei shnuln preise me in the lond of ther 
caitifte, and myndeful thei shul be of my 
23name. And thei shu) turnen awei them- 
self fro ther harde rig, and fro ther 
cursidhedus; for thei shul remembre the 
weie of ther fadris, that synneden in me. 
34And Y shal ajeen clepe hem in to the 
lond, that Y swor to the fadris of hem, 
Abraham, Isaac, aud Jacob; and thei shul 
lordshipen of it. And Y shal multeplie 
35them, and thei shul not be lassid. And 
Y shal sette to thein ‘an other" testament 
euere durende, that Y be to them in toa 
Lord, and thei shul be to me in to a pu- 
ple. And Y shal no more moue my puple, 
the sonus of Irael, fro the lond that Y 
jaf to them. 


CAP. III. 


1 And now, Lord God of Irael, the soule 
in anguysshes, and the spirit tormentid 
»crieth to thee. Heere, Lord, and haue! 
mercy; for God thou art merciful. And 
haue mercy of vs, for wee han synned 
3bifor thee, that sittist in to euermor, 
and wee shul not pershe in to the spi- 
srituel during. Lord God al my3ti, God 
of Irael, here now the orisoun of the 
deade men of Irael, and of the sonus of 
hem, for thei han synned bifor thee, and 
thei herden not the vois of the Lord ther 
5 God, and ioyned ben to vs euelis. Wile 
thou not han* mynde of the wickenesse! 
of oure fadris, but haue™ mynde of thin 
shond and of thi name in this tyme; for 
thou art Lord oure God, and wee shul 
7preise thee, Lord. For that thou hast 
3oue thi drede in oure hertes, that wee 


Snoeprm baa ihak. 


BARUCH. 


k ha xk. 


489 


a puple of hard nol. And it schal turne to 
her herte in the lond of her caitiftee; and si 
thei schulen wite, that Y am the Lord 
God of hem. And Y schal 3yue to hem an 
herte, and thei schulen vndurstonde, and 
eeris, and thei schulen here. And theise 
schulen herie me in the lond of her cai- 
tiftee, and thei schulen be myndeful of 
my name. Thei schulen turne awei hem3s 
silf fro her hard bak, and fro her wickid- 
nessis ; for thei schulen haue mynde of 
the wei of her fadris, that synneden a3ens 
me. Ani Y schal a3en clepe hem in to3s 
the lond, which Y swoor ¢o 3yue to the 
fadris of hem, to Abraham, Isaac, and Ja- 
cob; and thei schulen be lordis of it. And’ 
Y schal multiplie hem, and thei schulen 
not be maad lesse. And Y schal ordeyne 3s 
to hem an other testament euerlastynge, 
that Y be to hem in to God, and thei 
schulen be to me in to a puple. And Y 
schal no more moue my puple, the sones 
of Israel, fro the lond which Y 3af to hem. 
And now, Lord almi3ti, God of Israel, ai 
soule in angwischis and a spirit anoied 
crieth to thee, Jord, here thou, and hauez 
merci, for thou art merciful God; and 
haue thou merci on vs, for we han synned 
bifor thee, that" sittist withouten ende, and 3 
we schulen not perische withouten ende. 
Lord God almi3ti, God of Israel, here thou 4 
now the preier of the deed men of Israel, 
and of the sones of hem, that synneden 
bifor thee, and herden not the vois of 
her Lord God, and yuels ben fastned to 
vs. Nyle thou haue mynde on the wick-5 
idnesse of oure fadris, but haue thou 
mynde on thin hond and on thi name in 
this tyme; for thou art oure Lord God, ¢ 
and, Lord, we schulen herie thee. For whi7 
for this thing thou hast 3one thi drede 
in oure hertis, that we clepe thi name to 
help, and herie thee in oure caitiftee; for 
we schulen be conuertid fro the wickid- 
nesse of oure fadris, that synneden ajens 


| wickidnes acux. ™ha x. 


u thou 1. 


VOL. IIE. 


3R 


490 


inwardli clepe thi name, and preise thee 
in oure caitifte$; for wée shul be turned 
fro the wickenesse" of oure fadris, that 
ssynneden in thee. And lo! wee in oure 
caitifte ben to dai, that vs thou hast 
scatered, in to repref, and in to cursing, 
and in to synune, after alle the wickid- 
nessis® of oure fadris, that wenten awei 
ofro thee, Lord oure God. Here thou, 
Irael, the maundemens of lif; with eres 
10 parceyue, that thou wite prudence. What 
is, Irael, that in the lond of the enemys 
uthou art? Thou hast eldid in an alien 
lond, thou? art defoulid with deade men, 
thou? art set with men goende doun in 
12to helle? Thou hast forsake the welle 
130f wisdam; for if in the weies of God 
thou haddest go, thon shuldist han dwell- 
i4id forsothe in pes vp on erthe. Lerne, 
wher be prudence, wher be vertue, wher 
be vnderstonding, that thou wite togi- 
dere, wher be long abiding of lyf and of 
liflode, wher be 1i3t of ejen, and ‘pes’. 
1» Who fond his place? whot entride in to 
ishis tresores? Wher ben the princes of 
Jentilys, and that lordshipen of bestes, 
i7that ben vpon erthe? That in the 
18 briddis of henene pleien; that siluer tre- 
soren and gold, in whiche trosten men, 
and ther is noon ende of the purchasing 
of hem? That siluer forgen, and ben 
besy, ne ther is finding of the werkus of 
i9hem? Thei ben outlawid, and to helle 
thei wente doun; aud othyr men in the 
20 place of hem risen. The 3unge* men of 
hem sawen li3t, and dwelten on erth. 
Sothely thei knewen not the wei of disci- 
2iplyne, nether vndirstoden the pathis of 
it; nether the sones of hem resceyueden 
it. Fro the face of hem it is maad fer; 
22it is not herd in the lond of Canaan, 
23nether it is seen in Theman. And the 
sones of Agar, that sou3ten out prudence 
that is of erth, the marchauntis of erth, 
and Theman, and thet fablers, or sang- 


n wickidnes acnx. © wickenessis £. 
§ The Mss. c and £ end here. 


Vin N. 


BARUCH. 


P Om. E pr. m. 
The text in what follows is taken from x. 


Ww yisen F. resen I. 


III. 8——23. 


thee. And lo! we ben in oure caitiftes 
to dai, whidur thou scateridist vs, in to 
schenschipe, and in to cursyng, and in to 
synne, bi al the wickiduesse of oure fadris, 
that 3eden awei fro thee, thou oure Lord 
God. 


CAP. III. 


Israel, here thou the comaundementis9 
of lijf; perseyue thou with eeris, that 
thou kunne prudence. Israel, what is it, 10 
that thou art in the loud of enemyes ? 
Thou wexidist eld in an alien lond, thou 
art defoulid with deed men, thou art aret- 
tid with hem, that goou doun in to helle? 
Thou hast forsake the welle of wisdom; 12 
for whi if thou haddist gon in the weies 13 
of God, sotheli thou haddist dwellid in 
pees on erthe. Lerne thou, where is wis- 14 
dom, where is prudence, where is vertu, 
where is vndurstondyng, that thou wite 
togidere, where is long duryng of lijf and 
lijf lode, where is lizt of i3en, and pees. 
Who foond the place therof, and who en- 15 
tride in to the tresouris therof? Where 16 
ben the princes of hethene men, ard that 
ben lordis ouer the beestis, that ben on 
erthe? Whiche pleien with the briddis of 17 
heuene; whiche tresoren silner and gold, 18 
in which inen tristen, and noon ende is 
of’ the purchasyng of hem? Which maken 
siluer, and ben busi, and no fyndyng is of 
her werkis? Thei ben distried, and 3eden 19 
doun to hellis; and othere men riseden* 
in the place of hem. The 3onge men of 20 
hem sien 1li3t, ‘and dwelliden* on erthe. 
But thei knewen not the weie of wisdom, 
nether vndurstoden the pathis therof; ne-21 
ther the sones of hem resseyueden it. It 
was maad fer fro the face of hem; it is22 
not herd in the lond of Canaan, nether is 
seyn in Theman. Also the sones of Agar, 23 
that sou3ten out prudence which is of 
erthe, the marchauntis of erthe, and of 
Theman, and the tale telleris, and sekeris 


rand who AE sec. m. GHK. 
t Om. ac. 


4 of pese aGuk. 


x dwellynge 1. 


Ill. 24—IV. 2. 


lers, and seekers out of prudence, and of 
vnderstondinge; sothely thei knewen not 
the weie of wysdam, nether hadden 
24mynde of the paathis therof. O! Yrael, 
hou grete is the hous of God, and hou 
25 grete the place of his possessiounn ; gret 
and not hanynge eende, hee3 and with 
26outen mesure grete. Ther weren named 
gyauntis; tho that fro the bigynnynge 
weren in grete stature, witynge bataile. 
27The Lord chese not these, nether thei 
founden the weie of discipline; therfor 
asthei pershiden. And for thei hadde not 
wijsdam, thei pershiden for her vnwijs- 
2adam. Who stei3ede in to heuen, and 
toke it', and ledde it doun fro cloudis ? 
30 Who passide ouer the se, and foonde it, 
stand brou3t it to, ypon chosen gold? Ther 
is not, that may wite the waies therof, 
nether that sekith out the pathes therof ; 
s2bot he that wote alle thingis, knew3 it, 
and foond it by his prudence. The whiche 
maade redy the erth in euerlastynge 
tyme, and fulfilled it with feeld bestes, 
33and four footid bestis. The whiche send- 
ith out 1i3t, and it goth; and he clepid it, 
and it obeischide to hym in tremblynge. 
34Forsoth sterris jauen 1i3t in her keep- 
35 yngus, and gladiden; thei ben clepid, and 
thei seiden, We cummen, to; and thei 
shyneden to hym with mirth, that maad 
3s6hem. This is our God, and other shal 
s7not ben gessid ajenis hym. .He this 
foonde al weie of disciplyne, and bitoke 
itv to Jacob, his child, and to Yrael, his 
ssderworth. After these thingus he was 
seen in erthis, and lyued with men. 


CAP. IV. 

1 This boke of the maundementis of God, 
and the lawe that is in to with outen 
eend. Alle men that holden it", shuln per- 
fitly cummen to lijf. Forsoth thei that 

eshuln forsake it, in to deth. Jacob, be 
thou conuertid, and cacche it; walke by 


t Om. «4. 


Y A! cFGIIIKMNPQRSUVX. 


BARUCH. 


Z therinne Ns sec.m. ® N. 


491 


out of prudence and of vndurstondyng. 
But thei knewen not the weie of wisdom, 
nether hadden mynde on the paththis 
therof. O!Y Israel, the hous of God is ful 24 
greet, and the place of his possessioun is 
greet; it is greet and hath noon ende,25 
hi3 and greet without mesure. Namyd 26 
giauntis weren there”; thei that weren 
of greet stature at the bigynnyng, and 
knewen batel. The Lord chees not these, 27 
nether thei founden the weie of wisdom; 
therfor thei perischiden. And for thei had-2s 
den not wisdom, thei perischiden for her 
ynwisdom. Who stiede in to heuene, and 29 
took that wisdom, and brou3te it doun fro 
the cloudis? Who passide ouer the see, 30 
and foond it, and brou3te it* more than 
chosun gold? Noon is, that mai knowesi 
the weie therof, nethir that sekith the 
pathis therof; but he that han alle thingis, 32 
knewe it, and foond it bi his prudence. 
Which made redi the erthe in enerlast- 
ynge tyme, and fillide it with twei footid 
beestis, and foure footid beestis. Which 33 
sendith out li3t, and it goith, and clepide 
it; and it obeieth to hyin in tremblyng, 
Forsothe sterris 3auen 1ijt in her kep-a4 
yngis, and weren glad; tho weren clepid, 35 
and tho seiden, We ben present; and tho 
schyneden to hym with mirthe, that» 
made tho. This is oure God, and noon36 
other schal be gessid ajens hym. This37 
foond ech weie of wisdom, and 3af it to 
Jacob, his child, and to Israel, his derlyng. 
Aftir these thingis he was seyn in londis, 38 
and lyuede with men, 


CAP AV: 


This book of Goddis heestis, and the! 
lawe which is withouten ende. Alle that 
holden it, schulen come to lijf. But thei 
that han forsake it, schulen come in to 
deth. Jacob, be thon conuertid, and take 2 
thou it; go thou bi the weie at the bri3t- 


U beholden «. 


b and that n, 


3R 2 


492 


the waye to the shynynge of it, a3einus 
3the li3t of it. Bitake thou not thi glorie 
to an other, and thi dignitee to alien folk. 
4Yrael, we ben blessid; for what thingus 
ben plesaunt to God, ben knowen to vs. 
5 Thou peple of God, be of euener inwitt, 
or more stable, thou Yyrael, worthi of 
6mynde. 3e ben sold to heithen men, not 
in to perdicioun; bot for that in wrath 
3ee terriden God to wrathfulnesse, 3ee ben 
7bitaken to aduersaries. Forsoth 3ee ster- 
iden to bitternesse the enerlastyng God, 
that made 30n; offrynge to deuyls, and 
snot to God. Sothli 3ee han for3eeten 
hym that nurishide 3ou, aud 3ee han 
maad sorewful Jerusalem, 3our nurshe. 
9Sotheli it sawe wrathfulnesse of God 
cummynge to 30u; and saide, 3ee ni3 
coostis of Syon, heere; forsothe God 
10 brou3t to me grete mournynge. Forsoth 
I see3 the caitifte uf my peple, of my 
sones and dou3tris, whiche the euerlast- 
llynge aboue brou3te to hem. Sotheli I 
nurishide hem with mirthe; forsothe I 
left hem with weepynge and mournynge. 
12No man haue ioye vp on me, widue and 
desolate. I am left, or forsaken, of manye, 
for the synnes of my sones; for thei bow- 
i3iden awei fro the lawe of God. Forsoth 
thei wisten not the ri3twisnesse of hym; 
nether walkiden’ bi weies of the heestis 
of God, ne” bi the paathis of treuthe of 
hym thei entreden with rij3twisnesse. 
14Cum the ni3 coostis of Syon, and bi- 
thenke thei the caitiftee of my sones 
and dou3tris, the whiche the euerlast- 
1s ynge aboue brou3te to hem. Forsoth he 
brou3te vpon hem a fole fro fer, a fole 
vnsaciable, or enrestful, and of an other 
1étunge; whiche dredden not with reuer- 
ence an olde man, nether hadden mercy 
of children; and ledden aweie the sones 
of widue, and maaden desolat the aloon 
\7womman fro sonys. Forsoth what may 
18] help 30u? Forsothe he that bro3te euyl 


Vv thei walkiden acu. 


© pacienter, ether of betere coumfort CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 
k left 1. 


et alu. & riztwisnesses 1. Om. Nn. lof u. 


BARUCH. 


IV. 3-18. 


nesse therof, ajens the lijt therof. 3yue 
thou not thi glorie to another, and thi 
dignyte to an alien fole. Israel, we ben 
blessid; for tho thingis that plesen God, 
ben open to vs. The puple of God, Israels 
worthi to be had in mynde, be thou ‘of 
betere coumfort®. 3e ben seeld to hethenes 
men, not in to perdicioun; but for that 
that 3e in ire terreden God to wrathful- 
nesse, 3e ben bitakun to aduersaries. For7 
je wraththiden thilke God euerlastynge, 
that made 30u; and 3e offriden to fendis, 
and not to God. For 3e for3aten hym thats 
nurschide 30u, aud 3e maden sori 30ure 
nurse, Jerusalem. For it si3 wrathfulnesse9 
of God comynge to 3on, and it seide, 3e 
ni3 coostis of Sion, here; forsothe God 
hath brou3te greet morenyng to me. For 10 
Y si3 the caitiftee of my puple, of my 
sones and dou3tris, which he that is with 
out bigynnyng and ende brou3te on hem. 
For Y nurschide hem with myrthe; butu 
Y lefte hem with wepyng and morenyng. 
No? man haue ioye on me, a wedewe and 12 
desolat. Y am forsakun of manye for the 
synnes® of my sones'; for thei bowiden awei 
fro the lawe of God. Forsothe thei knewen 13 
not ‘the ri3tfulnessis? of hym; nether thei 
3eden bi the weies of Goddis heestis, nether 
bi the pathis of his treuthe thei entriden 
with ri3tfulnesse. The ni3 coostis of Sion 14 
come, and haue thei mynde on the caitifte 
of my sones and dou3tris, which he that 
is with out bigynuyng and ende brou3te 
on hem. For" he brou3te on hem a folk 1s 
fro fer, an yuel folk, and of an other 
langage; that reuerensiden not an eld man, 16 
nether hadden merci on children; and thei 
ledden awei the dereworthe sones of a wi- 
dewe, and maden a womman aloone deso- 
lat of sones. But what mai Y helpe 3ou ?17 
For he that brou3te on 30u yuels, shal de-18 
lyuer 30n fro the hondis of 3oure enemyes. 
Go 3e, sones, go 3e; for Y am forsakun* 19 
aloone. Y haue vnelothid me of the stoole! 


W neithir G sec. m. 


4 And non. © synne v. 
1 stole, ether long roobe, ceteri. 


f sone A pr. m- 


IV. 19—33. 


thingus vpon 3o0u, shal delyuere 30u fro 
isthe hondis of 3our enmyes". Wandre 
jee, sones, wandre’; I sothli am forsaken 
20aloon. J haue vnelothide me the stole of 


pese ; forsothe I clothide me with sak of ° 


bisechynge, and I shal crie to the bihest” 
21in my days. Sones, be 3ee of betir herte, 
or stabler; crie 3ee to the Lord, and he 
shal delyuere 30u fro the hond of princes, 
zeenmyes. Sotheli I hopide in to with 
outen eend 30ur helth, and ioye came to 
me of the holy vpon mercye, that shal 
cum to 30u of 3our saueour euerlastynge. 
23 Forsoth I sent jou out with mournyng 
and weepynge; forsoth God shal a3ein 
lede 30u to me with ioye and mirthe in 
21to with outen eende. Sotheli as the nei3- 
bores of Syon sawen 3our caitifte of God, 
so thei shuln see and in hast 3our helth 
of God, that shal aboue cum to 30u with 
grete honour in euerlastyng shynynge. 
' 25 Sones, suffre 3e pacientli the wrath, that 
aboue commith to 3ou; forsoth thin en- 
mye pursuede thee, bot sone thou shalt 
see perdicioun of hym, aud vpon the 
2énollis of hym thou shalt steiz vp. My 
delicatis, o7 nurshid in delicis, walkiden 
sharp weies ; sotheli thei weren led as a 
27 floc rauyshide with enmyes. Sones, be 
jee of euener herte, 07 stabler, and afer 
crie 3ee to the Lord ; sotheli 30ur mynde 
28 shal be of hym that ledith 3o0u. Forsoth 
as 30ur witt was for to erre fro God, éft 
sone tern so myche 3ee conuertyng shuln 
29'a3en seeken* hym. Forsothe he that ledde 
in to 30u enyl thingus, shal brynge eft 
sone to 3ou myrthe euerlastynge with 
3030ur helth. Jerusalem, be thou more 
stable, or of better herte ; sotheli he that 
3inamede thee, monestith thee. Thei that 
-traueiliden thee, shuln apeere noyinge, or 
gilty; and thei that thankiden’ in thi fail- 
3zyng, shuln be punyshide. The citees to 
whom thi sones seruyden, shuln be pu- 
33nishid, and it that toke thi sones. So- 
theli as it ioyide in thi fallyng, and glad- 


tenemye 4. V wandreth G sec. m. 


™ 3oure merci A prm.1. > Om. 1. 


8fleddenr. ¢Om.1. 


BARUCH. 


w heegest G sec. m. 


9% stele sone F. 


493 


of pees; but Y haue clothid me with a 
sak of bisechyng, and Y schal erie to the 
hi3este in my daies. Sones, be 3e of betere 21 
comfort ; erie 3e to the Lord, and he schal 
delyuere 3ou fro the hond of prinees, that 
ben 30ure enemyes. For Y hopide 3oure 22 
helthe with outen ende, and ioye cam to 
me fro the hooli on merci™, that schal 
come to jou fro 30ure sauyour without 
bigynnyng and ende. For Y sente 30u out 23 
with mourenyng and wepyng; but God 
schal brynge 3ou a3en to me with ioye 
and myrthe with outen ende. For as the" 24 
ueiz3boressis of Sion sien 3oure ecaitifte 
maad of God, so thei schulen se and in 
swiftnesse 3oure helthe of God, which 
helthe schal come to 30u fro aboue with 
greet onour and euerlastynge schynyng. 
Sones, suffre 3e pacientli ire, that cam ones 
jou; for thin enemy pursuede thee, but 
thou schalt se soone the perdicioun of 
hym, and thou schalt stie® on? the neckes 
of hym. My delicat men 3eden scharp26 
weies; for thei as a floc ‘that 7s rauysehid 
weren led of enemyes. Sones, be 3e pa-27 
cientere, and erie 3e fer to the Lord; for 
whi 3oure mynde schal be of hym that 
ledith 3ou. For as 30ure wit’ was, that 28 
je erriden fro God, 3e schulen conuerte 
eft, and schulen seke hym tensithis so 
myche. For he that brou3te in yuels toz 
3ou, schal brynge eft euerlastynge myrthe 
to 30u with joure helthe. Jernsalem, beso 
thou of betere coumfort; for he that 
nemyde thee, excitith thee. Thei thats 
traueliden thee, schulen perische gilti; and 
thei that thankiden in thi fallyng, schulen 
be punyschid. Citees to which thi sones32 
serueden’, schulen be punyschid', and that 
citee that took thi sones, sehal be pu- 
nyschid. For as Babiloyne made ioie in33 
thi hurlyng doun, and was glad in thi fal,. 
so it schal be maad sori in his desolacioun. 
And the ful out ioye of the multitudes 
therof schal be kit awei, and the ioie 
therof schal be in to mourenyng. For whi%s 


x seeken K. Y or toyeden G marg. 


P vpon I. a Om. ceteri. t witnesse N. 


494 


dide in thi caas, or tribulacioun, so it 

31shal be sorewful in his desolacion. And 
the mirth with outen forth of multitude 
therof shal be kitt aweye, and the ioye 

350f it shal be in to mournyng. Forsoth 
fijr shal aboue cum to it of the euerlast- 
yng, and longe duyrynge days; and it 
shal be enhabitid of deuylis, in to mychil- 

36nesse of tyme. Jerusalem, beholde aboute 
to the eest, and see the myrthe cummynge 
to thee of God. 


CAP AN. 


37. Loo! forsoth thi sones cummen, whom 
thou leftist seaterid; thei gadrid cum- 
men to thee fro the eest vn to theY west 
in the word of the holy, ioying in to 
thonour of God. Jerusalem, vnclothe thee 
the stoole of mournynge, and of thi tra- 
ueile; aud clothe thee with fairnesse, and 
honour of it, that is to thee of God in 
2euerlastynge glorie. Forsoth God shal 
enuyroun thee with double clothe of ri3t- 
wisnesse, and shal putte to thin heued a 
3mytre of euerlastynge honoure. ’Forsoth 
God shal shewe in thee his shynynge, 
4that is vndir heuen. Sotheli thi naine 
shal be nained to thee of God in to with 
outen eend, Peese’ of rijtwisnesse, and 
shonour of pitee. Jerusalem, rijse vp, and 
stoonde in hee3, and biholde aboute to 
the eest; and see thi sones gaderid fro 
the sune, rijsinge vn to the west in the 
word of the holy, ioyinge in the mynde 
cof God. Forsoth thei wenten out fro 
thee, led in feet of enmyes; forsoth the 
Lord shal brenge to thee hem born in to 
7 honour, as the sonnys of kyngdam. For- 
soth God ordeynyde for to meek eche 
hee3 hill, and euerlastynge rooches, and 
for to fulfille the euen valeys in to the 
euenesse of erthe; that Yrael walke dili- 
sgentli in to honour of God. Sothely 
woddis and eche tree of swetnesse of 
Israel shadewiden, 07 obeiden*, to the 
9maundement of God. Forsoth God shal 


y Om. a. 


u vnto I. 


BARUCH. 


Vv the wodis N pr. m. s. 


TV. 34—V. 9. 


fier schal come on it fro hym that is with- 
out bigynnyng and ende, in ful Jong daies ; 
and it schal be enhabitid of fendis, in to 
the multitude of tyme. Jerusalem, biholde 36 
aboute to the eest, and se thou myrthe 
comynge of God to thee. For lo! this7 
sones comen, which thou leftist scatered ; 
thei comen gaderid fro the eest ‘til to" the 
west in the word of the hooli, and maken 
ioie to the onour of God. 


CAP Ne 


Jerusalem, vnclothe thee of the stoole1 
of thi mourenyng, and trauelyng; and 
clothe thou thee in the fairnesse, and 
onour of it, which is of God to thee in 
euerlastynge glorie. God of ry3tfulnesse2 
schal cumpasse thee with a double cloth, 
and schal sette on thin heed a mytre of 
euerlastynge onour. For God schal schewe3 
his bri3tnesse in thee, which is vndur 
heuene. For thi name schal be uamyd4 
of God to thee with outen ende, The pees 
of ri3tfulnesse, and the onour of pitee. 
Jerusalem, rise vp, and stonde in an hi3s 
place, and biholde aboute to the eest; and 
se thi sones gaderid togidere fro the sunne 
risynge til to the west in the word of the 
hooli, that maken ioie in the mynde of 
God. For thei jeden out fro thee, andc 
weren led of enemyes on feet; but the 
Lord schal brynge to thee hem borun in 
to honour, as the sones of rewme. For7 
God hath ordeyned to make low ech hi3 
hil, and euerlastynge rochis of stoon, and 
gret valeis, to fille the uneuenesse of erthe ; 
that Israel go diligentli in to the onour of 
God. Forsothe wodis’ and ech tree ofs 
swetnesse schadewiden Israel, bi the co. 
maundement of God. For Ged schals 
brynge Israel with mirthe in’ the 1i3t of 
his maieste, with merci and ri3tfulnesse, 
which is of hym, 


2 obeischiden u. 


W into U. 


VI. I— II. 


leede to Yrael with myrthe in the 1i3t 
of his maiestee, with mercy and ri3twis- 
nesse, that is in hym. 


Heer begynneth ensaumple* of the 


same pistle, whiche® Jeremye sente to — 


the caitifs led aweie in to Babiloyne, of 
the kyng ‘of men* of Babiloyne, that he 
shulde shewe to hem, after that it is 
comaundid to him of God. 


CAP. VI. 


1 For the synnes that 3ee synnyden befor 
God, 3e shuln be led caitifs in to Babi- 
loyne, of Nabugodonosor, kyng of men 


20f* Babiloyne. And so 3e gon in to Ba-~ 


biloyne shuln be there ful many 3eris, 
and in to longe tyme, vnto seuen genera- 
cions ; forsoth after this I sha] lede out 
330u thennis® with peese. Now forsoth 3e 
shuln see in Babiloyne golden goddis, 
and silueren, and stonen, and treenf, for 
to be born in shuldris, shewinge drede to 
4folkis. Therfor see 3ee, lest and 3ee be 
maad liche to alien dedis, and 3ee dreede, 


sand that drede take 3ou in hem. And so - 


the cumpanye of peple seen fro bihynde 
and fro bifore wirshipynge, saye in 3our 
hertis, Lord God, it byhouith thee for 
éto be worshipid. Forsoth myn aungel is 
with 3ou, forsoth I my self shal seeke 
7out 3our soules. For whi the trees of 
hem polishid of a carpenter; thei also 
engoldid and ensiluered ben false, and 
smown not speke. And as to a mayden 
louynge ournementis, so gold takyn, thei 
oben forgid. Certeynli the goddis of hem 
han golden crownes vpon her hedis; wher- 
of prestis drawen aweie fro hem gold and 
syluer, and 3euen, o7 spenden, it in hem 
ioself. Forsoth and of it thei 3euen to 
pute’ in" bordel house, and ournen hooris; 
and eft sone when thei han resceyued it 
110f hooris, thei ournen her goddis. So- 


&@ the ensaumple G. » the whiche 4. ¢ Om. a. 


hin to G sec. m. 


Z the Jewis K. 
f Om. s. 


Xak. 


¥ epistle EPyY. 
4 Babiloyne FN. 


e thei 1. 


BARUCH. 


dOm, x. 


a Om. CEFGIUMNPQRSUXY. 


495 


Here bigynneth the* saumple of the 
pistley of the same Baruk, which pistle 
Jeremye sente to Jewis’, ‘that weren® led 
awei prisoneris in to Babiloyne, of the 
hing of Babiloynes, that he schulde telle 
to hem, bi that that was* comaundid of 
God to hym. 


CAP. VI. 


For the synnes which 3e synneden bifor) 
God, 3e schulen be led prisoneris in to 
Babiloyne, of Nabugodonosor, kyng of 
Babiloynes*. Therfor 3e schulen entre ine 
to Babiloyne, and 3e schulen be there ful 
many 3eeris, and in to long tyme, til to 
seuene generaciouns; forsothe after this 
Y schal lede out jou fro thennus with 
pees. But now 3e schulen se in Babiloynes 
goddis of gold, and of siluer, and of stoon, 
and of tree, to be borun on schuldris, 
schewynge drede to hethene men. Ther-4 
for se 3e, lest also 3e be maad Jijk alien 
dedis, and lest 3e dreden, and drede take 
jou in hem. Therfor whanne 3e seen as 
cumpeny bihynde and bifore, worschipe 3e 
Ged, and seie in 3oure hertes, Lord God, 
it bihoueth that thou be worschipid. For-6 
sothe myn aungel is with 3ou, but Y schal 
seke joure soulis. For whi the trees of7 
heim ben polischid of a carpenter ; also tho® 
ben araied with gold, and araied with sil- 
uer, and ben false, and moun not speke. 


- And as tof a virgyn louynge ournementis, 8 


so, whanne gold is takun, ourenementis 
ben maad ¢o idols. Certis the goddis of9 
hem han goldun corouns on her heedis ; 
wherfor prestis withdrawen fro tho goddis 
gold and siluer, and spenden it in hem 
silf. Sotheli thei 3yuen also of that to1o. 
hooris, and araien hooris; and eft whanne 
thei resseyuen that of hooris, thei araien 

f treenen GHK. 


© sennis K. & the putt «en. 


bOm. c. © he was k. 


496 


thely these ben not delyuerd fro rust 
izand mou3the. Forsoth hem couered with 
clothe of purpre, thei shuln wijpe the 
face of hem, for' dust of the hous, that 
131s fal myche amonge hem. Forsothe thei 
han a ceptre, or kyngis 3erd, as a man; 
as a iuge of a cuntree, that sleath not the 
l4synnynge in to hym. Forsoth thei han 
also in the hond swerd and axe; forsoth 
thei deliueren* not hem self fro bataile 
and day theues. Wher of be it knowen to 
15 30U, for thei ben not goddis ; therfor wor- 
shipe 3e not hem. Sotheli as a! vessel 
of a man broken is maad vuprofitable, 
issiche ben the goddis of hem. Hem sett 
to gidir in au hous, the ee3en of hem ben 
ful of dust of the feet of men entrynge 
17in, And as to sum man that offendith 
the kyng, the 3atis ben sette aboute, and 
as dead™ man led to sepulcre, so prestes 
oft kepen the dores with closingis and 
lockis, lest thei be robbed of day theues. 
18 Thei teenden launterns to hem, and so- 
theli manye, of whom thei mown noon 
see; forsoth thei ben as bemes in the 
i9hous. Sotheli serpentis that ben of the 
erthe, ben sayd to licke out the hertis of 
hem; the while thei eeten hem, and the 
clothing of hem, and thei feelen not. 
20 The faces of hem ben blac of smoke, that 
21is maad in the hous. Abone the bodi of 
hem, and aboue the hed of hem backis, 
or reremijse, and swalewis flee3en, and 
22briddis also, and also cattis. Wher of 
wite 3ee, for thei ben not goddis; therfor 
233ee shuln not drede hem. Also the gold 
that thei han, is to fairnesse ; no bot eny 
man shal wijpe awei the rust, thei shuln 
not shyne. Forsothe nether the whijle 
thei weren 3o00ten to gidir, thei feeliden. 
214Thei ben boujt of al pris, in whiche 
25 thingus spirit is not in hem.- With outen 
feet thei ben born in shuldris, shewynge 
her vnnobley to men; also be thei con- 
26foundid that wurshipen hem. Therfor 


BARUCH. 


VI. 12—26. 


her goddis. But tho’ goddis ben not de-11 
lyuered fro rust and mou3te. Forsothe 12 
whanne ‘tho goddis® ben hilid with a cloth 
of purpure, preestis schulen wipe the face 
of tho’, for dust of the hous, which is ful 
myche among tho goddis. Forsothe idols 13 
han a septre, as a man hath; as the iuge 
of a cuntrei, that sleeth not a man syn- 
nynge a3ens him silf. Also tho han in the 14 
hond a swerd, and ax!; but tho™ delyueren 
not hem silf fro batel and fro theues. 
Wherfor be it knowun to 30u, that tho® 
ben not goddis ; therfor worschipe 3e not 15 
tho®°. For as a brokun vessel of a man is 
maad vnprofitable, siche also ben the god- 
dis of hem. Whanne tho? ben set in the i6 
hous, the izjen of thot ben ful of dust of 
the feet of nen entrynge. And as jatisi7 
ben set aboute a man that offendide the 
kyng, ether as whanne a deed man is 
brou3t to the sepulcre, so preestis kepen 
sikirli the doris with closyngis and lockis, 
lest tho’ be robbid of theuys. Thei teenden 18 
lanternes to tho’, and sotheli many dan- 
ternes, of which thot moun se noon; for- 
sothe tho" ben as beemes in an_ hous. 
Sotheli men seien that serpentis, that ben 19 
of erthe, licken out the hertis of tho’; 
while the serpentis eten tho’, and her 
cloth; and tho’ feelen* not. The faces of 20 
tho’ ben blake of the smoke, which is 
maad in the hous. Ny3t crowis and swa-21 
lewis fleen aboue the bodi of tho’, and 
aboue the heed of tho*, and briddis also, 
and cattis in lijk maner. Wherfor wite 22 
3e, that tho* ben not goddis; therfor drede 
3e not tho, Also the gold which tho®2s 
han, is to fairnesse; no? bute suimman 
wipe awei the rust, thof schulen not schyne. 
For tho® feliden not, the while tho weren 
wellid togidere. Tho® ben bou3t of al prijs, 24 
in which no spirit is in tho!. Tho* with-2s 
out feet ben borun on schuldris of men, 
and schewen opynli her vnnoblei to men; 
be thei schent also that worschipen tho’. 


ifroa. Kdelyuereden 4. 1the 4. ™a dead acu. 
ethilke 1. bhthei1. ihemyr. EKtheirtr. lanaxer1 ™theirt. theiin. Ohemin.  P thei in. 
Gqhems. ‘Ythetr shemr ttheis. Uther in. Vhemsz. Wtheir. *feelenié1. yYlem4u. 
Zhemr, @theim. bhemin. ¢theirx, 4Om.1. e¢butifp. ftheiis. theirs. 4 Thei in. 
thema. & Theiin, ! hem in. 


VI. 27——40. 


3if thei shuln falle in to erthe, of hem 
self thei shuln not rijse to gyder; nether 
3if eny man shal sette hym ri3t, by hym 
self he shal stonde, bot as to dead men 
27shuldris shuln be putte to hem. The 
prestes of hem sellen the hoostis, or 
sacrifices, of hem, and mysusen; also 
and the wymmen of hem takynge aweie, 
nether parten to seeke man, nether to 
28 beggynge. Of the sacrifices of hem wym- 
men with chijlde, and menstruat, or in 
vncleene blode, touchen togyder. And so 
witynge of these thingis, for thei ben 
zonot goddis, dreed 3ee hem not. Forsoth 
wherof ben thei clepid goddis? For wym- 
men putten to golden goddis, sylueren, 


30and treeren"; and in the housis of hem~ 


sitten prestis hanyng torne, or kutt, 
cootis, and hedis and berd shauen, whos 
31 hedis ben nakid. Forsoth thei roren cry- 
inge a3eins her goddis, as in the super 
32o0f a dead man. Prestis taken awei the 
clothingus of hem, and clothen her wijues, 
and her sones. Nether 3if thei suffren eny 
33thing of euyl of eny man, nether 3if eny 
thinge of good, thei shuln mowe 3eelde. 
Nether thei mown make a kyng, nether 
3ido aweie. Also nether thei? mown 3eue 
ricchessis, nether 3eeld euyll thing. 3if 
eny man shal avowe to heim, and shal 
not 3eelde, nether thei requyren, or axen, 
35this thing. Thei delyueren not a man 
fro deth, nether delyueren a seeke man 
36fro a more mi3ti. Thei restoren not a 
blynde man to si3t; thei shuln not dely- 
37uere a man fro neede. Thei shuln not 
haue mercye of the wydue, nether thei 
shiln do weel to the fadrelesse and mo- 
3sdrelesse. The treenen goddis of hem, 
and stoonen, and golden, and sylueren, 
ben lijc to stoonys of the mounteyn ; for- 
soth thei that worshipen hem, shuln be 
39confoundid. Hou therfore is it to be 
gessid, or toP be saide, hem for to be 
4ogoddis; 3it the ylk Caldeis not honour- 


BARUCH. 


497 


Therfor if tho™ fallen doun to erthe, tho” 2s 
schulen not rise of hem silf; and if ony 
man settith that zdol upri3;t, it schal not 
stonde bi it silf, but as to deed thingis 
schuldris schulen be put to tho®°. The27 
prestis of tho? sillen the sacrifices of tho, 
and mysvsen; in lijk maner and the wyin- 
men of hem rauyschen awei, nether to a 
sijk man, nether to a begger tho" 3yuen 
ony thing. Of her sacrifices foule wym- 28 
men, and in vncleene blood, touchen. Ther- 
for wite 3e bi these thingis, that tho* ben 
not goddis, and drede 3e not thot. For29 
wherof ben tho" clepid goddis? For wym- 
men setten sacrifices to goddis of siluer, 
and of gold, and of tre; and preestis that 30 
han cootis to-rent, and heedis and berd 
schauun, whos heedis ben nakid, sitten in 
the housis of tho’. Sotheli thei roren and 31 
crien a3ens her goddis, as in the soper of 
a deed man. Prestis taken awei the clothis 32 
of tho’, and clothen her* wyues, and her 
children. And if thoY suffren ony thing of 
yuel of ony man, ether” if tho* suffren ony 33 
thing of good, tho? moun not 3elde. Nether 
tho moun ordeyne a kyng, nethir do awei. 
In lijk maner tho® moun nether 3yue rich- 34 
essis, nether 3ilde yuel. If ony man makith 
a vow to tho‘, and 3eldith not, tho® axen 
not this. Thof delyueren not a man fro35 
deth, nether rauyschen a sijk man fro a 
mi3tiere. Tho restoren not a blynd man 36 
to si3t; tho® schulen not delyuere a man 
fro nede. Tho schulen not have merci on37 
a widewe, nether tho" schulen do good to 
fadirles children. Her goddis of tre, and 38 
of stoon, and of gold, and of siluer, ben 
lijk stoonys of the mounteyn; forsothe 
thei that worschipen tho’, schulen be 
schent. Hou therfor is it to gesse, ether 39 
to seie, that tho’ ben goddis? for whi 3it 40 
whanne Caldeis onouren not tho!. Which - 
whanne thei heren that a doumb man mai 
not speke, offren hym to Bel, and axen of 
hym to speke; as if thei that han no stir-41 


otreen 4. 9° Om. 4. P Om. 4. 
mtheiin. ®theiin. ehemin. Phemin. Ghemi. ‘their, *thei rm, themin, @ thei 1. 
vhemn. Whemin. *bothe her a promi. Ytheiin. Zor, thei in. Dthei i.  ¢ thei 1n. 
dhem1. ¢tho goddis x. f Thetin, & Theiiy. »theiin, themin. # thei my. | hem 1. 


VOL. III. 358 


498 


ynge hem? Whiche whan thei shuln heere 
the doumbe not to?’ mowe speke, offren 
hym to Bel, axinge of hym for to speke ; 
stas thei mown feele, whiche han not mou- 
ynge. And thei whanne thei shuln vndir- 
stonde, shuln forsake hem ; sothely the 
42ilke goddis of hem han not witt. For- 
soth wymmen 3o0uen aboute, or bounden, 
with coordis sitten in weyes, brennynge 
43 hoonys of olyues. Forsoth whann eny of 
-hem drawen aweye of eny inan passinge 
hath slept, she dispisith hir nei3bore, for 
she is not had worthi as sche, nether hir 
44coord is broken. Forsoth alle thingis 
that ben don to hem, ben fals. Hou is it 
to be" gessid, or to be said, hem for* to 
45be goddis? Forsoth of carpenteres and 
goldsmithis thei ben maad. Thei shuln 
noon other thing be, no bot the ylk that 
46 prestis wolen for to be. Also thilk gold- 
smyththis that maken hem, ben not of 
inyche tyme; therfor whether the thingus 
that ben maad of hem mown be goddis? 
47 Forsoth thei leften fals thingus, and shen- 
asshipe to men to cummynge after. For 
whi whenne hataile shal aboue cum to 
hem, and euyl thingis, prestis thenken, 
where thei shuln hijde hem self with 
49hem. Therfore how own thei for to be 
feelid, or demyd, for thei ben goddis, 
whiche nether delyueren hem fro batail, 
nether delyueren hem fro euyl thingis ? 
50 For whi whenne thei ben treenen, and 
stoonen, and engoldid, and ensyluered, it 
shal bei wist afterward, for thei ben fals, 
to alle folkis and kyngis; whiche ben 
open, or knowen, for thei ben not goddis, 
bot werkis of mennus hondis, and no 
siwerc of God with hem. Wher of therfor 
it is knowen, for thei ben not goddis, bot 
werkis of mennus hondis, and no werk 
sz0f God is in hem. Thei reisen not a 
kyng to a cuntree, nether thei shuln 3eue 
s3reyn to men. Also thei shul not dis- 
eryue, or zuge, a dome, nether thei shuln 


BARUCH. 


VI. 41—53. 


yng, moun feel. And thei, whanne thei 

schulen vndurstonde, schulen forsake tho 

idols; for tho™ goddis of hem han no wit. 

Forsothe wymmen gird with roopis* sitten 42 * wommen gird 
. . with roopis, 

in weies, and kyndelen boonys of olynest. ete. Here is set 
Sotheli whanne ony of tho" wymmen i843 jnete 
drawun awei of ony man passynge, and Which ydolis 
slepith with hym, sche dispisith her nei3- 


ben worthi to 
be dispisid, for 
boresse, that sche is not hadde worthi as 


wommen gird- 
iden hem silf 


hir silf, nether hir roop is brokuu. For- 44 “ee Ps 

sothe alle thingis that ben don to tho®, beundun with 
aes sum greet 

ben false. Hou therfor is it to gesse, ethir synne and 


8 te! the 
to seie, that tho ben goddis? Forsothe the? 45 eet which 


idols ben maad of smithis, and of gold- {oy peeled 


to ydolis ; and 
ae * whanne ony 
smithis. Tho schulen be noon other thing, Fe "or hen 
no but that that prestis wolen, that tho* ph oso 


be. Also thilke goldsmithis that maken 46 wommen out 


f cheswel 
thot, ben not of myche tyme; therfor etl KiCaeteae 
whether" tho thingis that ben maad of Hd oe 


them moun be goddis? Sotheli thei leften 47 #ishli, she 
false thingis, and schenschipe to men to _ silf deliuerid 
comynge aftirward. For whi 


of the synne 
whanne 48 don, and bi- 

batels’ and yuels comen on hem, preestis 

thenken, 


leuyd, that the 
ydol sente that 


where thei schulen hide hem silf ™3" it signe 
of her dely- 


with tho. Hou therfor owen tho to be eee 
. . 1é Cal 

demyd, that tho” ben goddis, which ne- to hi felowis, 

ther delyueren hem silf fro batel, nether ae tions 


delyueren hem silf fro yuelis? For whi so W** not worthi 


to be visitid so 
whanne* tho ben of tree, and of stoon, 4 the ydol. xa 


and of gold, and of siluer, it schal be + kyndeliden 

6 5 boonis of olyues; 
knowun aftirward of alle folkis, and tithe custom 
kyngis, that tho thingis ben false, that pate 


ben maad open; for tho ben not goddis, 
but the werkis of hondis of men, aud no 
werk of God is with tho’. Wherof therfor s1 
it is knowun, that tho* ben not goddis, 
but the werkis of hondis of men, and no 
werk of God is in tho*. Tho? reisen not 52 
a kyng to a cuntrei, nether schulen 3yue 
reyn to men. Also tho® schulen not demess 
doom, nether tho® sehulen delyuere the 
cuntrei fro wrong. For tho moun nos 
thing, as litle crowis bitwixe the myddis 
of heuene and of erthe. For whanne fier 
fallith in to the hous of goddis of tree, 


qOm. 4. Om. x. § Oma. 
m thilke 1. the Nn. " thilke 1, ©hem In, P tho F sec. m. NVX. q thei 1Nn. 8 thei 1. 
themi. wherr passin, YVbatelrkNu. Wthein. Xsithi. Yhemi. Ztheimn, ®hem1. 


> Thei 1. These x. ¢ thei in. 


4 housis a pr. m. 


Vi. 54-66. 


54delyuere a cuntree fro wronge. For thei 
mown no thing, as litil crowis bitwix 
the mydil of heuen and erthe. And so- 
theli whenne fijre shal fal in to the house 
of treenen goddis, and golden, and sil- 
ueren, sotheli the prestis of hem shuln 
flee, and shnin be delyuered; bot thei as 
55 bemys in the mydil shuln be brent. For- 
soth thei shuln not ajeinstonde a kyng 
and batail. Hou therfore is it to he 
gessid, or to be resceyued, for thei ben 
segoddis? Thei shul not delyuere hem 
self fro ni3t theeues, nether day theeues, 
treenen goddis, and stoonen, and engoldid, 
and ensiluered, than whiche wickid men 
57ben strenger. Thei shuln take awei fro 
hem gold, and syluer, and clothing, in 
whiche thei ben couered, and thei shuln 
go aweie; nether thei beren help to hem 
ssself. And so it is beter a kyng for to be 
shewynge his vertue, or a profitable ves- 
selle in the house, in whom he shal glorie 
that weeldith it, than fals goddis; or a 
dore in the house, whiche kepith the 
thingis that ben in it, than fals goddis. 
59Sothely the sunne, and mone, and sterris, 
whenne thei ben shynynge, and sent out 
60 to profitis, obeyen. Also and leyt', whanne 
it shal apeere, is cleer". Forsoth the same 
thinge and spirit, or wyud, brethith in 
e1eche cuntre. And cloudis, to whiche when 
it shal be comaundid of God for to walke 
thorou al the world, don what thing is 
ezcomaundid to hem. Also fijr sente fro 
aboue, that it waast hillis and woddis, 
doth what thing is comaundid to it; for- 
soth these nether in lickenesse nether 
e3 vertues ben liche to oon of hem. Wher of 
nether it is to be gessid, nether to be 
said, hem for to be goddis, whenne thei 
mown nether deeme dome, nether do to 
esmen. And so witynge for thei ben not 
goddis, therfor 3ee shuln not dreden hem. 
65Sotheli nether thei shuln curse kyngis, 
esnether thei shuln blesse. Forsoth thei 


t the leyt en. 


& ether FIKS. 
athei x, "hem. 


f thei 1. 
P don 1. 


e thei 1. 
© Om. celeri. 


h seye A. 


BARUCH. 


$ thei 1. 


. 


499 


and of gold, and of siluer, sotheli the 
prestis of tho schulen fle, and schnlen be 
delyuered; but tho® schulen be brent as 
beemys in the myddis. Forsothe tho!ss 
schulen not a3en stonde a kyng and batel. 
Hou therfor is it to gesse, or’ to resseyue", 
that tho! ben goddis? Goddis of tree, and of 56 
stoon, and of gold and of siluer, schulen not 
delyuere hem silf fro ny3t theues, nether fro 
dai theuys, and wickid men ben strongere 
than tho goddis. Thei schulen take awei57 
gold, and siluer, and cloth, bi which tho 
ben hilid, and thei schulen go awei; ne- 
ther tho! helpen hem silf. Therfor it isss 
betere to be™ a kyng schewynge his vertu, 
ether a profitable vessel in the hous, in 
which he schal haue glorie that weldith 
it, than false goddis; ether a dore in the 
hous, that kepith tho thingis that ben in 
it, is betere than false goddis. Forsothe 59 
the sunne, and moone, and sterris, whan 
tho" ben bri3t, and sent out to profitis, 
obeien. In lijk maner and leit, whanne 60 
it apperith, is cleer. Sotheli the same 
thing and wynd brethith in ech cuntrei. 
And cloudis, to whiche, whanne it is co-61 
maundid of God to go thorou3 al the 
world, perfourmen that, that is comaundid 
to tho. Also fier ‘that is® sent fro aboue, 62 
to waste mounteyns and wodis, doith? 
that, that is comaundid to it; but these 
idols ben not lijk to oon of tho thingis, 
nether bi fourmes, nether bi vertues. Wher- 63 
for it is nether to gesse, nether to seie, 
that tho’ ben goddis, whanne tho’ moun 
not nether deme doom, nether do to men. 
Therfor wite 3e that tho ben not goddis, 61 
and drede 3e not tho’. For tho’ schulen 65 
nether curse, nethir schulen‘ blesse kyngis. 
Also tho" schewen not to hethene men6é6 
signes in heuene, nether tho schulen 
schyne as the sunne, nether tho” schulen 
3yue li3t as the moone. Beestis that moun 67 
fle vndur a roof, and do profit to hem silf, 
ben betere than tho’. Therfor bi no maner 68 


u cleer, or izle GuK prom. 


m Om. wns sec.m. " thel Nn. 
vthei in. ¥ thei. 


ithei ry. | thei mm. 
tQm.1. " thei 1. 


382 


500 


shewen not to folkis tokenis in heuen, 
nether thei shuln shyne as sunne, nether 
67li3tene as the mone. Bestis ben better 
than thei, whiche mown flee vndir a roof, 
sgand profit to hem self. And so by no 
manere it is knowen to 30w, for thei 
ben goddis. For whiche thing drede 3ee 
sonot hem. For whi as dreed in place 
where cucumeris, that ben bitter herbis, 
waxen, kepith no thing, so ben the tree- 
nen goddis, and sylueren, and goldid of 
johem. In the same manere and in a 3erd 
a whijt thorn, ypon whiche eche bridde 
sittith, also and to a dead thing cast in 
derckenesses, the treenen godus of hem, 
and ensiluered, and engoldid, ben lije. 
71 And of the purpre and marble, that thei 
holden aboue hem, 3ee’ shuln wite also, 
for™ thei ben no goddis. Also at the last 
thei hem self ben eten, and it shal be in 
z2to repreue in the cuntre. Betir is an 
iust* man, that hath not symylacris, for 
whi he shal be fer fro shenshipes. 


Here endith the boke of Baruch, and 
now bigynneth the boke of Exechiel, the 
prophete’. 


YweGH. WOm. 4H. 


x thei N.- y hem 1Nn. 


» thei Nn. 


BARUCH. 


X vniust 4GHK pr.m. 


Za man of raggis a pr.m. a scheweles A sec. m. 
¢ From cru. Here endith Baruk, and bigynneth Exechiel. ciqu. Here endeth Baruc; se now 


VI. 67—72. 


it is open to 30u, that tho* ben goddis. 
For which thing drede 3e not tho’. Fores 
whi as‘a bugge, esther a man of raggis’, 
in a place where gourdis wexen, kepith 
no thing, so ben her goddis of tree, and 
of siluer, and of gold. In the same maner 70 
and a whijt thorn in a gardyn kepith no 
thing, on which thorn ech brid sittith, in 
lijk maner and her goddis of tree, and of 
gold, and of siluer, ben lijk a deed man 
cast forth in derknessis. Also of purpur 71 
and of marble, whiche thei holden aboue 
it; therfor? 3e schulen wite, that tho» 
ben not goddis. Also tho ben etun at the 
laste, and it schal be in to schenschipe in 
the cuntrei. Betere is a iust man, that 72 
hath no symylacris, for whi he schal be 
fer fro schenschipis. 


Here endith Baruk, and here bigyn- 
neth Exechiel®. 


y From 4. No final rubric in eux. 


8 and therfor ns sec. m2. 


Ezechiel. k. Here endith Baruk, and here bigynneth a prologe vpon Ezechiel. m. Here endith the book of 
Baruch, and bigynneth the book of Ezechiel. n. Heere eendith Baruch, and bigynneth the prolog on 
Ezechiel. x. Here endith Baruc, and bygynu{eth] Ezechiel. s. Here endith Baruc, and here bigyuneth the 


booc of Exechiel, the profete. x. 


No final rubric in the other Mss. 


EZEKIEL. 





[Prologue on Ezechiel*. | 


Tuts profete Ezechiel sei3 in visioun, and rauyschid in spirit, the maieste of almy3ti 
God, and the sete of his trone, acordinge to seynt Joon, the enangelist, of the visioun 


that he sei3 im the ile of Pathmos. 


And this Ezechiel schewide bi symylitude alle 


yuelis that weren to comynge on the king, and on the peple of Juda, for priue idolatrie 
vsid of the peple, and for contynuaunce of fals wurschiping in hid places. 


Here eendith the prologe, and bigynneth the book of Ezechiel®. 


Her bigynneth the book of Exechiel, the 
prophete*. 


CAP. I. 


1 And it is don, in the thrittithe 3eer, 
in the fourthe moneth, in the fyuethe 
day of the moneth, when I was in the 
mydil of caitifs, bisydis the floode Cobar, 
heuens wern openyd, and I see3 visiouns 

2of God. In the fyuethe of the moneth; 
the ylk is the fyueth 3eer of trausmy- 
gracioun, or passyng ouer, of Joachym, 

3kyng of Juda; the word of the Lord is 
maad to Ezechiel, sone of Buzi, preste, 
in the lond of Caldeis, bisijdis the flode 
Cobar; and the hond of the Lord is 
4maad ther vpon hym. And I see3, and 
loo! a wynde of tempest, or whirlwynde, 
cam fro the north, and a grete cloude, 
and fyre inwlappynge, and a schynynge 
in the eumpas of it; and of the mydil of 


a Here biginneth the prophecie of Ezechiel. a. 


a This prologue is from mR. 


No initial rubric in these Mss. 


Here bigynneth the book of Exechiel, the 
profete’. 


CAP. I. 


And it was don, in the thrittithe’ 3eer, i 
in the fourthe monethe, in the fyuethe 
dai of the moneth, whanne Y was in the 
myddis of caitifs, bisidis the flood Chobar, 
heuenes weren openyd, and Y si3® the 
reuelaciouns of God. 
of the monethe; thilke is the fyuethe jeer 
of passing ouer of Joachym, kyng of Ju- 


da; the word of the Lord was maad tos 


Ezechiel, preest, the sone of Busi, in the 
lond of Caldeis, bisidis the flood Chobar ; 
and the hond of the Lord was maad there 
on hym. And Y si3, and lo! a whirle-4 
wynd cam fro the north, and a greet 
cloude, and fier wlappynge in, and _ bri3t- 
nesse in the cumpas therof; and as the 
licnesse of electret fro the myddis therof, 


No initial rubric in an. 


b From r. No final rubric in m. 


© Here biginnith the book of Ezechiel. ney. Here biginneth Ezechiel. m. No initial rubric in the other 


Mss. ‘thrittenthe my.  ¢ sau3 I. 


In the fyueth dace 


t electre; that 
is, a metal of 
gold and siluer, 
that schyneth 
clerere than 
gold and siluer. 
A et alii, 


502 


it, that is to saye, of the mydil of fijre, 
as a lickenesse of electre, that ts, a metal 
of gold and syluere, cleerer than gold. 
5And of the mydil of it a lickenesse of 
four bestis. And this the byholdynge of 
éhem, the lickenesse of man in hem. And 
four facis to oon, and four pennys to oon. 
7 And the feet of hem strei3t feet, and the 
sool of the foot of hem as the sole of a 
calues fote, and sparclis, as byholdyng of 
swhyte metale. And an hond of man 
vnder the pennys of hem, in four par- 
ties. And thei hadden faces and pennys 
9by foure parties; and the pennys of hem, 
of an other to the tother weren ioyned. 
Thei turneden not a3ein,when thei wenten, 
10 bot eche wente byfore his face. Forsoth 
the lickenesse of the semblaunt of hem; a 
face of man and face of a lyoun at the 
ri3thalf of hem foure. Forsoth a face of 
an oxe at the left half of hem foure; and 
the face of an egle fro aboue of hem 
i1foure. And the faces of hem and pennys 
of hem stre3t out aboue. Two pennys of 
eche weren ioyned, and two keuerden 
i2the bodies of hem. And eche of hem 
walkide befor his face. Where the feers- 
nesse of the spirit was, thidir thei wenten, 
nether thei turneden ajein, whenne thei 
is walkiden. And the lickenesse of the 
bestis, and the biholdynge of hem, as of 
brennynge coolis of fijre, and as bihold- 
ynge of laumpis. This was the si3t diuersly 
rennynge in myddil of the® bestis, shyn- 
yng of fijre, and of the fijre leyt goynge 
uforth. And the bestes wenten, and turn- 
eden a3ein, into lickenessis® of leyt shyn- 
isyuge. And when I behelde the bestis, 
oo whele apeerid vpon erthe bisijdis the 
is bestis, hauynge foure faces. And the bi- 
holdyng of wheelis and the werk of hem 
as si3te of the se; and oo lickenesse of 
hem foure; and the biholdynge of hem 
and werkis, as 3if a wheel be in the my- 
17del of a wheel. Thei goynge wenten bi 


b Om. 4. 


fOm.q. & the myddis EriKmNRsU. 


EZEKIEL. 


h of hem E sec. m. 


I. 5—17. 


that is, fro the myddis of thef fier. Ands 
of myddis& therof" eas a licnesse cf foure 
beestis. And this was the biholdyng of 
tho, the licnesse of a man in tho. And6& 
foure faces weren to‘ oon, and foure 
wyngis weren toj oon. And the feet of7 
tho weren strei3t feet, and the soole of the 
foote of tho was as the soole of a‘ foot of 
a calf, and sparelis, as the biholdynge of 
buylynge bras. And the hondis of a mans 
weren vudur the wyngis of tho, in foure 
partis. And tho hadden faces and wyngis 
bi foure partis; and the wyngis of thos 
weren ioyned togidir of oon to another. 
Tho! turneden not aj3en, whanne tho™ jeden, 
but eche 3ede bifore his face. Forsothe 10 
the" licnesse ‘of the® face? of tho’ was the 
face of a man and the face of a ‘lioun 
at the rijthalf of tho’ foure. Forsothe 
the face of an oxe was at the left half 
of tho foure; and the face of an egle 
was aboue tho foure. And the faces1! 
of tho and the wengis of tho weren 
stretchid forth aboue. Twei® wyngis of 
eche weren ioyned togidere, and tweynet 
hiliden the bodies of tho. And ech of tho!2 
jede bifore his face. Where the fersnesse 
of the wynd was, thidur tho jeden, and. 
turneden not a3en, whanne tho" jeden. 
And the licnesse of the’ beestis, and the 13 
biholdyng of tho’, was as of brennynge 
coolis of fier, and as the biholdyng of 
lanmpis. This was the si3t rennynge 
aboute in the myddis of beestis, the schyn- 
yng of fier, and leit* goynge out of the 
fier. And the beestis 3eden, and turneden 14 
a3en at the licnesse of leit schynynge. 
And whanne Y bihelde the beestis, 015 
wheel, hauuynge foure faces, apperide on 
the erthe, bisidis the beestis. And the16 
biholdyng of the wheelis and the werk of 
tho was as¥ the si3t of the see; and o 
licnesse was of tho foure; and the bihold- 
yng and the werkis of tho, as if a wheel 
be in the myddis of a wheel. Tho goynge 17 


¢ likenes 4, the lickenesse an. 


iin to Ns sec.m. jintos sec.m. * the ts. 


1Thet x. ™thei einpy. °Om.ar. ethers. P cheer, elher face CEFGHIKMNPQUXY, cheer Rs. 4 that is, 


Joure bestis K marg. ' then. &Twor. ttwor. 


uthei nN. 


Vthorrpy. Whemyn. *the leit1. Y at x. 


I. 18—27. 


foure parties of hem, and thei turneden 
not ajein, whenne thei wenten. To what 
place that that was first bowide, and the 
othir sueden. Thei turneden not ajein, 
18 Whenne thei walkiden. And stature was 
to the wheelis, and hee3nesse, and orrible 
biholdynge ; and al the bodye ful of 
igeez3en in cumpas of hem foure. And 
whenne the bestis walkiden, and the 
whelis to, gidir walkiden bisijdis hem. 
And whenn the bestis weren lift vp fro 
the erthe, and the wheelis weren lyft vp 
20togidir. Whidir euer the spirit wente, 
thidir goynge the spirit, and the wheelis 
weren lift vp to gidir suynge hym ; for- 
sothe the spirit of lyf was in the whelis. 
21 With the goynge thei wenten, and with 
the stondynge thei stoden. And with the 
reiside fro the erthe, and the wheelis 
weren reysid to gydir suynge hem; for 
22 the spirit of lyf was in the wheelis. And 
the lickenesse of the firmament vpon the 
~hedis of beestis, and as biholdynge of 
cristal orrible, and strei3t forth aboue 
23vpon the hedis of hem. Forsothe vndir 
the firmament the pennis of hem strei3t, 
of the tother to the tother; eche hilide 
his bodye with two weengus, and the 
24tother also was hilide. And I herde 
the soun of weengus, as the soun of many 
watris, as the soun of hee; God. When 
thei walkiden, there was as the sowne 
of multitude, as the soun of eastels, or 
oostis of men; and when thei stoden, the 
aspennys of hem weren leide doun. For 
whi whenne a vois was maad vpon the 
firmament, whiche was vpon the hedis of 
hem, thei stoden, and senten doun her 
26weingis. And vpon the firmament that 
was neiz3inge to the hede of hem, as the 
biholdynge of a saphire stoone, a licke- 
nesse of* trone; and vpon liknes of the 
trone the liknes, as biholdynge of man¢ 
e7fro aboue. And I sce3 as the liknes of 
electre, as the biholdynge of fier within- 


4 Ms. x is defective from this place to chap. xxxii. 12, and the text is supplied from 4. 


> strechith y. © heedis Fiks. 


b gauge 1. 


a fro y. 
& Om. a. 


EZEKIEL. 


ce two T passim. 


503 


jeden bi foure partis of tho, and turneden 
not a3en, whanne tho jeden. Also stature, 18 
and hi3nesse, and orible biholdyng was to 
the wheelis; and al the bodi was ful of 
i3en in the cumpas of tho foure. Andi9 
whanne the beestis 3eden, the wheelis also 
jeden togidere bisidis tho. And whaime 
the beestis weren reisid fro the erthe, the 
wheelis also weren reisid togidere. \Whi-20 
dur euere the spirit 3ede, whanne the spi- 
rit 3ede thedur, also the wheelis suynge it 
weren reisid togidere; for whi the spirit 
of lijf was in the wheelis. Tho 3eden2! 
with the beestis goynge, and tho stoden 
with the beestis stondynge. And with the 
beestis reisid fro erthe, also the wheelis 
suynge tho beestis weren reisid togidere; 
for’ the spirit of lijf was in the wheelis. 
And the licnesse of the firmament was22 
aboue the heed of the beestis, and as the 
biholdyng of orible cristal, and stretchid® 
abrood on the heed‘ of tho beestis aboue. 
Forsothe vndur the firmament the wyngis 23 
of tho beestis weren strei3t, of oon to an- 
othir; ech beeste hilide his bodi with twei* 
wyngis, and an other was hilid in lijk 
maner. And Y herde the sown of wyngis, 24 
as the sown of many watris, as the sown 
of hi3 God. Whanne tho 3eden, ther was 
as a sown of multitude, as the sown of 
oostis of batel; and whanne tho stoden, 
the’ wyngis of tho weren late doun. For 2s 
whi whanne a vois was maad on the fir- 
mament, that was on the heed of tho, tho 
stoden, and leten doun her wyngis. And 26 
on the firmament, that was aboue thee 
heed of tho, was’ as the biholdyng of a 
saphire stoon, the licnesse of a trone; and 
on the licnesse of the trone was a licnesse, 
as the biholdyng of a man aboue. And 27 
Y si3 as a licnesse of electre, as the bi- 
holding of fier with ynne, bi the cumpas 
therof; fro the Jendis of hym and® aboue, 
and fro the lendis of him til to bynethe, 
Y si34 as the licnesse of fier scliynynge in 


€ aman GH. 


Oma. tothe K sec.m.  f at py. 


504 


forth, bi the compas of it; fro the leendis 
of hym and aboue®, and fro the leendis 
of him and‘ bynethe Y see3 as the liknes 
28of fier shynynge in the cumpas, as the 
biholdynge of a bowe, whanne it shal be 
in the’ cloude in the dai of rayn. This 

' was the biholdynge of shinynge bi® com- 

pas. 
CAP. II. 

1 This siz3t of liknes of glorie of the 
Lord. And Y see3, and fel in to my face; 
and Y herde a vois of the spekynge. And 
he seide to me, Sone of man, stoond vpon 
thi feet, and Y shal speke with thee. 

2And a spirit entride in to me, after that 
he spak to me, and sette me vpon my 
feet. And Y herde the spekynge to me, 

sand seiynge, Sone of man, Y sende thee 
to the sones of Israel, to folkis' apostataas, 
that han broken her religioun or lawe, 
whiche wenten awei fro me; the fadris 
of hem braken my couenaunt vn to this 
4day. And the sones ben of hard face, 
and of herte vuchaastisable, that wole not 
be maad tame or meke, to whom I sende 
5thee. And thou shalt seye to hem, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God; if perauen- 
ture ether thei heren, and if perauenture 
thei resten, for it is an hows stirynge to 
wraththe. And thei shulen wite, for a 
prophete shal be in the mydil of hem. 
6Therfor thou, sone of man, drede not 
hem, ne drede thou the wordis of hem; 
for vnbileueful men and distruyers ben 
with thee, and thou dwellist with scor- 
piouns. Drede thou not the wordis of 
hem, ne drede the semblaunte of hem, 
for it is an hous styrynge to wraththe. 
7Therfor thou shalt speke my wordis to 
hem, if perauenture thei heren, and resten, 
sfor thei ben wraththers. Forsothe thou, 
sone of man, here what euer thingis I 
shal speke to thee; and nyl thou be 
styrynge to wraththe, as the hous of Is- 
rael is wraththeres. Opyn thi mouth, 


_, © fro aboue cu. f til en. 


i Om. 1K. J sau3 1 sepius. 


EZEKIEL. 


& Om. eu. 


k telde ks. I felle x. 


I. 28—II. 8. 


cumpas, as the biholdynge of the reyn-28 
bowe, whanne it is in the cloude in the 
dai of reyn. This was the biholdyng ‘of 
schynyng bi cumpas. 


CAP. II. 

This was a si3t of the licnesse of thei 
glorie of the Lord. And Y si3j, and felle ~ 
doun on my face; and Y herde the vois 
of aspekere. And he seide to me, Thou, . 
sone of man, stonde on thi feet, and Y 
schal speke with thee. And the spirite 
entride in to me, after that he spak to 
me, and settide me on my feet. And Y 
herde oon spekynge to me, and selynge, 3 
Sone of man, Y sende thee to the sones of 
Israel, to folkis apostatas, ‘ether goynge 
abak fro feith', that 3eden awei fro me; 
the fadris of hem braken my couenaunt til 
to this dai. And the sones ben of hard face, 
and of vnchastisable herte, to whiche™ Y 
sende thee. And thou schalt seie to hem, 
The Lord God seith these thingis; if per-s 
auenture nameli thei heren, and if per- 
auenture thei resten, for it is an hous 
terrynge to wraththe. And thei schulen 
wite, that a profete is in the myddis of 
hem. Therfore thou, sone of man, dredes 
not hem, nether drede thou the wordis of 
hem; for vnbileueful men and distrieris 
ben with thee, and thou dwellist with 
scorpiouns. Drede thou not the wordis of 
hem, and drede thou not the faces of hem, 
for it is an hous terrynge to wraththe. 
Therfor thou schalt speke my wordis to7 
hem, if perauenture thei heren, and resten, 
for thei ben terreris to wraththe. Buts 
thou, sone of man, here what euer thingis 
Y schal speke to thee; and nyle thou be 
a terrere to wraththe, as the hows of Is- 
rae] is" a terrere to wraththe. Opene thi 
mouth, and ete what euer thingis Y 3yue 


hin cu. i folke c pr.m.n. 


1Om.1 ™ whom. © was In. 


I. g—IIE. 11. 


and eet what euer thingis Y 3ene to thee. 

9 And I saw3, and loo! an hoond was sent 
to me, in whom was a boke foldyn. And 
he leide it abrood before me, the which 
was writen withinforth and withoutforth. 
And lamentaciouns, and dite, 07 soong, 
and woo, was writen in it. 


CAP. III. 


1 And he seide to me, Sone of man; eet 


what euer thing thou shalt fynde, eet 
this volym, or boke; and thou* goynge 
2spek to the sones of Israel. And Y open- 
ede my mouth, and he fedde me with the 
3ilk volym. And he seide to nie, Sone of 
man, thi wombe shal ete, and thin en- 
trailis shulen be fulfillid! with this volym, 
which Y 3yue to thee. And Y ete it, and 
it is maad in my mouth as swete hony. 
aAnd he seide to me, Sone of man, go 
thou to the hows of Israel, and thou 
sshalt speke my wordis to hem. For- 
sothe thou shalt not be sent to a puple 
of deep word, and of vnknowyn tunge; 
eto the hows of Israel, nether to manye 
puplis of deep word, and of vnknowyn 
tunge, of whom thou mayst not here the 
wordis. And if thou shuldis be sent to 
zhem, thei shulden here thee. Forsothe 
the hows of Israel wole not here thee, 
for thei wole not here me. Forsothe al 
the hows of Israel is of defoulid, 07 vn- 
sshamfust, forhed, and hard herte. Loo! 
I hane 3ouen thi face my3tier than the 
face of hem, and thi forheed harder than 
9the forheed of hem. And Y 3aue™ thi 
face as an adamaunt, and as a flynt; 
drede thou not hem, nether drede thou 
the face-of hem, for it is an hows styr- 
10 ynge" to wraththe. And he seide to me, 
Sone of man, tak to in thin herte, and 
with thin erys here alle thes my wordis, 
11 whiche I speke to thee. And go, entre® 
to the passynge ouere, to the sones of thi 
puple. And thou shalt speke to hem, and 


k Om. co prom.u. } fillid ex. . 


© Om. nN. 
QRSUXY. 


VOL. III. 


P deep CEFGHIKMNPQNSUX. 
s And Y a pr.m. 1 sec. m. 


EZEKIEL. 


m hardid x. 


4 wolen not 1. 


505 


to thee. And Y si3, and lo! an hond wasy 
sent to me, in which a book was foldid 

togidere. And he spredde abrood it bifor 

me, that was writun with ynne and with 

outforth. And lamentaciouns, and° song, 

and wo, weren writun ther ynne. 


CAP. III. 


And he seide to me, Sone of man, ete1 
thou what euer thing thou fyndist, ete 
thou this volym; and go thou, and speke 
to the sones of Israel. And Y openydez 
my mouth, and he fedde me with that 
volym. And he seide to me, Sone of man,3 
thi wombe schal ete, and thin entrails 
schulen be fillid with this volym, which 
Y 3yue to thee. And Y eet it, and it was 
maad as swete hony in my mouth. And4 
he seide to me, Sone of man, go thou to 
the hous of Israel, and thou schalt speke 
my wordis to hem. For thou schalt nots 
be sent to a puple of hi3? word, and of 
vnknowun langage; thou schalt be sent 
to the hous of Israel, nether to many pu-6 
plis of hi3? word, and of vnknowun lan- 
gage, of whiche thou maist not here the 
wordis. And if thou were sent to hem, 
thei schulden here thee. But the hous of7 
Israel nylen4 here thee, for thei nylen here 
me. For al the hous of Israel is of vn- 
schamefast’ forheed, and of hard herte. 
Lo! Y 3af thi face strongere than thes 
faces of hem, and thi forheed hardere than 
the forheedis of hem. Y* 3af thi face as» 
an adamaunt, and as a flynt; drede thou 
not hem, nether drede thou of the face 
of hem, for it is an hous terrynge to 
wraththe. And he seide to me, Sone of 10 
man, take in thin herte, and here with 
thin eeris alle these my wordis, whiche Y 
speke to thee. And go thou, and entre1) 
to the passyng ouer, to the sones of thi 
puple. And thou schalt speke to hem, and 
thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord God 


n of stirynge GH. © and entre GH. 


t defoulid, ether of vnshamfast CEFGHIKMNP 


37 


506 


thou shalt seie to hem, Thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, if perauenture thei 
12heren, and resten. And the spirit took 
me to, and Y herde after me a nois? of 
greet mouynge togider, the blessid glorie 
130f the Lord fro his place, and the vois 
of weengis of beestis smytynge another 
to the tother’, and the vois of wheelis 
suynge the beestis, and the vois of greet 
Mmouynge togidir. And the spirit reiside 
me, and took me to. And Y wente awey 
in’ bitter indignacioun of my spirit ; for- 
sothe the hoond of the Lord was with 
1sme, coumfortynge me. And Y cam to 
the transmygracioun, or passinge ouer, 
to the heep of newe fruytis, to hem that 
dwellen bisidis the flood Cobar. And I 
sat where thei saten, and I] dwellide 
there seuene days, mournynge, in the 
1émydil of hem. Forsothe whanne seuene 
days hadden passid, the word of the 
17 Lord is maad to me, seiynge, Sone of 
man, I haue 3ouen thee a biholder, or a 
spier, to the hows of Israel. And thou 
shalt here of my mouth a word, and 
18thou shalt telle tf to hem of me. If me 
selynge to the vnpitous man, Bi deeth 
thou shalt die, thou shalt not telle to 
hym, nether speke to hym, that he be 
turned fro his vupitous weie, and lyue; 
the ilk ynpitous shal die in his wickid- 
nes, forsothe I shal ajen seke the blood 
190f hym of thin hoond. Forsothe if thou 
shalt shewe to the vnpitous man, and he 
shal not be conuertid fro his vnpitousnes, 
and fro his wickid weie; sotheli he shal 
die in his wickidnes, but thou hast de- 
20]yuerede thi soule. But and if the ri3t- 
wijs inan shal be conuertid fro his ri3t- 
wisnes, and shal doo wickidnes, Y shal 
putte an hirtynge before hym; he shal 
die, for thou shewedist not to hym; -he 
shal die in his synne, and the ri3twis- 
nessis, whiche he dide, shulen not be in 
mynde, sotheli Y shal ajen seche his 


P voice G see. m. H. 


ta greet 1. 
¥ tellist ig 1. 


"Om. EH. hadden G:KMNPQRSX. 


EZEKIEL. 


4 other GH. 


Ill, 12——20. 


seith these thingis, if perauenture thei 
heren, and resten. And the spirit took i2 
me, and Y herde after me the vois of a 
greet mouyng. The blessid glorie of the 
Lord was herd fro his place; and Y1s 
herde the vois of wyngis of the beestis 
smytynge oon an othir, and the vois of 
wheelis suynge the beestis, and the vois 
of greet‘ stiryng. Also the spirit reiside 14 
me, and took me. And Y 3ede forth bittir 
in the indignacioun of my spirit; for the 
hond of the Lord was with me, and 
coumfortide me. And Y cam to the pass-15 
yng ouer, to the heep of newe fruytis, to 
hem that dwelliden bisidis the flood Cho- 
bar. And Y sat where thei saten, and Y 
dwellide there seuene daies, weilynge, in 
the myddis of hem. Forsothe whanne1ic 
seuene daies weren" passid, the word of 
the Lord was maad to me, and seide, 
Sone of man, Y 3af thee ‘a spiere’ to the 17 
hous of Israel. And thou schalt here of 
my mouth a word, and thou schalt telle 
to hem of me. If whanne Y seie to theis 
wickid man, Thou schalt die bi deth, thou 
tellist” not to hym, and spekist not to 
hym, that he be turned fro his wickid 
weie, and lyue; thilke wickid man schal 
die in his wickidnesse, but Y schal seke 
his blood of thin hond. Forsothe if thou 19 
tellist to the wickid man, and he is not 
conuertid fro his wickidnesse, and fro his 
wickid weie; sotheli he schal die in his 
wickidnesse, but thou hast delyuerid thi 
soule. But also if a just man is turned 20 
fro his rijtfulnesse, and doith wickidnesse, 
¥ schal sette an hirtyng bifor hym; he 
schal die, for thou teldist not to hym; he 
schal die in his synne, and hise ri3tful- 
nessis, whiche he dide, schulen not be in 
mynde, but Y schal seke his blood of thin 
hond. Forsothe if thou tellist to a iust21 
man, that a iust man do not synne, and 
he doith not synne, he lyuynge schal lyue, 
for thou teldist to hym, and thou hast 


Om. 46 prom, H. 


Ya spiere, or a bihalder ¥ sec.m.marg. to be a spiere 1. 


IE. 21—IV. 3. 


2iblood of thin hond. Forsothe if thou 
shalt telle to the iust man, that the iust 
man synne not, and he shal not synne, 
he lyuynge shal lyue, for thou tooldist 
to hym, and thou hast delyuerede thi 
2zsoule. And the hoond of the Lord is 


maad vpon me, and he seide to me, Thou . 


risynge go out in to the feeld, and there 
231 shal speke with thee. And I risynge 
wente out in to the feeld. And loo! the 
glorie of the Lord stoode there, as the 
glorie which Y see3 besidis the flood of 
24 Cobar; and I felle in to my face. And 
the spirit entride in to me, and sette me 
vpon my feet. And he spak to me, and 
seide to me, Entre, and be thou closid 
25in the mydil of thin hows. And thou, 
sone of man, loo! boondis ben 3ouen vp- 
on thee, and thei shulen bynde thee in 
hem, and thou shalt not goon out in the 
26mydil of hem. And Y shal make thi 
tunge for to cleue to the roof of thi 
mouth, and thou shalt be doumbe, nether 
as man chydynge, or sharpli spekynge; 
for it is an‘ hows stirynge to wraththe. 
27Forsothe whanne Y shal speke to thee, 
Y shal opyn thi mouth, and thou shalt 
seie to hem, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, He that herith, here, and he that 
restith, reste; for it is an hows stirynge 
to wraththe. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And thou, sone of man, take to thee 
a tijl stoon; and thou shalt putte it before 
thee, and thou shalt discriue in it the 

2citee of Jerusalem. And thou’ shalt or- 
deyne a3ens it a bisegynge; and thou 
shalt bilde waardingis, thou shalt bere 
togidre an heep of erthe, and thou shalt 
3yue azens it castels, o7 oostis, and thou 

3shalt putte engynes in compas. And 
take thou to thee an yren panne; and 
thou shalt putte it in to an yren wal bi- 
twix thee and bitwix the citee; and thou 
shalt vpon alle sidis stable thi face to it, 


EZEKIEL. 


507 


delyuered thi soule. And the hond of the 22 
Lord was maad on me, and he seide to 
me, Rise thou, and go out in to the feeld, 
and there Y schal speke with thee. And 23 
Y roos, and 3ede out in to the feeld. And 
lo! the glorie of the Lord stood there, as 
the glorie which Y si3 bisidis the flood 
Chobar; and Y felle doun on my face. And 24 
the spirit entride in to me, and settide 
me on my feet. And he spak to me, and 
seide to me, Entre thou, and be thou 
closid in the myddis of thin hous. And 25 
thou, sone of man, lo! boondis ben 3ouun 
on thee, and thei schulen bynde thee with 
tho, and thou schalt not go out in the 
myddis of hem. And Y schal make thies 
tunge to cleue to the roof of thi mouth, 
and thou schalt be doumbe, and thou 
schalt not be as a man rebuykinge; for 
it is an hous terrynge to wraththe. But27 
whanne Y schal speke to thee, Y schal 
opene thi mouth, and thou schalt seie to 
hem, The Lord God ‘seith these thingis, 
He that herith, here, and he that restith, 
reste; for- it is an hous terrynge to 
wraththe. 


CAP. IV. 


And thou, sone of man, take to thee a1 
tijlX stoon; and thou schalt sette it bifore 
thee, and thou schalt discriue ther ynne 
the citee of Jerusalem. And thou schalt2 
ordeyne bisegyng a3enus that Jerusa- 
lem; and thou schalt bilde strengthis, and 
thou schalt bere togidere erthe, and thou 
shalt 3yue oostis of batel azens it, and 
thou schalt sette engynes inY cumpas. 
And take thou to thee an irone friynges 
panne; and thou schalt sette it in to an 
irone wal bitwixe thee and bitwixe the 
cite; and thou schalt sette stidfastli thi 


3 Om. 4. 


x litil 1. 


yY bi in. 


38T2 


508 


and it shal be in to bisegynge, and thou 
shalt about 3yue it, or cumpas; it is a 
atokne to the hows of Israel. And thou 
shalt slepe vpon thit left sijde, and thou 
shalt putte the wickidnessis" of the hows 
of Israel vypon it in the noumbre of dais, 
in whiche thou shalt slepe on it, and thou 
sshalt take to the wickidnes of hem. For- 
sothe Y 3aue to thee 3eeris of the’ wickid- 
nes of hem, in noumbre of thre hundrid 
dais and nynti dais; and thou shalt bere 
éthe wickidnes of the hows of Israel. And 
whanne thou shalt fulfille thes thingis, 
thou shalt sleepe vpon thi ri3t syde the 
secounde tyme. And thou shalt take to 
the wickidnes of the hows of Juda fourty 
dais, a dai for a 3eer, sotheli Y 3aue to 
7thee a dai for a 3eer. And to the bi- 
segynge of Jerusalem thou shalt turne 
thi face; and thin arm shal be strau3t 
forth, and thou shalt prophecie ajens it. 
8Loo! Y 3ane about, or cumpaside, thee 
with boondis, and thou shalt not conuerte 
thee fro thi’ side in to the tother side, til 


othou fulfille the dais of thi segynge. And > 


take thou to thee whete, and barli, and 
bene, and lent, and mylie, and vetche; 
and thou shalt sende hem in to a vessel. 
And thou shalt make to thee looues in 
noumbre of dais, whiche thou shalt sleepe 
vpon thi side; thre hundrid and nynti 
10 dais thou shalt ete it. Forsothe thi meet, 
which thou shalt ete, shal be in wei3t 
twenti* stateris, that is, ten owncis, in 
the dai; fro tyme vn to tyme thou shalt 
i1ete it. And thou shalt drynke water in 
mesure the sixt part of hyn; fro tyme vn 
12to tyme thou shalt drynke it. And thou 
shalt ete it as a barly loof bakyn vndir 
asshenY; and thou shalt hille it with a 
toord that goth out of a man, in the eyen, 
ier si3t, of hem. Thes thingis seith the 
Lord, So the sones of Israel shulen ete 
her breed defoulid among-heithen men’, 


tthe cu. Ut witnessis 4. YOm. GH. Wthe H. 


Ztil Nn. 


ceteri. © the dunge 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


X of twenti GH. 


® bisechyng a. bifore segyng n. byfor sechynge s sec. m. 
© that other c. the tother ENs. to an other Fru. to the tother ckmrx. tother Ha. to the oother 1. 


IV. 4—13. 


face to it, and it schal be in to bisegyng, 
and thou schalt cumpasse it; it is a signe 
to the hous of Israel. And thou schalt4 
slepe on thi left side, and thou schalt 
putte the wickidnessis of the hous of Is- 
rael on that side, in the noumbre of daies 
in which thou shalt slepe on? that side, 
and thou schalt take the wickidnesse of 
hem. Forsothe Y 3af to thee the 3eeris of 5 
the wickidnesse of hem bi noumbre of 
daies, thre hundrid and nynti daies; and 
thou schalt bere the wickidnesse of the 
hous of Israel. And whanne thou haste 
fillid these thingis, thou schalt slepe the 
secounde tyme on thi ri3tside. And thou 
schalt take the wickidnesse of the hous of 
Juda bi fourti daies; Y 3af to thee a dai 
for a 3eer, a dai sotheli for a 3eer. And7 
thou schalt turne thi face to the biseg- 
ing® of Jerusalem; and thin arm schal be 
stretchid forth, and thou schalt profesie 
ajens it. Lo! Y haue cumpassid thees 
with boondis, and thou schalt not turne 
thee fro thi side in ‘to other® side, tille 
thou fille the daies of thi bisegyng. Ands 
take thou to thee wheete, and barli, and 
beenys, and tillis, and mylie, and vetchis ; 
and thou schalt putte? tho in to o vesselle. 
And thou schalt make to thee looues for 
the noumbre of daies, bi whiche thou 
schalt slepe on thi side; bi three hundrid 
and nynti daies thou schalt ete it. For-1o 
sothe thi mete, which thou schalt ete, 
schal be in wei3te twenti staters in a dai; 
fro tyme til to tyme thou schalt ete it. 
And thou schalt drynke watir in mesure, 11 
the sixte part of hyn; fro tyme til to 
tyme thou schalt drynke it. And thoui2 
schalt ete it as barli breed bakun vudur 
the aischis ; and with ‘a toord® that goith 
out of a man thou schalt hile, it bifore the 
iz3en of hem. The Lord seith these thingis, 13 
So the sones of Israel schulen ete her 
breed defoulid among hethene men, to 


Yaschis c. askis H. 2% Om. G pr.m.H. 


d this a pr.m. 1 sec.m. thi 1 prom. 
a sende 


IV. 14—V. 6, 


14to whom Y shal caste hem out. And I 
seide, A! A! A! Lord God, loo! my 

‘goulé is not defoulid; and fro my’ child- 
hed til now Y ete not deed careyn, and 
to-drawyn of beestis ; and al vnclene flesh 

isentride not in to my mouthe. And he 
seide to me, Loo! I 3aue to thee dunge 
of oxen’ for mannus toordis; and thou 

16shalt make thi breed in it. “And he seide 
to me, Loo! Y shal defoule the staf of 
breed in Jerusalem, and thei shulen ete 
her breed in wei3t and in bisynes, and 
thei shulen drynke watir® in mesure and 

17in anguysh ; that water and breed fail- 
ynge eche man falle doun to his brother, 
and waxe rotyn to gidre in her wickid- 
nessis. ‘ 


CAT A. 


1 And thou, sone of man, take to thee 
a sharp swerd, or rasour, shauynge 
heeris; and thou shalt ‘take it to, and 
thou shalt® lede it bi thin heed, and bi 
thi beerd. ‘And thou shalt take to thee 
a balaunce of wei3t‘, and thou shalt de- 

2parte hem. And thou shalt brenne the 
thridde part in fier in the mydil of the 
citee, besidis the fulfilling of dais of seg- 
ynge. And thou takynge to the thridde 
part*, shalt ‘togidir kitte bi swerd in 
cumpas of it. Sotheli thou shalt scatere 
in to wynd the tother thridde part ; and 
Y shal make nakid, or vnshethe, the 

3swerd after hem. And thou shalt take 
therof a litil noumbre, and thou shalt 
bynde hem in the hei3t of thin ouer- 
amost clooth. And eftsoone thou shalt 
take of hem, and thou shalt caste hem 
in to the mydil of fier. And thou shalt 
brenne hem in fier; and of it fier shal 
5gon out in to al the hous of Israel. Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, This is Jeru- 
salem; in the mydil of heithen men Y 
haue putte it, and loondis in the cumpas 
cof it. And it dispiside my domys, that 
it were more vnpitous than heithen men; 


aOm. Gpr.m.u. » Om. 4, 


EZEKIEL. 


¢ Om. 4. 


509 . 


whichef Y schal caste hem out. And Y14 
seide, A! A! A! Lord God, lo! my 'soule 
is not defoulid, and fro my 3ong childhed 
til to now Y eet not a thing deed bi it 
silf, and to-rent of beestis ; and al vnclene 
fleisch entride not in to my mouth. Andis 
he seide to me, Lo! Y haue 3oue to thee 
the dung of oxis for mennus toordis; and 
thou schalt make thi breed with it. Andis 
he seide to me, Sone of man, lo! Y schal 
al to-breke the staf of breed in Jerusalem, 
and thei schulen ete her breed in wei3te 
and in bisynesse, and thei schulen drynke 
water in mesure and in angwisch; that17 
whanne breed and watir failen, eche man 
falle doun to his brother, and thei faile 
in her wickidnessis. - 


CAP. V. 


And thou, sone of man, take to thee; 
a scharp swerd, schauynge heeris; and 
thou schalt take it, and schalt leede it bi 
thin heed, and bi thi berd. And thou 
schalt take to thee a balaunce of wei3te, 
and thou schalt departe tho. Thou schalt2 
brenne the thridde part with fier in the 
myddis of the citee, bi the fillyng of dates 
of bisegyng. And thou schalt take the 
thridde part, and schalt kitte bi swerd in 
the cumpas therof. But thou schalt scatere 
‘the tother$ thridde* part in to the wynd ; 
and Y schal make nakid a swerd aftir 
hem. And thou schalt take therof a litils 
noumbre, and thou schalt bynde tho in 
the hijnesse of thi mentil. And eft thous 
schalt take of hem, and thou schalt caste 
forth hem in to the myddis of the fier. 
And thou schalt brenne hem in fier; and 
fier schal go out of that in to al the hous 
of Israel. The Lord God seith theses 
thingis, This is Jerusalem; Y haue sette 
it in the myddis of hethene men, and 
londis in the cumpas therof. And it dis-6 
piside my domes, that it was more wickid 
than hethene men; and it dispiside my 
comaundementis more than londis that 


4 Om. 6 prom. u. © partye H. 


fwhom1. & that oother1. hb Om. 4 pr.m. Fs. 


510 


and my maundementis more than loondis 
that ben in compas of it. Forsothe thei 
han caste awei my domys, and thei walk- 
eden not in my preceptis, or heestis. 
7 Therfor thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
For 3e han ouerpasside, or ouercomyn, 
heithen men that ben in 3our cumpas, 
and 3e walkeden not in myn heestis, and 
my domys 3e han not doo, and 3e han 
not wrou3te aftir the domys of heithen 
smen that ben in 3our cumpas; therfor 
seith the Lord thes thingis, Loo! Y to 
thee, and Y my silf in the mydil of thee 
shal make domys in the eyen, or s73J, 
gof heithen men; and I shal doo in thef 
whiche thingis I dide not, and to whiche 
I shal namore make lije thingis, for alle 
tothin abhomynaciouns. Therfor faders 
shulen eete sones in the mydil of thee, 
and sones shulen eete her faders; and in 
thee I shal make domys, and J shal wyn- 
dewe alle thi relikis in to eche wynd. 
11 Therfor I lyue, seith the Lord God, no 
but for that that thou defoulidist myn 
hooli thing in alle thin offenciouns, and 
in alle thin abhomynaciouns ; and I shal 
breke togider, and myn eye® shal not 
igspare, and Y shal not haue mercie. The 
thridde part of thee shal die bi pesti- 
lence, and in hungre shal be wastid in 
the mydil of thee; and the thridde part 
of thee shal falle doun bi swerd in thi 
compas; sotheli I shal scatere thi thridde 
part in to eche wynd, and I shal drawe 
130ut a swerd after hem. And I shal ful- 
fille my woodnes, and Y shal make myn 
indignacioun for to reste in hem, and Y 
shal be coumfortid. And thei shulen wite, 
for I the Lord spake in my feruent 
wraththe, whanne Y shal fulfille myn 
iindignacioun in hem. And Y shal 3eue 
thee in to scornynge and shenship to 
heithen men that ben in thi compas, in 
15 the si3t of eche man passynge forth. And 
thou shalt be shenship and blasfemye, 
ensaumple and greet wondrynge, in hei- 


f Om. Hn. 


i Om. In. 


EZEKIEL. 


k ouercamen CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX, 


V. 7—15. 


ben in the! cumpas therof. For thei han 
cast awei my domes, and thei 3eden not 
in my comaundementis. Therfor the Lord? 
God seith these thingis, For 3e ‘han passid* 
hethene men that ben in 3oure cumpas, 
and 3e 3eden not in my comaundementis, 
and 3e diden not my domes, and 3e wrou3ten 
not bi the domes of hethene men that ben 
in 30ure cumpas; therfor the Lord God& 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y to thee, and Y 
my silf schal make domes in the myddis 
of thee, bifor the ijen of hethene men; 
and Y schal do thingis in thee, whiche Y9 
dide not, and to whiche Y schal no more 
make lijk thingis, for alle thin abhomyna- 
ciouns. Therfor fadris schulen ete sones 10 
in the myddis of thee, and sones schulen 
ete her fadris; and Y schal make domes 
in thee, and Y schal wyndewe alle thin 
remenauntis in to ech wynd. Therfor Y 1! 
lyue, seith the Lord God, no but for that 
that thou defoulidist myn hooli thing in 
alle thin offenciouns, and in alle thin abho- 
mynaciouns; and Y schal breke, and myn 
ize schal not spare, and Y schal not do 
merci. The thridde part of thee schal die 12 
bi pestilence, and schal be wastid bi hun- 
gur in the middis of thee; and the thridde 
part of thee schal falle doun bi swerd in 
thi cumpas; forsothe Y schal scatere thi 
thridde part in to ech wynd, and Y schal 
drawe out a swerd after hem. And Y13 
schal fille my stronge veniaunce, and Y 
schal make myn indignacioun to! reste in 
hem, and Y schal be coumfortid. And thei 
schulen wite, that Y the Lord spak in my 
feruent loue, whanne Y schal fille al myn 
indignacioun in hem. And Y schal 3yune14 
thee in to desert, in to schenschipe to he- 
thene men that ben in thi cumpas, in the 
si3t of ech that passith forth. And thous 
schalt be schenschipe ‘and blasfemye™, en- 
saumple and wondryng, among hethene 
men that ben in thi cumpas, whanne Y 
schal make domes in thee, in strong ven- 
iaunce, and indignacioun, and in blam- 


& eizen GH. 


lfor tov. ™Om.N. 


V. 16——V1. 9. 


then men that ben in thi compas, whanne 
¥ shal doo in thee domys in woodnes, and 
in indignacioun, and in blamyngis of 

lewraththe. Y the Lord; whanne Y shal 
sende the werst arewis of hungre in to 
hem, whiche shulen be deedly; and whom 
Y shal sende, that I scatere 30u. And I 
shal gedre hungre vp on 3o0u, and Y shal 

17defoule in 30u the staf of breed. And I 
shal sende in to 3ou hungre, and werste 
beestis, vn to deeth; and pestilence and 
blood shulen passe bi thee, and Y shal 
lede in a swerd vpon thee; I the Lord 
haue spokyn. 


CAP. VI. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seiynge, Sone of man, put thi face 
to the hillis of Israel ; and thou shalt pro- 
3phecie to hem, and thou shalt seye, Hillis 
of Israel, here 3e the word of the Lord 
God. Thes thingis seith the Lord God 
* to mounteyns, and reisyngis of hillis, to 
rochis, and valeys, Loo! I shal lede to on 
jou a swerd, and IJ shal scatere 3our hei3e 
4thingis. And I shal distruye 3our auters, 
and 3our symulacrys shulen be brokyn 
to gidre; and Y shal cast doun jour slayn 
5men before jour ydolis. And Y shal 3eue 
the deed careyns of the sones of Israel 
before the face of 3our symulacris, and 
Y shal scatere 30ure boonus about 3oure 
cautres, in alle 30ur dwellyngis. Cytees 
shulen be deseert, and hei3e thingis shu- 
len be distruyid, and shulen be dispar- 
plid ; and 3our auters shulen perishe, and 
shulen be brokyn togidre. And 3oure ydolis 
shulen ceese, and jour wode maumentis. 
shulen be troden togidre, and 3our werkis 
7shulen be don awei. And a slayn man 
shal falle doun in the mydil of 3ou; and 
33e shulen wite, for Y am Lord. And Y 
shal leeue in 3ou hem that han fledde the 
swerd in heithen men, ‘whanne I schal 
gscatere 30u in to londis. And 3oure dely- 
uered men schulen bethenke of me in 
hethen men, to whom thei ben lad cai-. 


EZEKIEL. 


511 


yngis of ire. Y the Lord haue spoke, 16 
whanne Y schal sende-in" to hem the 
worste arowis of hungur, that schulen bere 
deth ; and whiche Y schal sende, that Y 
leese 3ou. And Y schal gadere hungur on 
jou, and Y schal al to-breke in 3ou the 
sadnesse of breed. And Y schal sende ini7 
to 30u hungur, and worste beestis, til to 
the° deth ; and pestilence and blood schu- 
len passe bi thee, and Y schal bringe in 
swerd on thee; Y the Lord spak. 


CAP 


And the word of the Lord was maadi 
to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man,e 
sette thi face to the hillis of Israel; and 
thou schalt profesie to tho hills, and schalt 
seie, Hillis of Israel, here 3e the word of3 
the Lord God. The Lord God seith these 
thingis to mounteyns, and litil hillis, to 
roochis of stoon, and to valeis, Lo! Y schal 
bringe in on 3ou a swerd, and Y schal 
leese 30ure hize thingis. And Y schal dis-4 
trie 3oure auteris, and 3oure symylacris 
schulen be brokun; and Y schal caste 
doun 3oure slayn men bifore 3o0ure idols. 
dnA Y schal 3yue the deed bodies of the, 
sones of Israe) bifor the face of 3oure sy- 
mylacris, and Y schal scatere 3oure boonys 
aboute 3oure auteris, in alle 3oure dwell-, 
ingis. Citees schulen be forsakun, and hi3 
thingis schulen be distried, and schulen be 
scaterid; and 3oure auteris schulen pe- 
rische, and schulen be brokun. And 3oure 
idols schulen ceesse, and 3oure templis of 
idols schulen be al to-brokun, and 30ure 
werkis schulen be doen awei. And a slayn7 
man schal falle doun in the myddis of 30u ; 
and 3e schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 
And Y schal leeue in 30u hem that fledden g 
swerd among hethene men, whanne Y 
schal scatere 30u in to londis. And 3oure yg 
delyuered men schulen haue mynde on me 
among hethene men?, to whiche thei ben. 


b Om. «4. 


2 Om. I pr.m. 


© Om. IN. 


P Om. &.. 


512 EZEKIEL. VI. 10—VII. 4. 


tifs; for Y haue defoulide the herte of 
hem doynge fornycacioun, and goynge 
awey fro me, and the eyen of hem do- 
ynge fornicacioun after her ydolis. And 
thei shulen displese to hem self vp on 
the yuel thingis, whiche thei .diden .in 
1oalle her abomynaciouns. .. And thei .shu- 
len wite, for Y the Lord spake not veynli, 
that Y shulde doo to hem this yuel thing. 
11Thes thingis seith the Lord God, Smyte 
thin hoond, and hurtle to gidre thi foot, 
and sey, Allas! to alle abomynaciouns of 
yuel thingis of the hows of Israel, that 
ben to fallynge bi swerd, hungre, and 
i2pestilence. Forsothe he that is ny3, shal 
falle bi swerd. And he that shal be laft 
and be! bisegid, shal die bi hungre. And 
Y shal fulfille* myn indignacioun in hem. 
13 And 3e shulen wite, for Y the Lord, whanne 
3our slayn men shulen be in the mydil 
of 30ur ydolis, in the cumpas of 3our au- 
ters, in eche hei3 litle hil, and in alle 
hei3this of mounteyns, and vnder eche 
tree ful of wode, 07 bouwis, and vndir 
eche ook ful of bouwis, that is to seye, a 
place where thei brenten encensis swete 
14sauerynge to alle her ydolis. And I shal 
holde forth myn hoond vpon hem, and 
Y shal make the loond of hein desolat, 
and destitute, o7 forsakyn, fro deseert 
-Deblatha, in alle the dwellingis of hem ; 
and thei shulen wite, for I a! Lord. 


CAP. VII. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad.to 
2me, seiynge, And thou, sone of man, thes 
thingis seith the Lord God to the loond 
of Israel, Ende cometh, ende cometh, vp 
on the foure plagis, ‘or parties™, of the™ 
3erthe. Now ende vpon thee, and I shal 
sende my woodnes in to thee, and Y shal 
deme thee after thi weies, and I shal 
putte aj3en thee alle thin abomynaciouns. 
4And myn eye shal not spare vpon thee, 
and Y shal not haue mercye. But Y shal 
putte thi weies vpon thee, and thin abo- 
mynaciouns shulen be in the mydil of 


led prisoneris ; for Y haue al.to-broke her 
herte doynge fornycacioun, and goynge 
awei fro me, and her i3en doynge. fornica- 
cioun aftir her idols... And thei schulen dis- 
plese hem silf on the yuels, whiche thei 
diden in alle her abhomynaciouns. .And 10 
thei schulen wite, that. Y4 the Lord spak 
not.in veyn, that Y schulde do this yuel 
tohem. The Lord God’ seith these thingis, 11 
Smyte thin hond, and hurtle thi foot, and 
seie, Alas! to alle abhomynaciouns of the 
yuelis of the hous of Israel; for .thei 
schulen falle doun bi swerd, hungur, and 
pestilence. He that is fer, shal die bi pes- 
tilence. Forsothe he that is ni3, shal falle12 
bi swerd. And he that is laft and bisegid, 
shal die bi hungur. And Y schal fille 
myn indignacioun in hem. And 3e schu-3 
len wite, that Y am the Lord, whanne 
3oure slayn men schulen be in the myddis 
of 3oure idols, in the cumpas of 3oure au- 
teris, in eche hi3 litil hil, and in.alle the 
hijnessis of mounteyns, and vndur ech © 
tree ful of wode, and vndur ech ook ful 
of. boowis, that is, a place where thei 
brenten encense swete smellynge to alle 
her idols. And Y schal stretche forth myn 14 
hond on hem, and Y schal make her lond 
desolat and destitute, fro desert Deblata, 
in alle the dwellyngis of hem; and thei 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 


CAP. VII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, ‘and he seide*, And thou, sone of2 
man, the Lord God of the lond of Israel 
seith these thingis, The ende cometh, the 
ende cometh, on foure coostis of the lond. 
Now an ende 7s on thee, and Y shal sendes 
in my strong veniaunce.on thee, and Y 
schal deme thee bi thi weies, and Y schal 
sette alle thin abhomynaciouns a3ens thee. 
And myn ije shal not spare on thee, and4 
Y schal not do merey. But Y shal sette thi 
weies on thee, and thin abhomynaciouns 
schulen be in the myddis of thee; and 3e 


1Om. cu. * fulle c. fille. Ithe e@ prom. Hu. ™ Om. cH. ® Om. GH. 


4 Om. Ns sec.m. * Om. Apr.m. FI sec.m.  § seiynge I. 


Vil. 5-17. 


thee; and 3e shulen wyte, for I the Lord. 
5 These thingis seith the Lord God, Oon 
affliccioun, or fourment, loo! affliccioun 
6cometh; the ende cometh, the ende com- 
eth; it shal wake out a3ens thee; loo! 
zyt cometh. Contricioun, or tredynge to 


gider, cometh vpon thee, that dwellist in . 
erthe; tyme cometh, the dai of sleinge is - 


eny3, and not of glorie of hillis. Now of 


ny3 Y shal heelde out my wraththe vpon . 


thee, and I shal -fulfille my wocdnes in 
thee; and I shal deme thee after thi weies, 
and Y shal putte to thee alle thi greet 
9trespassis. And myn eye shal not spare, 
nether Y shal haue mercie; but thi weies 
Y shal putte to thee, and thin abomyna- 


ciouns shulen be.in the mydil of thee;- 


and 3e shulen wite, for Y am the Lord 
losmytynge. Lov! the day, loo! it cometh; 
contricioun, or defoulynge togidir, is gon 
out. The 3erde florishide, priyd burioun- 
iede, wickidnes roos in the 3erde of vn- 
pitee; not of hem, and not of the puple, 
nether of the sown of hein, and reste shal 
iznot be in hem. Tyme cometh, the® dai 
neizjede ; he that bieth, glade not, and 
he that sellith, mourne not; for wraththe 
isvpon al the puple of it. For he that 
soulde, shal not turne a3en to that thing 
that he soulde, and 3it in men lyuynge 
the lijf of hem; forsothe aP visioun, or 
prophecie, shal not goo a3en to al the 
multitude of it, and a man shal not be 
coumfortid in the wickidnes of his lijf. 
14Synge 3e with trumpe, and be alle men 
maad redie, and there is not that shal 
goo to bateile; forsothe my wraththe 
15 Vpon al the puple of hym. Swerd with 
out forth, pestilence, and hungre with 
inforth; he that is in the feeld, shal die 
bi swerde; and thei that ben in the citee, 
shulen be deuouride bi pestilence and 
ishungre. And thei! of hem that shulen 
flee, shulen be saued; and thei shulen be 
in mounteyns* as culueres of euyn valeys, 
izalle dreedful, eche in his wickidnes. Alle 
hoondis shulen be vndon, and alle knees 


EZEKIEL. 


513 


schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. Thes 
Lord God seith these thingis, Ot turment, 

lo! turment cometh; the ende cometh, thes 
ende cometh; it schal wake fulli a3ens 

thee ; lo! it cometh. Sorewe cometh on? 
thee, that dwellist in the lond; the tyme 

cometh, the dai of sleyng is ni3, and not 

of glorie of hillis. Now anoon® Y schals 
schede out myn ire on thee, and Y schal 
fille my strong veniaunce in thee; and Y 
schal deme thee bi thi .weies, and Y schal 
putte to thee alle thi grete trespassis. And9 
myn i3e schal not spare, nether Y schal do 
merci; but Y schal putte on thee thi weies, 
and thin abhomynaciouns schulen be in 
the myddis of thee; and 3e schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord smytynge. 
dai, lo! it cometh; sorewe is gon out. A 
3erde flouride, pride buriownede, wickid-11 
nesse roos in the 3erde of vnpitee; not of 
hem, and not of the puple, nether of the 
sown of hem, and no reste shal be in hem. 
The tyme cometh, the dai nei3ede; he that 12 
bieth, be not glad, and he that sillith, 
mourne not; for whi ire 7s on al the puple 
therof. For he that sillith, schal not turne 13 
a5en to that that he seelde, and 3it the lijf 
of hem zs in lyueris; for whi the renela- 
cioun’ to al the multitude therof shal not 
go ajen, and a man schal not be coum- 
fortid in the wickidnesse of his lijf. Synge 14 
3e with a trumpe, alle men be maad redi, 
and noon is that schal go to batel; for 
whi my wraththe zs on al the puple therof. 
Swerd is with out forth, pestilence and 15 
hungur with ynne; he that is in the feeld, 
schal die bi swerd; and thei that ben in 
the citee, schulen be deuourid bi pestilence 
and hungur. And thei schulen be sauyd 16 
that fleen of hem; and thei schulen be 
as culueris of grete valeis in hillis, alle 
quakynge, ech man in his wickidnesse. . 
Alle hondis schulen be aclumsid, and alle 17 
knees schulen flowe with watris. 
thei schulen girde -hem with heiris, and 
inward drede schal hile hem; and schen- 
schipe schal be in ech face, and ballid- 


°Om. Gc prmu. Pthe cH. 90m, ¢ pr.m. nu. * the mounteynes Gu. 


t Lo! ins.- t of nei3 CEFHIKMQRSU. 


VOL. II. 


Vv visioun, ether reuciacioun CFGHKMQSUX. Visioun EINPR, 


3U 


Lo! the1e 


And 18 


514 


isshulen flowe with waters. And thei shu- 
len girde hem with heiris, and inward 
dreed shal hille hem to gidre; and in eche 
face confusioun, and in alle the heedis of 
i9hem ballidnes. The siluere of hem shal 
be cast fer with outforth, and the gold 
of hem shal be in to dungehil ; the siluer 
of hem and the gold of hem shal not 
mowe deliuere hem in the dai of the 
woodnes of the Lord. Thei shulen not 
fulfille her soule, or 22jf, and the wombis 
of hem shulen not be fulfillid; for it is 
maad the sclaundre of wickidnes of hem. 
20And thei puttiden the ournement of her 
brochis in to pride; and thei maden of it 
the ymagis of her abomynaciouns and 
symulacris. For this thing Y 3aue it to 
21hem, in to vnclennes. And Y shal 3yue 
it iu to the hoondis of alienys, for to take 
awey, and to vnpitouse men of erthe in 
22to praye, and thei shulen defoule it. And 
I shal turne awey my face fro hem, and 
thei shulen defoule my priue thing; and 


foule men, 07 renners, shulen, entre in to . 


23it, and shulen defoule it. Mak thou con- 
clusioun, ov ende; for the erthe is* ful 
of doom of bloodis, and the citee ful of 

24 wickidnes. And I shal brynge the werst 
men of folk of kynde, and thei shulen 
weelde the howsis of hem; and Y shal 
make the pride of my3ti men for to reste, 
and’ thei shulen weelde the seyntuaries 

250f hem. Anguysh comynge vpon, thei 
shulen ajen seche pees, and it shal not 

abe. Trublynge togidre shal come vpon 
trublyng togidre, and herynge vpon her- 
ynge; and thei shulen seche a visioun of 
the prophete, and lawe shal perishe fro 

27 preest, and counseil fro eldre men. The 
kyng shal mourne, and the prince shal 
be clothid with inward sorew, and the 
hoondis of puple" of the loond sliulen be 
trublid togidir; after the weie of hein Y 
shal do to hem, and after the domes of 
hem Y shal deme hem; and thei shulen 
wite, for Y the Lord. 


EZEKIEL. 


VII. 18—27: 


nesse schal be im alle the heedis of hem. 
The siluer of hem schal be cast out, and 19 
the gold of hem schal be in to a dunghil; 
the siluer of hem and the gold of hem 
schal not mowe delyuere hem in the dai 
of the strong veniaunce of the Lord. Thei 
schulen not fille her soule, and the wombis 
of hem schulen not be fillid; for it is maad 
the sclaundre of hir wickidnesse. And thei.20 
setteden the ournement of her brochis in 
to pride; and thei maden of it the ymagis - 
of her abhomynaciouns and simylacris. 
For this thing Y 3af it to hem, in to vn- 
clennesse. And Y schal 3yue it in to theai 
hondis of aliens, to rauysche, and to the 
vnpitouse men of erthe, in to prey, and 
thei schulen defoule it. And Y schal turne 22 
awei my face fro hem, and thei schulen 
defoule my priuyte; and harlotis” schulen 
entre in to it, and schulen defoule it. 
Make thou a closyng to gidere; for the2s 
lond is ful of doom of bloodis, and the 
citee 2s ful of wickidnesse. And Y schal 2s 
brynge the worste of hethene men, and 
thei schulen haue in possessioun the housis 
of hem; and Y¥ schal make the pride of 
mi3ti men to ceesse, and enemyes schulen 
haue in possessioun the seyntuaries of hem. 
In anguysch comynge aboue thei schulenes 
seke pees, and it schal not be. Disturblyng 26 
schal come on disturblyng, and heryng on 
heryng ; and thei schulen seke of the pro- 
fete a reuelacioun, and lawe shal perische 
fro the preest, and counsel fro eldre* men. 
The kyng schal mourne, and the prince 27 
schal be clothid in weilyng, and the hondis 
of the puple of the lond schulen be dis- 
turblid ; bi the weie of hein Y schal do to 
hem, and bi the domes of hem Y schal 
deme hem; and thei schulen wite, that 
Y am the Lord. 


8 Om. G6 primum. tOm.G pr.m.H. the peple cH. 


W harlotis, ether messangcris CEFGHMNPQRSUXY. harlotis, ether messagers K. 


x the eldre 1. 


VIL. 1-—10, 


CAP. VIII. 


1 And it is doon in the sixte 3eer, in the 
sixte moneth, in the fifthe day of the 
’moneth, Y sate in myn hous, and the 
oolde men of Juda saten before me; and 
the hoond of the Lord God fel there vp- 
zon me. And I see3, and loo! a liknes as 
the biholdynge of fier; fro the biholdynge 
of the leendis of hym and bynethe was 
fier, and fro the leendis of hym and aboue 
as biholdynge of shynynge, as the seynge 
of electre, that ts, metal maad of gold 
sand siluer, briz3ter than gold, And the 
liknes of an hoond sent out cau3te me in 
the heer of myn heed; and a spirit lifte 
me vp hbitwix heuen and erthe, and 
ledde me in to Jerusalem, in the visioun 
of God, besidis the inner dore that bi- 
holdith to the north, where the idol of 
zele, or enuye, was set, for to styre enuye. 
4And loo! there the glorie of God of Is- 
rael, after the visioun which Y see3 in 
sthe feeld. And he seide to me, Sone of 
man, reys thin eyen to the weye of the 
north; and loo! fro the north of the 3aat 
of the auter, the ydol of enuye in that 
centrynge. And he seide to me, Sone of 
man, gessist thou whether thou seest 
what thes men don, the greet abomyna- 
ciouns whiche the hows of Israel doth 
here, that Y goo awey fer fro my seyn- 
tuarie? and 3it thou conuertid shal see 
7gretter abomynaciouns. And he ledde 
me in to the dore of the porche; and Y 
ssee3, and loo! an hoole in the wal. And 
he seide to me, Sone of man, dig the wal; 
and whanne Y hadde thur3 diggide the 
9 wal, o dore aperide. And he seide to me, 
Go thou yn, and se the werst abomyna- 
10 cilouns, whiche thes men doon here. ‘And 
I gon in, see3’; and loo! eche lyknes of 
crepynge thingis, and abomynacioun of 
beestis, and alle the ydolis of the hous of 
Israel, weren peyntid in compas in the 


EZEKIEL. 


515 


CAP. VIII. 


And it was doon in the sixte 3eer, in) 
the sixte monethe, inY the fyuethe dai of 
the monethe, Y sat in myn hous, and the 
elde men of Juda saten bifore me; and the 
hond of the Lord God felle there on me. 
And Y si3, and lo! a licnesse as the bi-2 
holdyng of fier; fro the biholding of hise 
leendis and bynetlie was fier, and fro 
hise leendis and aboue was as the bihold- 
yng of schynyng, as the si3t of electre. 
And the lienesse of an hond was sent out,3 
and took me bi the heer? of myn heed ; 
and the spirit reiside me bitwixe heuene 
and erthe, and bron3te me in to Jerusalem, 
in the si3t of God, bisidis the ynnere dore 
that bihelde to the north, where the idol 
of enuye was set, to stire indignacioun. 
And lo! the glorie of God of Israel was4 
there, bi si3t? which Y si3 in the feeld. 
And he seide to me, Thou, sone of man,5 
reise” thin i3en to the weie of the north; 
and Y reiside myn i3en to the weie of the 
north, and lo! fro the north of. the 3ate 
of the auter the idol of enuye was in that 
entryng. And he seide to me, Sone of¢ 
man, gessist thou whether» thou seest 
what thing these men doon, the grete ab- 
homynaciouns whiche the hous of Israel 
doith here, that Y go fer awei fro my 
seyntuarie? and 3it thou schalt turne, and 
schalt se grettere abhomynaciouns. And7 
he ledde me with ynne to the dore of the 
halle®; and Y si3, and lo! oon hoole in the 
wal. And he seide to me, Sone of man,s 
digge thou the wal; and whanne Y hadde 
diggid the wal, o dore apperide. And hes 
seide to me, Entre thou, and se the worste 
abhomynaciouns, whiche these men doon 
here. And Y entride, and si3; and lo!1i0 
ech licnesse of ‘crepynge beestis’, and ab- 
homynacioun® of beestis, and alle idols of 
the hous of Israel, weren peyutid in the 
wal al aboute in cumpas. And seuenti!! 


v Om, 4. 


yons. 2 heer, ether lockis crauKmansux. % the si3t cet ceferi, > reise vp1. >> wher cetert passim, 


¢ forzerde c et ceteri. 


d reptils, ether crepynge beestis c et ceteri. 


3uU 2 


€ abhomynaciouns IN. 


516 


11wal bi alle. And seuenti men of the 
eldris of the hous of Israel; and Jeconye, 
the sone of Saphan, stode in the mydil 


of hem, stoondynge before the peynt- 


yngis; and eche hadde a censer in his 
hoond, and the vapour, or smoke, of a 
12cloud roos togider of the ensence”. And 
he seide to me, Certis, sone of man, thou 
seest whiche thingis the eldre men of the 
hows of Israel doon in derkuessis, eche 
in the hid place ‘of his couche; forsothe 
thei seyn, The Lord seeth not vs, the 
13 Lord hath forsakyn the loond. And the 
Lord seide to me, 3it thou conuertid shal 
see gretter abomynaciouns, whiche thes 
1smen don. And he ledde me yn, bi the 
dore of the 3ate of the hows of the Lord, 
that biheelde to the north; and loo! there 
saten Wymmen, mournynge a@ mawmet™ 
of letcherie, that is clepid Adonydes. 
15 And he seide to me, Certis, sone of man, 
thou hast seen; 3it thou conuertid shal 
see gretter abomynaciouns than thes. 
16 And he ledde me in, in to the innermore 
porche of the hows of the Lord; and loo! 
in the dore of the temple of the Lord, 
bitwixe the vestiarie and the auter, as 
fyue and twenti men hauynge the backis 
a3ens the temple of the Lord, and the 
faces to the eest; and thei worshipeden 
1zat the* rysynge of the sunne. And he 
seide to me, Certis, mannus sone, thou 
shaltY see, whether this thing is li3t to 


the hous of Juda, that thei shulden doo’ 


thes abomynaciouns, whiche thei diden 
here? For thei fulfillynge the erthe with 
wickidnes, ben turned to gidre to terre me 
to wraththe; and loo! thei applien, or 
leyn to,a braunche to her nose thrillis. 

1s Therfor and Y shal doo in my woodnes ; 
myn eye shal not spare fo hem, nether 
I shal haue mercy; and whanne thei 
shulen crie to myn erys with greet vois, 
Y shal not here hem. 


W cense GI. 


f stiede up 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


WW manment A. 


£ and ech NS sec. m. 


VIII. 11-——18. 


men of the eldere of the hous of Israel 
stoden ; and Jeconye, the sone of Saphan, 
stood in the myddis of hem, ‘stondynge 
bifore the peyntyngis ; and ech man hadde 

a censere in his hond, and the smoke 
of a clonde of ‘encense stiedef. Aud he12 
seide to me, Certis, sone of man, thou 
seest what thingis the eldere men of the 
hous of Israel doen in derknessis, ech& 
man in the hid place of his bed; for thei 
seiyn, The Lord seeth not vs, the Lord 
hath forsake the lond. ‘And the Lord 13 
seide to me, 3it thou schalt turne, and 
schalt se gretter abhomynaciouns, whiche 
these men doon. And he ledde me with 14 
ynne, bi the dore of the 3ate of the hous 
of the Lord, which dore bihelde to the 
north; and lo! wymmen saten there, bi- 
weilynge Adonydes. And the Lord seideis 
to ine, Certis, sone of man, thou hast seyn; 
3it thou schalt turne, and schalt se gretere 
abhomynaciouns than these. And he ledde 16 
me with ynne, in to the ymnere halle" of 
the hous of the Lord; and lo! in the dore 
of the temple of the Lord, bitwixe the 
porche and the auter, weren as fyue and 
twenti men hauynge the backis a3ens the 
temple of the Lord, and her faces to the 
eest; and thei worschipiden at the risyng 
of the sunne. And the Lord seide to me, 17 
Certis, sone of man, thou hast seyn; whe- 
ther this is a li3t thing to the hous of 
Juda, that thei schulden do these abho- 
mynaciouns, whiche thei diden here? For 
thei filliden the lond with wickidnesse, 
and turneden to terre me to wraththe; and 
lo! thei applien a braunche to her nose 
thirlis. Therfor and Y schal do in strong 1s 
veniaunce; myn i3e schal not spare, ne- 
ther Y schal do merci; and whaune thei 
schulen crie to myn eris with greet vois, 
Y schal not here hem. 


xOm. Gu.  Y hast eu. 


h forjerd ceteri. 


IX. 1——9. 


CAP. Tx 


1 And he criede in myn eris with greet 


voys, seiynge, The visitaciouns of the citee 
han neized, and eche man hath a vessel 
2o0f sleynge in his hoond. And loo! sixe 
‘men camen fro the weye of the heijer 3aat, 
that biholdith to the north, and a vessel 
of deeth of eche man in his hoond; and o 
man in the mydil of hem was clothid 
with lynnen, and an ynkhorn of a wryter 


in? his reynes; and thei entriden, and 


3stoden besidis the brasen auter. And 
the glorie of the Lord of Israel is takyn 
of cherubin, that was on it, at the 
threshfoold of the hows; and he clepide 
the man that was clothid with lynnen, 
and hadde an enkhorn of a writer in his 
4leendis. And the Lord seide to hym, 
Go thou bi the mydil cytee, in the mydil 
of Jerusalem, and mark Tau vpon the 
forehedis of men mournynge and sorew- 
ynge vpon alle the abllomynaciouns that 
sben don in the mydil therof. And he 
seide to hem, me herynge, Passe 3e bi 
the cytee suynge hym, and smyte -3e; 
jour eye spare not, nether haue 3e mercy. 
6Slee 3e old man, 3onge man, meyden, 
litil child, and wymmen, vn to the 
perishynge; forsothe slee 3e not eche 
man, vp on whom 3e shulen see Tau; 
and bigynne 3e of my seyntuarie. Ther- 
for thei bigunnen at the eldre men, that 
7weren before the face of the hous. And 
he seide to hem, Defoule 3e the hous, 
and fulfille 3e the porchis with slayn 
men; goo 3e out. And thei wenten out, 
and thei han smyten hem that weren in 
sthe citee. And the sleynge fulfillid, Y 
dwelte. And Y felle vpon my face, and 
criynge Y seide, Allas! allas! allas! Lord 
God, therfor whether thou shalt distruye 
alle the relikis of Israel, shedynge out thi 
9 woodnes vpon Jerusalem? And he seide 
to me, The wickidnes of the hous of Is- 
rae] and Juda is ful greet, and the erthe 


Sat Gi. 


i Om. n. 


EZEKIEL. 


kK forjerdis ceteri. 


517 


CAP. TX? 


And he criede in myn eeris with greet! 
vois, and seide, The visityugis of the citee 
han neijed, and ech man hath in his hond 
an instrument of sleyng. And lo! sixe men2 
camen fro the weie of the hijere 3ate, that 
biholdith to the north, and the instrument 
of deth of ech man was in his hond; also 
o man in the myddis of hem was clothid 
with lynnun clothis, and a pennere of a 
writere at hise reynes; and thei entriden, 
and stoden bisidis the brasun auter. And3 
the glorie of the Lord of Israel was takun 
vp fro cherub, which glorie was on it, to 
the threisfold of the hous; and the Lord 
clepide the man that was clothid with 
lynun clothis, and hadde a pennere of a 
writere in hise leendis. And the Lord4 
seide to hym, Passe thou bi the myddis of 
the citee, in the myddis of Jerusalem, and 
marke thou Thauy on the forhedis of men 
weilynge and sorewynge on alle abhomy- 
naciouns that ben doon in the myddis 
therof. And he seide to hem in myn her-s 
yng, Go 3e thorou3 the citee, and sue 3e 
hym, and smytte 3e; 3oure i3e spare not, 
nether do 3e merci. Sle 3e til to deth, ane 
eld man, a 3ong man, and a virgyn, a litil 
child, and wymmen; but sle 3e not ony 
man, on whom 3e seen Thau; and bigynne 
3e at my seyntuarie. Therfore thei bi- 
gunnen at the eldere men, that weren 
bifore the face of the hous. And he seide7 
to hem, Defoule 3e the! hous, and fille je 
the hallis* with slayn men; go 3e out. 
And thei 3eden out, and killiden hem that 
weren in the citee. And lo! whanne thes 
sleyng was fillid, Y was left. And Y felle 
doun on my face, and Y criede, and seide, 
Alas! alas! alas! Lord Ged, therfor whe- 
ther thou schalt leese alle remenauntis! of. 
Israel, and schalt schede out thi stronge 
veniaunce on Jerusalem? And he seide to9 
me, The wickidnesse of the hous of Israel 
and of Juda is ful greet, and the lond is 


b Om. en, 


1 the remenauntis a sec. m. 1. 


+ Thau; that 
is, a crosse. A. 
Tau; isthelaste 
lettre in abse of 
Uebru, and is 
the first letter 
of this worde 
thora, that be- 
tokneth the 
Jawe; and bi 
this is tokned 
that men mak- 
ing sorwe for 
breking of the 
lawe, schule be 
saued, and the 
Temenaunt 
shule be slayn. 
A postil here. 
Ue 


518 


is fulfild with blodis, o7 synnes, and the 
citee is fulfillid with turnynge awei ; 
forsothe ‘thei seiden®, The Lord hath for- 
sakyn the loond, and the Lord seeth not. 

1o Therfor and myn eye? shal not spare, 
nether Y shal haue mercy; Y shal 3eelde 
the weies of hem vpon the heed* of hem. 

11And loo! the man that was clothid with 
lynnen, that hadde an enkhorn in his 
rigge, answerde a word, seiynge, Y haue 
don, as thou commaundidest! to me. 


CAP. X. 


1 And Y see3, and loo! in the*® firmament 
that was vpon the heed of cherubyn, as 
a saphir stoon, and as' the fourme of a 

2seet aperide! ‘vypon it*. And he seide to 
the man that was clothid with lynnen, 
and he seith, Go thou yn in the mydil 
of whelis, that ben vndir cherubyn, and 
fil thin hoond with coolis of fier, that ben 
amonge cherubyn, and sheed out vpon 

3the citee. 
forsothe cherubyns stoden vpon! the ri3t- 
half of the hous, whanne the man wente 
in, and a cloude fulfillide the porche with 
4inneforth. And the glorie of the Lord 
is lift vp aboue cherubyn at the thresh- 
foold of the hows; and the hows is ful- 
fillid with a cloude, and the porche is 
fulfillid with shynynge of the™ glorie of 
5the Lord. And the soun of weengis of 
cherubyn was herd vn to the vttermore 
porche, as the vois of almy3ti God spek- 
6ynge. And whanne he hadde command- 
ide to the man that was clothid with 
lynnen, seiynge, Tak thou fier of the 
mydil of the wheelis, that ben with inne 
cherubyn, he goon in, stoode besidis the 
7wheelis*". And chernb helde forth his 
hoond fro the mydil of cherubyn, to the 
fier that was bitwix cherubyn; and took, 
and 3af in to the hoondis of hym that 
was clothid with lynnen; whiche takyn, 


EZEKIEL. 


And he wente in my si3t;° 


1X) 16 


fillid of bloodis, and the citee is fillid with 
turnyng awei; for thei seiden, The Lord 
hath forsake the lond, and the Lord seeth 
not. Therfor and myn ize schal not spare, 10 
nether Y schal do merci; Y schal 3elde 
the weie of hem on the heed of hem. Andi: 
lo! the man that was clothid in lynun 
clothis, that hadde a pennere in his bak, 
answeride a word, and seide, Y haue do, 
as thou comaundidist to me. 


CAP. 


And Y si3, and lo! in the firmament! 
that was on the heed of cherubyns, as a 
saphir stoon, and as the fourme of licnesse 
of a kyngis seete apperide theron. Ande 
he seide to the man that was clothid in 
lynnun clothis, and spak, Entre thou in 
the myddis of wheelis™, that ben vndur 
cherubyns, and fille thin hond with coolis 
of fier, that ben bitwixe cherubyns, and 
schede thou out on the citee. And hes 
entride in my si3t; forsothe cherubyns 
stoden at the ri3t side of the hous, whanne 
the man entride, and a clowde fillide the 
ynnere halle". And the glorie of the Lord 4 
was reisid fro aboue cherubyns to the ° 
threisfold of the hous; and the hous was 
fillid with a cloude, and the halle® was 
fillid with schynyng of the glorie of the 
Lord. And the sown of wyngis of che-s 
rubyns was herd til to the outermere 
halle’, as the vois of almy3ti God spek- 
ynge. And whanne he hadde comaundidsc 
to the man that was clothid in lynnun 
clothis, and hadde seid, Take thou fier fro 
the myddis of the wheelis, that ben bi- 
twixe cherubyns, he’ entride, and stood 
bisidis the wheel. And cherub stretchide7 
forth his hond fro the myddis of cheru- 
byns, to the fier that was* bitwixe cheru- 
byns; and took, and 3af in to the hondis 
of hym that was clothid im lynnun 


© Om. G pr.m.u. “eigen cH. ¢hedis eu. f comaundist cu. & Om, G pr.m.H. » Om. G pr.m.H. 
$Om. Hy. * Om. G prom. on it x. long. ™Om.cGH. © wheel eH. 
m the wheelis a pr.m. © forjerde ceteri. © forzerd ceteri, P for3erd ceferi. 4Om.1n. * and he a. 


5 is NS sec. mt. 


X. 8— 20, 


swente out. And the liknes of an hoond 
of man aperide in cherubyn, vndir the 
gpennys of hem. And Y see3, and loo! 
foure wheelis besidis cherubyn ; 0 wheel 
besidis o cherub, and another wheel® be- 
sidis o cherub; forsothe the fourme of 
wheelis was as the si3t of a stoon criso- 
lolitus. And the biholdynge of hem, o lik- 
nes of foure, as if a wheel be in the mydil 
110f a wheel. And whanne thei walkiden, 
thei wenten in to foure parties; thei 
walkynge turneden not a3en, but to the 
place to whom that that was the first 
bouwid for to goo, and the othere sueden, 
ignether thei turneden ajen. And al the 
werk of hem, and neckis, and hoondis, 
and pennys, and cerclis, weren ful of eyen, 
13in the cumpas of foure wheelis. And he 
clepide the ilk wheelis volible, or ¢urz- 
uynge about, me herynge. Forsothe oon 
hadde foure faces; o face the face of 
cherub, and the secounde face a face of 
man, and the thridde face of? a lioun, 
and in the fourthe a face of an egle; 
isand the cherubyns ben lift? vp. The ilk 
is the beest, whom Y see3 besidis the flood 
isCobar. And whanne’ cherubyns walk- 
iden, and the wheelis wenten togidir be- 
sidis hem; and whanne the cherubyns 
liften vp her weengis, that thei shulden 
be rerid fro the’ erthe, the wheelis abiden 
not, but and thei weren besidis hem. 
17Hem stondynge, thei stoden, and with 
the lift vp thei weren lift vp; forsothe 
isthe spirit of lijf was in hem. And the 
glorie of the Lord wente out fro the 
threshfold of the temple, and stoode vpon 
i9cherubyn. And the cherubyns liftynge 
vp her weengis, ben reysid fro the erthe 
before met; and hem goynge out, and the 
wheelis sueden; and it stode in the entre 
of the eest 3aat of the hows of the Lord, 
and the glorye of God of Israel was vpon 
20it. The ilk is the beest, whom Y see3 
yndir God of Israel, besidis the flood 


° Om. G pr.m.H. P face of H. 


t Om. 1 prim. u of 1. ¥ thei 1. 


aabidenr. » frexfoold x. 


EZEKIEL. 


q liftid ex. 


wand tho a. 


519 


clothis ; and he took, and 3ede out. Ands 
the licnesse of the hond of a man apperide 
in cherubyns, vndur the wyngis of tho. 
And Y si3, and lo! foure wheelis wereu9 
bisidis cherubyns; 0 wheel bisidis 0 che- 


-rub, and* another wheel bisidis another 


cherub; forsothe the licnesse of wheelis 
was as the si3t of the stoon crisolitis. And 10 
the biholdyng of tho was o licnesse of 
foure, as if" a wheel be in the inyddis of 
a wheel. And whanne tho’ 3eden, tho’ 11 
3eden in to foure partis; tho” turneden 
not a3en goynge, but to the place to which 
that that was the firste wheel bowide to 
go, also othere suyden, and turneden not 
ajen. And al the bodi of tho wheelis, and 12 
the neckis, and hondis, and wyngis of the 
beestis, and the* cerclis, weren ful of i3zen, 
in the cumpas of foure wheelis. And he13 
clepide tho wheelis volible, etherY able to 
go al aboute, in myn heryng. Forsothe 14 
o beeste hadde foure faces; o face was the 
face of chernb, and the secounde face the 
face of a man, and in the thridde was the 
face of a lioun, and in the fourthe was the 
face of an egle; and the cherubyns weren 15 
reisid. Thilke is the beeste, which Y 
hadde seyn bisidis the flood Chobar. And 16 
whanne chcrubyns jeden, also the wheelis 
bisidis tho jeden to gidere; whanne che- 
rubyns” reisiden her wyngis, that tho 
schulden be enhaunsid fro the erthe, the 
wheelis abididen® not stille, but also tho 
weren bisidis cherubyns. The wheelisi; 
stooden with tho cherubyns stondynge, 
and weren reisid with the cherubyns reis- 
id; for the spirit of lijf was in tho wheelis. 
And the glorie of the Lord 3ede out fro1s 
the threisfold® of the temple, and stood on 
the cherubyns. And cherubyns reisiden 19 
her wyngis, and weren enhaunsid fro the 
erthe bifore me; and whanne tho 3eden 
out, also the wheelis sueden ; and it stood 
in the entryng of the eest 3ate of the hous 
of the Lord, and the glorie of God of 


rwhannus 4. *Om. u. men a. 


Xof1, Yorr. the cherybyns K sec. m. 


520 


Cobar". And Y vndirstode for foure che- 

21 rubyns weren, bi foure cheeris, ‘or facis’, 
to oon, and foure weengis to oon; and a 
liknes of mannus hoond vnder the weengis 

220f hem. And the liknes of the cheeris 
of hem, the ilk cheeris whom Y see3 be- 
sidis the flood Cobar; and the biholdinge 
of hem, and the feersnes of eche, for to 
goo before his face. 


CAP. XI. 


1 And the spirit lifte me vp, and ledde 
me in at the est 3ate of the hous of the 
Lord, which biholdith the rysynge of the 
sunne. And loo! in the entre of the 3ate 
weren fyue and twenti men; and Y see3 
in the mydil of hem Jeconye, the sone of 
Asur, and Pheltia, the sone of Banaye, 

2pryncis of puple. And he seide to me, 
Sone of man, thes men that thenken 

..wickidnes, and treten the worst counseil 

3in this citee, seiynge, Whether not a litil 
while gon ben housis bildid? this is the 

acaudrun, forsothe we flesshes. Therfor 
prophecy thou of hem, prophecy thou, 
ssone of man. And the Spyrit of the Lord 
felle in to me, and seide to me, Spek 
thou, The Lord seith thes thingis, Thus, 
hows of Israel, 3e spaken, and Y knew3 
6the thou3tis of 3our hertis; 3e slewen 
ful manye in this cytee, and 3e fulfilliden 
7the weies of it with slayn men. Therfor 
the Lord seith thes thingis, 3our slayn 
men,whom 3e han put in mydil of it, thes 
ben flesh, and this is the candrun; and Y 
sshal lede 30n out of the mydil of it. 3e 
dredden swerd, and I shal in Iede swerd 

9vpon 30u, seith the Lord God. And I 
shal caste 3o0u out of the mydil of it, and 
Y shal 3yue 30u in to the hoond of ene- 
myes, and Y shal make domys in 3ou. 

10 3e shulen falle bi swerd, in the endis of 
Israel Y shal deme 30u; and 3e shulen 
11 wite, for Y the Lord. This shal not be 


u of Cobar G pr.m. H. 


d Om, 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


Vv Om. G pr.m. H. 


X. 21——XI. 11. 


Israel was on tho. Thilke is the beeste, 20 
which Y si3 vndur God of Israel, bisidis 
the flood Chobar. And Y vndurstood that 
foure cherubyns weren; foure faces weren2i 
to oon, and foure wyngys weren® to oon ; 
and the licnesse of the hond of a man 
was vndur the wyngis of tho. And the 22 
licnesse of the cheris of tho weren thilke 
cheeris whiche Y hadde seyn bisidis the 
flood Chobar ; and the biholdyng of tho, 
and the fersnesse of ech, was to entre bifor 
his face. 
CAP. XI. 

And the spirit reiside me, and ledde met 
with ynne to the eest 3ate of the hons of 
the Lord, that biholdith the risyng of the 
sunne. And lo! in the entryng of the 
3ate weren fyue and twenti men; and Y 
si3 in the myddis of hem Jeconye, the sone 
of Assur, and Pheltie, the sone of Banaie, 
princes of the puple. And he seide to me, 2 
Thou, sone of man, these ben the men 
that thenken wickidnesse, and treten the 
worste counsel in this citee, and seien,3 
Whether housis weren not bildid a while 
ago? this is the cawdrun, forsothe we ben 
fleischis. Therfor profesie thou of hem, 
profesie thou, sone of man. And the Spi-s 
rit of the Lord felle in to me, and seide 
to me, Speke thou, The Lord seith these 
thingis, 3e hous of Israel spaken thus, and 
Y knewe the thou3tis of 3oure herte; 3e6 
killiden ful many men in this citee, and 
3e filliden the weies therof with slayn 
men. Therfor the Lord seith these7 
thingis, 3oure slayn men, whiche 3e put- 
tiden in the myddis therof, these ben 
fleischis®, and this is the cawdrun; and 
Y schal lede 30u out of the myddis therof. 
3e dredden swerd, and Y schal brynge ins 
swerd on 30u, seith the Lord God. Ando 
Y schal caste 30u out of the myddis ther- 
of, and Y schal 3yne 30u in to the hond 
of enemyes, and Y schal make domes in 
jou. Bi swerd 3e schulen falle doun, Y 10 
schal deme 30u in the endis of Israel; and 


w the hows ea. 


€ the fleischis 1. 


XI, 12 —23. 


to 30u in to a caudrun, and 3e shulen not 
be in to flesshis in the mydil of it; in the 
izendis of Israel Y shal deme 3ou, and 3e 
shulen wite, for Y the Lord. For 3e walk- 
iden not in myn heestis, and 3e* diden 
not my domes, but 3e wrou3ten after the 
domes of hethen men, that ben in 3o0ur 
i3cumpas. And it is don, whanne Y pro- 
pheciede, Pheltia, the sone of Banaye, is 
deed; and Y felle doun in to my face, cri- 
ynge with greet voys, and seide, Allas! 
allas! allas! Lord God’, thou makist an 
14 eendynge of the relikis of Israel. And the 
word of the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, 
is Sone of man, thi bretheren, and thi nei3 
men, and al the hows of Israel, and alle 
men, to whom dwellers of Jerusalem 
seiden, Goo 3e awey fer fro the Lord, 
the loond is 3ouen to vs in to possessioun. 
is Therfor thes thingis seith the Lord, For 
Y made hem fer in heithen men, and for 
I scatride hem in loondis, Y shal be to 
hem in to a litil halewinge, in loondis to 
17whom thei camen. Therfor spek thou, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God’, Y shal 
gadre 30u fro puplis, and Y shal gadre 3ou 
fro loondis, in whiche 3e ben scatered ; 
and Y shal 3yue to 30u the loond of Is- 
israel. And thei shulen go in thidir, and 
thei shulen doo awe? alle offensiouns, ‘or 
greuyngis*, and alle abomynaciouns of it 
i9in the ilk day. And Y shal 3eue ‘to hem 
a newe herte, and I schal 3eue” a new 
spirit in the entrails of hem; and Y shal 
take awey a stonen herte of the fleshe® 
of hem, and Y shal 3yue to hem an 
20herte of flesh; that thei walken in myn 
heestis, and kepen my domys, and doo 
hem, and be to me in to puple, and I be 
2ito hem in to God. Forsothe the herte 
of whom goth after her offendyngis and 
abomynaciouns, Y shal putte the weie of 
hem in her heed, the Lord God seith. 
22 And cherubyns liftiden vp her weengis, 
aud the! wheelis with hem, and the glorie 
230f God of Israel was vpon® hem. And 


EZEKIEL. 


521 


3e schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 
This schal not be to 30u in to a cawdrun, 11 
and 3e schulen not be in to fleischis in the 
myddis therof; Y schal deme 30u in the 
endis of Israel, and 3e schulen wite, that 12 
Yam the Lord. For 3e 3eden not in myn 
heestis, and 3e dyden not my domes, but 
3e wrou3ten bi the domes of hethene men, 
that ben in 3oure cumpas. And it wasis 
doon, whanne Y profesiede, Pheltie, the 
sone of Banaie, was deed; and Y felle 
doun on my face, and Y criede with greet 
vois, and seide, Alas! alas! alas! Lord 
God, thou makist endyng of the reme- 
nauntis of Israel. And the word of the is 
Lord was maad to me, and he® seide, Sone 15 
of man, thi britheren , thi kynes men, and 
al the hous of Israel, and alle men, to 
whiche! the dwelleris of Jerusalem seiden, 
Go 3e awei fer fro the Lord, the lond is 
3ouun to vs in to possessioun. Therfor is 
the Lord God seith these thingis, For Y 
made hem fer among hethene men, and for 
Y scateride hem in londis, Y schal be to 
hein in to a litil halewyng, in the londis 
to whiche thei camen. Therfor speke17 
thou, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Y schal gadere 30u fro puplis, and Y schal 
gadere 30u togidere fro londis, in whiche 
je ben scatered; and Y schal 3yue the 
erthe of Israel to 3ou. And thei schulen1s 
entre thidur, and schulen do awei alle 
offenciouns, and alle abhomynaciouns ther- 
of in that dai. And Y schal 3yue to hein 19 
oon herte, and Y schal 3yue a newe spi- 
rit in the entrails of hem; and Y schal 
take awei a stony herte fro the fleisch of 
hem, and Y schal 3yue to hem an herte of 
fleisch; that thei go in my comaunde- 20 
mentis, and kepe my domes, and do tho; 
and that thei be in to a puple to me, and 
Y be in to God to hem. But of whiche2i 
the herte goith after her offendyngis and 
abhomynaciouns, Y schal sette the weie 
of hem in her heed, seith the Lord God. 
And the cherubyns reisiden her wyngis, 22 


x Om. a. y Om. 4. zOm. a. 8 Om. #. > Om. 4. ¢ fleschs 4. 4 Om. G pr. m. i. 
© on GH. 
&Om.1. 4 bretheren, thi bretheren a pr.m.u. '! whom 1. 
VOL. Ill. 3x 


522 


the glorie of the Lord stiede vp of! the 
mydil of the citee, ‘and stode vpon the 
hille, that is at the eest of the citee®. 

214 And the spirit reiside me, and ledde me 
in to Caldea, to transmygracioun, in a 
visioun in the spirit of God; and the 
visioun which Y see3, is takyn awey fro 

25me. And Y spak to the transmygracioun, 
or to the puple led out of her loond, alle 
the wordis of the Lord, whiche he shew- 
ide to me. 


CAP. XII. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seiynge, Sone of man, thon dwellist 
in mydil of an hous terrynge to wraththe, 
whiche han eyen for to see, and seen not, 
and eris for to here, and heren not; for it 
sis‘an hous” terrynge to wraththe. Ther- 
for thou, sone of man, mak to thee 
vessels of transmygracioun, o7 passyng 
over, and thou shalt passe ouer bifore hem 
bi dai; forsothe thou shalt passe ouer fro 
thi place to another place, in the si;t of 
hem, if peranenture thei biholden, for it 
4is an hows terrynge to wraththe. And 
thou shalt bere out thi vesselis, as ves- 
selis of a man passynge ouer bi dai, in 
the si3t of hem; forsothe thou shalt gon 
out in the euenynge before hem, as a 
sinan passynge ouer goth out. Before 
the eyen of hem dig to thee! a wal, and 
sthou shalt gon out bi it in the si3t of 
hem. In shulders thou shalt be born, in 
derknessis thou shalt be born out; thou 
shalt hide thi face, and thou shalt not 
see the erthe, for Y 3aue thee a won- 
drynge, signyfiynge thing to comynge 
zafter to the hous of Israel. Therfor Y 
dide as the Lord comaundide mej; Y 
brou3te forth myjJj vesselis, as vesselis of a 
man passynge ouer bi dai, and in the 
euenynge I diggide a wal with hoond ; in 
derknes Y wente out, and in sbuldris Y 


EZEKIEL. 


XI. 24—-XIl1. 8. 


and the wheelis 3eden with tho, and the 
glorie of God of Israel was on) tho. And23 
the glorie of the Lord stiede fro the myd- 
dis of the citee, and stood on the hil, 
which is at the eest of the citee. And 24 
the spirit reiside me, and brou3te me in 
to Caldee, to the passyng ouer, in visioun 
bi the spirit of God; and the visioun 
which Y hadde seyn, was takun awei fro 
me. And Y spak to the passyng ouer 25 
alle the wordis of the Lord, whiche he 
hadde schewid to me. 


CAP. XII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad! 
to me, and he seide, Sone of man, thou2 
dwellist in the myddis of an hous ter- 
rynge to wraththe, which han i3en to se, 
and seen not, and eeris to here, and heren 
not; for it is an hous terrynge to - 
wraththe. Therfor thou, sone of man,3 
inake to thee vessels of passing ouer, and 
thou schalt passe ouer bi dai bifor hem; 
forsothe thou schalt passe ouer fro thi 
place to another place, in the si3t of hem, 
if perauenture thei biholden, for it is an 
hous terrynge to wraththe. And thou4 
schalt bere withoutforth thi vessels, as the 
vessels of a man passynge ouer bi dai, in 
the si3t of hem; sotheli thou schalt go 
out in the euentid bifore hem, as a man’ 
passynge forth goith out. Bifore the iz3en5 
of hem digge the wal to thee, and thou 
schalt go out thorou3 it in the si;t of hem. ¢ 
Thou schalt be borun on schuldris, thou 
schalt be borun out in derknesse; thou 
schalt hile thi face, and thou schalt not se 
the erthe, for Y haue 3oue thee a* signe 
of thing to comynge to the hous of Israel.7 
Therfor Y dide as the Lord comaundide 
to me; Y brou3te forth my vessels, as the 
vessels! of a man passynge ouer bi dai, 
and in the euentid Y diggide a wal to me 
with hond; Y 3ede out in derknesse, and 
Y was borun on schuldris, in the si3t of 


sam born, in the si3t of hem. And the hem. And the word of the Lord was 
fong prim, €Om.4. apuples. iOm.¢ prmH. Jtomecsec.m. Jiin a. 
Jint. Ktobeat. 1! vessel n, 


XI. g—20. 


word of the Lord is maad to me erli, 
yselynge, Sone of man, whether“ the hous 
of Israel seide not to thee, an hous ter- 
lorynge to wraththe,What dost thou? Sey 
thou to hem, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, This charge vpon! the duyk, which 
is in Jerusalem, and vpon alle the hows 
of Israel, that is in the mydil of hem. 
11 Therfor sey thou, Y 3our wondrynge; as 
Y dide, so it shal be don to hem; thei 
Shulen goo in to transmygracioun, and in 
l2to caitiftee. And the duyk that is in 
the mydil of hem, shal be born in shul- 
dris, and shul goo out in derknes™; thei 
shulen digge the wal, for to lede out hym; 
the face of hym shal be couered, that he 


i3see not with eye the erthe. And Y shal- 


stretche out my nette vpon hym, and he 
shal be takyn in my nette; and I shal 
lede hym in to Babiloyne, in to the loond 
of Caldeis, and he shal not see it, and he 
l4shal dye there. And Y shal disparple in 
to eche wynd alle that ben about hym, 
his helpe, and his cumpanyes; and Y shal 
15 drawe out a swerd after" hem. And thei 
shulen wite, for Y the Lord, whanne Y 
shal seatere hem in® heithen men, and 
16] shal sowe hem abrood in loondis. And 
I shal leeue of? hem a fewe men fro 
swerd, and hungre, and pestilence, that 
thei telle out alle the greete trespassys of 
hem in heithen men, to whom thei shu- 
len entre; and thei shulen wite, for Y 
17the Lord. And the word of the Lord is 
ismaad to me, seiynge, Sone of man, ete 
thou thi breed in trublynge to gidir, but 
and drynke thi water in hast and mourn- 
igynge. And thou shalt seie to the puple 
of the loond, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God to hem that dwellen in Jerusalem, 
in the loond of Israel, Thei shulen eete 
her breed in bisynes?, and thei shulen 
drynke her water in discoumfort; that 
the loond be desolatid fro his multitude, 
for the wickidnes of alle men that dwellen 
20in it. And the citees that ben now enha- 


k where G. wher 1. lon G prim. u. 


Pto 4. 4 bisynessis 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


m dercnessis Gi. 


523 


maad eerli to me, and he seide, Sone ofs 
man, whether the hous of Israel, the hous 
terrynge to wraththe, seiden not to thee, 
What doist thou? Seie thou to hem, The 10 
Lord God seith these thingis, This bir- 
thun ¢s on the duyk, which is in Jerusa- 
lem, and on al the hous of Israel, which 
is in the myddis of hem. Seie thou, Yui 
am 3oure signe of thing to comynge; as 
Y dide, so it schal be don to hem; thei 
schulen go in to passynge™ ouer, and in 
to caitifte. And the duyk which is in the 12 
myddis of hem, schal be borun out on 
schuldris, and he schal go out in derk- 
nesse; thei schulen digge the wal, and 
lede hym out; his face schal be hilid, that 
he se not with ize the erthe. And Y schalis 
stretche forth my net on hym, and he 
schal be takun in iny net; and Y schal 
lede hym in to Babiloyne, in to the lond 
of Caldeis, and he schal not se that lond, 
and he schal die there. And Y schal 1s 
scatere in to ech wynd alle men that ben 
aboute hym, his help, and hise cum- 
penyes; and Y scha] draw out the swerd 
aftir hem". And thei schulen wite, that 1s 
Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal seatere 
hem among hethene men, and schal sowe 
hem abrood in londis. And Y schal leue ie 
of hem a fewe men fro swerd, and hungur, 
and pestilence, that thei telle out alle the 
grete trespassis of hem among hethene 
men, to which® thei schulen entre; and 
thei schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 
And the word of the Lord was maad to17 
me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, ete ts 
thi breed in disturblyng, but also drynke 
thi water in haaste and mourening. Andy 
thou schalt seie to the puple of the lond, 


* The Lord God seith these thingis to hem 


that dwellen in Jerusalem, in the lond of 
Israel, Thei schulen ete her breed in an- 
gwisch, and thei schulen drynke her watir 
in desolacioun; that the lond be desolatP 
of his multitude, for the wickidnesse of 
alle men that dwellen ther ynne. And 20 


nN vpon G pr.m, H. © in toG prem, A. 


™ the passynge vu. "himv. © whom 1, P desolat, ether left alone c et ceteri. 


3x2Q 


“B24 


bitid, shulen be desolat, and’ the loond 
deseert, and 3e shulen wite, for Y the 
ztLord. And the word of the Lord is 
22maad to me, seiynge, Sone of man, what 
is this prouerbe, or ensaumple, to 30u in 
the loond of Israel, of men seiynge, Dais 
shulen be differrid, o7 drawen, in to 
loong, and eche visioun, or prophecie, 
23shal perishe? Therfor sey thou to hem, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God’, Y shal 
make this prouerbe for to reste, nether 
opynli, ov euery where, it shal be seide 
ouer in Israel; and spek thou to hem, for 
dais han neizede, and the word of eche 
24visioun. Forsothe not eche visioun shal 
be void, nether dyuynacoun douty‘ in the 
zsmydil of the sones of Israel; for Y the 
Lord shal speke what euere word Y shal 
speke, and it shal be don; it shal namore 
be drawen along, but in 3our dais, 3e hous 
terrynge to wraththe, I shal speke a 
word, and I shal doo it, the Lord God 
2¢seith. And the word of the Lord is maad 
27to me, seiynge, Sone of man, loo! the 
hous of Israel, of men seiynge, The vi- 
sioun which" this seeth, this prophecieth’ 
in to manye dais, and in to¥ loonge tymes. 
23Therfor sey thou to hem, Thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, Eche my word shal 
not be drawen alonge; the word that I 
shal* speke, shal be fulfillid, the Lord 
God seith. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 <And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, selynge, Sone of man, prophecy thou 
to the prophetis of Israel that prophe- 
cien; and thou shalt sey to men pro- 
pheciynge of her herte, Here 3e the word 
3o0f the Lord. Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, Woo to vnwise” prophetis, that suen 
sher spirit, and seen no thing; as foxes in 
sdeseertis, Israel, thi prophetis weren. 3e 
stieden not vp forn a3ens, nether 3e ajen 
puttiden a wal for the hous of Israel, 


rina. s Om. 4. 
y the vnwyse Gi. 


tdone u, the whiche w. 


4 desert, ether forsakun ChFGHKMNPQRSUXY. desert I. 


QRSUXY. 


EZEKIEL. 


XII. 21—XIII. 5. 


citees that ben now enhabitid, shulen be 
desolat, and the lond schkal be forsakun4; 
and 3e schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 
And the word of the Lord was maad to2i 
me, and he seide, Sone of man, what is22 
this prouerbe to 30u, of men seiynge in 
the lond of Israel, Daies schulen be differ- 
rid in to long tyme, and ech visioun shal 
perische ? Therfor seie thou to hem, Thez3 
Lord God seith these thingis, Y schal 
make this prouerbe to ceesse, and it schal, 
no more be seid comynli in Israel; and 
speke thou to hem, that the daies han 
nei3id, and ech word of profesie’. For whiz 
ech visioun schal no more be voide, nether 
bifor tellyng of thing to comynge schal be 
douteful in the myddis of the sones of 
Israel; for Y the Lord schal speke what 25 
euer word Y schal speke, and it schal he 
don; it schal no more be delaied, but in 
3oure daies, 3e hous terrynge to wraththe, 
Y schal speke a word, and Y schal do that 
word, seith the Lord God. And the word 26 
of the Lord was maad to me, and he seide, 
Thou, sone of man, lo! the hous of Israel, 27 
of hem that seien, The visioun which this 
man seeth, 7s in to manye daies, and this 
man profesieth in to longe tymes. Therfor 28 
seie thou to hem, The Lord God seith 
these thingis, Ech word of me schal no 
more be deferrid ; the word which Y schal 
speke, schal be fillid, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XIII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Sone of man, pro-2 
fesie thou to the profetis of Israel that 
profesien; and thou schalt seie to hem that 
profesien of her herte, Here 3e the word of3 


* theLord. The Lord God seith these thingis, 


Wo to the vnwise profetis, that suen her 
spirit, and seen no thing ; Israel, thi pro- 4 
fetis weren as foxis in desert. 3e stiedens 
not euene a3ens, nether ajensettiden a wal 
for the hous of Israel, that 3e shulden 
w Om, Gil. 


Y prophecie 4. x Om. G prom. Hu. 


t visioun, ether [of 1] profesie CEFGHIKMNP 


XU. 6—15. 


that 3e stoden in bataile in dai of the 
6Lord. Thei seen veyn thingis, and de- 
uynen leesynge, seiynge, The Lord seith, 
whanne he sente not hem; and thei last- 
ziden for to confeerme the word?, Whe- 


ther 3e sawen not a veyn visioun, and 3e 


spaken a fals dyuynynge, and seiden, 
The Lord seith, whanne Y spak not? 
8 Therfor thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
For 3e spaken veyn thingis, and 3e sawen 
lesynge*, therfor loo! Y to 3ou, seith the 
9 Lord God. And myn: hoond shal be vp- 
on the prophetis that seen veyn thingis, 
and deuynen leesynge; thei shulen not 
be in the counsey] of my puple, and thei 
shulen not be writyn in the writynge of 


the. hous. of Israel, nether thei shulen-: 


entre in to the loond of Israel; and je 
1oshulen wite, for I the Lord God. For 
that thei disseyueden my puple, seiynge, 
Pees, pees, and pees is not; and he bild- 
ide a wal, forsothe thei -dawbeden, or 
pargetiden, it with fen with outen chaffis. 
Sey thou to hem that dawben, or leyn 
morter, with outen temperynge, that it 
is to fallynge doun ; forsothe a reyn flow- 
ynge shal be, and Y shal 3yue ful grete 
stoonus fallynge doun fro aboue, and a 
12 wynde of tempest distruyinge. Forsothe 
loo! the wal felle doun. Whether? it shal 
not be seid to 3ou, Wher is the® dawb- 
izynge, that 3e dawbiden ? Therfor thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, And Y shal 
make a spirit of tempestis for to breke 
out in myn indignacioun, and a reyn 
flowynge shal be in my woodnes‘, and 
grete stoonus in my wraththe in to wast- 
14yuge. And Y shal distruye the wal,whom 
3e daubiden with outen temperynge, and 
I shal make it euen to the erthe; and the 
foundement of it shal be shewid, and it 
shal falle doun, and it shal be wastid in 
the mydil of it; and 3e shulen wite, for Y 
isam the Lord. And ¥ shal fulfille myn 
indignacioun in the wal, and in hem that 
dauben it with outen temperynge; and 


EZEKIEL. 


525 


stonde in batel in the dai of the Lord. 
Thei seeu veyn thingis, and deuynen aé 
leesyng, and seien, The Lord seith, whanne 
the Lord sente not hem: and thei con- 
tynueden to conferine the word. Whether7 
je seen not a veyn visioun, and spaken 
fals diuynyng, and seiden, The Lord seith, 
whanne Y spak not? Therfor the Lords 
God seith these thingis, For 3e spaken 
veyn thingis, and sien a leesyng, therfor 
lo! Y to 30u, seith the Lord God. Ands 
myn hond schal be on the profetis that 
seen veyn thingis, and dyuynen a‘ lees- 
yng*; thei schulen not be in the councel 
of my puple, and thei schulen not be 
writun in the scripture of the hous of 
Israel, nether thei schulen entre in to the 
lond of Israel; and je schulen wite, that 
¥ am the Lord God. For thei disseyueden 10 
my puple, and seiden, Pees, pees, and no 
pees is; and it** bildidet a wal, but thei 
pargitiden“t it with fen with out chaffis. 
Seie thou to hem that pargiten" with out 11 
temperure, that it schal falle doun; for a 
strong reyn schal be flowynge, and I shal 
3yne ful grete stoones fallinge fro aboue, 
and Y schal 3yue a¥ wynd of tempest that 
distrieth. For lo! the wal felle down. 12 
Whether it schal not be seid to 30u, Where 
is the pargetyng, which 3e pargetiden‘’? 
Therfor the Lord God seith these thingis, 13 
And Y schal make the spirit of tempestis 
to breke out in myn indignacioun, and 
strong reyn flowynge in my strong ven-' 
iaunce schal be, and greet stoonys in 
wraththe in to wastyng. And Y schal dis- 14 
trie the wal, which 3e pargetiden” with 
out temperure, and Y schal make it enene 
with the* erthe; and the foundement ther- 
of schal be schewid, and it schal falle 
doun, and it schal be wastid in the myddis 
therof; and 3e schulen wite, that Y am 
the Lord. And Y schal fille myn indig-1s 
nacioun in the wal, and in hem that par- 
geten it with out temperure ; and Y schal 
seie to 30u, The, wal is not, and thei ben 


z Lord 4. @lesyngys 1. >» Where cu. ¢this 1. 4 woodnessis G1. 


rr Om. EI. 
iden in. ¥ Om. A, 


8 lesingis E. 


88 he A sup. ras. F sec.m. IB. 
vv dede pargete &. W dede pargete E. han pargetid 1. 


thilde «. tt dedin pargete EP. 


x Om. 1. 


u parget- 


526 


Y shal seye to 3ou, The wal is not, and 
the prophetis of Israel that dauben it, 
16ben not, whiche prophecien to Jerusalem, 
and seen to it a visioun of pees, and pees 
17is not, the Lord God seith. And thou, 
sone of man, put thi face ajens the dou3- 
tris of thi puple, whiche prophecien of 
her herte; and prophecie thou of hem, 
isand sey, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, Woo ¢o hem that sewen to gidre 
cusshens vndir eche cubit of hoond®, and 
‘maken pilewis vnder the heed of eche 
age, for to take, or disseyne, soulis'; and 
whanne thei token the soulis of my pu- 
ple, thei quyckeneden the soulis of hem. 
19 And thei defouliden ime to my puple, for 
an handful of barli, and® a gobet of breed, 
that thei slewen soulis whiche dien not, 
and quikeneden soulis whiche lyuen not, 
liynge to my puple, byleenynge to lees- 
20 yngis. For this thing the Lord God seith, 
Loo! Y to 30ure cusshens, bi whom 3e 
taken soulis fleynge; and Y shal al to- 
breke hem of 3our armes, and Y shal dis- 
mytte, or delyuere, the soulis for to flee, 
2t whom 3e taken. And Y shal breke 3our 
pilewis, and Y shal delyuere my puple 
fro 30ur hoond; nether thei shulen be 
ouer in 30ur hoondis, for to be robbid ; 
ggand 3e shulen wite, for Y the Lord. For 
that that 3e maden” leei3yngli the herte 
of the iust man for to mourne, whom Y 
made not sorewful; and 3e coumfortiden 
the hoondis of the vnpitous man, that he 
shulde not turne a3en fro*" hys yuel weie, 
a3and shulde lyue. Therfor 3e shulen not 
see veyn thingis, and 3e shulen namore 
deuyne dyuynacions ; and I shal delyuere 
‘my puple fro 3oure hoond, and 3e shulen 
wite, for Y the Lord. 


CAP. XIV. 


; And men of the eldris of Israel camen 
2to me, and saten before me. And the 
word of the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, 
3Sone of man, thes men. han putte her 
vnclennes in her hertis, and han sette the 


¢the hond w. f soule «. 


yhan pargetid 1. Zin Nssec.m. 8 Om. IN. 


EZEKIEL. 


8 or 4. 


» stiynge w. 


XIII. 16—XIV. 3. 


not, that pargetenY it, the profetis of Is- 16 
rael, that profesien to* Jerusalem, and seen 
to it the visioun of pees, and pees is not, 
seith the Lord God. And thou, sone of 17 
man, sette thi face ajens the dou3tris of 
thi puple, that profesien of her herte; 
and* profesie thou on hem, and seie thou, 18 
The Lord God seith these thingis, Wo fo 
hem that sowen togidere cuschens vndur 
ech cubit of hond, and maken pilewis vn- 
dur the heed of ech age, to take soulis ; 
and whanne thei disseyueden the soulis of 
my puple, thei quykenyden the soulis of 
hem. And thei defonliden me to my pu-i9 
ple, for an handful of barli, and for a gobet 
of breed, that thei schulden sle soulis that 
dien not, and quykene soulis that lyuen 
not; and thei lieden to my puple, bileu- 
ynge to leesyngis. For this thing the2o 
Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! Y to 
3oure cuschens, bi whiche 3e disseyuen 
soulis fliynge’; and Y schal al to-breke 
tho fro 3oure armes, and Y schal delyuere 
soulis which 3e disseyuen, soulis to fle. 
And Y schal al to-breke 3oure pilewis, 21 
and Y schal delyuere my puple fro 3oure 
hond*; and thei schulen no more be in 
3oure hondis, to be robbid; and 3e schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord. For that that 22 
3e maden falsli the herte of a iust man to 
morene, whom Y made not sori; and 3e 
coumfortiden the hondis of a wickid man, 
that he schulde not turne ajen fro his yuel 
weie, and lyue. Therfor 3e schulen not se 23 
veyn thingis, and 3e schulen no more dy- 


‘uyne false dyuynyngis; and Y schal dely- 


uere my puple fro 3oure hond, and 3e 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 


GAP XIV. 


And men of the eldris of Israel camen1 
to me, and saten bifor me. And the word 2 
of the Lord was maad to me, and he seide, 
Sone of nan, these men han set her vn-s 


clennesses in her hertis, and han set stid- 
h seiden 4. bh for a. 


¢ Jond cEGHIK pr. m. MNPQSX sec. ni. 


xia 415. 


sclaundre of her wickidnes a3ens her face. 
Whether Y axyd, shal answere to hem? 
4For this thing spek thou to hem, and 
thou shalt seie to hem, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, A man, a man of the hous 
of Israel, that hath putte his vnclennes in 
his herte, and hath sette the sclaundre of 
his wiekidnes ajens his face, and shal 
come to the prophete, axynge bi hym me, 
Y the Lord shal answere to hym .in the 
smultitude of his vnclennes; that the hous 
of Israel be takyn in her herte, in whiche 
thei wenten awey fro me in alle her 
6ydohs. Therfor sey thon to the hous of 
Israel, Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Be 3e! conuertid, and departe 3e fro 3oure 
ydolis, and turne awei 3oure facis fro 
valle 3oure defoulyngis. For a man, a 
man of the hous of Israel, and of prose- 
litis, or men new comen to the lawe of 
Jewis, who euer shal be cumlynge, or 
gest, in Israel, if he shal be alienyd fro 
me, and shal putte his ydolis in his herte, 
and shal sette the selaundre of his wick- 
idnes a3ens his face, and shal eome to the 
prophete, that he axe bi hym me, I the 
Lord shal answere to hym bi my silf. 
8 And Y shal putte my face vpon that man, 
and I shal make hym in to ensaumple, 
and in to a prouerbe, and I shal distruye 
him fro the mydil of my puple; and 3e 
9shulen wite, for I the Lord. And whanne 
the prophete shal erre, and shal speke a 
word, Y the Lord shal disseyue the ilk 
prophete; and I shal stretche out myn 
hoond on him, and shal doo hym awey 
10 of the mydil of my puple of Israel. And 
thei shulen bere her wickidnes; aftir the 
wickidnes of the man axinge, so the 
11 wickidnes of the prophete shal be; that 
the hows of Israel erre namore fro me, 
nether be defoulid in alle his trespass- 
yngis, but be to me in to a puple, and 
Y be to hym in to a God, the Lord of 
120o0stis seith. And the word of the Lord 
iais maad to me, seiynge, Sone of man, 


i Om, 


4 Om. celeri. 


EZEKIEL. 527 


fastli the sclaundre of her wickidnesse 
ajens her face. Whether Y ‘that am! axid, 
schal answere to hem? For this things 
speke thou to hem, and thou schalt seie 
to hem, These thingis seith the Lord God, 
A man, a man of the hous of Israel, that 
settith:- hise vnclennessis in his herte, and 
settith stidfastli the sclaundre of his wick- 
idnesse a3ens his face, and cometh to the 
profete, and axith me bi hym, Y the Lord 
schal answere to hym in the multitude of 
hise vnelennessis ; that the hous of Israels 
be takun in her herte, bi which thei 3eden 
awei fro me in alle her idols. Therfore 
sele thou to the hous of Israel, The Lord 
God seith these thingis, Be 3e conuertid, 
and go 3e awei fro 3oure idols, and turne 
awei 30ure faces fro alle joure filthis. For7 
whi a man, a man of the hous of Israel, 
and of conuersis, who euer is a comelyng 
in Israel, if he is alienyd fro me, and set- 
tith hise idols in his herte, and settith 
stidfastli the sclaundir of his wickidnesse 
ajens his face, and he cometh to the pro- 
fete, to axe me bi hym, Y the Lord schal 
answere hym bi my silf. And Y schals 
sette my faee on that man, and Y schal 
make hym in to ensaumple, and in to a 
prouerbe, and Y schal leese hym fro the 
myddis of my puple; and 3e sehulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord. And whaune a pro-» 
fete errith, and spekith a word, Y the 
Lord schal disseyue that profete; and Y 
schal stretche forth myn hond on hym, 
and Y schal do hym awei fro the myddis 
of my puple Israel. And thei schulen to 
bere her wickidnesse; bi the wickidnesse 
of the axere, so the wickidnesse of the 
profete schal be; that the hous of Israel 
erre no more fro ine, nether be defoulid 
in alle her trespassyngis; but that it be 
in to a puple to me, and Y be in to a® God 
to hem, seith the Lord of oostis. And the1z 
word of the Lord was maad to me, and 
he seide, Sone of man, whanne the lond ts 
synneth a3ens me, that it trespassynge do 


A. 


€ Om. cefert. 


528 


whanne the erthe shal synne ajens me, 
that it trespassynge trespase, I shal 
stretche out myn hoond vponk it, and I 
shal togidir trede the 3eerd of breed of 
it; and I shal seride in to it hungre, and 
I shal slee of it man and werk beest. 
14 And if thes three men, Noe, Danyel, and 
Job, shulen be in the mydil of it, thei bi 
her ri3twisnes shulen delyuere her soulis, 
isthe Lord God of oostis seith. That and! 
if I shal lede yn werst beestis vpon™ the 
loond, that I waste it, and it shal be vu- 
waied, or wayles, for that there is no 
1s passynge bi it for beestis, and thes thre 
men that shulen be in it, the Lord God 
seith, Y lyue, for nether thei shulen dely- 
uere sones, nether dou3ters, but thei aloon 
shulen be delyuered ;, forsothe the loond 
i7shal be desolat. Or if I shal lede yn a 
swerd vpon that loond, and Y shal sey to 
the swerd, Passe bi the loond, and IJ shal 
isslee man and beest of it, and thes three 
men shulen be in the mydil of it, I lyue, 
seith the Lord God, thei shulen not dely- 
uere sones nethir dou3tris, but thei aloon 
i9shulen be delynered. And forsothe if Y 
shal sende yn vpon” that loond pestilence, 
and I° shal sheede out myn indignacioun 
vpon? it in blood, that Y doo awei fro it 
20man and beest, and Noe, Danyel, and 
Job, shulen be in the mydil of it, Y lyue, 
seith the Lord, for thei shulen not dely- 
uere sone and dou3ter, but thei aloon bi 
her rij3twisnes shulen delyuere her soulis. 
21 For thes thingis seith the Lord God, That 
and if I shal sende in to Jerusalem my 
foure werst domys, swerd, and hungre, 
and yuel beestis, aud pestilence, that Y 
22slee man and beest of it, and netheles 
sauynge of men ledynge out sonys and 
dou3tris shal be laft in it. Loo! thei 
shulen goo out to 3ou, and 3e shulen see 
the weie of hem, and the fyndyngis of 
hem; and 3e schulen be coumfortid on 
the yuel which Y haue ledde in to Je- 
rusalem, in alle thingis whiche I haue 


Kone promH. 1Om. a. 


£Om. 1. ben forseyd s. 


EZEKIEL. 


Mon G pr. m. il. 


XIV. 14——22, 


trespas, Y schal stretche forth myn hond 
on it, and Y schal al to-breke the 3erde of 
breed therof; and Y schal sende hungur in. 
to it, and Y schal sle of it man and beeste. 
And if these thre men Noe, Danyel, and 14 
Job, ben in the myddis therof, thei bi hér 
ri3tfulnesse schulen delyuere her soulis, 
seith the Lord of oostis. That if also Y 1s 
brynge in worste beestis on the lond, that 
Y distrie it, and if it is with out weie, for 
that no passer is for the beestis, and 16 
these thre men, that ‘ben bifore seid‘, ben 
therynne, Y lyue, seith the Lord God, for 
thei schulen nethir delyuere sones, nether 
dou3tris, but thei aloone schulen be deli- 
uered ; forsothe the lond schal be maad 
desolat. Ethir if Y brynge in swerd on17 
that lond, and Y seie to the swerd, Passe 
thou thorou3 the lond, and Y sle of it man 
and beeste, and these thre men ben in1s 
the myddis therof, Y lyue, seith the Lord 
God, that thei schulen not delyuere sones 
nether dou3tris, but thei aloone schulen 
be delyuered. Forsothe if Y brynge in£19 
also pestilence on that lond, and Y schede 
out myn indignacioun on it in blood, that 
Y‘do awei fro it man and beeste, and 20 
Noe, and Danyel; and Joob, ben in the 
myddis therof, Y lyue, seith the Lord God, 
for thei schulen not delyuere a sone and a 
dou3ter, but thei bi her ri3tfulnesse schulen 
delyuere her soulis. For the Lord God2 
seith these thingis, That thou3 Y sende in 
my foure worste domes, swerd, and hun- 
gur, and yuele beestis, and pestilence, in 
to Jerusalem, that Y sle of it man and 
heeste, netheles saluacioun of hem that 22 
leden out sones and dou3tris, schal be left 
ther ynne. Lo! thei schulen go out to® 
3ou, and 3e schulen se the weie of hem, 
and the fyndyngis of hem; and 3e schulen 
be coumfortid on the yuel, which Y brou3te 
in on Jerusalem, in alle thingis whiche Y 
bar in on it. And thei schulen coumforte 23 
3ou, whanne 3e schulen se the weie of hem 
and the fyndyngis of hem; and 3e schulen 


XonGpremu. 9Om. 4. Pon GH. 


£Omn. bof. 


XIV. 23-——XVI. 4. 


23 brou3te in on it. And thei shulen con- 
forte 30u, whanne 3e shulen see the weie 
of hem, and the fyndyngis of hem; and 
3e shulen knowe, for not idely Y dide- 
alle thingis, what euere Y dide in it, seith , 
the Lord almi3ti. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, selynge, Sone of man, what shal be 
don to tree of the viyn, of alle trees of 
the wodis, that ben among the trees of 
3woodis? Whether? a tree shal be takyn 
of it, that werk be maad? or a litil paal 
shal be forchid of it, that eny maner ves- 
4sel hange in it? Lo! it is 3ouun to the 
fier in to meet; the fier hath waastid eche 
either parti’ of it, and the mydil of it is 
brou3t in to aS deed broond; whether it 
5 shal be profitable to werk? 3he, whanne 
it was hool, it was not able to werk; hon 
myche more whanne fier hath denouride 
and brende to. gidre, no thing of werk 
6shal be maad of it? Therfor thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, Hou the tree of viyn 
amonge thet trees of woodis, whom I 3aue 
to fier for to deuoure, so Y shal bitake 
7 the dwellers of Jerusalem, and I shal 
putte my face in to hein. Thei shulen 
gon out of the fier,and the fier shal waaste 
hem; and 3e shulen wite, for I the Lord, 
whanne Y shal putte my face in hem, 
sand shal 3yue the loond vnwaied and de- 
solat, for that that thei weren trespass-. 
ours, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XVI. 
1 And the word of the Lord is maad 
2to me, seiynge, Sone of man, mak thou 
knowyn to Jerusalem her abomynaciouns; 
3and thou shalt seie, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God. Jerusalem, thi roote and 
thi generacioun, of the loond of Chanaan; 
thi fader Amorrei, and thi moder Cethei. 
4 And whanne thou art born, in the dai of 


q Where Gu. ° part Gi. 


i tree, ether (or EPY] tymbre CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


n Om. IN. 
VOI,. Ill. 


EZEKIEL. 


529 


knowe, that not in veyn Y dide alle thingis, 
what euer thingis Y dide there ynne, seith 
the Lord almy3ti. 


Cds. 


And the word of the Lord was maad tot 
me, and he seide, Sone of man, what schal2 
be don to the tre of a vyne, of alle the 
trees of woodis, that ben among: the trees 
of woodis? Whether tymbre! schal bes 
takun therof, that werk be maad? ether 
shal a stake be maad therof, that ony 
vessel hange ther onne? Lo! it is 3ouun4 
in to mete; fier wastide euer eithir part 
therof, and the myddis therof is dryunn 
in to deed! sparcle; whether it schal be 
profitable to werk? jhe, whanne it wass 
hool, it was not couenable to werk; hou 
myche more whanne fier hath deuourid, 
and hath brent it, no thing of werk schal 
be maad therof? Therfor the Lord Gode 


seith thes thingis, As the tre of a vyne 


is among the trees of woodis, which Y 3af 

to fier to deuoure, so Y 3af the dwelleris 

of Jerusalem, and Y schal sette my face7 
a3ens hem. Thei schulen go out of the fier, 

and fier schal waaste hem; and 3e schulen 

wite, that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal 

sette my face ajens. hem, and: schal 3yue8 
the lond with out weie and desolat, for 

thei weren trespassours, seith the Lord 

God™. 


CAP. XVI. 

And the word of the Lord was maadi 
to me, and he seide, Sone of man, make 2-~- 
thou" knowun to Jerusalem her abhomy- 
naciouns; and thou schalt seie, The Lords 
God seith these thingis. A! thou Jerusa- 
lem, thi rote and thi generacioun 7s of the 
lond of Canaan; thi fadir 7s Amorrei, and 
thi moder 2s Cetei. And whanne thou were 4 


8Om. Hu. t Om. en. 


la deed a sec. m.1KS sec. m. m Om. n. 


3 Y 


530. 


thi birth thi naule is not before kit, and 
in water thou art not wasshen in to helth, 
nether bi salt saltid, nether wlappid in 
sclothis. Myn eye sparide not vpon" thee, 
that I shulde doo to thee oon of thes 
thingis, Y hauynge mercie of thee; but 
thou art cast forth vpon the face of erthe, 
in the’ castynge awei of thi soule, in the 
6¢dai in which thou art born. Forsothe Y 
passinge bi thee, saw3 thee for to be de- 
foulid in thi blood; and I seide to thee, 
whanne thou were in thi blood, Lyue 
thou ; sotheli Y seide to thee in thi blood, 
7Lyue thou. And I 3aue thee multipliede 
as burionnynge, ov seed, of the” feeld, and 
thou art multiplied, and maad greet; and 
thou wentist in, and thou parfietli camest 
to wommanns aparaile; thi breestis, or 
teetis, waxeden greete, and thin heer bu- 
riounede; and thou was nakid, and ful of 
sconfusioun. And I passide bi thee, and 
Y see3 thee, and loo! thi tyme, ‘the tyme* 
of louers; and Y stretchide forth my cloth- 
inge vpon thee, and Y hilide thi shame. 
And Y swore to thee, and YY entride in 
couenaunt with thee, seith the Lord God, 
gand thou art aad boundyn to me. And 
T wasshide thee in water, and Y clenside 
thi blood of thee, and anoyntide thee with 
1woyle. And I clothide thee with clothis of 
dyuerse colours, and shodde thee with 
iasynct; and J girde thee with bijs, or 
whit silk; and 1 clothide thee with sotil 
thingis, and Y ournede thee with ourne- 
izmentis, And I 3af ryngis in thin hoondis, 
and a bee about thi necke; and I jane a 
reng vpon thi mouth, and ceerclis to thin 
eeris, and a coroun of fayrnes in thi heed. 
i3 And thou art ourned with gold and sil- 
uer, and thou art? clothid with bijs and 
with clooth many foold steyned with 
rounde ymagis, and with manye colours. 
Thou hast etyn flour, and hony, and oyle, 
and myche thou art maad fayr; and thou 
14 profitidist in to a rewme, and thi name 
is gon out in to hethen men for thi fair- 


Yon G prom. H. ¥ Om. GH. 


O11 sec. m. sup. ras. P Om. IN. 


EZEKIEL. 


w Om. Gu. 


q Om. N. 


vi. > 


borun, thi nawle was not kit awei in the 
dai of thi birthe, and thou were not 
waischun in watir in to helthe, nethir 
saltid with salt, nether wlappid in clothis. 
An ize sparide not on thee, that it® hau-s 
ynge merci on thee, dide to thee oon of 
these thingis; but thon were cast forth on 
the face of erthe, in the castynge out of 
thi sonle, in the dai in which thou were 
borun. Forsothe Y passide bi thee, andé 
Y si3 thee defoulid in thi blood; and Y 
seide to thee, whanne thou were in thi 
blood, Lyue thou; sotheli Y seide to thee 
in thi blood, Lyne thou. Y 3af thee mul-7 
tiplied as the seed of a feeld, and thou 
were multiplied, and maad greet; and thou 
entridist, and camest fulli to wymmens 
ournyng; thi tetis wexiden greet, and thin 
heer wexide; and thou were nakid, and ful 
of schenschipe. And Y passide bi thee,s 
and Y si3 thee, and lo! thi tyme, the tyme 
of louyeris; and Y spredde abrood my 
clothing on thee, and Y hilide thi schen- 
schipe. And Y swoor to thee, and Y made 
aP couenaunt with thee, seith the Lord 
God, and thou were maad a wijf to me. 
And Y waischide thee in water, and Y9 
clenside awei thi blood fro thee, and Y4 
anoyntide thee with oile. And Y clothide to 
thee with clothis of dyuerse colours, and 
Y schodde thee in iacynct, and Y girde 
thee with biys; and Y clothide thee with 11 
sutil thingis, and Y ournede thee with 
ournement. And Y jaf bies in thiniez 
hondis, and a wrethe aboute thi necke; 
and Y 3af a ryng on thi mouth, and cerclis 
to thin eeris, and a coroun of fairnesse in 
thin heed. And thou were ourned with i3 
gold and siluer, and thou were clothid 
with biys and ray cloth with rounde 
ymagis, and many colours. Thou etist* 
cleene® flour of wheete, and hony, and oile, 
and thou were maad fair ful greetli; and 
thou encreessidist in to a rewme, and this 
name 3ede out in to hethene men for thi 
fairnesse ; for thou were perfit in my fair- 
x Om. a. 


y Om. Gpr.m.H. 27 Om, a. 


T etidist K. 8 of clene I pr. m. Nn. 


XVI. 15—-26. 


nes; and thou wast perfit in my fairnes, 
which Y hadde putte vpon* thee, seith 
isthe Lord. And thou hauynge trust in 
thi fairnes, hast don fornycacioun in thi 
name; and thou hast putte thi fornyca- 
cioun to eche man passynge, that thou 
ig6were maad his. And thou takynge of 
my clothingis, madist to thee hei3 thingis, 
on eche side sewide togidre; and thou 
hast don fornicacoun vpon” hem, as it 
was not don bifore, nether is to beynge®. 
17 And thou tokist4 the vessels of thi fair- 
nes, of my gold and of my siluer, whiche 
Y 3aue to thee; and thou madist to thee 
ymagis of men, and didist® fornycacioun 
isin hem. And thou tokist thi clothingis 
of manye colours, and thou was‘ clothid 
in hem; and thou puttidist myn oyle and 
my tymyame, or encense, in the si3t of 
19hem. And my breed, which I 3aue to 
thee, flour, and oyle, and honye, with 
whiche Y nurshide thee, thou puttidist 
in the si3te of hem, in to odour of swet- 
nes; and it is don, seith the Lord God. 
20 And thou tokist thi sones and dou3tris, 
whom thou gendredist to me, and offred- 
ist to hem, for to be deuourid. Whether 
21 thi fornyeacioun is litil? Thou offredist 
my sones, and 3anest hem, togider halew- 
22 ynge to hem. And after alle thin abomy- 
naciouns and fornycaciouns, thou hast not 
mynde of the dais of thi 3ongth, whanne 
thou was nakid, and ful of confusioun, 
23thou was® defoulid in thi blood. And 
woo, woo bifelle to thee, after al thi ma- 
24 lice, seith the Lord God. Aud thou hast 
bildid to thee a bordel hous, and madist 
asto thee hordom in alle stretis. At eche 
heed of weie thou bildidist! a tokne of 
thi hordom, and madist thi fayrnes abo- 
mynable; and departidist thi feet to eche 
man passynge, and multipliedist alle thi 
26fornycaciouns. And thou didist forny- 
cacioun with sones of Egipt, thi nei3- 
boris of grete flesshis, and multipliedist 


> Om. G pr.m. i. 


3 on G pr.m. H. 
h Om. 


& wast G prim. were Il. i bildist 1. 


t settist 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


« bigynne 4. 


531 
nesse which Y hadde sett on thee, seith 
the Lord God. And thou haddist trist in is 
thi fairnesse, and didist fornicacioun in thi 
naine; and thou settidist' forth thi fornica- 
cioun to ech that passide forth, that thou 
schuldist be maad his. And thou tokist is 
of my clothis, and madist to thee hi3 
thingis set aboute on ech side; and thou 
didist fornycacioun on tho, as it was not 
don, nether schal be don. And thou tokist 17 
the vessels of thi fairnesse, of my gold and 
of my siluer, which Y 3af to thee; and 
thou imadist to thee ymagis of men, and 
didist fornycacioun in tho. And thouis 
tokist thi clothis of many colours, and 
thou were clothid in tho; and thou settid- 
ist myn oile and myn encence in the sit 
of tho. And thou settidist my breed, 19 
which Y 3af to thee, flour of wheete, and 
oile, and hony, bi whiche Y nurschide thee, 
in the si3t of tho, in to odour of swetnesse; 
aud it. was don, seith the Lord God. And 20 
thou tokist thi sones and thi dou3tris, 
whiche thou gendridist to me, and offridist 
to tho, for ‘to be deuourid. Whether thi 
fornicacioun is litil? Thou offridist my 21 
sones, and 3auest hem, and halewidist to 
tho. And aftir alle thin abhomynaciomns 22 
and fornicaciouns, thou bithou3tist not on 
the daies of thi 3ong wexynge age, whanne 
thou were nakid, and ful of schenschipe, 
and were defoulid in thi blood. And after 23 
al thi malice, wo, wo bifelle to thee, seith 
the Lord God. And thou bildidist to thee 24 
a bordel hous, and madist to thee a place 
of hordom in alle stretis. At ech heed of25 
the weie thou bildidist a signe of thin 
hordom, and madist thi fairnesse abhomy- 
nable ; and thou departidist thi feet to ech 
man passynge forth, and multepliedist thi 
fornicaciouns. Ard thou didist fornica- 26 
cioun with the sones of Egipt, thi nei3-_ 
boris of grete fleischis, and thou multe- 
pliedist thi fornicacioun", to terre me to 
wraththe. Lo! Y schal stretch forth myn 27 
f were H. 


d toke Gu. e thou didist 1. 


u fornicaciouns IN. 


3Y2 


532 


thi fornycacioun, for to terre ‘me to 
27wraththe. Loo! Y shal hoolde forth 
myn hoond vpon* thee, and Y shal take 
awey thi iustifiynge; and Y shal 3yue 
thee in to the hoondis of the hatynge 
thee, of the dou3tris of Palestyn, that 
zsshamen in thi cursid weie. And thou 
hast don fornycacioun in the sones of 
Assiriens, for that thou was not 3it ful- 
fillid; and after that thou didist fornyca- 
29cioun, nether so thou art swagid. And 
thou multipliedist thi fornycacioun in 
the loond of Canaan with Caldeis, and 
sonether so thou art fulfillid. In what 
thing shal Y clense thin herte, seith the 
Lord God, whanne thou dost alle thes 
werkis of a! womman hoore, and bold to 
3thordom? For thou hast forgid thi bordel 
hous in the heed of eche weie, and thou 
madist thin heiz3e thingis™ in eche strete; 
nether thou art maad as an hoore anoyed, 
sor ful of werynes, encresynge prijs, but 
aS a womman auowtresse, the whiche 
33ledith in aliens vpon hir husboond®. To 
alle hooris hijris ben 3ouen, forsothe thou 
hast 3ouun hijre, or mede, to alle thi 
loueris ; and thou 3auist to hem, that thei 
shulden entre to thee on eche side, for to 
31doo fornycacioun with thee. And it is 
don in thee ajen the custom of wymmen 
in thi fornycaciouns, and after thee shal 
uot be fornycacioun; forsothe in that 
thing that thou jauest hijris, and resseyu- 
edist not hijris, the? contrarie is don in 
35 thee. Therfor, thou hoore, here the word 
s6of the Lord. Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, For thi monee is shed out, and thin 
euyl fame is shewid in thi fornycaciouns 
vpon4 thi loueris and vpon‘ thin idolis of 
thin abomynaciouns, in the blood of thi 
sones, whom thou hast 3ouen to hem; 
37loo! Y shal gedre alle thi loneris, with 
whom thou art meynd, and alle men whom 
thou louedist, with alle men whom thou 
hatidist; and Y shal gadre hem vpon thee 
on eche side, and Y shal make nakid thin 
10m. 1. 


kon G prom. iu. m thinge Gu. 


Vv ech heed of the 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


© honsholde G11. 


W anoyntinge m. noyinge vu. 


XVI. 27-37. 


hond on thee, and Y scha) take awei thi 
iustifiyng ; and Y schal 3yue thee in to the 
soulis of hem that haten thee, of the dou3- 
tris of Palestyns, that ben aschamed in thi 
weie ful of greet trespas. And thou didist 28 
fornicacioun with the sones of Assirieus, 
for thou were not fillid 3it; ‘and after that 
thou didist fornicacioun, nether so thou 
were fillid. And thou multipliedist thi 29 
fornycacioun in the lond of Canaan with 
Caldeis, and nether so thou were fillid. 
In what thing schal Y clense thin herte,30 
seith the Lord God, whanne thou doist 
alle these werkis of a womman an hoore, 
and gredi axere? For thou madist this 
bordel hous in ‘the heed of ech’ weie, and 
thou madist thin hi3 place in ech street ; 
and thou were not maad as an hoore ful 
of anoiyng’, encreessynge prijs, but ass2 
a womman auowtresse, that bryngith in 
aliens on hir hosebonde. Hiris ben 3ounn 33 
to alle hooris, but thou hast 3oue hire to 
alle thi louyeris; and thou 3auest to hem, 
that thei schulden entre to thee on ech 
side, to do fornycacioun with thee. And 34 
it was don in thee a3ens the custom of 
wymmen in thi fornycaciouns, and forni- 
cacioun schal not be after thee; for in that 
that thou 3auest hiris, and tokist not hiris, 
the contrarie was don in thee. Therfor, 35 
thou hoore, here the word of the Lord. 
The Lord God seith these thingis, For thi 36 
riches is sched out, and thi schenschipe 
is schewid in thi fornicaciouns on thi 
louyeris, and on the idols of thin abho- 
mynaciouns*, in the blood of thi sones, 
whiche thou 3auest to hem; lo! Y schal37 
gadere to gidere alle thiY louyeris, with 
whiche thou were meddlid, and alle men 
whiche thou louedist, with alle men whiche 
thou hatidist ; and Y schal gadere hem on 
thee on ech side, and Y schal make nakid 
thi schenschipe bitore hem, and thei schu- 
len se al thi filthe. And Y scha] deme thee 3s 
bi the domes of auoutressis, and schedinge 
out blood; and Y schal 3yue thee in to3y 


Pand the 4. GonG@pr.m. nu. 


x abhomynacionn s. Y the 1. 


XVI. 38—47. 


yuel fame before hem, and alle shulen 
sasee thi filth. And I shal deme thee with 
domes of auoutressis, and of shedynge 
39 blood ; and Y shal 3yue thee in to blood 
of woodnesse, and enuye. And Yshal 3eue 
thee in to the hoondis of hem, and thei 
shulen distruye thi bordel hous, and thet 
shulen:distruye thin hoore hous; and thei 
shulen make thee nakid fro thi clothis, 
and shulen take awei the vesselis of thi 
feirnes, and thei shulen forsake thee 
sonakid, and ful of yuel fame. And thei 
shulen lede to vpon thee a multitude, 
and thei shulen stoone thee with stoonus, 
and thei shulen slee thee with her 
41swerdis. And thei shulen togider brenne 


thin housis in fier, and thei shulen doo- 


domys in thee, in the eyen of ful manye 
wymmen ; and thou shalt faile, ov ceese, 
for to do fornycacioun, and thou shalt 
42namore 3yue hijris. And myn indigna- 
cioun shal reste in thee, and my loue 
shal be takyn awei fro thee; and I shal 
reste, nether Y shal be wrooth more, 
43for that that thou haddist not mynde 
of the dais of thi 3ongth, and hast terrid 
me to wraththe in alle these" thingis. 
Wherfor and Y haue 30uen thi weies in 
thin heed, seith the Lord God, and Y 
dide not after thi greet trespassis, in alle 
4ithin® abomynaciouns. Loo! eche man 
that seith euery where, 07 comounli, a 
prouerbe in thee, shal take it to, seiynge, 
45 As the modir, so and hir dou3ter. Thou 
art the do3ter of thi modir, which castide 
awei hir husboond and hir sones; and 
the sister of thi sistris, whiche castiden 
awey her husbondis and her sones. Thi 
modir Cethei, and thi fader Ammorrei; 
4sand thi more sister Samarie, she and 
hir dou3tris, that dwellen at thi left side. 
Forsothe thi sister lasse than thou, that 
dwellith at thi ri3t half, Sodom and hirt 
s7dou3tris. But nether thou hast gon in 
the weies of hem, nether thou hast don 
after her" grete trespassis ; almest a litil 


r Om. 4. 


z Om. IN. 


EZEKIEL. 


8 Om. G pr. m. H. 


a Om. N. 


533 


the” blood of strong veniaunce, and of fer- 
uour. And Y schal 3yue thee in to the 
hondis of hem, and thei schulen destrie 
thi bordel hous, and thei schulen destrie 
the place of thin hordom; and thei schulen 
make thee nakid of thi clothis, and thei 
schulen take awei the vessels of thi fair- 
nesse, and thei schulen forsake thee nakid, 
and ful of schenschipe. And thei schulen 40 
bringe on thee a multitude, and thei schu- 
len stoon thee with stoonys, and thei 
schulen sle thee with her swerdis. And 41 
thei schulen brenne thin housis with fier, 
and thei schulen make domes in thee, bi- 
for the izen of ful many wymmen; and 
thou schalt ceese to do fornicacioun, and 
thou schalt no more jyue hiris. And myn 42 
indignacioun scha]l reste in thee, and my 
feruent loue schal be takun awei fro thee; 
and Y schal reste, and Y schal no more 
be wrooth, for thou haddist not mynde4s 
on the daies of thi 3ong wexynge age, 
and thou terridist me to ire in alle these 
thingis. Wherfor and Y 3af thi weies in 
thin heed, seith the Lord God, and Y# 
dide not aftir thi grete trespassis, in alle 
these thin abhomynaciouns. Lo! ech man 44 
that seith a prouerbe comynli, schal take 
it in thee, and schal seie, As the modir, so45 
and the dou3tir of hir. Thou art the dou3- 
ter of thi modir, that castide awey hir 
hosebonde and hir sones; and thou art the 
sister of thi sistris, that castiden a wei 
her hosebondis and her sones. Thi modir 
ts Cetei, and thi fadir 7s Ammorrei; and 46 
thi gretter sister 7s Samarie, sche and hir 
dou3tris, that dwellen at thi left side; but 
thi sistir lesse than thou, that dwellith at 
thi ri3t side, 7s Sodom, and hir dou3tris. 
But thou jedist not in the weies of hem, 47 
nethir thou didist aftir the grete tres- 
passis of hem; hast thou do almest a litil 
lesse cursidere dedis than thei, in alle thi 
weies? Y lyue, seith the Lord God, for ss 
Sodom, thi sister, did not, sehe and hir 
don3tris, as thou didist, and thi dou3tris. 


this a. his a. 


b and sche IN. 


534 


lesse gretter trespassis thou hast don 
48 than thei, in alle thi weies. Y lyue, seith 
the Lord God, for Sodom, thi sister, dide 
not, she and hir dou3tris, as thou didist 
avand thi dou3tris. Loo! this was the 
wickidnes of Sodom, thi sister, prijde, and 
fulnes of breed, or glotonye, and abouu- 
daunce, or plente, and idilnes of hir, and 
hir dou3tris; and thei dressiden not the 
sohoond to the nedi and pore. Aud thei 
ben lift an hei3, and diden other abomy- 
naciouns before nie; and Y dide hem a wei, 
s1as thou hast seen. And Samarie synnede 
not the half of thi synnes, but thon’ hast 
ouercoinen hem in grete trespassis, and 
hast iustified thi sistris in alle thin 
abomynaciouns, whiche thou wrou3tist. 
52 Therfor and thou bere thi confusioun, 
which hast ouercomyn thi sistris with 
thi synnes, doynge more cursidli than 
thei; forsothe thei hen iustified of thee. 
Therfor and thou be confoundid, and ber 
thou thin yuel fame, the which hast ins- 
58tifiede thi sistris. And Y restorynge shal 
conuerte hein with the turnynge togidre 
of Sodom and hir dou3tris; and Y shal 
conuerte thi turnynge a3en in the mydil 
stof hem, that thou bere thin yuel fame, 
and be confoundid in alle thingis whiche 
ssthou didist, coumfortynge hem. And 
thi sister Sodom and hir dou3tris shulen 
turne a3en to her oldenes; and Samarie 
and hir* doujtris shulen turne a3en to 
her oldenes; and thou and thi dou;tris 
sé6turne aj3en to 30ur oldenes. Forsothe 
Sodom, thi sister, was not herde in thi 
57 mouth, in the dai of thi pride, before that 
thi malice was shewid, as in this tyme, in 
to the* shenship of doujtris of Sirie, and 
of alle dou3ters of Palestyn in thi cum- 
pas, that gon about thee bi enuyroun. 
58 Thou hast born thi greet trespas, and thin 
s9yuel fame, seith the Lord God. For thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, And I shal 
doo to thee as thou dispisedist the ooth, 
that thou madist the couenaunt voyd; 


v Om. 4. 


© Om. N. 


EZEKIEL. 


W his 4. 


4 dressiden CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


XVI. 48—59. 


Lo! this was the wickidnesse of Sodom, 49 
thi sister, pride, fulnesse of breed, and 
habundaunce, and idilnesse of hir, and of¢ 
hir dou3tris; and thei puttiden’ not hond 
to a nedi man and pore. And thei weren so 
enhaunsid, and diden other abhomina- 
ciouns bifore me; and Y took hem awei, 
as thou hast seyn. And Samarie synnede si 
not the half of thi syunes, but thou hast 
ouercome hem in thi grete trespassis®; and 
thou hast iustified thi sistris in alle thin 
abhomynaciouns, whiche thou wrou3tist. 
Therfor and thou bere thi schenschipe, se 
that hast ouercome thi sistris with thi 
synnes, and didist more cursidli than thei; 
for thei ben iustified of thee. Therfor and 
be thou schent, and bere thi schenschipe, 
which hast iustified thi sistris. And Ys 
schal conuerte and restore hem by the 
conuersioun of Sodom with hir dou3tris, 
and bi the conuersioun of Samarie and of 
hir dou3tris; and Y schal conuerte thi 
turnyng a3en in the myddis of hem, that ss 
thou bere thi schenschipe, and be aschamed 
in alle thingis whiche thou didist, coum- 
fortynge hem. And thi sister Sodom ands5s 
hir do3tris schulen turne a3en to her eld- 
nesse; and Samarie and hir dou3tris shu- 
len turne ajen to her eeldnesse ; and thou 
and thi dou3tris turne a3en to 3oure eld- 
nesse. Forsothe Sodom, thi sister, wass6 
not herd in thi mouth, in the dai of thi 
pride, bifore that thi malice was schewid, 57 
as in this tyme, in to schenschipe of the 
dou3tris of Sirie, and of alle dou3tris in 
thi cumpas, of the dou3tris of Palestyn 
that ben aboute thee bi cumpas. Thouss 
hast bore thi greet trespas, and thi schen- 
schipe, seith the Lord God. For the Lord ss 
God seith these thingis, And Y schal do 
to thee as thou dispisidist the ooth, that 
thou schuldist make voide the couenaunt ; 
and Y schal haue mynde on my couenaunt 60 
with thee in the daies of thi 3ongthe, and 
Y schal reise to thee a couenaunt euer- 
lastynge. And thou schalt haue myndeei 


x Om. GH. 


© trespasse N. 


XVI. 60——XVIL 7. 


éoand Y shal haue mynde of my couenaunt 
with thee in the dais of thiY 3ongth, and 
I shal reise to thee couenaunt euerlast- 
ynge. And thou shalt haue mynde of thi 

61 weies, and thou shalt be confoundid, 
whanne thou shalt resseyue thi sistris 
more than thou, with thi lesse; and Y shal 
3yue hem to thee in to dou3tris, and not 

s2zof thi couenaunt. And Y shal reise my 
couenaunt with thee, and thou shalt wite, 

63for I the Lord, that thou haue mynde, 
and be confoundid; and that it be namore 
to thee for to opyn the? mouth, for thi 
confusioun, whanne Y shal be plesid to 
thee in alle thingis whiche thou hast don, 
seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seyynge, Sone of man, put forth a 
derk ensaumple, or hard questioun, and 
telle a parable to the hous of Israel; 
sand thou shalt seye, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God. A greet egle of grete 
weengis, with long ledynge of membris, 
ful of fetheris and dyuersite, cam to the 
Liban, and took the merou3 of cedre. 
4 He drow; of the heiznes of his bouwis, 
or braunches, and bare it ouer ‘in to* the 
loond of Canaan; in the citee of mar- 
schauntis he puttide it. And he took of 
the seed of the erthe, and puttide it in 
the erthe for seed, that he shulde make 
sad the root vpon® manye watris; in the 
6ouermest paart he puttide® it. And 
whanne it had buriounede, it wexede in 
to a brodder® viyn 3erd, in lowe stature, 
the braunches ‘of it belioldinge® to it, 
and the rootis therof weren vundir it; 
therfor it is maad in to a‘ viynjerd, and 
made fruyte in to siouns, and sente out 
7braunchis. And another greet egle is 
maad, with greet weengis, and manye 
fethers; and loo! this viynjerd as send- 
ynge his rootis to it, stretchide out® his 


y Om. eu. 2 thi 4. 
fOm.u.  & forth eu. 


4 to G pr.m. H. 


fand he v. 


EZEKIEL. 


bon G prom. n. 


535 


on thi weies, and schalt be aschanied, 
whanne thou schalt resseyue thi sistris 
grettere than thou, with thi lesse sistris ; 
and Y schal 3yue hem in to doun3tris to 
thee, but not of thi couenaunt. And Yz 
schal reise my couenaunt with thee, and 
thou schalt wite, that Y am the Lord, 
that thou haue mynde, and be aschamed; «3 
and that it be no more to thee to opene 
the mouth for thi schame, whanne Y schal 
be plesid to thee in alle thingis whiche 
thou didist, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XVII. 


And the word of the Lord was maadi 
to me, aud he seide, Sone of man, sette2 
forth a derk speche, and telle thou a para- 
ble to the hous of Israel; and thou schalt: 
seie, The Lord God seith these thingis. 
A greet egle of grete wyngis, with long 
stretchyng out of membris, ful of fetheris 
and of dyuersite, cam to the Liban, and 
took awei the merowe of the cedre. Hea 
pullide awei the hiznesse of boowis therof, 
and bar it ouer in to the lond of Chanaaun, 
and settide it in the citee of marchauntis. 
And he took of the seed of the lond, ands 
settide it in the lond for seed, that it 
schulde make stidfast roote on many wa- 
tris; hef settide it in® the hizere part. 
And whanne it hadde growe, it encreess- 6 
ide in to a largere vyner, in lowe stature ; 
for the boowis therof bihelden to that 
egtle, aud the rootis therof weren vudur 
that egle; therfor it was maad a vyner, 
and it made fruyt in to siouns, aud sente 
out boowis. And another greet egle was7 
maad, with grete wyngis, and many fe- 
theris; and lo! this vyner as sendynge 
hise rootis to that eg/e, stretchide forth 
his siouns to that eg/e, that he schulde 


¢ putt Gu. dbrod cu. ¢& Om. 4. 


€ on ry. 


536 EZEKIEL. 


siouns to it, that it moystide it of the 
slitil placis of his buriounynge. That in 
good erthe vpon" many waters is plaunt- 
id, that it make bouwis, and bere fruyte, 
ythat it be in to a greet viyn3erd. Sey 
thou, Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Therfor whether! it shal haue prosperite? 
Whether he shal not drawe vp the rote 
of it, and shal distruye the fruytis of it ? 
Aud he shal drye alle the syouns of his 
buriounynge, and it shal wexe drye; and 
not in a greet arme, nether in myche* 
puple, that he shulde drawe it vp bi the 
1oroote. Loo! it is plauntid ; therfor whe- 
ther! it shal haue prosperite? Whether 
whanne a brennynge wynde shal touche 
it, it shal not be dried, and it shal dwyne 
awey in the placis of his buriounynge ? 
i1And the word of the Lord is maad to 
izme, seiynge, Sey thou. to the hows ter- 
rynge to wraththe, Witen 3e not what™ 
thes thingis bitoknen? Sei thou, Loo! the 
kyng of Babiloyne cometh in to Jerusa- 
lem; and he shal take the kyng and his 
princes, and he shal lede hem to hym 
isself in to Babiloyne. And he shal take 
of the seed of the rewme, and he shal 
smyte a boond of pees with it, and of it 
he shal resseyue an ooth; but and he shal 
take a wei the stronge men of the" loond, 
tathat the rewme be lowe, and be® not 
reisid vp, but kepe the couenaunt of hym, 
isand kepe it, or saue. Whiche goynge 
awey fro hym, sente messageris to Egipt, 
that he shulde 3yue to hym horsis and 
myche puple. Whether? he shal haue 
prosperite, or shal gete helth4, which 
dide thes thingis? and he that vndoth a 
1g6couenaunt, whether he shal askape? Y 
lyue, seith the Lord God, for in the 
place of the kyng that made hym kyng, 
whos ooth he made voyd, and brak the 
couenaunt that he hadde with hym, in 
1; the mydil of Babiloyne he shal die. And 
not in greet oost, nether in myche puple 


hon G promi. 
G prem. 


iwher cH. ka myche GH. 
P Where G et H fere passim. 


b on EFPX. in to I sec. m. NRS sec. m. 


1 where Gu. 
9 helpe GH. 


XVI. 8—17. 


moiste it of the cornfloris of his seed. 
Which is plauntid: in? a good lond oni 
many watris, that it make boowis, and 
bere fruyt, that it. be in to a greet vyner. 
Seie thou, H’zechiel, The Lord God seith9 
these thingis, Therfor whether he schal 
haue prosperite? Whether Nabugodonosor 
schal not pulle awei the rootis of hym, 
and schal streyne the fruytis of hym? And 
he schal make drie alle the siouns of bu- 
riowning therof, and it schal be drie; and 
uot in greet arm, nether in myche puple, 
that he schulde drawe it out bi the rootis. 
Lo! it is plauntid, therfor whether it. schal 10 
haue prosperite? Whether not whanne 
brennynge wynd schal touche it, it schal 
be maad drye, and schal wexe drie in the 
cornfloris of his seed? And the word of11 
the Lord was maad to me, and he seide, 
Seie thou to the hous terrynge to wraththe, 12 
Witen 3e not what these thingis signefien ? 
Seie thou, Lo! the king of Babiloyne com- 
eth in to Jerusalem; and_he schal. take the 
kyng and the princis therof, and he schal 
leede hem to hym silf in to Babiloyne. 
And he schal take of the seed of the1s 
rewme, and schal smyte with it a boond 
of pees, and he sehal take of it an ooth; 
but also he schal take awei the stronge 
men of the lond, that it be a meke rewme, 14 
and be not reisid, but that it kepe the 
couenaunt of hym, and holde it. Whichis 
3ede awei fro hym, and sente messangeris 
in to Egipt, that it schulde 3yue to hym 
horsis and miche puple. Whether he that 
dide these thingis, schal haue. prosperite, 
ether schal gete helthe? and whether he 
that brekith couenaunt, schal ascape? Y 16 
lyue, seith the Lord God, for in the place 
of the king that made hym kyng, whos 
ooth he made voide, and brak the coue- 
naunt, which he hadde with hym, in the 
myddis of Babiloyne he schal die. And17 
not in greet oost, nether in myche puple 
Farao schal make batel ajens hym, in the 


m what that cu. "that cu. © Om. 


i of 1. 


XVII. 18—XVIII. 3. 


Pharao shal make batayle a3ens hym, in’ 
castynge of an heep of erthe, and in 
bildynge of paalis, that he slee many 
issoulis. Forsothe he dispiside the ooth, 
that he shulde breke the boond of pees, 
and loo! he 3af his hoond; and whanne 
he hath do alle thes thingis, he shal not 
i9skape. Therfor thes thingis seith the 
Lord God, I lyue, for I shal putte in to 
his* heed the ooth that he dispiside, and 
20the boond of pees that he brak. And 
I shal holde forth vpon*t hym my nette, 
‘and he shal be cacchid in my nette", and 
Y sha] lede hym in to Babiloyne; and Y 
shal deme hym in the trespassynge, in 
21which he dispiside me: And alle the 
fleers of hym with al his company shulen: 
falle togidre in swerd, forsothe the resi- 
dues shulen be scatered in to eche wynd; 
and 3e shulen wite, for I the Lord haue 
22spoken. Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, And Y shal take of the merew3 of 
the hee3 cedre, and IY shal putte” of the 
cop* of his braunchis; the tendre I shal 
distreyne, and Y shal plaunte vponY an 
23 hei3 hil, and fer aperynge. And in the 
hei3 hil of Israel Y shal plaunte it; and 
it shal brest vp in to buriownynge, and 
shal make fruyte, and shal be in to a 
greet cedre, and alle briddis shulen dwelle 
vndir it; al volatile shal make nestis? 
2avndir the shadewe of his bouwis. And 
alle the trees of the cuntre shulen wite, 
for Y the Lord haue mekid the hei3 tree, 
and reyside the meke tree, and Y driede 
the grene tree, and Y made the drye tree 
for to florisshe; Y the Lord spak, and 
Y dide. 
CAP. XVIII. 
1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, selynge, What is it, that amonge 30u 
je turnen a parable in to this prouerbe, 
in the loond of Israel, seyynge, The fa- 
dris eeten a soure grape, and the teeth 
30f sones® wexen on egge? Y lyue, seith 


EZEKIEL. 


537 


castyng of erthe, and in bildyng of palis, 
that he sle many persones. For he dis-18 
piside the ooth, that he schulde breke the 
boond of pees, and lo! he 3af his hond; 
and whanne he hath do alle these thingis, 
he schal not ascape. Therfor the Lord 19 
God* seith these thingis, Y lyue, for Y 
schal sette on his heed the ooth which he 
dispiside, and the boond of pees which he 
brak. And Y schal spredde abrood my 20 
net on hym, and he schal be takun in my 
net, and Y schal brynge hym im to Ba- 
biloyne; and there Y schal deme hym in 
the trespassyng, bi which he dispiside 
me. And alle hise flieris awei with al his 21 
cumpenye schulen falle doun bi swerd, 
forsothe the remenauntis schulen be scha- 
terid in to ech wynd; and 3e schulen wite, 
that Y the Lord spak. The Lord God 22 
seith these thingis, And Y schal take of 
the merowe of an hi3 cedre, and Y schal 
sette a tendir thing of the cop of hise 
braunchis; Y schal streyne, and Y schal 
plaunte on an hi3 hil, and apperynge fer. 
In the hi3 hil of Israel Y schal plaunte it; 23 
and it schal breke out in to buriownyng, 
and it schal make fruyt, and it schal be 
in to a greet cedre, and alle briddis schu- 
len dwelle vndur it; ech volatil schal 
make nest vndur the schadewe of hise 
boowis. And alle trees of the cuntrei 24 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord; Y 
made low the hi3 tre, and Y enhaunside 
the low tre, and Y made drie the greene 
tree, and Y made the drie tree tu brynge 
forth boowis; Y the Lord haue spoke, 
and Y haue do. 


CAP. XVIII. 


And the word of the Lord was maadt 
to me, and he seide, What is it, that 3e2 
turnen a parable among 30u in to this 
prouerbe, in the lond of Israel, and seien, 
Fadris eeten a bittir grape, and the teeth 
of sones ben an! egge, ether astonyed? Y3 


ring. *Om.eprmu. tonepr.mu. tOm.4. VOm.G primu. Wkutten. * top 6H. 
YonGu. Znestecu. 4the sonys GH. 
kOm.n. lonkx. 
VOL. UI. 32 


538 


the Lord God, if this parable shal be 
more to 30u in to a prouerbe in Israel. 
4Loo! alle soulis ben myne; as the soule 
of the fadir, so and» the soule of the 
sone is myne. The soule that shal synne, 
sthe ilk shal die. And if a man sha) be 
just, and shal doo doom and ri3twisnes, 
6he shal not ete in the hillis, and shal not 
reyse his eyen to the ydolis of the hows 
of Israel; and he shal not defoule the wijf 
of his nei3bour, and shal not go to a 
menstruat womman, or 7m vnclene blood 
iflowing ; and he shal not make a man 
sorewful, he shal 3eelde the wed to the 
dettour, and he shal ranysshe no thing 
bi strength, he shal 3yue his breed to the 
hungrynge, and he shal hille the nakid 
swith clothing; he shal not leene to 
vsure, and shal not take more; he shal 
turne awey his hoond fro wickidnes, and 
he shal doo verre dom bitwix man and 
gman; and shal walke in my comaunde- 
mentis, and shal kepe my domys, that 
he doo treuth; he this is iust, in lijf he 
1oshal lyue, seith the Lord God. That if 
he shal gendre a sone, theef, shedynge 
110ut blood, aud shal doo oon of thes, and 
sotheli not doynge alle thes, but etynge 
in mounteyns, and defoulynge the wijf 
wof his neizbour; makynge the nedy aud 
pore sorewful, rauyshynge raueyns, not 
3eeldynge wed, reisynge his eyen to 
isydolis, doynge abomynacioun; 3yuynge 
to vsure, and takynge more; whether he 
shal lyue? he shal not lyue; whanne he 
shal doo alle thes cursyd thingis, he shal 
die bi deeth, the blood of hym shal be in 
ihym. That if he shal gendre a sone, 
whiche seynge alle thes synnes of his 
fader, which he hath don, shal drede, 
isand not doo liche thing to hem; shal not 
eete in hillis, and shal not reyse his eyen 
to the® ydolis of the hows of Israel; and 
shal not defoule the wijf of his nei3- 
16 bour, and shal not make a man sorewful, 
shal not withholde a wed, and shal not 


b Om. 4. 


m doith n. 


EZEKIEL. 


0 blood, ether synne 1. 


XVIII. 4—16. 


lyue, seith the Lord God, this parable 
schal no more be in to a prouerbe to 30u 
in Israel. Lo! alle soulis ben myne; as4 
the soule of the fadir, so and the soule of 
the sone is myn. Thilke soule that doith 
synne, schal die. And if a man is iust,s 
and doith doom and ri3tfulnesse, etith not6é 
in hillis, and reisith not hise izen to the 
idols of the hous of Israel; and defoulith 
not the wijf of his nei3bore, and neizeth 
not to a womman defoulid with vncleene 
blood; and makith not a man sori, 3eldith7 
the wed to the dettour, rauyschith no 
thing bi violence, 3yueth his breed to the 
hungri, and bilith a nakid man with a 
cloth; leeneth not to vsure, and takiths 
not more; turneth awei his hound fro wick- 
idnesse, and makith trewe dom bitwixe 
man and man; and goith in my co-9 
maundementis, and kepith my domes, that 
he do™ treuthe; this is a iust man, he 
schal lyue in lijf, seith the Lord .God. 
That if he gendrith a sone, a theef, shed-10 
inge out blood, and doith oon of thes1! 
thingis, and sotheli not doing alle these 
thingis, but etinge in hillis, and defoul- 
ynge the wijf of his neizjbore; makynge !2 
soreuful a nedy man and pore, rauysch- 
ynge raueyns, not 3eldinge a wed, reisynge 
hise i3en to idols, doynge abhomynacioun; 
3iuynge to vsure, and takynge more; whe-13 
ther he schal lyue? he schal not lyue; 
whanne he hath do alle these abhomyn- 
able thingis, he schal die bi deth, his 
blood" schal be in hym. That if he gen-14 
drith’ a sone, which seeth alle the synnes 
of his fadir, whiche he dide, and dredith, 
and doith noon lijk tho; etith not on hillis, 15 
and reisith not hise ijen to the idols of the 
hous of Israel; and defoulith not the wijf 
of his nei3bore, and makith not sori aié 
man, witholdith not a wed, and rauysch- 
ith not raueyn, 3yueth his breed to the 
hungri, and hilith the nakid with a cloth; 
turneth a wei his hond fro the wrong of17 
a pore man, takith not vsure and ouer- 


¢ Om. GH. 


© getith 1. 


XVIII. 17—25. 


rauyshe raueyne, shal 3yue his breed to 
the hungrynge, and shal hille the nakid 
17 with clothing; shal turne awei his hoond 
fro wroong of the pore man, shal not 
take vsure and onere-aboundance, and 
shal doo my domys, shal walke in my 
preceptis; this man shal not die in the 
wickydnes of his fadir, but in lijf he shal 
islyue. The fadir of hym, for he dide fals 
chalenge’, and dide strengthe, or violence, 
to his brother, and wrou3te yuel thing in 
the mydil of his puple, loo! he is deed 
19in his wickidnes. And 3e seyn, Whi 
berith not the sone the wickidnes of his 
fader? That is for to wite, for the sone 
wrou3te doom and ri3twisnes, he kepte 


alle my preceptis, and dide hem, in lijf _ 


20he shal lyue, seith the Lord God. The 
soule that shal synne, the ilke shal die; 
the sone shal not bere the wickidnes of 
the fader, and the fadir shal not bere the 
wickidnes of the sone; the ri3twisnes of 
the iust man shal be vpon® hym, and the 
vnpitousnes of the vnpitous man shal be 
2ivpon® hym. Forsothe if the vnpitous 
man shal doo penaunce of alle his synnes 
whiche he hath wrou3te, and shal kepe 
alle myn heestis, and shal doo doom and 
ri3twisnes, in lijf he shal lyue, and he 
22shal not die. I shal not haue mynde of 
alle the wyckidnessis whiche he wrou3te; 
‘in his rijtwisnesse whiche he wrou3t', he 
23shal lyue. Whether the deeth of the 
vnpitous man is of® my wil, seith the 
Lord God, and not that he be conuertid 
2sfro his weies, and lyne? Forsothe if a 
just man shal turne hym awei fro his 
rijtwisnes, and shal doo wickidnes, after 
alle the abomynaciouns whiche the vn- 
pytous man is wont for to worche, whe- 
ther he shal lyue? Alle his ri3twisnessis 
whiche he dide, shulen not be recordid ; 
in the trespassynge in which he tres- 
passide, and in the synne in’ which he 
assynnede, in hem he shal dye. And 3e 
seiden, The weie of the Lord is not euen. 


4 chalengynge eu. © on GH. 


POm.IN. QVat 


EZEKIEL. 


'Om. a. 


539 


habundaunce, ‘that is, no thing more than 
he lente?, and doith my domes, and goith 
in my comaundementis; this sone schal 
not die in the wickidnesse of his fadir, 
but he schal lyue in lijf For his fadiris 
made fals caleng, and dide violence to his 
brother, and wrou3te yuel in the myddis 
of his puple, lo! he is deed in his wickid- 
nesse. And 3e seien, Whi berith not the 19 
sone the wickidnesse of the fadir? That is 
to seie, for the sone wrou3te doom and 
ri3tfulnesse, he kepte alle my comaunde- 
mentis, and dide tho, he schal lyue in lijf. 
Thilke soule that doith synne, schal die; 2) 
the sone schal not bere the wickidnesse of 
the fadir, and the fadir schal not bere the 
wickednesse of the sone; the ri3tfulnesse 
of a iust man schal be on hym, and the 
wickidnesse of a wickid man schal be on 
hym. Forsothe if a wickid man doith2i 
penaunce of alle hise synnes whiche he 
wrou3te, and kepith alle myn_heestis, 
and doith dom and ri3tfulnesse, he schal 
lyue bi lijf, and schal not die. Y schal 22 
not haue mynde of alle his wickidnessis 
whiche he wrou3te; he schal lyue in his 
ri3tfulnesse which he wrou3te. Whether 23 
the deth of the? wickid man is of my 
wille, seith the Lord God, and not that 
he be conuertid fro his weies, and lyue? 
Forsothe if a iust man turneth awey hym 24 
silf fro his rijtfulnesse, and doith wickid- 
nesse bi alle hise abhomynaciouns, which a 
wickid man is wont to worche, whether he 
schal lyue? Alle hise ri3tfulnessis whiche 
he dide, schulen not be had in mynde; 
in his trespassyng bi which he trespasside, 
and in his synne which he synnede, he 
schal die in tho. And 3e seiden, The weie 25 
of the Lord is not euene. Therfor, the 
hous of Israel, here 3e, whether my weie 
is not euene, and not more 30ure weies 
ben schrewid? For whanne a ri3tful man 26 
turneth awei hym silf fro his riz3tfulnesse, 
and doith wickidnesse, he schal die in it, 
he schal die in the vnrijtwisnesse™ which 


8 Om. 6 prom.x. 4 Om, 4. 


? vnriztfulnesse CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX, 


3Z 2 


540 


Therfor here 3e, hous of Israel, whether 
my weye is not even, and not more 3o0ure 
26 weies ben shrewid? Forsothe whanne a 
just man shal turne awei him fro his 
ri3twisnes, and shal do wickidnes, he shal 
die in hem, in! the vnrijtwisnes which 
27 he wrou3t, he shal die. And whanne the 
vnpitous man shal turne hym awey fro 
his vnpite which he wrou3te, aud shal 
doo doom and ri3twisnes, he shal quykne 
28 his soule. Forsothe biholdynge and turn- 
ynge awei hym fro alle his wickidnessis 
whiche he wrou3te, he shal lyue in lijf, 
29and shal not die. And the sones of Israel 
seyn, The weie of the Lord is not euen. 
Whether my weies ben not even, 3e hous 
of Israel, and not more 3joure weies ben 
soshrewid ? Therfor I shal deme eche man 
after his weies, 3e hous of Israel, seith 
the Lord God. Be 3e conuertid, and doo 
3e penaunce fro alle 3our* wyckidnessis, 
and wickidnes! shal not be to 3ou in to 
ai falling doun. Caste 3e awei fro 30u alle 
3our trespassyngis, in whiche 3e han tres- 
passide, and make 3e to 30u a newe herte 
and a newe spirite, and whi shulen 3e 
32die, hous of Israel? For J wole not the 
deeth of the diynge, but that he be con- 
uertid and lyue, seith the Lord God ; 
turne 3e a3en, and lyue. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 And thou, sone of man, take to thee 
weilynge vpon™ the princis of Israel ; 
zand thou shalt seie, Whi thi modir, a 
liounesse, laie amonge lyouns? In the 
mydil of smale liouns she nurshide hir 
3whelpis, and ledde out oon of her litil 
liouns; he is maad a lioun, and lerned 
for" to take® pray, and for to ete man. 
4And heithen men herden of hym, and 
not with outen his woundis thei tokyn 
hym; and ladden hym in cheynes in to 
sthe loond of Egipt. Which whanne she 
see3, for she is maad sijk, and abidynge 
of hym perishide, took oon of hir litil 


iandinecu. * Om. ¢ pr.mu. 


$Om.1. tthanne whi 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


1 wickidnessis Gx. 


Uwe N. 


XVIII. 26—XIX. 5. 


he wrou3te. And whanne a wickid man 27 
turneth awei him silf fro his wickidnesse 
which he wrou3te, and doith dom and 
ri3tfulnesse, he schal quykene his soule. 
For he biholdinge and turnynge awei hym 28 
silf fro alle hise wickidnessis which he 
wrou3te, schal lyue in lijf, and schal not 
die. And the sones of Israel seien, The 29 
weie of the Lord is not euene. Whether 
my weies ben not euene, 3e hous of Israel, 
and not more 3oure weies ben schrewid ? 
Therfor, thou hous of Israel, Y schal deme 30 
ech man bi hise weies, seith the Lord God. 
Turne 3e togidere, and do 3e penaunce for 
alle 3oure wickidnessis, and wickidnesse 
schal not be to 30u in to falling. Caste! 
awei fro 3ou alle 3oure trespassingis, bi® 
whiche 3e trespassiden, and make 3e a 
newe herte and a newe spirit to jou, and 
whit schulen 3e" die, the hous of Israel ? 
For Y nyle’ the deeth of hym that dieth, 32 
seith the Lord God; turne 3e ajen, and 


lyue 3e. 


CAP. XIX. 


And thou, sone of man, take weiling! 
on the princes of Israel; and thou schalt 2 
seie, Whi thi modir, a lionesse, lai among 
liouns? In the myddis of litle liouns sche 
nurschide hir whelpis, and ledde out oon3 
of hir litle liouns; he was maad a lioun, 
and he lernyde to take prei, and to ete 
men. And hethene men herden of hym,4 
and token hym not withouten her woundis; 
and thei brou3ten hym in chaynes in to* 
the lond of Egipt. Which modir whanne5 
sche hadde seyn, that sche was sijk, and 
the abiding of hym perischide, took oon 
of her litle liouns, and made hym a lioun. 


Mong pr.m.H. 2 Om. 4. © Om. 4. 


vwille notr. Wofi * Om. Nn. 


XIX=-6—XX. 3. 


élyouns?, ordeynde hym a lyoun. And he 
lernede for to take pray, and for to de- 
7uoure men. He lernede for to make 
wydewis, and for to’ brynge citees in to 
deseert; and the loond is desolat and* the 
plente of it, of the vois of his rorynge. 
sAnd heithen men camen togidre a3ens 
hym on eche syde fro prouyncis, and 
stretchiden out her net vpon hym; in the 
9woundis of hem he is takyn. And thei 
senten hym in to a caue in cheynes, and 
thei ledden hym forth to the kyng of 
Babiloyne; and thei senten hym in to 
prisoun, lest his vois were herd more 
10 vpon’ the hillis of Israel. Thi modir as 
a vyn3erd in thi blood vpont water is 


plauntid; the fruytis of it and bouwis of _ 


iit wexeden of many watris. And sad 
3eerdis ben maad to it in to septris of 
men hauynge lordship, and the stature 
of it is enhaunsid among bouwis; and it 
see3 his heijnes in the multitude of his 
12siouns. And it is drawyn vp in wraththe, 
and caste in to the" erthe; and a bren- 
nynge wynd driede the fruyte of it, the 
3erdes of his strength welewiden, and ben 
13maad drie, fier ete it. And now it is 
plauntid ouere in deseert, in loond not 
14 wayed, or not hauntid, and thristie. And 
fier wente out of the j3erde of his 
braunchis, which ete the fruyte of it. 
And a stronge 3erde, a ceptre, or kyngis 
3erde, of men hauynge lordship, was not 
in it. Weilynge is, and shal be in to 


weilynge. 
CAP. XX. 


1 And it is maad in the seuenthe jeer, 
in the fifthe moneth, in the tenthe dai of 
the moneth, men of the eldris of Israel 
camen for to axe the Lord, and saten be- 

afore me. And the word of the Lord is 

3maad to me, selynge, Sone of man, speke 
thou to the eldre men of Israel; and thou 
shalt seie to hem, Thes thingis seith the 

rin 4. 


Plyoun «4. 4 Om. 4, 


ythilker. 2then. 


8 on G pr.m. in H. 


athe fier Fqu. 


EZEKIEL. 54) 


Which 3ede among liouns, and was maad« 
a lioun; and lernede to take prey, and to7 
deuoure men. He lernyde to make widewis, 
and to brynge the citees of men in to de- 
sert; and the lond and the fulnesse therof 
was maad desolat, of the vois of his roryng. 
And hethene men camen togidere ajens + 
hym on ech side fro prouynces, and spred- 
den on hym her net; he was takun in the 
woundis of thoY hethene men. And theis 
senten hym in to a? caue in chaines, and 
brou3ten hym to the kyng of Babiloyne; 
and thei senten hym in to prisoun, that 
his vois were no more herd on the hillis 
of Israel. Thi modir as a vyner in thio 
blood was plauntid on watre; the fruitis 
therof and the boowis therof encreessiden 
of many watris. And sadde 3erdis weren 11 
maad to it in to septris of lordis, and 
the stature therof was enhaunsid among 
boowis ; and it si3 his hi3nesse in the mul- 
titude of hise siouns. And it was drawun lz 
out in wraththe, and was cast forth in to 
erthe ; and a brennynge wynd dryede the 
fruyt therof, and the 3erdis of strengthe 
therof welewiden, and weren maad drie, 
and fier? eet it. And now it is plauntid 13 
ouer in desert, in a lond with out weie, 
and thristi. And fier 3ede out of thei 
jerde of the braunchis therof, that eet the 
fruyt therof. And a stronge 3erde, the cep- 
tre of lordis, was not in it. It is weilyng, 
and it schal be in.to weilyng. 


CAP cXX. 


Aud it was doon in the seuenthe 3eer, 1 
in the fyuethe monetlie, in the tenthe dai 
of the monethe, men of the eldris of Israel 
camen to axe the Lord; and thei saten 
bifor me. And the word of the Lord was2_ 
maad to me, and he seide, Sone of man,3 
speke thou to the eldere men of Israel ; 
and thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord 
u Om, Gn. 


t on G pr.m. it. 


b a CFGITIKMNPQRSUX. 


542 EZEKIEL. XX. 4—13. 


Lord God, Whether 3e camen for to axe 
me? Y lyue, for Y shal not answere to 
jou, seith the Lord God. Sone of man 
aif thou demest hem, if thou demist, shew 
thou to hem the abomynaciouns of her 
sfadris. And thou shalt seie to hem, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord, In the dai 
in which Y cheese Israel, and reiside myn 
hoond for the kynrede, or generaciouns*, 
of Jacobs hows, and aperide to hem in 
the loond of Egipt, and reiside myn 
hoond for hem, seiyuge, Y the Lord j3oure 
6 God, in that dai Y reiside myn hoond for 
hem, that Y shulde lede hem out of the 
loond of Egipt, in to the loond which 
Y hadde purueiede to hem, flowynge with 
mylk and hony, whiche is noble amonge 
zalle loondis. And Y seide to hem, Eche 
man caste awey the offensiouns of his 
eyen, and in the ydols of Egipt nyl* 3e 
8be defoulid; I the Lord 3our God. And 
thei wraththiden me, and thei wolden not 
here me; eche man castide not awey the 
abomynaciouns of his eyen, nether for- 
soke the ydols of Egipt. And Y seide, 
that Y shulde sheede* out myn indigna- 
cioun vponY hem, and shulde fulfille my 
wraththe in hem, in the mydil of the 
yloond of Egipt. And Y dide for my 
name, that it were not defoulid before 
heithen men, in whos mydil thei weren, 
and among whom I aperide to hem, that 
I shulde lede out? hem fro the lond of 
10oEgipt. Therfor Y castide out hem fro 
the lond of Egipt, and Y ledde out in to 
11 desert, and 3af to hem myn heestis, and 
Y shewide to hem my domys, whiche a 
12man shulde* doo, and lyue in hem. More 
ouere and I 3aue to hem my sabotis, that 
it were a signe bitwixe> me and hem, 
and thei shulden wite, for I the Lord 
ishalewynge hem. And the hous of Israel 
wraththide me in deseert; in my pre- 
ceptis thei walkiden not, and thei cast- 
iden awey my domys, whom a man do- 


¥ generacioun GH. W yuel GH. % caste & pr.m. 


§ demest hem 1 pr. m. NS sec. m. 


God seith these thingis, Whether 3e eamen 
to axe me? Y lyue, for Y schal not an- 
swere to 30u, seith the Lord God. Sone of 
man, if thou demest hem, if thou demest$, 4 
schewe thou to hem the abhomynaciouns 
of her fadris. And thou schalt seie to hem, s 
The Lord God seith these thingis, In the 
dai in which Y chees Israel, and reiside 
myn hond for the generacioun of the hous 
of Jacob, and Y apperide to hem in the 
lond of Egipt, and Y reiside myn hond 
for hem, and Y seide, Y am 30ure Lord 
God, in that dai Y reiside myn hond fore 
hem, that Y schulde leede hem out of the 
lond of Egipt, in to the lond which Y 
hadde purueiede to" hem, the! lond flow- 
ynge with mylk and hony, which is noble 
among alle londis. And Y seide to hem,7 
Ech man caste awei the offenciouns of 
hise ijen, and nyle 3e be defoulid in the 
idols of .Egipt; Y am 3oure Lord God. 
And thei terriden me to wraththe, ands 
nolden here me; ech man castide not awei 
the abhomynaciouns of hise ij3en; nether 
thei forsoken the idols of Egipt. And Y9 
seide, that Y wold schede out myn indig- 
nacioun on hem, and fille my wraththe in 
hem, in the myddis of the lond of Egipt. 
And Y dide for my name, that it schulde 
not be defoulid bifore hethene inen, in the 
myddis of whiche* thei weren, and among 
whiche! Y apperide to hem, that Y schulde 
lede hem out of the lond of Egipt. Ther-10 
for Y castide hem out of the lond of Egipt, 
and Y ledde hem out in to desert; and Y11 
jaf to hem my comaundementis, and Y 
schewide to hem my doomes, which a man 
schal do, and lyue in tho. Ferthermore 12 
and Y 3af to hem my sabatis, that it 
schulde be a sygne bitwixe me and hem, 
and that thei schulden wite, that Y am 
the Lord halewynge hem. And the hous13 
of Israel terriden me to wraththe in de- 
sert; thei 3eden not in my comaunde- 
mentis, and thei castiden awei my domes, 


H. Yoneu. 7Om. 4. 8 shal ex. © bytwene Hn. 


bforn. iar. * whom: 1 whom. 


XX. 14-24. 


ynge shal lyue in hem; and thei defoul- 
iden greetli my sabotis. Therfor I seide, 
that I shulde shede out my woodnes vp- 
on® hem in deseert, and destruye hem; 
isand Y dide for my name, lest I were 
defoulid before heithen men, of whom Y 
castide hem out in the si3te of hem. 
15 Therfor Y reiside myn hoond vpon* hem 
in deseert, that Y ledde lem not in to 
the loond which Y 3aue to hem, flowynge 
with mylk and hony, the best of alle 
lsloondis. For thei castiden awei my 
domys, and thei walkiden not in myn 
heestis, and thei defonleden my sabotis; 
forsothe the herte’ of hem wente after 
17idolis. And myn eye® sparide vpon hem, 
that I shulde not slee hem, nether Y 
18waastide hem in deseert. Forsothe Y 
seide to the sones of hem in wildirnes, 
In the preceptis of 3oure fadris nyle 3e 
goo, nether kepe 3e the domys of hem, 
nether be 3e defoulid in the idolis of hem. 
19 Y¥ the Lord 3our God, in my preceptis 
walke je, and kepe 3e my domys, and 
20 doo 3e hem. And halewe 3e my sabothis, 
that it be a tokne betwixe me and jou, 
and it be wist, for Y the Lord 3our God. 
21 And the sones of Israel wraththiden me, 
and thei walkiden not in my preceptis, 
and thei kepten not my domys, that thei 
shulden do hem, whiche whanne a man 
shal doo, he shal lyue in hem, and thei 
defouliden my sabotis. And I thretenede, 
that I shulde sheede out my woodnes vp- 
on§ hem, and shulde fulfille my wraththe 
22in hem in deseert. Y turnede awei* myn 
hoond, and Y dide this thing for my 
name, that it were not defoulid before 
heithen men, of whom I castide out hem 
23in the eyen of hem. Eftsoone Y reyside 
myn hoond in to hem in wildirnes, that 
Y shulde scatere hem in to naciouns, and 
24shulde wyndow hem in to loondis; for 
that that thei diden not my domys, and 
repreueden my preceptis, and defouleden 


ConeH. ‘hertisG prem.u. © eejen GH. 


mwhomt. "™ Om. 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


© Om. 1KMsvU. 


543 


whiche a man that doith, schal lyue in 
tho; and thei defouliden greetli my sa- 
batis. Therfor Y seide, that Y wolde schede 
out my strong veniaunce on hem in de- 
sert, and waste hem; and Y dide for my 14 
naine, lest it were defoulid bifor hethene 
men, fro whiche™ Y castide hem out in 
the si3t of tho. herfor Y reiside mynis 
hond on hem in the” desert, that Y brou3te 
not hem in to the lond which Y 3af to hem, 
the lond flowynge with mylk and hony, 
the beste of alle londis. For thei castiden 16 
awei my domes, and 3eden not in my co- 
maundementis, and thei defonliden my sa- 
batis; for the herte of hem 3ede after 
idols. And myn ize sparide on hem, that 17 
Y killide not hem, nether Y wastide hem 
in the® desert. Forsothe Y seide to the 1s 
sones of hem in wildirnesse, Nyle 3e go in 
the comaundementis of 3oure fadris, nether 
kepe 3e the domes of hem, nethir be 3e 
defoulid in the idols of hein. Y @m 30ure 19 
Lord God, go 3e in my comaundementis, 
and kepe 3e my domes, and do 3e tho. 
And halowe 3e my sabatis, that it be azo 
signe bitwixe me and 3ou, and that it be 
knowun, that Y am 30ure Lord God. And2i 
the sones terriden me to wraththe, and 
jeden not in my comaundementis, and 
kepten not my domes, that thei diden tho, 
whiche whanne a man hath do, he schal 
lyne in tho, and thei defouliden my sa- 
batis. And Y manaasside to hem, that Y 
wolde schede out my stronge veniaunce 
on hem, and fille my wraththe in hem in 
the? desert. But Y turnede awei myn 22 
hond, and Y dide this for my name, that 
it were not defoulid bifore hethene men, 
fro whiche Y castide hem out bifore the 
i3en of tho. Eft Y reiside myn hond a3ens 23 
hem in wildirnesse, that Y schulde scatere 
hem in to naciouns, and wyndewe hein in 
to londis; for that that thei hadden not 24 
do my domes, and hadden repreuyd my 
comanndementis, and hadden defoulid my 


fongprmnu. €oneH. Om. G prom H. 


P Om, IU. 


544 


my sabotis, and the eyen of hem weren 
2safter the idolis of her fadris. 
aud Y 3aue to hem preceptis not goode, 
and domys in whiche thei shulen not 
2slyue. And Y defoulede hem in her 
3iftis, whanne thei offriden al thing that 
opneth the wombe for her giltis; and thei 
27shulden wite, for Y the Lord. Wherfor, 
sone of man, spek thou to the hous of 
Israel, and thou shalt seie to hem, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, 3it and in 
thes thingis 3oure faders blasfemeden me, 
whanne thei despisynge hadden forsake 
28me, and Y hadde ledde hem in to the 
loond vpon which Y reyside myn hoond, 
that Y shulde 3yue it to hem, thei sawen 
eche hee3 litil hil, o rezsynge of greet 
hil, and eche tree ful of wode, and thei 
offreden there her slayn sacrifices for vic- 
torie, and 3auen there her offryngis in to 
wraththinge ; and thei puttiden there the 
odour of her swetnes, and sacrefieden her 
libaciouns, that ben of fletynge thingis, 
20as wiyn, oyle, and siche. And Y seide 
to hem, What is the hei3 thing, to whom 
3e entren ini? And the name of it is 
30 clepid Hee3 Thing til in to this dai. Ther- 
for sey thou to the hous of Israel, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, Certis in the 
weie of 3oure fadris 3e ben polut, or de- 
foulid, and after her offensiouns 3e don 
31 fornycacioun, and in offrynge of jour 
jiftis, whanne 3e leden ouer 3oure sones 
bi fier, 3e ben defoulid in alle 30ur ydols 
til to dai, and Y shal answere to 3o0u, the 
hous of Israel? Y lyue, seith the Lord 
32 God, for I shal not answere to 3ou; ne- 
ther the thenkynge of jour soule, or 
vaderstondynge, shal be maad, of men 
selynge, We shulen be as heithen men, 
as the kynredis of erthe, that we wor- 
33shipe trees and stoonus. Y lyue, seith 
the Lord God, for in strong hoond, and 
in* arm strau3t out!, and in woodnes shed 
3:out, Y shal regne vpon™ 3ou. And I shal 


i Om. 6 pr.im. H. 


4 Om. Ns sec. m. 


EZEKIEL. 


Therfor: 


k Om. 4. 


T setten 1. 


XX. 25——34. 


sabatis, and her i3en hadden be after the 
idols of her fadris. Therfor and Y 3af to 25 
hem comaundementis not good, and domes 
in whiche thei schulen not lyue. And Y 26 
defoulide hem in her 3iftis, whanne thei 
offriden to me for her trespassis al thing 
that openeth the wombe ; and thei schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord. Wherfor speke 27 
thou, sone of man, to the hous of Israel, 
and thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord 
God seith these thingis, 3it and in this 
3oure fadris blasfemyden me, whanne thei 
dispisynge hadden forsake me, and Y28 
hadde brou3te hem in to the lond on 
which Y reiside myn hond, that Y schulde 
3iue to hem, thei sizen ech hi34 litil hil, 
and ech tree ful of boowis, and thei of- 
friden there her sacrifices, and thei. 3auen 
there her offryngis, in to terring to 
wraththe; and thei settiden™ there the 
odour of her swetnesse, and thei offriden 
her moiste sacrifices. And Y seide to hem, 29 
What is the hi; thing, to whiche 3e entren? 
And the name therof is clepid Hi3 Thing 
til to this dai. Therfor seie thou to the 30 
hous of Israel, The Lord God seith: these 
thingis, Certis 3e ben defoulid in the weie 
of 3oure fadris, and 3e don fornycacioun 
aftir the offendingis of hem, and in the3l 
offryng of 3oure 3iftis, whanne 3e leden 
ouers 30ure sones bi fier, 3e- ben defoulid 
in alle 3oure idols til to dai, and schal Y 
answere to 30u', the hous of Israel? Y lyue, 
seith the Lord God, for Y schal not an- 
swere to 30u; nether the thou3te of 3oure 32 
soul schal be don, that seien, We schulen 
be as hethene men, and as naciouns of 
erthe, that we worschipe trees and stoonys. 
Y lyue, seith the Lord God, for in strong 33 
hond, and in arm stretchid forth, and in 
strong veniaunce sched out, I schal regne 
on 30u. And Y schal lede out 30u: fro34 
puplis, and Y schal gadere 30u fro londis, 
in whiche 3e ben scaterid ; in strong hond, 
and in arm stretchid forth, and in strong 


‘forth GH. ™ on GH. 


sOm.x. tOmnr 


XX. 35—44. 


lede out 3ou of puplis, and Y shal gadre 
30u of loondis, in whiche 3e ben scaterid; 
in strong hoond and arm strau3t forth, 
and in woodnes shed out I shal regne 
35vpon 3ou. And Y shal lede 3ou in to 
deseert of puplis, and I shal be demed 
3¢there with jou face to face. As bi doom 
Y stroof a3ens 3our fadris in deseert of 
the loond of Egipt, so Y shal deme 3ou, 
37Seith the Lord; and I shal make you 
suget to my ceptre, and Y" shal lede in 
38 30u in boondis of pees. And Y shal cheese 
of 3ou trespasseris, and vupitouse men; I 
shal lede out hem fro the loond of her 
cumlyngnes®, and thei shulen not entre 
in to the loond of Israel; and 3e shulen 


39 Wite, for Y the Lord. And 3e, the hous . 


of Israel, thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
3e eche walke after 3our idolis, and serue 
3e to hem. That and if in this thing 3e 
shulen not here me, and 3e shulen de- 
foule ouer myn hooli name in jour 3iftis, 
4oand in 3our ydolis, in myn hooli hil, in 
the hei3 hil of Israel, seith the Lord God, 
there al the hous of Israel shal serue to 
me; forsothe eche in the loond, in which 
thei shulen plese to me; and there I shal 
seche 3our prymysies, or first fruytis, 
and? the bigynnynge of 3our tithis in alle 
4130ur halewyngis. In to odour of swet- 
nes Y shal resseyue 30u, whanne Y shal 
lede 30u out of puplis, and shal gedre 
jou of loondis, in to whiche 3e ben sca- 
tered; and I shal be halewid in 3o0u in 
azeyen, or si3t, of naciouns. And 3e shulen 
wite, for I the Lord, whanne I shal lede 
jou in to the loond of Israel, in to the 
loond for which Y reyside myn hoond, 
43 that I shulde 3yne it to 3our fadris. And 
there 3e shulen bithenke in hem of jour 
weies, and of alle 3our grete trespassis, 
bi whiche 3e ben defoulid in hem; and 
3e shulen displese to 30u in 3our si3t, in 
salle 3our malices whiche 3e diden. And 
3e shulen wite, for Y the Lord, whanne I 


2 Om. G pr.m. H. 


v and F pr. m. GIKMNPS Sec. m. XY 


VOL. Il. 


EZEKIEL. 


° comlynge G pr. m. H. 


545 


veniaunce sched out Y schal regne on 3ou. 
And Y¥ schal bringe 3on in to desert of 35 
puplis, and Y schal be demed there with 
jou face to face. As Y stryuede in doom ss 
a3ens 3oure fadris in the desert of the lond 
of Egipt, so Y schal deme 30u, seith the 
Lord; and Y schal make 30u suget to my 37 
septre, and Y schal bringe in 30u in the 
boondis of pees. And Y schal chese of3s 
3ou trespassouris, and wickid men; and Y 
schal leede hem out of the lond of her 
dwelling, and thei schulen not entre in to 
the lond of Israel; and 3e schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord. And 3e, the hous of 39 
Israel, the Lord God seith these thingis, 
Go 3e ech man aftir 3oure idols, and serue 
3e tho. That and if 3e heren not me in 
this, and defoulen more myn hooli name 
in 30ure 3iftis, and in 3oure idols, in myn 40 
hooli hil, in the hi3 hil of Israel, seith the 
Lord God, 3e schulen be punyschid greu- 
ousliere. There al the hous of Israel schal 
serue me, sotheli alle men in the lond, in 
which thei schulen plese me; and there 
Y schal seke 3oure firste fruytis, and the 
bigynnyng of 3oure tithis in alle 3oure 
halewyngis. YY schal resseiue 30u in to4i 
odour of swetnesse, whanne Y schal leede 
3ou out of puplis, and schal gadere 3ou 
fro londis, in whiche 3e weren scaterid; 
and Y schal be halewid in 30u bifor the 
izen of naciouns”. And 3e schulen wite, 42 
that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal bringe 
jou in to the lond of Israel, in to the lond 
for which Y reiside myn hond, that Y 
schulde 3yue it to 3oure fadris. And 3e43 
schulen haue mynde there on 3oure weies, 
and on alle 3oure grete trespassis, bi whiche 
3e ben defoulid in tho; and 3e schulen dis- 
plese 30u in* 3oure si3t, im alle 3oure ma- 
lices whiche 3e diden. And 3e schulen wite, 44 
that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal do 
wel to 30u for my name; not bi 3oure yuel 
weies, nether bi 3oure worste trespassis, 
3e hous of Israel, seith the Lord God. 


Pin 4. 


wthe naciouns1 pr.m, * Om. 1. 


4A 


546 EZEKIEL. XX gee 


shal wel doo te 30u for my name; not 
after 3our yuel weies, nether after jour 
werst huge trespassis, 3e hous of Israel, 
4sseith the Lord God. And the word of 
ac6the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, Sone 
of man, put thou thi face ajens the weie 
of the south, and drop to the south wynd, 
and prophecy thou to the’ wodi place, or 
wildernes, of the myddai, or south, feeld. 
47And thou shalt seie to the myddai, or 
south, wodi place, Here thou the word of 
the Lord: Thes thingis seith the Lord, 
Loo! I shal kyndle in thee fier, and I 
shal togider brenne in thee eche grene 
tree, and eche drye tree; the flaume of 
brennynge shal not be quenchid, and eche 
face in it shal be brent togidre, fro the 
assouth vnto the north. And eche flesh 
shal see, for J the Lord brende it, and it 
49shal: not be quenchid. And Y seide, A! 
A! A! Lord God, thei seyn of” me, 
What this spekith bi parablis ? 


CAP. XXI. 
1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seiynge, Sone of man, put thou thi 
face to Jerusalem, and drop to the seyn- 
tuaries, and prophecy thou a3ens the erthe 
30f Israel. And thou shalt seie to the 
loond of Israel, Thes thingis seith the 
Lord God, Loo! I to thee, and J shal 
caste out my swerd of his sheethe, and 
I shal slee in thee the iust and the vnpi- 
4tous. .Forsothe for that that Y slew in 
thee the iust man and vnpitous, therfor 
my swerd shal goo out of his sheethe to 
eche flesh, 07 aan, fro the south vn to 
sthe north; that eche flesh wite, for I 
the Lord ledde out my swerd of his 
sheethe irrevocable, or that may not be 
gclepid ajen. And thou, sone of man, 
sorew withinforth in the contricioun of 
leendis, and thou shalt inwardli sorewe 
zin bitternessis bifore hem. And whanne 
thei shulen seie to thee, Whi sorewist 


And the word of the Lord was maad to45 
me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, sette 46 
thi face ajens the weie of the south, and 
droppe thou to the south, and profesie 
thou to the forest of the myddai feeld. 
And thou schalt seie to the myddai forest, 47 
Here thou the word of the Lordy. The 
Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
kyndle a fier in thee, and Y schal brenne 
in thee ech green tre, and ech drie tre; the: 
flawme of brennyng schal not be quenchid, 
and ech face schal be brent ther ynne, fro 
the south til to the north. And ech manas 
schal se, that Y the Lord haue kyndlid it, 
and it schal not be quenchid. And Y 49 
seide, A! A! A! Lord God, thei seien 
of me, Whethir this man spekith not bi 
parablis ? 


CAP. XXI. 


And the word of the Lord was maad} 
to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, 2 
sette thi face to Jerusalem, and droppe 
thou to the seyntuaries, and profesie thou 
a3ens the erthe of Israel. And thou schalt3 
seie to the lond of Israel, The Lord God 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y to thee, and Y 
schal caste’ my swerd out* of his schethe, 
and Y schal sle in thee a iust man and a 
wickid man. Forsothe for that that Y hanes 
slayn in thee a iust man and a wickid 
man, therfor my swerd schal go out of 
his schethe ‘to ech man, fro the south til 
to the north; that ech man wite, that Ys 
the Lord haue drawe? out my‘ swerd fro 
his schethe, that schal not be clepid ajen. 
And thou, sone of man, weile in sorewe6 
of leendis, and in bitternessis thou schalt 
weile bifore hem. And whanne thei schu-7 . 
len seie to thee, Whi weilist thou? thon 
schalt seie, For hering, for it cometh; and 


40m. G prem. to Hn. 


y Lord God 1 pr.m.Nn. 2 caste out Is. 


2Q0m.1. © led ceFGHIKMNPQRSU. ¢ the Nn, 


XXI. 8—r9. 


thou? thou shalt seie, For the herynge, 
for it cumimeth; and eche herte.shal faile, 
and alle hoondis shulen be vndon, and 
eche spirit shal be sijk, and bi alle kne3es 
watris shulen fleete; loo! it cummeth, and 
sit shal be maad, seith the Lord God. And 
the word of the Lord is.maad to.me, sei- 
gynge, Sone of man, prophecy thou; and 
thou, shalt seie,.Thes thingis. seith the 
Lord God, Spek thou, The werd; the 
1oswerd is whettid, and furbushid ; that it 
kitte, or slee, slayn sacrifices, it is whet- 
tid; that it shyne, it is furbushid. The 
which mouynge the ceptre of my sone, 
ilhast kitte doun eche tree. And Y 3aue 
hym for to be maad pleyn, that it be 


hold with hoond; this swerd is whettid, - 


and this is furbushid, that it be in the 
izhoond of the sleynge. Sone of man, cry 
thou, and goul, for this is maad in my 
puple, this in alle the duykis of Israel; 
thei that han fledde fro swerd ben bi- 
takyn with my puple. Therfor bete to- 
i3gidre hoondis vpon’ the hipe, for it is 
proued ;. and this thing whanne it* shal 
distruye the ceptre, and it shal not be, 
14seith the Lord God. Therfor thou, sone 
of man, prophecy, and smyit hoond to 
hoond, and the swerd be doublid, and 
the swerd of sleers be treblid; this is the 
swerd of greet sleynge, which shal make 
ishem greetli abaist, 07 mad, and for to 
faile in herte, and it multiplieth fallyngis. 
In alle the. 3atis of hem Y 3aue tugidre 
sturblynge of swerd, sharp and furbushid 
16for to shyne, clothid to sleynge. Be thou 
whettid, go thou to the ri3t, or to the left, 
‘whidir enere", is the appetit, 07 desier, 
170f thi face.. For and Y shal smyte with 
hoond'to hoond, and Y shal fulfille myn 
indignacioun; Y the Lord haue spokyn. 
isAnd the word of the Lord is maad to 
19me, seiynge, And thou, sone of man, put 
to thee two weies, that the swerd of the 
king of Babiloyne come; bothe shulen 


EZEKIEL. 


547 


ech herte shal faile, and alle hondis schu- 
len be aclumsid, and ech spirit schal be 
sike, and watris schulen flete doun bi alle 
knees; lo! it cometh, and it shal be don, 
seith the Lord God. And the word of thes 
Lord was maad to me, and he seide, Sones 
of man, profesie thou; and thou schalt 
seie, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Speke thou, The swerd, the swerd is maad 
scharp, and is maad bri3t; it is maad 10 
scharp to sle sacrifices; it is maad_ bri3t, 
that it schyne. Thou that mouest the 
ceptre of my sone, hast kit doun ech tree. 
And Y 3af it to be forbischid, that it bei 
holdun with hond; this swerd is maad 
scharp, and this is maad bri3t, that, it be 
in the hond of the sleere. Sone of man, 12 
crie thou, and 3elle, for this swerd is maad 
in my puple, this in alle the duykis of 
Israel; thei that fledden ben 3ouun to 
swerd with! my puple. Therfor smite thou 
on thin hipe, for it is.preuyd; and this13 
whanne it hath distried the ceptre, and 
it schal not be, seith the Lord God. Ther- 14 
for, sone of man, profesie thou, and smyte 
thou hond to hond, and the swerd be dou- 
blid, and the swerd of sleeris® be treblid!; 
this is the swerd of greet sleyng, that 
schal make hem® astonyed, and to faile in 15 
herte, and multiplieth fallingis. In alle the 
3atis of hem Y 3af disturbling of a" swerd, 
scharp and maad bri3t to schyne, gird to 
sleynge. Be thou maad scharp, go thon 16 
to the ri3t side, ether to the left side, 
whidur euer the desir of thi face is. Certis 17 
and Y schal smyte with hond! to hond, 
and Y schal fille myn indignacioun ; Y the 
Lord spak. And the word of the Lord 1s 
was maad to me, and he seide, And thou, 19 
sone of man, sette to thee twei weies, that 
the swerd of the king of Babiloyne come; 
bothe schulen go out of o* lond, and bi. 
the! hond he™ schal take coniecting ; he 
schal coniecte in the heed of the" weie of 
the® citee, settinge a weye, that the swerd 20 


u where ever GH. 


hOm.1. ithe hond1. Kther. |! Om. cereuiK 


Sinegn. tla. 
diny. ¢thesleers1. ftroublid r. & hym a. 
MNPQRSUX. ™Ya. OOm.K. © Om, CFGIKMNPQSUX. 


4A 2 


548 


goo out of o loond, and in hoond he shal 
take coniectynge’, o7 suspicioun; in heed 
of the waie of the citee he shal gesse, or 
20 thenke, puttynge a weie, that the swerd 
come to Rabath of the sones of Amon, 
and to Juda ‘in to” Jerusalem moost 
21 waardid, or strengthid. Forsothe the 
kyng of Babiloyne stode in the metynge of 
two weies, sechynge dyuynacioun, meng- 
ynge arowis; he axede ydolis, he coun- 
22 seilide entrailis. At the ri3t half of hym 
dyuynacioun is maad vpon Jerusalem, 
that he putte engynes, that he opyn the 
mouth in sleynge, that he reyse the vois 
in goulynge, that he putte engynes a3ens 
jatis*, that he bere togidre an heepe of 
2gerthe, that he bilde waardynge’. And 
he shal be as veynly counseilynge an- 
swere of God in the eyen of hem, and 
chaungyng the idilnes, o7 rest, of sa- 
botis; forsothe he shal haue mynde of 
24wickidnes, for to take. Therfor thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, For that 
that 3e han mynde of 3our wickidnes, 
and han? shewide 3our trespassingis, and 
jour synnes apereden in alle 3our thou3tis, 
for that sotheli that 3e hadden mynde, 3e 
25shulen be takyn bi the hoond. Thou so- 
theli, cursid vnpitous duyk of Israel, whos 
day determyned cometh in tyme of wick- 
26idnes, thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Do awey the mytre, tak awei the coroun; 
whether this is not which enhaunside the 
27 meke, and mekide the hei3? Y shal putte 
it wickidnes, wickidnes, wickidnes; and 
this thing is not don til he cam, whos 
the doom of God is, and shal be take to 
28hym. And thou, sone of man, prophecy, 
and sey, Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God to the sones of Amon, and to the 
shenship of hem; and thou shalt seye, 
Swerd, swerd, vnshethe thee for to slee, 
furbishe thee, that thou slee and shyne, 
29 whanne veyne thingis weren seen to thee, 
and leesyngis weren dyuynyd, that thou 


EZEKIEL. 


XXI. z20-—29. 


come to Rabath of the sones of Amon, 
and to Juda in to Jerusalem moost strong. 
For the king of Babiloyne stood in the21 
meeting of twey weies, in the heed of twei 
weies, and sou3te dyuynyng, and medlide 
arowis; he axide idols, and took councel 
at entrails. Dyuynyng was maad to? his 22 
ri3t side on Jerusalem, that he sette en- 
gyns, that he opene mouth in sleyng, that 
he reise vois in 3elling, that he sette en- 
gyns ajens the jatis, that he bere togidere 
erthe, that he bilde strengthinges. And 23 
he shal be as eounceling in veyn goddis 
auswer bifor the i3en of hem, and seru- 
ynge thei reste of sabatis; but he schal 
haue mynde on wickidnesse, to take. Ther- 24 
for the Lord God seith these thingis, For 
that that 3e hadden mynde on 3oure wick- 
idnesse’, and schewiden 3o0ure trespass- 
yngis, and 3oure synnes apperiden in alle 
3oure thou3tis, forsothe for that that 3e 
hadden mynde, 3e schulen be takun bi 
honds. But thou, cursid wickid duyk of Is- 25 
rael, whos dai bifor determyned! is comun 
in the tyme of wickidnesse, the Lord God 26 
seith these thingis, Do awei the mitre, take 
awei the coroun; whether it is not this¥ 
that reiside the meke man, and made low 
the hij man? Wickidnesse, wickidnesse, 27 
wickidnesse Y schal putte it; and this 
schal not be doon til he come, whos the 
doom is, and Y schal bitake to hym. And 28 
thou, sone of man, profesie, and seie, The 
Lord God seith these thingis to the sones 
of Amon, and to the’ schenschipe of hem; 
and thou schalt seie, A! thou swerd, A! 
thou swerd, drawun out to sle, maad bri3te, 
that thou sle and schyne, whanne veyn29 
thingis weren seien to thee, and leesingis 
weren dyuynyd, that thou schuldist be 
j3ouun on the neckis of wickid men wound- 
id, the dai of whiche bifore determyned 
schal come in the tyme of wickidnesse, 
turne thou ajen in to thi schethe, in to30 
the place in which thou were maad. Y 


VY iecturing & pr. m. H. coniecturing G sec.m. WinGH. the 3atis#. Ywardingiscy. * Om. 
G prom. H, 
Ponn. (tor, fT wickidnessisin. $the hond1. termed 1 pr.m. determed sec.m. he this 1. 


Vv Om. n. 


XXI. 30—-XXII. 10. 


shuldist be 30uen vpon the neckis of vn- 
pitouse men woundid, of whom the dai 
determyned shal come in tyme of wickid- 
zones. Turn a3en in to thi sheethe, ‘in to” 
the place in which thou art maad. In the 
3iloond of thi birth Y shal deme thee, and 
Y shal shede out vpon thee myn indig- 
nacioun ; in fier of my woodnes Y shal 
blowe in thee, and Y shal 3eue thee in to 
the hoondis of vnwijs men, and forgynge 
x2 perishynge, or deeth. Thou shalt be 
meet to fier, thi blood shal be in the 
mydil of erthe; thou shalt be bitakyn to 
for3etynge, for I the Lord haue spokyn. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to. 


2me, seiynge, And thou, sone of man, 
whether thou demest not the citee of 
3bloodis ? And thou shalt shewe to it alle 
her abomynaciouns, and thou shalt seie, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord God, The 
citee shedynge out blood in the mydil of 
it, that the tyme of it cumme; and which 
made ydols a3ens it silf, that it were po- 
4lutid, or defoulid. Iu thi blood that is 
shed out of thee, thou trespassidist, and 
in thin ydolis whiche thou madist thou 
art defoulid; and thou madist thi daies 
for to nei3, and leddist to the tyme of thi 
3eeris. Therfor I 3aue thee shenship to 
heithen men, and scornynge to alle loondis 
sthat ben besidis; and thei that ben fer 
fro thee shulen haue victorie of thee, thou 
6foule, noble, greet in perishing. Loo! 
the princes of Israel, eche in her arm, 
weren in thee, for to shede out blood. 
7 Thei punyshiden with wroongis the fadir 
and moder in thee, thei falsly chaleng- 
iden a cumlynge in the mydil of thee, 
thei maden sorewful fadirles and moder- 
‘sles and widewe anentis thee. 3e han dis- 
piside my seyntuaries, and 3e han defoulide 
9my sabotis. Men bacbiters weren in thee, 
for to shede out blood, and vpon moun- 
teyns thei eten in thee; thei wrou3ten 
10 greet trespas in the mydil of thee. Fa- 


EZEKIEL. 


549 


schal deme thee in the lond of thi birthe, 
and Y schal schede out myn indignacioun 31 
on thee; in the fier of my strong ven- 
iaunce Y schal blowe in thee, and Y schal 
3yue thee in to the hondis of vnwise men, 
and makinge deth. Thou schalt be mete 32 
to fier, thi blood schal be in the middis of 
erthe; thou schalt be 3ouun to forjetyng, 
for Y the Lord spak. 


CAP. XXII. 


And the word of the Lord was maadi 
to me, and he seide, And thou, sone of2 
man, whether thou demest not the citee 
of bloodis? And thou schalt schewe to it3 
alle hise abhomynaciouns, and thou schalt 
seie, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
This is a citee schedinge out blood in the 
myddis of it silf, that the tyme therof 
come; and which made idols a3ens it silf, 
that it shulde be defoulid. In thi blooda 
which is shed out of thee, thou trespass- 
idist, and thou art defoulid in thin idols 
whiche thou madist; and thou madist thi 
daies to neize, and thon brou3tist the time 
of thi 3eeris. Therfor Y 3af thee* schen- 
schipe to hethene men, and scornyng to 
alle londis that ben ni3 thee, and thats 
ben fer fro thee; thou foul citee, noble, 
greet in perisching, thei schulen haue vic- 
torie of thee. Lo! princes of Israel, allec 
in her arm, weren in thee, to schede out 
blood. Thei punyschiden with wrongis7 
fadir and modir in thee, thei calengiden 
falsli a comelyng in the myddis of thee, 
thei maden sori a fadirles child and a 
widewe at thee. 3e dispisiden my seyn-8 
tuaries, and 3e defouliden my sabatis. Men 9 
bacbiteris weren in thee, to schede out 
blood, and eten on hillis in thee; thei 
wrou3ten greet trespas in the myddis of | 
thee. Thei vnhiliden the schamefulere io 


Zin G pr.m. B. 


w Om. N. 


X thee éo be 1. 


550 


dris vnhilliden in thee more shameful 
thingis, thei meekeden in thee the vnclen- 
lines of the menstruate womman. Eche 
man wrou3te abomynacioun in to the 
wijf of his nei3bour, and the husbondis 
fader defoulide his sonys wijf; vnleuefuli 
the brother oppresside ‘in thee* his sistyr, 
12the dou3ter of his fader. Thei token 
3iftis, for to sheede out blood at thee; thou 
tokist vsure and oueraboundaunce, and 
gredili, or coueytously, thou falsly cha- 
lengidist® thi neijbours, and hast forjete 
13me, seith the Lord God. Loo! I haue 
smytin togider myn hondis vpon thin 
aueryce, or gredynes, which thou didist, 
and vpon the blood that® is shed out in 
i4the mydil of thee. Whether thin herte 
shal susteyne*’, or thin hoondis shulen 
haue power in the dais whiche'I shal 
make to thee? Forsothe Y the Lord 
1sspak, and Y shal doo. And I shal seater 
thee in to naciouns, and I shal wyndewe, 
‘or blowe®, thee in to loondis; and I shal 
make thi vnelennes to fayle fro thee, 
isand I shal weelde thee in the si3t of 
heithen'men; and thou shalt wyte, for I 
17the Lord. And the word of the Lord is 
ismaad to me, seiynge, Sone of man, the 
hous of Israel is turnyd in to drosse, or 
syndre; alle thes bras, and tyn, and yren, 
and leed, in the mydil of fourneys, ben 
igmaad drosse of siluer. Therfor thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, For that 
that 3e alle ben turned in to drosse, ther- 
for loo! I shal gedre 30u in the mydil of 
20 Jerusalem, a gedrynge of siluer, and bras, 
and yren, and tyn, and leed, in the mydil 
of the fourneys; and I shal teende a fier 
in it, to welle togidre; so Y shal gedre 
jou in my woodnes, and in my wraththe, 
and I shal reste a3en. And I shal welle 
2130u togidir, and I shal gadre 3ou, and 
I shal kyndil 30u in fier of my woodnes, 
aud 3e shulen be wellid togidre in the 
gze2mydil of it. As siluer is wellid to gidre 
in mydil of the fourneis, so shulen 3e be 


a2Om. 4. > chalengist nu. 


Yofn. 7Om.1. Aaandn. 


EZEKIEL. 


¢ which H. 


b a furneis IN. 


XXIL, 11-22. 


thingis of. the fadir in thee, thei maden 
low in thee the vnelenesse of a womman 
in vnelene blood. . And ech man wrou3te11 
abhomynacioun ajens the wijf of his nei3- 
bore, and the fadir of the hosebonde de- 
foulide his sones wijf vnletefuli; a bro- 
ther oppresside in thee. his sister, the 
dou3tir of his fadir. Thei token 3iftis atY i2 
thee, to schede out blood; thou tokist 
vsure and ouerabundannce, and thou ca- 
lengidist greedili thi nei3boris, and thou 
hast for3ete me, seith the Lord God. Lo!13 
Y haue smyte togidere myn hondis on 
thin aueryce, which thou didist, and on 
the blood which is sched out in the 
myddis of thee. Whether thin herte schal 14 
susteyne, ether thin hondis schulen haue 
power in the daies whiche Y schal make 
to thee? For Y? the Lord spak, and Y 
schal do. And Y schal scatere thee in to1s 
naciouns, and Y schal wyndewe thee in 
to londis; and Y schal make thin vnelen- 
nesse to faile fro thee, and Y schal welde ic 
thee in the si3t of hethene men; and thou 
schalt wite, that Y am the Lord. Andi7 
the word of the Lord was maad to me, 
and he seide, Thou,'sone of man, the hous 1s 
of Israel is turned to me in to dros, ether 
Jilthe of irun; alle® these ben bras, and 
tyn, and irun, and leed, in the myddis of 
furneis®, thei ben maad the dros of siluer. 
Therfor the Lord God seith these thingis, 19 
For that alle 3e .ben turned in to dros, 
lo! Y schal gadere 30u togidere in the 
myddis of Jerusalem, bi gadering® togi- 20 
dere of siluer, and of latoun, and of irun, 
and of tyn, and of leed, in the myddis of 
furneis’; and Y schal.kindle ther ynne a. 
fier, to welle togidere; so Y schal gadere 
30u togidere in’ my strong veniaunce, and 
in my wraththe, and Y schal reste. And 
Y schal welle 30u togidere, and Y schal2! 
gadere 30u togidere, and Y schal sette 30u 
a fier in the fier of my strong veniaunce, 
and 3e schulen be wellid togidere in the 
myddis therof. As siluer is wellid togi- 22 


d suffre cH. ¢ Om. GH. 


¢ the gaderyng 1. 4a furneis EFHIKMQRSU. 


XXII. 23-—XXIII. 3. 


in the mydil of it; and 3e shulen wite, for 
Y the Lord, whanne Y haue shedde out 
23myn: indignacioun vpon 30u. And the 
word of the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, 
24 Sone of man, sey to it, Thou art the vn- 
clene loond, not reynyd togidir in the 
2dai of woodnes. Coniurisoun of pro- 


phetis in the mydil of it; as a Houn ror-- 


ynge and takynge pray, thei deuoureden 
soule, or dijf,; of the nedi man, and thei 
token priys; thei multiplieden widewis 
26of it in the mydil of it. The preestis of 
it dispiseden my lawe,.and defouleden 
my seyntuaries; thei hadden no difference 
bitwix hooli and vnhooli, thei vndirstoden 
not bitwixe vnclene and clene thing; and 


thei turneden awey her eyen fro my. sa- . 


botis, and Y was defoulid in the mydil 
270f hem. The princis of it in thef mydil 
of it as wulues rauyshynge pray, for to 
shede out blood, and for to lese soulis, 
ggand gredili suynge wynnyngis. Forsothe 


the prophetis of it dawbiden hem with, 


outen temperure, seynge veyn thingis, 
and dyuynynge lesynges to hem, seiynge, 


Thes thingis seith the Lord God, whanne 


29the Lord spak not. Puplis of the loond 
falsli chalengiden fals chalenge, and vio- 
lentli rauysheden the nedi man, and tour- 
mentiden the pore man; and thei oppress- 
iden the cumlynge with fals chalenge, 
30 With outen dvom. And Y sou3te ‘of 


hem a man, that shulde bitwene putte’ 


an hegge, and stonde sette euen a3ens 
me fro the loond, leste Y shulde distruye 

31it, and Y foond not. And Y shedde out 
myn indignacioun vpon hem, and in the 
fier of my wraththe Y waastide hem; Y 
3eelde the weye of hem in to the heed of 
hem, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXIII. 


i And the word of the Lord» is maad to 
2me, seyynge, Sone of man, two wyminen 
3weren dou3tris of o modir, and thei diden 


f Om. G prom. H. 


© coniuracioun 1, 


g Om, a. 


f Om. n. 


EZEKIEL. 551 


dere in the myddis of a furneis, so 3e 
schulen be in the myddis therof; and 3e 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord, whanne 
Y haue sched out myn indignacioun on 
jou. And the word of the Lord was maad 23 
to me, and he seide, Sone of man, seie 24 
thou to it, Thou art a lond vneleene, and 
not bireyned in the dai of strong ven- 
iaunce. Sweringe togidere, ether conspir-25 
inge® of profetis is in the myddis therof; 
as a lioun roringe and takinge prei, thei 
deuouriden men, thei token richessis and 
prijs; thei multiplieden widewis therof in. 
the myddis therof. Preestis therof dispis- 2s 
iden my lawe, and defouliden my seyn- 
tuaries; thei hadden not difference bi- 
twixe hooli thing and vnhooli, thei vndur- 
stoden not bitwixe defoulid thing and 
cleene thing; and thei turnéden awei her 
izen fro my sabatis, and Y was defoulid 
in the myddis of hem. The princes therof 27 
in the myddis therof weren as wolues 
rauyschinge prey, to schede out blood, and 
to leese men, and in suynge lucris gredili. 
Forsothe the profetis therof pargetiden 2s 
hem with out temperure, and se3en veyn 
thingis, and dyuyneden leesingis to hem, 
and seiden, The Lord God seith these 
thingis, whanne the Lord spak not. The29 
puples of the lond calengiden fals caleng, 
and rauyschiden bi violence; thei turment- 
iden a nedi man and pore, and oppressiden 
a comeling bi fals caleng, with out doom. 
And! Y sou3te of hem a man, that schulde 30 
sette an hegge bitwixe, and stonde set 
ajens me for the lond, that Y schulde 
not distrie it, and Y foond not. And Ys: 
schedde out on hem myn _ indignacioun, 
and Y wastide hem in the fier of my 
wraththe; Y® 3eldide the weie of hem on 
the heed of hem, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXITI. 


And the word of the Lord was maad to1 
me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, twei2 
wymmen weren the dou3tris of o modir, 


b Lord God u. 


gand Y x. 


552 


fornycacioun in Egipt, in her 3ongth thei 
diden fornyeacioun; there the breestis, 
or tetis, of hem ben vndirled, and the 
tetis of her puberte, that is, tyme of ma- 
4viage, ben broken. Forsothe the names 
of hem, Oolla the more, and Ooliba the 
lesse sister of hir. And Y hadde hem, 
and thei baren child, sones and dou3tris ; 
sotheli the names of hem, Samarie Oolla, 
sand Jerusalem Ooliba. Therfor Oolla 
dide fornycacioun vpon me, and wexe 
woode in to her loueres, in to Assiriens 
6neizynge, clothid with iacynct, princis, 
and magistratis, 3onge men of coueiting, 
alle kny3tis, or rydynge men, stiers vp 
70f horsis. And she 3af her fornycaciouns 
vpon hem, the chosyn sonys of alle As- 
siriens, alle and in alle in to whom she 
wexe woode, in the vnclennes of hem she 
sis defoulid. More ouere and she lefte 
not hir fornycaciouns, whiche she hadde 
in Egipt; for whi and thei slepten with 
hir in the 3ongth of hir, and thei togidre 
braken the brestis of hir puberte, and 
shedden out her fornycacioun vpon hir. 
9Therfor Y bitook hir in to the hoondis 
of hir louers, in to the hoondis of the 
sonys of Assur, vpon whos letchery she 
1owas woode. Thei vnhilliden the yuel 
fame of hir; thei token the sonys and 
dou;tris of hir, and slewen hir in swerd ; 
and thei ben maad famous, or sclaundrid, 
wyimmen, and thei diden domys in to hir. 
1 Which thing whanne hir sistir Ooliba 
hadde seen, she wexe woode in Jecherie 
more than she, and she 3af vncehastili, or 
with outen shame, hir fornycacioun, ouer 
12 the fornycacioun of hir sister, to the sonys 
of Assiriens, to duykys and magistratis 
comynge to hir, clothide with dyuerse 
clooth, to kny3tis that weren born in 
horsis, and 3onge men in noble fourme, 
1307 shapplt‘, to alle men. And Y saw3 
14that o weye of bothe was defoulid, and 
she encreside hir fornycaciouns. And 
whanne she see3 men peyntid in a wal, 


EZEKIEL. 


XXII. 4—14. 


and diden fornycacioun in Egipt; in her3 
jonge wexynge age thei diden fornica- 
cioun; there the brestis of hem weren 
maad low, and the tetis of the tyme of 
mariage of hem weren brokun. Forsothe - 
the names of hem ben, Oolla, the more 
sistir, and Ooliba the lesse sistir of hir. 
And Y hadde hem, and thei childiden 
sones and dou3tris; certis the names of 
hem ben Samarie Oolla, and Jerusalem 
Ooliba. Therfor Oolla dide fornicaciouns 
on me, and was wood on hir louyeris, on 
Assiriens neizinge, clothid with iacinct,6 
princes, and magistratis, 3onge men of 
coueytise, alle kni3tis, and» stieris of horsis. 
And sche 3af hir fornicaciouns on hem, on7 


‘alle the chosun sones of Assiriens; and in 


alle on whiche sche was wood, sche was 
defoulid in the vnclennessis of hem. Fer-s 
thermore and sche lefte not hir fornica- 
ciouns, whiche sche hadde in Egipt; for 
whi and thei slepten with hir in the 
3ongthe of hir, and thei braken the tetis 
of the tyme of mariage of hir, and thei 
scheden out her fornicacioun on_hir. 
Therfor Y 3af hir in to the hondis of hiro 
louyeris, in to the hondis of the sones of 
Assur, on whos letcherie sche was wood. 
Thei diskyueriden the schenschipe of hir ; 10 
thei token awei the sones and the dou3tris 
of hir, and killiden' hir with swerd; and 
the wymmen weren maad famouse, that 
is, sclaundrid, and thei diden domes in 
hir. And whanne hir sistir Ooliba hadde 11 
seyn this, sche was wood in letcherie more 
than that ststre, and 3af vnschamefastli 
hir fornicacioun on the fornicacioun of hir 
sistre, to the sones of Assiriens, to duykis 12 
and magistratis comynge to hir, that 
weren clothid with dyuerse cloth, to 
kny3tis that weren borun on horsis, and 
to 3onge men with noble schap, to alle 
men. And Y si3 that o weie of both sis-13 
tris was defoulid, and sche encreesside hir 14 
fornyeaciouns. And whanne sche hadde 
seyn men peyntid in the wal, the ymagis 


i schap cu. 


h Om. n. 


1 thei killiden 1. 


XXIII. 15—25- 


the ymagis of Caldeis expressid, o7 
isopnyd, in colours, and gird the reyns 
with kny3tis girdlis, and cappis died, o7 
steyned, in the heedis of hem, the 
fourmes of alle duykis, liknes of the 
sones* of Babiloyne, and of the loond of 
16 Caldeis, in whiche thei ben born; and 
she wexe woode a3ens hem in coueitise 
of hir ei3en, and sente messageris to hem 
17in to Caldee. And whanne sonys of Ba- 
biloyne cam to hir, to the couche of hir 
tetis, thei defouleden hir in her lecheries 
of defoulynge of maydynhod; and she is 
defoulid of! hem, and the soule of hir is 
isfulfillid of hem. And she made nakid 
hir fornyeaciouns, and discouerede hir 


euyl fame; and my soule wente awey fro. 


hir, as my soule hadde gon awey fro hir 
i9sister. Forsothe she multipliede hir for- 
nycaciouns, bithenkynge the dais of hir 


3ongth, in whiche she dide fornycacioun . 


20in the loond of Egipt. And she wexe 
woode bi letcherie vpon the liggynge bi 
of hem, whos flesshis ben as the flesshis 
of assis, and as fluxis, or rennyngis, of 
2ithorsis the fluxis of hem. And thou 
hast visitide the grete trespassis™ of thi 
jongth, for thi brestis ben vndirled in 
Egipt, and the teetis of thi pubertee ben 
aetogidre brokyn. Therfor, thou Ooliba, 
thes thingis seith the Lord God, Loo! 
Y shal reyse alle thi loueris ajens thee, 
of whiche thi soule is fulfild, and Y shal 
a3gadre hem ajens thee in cumpas; the 
sonys of PBabiloyne, and alle the noble 
Caldeis, and tyrauntis, and princis, alle” 
the sonys of Assyriens, and 3onge men 
in noble fourme, duykis, and magistratis, 
alle priucis of princis, and the named 
2astiers of horsis. And thei shulen come 
vpon thee, maad redy with chaare and 
wheel, the multitude of puplis shulen be 
armed ajens thee on eche syde with hau- 
berioun, and sheeld, and heline; and I 
shal 3yue before hem doom, and thei 


EZEKIEL. 5 


53 


of Caldeis expressid with colouris, and 1s 
gird on the reynes with kniztis girdlis, 
and cappis peyntid in* the heedis of hem, 
the foormes of alle duykis, the licnesse of 
the sones of Babiloyne, and of the lond 
of Caldeis, in which thei weren borun ; 
sche was wood on hem bi coueitise of hir 16 
ijen, and sche sente messangeris to hem 
in to Caldee. And whanne the sones of 17 
Babiloyne weren comun to hir, to the 
bed of tetis, thei defouliden hir in her 
letcheries of virgyns; and sche was de- 
foulid of hem, and the soule of hir was 
fillid of hem. Also sche made nakid hir 1s 
fornicaciouns, and diskyuered hir schen- 
schipe ; and iny soule 3ede awei fro hir, 
as my soule hadde go awei fro hir sistir. 
For sche multiplied hir fornicaciouns, and 19 
hadde mynde on the daies of hir 3ongthe, 
in whiche sche dide fornicacioun in the 
lond of Egipt. And sche was wood ing 
letcherie on the liggyng bi of hem, whos 
fleischis ben as the fleischis of assis, and 
as the membris of horsis ben the membris 
of hem. And thou visitidist the grete21 
trespas of thi 3ongthe, whanne thi brestis 
weren maad low in Egipt, and the tetis 
of the tyme of thi mariage weren brokun. 
Therfor, thon Ooliba, the Lord God seith 22 
these thingis, Lo! Y schal reise alle thi 
louyeris ajens thee, of whiche thi soule 
was fillid, and Y schal gadere hem ajens 
thee in cumpas; the sones of Babiloyne, 23 
and alle Caldeis, noble and mi3;ti men, and 
princes, alle the sones of Assiriens, and 
jonge men of noble foorme, duykis, and 
magistratis, alle princes of princes, and 
named stieris of horsis. And thei araied 24 
with chare and wheel schulen come on 
thee, the multitude of puplis schulen be 
armed with haburioun, and seheeld, and 
basynet, ajens thee on ech side; and Y 
schal 3yue doom bifor hem, and thei sehu- 
len deme thee bi her domes. And Y schal2s 
sette my feruour in thee, which thei schu- 


asshulen deme thee in her domys. And Y len vse with thee in woodnesse; thet ° 
kOm.cn. lina. ™ trespasse ew. 45 and alle 
Kk on Ins. 
VOL. III. 4B 


554 


shal putte myn enuye®, or wraththe, in 
thee, which thei haunten with thee in 
woodnes; thei shulen kitte of thi noose 
and thin eeris, and whiche thingis shulen 
dwelle, thei shulen kytte of with swerd ; 
thei shulen take thi sonys and thi don3- 
tris, and thi last shal be deuoured in fier. 
26 And thei shulen vnelothe thee thi elothis, 
and shulen take awei the vessels of thi 
27glorie. And Y shal make thi grete tres- 
passis? for to reste of thee, and thi for- 
nyeacioun of the loond of Egipt; nether 
thou shalt reyse thin eyen to hem, and 
thou shalt no more haue mynde of Egipt. 
28For thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Loo! Y shal bitake thee in to the hoondis 
of hem whom thou hatidist, in to the 
hoondis of whyehe thi soule is fulfillid. 
29 And thei shulen doo with thee in haate, 
and thei shulen take alle thi traueilis, 
and shulen leeue thee nakid, and ful of 
euyl fame; and the euyl fame of thi for- 
nycaciouns, shal be shewid. Thi greet 
sotrespas and thi fornyeaciouns han don 
thes thingis to thee; for thou didist for- 
nyeacioun after heithen men, amonge 
whom thou art defoulid in ydolis of hem. 
31 Thou wandridist’ in the weye of thi 
sistir, and Y shal 3yue the euppe of hir 
3z2in thin hoond. Thes thingis seith the 
Lord God, Thou shalt drynke the euppe 
of thi sister, deep and brood; and thou 
shalt be in to scornynge, and vndirmow- 
ynge, whiche thou art moost able to take. 
33 Thou shalt be fulfillid with drunkenes 
and sorewe, the euppe of mournynge and 
heuynes, the cuppe of thi sister Samarie. 
31 And thou shalt drynke it, and drynke of 
yn to the drestis, and thou shalt deuoure 
the relyues of it, and thou shalt to-teere 
thi breestis, for I spak, seith the Lord 
39God. Therfor thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, For thou hast for3ete me, and caste 
me fer after thi bak, and thou beere thi 
grete trespassis" and thi fornycaciouns. 
3¢6 And the Lord seith to me, seiynge, Sone 


© haat Gu. P trespasse GH. 


EZEKIEL. 


4 wandrist. GH. 


XXII. 26—36. 


schulen kitte awei thi nose and thin eeris, 
and thei schulen sle with swerd tho thingis 
that weren left; thei schulen take’ thi 
sones and thi dou3tris, and thi laste thing 
schal be deuourid bi fier. And thei schulen 26 
make thee nakid of thi clothis, and thei 
schulen take awei the vessels of thi glorie. 
And Y sehal make thi greet trespasse to27 
reste fro thee, and thi fornicacioun fro 
the lond of Egipt; and thou sechalt not 
reise thin i3en to hem, and thou sehalt no 
more haue mynde on Egipt. For the2s 
Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
3yue thee in to the hondis of hem whiche 
thou hatist, ‘in to! the hondis of hem of 
whiche thi soule was fillid, and thei schu-29 
len do with thee in hatrede. And thei 
sehulen take awei alle thi trauels, and 
thei sehulen leeue thee nakid, and ful of 
schenschipe ; and the schenschipe of thi 
fornicaciouns schal be schewid. Thi greet 
trespas and thi fornyeaciouns han do these 39 
thingis to thee; for thou didist forniea- 
eioun aftir hethene men, among whiche 
thou were defoulid in the idols of hem. 
Thou 3edist in the weie of thi sister, and si 
Y schal 3yne the ecuppe of hir in thin 
hond. The Lord God seith these thingis, 32 
Thou sehalt drinke the euppe of thi sistir, 
the depthe, and the broodnesse; thou that 
art most able to take, sehalt be in to 
scornyng, and in to mouwyng. Thou3s 
schalt be fillid with drunkenesse and so- 
rewe, with the cuppe of mourenyng and 
of heuynesse, with the euppe of thi sister 
Samarie. And thou sehalt drynke it, and 34 
thou schalt drinke of til to the drastis, 
and thou sehalt deuoure the relifs therof,. 
and thou schalt to-reende thi brestis, for 
Y the Lord spak, seith the Lord God. 
Therfor the Lord God seith these thingis, 35 
For thou hast forj3ete me, and hast east 
forth me bihynde thi bodi, bere thou also 
thi greet trespas and thi fornicaciouns. 
And the Lord God seide to me, and spak, 36 
Sone of man, whether thou demest Ooliba 


F trespasse GH.. 


land into A pr. m. 


XXIII. 37—47. 


of man, whether thou demyst Ooliba and 
Oolla, and shewist to hem the grete tres- 
37 passis of hem? For thei han don auow- 
trie, and blood in the hoondis of hem, 
and thei diden fornycacioun with her 
ydolis; more ouere thei offren to hem her 
sonys for to be deuourid, whiche thei 
ssgendriden to me. But and this thing 
thei diden to me, thei defouleden my 
seyntuaries in that dai, and thei pro- 
phaneden, or maden vnhooli, my sabotis. 
39 And whanne thei offreden her sonys to 
her ydolis, and entriden my seyntuarie in 
that day, for to defoule it, and also thei 
diden thes thingis in the mydil of myn 
4ohous. Thei senten to men comynge fro 


fer, to whom thei senten messageris. And ~ 


so loo! thei camen, to whom thou wash- 
idist thee, and al about anoyntidist thin 
eyen with oynement of wymmen, and art 
410urned with wommans atyre. Thou hast 
setyn in a bed moost fayr, and a bord is 
ourned before thee; thou puttidist my 
tymyame, or encense, and myn oynement 
4zvpon it. And a voys* of multitude ioi- 
ynge' without forth was in it; and in the 
men that weren led to of the multitude 
of men, and camen fro deseert, puttiden 
rengis in the hoondis of hem, and faire 
43corownys in the heedis of hem. And Y 
seide to hir, that is defoulid in auowtries, 
Now also this shal doo fornycacioun in 
4thir fornyeacioun. And thei wenten to 
hir as to a womman hoore, so thei en- 
triden to Oolla and to Ooliba, cursid 
4swymmen. ‘Therfor thes men ben iust, 
thes shulen deme hem in doom of auow- 
tres", and in dome of sheding out blood ; 
for thei ben auowtreris, and blood in the 
hoondis of hem, and with her ydolis thei 
46doon fornycacioun. Forsothe the Lord 
God seith thes thingis, 3it brynge the 
multitudis, and bitak hem in to noys and 
ajzraueyn; and be thei stonyd with stoonys 
of puplis, and be thei doluen with swerdis 
of hem. Thei shulen sle the sones and 


5 noys AG sec. m. 


mM bi CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


EZEKIEL. 


t goyng G prim. UL. 


555 


and Oolla, and tellist to hem the grete 
trespassis of hem? For thei diden auow-37 
trie, and blood was in the hondis of hem, 
and thei diden fornicacioun with her idols; 
ferthermore .and thei offriden to tho the 
sones whiche thei gendriden to me, for to 
be deuourid. But also thei diden this to3s 
me, thei defouleden my seyntuarie in that 
dai, and maden vnhooli my sabatis. Andso 
whanne thei sacrifisiden her sones to her 
idols, and entriden in to my seyntuarie 
in that dai, that thei schulden defoule it, 
thei diden also these thingis in the myddis 
of myn hous. Thei senten to men com-40 
yng fro fer, to whiche thei hadden sent 
messangeris. ‘Therfor lo! thei camen, to 
whiche thou waischidist thee, and anoynt- 
idist thin izen with" oynement of wym- 
men, and thou were ourned with wym- 
mens atier. Thou satist in a ful fair bed, 41 
and a boord was ourned, bifor thee; thou 
settidist myn encense and myn oynement 
on it. And a vois of multitude makynge 42 
ful out ioye was ther ynne; and in men 
that weren brou3t of the multitude of men, 
and camen fro desert, thei settiden bies 
in the hondis of hem, and faire corouns 
on the heedis of hem. And Y seide to43 
hir, that was defoulid in anoutries, Now 
also this" schal do fornycacioun in hir for- 
nicacioun. And thei entriden to hir; as to44 
a womman, an hoore, so thei entriden to 
Oolla and to Ooliba, cursid wymmen. 
Therfor these men ben iust, these schulen 45 
deme thilke .wymmen bi the doom of 
auoutressis, and bi the doom of hem that 
scheden out blood; for thei ben auou- 
tressis, and blood zs in the hondis of hem, 
and thei diden fornicacioun with her idols. 
For the Lord God seith these thingis, 46 
Bringe thou multitudis to® hem, and 3yue 
thou hem in to noise, and in to raueyn; 
and be thei stoonyd with the stoonys of47 
puplis, and be thei stikid togidere with 
the swerdis of hem. Thei schulen sle the 
sones and the doustris of hem, and thei 


U quoutressis GH. 


n sche this 1. © of 2. 


4B 2 


556 


don;tris of hem, and thei slulen brenne 
48 with fier the housis of hem. And Y shal 
doo awei greet trespas fro erthe; and alle 
wymmen shulen lerne, lest thei doon 
agafter the greet trespas of hem. And thei 
shulen 3yue 30ur greet trespas vpon 300; 
and 3e shulen bere the synnys of 3our 
idolis, and 3e shulen wite, for I the Lord 
God. 
CAP. XXIV. 

1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
me, in the nynthe 3eer, and in the tenthe 
moneth, the tenthe day of the moneth, 

2seiynge, Sone of man, wrijt thou to thee 
the name of this dai, in whoin the kyng 
of Babiloyne is confermyd a3ens Jerusa- 

3lem to day. And thou shalt seye bi 
pronerbe a parable to the hous, terrer to 
wraththe, and thou shalt speke to hem, 
Thes thingis seith the Lord, Put thou a 
brasen pot, sotheli put thou, and send in 
ato it water; tak toa beest moost fat. Put 
togidre the gobetis of it in to it, eche 
good part, and the thi3, and the shuldre, 
schosyn and ful of boonus. And mak to 
gidre heepis of boonus vndir it; and the 
sethinge of it buylide vp, and the boonns 
6ben ful sothen in the mydil therof. Ther- 


for thes thingis seith the Lord God, Woo - 


to the citee of blodis, to the pot whos 
rust is in it, and the rust therof wente 
not out of it; caste it out bi partis, and 
bi his partis; soort, ov dof, felle not vpon 


7it. Forsothe the blood therof is in the’ 
mydil therof; he shedde it out vpon the 


moost cleer stoon, he shedde it not out 
vpon erthe, that it nay be keuered with 
sdust, that Y shulde lede in aboue myn in- 
dignacioun, and in veniaunce be’ vengid; 
Y 3aue the blood therof vpon the mvost 
ocleer stoon, lest it were keuered. Ther- 
for thes thingis seith the Lord God, Woo 
to the citee of bloodis, of whom I shal 
10make greet hepe of stickis in fier; gadir 
the boonus, whom Y shal brenne with 
fier; fleshis shulen be waastid’, and al 


Om. 6 prim. H. 


POr.N. 4 terrer me k. 
W my veniaunce 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


T sende CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


XXIII. 48—XXIV. ro. 


schulen brenne with fier the housis of 
hem. And Y schal do awei greet trespas 48 
fro the lond; and alle wymmen schulen 
lerne, that thei do not aftir the greet 
trespas of hem. And thei schulen 3yue4s 
3oure grete trespas on 30u ; and 3e schulen 
bere the synnes of 3oure idols, and 3e 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord God?. 


CAP. XXIV. 


And the word of the Lord was maad}! 
to me, in the nynthe 3eer, and in the 
tenthe monethe, in the teuthe dai of the 
monethe, and he seide, Thou, sone of inau, 2 
write to thee the name of this dai, in 
which the king of Babiloyne is confermed 
a3ens Jerusalem to dai. And thou schalt3 
seie bi a prouerbe a parable to the hous, 
terrere’ to wraththe, and thou schalt speke 
to hem, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Sette thou a brasun pot, sette thou so- 
theli, and putte’ thou watir in to it. Take 
thou a beeste ful fat; gadere thou togi-4 
dere the’ gobetis therof in‘ it, ech good 
part, and the hipe, and the schuldre, 
chosun thingis and ful of boonys. Also5 
dresse thou heepis of boonys vndur it; and 
the sething therof buylide out, and the 
boonys therof weren sodun in the myddis 
therof. Therfor the Lord God seith these 6 
thingis, Wo to the citee of bloodis, to the 
pot whos rust is ther ynne, and the rust 
therof 3ede not out of it; caste thou out 
it® bi partis, and bi hise partis; lot felle 
not on it. For whi the blood therof is in7 
the myddis therof; he schede it out ona 
ful cleer stoon, he schedde not it out on 
erthe, that it mai be hilid with dust, thats 
Y schulde bringe in myn indignacioun, 
and ‘avenge’ bi veniaunce”; Y 3af the 
blood therof on a ful cleer stoon, that it 
schulde not be hilid. Therfor the Lord» 
God seith these thingis, Wo to the citee 
of bloodis, whos brennyng Y schal make 
greet; gadere thou togidire boonys, whiche 10 
Y schal kyndle with fier; fleischis schulen 


W waast H. 


Sthin, tintos. tOm.1. 


Vv venge I. 


XXIV. 11—22. 


the making togidre shal be sothen, and 
11 boonus shulen faile. And put thou it 
void vpon coolis, that it wexe hoot, and 
the brasse therof melte, and the foulynge 
therof* be wellid to gidre in the mydil 
therof, and the rust of it be waastid. 
12 With myche traueile it is’ maad in sweet, 
and the myche rust of it wente not out 
_utherof, nether bi fier. Thin vnclennes 
cursid ; for I wolde clense thee, and 
thou art not clensid fro thi filthis; but 
nether thou shal be clensid eer, til Y shal 
make myn indignacioun for to reste in 
i4thee. I* the Lord spak; it shal come, 
-and Y shal doo, Y shal not passe, nether 
spare, nether Y shal be plesid; after thi 


weies and after thi fyndyngis to Y dem-~ 


15 ede thee, seith the Lord. And the word 
isof the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, Sone 
of man, loo! Y take fro thee the desyrable 
thing of thin eyen in plage, or wounde, 
and thou shalt not mourne, nether weepe, 
ijnether thi teeris shulen flowe. Thou 
stillynge sorewe inward, thou shalt not 
make mournynge of* deede men; be thi 
coroun about boundyn to thee, and thi 
shoon shulen be in thi feet, nether with 
clooth thou shalt veile, ov hzjde, mouthis, 
nether thou shalt ete meet> of mourn- 
isynge men. Therfor Y spak to the puple 
in the mornynge, and my wijf is deed in 
the enenynge; and I dide, as he comaund- 
igide tome. And the puple seide to me, 
Whi shewist thou not to vs what thes 
20thingis bitokenen, that thou dost? And 
Y seide to hem, The word of the Lord 
21is maad to me, seiynge, Spek thou to the 
hows of Israel, Thes thingis seith the 
Lord God, Loo! Y-shal defoule my seyn- 
tuarie, the pryde of 30ur empyre, and 
desyrable thing of 3our eyen, and vpon 
which 3our soule dredith; and 3our sonys 
and 3o0ur dou3ters, whom 3e laften, shulen 
22falle in swerd. And 3e shulen doo, as Y 
dide; 3e shulen not hide mouthis with 
clooth, and 3e shulen not ete metis of 


xofitcn. Y Om. G prom. 


EZEKIEL. 


557 
be wastid, and al the settyng togidere 
schal be sodun, and boonys schulen faile. 
Also sette thou it voide on coolis, that the i1 
metal therof wexe hoot, and be meltid, 
and that the filthe therof be wellid togi- 
dere in the myddis therof, and the rust 
therof be wastid. It was swat bi myche 12 
trauel, and the ouer greet rust therof 3ede 
not out therof, nether bi fier. Thin vn-1is 
clennesse 7s abhomynable, for Y wolde 
clense thee, and thon art not clensid fro 
thi filthis; but nether thou schalt be clensid 
bifore, til Y make myn indignacioun to 
reste in thee. Y the Lord spak; it schal 14 
come, and Y schal make, Y schal not 
passe, nethir Y schal spare, nether Y sclial 
be plesid; bi thi weies and bi thi fynd- 
yngis Y schal deme thee, seith the Lord. 
And the word of the Lord was maad tots 
me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, lo! 16 
Y take awei fro thee the desirable thing of 
thin i3en in veniaunce, and thou schalt not 
weile, nether wepe, nether thi teeris schu- 
len flete doun. Weile thou beynge stille, 17 
thou schalt not make mourenyng of deed 
men; thi coroun be boundun aboute thin 
heed, and thi schoon schulen be in the 
feet, nether thon schalt hile the mouth 
with a cloth, nether thou schalt ete the 
metis of mourneris. Therfor Y spak to1s 
the puple in the morewtid, and my wijf 
was deed in the euentid; and Y dide in 
the morewtid, as he hadde comaundid to 
me. - And the puple seide to me, Whi19 
schewist thou not to vs what these thingis 
signefien, whiche thou doist ? And Y 2 
seide to hem, The word of the Lord was 
maad to me, and he seide, Speke thou to 21 
the hous of Israel, The Lord God seith 
these thingis, Lo! Y schal defoule my 
seyntuarie, the pride of 3oure empire, and 
the desirable* thing of 3oure ijen, and on. 
which 3oure soule dredith; and 3oure sones 
and 3oure dou3tris, whiche 3e leften, schu- 
len falle bi swerd. And 3e schulen do, as22 
Y dide; 3e schulen not hile mouthis with 

b metis GH. 


z2Om a4. @in Hw. 


x desiderable 1. 


558 EZEKIEL. XXIV. 23—-XXV. 5. 


23men mournynge. 3e shulen haue corouns 
in 30ur heedis, and shoon in feet; 3e shu- 
len not weile, ne wepe, but faile for leenes 
in 3our wickidnessis; and eche man shal 

2agsorewe to his brother. And Ezechiel 
shal be to 30u in to a wonder bitoknynge 
thing to come ; after alle thingis that he 
dide, 3e shulen doo; whanne‘ this thing 
shal come, 3e shulen wite, for Y the Lord 

25God. And thou, sone of man, loo! in the 
dai in which Y shal take fro hem the 
strength of hem, and ioye of dignytee, 
and desyre of her eyen, vpon which the 
soulis of hem resten, the sones and the 

2a¢dou3tris of hem; in that dai whanne a 
man fleynge shal come to thee, that he 

27 telle to thee; sotheli in that dai thi mouth 
shal be openyd with hym that fleeth*; 
and thou shalt speke, and thon shalt not 
be stille more; and thou shalt be to hem 
in to a wonder, and 3e shulen wite, for I 
the Lord. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
zme, seiynge, Sone of man, put thou thi 
face ajens the sonys of Amon, and thou 
3shalt prophecie of hem. And thou shalt 
seie to the sonys of Amon, Here 3e the 
word of the Lord God; thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, For that that 3e seiden, 
Wew! wew! or scorn, or repref, vpon my 


seyntuarie, for it is polutid, and vpon- 


the loond of Israel, for it is desolatid, 
and vpon the hous of Juda, for it is led 
4in to caitifdoom ; therfor loo! Y shal 
bitake thee to sones of the eeste in 
to eritage, and thei shulen togidir sette 
her fooldis in thee, and shulen putte her 
tentis in thee; thei shulen ete thi fruytis, 
sand thei shulen drynke thi mylk. And 
I shal 3yue Ramath in to dwellynge of 
camelis, and the sonys of Amon in to 
couche of beestis; and 3e shulen wite, for 


© and whan H. 


cloth, and 3e schulen not ete the mete of 
weileris. 3e schulen haue corouns in 3oure 23 
heedis, and schoon in the feet; 3e schulen 
not weile, nether 3e schulen wepe, but 3e 
schulen faile in wretchidnesse, for joure 
wickidnessis; and ech man schal weile to 
his brother. And Ezechiel schal be toza 
3ou in to a signe of thing to comynge; bi 
alie thingis whiche he dide, 3e schulen do, 
whanne this thing schal come; and 3e 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord God. 
And thou, sone of man, lo! in the dai ines 
which Y schal take awei fro hem the 
strengthe of hem, and the ioie of dignyte, 
and the desire of her i3en, on whiche the 
soulis of hem resten, caste awei the sones 
and dou3trisY of hem; in that dai whanne 26 
a man fleynge schal come to thee, to telle 
to thee; in that dai sotheli thou sehalt27 
opene thi mouth with hym that fledde; 
and thou schalt speke, and schalt no more 
be stille; and thou schalt be to hem in to 
a signe of thing to comynge, and 3e schu- 
len witen, that Y am the Lord. 


CAP. XX. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man,2 
sette thi face a3ens the sones of Amon, 
and thou schalt profesie of hem. Ands 
thou schalt seie to the sones of Amon, 
Here 3e the word of the Lord God; the 
Lord God seith these thingis, For that 
that 3e seiden, Wel! wel! on my seyn- 
tuarie, for it is defoulid, and on the londz 
of Israel, for it is maad desolat, and on 
the hous of Juda, for thei ben led* in to 
to caitifte; lo! therfor Y schal 3yue thee4 
the sones of the® eest in to eritage, and 
thei schulen sette her foldis in thee, and 
thei shulen sette her tentis in thee; thei 
schulen ete thi fruytis, and thei schulen 
drynke thi mylk. And Y schal 3yue Ra-s 
bath in to a dwellyng place of camels, and 
the sones of Amon in to a bed of beestis; 
and 3e schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 


d flee H. 


y the douztrist. Zhond apr.m left a prim. »Om.N. 


XXV. 6—17. 


6Y the Lord. For thes thingis seith the 
Lord God, For that that thou idiedist 
with hoond, and smytidist with foot, 
and ioiedist of al thi wil vpon the loond 
7of Israel; therfor loo! Y shal stretche 
forth myn hoond vpon thee, and Y shal 
bitake thee in to rauyshinge of heithen 
men, and Y sha) slee thee of puplis, and 
Y shal leese fro loondis, and togidre de- 
foule; and 3e shulen wite, for Y the Lord. 
’Thes thingis seith the Lord God, For 
that that Moab and Seyr seyden, Loo! 
as alle heithen men the hous of Juda; 
9therfor loo! Y shal opyn ‘the shulder of 
Moab of cytees, sotheli of his cytees and 
of his coostis, the noble of erthe, Bechies- 


10 moth, and -Beelmoth, and Cariathaym, to ~ 


the sones of the este, with the sones of 
Amon. And Y shal 3eue it in to eritage, 
that the mynde of the sones of Amon be 
tinamore in folkis, and in Moab Y shal 
make domes; and thei shulen wite, for I 
i2the Lord. Thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, For that that Ydume dide ven- 
iaunce, that she shulde venge hir of the 
sones of Juda, and synnede trespasynge, 
13and axede veniaunce of hem; therfor 
thes thingys seith the Lord God, Y shal 
stretche out myn hoond vpon Ydume, 
and shal take awey fro it man and beest, 
and Y shal make it deseert fro the south; 
and thei that ben in Dedan shulen falle 
iin swerd. And Y shal 3yue my ven- 
iaunce vpon Ydume, bi the hoond of my 
puple Israel; and thei shulen doo in 
Edom after ny wraththe, and my wood- 
nes; and thei shulen wite my veniaunce, 
1sseith the Lord God. Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, For that that Palestyns 
diden veniaunce, and vengiden hem silf 
with al inwit, sleynge and fulfillynge 
isoolde enemytees; therfor thes thingis 
seith the Lord, Loo! Y shal stretche out 
myn hoond vpon Palestyns, and Y shal 
slee the sleers, and Y shal lese the re- 
17lyues of the see cuntree ; and Y shal doo 
in hem grete veniaunces, repreuynge in 


Cofssec.m. 4 of FGIMNPQSUX. 


e Om. IN. 


EZEKIEL. 559 


For the Lord God scith these thingis, For « 
that that thou flappidist with hond, and 
smytidist with the foot, and ioyedist of 
al desijr on® the lond of Israel; therfor7 
lo! Y schal stretche forth myn hond on 
thee, and Y schal 3yue thee in to rauysch- 
yng of hethene men, and Y schal sle thee 
fro puplis, and Y schal leese thee, and al 
to-breke thee fro londis; and 3e schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord. The Lord Gods 
seith these thingis, For that that Moab 
and Seir seiden, Lo! the hous of Juda is 
as‘ alle folkis; therfor lo! Y schal openes 
the schuldre of Moab of citees, sotheli of 
citees therof and of the endis therof, the 
noble citees of the lond, Bethiesmoth, and¢ 
Beelmoth, and Cariathaym, to the sones to 
of the eest, with the sones of Amon. And 
Y schal 3yue it in to eritage, that mynde 
of the sones of Amon be no more among 
hethene men, and in Moab Y schal makew 
domes; and thei schulen wite, that Y am 
the Lord. The Lord Godf seith these tz 
thingis, For that that Ydumee dide ven- 
iaunce, that it avengide it silf of the sones 
of Juda, and synnede doynge trespas, and 
axide greetli veniaumce of hem; therfor1s 
the Lord God seith these thingis, Y schal 
stretche forth myn hond on Idumee, and 
Y schal take awei fro it man and beeste, 
and Y schal make it desert of the south; 
and thei that ben in Dedan schulen falie 
bi swerd. And Y schal 3yue my ven-14 
iaunce on Idumee, bi the hond of my pu- 
ple Israel; and thei schulen do in Edom 
bi my wraththe, and bi my strong ven- 
iaunce; and thei schulen knowe my ven- 
iaunce, seith the Lord God. The® Lord1s 
God seith these thingis, For that that Pa- 
lestyns diden veniaunce, and auengiden 
hem silf, with al wille sleynge, and fillynge 
elde enemytees; therfor the Lord God1¢ 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y sclial stretche 
forth myn hond on Palestyns, and Y schal 
sle sleeris, and Y schal leese the reme- 
nauntis of the se coost; and Y schal make 17 
grete veniaunces in hem, and Y schal re- 


fOm.n. & And the 1.. 


560 


woodnes; and thei shulen wite, for Y the 
Lord, whanne Y shal 3yue my veniaunce 
vypon hem. 


CAP. XXVI. 


1 And it is doon in the elleuenthe 3eer, 
in the first® of the moneth, the word of 
athe Lord is maad to me, seiynge, Sone of 
man, for that that Tyrus seide of Jeru- 
salem, Wew! or coye, the 3atis of puplis 
ben togidre broken, it is conuertid to 
me; Y shal be fulfillid, it is deseert ; 
stherfor thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Loo! Y vpon thee, Tyre; and Y shal 
make many folkis for to stie vp to thee, 
aas the see flowynge stieth vp. And thei 
shulen scatere the wallis of Tyre, and 
thei shulen distruye the touris therof; 
and I shal shaue the dust of it fro it, 
and Y shal 3yue it in to a moost cleer 
sstoon. Driyng of nettis it shal be in the 
mydil of the see, for Y spak, seith the 
Lord God. And it shal be in to rauysh- 
synge to folkis. And the dou3ters therof 
that ben in the feeld, shulen be slayn 
with swerd ; and thei shulen wite, for Y 
z7the Lord. For thes thingis seith the 
Lord God, Lo! I shal brynge to Tyre 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, fro 
the north, kyng of kyngis, with horsis, 
and charis, and horsmen, and cumpanye, 
sand greet puple. He shal slee bi swerd 
thi dou3tris that ben in the feeld; and 
he shal enuyroune thee with waardyngis, 
and he shal brynge togider the heepe of 
erthe in cumpas, and he shal reise vp 
ga3zens thee a sheld. And he shal tempre 
engynes in maner of vynes, and engynes 
in maner of wetheres in to thi wallis; and 
he shal destruye thi touris in his aarmer. 
10 With ynne flowynge of his‘ horsis, the 
dust of hem shal keuere thee; of the 
sowne of horsmen, and wheelis, and charis 
thi wallis shulen be moued; whanne he 
shal goo in the jatis, as bi entryngis of 


€ firste day #. 


hand n. 
KMNPQRSUX. 


stize vp1. k Om. a. 


EZEKIEL. 


I till 1 pr. m. 


XXVI. 1—r0o. 


preue in strong veniaunce; and thei schu- 
len wite, that Y am the Lord, whanne Y 
schal 3yue my veniaunce on hem. 


CAP. XXVI. 


And it was doon in the enleuenthe 3eer, 1 
in the firste dai of the monethe, the word 
of the Lord was maad to me, and he 
seide, Thou, sone of man, for that thatz 
Tire seide of Jerusalem, Wel! the jatis of 
puplis ben brokun, it® is turned to me; 
Y schal be fillid, it is forsakun; therfor3 
the Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! Tire, 
Y on thee; and Y schal make many folkis 
to stie! to thee, as the see flowynge stieth. 
And thei schulen distrie the wallis of Tire, 4 
and thei schulen distrie the touris therof ; 
and Y schal rase the dust therof fro it, 
and Y schal 3yue it* in to a ‘moost clere! 
stoon. Driyng of nettis schal be in thes 
myddis of the see, for Y spak, seith the 
Lord God. And T%re schal be in to ra- 
uysching to hethene men. And the dou3-6 
tris therof that ben in the feeld, schulen - 
be slayn bi swerd; and the: schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord. For whi the Lord7 
God seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
brynge™ to Tire Nabugodonosor, the" 
king of Babiloyne, fro the north, the kyng 
of kyngis, with horsis, and charis, and 
kny3tis, and with a cumpeny, and greet 
puple. He schal sle bi swerd thi dou;triss 
that ben in the feeld, and he schal cum- 
passe thee with strengthingis, and he schal 
bere togidere erthe in cumpas. And he 
schal reise a scheeld a3ens thee, and heo 
schal tempre engynes lije vineres, and en- 
gines ‘that ben® clepid wetheris a3ens thi 
wallis; and he schal distrie thi touris bi 
his armure. Bi flowynge of his horsis, 10 
the dust of tho schal hile thee; thi wallis 
schulen be mouyd of the soun of kny3tis, 
and of wheelis, and of charis; whanne he 
schal entre bi the jatis, as bi entryngis of 
a citee distried, with the clees of hise tt 


f Om, 4. 
© Om. CEFGHI 


msende Rsec,m. %Om.N. 


XXVI. 11—20. 


ithe citee distruyed, or scatered, with the 
feet of his horsis he shal defoule alle thi 
stretis. He shal sle bi swerd thi puple, 
and thi noble ymagis shulen falle in to 
1zerthe. Thei shulen waaste thi ri3tchessis, 
and thei shulen rauyshe thi marchaun- 
disis; and thei shulen distruye thi wallis, 
and thei shulen vndir-turne thi ful clere 
housis, and thei shulen putte thi stoonus, 
and thi trees, and thi poudre in the mydil 
130f watris. And Y shal make the multi- 
tude of thi songsters for to reste, and the 
sown of thin harpis shal namore be herd ; 
i4and Y shal] 3yue thee in to a moost cleer 
stoon. Thou shalt be driynge of? nettis in 
the mydil see", nether thou shalt more be 


bildid, for Y the Lord spak, seith the Lord . 


15 God. Thes thingis seith the Lord God to 


Tire, Whether not of the soun of thi fall- . 


ynge, and of the sorewynge of thi slayn 
men, whanne thei shulen be slayn in the 
mydil of thee, ylys shulen be moued to 
is gider ? And alle princis of the see shulen 
cum doun fro! her seetis, and thei shulen 
‘doo awei her spuylis, and thei shulen 
caste awei her dyuerse clothingis, and 
thei shulen be clothid with greet dreed. 
In the erthe thei shulen sitte, and thei 
astonyed vpon fhi sodeyn fal shulen 
17wondre. And thei takynge to vpon thee 
lamentacioun, shulen seie to thee, How 
pershidist thou, noble citee, that dwellist 
in the see, which was stroong in the see 
with thi dwellers, whom alle men dred- 
isden? Now shippis shulen wondre in the 
day of thi dreed, and ylis in the see 
shulen be sturblid, for that that no man 
i9goth out of thee. For thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, Whanne Y shal 3yue thee 
a citee desolat, as cytees that ben not 
enhabitid, and Y shal leede to vpon thee 
the depnes, or the see, aid manye watris 
2o0shulen hille thee. And Y shal drawe 
thee doun with thes that gon doun in to 
the lake, to puple euerlastynge ; and Y 


£Om. 4. 4» of the see u. 


P Om. a. 
4 wondringis a. 


VOL. IIT. 


90Om.Nn. * spak F. 
v Om. CEGIKMNPQRSUX. 


EZEKIEL. 


s the weiling CEFIIIKMQRSU. 
W on CEFHIKS. 


4c 


561 


horsis he schal defoule alle thi stretis. 
He shal sle bi swerd thi puple, and thi 
noble ymagis schulen falle doun in to 
erthe. Thei schulen waste thi richessis, 12 
thei schulen rauysche thi marchaundies ; 
and thei schulen distrie thi wallis, and 
thei schulen distrie thin housis ful clere, 
and thi stoonys, and thi? trees, and thei 
schulen putte thi dust in the myddis of 
watris. And Y schal make to reste the1s 
multitude of thi syngeris, and the sown 
of thin harpis schal no more be herd ; 
and Y schal 3yue thee in to a moost cleer 14 
stoon. Thou schalt be driyng of nettis, 
and thou schalt no more be bildid, for Y 
the Lord spak, seith the Lord God 4. 
The Lord God seith" these thingis of 15 
Tire, Whether ilis schulen not be moued 
of the sown of thi fal, and of weiling’ of 
thi slayn men, whanne thei ben slayn in 
the myddis of thee? And alle the princis 16 
of the see schulen go doun of her seetis, 
and thei schulen do awei her mentils, 
ether spuylist of slayn enemyes, and thei 
schulen caste awei her dyuerse clothis, 
and shulen be clothid with wondring". 
Thei shulen sitte in the erthe, and thei 
shulen be astonyed, and thei* shulen won- 
dre of* thi sodeyn fal. And thei shulen17 
take weilyng on thee, and schule seie to 
thee, Hou perischidist thou, noble citee, 
that dwellist in the see, that were strong 
in the see with thi dwelleris, whiche 
dwelleris alle men dredden? Now schippis 18 
schulen wondre in the dai of thi drede, 
and ilis in the see schulen be disturblid, 
for noon goith out of thee. For the Lord i9 
God seith these thingis, Whanne Y schal 
3yue thee* a citee desolat, as the citees 
that ben not enhabitid, and Y schal bringe 
on thee the depthe of watris, and many 
watris schulen hile thee. And Y schal ze 
drawe thee doun with hem that goon 
doun in to a lake, to the puple euerlast- 
ynge; and Y schal sette thee in the laste 


tofcu. * the a pr.m. kK. 


t her spuylis CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX, 
x thee fo be 1. 


562 


shal togidre sette thee in the last* loond, 
as old wildirnes, with thes that ben lad 
forth in to the lake, that thou be not 
enhabited. Sotheli whanne I shal 3yue 

ziglorye in the loond of men lyuynge, I 
shal dryue thee in to nou3t, and thou 
shalt not be; thon sow3t ajen shalt na- 
more be foundyn in to with outen ende, 
seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXVII. 


i And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seiynge, Therfor thon, sone of man, 
stak to vpon Tyre lamentacioun. And 
thou shalt seye to Tyre, that dwellith in 
the entre of the see, the marchaundisynge 
of puplis to many ylis, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, O! Tyre, thou seidist, Y 
4ain of perfijt fayrnes, and set in the herte 
of the see. Men of thi coostis that bild- 
siden thee, fulfilliden thi fayrnes; thei bild- 
iden thee with bechis of Sanyr, with alle 
makyngis of boord of the see; thei token 
cedre of Liban, for to make to thee a 
6mast. Thei heweden okis of Baasan in 
to thin ooris, and thei maden to thee thi 
seetis of rowers of yuer of Yude, and thi 
7litil cabans of the ylis of Ytalie. Dyuerse 
bijs of Egipt is wouun to thee in to veyl, 
that it shulde be put in the mast; iasynct 
aud purpur of the ylis Helysa ben maad 
sthin hillynge. Dwellers of Sidon and 
Aradie weren thi rowers; thou Tyre, thi 
wijse inen ben maad thi gouernours. 
9Olde men of Bibly, and prudent men 
therof, hadden shipmen to the seruyce of 
thi diuerse purtenaunce to houshold; alle 
the shippis of the see, and the maryners 
of hem, weren in the puple of thi mar- 
ivchaundise. Men of Pers, and Lidiense, 
and Libiense weren in thi cumpanye, 
or oost; men thi fizters hangiden sheld 
aud helm in thee, for thin onrnynge. 
11Sonys of Aradi with thin oost weren 
vpon thi wallis in thi cumpas; but and 
Pigmeis, that weren in thi touris, hang- 


EZEKIEL. 


XXVI. 21-——-X XVII. 11. 


loud, as elde wildirnessis, with hem that 
ben led doun in to a lake, that thou be 
not enhabited. Certis whanne Y schal 
3yue glorye in the lond of lyueris, Y 2! 
schal dryue thee in to nou3t, and thou 
schalt not be; and thou schalt be sou3t, 
and thou schalt no more be foundun with 
outen ende, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXVII. 


Aud the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Therfor thou, sone2 
of man, take weilyng on Tire. And thou; 
schalt seie to Tire, that dwellith in the 
entryng of the see, to the marchaundie of 
puplis to many ilis, The Lord God seith 
these thingis, OY! Tire, thou seidist, Y am 
of perfit fairnesse, aud Y am set in the4 
herte of the see. Thei that ben in thi 
coostis that bildiden thee, filliden thi fair- 
nesse; thei bildiden thee with fir trees ofs 
Sanyr, with alle werkis of boordis of the 
see; thei token a cedre of the Liban, to 
make a mast to thee. Thei hewiden ookis¢ 
of Bala in to thin ooris, thei maden to 
thee thi seetis 6f roweris of yuer of Ynde, 
and cabans of the ilis of Italie. Dyuerse7 
biys, ether whijt silk, of Egipt, was wouun 
to thee in to a veil, that it schulde be set 
in the mast; iacynct and purpur of the 
ilis of Elisa weren maad thin hiling. Thes 
dwelleris of Sidon and* Aradians weren 
thi roweris; Tire, thi wise inen weren 
maad thi gouernouris. The elde men of9 
Biblos, and the prudeut men therof, had- 
den schipmen to the seruyse of thi dy- 
uerse araye of houshold ; alle the schippis 
of the see, and the schip men of tho, weren 
in the puple of thi marchaundie. Perseis, 10 
and Lidiaus, and Libitans weren in thin 
oost; thi men werriours hangiden in thee 
a scheeld and helm, for thin ournyng. 
Sones Aradians with thin oost weren on!! 
thi wallis in thi cumpas; but also Pigmeis, 
that weren in thi touris, hangiden her 


k aft GH. 


yA! CEFGHIMNPQRSUX. 


z Om. CHNQY. 


® and of 1s sec. m. 


XXVIT. 12——24. 


iden her arewgirdlis in thi wallis bi cum- 
12 pas; thei fulfilliden thi fayrues. Cartagy- 
nessis, thi marchauntis, of multitude of 
alle ritchessis, with siluer, and yren, tyn, 
13 and leed thei fulfilliden thi fayris. Grece, 
and Tubal, or Spayn, and Mosoch, or 
Capadoceye, thei, thi biers, brou3ten ser- 
uauntis and brasen vessels to thi puple. 
14Of the hous Togorma thei brou3ten to 
thi chepynge horsis, and horsmen, and 
is mulis. Sonys of Dedan thi marchauntis ; 
manye ilis the marchaundisynge of thin 
hoond, chaungiden togidre iu thi prijs 
teeth of yuer, and of hebenyf, chat is, a 
tre that, after that it is kit, waaxith hard 
isas stoon. Syrus thi marchaunt, for the 


multitude of thi werkis thei puttiden’ 


forth in thi. market, or marchaundise, 
gemme, and purpur, and clooth with dy- 
uerse colours, and bijs, and silk, and 
chodchod, that is, precious marchaun- 
17dise. Juda and the loond of Israel, thei 
thi biers in the first whete, puttiden forth 
in thi fayris bawm, and hony, and oyle, 
1g8and rosyn, or gumme. Damascene thi 
marchaunt, in multitude of thi werkis, 
and multitude of dyuerse ritchessis, in 
\vfat wiyn, in wullis of best colour. Dan, 
and Grece, and Mousel, settiden forth! in 
thi fayris yren wrou3t bi craft, myrre, 
or preciouse gumme, and swete sauer- 
20 ynge spice, in thi marchaundise. Dedan 
21 thi biers, in tapetis for to sitte. Arabie 
and™ alle princis of Cedar, thei mar- 
-chauutis of thin hoond; with lambren, 
and wetheres, and kidis thi marchauntis 
2ecamen to thee. The sellers of Saba and 
Reema, thei thi marchauntis, with alle 
the first swete sauerynge spicis, aud pre- 
cious stoon, and gold, which thei put- 
23tiden furth in thi market. Aram, and 
Chemye, and Eden, thi marchauntis ; 
Saba, and Assur, and Thelinath, thi sell- 
2sers. Thei thi inarchauntis of manyfold 
wlappynge thing, of iacynct and steyned 
clothis, with ymagis and precious rytch- 


1 forsothe G pr.m. H. 


bon INs sec.m. © in N. 


EZEKIEL. 


563 


arowe casis in? thi wallis bi® cumpas ; 
thei filliden thi fairnesse. Cartagynensis, 12 
thi marchauntis, of the multitude of alle 
richessis filliden thi feiris, with siluer, and 
irun, with tyn, and leed. Greece, and 13 
Tubal, and Mosoch, thet weren thi mar- 
chauntis, and brou3ten booude men and 
brasun vessels to thi puple. Fro the hous 1s 
of Thogorma thei brou3ten horsis, and 
horse men, and mulis, to thi chepyng. Theis 
sones of Dedan weren thi marchauntis ; 
many ilis the marchaundie of thin hond, 
chaungiden teeth of yuer, and of heben- 
nus, in thi prijs. Sirie was thi marchaunt, 16 
for the multitude of thi werkis thei set- 
tiden forth in thi mareat gemme, and pur- 
pur, and clothis wouun dyuersli at the 
maner of scheeldis, and bijs, and seelk, 
and cochod, ether auer de peis. Juda and 17 
the lond of Israel weren thi marchauntis 
in the beste wheete, and settiden forth in 
thi feiris bawme, and hony, and oile, and 
resyn. Damassen was thi inarchaunt, ins 
the multitude of thi werkis, in the mul- 
titude of dyuerse richessis, in fat wyn, in® 
wollis of best colour. Dan, and Greece, 19 
and Mosel, settiden forth in thi fairis irun 
maad suteli, gumme of* myrre, and cala- 
mus, that is, a spice swete smellynge, in 
thi marchaundie. Dedan zeren thi mar-20 
chauntis, in tapitis to sitte. Arabie and2i 
alle the princes of Cedar, thei weren the 
marchauntis of thin hond; with lambren, 
and wetheris, and kidis thi marchauntis 
camen to thee. The silleris of Saba and 22 
of Rema, thei weren thi marchauntis, with 
alle the beste swete smellynge spices, and 
preciouse stoon, and gold, which thei set- 
tiden forth in thi marcat. Aran, and 23 
Chenne, and Eden, zverex thi marchauntis; 
Sabba, and Assur, and Chelmath, were thi 
silleris. Thei weren thi marchaundis in 24 
many maneres, in fardels of iacinct and 
of clothis of many colours, and of pre- 
ciouse richessis, that weren wlappid and 
boundun with coordis. Also schippis of 25 


min A. 


dand1. 2nd ar, and of s. 


4c2 


564 


essis, whiche weren wlappid and streyned 
25togidre with coordis. And shippis of 
the see hadden cedris in her marchaun- 
disis; thi princis in thi marchaundise ; 
and thou art fulfillid, and art glorified 
26fulmyche in the herte of the see. In 
manye watris thi rowers, or mareners, 
ledden thee to; the south wynde defoul- 
27ide thee in the herte of the see. Thi 
ritchessis, and thi tresours, and thi many 
fold instrument, thi mareneres, and thi 
gouernours that helden thi purtenaunce 
of houshold, and weren bifore to thi pu- 
ple, o7 sowerayns, and men thi fizters 
that weren in thee, with al thi multitude 
that is in the mydil of thee, shulen falle 
in to" the herte of the see. In the dai of 
xsthi fallynge of the soun of crye of thi 
gouernours multitude of shippis shulen 
29be disturbid® togidre; and alle men 
that helden oor, shulen cum doun of her 
shippis. Mareners and alle gouernours 
of the see shulen stoonde vpon the loond; 
soand thei shulen weile vpon thee with 
greet vois, and shulen erye bitterli, and 
shulen easte powdre, ov dust, in her 
heedis, and shulen be spreyned to gidre 
3iwith asshen?. And thei shulen shaue 
vpon thee ballidness, and shulen be gyrd 
with hairis, and shulen wepe thee in bit- 
ternes of soule, in moost bitter wepynge. 
32And thei shulen take to vpon thee a 
weping soong, and shulen weile thee, Who 
is as Tyre, that wax doumb in the mydil 
33o0f the see? Which in the outgoynge of 
thi marchaundises of the see fulfillidist 
manye puplis; in the multitude of thi 
ritchessis, and thi puplis thou madist 
3sriche kyngis of erthe. Now thou art de- 
foulid of the see, in depnessis of watris ; 
thi ritchessis and al thi multitude that 
35 was in mydil of the see fellen doun. Alle 
dwellers of ylis wondreden greetli vpon 
thee, and4 the rowers, ov the kyngis, of 
hem. Alle smyten with tempest chaung- 
aéiden cheris ; marchauntis of puplis hiss- 


"Om. G prom, H. 


EZEKIEL. 


© sturblid cx. 


XXVII. 25—36. 


the see hadden cedris in her marchaun- 
dies; thi princes weren in thi marchaundie; 
and thou were fillid, and were glorified 
greetli in the herte of the see. Thi rowers 26 
brou3ten thee in many watris, the south 
wynd al to-brak thee ; in the herte of the 
see weren thi richessis, and thi tresours, 27 
and thi many fold instrument. Thi schip 
men, and thi gouernouris that helden thi 
purtenaunce of houshold, and weren soue- 
reyns of thi puple, and thi men werriours 
that weren in thee, with al thi multitude 
which is in the myddis of thee, schulen 
falle doun in the herte of the see, in the 
dai of thi fallyng. Schippis schulen be 28 
disturblid of the sown of the cry of thi 
gouernours; and alle men that helden oore, 29 
schulen go doun of her shippis. Ship- 
men and alle gouernouris of the see shulen 
stonde in the lond; and schulen 3elle on30 
thee with greet vois. And thei shulen cry 
bitterli, and thei schulen caste poudur on 
her heedis, and sehulen be spreynt with 
aische. And thei schulen shaue ballid-31 
nesse on thee, aud schulen be gird with 
hairis, and thei schulen biwepe thee in 
bitternesse of soule, with most bittir wep- 
yng. And thei schulen take on thee a32 
song of mourenyng, and thei schulen bi- 
weile thee, Who is as Tire, that was 
doumb in the myddis of the see? And 32 
thou, Zire, fillidist many puplis in the 
goyng out of thi marchaundies of the 
see; in the multitude of thi richessis, and 
of thi puplis, thou madist riche the kingis 
of erthe. Now thou art al to-brokun of34 
the see, in the depthis of watris. Thi rich- 
essis and al thi multitude that was in 
the myddis of thee fellen doun; alle the3s 
dwelleris of ilis and the kyngis of tho 
weren astonyed on thee. Alle thei weren 
smytuu with tempest, and chaungiden 
cheris ; the marchauntis of puplis hiss-36 
iden on thee. Thou art brouj3t to nou3t, 
and thou schalt not be til ‘in tof with 
outen ende. 


Pasche gc. askys H. Qin 4. 


8 to vu. 


XXVIII. 1—13. 


iden, or scornyden, vpon thee. Thou art 


led forth to nou3t, and thou shalt not be’ 


til in‘to with outen eende. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seilynge, Sone of man, sey thou to 
the prince of Tyre, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, For that that thin herte 
is lift vp, and thou seidist, Y am God, 
and Y satte in the chaier of God, in the 
herte of the see, whanne thou art. man 
and not God, and hast 3ouen thin herte 
3as the herte of God; loo! thou art 
wyser than Danyel, eche priue thing is 
a4not hid fro thee; in thi wisdam and 
prudence thou madist to thee strength, 
and hast wonne to thee gold and siluer 
sin thi tresours ; in multitude of thi wis- 
dam, and in thi marchaundise thou mul- 
tepliedist to thee strength, and thin herte 
sis lift vp in thi strength; therfor thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, For that thin 
herte is reisid vp as the herte of God, 
7therfor loo! Y shal lede to thee® aliens, 
moost stronge of folkis. And thei shulen 
make nakid her swerdis on the*’ fairnes 
of thi wisdam, and shulen defoule thi 
sfeyrnes. hei shulen slee, and drawe 
doun thee; and thou shalt die in the 
perishynge of slayn men, in the herte 
gof thet se. Whether thou seiynge shalt 
speke, Y am God", before men’ sleynge 
thee, whanne thou art man, and not God? 
woIn the hoond of men sleynge thee, in 
deeth of vncircumcydid men, thou shalt 
die in the hoond of aliens; for Y spak, 
irseith the Lord God. And the word of 
the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, Sone 
of man, reys weilynge vpon the kyng of 
12 Tyre; and thon shalt sey to him, Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, Thou a sig- 
net of liknes, ful of wisdam, perfijt in 
isfayrnes, was” in delicis of paradise* of 
God. Eche precious stoon thi keuerynge, 


8 on thee Gc. oon of the mw. 88 thi a. 
dise Kk. 
bsithr iOma. kOm.1 'sith 3. 


delicis cCFGIIIKMNPQRSUX. 


EZEKIEL. 


tOm. 46 pr. m. 


m Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


565 


CAP. XXVIII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Sone of man, seiez 
thon to the prince of Tire, The Lord God 
seith these thingis, For thin herte was 
reisid, and thou seidist, Y am God, and 
Y sat in the chaier of God, in the herte 
of the see, sithen® thon art man and not 
God, and thou 3anest thin herte as the 
herte of God; lo! thon art wisere than: 
Danyel, ech priuetee is not hid fro thee; 
in thi wisdom and prndence thou madist 4 
to thee strengthe, and thon gatist to thee 
gold and siluer in thi tresonris; in thes 
multitude of thi wisdom, and: in thi 
marchaundie thou multipliedist to thee 
strengthe, and thin herte was reisid in 
thi strengthe ; therfor the Lord God seith« 
these thingis, For thin herte was reisid 
as the herte of God, therfor lo! Y schal7 
brynge on thee aliens, the strongeste of 
hethene. And thei schuwlen make nakid 
her swerdis on the fairnesse of thi wis- 
dom, and thei schulen defoule thi fair- 
nesse. Thei schulen sle, and drawe douns 
thee; and thou schalt die bi the* deth of 
vncircumcidid men, in the herte of the 
see. Whether thou schalt seie, and speke, 9 
Yam God, bifore hem that sleen thee; 
sithen! thou art a man, and not God? Inu 
the hond of hem that sleen thee, bi deth 
of vncircumcidid men, thou schalt die in 
the hond of aliens; for Y the Lord spak, 
seith the Lord God. And the word of 11 
the Lord was inaad to me, and he seide, 
Thou™, sone of man, reise thou weilyng 
on the kyng of Tire; and thou schalt seie 12 
to hym, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Thou a preente® of licnesse, ful of wis- 
dom, perfit in fairnesse, were in delicis® 1s 
of paradijs of God. Ech preciouse stoon 
uQOm. 4. W waast GH. 


vme 4. * a para- 


0 preentere Ns sec.m. © the 


566 


sardius, topacius, and iaspis, crisolitus, 
and onix, and berillus, saphirus, and car- 
buncle, and smaragd; and gold the werk 
of thi fairnes, and thin hoolis ben maad 
redy, in the day in which thou art maad. 
14 Thou cherub strei3t forth, and keuerynge; 
and I putte’ thee in the hooli hil of God. 
_ In the mydil of fijry stoonus thou walk- 
lsidist, perfijt in thi weies fro the dai of 
thi makynge, til wickidnes is foundyn in 
igthee. In the multitude of thi marchaun- 
dise ‘thin entrailis ben fulfillid with wick- 
idnesse”, and thou synnedist; and Y keste 
thee out of the hil of God, and I lost 
thee, thou cherub keuerynge, of the mydil 
17of firy stoonus. And thin herte is reysid 
vp in thi fairnes, thou lostist thi wisdam 
in thi fayrenes. Y keste thee doun in to 
erthe, Y 3aue thee before the face of 
iskyngis, that thei shulden see thee. In 
multitude of thi wickidnessis, and in 
wickidnes of thi marchaundise thou de- 
fouledist thin halewynge; therfor Y shal 
brynge forth fier fro the mydil of thee, 
which shal ete thee; and Y shal 3yue thee 
in to asshe on the erthe, in si3te of alle 
lvmen seynge thee. Alle men that shulen 
see thee in folkis, shulen wondre greetli 
vpon thee; thou art maad nou3t, and 
thou shalt not be in to with outen ende. 
20 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
21me, seiynge, Sone of man, put thi face 
ajens Sidon, and thou shalt prophecie of 
22it; and thou shalt seie, Thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, Loo! Y to thee, Sy- 
don, and Y shal be glorified in the mydy] 
of thee; and thei shulen wite, for Y the 
Lord, whanne I shal doo in it domys, 
23and Y shal be halewid in it. And Y shal 
‘sende to it pestilence and blood in the 
stretis therof, and men slayn shulen falle 
in the mydil therof bi swerd bi cumpas; 
and thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord God. 
24 And it* shal no more be to® the hows of 
Israel hirtynge of bitternes, and a thorn 
brengynge in sorewe on eche side bi 


Y putted GH. Zz Om. a. 


POm.N. 4 wickidnesse 1 pr. m. 


EZEKIEL. 


8 ther G sec.m. 


XXXVI. 14——24. 


was thin hilyng, sardius, topacius, and 
iaspis, crisolitus, and onix, and birille, 
safire, and carbuncle, and smaragde; also 
gold was the werk of thi fairnesse, and 
thin hoolis weren maad redi, in the dai in 
which thou were maad. Thou were che-14 
rub holdun forth, and hilynge; and Y 
settide thee in the hooli? hil of God. In 
the myddis of stoonus set afier thou 
3edist, perfit in thi weies fro the dai of thils 
makyng, til wickidnesse was foundun in 
thee. In the multitude of thi marchaundie 16 
thin ynnere thingis weren fillid of wickid- 
nesse, and thou didist synne; and Y cast- 
ide thee out of the hil of God, and, thou 
cherub hilynge fer, Y loste thee fro the 
myddis of stoonys set afier. And thin!7 
herte was reisid in thi fairnesse, thou 
lostist thi wisdom in thi fairnesse. Y cast- 
ide thee down in to erthe, Y 3af thee bifore 
the face of kingis, that thei schulden se 
thee. In the multitude of thi wickid-18 
nessis?, and in wickidnesse’ of thi mar- 
chaundie thou defoulidist thin halewyng ; 
therfor Y schal brynge forth fier of the 
myddis of thee, that schal ete thee; and 
Y schal 3yue thee in to aische on erthe, in 
the si3t of alle men seynge thee. Alle men 19 
that schulen se thee among hethene men, 
schulen be astonyed on thee; thou art 
maad nou3t, and thou schalt not be with 
outen ende. And the word of the Lord 20 
was maad to me, and he seide, Thou, sone 2! 
of man, sette thi face aj3ens Sidon, and 
thou schalt profesie of it; and schalt seie, 22 
The Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! 
Y to thee, Sidon, and Y schal be glorified 
in the myddis of thee; and thei schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal 
do domes in it, and Y schal be halewid 
ther ynne. And Y schal sende pestilence 23 
in to it, and blood in the stretis therof, 
and slayn men bi swerd schulen falle doun 
in the myddis therof bi cumpas; and thei 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord God. 
And there schal no more be an hirtyng 24 


b Om. 4. into #. 


r the wickidnesse CEFGHKMPQRsuUxX. thi wickidnessis 1N. 


XXVIII. 25-——-XXIX. 7. 


cumpas of hem that ben aduersaries to 
hem; and thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord 

25God. Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Whanne J shal gadre the hows of Israel 
of puplis, in whiche thei ben scaterid, Y 
shal be halewid in hem before folkis. 

26And thei shulen dwelle in her loond, 
which Y 3aue to my seruaunt Jacob. And 
thei shulen dwelle sikir in it, and shulen 
bilde housis, and shulen plaunte viyn 
3erdis, and thei shulen dwelle tristili, 
whanne Y shal doo domys in alle men 
that ben aduersaries to hem bi cumpas; 
and thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord 
God of hem. 


CAP. XXIX. 


1 In the tenthe 3eer, in the tweluethe 
moneth, in o day of the moneth, the 
word of the Lord is maad to me, seiynge, 
2Sone of man, put thi face a3eus Pharao, 
kyng of Egipt; and thou shalt prophecie 
30f hym, and of al Egipt. Spek thou, 
and thou shalt seie, Thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, Loo! Y to thee, Pharao, 
kyng of Egipt, greet dragoun, that lig- 
gist in the mydil of thi flodis, and thou 
seist, The flood is myn, and Y made my- 
asilf. And Y shal putte a bridil in thi 
cheekis, and Y shal glewe to gidre the 
fisshis of thi floodis to thi scalis; and J 
shal drawe thee out of the mydil of thi 
flodis, and alle thi fisshis shulen cleue to 
sthi scalis. And Y shal caste thee fer in 
to deseert, and alle fisshis of thi flood; 
vpon the face of erthe thou shalt falle, 
thou shalt not be gadrid vp, nether ga- 
drid to gidre; to beestis of erthe, and to 
volatils of heuene Y 3aue thee for to be 
edeuourid. And alle the dwellers of Egipt 
shulen wite, for J the Lord. For that that 
thou was° a staf of reed to the hows of 
7 Israel, whanne thei token ‘thee to“ hoond, 
and thou art broken to gidre, and hast 
drawe a] the shuldre of hem, and hem 


© wast G pr.m, were IH. 


EZEKIEL. 


567 


of bitternesse to the hous of Israel, and a 
thorn bryngynge in sorewe on ech side bi 
the cumpas of hem that ben aduersaries 
to hem ; and thei schulen wite, that Y am 
the Lord God. The Lord God seith these 25 
thingis, Whanne Y schal gadere togidere 
the hous of Israel fro puplis, among whiche 
thei ben scaterid, Y schal be halewid in 
hem bifor hethene men. And thei schulen 
dwelle in her lond, which Y 3af to my 
seruaunt Jacob. And thei schulen dwelle 26 
sikir ther ynne, and thei schulen bilde 
housis, and thei schulen plaunte vynes, 
and thei schulen dwelle tristili, whanne 
Y schal make domes in alle men that ben 
aduersaries to hem bi cumpas; and thei 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord God of 
hem. 


CAP. XXIX. 


In the tenthe 3eer, in the tweluethe1 
monethe, in the firste dai of the monethe, 
the word of the Lord was maad to me, 
and he seide, Thou, sone of man, sette2 
thi face ajens Farao, king of Egipt ; and 
thou schalt profesie of hym, and of al 
Egipt. Speke thou, and thou schalt seie,3 
The Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! 
Y to thee, thon Farao, kyng of Egipt, 
thou grete dragoun, that liggist in the 
myddis of thi floodis, and seist, The flood 
is myn, and Y made mysilf. And Y schal4 
sette a bridil in thi chekis, and Y schal 
glue the fischis of thi floodis to thi scalis; 
and Y schal drawe thee out of the myddis 
of thi floodis, and alle thi fischis schulen 
cleue to thi scalis. And Y schal caste thees 
forth in to desert, and alle the fischis of 
thi flood; on the face of erthe thou schalt 
falle doun, thon schalt not be gaderid, 
nethir schalt be gaderid togidere; to the 
beestis of erthe, and to the volatilis of the . 
eir Y 3af thee to be deuourid. And alleé 
the dwelleris of Egipt schulen knowe, that 
Y am the Lord. For that that thou were 
a staf of rehed to the hous of Israel, 
whanne thei token thee with bond, and7 
thou were brokun, and to-rentist ech 


4 to bi a pr.m.u. 60 thee bi the a sec. m. 


568 


lenynge, or trustinge, vpon thee, thou 
art maad litil, and hast dissoluyd, ov 
svudon, alle the reynes of hem; therfor 
thes thingis seith the Lord God, Loo! 
Y shal leede to on® thee swerd, and I 
yshal slee of thee man and beest; and the 
loond of Egipt shal be in to deseert and 
wildirnes, and thei shulen wite, for Y the 
Lord. For that that thou seidist, The 
ieflood is myn, and I made it, therfor 
loo! Y to thee, and tof thi floodis. And 
Y shal 3yue the loond of Egipt in to wil- 
dernessis® distried bi swerd, fro the ‘tour 
ii Syens til to" the termys of Ethiope. The 
foot of man shal not passe bi it, nether 
foot of beest shal goo in it, and it shal 
i2not be enabitid fourti 3eeris. And Y shal 
3eue the loond of Egipt deseert, or for- 
sakyn, in the mydil of deseert loondis', 
and the cytees therof in the mydil of 
citees vndir turned shulen be desolat 
fourty 3eris. And Y shal scatere Egip- 
ciens in to naciouns, and Y shal wyndewe 
i3hem in to loondis. For thes thingis seith 
the Lord God, After the ende of fourti 
3eeris Y‘shal gedre Egipt fro puplis, in 
14 whiche thei were scatered ; and Y shal 
lede a3en the caitifte of Egipt. And Y 
shal sette hem ‘to gydre* in the loond of 
Phatures, in to the loond of her natiuyte ; 
and thei shulen be there in to a meke, 
isor lowe, kyngdam, and among other 
rewmes it shal be the mekest, and it 
shal namore be reysid on naciouns. And 
Y shal make hem litil, lest thei be lordis 
16to folkis; nether thei shulen be more to 
the hous of Israel in trist, techynge wick- 
idnes, that thei flee, and sue hem; and 
thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord God. 
i7And it is maad in the seuenthe and 
- twenty! 3eer, in the first, in oon of the 
moneth, the word of the Lord is maad 
isto me, seiynge, Sone of man, Nabugodo- 
nosor, kyng of Babiloyne, made his oost 
for to serue in greet seruyce a3ens Tyre ; 


€ vpon GH. 


f Om. G6 prom. H. 
loondis 6 pr. m. 


k Om. 4. ! twentithe xz. 


8 loosid, ether discoumfortid CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


EZEKIEL. 


& wildernesse H. 


XXIX. 8—18. 


schuldre of hem, and whanne thei rest~ 
iden on thee, thou were maad lesse, and 
thou hast discoumfortid® alle the reynes 
of hem; therfor the Lord God seith theses 
thingis, Lo! Y schal bringe a swerd on 
thee, and Y schal sle of thee man and 
beeste; and the lond of Egipt schal beg 
in to desert, and in to wildirnesse, and 
thei schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 
For that that thou seidist, The flood is 
myn, and Y made it, therfor lo! Y to thee, 10 
and to thi floodis. And Y* schal 3yue ‘in 
to" wildirnesses’ the lond of Egipt distried 
bi swerd, fro the tour of Sienes til to the 
termes of Ethiopie. The foot of man schal 1 
not passe bi it, nether the foot of beeste 
schal go in it, and it schal not be enha- 
bitid in fourti jeer. And Y schal 3yue the 12 
lond of Egipt forsakun, in the myddis of 
londis forsakun, and the citees therof in 
the myddis of a citee distried, and tho 
schulen be desolat bi fourti 3eer. .And Y 
schal scatere Egipcians in to naciouns, 
and Y schal wyndewe hem in to londis. 
For the Lord God seith these thingis, 13 
After the ende of fourti 3eer Y schal ga- 
dere togidere Egipt fro puplis, among 
whiche thei weren scaterid; and Y schal 14 
bringe a3en the caitifte of Egipte. And Y 
schal sette hem in the lond of Phatures, in 
the lond of her birthe; and thei schulen 
be there in to a meke rewme, and among 1s 
othere rewmes it schal be most low, and 
it schal no more be reisid over naciouns. 
And Y schal make hem lesse, that thei 
regne not on hethene men; and thei schu-1¢ 
len no more be to the hous of Israel in 
trist, techinge wickidnesse, that thei fle, 
and sue hem; and thei schulen knowe, 
that Y am the Lord God. And it wasi7 
don in the seuene and twentithe 3eer, in 
the firste monethe, in the firste dat of the 
monethe, the word of the Lord was maad 
to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, 1s 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, made 


h comelyngis in to H. i his loondis #. is 


t Om. s. U to thee s. v wildirnesse a. 


XXIX. 19—XXX. 8. 


eche heed maad ballid, and eche shuldre 
is vnheerid, and hijre is not 3oldyn to 
hym, nether to his oost of Tyre, for the 
seruyce in which he seruede to me ajens 

19it. Therfor thes thingis seith the Lord 
God, Loo! Y shal 3yue Nabngodonosor, 
kyng of Babiloyne, in the loond of Egipt, 
and he shal take the multitude of it; and 
he shal take by pray the raueynes therof, 
and he! schal™ rauysshe the spuylis of it, 

20 and it shal be hijre to the oost of hym, and 
to the werk for which he seruede a3ens 
it; Y 3aue to hym the loond of Egipt, for 
that that he traneilde to me, seith the 

21Lord God. In that dai an horn shal 
sprynge to the hous of Israel, and to 
thee Y shal 3eue a mouthe opened in the 
mydil of hem; and thei shulen wite, for 
Y the Lord. 


CAP. XXX. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, seiynge, Sone of man, prophecy thon, 
and sey, Thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
3Gowle 3e, Woo! woo! to the dai, for the 
dai is ny3; and the dai of the Lord nei3- 
eth, a dai of cloude. The tyme of hethen 
amen shal be; and swerd shal come in 
to Egipt, and dreed shal be in Ethiope, 
whanne men woundid shulen falle doun 
in Egipt, and the multitude therof shal 
be taken awei, and the fonndementis 
stherof destryed. Ethiope, and Libie, and 
Lidij, and al other comoun puple, and 
Chub®*, ov Arabie, and the sones of boond 
of pees with hem bi swerd shulen falle. 
6Thes thingis seith the Lord God, And 
men vndir settynge Egipt shulen togidre 
falle doun, and pryde of lordship ‘therof 
shal be distrnyed®; fro the tour of Syenes 
by swerd thei shwlen falle doun ther yn, 
7the Lord of oostis seith. And thei shu- 
len be seatered in mydil of loondis deso- 
latid, and the cytees therof shulen be in 
sthe mydil of deseert cytees. And thei 


EZEKIEL. 


569 


his oost to serue bi greet seruyce ajens 
Tire; ech heed was maad ballid, and ech 
schuldir was maad bare of heer, and meede 
was not 3oldun of Tire to hym, nether to 
his oost, for the seruyce bi which he 
seruede to me a3ens it. Therfor the Lord 1 
God seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 3yue 
Nabugodonosor, kyng of Babiloyne, in the 
lond of Egipt, and he schal take the mul- 
titude therof; and he schal take in preye 
the clothis therof, and he schal ranysche 
the spuylis therof, and meede schal be to 
his oost, and to the werk for which he20 
seruyde to me ajens it; and Y jaf the lond 
of Egipt to hym, for that that he tranelide 
to me, seith the Lord God. In that daiz! 
an horn of the hous of Israel schal come 
forth, and Y schal 3yue to thee an open 
mouth in the myddis of hem; and thei 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. 


CAP. XXX. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Sone of ‘man, profesie 2 
thou, and seie, The Lord God seith these 
thingis, 3elle 3e, Wo! wo! to the dai, fors 
the dai is nij3; and the dai of the Lord 
neizith, the dai of a clonde. The tyme of 
hethene men schal be; and a swerd schal4 
come in to Egipt, and drede schal beW in 
Ethiopie, whanne woundid men schulen 
falle doun in Egipt, and the multitude 
therof schal be takun awei, and the foun- 
dementis therof schulen be distried. Ethi-s 
opie, and Libie, and Lidiens, and al the 
residue comyn puple, and Chub, and the 
sones of the lond of boond of pees schulen 
falle doun bi swerd with hem. The Lord«é 
God seith these thingis, And thei that 
vndursetten Egipt schulen falle doun, and 
the pride of the lordschipe therof schal be 
destried ; fro the tour of Sienes thei schu- 
len falle bi swerd ther ynne, seith the 
Lord’ of oostis. And thei schulen be di-7 
stried in the myddis of londis maad deso- 
lat, and the* citees therof schulen be in 


10m. x. ™Om.au. ® Cherub ¢ prom. H. © Om, 4. 


* not be A pr.m, CEFHI pr.m. K prom. mqsu.  ¥ Oni. IN. 
VOL. Il. 4D 


y Lord God a pr. m. 


570 


shulen wite, for Y the Lord God, whanne 
Y shal 3yue fier in Egipt, and alle the 
yhelpers therof shulen be defoulid. In 
that dai messageris shulen go out fro my 
face in greet shippis, for to defoule, ov 
destruye, the trust of Ethiope; and dreed 
shal be in hem in the dai of Egipt, for 
10 With outen doute it shal come. Thes 
thingis seith the Lord God, And Y shal 
make the multitude of Egipt for to ceesse 
in the hoond of Nabugodonosor, kyng of 
11 Babiloyne. He and his puple with hym, 
the strongest of folkis, shulen be led to, 
for to leese the loond; and thei shulen 
drawe out her swerdis on Egipt, and thei 
12shulen fulfille thee with slayn men. And 
Y shal make the botmes of floodis drye, 
and Y shal bitake the loond in the hoond 
of werste men; aud Y¥ shal leese the loond, 
and the plente therof in the hoond of 
isalienys; Y the Lord spak. Thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, And Y shal destrye 
simulacris, and Y shal make the ydols 
of Memphis to? ceesse, and duyk of the 
loond of Egipt shal namore be. And Y 
shal 3yue dreed in the loond of Egipt, 
i4and Y shal scatere, or destrie, the loond 
of Phatures. And Y shal 3yue fier in Thap- 
nys, and Y shal make my domys in Ali- 
issaundre. And Y shal helde out myn in- 
dignacioun on4 Pelusium, the strength of 
Egipt; ‘and I schal slea the multitude of 
i6 Alisaundre, and I schal 3eue fijr in E- 
gipt'. As a womman beringe child, Pelusie 
shal sorewe, and Alisaundre shal be de- 
struyed, and in Memphis eche dais an- 
i7guyshis. The 3onge men of Heliopoleos 
and Bubasti shulen falle bi swerd, and 
is thei shulen be lad caytifis. And in Taph- 
nys the dai shal wexe blac, whanne Y 
shal debrisse there the ceptris of Egipt, 
and the pride of power therof shal faile 
in it. A clowde shal hile it; forsothe the 
dou3ters therof shulen be led in to cai- 
i9 tiftee, and Y shal make domes in Egipt; 
and thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord. 


P Om. Gu. 


¥ Om. a sec. m. 


EZEKIEL. 


4 vpon GH. 


XXX. 9—19. 


the myddis of citees forsakun. - And theis 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord God, 
whanne Y schal 3yue fier in Egipt, and 
alle the helperis therof schulen be al to- 
brokun. In that dai messangeris schulen 9 
go out fro my face in schippis with thre 
ordris of ooris, to al to-breke the trist of 
Ethiopie ; and drede schal be in hem in 
the dai of Egipt, for with out doute it 
schal come. The Lord God seith these 10 
thingis, And I schal make to ceesse the 
multitude of Egipt in the hond of Nabu- 
godonosor, king of Babiloyne. He and his1 
puple with hym, the strongeste men of 
hethene men, schulen be brou3t, to leese 
the lond; and thei schulen drawe out her 
swerdis on Egipt, and thei schulen fille 
the lond with slayn men. And Y schaliz 
make drie the botmes of floodis, and Y 
schal 3yue the lond in the bond of the 
worste men; and I schal distrie the lond, 
and the fulnesse therof in the hond of 
aliens; Y the Lord spak. The Lord God is 
seith these thingis, And Y schal leese 
simylacris, and Y shal make idols to ceesse 
fro Memphis, and a duyk of the lond of 
Egipt schal no more be. And Y schal 3yne 
drede in the lond of Egipt, and Y schal14 
leese the lond of Phatures. And Y schal 
3yue fier in Tafnys, and Y schal: make 
my’ domes in Alisaundre. And Y schalis 
schede out myn indignacioun on Pelusyum, 
the strengthe of Egipt; and Y schal sle 
the multitude of Alisaundre, and Y schal ts 
3yue fier in Egipt. Pelusyum, as a wom- 
man trauelynge vf child, schal haue so- 
rewe, and Alisaundre schal be destried, 
and in Memphis schulen be ech daies an- 
gwischis’?. The 3onge men of Heliopoleos 17 
and of Bubasti schulen falle doun bi swerd, 
and tho citees schulen be led caitifs. And 18 
in Thafnys the dai schal wexe blak, 
whanne Y schal al to-breke there the 
ceptris of Egipt, and the pride of the 
power therof schal faile there ynne. A 
cloude schal hile it; forsothe the don3- 


r Om. 4. 


Z anguish N. 


XXX. 20—XXXI. 3. 


20And it is don in the elleuenthe 3eer, in 
the first moneth, in the seuenthe dai of 
the moneth, the word of the Lord is 
21maad to me, seiynge, Sone of man, Y 
brak togidre the arm of Pharao, kyng of 
Egipt; and loo! it is not wlappid about, 
that helthe shulde be restorid to it, that 
it were boundyn in clothis, and fastid, or 
boundyn, with smale lynnen clothis, and, 
strength taken a3en, he mi3te holde swerd. 
22 Therfor thes thingis seith the Lord God, 
Loo! Y to Pharao, kyng of Egipt; and Y 
shal make litil his stronge arm but 
broken togidre, and Y shal caste doun the 
exsswerd of his hoond. And Y shal scatere 
Egipt in folkis, and Y shal wyndewe 
24hem in loondis. 
the armys of the kynge of Babiloyne, 
and Y shal 3yue my swerd in his hoond ; 
and Y shal breke togidre the armes of 
Pharao, and thei shulen weile with weil- 
yngis of a slayn man before the face of 
2shym. And Y shal coumforte the armes 
of the kyng of Babiloyne, and the armes 
of Pharao shulen falle doun togidre. And 
thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord, whanne 
Ishal 3yue my swerd in the hoond of the 
kyng of Babiloyne; and he shal stretche 
26it out vpon the loond of Egipt. And I 
shal scatere Egipt in to naciouns, and I 
shal wyndewe hem in to loondis; and 
thei shulen wite, for Y the Lord. 


CAP. XXXI. 


1 And it is maad in the elleuenthe 3eer, 
in the thridde moneth, in oon of the 
moneth, the word of the Lord is maad 

2to me, seiynge, Sone of man, sey thou to 
Pharao, kyng of Egipt, and to his puple, 
To whom art thou maad lijk in thi 

3greetnes? Loo! Assur as a cedre in Li- 
ban, fayr in braunches, and bouwis ful 
of wode, and hei3 in hei3the; and the top 
therof is reisid vp amonge thicke bouwis. 


a Lord God Ns sec. m. 


4D 2 


And Y shal coumforte. 


EZEKIEL. 571 


tris therof schulen be led in to caitifte, 
and Y schal make domes in Egipt; ands 
thei schulen wite, that Y am the Lord’. 
And it was doon in the enleuenthe 3eer, 20 
in the firste monethe, in the seuenthe dai 
of the moneth, the word of the Lord was 
maad to me, and he seide, Thou sone of 21 
man, Y haue broke the arm of Farao, 
kyng of Egipt; and lo! it is not wlappid, 
that helthe schulde be restorid therto, that 
it schulde be boundun with clothis, and 
woundun with lynnun clothis, and that 
he my3te holde swerd, whanne he hadde 
resseyued strengthe. Therfor the Lord 22 
God seith these thingis, Lo! Y to Farao, 
king of Egipt ; and° Y schal make lesse 
his strong arm but brokun, and Y schal 
caste doun the swerd fro his hond. And 23 
Y schal scatere Egipt among hethene men, 
and Y schal wyndewe hem in londis. And 24 
Y¥ schal coumforte the armes of the kyng 
of Babiloyne, and Y schal 3yue my swerd 
in the hond of hym; and Y schal breke 
the armes of Farao, and men slayn bifore 
his face schulen weile bi weilyngis. And 25 
¥ schal coumforte the armes of the kyng 
of Babiloyne, and the armes of Farao 
schulen falle doun. And thei schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal 3yue 
my swerd in the hond of the kyng of Ba- 
biloyne; and he schal stretche forth it on 
the lond of Egipt. And Y schal scatere 26 
Egipt in to naciouns, and Y schal wyn- 
dewe hem in to londis; and thei schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord. 


CAP. XXXI. 


And it was don in the enleuenthe 3eer,. 
in the thridde moneth, in the firste daz of 
the monethe, the word of the Lord was 
maad to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of2 
man, seie to Farao, kyng of Egipt, and to 
his puple, To whom art thou maad hijk in 
thi greetnesse? Lo! Assur as a cedres 
in Liban, fair in braunchis, and ful of 
boowis, and hi3 bi hi3nesse; and his hei3te 
was reisid among thicke bowis. Watris4 


biti. © Om. IN. 


572 


1Watris nurshiden hym, depnes areyside 
hym; the flodis floweden in cumpas of his 
rootis, and he sente out his strondis to 
salle the trees of the cuntree. Therfor 
his: heijnes is reisid vpon alle the trees 
of the cuntre; and his tendre trees ben 
multiplied, and his braunchis ben reysid 
svp, for manye watris. And whanne he 
strau3te forth his shadewe, alle the vo- 
latils of heuen maden nestis in his 
braunchis; and alle beestis of wijlde 
wodis gedreden vnder his bouwis, and 
the cumpanye of ful many folkis dwell- 
ide vudre the shadewynge place of hym. 
7And he was moost fayr in his greetnes, 
and in spredynge of tendre trees ; forsothe 
shis root was bisyde many watris. Cedris 
weren not heizer than he in paradise of 
God; bechis weren not euen to his hei3- 
nes, and platan trees weren not euen to 
his bouwis. Eche tree of paradise of God 
is not maad lijc to hym, and to his fayr- 
ynes. For Y made hym fayre, and with 
manye and thicke bouwis; and alle the 
trees of voluptee, that weren in paradise 
10 of God, sueden hym. Therfor thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, For that that he is 
reysid in hiznes, and Y 3aue his hei3nes 
waxynge grene and thicke, and his herte 
iis lift vp in his hijnes; now Y haue 
bitake hym in to the hoondis of the 
strengest of folkis. He doynge shal doo to 
hym; after the vupite of hym Y castide 
12hym out. And aliens shulen kitte hym 
doun, and the mooste cruel men of na- 
ciouns shulen caste hym fer vpon moun- 
teynes. And his braunchis shulen falle 
doun togidre in alle valeys, and his ten- 
dre trees shulen be brokyn togider in alle 
the rooches of erthe. And alle puplis of 
erthe shulen goo awey fro his shadew- 
ynge place, and shulen forsake hym. 
13 Alle volatilis of heuene dwelliden in his 
fallynge, and alle beestis of the regioun 
'4weren in his braunchis. Wherfor alle 
trees of watris shulen not be lift vp in 
her heiznes, nether shulen putte her hei3- 


din a. 


EZEKIEL. 


€ the grete 1. 


XXXI. 4-14. 


nurschiden hym, the depthe of watris en- 
hauuside him ; hise floodis fletiden out in 
the cumpas of hise rootis, and he sente 
out hise strondis to alle the trees of the 
cuntrei. Therfor his hijnesse was en-s 
haunsid ouer alle trees of the cuntrei, and 
hise trees weren multiplied, and hise 
braunchis weren reisid, for many watris. 
And whanne he hadde stretchid forth his 6 
schadewe, alle the volatils of the eir 
maden nestis in hise braunchis; and alle 
the beestis of forestis gendriden vndur 
hise boowis, and the cumpeny of ful many 
folkis dwellide vndur the schadewynge 
place of hym. And he was ful fair in his7 
greetnesse, and in alargyng of hise trees ; 
for the roote of hym was bisidis many 
watris. Cedris in the paradijs of Gods 
weren not hijere than he; fir trees at- 
teyneden not euenli to the hijnesse of 
hym, aud plane trees weren not euene 
with the boowis of hym. Ech tree of para- 
dijs of God was not maad lic hym and¢ his 
fairnesse. For Y made hym fair, and with9 
many and thicke boowis; and alle the trees 
of lust, that weren in the paradijs of God, 
hadden enuye to hym. Therfor the Lord to 
God seith these thingis, For that that he 
was reisid in hi3nesse, and he 3af his hy3- 
nesse greene and thicke, and his herte was 
reisid in his hi3jnesse; now Y haue 3oue 1! 
hym in to the hondis of the strongeste 
man of hethene men. And he doynge schal 
do tu that Assur; aftir the vnfeithfulnesse 
of hym Y castide hym out. And aliens, 12 
and the moost cruel men of naciouns, 
schulen kitte hym doun, and schulen caste 
hym forth on hillis. And hise braunchis 
schulen falle doun in alle grete® valeis, 
and hise trees schulen be brokun in alle 
roochis of stoon of erthe. And alle the 
puplis of erthe schulen go awei fro his” 
schadewing place, and schulen forsake 
hym. Alle! volatils of the eir dwelliden in13 
the fallyng of hym, and alle beestis of the 
cuntrei weren in the braunchis of hym. 
Wherfor alle the trees of watris schulen'4 


f Alle the 1. 


eo 1¢==X XXII. 2. 


hes amonge wody thingis, and ful of 
bouwis*, nether alle thingis that ben 
moystid with watris shulen stoonde in 
the hei3nes of hem. For alle men ben bi- 
taken in to deeth, to the vtmoostt loond 
in the mydil of sones of men, to hem that 
15goon doun in to the lake. Thes thingis 
seith the Lord God, In the day that" Y 
ladde in mournynge ‘in hellis’, Y hillide 
hym with depnes, and forbedde the floodis 
of hym, and constreinede many watris. 
Liban is debroken™ on hym, and alle trees 
160f the feeld ben smyten togidre. Of the 
soun of his fallynge Y monede togidre 
folkis, whanne Y ledde forth hym to helle, 
with hem that wenten doun in to the 
lake. And alle lowest trees of voluptee, 
noble and ful cleer in Liban, ben coum- 
fortid in erthe. and alle that weren 
17moystid in watres. For whi and thei 
with hym shulen gon doun ‘in to* helle, 
to the slayn men in swerd; and the arme 
of eche man shal sitte vndre the shadew- 
ynge place of hym, in the mydil of na- 
ciouns. To whom art thou maad lije, 
A! thou noble and hei3e amonge trees of 
voluptee? Loo! thon art led forth with 
trees of voluptee to the last loond, or 
vimestY. In the mydil of vneyrcumcidid 
men thou shalt slepe, with hem that 
ben slayn with swerd. He is Pharao, and 
al the multitude of him, seith the Lord 
God. 


CAP. XXXII. 


1 And it is maad in the twelueth jeer, 
in the twelueth moneth, in oon of the 
moneth, the word of the Lord is maad 
2to me, seiynge, Sone of man, tak to a la- 
mentacioun vpon Pharao, kyng of Egipt, 
and thou shalt seye to hym, To a lioun 
of folkis thou art lickened, and? to a 
dragoun that is in the see. And thou 
wyndewist® with horn in thi flodis, and 
trublist to gidre watris with thi feet, and 


8 bowis nether alle thingis and ful of bowis @ pr.m. Hn. 


w broken G sec.m. *toGH. Y ullermost n. 


Shen. btreen. iOm.n. 


EZEKIEL. 


z Om. G pr.m. H. 


k wyndowidist K sec. m. 


573 


not be reisid in hir hijnesse, nether schu- 
len sette hir hi3nesse among places ful of 
woode, and ful of boowis, and alle trees 
that ben moistid of watris schulen not 
stonde in the hijnesse of tho. For alle thei 
ben 3ouun in to deth, to the ferthest lond 
in the myddis of the sones of men, to hem 
that goon doun in to the lake. The Lord 1s 
God seith these thingis, In the dai whanne 
he 3ede doun to hellis, Y& brou3te yn 
mourenyng; Y hilide hym with depthe of 
watris, and I forbede his flodis, and Y 
refreynede many watris. The Liban was 
sori on him, and alle the trees of the feeld 
weren shakun of the soun of his falling. 1« 
I mouide togidere hethene men, whanne 
Y ledde hym doun to helle, with hem that 
jeden doun in to the lake. And alle trees” 
of likyng, noble trees, and ful cleere in the 
Liban, alle that weren moistid with wa- 
tris, weren coumfortid in the loweste lond. 
For whi also thei schulen go doun with 17 
hym to helle, to slayn men with swerd ; 
and the arm of ech man schal sitte vndur 
the schadewyng place of hym, in the myd- 
dis of naciouns. To whom art thou licued, 18 
thou noble and hi3 among the trees of 
likyng? Lo! thou art led doun with the 
trees of likyng to the fertheste lond. In 
the myddis of vnecircumcidid men thou 
schalt slepe, with hem that ben slayn bi 
swerd. Thilke is Farao, and al‘ the mul- 
titude of hym, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXXII. 


And it was don in the tweluethe 3eer,1 
in the tweluethe monethe, in the firste dai 
of the monethe, the word of the Lord was 
maad to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of2 
man, take weilyng on Farao, kyng of 
Egipt, and thou schalt seie to hym, Thou 
were maad lijk to a lioun of hethene men, 
and to a dragoun whiche is in the see, 
And thou wyndewist* with horn in thi 
floodis, and thou disturblidist! watris with 


t vtermost ey.  whanne GH. ¥ to hillis Giz. 


& wyndowedist GH. 


1 disturblist FN. 


574 


3thou defoulidist the flodis of hem. Ther- 
for thes thingis seith the Lord God, Y 
shal sprede out upon thee my nette in 
multitude of many puplis, and Y shal 
adrawe out thee in my nette; and Y 
shal caste thee fer in the loond. Vpon the 
face of the feeld Y shal caste thee a wey, 
and J shal make vpon thee for to dwelle 
alle volatilis of heneue, and Y shal fulfille 
sof thee the” beestis of al erthe.. And Y 
shal 3yue thi fleshis vpon hillis, and Y 
shal fnlfille thi smale hillis with thi 
sroote; aud Y shal moyste the erthe with 
stynke of thi blood, more ouere moun- 
teyns and valeis shulen be fulfillid of 
7thee. And Y shal keuere heuens, whanne 
thou shalt be quenchid, and Y shal make 
the sterris of it for to waxe blac; Y shal 
keuere the sunne with cloude, and the 
smone shal not 3yue his li3t. Y shal make 
alle liz3tmakers of heuen for to mourne 
vpon thee, and Y shal 3yue derknessis 
vpon thi loond, seith the Lord God; 
whanne thi woundid men shulen falle 
doun in the mydil of erthe, seith the 
Lord God. And Y shal stire to wraththe 
the herte of many puplis, whanne Y shal 
in leede thi contricioun in folkis, vpon 
10loondis whiche thou knowist not. And 
Y shal make many puplis for to wondre 
greetli vpon thee, and the kyngis of hem 
with ful myche orrour shulen be agast 
vpon thee, for alle thi wickidnessis whiche 
thou wrou3tist, whanne my swerd shal 
bigynue for to flee vpon the facis of hem. 
And thei shwen wondre sodeynli, eche for 
11 his soule, in the day of his fallyng. For 
thes thingis seith the Lord God, The 
swerd of the kyng of Babiloyne shal 
12come to thee; in swerdis of stronge men 
Y shal cast doun thi multitude, alle thes 
folkis ben vnexpugnable, 07 mowen not 
be ouercomen. And thei shulen destruye 
the pryde of Egipt, and the multitude of 
\3it shal be scatrid. And I shal leese alle 
heestis therof, that weren vpon many 


EZEKIEL. 


XXXII. 3-——13- 


thi feet, and™ defoulidist the floodis of 
tho. Therfor the Lord God seith these3 
thingis, Y schal spredde abrood my net on 
thee in the multitude of many puples, and 
Y schal drawe thee out in my net; and4 
Y schal caste forth thee in to erthe. On 
the face of the feeld Y schal caste thee 
awei, and Y schal make alle the volatils 
of heuene to dwelle on thee, and Y schal 
fille of thee the beestis of al erthe. Ands 
Y schal 3yue thi fleischis on hillis, and Y 
schal fille thi litle hillis with thi root; andé 
Y schal inoiste the erthe with the stynk 
of thi blood on mounteyns, and valeis 
schulen be fillid of thee. And whanne7z 
thou schalt be quenchid, Y schal hile 
heuenes, and Y schal make blak the sterris 
therof; Y schal kyuere the sunne with a 
clowde, and the moone schal not 3yue hir 
lizt. Y"schal make alle the 1i3t 3yueriss 
of heuene to mourne on thee, and Y schal 
3yue derknessis on thi lond, seith the° 
Lord God; whanne thi woundid men schu- 
len falle doun in the myddis of erthe, 
seith the Lord God. And Y schal terres 
to wraththe the herte of many puplis, 
whanne Y schal bringe in thi sorewe 
among folkis, on londis whiche thou know- 
ist not. And Y schal make many puplis 10 
to wondre on thee, and the kyngis of hem 
schulen drede with ful greet hidousnesse? 
ou thee, for alle thi wickidnessis whiche 
thou wrou3tist, whanne my swerd schal 
bigynne to flee on the faces‘ off hem. And 
alle men schulen be astonyed sudenli, for 
her lijf, in the dai of her fallyng. For 
the Lord God seith these thingis, The 
swerd of the king of Babiloyne schal come 
to thee; in swerdis of stronge men Y 12 
schal caste doun thi multitude, alle these 
folkis ben not able to be ouercomun. And 
thei schulen waste the pride of Egipt, and 
the multitude therof schal be distried. 
And Y schal leese alle the beestis therof, 13 
that weren on ful many watris; and the 
foot of a man schal no more troble tho 


b Om. GH. 


m and thou 1. 
9d face in, Ton kK, 


n And Y 1. o thi a. 


P orrour, or [ether F1KS] hidousnesse CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


XXXII. 14—24. 


watris; and the foot of man shal namore 
truble hem togider, nether the clawe of 
14 beestis shal truble hem. Thanne I shal 
3elde the watris of hem clennest, and Y 
shal leede to the floodis of hem as oyle, 
isseith the Lord God, whanne Y shal 
3yue the looud of Egipt desolat. Forsothe 
the loond shal be forsakyn of his plentee, 
whanne I shal smyte alle the dwellers 
therof; and thei shulen wite, for I the 
ig Lord. There is mournynge, and the 
dou3ters of folkis shulen weile hym; vpon 
Egipt, and vpon the multitude therof 
thei shulen weile hym, seith the Lord 
i7God. And it is don in the twelueth jeer, 
in the fiftenthe of the moneth, the word 
of the Lord is maad to me, seyynge, 
isSone of man, syng thou a mournynge 
song vpon the multitude of Egipt, and 
draw doun the ilke same, and dou3tris 
of stronge folkis to the vttermest loond, 
with thes that wenten doun in to the 
iolake. Hou myche thou art fayrer, go 
doun, and sleep with vncircumcidid men. 
20In the mydil of slayn men thei shulen 
falle doun by swerd; a swerd is 3ouun, 
and thei drowen it to‘, and alle the pu- 
21 plis therof. The moost my3ti of stronge 
shulen speke to it, fro the mydil of helle, 
whiche with helpers‘ therof wenten doun, 
and slepten vncircumcidid, and slayn bi 
geswerd. There Assur, and al his multi- 
tude; in the® cumpas of hym the sepul- 
cris of hym, alle the slayn, and whiche 
asfellen doun bi swerd, whos sepulcris 
ben 3euen in the last thingis of the lake. 
And the multitude’ of hym is maad by 
cumpas of his sepulcre, alle slayn, and 
fallynge by swerd, whiche 3auen sum- 
tyme her‘ strengthe in the lond of lyu- 
2synge men. There Helam, and al his 
multitude bi cumpas of his sepulcre ; alle 
these slayn, and fallynge by swerd, 
whiche wenten doun vneircumcidid to 
the vttermost lond; the whiche puttiden 
her dreed in the lond of lyuynge men, 
and thei baren her yuel fame with these 


¢ Om. en, 
from K. f Om. a. 


8 Om. FNX pr.m. 


4 the helpers eu. © Om. G prom.u. 


t hem tn. 


EZEKIEL. 575 


watris, nether the clee of beestis schal 
troble tho. Thanne Y schal 3elde the1s 
watris of hem clenneste, and Y schal 
brynge the floodis of hem as oile, seith 
the Lord God, whanne Y schal 3yue de-15 
solat the lond of Egipt. Forsothe the lond 
schal be forsakun of lis fulnesse, whanne 
Y schal smyte alle the dwellers therof ; 
and thei schulen wite, that Y aw the 
Lord. It is a weiling, and the dou3tris 1 
of hethene men schulen biweile hym; thei 
schulen biweile hym on Egipt, and thei 
schulen biwetle hym on the multitude 
therof, seith the Lord God. And it wasi7 
don in the tweluethe 3eer, in the fiftenthe 
dai of the monethe, the word of the Lord 
was inaad® to me, and he seide, Sone of tz 
man, synge thou a song of weilyng on the 
multitude of Egipt, and drawe thou doun 
it the same, and the dou3tris of stronge 
hethene men to the laste lond, with hem 
that 3eden doun in to the lake. In asi 
myche as thou art fairere, go doun, and 
slepe with vncircumcidid men. In the2o 
inyddis of slayn men thei schulen falle 
doun bi swerd ; a swerd is 3ouun, and thei 
drowen it to, and alle the puplis therof. 
The my3tieste of stronge men schulen2i 
speke to hym, fro the myddis of helle, 
whiche with her helperis 3eden doun, and 
slepten vncircumcidid, and slayn bi swerd. 
There zs Assur, and al his multitude; the 22 
sepulcris of hem ben in the cumpas of 
hym', alle slayn men, and" that fellen 
doun bi swerd, whose sepulcris ben 23 
3ouun in the laste thingis of the lake. 
And the multitude of hym is maad bi the 
cumpas of his sepulcre, alle slayn men, and 
fallynge doun bi swerd, whiche 3auen sum 
tyme her ferdfulnesse in the lond of lyu- 
ynge men. There zs Helam, and al the24 
multitude therof bi the cwmpas of his se-" 
pulcre; alle these weren slayn, and fall- 
ynge doun bi swerd, that 3eden doun 
yncircumcidid to the laste lond: whiche 
settiden her drede in the lond of lyuynge 
men, and baren her schenschipe with hem 


ee Subsequently to this place the text is taken again 


u Om. t. 


576 


25that gon doun into the lake. In the 
mydil of slayn men thei puttiden the 
couche of hym in alle his peplis; in the 
cumpas of hym the sepulcre® of hym. 
Alle these vncircumcidid and slayn with 
swerd, forsothe thei 3auen dreed in the 
lond of lyuynge men, and baren her yuel 
fame with these that gon don into the 
lake; in the mydil of slayn men thei ben 
26putt. There Mosoch and Tubal, and al 
his multitude ; in the cumpas of hym the 
sepulcris of hym. Alle these vucircum- 
cidid slayn, and fallyuge by swerd, for 
thei 3auen her ferdfulnesse in the lond 
270f lyuynge men. And nowe thei shuln 
sleep with the stronge, and fallynge, and 
vucircumcidid, whiche wenten doun into 
helle with her armers, and han putt her 
swerdis yndir her hedis. And her wickid- 
Nessis weren in the boons of hem, for 
thei ben maad the dreed of hem in the 
28lond of lyuinge men. And therfore in 
the mydil of vncircumcidid thou shalt be 
defoulid, and shalt sleepe with slayn men 
by swerd, and whiche slepten with vn- 
29circumcidid. There Ydume, and kyngis 
therof, and alle duykis therof, whiche 
ben 3ouen with her oost, with the slayn 
bi swerd, and whiche slepten with vncir- 
cumcidid, and with these that wenten 
sodoun in to the lake. There alle princis 
of the north, and alle hunters, that ben 
led forth with the slayn, dreedynge and in 
her strengthe confoundid, whiche slepten 
vncircumcidid with the slayn by swerd, 
and baren her confusioun with these that 
si gon doun in to the laake. Pharao saw 
hem", and was coumfortid vpon his mul- 
titude whiche is slayn by swerd. And 
thei baren her confusioun, with these 
that wenten down into the laake, Pharao 
32 and al his oost, the Lord God saith; for 
he 3aaue his dreed in the lond of lyuynge 
men, and he slepte in the mydil of vneir- 
cumcided men, with the slayn in swerd, 
Pharao, and al his multitude, saith the 
Lord God. 


& sepulecris 4. 


v Om. 1Nn. 


EZEKIEL. 


w defoulid in. 


XXXII. 25—32. 


that goon doun in to the lake. In the2s 
myddis of slayn men thei puttiden his bed 
in alle the’ puplis of hym; his sepulcre 
is in the cumpas of hym. Alle these weren 
vneircumcidid and slayn bi swerd, for thei 
jauen drede in the lond of lyuynge men, 
and baren her schenschipe with hem that 
gon doun in to the lake; thei ben set in 
the myddis of slayn men. There ben 26 
Mosoch and Tubal, and al the multitude 
therof; the sepulcris therof ben in the 
cumpasse therof. Alle these men vncir- 
cumcidid weren slayn, and fallynge doun 
bi swerd, for thei 3auen her drede in the 
lond of lyuynge men. And thei schulen27 
not slepe with stronge men, and fallynge 
doun, and vncircumcidid, that 3eden doun 
in to helle with her armuris, and puttiden 
her swerdis vndur her heedis. And the 
wickidnessis of hem weren in the boonys 
of hem, for thei weren maad the drede of 
stronge men in the lond of lyuynge men. 
And thou therfor schalt be al to-foulid™ 28 
in the myddis of vncircumcidid men, and 
schalt slepe with hem that ben slayn bi* 
swerd. There is Idumee, and the kingis29 
therof, aud alle duykis therof, that ben 
3ouun with her oost, with men slayn bi 
swerd, and which slepten with vneircum- 
cidid men, and with hem that jeden doun 
in to the lake. There ben alle princes of 30 
the north, and alle hunteris, that weren 
led forth with slayn men, that ben dred- 
inge and schent in her strengthe, which 
slepten vncircumcidid with men slayn bi 
swerd, and baren her schenschipe with 
hem that 5eden doun in to the lake. Fa-3: 
rao si3 hem, and was coumfortid on al his 
multitude that was slayn bi swerd. And 
Farao and al his oost, seith the Lord God, 
baren her schenschipe with hem that 3eden 
doun in to the lake; for he 3af his dredes2 
in the lond of lyaynge men. And Farao 
and al his multitude slepte in the myddis 
of vncircumcidid men, with men slayn bi 
swerd, seith the Lord God. 


bh him 4. 


xX with 1. 


XXXII. I—10. 


CAP. XXXIII. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, sayinge, Sone of man, speke thou to 
the sones of thi peple, and thou shalt 
saye to hem, The erthe, whann I shal 
brynge yn vp on it a swerd, and the 
peple of the lond shal take oon man of 
his last, and shal ordeyn hym a byholder 
3vpon it, and he shal see a swerd cum- 
mynge vpon the lond, and shal synge 
with an horn, and shal shewe to the pe- 
4ple, forsothe a man heerynge, who euer 
he is, the soun of the horn, andi shal not 
kepe hym self, and the swerd shal cum, 
and shal take hym, the blood of hym shal 
5be vpon his hed. 
the horn, and kepte not him silf, the 
blood of hym shal be in hym; forsothe 
3if he shal kepe hym, he shal saaue his 
ssoule. That 3if the biholder, or aspier, 
shal see the swerd cummynge, and shal 
not soun in the horn, and the peple shal 
not keepe it self, and the swerd shal cum, 
and take a soule of hem, sothely he is 
taken in his wickidnesse; forsothe I shal 
a3ein seeke the blood of hym of the 
hond of the biholder, not the peple of 
7the Ilond, bot Y. And thou, sone of man, 
Y 3ane thee a biholder to the hous of 
Yrael; therfore thou heerynge a word of 
my mouth shalt shewe to hem of me. 
83if me sayinge to the vnpitous man, Vn- 
pitous man, by deeth thou shalt deye, 
thou shalt not speke, that the vnpitous 
man kepe him silf fro his waye, the ilke 
vnpitous man shal deye in his wickid- 
nesse; forsothe I shal a3en seeke the 
9bloode of hym of thin hond. Forsothe 
3if thee tellynge to the vnpytous man, 
that he be conuertid, he shal not’ be con- 
uertid fro his waye, he shal dye in his 
wickidnes; sothely thou hast delyuered thi 
iosoule. Therfore thou, sone of man, saye to 
the hous of Yrael, Thus 3e spaken, say- 


EZEKIEL. 


He herd the soun of © 


577 


CAP. XXXIII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, 2 
speke to the sones of thi puple, and thou 
schalt seie to hem, A Jond whanne Y 
bringe in a swerd ‘on it, and the puple of 
the lond takithY o man of hise laste men, 
and makith hym aspiere? on hym, ands 
he seeth a swerd comynge on the lond, 
and sowneth with a clarioun, and tellith 
to the puple, forsothe a man that herith,4 
who euer he is, the sowne of the clarioun, 
and kepith not him silf, and the swerd 
cometh, and takith hym awei, the blood 
of hym schal be on the heed of hym. Hes 
herde the sown of the* clarioun, and kepte 
not hym silf, his blood schal be in hym; 
forsothe if he kepith hym silf, he schal 
saue his lijf. That if the aspiere® seeth« 
a swerd comynge, and sowneth not with 
a clarioun, and the puple kepith not hym 
silf, and the swerd cometh, and takith 
awei a man. of hem, sotheli he is takun 
in his wickidnesse; but Y schal seke the 
blood of hym of the hond of the! aspiere. 
And, thou, sone of man, Y 3af thee aspiere®7 
to the hous of Israel; therfor thou schalt 
here of my mouth a word, and schalt telle 
to hem of me. If whanne Y seie to thes 
wickid man, Thou, wickid man, schalt die 
bi deth, thou spekist not, that the wickid 
man kepe hym silf fro his weie, thilke 
wickid man schal die in his wickidnesse, 
but Y schal seke his blood of thin hond. 
Forsothe if whanne thou tellist to thes 
wickid man, that he be conuertid fro his 
weies, he is not conuertid fro his weie, he 
schal die in his wickidnesse; certis thou 
hast delyuered thi soule. Therfore thou, 10 
sone of man, seie to the hous of Israel, 
Thus 3e spaken, seiynge, Oure wickid- 
nessis and oure syunes ben on vs, and we 
failen in tho; hou therfor moun we lyue ? 
seie thou to hem, Y lyue, seith the Lord 1 


i Om. 4G prim. H. 


¥Y take N. 
MNPQRSUX. d Om. enrRv. 
EFGIKMNPQRSUXY. 


VOL. ILI. 


2 a biholdere, ether aspiere CEFGIIKMNPQRSUXY. i 
e a lookere c pr. m. an ouerseer c sec. m. marg. a lookere, ether aspiere 


a@Om.1. Cher. ¢ biholdere ceFGnik 


4E 


578 EZEKIEL. 


inge, Oure wickidnessis and our synnys 
ben vpon vs, and in hem we failen not; 
uhou: therfore shuln we mown lyue? saye 
thou to hem, Y lyue, saith the Lord God, 
Y wole not the deth of the vnpitous man, 
bot that the vnpitous man be conuertid 
fro his way, and lyue; be 3e conuertid 
fro 30ur warst wayes, and whi shuln 3e 
dye, 3e hous of Yrael? And so thou, 
sone of man, saye to the sones of thi 
peple, The ri3twijsnesse of a iust man 
shal not delyuere hym, in whateuer day 
he shal synne; and the vnpitee of the 
vnpitous man shal not anoye to hym, in 
whateuer day he shal be conuertid fro 
his vnpitee; and a iust man shal not 
mowe lyue in his rij3twisnesse, in what- 
igeuer day he shal synne. he, if I shal 
saye to the iust man, that in lijf he shal 
lyue, and he tristyng in his rij3twisnesse 
shal do wickidnesse, alle his ri3twisnessis 
shuln be bitaken to for3etyng, and in his 
wickidnesse whiche he wrou3te, in the 
isylk he shal dye. Forsothe 3if I shal 
saye to the vnpitous man, Bi deth thou 
shalt die, and he shal do penaunce of his 
symne, and shal do dome and _ ri3twis- 
isnesse, and the ylk vnpitous shal restore 
the wed, and 3eeld the rauyn, shall go in 
the maundementis of lijf, nether shal do 
any thing vuiust, in lijf he shal lyue, 
isand he shal not dye. Alle the synnes 
whiche he synnyde, shuln not be rettid, ov 
acountid, to hym; he dide dome and ri3t- 
17 wysnesse, and in lijf he shal lyue. And 
the sones of thi peple saiden, The waye 
of the Lord is not of euen wei3te!; and 
isthe waye of hem is vniust. Forsothe 
whan a iust man shal go awey fro his 
ri3twijsnesse, and shal do wickidnesse, 
i9he shal dye in hem; and whann the 
vnpitous man shal go awey fro his wick- 
idnesse, and shal do dome and_ ri3twis- 
20nesse, he shal lyue in hem. And 3e 
sayn, The way of the Lord is not ri3t. 
3e hous of Yrael, I shal deeme eche of 


k Om. ac. 


f wile not 1. 


gin the 1. 


XXXII. 11—20. 


God, Y nylef the deth of the wickid man, 
but that the wickid man be conuertid fro 
his weie, and lyue; be 3e conuertid fro 
3oure worste weies, and whi schulen 3e 
die, the hous of Israel? Therfor thou, 12 
sone of man, seie to the sones of thi pu- 
ple, The riz3tfulnesse of a ri3tful man schal 
not delyuere hym, in whateuer dai he do- 
ith synne; and the wickidnesse of a wickid 
man schal not anoye him, in what euere dai 
he is conuertid fro his wickidnesse; and 
a iust man schal not mowe lyue in his 
ri3tfulnesse, in what euer dai he doith 
synne. Also if Y seie to a iust man,13 
that he schal lyue bi lijf, and he tristith 
in his riz3tfulnesse, and doith wickidnesse, 
alle his ri3tfulnessis schulen be 3ouun to 
for3etyng, and in his wickidnesse which 
he wrou3te, in that he schal die. For-14 
sothe if Y sele to the wickid man, Thou 
schalt. die bi deth, and he doith penaunce 
for his synne, and doith dom and ri3tful- 
nesse, and if thilke wickid man restorith 15 
a wed, and 3eldith raneyn, and goith in’ 
comaundementis of lijf, and doith not ony 
vniust thing, he schal lyue bi lijf, and 
schal not die. Alle hise synnes which 1s 
he synnede, schulen not be arettid to 
hym; he dide doom and ri3tfulnesse, he 
schal lyue bi lijf. And the sones of thit7 
puple seiden, The weie of the Lord is not 
euene” wei;te; and the weie of hem is 
vniust. For whanue a iust man ‘ goith 1s 
awei fro his ri3tfulnesse, and doith wick- 
idnessis, he schal die in tho; and whanne 19 
a wickid man goith awei fro his wickid- 
nesse, and doith dom and ri3tfulnes, he 
schal lyue in tho. And 3e seien, The weie 20 
of the Lord is not ri3tful. Y schal deme 
ech man bi hise weies of 30u, the hous of 
Israel. And it was doon in the tweluethe 21 
3eer, in the tenthe inonethe, in the fyuethe 
dai of the monethe of our passyng ouer, 
he that fledde fro Jerusalem cam to me, 
and seide, The citee is distried. Forsothe 22 
the hond of the Lord was maad to me in 


I weizte, or euen charge AGM. 


h of euene rFHIKMNQSUX. 


- ged. 


XXXII. 21—3o. 


213ou after his waies. And it is don in 
the twelfthe 3eer, in the tenthe monethe, 
in the fifthe of the monethe of oure trans- 
migracioun, he cam to me that flei3 fro 
Jerusalem, sayinge, The cytee is distruy- 
Forsothe the hond of the Lord was 
maad to me in the euen, byfore he came 
that flei3, and he opnyde my mouthe, til 
he came to me in the morewnyng; and, 
my mouth opnyd, Y was na more stille. 
23 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2ame, sayinge, Sone of man, thei that 
dwellen in these ruynouse thinges vpon 
the erthe of Yrael, sayinge, sayn, Abra- 
ham was oon, and by eritage he weeldide 
the lond; forsothe we ben manye, the 


lond is 30uen to vs in to possessioun. - 


2 Therfore thou shalt saye to hem, These 
thingus saith the Lord God, Where 3e 
shuln weelde the lond by eritage, whiche 
eten blood, and reysen 3our ee3en to jour 

26 vuclennessis, and sheden out blood? 3e 
stoden in jour swerdis, 3e diden 3our 
abominaciouns, and eche man defoulide 
the wijf of his nei3bore; and shul 3e 

27weelde the Jond by eritage? These 
thingus thou shalt saye to hem, Thus 
saith the Lord God, Y lyue, for thei that 
dwellen in ruynouse thingis, shuln falle 
by swerd, and he that is in the feeld, shal 
be taken to beestis for to be deuoured ; 


forsothe thei that in strengthis and den- 


agnys ben, by pestilence shuln dye. And I 
shal 3eue the lond in to wildernesse, and 
into desert, and the pride and strengthe™ 
therof shall faile; and the hillis of Yrael 
shuln be desolat, for that that ther is 

29no man that passith by hem. And thei 
shuln wite, for I the Lord, whanne I 
shal 3eue the lond of hem desolate and 
desert, for alle her abomynaciouns whiche 

30thei wrou3ten. And thou, sone of man, 
the sones of thi peple that speken of thee 
bisijdis wallis, and in doris of housis, 
and sayn, oon to an other, a man to his 


EZEKIEL. 579 


the euentid, bifore that he cam that fledde, 
and he openyde my mouth, til he cam to 
me eerli; and whanne my mouth was 
openyd, Y was no more stille. And the23 
word of the Lord was maad to me, and 
he seide, Thou, sone of man, thei that 24 
dwellen in ‘thingis in poynt to falle douni 
on the erthe of Israel, seien, spekynge, 
Abraham was oon, and bi eritage he hadde 
the Jond in possessioun ; forsothe we ben 
manye, the lond is 3ouun to vs in to pos- 
sessioun. Therfor thou schalt seie to hem, 25 
The Lord God seith these thingis, Whe- 
ther 3e that eten in blood, and reisen 3oure 
izen to joure vnclennessis, and scheden 
blood, schulen haue in possessioun the 
lond bi eritage? 3e stoden in 30ure26 
swerdis, 3e diden 30ure abhomynaciouns, 
and ech man defoulide the wijf of his 
nei3bore; and schulen je welde the lond 
bi eritage ? Thou schalt seie these thingis27 
to hem, Thus seith the Lord God, Y lyue, 
for thei that dwellen in ‘thingis redi to 
falle doun*, schulen falle doun bi swerd, 
and he that is in the feld, schal be j3ouun 
to beestis to be denourid; but thei that 
ben in stronge holdis and in dennes, schu- 
len die bi pestilence. And Y schal 3yue2s 
the lond in to wildirnesse, and in to de- 
sert, and the pryde and strengthe! therof 
schal faile; and the hillis of Israel schulen 
be maad desolat, for noon is that schal 
passe bi tho. And thei schulen wite, that 29 
Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal 3yue her 
Iond desolat and desert, for alle her abho- 
mynaciouns whiche thei wrou3ten. And 30 
thou, sone of man, the sones of thi puple 
that speken of thee bisidis wallis, and in 
the doris of housis, and seien, oon to an 
other, a man to his nei3bore, and speken, 
Come 3e, and here we, what is the word 
goynge out fro the Lord; and thei comen 31 
to thee, as if my puple entrith, and my 
puple sitten bifore thee, and thei heren 
thi wordis, and doon not tha; for thei 


m the strengthe 4. 


{ these rynouse thingis CEFGHIKMNPQNS sec. m. UX. ether redi to falle doun kK marg. these gryuouse 


thingis s pr.m. 
redi to falle 1. ruinouse thinges R. 


k ruinous thingis, ether redi to falle doun CEFGIKMNPQSUXY. ruynouse thingis, ether 
l the strengthe r. 


4E2 


580 


nei3bore, spekynge, Cumme 3e, and heere 
wee, whiche is the word goynge out of 

3ithe Lord; and thei camen to thee, as 
3if my peple go yn, and my peple sitten 
bifore thee, and heeren thi woordis, and 
don not hem; for thei turnen hem in to 
a songe of her mouthe, and the herte of 

32hem sueth her auerise; and it is to hem 
as a songe of musyke, whiche is sungen 
by soft and sweet soun; and thei heren 

33thi wordis, and don hem not; and 
whanne that thing that is byfore saide 
shal cume, forsothe loo! it cummeth, 
thanne thei shuln wite, for a prophete 
was among hein. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2 me, sayinge, Sone of man, prophecie thou 
of the shepperdis of Yrael, prophecie thou; 
and thou shalt saye to the sheperdis, 
These thingis saith the Lord God, Woo 
to the sheperdis of Yrael, that fedden 
hemself; wher flockis ben fedd of shep- 
serdis? 3ee eeten the mylk, and 3e weren 
keuered with the wollis, and 3e slewen 
that thing that was fat; forsothe 3e fed- 
4den not my flok”. 3e maden not sad to- 
gidre that that was seek, or vnastedefast, 
and 3e heeliden not that that was seek, 
or soor; 3e bounden not to that that was 
broken, and 3e ledden not ajein that that 
is° cast awey, and 3e sou3ten not that 
that perishide; bot with steernesse 3e co- 
sinaundide to hem, and with power. And 
my sheep ben scatrid, for that that ther 
was no? sheeperd; and thei ben inaad in 
to. deuouryng of alle beestis of the feeld, 
cand thei ben scatrid. My flockis erreden 
in alle hillis, and in eche hee3 litil hill, 
and ypon.al the face of erthe my flockis 
ben scatrid, and there was not that a3ein 
7sou3te. Therfore, 3e sheperdis, heer’ the 
sword of the Lord; Y lyue, saith the Lord 
God, for that. that my flockis ben maad 


n folk K. © was 4. 


Mm was N. nN come A. 
q not syik F pr. im. s. 


EZEKIEL. 


° a profete was A pr. m. EFGHIKMNPQRSUX. Y a profete c. 
* Om. A pr. m. CEFGHIKMNPQSU pr. mt. X. 


XXXII. 31—XXXIV. 8, 


turnen tho in to the song of her mouth, 
and her herte sueth her auerice; and its2 
is to hem as a song of musik, which is 
songun bi soft and swete sown; and thei 
heren thi wordis, and thei doon not tho; 
and whanne that that is™ bifore seidess 
cometh", for lo! it cometh, thanne thei 
schulen wite, that ‘profetis weren® among 
hem. 


CAP. XXXIV. 


And the word of the Lord was maad1 
to me, and he seide, Sone of man, profesie 2 
thou of the schepherdis of Israel, profesie 
thou; and thon schalt seie to the schep- 
herdis, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Wo to the schepherdis of Israel, that fed- 
den hym silf; whether flockis ben not fed 
of schepherdis ? 3e eeten mylk, and weren3 
hilid with wollis, and 3e killiden that that 
was fat; but 3e fedden not my floc. 3e4 
maden not sad that that was vnstidfast, 
and 3e maden not hool that thatP was 
sijk4; 3e bounden not that that was 
brokun, and 3e brou3ten not azen that 
that was cast awei, and 3e sou3ten not 
that that perischide; but 3e comaundiden 
to hem with sturnenesse, and with power. 
And imy scheep weren scaterid, for nos 
sheepherde was; and thei weren maad in 
to deuouryng of alle beestis of the feeld, 
and thei weren scaterid. My flockis err-¢ 
iden in alle mounteyns, and in ech hi3 hil, 
and my flockis weren scaterid on al the 
face of erthe, and noon was that sou3te. 
Therfor, scheepherdis, here 3e the word of7 
the Lord; Y lyue, seith the Lord God’, fors 
whi for that that my flockis ben maad in 
to raneyn, and my scheep in to deuouryng 


Pnot 4. 4 here 3e 4, 


P Om. 1. 


XXXIV. 9—18. 


in to rauyne, and my sheep in to deuour- 
yng of alle beestis of the feld, for that 
that ther was no sheperd, forsothe nether 
sheperdis sou3ten my floc, bot the shep- 
erdis fedden hemself, and fedden not my 
9flockis; therfore, 3e sheperdis, heer 3ee 
i0the word of the Lord, These thingis saith 
the Lord God, Loo! I my self vpon the 
sheperdis; I shal a3ein seeke my floc of 
the hond of hem, and I shal make hem 
for to ceese, that thei na more feede my 
floc, ne the sheperdis? shuln more feede 
hemself. And I shal deliuer my floc of 
the mouthe of hem, and it shal na more 
11 be to hem in to mete. For these thingus 
saith the Lord God, Loo! I myself shal 
ajein seeke iny sheep, and I shal visite 
izhem. As a shepherd visitith his floc, in 
the dai whan he shal be in the mydil of 
his scatered sheep, so I shal visite my 
sheep, and shal delyuere hem of alle 
places in whiche thei weren scatered, in 
isday of cloude, and derknesse. And I shal 
leede hem out of peplis, and I shal gadre 
hem of Jondis, and I shal leede hem into 
her lond, and I shal feede hem in the 
hillis of Yrael, in strondis, and in alle 
isseetis of erthe. .In pasturis most plen- 
teuouse Y shal feede hem, and in the 
hee} mounteyns of Yrael the lesewis of 
hem shuln be; there thei shuln a3ein reste 
in erbis wexynge greene, and in fat 
lesewis thei shuln be fed vpon the moun- 
isteyns of Yrael. Y shal feede my sheep, 
and I shal make hem for to reste, saith 
icthe Lord God. Y* shal a3ein seeke that 
that perishide, and I shal a3ein leede that 
that was cast awey; and I shal bynd to 
that that was to gidre broken, and I shal 
coumforte that that was seek; and J sha) 
keepe that that is fat and strong, and I 
i7shal feede hem in dome ; forsothe 3e 
ben my flockis. These thingus saith the 
Lord God, Loo! I deeme bitwixe beest 
and beest, and wether and buc of geet. 
18 Wher it was not ynew3 to 30u for to de- 


4 sheperd x. 


8 Om. cEFGHKMNPQRsUX. t Om. 1. 


HIKMQRSU. 


EZEKIEL. 


U Om. CEFGHIKMNPQHSUX. 


581 


of alle beestis of the feeld, for that that 
no scheepherde was, for the scheepherdis 
sou3ten not my floc, but the scheepherdis 
fedden hem silf, and fedden not my flockis; — 
therfor, scheepherdis, here 3e the word of 9 
the Lord, The Lord God seith these thingis, 10 
Lo! Y my silf* am ouer scheepherdis; Y 
schal seke my floc of the hond of hem, 
and Y schal make hem to ceesse, that thei 
fede no more my flok, and that thet scheep- 
herdis feede no more hem silf. And Y schal 
delyuere my floc fro the mouth of hem, 
and it schal no more be in to mete to hem. 
For the Lord God seith these thingis, Lo!1 
Y my silf schal seke my scheep, and Y 
schal visite hem. As a scheepherde visitith 12 
his floc, in the dai whanne he is in the 
myddis of hise scheep ‘that ben" scaterid, 
so Y schal visite my scheep; and Y schal 
delyuere hem fro alle places in whiche 
thei weren scaterid, in the dai of cloude, 
and of derknesse. And Y schal leede hem 1s 
out of puplis, and Y schal gadere hem fro 
londis, and Y schal brynge hem in to her 
lond, and Y schal feede hem in the hillis 
of Israel, in-ryueris, and in alle seetis of 
erthe. Y schal feede hem in moost plen- 14 
teouse pasturis, and the lesewis of hem 
schulen be in the hi3¥ hillis of Israel; there 
thei schulen reste in greene eerbis, and in 
fatte lesewis thei schulen be fed on the 
hillis of Israel. Y schal fede my scheep, 15 
and Y schal make hem to ligge, seith the 
Lord God. I schal seke that that pe-ic 
rischide, and Y schal brynge a3en that 
that was cast awei; and Y schal bynde 
that that was brokun, and Y schal make 
sad that that was sijk; and Y schal kepe 
that that was* fat and strong; and Y 
schal feede hem in doom; forsothe 3e ben 17 
my flockis. The Lord God seith these 
thingis, Lo! Y deme bitwixe beeste and 
beeste, and a wethir and a buc of geet. 
Whether it was not enow3 to 30u to de-18 
uoure good pasturis ? Ferthermore and 3e 
defouliden with 3oure feet the rermenauntis 


t And Y a, 


vOmyn. WOmN. *is cEF 


582 


uoure good lesewes? More ouer and 3e 
defouliden with 3our feet the relifis of 
3our lesewis, and whan 3e dronken most 
cleer water, and 3e trubliden the tother 
19 with 3our feet. And my sheep weren fed 
with these thingus that weren defoulid 
with 3our feet; and whiche thingus 3our 
20 feet trubliden, these thei drunken’. Ther- 
fore these thingis saith the Lord God to 
hem, Loo! I myself deeme bitwixe fat 


21 beeste and lene. For that that 3e punch-° 


iden with sydis, and shuldris, and with 
jour hornis wynewiden alle seek beestis, 
til thei weren scatered withouten forth, 
221 shal saue my floc, and it shal na more 
be into raueyn. And I shal deeme bitwix 
23beest and beest; and I shal reyse ypon 
hem oo sheperd, whiche shal feed hem, 
my seruaunt Dauyd; he shal feede hem, 
and be shal be to hem in to a sheperd. 
24Forsothe I the Lord shal be to hem in 
to God, and my seruaunt Dauith prince 
in the mydil of hem; forsothe I the 
25 Lord spake. And I shal make witli hein 
a couenaunt of pees, and I shal make for 
to ceese the werst beestis fro the erthe; 
and thei that dwellen in desert, sikir 
26shuln sleep in wilde wodes. And I shal 
putte hem in cumpas of my litil hill a 
blessyng, and I shal lede out rayn in his 
a7tyme. Raynes of blissyng shuln be, and 
the tree of the feeld shal 3eue his fruyt, 
and the erthe shal 3eue his buriownyng. 
And thei shuln be in her lond without 
dreed; and thei shuln wite, for I the 
Lord, whan I shal debrise the chaynes 
of her joc, and shal deliuere hem of the 
2shond of men comaundynge to hem. And 
thei shuln na more be in to raueyn in 
heithen men, nether beestis of the feeld 
shuln deuoure hem, bot thei shuln dwelle 
29 tristili without ony dreed. And I shal 
reyse to hem a iust buriownyng, o7 seed, 
named; and thei shuln na more be maad 
litil by hungre in erthe, nether thei shula 
heere more ouer the shendshipis of folkis, 


EZEKIEL. 


XXXIV. 19—~29. 


of 30ure lesewis, and whanne 3e drunken 
clereste watir, 3e disturbliden the residue 
with joure feet. And my scheep weren 19 
fed with thoY thingis that weren defoulid 
with joure feet; and thei drunken these 
thingis, that 3oure feet hadden troblid. 
Therfor the Lord God seith these thingis 20 
to 30u, Lo! Y my silf deme bitwixe a fat 
beeste and a leene beeste. For that that 21 
3e hurliden with sidis, and schuldris, and 
wyndewiden with joure hornes alle sike 
beestis, til tho weren scaterid without- 
forth, I schal saue my floc, and it schal 22 
no more be in to raueyn. And Y schal 
deme bitwixe beeste and beeste; and Y 23 
schal reise on tho” o* sheepherde, my ser- 
uaunt Dauid, that schal fede tho; he schal 
fede tho”, and he schal be ‘in to® a sheep- 
herde to hem. Forsothe Y the Lord schal 24 
be in to God to hem, and my seruaunt 
Dauid schal be prince in the myddis of 
hem; Y the Lord spak. And Y schal2s 
make with hem a couenaunt of pees, and 
Y schal make worste beestis to ceesse fro 
erthe; and thei that dwellen in desert, 
schulen slepe sikur in forestis. And Y26 
schal sette hem‘ blessyng in the cumpas 
of my litle hil, and Y schal lede doun 
reyn in his tyme. And reynes of blessyng 
schulen be, and the tre of the feeld schal 27 
3yue his frnyt, and the erthe schal 3yue 
his seed. And thei schulen be in her lond 
with out drede; and thei schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal al 
to-breke the chaynes of her 30k, and 
schal¢ delyuere hem fro the hond of hem 
that comaunden to hem. And thei schu-2s 
len no more be in to raueyn in to hethene 
men, nether the beestis of erthe schulen 
deuoure hem, but thei schnlen dwelle 
tristili with outen ony drede. And Y schal 29 
reise to hem a iust buriownyng named ; 
and thei schulen uo more be maad lesse 
for hunger in erthe, and thei schulen no 
more bere the schenschipisf of hethene 
men. And thei schulen wite, that Y am 30 


8 drynken 4. 


y these CEFHGIKMNPQRSUX. 
@Yschalrrn. f schenschip wn. 


zthee n. the s sec, m. 


aas. bthemsr. ¢Om.1. hem fo ber. 


XXXIV. 30-——-XXXV. 12. 


30 And thei shuln wite, for I the Lord God 
of hem with hem, and thei my peple, the 

31 hous of Yrael, saith the Lord God. For- 
sothe 3e men ben my flockis, the flockis 
of my lesewe; and I the Lord 3our God; 
saith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXXV. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad to 
2me, sayinge, Sone of man, putte thou thi 
face a3eins the mount of Seir; and thou 
shalt prophecie to it, and shalt saye to 
sit, These thingis saith the Lord God, 
Loo! I to thee, mount of Seir; I shal 
strecche out myn hond vpon thee, and 
aI schal 3iue thee desolat and desert. I 


schal distrye thi citees, and thou schalt ~ 


be desert; and thou schalt wite, for I the 
sLord. For that that thou was an enmy 
euer lastynge, and closidist to gydre the 
sones of Yrael in to hondis" of swerd, in 
the tyme of her affliccioun, in the tyme 
cof the last wickidnesse; therfore Y lyue, 
saith the Lord God, for I shal bitake 
thee to blood, and blood shal pursue thee; 
and whann thou hatist bloode, blood shal 
7pursue thee. And I shal 3eue the hil of 
Seir desolat and .desert, and I shal take 
awey fro ita man goynge and turnynge 
gazein; and I shal fulfille the hillis of it 
with careyns of slayn men. In thi litil 
hillis, and in thi valeis, and in rennynge 
brokis of reyn, men slayn in swerd shuln 
9falle doun. I shal bytake thee into wil- 
dernessis euerlastynge, and thi citees 
shuln not be enabitid; and 3e shuln wite, 
1ofor I the Lord God. For that that thou 
saidist, Two folkis and two londis shuln 
be myn, and bi eritage I shal weelde 
tthem, whan the Lord was there; ther- 
fore I lyue, saith the Lord God, for I 
shal do after thi wrath, and after thin 
enuye, whiche thou didist, hauynge hem 
in hate, and I shal be maad knowen by 
1zhem, when I shal deeme thee; and thou 
shalt wite, for J the Lord. Y herde alle 


EZEKIEL. 


583 


her Lord God with hem, and thei ben my 
puple, the hous of Israel, seith the Lord 
God. Forsothe 3e my flockis ben men,31 
the flockis of my lesewe; and Y am 3oure 
Lord God, seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XXXV. 


And the word of the Lord was maad to1 
me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man, sette2 
thi face a3ens the hil of Seir; and thou 
schalt profesie to it, and thou schalt seie 
to it, The Lord God seith these thingis,3 
Thou hil of Seir, lo! Y to thee; Y schal 
stretche forth myn hond on thee, and Y 
schal 3yue thee desolat and forsakun. Y4 
schal distrie thi citees, and thon schalt be 
forsakun ; and thou schalt wite, that Y cam 
the Lord. For thou were an enemye euer-s 
lastynge, and closidist togidere the sonis 
of Israel in to the hondis of swerd, in the 
tyme of her turment, in the tyme of the 
laste wickidnesse; therfor Y lyue, seith the« 
Lord God, for Y schal 3yue thee to blood, 
and blood schal pursue thee; and sithen 
thou hatidist blood, blood schal pursue 
thee. And Y schal 3yue the hil of Seir7 
desolat and forsakun, and Y schal take 
awei fro it a goere and a comere a3en; 
and Y schal fille the hillis therof withs 
the careyns of her slayn men. Men slayn 
by swerd schulen falle doun in thi litle 
hillis, and in thi valeys, and in this 
strondis. Y schal 3yue thee in to euer-9 
lastynge wildirnessis, and thi citees schu- 
len not be enhabitid ; and 3e schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord God. For thou seid-10 
ist, Twei folkis and twei londis schulen 
be myne, and Y schal welde tho bi eri- 
tage, whanne the Lord was there; ther-11 
for Y lyue, seith the Lord God, for Y schal 
do bi thi wraththe, and bi thin ennye, 
which thou didist, hatinge hem, and Y 
schal be made knowun bi hem, whanne 
Y schal deme thee; and thou schalt wite, 12 
that Y am the Lord. Y herde alle thi 


u the hoondis a. 


& Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX, 


584 


thi shendshipis, whiche thou hast spoken 
of the mounteyns of Yrael, sayinge, ‘Thei 
desert ben 3ouen to vs, for to deuoure. 
isAnd 3e han rise vpon me with 3our 
mouth, and han dymynued, o7 spoken 
yuel, azeins me; I herd 3our wordis. 
14 These thingis saith the Lord God, All 
erthe gladyuge, I shal dryue thee in to 
1swildrenesse. As thou ioyedist vpon.the 
eritage of the hous of Yrael, for that it 
was scatered, so I shal do to thee; the 
hill of Seir shal be seatered, and al Ydu- 
me; and thei shuln wite, for I the Lord. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 Forsothe thou, sone of man, prophecie 
vpon the mounteyns of Yrael; and thou 
shalt saye, Hillis of Yrael, heere 3e the 

2word of the Lord. These thingis saith 
the Lord God, For that that the enmye 
saide of 30u, Wele! 07° scorne, heeznessis® 
euerlastynge ben 3ouen to vs in to eritage; 

3therfore prophecie thou, and saye, These 
thingus saith the Lord God, For that that 
3e ben desolat and defoulid by cumpas, 
and maad in to eritage to other folkis, 
and 3ee stei3iden vp vpon the lipp of 
4tunge, and shendship of peple; therfore, 
3e hillis of Yrael, heereY the word of the 
Lord God. These thingis saith the Lord 
God to mounteyns, and smale hillis, to 
rennynge stremys of reyn, and valeys, 
and to desert wallingus, and to forsaken 
citees, that ben robbid, and scornyd of 
sother heithen men bi cumpas; therfore 
these thingus saith the Lord God, For in 
the fijr of my wrath I spake of other 
heithen men, and of al Ydume, that 3auen 
my lond to hem in to eritage in swerd, 
and al the herte, and of inwit, and cast- 
iden out it, that thei shulden waaste; 
6therfore prophecie thou vpon the erth 
of Yrael, and thou shalt saye to moun- 
teyns,and smale hillis, to hei3this of hillis, 
and valeys, These thingis saith the Lord 
God, For that that 3e ben desolat, loo! I 
in my wrath and in my woodnesse haue 
spoken. For that that 3e susteyneden 


EZEKIEL. 


XXXV. 13—XXXVI. 6. 


schenschipis, whiche thou: spakist of the 
hillis of Israel, and seidist, Zhe hillis of 
Israel ben forsakun, and ben 3oun to vs, 
for to deuoure. And 3e han rise on mei3 
with 30ure mouth, and 3e han deprauyd 
a3ens me; Y herde 3oure wordis. Thea 
Lord God seith these thingis, While al 
the lond is glad, Y schal turne thee in to 
wildernesse. As thou haddist ioie on the1s 
eritage of the hous of Israel, for it was 
distried, so Y schal do to thee; the hil of 
Seir schal be distried, and al Ydumee; 
and thei schulen wite, that Y am the 
Lord. 
CAP. XXXVI. 

Forsothe thou, sone of man, profesiet 
on the hillis of Israel; and thou schalt 
seie, Hillis of Israel, here 3e the word of 
the Lord. The Lord God seith these 
thingis, For that that the enemy seide of 
jou, Wel! euerlastyng hijnessis ben 3ouun 
to vs in to eritage; therefore profesies 
thou, and seie, The Lord God seith these 
thingis, For that that 3e ben maad desolat, 
and defoulid bi cumpas, and ben maad in 
to eritage to othere folkis, and 3e stieden 
on the lippe of tunge, and on the schen- 
schipe of puple; therfor, hillis of Israel, 4 
here 3e the word of the Lord God. The 
Lord God seith these thingis to the moun- 
teyns, and litle hillis, to strondis, and to 
valeis, and to peecis of wallis left, and to 
citees forsakun, that ben maad bare of 
puplis, and ben scorned of othere folkis 
bi cumpas ; therfore the Lord God seiths 
these thingis, For in the fier of my fer- 
uour Y spak of othere folkis, and of al 
Idumee, that 3auen my lond in to eritage 
to hem silf with ioie ‘and al herte, and of 
entent, and castiden out it, to distrie it; 
therfor profesie thou on the erthe of Is-6 
rael, and thon schalt seie to mounteyns, 
and litle hillis, to the hiznesse of hillis, 
and to valeis, The Lord God seith these 
thingis, For that that 3e ben desolat, lo! 
Y spak in my feruour and in my strong 
veniaunce. For that that 3e suffriden schen- 
schipe of hethene men; therfor the Lord7 


Vv here ye 4, 


XXXVI. 7—19. 


7the confusioun of heithen men. Therfore 
these thingis saith the Lord God, I reys- 
ide inyn hond a3eins heithen men, that 
ben in 3our cumpas, that thei bere her 
sconfusionn. Forsothe, 3e hillis of Yrael, 
buriown 3our braunchis, and bring jour 
fruyt to my peple of Yrael; forsothe it is 
9ni3 that it cum. For loo! I to you, and 
I shal be conuertid to 30u, and 3e shuln 
1wbe erid, and shuln take seed. And I 
shal multiplie in 301 men, and al the 
hous of Yrael; and citees shuln be enha- 
bitid, and ruynouse thingis shuln be in- 
11 storid, or maad a3ein. And I shal fulfil 
jou with men and beestis, and thei shuln 
be inultiplied, and shuln waxe; and I shal 


make 30u for to dwelle as fro the bygyn- » 


nyng, and [ sha) 3eue with gretter goodis 
than 3e hadden fro the bygynnynge; and 
123e shuln wite, for I the Lord. And I 
shal brenge vpon 30u men, my peple of 
Yrael, and by eritage thei shuln welde 
thee, and thou shalt be to hem in to eri- 
tage; and thou shalt na more putte to, 
13 that thou be without hem. These thingus 
saith the Lord God, For that that thei 
sayn of 3ou, Thou art a denouresse of 
i4men, and stranglinge thi fole; therfore 
thou shalt na more ete men, and thon 
shalt na more slea thi folk, the Lord God 
issaith. Nether I shal make the confu- 
sioun of heithen men herd more in thee, 
and thou shalt not bere the shendshipe 
of peplis, and thou shalt na more leese 
16 thi peple, saith the Lord God. And the 
word of the Lord is maad to me, sayinge, 
17 Sone of man, the lions of Yrael dwelliden 
in her Jond, and thei defouliden it in her 
wayes, and in her studies; after the vn- 
clennesse of the menstruat womman the 
18 way of hem is maad before me. And I 
shedde out inyn indignacioun vpon hem, 
for the blood whiche they shedden vpon 
the lond, and in her ydolis thei defoul- 
igiden it. And I scatride hem among hei- 
then men, and thei ben wyndowid in to 
londis. After the waies of hem and fynd- 


h Om. nN. 


VOL. III. 


iOm.n, kleseg. ! the v. 


EZEKIEL. 


™ schenschipis Nn. 


4F 


585 


God seith these thingis, Lo! Y reiside myn 
hond a3ens hethene men, that ben in 3oure 
cumpas, that thei bere her schenschipe. 
Forsothe, 3e hillis of Israel, brynge forths 
3oure braunchis, and bringe 3e fruit to my 
puple Israel; for it is ni3 that it come. Fors 
lo! Y to 30u, and Y schal turne to 30u, and 
3e schulen be erid, and schulen take seed. 
And in 30u I schal multiplie men, and al io 
the hous of Israel; and citees schnlen he 
enhabitid, and ruynouse thingis schulen 
be reparelid. And Y schal fille 36u with 
men and beestis, and thei schulen be mul- 
tiplied, and schulen encreesse; and Y schal 
make 30u to dwelle as® at the bigynnyng, 
and Y schal rewarde with more goodis 
than 3e hadden at the bigynnyng ; and 3e 
schulen wite, that Y am the Lord. And 12 
Y schal brynge men on 30u, my puple 
Israel, and bi eritage thei schulen welde 
thee, and thon schalt be to hem im to eri- 
tage ; and thon schalt no more leie to, that 
thou be with out hem. The Lord God 13 
seith these thingis, For that that thei 
seien of 3on, Thou art ai deuouresse of 
men, and stranglist thi folk; therfor thou 14 
schalt no more ete men, and thou schalt 
no more sle* thi folk, seith the! Lord God. 
And Y¥ schal no more make herd in thee is 
tle schenschipe of hethene men, and thou 
schalt no more bere the schenschipe™ of 
puplis, and thou schalt no more leese thi 
folk, seith the Lord God. And the word 16 
of the Lord was maad to me, and he seide, 
Thou, sone of man, the hous of Israel 17 
dwelliden in her lond, and thei defouliden 
it in her weies, and in her studies; bi the 
vnclennesse of a womman in rotun blood 
the weie of hem is maad bifor me. Andis 
Y schedde out inyn indignacioun on hem, 
for blood which thei schedden on the lond, 
and in her idols ther defouliden it. And 1s 
Y scateride hem among hethene men, and 
thei weren wyndewid to" londis; Y demede 
hem bi the weies and fyndyngis of hem. 
And thei entriden to hethene men, to20 
whiche thei entriden, and defonliden myn 


® in to CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


586 


zvyngis Y deemyde hem. And thei ‘en- 
triden to heithen men, to whom thei 
entriden, and defouliden myn holy name, 
whann it was said of hem, This is the 
peple of the Lord, thei wenten out of the 
zilond of hym. And I sparid to myn hooli 
name, whom the hous of Yrael defoulide 
in heithen men, to whom thei entriden. 
22 Therfore thou shalt saie to the lious of 
Yrael, These thingis saith the Lord God, 
Not for 3ou I shal do, 3e hous of Yrael, 
but for myn holy name, whom 3e defoul- 
iden in heithen men, to whoin je en- 
2striden. And I shal halewe ‘my greet 
name, whiche is defowlid among heithen 
men, whom 3e defouliden in the mydil of 
hem; that heithen men witen, for I the 
Lord, saith the Lord of hoostus, whanne 
24I shal be halewid in 30u bifore hem. So- 
thely Y shal take 30u awey fro heithen 
men, and I shal gadre 3ou of alle londis, 
and I shal brenge 30u into 30ur lond. 
25And I shal shede out vpon 3o0u clene 
watir, and 3e shuln be clensid of alle 
3our defoulyngis ; and I shal clense jou 
26 fro alle 3our ydolis. And I shal jeue to 
3ou a newe herte, and I shal putte ‘a 
newe™ spirit in the mydil of jou; and 
I shal take awey a stonen herte of 3our 
fleshe, and I shal 3eue to 30u an herte of 
27 fleshe. and I shal putte my spirit in the 
mydil of 3ou. And I shal make that 3e 
walke in myn heestis, and that jee kepe 
zsand wirche my domys. And 3e shin 
dwelle in the lond, whiche I 3aue to 3our 
fadris; and 3e shuln be to me in to peple, 
zgand I shal be to 3ou in to God. And I 
shal saue 30u of alle 3our filthis; and IJ 
shal clepe whete, and shal multiplie it, 
and I shal not putte hungre in to 3o0u. 
30 And I shal multiplie the fruyte of tree, 
and buriownyngus, ov seedis, of the feeld, 
that 3e bere na more shenship of hungre 
31in heithen men. And 3e shuln haue 
mynde of 30ur warst waies, and studies 
not goode ; and 3our wickidnessis*, and 


wWmy 4. 


tor PA! cCEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


EZEKIEL. 


4 heelde x. 


XXXVI. 20——31. 


hooli name, whanne it was ‘seid of°® hem, 
This is the puple of the Lord, and thei 
3eden out of the lond of hym. And Yai 
sparide myn hooli name, which the hous 
of Israel hadde defoulid among hethene 
men, to whiche thei: entriden. Therfor22 
thou schalt seie to the hous of Israel, The 
Lord God seith these thingis, OP! 3e hous 
of Israel, not for 30u Y schal do, but for 
myn hooli name, which 3e defouliden 
among hethene men, to whiche 3e ‘en- 
triden. And Y schal halewe my greet 23 
name, which is defoulid amoung hethene 
men, whiche 3e defouliden in the myddis 
of hem; that hethene men wite, that Y 
am the Lord, seith the Lord of oostis, 
whanne Y schal be halewid in 3ou before 
hem. For Y schal take awei 30u fro he-24 
thene men, and Y schal gadere 3ou fro alle 
londis, and Y schal brynge jou in to 30ure 
lond. And Y schal schede’ out clene wa-es5 
tir on jou, and 3e schulen be clensid fro 
alle 30ure filthis ; and Y schal clense 3ou 
fro alle 30ure idols. And Y schal 3yue2s 
to 30u a newe herte, and Y schal sette a 
newe spirit in the myddis of 30u; and Y 
schal do awei an herte of stoon fro 3oure 
fleisch, and Y schal 3yue to 3ou an herte of 
fleisch, and Y schal sette my spirit in the27 
myddis of 3ou. And Y schal make that 3e 
go in my comaundementis, and kepe and 
worche my domes. And 3e schulen dwelle 2s 
in the lond, whiche Y 3af to 3oure fadris ; 
and 3e schulen be in to a puple to me, and 
Y schal be in to a™-God to 30u. And Y 20 
schal saue 30u fro alle 3oure filthis; and 
Y schal clepe wheete, and Y schal multi- 
plie it, and Y schal not put hungur on 
jou. And Y schal inultiplie the fruyt of so 
tree, and the seedis of the feeld, that 3e 
bere no more the schenschipe of hungur 
among hethene men. And 3e schulen haue 31 
mynde on 30ure worste weies, and on stu- 
dies not goode; and 3oure wickidnessis, 
and 3oure grete trespassis schulen displese 
jou. Not for jou Y schal do, seith thes2 


x wickidnes a. 


t Om. CEFGHIKMN sec. mt. PQRSUX. 


XXXVI, 32=-XXXVIL. s. 


jour grete trespassis shuln displese to 
3230u. Not for jou I shal do, saith the 
Lord God, be it, knowen to. 30u; be 3e 


counfoundid, and shame 3e vpon 3our: 


33 waies, 3e hous of Yrael. These thingis 
saith the Lord God, In the day in whiche 
Y.shal clense jou of alle 3our wickid- 
nessis, and shal make citees for to be 
enhabitid, and .shal repareyle ruynouse 

34 thingis, and the desert lond shal he tilied, 
whiche sum tyme was desolat, in the 

35ee3en of eche way goar, thei shuln saye, 
The ylk lond. vntilied is maad as a 3erd 
of volupte, and citees desert and desti- 
tute and vndirdiggid, waardid, or made 

36 stronge, han setun; and heithen men 
shuln wite, whiche euer shuln be left, ov 
forsaken, in, 30ur cumpas, for I the Lord 
haue bildide the scatered thingus, and 

37 haue plantid vntilied thingus; Y the Lord 
haue spoke, and haue don. These thingis 
saith the Lord God, 3it the hous of Yrael 
in this thing shuln fynde me, that Y do 

38to hem; Y shal multiplie hem as flockis 
of men, as an holy floc, as the floc of 
Jerusalem in the solempnitees therof, so 
desert citees shuln be ful of flockis of 
men; and thei shuln wite, for Y the Lord. 


CAP. XXXVI. 


1 The hond of the Lord is maad vpon 
me, and he ledde me out in theY spirit 
of the Lord, and lefte me in the mydil 
zof a feeld that was ful of boones; and 
he ledde me aboute bi hem in cumpas. 
Forsothe there were ful manye vpon the 
3face of the erthe, and gretely drye. And 
he saide to me, Sone of man, gessist thou, 
wher these boones shuln lyue? And I 
asaide, Lord God, thou hast knowe. And 
he saide to me, Prophecie thou of these 
boonys; and thou shalt saye to hem, Drie 
hoones, heer 3e the word of the Lord. 
5These thingus saith the Lord God to 
these bonys, Loo! I shal with ynne send 


EZEKIEL. 


587 


Lord God, be it knowun to 30u; O*! the 
hous of Israel, be 3e schent, and be 3et 
aschamed on 3o0ure weies. The Lord God 33 
seith these thingis, In the dai in which 
Y schal clense 30u fro alle 3oure wickid- 
nessis, and Y schal make citees to be en- 
habitid, and Y schal reparele ruynouse 
thingis, and the desert lond schal be tilid, a1 
that was sum tyme desolat, bifor the iz3en 
of ech weiegoere, thei schulen seie, Thilkes; 
lond vntilid is maad as a gardyn of lik- 
yng, and citees forsakun and destitute 
and vndur myned saten maad strong; 
and hethene men, whiche euer ben left in36 
3oure cumpas, schulen wite, that Y the 
Lord haue bildid distried thingis, and Y 
haue plauntid vntilid thingis; Y the Lord 
spak, and Y dide. ‘The Lord God seiths7 
these thingis, 3it in this thing the hous of 
Israel schulen fynde me, that Y do to hem; 
Y schal multiplie hem as the floc" of men, 
as an hooli floc, as the floc of Jerusalems3s 
in the solempnytees therof, so the citees 
that ben’ forsakun, schulen” be fulle of 
the flockis of men ; and thei schulen wite, 
that Y am the Lord. 


CAP. XXXVII. 


The hond of the Lord was maad on me, ! 
and ledde me out in the* spirit of the 
Lord; and he lefte me in the myddis of 
a feeld that was ful of boonys; and hez 
ledde me aboute bi tho in cumpas. For- 
sothe tho weren ful manye on the face of 
the feeld, and drie greetli. And he seide3 
to me, Gessist thou, sone of man, whether 
these boonys schulen lyue? And Y seide, 
Lord God, thou wost. And he seide to me, 4 
Profesie thou of these boonys; and thou 
schalt seie to thoY, }e drie boonys, here’ | 
the word of the Lord. The Lord Gods 
seith these thingis to these boonys, Lo! 
Y schal sende in to 30u a spirit, and 3e 


y Om. aK sec.m. 


8 A! cEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. t Om. sx. 
Om. K pr.m. shulen be K see. m. 


here je vu. 


u folk A pr.m, EFGHMNPQSU. 
wand schulen CEFHIKMQRSU. 


Vv Om. CEFGHIMNPQRSUX. 


x Om. 1. yhem1. 2 heerith in. 


4 FPF 2 


588 


sin to 30u a spirit, and 3e shuln lyue. And 
I shal 3eue synewys vpon 30u, and I shal 
make fleshis for to wexe vpon 30u, and 
I shal aboue strecche skyn in 30u, and I 
shal 3eue to 3ou a spirit, and 3e shuln 
lyue; and 3e shuln wite, for I the Lord. 
7And I prophecied, as he comaundide to 
me; forsothe me prophecyinge a soun is 
maad, and loo! a styryng to gydre, and 
bones wenten to boones, eche to his ioyn- 
sture. And I sawe, and loo! vpon hem 
synewis and fleshis steiz3iden vp to” hem, 
and skyn is strechid forth aboue, and 
gthei hadden no spirit. And he saide to 
me, Prophecie thou to the spirit, sone of 
man, prophecie thou; and thou shalt saye 
to the spirit, These thingus saith the Lord 
God, Fro four wyndys cum, thou spirit, 
and blowe yn vpon these slayn men, and 
lolyue thei a3ein. And I prophecied, as he 
comaundide to me; and the spirit wente 
in to hem, and thei lyuyden, and stoden 
11 vpon her feet, a* ful greet oost. And the 
Lord saide to me, Sone of man, alle these 
boones is the hous of Yrael; thei sayen®, 
Oure boons dryeden, and our hoope pe- 
12ryshide, and we ben kit awey. Therfore 
prophecie thou, aud thou shalt saye to 
hem, These thingus saith the Lord God, 
Loo! I shal open 3our biriels, and shal 
leede 30u out of 30ur sepulcris, my peple, 
and IJ shal leed 30u in to 3our lond of Yrael. 
is And 3e shuln wite, for I the Lord, whan 
I shall opyn 3our sepulcris, and shal leede 
1430u out of 3our biriels, my peple; and 
shal 3eue my spirit in 3ou, and 3e shuln 
lyue. And I shal make 30u for to rest 
vpon 30ur lond; and 3e shuln wite, for I 
the Lord spake, and haue don, saith the 
1s Lord God. And the word of the Lord 
16is maad to me, sayinge, And thou, sone 
of man, take to thee oo tree, and wryte 
vpon it, Of Juda, and the sonys of Yrael, 
with his felawis. And take thou an other 
tree, and write vpon it, Of Joseph, and 
the tree of Effraym, and of al the hous 


Zin AGH. 


aOm. &. > Om, cCEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 
siumes EFGHKMNPQSUXY. 


EZEKIEL. 


& and a K sec. m. 


© neiziden CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 
© stieden on CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


XXXVI. 6—16. 


schulen lyue. And Y schal 3yue synewis6 
on 30u, and Y schal make fleischis to wexe 
on 30u, and Y schal stretche forth aboue® 
a® skyn in jou, and Y schal 3yue a spirit 
to 30u, and 3e schulen lyue; and 3e schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord. And Y pro-7 
fesiede, as he comaundide to me; forsothe 
a sown was maad, while Y profesiede, and 
lo! a stiryng togidere, and boonys camen¢ 
to boonys, ech to his ioynture. And Y si3,8 
and lo! synewis® and fleischis ‘wexeden 
vpon® tho, and skyn was stretchid forth 
aboue in hem, and tho hadden no spirit. 
And he seide to me, Profesie thou to thea 
spirit, profesie thou, sone of man; and 
thou schalt seie to the spirit, The Lord 
God! seith these thingis, Come, thou spirit, 
fro foure wyndis, and blowe thou on these 
slayn men, and lyue thei a3en. And Y10 
profesiede, as he comaundide to me; and 
the spirit entride in to tho® boonys, and 
thei lyueden, and stoden® on her feet, a 
ful greet oost. And the Lord seide to me, 11 
Thou sone of man, alle these boonys is 
the hous of Israel ; thei seien, Oure boonys 
drieden, and oure hope perischide, and we 
ben kit awei. Therfor profesie thou, and 12 
thou schalt seie to hem, The Lord God 
seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal opene 3oure 
graues, and Y schal lede 3ou out of 3oure 
sepulcris, my puple, and Y schal lede 30u 
in to 30ure lond Israel. And 3e schulen 1s 
wite, that Y am the Lord, whanne Y schal 
opene 3oure sepulcris, and scha) lede 30u 
out of 3oure biriels, my puple; and Y schal 14 
3yue my spirit in 3o0u, and 3e schulen lyue. 
And Y schal make 3ou for to reste on 3oure 
lond; and 3e schulen wite, that Y the 
Lord spak, and dide, seith the Lord God. 
And the word of the Lord was maad to1s 
ine, and he seide, And thou, sone of man, 16 
take to thee o tree, and write thou on it, 
To Juda, and to the sones of Israel, and 
to hise felowis. And take thou an other 
tree, aud write on it, Joseph, the tree of 
Effraym, and of al the hous of Israel, and 


b seiden 4. 


d sinewis cr. nervis; ether 


fOm.n. &therv. 4 stiede n. 


XXXVIL 17—26. 


i7of Yrael, and his felawis. And ioyne 
hem the® toon? to the tother® to thee into 
oo tree; and thei shuln be in to oonyng 
i8in thin hond. Forsoth whan the sonys 
of thi peplisf shuln saye to thee, spek- 
ynge, Wher thon shewist not to vs, what 
19thou wolt in these thingis to thee? thou 
shalt speke to hem, These thingus saith 
the Lord, Loo! I shal take to the tree of 
Joseph, that is in the hond of Effraym, 
and the kynredis of Yrael, that ben ioyned 
to hym, and I shal jeune hem to gydre 
with the tree of Juda; and I shal make 
hem in to 00 tree, and thei shuln be oon 
20in his hond. Forsothe the trees, vpon 
whom thou hast writen, shuln be in thin 


2thond in the ee3jen of hem. And thou - 


shalt saye to hem, These thingus saith 
the Lord God, Loo! I shall take to the 
sones of Yrael of the mydil of * naciouns, 
to whom thei wenten awey; and I shal ga- 
dere hem on eche syde. And I shal bringe 
22hem to her erthe, and I shal make bein 
oo folk in the lond, in hillis of Yrael, and 
oo kyng shal be comaundynge to alle; 
and thei shuln na more be two folkis, ney- 
ther thei shuln more be departid ‘in to® 
23two rewmes. Nether thei shuln be de- 
foulid more ouer in her ydols, and her 
abomynaciouns, and in alle her wickid- 
nessis. And I sha] make hem saaf of alle 
her setis, in whiche thei synneden, and 
I shal clense hem; and thei shuln be to 
me a peple, and I shal be God to hem. 
24 And my seruaunt kyng Dauyd vpon hem, 
and oo sheperd shal be of » hem alle; thei 
shuln walke in my domys, and thei shuln 
kepe my comaundementis, and shuln do 
2shem. And thei shuln dwelle vpon the 
lond, whiche Y 3aue to my seruaunt Ja- 
cob, in whiche 3our faderis dwelliden ; 
and thei shuln dwelle vpon it, thei, and 
the sones of hem, and the sonys of her 
sones, til in to with onten eende; and 
Dauyth, my seruaunt, prince of hem ‘in 
26to with oute eende. And I shal smyte 


€ tothe K sec.m. oon K sec. m. 


ihemv. k Om. n. 


EZEKIEL. 


€ other K sec.m. 


589 


of hise felowis. And ioyne thou tho frees 17 
oon to the tother in to o tree to thee; and 
tho schulen be in to onement in thin hond. 
Sotheli whanne the sones of thi puple that 18 
speken, schulen seie to thee, Whether thou 
schewist not to vs, what thou wolt to thee 
in these thingis? thon schalt speke to1y 
hem, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal take the tree of Joseph, which 
is in the hond of Effraym, and the lynagis 
of Israel, that ben ioyned to hym’, and Y 
schal 3yue hem togidere with the tree of 
Juda; and Y schal make hem in to o* 
tree, and thei schulen be oon in the hond 
of hym. Sotheli the trees,on whiche thon 20 
hast write, schulen be in thin hond bifore 
the i3en of hem. And thou schalt seie to21 
hem, The Lord God seith these thingis, 
Lo! Y schal take the sones of Israel fro 
the myddis of naciouns, to whiche thei 
3eden forth ; and Y schal gadere hem to- 
gidere on ech side. And Y schal brynge 
hem to her lond, and Y schal make hem 22 
o folc! in the lond, in the hillis of Israel, 
and o kyng schal be comaundynge to alle; 
and thei schulen no more be twei folkis, 
and thei schulen no more be departid in 
to twey rewmes. And thei schulen no23 
more be defoulid in her idols, and her 
abhomynaciouns, and in alle her wickid- 
nessis. And Y schal make hem saaf fro 
alle her seetis, in which thei synneden, 
and Y schal clense hem; and thei schulen 
be a puple to me, and Y schal be God to 
hem. And my seruaunt Dauid sehal he 24 
kyng on hem, and o scheepherde schal be 
of alle hem; thei schulen go in my domes, 
and thei schulen kepe my comaundementis, 
and schulen do tho. And thei schulen 25 
dwelle on the lond, which Y 3af to my 
seruaunt Jacob, in which 3o0ure fadris 
dwelliden; and thei schulen dwelle on - 
that ond, thei, and the sones of hem, 
and the sones of her sones, til in to with 
outen ende; and Dauid, my seruaunt, 
schal be the™ prince of hem with outen 
ffOm. Kk. 6 in AH. 


f puple Ae h vpon 4. 


I flock n.- ™ Om. yn. 


590 


to hem a couenaunt of pees; a couenauute 
euerlastynge shal be to hem, and I shal 

27founde hem, and shal‘ multiplie*. And 
I shal be to hem God!, and thei shuln be 

28to me peple. And heithen men shuln 
wite, for I the Lord, halewer of Yrael, 
whan my halewyng shal be in the mydil 
of hem in to with oute eende. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 
1 And the word of the Lord is made: to 
2me, sayinge, Sone of man, putte thi face 
ajeins Gog, and the lond of Magog, prince 
of the hed of™ Mosoch and Tubal; and 
sprophecie thou of hym. And thou shalt 
saye to hym, These thingus saith the 
Lord God, Loo! I to thee Gog, prince of 
athe hed of Mosoch and Tubal; and I shal 
leede thee aboute, and I shal] putte a 
brydil in thi cheekis, and sha) leede thee 
out, and al thin oost, horsis, and horsmen, 
alle clothed with hauberiouns, a greet. 
multitude cof men, takynge shaft, and 
3sheeld, and swerd. Men of Persis, Ethi- 
opiens, and Libiens with hem, alle sheeld- 
sid and helmyd. Gomer, and alle his cum- 
panyes, the hous of Togorma, sydis of the 
north, and al the strengthe of hym, and 
zimany peplis with thee. Di3te, and make 
thee redy, and alle thi multitude that is 
gadred to thee, be thou to hem in to 
*comaundement. After many dayes thou 
shalt be visitid, in the last of 3eeris thou 
shalt cum to erthe, whiche is turnyd a3ein 
fro swerd, and is gadrid of many peplis, 
to the‘hillis of Yrael that weren desert 
lastyngly ; this is led out of peplis, and 
valle dwelten in it tristili. Forsothe thou 
steiz3inge vp as a tempest shalt cum, and 
as a cloude, that thou hill the erthe, thou 
and alle thi cuinpaignyes, and many pe- 
ioplis with thee. These thingus saith the 


iT schal ex. 


EZEKIEL. 


k multiplie hem 4. multiplie it x sec. m. 


XXXVII. 27-—XXXVIII. 10. 


ende. And Y schal smyte to hem a boond 26 
of pees; it schal be a couenaunt euerlast- 
ynge to hem, and Y scha]l founde hem, 
and Y schal multiplie, and Y schal 3yue 
myn halewing in the myddis of hem with 
outen ende. And my tabernacle schal be27 
among hem, and Y schal be God to hem, 
aud thei schulen be a puple to me. And 2s 
hethene men schulen wite, that Y am the 
Lord, halewere of Israel, whanne myn 
halewyng schal be in the myddis of hem 
with outen ende. 


CAP. XXXVIII. 


And the word of the Lord was maad! 
to me, and he seide, Thou, sone of man,e2 
Sette thi face ajens Gog, and ajens the 
lond of Magog, the prince of the heed of 
Mosoch and of Tubal; and profesie thou 
of hym. And thou schalt seie to hym,3 
The Lord God seith these thingis, A! 
Gog, lo! Y to thee, prince of the heed of 
Mosoch and of Tubal; and Y schal ledes 
thee aboute, and Y schal sette a bridil in 
thi chekis, and Y schal leede out thee, and 
al thin oost, horsis, and horsmen, alle 
clothid with haburiouns, a greet multitude 
of men, takynge spere, and scheeld, and 
swerd. Perseis, Ethiopiens, and Libienss 
with hem, alle ben araied with scheeldis 
and helmes. Gomer, and alle the cum-6 
penyes of hym, the hous of Togorma, the 
sidis of the north, and al the strengthe 
therof, and many puplis ben with thee. 
Make redi, and araye thee, and al thi7 
multitude which is gaderid to thee, and 
be thou in to comaundement to hem. 
Aftir many daies thou schalt be visitid, ins 
the laste of 3eeris thou schalt come to the 
lond, that turnede a3en fro swerd, and was 
gaderid of many puplis, to the hillis of 
Israel that weren desert ful ofte; this was 
led out of puplis, and alle men dwellide 
tristili ther ynne. Forsothe thou schalt9 
stie", and schalt come as a tempest, and 
as a cloude, for to hile the lond, thou, 


la Goda. ™ Om. k. 


2 stie vp I. 


XXXVII. 11—19. 


Lord God, In that day wordis shuln stye 
vp vpon thin herte, and thou shalt thenke 
ithe warst thou3t; and shalt saye, I shal 
stiz3e vp" to the lond with oute wall, I 
shal cum to men restynge and dwellynge 
sykirly; alle these dwellen with outen 
wall, barris, or dockis, and 3atis ben not 
12to hem; that thou ranyshe spuilis, and 
assaile pray; that thou 3eue thin hond 
vpon hem that weren desert, and after- 
ward restoryd, and vpon the peple whiche 
is gadrid of folkis, whiche bygan for to 
weelde, and for to be dweller of the naule, 
sor mydil, of the erthe. Saba, and Dedan, 
and marchauntis of Tharsis, and alle 
_lyouns therof shuln saye to thee, Wher® 
thou cummest for to take spuylis ? Loo! 
for to rauyshe pray thou gaderest thi 
inultitude, that thou take gold and syl- 
uer, and take awey, and take portenaunce 
of houshold and suhstaunce, and rauyshe 
iaspuylis with outen noumbre. Therfore, 
sone of man, prophecie thou; and thou 
shalt saye to Gog, These thingus saith 
the Lord God, Wher" not in that day, 
whan my peple of Yrael shal dwelle tris- 
till, thou shalt wite; and shalt cum of 
thi place, fro sydis of the northe, thou, 
and many peplis with thee, alle styers of 
horsis, a greet cumpignye, and greet® 
1G 00st; and styeinge vp on? my peple Yrael, 
as a cloude, that thou hille the erthe? 
In the last dayes thou shalt be, and I 
shal leede thee to vp on my lond, that 
my folkis wite, whan I shal be halewid 
in thee, in the ee3en of hem, thou Gog. 
i7 These thingus saith the Lord God, Ther- 
fore thou art he of whom I spak in olde 
dayes, in the hond of my seruauntis, pro- 
phetis of Yrael, that prophecied in the 
days of tymes, that I shulde leede thee 
isto vpon hem. And it shal be, in that 
day, in the day of the cummyng of Gog 
vpon the lond of Yrael, saith the Lord 
God, myn indignacioun shal stye vp in 
iomy wodenesse, and in my wrath; in 


m Om. K sec. m. 


© stie vp 1. 


0 Whether a passim. 


P Om. 1. 


EZEKIEL. 591 


and alle thi cumpanyes, and inany puplis 
with thee. The Lord God seith these w 
thingis, In that dai wordis schulen stie on 
thin herte, and thou schalt thenke the 
worste thou3t; and schalt seie, Y schal 11 
stie? to the loud with out wal, andP Y 
schal come to hem that resten and dwellen 
sikirli; alle these dwellen with out wal, 
barris and 3atis ben not to hem; that iz 
thou rauysche spuylis, and asaile prei; 
that thon brynge in thin hond on hem 
that weren forsakun, and afterward re- 
storid, and on the puple which is gaderid 
of hethene men, that bigan to welde, and 
to be enhabitere of the nawle of erthe. 
Saba, and Dedan, and the marchauutis of 13 
Tharsis, and alle the liouns therof schulen 
seie to thee, Whether thou comest to take 
spuylis? Lo! to rauysche prey thou hast 
gaderid thi multitude, that thou take awei 
gold and siluer, and do awei purtenaunce 
of houshold and eatel, and that thon 
rauysche preyes with out noumbre. Ther-i4 
for profesie thou, sone of man; and thou 
schalt seie to Gog, The Lord God seith 
these thingis, Whether not in that dai, 
whanne my puple Israel schal dwelle 
tristili, thou schalt wite; and = schaltis 
come fro thi place, fro the sidis of the 
north, thou, and many puplis with thee, 
alle stieris of horsis, a greet cumpany, and 
an huge oost; and thou as a cloude schalt 16 
stie on my puple Israel, that thou hile the 
erthe ? Thou schalt be in‘ the laste daies, 
and Y schal brynge thee on my lond, that 
my folkis wite, whanne Y schal be ha- 
lewid in thee, thou Gog, bifor the ijen of 
them. The Lord God seith these thingis, 17 
Therfor thon art he of whom Y spak in 
elde daies, in the hond of my seruauntis, 
profetis of Israel, that profesieden in the 
daies of tho tymes, that Y schulde bringe - 
thee on hem. And it schal be, in that is 
dai, in the dai of the comyng of Gog on 
the lond of Israel, seith the Lord God, 
myn indignacioun schal stie in my strong 


Oagreet 4. P Om. 4. 


oon N. 


592 


20the fijre of my wrath I spac. For in 
that day shal be greet mouynge to gydre 
vpon the lond of Yrael; and fishis of the 
se shuln be moued to gydre fro my face, 
and beestis of the feeld9, and briddis of 
heuen, and eche crepynge thing that is 
moued vpon erthe, and alle men that ben 
vpon the face of the erthe; and hillis 
shuln be vndirtournyd, and heggis shuln 
falle, and eche wall shal falle to gidre to* 

2lerthe. And I shal clepe to gydre ajeins 
hym a swerd in alle my mounteyns, saith 
the Lord; the swerd of eche man shal be 

22adressid in to his brother. And than I 
shal deeme hym by pestilence, and blood, 
and reyn ful greet, and greete stoons; Y 
shal reyne vpon hym fyre and bronston, 
and vpon his oost, and vpon many peplis 

23that ben with hym. And I shal be mag- 
nyfyed and halewid, and I shal be knowen 
in the ee3jen of many folkis; and thei 
shuln wite, for I the Lord. - 


CAP. XXXIX. 


1 Forsothe thou, sone of man, prophecie 
a3eins Gog; and thou shalt saye, These 
thingus saith the Lord God, Loo! I vpon 
thee, Gog, prince of the hed of Mosoch 

2zand Tubal. And I shal leede thee aboute, 
and I shal disceyue thee, and make thee 
for to stey vp of sydis of the north, and 
I shal bryng thee on the hillis of Yrael. 

3And I shal smyte thi bouwe in thi left 
half, and I shal’ cast doun thin arowis of 
4thi ri3t hond. Vpont the mounteyns of 
Yrael thou shalt falle, thou, and alle thi 
cumpanyes, and peplis that ben with 
thee; to wylde beestis, briddis and eche 
volatile, and beestis of erthe I 3aue thee 
5for to be deuoured. Vpon the face of 
feeld thou shalt falle; for I the Lord spac, 
ésaith the Lord God. And I shal sende 
out fijr in to Magog, and in hem that 
dwellen in ijlis tristily; and thei shuln 
7 wite, for" I the Lord God of Yrael. And 


q feeldis kK. ° in to 4GH. 


rthe erthe 1s. $8 Om. a. 


EZEKIEL. 


s Om. G pr. m. K. 


t stie vp 1. 


XXXVIII. 20—-—XXXIX. 7. 


veniaunce, and in my feruour; Y spak in 19 
the fier of my wraththe. For in that daizo 
schal be grete mouyng on the lond of 
Israel; and fischis of the see, and beestis 
of erthe, and briddis of the eir, and ech 
crepynge beeste which is mouyd on erthe, 
and alle men that ben on the face of erthe, 
schulen be mouyd fro my face; and hillis 
schulen be vndurturned, and heggis schu- 
len falle doun, and ech wal schal falle 
doun in to erthe’. 


CAP. XXXIX. 


And Y schal clepe togidere a swerd21 
a3ens hym in alle myn hillis, seith the 
Lord God; the swerd of ech man schal be 
dressid a3ens his brother. And thanne Y 22 
schal deme hym bi pestilence, and blood, 
and greet reyn, and bi greet stoonys; Y 
schal reyn fier and brymstoon on hym, 
and on his oost, and on many puplis that 
ben with hym. And Y schal be magne-23 
fied, and Y® shal be halewid, and Y shal 
be knowun bifore the i3en of many folkis; 
and thei schulen wite, that Y am the 
Lord. But profesie thou, sone of man,1 
a3ens Gog; and thou schalt seie, The 
Lord God seith these thingis, Lo! Y on 
thee, thou Gog, prince of the heed of 
Mosoch and of Tubal. And Y schal lede2 
thee aboute, and Y schal disseyue thee, 
and Y schal make thee to stie' fro the 
sidis of the north, and Y schal brynge 
thee on the hillis of Israel. And Y schals 
smyte thi bouwe in thi left hond, and Y 
schal caste doun thin arowis fro thi ri3t 
hond. Thou schalt falle doun on the hillis4 
of Israel, thou, and alle thi cumpenyes, 
and puplis that ben with thee; Y 3af thee 
for to be deuourid to wielde beestis, to 
briddis, and to ech volatil, and to the 
beestis of erthe®. Thou schalt falle douns 
on the face of the feeld; for Y the Lord 
haue spoke, seith the Lord God. And Y6 
schal sende fier in Magog, and in hem 
that dwellen tristili in ilis; and thei 


tOn a. Om. K. 


u the erthe 1s. 


XNXXIX. 8—17. 


I shal make myn holy name" knowen in 
the mydil of my peple of Yrael, and I 
shal na more defoule myn holy name; and 
folkis shuln wite, for I the Lord, holy 
8God of Yrael. Loo! it cummeth, and it 
is maad, saith the Lord God. This is the 
yday of whiche I spac. And dwellers of 
the cytees of Yrael shuln go out, and 
kyndlen and brenne to gydre armeris, 
sheeld and shaft, bowe and arowis, and 
stafs of hond, and dartis; and thei shuln 
priuely brenne hem by fijr seven 3eeris. 
10 And thei shuln not bere trees of cuntrees, 
nether thei shuln priuely brenne of wijld’ 
wodis, for thei shuln priuely brenne ar- 
mers in fijr; and thei shuln robbe hem, to 
whom prayes weren, and thei shuln ra- 
uyshe her waasters, or distruyers, saith 
11the Lord God. And it shal be in that 
day, Y shal 3eue Gog a place named, se- 
pulcre in Yrael, the valey of way goers 
to the eest of the se, that makith men 
passynge for to be agast; and ther thei 
shuln byryen Gog”, and al the multitude 
of hym, and it shal be clepid the valey 
120f the multitude of Gog. And the hous 
of Yrael shuln birye hem, that thei clense 
isthe erthe seuen monethis. Forsothe al 
the peple of erthe shal byrien hem, 
and it shal be to hem a named day, in 
whom Y am glorified, saith the Lord God. 
14 And thei shuln ordeyne bysili men seek- 
ynge, or compasynge, the erthe, the 
whiche shuln birien and a3ein seeke hem 
that dwelten vpon the face of erthe, that 
thei clense it. Forsothe after seuen mo- 
nethis thei shuln bygynne for to seeke, 
isand shuln cumpas walkynge the lond; 
and when thei shuln see a boon of man, 
thei shuln sette a title, or signe, bisidis 
it, til that byriers byrye it in the valey 
isof multitude of Gog. Forsothe name of 
the citee Amona; and thei shuln clense 
i7the lond. Forsothe thou, sone of man, 
these thingis saith the Lord God, Saye 
thou to eche bryd, and to alle foulis, and 


uOm. x. ¥ the wijlde sc. 


v whom 1. 


VOL. III. 


EZEKIEL. 


593 


schulen wite, that Y am the Lord God of 
Israel. And Y schal make myn _ hooli7 
name knowun in the myddis of my puple 
Israel, and Y schal no more defoule myn 
hooli name; and hethene men schulen 
wite, that Y am the Lord God, the hooli 
of Israel. Lo! it cometh, and it is don,8 
seith the Lord God. This is the day of9 
which Y spak. And dwelleris schulen go 
out of the citees of Israel, and thei schulen 
set a fier, and schulen brenne armuris, 
scheeld and spere, bouwe and arowis, 
and stauys of hond, and schaftis with out 
irun; and thei schulen brenne tho in fier 
bi seuene 3eer. And thei schulen not bere 10 
trees of cuntries, nether schulen kitte doun 
of forestis, for thei schulén brenne armu- 
ris bi fier; and thei schulen take preies of 
hem, to whiche’ thei weren preies, and 
thei schulen rauysche her wasteris, seith 
the Lord God. And it schal be in that11 
dai, Y schal 3yue to Gog a named place, 
a sepulcre in Israel, the valei of weigoeris 
at the eest-of the see, that schal make 
hem that passen forth for to wondre; and 
thei schulen birie there Gog, and al the 
multitude of hym, and it schal be clepid 
the valei of the multitude of Gog. And 12 
the hous of Israel schulen birie hem, that 
thei clense the lond in seuene monethis. 
Forsothe al the puple of the lond schal1s 
byrie hym, and it schal be a named dai to 
hem, in which Y am glorified, seith the 
Lord God. And thei schulen ordeyne bi- 14 
sili men cumpassynge the lond, that schu- 
len birie and seke hem that weren left on 
the face of the lond, that thei clense it. 
Forsothe aftir seuene monethis thei schu- 
len bigynne to seke, and thei schulen cum-15 
pas goynge aboute the lond; and whanne 
thei schulen se the boon of a man, thei 
schulen sette a ‘notable signe" bisidis it, 
til the birieris of careyns birie it in the 
valei of the multitude of Gog. Sotheli1eé 
the name of the cite 7s Amona; and thei 
schulen clense the lond. Forsothe, thou, 17 


w her Gog 6 pr.m.u. the Gog x. 


w title, ether [or 1] a notable signe CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


4G 


594 EZEKIEL. 


to alle beestis of the feeld, Cum 3e to 
gydre, and haste 3ee, renne to gydre on 
eche sijde to my slayn sacrifice, whiche 
I offre to 30u, a greet slayn sacrifice vpon 


the hillis of Yrael, that 3ee ete fleshis, © 


isand drynke blood. je shuln ete the 
fleshis of strong men, and 3e shuln drynke 
the blood of princis of erthe, of we- 
thers, of lambren, and of Y kiddis, and of 
boolis, and of thingus fed for to be fatt, 
i9and of alle fatt thingus. And 3e shuln 
ete the fatnesse in to fulfillynge, and shuln 
drynke blood in to drunkennesse, of the 
slayn sacrifice whiche I shal offre to 30u. 
20 And 3e shuln be fulfillid vpon my bord, 
of hors, and of strong horsman, or kny3t, 
and of alle men of batail, saith the Lord 
21God. And IJ shal putte my glorie in 
folkis, and alle folkis shuln see my dome, 
that, I dide, and myn hond, that I haue 
22putte on hem. And the hous of Yrael 
shuln wite, for I the Lord God of hem, 


fro that day and afterward, or fro 


23thennus forth. And heithen men shuln 
wite, for the hous of Yrael is taken in 
his wickidnesse, for that that thei leften 
me; and Y hidde my face fro hem, and 
bytoke hein in to hondis of enmys, and 
24alle fellen in swerd. After the vnclen- 
nesse of hem and greet trespas Y dide 
to hem, and I hidde my face fro hem. 
25Therfore these thingis saith the Lord 
God, Now I shal leede a3ein the caitifte 
of Jacob, and I shal haue mercy on al 
the hous of Yrael; and I shal take to 
26]oue for myn holy name. And thei shuln 
bere her confusioun, and eche trespass- 
ynge whiche thei trespassiden in me, 
whan thei dwelliden in her lond tristili, 
27 dredynge no man; and I shal leede a3ein 
hem of peplis, and shal gadre hem fro 
londis of her enniyes, and shal be halew- 
id in hem, in the eejen of ful manye 
asfolkis. And thei shuln wite, for I the 
Lord God of hem, for that that I trans- 
latide hem into naciouns, and haue 


XXXIX. 18—-28. 


sone of man, the Lord God seith these 
thingis, Seie thou to ech brid, and to alle 
foulis, and to alle beestis of the feeld, 
Come 3e to gidere, and haste 3e, renne 3e 
togidere on ech side to my sacrifice, which 
Y sle to 30u, a greet sacrifice on the hillis 
of Israel, that 3e ete fleischis. and drynke 
blood. 3e schulen ete the fleischis of12 
stronge men, and 3e schulen drynke the 
blood of prynces of erthe, of wetheris, of 
lambren, and of buckis of geet, and of 
bolis, and of beestis maad fat, and of alle 
fat thingis. And 3e schulen ete the yn-19 
nere fatnesse in to fulnesse, and 3e schulen 
drynke the blood in to drunkenesse, of the 
sacrifice which Y schal sle to 3ou. And20 
3e schulen be fillid on my boord, of hors, 
and of strong horse man, and of alle men 
werriours, seith the Lord God. And Y 21 
schal sette my glorie among hethene men, 
and alle hethene men schulen se my doom, 
which Y haue do, and myn hond, which 
Y haue set on hem. And the hous of22 
Israel schulen wite, that Y am her Lord 
God, fro that dai and afterward. And he-23 
then men schulen wite, that the hous of 
Israel] is takun in her wickidnesse, for that 
that thei forsoken me; and Y hidde my 
face fro hem, and Y bitook hem into the 
hondis of enemyes, and alle thei fellen* 
doun bi swerd. Bi the unclennes and 24 
greet trespasse of hem Y dide to hem, and 
Y hidde my face fro hem. Therfor the 25 
Lord God seith these thingis, Now Y schal 
leede a3en the caitiftee of Jacob, and Y 
schal haue merci on al the hous of Israel ; 
and Y schal take feruoure for myn hooli 
name. And thei schulen bere here schen- 26 
schipe, and al theY trespassing bi which 
thei trespassiden a3ens me, whanne thei 
dwelliden in her lond tristili, and dredden 
no man; and whanne Y schal bringe hem 27 
a3en fro puplis, and schal gadere fro the 
londis of her enemyes, and schal be ha- 
lewid in hem, bifor the i3en of ful many 
folkis. And thei schulen wite, that Y am 28 


y Om. aqK. 


x felden c et alii. Y her 1. 


OO ooo LL, 


XXXIX. 29—XL. 8. 


gadrede hem vpou her lond, and I haue 
not forsaken, or /eft, eny man of hem 

29there. And I shal namore hide my face 
fro hem, for that I shedde out my spirit 
vpon eche hous of Yrael, saith the Lord 
God. 


CAP. XL. 


1 In the fyue and twentithe 3ere of oure 
transmygracioun, in the bygynnynge of 
the 3eer, in the tenthe of the moneth, in 
the fourtenthe 3eer aftir that the citee is 
smytyn, in the same day the hond of the 
Lord is maad on? me, and ledde me thi- 

2der in visiouns of God. And he brou3t me 


in to the lond of Yrael, and he* left me ~ 


on a ful hee3 hill, vpon whom was as a 
beeldyng of a citee goynge to the southe; 
3and he ledde me yn thider. And loo! a 
man, whos fourme was as the fourme of 
brasse, and a lytil lynnyn bond in his 
hond, and a 3erd of mesure in his hond ; 
4forsothe he stood in the 3ate. And the 
same man spac to me, Sone of man, see 
with thin eejen, and heere with thin 
eeris, and putte thin herte in to alle 
thingis, whiche I shal shewe to thee, for 
that it be shewid to thee, thou art brou3t 
to hither; telle thou alle thingus that thou 
sseest to the hous of Yrael. And loo! a 
wal with outforth, in cumpas of the hous 
in eche sijd, and in hond® of the man a 
3jerd of mesure of sixe cubitis and a 
palme; and ke metid the breede of the 
beeldyng with oo 3erd, and the hee3nesse 
6 with oo 3erd. And he came to the 3ate 
that biheelde to® the eest waye, and he 
stiede vp by the greese therof; and he 
metid the thrisfold of the j3ate with oo 
jerd, that is for to saye, the breede of 
7 the thrisfold, with oo 3erd in breede; and 
the chaumbre with oo 3erd in to long, 
and with oo 3erd in to breede, and bi- 
stwix chaumbris fyue cubitis; and the 
thresfold of the 3ate bisydis the vestiarie, 


Zypon 4, 4QOm. 4. 


b the hoond «. 


EZEKIEL. 595 


the Lord God of hem, for that Y trans- 
latide hem in to naciouns, and haue ga- 
derid hem on her lond, and Y lefte not 
ony of hem there. And Y schal no more2s 
hide my face fro hem, for Y haue schede 
out my spirit on al the hous of Israel, 
seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XL. 


In the fyue and twentithe 3eer of oure: 
passyng ouer, in the bigynnyng of the 
jeer, in the tenthe dai of the monethe, in 
the fourtenthe 3eer after that the citee 
was smytun, in this same dai the hond of 
the Lord was maad on me, and he brou3te 
me thidur in the reuelaciouns of God. And 2 
he brou3te me in to the lond of Israel, and 
he leet? me doun on a ful hi3 hil, on which 
was as the bildyng of a citee goynge to 
the south; and he ledde me in thidur.; 
And lo! a man, whos licnesse was as the 
licnesse of bras, and a coorde of flex was 
in his hond, and a reed of mesure in his 
hond; forsothe he stood in the 3ate. And4 
the same man spak to me, Thou sone of 
man, se with thin ijen, and here with 
thin eeris, and sette thin herte on alle 
thingis, whiche Y schal schewe to thee, 
for thou art brou3t hidur, that tho be 
schewid to thee; telle thou alle thingis 
whiche thou seest to the hous of Israel. 
And lo! a wal withouteforth, in the cum-5 
pas of the hous on ech side; and in the 
hond of the man was a rehed of mesure 
of sixe cubitis and a spanne, that is, an 
handibreede; and he mat the breede of 
the bildyng with o rehed, and the hi3nesse 
bio rehed. And he cam to the jate thats 
bihelde the weie of the eest, and he stiede 
bi degrees of it; and he mat the lyntil of 
the 3ate bi o rehed the breede, that is, o 
lyntil bi o rehed in breede; and he mat 07 
chaumbre bi o rehed in lengthe, and bi o 
rehed in breed, and fyue cubitis bitwixe 
chaumbris; and ke mat the lyntil of thes 
jate bisidis the porche of the 3ate with 


¢ Om. acu, 


z ledde n. 


462 


596 


or porche, of the 3ate with ynforth, oo 
v3zerd. And he metide the porche of the 
3ate of ei3t cubitus, and the frount therof 
in two cubitis; forsothe the vestiarie, 07 
porche, of the 3ate was with inneforth. 
10 Forsothe chaumhris of the 3ate to the 
est waye, three on this sijd, and three on 
that sijd; oo mesure of three, and oo me- 
iisnre of the frountis of eche syde. And 
he metid the breede of the thresfold of 
the 3ate of ten cubitis, and the lengthe 
iz0f the 3ate of thrittene cubitis; and the 
margyne, or vttemest* part, bifore the 
chaumbris of oo cubit, and oo cubit the 
eende of eche sijde; sothely the chaum- 
bres weren of sixe cubitis on this syde 
izaid on that syde. And he metide the 
3ate fro the roof of the chaumbre til the 
roof therof, the breede of fyue and twenty 
uscubitis, dore ajeins dore. And he maad 
frountis bi sixti cubitis, and at a frount 
porche of the 3ate on eche syde bi cum- 
ispas; and bifore the face of the 3ate that 
lastid til to the face of the porche of the 
igynner jate, fifti cubitis; and wyndowis 
ouerthwert, in chaumbris and in frountis 
of hem, that weren with ynne the 3ate 
on eche syde by cumpas. Also forsothe 
and wyndowis weren in the porchis bi 
cumpas with ynne forth, and bifore the 
17frountis peyntyng of palmes grauen. And 
he ledde me out tof the vtmer® porche, 
‘or large hous", and loo! tresories, and 
pament paued with stoon in the porche 
by enuyrounn; thritti tresories in the 
iscumpas of pament; and a pament in 
the frount of 3atis, after the lengthe of 
i9the 3atis was' with ynneforth. And he 
metide the breede fro face of the ynner 
3ate vnto the frount of the ynner porche 
with outeforth, an hundrid cubitis to the 
20eest, and to the north. And he metide 
the 3ate that biheelde the waye of the 
north, of the vtmore* porche, as wele in 
2ilengthe as in breede; and three chaum- 
bres therof, three on this syde, and three 


4 yllermost H. © Om. 4. f of H. 
aoced allt. 


celeri passim. 


a8 on N. 


EZEKIEL. 


& vttermer H. 


»b forzerd CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


XL. 9—2I. 


ynne, bio rehed. And he mat the porch» 
of the 3ate of eijte cubitis, and the frount 
therof bi twei cubitis; sotheli the porche 
of the 3ate was with ynne. Certis the 10 
chaumbris of the 3ate at the weie of the 
eest weren thre on this side, and thre on 
that side; o mesure of thre, and o mesure 
of the frountis on euer ethir side. Andu 
he mat the breede of the lyntel of the 3ate 
of ten cubitis, and the lengthe of the 3ate 
of threttene cubitis. And he mat a mar- 12 
gyn of a* cubit bifor the chaumbris, and o 
cubit was the ende on ech side; forsothe 
the chaumbris weren of* sixe cubitis on 
this side and on that side. And he mats 
the 3ate fro the roof of the chaumbre til 
to the roof therof, the breede of fyue and 
twenti cubitis, a dore a3ens adore. Andis 
he made frountes bi sixti cubitis, and at 
the frount an halle’ of the 3ate on ech 
side bi cumpas; and bifor the face of the 15 
3ate that stretchith forth til to the face of 
the porche of the ynner 3ate, he mat fifti 
cubitis. And he mat wyndows narawi6 
with out and large with ynne, in the 
chaumbris and frountis of tho, that weren 
with ynne the 3ate on ech side bi cumpas. 
Sotheli in lijk maner also wyndows weren 
in the porchis bi cumpas with ynne; and 
the peynture of palin trees was grauun 
bifor the frountis. And he ledde me out 17 
to the outermere halle*, and lo! tresories, 
and pawment arayed with stoon in the 
hallet bi cumpas; thretti tresories in the 
cumpas of the pawment; and the paw-1s 
ment was bynethe in the frout of the 3atis, 
bi the lengthe of the 3atis. And he matig 
the breede fro the face of the lowere 3ate 
til to the frount of the ynnere halle with 
outforth, an hundrid cubitis at the eest, 
and at the north. And he mat bothe in20 
lengthe and in breede the 3ate that bihelde 
the weie of the north, of the outermore 
halle. And 4e mat the chaumbris therof, 21 
thre on this side, and thre on that side, 
and the frount therof, and the porche 


hOm. 4. !Om.a.  vttermor u. 


¢ forzerd CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 4 forzerd 


XL. 22—32. 


on that syde, and the frount therof, and 
the porche therof, after the mesure of the 
first 3ate; the lengthe therof of fyfty cu- 
bitis, and the breede of fyue and twenti 
22cubitis. Forsothe the wyndowis therof, 
and porche, and grauyngis, after the ine- 
sure of the 3ate that byheelde to the eest; 
and of seuen grees was the styeing vp 
23therof, and a porche bifore it. And the 
3ate of the ynner porche! a3einus the 3ate 
of the north, and the eest 3ate; and he 
metide fro 3ate vnto 3ate an hnndrid 
21cubitis. And he ledde me out to the 
southe waye, and loo! a 3ate that bihelde 
to the southe; and he metide the frount 
therof, and the porche therof, after the 


25ouermore mesures ; and the wyndowis ~ 


therof, and porchis in cumpas, as the 
tother wyndows; of fifti cubitis the 
lengthe, and the breede of fyue and 
26twenti cubitis. And in seuen greesis 
‘men stieden™ therto, and a porche bifore 
the 3atis therof; and granen palines 
weren, oon on this syde, and an other in 
27the frount therof. And the 3ate of the 
ynner hous, in the south waye; and he 
metide fro 3ate vnto 3ate in the south 
28 waye, an hundrid cubitis. And he ledde 
me yn, in to the ynnermer hous at the 
south 3ate; and he metide the 3ate af- 
29ter the ouermer mesuris; the chaumbris 
therof, and frount therof, and porche 
therof, bi the same mesuris; and the wyn- 
dowis therof, and the porche therof in 
cuinpas ; fifti cubitis in lengthe, and of 
30 breed fyue and twenti cubitis; and the 
porche by cumpas, the lengthe of fyue 
and twenti cubitis, and the breed of fyue 
3)cubitis. And the porche therof to the 
vtiner® hous, and palmes therof in the 
frount; and ei3te greces weren, bi whiche 
32me steyede vp therby. And he ledde 
me in to the ynnermer hous, by the eest 
waye; and he metide the 3ate after the 


1 porche, or hous GHK pr. m. 


e Om. Nn sec.m. — f porche A. 
k forjerdis s, forjerd ceteri. 


m me styed GH. 


& a forjerd CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


EZEKIEL. 597 


therof, bi the mesure of the formere jate ; 
the lengthe therof of fifti cubitis, and the 
breede therof of ® fyue and twenti cubitis. 
Sotheli the wyndows therof, and the22 
porche, and the grauyugis, weren bi the 
mesure of the 3ate that bihelde to the 
eest; and the stiyng therof was of seuene 
degrees, and a porche was bifore it. And 2: 
the 3ate of the ynnere halle was a3ens the 
3ate of the north, and ajens the eest 3ate; 
and he mat fro the jate til to the 3ate an 
huudrid cubitis. And he ledde me ont24 
to the weie of the south, and lo! the 3ate 
that bihelde to the south; and he mat the 
frount therof, and the porche therof, bi 
the formere mesuris; and the wyndows 25 
therof, and the porchisf in cumpas, as 
othere wyndows; the lengthe of fifti cu- 
bitis, and the breede of fyue and twenti 
cubitis. And bi seuene degrees me stiede 26 
to it, and ‘an halle’ was bifor the 3atis 
therof; and palme trees weren graunn, 
oon in this side, and another in that 
side in the frount therof. And the 3ate 27 
of the ynnere halle was in the weie of the 
south; and he mat fro the j3ate til to the 
3ate in the weie of the south, an hundrid 
cubitis. And he ledde me in to the yn-28 
nere halle, to the south 3ate; and he 
mat the 3ate bi the formere mesuris ; the 29 
chaumbre therof, and the frount therof, 
and the porche therof bi the same me- 
suris; and he mat the wyndows therof, and 
the porche therof in cumpas; fifti cubitis 
of lengthe, and fyue and twenti cubitis 
of breede. And he mat the halle bi cum-3o 
pas, the lengthe of fyne and twenti cu- 
bitis, and the breede therof of fyue cubitis. 
And the porche therof was to the outer-3! 
mere halle, and the palm trees therof in 
the frount; and ei3te degrees weren, bi 
whiche me stiede thorou3 it. And he3z 
ledde me in to the ynnere halle*, bi the 
eest weie; and he mat the 3ate by the 


9° yttermor 71. 


h for3erd ceteri passim. 1 Om, . 


598 


33ouermer mesuris; the chaumbre therof, 
and frount therof, and porchis therof, as 
aboue; and wyndowis therof, and porchis 
therof in cumpas; the lengthe of fifty cu- 
bitis, and the breede of fyue and twenty 
s4cubitis; and the porche therof, that is 
to saye, of the vtmer? hous; and paimes 
graued in the frount therof, on this syde 
and ou that syde; and in eiz3te greese the 
sssteizing vp therof. And he ledde ime 
ynne, at the 3ate that biheelde to the 
north, and matte after the ouermore ine- 
36suris ; the chaumbris therof, and frount 
therof, and the porche therof, and wyn- 
dowis therof bi cumpas; of4 lengthe of 
fifty cubitis, and the breed of fyue and 
37twenti cubitis. The porche therof  bi- 
heelde to the vtmer" lous; and grauyngs 
of palmys in frount therof on bothe 
sydis; and in eiz3te greese the steiz3ing vp 
38therof. And bi alle tresories a dore in 
frountis of the 3atis; and there thei wash- 
suiden brend sacrifice. And in the porche 
of the 3ate two bordis on this syde, and 
two bordis on that syde, that vpon hem 
ben offrid brend sacrifice, for synne of* 
doyng and for trespas of leeuyng vndon. 
4o And at the vtmert syde, that goth vp to 
the dore of the 3ate that goth to the 
north, two bordis; and at the tother syde, 
bifore the porche of the 3ate, two bordis. 
41 Foure bordis on this syde, and four 
bordis on that syde; by the sydis of the 
3ate weren ei3te bordis, vpon whom men 
s2o0ffriden. Forsothe foure bordis to brend 
sacrifice heeldid of sqware stoons, in 
lengthe of oo cubit and an half, and in 
breede of oo cubite and an half, and in 
hei3the 00 cubit; vpon whiche thei putten 
vessels, in whiche brend sacrifice is offrid, 
43and slayn sacrifice. And the lippis, ov 
brynkis, of hem of oo palme, bowid ajein 
with ynneforth bi cumpas; vpon the 
44 bordis forsothe offringis" of fleshe. And 
with oute the ynner 3ate, treseries of 


P vttermore uv. 9 of the acu. 


P Om. Nn. 
“an f. 


q mesure A. r Om. CEFGHIKQSX. 


EZEKIEL. 


r vttermore H. 


and for M pr.m. NPRU. 


XL. 33—44. 


formere mesures; the chaumbre therof,33 
and the frount therof, and the porchis 
therof, as aboue; and ke mat the wyn- 
dows ther.:f, and the porchis therof in 
cumpas; the lengthe of fifti cubitis, and 
the breede of fyue and twenti cubitis; 
and the porche therof, that is, of the34 
outermore halle; and palme trees grauun 
in the frount therof, on this side? and on 
that side; and in eiz3te degrees was the 
stiyng therof. And he ledde me in to3s 
the 3ate that bihelde to the north; and 
he mat bi the formere mesuris4?; the36 
chaumbre therof, and the frount therof, 
and the porche therof, and the wyndows 
therof bi cumpas; the lengthe of fifti cu- 
bitis, and the breede of fyue and twenti 
cubitis. The porche therof bihelde to the 37 
outermore halle; and the grauyng of palm 
trees was in the frount therof, on this side 
and on that side; and in ei3te degrees was 
the stiyng therof. And bi alle tresories 3s 
a dore was in the frountis of 3atis; and 
there thei waischiden brent sacrifice. And 39 
in the porche of the 3ate weren twei 
boordis on this side, and twei boordis on 
that side, that brent sacrifice be offrid on 
tho, ‘bothe for™ synne and for trespasse. 
And at the outermore side, which stieth 40 
to the dore of the 3ate that goith to the 
north, weren twei boordis; and at ‘the 
tother’ side, bifor the porche of the 3ate, 
weren twei boordis. Foure boordis on 41 
this side, and foure boordis on that side; 
bi the sidis of the 3ate weren ei3te boordis, 
on whiche thei offriden. Forsothe foure 42 
boordis to brent sacrifice weren bildid of 
square stoonys, in the lengthe of o cubit 
and an half, and in the breed of o cubit 
and an half, and in the hi3the of o cubit; 
on whiche boordis thei schulen sette ves- 
sels, in whiche brent sacrifice and slayn 
sacrifice is offrid. And the brenkis of 43 
thot boordis ben of oon" handibreede, and 
ben bowid ajen with ynne bi cumpas; 

8 Om. H. 


t vttermore H. 4% of offringis x. 


8 that oother 1. t the 1. 


XL. 45—XLI. 3. 


chaunters, in the ynner hous that was 
in the side of the 3ate biholdynge to the 
north; and the face of them ajeinus the 
southe waye; oon on the syde of the eest 
3ate, that biheelde to the waye of the 
45north. And he saide to me, This is the 
tresorie, that biholdith the south waye, of 
preestis that waken in kepingis’ of the 
46temple. Sothli the tresorie that bihold- 
ith to the waye of the north, schal ben 
of prestis that waken to the seruyse of 
the auter; thes ben the sones of Sadoch, 
that comen to of the sonys of Leuy to 
the Lord, that thei ministre to hym. 
47And he matte the hous, the lengthe of 
an hundrid cubitis, and the breede by an 


hundrid cubitis, by sqware, and the auter - 


48bifore the face of the temple. And he 
ledde me yn, in to the porche of the tem- 
ple; and he matte the porche by fyue 
cubitis on this syde, and fyue cnbitis on 
that syde; and the breed of the 3ate, of 
three cubitis on this syde, and three cu- 

49 bitis on that syde; forsothe the lengthe 
of the porche” of twenti cubitis, and the 
breed of elleuen cubitis, and bi ei3te 
greese me stieden therto; and pilers 
weren in the frountus, oon on this syde, 
and an other on that syde. 


CAP. XLI. 


i And he ledde me yn*, into the temple; 
and he meet’ the frountis, sixe cubitis of 
breede on this syde, and sixe cubitis of 
breede on that syde, the breede of the 

2tabernacle. And the breede of the 3ate 
was of ten cubitis; and the sydis of the 
j3ate, by fyue cubitis on this syde, and by 
fyue cubitis on that syde; and he matte 
the lengthe therof of fourty cubitis, and 

3the breede of twenti cubitis. And he 
gon yn with ynneforth, matte in’ frount 
of the 3ate two cubitis, and the 3ate of 
sixe cubitis, and the breede of the 3ate 


v kepynge a. 


vOm. 1. W Om. EFNP. 


w porche, or large hous GHK pr.m. 


x on that other N. oen other on that s. 


EZEKIEL. 599 


forsothe on the boordis weren fleischis of 
offryng. And with out the ynnere 3ate 44 
weren tresories of chauntours, in the yn- 
nere halle, that was in the side of the 3ate 
biholdynge to the north; and the faces of 
tho weren a3ens the south weie; oon of the 
side of the eest 3ate, that bihelde to the 
weie of the north. And he seide to me, 45 
This treserie, that biholdith the south 
weie, is of the prestis that waken in the 
kepyngis of the temple, Sotheli the tre-.4¢ 
sorye that biholdith to the weie of the 
north, schal be of the preestis that waken 
to the seruice of the auter; these ben the 
sones of Sadoch, whiche of the sones of 
Leuy neizen to the Lord, for to mynystre 
tohym. And he mat the halle, the lengthe 47 
of an hundrid cubitis, and the breede of an 
hundrid cubitis, bi square, and the auter 
bifore the face of the temple. And he4s 
ledde me in to the porche of the temple; 
and he mat the porche bi fyue cubitis on 
this side, and bi’ fyue cubitis on that 
side; and he mat the breede of the 3ate, 
of thre cubitis on this side, and of thre 
cubitis on that side. But he mat the49 
lengthe of the porche of twenti cubitis, 
and the breede of eleuene cubitis, and bi 
eijte degrees me stiede to it; and _pileris 
weren in the frountis, oon” on this side, 
and ‘another on that* side. 


CAP. XLI. 


And he ledde me in to the temple, and 
he mat the frountis, sixe cubitis of breede 
on this side, and sixe cubitis of breede on 
that side, the breede of the tabernacle. 
And the breede of the 3ate was of tene 
cubitis; and he mat the sidis of the 3ate 
bi fyue cubitis on this side, and bi fyue 
cubitis ou that side; and he mat the 
lengthe therof of’ fourti cubitis, and the 
breede of twenti cubitis. And he entrides. 
with ynne, and he mat in the frount of 
the 3ate twei cubitis; and he mat the 3ate 
of sixe cubitis, and the breede of the 3ate 
2 the 4. 


x Om. 4. Y matte AGH. 


yYbir. 


600 


4of seuen cubitis. And he matte the 
lengthe therof of twenti cubitis, and the 
breede of twenti cubitis, byfore the face 
of the temple. And he sayde to me, This 
sis the holy of halewis. And he matte the 
wall of the hous of sixe cubitis, and the 
breede of the syde of foure cubitis, on 
seche syde bi cumpas of the hous. The 
sydis forsothe, syde to syde, twyse three 
and thritti; and thei weren shewynge, 
‘or aboue semynge*, that entriden bi the 
wall of the hous, in the sydis bi cumpas, 
that thei shulden holde? to gydre, and 
7not touche the wall of the temple. And 
the street was in to round, styinge vp- 
ward bi the hee3 toure, and in to soup- 
yng place of the temple it bare forth bi 
cumpas; therfore the temple was brod- 
der in the ouermore thingus; and so fro 
the lower parties me stied to the hee3er, 
sand the inydil. And I see3 in the hous 
hee3nesse bi cumpas, the sydis foundid at 
the mesure of a.3erd in space of sixe cu- 
9bitis; and the breede by the wall of the 
syde with outforth, of fyue cubitis; and 
the ynner hous was in the sydis of the 
iohous. And bytwix tresories the breede 
of twentye cubitis in cumpas of the hous 
1100 eche syde, and the dore of the syde 
to preyer; oo dore to the waye of the 
north, and oo dore to the south waye; 
and the breede of place to preyer, of fyue 
12cubitis in cumpas. And the beeldyng that 
was departid, and turnyd to the waye 
biholdynge to the see, of the breede of 
seuenty cubitis; forsothe the wall of 
beeldyng of fyue cubitis of breed in cum- 
pas, and the lengthe therof of nyntye 
i3cubitis. And he matte the lengthe of 
the hous, of an hundrid cubitis; and the 
byldyng that was departid, and the wallis 
therof, of lengthe of an hundrid cubitis. 
14Forsothe the breede byfore the face of 
the hous, and of it that was departid 
ajeinus the eest, of an hundrid cubitis. 
15And he matte the lengthe of the beeld- 


8 Om. H. 


yOm.n. 2 thor. ® of apremt. 


EZEKIEL. 


bh of EFHIMQU. 


XLI. 4—=15. 


of seuene cubits. And he mat the lengthe4 
therof of twenti cubitis, and the breede of 
twenti cubitis, bifor the face of the’ tem- 
ple. And he seide to me, This is thes 
hooli thing of hooli thingis. And he mat 
the wal of the hous of sixe cubitis, and 
the breede of the side of foure cubitis, on 
ech side bi cumpas of the hous, For-6 
sothe the sidis weren tweies thre and 
thretti, the side to the side; and tho weren 
stondynge an hi3, that entriden bi the wal 
of the hous, in the’ sidis bi cumpas, that 
tho helden togidere, and touchiden not the 
wal of the temple. And a street was in7 
round, and stiede vpward bi a vijs, and 
bar in to the soler of the temple bi cum- 
pas; therfor the temple was braddere in 
the hizere thingis; and so fro the lowere 
thingis me stiede to the hi3ere thingis, 
and in to the myddis. And Y si3 in thes 
hous an hiz3nesse bi cumpas, the sidis 
foundid at the mesure of a rehed in the 
space of sixe cubitis; and the breede by*9 
the wal of the side with outforth, of fyue 
cubitis; and the ynnere hous was in the 
sidis of the hous. And bitwixe treseries 10 
Y si3 the breede of twenti cubitis in the 
cumpas of the hous on? ech side; andi1 
Y si3 the dore of the side to preier; o 
dore to the weie of the north, and o dore 
to the weie of the south; and Y s73 the 
breede of place to preier, of fyue cubitis 
in cumpas. And the bildyng that was 12 
ioyned to the place departid, and turned 
to the weie biholdynge to the see, of the 
breede of seuenti cubitis; sotheli the wal 
of the bildyng of fyue cubitis of breede 
bi cumpas, and the lengthe therof of¢ 
nyuti cubitis. And he mat the lengthe13 
of the hous, of an hundrid cubitis; and 
that that was departid, the bildyng and 
the wallis therof, of lengthe‘ of an hundrid 
cubitis. Forsothe the breede of the street 4 
bifor the face of the hous, and of that that 
was departid a3ens the eest, was of an® 
hundrid cubitis. And he mat the lengthe1s 


b folde .. 
Cust. 


4 the lengthe ceraniKmNnrarsux. ¢ Om. v. 


XLI. 16—26. 


yng a3einus the face therof, that was de- 
partid at the bac; solers on eche syde of 
an hundrid cubitis, and the temple with 
isynforth, and porchis of the hous, thres- 
foldis, and wyndowis ouerthwert ; solers 
in cumpas by three parties, ajeinus the 
threshfold of eche, and di3te with tree by 
cumpas in enuyroune; forsothe erthe til 
to the wyndowis, and wyndowis closiden 
17the doris, vnto the ynner hous, and with 
out forth, by eche wall in cumpas, with 
ynneforth and with outforth at mesure. 
1s And cherubyns forged, and palmes, and 
a palme bitwix cherub and cherub; and 
i9cherub hadde two faces, a face of man 
bysijdis the palme of this syde, and a 
face of lyoun bysydis a palme expressid 
on the tother syde. By all the hous in 
20 cumpas, fro the erthe vnto the® ouermer 
part, cherubyns and palmes weren graued 
21in the wall of the temple. The thresfold 
foure cornerd; and the face of the byhold- 
yng of the sayntuarye ajenus the bihold- 
2zyng of the treenen auter; the hei3t of it 
of three cubitis, aud the lengthe therof 
two cubitis; and the corners therof, and 
lengthe therof, and wallis therof, treenen. 
And he spac to me, This is the bord by- 
23fore the Lord. And two doris weren in 
24the temple, and in the sayntuarie. And 
in the two doris on eche sijde weren two 
smale doris, that weren folden in hem self 
to gydre; forsothe two doris weren on 
aseche syde of the doris. And grauen 
weren in the ylk doris of the temple 
cherubyns and grauyng of palmes, as and 
in the wallis thei weren expressid. Wher- 
fore and gretter trees weren in the frount 
26of the porche with outforth, on whiche 
the ouerthwert wyndowis, and lickenesse 
of palmes, on this syde and that syde; in* 
the litil shuldris of the porche, after the 
sydis of the hous, and breede of wallis. 


EZEKIEL. 601 


of the bildyng a3ens the face of that, that 
was departid’ at the bak; he mat the 
boteraces on euer either side of an hun- 
drid cubitis. And he mat the ynnere tem- 
ple, and the porchis of the halle, lyntels, 1 
and wyndows narowe withoutforth and 
broode with ynne; boteraces in cumpas bi 
thre partis, ajenst the lintel of ech, and 
araied with tree bi cumpas al aboute ; so- 
theli fro the erthe til to the wyndows, 
and the wyndows weren closid on the 
doris, and til to the ynnere hous, and 17 
withoutforth bi al the wal in cumpas, 
with ynne and with outforth at mesure. 
And cherubyns and palm trees weren is 
maad craftili, and a palm tree bitwixe 
cherub and cherub; and cherub hadde 
twei faces, the face of a man bisidisis 
the palm tree on this side, and the face 
of a lioun expressid bisidis the palm tree 
on ‘the tother’ side. Bi al the hous in cum- 
pas, fro the erthe til to the hijere part, 20 
cherubyns and palm trees weren grauun 
in the wal. of the temple. A threisfold 21 
foure® cornerid; and-the face of the bi- 
holdyng of the seyntuarie was a3ens the 
biholding of the auter of tree ; the hei3the 22 
therof was of thre cubitis, and the lengthe 
therof of! twei cubitis; and the corneris 
therof, and the lengthe therof, and the 
wallis therof, weren of tree. And he spak 
to me, This is the boord bifor the Lord. 
And twei doris weren in the temple, and 23 
in the seyntuarie. And in the* twei doris 24 
on euer either side weren twei litle doris, 
that weren foldun togidere in hem silf; 
for whi twei doris weren on! euer either 
side of the doris. And cherubyns™ and 2s 
the grauyng of palm trees weren grauun 
in tho" doris of the temple, as also tho 
weren expressid in the® wallis. Wherfor 
and grettere trees weren in the frount of. 
the porche with outforth, on whiche the 26 
wyndows narowe with out and large with 
ynne, and the licnesse of palm trees weren 


¢Om.cpromxk. Vand 4, 
f partid 1. & that oother 1s. ) was fourer. 1} Om.1. &Om.1. l!oononn. ™the cherubyns 1. 
athe. thon. 
VOL. III. 44 


602 


CAP. XLII. 


1 And he ledde me out in to the vtmerf 
hous, by the waye leedynge to the north; 
and he ledde me yn, in to the tresorie, 
that was a3einus the departid beeldyng, 
and a3einus the hous goynge to the north; 

2in the face of lengthe an hundred cubitis 
of the north dore, and of breede fifti cu- 

sbitis, ajeinus twenti cubitis of the ynner 
hous, and a3einus the pament pauyd with 
stoon of the vtmer® hous, wher was a 
4porche ioynyd to treble porche. And bi- 
fore the tresories a walkyng of ten cubitis 
of breede, and biholdynge to the ynner 
thingus of a* waye of oo cubit. And the 
sdoris of hem to the north, wher weren 
tresories lower in the ‘ouermore partis ; 
for thei baren vp the porchis that of hem 
apperiden of the lower partis, and of the 
e6mydlis of beeldyng: Sothely housis of 
three stagis weren, and hadde not pilers, 
as pilers weren of the greet housis ; ther- 
fore thei appeeriden out fro the lower 
parties, and fro the mydlis fro the erthe, 
7in fifty cubitis. And the vtmer aley after 
the tresories, that weren in the waye of 
the vtiner greet hous, byfore the tresories ; 
éthe lengthe therof of fyfty cubitis. For 
the lengthe was of the tresories of the 
vtmer hous of fyfty cubitis, and the 
lengthe byfore the face of the temple 
of an hundrid cubitis. And vndir these 
tresories was an eentre fro the eest, of 
men entrynge in to! it, of the vtmer hous, 
loin the breede of the aley of the hous, 
that was a3einus the eest waye, in to the 
face of the departid beeldyng. And by- 
fore the beeldyng weren tresories, and 
a waye bifore the face of hem, after the 
licknesse of tresories that weren in thek 


f vttermore 1. 


P schuldris, ether undursettingis coEFGHIKNPQRSUXY. 


prom. — 8 forz3erd cetert passim, *t Om. 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


& vttermore H passim. 


¥ forzerdis ceteri passim. 


XLIL 1—11. 


on this side and on that syde; in the litle 
vndursettyngis? of the porche, bi the sidis 
of the hous, and bi the breede of the4 
wallis. 


CAP. XLII. 


And he Jedde me out in to the" outer-1 
mere halle*, bi the weie ledynge to the 
north ; and he ledde me in to the treserie, 
that was ajens the bildyng departid, and 
a3ens the hous goynge to the north; ine 
the face an hundrid cubitis of lengthe of 
the dore of the north, and fifti cubitis of 
breede, a3ens twenti cubitis of the ynnere3 
halle, and a3ens the pawment araied with 
stoon of the outermere halle, where a 
porche was ioyned to thre fold porche. 
And bifor the tresories was a walkyng of 4 
ten cubitis of breede, biholdynge to the 
ynnere thingis of the weie of o cubit. And 
the doris of tho to the north, where tre-5 
sories weren lowere in the hi3ere thingis ; 
for tho baren vp the porchis that apperiden 
an hi3 of tho fro the lowere thingis, and 
fro the myddil thingis of the bildyng. 
For tho weren of thre stagis, and haddene 
not pileris, as weren thet pilers of hallis"; 
therfor tho stoden an hi3 fro the lowere 
thingis, and fro the myddil thingis fro 
erthe, bi fifti cubitis. And the outermore7 
halle closynge the walkynge place was bi 
the treseries, that weren in the weie of the 
outermore halle, bifor the treseries; the 
lengthe therof was of fifti cubitis. Fors 
the lengthe of the tresories of the outer- 
more halle was of fifti cubitis, and the 
lengthe bifor the face of the temple was 
of an hundrid cubitis. And vndur these’ 9 
tresories was an entring fro the eest, of ¥ 
men entringe in to* tho, fro the outer- 
mere halle, in the brede of the wal of the1o0 
halle, that was a3ens the eest weie in the 
face of the bilding departid. And tre- 
series weren bifore the bilding, and a weie 11 
was bifor the face of tho, bi the licnesse 


hthe 4. i Om. acu. k Om. agen. 


t Om. CEGHNPSX 
wandn. *Om.N. 


4 Om. CEFGIIIKMNPQRSUX. 
vthe 1 


XLU. 12——XLIIL. 2. EZEKIEL. 603 — 


waye of the north; after the lengthe of 
hem, so and the breede of hem. And al 
the entryng of hem, and lickenessis and 
i2doris of hem, after the doris of tresories 
that weren in the waye biholdynge to the 
south dore in the heed of the waye, whiche 
waye was byfore the porche departid to 
ismen entrynge by the eest waye. And he 
saide to me, The tresories of the north, 
and the tresories of the south, that ben 
byfore the beeldyng departid, these ben 
holy tresories, in whiche the prestis ben 
clothid, whiche neijen to the Lord in to 
the holy of halewis; there thei shuln 
putte the holy thingus of the holy, and 
offryngus for synne of doyng, and trespas 
of leeuyng ; forsothe the place is holy: 
14 Forsothe whan prestis shuln entre, thei 
shuln not go out of holy thingis in to 
the vtmer hous; and there thei shuln 
putte ajein her clothis, in whiche thei 
ministren, for thei ben holy; and thei 
shuln be clothid with other clothingus, 
and so thei shuln go forth to the peple. 
1s And whenn he hadde ful eendid the me- 
suris of the ynner hous, he ledde me out 
by the waye of the 3ate that byhelde to 
the eest waye; and he matte it on eche 
ig6syde by cumpas. Forsothe he matte 
a3einus the eest wynd with a 3erd of me- 
sure by cumpas fyue hundreth 3erdis, in 
17a 3erd of mesure by cumpas. And he 
matte aj3einus the wynd of the north fyue 
hundred 3erdis, in a 3erd of mesure by 
iscumpas. And in to the south wynd he 
matte fyue hundreth 3erdis, in a 3erd of 
igmesure by cumpas. And to the west 
wynd he matte fyue hundreth jerdis, in 
20a 3erd of mesure. By foure wyndus he 
matte the wall therof on eche syde by 
cumpas, the lengthe of fyue hundred cu- 
bitis, and the breed of fyue hundred cu- 
bitis, departinge bitwix the sayntuarie 
and place of commoun peple. 


CAP. XLIII. 


1 And he ladde me out at the 3ate, that 
2byhelde to the eest waye. And loo! the 


Y the doris ns. 7 not go K sec. m. 8 sec. m. 


of treseries that weren in the weie of the 
north ; bi the lengthe of tho, so was also 
the breede of tho. And al the entryng of 
tho, and the licnessis and doris’ of tho, 
weren lijk the doris of treseries that weren 12 
in the weye biholdynge to the south; a 
dore was in the heed of the weye, which 
weie was bifor the porche departid to men 
entringe bi the eest weie. And he seide1: 
to me, The treseries of the north, and the 
treseries of the south, that ben bifor the 
bildyng departid, these ben hooli treseries, 
in whiche the preestis ben clothid, that 
neijen to the Lord in to the hooli of hooli 
thingis; there thei schulen putte the hooli 
of hooli thingis, and offryngis for synne, 
and for trespas; for it is an hooli place. 
Sotheli whanne prestis han entrid, thei 14 
schulen go’ out of hooli thingis in to the 
outermore halle; and there thei schulen 
putte vp her clothis, in whiche thei myny- 
stren*, for tho ben hooli; and thei schulen 
be clothid in othere clothis, and so thei 
schulen go forth to the puple. And whanne ts 
he hadde fillid the mesuris of the ynnere 
hous, he ledde me out bi the weie of the 
jate that biheelde to the eest weie; and 
he mat it on ech side bi cumpas.  For- 16 
sothe he mat aj3ens the eest wynd with 
the rehed of mesure bi cumpas fyue hun- 
drid rehedis, in a rehed of mesure bi cum- 
pas. And he mat aj3ens the wynd of the17 
north fiue hundred rehedis, in the rehed 
of mesure bi cumpas. And at the south 18 
wynd he mat fyue hundrid rehedis, with 
a rehed of mesure bi cumpas. And at the 19 
west wynd he mat fyue hundrid rehedis, 
with” thee rehed of mesure. Bi foure 20 
wyndis he mat the wal therof on ech side 
bi cumpas, the lengthe of fyue hundrid, 
and the breede of fyue hundrid, depart- 
ynge bitwixe the seyntuarie and the place’ 
of the comyn puple. 


CAP. XLII. 


And he lIedde me out to the 3ate, that1 
bihelde to the eest weie. And lo! the2 


a mynystriden NS sec.m. in cIUX. a FH. 


4H 2 


604 


glorie of God of Yrael entride by the 
eest waye; and a voice was to hym, as 
the voice of many watris, and the erthe 
xshoone of the maieste of hym. And I 
saw} a visioun, after the fourme whiche 
I saw3, whan he came for to distruye 
the citee; and the fourme after the bi- 
holding whom I saw3 bysydis the flood 
4Cobar. And I felle vpon my face, and 
the maieste of the Lord entride the tem- 
ple, by the waye of the 3ate that biheelde 
sto the eest. And the Spirit reyside me, 
and ledde me yn!, in to the ynner hous; 
and loo! the hous was fulfilled with glo- 
érie of the Lord. And I herde the spek- 
yng to me of the hons. And the man that 
7stoode bysidis me, saide to me, Sone of 
man, the place of my seete, and the place 
of steppis of my feet, wher Y dwelle in 
the mydil of the sones of Yrael in to 
with outen eende; and the hous of Yrael 
shuln na more defoule myn holy name, 
thei, and the kyngus of hem, in her for- 
nicaciouns, and in fallyngus of her kyngus, 
gand in hee3 thingus. Whiche forgiden 
her thresfold bysydis my thresfold, and 
her postis bysidis my postis, and a wall 
was bitwix hem and me; and thei de- 
fouliden myn holy name in abomina- 
ciouns whiche thei diden; for whiche I 
ywastide hem in my wrath. Now ther- 
fore putte thei ferr her fornicaciouns, 
and fallyngus of her kyngus fro me; and 
I shal dwelle in the mydil of lem euer- 
1omore. Forsothe thou, sone of man, shewe 
to the hous of Yrael the temple, and be 
thei confoundid of her wickidnessis ; and 
1imete thei the makyng, and shame thei 
of alle thingus that thei diden. Thou shalt 
shewe to hem the figure of the hous, and 
makyng therof ; the outgoyngus™, and the 
yngoingus, and al discryuyng therof, and 
alle maundementus therof, and al the or- 
dre therof, and alle lawis therof, and 
thou shalt write in the ee3en of hem; 
that thei keepe alle discryuyngus therof, 


10m, acu. 


EZEKIEL. 


XLYY. 3-—1t1. 


glorie of God.of Israel entride bi the eest 
weie; and a vois was to it, as the vois of 
many watris, and the erthe schynede of 
the mageste of hyn. And Y si3 a visioun,3 
bi the licnesse whiche Y hadde seyn, whanne 
he cam to distrie the citee; and the lic- 
nesse was lijc the biholdyug whiche Y 
hadde seyn bisidis the flood Chobar. And 4 
Y felle doun on my face, and the mageste 
of the Lord entride in to the temple, bi 
the weie of the 3ate that bileeld4 to the 
eest. And the Spirit reiside me, and leddes 
me in to the ynnere halle; and lo! the 
hous was fillid of the glorie of the Lord. 
And Y herde oon spekynge to me of thes 
hous. And the man that stood bisidis 
ine, seide to me, Thou, son of man, this7 
is the place of my seete, and the place of 
the steppis of my feet, where Y dwelle in 
the myddis of the sones of Israel with- 
outen ende; and the hous of Israel schulen 
no more defoule myn hooli name, thei, 
and the kyngis of hem in her fornica- 
ciouns, and iu the fallyngis of her kyngis, 
and in bi3 places. Whiche maden hers 
threisfold bisidis my threisfold, and her 
postis bisidis my postis, and a wal] was 
bitwixe me and hem; and thei defouliden 
myn hooli name in abhomynaciouns whiche 
thei diden; wherfor Y wastide hem in my 
wraththe. Now therfor putte thei aweio 
fer her fornicacioun, and the fallyng® of 
her kyngis fro me; and Y schal dwelle 
euere in the myddis of hem. But thou, 10 
sone of man, schewe the temple to the 
hous of Israel, and be thei schent of her 
wickidnessis ; and mete thei the bilding, 
and be thei aschamed of alle thingis11 
whiche thei diden. Thou schalt schewe to 
hem, and thou schalt write bifore the i3en 
of hem the figure of the hous, and of the 
bildyng therof; the outgoyngis, and thef 
entryngis, and al the discryuyng® therof, 
and aile the’ comaundementis therof, and 
al the ordre therof,‘and alle the lawis 
therof'; that thei kepe alle the discryu- 


™ outgoynge 4. 


a biholdith A. ¢ fallyngist. fOm.cerHikmgru. §& discryuyngis ENP. » the lawis theroff, and alle 1. 


Om. Fs. 1 Om. 1, 


XLITI. 12—21. 


12and preceptis therof, and do hem. This is 
lawe® of the hous, in hee3nesse of mount®"; 
alle the eendis therof in cumpas is the 
holy of halewis; therfore this is the lawe 
i30f the hous. These sothely the mesures 
of the auter in a cubit most verre, that 
hadde a cnbit and an‘hond; and® the bo- 
sum therof was a cubit in lengthe, and 
a cubit in breede; and the diffynyng, or 
certeyntee, therof vn to the lippe, or 
brynke, therof in cumpas, 0 palme, or 


hond ; and this was the diche, 07 holow- 


14 nesse, of the auter. And fro the bosum 
of the erthe vn to the last hei3t, or brinke, 
two cubitis, and the breede of:00 cubit ; 
and fro the lesse hei3t, or aufer,‘to the 


more hei3t, or auter’, foure cubitis, and’ 
the breede of 00 cubit; forsothe the ylk. 


ariel, o7 auter, of foure cubitis, and fro 
16ariel vn to aboue, foure corners. And the 


ariel, or aufer?, of twelfe cubitis in lengthe, 


by twelue cubitis of breede, foure corner- 
ized with euen sydis. And the hei3t, or 
brynke, of fourtene cubitis of lengthe 
by fourtene cubitis of breede, in four cor- 
ners therof. And a croune in cumpas 
therof of half a cubit, and the bosum 
therof of oo cubit by cumpas; forsothe 
18 the grese therof?? turnyd to the eest. And 
he saide to me, Sone of man, these thingus 
saith the Lord God, These ben the rytis, 
or obseruaunces, of the auter, in what 
euer’ day it shal be forgid%4, that brent 
sacrifice be offrid thervpon, and bloode 
i9be shed out. And thou shalt 3eue to 
prestis and dekenys, that ben of the seed 
of Sadoch, that cumen to me, saith the 
Lord God, that thei offre to me a calf 
200f the droue for synne don. And thou, 
takyng to of the bloode therof, shalt 
putte vpon four corners therof, and vpon 
four corners of the hei3t, and vpon the 
crown in cumpas; and thou shalt clense 
21it, and fully make clene. And thou shalt 
take the calf that was offrid for synne 


_ the Jawe G sec. m. 9 the mount G sec. m. 
qd euery Gx. 44 forchid x. 


k Om. CEFGIHIMNPQRUX. 


EZEKIEL. 


° palm; in G sec. m. 


1 fourti x. 


605 
yngis therof, and comaundementis therof, 
and do tho. This is the lawe of the hous, 12 
in the hijnesse of the hil; alle the coostis 
therof in cumpas is the hooli of hooli 
thingis ; therfor this is the lawe of the 
hous. Forsothe these ben the mesuris of 13 
the auter, in a verieste cubit, that hadde 
a cubit and a spanne; in the bosum therof 
was a cubit in lengthe, and a cubit in 
breede; and the ende therof til to the 
brenke, and o spanne in cumpas; also 
this was the diche of the auter And frois 
the bosuin of the* erthe til to the laste 
heiz3the wer'en twei cubitis, and the breede 
of o cubit;.and fro the lesse hei3the til to 
the grettere heijthe were foure! cubitis, 
and the breede was of o eubit ; forsothe 
thilke ariel, that és, the hizere part of the 
auter, was of foure cubitis; and fro the 
auter ‘til to™ aboue weren foure hornes. 
And the auter of twelue cubitis in lengthe 16 
was foure cornerid with enene sidis, bi 
twelue cubitis of breede. And the hei3the 17 
of fourtene cubitis of lengthe was bi four- 
tene cubitis of breede, in foure corneris 
therof. And a coroun of half a cubit was 
in the cumpas therof, and the bosum ther- 
of was of 0 cubit bi cumpas; forsothe the 
degrees therof weren turned to the eest. 
And he seide to me, Thou, sone of man, js 
the Lord God seith these thingis, These 
ben the customs of the auter, in what euer 
dai it is maad, that me offre on it brent 
sacrifice, and blood be sched out. Andis 
thou schalt 3yue to preestis and dekenes, 
that ben of the seed of Sadoch, that nei3en . 
to me, seith the Lord God, that thei offre 
to me a calf of the drooue for synne. And 20 
thou schalt take of the blood therof, and 
schalt putte on foure hornes therof, and 
on foure corneris of hei3the, and on the 
coroun in cumpas; and thou schalt clense- 
it, and make clene. And thou schalt take 21 
the calf which is offrid for synne, and 
thou schalt brenne it in a" departid place 
pp Om. a. 


no Om. kK. =P Om. 4. 


«Om. 1. 


mynto fr. 


606 


don, and thou shalt brenne hym in a de- 


partid place of the hous, with outen the . 


zesayntuarye. And in the secounde day 
thou shalt offre a buc of geet vnspottid 
for synne don; and thei shuln fully clense 
the auter, as thei clensiden in the calf. 

23 And whann thou hast fulfillid that clens- 
yng, thou shalt offre a calf vnspottid of 
the droue, and a wether, or ram, vnspot- 

24tid of the floc. And thou shalt offre hem 
in the si3t of the Lord; and prestis shuln 
sende salt vpon hem, and shuln offre hem 

2;1n to brent sacrifice to the Lord. Seuen 
days thou shalt make the geet buc for 
synne, day by day; and the calf of the 
drooue, and the wether of the® sheep 

26thei shuln offre bem vnspottid. Seuen 
days thei shuln fulli make clene the au- 
ter, and shuln clense it, and shuln ful- 

27fille the hond therof. Forsothe seuen 
days fulfillid, in the ei3t day and ouer 
prestis shuln do 3our brent sacrifices vpon 
the auter, and whiche thei offren for pees; 
and I shal be plesid to 3o0u, saith the 
Lord God. 


CAP. XLIV. 


1 And he turned me to the waye of the 
3ate of the vtmer sayntuarie, that bihold- 
2ith to the eest, and was closid. And the 
Lord saide to me, This 3ate shal be closid, 
and shal not be opnyd, and a man shal 
not passe by it; for the Lord God of 
Yrael entride yn by it, and it shal be 
3closid to the prynce. The prince he shal 
. sitte in it, that he ete breede bifore the 
Lord; by the waye of the 3ate of the 
porche he shal go yn, and by the waye 
4therof he shal go out. And he ledde me 
to by the waye of the north jate, in the 
si3te of the hous; and I saw3, and loo! the 
glorie of the Lord fulfillid the hous of 
5the Lord; and I felle in to my face. And 
the Lord sayde to me, Sone of man, putte 
thin herte, and see with thin ee3en, and 
heer with thin eris alle thingus whiche 


EZEKIEL. 


XLII. 22——XLIV. 5. 


of the hous, with out the seyntuarie. And 22 
in the secounde dai thou schalt offre a 
buk of geet, which is with out wem, for 
synne; and thei schulen clense the auter, 
as thei clensiden in the calf. And whanne23 
thou hast fillid that clensyng, thou schalt 
offre a calf of the drooue, which calf is 
without wem, and a wether with out wem 
of the floc. And thou schalt offre tho in 24 
the si3t of the Lord; and prestis schulen 
putte® salt on tho, and schulen offre tho 
in to brent sacrifice to the Lord. Bi se-25 
uene daies thou schalt make a buk of geet 
for synne, ech dai; and thei schulen offre 
a calf of the drooue, and a wether vn- ~ 
wemmed of scheep. Bi seuene daies thei 26 
schulen clense the auter, and schulen make 
it cleene, and thei schulen fille the hond 
therof. Forsothe whanne seuene daies ben 27 
fillid, in the ei3theP dai and ferther prestis 
schulen make on the auter 3oure brent sa- 
crifices, and tho thingis whiche thei offren 
for pees; and Y schal be plesid to 3ou, 
seith the Lord God. 


CAP. XLIV. 


And he turnede me to the weie of thei 
jate of the outermore seyntuarie, which 
jate byhelde to the eest, and was closid. 
And the Lord seide to me, This 3ate schal 2 
be closid, and schal not be opened, and a 
man schal not passe thorou it; for the 
Lord God of Israel entride bi it, and it 
schal be closid to the prince. The princes 
hym silf schal sitte ther ynne, that he ete 
breed bifor the Lord; he schal go yn bi 
the weie of the 3ate of the porche, and he 
schal go out bi the weie therof. And he4 
ledde me bi the weie of the north jate, in 
the si3t of the hous?; and Y si3, and lo! 
the glorie of the Lord fillide the hous of 
the’ Lord; and Y felle doun on my face. 
And the Lord seide to me, Thou, sone of 5 
man, sette thin herte, and se with thin 
i3en, and here with thin eeris alle thingis 


g Om. 4GH. 


© sende CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


P eiste A. 


4 hous of Juda a secem. * Om. Nn. 


XEIV, 6—r4. 


I speke to thee, of alle cerymonyes of the 
hous of the Lord, and of alle the lawis 
therof; and thou shalt putte thin herte in 
wayes of the temple, by alle the out goyngus 
60f the seyntuarie. And thou shalt saye to 
the hous of Yrae]l terrynge me to wrath, 
These thingus saith the Lord God, 3e hous 
of Yrael, alle 30ur grete trespassis suffice 
7 thei to 30u, for that that 3e bryng yn alyen 
sonys, vncircumcidid in hert, and yneir- 
eumcidid in flesh, that thei be in my 
sayntuarie, and defoule myn hous. And 
je offren my louys, fatnesse, and bloode, 
and 3e vndo my couenaunt in alle 3our 
sgrete trespassis. And 3e kepte not the 
preceptis of my sayntuarie, and 3e han 


putte keepers of myn obseruaunces in > 


9my sayntuarie to 30ur self. These thingus 
saith the Lord God, Eche alien vneir- 
cumcidid in herte, and vncircumcidid in 
fleshe, shal not entre my sayntuarie ; 
eche alyen sone, that is in the mydil of 
10 the sones of Yrael. Bot and the Leuytis, 
or dekenys, whiche wenten fer awey fro 
me in errour of the sonys of Yrael, and 
erriden fro me after her ydolis, aud baren 
11 her wickidnes, shuln be in my sayntuarie 
kepers of the hous, and porters of the 
j3atis of the hous, and mynistris of the 
hous; thei shulen slee brent sacrificis', 
and slayn sacrificis* of the peple; and 
thei shuln stonde in the si3t of hem, that 
i2thei ministre to hem. For that that thei 
mynystryden to hem in the si3t of the 
ydols, and ben maad to the hous of Yrael 
in to offencioun of wickidnesse ; therfore 
Y reyside myn hond vpon hem, saith the 
Lord God, and thei han horn her wickid- 
isnesse. And thei shuln not neije to ime, 
that thei be ordeyned in presthod to me, 
neither thei shuln cum to al my sayn- 
tuarye bysidis the holy of halewis, bot 
thei shuln bere her confusioun, and her 
lagrete trespassis that thei diden. And I 
shal 3eue hem porters of the hous, in al 
the mynysterie therof, and in alle thingus 


T sacrifice K sup. ras. 


t Om, cerniKmarsu. %Om. Nn. 


ys 3yue CEFHIKMQRSU. 


Sand Nn. 
GHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


EZEKIEL. 


¥Om. s. 
Z hem Jo be 1. 


607 


whiche Y speke to thee, of al the cere- 
monyes of the hous of the Lord, and of 
alle the lawis therof ; and thou schalt sette 
thin herte in the weies of the temple, bi alle 
the goyngis out of the seyntuarie. Ande 
thou schalt seie to the hous of Israel ter- 
rynge me to wraththe, The Lord God 
seith these thingis, 3e hous of Israel, alle 
joure grete trespassis suffice to 30u, for 3e7 
bryngen in alien sones, vneircuncidid in 
herte, and vneircumcidid in fleisch, that 
thei be in my seyntuarie, and defoule myn 
hous. And 3e offren my looues, ynnere fat- 
nesse, and blood, and breken my coue- 
naunt in alle 3oure grete trespassis. Ands 
3e kepten not the comaundementis of my 
seyntuarie, and 3e settiden keperis of my* 
kepyngis in my seyntuarye to 30u silf. 
The Lord God seith these thingis, Echs 
alien ‘that 7st vncircumcidid in herte, and 
vucircumcidid in fleisch, schal not entre in 
to my seyntuarie; ech alien sone, which 
is in the myddis of the sones of Israel. 
But also Leuytis, ‘ether men of the lynage 
of Leuy®, that 3eden fer awei fro me in 
the’ errour” of the sones of Israel, and 
erriden fro me aftir her idols, and baren 
her wickidnesse, thei schulen be kepers of 11 
housis in my seyntuarye, and porteris of 
jatis of the hous, and mynystris of the 
hous; thei schulen sle brent sacrifices, and 
sacrifices for victorie of the puple ; and thei 
schulen stonde in the si3t of the prestis, 
for to mynystre to hem. For that that tz 
thei mynystriden to tho in the si3t of her 
idols, and weren maad to the hous of Is- 
rae] in to offendyng* of wickidnesse ; ther- 
for Y reiside myn hond on them, seith the 
Lord God, and thei baren her wickid- 
nesse. And thei schulen not neize to me, 13 
that thei vse preesthod to me, nether thei 
schulen neije to al my seyntuarie bisidis 
hooly of hooli thingis, but thei schulen 
bere her schenschipe, and her grete tres- 
passis whiche thei diden. And Y schal 14 
imakeY hem? porteris of the hous, in al the 


8 sacrifice K sup. ras. 


Werrouris 1. * offending, ether hirting cer 


608 EZEKIEL. 


isthat weren in it. Forsothe prestis and 
dekenys, sonys of Sadoch, whiche kepten 
thet cerymonyes of my sayntuarie, whan 
the sones of Yrael erryden fro me, thei 
shuln cum to me, that thei mynistre to 
me; and thei shuln stonde in my si3te, 
that thei offre to me fatnesse and blood, 
issaith the Lord God. Thei shuln go yn 
to my sayntuarie, and thei shulu cum to 
my bord, that thei mynystre to me, and 
17keepe my cerymonyes. And whan thei 
shuln go yn to the 3atis of the ynner 
is hous, thei shuln be clothid with lynnen 
clothis, nether eny wollun shal stye vp 
on hem, whaun thei mynystren in the 
jatis of the ynner hous, and with ynne- 
forth; lynnen byndyngus shuln be in the 
hedis of hem, and wommans lynnen in 
the leendus of hem, and thei shuln not 
19 be gyrd in swoot. And whan thei shuln 
go out the vtmer hous to the peple, thei 
shuln vnelothe hem her clothingus", in 
whiche they mynistriden, and shuln aj3ein 
putte hem in the tresorie of sayntuarie ; 
and thei shuln clothe them with other 
clothingus’, and thei shuln not halewe 
20the peple in her clothis. Sothely thei 
shuln not shane her hedis, nether norishe 
longe her, bot clippyng thei shuln clippe 
21 her hedis. And eche prest shal not drynke 
wijne, whan he entrith the ynner hous. 
22 And thei shuln not take wyues a wydue, 
and forsaken, bot meydens of the seed 
of the hous of Yrael; bot and thei shuln 
take a wydue, whiche was wydue of a 
23prest. And thei shuln teche my peple, 
what is bitwixe holy and polute, o7 de- 
foulid, aud bitwixe cleen and vncleen ; 
24and thei shuln shewe to hem. And 
whann debate shal be, thei shuln stonde 
in my domys, and thei shuln deem my” 
lawis; and thei shuln kepe my heestis in 
alle my solempnyteese, and thei shuln 
25 halewe my sabothis. And thei shuln not 
entree to a dead man, lest thei be de- 
foulid, no bot to fader, and moder, sone, 


t Om. a. ¥ clothis «4. 


®Om. 1 > Om. a. 


Vv clothis acH. 


© stie CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


XLIV. 15—25. 


seruyce therof, and in alle thingis that ben 
don ther ynne. Forsothe preestis and de-1s 
kenes, the sones of Sadoch, that kepten 
the® cerymonyes of my seyutuarie, whanne 
the sones of Israel erriden fro me, thei 
schulen neije to me, for to mynystre to 
me; and thei schulen stonde in my si3t, 
that thei offre to me ynnere fatnesse and 
blood, seith the Lord God. Thei schulen 16 
entre in to my seyntuarie, and thei schulen 
neije to my boord, that thei mynystre to 
me, and kepe my ceremonyes. And *17 
whanne thei schulen entre in to the 3atis 
of the ynnere halle, thei schulen be clothid 1s 
with lynnun clothis, nether ony wollun 
thing schal ‘be do* on hem, whanne thei 
mynystren in the 3atis of the ynnere halle, 
and with ynne; lynnun cappis, ether mytris, 
schulen be in the heedis of hem, and lyn- 
nun brechis schulen be in the leendis of 
hem, and thei schulen not be gird in swoot. 
And whanne thei schulen go out at the19 
outermere halle to the puple, thei schulen 
dispuyle hem of her clothis, in whiche 
thei mynystriden, and thei schulen leie 
tho vp in the treserie of seyntuarie’; and 
thei schulen clothe hem silf in othere 
clothis, and thei schulen not halewe my 
puple in her clothis. Forsothe thei schulen 20 
not schaue her heed, nether thei schulen 
nursche long heere, but thei clippynge 
schulen clippe her heedis. And ech preest 21 
schal not drynke wyn, whanne he schal 
entre in to the ynnere halle. And preestis 22 
schulen not take wyues a widewe, and a 
forsakun womman, but virgyns of the seed 
of the hous of Israel; but also thei schulen 
take a widewe, which is the widewe of a 
preest. And thei schulen teche my puple, 23 
what is bitwixe hooli thing and defoulid ; 
and thei schulen schewe to hem, what is 
bitwixe cleene thing and vncleene. And 2¢ 
whanne® debate is, thei schulen stonde in 
my domes, and schulen deme my lawis; 
and thei schulen kepe my comaundementis 
in alle my solempnytees, and thei schulen 


Win my 4. 


4 the seyntuarie 1 sec.m. © what N. 


XLIV. 26—XLV. 4. 


and dou3ter, and* brother, and sister 
whiche hadde nonY husbond, in whom 
26thei shuln be defoulid. And after that 
he shal be clensid, seuen days shuln be 
27noumbred to hym. And in the day of 
his entryng in to the sayntuarie, at the 
ynner hous, that he mynistre to me iu 
nly sayntuarie, he shal offre for his synne, 
zssaith the Lord God. Forsothe heritage 
shal not be to hem, Y the heritage of 
hem; and 3e shuln not 3eue to hem pos- 
sessioun in Yrael, forsothe I the posses- 
29sion of hem. Thei shuln ete slayn sacri- 
fice, and for synne of doyng, and for 
trespas of leuyng, and eche vow in Yrael 
30shal be hern. And the primyssis, or first 


EZEKIEL. 


609 


halewe my sabatis. And thei schulen notes 
entre to a deed man, lest thei be defoulid, 
no but to fadir, and modir, and to sone, 
and‘ dou3ter, and to brother, and sister 
that hadde not an hosebonde, in whiche 
thei schulen be defoulid. And after that he2« 
is clensid, seuene daies schulen be nouim- 
brid to hym. And in the dai of his en-27 
tryng in to the seyntuarie, to the ynnere 
hallef, that he mynystre to me in the 


‘seyntuarie, he schal offre for his synne, 


thingus, of alle beestus first bygoten, and © 


alle liquyd sacrifices, or fleetynge, as oyle, 
and hony, and syche, of alle thingus that 
ben offrid, shuln be the prestis; and 3e 
shuln 3ehe to the prest the first thingus 
of 30ur metis, that he putte vp a bless- 
3iyng to his hons. Prestis shuln not ete 
eche dead thing by it self, and taken of 
beestis, of briddus, and of etable beestis. 


CAP. XLV. 


1 
parte the lond by lot, departe 3e the first 
frnytis to the Lord, and halewid thinge 
of the lond, the lengthe fyue and twenti 
thousandus, and the breed ten thousandus; 
it shal be halewid in al the terme therof 

2by cumpas. And on eche part it shal be 
halewid in fyue hundrid by fyue hun- 
drid, four maner by cumpas, and in fifti 
cubitis in to the suburbis therof bi cum- 

3pas. And of this mesure thou shalt me- 
sure the lengthe of fyue and twenty 
thousandis, and the breed of~ten thon- 
sandus; and in that the temple shal be, 
aand the holy of holy thingus. The ha- 
lewid thing of the lond shal be to prestis, 
mynystris of the sayntuarye, whiche cum- 


x Om. a. 


f orn.  forzerd ceteri preter 1. 


k Om. x. 
VOL. III. 


Whann 3e shuln bygynne for to de- 


b and CEFGHNKMNPQRSUX. 


41 


seith the Lord God. Forsothe noon eri-28 
tage schal be to hem, Y am the eritageé of 
hem; and 3e schulen not 3yne to hem pos- 
sessioun in Israel, for Y am the possessioun 
of hem. Thei schulen ete sacrifice, bothe® 29 
for synne and for trespasse, and ech avow 
of Israel schal be hern. And the firste 30 
thingis of alle firste gendrid thingis, and 
alle moiste sacrifices, of alle thingis that 
ben offrid, schulen be the prestis part ; 
and 3e schulen 3yue the firste thingis of 
3oure metis to the prest, that he leie vp 
blessyng to his hous. Preestisi schulen si 
not ete ony thing deed bi it silf, and takun 
of a beeste, of foulis, and of scheep. 


CAP. XLV. 


And whanne 3e schulen bigynne to de-1 
parte the lond bi partis, departe 3e the 
firste thingis to the Lord, an halewid 
thing of the lond, fyue and twenti thou- 
synde of rehedis in lengthe, and ten thou- 
synde of rehedis in breede; it schal be 
halewid in al the coost therof by eum- 
pas. And it schal be halewid on ech part2 
in fyue hundrid rehkedis bi fyue hundrid, 
in foure sidis bi cumpas, and in fifti cu- 
bitis in to the subarbis therof bi cumpas. 
And fro this mesure thou schalt mete thes 
lengthe of fyue and twenti thousynde of 
rehedis, and the breede of ten thousynde; 
and the temple and the hooli of hooli 
thingis schal be in it. An halewid thing 4 
of the lond schal be to prestis, the* myn- 


Y noon other G sec. am. 


i Therfore preestis Ns sec. m. 


610 


men to the seruyce of the Lord; and a 
place shal be to hem in the hous, in to 
ssayntuarie of halewyng. Sothely fyue 
and twenti thousandis schulen ben of 
lengthe, and ten thousandus of breede; 
forsothe the dekenys that ministren to 
the hous, thei shuln weelde twenty tre- 
ssories. And 3e shuln 3eue possessiouns 
of the citee, fyue thousandus of breed, and 
of lengthe fyue and twenti thousandis, 
after the departyng of sayntuarie, to eche 
zhous of Yrael. And to the prince on this 
half and on that half, and in to the de- 
partynge of sayntuarie’, and in to pos- 
sessioun of the citee, ajeinus the face of 
departyng of the sayntuarie, and a3einus 
the face of possessioun of the citee, fro 
the syde of the see vn to the see, and fro 
the syde of the eest vn to the eest. For- 
sothe the lengthe bysydis eche of the 
parties, fro the west terme vnto the eest 
sterme of the lond, shal be possessioun 
in Yrael; and princis shuln namore spuyle 
my peple, but shuln 3ene lond to the 
hous of Yrael, after the lynagis of hem. 
9These thingus saith the Lord God, 3e 
princis of Yrael, be it ynew3 to 3o0w, leue 
je wickidnesse and raueyns, and do 3e 
dome and ri3twijsnesse; departe 3e 3our 
ni3 coostus fro my peple, saith the Lord 
10God. <A iust balaunce, and iust mesure 
of drye thingis, that is clepid ephi, and 
iust mesure of fleetynge thingus, that is 
icleepid bachus, shal be to 30u. Ephi 
and bachus shuln be euen, and of 00 me- 
sure, that bachus take the tenthe part 
of corus, that ts a” mesure of thritti 
busshellis, and ephi the tenthe part of 
chorus; after the mesure of corus ther 
i2Shal be euen wei3t of hem. Forsothe a 
Sicle shal haue twenti halpenns; forsothe 
twenti syclis, and fyue and twenti syclis 
ismaken a besaunt. And these ben the 
first thingus whiche 3e shuln take; the 
sixt part of ephi, of the mesure corus of 


EZEKIEL. 


XLY. 5——13- 


ystris of seyutuarie!, that nei3en to the 
seruyce of the Lord; and a place schal be 
to hem in to housis, and in to the seyn- 
tuarie of hoolynesse. Sotheli fyue ands 
twenti thousynde of lengthe schulen be, 
and ten thousynde of breede; but the de- 
kenes that mynystren to the hous, thei 
schulen haue in possessioun twenti tre- 
series. And 3e schulen 3yue the posses-6 
sioun of the citee, fyue thousynde rehedis 
of breede, and fyne and twenti thousynde 
of lengthe, bi the departyng of the™ seyn- 
tuarie, to al the hous of Israel. And 3e7 
schulen 3yue a porcioun to the prince on 
this side and on that side, bisidis the de- 
partyng of the™ seyntuarie, and bisidis the 
possessioun of the citee, a3ens the face of 
departynge of seyntuarie®, and a3ens the 
face of possessioun of the citee; fro the 
side of the se til to the see, and fro the 
side of the cest ‘til to? the eest, schal be of 
the possessioun of the prince. Forsothe 
the lengthe bi ech of the partis, fro the 
west ende til to the eest ende of the lond,s 
schal be possessioun to hyin in Israel; aud 
the princes schulen no inore robbe my 
puple, but thei schulen 3yue the lond to 
the hous of Israel, bi the lynagis of hem. 
The Lord God seith these thingis, O'!» 
princes of Israel, suffice it to® 30u, leue 3e 
wickidnesse ‘and raueyns'‘, and do 3e dooin 
and ri3tfulnesse ; departe 3e joure ni3 
coostis fro my puple, seith the Lord God. 


A iust balaunce, and a iust mesure clepid io 


ephi*, and a iust mesure clepid bathus, 
schulen be to jou. Ephi 
schulen be euene, and*t of o mesure, that 
bathus take the tenthe part of the mesure 
clepid corus, and that ephi take the tenthe 
part of the" mesure corus’; bi the mesure 
of corus schal be euene weiynge of tho. 


* Ephi is a 
mesure of drie 
thingis, as of 
wheete, and 
barli, and lijk 
thingis, and it 
conteyneth 
thre buyschelis. 
Bathus is a me- 
sure of moiste 
thingis, as of 
wyn, and oile, 
and lijk thingis, 
and conteyneth 
as miche as 
ephi. Corus is 
a mesure bothe 
in drie thingis 
and in moiste 
thingis, and con- 
teyneth thretti 
buyschelis. 
ACEGFQUY. 
xx. siclis and 
rere. siclis, and 
«xv. siclis maken 
sixti siclis, and 
sixtisiclismaken 
a besaunt. Lire 
here.cCEGPQUY. 
Ephi is a me- 
sure of drye 


and bathus 11 thingis, and 


conteyneth thre 
bushelis. Ba. 
thus, a mesure 
of moiste 
thingis, and 
conteyneth thre 
bushelis also, 
or foure and 
twenti galouns. 
Corus, a me- 


Forsothe a sicle schal haue twenti halpens; 12 sure both of 


certis twenti siclis, and fyue and twenti 
siclis, and fiftene siclis maken a besaunt. 


drie thingis and 
moiste, and 
conteyneth 
thretti bushelis. 


And these ben the firste fruytis whiche 3e 13 *- 


Z the seyntuarie 4. 22 Om. c. 
1 Als seyntuarie X sec.m. ™Om.N. SOm.N. © the seyntuarie x scc.m. Pvntor 4Om.N. 
’ Al cercHKmNrgrsux. SOm.1. tof rauein EY. andraueinp. ¢ttOm. enpy. "Om. py. ‘of 


corus 8. 


XLV. 14—24. 


whete, and the sixte part of ephi, of the ~ 
14 mesure corus of barly. And the mesure: 


of oyle; bachus of oyle is the tenthe part 
of the mesure corus, and ten mesuris of 
bachus maken the mesure corus; for ten 
mesuris of bachus fulfllen the mesure 
iscorus. And oo wether of a floc of two 
hundrid, of these whiche the sones of 
Yrael nuryshen, in to sacrifice, and in to 
brend sacrifice, and in to pesible, for to 
fulli elense for hem, saith the Lord God. 
16 Al the peple of the lond shal be holden 
in these primisses to the prince of Yrael. 
17 And vpon the prince shuln be brend sa- 
crifices, and sacrifice of offryngus of fleet- 
yng thingus, in solempniteese, and in ka- 


lendus, and in sabothis, and in alle the’. 


solempnytees of the hous of Yrael; he 


shal make sacrifice for synne, and brend 


sacrifice, and pesible, for to fulli clense 
isfor the hous of Yrael. These thingus 
saith the Lord God, In the first monethe, 
in oon of the moneth, thou shalt take a 
calf vnspottid of the droue, and thou 
igshalt fully clense the sayntuarie, And 
the prest shal take of the bloode, that 
shal be for synne; and shal putte in 
postis of the hous, and in four corners 
of the hei3t of the auter, and in postus 
200f the 3ate of the ynner hous. And so 
thou shalt in the seuenthe of the mo- 
nethe, for eche man that vnknewe, and 
by errour is disceyued, and thou shalt 
2ifully clense for the hous. In the first 
moneth, in the fourtenthe day of the 
moneth, the solempnytee of pask shal be 
to 30u; in seuen days therf thingus shulu 
22be eten. And the prince shal do in that 
day, for hym and for al the peple of the 
23lond, a calf for synne. And in the so- 
lempnyte of seuen days he shal do brend 
sacrifice to the Lord; seuen calues and 
seuen wetheris vnspottid day by day, in 
seuen days, and for synne a geet buc 
2aeche day. And the sacrifice of the* me- 
sure ephi bi a calf, and ephi by a wether, 


EZEKIEL. 611 


schulen take awei; the sixte part of ephi 
of a corus of wheete, and the sixte part 
of ephi of a corus of barli. Also the me-14 
sure of oile; a bathus of oile is the tenthe 
part of corus, and ten bathus maken o 
corus; for ten bathus fillen o corus. And 1s 


‘a ram of the floc of twei hundrid, of 


these whiche the men of Israel nurschen, 
in to sacrifice, and in to brent sacrifice, 
and in to pesible sacrifices, to elense for 
hem, seith the Lord God. Al the puple ts 
of the lond schal be boundun in these 
firste fruytis to the prince of* Israel. And 17 
on the prince schulen be brent sacrifices, 
and sacrifice, and moiste sacrifices, in so- 
lempnytees, and in’ kalendis, ether bigyn- 
nyngis of monethis, and in sabatis, and in 
alle the solempnytees of the hous of Israel; 
he schal make sacrifice for synne, and 
brent sacrifice, and pesible sacrifices, to 
clense for the hous of Israel. The Lord 18 
God seith these thingis, In the firste mo- 
neth, im the firste dai of the monethe, 
thou schalt take a calf with ont wem of 
the drooue, and thou schalt clense the 
seyntuarie. And the preest schal take of 19 
the blood of the beeste, that schal be for 
synne; and he schal putte in the postis of 
the hous, and in foure corneris of the 
hei3the of the auter, and in the postis of 
the 3ate of the ynnere halle. And thus20 
thou schalt do in the seuenthe dai of the 
monethe, for ech that knew not, and was 
disseyued bi errour, and thou schalt clense 
for the hous. In the firste monethe, in21 
the fourtenthe dai of the monethe, the 
solempnytee of pask schal be to 30u; therf 
looues schulen be etun bi seuene daies. 
And the prince schal make a calf for22 
synne in that dai, for hyin silf and for al 
the puple of the lond. And in the so-23 
lempnytee of seuene daies he schal make | 
brent sacrifice to the Lord; he schal 
offre seuene caluys and seuene wetheris 
with out wem ech dai, bi seuene daies, 
and ech dai a buc of geet, for synne. And 24 


a Om. a. 


Wo ram, ether wethir CEFGHIMPQRSUXY. 0 ram N. 


X ju CEFHUKMPQRUY. 


412 


612 


he shal do, and the mesure hyn of oyle, 

25by eche ephi. In the seuenthe moneth, 
the fiftenthe day of the monethe, in the 
solempnytee, he shal do as thei ben 
aboue sayde, by seuen days, as wele for 
synne as for brent sacrifice, and in sacri- 
fice, and in oyle. 


CAP. XLVI. 


t These thingus saith the Lord God, The 
3ate of the ynner hous, that byholdith to 
the eest, shal be closid sixe days, in 
whiche werk is don; forsothe in the day 
of saboth it shal be opnyd, bot and in 
the day of kalendis it shal be opnyd. 

2 And the prince shal entre by the way of 
the porche of the 3ate with outforth, 
and he shal stonde in the thresfold of the 
jate; and prestis shuln do his brend 
sacrifice, and his pesibles>; and he shal 
worship vpon the thresfold of the 3ate, 
and he shal go out; forsothe the 3ate 

3shal not be closid vn to euyn. And the 
peple of the lond shal worship at the 
dore of that 3ate, in sabothis, and ka- 

4lendis, byfore the Lord. Forsothe the 
prince shal offre this brent sacrifice to 
the Lord in the day of saboth, sixe lam- 

‘bren vnspottid, and a wether vnspottid, 

sand a sacrifice of ephi by the wether; in 
lambren forsothe the sacrifice that his 
hond shuln 3eue, and the mesure hyn of 

6oyle, bi eche of ephi. Sothely in the day 
of kalendis a calf vuspottid of the drooue, 
and six lambren, and wethris vnspottid 
7shuln be, and the mesure ephi by the 
calf. And he shal make the sacrifice of 
the mesure ephi by the wether; forsothe 
of the lambren as his hond shal fynde, 
and of oyle the mesure hyn, by eche of 
smesure ephi. And whann the prince is 
to entringe, by waye of the porche of the 
3ate entre he, and by the same waye go 
9he out. And whan the peple of the lond 
shal entre in the si3t of the Lord, in so- 


EZEKIEL. 


XLV. 25——XLVI. 9. 


he schal make the sacrifice of ephi by a 
calf, and of ephi byY a wether, and of oile 
the mesure hyn, bi ech ephi. In the2s 
seuenthe monethe, in the fiftenthe dai of 
the monethe, in the solempnytee, he schal 
make as tho ben biforseid, bi seuene daies, 
as wel for synne as for brent sacrifice, and 
in sacrifice, and in oile. 


CAP. XLVI. 


‘The Lord God seith these thingis, Thet 
jate of the ynnere halle, that biholdith to 
the eest, schal be closid bi? sixe* daies, in 
whiche werk is doon; for? it schal be 
openid in the dai of sabat, but also it 
schal be openyd in the dai of kalendis. 
And the prince scha] entre bi the weie of2 
the porche of the 3ate withoutforth, and 
he schal stonde in the threisfold of the 
jate ; and preestis schulen make the brent 
sacrifice of hym, and the pesible sacrifices 
of hym; and he schal worschipe on the 
threisfold® of the 3ate, and he schal go 
out ; forsothe the 3ate schal not be closid 
til to the’ euentid. And the puple of thes 
lond schal worschipe at the dore of that 
j3ate, in sabatis, and in calendis, bifor the 
Lord. Forsothe the prince schal offre this 4 
brent sacrifice to the Lord in the dai of 
sabat, sixe Jambren with out wem, and 
a wether with out wem, and the sacrifices 
of ephi bi a wether; but in the lambren 
he schal offre the sacrifice which his hond 
schal 3iue, and of oile the® mesure hyn, 
bi ech ephi. But in the dai of calendis« 
he schal offre a calf with out wem of the 
drone; and sixe lambren, and wetheris 
schulen be with out wem, and ephi bi a7 
calf. Also he schal make thef sacrifice 
ephi bi a wether; but of lambren as his 
hond fyndith, and of oile the mesure hyn, 
bi ech ephi. And whanne the princes 
schal entre, entre he bi the weie of the 
porche of the 3ate, and go he out bi the 
same weie. And whanne the puple of9 
the lond® schal entre in the si3t of the 


» pesible 4. 


Ywith 1 2z Om. x. 
4 Om. c et ceteri. 


4 seuene A pr.m, EFGUIK pr. 1, MNPQRSUX, 
©ofi. fOm.1. & same lond yn, 


» forsothe a sec.m. ¢ frexfoold K. 


XLVI. ro—18. 


lempnytees, whiche goth ynne by the 
north 3ate, that it wirship, go it out by 
the waye of the south 3ate. Forsothe he 
that entrith by the waye of the south 
3ate, go out by waye’ of the north 3ate. 
He shal not turne a3ein by waye® of the 
3ate, by whom he goth yn, bot euen 
ioa3einus it he shal go out. Sotheli the 
prince shal be in the mydil of hem; with 
men goynge yn he shal go yn, ‘and with 
11 men goyngeoute he schal gooute®*. Hou in 
fairis and in solempnyteese shal be sacri- 
fice of mesure" ephi by a calf, and mesure 
ephi. by. a wether; in lambren shal be 
sacrifice as his hond shal fynde, and of 
oyle the mesure hyn, bi eche of mesure 
izephi. Forsothe whan the prince shal do 
wilful brent sacrifice, or wilful pesibles 
to the Lord, the 3ate that biholdith to 
the eest, shal be opnyd to hym; and he 
shal do his brent sacrifice, and his pesi- 
blis, as it is wont for to be don in the 
day of saboth; and he shal go out, and 
the 3ate shal be shette after that he shal 
13go out. And he shal doa brend sacri- 
fice, a lomb of the same 3eer vnspottid, 
eche day to the Lord; evermore in the® 
i4morewe he shal .do it, and he shal do 
sacrifice theron® bisidis, 07 223, the mo- 
rewe; erly the sixt part of the" mesure 
ephi, and of oyle the thridde part of thei 
mesure hyn, that it be meynt to floure ; 
a lawful sacrifice to.the Lord, contynuel 
isand euerlastynge. And he shal make a 
lombe in to sacrifice, and oyle, ni3 the 
morewe; erly the brend sacrifice enerlast- 
isynge. These thingis seith the Lord God, 
3if the prince shal 3yue a hous to eny of 
his sones, the eritaage therof schal be of 
his sones; thei schulen weelde it by eri- 
ijtage. Forsoth 3if he shal 3eue a bi- 
quethun thing of his eritage to oon of 
his seruauntis, it shal be his vn to the 
jeer of remyssioun, and it shal turne 
a3ein to the prince; forsothe the eritage 
1sof hym shal be to his sonys. And the 


¢Om.c pr.m.ux. 4 the weye a. 


sure Gsec.m. & Om. AGH, 


EZEKIEL. 


€ the weie am. 
ge there 4. therupon G pr. m. U. 


613 


Lord, in+ solempnytees, which puple en- 
trith bi the 3ate of the north, for to wor- 
schipe, go it out bi the wei of the south 
jate. Certis the pup/e that entrith bi the 
weie of the south 3ate, go out bi the weie 
of the north 3ate. It schal not turne ajen 
bi the weie of the 3ate, bi which it en- 
tride, but enene a3ens that weze it schal 
go out. Forsothe the prince schal be in 10 
the myddis of hem; hei schal entre with 
hem that entren, and he schal go out with 
hem that goen out. And in feiris and ini 
solempnytees, tlie sacrifice of ephi schal be 
bi a calf, and ephi bi a wether; in lambren 
schal be sacrifice as his hond fyndith, and 
of oile the* mesure hyn, bi ech ephi. For-12 
sothe. whanne the prince makith a wilful 
brent sacrifice, ether wilful pesible sacri- 
fice to the Lord, the 3ate that biholdith to 
the eest, schal be openyd to hym; and he 
schal make his brent sacrifice, and hise 
pesible sacrifices, as it is wont to be doon 
in the dai of sabat; and he schal go out, 
and the 3ate schal be closid after that he 
3ede out. And he schal make brent sa-13 
crifice ech. day to the Lord, a lomb with 
out wem of the same 3eer; euere he schal 
make it in the morewtid, and he schal14 
make sacrifice on it ful eerli; eerli he schal 
make the sixte part of ephi, and of oile 
the thridde part of hyn, that it be meddlid 
with the floure of wheete; 7f zs a lawful 
sacrifice, contynuel and euerlastinge, to the 
Lord. He schal make a lomb, and saeri- 15 
fice, and oile, ful eerli; he schal make 
eerli brent sacrifice euerlastynge. Theis 
Lord God seith these thingis, If the prince 
3yueth an hous to ony of hise sones, the 
eritage of hym schal be of hise sones; thei 
schulen welde it bi eritage. Forsothe if17 
he 3yueth a biquest of his eritage to oon 
of hise seruanntis, it schal be his ‘til to! 
the 3eer of remyssioun, and it schal turne 
a3en to the prince; forsothe the eritage of 
hym schal be to hise sones. And theis 
prince schal not take bi violence of the 


ee Om, 4c pr.m.uK. f Om.G sec. m. ff the me- 


hOm. a. i Om. 4. 


hintor. iand hecruimesu. * thaét. J vnto 1. 


614 


prince shal not take by violence of the 
eritage of the peple, and of the posses- 
sioun of hem; bot of his possessioun he 
shal 3ene eritage to his sonys, that my 
peple be not disparplid, eche man fro his 
19 possessioun. And he ledde me yn bi the 
entree, that was on the syde of the jate, 
in to the tresories of the sayntuarie to 
the prestis, that biheelden to the north; 
and there was a place goynge to the 
20west. And he sayde to me, This is a 
place, wher and prestis shuln sayei and 
for synne of doynge, and for trespas of 
leeuynge; wher thei shuln say‘4j sacrifice, 
that thei bere not out in to the vtmer‘ 
2ihous, and the peple be halewid. And 
he ledde me ont in to the vtmer hous, 
and about ledde me by foure corners of 
the hous; and loo! a litil hous was in 
the corner of the hous, smale housis, eche 
22 by corners of the hous; in to foure cor- 
ners of the hous litil housis disposid, of 
fourti cubitis by longe, and thritti by 
23 breede; foure weren of oo mesure; and 
a wal by cumpas enuyronnynge foure 
smale housis; and kitchens weren forgid 
24 vndir porchis bi cumpas. And he saide 
to me, This is the hons of kitchenys, in 
whom the mynystris of the hous of the 
Lord seethen slayn sacrifices of the peple. 


CAP. XLVII. 


1 And he turnede me to the 3ate of the 
hous; and loo! waters wenten out vndir 
the thresfold of the hous to the eest; 
forsothe the face of the hous byheelde to 
the eest; sothely the waters wenten doun 
in to the ri;t syde of the temple, to the 

2south of the auter. And he ledde me 
out by the waye of the north 3ate, and 
he turnyde me to the waye with outen 
the vtmer 3ate, the waye that byheelde 
to the eest; and loo! waters tournynge 

sajein of the ri3t syde, whan the man 
wente out to the eest, that hadde a litil 
coord in his hond, and matte a thousand 
cubitis, and ledde me ouer by the water 


J seie 4. seye c. 


™Om.1. ™ the whiche 1. 


Sofw. 88 biheld c sec.m, taa. 


EZEKIEL. 


ji seie 4. sey c. 


9 forzerd celeri passim. 


XLVI. 19<—XLVII. 3. 


eritage of the puple, and of the posses- 
sioun of hem; but of his owne possessioun 
he schal 3yue eritage to hise sones, that 
my puple be not scaterid, ech man fro his 
possessioun. And he ledde me in bi thet9 
eutryng, that was on the side of the 3ate, 
in to the treseries of the seyntuarie to 
the™ preestis, whiche" ¢reseries bihelden 
to the north; and there was a place go- 
ynge to the west. And he seide to me, 20 
This is the place where prestis schulen 
sethe, bothe for synne and for trespas; 
where thei schulen sethe sacrifice, that 
thei bere not out in to the outermere 
halle, and the puple be halewid. And he21 
ledde me out in to the outermere halle®, 
and ledde me aboute bi the foure corneris 
of the halle; and lo! a litil halle was in 
the corner of the halle, alle litle hallis? bi 
the corneris of the halle; in foure corneris 22 
of the halle litle hallis ween disposid, of 
fourti cubitis bi lengthe, and of thretti bi 
breede; foure weren of o mesure; and a3 
wal bi cumpas 3ede aboute foure litle 
hallis; and kychenes weren inaad yndur 
the porchis bi cumpas. And he seide tos 
me, This is the hous of kichenes, in which 
the mynystris of the hous of the Lord 
schulen sethe the’ sacrifices of the puple. 


CAP. XLVII. 


And he turnede me to the 3ate of the1 
hous; and lo! watris 3eden out vndur the 
threisfold of the hous to’ the eest; for the 
face of the hous bihelde to the eest; for- 
sothe the watris camen doun in to the 
ri3t side of the temple, to the south part 
of the auter. And he ledde me out bi thee 
weie of the north 3ate, and he turnede me 
to the weie with out the outermere 3ate, to 
the weie that biholdith’s to the eest ; and 
lo! watris flowynge fro the ri3t side, 
whanne thet man that hadde a coord ins 
his hond, 3ede out to the eest. And he 
mat a thousynde cubitis, and ledde me 
ouer thorou the water til to the heelis. 


k vttermore H passim. 


P forzerdis celeri passim. 4 Om.cx. © sacrifice n. 


XLVIL. 4—13. 


EZEKIEL. 615 


4vn to the helis. And aft sone he matte » And eft he mat a thousynde, and leddet 4 


a thousand, and ledde me ouer by the 
water vn to the knees. And aft sone he 
matte a thousand, and ledde me by the 
5 watre vn to the reynys. And he matte a 
thousand, by the streme of reyn whom Y 
mi3te not ouer passe; for deep waters of 
the streme of reyn wexiden grete, whiche 
6may not be ouer wad. And he saide to 
me, Certis, sone of man, thou hast seen. 
And he ledde me, and turnyde me to the 
7ryuer of the streme of rayn. And whan 
I hadde conuertid me, loo! in the ryuer 
of the streem of rayn ful many trees on 
seche syde. And he saith to me, These 
waters that gon out to the heepis of the 
eest soond, and gon doun to the playn 
thingus of desert, shuln go ynne to the 
see, and go™ out; and the waters shuln 
gheele. And eche lyuynge soule that 
creepith, whither euer the strem of rayn 
shal cum, shal lyue; and there shuln be 
fishis many ynow, after that these waters 
shuln cum thidir, and thei shuln be maad 
hoole, and shulu lyue; alle these shuln 
lyue, to whom the streme of rayn shal 
iocum. And fishers shuln stond vpon hem; 
fro Engaddi vnto Engallym shal be dry- 
inge of nettis ; ful many spices shuln be 
of fishis therof, as fishes of the grete 
11se, of ful grete mykilnesse ; forsothe in 
brynkis therof and in mareisis thei shulu 
not be helid, for thei shuln be 3ouen in 
12to salt places. And on™ the streme of 
rayn, aud ryuers therof, and on eche 
part, al tree berynge appul shal be brou3t 
forth; a lefe shal not fle awey therof, and 
the fruyt of it shal not fayle; by eche 
monethes it shal brynge first fruytis, for 
the waters therof shuln go out of sayn- 
tuarie; and fruytis therof shuln be in to 
mete, and lefis therof to® medecyne. 
13 These thingus saith the Lord God, This 
is the terme, in whiche 3e shuln weelde 
the lond, in twelue kynredis of Yrael; 


m shulen gon 4. 


the ledde Nx sec.m. % vnto I. 
ne sec.m. Zof1. Athat1. > in tos pr.m. 
NPQRSUXY. 


" vpon 4. 


v he ledde cEFHIKMNPORSUX. 
¢ the playn 1. 
f the brynkis cereniknrgnrsuxy. the brynke m. 


me ouer thorou3 the watir ‘til to" the 
knees. And eft he mat a thousynde, and 5 
ledde’ me ouer thorou3 the watir ‘til to” 
the reynes. And he mat a thousynde, the* 
stronde which Y my3te not passe; for the 
depe watris of the stronde hadden wexe 
greet, that mai not be waad ouer. Ande 
he seide to me, Certis, soneY of man, thou 
hast seyn. And he seide to me; and be 
turnede me to the ryuere of the stronde. 
And whanne Y hadde turned me, lo! in7z 
the ryuer of the stronde ful many trees on 
euer either side. And he seide to me,s 
These watris that goon out to* the heepis 
of soond of the eest, and* goen doun to 


~ pleyn® places of desert, schulen entre in to 


the see, and schulen go out; and the wa- 
tris schulen be heelid. And ech lyuyngeg 
beeste that creepith, schal lyue, whidur 
euere the stronde schal come; and fischis 
many ynow schulen be, aftir that these 
watris comen thidur, and schulen be heel- 
id, and schulen lyue; alle thingis to 
whiche the stronde schal come, schulen 
lyue. And fisshers schulen stoude on tho 10 
watris; fro Engaddi ‘til to? Engallym 
schal be driyng of nettis; ful many kyndis® 
of fischis therof schulen be, as the fischis 
of the greet see, of ful greet multitude ; 
but in brynkisf therof and in maraisis 1 
watris shulen not be heelid, for tho ‘schu- 
len be 30uun in to places of makynge of 
salt. And ech tree berynge fruit schalie2 
growe on the stronde, in the ryueris ther- 
of on ech side; a leef therof schal uot 
falle doun, and the fruyt therof schal not 
faile; bi alle monethis it schal bere firste 
fruytis, for the watris therof schulen go 
out of the seyntuarie; and the fruytis 
therof schulen be in to mete, and the 
leeuys therof to medicyn. The Lord God 13 
seith these thingis, This is the ende, in 
which 3e schulen welde the lond, in the& 
twelue lynagis of Israel; for Joseph hath 


in to 4. to the am. 
wyntor *bither. Y thou, sone 


€ spices, ether kindis CHFGHIKM 
g Om. 1. 


3 ynto 1 
f ben a prom. Om. c pr. m. ER. 


616 


for Joseph hath double coord, or part. 
14 Forsoothe 3e shuln weelde it, eche evenly 
as his brother; vpon whom I reyside myn 
hond, that I shulde 3ene to 3our fadris ; 
and this lond shal falle to 3o0u in to pos- 
issessioun. This is the terme of the lond 
at the north coost, fro the grete se, the 
way of Bethalon to men cummynge to 
16 Sedala, Emath, Beroth, Sabarym, whiche 
is bitwix the mydil of Damask and the 
coostis of Emath, the hous Athicon, that 
izis bysidis the termys of Auran. And 
the terme shal be fro the se vn to the 
hous Ennon, the terme of Damask, and 
fro the north vn to the north, the terme, 
or eende, of Emath; forsothe the north 
is plage, or coost. Forsothe the eest coost 
of the mydil of Auran, and of the mydil of 
Damask, and of the? mydil of Galaad, and 
of the mydil of the lond of Yrael, Jordan, 
departynge at the eest see, 3e shuln mete 
igeest coost. Sothely the south coost of 
mydday, fro Thamar vn to the waters of 
ajein saiynge of Cades; and the streme 
of rayn vn to the grete see, and the south 
29cost at mydday. And the coost of the 
see is the grete see, fro the eende coost 
by the strei3t, til thou cum to Emath; 
aithis is the coost of the see. And 3e 
shuln departe this lond to 30u by lynagis 
220f Yrael; and 3e shuln sende it in to 
eritage to 30u, and to cumlyngis that 
camen to 30u, that gendreden sonys in 
the mydil of 3ou; and thei shuln be to 
3ou as in dwellers amonge the sonys of 
Yrael; with 3o0u thei shuln departe pos- 
sessioun, in mydil of the lynages of Yrael. 
23 Forsothe in what euer lynage a cumlynge 
shal be, there 3e shuln 3eue possessioun 
to hym, saith the Lord God. 


CAP. XLVIII. 


1 And the names of lynages, fro the 
eendis of the north, bysidis the waye of 4 
Methalon, to men goynge to Emath, the 
hous of Ennon, terme of Damaske, fro 


Pp Om. 4. _ 


h ynto 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


XLVII. 14—XLVIII. 1. 


double part. Forsothe 3e schulen welde14 
it, ech man euenli as his brother; on 
which Y reiside myn hond, that Y schulde 
3yue to 3oure fadris; and this lond schal 
faile to 30u in to possessioun. This is the 15 
ende of the lond at the north coost fro 
the grete see, the weie of Bethalon to men 
comynge to Sedala, Emath, Beroth, Sa- 16 
barym, which is in the myddis bitwixe 
Damask and ni3 coostis of Emath, the 
hous of Thichon, which is bisidis the 
endis of Auran. And the ende schal be17 
fro the see ‘til tot the porche of Ennon, 
the ende of Damask, and fro the north til 
to the north, the ende of Emath; for- 
sothe this is the north coost. Certis thes 
eest coost fro the myddis of Auran, and 
fro the myddis of Damask, and fro the 
myddis of Galaad, and fro the myddis of 
the lond of Israel, 2s Jordan departynge at 
the eest see, also 3e schulen mete the eest 
coost. Forsothe the south coost of myd-19 
dai zs fro Thamar til to the watris of 
ajenseiyng of Cades; and the stronde til 
to the greet see, and the south coost at 
myddai. And the coost of the see is the 20 
greet see, fro the ni3 coost bi strei3t, til 
thou come to Emath; this is the coost of 
the see. And 3e schulen departe this lond 21 
to 30u bi the lynagis of Israel; and 3e22 
schulen sende it in to eritage to 30u, and 
to comelyngis that comen to 3o0u, that gen- 
driden sones in the myddis of 30u; and 
thei schulen be to 30u as men borun in 
the lond among the sones of Israel; with 
jou thei schulen departe possessioun, in 
the myddis of the lynages of Israel. For-23 
sothe in what euer lynage a comelyng is, 
there 3e schulen 3yue possessioun to hym, 
seith the Lord Godi. 


CAP. XLVIII. 


And these ben the names of lynagis, fro1 
the endis of the north, bisidis the weie 
Ethalon, to men goynge to Emath, the 
porche of Ennon, the terme of Damask, 


q Om. 4GH. 


i Om. Fis. 


XLVIII. 2—-13. 


the north bysidis Emath; and the eest 


2coost the see shal be, to Dan oon. And 


fro the terme of Dan, fro the eest coost 
3to the coost of the se, to Aser oon. And 
vpon the terme of Aser, fro the eest coost 
vn to the coost of the see, to Neptalym 
4oon. And vpon the terme of Neptalym, 
fro the eest coost vn to the coost of the 
seest see, to Manasses oon. And vpon the 
terme of Manasses, fro the eest coost vn to 
the coost of the see, to Effraym oon. 
6 And vpon the terme of Effraym, fro the 
eest coost vn to the coost of the see, to 
7Ruben oon. And vpon the terme of Ru- 
ben, fro the eest coost vn to the coost of 
sthe see, to Juda oon. And vpon the 


terme of Juda, fro the eest plage, or - 


coost, vn to the coost of the see, shuln be 
primissis, whiche 3e shuln departe in 
fyue and twenti thousandus 3erdis of 
breede and lengthe, as eche partis, fro the 
eest coost vnto the coost of the see; and 
the sayntuarie shal be in mydil’ therof. 
9 The primissis whiche 3e shuln departe to 
the Lord, the lengthe in fyue and twenti 
thousandis, and the breede in ten thou- 
1wwsandus. Sotheli these shuln be the pri- 
missis of the sayntuarie of prestis ; at the 
north of lengthe fyue and twenti thou- 
sandis, and to the see of breede ten thou- 
sandis; bot te the eest of breed ten thou- 
sandis, aud to the south of lengthe fyue 
and twenti thousandis; and the sayn- 
tuarie of the Lord shal be in mydil' 
11therof. To prestis the sayntuarie shal be, 
of* the sonys of Sadoch, whiche kepten 
my cerymonyes, and erriden not, whanne 
the sones of Yrael erriden, as and the 
i2dekenys erriden. And to hem shuln be 
primissis of primissis of the lond, the 
holy of holy thingus, bysidis the terme of 
isdekenes. Bot and tot dekenys also by- 
sidis the eendis of prestis, fyue and twenti 
thousandis of lengthe, and of breede ten 
thousandis; al the lengthe of fyue and 


r the mydil c. 


EZEKIEL. 


the mydil 4. 


617 


to the north bisidis Emath; and the eest 
coost schal be to it the see, o part schal 
be of Dan. And fro the ende of Dan, fro2 
the eest coost til to the coost of the see, 
o part schal be of Aser. And on thes 
ende of Azer, fro the eest coost til to the 
coost of the see, oon of Neptalym. And4 
on the terme of Neptalym, fro the eest 
coost til to the coost of the see, oon of 
Manasses. And on the ende of Manasses, 5 
fro the eest coost til to the coost of the 
see, oon of Effraym. And on the ende of « 
Effraym, fro the eest coost til to the coost 
of the see, oon of Ruben. And on the7 
ende of Ruben, fro the eest coost til to the 
coost of the see, oon of Juda. And ons 
the ende of Juda, fro the eest coost til to 
the coost of the see, schulen be the firste 
fruytis, whiche 3e schulen departe bi fyne 
and twenti thousynde reheedis of breede 
and of lengthe, as alle partis ben, fro the 
eest coost til to the coost of the see; and 
the seyntuarie schal be in the myddis 
therof. The firste fruytis whiche je schu-9 
len departe to the Lord, the lengthe sehal 
be in fyne and twenty thousynde, and the 
breed in ten thousynde. Forsothe these i» 
schulen be the firste fruytis of the seyn- 
tuarie of preestis; to the north fyue and 
twenti thousynde of lengthe; and to the 
see ten thousinde of breede; but to the 
eest ten thousynde of breede, and to the 
south fyue and twenti thousynde of 
lengthe ; and the seyntuarie of the Lord 
schal be in the myddis therof* The seyn- 11 
tuarie schal be to prestis of the sones of 
Sadoch, that kepten’ my cerymonyes, and 
erriden not, whanne the sones of Israél 
erriden, as also dekenes erriden. And12 
the firste fruytis schulen be to hem of the 
firste fruytis of the lond, the hooli of hooli 
thingis, bi the terme of dekenés!. Butis 
also to dekenes in lijk maner bi the coostis 
of preestis sehulen be fyue and twenti 
thousynde of lengthe, and ten thousynde 


Sto Kx. tt Om. 4. 


1 Leuitis, ether dekens CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


VOL. III. 


4K 


618 


twenti thousandis, and the breede of ten 
l4thousandis. And thei shuln not selle 
therof, nether chaunge; nether the first 
fruytis of the lond shuln be transferrid, 
or born ouer, for thei ben halewid to 
1sthe Lord. Forsothe fyue thousandis, that 
leuen ouer in breede, by fyue and twenti 
thousandus, shuln be vnholi places of the 
citee, into dwellyng, and in to subarbis ; 
and the citee shal be in the mydil therof. 
16 And these the mesuris therof; at the north 
coost, fyue hundrid and foure thousandis, 
and at the southe plage, or coost, fyue 
hundred and foure thousandis, and at the 
eest coost, fyue hundred and foure thou- 
sandis, and at the west coost, fyue hun- 
17drid and foure thousandis. Forsothe the 
subarbis of the citee shuln be at the north 
two hundrid and fifty, and to the south 
two hundrid and fifti, and at the eest 
coost" two hundrid and fifty, and at the 
1ssee two hundrid and fifty. Forsothe that 
that shal be laft, 07 over, in lengthe, after 
first fruytis of the sayntuarie, ten thou- 
sandis in to the eest, and ten thousandus 
in to the west, shuln be as premissis of 
the sayntuarie; and the fruytis therof 
shuln be in to looues to these that seruen 
i9to the citee. Forsothe men seruynge to 
the citee shuln worche, of al the lynages 
2vof Yrael. Alle the premisses of fyue and 
twenti thousandis, by fyue and twenti 
thousandis in sqware, shuln be departid 
in to primisses of the sayntuarie, and pos- 
z1session of the citee. Forsothe that that 
shal be left ower, shal be of the prince, 
on’ eche part of primissis of the sayn- 
tuarie, and possessioun of the citee, euen 
a3eins fyue and twenti thousandis of pri- 
missis, vnto the eest terme; bot and to the 
see euen a3einus of fyue and twenti thou- 
sandus, vn to the terme of the see, also in 
partis’’ of the prince shal be; and pre- 
inissis of the sayntuarie shuln be, and 
the sayntuarie of temple” of the cite*, in 


2 Om. GK prem. ¥ of 4. 


Mtwor Om. A. 


EZEKIEL. 


Ww the partis 4. 


XLVIV. 14-——21. 


of breede; al the lengthe of fine and twenti 
thousynde, and the breede of ten thou- 
synde. And thei schulen not sille therof, 14 
nether schulen chaunge; and the firste 
fruytis of the lond schulen not be trans- 
latid, for tho ben halewid to the Lord. 
Sotheli the fyue thousynde, that ben left is 
ouer in breede, bi fyue and twenti thou- 
synde, schulen be the vnhooli thingis, 
ether comyn thingis, of the citee, in to 
dwellyng place, and in to subarbis; and 
the citee schal be in the myddis therof. 
And these schulen be the mesuris therof 316 
at the north coost, fyue hundrid and foure 
thousynde of rehedis, and at the south 
coost, fyue hundrid and foure thousynde, 
and at the eest coost, fyue hundrid and 
foure thousyude, and at the west coost, 
fyue hundrid and foure thousynde. For-17 
sothe the subarbis of the citee at the north 
schulen be twei™ hundrid and fifti, and at 
the southe twei™ hundrid and fifti, and at 
the eest twei™ hundrid and fifti, and at the 
see, that is, the west, twei hundrid and 
fifti. But that that is residue in lengthe, is 
bi the firste fruytis of the seyntuarie, ten 
thousynde in to the eest, and ten thou- 
synde in to the west, schulen be as the 
firste fruitis of the seyntuarie; and the 
fruitis schulen be in to looues to hem that 
seruen the citee. Forsothe thei that seruen 19 
the citee schulen worche, of alle the lynagis 
of Israel. Alle the firste fruitis of fyue2o 
and twenti thousynde, bi fyue and twenti 
thousynde in” square, schulen be departid 
in to the firste fruytis of seyntuarie, and in 
to possessioun of the citee. Forsothe that 21 
that is residue, schal be the® princes part, 
on ech side of? the firste fruitis of seyn- 
tuarie, and of the possessioun of the citee, 
euene ajens fyue and twenti thousynde of 
the firste fruytis, til to the eest ende; but 
also to the see euene ajzens fyue and 
twenti thousynde, til to the ende of the 
see, schal be in lijk maner in the partis of 


Wthe temple ay. * citees 4. 


Stother. Ponts. 


XLVIII. 22——-35. 


22 mydil therof. Forsothe of the possessioun 
.of dekenys, and of possessioun of the citee, 
in mydil of partis of the prince, shal be 
in to terme of Juda, and in to terme of 
Beniamyn, and shal pertene to the prince. 

23And to the tother lynagis, fro the eest 


coost vn to the west coost, to Beniamyn ~ 


2400n. And a3einus the terme of Beniamyn 
fro the eest coost vn to the west coost, to 
2sSymyon oon. And vpon the terme of Sy- 
myon, fro the eest coost vn to the west 
26 coost, to Ysacar oon. And vpon the terme 
of Ysacar, fro the eest cost vnto the west 
27coost, to Sabulon oon. And vpon the 
terme of Sabulon, fro the eest coost vnto 
2sthe cost of the see, to Gad oon. And 


vpon the terme of Gad, vn to the coost of » 


the south in to mydday, or southe; and 
the eend shal be fro Thamar vn to the 
waters of a3ein sayinge of Cades, and the 
29eritage a3ein the grete see. This is the 
lond whiche 3e shuln sende in to lot to 
the lynagis of Yrael, and these the part- 
30 yngis’ of hem, saith the Lord God. And 
these the goyngus’ out of the cytee; fro 
the north coost thou shalt mesure fyue 
31 hundrid and foure thousandis. And the 
j3atis of the citee, in alle the lynagis of 
Yrael, three 3atis fro the north; the 3ate 
of Ruben oon, the 3ate of Juda oon, the 
323ate of Leuy oon. And at the eest coost, 
fyue hundrid and foure thousandis, and 
three 3atis; the 3ate of Joseph oon, the 
3ate of Beniamyn oon, the 3ate of Dan 
330on. And at the mydday coost, or southe, 
fyue hundrid and four thousandis thou 
shalt mete, the 3atis of hem three; the 
jate of Symyon oon, the 3ate of Ysacar 
3400n, the 3ate of Zabulon oon. And at 
the west coost, fyue hundred and foure 
thousandis, three 3atis of hem; the 3ate 
of Gad oon, the 3ate of Aser oon, the 3ate 
35 of Neptalym oon. By the cumpas ei3tene 


Y partis 4. 


q that 1. 
sUXY. terme I S€c. m. M. 
vofi1. Om. k pr. m. 
sandis A. to N. 


t vnto 1. 


EZEKIEL. 


r terme, ether porcioun CEFGHIKMPQRSUXY. 
u terme, ether porctoun CEFGHI pr. in. KMNPQRSUXY. terme I sec. m. 
% west coost GNS pr.m. X pr.m. 


619 


the prince; and the firste fruytis of the 
seyntuarye, and the seyntuarie of the tem- 
ple schulen be in the myddis of it. For-22 
sothe fro the possessioun of dekenes, and 
fro the possessioun of the citee, which is 
in the myddis of partis of the prince, 
schal be in to the porcionn" of Juda, and 
in to the porcioun® of Beniamyn ; and it 
schal perteyne to the prince. And to2s 
other lynagis, fro the eest coost ‘til tot 
the west coost, oon to Beniamyn. And 2 
a3ens the porcioun" of Beniamyn, fro the 
eest coost til to the west coost, oon to 
Symeon. And on the terme of Symeon, 25 
fro the eest coost til to the west coost, 
oon to Isacar. And on the terme of Isa-2¢ 
car, fro the eest coost til to the west cvost, 
oon to’ Zabulou. And on the terme of 27 
Zabulon, fro the eest coost til® to the 
coost* of the see, oon to Gad. And onoas 
the terme of Gad, to the coost of the 
south in toY myddai; and the ende schal 
be fro Thamar til to the watris of ajen- 
seying of Cades, and the eritage a3ens the 
grete see. This is the lond which 3e schu-29 
len sende in to part to the lynagis of Is- 
rael, and these ben the partyngis’ of tho, 
seith the Lord God. And these ben these 
goyngis out of the citee; fro the north 
coost thou schalt mete fyue hundrid and 
foure thousynde rehedis. And 3atis of the si 
eitee schulen be in alle the lynagis of 
Israel, thre 3atis at the north; o 3ate of 
Ruben, o jate of Juda, o 3ate of Leuy. 
And at the eest coost, fyue hundrid ands 
foure thousynd” rehedis, and thre 3atis ; 
o jate of Joseph, o 3ate of Beniamyn, 
o 3ate of Dan. And at the south coost3% 
thou schalt mete fyue hundrid and foure 
thousynde rehedis, and thre 3atis schulen 
be of tho; o 3ate of * Symeon, o 3ate of * 
Isacar, o 3ate of Zabulon. And at thes: 
west coost, fyue hundrid and foure thou- 


2 goynge A. 


S terme, efher porcioun EFGHI pr.m. KNPQR 


ythe x. # departingis k sec.m. 22 thou- 


4KQ 


620 EZEKIEL. 


thousandis; and the name of the citee synde of » rehedis, thre 3atis of tho; 0 3ate 
fro that day, The Lord there. Amen?. of Gad, 0 3ate of Aser, 0 3ate of Nepta- 
lym. Bi cumpas ei3tene miles; and thes 
Here endith the book of Exechiel,and name® schal be fro that dai, The Lord 
bigynneth the book of Daniel». there. Amen. 


Here endith Exechiel, and here by- 
gynneth Danyel 4, 


a@Om. 4c. » No final rubric in acu. 


b Om. v. ¢ name of the citee 1. 4 From criv. Here endith Ezechiel, and bigynnith Danyel. cuas. 
Here endeth Ezechiel, the prophete ; se now Danyel, the prophete. x. Here endith Ezechiel, and here 
bigynneth the prologe of Danyel- m. Here endith the book of Ezechiel, and bigyuneth the book of Daziel. n. 
Heere eendith Ezechiel, and bigynneth the prologe vpon Daniel. rn. Here endith Ezechiel, the profete, and 
bigynneth Danyel, the profete. x. No final rubric in aEPy. 


DANIEL. 





[ Prologue on Daniel*.] 


Tuts profete Danyel was in the transmygracioun of Babiloyne, and he forsook the 
kingis metis, and eet onli breed and potage, lest he scholde be defoulid ajens his 
God thoru3 delicat metis, and forsake the lawe of God. Wherfor the Lord God 
3af to him of his Holi Spirit, to interprete dremes and visiouns ; and gat grace aneuitis 
the king, and fauour to al the peple of Israel; and the Lord schewide to him, bi 
visioun and expownyng of an aungel, thingis that weren to, comynge in to the ende 
of the world, and of the dai of doom, and of arisynge a3en of dede men, and of the 
blisse that euer schal laste to the chosene of God. 


Heere eendith the prologe, and bigynneth the book of Daniel’. 
rr 


The book of Daniel *. Here bigynneth the book of Daniel. 


CATE 


i In the thridde 3eer of the kyngdam 
of Joachym, kyng of Juda, Nabugodono- 
sor, kyng of Babiloyne, came in to Jeru- 

2salem, and byseegide it. And the Lord 
bitoke Joachym, kyng of Juda, in the 
hound of hym, and he toke a part of ves- 
sels of the hous of God; and bare hem 
out in to the lond Sennaar, in to the 
hous of his god, and toke the vessels in 

3to the hous of tresour of his god. And 
the kyng saith to Aphanet, prepost, or 
souereyne, of his geldingus, that he shulde 
brynge yn of the sonys of Yrael, and of 
the kyngus bloode, and the children of 


CART: 


In the thridde 3eer of the rewme of1 
Joachym, king of Juda, Nabugodonosor, 
the kyng of Babiloyne, cam to Jerusalem, 
and bisegide it. And the Lord bitook inz 
his hond Joachym, the kyng of Juda, 
and he took a part of the vessels of the 
hous of God; and he bar out tho in to 
the lond of Sennaar, in to the hous of his 
god, and he took the vessels in to the 
hous of tresour of his god. And the kyng: 
seide to Asphaneth, souereyn of his onest 
seruauntis and chast, that he schulde © 
brynge yn of the sones of Israel, and of 
the kyngis seed, and the children of ti- 


a Here bigynneth the boke of Danyel, the prophete. a. No initial rubric in cu. 


a This prologue is from mR. 


b From r. No final rubric in 1. 


¢ From ary. Ifere biginnith the 


book and the profecie of the hooli man Daniel, the profete. w. Here bigynneth the book of Danyel, the pro- 


fete. m. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


¢ 


622 


4tyrauntis, or strong men, in whom was 
no wela, faire in fourme, and lernd® in al 
wisdam, war in science, and tan3t in 
disciplyne, and whiche mi3ten stonde in 
paleys of the kyng, that he shulde teche 
shem lettris and langage of Caldeis. And 
the kyng ordeynde to hem fruyte of oo 
3eer bi alle days of his metis, and of the 
wijne of whiche he dranke; that thei 
nurishid out in three 3eers, afterward 
shulden stonde in si3t of the kyng. 
6Therfore there weren amonge hem of 
the sonys of Juda, Danyel, Ananyas, 
7 Mysael, and Azarias. And the prepost 
of geldyngus puttide to hem names; to 
Danyel, Balthasar; to Ananyas, Sydrac; 
to Mysael, Mysac; and to Azarias, Abde- 
snago. Forsothe Danyel purposide in his 
herte, that he were not defoulid of the 
borde of the kyng, nether of the wyne 
of his drinke; and he preyede the pre- 
post of the geldingis, that he were not 
ydefoulid. Forsothe God 3aue grace and 
mercy to Danyel, in si3te>® of the prince 
wof geldyngus. And the prince of geld- 
ingus saide to Danyel, I dreede my lord 
the kyng, whiche ordeynede to 30u mete 
and drinke; whiche 3if he shal see 3our 
cheeris lener byfore other 3unge men, 
3our® eueneldis, 3e shuln condempne myn 
inhede to the kyng. And Danyel sayde 
to Malassar, whom the prince of geld- 
yngus hadde ordeynyd vpon Danyel, Ana- 
izuye, Mysael, and Azarie, I beseche, 
tempte, o7 assaie, vs thi seruauntis ten 
days, and be potage 3ouen to vs for to 
isete, and water for to drinke ; and byholde 
thou oure cheeris, and the cheeris of 
children that eten the kyngus mete ; and 
as thou shalt see, so do thou to thi seru- 
i4auntis. Whiche, siche manere wordis4 
1sherd, temptide hem ten days. Forsothe 
after ten days the cheeris of hem apper- 
iden betir and fuller of fleshe, byfore alle 
1s the children that eeten kyngus mete. So- 


theli Malassar toke*4 the metis, and wijn 
bleryd 4. lerned c. >» the sigte 4. 


a chastizing, ether lerning EFGHIKNPQRSUXY. 
b to lijflode 1. iOm.epy. k the honeste 1. 


DANIEL. 


€ thin 4. 


€ the whiche 1. 
l the unest Nn. 


I. 4—16. 


rauntis, in whiche weren no wem, faire in4 
schap, and lerned in al wisdom, war in 
kunnyng, and tau3t in chastisyng‘’, and 
that® my3ten stonde in the paleis of the 
kyng, that he schulde teche hem the let- 
tris and langage’ of Caldeis. And thes 
king ordeynede to® hem lijflode® bi ech 
dai of hise meetis, and of the wyn wherof 
he drank ; that thei nurschid bi thre jeer’, 
schulden stonde aftirward bifor the si3t of 
the kyng. Therfor Danyel, Ananye, My-6 
zael, and Azarie, of the sones of Juda, 
weren among hem. And the souereyn of7 
onest* seruauntis and chast puttide to hem 
names; to Danyel he puttide Balthasar ; 
to Ananye, Sidrach; to Mysael, Misach ; 
and to Azarie, Abdenago. Forsothe Da-s 
nyel purposide in his herte, that he schulde 
not be defoulid of the boord of the kyng, 
nether of the wyn of his drink; and he 
preiede the souereyn of onest! seruauntis 
and chast, that he schulde not be defoulid. 
Forsothe God 3af grace and merci to Da-9 
niel, in the si3t of the prince of onest 
seruauntis and chast. And the prince of to 
onest™ seruauntis and chast seide to Da- 
niel, Y drede my lord the king, that or- 
deinede to 3ou mete and drynk; and if he 
seeth" 3oure faces lennere than othere 
jonge wexynge men, 30ure eneneeldis, 3e 
schulen condempne myn heed to the kyng. 
And Danyel seide to Malazar, whom the1!1 
prince of onest seruauntis and chast hadde 
ordeynede on Danyel, Ananye, Mysael, 
and Asarie, Y biseche, asaie thou vs thi 12 
seruauntis bi ten daies, and potagis be 
jouun to vs to ete, and water to drynke; 
and biholde thou oure cheris, and the13 
cheris of children that eten the kyngis 
mete; and as thou seest, so do thou with 
thi seruauntis. And whanne he herde1s 
siche a word, he asaiede hem bi® ten daies. 
Forsothe after ten daies the cheris of hem 15 
apperiden betere and fattere, than alle the 
children that eeten the kyngis mete. Cer-16 
tis Malazar took the metis, and the wyn 


4word acu.  4¢ toke away G sec. m. 


f langagis a. the langagis s. & Om.1. 


m the onest N. ser. © Om.N. 





I, 17—Il. 6. 


the drinke of hem, and 3aue to hem pot- 
ijagis. Forsothe God 3aue to these chil- 
dren science and discipline in: eche boke, 
and wisdam; to Danyel sothely vndir- 
stondynge of alle visiouns and sweuens. 
is And so the days fulfillid, after whom the 
kyng saide, that thei shulden be brou3t 
yn, the prepost of geldyngus brou3te hem 
i9yn, in the si3t of Nabugodonosor. And 
whan the kyng spac to hem, ther ben not 
founden siche of alle, as Danyel, Ananyas, 
Mysael, and Azarias; and thei stoden in 
20 si3t of the kyng. And eche word of wijs- 
dam and vndirstondyng, that the kyng 
axide of hem, he fonde in hem the tenthe 
folde over alle dyuynours and witchis, 
that weren in alle the rewme of hym. 
21 Forsothe Danyel was vn to the first 3eer 
of kyng Cyrus. 


CAP. 1. 


1 In the secounde 3eer of the kyngdam 
of Nabugodonosor, Nabugodonosor saw3 
a swenen; and his spirit was to gydre 
ferid, and his sweuen flei3 fro hym. 

2 Therfore the kyng comaundide, that dy- 
uynours shulden be clepid to gydre, and 
witchis, and enchauntours, and Caldeis, 
that thei shulden shewe to the kyng his 
sweuens; whiche whenn thei camen,stoden 

sbifore the kyng. And the kyng saide to 
hem, Y saw3 a sweuen, and Y confusid, 
or astonyed, in mynde, wote not what I 

4saw3. And Caldeis answerden to the 
kyng by Siry speche, Kyng, lyue thou 
in to with outen eende; saye thou thi 
sweuen to thi seruauntis, and we shuln 
shewe the interpretacioun, or declaryng, 
stherof. And the kyng answerde, and 
saith to the Caldeis, The word wente 
awey fro me; no bot 3e shuln shewe to 
me the sweuen, and the coniecturyng, or 
menyng, therof, 3e shuln perishe, and 
3our housis shuln be maad commoun, o7 
éforfetid. Forsothe 3if 3e shuln telle the 
T of alle Fr. 


POm.1. 49 him Ey. 


mieris EP. 
RFGHIKMNPQASXY. 
EFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


DANIEL. 


8 astromiers EPY. astronomeris 5. 
tt wicchis, ether treielouris CEFGHIKMNPQasuUxy, 
w the expownyng c. coniecting, ether expouning EFGIIIKMNPQRSUXY. 


623 


of the drynk of hem, and jaf to? hem 
potagis. Forsothe to these children God 17 
3af kunnyng and lernyng in ech book, and 
in al wisdom; but to Daniel God 30f vn- 
durstondyng of alle visiouns and dremys. 
Therfor whanne the daies weren fillid, 1g 
aftir whiche the kyng seide, that thei 
schulden be brou3t yn, the souereyn of 
onest seruauntis aid chast brou3te in hem, 
in the si3t of Nabugodonosor. And whanne 19 
the kyng hadde spoke to hem, siche weren 
not foundun of alle, as Daniel, Ananye, 
Misael, and Azarie; and thei stoden in 
the siz3t of the king. And ech word of20 
wisdom and of vndurstondyng, which the 
king axide of hem, he foond in hem‘ ten 
fold ouer alle’ false dyuynouris and astro- 
nomyens*, that weren in al his rewme. 
Forsothe Danyel was til to the firste 3eer 21 
of king Cyrus... 


CAP. 1. 


*In the secounde 3eer of the rewme of: 
Nabugodonosor, Nabugodonosor si3** a 
dreem; and his spirit was aferd, and his 
dreem fledde awei frohym. Therfor thez 
kyng comaundide, that the dyuynours, and 
astronomyens', and witchis*t, and Caldeis 
schulden be clepid togidere, that thei 
schulden telle to the kyng hise dremys; 
and whanne thei weren comun, thei stoden 
bifor the king. And the king seide tos 
hem, Y si3 a dreem, and Y am schent in 
mynde, and Y knowe not what Y si3. And4 
Caldeis answeriden the kyng bi Sirik lan- 
gage, Kyng, liue thou" with outen ende ; 
seie thi dreem to thi seruauntis, and we 
schulen schewe to thee the expownyng’ 
therof. And the kyng answeride, ands 
seide to Caldeis, The word is goen awei 
fro me; if 3e schewen not to me the 
dreem, and expownyng™ therof, 3e schulen 
perische, and 3oure housis schulen be for- 
fetid. Forsothe if 3e tellen the dreem,6 
and the expownyng* therof, 3e schulen 
take of me meedis and 3iftis, and myche 


88 sau3 1 s@pius, + astrono- 
v interpreting, ether expounmng 


U 30u EY. 
* comecting 


* Danyel pur- 
posith toschewe 
the power of 
the rewme of 
Crist aboue the 
rewme of the 
world, ether of 
the deuel; and 
this bi ten vi- 
siouns, ether 
reuelaciouns, 
set here suyngli 
in ordre. Fyue 
the firste vi- 
siouns per- 
teynen princi- 
pali to the firste 
comyng of 
Crist; the 
othere fyue 
perteynen prin- 
cipali to the 
secounde eom- 
yng of Crist 5 
thou3 bothein ~ 
these firste and 
in tho laste is 
maad sum tyme 
mencioun of 
euer either 
comyng of 
Crist. And the 
last visiouns 
bigynnen in 
the vij. co. The 
first visioun is 
of a stoon kit 
doun withouten 
hondis, that al 
to-brekith the 
greet ymage ; 
and the con- 
seyuyng 


624 


sweuen, and coniecture therof, 3e shuln 
resceyue of me meedis and 3iftis, and 
myche honour; therfore shewe 3e to 
ine the sweuen, and the interpretacioun 
7therof. Thei answerden the secounde 
tyme, and saiden, The kyng saye the 
sweuen to his seruauntis, and we shuln 
sshewe the interpretacioun therof. ‘The 
kyng answerde, and saith, Certis I wote, 
for 3e a3ein byen the tyme, witynge that 
»the word hath gou awey frome. Ther- 
fore 3if 3e shuln not shewe to me the 
sweuen, 00 sentence is of 30u, that 3e 
han maad to gydre an interpretacioun, 
and fals, and ful of dysceyt, that 3e speke 
to me til the tyme passe; and so saye 3e 
to me the sweuen, that Y wite, that 3e 
shuln speke to me and the verre inter- 
io pretacioun therof. Therfore the Caldeis 
answeryng byfore the kyng, saiden, Kyng, 
ther is no man vpon erthe, that may 
fulfille thi word; bot nether eny grete of 
kyngus and mi3ti axith siche manere 
word of eche dyuynour, and witche, and 
11Caldey. Sotheli the word whom thou, 
kyng, seekist, is greuous, nether eny man 
shal be founden, that shal shew it in si3t 
of the kyng, out taken goddis, whos lyu- 
l2yng is not with men. Whiche thing 
herd, the kyng, turned in to wodenesse 
and in grete wrath, comaundide, that alle 
the wijse men of Babyloyne shulde pe- 
isrishe. And the sentence gon out, the 
wijse men weren slayn; and Danyel and 
his felawis weren sow3t, that thei shulden 
14perishe. Than Danyel enquyride of the 
lawe and sentence, of Arioch, prince of 
the® kny3thode of the kyng, whiche 
wente oute for to slea the wijse men of 
15 Babiloyne. Aud he axide hym, that 
hadde taken power of the kyng, for 
what cause so cruel sentence wente out 
fro the face of the kyng. Therfore 
whann Arioch hadde shewide to Danyel, 
i6 Danyel gon yn preyede the kyng, that 
he shulde 3eue hym tyme for to shewe 


DANIEL. 


Il. 7—16. 


onour; therfor schewe 3e to me the dreem, 
and the interpretyng therof. ‘hei an-7 
sweriden the secounde tyme, and seiden, 
The kyng seie the dreem to hise seru- 
auntis, and we schulen schewe the inter- 
pretyng therof. The kyng answeride,s 
and seide, Certis Y woot, that 3e ajenbien 
the tyme, and witen that the word is 
goen awei frome. Therfor if 3e schewen9 
not to me the dreem, o sentence is of jou, 
for 3e maken an interpretyng bothe fals 
and ful of disseit, that 3e speke to me til’ 
the tyme passe; therfor seie 3e the dreem 
to me, that Y wite, that 3e speke also the 


of Crist al to- 
breking the 
deuel is figurid 
in this. The 
secounde vi- 
sioun is of the 
aungel licned 
to Goddis sone 
comynge doun 
in to the fur- 
neis; and the 
natinite of Crist 
comynge doun 
in to oure peyn- 
fulnesse is fi- 
gurid in this. 
The thridde 
visioun is of an 
hooli wakere, 
criynge the 
kitting doun 

of the tre; and 
the preching of 
Crist kittinge 
doun vices is 


veri iuterpretyng therof. Therfor Caldeis 10 figurid in this. 


answeriden bifor the kyng, and seiden, 
Kyng, no man is on erthe, that mai fille 
thi word; but nether ony greet man and 
my3ti of kyngis axith siche a word of ony 
dyuynour, and astronomyen’, and of a 
man of Caldee. 
thou, kyng, axist, is greuouse, nether 
ony schal be foundun, that schal schewe 
it in the si3t of the king, outakun goddis, 
whos lyuyng is not with men. 
whanne this word was herd, the kyng 
comaundide, in woodnesse and in greet 
ire, that alle the wise men of Babiloyne 
schulden perische. 
goon out, the wise men weren slayn; and 
Danyel and hise felows weren sou3t, that 
thei schulden perische. 
axide of the lawe and sentence, of Ariok, 
prynce of chyualrie of the kyng, that was 
gon out to sle the wise men of Babiloyne. 


And he axide hym, that hadde take power 15 


of the kyng, for what cause so cruel a 
sentence 3ede out fro the face of the kyng. 
Therfor whanne Ariok hadde schewid the 


thing to Danyel, Danyel entride, and prey- 16 


ede the kyng, that he schuide 3yue tyme 
to hym to schewe the soilyng to the kyng. 


And he entride in to his hous, and schew- 17 


ide the nede to Ananye, and* to® Misael, 


and Asarie‘, hise felowis, that thei schulden tz 


axe merci of the face of God of heuene on 


e Om. 46H. 


Ytilton. 2 astronomier Ep. 


a Om. s. 


bOm. sx. ¢ to Asarie ts. 


For the word which! 


And !2 


And bi the sentence 13 


The fourthe 
visioun is of 
the hond writ- 
ynge in the 
wal, the end- 
yng of the 
rewme of Bal- 
tasar ; and the 
passioun of 
Crist distriynge 
the rewme of 
the deuel, and 
ficchynge on 
the cros the 
obligacioun of 
decree, is figurid 
in this. The 
fyuethe visioun 
[is] of the en- 
closyng of Da- 
nyel in the lake 
of liouns, and of 
his delyuering 
bi the angel ; 
aud the rising 
azen of Crist 
spuylynge helle 
is figurid in 
this. Lire here. 


Thanne Danyel 11 cee. 


If. 17-——27. 


17the vndoyng to the kyng. And he en- 
tride in to his hous, and shewide to 
Ananyas, Mysael, and Azarias, his fe- 
18lawis, the neede, that thei shulden seeke 
mercye of the face of God of heuen vpon 
this sacrament; and Danyel and his fe- 
lawis shulden not perishen with other 
19 wijse men of Babyloyne. Thann the mis- 
terie was shewid to Danyel by a visioun 
in ni3t. And Danyel blesside God of he- 
20uen, and saith, Be the name of God 
blessid fro world, and til in to world, for 
21wijsdam and strengthe is of hym; and 
loo! he chaungeth tymes and ages, trans- 
latithf rewmes and ordeyneth; 3euith* 
wisdam to wijse men, and science to men 
22 vndirstoudynge disciplyne; shewith’ depe 
thingus and hid, and knewe®# in derknessis 
thingus ordeyned, and li3t is with hym. 
23 God of oure faders, to thee I knowleche, 
and Y herye thee, for thou hast 3ouen to 
me wijsdam and strengthe; and now thou 
hast shewide to me whiche thingus we 
preyden thee, for thou hast opnyde to 
2ivs the word of the kyng. After these 
thingis Danyel wente yn to Arioch, 
whom the kyng hadde ordeyned, that he 
shulde leese the wise men of Babiloyne, 
and thus spake to hym, Leese thou not 
the wijse men of Babiloyne; leede yn me 
in the si3t of the kyng, and J shal telle 
to the kyng the solucioun, or vndirstond- 
25yng. Thanne Arioch hastynge ledde yn 
Danyel to the kyng, and saide to hym, 


I haue founden a man of the sonys of: 


transmygracioun of Jude, that shal telle 
26to the kyng the solucioun. The kyng 
answerde, and saide to Danyel, to whom 
the name was Balthasar, Gessist thou, 
wher thou maist verrely shewe to me 
the sweuen that I saw3, and the inter- 
27 pretacioun therof? And Danyel answerde 


byfore the kyng, and saith, The mysterie. 


whiche the kyng axith, the wise men, and 
the" witchis, and dyuynours bi auteris, 
and dyuynours by lokyng of sterris, 


fhe translatith x pr. m. 
4 Om. 4GH. 


4 and he v. 
VOL. III. 


f And the 1. 


DANIEL. 


ff he 3euith @ sec. m. K pr.m. 


8 Wher ceécri fere passim. 
41L 


625 


this sacrament; and that Danyel and hise * 
felowis schulden not perische with othere 
wise men of Babiloyne. Thanne the pri-19 
uyte was schewid to Danyel bi a visioun 
in ny3t. And Danyel blesside God of he- 
uene, and seide, The name of the Lord be2o 
blessid fro the world, and til in to the 
world, for wisdom and strengthe ben 
hise; and he chaungith tymes and ages, 21 
he? translatith rewmes and ordeyneth; he 
3yueth wisdom to wise men, and kunnyng 
to hem that vndurstonden techyng, ether 
chastisyng ; he schewith deepe thingis and 22 
hid, and he knowith thingis set in derk- 
nessis, and 1li3t is with hym. God of23 
oure fadris, Y knowleche to thee, and Y 
herie thee, for thou hast 3oue wisdom and 
strengthe to me; and now thou hast 
schewid to me tho thingis, whiche we 
preieden thee, for thou hast openyd to vs 
the word of the kyng. Aftir these thingis 24 
Danyel entride to Ariok, whom the kyng 
hadde ordeyned, that he schulde leese the 
wise men of Babiloyne, and thus he spak 
to hym, Leese thou not the wise men of 
Babiloyne; leede thou me in bifor the 
si3t of the kyng, and Y schal telle the 
soilyng to the kyng. Thanne Ariok hast- 25 
ynge ledde in Danyel to the kyng, and 
seide to him, Y haue foundun a man of 
the sones of passyng ouer of Juda, that 
schal telle the soilyng to the kyng. Thef26 
kyng answeride, and seide to Danyel, to 
whom the name was Balthasar, Whethir® 
gessist thou, that thou maist verili schewe 
to me the dreem which Y si3, and the in- 
terpretyng therof? And Danyel answer- 27 
ide bifore the king, and seide, The pri- 
uytee which the kyng axith, wise men, and 
astronomyens®, and dyuynours, and lokeris 
of auteris, moun not schewe to the kyng. 
But God is in heuene, that schewith pri-2s 
uytees, which hath schewid to thee, thou 
king Nabugodonosor, what thingis schulen 
come in the laste tymes. Thi dreein and 
visiouns of thin heed, in thi bed, ben sich. 
& he shewith cx pr.m. && he knewe K pr.m. 


h astronomieers EP. 


626 


28mown not shewe to the kyng. Bot ther 
is God in heuen, shewynge mysteries, 
whiche shewide® to thee, thou kyng Na- 
bugodonosor, whiche thingus ben to cum 
in the last tymes. Thi swenens and vi- 
sions of thin hed, in thi couche, ben siche. 
20 Thou, kyng, biganst for to thinke in thi 
bed, what thing was to cummynge after 
these thingus; and he that shewith mys- 
teries", shewide to thee what thingus ben 
30to cummynge. And this sacrament, or 
hid trewthe, is shewid, not in wisdam 
that is in me more than in alle lyuynge 
men, bot that the interpretacioun be 
shewid to the kyng, and that thou shuld- 
siist wite the thoustis of thi soule. Thon, 
kyng, hast seen, and loo! as oo grete 
ymage; thilk ymage grete, and in stature 
hi3, stode ajeinus thee, and the biholdyng 
s2therof was dreedful. The hed of this 
ymage was of best gold, forsothe the 
brest and armys of syluer; forsothe the 
33 wombe and thizes of brasse, sothely the 
leggis of yren; forsothe of the feet sum 
34 part of yren, sum of erthe. Thou hast 
seen thus, til a stoon was kit of, with 
outen hondis, of a mount, and smote the 
ymage in his feet of yren and erthe, and 
35 made lesse, o7 brake, hem. Thanne the 
yren, pott, or mater maad of erthe, brasse, 
syluer, and gold, ben broken to gidre, and 
dryuen as in to a qwenchid brond of 
somer feeld, whiche ben rauyshid with 
wynd, and no place is foundun in hem; 
forsothe the stoon that smote the ymage, 
is maad a grete mounteyn, and fulfillide 
séal erthe. This is the sweuen. And we 
‘shuln saye the interpretacioun therof by- 
37 fore the kyng. Thou art kyng of kyngus, 
and God of heuen jaue to thee kingdam, 
strengthe, and empire, or lordship, and 
33 glorie, and alle thingus in whiche sones 
of men dwellen, and beestis of the feeld ; 
and he 3aue in thin hond the foulis of 
heuen, and ordeynyde alle thingus vndir 
thi lordship; therfor thou art the golden 


& shewith «. 


 sau3zest 1 passin. 


DANIEL. 


Il. 28——38. 


Thou, kyng, bigunnest to thenke in this 
bed, what was to comynge aftir these 
thingis; and he that schewith priuetees, 
schewide to thee what thingis schulen 
come. And this sacrament is schewid to 30 
me, not bi wisdom which is in me more 
than in alle lyuynge men, but that the . 
interpretyng schulde be maad opyn to the 
kyng, and thou schuldist knowe the 
thou3tis of thi soule. Thou, kyng, sijest, 31 
and lo! as o greet ymage; thilke ymage 
was greet, and hi3 in stature, and stood 
bifore thee, and the loking therof was 
ferdful. The heed of this ymage was of 32 
best gold, but the brest and armes weren 
of siluer; certis the wombe and thies 
weren of bras, but the leggis weren of33 
irun; forsothe sum part of the feet was 
of irun, sum was of erthe. Thou sijestiss 
thus, til a stoon was kit doun of the hil, 
with outen hondis, and smoot the ymage 
in the irun feet therof and erthene fect, 
and al to-brak tho. Thanne the irun, tijl 3s 
stoon, ether erthene vessel, bras, siluer, 
and gold, weren al to-brokun togidere, and 
dryuun as in to a deed sparcle of a large 
somer halle, that ben rauyschid of wynd, 
and no place is foundun to tho; forsothe 
the stoon, that smoot the ymage, was 
maad a greet hil, and fillide al erthe. 
This is-the dreem. Also, thou kyng, we3e 
schulen seie bifor thee the interpretyng 
therof. Thou art kyng of kyngis, and 37 
God of heuene 3af to thee rewme, strengthe, 
and empire, and glorie; and he 3af in thin ss 
hond alle thingis, in whiche the sones of 
men, and the beestis of the feeld, and the 
briddis of the eir dwellen, and ordeynede 
alle thingis vndur thi lordschip; therfor 
thou art the goldun heed. And another 39 
rewme lesse than thou schal rise aftir 
thee; and the thridde rewme, an other of 
bras, that schal haue the empire of al 
erthe. And the fourthe rewme schal be 40 
as irun, as irun makith lesse, and makith 
tame alle thingis, so it schal make lesse, 


h mysteries, or priuytees G. 


k Om. 


Il. 39-—48. 


3dhed. And after thee an other rewme 
shal ryse to gydre, lesse than thou; and 
the thrid rewme, an other of brasse, 
40 whiche shal comaunde to al erthe. And 
the fourthe rewme shal be as yrunny"; 
hou yrun brekith to gydre alle thingus, 
and dauntith, ov tamith, so it shal me- 
nushe, and to gydre breke alle these 
aithingus. Forsothe thou hast seen of the 
feete and fyngris erthi', or cleyz‘, part of 
a potter, and a part of yren, the rewme 
- shal be departid; whiche neuerthelese 
shal sprynge of the plauntyng of yren, 
after that thou hast seen yren meyut of 
42cleye and tyel, and fingris, or toon, of 
feet in partie of yren, in partie of erthe, 
the rewme in party shal be sad, and in 
43 party debrusid. Sothely that thou hast 
seen yren meynt to tyel of cley, forsothe 
thei shuln be meynt to gidre by mans 
seed; bot thei shuln not cleue to hem 
self, as yren may not be meynt to tyel. 
44 Forsothe in the days of tho rewmes, God 
of heuen shal reyse a kyngdam, whiche 
shal not be distruyed in to with outen 
eende, and his rewme shal not be taken 
.to an other peple ; it shal make lesse, and 
waste alle these rewmes, and the ylk 
45Shal stonde in to with outen eende. Vp 
that that thou.saw3, that a stoon is kit 
off with outen hondis of an hill, and 
maad lesse, ov brake, the tyel, and yren, 
and bras, and syluer, and gold, the grete 
God shewide to ‘the kyng', what thingus 
ben to cummynge afterward; and the 
sweuen is trewe, and the interpretacioun 
46 therof feithful. Than kyng Nabuchodo- 
nosor felle in to his face, and wirshipide 
Danyel,.and comaundide sacrifices and 
encense, that it were offride to hym. 
47 Therfore the kyng spekynge saith to Da- 
nyel, Verreli 3our God is God of goddis, 
and Lord of kyngus, shewinge myste- 
ries, for thou mi3tist opne this sacrament. 
48Thann the kyng enhaunside in to hee3 


hyren an. ‘erth n. 


1 but x. but that s sec. m. 


DANIEL. 


K cley ut. 


m thilke 1. 


627 


anid schal ‘al to-breke alle these rewmes. - 
Forsothe that thou siest a part of the feet 41 
and fyngris of erthe of a pottere, and a 
part of irun, the rewme shal be departid; 
which netheles schal rise of the plauntyng 
of irun, ‘bi that! that thou siest irun meynd 
with a tijl stoon of clei, and the toos of 42 
the feet in parti of irun, and in parti of 
erthe, in parti: the rewme schal be sad, 
and in parti to-brokun. Forsothe that 43 
thou siest irun meynd with a tiel stoon of 
clei, sotheli tho schulen be meynd togidere 
with mannus seed; but tho schulen not 
cleue to hem silf, as irun mai not be med- 
dlid with tyel stoon. Forsothe in the4s 
daies of tho™ rewmes, God of heuene shal 
reise a rewme, that schal not be distried 
with outen ende, and his rewme schal not 
be 3ouun to another puple; it schal make 
lesse, and schal® waste alle these rewmes, 
and it schal stonde with outen ende, bi 45 
this that thou siest, that a stoon was kit 
doun of the hil with outen hondis, and 
maad lesse the tiel stoon, and irun, and 
bras, and siluer, and gold. Greet God hath 
schewid to the kyng, what thingis schulen 
come aftirward ; and the dreem is trewe, 
and the interpretyng therof zs feithful. 
Thanne king Nabugodonosor felle doun 46 
on his face, and worschipide Danyel, and 
comaundide sacrifices and encense to be 
brou3t, that tho schulden be sacrifised® to 
hym. Therfor the kyng spak, and seide 47 
to Danyel, Verili 30ure God is God of 
goddis, and Lord of kyngis, that schewith 
mysteries, for thou mi3tist opene this sa- 
crament. Thanne the kyng reiside Da-48 
nyel an hi3, and 3af many 3iftis and grete 
to hym; and ordeynede hym prince and 
prefect, ether cheef tustise, ouer alle the 
prouynces of Babiloyne, and maister ouer 
alle the wise men of Babiloyne. Forsothe 49 
Danyel axide of the kyng, and ordeynede 
Sidrac, Misaac, and Abdenago ouer alle 
the werkis of the prouynce of Babiloyne ; 


1 thee, kyng K sec. m. 


nQOm.cGn. © sacrified a pr. m. 1. 


412 


628 


Danyel, and 3aue to hym many 3iftis 
and grete, and ordeynyde hym vpon alle 
prouyncis of Babiloyne prince and pre- 
fect, and maister ypon alle wijse men of 
so Babiloyne. Forsothe Danyel axide of 
the kyng, and ordeynyde vpon the werkis 
of the prouynce of Babiloyne, Sydrac, 
Mysac, and Abdenago; forsothe Danyel 
hym self was in the! 3atis of the kyng. 


CAP. III. 


1 Nabugodonosor, kyng, made a goldyne 
ymage, iu heizte of sixty cubitis, in 
breede of six cubitis; and sette it in the 
feeld Duram, of the prouynee of Babi- 

zloyne. And so Nabugodonosor sente for 
to gedre satrapis, or wijse men, magis- 
tratis, and iugis, and duykis, and ti- 
rauntis, 07 strong men, and prefectis, 
and alle the princes of cuntrees, that thei 
shulden cum to gydre to ‘halewyng of ™ 
the ymage, whom the kyng Nabugodo- 

3uosor rayside vp. Than satrapes weren 
gedrid, magestratis, and iugis, and duykis, 
and tirauntis, and the best men that 
weren ordeyned in poweris, and alle 
princis of cuntrees, that thei shulden cum 
to gydre to halewyng of the ymage, 
whom the kyng Nabugodonosor reyside 
vp. Forsothe thei stoden in si3t of the 
ymage, whiche kyng Nabugodonosor 
shadde putt; and a bedel criede mi3tily, 

To 30u it is sayd, peplis, lynagis, and 

slangagis; in the hour in whiche 3e shuln 
heere the sown of trumpe, and pipe, and 
harpe, sainbuke, sautrie, and symfonie, 
and al kynde of musikis, 3e fallynge wir- 
shipe the golden ymage, whom Nabugo- 

edonosor, kyng, ordeynyde. Sotheli 3if eny 
man not fallynge" doun shal wirship, in 
the same hour he shal be sent in to a four- 
7neyse of fijr brennynge. ‘Therfore after 
these thingus, anoon as alle peplis harden 
the sown of trumpe, pype, and harpe, 


DANIEL. 


H. 49-—II1. 7. 


but Danyel hym silf was in the 3atis of 
the kyng. : 


CAP. HI. 


Nabugodonosor, the? kyng, made a goldun | 
ymage, in the hei3the’ of sixti cubitis, and 
in the breede of sixe cubitis; and he sett- 
ide it in the feeld of Duram, of the pro- 
uynce of Babiloyne. Therfor Nabugodo-2 
nosor sente to gadere togidere the wise 
men, magistratis, and iugis, and duykis, 
and tirauntis, and prefectis, and alle princes 
of cuntreis, that thei schulden come togi- 
dere to the halewyng of the ymage, which 
the kyng Nabugodonosor hadde reisid. 
Thanne the wise men, magistratis', ands 
iugis, and duykis, and tirauntis, and beste 
men, that weren set in poweris, and alle 
the princes of cuntreis, weren gaderid to- 
gidere, that thei schulden come togidere 
to the halewyng of the’ ymage, which 
the kyng Nabugodonosor hadde reisid. 
Forsothe thei stoden in the si3t of the 
ymage, which Nabugodonosor hadde set; 
and a bedele criede my3tili, It is seid4 
to 30u, puplis, kynredis, and langagis; ins 
the our in which 3e heren the soun of 
trumpe, and of pipe, and of harpe, of‘ 
sambuke", of’ sawtre, and of sympho- 
nye, and of al kynde of musikis, falle 3e 
doun, and worschipe’ the goldun yniage, 
which the kyng Nabugodonosor made. 
Sotheli if ony man fallith not doun, andé 
worschipith not, in the same our he schak 
be sent in to the* furneis of fier bren- 
nynge. Therfor aftir these thingis, anoon7 
as alle puplis herden the sown of trumpe, 


Om. acu. ™halewe the 4. © fallen cx. 
POm. x. hiznesser. Y and magestratis 1. 8 Om.1. tand ofa. °sambuke, ether rehed pipe cEF 
GHIKMNPQUSxX. VYandofR. W worshipeth 1. worschipe 3e Ns. * a CBFITIIKMNQNSU. 


ERS: ,. DANIEL. 629 


sainbuke, and sautrie, synphonie, and al 
kynde of musikis, fallynge alle peplis, 
lynagis, and langagis, wirshipiden the 
golden ymage, whom Nabugodonosor, the 
skyng, ordeynede. And anoon in that 
tyme men Caldeis cummynge to°, accus- 
giden Jewis, and saiden to Nabugodono- 
sor, kyng, Kyng, in to with outen eende 
1olyue thou. Thou, kyng, hast putte a 
decree, or dome, that eche man that shal 
heere the sown of trumpe, pype, and 
harpe, sambuke, and sautre, and synfo- 
nye, and al kynde of musykis, putte doun 
hym self, and wirshipe the golden ymage ; 
11 forsothe 3if eny man not fallynge doun 
shal wirshipe, be he sent in to fourneyse? 
120f brennynge fijr. Therfore men Jewis 
ben, whom thou hast ordeynyd vpon 
werkis‘ of the cuntree of Babyloyne, Sy- 
drac, Mysac, and Abdenago. These men, 
kyng, dispisiden? thi decree; thei hon- 
ouren not thi goddis, and thei worshipen 
not the golden ymage, whom thou reys- 
isidist. Thanne Nabugodonosor in wood- 
nesse and in wrath, comaundide, that Sy- 
drac, Mysac, and Abdenago shulden be 
ledde to; whiche anoon ben ledde to in 
14813t§ of the kyng. And Nabugodonosor, 
the kyng, pronounsynge saith to hem, 
Verrely wher .3e, Sydrac, Mysac, and 
Abdenago, honouren not my goddis, and 
wirshipen not the golden ymage, whom 
15 Y reiside? Now therfore be 3e' redy, in 
what ever hour 3e shuln heer sown of 
truimpe, pype, harp, sambuke, sautrie, and 
synfonye, and of al manere of musykis, 
putte 3e doun jou, and wirshipe the 
ymage that Y made; for 3if 3e shuln not 
wirship, in the same houre 3e shuln be 
sent in to the fourneys of fijr brennynge ; 
and who is God, that shal delyuere 3ou 
160f myn hond? Sydrac, Mysac, and Ab- 
denago answerynge saiden to kyng Na- 
bugodonosor, It byhoueth not vs of this 
17thing for" to answere to thee. Loo! so- 


°Om. 4. P the fourneys 4cH. 4 the werkis «. 


of Y pipe, and of? harpe, of sambuke®, and - 
of sawtre, of symphonye, and of al kynde 
of musikis, alle puplis, lynagis, and lan- 
gagis fellen doun, and worschipiden the 
golden ymage, which the kyng Nabugo- 
donosor hadde maad. And anoon in thats 
tyme men of Caldee neiziden, and accus- 
iden the Jewis, and seiden to the kyngo 
Nabugodonosor, Kyng, lyue thou with 
outen ende. Thou, kyng, hast set a de-10 
cree, that ech man that herith the sown 
of trumpe, of pipe, and of harpe, of sam- 
buke, and of sawtree, and of symphonye, 
and of al kynde of musikis, bowe doun 
hym silf, and worschipe the goldun ymage ; 
forsothe if ony man fallith> not doun, andi 
worschipith not, be he sent in to the fur- 
neis of fier brennynge. Therfor men Jewis 12 
ben, Sidrac, Mysaac, and Abdenago, whiche 
thou hast ordeynede on the werkis of the 
cuntrei of Babiloyne. Thou kyng, these 
men han dispisid thi decree; thei® onouren 
not thi goddis, and thei worshipen not 
the’ goldun ymage®, which thou reisidist. 
Thanne Nabugodonosor comaundide, inis 
woodnesse and in wraththe, that Sidrac, 
Mysaac, and Abdenago schulden be bron3t; 
whiche weren brou3t anoon in the si3t of 
the kyng. And the kyng Nabugodonosor 14 
pronounside, and seide to hem, Whether 
verili Sidrac, Mysaac, and Abdenago, 3e 
onouren not my goddis, and worscnipen 
not the golden ymage, which Y made? 
Now therfor be 3e redi, in what euer our 15 
je heren the sown of trumpe, of pipe, of 
harpe, of sambuke, of sawtree, and of 
symphonye, and of al kynde of musikis, 
bowe 3e doun jou, and worschipe the 
ymage which Y made; that if 3e wor- 
schipen not, in the same our 3e schulen 
be sent in to the furneis of fier brennynge; 
and who is God, that schal delyuere 30u 
fro myn hond? Sidrac, Misaae, and Ab- 16 
denago answeriden, and seiden to the king 
Nabugodonosor, It nedith not, that we 


rdispisen 4. % the sij3t 4, *Om.a. % Om. 4. 


yOm,s. and of y. 2Om.s. 4 sambuke, ether reehd pipe x. © falle cenknsu. ¢ and thei a pr.m. 


dthiu. © ymagis s. 


630 


thely our God, whom we wirshipen, may 
delyuere vs of the chymneye of bren- 
nynge fijre, and of thin hondis delyuere, 
isthou kyng. For’ 3if he wole not, be it 
knowen to thee, kyng, for we honoure not 
thi goddis, and we wirshipen not the 
golden ymage, whom thou hast reyside. 
19 Thanne Nabugodonosor was fulfillid with 
wodenesse, and the biholdynge of his face 
is chaungid vpon Sydrac, Mysac, and 
Abdenago. And he bad, that the four- 
neyse shulde be sette on fijre seuen fold, 
hatter’’ than it was wont for to be tendid. 
20 And he badde the strongist men of his oost, 
that the feet bounden of Sydrac, Mysac, 
and Abdenago, thei shulden sende hem 
in to the fourneyse of brennynge fijre. 
21And anoon the ilk men bounden, with 
armes, and cappis, and shoon, and clothis, 
weren sente in to mydil” of the fourneys 
220f brennynge fijre; for whi the co- 
maundyng of the kyng constreynide. For- 
sothe the fourneys was tendid ful miche ; 
forsothe flawme of the fijre slew3 tho 
men, that senten Sydrac, Mysac, and Ab- 
23denago in to the fourneyse. Forsothe 
these three men, Sydrac, Mysac, and Ab- 
denago, fellen doun bounden in mydil* of 
the chymney of brennynge fijre. 


These thingis that suen, I foond not 
in Ebrew bookis. 


24 And thei walkiden in mydil of the 
flawme, heryinge God, and blessynge toY 
2sthe Lord. Forsothe Azarie stondynge 
preyede thus; and opnyng his mouth in 
26mydil of the fijre, saith, Blessid art thou, 
Lord God of our fadris, and heryfulz, or 
worthi to be preyside, and thi name glo- 
27 rious in to worldis; for thou art iust in 
alle thingus whiche thou didist to vs, and 
alle thi werkis trewe, and thi wayes ri3t, 
28and alle thi domes verrey. Forsothe thou 


v That G sec.m. YY Om. G pr. mHK. 


f the comaundement k sec. m. RU sec. m. comaundementis s. 


DANIEL. 


Ww the mydil a. 


Ill. 18— 28. 


answere of this thing to thee. For whii7 
oure God, whom we worschipen, mai ra- 
uysche vs fro the chymenei of fier bren- 
nynge, and maz delyuere fro thin hondis, 
thou kyng. That if he nyle, be it knowun 1s 
to thee, thou kyng, that’ we onouren not 
thi goddis, and we worschipen not the 
goldun ymage, which thou hast reisid. 
Thanne Nabugodonosor was fillid of wood- 19 
nesse, and the biholdyng of his face was 
chaungid on Sidrac, Misaac, and Abde- 
nago. And he comaundide, that the fur- 
neis schulde be maad hattere seuenfold, 
than it was wont to be maad hoot. And 20 
he comaundide to the strongeste men of 
his oost, that thei schulden bynde the feet 
of Sidrac, Mysaac, and Abdenago, and 
sende hem in to the furneis of fier bren- 
nynge. And anoon tho men weren boundun, 21 
with brechis, and cappis, and schoon, and 
clothis, and weren sent in to the myddis 
of the furneis of fier brennynge; for whi 22 
comaundement! of the kyng constreinede. 
Forsothe the furneis was maad ful hoot; 
certis the flawme of the fier killid tho men, 
that hadden sent Sidrac, Misaac, and Ab- 
denago in to the furneis. Sotheli these 23 
thre men, Sidrac, Misaac, and Abdenago, 
fellen doun boundun in the mydis of the 
chymenei of fier brennynge. 


Y foond not in Ebreu bokis these 
thingis that suens. 


And thei walkiden in the myddis of the 24 
flawme, and herieden God, and blessiden 
the Lord. Forsothe Asarie stoode, and 25 
preiede thus; and he openyde his mouth 
in the myddis of the fier, and seide, Lord 26 
God of oure fadris, thou art blessid, and* 
worthi to be heried, and thi name és glo- 
rious in to worldis; for thou art ri3tful 27 
in alle thingis whiche thou didist to vs, 
and alle thi werkis ben trewe; and thi 
weies ben ri3tful, and alle thi domes bez 


* the mydil zu. Y Om. 4, 


2 hey3ful c. heeiful x. 


8 folewen 1. » and art Nn, 


III. 29——42. 


hast don verrey domes, after alle thingus 
that thou leddist in vpon vs, and vpon the 
holy citee of our fadris, Jerusalem; for in 
trewthe and dome thou leddist yn alle 
29these thingus for oure synnes. Sothely 
we synnyden, and diden wickidly, go- 
ynge awey fro thee, and trespassiden in 
30 alle thingus, and herden not thin heestis, 
nether kepten, nether diden as thou co- 
maundidist to vs, that it were wele to vs. 
3) Therfore alle thingus that thou leddist yn 
vpon vs, and alle thingus that thou didist 
32to vs, in verre dome thou hast don; and 
thou hast bitaken vs in the hondis of 
enmys, wickid and warst trespassours, 
and to the vniust kyng, and warst ouer 
33al erthe. And now we mown not opne 
the mouthe; we ben maad confusioun 
and shenship to thi seruauntis, and to 
34these that wirshipen thee. We preyen, 
bitake? not vs in to with outen eende, for 
thi name, and distruye not thi testament, 
3snether do awey thi mercye fro vs, for 
Abram, thi derworthe, and Ysaac, thi 
seruaunt, and Yrael, or Jacob, thin holy; 
36 to whiche thou spake, bihetynge that thou 
shuldist multiplie the seede of hem as 
sterris of heuen, and as grauel that is in 
37 the” brynke of the see. For, Lord, we 
ben maad litil, more than alle hethen men, 
and we ben meeke, or dowe, in eche lond 
38this day, for oure synnes. And ther is 
not in this tyme prince, and duyke, and 
prophete, nether brent sacrifice, nether 
sacrifice, nether offring, nether encense, 
s9ne* place of primissis byfor thee, that 
we mown fynde thi mercye; bot in con- 
trite soule, or ynwitt, and in spirit of 
40mekenesse be we resceyuyd. As in brend 
sacrifice of wetheris and boolis, and as in 
thousandis of fat lambren, so oure sacri- 
fice be maad to day: in thi si3t, that it 
plese to thee; for confusioun, o7 shame, 
41is not to men tristinge in thee. And now 
we suen thee in al herte, and dreeden 
42thee, and seeken thi face. Confounde 


z bitake thou G sec. m. 


ithi veri at sec. m. 


DANIEL. 


22 Om. aGu. 


631 


trewe. For thou hast do trewe domes, bies 
alle thingis whiche thou brou3tist yn on 
vs, and on Jerusalem, the hooli citee of 
oure fadris; for in trewthe and in doom 
thou brou3tist yn alle these thingis for 
oure synnes. For we synneden, and didengs — 
wickidli, goynge awei fro thee, and we 
trespassiden in alle thingis, and we herden 30 
not, nether kepten thi comaundementis, 
nether we diden as thou comaundidist to 
vs, that it schulde be wele to vs. Ther-31 
for thou didist bi veri! doom alle thingis 
whiche thou brou3tist yn on vs, and alle 
thingis whiche thou didist to vs; and3e 
thou hast bitake vs in the hondis of ene- 
myes, wickid men, and worst trespassouris, 
and to the vniust kyng, and worst ouer 
al erthe. And now we moun not opene33 
the mouth; we ben maad schame and 
schenschipe to thi seruauntis, and to hem 
that worschipen thee. We bisechen, 3yue 34 
thou not vs fo enemyes with outen ende, 
for thi name, and distrie thou not thi 
testament, and take thou not awei thi3s 
merci fro vs, for Abraham, thi derlyng, 
and Ysaac, thi seruaunt, and Israel, thin 
hooli; to whiche thou spakist, biheetyng 36 
that thou schuldist multiplie her seed as 
the sterris of heuene, and as grauel which 
is in the brynke of the see. For whi,37 
Lord, we ben maad litle, more than alle 
folkis, and we ben lowe in al erthe to dai, 
for oure synnes, And in this tyme isss 
no prince, and duyk, and profete, nether 
brent sacrifice, nether sacrifice, nether* 
offryng, nether encense, nether place of 
firste fruytis bifor thee, that we moun39 
fynde thi mercy; but be we resseyued in 
contrit soule, and in spirit of urekenesse. 
As in brent sacrifice of rammes, and of 40 
bolis, and as in thousyndis of fatte lam- 
bren, so oure sacrifice be maad to dai in 
thi si3t, that it plese thee; for no schame 
is to hem that tristen in thee. And now 41 
we suien thee in al the herte, and we 
dreden thee, and we seken thi face. 


® nether 4. 


Kner. 


632 


thou not vs, but do with vs vp? thi 
inyldenesse, and vp° the mykilnesse of 
43thi mercy. And deliuere vs in thi mer- 
ueylis, and 3eue glorie to thi name, Lord; 
4sand coufoundid be alle, that shewen to 
thi seruauntis yuel thingis; be thei con- 
foundid in al thi power, and the strengthe 
4sof hem be broken to gydre; and thei 
shuln wite, for thou art the Lord God 
aloone, and glorious vpon the rounde- 
a6nesse of erthes. And thei ceesiden not, 
the ministris of the kyng, that sente hem, 
for to tende the fourneis with napte, 
herdis of hemp, o7 faze, and pitche, 
47and kittyngus of vynes. And the flawme 
was held out ouer the fourneys by nyne 
asand fourti cubitis, and brake out, and 
brent whom of Caldeis it fonde bysidis 
49the fourneis. Forsothe an aungel of the 
Lord cam doun with Azarie and his fe- 
lawis, in to the fourneys, and sinote ouere 
50the flawme of fijre of the fourneis; and 
maade the mydil of the fourneis as wynde 
of dewe blowinge; and the fijre touchide 
not hem on al manere, nether made so- 
rewfull, nether brou3te yn eny thing of 
51 heuynesse®®. Thanne these three as of 00 
mouthe heryeden God, and _ glorifieden, 
and blessiden God in the fourneys, say- 
szinge, Blessid art thou, Lord God of oure 
fadris, and worthi to be heryed, and glo- 
rious, and aboue enhaunsid in to worldis; 
aud blessid the name of thi glorie, the 
whiche is holy, and worthi to be heried, 
53and aboue reisid in alle worldis. Blessid 
art thou in the holy temple of thi glorie, 
and thou aboue preiseful, and glorious in 
54to worldis. Blessid art thou in the trone 
of thi rewme, and aboue preyseful, and 
ssaboue reysid in to worldis. Blessid art 
thou, that biholdist depnessis, and sittist 
vpon cherubyn, and preysful, and aboue 
séreysid in to worldis. Blessid art thou 
in the firmament of heuen, and preysful, 
s7and glorious in to worldis. Blesse 3e4, 
alle the® werkis of the Lord, ‘to the 


> vpon G prim. 


e vpon G pr.m.H. 
Lord a. ¢ Om. a. 3 


1Om. 4, 


DANIEL. 


ce heuynesse fo hem K pr.m, heuynesse fo K sec. m. 


ILL. 43-57; 


Schende thou not vs, but do with vs bie 
thi myldenesse, and bi the multitude of 
thi merci. And delyuere thou vs in thy 43 
merueils, and 3yue thou glorie to thi name, 
Lord; and alle men ben schent, that44 
schewen yuelis to thi seruauntis; be thei 
schent in all thi mi3t, and the strengthe 
of hem be a] to-brokun; and thei schulen 45 
wite, that thou art the Lord God aloone, 
and glorious on the roundnesse of londis. 
And the mynystris of the kyng, that had-46 
den sent hem, ceessiden not to make hoot 
the furneis with syment, and herdis of 
flex; and pitche, and siouns of vynes. And 47 
the flawme was sched out over the fur- 
neis bi nyne and fourti cubitis, and brak 48 
out, and brente hem that it foond of Cal- 
deis bisidis the furneis. Forsothe the aun- 49 
gel of the Lord cam doun with Asarie and 
hise felowis, in to the! furneis, and smoot 
out the flawme of the fier fro the furneis; 
and made the myddis of the furneis as the 50 
wynd of deew blowynge; and outerli the 
fier touchide not hem, nether made sori, 
nether dide ony thing of disese. Thannesi 
these thre as of o mouth herieden and 
glorifieden God, and blessiden God in the 
furneis, and seiden, Lord God of oure fa-52 
dris, thou art blessid, and worthi to be 
preisid, and gloriouse, and aboue enhaunsid 
in to worldis; and blessid zs the name of 
thi glorie, which zame is hooli, and wor- 
thi to be heried, and aboue enhaunsid in 
alle worldis. Thou art blessid in the hooliss 
temple of thi glorie, and aboue preisable, 
and gloriouse in to worldis. Thou arts 
blessid in the trone of thi rewme, and 
aboue preisable, and aboue enhaunsid in to 
worldis. Thou art blessid, that biholdists5s 
depthis of watris, and sittist on cherubyn, 
aud art™ preisable, and aboue enhaunsid 
in to worldis. Thou art blessid in these 
firmament of heuene, and preisable, and 
gloriouse in to worldis. Alle werkis of 57 
the Lord, blesse 3e the Lord, herie 3e, and 
aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 


4 3e the 


m Om. 1. = 


It. 58-——77. 


Lord‘; preyse 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e 
sshym in to worldis. Blesse 3e, aungels 
of the Lord, to the Lord ; preyse 3e, and 
59 aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. Blesse 
3e, heuens, to the Lord; preyse 3e, and 
60 aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. Blesse 
3e, alle watris that ben vp on heuens, to 
the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e 
61 hym in to worldis. Alle vertues of the 
Lord, blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, 
and aboue reyse 3e him into worldis. 
62 Sunne and moone, blesse 3e to the Lord ; 
preise 3e, and aboue reyse 3e him in to 
e3worldis. Sterris of heuene, blesse 3e to 
the Lord; preise 3e, and aboue reise 3e 
¢1him in to worldis. Reyn and dew, blesse 
3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 
653e him into worldis. Ech spirit of God, 
blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, and 
66 aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. Fijre 
and heete, blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 
3e, and aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
c7 Colde and sumer, blesse 3e to the Lord ; 
preyse 3ee, and aboue reyse 3e hym in to 
68 worldis. Dewis and whijt frost, blesse 
je to the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue 
sgreyse 3e him in to worldis. Byndynge 
frost and colde, blesse 3e to the Lord; 
preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e hym in to 
joworldis. Yss and snowes, blesse 3e to 
the Lord ; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e 
7ihym into worldis. Ny3tis and days, 
blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, and 
yzaboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. Li3t 
and derknesses, blesse 3e to the Lord ; 
preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e hym in to 
73worldis. Leitis and cloudis, blesse 3e to 
the Lord ; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e 
7ahym into worldis. Blesse the erthe the 
Lord; preyse it, and aboue reyse hym 
75in to worldis. Mounteyns and smale 
hillis, blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, 
and aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
76 Alle buriownynge thingus in erthe, blesse 
je to the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue 
77 reyse 3e hym in to worldis. Wellis, blesse 


DANIEL. 633 


Aungels of the Lord, blesse 3e the Lord ;58 
herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e° hym in to 
worldis. Heuenes, blesse 3e the Lord; herie 59 
3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 
Alle watris, that ben aboue heuenes, blesse 3e 60 
the Lord ; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e 
him into worldis. Alle the vertues of thee 
Lord, blesse 3e the Lord; herie 3e, and 
aboue enhaunse 3eP hym in to worldis. 
Sunne and moone, blesse 3e4 the Lord ;62 
herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to 
worldis. Sterris of heuene, blesse 3e the6s 
Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e 
hym in to worldis. Reyn and deew, blesse 64 
3e the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 
je hym in to worldis. Ech spirit of God, 65 
blesse 3e the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue 
enhaunse 3e" hym in to worldis. Fier and 66 
heete, blesse 3e the Lord; herie 3e, and 
aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 
Coold and somer, blesse 3e the Lord ;67 
herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to 
worldis. Dewis and whijt forst', blesse 6s 
3e" the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 
3e hym in to worldis. Blac forst andes 
coold, blesse 3e” the Lord; herie 3e”, and 
aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 
Yces and snowis, blesse 3e the Lord ; herie 70 
3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e* hym in to 
worldis. Ni3tis and daies, blesse 3e the 71 
Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym 
in to worldis. Li3t and derknesse, blesse 72 
3e the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 
3eY hym in to worldis. Leitis and cloudis, 73 
blesse 3e the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue en- 
haunse 3e hym in to worldis. The erthe 74 
blesse the Lord; herie it, and aboue en- 
haunse it hym in to worldis. Mounteyns 75 
and litle hillis, blesse 3e the Lord; herie 3e, 
and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 
Alle buriownynge thingis in erthe, blesse 76 
3e the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 
3e hym in to worldis. Wellis, blesse 3e 77 
the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e 
hym in to worldis. Sees and floodis, blesse 7# 
3e the Lord; herie 3e”, and aboue enhaunse 


f Om, a. 
°Omn. POmx. 9@Om: 'Om.1. 8Omn. tfrostis, YOm.nN. VYOm.xn. WOm.1. 
xOm.n. YOm.n. 23e him Nn. 
VOL. III. 4M 


634 


3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue 
ysreyse 3e hym in to worldis. Sees and 
floodes, blesse 3e to the Lord ; preyse 3e, 
and aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
79 Whallis, and alle thingis that ben moned 
in watris, blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 
3e, and aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
80 Alle foulis of heuen, blesse 3e to the 
Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e hym 
siin to worldis. -Alle beestis and® etable, 
or litil, beestis, blesse 3e to the Lord ; 
preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e hym in to 
sz worldis. Sonys of men, blesse 3e to the 
Lord ; preyse 3e, aud aboue reyse 3e hym 
s3into worldis. Blesse Yrael the Lord; 
preyse it, and aboue reyse him in to 
siworldis. Prestis of the Lord, blesse 3e 
to the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 
853e hym in to worldis. Seruauntis of the 
Lord, blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, 
and aboue reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
86 Spiritis and soulis of iust men, blesse 3e 
to the Lord ; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 
873e hym into worldis. Holi and meeke in 
herte, blesse 3e to the Lord; preyse 3e, 
and aboue reyse 3e hym into worldis. 
88 Ananyas, Azarias, Mysael, blesse 3e to 


the Lord; preyse 3e, and aboue reyse 3e. 


hym in to worldis. Whiche delyuerede vs 
fro helle, and made saaf fro the hond of 
deth, and delyuerede fro the mydil of the 
brennynge flawme, and rauyshide vs out. 

89 of the mydil of the® fyre. Knowleche 3e 
to the Lord, for he is good; for in to the 

90 world the mereye of hym. Alle religious, 
blesse 3e to the Lord, God of goddis; 
preyse 3e, and kuowleche 3e to hym, for 
in to alle worldis the mercye of hym. 


Hiderto is not had in Ebrue, and 
what thingus we han putte, ben trans- 


latid' of the makyng of Teodosion. 


9 Thanne kyng Nabugodonosor won- 
dride myche, and rose hastiliche, and 
saith to his best men, Wher we senten 


& Om. acn. 


® The whiche 1. 
i Om. 1. 


bsaued 1. ¢ vs fro Nn. 


DANIEL. 


hOm. «4. 


4 the 1. 


II. 78—9g1.. 


3e hym in to worldis. Whallis, and alle79 
thingis that ben mouyd in watris, blesse 
3e the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 
3e hym in to worldis. Alle briddis of the so 
eyr, blesse 3e the Lord ; herie 3e, and aboue 
enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. Alle wielde ai 
beestis and tame beestis, blesse 3e the Lord; 
herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to 
worldis. Sones of men, blesse 3e the Lord; 82 
herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to 
worldis. Israel blesse the Lord; herie it, 83 
and aboue enhaunse it hym in to worldis. 
Prestis of the Lord, blesse 3e the Lord ; 84 
herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to 
worldis. Seruauntis of the Lord, blesse 8s 
je the Lord; herie 3e, and abone enhaunse 
je hym in to worldis. Spiritis and soulis 86 
of iust men, blesse 3e the Lord; herie 3e, 
and aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 
Hooli men and meke of herte, blesse 3e87 
the Lord; herie 3e, and aboue enhaunse 
3e hym in to worldis. Ananye, Azarie, 88 
Mysael, blesse 3e the Lord; herie je, and 
aboue enhaunse 3e hym in to worldis. 
Which* Lord rauyschide vs fro helle, and 
‘made saaf fro the hond of deth, and de- 
lyueride fro® the myddis of flawme bren- 
nynge, and rauyschide vs fro the myddis 
of fier. Knowleche 3e to the Lord, for he s9 
is good; for his merci zs in to the world. 
Alle religiouse men*, blesse 3e the Lord, 90 
God of goddis; herie 3e, and knouleche 3e 
to hym, for his merci zs in to alle’ worldis. 


Hidur to it is not had in Ebreu, and 
tho thingis that we han® set, ben’ trans- 
latid ‘of the writyngs of Theodosion. 


Thanne kyng Nabugodonosor was asto- 91 
nyed, and roos hastily, and seide to hise 
beste men, Whether we senten not thre 
men feterid in to the myddis of the fier ? 
Whiche® answeriden the kyng, and seiden, 
Verili, kyng. The kyng answeride, and 92 
seide, Lo! Y se foure men ynboundun, 
and goynge in the myddis of the’ fier, and 


i translacioun 11. 


€Om.y. fOm.1. g ben 1. »& The whiche 1. 


* Alle religi- 
ouse men; this 
laste is addid, 
for not oonli 

in the peple of 
Israel, but also 
in othere pe- 
plis, weren sum 
meu, that wor- 
shipeden God 
bi special wor- 
shiping, as was 
Joob, and Mel- 
chisedech, and 
lik men, whiche 
ben seid here 
religious men. 
Lire here. cen 
KPQUY. 


IIl, g2——100. 


not three men bounden to gidre in to 
mydil* of fyre? Whiche answeringe to 


s2the kyng saiden, Verrely, kyng. Thanne. 


the king answerde, and saith, Loo! I see 
foure men vnbounden, and walkynge in 
mydil of the. fyre, and no thing of cor- 


rupcioun is in hem; and the fourme of. 


the fourthe lijc to.the sone: of God. 


93 Thanne Nabugodonosor, kyng, came to. 
the dore of the fourneys of brennynge 


fyr, and saith, Sydrac, Mysac, and Ab- 
denago, saruauntis of hee; lyuyng God, 
go 3e out, and cume 3e.. And anoon Sy- 
drac, Mysac, aud Abdenago, wentén out 
940f the mydil.of fyr. And satrapis ge- 
drid, and magestratis, and domysmen, and 
mi3ty men of the kyng, biheelden thoo 
men, for fijre hadde no thing of power in 
the bodys of hem, and an heer of hir hed 
was not brent to; also the breechis of 
hem weren not chaungid, and the sauer 
950f fijr passide not by hem. And Nabu- 
godonosor brestinge out saith, Blessid ‘is 


God! of hem, that is to saye, of Sydrac, 


Mysac, and Abdenago, whiche sente his 
aungel, and delyuerde his seruauntis that 
byleeuyden in to hym, and chaungiden 
the word of the kyng, and 3auen her 
bodies, lest thei seruyden, and lest thei 
wirshipideu euery™ god, outake her God 
gsaloone. Therfore of me this decree, or 
dome, is putt, that eche peple, and lan- 
gagis, and lynagis, who euere shal speke 
blasfeme a3einus God of Sydrac, Mysac, 
and Abdenago, perishe, and his hous be 
waastid; forsothe ther is non other God, 
97 that may thus saue. Thaune the kyng 
anaunside Sydrac, Mysac, and Abdenago, 
in the prouynce of Babyloyne; and in 
to eche Jond he sente a pistle, conteenynge 
gsthese woordis. Nabugodonosor, kyng, to 
alle peplis, folkis, and langagis, that 
dwellen in al erthe, pees be multiplied 


DANIEL. 


635 


no thing of corrupcioun is in hem; and. 
the licnesse of the fourthe és lijk the sone 
of God. Thanne the kyng Nabugodonosor 93 
neizide to the dore of the furneis of fier* 
brennynge, and seide, Sidrac, Mysaac, and 
Abdenago, the seruauntis of hi3 God lyu- 
ynge, go 3e out, and come 3e. And anoon 
Sidrac, Mysaac, and Abdenago, 3eden out 
of the myddis of the fier. And the wiseo4 
men, and magistratis, and iugis, and mi3ti 
men of the kyng, weren gaderid togidere, 
and bihelden! tho men, for the fier hadde 


‘had no thing of power in the bodies of 


hem, and an heer of her heed was not 
brent; also the breechis of hem weren not 
chaungid, and the odour of fier hadde not 
passid bi hem. And Nabugodonosor bracgs 
out, and seide, Blessid be the God of hem, 
that is, of Sidrac, Mysaac, and Abdenago, 
that sente his aungel, and delyueride hise 
seruauntis, that bileuyden in to hym, and 
chaungiden™ the word of the kyng, and 
jauen her bodies, that thei schulden not 
serue, and that thei schulden not wor- 
schipe ony god, outakun her" God aloone. 
Therfor this decree is set of me, that ech 9 
puple, and langagis, and lynagis, who euer 
spekith -blasfemye ajen God of Sidrac, and°® 
of Mysaac, and of Abdenago, perische, 
and his hous be distried ; for noon other 
is God, that mai saue so. Thanne the kyng 97 
anaunside Sidrac, Mysaac, and Abdenago, 
in the prouynce of Babiloyne; and sente 
in to al the lond a pistle, conteynynge 
these wordis. 


GAP: TV: 


Nabugodonosor, the kyng, writith ¢hus gs 
to alle puplis and langagis, that dwellen 
in al erthe, pees be multiplied to 3ou. 


Hi3 God made at me myraclis and mer-99 
ueils; therfor it pleside me? to preche hise 100 
myraclis, for tho ben greet, and hise mer- 


99to 30u. Hee3 God made at me siguis 
and wondirful thingus; therfore it pleside 
1o0to me for to preche the sygnys of hym, 


k the mydil #. |! the God 4. be God #. God kK pr.m. ™eny 4. 


k the fier Gnu. _—_! thet biholden 1. © Om. CEGHIKM 


NPQrsux. P to mel. 


m thei chaungiden kK sec.m. ° Om. K pr.m. 


4M 2 


636 


for thei ben greet, and his wondirful 
thingis, for thei" stronge; and his rewme 
enerlastinge rewme, and his power in to 
generacioun and generacioun. 


CAP. IV. 


Vel Nabugodonosor, was quyete in myn 
2hous, and flouringe™™ in my paleys; I 
saw3 a sweuen, whiche feride me; and my 
thou;tis in my bed, and si3tis of myn hed, 
3to gidre troubliden me. And by me a 
decree was putte forth, that alle wijse 
men of Babiloyne shulden be ledde yn in 
my si3t, that thei shulden shewe to me 
the solucioun, o7 vudirstondyng, of the 
asweuene. Thanne entriden dyuynours by 
auters, wicches®, Caldeis, and dyuynours 
by sterris; and I teelde the swenen in the 
si3t of hem, and thei shewiden not to me 
sthe solucioun therof, til a felowe of office 
entride in my si3t, Danyel, to whom the 
name Balthasar, after the name of my 
god, whiche hath the spirit of holy goddis 
in hym self; and I spac the sweuen bi- 
«fore hym. Balthasar, prince of dyuy- 
nours by autris, whom I wote, for thou 
hast in thee the spirit of holy goddis, 
and eche sacrament is not impossible to 
thee, telle thou to me the visions? of my 
7 sweuens, and the solucioun of hem. The 
visioun of myn hed in my couche. I saw3, 
and loo! a tree in the mydil of erthe, 
gand the hei3t therof ful myche. And a 
greete tree and stronge, and the nobley, 
or strecchinge out, therof touchynge he- 
uen, biholding therof was vnto termes of 
gal erthe. The leues therof most faire, 
and the fruyte therof ful myche, and 
mete of alle thingus theryn; vnder it 
beestis dwelliden, and wijlde beestis, and 
in bowis therof briddis of heuen lyuyden, 
ioand eche fleshe eete of it. Thus I saw3 
in si3t of myn heued, vpon my bed. And 
loo! the waker, and holy came doun from 
11 heuen, and criede strongli, and thus saith, 
Kitte 3e doun the tree, and bifore kitte 


"thei ben an pr.m.xK pr.m. ®® flouringe thinge x pr. m. 


4 Om. 1. ins sec. m. 
MNPQRSUX. 


Yr astronomieers EP. 
W the rootis KN sec. m. 


DANIEL. 


8 the whiche 1. 


IV. 1—II. 


ueils, for tho ben stronge ; and his rewme 
is an‘ everlastynge rewme, and his power 
is in generacioun and in to generacioun. 
I, Nabugodonosor, was restful in myn! 
hous, and flourynge in my paleis; Y si32 
a dreem, that made me aferd; and my 
thou3tis in my bed, and the siztis of myn 
heed disturbliden me. And a decre was3 
set forth bi me, that alle the wise men of 
Babiloyne schulden be brou3t in bifor my 
siz3t, and that thei schulden schewe to me 
the soilyng of the dreem. Than false dy-4 
uynours, astronomyens’, Caldeis, and bi- 
holderis of auteris entriden; and Y telde 
the dreem in the si3t of hem, and thei 
schewiden not to me the soilyng therof, 
til the felowe in office, Danyel, to whoms 
the name was Balthasar, bi the name of 
my God, entride in my si3t, which’ Danyel 
hath the spirit of hooli goddis in hym silf; 
and Y spak the dreem bifor hym. Baltha-6 
sar, prince of dyuynouris, whom Y knowe, 
that thou hast in thee the spirit of hooli 
goddis, and ech sacrament, ether preuytee, 
is not vnpossible to thee, telle thou to me 
the visiouns of my dreemes, whiche Y si3, 
and the soilyng of tho. This zs the visioun 7 
of myn heed in my bed. Y si3, and lo! a 
tree was in the myddis of erthe, and the 
hijnesse therof was ful greet. And thes 
tree was greet and strong, and the hei3the 
therof touchide heuene, and the bihold- 
ynge therof was ‘til tot the endis of al 
erthe. The leeuys therof were ful faire, 9 
and the fruyt therof was ful myche, and 
the mete of alle was in it; beestis and 
wielde beestis dwelliden vndur it, and 
briddis of the eir lyuyden iu the braunchis 
therof, and ech man ete of it. Thus Y si310 
in the visioun of myn heed, on my bed. 
And lo! a wakere, and" hooli man’ cam 
doun fro heuene, and he criede strongli, 11 
and seide thus, Hewe 3e doun the tree, 
and kitte 3e doun the bowis therof, and 
schake 3e awei the leeuys therof, and sca- 
tere 3e abrood the fruytis therof; beestis 


° and wicchis 4. P visyoun 4. 


tyutor, Yane. Y¥ Om. cEFeNIK 


Wsae—109. DANIEL. 637 


je the braunchis therof, and smyte out 
the leeues therof, and scatere 3e the 
fruytis therof; beestis that ben vndir it, 
flee thei, and briddis of the braunchis 
12therof. Nethelese suffre 3e buriownyng 
of rootis therof in the erthe, and be it 
bounden to in boond of yren and brasun, 
in erbis that ben with outforth, and be it 
dyed in dewe of heuen, and with wijlde 
beestis the parte therof in erbe of erthe. 
13 The herte therof be chaungid fro mans, 
and the herte of wijlde beest be 3ouen to 
it, and seuen tymes be chaungid vpon 
shym. As in sentence of wakers it is 
demyd, and the word of saintus and ax- 
ing, to lyuynge men knowen, for the hee3 
shal be Lord in rewme of men; and he 
shal 3eue it to whom euere he shal woln, 
and he shal ordeyne the mekist man 
isvpon it. This sweuen saw3 Y Nabugo- 
donosor, kyng. Therfore thou, Balthasar, 
hastily telle the interpretacioun4, for alle 
the wijse men of my rewme mown not 
saye out to me the solucioun; forsothe 
thou maist, for the spirit of the™ holy 
isgoddis is in thee. Thanne Danyel, to 
whom the name Balthasar, bygan with 
yn hym self stilly for to thenke, as oon 
hour, and his thou3tis to gydre trubliden 
hym. Forsothe the kyng answerynge, 
saith, Balthasar, the sweuen and inter- 
pretacioun of it truble not thee. Bal- 
thasar answerde and saide, My lord, the 
sweuen be to hem that haten thee, and 
the interpretacioun therof be to thin en- 
izmyes. The tree whom thou hast seen 
hee3 and stronge, whos hei3t stretchith 
vnto heuen, and the biholdyng therof vn- 
isto al erthe, and his most faire braunchis, 
and fruyte therof ful myche, and mete of 
alle thingus theryn, vndir it dwellynge 
beestis of the feelde, and in braunchis 
19 therof dwellynge briddis of heuen, thou 
art, kyng; that’ art magnyfied, and hast 
woxen stronge, and thi greetnesse wex- 
ide, and cam fully vnto heuen, and thi 


4 interpretacioun therof 4. 


fle awei, that be vndur it, and briddis fro . 
the bowis therof. Netheles suffre 3e the12 
seed of rootis” therof in erthe, and be he 
boondun with a boond of irun and of 
bras, in erbis that ben with out forth, and 
in the* deew of heuene be he died, and 
his part be with wielde beestis in the 
erbeY of erthe’. His herte be chaungid fro13 
mannus herte, and the herte of a wielde 
beeste be 30uun to hym, and seuene tymes 
be chaungid on hym. In the sentence of 14 
wakeris it is demed, and 7 is the word 
and axyng of seyntis, til lyuynge men 
knowe, that hi3 God is Lord in the rewme 
of men; and he schal 3yue it to whom 
euere he wole, and he schal ordeyne on it 
the mekeste man. Y, Nabugodonosor, the 15 
kyng, si3 this dreem. Therfor thou, Bal- 
thasar, telle hastili the interpretyng, for alle 
the wise men of my rewme moun not seie 
to me the soilyng; but thou maist, for the 
spirit of hooli goddis is in thee. Thanne te 
Danyel, to whom the name was Balthasar, 
began to thenke priueli with ynne hym 
silf, as in oon our, and hise thou3tis dis- 
turbliden hym. Forsothe the kyng an- 
sweride, and seide, Balthasar, the dreem 
and the interpretyng therof disturble not 
thee. Balthasar answeride, and seide, My 
lord, the dreem be to hem that haten thee, 
and the interpretyng therof be to thin 
enemyes. The tree which thou sijest hi317 
and strong, whos hei3the stretchith> ‘til to¢ 
heuene, and the biholdyng therof in to ech 
lond, and the faireste braunchis therof, and 18 
the fruyt therof ful myche, and the mete 
of alle in it, and beestis of the feeld dwell- 
ynge vndur it, and the briddis of the® eir 
dwellynge in the boowis therof, thou art, 19 
kyng, that art magnefied, and wexidist 
strong, and thi greetnesse encreesside, and 
cam ‘til to® heuene, and thi power in to 
the endis of al erthe. Sotheli that the20 
kyng si3 a wakere and hooli come doun 
fro heuene, and seie, Hewe 3e doun the 
tree, and distrie 3e it, netheles leeue 3e the 


rOm. 4GH. § thou G pr. m. K. 


xOm.1. Yerbesr. %*theerthe 1.  Ostrecchide con. ¢ til in tog. ynto 1 @ Om. K pr.m. 


® yvnto 1. 


638 


20 power in to termis of al erthe. Forsothe 
that the kyng saw3 the waker and hooly 
for to cum doun fro heuen, and for to 
saye, Kitte 3e doun the tree, and scatre 
3e' it, nethelese leue the buriownyng of 
rootys therof in erthe, and be he bounden 
in yren and brasse, and in erbis with out 
forth, and dew of heuen be it spreyn to 
gydre, and with wylde beestis be his 
mete, til seuen tymes be chaungid vpon 

eihym; this is the interpretacioun of sen- 
tence of the heei3zist, that came fully vpon 

gemy lord kyng. Thei shuln cast thee out 
fro men, and with beestus and wijlde 
beestis thi dwellyug shal be, and thou 
shalt ete hay as an oxe, bot and in dewe 
of heuen thou shalt be inshed, and se- 
uene tymes shuln be chaungid vpon 
thee, til thou wite, that the hey3 lord- 
shipith vpon rewme of men, and he 
3euith it to whom ever he shal wiln. 

23 Forsothe that he comaundide, that bur- 
iownyng of rootis therof, that is to saye, 
of the tree, shulde be left, thi rewme shal 
dwelle to thee, after that thon shalt 

24knowe power for to be heuenly. Wher- 
fore, kyng, my counseil plese to thee, 
and ajeinby thou thi synnes with almes 
deedis, and thi wickidnessis with mercies 
of pore men; perauenture God shal for- 

253eue thi trespasses. Alle these thingus 
g6camen on Nabugodonosor, kyng.. After 
the eende of twelue monethis in the halle 
270f Babiloyne he walkide; and the kyng 
answerde and saith, Wher this not Baby- 
loyne, the grete citee, whiche I beeldide 
in to the hous of rewme, in® mi3t of my 
strengthe, and in glorie of my fairnesse ? 

28 Therfore whann 3it the word was in the 
kyngus mouthe, a voice felle fro heuen, 
To thee it is said, kyng Nabugodonosor, 

29 Thi rewme passith fro thee, and fro men 
thei shuln caste out thee, and with beestis 
and wijlde beestis thi dwellyng shal be; 
thou shalt ete hay as an oxe, and seuen 
tymes shuln be chaungid vpon thee, til 


t Om, acu. 


f ouer the c. ouer EFGINPRsUX. in the H. in Q. 


DANIEL. 


IV. 20——29. 


seed of rootis therof in erthe, and be he 
boundun with .irun and bras, in erbis 
with out forth, and be he bispreynt with 
the deew of heuene, and his mete be with 
wielde beestis, til seuene tymes be chaung- 
id on hym; this is the interpretyng of21 
the sentence of the hij3este, which sentence 
is comun on my lord, the kyng. Thei2ze 
schulen caste thee out fro men, and thi 


- dwellyng schal be with beestys and wielde 


beestis, and thou schalt ete hey, as an oxe 
doith, but also thou schalt be bisched with 
the dew of heuene, also seuene tymes schu- 
len be chaungid on thee, til thou knowe, 
that hi3 God is Lord ‘on the’ rewme® of 
men, and 3yueth it to whom euer he wole. 
Forsothe that he comaundide, that the 23 
seed of rootis therof, that is, of the tree, 
schulde be left, thi rewme schal dwelle to 
thee, aftir that thou knowist that the 
power is of henene. Wherfor, kyng, my 2 
counsel plese thee, and a3enbie thi synnes 
with almesdedis, and a3enbie thi wickid- 
nessis with mercies of pore men; in hap 
God schal for3yue thi trespassis. Alle 2s 
these thingis camen on Nabugodonosor, 
the’ kyng. After the ende of twelue2s 
monethis he walkide in the halle of 
Babiloyne; and the kyng answeride, and 27 
seide, Whether this is not Babiloyne, the 
greet citee, which Y bildide in to the hous 
of rewme, in the mi3t of my strengthe, 
and in the glorie of my fairnesse? Whanne zs 
the word was 3it in the mouth of the 
kyng, a vois felle doun fro heuene, Nabu- 
godonosor, kyng, it is seid to thee, Thi 
rewme is passid fro thee, and thei schulen 29 
caste thee out fro men, and thi dwellyng 
schal be with beestis and wielde beestis ; 
thou schalt ete hey, as an oxe dotth, and 
seuene tymes schulen be chaungid on thee, 
til thou knowe, that hi3 God is Lord in 
the rewme of men, and 3yueth it to whom 
euere he wole. In the same our the word 30 
was fillid' on Nabugodonosor, and he was 
cast out fro men, and he eet hey, as an 


wand xk. 


frewmes K. 4Om.n. 


i fulfillid n sec. m. 


IV. 30—V. 2. 


thou wite, that the hey3 lordshipith in 
rewme? of men, and he 3euith it to whom 
soeuer he shal woln. In the same houre 
the word was fulfillid vp on Nabugodo- 
‘nosor, and of men he is cast out, and he 
eete hay as an oxe, and with dewe of 
heuen his body was enfourmed, or de- 
foulid, til his heris wexiden in to licke- 
nesse of eglis, and his naylis as naylis,: 
3107 clees, of briddis. Therfore after the 
eend of days, Y, Nabugodonosor, reyside 
myn ee3en to heuen, and my wit is 3olden 
to me; and’I blesside to the hee3ist, and 
I heriede, and glorifiede the lyuynge in 
to with outen eende; for his power euer- 
lastynge power, and the rewme of hym 
s2in to generacioun and generacioun. And 
alle dwellers of erthe anentis him ben 
rettid in to noujt; forsothe after his 
wille he shal do, as wele in vertues of 
heuen, as in dwellers of erthe, and there. 
is not, that shal a3ein stonde his hond, 
and shal saye to hym, Whi didist thou 
-33thisY ? That® tyme my wit tourned a3ein: 
to me, and I came fully to the honour 
of my kingdam, and fairnesse, and my 
figure, o7 shap, turnyde a3ein to me; and 
my best men and my magestratis a3ein 
sou3ten me, and I am ordeyned in my 
kingdam, and my magnyfience*, or grete- 
34 nesse, is addid to me.’ Now therfore Y 
Nahugodonosor herie,'and magnyfie theY 
kyng of heuen; for alle his werkis ben 
trewe, and his wayes domes; and he 
may make meke, o7 /owe, men goynge 
in pryde. 


CAP. V. 


1 Balthasar, kyng, made a grete fest to 
his best men a thousand, and eche man 

2dranke after his age. Forsothe the kyng 
now drunken comaundide, that the golden 
vessels and sylueren shulden be brou3t 
forth, whiche Nabugodonosor, his fadre, 
bare out of the temple that was in Jeru- 
salem, that the kyng, and his best men, 

w In that acH. 


Yrewmes «4. Y Om, 4GH. 


DANIEL. 


639 


oxe doith, and his bodi was colouryd with 
the deew of heuene, til hise heeris wexiden 
at the licnesse of eglis, and hise nailis as 
the nailis of: briddis. 
ende of daies, Y*, Nabugodonosor, reiside 
myn i3en to heuene, and my wit was 
joldun to me; and Y blesside the hijeste, 
and Y heriede, and glorifiede hym_ that 
lyueth with outen ende; for whi his 
power zs euerlastynge power, and his 
rewme 7s in generacioun and in to gene- 


racioun. And alle the dwelleris of ertheze 


ben arettid in to no3t at hym; for.bi his 
wille he doith, bothe in the vertues of 
heuene, and in the dwelleris of erthe, and 
noon is, that a3enstondith his hond, and 


Therfor after the3i 


-® It is doutid 


of sum men, 
wher this Na- 
bngodonosor is 
sanyd, for this 
that Is seid of 
him in [the 6] 
xiiij. c°. of 
Ysaie, Thi 
pride is drawun 
doun to hellis, 
and eft, Thou 
schalt be draw- 
un doun to 
helle, to the 
depthe of the 
lake, and many 
thingis that 
hen seid there 
[of him 6] of 
whiche ‘it 
semeth to sum 
men [sum men 
trowen G], that 
he is dampned; 
but it is to seie 
that heis saned, 
for the scrip- 
ture endith the 


seith to hym, Whi didist thou so? In 33stori of him in 


that tyme my wit turnede a3en to me, and 
Y cam fulli to the onour and fairnesse of 
my rewme, and my figure turnede a3en to 
me; and my beste men and my magistratis 
sou3ten me, and Y was set.in my rewme, 
and .my greet doyng was encreessid grettir 
to me. 
herie, and magnefie, and glorifie the kyng 
of heuene; for alle hise werkis ben trewe, 
and alle his weies ben domes; and he may 
make* ineke hem that goon in pride. 


CAP. V. 


Now therfor Y Nabugodonosor 34 


his meking, and 
in the ‘scrip- 
ture [feithful 
Gaqu] knou- 
leching of 
Goddis vertu, 
as it is open 
here. cGau. 
Which thing 
is not doon in 
scripture, no 
but of hem that 
ben in the stat 
of salnacioun. 
Also the decree 
in xxiii. cause, 
in v. questioun, 
ce’, Nabugodo- 
nosor, seith 
‘thus (this au]. 
To the con- 
trarie in Ysaie 
it is to seie, 
that it is seid 
bi manassing, 
with a con- 
dicioun vndur- 
stondun, that 
is, if he dide 
not penaunce ; 
netheles for he 
dide penaunce, 
therfor he 3ede 
not doun [inv] 
to the helle of 
dampned men, 
as in xxxviij. 
c°. of Ysaie, 


Balthasar, the kyng, made a greet feeste1 the protete 


to hise beste men a thousynde, and ech 
man drank aftir his age. 
kyng thanne drunkun comaundide, that 
the goldun and siluerne vessels schulden 
be brou3t forth, whiche Nabngodonosor, 
his fadir, hadde borun out of the temple 
that was in Jerusalem, that the kyng, and 


x magnificence 4. ¥ and glorifie the K pr. m. 


k Om. vu. 


Ysaie seide to 
Ezechie, Dis- 


Forsothe thee Pes thin hows, 


for thou schalt 
die, and schalt 
not lyue ; nes 
theles for he 
dide penaunse, 
therfor the sen- 
tense was 
chaungid, and 
fiftene 3eer 
weren addid 

to his liyf. Lire 
here. cau. 


640 


and wyues, and his* concubynes, or se- 
acundarie wyues, shulden drynke. Thei 
drunken wijne, and herieden her goddis 
of gold, and of syluer, and of brasse, and 
sof yren, and of tree, and of stoon. In the 
same houre there apeeriden fyngris, as of 
hond of a man, writynge ajeins the can- 
dilstike, in the ouermer part of the walle 
of the kyngis halle; and the kyng bi- 
helde the fyngris of the hond wrijtynge. 
6Thanne the face of the kyng was 
chaungid to gydre, and his thou3tis ‘al 
to-trublidenY hym; and the ioyntures of 
his reynys weren vnbounden, and his 
knees weren hurtlid to gydre at hem- 
7self. And so the kyng cried strongly, 
that thei shulden leede yn witches, or 
wijs men, Caldeis, and dyuynours by 
sterris. And the kyng spekyng afer 
saith to the wijs men of Babiloyne, Who 
euere shal reede this wrytyng, and shal 
make the interpretacioun therof knowen 
to me, shal be clothid with purpre, and 
shal haue a golden bee in the nek, and 
sshal be the thrid in my rewme. Thann 
alle wijse men of the kyng gon yn my3ten 
not reede the scripture, uether shewe to 
9the kyng interpretacioun therof. Wherof 
kyng Balthasar is trublid to gydre ynow3, 
and his cheere is chaungid, bot and his? best 
10men weren trublid to gydre. Forsothe 
the queen for the thing that bifelle to 
the kyng, and best men of hym, wente to 
the hous of feest; and for spekynge saith, 
Kyng, in to with outen eende lyue thou. 
Thi thou3tis trublen thee not, nether thi 
ilface be chaungid. A man is in thi 
rewme, that hath in hym the spirit of 
holi goddis, and in the days of thi fadir 
science and wisdam ben founden in hym; 
for whi and kyng Nabugodonosor, thi 
fadre, ordeynyde hym prince of witchis, 
enchauntris, of Caldeis, and of dyuynours 
by sterris; sotheli, thou kyng, thi fadir, 
izfor the more spirit, and more prudent, 
and vndirstondynge, and interpretacioun 


x Om. a. 


Tand hise a prim. ™ and Ais is. 


DANIEL. 


Y trubliden «4. 


2 astronomiers EPY. astronomers 8. 


Vv. 3-12. 


hise beste men, hise! wyues, and™ concu- 
byns schulden drynke in tho vessels. 
Thanne the goldun vessels and siluerne,s 
whiche he hadde borun out of the temple 
that was in Jerusalem, weren brou3t forth; 
and the kyng, and hise beste men, and 
hise wyues, and concubyns, drunken in 
tho vessels. Thei drunken wyn, and heri-4 
eden her goddis of gold, and of siluer, of 
bras, and of irun, and of tree, and of stoon. 
In the same our fyngris apperiden, as ofs 
the hond of a man, writynge a3ens the 
candilstike, in the pleyn part cof the wal 
of the kyngis halle; and the kyng bihelde 
the fyngris of the hond writynge. Thannes 
the face of the kyng was chaungid, and 
hise thou3tis disturbliden hym; and the 
ioyncturis of hise reynes weren loosid, and 
hise knces weren hurtlid to hem silf to- 
gidere. Therfor the kyng criede strongli,7 
that thei schulden brynge yn astrono- 
myens", Caldeis, and®° dyuynouris bi lok- 
yng of auteris. And the kyng spak, and 
seide to the wise men of Babiloyne, Who 
euer redith this scripture, and makith 
opyn the interpretyng therof to me, schal 
be clothid in purpur; and he schal haue 
a goldun bie in the necke, and he schal 
be the thridde in my rewme. Thannes 
alle the wise men of the kyng entriden, 
and mi3ten uot rede the scripture, nether 
schewe to the kyng the interpretyng 
therof. Wherfor kyng Balthasar was dis-9 
turblid ynow, and his cheer was chaungid, 
but also hise beste men weren disturblid. 
Forsothe the queen entride in to the hous 10 
of feeste, for the thing that hadde bifeld 
to the king, and beste men; and sche 
spak, and seide, Kyng, lyue thou with- 
outen ende. Thi thou3tis disturble not 
thee, and thi face be not chaungid. A mann 
is in thi rewme, that hath the spirit of 
hooli goddis in hym silf, and in the daies 
of thi fadir kunnyng and wisdom weren 
foundun in hym; for whi and Nabugodo- 
nosor, thi fadir, made him prince of astro- 


zOm. «4. 


°Om. 1. 


V. 13——21. 


of sweuens, and shewyng of pryuy thi ngus, 
and vndoyng of bounden thingus ben 
founden in hym, this is in Danyel, to 
whom the kyng 3ane name Balthasar. 
Now therfore Danyel be clepid, and he 
i3Shal telle the interpretacioun. Therfore 
Danyel is brou3t yn byfore the kyng. 
To whom the forsaid king saith, Thou 
art Danyel of ‘the sonys of caytiftee* of 
Jude, whom my fadre, kyng, ledde to fro 
14Jude? Y herde of thee, for thou hast in 
thee the spirit of goddis, and science, and 
vndirstondynge, and wisdam gretter ben 
1sfounden in thee. And now wijse men, 
witches, entreden in my si3t, for to reede 
this writyng, and for to shew to me the 
interpretacioun therof; and thei mi3ten 
not saye out to me the wit of this word. 


is Forsothe I herde of thee, that thou mayst_ 


interprete derke thingis, and vnbynde 
bounden thingus ; therfore 3if thou maist 
reede the wrijtyng, and shewe to me 
the? interpretacioun therof, thou shalt be 
clothid with purpre, and thou shalt have 
a golden bee aboute thi nek, and thou 
shalt be the thridde prince in my rewme. 
17To whiche thingus Danye] answerynge 
saith byfore the kyng, Thi 3iftis be to 
thee, and 3eue thou to an other the 3iftus 
of thin hous; forsothe, kyng, I shal reede 
to thee the wrytyng, and I shal shewe 
18interpretacioun therof to thee, thou 
kyng. The hee3ist God 3aue rewme, and 
magnyficence, glorie, and honour to Na- 
!9bugodonosor, thi fadir. And for thee 
magnificence whiche he 3aue to hym alle 
peplis, lynagis, and tungis, trembliden 
and dredden hym; he slow; whom he 
wolde, and whom he wolde he smote, 
and whom he wolde he enhaunside, and 
20whom he wolde he meekide. Forsothe 
whan his herte was reyside vp, and his 
spirit stablid to pride, he was putt doun 
21 of ¢ the seete of his rewme; and the glo- 
rie of hym was taken awey, and he was 


a the caitiftee of the sones «4. 


° astronomieers EP. astronomers 8. 
« astronomiers Ep. tthe whiche 1. 


VOL. III. 


b Om, «4. 


P channteris E. 
uA! cEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


4N 


DANIEL. 641 


nomyens®, of enchaunteris?, of Caldeis, and 
of dyuynouris bi lokyng on auteris; so- 
theli thi fadir, thou kyng, dide this; for 12 
more spirit, and more prudent, and vndur- 
stondyng, and interpretyng of dremes, and 
schewyng of priuytees, and assoilyng of 
boundun thingis weren foundun in hym, 
that is, in Danyel, to whom the kyng put- 
tide the? name Balthasar. Now therfor 
Daniel be clepid, and he schal telle the 
interpretyng. Therfor Daniel was brou3t 
in bifor the kyng. To whom the forseid 
kyng seide, Art thou Danyel, of the sones 13 
of caitifte’ of Juda, whom my fader, the 
kyng, brou3te fro Jndee? Y haue herd of 14 
thee, that thou hast in thee the spirit of 
goddis, and more kunnyng, and vndur- 
stondyng, and wisdom be foundun in thee. 
And now wise men, astronomyens’, en-15 
triden in my si3t, to rede this scripture, 
and to schewe to me the interpretyng 
therof; and thei my3ten not seie to me 
the vndurstondyng of this word. Certis 16 
Y haue herde of thee, that thou maist 
interprete derk thingis, and vnbynde 
boundun thingis; therfor if thou maist 
rede the scripture, and schewe to me the 
interpretyng therof, thou schalt be clothid 
in purpur, and thou schalt haue a goldun 
bie aboute thi necke, and thou schalt be 
the thridde prince in my rewme. To17 
whichet thingis Danyel answeride, and 
seide bifore the kyng, Thi 3iftis be to 
thee, and 3yue thou to another man the 
3iftis of thin hous; forsothe, kyng, Y schal 
rede the scripture to thee, and Y schal 
schewe to thee the interpretyng therof. 
O!" thou kyng, hizeste God 3af rewme, '8 
and greet worschipe, and glorie, and 
onour, to Nabugodonosor, thi fadir. And! 
for greet worschip which he hadde 3oue © 
to thilke Nabugodonosor, alle puplis, ly- 
nagis, and langagis, trembliden and dred- 
den hym; he’ killide whiche he wolde, 
and he smoot whiche he wolde, and he 


e¢Om. cn. 4 fro 4. 


qOm.eENnr. * the caitiftee CEFGIIKMNQRSUX, 
v and he n. 


642 


cast out of sones of men; bot and the 
herte of hym was putt with beestis, and 
with feeld assis his dwellynge was; and 
he eete hay as an oxe, and with dewe of 
heuen his body was fourmed*, or de- 
foulid, til he knew that the hee3ist hath 
power in the rewme of men, and whom 
euere he shal wole, he shal reyse on it. 
22 Forsothe thou, Balthasar, his sone, mek- 
edist not thin herte, whann thou wistist 
23 alle these thingus; bot a3einus the Lord 
of heuen thou art reysid vp, and the 
vessels of his hous ben brou3t to byfore 
thee, and thou, and thi best men, and thi 
wyues, and thi concubynes han drunke 
wijne in hem‘; and thou heriedist goddis 
of syluer, and of gold, and of brasse, aud 
of yren, and of tree, and of stoon, whiche 
-seen not, nether heeren, nether feelen ; 
forsothe thou glorifiedist not God, that 
hath thi wynd, or spirit, in his hond, 
2aand alle thi weies. Therfore fro hym the 
fyngre of an€ hond is sente, whiche wrote 
25 this thing that is writen. Forsothe this 
is the wrytyng that is ordeyned, Mane, 
26Techel, Phares. And this interpreta- 
cioun of the word. Mane, God hath 
noumbride thi rewme, and fulfillid it; 
27 Techel, it is hangid in a balaunce, and 
28is founden hauynge lesse; Phares, thi 
kyngdain is departid, and is 30uen to 
29 Medis and to Persis. Thanne, the kyng 
comaundynge, Danyel is clothid with pur- 
pre, and a gold bee is 3onen aboute in 
his nek; and it is prechid of hym, that 
he hadde power, he the thrid in his 
sorewme. The same ni3t Balthasar, kyng 
31 Caldeyi, is slayn; and Darius of Mede 
was successour in the rewme, hauynge 
two and sixti jeeris. 


© deformed ¢ see.m.u. f Om. a. & the 4. 


¥ to CEFGHKMNPQRSUX,. 
> Om. nN, 


DANIEL. 


h Om. acu. 


x Om. CEFGHMNPQRUX. 


V. 22—31. 


enhaunside whiche he wolde, and he made 
low which he wolde. Forsothe whannezo 
his herte was reisid, and his spirit was 
maad obstynat in” pride, he was put doun 
of the seete of his rewme ; and his glorie2: 
was takun awei, and he was cast out fro 
the sones of men; but also his herte was 
set with beestis, and his dwellyng was 
with wielde assis ; also he eet hei as an 
oxe doith, and his bodi was colourid with 
the deew of heuene, til he knewe, that 
the hijeste hath power in the rewme of 
men, and he schal reise on it whom euer 
he wole. And thon, Balthasar, the sone 22 
of hym, mekidest not thin herte, whanne 
thou knewist alle these thingis; but thou 23 
were reisid ajens the Lord of heuene, 
and the vessels of his hous weren brou3t 
bifore thee, and thou, and thi beste men, 
and thi wyues, and thi concubyns, drunk- 
en wyn in tho vessels ; and thou heriedist 
goddis of siluer, and of gold, and of bras, 
and of irun, and of tree, and of stoon, that 
seen not, nether heren, nether feelen; cer- 
tis thou glorifiedist not God, that hath 
thi blast, and alle thi weies in his hond. 
Therfor the fyngur of the* hond was sent 24 
of hym, which hond wroot this thing that 
is writun. Sotheli this is the scriptures 
which is discryued, Mane, Techel, Phares. 
And this is the interpretyng of the word. 26 
Mane, God hath noumbrid thi rewme, and 
hath fillid it; Techel, thou art weied in 27 
a balaunce, and thou art foundun hauynge 
lesse ; Phares, thi rewme is departid, and 23 
is 3ouun to Medeis and Perseis’. Thanne, 29 
for the kyng comaundide, Daniel was 
clothid in purpur, and a goldun bie was 
j3ouun aboute in*. his necke; and it was 
prechid of hym, that he hadde power, and 
was the thridde in the rewme. In the3o0 
same ni3t Balthasar, the kyng of Caldeis, 
was slayn; and Daryus.of Medei® was3zi 
successour in’ to the rewme, and he was 
two and sixti 3eer eld. 


i of Caldeis ac see. m. Caldeis 1. 


Y to Perseis x. 2 Om. npsx. ® Medeis 1. 


VI. 1106. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Jt pleside to Darius, and he ordeynyde 
on the rewme satraps an hundrid and 
twenti, that thei weren in al his rewme; 

2and on hem three princis, of whom Da- 
nyel was oon; that the satraps shulden 
3elde resoun to hem, and the kyng shulde 

3not suffre eny disese. Therfore Danyel 
overcame alle princis and satraps, for the 
4more spirit of God was in hym. For- 
sothe the kyng thou3te for to ordeyne 
hym on al the rewme. Wherfore princes 
and satraps sou3ten for to fynde occa- 
sioun to Danyel, of syde of the kyng; 
and thei mi3ten fynde no cause and sus- 
picioun, for that that he was feithful, 
and eche blame and suspicioun was not 
sfounden in hym. 
saiden, We shuln not fynde to this 
Danyel eny occasioun, no bot perauen- 
6ture in the lawe of his God. Thanne 
princes and satraps falsli tysiden, or coun- 
ceyliden, to the kyng, and thus spaken 
to hym, Darye, kyng, in to with outen 
zeende lyue thou. Alle princes of thi 
rewme, and magestratis, and satrapis, 
senatours, and domysmen, maden a con- 
ceyle, that decree, o7 dom, of the em- 
perour go out,.and maundement, that 
eche man that shal axe eny axinge of 
eny god and man, vnto thritty days, no 
bot of thee, kyng, be* sent in to the lake 
sof lyouns. And so now, kyng, conferme 
thou the sentence, and write the decree, 
that it be not chaungid whiche is or- 
deynyd of Medis and Persis, nether be 
9it leeful to eny man for to breke. For- 
sothe kyng Darius putte forth the decree, 
1oand ordeynyde. Whiche thing whanne 
Danyel had founden, that is to saye, the 
lawe ordeynyd, he wente in to his hous; 
and the wyndowis opnyd in his soupyng 
place a3einus Jerusalem, three tymes in 
the day he bowide his knees, and wir- 
shipide, and knawelichide byfore his God, 


DANIEL. 


Therfore thilk men 


643 


Car. Vi. 


It pleside Darius, and he ordeynede sixe 1 
score duykis over the rewme, that thei 
schulden be in al his rewme. And ouere 
hem he ordeynede thre princes, of whiche 
Danyel was oon; that the duykis schulden 
jelde resoun to hem, and that the kyng 
schulde not suffre ony disese. Therfors 
Danyel ouercam alle the princes and 
duikis, for more spirit of God was in 
hym. Certis the kyng thou3te to ordeyne4 
hym on al the rewme. Wherfor princes 
and duikis® sou3ten to fynde occasioun to 
Danyel, of the side of the kyng; and thei © 
mi3ten fynde no cause and suspicioun, for 
he was feithful, and no blame and suspi- 
cioun was foundun in hym. Therfor thos 
men seiden, We schulen not fynde ony 
occasioun to this Danyel, no but in hap 
in the lawe of his God. Thanne thee 
princes and duykis’ maden fals sugges- 
tioun to the kyng, and spaken thus to 
hym, Kyng Darius, lyne thou with onten 
ende. Alle the princes of thi rewme, and7 
magistratis, and duykis, senatours, and 
lugis, han maad a counsel, that a decree 
and comaundement of the emperour go 
ont, that ech man that axith ony axyng 
of what euer god and man, til to thretti 
daies, no but of thee, thou kyng, he be 
sent in to the lake of liouns. Now® ther-s 
for, kyng, conferme thou the sentence, and 
write thou the decree, that this that is 
ordeyned of Medeis and Perseis be not 
chaungid, nethir be it leueful to ony man 
to breke. Forsothe Darius, the kyng, set-9 
tide forth, and confermyde the decree. And 10 
whanne Danyel hadde founde this thing, 
that is, the lawe ordeyned, he entride in 
to his hous; and the while the wyndows 
weren open in his soler ajens Jerusalem, in 
thre tymes in the dai he bowide hise 
knees, and worschipide, and knoulechide 
bifore his God, as he was wont to do bifore. 
Therfor tho men enqueriden ful bisili, and 11 


k be he «. 


¢ dukis, ether prefectis y. 


4 duykis, ether prefectis EFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


e And now n. f that thing 1. 


4N 2 


644 


i1as he was wonte for to do byfore. Ther- 
fore tho men more bysily enquerynge 
founden Danyel preyinge, aud bisechynge 
izhis God. And thei cummynge to spaken 
to the kyng on! the maundement, Kyng, 
wher thou ordeynidist not, that eche man 
whiche preyde eny of goddis and men, 
vnto thritti days, no bot thee, kyng, he 
shulde be sent in to the lake of lyouns ? 
To whom the kyng answerynge saith, 
The word is trewe, vp the decree of 
Medis and Persis, whiche it™ is not leeful 
is for to breeke. Thanue thei answerynge 
saiden bifore the kyng, Danyel, of the 
sones of caytifte of Judee, reckide not of 
thi lawe, and of the" maundement, whiche 
thou ordeynedist®, bot three tymes by 
14 day he preyeth in his bisechynge. Whiche 
word whan the kyng hadde herd, he was 
sorewful ynew3, and for Danyel sette the 
herte, that he shulde delyuere hym; and 
vnto goynge doun of the sunne he tra- 
isueilide for to delyuere hym. Forsothe 
tho men vndirstondynge the kyng, saiden 
to hym, Wite thou, kyng, for the lawe 
of Medis and Persis is, that eche decree 
whiche the kyng ordeyneth, be not leeful 
isfor to be chaungid. Thanne the kyng 
comaundide, and thei ledden to Danyel, 
and senten hym into the lake of lyouns. 
And the kyng sayde to Danyel, Thi God, 
whom thou wirshipidist euermore, he shal 
17delyuere thee. And a stoon is bron3t to, 
and is putt on the mouthe of the lake, 
whiche the kyng markide, ov sealide, on 
eche syde with his reng, and with reng 
of his best men, lest eny thing were don 
isa3einus Danyel. And the kyng wente 
awey in to his hous, and slepte vnsoupid, 
and metis be not brou3t to byfore hym; 
more ouer and sleep wente awey fro hym. 
‘9 Thanne the kyng first in the mornyng 
rysynge hastily, wente to the lake of 
20lyouns ; and he nei3inge to the lake, with 
a wepynge voice criede vn to Danyel, and 
spake to hym, Danyel, the seruaunt of 


1Om. x. ™ Om. 4. 


DANIEL. 


® thi w. 


VI. 11—20. 


founden Danyel preiynge, and bisechynge 
his God. And thei neiz3iden and spaken 12 
to the kyng of the comaundement, Kyng, 
whether thou ordeynedist not,that ech man 
that axide ony of goddis and of men, til 
to thretti daies, no but thee, thou kyng, 
he schulde be sent in to the lake of liouns? 
To whicheS men the kyng answeride, and 
seide, The word is soth, bi the decree of 
Medeis and! Perseis, which it is not leue- 
ful to breke. Thanne thei answeriden, 13 
and seiden bifore the kyng, Danyel, of the 
sones of caitifte of Juda, reckide not of 
thi lawe, and of the comaundement, which 
thou ordeynedist, but thre tymes bi the 
dai he preieth in his bisechyng. Andis 
whanne the kyng hadde herd this word, 
he was sori ynow, and he settide the herte 
for Danyel, for to doi delyuere hym; and 
til to the goyng doun of the sunne he tra- 
uelide for to do* delyuere hym. But thois 
men vndurstoden the kyng, and seiden to 
hym, Wite thou, kyng, that it is the lawe 
of Medeis and of Perseis, that it is not 
leueful that ony decree be chaungid, which 16 
the kyng ordeyneth. Thanne the kyng 
comaundide, aud thei brou3ten Danyel, 
and senten hym in to the lake of liouns. 
And the kyng seide to Danyel, Thi God, 
whom thou worschipist euere, he schal 
delyuere thee. And o stoon was brou3t, 17 
and was put on the mouth of the lake, 
which the kyng aselide with his ryng, 
and with the ryng of hise beste men, lest 
ony thing were don aj3ens Danyel. Thanne is 
the kyng 3ede in to his hous, and slepte 
with out soper, and metis weren not 
brou3te bifore hym; ferthermore and sleep 
3ede awei fro hym. Thanne the kyng roos 19 
in the firste morewtid, and 3ede hastili to 
the lake of liouns; and he nei3ide to the 20 
lake, and criede on Danyel with wepynge 
vois, and spak to hym, Danyel, the ser- 
uaunt of God lyuynge, gessist thou, whe- 
ther thi God, whom thon seruest euere, 
miz3te delyuere thee fro liouns!? Anda2i 


° ordeynest 4. 


& the whiche 1. and of is. i Om. acrxurs. k Om. cerKars. ! the liouns Nn. 


VI. 21-—VII. I. 


the? lyuynge God, gessist thou, wher thi 
God, to whom thou seruist euermore, mi3t 
21not delyuere thee fro lyouns? And Da- 
nyel answerynge to the kyng saith, Kyng, 
22in to with outen eende lyue thon. My 
God sente his aungel, and closide to 
gydre the mouthes of lyouns, and thei 
anoyeden not me%, for byfore hym ri3t- 


wysnesse is founden in me; bot and by-~ 


23 fore thee", kyng, Y did no trespas. Thann 
the kyng gretely ioyede vpon hym, and 
comaundide Danyel for to be led out of 
the lake. And Danyel was led out of the 
lake, and noon hirtyng is founden in hym, 

24for he bileeuyde to his God. Forsothe the 
kyng comaundynge, thei that accusiden 
Danyel ben brou3t forth, and in to the 
lake of lyouns ben sent, thei, and the 


sonnys of hem, and the wyues of hem; 


and thei camen not fully vn to the 
pament of the lake, tyl the lyouns ra- 
uyshiden hem, and braken to gydre alle 
25her bonys. Than Darius, kyng, wrote 
to alle peplis, lynagis*, and langagis, 
dwellynge in al erthe, Pees be multiplied 
asto 30u. Therfore a decre is ordeynide 
of me, that in alle the empire and my 
rewmme thei tremble, and drede the God 
of Danyel; forsothe he is lyuynge God, 
and euerlastinge into worldis, and his 
rewme shal not be distruyed, and the 
power of hym vnto with outen eende. 
27 He is delyuerer' and sauer, doynge signe 
and merueilis in heuen and in erthe, 
whiche delyuerde Danyel fro the lake 
280f lyouns. Forsothe Danyel duryde vnto 
the kyngdam of Darius, and to" the 
kyngdam of Cyrus of Persis. 


CAP. VII. 


1 In the first 3eer of Balthasar, kyng of 
Babyloyne, Danyel saw3 a swenen. For- 
sothe the visioun of his hed in his couche, 
and sweuen’, he wrytynge comprehendide 
in short word; and in sum, or itil wordis, 


POm.4cH. GItomes. "the kK. Ssynagogis 4. 
sweuen G sec. 7m. 
mMtheit. andtho1 Ovntor. P Om. ENP. 


dreme CFYGHIKMNQRSUX, 


DANIEL. 


645 


Danyel answeride the kyng, and seide, 
King, lyue thou with outen ende. My22 
God sente his aungel, and closide togidere 
the mouthis of liouns, and tho™ noieden 
not me, for ri3tfulnesse is foundun in me 
bifore hym ; but also, thou kyng, Y dide 
no trespas bifore thee. Thanne the kyng23 
made ioie greetli on hym, and comaundide 
Danyel to be led out of the lake: And 
Danyel was led out of the lake, and noon 
hirtyng was foundun in hym, for he bi- 
leuede to his God. Forsothe the kyng 24 
comaundide, tho" men, that accusiden 
Danyel, weren brou3t, and weren sent in 
to the lake of liouns, thei, and the sones 
of hem, and the wyues of hem; and thei 
camen not ‘til to° the pawment of the lake, 
til the liouns rauyschiden hem, and al to- 
braken alle? the boonys of hem. Thannegs 
Darius, the kyng, wroot to alle puplis, 
lynagis, and langagis, dwellynge in al erthe, 
Pees be multiplied to 30u. Therfor a de-26 
cree is ordeyned of me, that in al myn 
empire and rewme men tremble, and drede 
the God of Danyel; for he is God lyuynge, 
and euerlastynge in to worldis, and his 
rewme schal not be distried, and his power 
as ‘til in tod with outen ende. He is dely-27 
uerer and sauyour, makynge myraclis and 
merueils in henene and in erthe, which 
delyuerede Danyel fro the lake of liouns, 
Certis Danyel dwellide stabli ‘til to™ the 2s 
rewme of Darius, and ‘til to" the rewme 
of Sirus of Persey. 


CAP. VII. 


In the firste 3eer of Balthasar*, kyng1 
of Babiloyne, Danyel si3 a swenene®. For- 
sothe he wrcot the visioun of his hed in 
his bed, and the dreem, and compre- 
hendide in schort word; and he touchide 
v whenne x. the 


t the delyuerer 4. U Om. 4. 


atilto K prom. ‘vntor. 8 sweuene, ether a 


* In the firste 
3eer of Baltha- 
sar; bi this it 
is open, that 
Danyel settith 
not the vi- 
siouns bi the 
ordre of stori, 
ether of tyme 
in whiche tho 
weren maad 

to Danyel ; for 
whi tho thingis 
that ben writun 
in the chapitre 
bifor goinge, 
weren aftir this 
visioun, for tho 
Wweren maad 
yndur Darius, 
that was suc- 
cessonr of Bal. 
thasar, as it is 
seid in [the 6] 
v. chapitre. 
The resoun of 
this ordre is 
this, for this 
visionn is 
clenly of pro- 
fecie, and ther - 
for it is set 
with the vi- 
siouns suynge, 
that ben of the 
same condi- 
cioun ; but the 
visiouns bifor 
goige ben 
ether of pure 
stori, ether in 
parti of pro- 
fesie, and in 
parti of stori. 
Another resoun 
is this, for the 
visiouns bifor . 
goinge per- 
teynen to the 
firste comyng 
of Crist, but 
this visioun, 
with tho that 
suen, perteynen 
to the secounde 
comynge of 
Crist, that is 
to the general 
doom. Lire 
here. CGQu. 


646 


2touchynge saith, Y saw3 in my visioun 
by ni3t, and loo! foure wyndis of heuen 
3fou3ten in the mydil see. And foure 
greet beestis stieden vp of the se, dyuerse 
abytwixe hem self. The first as a lyon- 
esse, and hadde weengis of an egle. Y 
byheelde til hir weengis weren drawen 
of, and she is taken vp of the erthe, and 
she stode on the feet as a man, and the 
sherte of it is 3ouen to it. And loo! an 
other beest, lije to a bere in party, stode, 
and three ordris weren in mouth therof, 
and in teeth therof three princis. And 
thus thei saiden to it, Ryse thou, ete ful 
smanye fleshis. After these thingus Y by- 
heelde, and loo! an other as a pard, and 
hadde vp on it foure weengis of “ a bridd 
on it, and foure hedis weren in the beest, 
zand power is 3o0uen to it. After these 
thingus Y byheelde in a visioun of ni3t, 
and loo! the fourthe beest, dreedful, and 
wonderful, and ful stronge. It hadde 
greet yren teeth, etynge and brekynge 
to gydre, and defoulynge other thingus 
with his feet; forsothe it was vnlije to 
other beestis, whiche Y saw3 byfore it, 
sand it hadde ten hornys. Y biheelde the 
hornys, and loo! an other litil horn is 
sprungen vp of the mydil of hem, and 
three of the first horns:-ben drawen out 
fro the face therof; and loo! eezen as 
eejen of a man weren in this horn, and 
9a mouth spekynge greet thingus. Y by- 
helde, til trones weren sette, and the 
olde of days sat; his clothinge white as 
snowe, and the heris of his hed as cleen 
wolle, his trone of flawme of fijr, the 
1oWhelis of hym fijr tendid. <A flode of 
fijr and fast rennynge wente out fro his 
face, a thousand of thousandis mynis- 
triden to hym, and ten thousand sithis 
an hundred thousand stoden ni3 to hym; 
iithe dom sate, and bokis ben opnyd. Y 
byheelde for the voice of grete wordis, 
whiche the ylk horn spake; and I saw3, 
for the beest was slayn, and the body 
therof peryshide, and was bytaken for 


DANIEL. 


VII. 2—rI1. 


schortli the sentence, and seide, Y si3 in2 
my visioun in ni3t, and lo! foure wyndis 
of heuene fou3ten in the myddis of the 
greet see. And foure grete beestis dyuerse3 
bitwixe hem silf stieden® fro the see. The 
firste beeste was as a lionesse, and hadde 
wyngis of an egle. Y bihelde til" the 
wyngis therof weren pullid awei, and it 
was takun awei fro erthe, and it stood as 
a man on the feet, and the herte therof 
was 3ouun to it. And lo! another beeste,5 
lijk a bere in parti, stood, and thre or- 
dris weren in the mouth therof, and thre 
princes in the teeth therof. And thus thei 
seiden to it, Rise thou, ete thou ful many 
fleischis. Aftir these thingis Y bihelde,« 
and lo! anothir beeste as a pard, and it 
hadde on it silf foure wyngis of a brid, 
and foure heedis weren in the beeste, and 
power was 3ouun toit. Aftir these thingis7 
Y bihelde in the visioun of ni3t, and le! 
the fourthe beeste, ferdful, and wondirful, 
and ful strong. It hadde grete’ irun teeth, 
and it ete, and made lesse, and defoulide 
with hise feet othere thingis; forsothe it 
was vnlijk othere beestis, which Y hadde 
seyn bifore it, and it hadde ten hornes. 
Y bihelde the hornes, and lo! an others 
litil horn cam forth of the myddis of tho, 
and thre of the firste hornes weren drawun 
out fro the face therof; and lo! iz3en as 
izen of a man weren in this horn, and a 
mouth spekynge grete thingis. Y bihelde,9 
til that trones weren set, and the elde of 
daies sat; his cloth was whijt as snow, 
and the heeris of his heed weren as cleene 
wolle, his trone was as flawmes” of fier, 
hise wheelis weren fier* kyndlid. <A flood 10 
of fier and rennynge faste 3ede out fro his 
face, a thousynde thousynde mynistriden 
to hym, and ten sithis a thousynde sithis 
an hundrid thousynde stoden ni; hym; 
the dom sat, and bookis weren opened. 
Y bihelde for the vois of grete wordis1 
whiche thilke horn spak; and Y si3 that 
the beeste was slayn, and his bodi was 
perischid, and was 3ouun to be brent in 


Ww as of 4. 


* stieden vp x. t And the 1. 


U ynto I. 


Vv strong NS sec. m. 


W flawme a pr.m.Rv. * as fier 1. 


VIL. 12—23. 


12to be brent in fijr. And the power of 
other beestus was taken awey, and tymes 
of lijf ben ordeynyd to hem, vn to tyme 
13and tyme. Therfore Y byhelde in visioun 
of ni3t, and loo! with cloudis of heuen as 
the sone of man came; and vnto the olde 
of days he came fully, and in his si3t 
14 thei offreden hym. And he 3aue to hym 
power, and honour, and rewme, and eche 
peple, lynagis, and tungis shuln serue to 
hym; the power of hym euerlastinge 
power, whiche shal not be don awey, 
and the rewme of hym, whiche shal not. 
1sbe corrupte, or distruyed. My spirit 
hidouside*; Y, Danyel, was ferd in these, 
and the visiouns of my heed to gidre 
16 trubliden me. Y came to oon of the ni3 
stondynge, and Y axide of hym trewthe 
of alle these thingus. Whiche saide to 
me interpretacioun of wordis, and tau3te 
i7me. These foure greet beestis ben foure 
* rewmes, that shuln ryse to gydre of the 
iserthe. Forsothe thei shuln resceyue the 
rewme of God hee3ist holy, and thei 
shuln holde the rewme, til into the world, 
igand in to world of worldis. After these 
thingus Y wolde diligently lerne of the 
fourthe beest, that was gretely vnlije fro 
alle, and dreedful ful myche, the teeth 
and naylis therof of yren; it eete, and 
brake to gydre, and defoulide the tothir 
20 thingus with his feet. And of ten hornes 
whiche it hadde in the hed, and of the 
tother that was sprungen vp, bifore 
whiche three hornes fellen doun, and of 
that horne that hadde ee3en, and mouthe 
spekinge grete thingis, and was more 
2ithan other; Y byheelde, and loo! the 
ylk horn made bataile a3ein saintis, and 
22hadde power ouer hem, til the olde of 
dais came, and 3aue dome to saintis hi3e ; 
and loo! tyme came, and saintis weldiden 
23rewme. And thus he saith, The fourthe 
beest shal be the fourthe rewme in erthe, 
that shal be more than alle rewmes, and 
shal deuouren al erthe, and shal defoule, 


DANIEL. 


647 


fier. And Y s23 that the power of othere 12 
beestis was takun awei, and the tymes of 
lijf weren ordeyned to hem, til to tyme 
and tyme. Therfor Y bihelde in the vi-13 
syoun of ni3t, and lo! as a sone of man 
cam with the cloudis of heuene; and he 
cam fulli til to the elde of daies, and in 
the sij3t of hym thei offriden hym. And14 
he 3af to hym power, and onour, and 
rewme, and alle the puplis, lynagis’, and 
langagis schulen serue hyin; his power 
is euerlastynge power, that schal not be 
takun awei, and his rewme, that schal not 
be corrupt. My spirit hadde orrour, ether 15 
hidousnesse; Y, Danyel, was aferd in these 
thingis, and the si3tis of myn heed dis- 
turbliden me. Y neijede to oon of thei 
stonderis ni3, and Y axide of hym the 
treuthe of alle these thingis. And he seide 
to me the interpretyng of wordis’, and he 
taujte me. These foure grete beestis ben 17 
foure rewmes, that schulen rise of erthe. 
Forsothe hooli men schulen take theis 
rewme of hijeste God, and thei schulen 
holde the rewme, til in to the world, and 
‘til in to® the world of worldis. Aftir19 
these thingis Y wolde lerne diligentli of 
the fourthe beeste, that was greetli vnlijk 
fro alle, and was ful ferdful, the teeth and 
nailis therof weren of irun; it eet, and 
made lesse, and defoulide with hise feet 
othere thingis. And of ten hornes whiche 20 
it hadde in the heed, and of the tother 
horn, that cam forth, bifore which thre 
hornes fellen doun, and of that horn that 
hadde izen, and a mouth spekynge grete 
thingis, and was grettere than othere; [a1 
bihelde, and lo! thilke horn made batel 
ajens hooli men, and hadde maistrie of 
hem, til® the elde of daies cam, and hi}322 
God 3af doom to hooli men; and lo! tyme 
cam, and hooli men goten rewme. And 23 
he seide thus, The fourthe beeste sclial be 
the fourthe rewme in erthe, that schal be 
more than alle rewmes, and it schal de- 
uoure al erthe, and it schal defoule, and 


2 hidous 4. 


y and lynagis 1. 2 these wordis n, 


aynto I. in to nsu sce.m. » til to 1. 


648 


2vand to gydre breke it. Forsothe ten 
horns of that kyngdam shuln be ten 
kyngus; and an other shal rijse after hem, 
and he shal be mi3tier than the former, 

2sand shal meeke three kyngus. And he 
shal speke wordis a3einus the hee3, and 
he shal breke to gidre the saintis of the 
hee3ist; and he shal wene, that he may 
chaunge tymes and lawis; and it shal be 
3ouen in to the hondis of hym, vn to 
tyme, and tymes, and the half of tyme. 

26 And dom shal sitte, that power be taken 
awey, and be broken to gydre, and pe- 

a7rishe til into the eende. The rewme 
forsothe, and power, and the gretenesse 
of rewme, whiche is vndre al heuen, be 
3ouen to the peple of halewis of the 
hee3zist, whose rewme is euerlastinge 
rewme, and alle folkis shuln serue to 

eshym, and obeye. Til hidre the eende of 
the word. Y, Danyel, in my thou3tis was 
miche trublid, and my face is chaungid 
in me; forsothey Y kepte to gidre the 
word in my hert. 


CAP. VITI. 


1 In the thrid 3eer of rewme of Baltha- 
sar, kyng, a vysioun apeeride to me. Y, 
Danyel, after that thing whiche Y hadde 

2seen in the bygynnyng, saw3 in my vi- 
sioun, whan I was in the castel Susis, 
whiche is in the cuntre of Helam; for- 
sothe I saw3 in visioun me for to be 

svpon the 3ate Viay. And Y rayside myn 
eejen, and saw3; and loo! oo wether 
stode byfore the mareis, hauynge hee3 
horns, and oon hee3er than an other, and 

4vndrewexinge. Afterward Y sawe the 
wether with hornys wyndowynge, or 
castynge doun, a3einus the eest, and 
a3einus the west, and a3einus the north, 
and a3einus the south; and alle beestis 
mi3ten not a3ein stonde it, nether be de- 
lyuerd fro the hondis therof. And he dide 

svp his wille, and is magnyfied. And I 

vndirstode. Lo! forsothe a buk of geet 


DANIEL. 


VII. 24—VIII. 5. 


make lesse that erthe. Forsothe ten hornes 24 
schulen be ten kyngis of that rewme ; and 
another kyng schal rise after hem, and he 
schal be mi;tiere than the formere, and he 
schal make low thre kyngis. And he schal 2s 
speke wordis aj3ens the hi3 God, and he 
schal defoule the seyntis of the hijeste ; 
and he schal gesse, that he mai chaunge 
tymes and lawis; and thei schulen be 
jouun in® to his hondis, til to tyme, and 
times, and the half of tyme’. And ‘doom 26 
schal sitte, that the power be takun awei, 
and be al to-brokun, and perische til in to 
the ende. Sotheli that the rewme, and 27 
power, and the® greetnesse of rewme, 
which is vndur ech heuene, be 3ouun to 
the puple of the‘ seintis of the hijeste, 
whos rewme is euerlastynge rewme, and 
alle kingis schulen serue, and obeie to hym. 
Hidur to is the ende of the word. Y, Da-28 
nyel, was disturblid myche in my thou3tis, 
and my face was chaungid in me; for- © 
sothe Y kepte the word in myn herte. 


CAP. VIII. 


In the thridde 3eer of the rewme of! 
Balthasar, the king, a visioun apperide to 
me. Y, Danyel, after that thing that Y 
hadde seyn in the bigynnyng, si3 in my2 
visioun, whanne Y was in the castel of 
Susis, which is in the cuntrei of Helam; 
sotheli Y si3 in the visioun that Y was on 
the 3ate Vlay. And Y reiside myn ijen,3 
and Y si3; and lo! o ram stood bifor the 
mareis, and hadde hi3 hornes, and oon 
hijere than the tother’, and vndurwex- 
yuge. Aftirward Y si3 the ram wyndew-4 
ynge with hornes a3ens the eest, and a3ens 
the west, and a3ens the north, and ajens 
the south; and alle beestis my3ten not 
a3enstonde it, nether be delyuered fro the 
hondis of it. And it dide bi his wille, and 
was magnefied. And Y vndurstood. Lo!5 
forsothe a buk of geet cam fro the west 
on the face of al erthe, and touchide not 


Y for a. 


© Om. 1. 4 tymes cr. 


€ Om. Nn. 


fOm.1.  & oother 1. 


VII. 6——16. 


came fro the west vpon the face of al 
erthe, and touchide not the erthe; for- 
sothe the buk hadde a noble horn bitwixe 
6his ee3en; and came vnto the ylk wether 
horned, whiche Y saw3 stondynge byfore 
the 3ate, aud he ran to hym in bir of his 
7strengthe. And whenn he neizede ni3 the 
wether, he dide crueli in to hym, and he 
smote the wether, and he brake to gidre 
two hornys of hym, and the wether mi3te 
not withstonde hym. And when he sente 
hym in to the erthe, he defoulide hym; 
and no man mi3te delyuere the wether of 
shis hond. Forsothe the buk of geet is 
maad grete ful miche; and whan he 
hadde waxen, the grete horn is brosten, 
and foure horns ben brou3t forth vndir 
9it, bi foure wyndis of heuen. Eftsoone 
forsothe of hem oo liti] horne wente out, 
and it is maad grete a3einus the south, and 
ajeinus the eest, and a3einus strengthe. 
10 And it is magnyfied vnto the strengthe 
of heuen, and castide doun of strengthe 
liand of sterris, and defoulide hem. And 
vnto the prince of strengthe he is mag- 
nyfied, and fro hym he toke the con- 
tynuel sacrifice, and castide doun the 
izplace of halewyng of hym. Forsothe 
strengthe is 3ouen to hym a3einus the 
contynuel sacrifice for synnes, and trewthe 
shal be cast doun in erthe; and he shal 
ishaue prosperite, and shal do. And Y 
herde oon of the saintus spekynge; and 
oo saynt saide to an other, Y noote to 
whom spekynge, Hou longe deuysioun, 
and the contynuel sacrifice, and synne of 
desolacioun, or discoumfort, that is maad, 
and sayntuarie, and strengthe shal be de- 
14foulid ? And he saide to hym, Vnto euen- 
yng and morewnynge, days two thousand 
and three hundred; and the sayntuarie 
isshal be clensid. Forsothe it is don, when 
Y, Danyel, sawe the visioun, and sou3te 
vndirstondyng, loo! there stode in my 
168i3t as the fourme of mau. And Y herde 
a voice of the man bytwixe Vlay, and he 
criede, and saith, Gabriel, make thou this 


hhurtlide ns. !Om.a prim. 


DANIEL. 


J Om. 8 prom. 
VOL. IIT. 40 


649 


the erthe; forsothe the buk of geet hadde 
a noble horn bitwixe hise izen; and hee 
cam til to that horned ram, which Y 
hadde seyn stondynge bifore the 3ate, and 
he ran in the fersnesse of his strengthe to 
that ram. And whanne he hadde nei3id7 
ni3 the ram, he hurlide® fersly on hym, 


‘and he smoot the ram, and al to-brak 


tweyne hornes of hym, and the ram mi3te 
not a3enstonde hym. And whanne he 
hadde sent that ram in to erthe, he de- 
foulide; and no man mi3te delyuere the 
ram fro his hond. Forsothe the buk ofs 
geet was maad ful greet; and whanne he 
hadde encreessid, the greet horn was 
brokun, and foure hornes risiden vndur 
it, bi foure wyndis of heuene. Forsothes 
of oon of hem 3ede out o litil horn, and it 
was maad greet a3ens the south, and a3ens 
the eest, and ajens the strengthe. And it 10 
was magnefied til to the strengthe of he- 
uene, and it castide doun of the strengthe 
and! of sterris, and defoulide tho. Andi 
he was magnefied til to the prince of 
strengthe, and he took awei fro hym thei 
contynuel sacrifice, and castide donn the 
place of his halewyng. Forsothe strengthe 12 
was 3ouun to hym a3ens the contynnel 
sacrifice for synnes, and treuthe schal be 
cast doun in erthe; and he schal haue 
prosperite, and schal do. And Y herdeis 
oon of hooli aungels spekynge; and oon 
hooli aungel seide to another, Y noot to 
whom spekinge, Hou long the visioun, and 
the* contynuel sacrifice, and the synne of 
desolacioun, which is maad, and the seyn- 
tuarie, and the strengthe schal be defoulid? 
And he seide to hym, Til to the! euentid 14 
and morewtid, two thousynde daies and 
thre hundrid; and the seyntuarie schal be 
clensid. Forsothe it was doon, whanne 15 
Y, Danyel, si3 the visioun, and axide the 
vndurstondyng, lo! as the licnesse of a 
man stood in my si3t. And Y herde thei¢ 
voys of a man bitwixe Vlai, and he criede, 
and seide, Gabriel, make thou Danyel to 
vndurstonde this visioun. And he cam, 17 


kOm.n. !Om.N. 


650 


17for to vndirstonde the visioun. And he 
came, and stode bysidis wher Y stode ; 
and when he came, Y dreedynge felle 
doun in to my face. And he saith to 
me, Vndirstonde thou, sone of man, for 
in the tyme of eende diuisioun shal be 
isfulfillid. And when he spac to me, Y 
slode to gydre doun ri3t in to the erthe. 
And he touchide me, and sette me in 
igmy degree. And he saide to me, Y shal 
sliewe to thee what thingis ben to cumn- 
mynge in the last of cursidnesse, for 
20tyme hath his eende. The wether, 07' 
ram, whom thou hast seen for to haue 
hornys, is the kyng of Medis and Persis. 


21Forsothe the geet buk is the king of: 


Grekis; and the grete horn that was bi- 
getwix his ee3en, is the first kyng. For- 
sothe that, it broken, fonre han rysen for 
it, foure kyngus shuln to gydre ryse of 
that fole, bot not in the strengthe of 
2zhym. And after the rewme of hem, 
whenn wickidnesses shuln wexe, there 
shal ryse a king vnshamfast in face, and 
vndirstondynge proposiciouns, o7 re- 
241souns; and his strengthe shal be maad 
mi3ty, bot not in his own strengthis. And 
ouer that it may be byleeued he shal 
waste alle thingus, and shal haue pros- 
perite, and shal do. And he shal slea 
stronge men, and the peple of sayntus, 
2after his wille, and gyle shal be dressid 
in his hond. And he shal magnyfie his 
hert, and in plente of alle thingus he shal 
slea ful manye, And he shal ryse to gydre 
a3eins the prince of princis, and with 
outen hond he shal be broken to gydre. 
26 And the visioun, that is said in enening 
and morewnyng, is trewe. Therefore 
seale thou, o7 marke, the visyoun, for 
27after manye days it shal be. And Y, 
Danyel, languyshide, and was seeke by 
ful manye days; and when Y roos, Y 
dide the werkis of the kyng; and I won- 
dride at the visioun, and ther was not 
whiche shulde interprete, or expoun. 


m Om. 1. 
plat to the erthe v. 
noon 1, 


°Om. 1. 


DANIEL. 


VII. 17-——-27. 


and stood bisidis where Y stood; and 
whanne he was comun, Y dredde, and 
felle on my face. And he seide to me, 
Thou, sone of man, vndurstonde, for the 
visioun schal be fillid in the™ tyme of 
ende. And whanne he spak to me, Y18 
slood doun ‘plat to the erthe". And he 
touchide me, and settide me in my degree. 
And he seide to me, Y schal schewe to19 
thee what thingis schulen come in ‘the 
laste of cursing, for the® tyme hath his 
ende. The ram, whom thou sizest haue 20 
hornes, is the kyng of Medeis and of 
Perseis. Forsothe the bue of geet is the21 
kyng of Grekis; and the greet horn that 
was bitwixe hise iz3en, he is the firste 
kyng. ‘Forsothe that whanne that horn 22 
was brokun, foure Aorzes risiden for it, 
foure kyngis schulen rise of the fole of 
hym, but not in the strengthe of hym. 
And after the rewme of hem, whanne23 
‘wickidnessis han? encreessid, a kyng schal 
rise vnschamefast in face, and vndurstond- 
yng proposisiouns, ether-resouns set forth; 
and his strengthe schal be maad stalworthe, 24 
but not in hise strengthis. ‘And more 
than it mai be bileuyd he schal waste alle 
thingis, and he schal haue prosperite, and 
schal do. And he schal sle stronge men, 
and the puple of seyntis, bi his wille, and 25 
gile schal be dressid in his hond. And he 
schal magnefie his herte, and in abund- : 
aunce of alle thingis he schal] sle ful many 
men. And he schal rise ajens the prince 
of princes, and withouten hond‘he schal 
be al to-brokun. And the visioun, which 26 
is seid in the morewtid and euentid, is 
trewe. Therfor seele thou the visioun, for 
it schal be after many daies. And Y,27 
Danyel, was astonyed, and was sijk bi ful 
many daies; and whanne Y hadde rise, Y 
dide the werkis of the kyng ; and Y was 
astonyed at the visioun, and ‘noon was? 
that interpretide’. 


" gronelinge on [the 1] erthe, ether plat to the erthe CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. grouelinge, ether 
j ; A P wickidnesse han a pr.m. cusux. wickidnesse hath grmnq. 
¥ interpretide, either expounede CFGHIKMNQRSUX. 


9 ther was 


IX. 1—12. 


Crop xX: 


1 In the first 3eer of Darius, sone of 
Assuerus, of the seed of Meedis, whiche 
comaundide vpon the rewme of Caldeis, 

2in oo 3eer of his rewme, Y, Danyel, vn- 
dirstode ‘in bokis the’ noumbre of 3eeris, 
of whiche the word of the Lord is maad 

‘to? Jeremye, the prophete, that seuenty 
3eeris of desolacioun of Jerusalem shulden 

3be fulfillid. And Y putte my face to the 
Lord my God, for to preye and byseche 

sin fastyngis, sac, and ashe. And Y 
preyede the Lord my God, and I knaw- 
lechide, and sayde, Y biseche, thou Lord 
God, grete and dreedful, kepynge coue- 
naunt and mercy to men louynge thee, 

sand kepynge thi maundementis. We 
han synned, we han don wickidnesse; 
vnpytously we diden, and wenten awey, 
and bowiden awey fro thi maundementis 

sand domys. We obeyeden not to thi 
seruauntis, prophetis, that spaken in thi 
name to our kyngis, oure princis, oure 
7fadris, and to al peple of the lond. Lord, 
to thee ri3twisnesse, forsothe to vs con- 
fusioun of face, as is to day to man of 
Juda, and dwellers of Jerusalem, and to 
al Yrael, to these that ben ni3, and to 
these that ben fer in-alle londis, to whom 
thou castidist hem out for the wickid- 
nessis of hem, in whiche thei synnyden 
gin thee, Lord. To vs confusioun of face, 
to oure kyngis, oure princis, and to oure 
9fadris, that synneden; forsothe to thee, 
Lord oure God, imercye and helpe. For 

10 We wenten awey fro thee, and herden 
not the voice of the Lord oure God, that 
we shulde walke in his lawe, whiche he 
puttide to vs by his seruauntis, prophetis. 

11 And al Yrael braken thi Jawe, and bow- 
iden awey, that thei herden not thi voice ; 
and cursse droppide on vs, and wlatyng- 
nesse, that is writen in the boke of Moy- 
ses, seruaunt of God, for we han synned 

12to hym, And he ordeynyde his wordis, 


Z of A. 


8 Om. IN. ‘in aische N. 


DANIEL. 


651 


CAP. IX. 


In the firste 3eer of Darius, the sone of 1 
Assuerus, of the seed of Medcis, that was 
emperour on the rewme of Caldeis, in thee 
firste 3eer of his rewme, Y, Danyel, vn- 
durstood in bookis the noumbre of 3eeris, 
of which noumbre the word of the Lord 
was maad to Jeremye, the profete, that 
seuenti 3eer of desolacioun of Jerusalem 
schulde be fillid. And Y settide my faces 
to my Lord God, to preie and to’ biseche 
in fastyngis, in sak, and aischet. And Y4 
preiede my Lord God, and Y knoulechide, 
and seide, Y biseche, thou Lord God, greet 
and ferdful, kepynge couenaunt and mercy 
to hem that louen thee, and kepen thi 
comaundementis. We han synned, we hans 
do wickidnesse, we diden unfeithfuli, and 
jeden awei, and bowiden awei fro thi co- 
maundementis and domes. We obeiedens 
not to thi seruauntis, profetis, that spaken 
in thi name to oure kyngis, to oure princes, 
and to" oure fadris, and to al the puple of 
the lond. Lord, ri3tfulnesse zs to thee,7 
forsothe schenschipe of face 7s to vs, as 
is to dai to a man of Juda, and to the 
dwelleris of Jerusalem, and to al Israel, 
to these men that ben ni3, and to these 
men that ben afer in alle Jondis, to which 
thou castidist hem out for the wickidnessis 
of hem, in whiche, Lord, thei synneden 
ajens thee. Schame of face zs to vs, tos 
oure kyngis, to oure princes, and to oure 
fadris, that synneden; but merci and be- 9 
nygnytee 7s to thee, oure Lord God. For 
we 3eden awei fro thee, and herden not io 
the vois of oure Lord God, that we schul- 
den go in the lawe of hym, whiche he 
settide to vs bi hise seruauntis, profetis. 
And al Israel braken thi lawe, and bow- 11 
iden awei, that thei herden not thi vois; 
and cursyng, and wlatyng, which is writun 
in the book of Moises, the seruaunt of 
God, droppide on vs, for we synneden to 
hym. And he ordeynede hise wordis, 12 


ain to GH. 


u Om. ¢ sec. m. EFGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


402 


652 


whiche he spac vpon vs, and vpon oure 
princis, that demyden vs, that thei shulden 
aboue lede yn in to vs grete yuel, what 
mauer was nener vndir al heuen, vp that 
i3it is don in Jerusalem, as it is writen 
in the lawe of Moyses. Al this yuel came 
vpon vs, and we preyeden not thi face, 
Lord oure God, that we shulden turne 
ajein fro oure wickidnessis, and shulden 
tuthinke thi trewthe. And the Lord wak- 
ide on his malice, and brou3t it vpon vs; 
iust the Lord oure God in alle his werkis 
whiche he dide, forsothe we herden not 
isthe voice of hym. And now, Lord oure 
God, that leddist out thi peple of the lond 
of Egypt in strong hond, and madist to 
thee a name vp this day, we han synned, 
1éwe diden wickidnesse, Lord, in to al 
thi rijtwisnesse. Y biseche, be thi wrath 
turned awey and thi woodnesse fro thi 
citee Jerusalem, and fro thin holy hill ; 
forsothe for oure synnes, and wickidnessis 
of oure fadris, Jerusalem and al thi peple 
ben in shenshipe, to alle men bi oure 
17cumpas. Now forsothe, oure God, heere 
the orisoun of thi seruaunt, and preyeres 
of hym, and shewe thi face on thi sayn- 
istuarye, that is desert. For thi self thou, 
my God, bowe thin eere, and heere; opyn 
thin ee3en, and see oure desolacioun, and 
the cite, on whom thi name is yn clepid. 
Forsothe nether in oure iustifiyngus we 
casten forth preeyeres byfore thi face, 
bot in thi manye doyngus of mercy. 
19 Heer thou, Lord; be thou plesid, Lord, 
perceyue, and do; dwelle thou, o7 tarye, 
not, for thi self, Lord my God, for thi 
name is in clepid vpon the cytee, and 
z0vpon thi peple. And whan 3it I spac, 
and preyede, and knowlachide my synues, 
and synnys of my peple Yrael, that Y 
shedde out preyers in si3t of my God, for 
2ithe holy hill of my God, 3it me spek- 
ynge in my preyer, loo! the man Ga- 
briel, whom I saw3 in visioun fro the 
bygynnynge, soone flee3inge touchide me 
22in tyme of even sacrifice; and tau3t me, 


Vv oure Lord rv. 


DANIEL. 


Wal thi u sec. m. 


IX. 13-22. 


whiche he spak on vs, and on oure princes, 
that demyden vs, that thei schulden brynge 
in on vs greet yuel, what maner yuel was 
neuer vndur al heuene, bi that that is doon 
in Jerusalem, as it is writun in the lawe1s 
of Moises. Al this ynel cam on vs, and, 
oure Lord God, we preieden not thi face, 
that we schulden turne ajen fro oure 
wickidnessis, and schulden thenke thi 
treuthe. And the Lord wakide on ma-14 
lice, and brou3t it on vs; oure Lord God 
as iust in alle his werkis whiche he made, 
for we herden not his vois. And now, 15 
Lord’ God, that leddist thi puple out of 
the lond of Egipt in strong hond, and 
madist to thee a name bi this dai, we han 
synnede, we han do wickidnesse, Lord, 16 
az3ens thi” riz3tfulnesse. Y biseche, thi 
wraththe and thi stronge veniaunce be 
turned awey fro thi citee Jerusalem, and 
fro thi hooli hil; for whi for oure synnes, 
and for the wickidnessis of oure fadris, 
Jerusalem and thi puple ben in schen- 
schipe, to alle men bi oure cumpas. But17 
now, oure God, here thou the preyer of 
thi seruaunt, and the bisechyngis of hima, 
and schewe thi face on thi* seyntuarie, 
which is forsakun. My God, for thi silf1s 
boowe doun thin eere, and here; opene 
thin i3en, and se oure desolacioun, and the 
citee, on which thi name is clepid to help. 
For not in oure iustifiyngis we setten forth 
mekeli preiers bifor thi face, but in thi 
many merciful doyngis. Lord, here thou; 19 
Lord, be thou plesid, perseyue thou, and 
do; my Lord God, tarie thou not, for thi 
silf, for thi name is clepid to help on the 
citee, and on thi puple. And whanne Y 20 
spak 3it, and preiede, and knoulechide my 
synnes, and the synnes of my puple Is- 
rael, that Y schulde sette forth mekeli my 
preieris in the si3t of my God, for the 
hooli hil of my God, the while Y spak21 
3it in my preyer, lo! the man Gabriel, 
whom Y hadde seyn in visioun at the bi- 
gynnyng, flei soone, and touchide me in 
the tyme of euentid sacrifice; and he22 


x the n. 


IX. 23——X. 3. 


and spac to me, and saide, Danyel, now 
Y am gon out, that Y shulde teche thee, 
23and thou shuldiste vndirstonde. Fro the 
bygynnyng of thi preyers a word passide 
out. Forsothe Y came for to shewe to 
thee, for thou art a man of desijris ; for- 
sothe perceyue thou the word, and vn- 
24dirstonde the visioun. Seuenty weekis 
ben abreggid on thi peple, and vpon thin 
holi citee, and trespassyng shal ben eend- 
id, and synne shal take eend, and wick- 
idnesse shal be don awey, and ri3twys- 
nesse euerlastynge shal be led to, and the 
visioun shal be fulfillid, and prophecie, 
and the holy of halewis shal be anoyntid. 
2s Therfore wite thou, and perceyue; fro 
bygynnynge of the word, that Jerusalem 
eftsone be beeldid, til to Crist, duyk, 
seuen weekis and two and sixti weekis 
shuln be; and eftsoone the strete shal 
be beeldid, and wallis, in anguyshe, or 
26streytnesse, of tymes. And after two 
and sixti weekis Crist shal be slayn. 
And it shal not be the peple of hym, that 
is to denyinge hym. And the peple shal 
distruye the citee and sayntuarie, with 
the duyke to commynge; and the eende 
of hym waastynge, and? after the eende 
270f bataile ordeynd desolacioun. Forsothe 
he shal conferme the couenaunt with 
manye oo weeke, and in the half of a 
weeke oost and sacrifice shal fayle; and 
in the temple abomynacioun of desola- 
cioun shal be, and vnto the eendynge and 
eende the desolacioun shal last. 


CAP. X. 


1 In the thrid 3eer of rewme‘ of Cyrus, 
kyng of Persis, a word is toke a3ein to 
Danyel, by name Balthasar; and the 
word trewe, and grete strengthe, and he 
vndirstode the word; forsothe vndir- 

astondyng is neede in visioun. In tho 
days Y, Dauyel, weilide in days of three 

3wekis; Y eete not desireful breede, and 


b Om. «. 


Yofn. .2Om. 1. 


DANIEL. 


8Om.1. -> myd n. 


653 
tau3t me, and he spak to me, and seide, 


Danyel, now Y 3ede out, that Y schulde 
teche thee, and thou schuldist vndurstonde. 


Fro the bigynnyng of thi preieris a word 23 


jede out. Forsothe Y cim to schewe to 
thee, for thou art a man of desiris; ther- 
for perseyue thou the word, and vndur- 
stonde thou the visioun. 
of 3eerts ben abreggid’ on thi puple, and 
on thin hooli citee, that trespassyng be 
endid, and synne take an ende, and that 
wickidnesse be doon awei, and euerlast- 
ynge ri3tfulnesse be brou3t, and that the 
visioun, andY prophesie be fillid, and the 
hooli of seyntis be anoyntid. 
wite thou, and perseyue; fro the goyng 
out of the word, that Jerusalem be bildid 
eft, til to Crist, the duyk, schulen be 
seuene woukis of 3eerv7s and two and sixti 
woukis 9f 3eerts; and eft the street schal 
be bildid, and wallis, in the angwisch of 
tymes. 
And it 
schal not be his puple, that schal denye 
hym. And the puple with the duyk to 
comynge schal distrie the citee, and the 
seyntuarie; and the ende therof schal be 
distriyng, and after the ende of batel schal 
be ordeynede desolacioun. 
wouk ‘of 3eeris* schal conferme the coue- 
naunt to many men, and the offryng and 
sacrifice schal faile in the myddis® of the 
wouke of 3eerts; and abhomynacioun of 
desolacioun schal be in the temple, and 
the desolacioun schal contynue til to the 
parformyng and ende. 


CAPs X: 


In® the thridde 3eer of the rewme of 
Sirus, kyng of Perseis, a word was schew- 
id to Danyel, Balthasar bi name; and a 
trewe word, and greet strengthe, and he 
vndurstood the word; for whi vudurstond- 
yng is nedeful in visioun. In tho daies2 
Y, Danyel, mourenyde bi the daies of thre 
woukis; Y eet not desirable breed, and3 


© the rewme 4G sec. m. 


e And ini. 


Therfor 25 


And after two and sixti woukis26 
‘of 3eeris? Crist schal be slayn. 


Forsothe 027 


Seuenti woukis* 24+ seuenti 


woukis : here 
a wouke is 
nedis takun for 
a wouke of 
3eeris, and so 
ech wonk here 
conteyneth vij. 
jeer. Lire here. 
ceau. 


654 


fleshe and wyne entriden not in to my 
mouth, bot nether with oynement Y was 
anoyntid, til days of three weekis weren 
sfulfilid. Forsothe in the fourthe and 
‘twentithe day of the first moneth, Y was 
bysydis the grete flode, that is Tigris. 
5 And I reyside myn ee3en, and saw3, and 
loo! oo man clothid in lynnen, and his 
sreyns gird to with shynyng gold; and 
his body as crisolitus, and his face as 
fourme of Jeyt, aud his ee3en as a lJaumpe 
brennynge, and his armys and whiche 
thing is downward vn to the feet as 
fourme of brasse waxinge whyte, and the 
voice of his wordis as voice of multitude. 
7Forsothe Y, Danyel, aloone sawe the vi- 
sioun; sothely the men that weren with 
me, saweu not, bot ful myche dreed felle 
vp on hem, and thei fledden in to an hid 
splace. Forsothe Y left aloone sawe this 
greet visioun, and strengthe abode not in 
me; bot and my fourme is chaungid in 
me, and Y was drye, or welewid, nether 
ahadde eny thing of strengthis. And Y 
herde the voice of his wordis, and Y 
heerynge laye castidoun, or ferd, vpon 
my face, aud my cheer cleuyde to the 
loerthe. And loo! an hond touchide me, 
and reyside me on my knees, and vpon 
ithe fyngris of myn hondis. And he 
sayde to me, Danyel, man of desiris, vn- 
dirstonde the wordis whiche Y speke to 
thee, and stonde thou in thi degree ; 
now forsothe Y am sente to thee. And 
whenn he saide to me this word, Y stode 
iztremblynge. And he saith to me, Da- 
nyel, nyl thou dreede, for of the first 
day in whiche thou puttidist thin herte 
for to vndirstonde, that thou shuldist 
tourmente thee in si3t of thi God, thin 
wordis ben herde, and Y came for thi 
iswordis. Forsothe the prince of the king- 
dain of Persis ajein stode me oon and 
twenti days, and loo! Mychael, oon of 
the first princis, came in to myn help, 


DANIEL. 


X. 4—13. 


fleisch, and wyn entride not into my 
mouth, but nethir Y was anoynted with 
oynement, til the daies of thre woukis 
weren fillid. Forsothe in the foure and4 
twentithe dai of the firste monethe, Y was 
bisidis the greet flood, which is Tigris. 
And Y reiside myn i3en, and Y si3, and lo!5 
o man was clothid with lynun clothis, and 
hise reynes weren gird with schynynge 
gold; and his bodi was as crisolitus, and 6 
his face was as the lienesse of leit, and 
hise i3en weren as‘ a® brennynge laumpe, 
and hise armes and tho thingis that weren 
bynethe til to the feet weren as the lic- 
nesse of bras beynge whijt, and the vois 
of hise wordis was as the vois of multitude. 
Forsothe Y, Danyel, aloone si3 thef visioun; 7 
certis theS men that weren with me, sien 
not, but ful greet ferdfulnesse felle yn on 
hem, and thei fledden in to an hid place. 
But Y was left aloone, ard Y si3 thiss 
greet visioun, and strengthe dwellide not 
in me; but also my licnesse was chaungid 
in me, and Y was stark, and Y hadde not 
in me ony thing of strengthis. And Yo 
herde the vois of hise wordis, and Y herde, 
and lay astonyed on my face, and my face 
cleuyde to the erthe. And lo! an hond 10 
touchide me, and reiside me on my knees, 
and on the toes of my feet. And he seide 1! 
to me, Thou, Danyel, a man of desiris, 
vndurstonde the wordis whiche Y speke 
to thee, and stonde in thi degree; for now 
Y am sent to thee. And whanne he hadde 
seid this word to me, Y stood quakynge. 
And he seide to me, Danyel, nyle thou 12 
drede, for fro the firste dai in which thou 
settidist thin herte to vndurstonde, that 
thou schuldist turmente thee in the si3t of 
thi God, thi wordis weren herd, and Y 
cam for thi wordis. Forsothe the prince 13 
of the rewme of Perseis a3enstood me oon 
and twenti daies, and lo! My3hel, oon of 
the firste princes, cam in to myn help, and 
Y dwellide stille there bisidis the kyng of 


and Y abode there bysidis the kyng of  Perseis. Forsothe Y am comun to teche 14 
don a, 
cOmaprm TOmn. © Omir. faa. 8 thor. 


X. 14——XI. 3. 


14Persis. Forsothe Y came for to teche 
thee, what thingis ben to cummynge to 
thi peple in the last days; for 3it the 
visioun is deferrid, or drawen alonge, 
isin to days. And whann he spac to me 
siche maner wordis, Y keste doun my 
i¢cheer to the erthe, and was stille. And 
lo! as the licnesse of the sone of man 
touchide my lippis; and Y opnynge my 
mouth spac, and saide to hym that stode 
byfore me, My Lord, in thi visioun: my 
ioyntouris ben vnbounden, and no thing 
170f. strengthis aboden in me. And how 
may the seruaunt of my Lord speke with 
my Lord? no thing of strengthis aboode 
in me, bot and my brethe is closid bi- 
is twixe, or stoppide. Therfore eftsoone as 
the si3t of man touchide me, and couin- 
i9fortide me, and saide, Nyl thou dreede, 
thou man of desyrs; pees to thee, be thou 
coumfortid, and be thou strong. And 
whann he spac with me, Y waxe stronge, 
and: saide, Speke thou, my Lord, for and 
20 thou hast coumfortide me. And he saith, 
Wher thou. wast, whi Y came to thee? 
And now Y shal: turne a3ein, for to fi3t 
ajeinus the prince of Persis. Forsotlie 
whann Y wente out, the prince of Greekis 
2lapeeride cummynge. Nethelese Y shal 
telle to thee, what thing-is expressid in 
the wrytyng of trewthe; and no man is 
myn helper in alle these thingis, no hot 
Mizhel, 3our prince. 


CAP. XI. 


1 Forsothe fro® the first 3eer of Darius 
of Mede Y stode, that he shulde be coum- 
2fortid, and strengthid. And now’'Y shal 
telle to; thee’ trewthe. And loo! three 


kyngus:shuln stonde in Persis, and the’ 


fourthe shal be maad riche with- ful 
manye richessis ouer. alle men. And 
whanne he shal: be stronge in: his rich- 
essis, he shal stire: to gydre ‘alle men 


3 a3einus the rewme of Grece. Forsothe a: 


stronge kyng shal rijse;.and. shal lord- 


DANIEL. 


655. 


thee, what thingis schulen come to thi 
puple in the laste daies; for 3it the visioun 
is. delaied in to daies. And whanne hew 
spak to me bi siche wordis, Y castide doun 
my cheer to erthe®, and was stille. Andi 
lo! as the licnesse of sone! of man* touch- 
ide my lippis; and Y openyde my mouth, 
and spak, and seide to hym that stood 
bifore me, My Lord, in thi siz3t my ioynctis 
ben vnknit, and no thing of strengthis 
dwellide in me. And hou schal the seru- 17 
aunt of my Lord mow speke with my Lord? 
no thing of strengthis dwellide in me, but 
also my breeth is closyde bitwixe. Ther- 1s 
for eft as the si3t of a man touchide me, 
and coumfortide me, and seide, Man of t9 
desiris, nyle thou drede; pees be to thee, 
be- thou coumfortid, and be thou strong. 
And! whanne he spak with me, Y™ wex- 
ide’ strong and seide, My Lord, speke thou, 
for thou: hast coumfortid me. And he20 
seide, Whether thou woost not, whi Y 
cam to thee? And now Y schal turne 
a3en, to fi3te a3ens the prince of Perseis. 
For whanne Y 3ede out, the prince of 
Grekis apperide comynge. Netheles Y21 
schal telle to thee that, that is expressid 
in the scripture of treuthe; and noon is 
myn helpere in alle these thingis, no but 
My3hel, 3oure" prynce. 


CAP. XI 


Forsothe fro the firste 3eer of Darius of 1 
Medei Y stood, that he schulde be coum- 
fortid, and maad strong. And now Ye2 
schal telle to’ thee the treuthe. And lo! 
thre kyngis schulen stonde 3it in Persis, 
and the fourthe schal be maad riche with 
ful many’richessis ouer alle. And whanne 
he hath woxe strong bi hise richessis, he 
schal reise alle men az3ens the rewme of 
Greece. Forsothe a strong kyng: schals 
rise; and: shal be lord: in'greet power, and 


ein a. 


h the erthe kK sec.m. ithe sone x. 


© oure N. 


k a man CFGHKMN sec. m. PQSX sec. mM. 


1Om.ns. ™ and Y'ns. 


656 


shipe with myche power, and that, that 
tshal plese to hym, shal do. And whanne 
he shal stonde, lis rewme shal be broken, 
and shal be departid in to foure wyndis 
of heuen, bot not in to his folewers of 
bloode, nether after his power, in whiche 
he lordshipide; the rewme of hym shal 
be departid, and‘ in to alyens, out taken 
sthese. And the kyng of southe® shal be 
coumfortide; and of the princis of hym 
ther shal be strengthe ouer hym, and 
shal be lord in lordship; forsothe his 
slordshipyng myche. And after the eende 
of jeeris thei shuln be knyt in pees ; and 
the dou3ter of kyng of south shal cume 
to the kyng of the north, for to make 
frenship. And she shal not haue strengthe 
of arm, nether hir seed shal stonde; and 
she shal be bitaken, and hir 3unge men 
that ledden hir to, and thei that coum- 
7fortiden hir in tymes. And a plauntyng 
shal stonde of the buriownyng of hir 
rootis; and he shal cum with an oost, and 
shal entre the prouynce of the kyng of 
the north, and he shal mysuse hem, and 
s shal weelde the goddis of hem, and grauen 
thingus. And he shal lede the precious 
vessels of gold and syluer caitif, or taken 
in bataile, in to Egipt. He shal haue vic- 
ytorie ajeinus the kyng of the north; and 
the kyng of the south shal entre in to 
the kyngdam, and shal turne a3ein ‘in to! 
iwhis lond. Forsothe the sonys of hym 
shuln be stirid to wrath, and thei shuin 
gadre the multitnde of ful manye oostis. 
And he shal cum hizinge and flowynge, 
and he shal turne ajein, and shal be 
stirid, and go to gydre with strengthe 
of hym. And the kyng of the south 
terrid to wrath, shal go out, and fi3te 
ajeinus the kyng of the north, and shal 
make redy a ful grete multitude; and 
multitude shal be 3ouen in the hond of 
izhym. And he shal take multitude, and 
the horn of hym shal be enhaunsid; and 
he shal cast doun many thousandis, bot 


fOm. 4. & the south «. 


DANIEL. 


b the south Kk pr. am. 


XI. 4—12. 


schal do that, that schal plese hym. And4 
whanne he schal stonde, his rewme schal 
be al to-brokun, and it schal be departid 
in to foure wyndis of heuene, but not in 
to® hise eiris?, nether bi the power of 
hym in which he was lord ; for his rewme 
schal be to-rente, 3he, in to straungeris, 
outakun these. And the kyng of thes 
south schal be coumfortid; and of the 
princes of hym oon schal haue power 
aboue hym, and he schal be lord in power; 
for whi his lordschipe schal be myche. 
And after the ende of 3eeris ‘thei schulen’6é 
be knyt in pees; and the dou3ter of the 
kyng of the south schal come to the kyng 
of the north, to make frenschipe. And sche 
schal not gete strengthe of arm, nether 
the seed of hir schal stonde; and sche schal 
be bitakun, and the 3onglyngis of hir that 
brou3ten hir, and he that coumfortide hir 
in tymes. And a’ plauntyng of the seed of7 
the rootis of hir schal stonde; and he 
schal come with an oost, and schal entre 
in to the prouynce of the kyng of the - 
north, and he schal mysuse hem, and he 
schal gete; ferthir more he schal gete both8 
the goddis of hem. and grauun ymagis. 
Also® he schal lede into Egipt preciouse 
vessels of gold, and of siluer, takun in 
batel. He schal haue the maistrie ajens the 
kyng of the north; and the kyng of the9 
south schal entre in to the rewme, and 


‘ schal turne ajen to his lond. Forsothe 10 


the sones of hym schulen be stirid to 
wraththe, and thei schulen gadere togidere 
a multitude of ful many coostis. And he 
schal come hastynge and flowynge, and he 
schal turne a3en, and schal be stirid, and 
schal bigynne batel with his strengthe. 
And the king of the south schal be stirid, 1! 
and schal go out, and schal fi3te ajens the 
kyng of the north, and schal make redi a 
ful grete multitude; and the multitude 
schal be 3ouun in his hond. And he schal 12 
take the multitude, and his herte schal be 
enhaunsid; and he schal caste doun many 


‘to 4GH. 


° Om. A pr.m.CEFGHIK pr.m. MNPQRSU pr.m. xX. P ether aftircomers K marg. dheschalr, tOm.a. 


s And nx. 


XI. 13-—23. 


13 he shal not haue victorie. The kyng of 
the north shal be conuertid, and shal 
make redy a multitude, miche more than 
byfore; and in the eende of tymes and 
3eeris he shal cum hi3inge with the most 

1400st, and ful many richessis. And in 
tho tymes many shuln ryse to gydre 
aj3einus the kyng of south!; and sones of 
trespassours of thi peple shuln be en- 
haunsid, that thei fulfille the visioun, and 

isshuln'! falle to gydre. And the) kyng of 
the north shal cum, and shal bere to 
gydre hepis of erthe, and shal take 
strengist* cytees; and the! armys of the 
south shuln not susteyne!!. And the chosen 
of hy shuln ryse to gydre, for to with- 
16stonde, and strengthe shal not be. And 
he cummynge ‘vp on™ hym, shal do vp 
his likyng; and ther shal not be, whiche 
shal stonde a3einus his face. And he shal 
stonde in the noble lond, and it shal be 

17 waastid in hond of hym. And he shal 
putte his face, that he cum for to holde 
al the rewme of hym, and he shal do ri3t 
thingus with hym. And he shal 3eue to 
hym the doujtre of wymmen, that she 
turne hym vpsadoun; and it shal not 

18 stonde, nether shal be his. And he shal 
turne his face to ylis, and shal take 
manye. And he shal make prince for to 
cese, and the shendship of hym shal be 

lyturned in to hym. And he shal turne 
his face to the empire of his lond, and 
he shal hurtle, and shal falle, and shal 

20not be founden. And the foulist and 
vnworthi to kyngis fairnesse shal stonde 
in place of hym, and in fewe days he 
shal be’ broken to gydre, not in wode- 
2inesse, nether in batel. And a dispisid 
man shal stonde in his place, and kyngus 
honour shal not be jouen to hym; and 
he shal cum priuely, and shal weelde the 
22rewme in fraude doynge. And armys of 
the" fiz3tynge shuln be ouercummen of his 
face, and shuln be broken to gydre, more 
230uer and the duyke of pees. And aftir 


Om. G prom. K prom. ithe southe & sec. m. 
1Om. acu. 1 susteine him G sec. m. 


DANIEL. 


ii thei shulen 4. 
Mon AGHK pr. m. 


657 


thousyndis, but he schal not haue the: 
maistrie. For the kyng of the north schal 13 
turne, and schal make redi a multitude, 
myche more than bifore; and in the ende 
of tymes and of 3eeris he schal come hast- 
ynge with a ful greet oost, and with ful 
many richessis. And in tho tymes many 14 
men schulen rise togidere aj3ens the kyng 
of the south; and the sones of trespassouris 
of thi puple schulen be enhaunsid, that 
thei fille the visioun, and thei schulen falle 
doun. And the kyng of the north schal1s 
come, and schal bere togidere erthe, het 
schal take strongeste citees; and the armes 
of the south schulen not susteyne. And the 
chosun men therof schulen rise togidere, 
to a3enstonde, and strengthe schal not be. 
And he schal come on hym, and schal do1ié 
bi his wille; and noon schal be, that schal 
stonde ajens his face. And he schal stonde 
in the noble lond, and it schal be wastid 
in his hond. And he schal sette his face, 17 
that he come to holde al the rewme of 
him, and he schal do ri3tful thingis with 
hym. And he schal 3yue to hym the dou3- 
ter of wymmen, to distrie hym; and it 
schal not stonde, and it schal not be his. 
And he schal turne his face to ilis, and he 1s 
schal take many zis. And he schal make 
ceesse the prince of his schenschipe, and 
his schenschipe schal turne in to hym. 
And he schal turne his face to the lord-1s 
schip of his loond, and he schal snapere, 
and falle doun, and he schal not be 
foundun. And the vilest and vnworthi20 
to the kyngis onour schal stonde in the 
place of hym, and in fewe daies he schal 
be al to-brokun, not in woodnesse, nether 
in batel. And a dispisid man schal stonde21 
in the place of hym, and the onour of a 
kyng schal not be 3ouun to hym; and he 
schal come priueli, and he schal gete the 
rewme bi gile. And the armes of the22 
fiztere schulen be ouercomun of his face, 
and schulen be al to-brokun, ferthermore 
and the duyk of boond of pees. And after 23 


JOm. xk prim. — * strengthid a. 


n Om. 4. 


t and he v sec. m. 


VOL. Il. 


4P 


658 
frendship with hym, he shal do gyle. And 
he shal stize vp, and ouercune litil peple; 
21and he shal entre plenteuous and grete 
citees, and shal do whiche thingis the 
fadris of hym diden uot, and fadris of 
fadris of hym. He shal scatere raueyns, 
and prayes, and ricchessis of hem, and he 
shal bygynne, or go yn, counseile ajeinus 
saddist thou3tis, and this thing vn to 
2styme. And the strengthe of hym shal 
be stirid, and the herte of hym, a3einus 
the kyng of south in grete oost. And the 
kyng of south shal be terrid to bateil 
with manye helpis, and stronge ful 
myche; and thei shuln not stonde, for 
thei shulu go in to counseilis a3einus 
2shym. And thei etynge breede with hym 
shuln breke hym to gydre; and his oost 
shal be oppressid, and his slayn men ful 
e7manye shuln falle. And the herte of two 
kyngus shal be, that thei do yuel, and at 
oo bord thei shuln speke lesyng, and thei 
shul not profite; for 3it the eende in to 
2sother tyme. And he shal turne ajein 
‘to® his lond with manye ricchessis, and his 
herte ajeinus the holy testament, and he 
shal do, and shal turne a3ein ‘in to! his 
zalond. In tyme ordeynyd he shal cum 
a3ein, and shal cum to the south, and the 
3olast shal not be lije to the former. And 
grete shippis, and Romayns, shal cum 
vpon hym\, and he shal be smyten. And 
-he shal turne a3ein, and be wrothe a3einus 
the testainent of the sayntuarie, and shal 
do. And he shal turne a3ein, and shal 
thinke a3einus hem that forsoken the tes- 
3itament of sayntuarye™. And the aries 
of hym shuln stonde, and shuln defoule 
the sayntuarie of strengthe, and shuln 
take awey the contynuel sacrifice, and 
shuln 3eue abominacioun in to desola- 
szcioun. And ynpitous men shuln feyne 
gylfuly a testament ; forsothe the peple 
witynge her God shal weelde, and do. 
33 And tau3t men in peple shuln teche ful 


©into“ucH. Pin«en. 


° Om. CEFIMNQRSU. 
X of strengthe K marg. 


DANIEL. 


a Om. 4. 


V til to CEFGHIKMNPQRsUX. 


XI. 24—33. 


frenschipe with hym, he schal do gile. And 
he schal stie, and he" schal ouercome with 
liti] puple; and he schal entre in to grete 24 
and riche citees, and he schal do thingis 
which hise fadris and the fadris of ‘hise 
fadris diden not. He schal distrie the ra- 
ueyns, and prei, and richessis of hem, and 
a3ens most stidfast thou3tis he schal take 
counsel, and this‘vn to’ a tyme. And thes 
strengthe of hym, and the herte of hym 
schal be stirid ajens the kyng of the south 
with a greet oost. And the king of the 
south schal be stirid to batel with many 
helpis and ful stronge; and thei schulen 
not stonde, for thei schulen take counsels 
ajens hym. And thei that eeten breed 26 
with hym schulen al to-breke hyin; and 
his oost schal be oppressid, and ful many 
men of hise schulen be slayn, and falle 
doun. And the herte of twei kyngis schal 27 
be, that thei do yuel, and at o boord thei 
schulen speke leesyng, and thei schulen 
not profite; for 3it the ende schal be in to 
an other tyme. And he schal turne aj3en 28 
in to his lond with many richessis, and 
his herte scha/ be a3ens the hooli testa- 
ment, and he schal do, and schal turne 
a3en in to his lond. In tyme ordeyned 29 
he schal turne ajen, and schal come to 
the south, and the laste schal not be lijk 
the formere. And schippis with three or-30 
dris of ooris, and Romayns, schulen come 
on hym, and he schal be smytun. And he 
schal turne ajen, and schal haue indigna- 
cioun a3ens the testament of seyntuarie, 
and he schal do. And he schal turne a3en, 
and he schal thenke a3ens hem that for- 
soken the testament of seyntuarie. And 31 
armes of hym schulen stonde, and schulen 
defoule the seyntuarie*, and schulen take 
awei the contynuel sacrifice, and schulen 
3yue abhomyuacioun in to desolacioun. 
And wickid men schulen feyne testament 32 
gilefuli ; but the puple that knowith her 
God schal holde, and do. And tau3zt men3s 


® the seyntuarie ac. 


¥ Om. A pr. m. CEFGHIMNPQRS pr.m. U pr. m. X. 


XI. 34—40. DANIEL. 659 


manye, and shuln falle in swerd, and in 
flawme, and in caitiftee, and in to rauyn 
asof days. And whanne thei shuln falle 
to gidre, thei shuln be reysid vp with 
litil help; and ful many shuln be applied, 
ssor putt to, to hem gylfully. And of 
lerned men shuln falle, that thei be 
wellyd to gydre, and be chosen, and be 
maad whijt unto the tyme determynyd ; 
36for 3it an other tyme shal be. And the 
kyng shal do after his wille, and shal be 
reysid vp, and magnyfied a3einus eche 
god, and a3eines God of goddis he shal 
speke great thingus; and he shal be 
dressid, til wrath be fulfillid. Forsothe 
37 diffnicioun, or dome, is fully don. And 
he shal not rette the God of his fadris, 
and he shal be in coueityngis of wym- 
men, nether he shal recke eny of goddis, 
for a3einus alle thingus he shal ryse to 
asgydre. Forsothe he shal wirshipe god of 
Maosym in his place, and he shal ho- 
noure god, whom his fadris knewen not, 
in gold, and syluer, and precious stoon, 


in the puple schulen teche ful many men, . 
and schulen falle in swerd, and in flawme, 
and in toY caitifte, and in to raueyn of 
daies. And whanne thei han feld* doun, 34 
thei schulen be reisid bi a litil help; and 
ful many men schulen be applied to hyim* 
gilefuli. And of lerud men schulen falle, 35 
that thei be wellid togidere, and be chosun, 
and be maad whijt til to a> tyme deter- 
myned; for 3it another tyme schal be. 


And the kyng* schal do bi his wille, and 36* 4nd the king; 
oe ‘ that is, Anti- 
he schal be reisid, and magnefied a3ens ech  crist. schal do bi 


: rite ae 
god, and ajens God of goddis he schal fi wes fr 


speke grete thingis; and he schal be dressid, be browt to 


til wrathfulnesse be fillid. For the deter- _ thingis ben 
5 ‘ seid of Antiok 
mynynge is perfitli maad. And he® schal 37 oneli, as he 


ae fi f 
not arette the God of hise fadris, and he AMEnEt foe 


: ee, | these thingis 
schal be in the coueitisis’ of wymmen, and jon hee 


he schal not charge ony of goddis, for [verefied au] 
5 J 5 3 for he of Antiok to 


schal rise a3ens alle thingis. Forsothe he 3s the lettre, hut 
G é oneli of Anti- 
schal onoure god of Maosyin in his place,  crist. reisid and 
. sha . magnefied 
and he schal worschipe god, whom hise ee 
fadris knewen not, with gold, and siluer, 9°43 3s Pout 
: er seith in (the Q] 
and preciouse stoon, and preciouse thingis. _ ij, Pistle to 


syand precious thingus. And he shal do And he schal do that he make strong 39 Antierist js 
that he make stronge Maosym, with an Moosym, with the alien god which he arti 
which is 


alien god whom he knewe not. And he knew. And he schal multiplie glorie, and Fis¢05 
shal multiplie glorie, and shal 3eue to schal 3yue power to hem in many thingis, — ether which 


. : 3 = is worschipid 
hem power in many thingus, and he shal and schal departe the lond at his wille. and schewith 
him silf as 


4odeparte erth at his wille. And inutyme And in the tyme determyned the kyng of 40 if te is God. 


nN 


sett® the kyng of south‘ shal fi3t a3einus the south schal fizjte a3ens hym, and the Tee 
not be ex- 

powned no but of Anticrist, for whi Antiok reiside not him silf azenus ech god, but he worschipide the idol of Jouys, and settide it in the temple of 
Jerusalem, and induside Jewis to the worschiping therof, as myche as he my3te, as it is red in i. book and ij. book of Machabeus. end a3enus God 
of goddis he schal speke grete thingis ; for Anticrist schal speke dispisingis and ‘blasfemyngis (blasfemies qu] azenus God of heuene, for he schal 
schewe him silf as if he is God. he schal be dressid ; for his malice schal be brou3t to his purpos, for he schal sitte in the temple as if he is God, but 
not longe, for it sueth til wrathfulnesse of God be fillid on him, whanne bi Goddis vertu he schal die sudenli, as seintis seien, and the postle seith in 
ij. Pistle to Tess. ij. c*. The Lord Jhesu bi the spirit of his mouth schal sle Anticrist. the determynyng, etc.; as if he seide, it is determynd so in 
the biforknowing of God, and therfor it is so certeyn of tyme to comynge, as if ‘he [it au] were now doon of tyme passid. not arette the God of hise 
fadris ; for Anticrist schal be born of Jewis, ether of Cristen men, that worschipen God of heuene, and Anticrist schal do awei his worschiping, and 
mystake to him silf. and he schal be in the coueitisis of wymmen ; for thon3 Anticrist feyne chastite with outforth, to disseyue liztliere othere men, 
netheles he schal not be chast verili, for he schal be ful of [al qu] malice, and so he schal be leccherouse, and therfor he is signefied bi the beeste 
stiynge fro the see, in xvij. c°. of Apocalips. In the beeste is signefied fleisly iolynesse, ether leccherie, and therfor the filosofore in j. book of Etikis 
clepith fleisli liyf, ether lustful liyf, beestli liyf. he schal not charge ony of goddis ; this is opynli soth of Anticrist, and fals of Antiok. for he scha? 
rise a3enus alle thingis ; that is, ajenus God and men; for Anticrist schal rise ajenus alle men, in makinge hem suget to him silf, and a3enus God, 
in mystakinge to himsilf the ‘worschiping [worschipe u] of God. onowre god Maosym ; Maosym is interpretid strong hold, ether help; the prinat 
fend of Anticrist schal be clepid thus, for he schal haue of him strong hold and help; ether in other maner strong hold is seid a place that schal be 
hildid of Anticrist, where he schal worschipe pryuyli thilke fend. and he schal worschip god, etc.; this word ond is set here for this word that is. 
whom hise fadris knewen not; that is, Jewis ether Cristen men, of whiche Anticrist schal come. with gold and siluer, etc.; for in ‘that [this vu] 
place Anticrist schal sette preciouse richessis, as in a place most priuy, and most stronge. he schal do; this thing that is seid. that he make strong 
Maosym ; that is, thilke place where he schal worschipe the fend priuyli; therfor he seith, with the alien god which he knew, bi homelynesse, and 
couenauntis maad with him, for he schal haue a couenaunt with that fend, priuat ether special to him silf, which fend owith to be alien fro ech man. 
he schal multiple glorie ; to men obeiynge to him, in enhaunsing hems for he schal enhaunse yuele men, that schulen obeie to him, and he schal 
pursue goode men, that echulen ajenstonde him. power in many thingis ; he seith not in alle thingis, for he schal not make ony man enene with him 
silf. departe the lond at his wille ; that is, for his wille, to hise homeli men. in tyme determynd ; of God, that bifor seeth and ordeyneth thingis 
to comynge. the king of the south; that is, [of qu] Egipt. and the kyng of the north ; that is, Anticrist, signefied here bi Antiok, that was the 


8 bifore sett G sec.m. tthe south G sec. m. 


yOm. K prom Zfaller, ahemvu. & Om. 1. ¢Om.N. 4 coueitise a. 


4p Q 


660 DANIEL. 


hym, and the kyng of the north as a 
tempest shal cum a3eimus hym, in chaaris, 
sand horsmen, and grete nauee. And he 
shal entre londis, and shal breke to gydre ; 
and shal passe by, and shal entre in to 
glorious lond, and many shuln falle. For- 
sothe these aloone shuln be saued fro the 
hond of hym, Edom, and Moab, and of 
athe princis of the sonys of Amon. And 
he shal sende his hond in to londis, and 
asthe lond of Egypt shal not scape. And 
he shal be lord of tresours of gold, and 
sylter, and in alle precious thingis of 
Egypt; and he shal passe by Libie and 
44 Ethiopie. And fame shal truhle hym 
fro eest and north; and he shal cum in 
grete multitude, for to breke to gydre, 
4sand slea ful manye. And he shal sette 
his tabernacle tro Feduo, bitwixe seese, 
vpon a noble hille and holy; and he* 
shal cum vnto the hee3 therof, and no 
man shal help hym. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Forsothe in that tyme My3hel shal 
rijse, the grete prince, that stondith for 
sonys of thi peple. And tyme shal cuin, 
what maner was not, fro that sithen 
folkis bygunen for to be, vn to that 
tyme. And in that tyine thi peple shal 
be saued, eche that shuln be founden 
2wrijten in the boke of lijf. And manye 
of these that slepten in dust of erthe, 
shuln wake out, other in to euerlastinge 
lyf, and othere in to shenship, that thei 
3se euermore. Forsothe thei that shuln 
be tau3t men, or wijse, shuln shyne as 
shynyng of the firmament, and thei that 
lernen, or enfourmen, manye to ri3twijs- 
nesse, as sterris in to euerlastyngnessis. 
4 Forsothe thou, Danyel, close the wordis, 
and seale the boke, vn to the tyme or- 


XI. 41—~-XII. 4. 


kyng of the north schal come as a tempest figure of An. 
° . 6 5 ticrist. entrein 

ajens hym, in charis, and with® kny3tis, ¢ londis, and 
A . schal defoule ; 

and in greet nauei. And he schal entre 41 for the king of 
in to londis, and schal defonle hem’; and  =s'pt schal be 


oon of the firste 
defoulid of An- 
ticrist. in to the 
gloriouse lond ; 


he schal passe®, and schal entre in to the 
gloriouse lond, and many schulen falle. 


4 that is, Judee, 
Forsothe these dondis aloone schulen be which is seid 
: loriouse, fo 
sauyd fro his hond, Edom, and Moab, and tiyraclis doon 
‘ there of God 
princes of the sones of Amon. And he42'e for the” 
schal sende his hond in to Jondis, and the  werkis of oure 


helthe maad 
And _ he 43 there bi Crist. 
and many schu- 
len falle ; that 
is, many londis, 
and citees, and 
folkis schulen 
be suget to An- 
And fame fro the eest and fro 44 ticrist. these 
aloone, etc.; E- 


the north schal disturble hym; and heschal —domand Moab, 
etc.; this schal 


come with a greet multitude, to al to-breke, 6 doon bi 
and to sle ful many men. And he schal 45 Ate ee 
sette his tabernacle in Apheduo, bitwixe  schulen hane 

: ‘ there sum re- 
the sees, on the noble hil and hooli; and fuytinthetyme 
he schal come til to the hei3the therof, and 
no man schal helpe hyin. 


lond of Egipt schal not ascape. 
schal be lord of tresouris of gold, and of 
siluer, and in alle preciouse thingis of 
Egipt; also he schal passe bi Libie and 
Ethiopie. 


of Anticrist ; 
and this schal 
be doon for fe- 
ble men, that 
dursten not put 
hemsilf forth 
a3enus Anti- 


CAP. XII. 
crist. sende his 


Forsothe in that tyme Mi3hel, the greet 1 hoondinto onde; 
prince, schal rise, that stondith for the Oa 


crist schal sende 
sones of thi puple. And tyme schal come, ™OSmgeris 1p 


to londis, where 


what maner tyme was not, fro that ¢yme he schsl not 

fro which folkis bigunnen to be, ‘vn toi ore ee 
e . 7 - 

that tyme. And in that tyme thi puple Gin rei te 


: 2 s for i 
schal be saued, ech that is foundun writun  Sihi of che 
‘ g firste londis su- 
in the book of life. And many of heme a eS 
that slepen in the dust of erthe, schulen ple wr 
5 ; ae jiopie; for 
awake fulli, summe in to euerlastynge lijf, also these twei 
herent i i that tne rewmes schulen 
and othere in to schenschipe, tha €1 S€ be suget to An- 
; . ticrist. and 
euere. Forsothe thei that ben tau3t, schu-3 fame, ee, ; for 
len schyne as the schynyng of the firma- tam Ae 
ment, and thei that techen many men to _ that nylenobeie 
i 6. 1S to Anticrist, 
ri3tfulnesse, schulen schyne as sterris in schal disturble 
° him, ether in 
to euerlastynge euerlastyngnessis. But4 jap’the fame 
thou, Danyel, close the wordis, and aseele of summe feith- 
i ful kyngis, that 
the book, til to the! tyme ordeyned ; fu] — olen asen- 
stonde him. 
come with a 


greet multitude; for he schal hane a ful greet oost. sle ful many men; that is, alle men that nylen obeie to him. in Apheduo; that is, Emaws, as 
Jerom seith, which place is bitwixe the deed see and the see of myddil erthe. on the noble hil and hooli; that is, the hil af Olyuete, ether Sion; fer 
whanne Anticrist schal sette bis tabernacle in Emaws, he schal sette it in a maner on the hil of Olyuete, ether on the hil of Sian, that ben ny3 hillis, 
and ben fer oneli bia myle, for the hilli places of Jerusalem biginnen at Emaws. and he schal come til to the heizthe therof ; for Anticrist schal 
come in to the hil of Sion, in the place where the temple was, that he sitte there, and be worschipid, as if he he God, as Poul seith; also he schal 
come til to the cop of the hil of Olyuete, fro whennus Crist stiede in to henene, as if he schal stie fro thennus an hi3 bi the vertu of the fend beringe 
him. and no man schal helpe him ; for he schal be slayn there sudenli, bi Goddis vertu, as Poul seith in ij. Pistle to Tess. ij. c®. Lire here. cau. 


8 Om. AGH. 


€ in CEFGIIKMNPQRSUX. 


KMNPQRUX. itil to A pr. m. CEGHIMNPQRUXY. 


f Om. CEFGHKMNPQRSUX, 
1 Om. Ac sec. m. EFHIKMQRSU, 


& passe forth ru see.m. 4 Om. CEFGHI prem. 


XU. 5——13. 


deynyd; ful manye shuln passe, and 
sscience manyfold shal be. And Y, Da- 
nyel, saw3, and loo! as two other stoden ; 
oon stode on this syde, vpon the ryuere 
of floode, and an other on that syde, on 
6the tother part of the floode. And I 
sayde to the man, that was clothid with 
lynnen, whiche stode vpon the watris of 
the floode, Hou longe the eende of these 
7merueylis? And Y herde the man, that 
was clothid in lynnen, whiche stode vpon 
watris of the floode, whann he hadde 
reyside vp his ri3t' and left half in to 
heuen, and swore by the lynynge in to 
with outen eende, For in to tyme, and 
tymys, and the half of tyme. And whan 
scateryng abrood of the lond of holy 
peple shal be fulfillid, alle these thingus 
sshuln be eendid. And Y herde, and vn- 
dirstode not; and saide, My lord, what 
gshal be after these thingus? And he 
saith, Go thou, Danyel, for the wordis 
ben closid and sealid, vn to tyme" or- 
1odeynyd. Thei shuln be chosen, and be 


maad whijt, and as fijr many shuln be, 


proued, and vnpytous men shuln do vn- 
pytously, nether alle vnpitouse men shuln 
vndirstonde; forsothe tau3t men shuln 
uvndirstonde. And fro tyme in whiche 
contynuel sacrifice shal be don awey, and 
abomynacioun in to desolacioun shal be 
sett, days a thousand two hundrid and 
iznynty. Blessid zs’ he, that abydith, and 
fully cummeth, vn to days a” thousand 
13thre hundrid and thritty and fyue. For- 


DANIEL. 


661 


many men schulen passe, and kunnyng 
schal be many fold. And Y, Danyel, si3,5 
and lo! as tweyne othere men stood™; oon 
stood on this side, on the brenk of the 
flood, and another on that side, on’ the 
tother® part of the flood. And Y seidec 
to the man, that was clothid in lynnun 
clothis, that stood on the watris of the 
flood, Hou long schal be the ende of these 
merueils? And Y herde the man, that7 
was clothid in lynnun clothis, that stocd 
on the watris of the flood, whanne he 
hadde reisid his ri3thond and lefthond to 
heuene, and hadde sworun by hym that 
lyueth with outen ende, For in to a° tyme, 
and tymes, and the half of tyme. And 
whanne the scateryng of the hoond of the 
hooli puple is fillid, alle these thingis 
schulen be fillid. And Y herde, and vn-g 
durstood not; and YP? seide, My lord, what 
schal be aftir these thingis? And hes 
seide, Go thou, Danyel, for the wordis ben 
closid and aseelid, til to the tyme deter- 
myned. 
and schulen be maad whijt, and schulen 
be preued as fier, and wickid men schn- 
len do wickidli, nether alle wickid men 
schulen vndurstonde; certis tau3t men 
schulen vndurstonde. 
whanne contynuel sacrifice is takun awei*, 
and abhomynacioun is set in to discoum- 
fort, schulen be a thousynde daies two 
hundrid and _ nynti. 
abideth, and cometh fulli, til’ a thousynde 
daies thre hundrid and fyue and thritti. 


* fro the tyme 
whanne the con- 
tynuel sacrifice 
is takun awei, 
etc.; that is, fra 
the tyme in 
which the sa- 
crament of the 
auter schal 
ceesse to be 
halewid so- 
lempneli. and 
abhomynacioun 
is set in to dise 
coumfort 3 that 
is, Anticrist is 
schewid to men 
for to be wor- 
schipid; fro 
that tyme schu- 
Jen be a thou- 
sinde daies ij. 
hundrid and 
nynti, that 
maken tlre 
3eer and a half, 
with xij. daies, 
for o 3eer hath 
thre liundrid 
daies and Ixv.; 
therfor thus 

it is open, 

that thre 3eer 
and an half of 
the persecu- 
eioun of Anti- 
erist schulen 
not be bigun- 
nun fro that 
tyme in which 
he schal schewe 


Many men schulen be chosun, 10 himsilf,‘to [and 


au] drawe 
summen to 
him, but fro 
that tyme 
whanne he 
schal be of so 
greet power, 
that he schal 


And fro the tyme 11 schewe him to 


men, for to be 
worschipid, and 
whanne feith- 
ful men sehu- 
Ten not be hardi 
to make the 


He is blessid, that 12 sacrement of 


the auter apen- 
li, for the drede 
of him. til a 

thousynde daies 
ily. hundrid and 





«t2xv.; here to the noumbre biforgoinge ben addid xlv. daies that schulen he 30unn of God, aftir the deth of Anticrist, bifar the doom, that thei that 
ben disseyued in the persecucionn of Anticrist, moun do penaunce; and therfor Danyel seith, he is blessid that cometh fulli til to a thousinde daies 
tij. hundrid and xxxv.; that is, he is blessid, that schal stonde in the persecucioun of Anticrist, that schal dure hi thre 3eere and an half, and 3it schal 
lyue ouer this bi xiv. daies ; for if he is not disseyued bi Anticrist, he schal be corowned as a perfit man, and if he was disseyued, he mai do penaunce 
in thn xlv. daies suynge the deth of Anticrist ; for thanne his falsnesse schal be open to alle men, and his power sehal be takun awei. Thon3 this 
seiyng is comyn ynow, netheles it is not had herbi, that the comyng of Crist to the doom schal be anoon aftir xlv. naturel daies, to be rikenyd fra 
the deth of Anticrist, for it is nat determynd certeynli that tho xlv. daies ben vsual, ether custumable daies, ether daies of 3eeris, bi that word of 
Ezechiel in [the @] iiij.e°. Y 3af to thee a dai for a seer; and thon3 it were determynd of vsual daies, netheles it is not determynd that the comyng to 
the doom is anon aftir tha; rather it semeth, that more space of tyme schal come bitwixe, bi this that Crist seith, in xxiiij. ¢°. of Matheu, As in the 
daies of Noe men weren etinge and drinkinge, weddinge and 3yuynge to weddinge, til to that dai wherinne Noe entride in to the schip, and 
thei knewen nat, til the greet flood cam, and took awei alle men, so schal be the comynge of mannus sone. And summe Cristen doctours 
teferren this to the tyme that schal be bitwixe the deth of Antierist, and the dai of doom, but sich pees and sikirnesse, in which feestis and wed- 
dingis ben vsid, semen not to be of so litil tyme, as of xlv. daies, and most if this were determynd of vsual daies; and this Y seide fulliere in xxxix. 
c°. of Ezechiel. Bi thingis seid here, the falsnesse of Jewis is apyn, that scien, that here is set the tyme for which thei owen to abide Messias, ether 
Sauyour to comynge, and as thei seien, a dai is takun here for a 3eer, so that thei owen to abide bi a thousinde iij. hundrid and xxxv. 3eer, in biginnyng 
the rikenynge of these 3ceris, fra the tyme wherinne the idol was set in the temples but an argument ether pref is maad ajenus this sciynge, for ether 
the settyng of idol is takun of hem of the idal set in the tyme of Antiok Epifanes, and this must be seid bi tho Jewis that expownen of Antiok 
thingis ‘itor seid in this chapitre, and thanne the falsnesse of hem apperith apynli, for fro that tyme til now ben passid more than a thousynde and 
iiij. hundrid 3eer, and netheles thei han nat 3it Messias, as thei seien; ether it is takun of the idol set bi the emperaur of Rome, aftir the distriyng 
maad bi Titus, and thanne it bihoueth, that thingis biforseid in this chapitre weren expowned of the emperour af Rome; but this mai not be, for 
that that is seid, And he schal not charge ony of goddis, ete. mai not be expowned of him, far whi Romayns worschipiden [the Qu] goddis of alle 


t riz3t side 4 sec.m. “the tyme 4. YOm.Gu. WwW ofa G sec.m. 


™ gstoden is. "ootherr. @Om.1. POm.1. ‘tou. 


662 


sothe go thou to determynd*; and thou 
shalt reste az3ein, and shalt stonde in thi 
sort, or part, in the eende of days. 


Hidre to we reeden Danyel in Ebru; 
other thingis that suen, til in to the eende 
of the boke, ben translatid of the making 
of Theodosyon. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Aman was in Babiloyne, and the name 
2of hym Joachym. And he toke a wijf, 
Susanne by name, the dou3tir of Elchie, 
ful faire, and dreeding the Lord. For- 
sothe the fadir and modir of hir, when 
thei weren iust, lerneden her dou3ter 
safter the lawe of Moyses. Forsothe Joa- 
chym was ful riche, and to hym was 
a gardyne ny3 to his hous; and Jewis 
camen to gidre to hym, for that he was 
smore honourable of alle. And two olde 
domesinen ben ordeynyd in that 3eer, of 
whiche the Lord spac, for wickidnesse 
wente out of Babyloyne, of the eldre 
iugis whiche weren seen for to rewle the 
6peple. These ofte hauntiden the hous of 
Joachym; and alle that hadden domis 
z7camen to hem. Forsothe whenn the pe- 
ple turnyde a3ein after mydday, Susanne 
entride, and walkide in the gardyne of 
shir husbond. And the eldre men sawen 
hir eche day entrynge, and walkinge; and 
thei brennyden ‘in the" coueitise of hir. 
“And thei turnyden awey her witt, and 
bowiden awey her ee3en, that thei shul- 
den not see heuen, nether shulde hane 
1omynde of iust domys. Forsothe bothe 
weren woundid in loue of hir, nether 
11shewiden to hem self her sorewe; for- 
sothe thei shameden for to shewe to hem 
self her coueitise, willynge for to ligge 
igwith hir. And thei aspieden eche day 
bysilier for to see hir. And the tother 
13 Saide to the tother, Go we home, for oure 
of mete is. And thei gon out, departiden 


* the determynd tyme G sec. m. 


Tintov. § Om. 1. 
In the daies ag. 


é u Om. g. 
ether coueilise 1. 


abi g. 


v Om. g. 
> concupiscence 1. 


DANIEL. 


t Theodosion, and seith thus. ¥. 
W to be ingis g. 
C aspie g. 


XII. 1-—13. 


But go thou, Danyel, to the tyme deter- 13 folkis. Also it 


myned; and thou schalt reste, and stonde 
in thi part, in the ende of daies. 


Hidir to we reden Daniel in Ebreu 
book ; othere thingis that suen, til to the 
ende, ben translatid out of ‘the transla- 
ctoun of ® Theodostou'. 


CAP. XIII. 


Att man was in Babiloyne, and his name} 
was Joachim. And he took a wijf, Su-2 
sanne bi name, the dou3ter of Helchie, a 
womman ful fair, and dredynge the Lord. 
Forsothe hir fadir and modir, whanne thei} 
weren ri3tful, tauj3ten her dou3ter* bit 
the lawe of Moises. Sotheli Joachim was 4 
ful riche, and he’ hadde a gardyn ni3 his 
hous; and the Jewis camen to hym, for he 
was the moost worschipful of alle. Ands 
tweyne elde men weren ordeyned iugis” 
in that 3eer, of whiche the Lord spak, that 
wickidnesse 3ede out of Babiloyne, of the 
eldere iugis* that semeden to gouerne the 
puple. These zugis vsiden oftY the house 
of Joachym; and alle men that hadden 
domes camen to hem. Forsothe whanne7 
the puple hadde turned a3en after myddai, 
Susanne entride, and walkide in the gar- 
dyn of hir hosebonde. And the eldre mens 
si3en hir entrynge ech dai, and walkynge ; 
and thei brenten out in to ‘the couetise® 
of hir. And thei turneden awei her wit,9 
and bowiden doun her i3en, that thei siz3en 
not heuene, nether bithou3ten on iust domes. 
Sotheli bothe weren woundid bi the Joue 10 
of hir, and thei schewiden not her sorewe 
to* hem silf togidere ; for thei weren ll 
aschamed to schewe to hem silf her co- 
ueitise”, willynge to ligge fleischli bi bir. 
And thei aspieden ech dai more bisili to12 
se‘ hir. And oon seide to the tothir, Go we 13 
hoom, for the our of mete is. And thei 
jeden out, and departiden fro hem silf. 
And whanne thei hadden turned a3en, 14 


Win to 4G. 


t Here bigynneth a pistle of holy Sussanne. 
x Jewisg. yOm.g. = concupiscence, 


is open bi this, 
that the waking 
of sleperis in 
the dust of 
erthe, of which 
it is seid in the 
biginnyng of 
this chapitre, 
schal’ be vndur- 
stondnn of the 
veri rising ajen 
in the ende of 
the world, and 
it is not takun 
for the going 
ont of caves in 
the tyme of Ma- 
chabeis, as the 
fals Porfirie 
seith, for Da- 
nyel roos not 
thanne in this 
maner. Lire 
here. cau. 


* tausten her 
doutir, ete. ; 
here fadris and 
modris ben 
monestid to 
teche bi the 
lawe of God, 
not oneli ber 
sones, but also 
her doustris. 
The Glos here. 
ceau. 


XL 14—27. 


fro hem self. And whann thei hadden 
departid, thei camen in to oon; and thei 
axinge cause eche of other, knawlechiden 
her coueitise. And thann in comoun 
thei ordeynyden tyme, whann thei mi3ten 
15 fynde hir aloon. Forsothe it is don, whanne 
thei aspieden a conenable day, sche en- 
tride sum tyme, as 3isterday and three 
days gon, with two damisels aloone, and 
wolde be washen in the gardyne; sothely 
isheete was. And no man was there, out 
taken two olde men hid, byholdyng hir. 
17And she saide to the maydens, Brenge 
je to me oyle, and sope, or oynement; 
and shitte 3e the doris of the gardyne, 
isthat Y be washen. And thei diden as 
she comaundide; and thei closiden the 
doris of the gardeyn, and wenten out by 
a postern, for to brenge whiche thingus 
she bad. And she wiste not olde men for 
19to be hid with yn forth. Sothely when 
the damysels weren gon out, the two 
olde men rysen, and runnen to hir, aud 
20saiden, Loo! doris of the gardyne ben 
closid, and no man seeth vs, and we ben 
in coueitise of thee. Wherfore accorde to 
21 vs, and be ioyned with vs. That 3if thou 
wilt not, we shuln saye witnessyng a3einus 
thee, that a 3ung man was with thee, 
and for this cause thou sentist out the* 
22damysels fro thee. And Susanne inward- 
ly sorewide, and saith, Anguyshis ben to 
me on eche syde; forsothe 3if Y shal do 
this thing, deth is to me; sothely 3if Y 
shal not do, Y shal not ascape 3oure 
23hondis. Bot bettir it is to me for to falle 
with outen werk in to 3our hondis, than 
24 for to synne in the siz3t of the Lord. And 
Susanne criede with a grete voice, for- 
sothe and the olde men crieden ajeinus 
2hir. Sothely the ton ran, and opnyde 
26the dore of the gardeyn. Forsothe ser- 
uauntes of the hous fellen yn by the 
posterne, whan thei herden cry in the 
27 gardeyne, for to see what it was. For- 


a 


DANIEL. 


663 


thei camen in to o place; and thei axiden 
ech of othere the cause, and thei knou- 
lechiden her coueitise. And thane in 
comyn thei ordeyneden a tyme, whaiine 
thei mi3ten fynde hir aloone. Forsothe it 1s 
was doon, whanne thei aspieden a couen- 
able dai, sche entride sumtyme, as 3istir- 
dai and the thridde dai ago, with twei 
damysels aloone, and wolde be waischun* 
in the gardyn; for whi heete was. Andis 
no man was there®, outakun tweyne’ elde 
men hid’, biholdynge hir. Therfor sche17 
saide to the damysels, Bringe 3e to me 
oile, and oynementis; and close 3e" the 
doris of the gardyn, that Y be waischun. 
And thei diden as sche ‘hadde comaundidi; 18 
and thei closiden the doris of the gardyn, 
and 3eden out bi a posterne, to bringe tho 
thingis that sche hadde comaundid. And 
thei wisten not, that the elde) men weren 
hid with ynne. Sotheli whanne the da-1y 
mysels weren gon out, tweyne elde men 
risiden, and runnem to hir, and seiden, Lo! 20 
the doris of the gardyn ben closid, and no 
man seeth vs, and we ben in ‘the coueitise* 
of thee. Wherfor assente thou to vs, and be 
thou meddlid with vs. That! if thou wolt 21 
not, we schulen seie witnessyng ajens 
thee, that a 3ong man was with thee, and 
for this cause thou sentist out the dame- 
sels fro thee. And Susanne inwardli so-22 
rewide, and seide, Angwischis ben to me 
on ech side; for if Y do this, deth is to 
me; forsothe if Y do not, Y schal uot 
ascape 30ure hondis. But it is betere™ 2s 
for me to falle in to 3oure hondis without 
werk, than to do synne in the si3t of 
the Lord. And Susanne criede ‘an hi3" 21 
with greet vois, but also the elde men cri- 
eden ajens hir. Forsothe oon ran, and 2s 
openede the door of the gardyn. Sotheli® 26 
whanne the seruauntis of the hous hadden 
herd the cry in the gardyn, thei fellen in 
bi the posterne, to se what it was. But27 
after that the Yelde men spaken, the ser- 


x thi K. 


d waischid CFGIKMNPQRSUX. 
‘the twog. - 8 yhid 1. h Om. g 
™ more betere g. n Om. g. © Forsothe g. 


e ther was not ony man I. ony man was not CEFGIIMNPQRSUXg. 
i comaunde g. 
P these g. 


J eldere g. k coneupiscence 1. 1 And g. 


DANIEL. XIII, 28—42. 


664 


uauntis weren aschamed greetly, for neuer 
was siche a word seid of Susanne. And 
the morew dai was maad. And whanne2zs 


sothe after that the olde men spaken, 
the seruauntis shamyden gretely, for 
siche word was neuer herd of Susanne. 


28 And the morewe day is maad. And 
whanne the peple cam to hir husbond 
Joachym, and the two prestis camen ful 
of yuel thou3t a3einus Susanne, for to 

29slea hir. And thei seiden byfore alle the 
peple, Sende 3e to Susanne, dou3ter of 


the puple was comyn to Joachym, hir 
hosebonde, also the twei prestis fulle of 
wickid thou3te1 camen a3ens Susanne, for 
to sle hir. And thei seiden bifor al the29 
puple, Sende 3e to Susanne, the dou3ter 
of Helchie, the wijf of Joachym. And 


anoon thei senten. And sche cam with3o 
hir fadir, and modir, and children, and 

alle kynesmen. Certis™" Susanne was ful31 
delicat’, and fair of schap. And thotse 


Elchie, wyf of Joachym. And anoon thei 
svsenten. And she came with fadir, and 
modir, and sonnys, and alle hir cosyns. 
31 Forsothe Susanne was ful delicate, and 


32 faire of fourme, ‘or shapY. And the ylke 
wickid men comaundeden, that she shulde 
be vnkeuered, sothely she was hillid; that 
or so thei weren fulfillid with tairnesse of 

33hir. Therfore hern? wepten, and alle 

sithat knewen hir. Sotheli two prestis 
rijsyng to gydre in mydil of the peple, 
puttiden hir hondis vpon the hed of hir. 
3s Whiche wepynge byhelde to heuen, for- 
sothe the hert of hir was hanynge trist 
36in the Lord. And the prestis saiden, 
Whann we walkiden aloon in the gar- 
deyn, she this came yn with two maydens 
damesels; and closide the dore of the gar- 

37 deyn, and lefte the damysels. And a 3ung 
man, that was hid, came to hir, and dide 

38lechorie with hir. Forsothe we, whanne 
we weren in a corner of the gardeyn, 
seeynge wickidnesse®, runnen to hem, and 
we sawen hem for to be mengid to gidre. 

x9 And sothely we mi3ten not cacche hym, 
for he was strengre than we; and the 

40 doris opnyd, he lepte out. Sothely when 
we hadden cau3t this®, we axiden, who 
was that 3unge man; and she wolde not 
shewe to vs. Of this thing we ben wit- 

4inesses. The multitude byleeuyde to hem, 
as to eldre men of the peple and iugis, 

azand condempnyden hir to deth. For- 
sothe Susanne criede with grete voice, 
and saide, Lord God euerlastinge, that 
art knower of hid thingus, that hast 


y Om. 4k sec. m. 


4 thou3tis g. 
t the g. 
NS sec. m. 


v And certis 1. 
u setten g. v for vu. 
» the deeth g. 


*thour. 4 thei 1g. 


z hern neegje frendis G sec. m. 


x Om. 1. 


wickid meu comaundiden, that sche schulde 
be vnhilid, for sche was kyuered; that 
nameli so thei schuldun be fillid of hir 
fairnesse. Therfor hir kynesmen wepten, 33 
and alle that knewen hir. 
twei prestis risiden togidere in the myddis 
of the puple, and settiden® her hondis on 
the heed of hir. And sche wepte, and bi- 35 
helde to heuene, and’ hir herte hadde 
trist in the Lord. And the prestis seiden, 36 
Whanne we walkiden aloone in the gar- 
dyn, this” Susanne* entride with twei 
damesels; and sche closide the dore of the 
gardyn, and lefte the damesels. And a37 
jong man, that was hid, cam to hir, and 
lai bi hir. 
corner of the gardyn, we sien the wickid- 
messe, and runnen to hem, and we sien 
hem meddlid togidere. And sotheli we39 
my3ten not take hym, for he was strongere 
than we; and whanne he hadde opened 
the doris, he skippide out. 
we hadde take this womman, we axiden, 
who was the 3onge man; and sche nolde? 
schewe to vs. Of* this thing we ben wit- 
nessis. The multitude bileuede to hem, 4! 
as to the eldre men and iugis of the pu- 
ple, and condempneden hir to deth». 
sothe Susanne criede loud with greet vois, 
and seide, Lord God, without bigynnyng 
and ende, that® art knowere of hid thingis, 
that knowist alle thingis bifore that thot 


a the wickidnesse G sec. m. b hir this 4. ~ 


8 delicat, ethir tendir CEFGHIKMNPQRUXYg. tendir, ethir delicat s. 
w sche this 1. 


yand weg. zwoldenot1. ® And of 


Forsothe the 34 


Certis whanne we weren in a38 


But whanne 40 


For- 42 


XIII. 43—57. 


knowen alle thingus byfore thei be maad; 
43thou wost, for thei han born fals wit- 
nessinge a3eines me. And loo! Y dye, 
whann Y dide nou3t of these thingus, 
whiche these maliciously maken to gydre 
44a3einus me. Forsothe the Lord herd the 
asvoice of hir. And whann she was ledde 
to deth, the Lord reyside a spirit of a 
463ungir® chijld, whose name Danyel. And 
he cryede with greete voyce, Y am cleene 
470f the blood of this. And al the peple 
to gyder turnyd to hym saide, What is 
this word, whom thou hast spoken ? 
48 Whiche, whanne he stode in the mydil 
of hem, saide, So 3e, foolis, sonys of 
Yrael, not demynge nether knowynge 
that thing that is iust, condempneden 
49the dou3ter of Yrael. Turne 3e a3ein to 
dome, for thei han spoke fals witnessyng 
soajzeinus hir.. Therfore the peple turned 
ajein with hi3yng. And the olde men 
saiden to hym, Cum thou, and sitt in 
mydil of vs, and shewe thou to vs; for 
51God 3aue to thee honour of eelde. And 
Danyel saide to hem, Departe 3e hem fro 
a twynne, or eche fro other, fer, and Y 
52 Shal wysely deme hem. Therfore, whanne 
thei weren departid the tother fro the 
tother, he clepide oon of hem, and saide 
to hym, Thou olde of yuel days, nowe 
thi synnes camen® on thee, whiche thou 
53 Wrou3tist byfore, demynge vniust domys, 
oppressinge innocentis, and delyuerynge 
gylti, sayinge the Lord, Thou shalt not 
s4Slea the innocent and iust man. Now 
forsothe 3if thou sawist hir, saye thou, 
vndir what tree thou saw3 hem speek- 
ynge to hemself? Whiche saith, Vndir a 
55 Sloo tree. Sothely Danyel saide, Ri3tly 
thou lee3ist in to thin hed; loo! forsothe 
an aungel of the Lord, the sentence token 
s60f hym, shal kitte thee the mydil. And 
hym remoued awey, he comaundide the 
tother for to cum, and saide to hym, 
Seed of Canaan, and not of Juda, fourme, 
or fairnesse, disceyuyde thee, and co- 
57 Ueitise turnyde thin hert vpsadoun; thus 


DANIEL. 


665 


ben don; thou wost, that thei han bore 43 
fals witnessyng ajens me. And lo! Y dye, 
whanne Y haue not do ony of these thingis, 
whiche these men han maad maliciously 
ajens me. Forsothe the Lord herde the 44 
vois of hir. And whanne she was led to45 
the deth, the Lord reiside the hooli spirit 
of a 30nge child, whos name was Danyel. 
And he criede loude with a greet vois, Y 46 
am cleene of the blood of this ewomman. 
And al the puple turned ajen to hym, and 47 
seide, What is this word, which thou hast 
spoke? And whanne he stood in the myd-4s 
dis of hem, he seide, So 3e, fonned children 
of Israel, not demynge nether knowynge 
that that is trewe, condempneden the 
dou3ter of Israel. Turne 3e aj3en to the49 
dom, for thei spaken fals witnessyng a3ens 
hir. Therfor the puple turnede a3en with 50 
haaste. And the elde men‘* seiden to hym, 
Come thou, and sitte in the myddis of vs, 

and schewe to vs; for God hath 3oue to Tha Higa den 
thee the! onour of eelde. And Danyel 51 Fisica 
seide to hem, Departe 3e hem atwynny! — kunnyng, and 
fer™, and Y schal deme hem. Therfor, 52 te as 
whanne thei weren departid oon" fro the? 70:40 


* That is, the 
elde men of the 
puple, not tho 


for here myra- 

i } G cle fillide age. 
tother?, he clepide oon of hem, and seide “Ta te 
to hym, Thou elde man of yuel daies, now ee here. a] 


thi synnes ben comun, whiche thou wrou3t- 

ist bifore, demynge vniust domes, oppress- 53 

ynge innocentis, and delyuerynge gilti 

men, whanne the Lord seith, Thou schalt 

not sle an innocent and iust? man. But 54 

now if thou siest" hir, seie thou, vndur 

what tree thou siest hem spekynge togi- 

dere to hem silf? Which* seide, Vndur 

an haw tree. Forsothe Danyel seide,5s 

Ri3tli thou liest in thin heed; for lo! tlie 

angel of the Lord, bi a sentence takun of 

hym, schal kitte thee bi the myddil. And 56 

whanne he was stirid' awei", he comaund- 

ide the tother to come, and seide to hym, 

Thou seed of Canaanf, and not of J uda, Lea tal 
fairnesse hath disseyued thee, and coueitise  condiciouns, 
hath misturned thin herte; thus 3e diden 57 ee 
to the dou3tris of Israel, and thei dredden, 72. per 


nesse. A Pos- 
and spaken to 30u, but the dou3ter of Juda = ehere.caav. 


¢30ng 4. 4 comen a4. 
k men of the puple, not tho twey prestes kK. 1Om.g. Uatwynne arasug. ™aferN. ™ that oon g. 
othats. Pootheris. daiustg. "saigjg. 8 The whicher1. tmoued1. 4% Om. g. 
VOL. III. 4Q 


666 DANIEL. XIII. 58——XIV. 4. 


je diden to dou3tris of Yrael, and thei 
dredynge spaken with 30u, bot the dou3- 
ter of Juda suffride not jour wickidnesse. 
58 Now therfore saye to me, vndir what 
tree thou sawist hem spekynge to hem 
self? Whiche saith, Vndir a plum tree. 
59 Sothely Danyel saide to hym, Ri3tly and® 
thou lee3ist inf thin hed; forsothe an& 
aungel of the Lord dwellith, hauynge a 
swerd, that he kitte thee the mydil, and 
soslea jou. And so alle the peple criede 
with grete voyce, and blessiden the Lord, 
6ithat saueth men hopynge in hym. And 


thei rysen to gidre ajeins two” prestis ; 


sothely Danyel hadde conuicte hem of 
her mouth, for to haue saide fals wit- 
nessyng ; and thei diden to hem, as thei 
62 hadden do yuel a3eines the nei3bour, that 
thei diden after the lawe of Moyses, and 
slewen hem. And the giltlesse blode is 
63saued in that day. Forsothe Elchie and 
his wyf preysiden God in that day, for 
her dou3ter Susanne, with Joachym, hir 
husbond, and alle hir cosyns,,for foule 
64thing was not found in hir. Forsothe 
Danyel was maad greet in siz3t of the 
65 peple, fro that day and afterward. And 
kyng Astriages is putt to his fadris, and 
Cyrus of Perse resceyuyde the kyngdam 
lof hym. Forsothe Danyel was meete 
feere of the kyng, and honoured aboue 
alle the freendis of hym. 


CAP. XIV. 


2 And an ydol, Bel by name, was anentis 
men of Babyloyne, and there weren 
spendid in it by alle days twelue mesuris 
artabis, and oon conteyneth three bus- 
shels of floure, and fourty sheep, and of 

3wijn sixe amphoris. And the kyng wir- 
shipide hym, and wente by alle days for 
to honoure it; forsothe Danyel honour- 
ede his God. And the kyng saide to 
hym, Whi honourest thou not Bel ? 

4 Whiche answerynge saith to hym, For 
Y wirshipe not ydolis maad by hond, bot 
lyuyng God, that made of nou3t heuen 


suffride not 3oure wickidnesse. Now ther-s8 
for seie thou’ to me, vndur what tree thou 
siest hem spekynge togidere to hem silf ? 
Which” seide, Vndur a blak thorn. For-59 
sothe Danyel seide to hym, Ri3tli also thou 
liest in thin heed; for* the aungel of the 
Lord dwellith, and hath a swerd, that he 
kitte thee bi the myddil, and sle 3ou. 
Therfor al the puple criede lowde witheo 
greet vois, and blessiden ‘the Lord’, that 
saueth hem that hopen in hym. And theiei 
risiden togidere a3ens the twei preestis ; 
for Danyel hadde conuyctid hem bi* her 
mouth, that thei hadden bore fals witness- 
yng; and thei diden to hem, as thei had- 
den do yuele ajens the neizboresse, that 62 
thei schulden do bi the lawe of Moises, 
and thei killiden hem. And giltles blood 
was sauyd in that dai*. Forsothe Hel-63 
chie and his wijf herieden the Lord in 
that day, for Susanne, her dou3ter, with 
Joachym, hir hosebonde, and with alle hir 
kynesmen, for a foul thing was not foundun 
in hir. Forsothe Danyel was maad greet 61 
in the si3t of the puple, fro that dai and 
afterward. And kyng® Astriages was put 6s 
to his fadris, and Sirus of Perseis took his 
rewme. Forsothe Danyel eet with the} 
kyng, and was onourid aboue alle the 
frendis of hym. 


CAP. XIV. 


Also an idol, Bel bi name, was at Babi-2 
loyne, and twelue mesuris of cleene flour, 
of whiche mesuris eche conteynede thre 
buyschels, and fourti scheep, and sixe me- 
suris of wyn, that ben clepid amfrist, 
weren spendid in it ech day. And thes 
kyng worschipede that Beel, and 3ede ech 
dai to onoure hym; certis Danyel wor- 
schipide his God. And the kyng seide to 
hym, Whi worschipist thou not Beel ? 
Which* answeride, and seide to him, For4 
Y worschipe not idols maad bi hond, but 
God lyuynge, that made of nou;t heuene 


€Om. x. fintoacn. 6 Om.c pr.m. the G sec.m. the two G sec. m. 


¥Om.1. © The whiche 1. * forsothe g. y God g. Zing. ®day. Here eendith the pistle of holy 


Sussaune. g.  Y the kyng1. ¢ The whiche 1. 


+ An amfre, as 
Isidore in {the 
G] xvj. of E- 
thymologies, is 
a foure sqnuarid 
vessel, and hath 
handlis at the 
maner of eeris ; 
and anentis 
Greekis it con- 
teyneth a 
sqnare foot of 
wyn. A Postille 
here. cGQU. 


XIV. 5—17. 


and erthe, and hath power of eche fleshe. 
s And the kyng saide to hym, Wher Bel 
is not seen to thee a lyuynge God? whe- 
ther thon seest not, hon many thingus he 
éetith and drynkith eche day? And Da- 
nyel leiz3inge saith, Kyng, erre thou not; 
this is withynforth of cley, and with out- 
forth of brasse, nethir etith eny tyme, 
7nether drynkyth. And the kyng wroth 
clepide the prestis of hym, and saide to 
hem, No bot 3e shuln saye to me, who 
setith these 3iftis, 3e shuln dye. Forsothe 
3if 3e shuln shewe for Bel etith these, 
Danyel shal dye, for he blasfemyde Bel. 
And Danyel sayde to the kyng, Be it 
9don vp thi word. Forsothe there weren 
of Bel seuenty prestis, oute taken wijues, 
and litil children, and sonys. And the 
kyng with Danyel came into the temple 
10of Bel. And prestis of Bel saiden, Loo! 
we shuln go out, and thou, kyng, putte 
metis, and meynge wyne, and shitte the 
idore, and sealef with thi ryng. And 
whan thou shalt cum yn erly, no bot 
thou shalt fynde alle thingus eten of Bel, 
by deth we shuln dye, or Danyel, that 
i2lee3ide ajeinus vs. Forsothe thei dispis- 
iden£, for thei hadden maad an hid en- 
tryng vndir the bord, and therby thei 
entriden evermore, and deuoureden tho 
i3thingus. Forsothe it is don, after that 
they wenten out, and the kyng puttide 
metis byfore Bel, Danyel comaundide his 
children, and thei brou3ten to ashe, and by 
al the temple he ridlide byfore the kyng. 
And thei gon out closiden> the dore, and 
sealynge with ryng of the' kyng wenten 
uawey. Sothely the prestis wenten yn in 
ny3t, after her custome, and wijues, and 
sonys of hem, and eeten alle the thingus, 
isand drunken. Sotheli the kyng roose in 
the heei3ist spring of day, and Danyel 
ig with hym. And the kyng saith, Danyel, 
wher the sealis ben saaf? Whiche an- 
i7sweride, Kyng, saaf. And anoon whan 
thei hadden opnyd the dore, the kyng 
byhelde the bord, and he criede with 


f seel it a. 


4 ether spensis K marg. @comist N.  £ bis. 


DANIEL. 


& dispysiden, or sett at nou3l, G sec. m. 


& the nijt CEFGNIKMNPQRSUX. 


667 


and erthe, and hath power of ech fleisch. 
And the kyng seide to hym, Whether its 
semeth not to thee, that Bel is a lyuynge 
god ? whether thou seest not, hou grete 
thingis he etith and drynkith ech dai? 
And Daniel seide lei3inge, Kyng, erre thoue 
not; for whi this Be is of clei with ynne, 
and of bras withoutforth, and etith not 
ony tyme. And the king was wroth, and7 
clepide the preestis therof, and seide to 
hem, If 3e seien not to me, who it is that 
etith these costis’, 3e schulen die. For-8 
sothe if 3e schewen that Bel etith these 
thingis, Daniel schal die, for he blasfemede 
Bel. And Daniel seide to the king, Be it 
don bi thi word. Forsothe the prestis ofy 
Bel weren seuenti, outakun wyues, and 
litle children, ether seruauntis, and sones. 
And the kyng cam with Daniel in to the 
temple of Bel. And the preestis of Bel 10 
seiden, Lo! we schulen go out, and thou, 
kyng, sette meetis, and meddle wyn, and 
close thou the dore, and aseele 7¢ with thi 
ryng. And whanne thou entrist® eerli, if11 
thou fyndist not alle thingis etun of Bel, 
we schulen die bi deth, ether Daniel schal 
die, that liede a3ens vs. Sotheli thei trist-12 
iden, for thei hadden maad a priuy en- 
tryng vndur the boord, and bi it thei 
entriden euere, and deuouriden tho thingis. 
Forsothe it was don, aftir that thei 3eden 13 
out, and the king settide metis bifor Bel, 
Daniel comaundide to hise children, and 
thei brou3ten aischis, and he riddlide 
thorou3 al the temple bifor the kyng. And 
thei 3eden out, and closiden the dore, and 
aseeliden with the ryng of the kyng, and 
3eden forth. But the preestis entriden in'14 
ni3t®, bi her custom, and the wyues, and 
children of hem, and eeten® and drunken 
alle thingis. Forsothe the kyng roosis 
moost eerli, and Daniel with hym. Andic 
the kyng seide, Daniel, whether the seelis 
ben saaf? And he answeride, King, tho 
ben saaf. And anoon whanne thei hadden 17 
openyd the dore, the king biheelde the 
boord, and he criede an hi3 with a greet 
bh and closiden 4. | Om. @ prim. K. 


b thei eeten 1. 


4Q2 


668 


grete voyce, Grete art thou, Bel, and no 
isgyle is anentys thee. And Danyel lei3- 
ide, aud he heelde the kyung, lest he en- 
tride with ynforth; and saide, Loo! the 
pament, perceyue whos steppis these ben. 
ig And the kyng saide, Y see steppis of 
men, and wyinmen, and 3unge children. 
»oAnd the kyng is wroth. Thanne the 
kyng cau3te the prestis, and wijues, and 
sones of hem; and thei shewiden to hym 
sinale doris hid, by whom thei entriden, 
and wastiden what thingus weren on the 
zi bord. Therfore the kyng slew3 hem, and 
bytoke Bel in to power ot Danyel, whiche 
2 distruyide hym and his temple. And a 
grete dragoun was in that place, and 
23men of Babyloyne wirshipiden hym. And 
the kyng saide to Danyel, Loo! now thou 
maist not saye, that this is not god lyu- 
24ynge; therfore wirshipe hym. And Da- 
nyel saide to the kyng, Y wirshipe the 
Lord my God, for he is lyuynge God ; 
2this is not god lyuynge. Thou forsothe, 
kyng, 3eue to me power, that Y slea the 
dragoun, with oute swerd and staff. And 
26the kyng saith, Y 3eue to thee. Therfore 
Danyel toke picche, and fatnesse, and 
heris, and seethide to gydre; and he 
made gobettis, and 3aue in to mouthe of 
the dragoun, and the dragoun is borstun. 
And Danyel sayde, Loo! whom 3e wir- 
27shipiden. Whiche thing whanne men of 
Babyloyne herden, thei hadden indigna- 
cioun gretely; and thei ben gadrid a3einus 
the kyng, and sayden, The kyng is maad 
a Jewe; he distruyede Bel, and slew3 the 
28dragoun, and killide prestis. And thei 
saiden, whanne thei camen to the kyng, 
3eue to vs Danyel, that distruyede Bel, 
and slew3 the dragoun; ellis we shuln 
z9slea thee, and thin hous. Therfore the 
king saw3, that thei fellen in to hym 
gretely; and by neede he constreyned 
303aue to hem Danyel. Whiche senten hym 
in to the lake of lyouns, and he was there 
3iseuen days. Forsothe in the lake weren 
seuen lyouns, and eche day two bodyes 
and two sheep weren 3o0uen to hem. And 
thanne thei weren uot 3ouen to hem, that 


‘Om. 1. 


Jthe whiche 1. & orn. 


DANIEL. 


I that he n. 


XIV. 18-—31. 


vois, Bel, thou art greet, and no gile is at 
thee. And Daniel leizede, and he helde1s 
the kyng, that he entride not with ynne. 
And Daniel seide, Lo! the pawment, per- 
seyue thou whos steppis these ben. And 19 
the kyng seide, Y se steppis of men, and 
of wymmen, and of 3onge children. And 
the kyng was wrooth. Thanne the kyng 20 
took the preestis, and the wyues, and chil- 
dren of hem; and thei schewiden to hym 
litle priny doris, bi whiche thei entriden, 
and wastiden tho thingis that weren on 
the boord. Therfor the kyng killide hem, 21 
and bitook Bel in to the power of Daniel, 
whichi distriede thilke Bel, and his tem- 
ple. And a greet dragoun was in that 22 
place, and Babiloyns worschipiden it. And 23 
the kyng seide to Daniel, Lo! now thou 
maist not seie, that this is not a quik god; 
therfor worschipe thou hym. And Da-2 
niel seide to the kyng, Y worschipe my 
Lord God, for he is God lyuynge. Butes 
thou, kyng, 3yue power to me, and Y 
schal sle the dragoun, with out swerd andk 
staf. And the kyng seide, Y 3yue to 
thee. Therfor Daniel took pitch, and26 
talow, and heeris, and sethide togidere ; 
and he made gobetis, and 3af in to the 
mouth of the dragun; and the dragun 
was al to-brokun. And Daniel seide, Lo! 
whom 3e-worschipiden. And whanne Ba-27 
biloynes hadden herd this thing, thei had- 
den indignacioun greetli; and thei weren 
gaderid a3ens the king, and seiden, The 
king is maad a Jew; he distriede Bel, and 
killide the dragun, and slow the preestis. 
And thei seiden, whanne thei weren comun 28 
to the kyng, Bitake thou to vs Daniel, that - 
distriede Bel, and killide the dragun ; ellis 
we schulen sle thee, and thin hous. Ther-29 
for the kyng si3, that thei fellen in on 
hym greetli; and he! was compellid bi 
nede, and he bitook Daniel to hem. 
Whiche™ senten hym in to the lake of30 
liouns, and he was there seuene daies. 
Certis seuene liouns weren in the lake, 31 
and twei bodies" aud twei scheep weren 
j3ouun to hem ech dai. And thanne tho 
weren not 3ouun to hem, that thei schul- 


m The whiche 1. © dampned 1 marg. 


XIV. 32—42. 


s2thei shulde deuoure Danyel. Forsothe 
Abacuc was a prophete in Judee, and he 
hadde sothen potage, and hadde ‘sette yn! 
looues in a litil vessel, and wente in to 
33 the feeld, for to bere to repers. And an 
aungel of the Lord saide to Abakuc, Bere 
thou the mete, that thou hast, in to Ba- 
byloyne, to Danyel, that is in the lake of 
34lyouns. And Abakuc saide, Lord, I saw3 
not Babyloyne, and I knewe* not the 
3slake. And the angel of the Lord toke 
hym in the poll of hym, and bare hym 
in an her of his hed, and putte hym in 
to Babyloyne, on the lake, in bir of his 
séspirit. And Abakuc criede, sayinge, 
Danyel, sernaunt of God, take thou the 
37mete, that God sente to thee. And Da- 
nyel saith, Lord God, thou hast mynde 
of me, and forsakist not men loouynge 
38thee. And Danyel rysynge eet; forsothe 
the aungel of the Lord restoride anoon 
39 Abakuc in his place. Therfore the kyg 
cam in the seuenthe day for to weile 
Danyel; and he came to the lake, and 
lookide with ynne, and loo! Danyel sitt- 
4oynge in the mydil of lyouns. And the 
kyng criede with grete voice, saiynge, 
Grete art thou, Lord God of Danyel; 
4i1and drou3 out him of the lake. Forsoth 
he sente yn in to the lake hem, that 
weren cause of his perdicioun, and thei 
beu deuoured in a moment byfore hym. 
42Thann the kyng saith, Men dwellynge 
in al erthe, dreede the God of Danyel; 
for he is deliuerer, and sauere, doynge 
sygnes and merueyles in heuen and in 
erthe, that delyuerede Danyel of the lake 
of lyouns. 


Here endith the book of Danyel, the 
prophete, and bigynneth the book of 
Osee, the prophete'. 


DANIEL. 


669 


den deuoure Daniel. Forsothe Abacuk, 32 
the profete, was in Judee, and he hadde 
soden potage, and hadde set in looues in a 
litil panyere; and he 3ede in to the feeld, 
to bere to reperis. And the aungel of thes: 
Lord seide to Abacuk, Bere thou the mete, 
which thou hast, in to Babiloyne, to Da- 
niel, which is in the lake of liouns. And34 
Abacuk seide, Lord, Y si3 not Babiloyne, 
aud Y knew not the lake. And the aun-35 
gel of the Lord took hym bi his top, and 
bar hym bi the heer of his heed; and he 
‘settide thilke Abaevk° in Babiloyne, on 
the lake, in the fersnesse of his spirit. 
And Abacuk criede, and seide, Daniel, the 36 
seruaunt of God, take thou the mete, that 
God hath sent to thee. And Daniel seide, 37 
Lord God, thou hast myude on me, and 
hast not forsake hem that louen thee. 
And Daniel roos, and eet; certis the ann-3s 
gel of the Lord restoride Abacuk anoon 
in? his place. Therfor the kyng cam in: 
the seuenthe dai to biweile Danyel ; and 
he cam to the lake, and lokide in; and lo! 
Daniel sittynge in the myddis‘ of liouns. 
The kyng. criede an hi3 with greet vois, 40 
and seide, Lord God of Daniel, thou art 
greet; and the kyng drow hym out of 
the lake. Certis he sente in to the lakes 
hem, that weren cause of his perdicioun, 
and thei weren deuourid in a moment bi- 
for him. Thanne the kyng seide, Thei 42 
that dwellen in al erthe,-drede the God 
of Daniel, for he is God lyuynge in to 
worldis ; he is delyuerere, and sauyour, do- 
ynge myraclis and meruels in heuene and 
in erthe, that delyuerede Daniel fro the 
lake of liouns. 


Here endith Danyel, and here bigyn- 
neth Osee*. 


iin put G sec. m. & knowe 4. 1 Here endethe the boke of Daniel, and here bigynneth Osee. a. No final 


rubric in ei. 


osettehymi. Pinton. q myddil wn. 


T From caimqu. Here endith Danyel, and here bigynneth 


Osee, profete. F. Here endith Danyel, and here bigynneth Osee. u. Here endeth Daniel, the prophet ; se 
now Osee, the profete. K. Here endith the book of Danyel, and bigynneth the book of Osee. Nn. Heere eend- 


ith Daniel, and bigynneth the prophete Osee. r. 
No final rubric in agpy. Ins it Is cut off. 


Here endith Danyel, and begynneth Osee, the profete. x. 


HOSE A. 





Osee, the Prophete*. 


CAP. I. 


1 THE word of the Lord that is maad to 
Osee, sone of Bery, in the days of Osye, 
Joathan, Achas, and Ezechie, kyngis of 
Juda, and? in the days of Jeroboam, sone 

2of Joas, kyng of Yrael. The bygynnyng 
of spekynge Lord* in Osee. And the 
Lord said to Osee, Go thou, take to thee 
a wijf of fornicacioun, and make to thee 
sonys of fornicaciouns, for the erthe do- 
ynge fornicacioun shal do fornicacioun 

3fro the Lord. And he wente, and toke 
Gomer, the dou3ter of Debalaym; and she 
conceyuyde, and bare to hym a sone. 
4And the Lord saide to hym, Clepe the 
name of hym Jesrael; for 3it a lytil and 
Y shal visite the blode of Jesrael on the 
hous of Hyeu, and shal make the kyng- 
dam of the hous of Yrael for to reste. 

5 And in that day Y shal breke to gydre 
the bowe of Yrael in the valey of Jesrael. 

6 And she conceyuyde 3it, and bare a dou3- 
ter. And he saide to hym, Clepe thou the 
name of hir With outen mercy, for Y 
shal namore putte to, for to haue mercy 
to the hous of Yrael, bot bi for3etyng Y 

7shal for3ete hem. And to the hous of 
Juda Y shal haue mercy, and Y shal saue 
hem in the Lord her God; and Y shal 
not saue hem in bowe, and swerd, and 
bateil, and in horsis, and in horsmen. 


8 No initial rubric in «eH. 


b Om. HK. 


Here biginnith the book of Osee, the 
profete*. 
CAPA: 


THE word of the Lord that was maad1 
to Osee, the sone of Bery, in the daies of 
Osie, Joathan, Achas, Ezechie, kingis of 
Juda, and in the daies of Jeroboam, sone of 
Joas, the kyng of Israel. The bigynnyng2 
of the spekyng to the Lord in Osee. And 
the Lord seide to Osee, Go thou, take to 
thee a wijf of fornycaciouns, and make to 
thee sones of fornycaciouns, for the lond 
doynge fornicacioun schal do fornicacioun 
fro the Lord. And he 3ede, and took; 
Gomer, the dou3ter of Debelaym; and 
sche conseyuede, and childide a sone to 
hym. And the Lord seide to hym, Clepe4 
thou the name of hym Jesrael; for 3it a 
litil and Y schal visite the blood of Jes- 
rael on the hous of Hieu, and Y schal 
make to reste the rewme of the hous of 
Israel. And in that dai Y schal al to-s 
breke the bowe of Israel in the valei of 
Jesrael. And sche conseyuede 3it, andé 
childide a dou3ter. And the Lord seide 
to hym, Clepe thou the name of hir With 
out merci, for Y schal no more leye to, 
for to haue merci on the hous of Israel, 
but bi for3etyng Y schal for3ete hem. And7 
Y schal haue merci on the hous of Juda, 
and Y schal saue hem in her Lord God; 
and Y schal not sane hem in bowe, and 
swerd, and batel, and in horsis, and in 


© bi the Lord G sec. m. H. 


8 From epy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


I. 8—Il. 7s 


8 And she wenyde hir that was With outen 
gmereye. And she conceyuyde, and bare 
to hym a sone. And he saide*, Clepe 
thou the name of hym Not my people, 
for 3e ben not my peple, and Y shal not 
1obe 30ur God. And the noumbre of sones 
of Yrael shal be as grauel of the see, 
whiche is with oute mesure, and shal 
not be noumbrid; and it schal be‘ in 
place, where it schal be seid to hem, Not 
my peple 3e; it schal be seid to hem, 
Sones of God lyuynge. And sones* of 
Juda and sones of Yrael shuln be ge- 
drid to gydre, and thei shuln putte to 
hem self oon hed, and shulu stie vp fro 
the lond, for grete is the day of Jesrael. 


CAP. II. 


1 Saye 3e to 30ur bretheren, My peple; 
and to 3our sister, Wynnynge mercy ; 
2deme 3e 3our modir, deine 3e, for she is 
not my wijf, and Y not hir husbond. Do 
she aweye hir fornicaciouns fro hir face, 
and hir auowtries fro the mydil of her 
3tetis; lest perauenture Y vnclothe hir 
nakid, and sette hir vp the day of hir 
birthe. And Y shal putte hir as a® wil- 
drenesse, and ordeyne hir as a lond vn- 
weyed, or with outen weye, and shalf 
sslea hir with thrist. And of the sones 
of hir Y shal not haue mercy, for thei 
sben sonys of fornycacioun; for the mo- 
dir of hem dide fornycacioun, she is con- 
fusid that conceyuyde hem, for she saide, 
Y shal go after my louers that 3iuen® 
my looues to me, and my waters, and my 
wolle, and my lynnen, and myn oyle, and 
emy drinke. For this thing lo! Y shal 
hegge thi weye with thornys, and I shal 
hegge it with a walle, and it shal not 
7fynde his pathis. And she shal sue hir 
loners, and shal not cacche hem, and shal 
seke hem, and shal not fynde hem; and 
she" shal saye, Y shal go, and Y shal 
turne aj3ein to my former husbond, for 
wele it was to me thanne more than now. 


¢ seide tohym 4. © not be kK. 


3enen H. =bOm. 4. 


> stie np 1. © the erthe 1. 


HOSEA. 


4 the sonys G sec. n. 


d Tsrael 1, 


671 


horse men, ether kni3tis. And he wenydes 
hir that was With out merci.. And sche 
conseyuede, and childide a sone to hym. 
And he seide, Clepe thou his name Nots 
my puple, for 3e schulen not be my puple, 
and Y schal not be 30ure God. 


CAP. II. 


And the noumbre of the sones of Is-10 
rael schal be as grauel of the see, which 
grauel is with out mesure, and it schal 
not be noumbrid; and it schal be in the 
place, where it schal be seid to hem, 3e 
ben not my puple; it schal be seid to hem, 
3e ben the sones of God lyuynge. Andit 
the sones of Juda and the sones of Israel 
schulen be gaderid togidere, and thei 
schulen sette oon heed to hem silf, and 
thei schulen stie® fro erthe®, for the dai of 
Jesrael* is greet. Sei 3e° to 3oure bri-1 
theren, Thei ben my puple; and to 3oure 
sister that hath gete merci, Deme 3e 3o0ure2 
modir, deme 3e, for sche is not my wijf, 
and Y am not hir hosebonde. Do sche 
awey hir fornicaciouns fro hir face, and 
hir auowtries fro the myddis of hir 
brestis; lest perauenture Y spuyle hirs 
nakid, and sette hir nakid bi the dai of 
hir natyuyte. And Y schal sette bir as a 
wildirnesse, and Y schal ordeyne hir as a 
lond with out weie, and Y schal sle hir in 
thirst. And Y schal not haue merci on4 
the sones of hir, for thei ben sones’ of 
fornicaciouns ; for the modir of hem dides 
fornicacioun, sche is schent that conseyu- 
ede hem, for sche seide, Y schal go after 
my louyeris that 3euen looues to me, and 
my watris, and my wolle, and my flex, 
and myn oile, and my drynke. For thise 
thing lo! Y schal hegge thi weie with 
thornes, and Y schal hegge it with a wal, 
and sche schal not fynde hir pathis. And7 
sche schal sue hir louyeris, and schal not 
take hem, and sche schal seke hem, and 
schal not fynde; and sche schal seie, Y 


sehal go, and turne a3en to my formere 
FY schal a. 


¢ Om. 4Gn. & 3auen 4. 


€ Om. nx. f the sones n. 


672 


sAnd this womman wiste not, for Y 3aue 
to hir wheet, wijne, and oyle; and mul- 
tiplied to hir syluer and gold, whiche 
gthei maden to Baal. Therfore Y shal 
turne, and shal take my wheet in hys 
tyme, and my wijn in his tyme; and I 
shal wei3e my wolle, and my lynnen, 
10 whiche hiliden the yuel fame of hir. And 
now Y shal shewe the folye of hir in the 
eezen of hir louers, and a mau shal not 
idelyuere hir fro myn hond; and I shal 
make alle the ioye of hir for to ceese, hir 
solempnyte, hir neomynye, 07 new feest, 
hir saboth, and alle feestis and tymys of 
ihir. Aud I shal corrumpe, or distruye, 
hir vyne 3erd, and hir fijge tree, of which 
she saide, These ben my hijris, whiche 
my louers 3auen to me; and Y shal putte 
hir in to wijlde wode, and the beest of 
13the feeld shal eet hir. And I shal visite 
vpon hir the days of Baalym, in whiche 
she brent ensence, and was ourned with 
hir ere ring, and hir broche, and wente 
aftir hir louers, and forj3ate me, saith the 
14Lord. For this thing loo! Y shal 3eue 
mylk to hir, and shal lede hir in to wil- 
dernesse, and Y shal speke to hir herte; 
isand shal 3eue to hir vijne tyliers of the 
same place, and the valey of Achor, for 
toopyn hope. And she shal synge there vp 
the days of hir 3outhe, and vp the days 
of hir steying vp fro the lond of Egypt. 
16And it shal be in that day, saith the 
Lord, she shal clepe me Myn husbond, 
and she shal namore clepe me Baalym ; 
i7and Y shal take aweye the names of Ba- 
lym fro hir mouthe, and she shal namore 
ishaue mynde of the name of hem. And Y 
shal sinyte to hem a boond of pees in 
that day with beest of the feeld, and with 
brid of heuen, and with creepynge beest 
of erthe. And Y shal breke to gydre bowe, 
and swerd, and batel of the! erthe; and 
Y shal make hein for to sleepe tristili. 
i9 And I shal spouse thee to me in to with 
outen eende, and Y shal spouse thee to 


HOSEA. 


IL. 8—19. 


hosebonde, for it was wel to me thanne 
more than now. And this Jerusalems 
wiste not, that Y 3af to hir wheete, wyn, 
and oile; and Y multiplied siluer and gold 
to hir, whiche thei maden to Baal. Ther-9 
for Y schal turne, and take my wheete in 
his tyme, and my wiyn in his tyme; and 
Y schal delyuere my wolle, and my flex, 
bi which thei hiliden the schenschipe ther- 
of. And now Y schal schewe: the foli of 10 
hir bifore the i3en of hir louyeris, and a 
man schal not delyuere hir fro myn hond ; 
and Y schal make to ceesse al the ioyeil 
therof, the solempnyte therof, the neome- 
nye* therof®, the sabat therof, and alle 
the feeste tymes therof. And Y schal dis-12 
trie® the vyner therof, of whiche sche seide, 
These ben myn hiris, whiche my louyeris 
3auen to me; and Y schal sette it in toa 
forest, and a beeste of the feeld schal ete 
it. And Y schal visite on it the daies of 13 
Baalym, in whiche it brente encense, and 
was ourned with hir eere ryng, and hir 
broche, and 3ede after hir louyeris, and 
for3at me, seith the Lord. For this thing 14 
lo! Yschal 3yue mylk to it, and Y schal 
brynge it in to wildirnesse, and Y schal 
speke to the herte! therof. And Y schalis 
3yue to it vyn tilieris therof of * the same 
place, and the valei of Achar, that is, of! 
disturblyng, for to opene hope. And it schal 
synge there bi the daies of hir 3ongthe, 
and bi the daies of hir stiyng™ fro the 
lond of Egipt. And it schal be in that tc 
dai, seith the Lord, sche schal clepe me 
Myn® hosebonde, and sche schal no more 
clepe me Baalym; and Y schal take awei17 
the names of Baalym fro hir mouth, and 
sche schal no more haue mynde of the 
name of tho. And Y schal smyte to hem 18 
a boond of pees in that dai with the beeste 
of the feeld, and with the brid of the eir, 
and with the crepynge beeste of erthe®. 
And Y schal al to-breke bowe, and swerd, 
and batel fro erthe; and Y schal make 
hem to slepe tristili. And Y schal spouse 19 


* Neomenye is 
the feeste of the 
newe moone. A. 


iOm. 4. 


& therof, ether feeste of newe moone CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


h corumpe, ether distrie CEFGHIKMNPQSUX. 


' heelthe ceEFGNMNPQsUX. hei3the kK. kin rt. 10m, x. ™stiyngvpi. ®hir Nn. © the erthe ev. 


If, 20-—1V. 1. 


me in ri3twijsnesse, and in dome, and in 
zomercy, and in doyngis of mercy. And 
Y shal spouse thee to me in feith; and 
2ithou shalt wite, for Y the Lord. And 
it shal be, in that day Y shal heere, saith 
the Lord, and I shal heere heuens, and 
22thei shuln heere the erthe; and the erthe 
shal heere wheete, and wijn, and oyle, and 
23these shuln heere Jesrael. And Y shal 
sowe hir to me in to lond, and Y* shal 
have mercy on hir that was with out 
2imercy. And Y shal saye to not my pe- 
ple, Thou art my peple, and he shal saye, 
Thou art my God. 


CAP. III. 


And the Lord saide to me, 3it go thou, 
and loue thou a womman loued of a frend, 
and auoutresse, as the Lord loneth the 
sonys of Yrael; and thei byholden to 
alyen goddis, and louen the darstis of 
grapis, that leucth in hem aftir pressyng. 
2And Y dalf hir to me with fifteen platis 

of siluer, and with a chorus of barly, 
whiche is a mesure of thritti busshels, 
3and with an half chorus of barly. And 
Y saide to hir, Manye days thou shalt 
abyde me; thou shalt not do fornycacioun, 
and thou shalt not be to husbond, bot 
sand! Y shal abijde thee. For manye 
days the sonys of Yrael shuln sitte with 
out kyng, with out prince, with out sa- 
crifice, and with out auter, and with out 
ephot, or prestis clothing, and with out 
steraphyn™. And after these thingis sonys 
of Yrael shuln turne ajein, and shuln 
seke the Lord her God, and Dauith. her 
kyng; and thei shuln dreede to the Lord, 
and to the good of hym, in the last of 
days. 


Grr. ly. 


Heere 3e, sonys of Yrael, the word of 
the Lord, for dome to the Lord with 
dwellers of erthe; forsothe trewthe is not 


HOSEA. 


673 


thee to me withouten ende; and Y schal 
spouse thee to me in ri3tfulnesse, and in 
dom, and in merci, and in merciful do- 
yngis. .And Y schal spouse thee to ine in 20 
feith ; and thou schalt wite, that Y am 
the Lord. And it schal be, in that dai2i 
Y schal here, seith the Lord, and Y schal 
here heuenes, and tho schulen here the 
erthe; and the erthe schal here? wheete, 22 
and wyn, and oile, and these schulen here 
Jesrael4, And Y schal sowe it to me in23 
to a lond, and Y schal haue merci on it 
that was with out merci. And Y schalo4 
seie to that, that is not my puple, Thou 
art my puple, and it schal seie, Thou art 
my God. 
CAP. III. 

And the Lord seide to me, 3it go thon, t 
and loue a womman loued of a frend, and 
a womman auoutresse, as the Lord loueth 
the sones of Israel; and thei biholden to 
alien goddis, and louen the draffis of grapis. 
And Y dalf it to me bi fiftene pens, andez 
bi a corusf of barli, and bi half a corus of 
barli. And Y seide to it, Bi many daies3 
thou shalt abide me; thou schalt not do 


t+ d corus con- 
teyneth xxx. 
buschels, and 
so a corus and 


an half con- 
fornycacioun, and thou schalt not be with ec 
an hosebonde, but also Y schal abide thee.  cxxav. 


For bi many daies the sones of Israel schu-4 
len sitte with out kyng, with out prince, 

and with out sacrifice, and with out auter, 

and with out prestis cloth, and with out 

terafyn, that is, ymagis. And after theses 
thingis the sones of Israel schulen turne 

azen, and schulen seke her Lord God, and 

Dauid, her king ; and thei schulen drede 

at the Lord, and at the good of him, in 

the laste of" daies., 


CAP. IV. 


Sones of Israel, here 3e the word of the1 
Lord, for whi doom és to the Lord with 
the dwelleris of erthe; for whi trewthe is 


kOm. a. !Om. a4. ™ serafyn x. 
P bere n.- @ Israel 1.° ° Om. 4. 
VOL. ILI. 4R 


674 


and mercy is not, and science, or kunnynge, 
2of the Lord is not in erthe. Cursidness, 
and lesyng, and mansleaynge, and theft, 
and auoutrie flowiden, and bloode touchide 
3bloode. For this thing erthe shal mourne, 
and eche man that dwellith theryn shal be 
seeke, in beest of the feeld, and in brid of 
heuen; bot and fishis of the se shuln be 
4gadrid. Nethelese eche man deeme not, 
and be not a man reproued ; forsothe thi 
peple as these that a3ein sayen the prest. 
5 And thou shalt falle to day, and also the 
prophete shal falle to gydre with thee; 
in ny3t Y made thi modir for to be 
6stille. And my peple was to gydre stille, 
for it hadde not science; for thou hast 
putte awey science, Y shal putte thee 
awey, that thou be not set, o7 vse, in 
presthode to. me; thou hast for3ete the 
lawe of thi God, and Y shal forgete thi 
z7sonys. Vp the multitude of hem, so thei 
synnyden to me. Y shal chaunge the 
sglorie of hem in to yuel fame. Thei™ 
shuln ete the synnys of my peple, and to 
the wickidnesse of hem thei shuln reyse 
yvp the soulis of hem. And it shal be, 
as the peple so the prest; and I shal 
visite on hym the weyes of hym, and I 
shal 3elde to hym his thou3tis. And thei 
shuln ete, and shuln not be fulfillid; thei 
diden fornycacioun, and cesiden not, for 
thei forsoken the Lord in not kepynge. 
11 Fornicacioun, and wijn, and drunkenesse 
12doth awey herte. My peple axide in his 
tree, and the staff of hym shal shewe to 
hyin; forsothe the spirit of fornicaciouns 
disceyuyde hem, and thei diden fornica- 
iscioun fro her God. On hedis" of hillis 
thei maden sacrifice, and on litil bills 
thei brenneden tymyame, or encense, vn- 
der ook, and poplere, aud terebynt, for 
the shadew of it was good. Therfore 3our 
dou3ters shuln do fornicacioun, and 3our 
spousis, o7 wijfis, shuln be auoutressis. 
14 Y shal not visite on 3our dou3ters, whan 
thei shuln do fornicacioun, and on 3oure 


m and thei an. 


Sand I1. 


HOSEA. 


t Om. n. 


IV. 2—~-14. 


not, and merci is not, and kunnyng of the 
Lord is not in erthe. Curs, and leesyng, 2 
and manquelling, and thefte, and auowtrie 
flowiden, and blood touchide blood. Fors 
this thing the erthe schal mourne, and ech. 
that dwellith in that lond, schal be sijk, 
in the beeste of the feeld, and in the brid 
of the eir; but also the fischis of the see 
schulen be gaderid togidere. Netheles ech 4 
man deme not, and a man be not repreuyd ; 
for thi puple zs as thei that a3en seien the 
prest. And thou schalt falle to dai, ands 
the profete also schal falle with thee; in 
the ni3t Y made thi modir to be stille. 
My puple was stille, for it hadde not kun-6 
nyng; for thou hast putte awei kunnyng, 
Y* schal putte thee awei, that thou vse not 
presthod to me; and for thou hast for3ete 
the lawe of thi God, also Y schal for3ete 
thi sones. Bi the multitude of hem, so7 
thei synneden asens me. Y schal chaunge 
the glorie of hem in to schenschipe. Theis 
schulen ete the synnes of my puple, and 
thei schulen reise the soulis of hem to the 
wickidnesse of hem. And it schal be, asy 
the puple so the prest; and Y schal visite 
on hym the weies of hym, and Y schal 
jelde to him the thou3tis of hym. And io 
thei schulen ete, and thei schulen not be 
fillid; thei diden fornicacioun, and ceess- 
iden not, for thei forsoken the Lord in 
not kepynge. Fornycacioun, and wiyn, 11 
and drunkenesse doen awei the herte. 
My puple axide in his tre, and the staf12 
therof* telde to it ; for the spirit of forni- 
cacioun disseynuede hem, and thei diden 
fornicacioun fro her God. On the heedis" 13 
of inounteyns thei maden sacrifice, and on 
the litil hillis thei brenten encense vudur 
an ook, and a popeler, and terebynte, for 
the schadewe therof was good. Therfor 
3oure dou3tris schulen do fornicacioun, and 
joure wyues schulen be auoutressis. Y 14 
schal not visite on 3oure dou3tris, whanne 
thei don fornicacioun, and on j30ure wyues, 
whanne thei doon auowtrie; for thei lyu- 


a the hedis acu. 


uhedis, ether coppis 1. 


IV. 15—V. 9. 


wijues, whanne thei shuln do auowtrie; 
for thei lyueden with hooris, and sacri- 
fieden with men turned in to wommans 
maners. And peple not vndirstondynge 
15shal be beten. 3if thou, Yrael, dost for- 
nycacioun, namely thou, Juda, trespasse 
not; and nyl 3e entre in to Galgala, and 
stye 3e not in to Bethauen, nether swere 
163e, The Lord lyueth. For as a cowe 
waxinge wijlde Yrael bowide awey; now 
the Lord shal feede hem as a lombe 
1zin breed. Parcener of ydolis Effraym, 
isleue 3e hym; the feest of hem is de- 
partid. In fornicacioun thei diden forni- 
eacioun, the defenders of hem loueden 
19for to brynge to yuel fatne. A spirit 
boonde hym in his weengis, and thei 
shuln be confoundid of her sacrifices. 


CAP. Vv. 


‘ Heere 3e, prestis, these thingis, and 
perceyue 3e, hous of Yrael, and herken 
3e, hous of the kyng; for with 3ou is 
dome, for 3e ben maad a graue to byhold- 
yng, and as a nette sprad abrood on Tha- 
2bor. And 3e bowiden doun slayn sacrifice 
for victorie in to depnesse; and Y the 
3lerner of hem alle. Y wote Effraym, and 
Yrael is not hid fro me; for now Effraym 
adide fornicacioun, Yrael is defoulid. Thei 
shul not 3eue her thou3tis, that thei turne 
ajein to her God; for the spirit of forni- 
cacioun in the mydil of hem, and thei 
5knewen not the Lord. And the pryde of 
Yrael shal answere in to his face, and 
Yrael and Effraym shuln falle to gydre 
in her wikkidnesse; also Juda shall falle 
é6with hem. In her flockis, and in her 
droues thei shuln go for to seke the 
Lord, and shuln not fynde; he is taken 
zawey fro hem. In the Lord thei tres- 
passiden, for thei gendriden alien sonys; 
now the monethe with her partis shal 
sdeuoure hem. Sowne 3e with an horn in 
Gabaa, with trumpe in Rama; woule 3e 
in Bethauen, aftir thi bac, Beniamyn. 
9 Effrayin shal be in to desolacioun, in the 
day of correctioun, and in lynagis of 


V trespasside CEFK pr. m. NVX. 


HOSEA. 


675 


yden with hooris, and maden sacrifice with 
men turned in to wymmens condiciouns. 
And the puple that vndirstondith not, schal 
be betun. If thou, Israel, doist fornica-15 
cioun, nameli Juda trespasse’ not; and nyle 
3e entre in to Galgala, and stie 3e not in 
to Bethauen, nether swere 3e, The Lord 
lyueth. For as a wielde cow Israel bowide 16 
awei; now the Lord schal fede hem as a 
lomb in broodnesse. Effraym ¢s the par-17 
tener of idols, leeue thou him; the feeste1s 
of hem is departid. Bi fornicacioun thei 
diden fornicacioun, the defenders therof 
louyden to brynge schenschipe. The spirit 19 
boond hym in hise wyngis, and thei schu- 
len be schent. of her sacrifices. 


CAP. WN. 


Preestis, here 3e this, and the hous of! 
Israel, perseyue 3e, and the hous of the 
kyng, herkne 3e; for whi doom is to you, 
for 3e ben maad a snare to lokyng afer, 
and¥ as a net spred abrood on Thabor. 
And 3e bowiden doun sacrifices in to2 
depthe; and Y am the lernere of alle hem. 
Y knowe Effraym, and Israel is not hid3 
fro me; for now Effrayin dide fornica- 
cioun, Israel is defoulid. Thei schulen not 4 
3iue her thou3tis, that thei turne a3eu to 
her God; for the spirit of fornicacioun és 
in the myddis of hem, and thei knewen 
not the Lord. And the boost of Israels 
schal answere i to the face therof, and 
Israel and Effraym schulen falle in her 
wickidnesse ; also Judas schal falle with 
hem. In her flockis, and in her droues¢ 
thei schulen go to seke the Lord, and thei 
schulen not fynde; he is takun awei fro 
hem. Thei trespassiden ajens the Lord,7 
for thei gendriden alien sones; now the 
monethe schal deuoure hem with her 
partis. Sowne 3e with a clarioun in Ga-»s 
baa, with a trumpe in Rama; 3elle 3e in 
Bethauen, after this bak, Beniamyn. Ef-» 
fraym schal be in to desolacioun, in the 
dai of amendyng, and in the lynagis of 


wOmr * ther. 


4R2 


676 HOSEA. V. 10-—VI. 9. 


10 Yrael Y shewide feith. The princis of 
Juda ben maad as takynge to the termes 
on hem; Y shal shede out as water my 

nwrath. Effraym is suffrynge fals cha- 
lenge, he broken in dome; for he by- 

i2gaune for to go after filthis. And Y as 
a mou3the to Effraym, and as rot to the 

ishous of Juda. And Effraym saw3 his 
seekenesse, and Juda his boond. And 
Effraym wente to Assur, and sente to 
the kyng veniour. And he shal not mowe 
saue 30u, nether shal mowe vnbynde the 

14boond fro 30u. For Y as a lyonesse to 
Effraym, and as a whelp of lyoun to the 
hous of Juda. Y, Y shal take, and shal 
go, and shal take awey, and ther is not 

iswhiche shal delyuere. Y goynge shal 
turne a3ein to my place, til 3e fayle, and 
seeke my face. 


CAP. VI. 


1 In her tribulacioun erly thei shuln 
ryse to gyder to me. Cum 3e°, and turne 
2we a3ein to the Lord; for he toke, or 
bigan, and shal hele us; he shal smyte, 
sand shal cure us. He shal quycken us 
aftir two days, in the thrydde day he 
shal reyse vs, and we shuln lyue in the 
si3t of hym. We shuln wite, and sue, that 
we knewe the Lord. As the spryng of day 
his out goyng is maad redy, and he shal 
cum as rayne tymiely to vs, and late to 
4erthe. What shal Y do to thee, Effraym? 
what shal Y do to thee, Juda? 3our mercy 
as a morew cloude, and as dewe erly pass- 
syuge forth. For this thing Y haue hewun 
in prophetis, and slayn hem in wordis of 
my mouthe; and thi domys shuln go out 
6as liz3t. For Y wolde mercy, and not sa- 
crifice, and science of God, more than 
7brente sacrifices. Forsothe thei as Adain 
braken my couenaunt; there thei tres- 
8passiden in me, Galaad the cite of men 
wirchynge ydol, supplauntid by blood ; 
gand as cheekis of men theeues. Parcener 
of prestis in the waye of men sleaynge 


Israel Y schewide feith. The princes of 10 
Juda ben maad as takynge terme; Y schal 
schede out on hem my wraththe as watir. 
Effraym suffrith fals chalenge, and 7s bro-11 
kun bi doom; for he bigan to go after 
filthis. And Y am as a mou3te to Effraym, 12 
and as rot to the hous of Juda. And Ef-13 
fraym si3 his sikenesse, and Judas 573 his 
boond. And Effraym 3ede to Assur, and 
sente to the kyng veniere. And he mai not 
saue 30u, nether he mai vnbynde the boond 
fro 30u. For Y @m as a lionesse toY Ef-14 
fraym, and as a whelp of a lioun to the 
hous of Juda. Y my silf schal take, and 15 
go, and take awei, and noon is that schal 
delynere. I schal go, and turne a3en to my 
place, til 3e failen, and seken my face. 


CAPA 


In her tribulacioun thei schulen risé1 
eerli to me. Come 3e, and turne we ajen 
to the Lord ; for he took, and schal heelez 
vs; he schal smyte, and schal make vs 
hool. He schal quykene vs after twei%s 
daies, and in the thridde dai he schal reise 
vs, and we schulen lyue in his sijt. We 
schulen wite, and sue, that we knowe the 
Lord. His goyng out is maad redi at the 
morewtid, and he schal come as a reyn 
to vs, which is timeful and lateful to the 
erthe. Effraym, what schal Y do to thee ?4 
Juda, what schal Y do to thee? 3oure 
merci is as a cloude of the morewtid, and 
as deew passynge forth eerli. For thiss 
thing Y hewide in profetis*, Y killide hem 
in the wordis of my mouth; and thie 
domes schulen go out as li3t. For Y wolde 
merci, and not sacrifice, and Y zwolde the 
kunnyng of God, more than brent sacri- 
ficis*. But thei as Adam braken the co-7 
uenaunt; there? thei trespassiden a3ens 
me. Galaad the citee of hem that wor-8 
chen® idol, 2s supplauntid with blood; and 
as the chekis of men ‘that ben" theues.9 


o0 Om. 4. 


Yofx. #fewel. ®sacrificea. band there. ¢ worshipen A prom 40m. c et ceteri. 


* that is, bi the 
coreccioun of 
prophetes, T 
wolde leede 
ajen 30 to 
riztnesse, o7 
euenesse, as 
trees bi hew- 
ing. Lire 
here. K. 


VI. 10——VIT. rr. 


men goynge of Sychem, for thei wrou3ten 

rogrete trespas. In the hous of Yrael Y 
saw au orrible thing; there the fornyca- 
ciouns of Effraym. 


CAP..VIE 


i1 Israel is defoulid; bot and thou, Juda, 
putte to thee rijp° corn, whanne Y shal 
turne to gydre the caitiftee of my peple. 
1 Whanne Y wolde hele Yrael, the wickid- 
nesse of Effraym is shewid, and the ma- 
lice of Samarie, for thei wrou3ten lesyng. 
And a ny3t theef wente in robbynge; a 
2litil day theef with out forth. And lest 
perauenture thei sayen in her hertis, me 
hauynge mynde on al the malice of hem, 
now her fyndyngis han gon about hem, 
3thei ben maad byfore my face. In her 


malice thei gladden? the kyng, and in 


4her lesyngus the princis. Alle doynge 
auoutrie, as fourneice kyndlid of a man 
seethinge. The citee restide a litil in 
mengyng to gydre of soure dowe, til it 
swere sourdowid all. The day of oure 
kyng; princis bygunnen for to wexe wode 
of wijn; he strei3te out his hond with 
sscorners. For thei applieden as a four- 
neys her herte, whanne he aspiede, or 
setée, tresoun to hem. Al ni3t he slepte 
seethinge hem, erly he set on fijr, as fijr 
7of flawme. All ben maad hoot as a‘ 
fourneice, and deuoureden her domes- 
men. All kyngis of hem fellen doun, and 
ther is not in hem that shal crie to me. 
8Effraym in peplis he was meynt to 
gydre; Effraym is maad a lvof baken 
vndir ashis, whiche is not turned ajein. 
» Aliens eeten the strengthe of hym, and 
he wist not; bot and whijt heeris ben 
shed out in hym, and he knewe not. 
io And the pride of Yrael shal be mekid 
in the face of hym; nether thei ben turn- 
ed aj3ein to the Lord her God, and thei 
sou3ten not hym in alle theese thingus. 
And Effraym is maad as a culuer dis- 
ceyned, not hauynge herte. Thei inclep- 


© the rijp. 


€QOm.1. fOm.1. 
™ whanne thei n. 


g Om. 1. h Om. 1. 


HOSEA. 


P gladiden a. 


i felden 1 ef 8 passim. 


677 


Partener of prestis sleynge in the weie 
men goynge fro Sichem, for thei wrou3ten 
greet trespasse. In the hous of Israel Y 10 
si3 an orible thing; there the fornicaciouns 
of Effraym. Israel is defoulid; but also 
thou, Juda, sette heruest to thee, whanne 
¥ schal turne the caitiftee of my puple. 


CAP. VII. 


Whanne Y wolde heele Israel, the wick-1 
idnesse of Effraym was schewid, and the 
malice of Saimarie was schewid, for thei 
wrou3ten a leesyng. And‘ a ni3t theef en- 
tride, and robbid; a dai theef was with- 
outforth. And lest thei seien in her hertis, 2 
that Y haue mynde on al the malice of 
hem, now her fyndyngis han cumpassid 
hem, tho ben maad bifor my face. In hers 
malice thei gladiden the kyng, and in her 
leesyngys ‘thei gladiden® the princes. Alle 4 
that doen auoutrie, ben as an onene maad 
hoot of a bakere. The citee restide a litil 
fro the medlyng of sour dou3, til al was 
maad sour ‘of sour dou3”. The dai of oures 
kyng; the princis bigunnen to be wood of 
wyn; he stretchide forth his hoond with 
scorneris. For thei applieden her herte asé 
an ouene, whanne he settide tresoun to 
hem. Al the ni3t he slepte bakynge hem, in 
the morewtid he was maad hoot, as the fier 
of flawme. Alle weren maad hoot as an7 
ouene, and thei deuouriden her iugis. Alle 
the kyngis of hem fellen' doun, and noon 
is among hem that crieth to me. Effrayms 
hym silf was medlid among puplis; Ef- 
fraym was maad a loof bakun vndur 
aischis, which is not turned ajen. Aliensy 
eeten the strengthe of hym, and he knew 
not; but also hoor heeris weren sched out 
in hym, and he knew not. And the pride 10 
of Israel schal be maad low in the face 
therof; thei turneden not a3en to her Lord 
God, and thei sou3ten not hym in alle 
these thingis. And* Effraym was maad 11 
as' a culuer disseyued, not hauynge herte. 
Thei clepiden Egipt to help, thei™ 3eden to 


q Om. 4. 


kOm.aprem. lyk tos. 


678 


iden Egypt, to Assiriens thei wenten. 
i2 And whanne thei shuln go, Y shal sprede 
abrode on hem my nett, as a brid of 
heuen Y shal drawe hem doun. Y shal 
bete hem, vp the heeryng of the cum- 
ispanye of hem. Wo to hem, for thei 
wenten awei fro me; thei shuln be 
waastid, for thei trespassiden in me. Y 
ajein bou3te hem, and thei spaken a3einus 
14me Jesyng. And thei crieden not to me 
in her herte, bot thei wouliden in her 
couchis. Thei chewiden cud vpon whete, 
isand wijne, and departiden fro me. And 
I lernyde hem, and coumfortide the ar- 
mys of hem, and in me thei thou3ten 
ismalice. Thei turneden a3ein, that thei 
shulden be with out 30c; thei ben maad 
as a gylful bowe. The princis of hem 
shuln falle in swerd, of the wodenesse of 
her tunge; this the mowyng, or scornyng, 
of hem in the lond of Egypt. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Jn thi throte be a trumpe, as an egle 
on the hous of the Lord; for that that 
thei braken my bond of pees, and thei 

2trespassiden, or braken, my lawe. Thei 
inclepiden me, My God, we Yrael knewen 

3thee. Yrael castide awey good thing, an 
senemy shal pursue hyin. Thei regn- 
eden, and not of me; thei weren princis, 
and I knewe not. Thei maden her syluer 
aud gold and her ydolis to hem, that thei 
sshulden perishe. Samarie, thi calf is cast 
awey; my woodnesse is wrothe in hem. 

6 Hou long mi3ten thei not be clensid ? for 
of Yrael and he is. A craftise man made 
hym, and he is not god; for the calf of 
Samarie shal be‘ into webbis of yreinus. 
7¥For thei shuln sowe wynd, and repe 
whirlwynd. A stondynge stalk is not in 
hem, the buriownyng shal not make 
mele; that and 3if it shal make, aliens 
sshuln ete it". Yrael is denoured; now he 
is maad in naciouns, as an vnelene vessel, 
9for thei stieden to Assur. Effrayin a soli- 
tarie fecld asse to hym self. Thei 3auen 

19 3iftis to her louers; bot and with meed 
thei hijriden naciouns. Now Y shal gedre 


4 be do k pr. m. 


HOSEA. 


VII. 12——VIII. 10. 


’ 


Assiriens. And whanne thei ben goen12 
forth, Y schal sprede abrood on hem my 
net, Y schal drawe hem doun as a brid of 
the eir. Y schal beete hem, bi the heryng 
of the cumpany of hem. Wo to hem, fori 
thei 3eden awei fro me; thei schulen be 
distried, for thei trespassiden ajens me. 
And Y ajenbou3te hem, and thei spaken 
leesyngis ajenus me. And thei criedenis 
not to me in her herte, but 3elliden in her 
beddis. Thei chewiden code on wheete, 
and wyn, and thei 3eden awei fro me. 
And Y tau3te, and coumfortide the armes 1s 
of hem, and thei thou3ten malice a3ens 
me. Thei turneden ajen, that thei schul-is 
den be with out 30k; thei ben maad as a 
gileful bowe. The princis of hem schulen 
falle doun bi swerd, for the woodnesse of 
her tunge; this 7s the scornyng of hem 
in the lond of Egipt. 


CAP. VIII. 


A trumpe be in thi throte, as an egle1 
on the hous of the Lord ; for that that thei 
3eden ouer my boond of pees, and braken 
my lawe. Thei clepiden me to helpe, A !2 
my God, we Israel han knowe thee. Israels 
hath cast awei good, the enemye schal 
pursue hym. Thei regnyden, and not of4 
me; thei weren princes, an Y knew not. 
Thei maden her gold and siluer idols to 
hem, that thei schulden perische. -A! Sa-s 
marie, thi calf is cast awei; my strong 
veniaunce is wrooth a3ens hem. Hou long 
moun thei not be clensid ? for also it is of¢ 
Israel. A crafti man made it, and it -is 
not god; for the calf of Samarie schal be 
in to webbis of ireyns. For thei schulen7 
sowe wynd, and thei schulen repe whirle- 
wynd. A stalke stondynge is not in hem, 
the seed schal not make mele; that if also 
it makith mele, aliens schulen ete it. Is-s 
rael is deuouryd ; now Israel is maad as 
an vnelene vessel among naciouns, for theis 
stieden to Assur. Effraym ts a wielde 
asse, solitarie to hym silf. Thei 3auen 3iftis 
to louyeris; but also with meede thei hir- 10 
iden naciouns. Now Y schal gadere hem 


r hit x. 


VIII. 11-—-1X. 8. 


hem, and thei shuln reste a litil of charge 
niof the kyng and princis. For Effraym 
multipliede autris for to synne, autris 
12ben maad to hym in to trespasse. Y 
shal write to hym my manyfolde lawis, 
iswhiche ben acomptid as alyen. Thei 
shulen brenge to oostis, and shuln offre 
fleshis, and shuln ete; and the Lord shal 
not resceyue hem. Now he shal recorde 
the wickidnesse of hem, and shal visite 
the synnes of hem; thei shuln be turnyd 
14in to Egypt. And Yrael forjate his 
maker, and beeldide templis, and Judas 
multipliede stronge citees; and Y shal 
sende fijr in to the citees of him', and it 
shal-deuoure the housis of hym. 


a 


CAP. IX. 


1 Yrael, nyl thou glade, nyl thou ioye 
with outforth as peplis; for thou hast do 
fornicacioun fro thi God. Thou .louedist 

2hijris on alle feeldis of whete. Feeld 
and pressour shal not feede hem, and 

3wijue shal lye to hem. Thei shuln not 
dwelle in the lond of the Lord. Effraym 
turnyde ajein in to Egypt, and in Assi- 
ariens eete defoulid thing. Thei shuln 
not sacrifice wijn to the Lord, and thei 
shuln not plese to hym. The sacrifices of 
hem as breede of mournynge men; alle 
that eten it shuln be defoulid. For the 
breed of hem, of the soule of hem, shal 
not entre in to the* hous of the Lord. 

5 What shuln 3e do in the solempne day, 

6in day of the fest of the Lord? Loo! 
sothely thei ben gon fro wastnesse. 
Egypt shal gedere hem, Memphis shal 
birie hem. A nettil shal enherit the de- 
sirable syluer of hem, a cloote in the 

ztabernaclis of hem. Days of visityng 
camen, days of 3eldyng camen. Yrael, 
wite thou thee a fool, a wood prophete, 
a spirituel man, for the multitude of thi 
wickidnesse, and multitude of madnesse. 
4A spier of Effraym with my God; the 
prophete is maad a gnare of fallynge, on 
alle the wayes of hym, wodenesse in the 


rhem K. 


" not reste A pr.m. 


HOSEA. 


9 his ydoles s. 


679 


togidere, and thei schulen reste" a litil fro 
birthun of the kyng and of princes. For 1 
Efraym multipliede auteris to do synne, 
auteris weren maad to hym in to trespas. 
Y schal write to hem my many fold lawis, 12 
that ben arettid as alien /awis. Thei schu- 13 
len brynge sacrifices, thei shulen offre, and 
ete fleischis; and the Lord schal not res- 
seyue tho. Now he schal haue mynde on 
the wickidnessis of hem, and he schal vi- 
site the synnes of hem; thei schulen turne 
in to Egipt. And Israel for3at his makere, 14 
and hildide templis fo idols°, and Judas 
multipliede stronge citees; and Y schal 
sende fier in to the citees? of hym, and it 
schal deuoure the housis of hym. 


CAP. IX. 


Israel, nyle thou be glad, nyle thoui 
make ful out ioie as puplis; for thou 
hast do fornicacioun fro thi God. Thou 
louedist meede on alle the cornflooris of 
wheete. The cornfloor and pressour schal 2 
not feede hem, and wyn schal lie to hem. 
Thei schulen not dwelle in the lond of thes 
Lord. Effraym turnede a3en in to Egipt, 
and eet defoulid’ thing among Assiriens. 
Thei schulen not offre wyn to the Lord, 4 
and thei schulen not plese hym. The sacri- 
ficis of hem ben as breed of mourneris; 
alle that schulen ete it schulen be de- 
foulid. For the breed of hem és to the 
lijf of hem; thei schulen not entre in to 
the hous of the Lord. What schulen 3e5 
do in the solempne dai, in the dai of the 
feeste of the Lord? For lo! thei bene 
goon out fro distriyng. Egipt schal ga- 
dere hem togidere, Memphis schal birie 
hem. A nettle schal etiherite the desirable 
siluer of hem, a clote schal be in the ta- 
bernaclis of hem. Daies of visitacioun7 
ben comun, daies of 3eldyng ben comun. 
Knowe 3e, that Israel 7s a fool, a wood 
profete, a spiritual man, for the multitude 
of thi wickidnesse 7s also the multitude 
of woodnesse. The biholdere of Effrayms 
with my God ¢s a profete; a snare of fall- 


8 Om. GR. 


P citee nN. 4 and defoulide 1. 


680 


ohous of his God. Thei synneden depely, 
as in days of Gabaa. He shal recorde her 
wickidnesse, and shal visite the synnys 
ioof hem. Y foonde Yrael as grapes in de- 
sert, as the first applis of a litil fyge tree. 
In the hee3t therof Y see3 the faders of 
hem; forsothe thei entriden to Belphagor, 
and ben alienyd aweye in to confusioun, 
and ben maad abomynable as tho thingus 
lithat thei loueden. Effraym as a brid 
flee; awey; the glorie of hem of chijld 
beryng, and of wombe, and of conceyu- 
wynge. That and 3if thei shuln nurishe 
out her sonys, Y shal make hem with 
out free childre in men. Bot and wo to 
hem, whanne I shal go awey fro hem. 
13 Effraym, as I sy3 Tyrus, was foundid in 
fairnesse; Effraym schal leede out his 
1asones to the slear. Lord, 3yue thou to 
hem; what schalt thou 3yue to hem ? 3eue 
thout to hem a 3ate of wombe with oute 
is free children, and drie tetis. Al wickid- 
nesse of hem in Galgal, for there Y hadde 
hem hateful ; for the malice of her wickid- 
nesse Y shal caste hem out of myn hous. 
Y shal not putte to, that Y loue hem. 
is Alle prineis of hem goynge awey; Ef- 
fraym is smyten, the root of hem is dried 
yp; thei shuln not make fruyte. That and 
3if thei shuln gendre, Y shal slea the 
most loued thingus of the wombe of hem. 
17 The Lord my God shal caste hem awey, 
for thei herden not hym; and thei shuln 
be wagringe in naciouns, 


CAPS x. 


1 Yrael a vijne ful of bowis, fruyte is 
maad euen to hym; vp the multitude of 
his fruyte he multipliede auters, vp the 
plente of his lond he was plenteous in 

2symulacris, or fals goddis. The herte of 
hem is departid, now thei shuln perishe. 
He shal breke to gydre the symulacris of 
hem, he shal spuyle the auters of hem. 
3For now thei shuln saye, Kyng is not 

‘to vs", forsothe we dreeden not God. And 


“ t Om, 4cu. 


rOm.1. 8 sau3 1 sepius. 


HOSEA. 


IX. 9g—X. 3. 


yng is maad now on alle the weies of 
hym, woodnesse 7s in the hous of his God. 
Thei synneden deepli, as in the" daies of 9 
Gabaa. The Lord schal haue mynde on 
the wickidnesse of hem, and schal visite 
the synnes of hem. Y foond Israel asio 
grapis in desert, Y si3* the fadris of hem 
as the firste applis of a fige tree, in the 
cop therof; but thei entriden to Belfegor, 
and weren alienyd in confusioun, and thei 
weren maad abhomynable as tho thingis 
whiche thei Jouyden. Effraym as a brid 1 
fley awei; the glorye of hem 7s of child- 
beryng, and of the wombe, and of con- 
seyuyng. That if thei nurschen her sones, 12 
Y schal make hem with out children 
among men. But also wo to hem, whanne 
Y schal go awei fro hem. Y si3 that Ef-13 
fraym was as Tire, foundid in fairnesse ; 
and Effraym schal lede out hise sones to 
the sleere. Lord, 3yue thou to hem ; what 14 
schalt thou 3yue to hem? 3yue thou to 
hem a wombe with out childrent, and drie 
tetis. Alle the wickidnessis of hem ben 15 
in Galgal, for there Y hadde hem hateful ; 
for the malice of her fyndyngis. Y schal 
caste hem out of inyn hous; Y schal not 
leie to, that Y loue hem. Alle the princes 
of hem goen awei. Effraym is smyten, 16 
the roote of hem is dried vp; thei schulen 
not make fruyt. That thou3 thei gendren, 
Y sehal sle the moost louyd thingis of her 
womhe. My God schal caste hem awey, 17 
for thei herden not hym; and thei sehulen 
be of vnstable dwellyng among naciouns. 


CAP. X. 


Israel was a vyne ful of bowis, fruyt1 
was maad euene to hym; bi the multi- 
tude of his fruyt he multipliede auteris, 
bi the plente of his lond he was plen- 
teuouse. In simylacris the herte of hem2 
is departid, now thei schulen perische. He 
schal breke the simylacris of hem, he scha} 
robbe the auteris of hem. For thanne thei3 
schulen seie, A kyng is not to vs, for we 
dreden not the Lord.. And what schal a 


u of thee 4. 


t fre children ns sec. m. 


X. J-—15. 


4what shal a kyng do to vs? Speke 3e 
wordis of vnprofitable visioun, and 3e 
shuln make a couenaunt with lesyng; and 
dome shal buriowne as bitternesse on fo- 
srowis of the feeld. The dwellers of Sa- 
marie wirshipen the kijn of Bethauen. 
For the peple therof mournyde vpon hym, 
and kepers of the hous of hym ioyeden 
with outforth in glorie of hym, for it 
6passide fro hym. Forsothe and he is 
born in to Assur, a 3ift to the king 
venier. Confusioun shal take Effraym, and 
7 Yrael shal be confoundid in his will. Sa- 
marie made his king: for to passe, as 
sfrooth on" the face of water. And the 
hee3 thingis of ydol, the synne of Yrael, 
shulen be distruyed. Cloote and breere 
shal stye on’ the auters of hem. And thei 
shuln seye to mounteyns, Hille 3e vs, and 
9to smale hillis, Falle 3e vpon vs. Of the 
days of Gabaa Yrael synnyde; there thei 
stoden. Batey] shal not cotche hem in Ga- 
10baa, on the sonys of wickidnesse. Vp 
my desijre Y shal chastise hem; puplis 
shuln be gadrid on hem, whanne thei 
shuln be chastisid for her two wickid- 
ilnessis. Effraym a cow calf, tau3t for to 
loue thresshyng; and Y passide on the 
fairnesse of hir neck. Y shal stye vp on 
Effraym. Judas shal ere, Jacob shal breke 
i2to gydre to hym forowis. Sowe 3e to 30w 
in ri3twijsnesse, and repe 3e in the mouth 
of mercy, and make newe to 30u a newe 
feeld. Tyme sothely for to ajein seeke the 
Lord, whanne he shal cum, that shal 
is teche 3ou riz3twijsnesse. 3e han sowe vn- 
pite, 3e repiden wickidnesse, 3e eeten the 
fruyte of lesyng. For thou tristidist in thi 
wayes, and in multitude of thi stronge 
14men. Noyse shal ryse to gydre in thi 
peple, and alle thi strengthus shuln be 
distruyed; as Salmana is distruyed of the 
hous of hym, that veniede Baal; in the 
day of bateyle, the modir hurtlid on 
issones. So Bethel shal do to 3o0u, fro the 
face of malice of 3our wickidnessis”. 


U vpon G sec. m. 


"Om.1. Vofn. Wand tatizt 1. 


VOL. III. 


VY ypon 4. 


X stie up I. 


4s 


HOSEA. 681 


kyng do to vs? Speke 3e wordis of vnpro-4 — 
fitable visioun, and 3e schulen smyte boond 
of pees with leesyng; and doom as bittir- 
nesse scha]l burioune on the forewis of the 
feeld. The dwelleris of Samarie worschip-5 
iden the kien of Bethauen. For the puple 
therof mourenyde on that calf; and the 
keperis of the hous therof; thei maden ful 
out ioye on it in the glorie therof, for it 
passide fro that puple. For also it wase 
borun to Assur, a 3ifte to the king veniere. 
Confusioun schal take Effraym, and Israel 
schal be schent in his wille. Samarie made7 
his kyng to passe, as froth on the face of 
water. And the" hi3 thingis of idol, the 
synne of Israel, schulen be lost. <A clootes 
andY a brere schal stie on the auters of 
hem. And thei schulen seie to mounteyns, 
Hile 3e vs, and to litle hillis, Falle 3e doun 
on vs. Fro the daies of Gabaa Israels 
synnede; there thei stoden. Bate) schal 
not take hem in Gabaa, on the sones of 10 
wickidnesse. Bi my desir Y schal chastise 
hem; puplis schulen be gaderid togidere 
on hem, whanne thei schulen be chastisid 
for her twei wickidnessis. Effraym 7s au 
cow calf, tau3t” for to loue threischyng ; 
and Y 3ede on the fairenesse of the necke 
therof. Y schal stie* on Effraym. Judas 
schal ere, and Jacob schal breke forewis to 
hym silf. Sowe 3e to 3ou ri3tfulnesse in 12 
treuthe, and repe 3e in the mouthe of 
inerci, and make 3e newe to jou a feld 
newli brou3te to tilthe. Forsothe tyme zs 
to seke the Lord, whante he cometh, that 
schal teche jou rijtfulnesse. 3e han erid is 
vnfeithfulnesse, 3e han rope’ wickidnesse, 
3e han ete the corn of leesyng. For thou 
tristydist in thi weies, and in the multi- 
tude of thi stronge men. Noise schal rise 14 
in thi puple, and alle thi stronge holdis 
schulen be distried; as Salinana was dis- 
tried of the hous of hym, that took ven- 
jaunce ou Baal; in the dai of batel, whanne 
the modir was hurlid? doun on the sones. 
So Bethel dide to 30u, for the face ofis 
malice of 3oure wickidnessis. 


w wickidnes 4. 


Yrepes. 2 hurtlid 1. 


682 


CAP. XI. 


1 As the morewnyng passith, the kyng 
of Yrael passith byfore Yrael a chijld, 
and Y louede hym; and of Egypt Y 
2clepide my sone. Thei clepiden hem, so 
thei wenten awey fro the face of hem. 
Thei offreden to Baalym, and maden sa- 
scrifice to symulacris. And Y as a nurishe 
of Effraym bare hem in myn armys, and 
sthei wisten not, that Y helide hem. In 
litil boondis of Adam Y shal drawe hem, 
in boondis of charitee. And Y shal be to 
hem as reysynge 30c on the cheekis of 
hem; and Y bowide doun to hym, that he 
sshulde ete. He shal not turne a3ein in 
to the lond of Egypt. And Assur the* 
kyng therof, for thei wolden not be con- 
suertid. Swerd toke, or bigan, in the 
citees therof, and schal waaste the chosun 
therof, and schal ete the heedis of hem. 
7And my peple schal hange, at my com- 
ynge ajein. Forsoth a 30k shal be putte 
vpon hem to gydre, whiche shal not be 
sdon awey. Hou shal Y 3eueY thee, Ef- 
fraym? shal Y hille, or defende, thee, 
Yrael? hou shal Y 3eve thee as Adama? ? 
shal Y putte thee as Seboym? Myn hert 
is conuertid in me; my forthinkyng is 
9 trublid to gidre. Y shal not do the wood- 
nesse of my wrath. Y shal not be con- 
uertid, that Y distruye Effraym ; for Y 
God, and not man; holy in the mydil of 
thee, and Y shal not entre in to cytee. 
After the Lord thei shuin go. Asalyoun 
he schal roore, for he schal roore, and 
1! sones of the see schulen drede. And ‘thei 
shuln® flee awey as a brid fro Egypt, and 
as culuer® of the lond of Assiriens. And 
Y shal to gydre sette hem in her housis, 
saith the Lord. 


CAP. XII. 


12 Effraym disceyuede me in marchaun- 
dise, and in ydol of the hous of Yrael. 
Forsothe Judas witnes wente doun with 


1God, and with feithful saintis. Effraym 


theac. ¥ hille a. 


® wolden not 1. 


HOSEA. 


2 an adamaunt G sec. m. H. 


XI, 1—XII1. 1. 


CAP. XI. 


As the morewtid passith, the king of 1 
Israel schal passe forth. For Israel was a 
child, and Y louyde hym; and fro Egipt 
Y clepide my sone. Thei clepiden hem,2 
so thei 3eden awei fro the face of hem: 
Thei offriden to Baalym, and maden sacri- 
fice to symylacris. And Y as a nursches 
of Effraym bare hem in myn armes, and 
thei wisten not, that Y kepte hem. Y schala 
drawe hem in the ropis of Adam, in the 
boondis of charite. And Y schal be to hem 
as he that enhaunsith the 3ok on the chekis 
of hem; and Y bowide doun to hym, that 
he schulde ete. He schal not turne a3en ins 
to the lond of Egipt. And Assur, he schal. 
be kyng of hym, for thei nolden* turne. 
A swerd bigan in the citees therof, and ite 
schal waaste the chosun men therof, and 
schal eete the heedis of hem. And my7 
puple schal hange, at my comynge ajen.. 
But a 30k schal be put to hem togidere, 
that schal not be takun awei. Hou schals 
Y 3yue thee, Effraym? schal Y defende 
thee, Israel? hou schal Y 3yue thee? As 
Adama Y schal sette thee; as Seboym. 
Myn herte is turned in me; my repent- 
aunce is disturblid togidere. Y schal noto 
do the strong veniaunce of my wraththe: 
Y schal not turne, to leese Effraym; for 
Y am God, and not man. Y am hooli iu 
the myddis of thee, and Y schal not entre 
in to a citee. Thei schulen go after the 10 
Lord. He shal rore as a lioun, for he shal 
rore, and the> sones of the see schulen 
drede. And thei schulen fle awei as a brid 
fro Egipt, and as a culuer fro the lond of 
Assiriens. And Y schal sette hem in her 
housis, seith the Lord. 


CAP. XII. 


Effraym cumpasside me in denying, the 12 
hous of Israel in gile. But Judas a wit- 
nesse 3ede doun with God, and with feith- 
ful seyntis. Effraym fedith wynd, andi 
sueth heete. Al dai he multiplieth leesyng, 


8 Om. 6 sec.m. %a culuer G sec. m. 


bOm. n. 


XII. 2—XIII. 2. 


feedith the wijnd, and sueth heete. Al day 
he multiplieth lesyng, and distruccioun ; 
and made pees with Assiriens, and bare 
2oyle in to Egypt. Therfore the dome of 
the Lord with Juda, and visitacioun on 
Jacob; vp the wayes, and vp* the fynd- 
yngus of hym he shal 3eelde to hym. 
3In the wombe he supplauntide, o7 dis- 
ceyuyde, his brother, and in his strengthe 
4he was dressid with an aungel. And he 
hadde victorie at the aungel, and he was 
coumfortid ; he wepte, and preiede hym ; 
in Bethel he fonde hym, and there he 
sspac with 3ou. And the Lord God of 
6 oostis, the Lord, memoria] of hym. And 
thou shalt be conuertid to the Lord thi 
God. Keepe thou mercy and dome, and 
7hoope thou evermore in thy God. Ca- 
naan, in his hond a gyleful balaunce, 
8 louede fals chalenge. And Effraym saide, 
Netheles Y am maad riche, Y fonde an 
ydol to me; alle my trauailis shuln not 
fynde to me wickidnesse, whiche Y syn- 
gnyde. And Y the Lord thi God, whiche 
ledde thee out of the lond of Egypt; 3it 
Y shal make thee for to sytte in tahber- 
10 naclis, as in days of feest. And Y spac 
on? prophetis, and Y multipliede‘ visioun, 
and in the hond of prophetis Y am 
ilickenyd. Jif in Galaad an ydol, ther- 
fore veynly they weren in Galgal of- 
frynge to oxis; forwhi and the auters of 
hem as’ hepis on forowis of the feeld. 
12 Jacob flei3 into the cuntrie of Sirie, and 
Irae] sernyde into wyf, and sernyde into 
iswyf. Forsothe in a prophete the Lord 
ledde out Yrael of Egypt, and in a pro- 
14 phete he is kepte. Effraym terride me to 
wrath in his bitternessis, and his blood 
shal cum on hym; and the Lord his God 
shal restoren hym his shenship. 


CAP. XIII. 
1 Effraym spekynge, errour* assailide 
Yrael; and he trespasside in Baal, and 
zis dead. And now thei puttiden to for 


aOm. 4H.) Pin a, 


©wordr. Gand vu.  ¢ that ledde thee fro x. 


restorid 1. 


4s 


HOSEA. 


-€ multiplie x. 


683 


and distriyng ; and he made boond of pees 
with Assiriens, and bar oile in to Egipt. 
Therfor the doom of the Lord ts withe 
Juda, and visityng 7s on Jacob; bi the 
weies of hym, and bi. the fyndyngis of 
hym he schal 3elde tohym. In the wombe3 
he supplauntide his brother, and in his 
strengthe he was dressid with the aungel. 
And he was strong to the aungel, and was 4 
coumfortid ; he wepte, and preiede hym; 
in Bethel he foond hym, and there he 
spak with vs. And the Lord God ofs 
oostis, the Lord, 7s the memorial of hym. 
And thou schalt turne to thi God. Kepec 
thou merci and doom, and hope thou euere 
in thi God. Chanaan lonyde fals caleng,7 
a‘ gileful balaunce in his hond. And Ef-8 
fraym seide, Netheles Y am maad riche, 
Y haue founde an idol to me; alle my 
trauelis schulen not fynde to me the wick- 
idnesse, whiche Y synnede. And Y am this 
Lord God fro® the lond of Egipt; 3it Y 
schal make thee to sitte in tabernaclis, as 
in the daies of feeste. And Y spak bi pro-10 
fetis, and Y multiplied profesie', and Y was 
licned in the hond of profetis. If Galaad ! 
worschipith an idol, therfor thei erren in 
veyn offryng to oxis in Galgal; for whi 
and the auteris of hem schulen be as heepis 
on the forewis of the feeld. Jacob fledde 12 
in to the cuntrei of Sirie, and Israel ser- 
uyde for a wijf, and seruyde, ether kepte, 
for a wijf. But bi a profete the Lord ts 
ledde Israel out of Egipt, and bi a pro- 
fete he was kept. Effrayin terride me to14 
wrathfulnesse in hise bitternessis, and the 
blood of hym schal come on hym; and his 
Lord schal restore* to hym the schen- 
schipe of him. 


CAP. XIII. 


For Effraym spak, hidousnesse assailide ! 
Israel; and he trespasside in Baal, and was 
deed. And now thei addiden to do synne, 2 


d orroure 4. 


f visicun, ether profecie CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. § be 


9) 


vw 


684 HOSEA. XIII. 3——XIV. 1. 


to synne, and maden to hem a 3oten 
thing of her syluer, as the licknesse of 
ydols; the makyng of crafty? men it is 
al. To these thei sayen, Offre, 3e men, wir- 
sshippynge calues. Therfore thei shuln 
be as a morewe clowde, or wyst, and as 
morewe dewe passynge, as dust rauyshid 
with whirlwynd of the feeld, aud as 
ssmoke of the chymney. Forsothe Y the 
Lord thi God, of the lond of Egypt; and 
thou shalt not knowe God, with outen 
sme, and saueour® is not, out take me. Y 
knewe thee in desert, in the lond of wil- 
sdernesse. Bysidis her lesewis and thei 
ben fulfillid, and ful crammyd ; thei lyft- 
ziden vp her herte, and forjaten me. And 
Y shal be to hem as a lyounesse, and as 
sa paard in the waye of Assyriens. Y 
shal renne to hem as a she bere, the 
whelpis rauyshid; and Y shal breke the 
ynuer thingis of her mawe, and Y shal 
waastye hem there as a lyoun. <A beest 
9of the feeld shal kitte hem. Thi losse, 
10 Yrael; oonly of me thin help. Wher is 
thi kyng ? most now saue he thee in alle 
thi citees; and thi domysmen, of whom 
thou saidist, 3eue thou to me a kyng, and 
1 princis? And‘ Y shal 3eue to thee a kyng 
in my wodenesse, and Y shal take awey 
izin myn indignacioun. The wickidnesse 
of Effraym is bounden to gidre; the synne 
sof hym hydde. Sorewis of a@ wouman 
berynge chijld shulu cume to hymn; he 
is a sone not wijse. Now forsothe he shal 
14not stonde in contricioun of sonys. Of 
the hond of deth Y shal delyuere hem, 
Y shal a3ein bye hem fro deth. Thou 
deth, Y shal be thi deth; thou helle, Y 
shal be thi morsel. Coumfort is hid fro 
ismyn eejen, for he departith among bre- 
theren. The Lord shal brenge a bren- 
nynge wynd, of desert steiynge vp; and 
shal drye the veynis therof, and discoum- 
forte, or leeue aloon, the welle therof; 
and he shal rauyshe tresour of eche de- 
isirable vessel. Perishe Samarie, for to 


and maden to hem a 3otun ymage of her 
siluer, as the lienesse of idols; al is the 
makyng of crafti men. To these thei 
seien, A! 3e men, offre, and worschipe® 
ealuys. Therfor thei schulen be as a mo-3 
rewtid cloude, and as the’ deew of morew- 
tid, that passith forth, as dust rauyschide 
bi whirlewynd fro the corn floor, and as 
smoke of a chymenei. Forsothe Y am thik 4 
Lord God, ‘that ledde thee' fro" the loond 
of Egipt; and thou schalt not knowe God, 
outakun me, and no sauyour is, outakun 
me. Y knewe thee in the desert, in thes 
lond of wildirnesse. Bi her lesewis theis 
weren fillid, and hadden abundaunce; thei 
reisiden her herte™, and for3aten me. And7 
Y schal be as a lionesse to hem, as a parde 
in the weye of Assiriens. Y as a female 
bere, whanne the whelps ben rauyschid, 
schal mete hem; and schal al to-breke the 
ynnere thingis of the mawe of hem. And 
Y as a lioun schal waaste hem there; a 
beeste of the feeld schal al" to-rende hem. 
Israel, thi perdicioun is of thee; thin help» 
is oneli of me. Where is thi kyng? moost 10 
saue he thee now in alle thi citees; and 
where ben thi iugis, of whiche thou seidist, 
3yue thou to me a kyng, and princes? Yu1 
schal 3yue to thee a kyng in my strong 
veniaunce, and Y schal take awei in myn 
indignacioun. The wickidnesse of Effrayim 12 
is boundun togidere; his synne is hid. 
The sorewis of a womman trauelynge of 13 
child schulen come to hym; he zs a sone 
not wijs. For now he schal not stonde in 
the defoulyng of sones. Y schal delyuere 14 
hem fro the hoond of deeth, and Y schal 
a3enbie hem fro deth. Thou deth, Y schal 
be thi deth; thou helle, Y schal be thi 
mussel. Coumfort is hid fro myn® i3en, for 15 
he schal departe bitwixe britheren. The 
Lord schal brynge a brennynge wynd, 
stiynge? fro desert; and it schal make drie 
the veynes therof, and it schal make deso- 
lat the welle therof; and he schal rauysche 
the tresour of ech desirable vessel. 


4 craftise 4. ©asaueour G sec.m. fOm.acH. & Om. GH. 


s worschipeth 1, idain. Kther 1Om.apr.m. lout frox, ™ hope cEFGHIMNQPX. ° Om. 
CGHKMNQRSUX sec.m. F. thin x,  P stiynge vp 1. 


XIV. 2—10. 


bitternesse she stiride hir God; in swerd 
perishe it. The litil childre of hem ben 
hurtlid, and wymmen with chijld of it 
ben coruen out. 


CAP. XIV. 


2 Yrael, be thou conuertid to the Lord 
thi God, for thou hast fallen to gydre in 
3thi wickidnesse. Take with 30u wordis, 
and be 3e conuertid to the Lord; and 
saye 3e to hym, Do awey alle wickid- 
nesse, and resceyue good; and we shuln 
43eelde the calues of our lippis. Assur 
shal not saue vs, we shuln not steye on 
hors; nether we shuln saye more, Our 
goddis werkis of oure hondis; for thou 
shalt haue mercy of the ylke fadrelesse 
schijld, that is in thee. 
contricioun of hem; Y shal loue hem of 
my free wille, for my woodnesse is turned 
sawey fro hem. Y shal be as dew, and 
Yrael shal buriowne as lilie. And the roote 
70f hym shal birst out as of Lybau; the 
braunchis of hym shuln go. And as olyue 
his glorie shal be, and his sauour as of 
8 Liban. Thei shuln be conuertid sittynge 
in the shadewe of hym; thei shuln lyue 
in whete, and shuln burioune as a vyne 
3erd. The memoriel of hym as wijn of 
y Lyban. Effraym, what ouer to me ydolis? 
Y shal heere® hym, and Y shal dresse 
hym as a beeche wexinge green. Of me 
10 thi fruyte is founden. Who is wijse, and 
shal vndirstonden these thingis? vndir- 
stondynge, and shal wite these thingis ? 
For ri3tful the wayes of the Lord, and 
iust men shuln walke in hem; forsothe 
trespassours shuln falle in hem. 


Here endith the book of Osee, and 
bigynneth the book of Joel, prophete. 


& ful out heere G sec. m. 


q fellidist cntqgru. feldest s. fallidest x fext - ether fel K marg. 


HOSEA. 


Y shal heele the_ 


685 


CAP. XIV. 

Samarie perische, for it stiride his God! 
to bittirnesse; perische it bi swerd. The 
litle children of hem be hurtlid doun, and 
the wymmen with child therof be koruun. 
Israel, be thou conuertid to thi Lord God, 2 
for thou fellist? doun in thi wickiduesse. 
Take 3e wordis with 30u, and be 3e con-3 
uertid to the Lord ; and seie 3e to hyin, Do 
thou awei al wickidnesse, and take thou 
good ; and we schulen 3elde the caluys of 
oure lippis. Assur schal not saue vs, we4 
schulen not stie’ on hors; and we schulen 
no more seie, Oure goddis bex the werkis 
of oure hondis; for thou schalt haue merci 
on that modirles child, which is in thee. 
Y schal make hool the sorewis of hem ;5 
Y schal loue hem wilfuli, for my strong 
veniaunce is turned awei fro hem. Ye 
schal be as a‘ dew, and Israel schal buri- 
owne as a lilie. Aud the root therof schal 
breke out as of the Liban; the braunchis7 ° 
therof schulen go. And the glorye therof 
schal be as an olyue tree, and the odour 
therof schal be as of the Liban. Theis 
schulen be conuertid, and sitte in the scha- 
dewe of hym; thei schulen lyue bi wheete, 
and schulen buriowne as a vyne. The me- 
morial therof schal be as the wyne of 
Liban. Effraym, what schulen idols do» 
more to me? Y schal here him, and Y 
schal dresse him as a greene fir tree. Thi 
fruit is foundun of me. Who és wijs, and 10 
schal vndurstonde these thingis? who is 
vndurstondyng, and schal kunne_ these 
thingis? For the weies of the Lord bex 
ri3tful, and iust men schulen go in tho; 
but trespassours schulen falle in tho. 


Here endith Osee, and here biginneth 
Joel'. 


h Here endith Osce, and bigynneth Jocl, prophete. A. No final rubric in eu. 


rstieupr. * Oma prom. ¢ From 


cramignsu. Lfere endeth the booe of the profete Osee; se now Jocl, the prophete. x. Here endith Osee, 
and here bigynneth the book of Joel.m. Here endith the book of Osee, and bigynneth the book of Joel. x. 


Here endith the booe of the profete Osee, and begynneth Joel. 


No final rubric in aEPy. 


J O 


The book of Joel, prophete'. 


CAP. I. 


1 THE word of the Lord, that is maad to 
2Joel, the sone of Fatuel. Heere 3e, olde 
men, this, and with eeris perceyue 3e, alle 
dwellers of erthe. 3if this thing is don in 
3our days, or in days of 3our faders. 
sVpon this thing telle 3e to 3our sones, 
and 30ur sonys to her sonys, and the 
sonys of hem to an other generacioun. 
4A locust eete the residue of ernke, that 
is, a worme of bowts, and a bruke eete 
the residue of locust, and rust eete the 
sresidue of bruke. Awake 3e, drunken 
men, aud weepe; and 3oule 3e, alle that 
drynken wyne in swetnesse; for it pe- 
6rishide fro 30ur mouth. Forsothe folk hath 
styed vpon my lond, stronge and vnnoum- 
breable. The teeth of hym as teeth of 
lyoun, and his wangteeth as whelpis of 
7a lyoun. He hath putte my vyne 3erd 
in to desert, and hath drawen of the bare 
of my fijg tree. He nakynge? robbide it, 
and castide awey; the braunchis therof 
s ben maad whijt. Weile thon, as a mayden 
gird with a sacche vpon the husbonde of 
hir puberte, that is, tyme of weddynge. 
9 Sacrifice perishide, and libacioun, ‘hat 7s, 
offryng fleetynge® thingus, of the hous of 
the Lord; and prestis, mynystris of the 
10 Lord, murneden. The cuntree is robbid, 
the erthe mournede; for whete is waastid, 


8 No initial rubric in sca. 


® Here biginnithe the book of Joel, the profele. EPpy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


© of the Ey. 


b naknynge 4G sec. m. H. 


E L. 


Here bigynneth the book of Joel*. 


CAP. I. 


THE word of the Lord zs this, that was! 
maad to Joel, the sone of Phatuel. Elde2 
men, here 3e this, and alle dwelleris of the 
lond, perseyue 3e with eeris. If this thing 
was don in 3oure daies, ether in the daies 
of 3oure fadris. Of this thing telle 3e to3 
3our sones, and 3our sones felle to her 
sones, and the sones of hem fedle to an- 
other generacioun. <A locuste* eet the4 
residue of a worte worm, and a_ bruke 
eet the residue of a locuste, and rust eet 
the residue of a bruke. Drunken men,5 
wake 3e>, and wepe; and 3elle 3e, alle that 
drynken wyn in swetnesse ; for it perisch- 
ide fro j3oure mouth. For whi a foles 
strong and vnnoumbrable stiede on my 
lond. The teeth therof bez as the® teeth 
of a lioun, and the cheek teeth therof ben 
as of a whelp of a lioun. It settide my7 
vyner in to desert, and took awei the 
riynde of my fige tre. It made nakid and 
spuylide that vyver, and castide forth; the 
braunchis therof ben maad white. Weiles 
thou, as a virgyn gird with a sak on the 
hosebonde of hir tyme of mariage. Sacri-9 
fice and moist sacrifice perischide fro the 
hous of the Lord; and preestis, the mynys- 


tris of the Lord, moureneden. The cuntrey 10 


is maad bare of puple. The erthe mouren- 
yde ; for whete is distried. Wyn is schent, 


© of fletynge A. 


b Om. x. 


* A locust is 
whanne it hath ‘ 
ful wyngis; @ 
brucke is of the — 
same kynde, 
bifore that it 
hath wyngis. 

rust eet, etc. 

rust is vice ei- 
ther corrup- 
cioun of wex- 
yuye corn, ( 
whanne bi 
brennynge 

wynd it makith 
no seed, and if 

it makith ony, 

it is in veyn, 

Lire here. v. 

Al bruke is cle- 
pid the fruyt of 

a locuste, bifore 
that it hath 
wyngis, after- 
ward whanne 

it bigynneth to 
fle a litil, it is 
seid athelebus, 
and whanne it 
fleith fulli it is 
seid a Jocuste ; 
and a bruke is 
myche greuous- 
ere than a lo- 
custe, either 
athelebus, for it 
liggith in o 

place, and eet- 

ith the fruytis 


I, 11—II. 2. 


and wijn is confoundid, and oyle lan- 
iigwishide, or failide. LErthe tiliers ben 
confoundid, vyne tiliers 3ouliden vpon 
whete, wijn, and barly; for corn of the 
12feeld perishide. The vyne 3erd is con- 
foundid, and the fyge tree langwishide. 
Poumgarnet, and palme tree, and maal 
tree, or fir, of whom mastis ben maad, 
and alle trees of the feeld dryeden; for 
13i0ye is confoundid fro sonys of men. 3e 
prestis, gyrde 30u, and weile; 3e myn- 
ystris'of the anter, 3oule. 3e mynystris 
of my God, entre 3e yn, ligge 3e in sak; 
for sacrifice perishide of the hous of 3our 
14 God, and offryng of fleetyng thing. Ha- 
lewe 3e! fastyng, clepe 3e cumpanye, gadre 
3e olde men, and alle dwellers of the:lond 
in to the hous of 30ur God; and crye 3e 
18 to the Lord, A! A! A! to the day; for 
the day of the Lord is ni3, and as waast- 
léynge it shal cum of the mizty. Wher 
not before 3our ee3en fodis perishen of 
the hous of your God ; gladnesse and ioye 
17 with outen forth ? Beestus wexiden roten 
to gidre in her drit. Berns ben destruyed, 
celers ben scaterd, for whete is confusid. 
is What sorewide a beest with ynne? flockis 
of grete beestis lowiden? for lesewe is 
not to hem; bot and flockis of sheep pe- 
igrishiden. ‘To thee, Lord, Y shal crye, 
for fijre ete the fair thingus of desert, and 
flawme brente alle trees of the cuntree. 
20 Bot: and beestis of the feeld, as a feeld 
thristynge rayn, byhelden vp to thee; for 
wellis of watris ben, dryed vp, and fijr 
deuourede the fair thingis of desert. 


CAP. II. 


1 Synge 3e with trumpe in Syon, 3o0ule 
3e in myn holy mounteyn. Alle dwellers 
of erthe be trublid to gydre; for the* day 

2of the Lord cummeth, for ni3 is the day 
of derknessis and myst, and day of cloude 
and of whirlwynd. As the mornyng sprad 
abrood,vpon hillis myche peple and strong. 
Lijc.to hym was not fro the bygynnyng, 


4 Om. «4. 
d the trees vu. 


© 3elleth 1. f the cumpany EPpy. 


JOEL. 


687 


and oile was sijk, ether failide. The erthe 11.10 the roote. 


tilieris ben schent, the vyn tilieris 3elliden es ee 
on wheete and harli; for the ripe corn of Riitdee tna 
the feeld is perischid. The vyner is schent ; 12 othe the 
and the fige tre was sijk. The pomgarnate (ris of vom 
tre, and the palm tre, and the fir tre, and to reduesse. If 
alle trees’ of the feeld drieden vp; for chs eat 
ioie is schent fro the sones of men. mise 
prestis, girde 3ou, and weile; 3e mynystris ete: eS S 
of the auter, 3elle’. Mynystris of my God, sete 
entre 3e, ligge 3e in sak; for whi sacrifice The glase. v. 
and moist sacrifice pevischide fro the hous 

of 3oure God. Halewe 3e fastyng, clepe is 

3e cumpeny‘, gadere 3e togidere elde men, 

and alle dwelleris of the erthe in to the 

hous of 3oure God; and crie 3e to the 

Lord, A! A! A! to the® dai; for the dais 

of the Lord is ni3, and schal come as a 

tempest fro the my3ti. Whether" foodis 16 
perischiden not bifore 3oure ijen; glad- 

nesse and ful out ioie perischide fro the 

hous of 3oure God? Beestis wexeni rotnn 17 

in her drit. Bernes ben distried, celeris ben 

distried, for wheete is schent. Whi weilide 1s 

a beeste? whz lowiden the flockis of oxun 

and kien? for no lesewe is to hem; but 

also the flockis of scheep _perischiden. 

Lord, Y schal crye to thee, for fier eet 19 

the faire thingis of desert, and flawme 

brente all the trees of the cuntrei. But20 

also beestis of the feeld, as a corn floor 

thirstynge reyn, bihelden to thee; for the 

wellis of watris ben dried vp, and fier 

deuouride the faire thingis of desert. 


CAP. II. 


Synge 3e with a trumpe in Sion, 3elle1 
3e in myn hooli hil. Alle the dwelleris of 
erthe be disturblid;, for the dai of the 
Lord cometh, for the dai of derknessis and 2 
of myist is ni3, the dai of cloude and of 
whirlewynde. As the morewtid spred 
abrood on hillis, a myche puple and 
stroug. Noon was lijk it fro the bigyn- 


e Om, 4G. 
i wexiden IKs sec. m. 


€Om.1. bh Wher ceteri pass. 


688 


aud after hym shal not be, vnto 3eeris of 
sgeneracioun and generacioun. Byfore 
the face of hym fijr deuourynge, and 
after hym brenyng flawme ; as a 3erde of 
voluptee the erthe byfore hym, and after 
hym aloonenesse of desert, nether ther is 
sthat shal ascape hym. As the si3t of 
horsis the sizjt of hem, and as horsmen 
sso thei shuln renne. As sown of cartis 
on coppis of hillis shuln lijpe; so the sown 
of flawme of fijre deuourynge stoble, as a 
cstronge peple maad redy to bataile. Of 
the face of hym peplis shuln be tour- 
mentid, alle cheeris shuln be dryueu in 
7to a pot. As strouge thei shuln renne, 
as men fi3ters thei shuln stye on the 
walle. Men shuln go in her wayes, and 
thei shuln not bowe awey fro her pathes. 
8Eche shal not streyte® his brother, eche 
shuln go in his path; bot and by wyn- 
dowis thei shuln falle, and thei shuln not 
9be distruyed. Thei shuln entre in to the 
cyte, the shuln renne in the wall; thei 
shuln stye vponf housis, thei shuln entre 
loby wyndowis as a ni3t theef. Of the 
face of hym the erthe tremblide togydre, 
heuens hen moued, the sunne and the 
mone ben maad derk, and sterris with- 
11 drowen her li3t. And the Lord 3aue his 
voice byfore the face of his oost, for many 
ben the castels of hym ful myche; for 
stronge, and doynge the word of hym. 
Forsothe the day® of the Lord grete, and 
dreedful ful myche, and who shal sus- 
12teyne it? Now therfor saith the Lord, 
Be 3e conuerted to me in al 3our herte, 
in fastyng, and weepyng, and weylyng; 
sand kerue 3e 3our hertis, aud not 3o0ur 
clothingus, and be 3e conuertid to the 
Lord 3our God, for he is benygne, and 
mercyful, pacient, and of myche mercy, 
l4and abydynge vpon malice. Who wote, 
3if God be conuertid, and forjeue, and 
leue after hym blessyng? sacrifice and 
offryng of fleetynge thingus to the Lord 
1530ur God. Synge 3e with trump in 


© constreyne G sec. M. 


JOEL. 


Il. 3-——15+ 


nyng, and after it schal not be, til in to 
3eeris of generacioun and of generacioun. 
Bifore the face therof schal be fier de-3 
uourynge, and after it schal be brennynge 
flawme; as a gardyn of liking the lond 
schal be bifor him, and wildirnesse of de- 
sert schal be after him, and noon is that 
schal ascape him. The lokyng of hema 
schal be as the lokyng of horsis, and as 
horse men so thei schulen renne. As thes 
sown of cartis on the heedis of hillis thei 
schulen skippe; as the sowne of the flawme 
of fier deuourynge stobil, as a strong puple 
maad redi to batel. Puplis schulen beé 
turmentid of the face therof, alle facis 
schulen be dryuun in to a pot. As stronge7 
men thei schulen reine, as men werriours 
thei schulen stie* on the wal. Men schulen 
go in her weies, and thei schulen not bowe 
awei fro her pathis. Ech man schal nots 
make streyt his brother, ech man schal go 
in his path; but also thei schulen falle 
doun bi wyndows, and schulen not be 
hirt. Thei schulen entre in to the citee,9 
thei schulen renne on the wal; thei schulen 
stie on housis, thei schulen entre as a ni3t 
theef bi wyndows. The erthe tremblide of 10 
his face, henenys weren mouyd, the sunne 
and the moone weren maad derk, and 
sterris withdrowen her schynyng. Andii 
the Lord 3af his vois bifor the face of his 
oost, for hise oostis ben ful manye; for 
tho ben stronge, and doen the word of 
hym. For the dai of the Lord is greet, 
and ful ferdful, and who schal suffre it? 
Now therfor seith the Lord, Be 3e con- 12 
uertid to me in al 3oure herte, in fastyng, 
and wepyng, and weilyng; and kerue 3e13 
3oure hertis, and not 3oure clothis, and be 
je conuertid to 3oure Lord God, for he 
is benygne, and merciful, pacient, and of 
myche merci, and abidynge, ether for- 
3yuynge, on malice. Who woot, if God 14 
be conuertid, and for3yue, and leeue bless- 
yng aftir hyim? sacrifice and moist sacri- 
fice to oure Lord God. Synge 3e with ais 


fOm.aGH. & dais a. 


kK stie up 1. 


Il. 16—26. 


Syon, halewe 3e fastyng, clepe 3e cum- 
i6panye; gadre 3e the peple, halewe 3e the 
chirche, gadre 3e to gidre olde men, gadre 
3e litil children, and soukynge tetis; the 
husbonde go out of his couche, and the 
17 wijf of hir chaumbre. Bitwix the vesti- 
arie and the auter prestis, mynystris of 
the Lord, shuln weepe, and shuln saye, 
Lord! spare thou, spare to thi peple, and 
3eue not thin eritage into schendship, that 
naciouns be lordis to hem. Whi sothely 
sayn thei in peplis, Wher is the God of 
1shem? The Lord louede his lond, and 
l9sparide to his peple. And the Lord an- 
swerde, and saide to his peple, Loo! Y 
shal sende to 30u whete, and wijn, and 
oyle, and 3e shuln be fulfilled in hem; 


and Y shal namore 3eue 3ou shenship in. 


20hethen men. And Y shal make fer fro 
30u hym that is of the north; and Y shal 
putte hym awey in to a lond with outen 
way, and desert; the face therof a3einus 
the eest see, and the last therof to the 
last see; and the stynk of hym shal stye 
vp, and the root of hym shal stye vp, for 
2ihe did proudly. Erthe, ny] thou dreede, 
bot ioye thou with outforth, and be 
glad; for the Lord magnyfiede that he 
2zshulde do. Ny] 3e dreede, 3e beestis of 
the cuntre, for the faire thingus of desert 
buriowneden ; for a tree brou3te to his 
fruyte, the fijge tree and the vynej3erd 
233auen her vertue. And ioye 3e, sonys of 
Syon, and gladde 3e in the Lord 3our 
God, for he 3aue to 3ou a techer of ri3t- 
wisnesse, and he shal make for to cum 
doun to 30u morewe rayn, and late, as 
2ifro the bygynnyng. And feeldis shuln 
be fulfillid with whete, and pressours 
shuln be plenteuouse in wijn, and oyle. 
25 And Y shal 3eelde to you the 3eris whom 
the locust eete, and bruke, and rust, and 
eruke, my grete strengthe, whom Y sente 
26in to 30u. And 3e shuln ete etynge, and 
ye shuln be fulfillid; and ye shuln herie 
the name of the Lord 3our God, that did 
with 30u marueilis; and my peple shal 
not be confounded in to with outen eende. 


land clepe c, 
VOL. Il. 


JOEL. 


m Om. nv. 


4T 


689 


trumpe in Sion, halewe 3e fastyng, clepe! 
3e cumpany; gadere 3e™ togidere the puple, 
halewe 3e the chirche, gadere 3e togidere 16 
elde men, gadere 3e togidere litle children, 
and soukynge the brestis; a spouse go out 
of his bed, and a spousesse of hir chaum- 
bre. Prestis, the mynystris of the Lord, 17 
schulen wepe bitwixe the porche and the 
auter, and schulen seie, Lord! spare thou, 
spare thi puple, and 3yne thou not thin 
eritage in to schenschipe, that naciouns 
be lordis of hem. Whi seien thei among 
puplis, Where is the God of hem? Theis 
Lord louyde gelousli his lond, and sparide 
his puple. And the Lord answeride, and 19 
seide to his puple, Lo! Y schal sende to 
jou whicete, and wyn, and oile, and 3e 
schulen be fillid with tho; and Y schal 
no more 3yue you schenschipe ainong he- 
thene men. And Y schal make hym thiat 20 
is at the north fer fro 30u; and Y schal 
cast hym out in to a loud with out weie, 
and desert; his face a3ens the eest see, 
and the laste part therof at the last see; 
and the stynk therof sehal stie", and the 
root therof schal stie, for he dide proudli. 
Erthe, nyle thou drede, make thou ful out 21 
ioye, and be glad; for the Lord magnefiede 
that he schulde do. Beestis of the cuntrei, 22 
nyle 3e drede, for the faire thingis of de- 
sert buriowneden; for the tre brouj3te his 
fruyt, the fige tre and vyner 3auen her 
vertu. And the sones of Sion, make 3e ful 23 
out ivie, and be 3e glad in 3oure Lord 
God, for he 3af to 3o0u a techere of ri3t- 
fulnesse, and he schal make morewtid 
reyn and euentid reyn to come doun to 
3ou, as in the bigynnyng. And cornflooris 21 
schulen be fillid of wheete, and pressours 
schulen flowe with wyn, and oile. And 2 
Y schal 3elde to 30u the 3eris whiche the 
locuste, bruke, and rust, and wort worin, 
my greet strengthe, eet, which Y sente in. 
to 30u. And 3e schulen ete etyng, and 3e 26 
schulen be fillid; and 3e schulen lerie the 
name of 3oure Lord God, that made mer- 
ueils with® you; and my puple schal not 
be schent with outen ende. And 3e schulen 27 


Nstieup 1. ton. 


690 


27 And 3e shuln wite, for in the mydil of 
Yrael Yam; and Y the Lord 3our God, 
and there is not more; and my peple shal 
not be confoundid in to with outen eende. 

23 And it shal be, after these thingus Y 
shal helde out my spirit vpon eche fleshe, 
and 3our sonys shuln prophecie, and 3oure 
dou3ters; 3our olde men shuln mete swe- 
uens, and 3our 3unge men shuln see vi- 

sgsiouns. But and on my seruauntis, and 
hond maydens, in tho days Y shal heelde 

300ut my spirit ; and Y shal 3eue wondris 
in heuen, and in erthe, blood, and fijr, and 

sivapour of smoke. The sunne shal be 
turned in to dercknessis, and the mone 
in to blood, byfore that the grete day 

szand orrible of the Lord cumme. And it 
shal be, eche man that, shal inclepe the 
name of the Lord, shal be saaf; for in the 
hill of Syon and in Jerusalem shal be 
saluacioun, as the Lord saide, and in the 
residue, whom the Lord shal clepe. 


CAP SALI: 


i For loo! in tho days, and in that 
tyme, whanne Y shal to gydre turne the 
2caitiftee of Juda and Jerusalem, Y" 
shal gedre alle folkis, and Y shal leede 
hem forth in to the valey of Josaphath ; 
and Y shal dispute there with hein on 
my peple, and myn eritage Yrael, whom 
thei scaterden in naciouns; and thei 
3departiden my lond, and on my peple 
thei senten lot; and thei puttiden a chijld 
in the bordel hous, and solden a meyd- 
chijld for wijn, that thei shulden drynke. 
4Sothely what to me and 30u', Tyrus, and 
Sydon, and alle the terme of Palestynys ? 
Wher 3e shuln 3elde vengyng to me? and 
3if 3e vengen 3ou a3einus me, soone swiftly 
Y shal 3eelde the whilnesse to 3ou on 
s30ur hed. Forsothe 3e token my syluer 
and gold, and my desireable and most 
faire thingus 3e baren in to 3our templis. 
sAnd 3e solden sonys of Juda, and sonys 
of Jerusalem to the sonys of Greekis, 


bh And Y x. 


JOEL. 


I. 27—III. 6. 


wite, that Y am in the myddis of Israel ; 
and Y am 30ure Lord God, and ‘noon is? 
more; and my puple schal not be schent 
with outen ende. 


CAP. II. 


And it schal be, aftir these thingis Y 28 
schal schede out my spirit on ech man, 
and 3oure sones and 30ure dou3tris schulen 
profesie; 3oure elde men schulen dreme 
dremes, and 3oure 3onge men schulen se 
visiouns1. But also Y schal schede out29 
my spirit on my seruauntis, and hand- 
maydis, in tho daies; and Y schal 3yue30 
grete wondris in heuene, and in erthe, 
blood, and fier, and the heete of smoke. 
The sunne schal be turned in to derk-31 
nessis, and the moone in to blood, bifor 
that the greet dai and orrible of the Lord 
come, And it schal be, ech that clepith to 32 
helpe the name of the Lord, schal be saaf; 
for whi saluacioun™ schal be in the hil of 
Sion and in Jerusalem, as the Lord seide, 
and in the* residue men, whiche the Lord 
clepith. For lo! in tho daies, and in that1 
tyme, whanne Y schal turne the caitifte of 
Juda and of Jerusalem, Y schal gadere2 
alle folkis, and Y schal lede hem in to the 
valei of Josephat; and Y schal dispute 
there with hem on my puple, and myn eri- 
tage Israel, whiche thei scateriden among 
naciouns; and thei departiden my lond, 
and senten lot on my puple; and thei set-3 
tiden a knaue child in the bordel hous, 
and seelden a damesel for wyn, that thei 
schulden drynke. But what to me and to4 
jou, thou Tire, and Sidon, and ech ende 
of Palestyns? Whethir 3e schulen 3elde 
vengyng to me? and if 3e vengen 30u a3ens 
me, soone swiftli Y schal' 3elde while to 
jou on joure heed. 3e token awey mys 
siluer and gold, and 3e brou3ten my de- 
sirable thingis and faireste thingis in to 
joure templis of idols. And 3e selden thee 
sones of Juda, and the sones of Jerusalem 
to the sones of Grekis, that 3e schulden 


i to 300 4. 


P ther is noon. 4 visiouns, ether reuelaciouns CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. ° saluacioun, ether sauyng CFGH 


IKMNQSUX. §% Om. CEFGHIMNPERSUX. +t 


Om. n. 


HI. 7—19. 


that 3e shulden make hem fer fro her 
zcoostis. Loo! Y shal reyse hem of the 
place in whiche 3e solden hem; and Y 
shal turne to gydre 3our 3eldyng in to 
s30ur hed. And Y shal selle 3our sonys 
and 30ur dou3tris in the hondis of the 
sonys of Juda, and thei shuln selle hem 
to Sabeis, a fer fole, for the Lord spac. 
9 Crie 3e this thing in heithen men, halewe 
3e bateile, reyse 3e strong men; alle men- 
1ofizters, cum to, and stey vp. Bete to 
gydre 3o0ur plowis in to swerdis, and 3our 
pikoysis, or mattokis, in to speris; the 
11seeke man saye, for Y am strong. Breste 
3e out, and come 3e, alle folkis of eumpas, 
and be 3e gadrid; there the Lord shal 
12make thi stronge men for to dye. Folkis 
rijse to gydre, and stie vp in to the valey 
of Josephath; for there I shal sitte, that 
13 Y deme alle folkis in cumpas. Sende 3e 
sykelis, for the corn hath rypid; cum 3e, 
and diseende 3e, for the pressoure is ful ; 
pressours ben plenteuouse, for the malice 
140f hem is multiplied. Peplis, peplis in 
the valey of concisioun, or sleaynge to 
gydre; for the day of the Lord is ni3 in 
15 the valey of concisioun. ‘The sonne and 
mone ben maad derck, and sterris with- 
iedrewen her shynyng. And the Lord of 
Syon shal rore, and of Jerusalem shal 
3eue his voiee, and heuens and erthe 
shuln be moued; and the Lord hoope of 
his peple, and strengthe of the sonys of 
17Yrael. And 3e shuln wite, for Y the 
Lord 3our God, dwellynge in Syon, in my 
holy hyll; and Jerusalem shal be holy, 
and aliens shuln namore passe therby. 
isAnd it shal be, in that day mounteyns 
shuln droppe swetnes, and litil hillis shuln 
flowe with niylk, and by alle the reuers 
of Juda waters shuln go; and a welle shal 
go out of the hous of the Lord, and shal 
moiste the reyny streme of thornys. 
19 Egypt shal be in to desolacioun, and 
Ydume in to desert of perdicioun; for 
that that thei diden wickidly in to sonys 
of Juda, and shedden out innocent blood 


u her vu. 


¥vOm. 1. © neijeth 1. 
> stieth up 1. 


¢ Om. kK. 


JOEL. 


x stieth up 1. 


691 


make hem fer fro her coostis. Lo! Y7- 
schal reise hem fro the® place in which 3e 
seelden hem; and Y schal turne 3oure 
3eldyng in to 30ure heed. And Y schals 
sille 3oure sones and 3oure dou3tris in the 
hondis of the’ sones of Juda, and thei 
schulen selle hem to Sabeis, a fer fole, 
for the Lord spak. Crye 3e this thing» 
among hethene men, halewe 3e batel, reise 
3e stronge men; alle men werriours, nei3”, 
and stie*. BeeteY 3e togydere 3oure plowis 10 
in to swerdis, and 3oure mattokkis” in to 
speeris ; a sijk man seie, that Y am strong. 
Alle folkis, breke 3e out, and come* fro1! 
cumpas, and be 3e gaderid togidere; there 
the Lord schal make thi stronge men to 
die. Folkis rise togidere, and stie® in to12 
the valei of Josofat; for Y schal sitte 
there, to deme alle folkis in cumpas. Sende 13 
3e sikelis, ‘ether sithis*®, for ripe corn wex- 
ide; come 3e, and go 3e doun, for the 
pressonr is ful ; pressouris ben plenteuouse, 
for the malice of hem is multiplied. Pu-14 
plis, puplis in the valei of kittyng doun ; 
for the dai of the Lord is ny3 in the valei 
of kittyng doun. ‘The sunne and thets 
moone ben maad derk, and sterris with- 
drowen her schynyng. And the Lord 16 
schal rore fro Sion, and schal 3yue his 
vois fro Jerusalem, and heuenes and erthe 
sehulen be mouyd; and the Lord is the 
hope of his puple, and the strengthe of 
the sones of Israel. And 3e schulen wite, !7 
that Y am 30ure Lord God, dwellynge in 
Sion, in myn hooli hil; and Jerusalem 
schal be hooli, and aliens schulen no more 
passe bi it. And it schal be, in that dai1s 
mounteyns schulen droppe swetnesse, and 
litle hillis sehulen flowe with mylke, and 
watris schulen go bi alle the ryueris of 
Juda; and a welle schal go out of the hous 
of the Lord, and schal moiste the stronde 
of thornes. Egipt sehal be in to desola-1s 
cioun, and Idume in to desert of perdi- 
cioun; for that that thei diden wickidli 
a3ens the sones of Juda, and schedden out 
innocent blood in her lond. And Judee 20 


y Bere n. 2 ether picoyses K marg. % cometh 1. 


472 


692 JOEL. LI. 20, 21. 


voin her lond. And Jude in to with oute 
eende shal be enhabited, and Jerusalem 

21in to generacioun and generacioun. And 
Y shal clense the blood of hem, whiche 
Y clenside not; and the Lord shal dwelle 
in Syon. 


Here endith the book of Joel, and 


bigyn{neth] the book of Amos, prophete*. 


schal be enhabited with outen ende, and 
Jerusalem in to generacioun and in to ge- 
neracioun. And Y schal clense the blood 21 
of hem, which Y hadde not clensid; and 
the Lord schal dwelle in Syon. 


Here endith Joel, and here biginnith 
Amos‘, 


k Here endcth the boke of Joel, and bigynneth the boke of Amos. a. No final rubric in en. 


4 From crcnimgrsu. Here endeth Joel, the profete ; se now the book of the profete Amos. K. Here endith 
the book of Joel, and here bigynneth the book of Amos. x. Here endith the booc of the profete Joel, and 
here bigynneth the booc of the profete Amos. x. No final rubric in axpy. 


A M O S&S. 


The book of Amos*. 
CAP. I. 


1 THE wordis of Amos, whiche was in 
sheperdis thingus of Thecue, whiche he 
~ saw3 on Yrael, in the days of Osye, kyng 
of Juda, and in the days of Jeroboam, 
sone of Joas, kyng of Yrael, byfore two 
23eris of the erthe mouynge. And he 
saide, The Lord shal rore of Syon, and 
of Jerusalem shal 3eue his voice; and the 
faire thingus of sheperdis mourneden, and 
sthe top of Carmele is dried vp. These 
thingis saith the Lord, On thre grete 
trespassis of Damask, and on foure, Y 
shal not conuerte hym, for that that thei 
4threshiden in yren waynes Galaad. And 
Y shal sende fijr in to the hous of Asael, 
and it shal deuoure the houses of Bena- 
sdab. And Y shal breke to gydre the 
barris>, or lockis, of Damaske, and Y shal 
distruye the dweller of the feeld of ydol, 
and the holdynge sceptre of the hous of 
voluptee and lecchorie; and the peple of 
Syrie shal be transferrid to Sirenen, saith 
6the Lord. These thingus saith the Lord, 
On¢ three grete trespassis of Gasa, and 
on foure, Y shal not conuerte hym, for 
that that he translatide perfit caitiftee, 
that he shulde close to gydre it4 in to 
7Ydume. And Y shal sende fijr in to the 
wall of Gasa, and it shal deuoure housis 
stherof. And Y shal distruye the dwellers 
of Azotus, and the holdynge sceptre of 


a No initial rubric in acu. 


a Here biginnith the book of Amos, the profete. Rey. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
f ceptre, ether kingis 3erde CEYGNIKMNPQRSUXY. 


Ctwo1. 43eerery. ©€ Om. nN, 


v herris 4. 


Here begynneth Amos’. 


CAP. I. 


THE wordis of Amos ben these, that: 
was in the schepherdis thingis of Thecue, 
whiche he si3 on Israel, in the daies of 
Osie, king of Juda, and in the daies of 
Jeroboam, sone of Joas, kyng of Israel, 
bifor twei® 3eeris4 of the erthe mouynge. 
And he seide, The Lord schal® rore froz 
Sion, and schal 3yue his vois fro Jeru- 
salem; and the faire thingis of schepherdis 
mourenyden, and the cop of Carmele was 
maad drie, The Lord seith these thingis, 3 
On thre grete trespassis of Damask, and 
on foure, I shal not conuerte it, for it 
threischide Galaad in irun waynes. And4 
Y schal sende fier in to the hous of Asael, 
and it schal deuoure the housis of Bena- 
dab. And Y schal al to-breke the barres 
of Damask, and Y schal leese a dwellere 
fro the feeld of idol, and hym that holdith 
the ceptre'* fro the hous of lust and of 
letcherie; and the puple of Sirie schal be 
translatid to Sirenen, seith the Lord. Thefts 
Lord seith these thingis, On thre grete 
trespassis of Gasa, and on foure, Y schal 
not conuerte it, for it translatide perfit 
caitifte, to close that togidere in Idumee. 
And Y schal sende fier in to the wal of7 
Gasa, and it schal deuoure the housis 
therof. And Y schal leese the dwelleris of s 
Azotus, and hym that holdith the ceptre 
of Ascalon; and Y schal turne myn hond 


©¢Om. x. 4 Om. acu. 


b sau3 1 sepins. 
g And the 1. 


*aceptre isa 
kyngis 3erde. a. 


694 AMOS. I. 9—II. 4. 


Ascalon; and Y shal turne to gydre myn 
hond vpon Accharon, and relikis of Phi- 
listiens shuln perische, seith the Lord 
9God. These thingis seith the Lord God, 
On thre greet trespassis of Tyrus, and on 
four, Y shal not conuerte hym, for that 
that thei closiden to gydre perfit caytiftee 
in Ydume, and thou3ten not of the boond 
10of bretheren. And Y schal send fijr in 
to the wall of Tyrus, and it shal denoure 

11 the housis therof. These thingus seith the 
Lord God, On three grete trespassis of 
Edom, and on foure, Y shal not conuerte 
hym, for that he pursuede in swerd his 
brother, and defoulide the mercy of hym, 
and heelde ouer his wodenesse, and kepte 

12his indignacioun til in to the eend. Y 
shal sende fijr in to Theman, and it shal 

isdeuoure the housis of Bosra. These 
thingus saith the Lord God, On® three 
grete trespassis of the sonys of Amon, 
and ou the foure, Y shal not conuerte 
hym, for that he karf wymmen with 
chijld of Galaad, for to alarge his terme. 

4And Y shal kyndyl fijr in the wall of 
Rabba, and it shal deuoure his housis, in 
3oulyng in the day of bateyle, and in 
whirlwynd in the day of menyng to 
1sgydre. And Melchon shal go in to cai- 
tiftee, he and his princis to gydre, saith 
the Lord. 
CAP. II. 

1 These thingis saith the Lord God, On 
three grete trespassis of Moab, and on 
foure, Y shal not conuerte hym, for that 
he brente the boonys of the kyng of 

2Ydume vn to ash. And Y shal sende 
fijr in to Moab, and it shal deuoure the 
housis of Carioth; and Moab shal dye in 

3sown of trumpe. And Y shal distruye the 
domysman of the mydil therof, and Y 
shal slea alle his princis with hym, saith 
the Lord. These thingis saith the Lord, 
4On three grete trespassis of Juda, and on 
foure, Y shal not conuerte hym, for that 
he castide awey the lawe of the Lord, 
and kepte not his comaundementis; for- 


on Accaron, and the remenauntis of Filis- 
teis schulen perische, seith the Lord God. 
The Lord God seith these thingis, On thre9 
grete trespassis of Tire, and on foure, Y 
schal not conuerte it, for thei closiden to- 
gidere perfit caitifte in Idumee, and hadde 
not mynde on the boond of pees of bri- 
theren. And Y schal sende fier in to the 10 
wal of Tire, and it schal devoure the housis 
therof. The Lord seith these thingis, On1) 
thre grete trespassis of Edom, and on 
foure, Y schal not conuerte it, for it pur- 
suede bi swerd his brother, and defoulide 
the merci of hym, and helde ferthere his 
woodnesse, and kepte his indignacioun ‘til 
in to® thei ende. Y* schal sende fier in to12 
Theman, and it schal deuoure the housis 
of Bosra. The Lord seith these thingis, 13 
On thre grete trespassis of the sones of 
Amon, and on foure', Y schal not conuerte 
hym, for he karf the wymmen with childe 
of Galaad, for to alarge his terme. And 14 
Y schal kyndle fier in the wal of Rabbe, 
and it schal deuoure the housis therof, in 
jellyng iu the dai of batel, and in whirl- 
wynd in the dai of mouyng togidere. And 15 
Melchon schal go in to caitifte, he and 
hise princes togidere, seith the Lord. 


CAR. 

The Lord God seith these thingis, On1 
thre grete trespassis of Moab, and on 
foure, Y schal not conuerte it, for it 
brente the boonys of the kyng of Idumee 
til to aische. And Y schal sende fier in2 
to Moab, and it schal denoure the housis 
of Carioth; and Moab schal die in sown, 
in the noise of a trumpe. And Y schals 
leese a inge of the myddis therof, and Y 
schal sle with it alle the princes therof, 
seith the Lord. The Lord seith these 
thingis, On thre grete trespassis of Juda, 
and on foure, Y schal not connerte hym, 
for he hath caste awei the lawe of the 
Lord, and kepte not the comaundementis 


© Vpon 4GH. 


hto zy. til into withowtens. iOm.s. kAndI1. 'the foure ry. 


If. 5—II. 1. 


sothe her ydols disceiueden hem, after 
5 whom the faders of hem wenten. And Y 
shal sende fijr in to Juda, and it shal 
édeuoure the housis of Jerusalem. These 
thingus saith the Lord‘, On three greteff 
trespassis of Yrael, and on foure, Y shal 
not conuerte hym, for that he solde a 
iust man for syluer, and a poore man for 
7shoone. Whiche breken to gydre on® 
dust of the erthe the hedis of pore men, 
and bowen awey the waye of meeke 
men; the sone and his fadir wente to a 
wenche, that thei defouliden myn holy 
sname. And on clothis leyde to wedde 
thei eeten bysidis eche auter, and drunken 
wijn of dampnyd men in the hous of her 
9God. Forsothe Y distruyede Ammorey 
fro the face of hem, whos hienesse of 
cedris the hyenesse of hym, and he strong 
as an ook; and Y brake to gidre the 
fruyte of hym aboue, and the rotis of 
iohym bynethe. Y am, that made 30u for 
to stye vp fro the lond of Egypt, and Y 
ledde 30u out in desert fourty 3eer, that 
3e shulde weelde the lond of Ammorrey. 
And Y reyside of 3our sonys in to pro- 
phetis, and of 3our 3unge men Najareys. 
Wher it is not thus, 3e sonys of Yrael ? 
izsaith the Lord. And 3e 3auen wijn to 
Najareys, and 3e comaundiden to pro- 
13 phetis, sayinge, Prophecie 3e not. Loo! 
Y shal sowne strongly vndir 30u, as a 
wayn chargid with hay sowneth strongly. 
14 And flijt shal perische fro the! swift, and 
a strong man shal not weelde his vertue, 
and a mi3ty man) in strengthe shal not 
issaue his soule, or 4ijf; and a man hold- 
ynge bowe shal not stonde, and the swift 
in his feet shal not be saued; and the 
igstyer of hors shal not saue his soule, and 
the stronge in herte amonge men shal 
flee nakid in that day, saith the Lord. 


CAP. III. 


1 Sonys of Yrael, heer 3e the word that 
the Lord spac on 30u, on al the kynred, 


fLord God 4. ff Om. kK. 8 a8 4. 


™ stie up 1. 


AMOS. 


n gnaste, ether charke CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


695 


of hym; for her idols, after whiche the 
fadris of hem 3eden, disseyueden hem. 
And Y schal sende fier in to Juda, ands 
it schal deuoure the housis of Jerusalem. 
The Lord seith these thingis, On three 
grete trespassis of Israel, and on foure, 
Y schal not connerte hym, for that that 
he seelde a iust man for siluer, and a 
pore man for schoon. Whiche al to-fonlen7 
the heedis of pore men on the dust of 
erthe, and bowen awei the weie of meke 
men; and the sone and his fadir jeden 
to a damesele, that thei schulden defoule 
myn hooli name. And thei eeten ons 
clothis leid to wedde bisidis ech auter, 
and drunken the wyn of dampned men 
in the hous of her God. Forsothe Yo 
distriede Ammorrei fro the face of hem, 
whos hiznesse was the hiznesse of cedris, 
and he was strong as an ook; and Y al 
to-brak the fruyt of hym aboue, and the 
rootis of hym bynethe. Y am, that made 10 
jou to stie™ fro the lond of Egipt, and 
ledde 30u out in desert bi fourti jeer, 
that 3e schulden welde the lond of Am- 
morrei. And Y reiside of 3oure sones11 
in to profetis, and Na3areis of 3oure jonge 
men. Whether it is not so, 3e sones of 
Israel? seith the Lord. And 3e birliden 12 
wyn to Najareis, and comaundiden to 
profetis, and seiden, Profecie 3e not. Lo!13 
Y schal charke™ vndur 30u, as a wayn 
chargid with hei charkith. And fli3t schal 14 
perische fro a swift man, and a strong 
man schal not holde his vertu, and a stal- 
worthe man° schal not saue his lijf; and 1s 
he that holdith a bowe schal not stonde, 
and a swift man schal not be sauyd by 
hise feet; and the stiere of an hors schal 
not saue his lijf, and a stronge man of16 
herte schal fle nakid among stronge men 
in that dai, seith the Lord. 


CAP. III. 


Sones of Israel, here 3e the word which 1 
the Lord spak on 30u, and on al the kyn- 


bhym a. iOm.4. Jj Om. sen. 


o Om. N. 


696 


whiche Y ledde out of the lond of Egypt, 
gsayinge, Oonly 3ou Y knew of alle kyn- 
redis of erthe; therfore Y shal visite on 
s3ou alle 30ur wickidnessis. Wher two 
shuln go to gydre, no but it shal accorde 
ato hem? Wher a lyoun shal rore in 
the wijld wode, no bot he shal haue 
pray? Wher the whelp of a lyoun shal 
3eue voice of his couche, no bot he shal 
seacche sum thing? Wher a brid shal 
falle in to grane* of erthe, with outen a 
fouler? Wher a gnare shal be taken awey 
fro erthe, before it shal take sum thing ? 
6 3if a trumpe shal sowne in a eytee, and 
the peple shal not dreede? 3if there be 
yuel in the citee, whiche the Lord shal 
zynot do? For the Lord God shal not do 
a word, no bot he shal shewe his preuyte 
sto his seruauntis prophetis. A lyoun shal 
rore, who shal not dreede? the Lord God 
aspac, who shal not prophecie? Make 3e 
herd in the housis of Azotus, and in the 
housis of the lond of Egypt; and saye 3e, 
Be 3e gadrid on the hillis of Samarye, 
and see many woodnessis in the mydil 
therof, and men suffrynge fals chalenge 
1o0in priuy chaumbris therof. And _ thei 


couthen not do ri3t thing, saith the Lord, - 


tresourynge wickidnesse and raueyn in 
ither housis. Therfore these thingus saith 
the Lord God, The lond shal be im tri- 
bulacioun, and shal! be cumpasid; and thi 
strengthe shal be drawen awey fro thee, 
1zand thin housis shuln be robbid. These 
thingus saith the Lord, Hou 3if a sheperd 
delyuere two hypis, or the last thing of 
a litil ere of the lyouns mouthe, so the 
sonys of Yrael shuln be delyuered, that 
dwellen in Samarie, in plage, o7 wound, 
of the litil bed, and in the™ lappe of 
13Damaske, Heere 3e, and witnesse 3e to 
gidre in the hous of Jacob, saith the 
11Lord God of oostis. For in the day, 
whanne Y shal bygynne for to visite the 
trespassis of Yrael on hym, Y shal visite 
and on the auters of Bethel; and the cor- 


k enare aGH. 


P hous 1s. 4 ¢kei tresouriden 1. 


AMOS. 


I shal not a. 


r Om. yn. 


Il. 2—14. 


rede, which Y ledde out of the lond of 
Egipt, and seide, Oneli Y knewe jou of2 
alle the kynredis of erthe; therfor Y schal 
visite on 30u alle 3oure wickidnessis. 
Whether tweyne schulen go togidere, nos 
but it acorde to hem? Whether a liouns 
schal rore in a forest, no but he haue 
prey? Whether the whelp of a lioun schal 
3yue vois fro his denne, no but he take 
ony thing? Whether a brid schal falles 
in to a snare of erthe, with outen a 
foulere? Whether a snare schal be takun 
awei fro erthe, bifor that it tak sum 
thing ? Whether a trumpe schal sowne6 
in a citee, and the puple schal not drede? 
Whether yuel schal be in a citee, which 
yuel the Lord schal not make? For the7 
Lord God schal not make a word, no but 
he schewe his priuyte to hise seruauntis 
profetis. A lioun schal rore, who schal& 
not drede? the Lord God spak, who 
schal not profesie? Make 3e herd in» 
the housis? of Azotus, and in the housis 
of the lond of Egipt; and seie 3e, Be 3e 
gaderid togidere on the hillis of Samarye, 
and se 3e many woodnessis in the myddis 
therof, and hem that suffren fals calenge 
in the priny places therof. And thei to 
kouden not do ri3tful thing, seith the 
Lord, and tresouriden® wickiduesse and 
raueyn in her housis. Therfor the Lord!t 
God seith these thingis, The lond schal 
be troblid, and be cumpassid; and thit 
strengthe schal be drawun doun of thee, 
and thin housis schulen be rauyschid. 
The Lord God® seith these thingis, As !2 
if a schepherd rauyschith fro the mouth 
of a lioun tweyne hipis, ether the laste 
thing of the eere, so the children of Is- 
rae] schulen be rauyschid, that dwellen 
in Samarie, in the cuntrei of bed, and in 
the bed of Damask. Here 3e, and wit-13 
nesse 3e in the hous of Jacob, seith the 
Lord God of oostis. For in the dai, 14 
whanne Y schal bigynne to visite the 
trespassyngis of Israel on hym, Y schal 


m On. 4. 


5 Om. CEFGHIKMNPQRUX. 


NI. 15—IV. 9. 


ners of the auters shuln be kitte of, and 

isshuln falle in to erthe. And Y shal 
smyte the wyntyr hous with the somer 
hous, and the housis of yuer shuln pe- 
rishe, and many housis shuln be distruy- 
ed, saith the Lord. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Heer this word, 3e fatt kyen, that ben 
in the mount of Samarie; whiche don 
fals chalenge to nedy men, and to gydre 
breken poore men; whiche saien. to 3our 
lordis, Brenge 3ee", and we shuln drynke. 

2The Lord God swore in his holy, for loo! 
days shuln cum on 30u; and thei shuln 
reyse jou in a dart with out yren, and 

330ur relykis in pottis boylynge. And by 


opnyngis 3e shuln go out, an other a3einus | 


an other, and 3e shuln be cast in to Ar- 
4noun, saith the Lord. Cum 3e to°® Be- 
thel, and do 3e vnpytously; to Galgala, 
and multiplie 3e trespassyng; and offre 
3e eerly 30ur sacrifices for victorie, in 
sthree days jour tithes. And sacrifie 3e 
herying of sour dowid, and clepe 3e wil- 
ful offryngus, and telle 3e; forsothe thus 
3e wolden, sonys of Yrael, saith the Lord 
6God. Wherfore and Y 3aue to 30u eg- 
gyng of teeth in alle 30ur cytees, and need 
of loues in alle 30ur placis; and 3e turn- 
eden not a3ein to me, saith the Lord. 
7And Y forbad rayn fro 30u, whanne 3it 
three monethis weren ouer, til to rype 
corn; and I reynede on oo citee, and I 
reynede not on an other; oo part is reyned, 
and the part on whiche Y reynede”™ not, 
adryede. And two and three cytees camen 
to oo cytee, for to drinke water, and thei 
ben not fulfillid; and 3e turnede not ajein 
9to me, saith the Lord. Y sinote 3ou in 
breunyng wynd, and in myldew, the mnul- 
titude of 3our gardeyns, and 3o0ur vijn 
3erdis; and olyuetis, or placis wher olyues 
wexen,and fijge placis,eruke eete; and 3ee 


2 Om. 4. 


tthe erther, 4% Om, CEFGIIIKMNPQRSUXY. 
W corn, ether heruest EFGUIKMNEQRSUXY. 


VOL. III, 


Oin A. 


AMOS. 697 


visite also on the anteris of Bethel; and 
the hornes of the auter schulen be kit 
awei, and schulen falle doun in to erthe’. 
And Y schal smyte the wynter hous with 1s 
the somer hous, and the housis of yuer 
schulen perische, and many housis schulen 
be distried, seith the Lord. 


CAP. IV. 


3e fatte kien, that ben in the hil of1 
Samarie, here this word; whiche maken 
fals caleng to nedi men, and breken pore 
men; whicli seten to 30ure lordis, Bringe 
3e, and we schulen drynke. The Lord2 
God swoor in his hooli, for lo! daies 
schulen come on 30u; and thei schulen 
reise 3ou in schaftis, and joure reme- 
nauntis in buylynge pottis. And 3e3 
schulen go out bi the” openyngis, oon 
a3ens another, and 3e schulen be cast 
forth in to Armon, seith the Lord. Come 
3e to Bethel, and do 3e wickidli; to Gal- 
gala, and multiplie 3e trespassyng; and 
offre 3e eerli joure sacrifices, in thre 
daies 3oure tithis. And sacrifice 3e heri-s 
yng of breed maad sour, and clepe 3e 
wilful offryngis, and telle 3e; for 3e, sones 
of Israel, wolden so, seith the Lord God. 
Wherfor and Y 3af to 30u astonying of6 
teeth in alle 3oure citees, and nedinesse 
of looues in alle joure places; and 3e 
turneden not a3en to me, seith the Lord. 
Also Y forbeed reyn fro jou, whanne7 
thre monethis weren 3it ‘to comyng’, til 
to ripe corn’; and Y reynede on o citee, 
and on another citee Y reynede not; 0 
part was bireyned, and the part driede 
vp on which Y reynede not. And tweynes 
and thre citees camen to o citee, to drynke 
watir, and tho weren not fillid; and 3e 
camen not a3en to me, seith the Lord. 
Y smoot 30u with brennynge wynd, aids 
with rust*, the multitude of joure or- 
cherdis, and of 30ure vyneris; and a wort 
worm eet 3oure olyue places’, and 3oure 


© ranede kK, 


Vv residue, ether [3i 1] to comynge CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 
x rust, elher myldew CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


4U 


Y place n. 


698 


turneden not a3ein to me, saith the Lord. 
10 Y sente in to 3ou deeth in the waye of 
Egypt, Y smote in swerd jour 3ung men, 
vn to caitifte of 3our horsis, and Y made 
the stynk of jour castels, or multitude of 
armed men, for to stye in to 30ur nose 
thrillis; and je turneden not ajein to me, 
usaith the Lord. Y distruyede jou, as 
God distruyede Sodom and Gomor, and 
3e ben maad as a brond rauyshid of 
brennyng; and 3e turneden not a3ein to 
1gme, saith the Lord. Wherfore this Y 
shal do to thee, Yrael; forsothe after 
that Y shal do to thee this thing, Yrael, 
be thou maad redy in to ajein cummyng 
izof thi God. For loo! Y fowmynge 
hillis, and makynge of nou3t wynd, and 
tellynge to man his speche, makynge a 
morewe cloude, o7 myst, and goynge on 
hee} thingis of erthe ; the Lord of oostis 
name of hym. 


CAP. V. 


1 Heere 3e, hous of Yrael, this word, 
2that Y reyse on 30u a weylyng. The 
meyden of Yrael felle doun, she shal not 
put to, that she rijse ajein; she is cast 
doun in to hir erthe, ther is not that shal 
3reyse hir. For these thingus saith the 
Lord God, The cite of whiche a thon- 
sand wenten out, an hundrid shuln be 
left theryne; and of whiche an hundrid 
wenten out, ten shuln be left therynne, in 
4the hous of Yrael. For these thingis seith 
the Lord to the hous of Israel, Seeke 3e 
sine, and 3e shulen lyue; and nyle 3e 
seeke Bethel, and in to Galgala nyle 3e 
entre, and into Bersabe passe 3e not; for 
Galgal schal be led caityf, and Bethel shal 
ébe vnprofitable. Seeke 3e the Lord, and 
lyue 3e, lest per auenture the hous of 
Joseph be brent as fijre; and it shal de- 
uoure, and ther shal not be, that shal 
7quenche Bethel. Whiche conuerten dom 
in to wermod, and forsaken ri3twijsnesse 
sof the Lord in erthe, and makynge Ar- 


Zvntol, 


& stie up 1. 
f Om. n. 


& noon v sece.m. 6 The whiche 3. 


AMOS. 


> morew cloud, or myist c et ceteri. 
' riztfulnesse 1. 


Iv. 10-—V. 8. 


fige places; and 3e camen not a3en to me, 
seith the Lord. Y sente in to 30u dethio 
in the weie of Egipt, Y smoot with swerd 
3oure 3onge men, ‘til to” the caitifte of 
joure horsis, and Y made the stynk of 
3oure oostis to stie* in to 3oure nose thir- 
lis; and 3e camen not a3en to me, seith 
the Lord. Y distriede 30u, as God dis-11 
triede Sodom and Gomorre, and 3e ben 
maad as a brond rauyschid of brennyng ; 
and 3e turneden not a3en to me, seith the 
Lord. Wherfor, thou Israel, Y schal do12 
these thingis to thee; but aftir that Y schal 
do to thee these thingis, Israel, be maad 
redi in to ajen comyng of thi God. Forts 
lo! he fourmeth hillis, and inakith wynd, 
and tellith to man his speche; and he 
makith a‘morew myist®, and goith on hi3 
thingis of erthe; the Lord God of oostis 
is thee naine of ¢ hym. 


CAP. V. 


Here 3e this word, for Y reise on 30u1 
a weilyng. The hous of Israel felle doun,2 
he schal not put to, that it rise a3jen; the 
virgyn of Israel is cast doun in to hir 
lond, noon is that schal reise hir. Fors 
the Lord God seith these thingis, The 
citee of which a thousynde wenten out, 
an hundrid schulen be left ther ynne; 
and of which an hundrid wenten out, ten 
schulen be left ther ynne, in the hous of 
Israel. For the Lord seith these thingis 4 
to the hous of Israel, Seke 3e me, and 3e 
schulen lyue; and nyle 3e seke Bethel,» 
and nyle 3e entre in to Galgala, and 3e 
schulen not passe to® Bersabee; for whi 
Galgal schal be led caitif, and Bethel schal 
be vuprofitable. Seke 3ef the Lord, andé 
lyue 3e, lest perauenture the hous of Jo- 
seph be brent as fier; and it schal deuoure 
Bethel, and there schal not& be, that schal 
quenche. Whiche" conuerten doom in to7 
wermod, and forsaken ri3twisnesse? in 
the lond, and forsaken hym that makiths 


¢Om.1. dtor ¢€intosu sec. m. 


V. 9Q—20. 


ture and Orion, and turnynge in to mo- 
rewnyng dercknessis, and chaungynge 
day ‘in to? ni3t; whiche clepith waters of 
the see, and heeldith out hem on the face 
of the erthe; the Lord is name of 4 hym. 
a Whiche scorneth distruyinge, or waast- 
nesse, on the stronge, and bringith rob- 
io byng on the mi3ty. Thei hadden in hate 
the repreuynge man in the 3ate, and thei 
11 wlatiden a man spekynge perfitly. Ther- 
fore for that that™ 3e robbiden the pore 
man, and token fro hym the chosen pray, 
je shuln beelde housis with sqware stoon, 
and 3e shuln not dwelle in hem; 3e shuln 
plante most amyable vyne 3erdis, and 3e 
izshuln not drinke the wyne of hem. For 
Y knewe jour manye grete trespassis, 
and 30ur strong synnes; enmyes of the 
iust, takynge 3iftis, and beringe doun pore 
13men in the 3ate. Therfore a prudent 
man in that tyme shal be stille, for the 
14tyme is yue]. Seke 3e good, and not yuel, 
that 3e lyue, and the Lord God of oostis 
15shal be with 30u, as 3e saiden. Hate 3e 
yuel, and loue 3e good, and ordeyne 3e in 
the 3ate dom; 3if per auenture the Lord 
God of oostus haue mercye to the relikis 
of Joseph. Therfore these thingus saith 
the Lord God of oostis, hauynge lord- 
ship, In alle stretis weylyuge, and in alle 
thingus that ben with outforth ‘it shal 
bet said, Wo! wo! and thei shuln cleepe 
an erthe tilier to mournyng, and hem to 
17 weylyng, that kunnen weyle. And in alle 
weyes weylyng shal be, for Y shal passe 
by the mydil of thee, saith the Lord. 
1sWo to men desirynge the day of the 
Lord; whier to it to jou? This day of the 
19 Lord dercknessis, and not li3t. Hou 3if a 
man renne fro face" of a lyoun, and a 
bere renne to hym; and he entre in the 
hous, and lene with his hond vpon the 
walle, and a serpent dwellynge in sha- 
zodewe byte hym. Wher not dercknessis 
rT Om. FA, 


Pvnto 4, Wto a. 


K ton. 


AMOS. 


8 Om, 4, 


1 distriyng, or [ether y] wastnesse c et ceteri. 


699 


Arture and Orion, and hym that turneth . 
derknessis in to the morewtid, and him 
that chaungith dai in to ni3t; which clep- 
ith watris of the see, and heldith out hem 
on the face of erthe ; the Lord is name of* 
hym. Which scorneth distriyng! on theo 
stronge™, and bringith robbyng on the 
my3ti®. Thei hatiden a man repreuynge 10 
in the 3ate, and thei wlatiden a man spek- 
ynge perfitli, Therfor for that that 3e11 
robbiden a pore man, and token fro hym 
the chosun prey, 3e schulen bilde housis 
with square stoon, and 3e schulen not dwelle 
in hem®; 3e schulen plaunte moost louyd 
vyne3erdis, and 3e schulen not drynke the 
wyn of hem?. For Y knew 3oure grete1g 
trespassis many, and 3oure stronge synnes; 
enemyes of ‘the ri3twis man4, takynge 
3ifte’, and berynge doun pore men in the 
jate. Therfor a prudent man schal beis 
stille in that time, for the time is yuel. 
Seke 3e good, and not yuel, that 3e lyue, 14 
and the Lord God of oostis schal be with 
jou, as 3e seiden. Hate 3e yuel, and loueis 
3e good, and ordeyne 3e in the gate doom ; 
if perauenture the Lord God of oostis 
haue merci on the remenauntis of Joseph. 
Therfor the Lord God of oostis, hauynge 16 
lordschipe, seith these thingis, Weilyng 
schal be in alle stretis, and in alle thingis 
that ben withoutforth it schal be seid, 
Wo! wo! and thei schulen clepe an erthe 
tilier to mourenyng, and hem that kunnen 
weile, to weilyng. And weilyng schal be17 
in alle weies, for Y schal passe forth in 
the myddil of ‘the see’, seith the Lord. 
Wo to hem that desiren the dai of the1s 
Lord ; wher to desiren 3e it to jou? This 
dai of the Lord schal be derknessis, and 
not li3t. As if a man renne fro the face of 19 
a lioun, and a bere rennet to hym; and he 
entre in to" the’ hous, and lene with his 
hond on the wal, and a serpent dwellynge 
in schadewe bite hym, Whether the dai 20 


tbe it 4, "the face 4. 


™ stronge man U sec.m. 4 my3ti man vu sec. m. 


© tho v sup.ras. P tho vu sup.ras. 4 rigtfulnesse a pr. m. CEFGIIKMNPQRSUXY,. rijtwise man I. ° a 3ifte 


U sec.m, © see FMQS sup. ras. thee ru SUD. 7S. 


trenneth x. 


u Om. CEFGHKNPQRSUX gec.m.¥. Y¥ Om. 1. 


4uU 2 


700 AMOS. 


the day of the Lord, and not 1i3t; and 
2imyst, aud not shynyng therynne? ny 
hatide and castide awey 3oure feest days, 
and Y shal not take the odour of 3our 
22cumpanyes. That 3if 3e shuln offre to 
me 3our brent sacrifices, and 3iftis, y¥. 
shal not resceyue, and Y shal not by- 
23holde avowis of 30ur fat thingus. Do 
awey fro me the noyse of thi songis, o7 
ditees, and Y shal not heere the songis 
2iof thin harpe. And dom shal be shewid 
as water, and rijtwysnesse as a strong 
asstreem of reyn. Wher 3e offriden to 
me oostis, and sacrifice’ in desert fourty 
2¢3eeris, 3e hous of Yrael? And 3e han 
born tabernaclis to Moloch, 3our god, and 
ymage of 3oure ydolis, the sterre of 3our 
27 god, whiche 3e maden to 3ou. And Y 
shal make 30u for to passe ouer Dainask, 
saide the Lord; God of oostis name to 
hym. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Wo to 3o0u, that ben ful of richessis in 
Syon, and tristen in the hille of Samarie, 
3e best men in honour, hedis of peplis, 
proudly goynge in to the hous of Yrael. 

2Go 3e in to Calamye, and se 3e”, and 
go 3e thennus in to Emath the grete; and 
go 3e doun in to Geth of Palestyns, 
and to alle the best rewmes of hem, 3if 
her terme be bradder than 3o0ur terme. 

3Whiche 3e ben departid in to yuel day, 
and neizjen to seete of wickidnesse ; 
1whiche 3e sleepen in beddis of yuer, and 
wexen wijld, or iolyf, in 3our beddis ; 
whiche 3e eete lombe of floc, ad a calf 
sof mydil of the droue; whiche 3e syngen 
at voice of psautrie. As Dauid thei ges- 
6siden hem for to haue vessels of song, In 
vyols drinkynge wyne, and with best 
oynement anoyntid; in no thing thei 
suffriden on the coutricioun of Joseph. 
7 Wherfore now thei shun passe in the 


V sacrificis aGH. 


W the avowis vu sec.m. 
CEFHIKMQRSU pr. m. 


b the calamye 1. 
droue v pr.m. 


f the vois 1s. 


x rijtwisnesse CFGHIKMNPQSUXY. 
¢ the yuel v. 


Vv. 21——VI. 7. 


of the Lord schal not be derknessis, and 
not li3t ; and myist, and not schynyng ther 
ynne? Y hatide and castide awei 3oure21 
feeste daies, and Y schal not take the 
odour of 3oure cumpenyes. That if 3e22 
offren to me 3oure brent sacrifices, and 
3iftis, Y schal not resseyue, and Y schal 
not biholde avowis” of 30ure fatte thingis. 
Do thou awei fro me the noise of thizs 
songis, and Y schal not here the songis of 
thin harpe. And doom schal be schewid 24 
as watir, and ri3tfulnesse* as a strong 
streem. Whether 3e, the hous of Israel, 25 
offriden to me sacrifices for enemyes to be 
ouercomun, and sacrifice in desert fourti 
jeeris ? And je han bore tabernaclis to 26 
Moloch, 30ure god, and yimage of 3oure 
idols, the sterre of 30ure god, which 3e 
maden to 30u. And Y schal make 3ou for 27 
to passe ouer Damask, seide the Lord ; 
God of oostis 7s the name of him. 


CAP. VI. 


Wo to 30n, that ben ful of richessis ins 
Sion, and tristen? in the hil of Samarie, 3e 
principal men, the heedis of puplis, that 
goen proudli in* to the hous of Israel. Goz 
3e in to Calamye', and se 3e, and go 3e fro 
thennus in to Emath the greet ; and go 3e 
doun in to Geth of Palestyns, and to alle 
the beste rewmes of hem, if her termine be 
broddere than joure terme. And 3e bens 
departid in to yuel® dai, and neizen to the? 
seete of wickidnesse; and 3e slepen ina 
beddis of yuer, and doen letcherie in 30ure 
beddis ; and 3e eten a lomb of the flok, and 
calues of the myddil of droue*; and 3e5 


’ syngen at vois' of sautree. As Dauid thei 


gessiden hem for to haue instrumentis of 
song, and drynken wyn in viols; and withse 
beste oynement thei weren anoynted ; and 
in no thing thei hadden compassioun on 
the sorewe, ether defoulyng, of Joseph. 
Wherfor now thei schulen passe in the7 


W thee xk. 


YtoN. 2 tristenen HI@RSU. 


a Om. apr. m. 
4 Om. A pr. m. CEFGUMNPQRSX U pr. m. 


e the 


Vi. §—=VIl. 4. 


hed of men passynge ouer, and the do- 
yng, or tresoun, of men wexinge ioly* 
sshal be don awey. The Lord God swore 
in his soule, saith the Lord God of oostis, 
Y wlate the pride of Jacob, and Y hate 
the hous of hym, and Y shal bytake the 
ocitee with his dwellers; that 3if the 
relikis shuln be ten men in oon hous, 
ioand thei shuln dye. And his nei3bore 
shal take hym, and shal to gydre brenne 
hym, that he bere ont boonys of the 
hous. And he shal saye to hym, that is in 
11 priue places of the hous, Wher there is 
3it anentis thee? And he shal answere, 
Au eend is. And he shal saye to hym, Be 
stille, and recorde uot the name of the 
12 Lord. For loo! the Lord shal comaunde, 
and shal smyte the gretter hous with 
fallyugis, and the lesse hous with keru- 
isyngis. Wher horsis mown renne in 
stonys, or may it be erid in wijlde 
oxen? For 3e conuerten dom in to bit- 
ternesse, and the fruyte of ri3twisnesse 
i4in to wormod. Whiche 3e gladen in 
nou3t, whiche 3e sayen, Wher not in oure 
isStrengthe we token to vs horns? Loo! Y 
shal reyse a fole vpon 30u, 3e they hous of 
Yrael, saith the Lord God of oostis; and 
it shal to gydre breke jou fro entre of 
Kimath vn to the streme of desert. 


CAP. VII. 


i These thingus the Lord God shewide 
to me; and loo! a maker of locust in 
the bygyanyng of buriownynge thingus 
of eeuen rayn, and loo! eeuen rayn after 

2the clipper of floc, o7 Ayng. And it is 
don, whanne he eendide for to eete the 
herbe of erthe, Y saide, Lord God, be thou 
mercyful, Y byseche ; who shal reyse Ja- 

3cob, for he is litil? The Lord hadde 
mercy on this thing; It shal not be, saide 
athe Lord God. The Lord God shewide 
to me this thing; and loo! the Lord God 


x jolif 4. 


& doyng, or [ether y] tresoun ceFGukmNPQnsxy. feyned doing, either tresoun U sec. m. 
k also v. 


1 residue, ether left CK FGIIIMNPQsSUXY. residue R. 


AMOS. 701 


heed of men passynge ouer, and the do- 
yng® of men doynge letcherie schal be don 
awei. The Lord God swoor in his soule,s 
seith the Lord God of oostis, Y wlate 
the pride of Jacob, and Y hate the housis 
of hym, and Y schal bitake the citee with 
hise dwelleris; that if ten men ben left' ing 
oon hous, and* thei schulen die. And _ his 10 
nei3bore schal take hym, and schal brenne 
hym, that he bere out boonys of the hous. 
And he schal seie to hym, that is in the 
priuy places! of the hous, Whether ther is11 
3it anentis thee? And he schal answer, An 
ende is. And he schal seie to hym, Be thou 
stille, and thenke thou not on the name of 
the Lord. For lo! the Lord schal co-t2 
maunde, and schal sinyte the grettere hous 
with fallyngis, and the lesse hous with 
brekyngis™. Whether horsis moun renne 13 
in stoonys, ether it mai be eerid with" 
wielde oxun? For 3e turneden doom in 
to bitternesse, and the fruyt of ri3tful- 
nesse® in to wermod. And 3e ben glad inis 
nou3t, and 3e seien, Whether not in oure 
strengthe we token to vs hornes? Lo! Y1s 
schal reise on 30u, the hous of Israel, seith 
the Lord God of oostis, a fole; and it schal 
al to-breke 30u fro entre? of Emath ‘til 
toi the streem of desert. 


CAP. VII. 


The Lord God schewide these thingis 1 
to me; and lo! a makere of locust in bi- 
gynnyng" of buriownynge thingis of euen- 
tid reyn, and lo! euentid reyn after the 
clippere of the kyng’. And it was don,2 
whanne het hadde endid for to ete the 
erbe of erthe, Y seide, Lord God, Y bi- 
seche, be thou merciful; who schal reise 
Jacob, for he is litil? The Lord haddes 
merci on this thing; It schal not be, seide 
the Lord God. The Lord God schewide4 
to me these thingis; and lo! the Lord 


y Om. 4Gu. 


h wlatide x pr. m. 


1 place x. ™ keruyngis, ether brekingis 


CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX. HB in CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY, © rijtwisnesse CFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. P the entre 1U sec.m. 


Gvnto1. * the begynnyng vu sec. m. 


8 flocke 1 sup. ras. 


tit u sup. ras. 


702 


shal cleepe dom to fijr, and it shal de- 
uoure imyche depnesse, and shal eet to 
sgydre a part. And Y saide, Lord God, 
reste thon, Y byseche; who shal reise 
6 Jacob, for he is lytil? The Lord hadde 
mercy on this thing; Bot and this thing 
zshal not be, saide the Lord God. The 
Lord God shewide to me these thingus ; 
and loo! the Lord stondynge on a wall 
teerid, or morterd, and in the hond of 
shym a truel of masoun. And the Lord 
saide to me, What seest thou, Amos? 
And Y saide, A truel of masoun. And the 
Lord saide, Loo! Y shal putte a truel 
in mydil of my peple Yrael; Y shal no 
more putte to, for to ouer leede hym; 
gand the hee3 thingus of the ydol shuln 
be distruyed, and the halewyngis’ of 
Yrael shuln be desolat; and Y shal ryse 
100n the hous of Jeroboam in swerde. And 
Amasie, prest of Bethel, sente to Jero- 
boam, kyng of Yrael, sayinge, Amos re- 
bellide ajeinus thee, in the mydil of the 
hous of Yrael; the lond may not susteyne 
italle his wordis. Forsothe Amos saith 
these thingus, Jeroboam shal dye in swerd, 
and Yrael caitif shal passe of his lond. 
12And Amasie saide to Amos, Thou that 
seest, go; flee thou in to the lond of Juda, 
and eete thou there thi breede; and there 
i3thou shalt prophecie. And in Bethel 
thou shalt no more putte to, that thou 
prophecie, for it is the halewyng of the 
1ukyng, and is hous of the rewme. And 
Amos answerde, and saide to Amasye, 
Y am not a prophete, Y am not the sone 
of a prophete; but a neet heerde Y am, 
1s drawinge*® vp sycomoris. And the Lord 
toke me, whanne Y suede the floc; and 
the Lord saide to me, Go, and prophecie 
i6thou to my peple Yrael. And now heere 
thou the word of the Lord. Thou saist, 
Thou shalt not prophecie on Yrael, and 
thou shalt not droppe on the hous of 
i7ydol. For this thing the Lord saith 


Z halewis 4. 


x also and vu sec, m. 
* a profete vu. 


AMOS. 


a dwellynge «. 


Vil. 5——17- 


God schal clepe doom te fier, and it schal 
deuoure myche depthe of watir, and it eet 
togidere a part. And Y seide, Lord God,» 
Y biseche, reste thou; who schal reise 
Jacob, for he is litil? The Lord haddec 
merci on this thing; But and" this thing 
schal not be, seide the Lord God. The7 
Lord God schewide to me these thingis; 
and lo! the Lord stondinge on a wal 
plastrid’, and in the hond of hym was a 
trulle of a masoun. And the Lord seides 
to me, What seest thou, Amos? And Y 
seide, A trulle of a masoun. And the 
Lord seide, Lo! I schal putte a trulle in 
the myddil of my puple Israel; Y schal 
no more putte to, for to ouerlede it; andy 
the hi3 thingis of idol schulen be distried, 
and the halewyngis of Israel schulen be 
desolat; and Y schal rise on the hous of 
Jeroboam bi swerd. And Amasie, prest10 
of Bethel, sente to Jeroboam, kyng of Is- 
rael, and seide, Amos rebellide ajens thee, 
in the myddil of the hous of Israel; the 
lond mai not susteyne alle hise wordis. 
For Amos seith these thingis, Jeroboam 11 
schal die bi swerd, and Israel caitif schal 
passe fro his lond. And Amasie seide to 12 
Amos, Thou that seest, go; fle thon in to 
the lond of Juda, and ete thou there thi 
breed; and there thou schalt profesie. And 13 
thou schalt no more put to, that thou pro- 
fesie in Bethel, for it is the halewyng of 
the king, and is the hous of the rewme. 
And Amos answeride, and seide to Ama-14 
sie, Y am not a profete, and Y am not 
sone’ of profete*; but an herde of neet Y 
am, drawyng vp sicomoris. And the Lord is 
took me, whanne Y suede the floc; and the 
Lord seide to me, Go, and profesie thou 
to my puple Israel. And now here thou ic 
the word of the Lord. Thou seist, Thou 
schalt not profesie on Israel, and thou 
schal not droppe on the hous of idol. For 17 
this thing the Lord seith these thingis, 
Thi wijf schal do fornicacioun in the 


b Om. 46K pr.m. 


Y pargetid, e¢her [or upy] plastrid chFGHIKMNPQSUXY, pargetid R. W the sone 1. 


VII. I—10. 


these thingis, Thi wyf in cytee shal do 
fornycacioun, and thi sonnys and thi 
dou3ters in swerd shuln falle, and thin 
erthe shal be meetyn with a litil coorde ; 
and thou shalt dye in a polut lond, and 
Yrael shal passe caitif of his lond. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 The Lord God shewide to me these 
2thingis; and loo! an hoke of applis. And 
the Lord saide, What seest thou, Amos ? 
And Y saide, An hok of applis. And 
the Lord saide to me, The eende cum- 
meth on my peple Yrael; Y shal namore 
3putte to, that Y passe by hym. And the 
herris of temple shuln gretely soune in 
that day, saith the Lord God. Manye 
men shuln dye, in eche place silence 
4shal be cast doun. Heere® this thing, 
whiche’ breken to gydre the pore man, 
and maken needy men of the lond for 
sto fayle, sayinge, Whan shal rype corn 
passe, and we shuln selle marchaundises? 
and the saboth, and we shuln opyn 
whete? that we make lesse the mesure, 
and encresce the sycle, and vndirputte 
sgylfull balauncis; that we welden in 
syluer nedy and pore men for shoon, 
jand we selle clensingus of whete? God 
swore ajeinus the pryde of Jacob, 3if Y 
shal forjete in to the eende alle the 
swerkis of hem. Wher on this thing the 
erthe shal not be moued to gidre, and 
eche dweller therof shal mourne? And it 
shal stye vp as al the flood, and shal be 
cast out, and shal fleete awey as the 
9strond of Egypt. And it shal be, saith 
the Lord, in that day the sunne shal go 
dounn in mydday, and Y shal make the 
ioerthe for to be derk in day of li3t. And 
Y shal conuerte 30ur feest days in to 
mournyng, and alle 3our songis in to 
weylyng; and Y shal leede yn on al 3our 
bac a sak, and on eche 3o0ur hed ballid- 
nesse; and Y shal putte it as mournyng 


¢ Heere je K pr.m. 


Y metun cnHu. metin EFIPSY. meten KM. 
sup. ras. 
f Om. vu sec. m. 


AMOS. 


2 leye U see. m. 
¢ clensingis, ether outcastingis CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


703 


citee, and thi sones and thi dou3tris schal 
falle bi swerd, and thi lond schal be 
motuny with a litil coord ; and thou schalt 
die in a pollutid lond, and Israel caitif 
schal passe fro his lond. 


CAP. VIII. 


The Lord God schewide to me these1 
thingis; and lo! an hook of applis. And2 
the Lord seide, What seist thou, Amos ? 
And Y seide, An hook of applis. And 
the Lord seide to me, The ende is comun 
on my puple Israel; Y schal no more 
putte? to, that Y passe bi hym. And thes 
herris, ether twistis, of the temple schulen 
greetli sowne in that dai, seith the Lord 
God. Many men schulen die, silence 
schal be cast forth in ech place. Here 3e4 
this thing, whiche al to-breken a pore 
man, and maken nedi men of the lond for 
to faile; and 3e seien, Whanne schal her-5 
uest passe, and we schulen sille mar- 
chaundises? and the sabat, and we schulen 
opene wheete? that we make lesse the me- 
sure, and encreesse the cicle, and ‘vndur 
put® gileful balauncis; that we welde bi>« 
siluer nedi men and pore men for schoon, 
and we sille outcastyngis® of wheete ? 
The Lord swoor a3ens the pride of Jacob, 7 
Y schal not for3ete til to the ende alle the 
werkis of hem. Whether* on this things 
the erthe schal not® be mouyd togidere, 
aud eche dwellere therof schal mourene ? 
And it schal stie vp as al the flood, and 
schal be cast out, and schal flete awei as 
the stronde of Egipt. And it schal be,9 
seith the Lord, in that dai the sunne schal 
go doun in myddai, and Y schal make 
the erthe for’ to be derk in the dai of 1i3t. 
And Y schal conuerte 3oure feeste daies in 10 
to mourenyng, and alle 3oure songis in 
to weilyng; and Y schal brynge yn on ech 
bac of 3ou a sak, and on ech heed of 30u 
ballidnesse; and Y schal put it as the 


4 that 4. that whiche x. 


® that we sette preueli vu sec.m. » for u 
P: 
d Wher not u sec.m. © Om. vu sec. m. 


704 AMOS. VIII. 11-—IX. 5- 


of an oon bigeten sone, and the last 
ithingus therof as a bitter day. Loo! the 
days cummen, saith the Lord’, and Y 
shal sende out hungre in to erthe; not 
hungre of breed, nether thrist of water, 
12 bot of heeryng of the word of God. And 
thei shuln be moued to gydre fro see 
vn to see, and fro the north vn to the 
eest thei shuln cumpasse, seekynge the 
word of the Lord, and thei shuln not 
isfynde. In that day faire maydeyns shul 
i4faile, and 3unge in thrist, whiche sweren 
in trespas of Samarye, and sayen, Thi 
god lyneth, Dan, and the waye of Ber- 
sabe lyueth; and thei shuln falle, and 
thei shuln namore ryse a3ein. 


CAP. IX. 


1 I saw the Lord stondynge on the 
auter, and he saide, Smyte thou the 
herre, and be the ouer thrisfoldis moued 
to gydre; forsothe auerice in the hed of 
alle, and Y shal slea in swerd the last of 
hem; therf shal no fli3t be to hem, 
and he that shal flee of hem, shal not be 

2saued. 3if thei shuln go doun vn to 
helle, fro thennus my hond shal leede 
hem out; and 3if thei shuln stye til in 
to heuen, fro thennus Y shal drawe hem 

3doun. Aud 3if thei shuln be hid in the 
top of Carmele, fro thennus Y seekynge 
shal do hem awey; and 3if thei shuln 
hyde hem self fro myn ee3en in depnesse 
of the see, ther Y shal comaunde to a 
4serpent, and it shal bite hem. And 3if 
thei shuln go awey in to caitiftee bifore 
her enmyes, ther Y shal comaunde to 
swerd, and it shal slea hem. And Y shal 
putte myn ee3en vpon hem in to yuel, 
sand not in to good. And the Lord God 
of oostis, that toucheth erthe, and it shal 
fayle, and alle men dwellynge theryn 
shuln mourne; and it shal stye vp as 
eche stronde, and shal fleete awey® as 


mourenyng of oon bigetun sone, and the 
laste thingis therof as a bittir dai. Lo!i 
the daies comen, seith the Lord, and Y 
schal sende out hungur in to erthe; not 
hungur of breed, nether thirst of watir, 
but of herynge the word of God. Andiz 
thei schulen be mouyd to gidere fro the 
see til to the see, and fro the north til to 
the eest thei schulen cumpasse, sekynge 
the word of the Lord, and thei schulen 
not fynde. In that dai faire maidensis 
schulen faile, and 3onge men in thirst, 
whiche sweren in trespas® of Samarie, and 14 
seien, Dan, thi god lyueth, and the weie 
of Bersabee lyueth; and thei schulen 
falleb, and thei schulen no more rise a3en. 


CAP. EX 


I si3 the Lord stondynge on the auter, ! 
and he seide, Smyte thou the herre, and 
the ouer threshfoldisi be mouyd togidere ; 
for aueryce 7s in the heed of alle, and Y 
schal sle bi swerd the laste of hem; ther 
schal no flijt be to hei, and he that schal 
fle of hem, schal not be sauyd. If thei2 
schulen go doun til to helle, fro thennus 
myn hond schal lede out hem ; and if thei 
schulen ‘stie til in to* henene, fro thennus 
Y schal drawe hem doun. And if thei3 
schulen be hid in the cop of Carmele, fro 
thennus’ Y sekynge schal do awei hem ; 
and if thei schulen hide hem silf fro myn 
izen in the depnesse of the see, there Y 
shal comaunde to! a serpente, and it schal 
bite hem. And if thei schulen go awei4 
in to caitifte bifore her enemyes, there Y 
schal comaunde to swerd, and it schal sle 
hem. And Y schal putte myn i3en on hem 
in to yuel, and not in to good. And thes 
Lord God of oostis schal do these thingis, 
that touchith erthe, and it schal faile, and 
alle men dwellynge ther ynne schulen 
mourene ; and it schal stie vp as ech 
stronde, and it schal flete awei as flood™ 


¢ Lord God 4. fandther x. § Om. a. 


& the trespas u sec. m. » falle doun v sec. m. 


i threisfoldis, either lyntelis v sec.m. * stie up vnto 1. 


stie tiltos. 10m. xu pr.m. ™a flood s sup.ras. the flood v. 


IX. 6—1T5. 


6the flood of Egypt. He that beeldith 
his stying vp in heuen, and foundide his 
knytche, or berthen, on erthe; whiche 
clepith waters of the see, and heeldith 
hem out on face of the erthe; the Lord 
z7name of hym. Wher not as sonys of 
Ethiopyens 3e ben to me, the sonys of 


Yrael? saith the Lord God. Wher Y_ 


made not Yrael for to stye vp of the 
lond of Egypt, and Palistens of Capa- 
adocie, and Siriens of Syrenen? Loo! the 
~ eezen of the Lord God on rewme syn- 
nynge, and Y shal to gydre breke it fro 
face of the erthe; netheles Y brekynge 
togidere shal not breke to gydre the hous 
ygof Jacob, saith the Lord. Loo! sotheli 
Y shal comaunde, and shal smyte in alle 
folkis the hous of Yrael, as whete is 
smyten in a rydil, and a lytil stoon of it 
10shal not falle on erthe. Alle synners of 
my peple shal dye in swerde, whiche 
sayn, Yuel shal not nei3, and shal not 
1lcumme on ys. In that day Y shal rayse 
the tabernacle of Dauid, that felle doun, 
and Y shal a3ein beelde opnyngis of 
wallis therof, and Y shal instore tho 
thingis that fellen to gydre; and Y shal 
1za3ein beelde hym, as in olde days, that 
thei weelde relikis of Ydome, and alle 
naciouns; for that my name is in clepid 
on hem, saith the Lord doynge these 
isthingus. Loo! days cummen, saith the 
Lord, and the erer shal cacche the reper, 
and treder of grape the man sendynge 
seed; and mounteyns shuln droppe swet- 
nesse, and alle smale hyllis shuln be 
utilizjid. And Y shal converte the caytifte 
of my peple Yrael, and thei shuln beelde 
forsaken cytees, and sliuln dwelle; and 
shuln plaunte vyne 3erdis, and thei shuln 
drinke wyne of hem; and thei shuln make 
gardyns, and shuln ete fruytis of hem. 
15s And Y shal plante hem on her erthe, and 


n knycchoun, [knicchin c ef clii] ether birthun ceFGHIKMNPQRsUXY. knytche Nn. 
4 make 1. schake togidir u sec. m. 
V the wallis u sec. m. 
or stampere CEFGHIKMNPQRSXY. the pressere, or stompere u sec. m. 

4 thei shulen v sce. m. 


P that al u sec. m. 
sec.m. tinn. the erthe r. 


sup. ras. » thei shulen vu. © tho u sec. m. 


VOL. Ill. 


AMOS. 


705 


of Egipt. He that bildith his stiyng vpe - 
in heuene, schal do.these thingis, and 
foundide his birthun” on erthe; which 
clepith watris of the see, and heldith out 
hem on the face of erthe; the Lord és 
name of hym. Whether not as sones® of 7 
Ethiopiens 3e ben to me, the sones of Is- 
rael?.seith the Lord God. Whether Y 
made not Israel for to stie vp fro the lond 
of .Egipt, and Palestines fro Capodosie, 
and Siriens fro Cirenen? Lo! the izen of 
the Lord God ben on the rewme synnynge, 
and Y schal al to-breke it fro the face of 
erthe; netheles Y al? to-brekynge schal 
not al to-breke the hous of Jacob, seith 
the Lord. For lo! Y schal comaunde,» 
and schal schake‘ the hous of Israel in alle 
folkis, as wheete is" in a riddil, and a 
litil stoon schal not falle’ ont erthe". Alle 1 
synneris of my puple schulen die bi swerd, 
whiche seien, Yuel schal not nei3, and 
schal not come on vs. In that dai Y schal11 
reise the tabernacle of Dauith, that felle 
doun, and Y schal a3en bilde openyngis of 
wallisY therof, and Y schal restore the 
thingis that fellen doun; and Y schal ajen 
bilde it, as in olde daies, that thei welde1z 
the remenauntis of Idume, and alle na- 
ciouns; for that” my name is clepun* to 
help on hem, seith the Lord doynge these 
thingis. Lo! daies comen, seith the Lord, 13 
and the erere schal take the repere, and 
‘the stampereY of grape schal take the 
man sowynge’ seed; and mounteyns schu- 
len droppe swetnesse, and alle smale hillis 
schulen be tilid. And Y schal conuerte*14 
the caitifte of my puple Israel, and thei 
schulen bilde forsakun citees, and schulen 
dwelle; and schulen” plaunte vynejerdis, 
and thei schulen drynke wyn of hem‘; and 
schulen¢ make gardyns, and schulen ete 
fruitis of hem®. And Y schal plaunte heim 1s 
on her lond, and Y schal no more drawe 


© the sones 18U scc. m. 

r is shaken togidir U sec. m. 8 falle doun vu 
Ww that that uv sec.m. *clepid vis. Y tredere, 
% sendinge FMQRSU. a turne U 
€ tho u sup. ras. 


4x 


706 AMOS. 


Y shal namore drawe hem out of her out hem of her lond, which Y 3af to hem, 
lond, whiche Y 3aue to hem, saith the  seith the Lord thi‘ God. 
Lord thi God. 


Here endith the book of Amos, pro- Here endith Amos, and here bigyn- 
phete, and bigynneth the book of Abdias, neth Abdiass. 
prophete'. 
b Om. 4x prom. i No final rubric in acu. 
fOm.apr.m. & From creHimgrsu. Here endeth Amos, the profete; se now Abdias, the profete. Kk. Here 


endith the book of Amos, the profete, and bigynneth the book of Abdias, the profete.x. Here endith Amos, 
and bigynneth the booc of Abdias, the profete. x. No final rubric in arpy. 


OBADIAH. 





The book of Abdias *. 


1 THE visioun of Abdias. These thingus 
saith the Lord God to Edom. We herden 
an heeryng of the Lord, and he sente a 
legate, or messager, to heythen men. 


Ryse 3e, and to gydre ryse we a3einus 


2hym in to bateile. Loo! Y 3aue thee 
liti] in heithen men, thou art ful myche 
contemptible, or wortht to be dispisid. 
3 The pride of thin herte enhaunside thee, 
dwellynge in kyttyng, or hoolis of 
stoonys, areysynge thi seete. The? whiche 
saist in thin herte, Who shal drawe me 
4doun in to erthe? 3if thou shalt be 
reysid as an egle, and 3if thou shalt putte 
thi nest amonge sterris, fro thennus Y 
shal drawe thee doun, saith the Lord. 
5 3if ni3t theeues entriden to thee, 3if out- 
lawis bi ni3t, hou shuldist thou haue be 
stylle? wher thei shulden not haue stoln 
ynowe thingus to hem? 3if gadreris of 
grapis hadden entriden to thee, wher at 
the leste thei shulden haue left racyns to 
6thee? Hou sou3ten thei Esau, serchiden 
7the hid thingus of hym? Vn to the termys 
thei senten thee out; and alle men of thi 
couenaunt scorneden, or disceyueden, 
thee, men of thi pees wexiden strong 
ajeinus thee; thei that shuln ete with 
thee, shuln putte aspies, or tresouns, vn- 
dir thee; ther is no prudence in hym. 


a Here bigynneth the boke of Abdias the prophete. 4. No initial rubric in au. 


8 From epy. Abdias. a. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
© contemptible, or worthi to be dispisid c et ceteri. 
e rasyns, or [ether ErY] clustris c ct ceteri. * sou3ten E pr.m. PQ pr.m. X pr.m. Y. 
' setten U sup. ras. 


MNPQRSUY. messager K. 
U sec. m. 
ether disseyueden c et ceteri. 
MPS pr.m. UXY. the ¢ pr.m. 


bh Om. a prem. 


The book of Abdias, the profete*. 


VisiouNn of Abdias. The Lord God1 
seith these thingis to Edom. We herden 
an heryng of the Lord, and he sente a 
messanger to hethene men. Rise 3e, and 
togidere rise we ajens hym in to batel. 
Lo! Y jaf thee litil in hethene men, thou2 
art ful myche ‘worthi to be dispisid®. Thes 
pride of thin herte enhaunside thee, dwell- 
ynge in crasyngis* of stoonys, areisynge 
thi seete. Whiche seist in thin herte, 
Who schal drawe me doun in to erthe? 
Thou3 thou schalt be reisid as an egle,4 
and thou3 thou schalt putte thi nest among 
sterris, fro thennus Y schal drawe thee 
doun, seith the Lord. If ni3t theuys had-s 
den entrid to thee, if outlawis bi ni3t, hou 
schuldist thou haue be stille? whether 
thei schulden not haue stole thingis ynow 
to hem? If gadereris of grapis hadden en- 
trid to thee, whether thei schulden haue 
left nameli clustris® to thee? Hou sou3ten 6 
thei Esau, serchiden the hid thingis of 
him? Til to the termes thei senten’ out7 
thee; and alle men of thi couenaunt of 
pees scorneden® thee, men of thi" pees 
wexiden stronge ajens thee; thei that 
schulen ete with thee, schulen puti aspies, 
ether tresouns, vndur thee; ther is no pru- 
dence in hym. Whether not in that* dai, s 
seith the Lord, Y schal lese the wise men 


b Om. 4. 


» legat, ether [a rmsu] messenger CEFGII 
4 crasynge Q. the crasingis 
& scornyden, 
k Om. pr. m. C sec. m. EFGWIK pr. i. 


4x2 


708 


sWher not in that day, saith the Lord, 
Y shal leese the wyse men of Ydume, 
and prudence of the mount of Esau? 
9 And thi stronge men shuln dreede fro 
mydday, that a man of the hill of Esau 
1perishe. For sleayng and for wickidnes 
in to thi brother Jacob, confusioun shal 
hille thee, and thou shalt perishe in to 
iwith out eende. In the day whan thou 
stodist azeinus hym, whanne aliens token 
the oost of hym, and straungers entriden 
the 3atis of hym, and on Jerusalem senten 
12lot, and thou wast as oon of hem. And 
thou shalt not dispise in the day of thi 
brother, in day of his pilgrimage, and 
thou shalt’ not glade on sonys of Juda, 
in the day of perdicioun of hem; and 
thou shalt not magnyfie thi mouth in 
isday® of anguysch, nether shalt‘ entre 
the 3ate of my peple, in the day of fall- 
yng of hem; nether and thou shalt dis- 
pyse in the yuels of hym, in the day of 
his distriyng; and thou shalt not be 
sent out ajens his ost, in the dai of his 
idistriyng ; nether thou schalt stonde in 
the goynge out of the waies, that thou 
sle hem that fledden; and thou schalt not 
close to gydre the relikis, or left men, 
is of hym in the day of tribulacioun, for the 
day of the Lord is nize vpon alle hei- 
then men. As thou hast don, so it shal 
be don to thee; he shal conuerte thi 3eld- 
isyng in to thin hed. Forsothe as 3e 
drunke on myn holy hylle, alle heithen 
men shuln drynke bysily, and thei shuln 
dryuke, and shuln soupe vp; and thei 
17shuln be as thei ben not. And in the 
hill of Syon saluacioun shal be, and holy 
shal be; and the hous of Jacob shal 
18 weelde hem whiche weldiden hem. And 
the hous of Jacob shal be fijr, and the 
hous of Joseph flawme, and the hous of 
Esau stobul; and thei shuln be brent in 
hem, and thei shuln deuoure hem; and 


© the day @ sec. m. nH. Om. kK. 


the prudence vu sec. m. 
INRS sec. m. U. P Om. Epy. 


8 not conuerte Rs pr. m. not turne uv sup. ras. 
sec. m. 


OBADIAH. 


m myddai, ether south c et ceteri. 
4 going A pr. m. CEFGHIKMNPQRSU pr. m. XY. 
t thei schulen n. 


8—18. 


of Idumee, and prudence! of the mount of 
Esau? And thi stronge men schulen drede 9 
of myddai™, that a man of the hil of Esau 
perische. For sleyng and for wickidnesse 10 
a3ens thi brother Jacob, confusioun schal 
hile thee, and thou schalt perische with 
outen ende. In the dai whanne thou 
stodist ajens hym, whanne aliens token 
the oost of hym, and straungeris entriden™ 
the 3atis of hym, and senten lot on Jeru- 
salem, thou were also as oon of hem. And 12 
thou schalt not dispise in the dai of thi 
brother, in the dai of his pilgrimage, and 
thou schalt not be glad on the sones of 
Juda, in the dai of perdicioun of hem; 
and thou schalt not magnefie thi mouth 
in the dai of angwisch, nether schalt° en-13 
tre in to the 3ate of my puple, in the dai 
of fallyng of hem; and thou schalt not 
dispise in the yuels of hym, in the dai of - 
his? distriyng; and thou ‘schalt not be 
sent out a3ens his oost, in the day of his 
distriyng; nether thou schalt stonde in the 1s 
goynges! out, that thou sle hem that fled- 
den; and thou schalt not close togidere 
the residues, ether left men, of hym, in 
the day of tribulacioun, for the dai of1s 
the Lord is ni3 on alle ‘hethene men’. As 
thou hast doon, it schal be doon to thee; 
he schal conuerte* thi 3eldyng in to thin 
heed. For as 3e drunken on myn hooliié 
hil, alle hethene men schulen drynke bi- 
sili, and thei schulen drynke, and schulent 
soupe vp; and thei schulen be as if thei 
ben not. And saluacioun schal be in the17 
hil of Sion, and it schal be hooli; and 
the hous of Jacob schal welde hem whiche 
weldiden hem". And the hous of Jacobis 
schal be fier, and the hous of Joseph schal 
be flawme, and the hons of Esau schal be 
stobil; and ‘thei schulen’ be kyndlid in 
hem, and thei schulen deuoure hem; and 
relifs schulen not be of the hous of Esau, 
for the Lord spak. And these that ben at 19 


4 thou shalt 4. © Om. 4GH. 


© thou schalt 
t folkis u sup. ras. 
Vit U sup. ras. Vit schal a 


D entriden in to u sec. m. 


19—21. 


relikis shuln namore be of the hous of 

i9Esau, for the Lord spake. And these 
that ben at the southe, shuln enherite 
the hill of Esau; and thei that in the 
lowe feeldis, Philistiym; and thei shuln 
weelde the cuntree of Effraym, and cun- 
tre of Samarie; and Beniamyn shal 

20weelde Galaad. And transmygracioun, 
or ouer passynge, of this oost of sonys 
of Yrael, alle places of Cananeys, vn to 
Sarepta; and the transmygracioun of Je- 
rusalem, that is in Bosphoro, shal weelde 

21 citees of the south. And saueouris shuln 
stye in to the hyll of Syon, for to deme 
the hill of Esau, and shal be rewme to 
the Lord. ‘Amen. 


Here endith the book of Abdias, pro- 
phete, and bigynneth the book of Jonas, 
the prophetes. 


Om. 4. 


w not enherite 1. 


usec.m. ¢stieupr ¢ Om. 1. 


OBADIAH. 


x the cuntrei CIKNR sec. mm. 8UX sec. m. 
MNPQRUKY. transmygracioun, ether passynge ouer 8. 
€ Lord. Amen. X sec. m. 


709 


the south, schulen enherite* the hil of 
Esau; and thei that ben in the lowe feeldis, 
schulen enherite Filistiym ; and thei schu- 
len welde the cuntrei of Effraym, and 
cuntreix of Samarie; and Beniamyn schal 
welde Galaad. And ouerpassyng’ of this 20 
oost of sones of Israel schal welde alle 
places” of Cananeis, til to Sarepta; and the 
transmygracioun of Jerusalem, that* is in 
Bosphoro, schal welde citees® of the south. 
And sauyours schulen stie® in to the hil2i 
of Sion, for to deme the hil of Esau, and 
a? rewme schal be to the Lord. 


Heere endith Abdias, and here bigin- 
neth Jonas*, 


& No final rubric in sgn. 


Y transmygracioun, or overpassing CEFOHIK 
“the places1. 8 which u sup. ras.  » the citees 
f From creuimnarsu. Here endeth Abdias, 


the profete ; se now Jonas, the profete. x. Here endith Abdias, the profete, and bigynneth Jonas. x. No 


final rubric in AEPY. 


JON A H. 





The book of Jonas*. 


CAP. A: 


1 AwNp the word of the Lord is maad to 
zJonas, sone of Amathy, sayinge, Ryse 
thou, and go in to Nynyuen, the grete 
cytee, and preche thou therynne, for the 
3malyce therof styeth vp byfore me. And 
Jonas ros for to flee; in to Tharsis, fro 
the face of the Lord. And he came doun 
to Joppe, and foonde a ship goynge in to 
Tharsis, and he 3aue shiphijre to hem; 
and he wente doun in to it, for to go with 
hem in to Tharsis, fro the face of the 
4Lord. Forsothe the Lord sente a grete 
wynde in the se, and a grete tempest is 
maad in the se, and the ship was in 
speryl for to be broken. And ship men 
dredden, and men crieden to her god; 
and senten vessels, that weren in the ship, 
in to the se, that it were maad li3ter of 
hem. And Jonas wente doun to? the 
ynner thingis of the ship, and slepte in a 
6 greuouse sleep. And the gouernour cam 
to hym, and saide to hym, What art thou 
cast doun in sleep? ryse thou, ynclepe 
thi God, 3if per auenture God a3ein thenk 
70f¢ vs, and we perishe not. And a man 
saide to his felaw, Cum 3e, and sende 
we lot, and wite we, whi this yuel is to 
vs. And thei senten lottis, and lot felle 
sou Jonas. And thei saiden to hym, Shewe 
thou to vs, for cause of what thing this 


a Here bigynneth the boke of Jonas prophet. a. No initial rubric in cx. 


a Here bygynnyth the profecie of the book of Jonas, 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
Xpr.my. into EKpy. 


f e Om. 1. 
h senten c ef celeri. 


i felde c et plures. 


b the sone isu sec. m. 
f clepe thou K sec. m. NRU. 


Here bigynneth Jonas, the profete*. 


CAP. I. 


AND the word of the Lord was maad1 
to Jonas, sone” of Amathi, and seide, Rise 2 
thou, and go in to Nynyue, the° greet 
citee, and preche thou ther ynne, for the 
malice therof stieth vp bifore me. And3 
Jonas roos for to fle in to Tharsis, fro the 
face of the Lord. And he cam doun to 
Joppe, and foond a schip goynge in to 
Tharsis, and he 3af schip hire to hem; 
and he wente doun in to it, for to go with 
hem in to Tharsis, fro the face of the 
Lord. Forsothe the Lord sente a greet 4 
wynd in‘ the see, and a greet tempest was 
maad in the see, and the schip was in 
perel for to be al to-brokun. And schips 
men dredden, and men crieden to her god; 
and senten vessels, that weren in the schip, 
in to the see, that it were maad li3tere of 
hem. And Jonas wente doun in to the® 
ynnere thingis of the schip, and slepte bi 
a greuouse sleep. And the gouernour cams6 
to him, and seide to hym, Whi art thou 
cast doun in sleep? rise thou, clepe’ thi 
God to help, if perauenture God a3enthenke 
of vs, and we perische not. And a man7 
seide to his felowe, Come 3e, and caste® 
we lottis, and wite we, whi this yuel is to 
vs. And thei kesten® lottis, and lot felle! 
on Jonas. And thei seiden to hym, Schewe 8 
thou to vs, for cause of what thing this 


Din to «GH. Con a. 


the profete. x. The book of Jonas, the profcte. Py. 
¢ Om. ACEFGHKMNPQSR pyr. mm. U sec. m. 
& sende CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. 


I. 9-—Il. 5. 


yuel is to vs; what is thi werk, whiche 
thi lond, and whither gost thou, or of 
9what peple art thou? And he saide to 
hem, Y am an Ebru, and Y dreede the Lord 
God of heuen, that made heuen and erthe. 
ioAnd the men dredden with grete drede, 
and saiden to hym, What didist thou 
this thing? forsothe the men knewen 
for he flee3 fro the face of the Lord, for 
11 Jonas had shewid to hem. And thei 
saiden to hym, What shuln we do to? 
thee, and the se shal ceese fro vs? for the 
12Se wente, and wexe grete on hem. And 
he saide to hem, Take 3e me, and sende 
in to the se, and the se shal cese fro 
jou; forsothe Y wote, for whi for me 
13this grete tempest is on 30u. And men 
rowiden, for to turne ajein to the drye 
lond, and thei mi3ten not, for the se 
14wente, and wexe grete on hem. And 
thei crieden to the Lord, and saiden, 
Lord, we bisechen, that we perishe not 
in the soule of this man, and that thou 
3eue not on vs innocent blode; for thou, 
15 Lord, didist as thou woldist. And thei 
token Jonas, and senten in to the se; and 
16the se stode of his buylyng. And the 
men dredden the Lord with grete dreed, 
and offreden oostis to the Lord, and vow- 
iden avowis. 


CAP. II. 


1 And the Lord made redy a grete fisshe, 
that he shulde swelow Jonas; and Jonas 
was in wombe of the fishe three days 

gand three ni3tis. And Jonas preyede to 
the Lord his God of the fishis wombe, 

3and saide, Y cryede to God of my tri- 
bulacioun, and he herde me; of the 
wombe of helle Y criede, and thou herd- 
4ist my voice. Thou castidist me doun in 
to depnesse in the hert of the se, and the 
flood aboute 3aue me; alle thi swelowis 
sand wawis passiden on me. And Y saide, 
Y am cast awey fro the si3t of thin eejen; 


JONAH. 711 


yuel is to vs; what is thi werk, which is 
thi lond, and whidur goist thou, ether of 
what puple art thou? And he seide tog 
hem, Y am an Ebrew, and Y drede the 
Lord God of heuene, that made the see 
and the drie Jond. And the men dredden 10 
with greet drede, and seiden to him, Whi 
didist thou this thing ? for the men knewen 
that he flei fro the face of the Lord, for 
Jonas hadde schewide to hem. And thei 
seiden to hym, What schulen we do to 
thee, and the see schal seesse fro vs? for 
the see wente, and wexe greet on hem. 
And he seide to hem, Take 3e me, and 12 
throwe! in to the see, and the see schal 
ceesse fro 30u; for Y woot, that for me 
this greet tempest is on 30u. And men™ 13 
rowiden, for to turne ajen to the drie 
lond, and thei mijten not, for the see 
wente, and wexe greet on hem. And theil4 
crieden to the Lord, and seiden, Lord, we 
bisechen, that we perische not in the lijf 
of this man, and that thou 3yue not on vs 
innocent blood; for thou, Lord, didist as 
thou woldist. And thei token Jonas, and 15 
threwen" in to the see; and the see stood 
of his buylyng. And the men dredden16é 
the Lord with greet drede, and offriden 
oostis to the Lord, and vowiden avowis. 


CAP. II. 


And the Lord made redi a greet fisch, 1 
that he shulde swolowe Jonas; and Jonas 
was in the wombe of the fisch thre daies 
and thre ni3tis. And Jonas preiede to thee 
Lord his God fro the fischis wombe, and 3 
seide, Y criede to God of my tribulacioun, 
and he herde me; fro the wombe of helle 
Y criede, and thou herdist my vois. Thou4 
castidist® me doun in to depnesse, in the 
herte of the see, and the flood? cumpasside 
me; alle thi swolowis and thi wawis pass-. 
iden on me. And Y seide, Y am cast aweis 
fro si3t1 of thin izjen; netheles eftsoone” 


d Om. x. 


k Om. gpy. !sende ceFGusmNrQruxy. sendeth r. sende me K. ™the men vsec.m. %® senten c et 
ceterit. castist ru. P floodis Kk sup. ras. 4 the si3t su. eftsones s. 


712 


netheles eftsoone Y shal see thin holy 
stemple Waters enuirounden me vn to 
my soule, depnesse encloside me, the se 
zhillide myn hed. To the vtmest places 
of hillis Y wente doun, the herris of erthe 
closiden me to gydre, in to with outen 
eend; and thou shalt reyse vp my lijf of 
scorrupcioun, Lord my God. Whanne my 
soule was angwishid in me, Y¢ bithou3te‘ 
of the Lord, that my prayer cum to thee, 
oto thyn holy temple. Thei that kepen 
vanytees, ydely shuln forsake her mercy. 
10 Y forsothe in voice of preysyng shal offre 
to thee; what euer thingis* Y vowide, Y 
1shal 3eelde to the Lord, for helth. And 
the Lord saide to the fishe, and it castide 
out Jonas in to lond. 


CAP. III. 


1 And the word of the Lord is maad the 
2secounde tyme to Jonas, sayinge, Ryse 
thou, and go in to Nynyue, the’? grete 
cytee, and preche thou there the prech- 
3ynge whiche Y speke to thee. And Jonas 
ros, and wente in to Nynyue, vp the 
word of the Lord. And Nynyne was a 
grete cytee, in iourney of three days. 
4And Jonas bygan for to entre in to the 
cytee, in iourney of oo day, and cryede, 
and saide, 3it fourty days, and Nynyue 
sshal be vndirturned, or distruyed. And 
men of Nynyue byleenyden to the Lord, 
and prechiden fastyng, and weren clothid 
with sackis, fro the more vnto the lasse. 
6And the word cam to the kyng of Ny- 
nyue; and he ros of his seete, and castide 
awey his clothing fro hym, and is clothid 
7with sacke, and sate in ashe. And he 


criede, and saide in Nynyue of the mouth . 


of the kyng and of his princes, sayinge, 
Men, and werk beestis, and oxen, and 
sheep taaste not ony thing, nether be 
sfed, nether drynke watir. And be men 


© and G pr.m.u. and Y G sec. m. 
Synto 1. ¢ vttermoste K. outmest s. 
W kepten n. x her a pr. m. CFGHIKNSX. Om. x, 


JONAH. 


f bisou3te x. 


u harris CEFGHI pr. m. K pr.m. MNPQRSX. 


Il, 6——I1I, 8. 


Y schal see thin hooli temple.’ Watris¢é 
cuinpassiden me ‘ti] to® my soule, dephesse 
enuyrownede me, the see hilide myn heed. 
Y wente doun to the vtmestet places of7 
hillis, the barris" of erthe closiden me to- 
gidere, in to withouten ende; ‘and thou, 
my Lord.God, schalt reise vp my lijf fro 
corrupcioun. Whanne my soule was an-s 
gwisched in me, YY bithou3te on the Lord, 
that my preier come to thee, to thin hooli 
temple. Thei that kepen” vanytees, for-9 
saken his* merci idili. But Y in vois of10 
heriyng schal offre to thee; what euer 
thingis Y vowide, Y schal 3elde to: the 
Lord, forY myn helthe. And the Lord1: 
seide to the fisch, and it castide out Jonas 
‘in to” the drie lond. 


CAP. III. 


And the word of the Lord .was:maad 1 
the secounde tymé to Jonas, and” seide, 
Rise thou, and go in to Nynyue, the greet 2 
citee, and preche .thou in it the prechyng 
which Y speke to thee. And Jonas roos,3 
and wente in to Nynyue, bi the word of 
the Lord. And Nynyue was a greet. citee, 
of the iurnei of thre daies. And Jonas4 
bigan for to entre in to the citee, bi: the 
jornei of o dai, and -criede, and seide, 3it 
fourti daies, and Nynyue schal be ‘turned 
vpsodoun*. And men of Nynyue bileuedens 
to the Lord, and prechiden fastyng, and 
weren clothid with sackis, fro :the more 
‘til tob the-lesse. And the word cam til‘6 
to the kyng of Nynyue; and he roos of his 
seete, and castide awei his clothing fro 
him, and was clothid with a‘ sak, and: sat 
in aische. , Aud he criede, and seide in7 
Nynyue of the mouth of the. kyng and of 
‘his princis*, ‘and seidef, Men, and werk 
beestis, and oxun®, and scheep taaste not 
ony thing, nether be fed, nether drynke 
watir. And men be hilid with sackis, ands 


thing 4. 8 Om. GK pr. m. 


Vand Y a pr. m. 


y Om. rv. Ztotpr.m. on R. in vu pr.m, 


a asus Peas ic Be 
vndurturned, or distried c pr.m. distried c sec. m. ouerturned, or distried EKN pr-m. PRuY. vnturnyd, 


or distried ru, distried Gun sec. m. Qsx. 
therof axmnqgsx. the princis therof x. 


> vnto 1. 
f seiynge 1. 


¢ Om. CEGHIKMNPQRSUX. 


d Om. Fis. 
& oxis 1K. i 


€ princis 


11. g—IV. 8. 


hillid with sackis, and werk beestis '‘crie 
to the Lord in strengthe ; and be a man 
conuertid, or al turnyd, fro his yuel waye, 
and fro wickidnesse that is in the hondis 

9of hem. Who wote, 3if God be conuertid, 
and for3eue, and be turned a3ein fro wood- 
nesse of his wrath, and we shuln not pe- 

iorishe ? And God saw3 the werkis of hem, 
for thei ben conuertid fro her yuel waye; 
and God hadde mercy on the malice 
whiche he spac, that he shulde do to 
hem, and dide not. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And Jonas was tourmentid with grete 
2tourment, and was wrooth. And he prei- 
ede to the Lord, and saide, Lord, Y bi- 
seche, wher this is not my word, whanne 
Y was 3it in my lond? For this thing Y 
before ocupiede, for to flee in to Tharsis ; 
forsothe Y wote, for thou, God, art meke 
and mercyful, pacient,and of myche mercy 
3doynge, and forzjeuynge on malice. And 
now, Lord, Y preye, take my soule, or 
lijf, fro me; for deeth is beter to me than 
alyf. And the Lord saide, Gessist thou, 
swher thou art wel wroth? And Jonas 
wente out of the cytee, and sate ajeinus 
the eest, and made to hyin a shadewyng 
place there ; and sate vndre it in shadewe, 
til he saw3 what byfelle to the citee. 
6And the Lord God made redy an eder, 
or a plaunt, and it styede vp on the 
hed of Jonas, that shadewe wer on his 
hed, and keuerde hym; forsothe he hadde 
traneilid. And Jonas gladid on the eder, 
7 with grete gladnesse. And God made 
redy a worme, in styinge vp of grey day 
in to morew; and smote the eder, and it 
sdryede vp. And whan the sunne was 
sprungen, the Lord comaundide to the 
hote wynd and brennynge; and the sunne 
smote on the hed of Jonas, and he swa- 
lide. And he axide to his soule that he 


h a man be € sup. ras. 1Ks. 
Npr.m.pruy. * which c sec. m. 1K. 
© wolde u sup.ras. P to the u sec. m. 


merciful a pr. m.crumasx. myche merciful Kx sec. m. moche merciful v. 
v than is U sec. m. 
D he seide 1K. 


Ay 


or lif cRFGMIMNPQRUSY. lijf Kx. 
2 the stiyng v sec.m. ® Om. A pr.m. CEFUR, 


VOL. III. 


JONAH. 


713 


werk beestis crie to the Lord in strengthe; 
‘and be a man? conuertid! fro his yuel 
weie, and fro wickidnesse that* is in the 
hondis of hem!. Who woot, if God be con-9 
uertid, and for3yue, and be turned ajen™ 
fro woodnesse of his wraththe, and we 
schulen not perische? And God sai" the io 
werkis of hem, that thei weren conuertid 
fro her yuel weie; and God hadde merci 
on the malice which he spac, that he 
schulde® do to hem, and did not. 


CAP. IV. 


And Jonas was turmentid with greet 
turment, and was wrooth. And he preiede2 
the? Lord, and seide, Lord, Y biseche, whe- 
ther this is not my word, whanne Y was 
3it in my lond? For this thing Y pur- 
poside’, for to fle in to Tharsis; for Y 
woot, that thou, God, art meke and mer- 
ciful, pacient”, and of merciful’ doyng, and 
forz3yuynge ont malice. And now, Lord,3 
Y preie, take my soule® fro me; for deth 
is betere to me than’ lijf. And the Lord« 
seide”, Gessist thou, whether thou art 
wel wrooth ? And Jonas wente out of thes 
citee, and sat a3ens the eest of the citee, 
and made to hym a schadewyng place 
there; and sat vndur it in schadewe, til he 
saix what bifelle to the citee. And thes 
Lord God made redy an yuy, and it stiede 
vp on the heed of Jonas, that schadeweY 
were on his heed, and kyueride hym; for 
he hadde trauelid. And Jonas was glad on 
the yuy, with greet gladnesse. And God7 
made redi a worm, in stiyng” up of grei 
dai on the morewe; and it* smoot the yuy, 
and it driede up. And whanne the sunnes 
was risun, the Lord comaundide to the 
hoot wynd and brennyng; and the sunne 
smoot on the heed of Jonas, and he swa- 
lide. And he axide to his soule that he 
schulde die, and seide®, It is betere to me 


i al turned c sup. ras. GIKMN sec. m. Qsx. conuertid, or al turned EFH 
Thim u sup. ras. 
4 bifore ocupiede CEFGHMNPQRSUX. 


Mawey I. 813 E ef alii, saw F. say3 N. 


¥ myche pacieut R. § mercy 
t of imqu sup.ras. ™ soule, 
w seide fo Jonas 1, * saw3F. sau31. Y schade a. 


714 


shulde dye, and saide, It is beter to me 
9for to dye, than for to lyue. And the 
Lord saide to Jonas, Gessist thou, wher 
thou art wel wroth on the eder? And 
he saide, Y am wel wrothe, vn to the 

1odeth. And the Lord saide, Thou art 
sorie on the eder, in whiche thou trauey]- 
idist not, nether thou madist) that it 
wexide, the whiche was born vnder 00 

11 ni3t, and in oo ni3t perishide. And shal 
Y not spare to the grete citee Nynyue, 
in whiche ben more than a hundred and 
twenti thousand of men, whiche witen 
not what is bitwix her ri3t half and left, 
and many werk beestis ? 


Here endith the book of Jonas, and 
bigynneth the book of Micheasi. 


h made it x. 


¢ Om. 1kmgs. 9 Om. 1xmQs. 
profete; se now Micheas, the profete. x. 


Here endith Jonas, and bigynneth Michee, the prophete. s. 
No final rubric in apy, 


here bigynneth Mycheas, the profete. x. 


JONAH. 


€ left half u sec. m. 
Here endith Jonas, and here bigynneth the book of Mychee. nq. 


IV. 9-——11. 


fore to die, than for’ to lyue. And thes 
Lord seide to Jonas, Gessist thou, whether 
thou art wel wrooth on the yuy? And he 
seide, Y am wel wrooth, til to the deth. 
And the Lord seide, Thou art sori on the 10 
yuy, in which thou trauelidist not, nether 
madist that it wexide, which was growun 
vndur 0 ny3t, and perischide in o ny3t. 
And schal Y not spare the grete citee Ny-11 
nyue, in which ben more than sixe score 
thousynde of men, which witen not what 
is betwixe her ri3t half and left®, and many 
beestis ? 


Here endith Jonas, and here bigyn- 
neth Micheas*, 


i No final rubric in acu. 


f From creuimru. Here endeth Jonas, the 


Here endith the booc of the profete Jonas, and 


MICA H. 





The book of Micheas, prophete*. 


CARat. 


1 THE word of the Lord, whiche is maad 
to Mycheas Morastites, in the days of 
Joathan, Achas, Ezechie, kyngys of Juda; 
whiche he saw3 on Samarie, and Jerusa- 

2lem. Heere 3e, alle peplis, and the erthe 
perceyue, and the plente therof; and be 
the Lord God to 30u in to a witnesse, the 

3 Lord of hys holy temple. For loo! the 
Lord shal gon out of his place, and shal 
cumme doun, and shal trede on hee} 

4thingus of erthe. And mounteyns shuln 
be waastid vndir hym, and valeys shuln 
be kitt, as wex fro face of fijre, as waters 

5that rennen in to a pitt. In the grete 
trespas of Jacob al this thing, and in the 
synnes of the hous of Yrael. Whiche the 
grete trespas of Jacob, wher not Sama- 
rie? and whiche the hee3 thingis of Juda, 
é6wher not Jerusalem? And Y shal putte 
Samarie as an heep of stoons in the feeld, 
whanne a vyne 3erd is plauntid; and Y 
shal drawe awey the stoons therof into a 
valey, and shal> shewe the foundementis 
7therof. And alle sculptilis, or grauen 
ymagis, therof shuln be beten to gidre, | 
and alle hijres therof shuln be brent in 
fijr; and Y shal putte al ydolis therof in 
to perdicioun; for of hijris of an hoore 
thei ben gadrid, and vn to hijre of an 


a Here bigynneth the boke of Mycheas. a. 


a From epy. Mychee, the profete. a. 
cKrant pr.m.Npy. Micheeas k. Mycheas nx. 
f watir A pr. im. 
grauun ymagis CEFGNIKMNPQRSUXY. 


No initial rubric in Gu. 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
© wordis EP pr. m. ¥. 
g renneth a pr.m. rennen doun vu sec. m. 
k the idols u sec. m. 


Here byginnith the book of Michie, 
the profete*. 


CAPE 


THE word of the Lord, which was maad 1 
to ‘Mychee of® Morasti, in the daies of 
Joathan, Achas, Ezechie, kyngis of Juda ; 
which word he sai on Samarie, and Jeru- 
salem. Here 3e, alle puplis, and the erthe2 
perseyue, and plentee? therof, and be the 
Lord God to 3ou in to a witnesse, the 
Lord fro his hooli temple. For lo! thes 
Lord schal go out of his place, and schal 
come doun, and schal trede on hi3 thingis 
of erthe. And mounteyns schulen be4 
waastid vndur hym, and valeis schulen be 
kit, as wex fro the face of fier, as® watirs’ 
that rennen® in to a pit. In the gretes 
trespas of Jacob zs al this thing, and in 
the synnes of the hous of Israel. Which zs 
the greet trespas of Jacob? whether" not 
Samarie? and whiche ben the hi3 thingis 
of Juda? whether not Jerusalem? Andé 
Y schal put Samarie as an heep of stoonys 
in the feeld, whanne a vyn3erd is plauntid; 
and Y schal drawe awei the stoonys therof 
in to a valei, and Y schal schewe the foun- 
dementis therof. And alle ‘grauun yiagis!7 
therof schulen be betun togidere, and alle 
hiris therof schulen be brent in fier; and 
Y schal putte alle idols* therof in to per- 
dicioun; for of hiris! of an hoore tho ben 
gaderid, and ‘til to™ hire of an hoore tho 


b Y shal ac. 


b Mychee as of a pr.m. 

dtheplenteEipy. ¢andasvusec.m. 

h wher ceteri fere passim. i sculptils, ether 
I the hiris u sec.m. ™ toc pr.m. vnto I. 


4¥ 2 


716 MICAH. 1, 8—II. 3. 


shoore thei shuln be turned ajein. On 
this thing Y shal weile and 3oule, Y shal 
go spuylid and nakid; and° Y shal make 
weyling as of dragouns, and mournyng 
yas of struciouns. For plage, or wounde, 
therof is dispeirid; for it came vn to Juda, 
it touchide the 3ate of my peple, vn to 
1o Jerusalem. In Geth ny] 3e telle, in teris 
weepe 3e not; in the hous of dust with 
dust togydre sprenge 30u. And a faire 
dwellyng shal passe fro 30u, confoundid 
with yuel fame; it is not gon out, whiche 
dwellith in the goynge out; a ni3 hous 
shal take of 30u weylyng, whiche stode 
12to it self. For it is maad seeke in to 
good, whiche dwellith in bitternessis. For 
yuel came doun fro the Lord in to the 
ls3ate of Jerusalem, noyse of a‘ four 
horsid cart, of dreed to the dwellynge at 
Lachis. Itis the bygynnyng of synne of 
the dou3ter of Syon, for in thee the grete 
i4trespassis of Yrael ben founden. Ther- 
fore he shal 3eue vnnoble men on the 
heritage of Geth, an hous of lesyng in to 
isdisceyte to the kyngis of Yrael. 3it Y 
shal brenge an eir to thee, that dwellist 
in Maresa®; vnto Odolla of glorie of Yrael 
1é6shal cum. Be thou maad ballid, and be 
thou clippid on the sonys of ydolis; alarge 
thi baldnesse as an egle, for thei ben led 
caityf fro thee. 


CAP. II. 


1 Woo to 30u, that thenken vnprofitable 
thing, and wirchen yuel in 3oure couchis; 
in the morew li3t thei don it, for the 

2hond of hem is ajeinus God. Thei co- 
uetiden feeldis, and violently token; and 
ranyshiden housis, and falsly chalengiden 
aman and his hous, and‘ a man and his 

seritage. Therfore these thingis saith the 
Lord, Loo! Y thenke on this meynee 
yuel, of whom 3e shuln uot take awey 
3our neckis; and 3e shuln not walke 


©Om. acu. 40m. ach. 


schulen turne a3en. On this thing Y schals 
weile and 3elle, Y" schal go spuylid and 
nakid; Y schal make weilyng of® dra- 
gouns, and inournyng as of ostrigis. Fors 
wounde therof is dispeirid; for it cam til 
to Juda, it touchide the 3ate of my puple, 
til to Jerusalem. In Geth nyle 3e telle, io 
bi teeris wepe 3e not; in the hous of dust 
with dust togidere sprynge 30u?. And 3e11 
a fair dwellyng passe‘, which is confoundid 
with yuel fame; it is not goon out, which 
dwellith in the goyng out; a ni3 hous 
scha] take of 30u weilyng, which stood to 
it silf. For it is maad sijk to good, which 12 
dwellith in bitternessis. For yuel cam doun 
fro the Lord in to the 3ate of Jerusalem, 
noise* of foure horsid cart, of drede to the 13 
puple dwellynge at Lachis. It is the bi- 
gynnyng of synne of the dou3ter of Sion, 
for the grete trespassis of Israel ben 
foundun in thee. Therfor he schal 3yue14 
werriours on the eritage of Geth, on 
housis’ of leesyng in to deseit‘ to" kyngis 
of Israel. 3it Y schal brynge an eir tots 
thee, that dwellist in Maresa; the glorie 
of Israel schal come til to Odolla. Bee 
thou maad ballid, and be thou clippid on 
the sones of thi delices; alarge thi ballid- 
nesse as an egle, for thei ben lad caitif 
fro thee. 


CAP +E 


Wo to 30u, that thenken vnprofitable! 
thing, and worclien yuele in 3oure beddis ; 
in the morewtid 1i3t thei don it, for the 
hond of hem is ajenus God. Thei co-2 
ueitiden feeldis, and tooken violentli; and 
rauyschiden housis, and falsli calengiden 
aman and his hous, a man and his eri- 
tage. Therfor the Lord seith these thingis, 3 
Lo! Y thenke on this meynee yuel, fro 
which 3e schulen not take awei 3oure 
neckis ; and 3e schulen not walke proude, 


€the Maresa xk. f£ Om. sau. 


n isi : 
and It. as of usec.m. P 3e 30u plures. 9 passe to 30u I sec.m. usec. m. * the noise u sec. m. 
* the housis usec. m. —t desert A pr.m, EFIPY, dissent kK. 4 of s. 


Il. 4—III. 1. 


4proude, for the warst tyme is. In that 
daye a parable shal be taken on 3ou, and 
a songe Shal be sungen with swetnesse of 
men, sayinge, By robbyng we ben dis- 
truyed; a part of my peple is chaungid 
to gidre; hou shal he go awey fro me, 
whanne he turneth ajein that shal de- 
sparte 3oure cuntrees? For this thing 
there shal not be to thee the sendyng 
a litil coorde of sort in cumpanye of the 
éLord. Thou Yrael, speke 3e not spek- 
ynge; it shal not droppe on these, con- 
7fusioun shal not cacche, saith the Lord 
to Jacob. Wher the Spirit of the Lord is 
abreggid, or siche ben the thou3tus of 
hym? Wher my wordis ben not goode, 
swith hym that ri3tli goth? And a3ein- 
ward iny peple ros to gidre in to an 


aduersarie; 3e toke awey the mantil aboue. 


the coote, and 3e turnyden hem in to 
9 bataile, hem that wenten symply. 3e cast- 
iden out the wymmen of my peple, of 
the hous of her delices; fro the litil childre 
of hem 3e token awey my herying in to 
1owith outen eende. Ryse 3e, and go, for 
here 3e han not reste; for the vnclennesse 
therof it shal be corrupt with the warst 
trott. Y wolde Y were not a man hau- 
ynge spirit, and rather Y spake lesyng. 
Y shal droppe to thee in to wyn, and in 
to drunkenesse; and this peple shal be, 
1220n whom it is droppid. With gadryng 
¥ shal gadre Jacob; Y shal leede to gydre 
thee al in to oon, the relikis of Yrael. Y 
shal putte hym to gydre, as a flok in 
folde; as sheep in the mydil of foldis 
thei shuln make noyse, of multitude of 
ismen. Forsothe he shal stye shewynge 
waye byfore hem ; thei shuln departe, and 
passe the 3ate, and shuln go out therby ; 
and the kyng of hem shal passe byfore 
hem, and the Lord in the hed of hem. 


CAP. III. 


1 And Y saide, Heere, 3e princis of Ja- 
cob, and duykys of the hous of Yrael. 


Vv ther schal be noon 1. © lot u sec. m. 
Ynousec.m. 7 rather thanne s. 


4 the folde t sec.m. ¢&stieupr. fa weie nN. 


MICAH. 


717 


for the worste tyme is. In that dai aa - 
parable schal be takun on 30u, and a song 
schal be songun with swetnesse of men, 
seiynge, Bi robbyng we ben distried; a 
part of my puple is chaungid; hou schal 
he go awei fro me, whanne he turneth 
a3en that schal departe 3oure cuntreis? 
For this thing ‘noon schal be’ to thees 
sendynge a litil corde of sort” in cumpeny 
of the Lord. A! thou Israel, speke 3e nots 
spekyng ; it schal not droppe on these men, 
confusioun schal not catche, seith the hous7 
of Jacob. Whether the Spirit of the Lord 
is abreggid, either* siche ben the thou3tis 
of hym? Whether my wordis ben not 
gode, with hym that goith ri3tli? Ands 
a3enward my puple roos togidere in to an 
aduersarie; 3e token awei the mantil 
aboue the coote, and 3e turneden in to batel 
hem that wenten sympli. 3e castiden thes 
wymmen of my puple out of the hous of 
her delices; fro the litle children of hem 
3e token awei myn heriyng with onten 
ende. Rise 3e, and go, for here 3e han to 
notY reste; for the vnclennesse therof it 
schal be corrupt with the worst rot. Yui 
wolde that Y were not a man hauynge 
spirit, and rathere’ Y* spak a leesyng. Y 
schal droppe to thee in to wyn, and in to 
drunkenesse; and this puple schal be, on 
whom it is droppid. With gaderyng Y 12 
schal gadere Jacob’; Y schal lede togidere 
thee al¢ in to oon, the relifs of Israel. Y 
schal put hym togidere, as a floc in folde’; 
as scheep in the myddil of fooldis thei 
schulen make noise, of multitude of men. 
For he schal stie® schewynge weief bifore is 
hem; thei schulen departe, and passe the 
jate, and schulen® go out therbi; and the 
kyng of hem schal passe bifore hem, and 
the Lord in the heed of hem. 


CAP. IL: 


And Y seide, 3e princis of Jacob, and: 
duykis of the hous of Israel, here". Whe- 


x Om. A pr. m. CEFGIUIK pr. Mm. MNPQS pr. m, U pr.m. X sec. m. 
@ that Y cG1kMNQrux. 
& thei schul 1. thei shulen v sec. m. 


¢ Om. A sec. m. 
h hereth 1. 


b al thee, Jacob a sec. m. 


718 


2 Wher it be jour for to wite dom, whiche 
han in hate good, and louen yuel? Whiche 
violentli taken awey the skinnis of hem 
fro aboue hem, and the fleshe of hem 

afro aboue the bonys of hem. Whiche 
eeten fleshe of my peple, and hildiden, or 
flewen, the skyn of hem fro aboue; and 
braken to gydre the bonys of hem, and 
kittiden to gydre as in a cawdroun, and 

sas fleshe in the mydil of a pott. Thanne 
thei shuln crye to the Lord, and he shal 
not heer’ hem; and he shal hijde his face 
fro hem in that tyme, as thei diden wick- 
sidly in her fyndyngus. These thingus 
saith the Lord on the prophetis that dis- 
ceyuen my peple, and biten with her 
teeth, and prechen pees; and 3if eny man 
shal not 3eue in the mouth of hem eny 
thing, thei halewyn bateyle on hym. 
6Therfore ni3t shal be to 3ou for visioun, 
or prophecie, and derknessis to 30u for 
dyuynacioun; and the sunne shal go doun 
on the prophetis, and the day shal be 

;maad derk on hem. And thei shuln be 
confoundid that seen visiouns, and dy- 
uynours shuln be confoundid, and alle 
shuln hille her cheeris, for it is not the 

sanswere of God. Netheles Y am fulfillid 
with strengthe of Spirit of the Lord, in 
dom and vertu, that Y shewe to Jacob 
his grete trespas, and to Yrael his synne. 

9 Heere 3e these thingis, 3e princis of the 
hous of Jacob, and domysmen of the hous 
of Yrael, whiche wlaten dom, and per- 

iouerten alle ri3t thingus; whiche beelden 
Syon in blodis, and Jerusalem in wickid- 

itnesse. Princis therof demyden in 3iftus, 
and the prestis therof tau3ten in hijre, and 
prophetis therof dyuynyden in money; 
and on the Lord thei restiden, sayinge, 
Wher not the Lord in the mydil of vs? 

1zyuels shuln not cume on vs. For this 
thing by cause of 30u, Syon as a feeld 
shal be eryd; and Jerusalem shal be as 
an heep of stoons, and the hill of the 
temple in to hee3 thingus of wodys. 


MICAH. 


TJ. 2——-12. 


ther it be! not 3oure for to knowe doom, 
whiche haten good, and louen yuele?2 
Whiche violentli taken awei the skynnes 
of hem fro aboue hem, and the fleisch 
of hem fro aboue the bonys of hem. 
Whichek eeten the fleisch of my puple,s 
and hiliden! the skyn of hem fro aboue; 
and broken™ togidere the boonys of hem, 
and kittiden togidere as in” a cawdroun, 
and as fleisch in the myddil of a pot. 
Thanne thei schulen crie to the Lord, and 4 
he schal not here hem; and he schal hide 
hise face fro hem in that tyme, as thei 
diden wickidli in her fyndingis. Thes 
Lord God seith these thingis on the pro- 
fetis that disseynen my puple, and? biten 
with her teeth, and prechen pees; and if 
ony man 3yueth not in the mouth of hem 
ony thing, thei halewen bate! on hym. 
Therfor ni3t schal be to 30u for visioun, 6 
or profesie, and derknessis to 30u for dy- - 
uynacioun ; and sunne‘ schal go doun on 
the profetis, and the dai schal be maad 
derk on hem. And thei schulen be con-7 
foundid that seen visiouns, and dyuynours 
schulen be confoundid, and alle schulen 
hile her cheris, for it is not the answer of 
God. Netheles Y am fillid with strengthes 
of Spirit’ of the Lord, and in* doom 
and vertu, that Y schewe to Jacob his 
greet trespas, and to Israel his synne. 
Here these thingis, 3e princes of the hous 9 
of Jacob, and domesment of the hous of 
Israel, whiche wlaten dom, and peruerten 
alle ri3t thingis; whiche bilden Sion inio 
bloodis, and Jerusalem in wickidnesse. 
Princes" therof demyden for 3iftis, andit 
prestis therof tau3ten for hire, and pro- 
fetis’ therof dyuyneden for money; and on 
the Lord thei restiden, and seiden, Whe- 
ther the Lord is not in the myddil of us? 
yuelis schnlen not come on vs. For this 12 
thing bi cause of 30u, Sion as a feeld schal 
be erid ; and Jerusalem schal be as an heep 
of stoonys, and the hil of the temple schal 
be in to hize thingis of woodis. 


& heer do effect K pr. m. 


k The whiche 1. 
@ the sunne v sec. m. 
u The princis u see. m. 


lis u sec. m, 
A sec. m. 
U sec. mm. 


'hildiden rx. 


m braken 1. 
T the Spirit c pr. m. KRUX sec. m. 
¥ the profetis u sec. m. K. 


o Om. celeri. 
8 with v sec. m. 


2 Om. 1 pr.m. P that 


t 3e domesmen 


IV. i—10. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And it shal be, in the last of days 
the hill of the hous of the Lord shal be 
maad redy in the top of hillis, and hee3 
ouer smale hillis. And peplis shuln fleete 

2to hym, and many folkis shuln hasten, 
and shuln saye, Cum 3e, stye we to the 
hill of the Lord, and to the hous of God 
of Jacob; and he shal teche vs of his 
wayes, and we shuln go in his pathes. 
For of Syon the lawe shal go out, and 

3the word of the Lord of Jerusalem; and 
he shal deme bitwixe manye peplis, and 
shal chastyse strong folkis vnto in to fer. 
And thei shuln bete to gydre her swerdis 
in to shaaris, and her speris in to py- 


coysis ; a folk shal not take swerd a3einus 


folk, and thei shuln namore lerne for te 
4fi3te. And a man shal sitte vndir his 
vyne 3erd, and vnder his fijge tree; and 
ther shal not be that shal fere, for the 
smouth of the Lord of hoostis spak. For 
alle peplis shuln go, eche man in name of 
the Lord her God; forsoth we schulen 
walke in the name of the Lord oure God 
6into with outen ende, and ouer. In that 
day, seith the Lord, I schal gedere the 
haltinge, and hir that I castide awey Y 
shal gedre, and whom Y tourmentide Y 
7shal coumforte. And Y shal putte the 
haltynge in to relikis, and hir that tra- 
ueilide, in to a stronge folk. And the 
Lord shal regne on hem in the hill of 
Syon, fro this now and till in to the 
sworld. And thou, cloudy, or derk, tour 
of folk of the dou3ter of Syon, vn to thee 
he shal cume, and the first power shal 
cume, the rewme of the dou3ter of Jeru- 
9salem. Now whi art thou with mourn- 
yng drawen to gydre? wher a kyng is 
not to thee, or thi counseilour perishide ? 
for sorewe hath cachid thee, as a wom- 
1oman berynge chijld. Thou dou3ter of 
Syon, make sorewe, and tyse, or do 


MICAH. 


m9 


cP ey. 


And in the laste of daies the hil of1 
the* hous of the Lord schal be maad redi 
in the cop of hillisy, and hi3? ouer smale 
hillis, And puplis schulen flete® to him, 
and many puplis> schulen haaste, and2 
shulen seie, Come 3e, stie we tile to the 
hil of the Lord, and to the hous of God 
of Jacob; and he schal teche vs of hise 
weies, and we schulen go in hise pathis. 
For lawe? schal® go out frof Syon, and the 
word of the Lord fro Jerusalem; and3 
he schal deme bitwixe many puplis, and 
schal chastise stronge folkis til in to fer. 
And thei schulen bete togidere her swerdis 
in to scharis, and her speris in to picoisis ; 
a® fole schal not take swerd aj3ens fole, 
and thei schulen no more lerne® for' to 
fi3te. And a man schal sitte vndur his4 
vyne3erd, and vndur his fige tree; and ther 
schal not be that schal make aferd, for 
the mouth of the Lord of oostis spak. 
For alle puplis schulen go, ech man ins 
the name of his Lord God; but we schulen 
walke in the name of oure Lord God in 
to the world, and ouer. In that dai, seith6 
the Lord, Y schal gadere the haltynge, 
and Y schal gadere hir that* Y castide 
awei, aud whom Y turmentide Y schal 
coumforte. And Y schal putte the halt-7 
ynge in to relifs, ether remenauntis, and 
hir that trauelide, in a strong fole. And 
the Lord schal regne on hem in the hil 
of Sion, fro this! now and til in to with 
outen ende. And thou, ‘derk tour™ of# 
the" floc of the dou3ter of Sion, ‘til to° 
thee he schal come, and the first power 
schal come, the rewme of the dou3tir of 
Jerusalem. Now whi art thou drawun to-9 
gidere with mournyng? whether a kyng 
is not to thee, ether thi counselour pe- 
rischide? for sorowe hath take thee, as 
a womman trauelinge of child. Thou to 
dou3ter of Sion, make sorewe, and _ haaste, 


wOm.1. * Om. chF sec.m.rsu prom. Ythehillisw. 7 shal be hij usec.m. 4 flowe u sup. ras. 
> folk c et ceteri. © Om.ceteri. the lawer. € Om.ssec.m. {shal fros. & Om.1. » serne u sec.m. 
1Om.s. kwhomr. | this tyme u sec.m. ™ cloudi, or [ether x] derk, tour cecnimnpqruxy. cloudi, 


or derk ¥. %®QOm.cFKs. ©® vato 1. 


720 


ynew3, as a womman berynge chijld; for 
now thou shalt go out of the cyte, and 
thou shalt dwelle in cuntre, and thou 
shalt cum vn to Babiloyne; there thou 
shalt be delyuered, there the Lord shal 
ajein bye thee, of the hond of thin en- 

irmyes. And now many folkis ben gadrid 
on thee, whiche sayen, Be it stoonyd, 

igand biholde our ee3e$ in to Syon. For- 
sothe thei knewen not the thou3tis of 
the Lord, and vndirstoden! not the coun- 
seil of hym, for he gadride hem as hay 

sof the feeld. Ryse thou, and threshe, 
dou3ter of Syon, for Y shal putte thin 
horn of yren, and Y shal putte thi naylis 
brasen; and thou shalt waste many pe- 
plis, and shalt slea to the Lord the! ra- 
ueyns of hem, and the strengthe of bem 
to the Lord of al erthe. 


CAP. V. 


1 Now thon, dou3ter of the theef, shalt 
be distruyed; thei puttiden on vs byseeg- 
yng, in a 3erd thei shuln smyte the cheeke 

20f the iuge of Yrael. And thou, Beth- 
lem Effrata, art liti! in the thousandis of 
Juda; of thee shal gon out to me, whiche 
is lordshiper in Yrael; and the goyng out 
of hym fro the bygynnyng of dais of 

seuerlastyngnesse. For this thing God 
shal 3ere hem vn to tyme in whiche the 
traueilynge of chijld shal bere chijld, and 
the relikis of his bretheren shuln be con- 
auertid to the sonys of Yrael. And he 
shal stonde, and shal feede in strengthe 
of the Lord, in the hei3t of the name of 
the Lord his God; and thei shuln be econ- 
uertid, for now he shal be magnyfied vn 
sto the termes of al erthe. And this shal 
be pees, whanne Assirius shal cum in to 
oure lond, and whanne he shai trede in 
oure housis; and we shuln reyse on hym 
seuen sheperdis, and eij3t primatis, or 
cfirst men in dignyte. And thei shuln 
feede the lond of Assur in swerd, and 


& eyen 4. hee3 x. 


P the cuntre u sec.m. 4 vnto 1. 
EGHUKSPQRMNX pr. m. & U sec. Mm. 


r Om. Gt. 


MICAH. 


bh yndirstonden 4Gui. 


IV. 11—V. 6. 


as a womman trauelynge of child ; for now 
thou schalt go out of the citee, and schalt 
dwelle in cuntree?, and schalt come ‘til to® 
Babiloyne ; there thou schalt be delyuered, 
there the Lord schal a3en bie thee, fro the 
hond of thin enemyes. And now manyu 
folkis ben gaderid on thee, whiche seien, 
Be it stonyd, and oure ize biholde in to 
Sion. Forsothe thei knewen not the1l2 
thou3tis of the Lord, and vndurstoden not 
the councel of hym, for he gaderide hem 
as the’ hei of feeld’. Rise thou, dou3ter 13 
of Sion, and threische, for Y schal putte 
thin horn of irun, and Y schal putte thi 
nailis brasun ; and thou schalt make lesse, 
ether waste, many puplis, and schalt sle 
to the Lord the raueyns of hem, and the 
strengthe of hem to the Lord of al erthe. 
Now thon, dou3ter of a theef, schalt be! 
distried ; thei puttiden ont vs bisegyng, 
in a 3erde thei schulen smyte the cheke of 
the® iuge of Israel. 


CAP. V. 


And thou, Bethleem Effrata, art litil inz 
the thousyndis of Juda; he that is the 
lordli gouernour in Israel, schal go out of 
thee to me; and the goyng out of hym is 
fro bigynnyng, fro daies of euerlastyng- 
nesse. For this thing he shal 3yue hems 
til to the tyme in which the trauelinge 
of child schal bere child, and the relifs of 
hise britheren schulen be conuertid to the 
sones of Israel. And he schal stonde, and 4 
schal fede in the strengthe of the Lord, 
in the hei3the of the name of his Lord 
God; and thei schulen be conuertid, for 
now he schal he magnefied til to the endis 
of al erthe. And this schal be pees,s 
whanne Assirius schal come in to oure 
lond, and whanne he schal trede in onre 
housis; and we schulen reise on hym se- 
uene scheepherdis, and ei3te primatis men, 
ether the firste in dignytee. And theis 
schulen frete the lond of Assur bi swerd, 


i Om. a. 


8 the feld F pr. m.qikNgrsux. tOm.Nn. 4% Om. 


V. 7—VI. 2. 


the lond of Nembroth in speris of hym; 
and he shal delyuere vs fro Assur, 
whanne he shal cum in to oure lond, 
and whanne he shal treede in oure 
zeoostis. And relikis of Jacob shuln be 
in the mydil of many peplis, as dewe of 
the Lord, and as droppyngis on erbe, 
whiche abydith not man, and shal not 
sabyde the sonys of men. And relikis of 
Jacob shuln be in heithen men, in the 
mydil of many peplis, as a lyoun in 
bestis of woddis, and as whelpe of lyoun 
rorynge in flockis of smale_beestis ; 
whiche whan shal passe, and defoule, 
and take, ther is not that shal delyuere. 
9Thin hond shal be reysid on thin en- 
myes, and alle thin emmyes shuln perishe. 


1oAnd it shal be, in that day, saith the. 


‘Lord, Y shal take awey thin horsis of 
the mydil of thee, and Y shal distruye 
11 thi foure horsid cartis. And Y shal leese 
the citees of thi lond, and Y shal distruye 
alle thi strengthis; and Y shal do awey 
the yuel deedis of thin hond, and dyuy- 
naciouns, or tellyngus by deuels craft, 
12shuln not be in thee. And Y shal make 
for to perishe thi sculptilis, o7 grauen 
ymagis, and Y shal breke* to gydre of 
the mydil of thee thin ymagis, and thou 
shalt namore wirshipe the werkis of thin 
izshondis. And Y shal drawe out thi inaw- 
met wodis, and shal! breke to gydre thi 
1acitees. And Y shal make in woodnesse 
and in indignacioun veniaunce in alle 
folkis, whiche herden not. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Heere 3e whiche thingis the Lord 
spekith. Ryse thou, stryue thou by dome 
a3einus mounteyns, and litil hillis heere 

2thi voice. Mounteyns heere the dom of 
the Lord, and the strenger foundementis 
of erthe; for the dom of the Lord with 
his peple, and with Yrael he shal be 


k brenge xk. 


vmyddis epsy. W the sones v. 
2 of 1, 
ether deuelis craft y. 


be with u sec. m. 
VOL. III. 


MICAH. 


x among 8 scc, m. 
a dyuynaciouns, ether tellingis [tellynge s] bi [of 1] deuels craft cnrGHKMNPQRSUX. diuinaciouns, 
b sculptilis, ether grauen ymagis CEFGNIKMNPQRSUY. 


4Z 


721 


and the lond of Nembroth bi speris of 
hym; and he schal delyuere vs fro As- 
sur, whanne he schal come in to oure 
lond, and whanne he schal trede in oure 
coostis. And relifs of Jacob schulen be7 
in the myddil’ of many puplis, as dew of 
the Lord, and as dropis on erbe, whiche 
abidith not man, and schal not abide 
sones” of men. And relifs of Jacob schu-s 
len be in hethene men, in the myddil of 
many puplis, as a lioun in* beestis of the 
woodis, and as a whelpe of a lioun ror- 
ynge in flockis of scheep; and whanne he 
passith, and defoulith, and takith, there 
is not that schal delyuere. And thin hond9 
schal be reisid on thin enemyes, and alle 
thin enemyes schulen perische. And it 10 
schal be, in that dai, seith the Lord, Y 
schal take awei thin horsis fro the myd- 
dil of thee, and Y schal distrie thi foure 
horsid cartis. And Y schal leese thei 
citees of thi lond, and Y schal distrie alle 
thi strengthisy; and Y schal do awei 
witchecraftis fro? thin hond, and dyuy- 
naciouns® schulen not be in thee. And Y 12 
schal maké for to perische thi ‘grauun 
ymagis®, and Y shal breke® togidere fro 
the myddil of thee thin ymagis, and thou 
schalt no more worschipe the werkis of 
thin hondis. And Y schal drawe out of 13 
the middis of thee thi woodis, and Y schal 
al to-breke thi citees. And Y schal make 14 
in woodnesse and indignacioun veniaunce 
in alle folkis, whiche herden not. 


CAP. VI. 


Here 3e whiche thingis the Lord spek-1 
ith. Rise thou, stryue thou bi doom a3ens 
mounteyns, and litle hillis here thi vois. 
Mounteyns, and the stronge foundementis 2 
of erthe, here the doom of the Lord; for 
the doom of the Lord with* his puple, 
and he schal be demyd with Israel. Mis 


1Y shal a. 


y strengthis, ether wardingis EFGHKMNPQRSUXY. 


© al to-breke Nrv. ¢ shal 


722 


swysely demed. My peple, what haue Y 
don to thee, or what was Y greuous to 
4thee ? Answere thou to me. For Y ledde 
thee out of the lond of Egypt, and of the 
hous of seruage Y delyuerde thee; and 
Y sente byfore thi face Moyses, and 
5 Aaron, and Marie. My peple, bythenke, 
Y preye, what Balaac, kyng of Moab, 
thou3te, and what Balaam, sone of Beor, 
of Sethym, answeride to hym vn to Gal- 
gala, that thou shuldist knowe the ri3t- 
6 wisnesse of the Lord. What worthi thing 
shal Y offre to the Lord? shal Y bowe 
the knee to the™ hee3 God ? Wher Y shal 
offre to hym brent sacrifices, and calues 
z0f oo 3eer? Wher God may be plesid in 
thousandis of wetheris, or in many thou- 
sandus of fatt goot buckis? Wher Y shal 
3eue my first bygoten for my grete tres- 
pas, the fruyte of my wombe for synne 
sof my soule? Y shal shewe to thee, 
thou man, what is good, and what the 
Lord axith of thee; forsothe for to do 
dom, and for to loue mercy, and bysi for 
gto walke with thi God. The voice of 
the Lord crieth to the citee, and helthe 
shal be to alle men dreedinge thi name. 
Heere, 3e lynagis; and who shal aproue it? 
10 3it fijr in the hous of the vnpitous man, 
the tresours of wickidnesse, and a lasse 
irmesure ful of wrath. Wher Y shal ius- 
tifie the wickid balaunce, and the gijlful 
iweiztis of litil® sac, in whiche riche 
men therof ben fulfillid with wickidnesse ? 
And men dwellynge theryn spaken les- 
yng, and the tunge of hem gijleful in the 
ismouth of hem. And Y therfore bygan 
for to smyte thee, in perdicioun on®® thin 
1asynnys. Thou shalt ete, and shalt not 
be fulfillid, and thi meekyng in the my- 
dil of thee; and thou shalt take to, and 
shalt not saue; and whom thou shalt 
1ssaaue, Y shal 3eue in to swerd. ‘Thou 
shalt sowe, and shalt not repe; thou 
shalt trede the olyue, and shalt not be 
anoyntid with oyle; and must, and shalt 


m Om. e pr.m. 


¢ Om. CEFHNPQRSUX pr.m.y. f men ES. 
A pr.m. ERU. ™ oliue tre crikuQs. slyme H. 


MICAH. 


" the litil G sec. m. 


& and v. 
2 Om. v. 


VI. 3-——15- 


puple, what haue Y don to thee, ether 
what was Y greuouse to thee? Answere 
thou to me. For Y ledde thee out of the 
lond of Egipt, aud of the hous of seruage 
Y delyuerede thee; and Y sente bifore 
thi face Moises, and Aaron, and Marye. 
My puple, bithenke, Y preie, what Ba-5 
laac, kyng of Moab, thou3te, and what 
Balaam, sone of Beor, of Sethym, answer- 
ide to hym til to Galgala, that thou 
schuldist knowe the rijtwisnesse of the 
Lord. What worthi thing schal Y offreé 
to the Lord? schal Y bowe the knee to 
the hize God? Whether Y schal offre to 
hym brent sacrifices, and calues of 0 jeer ? 
Whether God mai be paid in thousyndis7 
of wetheris, ether in many thousyndis of 
fatte geet buckis? Whether Y schal 3yue 
my firste bigetun for my greet trespas, 
the fruyt of my wombe for synne of my 
soule? Y schal schewe to thee, thou man,s 
what is good, and what the Lord axith 
of thee; forsothe for to do doom, and 
for to loue merci, and be bisi for to walke 
with thi God. The vois of the Lord eri-9 
eth to the citee, and heelthe schal be to 
alle men dredynge thi name. je lynagis, 
here; and who schal approue it? 3it fier io 
zs in the hous of the® vnpitouse man’, the® 
tresouris of wickidnesse, and a lesse me- 
sure ful of wraththe. Whether Y schali 
iustifie the wickid balaunce, and the gile- 
ful wei3tis of litil® sak, in whiche riche 
men therof beni fillid with wickidnesse? 
And men dwellynge ther ynne spaken lees- 
yng, and the tunge of hem was gileful in 
the mouth of hem. And Y therfor bigan13 
for to smyte thee, in perdicioun on thi 
synnes. Thou schalt ete, and schalt notis 
be fillid, and thi mekyng zs in the middil 
of thee; and thou schalt take, and schalt 
not saue; and which thou schalt saue, Y 
schal 3yue in to swerd. Thou schaltis 
sowe, and schalt not repe; thou schalt 
trede the* ‘frut of! oliue™, and schalt not® 
be anoyntid® with oile; and must, and 


5" vpon G sup. Tas. 


halitilis, 'Om.s. kin the v. 
© oyntid cFGHINQRX. noyntid s. 


10m. 


VI. 16—VII. 10. 


ienot drynke wijne. And thou keptist the 
heestis of Amry, and al the werke of the 
hous of Achab, and hast walkide in the 
voluptees, or Justis, of hem, that Y shulde 
jeue thee in to perdicioun, and men 
dwellynge in it in to hissyng, or scorn- 
yng, and thou shalt bere the shenship of 
my peple. 

CAP. VII. 

1 Woo to me, for Y am maad as he that 
gadrith in heruest rasyns of grape tyme ; 
ther is no clustre for to ete; my soule 

2desiride fijgis rijp before other. The 
holy perishide of the erthe, and ri3tful 
is not in men; alle in blood aspien, a man 

3hunteth his brother to deth. The yuel 
of her hondis thei sayn good; the prince 
axith, and is domesman in 3eeldynge; 
and a grete man spake desijr of his soule, 
aand thei strubliden to gydre it. He 
that is best in hem, is as a palyure, that 
is, a sharp bushe, or a thistil, or frijse™; 
and he that is ri3tful, as a thorne of 
hegge. The day of thi byholdyng, thi 
visityng cummeth, now shal be distruy- 
sing of hem. Nyl 3e byleue to frend, and 
ny]® 3e trist in duyke; fro hir that rest- 
ith in thi bosum, keepe thou closyngis of 
6thi mouth. For the sone doth wronge 
to the fadre, and the dou3ter shal rijse 
a3einus hir modir, and wijf of the sone 
ajeinus hir husbond modir; the enmyes 
of a man, the homly, or houshold meyne, 
7of hym. Forsothe Y shal biholde to the 
Lord, Y shal abijde God my saueour; the 
sLord my God shal heere me. Thou, 
myn enmy, glade not on ime, for Y felle 
doun, Y shal ryse; whan Y shal sitte in 
9dercnessis, the Lord is" my li3t. Y shal 
bere wrath of the Lord, for Y haue 
synned to hym, til he deme my cause, 
and make my dom; he shal leede me 
out in to li3t, Y shal se the rijtwisnesse 
100f hym. And myn enmye shal byholde 


™ firse GU, 


P kepist vu. 
yng c et ceteri. 


4Om Harv prim. 


dispite c el ceteri. 4 the houshold Evy. 


MICAH. 


2 nole 4. 


t voluptees, ether lustis c et celeri. 
u disturbliden ¢ pr. m. F pr. m.s. troubliden 1. 
x palnyre, ether a tasil, ether (or npY] a scharpe bush c et ceteri. 
» felde c1xs. 


723 


schalt not drynke wyn. And thou kept- 16 
istP the heestis of Amry, and al the werk 
of the’ hous of Acab, and hast walkid in 
the lustis' of hems, that Y schulde 3yue 
thee in to perdicionn, and men dwellynge 
in it in to scornyng', and 3e schulen bere 
the schenschipe of my puple. 


CAP. VII. 


Wo to me, for Y am maad as he that 
gaderith in heruest rasyns of grapis ; 
there is no clustie for to ete; my soule 
desiride figis ripe bifore othere. Thee 
hooli perischide fro erthe, and ri3tful is 
not in men; alle aspien, ether setten tre- 
soun, in blood, a man huntith his brother 
to deth. The yuel of her hondis theis 
seien good; the prince axith, and the 
domesman is in 3eldyng; and a greet man 
spak the desir of his soule, and thei 
sturbliden" togidere’ it. He that is best” 4 
in hem, is as a paluyre**; and he that is 
riz3tful, 7s as a thorn of hegge. The dai 
of thi biholdyng, thi visityng cometh, now 
schal be distriyng of hem. Nyle 3e bi-s 
leue to a frend, and nyle 3e truste in a 
duyk; fro hir that slepith in thi bosum, 
kepe thou closyngisY of thi mouth. Fore 
the sone doith wrong” to the fadir, and 
the dou3ter schal rise ajens hir modir, and 
the wijf of the sone a3ens the modir of hir 
hosebonde; the eneinyes of a man dew the 
homeli, ether houshold* meynee, of hym. 
Forsothe Y schal biholde to the Lord, Y7 
scha] abide God my sauyour; the Lord 
my God schal here me. Thou, myn eue-s 
mye, be not glad on me, for Y felle> doun, 
Y schal rise; whanne Y sitte in derknessis, 
the Lord is my 1i3t. Y schal bere wraththes 
of the Lord, for Y haue synned to hym, 
til he deme my cause, and make my 
doom; he schal lede out me in to li3t, Y 
schal se ri3twisnesse of hym. And mynio 
enemye schal biholde me, and sche schal 


no Om. a. 


t hissing, ether scorn- 
w the best u sec. m. 
z wrong, ether 


8 men EPY. 
v Om. s sec. m. 
y the closyngis 1. 


472 


* a patuyre is 
a tasil, ether a 
scharp buysch. 
A. 


724 


me, and she shal be hillid with confu- 
sioun, whiche saith to me, Wher is the 
Lord thi God? Myn ee3en shuln se hir, 
now she shal be in defoulyng, as clay, 
or fen, of stretis, day that thi wallis be 
beeldid. In that day law shal be maad 
ieafer, in that day Assur vn to thee shal 
come, and ‘vn to® stronge citees, and fro 
stronge citees vnto the flood; and to see 
13 0f see, and to hill of hill. And the erthe 
shal be in to desolacioun for hir dwellers, 
and for fruyte of the thou3tis of hem. 
14 Feed thou thi peple in thi 3erd, the floc 
of thin eritage, dwellynge aloone in the 
wijld wode; in the mydil of Carmele 
thei shuln be fed Basan and Galaad, vp 
isolde days, vp° days of thi goyng out of 
the lond of Egypt. Y shal shewe to hym 
16 wondirful thingis; heethen men shuln 
see, and thei shuln be confoundid on al 
her strengthe ; thei shuln putte hondis on 
the mouthe, the eris of hem shuln be defe; 
17thei shuln lick dust as the? serpent, as 
crepynge thingis of the erthe thei shuln 
be distourblid of her housis; thei shuln 
desijre the Lord our God, and thei shuln 
isdreede thee. What god liche of thee, 
that dost awey wickidnesse, and berist 
ouer the synne of the relikis of thin eri- 
tage? He shal namore in sende his wod- 
19nesse, for he is willynge mercy; he shal 
turne a3ein, and haue mercy of vs. He 
shal putte doun oure wickidnessis, and 
he shal caste fer in to depnesse?? of the 
20see alle oure synnes. Thou shalt 3eue 
trewthe to Jacob, mercy to Abraham, 
whiche thou sworist to oure fadris fro 
olde days. 


Ende of the book of Micheas, and bi- 
gynneth the book of Naum, prophetes. 


° to G. 


90 Om. kK prom. PP Om. 4, 


© clei, ether fen c et ceteri. 4 vnto the 1. 


MICAH. 


PP depnesses K. 


€ desolaciouns a pr. m. 


VII. 11——20. 


be hilid with confusioun, which seith to 
me, Where is thi Lord God? Myn i3en 
schulen se hir, now sche schal be in to 
defoulyng, as clei® of stretis. Dai schalu 
come, that thi wallis be bildid; in that 
dai lawe schal be maad afer. In thati2 
dai and Assur schal come til to thee, and 
‘til tod stronge citees, aud fro stronge citees 
til to flood; and to see fro see, and to hil 
fro hil. And erthe schal be in to desola-13 
cioun® for her dwelleris, and for fruyt of 
the thou3tis of hem. Fede thou thi puple 14 
in thi 3erde, the floc of thin eritage, that 
dwellen aloone in wielde wode; in the 
myddil of Carmel thei schulen be fed of 
Basan and of Galaad, bi elde daies, bi1s 
daies of thi goyng out of the lond of 
Egipt. Y schal schewe to hym wondurful 
thingis; hethene men schulen se, and i¢ 
thei schulen be confoundid on al her 
strengthe; thei schulen putte hondis on 
her mouth, the eris of hem schulen be 
deef; thei schulen licke dust as af ser-17 
pent; as crepynge thingis of erthe thei 
schulen be disturblid of her housis; thei 
schulen not desire oure Lord God, and 
thei schulen drede thee. God, who zs lijk 1s 
thee, that doist awei wickidnesse, and ber- 
ist oner the synne of relifs’ of thin eri- 
tage? He shal no more sende in his 
stronge veniaunce, for he is willynge mer- 
ci; he schal turne a3en, and haue merci19 
on vs. He schal put doun oure wickid- 
nessis, and schal caste fer in to depnesse 
of the see alle oure synnes. Thou schalt20 
3yue treuthe to Jacob, merci to Abraham, 
whiche thou sworist to oure fadris fro 
elde daies. 


Here endith Micheas, and here bigin- 
neth Naum”. 


4 No final rubric in acu. 


fOm.n. € the relifsr. » From 


creuimgrsu. Here endeth Micheas, the profete ; se now Naum, the profete. x. Here endith the book of 


Micheas, and bigyuneth the book of Naum. nN. Here endith Micheas, and bigynneth Naum, the prophete. s. 
No final rubric in azpy. 


NA HU M. 


The book of Naum, prophete*. 


CAT I. 


1 THE charge of Nynyue; the boke of 
2visioun of Naum Helchesey. The Lord 
a louer, and the Lord vengeynge; the 
Lord vengynge, and hauynge woodunesse ; 
the Lord vengynge in to his enmyes, and 
3he wrathinge to his enmyes. 
pacient, and grete in strengthe, and he 
clensynge shal not make innocent. The 
Lord in tempest, and in whirlwynd the 
wayes of hym, and cloudis dust of his 
4feet; blamynge the see, and dryinge it, 
and bryngynge alle flodis to desert. Ba- 
san is maad seek, and Carmele, and the 
sflour of Liban langwishide. Mounteyns 
ben moued to gidre of hym, and litil 
hillis ben desolate. And the erthe trem- 
blide to gydre fro the face of hym, and 
the roundnesse of erthe, and alle the 
6dwellyng theryn. Bifore the face of his 
indignacioun‘ who shal stonde? and who 
shal a3ein stonde in? the wrath of his 
woodnesse? His indignacioun is shed 
out as fijre, and stoonus® ben dissolued, or 
zbroken, of hym. The Lord good‘, and 
coumfortynge in the day of tribulacioun, 
and he knowynge men hvopynge in hym. 
sAnd in grete floode passynge by, he shal 
make eende of his place; and dercnessis 
9shuln pursue his enmyes. What thinken 
3e a3einus the Lord? He shal make eend; 
double tribulacioun shal not ryse to gy- 
iodre. For as thornys biclippen hem to 


a Here bigynneth the book of Naum. a. No initial rubric in ex. 
f is good 4 sec.m. K pr. m. 


Aprm.K. Om. 4. & stoon k. 


a Here bigynnith the book of Naum, profete. ury. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
© dissoluyd, ether brokun c et cetert. 


Cinto. 4 Om. crinrgr pr. m. ¥. 


The Lord. 


Here bigynneth Naum, the profete*. 


CAPS 


THE birthun of Nynyue; the book of 
visioun of Naum Helcesei. The Lord tsz 
a punyschere, and the Lord zs vengynge ; 
the Lord zs venginge, and hauynge strong 
veniaunce; the Lord zs vengynge aj3ens__ 
hise aduersaries, and he 7s wraththing to 
hise enemyes. The Lord ¢s pacient, and3 
greet in strengthe, and he clensynge schal 
not make innocent. The Lord cometh in 
tempest, and the weies of hym ben in 
whirlwynd, and cloudis bez the dust of 
hise feet ; he blameth” the see, and drieth 4 
it, and bryngith alle flodis to° desert. Ba- 
san is maad sijk, and Carimel, and the 
flour of Liban langwischide. Mounteynss 
ben mouyd togidere of hym, and litil hillis 
ben desolat. And erthe tremblide togidere 
fro the’ face of him, and the roundenesse 
of erthe, and alle dwellynge ther ynne. 
Who schal stonde bifore the face of hisé 
indignacioun ? and who schal a3eustonde 
in the wraththe of his stronge veniaunce ? 
His indignacioun is sched out as fier, and 
stoonys ben brokun® of hym. The Lord7 
zs good, and coumfortynge in the dai of 
tribulacioun, and knowynge hem _ that 
hopen in hym. And in greet flood pass-8 
ynge forth, he schal make ende of his 
place; and derknessis schulen pursue hise 
enemyes. What thenken 3e ajens thes 
Lord? He schal make ende; double tri- 
bulacioun schal not rise togidere. For as to 


bOm. 4G prim. H. — ¢ dignacioun 


b blamede EPy. 


726 


gydre, so the feest of hem drynkynge 
to gydre shal be eendid, as stoble ful of 
1idrynesse. Forsothe of thee shal go out 
the thynkynge malice a3einus the Lord, 
in soule, or mynde, tretynge trespassyng. 

12 These thingus saith the Lord, 3if thei 
shuln be perfit, and so mo, and thus thei 
shuln be clippid, and it shal passe by. 
Y tourmentide thee, and Y shal namore 

istourmente thee. And now Y shal to 
gydre breke the 3erd of hym of thi bac, 

i4and Y shal breke thi boondis. And the 
Lord shal comaunde on thee, it shal na- 
more be sown of. thi name. Of the hous 
of thi god Y shal slea; a sculptil, or 

grauen ymage, and wellid to gydre, Y 
shal putte thi sepulcre, for thou art vn- 

iswirshipid. Loo! on hillis the feet of 
euangelizinge and tellynge pees. Juda, 
halewe thou thi feest days, and 3eelde 
thi vowis, for he shal namore putte to, 
that he passe by in thee; al Belial 
perishide. 

CAP. II. 

1 He styede vp, that schal scatere byfore 
thee, that shal] kepe the byseeging® ; by- 
holde thou the waye, coumforte leendis, 

2strengthe thou vertu gretely. For as 
the Lord 3eldide the pride of Jacob, so 
the pryde of Yrael; for distruyers scatri- 
den hem, and corrumpten, or distruy- 

3iden, the generacionns of hem. The 
sheeld of the strong®* of hym fijry, men 
of the hoost in rede clothis; raynes" of 
fijre of the chaare, in the day of his mak- 
yug redy; and the leeders therof ben 
4asleepe. In wayes thei ben trublid to 
gydre, cartis of foure horsis he hurtlide 
to gydre in stretis; the si3t of hem as 
slaumpis, as lei3tis rennynge aboute. He 
shal bythenke of his strenger, thei shu- 
len falle in her wayes; and swyftly thei 
shuln stye vp the wallis therof, and the 
shadewynge place shal be maad redy. 


& by seege “eu. 


f hem silf u sec. m. 
@ K) grauen ymage ¢ pr.m. EFHKPRUY. 
3otun GIKNQSXx. 1 ben the vu sec. m. 
C sec. m. FEIKMNQRSUX, 


NAHUM. 


&& stronge men & sec. m. 


& sle thee cai pr. m. KMNQSX. 
k Om. 1kmqs pr.m. and an ymage § sec. m. 
m On. cQ. 


; P so he schal 3elde c sec. m. GIKMNQRSUX. 
destrieden CEFH1K sec. M.NPRU. corrumpiden emQsx. 


I. 1iI—Il. 5. 


thornes byclippen hem‘ togidere, so the 
feeste of hem drynkynge togidere schal 
be wastyd, as stobul ful of drienesse. Of11 
thee schal go out a man thenkynge malice 
a3ens the Lord, and trete trespassyng in 
soule. The Lord seith these thingis, If12 
thei schulen be parfit, and so manye, and 
thus thei shulen be clippid, and it schal 
passe bi. I turmentide thee, and Y schal 
no more turmente thee. And now Y schal1s3 
al to-breke the 3erde of hym fro thi bak, 
and Y schal breke thi bondis. And the14 
Lord schal comaunde on thee, it schal no 
more be sowun of thi name. Of the hous 
of thi god Y schal sle®; Y schal putte" 
thi sepulcre a‘grauun ymagel, and* wellid 
togidere**, for thou art vnworschipid. Lo! 1s 
on hillis the! feet of the™ enangelisynge 
and tellynge pees. Juda, halewe thou thi 
feeste daies, and 3elde thi vowis, for whi 
Belial schal no more put to, that he passe 
forth in thee; al Belial" perischide. 


CAP. II. 


He stiede up, that schal scatere bifore1 
thee, that schal kepe bisechyng ; biholde 
thou the weie, coumforte® leendis, strengthe 
thou vertu greetli. For as the Lord 3eld-2 
ide the pride of Jacob, so? the pride of 
Israel; for distrieris scateriden? hem, and 
distrieden' the generaciouns* of hem. Thes 
scheld of stronge men of hym ben firi, 
men of the oost bez in rede clothis; raynes 
of fire of chare, in the dai of his makyng 
redi; and the leederis therof ben asleep. 
In weies thei ben troblid togidere, cartis4 
of foure horsis ben** hurtlid togidere in 
stretis; the sijte of hem as laumpis, as 
leitis rennynge aboute. He schal bi-s 
thenke of his stronge men, thei schulen 
falle in her weies; and swiftli thei schulen 
stie' on the wallis therof, and schadewyng 
place schal be maad redi. 3atis of floodis6 
ben openyd, and the temple zs brokun 


4 bridil reines 6 sec. m. 
» sette cekmngsx. i senlptil, ether [or Epy. ether 
kk togidere, cther 

° comforte thou 
Y corrumpiden, ether 
t stie up 1. 


D he is c sec. m.1. Om. 8 sec. m. 
4 gaderiden Nn. 


8 generacioun vu. 88 be A. 


I. 6—IIL. 5. 


6 3atis of flodis shuln be opnyd, and the 
7temple broken doun to the erthe. And 
a kni3t caitif is led to, and the hond 
maydens therof shuln be dryuen sorew- 
yng as culuers, grucchynge in her hertis. 
sAnd Nynyue, as the cysterne of waters 
the waters therof; forsothe thei fledden, 
sayinge, Stonde 3e, stonde 3e, and ther is 
gnot that shal turne a3ein. Rauyshe 3e 
syluer, rauyshe 3e gold; and there is not 
eende of richessis, of all desireable vessels. 
ioIt is distruyed, and kitt, and to-torne, 
and herte feylynge, and vnknyttynge of 
smale knees, and failyng in alle reynes ; 
and the face of alle as blacnesse of a pott. 
11 Where is the dwellynge of lyouns, and the 
lesewis of whelpis of lyouns? The lyoun 
wente to water, that the whelpe of the 
lyoun shulde entre thidre, and there is 
12 not that shal fere. The lyoun toke ynow3 
to his whelpis, and slew3 to his lyoun- 
nessis; and fulfillide with praye her den- 
i3nys, and his couche with rauyn. Loo! 
Y to thee, saith the Lord God of oostis; 
and Y shal vndre brenne thi cartis of 
foure horsis vn to the hee3ist, and swerd 
shal ete thi smale lyouns; and Y shal 
distruye of erthe thi praye, and voice of 
thi messangeres shal no more be herd. 


CAP. III. 


1 Wo ‘to the! citee of blodis, al of lesyng, 
ful of to-teryng; raueyn shal not go 
zawey fro thee. Voice of scourge, and 
voice of bir of wheel, and of hors mak- 
ynge noyse, and of a foure horsid cart 
brennynge, and of knij3t steyinge vp, 
3and of shynyuge swerd, and smytynge 
spere, and of the slayn multitude, and 
greuouse fallynge, nether) ther is eende 
of careins. And thei shuln falle to gydre 
4in her bodies, for multitude of the for- 
nycaciouns of the hoore fair and able, 
and hauynge euel dedis, or wicchecraftis; 
whiche solde folkis in her fornycaciouns, 
sand meynees in her poysouns. Loo! Y 


ithe G pr.m. thou 6 sec. m. 


u hand maidens CEFGHIKMNPQRUX. 


NAHUM. 


uu desiderable c. 


727 


doun toerthe. And a kny3t is led awei7 . 
caitif, and the handmaidis" therof schulen 
be dryuun sorewynge as culueris, grutch- 
ynge in her hertis. And Nynyue, as ag 
cisterne of watris the watris therof; for- 
sothe thei fledden; stonde 3e, stonde 3e, 
and there is not that schal turne ajen. 
Rauysclie 3e siluer, rauysche 3e gold ; aud» 
there is noon ende of richessis, of alle de- 
sirable™ vessels. It is distried, and kit, and 10 
to-rent, and herte failynge, and vnknyt- 
tinge of smale knees, and failynge in alle 
reynes; and the face of alle ben as blac- 
nesse of a pot. Where is the dwellyng!! 
of liouns, and lesewis of whelpis of liouns? 
To whiche cifee the lioun 3ede, that the 
whelp of the lioun schulde entre thidur, 
and there is not that schal make aferd. 
The lioun took ynow to hise whelpis, and 12 
slow3 to his lionessis; and fillide her dennes 
with prei, and his couche with raueyn. 
Lo! Y to thee, seith the Lord God of 13 
oostis; and Y schal brenne thi cartis of 
foure horsis til to the hizeste, and swerd 
schal ete thi smale liouns; and Y schal 
distrie thi’ prei fro the lond, and the vois 
of thi messangeris schulen’’ no more be 
herd. 


CAP. III. 


Wo to the citee of bloodis, al of leesyng, 1 
ful of to-reendyng; raueyn shal not go 
awei fro thee. Vois of scourge, and vois2 
of bire of wheel, and of hors makynge 
noise, and of foure horsid carte brennynge, 
and of kni3t stiynge vp, and of schynynge3 
swerd, and glesenynge spere, and of slayn 
multitude, and of greuouse fallyng, nether 
ther is eende of careyns. And thei schulen 
falle togidere in her bodies, for the mul-4 
titude of fornicaciouns of the hoore fair 
and plesaunt, and hauynge witchecraftis ; 
which” seelde folkis in her fornicaciouns, 
and meynees in her enchauutementis, ether 
sorceries. Lo! Y to thee, seith the Lords 


Jnec. 


vther Wshul eg. ¥ the whiche 1. 


728 


to thee, saith the Lord God of oostis; and 
Y shal shewe thi shamful thingis in thi 
face; and Y shal shewe to folkis thi na- 
kidnesse, and to rewmes thin yuel fame. 
6 And Y shal caste out on! thee thin abo- 
mynaciouns, and Y shal punyshe thee 
with dispitis, and Y shal putte thee in to 
zensaumple. And it shal be, eche man 
that shal see thee, shal lippe a3ein fro 
thee, and shal saye, Nynyue is distruyed. 
Who shal moue togydre the hed vpon 
thee? wherof shal Y seke to thee a coum- 
sfortour? Wher thou art better than 
Alisaundre, of peplis whiche dwellith in 
flodis? Waters in cumpas therof, whos 
ritchessis the se, waters the wallis therof. 
9 Ethiopie the strengthe therof, and Egypt, 
and ther is noon eende; Affrik and Libie 
ioweren in help therof. Bot and it in 
transmygracioun, o7 passing ouer, is led 
im to caitiftee; the litil children therof 
ben hirt in the heed of alle wayes. And 
on the noble men therof thei senten lot, 
and alle grete men therof ben sett togi- 
uder in thej stockis. And thou therfore 
shalt be drunken, and thou shalt be dis- 
pisid, and thou shalt seeke help of enmy. 
12Alle thi strengthis as a fijge tree, with 
his vnripe fijgis ; 3if thei shuln be smyten 
to gydre, thei shuln falle in to the mouth 
130f the etynge. Loo! thi peple wymmen 
in the mydil of thee; to thin enmyes, to 
the opnynge theii 3atis of thi lond shuln 
be shewid, or opayd ; fijr shal deuoure thi 
14 barris*, ov lockis. Drawe vp to thee water 
for aseegyng, beelde thi strengthis; entre 
in to fen, and trede, thou vndergoynge 
isholde a tijl. There fijr shal ete thee, 
thou shalt perishe by swerd, it shal de- 
uoure thee, as bruke; therfor be thou 
gadrid togydre as bruke, be thou multi- 
isplied as locust. Thou madist thi mar- 
chaundises mo than ben sterris of heuen; 
bruke is sprad o brood, and flei3eth awey. 
17 Thi keepers as locustis, and thi litel chil- 


I vpon G see. m. 


x fame, ether schenschipe c et celeri. 
ouer C et celeri. ® senten ceteri. 


4 ben as c see. m1. F sup.ras, © and fier v. 


NAHUM. 


J Om, seu. 


Y lippe c et ceteri. 
» ether feteres x marg. 
f marchaundies x. 


Ill. 6—t17. 


God of oostis; and Y schal schewe thi 
schameful thingis in thi face; and Y schal 
schewe to folkis thi nakidnesse, and to 
rewmes thin yuel fame*. And Y schale 
cast out on thee thin abhomynaciouns, 
and Y schal punysche thee with dispitis, 
and Y schal putte thee in to ensaumple. 
And it schal be, ech man that schal se7 
thee, schal skippeY awei fro thee, and schal 
seie, Nynyue is distried. Who schal moue 
heed on thee? wherof schal Y seke to 
thee a coumfortour? Whether thou arts 
betere than Alisaundre of puplis, that 
dwellith in floodis ? Watris ben in cumpas 
therof, whos richessis is the see, watris 
ben wallis therof. Ethiope zs strengthes 
therof, and Egipt, and there is noon ende; 
Affrik and Libie weren in help therof. | 
But and it in ‘passyng ouer? is led in to10 
caitifte; the litle children therof ben hurt- 
lid down in the heed of alle weies. And 
on the noble men therof thei kesten? lot, 
and alle grete men therof ben set togidere 
in gynes®, And thou therfor schalt bet 
drunkun, and schalt be dispisid, and thou 
schalt seke helpe of enemye*’. Al thit2 
strengthis as‘ a fige tree, with hise figis 
vnripe; if thei schulen be schakun, thei 
schulen falle in to the mouth of the etere. 
Lo! thi puple Jen wymmen in the myddil 13 
of thee; the 3atis of thi lond schulen be 
schewid to openyng to thin enemyes ; 
fier® schal deuoure thin herris. Drawe14 
vp to thee water for asegyng, bilde thi 
strengthis; entre in fen, and trede, thou 
vndurgoynge holde a tiel stoon. There1s 
fier schal ete thee, thou schalt perische bi 
swerd, it schal deuoure thee, as bruke do- 
ith; be thou gaderid togidere as a bruke, 
be thou multiplied as a locuste. Thoute 
madist thi marchaundisesf mo than ben 
sterris of heuene; a bruke is spred abrood, 
and flei awei. Thi keperis ben as locustis, 17 
and thi litle children ben® as locustis of 
locustis, whiche sitten togidere in heggis 


liof a. berris ex pr.m. 


Z transmygracioun, ether [or EPY] passing 
¢ the enemye C Sec. m. F sec. mM. GIKMNQRSUX. 
¢ Om. nN. 


III. 18, 19. NAHUM. 729 


dren as locustis of locustis, whiche siten in the dai of coold; the sun is risun, and 

to gidre in heggis in the day of cold; thei fledden awei, and the place of hem 

the sunne is sprungen vp, and thei fled- is not knowun, where thei weren. Thiis 

den awey, and the place of hem is not scheepherdis napten*, thou kyng Assur, 
isknowen, where thei weren. Thi* shep- thi princes schulen be biried; thi puple 

erdis napten!, thou kyng Assur, thi ofte was hid in hillis, and ther is not that 

princes shuln be biried; thi peple oft schal gadere. . Thi sorewe is not priuy',19 

derkid in hillis, and ther is not that. thi wounde is worst; alle men that herden 
igshal gadre. Thi contricioun is not derk, thin heryng, pressiden togidere hond on 

thi wound is warst; alle men that thee, for on whom passide not thi malice 

herden thi heering, pressiden™ to gidre  euermore ? 

hond on thee, for vpon whom _ passide 

HOt timamaliceleucnetee? Here endith Naum, and here bigin- 

— neth Abacuki, ; 
Here endith the [book| of Naum, 
prophete, and. bigynneth the book of 
Abacuk, prophete. 


k The x. Inappen i. ™ pressiden, or wrong cH. © No final rubric in «cu. 


hnappenr. i derk, ether priuy c et ceteri. 1 From crauimgsu. Here endith Naum, the profete ; 
se now Abacuk, the profete. K. Here endith the book of Naum, and bigynneth the book of Abacuc. x. Here 
eendith the booc of the profete Naum, and here bigynneth Abacuc. x. No final rubric in AEpRy. 


VOL. III. 5A 


HABAKKUK. 


The book of Abacuk®. 


CAP. I. 


1 THE charge that Abacuk, prophete?, 
2saw’. Hou longe, Lord, shal Y crye, and 
thou shalt not heere graciously? Y suf- 
fringe violence shal crie on hee3, and 
sshalt thou not saue? Whi shewidist 
thou to me wickidnesse and traueile, for 
to see pray and vuri3twisnesse a3einus 
me? Whi biholdist thou dispisers, and 
art stille, the vnpitouse man defoulyng a 
juster than hym? And thou shalt make 
men as fishis of the se, and as crepynge 
thingis' not hauynge duyk; and dom is 
maad, and ajeinsayinge more mi3ty. 
4¥For this thing law is to-broken, aud dom 
cummeth not vn to the eende; for vn- 
pitous man hath mi3t ajeinus the iust, 
stherfore weywerd dom shal go out. Bi- 
holde 3e in hethen men, and see 3e, and 
wondre 3ee, and gretely dreede 3ee; for a 
worke is dun in 3our days, whiche no man 
6shal byleene, whan it shal be told. For 
loo! Y shal reyse Caldeis, a bitter folk 
and swift, goynge vpon the breed of 
erthe, that he weelde tabernaclis not his. 
7 He is orrible, and dreedeful; of hym self 
sdome, and his charge shal go out. His 
horsis lijter than pardis, and swifter than 
euyn wolues, and his horsmen shuln be 


8 Here bigynneth the boke of Abacuk, prophete. 4. No initial rubric in ex. 


¢saith x. 4 thing a. 


Here bigynneth Abacuk, the profete*. 


CAP. I. 


Tue birthun that Abacuk, the profete, 1 
sai. Hou longe, Lord, schal Y crye, andez 
thou schalt not here? Y suffrynge vio- 
lence schal crie an hi3 to thee, and thou 
scha]t not sane? Whi schewidist thou tos 
me wickidnesse and trauel, for to se prey 
and vnri3twisnesse a3jens me? Whi bi- 
holdist thou dispiseris, and art stille, the 
while an” vnpitouse man® defoulith a ri3t- 
fulere than hym silf? And thou schalt 
make men as fischis of the see, and as 
crepynge thingis not hauynge a ledere; 
and doom is maad, and aj3enseiyng 7s more 
mi3ti. For this thing lawe is ‘to-brokun4, 4 
and doom cometh not til to the ende; for 
the vnpitouse man hath mi3t aj3ens the 
iust, therfor weiward doom schal go out. 
Biholde 3e in hethene men, and se 3e, ands 
wondre 3e, and greetli drede 3e; for a 
werk is doon in joure daies, which no 
man schial bileue, whanne it schal be teld. 
For lo! Y schal reise Caldeis, a bittir folke 
and swift, goynge on the breede of erthe, 
that he welde tabernaclis not hise. It is7 
orible, and dredeful; the dom and birthun® 
therof schal go out of it silf. His horsiss 
ben liz3tere than pardis, and swifter than 
euentyd woluys, and hise horse men schu- 


> Om. 4. the prophete #. 


8 Here biginnith the book of Abacuk, profete. £. The book of Abacuk, the profete. py. Abacuk. R. No 


initial rubric in the other Mss. > the c ef ceteri. 


¢ Om. c. 


dbrokuni. € the hirthun ts, 


I. 9—II. 2. 


scatrid abrode; for whi horsmen shuln 
cum fro fer, thei shuln flee as an egle 
ohastynge to ete. Alle men shuln cume 
to preye, the face of hem as* brennynge 
wynde; and he shal gadre as grauel cai- 
iotiftee. And he shal haue victorie of 
kyngis, and tirauntis shuln be his lei3- 
ingis; he shal leize vpon al strengthe, 
and shal bere to gidre an hepe of erthe, 
1iand shal take it, Thanne the spirit of 
hym shal be chaungid, and he shal passe 
by, and falle to gydre; this is the 
12strengthe of hym, of his god. Wher 
not thon fro bigynnynge, Lord my God, 
myn holy, and we shuln not dye? Lord, 
in tof dome thou hast putte hym, and 
thou groundidist hym strong, that thou 
i3shuldist chastise. Thyn ee3en ben cleene, 


see thou not yuel, and thou shalt not> 


mow biholde to wickidnesse. Whi bi- 
holdist thou not vpon men doynge wick- 
idly, and thou art stille, the vnpytouse 
man deuourynge a more iust than hym? 
14And thou shalt make men as fishis of 
the se, and as crepynge thing not hau- 
1synge prince. Alle in hooke he shal lifte 
vp; he drawide it in his nett, and gadride 
in to his net; vpon this thing he shal 
i¢glade, and ioye with out forth. Ther- 
fore he shal offre to his nett, and he shal 
make sacrifice to his nett; for in hem his 
part is maad fatt, and his mete chosen. 
17Therfore for this thing he spredith 
abrood his nett, and euermore he shal 
not spare for to slea folkis. 


CAP. II. 


1 Vpon my keepyng Y shal stonde, and 
Y shal picche a greese vpon the ward- 
yng; and Y shal byholde, that Y see what 
thing shal be saide to me, and what Y 

2shal answere to the reprouynge me. And 
the Lord answerde to me, and saide, 
Write thou the si3t, and make it pleyn 


© a AGH. 


f hise horsemen vu sec. m. 


HABAKKUK. 


& the praye EP sec. m. Y. 


731 


len be scaterid abrood; for-whi ‘horse 
menf schulen come fro fer, thei schulen 
fle as an egle hastynge to ete. Alle mena 
schulen come to preye%, the faces of hem 
is as a brennynge wynd; and he schal 
gadere as grauel caitifte, and he schalio 
haue victorie of kyngis, and tirauntis 
schulen be of his scornyng. He schal leize 
on al strengthe, and schal bere togidere 
heep of erthe, and schal take it. Thannei 
the spirit schal be chaungid, and he schal 
passe forth, and falle doun; this is the® 
strengthe of hym, of his god. Whether 12 
‘thou, Lord, art not my God‘, myn hooli, 
and we schulen not die? Lord, in to doom 
thou hast set hym, and thou groundidist 
hym strong, that thou schuldist chastise. 
Thin izen ben clene, se thou not yuel, 13 
and thou schalt not mowe biholde to 
wickidnesse. Whi biholdist thou not on 
men doynge wickidli, and thou art stille, 
while the vnpitouse nian deuourith a more 


Just man than hymsilf? And thou schalt is 


make men as fischis of the see, and as aj 
crepynge thing not hauynge prince*. He1s 
schal lifte vp al in the hook; he drawide! 
it™ in his greet net, and gaderide in to 
his net; on this thing he schal be glad, 
and make ioie with outforth. Therfore is 
he schal offere to his greet net, and schal 
make sacrifice to his net; for in hem his 
part is maad fat, and his mete ¢s chosun. 
Therfor for this thing he spredith abrood 17 
his greet net, and euere more he ceesith 
not for to sle folkis. 


CAP. II. 


On" my kepyng Y schal stonde, andi 
schal pitche a° grees on wardyng; and Y 
schal biholde, that Y se what thing schal 
be seid to me, and what Y sclial answere 
to hym that repreuith me. And the Lorde 
answeride to me, and seide, Write thon 
the reuelacioun?, and make it pleyn on 


f thi a. 


h Om. ru. i thou, Lord, art not my God fro 


bigynnyng a sec. m.1. thou art not fro the bigynnyng, thou, Lord my God s sup. ras. 1 Om. psy. al R. 


ka prince cr. !drow3 py. ™itvps. " Inis. 


omy U sec. m. 


P siz3t, ether reuelacioun c et ceteri. 


5A 


732 


ypon tablis, that -he renne, that shal 
sreede it. For 3it the visioun fer, and it 
shal apeere in to eende, and shal not 
leeje; 3it it shal make dwellyng, abijde 
thou it, for it cummynge shal cum, and 
sshal not, tarie. Loo! he that is vnbi- 
leeful, the soule of hym shal not be ri3t 
in hym self; forsothe the iust man shal 
slyue'in his feith. And as wijn disceiu- 
eth a man drinkynge, so shal the proude 
man be, and shal not be maad faire; for 
as helle he alargide his soule, and he as 
deth, and he shal not be fulfillid; and he 
shal gedre to hym alle folkis, and he shal 
shepe® to gydre to hym alle peplis. Wher 
not alle these vpon hym shuln take a 
parable, and the spekyng of derk sen- 
tencis of hym? And it shal be saide, Wo 
to hym that multiplieth thingus not his 
owne; how long, and he aggregith a3einus 
zhym thicke clay? Wher not sudeynly 
thei shuln ryse to gydre, that shuln bite 
thee? And thei shuln be reisid to-terynge 
thee, and thou shalt be in to raueyne to 
hem; and thin aspiers 7 yuel shuln 
awake. For thou robbidist many folkis, 
alle shuln robbe thee, whiche shuln be 
relikis of peplis, for blood of man, and 
wickidnesse of lond of the citee, and of 
omen dwellynge in it. Woo to hym that 
gadrith euyl coueitise to his hous, that 
his nest be in hee3, and gessith hym for 

_ to be delyuered of the hond of yuel. 
10 Thou thou3tist confusioun to thin hous ; 
thou hast slayn many peplis, and thi 
11soule synnede. For a stoon of the wall 
shal crie, and a tree that is bitwixe 
ioyntours of beeldingis shal answere. 
12Woo to hym that heeldith a citee in 
blodis, and makith redy a cytee in wick- 
izidnesse. Wher not these thingis ben of 
the Lord of oostis? Forsothe peplis shuln 
traueile in myche fijr, and folkis in veyn, 
i4and thei shuln faile. For the erthe shal 
be fulfillid, that thei knowe the glorie of 


HABAKKUK. 


Il. 3-14. 


tablis, that he renne4, that schal rede it.. 
For 3it the visioun zs fer, and it schals 
appere in'to ende’, and schal not lie; if it 
schal make dwellyng, abide thou it, for 
it comynge schal come, and schal’ not 
tarie. Lo! the soule of hym, that is vn-4 
bileneful, schal not be ri3tful in hym silf; 
forsothe the iust man schal lyue in his 
feith, And as wyn disseyueth a mans 
drynkynge, so schal the proude man be, 
and he schal not be maad feir; for as helle 
he alargide® his soule, and he zs as deth, 
and he is not fillid; and he schal gadere to 
hym alle folkis, and he shal kepet togidere 
to hym alle puplis. Whether" not alles 
these puplis schulen take a parable on 
hym, and the speking of derk sentencis of 
hym? And it schal be seid, Wo to hym that 
multiplieth thingis not his owne; hou 
longe, and he aggreggith a3ens hym silf 
thicke clei? Whether not sudeynli thei7 
schulen rise to gidere, that schulen bite 
thee? And thei schulen be reisid to-teer- 
ynge thee, and thou schalt be in to raueyn 
to hem; and thin aspieris 2 ywel schulen 
wake. For thou robbidist many folkis,s 
alle schulen robbe thee, whiche schulen be 
left" of puplis, for blood of man, and for 
wickidnesse of lond of the citee, and of 
alle men dwellynge in it. Wo to hymo 
that gaderith yuel coueitise to- his hous, 
that his nest be in hi3, and gessith hym 
for to be delyuered of the hond of yuel. 
Thou thoustist confusioun to thin hous; 10 
thou hast slayn many puplis, and thi 
soule synnede. For a* stoon of the wali 
schal crie, and a tree that is bitwixe ioyn- 
turis of bildyngis schal answere. Wo to1z2 
hym that bildith a citee in bloodis, and 
makith redi a citee in wickidnesse. Whe- 3 
ther not these thingis ben of the Lord 
of oostis? For puplis schulen trauele in 
myche fier, and folkis in veyn, and thei 
schulen faile. For the erthe schal bet 
fillid, that it knowe the glorie of the 


& kepe x. 


4 renne perfizth u sec. m. 


T the ende c pr. m. 
Wher c et ceteri. Vin to c, 


; 8 largide s, 
Ww residue, ether left c et ceteri. 


t eadere s, 


u And whether a pr. m. 
x the 1. 


Il. 15——III. 6. 


15 the Lord, as waters hillynge the se. Woo 
to hym that 3euith drinke to his frend, 
sendynge his galle, and makynge drunken, 

i6that he biholde his nakidnesse. He is 
fulfillid with yuel fame for glorie; and 
drynke thou, and be aslept'; the cup of 


the ri3t half of the Lord shal aboute - 


jeue thee, and casting vp of yuel fame 
17vpon thi glorie. 
Liban shal keuere thee, and the distruc- 
cioun of beestis shal fere thee, of blodis 
of man, and‘ of wickidnesse of lond* of 
the citee, and of alle dwellynge theryn. 
is What profitith the sculptile, for his 
maker grauede it; a wellid thing to gi- 
dre, and a fals ymage, for the maker 
therof hopide in the makyng, that be 
19made dumbe symulacris? Woo to hym 
that saith to a tree, Wake thou; Ryse 
thou, to a stoon beynge stylle; wher he 
shal mowe teche? Loo! this is keuered 
in gold and syluer, and eche spirit is not 
20in his entrailis. Forsothe the Lord in 
his holy temple, al erthe be stille fro his 
face. 


HABAKKUK. 


For the wickidnesse of - 


733 


Lord, as watris hilynge the see. Wo to1s 
hym that 3yueth drynk to his frend, and 
sendith his galle, and makith drunkun, 
that he biholde his nakidnesse. He is fill- 16 
id with yuel fame for glorie; and thou 
drynke, and be aslept; the cuppe of the 
ri3thalf of the Lord schal cumpasse thee, 
and ‘castynge vpY of yuel fame on thi 
glorie. For the wickidnesse of Liban17 
schal kyuere thee, and distruccioun of 
beestis schal make hem aferd, of bloodis 
of man, and of wickidnesse of lond, and 
of the citee, and of alle men dwellynge 
ther ynne. What profitith the ‘grauunis 
ymage’, for his makere grauyde it, a 
wellid thing togidere and fals: ymage? for 
the makere therof hopide in makyng, that 
he made doumbe symylacris. Wo to hym 19 
that seith to a tre, Wake thou; Rise thon, 
to a stoon beynge stille; whether he schal 
mow teche? Lo! this is kyuerid with gold 
and siluer, and no spirit is in his entrails. 
Forsothe the Lord zs in his hooli temple, 20 
al erthe be stille fro his face. 
CAP. II. 


The preier of Abacuk, the profete, for 


onkunnynge men*. 


This litle is in 
Ebrew, and is 
of the text. 
Lire here. 


Lord, Y herde thin heryng, and Y! eoxeavy. 


CAP. III. 
Lord, Y herde thi heerynge, and Y 


Domine, audiui 1 
auditum tuum. 


‘ 2dredde; Lord,. thi werke, in the mydil 


of 3eeris quyckene thou it. In the my- 
dil of 3eeris thou shalt make knowen ; 
whan thou shalt be wrothe, thou shalt 
3recorde of mercy. God shal cum fro the 
south, and the holy fro the mount of 
‘Pharan. The glorie of hym keuerde he- 
uen, and the erthe is ful of his herying. 
4 The shynyng shal be as 1i3t; hornys in 
shondis of hym. There the strengthe of 
hym is hid, byfore his face deth shal go; 
6the deuyl shal go out bifore his feet. He 
stode, and matte the erthe; he bihelde, 
and vnboonde folkis, and hillis of the 
world ben broken to gydre; the litil hillis 


h asleepe 4. 


Y casting up, ether spuyng c el celeri preter 1. 


hondis rv. 


i Om. a. 


z seulptil c et ceteri. 
preier of Abacuk, the profete, for unkunnynge men, and this schulde be red. v. No rubric in aus. 


dredde; Lord, it ¢s thi werk, in the myd-2 
dil of 3eeris quykene thou it. In the 
middil of 3eeris thou schalt make knowun; 
whanne thou schalt be wrooth, thon schalt 
haue mynde of mercy. God schal come3 
fro the south, and the hooli fro the mount 
of Faran. The glorie of hym kyueride 
heuenes, and the erthe is ful of his heriyng. 
The schynyng of hym schal be as li3t 34 
hornes in hondis> of hym. There thes 
strengthe of hym was hid, deth schal go 
bifore his face; the deuel schal go out 
bifore hise feet. He stood, and mat thes 
erthe; he bihelde, and vnboond folkis, and 
hillis of the world weren al to-brokun; the 


k the lond w. 


a From CEFGIKMNPQRXY. The 
b the 


734 HABAKKUK. III. 7—19. 


of the world ben bowid doun, of the 
zwayes of his euerlastingnesse. For wick- 
idnesse Y saw3 the tentis of Ethiopie, 
the skynnes of lond of Madian shuln be 
strublid. Lord, wher in flodis thou art 
wrothe, or in flodis thi woodnesse, or in 
the se thin indignacioun ? Whiche shalt 
stye vp thin horsis; and thi foure horsid 
9cartis saluacioun. Thou reysynge shalt 
reyse thi bowe, othis to lynagis whiche 
thou hast spoken; thou shalt kitte flodis 
100f erthe. Watris sawen thee, and hillis 
sorewiden, the guter of waters passide ; 
depnesse 3af his voice, hee3nesse reyside 
ithis hondis. Sunne and mone stoden in 
her dwellynge; in the li3t of thin arewis 
thei shuln goo, in the shynynge of thi 
l2spere smytynge. In beting of teeth thou 
shalt defoule erthe, and in wodnesse 
i3thou shalt astoneye folkis. Thou art gon 
out in to helthe of thi peple, in to helthe 
with thi crist; thou hast smyten the heued 
of the hous of the vnpitouse man, thou 
hast made nakid the foundement vn to 
iathe neckus. Thou cursidist the sceptris, 
or powers, of hym, the hed of his fizters, 
cummynge as whirlwynde for to scatere 
me; the ioyinge with outforth of hem, as 
of hym that deuourith a pore man in 
ishidils. Thou madist a weye in the se 
to thin horsis, in cleye of manye waters. 
16 Y herde, and my wombe is to gydre 
trublid; of the voice my lippis trem- 
bleden to gydre. Rott entre in to my 
boonys, aud boyle, 07 sprynge, vndir me; 
and Y shal reste a3ein in the day of tri- 
bulacioun, and Y shal stey vp to oure 
17 peple girde to gydre. Forsothe the fijge 
tree shal not florishe, and buriownyng 
shal not be in vyne 3erdis; the werk of 
the olyue shal lee3e, and feeldis shuln 
not brynge to mete; a sheep shal be kitt 
of fro the folde, and a drooue shal not 
18 be in the cratchis. Forsothe Y shal haue 
ioye in the Lord, and Y shal ioye with 
i9outeforth in God my Jhesu. God the 


Conthiru. disthin, ¢ ceptre s. f power s. 


‘la droue 1K. 


litle hillis of the world weren bowid doun,; 
of the weies of his euerlastyngnesse. For7 
wickidnesse Y sai3 the tentis of Ethiope, 
the skynnes of the lond of Madian schulen 
be troblid. Lord, whether in floodis thous 
art wrooth, ether in floodis zs thi strong 
veniaunce, ether in the see zs thin indig- 
nacioun ? Which shalt stie on thin horsis ; 
and thi¢ foure horsid cartis 7s4 saluacioun. 
Thou reisynge schalt reise thi bouwe,9 
othis to lynagis whiche thou hast spoke ; 
thou schalt departe the floodis of erthe. 
Watris saien thee, and hillis sorewiden, 10 
the goter of watris passide; depnesse 3af 
his vois, hi3nesse reiside hise hondis. The 
sunne and moone stoden in her dwellyng - 
place; in the 1i3t of thin arowis thei schu- 
len go, in the schynyng of thi spere glis- 
nynge. In gnastyng thou schalt defoule 12 
erthe, and in strong veniaunce thou schalt 
astonye folkis. Thou art gon out in to13 
helthe of thi puple, in to helthe with thi 
crist; thou hast smyte the heed of the 
hous of the vnpitouse man, thou hast 
maad nakid the foundement til to the 
necke. Thou cursidist the ceptris®, ether is 
powers‘, of hym, the heed of hise fi3teris, 
to men comynge as whirlewynde for to 
scatere me; the iolyng withoutforth of hem, 
as of hym that deuourith a pore man in 
hidlis. Thou madist a weie in the seeis 
to thin horsis, in clei of many watris. Y 16 
herde, and my wombe is troblid togidere ; 
my lippis trembliden togidere of the vois. 
Rot entre? in my boonys, and sprenge” 
vndur me; that Y reste ajen in the dai 
of tribulacioun, and Y schal stie vp to 
oure puple gird togidere. For the fige17 
tre schal not floure, and buriownyng schal 
not be in vyn3erdis ; the werk of olyue tre 
schal lie, and feeldis schulen not brynge 
mete; a scheep schal be kit awei fro the 
fold, and droue'! schal not be in cratchis. 
Forsothe Y schal have ioye in the Lord, is 
and Y schal make ioie with outforth in 
God my Jhesu. God the Lord zs my 19 


B entrede apr.m. 4 buyle, ether sprynge c et ceteri. 


HABAKKUK. 735 


Lord my strengthe, and he shal putte — strengthe, and he schal putte my feet as _ 
my feet as of hertis; and vpon myn hee3__— of hertis; and on myn hi3e thingis, the 
thingus, the ouercummer shal leede me _ouercomere schal lede forth me, syngynge 
forth, singynge in psalmes. in salmes. 


Here endith the book of Abacuk, the Here endith Abacuk, and here bigin- 
prophete, and bigynneth the book of  neth Sofonyei. 
Sophonye, prophete'. 


1 No final rubric in acu. 


j From crewimersu. Here endeth Abacuk, the profete; se now the booe of Sophonye, the profete. K. 
Here endith the book of Abacuk, and bigynneth the book of Sophonye. x. Here endith Abacuk, the pro- 
- fete, and here bigynneth the booc of Sophonye, the profete. x. No final rubric in aEPy. 


ZEPHANIAH. 





The book of Sophonye*. 


CAP. I. 


1 THE word of the Lord, that is maad to 
Sophonye, sone of Chusy, sone of Godo- 
lie, sone of Amasie, sone of Ezechie, in 
the days of Josye, the sone of Amon, 
ekyng of Juda. Y gaderynge shal gadre 
alle thingus fro face of erthe, saith the 
3Lord; gadrynge man and beeste, gad- 
rynge volatilis of heuen, and fishes of the 
se; and fallyngis of vnpytous men shuln 
ben, and Y shal leese men fro face of 
4the erthe, saith the Lord. And Y shal 
stretche out myn hond vpon Juda, and 
vpon alle the dwellers of Jerusalem ; and 
Y shal leese of this place the relikis of 
Baal, and the names of kepers of the 
shousis, with the prestis; and hem that 
worshipen vpon roues the kny3thod of 
heuen, and worshipen, and sweren in 
6the Lord, and sweren in Melchon; and 
whiche ben turned awey byhynde the 
bac of the Lord, and whiche sou3ten, or 
axiden, not the Lord, nether enserch- 
ziden hym. Be 3e stille fro face of the 
Lord God, for ni3 is the day of the 
Lord; for the Lord made redi a sacrifice, 
shalewide his clepid men. And it shal 
be, in the day of offryng of the Lord, Y 
shal visite vpon princes, and vpon sones 


Here bigynnith the book of the profecie 
of Sophonie, the profete*. 


CAP. I. 


THE word of the Lord, that was maad1i 
to Sofonye, sone of Chusi, sone of Godo- 
lie, sone of Amasie, sone of Ezechie, in 
the daies of Josie, the sone of Amon, king 
of Juda. Y gaderinge schal gadere alle2 
thingis fro the face of erthe, seith the 
Lord; Y gaderynge man and beeste, Y3 
gaderynge volatils of heuene, and fischis 
of the see; and fallyngis of vnpitouse men 
schulen be, and Y schal leese men fro 
face’ of erthe, seith the Lord. And Ya4 
schal stretche out myn hond on Juda, and 
on alle dwellers® of Jerusalem; and Y schal 
lese fro this place the relifs of Baal, and 
the names of keperis of housis, with 
prestis; and hem that worschipen ons 
roouys the kny3thod of heuene, and wor- 
schipen, and sweren in the Lord, and 
sweren in Melchon; and whiche bene 
turned awei bihynde the bak of the Lord, 
and whiche ‘sou3ten not’ the Lord, nether 
enserchiden hym. Be 3e stille fro the7 
face of the Lord God, for ni3 is the dai 
of the Lord; for the Lord made redi a® 
sacrifice, halewidef hise clepid men. Ands 
it schal be, in the dai of sacrifice of the 
Lord, Y schal visite on princes, and on 
sones of the kyng, and on alle that ben 


® Here bigynneth the boke of Sophonyas, prophete. 4. No initial rubric in eu. 


® From. Sofonye. a. Here bigynnith Sophonie, profete. py. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


> the face c pr. m. IKNR sec. m. SX sec. m. 


© the dwelleris x sec. m. 


4 sou3ten not, nether axide not 


c pr.m. s.n. ether a. not c sec.m. sou3ten not, nether axeden not Es. sou3ten not, either axeden not FGHI 


KMNPQRUXY. ¢€ Om. 1. 


f he halewide 1K sec. m. 


I. 9—18. 


of the kyng, and vpon alle that ben 
clothid with pilgrim, or straunge, cloth- 
ying. And Y shal visite vpon eche that 
proudli entrith vpon the threshfold in 
that day, whiche fulfillen the hous of the 
Lord her God with wickidnesse and gyle. 
1o And ther” shal be in that day, saith the 
Lord, a voys of crye fro the 3ate of fishis, 
and 3oulynge fro the secounde, or that 
streete of Jerusalem, and grete contri- 
ticioun fro litil hillis. 3oule 3e, dwellers 
of Pyle, or of tauern; alle the peple of 
Canaan was stille to gidre, alle wlappid 
izin syluer perishiden. And it shal be, in 
that tyme Y shal seeke Jerusalem in 
lanternys, and Y shal visite vpon alle 
men pi3t in her darstis, whiche sayen in 
her hertis, The Lord shal not do wel, and 
13he shal not do yuel. 
of hem shal be in to ranyshyng, and the 
hous of hem in to desert; and thei shuln 
beelde housis, and shuln® not enhabite ; 
and thei shuln plante vyne 3erdus, and 
thei shuln not drynke the wijn of hem. 
14 Ni3 is the grete day of the Lord, ni3 and 
swyft ful myche; the voys of day of the 
Lord bitter, a stronge man shal be in 
istribulacioun there. The ilk day a day 
of wrath, day of tribulacioun and an- 
guysh, the day of needynesse, o7 sorewe 
with out coumfort, and myseisetee, or 
wretchidnesse®*, day of derknessis and 
myst, day of cloude and whirlwynde, 
i6day of trumpe and noyse vpon stronge 
17cytees and vpon heeje corners. And Y 
shal truble men, and thei shuln walke as 
blynde, for to the Lord thei han synned ; 
and the blood of hem shal be shed out 
as erthe, and the bodyes of hem as 
istordis. Bot and the syluer of hem, and 
the gold of hem, shal not mowe delyuere 
hem in the day of wrath of the Lord; in 
fijr of his feruour al erthe shal be de- 
uoured, for he shal make eende with 
haastyng to alle men enhabitynge erthe, 


bY a. Y ther un. 


ZEPHANIAH. 


And the strengthe 


¢ thet shulen a. 


737 


celothid with pilgrimys, ether straunge, © 
clothing. And Y schal visite on ech thato 
proudli entrith on the threisfold® in that 
dai, whiche fillen the hous of her Lord 
God with wickidnesse and gile. And ther 10 
schal be in that dai, seith the Lord, a vois 
of cry fro the jate of fischis, and 3ellynge 
fro the secounde 3a¢e, and greet defoulyng 
fro litle hillis. 3elle 3e, dwelleris of Pila;11 
al the puple of Canaan was stille togidere, 
alle men wlappid in siluer® perischiden. 
And it schal be, in that tyme Y schalie2 
seke Jerusalem with lanternes, aud Y 
schal visite! on alle men pijt* in her 
darstis', whiche seien in her hertis, The 
Lord schal not do wel, and he schal not 
do yuele. And the strengthe of hem schal 13 
be in to rauyschyng, and the housis of 
hem in to desert; and thei schulen bilde 
housis, and schulen not enhabite; and thei 
schulen plaunte vyne3erdis, and thei schu- 
len not drynke the wyn of hem. Ny3 isl4 
the greet dai of the Lord, ni3 and swift 
ful myche; the vois of the™ dai of the 
Lord ?s bittir, a strong man schal be in 
tribulacioun there. ‘The ilke" dai zs a dais 
of wraththe, dai of tribulacioun and°® an- 
gwisch, dai of nedynesse and wretchid- 
nesse?, dai of derknessis and myist, dai of 
cloude and whirlewynd, dai of trumpe16 
and4 noise on strong citees and on hi3e 
corneris. And Y schal troble men, and 17 
thei schulen walke as blynde, for thei han 
synned a3ens the Lord; and the blood of 
hem schal be sched out as erthe, and the 
bodies of hem schulen be as tordis. But 18 
and‘ the siluer of hem, and gold of hem, 
schal not mowe delyuere hem in the dai 
of* wraththe of the Lord; in fier of his 
feruour al erthe schal be denourid, for he 
schal make ende with haastyng to alle 
men enhabitynge the‘ erthe, 


ce wretchidnesses @ sec. m. 


& threshold xipy. frexfold kK. "childrenn. Iryser, * put x sec. m.qrsu. !drastis Ksx. ™ Om. 
EFHKMQgsU. 4% Thilke EFGikmPy. © and of 1. P miyseiste, edher wreechidnesse CEGHIKMNPQRUKY. 
myseise, eithir wrecchidnesse ¥s. and of1. Om. epsy. Softhes. in ceferi. 

VOL. I. 5B 


738 


CAP. II. 


1 Cum 3e togydre, be 3e4 gadrid, 3e folk 
2not worthi to be louyd, byfore that 
comaundyng brenge forth as dust pass- 
ynge day; byfore that wrath of wode- 
nesse of the Lord cum, byfore that the 
day of his indignacioun cume vpon 3ou. 
xAlle mylde, or pacient, men of erthe, 
seeke 3e the Lord, whiche han wrou3t 
the dom of hym; seke 3e the iust, seeke 
3e the mylde, 3if eny maner 3e be hid in 
4the day of woodnesse of the Lord. For 
Gaza shal be distruyed, and Aschalon in 
to desert; thei shuln caste out Azotus 
in mydday, and Ackaron shal be drawen 
sout by the rote. Woo! 3e that dwellen 
the litil part of the se, a*¢ folk of lost men. 
The word of the Lord vpon 30u°, Canaan, 
the lond of Fylisteyns, and Y shal dis- 
truye thee, so that an yndweller be not; 
cand the litil part of the se shal be reste 
70f sheeperdis, and fooldis of sheep. And 
it shal be a litil part of hym, that shal 
abide of the hous of Juda, there thei 
shuln be fed in the housis‘ of Aschalon ; 
at euyn thei shuln reste, for the Lord 
God of hem visitide hem, and shal turne 
sawey the caityftee of hem. Y herde the 
shenshipe of Moab, and blasfemyes of 
the sonys of Amon, whiche thei dispis- 
iden my peple, and thei ben magnyfied 
gvpon the termes of hem. Therfore Y 
lyue, saith the Lord of oostis, God of 
Yrael, for Moab shal be as Sodom, and 
the sonys of Amon as Gomor; drienesse 
of thornes, and hepis of salt, and desert, 
til in to with out eende. The relikis of 
my peple shuln rauyshe hem, the resi- 
todues of my fole shuln welde hem. So- 
thely this thing shal cum to hem for her 
pride, in whiche thei blasfemyden, and 
weren magnyfied vpon the peple of the 
it Lord of oostis. Orrible the Lord vpon 
hem, and he shal make feble alle goddis 
of erthe; and men of her place shuln 


1Om. acu. do 4, 


"" myelde, ether pacient c et ceteri. 


ZEPHANIAH. 


e Om, a. 


¥ blasfemye r¥, 


Il, 1—-11. 


CAP. 1 


Come 3e togidere, be gaderid, 3e folei 
not worthi to be loued, bifore that co-2. 
maundyng brynge forth as dust passyng 
dai; bifore that wraththe of strong ven- 
iaunce of the Lord come on 30u,° bifor 
that the dai of his indignacioun come on 
jou. Alle myelde" men of erthe, seke 3e3 
the Lord, whiche han wrou3t the doom of 
hym; seke 3e the iust, seke 3e the mylde, 
if ony maner je be hid in the dai of 
strong veniaunce of the Lord. For Gasa4 
schal be distried, and Ascalon sehal be in 
to desert; thei schulen caste out Azotus 
in myddai, and Accaron schal be drawun 
out bi the root. Wo to 30u that dwellens 
in the litil part of the see, a fole of loste 
men. The word of the Lord on 30u, Ca- 
naan, the lond of Filisteis, and Y schal 
distrie thee, so that a dwellere be not; 
and the litil part of the see schal be reste 6 
of scheepherdis, and foldis of scheep. And 7 
it schal be a litil part of hym, that schal 
be left of the hous of Juda, there thei 
schulen be fed in the housis of Ascalon ; 
at euentid thei schulen reste, for the Lord 
God of hem schal visite hem, and schal ° 
turne awei the caitifte of hem. Y herdes 
the schenschip of Moab, and blasfemyes’ 
of* sones of Amon, whiche thei seiden 
schentfuli to my puple, and thei weren 
magnefied on the termes of hem. Therfor9 
Y lyue, seith the Lord of oostis, God of . 
Israel, for Moab schal be as Sodom, and 
the sones of Amon as Gomorre; drynesse 
of thornes, and hepis of salt, and desert, til 
in to withouten ende. The relifs of my 
puple schulen rauysche hem, the residues 
of my fole schulen welde hem. Sotheli 10 
this thing schal come to hem for her 
pride, for thei blasfemeden, and weren 
magnefied on the puple of the Lord of 
oostis. ‘The Lord schal be orible on hem, 11 
and he schal make feble alle goddis* of 
erthe; and men of her place schulen wor- 


fhous 4. ff Om. ¢ sec. m. 


wofthe 1. * goodis nrs sup. ras. U. 


il. 12—III. 7. 


wirshipe hym, alle the ijlis of hethen 
1zmen. Bot and 3ee, Ethiopiens, shuln be 
13sSlayn bi my swerd. And he shal stretche 
forth his hond vpon the north, and shal 
leese Assur; and he shal putte the faire 


in to wildrenesse, and in to vnwayed, and. 


14as desert. And alle flockis®, and beestis 
of folkis, shuln ligge in the mydil therof; 
and onacratalus, that is, a brid with a 
long bill lijke a swan, and the yrchoun 
shuln dwelle in the threshefoldis therof ; 
voys of the syngynge in a wyndowe, and 
a crowe in the lyntill, 07 ower thresfold, 
for Y shal make thynne the strengthe 

1stherof. This is the glorious citee dwell- 
ynge in trist, whiche saide in her herte, 
Y am, and ther is noon other more with 
outen me. Hou it is maad desert, a 
couche of beest ? Eche man that shal passe 
bi it, shal hisse, 07 score, and shal moue 
his hond. 


CAP. ITI. 


1 Wo! thou cytee, terrere, or stirere, to 
2wrathe, and bou3t ajein culuer. It herde 
not the voice, and resceyuede not disci- 
plyne, or chastising ; it tristinede not in 
3the Lord, it neizide not to hir God. The 
princis therof in mydil therof as lyouns 
roringe; iugis therof wolues, in the euyn- 
4tyde leften not in to morewe. The pro- 
phetis therof wode, vnfeithful men; the 
prestis therof defouliden holy thing, vn- 
siustly diden a3einus the lawe. The Lord 
just in mydil therof, he shal not do 
wickidnesse; erly, erly he shal 3eue his 
dom in 1i3t, and it shal not be hid; for- 
sothe the wickid man wist not confu- 
ssioun. Y loste folkis, and the corners of 
hem ben distruyed; Y made the wayes of 
hem desert, whij] ther is not that shal 
passe. The cytees of hem ben desolate, 
not dwellynge a man, nether eny dweller. 
7Y sayde, Nethelese thou shalt dreede me, 


ZEPHANIAH. 


739 


schipe hym, alle the ilis of hethene men. 

But and 3e, Ethiopiens, schulen be slayu 12 

bi my swerd. And he schal stretche forth 13 

his hond on the north, and schal leese 

Assur; and he schal putte the feir citee 

Nynyue in to wildirnesse, and into with 

out weie, and as desert. And flockis, and 14 

alle the beestis of folkis’, schulen ligge in 

the myddil therof; and? onacratalus*, and — * onacratal: 
irchun schulen dwelle in threshfoldis ther- Neer bile, Tijk 
of; vois of the syngynge in wyndow*, %o,°" *°* 
and crow? in the lyntil, for Y schal make 

thinne the strengthe therof. This isis 

the gloriouse citee dwellynge in trist, 

which seide in hir herte, Y am, and ther 

is noon other more withouten me. Hou 

is it maad yvnto desert, a couche of beeste ; 

ech man that schal passe bi it, schal hisse, 

and schal moue his hond. 


* onacratalus 


CAP. III. 


Wo! thou citee, terrere to wraththe,1 
and bou3t ajen a culuer. It herde notz 
the! vois of the Lord, and resseyuede not 
techyng, ether chastisyng ; it tristenyde® 
not in the Lord, it neizide not to her God. 
Princes therof in myddil therof weren as3 
liouns rorynge; iugis therof weren wolues, 
in the euentid thei leften not in to mo- 
rewe. Profetis therof weren woode, vn-4 
feithfulf men; prestis therof defouliden 
hooli thing, thei diden vniustli ajens the 
lawe. The Lord iust® in the myddils 
therof, schal® not do wickidnesse ; erli, erli 
he schal 3yue his dom in 1i3t, and it schal 
not be hid; forsothe the wickid puple 
knew not confustonn. Y loste folkis, and6 
the corneris of hem ben distried; Y made 
the weies of hem desert, while there is 
not that schal passe. The citees of hem 
ben desolat, for a man is not left, nether 
ony dwellere. Y seide, Netheles thou7 


thou shalt resceyue disciplyne; and the schalt drede me, thou schalt resseyue 
& folkis a. 
¥ flockis 1. 7 Om. ery. &the wyndowc. %acrow vu. 4 Om. cCEFGHKMNPQRSUX pr.m, © tristede 1. 


fand vnfeithful v sec.m. 8 is lust U sec. m. 


h and schal vu sec. m. 


5 BQ 


740 


dwellynge therof shal not perishe, for 
alle thingus in whiche Y visitide it; ne- 
thelese ful erly thei rysynge han cor- 
srumpid alle her thou;tis. Wherfore 
abyde thou me, saith the Lord, in the 
day of my rysyng ajein in to comynge. 
For my dome is, that Y gadre folkis, and 
gadre rewmes; aud Y shal shede out 
vpon hem myn indignacioun, and al the 
wrath of my wodenesse; forsothe in fijr 
of my feruour al erthe shal be deuoured. 
oFor thanne Y shal 3elde to my peplis a 
chosen tunge, that alle in cleepen in name 
of the Lord, and serue to hym in 00 
loshuldre. Quer the flodis of Ethiopie, 
fro thennis my bisecheris, the sonys of 
my scaterid men, shuln brynge a 3ift to 
lime. In that day thou shalt not be con- 
foundide vpon alle thi fyndyngis, in 
whiche thou trespassidist in me; for 
thanne Y shal take awey fro the mydil 
of thee the grete spekers of thi pride, 
and thou shalt namore putte to, for to 
12be enhaunsid in myn holy hill. And Y 
shal leue in mydil of thee a pore peple, 
and nedy; and thei shuln hope in name 
3o0f the Lord. The relikis of Yrael shuln 
not do wickidnesse, nether shuln speke 
leesyng, and a gyleful tunge shal not be 
funden in hem; for thei shuln be fed, 
and shuln reste, and there shal not be 
14that shal fere. These thingus saith the 
Lord*, Dou3ter of Syon, herie thou, 
synge thou, Yrael; glade thou, and ful- 
out ioye in al thi herte, thou dou3ter of 
is Jerusalem. The Lord hath taken awey 
thi dom, he hath turned awey thin en- 
myes; kyng of Yrael lord‘ in the mydil 
of thee, thou shalt namore dreede yuel. 
i¢6In that day it shal be said, Jerusalem, 
nyl thou dreede; Syon, be not thin hondis 
i7vnknyt. The Lord thi God stronge in 
mydil of thee, he shal saauej; he shal 

‘ enioye/ vpon thee in gladnesse, he shal be 
stille in thi lonyng, he shal ful enioye* 
h Lord God 4. ‘lord, lord x. 


ial the 3. 
Jerusalem =. to Jerusalem vu sec. m. 


ZEPHANIAH. 


J saaue thee G sec. m. 


kK of men A pr.m. C sec. m. EFGHIKMNPQRSUX prem. 


IIL. 8—17. 


techyng; and the dwellyng place therof 
schal not perische, for alle thingis in 
whiche Y visitide it; netheles ful eerli 
thei risynge han corrupt alle her thou3tis. 
Wherfor abide thou me, seith the Lord,s 
in the dai of my rysyng a3en in to com- 
ynge. For my doom is, that Y gadere 
folkis, and Y schal gadere rewmes; and 
Y schal schede out on hem myn indigna- 
cioun, and al‘ wraththe of my strong ven- 
jaunce; for in fier of my feruour al erthe 
schal be deuourid. For thanne Y schalo 
3elde to puplis a chosun lippe, that alle 
clepe inwardli in the name of the Lord, 
and serue to hym with o schuldre. Quer 10 
the floodis of Ethiopie, fro thens my bi- 
secheris, the sones of my scaterid menk, 
schulen brynge 3ifte to me. In that 
day thou schalt not be confoundid on alle. 
thi fyndyngis, in whiche thou trespass- 
idist ajens me; for thanne Y schal take 
awei fro the myddil of thee grete spekeris 
of thi pride, and thou schalt no more put 
to, for to be enhaunsid in myn hooli hil. 
And Y schal leeue in the myddil of thee te 
a pore puple and nedi; and thei schulen 
hope in the name of the Lord. The relifs13 
of Israel schulen not do wickidnesse, ne- 
ther schulen speke leesyng, and a gileful 
tunge schal not be foundun in the mouth 
of hem; for thei schulen be fed, and schu- 
len reste, and ther schal not be that schal 
make aferd. These thingis seith the Lord, 14 
Dou3ter of Sion, herie thou hertli’, synge 
thou, Israel; be thou glad, and make thou 
joie withoutforth in al thin herte, thou 
dou3ter of Jerusalem. The Lord hathis 
take awei thi dom, hath turned awey 
thin enemyes ; the kyng of Israel the Lord 
as in™ myddil of thee, thou schalt no more 
drede yuel. In that dai it schal be seid, 16 
Jerusalem", nyle thon drede; Sion, thin 
hondis be not clumsid®. Thi Lord God és 17 
strong in the myddil of thee, he schal 
saue; he schal make ioie on thee in glad- 


Uioye asec.m. * out ioye an. 


1Om. 1, m in the 1K. Din 


° aclumsid crgHikmNQRSUX. acumbled Ep. 


lil. 18—20. 


isvpon thee in herying. Y shal gadre the 
foolis that wenten awey fro thi lawe, for 
thei weren of thee, that thou haue na- 

19more shenshipe vpon hem. Loo! Y shal 
slea alle men that tourmentiden thee in 
that tyme, and Y shal saaue the halt- 
ynge, and Y shal gedre hir that was cast 
out ; and Y shal putte hem in to herying, 
and in to name in eche lond of confu- 
sioun of hem, in that tyme in whiche Y 

20shal Jeede 30u- to, and in the tyme in 
whiche Y shal gadre 30u. Forsothe Y 
shal 3eue 30u in to name, and in to hery- 
ing to alle peplis of erthe, whanne Y shal 
conuerte 3our caitifte byfore 3our ee3en, 
saith the Lord. 


Here endith the book of Sophonye, 
prophete, and bigynneth the book of 
Aggey, the prophete}. 


ZEPHANIAH. 


741 


nesse, he schal be stille in thi louyng, he 
schal make ioie withoutforth on thee in 
heriyng. Y schal gadere the foolis?, ether \s 
veyn men, that wenten awei fro the lawe, 
for thei weren of thee, that thou haue uo 
more schenschipe ou hem. Lo! Y schaliy 
sle alle men that turmentiden thee in that 
tyme, and Y schal saue him that haltith, 
and Y schal gadere hir that was cast out ; 
and Y schal putte hem in to heriyng, and 
in to name in ech lond of confusioun of 
hen, in that tyme in which Y schal 
brynge 3ou, and in the tyme in which Y 20 
schal gadre 3ou. For Y schal 3yue 3o0u in 
to name, and in to heriyng to alle puplis 
of erthe, whanne Y schal conuerte joure 
caitifte bifore 3oure i3en, seith the Lord. 


Here endith Sophonye, and here bi- 
gynneth Aggeis. 


| No final rubrie in acu. 


P triflers 1. 


4 From crcuimgrsu. Here eendeth the booc of Sophonye ; se now the booc of Aggei, the 


profete. K. Here endith the book of Sophonye, and bigynneth the book of Aggey. Nx. No final rubric in 


AEPY. 


HAG 


The book of Aggey*. 
CAP. I. 


1 IN the secounde 3eer of Darius, kyng 
of Persis, in the sixte moneth, in oo day 
of the moneth, the word of the Lord is 
maad in the hond of Aggey, prophete, to 
Zorobabel, sone of Salatiel, duyke of Juda, 
and to Jhesu, ‘the greet prest, sone of Jo- 

2sedech>, sayinge, These thingus saith the 

Lord of oostis, sayinge, This peple saith, 
3it cummeth not the tyme of the hous of 

3the Lord to be beeldid. And the word 
of the Lord is maad in the hond of Ag- 

4gey, prophete, sayinge, Wher it is tyme 
to 3ou, that 3e dwelle in housis® couplid 

5 with tymbre, and this hous desert ? And 
now these thingus saith the Lord God of 
oostis, Putte 3e4 jour hertis vpon jour 

swayes. 3e han sown myche, and brou3ten 
in litil; 3e han eten, and 3e ben not ful- 
fillid; 3e han drunke, and 3e ben not ful 
of drinke ; 3e hilliden 3ou, and 3e ben not 
maad hote; and he that gadrid hijris, 
sente hem in to a sac, or bagge, hoolid, 

ior broken, These thingus saith the Lord 
of oostis, Putte 3e 3our hertis vpon jour 
swayes. Stye 3e vp in to the mounteyn, 
bere 3e treese, and bielde 3e an hous; 
and it shal be acceptable to me, and Y 
9shal be glorifiede, saith the Lord. 3e 
bihelden to more, and loo! it made® 
lesse; and 3e brou3ten in to hous, and 


* Here begynneth the boke of Aggey, prophete. a. No initial rubric in cu. 
¢the hous k. 4 Om. a. 


greet preest AGUK pr. im. 


* Here biginnyth the book of Aggei, profete. x. 
the other Mss.’ Om. minrux pr.m. 
CFEFGMIKMNPQRUKY. desert, ether desolacioun s. 


Here biginnith Aggei, profete. Py. 
¢ the prophets I. 


G A i. 


Here bigynneth Aggey?*. 
CAP. I. 


In the secounde 3eer of Darius, kyng of 1 
Persis, in the sixte monethe, in the firste 
dai of the monethe, the word of the Lord 
was inaad in the hond of Aggey, profete, 
to Sorobabel, sone of Salatiel, duyk of 
Juda, and to Jhesu, the greet preest, sone 
of Josedech, and seide, The Lord of oostis 2 
seith these thingis, and spekith, This pu- 
ple seith, 3it cometh not the tyme of the 
hous of the Lord to be bildid. And thes 
word of the Lord was maad in the® hond 
of Aggei, profete’, and seide, Whether? it 4 
is tyme to 30u, that 3e dwelle in housis 
couplid with tymbir, and this hous de for- 
sakun®? And now the Lord of oostis seiths 
these thingis, Putte 3e 3oure hertis on 
3oure weies. 3e han sowe myche, andé 
brou3te in litil; 3e han etun, and ben not 
fillid; 3e han drunke, and 3e ben not ful 
of drynk; 3e hiliden 3ou, and 3e ben not 
maad hoote; and he that gaderide hiris, 
sente tho in to a sak holid, ether brokun. 
The Lord of oostis seith these thingis,7 
Putte 3e 3oure hertis on 3oure weies. Sties 
je vp in to the munteyn, bere 3e trees, 
and bilde 3e an hous; and it schal be 
acceptable to me, aud Y schal be glorified, 
seith the Lord. 3e bihelden to more, and» 
lo! it is maad lesse; and 3e brou3ten in 
to the hous, and Y blew it out. For what 


b the sone of Josedech, the 
€ is maad G sec. m. 


No initial rubric in 
a@ Wher ceteri. © desert, ether forsakun 


3e ben ceteri. 


I, 1o—IL. 5. HAGGAIL. 743 


Y blewe it out. For what cause, saith 
the Lord of oostis? for myn hous is de- 
sert', and 3e hasten eche man in to his 
10hous. For this thing heuens ben for- 
beden, that thei shulden not 3eue dew; 
and the erthe is forbeden, that. it shulde 
11not 3eue his buriownyng. And Y cle- 
pide dryenesse vpon erthe, and vpon 
mounteyns, and vpon whete, and vpon 
wyn, and vpon oyle, and what ener 
thingus the erthe bringeth forth; and 
vpon men, and vpon beestis, and vpon 
i2al labour of hondis. And Zorobabel, 
sone of Salatiel, herde, aud Jhesus, ‘the 
grete prest, sone of Josedech*, and 
alle relikis of the peple, the voys of her 
God, and the wordis of Aggey, prophete, 
as the Lord God of hem sente hym to 
hem; and al the peple dredde of the face 
i30f the Lord. And Aggey saide, a mes- 
sangere of the Lord, of messangers of 
the Lord to the peple, sayinge, Y am 
i4 With 3ou, saith the Lord. And the Lord 
reyside the spirit of Zorobabel, sone of 
Salatiel, duyk of Juda, and the spirit of 
Jhesu, ‘the grete prest, sone of Josedeché, 
and the spirit of the relikis of alle peple; 
and thei entriden, and maden werk in 
the hous of the Lord of hoostis, her God, 
1in the twentithe day and fourthe of the 
moneth, in the sixte moneth, in the se- 
counde 3eer of Darius, kyng. 


CAR SII. 


2 In the seuenthe moneth, in the twen- 
tithe and firste of the moneth, the word 
of the Lord is maad in the hond of Ag- 

3gey, prophete, sayinge, Speke thou to Zo- 
robabel, sone of Salatiel, duyk of Juda, 
and to Jhesu, ‘the greet preest, sone of Jo- 
sedech88, and to other of the peple, say- 

4inge, Who in 3ou is left, that saw3 this 
hous in his first glorie? and what seen 
3e this now? wher it is not thus, as it be 
snot in jour ee3en? And now, Zorobabel, 


cause, seith the Lord of oostis? for myn 
lous is desert®, and 3e hasten ech man in 
to his hous. For this thing heuenes ben 10 
forbedun', that thei schulden not 3yue 
dew on 30u; and the erthe is forbodun, 
that it schulde not 3yue his buriownyng. 
And Y clepide drynesse on erthe, and on11 
mounteyns, and on wheete, and on wyn, 
and on oile, and what euer thingis the 
erthe bryngith forth; and on men, and on 
beestis, and on al labour of hondis. And 12 
Sorobabel, the sone of Salatiel, and Jhesus, 
the greet preest, the sone of Josedech, and 
alle relifs of the puple, herden the vois of 
her God, and the wordis of Aggei, the pro- 
fete, as the Lord God of hem sente him to 
hein; and al the puple dredde of the face 
of the Lord. And Aggei, a messanger of 13 
the Lord, of the messangeris of the Lord, 
seide to the puple, and spak, Y am with 
3ou, seith the Lord. And the Lord reisidel! 14 
the spirit of Sorobabel, the sone of Sala- 
tiel, duik of Juda, and the spirit of Jhesu, 
the greet preest, the sone of Josedech, and 
the spirit of the relifs of al puple; and 
thei entriden, and maden werk in the 
hous of the Lord of oostis, her* God. 


CAP. II. 


In the foure and twentithe dai of the: 
monethe, in the sixte monethe, in the se- 
cunde 3eer of kyng Darius. In the se-2 
uenthe monethe, in the oon and twentith 
dai of the monethe, the word of the Lord 
was maad in the hond of Aggei, the pro- 
fete, and seide, Speke thou to Sorobabel,s 
the sone of Salatiel, the duyk of Juda, 
and to Jhesu, the gret preest, the sone of 
Josedech, and to othere! of the puple, and 
seie thou, Who in 3o0u is left, that sai™ 4 
this hous in his firste glorie? and what 
seen 3e this now ? whether it is not thus, 
as if it be not bifore 3oure izen? Ands 
now, Sorobabel, be thou coumfortid, seith 
the Lord, and Jhesu, greet” preest, soue® 


f desert, or forleft Gk pr.m. ff the sone of Josedech, the greet preest 4c. _ & sone of Josedech, the 
greet preest AGHK pr.m. 88 sone of Josedech, the greet preest AGHK pr. m. 


& desert, or forleft CEFGHIKMNPQRUXY. desert, other lefts. 4 forfendid 1. iseisede ny. of her 


Kru. !othere men vu sec.m. ™ sau3 1 sepius. 


a the grete r1. - 9 the sone 7. 


TAA 


be thou coumfortid, saith the Lord,-and 
Jhesu, ‘greet preest, sone of Josedech*, be 
thou coumfortid, and al peple of the 
lond, be thou coumfortid, saith the Lord 
of oostis; and do 3e, for Y am with 3o0u, 
ssaith the Lord of oostis. The word 
that Y couenauntide with 3ou, whanne 
3e wenten out of the lond of Egypt, and 
my Spirit shal be in the mydil of 3ou, 
7Nyl 3e dreede, for these thingus saith 
the Lord of oostis, 3it oo lytil thing, or 
tyme, is, and Y shal moue heuen, and 
serthe, and the se, and dryenesse; and Y 
shal moue alle folkis, and the desirid to 
alle fulkis shal cume; and Y shal fulfille 
this hous with glorie, saith the Lord of 
9oostis. Myn is syluer and myn is gold, 
wseith the Lord of oostis. The glorie of 
this laste hous schal be greet, more than 
of the firste, seith the Lord of oostis. 
And in this place I schal 3yue pees, 
useith the Lord of oostis. In the foure 
and twentithe of the nynthe moneth, in 
the secunde 3eer of Darius, kyng, the 
word of the Lord is maad to Aggey, 
12prophete, seiynge, These thingus saith 
the Lord God of oostis, Axe prestis the 
islawe, sayinge, 3if a man shal take ha- 
lewid fleshe in the heme of his clothinge, 
and shal touche of the hee3nesse therof 
brede, or potage, or wyne, and oyle, or 
eche mete, wher it shal be halewid? 
Sotheli prestis answerynge sayden, Nay. 
14And Aggey saide, 3if a man defoulid in 
soule shal touche of alle these, wher it 
shal be defoulid? And prestis answerden, 
isand saiden, It shal be defoulid. And 
Aggey answerde, and saide, So this peple, 
and so this folk byfore my face, saith the 
Lord, and so al were of her hondis; and 
alle thingus that thei shuln offre there, 
isshuln be defoulid. And now putte 3e 
3our hertis, fro this day and aboue, by- 
fore that a stoon vpon a stoon was putt 
17in the temple of the Lord, whenne 3e 
wenten to an hep of twenty bushellis, 


HAGGAIL. 


ll. 6—17. 


of Josedech, be thou coumfortid, and al 
the puple of the lond, be thou coumfortid, 
seith the Lord of oostis; and do 3e, for Y 
am with jou, seith the Lord of oostis. 
The word that Y couenauntide with 3ou, 6 
whanne 3e wenten out of the lond of 
Egipt, and my Spirit schal be in the myd- . 
dil? of 30u. Nyle 3e drede, for the Lord7 
of oostis seith these thingis, 3it o litil 
thing is, and Y schal moue heuene, and 
erthe, and see, and drie lond; and Y schals 
moue alle folkis, and the desirid to alle 
folkis schal come; and Y schal fille this 
hous with glorie, seith the Lord of oostis. 
Myn is siluer, and myn is gold, seith thes 
Lord of oostes. The glorie of this laste1o 
hous scha] be greet, more than the‘ firste, 
seith the Lord of oostis. And in this 
place Y schal 3yue pees, seith the Lord of 
oostis. In the foure and twentithe daz of 11 
the nynthe monethe, in the secounde 3eer 
of kyng Daryus, the word of the. Lord 
was maad to Aggei, the profete, and seide, 
The Lord God of oostis seith these thingis, 12 
Axe thou preestis the lawe*, and seie  *Aze thou 
thou, If a man takith halewyd fleisch in 1S een (he an 


the hem of his clothing, and touchith of olden kaa 
the hiz3nesse therof breed, ether potage, * Lire here. 
f kuy. It per- 
ether wyn, ether oile, ether ony mete,  teineth to 
whether it schal be halewid? Sotheli hemes lawe 


. . . . f 
preestis answeriden, and seiden, Nai. And 14 songs ke 


Aggei seide, If a man defoulid in soule {ysl 


touchith of alle these thingis, whether it the lawe. Ifa 
S . man is 3 
schal be defoulid? And prestis answer- kenne kenthall 


A é 5 } f 
iden, and seiden, It schal be defoulid. And 15 pp 


Aggei answeride, and seide, So zs this 7% the wall 


; i the Lord, he 
uple, an 18 S S preueth him- 
puple, so 28 this fole bifor my face, Pruett him 
seith the Lord, and so zs al werk* of her _ prest of the 
hoes: rl ‘ ¥ e 4 Lord. Jerom 
ondis; aud alle thingis whiche thei offren and the Glose 


there, schulen be defoulid. And nowe16"?**?*™ 


putte 3e 3onre hertis, fro this dai and 
aboue, bifor that a stoon on a stoon was 
put in temple® of the Lord, whanne 3e17 
wenten to an heep of twenti buischels, 
and there weren maad ten; 3e entriden to 
the pressour, that 3e schulden presse out 


h sone of Josedech, the greet preest 4G. sone of Josedech, greet preest HK pr,m. 


P myddis1.. 4 of the CEFGHIKMNPQRSUX, aa the werk 1K.  & the temple 1K. 


WT, 18——24. 


and there weren maad ten; 3e entriden 
to the pressour, that 3e shulden presse 
out fifty galouns, and ther weren maad 
istwenti. Y smote 30u with brennynge 
wynd, and mildew, and hayl, and alle 
the werkis of 3our hondis; and ther was 
not in 30u that turnede a3ein to me, saith 
i9the Lord. Putte 3e 30ur hertis of this 
day, and in to cummynge, fro the fourthe! 
and twentithe of the ninthe moneth, fro 
the day in whiche foundementis ben 
casten of the temple of the Lord, putte 
203e vppon 3our herte. Wher now seed is* 
in buriownyng? and 3it the vyne 3erd, 
and fijge tree, and powme garnet, and 
the tree of olyue florishide! not. Of this 
2iday Y shal blesse. And the word of 
the Lord is maad the seconnde tyme to 
Aggey, in the foure and twentithe of the- 
22moneth, saiynge, Speke thou to Zoro- 
babel, duyk of Juda, sayinge, Y shal 
23moue henen and erthe to gydre, and Y 
shal distrnye the sete of rewmys, and Y 
shal breke the strengthe of the rewme of 
heithen men, and Y shal distruye the 
foure horsid cart, and the styer therof; 
and the horsis shuln go doun, and the 
styers of hem, a man in swerd of his 
24brother. In that day, saith the Lord of 
oostis, thou Zorobabel, sone of Salatiel, 
my seruaunt, Y shal take to thee, saith 
the Lord; and Y shal putte thee as a 
sygnet, for Y cheese thee, saith the Lord 
of hoostis. 


Here endith the book of Aggey, the 
prophete, and bigynneth the book of 
Zacharie, sone of Barachie™, 


ifoure a. k Om. 4. 


t and I 1x. 
the profete. k. 


HAGGAIT. 


I flouride . 


TA5 


fifti galouns, and there weren maad twenti. 
Y smoot 30u with brennynge wynd; and is 
with myldew, and hail, alle the werkis of 
3oure hondis; and ther was noon in 3o0u 
that turnede a3en to me, seith the Lord. 
Putte 3e 30ure hertis fro this dai, and in1s 
to comynge, fro the foure and twentithe 
dai of the nynthe monethe, fro the dai in 
whiche foundementis of the temple of the 
Lord ben castun, putte 3e on 3oure herte. 
Whether now seed is in buriownyng? 2 
and 3it vine3erd, and fige tre, and pom- 
garnade, and the tre of olyue flouride not. 
Fro this dai Y schal blesse. And the2i 
word of the Lord was maad the secounde 
tyme to Aggei, in the foure and twentithe 
dai of the monethe, and seide, Spek thou 22 
to Sorobabel, duik of Juda, and seie thou, 
Y shal moue heuene and erthe togidere, 
and Y schal distrie the seet of rewmes, 23 
and Y schal al to-breke the strengthe of 
rewme of hethene men, and‘ schal distrie 
a foure horsid carte, and the stiere therof; 
and horsis schulen go doun, and stieris of 
hem, aman bi swerd of his brother. Ina 
that dai, seith the Lord of oostis, thou 
Sorobabel, sone of Salatiel, my seruaunt, 
Y schal take thee, seith the Lord; and Y 
schal putte thee as a signet, for Y chees 
thee, seith the Lord of oostis. 


Here endith Aggei, and here bigyn- 
neth Sacarie%, 


m No final rubric in sen. 


u From crcuimgrsu. Here eendeth the booe of Aggei; se now the booc of Zacharie, 
Here endith the book of Aggey, and bygynneth the book of Sacharie, the prophete. n. 


Here endith the booc of Aggey, the profete, and here bigynneth the booc of Sacarie, the profete. x. No final 


rubric in AEPY. 


VOL. III. 


ZECHARIAH. 





The book of Zacharias*. 
CAPs 4: 


1 In the ei3te moneth, in the secounde 
seer of Darius, the word of the Lord is 
maad to Zacharie», sone of Barachie, sone 

»of Addo, prophete®, seyinge, The Lord is 
wroth vpon 3our fadris with wrathe. 

3And thou shalt saye to hem, These 
thingis saith the Lord of oostis. Be 3e 
conuertid to me, saith the Lord of oostis, 
and Y shal be conuertid to 3ou, saith 

4the Lord of oostis. Be 3e not as 3our 
fadris, to whom former prophetis crieden, 
sayinge, These thingus saith the Lord of 
oostis, Be 3e conuertid of jour yuel 
wayes, and 3oure warst thou3tes; and 
thei herden not, nether token entente® 
sto me, saith the Lord of oostis. Wher 
ben 3our faders and prophetis? wher 
thei shuln lyue into with outen eende? 
6Nethelese my wordis and my lawful 
thingis, whiche Y comaundide to my ser- 
uauntis prophetis, wher thei tau3ten not 
3oure fadris? And thei weren to gydre 
turned, and saiden, As the Lord of oostis 
thou3te for to do to vs vp oure wayes, 
and vp oure fyndyngis he dide to vs. 
7In the foure and twentithe day of the 
elleuenthe moneth Sabath, in the se- 
counde 3eer of Darius, the word of the 
Lord is maad to Sacharie, sone of Bara- 
chie, sone of Addo, prophete, sayinge, 
8Y saw3 bi ni3t, and loo! a man styinge 


a Here bigynne[th] the boke of Zacharye, prophete. a. No initial rubric in ex. 


K sec.m. © Om. xK sec.m. 4 tente AGH, 


a Here biginnith the book of Zacharie, profele. ery. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


celert. © cau3ten A. 


Here bigynneth Sacarie, the prophete*. 
CAP. I. 


IN the eiz3the monethe, in the secounde i 
jeer of Darius, the word of the Lord was 
maad to Sacarie, the sone of Baracliie, the 
sone of Addo, profete, and seide, The Lord 2 
is wrooth on 3oure fadris with wrathful- 
nesse. And thou schalt seie to hem, Thes 
Lord of oostis seith these thingis. Be 3e 
conuertid to me, seith the Lord of oostis, 
and Y schal be conuertid to 30u, seith the 
Lord of oostis. Be 3e not as 3oure fadris, 4 
to whiche the formere profetis crieden, 
seiynge, The Lord of oostis seith these 
thingis, Be 3e conuertid fro 3oure yuel 
weies, and 3oure worste thou3tis; and 
thei herden not, nether token tent to me, 
seith the Lord of oostis. Where ben 30ure5 
fadris and profetis? whether thei schu- 
len lyue with outen ende? Netheles my6 
wordis and my lawful thingis, whiche Y 
comaundide to my seruauntis profetis, whe- 
ther thei tau3ten® not 3oure fadris? And 
thei weren conuertid, and seiden, As the 
Lord of oostys thou3te for to do to vs bi 
oure weies, and bi oure fyndingis he dide 
to vs. In the foure and twentithe dai of7 
the enleuenthe monethe Sabath*, in the 
secounde 3eer of Darius, the word of the 
Lord was maad to Sacarie, sone of Bara- 
chie, sone of Addo, profete, and seide, Ys 
sai3 bi ni3t, and lo! a man stiynge on a 
reed hors; and he stood bitwixe places 


b Zacharie, prophete 


b wher 


* In Ebreu it 

is Sebeth, and 

it answerith to _ 
Januarie. AEI P 
KNPUY. 


I. 9—2I1. 


vp® a rede hors; and he stode bitwixe 
the places where myrtis wexen, that 
weren in the deepe, and after hym horsis 
9dyuerse, rede, and white. And Y saide, 
My lord, what ben these? And an an- 
gel of the Lord saide to me, that spac in 
me, Y shal shewe to thee what these ben. 
io And the man that stode bitwixe places 
wher myrtis wexen, answerde, and saide, 
These ben, whom the Lord sente, that 
11thei walke thorow erthe. And thei an- 
swerden to the aungel of the Lord, that 
stode bitwixe places wher myrtis wexen, 
and saiden, We han walkid thorou erthe, 
and loo! al erthe is enhabitid, and rest- 
izith. And the aungel of the Lord an- 
swerde, and saide, Lord of oostis, hou 
longe shalt thou not haue mercy of Je- 
rusalem, and of the citees of Juda, to 
whiche thou art wroth? This is now 
isthe seuentithe 3eer. And the Lord an- 
swerde to the aungel, that spae in me, 
i4good wordis, coumfortynge. And the 
aungel that spac in me, saide to me, Crie 
thou, sayinge, These thingus saith the 
Lord of oostis, Y lonede Jerusalem and 
isSyon in grete feruour; and in grete 
wroth Y shal be wroth vpon riche folkis; 
for Y was wrothe a litil, forsothe thei 
isholpen in to yuel. Therfore these thingis 
saith the Lord, Y shal turne ajein to 
Jerusalem in mercyes. My hous shal be 
byldid in it, saith the Lord of oostis; and 
an hangynge lyne, or mesure, shal be 
17Strei3t out vpon Jerusalem. 3it crie thou, 
sayinge, These thingus saith the Lord of 
oostis, jit my cytees shuln flete with 
goodis, and 3it the Lord shal coumforte 
Syon, and 3it he shal chese Jerusalem. 
isAnd Y reyside myn ee3en, and saw3, and 
igloo! foure horns. And Y saide to the 
aungel that spak in me, What ben these? 
And he saide to me, These ben hornes, 
that wyndewiden Juda, and Israel, and 
2oJerusalem. And the Lord shewide to 
2ime foure smythis. And Y saide, What 


ZECHARIAH. 


747 


where mirtis wexen, that weren in the 
depthe, and aftir hym weren horsis reede, 
dyuerse, and white. And Y seide, Myo 
lord, who ben these? And an aungel of 
the Lord seide to me, that spak in me, Y 
schal sehewe to thee what these ben. And 10 
the man that stood bitwix places where 
mirtis wexen, answeride, and seide, These 
it ben, whiche the Lord sente, that thei 
walke thoron3 erthe. And thei answer-11 
iden to the aungel of the Lord, that stood 
bitwixe places where mirtis wexen, and 
seiden, We han walkid thorou3 erthe, and 
lo! al erthe is enhabitid, and restith. And 12 
the aungel of the Lord answeride, and 
seide, Lord of oostis, hou long schalt thou 
not haue merei on Jerusalem, and” citees 
of Juda, to whiche thou art wrooth? This 
now is the seuentithe jeer. And the Lord 13 
answeride to the aungel, that spak in me, 
-goode wordis, and wordis of coumfort. 
And the aungel that spak in me, seide to 14 
me, Crie thou, seiynge, The Lord of oostis 
seith these thingis, Y louyde Jerusalem 
and Sion in greet feruour; and in greet 1s 
wraththe Y schal be wroth on riche folkis; 
for Y was wrooth a litil, forsothe thei 
helpiden in to yuel. 
seith these thingis, Y schal turne a3en to 
Jerusalem in mercies. Myn* hous sehal be 
bildid in it, seith the Lord of oostis; and 
a plomet sehal be strei3t out on Jerusalem. 
3it erie thou, seiynge, The Lord of oostis 17 
seith these thingis, 3it my citees schulen 
flete with goodis, and 3it the Lord schal 
coumforte Sion, and 3it he sehal chese 
Jerusalem. And Y reiside myn ijen, and is 
Y sai3, and lo! foure hornes. 
seide to the aungel that spak in me, What 
ben these? And he seide to me, These 
ben hornes, that wyndewiden* Juda, and 
Israel, and Jerusalem. 
schewide to me foure smythis. And Y2! 
seide, What eomen these for to do ? 
Which® spak, seiynge, These ben’ the 
hornes, that wyndewiden® Juda bi alle 


c vpon AGH. 


band on 1. ¢ And myn vu sec. m. 
& winweden &. wynewden I. 


4 wynewden 1. wyndowen k. 


e The whiche r. f Om. Ey, 


5c2 


Therfor the Lord 16 


And Y19 


And the Lord 20 


748 


cumnien these for to do? Whiche saith, 
sayinge, These ben the hornes, that wyn- 
dewiden Juda by alle men, and no man 
of hem reiside his hed; and these camen 
for to fere hem, that thei caste doun 
hornes of heithen men, whiche reysiden 
horn vpon the lond of Juda, for to sca- 
tere it. 
CAP. II. 
1 And Y reyside myn ee3en, and saw}, 
and loo! a man, and loo! in his hond a 
2litil coorde of meters. And Y= saide, 
Whider gost thou? And he saide to 
me, That Y mete Jerusalein, and Judee ; 
hon myche is the breede therof, and hou 
smyche the lengthe therof. And loo! the 
angel that spac in me, wente out, and an 
other angel wente out into meetynge of 
shym, and saide to hym, Renne thou, 
spek to this chijld, saiynge, With outen 
wall Jerusalem shal be enabitid, for mul- 
titude of men and beestis in the mydil 
stherof. And Y shal be to it, saith the 
Lord, a wall of fijr in cumpas; and Y 
shal be in glorye in the mydil therof. 
60! O! O! flee 3e of the lond of the north, 
saith the Lord, for in foure wyndis of 
heuen Y scatride 30u, saith the Lord. 
7Thou Syon, flee, that dwellist anentus 
sthe dou3ter of Babyloyne. For these 
thingus saith the Lord of oostis, After 
glorie he sente me to heithen men, whiche 
robbiden 30u; forsothe he that shal touche 
3ou, shal touche the appil of myn ee3e. 
“For lo! Y reyse ny hond vpon hem, and 
thei shuln be pray to these that sernyden 
to hem; and 3e shuln knowe, for the 
10Lord of oostis sente me. Dou3ter of 
Syon, herye thou, and glade; for loo! Y 
come, and shal dwelle in the mydil of 
11 thee, saith the Lord. And manye folkis 
shulu be applied to the Lord in that day, 
and thei shuln be to me in to a peple, 
and Y shal dwelle in the mydil of thee; 
and thou shalt wite, for the Lord of 
1200stis sente me to thee. And the Lord 


4 hornes ¢ pr. m. e¥umpy. the horn 1. hornen v. 
min the 1, 


ZECHARIAH. 


Il. 1—12. 


men, and no man of hem reiside his heed ; 
and these camen for to make hem aferd, 
that thei caste doun the hornes of hethene 
men, which reisiden horn" on the lond of 
Juda, for to scatere it. 


CART: 

And Y reiside myn i3en, and si3, and) 
lo! a man, and lo! in his hoond a litil 
coorde of meteris. And Y seide, Whidir2 
goist thou? And he seide to me, That Y 
mete Jerusalem, and Judee; hou mycli is 
the breede therof, and hou myche zs the 
lengthe therof. And lo! the aungel thats 
spak in me, wente out, and another aun- 
gel wente out in to the metyng of hym, 
and seide to hym, Renne thou, speke to4 
this child, and seie thou, Jerusalem shal 
be enhabitid with out wal, for the mul- 
titude of men and of! beestis in the myd- 
dil therof. And Y schal be to it, seiths 
the Lord, a wal of fier in cumpas; and 
Y schal be in glorie in inyddil therof. 
A! A! A! fle 3e fro the lond of the north,é 
seith the Lord, for in foure wyndis of 
heuene Y scateride you, seith the Lord. 
A! thou Sion, fle, that dwellist at the7 
dou3ter of Babiloyne. For the Lord ofs 
oostis seith these thingis, After glorie he 
sente me to hethene men, whiche robbiden 
3ou; for he that schal touche 30u, schal 
touche the apple of myn ize. For lo! Yo 
reise myn hond on hem, and thei schulen 
be preyes to these that seruyden hem; and 
3e schulen knowe, that the Lord of oostis 
sente me. Dou3ter of Sion, herie thou, 10 
and be glad; for lo! Y come, and Y schal 
dwelle in myddil of thee, seith the Lord. 
And many folkis schulen be applied to the 1) 
Lord in that dai, and thei schulen be to 
me in to puple!, and Y schal dwelle in™ 
myddil of thee; and thou schalt wite, that 
the Lord of oostis sente me to thee. And 12 
the Lord schal welde Juda in to his part, 


i Om. 1. k yeiside 1. Ta puple 4 secem. 1, 


II. 13—IlI. 9. 


shal welde Juda in to his part, in the 
lond halewid, and shal chese 3it Jerusa- 

izlem. Be eche flesh stille fro the’ face of 
the Lord, for he roose of his holy dwell- 
ynge place. 


CAP. III. 


i And the Lord shewide to me the grete 
prest Jhesu, stondynge byfore the aungel 
of the Lord; and Sathan stode on his 
ri3t half, that he were aduersarie to hym. 

2 And the Lord saide to Sathan, The Lord 
blame in thee, Sathan, and the Lord 
blame in thee, that ches Jerusalem. Wher 
this is not a dead brond ranyshid of the 

3fijr ? And Jhesus was clothid with 
filthi clothis, and stode byfore the face 

4of the aungel. Whiche answerde, and 
saith to hym that stode bifore hym, say- 
inge, Do 3e awey filthi clothis fro hym. 
And he saide to hym, Loo! Y haue 
don awey fro thee thi wickidiuesse, and 
Y haue clothid thee with chaungynge 
sclothis. And he saide, Putte 3e a cleene 
cappe, or mytre, vpon his heued. And 
thei puttiden a cleene cappe, or mytre, 
vpon his heed, and clothiden hym with 
clothis. And the aungel of the Lord 
6stode, aud the aungel of the Lord wit- 
7nesside Jhesu, sayinge, These thingis 
saith the Lord of oostis, 3if thou shalt 
go in my wayes, and shalt keepe my 
keepyng, and thou shalt deme my hous, 
and shalt keepe my porehis; and Y shal 
jene to thee men walkynge, of these 
8that now stonden here ni3. Heere thou, 
Jhesu, grete prest, thou and thi freendis 
that dwellen byfore thee, for thei ben 
men signyfyinge thing® to cummynge. 
Loo! sothely Y shal bringe my seruaunt 

%spryngynge vp. For loo! the stoon 
whom Y 3af! byfore Jhesu, vpon oo 
stoon ben seuen ee3en;.and loo! Y shal 
graue the grauynge therof, saith the 
Lord of oostis, and Y shal do awey the 


d Om. 4. 


® cappe, ether [a 8} mytre c et ceteri. 
clothis u see. m. 


ZECHARIAH. 


¢ thingis a. 


® cappé CEKPRY. cappes ether mylre GIIMNQSUX. 


749 


in the loud halewid, and sehal cheese 3it — . 
Jerusalem. Ech fleisch be stil fro thes 
face of the Lord, for he roos of his hooli 
dwelling place. 


CAP. III. 


And the Lord schewide to me the greet | 
prest Jhesu, stondynge bifore the aungel 
of the Lord; and Sathan stood on his 
ri3thalf, that he schulde be aduersarie to 
hym. And the Lord seide to Sathan, The2 
Lord blame in thee, Sathan, and the Lord 
that chees Jerusalem, blaine in thee. Whe- 
ther this is not a deed broond rauyschid 
fro the fier ? And Jhesus was clothid withs 
foule clothis, and stood bifor the face of 
the aungel. Which ausweride, and seide4 
to hem that stoden bifor hym, and he 
seide, Do 3e awei foule clothis fro him. 
And he seide to hym, Lo! Y haue don 
awei fro thee thi wickidnesse, and Y haue 
clothid thee with chaungynge clothis. 
And he seide, Putte 3e a clene mytre" ons 
his heed. And thei puttiden a cleene 
mytre® on his heed, and clothide him with 
clothis?, And the aungel of the Lord 
stood, and the aungel of the Lord wit-6 
nesside to Jhesu, and seide, The Lord of7 
oostis seith these thingis, If thon schalt 
go in my weies, and schalt kepe my kep- 
ynge, also and thou schalt deme myn hous, 
and schalt kepe my porehis; and Y schal 
3yue to thee goeris, of these that now here 
stonden ni3. Here thou, Jhesu, greets 
preest, thou and thi frendis that dwellen 
bifore thee, for thei hen men signefiynge 
thing to comyng. Lo! sotheli Y schal 
bryuge my seruaunt spryngyuge up, ether 
Crist borun. For lo! the stoon whichs 
Y 3af bifor Jhesu, on o stoon ben seuene 
izen; and lo! Y schal graue the grauyng 
therof, seith the Lord of oostis, and Y 
sehal. do awei the wickidnesse of that 
lond in o dai. In that dai, seith the Lord 10 


f 3att K. 


P white 


750 


io wickidnesse of that lond in oo day. In 
that day, saith the Lord of oostus, a man 
shal clepe his frend vndir his vyne 3erd, 
and vndir his fijge tree. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And the anngel turnede ajein, that 
spak in me, and reyside me, as a man 
athat is reyside of his sleep. And he 
saide to me, What seest thou? And Y 
saide, Y saw3, and loo! a candilstyke al 
of gold, and the laumpe therof vpon the 
hed therof, and seuen lanternes therof 
vpon it, and seuen vessels for to holde 
oyle to the lanternys, that weren vpon 
3the hed therof. And two olyues ther- 
vpon, oon on the ri3t half of the laumpe, 
and an other on the left half therof. 
41And Y answerde, and Y saye to the an- 
gel that spak in me, sayinge, What ben 
these thingus, my lord? And the angel 
that spak in me, answerde, and saide to 
me, Wher thou wost not what ben these 
thingus ? And Y saide, No, my lord. 
6And he auswerde, and saith to me, say- 
inge, This is the word of the Lord to 
Zorobabel, sayinge, Not in oost, nether 
in strengthe, bot in my spirit, saith the 
7 Lord of oostis. Who thou, grete hill, 
byfore Zorobabel in to pleyn? and he shal 
leede out the firste stoon, and shal make 
seuene grace to grace therof. And the 
word of the Lord is maad to me, say- 
ginge, The hondis of Zorobabel foundiden 
this hous, and the hondis of hym shuln 
perfourme it; and 3e shuln wite, for the 
.10Lord of oostis sente me to 300. Who 
forsothe dispiside litil days? and thei 
shuln glade, and shuln see a stoon of tyn 
in the hond of Zorobabel. These ben 
seuen eejen of the Lord, that rennen 
iraboute in to eche lond. And Y an- 
swerde, and saide to hym, What ben 
these two olyues on the ri3thalf of the 
12 candilstike, and at the left half? And Y 
answerde the secounde tyme, aud sayde 


t Om. ceferi. 


; ® helde yn vu sec. m. 
passim, 


tons. 
x ben the 1. 


ZECHARIAH. 


u therof Rsv. 


Il]. 1o—IV, 12. 


of oostis, a man schal clepe his frend vn- 
dur a vyn ¢re’, and yndur a fige tre. 


CAP. IV. 


And the aungel turnede ajen, that spak: 
in me, and reiside me, as a man that is 
reisid of his sleep. And he seide to me,2 
What seest thou? And Y seide, Y sai3, 
and lo! a candilstike al of gold, and the 
laumpe therof on the heed therof, and 
seuene lanternes therof on it, and seuene 
vessels for to holde® oyle to the lanternes, 
that weren on the heed therof. And tweis3 
olyues there onne, oon of * the ri3thalf ‘of 
the laumpe", and ‘an other’ on the left 
half therof *. And Y answeride, and seide4 
to the aungel that spak in me, and Y 
seide, What ben these thingis, my lord ? 
And the aungel that spak in me, answer-5 
ide, and seide to me, Whether’’ thou 
woist not what ben these thingis? And 
Y seide, No, my lord. And he answeride, 6 
and seide to me, and spak, This is the 
word of the Lord, seiynge to Sorobabel, 
Not in oost, nether in strengthe, but in 
my spirit, seith the Lord of oostis. Who7 
art thou, greet hil, bifore Sorobabel in to 
pleyn? and he schal lede ont the firste 
stoon, and schal make enene grace to 
grace therof. And the word of the Lords 
was maad to me, and seide, The hondisa 
of Sorobabel foundiden this hous, and the 
hondis of hym schulen perfourme it; and 
3e schulen wite, that the Lord of oostis 
sente me to 30u. Who forsothe dispiside 10 
litle daies? and thei schulen be glad, and 
schulen se a stoon of tyn in the houd of 
Sorobabel. These ben* seuene ijen of the 
Lord, that rennen aboute in to al erthe. 
And Y answeride, and seide to hym,n 
What ben these tweyne olyues on the 
rijthalf of the candilstike, and at the lift- 
half therof? And Y answeryde the se-12 
counde tyme, and seide to hym, What ben 


Yoons. WOm. ru. WW Wher ceferi 


IV. 13-—V. 9. 


to hym, What ben the two eris, or rijp 
Jruyt, of the olyues, that ben bysidis the 
two golden bilis$, in whiche ben oyle 

i3vesselis of gold? And he saith to me, 
sayinge, Wher thou wost not what ben 
these thingis? And Y saide, No, my 

14lord. And he saide, These ben two 
sonys of oyle shynynge, whiche stonden 
ni3 to the lordshipere of al erthe. 


CAP. V. 


i And Y was conuertid, and reyside* 
myn eejen, and saw3, and loo! a bok 
2fleezinge. And he saide to me, What 
seest thou? And Y saide, Y see a bok 
fleezinge ; the lengthe therof of twenti 
cubitis, the breed therof of ten cubitis. 
3And he saide to me, This is the curs, 


that goth out vpon the face of al erthe ;. 


for eche theef, as it is writen there, shal 
be demyd; and eche man swerynge, of 
4this also shal be deemid. Andi Y shal 
leede it out, saith the Lord of oostis, and 
it shal cum to hous of the theef, and to 
hous of the swerynge falsly in my name; 
and it shal dwelle in mydil of his hous, 
and shal waaste hym, and his trees, and 
shis stoones. And the aungel wente out, 
that spak in me, and saide to me, Reyse 
thin ee3en, and see, what this thing is, 
sthat goth out. “And Y saide, What is 
it? And he saith, This is an amfer, or 
a vessel that sum men clepen a tankard, 
goynge out. And he saide, This is the 
z7ee3e of hem in eche lond. And lo! a 
talent of lede was born; and loo! a wom- 
man syttynge in mydil of the amfer. 
8 And he saide, This is vnpitee. And he 
keste hir doun in mydil of the amfer, 
and sente a gobet of leed in the mouth 
9therof. And Y reyside myn ee3en, and 
sau3, and loo! two wymmen goynge out, 
and a spirit in the wengus of hem; and 
thei hadden weengus as weengus of a 


& brid billes mu. 


yOm.n. Zstoodenn. 4TJ siz 1. 
pot CEFGIIKMNPQHSUY. 
potKx.  § the myddil crrmsux sec. m. 


Nprsx pr.m. ‘inthe1. las the. 


h Y reiside 4. 


b Om. CUNPR pr. m. U. 

€ the myddil Fux see. m. myddis m. 
h amfore ceFGHimNnPansu. amfore, ether pot K sec. m. 

m amfore cEFGuImNorans. amfore, ether pol K see. m. 


ZECHARIAH. 751 


the tweyne eeris, ether ripe fruyt, of 
olyues, that ben bisidis the twei bilis of 
gold, in whiche ben oile vesselis of gold ? 
And he seide to me, and spak, Whether 13 
thou woost not what ben these thingis ? 
And Y seide, No, my lord. And he seide, 14 
These ben twei sones of oile ofY schynyng, 
whiehe stonden* ny3 to the lordli gouern- 
our of al erthe. 


CAP. V. 


And Y was conuertid, and reiside myn! 
i3en, and si3*, and lo! a book fleynge. 
And he seide to me, What seest thon ?2 
And Y seide, Lo! Y se a book fleynge ; 
the lengthe therof was of twenti eubitis, 
and the breede therof of ten cubitis. And3 
he seide to me, This is the curs, that go- 
ith on the face of al erthe; for ech theef 
schal be demed, as it is writun there; and 
ech man swerynge, schal be demyd of this 
also. Y schal lede out it, seith the Lord4 
of oostis, and ‘it schal come to the hous 
of a theef, and to the® hous of hym that 
swerith falsli in my name; and it schal 
dwelle in myddil*® of hys hous, and schal 
waaste hyim, and hise trees, and_hise 
stoonys. And the aungel wente out, that 5 
spak in me, and seide to me, Reyse thin 
izen, and se, what this thing is, that goith 
out. And Y seide, What is it? And hee 
seide, This is a pot’ goyng out. And he 
seide, This is the i3e of hem in al erthe. 
And lo! a talent of leed was borun; and7 
lo! a womman sittynge in myddil¢ of the 


pot’, And he seide, This is vnpite, ethers 
onfeithfulnesse. And he castide doun hir 


in myddil® of the pot, and sente a gobet 
of leed in to the! mouth therof. And Yo 
reiside myn iz3en, and si3, and lo! twei 
wymmen goyuge out, and a spirit in* 
wyngis of hem; and thei hadden wyngis 
as! wyngis of a kite, and reisiden the pot™ 
bitwixe heuene and erthe. And Y seide1o 


i Om. acu. 


¢ the myddil su. 4 an amfore, ether a 
f amfore CEFGHIMNPQRSU. amfore, ether 
i Om. 


752 


kijte, and reysiden the amfer bitwix he- 
iouen and erthe. And Y saide to the 
aungel that spac in me, Whither beren 
1ithese the amfer? And he sayde to me, 
That an hous be beeldid therto in the 
lond of Sennaar, and be stablid, and putte 
there vpon his foundement. 


CAP. VI. 


1 And Y was conuertid, and Y reyside 
myne e3en, and saw3, and leo! foure four- 
horsid cartis goynge out of the mydil of 
two hillis, and the hillis hillis of brass. 

2In the first foure horsid carte rede horsis, 
and in the secound foure horsid cart 

3blake horsis; and in the thrid foure 
horsid cart white horsis, and in the 
fourth foure horsid carte dyuerse horsis 
astronge. And Y answerde, and saide to 
the aungel that spac in me, What ben 
sthese thingus, my lord? And the aungel 
answerde, and saith to me, These ben 
foure wyndis of heuen, whiche gon out, 
that thei stonde byfore the lordshipere of 
eal erthe. In whiche weren blake horsis, 
wente out in to the* lond of the north; 
and the white wenten out after hem; and 
the dyuers wenten out to the lond of the 
7south. Forsothe thei that weren streng- 
est wenten out, and sou3ten for to gO, 
and renne aboute bi al erthe. And he 
saide, Go 3e!, walke 3e thoru the erthe. 
sAnd thei walkiden thorn erthe™. And 
he clepide me, and spac to me, saiynge, 

Loo! thei that gon out in to Iond of the 
north, maden my spirit for to reste in 

9lond of the north. And the word of the 

10 Lord is maad to me, sayinge, Take thou 
of the transmygracioun, or caitiftee, of 

Olday, and of Toby, and of Byday®; and 
thou shalt cum in that day, and thou 
shalt entre in to the hous of J: osye, sone 
of Sophonye, that camen fro Babyloyne. 

11 And thou shalt take gold and syluer, and 


k Om. 4. |! Or. a. 


n amfore CEFGHIMNTQRSU. amfore, ether pol K sec. m. 


wenten I. 
EIKSU. 


v into BE. 


8 Om. ACHMNPQRX sec. m. 
Ww Om. n. 


xOm.wn. Y the north ixsv. 


ZECHARIAH. 


m the erthe u. 


t the erthe 1. 
z of hem that vu sec. m. 


V. 10o—VI. It. 


to the aungel that spak in me, Whidur 
beren these the pot"? And he seide toii 
me, That an hous be bildid therto in the 
lond of Sennaar, and be stablischid, and 
set there on his foundement. : 


CAP. VI. 


And Y was conuertid, and reiside mynt 
i3en, and si3, and lo! foure horsid cartis 
goynge out of the myddil of tweyne hillis, 
and the hillis weren hillis of bras. In the2 
firste foure horsid carte weren reed horsis, 
and® in the secounde foure horsid carte 
weren blac horsis; and in the thriddes 
foure horsid carte weren white horsis, and 
in the fourthe foure horsid carte weren 
dyuerse horsis, and? stronge. And Y an-4 
sweride, and seide to the aungel that spak 
in me, What ben these thingis, my lord ? 
And the aungel aunsweride, and seide tos 
me, These ben foure wyndis of heuene, 
whiche goen out, that thei stonde bifor the 
lordschipere of al erthe. In which werene 
blake horsis, wenten? out in to the lond of 
the north; and the white wenten out aftir 
hem; and the dyuerse wenten out to the® 
lond of the south. Forsothe thei that7 
weren strengeste wenten out, and sou3ten 
for to go, and renne aboute bi al erthe. 
And he seide, Go 3e, and walke 3e thorou3 
the erthe. And thei walkiden thorou3 
erthe'. And he clepide me, and spak tos 
me, and seide, Lo! thei that goon out in 
to lond® of north’, maden my spirit for” 
to reste in the* lond of northY. And thes 
word of the Lord was maad to me, and 
seide, Take thou of* the transmygracioun, 10 
ether caitiftee, of Oldai, and of Tobie, and 
of Idaye; and thou schalt come in that dai, 
and schalt entre in to the® hous of Josie, 
sone of Sofonye, that camen fro Babiloyne. 
And thou schalt take gold and siluer, and 1) 


n Bidai 4. Yday G sec. m. 


P Om. cEFHRU. q thei 
u the lond cksux sec.m. the north 
a Om. EFHMNPQRSX pr. m. 


© Om. A sec. m. 


VI. 12——VII. 7. 


thou shalt make crownes, and putte in 
the hed of Jhesu, sone of Josedech, the 
12grete preste; and thou shalt speke to 
hym, sayinge, These thingus saith the 
Lord of oostus, sayinge, Loo! a man, 
Eest, or Springynge, his name, and vndir 
hym shal springe; and he shal beelde a 
13 temple to the Lord. And he shal ful make 
the temple to the Lord, and he shal bere 
glorie, and shal sitte, and shal be lord 
vpon his seete; and counseile of pees shal 
14 be bitwixe hem two. And crownys shuln 
be to Helem, and Toby, and Ydaie, and 
Hen, the sone of Sophonye, a memorial 
15in temple" of the Lord. And thei that 
ben fer, shuln cumme, and bylde in the 
temple of the Lord; and 3e shuln witen, 
for the Lord of oostis sente me to 3ou. 
Sothely this thing shal be, 3if bi heeryng 
je shuln heere the voyce of the Lord 
jour God. 


CAP. VII. 


1 And it is maad in the fourthe 3eere of 
Darius, kyng, the word of the Lord is 
maad to Zacharie, in the fourthe day of 

2the nynthe monethe, that is Casleu. And 
Sarasar, and Rogumelech, and men that 
weren with hem, senten to the hous of 
the Lord, for to preye the face of the 

3 Lord; that thei shulden saye to prestis of 
the hous of the Lord of oostis, and to 
prophetis, spekynge, Wher it is to wepe 
to me in the fifthe moneth, or Y shal 
halewe me, as Y dide now manye 3eeris ? 

4And the word of the Lord of oostis is 

5maad to me, sayinge, Speke thou to al 
the peple of the lond, and to prestis, say- 
inge, Whenne 3e fastiden, and weiliden 
in the fifthe and seuenthe monethe, by 
seuenty 3eeris, wher 3e fastiden a fast ‘to 

' 6me°? And when 3e eeten, and drunken, 
wher 3ee eeten not ‘to 3ou?, and drunken 

7to 3our self? Wher wordis of prophetis 


® the temple u. 


bthesones. list asec.m. 4 the sone 1K. 


myndeful thing zy. memorial, either a thing for mynde GKMNQRSUX. 


h the wordis 1 sec. m. 
VOL. III. 


ZECHARIAH. 


° Om. 4. 


753 


schalt make corouns, and putte on the 
heed of Jhesu, the greet preest, sone” of 
Josedech ; and schalt speke to hym, and 12 
seie, The Lord of oostis seith these thingis, 
seiynge, Lo! a man, Comynge forth, ether 
Borun, is his name, and vndir him it schal 
sprynge. And he schal bilde a temple to 
the Lord, and he schal make a temple to1s 
the Lord; and he schal bere glorie, and 
schal sitte, and schal be lord on his seete; 
and the preest schal be on his seete, and 
counsel of pees schal be bitwixe hem 
tweyne. And corouns schulen be to He-14 
lem, and to Tobie, and to Idate, and to 
Hen, sone! of Sofonye, a memorial in the 
temple of the Lord. And thei that ben 1s 
fer, schulen come, and bilde in the temple 
of the Lord; and 3e schulen wite, that the 
Lord of oostis sente me to 3ou. Sotheli 
this thing schal be, if bi heryng 3e schulen 
here the vois of 3oure Lord God. 


CAP. VII. 


And it is maad in the fourthe 3eer of 1 
Darius, kyng, the word of the Lord was 
maad to Sacarie, in the fourthe dai of the 
uynthe monethe, that is Caslew*. And2 
Sarasar, and Rogumelech, and men that 
weren with hem, senten to the hous of 
the Lord, for to preye the face of the 
Lord; that thei schulden seie to prestis of 3 
the hous of the Lord of oostis, and to pro- 
fetis, and speke, Whether it is to wepe to 
me in the fyuethe monethe, ether Y schal 
halowe me, as Y dide now many 3eeris? 
And the word of the Lord was maad to4 
me, and seide, Speke thou to al the puples 
of the lond, and to prestis, and seie thou, 
Whanne 3e fastiden, and weiliden in the 
fyueth® and seuenthe monethe, bi these se- 
uenti 3eeris, whether je fastiden a fast to 
me? And whanne 3e eeten, and drunken, 6 
whether 3e eten not to 30u, and drunken 
not to 30u silf? Whether wordis® of pro-7 


P togidre 4. 


© memorial, or thing for mynde cru. memorial, or 
£ Om. rr. & fifthe monethe 1. 


5D 


*that is, No- 
uembre. AENP 
suUY. 


754 ZECHARIAH. vil. 8—-VIII. 4. 


ben not, whiche the Lord spak in the 
hond of former prophetis, when 3it Jeru- 
salem was enhabited, and was ful of 
ritcliessis, and it, and the citees therof in 
cumpas? therof, and at the south and in 
afeeldi place was enhabited? And the 
word of the Lord is maad to Zacharie, 
sayinge, These thingis saith the Lord of 
» oostis, sayinge, Deme 3e trewe dome, and 
mercy, and doyngus of mercy do 3e, eche 
1oman to his brother. And nyl 3e falsly 
chalenge the wydue, and fadirlesse, or 
moderlesse, and the cumlyng, and pore 
man; and a man thenke not in his herte 
i1yuel to his brother. And thei wolden 


not take heed, and thei turneden awey 


the shuldre goynge awey, and aggre- 
giden, or maden heuy, her eeris, lest 
izthei herden. And thei puttiden her herte 
as an adamaunt, lest thei herden the law, 
and wordis whiche the Lord of oostus 
sente in his holy Spirit, by hond of 
former prophetis; and grete indigna- 
cioun is maad of the Lord of oostis. 
isAnd it is don, as he spak; and as thei 
herden not, thei shuln crye, and Y shal 
not heere hem, saith the Lord of oostis. 
i4And Y seatride hem by alle rewmys, 
whiche thei knewen not, and the lond is 
desolate fro hem, for that there was not 
aman goynge aud turnynge a3ein; and 
thei han putt the desirable lond in to 
desert. 
CAP. VIII. 
1 And the word of the Lord of oostis is 
zmaad to me, sayinge, These thingis saith 
the Lord of oostis, Y hatide Syon with 
grete feruour, and with grete indigna- 
scioun Y hatid it. These thingus saith 
the Lord of oostis, Y am turned a3ein to 
Syon, and Y shal dwelle in the mydil of 
Jerusalem ; and Jerusalem shal be clepid 
a cytee of trewthe, and the hill of the 
4Lord, an hill halewid. ‘These thingus 


fetis ben not, whiche the Lord spak in the 
hond of the formere profetis, whanne 3it 
Jerusalem was enhabited, and was ful of 
richessis, and it, and citees' therof in cum- 
pas therof, and at the south and in feeldi 
place was enhabited? And the word ofs 
the Lord was maad to Sacarie, and seide, 
The Lord of oostis saith these thingis, 
and spekith, Deme 3e trewe dom, and dog 
3e merci, and doyngis of merci, ech man 
with his brother. And nyle 3e falsli1o 
calenge a widewe, and fadirles, ether* mo- 
dirles', and™ comelyng, and® pore man; 
and a man thenke not in his herte yuel 
to his brother. .And thei wolden not 
‘take heede®, and thei? turneden awei the 
schuldre, and 3eden awei, and’ ‘maden 
heuy' her eeris, lest thei herden. And 12 
thei pnttiden® her herte ast adamaunt, lest 
thei herden the lawe, and wordis whiche 
the Lord of oostis sente in his Spirit, bi 
the hond of the formere profetis; and 
greet indignacioun was maad of the Lord 
of oostis. And it is doon, as he spak; and 13 
as thei herden not, so thei schulen crie, 
and Y schal not here, seith the Lord of 
oostis. And Y scateride hem bi allets 
rewines, whiche thei knewen not, and the 
lond is desolat fro hem; for that there was 
not a man goynge and turnynge a3en, 
and thei han put desirablet lond in to 
desert. 


CAP. VIII. 


And the word of the Lord of oostis was | 
maad to me, and seide, The Lord of oostis 2 
seith these thingis, Y hatide Sion with 
greet feruour, and with greet . indigna- 
cioun Y hatide it. The Lord of oostis3 
seith these thingis, Y am turned ajen to 
Sion, and Y schal dwelle in the myddil¥ 
of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem schal be 
clepid a citee of treuthe, and hil of the 
Lord’ schal be clepid an hil halewid. 


4 the cumpas 4. 


ithe citees 1. k andixs. |! modirles child 1xs. 


4 and thet mx, 


Mandaiks. andaiKs. 0° perceyue 1. P Om.1. 


‘ aggregiden, ether [or EPY] maden heny cRFGHIKMNPQRSUXY. § settiden GMN sec. m. 
Qsx. setten 1. tasanik. tt desiderablec. 4 myddis 1. 


v Lord of oostis uv sec. m. 


Vill. 5—14. 


saith the Lord of oostis, 3it olde men 
and olde wymmen shuln dwelle in streetis 
of Jerusalem, and the staff of a man in 
shis hond, for multitude of 3eeris. And 
streetis of the citee shuln be fulfillid with 
infauntis and maydens, pleyinge in the 
6streetis of it. These thingus saith the 
Lord of oostis, 3if it shal be seen hard 
in ee3en of the relikis of this peple in tho 
dayes, wher in myn eejen it shal be 
vhard, saith the Lord of oostis? These 
thingus saith the Lord of oostis, Loo! 
Y shal saue my peple of lond™ of the 
eest, and of the lond of goynge doun of 
asthe sunne; and Y shal leede hem to, and 
thei shuln dwelle in mydil of Jerusalem ; 
and thei shuln be to me in to peple, and Y 
shal be to hem in to God, and in trewthe, 
yand in rijtwisnesse. 
the Lord of oostis, Be 3oure hondis coun- 
fortid, whiche heeren in these days these 
wordis by the mouth of prophetis, in the 
day in whiche the hous of the Lord of 
oostis is foundid, that the temple shulde 
i0be beeldid. Sothely bifore tho days hijre 
of men was not, nether hijre of werk 
beestis was, nether to man entringe and 
goynge out was pees for tribulacioun ; 
and Y departide alle men, eche a3einus 
ithis nei3bore. Now forsothe not after 
the former days Y shal do to the relikis 
of this peple, saith the Lord of oostus, 
i2but seed of pees shal be; the vyne 3erd 
shal 3eue his fruyt, and the erthe shal 
3eue his buriownyng, and heuens shuln 
3eue her dewe; and Y shal make the 
relikis of this peple for to welde alle 
isthese thingus. And it shal be, as 3e, 
hous of Juda, and the hous of Yrael, 
weren cursynge in heithen meu, Y shal 
saaue 30u, and 3e shuln be blessyng. Nyl 
je dreede, be 30ur hondis coumnfortid ; 
i4for these thingus saith the Lord of 
oostis, As Y thou3te for to tourmente 


ZECHARIAH. 


These thingis saith 


755 


The Lord of oostis seith these thingis, 4 
3it elde men and elde wymmen schulen 
dwelle in the stretis of Jerusalem, and 
the staf of man” in* his hond, for the mul- 
titude of 3eeris. And the stretis of thes 
cite schulen be fillid with ‘3onge children’ 
and maidens’, pleiynge in the stretis ‘of 
it*, The Lord of oostis seith these thingis, « 
Though it schal be seyn hard bifor the 
izen of relifs® of this puple in tho daies, 
whether bifor myn izen it schal be hard, 
seith the Lord of oostis? The Lord of7 
oostis seith these thingis, Lo! Y schal 
saue my puple fro the lond of the eest, 
and fro lond® of goynge’ doun of the 
sunne; and Y schal brynge hem, ands 
thei schulen dwelle in the myddil of Jeru- 
salem; and thei schulen be to me in toa 
puple, and Y schal be to hem in to God, 
and in treuthe, and in ri3twisnesse®. Theo 
Lord of oostis seith these thingis, Be 3oure 
hondis coumfortid, whiche heren in these 
daies these wordis bi the mouth of pro- 
fetis, inf the dai in which the hous of the 
Lord of oostis is foundid, that the temple 
schulde be bildid. Sotheli® bifore tho daies 10 
hire' of men was not, nether hire! of werk 
beestis was, nether to man* entrynge and 
goynge out was pees for tribulacioun ; and 
Y lefte alle inen, ech a3ens his nei3bore. 
But now not after the formere daies Yu 
schal do to relifs' of this puple, seith the 
Lord of oostis, but seed™ of pees schal 12 
be; vyne3erd” schal 3yue. his fruyt, and 
erthe® schal 3yue his buriownyng, and 
heuenes schulen 3yue her dew; and Y 
schal make the relifs? of this puple for to 
welde alle these thingis. And it sehal be, 13 
as the’ hous of Juda and hous’ of Israel 
weren cursyng in’ hethene men, so Y 
schal saue 30u, and 3e schulen be bless- 
yng. Nyle 3e drede, be 30ure hondis coum- 
fortid; for the Lord of oostis seith these 14 
thingis, As Y thou3te fort to turmente 


® the lond n. 


Waman U sec, m. 
bthe remenantis R. © the lond 1KRsv. 
sotheli r. hthe hirer. ithe hire pr, 
1 the vynejerd 1. the vyne R. © the erthe r. 
Samongr. Om. v. 


X js in mM. shal be in Ru sec. m. 
d the goyng 1Rs. 
k men Rr. 
P remenauntis R. 


zdamysels rk. 4 therof x. 
¢ riztfulnesse ER. fandinr. & And 
I the relifs 1. the remenantis R. m the seed R. 
43e, the R.  ‘* the hous crkrsu. 


Y infauntis c et ceteri. 


5D2 


756 


jou, whanne 3oure fadris hadden terrid 
isme to wrath, saith the Lord, and Y 
hadde not mercy, so Y connertid thou3te 
in these days for to do wele to the hous 
of Juda and Jerusalem; nyl 3e dreede. 
is Forsothe these ben the wordis whiche 3e 
shulu do; speke 3e trewthe, eche man 
with his neiz3bore; deme 3e treuthe and 
i7dom of pees in 3our 3atis; and thinke 
3e not in 3oure hertis, eche man yuel 
a3einys his freend, and loue 3e not a 
fals oth; forsothe alle these thingus ben, 
iswhiche Y hate, saith the Lord. And 
the word of the Lord of hoostis is maad 
igto me, sayinge, These thingus saith the 
Lord of oostis, Fastyng of the fourthe 
monethe, and fastynge of the fifthe, and 
fastyng of the seuenthe, aud fastyng of 
the tenthe, shal be to the hous of Juda 
in to ioye and gladnesse, and in to ful 
cleere solempuytees ; loue 3e oonly treuthe 
goand pees. These thingis saith the Lord 
of oostis, On eche syde peplis shuln cume, 
avand dwelle in many citees; and the 
dwellers shuln go, oon to an other, sai- 
ynge, Go we, and biseche the face of the 
Lord, and seeke we the Lord of oostus; 
gzalso Y shal go. And many peplis shuln 
cumme, and stronge folkis, for to seeke 
the Lord of oostus in Jerusalem, for to 
asbiseche the face of the Lord. These 
things saith the Lord of oostis, In tho 
days, in whiche ten men of alle tungis, 
or langagis, of heithen men shuln cacche, 
and thei shuln catche the hem of a man 
Jew, sayinge, We shuln go with 30u; 
forsothe we han herd, for God is with 
30u. 
CAP. IX. 
1 The charge of word’ of the Lord, in 
the lond of Adrach, and Damask, reste 
therof; for the Lord is the ee3e of man, 
zand of alle the lynagis of Yrael. And 
Emath in termes therof, and Tyrus, and 


ZECHARIAH. 


VIII, 15 —-IX. 2. 


3ou, whanne 3oure fadris hadden terrid me 
to wraththe, seith the Lord, and Y hadde1s 
not merci, so Y conuertid thou3te in these 
daies for" to do wel to the hous of Juda 
and Jerusalem’; nyle 3e drede. Therfor 16 
these ben the wordis whiche 3e schulen 
do; speke 3e treuthe, ech man with his 
neizbore; deme je trenthe and dom" of 
pees in 3oure 3atis; and thenke 3e not in17 
3oure hertis, ony man yuel a3ens his frend, 
and lone 3e* not a fals ooth; for’ alle thes 
thingis it ben, whiche Y hate, seith the 
Lord. And the word of the Lord of18 
oostis was maad to me, and seide, The 19 
Lord of oostis seith these thingis, Fast- 
yug* of the fourthe monethe, ‘and fastyng 
of the fyuethe*, and fastyng® of the se- 
uenthe, and fasting® of the tenthe, schal be 
to the hous of Juda in‘ to ioie® and gilad- 
nes, and inf to solempnitees ful cleer; loue 
3e oneli treuthe and pees. The Lord of 20 
oostis seith these thingis, Puplis schulen 
come on ech side, and dwelle in many 
citees ; and the dwelleris schulen go, oon 21 
to an other, and seie, Go we, and biseche 
the face of the Lord, and seke we the 
Lord of oostis; also I shal go. And many 22 
puplis schulen come, and strong folkis, for 
to seke the Lord of oostis in Jerusalem, 
and for’ to biseche the face of the Lord. 
The Lord of oostis seith these thingis, In 23 
tho daies, in whiche ten inen of alle lan- 
gagis of hethene men schulen catche’, and 
thei schulen catche’ the hemme of a man 
Jew!, and seye, We schulen go with 30u; 
for we han herd, that God is with jou. 


CAP. IX. 


The birthun of the word of the Lord, 
in the lond of Adrach, and of Damask, the 
reste therof; for ‘of the Lord is™ the ize 
of man, and of alle lynagis of Israel. And2 
Emath in® termes® therof, and Tirns, and 


8 the word n. 


« Om. R. 


‘ . ¥ to Jerusalem rx. W the dome r. »Om.R. Y for whix. 4% The fastyng rR. 

Om. rR. the fastyng R. ¢the fasting r. 4 and Apr.m, CEGHKMNPQUX. €theioier. f Om. 1 
&Om. Rr. * tungis, or langagis caranikmNrgsuxy. Vtaker. taker. laJewrusec.m. ™ the 
Lord of rk. "shal be in ru. © the termes r. 


IX. 3-—13. 


Sydon; sotheli thei token to hem wis- 
3dam gretely. And Tyrus beeldide his 
strengthynge, and gadride syluer as erthe, 
4and gold as fen of streetis. Loo! the 
Lord shal weelde it, and shal smyte in 
the see the strengthe therof, and it shal 
sbe deuoured in fijr. Aschalon shal se, 
and shal drede; and Gaza, and shal so- 
rewe ful myche; and Acharon, for the 
hoope therof is confoundid ; and the kyng 
shal perishe of Gaza, and Asealon shal 
snot be enhabited ; and a departer shal 
sitte in Azoto, and Y shal distruye the 
7pride of Philistynes. And Y shal take 
awey the blood therof of the mouth of it, 
and the abhomynaciouns therof of mydil 
of the teeth therof, and it also shal be 
left to oure God; and it shal be as a 
duyk in Juda, and Accharon as Jebusey. 
sAnd Y shal enuyrounne myn hous of 
these that holden kny3thode to me, go- 
ynge and turnynge a3ein; aud the ex- 
actoure, 07 the uniust axer, shal namore 
passe vpon hem, for now Y saw3 in myn 
geejen. Thou dou3ter of Syon, ioye with 
-outeforth ynow3, syuge, thou dou3ter 
of Jerusalem; loo! thi kyng shal cume 
to thee, he iust, and saueour; he pore, 
styinge vpon a she asse, and vpon a fole, 
1osone of the she.asse. And Y shal sea- 
tere the foure horsid carte of Effraym, 
and the hors of Jerusalem, and bowe of 
the bateile shal be distruyed; and he 
shal speke pees to heithen men, and 
power of hym fro se vn to se, and fro 
11 floodis vu to eendis of the erthe. And thou 
in blood of thi testament sentist out thi 
boutrden fro the lake, in whiche is not 
12water. Be 3e conuertid to strengthing, 
3e bounden of hoope; and this day Y 
shewynge double thingus shal 3eelde to 
i3thee, for Y shal stretche forth to me 
Juda as a bowe, Y shal fulfille the lond 
of Effraym. And Y shal reyse thi sones, 
Syon, vpon thi sones, Greece, and Y shal 


P For r. 4 For. ‘schal make r. 8 of him Rr. 
¥tomet. 
Z colt R. 


se R. 


a the sone nh. 


fthe seer. & the blood rn. | the lake ir. 


ZECHARIAH. 


xX exactour, ether [or EpY] vniust axere CRFGHMIKMNPQSUXY. exactour R. 
> Om. EFGHUMNPQUX pr. m. ¥. 


757 


Sidon; for thei token to hem wisdom 
greetli. And? Tirus bildide his strength-s 
ing, and gaderide siluer as erthe, and 
gold as fen of stretis. Lo%! the Lords 
schal welde it, and schal smyte in the see 
the strengthe therof, and it schal be de- 
uourid bi fier. Asealon schal see, ands 
schal drede ; and Gasa, ‘and schal™ sorewe 
ful myehe; and Acearon, for the hope 
therof is confoundid ; and the kyng schal 
perische fro Gasa, and Ascalon schal not 
be enhabited; and a departere schal sitte« 
in Asotus, and Y schal distrie the pride of 
Filisteis. And Y schal take awei the7 
blood therof* fro the mouth of him, and 
abhomynaciouns' of hym fro the myddil 
of teeth" of hym, and he also’ schal be 
left to our God; and he schal be as a duyk 
in Juda, and Accaron as Jebusei. And Ys 
sehal cumpasse myn hous of these that 
holden kni3thod to me, and goen, and 
turnen a3en”; and ‘an vniust axere* schal 
no more passe on hem, for now Y si3 with 
myn izen. Thou dou3ter of Sion, make» 
ioie withoutforth ynow, synge’, thou 
dou3ter of Jerusalem; lo! thi kyng schal 
come to thee, he iust, and sauyour ; he pore, 
and stiynge on a sche asse, and on a fole’, 
sone* of a> sche asse. And Y schal leese 10 
foure® horsid carte of Effraym, and* an 
hors of Jerusalem, and the bouwe of batel 
sehal be distried ; and he schal speke pees 
to hethene men, and the power of him 
schal be fro see® til to seef, and fro floodis 
til to the endis of erthe. And thou init 
blood& of thi testament sentist out thi 
boundun mez fro lake, in which is not! 
water. 3e boundun of hope, be conuertid 12 
to strengthing; and to dai Y schewynge* 
schal 3elde to thee double thingis, for Y is 
schal stretehe forthe to ne Juda as a bowe, 
Y fillide ‘the lond of! Effraymm. And Y schal 
reise thi sones, thou Sion, on thi sones, 
thou lond of Grekis, and Y schal sette 
thee as the swerd of stronge men. Andts 


uthe teeth in. YOm.1. 
y synge hertili r. 
¢ the foure 1x sec.m. afourer. 2Om.N. © the 
Inor. *telle, and Yr. ! Om. Rr. 


t the abhominacions rr. 


758 


i4putte thee as swerd of stronge. And the 
Lord God shal be seen vpon hem, and 
the swerd of hym shal go out as leyt. 
is And the Lord God shal synge in trumpe, 
and shal" go in whirlwynd of the south; 
the Lord of oostis shal keuere, o7 de- 
Jende, hem, and thei shuln deuouren, and 
inaken suget in stones of slynge; and 
thei drynkynge shuln be fulfillid as with 
wyne, and shuln be fillid as cruetis, and 
isas hornes of the auter. And the Lord 
God of hem shal saaue hem in that day, 
as a floc of his peple, for holy stoonys 
shuln be reysid vpon the lond of hym. 
17 What forsothe is the good of hym, and 
what the faire of hym, uo but whete of 
chosen, and wyne buriownynge virgynes? 


CAPS 


1 Axe 3e reyn of the Lord in euenyng 
tyme, and the Lord shal make snowis, 
and reyn of mi3t™ of the cloude; and he 
sha] 3ene to hem, eche by hem self, erbe 

2in the feeld. For symulacris spaken vn- 
profitable thing, and dyuynours sawen 
lesyng; and dremers spaken veynly, 
ydely thei confortiden; therfor thei ben 
ledde to as’ a floc’, thei shuln be tour- 

smentid, for sheperd is not to hem. Vpon 
sheperdis my woodnes is wrothe, and 
vpon goot buekis Y shal visite; for the 
Lord of oostis hath visited his floc, the 
hous of Juda, and hath putt hem* as 
ahors of his glorye in batel. Of hym 
corner, and of him a litil pale, of hym 
bowe of batel, and of hym eche exactour, 
sor vniust aver, shal go out togidre. And 
thei shuln be as stronge men, defoulynge 
cley of wayes in bateil, and thei shuln 
fizte, for the Lord is with hem; and sty- 
sers of horsis shuln be confoundid. And 
Y shal coumforte the hous of Juda, and 
Y shal saaue the hous of Joseph; and Y 


“he shal k pr.m, nu ny3t 4. 


ZECHARIAH. 


IX. 14—X. 6. 


the Lord God schal be seyn on™ hem, and 
the dart of him" schal go out as leit. And 15 
the Lord God schal synge in a trumpe, 
and schal go in® whirlwynd of the south ; 
the Lord of oostis schal defende? hem, and 
thei schulen deuoure, and make suget with 
stoonys of a slynge; and thei drynkynge4 
schulen be’ fillid as with wyn, and schulen 
be fillid as viols’, and as hornes of the 
auter. And the Lord God ‘of hem* schal 16 
saue hem in that dai, as a floc" of his 
puple, for hooli stoonus schnlen be reisid 
on the lond of hym. For’ what is the17 
good of hym, and what zs the faire” of 
hym, no but whete* of chosun men, and 
wyn buriownynge virgynsy ? 


CAP. X. 


Axe 3e of the Lord reyn in late? tyme,1 
aud the Lord schal make snowis, and reyn 
of my3t of cloude; and he schal 3yne to 
hem, to ech bi hym silf, erbe in the feeld. 
For syinylacris spaken vnprofitable thing®, 2 
and diuynours saien leesyng ; and dremeris 
spaken veynli, ydily thei coumfortiden ; 
therfor thei ben led awei as a floc, thei 
schulen be turmentid, for a scheepherd is 
not to hem. On? scheepherdis my strongs 
veniaunce is wrooth, and on buckis® of 
geet Y schal visite; for the Lord of ovstis 
hath visitide his floc, the hous of Juda, 
and hath put? hem as an hors of hys glorie 
in batel. Of hym ‘schal be® a cornere, 
and of hym af litil pale, of hym a& bowe 
of* batel, and of hym ech vniust axere' 
schal go ont togidere. And thei schulens 
be as stronge men, defoulynge clei of weies 
in hatel, and thei schulen fi3te, for the 
Lord is with hem; and stieris of horsis 
schulen be confoundid. And Y schal coum-6 
forte the hous of Juda, and Y schal saue 
the hous of Joseph; and Y schal conuerte 


VYysasa. Wfolew. * him a. 


: m of LG nhem Rr. © in to the R. P kyuere, ether defende cet ceteri. 4 schulen drinke rR. * greetli 
bg R. § viols, ether cruetis cet ceteri. tOm.n. %fole A pr.m. Y For whi x. W faire thing ru sec. m. 

the wheter. YOm.r. 7 latefulx. thingesr. > Vponr. Cthe buckisr. ‘set Rr. is R. 
fisan. Eisan. binr., 


1 exactour, ether uniust axere CRFGHIKMNPQSUXY, exactour R. 


X. 7—=XI. 5. 


shal conuerte hem, for Y shal haue mercye 
of hem; and thei shuln he as thei weren, 
whanne Y hadde not cast hem awey; 
forsothe Y the Lord God of hem, and Y 
7shal graciousely heere hem. And thei 
shuln be as stronge of Effraym, and the 
herte of hem shal glade, as of wyne; and 
the sonys of hein shuln see, and glade, 
and the hert of hem shal ioye with oute- 
sforth in the Lord. Y shal hisse, or softly 
speeke, to hem, and Y shal gedre hem, 
for Y a3ein bou3te hem, and Y shal mul- 
tiplie hem, as thei weren byfore multi- 
9plied. And Y shal sowe hein in peplis, 
and of fer thei shuln bithenke of me; 
and thei shuln lyue with her sonys, and 
1oshuln turne a3ein. And Y shal a3ein 
leede hem fro the lond of Egypt, and of 
Assiriens Y shal gedre hem; and to the 
lond of Galaad and of Liban Y shal 
bringe hem, and place shal not be 
1 founden in hem. 
wawe of the se, aud shal smyte wawes 
in the see, and alle depnessis of flood 
shuln be confoundid; and the pride of 
Assur shal be meekid, and the sceptre of 
12 Egipt shal go awey. Y shal coumforte 
hem in the Lord, and in the naine of 
hym thei shuln walke, saith the Lord. 


CAP. XI. 


1 Liban, opne thi 3atis, and fijr shal 
2eete thi cedris. 3oule, thou beche, for 
the cedre felle doun, for the grete ben 
distruyed ; joule, 3e ookis of Basan, for 
the stronge wijlde wod is kitt doun. 
3 Voice of 3oulyng of sheperdis, for the 
grete doyng of hem is distruyed; voice 
of roryng of lyouns, for the pride of Jor- 
adan is waastid. These thingus saith the 
Lord my God, Feede thou beestis of slau3- 
ster, whom thei that weeldiden slewen; 
and sorewiden not, and soulden hem, say- 
inge, Blessid the Lord, we ben maad 
riche. And the sheperdis of hem spariden 


m And Iu. 
t go KR. 
w forest R. 
b inaden no sorewe R. 


k stronge men rR. | the sones R. 
ajen Rk. ‘that a. & depthis r. 
wylde s. wilde v. wijld x. 
sec.m.  ® killiden r. 


ZECHARIAH. 


And he shal passe in’ 


n Om. Rk. 
u Om. rR. 
X as A pr. it. CEFGUMNPQU. 
¢ and thei 1. 


759 


hem, for Y schal haue merci on hem; and 
thei schulen be as thei weren, whanne Y 
hadde not cast awei hem; for Y schal be 
the Lord God of hem, and Y schal gra- 
ciousli here hem. And thei schulen be as7 
the stronge* of Effraym, and the herte of 
hem schal be glad, as of wyn; and sones! 
of hem schulen se, and be glad, and the 
herte of hem schal make ioie withoutforth 
in the Lord. Y™ schal hisse, ‘ether softlis 
speke", to hem, and Y schal gadere hem®, 
for Y a3en bou3te hem, and Y schal inul- 
tiplie hem, as thei weren multiplied bi- 
fore. And Y schal sowe hem in? puplis,9 
and fro fer thei schulen bithenke of me; 
and thei schulen lyne with her sones, and 
schulen turne a3en. And Y schal ‘ajen10 
lede? hem fro the lond of Egipt, and Y 
schal gadere hem fro Assiriens; and Y 
schal brynge hem to the lond of Galaad 
and of Liban, and place schal not be 
foundun to hem. And he schal passe in 
the’ wawe of the see, and schal smyte 
wawis in the see, and alle depnessis* of 
flood schulen be confoundid ; and the pride 
of Assur schal be mekid, and the ceptre of 
Egipt schal go awei. Y schal coumforte 12 
hem in the Lord, and thei schnlen walket 
in the name of hym, seith the Lord. 


CAP XI. 


Thou Liban, opene thi 3atis, and fier: 
schal ete thi cedris. 3elle, thou fir tre, for 2 
the cedre felle doun, for grete men ben" 
distried ; 3elle, 3e okis of Basan, for the 
stronge welde’ wodeW is* kit doun. Vois¥3 
of 3ellyng of schepherdis, for the greet 
worschip of hem is distried; vois* of ror- 
yng of liouns, for the pride of Jordan is 
wastid. My Lord God seith these thingis, 4 
Fede thou beestis of slau3ter, whiche theis 
that weldiden slowen*; and‘sorewiden 1iot?, 
and selden hem, and® seiden, Blessid be 
the Lord, we ben inaad riche. And schep- 
herdis¢ of hem spariden not hem, andé 


© hem togedere R. Pamonge r. 4 brynge 
v weldide cg. wielde 1. wijlde k. weelde n. Om. Rr. 
y The voice r. 2 the voice RU 
4 the scheperdis R. ; 


760 


snot hem, and Y shal na more spare 
yponY men enabitinge the erthe, saith the 
Lord. Loo! Y shal bytake men, eche 
in the hond of his nei3bore, and in the 
hond of his kyng, and thei shuln falle 
to gydre in to erthe; and Y shal not de- 
zlyuere of the hond of hem, and Y shal 
feede the beest of sleaynge. For this thing, 
3eYY pore men of the floc’, heerith. And 
Y toke to me two 3erdis; oon Y clepide 
Fairnesse, and the tother Y clepide Litil 
sCoorde; and Y fedde the floc. And Y 
kitte doun thre sheperdis in oo monethe, 
and my soule is drawen to gydre in 
hem; sothely and the soule of hem vari- 
yede, or chaungide, in me. And Y saide, 
Y shal not feede 30u; that that dyeth, 
dye; and that that is kitt doun, be it 
kitt doun; and the tother deuoure, eche 
othe fleshe of his nei3bore. And Y toke 
iny 3erde, that was clepid Fairnesse, and 
Y kitte it doun, that Y shulde make 
voide my couenaunt, that Y smote with 
ltalle peplis. And it is led forth void in 
that day; and the pore of the floc* that 
kepen to me, knewen thus, for it is the 
12word of the Lord. And Y saide to hem, 
3if it is good in 3our ee3en, brenge 3e 
my meede; and 3if nay, reste 3e. And 
thei wey3iden my meede, thritti platis of 
1ssyluer. And the Lord saide to me, Caste 
it awey to a feir maker of ymagis, the 
pris, by whiche Y am preysid of hem. 
And Y toke the thritti platis of syluer, 
and Y keste hem forthe in the hous of 
athe Lord, to the maker of ymagis. And 
Y kitte doun my secounde 3erde, that 
was clepid Litil Coorde, that Y shulde de- 
parte, or enbynde, the brotherhed bitwixe 
is Juda and Yrael. And the Lord saide to 
me, jit take to thee vessels of a foltishe 
\ssheperd ; for loo! Y shal reyse a sheperd 


Yona. YYthe x. 2Z folk x. 


® hem that enhabiten rn. ‘in to the r. 


ZECHARIAH. 


& the hond r. 
kh was R. | variede, or chaungide c et ccteri. ™ eche man R. 


XI. 6-16. 


Y schal no more spare on ‘men enhabit- 
yuge® the erthe, seith the Lord. Lo! Y 
schal bitake men, ech in hond of his 
nei3bour, and in hoond® of his kyng, 
and thei schulen to-reende togidere the . 
lond; and Y schal not delyuere fro the 
hond of heim, and Y schal fede the7 
beeste of sleyng. For this thing, 3e pore 
men of the floc, here". And Y took to 
me twei 3erdis; oon Y clepide Fairnesse, 
and the tother Y clepide Litil Corde; and 
Y fedde the floc. And Y kittide douns 
thre scheepherdis in 0 monethe, and my 
soule is‘ drawun togidere in hem; for 
also the soule of hem variede! in me. 
And Y seide, Y schal not fede 3ou; thats 
that dieth, die; and that that is kit doun, 
be kit doun; and the residues deuoure, 
ech™ the fleisch of his neizbore. And 10 
Y took my 3erde, that was clepid Fair- 
nesse, and Y kittide doun it, that Y 
schulde make void my couenaunt®, that® 
Y sinoot with alle puplis. And it ‘is led 
forthP voide in that dai4; and the pore’. 
of floc’ that kepent to me, knewen thus, 
for it is the word of the Lord. And Y 12 
seide to hem, If it is good in" 3oure ijen, 
brynge 3e my meede; and if nai, reste 
je. And thei weieden my meede, thretti 
platis’ of siluer. -And the Lord seide to13 
me, Caste awei” it to a* makere of 
ymagis, the fair prijs, bi which Y am 
preisid of hem. And Y took thritti 
platisY of siluer, and Y? castide forth 
hem* in® the hous of the Lord, to the 
makere of ymagis. And Y kittide doun 14 
my secunde 3erde, that was clepide Litil 
Corde, that Y schulde departe® the bro- 
therhed bitwixe Juda and Israel. And15 
the Lord’ seide to me, 3it take to thee 
vessels® of a fonned scheepherde; for lo!16 
Y schal reise a scheepherde* in erthe, 


* schepparde ; 
that is, Ante- 
crist. Lire here. 
Cc et plures. 


4 folk x. in to G sce.m. 


hheereth 1. i folk a pr.m. CRFGIKMNPQUX. 


» couenaunt of pees C sec. m. F sec.m. 1KRS. 


° which c sec. m. F sec. m. 1KS. P was made ¢ sec. m. F sec. m. IKRS. ¢ Om. x. Tr pore men C sec. m. 
CF Sec. m. IKRSU sec. m. 8 the floc F sec. m.1KRS. tkepten F sec.m. biforer. Vv pens rR, W¥ thou 
forth r. _*ther, ¥pensr. 2Om.celeri. thor. Dbintor ©¢ departe, or [ether Epy] unbynde 
cetceteri. Lord Godi. © the vessels r. 


XI. 17-—XIl. 7. 


in erthe, whiche shal not visite forsaken’ 


thingus, he schal not seeke scatered 
thingis, and shal not heele the broken 
to gydre, and shal not nurishe forth that 
that stondith. And he shal eete fleshis of 
the fatt, and shal vnbynde the clees of 

izhem. A! sheperd, and ydol, forsakynge 
the floe; swerd on his arme, and on his 
rijt eeze; the arm of hym shal be dried 
with dryenesse, and his ri3t ee3e wexinge 
derk shal be maad derc. 


CAP. XII. 


1 The charge of word‘ of the Lord on 
Yrael. The Lord saide, stretchynge 
forth heuen, and foundynge erthe, and 
makynge the spirit of a man in hym, 
2Loo! Y shal putte Jerusalem a thresh- 


fold of glotonye to alle peplis in cum- 


pas, bot and Juda shal be in aseegynge 
sa3einus Jerusalem. And it shal be, in 
that day Y shal putte Jerusalem a stoon 
of charge to alle peplis; alle that shuln 
lifte it, with conscicioun, or kittyng to 
gidre, shuin be to-drawen, and _ alle 
rewmys of erthe shuln be gadrid a3einus 
ait. In that day, sayth the Lord, Y shal 
smyte eche hors in to dreed, or leesyng 
of mynde, and the styer of hym in to 
wodenesse; and on* the hous of Juda I 
shal opyn myn ee3en, and Y shal smyte 
5 with blyndnesse eche hors of peplis. And 
duykis of Juda shuln saye in her hertis, 
Be the dwellers of Jerusalem counfortid 
to me in the Lord of oostis, the God of 
shem. In that day Y shal putte the 
duykis of Juda as a chymney of fijr in 
trees, and as a brond of fijr in hay; and 
thei shuln deuoure at the ri3t half and 
left alle peplis in cumpas. And Jerusalem 
shal be enhabitid eftsoone in his place, 
zin Jerusalem. And the Lord shal saaue 
the tabernaclis of Juda, as in the bygyn- 


¢ the word #. 


ZECHARIAH. 


761 


which schal not visite forsakun thingis, 
schalf not seke scatered thingis, and schal¢ 
not heele ‘the brokun togidere®, and schal 
not nurische forth that that stondith. 
And he schal ete fleischis' of the fat*, and 
schal vnbynde the clees of hem. A! the1i7 
scheepherd, and ydol, forsakynge the floc; 
swerd on his arm, and on his rijt ize; 
the arm of hym schal be dried with dry- 
nesse, and his ri3t ize wexynge devk schal 
be maad derk. 


CARS XT: 


The birthun of the word of the Lord 
on Israel. And the Lord seide, stretch- 
ynge forth heuene, and founding erthel, 
and makynge the spirit of a man in hym, 
Lo! Y schal putte™ Jerusalem a lyntel of 2 
glotonye to alle puplis in cumpas, but 
and® Juda schal be in ‘asegyng® ajens 
Jerusalem. And it schal be, in that dais 
Y schal putte? Jerusalem a stoon of bir- 
thun to alle puplis; alle that schulen lifte 
it, schulen be to-drawun with kittyng 
doun, and alle rewmes of erthe schulen 
be gaderid a3ens it. In that dai, seith the 
Lord, Y schal smyte ech hors in drede, 
‘ether leesynge of mynde4, and the stiere 
‘of hym" in woodnesse; and on the hous 
of Juda Y schal opene myn i3en, and 
schal’ smyte with blyndnesse ech hors of 
puplis. And duikist of Juda schulen seies 
in her hertis, Be the dwellers of Jerusa- 
lem coumfortid to me in the Lord of 
oostis, the God of hem. In that dai Ye 
schal putte" the duykis of Juda as a 
chymnei of fier in trees, and as a broond 
of fier in hei; and thei schulen denoure 
at the ‘rijthalf and lefthalf” alle puplis 
in cumpas. And Jerusalem schal be en- 
habitid eftsoone* in his place, ‘in Jerusa- 
lemY. And the Lord schal saue the taber-7 
naclis of Juda, as in bigynnyng’, that the 


a Om. x. 


fand schal r. he shals, &heschalr. bathing alto-broken er. the fleischisr. * fat men x. 
Itheerthe R, ™setter. alson. © bisegyngR. Psette irs. @Om.R. ‘therofr. $s Y schal x. 
tthe dukes x. setter. riz3t side and Jeft sider. |W Israel exmsu pr.m. Irael NQx. —* eft R. 


yOm.r. 2 the bigynnyng r. 
VOL. III. 


5 E 


762 


nyng, that the hous of Dauid glorie not 
greetly, and the glorie of men dwellynge 
sin Jerusalem a3einus Juda. In that day 
the Lord shal defende the dwellers of 
Jerusalem; and it shal be, he that shal 
offende of hem in that day as Dauyd, 
and the hous of Danyd as of God, as the 
aungel of the Lord in the* si3t of hym. 
9 And it shal be, in that day Y shal seeke 
for to breke to gydre alle folkis that 
locummen a3einus Jerusalein. And Y shal 
heelde ont on the hous of Dauid, and on 
dwellers of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, 
and of prayers; and thei shuln biholde 
to me, whom thei to gidre ficchiden. And 
thei shuln weile hym with weilyng, as 
on the oon bigoten; and thei shuln so- 
rewen on hym, as it is wont for to be 
i1sorewid in deth of the first bygoten. In 
that day grete weilyng shal be in Jeru- 
salem, as the weilyng of Adremon in the 
12feeld of Magedon*. And erthe shal weyle; 
meynees and meynees by hem self; the 
meynees of the hous of Dauid by hem 
self, and the wymmen of hem by hem- 
13 self; meynees of the hous of Nathan bi 
hem self, and the wymmen of hem by 
hem self; meynees of the hous of Leuy 
by hem self, and the wymmen of hem 
by hem self; meynees of Semey4 bi hein 
self, and the wymmen of hem bi hem 
l4self. Alle meynees, and¢ other meynees, 
and meynees by hem self, and wymmen 
of hem by hem self. 


CAP. XIII. 


‘In that day shal be a welle opnynge 
to the hous of Dauith, and to men dwell- 
ing at Jerusalem, in to washyng awey 
of the synful, and of the menstruate. 

2And it shal be, in that day, saith the 
Lord of oostis, Y shal distruye names of 
ydolis of the lond, and thei shuln namore 


20m. 46H. > vp on G see.m. 


8 haue not glorie r. 
dwellers iru. —} prickeden r. 
2 sorewe R. © to be maad pr. 
womman CFGHIKMNRSUX. 


» that the r. 
i Om. enev. 


ZECHARIAH. 


© Maiedon x. 


¢ the house of x. 


P bigetun sone r. 
u the names rv sec. m. 


qa Remon r. 
Vv erthe r. 


XII. 8—XIII. 2. 


hous of Dauid ‘glorie not* greetli, and 
the> glorie of men dwellynge in Jerusalem 
be not a3ens Juda. In that dai the Lords 
schal defende the dwelleris of Jerusalem ; 
and he that schal offende of hem, schal 
be in that dai as Dauid, and the hous of 
Dauid schal be as of° God, as the’ aungel 
of the Lord in the si3t of hym. And ito 
schal be, in that dai Y schal seke for® to 
al to-breke alle folkis that comen ajens 
Jerusalem. And Y schal heldef out on1o0 
the hous of Dauid, and on dwelleris® of 
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and of 
preieris; and thei schulen biholde to me, 
whom thei ‘fitchiden togidere®. And thei 
schulen biweile hym with weilyng, as on! 
‘the oon* bigetun!; and thei schulen so- 
rewe™ on hym, as it® is wont ‘for to be 
sorewid° in the deth of the firste bigetun?. 
In that dai greet weilyng schal be in Je-11 
rusalem, as the weilyng of Adremon? in 
the feeld of Magedon. And erthe™ schalie 
weile; meynees and meynees bi hem silf; 
the meynees of the hous of Dauid bi hem 
silf, and the wymmen of hem bi hem silf; 
meynees of the hous of Nathan bi hem13 
silf, and the wymmen of hem bi hem silf; 
meynees of the hous of Leuy bi hem 
silf, and the wymmen of hem bi hem silf; 
meynees of Semei bi hem silf, and the 
wymmen of hem bi hem silf. All othere14 
meynees, meynees and meynees bi hem 
silf, and the’ wymmen of hem bi hem silf. 


CAP. XIIL 


In that dai an open welle schal be tor 
the hous of Danid, and to men dwellynge 
at Jerusalem, in to waischyng awey of a 
synful man, and of wommant defoulid in 
vnelene blood. And it schal be, in thate 
dai, seith the Lord of oostis, Y schal dis- 
trie names" of idols fro ‘the lond’, and 


dSemeth x. © of G sec. m. 
dan rR. eOm.r. fscheder. & the 
k Om. ¥. 1 bigotun sone Rr. m make sorewe R. 


tthe lond rkmgrsu. 58 Om. rR. ta 


XIII. 3—XIV. 2. 


be thou3te on; and Y shal take awey 
fro erthe fals prophetis, and the vnclene 
3spirit. And it shal be, whan eny man 
shal prophecie ouere, his fader and mo- 
der that gendriden hym, shuln saye to 
hym, Thou shalt not lyue, for thou hast 
spoken lesyng in name of the Lord; and 
his fadir aud modir, gendrers’ of hym, 
shuln to gidre ficche hym, whanne he 
ahath prophecied. And it shal be, in that 
day prophetis shuln be confoundid, eche 
of his visioun, whan he shal prophecie ; 
nether thei shuln be hillid with mantil 
sof sac, that thei lee3e; bot thei shuln 
sey, Y am not a prophete; a man erthe 
tilier Y am, for Adam my ensaumple 
6fro’ my 3ongthe. And it shal be said 
to hym, What ben these woundis in my- 
dil of thin hondis? And he shal say, 
With these Y was woundid in the hous 
7of hem that loueden me. Swerd, be 
thou reysid on my sheperd, and on the 
wall cleuynge to me, saith the Lord of 
oostis; smyte thou the sheperd, and the 
sheep of the floc shuln be scaterid. And 
8 Y shal turne my hond to the litil; and 
ther shuln be in eche lond, saith the 
Lord, two parties in it, and shuln be 
scatered, and shuln faile, and the thrid 
9 part shal be left in it. And Y shal leede 
the thrid part bi fijr, and Y shal brenne®, 
as syluer is brent, and Y shal proue hem, 
as gold is proued. He shal incleepe my 
name, and Y shal graciously heere hym ; 
and Y shal saye, Thou art my peple, 
and he shal saye, The Lord my God. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Loo! days ‘cummen, saith the Lord, 
and thi spuylis shuln be departid in my- 
2dil of thee. And Y shal gadre alle folkis 
to Jerusalem, in to bateyl ; and the citee 


f the gendercrs G sec. m. gendres K. 


w tho Rr. 
ppeene R. 
myddis R. 


x had in mynde R. 
4d pricke rR. © schend x. 
1 the scheep R. 


5k 


ZECHARIAH. 


& is fro G sec. m. 


¥Y eny more RU Sec. m. 
fa mentil Rk. 


763 


thei” schulen no more be ‘thou3t on*; and 

Y schal take awei fro erthe false profetis, 

and an vnelene spirit. And it schal be,3 
whanne ony man schal profesie ouerY, his 

fadir and modir that gendriden hym, 

schulen seie to hym, Thou schalt not 

lyue, for thou hast spoke leesyng in the 

name of the Lord; and his fadir? and his® 

modir®, gendreris* of hym, schulen ‘togi- 

dere fitche’ hym, whanne he hath profe- 

sied. And it schal be, in that dai profetis4 
schulen be confoundid®, ech of his visioun, 

whanne he schal profesie; nether thei 

schulen be hilid with mentilf of sak, that 

thei lie; but ‘thei schulen® seie, Y ams 
not a profete; Y am a man ‘erthe tiliere!, 

for Adam is myn ensaumple' fro my 

jongthe. And it schal be seid to hym,6 
What ben these woundis in the myddil* 

of thin hondis? And he schal seie, With 

these Y was woundid in the hots of hem 

that lonyden me. Swerd, be thou reisid7 
on my scheepherde, and on a man cleu- 

yuge to me, seith the Lord of oostis; 

smyte thou the scheepherde, and scheep! 

of the floc schulen be scaterid. And Y 

schal turne myn hond to the litle. Ands 
twei partis schulen be in ech lond, seith 

the Lord, and thei schulen be scaterid, 

and schulen faile, and the thridde part 

schal be left in it. And Y schal lede theo 
thridde part bi fier, and Y schal brenne 

hem, as siluer is brent, and Y schal preue 

hem, as gold is preuyd. He schal clepe 

to help my name, and Y schal graciously 

here him; aud Y schal seie, Thou art my 

puple, and he schal seie, Zhou art my 

Lord God. 


CAP. XIV. 


Lo! daies comen, seith the Lord, and) 
thi spuylis schulen be departid in the 
myddil of thee. And Y schal gadere alle 
folkis to Jerusalem, in to batel; and the 


h brenne hem G sec. mm. 


a8QOm.1r. modrisi. ¢ the 
h an erthe tilier rn. isample r. 


2 fadris 1. 
& he schal r. 


2 


764 


shal be taken, and housis shuln be dis- 
truyed, and wymmen shuln be defoulid. 
And the mydil part of the citee shal go 
out in to caitiftee, and the tother of the 
peple shal not be taken awey fro the 
scitee. And the Lord shal go out, and 
shal fi3te azeinus the folkis, as he fau3te 
ain the day of stryf. And his feet shuln 
stonde in that day on the hill of olyues, 
that is ajeins Jerusalem at the eest. And 
the hill of olynes schal be cornen of the 
myddel part therof to the eest and.to the 
west, the greet valey bifore brokyn ; and 
the iyddel of that hill be! departid to 
the north, and the myddil therof to the 
sinydday, or southe. And 3e shuln flee 
to the valey of myn hillis, for the valey 
of hillis shuln be ioyned togidre vn to 
the next. And 3e shuln flee, as 3e fledden 
fro face‘ of the erthe mouynge in the 
days of Osee, kyng of Juda; and the 
Lord my God shal cumme, and alle 
ssayntis with hym. And it shal be, in 
that day li3t shal not be, bot colde and 
7frost. And ther shal be 00 day, whiche 
is knowen to the Lord, not day, nether 
ni3t, and in tyme of euyn 1i3t shal be. 
8 And it shal be, in that day quyck waters 
shuln go out of Jerusalem, the mydil of 
hem to the eest see, and the mydil of 
hem to the last see; in somer and in 
y9wynter thei shuln be. And the Lord 
shal be kyng on al erthe; in that day 
ther shal be oo Lord, and his name shal 
10be oon. And eche erthe shal turne a3ein 
vnto desert, fro the lial hill Remmon to 
the south of Jerusalem. And it shal be 
reysid, and shal dwelle in his place, fro 
the 3ate of Beniamyn til to the place of 
the former 3ate, and vn to the 3ate of 
corners, and fro the tour of Ananyel vn- 
lito pressours of the kyng. And thei 
shuln dwelle therynne, and cursidnesse 
shal namore be, bot Jerusalem shal sitte 


i shal be sau. 


™ captiuite R. ™ oother part 1. residue r. 
‘thetymeir. ttho watrisr. tho r. 
2 Om. CEFGUK pr. m. MNPQSUX. 


ZECHARIAH. 


9 the 1. 
¥ tho r. 


XIV. 3-11. 


citee schal be takun, and housis schulen 
be distried, and wymmen schulen be de- 
foulid. And the myddil part of the citee 
schal go out in to caitiftee™, and the ‘to- 
ther part of the puple schal not be takun 
awei fro the citee. And the Lord schals 
go out, and schal fiz3te a3ens tho® folkis, 
as he fau3te in the dai of strijf. Anda 
hise feet schulen stonde in that dai on 
the hil of olyues, that? is ajens Jerusalem 
at the eest. And the hil of olyues schal be 
coruun! of the myddil part therof to the 
eest and to the west, bi ful greet bifor- 
brekyng ; and the myddil of the hil schal 
be departid to the north, and the myddil 
therof to the south. And 3e schulen fles 
to the valei of myn hillis, for the valei of 
hillis schal be ioyned togidere til to the 
nexte. And 3e schulen fle, as 3e fledden 
fro the face of erthe mouyng in the daies 
of Osie, kyng of Juda; and my Lord God 
schal come, and alle seyntis with hym. 
And it schal be, in that dai 1i3t schal not6 
be, but coold and frost. And ‘ther schal7 
be o dai‘, which is knowun to the Lord, 
not day, nether ni3t, and in tyme® of euen- 
tid 1i3t schal be. And it schal be, in thats 
dai quyke watris schulen go out of Jeru- 
salem, the myddil of hem schal go out 
to the eest see, and the myddil of hem® 
to the laste see; in somer and in wynter 
thei’ schulen be. And the Lord schal beo 
kyng on al erthe; in that dai there® schal 
be o Lord, and his name schal be oon. 
And al erthe schal turne ajen til to de-10 
sert, fro the litil hil Remmon to the south 
of Jerusalem. And it schal be reisid, and 
schal dwelle in his place, fro the 3ate of 
Beniamyn til to place* of the formere 
3ate, and til to the 3ate of theY corneris, 
and fro the tour of Ananyel til to the? 
pressouris of the kyng. And thei schulen11 
dwelle there ynne, and cursidnesse schal 
no more be, but Jerusalem schal sitte 


k the face u. 


P whiche r. 


4 departed R.  o day schal be x. 
w Om, rR. 


* the place rkru. Y Om. celeri. 


XIV. 12-——21. 


izsykir. And this shal be the plage, by 
whiche the Lord shal smyte alle folkis, 
that fon3ten ajeinus Jerusalem ;_ the 
fleshe of eche man stondinge vpon his 
feet shal fayle, or rote, and his eejen 
shuln faile to gydre in her hoolis, and 
his tunge shal faile to gydre in his 
13mouth. In that day grete noyse of the 
Lord shal be in hem, and a man shal 
catche the hond of his nei3bore; and his 
hond shal be lockid to gidre on the hond 
14of his nei3bore. Bot and Judas shal fi3te 
aeinus Jerusalem ; and ricchessis of alle 
folkis in cuinpas shuln be gadred to gi- 
der, gold, and syluer, and! many clothis 
1wynowe. And so fallyng shal be of hors, 
and mule, and camel, and asse, and of 
alle werc beestis, that weren in tho 
1écastellis, as this fallyng. And alle that 
shuln be residu of alle folkis, that camen 
ajeinus Jerusalem, shuln stye vp fro 3eere 
‘in to™ 3eer, that thei wirshipen the kyng, 
Lord of oostis, and halewe the feest of 
17tabernaclis. And it shal be, thei that 
shuln not stye vp of the meynees of erthe 
to Jerusalem, that thei wirshipe the 
kyng, Lord of oostus, reyn shal not be 
ison hem. That and 3if the meynee of 
Egypt shal not stye vp, and sha] not cum, 
nether on heim shal be; bot fallynge shal 
be, bi whiche the Lord shal sinyte alle 
folkis, whiche stieden not vp, for to ha- 
lewe the fest of tabernaclis. This shal 
be the synne of Egypt, and this the 
synne of alle folkis, that stieden not vp, 
20for to halewe the fest of tabernaclis. In 
that day, it shal be, on whiche thing the 
bridil of hors zs hooly to the Lord; and 
caudrons shuln be in the hous of the 
21 Lord, as cruetis byfore the auter. And 
euery eaudron in Juda and Jerusalem 
shal be halewid to the Lord of oostis. 
And alle men shuln cum offrynge, and 


1 Om. x. 


a fail, ether rol CEFGUIKMNPQSUXY. be roten rR. 
hond Firux sec. m. © also € sec. m. FQLKMNQRUX. 
1Om.r. Kofi. '!Om. rx. ™ whiche r. 
rOm.R. Sthatr. tnotup1. "Om. rR. 
ras. UX sec.m, Y Om. CEFHMNPQX pr. m. 


ZECHARIAH. 


n Om. R. 
v shal be the rx sec. m. 
Zz viols rR. 


765 


sikir. And this schal be the wounde, bi 12. 
which the Lord schal smyte alle folkis, 
that fou3ten a3ens Jerusalem; the fleisch 
of ech man stondynge on hise feet schal 
faile*, and hise i3en schulen faile togidere 
in her hoolis, and her tunge schal faile 
togidere® in her mouth. In that dai greet 13 
noise of the Lord schal be in hem, and a 
man schal catche the hond of his nei3bore; 
and his hond schal be lockid* togidere on 
hond¢ of his nei3bore. But and® Judas 14 
schal fi3te a3ens Jerusalem ; and richessis‘ 
of alle folkis in cumpas schulen be gader- 
ide togidere, gold, and siluer, and many 
clothis ynow. And so fallyng schal bets 
of hors, and mule, and camel®, and asse?, 
and of alle werk beestis, that weren in 
tho castels, as‘ this fallyng. And alle is 
that schulen be residue of alle folkis, that 
camen a3ens Jerusalem, schulen stie vp! 
fro 3eer in to 3eer, that thei worschipe the 
kyng, Lord of oostis, and halewe the 
feeste of tabernaclis. And it schal be, 17 
reyn schal not be on hem that™ schulen 
not stie vp" of the meyneis of erthe to 
Jerusalem, ‘that thei® worsehipe the king, 
Lord of oostis. “That and if? the mey-1s 
nee? of Egipt schal not stie vp", and schal 
not come, nether on hem schal be reyn; 
but fallyng schal be, bi which the Lord 
schal smyte alle folkis, whiche® stieden 
not', for® to halewe the feeste of taber- 
naclis. This schal be the synne of Egipt, 19 
and this the’ synne of alle folkis, that 
stieden not, for to halewe the feeste of 
tabernaclis. In that dai, that that is on* 20 
the bridil of hors* schal be hooli to the 
Lord; and caudruns schulen be in theY 
hous of the Lord, as cruetis? bifor the 
auter. And euery* caudrun in Jerusalem 21 
and Juda schal be halewid to the Lord 
of oostis. And alle men schulen come of- 
frynge, aud schulen take of tho, and schu- 


mM to A. 


¢ lokun C sec. m. FGIKMNQRSX. 4 the 
& of camele r. h of asse n. 

P That ifalsor. 4 meynees G. 
Wnoton Pp. * the hors KNs sup. 


b Om. R. 
f the riches R. 
° for to R. 


a eche R. 


766 ZECHARIAH. 


shuln take of hem, and shuln seethe in 
hem: and a marchaunt shal namore be 
in hous of the Lord of oostus in that 
day. 


Here endith the book of Zacharias, 
the prophete, and bigynneth the book of 
Malachie, prophete*. 


len sethe” in tho; and a marchaunt schal 
no more be in the hous of the Lord of 
oostis in that day. 


Here endith Sacarie, and here bigyn- 
neth Malachie, the profete®. 


2 No final rubric in «eH. 


> se A pr.m. EGHIMPQsUX. see F. Sle N. © From cH. Here endith Sacarie, and here bigynneth Malachie. 
Fermngsu. Here endeth the booc of Zacarie ; se now Malachie, the profete. x. Heere endeth the profete 
Zacarie, and bigynneth the book of Malachie, profete. nr. Here endith Sacarie, the profete, and bigynneth 


Malachie. x. No final rubric in arpy. 





MALACHI. 





The book of Matachie, the prophete*. 


CAP. I. 


1 THE charge of word of the Lord to 
Yrael, in the hond of Malachie, prophete. 
2Y louyde 3ou, saith the Lord, and 3ee 
saiden, In what thing louydist thou vs? 
Wher Esau was not the brother of Jacob, 
ssaith the Lord, and Y louyde Jacob, for- 
sothe Y hadde Esau in hate? And Y 
haue putte Seir his hillis in to wildre- 
nesse, and his eritage in to dragouns of 
4desert. That 3if Ydume shal say, We be 
distruyed, but we turnynge a3ein shuln 
beelde, whiche thingus ben distruyed ; 
these thingus saith the Lord of oostis, 
These shuln beelde, and Y shal distruye; 
and thei shuln be cleepid termes of wick- 
ednesse, and a peple to whom the Lord 
5is wroth, til vnto withouten eende. And 
3our eejen shulu see, and 3ee shuln saye, 
Magnyfied be the Lord on the terme of 
¢Yrael. The sone honoureth the fadir, 
and the seruaunt shal drede his lord; 
therfore 3if Y am fadir, wher is myn 
honour? and 3if Y am lord, wher is 
my dreed? saith the Lord of oostis. O! 
prestis, to 3ou that dispisen my name; 
and 3e saiden, Wher yn haue we dispisid 
7thi name? 3e offren on myn auter de- 
foulid, o7 vnclene, breed, and 3e sayn, 


a Here bigynneth Malachie. a. 


@From re. Ilere beginnith Malachic,profete. py. 
HKNPSXY. ¢butn. @setr. © These men Ru sec. m. 
ithe lord rx. kseiens,  ! offriden 1. 


Here biginnith the book of Malachie, 
the profete*. 


CAP. I. 


THE birthun of the word of the Lordi 
to Israel, in the hond of Malachie, the 
profete. Y louyde 30u, seith the Lord,2 
and 3e seiden, Jn what thing louydist 
thou vs? Whether Esau was not the 
brother of Jacob, seith the Lord, and Y 
louyde Jacob, forsothet Y hatide Esau ?3 
And Y haue put? Seir the hillis of hym in 
to wildirnesse, and his eritage in to dra- 
gouns of desert. That if Idumee seith, 4 
We ben distried, but we schulen turne 
a3en, and bilde tho thingis that ben dis- 
tried ; the Lord of oostis seith these 
thingis, These® schulen bilde, and Y schal 
distrie; and thei schulen be clepid termes‘ 
of wickidnesse, and a puple to whom the 
Lord is wroth, til mm to with outen ende. 
And 3oure i3en schulen se, and® 3e schulen s 
seie, The Lord be magnefied on the terme 
of Israel. The sone onourith the fader, ¢ 
and the seruaunt schal drede his lord; 
therfor if Y am fadir*, wher is myn 
onour? and if Y am lord‘, where is my 
drede? seith the Lord of oostis. A! 3e 
prestis, to 30u that dispisen my name; and 
3e seiden*, Wherynne han we dispisid thi 
name? 3e offren! on myn auter vncleene™ ; 
breed, and 3e seien, Wherynne han we 


No initial rubric in on. 


> Om. cEFG 
h the fadir r. 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
fthetermesr. & Om.N. 


m defoulid, ether vneleene craunikmNasux. defoulid epry. 


768 


Wherynne han we defoulide thee? In 
that thing that 3e sayn, The bord of the 
sLord is dispisid. 3if 3e offren a blynd 
thing for to be offrid, wher it is not 
yuel? And 3if 3e offren a crokid and? 
seek, wher it is not yuel? Offre it to thi 
duyk, 3if it shal plese to hym, or 3if he 
shal resceyne thi face, saith the Lord of 
soostis. And nowe biseeche® the cheere 
of the Lord, that he haue mercy on 3ou 5 
forsothe of 30ur hond this thing is don, 
3if eny manere he resceyue 30ur faces, 
losaith the Lord of oostis. Who is in 
3ou that closith doris, and brenneth myn 
auter of his own wille, or freeli? Wille 
is not to me in 30u, saith the Lord of 
oostus; and Y shal not resceyue a 3ift of 
i30ur hond. Forsothe fro rysyng of the 
sunne vn to goyng doun, my name is 
grete in heythen men; and in eche place 
a cleene offryng is halewid, and offrid to 
my name; for my name is grete in’ hei- 
izthen men, saith the Lord of oostis. And 
je han defoulid it in that that 3e sayn, 
The bord of the Lord is defoulid, and 
that that is putt on is contemptible, ov 
worthi for to be dispisid, with the fijr 
isthat deuourith it. And 3e saiden, Loo! 
of traueil; and 3e han blowe it awey, 
saith the Lord of oostis. And 3e brou3ten 
yn of raueins a krokid thing, and seeke, 
and brou3ten yn a 3ift; wher Y shal 
resceyue it of 3our hond ? saith the Lord. 
i4Cursid the gylful, that hath in his floc 
a male beest, and he makynge avowe 
offrith a feble to the Lord; for I a grete 
kyng, saith the Lord of oostus, and my 
name orrible in folkis. 


CAP: II. 


1 And now, O! prestis, to 3ou this maun- 
2dement, 3if 3e woln heere. And 3if 3e 


> or G sec. m. 


2 boond 1. 
t Om. 1. 
EIPRSY. 


© defoulid x. 
Useid x. V thi xy, 
b among R. 


P thing rupy, 
ea among R. 
€ sacrified py. 


l wher ceteri preter x hie et alibi. 


best Rk. 4Om. rrGumnresuxy. 1 hidouse R. 


MALACHI. 


© biseche 3e @ sec. m. 


9 sacrified EPpy. 
* the dores r. 
: d among R. 
lor y] worthi for to be dispisid cercnikmNnPesuxy. 
™ gileful man Rv sec. an. 


{, 8—II. 2. 


defoulid thee? In that thing that 3e seien, 
The boord® of the Lord is dispisid®. If 3e8 
offren a blynd beest? to be sacrifisid4, whe- 
ther it is not yuel? And* if 3e offren a 
crokid and sike beeste, whether’ it is not* 
yuel ? Offre thou it to thi duyk, if it schal 
plese hym, ether if he schal resseyue thi 
face, seith" the’ Lord of oostis. And nowa 
biseche 3e the cheer of the Lord, that he 
haue merci on 30u; for of 3oure hond this 
thing is doon, if in ony maner he resseiue 
3oure faces, seith the Lord of oostis. Who 10 
is ‘in 30u” that closith doris*, and bren- 
neth myn auter ‘of his owne wille, ethir 
Jreliy? Wille is not to me in 3o0u, seith 
the Lord of oostis; and Y schal not res- 
seyue a 3ifte of 3oure hond. For fro rys-11 
yng” of the sunne til to goyng* doun, my 
name is greet in® hethene men; and in ech 
place a cleene offring is sacrifisid®, and 
offrid to my name; for my name is greet 
in hethene men, seith the Lord of oostis. 
And 3e° han defoulid it in that that 3e12 
seien, The boord of the Lord is defoulid, 
and that that is put’ aboue is ‘worthi to 
be dispisid’, with fier® that deuourith it. 
And 3e seiden', Lo! of travel; and 3e hanis3 
blowe it awei, seith the Lord of oostis. 
And je brou3ten in of raueyns a crokid 
thing* and sijk, and brou3ten in a 3ifte; 
whether! Y schal resseyue it of 3oure 
hond? seith the Lord. Cursid 7s the14 
gileful™, that hath in his floc a male 
beeste, and ‘he makynge” avow offrith® 
a feble? to the Lord; for Y am a greet 
kyng, seith the Lord of oostis, and my 
name 7s4 dredeful™ ‘in folkis*, 


CAP. II. 


And now, A! 3e preestis, this maunde- 
ment 7s to 30u. If 3e wolen here, and if 


4 amonge 4. 


r Om. x. 
Yfrely r. 
€ 3e that a. 
b the fier Rr. 


8 wher celeri preter Rs, 

Z the risyng Rr. 8 the going 
fset R. & contemptible, ether 
i seyen F. k Om. rR. beest vu. 
nmakith nr. © and offrithr. Pp feble 


§ among folkis 1. among hethen men RU sec. m. 


Il. 3—12. 


woln not putte on the herte, that 3e jeue 
glorie to my name, saith the Lord of 
oostis, Y shal sende in® 30u nedynesse, 
and Y shal curse to 3our blessyngis; and 
Y shal curse hem, for 3e han not putte 
3on the herte. Loo! Y shal caste to 3ou 
arme, and Y shal scatere on‘ 30ur cheere 
the dritt of joure solempnytees, and it 
4shal take 30u with it. And 3e shuln wite, 
for Y sente to 30u this maundement, that 
my couenaunt were with Leuy, saith the 
5 Lord of oostis. My conenaunt was with 
hym of lijf and pees ; and Y 3aue to hym 
a dreed, and he dredde me, and he dredde 
sof the face of my name. The lawe of 
trewthe was-in his mouth, and wickid- 
nesse is not founden in his lippis; in pees 
and in equitee he walkide with me, and 
-many men he turnyde awey fro wickid- 
znesse. Forsothe lippis® of the prest kepen 
science, or hkunnyng, and thei shuln 
seeke a3ein the lawe of the mouth of 
hem, for he is an aungel of the Lord of 
soostis. Forsothe 3e wenten awey fro the 
weye, and sclaundren® ful many men in 
the lawe; 3e maden voide the conenaunt 
of Leuy, these thingus saith the Lord of 
9oostis. For whiche thing and Y 3aue 
30u worthi to be dispisid, and meeke, or 
lowe, to alle peplis, as 3e kepten not my 
lo wayes, and token folc! in the lawe. Wher 
not oo fadir of alle 301? wher oo God 
made 30u not of nou3t? Whi therfore 
ech of 30u dispisith his brother, defoul- 
1lynge the couenaunt of 3our faders ? Judas 
trespaside, and abomynacioun is maad 
in Yrael, and in Jerusalem; for Judas 
defoulide the halewing of the Lord, 
whiche he* louyde, and aliens hadden 
12the dou3ter of the Lord. The Lord shal 


€ in to G sec. m. f vpon G sec. m. 
' face of person G sec.m.u. * Om. x. 


tnylen setter. tOm. Rr. Vthor. W set R. 
sofpeesr. bmynr. ¢ Om. ceHPs. 
CEFGUMNPQSUX pr.m. the kK. 
mouthe r. Kther. I3eden rR. 

° to you c. 
dispisable rn. 4 lowed ¥. bowiden 1, low3 R. 
YOm.x. WOm.r. *schal dor. 


VOL, IIT. 


MALACHI. 


& science K. 


* caste forth r. 
d the face cemIKPRSUX pr. im. ( 
h kunnyng cER. science, ether (or G] kunnynge rauixmnsx. — } his 
™m sclaundriden CEFGIUKMNPQRSUX. 
P contemptible, ether worthi [for reum] fo be dispisid craikmesux. contemptible Enr. 
° whether not rR. 


769 


3e ‘wolen not puttet on the herte, that 3e 
3yue glorie to my name, seith the Lord of 
oostis, Y schal sende nedynesse in to 3ou, 
and Y schal curse to" 3oure blessyngis ; 
and Y schal curse hem’, for 3e han not 
putte” on the herte. Lo! Y schal caste*3 
to 3ou the arm, and Y schal scatere on 
joure cheereY the drit of 3oure solempny- 
tees, and it schal take 3ou with it. And4 
je schulen wite, that Y sente to 30u this 
maundement, that my couenaunt were 
with Leuy’, seith the Lord of oostis. Mys 
couenaunt was with hym of lijf and pees*; 
and Y 3af to hym a? drede, and he dredde 
me, and he dredde of¢ facet of my name. 
The lawe of trewthe was in his mouth,6 
and wickidnesse was not foundun in hise 
lippis ; in pees and in® equite he walkidef 
with me, and he turnede awei many men 
fro wickidnesse. For the lippis of a&7 
prest kepen science’, and thei schulen 
ajen seke the lawe of ‘the mouth of hymi, 
for he is an aungel of the Lord of oostes. 
But 3e wenten' awei fro the weie, ands 
sclaundren™ ful many men® in the lawe; 
je maden voide the couenaunt of Leuy, 
seith the Lord of oostis. For which""9 
thing and Y 3af 30u° worthi to be dispisid?, 
and bowen‘ to alle puplis, as 3e kepten 
not my weies, and token a face in the 
lawe. Whether not o fadir zs of alle 30u ? 10 
whether’ 0’ God made not* of nou3t 3ou? 
Whi therfor ech of jou dispisith his bro- 
ther, and defoulith the couenaunt of 3oure 
fadris? Judas trespasside, and abhomy-it 
nacioun is maad® in Israel, and inY Jeru- 
salem; for Judas defoulide the halewyng 
of the Lord, which he louyde, and he 
hadde the dou3ter of an alien god. Thee 
Lord schal” distrie the man that dide* 


bh sclaundreden 4. han sclaundrid a sec. m. H. 


2 30u and Leuy R sec. mm. 
fwente rR. §& Om, 


Y face R. 
e On. RK. 


8QOm.N. 19 the whiehe 1, 


8Om. 5. ¢tOm.ar. 4% done Rr. 


5 F 


770 


distruye the man that dide this thinge, 
the maystir and disciple, of tabernaclis of 
Jacob, and the offryng a 3ift to the Lord 
i30f oostis, And eftsoone 3e diden this 
thing; 3e hilliden with teris the auter of 
the Lord, with weepyng and mournyng, 
so that Y biholde namore to sacrifice, 
nether resceyue eny thing plesaunt of 
i43our hond. And 3e saiden, For what 
cause? For the Lord witnesside bitwixe 
thee and the wijf of thi pubertee, that 
is, tyme of mariage, whiche thou di- 
spisidist, and this thi parcener, and! wijf 
isof thi couenaunt. Wher oon dide not, 
and the residue of his spirit is? aud what 
seekith oon, no bot the seed of God? 
Therfore kepe 3e 30ure spirit, and nyl 
thou dispise the wijf of thi 3ongthe; 
16whanne thou shalt haue hir in hate, 
leue thou hir, saith the Lord God of 
Yrael. Forsothe wickidnesse keuere the 
closyng of hir, saith the Lord of oostis ; 
kepe 3e 30ure spirit, and nyl 3e dispise. 
173e maden the Lord for to traueile in 
3our wordis, and 3e saiden, Wheryn 
made we hym for to traueile? In that 
that 3e sayen, Eche man that doth yuel, 
is good in the si3t of the Lord, and siche 
plesen to hym; or certis wher is God 
of dom ? 
CAP. III. 

1 Loo! Y shal sende myn aungel, and he 
shal make redy the waye byfore my face ; 
and anoon the lordshiper, whom 3e seken, 
shal cum to his holy temple, ‘and the™ 
aungel of testament, whom 3e woln. Loo! 
he cummeth, saith the™™ Lord of oostis ; 

zand who shal mowe thenke the day of 
his cummyng? and who shal stonde for 
to see hym? Forsothe he as fijr wellynge 

3to gidre, and as the erbe of fullers; and 
he shal sitte wellinge to gidre and clens- 
ynge syluer, and shal purge the sonys of 


10m. a. 
Yweilingr. 2 Om.v. 4 whomr. 
fnotn. fhiler. &clother. » Om.R. 
Ru sec.m. ™thewey1. .Lordr. ° of ther. 


toukeris EGHIKMNPQSUX. 


MALACHI. 


m Om, G pr. m. 


» the wijf rR. 
1 suche men Rr. 


Il. 13—II. 3. 


this thing, the maister and disciple, fro 
the tabernacle of Jacob, and him that 
offrith a 3ifte to the Lord of oostis. And 13 
eftsoone 3e diden this thing; 3e hiliden 
with teeris the auter of the Lord, with 
wepyng and mourenyng’; so that Y bi- 
holde no more to sacrifice, nether resseyue 
ony thing plesaunt of j3oure hond. Andis 
3e seiden, For what cause? For the Lord 
witnesside bitwixe thee and the wijf of 
thi ‘puberte, that is’, tyme of mariage, 
which* thou dispisidist, and this zs thi 
felowe, and wijf® of thi couenaunt®. Whe-1s 
ther oon made not, and residue’ of spirit 
is his? and what sekith oon, no® but the 
seed of God? Therfore kepe 3e 3oure 
spirit, and nyle thou dispise the wijf of 
thi 3ongthe; whanne thou hatist hir, leue ic 
thou hir, seith the Lord God of Israel. 
Forsothe wickidnesse schal kyuere' the 
closyng? of hym, seith the Lord of oostis ; 
kepe 3e 30ure spirit, and nyle 3e dispise. 


CAP. III. 


3e maden the Lord for to trauele in17 
3oure wordis, and 3e seiden, Wherynne 
maden we hym for to trauele? In that 
that 3e seien, Ech man? that doith yuel, is 
good in the si3t of the Lord, and siche! 
plesen tok hym; ether certis where is the! 
God of doom? Lo! Y sende! myn aungel,1 
and he schal make redi weie™ bifor my 
face; and anoon the lordshipere®, whom 3e 
seken, schal come to his hooli temple, and 
the aungel of ° testament, whom 3e wolen. 
Lo! he cometh, seith the Lord of oostis; 
and who schal mowe thenke the dai of his2 
comyng ? and who schal stonde for? to se 
hym? For he schal be as fier wellynge 
togidere, and as erbe! of fulleris"; and he3 
schal sitte wellynge togidere and clens- 
ynge siluer, and he schal purge the sones 


mm Om. kK. 


d the residue rr. 
l_schal sende 
t fulleris, ether 


© couenaunt of pees R. 
k Om.r. 'Om.rR. 


POm.R. 4 the erbe rx sec. m. 


Ill. 4—13. 


Leuy; and shal purge hem as gold and 
as syluer, and thei shuln be offrynge to 
4the Lord sacrifices in ri3twisnessis. And 
sacrifice of Juda and Jerusalem shal plese 
to the Lord, as days of the world, and as 
solde 3eeris. And Y shal cum to 30u in 
dom, and Y shal be a swyft witnesse to 
mysdoars, to poysonners, or enchaunters 
bi the deuyls craft, and to auowters, and 
forsworne men, and that falsly chalenge 
the hijr of the hirid man, and meeken 
widues, and faderlesse childre, and mo- 
derlesse, and oppressen the pylgryme, 
nether dredden me, saith the Lord of 
coostis. Forsothe Y the Lord, and Y am 
not chaungid; and 3e sonnys of Jacob 
7ben not waastid. Forsothe fro the days 
of 30ur fadres 3e wenten awey fro my 
lawful thingus, and kepten not; turne 3e 


azgein to me, and Y shal a3ein turne to 


jou, saith the Lord of oostis. And 3e 
saiden, In what thing shuln we turne 
sajein ? 3if a man shal turmente God ? for 
3e to gydre fitchen me. And 3e saiden, 
In what thing togidre fitchen we thee? 
In tythes, and in premissis, or jirst 
ofruytis, and in myseyse, or nedynesse, 
je ben cursid; and al 3e folk disceyuen 
1ome, and to gidre fitchen. Brenge 3e yn™ 
eche tithe in to my berne, that mete be 
in my hous, and proue 3e me on this 
thing, saith the Lord, 3if Y shal not 
opne to 3ou the gutters of heuen, and 
shal sheede out to 30u blessyng, vnto 
i1aboundaunce. And Y shal blame for jou 
the deuourynge, and he shal not cor- 
rumpe, or distruye, the fruyte of jour 
londe ; nether bareyn vyne3erd shal be in 
i2the feeld, saith the Lord of oostis, and 
alle folkis shuln sayn 30u blessid ; sothely 
je shuln be a desyrable lond, saith the 
13Lord of oostis. 3oure wordis wexiden 


MALACHI. 


: 771 


of Leuy ; and he schal purge hem as gold 
and as siluer, and thei schulen be offrynge 
to the Lord sacrifices in ri3tfulnesse®. And 4 
the sacrifice of Juda and of Jerusalem 
schal plese tot the Lord, as the daies of 
the world, and as olde 3eeris. And Ys 
schal come to 30u in doom, and Y schal 
be a swift witnesse to" mysdoeris, ‘ether 
enchaunteris of deuelis craft’, and to 
auouteris*, and* forsworn men, and that 
falsli calengen the hire of theY hirid man, 
and widewis, and fadirles, ‘ether modir- 
les*, children, and oppressen a pilgrym, 
‘nether dredden* me, seith the Lord of 
oostis. Forsothe Y am the Lord, and am?« 
not chaungid; and 3e sones® of Jacob ben 
not wastid. Forsothe fro daies! of 3oure7 
fadris 3e wenten® awei fro my lawful 
thingis, and kepten not; turne 3e a3en to 
me, and Y schal a3en turne to 3ou, seith 
the Lord of oostis. And 3e seiden, In 
what thing schulen we turne a3en? If as 
man schal turmente God, for 3e ‘togidere 
fitchenf me. And 3e seiden, In what thing 
‘togidere fitchen® we thee? In tithis and 
in ‘firste fruitis*; and 3e ben cursid ing 
nedynesse’, and alle 3e fole* disseyuen me, 
and ‘togidere fitchen'. Brynge 3e yn™ ech 10 
tithe in to my berne, that mete be in myn 
hous, and preue 3e me on this thing, seith 
the Lord, if Y schal not opene to you the 
goteris of heuene, and sclial" schede out to 
jou blessyng, til to aboundaunce. And Yi 
schal blame for 30u that® that deuourith, 
and he schal not distrieP the fruit of 3oure 
lond ; nether bareyn vyne3erd4 schal be in 
the feeld, seith the Lord of oostis, and 12 
alle folkis schulen seie 30u blessid ; for 3e 
schulen be a desirable"? lond, seith the Lord 
of oostis. 3oure wordis wexiden" strong 13 
on me, seith the Lord; and 3e seiden, 
What han we spokun a3ens thee? Andis 


n Om. 4. 


8 riz3twisnesse CEFGUIKMNPQSUX. ¢ Om. R. 
YanrR, 2Om. R. and modirles s. 

sonesr. 4 thedaies x. ¢& jeden R. 
Jruytis CEFGHIKMNPQsUX. the firste fruytis R. 
k the folk a pr.m. x. | turmenten R. 


distrie CEFGIIKMNPQSUX. 4 vyne R. 


Yin tol. 
8 nether thei dredden 1. and dredden not r. 
f turmenten rn. 

i myseiste, ether [or Er] nedynesse CRFGHIKMNEQSUX, 
m Om. R. 
qq desiderable c. 


Ww auoutreris 1kKR. ¥* and to 1, 
blTamt. c the 
h premyssis, ether jirste 


v Om. R. 
& turmeniten R. 


0 Y schal ir. © him Rv. P corrumpe, ether 


TF wexen R. 


5F 2 


172 


stronge on° ime, saith the Lord; and 3e 
saiden, What han we spoken ajeins thee ? 
14 And 3ee saiden, He is veyn, that serueth 
God ; aud what wynnynge for we kepten 
his heestis, and for we wenten sorewful 
15 bifore the Lord of oostis? Therfore now 
we sayn proud inen blessid?; sotheli thei 
ben beeldid doynge vnpite, and thei 
temptiden God, and ben maad_saaf. 
is Thanne men dredinge God spaken, eche 
with his nei3boure; and the Lord per- 
ceuyde, and herde, and a boke of mynde 
is writen bifore hym to men dreedinge 
17God, and thinkynge his name. And thei 
shuln be to me, saith the Lord of oostis, 
in the day in whiche Y shal make, into a 
special tresoure; and Y shal spare hem, 
as a man sparith his sone seruynge to 
ishym. And je shuln be conuertid, and 
3e shuln see, what is bitwixe the iust 
man and the vnpitouse, bitwixe the seru- 
ynge to the Lord and not sernynge to 
1hym. Loo! forsothe the day shal cumme, 
brennynge as a chyinney ; and alle proude 
men, and alle doynge vnpite shuln be 
stobil; and the day cummynge shal en- 
flawme hem, saith the Lord of oostis, 
whiche shal not leue to hem rote and 
zburiownyng. And to 3ou dredynge my 
name the sunne of ri3twisnesse shal 
springe, and helthe in pennys of hyin; 
3e shulu go out, and 3e shuln lippe, as a 
scalf of the droue. And 3e shuln to-trede 
vupytouse men, whanne thei shuln be 
ashe vndir the soole of 3oure feet, in the 
day in whiche Y do, saith the Lord of 
soostis. Bithenke 3e of the lawe of my 
seruaunt Moyses, whiche Y comaundide 
to hym in Oreb, to alle Yrael comaunde- 
smentis and domys. Loo! Y shal sende 
to 30u Hely, the prophete, bifore that 
the grete day and orrible of the Lord 


© vpon 4. 


$ seden rR, 
vnfeithful r. 
done x. ¢ of R. 
& schal be in r. 
2 Om. r. 


t wickidnesse k. 
Y and hitwixe r. 
4 that dredden r. 
h the pennys r. 
© schal do rR, 


MALACHI. 


TIl. 14——IV. 5. 


3¢ seiden, He is veyn, that serueth God ; 
and what wynnyng for we kepten hise 
heestis, and for we wenten’ sorewful bi- 
fore the Lord of oostis? Therfor now weis 
seien proude men blessid; for thei ben 
bildid doynge vnpitee', and thei tempt- 
iden God, and ben maad saaf. ' Thanne1i6 
men dredynge God spaken, ech with his 
nei3bore; and the Lord perseyuede, and 
herde, and a book of mynde is writun 
bifor hym to ‘men dredynge" God, and 
thenkynge’ his name. And thei schulen17 
be to me, seith the Lord of oostis, in the 
dai in which Y schal make, in to a special 
tresour; and Y schal spare hem, as a man 
sparith his sone seruynge to hym. Andis 
3e schulen be conuertid, and 3e schulen se, 
what is bitwixe the” iust man and vn- 
pitousex, bitwixe” ‘the seruynge to” the 
Lord and ‘not seruynge to hym?. 


CAP. IV. 


For lo! a dai schal come, brennynge as1 
a chymenei; and alle proude men, and alle 
doynge” vupitee schulen be stobul; and 
the dai comynge schal enflaume hem, seith 
the Lord of oostis, which schal not leeue 
to hem rote and® buriownyng. And to2 
3ou dredynge’ my name the sunne of ri3t- 
wisnesse® schal rise, and heelthe in® pen- 
nys of hym; and 3e schulen go out, and 
schulen skippe', as a calf of* the! droue. 
And 3e schulen to-trede vnpitouse™ men, 3 
whanne thei schulen be aiscbe vndur the 
soole of 30ure feet, in the dai in® which Y 
do°®, seith the Lord of oostis. Bithenke4 
3e on the lawe of my seruaunt Moises, 
which Y comaundide to hym in Oreb, to 
al Israel comaundementis and domes. Lo!5 
¥ schal sende to 30u Elie, the profete, bi- 
fore that the greet dai and orible of the 
Lord come. And he schal conuerte thee 


P ben blessid & sec. m. 


4 hem that dredden Rk. vthenkenonr. War. * the vnpitous FI. 
2 him that serneth r. 
€ riztfulnesse R. 
i lippe cereHikmNPQsuX. 


a him that serueth not the Lord rn. » that 
f rise, ether [or Ep] be borun CEFGHIKMNPQSUX, 
kink. lax. ™ the vnpitouse 1. 


Iv. 6. 


6cumme. And he shal conuerte the herte 
of faders to sonys, and the herte of sonys 
to her faders, lest per anenture Y cumme, 
and smyte the erthe with curse. 


Here endith the book of Matachie, 
and bigynneth the firste book of Ma- 
chabeorum 4. 


MALACHI. 773 


herte of fadris to sones, and the herte of 
sones to fadris? of hem, lest perauenture Y 
come, and smyte the erthe with curs’. 


Here endith Malachie, the profete, 
and here bigynneth the firste book of 
Machabeis*. 


4 No final rubric in agH. 


P the fadirs rr. 


and bigynneth a prolog on the firste book of Machabies. a. 


4 curs. Amen. CEFGHMNPQRSU. cursidnesse I. 


t From crx. Here endith Malachie, 
Here endeth Malachie, and bigynneth the 


firste book of Machabeis. n1asvu. Heere endeth Malachie, the profete; se now the firste book of Macabeus. K. 


Here endith Malachie, the profete, and here bigynneth a prologe on Machabeis the firste. m. 
Heere endith the profete Malachite, and bigynneth the 
No final rubric in AEP. y is defective. 


Malachie, and bigynneth the firste Machabens. n. 
Jirsle booke of Machabeis. R. 


Here endith 


I. MACCABEES. 





[ Prologue on the Iirst book of Maccabees". | 


Tis book of Machabeis techith alle men, bi ensaumple of Matatias and of hise 
sones, to stonde in tyme of persecucioun stifli bi the lawe of God, and rathere to 
leue alle worldli goodis and bodili lijf, than to feyne, or peruerte in to errour, for 
the drede of hei3 power of men; as Judas Machabeus and hise brethren ouer- 
camen her enemyes, bi hei3 vertu of God, with fewe men, and not in multitude of 
peple, and ajenstoden kingis and princes, and hadden victorie bi the help of almy3ti 
God, and susteyneden it anoon to the deeth. 


Here endith the prologe, and here bigynneth the firste book of Machabeis. 


The firste book of Machabeorum*. 


CAP. I. 


i AND it is don, after that Alisaundre 
of Philip, kyng of Macedo, which regn- 
ede first in Grece, smote, he gon out of 
the lond of Sethym, smote Darius, kyng 

2of Persis and Medis, and ordeynyde many 
bateilis, and gate strengthes of alle; 

sand he slew3e kyngus of erthe, and 
passide forth vnto eendis of erthe, and 
toke spuylis of multitude of folkis; and 
the erthe was stille in the siz3t of hym. 
4And he gadride vertu, and ful stronge 
oost, and the herte of hym is enhaunsid 
sand lift up. And he gate cuntrees of 
folkis, and tyrauntis, or stronge men; 
and thei ben maad to hym in to tribut. 


Here biginnith the firste book of Ma- 
chabeies”. 


CAPO 


AND it was don, aftir that Alisaundre1 
of Filip, king of Macedoyne, which regn- 
ede first in Grece®, and 3ede out of the 
lond of Sethym, smoot Darius, king of 
Perseis and of Medeis, he ordeynede many 2 
batels, and gat strengthis of alle; and he 
slow the kingis of erthe, and passides 
forth til to endis* of erthe, and took 
spuylis of multitude of folkis; and the 
erthe was stille in si3t®° of hym. And hea 
gaderide vertu, and oost ful strong, and 
the herte of hym was enhaunsid and lift 
vp. And he gat the cuntreis of folkis,s 
and tirauntisf; and thei weren maad to% 
hym in to tribut. And after these vhingis 6 


a Here bigynneth the first boke of Machabeorum. a. Machabee the first. c. The first boke of 


Machabeis. u. b Om. 4cu. 


* This Prologue is from m. 


men CEFGHIKMNPQsUXe. § in to F. 


gue i > From Ere. No initial rubric in the other Mss. ¢ Grece, ether [or EP] 
in the lond of Grekis EFGuiKMNrQsuXe. 4 the endis EIR. 


© the sijt ExkR. f tirauntis, elher stronge 


I. 6—20. 


6And after these thingus he felle in to 
7bed, and knewe that he shulde die. And 
he clepide his noble childre, that weren 
nurishid with hym fro her 3outhe, and 
departide to hem his kyngdam, whanne 
83it he leuede. And Alisaundre regnyde 
9twelue 3eer, and is dead. And his chil- 
dren weldiden the rewme, eche in his 
10 place, and alle puttiden to hem dyademes 
after his deth, and sonys’ of hem after 
hem, many 3eeris; and yuelis ben mul- 
litipled in erthe. And there wente out of 
hem a root of synne, Antiochus the no- 
ble, the sone of Antiochi kyng, that was 
at Rome in seegyng, ‘or plegge’, and 
regnede in the hundrid and senen and 
12thretti 3eer of the rewme of Greekis. In 
tho days wickid sonys of Yrael wenten 
out, and counseiliden many, sayinge, Go 
we, and ordeyne we a testament with 
heithen men, that ben aboute us; for 
sithen we departiden fro hem, many yuels 
13founden us. And the word® is seen good 
14in the eezjen of hem. And summe of the 
peple senten, and wenten awey to the 
kyng; and he 3aue power to hem for to 
15do ri3twisnesse of heithen men. And 
thei beeldiden a scole in Jerusalem, vp 
i6the lawis of naciouns; and thei maden 
to hem prepucyes, or hethen customes, 
and wenten awey fro the holy testament, 
and weren ioyned to naciouns, and weren 
17solde for to do yuel. And the rewme 
hadde prosperite in the siz3t of Antio- 
chus, and he byganne for to regne in 
the lond of Egypt, for to regne on two 
isrewmes. And he entride into Egipt in 
a grenous multitude, in chaaris, and oli- 
fauntis, and horsmen, and a plenteuous 
19 multitude of schippis, and he ordeynede 
bateil a3ens Tholome, kyng of Egipt; 
and Ptholome dredde of his face, and 
flei3; and manye woundid fellen doun. 
20And he toke the stronge citees in the 
lond of Egypt, and he toke prayes of the 


» the sonys G pr. m. 


& felde c et alii, 
I the kyng 1. 


xpr.me. Viouda. *Om.R. 8 riztfulnesse r. 


I. MACCABEES. 


¢ Om. 4. 


h that is, familiar felowis e marg. 
™ ostage, ether plegge CHFGHIKMNPQSUX. 


775 


he felle’ in to bed, and knew that he 
schuide die. And he clepide his noble7 
children*, that weren nurschid with hym 
fro 3ongthe!, and departide to hem his 
kingdom, whanne he lyuede 3it. Ands 
Alisaundre regnede twelue 3eer, and was 
deed. And his children weldiden thes 
rewme, ech in his place, and alle puttiden 10 
to hem diademys aftir his deth, and the 
sones of hem after hem, many 3eeris; 
and yuels weren multiplied in erthe. And11 
ther wente out of hema roote of synne, 
Antiok the noble, the sone of Antiok 
kyng', that was at Rome in ostage™, and® 
regnede in the hundrid and seuene and 
thrittithe 3eer of¢ the? rewme? of Grekis. 
In tho daies wickid sones ‘of Israel" 12 
wenten out, and counseiliden many, and 
seide, Go we, and ordeyne we testament 
with hethene men, that ben aboute vs; 
for sithen we departiden fro hem, many 
yuels foundun vs. And the word was13 
seyn good bifore the izen of hem. And 14 
summe of the puple senten, and wenten 
to the kyng; and he 3af power to hem 
for to do.rijtwisnesse’ of hethene men. 
And thei bildiden a scole in Jerusalem, 15 
bi lawis of naciouns; and maden to hem16 
prepucies, and wenten awei fro the hooli 
testament, and weren ioyned to nacionns, 
and weren seeld** for to do yuel. And the17 
rewme hadde prosperite in the si3t of An- 
tiok, and he bigan fort to regne in the 
lond of Egipt, that he schulde regne on 
twei rewmes. And he entride in to E-18 
gipt with a grenouse multitude, in cha- 
ris, and olifauntis, and horse men, ‘ether 
kni3tis“, and plenteuouse multitude of 
schippis, and he ordeynede bate] ajens 19 
Tholome, kyng of Egipt; and Tolome 
dredde of his face, and flei; and many 
weren woundid, and fellen doun. And he2o 
took the stronge citees in the lond of 
Egipt, and took the preies of the lond of 
Egipt. And Antiok turnede, after that21 


ec Lord K. 


i her 3ongthe c ef ceteri. & Om. ceteri preter K. 
Randher. ing  P Om. CEFHMNPQSU 
88 seeld to naciouns F. tOm. rn. Om. R. 


776 I. MACCABEES. 


21lond of Egypt. And Antiochus turnede, 
after that he smote Egypt, in the hun- 
drid and three and fourtithe 3eer, and 
gastyede vp' to Yrael. And he stiede vp 
to Jerusalem in a grenouse multitude, 
23and entride in to the halewyng with 
pride; and he toke the golden auter, 
and the candilstike of li;t, and alle ves- 
sels therof, and the bord of proposicioun, 
and vessels of fleetynge sacrifices, and 
cruetis, and golden morters, and veil, 
and crownys, and golden ournement that 
was in face of the temple; and he brake 
zialle. And he toke gold and syluer, and 
alle desireable vessels, and he toke the 
priuy tresours, whiche he fonde; and alle 
25taken up, he wente in to his lond. And 
he made slaw3ter of men, and spake inf 
26grete pride. And grete weiling is maad 
27in Yrael, and in eche place of hem; and 
princis sorewiden inwardly, and elder 
men, and meydenys, and 3ung men, ben 
maad seeke, and fairnesse of wymen is 
2schaungid. Eche husbond toke weilyng, 
and thei that saten in the husbondis bed, 
29mourneden. And the lond is moued to 
gidre on men dwellynge therynne, and al 
the hous of Jacob clothide confusioun. 
30 And after two 3eeris of days, the kyng 
sente a prince of tributis in to the citees 
of Juda, and he cam to Jerusalem with 
sigrete cumpaignye. And he spake to 
hem pesible wordis in gyle, and thei 
32 bileenyden to hym. And sodenly he felle 
yn on the citee, and smote it with grete 
wounde, and lost miche peple of Yrael. 
33And he toke prayes of the citee, and 
brente it with fijr, and distruyede housis 
34 therof, and wallis therof in cumpas. And 
thei ledden wyinmen caityf, and children, 
35and weldiden beestis. And thei beeld- 
iden the cytee of Dauid with grete® wall 
and sad, and sad toures; and it is maad 
36to hem in to strengthe. And thei put- 
tiden there a folk of synners, wickid 
men, and thei weren stronge in it; and 


1Om. 4. ¢ Om un. 


valle the 1, W desiderablec. * Om. Rr. 


f Om. x. 


y Om. rR. 


I. 21—36. 


he smoot Egipt, in the hundrid and thre 
and fourtithe 3eer, and stiede to Israel. 
And he stiede to Jerusalein with a greu-22 
ouse multitude, and entride in to the23 
halewyng with pride; and he took the 
goldun auter, and the candilstike of 1i3t, 
and alle’ vessels therof, and the boord of 
proposicioun, and vessels of fletynge sacri- 
fices, and cruetis, and goldun morteris, 
and veil, and crownes, and goldun ourne- 
ment that was in the face of the temple; 
and he brak alle. And he took siluer24 
and gold, and alle desirable” vessels, and 
he took the priuy tresours, whiche he 
foond; and whanne he hadde takun vp 
alle thingis, he wente in to his lond. And 25 
he made slau3ter of men, and spak in 
greet pride. And greet weilyng was maad 26 
in Israel, and in ech place of hem; and 27 
princes sorewiden inwardli, and eldere 
men, and maidens, and 3onge men weren 
maad sike, and fairnesse of wymmen was 
chaungid. Ech hosebonde took weilyng, 2s 
and thei that saten in hosebondis bed, 
morenyden. And the lond was mouyd29 
togidere on men dwellynge therynne, and 
al the hous of Jacob was clothid with 
confusioun. And aftir twei j3eeris of30 
daies, the kyng sente a prince of tributis 
in to the citees of Juda, and he cam to 
Jerusalem with greet cumpanye. And hesi 
spak to hem pesible wordis in gile, and 
thei bilenyden to hym. And sudeynli hese 
felle in on the citee, and smoot it with a* 
greet wounde, and loste myche puple of 
Israel. And he took .preies of the citee, 33 
and brente it with fier, and distriede 
housis therof, and wallis therofY in eum- 
pas. And thei ledden wymmen caitif,34 
and children, and weldiden beestis. And 3s 
thei bildiden the citee of Danid with greet 
wal and sad, and sadde touris; and it was 
maad to hem in to an hi3 tour’%. Ands36 
thei puttiden there a fole of synuneris, 
wickid men, and thei weren strong in it; 
and thei puttiden armeris, and metis, and 


& a grete G sec, m. H. 


Z toure, ether strengthe CEFGUIKMNPQSUXE. 


I, 37——5!. 


thei puttiden armers, and metis, and 
37gadirden prays of Jerusalem; and put- 
tiden vp there, and ben maad into a 
asgrete gnare. And this thing is maad to 
aspyingus in yuel of halewyng, and in 
39to yuel gyle in Yrael euermore. And 
thei shedden out innocent blood, bi cum- 
pas of the halewyng, and defouliden the 
4ohalewyng. And dwellers of Jerusalem 
fledden for hem, and is maad_ habita- 
cioun of straungers, and is maad strange, 
or alien, to his seed, and the sounys 
4itherof forsoken it. The halewyng therof 
is desolat as wildrenesse; the feestdays 
therof ben turned in to mournyng, the 
sabothis therof in to shenship, the hon- 
42ouris therof into nou3t. Vp the glorie 
therof the yuel fame therof is multi- 
plied, and heiznesse therof is tourned 
43into mournyng. And kyng Antiochus 
wrot to al his reume, that al the peple 
weren oon. And thei forsoken eche man 
44his lawe; and alle folkis consentiden vp 
45the word of kyng Antiochus, and manye 
of Yrael consentiden to hym, and sacri- 
fieden to ydolis, and defouliden saboth. 
46 And kyng Antiochus sente bokis bi the 
hond of messangers in to Jerusalem, and 
in to alle citees of Judee, that thei shul- 
47den sue the lawis of folkis of erthe, and 
thei shulden forbede burnt sacrifices, and 
sacrifices, and plesyngis for to be don in 
48the temple of God, and shulden" forbede 
the saboth for to be halewid, and so- 
49lempne days, and holy thingus for to be 
defoulid, and the holy peple of Yrael. 
50And he comaundide auters for to be 
beeldid, and templis, and‘ ydolis; and 
swyne fleshe for to be sacrifisid, and 
51commoun, or unclene, beestus; and for 
to leue her sonys vncircumcidid, and the 
soulis of hem for to be defoulid in alle 
vnclennessis and abominaciouns, so that 
thei shulden for3ete the lawe, and shul- 
den chaunge alle the iustifiyngis of God. 


h thei schulden & sec. m. UL. 


&Om.yx. bintoz ¢Om.r. 4 fro a prim. is. 
mnpgsuxe. f habitacion rR. 


NPQsUXe. Common R. 
VOL. ILI. 


I. MACCABEES. 


& sacrifisiden c ef ceferi. 


5G 


777 


gaderiden preies of Jerusalem ; and put-37 
tiden vp there, and weren maad in to a® 
greet snare. And this thing was maadss 
to aspiyngis in yuel, ‘ether tresouns®, to 
halewyng, and in to an yuel deuel in 
Israel euere more. And thei schedden39 
out innocent blood, bi cumpas of the ha- 
lewyng, and defouliden the halewyng. 
And dwelleris of Jerusalem fledden for® 40 
hem, and it was maad abitacioun of 
straungeris, and it was maad straunge® 
to his seed, and sones therof forsoken it. 
The halewyng‘ therof was desolat as wil-41 
dirnesse ; feeste daies therof weren turned 
in to mourenyng, sabotis therof in to 
schenschip, onouris therof in to nou3t. Bi42 
the glorie therof the yuel fame therof was 
multiplied, and hy3nesse therof was turned 
in to mournyng. And kyng Antiok wroot 43 
to al his rewme, that al the puple schulde 
be oon. And thei forsoken ech man his 
lawe; and alle folkis consentiden bi the 44 
word of kyng Antiok, and many of Israel] 45 
cousentiden to him, and _ sacrifieden® to 
idols, and defouliden sabot. And king 46 
Antiok sente bokis bi the hondis of mes- 
sangeris in to Jerusalem, and in to alle 
citees of Judee, that thei schulden sue 
lawis of folkis of erthe, and schulden for-47 
bede brent sacrifices, and sacrifices, and 
plesyngis® for to be don in the temple of 
God, and that thei schulden forbede thes 
sabot for to be halewid, and solempne 
daies, and hooli thingis for to be defoulid, 49 
and the hooli puple of Israel. And heso 
comaundide auteris for to be bildid, and 
templis, and idols; and swynes fleisch for 
to be sacrifisid, and vneleene' beestis; and 51 
for to leeue her sones vneircumncidid, and 
the soulis of hem for to be defoulid in alle 
vnclennessis and abhomynaciouns, so that 
thei schulden forjete the lawe, and schu- 
len chaunge alle the iustifiyngis of God. 
And who euere dide not bi the word of52 
kyng Antiok, schulden die. Bi alle theses: 


i of A. 


© alien c. straunge, ether (thal is Kk] alien EFGHIK 
4 plesyng x. | comyn, ether uncleene CEFGHIKM 


778 
52 And who euer diden not the] word of 
53 Antiochus, shulden dye. After alle these 

wordis he wrote to al his rewme, and 

bifore sette princis to the peple, whiche 
shulden constreyne these thingis for* to 
stbe don. And thei comaundiden to citees 
ssof Juda for to sacrifice. And many of 
the peple ben gadrid to hem, whiche for- 
soken lawe! of the Lord, and diden yuels 
360m erthe; and dryuen out the peple of 

Yrael of priue places, and in hid places 
s7of fugityues, or fleeynge men. In the 

fyftenthe day of the moneth Casleu, in 

the hundrid and fyue and fourtithe 3eere, 
kyng Antiochus beeldide the abominable 
ydol of desolacioun, or discomfort, on™ 
the auter of God; and bi alle the citees 
ssof Jude thei beeldiden auters. And bi- 
fore 3atis of housis and in streetis thei 
s9brenten encensis, and sacrifieden; and 
breuten by fijr bokis of the lawe of God, 
so keruynge hem. And anentis whom euer 
bokis of the" testament of the Lord 
weren founden, and who euer kepte the 
lawe of the Lord, vp maundement of the 
sikyng thei slewen hym. In her vertu, 
or power, thei diden these thingus to the 
peple of Yrael, that was founden in eche 
sgmoneth in citees. And in the® fyue and 
twentithe day of the moneth, thei sacri- 
fisiden on the auter, that was ajeinus the 
s3auter. And wymmen, that circumcid- 
iden her sonys, weren strangled, vp co- 
6imaundement of kyng Antiochus; and 
thei hangiden children of the haterels, 
or hyndre part of the nek, by alle housis 
of hem, and strangliden that circumcid- 
6siden®° hem. And many of the peple of 

Yrael determyden, or fully demyden, 

anentis hem, that thei shulden not ete 

vnelene thingis, and chesiden more for 
to dye, than for to be defoulid with vn- 
s6clene metis. And thei wolden not breke 


J vp the a. 
G prem. 


k Om. a pr.m. 1 the lawe n. 


1 setter. ™Om. Rr. 
cioun, ether discoumfort c et ceteri. 
PQsuUX. vertu R. 8 the citees vu. 
demyden crguikmnposuxe. fulli demeden F sup. ras. 


P of the x. 


I. MACCABEES. 


m vpon 4 


" fugityues R. fugityues, ether Jfleynge men c et ceteri. 
f th q sacrifisiden ceteri. 
t sacrifisiden ceteri. 


I. 52——66. 


wordis he wroot to al his rewme, and 
aboue settide! princes to the puple, whiche 
schulden constreyne these thingis for™ to 
be don. And thei comaundiden to citees 54 
of Juda for to make sacrifice. And many 5s 
of the puple weren gaderid to hem, whiche 
forsoken the lawe of the Lord, and diden 
yuels on erthe. And thei dryueden outs 
the puple of Israel fro priuy places, and 
in hid places of fleynge" men. In the fif-57 
tenthe dai of the monethe Casleu*, in‘ the 
hundrid and fyue and fourtithe 3eer, king 
Antiok bildide abhominable idol of dis- 
coumfort® on the auter of God; and bi alle 
citees of Judee in cumpas thei bildiden 
auters.' And bifore the 3atis of? housisss 
and in stretis thei brenten encensis, and 
sacrifieden4; and brenten bi fier thess 
bookis of the lawe of God, and keruyden 
hem. And anentis whom euere the bookis 60 
of testament of the Lord weren foundun, 
aud who euere kepte the lawe of the 
Lord, bi the maundement of the kyng 
thei slowen hym. In her power’ theiei 
diden these thingis to the puple of Is- 
rael, that was foundun in ech monethe in 
citeess. And in the fyue and twentithe 62 
dai of the monethe, thei sacrifiedent on 
the auter, that was ajens the auter of God. 
And wymmen, that circumcididen't her 63 
sones, weren stranglid, bi comaundement 
of kyng Antiok; and thei hangiden chil-6s 
dren bi the neckis, bi alle housis of hem, 
and strangliden hem that circumcididen 
hem. And many of the puple of Israel ¢s 
determyneden® anentis hem, that thei 
schulden not ete vnclene thingis, and ches- 
iden more for to die, than for to be de- 
foulid with vnelene metis. And thei wol-6e 
den not breke the hooli lawe of God, and 
thei weren slayn ; and ful greet wraththe 67 
was inaad on the puple. 


Om. 4GH. 9Om. H. °° circumciden 


° desolacion Rk. desola- 
® vertu, ether power EFGHIKMN 
 circumciden 4. ¥ determyneden, ether fulli 


* That answer- 
ith to oure No- 
uembre, aud 
sum tyme it 
renueth in parti 
with oure Octo- 
bre. Qu. 


I. 67—~II. 16. 


the holy lawe of God, and thei weren 
67slayn; and grete° wrath is maad on the 
peple ful myche. 


CAP. II. 


1 In tho days Mathatias roose, the sone of 
Joon, sone of Symeon, he ‘a prest? of the 
sones of Joazin, of Jerusalem, and sate in 

2the hil Modyn. And he hadde fyue sones; 

3 Joon, that was named Gaddis; and Sy- 

4mount, that was namyd Thasi; and Ju- 

5das, that was clepid Machabeus; and 
Eleazarus, that was namyd Abaron; and 
Jouathas, that was named Apphus. 

6 These sawen the yuelis that weren don 
in the peple of Juda and Jerusalem. 

7 And Mathatias saide, Woo to me! wher- 


to am I born, for to se contricioun, or 
distruying 1, of my peple, and contri- . 


cioun of the holy citee, and for to sitte 
there, whan it is 30uen in hondis of en- 
amyes? Holy thingus ben maad in the 
hond of strangers; the temple therof as 
ga man vnnoble; vessels of glorie therof 
ben ladde awey caytif. Olde men therof 
ben slayn in streetis therof, and 3unge 
men therof fellen doun in swerd of en- 
1omyes. What folk enheritide not the 
kyngdam therof, and weeldede not prayes 
11therof? Al makyng to gidre, or ourn- 
yng, therof is born awey; she that was 
1gfree, is maad hond mayden. And loo! 
oure holy, and oure fairnesse, and oure 
cleerte, is desolate, and heithen men de- 
i3fouliden it. What therfore 3it to vs for 
1ato lyue? And Mathatias kitte, and his 
sonys, her clothis, and hilliden hem with 
ishayris, and weiliden gretely. And thei 
that weren sente of kyng Antiochus, 
camen thidre, for to constreyne hem that 
fledden. to gydre in to the citee Modyn, 
for to offre and brenne encensis, and for 
isto departe fro the lawe of God. And 
many of the peple of Yrael consentynge 
camen to hem; bot Mathatias and his 


© the greet H. 


va prest c ef ceteri. 


¢hond a sec.m. 4hondis as. ¢ and n. 


I. MACCABEES. 


P Om. K sec. m. 


w of Modyn F sec. m. GIKN sec. m. QSX. 
z defoulyng, ether [or Epy] distriyng cereukmnpasux. Om. 1. defoulyng rR. 
f Om. R. 


779 


CAR. II. 


In tho daies Matatias, the sone of Joon, | 
sone of Symeon, and he was prest’ of the 
sones of Joarym, roos fro Jerusalem, and 
sat in the hil Modyn”. And he hadde2 
fyue sones; Joon, that was named Gaddis ; 
and Symount, that was named Thasi;3 
and Judas, that was clepid Machabeus ;4 
and Eleasarus, that was named Abaron ;5 
and Jonathas, that was clepid* Apphus. 
These sizjen the yuels that weren don iné 
the puple of Juda and inY Jerusalem. And7 
Matatias seide, Wo to me! wher to am Y 
borun, for to se the distriyng* ‘of my pu- 
ple, and the* defoulyng of the hooli citee, 
and for to sitte there, whanne it is 3ouun 
in to® the hondis® of enemyes? Hoolis 
thingis ben maad in the hond‘ of 
straungeris ; the temple therof as a man 
vnnoble ; vessels of¢ glorie therof ben led 9 
awei caitif. Elde men therof‘ ben slayn in 
stretis, and 3onge men therof fellen doun 
bi swerd of enemyes. What folc enherit-10 
ide not the kingdom therof, and weldide 
not preies therof? Al ournyng therof is 11 
borun awei; sche that was fre, is maad 
handmaidun&. And lo! oure hooli thing, 12 
and oure fairnesse, and oure clerete, is 
desolat, and hethene men defouliden it. 
What therfor is 3it to vs for to lyue?13 
And Matatias and his sones to-renten her 14 
clothis, and hiliden hem with heiris, and 
weiliden greetli. And thei that weren1s 
sent of* kyng Antiok, camen thidur, for 
to constreyne hem that fledden togidere . 
ini to the cite of Modyn, for to offre and 
brenne encensis, and for to departe fro the 
lawe of God. And many of the puple of 16 
Israel consentiden, and camen to hem;3>- 
but Matatias and his sones stoden stide- 
fastli. And thei answeriden, that weren 17 


q distruccioun A. 


Yof1. Om. R. 
b Om. Rr. 
1Om. wn. 


X named CEFHIKMQRSU. 
aOm..I. ° 


the hondmaiden r. ° of the 1. 


5G 2 


780 I. MACCABEES. 


i7sonys stoden stidfastly. And thei an- 
sweryng, that weren sente of Antiochus, 
saiden to Mathatias, Thou art prince, 
and most cleer, and grete in this citee, 
and ourned with souys and bretheren. 
is Therfore go to former, and do the maunde- 
ment of the kyng, as alle folkis han don, 
and ment of Juda, and thei that laften 
in Jerusalem. And thou shalt be, and thy 
sonnys, among freendis of the kyng, and 
made large in siluer and gold, and in 
ismany 3iftis. And Mathatias answeride, 
and saide with grete voice, And if alle 
folkis obeien to the’ kyng Antiochus, 
that thei go awey eche man fro seruice 
of the lawe of his fadris, and conseute to 
20 his manndementis, Y, and my sonnys, and 


my bretheren shuln obeie to the lawe of 


z.oure fadris. God be helpful to us; it is 
not prophitable to us for to forsake the 
22 lawe and ri3twisnessis of God. We schu- 
len not heeren the wordis of kyng An- 
tiochus, nether shuln sacrifice, brekyuge 
the maundementis of oure lawe, that we 
23g0 another way. And as he ceeside for 
to speke these wordis, sum Jew wente to 
in ee3en of alle men, for to sacrifice to 
ydolis on the auter, in the cytee Modyn, 
24vp comaundement of the kyng. And 
Mathatias sau3, and sorewide, and his 
reyns trembliden togidre, and his wod- 
nesse is kyndled after dom of the lawe; 
and he lippynge ynne, slew3 hym on the 
2auter. Bot and he slew3 in that tyme 
the man whom kyng Antiochus sente, 
whiche compellide for to be offrid, and 
26distruyide the auter. And he louede 
feruently the lawe, as Fynees dide to 
27 Zambri, sone of Salomy. And Mathatias 
criede in grete voice in the cytee, say- 
inge, Eche man that hath feruent loue of 
the lawe, ordeynynge testament, go out 
esafter me. And he flei3, and his sonnys, 
in to mounteyns, and leften what euer 
29 thingus thei' hadden in the citee. Thanne 
manye wente doun, seekynge domes and 


¥ the men 4. 


8 Om. 4GH. 


Il. 17——29. 


sent of Antiok, and seiden to Matatias, 
Thou art prince, and* moost clere, and 
greet in this citee, and ourned with sones 
and britheren. Therfor go thou the for-18 
mere, and do the maundement of the kyng, 
as alle folkis han don, and men of Juda, 
and thei that leften in Jerusalem. And 
thou schalt be, and thi sones, among 
frendis of the king, and maad large in 
silner and gold, and many 3iftis. And 19 
Matatias answeride, and seide with greet 
vois, Thou3 alle folkis obeien to! kyng 
Antiok, that thei go awei ech man fro™ 
seruice of the lawe of his fadris, and con- 
senten to his maundementis, Y, and my 20 
sones, and my britheren schulen obeie to 
the lawe of oure fadris. God be helpful 21 
to vs; it is not profitable to vs for to for- 
sake the lawe and ri3twisnesses" of God. 
We schulen not here the wordis of kyng®22 
Antiok, nether? schulen make sacrifice4 
to idols, and breke the maundementis of 
oure lawe, that we go bi anothir weie. 
And as he ceesside for to speke these23 
wordis, sum Jew wente to, bifore the izen 
of alle men, for to sacrifice to idols on the 
auter, in the citee Modyn', bi comaunde- 
ment of the kyng. And Matatias si3, and 24 
sorewide, and his reynes trembliden togi- 
dere, and his wovdnesse* was kyndlid bi 
doom of the lawe; and he skippide* in, 
and slow hym on the auter. But and he2s 
slow in that tyme the man whom king 
Antiok sente, which compellide for to 
offre, and he distriede the auter. And 26 
he louyde feruentli the lawe, as Fynees 
dide to Sambri, sone of Salomy. And27 
Matatias criede with greet vois in the citee, 
and seide, Ech man that hath feruent loue 
of the lawe, ordeyne a testament, ‘that is, 
a couenaunt', and go" out after me. And 28 
he flei, and hise sones, in to munteyns, 
and leften what euere thingis thei hadden 
in the citee. Thanue many sekynge dom29 
and ri3twisnesse, wenten doun in to de- 
sert, that thei schulden sitte there, thei,30 


t that thei 4. 


: ae arti. ‘ltother, ™frother 48 riztfulnessis R. Othe kyng1. P nether wer. 4 sacrificis a. 
of Modyn ¥F sec.m. 1K. 8 leppide c et ceterii’ t Om. Rr. 2 go her. 


thanne bi the 


id 
dom of resoun. 


Il. 30—44. 


30 rijtwisnesse, in to desert, that thei saten 
there, thei, and sonys of hem, and wym- 
men of hem, and beestis of hem, for 

3iyuels weren hard on hem. And it is 
tolde azein to men of the kyng, and to 
the oost, that weren in Jerusalem, in the 
cytee of Dauid, for sum men wente awey, 
that distruyeden maundement of the kyng, 
in to priuy placis of desert; and many 

szhadden gon after hem. And anoon thei 
wenten to hem, and ordeyniden a3eins 

33 hem bateile, in the day of sabothis; and 
saiden to hem, A3einstonde 3e and now 
3it? go 3e out, and do 3e vp the word of 

34kyng Antiochus, and 3e shuln lyue. And 
thei saiden, We shuln not go out, nethir 
we shuln do the word of the kyng, that 

35we defoule the day of sabothis. And 


36thei steriden bateile ajeinus hem. And ~ 


thei answerden not to hem, nether sente 
stoon to hem, nether stoppiden preuy 
37 places, sayinge, Dye we alle in oure 
symplenesse, and heuen and erthe shuln 
be witnessis on vs, that vniustly 3e 
38leesen us. And thei baren yn to hem 
bateil in sabothis, and thei ben deade, 
and the wyues of hem, and sonnys of 
hem, and beestis of hem, vnto a thou- 
39sand soules of men. And Mathatias 
knewe, and his freendis; and thei had- 
4oden mournyng on hem gretely. Anda 
man saide to his neizbore, 3if we alle 
shuln do as oure bretheren diden, and 
shuln not fijte ajeinus heithen men, for 
oure soulis, and oure iustifiyngis, sunner 
4ithei shuln distruye vs of erthe. And 
thei thon3ten in that day, sayinge, Eche 
man who euer shal cum to vs in bateile, 
in day of sabothis, fijte we aj3einus hym, 
and dye we not alle, as oure bretheren 
a2ben dead in priuy places. Than the 
synagoge of Jewis, stronge in mi3tis of 
Yrael, is gadrid to lem, euery wilful 
4sman in lawe; and alle that fledden fro 
yuels, ben addid, or put, to hem. And thei 
44ben maad to hem to stedfastnesse, and 


Vteld ajen Rk. W the maundement 1KkR. 


erther. &thedai1. &Om.r. i othere 1. 


I. MACCABEES. 


x Om. Rk. 
b threuwen c sup. ras. ether senten K marg. senten R. 


781 


and the sones of hem, and wymmen of 
hem, and beestis of hem, for yuels weren 
hard on hem. And it was teld’ to mens 
of the kyng, and to the oost, that weren in 
Jerusalem, the citee of Dauid, that sum- 
men wenten awei, that distrieden maunde- 
ment” of the kyng, in to priuy places in 
desert; and many hadden go after hem. 
And anoon thei wenten to hem, and or-32 
deineden ajens hem batel, in the* dai of 
sabatis; and’ seiden to hem, A3enstonde3s3 
3e also now 3it? go 3e out, and do 3e? 
after the word of kyng Antiok, and 3e 
schulen lyue. And thei seiden, We schu-34 
len not go out, nether schulen do the word 
of the king, that we defoule the dai of 
sabatis*. And thei stiriden batel ajens3s 
hem. And thei answeriden not to hem, 36 
nether threwen® stoon® to hem, nether 
stoppiden priuy places, and seiden, Die37 
we alle in oure simplenesse, and heuene 
and erthe schulen be witnessis on vs, that 
vniustli 3e lesen vs. And thei 3auen toss 
hem batel¢ in sabatis, and thei weren 
deed, and wyues of hem, and sones of 
hem, and beestis of hem, til to a thousande 
persoones of men. And Matatias knew, 39 
and his frendis; and thei hadden mourn- 
yng on hem greetli. And a man seide to4¢ 
his nei3bore, If we alle shulen do as oure 
britheren diden, and schulen not fiz3te ajens 
hethene men, for oure lyues, and oure ius- 
tifilyngis, sunnere® thei schulen distrie vs 
fro erthe’. And thei thou3ten in that dai, 41 
and seiden, Ech man who euere cometh to 
vs in batel, in dai& of sabotis, fiz3te we 
ajens hym, and die we not alle, as oure 
britheren ben deed in priuy places. Thanne 42 
the synagoge of Jewis, strong in my3tis of 
Israel, was gaderid to hem. Euery wilful 
man in the® lawe, and alle that fledden 43 
fro yuels, weren addid to hem, and thei 
weren maad to hem to stidtastnesse. And 44 
thei gaderiden an oost, and smytiden syn- © 
neris in her wraththe, and wickid men in 
her indignacioun ; and the tother! fledden 


4 the sabatis I pr. m. 
e the sunnere i. ‘the 


yandtheir. 2 Om.1. 
castoont. 4 batels r. 


782 


gedryden an oost, and smyten synners in 
her wrath, and wickid men in her indig- 
nacioun; and the tother fledden to na- 
asciouns, for to ascape. And Mathatias 
enuyrounede, and his freendis, and dis- 
sstruyeden auters, and circumcididen chil- 
dren vncircumcidid, hou manye euer thei 
founden in coostis of Yrael, in streugthe. 
47 And thei pursueden sonys of pride, and 
the werk hadde prosperite in her hondis. 
4s And thei weeldiden the lawe ‘of hondis" 
of heithen men, and of hondis of kyngus, 
and 3auen not horn, or strengthe, to the 
aosynner. And the days of Mathatias of 
dying nei3eden, and he saide to his sonys, 
Now pride is counfortid, and chastisyng, 
and tyme of distruccioun, and the wrath 
soof indignacioun. Now therfore, sonys, 
be 3e suers, om lowers, of the lawe, and 
jeue 3e 30ure lyues for the testament of 
sifadris. And bithenke 3e of the werkis 
of fadris, that thei diden in her genera- 
ciouns, and 3e shuln resceyue grete glorie, 
szand euerlastynge name. Wher Abraham 
in temptation was not founden feithful, 
and it is rettid to hym to’ rijtwisnesse ? 
s3Joseph in tyme of his anguyshe kepte 
the comaundement, and was maad lord 
siof Egypt. Fynees, oure fadir, feruently 
louynge the feruent loue of God, toke tes- 
55tament of euerlastynge presthode. Jhe- 
sus, or Josue, whijle he fulfilled the 
56 word, is maad duyk in Yrael. Caleph, 
whijl he witnessith in the chirche, toke 
s7heritage. Dauid in his mercy gate the 
58seete of kyngdam, in to worldis. Helye, 
whijl he feruently loueth the feruent loue 
of the lawe, is resceyued in to heuen. 
59Ananias, Azarias, Mysael, by leeuynge 
60ben delyuered of flawme. Danyel in 
his symplenesse is delyuerd of mouth of 
silyouns. And thus bithenke 3e bi gene- 
racioun and generacioun, for alle that 
hopen in to hym ben not maad vnsted- 


u Om. G prim. 


k and thei 1. 


1Om.x. ™ frothe1. ™ fro the 1 
MNPQsUXe. horn R. 4 indignaciouns A. 7 Om. R. 
Seithful ¢ et ceteri preterR,. eandher Y Om. R, 


I. MACCABEES. 


- © thei jauen rR. 


Tl. 45-—61. 


to naciouns, for to ascape. And Matatias 4s 
enuyrownede, and hise frendis, and* dis- 
trieden auteris, and cireumcididen chil-46 
dren vneircumcided, hou many euere thei 
founden in the coostis of Israel, ‘in 
strengthe. And thei pursueden the sones 47 
of pride, and the werk hadde prosperite in 
her hondis. And thei gaten the lawe fro™ 48 
hondis of hethene men, and fro” hondis 
of kyngis, and 3auen° not strengthe? to 
the synnere. And daies of Matatias of 49 
diynge nei3iden, and he seide to hise sones, 
Now pride is coumfortid, and chastisyng, 
and tyme of distruccioun, and the wraththe 
of indignacioun’. Now therfor, sones, be 50 
3e sueris, ‘ether louyeris', of the lawe, and 
3yue 3e 30ure lyues for the testament of 
fadris. And bithenke 3e on werkis ofs: 
fadris, whiche thei diden in her genera- 
ciouns, and 3e schulen resseyue greet glo- 
rie, and euerlastynge name. Whether" in 52 
temptacioun Abraham was not‘ founden 
trewe', and it was arettid to hym to ri3t- 
wisnes ? Joseph in time of his angwisch 53 
kepte comaundement, and" was maad lord 
of Egipt. Fynees, oure fadir, in feruentli 54 
louynge the feruent loue of God, took tes- 
tament of euerlastynge preesthod. Jhesus, 5s 
‘ether Josue’, while he fillide the word, 
was maad duyk in Israel. Caleph, while s6 
he witnesside in the chirche, took eritage. 
Dauid in his merci gat the sete of kyng- 57 
dom, in to worldis. Elie, while he fer-5¢ 
uentli louyde the feruent loue of the lawe, 
was resseyued in to henene. Ananyas, 59 
Azarias, Misael, bileuyden, and weren de- 
lyuered fro’ flawme. Danyel in his sym-6o0 
plenesse was delyuered fro the mouth of 
liouns. And thus bithenke 3e bi* gene-¢1 
racioun and generacioun, for alle that 
hopen in to hym ben not maad vastide- 
fast. And drede 3e not of the wordis of a 62 
man synnere’, for the glorie of hym is 
tord and worm; to dai he is enhaunsid, ¢3 


vin to 4. 


P horn, ether strengthe EFGHIK 
tt Wher ceteri passim. 8 Om.1. +t trewe, ether 
Wfrothe1. *fro1. Ya synner R sec. m. 


Il. 62—lIl. 6. 


ezfast. And of wordis of the syimer 3e 
shuln not drede, for the glorie of hym 
63is torde and worme; to day he is en- 
haunsid, and to morrew he shal not be 
founden, for he is turned in to his erthe, 
64and his thou3te shal perishe. Therfore, 
sonys, be 3e confortid, and do 3e manly 
in the lawe; for whan 3e shuln do whiche 
thingus ben bedun to 30u in the lawe of 
the Lord 3our God, in it 3e shuln be 
ssglorious. And loo! Symount, 3our bro- 
there; I wote, for he is a man of coun- 
seile, heere 3e hym euermore, and he 
66Shal be fadir to 30u. And Judas Macha- 
beus, stronge in mi3tis fro his 3outh, be 
he to 30u a prince of kni3thode, and he 
e7shal do bateil of the peple. And 3e 
shuln brynge to 3ou alle doars of the 
lawe, and venge 3e the veniaunce of 
6g30ure peple. jelde 3e 3eeldynge to hei- 
then men, aud take 3e tent ‘in to” the 
69 heest of lawe. And he blesside hem, and 
zois putt to his faders. And he is dead in 
the hundrid and sixe and fourtie” 3eere, 
and is biryed of his sonnys in to the 
sepulcre. of his fadris in Modyn; and 
. alle Yrael weiliden bhym witb greet 
weylyng. 
CAP. III. 
1 And Judas roose, that was cleepid Ma- 
2 chabeus, his sone, for him. And alle his 
bretheren helpiden hym, and alle that 
ioyneden hem to his fadir, and thei 
fou3ten the bateil of Yrael with glad- 
snesse. And he alargide glorie to his 
peple, and clothide hym a hawberioun 
as a ieaunt, and girde hym his* armeres 
of bateile in bateilis, and defendide cas- 
atellis with his swerde. He is maad lije 
to a lyoun in his werkis, and as whelp of 
slyoun rorynge in his huntyng. And he 
pursuede wickid men, seekynge hem ; 
and he brente hem in flawmes, that to 
egydre distourbliden his peple. And his 
enmyes ben putt a3ein for dreed of hym, 


Vv to AH. 


+ of ceteri preter 8. 
et plures. © like to R. 


fOm.r. a Houn FR. 


I. MACCABEES. 


w fourtithe am. 


a sixe and fourtithe c ef plures. xl. foure 1. 


783 


and to morewe he schal not be foundun, 
for he is turned in to his erthe, and his 
thou3t schal perische. Therfor, 3e sones, 64 
be coumfortid, and do 3e manli in the 
lawe; for* whanue 3e schulen do tho thingis 
that ben bodun to 3o0u in the lawe of 30ure 

Lord God, in it 3e schulen be gloriouse. aes 
And lo! Symount, 30ure brother ; Y woot, 6s eee te. 
that he is a man of councel, here 3e hym tere. era. 
eueremore, and he schal be fadir to 3ou. 

And Judas Machabeus, stronge in mi3tis 66 

fro his 3ongthe, be to 30u a prince in? 

kny3thod, and he schal do batel of the 

puple. And 3e schulen brynge to 3ou alle 67 

doeris of the lawe, and venge 3e the ven- 

iaunce of 3oure puple. 3elde 3e 3eldyng 68 

to hethene men, and take 3e tent to the 

heeste of the lawe. And he blesside hem, 69 

and was put to hise fadris. And he was 7 

deed in the hundrid and ‘sixe and fourti* 

jeer, and was biried of hise sones in to 

sepulcre of hise fadris in Modyn; and al 

Israel weiliden hym with greet weilyng. 


* This clause 
til thedir, And 
lo! Symount, is 


CAP. III. 


And Judas, that was clepid Macha-1 
beus, the sone of Matatias, roos for hym. 
And alle hise britheren helpiden hym, and 2 
alle that ioyneden hem to his fadir, and 
thei fouj3ten the batel ‘of Israel” with 
gladnesse®. And he alargide glorie tos 
his puple, and clothide hym with an ha- 
buriowne as a giaunt, and girde? hym 
with hise armeris of batel in batels, and 
defendide castels with his swerd. He was4 
maad lijk® a lioun in hise werkis, and as 
af whelp of lioun® rorynge in his huntyng. 
And he" pursuede wickid men, and sou3tes 
hem; and he brente hem in flawmes, that 
disturbliden his puple. And hise enemyesé 
weren put abac for drede of hym, and alle 


x with 4. 


bOm.r. ¢ greet gladnesr. 4 girte c 


bh Om. x. 


784 


and alle wirchers of wickidnesse ben tru- 
blid to gidre; and helthe is dressid in 
vhis hond. And he wraththide many 
kyngus, and gladide Yrael in his werkis, 
and in to world his mynde in blessyng. 
sAnd he wente thoru the citees of Juda, 
aud lost vnpitous men of hem, and turn- 
gyde awey wrath fro Yrael. And he is 
named vn to the vttermost of erthe, and 
lohe gadride the perishynge. And Appo- 
lonius gadride folkis, and fro Samarie 
miche vertue, and grete, for to fi3t 
liajeinus Yrael. And Judas knewe, and 
wente out aj3einus hy, and smote, and 
slew3 hym. And many woundid fellen 
izdoun, and the other fledden; and he 
toke prayes of hem. And Judas toke 
awey the swerd of Appolonie, and was 
13fi3tyng therynne in alle days. And Se- 
ron, prince of the oost of Syrie, herde, 
that Judas gadride a gaderyng, and the 
i4chirehe of feithful men with hym. And 
he saith, Y shal make to me a name, and 
Y shal be glorified in rewme, and Y shal 
ouercumme Judas, and hem that ben 
with hym, whiche dispisiden the kyngus 
isword. And he made hym redy; and 
the castels of vnpitous men, strong help- 
ers, stieden vp with hym, for to do ven- 
isiaunce in to the sonys of Yrael. And 
thei nei3iden vn to Betheron; and Judas 
wente out ajeinus hem, with fewe men. 
17 Forsothe as thei sawen the oost cuin- 
mynge to hem in meetyng, thei saiden 
to Judas, How mown we fewe fi3te 
ajeinus so grete multitude, so stronge ; 
and we ben maad wery by fastyng this 
isday ? And Judas saith, It is li3t, or etsy, 
many for to be closid to gydre in hond 
of fewe; and difference is not in the si3t 
of God of heuen, for to delyuere in many 
wor in fewe; for not in multitude of oost 
the victorie of bateil, bot of heuen is 
20strengthe. Thei cummen to us in rebelle 
multitude, and prid, for to distruye vs, 
and oure wyues, and oure sonys, and for to 


I. MACCABEES. 


Ill. 7—20. 


worcheris of wickidnesse! weren troblid to 
gidere; and heelthe was dressid in his 
hond. And he wraththide many kyngis,7 
andi gladide Jacob‘* in hise werkis, and in 
to world his mynde ¢s in blessyng. Ands 
he wente thorou3 the citees of Juda, and 
loste vnpitouse men of hem, and turnede 
awei wraththe fro Israel. And he was9 
named til to the vtmest of erthe, and he 
gaderide men perischynge. And Appol-10 
lyne gaderide folkis, and fro Samarie 
myche vertu, and greet, for to fi3te a3ens 
Israel. And Judas knew, and wente out11 
a3ens hym, and smoot, and slow hym. And 
many woundid fellen doun, and the othere! 
fledden; and he took preies of hem. And 12 
Judas took awei the swerd of Appollyne, 
and was fi3tynge therwith™ in" alle daies. 
And Seron, prince of the oost of Sirie, 13 
herde, that Judas gaderide a gaderyng, 
and the chirche of feithful men with hym. 
And he seide, Y schal make to me a name, 14 
and Y schal be glorified in the rewme, and 
Y schal ouercome Judas, and hem that ben 
with hym, whiche dispisiden the kyngis 
word. And he made redi hym; and the15 
castels of vnpitouse men, stronge helperis, 
stieden vp with hym, for to do veniaunce 
on the sones of Israel. And thei nei3iden '6 
‘til to? Betheron; and Judas wente out 
a3ens hem, with fewe men. Forsothe as 17 
thei sizen the oost comynge to hem in 
metinge, thei seiden to Judas, Hou moun 
we fewe fijten ajens so greet inultitude, so 
strong; and we ben maad weri bi fastyng 
this dai? And Judas seide, It is 1i3t, 18 
‘ether esy?, that many be closid togidere 
in hond of fewe; and difference is not in 
si3t of God ‘of heuene4, for to delyuere in 
manye ether in fewe; for not in multitude 19 
of oost 7s the victorie of batel, but of heuene 
is strengthe. Thei comen to vs in rebel 20 
multitude, and pride, for to distrie vs, and 
oure wyues, and oure sones, and for to 
robbe vs. Forsothe we schulen fi3te for 21 
oure lyues, and oure lawis; and the Lord 22 


‘wicknesse x. Jand he 1. * Jacob, that is, puple of Israel c et ceteri, preter. ‘tother Rr. ™ ther- 


ynner. 2®Om.1 Svntor POm.R. 


q Om. R. 


* Jacob, that is, 
the puple of 
Israel. a. 


III. 2I—34. 


2irobbe us. Forsothe we sliuln fi3te for 
220ure soulis, and oure lawis, and le the 
Lord shal breke hem to gydre byfore 
oure face; forsothe dreede 3e not hem. 
a3Sothely as he ceeside for to speke, he 
hurlide in in to hem soodeynly; and Seron 
is broken to gidre, and his oost, in si3t 
21of hym. And he pursuede hym in the 
goyug doun of Bethieron, til in to the 
feeld; and ei3te hundrid men of hem 
fellen doun, the other forsothe fledden 
2sin to the lond of Philistyim. And dreedY 
of Judas, and of his bretheren, and in- 
ward ferduesse, felle on alle heithen men 
26in cumpas of hem; and the name of 
hym came to the kyng, and of the batels 
270f Judas alle folkis telden. Sothely as 
kyng Antiochus herde these wordis, he 
was wrothe in inwitt; aud he sente, and 
gadride the oost of al his rewme, ful 
28stronge” castels. And he opnyde his 
tresorie, and 3aue soudis to the oost, in 
to oo 3eer, and comaundide hem, that 
29 thei weren redy to alle thingus. And he 
saw3, that monee failide of his tresours, 
and tributis of the enntre litil, for dis- 
eeneioun and yeniaunce that he dide in 
to the lond, for to do awey the lawful 
thingis that weren of the first days. 
39 And he dredde, that he shulde not haue 
and oonys and twies in to costis and 
3iftis, whiche he hadde 3ouen byfore 
with large hond; and he aboundide ouer 
3ikyngus that weren bifore hym. And 
he was astonyed in ynwitt gretly, and 
thou3te for to go in to Persis, and to 
take tributis of cuntrees, and for to 
zegadre myche syluer. And he laft Ly- 
sias, a noble man of the kyngis kynne, 
on the kyngus needis, fro the flood Eu- 
safrates vn to the flood of Egipt; and 
that he shulde nuriche Antiochus, his 
3, sone, til he eam ajein. And he toke to 
hym the mydil oost, and olifauntis, and 
comaundide to hym of alle thingus that 
he wolde, and of men enhabitynge Jude 


y the dreed au. 


rOm. erpmu. TTinx. *Om.r. 8 al the r. 
x Om. pr. Y the relifs x. 
VOL. III. 5 


I. MACCABEES. 


785 


hym silf sehal al to-breke hem bifore oure 
face; forsothe drede 3e not hem. Sotheli23 
as he ceesside for to speke, he hurlide in™ 
‘in to'™ hem sudenli; and Seron was al to- 
brokun, and his oost, in the si3t of hym. 
And he pursuede hym in the goynge doun 24 
of Betheron, til in to the feeld; and ei3te 
hundrid men of hem fellen doun, the 
othere forsothe fledden in to the’ lond of 
Filistiym. And the drede of Judas, and 25 
of his britheren, and the inward ferdnesse, 
felle on alle hethene men in eumpas of 
hem; and the name of hymn cam to the26 
kyng, and alle folkis telden of the bateils 
of Judas. Sotheli as king Antiok herde27 
these wordis, le was wrooth in soule; 
and he sente, and gaderide the’ oost of al 
his rewme, fult stronge ecastels. And he28 
openyde his treserie, and 3af sowdis to the 
oost, in to a 3eer, and comaundide hem, 
that thei schulden be redi to alle thingis. 
And he sai, that money failide of hise 29 
tresouris, and tributis of the cuntrei weren 
litil, for dissencioun and veniaunce that he 
dide in the lond, for to do awei the lawful 
thingis that weren of the" firste daies. And 30 
he dredde, that he sehulde not haue as 
onys and twies in to costis and 3iftis, 
whiche he hadde 3ounun bifore with large 
hond; and he was riche ouer kingis that 
weren bifore hym. And he was astonyed 31 
in soule greetli, and thou3te for to go in 
to Persis, and for to take tributis of eun- 
treis, and for to gadre myche siluer. And 32 
he lefte Lisias, a noble man of the kyngis 
kyn, on the kingis nedis, fro the flood 
Eufrates ti] to the flood of Egipt; ands: 
that he schulde nursche Antiok, his sone, 
ti] he cain ajen. And heY bitook to hym 3s 
the half of the oost, and olifauntis, and 
comaundide to hym of alle these” thingis 
that he wolde, and of men enhabitynge 
Judee and JerusaJem; and that he schuldess 
sende to hem an oost, for to al to-breke, 
and to* distrie vttirly the vertu of Israel, 
and relifsY of Jerusalem, and for to do 


2 grete A. 


tand fulr prom %Om,a. YOm.1 ¥ Om, pr. 


H 


786 


s5and Jerusalem ; and that he shulde sende 
to hem an oost, for to breke to gidre, 
and to distruye vtterly the vertue of 
Yrael, and relikis of Jerusalem, aud for? 
to do awey the mynde of hem of place; 
sand for to ordeyne aliens sonys dwellers 
in alle the coostis of hem, and bi lot for to 
37 departe the lond of hem. And the kyng 
toke to a part of the residue oost, and 
wette out of Antioche, the citee of his 
rewme, in the hundrid and senen and 
fourtye 3eer ; aud passide ouer the flood 
Eufrates, and wente thoru the hee3er 
sscnntrees. And Lisias chese Ptholome, 
sone of Dorim, and Nychanore, and Gor- 
gie, mi3ty men of the kyngus freendus. 
x9 And he sente with hem fourti thousand 
of men, and seuen thousand of horsmen, 
‘or kny3tis®; and that thei shulden cum 
in to the lond of Juda, and distruy it, 
4ovp word of the kyng. And thei wenten 
forth, for to go with al her vertue; and 
thei camen, and applieden, or fellen to, 
arat Ammaum, in the feeldy lond. And 
marchauntis of euntrees herden the name 
of hem, and token syluer and gold ful 
myche, and children, and camen in to 
castels, fur to take the sonys of Yrael in 
to sernauntis; and the oostis of Sirie 
ben added to hem, and londis of aliens. 
42 And Judas see3, and his bretheren, for 
yuels ben multiplied, and the oost ap- 
pliede, ov londide, at the coostis of hem; 
and thei knewen wordus of the kyng, 
whiche he comaundide the peple for to 
43do, in to perishyng and eendyug. And 
thei saiden, eche man to his neizbore, 
Reise we the casting doun of oure peple, 
and fi3te we® for oure peple, and oure holy 
4ithingus. And cummyng to gidre of oost is 
gadrid, for to be redy in to bateile, and 
for to preye, and axe mercy, and mercy 
4sdoyngus. And Jerusalem was not enha- 
bitid, bot was as desert; ther was not 
that entride and wente oute, of the chil- 
dren therof; and the holy thing was 


a Om. 4. 
2 fourtithe crgnrx. 


ceteri. 


applieden rn. 


4Om.rn. >%Om.R. 


& lond of Juda s. 


I. MACCABEES. 


b Om. 4. 


c Om. rR. 


f londiden a sec. m. sup. ras. applieden, ether felden [ fellin Ev. fellen ym] fo CEFGHIKMNPQSUXE. 
h or londede EP. Om. R. 


II]. 33—45. 


awey the mynde of hem fro place; and 36 
for to ordeyne dwelleris sones aliens in 
alle the coostis of hem, and bi lot for to 
departe the lond of hem. And the kyng3; 
took a part of the residue oost, and wente 
out of Antiochie, citee of his rewme, in 
the hundrid and seuene and fourti* 3eer ; 
and passide ouer the flood Eufrates, and 
wente thorou the hiz3ere cuntreis. And 3g 
Lisias chees Tholome, the sone of Dorym, 
and Nycanore, and Gorgie, mi3ti men of 
the kyngis frendis. And he sente with 3y 
hem fourti thousynde of? men, and senene 
thousynde of hors men, ‘ether kny3tis*, 
that thei schulden come in to the lond of 
Juda, and distrie it, bi the’ word of the 
kyng. And thei wenten forth, for to go4 
with al her pouer®; and thei camen, and 
londidenf at Ammaum, in the feeldi londé. 
And marchauntis of cuutreis herden the 4; 
name of hem, and token siluer and gold 
ful miche, and children, and camen in to 
castels, for to take the sones of Israel in 
to seruauntis ; and the oostes of Sirie and 
the londis of aliens weren addid to hem. 
And Judas si3, and his britheren, that 42 
yuelis weren multiplied, and the oost ap- 
pliede, ‘ether londide*, at the coostis of 
hem; and thei knewen the wordis of the 
kyng, whiche he comaundide the puple for 
to do, in to perischyng and endyng. And 43 
thei seiden, ech man to his neijbore, Reise 
we the castyng donn of oure puple, and 
fi3te we for oure puple, aud oure hooli 
thingis. And comyng togidere of oost 44 
was gaderid, for to be redi in to batel, and 
for to preie, and axe merci, and merciful 
doyngis. And Jerusalem was not enha-45 
bitid, but was as desert; ther was not 
that entride and wente out, of children 
therof; and the hooli thing was defoulid, 
and sones of aliens weren in the hi3 tour, 
ther was the dwellyng of hethene men; 
and the likyng was don awei fro Jacob, 
and pipe and harpe failide there. And 4é 
thei weren gaderid, and camen in to Mas- 


¢ Om. xk. 


4QOm.1. © pouer A sec. m. sup. ras, vertu 


If. 46—53. 


defoulid, and sonys of aliens weren in 
the hee3 rocke, or foure, there was the 
dwellyng of heithen men; and volupte, 
or lust, of Jacob is don awey,.and pipe 
asand harpe failide there. And thei weren 
gadrid, and came in to Masphath a3einus 
Jerusalem; for place of preyer was in 
Masphath, bifore than in Jerusalem. 
47 And thei fastiden in that day, and cloth- 
iden hem with heiris, and puttiden ashe? 
asin her hed, and renten her clothis. And 
thei® spradden abrood bokis of the lawe, 
of whiche heithen men sou3ten liknesse 
a9of her symulacris; and thei brou3ten to 
ournementis of prestis, and premyssis, 
and tithis; and thei reisiden Nazareis, 
sothat hadden fulfilliden days. And thei 


crieden with grete voice in to heuen,_ 


sayinge, What shuln we do to these, 
stand whidir shuln we leede hem? And 
thin holy thingus ben to-troden, and de- 
foulid, and thi prestis ben maad in to 
mournyng, and in to meekenesse, o7 
szdispite. And lo! naciouns camen togi- 
dre ajeinus vs, for to distruye vs; thou 
woost what thingus thei thenken in to 
asvs. Hou shuln we mown with stonde 
byfore the face of hem, no bot thou, God, 
sshelp us? And thei crieden in trum- 
ss pis, with! grete voice. And after these 
thingus Judas ordeynyde duykis of the 
peple, tribunys, that oou ledde a thou- 
sand, and centoriouns, or ledinge an hun- 
drid, and pentacontarkes, leders of fyfty, 
s6and decuriouns, leders of ten. And he 
saide to these that bildiden housis, and 
weddiden wyues, and plantiden vyne 
3erdis, and to dreedful men, that thei 
turuyden a3ein, eche man in to his hous, 
a7 vp the lawe. And thei moueden eastels, 
or oostis of armed men, and thei settiden 
ssto gidre at the south of Ammaum. And 
Judas saith, Be 3e gird, and be 3e mi3ti 


da gacke 4. 


ithe lawer. k Om. n. 
IKMNPQsuxe. castyng doun R. 


ether ledynge an hundrid ceErGuikMNPQsve. centuriouns, oon ledinge an hundrid x. 
lederis of fifti cerGuIkmNPQsux. pentakontarkis, (hal is, lederis of fifi e. 
CEFGHIKMNPQSUX. dectriouns, that is, lederis of ten e. 

Ut is I. 


resuxe. %intor. * morwenyng into batel x. 


I. MACCABEES. 


€ Om. a. 


1 primyssis c ed eeleri. 
n tribunes, that von ledde a thousand CEFGHIKMNPQSUXe. 


787 


phat a3ens Jerusalem ; for place of preier 
was in Masphat, sunnere than in Jerusa- 
lem. And thei fastiden in that dai, and 47 
clothiden hem with hairis, and puttiden 
aisch in her heed, and renten her clothis. 
And thei spredden abrood bookis* of 42* To shewe, 
lawe', of the’ whiche hethene men sou3ten heh eae 
licnesse of her symylacris; and thei 10 teat desk 
brou3ten ournementis of prestis, and ieee 
, : irae: rae Oe 

firste fruytis', and tithis; and thei reis- vav. 

iden Nazareis that hadden fillid daies. 
And thei erieden with greet vois to he-50 
uene, and seiden, What sehulen we do to 
these, and whidur sehulen we lede hem ? 
And thin hooli thingis ben to-trodun, 51 
aud defoulid, and thi prestis ben maad 
in to mourenyng, and in to dispisyng™. 52 
And lo! naciouns camen togidere aj3ens 
vs, for to distrie vs; thou wost what 
thingis thei thenken ajens vs. Hou schu-53 
len we mow withstonde bifore the face of 
hem, no but thou, God, helpe vs? And 4 
thei crieden in trumpis, with greet vois. 
And aftir these thingis Judas ordeynede 55 
duykis of the puple, tribunes"{, and een- 
turiouns®, and pentacontrarkis?, and deeu- 


t+ lribunes; 
that is, ledinge 
a thonsynde. 


] i q centuriouns ; 
riouns?. And he seide to these that bild-56 jedieee ka tina’ 
iden housis, and wediden wyues, and 44. pentacon- 


trarkis; ledinge 


plauntiden vyne 3erdis, and to dredeful _ fifti. decuri- 
F; ouns; ledynge 
men, that thei schulden turne ajen, eche ten. a. 


man in to his hous, bi the lawe. And thei57 
mouyden eastels', and thei settiden togi- 
dere at the south of Ammaum. And Ju-ss 
das seide, Be 3e gird, and be 3e mi3ti 
sones, and be 3e redi ‘in the’ morewnyng*, 
and that 3e fijte ajens these naciouus, that 
camen togidere for to distrie vs, and oure 
hooli thingis. For betere is", that we dies9 
in batel, than for to se yuels of oure fole 
and holi thingis. Sotheli as wille’ schal be ¢o 
in heuene, so be it don. 


f and with «. 


m castynge doun, ether [that is k) dispisyng ceFGu 

9 centuriouns, 

P pentacontarkis, 

4 decuriouns, federis of ten 

r castels. ether vost of armed men CEFGUIKMN 
¥ thi wille F pr.m. 


5H 2 


788 I. MACCABEES. III. 59-—IV. 13. 


sonys, and be 3e redy in the morewyng, 
and that 3e fizte ajeinus these naciouns, 
that camen to gidre for to distruye vs, 
sgand oure holy thingus. For better is vs 
for to dye in bateile, than for to see yuel 
«oof oure folk and holy thingus. Forsothe 
as wille shal be in heuen, so he it don. 


CAP. IV. 


1 And Gorgias toke to fyue thousand of 
men, and a thousand chosen horsmen 3 
zand thei moueden tentis by ny3t, for to 
applie to the tentis of Jewis, and for to 
smyte hem sodeynly ; and the sonys that 
weren on the hee} rocke, weren leeders 
3to hem. And Judas herde, and he roose, 
and mi3ty men, for to smyte the vertue 
of oostis of the kyng, that was in Am- 
4maum ; 3it® sothely the oost was scaterid 
sfro tentis. And Gorgias came in to the 
tentis of Judas bi ni3t, and fonde no 
man; and thei sou3ten hem in hillis, for 
6he saide, These fleen fro vs. And whan 
“day was maad, Judas apperide in the 
feelde with three thousandis of men 
oonly, whiche hadden not hilingis and 
iswerdis. Aud thei sawen the tentis of 
heithen men stronge, and men hauberi- 
ounyd, and ridingis in cumpas of hem, 
sand these tau3t to bateile. And Judas 
saith to men, that sueden, Dreede 3e not 
the multitude of hem, and dreede 3e not 
sinwardli the feersnesse of hem. And? 
bythenke 3e, hou oure fadris ben maad 
saaf in the Rede Se, whan Pharao suede 
iohem with miche oost. And nowe crie 
we in to heuen, and the Lord shal haue 
mercy of vs, and shal be myndeful of the 
testament of oure fadris, and shal breke 
to gidre this oost bifore oure face to day. 
11And alle folkis shuln wite, for God is, 
that shal aj3ein bye, and delyuere Yrael. 
12 And aliens reisiden her ee3en, and sawen 
hem cummynge of the contrarie parti, or 
euen azem, and wenten out of tentis in 
to bateile. And thei that weren with 


CAP. IV. 


And Gorgias took fyue thousynde of *1 
men, and a thousynde chosun horse men ; 
and thei mouyden tentis bi ni3t, for to2z 
applie to the tentis of Jewis, and for to 
smyte hem sudenli; and sones that weren 
of the hi3 tour, weren lederis toY hem. 
And Judas herde, and he roos, and mi3ti3 
men, for to smyte the pouer? of oostis of 
the kyng, that was in Ammaum; for 3it4 
the oost was scaterid fro tentis. Ands5 
Gorgias cam in to the* tentis of Judas bi 
ni3t, and foond no man; and thei sou3ten 
hem in hillis, for he seide, These fleen fro 
vs. And whanne dai was maad, Judasé 
apperide in the feeld with thre thousyndis 
of men oneli, whiche hadden not hilyngis 
and swerdis. And thei si3en the tentis of7 
hethene men stronge, and men haburi- 
owned, and the multitude of horse men 
in cumpas of hem, and these weren 
tau3t to batel. And Judas seide to hises 
men, that weren with hym, Drede 3e not 
the multitude of hem, and drede 3e not 
inwardli the fersnesse of hem. Bithenkes 
3e hou oure fadris weren maad saaf in the 
Reed See, whanne Farao pursuede hem 
with mychel cost. And now crie we toto 
heuene, and the Lord schal haue mercy 
on vs, and schal be myndeful of the testa- 
ment of oure fadris, and schal al to-breke 
this oost bifore oure face to dai. Andi 
alle folkis schulen wite, that it is God, 
that schal a3enbie, and delyuere Israel. 
And aliens reisiden her ijen, and sien 12 
hem comynge of the contrarie part, and '3 
wenten out of tentis in to batel. And thei 
that weren with Judas, songen in trumpe. 


Sand 3it 4. bOm. acu. iOm. a. 


xOm rR. Yofn. 


2 pouer A sec, m. sup. ras. vertu CEFGHIKMNPQsuxe. 4 Om. celeri preter 1. 


IV. 14——30. 


14Judas, songen in trumpe. And _ thei 
wenten to gidre, and heithen men ben 
broken to gidre, and fledden in to the 
usfeelde; forsothe the last fellen doun in 
swerd. And thei pursueden hem vn to 
Gaseron, and til in to the feeldis of 
Ydume, and A3otus, and Jamny; and 
ther fellen doun of hem vn to three thou- 
i¢sandus of men. And Judas turnyde a3ein, 
17and his oost suynge hym. And he saide 
to the peple, Coueyte 3e not prayes, for 
18 bateil is a3einus vs, and Gorgias and his 
oost in the hil ni3 vs; bot stonde 3e 
nowe a3einus 30ure enmyes, and ouer- 
cumme 3e hem, and after these thingus 
193e sikir shuln take prayes. And 3it Ju- 
das spekynge these thingus, loo! sum part 
apperide, biholdynge forth of the hill. 
20 And Gorgias saw3, that his ben to gidre 
turnyd in to fliz3t, and tentis ben brent; 
forsothe the smnmoke that was seen, de- 
2iclaride that that was don. Whiche 
thingus biholden, thei dredden greteli, 
biholdinge to gidre and Judas and the 
2200st in the feeld, redi to bateile. And 
thei fledden alle in the feeld of aliens, 
2sand Judas turnyde a3ein to preyes of 
the tentis; and thei token myche gold, 
and syluer, and iacintt, and purpre of 
2ithe se, and grefe ritchessis. And thei 
conuertid sungen an ympne, or herying, 
and blessiden God in to heuen; for he is 
good, for in to the world the mercy of 
2shym. And grete helthe is maad in Yrael 
26in that day. Forsothe who euer of aliens 
fledden, camen, and teelden to Lisias alle 
27thingus that bifellen. Whiche herd, he, 
astonyed in ynwitt, failide; for not what 
maner thingus he wolde, siche bifellen in 
Yrael, and what manere thingus the kyng 
2scomaundide. And the jeer suynge, Li- 
sias gadride of chosen men sixti thou- 
sandis, and of horsmen fyue thousand, 
29for to ouercumme hem. And thei camen 
in to Judee, and setten tentis in Bethe- 
ron; and Judas ran to hem with ten 
3othousand of men. And thei sawen a 


> the feeld rrxr. ¢ felden corks. 4 in acim. 


Om. Rr. » bifelden cuxs et al. felden r. 


I. MACCABEES. 


i gadere alle n. 


789 


And thei wenten togidere, and hethene 14° 
men weren al to-brokun, and fledden in 
to feeld»; forsothe the laste fellen® doun 1s 
bi swerd. And thei pursueden hem til to 
Gaseron, and til ‘in to® feeldis® of Idumee, 
and Aj3otus, and Jannye; and there fellen 
doun of hem til to tlire thousyndis of men. 
And Judas turnede ajen, and his oost su-i¢ 
ynge hym. And he seide to the puple,17 
Coueite 3e not preies, for bate] is ajens vs, 
and Gorgias and his oost ben in the hilis 
ni3 vs; but stonde 3e now ajens oure ene- 
myes, and ouercome hem, and after these 
thingis 3e schulen take preyes sikirli. And 19 
3it while Judas spak these thingis, lo! 
sum part apperide, biholdynge forth fro 
the hil. And Gorgias si3, that hise 20 
helperis weren togidere turned in to fli3t, 
and tentis weren brent; for smoke that 
was seyn, declaride that that was don. 
And whamne thei bihelden these thingis, 21 
thei dredden greetli, biholdynge togidere 
bothe Judas and the oost, redi to batel in 
the feeld. And thei fledden alle in the 22 
feeld of aliens, and Judas turnede a3en to23 
preies of the tentis; and thei token myche 
gold, and siluer, and iacynet, and purpur 
of the see, and grete richessis. And thei 2s 
conuertiden, and songen an ympne, ‘ether 
heriyng®, and blessiden God in to heuene ; 
for he is good, for the merei of hyin ¢s in 
to the world. And greet helthe was maad 25 
in Israel in that dai. Forsothe who euere 26 
of aliens ascapiden, camen, and telden to 
Lisias alle thingis that bifellen. And 27 
whanne he herde these thingis, he was 
astonyed in soule, and failide ; for not what 
maner thingis he wolde, siche bifellen® in 
Israel, and what maner thingis the kyng 
comaundide. And in the jeer suynge, 2s 
Lisias ‘gaderide of! chosun men sixti thou- 
syndis*, and of horse men fyue thousynde, 
for to ouercome hem. And thei caimen in 29 
to Judee, and settiden tentis in Betheron; 
and Judas ran to hem with ten thousynde 
of men. And thei sien strong oost, and 30 
he preiede, and seide, Blessid art thou, 


e the feeldis1. fOm.nr prim. & or herijng EP. 


k thousend Ep, 


790 


stronge oost, and he preyede, and seide, 
Blessid art thou, saueour of Yrael, that 
hast broken to gidre the firsnesse of the 
nii3ti in the hond of thi seruaunt Dauid, 
aud bitokist the castels, o7 fentzs, of 
aliens in to the hondis of Jonathas, sone 
siof Saul, and of his squyer. Close thou 
to gydre and this! oost in the hond of thi 
peple Yrael, and be thei coufoundid in 
szher oost, and horsmen. 3eue thou™ to 
hem inward" dreed, and make the hardi- 
nesse of her vertue to faile, and be thei 
moued to gidre in her® brekyng to gidre. 
33Caste hem doun in the swerd of men 
louynge thee, and to gidre preyse thee 
alle that knewen thi name, in ympuys. 
3tAnd thei sente, or ioyneden, to gidere 
bateile, and fyue thousand of men fellen 
35doun of the? oost of Lisias. Lisias for- 
sothe seeynge the fli3t of hyse, and the 
hardynesse of Jewis, and that thei ben 
redy ether for to lyue, ether for to dye 
strongly, wente to Antioche, and cheese 
kni3tis, that thei multiplied eftsone shul- 
36den cume in to Judee. Forsothe Judas 
siide, and his bretheren, Loo! oure en- 
myes ben broken togidre; stye we nowe, 
for to clense holy thingis, and renewle4, 
sjor make newe. And al the oost is ga- 
drid, and styeden in to the hill of Syon. 
38And thei sawen the halewyug desert, 
and the auter vnhalewid, and the 3atis 
brent, and in the porehis tendre trees 
sprungen, as in wijlde wode or moun- 
suteyns, and the litil cellis distruyed. And 
thei renten her clothingus, and weiliden 
with grete weilynge; and puttiden ashe 
4oon her hede, and fellen in to face on the 
erthe, and crieden in trumpis of signys, 
4tand crieden in to heuen. Thanne Judas 
ordeynyde, for to fi3te ajeinus hem that 
weren in the hee3 roeke, til thei clens- 
42iden holi thingus. And he chese prestis 
with outen wemme, hauynge wille in the 


k 30u Gpr.m. \thee prom ™ Om. & prem. 


1Om. rs. ™ castels, ether (or EP] oostis c et cetcri preter R. 
ENPU. P Om. R, 
vpi. 8 the halewyng 1. t desert, ether forsakun 1. 


c et ceteri preter Rn. ¥ porchis ceteri. 


I. MACCABEES. 


2 inwardli a. 


drenule 1. renule, or [ether plures] make newe © el ccleri preter CR. 


w clothingis ceteri, 


IV. 31—42. 


sauyour of Israel, that hast al to-brokun 
the feersnesse of the my3ti Golvas in the 
hond of thi seruaunt Dauid, and bitokist 
the! castels™ of aliens in to the" hondis of 
Jonathas, sone of Saul, and of his squyer. 
Close thou togidere also this oost in thes 
hond of thi puple Israel, and be thei con- 
foundid in her oost, and horse men. 3yues2 
thou to hem inward drede, and make the 
hardynesse of her vertu to faile, and be 
thei mouyd togidere in her brekyng togi- 
dere. Caste doun hem bi the swerd of3s 
men louynge thee, and alle that knowen 
thi name, togidere preyse thee in ympnys. 
And thei ioyneden togidere batel, and 34 
fyue thousyndis® of men fellen doun of 
the oost of Lisias. Lisias forsothe si3 the 35 
flizt_ of hise men, and the hardynesse of 
Jewis; and that thei weren redi ether for 
to lyue, ether for to die strongli. And he 
wente to Antioche, and chees kny3tis, that 
thei multiplied schulden come eftsoone in 
to? Judee. Forsothe Judas seide to hise 36 
britheren, Lo! oure enemyes ‘ben al to- 
brokun; stie we now, for to clense hooli 
thingis, and ‘make newe‘. And al the37 
oost was gaderid, and thei stieden™ in to 
the hil of Sion. And thei si3en halew-3s 
yngs desert’, and the auter vnhalewid®, 
and the 3atis brent, and in the porche’ 
tendur trees growun, as in wielde wode 
or munteyns, and litle cellis distried. And 39 
thei renten her clothis”, and weiliden* 
witb greet weilyng; and puttiden aische 
on her heed, and fellen on the face of the4o 
erthe, and crieden in trumpis of signes, 
and crieden in to henene. ‘Thanne Judas 41 
ordeynede men, for to fiz3te a3ens hem that 
weren in the hi3 tour, as long as thei’ 
clensiden hooli thingis. And he cheese 
preestis with out wem, hauynge wille in 
the lawe of God; and thei clensiden hooli 4s 
thingis, and token awei stoonys of defoul- 
yug in to an vnelene place. And hea 
q renewe 4. 


°Om. eprom, P Om. 4c. 


© thlonsend 

¥ stieden 
0 vnhalewid, ether [or sp] defoulid bi idolatrie 
y til thei r. 


0 Om. celerit preter 1. 


* thei weiliden EP. 


IV. 43—57- 


43lawe of God; and thei clensiden holy 
thingus, and token awey stoons of defoul- 
44yng in to an vnelene place. And he 
thou3te of the auter of brent sacrifices, 
that was vuhalewid, what he shulde do 
astherof. And a good counseile felle yn 
to hym, for to distruye it, lest it were 
to hem in to shenship, for heithen men 
defouliden it. And thei destruyeden it, 
4é6and puttiden a3ein, or kepten, stoons in 
the hill of the hous, in couenable place, 
til that a prophete came, and answerde™ 
470f hem. And thei token hool stoons, 
after the lawe, aud beeldiden a newe 
as auter, vp that that was byfore. And thei 
beeldiden holy thingus, and tho thingus 
that weren withyime the hous withynn- 
forth; and thei halewiden the hous and 
49the porchis. And thei maden newe holy 
vessels, and brou3ten yn a candilstike, 
and the auter of encensis, and a bord in 
soto the temple. And thei puttiden en- 
cense on the auter, and tenden lanternys, 
that weren on the candilstike, and 3auen 
511i3t in the temple. And thei puttiden 
looues on the borde, and hangiden veyles, 
and eendiden al the’ werkis that thei 
s2maden. And bifore morewtid thei risen, 
in the ‘fifthe and twentit day of the 
nynth monethe, this is" the moneth Cas- 
leu", of the hundrid and ei3te and four- 
s3tithe 3eer. And thei offeriden sacrifice 
after the lawe, on the newe auter of 
54 brent sacrifices, whiche thei inaden after 
tyme. And after the day in whiche hei- 
then men defouliden it, in that it was 
renulid, in songis, and harpis, and cyna- 
ris, that ben cnstrumentis of mustke, and 
sscymbalis. And alle the peple felle in to 
the face, and wirshipiden, and blessiden in 
to heuen hym that dide prosperite in heim. 
56 And thei maden halewing of the auter 
in ei3te days, and offreden brent sacri- 
fices with gladnesse, and helpful thingis 
svof heryingis. And thei ourneden’ 


T answre G pr.m. schulde answre G sec. m. 
u Om. apr.m. 4 of Casleu K pr.m. 


2 the porchis 1. 2Z resin EP. risen F. 


4 thingis rv. 


I. MACCABEES. 


a renulid c ef ceteri. 
e housis, ether smale cellis ¢ et cetert preter R. 


col 


thou3te on the auter of brent sacrifices, 
that was vnhalewid, what he schulde do 
therof. And a good counsel felle in to4s 
him, for to distrie it, lest it were to hem 
in to schenschip, for hethene men defoul- 
iden it. And thei distrieden it, and kepten 46 
stonys in the hil of the hous, in couenable 
place, til that a profete cam, and answer- 
ide of hem. And thei token hoole stoonys, 47 
by the lawe, and bildiden a newe auter, 
hijk that that was bifore. And thei bild-4s 
iden hooli thingis, and the thingis that 
weren with ynne the hous with ynne- 
forth; and thei halewiden the hous, and 
porchis?. And thei maden newe_ hooli4g 
vessels, and brou3ten in a candilstike, and 
auter of encensis, and a boord in to the 
temple. And puttide encense on the au-so 
ter, and tenden lanternes, that weren on 
the candilstike, and 3auen 1i3t in the tem- 
ple. And thei puttiden looues on theasi 
boord, and hangiden veiles, and endiden 
alle werkis that thei maden. And _bifores2 
morewtid thei risiden”, in the fyue and 
twentithe dai of the nynthe monethe, this 
is the monethe Casleu*, of the hundrid 
and ei3te and fourtithe jeer. And theiss 
offriden sacrifice bi the lawe, on the newe 
auter of brent sacrifices, which thei maden 
bi tyme. And bi the dai in which hethene 54 
men defouliden it, in that it was ‘maad 
newe’*, in songis, and harpis, and cyuaris, 
‘that ben instramentis of musth, ether gi- 
ternes», and cyinbalis. And al the puple5s 
felle on her face, and worschipiden®, and 
blessiden in to heuene him that made 
prosperite to hem. And thei maden ha-sé 
lewyng of the auter in ei3te daies, and 
offriden hrent sacrifices with gladnesse, 
and helful thing’ of heriyng. And theis7 
ourneden the face of the temple with 
goldun corouns, and smale scheeldis; and 
halewiden jatis, and litle housis*, and put- . 
tiden to hem jatis. And ful greet glad- ss 
nesse was maad in the puple, and the 


8 these 4. ¢t fyne and twentithe 4. fifthe and twentithe 1. 
v honouredeu a. 


b Om. R. ¢ worschipiden God 1. 


792 


the face of the temple with golden 
crownys, and smale sheeldis; and halew- 
iden the jatis, and porchis, o7 smale 
sscellis, and puttiden to hem jatis. And 
ful grete gladnesse is maad in the peple, 
and the shenship of heithen men is turned 
ssawey. And Judas ordeynide, and his 
bretheren, and al the chirche of Yrael, 
that the day of halewyng of the auter be 
don in his tymes, fro 3eer in to 3eer, bi 
ei3te days, fro the ‘fifthe and twenty” 
day of the moneth of Casleu, with glad- 
sonesse and ioye. And thei beeldiden in 
that tyme the hill of Syon, and bi cum- 
pas hee3 wallis, and sadde toures, lest 
eny tyme heithen men camen, and de- 
61fouliden it, as thei diden byfore. And 
he sette there a cumpanye, for to keepe 
it; and he wardide it, for to kepe Beth- 
sura, that the peple shulde haue ward- 
yng, or strengtheing, a3ein the face of 
Ydume. 
CAP. V. 

1 And it is don, as heithen men herden 
in cumpas, for the auter is beeldid, and 
the sayntuarie as bifore, thei weren wroth 

2greteli. And thei thou3ten for to do awey 
the kynrede of Jacob, that was among 
hem; and thei bygunne for to slea of the 

3peple, and pursue. And Judas ouercam 
the sonys of Esau in Ydume, and hem 
that weren in Arabathane, for thei saten 
aboute men of Yrael; and he smote hem 
4with a grete wound. And he thou3te of 
the malice of sonis* of Bean, that weren 
to the peple in to gnare, and in to sclann- 
sdre, aspyinge it in the waye. And thei 
ben closid ‘to gidreY fro hym in toures; 
and he appliede to hem, and curside 
hem, and brente with fijr the toures of 
hem, with alle men that weren in hem. 
6And he passide to the sonys of Amon, 
and fonde stronge hond, and plenteuouse 
peple, and Tymothe, the duyk of hem. 
7And he smote many batels with hem, 


W fyue and twentithe «4. 


f of Casleu c sec. m. F pr.m. Ru. Casleu, thal is, Decembre x. 
strengthe Ep. wardyng, either strengthing FGUIMNPQSUXe. 


I snare in. ™ ether setien Fr. Omen. 0 Om, rR. 


I. MACCABEES. 


x the sonis 4. 


0 thel A pr. m. e. 


IV. 58—vV. 7. 


schenschipe of hethene men was turned 
awei. And Judas ordeynede, and hisesy 
britheren, and al the chirche of Israel, 
that the dai of halewyng of the auter be 
don in his tymes, fro 3eer in to jeer, bi’ 
ei3te daies, fro the fyue and twentithe dai 
of the monethe Casleu‘, with gladnesse and 
iove. And thei bildiden in that tyme the 60 
hil of Sion, and bi cumpas hi3 wallis, and 
sadde touris, lest ony tyme hethene men 
wolden come, and defoule it, as thei diden 
before. And he sette there an oost, for to 61 
kepe it; and he wardide it, ‘for to kepe® 
Bethsura, that the puple schulde haue 
strengthing® a3ens the face of Ydume. 


CAP. V. 


And it was don, as hethene men herden1 
in cunpas, that the auter was bildid, and 
the seyntuarie as bifore, thei weren wroth 
greetli. And thei thou3ten for to do awei,2 
‘ether distrie’, the kyn of Jacob, that was 
among hem; and thei bigunnen for to sle 
of the puple, and pursue. And Judas3 
ouercam the sones of Esau in Ydume, 
and hem that weren in Arabathane, for 
thei saten aboute men of Israel; and he 
smoot hem with a greet wounde. Anda4 
he thou3te on the malice of sones* of 
Bean, that weren in to gnare', and in to 
sclaundre to the puple of Israel, and 
aspieden it, ‘ether settiden™ ‘buysche- 
mentis to tf", in the weie. And thes®s 
weren closid togidere fro hym in the? 
touris; and he appliede to hem, and curs- 
ide hem, and brente with fier the touris 
of hem, with alle men that weren in hem. 
And he passide to the sones of Amon,6 
and foond strong hond, and plenteuouse 


y Om. 4. 


& and kepte r. 
warding R. i Om. rR. 
00 in to F. 


h wardinge, ether 
k the sones FR. 
P Om. R. 


V. 8—20. 


and thei ben broken to gidre in si3t of 
8hem. And he smote hem,’and he toke 
the cite Jazar?, and the sonys therof; 
gand he turnyde'a3ein in to Judee. And 
hethen men that ben in Galaad, ben ga- 
drid a3einus Israelitis, that weren in the 
costis of hem, for to do hem awey; and 
thei fledden into Dathinan strengthinge. 
10 And thei senten lettris to Judas,'and his 
bretheren, sayinge, Heithen men ben ga- 
drid a3einus vs bi eumpas, that thei do vs 
llawei; and thei maken redi for to cumme, 
and occupie the strengthing, in to whom 
we fledden; and Tymothe is duyk of the 
1200st of hem. Now therfore cum thou, 
and delyuere vs fro her hondis, for the 
13 multitude of vs felle doun; and alle oure 


bretheren that weren in the placis of. 


Tubyn, euery wher ben slayne; and thei 
ledden caityf the wyues of hem, and 
children, and token spuylis, and killiden 
i4there almest a thousand men. And 3it 
pistles weren rad, and nowe other mes- 
sangers camen of Galilee, with cootis to- 
15 rent, tellynge after these wordus, sayinge, 
for to have cummen to gidre a3eins hem 
fro Ptholomaida, and Tyre, and Sydon, 
and al Galilee is fulfillid with aliens, for 
1é6to distruye vs. Sotheli as Judas herde, 
and the peple, ‘these wordis, a grete 
chirche came to gidre, for to thenke 
what thei shulden do to her bretheren, 
that weren in tribulacioun, and weren 
17ouercummen of hem. And Judas saide 
to Symount, his brother, Chese to thee 
men, and go, and deliuere thi bretheren 
in Galilee; I forsuthe and my brother 
Jonathas shuln go in to Galatithym. 
18 And he®* lafte Josephus, sone of Zacharie, 
and Azarie, duykis of the peple, with 
the residue oost in Jude to keepynge. 
isAnd he comaundide hem, sayinge, Bi- 
fore be 3e to this peple, and ny] 3e simyte 
bateil ajeinus heithen men, til we turnen 
2z0azein. And three thousand men ben 
3ouen to Symont, for to go in to Ga- 


I. MACCABEES. 


793 


puple, and Tymothe, duyk of hem. And; — 
he smoot many batels with hem, and thei 
weren? brokun in si3t' of hym; and he 
smoot hem. And he took the citee Jaser,s 
and vilages therof; and he turnede a3en 
in to Judee. And hethene men that weren9 
in Galaad, weren gaderid ajens Israel- 
itis, that weren in® coostis of hem, fort to 
do awei hem; and thei fledden in to the 
strengthing of Datheman. And thei senten 10 
lettris to Judas, and hise britheren, and 
seiden, Hethene men ben gaderid ajens vs 
bi cumpas, that thei do awei vs; and theill 
maken redi for to come, and oeupie the 
strengthing, in to which we" fledden ; and 
Tymothe is duyk of the oost of hem. 
Now therfor come thou, and delyuere vs 12 
fro her hondis, for a multitude of vs felle 
doun; and alle oure britheren that weren 13 
in places of Tubyn, enerywhere ben slayn; 
and thei ledden awei caitif the wyues of 
hem, and children, and token spuylis, and 
killiden there almeste a'thousynde men. 
And 3it epistlis weren rad, and lo! othere 14 
messangeris cainen fro Galile, with cootis 
to-rent, and telden bi these wordis, and 1s 
seiden, that men caimen togidere a3ens 
hem fro’ Tolomaida, and Tire, and Sidon, 
and al Galile is fillid with aliens, for to 
distrie vs. Sotheli as Judas herde, and 16 
the puple, these wordis, a greet chirche 
cam togidere, for to thenke what thei 
schulden do to her britheren, that weren 
in tribulacioun, and weren ouer comun of 
hem. And Judas seide to Symount, his 17 
brother, Chese to thee men, and go, and 
delyuere thi britheren in Galile; Y for- 
sothe and my brother Jonathas sehulen 
go in to Galatithym. And he lefte Josa- 1s 
fus, sone of Sacarie, and Azarie, duykis of 
the puple, with the residue oost in Judee 
to kepyng; and comaundide to hem, and 19 
seide, Be 3e souereyns to this puple, and 
nyle 3e smyte batel a3ens hethene men, til 
we turnen ajen. And men weren 3ouun 20 
to Simount thre thousyndis, for to go in 


2 of Jazar 4. 8 Om. 4. 
awerenalsor. ‘the sijtrr. Sinthex tOm.a, Uthein. Yandy. 
VOL. IH. 51 


794 


lilee; to Judas sothely e3te thousand, in 
ito Galadithym. And Symont wente in 
to Galilee, and ioynyde many bateils 
with heithen men. And hethen men ben 
broken to gydre fro his face, and he pur- 
22suede hem vu to the 3ate of Ptholomaida. 
And there fellen doun of hethen men al- 
e3mest three thonsand of men; and he 
toke the spuilys of hem. And he toke to 
hem that weren in Galilee, and in Arba- 
this, with wyues, and children, and alle 
thingus that weren to hem; and he? ledde 
eito® in to Jude with grete gladnesse. And 
Judas Machabeus, and Jonathas, and his 
bretheren passiden Jordan, and wenten 
forth the waye of three days in to desert. 
25And Nabutheis camen a3einus hem, and 
resceyueden hem pesibely, and teelden 
alle thingus that bifellen to her bretheren 
26in Galadithym; and for many of hem 
ben cau;t. in Barasa, and Bozor, and 
Malymys, and Casphor, and Mathet, and 
Carnaym; alle these stronge citees and 
27greete. Bot ‘and in‘ other citees of Gala- 
dithis thei ben holden can3t. And on® the 
morewe thei ordeyneden for to moue the 
oost to tho citees, and for to cacche, and 
2stake hem awey in oo day. And Judas 
turnyde, and his oost, the waye in to 
desert of Bozor soodeynly.. And he occu- 
piede the citee, and.slew3 eche male in 
mouth of swerd, and toke alle the spuylis 
29 therof, and brente it with fijr. And thei 
rijsen thennus in ni3t, and wenten vn to 
30the strengthinge. And it is maad in 
spryng of the day, whanne thei reysiden 
her eezen, and loo! myche peple, of 
whom was no noumbre, beryng laddris 
and engynes, for to take the strength- 
3iyug, and ouer cumme hem. And Judas 
see3, for bateil byganne, and crye of 
bateile styede in to heuen, as a‘ trumipe, 
szand grete cry of a& citee. And he saide 
to his oost, Fiz3te 3e to day for 3our 
33bretheren. And he cain in three ordris 


> Om. G pr. m. 


© Om. Ga pr.m. “in to a. 


¥ fo go in 1 marg. 


é = til to cEFNKMQRSUY. to 1. 
EPY. risen ¥. 


€vnto1 4@Om. Nn. & oure F, 


I. MACCABEES. 


V. 21—33. 


to Galile; to Judas sotheli eiz3te thou- 
synde, in to Galatithym. And Symount2i 
wente in to Galile, and ioynede many 
batels with ,hethene men. And hethene 
men weren al to-brokun fro his face, and 
he pursuede hem til* the 3ate of Tolo-22 
maida. And there fellen doun of hethene 
men almest thre thousyudeY of men; and 2s 
he took the spuylis of hein. And he took 
hem that weren in Galile, and in Arba- 
this, with wyues, and children, and alle 
thingis that weren to hem; and brou3te 
in to Judee with greet gladnesse. And 2 
Jndas. Machabeis, and Jonathas, and hise 
britheren passiden Jordan, and wenten 
forth the weie of thre daies in to desert. 
And Nabutheis cameu ajens hem, and 25 
resseyueden hem? pesibli, and telden to 
hem alle thingis that bifellen to her bri- 
theren in Galadithym; and that manye of 
hem wereu takun in Barasa, and Bosor, 
and in Alymys, and in Casplior, and 
Mathet, and Carnaym; alle these were 
strong citees and grete. But and in othere 27 
citees of Galatithis thei ben holdun cau3t. . 
And on the morewe thei ordeyneden for to 
nioue oost® to tho citees, and for to take, 
and do awei hem in o dai. And Judasze 
turnede, aud his oost, the weie in to desert 
of Bosor sudenli; and ocupiede the citee, 
and slow ech male bi the scharpnesse of 
swerd, and took alle the spuylis of hem, 
and brente it with fier. And thei risiden? 29 
thennus in ny3t, and wenten ‘til to® the@ 
strengthing. Aud it was maad in spryng-30 
ing of dai, whanne thei reisiden her i3en, 
and lo! myche puple, of whom was no 
noumbre, berynge laddris and engynes, 
for to take the strengthing, and oner 
come hem. And Judas si3, that batels1 
Bigan, and crie of batel stiede in to he- 
uene, as trumpe, and greet cry of citee. 
And he seide to his cost, Fi3te 3e to dai32 
for 30ure® britheren. And he cam, and33 
thre ordris after hem, and thei crieden 
Cin a. 


fOm. G prim. &§ Om. G prem. 


Ythousandis nN. ZOm. Nn. 4the cost 1. » resin 


V. 34-—-44- 


after hem, and thei crieden with trumpis, 
34and crieden in preyer. And the tentis 
of Tymothe knewen, for it is Machabeus, 
and fledden fro his face. And thei han 
smyten hem with grete wounde; and 
there fellen doun of hem in that day 
35almest ei3t thousand of men. And Judas 
turnyde awey in to Masphath; and he" 
ouercame and toke it, and slew3 eche 
male therof, and toke spuylis of it, and 
36 brente it in fijr. Fro thennus he wente, 
and toke Casbon, and Mageth, and Bozor, 
37and other citees of Galadithe. Sotheli 
after these wordis Thymothe gadride an 
other oost, and puttide tentis a3einus 
38 Raphon, ouer the strem of rayn. And 
Judas sente for to biholde the oost, and 
thei tolden ajein to hym, sayinge, For 
alle heithen men that beu in oure cum- 
pas camerf to gidre to hym, and a ful 
a9myche oost. And thei hijriden Arabians 
in to help to hym, and thei han sette 
tentis ouer the streme of reyn, redy for 
to cume to thee in to bateile. And Ju- 
40 das wente a3einus hem. And Tymothee 
saide to princis of his oost, Whanne 
Judas shal nei3, and his oost, to the 
streme of reyn water, 3if he shal passe 
former to vs, we shuln not mowen sus- 
teynen hym, for he mi3zti shal mowe 
4lajeinus vs. Sothely 3if he shal dreede 
for to passe, and shal sette tentis bisidis, 
or with ynne, the flood, passe we ouer to 
hem, and we shuln mown a3einus hym. 
42 Forsothe as Judas nei3ide to the streme 
of watir, he ordeynide scribis' of the 
peple by sidis the streme, and comaund- 
ide to hem, sayinge, Leue 3e noon of 
men, bot cumme 3e alle in to bateile. 
43 And he the former passide ouer to hem, 
and alle the peple after hym. And alle 
these heithen men ben broken to gidre 
fro the face of hem, and thei castiden 
awey her armours; and thei fledden to 
4ithe temple, that was at Carnaym. And 


b Om. G pr. m. 


€ Sotheli ceteri. f Om. rR. & hem r. 
k writeris c. !Om. cr. or mriteris EPY. 


I. MACCABEES. 


h streem of Arabiens rp. 
™ come 3e R. 


795 


with trumpis, and crieden in preier. And 34 

oostis of Thymothe knewen, that it was 

Machabeus, and thei fledden fro his face. 

And thei han smytun hem with greet 

wounde; and there fellen doun of hem in 

that dai almest ei3te thousynde of men. 

And Judas turnede awei in to Maspha3;35 

and ouercam and took it, and slow ech 

male therof, and took spuylis of it, and 

brente it with fier. Fro thennus he wente, 36 

and took Casbon, and Mageth, and Bosor, 

and othere citees of Galathite. Forsothe® 37 

after these wordis Thymothe gaderide an 

other oost, and puttide tentis a3ens Ra- 

phon, ouer the streem. And Judas sentess 

for to biholde the oost, and thei telden 

ajen to hym, and seide, That‘ alle hethene 

men that ben in oure cumpas, ful myche 

oost, camen togidere to hym. And theisz9 

hiriden Arabiens in to help to himé, and 

thei han set tentis ouer the streem", and 

ben redi for to come to thee in to batel. 

And Judas wente a3jens hem. And Ty-40 

mothe seide to princes! of his oost, Whanne 

Judas nei3eth, and his oost, to the streem 

of water, if he passith formere to vs*, we 

schulen not mowe abide hym, for he mi3ti mothe was a 

schal mowe ajens vs. Sotheli if he dredith 1 enn 

for to passe, and settithi tentis bizende @yuyny¢ Di 

the flood, passe we ouer to hem, and we _ bis victorie 
ajens Judas, 

schulen mowe ajens hym. Forsothe as 42 either asen- 

Judas neijede to the streem of water, he Pere 

ordeynede scribis*, ‘ether writeris' of the 

puple, bisidis the streem, and comaundide 

to hem, and seide, Leeue 3e noon of men, 

but coine™ alle in to batel. And he the 43 

formere passide ouer to hem, and al the 

puple after hym. And alle these hethene 

men weren brokun® fro the face of hem, 

and thei castiden awei her armeris; and 

thei fledden to the temple, that was at 

Carnaym. And Judas ocupiede ‘the ilke® 44 

citee, and brente the temple with fier, . 

with alle that weren in it; and Carnaym 

was oppressid, and mi3te not abide ajeus 


* if he passith, 
etc.; this Ty- 


I seribis or writers H. 


ithe princistr. J sette R. 


"altc-broken rR. © thilke plures. 


512 


796 I. MACCABEES. 


he oceupiede thilk citee, and brente the 
temple with fijr, with alle that weren in 
it; and Carnaym is oppresid, and mi3te 
not susteyn ajeinus the face of Judas. 
4s And Judas gadride alle Ysraelitis that 
weren in Galadithes, fro the leste vn to 
the most, and the wijues of hem, and 
children, and a ful grete oost, that thei 
shulden cume in to the lond of Judee. 
46 And thei eamen til to Ephron, and this 
grete citee putt ful stronge in the entree; 
and ther was not for to howe awei fro it, 
in the ri3t half or left, bot by the mydil 
47the waye was. And thei that weren in 
the citee closiden hem yn, and stoppiden 
the 3atis with stoonys. And Judas sente 
4sto hem with pesible wordis, sayinge, 
Passe we by 3oure lond, for to go into 
oure lond, and no man schal anoye 3o0u, 


oonly on feet we sehulen go. And thei- 


sg9wolde not opne to hem. And Judas 
comaundide for to preeche in tentis, o7 
oost, that eche man shulde applie, in 
30 what place he was. And men of vertu 
applieden hem, and he fau3te a3einus 
that eitee al day and al ni3t, and the 
sleitee is bitaken in his hond. And thei 
slewen eche male in mouth of swerd, 
and drew3 it vp by the rootis, and toke 
the spuylis therof, and passide by al the 
secitee on the slayn men. And thei pass- 
iden ouer Jordan, in the grete feeld ajeinus 
asthe face of Bethsan. And Judas was 
gadrynge the last, and monestide the 
peple bi alle the waye, til thei camen in 
sito the lond of Juda. And thei styeden 
in to the hill of Syon with gladnesse and 
ioye, and offriden brent sacrifices, that 
no man of hem felle doun, o7 was dead, 
35 til thei turnyden ajein in pese. And in 
the days in* whiche Judas was, and 
Jonathas, in the lond of Galaad, and 
Symont, his brother, in Galilee, azeinus 
séthe face of Ptholomaida, Josephus, sone 
of Zacharie, herde, and Azarias, prince 


V. 45—56. 


the face of Judas. And Judas gaderide 4s 
alle Israelitis that weren in Galadithes, 
fro the leeste to? the moste, and wyues of 
hem, and children, and ful4 greet oost, 
that thei schulden come in to the lond of 
Judee. And thei camen til to Efron, and 46 
this greet citee put in the entre was ful 
strong; and ther was not for to bowe awei 
fro it, in rij3t half or left", but the weie 
was thorou the myddil. And thei that 47 
weren in the citee closiden in hem, and 
stoppiden the 3atis with stoonys. And 
Judas sente to hem with pesible wordis,. 
and seide, Passe we bi 30ure lond, for to4s 
go in to oure lond, and no man schal 
anoie 3ou, oneli on feet we schulen go. 
And thei wolden not opene to hem. And 49 
Judas comaundide for to preche in tentis, 
‘ether oost’, that ech man schulde appliet, 
‘that is, asaile the citee™, in what place he 
was. And men of vertu applieden hem, 50 
and he fau3t a3ens that citee al dai and al 
ni3t, and the citee was bitakun in his 
hond. And thei slowen ech ‘knaue child’ 51 
bi the seharpnesse of swerd, and drow vp 
bi the rootis it, and took the spuylis 
therof, and passide bi al the citee on the 
slayn men. And thei passiden ouer Jor-s52 
dan, in the greet feeld a3ens the face of 
Bethsan. And Judas was gaderynge thes: 
laste men, and monestide the puple bi al 
the weie, til thei camen in to the lond of 
Juda. And thei stieden” in to the hil of * 54 
Sion with gladnesse and ioie, and offriden 
brent sacrifices, that no man of hem ‘was 
deed’, til thei turneden ajen in pees. And 55 
in the daies in whiche Judas was, and 
Jonathas, in the lond of Galaad, and Sy- 
mount, his brother, in Galilee, ajens the 
face of Tholomaida, Josofus, sone of Za-5c6 
carie, herde, and Azarias, prince of vertu, 
the thingis doon wel, and batels that weren 
maad. And he seide, Make we? also as7 
nanie to vs, and go we for to fi3te azens 
hethene mei, that ben in oure cumpas. 


k Om. x. 


Ptiltor. 4a ful CEFGHIKMNPQRSU SCC. m. Ke. 


Tiefthalfr. %8Om.r. tasailec. Om. cr. 


v male Er. male, cther knaue child c et ceteri. ¥ stieden upi1. *Om.Rr.  Y fel doun r. felde [fel EF 


mpy) doun, ether [or EPpy] was deed c et ceteri. 


z Om. R. 


Vv. 57—VI. 2. 


of vertu, the thingis wel done, and bateilis 
s7that ben maad. And he saide, Make 


and we oure self a name to vs, and go’ 


we for to fi3te a3einus heithen men, that 
58 ben in oure cumpas. And he comaundide 
to these that weren in his oost, and thei 
59 wenten forth nowe the waye. And Gor- 
gias wente out of the citee, and his men, 
coazeinus hem, in to fi3t. And Josephus 


and Azarias ben dryuen til into the: 


eendis of Judee; and ther felle doun in 
that day of the peple of Yrael, men two 
thousandis. And a grete wound is maad 
61in the peple; for thei herden not Judas 
and his bretheren, gessynge hem to do- 
ezynge strongly. Forsothe thei weren not 
of the seed of tho men, by whiche helthe 
e3is maad in Yrael. And men of Juda 
ben magnyfied greteli in si3t of al Yrael, 
and of alle heithen men, wher the name 
c1of hem was herd. And thei cammen 
to gidre, eryinge to hem prosperite, or 
65 blessid thingus. And Judas wente oute, 
and his bretheren, and ouer camen the 


‘sonnys of Esau, in the lond that is at . 


the south; and he smote Chebron, and 
the dou3ters therof, and wallis therof, 
and the touris therof brente in fijr in 

sccumpas. And he mouede tentis, for to 
go in to lond of aliens; and he wente 

67thoru Samarie. In that day prestis 
fellen doun in bateile, whijl thei wolen 
do strongly, whijl with outen counseil 

sgthei wenten out in to bateil. And Judas 
bowide aweye in to Azotus, in the lond 
of aliens, and distruyide the auters of 
hem, and spuylis of her goddis brente in 
fijr, and toke prayes of citees; and turn- 
yde a3ein in to the lond of Juda. 


oak. VI: 


1 And kyng Autiochus walkide thoru 
the hee3er cuntrees, and he herde a citee 
for to be, Elymaides, in Persis, the no- 
blist and plenteuous in syluer and gold; 

gand a temple in it ful riche, and there 


I. MACCABEES. 


797 


And he comaundide to these that weren se - 
in his oost, and thei wenten forth to Jam- 
nyan. And Gorgias wente out of thes 
citee, and hise men, a3eus hem, in to fi3t. 
And Josofus and Azarias weren dryuun co 
‘til to? the® endis of Judee; and ther 
fellen doun in that dai of the puple of 
Israel, men to twei thousyndis. And a 
greet wounde was maad in the puple; fore: 
thei herde not Judas and hise britheren, 
and gessiden hem to do strongli. Forsothe 62 
thei weren not of the seed of tho men, bi 
whiche helthe was maad in Israel. Andes 
men of Juda weren magnefied greetli in 
the® siz3t of al Israel, and of alle hethene 
men, where the name of hem was herd. 
And thei camen togidere, criynge to hem 64 
‘prosperite, ether preisyngis. And Judas 65 
wente out, and his britheren, and ouer- 
camen the sones of Esau, in the lond that 
is at the south; and he smoot Chebron, 
and vilagis® therof, and distriede -‘the 
wardyngis therof, and wallis theroff, and 
brente® in” fier touris therofi in cumpas: 
And he mouede tentis, for to go in to the 66 
lond of aliens; and wente thorou Sainarie. 
In that dai prestis fellen doun in batel, 67 
while thei wolden do strongli, while with 
out counsel thei wenten out in to batel. 
And Judas bowide awei in to Asotus, in 6s 
the lond of aliens, and distriede auteris of 
hem, and brenten in fier the spuylis of 
her goddis*, and took preies of citees ; and 
turnede a3en in to the lond of Juda. 


CAP. VI. 


And kyng Antiok walkide thorou3 the! 
hijere cuntreis, and herde that a citee, 
Elymaides, was in Persis, the nobleste — 
and plenteuouse in siluer and gold; and2 
a temple in it was ful riche, and there 


golden veylis, and hauberiouns, and weren goldun veilis, aud haburiowns, and 
aintor vntor. »%Om.n. ¢Om.ccteri. 4Om.Rr. &the dongtrisr. the wallis therof x. the 
wardingis therof uv. & brenten therof Fr. » withi1, 1 Om.r.  * goodis ene. godis F. 


798 


sheeldis, whiche Alisaundre of Philip, 
kyng of Maeedo, left, that regnyde first 
3in Grece. And he caine, and sou3te for 
to take the citee, and robbe it; and he 
mizte not, for the word was knowen to 
them that weren in the citee. And thei 
risen vp in to bateil, and he flei3 thennus, 
and wente awey with grete heuynesse, 
sand turnyde a3ein to Babiloyne. And 
ther came, that teelde to hym in Persis, 
for the oostis that weren in the loud of 
6Juda ben drynen, and for Lisias wente 
with stronge vertu in the first, or best 
men, and he is dryuen fro the face of 
Jewis, and thei wexiden stronge in ar- 
mers, and strengthis, and many prayes, 
whiche thei token of tentis, o7 oostis, 
7whiche thei slewen ; and for thei dis- 
truyeden the abominacioun, whiche he 
beeldide on the auter that was in Jeru- 
salem, and thei ennyrounyden with hee3 
wallis the halewyng, as byfore, bot and 
8 Bethsura, his citee. And it is don, as 
the kyng herde these wordis, he dredde, 
and was mouyd to gidre gretely, and 
felle doun in to a bed, and felle in to a 
langour for heuynesse, for it is not don! 
gas he thou3te. And he was there many 
dais, for grete heuynesse is renulid in 
hym, and he deemyde hym self for to 
iodye. And he clepide alle his freendis, 
and saide to hem, Sleep passide awey fro 
myn eejen, and Y departide, and felle 
11doun in herte for bysynesse; and saide 
in ny herte, In to hou grete tribula- 
cioun came Y, and in to what wawis of 
heuynesse in whiehe Y am nowe, that 
was myri, and biloued in my power? 
12 Now forsothe Y bithenke of the yuelis 
that Y dide to Jerusalem, fro whennus 
and Y toke alle golden spuylis, and syl- 
ueren, that weren theryne; and Y sente 
with outen cause, men dwellynge in Judee 
i3for to be don awey. Therfore Y knewe 


I. MACCABEES. 


VI. 3—13. 


seheldis, whiche Alisaundre of Filip, kyng 
of! Macedo, lefte, that regnede the firste 
in Greece. And he cam, and sou3te fors 
to take the citee, and robbe it; and™ mi3te 
not, for the word was knowun to hem 
that weren in the citee. And thei ris-4 
iden vp in to batel, and he flei fro then- 
nus, and wente awei with greet heuynesse, 
and turnede a3en to Babyloyne. And thers 
cam®, that telde to hym in Persis, that 
the oostis that weren in? the lond ‘of 
Juda? weren drynun, and that" Lisiase 
wente with strong vertu in the beste® 
men, and was dryuun fro the faee of 
Jewis, and thei wexiden stronge in ar- 
meris, and strengthis, and‘ many preies, 
whiche thei token of tentis, ‘ether oostis", 
that thei slowen; and that thei distrieden 7 
the abhomynacioun, which he bildide on 
the auter that was in Jerusalem, and thei 
cumpassiden with hize wallis the halew- 
yng, as bifore, but and Betsura, his eitee. 
And it was don, as the kyng herde theses 
wordis, he dredde, and was mouyd greetli, 
and felle doun’ in to a¥ bed, and felle in 
toa greet sikenesse for heuynesse, for it 
was not don as he thou3te. And he was9 
there many daies, for greet heuynesse was 
renulid in him, and he demide hym silf 
for to die. And he clepide alle hise1o 
frendis, and seide to hem, Sleep passide 
awei fro myn i3en, and Y failide ‘in herte*, 
and felle doun for bisynesseY; and? seide 11 
in myn herte, In to hou greet tribulacioun 
bieam Y, and in to what wawis of heuy- 
nesse in which Y am now, that was myrie, 
and ‘bolnyde, ether delicat® in my power ? 
Now forsothe Y bithenke on the yuelsi2 
that® Y dide to Jerusalem, fro whennus 
and Y took alle goldun spuylis, and sil- 
uerne, that weren ther ynne; and Y sente 
with out cause, that men dwellynge in 
Judee be® don awei. Therfor Y knew13 
that these yuels founden me therfor, and 


10m. 4. 
] . 
o Om. a pr.m.crrcumNparsuxe. ™andher. risen FN. camoont. Pton. @Om.n. *Om.R. 
rste R. firste, efher [or EPY] beste c et ceteri. tinmany1 °%Om. RK. v Om. N. w Om. Rk. 


x Om. rR. 


y besynes in myn herte r. 
» whiche wx. 


© to be EF pr.m.u. for to be rR. 


Zand 11. 


a lusty n. biloued e text, ether delycat e marg. 


VI. 14—28. 


for these yuelis han founden me; therfore 
and loo! I perishe bi grete heuynesse 
14in™ an alien lond. And he clepide Phi- 
lip, oon of his freendis, and bifore put- 
15tide hym on al his rewme; and he 3aue 
to hym the dyademe, and his stoole, and 
ringe, for to leede to Antiochus, his sone, 
and to nuryshe hyim, and for to regne. 
16 And kyng Antiochus dyede there, in the 
17hundrid and nyne and fourty 3eer. And 
Lisias knewe, for the kyng is dead, and 
he ordeynyde Antiochus, the sone of 
hym, for to regne, whom he nurishide 
3unge; and he clepide his name Eupa- 
itor. And thei that weren in the hee} 
rocke, closiden to gydre Yrael in cumpas 
of holy thingis, and sou3ten to hem yuels 


euer more, to strengthing of hethen men. ~ 


19 And Judas thou3te for to distruye hem, 
and he clepide togidre alle the peple, for 
20to biseege hem. And thei camen to 
gidre, and biseegiden hem, in the hun- 
drid and fiftythe" 3eer; and thei maden 
balistis, an iustrument for to cast shaftis. 
z1and stoonys, and engynes. And summe 
of hem that weren biseegid, wenten out; 
and sum of the vnpitous men of Yrael 
22ioyneden hein to hem, and wenten to the 
kyng, and saiden, Hou long dost thou 
not doin, and vengest oure bretheren ? 
23 And wee deemyden for to serue thi fadir, 
and for to walke in his heestis, and 
24obeishe to his comaundementis. And 
the sonys of oure peple for this thing 
alieneden hem fro vs; and whiche euer 
were founden of vs, weren slayn, and 
25 0ure eritagis weren rauyshid awei. And 
not oonly to vs thei strecchiden out the 
hond, bot and in to alle oure coostis. 
26 And loo! thei applieden to day to the 
hee3 rocke in Jerusalem, for to occupie 
it, and thei strengthide® a strengthing in 
27 Bethsura. And 3if thou shalt not byfore 
cume hem more swyftly, thei shuln do 
gretter thingus than these, and thou shalt 
2gnot mowe weelde hem. And the kyng 


mand in kK. 


@ in an 1. 
in the margin. 


¢himar, fthe kyng 1. 
10m. a prim. J obeie &. 


I. MACCABEES. 


n fifti 4. 


£ fourtithe cGi1KNX. 
K strecehen 1. 


feos) 


lo! Y perische bi greet heuynesse in’ alien 
lond. And he clepid Filip, oon of hisi4 
frendis, and made him souereyn on al his 
rewme; and jaf to hym®* diademe, and 1s 
his stole, and ryng, for to lede Antiok, 
his sone, and nurische hym, and that he 
schulde regne. And kyngf Antiok diede 16 
there, in the hundrid and nyne and fourti® 
jeer. And Lisias knew, that the kyng17 
was deed, and ordeynede Antiok, the sone 
of hym, for to regne, whom he nurschide 
jong; and clepide his name Eupator. And 1s 
thei that weren in the hi3 tour, closiden 
togidere Israel in cumpas of hooli thingis, 
and sou3ten to hem yuels euer more, to 
strengthing of hethene men. And Judas19 
thou3te for to distrie hem, and clepide 
togidere al the puple, for to bisege hem. 
And thei camen togidere, and bisegiden 20 
hem, in the hundrid and fiftithe 3eer; and 
thei maden arblastis, ‘ether trepeiettis, 
that is, an instrument for to caste schaftis, 
and stoonys", and engynes. And summe2! 
of hem that weren bisegid, wenten out; 
and summe of! vnfeithful men of Israel 
ioyneden hem silf to hem, and wenten to 22 
the kyng, and seiden, Hou long doist thou 
not dom, and vengist not oure britheren ? 
And we deinyden for to serue thi fadir, 23 
and for to walke in hise heestis, and 
obeische) to hise comaundementis. And 24 
the sones of oure puple alienyden hem fro 
vs for this thing; and whiche euere weren 
foundun of vs, weren slayn, and oure eri- 
tagis weren rauyschid awei. And not2 
oneli to vs thei stretchiden* out the hond, 
but and! in to alle oure coostis. And lo! 26 
thei applieden to day to the hi3 tour in Je- 
rusalem, for to ocupie it, and thei streugth- 
iden a strengthing in Bethsura. And if27 
thou schalt not bifore come hem more 
swiftli, thei schulen do grettere thingis 
than thes, and thou schalt not mowe 
welde hem. And the kyng was wroth, 28 
as he herde this thing, and clepide togi- 
dere alle hise frendis, and princes of his 


© stretchiden siz. 


h Om. r. In ae the whole gloss is placed 
1Om. a. 


800 


was wrothe, as he herde this thing, and 
cleepide to gidre alle his freendis, and 
princis of his oost, and hem that weren 
290n horsmen; bot and of other rewmys, 
and ylis, and of the see coostis camen to 
sohym an hijrid oost. And the noumbre 
of his oost was an hundred thousand of 
fote men, and twenti thousand of hors- 
men, and two and thritty olyfauntis? 
3itau3te to bateile. And thei camen by 
Ydume, and thei applieden to Bethsura, 
and fou3ten many days; and thei maden 
engynys, and thei wenten out, and bren- 
ten hein in fijre, and fou3ten manly. 
32 And Judas wente fro the hee3 rocke, and 
monede tentis to Bethsacharam, a3einus 
33 tentis of the kyng. And the kyng roose 
bifore the 1i3t, and stiride the oost in to 
feersnesse, a3einus the waye of Bethsa- 
charam; and the oostis maden hem to 
gidre redy in to bateile, and sungen in 
34trumpis. And to olifantis thei shewiden 
blood of grape, and morus, or4 mulberie 
trees, for to whette hem in to bateil. 
35 And thei departiden the beestis bi le- 
giouns; and to eche olifaunt a thousand 
men stoden ni3 in mailid to gidre haube- 
riownes, and brasen helmys in her hedis, 
and fyue hundred chosen horsmen weren 
scordeynyd to eche beest. These bifore 
the tyme, wher euer the beest was, weren 
there; and whider ener it wente, thei 
37 wenten, and departiden not therfro. Bot 
and sad toures of tree on hem, defend- 
ynge by alle the beestis, and on hem 
engynes, and on eche bi hem self men of 
vertu two and thritti, whiche fou3ten fro 
aboue, and with ynne the maister of the 
ssbeest. And he ordeynide the residue 
rijdynge on this half and that half, in to 
two parties, for to moue to gidre the oost 
with trumpis, and for to constreyne the 
39ariyd men in his legiouns. And as the 
sunne shynyde a3ein in to golden sheeldis, 
and brasen, the hillis shynyden a3ein of 


P of olifauntis c sec. m. 


™ and cEFGiIKMNraRsxye. Om. v. 
4 cheyned, ether nailid cx. chained, or 


Sthe whiche1. tonr. QOm.a. VY Om. ceteri. 


I. MACCABEES. 


n hundrid cu. hunderd x. 
[ether plures] mailid nrcuikmnpasuye. cheyned R. 


-VI. 29——-39. 


oost, and hem that weren ouer horse- 
men; but also™ an hirid® oost fro othere 29 
rewmes, and ilis, and see coostis camen 
to hym. And the noumbre of his oost3o 
was an hundrid thousynde of foot men, 
and twenti thousynde of horse men, and 
two and thritti olifauntis® tau3t to batel. 
And thei camen bi: Idumee, and thei ap-31 
plieden to Bethsura, and fou3ten many 
daies; and thei maden engynes, and thei 
wenten out, and brenten hem in fier, and 
fou3ten manli. And Judas wente fro thes2 
hi3 tour, and mouede tentis to Bethsacha- 
ran, ajens tefitis of the kyng. And thess3 
kyng roos bifore the 1i3t, and stiride the 
oost in to feersnesse, ajens the weie of 
Bethsacharan; and the oostis maden redi 
hem togidere in to batel, and songen in 
trumpis. And to olifauntis thei schew-34 
iden blood of grape, and morus, ‘or mul- 
berie trees’, for to whette hem in to 
batel. And thei departiden the beestis biss 
legyouns; and to ech olifaunt a thousynde 
men stoden ni3 in haburiownes mailid4 
togidere, and brasun helmes in her heedis, 
and fyue hundrid horse men chosun weren 
ordeyned to ech beeste. These werense 
there bifore the tyme, where euere the 
beeste was; and whidur euere™ it wente, 
thei wente, and departiden not ther fro. 
But and sadde touris of tre weren on37 
hem, defendinge bi alle the beestis, and on 
hem weren engynes, and on ech bi hem 
silf men of vertu two and thritti, whiche’ 
fou3ten fro aboue, and with ynne was the 
maister of the beeste. And he ordeinede3s 
the residue multitude of horse men on 
this half and that half, ‘in to' twei partis, 
for to moue togidere the oost with trumpis, 
and for to constreyne the mei maad thicke 
in her legiouns. And as the" sunne schyn-39 
ede in to the’ goldun scheldis, and brasun, 
the” hillis schyneden a3jen of hem, and 
schyneden ajen, as laumpis of fier. And 40 
a part of the kyngis oost was departid bi 


q that ben G sec. m. 


P Om. R. 
r Om. nN. 


© of olifauntis I. 


wand the r. 


VIL 40—52. 


4ohem, as laumpis of fyre. And a part of 
the kyngus oost is departid bi hee3 hillis, 
and other by lowe places; and thei 
41 wenten warly, and ordynatly. And alle 
men dwellynge in the lond weren moued 
to gidre of the voice of multitude of hem, 
and ingoinge of the compaignye, and 
hurtlyng of. armeris; forsothe the cost 
42was ful grete and stronge. And Judas 
and his oost nei3iden yn to bateil; and 
there fellen doun of the kyngus oost sixe 
a3hundrid men. And Eleasar, sone of 
Saura, see3 oon of the beestus hauberi- 
ownyd with hawberiouns of the kyng, 
and it was hee3 stondynge ouere other 
beestis. And it is seen to hym, that the 
4tkyng was in it; and he 3aue hym self 


for to delyuere hys peple, and for to gete | 


4sto hym a name euerlastynge. And he 
ran therto hardili, in to mydil of the 
legioun, sleaynge on ri3thalft and left; 
and thei fellen doun fro hym hidir and 
aéthidir. And he wente vndir the feet of 
the olyfaunt, and vndirputtide hym self 
therto, and slew3 hym; and it felle doun 
in to the erthe on hym, and he is dead 
47there. And thei seeynge the vertue of 
the kyng, and fersnesse of his oost, turn- 
asyden awey hem self fro hem. Forsothe 
tentis of the kyng’ styede vp a3einus hem, 
in to Jerusalem; and tentis of the kyng 
applieden to Judee, and to the hill of 
49Syon; and he made pees with these that 
weren in Bethsura. And thei wenten 
out of the citee, for foodis weren not to 
hein closid to gidre there, for sabothis of 
sothe erthe weren. And the kyng toke 
Bethsura, and ordeinyde there keepyng, 
sifor to keepe it. And he turnyde the 
tentis to the place of halewyng many 
days; and ordeynyde there balistis, and 
engynes, and dartis, or castyngis, of fijr, 
and tourmentis for to cast stoons and 
dartis, and scorpiouns for to sende arowis, 
sgand slyngis. Forsothe and thei maden 


I. MACCABEES. 


801 


hi3 hillis, and other bi lowe places; and 
thei wenten warli, and ordynatli. Anda 
alle men dwellynge in the lond weren 
mouyd togidere of the vois of multitude 
of hem, and ingoyng of cumpeny, and 
hurtlyng* togidere of armeris; for the 
oost was ful grete and strong. And Ju-42 
das and his oost nei3ide in to batel; and 
there fellen doun of the kyngis oost sixe 
hundrid men. And Eleasar, the’ sone of 43 
Saura, si3 oon of the beestis haburiowned 
with haburiownes of the kyng, and it was 
hi3 stondynge ouer othere beestis ; and it 
was seyn to hym, that the kyng was on? 
it. And he 3af hym silf for to delyuere 44 
his puple, and for to gete to hym a name 
euerlastynge. And he ran ther to hardili, 4s 
in to the myddil of legioun, and killide 
on the ri3t half and left*; and thei fellen 
doun fro hym hidur and thidur. And hes 
wente vndur the feet ofthe olifaunt, and 
vndur puttide hym silf ther to, and slow 
it; and it felle doun in to erthe on hym, 
and he was deed there. And thei siz3en47 
the vertu of the kyng, and fersnesse of 
his oost, and turneden awei hem silf fro 
hem. Forsothe tentis of the kyng stieden 4s 
vp a3eus hem, in to® Jerusalem; and tentis 
of the king applieden to Judee, and to the 
hil of Syon; and he made pees with 49 
these that weren in Bethsura. And thei 
wenten out of the citee, for foodis weren 
not to hem closid togidere there, for the 
sabatis of erthe weren. And the kyng 50 
took Bethsura, and ordeynede there kep- 
yng, for to kepe it. And he turnede thesi 
tentis to the place of halewyng many 
daies; and ordeynede there arblastis, and 
engynes, and dartis‘ of fier, and turmentis 
for to caste stoonys and dartis, and scor- 
piens for® to schetef arows, and slyngis. 
Forsothe and thei maden engynes a3ensse2 
thes engynes of hem, and fou3ten many 
daies. Forsothe metis weren not in thes: 
citee, for that it was the seuenthe jeer ; 


t the rizt half seu. 


x hurting y. in hurtling rk. Y Om. R. 


Z in celeri. 


®on the left1. the feersnesr. ¢ Om. R. 


d dartis, ether [or EPpy] castyngis c et ceteri preter x. © Om.1. fsende c et eeleri, & Om. E pr.m. Re. 


VOL. III. 


5K 


802 


engynes a3einus the engynes of hem, and 
s3thei foujten many days. Forsothe metis 
weren not in the citee, for that it was 
the seuenthe 3eer; and thei that leften 
of heithen men in Judee, hadden wastid 
54the relikis of hem that weren kept. And 
fewe men leften in holy thingus, for hun- 
gre hadde taken hem ; and thei ben sca- 
ssterid, eche man in to his place. And 
Lisias herde, that Philipp, whom kyng 
Antiochus ordeynyde, whan 3it he leu- 
yde, that he shulde nuriche Antiochus, 
s¢his son, that he® regnide, turnyde ajein 
fro Perse and Mede, and the oost that 
weuten with hym; and for he seekith 
s7for to take the causis of the rewme, het 
hastide for to go, and saye to the kyng, 
and to duykis of the oost, We failen eche 
day, and litil mete is to vs, and the place 
whom we" biseegen, is stronge, and it 
fallith to vs for to ordeyne of the rewme. 
58 And so nowe 3eue we ri3thondis to these 
men, and make we pees with hem, and 
s9with alle the folk of hem; and ordeyne 
we to hem, that thei go in lawful thingis” 
as byfore; sothely for the lawful thingus 
of hem thei ben wrothe, and han don 
60 alle these thingus. And the word pleside 
in si3t of the kyng, and princis; and he 
sente to hem for to make pees, and thei 
61resceyuyden it. And the kyng swore to 
hem, and princis; and thei wenten out 
c2of the strengthing. And the kyng en- 
tride the mount Syon, and he see3 the 
strengthyng of the place; and he brake 
fulsone the ooth that he swore, and co- 
maundide for to distruye tbat’ wall in 
ezcumpas. And he departide awey hastili, 
and turnyde a3ein to Antioche, and fonde 
Philip lordshipynge to the citee; and he 
fau3te ajeinus hym, and occupiede the 
citee bi strengthe, 


CAP. VII. 


1 In the hundrid 3eer and oon and fifty 
Demetrie, sone of Seleuci, wente out fro 


$Om.cGpr.m. tand he a. 


h Perseis xn, i Medeisr. k Om. r. ! seide 1. 


I. MACCABEES. 


@ 3e 4. 


m for R. 


VI. 53—VII. 6. 


and thei that leften of hethene men in 
Judee, hadden wastid the relifs of tho 
thingis that weren kept. And fewe menss 
leften in hooli thingis, for hungur hadde 
take hem; and thei weren scaterid, ech 
man in to his place. And Lisias herde, 55 
that Filip, whom kyng Antiok ordeynede, 
whanne he lyuyde 3it, that he schulde 
nursche Antiok, his sone, that he schulde 
regne, turnede a3en fro Perse and Medeii, ss 
and the oost that wente with hym. And 
that* he sekith for to take the causis of 
the rewme, Lisias hastide for to go, and 57 
seie! to the kyng, and duykis of the oost, 
We failen ech dai, and litil mete is to vs, 
and the place which we bisegen, is strong, 
and it fallith to vs for to ordeyne of ™ the 
rewme. Therfor now 3yue we" ri3thondis 58 
to these men, and make we pees with 
hem, and with™ al the fole of hem; ands» 
ordeyne we to hem, that thei go in lawful 
thingis as bifore; for whi for the lawful 
thingis of hem whiche we dispisiden, thei 
ben wrooth, and han don alle these thingis. 
And the word plesid in the® si3t of theco 
kyng, and of princes; and he sente to hem 
for to make pees, and thei resseyueden it. 
And the kyng swoor to hem, and princes ; 61 
and thei wenten out of the strengthing. 
And the kyng entride in to the mount 
Sion, and he st3 the strengthing of the 
place ; and he brak ful soone the ooth that 
he swoor, and comaundide for to distrie 
the wal in cumpas. And he departide 6s 
awei hastili, and turnede ajen to? Antio- 
chie, and foond Filip regnynge in the 
citee ; and he fau3t a3ens hym, and ocu- 
piede the cyte bi strengthe. 


CAP. VII. 


In the hundrid 3eer and oon and fiftir 
Demetrie, sone of Sileuce, wente out fro 


Vthing 4. W the aqH. 


"3enk. 22 Om. Fr. °Om.15. Pinton, 


VII. 2—16. 


Rome citee, and stiede with fewe men in 
to a citee ni3 the see, and regnyde there. 
2And it is don, as he entride in to hous 
of the rewme of his fadris, the oost cau3te 
Antiochus, and Lisias, for to brenge hem 
3to hym. And the thyng was knowen to 
hym, and he saith, Nyl 3e shewe to me 
4the face of hem. And the oost slew3 
hem. And Demetrie sate vpon the sete 
sof his rewme; and wickid men and yn- 
pitous of Yrael camen to hym, and Al- 
chymus, duyke of hem, that wolde be 
6maad prest. And thei accusiden the pe- 
ple atientus the kyng, sayinge, Judas and 
his bretheren han loste thi freendus, and 
7scateride vs fro oure lond. Now ther- 
fore sende thou a man, to whom thou 
byleeuyst, that he go, and see all the 


distruying that he hath don to vs, and® 


to cuntrees of the kyng; and he punysh- 
ith alle his frendis, and the helpers of 
8hem. And the kyng chese of his freendis 
Bachides, that was lord ouer the grete 
flood in the rewme, and treweY to the 
9kyng, and he sente hym, for to see the 
distruying that Judas dide; and he or- 
deynyde vnpytous Alchymus in to prest- 
hode, and badde hym do veniaunce in to 
10the sonys of Yrael. And thei rysen, and 
camen with greete oost in to the lond of 
Juda; and thei senten messangers, and 
spaken to Judas and his bretheren, with 
11 pesible wordis in gyle. And thei 3auen 
not tente to her wordis; sothely thei 
sawen, for thei camen with greet oost. 
12 And the congregacioun of scribes camen 
to gydre to Alchymus and Bachides, for 
13to axe what thingus be iust; and the 
first Assideys, that weren in the sonys 
of Yrael, and thei axiden of hem pees. 
14Sothely thei saiden, A man, prest of the 
seed of Aaron, cummeth, he shal not 
isdisceyue vs. And he spac with hem 
pesible wordis, and swore to hem, say- 
inge, We shuln not 3eue to 30u yuels, 
iénether to 3oure frendus. And thei bileeu- 


I. MACCABEES. 


803 


the cite of Rome, and stiede? with fewet 
men in to a citee ni3 the see, aud regnede 
there. And it was don, as he entride ing 
to the hous of the rewme of his fadris', 
the oost can3te Antiok, and Lisias, for to 
brynge hem to hym. And the thing was3 
knowun to hym, and he seide, Nyle 3e 
schewe to me the face of hem. And thes 
oost slow hem. And Demetrie sat on the 
seete of his rewme; and wickid men ands 
vnfeithful of Israel camen to hym, and 
Alchymus, duyk of hem, that wolde be 
maad prest; and accusiden the puples 
anentis the kyng, and seiden, Judas and 
hise britheren loste thi frendis, and dy- 
uerseli loste vs fro oure lond. Now ther-7 
for sende thou a man, to whom thou 
bileuest, that he go, and se al the distri- 
yng that he hath don to vs, and to cun- 
treis of the kyng + and he punyschide® alle 
frendist of hym, and helperis of hem. Ands 
the kyng chees of his frendis Bachides, 
that was lord ouer the greet flood in the 
rewme, and trewe to the kyng, and sente 
hym, for to see the distriyng that Judas9 
dide ; and he ordeynede vnfeithful Alchy- 
mus in to presthod, and bad hym do ven- 
iaunce on the sones of Israel. And thei1o 
risiden", and camen with greet oost in to 
the lond of Juda; and thei senten mes- 
sangeris, and spaken to Judas and his bri- 
theren, with pesible wordis in gile. Andi 
thei 3auen not tent to her wordis; for 
thei sijen, that thei cainen with greet oost. 
And the congregacioun of scribis camen 12 
togidere to Alehymus and Bachides, for 
to axe tho thingis that ben iust; and the1s 
firste Assideis’, that weren among the 
sones of Israel, and thei axiden of hem 
pees. For thei seiden, A man, preist of t4 
the seed of Aaron, cometh, he schal not 
disseyue vs. And he spak with hem pes- 1s 
ible wordis, and swoor to hem, aud seide, 
We schulen not brynge in to 30u yuels”, ° 
nether to 3oure frendis. And thei bileu-t6 
yden to hym. And he cau3te of hein sixti 


t the frendis1. resin EPy. risen F. 


w the yuel Nn. 


xjn kK.  Y trewthe x. 
Qstiede vp1. ‘fafewer. 't fadir apr.m.e. * ponysche rR. 
resen 1, VY that is, men present to Goddis worschipinge e marg. 


5K 2 


804 


yden to hym. And he cau3te of hem sixti 
men, and slew3 hem in oo day, after the 
i7word that is wryten, Thei shedden out 
fleshis of thi sayntis, and blood of hem 
in cumpas of Jerusalem, and there was 
isnot that biryede. And dreed and trem- 
blyng lay, or fedle, in to al the peple, 
for thei saiden, Ther is not trewthe and 
dom to hym; sothely thei han broken 
the statute?, and the ooth that thei 
igsworen. And Bachides mouede tentis 
fro Jerusalem, and appliede in to Beth- 
secha; and sente, and cau3te many of 
hem that fledden fro hym; and he killide 
sum of the peple, and castide in to a 
zogrete pitt. And he bitoke the regioun® 
to Alchimus, and left with hym help, in 
to helpyng of hym. And Bachides wente 
21to the kyng, and Alchymus dide ynew3, 
22for the princehod of his: presthod. And 
alle camen to gidre to hym, whiche dis- 
tourbliden her peple, and weldiden? the 
lond of Juda>»; and thei diden grete ven- 
23tauncee in Yrael. And Judas see} alle 
the ynels, that Alchymus dide, and thei 
that weren with hym, to the sonnys of 
Yrael, myche more than heithen men. 
24 And he wente out in to alle coostis of 
Judee in cumpas, and didé veniaunce in 
to men forsakers, and thei cesiden for to 
25go out ferther in to the cuntree. For- 
sothe Alchymus see3, for Judas hadde 
victorie, and thei that weren with hym; 
and he knew3 for he may not susteyne 
hem, and he wente ajein to the kyng, 
26and accuside hem in many synnys. And 
the kyng sent Nychanor, oon of his no- 
bler princis, that was hauntynge enmy- 
tees a3einus Yrael; and he comanndide 
27him* for to distruye the peple. And 
Nychanor came in to Jerusalem, with 
grete oost, and he sente to Judas and his 
bretheren with gyle, by pesible wordis, 
28 sayinge, F'i53t be not bitwixe me and 30u; 
I shal cume with fewe men, for to see 


2 statute, or ordynaunce ¥. 
or vengeaunce H. Om, «4. 


*no R. 
regioull, or cunire & et ceteri preter c, 


I. MACCABEES. 


® regioun, or euntree HL. 


Y statute R. statute, ether [or EPY] ordinaunce c et ceteri. % Om. N. 
¢ these yuels a pr. m. the yuels 1. 


VII. 17—28. 


men, and slow hem in o dai, bi the word 
that is writun, Thei shedden out the17 
fleischis of thi seyntis, and blood of hem 
in cumpas of Jerusalem, and there was 
not that biriede. And drede and trem-is 
blyng felle in to at the puple, for thei 
seiden, Ther is: not* treuthe and dom in 
hem; for thei han brokun ‘the ordy- 
naunce’, and the ooth that thei ‘sworen. 
And Bachides monyde tentis fro Jerusa- 19 
lem, and appliede in to Bethseca; and 
sente, and cau3te many of hem that fled- 
den fro? hym; and he killide summe of 
the puple, and castide in to a greet pitte. 
And he® bitook the regioun> to Alchymus, 20 
and left with hym help, in to helpyng of 
hym. And Bachides wente to the kyng, 
and Alchymus dide ynow, for the prince-21 
hod of his presthod. And alle camen to-22 
gidere to hym, whiche disturbliden her 
puple, and weldiden the lond of Juda; 
and diden greet veniaunce in Israel. And 23 
Judas si3 alle yuels®, that Alchymus dide, 
and thei that weren with hym, to the 
sones of Israel, myche more than hethene 
men. And he wente oute in to alle2s 
coostis¢ of Judee in cumpas, and dide ven- 
iaunce on men forsakeris, and thei cees- 
iden for to go out ferthere in to the cun- 
trei. Forsothe Alchimus si3, that Judas 25 
hadde victorie, and thei that weren with 
hym; and he knew that he mai not abide 
hem, and he wente azen to the kyng,. 
and accusiden hem in many synnes. And 26 
the kyng sente Nicanor, oon of his noblere 
princes, that was hauntynge enemytees 
ajens Israel, and comaundide hym for to 
distrie the puple. And Nycanor cam in 27 
to Jerusalem, with greet vost, and he sente 
to Judas and his britheren with gile, bi 
pesible wordis, seiynge, Fi3te be not bi- zs 
twixe me and 30u; Y schal come with 
fewe men, for to se 30ure faces with pees. 
And he cam to Judas, and thei gretten 29 
lem togidere pesibli; and enemyes weren 


b weelden 4. >> Judas ac pr.m.x. © plage, 


aOm.1. » cuntrei R. 


4 the coostis 1. 


VII. 29—42. 


2930ure faces with pees. And he cam to 
Judas, and thei gretten hem to. gidre 
pesibli; and enmyes weren redy for to 
zorauyshe Judas. And the word was 
knowen to Judas, for with gyle he came 
to hym; and he is broken togidre of 
hyni, and he wolde namore see his face. 
31 And Nychanor knewe, that his conceile 
is knowen, and he wente out ajeinus 
Judas in to fi3t, bisidis Capharsalma. 
32And there fellen doun of Nychanoris 
oost almest fyue thousand men, and thei 
33fledden in to the citee of Dauyd. And 
after these wordis Nychanore stiede in 
to the hille of Syon, and there wenten 
out of prestis of the peple, for to greete 
hym in pees, and for to shewe to hym 


brent sacrifices, that thei offriden for the. 


34kyng. And he scornynge dispiside hem, 
35and defoulide; and spake proudly, and 
swore with wrath, sayinge, 3if Judas 
shal. not be taken, and his oost, in myn 
hoondis, anoon whanne Y shal turne a3ein 
in pees, Y shal brenne this hous. And 
sshe wente out with grete wrath. And 
the prestis entriden, and stoden bifore 
face of the autir and of the temple, and 
37 weepynge saiden, Thou, Lord, hast chosen 
this hous, for to inclepe thi name in it, 
that it were an hous of preyer and bi- 
sssechyng to thi peple; do venieaunce in 
this man, and his oost, and falle thei in 
swerd ; haue mynde of the blasfemyes of 
hem, and 3eue not hem that thei abide. 
39 And Nychanor wente out fro Jerusalem, 
and appliede tentis to Betheron; and 
4othe oost of Syrie cam to hym. And 
Judas appliede in Adarsa, with three 
41thousand men. And Judas preyide, and 
saide, Lord, an aungel wente out, and 
smote an hundrid fourescore® and fyue 
thousandis of hem, that weren sent fro 
kyng' Senacherib, for thei blasfemyden 
azthee ; so breke thou togidre this oost in 
oure si3t to day, and wite other men, for 


€ and fourscoor A. 


f felden cHIs. 
lintor. ™Om.N. 


© afeerd broken R. 
k inclepe F pr. m. N. 


I. MACCABEES. 


& of men £. 
Dina. 


805 


redi for to rauysche Judas. And the word 30 
was knowun to Judas, that with gile he 
cam to hym; and he was aferd® of hym, 
and he wolde no more se his face. And31 
Nicanor knew, that his councel was 
knowun, and he wente out ajens Judas in 
to fi3t, bisidis Cafarsalama. And _ ther 32 
fellenf doun of Nicanoris oost almest fyue 
thousynde men&, and thei fledden in to 
the’ citee of Dauid. And after theses3 
wordis Nicanor stiede in to the hil of 
Sion, and ther wenten out of prestis of 
the puple, for to grete hym in pees, and 
for to schewe to hym brent sacrifices, that 
weren ofirid for the kyng. And he scorn-34 
yde and dispiside hem, and defoulide, and 
spak proudli, and swoor with wraththe,35 
seiynge, If Judas schal not be takun, and 
his oost, in to myn hondis, anoon whanne 
Y schal turne ajen in pees, Y schal brenne 
this hous. And he wente out with greet 
wraththe. And prestis entriden, and 36 
stoden bifore the face of the auter and 
temple, and wepynge seiden', Thou, Lord, 37 
hast chosun this hous, for to clepe‘ to 
helpe thi name in it, that it schulde be an 
hous of preier and biseching to thi puple; 
do thou veniaunce in! this man, and his38 
oost, and™ falle thei bi swerd; haue mynde 
on™ her blasfemyes, and 3yue not to hem 
that° thei abide. And Nicanor wente out39 
fro Jerusalem, and appliede tentis to Be- 
theron ; and the oost of Sirie eam to him. 
And Judas appliede? in Adarsa, with thre 40 
thousynde men. And Judas preiede, and 41 
seide, Lord, an aungel wente out, and 
smoot an hundrid thousynde foure score 
and fyue thousyndis of hem, that weren 
sent fro thel kyng Senacherib, for thei 
blasfemiden thee; so al to-breke this oost 42 
in oure si3t to dai, and othere men wite, 
that he spak yuel on thin hooli thingis; 
and deme thou hym by the malice of hym. 


And the oostis ioyneden batel in the thrit-43 « yrarche. 4. 


tenthe dai of the monethe Adar*; and 
f the kyug ¢ pr.m. 


1 thei seiden 1. 
gq Om. R. 


h Om. cEFIINQUX sec. m1. @& 
© that that rn. P apperide R. 


806 I. MACCABEES. VII. 43-—VUI. 4. 


yuel he spak on thin holy thingus, and 
deme thou hym vp the malice of hym. 
4s And the oostis ioynyden bateil, in the 
thrittenthe day of the moneth Adar; 
and the tentis of Nychanor ben broken 
to gidre, and he felle doun the first in 
44bateil. Sothely as his oost see3, for Ny- 
chanor felle doun, thei castiden awey her 
4sarmers, and fledden. And thei pursu- 
eden hem the way of oo day, fro Adasor 
vnto me coine in to Gazera; and thei 
sungen in trumpis after hem with signy- 
46fiyngus. And thei wenten out of alle 
the® castellis of Judee in cumpas, and 
wynnewiden hem with hornys, and eft- 
soone weren conuertid to hem; and thei 
fellen alle in swerd, and ther is not left 
47of hem nether oon. And thei token the 
spuylis of hem in to pray; and thei kit- 
tiden of the hed of Nychanor, and his 
ri3thond whiche he strechide proudly, 
and thei brou3ten to, and hangiden ajeinis 
4s Jerusalem. And the peple gladide grete- 
ly, and diden that day in grete glad- 
sgnesse ; and ordeynyde this day for to be 
don in alle 3eeris, in the thrittynth day 
s0of the moneth Adar. And the lond of 
Juda was stille a fewe dayes. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 And Judas herde the name of Romey- 
nys, for thei ben mi3ty in strengthis, and 
acorden to alle thingis that ben axid of 
hem; and who euer wente to hem, thei 
ordeynyden with hem frendshipus; and 

2for thei ben mi3ty in strengthis. And 
thei herden bateyls of hem, and good 
vertues, that thei don in Galacie, for 
thei weldiden hem, and ledden yndir 

3tribute; and hou many thingus thei 
diden in the cuntree of Spayne, and that 
in to" power thei dryuen metalis of syl- 
uer and gold that ben there; and wel- 
diden eche place with her conseile, and 
4 pacient places that weren ful fer fro hem ; 


§ Om. @ pr.m. 


tentis" of Nicanor weren al to-brokun, and 
he felle doun the’ firste in batel. Sothely 44 
as his oost si3, that Nicanor felle doun, 
thei castiden awei her armeris, and fled- 
den. And thei pursueden hem the weie4s 
of o dai, fro Adasor til me come in to 
Gasara; and thei sungen in trumpis after 
hem with signefiyngis. And thei wenten 46 
out of alle castels of Judee in cumpas, and 
wyndewident hem with hornes, and eft- 
soone weren" conuertid to hem; and alle 
falliden"" bi swerd, and ther was not” left 
of hem not* oon. And thei token the47 
spuylis of hem to prey; and thei girdiden 
of the heed of Nicanor, and his ri3t hond 
which he stretchide forth proudli, and 
thei brou3ten, and hangiden a3ens Jeru- 
salem. And the puple was glad” greetli, 48 
and diden* thatY dai in greet gladnesse ; 
and ordeyneden? this dai for to be doon 4s 
in alle 3eeris, in the* thritteneth day of 
the monethe Adar. And the lond of Judaso 
was stille a fewe dais. 


CAP. VIII. 


And Judas herde the name of Romayns, 1 
that thei ben mi3ti in strengthis, and 
acorden to alle thingis that ben axid of 
hem; and who euere wente to hem, thei 
ordeineden with hem frendschipis; and 
that thei ben mi3ti in strengthis. And? 
thei herden batels of hem, and goode ver- 
tues, that thei diden in Galacie, for thei 
weldiden hem, and ledden® vndur tribute; 
and hou many thingis thei diden in thes 
cuntre of Spayne, and that thei brou3ten 
in to power metals of siluer and gold that 
ben there; and® weldiden ech place with 
her councel and pacience, ‘or wisdom4, 
places that weren ful fer fro hem; and‘ 4 


h Om. G prim. 


F : : . 

pees tentist. §Om.31. t wynewiden 1. thei weren1. ben, 4 failiden yr. VOm.u. ¥ nether 

ye IKMQRXe. neuer Rsu. WW gladid e. * thei dident. Yin that a pr.m.F. 2 ordeynede c et plures. 
eynen, 8Om.1. bledden hemi. Candtheit. Om. Rr. ¢ Om. re. 


Sie s-—15. 


and kyngus that camen aboue to hem fro 
the vttemest places of erthe, thei braken 
to gydre, and smyten hem with grete 
plage; forsothe other 3yuen to hem 
stribute alle 3eeris. And thei braken to 
gidre in bateil Philip, and Persen, kyng 
of Cetheis, and other that baren armers 
6a3einus hem, and thei weldiden hem; and 
Antiochus, the grete kyng of Asye, that 
3aue bateil to heim, hauynge an hundred 
and twenti olifauntis, and rydyng, and 
charys, and ful greet oost, broken togidre 
7of hem; and for thei token hym quyk, 
and ordeynyden to hym, that he shulde 
jeue grete tribute, and thei that regn- 
yden after hym; and! shulden 3eue pleggis 
gand ordenaunce, and the* cuntree of Yn- 
dis, and men of Mede, and of Lidde, of 
the best cuntrees of hem, and thei 3auen 
9hem taken of hem to kyng Eumenij; and 
for thei that weren anentis Elada, wolden 
go, and take hem; and the word was 
10 knowen to these, and thei senten to hem 
oo duyk, and thei fou3ten a3einus hem; 
and many of hem fellen, and thei ledden 
her wijues caitifs, and sonys, and robbiden 
hem; and weldiden the lond of hem, and 
distruyeden the wallis of hem, and dryuen 
11 hem in to seruage, til in to this day. And 
thei distruyeden other rewmys and ylis, 
that sumtyme ajein stoden hem, and dry- 
j2uen hem in to power. Forsothe with 
her freendis, and that hadden rest in 
hem, thei kepten frenship, and thei weld- 
iden rewmys that weren next, and that 
weren fer; for who euer herden the name 
13 of hem, dredden hem. For thei regnyden, 
to whom thei wolden be in help for to 
regne ; and whom thei wolden, fro rewme 
thei distourbliden; and thei ben gretely 
uenhaunsid. And in alle these no man 
bare diademe, nether was clothid in pur- 
15 pre, for to be magnyfied therynne. And 
for thei maden to hem a courte, and eche 
day thei counseiliden three hundrid and 
twenti, doynge counseile euermore of 


i Om. x. 


fthat their. Sand thein. 4 the kyng1. 


mwith Rk. ® Om. R. 


I. MACCABEES. 


Om. rR. 


807 


thei al to-braken kyngis that camen on 
hem fro the vtmeste places of erthe, and 
thei smytiden hem with greet wounde; 
forsothe othere 3yuen to hem tribute bi 
alle 3eeris. And thei al to-braken in batels 
Filip, and Persen, kyngis of Cethis, and 
othere that baren armeris a3ens hem, and 
weldiden hem. And thei weldiden Antiok, 6 
the greet king of Asie, that 3af batel to 
hem, and hadde an hundrid and twenti 
olifauntis, and multitude of horse men 
and charis, and ful greet oost al to brokun 
of hem; and theif token hym quyk, and’7 
ordeyneden to hym, that he schulde 3yue 
greet tribut, and thei that regnede after 
hym; and that he schulde 3yue pleggis 
and ordynaunce, in the cuntre of Yndis;8 
and the: puttiden out men of Medei, and 
of Lidde, fro the beste cuntreis of hein, 
and thei 3auen tho cuntreis takun of hem 
to kyng> Eumeny; and that thei thats 
weren anentis Elada, wolden go, and take 
awei hem; and the word was knowun to 
these Romayns, and thei senten to hem 0 to 
duyk, and thei fou3ten’ a3ens hem; and 
many of hem fellen, and thei ledden her 
wyues caitifs, and sones, and robbiden 
hem; and weldiden the lond of hem, and 
distrieden the wallis of hem, and brou3ten 
hem in to seruage, til in to this dai. Andi 
thei distrieden othere rewines and ilis, that 
sum tyme a3enstoden hem, and’ brou3ten 
in to power. Forsothe with her frendis, 12 
and that hadden reste in hem, thei kepten 
frenschip, and thei weldiden rewmes that 
weren next, and that! weren fer; for who 
euere herden the name of hem, dredden 
hem. For thei regnyden, to whiche* thei 1s 
wolden be in help for to regne; forsothe 
whiche thei wolden, thei disturbliden** fro 
rewme; and thei weren greetli enhaunsid. 
In! alle these Romayns no man bar dia- 14 
deme, nether was clothid in™ purpur, for 
to be magnefied ther ynne. And thei that" 1s 
maden to hem a court, and ech dai thei 
counseliden thre hundrid and twenti, do- 


k in the G pr.m. 


k whom. kk distrieden F. | And in r. 


808 


multitude, that thei do what thingus ben 
isworthi. And thei bitakun to oo man 
her maistrie, or cheef gouernaunce, bi 
eche 3eeris, for to be lord to al her lond; 
and alle obeishen to oon, and enuye is 
17not, nether wrath among hem. And 
Judas chese Eupolemus, sone of Joon, 
sone of Jacob, and Jason, sone of Elea- 
zarus, and he sente hem to Rome, for 
to ordeyne with hem frendship and felaw- 
isship; and that thei shulde take awey fro 
hem the 30c of Greekis, for thei sawen 
that thei oppresiden the rewme of Yrael 
19in to seruage. And thei wenten to Rome, 
a ful grete way, and thei entriden the 
20courte, and saiden, Judas Machabeus, 
and his bretheren, and the peple of 
Jewis senten vs to 30u, for to ordeyne 
with 3ou felawship and pees, and for to- 
gidre write vs 3oure felawis and freendis. 
21 And the word pleside in si3t of hem. 
22 And this ajein wrytyng is, whiche thei 
a3ein wryten in brasen tablis, and senten 
in to Jerusalem, that it were there a 
memorial, 07 a thing of mynde, of pees 
2zaud felawship. Be it wel to Romayns, 
and to folk of Jewis, in see and lond, 
in to with outen eende; and swerd and 
2senmye be fer fro hem. That 3if bateil 
shal a3ein stonde Romayns former, or to 
alle felowis of hem in al the lordship of 
25hem, the fole of Jewis shal bere help, as 
26tyme shal axe, with ful herte; ‘and thei 
shuln not! 3eue, nether priuyli mynystre 
to the fiz3tyng, whete, armers, monee, 
shippus, as it pleside to Romayns; and 
thei shuln keepe the maundementis of 
ajzhem, no thing takynge of hem. Also 
forsothe and 3if bateil shal falle bifore to 
the folk of Jewis, Romayns shuln helpe 
of ynwitt, or good herte, as tyme shal 
23sufire hem; and to hem helpynge whete 
shal not be 3ouen, armers, money, ship- 
pus, as it pleside to Romayns; and thei 
shuln keep the maundementis of hem 


I. MACCABEES. 


VIII. 16—28. 


ynge counsel euere more of multitude, 
that thei do what thingis ben worthi. 
And thei bitaken to o man her maistrie, 16 
‘ether cheef gouernaunce®, bi ech 3eer, 
for to be lord of al? her lond; and alle 
obeschen to oon, and enuye is? not, ‘ne- 
ther wraththet among hem. And Judas17 
chees Eupolemus, the sone of Joon, sone 
of Jacob, and Jason, the sone of Eleasa- 
rus, and sente hem to Rome, for to or- 
deyne with hem frenschip and felouschip ; 
and that thei schulden take awei fro hem 18 
the 30k of Grekis, for thei sien that thei 
oppressiden the rewme of Israel in to 
seruage. And thei wenten to Rome, al9 
ful greet weie, and thei entriden in to the 
court, and seiden, Judas Machabeus, and 20 
hise britheren, and the puple of Jewis 
senten vs to 30u, for to ordeyne with 30u 
felouschip and pees, and for to write togi- 
dere vs 3oure felowis and freendis. And2i 
the word pleside in the si3t of hem. And 22 
this is the ajen writyng, which thei a3en 
writiden in brasun tablis, and senten in to 
Jerusalem, that it were there'™ a memorial, 
‘ether a thing of mynde*, of pees and' felou- 
schip. Be it wel to Romayns, and to the fole 23 
of Jewis, in see" and Jond, with outen ende; 
and swerd and enemy be fer fro hem. 
That if batel bifallithY to Romayns bifore, 24 
ether to alle felowis of hem in al the lord- 
schip ‘of hem¥, the fole of Jewis schal 25 
bere help, as tine axith, with ful herte; 
and the Homayns schulen not 3yue, ne-26 
ther priuyli ministre to the Jewis fi3t- 
ynge, wheete, armeris, monei, schippis, as 
it pleside toX Romayns; and thei schulen 
kepe the maundementisY of hem, and take 
no thing of hem. Forsothe in lijk* maner 27 
and if batel fallith* bifore> to the fole of 
Jewis, Romayns schulen helpe of herte, as 
tyme suffrith hem; and to Romayns help-2s 
ynge wheete schal not be 3ouun, nether 
armeris, monei, nether schippis, as it ples- 
ide to Romayns; and thei schulen kepe 


1 ne thei shuln a. 


© ether cheef gouernail kK. Om. x. 
tofn. theseex, ¥ bifalle 1, 
> Om. n. 


P Om. Nn. 
w Om. n. 


4 and wraththe is 1. 
x Om. 1. 


8 Om. RK. 
4 bifalle 1. 


rTOm.1. ‘Om. F, 
Ycomaundementis 1. 2 the lijk n. 


VIII. 29—1IXx. 8. 


29with outen gyle. After these wordis 
Romaynes ordeynyden to the peple of 
30 Jewis, That 3if after these wordis, these 
or thei shuln woln for to putte eny thing 
to, or do awey, thei shulu do of her pur- 
posyng; and what euere thingus thei 
shuln putte to, or do awey, thei shuln 
31 be stedfast. Bot and of yuels whiche 
kyng Demetrie hath don in to hem, we 
han writen to hym, sayinge, Whi hast 
thou greeuyd thi 30ck vpon oure freendis 
szand felawis, the Jewis? Therfore 3if eft 
soone thei shuln cumine to vs ajeinus 
thee, we shuln do dom to hem, and we 
shuln fijte with thee by lond and see. 


CAR LEX, 


1 In the mene tyme, wher Demetrie_ 


herde that Nychanor felle, and his oost, 
in bateil, he puttide to eftsoone for to 
sende Bachides and Alchymus in to 
2Judee, and the ri3t horn with hem. And 
thei wenten the weye that ledith in to 
Galgala, and thei settiden tentis in Ma- 
soloth, that is in Arbellis; and thei oceu- 
pieden it, and slewen manye lyues of 
3men. In the first moneth of an hundrid 
and two and fifti™ 3eer, thei applieden the 
aoost to Jerusalem. And twenti thou- 
sand of men, and two thousand of hors- 
men, han risen, and wente in to Berea. 
sAnd Judas sette tentys in Laysa, and 
three thousand chosen men with hym. 
e6And thei sawen the multitude of oost, 
for thei ben many, and thei dredden 
gretely; and manye withdrewen hem 
fro tentis, and there leften not of hem 
7no bot ei3te hundrid men. And Judas 
saw3 for his oost flette awey, and bateil 
constreynyde hym, he is broken to gydre 
in herte, for he hadde not tyme of ga- 
dryng hem, and he is dissoluyd, o7 dis- 
scounfortid. And he saide to these that 
weren residue, Ryse we, and go we to 
oure aduersaries, 3if we shuln mowe fi3t 


I. MACCABEES. 


809 


the maundementis® of hem with out gile. 
Bi these wordis Romayns‘ ordeyneden to 29 
the puple of Jewis, That if after these 30 
wordis, these ether thei wolen put ony 
thing to, ether do awei, thei schulen do 
of her ‘comyn assent®; and what euere 
thingis thei schulen put to, ether do awei, 
thei schulen be stidfast. But also of yuels31 
whiche kyng Demetrie hath don ajens 
hem, we han writun to hym, and we 
seiden, Whi hast thou grenyd thi 30k 
on oure frendis and felowis, the Jewis? 
Therfor if eftsoone thei schulen come tos 
vs ajens thee, we schulen do doom to 
hem, and schulen fi3te with thee bi lond 
and see. 
CAP. IX. 

In the mene tyme, where Demetrie1 
herde that Nicanor fellef, and his oost, 
in batel, he puttide to eftsoone for to 
sende Bachides and Alchymus in to Ju- 
dee, and the ri3t half schiltrun® with hem. 
And thei wenten the weie that ledith in2 
to Galgala, and thei settiden tentis in 
Masoloth, that is in Arbellis; and thei 
ocupieden it, and slowen many persoones 
of men. In the firste monethe of thes 
hundrid and two and fifti 3eer, thei ap- 
plieden the oost to Jerusalem. And twenti4 
thousynde of men, and twei thousynde of 
horse men, han risun, and wenten in to 
Berea. And Judas settide tentis in Laisa, 5 
and thre thousynde men chostn with 
hym. And thei sijen the multitude ofé 
oost", that thei ben manye, and thei dred- 
den greetli; and many withdrowen hem 
fro tentis, and there left not of hem no 
but eij3te hundrid men. And Judas si37 
that his oost fleet’ awei, and batel con- 
streynede hym, he* was brokun togidere 
in herte, for he hadde not tyme to gadere 
hem, and he! was discoumfortid. And hes 
seide to these that weren residue, Rise . 
we, and go we to oure aduersaries, if we 
schulen mow fi3te ajens hem. And theig 


m fizti K. 


¢ comaundementis 1. 4% the Romayns rR. 
either c et ceteri. felde cri ef alte passim. 
horn e teat. that is, the strong sheltrun e marg, 
hen. !0Om. Rn. 


VOL. III. 


€ purposing R. purposing, thal is, comyn assent of ener 
& horn, ether [or EPpy] sheltrun CEFGHIKMNPQSUXY. 
h the oost 1KR. 


1 fledde cr. fleede £. fleyr. * and 


5 1L 


810 


oajeinus hem. And thei turnyden hem 
awey, sayinge, We shuln not mown, bot 
delynere we nowe oure lyues, and turne 
we ajein to oure bretheren, and thanne 
we shuln fi3te az3eins hem; forsothe we 
ioben fewe. And Judas seith, Fer be it 
for to do this thing, that we flee fro 
hem; and 3if oure tyme hath nei3id, dye 
we in vertu of oure bretheren, and 3jeue 
11we not cryme to oure glorie. And the 
cost moued of tentis, and thei stoden 
ajeinus hem. And horsmen ben departid 
in™ two parties, and slyngers and archers 
wenten bifore the oost, and the first of ® 
12the® bateil al the mi3ty. Forsothe Ba- 
chides was in the ri3t horn, o7 cornere. 
And the legioun of two partis came ni3, 
isand crieden with trumpis. Forsothe and 
these that weren of the part of Judas, 
crieden also thei, and the erthe is moued 
to gidre of the voice of oostis, and bateil 
isis ioyned fro morewe vn to euen. And 
Judas see3, that the part of Bachides 
oost is sadder inthe rij3t half, and alle 
stedfast in herte camen to gidre with 
ihym. And the ri3t part is broken to- 
‘ gydre of hem; and he pursuede hem vn 
16to the hill of Azotus. And thei that 
weren in the left horn, sawen, that the 
ri3t horn is broken to gidre, and thei 
sueden after Judas, and hem that weren 
17 with hym at the bac. And the bateil is 
maad greuouse, and there fellen manye 
1swoundid of these and of hem. And 
19 Judas felle, and the other fledden. And 
Jonathas and Symont token her brother 
Judas, and birieden hym in the sepulcre 
200f his fadris, in the citee Modyn. And 
al Yrael wepten hym with grete weyl- 
yng, and thei mourneden manye days, 
ziand saiden, Hou felle the mi3ty, that 
ezimaad Yrael saaf? And other wordis of 
bateilis of Judas, and of vertues that he 
dide, and his gretenessis, ben not writen ; 


min to 4GH. 


mM oure owen Rk. 
Pouerr. @Om.n. 5 Om. 1. 
sheltrun EYGMINNPQSUXYe., 
ybimany x. 2 Om. pr. 


I. MACCABEES. 


o Om. kK. 


“the mizti plures. thei my3ty s. 
rr morewe € see. m. et alti. 
thorn celer?. vtothirr. W the sepulere 1x sec.m. ¥ Om. CEFHIKMQRSU. 


IX. 9-22. 


turneden awei hym, and seiden, We schu- 
len not moun, but delyuere we oure™ 
lyues, and turne ajen we to oure brithe- 
ren, and thanne we schulen fijte ajens 
hem; forsothe we ben fewe. And Judas 10 
seide, Fer be it for to do this thing, that 
we fle fro hem; and if oure tyme hath 
nei3ed, die we in vertu for oure britheren, 
and 3yue we not cryme to oure glorie. 
And the oost mouyde fro tentis, and thei! 
stoden ajens hem. And horse men weren 
departid iu to twei partis, and slyngeris 
and archeris wenten bifore the oost, aud 
the firste men of batel alle mi3ti". For-12 
sothe Bachides was in the ri3t schiltrun®. 
And the legioun of twei partis cam ny3, 
and crieden with trumpis. Forsothe and 1s 
these that weren on? the part of Judas, 
crieden also, and thel erthe was mouyd 
togidere of the™ vois of oostis, and batel 
was ioyned fro the morewtid™ til to euen- 
tid. And Judas si3, that the part oft 
Bachides oost was saddere in the rijt 
half, and alle stidfast in herte camen to- 
gidere with hym. And the ri3t part was 1s 
al to-brokun of hem; and he pursuede 
hem ‘til to* the hil of Asotus. And.thei1¢ 
that weren in the left scheltrun', si3en, 
that the ri3t scheltrun" was al to-brokun, 
and thei sueden at the bac aftir Judas, 
and hem that weren with hym. And the17 
batel was maad grenouse, and there fellen 
many woundid of these and of hem. Andis 
Judas felle, and the othere’ fledden. And 19 
Jonathas and Symount token her brother 
Judas, and birieden hyin in sepulcre™ of 
his fadris, in the citee of* Modyn. And :o 
al Israel biwepten hiin with greet weil- 
yng, and mourneden many’ daies, and 2i 
seiden, Hou felle the my3ti, that made 
Israel saaf. And othere wordis of batels 22 
of Judas, and of vertues that he dide, and 
of his? greetnessis, ben not writun ; for tho 
weren ful many. And it was don, after 23 


°o Om. H. 


9 horn r. horn, ether [or EPpy] sheltrun c et ceteri. 
svnto1. thorn cr. horn, or [ether plures]} 


IX. 23—~-37. 


23forsothe thei weren ful manye. And it 
is don, after the deth of Judas, alle 
wickid men in alle coostis of Yrael rysen 
out, and alle that wroujten wickidnesse 
24ben born out sprungen. In tho days ful 
grete hungre is maad, and all the cuntre 
of hem bitoke hem self to Bachides with 
2shem. And Bachides ehese vnpytous 
men, and ordeynyde hem lordis of the 
26cuntree. And thei axiden out, and sou3ten 
the freendis of Judas, and brou3ten hem 
to Bachides; and he vengide in to hem, 
27and scornyde. And grete tribulacioun is 
maad in Yrael, what manere was not fro 
the day in whiche a prophete is not seen 
2tin Yrael. And alle the frendis of Judas 
ben gadrid, and saiden to Jonathas, 
29Sithen thi brother Judas is dead, ther 
is no man lije to hym, that shal go out 
ajeinus enmyes, Bachides and hem that 
30ben enmyes of oure fole. And so now 
we chese thee to day for to be prince to 
vs and duyk for hym, for to fi3te oure 
31 bateil. And Jonathas resceynyde in that 
tyme the princehod, and rose in the place 
3zof Judas, his brother. And Bachides 
33knewe, and sou3te for to slea hym. And 
Jonathas knewe, ard Symont, his bro- 
ther, and alle that weren with hymP, 
and thei fledden‘in to desert Techue, and 
saten to gidre at the water of the lake 
31 Aphar. And Bachides knewe, and in 
day of sabothis he came, and alle his 
350ost, over Jordan. And he sente his 
brother duyk of the peple, and preyede 
Nabutheis, his frendis, that he shulde 
bitake to hem his appareil, that was 
36 plenteuous. And the sonys of Sambri 
wenten out of Madaba, and caujten 
Joon, and alle thingus that he hadde, and 
37 wenten awey, hauynge hem. After these 
wordis it is tolde a3ein to Jonathas, and 
Symont, his brother, for the sonys of 
Sambry maken grete weddingus, and 
wedden a wijf of Madaba, the dou3tre 
of oon of the grete princis of Canaan, 


I. MACCABEES. 811 


the deth of Judas, alle wickid men in alle 
coostis* of Israel risiden® out, and alle that 
wrou3ten wickidnesse camen forth. In24 
tho daies fil greet hungur was maad, and 
al the cuntrey of hem bitook hem silf to 
Bachides with hem. And Bachides chees 25 
vnpitouse men, and ordeynede hem lordis 
of the cuntrei. And thei axiden out, and 26 
sou3ten® the frendis of Judas, and brou3ten 
hem to Bachides; and he vengide on hem, 
and scornede. And greet tribulacioun was 27_ 
maad in Israel, what maner was not fro 
the dai in which a profete was not seyn 
in Israel. And alle the frendis of Judas2s 
weren gaderid, and seiden to Jonatas, 
Sithen thi brother Judas is deed, ther is29 
no man lijk hym, that schal go out ajens 
enemyes, Bachides and hein that ben ene- 
myes of? oure fole. Therfor now we30 
chesen thee to dai for to be prince and 
duyk to vs for hym, for to fi3te oure batel. 
And Jonatas resseyuede in that tyme the31 
prinshod, and roos in the place of Judas, 
his brother. And Bachides knew, and 32 
sou3te for to sle him. And Jonatas knew, 33 
and Symount, his brother, and alle that 
weren with hym, and fledden in to desert 
of Thecue, and saten togidere at the wa- 
ter® of the lakef Asphar. And Bachides34 
knew, and in the dai of sabatis he cam, 
and al his oost, ouer Jordan. And Jona-35 
thas sente his brother ledere of thaé puple, 
and preiede Nabutheis, his frendis, that he 
schulde bitake to hem his apparel, that 
was plenteuouse. And sones of Jambri3e 
wenten out of Madaba, and cau3ten Joon, 
and alle thingis that he hadde, and wenten 
awei, hauynge tho thingis. After thes37 
wordis it was teld a3en to Jonathas, and 
Symount, his brother, that the sones of 
Jambri naken grete weddyngis, and wed- 
den a wijf of Madaba, the dou3ter of oon 
of the grete princis of Canaan, with greet 
pride and apparel. And thei bithou3ten3s 
on the blood of Joon, her brother, and 
stieden vp, aud hidden hem silf vndur 


Pkem 4. 


the coostig 1. > risen c sec. m. F. resin EPY. 


© souzten out R. 


dajensR. ¢laker. f watir er. 


5 L 2 


812 


38with grete pride. And thei bithou3ten 
of the blood of Joon, his brother, and 
stieden vp, and hidden hem self vndir 
39 keueryng of the hill. And thei reisiden 
her ee3en, and sawen, and loo! noys, 
and grete apparey]; and a spouse, or 
husbond, cam forth, and his frendis, and 
his bretheren ajeinus hem, with tym- 
pans, and musykis, and many armers. 
soAnd thei risen to hem of aspies, and 
slewen hem, and many woundid fellen 
doun, and the residues fledden in to the 
hill, and thei token alle the spuylis of 
aihem; and the weddingus ben conuertid 
in to mournyng, and the voice of her 
agmusikis in to weyling. And thei ven- 
giden the veniaunce of her brothers 
blood, and thei turnyden ajein to the 
asryuer of Jordan. And Bachides herde, 
and came in the day of sabothis vn to 
the vttermost part of Jordan, in grete 
4ivertu. And Jonathas saide to hise, Ryse 
we, and fijte a3einus oure enmyes; for- 
sothe it is not to day as 3isterday and 
4sthe thrid day gon. Loo! sotheli bateil 
enen ajeinus; sotheli water of Jordan on 
this half and on that half, and ryuers, 
and mareys, and wijld woodis, and there 
4s6is not place of turnyng awey. Now 
therfore crie 3e in to heuen, that 3e be 
delyuered fro hond of 3our enmyes. And 
47 bateil is ioyned. And Jonathas strau3te 
out his hond, for to smyte Bachides, and 
48he turnyde awey fro hym byhynde. And 
Jonathas lippide out, and thei that weren 
with hym, in to Jordan, and swame over 
a9Jordan to hem. And there fellen of 
Bachides part in that day a thousand 
men, and thei turnyden a3ein in to Jeru- 
sosalem. And thei4 beeldiden stronge citees 
in Judee, the strengthe that was in Je- 
rico, and in Ammaum, and in Betheron, 
and Bethel, and Thamathan, and Phara, 
and Copho, with hee3 wallis, and 3atis, 
siand lockis. And he sette keepynge in 


I. MACCABEES. 


IX. 38—51. 


kyueryng of the hil. And thei reisiden her 39 
izen, and sizen, and lo! noise, and greet 
apparel; and a hosebonde® cam forth, and 
hise frendis, and hise britheren, ajens 
hem, with tympans, and musikis, and 
many armeris. And thei risiden® to hem 40 
fro buyschementis, and slowen hem, and 
many woundid fellen doun, and the resi- 
dues fledden in to hil‘, and thei token alle 
the spuylis of hem; and weddyngis weren 41 
conuertid in to mourenyng, and vois of 
her musikis in to weilyng. And thei42 
vengiden the veniaunce of her brothieris 
blood, and turnyden ajzen to the brynk of 
Jordan. And Bachides herde, and cam 43 
in the dai of sabatis til to the vtmeste 
part of Jordan, in greet strengthej. And 44 
Jonathas seide to hise, Rise we, and fi3te 


_ ajens oure enemyes; for it is not to dai 


as 3istirdai and the thridde dai agoon. 

For lo! batel ¢s euene a3ens; sotheli wa-45 

tir’ of Jordan zs on this half and on that 

half, and ryuers, and mareis, and forestis, 

and ther is not! place of turnyng awei. 

Now therfor crie 3e in to heuene, that 3e46 

be delyuerede fro hond of 3oure enemyes. 

And batel was ioyned. And Jonathas 47 

strau3t out his hond, for to smyte Ba- 

chides, and he turnede awei fro him bi- 

hynde. And Jonathas skipte doun, and 4s 

thei that weren with hym, in to Jordan, 

and™ swommen ouer Jordan to hem. And 49 

there fellen of Bachides part in that dai 

a thousande men, and thei* turneden ajen_ * mei; that is, 
in to Jerusalem; and bildiden™ strong 50 hee 
citees in Judee, the strengthe that was here. ENPU Ye. 
in Jerico, and in Ammaum, and in Bethe- 

ron, and Bethel, and Thamathan, and 

Phara, and Copho, with bize wallis, and 

jatis, and lockis. And he® settide kepyng 51 

in hem, that thei schulden haunte enemy- 

tees in Israel; and he strengthide thes2 

citee Bethsura, and Gazaram, and the hi3 

tour, and puttide in hem helpis and ap- 

parel of metis. And he took the sones ofss 


q Om. 4. 


B spouse R. spouse, or husbonde c et ceteri. 


bildiden ceferi., © Om. r. 


h resin EPY. risen F. 
vertu, or [ether plures] strengthe x et ceteri preter c. 


J vertu r. 
a thei 


i the hil 1krx sec. m. 


k the watir 1. lnor. m Om. A. 


IX. 52—64. 


hem, that thei shulden haunte ennemi- 
s2tees in Irael; and he strengthide the 
citee Bethsura, and Gazarain, and the 
hee3 rocke; and he puttide in hem helpis, 
s3and appareil of metis. And he toke 
sonys of princis of the cuntree in ostage, 
or plegis, and he™ putte®’ hem in the hee3 
s4rocke in Jerusalem, in keepyng. And 
in the hundreth 3eere and three and fif- 
tithe, im the secounde moneth, Alchymus 
comaundide the wallis of the holy ynner 
hous for to be distruyed, and the werkis 
of prophetus for to be distruyed, and he 
ssbyganne for to distruye. In that tyme 
Alchymus is smyten, and the werkis of 
hym ben lettid. And his mouth is closid, 
and he is dissolued by* palasie, nether he 
mite spek overe a word, and comaunde" 
s60f his hous. And Alchymus is dead in 
sj7that tyme, with grete tourment. And 
Bachides see3 that Alchymus is dead, 
and he turnyde a3ein to the kyng, and 
58 the lond was stille two jeer. And alle 
wickid men thou3ten, saiynge, Loo! Jo- 
nathas, and thei that ben with hym, 
dwellen in silence, tristyng ; now ther- 
fore brenge we Bachides, and he shal 
sg9cacche hem al in oo nij3t. And thei 
wenten forth, and 3auen counseil to hym. 
60 And he rose, for to cume with miche 
cost. And he sente epistilis priuely to his 
felawis, that weren in Judee, that thei 
shulden cacche Jonathas, and hem that 
weren with hym; bot thei mi3ten not, 
for her counseil was knowen to hem. 
61 And he cau3te of men of the cuntree, 
that weren princis of kni3thode, fifty’ 
62men, and slew3 hem. And Jonathas and 
Symont wente, and thei that weren with 
hym, in to Bethbesse, that is in desert, 
and beeldiden the distruyed thingus ther- 
63of, and maden it stronge. And Bachi- 
des knewe, and gadride al his multitude, 
and denounside to hem that weren of 
64Judee. And he came, and sette tentis 


tOm. acu. § puttide nu. 


P pleggis c. ostage, or (elher plures] pleggis EFGHIKMNPQSUE. 
Vv Om. Rr. 


®comaundide A pr.m. t3eer1. %a myche 4. 


I. MACCABEES. 


tin a. 


813 


princes of the cuntrei in ostage?, and put- 
tide hem in the hi3 tour in Jerusalem, in 
kepyng. And in the hundrid 3eer ands4 
thre and fifti, in the secounde moncthe, 
Alchymus comaundide the wallis of the 
hooli ynnere hous for to be distried, and 
the werkis of profetis for to be distried, 
and he bigan for to distrie. In that tymess 
Alchymus was smytun, and the werkis 
of hym weren lettid. And his mouth was 
closid, and he was dissoluyd4, ‘ether maad 
Jeble*, bi palesie, nether he mi3zte speke 
more a word, and comaunde’ of his hous. 
And Alchymus was deed in that tyme, 56 
with greet turment. And Bachides si3, 57 
that Alchymus was deed, and he turnede 
a3en to the kyng, and the lond was stille 
twei 3eeris*. And alle wickid men thou3ten, 58 
seiynge, Lo! Jonathas, and thei that ben 
with hym, dwellen in silence, and tristen ; 
now therfor brynge we Bachides, and he 
schal take hem alle ino nijt. And thei 59 
wenten forth, and 3auen councel to hym. 
And he roos, for to come with myche® co 
oost. And he sente epistlis priuyli to his 
felowis, that weren in Judee, that thei 
schulden catche Jonathas, and hem that 
weren with hym; but thei mi3ten not, for 
her councel was knowun to hem. Andet 
Jonathas cau3te of men of the cuntre, that 
weren princis of knyt3hod, fifti men, and 
slow hem. And Jonathas and Symount62 
wenten, and thei that weren with hym, 
in to Bethbesse, ‘that is in desert’, and 
bildiden the distried thingis therof, and 
maden it strong. And Bachides knew, 63 
and gaderide al his multitude, and de- 
nounside to hem that weren of Judee. 
And he cam, and settide tentis aboue 61 
Bethbesse, and fau3te a3ens it many daies, 
and made engynes. And Jonathas lefte 6s 
Symount, his brother, in the citee, and 
wente oute in to cuntre’, and cam with > 
noumbre; and smoot Odaren, and _hise 66 
britheren, and sones of Faseron, in the 


u comaundide x. VY and fifty x. 


a maad feble c. r Om. cr. 


w the cuntre FIKR. 


814 


above Bethbesse, and fan3te ajeinus it 
ssmanye days, and made engynes. And 
Jonathas lafte Symont, his brother, in 
the citee, and wente oute in to cuntree, 
6cand came with noumbre; and smote O- 
daren, and his bretheren, and the sonys 
of Phaseron, in the tabernaclis of hem, 
and he bigan for to smyte, and waxe in 
67 vertues. Simont sothely, and they that 
weren with hym, wenten onte of the 
sscitee, and brenten engynes. And thei 
fou3ten ajeinus Bachides, and he is to 
gidre broken of hem; and thei tour- 
mentiden hym gretely for his counseil, 
«sand his goyng to togidre was void. And 
he wrothe a3einus the wickid men, that 
3auen counseile to hym for to cumme in 
to her cuntree, slew3 many of hem; for- 
sothe he thou3te with other for to go in 
70to his cuntree. And Jonathas knewe, 
and he sente legatis to hym, for to make 
pees with hym, and 3eelde to hym cai- 
71 tiftee. And wilfully he toke, and dide 
after his wordis, and swore hym to do- 
yng to hym no thing of yuel alle days of 
whis lyf. And he 3eeldide to hym cai- 
tiftee, whiche he toke by praye bifore of 
the lond of Juda. And he turnyd a3ein 
wente into his lond, and puttide namore 
73for to cume in” to his coostis. And 
swerd ceeside of Yrael. And Jonathas 
dwellide in Machinas, and there Jonathas 
bigane for to deme the peple, and dis- 
truye* vnpitous men of Yrael. 


CAP. X: 


i And in the hundrid and sixtitheY 3eer 
Alisanndre, sone of Antiochus, that is 
named noble, stiede? vp, and occupiede 
Ptholomaida ; and thei resceyuyden hym, 

zand he regnyde there. And kyng De- 
metrie herde, and gadride an oost ful 
copiouse, and wente out a3einus hym in 

sto bateil. And Demetrie sente an epistle 
to Jonathas with pesible wordis, for to 


wOm, a. 


X eaitifte rR. eaitifte, thal is, prisoneris © el eeteri. 


bOm.n ¢Om.n, €OmrR. e& y-namyd F. 


I. MACCABEES. 


x distruyed 4c. he distruyid 1. 


IX. 65——-X. 3. 


tabernaclis of hem, and bigan for to 
smyte, and wexe in vertues. Symounts7 
sotheli, and thei that weren with hym, 
wenten out of the citee, and brenten en- 
gynes. And thei fou3ten a3ens Bachides, 6s 
and he was al to-brokun of hem; and thei 
turmentiden hym gretli, for his councel 
and his assailyng was voide. And he was 69 
wrooth a3zens wickid men, that 3anen 
councel to hym for to come in to her 
cuntre, and slow many of hem; forsothe 
he thou3te with othere for to go in to his 
euntre. And Jonathas knew, and sente70 
legatis to hym, for to make pees with 
hym, and to 3elde to him prisoneris*. And 7! 
wilfuli he took, and dide bi his wordis, 
and swoor that he schulde not do to him 
ony yuel in alle daies’ of his lijf. And72 
he 3eldide to him caitifte’, which he took® 
bi prey bifore® of the lond of* Juda. And 
he turnede, and wente in to his lond, and 
puttide no more for to come in to his 
coostis. And swerd ceesside fro Israel.73 
And Jonatas dwellide in Machynas, and 
there Jonathas bigan for to deme the 
puple, and he‘ distriede the vnfeithful 
men of Israel. 


CAP. 


And in the hundrid and sixtithe jeer 
Alisaundre, the sone of Antiok, stiede up, 
that is named® noble, and ocupiede Tolo- 
maide ; and thei resseyueden hym, and he 
regnede there. And kyng Demetrie herde, 2 
and gaderide an oost ful copiouse, and 
wente out ajens lym in to batel. And3 
Demetrie sente epistle to Jonathas with 
pesible wordis, for to magnefie hym. Fors 


Ysixtis. 2 stye G pr.m. 


ythe daies1. 2 the caitifter.  2@ took to him rR. 


XxX. 4—T9. 


4niagnyfye hym. Sothely he saide, Bifore 
take we for to make pees with hym, 
bifore that he make with Alisaundre 
5a3einus vs; sothely he shal haue mynde 
of alle yuels, that we han don into him, 
and in to his brother, and in to his fole. 
6 And he 3aue hym power of gadryng oost, 
and for to make armeris, and hym for to 
be his felawe. And he comaundide oost- 
agis, that were in the hee3 rocke, for to 
z7be 30uen to hym. And Jonathas came 
in to Jerusalem, and radde the pistlis®, 
in heerynge of al the peple, and of hem 
athat weren in the hee3 rocke. And thei 
dredden with grete dreed, for thei 
herden, that the kyng 3aue to hym 
9power of gadryng an oost. And the 
oostagis> ben bitaken to Jonathas; and 
he 3eeldide hem to her fadris and mo- 
1oders. And Jonathas dwellide in Jerusa- 
-lem, and bygan for to beelde and to 
11renule the citee.. And he saide to men 
doynge werkis, that thei shulden make 
vp the wallis, and the hill of Syon in 
cumpas, with square stoones to strength- 
izing; and so thei diden. And aliens 
fledden, that weren in the strengthus, 


13 whom Bachides hadde bildide; and eche © 


man lafte his place, and wente in to his 
ulond. Oonly in Bethsura dwelten summe 
of hem, that forsoken the lawe and the! 
heestis of God; sotheli this was to hem 
isto refute. And kyng Alisaundre herde 
the biheestis, that kyng Demetrie bi- 
hizte to Jonathas, and thei teelden to 
him bateilis and vertues whiche he dide, 
and his bretheren, and the traucils 
1Wwhiche thei traueiliden; and_ saith, 
Wher we shuln fynde eny siche man ? 
Also nowe make we hym frend, and 
170ure felawe. And he wrote an epistle, 
igand sente vp these wordis, sayinge, Kyng 
Alisaundre to Jonathas, brother, helthe. 
i9 We han herde of thee, that thou art a 
mi3ti man in strengthis, and art able 


8 epistlis aai. 


€Om.r. f for toc pr.m.1. 
1 bitake cEFGHIKMNPQsUXe. 


don Fr. 
MNQSUE. 


I. MACCABEES. 


» oostis K. 


& Om. cer. 


m Om. Nn. "1 the heestis CEFRS. 


815 


he seide, Bifore take we for to make pees 
with hym, bifore that he make with Ali- 
saundre a3ens vs; for he schal haue myndes 
of? alle yuels, that we han don‘a3ens him, 
and¢ a3ens his brother, and a3ens his fole. 
And he 3af to hym power tof gadere oost, 6 
and for to make armeris, and hym for to 
be his felowe. And he comaundide ostagis, 
‘ether pleggis®, that weren in the hi3 tour, 
for to be 3ouun to hym. And Jonathas7 
cam in to Jerusalem, and radde epistlis, 
in heryng of al the puple, and of hem that 
weren in the hi3 tour. And thei dred-s 
den with greet drede, for thei herden, 
that® the kyng 3af to! hym power to ga- 
dere an oost. And ostagis* weren takun! 9 
to Jonathas, and he 3eldide hem™ to her 
fadris and modris. And Jonathas dwelte 10 
in Jerusalem, and bigan for to bilde and 
renule the citee. And he seide to meni 
doynge werkis, that thei schulden make 
up the wallis, and the hilt of Sion in cum- 
pas, with square stonys to strengthing ; 
and thei diden so. And aliens fledden, 12 
that weren in the strengthis, whiche Ba- 
chides hadde bildid; and ech man lefte13 
his place, and wente in to his lond. Onelit4 
in Bethsura dwelten sum of hem, that 
forsoken the lawe and heestis" of God ; 
for whi this was to hem to® refuyte. And 15 
Alisaundre the kyng herde biheestis, that 
Demetrie bihijte to Jonathas, and thei 
telden to hym the? batels and vertues 
whiche he dide, and his britheren, and 
the’ trauelis whiche thei traucliden. And 16 
he seide, Whether we schulen fynde ony 
such man? And now make we hym our 
frende and felowe. And he wroot epistle, 17 
and sente bi these wordis, seiynge, Kyng 18 
Alisaundre to Jonathas, brother, helthe. 
We han herde of thee, that thou art aig 
mi3ti man in strengthis, and art able that 
thou be oure frend. And now we or-20 
deynen thee to dai hizest prest of thi fole, 
and that thou be clepid frend of the 


¢Qm.apr.m. 410m. aan. 


k ostagis, ether pleggis Fen 
POm.1 9 Om. R: 


i Om. 1. 
© the rR. 


h Om. Rr. 


816 


20that thou be oure freend. And nowe or- 
deyne we® thee to day hee3ist prest of thi 
folk, and that thou be clepid freend of 
the kyng. And he sente to hym purpre, 
and a golden crowne, that thou feele 
with vs what thingus oure ben, and kepe 
21frenshipis to vs. And Jonathas clothide 
hym with the holy stoole, in the seuenthe 
monethe, in the hundrid and _ sixtithe 
3ere, in the solempne day of Senophegie. 
And he gadride an oost, and made copi- 
22ouse armers. And Demetrie herde these 
wordis, and is maad ful sorewful, and 
23saith, What han we do this thing, that 
Alisaundre bifore ocupiede vs, for to 
cacche the frenshipe of Jewis to his 
24strengthing ? And Y shal wryte to hym 
preying wordis, and of dignitee, and 3iftis, 
25that he be with me in help. And he 
wrote to hym in these wordis, Kyng De- 
26 metrie to the folk of Jewis, helthe. For 
3e kepten to vs couenaunt, and dwelten 
in oure frenship, and wenten not to oure 
27enmyes, we herden, and ioyeden. And 
nowe laste 3e 3it for to kepe to vs feith ; 
28and we shuln quyte to 30u good thingus, 
for these thingus that 3e diden with! vs, 
and we shuln forjeue to jou many 3eu- 
yngus of’ rentis, and we shuln 3eue 3iftis 
29to 30. And nowe Y assoile” 30u, and 
alle Jewis, of tributis, and I for3eue to 
jou the pricis of salt, and forzeue 
30 crownys, and the thriddis of seed; and 
the half part of fruyt of tree, that is of 
my porcioun, I leue to 3ou fro this day, 
and with ynne forth, that it be not taken 
of the lond of Juda, and of three citees 
that ben addid therto, of Samarie and 
31 Galile, fro this day in to al tyme. And 
Jerusalem be holy, and free, with his 
coostis; and tithis and tributis be of it. 
32 Also Y forzeue the power of the hee3 
rocke, that is in Jerusalem; and Y jeue 
it to the heeist prest, that he ordeyne 


I. MACCABEES. 


X, 20-—~32. 


kyng. And he sente to hym purpur, and 
a goldun coroun, that thou feele with vs 
what thingis ben oure, and kepe fren- 
schipis to vs. And Jonathas clothide hym2i 
with hooly™ stoole, in the seuenthe mo- 
nethe, in the hundrid and sixtithe® 3eer, 
in the solempne dai of Senofegie. Andt* he 
gaderide an ooste, and made copiouse" ar- 
meris. And Demetrie herde these wordis, 22 
and was maad ful sorewful, and seide, 
What han we do this thing, that Ali-23 
saundre bifor ocupiede vs, for to catche 
frenschip of Jewis to his strengthing ? 
And Y schal write to hym_ preiynge2s 
wordis, and dignitees, and 3iftis, that he 
be with me in help. And he wroot to2s 
hym by these wordis, Kyng Demetrie to 
the fole of Jewis, helthe. For 3e kepten2e 
to vs couenaunt, and dwelten in oure 
frenschip, and wenten not’ to oure ene- 
niyes, we herden, and ioieden. And” now 27 
laste 3e 3it for to kepe to vs feith; and2s 
we schulen quyte to 30u good thingis, for 
these thingis that 3e diden with* vs, and 
we schulen forz3yue to 3ou many rentis’, 
and we schulen 3yue 3iftis to 30u. And29 
now Y asoile 3ou, and alle Jewis, of tri- 
butis, and Y? for3yue zo 30u the prices of 
salt, and for3yue corouns, and the thridde 
part of seed; and Y leeue to 3ou fro this30 
dai and afterward the half part of fruyt 
of tre*, that is of my porcioun, tha tit be 
not takun of the lond of Juda, and of thre 
citees that ben addid therto, of Samarie 
and Galile, fro this dai and in to al tyme. 
And Jerusalem be hooli, and fre, with hise 31 
coostis; and -tithis and tributis be of it. 
Also Y forjiue the power of the hi3 tour, 32 
that is in Jerusalem; and Y 3yue it to the 
hizest® prest, that he ordeyne therynne 
men, whiche enere he schal chese, that 
schulen kepe it. And ech persoone of 33 
Jewis, that is caitif of the lond of Juda, 
in® al my rewme, Y delyuer fre wilfuli‘, 


©Om.x. ftoa. SoraH. »} soyle G pr.m. 
ran hooly 1. ® fourtithe n. t Om. n. u plenteuouse EP. v ont nN. w Om. 4. X tol. 
¥ jeuynges R. 3yuyngis, ether [or EPY] rentis c et ceteri. 2Om.a. @thetreer. O%hijer. ¢ and 
InN. 


@ wilfuli x. wilfuli, or [ether x] without money c et ceteri. 


S43: 


therynne men, whom euere he shal 
ascheese, that shuln kepe it. And eche 
soule of Jewis, that is caitif of the lond 
of Juda, in al my rewme, Y leue wilfully 
with out money; that alle be soiled of 
3ther tributis, 3ea, of her beestus. And 
alle solempne days, and sabothis, and 
neomenyes, and alle days ordeyned, and 
three days before the solempne day, and 
three dais after the solempne day, ‘be 
alle dais of! ynmunite, or fraunchise, 
and of remissioun, to alle Jewis that ben 
351n my rewme. And no man shal haue 
power for to do eny thing, and moue 
needis, 07 causis, ajeinus eny of hem in 
36a] cause. And that there be writen to 
of Jewis in the kyngus oost, to thritti 
thousandis of men; and plentees shuln be 
3ouen to hem, as it byhoueth to alle 
3700stis of the kyng. And of hem shuln 
be ordeynyde, that ben in the grete 
3astrengthis of the kyng; of hem shuln be 
ordeyned ouer needis of the rewme, that 
ben don of feith, and princis be of hem; 
and walke thei in her lawis, as the kyng 
comaundide in the lond of Juda. And 
three citees, that ben addid to Judee of 
the cuntre of Samarie, be rettid, o7 dem- 
yd, with Judee; that thei be vnder oon, 
and obeye not to other power, no bot to 
3o9the heezest prest; Ptholomayda, and 
coostis therof, whiche Y haue 3ouen a 3ift 
to the holy that ben in Jerusalem, to 
4oneedful costis of sayntis. And I shal 
3eue in eche 3eris fiftene thousandis of 
siclis of syluer, of the kyngis reysons, 
4ithat perteynen to me; and al that shal 
be residue, whiche thei that weren ouer 
needis 3eelden not in former 3eeris, fro 
this tyme thei shuln 3eue in to werkis of 
42the hous. And ouer this fyue thousand 
siclis of syluer, whiche thei token of re- 
soun of holy thingus by eche 3eeris ; and 
these thingus shuln perteyne to prestis, 
a3that ben sett in ministerie. And who 


I. MACCABEES. 


817 


that alle be soilid of her tributis, 3he, of 
her beestis. And alle solempne daies, and a4 
sabatis, and neomenyes, and alle daies or- 
deyned, and thre daies bifor the solempne 
dai, and thre daies after the solempne dai, 
alle these be daies of fraunchise*, and of 
remissioun, to alle Jewis that ben in my 
rewme. And no man schal haue power3s 
for to do ony thing, and moue causis a3ens 
ony of hem in ony cause. And that ther 36 
be writun of Jewis in the kingis oost, to 
thritti thousyndis of men; and _ plentees 
schulen be 3ouun to hem, as it bihoueth 
to alle oostis of the kyng. And of hem37 
schulen be ordeyned, that be in the’ greet 
strengthis of the kyng; of hem schulense 
be ordeyned ouer nedis of the rewme, that 
ben don of feith, and princes be of hem; 
and walke thei in her lawis, as the kyng 
comaundide in the lond of Juda. And thre 
citees, that ben addid to Judee of the cun- 
tre of Samarie, be demyd® with Judee; that 
thei be vndur oon, and obeie not to other 
power, no but to the hizeste prest ; Tolo-39 
maida, and coostis' therof, whiche Y haue 
jouun a 3ifte to hooli men that ben in 
Jerusalem, to nedeful costis of seyntis. 
And Y schal 3yue in ech 3eer fiftene thou- 40 
synde of siclis of siluer, of the kyngis re- 
souns, that perteynen to me; and al that) 
is residue, which thei that weren ouer 
nedis 3eldiden not in formere 3eeris, fro 
this tyme thei schulen 3yue in to werkis* 
of the hous. And ouer this fyue thou-42 
synde siclis of siluer, whiche thei token 
of resoun of hooli thingis bi ech 3eer; and 
these thingis schulen perteyne to prestis, 
that vsen mynysterie. And who euere43 
schulen fle to the temple that is in Jeru- 
salem, and in alle coostis therof, and ben 
gilti to the king in ony cause, be releesid?; 
and haue thei fre alle thingis, that ben to 
hem in my rewme. And to bilde™ werkis 44 
of hooli thingis, costis" schulen be 3ouun 
of the kyngis rent®, and for to bilde out 4s 


iOm. x. 


¢ [inm]nunite r. inmunite, ether [or EP] fraunchise c et ceteri, preter e. : 
h arettid Er. arettid, ether [or e] demyd c et cetert. 


causis C el celert, & Om. R. 
werkis 1. 
c et celeri preter R. 
rente c et celeri, preter e. 


VOL. III. 


1 dismittid x. dismyttid, ether [or ry] releesid c ef celeri. 
1 costis, ether [or e] spensis FanImNQsuxe. 


f nedis x. nedis, ether [or EPye] 
ithe coostis1. k the 

m bilde, ether [or EPye] restore 
© resoun rR. resoun, ether [or EPY] 


5M 


818 


euer shuln flee to the temple that is in 
Jerusalem, and in* alle coostus therof, 
gylty to the kyng, in eche cause be dis- 
inittid, ov relesid ; and alle thingis that 
ben to hem in my rewme, be hadde free. 
41 And to bilde, or restore, werkis of holy 
thingus, expensis! shuln be 3ouen of the 
4skyngus resoun, and for to bilde out the 
wallis of Jerusalem; and for to make 
stronge in cumpas, spensis shuln be 3ouen 
of the kyngus resoun, for to make out 
aé¢wallis in Judee. As Jonathas and the 
peple herde these wordis, thei bileeayden 
not to hem, nether resceyuyden; for thei 
hadden mynde of the grete malice that 
he hadde don in Yrael, and trubliden 
47hem gretely. And it pleside to gidre to 
hem in to Alysaundre, for he was to 
hem prince of wordis of pees, and to 
4shym thei baren help in alle days. And 
kyng Alisaundre gadride a grete oost, 
and mouyde tentis ajeinus Demetrie. 
49 And the kyngis ioynyde bateil, and the 
oost of Demetrie fledde; and Alisaundre 
so pursuede hym, and lay vpon hym; and 
the bateil was ful stronge, til the sunne 
wente doun, and Demetrie fledde in that 
siday. And Alisaundre sente to Ptholoie, 
kyng of Egypt, legatis after these wordis, 
sesayinge, For Y am gon a3ein in to my 
rewme, and satte in seete of my faders; 
and Y haue weldide princehode, and haue 
broken togidre Demetrie, and haue wel- 
ssdide oure cuntree; and haue ioynyde 
with hym fi3t, and he is broken to gidre 
and his tentis of vs, and we saten in sete 
siof his rewme. And nowe ordeyne we to 
gidre frenship, and 3eue to me thi dou3- 
ter wijf, and Y shal be thi dou3ter hos- 
bond; and Y shal 3eue to thee 3iftis, and 
5sto hir dignitee. And kyng" Ptoloime 
answerde, saiynge, Blessid the day in 
whiche thou turnedist a3ein to the lond 
of thi fadris, and hast sitten in sete of 
s6the rewme ‘of hem®. And nowe Y shal 
do to thee whiche thingus thou hast 


k Om. eG pr.m. 


P resonn C ef ceteri. resoun, ether rente e. 


, q Om. 
u¥a.and Yu. v the seete x. 


W kyng Tolome Fr. 


I. MACCABEES. 


1 costes, or spenses H. 


X. 44—-56. 


the wallis of Jernsalem; and for to make 
strong ‘in cumpas, spensis schulen be 
3ouun of the kyngis rent?, for to make 
out wallis in Judee. As Jonathas and 46 
the puple herde these wordis, thei bileu- 
eden not to hem, nether resseyueden hem; 
for thei hadden mynde of the greet malice 
that he hadde don in Israel, and hadde 
troblid hem greetli. And it pleside to- 47 
gidere to hem in to? Alisaundre, for he 
was to hem prince of wordis of pees, and 
to hyin thei baren help in alle daies. And 4s 
kyng Alisaundre gaderide a greet oost, 
and mouyde tentis a3ens Demetrie. And 49 
the kyngis ioyneden batel, and the oost of 
Demetrie fledde; and Alisaundre pursuede 
him, and lai on hem™; and the batel wasso 
ful strong, til the sunne wente doun, and 
Demetrie felle’ in that dai. And Ali-s: 
saundre sente to Tolome, king of Egipt, 
legatis bi these wordis, and seide, For Y 52 
cam a3en in to my rewme, and sat in thet 
seete of my fadris; and Y haue weldid 
princehod, and Y haue al to-brokun Deme- 
trie, and" haue weldid oure cuntrei; and 53 
Y haue ioyned fi3t with hym, and he and 
his oostis ben al to-foulid of vs, and we 
saten in seete’ of his rewme. And nows4 
ordeyne we togidere frenschip, and 3yue 
thi dou3ter a wijf to me, and Y schal be 
thi dou3ter hosebonde; and Y schal 3yue 
to thee 3iftis, aud to hir dignytee. Ands5s 
‘Tolome, kyng’’, answeride, seiynge, Blessid 
is the dai in which thou turnedist a3en 
to the lond of thi fadris, and hast sotun 
in the seete of rewme* of hem. And nows6 
Y schal do to thee whiche thingis thou 
hast writun; but come thou a3ens me to 
Tolomaida, that we se vs togidere, and Y 
biheete to thee, as thou seidist. Ands57 
Toloine wente out of Egipt, he, and Cleo- 
patra, his dou3ter; and he cain to Tolo- 
inaida, in the hundrid and two and six- 
tithe 3eer. And Alisaundre, the king, 58 
came to hym; and he 3af to hym Cleo- 
patra, his dou3tir, and made his weddingis 
2 Om. G prem. ° Om. 4. 


rhim pr. 
Ww be rR. 


N, 8 felde c1 ef alii. 


x the rewme R. 


t Om. ceteri. 


X. 57-—69. 


writen; bot come thou ajeinus me to 
Ptholomayda, that we see vs togidre, 
s7and Y biheete thee?, as thou saidist. And 
Ptholome wente out of Egypt; he, and 
Cleopatra, his dou3ter; and he came to 
Ptholomaida, in the hundrid and two 
ssand sixti 3eer. And kyng Alisaundre 
came to hym; and he 3aue to hym Cleo- 
patra, his doujter, and made his wed- 
dyngus at Ptolomaida, as kyngus in grete 
s9glorie. And kyng Alisaundre wrote to 
Jonathas, that he shulde come ajeinus 
6ohym. And he wente with glorie to 
Ptholomaida, and came there to two 
kyngis, and 3aue to hem miche syluer, 
and gold, and 3iftis; and he fonde grace 
61in si3td of hem. And men of Yrael, ful 
of venym, camen togidre ajeinus hym, 
wickid men, axinge ajeinus hym, and 
szthe kyng toke no tente to hem; .and 
comaundide Jonathas fori to be maad 
nakid of his clothis, and hym for to be 
clothid in purpre; and so thei diden. 
And the kyng sette hym for to sitte 
63 with hym, and saide to his princis, Go 
3e out with hym in to mydil of the citee, 
and preche, that no man axe aj3einus hym 
of eny need, or cause, nether eny man be 
csheuy to hym of eny resoun. And it is 
don, that thei that axiden, or apeliden 
hym, sawen his glorie that was prechid, 
and hymn keuerd with purpre, fledden 
ssalle. And the kyng magnyfiede hym, 
and wrote hym amonge the first freendis, 
and he putte him duyk, and parcener, or 
66 felawe, of princehode. And Jonathas 
turnyde a3ein in to Jerusalem, with pees 
e7and gladnesse. In the hundrid 3eer and 
fyue and sixtithe, Demetrie, sone of De- 
metrie, came fro Crete in to the lond of 
6shis fadris. And kyng Alisaundre herde, 
and is maad ful sorewful, and turnide 
e9a3ein in to Antioche. And Demetrie 
ordeynide Appolonye duyk, that was 
souereyn to Seleserie; and gadride his 


P to thee 4GH. 


¥ to twei a pr.m.cEF pr.m.urvue. 2 Om.Nn. 


I. MACCABEES. 


4 the sizt 4. 


4 not N. 


819 


at Tolomaida, as kyngis in greet glorie. 
And kyng Alisaundre wroot to Jonathas, 59 
that he schulde come ajens hym. Andeo 
he wente with glorie to Tolomaida, and 
mette there tweiY kyngis, and j3aue to hem 
myche? siluer, and gold, and 3iftis; and 
foond grace in the siz3te of hem. And mensi 
of Israel, ful of venyin, camen togidere 
ajens hym, wickid men, axynge a3ens 
hym, and the kyng took no* tent to 
hem; and comaundide Jonathas for to becz 
maad nakid of his clothis, and hym for to 
be clothid in purpur; and thei diden so. 
And the king settide hym for to sitte with 
hym, and seide to hise princis, Go 3e out 63 
with hym in to the myddil of the citee, 
and preche 3e, that no man axe a3ens hym 
of ony cause®, nether ony man be heuy to 
hym of ony resoun. And it was don, as64 
thei that® axiden sien® his glorie that was 
prechid, and hym kyuered with purpur, 
alle fledden. And the kyng magnefiede ss 
hym, and wroot hym among the firste 
frendis, and puttide hym duyk, and felowf 
of prinshod. And Jonathas turnede ajen 66 
in to Jerusalem, with pees and gladnesse. 
In the hundrid 3eer and fyue and sixtithe, 67 
Demetrie, the sone of Demetrie, cam fro 
Crete in to the lond of his fadris. And 6s 
kyng Alisaundre herde, and was maad ful 
soreuful, and turnede aj3jen to Antiochie. 
And Demetrie ordeynede Appolyne dnyk, co 
that was souereyn of Celesirie; and he 
gaderide his greet oost, and cam to Jam- 
nam; and sente to Jonathas, hijeste® prest, 
and seide, Thou aloone ajenstondist vs ; 70 
Y am maad in to scorn and schenschip 
therfor, for thou hauntist power in hillis 
az3ens vs. Now therfor if thou tristist in 7 
thi vertues, come doun to vs in to the 
feeld; and there asemble we togidere, for 
with me is vertu of batels. Axe thou, 72 
and lerne who Y am, and othere that ben 
in help to me, and whiche seien, that 3oure © 
foot may not stonde a3ens oure face, for 


qq Om. G prem. 


b nede R. nede, ether [or EPpy] cause c et ceteri. 


¢Om.1. ¢€thei saujen1. f partener Rr. partener, [parcener alii] ether [or epy] felowe c et ceteri. & the 


hijeste 1. =} we vs N. 


5M 2 


820 


grete oost, and came to Jamnyam ; and 
he sente to Jonathas, hee3ist prest, say- 
zoinge, Thou aloone aeinstodist vs? Y am 
maad in to scoorn and shenship, ther- 
fore for’ thou hauntist power in hillis 
j1ajeinus vs. Nowe therfore 3if thou trist- 
est in thi vertues, come doun to vs in to 
the feeld; and there comparysoun we to 
gidre, for with me is vertu’ of bateilis. 
72 Axe thou, and lerne who Y am, and 
other that ben in help to me, and whiche 
sayn, for 3our fote may not stonde ajeinus 
oure face, for this faders ben conuertid 
73in to fli3t twyis in to her Iond. And 
now hou shalt thou mowe susteyne ryd- 
yng, and‘ so grete oost in the feeld, 
where is no stoon, ne rocke, nether place 
i10f fleezynge? Sothely as Jonathas herde 
the wordis of Appolonye, he was moued 
in ynwitt"; and he chees ten thousand 
of nen, and wente out fro Jerusalem, 
and Symont, his brother, came to hym 
75in to helpe. And thei applieden tentis 
in Joppen, and he shitte hym out fro the 
citee, for Joppen was the keepyng of 
Appolonye; and he fau3te a3einus it. 
76And thei agast, that weren with ynne 
the citee, opnyden to hym; and Jona- 
7ithas weeldide Joppen. And Appolonye 
herde, and mouede to three thousand of 
78horsmen, and myche oost ; and he wente 
to Azotum, as makynge the waye. And 
anoon he wente out in to the feelde, for 
that he had multitude’ of horsmen, and 
he" tristnyde in hem; and Jonathas su- 
ede hym in to Azotum, and thei ioyniden 
79 bateil. And Appolonye lefte in the tentis 
a thousand horsmen after hem priuyly. 
so And Jonatas knewe for aspies ben after 
hym, and thei enuyrounden his tentis, 
and castiden dartes in to the peple, fro 
81morew vn to euyn. Forsothe the peple 
stode, as Jonathas comaundide, and the 
szhorsis of hem traueiliden out. And Sy- 
mount castide out his oost, and ioynide 


*Om.c prim.  vertues 4. Shera. ¢ Om.acu. 
iOm.y. Estrengthing:. Ither. ™ Om. Rr. 
tristnede R. ‘the morwer. %Om.v. ¢ ledde out rR. 


I. MACCABEES. 


X, 7o—82. 


thi fadris weren conuertid in to! fliz3t twies 
in to her lond. And now hou schalt thou 73 
mow susteyne multitude of horse men, 
and so greet oost in the feeld, where is 
no stoon, ne rocke, nether place of fle- 
ynge“? Sotheli as Jonathas herde these! 74 
wordis of Appollonye, he was mouyd in 
herte; and he chees ten thousynde of ™ 
men, and wente out fro Jerusalem, and 
Symount, his brother, cam to hym in to" 
help. And thei applieden tentis in° Joppe, 75 


and it?* schittide out hym fro the citee,  * that is, the 
e peple of Joppe. 
for Joppe was the keping of Appolyne; Lire here. v. 


and het fou3te aj3ens it. And thei weren 76 t that is, Jo- 
agast, that weren with ynne the citee, and aon saa a 
openyden to hym; and Jonathas weldide 
Joppe. And Appolyne herde, and mouyde77 
thre thousynde of horse men, and myche 
oost; and wente to Asotus, as makynge78 
weie. And anoon he wente out in to the 
feeld, for that he hadde multitude of horse 
men, and tristnyde? in hem; and Jonathas 
suede hym in to Asotus, and thei ioyneden 
batel. And Appoloyne lefte in tentis a7 
thousynde horse men bihynde hem pri- 
ueli. And Jonathas knewe that busche- se 
mentis weren bihynde hym, and thei enui- 
rowneden his tentis, and castiden dartis in 
to the puple, fro morew* til to’ euentid. 
Forsothe the puple stood, as Jonathas 
comaundide, and the horsis of hem trauel- 
iden out. And Symount ledde* his oost,s2 
and ioynede a3ens the legioun; forsothe 
horse men weren maad weri, and weren 
al to-brokun of hym, and fledden. And #s 
thei that weren scaterid in to” the feeld, 
fledden in to Asotus; and entriden in to 
the hous of Dagon, her idol, that there 
thei schulden delyuere hem silf. And s4 
Jonathas brente Asotus, and citees that 
weren in cumpas therof, and took spuylis 
of hem; and he brente in fier the temple 
of Dagon, and hem that fledden in to it. 
And ther weren that fellen bi swerd with 85 
hem that weren brent, almeste eijte thou- 


® inwitt, or herte uw. Ya multitude 4. W Om. nH. 


"Om. rR. °toR. 
u Om. R, 


POm. sr. 4 tristede ere. he 


X. 83-—XI. 4. 


a3einus the legioun; forsothe the hors- 
men weren maad wery, and ben togidre 
83 broken of hym, and fledden. And thei 
ben scaterd in to the feeld, and fledden 
in to Azotum; and thei entriden in to 
Betlidagon, her ydol, that ther thei shul- 
aiden delyuere hem self. And Jonathas 
brent Azotum, and citees that weren in 
cumpas therof, and toke the spuylis of 
hem; and he brente in fijr the temple of 
Dagon, and hem that fledden in to it. 
s5And ther weren that fellen by swerd 
with hem that ben brent, almest ei3t 
s6thousande of men. And fro thennus Jo- 
nathas mouede tentis, and applieden hem 
to Ascalon; and thei wenten out of the 
s7citee a3einus hym in grete glorie. And 
Jonathas turnyde a3ein in to Jerusalem 
ss with his, hauynge many spuylis. And 
it is don, as kyng Alisaundre herde these 
wordes, he putte to 3it for to glorifie 
a9 Jonathas. And he sente to hym a golden 
lase, or nouche, as custume is for to be 
3ouen to cosyns of kyngus; and he 3aue 
to hym Accaron, and alle coostis therof 
in to possessioun. 


CAP. XI. 


1 And the kyng of Egypt gadride an 
oost, as grauel that is about brynk* of 
the se, and many shippus ; and sou3te for 
to weelde the rewme of Alisaundre in 

2gyle, and adde it to his rewme. And 
he wente out in to Syrie with pesible 
wordis, and thei opnyden to hym citees, 
and camen to hym; for kyng Alisaundre 
comaundide for to go out ajeinus hym, 
for he was fader of the kyngus wiljf. 

3Sotheli whan Ptolome entride a citee, 
he putte keepyngus of kni3tis in eche 
acitees. And as he nei3ide to Azotus, 
thei shewiden to hym the temple of Da- 
gon brente in fijre, and Azotus, and 
other thingus therof distruyed, and bo- 
dies cast forth, and the biryels of hem 
that weren slayn in bateil, whiche thei 


I. MACCABEES. 821 


synde of men. And fro thennus Jona- se - 
thas mouyde’ tentis, and appliede hem to 
Ascalon; and thei wenten out of the citee 
a3ens hym in greet glorie. And Jonathas 87 
turnede a3en in* to Jerusalem with hise 
men, hauynge many spuylis. And _itass 
was don, as king Alisaundre herde these 
wordis, he puttide to 3it for to glorifie 
Jonathas. And he sente to hym a goldunes 
lace, ‘ether noucheY, as custom is forYY to 
be 3ouun to cosyns of kingis; and he 3af 
to him Accoron, and alle coostis therof in 
to” possessioun. 


CAP. XI. 


And the kyng of Egipt gaderide ani 
oost, as grauel that is aboute the brynke 
of the see, and many schippis; and sou3te 
for to welde the rewme of Alisaundre in 
gile, and adde it to his rewme. And hez 
wente out in to Sirie with pesible wordis, 
and thei openyden to hym citees, and 
camen to hym; for whi kyng Alisaundre 
comaundide for to go out a3ens him, for 
he was fadir of the kyngis wijf. Sothelis 
whanne Tolome entride in to a? citee, he 
puttide kepyngis of kni3tis in ech citee. 
And as he neijede to Azotus, thei schew- 4 
iden to hym the temple of Dagon brent 
in’ fier, and Azotus, and othere thingis 
therof distried®, and bodies cast forth, and 
the biriels of hem that weren slayn in 
batel, whiche thei maden bisidis the weie. 


x the brynke x. 


vOm. rR. Wturnede r. *Om.r. Y Om. R. 


yy Om. F. 


zOm.r. @ther. > bien. ¢ weren distried 1. 


g22 I. MACCABEES. XL. 5—10. 


smaden bisidis the wey. And thei teelden 
to the kyng, for Jonathas dide these 
thingus, for to make enuye to hym; and 
sthe kyng was stille. And Jonathas came 
to the kyng with glorie inY Joppen, and 
thei gretten hem to gidre; and thei slepten 
7there. And Jonathas wente with the 
kyng ‘vn to? the flood that is clepid 
Eleutherus, and turnyde ajein in to Je- 
srusalem. Sotheli kyng Ptholome weeld- 
ide the lordship of citees ‘vn to* Sileuce, 
by the see coost, and thou3te to Alisaun- 
gdre yuel counseils; and sente legatis to 
Demetrie, sayinge, Cumme thou, make 
we bitwix vs couenaunt, and Y shal 3eue 
to thee my dou3ter, whom Alisaundre 
hath, and thou shalt regne in rewme of 
iothi fadir. Forsothe it rewith me, for Y 
jaue to hym my dou3ter; sotheli he sou3te 
ufor to slea me. And he dispiside hym 
therfore, for he coueitide the rewme of 
izhym. And he toke awey his dou3ter, 
and jaue hir to Demetrie, and alienede 
hym fro Alisaundre; and his enmytees 
i3ben maad knowen. And Ptholome en- 
tride Antioche, and ynputtide two dya- 
demes to his hed, of Egipt and Asie. 
11Forsothe Alisaundre was in Cilice in 
tho tymes, for thei rebelliden, that weren 
isin tho placis. And Alisaundre herde, 
and came to hym in to bateil; and Ptho- 
lome, kyng, brou3t forth the oost, and 
came to hym in strong hond, and drofe 
ishym. And Alisaundre flei3 in to Araby, 
for to be defendid there; sothely kyng 
17 Ptholome is enhaunsid. And Gadiel of 
Araby toke awey Alisaundre® hed, and 
issente to Ptholome. And kyng Ptho- 
lome is dead in the thrid day; and thei 
that weren in strengthis perishiden, of 
hem that weren with ynne the castels. 
i9And Demetrie regnyde in the hundrid 
203eer and seuen and sixtithe’. In tho 
days Jonathas gadride hem that weren 
in Judee, for to overcume the hee3 rocke, 
that is in Jerusalem; and thei maden 


Yintoacu. Ztiltou. til to x. 


dseer. ¢therewmern. fOmn. & daies x. 


aWel IR. 


And thei telden to the kyng, that Jona-s 
thas dide these thingis, for to make enuye 
to hym; and the kyng was stille. Ande 
Jonathas cam to the kyng with glorie in 
to Joppen, and thei gretten hem togidere ; 
and thei slepten there. And Jonathas7 
wente with the king til to the flood that 
is clepid Eleutherus, and turnede a3en in 
to Jerusalem. Sotheli kyng Tolome weld-s 
ide the lordschip of citees til to Seleuce, 
bi the eest? coost, and thou3te a3ens Ali- 
saundre yuel counsels; and sente legatis9 
to Demetrie, and seide, Come thou, make 
we bitwixe vs couenaunt, and Y schal 
3yue to thee my dou3ter, whom Alisaundre 
hath, and thou schalt regne in rewme® of 
thi fadir. For it rewith me, that Y 3af to10 
hym my dou3ter; for he sou3te for to sle 
me. And he dispiside him therfor, for he11 
coueitide the rewme of hym. And‘ hei 
took awey his dou3ter, and 3af hir to 
Demetrie, and alienyde hym fro Alisaun- 
dre; and hise enemytees weren maad 
kuowun. And Tolome entride in to An-13 
tiochie, and puttide twei diademys to his 
heed, of Egipt and of Asie. Forsothe 14 
Alisaundre, the kyng, was in Cilice in tho 
tymes®, for thei rebelliden, that weren in 
tho places. And Alisaundre herde, andis 
cam to hym in to batel; and Tolome, 
kyng*, brou3t forth oost', and cam to hym 
in strong hond*, and droof hym!. Andie 
Alisaundre flei in to Arabie, for to be 
defendid there; sotheli kyng Tolome was 
enhaunsid. And Gadiel of Arabie took 17 
awei Alisaundris heed, and sente to To- 
lome. And kyng Tolome was deed inis 
the thridde dai; and thei that weren in 
strengthis perischiden, of hem that weren 
with ynne the castels. And Demetrie 19 
regnede in the hundrid 3eer and seuene 
and sixtithe. In tho daies Jonathas ga- 20 
deride hem that weren in Judee, for to 
overcome the hi3 tour, that is in Jerusa- 
lem; “and thei maden a3ens it many en- 
gynes. And summe wickid men, that2i 


bOm. x. ¢ Alisaundris 4H. 4 sexti a. 


hthe kyng 1. ithe oost 1, koost1. |! hym 


XI. 21——34. 


2lajeinus it many engynes. And summe 
wickid men, that hatiden her fole, wente 
to kyng* Demetrie, and tolden to hym, 
that Jonathas bisegide the hee3 rocke. 
23 And as he herd, he is wrothe, and anoon 
he came to Ptholomaida, and wrote to 
Jonathas, that he bisegide not the hee3 
rocke, but he’ shnlde cume to hym in 
23hast, to speke to gidre. Sotheli as Jo- 
nathas herde, he comaundide for to bi- 
seege; and he cheese of the elder men of 
Yrael, and of prestis, and 3aue hym to 
24perel. And he® toke gold, and syluer, 
and cloth, and many other presentis ; 
and wente to the kyng, to Ptholomaida, 
25and fonde grace in si3t of hym. And 
sume wickid men of his fole axiden 
26a3einus hym; and the kyng dide to 
hym, as thei that weren bifore hym, 
diden to hym; and he enhaunside hym 
27in si3t of alle his frendis, and ordeynide 
to hym princehod® of presthod, and what 
euer preciouse thingus he hadde before; 
28and made hym prince of frendis. And 
Jonathas axide of the kyng, that he make 
Judee free, and three princehodis of three 
placis, and Samarie, and ni3 coostis ther- 
of; and he bihiz3te to hym thre hundrid 
2z9talentis. And the kyng consentide, and 
wrote to Jonathas epistlis of all these 
30thingus, conteynyng this manere. Kyng 
Demetrie to Jonathas, brother, helthe, 
3iand to folk of Jewis. The ensaumple 
of the epistle whiche we han wryten to 
Lascheny, oure fadre, of 30u, we senten 
32to 30u, that 3e shulde wite. Kyng De- 
33metrie to Lascheny, fader, helthe. To 
the peple of Jewis, oure frendis, and 
kepynge whiche thingus ben iust anentis 
vs, we demyden for to wele do, for the! 
benignytee of hem that thei han anentus 
3ivs. Therfore we ordeynen to hem, alle 
the coostis of Judee, and three citees, 
Lidea, and Ramatha, that ben addid to 
Judee, and Samarie, and alle the ni3 
coostis of hem, for to be sequestrid, or 


ethekyngy. ‘Om. uw. 


10m. a prim. 1 Om. a et omnes preter rR. 


I. MACCABEES. 


g Om. 4 


m hanncide F. 


823 


hatiden her fole, wenten to the kyng De- 
metrie, and telden to hym, that Jonathas 
bisegide the hi3 tour. And as he herde, 22 
he was wroth, and anoon he cam to Tolo- 
maida, and wroot to Jonathas, that he 
schulde not bisege the hi3 tour, but 
schulde come to hym in haaste, to speke 
togidere. Sotheli as Jonathas herde, he23 
comaundide for to bisege; and he chees 
of the eldere inen of Israel, and of! prestis, 
and 3af hym to perel. And he took gold, 2 
and siluer, and cloth, and many other 
presentis ; and wente to the kyng, to To- 
lomaida, and foond grace in the si3t of 
hym. And summe wickid men of his folc 2s 
axiden a3evs hym; ‘and the kyng dide 26 
to him", as thei that weren bifore hym, 
diden to hym; and he enhaunside™ him in 
si3t of alle his frendis, and ordeynede to27 
hym prinsehod of presthod, and what 
euere othere preciouse thingis he hadde 
bifore; and made hym prince of hise 
frendis. And Jonatas axide of the kyng, 2s 
that he schulde make Judee fre, and thre 
prinshedis of thre places, and Samarie and 
ni3 coostis therof; and he bihi3te to hym 
thre hundrid talentis. And the kyng con-29 
sentide, and wroot to Jonatas epistles of 
alle these thingis, conteynynge this ma- 
ner. Kyng Demetrie to Jonathas, brother, 30 
heelthe, and to the fole of Jewis. The en-s1 
saumple of epistle™™, which we han writun 
to Lascheny, oure fadir, of 30u, we senten 
to 3ou, that 3e schulden wite. Kyng3e 
Demetrie to Lascheny, fadur, heelthe. To3s 
the puple of Jewis, oure frendis, and kep- 
ynge whiche thingis ben iust anentis vs, 
we demyden for to do wel, for benygnyte 
of hem that thei han anentis vs. Therfor ss 
we ordeynen® to hem, alle the coostis of 
Judee, and thre citees of offryngis, Liddea, 
and Raimatha, and Faseron, that ben addid 
to Judee, and Samarie, and alle the ni3 
coostis of hem, for to be departid"" to alle 
men doynge sacrifice in Jerusalem, for 
these thingis that the kyng took bifore 


h the princehod cu. i Om. Hn. 


mm pistle Fe. %ordeyneden R. "5 se- 


questrid rn. sequestrid, ether [or EPpy] departid c et ceteri. 


824 


departid, to alle doynge sacrifice in Je- 
rusalem, for these thingus that the kyng 
toke byfore of hem by alle 3eeris, and for 
asfruytis of erthe, and of applis. And 
other thingus that perteyneden to vs, of 
tithis, and tributis, fro this tyme we for- 
3euen to hem; and the playn places of 
salt makyng, and the crownes that weren 
36 born to vs, alle thingus we graunten to 
the peplis; and no thing of these shal 
be voide, fro this and in to al tyme. 
37 Nowe therfore bisie 3e for to make en- 
saumple of these thingus, and be it 3ouen 
to Jonathas, and be putt in the holy 
3smount, and in the holy place. And 
kyng Demetrie seynge, that the lond 
was stille in his siz3t, and nothing a3ein 
stondeth hym, left alle his oost, eche 
man in to his place, out taken the strange 
oost, that he drew3 fro ylis* of heithen 
nien; and enmyes to it, al the oost of his 
sofadris. Forsothe sum! Trifon was of 
the™ partis of Alisaundre bifore, and he 
see3 for al the oost grucchide a3einus 
Demetrie; and he wente to Emacuel 
Arabyam, that nurishide Antiochus, sone 
4oof Alisaundre. And he® sate ni3 to hym, 
that he shulde bitake hym to hym, for to 
regne in stede of his fadir; and tolde™™ 
out to hym, hou grete thingus Demetrie 
hadde don, aud enmytees of his oostis 
a3einus hym; and he dwelte there many 
4idays. And Jonathas sente to kyng De- 
metrie, that he shulde caste hem out, 
that weren in the® hee3 rocke in Jeru- 
salem, and whiche weren in helpis, or 
strengthis, for thei inpungueden Yrael. 
42And Demetrie sente to Jonathas, say- 
inge, Not oonli this Y shal do to thee 
and to thi fole, bot Y shal make thee 
noble by glorie, and thi folk, whan it 
43shal be couenable. Nowe therfore ri3tly 
thou shalt do, 3if thou shalt sende men 
in to helpe of me, for al myn oost wente 
44awey. And Jonathas sente to hym three 
thousand of strong men, to Antioche; 


K the ylis 4. ! sum man a sec.m.u. ™ tho H. 


2Om.r. ™Om.a prom, 
pr. ™. CEF prom. HPRYe. 


© of othere ¥. 


I. MACCABEES. 


on this ¢yme 1. 
* helpis x. helpis, ether [or py] 


XI. 35—44. 


of hem bi alle 3eeris, and for fruytis of 
the" erthe, and of ™ applis. And other®ss 
thingis that perteyneden to vs, of tithis, 
and tributis, fro this tyme we for3yuen to 
hem ; and the pleyn places of salt makyng, 
and the corouns that weren borun to vs, 
alle thingis we graunten to hem; and no3e 
thing of these schal be voide, fro this°? and 
in to al tyme. Now therfor bisie 3e fors7 
to make ensaumple of these thingis, and 
be it 3ouun to Jonathas, and be put in the 
holi mount, and in the solempne place. 
And kyng Demetrie si3, that the lond was ss 
stille in his si3t, and that no thing a3en- 
stood hym, and lefte al? his oost, ech man 
in toP? his place, outakun the straunge oost, 
that he drow fro ilis of hethene men; and 
alle the oostis of his fadris weren enemyes 
to hym. Forsothe oon’ Trifon was of these 
partis of Alisaundre bifore, and he si3 that 
al the oost grutchide a3ens Demetrie ; and 
he wente to Machuel Arabian, that nursch- 
ide Antiok, the sone of Alisaundre. And 4o 
he maad greet instaunce to hym, that he 
schulde bitake him to hym, for to regne 
in stide of his fadir; and telde out to hym, 
hou grete thingis Demetrie hadde don, 
and the enemytees of his oostis a3ens hym; 
and he dwelte there many daies. And4i 
Jonathas sente to kyng Demetrie, that he 
schulde caste out hem, that weren in the 
hi3 tour in Jerusalem, and whiche weren 
in strengthis’, for thei inpugnyden Israel. 
And Demetrie sente to Jonatas, and seide, 42 
Not oneli this Y schal do to thee, and 
thi fole, but Y schal make thee noble bi 
glorie, and thi fole, whanne it schal be 
couenable. Now therfor ri3tli thou schalt 43 
do, if thou schalt sende men in to help to 
me, for al myn oost wente awei. And 44 
Jonathas sente to hym thre thousynde of 
stronge men, to Antiochie; and thei camen 
to the kyng, and the kyng delitide in the 
comyng of hem. And there camen togi-4s 
dere that weren of the citee sixe score 
thousynde of men, and wolden sle the 


1 Om. H. 


on he tolde xk pr.m. © Om. x. 


POm.R. PP Om. A prem. 
strengthis c et ceteri. 


qsum A 


X1. 45—57- 


and thei camen to the kyng, and the 
kyng delitide in the cummyng of hem. 
45And there camen to gidre that weren of 
the citee an hundrid and twenti thou- 
sand of men, and wolden slea the kyng. 
46 And the kyng fledde in to the halle. And 
thei that weren of the citee ocupieden 
the wayes of the citee, and bigunne for 
47 to fiz3te. And the kyng clepide Jewis in 
to help, and alle camen togidre to hym; 
4sand alle ben scatered by the citee, and 
slewen in that day an hundrid thousand 
of men. And thei brenten the citee, and 
token many spuylis in that day, and 
49delyuerden the kyng. And thei sawen, 
that weren of the citee, that Jewis had- 
den taken the citee as thei wolden; and 
ben maad vnstedefast in her soule, and 
crieden to the kyng with preyers, say- 
s0inge, Zeue thou to vs ri3t hondis, and 
ceese the Jewis for to fi3te ajeinus vs 
stand the citee. And thei castiden awey 
her armers, and maden pees. And Jewis 
. ben glorified in si3t of the kyng, and in 
si3t of alle men that weren in his rewme, 
and ben named in the rewme. And thei 
wenten ajein in to Jerusalem, hauynge 
szmany spuylis. And kyng Demetrie sit- 
tith in sete of his rewme, and the lIond 
s8was stille in his si3t. And he lee3ide 
alle thingus, what euere he saide, and 
alyenyde hym fro Jonathas, and he? 
3eeldide1 not to hym vp benyficis, that 
he hadde 3ouen to hym, and traueilide 
s4hym gretely. After these thingus Trifon 
turnyde a3ein, and Antiochus with hym, 
a 3unge chijld; and regnide', and puttide 
550n to hym a diademe. And alle oostis 
ben gadrid to hyin, whiche kyng Deme- 
trie seatride; and thei foujten ajeinus 
hym, and he flei3, and turnyde backis. 
s6And Trifon toke beestis and weeldide 
57 Antioche. And Antiochus the 3unge 
wrote to Jonathas, sayinge, I ordeyne to 
thee presthod, and I ordeyne thee on 
foure citees, that thou be of the kyngis 


P Om. H. 


shisr. tsittith r. 4 the seete mr. 


VOL. III. 


4 3jelde 1. 


Vv euer thinges Rn. 
5.N 


I. MACCABEES. 825 


kyng. And the kyng fledde in to the46 
halle And thei that weren of the citee 
ocupieden the weies of the citee, and bi- 
gunnen for to fizte. And the kyng clepide 47 
Jewis in to help, and alle camen togidere 
to hym, and alle weren scaterid bi the 
citee; and slowen in that dai an hundrid 48 
thousynde of men, and brenten the citee, 
and token many spuylis in that dai, and 
delyueriden the kyng. And thei sijen, 49 
that weren of the citee, that Jewis hadden 
take the citee as thei wolden; and thei 
weren maad vnstidefast in her soule, and . 
crieden to the king with preieris, and 
seiden, 3yue to vs ri3thondis, and ceesse 50 
the Jewis for to fijte ajens vs and the 
citee. And thei castiden awei her armeris, 51 
and maden pees. And Jewis weren glo- 
rified in the si3t of the kyng, and in the 
sist of alle men that weren in his rewme, 
and weren named in the’ rewme. And thei 
wenten a3en in to Jerusalem, hauynge 
many spuylis. And kyng Demetrie sat's2 
in seete" of his rewme, and the lond was 
stille in his si3t. And he liede alle thingis, 53 
what euereY he seide, and alienyde hym 
fro Jonathas, and 3eldide not to hym bi 
beneficis, whiche he hadde 3ouun to hym; 
and Demetrie trauelide hym greetli. Aftir51 
these thingis Trifon turnede ajen, and 
Antiok, a 3ong child, with hym; and regn- 
ede, and puttide on hym a diademe. And 5s 
alle oostis weren gaderid to hiin, whiche 
kyng Demetrie scateride; and thei fou3ten 
ajens hym, and he flei, and turnyde backis. 
And Trifon took beestis*, and weldide 56 * that is, oli- 
Antiochie. And Antiok the 3onge WrOOt 57 feet of Domes“ 
to Jonatas, and seide, Y ordeyne to thee ‘* 
presthod, and Y ordeyne thee on foure 
citees, that thou be of the kyngis frendis. 
And he sente to hym goldun vessels, in 58 
to mynysterie, and 3af” to hym power to* 
drynk in gold, and for to be in purpur, © 
and for to haue a goldun lace, ‘ether 
nouchey. And he ordeynede Symount,59 
his brother, duyk fro the endis of Tirie 


r he regnede cu. 


wIjaf1. *fortoc. Y Om. Epry. 


826 


ssfrendis. And he sente to hym golden 
vessels, in to mynysterie, and 3aue to hym 
power of drinkyng in gold, and for to be 
in to purpre, and for to haue a golden 
sgnouche’. And he ordeynyde Symont, 
his brothere, duyke fro termes of Tire 
6o'vn tot the" eendis of Egypt. And Jona- 
thas wente out, and walkide ouere the 
flood bi citees; and al the oost of Syrie 
is gadrid to hym in to help. And he came 
to Ascalon, and thei of the citee camen 
s1ajeins hym wirshipfully. And fro then- 
nus he wente to Gaza, and thei that 
weren at Gaza closiden hem to gidre, 
and he biseegide it. And he brente what 
thingis weren in cumpas of the citee, and 
62 spuylide it by praye. And men of Gaza 
preyeden Jonathas, and he 3ane to hem 
ri3t hond, or pees. And he toke the sonys 
of hem pleggis, ‘or in ostage’, and he 
sente hem in to® Jerusalem; and he* 
walkide thorou the cuntree ‘yn toY Da- 
esmask. And Jonathas herde, for princis 
of Demetrie trespassiden in Cades, that is 
in Galilee, with miche oost, willynge for 
to remoue hym fro need of the rewme; 
c1and he came ajeinus hem. Forsothe he 
lefte Symont, his brother, bisidis the pro- 
és5uynce. And Symont appliede to Beth- 
sura, and fauj3te ajeinus it many days, 
séand closide hem togidre. And thei ax- 
iden of hym for to take ri3thondis, and 
he 3aue to hem. And he castide hem 
out fro theunus, and toke the citee, and 
67 puttide therinne help, or strengthe. And 
Jonathas and his tentis, 07 oost, appli- 
eden to the water of Genasar, and bifore 
the li3t thei walkiden in the feeld of 
ssAsor. And loo! the tentis, or oostis, 
of alyens camen ajeinus in the feeld, and 
benten’, o7 setten, to hym aspies, or 
disceytis, in the hillis. Sotheli he came 


8 lace, or nouche H. ttilto x. 


? thei benten 4x pr.m. 


u Om. nu. 


Y Om. A pr. m. GIKMNQSX. 
FGHIMNQsUe, ¢€ Om. nr. 
preter Cc. & aost c. 
disseilis FGNIMNPQSUX. 
plures. 44 resin EFPY. 


Z to R. 
¢ hem a. 
h Om. cr. i wakiden r. 
Sheri. P Om. Rr. 

é Salomy pr. 


I. MACCABEES. 


8 hondis c. 
ee him a see. m. 
k Om. R. 
4 buschementis c. aspies, clher [or upy] bushementis ¥ el 


XI. 58—68. 


til to the endis of Egipt. And Jonathas 60 
wente out, and walkide ouer the flood bi 
citees; and al the oost of Sirie was ga- 
derid to hym in to help. And he cam to 
Ascalon, and thei of the citee camen ajens 
hym worschipfuli. Andy fro thennus heer 
wente ‘in to? Gasa, and thei that weren at 
Gasa closiden hem togidere, and he biseg- 
ide it. And he brente what thingis weren 
i cumpas of the citee, and spuylide it bi 
prey. And inen of Gasa preyeden Jona-¢z 
tas, and he 3af to hem ri3t hond*, ‘ether 
pees*, And he took the sones of hem in 
ostage’, and he sente hem in to Jerusalem, 
and walkide thorou the cuntre til to Da- 
mask, And Jonathas herde, that theses 
princes of Deinetrie trespassiden in Cades, 
that is in Galilee, with myche oost, will- 
ynge for’ to remoue him fro nede of the 
rewme; and he cam ajens hem. Forsothe 6s 
he lefte Symount, his brother, withynne 
the prouynee. And Symount appliede to és 
Bethsura, and fau3t a3ens it many daies, 
and closide togidere hem. And thei ax- 6s 
iden of hym for to take ri3thondis, and he 
jaf to hem. And he castide out hem fro 
thennus, and took the citee, and puttide 
ther ynne strengthe.. And Jonathas and «7 
his tentis8, ‘ether oost", applieden to the 
water of Genasar, and bifor the 1li3t thei 
walkiden! in the 1i3t of Asor. And lo!es 
the tentis!, ‘ether oostis™, of aliens camen 
ajens in the feeld, and settiden to him 
aspies" in the® hillis. Sotheli he cam 
a3ens of the contrarie part. Sotheli the? 69 
aspies! risiden?4 vp of her places, and 
ioyneden batel. And alle that weren of Jo-70 
nathas part fledden, and no man of hem 
was left, no but Matathias, sone of Absa- 
lomy", and Judas, sone of Calphi, prince 
of kny3thod and oost. And Jonathas to-71 
rente hise clothingis, and puttide erthe 


¥Om.H. Om. 6G prem *Om. Hn. Y til ton. 


bOm.R. ¢ pleggis cexrxy. pleggis, either in ostage 
fhelp x. help, ether [or EPpy] strengthe © et ceteri 
loostisc. ™ Om. crir. "aspies, either 


XI. 69-—XIf. 8. 


" 69aseinus of the cuntrarie part. Sotheli 
the aspies, 07 bushementis, risen vp of 

7oher places, and ioyneden bateil. And 
alle that weren of Jonathas part fledden, 
and no inan of hem is left, no bot Ma- 
thatias, sone of Absalomy, and Judas, 
sone of Calphi, prince of the® kni3thod 

ziand oost. And Jonathas kittide his 
clothis, and puttide erthe in his hed, 

wzand preyede. And Jonathas turnyde 
a3ein to hem in to bateil, and to gidre 
turnyde hem im to fli3t, and fou3ten. 

73 And thei sawen that fledden of¢ his part, 
and thei? turneden ajein to hym, and 
pursueden with hym ‘in to® Cades, to her 
tentis, and fully theif camen vn to thider. 

74And there felle donn in that day of 
aliens three thousand of men, and Jona- | 
thas turnyde a3ein in to Jerusalem. 


CAP. XII. 


1 And Jonathas see3 for the tyme help- 
ith hym; and he cheese men, and sente 
hem to Rome, for to ordeyne and renule 

2frenschip with hem. And to Sparciatis, 
and to other places%, he sente epistlis vp 

3the same fourme. And thei wenten to 
Rome, and entriden in the! courte, and 
saiden, Jonathas, hee3est prest, and fole 
of Jewis, senten vs, for to renule frend- 
ship and felawship, after* the former. 
4And thei 3auen to hem epistlis to hem 
by placis, that thei shulden leede hein 
forth in to the! lond of Juda with pees. 
sAnd this is the ensaumple of epistlis, 
whiche Jonathas wrote to Sparciatis. 
6Jonathas, the™ heizist prest, and elder 
men of the fole, and prestis, and other 
peple of Jewis, to Sparciatis, bretheren, 
7helthe. Nowe bifore the” epistlis weren 
sente to Onye, the heei3est prest, fro Da- 
rius, that regnide anentis 30u; for 3e ben 
oure bretheren as the rescrite, or writing, 
sconteneth, that is vndirput. And Onye 
resceynyde the man with honour, that 


aOmn. > Ome prm ¢Omu. 1Om. n. 
ach. iOmon. Kvpu. 'Omu. ™ Om. nu, 
Ssaien FI. + helpide in. 


I. MACCABEES. 


827 


in his heed, and preiede. And Jonathas72 ~ 
turnede ajen to hein in to batel, and togi- 
dere turnyde hem in to fliz3t, and fou3ten. 
And thei of his part that fledden sayn’, 73 
and thei turnyden ajen to hym, and pur- 
sueden with hym til to Cades, to her 
tentis, and fulli camen til thidur. And 74 
ther felden doun in that dai of aliens thre 
thousynde of men, and Jonathas turnede 
ajen in to Jerusalem. 


CAP. XII. 


And Jonatas si3 that the tyme helpith': 
hym; and he chees men, and sente hem to 
Rome for to ordeyne and renule frend- 
schip with hem. And to Sparciates, and2 
to other places, he sente epistlis bi the 
same forme. And thei wenten to Rome,;3 
and entriden in to the court, and seiden, 
Jonathas, hizeste prest, and the fole of 
Jewis, sente vs, for to renule frendschip 
and felouschip, bi the formere. And thei 
jauen to hem epistlis to hem bi placis, 
that thei schulden lede forth hem in to 
the" lond of Juda with pees. And this iss 
the ensaumple of pistlis, whiche Jonathas 
wroot to Sparciatis. Jonathas, hijestes 
preest, and the eldere men of the fole, and 
prestis, and othere puple of Jewis, to 
Sparciatis, britheren, helthe. Now bifore7 
epistlis weren sent to Onyas, hizeste prest, 
fro Darius, that regnede anentis 30u; for 
3e ben oure britheren, as the rescrite con- 
teyneth, that is-vndur put. And Onyasa_ 
resseyuede the man, that was sent, with 
onour, and took epistlis, in whiche he’ 


evntoag. tila. fOm.n. & plas a, bin to 
no Om, HU. 
uOm.R. VY Om, IR, 


5N2 


828 I. MACCABEES. 


was sente, and toke the® epistels, in 
whom? was signified of felawship and 
ofrenship. Whan we hadden no need of 
these, hauynge in solace, or coumfort, 
holy bokis, that ben in oure hondis, 
10 hadden leuere for to sende to 30u, for to 
renule bretherhed and frenship, lest per- 
auenture we ben maad aliens fro 30u; 
forsothe many tymes passiden, sithen 3e 
lisenten to vs. We therfore in al tyme 
with out ceesyug, in solempne days, and 
other, in whiche it byhoueth, ben mynde- 
ful of 3ou in sacrifices that we offren, 
and in obseruances, as leeful is, and bi- 
semeth, for to haue hadde mynde of bre- 
i2theren. And so we ben glad of 3oure 
i3glorie. Forsothe many tribulaciouns en- 
uyrounden vs, and many bateils; and 
kyngis, that ben in oure cumpas, en- 
14 pugneden, or fow3ten, a3einus vs. And4 
therfore we woln not be greuous to 3ou, 
nether to other felawis, and oure frendis, 
isin these bateilis. SotheliT we hadden 
help of heuen, and ben delyuerde, and 
isoure enmyes ben maad lowe. And so 
we han chosen Numenium of Antiochi, 
and Antipatre, sone of Jasoun, and sente 
to Romayns, for to renule with hem and 
i7frenship and former felawship. And so 
we comaundiden to hem, that thei cum 
also to 30u, and grete 3ou, and 3eelde to 
30u oure pistlis of renulyng of oure bre- 
istherhed. And now 3e shuln wel do, an- 
igsweryng to vs oft these thingis. And 
this is the rescrite, or azein wrytyng, 
of the epistlis, that Onye, kyng of Spar- 
20ciatis, sente. Onye to Jonathas, the 
2igrete prest, helthe. It is founden in 
wrytyng of Sparciatis, and Jewis, for 
thet ben bretheren, and for thei ben of 
22 the" kyn of Abraham. And nowe sithen 
we knewen these thingus, 3e don wel, 
23 wrytynge to vs of oure pees. Bot and 
we a3ein writen to 30u. Our beestis and 


°Om. n. Pwhiche nH. Om. acu. * Forsothe and 4. 


W the 1. 
pugneden vs, or 


plures] a3en writing et ceteri preterc. »%Om.R. 


x solace R. solace, ether [or EPY] coumfort c et ceteri. 
[ether plures] fou3zten azens vs x ed celeri preter c. 


XII. 9-——23. 


was signefied of felouschip and frendschip. 
Whanne we hadden no nede of these, and 9 
hadden in* coumfort* hooli bookis that 
ben in oure hondis, we hadden leuere for 10 
to sende to 30u, for to renule britherhod 
and frenschip, lest perauenture we be 
maad aliens fro 30; forwhi many tymes 
passiden, sithen 3e senten to vs. Wen 
therfor in al tyme with out ceessyng, in 
toY solempne daies, and othere, in whiche 
it bihoueth, ben myndeful of 3ou in sacri- 
fices that we offren, and in obseruaunces, 
as leueful is, and bisemeth, for to haue 
hadde mynde of britheren. Therfore we 12 
ben glad of 30ure glorie. Forsothe many 13 
tribulaciouns and many batels enuyrown- 
den vs; and kyngis, that ben in oure cum- 
pas, ‘fouz3ten ajens vs’. Therfore we14 
wolden not be greuouse to 30u, nether to 
othere felowis, and oure frendis, in these 
batels. For we hadden help of heuene, 15 
and ben delyuered, and oure enemyes ben 
maad lowe. Therfor we han chosun New- 16 
menyus, the sone of Antiok, and Anti- 
patre, sone of Jasoun, and senten to Ro- 
mayns, for to renule with hem both 
frendschip and formere felouschipe. Ther-17 
for we comaundiden to hem, that thei 
come also to 3o0u, and grete 30u, and 3elde 
to 30u oure pistlis of renulyng of oure 
britherhod. And nowe 3e schulen do wel, 18 
answerynge to vs to these thingis. And19 
this is the a3enwrityng* of epistlis, that 
Onyas, the> kyng of Sparciatis, sente. 
Onyas to Jonathas, greet preest, heelthe. 20 
It is foundyn in writyng of Sparciatis, and 21 
of Jewis, that thei ben britheren, and that 
thei ben of the kyn of Abraham. And 22 
now sithen we knowen these thingis, 3e 
don wel, writynge to vs of 3oure pees. 
But and we han a3en writun to jou. Oure 23 
beestis and oure possessiouns ben 3oure, 
and 3oure® oure. Therfor we comaundiden4, 
for to telle these thingis to 30u. And 24 


8Om.H. tton. 8 Om. 1. 


yOm.R. 7 impugneden R. im- 
8 rescrite R. rescrite, or [ether 
¢ 30ure ben n. 4 comaunden Fv. 


ee ee ee 


XII. 24-——36. 


oure possessions ben 3our, and jour 
oure. Aud so we comaundiden’, for to 
2itelle these thingis to 30u. And Jona- 
thas herde, for the” princis of Demetrie 
wenten out with miche oost, ouer that 
25byfore, for to fi3te a3jeinus hym. And 
he wente ont fro Jerusalem, and ranne 
a3einus hem in the* cuntree of Amathi- 
tha; sotheli he 3aue not space to hem, for 
26to entre in to his cuntree. And he sente 
aspies in to theY tentus of hem, and thei 
turnyd a3ein tolden, for thei ordeynyden 
27 for to cum over’ thidre in ni3t. Whanne 
the sunne had go doun, Jonathas baad 
his waake, and be redy in armeres to 
bateil al nijt. And he sette* keepers bi 
2scumpas of the* tentis; and the? aduer- 
saries herden, for Jonathas is redy with. 
his in bateil, and thei dredden, and in- 
wardly weren agast in her herte, and 
29tenden fijrs in her tentis. Forsothe Jo- 
nathas, and thei that weren with hym, 
knewen not til morewe; forsothe thei 
sosawen liz3tis brennynge. And Jonathas 
suede hem, and can3te hem not; forsothe 
31 thei passiden the flood Eleutherus. And 
Jonathas turnyde to Arabas, that weren 
clepid Sabadeis; and he® smote hem, 
xzand toke spuylis of hem. And he® 
ioynyde, and came to Damask, and 
as walkide bi al that cuntree. Forsothe 
Symont wente out, and came til Asca- 
lon, and to the next strengthis; and he 
bowide doun in to Joppen, and occu- 
s4piede it. Forsothe he herde, that thei 
wolden 3eue help to the parties of De- 
mmetrie; and he puttide there keepers, for 
35to keepe it. And Jonathas turnyde a3ein, 
and clepide togidre the eldre men of the 
peple, and thou3te with hem for to beelde 
s6strengthis in Judee, and for to beelde 
wallis in Jerusalem, ard for to reyse a 
grete hei3t, bitwix the mydil of the hee3 
rocke and the citee, for to departe it fro 
the citee, that it were aloon, and nether 


I. MACCABEES. 


829 


Jonathas herde, that the princes of De- 

metrie wenten out with myche oost, ouer 

that bifore, for to fi3te azens hym. And 25 

he wente out fro Jerusalem, and ran ajens 

hem in the cuntre of Amathitha; for he 

jaf not’ space to heim, for to eutre in to 

his cuntree. And he sente aspies in® the 26 

tentis of hem, and thei turneden ajen, and 

telden, that thei ordeyneden for to come 

ouer thidur in ni3t. Whannef the sunne27 

hadde go doun, Jonathas badde his men 

wake, and be redi in armeris to hatel al 

ny3t. And he settide keperis bi cumpas of 

tentis; and aduersaries herden, that Jo-2s 
nathas was redi with hise mex in batel, 

and thei dredden, and inwardli weren 

agast in her herte, and tendidené fieris in 

her tentis*. Forsothe Jonathas, and thei 29 as if the: 
that weren with hym, knewen not til to ae ea 
the morewe; for thei sizen 1iz3tis bren- enter eae 
nynge. And Jonathas suyde hem, and 30 Lire here. 
cau3te not hem; for thei passiden the i ee 
flood Eleutherus. And Jonathas turnede 31 

to Arabas, that weren clepid Sabadeis ; 

and smoot hem, and took spuylis of hem ; 

and ioynedet, and cam in™ to Damask, 32+ in gaderinge 
and walkide bi al that! cuntre. Forsothe33 rec hes soy 
Symount wente out, and cam til to Asca-  “°™" 
lon, and to the nexte strengthis ; and he 

bowide doun in to Joppe, aud ocupiede it. 

For he herde, that thei wolden 3yue help* 34 

to partis of Demetrie ; and he puttide there 

keperis, for to kepe it. And Jonathas3< 
turnede a3en, and clepide togidere the 

eldere men of the! puple, and thou3te with 

hem for to bilde strengthis in Judee, and 3¢ 

for to bilde wallis in Jerusalem, and for 

to reise a greet hi3the, bytwixe the myddil 

of the hij tour and the citee, for to de- 

parte it fro the citee, that it were aloone, 

and nether thei bie, nether sille. Ands7 

thei camen togidere, for to bilde the citee. 

And the wal felle doun togidere, that was 

on the streem, fro the risyng of the sunne; 

and he reparalide it, that is clepid Cafe- 


Ycomaunden 7. ¥ Om mu. * Om... YOm.n. YY Om.G prim. @%sente a, ® Om. yu. > Om. 1. 
¢Om. mn. %Om. #. 

dnor. €in to R. f And whanne 1. £ tentiden a prom. ¥. tenden IN. h Om. R. ithe ~. 
khelpis rn. 1 Om. FI. 


$30 


47 theif bye, ne selle. And thei camen to 
gidre, for to beelde the citee. And the 
wal felle togidre, that was on the streme 
of reyne, fro rysinge of thef sunne; and 
he repareilide it, that is clepid Caphe- 

siteca. And Symont beeldide® Adiada in 
Sephela, and he® strengthide it, and put- 

x9tide on 3atis and locks. And whanne 
Tryfon thoute for to regne at Asie, and 
take to a diademe, and strecche out hond 
4oin to kyng Antiochus, dredinge lest per- 
auenture Jonathas shulde not suffre hy, 
bot fizte ajeinus hym, he sou3te for to 
caeche hym, and slea. And he rysyng vp 
4twente in to Bethsan. And Jonathas 
wente out ajeinus, with fourty thousand 
of chosen men in to bateil, and came to 

42 Bethsan. And Trifon see3, for Jonathas 
caine with ai myche oost, for to strecche 
out hondis in to hym. And he dredde, 

4sand reseeyuede hym with honoure, and 
comendide him to alle his freendis; and 
jaue to hym 3iftis, and comaundide to 
his oostis, for to obeye to hym as to hym 

44self. And he saide to Jonathas, Wherto 
hast thou traueilide al the peple, whann 

45 bateil is not to vs? And nowe sende 
hem a3ein in to her housis. Sothely 
chese thou to thee a fewe men, that ben 
with thee, and cume with me to Ptholo- 
inaida, and Y shal 3eue it to thee, and 
other strengthis, and oost, and alle pre- 
postis, 07 souereyns, of neede; and Y con- 
nertid shal go awey. Sothely therfore Y 

sscame. And he byleeuyde to hym, and 
dide as he said, and lefte* the oost; and 
thei wenten awey in to the! lond of 

47Juda. Forsothe he withheelde with hym 
three thousand of men, of whom™ he 
sente a3ein in to Galilee two thousand ; 
sotheli a thousand camen with hym. 

48 Forsothe® as Jonathas entride® Ptholo- 
inaida, men of Ptholomaida shitten the 
3atis, and cau3ten hym; and alle that 
entriden with hymP thei slewen with 


€ there a. 
® Sotheli 4. 


f£Om.n.  & beelde a. 
° entride into G see. m. H. 


™ office Rr. 


I. MACCABEES. 


bOm. xu. iOm. x. 


P hym, loo! for he repentide to take possessionn H, 


XI. 37-——48. 


teta. And Symount bildide Adiada inss 
Sephela, and strengthide it, and puttide 
on j3atis and lockis. And whanne Trifon 39 
thou;te for to regne at Asie, and take a 
diademe, and stretche out hond in to An- 
tiok kyng, he dredde, lest perauenture Jo- 40 
nathas schulde not suffre hym, but fi3te 
asens hym; and he sou3te for to catche 
hym, and sle. And he roos vp, and wente41 
in to Bethsan. And Jonathas wente out 
azens hym, with fourti thousynde of chosun 
men in to batel, and cam to Bethsan. And 42 
Trifon si3, that Jonathas cam with myche 
oost, for to stretche out hondis in to hym. 
And he dredde, and resseyuede hym with 43 
onour, and comendide hym to alle his 
frendis; and 3af to hym 3iftis, and co- 
maundide to his oostis, for to obeie to 
hym as to hym silf. And he seide to4 
Jonathas, Wherto hast thou trauelid al 
the puple, whanne batel is not to vs? 
And now sende ajen hem in to her housis. 45 
But chese thou to thee a fewe men, that 
ben with thee, and come thou with me to 
Tolomayda, and Y schal 3yue it to thee, 
and other strengthis, and oost, and alle 
souereyns of offices™; and Y schal turne, 
and Y schal go awei. For whi therfor Y 
eam. And he bileuyde to hym, and dide 46 
as he seide, and lefte the oost; and thei 
wente awei in to the lond of Juda. For-47 
sothe he withhelde with hym thre thou- 
synde of men, of whiche he sente aj3en in 
to Galilee two thousynde; sotheli a thou- 
synde cam with hy. Forsothe as Jona-4s 
thas entride in to Tolomaida, men of To- 
lomaida schittiden the 3atis, and cau3ten 
hym; and slowen bi swerd alle that en- 
triden with hym. And Trifon sente oost, 49 
and horse men in to Galilee, and in to the 
greet feeld, for to leese alle the" felowis of 
Jonathas. And whanne thei knewen that 50 
Jonathas was takun, and perischide, and 
alle that weren with hym, thei inonestiden 
hem silf, and wenten out redi in to batel. 


k he lefte x. '!Om.H. ™whiche n, 


9 Om. celeri, 


XH. 49—XIII. 8. 


soswerd. And Trifon sente an oost and 
horsmen in to Galilee, and in to the 
greet feeld, for to leese alle the felawis 
so of Jonathas. And thei, whan thei knewen 
for Jonathas is taken, and perishide, and 
alle that weren with hym, monestiden4 
hem self, and wenten out redy in to 
st bateile. And thei seeynge, that pursu- 
eden, for for’ soule*, or Z7jf, the thing is 
szto hem, turnyden ajein. Forsothe thei 
camen alle with pees in to thet lond of 
Juda. And thei weiliden Jonathas gretely, 
and alle that weren with hym, and Yrael 
s3mournyde with grete mournynge. And 
alle heithen men that weren in the" cum- 
pas of hem, sou3ten for to breke hem to 
si gidre; forsothe thei saiden, Thei han no 


prince and helpyng; now therfore ouer- 


cumme we hem, and take awey of men 
the inynde of hem. 


CAPS XiIT. 


1 And as Symont herde, that Trifon 
gadride a grete oost, for to cum in to 
the lond of Juda, and for to distruye it, 
zseeynge for the peple is in tremblyng 
and dreed, he stie3 vp in’ to Jerusalem, 
saud gadride the peple; and monestynge 
saide, 3e witen, hou many thingus Y, and 
my bretheren, and the” hous of my fadir, 
han don, for lawis* and for holy thingus, 
batels, and what maner anguyshis we 
isawen. For grace, or cause, of these 
thingus alle my bretheren perishiden for 
5 Yrael, and Y aloone am left. And now 
bifalle it not to me, for to spare my soule, 
or lif, in al tyme of tribulacioun ; for- 
sothe Y ai not better than my bretheren. 
6 And so Y shal venge my folc, and holy 
thingus, and oure children, and wyues; 
for alle heithen men ben gadrid, for to 
7distruye vs, bi cause of enmytee. And 
the spirit of the peple is brent togidre, 
gas it herde these wordis. And thei an- 
swerden with grete voice, sayinge, Thou 


q amonestiden nw. * Om. Hu. 


x the lawis Hu. 


1 Om. A pr.m. F prom. R, 


I. MACCABEES. 


s the soule G sec. m. nu. 


o into F. 


$31 


And thei sizen that pursueden, that thing s1 
was to hem for the lijf, aud turneden ajen. 
Forsothe thei camen alle with pees in tos2 
the lond of Juda. And thei biweiliden Jo- 
nathas greetli, and alle that weren with 
hym, and Israel mourenyde with greet 
mourenyng. And alle hethene men thatss 
weren in the cumpas of hem, son3te for to 
al to-breken hem; for thei seiden, Theis. 
han no prince and helpere; now therfor 
overeome we hem, and take we" awei fro 
men the mynde of hem. 


CAP. XIII. 


And as Symount herde, that Trifon1 
gaderide a greet oost, for to come in to 
the lond of Juda, and for to distrie it, and 2 
si3 that the puple was in tremblyng and 
drede, he sti3 vp to® Jerusalem, and ga- 
deride the puple; and monestide, ‘ands 
seide, 3e witen, hou grete thingis Y, and 
my britheren, and the? hous of my fadir, 
han do, for lawis, and for hooli thingis, 
batels, and what maner angwischis we 
saien. For loue of these thingis alle my 4 
britheren perischiden for Israel, and Y 
aloone ain left. And now bifalle it nots 
to ine, for to spare my lijf in al the tyme 
of tribulacioun; for Y am not betere 
than my britheren. Therfor Y schal« 
venge my folc, and hooli thingis, and 
oure™ children, and wynes; for alle he- 
thene men ben gaderid, for to distrie vs, 
bi cause of enemyte. And the spirit of7 
the puple was kyndlid togidere, as it herde - 
these wordis. And thei answeriden withs 
greet vois, seiynge, Thou art oure duyk 


tOmu. %Omu. YOmeu., ¥ Om. Hu. 


POnm.R. Gnor. Om. Ra. 


832 


art oure duyk in stede of Judas, and 
oJonathas, thi brother; fi3te thou oure 
bateil, aud alle thingus what euere thou 
toshalt saye, we shuln do, And he ga- 
dryngY alle men fisters hastide for to 
eende alle the? wallis of Jerusalem, and 
ihe® strengthide it in cumpas. And he 
sente Jonathas, the® sone of Absolomy, 
and with hym a uewe oost, in to Joppen. 
And these cast out that weren in it, he 
i2dwellide there. And Trifou mouede fro 
Ptholomaida with inyche oost, for to 
cum in to thee lond of Juda, and Jona- 
i3thas with hym in keepyng. Forsothe 
Symont appliede in Addus, a3einus the 
14 face of the feeld. And as Trifon knewe, 
for Symont rose in stede of his brother 
Jonathas, aud for he was to ioynyng 
bateil with hym, he sente to hymn le- 
ls gatis, sayinge, For syluer, that tli bro- 
ther Jonathas ou3te in resun of the kyng, 
iswe withhelden hym. And nowe sende 
thou an hundred talentis of syluer, and 
his two sonnys pleggis, that he not dis- 
mitted fleet fro vs, and we shuln a3ein 
i7sende hym. And Symont knew3, that 
with gijle he spake with hym. Netheles 
he comaundide the® syluer tof be 3ouen, 
and children, lest he toke grete enmyte 
isto thes peple of Yrael, sayinge, For he 
sente not to hym the syluer and chil- 
19dren, therfore he perishide. And he 
sente the children, and an hundred ta- 
Jentis. And he lee3ide, and dismytted* 
20not Jonathas. And after these thingus 
Tryfon came with ynne the cuntre, for 
to distruye it. And thei cumpaseden by 
the waye that ledith to Ador; and Sy- 
mont and his oost walkiden in to eche 
21 place, whider euere thei wenten. Sothely 
thei that weren in the hee3 rocke, senten 
legatis to Trifon, for to haste for to cume 
22 by desert, and sende to hem fodis. And 
Trifon made redy al the rydyng, for to 


Ygadrede un. 2Om.u. ®@ Om. Hn. > Om. nu. 
2Om.n. 4b dismytte 1. 
8 the wallist. tOm.r. 4 batels 1s. 


legatis, either messangers FGUIMNPQSUXYe. 


I. MACCABEES. 


Vv resoun C ef celeri. 


XID. 9-22. 


in stide of Judas, and Jonathas, thi bro- 
ther; fiste thou oure batel, and alles 
thingis what euere thou schalt seie to vs, 
we schulen do. And he gaderide alle1o0 
nien fi3teris, and hastide for to ende alle 
walliss of Jerusalem, and strengthide it in 
cumpas. And he sente Jonathas, the sone in 
of Absolomy, and with hym a newe oost, 
in to Joppe. And whanne he hadde put 
out these men that weren in it, he dwelte 
there. And Trifon mouyde fro Tolomaida 12 
with myche oost, for to come in to the 
lond of Juda, and Jonathas with hym in 
kepyng. Forsothe Symount appliede in1s3 
Addus, aj3ens the face of the feeld. And 14 
as Trifon knew, that Syimount roos in the 
stide of his brother Jonathas, and thatt he 
was to ioynynge batel" with hym, he sente 
to hym legatis, and seide, For siluer, that 15 
thi brother Jonatas ou3te in acountis’ of 
the kyng, we withhelden hym. And nowe 16 
sende thou an hundrid talentis of situer, 
and hise twei sones pleggis, that he not 
dismyttid fle fro vs, and we schulen a3en- 
sende hym. And Symount knew, that 17 
with gile he spak with hym. Netheles he 
comaundide the siluer for to be 3ouun, 
and children, leste he schulde take grete 
enemytee at” the puple* of Israel, seiynge, 
For he sente not to hym siluer and chil-1s 
dren, therfor he perischide. And he sente 19 
the children, and an hundrid talentis. And 
he liede, and dismyttide not Jonathas. 
And after these thingis Trifon cam with 20 
yune the cuntre, for to distrie it. And thei 
cumpassiden bi the weie that ledith to 
Ador; and Symount and his oost walk- 
iden in to ech place, whidur euere thei 
wenten. Sotheli thei that weren in thea 
hi3 tour, senten legatis’ to Trifon, for to 
haste to come bi desert, and sende to 
hem foodis. And Trifon made redi al the 22 
multitude of horse men, for to come in 
that ny3t. Sotheli ther was ful myche 


c Om. H. 


d flee not Hu, ¢Om.n. f for to acu. 


WofR. * children rk. Y messangeris c. 


XIII. 23-——37. 


cume in that ni3t; sotheli ther was ful 
myche snowe, and he cam not in to Ga- 
23ladithym. And whanne he nee3ide to 
Basehama, he slew3 Jonathas and _ his 
zasonys there. And Trifon turnyde, and 
25 wente in to his lond. And Symont sente, 
and toke the bonys of Jonathas, his bro- 
ther, and byryede hym in Modyn, eitee 
260f his fadris. And al Yrael weiliden 
hym with grete weylyng, and thei mourn- 
27eden hym many daysi. And Symont 
beeldide on the* sepulere of his fadir and 
bretheren! an heeze beeldyng, with stoon 
28 polishid™ byhynd and byfore. And he 
ordeynyde seuen smale bildyngus, broode 
bynethe and sharp aboue, oon a3einus 
oon, to his" fader, and moder, and foure 


29 bretheren. And to these he putte aboute - 


grete pilers, and on the pilers armers, to 
euerlastynge mynd; and bysidis the® ar- 
mersP grauein shippis, whiche shulden 
30 be seen of men saylynge the see. This 
is the sepulcre that he made in Modyn, 
31til in to this day. Forsothe whan Trifon 
maad waye with Antiochus, the? 3unge 
3zkyng, in gijle he slew3 hym, and regnyde 
in his stede; and he puttide on to hym 
the diademe of Asie, and made grete 
33 veniance in the lond. And Symont bild- 
ide the? strengthis* of Judee, wardynge 
hem with hee3 tours, and grete wallis, 
and 3atis, and loekis; and he putte fodis 
34in strengthis'. And Symont cheese men, 
and sente to kyng Demetrie, that he 
shulde do remissioun to the cuntre, for 
alle the dedis of Trifon weren don by 
3sranyshyng. And to these wordis kyng 
Demetrie answerde to hyin, and wrote 
36siche epistil". Kyng Demetrie to Symont, 
hee3ist prest, and frend of kyngus, and 
to elder men, and fole of Jewis, helthe. 
37 The golden crown, and balhieu, whielie 3e 
senten, we resceyneden, and ben redy for 
to make with 30u grete pees, and for to 


tadaye wu. * Om.u, this bretheren 1. 

POm. Gc prom GOm. un. Om. 1.  § strengus kK. 
Zofhiser. © the sizt 1. 

adits. COm.R. Ccapistler. 4 baseu GMNsx. 


VOL. III. 


I. MACCABEES. 


™ polischid, or fair diz3t m. 


833 


snow, and he cam not in to Galadithym. 
And whanne he neijede to Baschama, he 23 
slow Jonathas and hise sones there. And 24 
Trifon turnede, and wente in to his lond. 
And Symount sente, and took the boonus 25 
of Jonathas, his brother, and biride tho in 
Modyn, the citee of hise fadris. And al26 
Israel biweiliden hym with greet weilyng, 
and thei bymourenyde hym many daies. 
And Symount bildide on the sepulere of 27 
his fadir and hise* britheren an hi3 bild- 
yug in si3t*, with stoon polisehid> bihynde 
and bifore. And he ordeynede seuene2é 
smale bildyngis, brood bynethe and scharp 
aboue, oon a3ens oon, to fadir, and modir, 
and foure britheren. And to these he29 
puttide aboute grete pilers, and on the 
pileris armeris, to euerlastynge mynde; and 
bisidis armeris schippis grauun, whiehe 
schulden be seyn of men seilynge in the 
see. This is the sepulere that Symount3o 
maad in Modyn, til in to this day. For-31 
sothe whanne Trifon made weie with An- 
tiok, the® 3onge kyng, in gile he slow 
hym, and regnyde in his stide; and put-32 
tide on hym-the diademe of Asie, and 
made greet veniaunce in the Jond. And33 
Symount bildide strengthis of Judee, and 
wardide hem with hi3 touris, and grete 
wallis, and 3atis, and lockis; and puttide 
foodis in strengthingis. And Symountss 
ehees men, and sente to kyng Demetrie, 
that he schulde make remyssioun to the 
euntree, for alle dedis of Trifon weren 
don bi rauysehyng. And kyng Demetrie3s 
answeride to hym to these wordis, and 
wroot suche epistle. Kyng Demetrie to 36 
Symount, hizeste prest, and frend of 
kyngis, and to the eldere men, and fole 
of Jewis, heelthe. We resseyueden the37 
goldun coroun, and baheu?*, which je 
senten, and ben redi for to make with 
3ou greet pees, and for to write to pre- 
postis of the kyng, for to releesse to jou 


nOm. nu. 9 Om. G prem. ue 


t strengthingis w. Yan epistle m. 


» polischid, or [either c] faire diz3t CEFGHIKMNPQUXYe. polyshid, or fair 


50 


* baheu is an 
ournement of 
the necke, made 
of gold ryngis. 
Lire here. AEVK 
PUY. 


834 


write to prepostus of the kyng, for to 
releese to 300 what thingus we for3auen ; 
skforsothe what ener thingus we ordeyn 
to 30u, ben stable. The strengthis that 
393e bildiden, be to 30u; and we for3eue 
ignoraunces and synnes, til in to this 
day, and the crown that 3e ou3ten; and 
3if eny other thing was tributarye, 07 
bounden to tribute, in Jernsalem, nowe 
4obe it not tributarie. And 3if eny of jou 
ben able for to be wryten to gydre 
amonge oure men, be thei writen togi- 
4idre, and pees be bitwixe vs. In the 
hundrid 3eer and seuentithe, the 30c of 
heithen men is taken away fro Yrael. 
42 And the peple bigan for to write in ta- 
blis, and opyn, 07” comun, doyinges, in 
the first 3eer vndre Symont, heeist prest, 
asgrete duyk, and prince of Jewis. In thoo 
days Symont appliede to Gasan, and en- 
uyrounyde it with tentis, o7 men of 
armes, and made engynes, and appliede 
to the citee, and smote a toure, and toke 
a4it. And thei that braken ont, weren 
bitwixe the engyne and in” the citee, 
and grete stiryng is maad-in the citee. 
49 And thei stei3iden vp, that weren in the 
citee, with her wijues, and sonys, on the 
walle, with her kotis kitt, and crieden 
with grete voice, axinge of Symont ri3t- 
4¢hondis’ for to be jouen to hem, and 
saiden, 3eelde thou not to vs after oure 
mialices, bot after thi mercyes, and we 
47shuln serue to thee. And Symont bow- 
ide, or folden*, fau3zte not a3einus hem, or 
ouercame not hem; netheles he castide 
hem out of the citee, and clenside out 
the housis in whomY weren symulacris, 
and thanne he entride in to it, with 
4eympnus, blessynge the Lord. And alle 
vnclennesse cast out therof, he sette ther- 
yune men, that shulden do the lawe; and 
he strengthide it?, and made to hym 
asabitacioun. Forsothe thei that weren in 


V Om. G sec.m.u.  W rizthoond 4. 


© ordeyneden 1. 
i Om. r. k tentis, ether men of armeris c. 
™ bowid, either folden rentmngsuxe. 


I. MACCABEES. 


‘ tributarie, ether boundun lo tribute CFGIIKMNPQSUXe. 


tentis, ether men of armes FOHKMNQSUXE. 
4. vuclennessis R. 


XI 38—49: 


what thingis we for3anen; for what enere 38 

thingis we ordeynen® to 30u, ben stable. ; 
The strengthis that 3e bildiden, be to 30u ; 

and we forgyuen ignorances and synnes, 39 

til in to this dai, and the coroun that 3e 

ou3ten; and if ony other thing was tri- 
butarie’ in Jerusalem, now be it not tri- 
butarie. And if ony of 3ou ben able for 40 
to be writun togidere among oure men, be 
thei writun togidere, and pees be bitwixe 
vs®. In the hundrid 3eer and seuentithe, 41 
the 30k of hethene men was takun awéi 
fro Israel. And the puple began for! to42 
write in tablis, and comyn doyngis, in the 
firste 3eer vndur Symount, hijeste prest, 
greet duyk, and prince of Jewis. In tho43 
daies Symount appliede to Gasan, and 
enuyrownyde it with tentis*, and made 
engines, and appliede to the citee, and 
smoot o tour, and took it. And thei that 44 
brakeu out, weren with ynne the engyne* 
in the cite, and greet stiryng was maad in strong hold of 
the cite. And thei stieden vp, that weren se “ie. z 


* that is, fei 
den to sim 


strong hold w 
in the cite, with her wyues, and sones!, on aed a Lire 
the wal, with her cootis kit, and crieden 
with greet vois axynge of Symount that . 
rijthondis be 30uun to hem, and seiden, 46 . 
3elde thou not to vs bi cure malices, but 
bi thi mercies, and we schulen serue to 


thee. And Symount was bowid™, and 47 
fau3tt not a3jens hem; netheles he castide + that is, kille 
hem out of the citee, and clenside fulli the |e net hem. 


housis in whiche weren symylacris, and 
thanne he entride in to it with ympnes, 
and blesside the Lord. And whanne alle 4s . 
ynclennesse” was caste out therof, he set- : 
tide therynne men, that schulden do the 

lawe; and he strengthide it, and made an 

abitacioun to him. Forsothe thei that4o 

weren in the hi3 tour of Jerusalem, weren 

forbodun for to go out and go yn, in to 

the cuntre, and bie, and sille; and thei : 
hungriden greetli, and many of hem pe- 
rischiden for hungur. And thei criedenso 


x fooldid a. Ywhichen. 2 Om. 4. 


Z30ur. 4 seuenti jeer R. 


1 her sones R. 


XIII. §0—=XIV. 5. 


the* hee3 rocke of Jerusalem, weren for- 
boden for to go out and go yn’, in to the 
cuntree, and to bye, and selle; and thei 
hungriden gretely, and many of hem 
so perishiden for hungre. And thei crieden 
to Symont, for to take rijthondis, and he 
jaue to hem; and he cast out hem fro 
thennus, and cleuside the hee3 roeke fro 
stdefoulyngus. And thei entriden in to it 
in the three and twentithe day of the 
secounde monethe, in the hundred and 
oon and seuenti 3eer, with preisyng®, and 
braunehis of palmes, and instrumentis of 


musik, and cymbalis, and nablis*, and 


ympnis, and songis, for the grete enmye 
s20f Yrael is broken to gidre. And he 
ordeynede, that in alle 3eeris these days 
ssshulden be don with gladdenesse. 
he strengthide the hille of the temple, 
that was bisidis the hee3® roeke, and 


dwelte there, he, and thei that weren ° 


siwith hym. And Symont see3 Joon, his 
sone, that he was a man of bateil, and 
he putte hym duyk of alle vertues, and 
he dwelte in Gasaris. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Inthe hundrid and two and seuentithe 
3eer kyng Demetrie gadride his oost, and 
wente to Mede, for to drawe togidre 
helpis to hym, for to ouercume Trifon. 

2And as Arsaees, kyng of Persis and 
Mede, herde for Demetrie entride his ni3 
coostis, he sente oon of his princis, for 
to take hym quyck, and that he shulde 

3 brynge hym to hym self. And he wente, 
and smote thef tentis? of Demetrie, and 
toke hym, and ledde hym to Arsaces, 

sand putt hym in to keepyng. And the 
lond of Juda was stille, o7 pesible, alle 
the days of Symont, and he sou3te good 
thingus of his folk; and his power ples- 
ide to hem, and his glorie, in alle days. 

5 And with alle his glorie he toke Joppen 
in to hauen, and maade entre in the® 


b Om. nu. 
h Om. AGH. 


@ Om. u. 
& tentis, or oost u. 


q Om. R. 
v the daies rR. 


Othe threr. P Om. Rr. 
either pesible ¥F et plures. 


I. MACCABEES. 


And - 


¢ pressyng K. herying 1. 


r the oost c. 
W to R. 


835 


to Symount, for to take rit hondis, and he 
3af to hem; and he castide out hem fro 
thennus, and clenside the hi3 tour fro 
defoulingis. And thei eutriden in to it inst 
thre° and twentithe dai of the secounde 
monethe, in the hundrid and oon and 
seuenty 3eer, with heriyng, and braunchis 
of palmes, and instrumentis of musik, 
‘ether giternys”, and eymbalis, and harpis, 
and ympnys, and songis, for the greet ene- 
mye of Israel was al to-brokun. And hese 
ordeynede, that in alle 3eeris these daies 
schulden be don with gladnesse. And hess 
strengthide the hil of the temple, that was 
bisidis the hi; tour, and dwelte there, he, 
and thei that weren with hym. Andss 
Symount si3 Joon, his sone, that he was 
a man of batel, and he puttide hym duyk 
of alle vertues*, and he dwelte in Gasaris. 


CAP. XIV. 


In the hundrid and two and seuenti1 
jeer kyng Deinetrie gaderide his oost, and 
wente to Medei, for to drawe togidere 
helpis to hy, for to ouercome Trifon. 
And as Arsases, kyng of Persis and Me-2 
dei, herde that Demetrie entride in to his 
ni3 coostis, he sente oon of hise princes, 
for to take hym quyk, and that he schulde 
brynge hym to hym silf. And he wente,s 
aud smoot tentis', ‘efher oost’, of Deme- 
trie, and tookt hym, and ledde hym to 
Arsaees, and he puttide hym in to kep- 
yng. And the lond of Juda was pesible"4 
in alle daies’ of Symount, and he suu3te 
goode thingis of” his fole; and his power 
and his glorie pleside to* hem in alle daies. - 
And with al his glorie he took Joppe ins 
to hauene, and made entre in toY ilis of 


d nablis, or sautres Hu. @greetu. fOm.u. 
sOm.cer. thetoker. ®stille £. stille, 
xOm. rn. Y Om. ceEFnKMQRsve. 


502 


836 


eylis of the see‘; and hej alargide the 
coostis of his peple, and weeldede the 
zeuntre. And he gadride myche caitiftee, 
and was lord in Gasara, and Bethsura, 
and Arcus ; and he dide awey the* vn- 
clennesse of it, and there was not that 
sazein stode hym. And eche man tilied 
his own lond with pees, and the lond of 
Juda 3aue his fruytis, and trees of the! 
yfeeld™ her fruyte. Alle elder men saten 
in stretis, and tretiden of goodis of the 
loud; and 3unge men clothiden hem in 
lo glorie, and stoolis of bateil. And to the 
citees he 3aue foodis, and ordeynyde hem, 
that thei weren vessels of strengthing, til 
that name" of his glorie was named vnto° 
11the last of erthe. He made pees on the 
lond, and Yrael gladide with grete glad- 
lgnesse; and eche man sate vunder his 
vyne, and vnder his fijge tree, nether 
i3there was that feride hem. The fiz3tynge 
man a3einus hem feilide on erthe; kyngis 
14 ben broken togidre in tho days. And he 
confermyde alle meke men of his peple, 
and he soujte out the lawe, and dide 
1sawey al yuel and wickid; and glorifiede 
holy thingus, and multipliede vessels of 
isholy thingus. And it is herd at Rome, 
for Jonathas is dead, and til in to Spar- 
i7tialis, and thei ben ful sorewful. For- 
sothe as thei herden, that Symont, his 
brother, was maad heeist prest in his 
stede, and weldide the cuntree, and citees 
isin it, thei wryten to hym in? brasen ta- 
blis, for to renule frenship, and felaw- 
ship, that thei maden with Judas and 
19 Jonathas, his bretheren; and thei ben 
rad in si3t of thet chirche in Jerusalem. 
And this ensaumple of pistlis', that Spar- 
2ociatis senten. Prince and the citees of 
Sparciatis to Symound, the grete preest, 
and to eldre men, and preestis, and to® 
other peple of Jewis, bretheren, helthe. 
21 Legatis that ben sente to oure peple, 


ise K pr.m. hic et alibi. 


: k Om. u. 
Stilton, Pinto. 


T epistles u. 


J Om. x. 
4 Om. un. 


Y that is, took manye prisoneris ¢ marg. 


eee that is, armuris in the time of peest. f Omen. 
tho rt, 


m the ensaumple F pr.m.R. 0 the citees 


I. MACCABEES. 


Zhe dide 1. 


XIV. 6—21. 


the see; and alargide the coostis of hise 
puple, and weldide the cuntre. And he7 
gaderide myche caitiftey*, and was lord in 
Gasara, and Bethsura, and the hi3 tour; 
and dide? awei vnelennessis of it, and 
ther was not that a3enstood hym. Ands 
ech man tilide his owne lond with* pees, 
and the lond of Juda 3af hise fruitis, and 
trees of feeldis her fruitis», Eldere meno 
saten alle in stretis, and tretiden of goodis® 
of the lond ; and 3jonge men clothiden hem 
in glorie, and in‘ stoolis of batele¢. And 10 
to the citees he 3af foodis, and ordeynede 
thof, that tho weren vessels of strengthing, 
til that the name of his glorie was named 
til to the laste of erthe. He& made pees1! 
on the lond, and Israel was glad with 
greet gladnesse; and ech man sat vndur 12 
his vyne, and vndur his fige tree, nether 
ther was that feeride hem. The fi3tynge 13 
man a3ens hem failide on erthe; kyngis 
weren al to-brokun in tho daies. And hei 
confermyde alle meke men of his puple, 
and he sou3te out the lawe, and dide awei 
al yuel and wickidnesse; and he" glori-15 
fiede hooli thingis, and multipliede vessels 
of hooli thingis. And it was herd atic 
Rome, that Jonathas was deed, and til in 
to Sparciatis, and thei weren ful soreuful. 
Forsothe as thei herden, that Symount, 17 
his brother, was maad hijeste preest in his 
stide, and he weldide the cuntre’, and citees 
in it, thei writiden* to hym in brasun1s 
tablis, for to renule frenschip, and felou- 
schip, that thei maden with Judas and 
Jonathas, his britheren; and thei! weren 19 
rad in the si3t of the chirche in Jerusalem. 
And this 7s ensaumple™ of pistlis, that 
Sparciatis senten. The prince and citees® 20 
of Sparciatist to Symount, greet prest, 
and to the eldere men, and prestis, and to 
othere puple of Jewis, britheren, heelthe. 
Legatis that weren sente to oure puple,21 
telden to vs of 30ure glorie, and onour, 
1Om. 1. 


™m feeldes G sec.m. H. © the name H. 


8 Om. H. 


4 Om. 1. 


ainkg, » fruyt rn. 
k writen 1. 


€ Andher. 4Om.t. 


R. 


¢ the goodis rR. 
1 cnntrees R. 


* that is, took 
many hethene 
men prisoneris, 
either aj3enboute 
many Jewis, 
that weren pri- 
soneris, and 
brou3te hem 
into Judee. 
Lire here. vu. 


+ that is, ar- 
muris: in the 
time of pees 
thei vseden 
siche thingis, 
that if hatel 
roos a3ens hem, 
thei shulden 
inne arme 
hemself, and 
liztliere bere 
armuris. Lire 
here. EXPUY. 


3 that is, 
gouernours of 
citees. Lire 
here. ELPUy, 


i OO 


| 


XIV. 22—30. 


tolden to vs of 3our glorie, and ho- 
noure, and gladnesse, and we ioyeden 
22in the entree of hem. And we han 
writen what thingus weren saide of hem 
in counseil' of peple", thus. Numenius 
of Antiochus’, and Antipatre, sone of 
Jason, legatis of Jewis, camen to vs, 
renulyng with vs the. former frendship. 
23 And it pleside to the peple, for to resceyue 
the men gloriously, and to putte ensaum- 
ple of her wordis in” departid bokis of 
the peple, that it be to mynde to the 
peple of Sparciatis; forsothe we han 
writen ensauinple of these thingus to 
21Symont, the greete prest. Forsothe after 
these thingus Symont sente Numenye to 
Rome, hauynge a greete golden sheld, 
wei3t of a thousand besauntis, for to 
ordeyne frenship with hem.  Sotheli 
2;whan the peple of Rome herde these 
wordis, thei saiden, What doynge of 
thankingus shuln we jeelde to Symont, 
2sand his sonys? Forsothe he restoride 
his bretheren, and ouer came the enmyes 
of Yrael fro hem. And thei ordeynyden 
to him* freedamY, and wryten iu brasen 
tablis, and puttiden in tytlis, in to the 
27mount of Syon. And this is the’ en- 
saumple of writyng. In the ei3tenthe 
day of the monethe Ebul, in the hundred 
and two* and seuentithe® 3eer, the thrid 
3eer vnder Symont, the grete prest, in 
23 Asaramel, in the grete cummyng togidre 
of prestis, peple, and princis, and folc, 
and ‘eldre men¢ of the cuntree, these 
thingus ben maad knowen; for many 
tymes bateils ben maad¢ in 3our cuntree. 
29 Forsothe Symont, tlie sone of Mathatias, 
of the® sonys of Joaryb, and his bre- 
theren‘, 3auen hem self to perel, and 
ajein stoden aduersaries of her fole, that 
her holy thingus and lawe shulden stonde; 
and bi grete glorie thei glorifieden her 
s0folc. And Jonathas gadride his folc, and 
is maad to hem a grete prest, and he® is 


t counseiles uw. 4 the peple @ sec. m. 1. 


athetwo mw. » seuenty un. 


Owreten i. Pinto plures. 4 Om. plures. 


ether [or Epye] eldere men c ef ceteri. 


I. MACCABEES. 


v Antioke m. 
¢ senyonrs, or eldre men HH. 


r Om. plures. 
u Om. plures. 


837 


and gladnesse, and we ioieden in the en- 
tree of hem. And we han write what22 
thingis weren seid of hem in councels 
of puple, thus. Numenyus, the sone of 
Antiok, and Antipater, the sone of Jason, 
legatis of Jewis, camen to vs, and renulide 
with vs the formere frendschip. And it 2s 
pleside to the puple, for to resseyue the 
men gloriousli, and to putte ensaumple of 
her wordis in departid bookis of the puple, 
that it be to mynde to the puple of Spar- 
ciatis; forsothe we han write ensaumple 
of these thingis to Symount, the greet 
preest. Forsothe aftir these thingis Sy-24 
mount sente Numenyus to Rome, hauynge 
a greet goldun scheeld, in wei3te of a 
thousynde besauntis, for to ordeyne felon- 
schip with hem. Sotheli whanne the puple 
of Rome herde these wordis, thei seiden, 25 
What doyng of thankyngis schulen we 
3elde to Symount, and his sones? For he2s 
restoride his britheren, and ouercam the 
enemyes of Israel fro hem. And _ thei 
ordeyueden to hym liberte, and writiden® 
in brasun tablis, and Jewis puttiden in 
titlis, in? the? mount of Sion. And this is 27 
ensaumple of writyng. In the ei3tenthe 
dat of the monethe Ebul*, in the hundrid 
and two and seuenti 3eer, the thridde 3cer 
vndur Symount, greet preest, in Asara- 
mael, in the greet comyng togidere ofzs 
prestis, of the" puple, and princis, and’ fole, 
and ‘eldere ment of the" cuntre, these 
thingis weren maad knowun; for many 
tymes batels weren dou in 30ure cuntre. 
Forsothe Symount, the sone of Matatias, 29 
of the sones of Jarib, and his britheren, 
3auen hem silf to perel, and a3eustoden 
aduersaries of her fole, that her hooli 
thingis and lawe schulde stonde; and bi 
greet glorye thei glorifieden her fole. And 30 
Jonathas gaderide his fole, and was maad 
to hem a greet preest, and is put to his 
puple. And the enemyes of hem wolden 31 
defoule holi thingis, and distrie the cuntre 


z2Om. Hn. 
¢Om. nu. 


xhem x. Y liberte 1. 
€Om.u. f brethen c. 


wand kK. 
addon m. 


sofa. tthe eldere men R. senyours, 


838 


31 put to his peple. And the enmyes of 
hem wolden defoule holy thingus?, and 
distruye the cuntre of hem, and strecche 
forth the hond in to holy thingus of 

zzhem. Thanne Symont a3einstode, and 
fau;te for his peple, and 3ane myche 
moneys, and armyd men of vertu of his 

a3folc, and he 3aue to hem sowdis; and 
strengthide the citees of Juda, and Beth- 
sura, that was in the eendis of Judee, 
wher bifore weren armers of enmyes, 
and he puttide there help, o7 strengthe, 
3imen Jewis. And he strengthide Joppe, 
that was at the see, and Gasara, that 
was in the! coostis of Azotus, in whom* 
enmyes dwelten byfore; and he sette 
there Jewis, and what euere thingus 
weren able to the amendyng of hem, he 

35 putte in hem. And the peple saw3 the 
doyng of Symount, and the glorie that 
he thou3te for to do to his fole, and thei 
puttiden hym her duyke, and prince of 
prestis, for that he hadde don alle thes 
thingis and** ri3twisnesse, and feith, that 
he kepte to his folk; and he sou3te out in 

36al maner for to reyse his peple. And 
in his days it hadde prosperitee in his 
hondis, that heithen men weren taken 
awey fro the cuntree of hem, whiche 
weren in the! citee of Dauid in Jerusa- 
Jem, in the hee3 rocke; of whiche thei 
camen out, and defouliden alle thingus 
that weren in the™ cumpas of holy 
thingus, and jauen grete wounde to the 

s7citee. And he sette therynne men Jewis, 
to defendyng of the cuntree and the” 
citee, and he reyside the wallis in Jeru- 
sssalem. And kyng Demetrie ordeynede 
ato hym the hee3ist presthod; vp this 
he made hym his frend, and glorifiede 
sohyin in grete glorie. Forsothe he herd, 
that Jewis ben cleepid of Romayns 
frendis, and felawes, and bretheren, and 
for thei resceyuyden the° legatis of Sy- 
4imont gloriously; and for Jewis and 


h thingis of hem m1. 1Om. au. & whiche a. kkin x. 1Om.u. ™Om. a. 2 Om. acn. © Om. H. 

4 ; hondis 1. w ase R. *eender.  ¥ strengthe c. help, cither strengthe ¥ ef plures. 2 Om. ceteri. 
the coostis rR. Om. R. © puttiden ceteri. 4 Om. plures. 49 defonlyng ¥. ¢ of the citee Rr. 
Om. R.  & cure, or bisinesse Ey. : 


I. MACCABEES. 


XIV. 31-——4I. 


of hem, and stretche forth hond’ in to 
hooli thingis ‘of hem”. Thanne Symount 32 
a3enstood, and fau3t for his puple, and 3af 
many richessis, and armyd men of vertu 
of his fole, and 3af to hein sowdis; and 33 
strengthide the citees of Juda, and Beth- 
sura, that was in the endis* of Judee, 
where bifor weren arimeris of enemyes, 
and he puttide there help’, men of? Jewis. 
And he strengthide Joppe, that was at the 34 
see, and Gasara, that was in coostis* of 
Asotus, in which enemyes dwelten bifore ; 
and he settide there Jewis, and what 
euere thingis weren able to amendyng of 
hem, he puttede in hem. And the puple3s 
si3 the doyng of Symount, and glorie that 
he thou3te ‘for to” do to his fole, and thei 
inaden® hym her duyk, and prince of 
preestis, for that he hadde don alle these 
thingis, and ri3twisnesse, and feith that he 
kepte to his fole; and he sou3te out in al 
maner for to raise hys puple. And in hise 36 
daies it hadde prosperite in his hondis, 
that hethene men weren takun awei fro 
the cuntre of hem, whiche weren in the? 
citee of Dauid in Jerusalem, in the hij 
tour; fro which thei camen out, and de- 
fouliden alle thingis that weren in cumpas 
of hooli thingis, and 3auen greet wounde 
to chastite. And he settide ther ynne37 
men Jewis, to defendyng“4 of the cuntre 
and citee*, and reiside the wallis in Jeru- 
salem. And kyng Demetrie ordeynede to 32 
hym the hizeste presthod; bi this he made 39 
him his frend, and glorifiede hym in greet 
glorie. For he herde, that Jewis weren 40 
clepid of Romayns frendis, and felowis, 
and britheren, and that thei resseyueden 
legatis of Symount gloriousli; and that's 
Jewis, and prestis of hem, consentiden, him 
for to be her duyk, and hijeste pfeest 
with outen ende, til ther rise a feithful  Jewis, and bi- 
profete* ; and that he be duyk on hem, 425700 Foe 
and cure’ were to him for hooli thingis; $3enthec: 0 
and that he schulde ordeyne gouernouris 


* that is, Mes- 
sias or Saueour, 
abedin of the 


here. EPuy. 


. 


Solve t2——X Vv. 3. 


prestis of hem consentiden, hym for to 
be her duyke, and hee3ist prest, in to 
withouten eende, til there ryse a feithful 
42 prophete; and that he be duyk on hem, 
and eure were to hym for holy thingus ; 
and that he shulde ordeyne prepostus, or 
gouernours, on? the werkis of hem, and 
on the cuntree, and on armers, and on 
4sstrengthus; and cure be to hym of holy 
thingus; and that he he herd of men, and 
alle wrytyngis in the cuntree be wryten 
sito gidre vnder name of hym; and that 
it be not leeful to eny of the peple, and 
to prestis, for to make eny thing of these 
voide, and a3ein saye to these thingus 
that ben said of hym, ether tod clepe to- 
gidre conent in the cuntree withouteu 
hym; and for to be elothid in pur- 
pre, and for to vse a golden laee, or 
ssnouche, Sothely he that shal do with 
out this, or shal make voide eny of these, 
igshal be gylty. And it pleside to gidre 
to alle the peple, for to ordeyne Symout, 
47and to do after’ these wordis. And Sy- 
mont reseeyuede, and it pleside, that he 
were sett in the’ heeist presthod, and 
were duyk and prinee of the‘ fole of 
Jewis, and prestis, and were bifore to 
ssalle men. And thei saiden em" for to 
putte this wrytyng in brasen tablis, and 
to’ putte hem in the walkyng place of 
49 holy thingus, in solempne place ; forsothe 
for to putte ensaumple of these in tre- 
sorie, that Symont haue and his sonys. 


CAP. XV. 


1 <And the” kyng Antiochus, sone of 
Demetrie, sente epistlis fro ijlys of the 
see, to Symout, prest, and prince of fole 
20f Jewis, and to al the fole; and thei 
weren conteynynge this manere. Kyng 
Antiochus to Symont, the grete prest, 
sand to fole of Jewis, helth. For sothli 
men berynge pestilenee weeldiden the 
rewme of oure faders, forsothe Y wole 


Pvypon a. 4 forton. SvpHu. § Om. acu. 
hthenamer.anamer. i purpule. J hem r. 
Nyse. Othesec. POm. Rr. PP hei3 F. 


preest 1. the fole x. 


I. MACCABEES. 


t Om. uu. 


k with n. 
q and duyk of r. 


839 


on the werkis of hem, and on the cuntre, 
and on armeris, and on strengthis ; ands 
cure be to hym of hooli thingis; and that 
he be herd of men, and alle writyngis in 
the cuntre be writun togidere vndur name" * 
of hym; and that he be keuered with pur- 
puri and gold; and that it be not leueful 44 
to ony of the puple, and to prestis, for to 
make ony thing of these voide, and a3en- 
seie to these thingis that ben seid of hym), 
ether for to clepe togidere couent in the 
cuntre with outen hym; and for to be 
clothid in* purpur'’, and for to vse a goldun 
lace™, ‘ether noche™”, Sotheli he that sehal 45 
do with out" this®, ether schal make voide 
ony of these, schal be gilti. And it ples-46 
ide togidere toP al the puple, for to or- 
deyne Symount, and do bi these wordis. 
And Symount resseyuede, and it pleside 47 
hym, that he sehulde vse hijeste?P preest- 
hod, and be duyk and prince of4 the fole 
of Jewis, and prestis, and be souereyn%4 
of alle men. And thei ordeyneden for™ 48 
to put this writyng in brasun tablis, and 
put hem in the wal aboute the cumpass- 
yng of hooli thingis, in solempne place ; 
forsothe for to putte ensaumple of these 49 
in the tresorie, that Symount hane and 
hise sones. 


CAP. XV. 


And kyng Antiok, the sone of Deime-! 
trie, sente epistlis fro ilis of the see to 
Symount, prest*, and prince of fole' of 
Jewis, and to al the fole; and tho weren2 
eonteynynge this maner. Kyung Antiok to 
Symount, greet prest, and to the fole of 
Jewis, helthe. For summen berynge pes-3 _ 
tilenee weldiden the rewme of oure fadris, 
forsothe Y wole calenge the rewme, and 
w Om. 4GH. 


u Om. G prem. ¥ Om. 11. 


mm Om, EPRY. 


1 purpul ep. ™ noche py. 
rOm.n.  § the 


qq the souereyn Rk. 


840 I. MACCABEES. XV. 4—16. 


vege the rewme, and restore it, as it 
was byfore; Y made the* chosen multi- 
tude of oost, and made shippus of werre. 
4Forsothe Y wole go forth by cuntrees, 
that Y do veniaunce in to hem that dis- 
truyede oure cuntree, and that maden 
smany’ citees desolate in my rewme. Now 
therfore Y ordeyne? to thee alle offringus, 
that alle kyngus byfore me forjauen to* 
thee, and what euer other 3iftis thei for- 
63auen to thee; and Y suffre thee for to 
make smytyng, o7 printe, of thin own 
7mouey, in thi regyoun; sothely Jerusa- 
lem for to be holy and free, and alle 
armers that ben maad, and strengthis, 
that thou hast maad out, and that thou 
sholdist, dwelle to thee; and al dett of the 
kyng, and tho that ben to cummynge of 
kyngus thingis, fro this in to al tyme 
9ben forjouen to thee. Sothely whanne 
we shuln weelde oure rewme, we shuln 
glorifie thee, and thi folc, and temple’, 
with grete glorie, so that 3oure glorie be 
10shewid in al erthe. In the hundrid 3eer 
and foure and seuentithe Antiochus wente 
out in to the lond® of his fadris, and alle 
oostis camen to gydre to hym, so that 
ufewe weren left with Trifon. And kyng 
Antiochus pursuede hym, and he came 
12to Doram, fleezinge by the se coost; for- 
sothe he wist, that yuels weren gadrid in 
i3to hym, and the oost forsoken hym. And 
Antiochus appliede on Doram, with an 
hundrid and twenti thousand of fi3tyng 
men, and eij3te thousand of horsmen ; 
14and he cumpaside the citee, and shippus 
fro the se camen to; and thei traueiliden 
the cite fro loud and se, and suffreden no 
isman for to entre, or go out. Forsothe 
Numenyus came, and thei that weren 
with hym, fro Rome, hauynge epistlis 
wryten to kyngis and cuntrees, in whiche 
\6these thingus weren conteyned. Lucius, 
consul of Romayns, to kyng Ptholome, 


restore it, as it was bifore; Y made a 
chosun multitude of oost, and Y made 
schippis of werre. Forsothe Y wole go4 
forth bi cuntrees, that Y do veniaunce on 
hem that distrieden oure cuntre, and that 
maden many citees desolat in my rewme. 
Now therfor Y ordeyne" to thee alle of-5 
fryngis, that kyngis bifore me forj3auen to 
thee, aud ‘what euere’ other 3iftis” thei for- 
3auen to thee; and Y suffre thee for toc 
make prynte*® of thin owne monei, in thi 
regiounY. Sotheli Y sauffre Jerusalem for7 
to be hooli and fre, and alle armeris that 
ben maad, and strengthis, that thou hast 
maad out, and that thou holdist, dwelle to 
thee; and al dette of the kyng, and thos 
that ben to comynge of kingis thingis, fro 
this? and* in to al tyme ben for3ouun to 
thee. Sotheli whanne we schulen welde9 
oure rewme, we schulen glorifie thee, and 
thi fole, and temple, with greet glorie, so 
that 3oure glorie be schewid in al erthe. 
In the hundrid jeer and foure and seuen- to 
tithe 3eer Antiok wente out in to the 
lond of his fadris, and alle oostis camen 
togidere to hym, so that fewe weren left 
with Trifon. And king Antiok pursuede 11 
hym, and Trifox cam in? to Doram, and 
fledde bi the see coost; for he wiste, that 12 
yuels weren gaderid on hym, and the oost 
forsook hym. And Antiok appliede onis 
Doram, with sixe score thousynde of fi3t- 
yuge men, and eiz3te thousynde of horse 
men; and he cumpasside the citee, and 14 
schippis camen fro the see; and thei tra- 
ueliden the citee bi lond and see, and suf- 
friden no man for to entre, ether go* out. 
Forsothe Numenyus cam, and thei thatis 
weren with hym, fro Rome, and hadden 
epistlis writun to kingis and cuntreis, in 
whiche these thingis weren conteyned. 
Lucius, ‘cheef gouernour’ of Romayns, to 16 
kyng Tolome, heelthe. Messangeris® of 17 
Jewis camen to vs, oure frendis, renulinge 


x 
Om. un. Ymy a pr.m. 2% ordeynede, or confermen, ® Om. nH. > regyoun, or cuntre u. © and 


inacH. 4 the temple mu. ¢ londis #. 


u ! ° ° . ° . 

ii a ha either conferme ¥ et plures. vin whateuer R, Wthingiss. *smyting cr. smyting, or 
le! ter plures] printe E _ plures. ¥ regioun, or euntre c et plures. Zthistymer 2? Om. Rr. > Om. 
ceteri, c i : 

ae to go N. consul r. consul, ether [or Evy] cheef gouernour c et ceteri. © Legatis cEPRY. 


Legatis, either messangeris FauiMNQsUXe. 


XV. 17-—29. 


i7helthe. Legatis of Jewis camen to vs, 
oure freendis, renulynge the former fren- 
ship and felawship, sent of Symont, 
prince of prestis, and of the peple of 
is Jewis. Sotheli thei brou3ten to and a 
golden sheeld of a thousand besauntis. 
i9 And so it pleside to vs for to wryte to 
kyngis and cuntrees, that thei do not 
yuels to hem, nether enpungnef hem, and 
her cytees, and her cuntrees, and that 
thei bere not help to men fi3tynge a3einus 
20hem. Forsothe it is seen to vs, for to 
2iresceyue of hem the sheeld. Therfore 
3if any men& of pestilence shuln flee fro 
the cuntree of hem to 3ou, bytake 3e 
hem to Symont, prince of prestis, that 
he venge in to hem after’ his lawe. 


22 These same thingus ben wryten to kyng. 


Demetrie, and Attalus, and Araba, and 
23 Arsaces, and in to alle cuntrees, and 
Sampsame, and Spartanyes, and Delo, 
and Myde, and Synone, and Carie, and 
Samyum, and Pamphiliam, and Lysiam, 
and Alacarnasum, and Rodum, and Pha- 
selida, and Reo, and Sydon, and Arado, 
and Gortynam, and Gnydum, and Cypre, 
24and Cyrenen. Forsothe ensaumple of 
these thei han wryten to Symont, prince 
25 of prestis, and to peple of Jewis. For- 
sothe Antiochus appliede tentus in Do- 
ram the secounde tyme, mouynge to it 
euermore hondis, and makyng engynes; 
and he closide to gidre Trifon, lest he 
26 wente out. And Symont sente to hym 
two thousand of chosen men, in to help, 
‘and syluer, and gold, and plenteuouse 
27 vessels; and he wolde not take. Bot he 
brake alle thingus that he couenantide 
with hym byfore, and alyenyde hym self 
28fro hym. And he sente to hym Athe- 
nobius, oon of his freendis, for to treete 
with hym, sayynge, 3e holden Joppen andi 
Gazaram, and the hee3 rocke that is in 
29 Jerusalem, cytees of my rewme; the 
coostis of hem je han waastid, and han 


I. MACCABEES. 


841 


the formere frendschip and _ felouschip, 
sent of Symoun, prince of prestis, and 
puplef of Jewis. Sotheli thei brou3ten 1s 
also a goldun scheeld of a thousyude be- 
sauntis. Therfor® it pleside to vs for to19 
write to kyngis and cuntreis, that thei do 
not yuels to hem, nether impugne hem, 
and! her citees, and her cuntreis, and theii 
bere not help to men fi3tynge a3ens hem. 
Forsothe it is seyn to vs, for to resseyue 20 
of hem the scheeld. Therfor if ony men* 21 
of pestilence schulen fle fro the cuntre of 
hem to 30u, bitake 3e hem to Symount, 
prince of prestis, that he do veniaunce on 
hem bi his lawe. These same thingis ben 22 
writun to kyng Demetrie, and Attalus, 
and Arabas, and Arsaces, and in to alle23 
cuntreis, and Sampsame, and Spartanyes, 
and Delo, and Mydo, and Sydone, and 
Carie, and Sanyum, and Pamfiliam, and 
Lisiam, and Alacarnasum, and Rodum, 
and Phaselida, and Choo, and Sidon, and 
Arodo, and Gortynam, and Gnydum, and 
Cipre, and Cirenen. Forsothe thei han 24 
writun ensaumple of these to Symount, 
prince of prestis, and to the puple of 
Jewis. Forsothe Antiok, the kyng, appli-2s 
ede tentis! in Doram the secounde tyme, 
mouynge to it ‘euere more™ hondis, and 
makynge engynes ; and he closide togi- 
dere Trifon, lest he wente out. And Sy-26 
mount sente to hym twei thousynde of 
chosun men, in to help, and siluer, and 
gold, and plenteuouse vessels; and he27 
wolde not take tho. But he brak alle 
thingis that he couenauntide with hym 
bifore, and alienyde him silf" fro hym. 
And he sente to hym Athenobius, oon of 28 
his frendis, for to trete with hym, and 
seide, 3e holden Joppe, and Gasaram, and 
the hi; tour that is in Jerusalem, citees of 
my rewme; 3e han wastid the coostis of29 
hem, and han do greet® distriyng in the 
lond, and with out coostis? of Judee 3e ben 
lordis bi many places in my rewme. Now 30 


frepugne a. Smanu. "“vypu. jin 4G prom. uK. 
fprincer. & Andtherforr. inn. ithattheir. mana. ! tentis, or [ether plures] oost £ et 
plures. oostis, ethir lentiss. ™Om.R. %Om.r. a greet R.  P the coostis Ru. 
5 P 


VOL. III. 


842 


don a grete veniaunce in the lond, and 
3e lordshipen by many places in my 
sorewme. Nowe therfore 3eue 3e the citees, 
whom! 3e occupieden, and tributis of 
places, ‘to whom" 3e lordshipen, out of 
sithe eendis of Judee. Or ellis 3eue 3e 
for hem fyfty talentis of syluer, and of 
distruyyng that 3e han distruyed, and of 
tributis of citees, other fifty talentis; or 
ellis we schuln cumme, and ouercumme 
32301. And Athenobyus, frend of the 
kyng, came in to Jerusalem, and see} 
the glorye of Symont, and cleernesse, in 
gold, and syluer, and plenteuouse apareil, 
and was astonyed; and he tolde to hym 
33wordis of the kyng. And Symont an- 
swerde, and seide to hym, Nether we 
token alyen londis!, nether with holden 
other mens thingus, bot eritage of oure 
fadris, that was weeldid sum tyme vn- 
34iustly of oure enmyes. Sothely we hau- 
ynge tyme chalengen the heritage of ™ 
350ure fadris. For why of Joppe and Ga- 
zara that thou axist, thet diden grete 
veniaunce” in the peple, and in® oure 
cuntree; of these we 3euen an hundrid 
sétalentis. And Athenobyus answerde not 
aword. Sothely he, turned a3ein with 
wrath to the kyng, tolde a3ein to hym 
these wordis, and the glorie of Symont, 
and alle thingus that he see3. And the 
kyng was wrothe with grete wrath. 
37 Forsothe Trifon flei3 by ship in to Orto- 
sssayda. And the kyng ordeynyde Cen- 
debeus, duyk of the se coost, and 3aue to 
so hym oost of fotmen® and horsmen; and 
comaundide hym for to moue_ tentis 
a3einus the face of Judee. And he co- 
maundide hym for to bilde Cedron, and 
to stoppe 3atis? of the’ citee, and ouer- 
cumme the peple; forsothe the kyng 
40 pursuede Trifon. And Cendebeus caine 
to Jamniam, and bigan for to terre the 
peple to wrath, and for to defoule Judee, 
and to make the peple caityf, and slea, 


lJoond acu. 
q Om. nu. 


k whiche x. 
P the gatis mu. 


i whiche 1, 
°° the footmen 4. 


q cite a pr.m, EFGUKMNPQSUX. 


I. MACCABEES. 


Mon K. 


T occupien R. 


XV. 30—-40. 


therfor 3yue 3e the citees’, which 3e ocu- 
pieden’, and tributis of places, of whiche 
3e ben lordis, out of endis of Judee. Ether 31 
ellis 3yue 3e for hem fyue hundrid talentis 
of siluer, and of distriyng that 3e han dis- 
tried, and of tributis of citees, othere fyue 
hundrid talentis; ether ellis we schulen 
come, and ouercome 3ou. And Atheno-32 
bius, frend of the kyng, cam in to Jeru- 
salem, and si3 the glorie of Symount, and 
clerenesse, in gold, and siluer, and plenteu- 
ouse apparel, and was astonyed; and telde 
to him the wordis of the kyng. And Sy-3s 
mount answeride, and seide to hym, Ne- 
ther we token alien lond, nether with- 
holden other mennus thingis, but eritage 
of oure fadris, that was weldid some time 
vniustly of oure enemies. Sotheli we hans 
tyme, and calengen the eritage of oure 
fadris. For whi of Joppe and Gasara3s 
that thou axist, thei diden greet veniaunce 
in oure puple, and cuntree; of these we 
3yuen an hundrid talentis. And Atheno-3¢ 
bius answeride not a word. Sotheli he 
turnede a3en with wraththe to the kyng, 
and telde ajen to hym these wordis, and 
the glorie of Symount, and alle thingis 
that he si3. And the king was wroth 
with greet wraththe. Forsothe Trifon37 
flei bi schip ‘in to’ Ortosaida. And the3s 
kyng ordeynede Cendebeus, duyk of the 
see coost, and 3af to him oost of foot men 
and horse men; and comaundide him for 39 
to moue tentis ajens the face of Judee; 
and comaundide hym for to bilde Cedron*, 
and stoppe the 3atis of the cite, and ouer- 
come the puple; forsothe the kyng pur- 
suede Trifon. And Cendebius cam _ to4o 
Jamnyam, and bigan for to terre the pu- 
ple to wraththe, and for to defoule Judee, 
and make tle puple caitif, and sle, and 
bilde Cedron. And he settide there horse 41 
men and oost, that thei schulden gon out, 
and schulden walke bi weie of Judee, as 
the kyng ordeynede tot hym. 


1 plage, or veniaunce #. © Om. G pr.m. 
g 1 


Stor prem. *tOm. BR prim. 


* that is, a 
strong hold f 
namid so, for it 
was set on the 
stronde of Ce- 
dron, that hi 
this he mi3te 
bettere im- . 
pugne Judee. 


Lire here. KaUe { 


XV. 41——XVI. 10. 


4tand to beelde Cedron. And he sette 
there horsmen and oost, that thei gon 
out shulden walke by the’ waye of Judee, 
as the kyng ordeynyde hym. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 And Joon styede fro Gazara, and tolde 
to Symont, his fadir, what thingus Cen- 
2debeus dide in the peple of hem. And 
Symont clepide his two eldre sonnys, 
Judas and Joon, and saith to hem, Y, and 
my bretheren, and the* hous of my fadre, 
han ouercummen the enmyes of Yrael, 
fro 3ongthe til in to this day; and it 
hadde prosperite in oure hondis, for to 
3delyuere Yrael sumtymes. Forsothe 
nowe I haue oldid, bot be 3e in my stede, 
and of my brother, and 3e gon out, fiz3te 


for oure fole; forsothe help of heuen be 


4with 3ou. And he cheese of the cuntree 
twenti thousand of fijtynge men, and 
horsmen; and thei wenten out to Cende- 
sbeus, and slepten in Modyn. And thei 
rysen erly, and wenten in to the feeld, 
and loo! a copyous oost in to metyng to 
hem, of fotemen and horsmen; and the 
flood of reyn water was bitwix the myd- 
6dis of hem. And he mouede to the tentis 
a3einus thet face of hem, he and his pe- 
ple, and he see3 the peple tremblynge to 
passe ouer the streme of reyn, and he 
passide ouer the first; and men see3en 
z7hym, and passiden after hym. And he 
lefte the peple and horsmen in mydil of 
fotemen ; forsothe the" rydyng of aduer- 
asaries was ful plenteuouse. And thei 
cryeden an hee3 with holy trumpis; and 
Cendebeus is conuertid in to flizt, and his 
oost’, and many of hem felle woundid ; 
sothely the residues fledden in to the 
gSstrengthe. Thanne* Judas, the brother 
of Joon, is woundid ; forsothe Joon pur- 
suede hem, til he came to Cedrona, whomyY 
Whe beeldide. And thei fledden ‘vnto” 
toures, that weren in the* feeldis of Azo- 


I. MACCABEES. 


843 


CAP. XVI, 


And Joon stiede fro Gasara, and telde1 
to Symount, his fader, what thingis Cen- 
debius dide in the puple of hem. And2 
Symount clepide his tweyne eldere sones, 
Judas and Joon, and seide to hem, Y, and 
my britheren, and the hous of my fadir, 
han ouercomun the enemyes of Israel, fro 
jongthe til in to this dai; and it hadde 
prosperite in oure hondis, for to delyuere 
Israel sum times. Forsothe now Y haues 
eldid, but be 3e in my stide, and of my 
brother, and go 3e out, and fizte for oure” 
fole; forsothe helpe of heuene be with 
jou. And he chees of the cuntrei twenti4 
thousynde of fi3tinge men, and horse men; 
and thei wenten out to Cendebeus, and 
slepten in Modyn. And thei risiden’s 
eerli, and wenten in to the” feeld, and lo! 
a copiouse oost cam in to metyng* ofY 
hem, of foot men and horse men; and a 
rennynge flood was bitwixe the myddis 
of hem?. And he and his puple mouedes 
the scheltruns ajens the* face of hem, and 
he si3 the puple tremblynge® to passe ouer 
the streeme of water, and he passide ouer 
the firste; and men sijen hym, and _ pass- 
iden aftir hym. And he departide the7 
puple and horse men in the myddil of foot 
men; forsothe the multitude of horse 
men of aduersaries was ful plenteuouse. 
And thei crieden an hi3 with hooli trum-s 
pis; and Cendebeus was turned in to fli3t, 
and his oost, and many of hem fellen 
woundid ; sotheli the residues fledden in 
to strengthe. Thanne Judas, the brother 9 
of Joon, was woundid; forsothe Joon pur- 
suede hem, til Cendebeus cam to Ce- 
drona, which he bildide. And thei fled-10 
den til to touris, that weren in the feeldis 


rOmn. Om. tOm.nu. tOm. Hu. Vtentesu. wWOm.nu. * And, Ywhiche w. 2 tom. 
a Om. nu. 

Ugzoure R. Vrisen F. resin eEPY. WOm.csec.mu. *themetyngN. YJ to CEFGHIKMPQRS sup. 
ras.Uxe. %mensEy. ® Om. cEGnuNegsuy. » tremble n. 


5PQ 


844 


tis, and he brente hem with fijr; and 
there fellen of hem two thousand of men; 
aud he turnyde a3ein in to Judee in pees. 
11And Ptholome, sone of Aboby, was or- 
deynyd duyk in the feeld of Jerico, and 
izhe hadde myche syluer and gold; for- 
sothe he weddide the dou3ter of the? 
ishee3ist prest. And the hert of hym is 
reysid, and he wolde weelde the cuntree; 
aud he thou3te gyle ajeinus Symont and 
this sonys, for to do awey hem. For- 
sothe Symont walkynge by citees that 
weren in the cuntree of Judee, and ber- 
ynge the besynesse of hem, came doun in 
to Jericho, he, and Mathatias, his sone, 
and Judas, in the hundrid 3eer and seuen 
and seuentithe, in the elleuenthe monethe; 
isthis is thee moneth Sabath. And the 
sone of Abobi resceyuyde hem in to a 
litil strengthe, that is clepid Doth, with 
gijle, whom? he beeldide; and he made 
to hem a grete feest, and hidde men 
isthere. And whan Symont was ful of 
drinke, and his sonys, Ptholome roose 
with his, ‘and token her armers®, and 
entriden in to the feest, and slewen hym, 
and his two sonnys, and sume children 
ijof hym. And he did a grete disceyte in 
Yrael, and jeeldidef yuels for goodis. 
i8 And Ptholome wrote these thingus, and 
sente to the kyng, for to sende to hym 
an oost in to help, and he shulde bitake 
to hym the cuntre and citees of hem, and 
igtributis. And he sente other in to Ga- 
zara, for to do awey Joon; and the tri- 
bune sente epistlis, that thei shulden 
cume to hym, and he shulde 3eue to hem 
2osyluer, aud gold, and 3iftis. And he 
sente other, for to ocupie Jerusalem, and 
2ithe mount of the temple. And summan 
rennynge byfore tolde to Joon in Ga- 
zara, for his fader perishide, and his 
bretheren, and for he hath sente and 
2ethee for to be slayn. Forsothe as he 
herde, he dredde preteli; and he cau3te 


bOm. nu. ¢ Om. uch. 


candr. 4QOm. R pr.m. 


Shismenr, bhemy. iOmr. kOm.r. 


I. MACCABEES. 


d whiche H. 


XVI. 11—22. 


of Azotus, and he brente hem with fier ;- 
and ther fellen of hem two thousynde of 
men, and he turnede ajen in to Judee in 
pees. And Tolome, the sone of Abobi,11 
was ordeyned duyk in the feld of Jerico, 
and hadde myche siluer and gold; for®12 
he? weddid the douster of the hizeéste 
preest. And the herte of hym was reisid, 13 
and he wolde welde the cuntre; and he 
thou3te gile a3ens Symount and his sones, 
for to do awei hem. Forsothe Symount 14 
walkide bi citees that weren in the cuntre 
of Judee, and bar bisynesse of hem, and 
cam doun in to Jerico, he®, and Matatias, 
his sone, and Judas, in the hundrid 3eer 
and seuene and seuentithe, in the en- 
lenenthe monethe; this is the monethe 
Sabath**, And the sone of Abobi res-15 
seyuede him in to a litil strengthe, that is 
clepid Doth, with gile, which he bildide; 
and made to hem a greet feeste, and hidde 
men ther. And whanne Symount was ful 16 
of drynk, and hise sones, Tolome roos 
with hisf, and token her armeris, and en- 
triden in to the feeste, and slowen hym, 
and hise twei sones, and summe children 
of hym*, And he dide a greet disseit in17 
Israel, and 3eldide yuels for goodis. And18 
Tolome wroot these thingis, and sente to 
the kyng, for to sende to hym an oost in 
to help, and he schulde bitake to hym the 
cuntre and citees of hem, and tributis. 
And he sente othere in to Gasara, for to 19 
do awei Joon; and to the tribunes he 
sente epistlis, that thei schulden come to 
hym, and he schulde 3yue to hem siluer, 
and gold, and 3iftis. And he sente other 20 
men, for to ocupie Jerusalem, and the 
mount of the temple. And stm man ran 2! 
bifore, and told to Joon in Gasara, for! 
that his fadir perischide, and his bri- 
theren, and that* he sente that thou also 
be slayn. Forsothe as he herde, he won-22 
dride greetli; and he cau3te the men that 
camen for! to leese hym, and he slow 


faspyes H. f 3eelde uw. 


fandher f Sete that is, Januarye 1e marg. Sebeth, that is, Jeneuer n. 
Om. rR. 


* that is, Feb- 
ruari. AK. It 
shal be wretin 
Sebeth, and an- 
swerith to Ja- 
nuarie. Lire 
ere. EPQUY. 





XVI. 23, 24. 


the men that came for to leese hym, and 
slew3 hem; forsothe he knewe, for? thei 

23sou3ten for to leese hym. And other 
thingus of Joons wordis, and of his ba- 
teils, and good vertues, in whiche he 
dide strongly, and of beeldyng of wallis, 
whom he fully maade, and of thingus 

21don of hym, loo! theese ben writen in 
the boke of days of his presthod, sithen 
he was maad prince of prestis aftir his 
fadir. 


Here endith the book of the firste 
Judas Machabeus, and bigyuneth the 
book of secunde Judas Machabeus*, 


& that . 


mand lo! Epy. 0 the book Rx sec. 2m. 
and here bygynneth the secounde book. ¥. 


I. MACCABEES. 845 


hem; for he knew, that thei sou3ten for 
to leese hym. And othere thingis of2: 
Joons wordis, and of his batels, and good 
vertues, in whiche he dide strongli, and 
of bildyng of wallis, whiche he fulli made, 
and of thingis don of him™, lo! these ben 24 
writun in book® of daies of his presthod, 
sithen he was maad prince of prestis aftir 
his fadir. 


Here endith the jirste book of Macha- 
beis, and here bigynneth the secounde 
book of Machabeis°. 


bh No final rubric in aen. 


© From cqux. Here endith the firste book of Machabeis, 
Here endith the firste book of Machabeis, and bigynneth a 


prolog on the secounde book of Machabeis. c. Here endeth the firste book of Machabeis, and bigynneth 
the secounde. uinRe. Here endeth the firste book of Macabeus ; se now the secound book of Macabeus. k. 
Here endith Machabeus i., and here bigynnet h Machabeus ii. m. Here endith the firste book of Maca- 
beis, and heere bygynueth the secunde Macabeis.s. No final rubric in arry. 


Il. MACCABEES. 





The book of the secunde Machabeus*. 


CAP. 1s 


1 To bretheren, that ben by Egipt, Jewis, 
helthe sayen bretheren, that ben in Jeru- 
salem, Jewis, and that ben in the? cuntree 

2o0f Judee, and good pees. God do wel to 
jou, and haue mynd of his testament, 
that he spake to Abraham, Ysaac, and 

3Jacob, his trewe seruauntis; and 3eue 
herte to jou alle, that 3e wirshipe hym, 
and do the wille of hym with grete herte 
sand wilful ynwytt. Opene he 3o0ur herte 
in his lawe, and his heestis, and make he 
spees; heere he graciously 3our preyers, 
and be recounseilid to 3ou, nether forsake 
630u in yuel tyme. And nowe we ben 
zhere preyinge for 3ou. Regnynge Deme- 
trie in the hundrid 3eer and sixti® and 
nynthe, we Jewis han writen to jou in 
tribulacioun and fersnesse, that came 
aboue to vs in these 3eeris, sithen Jason 
wente oute of the holy lond and rewme. 
sThei brenten the 3ate, and shedden out 
innocent blood; and we preyeden to the 
Lord, and we ben graciously herd, and 
we han offrid sacrifice, and cleene flour, 
and han tendid lanterns, and han putte 
oforth looues. And nowe vse 3e the days 
10 of Senephegie, of the moneth Casleu. In 
the hundred 3eer and ei3te and ei3tithe, 
the peple that is in Jerusalem and in 
Judee, and the senate, and Judas, to 


& Here bi 
inn. %&Om. Hn. ¢ sixtithe on. 


a From rpy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
fOm.r. £ Om. r. 


Here byginneth the seconde book of 
Macabeys*. 


CAPS: 


To britheren Jewis, that ben scaterzd>, 
thorou3; Egipt, britheren, that ben in Jeru- 
salem, Jewis, and that ben in the cuntre 
of Judee, seien heelthe and good pees. 
God do wel to 3ou, and haue mynde of2 
his testament, that he spak to Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, that ben of the noumbre 
of his trewe seruauntis; and 3yue he herte3 
to 30u alle, that 3e worschipe hym, and do 
the wille of hym with greet herte and 
wilful soule. Opene he 3oure herte in his 
lawe, and in hise heestis, and make he 
pees; here he graciousli 3oure preieris,s5 
and be recounceld to 30u, nether forsake* 
jou in yuel tyme. And now we ben heres 
preiynge for 30u. While Demetrie regneth 7 
in the hundrid 3eer and sixtithe’ and 
nynthe®, we Jewis han writun to 3ou in 
tribulacioun and fersnesse, that cam aboue 
to vs in these 3eeris, and‘ sithen Jason 
wente out of the hooli lond and rewme. 
Thei brenten the 3ate, and schedden outs 
innocent blood; and we preieden to the 
Lord, and we ben graciousli herd, and we 
han offrid sacrifice, and clene flour, and 
han tendid lanternes, and han put forth 
looues. And now make 3e solempne thes 
daies of Cenefegye, ‘ether clensyng of the 
temple®, of the monethe Caslew*. In the 10 that is, No- 
hundrid 3eer and eiz3te and eiztithe, the “™"* * 


gynneth the secounde boke of Machabeorum. 4. Machabee the secunde. G. No initial rubric 


bOm.R. © forsake he 1x. 4 sixtirr. © nyne R. 


Y. 1f—=—20. 


Aristoble, maister of Tholome, kyng, 
that is of the kyn of oyntyd _prestis, 
and to hem that ben in Egypt, Jewis, 
ithelthe of soule, and helthe of body. We 
delyuerd of God fro grete perilis, don 
thankyngis to hym hugely, as we that 
izhan fou3ten ajeinus siche a kyng. For- 
sothe he made to® buyle out of Persis 
hem that fou3ten a3einus vs and! the holy 
iscitee. For whi whan in Perse was the 
duyke hym self, and with hym al the 
oost, he felle in the temple of Nauee, 
disceyuyd bi the counseil of the prest of 
14 Nauee. Forsothe as to dwellyng with 
hym Antiochus came to the place, and 
his freendis®’, and for to take myche 
ismoneys by name of dower. And whan 


prestis of Nauee hadden putte hem. 


forth, and he with fewe entride with 
ynne cumpas of the temple, thei clos- 
isiden the temple, whanne Antiochus 
had entride. And the priuy entree of 
the temple opnyd, thei sendinge stoons 
smyten the duyk, and hem that weren 
with hym, and departiden lym mele; and 
17the hedis gird off, casten forth out. Bi 
alle thingis blessid God, that bitoke vn- 
ispitous men. Therfore we to makynge 
puryfiyng, or clensynge, of the temple, 
in the" fyue and twentithe day of the 
moneth Casleu, ledden needful for to sig- 
nyfie to 30u, that and 3e do the day of 
Senephegie, and the day of fijr, that is 
3ouen, whan Neemye offride sacrifices, 
and the temple and the: auter bildid. 
19For whi whan oure fadris weren ledde 
in to Persis, prestis that thanne weren 
wirshipers of God, hidden priuyly fijr 
taken of the auter, in a valey, wher was 
a deep pitt, and drye; and therynne 
thei kepten it, so that the place was 
20 vnknowen to alle men. Forsothe whanne 
many 3ceris hadden passid, and it pleside 
to God that Neemye was sente -fro the 
kyng of Persis, he sente the sonys sonys* 


efortou. fin G prom Hn. 


8 of oynted re. 1 felde c et alit. 


smyten F. 
° and prestis F. 


Pther, dOm.y. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


& frende m. 


i the councel Rr. 
m purifiyng, or [ether plures] clensinge EFGNIKMNPQSUXYe. purifiyng R. 


847 


puple that is in Jerusalem and in Judee, 
and the elde men, and Judas, to Aristoble, 
maister of Tolome, kyng, that is of the 
kyn anoyntid® prestis, and to hem that 
ben in Egipt, Jewis, helthe of soule, and 
helthe of bodi. We delyuered of Godi1 
fro grete perelis, don thankyngis to hym 
hugely, as we that han fon3ten a3ens sich 
akyng. For he made for to buyle out of tz 
Persis hem that fou3ten ajens vs and the 
hooli citee. For whi whanne the duyk1is 
hym silf was in Persis, and with hym a 
greet oost, he felle® in the temple of 
Nauee, and was disseyued bi councel! of 
the prest of Nauee. Forsothe Antiok cam t+ 
to the place as to dwellynge with hym, 
and his frendis, and for to take many 
richessis bi name of dower. And whanne 1s 
prestis of Nauee haddeu put forth tho, 
and he with fewe entride with ynne the 
cumpas of the temple, thei closiden the 
temple, whanne Antiok hadde entrid. And. 
whanne the pryuy entre of the temple 
was openyd, thei threwen* stoonys, and 
smytiden! the duik, and hem that weren 
with hym, and thei departiden lememeel ; 
and whanne the heedis weren gird of, thei 
castiden out forth. Bi alle thingis blessid 17 
be God, that bitook vnpitouse men, Ther- 16 
for we to makynge clensyng™ of the tem- 
ple, in the fyue and twentithe dai of the 
monethe Caslew*, ledden nedeful for to * that is, No- 
signefie to 30u, that and 3e do also the dai es 
of Scenofegie, and the dai of fier, that was 
j3ouun, whanne Neemye offride sacrifices, 
after that the temple and auter" weren 
bildid. For whi whanne oure fadris weren !9 
led in to Persis, prestis® that thanne 
weren worschiperis of God, hidden priueli 
fier takun of the auter, in a? valei, where 
was a1 deep pit and drie; and there ynne 
thei kepten it, so that the place was vn- 
knowun to alle men. Forsothe whanne 20 
many 3eeris hadden passid, and it pleside 
to God that Neemye was sent fro the 
k Om. 1. 


hOm nu. ! Om. m. 


1 smetin EPpy. 


k sou3ten F. senten celeri. 
n the auter KR. 


848 


of! prestis that hidden, for to seeke fijre ; 
and as thei teelden to vs, thei foonden 
21 not fijre, bot fatt water. And he comaund- 
ide hem for to drawe, and brynge to 
hym. And Neemye, prest, comaundide 
the sacrifices, that weren put vpon™, for 
to be spreynt with this water, and the 
trees, and tho that weren putte aboue. 
22 And as this was don, and the tyme came 
to, in whiche the sunne shoon a3ein, that 
byfore was in cloude, a grete fijr is kyn- 
23dlid, so that alle men wondriden. For- 
sothe alle the prestis maden preyer, whijl 
the sacrifice was eendid; Jonathas bygyn- 
2zsnynge, other forsothe answerynge. And 
the preyer of Neemye was hauynge this 
manere. Lord God, of alle thingis maker 
of nou3t, dreedful and stronge, iust and 
mercyful, whiche aloon art a® good kyng, 
25 aloon 3euynge, aloone iust,and almi3ti, and 
with out bigynnyng and eend, whiche 
delyuerist Yrael fro° al yuel, whiche mad- 
ist chosen faders, and halewidist hem; 
26 take thou sacrifice for al thy peple Yrael, 
az7and keepe thi part, and halewe. Gadre 
oure scateryng?, delyuere hem that seruen 
to heithen men, and biholde thou4 dis- 
pisid men, and maad abomynable, that 
heithen men wite, that thou art oure 
2sGod. Tourment thou men oppressynge 
29 vs, and doynge dispite in pride. Ordeyn 
thi peple in thin holy place, as Moyses 
sosaide. Forsothe prestis sungen ympnys, 
aityl the sacrifice was eendid. Forsothe 
whan the sacrifice was eendid, Neemye 
comaundide the more stoons for to be 
3eshed on™ of the residue water; whiche 
thing as was don, flawme is kyndlid of 
hem, bot it is waastid of the li3t, that 
s3ajein shynyde of the auter. Forsothe as 
the thing is knowen, it is tolde to the 
kyng of Peris, that in the place in whiche 
tho prestis that weren translatid, hadden 
hidde fijr, water apperide, of whiche 
Neemye and thei that weren with hym, 


loftho Gsee.m.H. ™onH, Om. HK. 
F ypon H, 

q the fyrceteri. ‘forty. 8 the prest EKPy. 
seatering c et plures. WOm.1. * knowen F. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


© of AGH. 


I, 21—33. 


kyng of Persis, he sente the sones sones 
of tho prestis that hidden, for to seke fier4; 
and as thei telden to vs, thei founden not 
fier, but fat water. And he comaundide21 
hem ‘for to' drawe, and brynge to hym. ° 
And Neemye, preest’, comaundide the sa- 
crifices, that weren put on, for to be 
spreynt with the water, tho and the trees, 
and‘ tho thingis that weren put aboue. 
And as this was don, and the tyme cam, 22 
in which the sunne schon ajen, that bifore 
was in cloude, a greet fier was kyndlid, so 
that alle men wondriden. Forsothe alle2s 
prestis maden preier, while the sacrifice 
was endid; and Jonathas bigan, and othere 
forsothe answeriden. And the preier of24 
Neemye was hauynge this maner. Lord 
God, maker of nou3t of alle thingis, drede- 
ful and strong, iust and merciful, which 
aloone art good kyng, aloone 3yuynge, 25 
aloone iust, and almy3ti, and with out 
bigynnyng and ende, which delyuerist Is- 
rael fro al yuel, which madist fadris 
chosin, and halewidist hem; take thou 26 
sacrifice for al thi puple Israel, and kepe 
thi part, and halewe. Gadere oure" scat- 27 
eryng’, delyuere hem that seruen to he- 
thene men, and biholde thou dispisid men, 
and maad abliomynable, that hethene men 
wite, that thou art oure God. Turmente 28 
thou men oppressynge vs, and doynge 
dispit in pride. Ordeyne thi puple in thin 29 
hooli place, as Moises seide. Forsothe 30 
prestis sungen ympnes, til the sacrifice 
was endid. Forsothe whanne the sacri-31 
fice was endid, Neemye comaundide the 
more stoonys for to be bisched of the 
residue watir; and as this thing was don, 32 
flawme was kyndlid of hem, but it was 
wastid of the li3t, that ajen schynede of 
the auter. Forsothe after that” the thing 33 
was knowun, it was teld* to the kyng of 
Persis, that in the place in which the 
prestis that weren translatid, hadden hid 
fier, water apperide, of which Neemye 


P dispersyoun, or scaterynge H. 4 thou to H. 


tofn. Youtr. VY dispercioun, ether [or EPY] 


Y tho r. 


I. 34——I1. 8. 


34clensiden sacrifices. Forsothe the kyng 
byholdynge and diligently examyninge 
the thing, made a temple to hym, for to 

35proue that thing that was don. And 
whanne he hadde proued, he 3aue many 
goodis to prestis, and other with outen 
noumbre; and takynge with his hond, 

36he 3aue to hem. Forsothe Neemye clep- 
ide this place Nepthar, that is interpretid® 
clensyng; forsothe anentis many it** is 
clepid Nephi. 


Cert. 


1 Forsothe it is founden in dyscryuyngis, 
or wrytyngis, of Jeremye, thet prophete, 
that he comaundide hem that passiden 
ouer, for to take fijr, as it is signyfied, 
and as he bade to men passynge ouer, o7 

2caitif. And he 3aue to hem the lawe, 
lest thei forjaten the heestis of the Lord ; 
and that thei shulden not erre" in soulis, 
or vndirstondingis, seeynge golden and 
sylueren symulacris, and ournementis of 

3hem. And he sayinge other siche thingus 
monestide, that thei shulden not remoue 
4the lawe fro her herte. Sothely it was 
in that wrytyng, hou the prophete badde 
the tabernacle, and the’ hucche, or ark, 
for to folowe with hem, Goddis answer 
maad to hym, til he wente out in to the 
hill in whiche Moyses ascendide, and 
5see3 the eritage of God. And Jereinye 
cummynuge foonde there a place of a¥ 
den, and brou3te yn thidir the tabernacle, 
and the* hucche, and theY auter of en- 
6cense, and stoppide the dore. And sume 
men camen to gidre that folewiden, for 
to marke the place to hem, and thei 
7mi3ten not fynde. Forsothe as Jeremye 
knewe, he blamynge hem saide, that the 
place shal be vnknowen, til God gadre 
the congregacioun togidre of peple, and 
sbe maad mercyful% And thanne the 


8 interpretid, or expounned Hu. 
wOm.cu. *Om.u. Y Om. u. 
* biholdyng Rr. z Om. R. 


Y examynyng R. 


{ether plures] swritingis eFGuMKMNEQsUXYe. discryuynges R. 
€ answeryng CEFIMPMU. 
g arke ceFHIPR. hucche, either arke Gas. whizcche kK. 


[or EFHPYe] cailif CRFGNIKMNPQSUXYe. 
arke rurKMNasuUXxe. hucche, ether arke a. 


whicche, either arke mNuX. whicchee. 4hebec. i helpeful, ether [or Epy] merciful c et plures. 


5aQ 


VOL. HI. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


88 Om. G pr. m. K. 
Zhelthful, or merciful 1, 


8 Om. cur. or fo undirstonde EPY. 


849 


and thei that weren with hym clensiden 
sacrifices. Forsothe the kyng bihelde*ss. 
and diligentli examynedeY the thing, and 
made a temple to hym, for to preue that 
thing that was don. And whanne hess 
hadde preued, he 3af many goodis to prestis, 
and othere 3iftis; and he took with his 
hoond, and he? 3af to hem. Forsothese 
Neemye clepte this place Nepthar, that is 
interpretid, ‘e/her eaxpowned ®, clensyng ; 
forsothe anentis many it is clepid Nephi. 


CAP. II. 


Forsothe it is foundun in writyngis® of: 
Jeremye, the° profete, that he comaundide 
hem that passiden ouer, for to take fier, as 
it is signefied, and as he bad to men ‘pass- 
ynge ouer*, And he jaf to hem the lawe, 2 
leste thei for3aten the heestis of the Lord ; 
and that thei schulden not erre in soulis, 
seynge goldun and siluerne symylacris, 
and ourneimentis of hem. And he seides 
othere siche thingis, and monestide, that 
thei schulden not remoue the lawe fro her 
herte. Sotheli it was in that writyng,4 
hou the profete bad, bi Goddis answere® 
maad to hym, that the tabernacle and ‘the 
arkef folowe with hem, til he wente out in 
to the hil in which Moises ascendide, and 
si3 the eritage of God. And Jeremye cam, 5 
and foond ther a place of denne, and 
brou3te in thidur the tabernacle, and ‘the 
arke’, and auter of encense, and stoppide 
the dore. And sumimen camen togidere« 
that folewiden, for to marke the place to 
hem, and mi3ten not fynde. Forsothe as; 
Jeremye knew, he blamede hem, and seide, 
that the place schal be vuknowun, til God 
gadere the congregacioun of puple, and 
be> maad helpful, And thanne the Lord s 
schal schewe these thinges, and the ma- 
ieste of the Lord schal appere; and a 
cloude schal be, as and* to Moises it was 


t Om, un. “ oute erre G pr. a. H. v On. 1. 


> discriuingis, or 
¢ Om. cEFHNPX. 4 passinge oner, ether 
f arke cerry. whichche, either 


k Om.1 


850 Il. MACCABEES. 


Lord shal shewe these thingus, and ma- 
ieste® of the Lord shal appere; and a cloude 
shal be, as and to Moyses was schewid, 
and as whan Salomon axide, that the 
place shulde be halewid to grete God. 
9Forsoth greetli he tretid wysdom, and 
as hauynge wysdom he offride sacrifice 
of halewyng, and of parfourmyng of the 
lotemple. As and Moyses preyide to the 
Lord, and fijr came doun fro heuen, and 
wastide the brent sacrifice; as and Salo- 
mon preyide, and fijr came doun fro 
heuen, and wastide the brent sacrifices”. 
iAnd Moyses saide, For that it is not 
clensid, that was for synne, and it is 
12waastid. Also and Salomon in ei3te days 
13 wirshipide the halewyng. Forsothe and 
these same thingis weren born in discrip- 
ciouns, and the almeries of Neemye ; 
and he makynge a litil bible, gadride of 
cuntrees bokis, and of prophetis, and of 
Dauid, and epistlis of kyngus, and of 
143iftis. Also sothely and Judas gadride 
alle tho thingus whiche he lernyde by 
bateil, that bifelle to vs, and thei? ben 
1sanentus vs. Therfore 3if 3e desiren these, 
16sende 3e whiche shuln bere to 30u. And 
so we to doynge purifyyng, han write to 
jou; therfore 3e shuln do wel, 3if 3e 
17shuln do these days. Forsothe God that 
delyuerde his peple, and 3eeldide® his 
eritage to alle, and‘ rewme, and prest- 
ishod, and halewyng, as he byhei3te in 
the lawe, we hopen that soone he shal 
haue mercy of® vs, and shal gadre fro 
19vuder heuen in to the holy place; for- 
sothe he delyuerde vs fro grete perelis, 
20and purgide the place. Sothely of Judas 
Machabeus, and his bretheren, and of 
purifying of the grete temple, and of 
2\halewyng of the auter; bot and of the 
bateilis, that perteynen to noble Antioch, 
22and to his sone Eupator; and of 1i3t- 
nyngus that ben maad of heuen, to hem 
that strongly diden for Jewis, so that 


®the mageste nu. » sacrifice zu. © Om. u. 


lthe greete 1. ™ Om. 1. 


n made EKNPXY. 
noble x. 


II. 9-22. 


schewid, and as whanne Salomon axide, 
that the place schulde be halewid to greet! 
God, this cloude schewide; and as hau-9 
ynge wisdom he offryde sacrifice of halew- 
yng, and of performyng of the temple. As 10 
and Moises preiede to the Lord, and fier cam 
doun fro heuene, and wastide the brent 
sacrifice; as and Salomon preiede, and 
fier cam doun fro heuene, and wastide the 
brent sacrifice. And Moises seide, For 
that it is not clensid, that was for synne, 
aud it was wastid. Also and Salomon in 12 
eij3te daies made solempne the halewyng. 
Forsothe and these same thingis weren 13 
put yn™ in discripciouns, and exposiciouns 
of Neemye; and as he makide" a litle 
bible, and gaderide bookis of cuntrees, 
and bookis® of profetis, and of Dauid, and 
epistlis of kyngis, and of? 3iftis. Also 1s 
sotheli and Judas gaderide alle tho thingis 
which he lernyde bi batel, that bifelle to 
vs, and thei ben anentis vs. Therfor if is 
3e disiren these, sende 3e whiche schulen 
bere to 30u. Therfor we to4 doynge puri-16 
fiyng, han write to 30u; therfor 3e schulen 
do wel, if 3e schulen do these daies. For-17 
sothe it is God that delyueride his puple, 
and 3eldide his eritage to alle, and rewme, 
and presthod, and halewyng, as he bihi3te ts 
in the lawe, we hopen that soone he 
schal haue merci on vs, and schal gadere 
fro vndur heuene in to the hooli place; 
for he delyuerede vs fro grete perelis, and 1 
purgide the place. Sotheli of Judas Ma-20 
chabeus, and hise britheren, and of purifi- 
yng of the greet temple, and of halewyng 
of the auter; but and of the" batels, that 21 
perteynen to Antiok noble’, and his son 
Eupator; and of li3tnyngis that weren 22 
maad fro heuene, to hem that strongli 
diden for Jewis, so that, whanne thei 
weren fewe, thei auengiden al the cuntre, 
and dryuun an hethene multitude, and 23 
rekyueriden the most famouse temple in 
al the world; and delyueriden the citee, 


dthei that x. ¢3eelden. fthe nu. § on un. 


°oOm rn. POm.nx. 9Om.1n «tOmR. 8 the 





TT ea oe 


II, 23—32. 


whan thei weren fewe, thei vengeden al 
the cuntree, and dryuen an heithen mul- 
3% titude, and rekyuerden the most famous 
temple in al the world; and thei dely- 
uerden the citee, that and lawis that 
weren don awey weren restorid; the 
Lord maad helpful to hem, with al pesi- 
21bletee. And so we temptiden, or as- 
sayeden, for to abregge ‘in to" 00 boke, 
thingus comprehendid of Jason of Cyre- 
25nen in fyue bookis. Forsothe we by- 
holdynge the multitude of bookis, and 
hardnesse, to men willynge for to assaile, 
or bygynne, the tellyngis of stories, for 
26 multitude of thingus, sothely we curiden, 
or hadden bysynesse, that it were delec- 
tacioun, or dykyng, of ynwitt to men 
willynge for to reede; forsothe the stu- 
dyouse, that thei mi3ten li3tlyer bytake 
to mynde; forsothe to alle men reedyng 
27profit be 3onen. And sothely we token 
to ‘oure selfi that resceyueden this werk, 
bi cause of abreggyng, not 1i3t* traueil, 
bot sothely a needefull of wakyngis and 
28o0f swote. As these that maken redy a 
feest, and seekyn for to plese to the wille 
of other men, for grace of many men, 
29we susteynen wilfully traneile; forsothe 
grauntynge the trewthe of alle autours, 
bot we oure self studyinge to shortnesse, 
svafter the fourme 3ouen. Forsothe as it 
is for to cure, or bisic, to the wri3t of 
the! new hous, of al the beeldyng; to 
hym sothely that bisieth for to peynte, 
tho thingus ben to be sou3t out, that ben 
couenable to ournyng; so it is to be 
sigessid and in vs. Forsothe for to gedir 
vndirstondyng, aud ordeyne word, and ful 
bisili for to enquere alle partis of the 
storie, eche bi. hem self, acordith to an 
3zauctour; forsothe for to sue shortnesse 
of sayinge, and for to eschewe out su- 
yngus of thingus, is to be grauntid to the 


Il. MACCABEES. 


851 


that and‘ lawis that weren don a wei 
weren restorid; for the Lord was maad 
helpful to hem, with al pesiblete. And 24 
also we asaieden" for to abregge in o 
book, thingis comprehendid of Jason of 
Cirenen in fyue bookis. Forsothe we bi-25 
helden’ the multitude and hardnesse of 
bookis, to men willynge for to bigynne 
the tellyngis of stories, for multitude of 
thingis; and sotheli we hadden bisinesse, 26 
that it were likyng* of soule to men will- 
ynge for to rede; forsothe to studiouse 
men, that thei mi3ten li3there bitake to 
mynde ; forsothe that to alle men redynge 
profit be jouun. And sotheli we token to27 
vs silf that resseyueden this werk, bi cause 
of abreggyng, not esi trauel, but sotheli a 
werk ful of wakyngesY and swoot. Asee 
these that maken redi a feeste, and seken 
for to plese to” the wille of othere men, 
for grace of many men, we suffren wilfuli 
tranel; forsothe we graunten the treuthe 29 
of alle autoris, but we vs* silf studien to 
schortnesse**, bi the fourme 3ounn. For-30 
sothe as it is to the cheef carpenter” of ‘a 
newe® hous, to be bisie of al the bildyng ; 
to him sotheli that bisieth for’ to peynte, 
tho thingis ben to be sou3t out, that ben 
couenable to ournyng ; so it is to be gessid 
also in vs. Forsothe for to gadere vndur- 31 
stondyng, and ordeyne a word, and ful 
bisili for to® enquere alle partis of the 
storie, ech bi hem silf, acordith to an 
autour; forsothe for to sue schortnesse of 32 
seiyng, and for to eschewe out suyngis of 
thingis, is to be grauntid to the breggere. 
Therfor fro hennus forth we schulen bi-35 
gynne the tellyng; be it ynow for to 
haue’ seid so myche of ‘bifor spekyng" ; 
fori it is foli for to flete ont, ether be long, 
bifore the stori, but in that stori for to be 
maad* schort. 


hin acu. ivsself in.” * lizt, or esyan. aun. 
tthe n.  temptiden, or [ether plures] assateden EFGuIMNPQSUXYe. attemptiden rR. VY biholden w. 
biholding x. of x.  * delectacioun, ether [or Epy] /Jiking c et plures. delectacioun R. — Y wakyng 
Apr.m *Om.R. ® Om. CEFNGKMN?QRUXe. 44 schortene A. _> wrizte Re. ether cheef carpinter 
emarg, Cann. ‘himforr. ¢Om.x. fOm.r. &beR. > prefacioun, ether [or erry) befor 
spekyng CEFGHIKMNPQRSUXYe. i forsothe rR. k Om. 1. 


5Q2 


852 


33bregger. Fro hennus therfore we shuln 
bygynne the tellyng; be it ynew3 for to 
haue said so myche of prefacioun, or 
byfore spekyng; forsothe it is foly for 
to flete out, o7 be longe, bifore the sto- 
rye, bot in that storie for to be maad 
short. 
CAP. II. 
1 Therfore whanne the holy citee was 
enhabited in al pees, lawis also 3it weren 
best kept, for ordynaunce and pite of 
Onye, prest, and for soulis hauynge in 
ehate yuel thingus, it was maad, that and 
thei kyngis and princis ledden the place 
worthi heeist honour, and lijteneden the 
stemple with grettist 3iftis; so that Se- 
leucus, kyng of Asie, 3aue of his rentis 
alle spensis perteynynge to the seruice 
4of sacrifices. Forsothe Symont, of the 
lynage of Beniamyn, ordeynyd prepost 
of the temple, the prince of prestis a3ein- 
stondynge hym, strofe for to caste sum 
swickid thing in the cytee. Bot whan 
he mi3te not ouercume Onye, he came to 
Appollonye, sone of Tharsie, that in that 
tyme was duyk of Celessirie and Fenyce; 
cand tolde to hym the tresorie in Jerusa- 
lem for to be ful with moneys vnnoum- 
breable ; and commoun plentees, o7 rich- 
essis, for to be grete, whiche perteynen 
not to resoun of sacrifices; forsothe™ for 
to be possible, alle thingus for to falle 
7vndir power of the kyng. And whanne 
Appollonye hadde tolde to the kyng of 
moneys that weren born ynne, he sente 
Heleodore clepid, that was on his needis, 
with maundementus for to bere out the 
sforsaid money. And anoon Heleodore 
takynge the" waye, sothely by fourme as 
he were to passynge by Celescirie and 
Fenyce cytees, sothely in trewe thing®, 
to parfourmynge the kyngus purpose. 
9Bot when he came to Jerusalem, and 
benyngly of the hee3ist prest in the? cite 
was resceyued, he tolde of dom 3ouen of 
moneys, and opnyde for grace, or cause, 


™ for g pr.m. bot G sec. m. H. 


lin hatyng rR. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


n Om. Gu. 


m seruyce R. 


I. 33-—Ill. 9. 


CAP. III. 


Therfor whanne the hooli citee was1 
enhabited in al pees, lawis also 3it weren 
best kept, for the feithfulnesse* of Onyas, 
bischop, and for soulis hatynge! yuele 
thingis, it was maad, that bothe thei2 
kyngis and prynces ledden the place 
worthi hizeste onour, and li3tiden the 
temple with gretteste 3iftis; so that Se-3 
leucus, kyng of Asie, 3af of his rentis alle 
spensis perteynynge to the seruices™ of 
sacrifices. Forsothe Symount, of the ly-4 
nage of Beniamyn, that was ordeyned 
souereynt of the temple, whanne the 
prince of prestis a3enstood hym, stroof 
for to caste sum wickid thing in the citee. 
But whanne he mi3te not ouercome Onyas, 5 
he cam to Appollonye, sone of Tharsee, 
that in that tyme was duyk of Celescirie 
and Fenyce; and telde to hym, that thee 
treserie in Jerusalem was ful with rich- 
essis vnnoumbrable ; and that comyn rich- 
essis ben grete, whiche perteynen not to 
the" resoun of sacrifices; forsothe that 
it was°® possible, that alle thingis falle 
vndur power of the kyng. And whanne7 
Appolonye hadde telde to the kyng of 
richessis that weren borun in, he sente 
Heliodore clepid, that was on his nedis, 
with maundementis for to bere out the 
forseid monei. And anoon Heliodore took s 
the weie, sotheli bi forine as if? he were 
to passynge bi Celessirie and Fenyce 
citees, but in trewe thing to parformynge 
the kyngis purpos. But whanne he camg 
to Jerusalem, and was resseyued benygneli 
of the hizeste prest in the citee, he telde of 
doom 3ouun of the richessis, and openyde 
for cause of what thing he cam; forsothe 


o thingis Gu. P Om. cG. 


2Om.1. Ober. POm.R. 


® feithfuinesse ; 
that is, dili- 
gence in Goddis 
worschiping. v. 
this word, dis- 
posicioun, ei- 
ther ordy- 
naunece, is not 
of the tixt, 
neither is in 
hokis amendid. 
Lire here. U. 


+ souereyn, as 
to outtermore 
thingis, for he 
was no prest. 
Lire here. 1KU. 


: 
| 
: 


II. 10—~21. 


of what thing he came; forsothe he axide 
10 ‘3if verrely° these thingus weren so. Thanne 
the hee3ist prest shewide, these thingus for 
to be kept to the lyuelodis of widues, and 
11 faderlesse and moderlesse children; sum? 
sothely for to be of Hircam Tobye, man 
ful noble in4 these thingus, that vn- 
pitous Symont hadde teelde; forsothe 
alle the’ talentis of syluer for to be foure 
szhundrid, and of gold two hundrid; for- 
sothe for to be inpossible on al manere, 
hem for’ to be disceyued, that bileuyden, 
or bitoken, to the place and temple, that 
bi al the world is honourid for his wir- 
isshipyng, and holynesse. And for these 
thingus ‘that het hadde in maundementis 
of the kyng, he saide, in al kynde hem 


isfor to be born to the kyng. Forsothe in. 


the day ordeynyde Heleodore entride, to 
ordeynynge of these thingis; forsothe 
there was not a" lytil tremblyng by al 
15 the citee. Forsothe prestis castiden hem 
self byfore the auter, with prestis stolys, 
and ynclepiden fro heuen hym that 3aue 
lawe of thingus put in keepyng, that he 
shulde keepe hem saaf to these that had- 
i¢den putte hem in keepyng. Nowe for- 
sothe he that see3 the chier of the’ hee3- 
ist prest, was woundid in sowle; forsothe 
the face and colour inchaungid, declaride 
the ynward sorewe of soule, or ynwitt. 
17 Forsothe sum sorewfulnesse was shied 
about to the man, and hydousnesse of 
body, by whiche the sorewe of herte was 
ismaad” knowen to men byholdynge. Also 
other men by gadring to gidre camen out 
of housis, bysechynge with open bysech- 
yng, for that that the place was to cum- 
i9mynge in to dispit. And wymmen gyrd 
the brest with heyris, flowiden togidre by 
streetis; bot and virgynes, that weren 
closid togidre, runnen fully to Onye; 
other forsothe to the wallis, summe 
20sothely byheelden by wyndowis. For- 
sothe alle holdynge forth hondis in to 
2iheuen bisou3ten; sothely there was a 


© verrely 3if kK. P. sum man G sec. m. 
¥Om. 1. WY Om. G pr.m. 


qgOm.r. Calle the r. 


II. MACCABEES. 


Gand in K. 


8 forsothe nr. 


853 


he axide, if verili these thingis weren so. 
Thanne the hijeste prest schewide, that io 
these thingis weren kept to the lijflodis of 
widewis, and of fadirles ether modirles 
children; that. summe sotheli weren of 11 
Ircan Tobie, a man ful noble in these 
thingis, that vnpitouse Symount hadde 
teld ; forsothe that‘ alle" talentis of siluer 
weren foure hundrid, and of gold two hun- 
drid; for’ that it was impossible on al iz 
maner, that thei be disseyned, that bitoken 
her thingis to be kept to the place and 
temple, that bi al the world was onourid 
for his worschipyng, and holynesse. And 1s 
he seide, for these thingis that he hadde 
in maundementis of the kyng, that in al 
kynde tho schulden be borun to the kyng. 
Forsothe in the dai ordeyned Heliodore 1: 
entride, to ordeyne of these thingis; for- 
sothe there was not a litil tremblyng 
thorou3 al the citee. Forsothe prestis15 
castiden hem silf bifore the auter, with 
prestis stoolis, and clepiden to help fro 
heuene hym that 3af lawe of thingis put 
in kepyng, that he schulde kepe tho thingis 
saf to hem that hadden put tho in kepyng. 
Now forsothe he that si3 the cheer of the 16 
hi3este prest', was woundid in soule; for 
the face and colour was chaungid, and 
declaride the inward sorewe of soule. For 17 
sum soreufulnesse was sched aboute to the 
man, and hidousnesse of bodi, bi whiche 
the sorewe of herte was maad knowun to 
men biholdynge. Also othere men ‘weren ts 
gaderid" togidere flocmeel, and camen out 
of housis, bisechynge with opyn bisech- 
yng, for that that the place was to com- 
ynge in to dispit. And wymmen weren 19 
gird on the brest with heiris, and flowiden 
togidere bi stretis; but and virgyns, that 
weren closid togidere, runnen to Onyas; 
othere forsothe to the wallis, summe 
sotheli bihelden bi wyndowis. Forsothe 20 
alle helden forth hondis in to heuene, and 
bisou3ten; for ther was a wretchid abid-21 
yng of multitude meynt, and of the hijeste 
tthei uu. % Om. nu. 


trOm. nu. $ Om. aen. 


‘Om. nr. % gaderiden 1. 


854 


wretchid abyding of the* multitude meynt, 
and of theY hee3ist prest ordeyned in 
22strijf, or anguyshe. And these sothely 
inclepide almi3ti God, that thingus taken 
in keepyng weren kept in al hoolnesse, to 
these that hadden putte hem in keepynge. 
23 Forsothe Heleodore parfourmyde that? 
thing, that he hadde demyde, he presente 
with his kny3tis in the same place aboute 
2ithe tresorie. Bot the spirit of almi3ty 
God made grete euydence of his shew- 
yng, so that alle that weren hardye for 
to obeye to hym, fallyng doun by the* 
vertu of God, weren ‘togidre turnyd® in 
to vnbyndynge, or vustrengthe’, and in- 
25 ward dreed. Forsothe sum hors apeeride 
to hem, hauynge a dreedful sitter, ournyd 
with best hillyngus; and he’ with feers- 
nesse, or dire, rushide the former feet to 
Heleodore; forsothe he that sate on hym, 
26 was seen for to haue golden armers. Also 
other two 3unge apperiden, faire in vertu, 
best in glorie, and fair in clothinge, that 
stoden aboute hym, and on eche sijd 
scourgiden hym with outen ceesyng, with 
27many woundis betynge. Sodeynly for- 
sothe Heleodore felle in to erthe, and thei 
rauyshiden hym shed about with myche 
derknesse, and castiden hym out, put in 
28a ‘sadil of beere®. And this that with 
many rynners and kni3tis entride in to 
the forsaide tresorie, was born, no man 
berynge help to hym, the opyn vertu of 
209God knowen; and forsothe by Goddis 
vertu he lay doumbe, and pryued of al 
30hope and helthe. Forsothe these bless- 
iden the Lord, for he magnyfied his 
place; and the temple, that a lytil by- 
fore was ful of dreed and noyse, the 
Lord almi3ty appeerynge, is fulfillid with 
3iloye and gladnesse. Thanne forsothe 
sume of Heliodoris frendis preyeden 
anoon Onye, for to inclepe the Hee3ist, 
and for to 3eue lyf to hym, for he was 
sesette in the last spirit. Sothely the 


x Om. H. y Om. H. 
© beringe sadil ex. 


2 the un. a Om. H. 


lt. MACCABEES. 


III. 22—-32. 


prest ordeyned in strijf’. And these so- 22 
theli clepiden almi3ti God to help, that 
thingis takun in kepyng schulden be kept 
in al holynesse, to hem that hadden put 
tho in kepyng. Forsothe Heliodore per-23 
formyde that thing, that he hadde demyd, 
and he was present with his kny3tis in 
the same place aboute the treserie. But 2s 
the spirit of almy3ti God made greet euy- 
dence of his schewyng, so that alle that 
weren hardi for to obeie to hym, fellen 
doun bi vertu of God, and weren conuertid 
in to feblenesse, and inward drede. ~- Fores 
an” hors apperide to hem, and hadde a 
dredeful sittere, ourned with beste hilyn- 
gis; and he with fersnesse* ruyschide the 
formere feet to Heliodore; forsothe he 
that sat on hym, semyde for to haue 
goldun armeris. Also twei othere 3onge26 
men apperiden, faire in vertu, beste in 
glorie, and faire in clothing, that stoden 
aboute hym, and on ech side scourgiden 
hym with out ceessyng, and beeten with 
many woundis. Sodenli forsothe Helio-2; 
dore felle down to** ertheY, and thei ra- 
uyschiden hym sched aboute with myche 
derknesse, and castiden out hym, putte in 
a pakke sadil, ‘ether hors litir?. And hes 
that entride with many renneris and 
kny3tis in to the forseid tresorie, was 
borun, whanne no man helpide hym, for 
the opyn vertu of God was knowun; and 29 
forsothe bi Goddis vertu he lay doumb, 
and priued of al hope and heelthe. For-30 
sothe these Jewis blessiden the Lord, for 
he magnyfiede his place; and the temple, 
that a litil bifore was ful of drede and 
noyse, is fillid with ioye and gladnesse, 
for the Lord almy3ti apperide. Thanne3i 
forsothe summe of Eliodoris frendis prei- 
eden anoon Onyas, for to clepe to help the 
Hi3este, and for to 3yue lijf to hym, that 
was set in the laste spirit. Sotheli these 
hijgeste prest bihelde, lest perauenture the 
kyng wolde suppose ony malice fulli don 


b conuertid H. © ynstrenge K. 4 he that x. 


+e ‘ : F a 
rif, ether [or PY] angnisch c et plures. * sumcet ceteri. * fersnesse, either bire FEHIKMNQSUXE. 


xX in toe. Y the erthe C pr.m. RB. 


2 or horsliter Epsy. Om. R. 


III. 33-——IV. 3. 


hee3ist prest biholdinge, lest par auenture 
the kyng supposide eny malice of Jewis 
fully done a3einus Helyodore, he’ offride 
for helthe of the man an helthful sacri- 
33fice. And whan the heeist prest prey- 
ede, the same 3unglyngus, clothid in the 
same clothis, stondynge ni3 to Heliodore, 
saiden, Do thou thankyugys to Onye, 
the" prest; for whi for hym the Lord 
3thath 3onen lyf to thee; thou sothely, 
scourgid of God, telle to alle men the 
greete doyngus of God, and power. And 
these thingis said, thei apperiden not. 

35 Helyodore sothely, a sacrifice offrid to 
God, and grete auowis bihijte to hym, 
that grauntide to hym for to lyue, and 
doynge thankyngis to Onye, his oost re- 

36sceyued, wente a3ein to the king. So- 
thely he witnesside to alle men the 
werkis of grete God, whiche he see3 yn- 
37der his eezjen. Forsothe whan the kyng 
axide Helyodore, who was able 3it oonys 
38for to be sente to Jerusalem, he saith, 3if 
thou hast eny enmye, or aspier, o7 trai- 
tour, of thi rewme, sende thider, and 
thou shalt reseceyne hym betun, 3if ne- 
theles he schal scape; for that in the 
3y place is verrely sum vertu of God. For 
whi he that in heuens hath dwellyng, is 
visiter and helper of that place; and he 
smyteth and leesith men cummynge to 
mysdo. Therfore of Heliodore, and kep- 
yng of the tresorie, thus the thyng hath 
hym. 
CAP. IV. 

i Symont forsothe byfore saide, accuser 
of moneys, and of the cuntree, spake yuel 
of' Onye, as he hadde stiride Helyodore 
to these thingis, and he hadde be stirer 

2of yuels; and he durst saye the puruey- 
oure of the citee, and defender of his 
fole, and louer of the lawe of God, enmye, 

sor traitour, of the rewine. Bot whan 
enmytees in so myche camen forth, that 
by summe necessaries, o7 223 freendis, 


f Om. u. 


aofr, 24 to hymapr.m.c et plures. bthankis i. ¢ Om. r. ¢Om. rR, ©¢ that 1. 


Il. MACCABEKS. 


& and he nv. 


855 


aboute? Jewis aboute Heliodore, and of- - 
fride for helthe of the man an _heelful 
sacrifice. And whanne the hizeste prest33 
preiede, the same 3onglyngis, clothid in 
the same clothis, stooden ni; Heliodore, 
and seiden, Do thon thankyngis to Onyas, 
the prest ; for whi for hym the Lord hath 
3ouun lijf to thee; thou sotheli, that arts1 
scourgid of God, telle to alle men the 
grete doyngis and power of God. And 
whanne these thingis weren seid, thei 
apperiden not. Heliodore sotheli, whanne 35 
a sacrifice was offrid to God, and grete 
avowis weren bihi3t to hym, that graunt- 
ide hym*™ for to lyue, and dide thank- 
yngis® to Onyas; and whanne his oost 
was resseyued, he wente a3en to the kyng. 
Sotheli he witnesside to alle men thes 
werkis of greet God, whiche he si3 vndur 
hise i3eu. Forsothe whanne the kyng37 
axide Heliodore, who was able for® to be 
sent 3it onys to Jerusalem, he seide, Ifss 
thou hast ony enemye, ether traitour of 
thi rewme, sende thidur, and tlion schalt 
resseyue hym betun, if netheles he schal 
seape; for sum vertu of God is verili? in 
the® place. For whi he that hath dwell-39 
yng in heuenys, is visitere and helpere of 
that place; and he smytith and lesith hem, 
that comen to mysdo. Therfor of Helio- 
dore, and kepyng of the treserie, thus the 
thing hath it silf. 


CAP. IV. 


Simount forsothe biforseid, accusere’ of 1 
cuntree, and of richessis*, spak yuel of 
Onyas, as if he had stirid Heliodore to 
these thingis, and he hadde be stirere of 
yuels; and he durst seie the puruyour2 
of the citee, and defendere of his folc, and 
louyere of the lawe of God, traitour of 
the rewme. But whanne enemytees camen3 
forth in so myche, that also bi summe 
famyliar frendis of Symount mansleyngis 


A 


hOm.u. ito. 


f and accuser R. 


g the cuntre and of richessis c. cuntrees and of rijechesses K. richessis of the cuntre rk. richesses and of 


cuntre e. 


856 II. MACCABEES. IV. 4-——14. 


of Symount man sleayngus weren don, 
4Onye, byholdynge the perel of strijf, and 
Appolonye for to be wood, as duyk of 
Celescerie and Fenyce, for to eneresce 
the malice of Symont, 3aue hym self to 
othe kyng; not as acuser of citeeseins, bot 
biholdynge anentis hym self the comoun 
6 profit of al the multitude. Forsothe he 
see3, for to be impossible pees for to be 
3ouen to thingus without the kyngus pur- 
uyaunce, nether Symont mowe ceese of 
zhis foly. Bot after the* passing of ** 
Seleucus lijf, whan Antiochus, that was 
cleepid noble, hadde taken rewine, Jason, 
brother of Onye, coueytide the hee3ist 
apresthod, the kyng gon to, byhetynge 
hym three hundred talentis and sixty of 
syluer, and of other rentis foure score ; 
»vpon these thingus he bihi3te! and other 
an hundrid and fyfty, 3if it were graunt- 
id to his power, for to ordeyne a scole, 
and a™ gadryng of 3unge men to hym; 
and for to wryte hem that weren in Je- 
rusalem Antiochenys, 07 men of Anti- 
1woche. Whiche thing whan the kyng had 
grauntide, and he weeldide the prince- 
hod, anoon he bygan for to transferre to 
i! heithen custum" inen of his lynage. And 
these thingus don awey, whiche bi cause 
of humanytee, ov curtasie, to Jewis weren 
ordeynyd of kyngus by Joon, fader of 
Eupolemy, whiche anentus Romayus is 
ordeyned in laweful message of frend- 
ship and felawship, he, distruyinge ri3tis, 
or lawis, of the® cyteeseyns, made shrewid 
i20rdinauncis; and sothely he was hardy 
for to ordeyne a scole vnder that hee} 
rocke, and for to putte al the beste of 
133unge in bordel hous. Forsothe this 
was not bygynnyng, bot sum encresyng 
and profit of heithen and alien lijf, for 
the vnleeful and vnherd grete trespas of 
l4vnpytous, and not prest Jason; so that 
prestis not nowe weren 3ouen aboute 
offices of the auter, bot the temple dis- 


kOmon. kk ofof x. lhisteg prom. ™ Om 


Sheize Fr. =" Om. c pr.m.Euprye. i Om. R. 
GHIKMNPQsuxye. Antiochenus rR.  *k Om. F. 


weren don, Onyas bihelde the perel of 4 
strijf, and that Appolonye was wood, as 
duyk of Celessirie and Fenyce, for to 
encreesse the malice of Symonnt. And 
Onyas 3af him silf to the kyng; not ass 
acensere of citeseyns, but biholdyng anen- 
tis him silf the comyn profit of al the 
multitude. For he si3, that it was im-6 
possible that pees were 3ouun to thingis 
with out the kyngis puruyaunce, and that 
Symount my3te not ceesse of his foli. 
But after the passyng out of Seleucus lijf,7 
whanne Antiok, that was clepid noble, 
hadde takun rewme, Jasoun, the brother 
of Onyas, coueitide the hizeste® presthod ; 
and Jason 3ede to the kyng, and bihiztes 
to hym thre hundrid talentis and sixti of 
siluer, and of othere rentes fourescore fa- 
lentis*; ouer these thingis he bihizte alsos 
othere falentis an hundrid and fifti, if it 
were grauntid to his power, for to ordeyne 
a scole, and gaderyng, ‘ether bordel hous’, 
of 3onge men* to hym; and for to write — * a scole of he- 
hem that weren in Jerusalem ‘men of 72;606/¢ 00 


dering of 30nge 


Antiochusj. And whanne the kyng hadde 105, et 


grauntid this, and he weldide the pryns- to vse sine of 
Sodom with 


hod, anoon he bigan for‘ to translate to faire 3onge chil- 
hethene custom men of his lynage. And Te 
whanne these thingis weren don awei, 

whiche bi cause of humanyte, ‘ether cur- 

tesie!, weren ordeyned of kyngis to Jewis 

bi Joon, the fadir of Eupolemy, which 

was ordeyned in lawful message of fren- 

schip and felouschip anentis Romayns, 

he distriede lawis™ of citeseyns, and made 

schrewid ordenaunces; for" he was hardi 12 

for to ordeyne a scole of hethenesse vndur 

that hi; tour, and for to put alle the beste f 

of faire 3onge men in bordel housis. For-13 

sothe this was not bigynnyng, but sum 
encreessyng and profit of hethene and 

alien lijf, for the vnleueful and vnherd 

greet trespas of vnpitouse®, and not prest 

Jason; so that prestis not now weren14 

jouun aboute offices of the auter, but thei 


.H. © eustom, or obseruaunce H. © Om, AGH. 


j Antiochierius, ether [or Epy] men of Antioche CEF 


1Om. R. or curtesie EPpy. ™ rizlis, ether [or ERY] lawis 


¢ et plures. riztis R. "and for Rr. © vnpitouse men R. 


IV. 15-——24. 


pisid, and sacrifices left, thei hastiden for 
to be maad felawis of wrastlyng, and of 
vniust 3euynge therof, and of oost, or 
cumpanye, of dishe, or pleyinge with 
15ledun dishe. And thei hauynge honours 
of fadris at nou3t, demyden Greek glories 
isbest. For grace of whiche perilous con- 
tencioun hadde hem, and her ordinauncis 
thei folewiden, or douyden; and by alle 
thingus thei coueitiden for to be lijk to 
hem, whom thei hadden enmyes and dis- 
i7truyers. Forsothe for to do vnpitously 
aeinus Goddis lawis fallith not with 
outen peyn, bot and the tyme suynge 
isdeelaride these thingus. Sothely whan 
fyue 3eer stryf, or fi3t, was wirshipid in 
19 Tyre, and the kyng was present, Jason 


ful of grete trespassis sente fro Jerusalem . 


imen synners, berynge three hundrid 
dragmes of syluer in to sacrifice of Er- 
cules; whiche these men that baren out 
axiden, that thei weren not 3ouen in 
sacrifices, for it needide not, bot in to 
other spensis hem for to be ordeynyd. 
20 Bot these sothely ben offrid of hym that 
sente in to sacrifice of Ercules; sothely 
for men present thei ben 3ouen in to 
2imakynge of grete shippis. Forsothe 
Appollonye, sone of Nesteye, sente in to 
Egipt for primatis of? Tholome Philo- 
metoris, kyng; forsothe whanne Antio- 
chus knewe hym maad alien fro needis 
of the rewme, he conseilynge to his owne 
profitis, gon thennus, cam to Joppen, and 
22fro thennus to Jerusalem. And he, re- 
sceiued of Jason and of the citee wir- 
shipfully, with li3tis of broondis, and 
preysyngus, wente yn, and fro thennus 
turnyd the oost in to eoost of Fenyee. 
23 And after the tyme of three 3eer Jason 
sente Menelaus, brother of Symont aboue 
said, berynge inoneys to the kyng, and 
of necessarie’ causis to beryng answeris. 
24 And he comendid' to the kyng, whan he 
magnyfiede* the face of his power, turn- 


II. MACCABEES. 


857 


dispisiden the temple, and leften sacrifices, 
and thei hastiden for to be maad felowis 
of wrastling, and of? vniust 3yuyng of 
hym*, and in ocupaciouns of a4 disch, 


‘ether pleiyng with a ledun disch*. Andis 


sotheli thei hadden onouris of fadris at 
nou3t, and demyden Greke® glories beste. 
For cause of which perelouse eontension 'é 
hadde hem, and thei folewiden her ordy- 
naunces; and bi alle thingis thei coucitiden 
hem! for to be lijk hem, whiche thei had- 
den enemyes and distrieris. Forsothe for 17 
to do vnfeithfuli ajens Goddis lawes it 
bifallith not with out peyne, but the tyme 
suynge schal declare these thingis. Sotheli1s 
whanne iustus, doon onys in fyne jeer, was 
maad solempli in Tire, and the kyng was 
present, Jason ful of grete trespassis sente !9 
fro Jerusalem men synneris, berynge thre 
hundrid double dragmes of siluer in to 
sacrifice of Erculis; whiehe these men that 
baren out axiden, that tho weren not 
jouun in sacrifices, for it nedide not, but 
that tho schulen be ordeyned in to othere 
spensis. But sotheli these weren offrid 20 
of" him that sente in to the sacrifice of 
Ereules; sotheli for men present tho ben’ 
jouun in to makyng of grete schippis. 
Forsothe Appolonye, sone of Nestei, was2! 
sent in to Egipt for primatis”, ‘ether 
princes*, of Tolome Philometor, the kyng; 
whanne Antiok knew him maad alyen fro 
nedis of the rewme, he counselide for his 
owne profitis, and 3ede fro thennus, and 
cam to Joppe, and fro thennus to Jerusa- 
lem. And he was resseyued of Jason 22 
and the citee worschipfuli, with li3tis of 
brondis, and preisyngis, and wente yn, 
and fro thennus he turnede the oost in to 
Fenyee. And aftir the tyme of thre 3eer 2% 
Jason sente Menelaus, the brother of Sy- 
mount aboue seid, berynge richessis to 
the kyng, and of necessarie causis to her- 
ynge answeris. And he was comendid to 
the kyng, and, whanne he hadde magne- 


P to. the necessarye 4. ‘comaundide u. * hadde magnyfied c sec. m. 1. 
P Om. R. q Om. crre. r Om. R. ® Grekis Rr. t Om. R. U to R. Vv were R. weren e, 
W princis c. * Om. cR. or princis EPY. 
VOL, III. 5R 


* of uniust 3in- 
ing of him; 
that is, of his 
3iuing of werst 
teching. onouris 
of fadris ; that 
is, the worslap- 
ing of God, 
wherinne her 
fadris haddin 
glorie. Greek 
glories ; that 
is, customes and 
maners of liu- 
ing of Grekis. 
Lire here. 
EPKUY. 


858 


yde in to hymn self the hee3ist presthode, 
aboue puttynge to Jason three hundrid 
gstalentes of syluer. And maundementis 
taken of the kyng, he came, sothely hau- 
ynge no thing worthi to presthod; so- 
thely inwitt of cruelt tyraunt, and ber- 
26 yng wrath of wijld" beest®. And sothely 
Jason, that toke his own brother caitif, 
he disceyued is putt out outlawid in to 
27 the cuntree of Amanythen”. Bot Mene- 
laus forsothe weeldide the princehod, bot 
of moneys bihiz3t to the kyng he hadde 
no thing, whan Sostratus, that was pre- 
poost to the hee3 rocke, made exactioun, 
2sor vniust axing, for whi exactioun of 
tributis perteynede to hym; for whiche 
29 cause bothe ben clepid to the kyng. And 
Menelaus remoued fro presthod, succed- 
yng, or next cummynge after, Lysyma- 
cus, his brother; sothely Sostratus is 
30maad souereyn to men of Sypre. And 
whan these thingus weren don, it byfelle 
Tharsensis and Mallotis for to moue de- 
bate, for that thei weren 3ouen in 3ift to 
31 the concubyne of kyng Antiochus. And 
so the kyng hastily came, for to swage 
hem, left oon of his erlis suffectus An- 
sedronyk. Forsothe Menelaus demynge 
hym for to haue taken couenable tyme, 
stelinge sume golden vessels of the tem- 
ple, 3aue to Andronyk, and other he 
33solde to Tyre, and by ni3 citees. Whiche 
thing whan Onye hadde knowen most 
certeynly, he repreuede hym, he hold- 
ynge hym self in a syker place at An- 
34 tioche, bisidis Daphnen. Wherof Mene- 
Jaus goynuge to Andronyk, preyede that 
he slew3* Onye. Whiche whan he came 
to Onye, and ri3t hondis 3ouen with ooth, 
thon3 he was suspect to hym, counseilide 
hyin for to go forth of asile, anoon slew3 
3shym, not dreedynge rijtwisnesse. For 
whiche cause not oonly Jewis, bot and 


ta cruel G sec. m. 11. 


a wijld G sec. m. Hn. 
x schulde sle G sec. m. 11. 


y) beeste, cther [or EFuPye] of wondur azenus kynde c et plures. 
{or EPpy] maisterful azyng c et plurcs. exaccioun RK. 


office EFGHUIKMNPQSUXYe. 


] ¢ the kyng r. 
nimr., & Om. R. oN 


bh Om. F. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


VY beest, or of woundur azenis kynde H. 


4 lutenaunt c. 


IV. 25-—35- 


fiede the face of his power, he turnyde in 
to hym silf the hizeste presthod, and set- 
tide aboue Jason thre hundrid talentis of 
siluer. And bi maundementis takun of25 
the kyng, he cam, sotheli hauynge no 
thing worthi to presthod; but he bar the 
soule of a cruel tiraunt, and wraththe of 
wielde beesteY. And sotheli thilke Jason, 26 
that took his owne brother caitif, was dis- 
seyued, and outlawid’, and put out in to 
the cuntree of Amanythen. But Mene-27 
laus forsothe weldide the prinshod, but 
of richessis bihi3t to the kyng he dide 
no thing, whanne Sostratus, that was so- 
uereyn of the hi3 tour, made ‘maister- 
ful axyng*, for whi reisyng of tributis2s 
perteynede to hym; for whiche cause 
bothe weren clepid to the kyng. And 29 
Menelaus was remoued fro presthod, and 
Lysimacus, his brother, was successour® ; 
sotheli Sostratus was maad souereyn of 
men of Cipre. And whanne these thingis30 
weren don, it bifelle Tarsensis and Mal- 
lotis for to moue debate, for that thei 
weren 30uun in 3ifte to the concubyn of 
Antiok, kyng®. Therefor the kyng hastili31 
cam, for to swage hem, and lefte oon of 
his eerlis suffectus Andronyk ‘in dig- 
nyte’, ‘ether lutenaunt®. Forsothe Mene-32 
laus demydef that he hadde taken couen- 
able tyme, and& stal surnme goldun vessels 
of the temple, and 3af to Andronik, and 
he selde to Tire othere, and bi ni3 citees. 
And whanne Onyas hadde knowun this33 
thing most certeynli, he repreuyde hym, 
and helde him silf® in a sikir place at 
Antiochie, bisidis Daphnen. Wherfor Me-34 
nelaus 3ede to Andronik, and preiede that 
he wolde sle Onyas. And whanne he cam 
to Onyas, and hadde 3oue ri3thondis with 
an ooth, thou3 he was suspect to him, he 
counselide hym for to go forth of asile, 
and anoon he slow hym, and dredde not 


w Amanythew x. 


z was outlawid rR. 4 exaccioun, ether 
> snecessour, or [ether plures] cam neat in that 
€ Om. cr. or leuz3tenaunt EPpy.  demede 


IV. 36—~47. 


other naciouns, weren wrothe, and baren 
heuyly of the vniust deth of so grete a* 
36man. Bot Jewis at Antioche, and Greekis, 
togydre pleynynge of the vniust deth of 
Onye, wenten to the kyng, turnyd a3ein 
370f theY places of Cilicia. And so the 
kyng Antiochus sory in inwit for Onye, 
and he’, bowid to mercy, shedde teeris, 
recordynge the sobrenesse and myldnesse 
3sof the dead man. And the ynwitt kyn- 
dlid, he comaundith Andronyke, vncloth- 
id purpre, for to be led about by al the 
citee, and, in that place in whiche he 
hadde don vnpitee in to Onye, the cursid 
man for to be priued of lijf; the Lord 
39 3euynge to hym euen worth* peyne. For- 
sothe many sacrilegis don in the temple 
of Lysymacus, by counceil of Menelaus, 
and fame puplishid, a multitude is ga- 
drid a3einus Lysymacus, myche gold 
aonow born out. Forsothe the cumpanyes 
ajein rysynge, and the? inwittus fulfillid 
with wrath, Lysymacus almest three 
thousand aarmyd wickid hondis bygan 
for to vse, sum tyraunt duyk, olde in 
a1age and also woodnesse. Bot as thei 
vndirstoden the enforsyng of Lysymacus, 
other tooken stoonys, other strong stafs, 
sum® hasten for to kasten askis® in to Ly- 
42symacus. And many sothely woundid, 
sum forsothe cast doun, alle forsothe ben to 
gidre turnyd in to fli3t; also thei slewen 
hym sacrileger, or theef of holy thingis, 
43 bysidis the tresorie. Therfore of these 
thingis dom bygan for to be moued a3ein 
44Menelaus. And whan the kyng came to 
Tyre, three men, sente of the eldre men, 
45 brou3ten the cause to hym. And whanne 
Menelaus was ouercummen, he bihi3te for 
to 3eue many moneys to Tholome, for to 
ascounseile the kyng. And so Tholome 
wente to the kyng, sett in sum porche, 
as for grace of refreytyng'. or colyng, 
4z7and ledd awey fro sentence. And he as- 
soilide Menelaus, gylty trewly of crymes, 


=Omu. yYOmu. 7Om He. 
£Om. x. frefresching cu. 

honr. ijofceteri *Om.R. | purpul er. 
pandaller, 4hymia. or epy. Om. R. 


II. MACCABEES, 


a worthi acu. 


859 


ri3twisnes. For which cause not oneliss 
Jewis, but and othere naciouns, weren 
wrothe, and baren heuyli of the vuinst 
deth of so greet a man. But Jewis atse 
Antiochie, and Grekis, togidere playneden 
of» the vniust deth of Onyas, and wenten 
to the king, that turnede a3en fro! places 
of Cilicie. Therfor the kyng Antiok was37 
sori in soule for Onyas, and was howid to 
merci, and schedde teeris, and bithou3te 
on the sobrenesse and myldenesse of the 
deed man. And his herte was kyndlid, 38 
and he* comaundide that Andronyk, vn- 
clothid of purpur!, be led aboute bi al the 
citee, and that in that place in which he 
hadde don vnpitee a3ens Onyas, the cursid 
man be priuyd of lijf; for the Lord 3af 
to hymn euene worthi peyne. Forsothe39 
whanne manye sacrilegijs weren don of 
Lisymacus, bi counsel of Menelaus, in the 
temple, and the fame was pupplischid, 
multitude was gaderid ajens Lisymacus; 
for myche gold was thanne borun out. 
Forsothe whanne the cunipenyes risiden", 40 
and® soulis weren fillid with wraththe, 
Lisymacus bigan for to vse almest thre 
thousynd armyd wickid hondis, bi sum 
tyraunt ledere, elde in age and also in 
woodnesse. But as thei vndurstoden the 41 
enforsyng of Lysimacus, othere token 
stoonys, othere stronge stafis, summe so- 
theli castiden aische in to Lysimacus. 
And many sotheli weren woundid, summe 42 
forsothe ween cast doun, alle? forsothe 
weren togidere turnyd in to flist; also 
thei slowen hym4 sacrilegere, ether™ ‘theef 
of hooli thingis’, bisidis the  treserie. 
Therfor of these thingis dom bigan for to 43 
be mouyd aj3ens Menelaus. And whanne44 
the kyng cam to Tire, thre men weren 
sent of the eldere men, and brou3ten the 
cause to him. And whanne Menelaus4s 
was ouercomun, he bihi3te for to 3yue . 
many richessis to Tolome, for to counsele 
the kyng. Therfor Tolome wente to the46 
4 sum sothely i. 


b Om. H. ¢ Om. H. 


" resin EP ef ¥ passim. risen F. © Om. A et plures. 


5 Om, R. 


5RQ 


860 


of al the malice. Forsothe he dampnyde 
by deeth these wrecches, whiche shulden 
be demyd innocentis, 3ea‘, 3if thei hadden 

asledde cause anentis$ Sithis. Therfore 
soone thei 3auen vniust peyn to hem, that 
pursueden cause for the citee, and for 

49the® peple, and holy vessels. Wherfore 
and men of Tyre wroothe, weren most 

so liberal ajeinis the birying of hem. For- 
sothe for coueitise of hem that weren in 
power, Menelaus dwelte in power, wex- 
inge in malice, and to disceytis of cite- 
seyns. 


CAP. V. 
1 In the same tyme Antiochus made 
redy the secounde goynge in to Egipt. 
2Forsothe it byfelle, by eche citee of men 
of Jerusalem, for to be seen fourty days 
horsmen rennyng aboute by the eyre, 
hauynge golden stoolis, and‘ shaftis, as 
3cumpanyes of kni3tis armed; and coursis 
of horsis* wijsly set bi ordris, and assail- 
yngis, or jiztyngus to gidre, for to be 
maad_ ni3, and mouyng! of sheeldis, and 
multitude of helmyd men, with streyned 
swerdis, and castyng™ of dartys, and 
shynyng of golden armers, and of al 
4kynde of hauberiouns. Wherfore alle 
men preyeden, the monstris, or wondres, 
tokne of thingus to cummyng, for to be 
s‘togidre turned" in to good. Bot when 
fals ‘rumour, or tithing°®, wente out, as 
Antiochus hadde gon out of lijf, Jason 
sodeynly assailide the citee, 2 thousand 
men taken to, not lesse; and the? cite- 
seyns togidre fleezinge to the wall, at 
the last the citee taken, Menelaus flei3 in 
6to the hee3 rocke. Forsothe Jason spar- 
ide not in sleaynge to his citeseyns, ne- 
ther he thou3te prosperite azens cosyns ; 


Il. MACCABEES. 


IV. 48—V. 6. 


king, set in sum porche, as for cause of re- 
freityng, ether coolding*, and ledde awei fro 
sentence; and assoilide fro crymes Menelaus, 47 
gilti treuli of al the malice. Forsothe he 
dampnede bi deth these wretchis, whiche . 
schulden be demed innocentis, 3he, if thei 
hadden led cause anentis Scitis*. Ther- 48 1Seitss eid 
for soone thei 3auen vniust peyne to hem, _ hethene men, 
that pursueden cause for the citee, and ae 
puple, and hooli vessels. Wherfor and 49%” 4FI*P%- 
men of Tire weren wrothe, and weren 
most liberal ajens® the biriynge of hem. 
Forsothe for coueitise of hem that weren 50 
in power, Menelaus dwelte in power, wex- 
ynge in malice, and to disseitis of cite- 
seyns. 
CAP. V. 
In the same tyme Antiok made redit 
the secounde goyng in to Egipt. Forsothe2 
it bifelle, that bi’ ech citee of men of Jeru- 
salem, weren seyn bi fourti daies horse 
men rennynge aboute the” eir, hauynge 
goldun stoolis, and schaftis, as campenyes 
of kny3tis armyd; and coursis of horsis3 
wiseli set bi ordris, and asailyngis* for to 
be maad ni3, and mouyngis of scheldis, 
and multitude of helmyd men, with 
streyned swerdis, and castyngis of dartis, 
and schynyng of goldun armeris, and of 
al kynde of haburiouns. Wherfor alle 
men preieden, that the monstris, ‘etherY 
wondris, tokene*Y of thingis to comynge?, 
be conuertid in to good. But whanne falss 
tithing wente out, as if Antiok hadde 
goon out of lijf, Jason sudenli assaylide 
the citee, with men takun not lesse than 
a thousynde; and whanne citeseyns fled- 
den to the wal togidere, and at the laste 
the citee was takun, Menelaus fledde* to? 
the hi3 tour. Forsothe* Jason sparide nots 
in4 sleynge his citeseyns, nether he thou3te 
prosperite ajens cosyns; and he demyde 
it for to be moost yuel, that he schulde 


fandn. 8 ajenis H. = bh Omer. = Lofa prem. kKhors#. ‘lmouyngisH. ™ castyngis 1. ; 
‘conuertid nH. © tithing w. =P Om. H. - 
t : nye . 
A refreityng a pr.m.R. acoolynge a sec. m. refreiding, ether coolding c. ether cooldyng e marg. 
abe R. Om. a et plures. — ¥ bi the rv. * asailyngis to gidere c pr.m. assailingis, or [ether a 
P ures] fiztings to gidre RYGHIKMNPQsUXYe. Yor EPY. YY tooknes EPY. tokev. ‘2Om.R. & fleiz R. ‘ 
In to cetert. fork, ‘asin a. \ 


Ee 


V. 7-17. 


demynge most yuel, for to be hym to 
takynge victories of enmyes, and not of 
7citeseyns. And sothely he weldide not 
princehod, bot toke confusioun eend of 
his aspies, or disseitis; and he, flee3inge 
seft, wente in to Ammanithen. At the 
last vndoynge of hym, closid togidre of 
Areta, tyraunt of Arabum, flee3inge fro 
citee in to citee, odiouse to alle men, as 
apostata, or forsaker of lawis, and abo- 
minable4, as enmye of the cuntree and 
9citeeseyns", is cast out in to Egipt. And 
he that hadde putt out many of her 
cuntree, perishide in pilgrimage, goynge 
to Lacedomonas, as for cosynage to hau- 
loynge there refuyt. And he that castide® 
awey many vnbiried, he and vnweilid 


and vubiried is cast out of byryyng, 


nether vsynge straunge sepulcre, nethir 
iltakynge part of fadris sepulere. And so 
these thingus don, the kyng supposide 
Jewis to forsakyng felawship; and for 
this he gon out of Egipt with wood in- 
wittis, toke the citee sothely with armes. 
12Forsothe he comaundide to the kni3tis, 
for to slea, nether tot spare to men ren- 
nynge a3einus, and by housis styinge vp 
i3for to strangle. Thefore ther weren 
maad sleayngis of 3unge and eldre, of 
wymmen and children distruyingus, and 
14 dethis of meydens and liti] children. For- 
sothe in alle three® days foure score thou- 
sand weren slayn, and’ fourty thousand 
bounden, forsothe not lesse seeld; bot 
isnether these thingus suffisen. Also he 
was hardy for to entre in to the temple 
holier than al the lond, Menelaus the 
leeder, that was traitour of lawis and 
iscuntree. And he touchide vnworthili, 
and defoulide, takyng in cursid hondis 
the holy vessels, that weren putt of other 
kyngis and citees, to ournyng and glorie 
170f the place. Antiochus so aliened fro 
mind, or vndirstondyng, biheelde not, 


4 abomynable, or waried u. abominable, or cursid G sec. m. 


tOm. acu. Uthethreen. v Om. acu. 


&aspies, or [ether plures] deceitis EFGHIMNPQSUXYe. aspies R. 
minable, or [ether plures] waried EpGHIMNPQsUXYe. 


[or EPY] undurstonding © et plures. 


II. MACCABEES. 


861 


take victories of enemyes, and not of cite- 
seyns. And sotheli he weldide not prins- 7 
hod, but took confusioun ende of his dis- 
Seitis®; and he flei eft, and wente iu to 
Ammanythen. And at the last in to vn-8 
doyng of him, he was closid togidere of 
Areta, tiraunt of Arabeis, and fley fro 
citee in to citee, and was odious to alle 
men, as apostata, ‘ether forsakere' of 
lawis, and abhomynable®, as enemye of 
cuntre and citeseyns, and was cast out in 
to Egipt. And he that hadde put outs 
many of her cuntre, perischide in pilgrim- 
age, and 3ede to Lacedomonas, as for co- 
synage to haue there refut. And he that.o 
castide awei many vnbiried, is cast out 
bothe vnweilid and vnbiried, and nether 
vsith straunge sepulture", nether takith 
part of fadris sepulcre. And whannell 
these thingis weren don so, the kyng 
supposide, that Jewis scliulden forsake 
felouschip; and for this he 3ede out of 
Egipt with woode soulis, and took the 
citee sotheli with armeris. Forsothe he1z 
comaundide to the kny3tis, for to sle, ne- 
ther spare to men rennynge a3ens, and to 
stie vp bi honsis, and strangle. Therfor 1s 
ther weren maad sleyngis of jonge and 
eldere, distriyngis of wymmen and chil- 
dren, and dethis of maidens and litle chil- 
dren. Forsothe in alle thre daies foure \4 
score thousynde weren slayn, fourti thou- 
synde boundun, forsothe not lesse seld ; 
but nether these thingis sufficen. Also he 15 
was hardi for to entre in to the temple 
holiere than al the lond, bi Menelaus 
ledere, that was traitour of lawis and 
cuntre. And he touchide vnworthily, and 16 
defoulide, takynge in cursid hondis the 
hooli vessels, that weren put of othere 
kyngis and citees, to ournyng and glorie! 
of the place. Antiok was so alienyd fro17 
mynde‘, and bihelde not, that, for synnes 
of men enhabitynge, the Lord was wroth 


r of citeseynes G sec. m. H. 8 cast H. 


f or forsakerc PY. Om. R. _& abho- 


hb sepulcre cru. 'gloriyng Rr. * mynde, ether 


862 


that, for synnys of men enhabitynge, the 
Lord was wroth a litil to the citee; for 
whiche thing and dispisyng bifelle aboute 
isthe place. Ellis 3if it hadde not bifallen 
hem for to be wlappid in many synnys, 
as Heleodore, that was sent fro kyng 
Seleucus for to robbe the tresorie, also 
this anoon cummynge to shulde be beten, 
igand forsothe put abac of hardinesse. Bot 
the Lord cheese not for the place the 
20fole, bot for the fole the place. And 
therfor and that place is maad parcener 
of yuels of the peple; afterward forsothe 
it shal be maad felawe and of goodis, and 
it, that is forsaken in wrath of almi3ty 
God, eftesoone in grete recounseilyng of 
the Lord shal be enhaunsid with grete 
ziglorie. Therfore Antiochus, taken awey 
a thousand and ei3te hundrid talentis of 
the temple, swiftly turnyde” a3ein to 
Antioche, demynge* hym for pryde ‘to 
leedyngeY ‘the lond to sayle*, the se for- 
sothe for to make? journey», for pride of 
22thou3t of soule. Forsothe he left pre- 
postis, to tourment the folc, in Jerusalem 
sothely Philip, of the® kyn of Friges, in 
maners crueler than hym self¢, of whom 
2he is ordeynyd; forsothe in Garysym, 
Andronyk and Menelaus, whiche more 
greuously than other layen® to citeseyns. 
24 And whanne he was sette a3einus Jewis, 
he sente an odious prince, Appollonye, 
with an oost two and twenti thousandis, 
comaundynge to hym for to slea alle of 
perfit age, wymmen and 3unglyngis' for 
25 to selle. Whiche whan he came to Jeru- 
salem, feynynge pees, restide ‘vn to% the 
holy day of saboth. And thanne, the™ 
Jewis holdynge holy day, he comaund- 
2synge' his for to take armers, and he* 
stranglide togidre alle that camen forth 
to the spectacle, or biholdyng; and he 
rennynge aboute the citee with armyd 
27mmen, slew3 a grete multitude. Forsothe 


I. MACCABEES. 


V. 18—27. 


a litil to the citee; for which thing also 
dispisyng bifelle aboute the place. Ellisis 
if it had not bifeld! hem for to be wlappid 
in many synnes, as Eliodore, that was 
sent fro kyng Seleucus for to robbe the 
treserie, also this anoon comynge schulde 
be betun, and forsothe put abak fro™ 
hardynesse. But the Lord ches not the 19 
fole for the place, but place for the folk. 
And therfor also thilke place was maad 20 
parcener of yuelis of the puple; aftirward 
forsothe it schal be maad felowe also" of 
goodis, and it, that is forsakun in wraththe 
of almy3ti God, eftsoone in recounselyng 
of the greet Lord schal be enhaunsid with 
greet® glorie. Therfor Antiok, whanne2i 
he hadde takun awei a thousynde and 
ei3te hundrid talentis of the temple, swiftli 
turnede a3en to Antiochie, and demyde 
hym for pride to lede the lond for to seile, 
the see forsothe for to make iournei, for 
pride of soule. Forsothe he lefte alsoP 22 
souereyns, toi turmente the fole, in Jeru- 
salem sotheli Filip, of the kyn of Fri- 
geus, cruelere than hym silf in maneris, 
of whom he was ordeyned; forsothe in23 
Garisyin, Andronik and Menelaus, whiche 
more greuousli than othere laien on cite- 
seyns. And whanne he was set ajens 24 
Jewis, he sente an odious prince, Appol- 
lonye, with an oost two and twenti thou- 
syndis, and comaundide to hym for to sle 
al of perfit age, for to sille wymmen and 
3onge children. Whiche whanne he cam 25 
to Jerusalem, feynede pees, and restide til 
to" the holi dai of sabat. And thanne while 
Jewis helden halidai, he comaundide his 
men for to take armeris, and stranglide 26 
alle that camen forth togidere to the bi- 
holdyng*; and he ran aboute the citee 
with armed men, and slowe a greet mul- pet ee 
titude. Forsothe Judas Machabeus, that 27 Grekis, that 
was the tenthe*, wente in to desert place, eee a 
and there ledde lijf with his men, among 


* the tenthe ; 
lawful hizest 
prest fro the 


grete. Lire 
here. EKPUY. 


ee pads Gsec.m.H. xX gessinge Gu. YOm. Gu. % to seyle, or rewe, the lond cu. @ lede, or 
ae € i. bi fote for to make iourney 4 pr.m. bi fole journey Gsec.m.H. © Om. Hu. 4 Om. G prim. 
ayen, or noyeden H. f3ongen. &tilton. » Om.n. icomaundide su, * Om. H. 
1 bi 7 
bifalle eripy. ™forr. ™andalsorn. ©°Om.R. Pallen. Gfortor. * Om. R. ‘5 spectacle, 


ether (or ery] bikolding c et plures. spectacle R. 


VI. I—lo. 


Judas Machabeus, that was the tenthe, 
wente in to desert place, and there he! 
ledde lijf with his, among wijld beestis 
in hillis; and thei dwelten etinge mete 
of hay, lest thei weren parceners of 
defoulyng. 

CAP. VI. 

1 Bot not after myche tyme the kyng 
sente sum olde Antiochene, whiche shulde 
constreyne Jewis, that thei shulde trans- 
ferre hem fro the™ lawis of faders and of 

2God; also® he shulde defoule the tem- 
ple, that was in Jerusalem, and shulde 
clepe it of Jouis Olympij, and in Gary- 
sym, as thei weren, that enhabitiden the 

3place, of Jouis hospitale. Forsothe the 
ajein rennyng of yuels was warst and 
4greuous to alle; for whi the temple was 
ful of lecherie and glotonye, and of men 
doynge lechery with horis, and wymmen 
baren yn hem self to halewid housis, at° 
her own will, berynge with ynne tho 
sthingis whiche it was not leefull. Also 
the auter was ful of vnleeful thingus, 
6whiche weren forbeden bi lawis. Sothely 
nether sabothis weren kept, nether so- 
lemne days of faders, or cuntree, weren 
kept, nether symply, or pleyuly, eny man 
7knowlachide hym a Jew. Forsothe thei 
weren ledde with bitter neede in day 
of the kyngus birthe to sacrifices. And 
whanne holy thingus of aP free chijld 
weren halewid, or wirshipid, thei, crowu- 
yd with edera, weren constreyned for to 
sgo about with the free chijld. Sothely 
the dome wente out in to the next citees 
of heithen men, Tholomeys procurynge, 
that liche manere thei shulden do a3einus 
sJewis, for to sacrifice; sothely that thei 
shulden slea hem, that wolden not passe 
to the ordenauncis of heithen men. Ther- 
fore it was wretchidnesse for to see these 
iothingus. Forsothe two wymmen weren 
accusid, for to haue circumcidid her chil- 
dren; whom whan thei hadden ledde 


LOm nu. ™ Om. H. 
-t sum celeri preter 1. u Om. r. v Om. 1. 
2 the helhen ¥: el plures. ‘227 Om. IR. 8 Om. Rh. 


II. MACCABEEKS. 


" and also x. 


863 


wielde beestis in hillis; and dwelten etynge 
mete of hey, lest thei weren parceneres 
of defoulyng. 


CaP, VI, 


But not aftir myche tyme the king) 
sente ant elde man of Antiochie*, which 
schulde constreyne Jewis, that thei schul- 
den translate hem silf fro lawis of fadris 
and of God; also he schulde defoule thee 
temple, ‘that was" in Jerusalem, and 
schulde clepe it of Jouis Olympij, and in 
Garisym, as thei weren, that enhabitiden 
the place, of Jouis hospital. Forsothe thes 
fallyng in of yuels was worste and greu- 
ouse to alle; for whi the teinple was ful4 
of letcherie and glotenye of hethene men, 
and of men doynge letcherie with horis, 
aud wymmen baren in hem silf to halewid 
housis, at her owne wille, berynge with 
ynne tho thingis whiche it was not leue- 
ful. Also the auter was ful of vnleueful 5 
thingis, whiche weren forbodun bi lawis. 
Sotheli nether sabatis weren kept, nether 6 
solempne daies of fadris weren kept, ne- 
ther sympli, ‘ether opynli*, ony man knou- 
lechide hym a Jew. Forsothe thei weren7 
led with bittir nede in the dai of the* 
kyngis birthe to sacrifices. And whanne 
hooli thingis of Liber, ‘that 7s, Bacus’, 
‘ether a false god, which hethene™ men 
clepiden god of wyn**, weren maad so- 
lempli, thei weren crownyd with yuy, and 
weren constreyned for to go aboute with 
Liber. Sotheli the doom wente out in tos 
the nexte citees of hethene men, bi Tolo- 
meis} procurynge, that in* lijk maner also 
thei schulden do a3ens” Jewis, that thei 
schulden do sacrifice; sotheli that thei9 
schulden sle hem, that wolden not passe 
to® ordynaunces* of hethene men. Ther- 
for it was to set wretchiduesse. 
whi twei wymmen weren accusid, that 


oofm. P Om. m. 


w nether openli 1. Om. pk. x Om. Rk. y Om. 1. 


btor. ¢tother. 4 ordynaunce rR. 


* that is, au 
hethen prest. 
Lire here. tr 
vY. 


+ that is, the 
synneris of 
Tolome. Lire 
here. U. 


2 that is, it bi- 
feld thanne to 
allemen [beinge 
thanne in x} 


For 10 present, to se 


wrecchidnesse 
that sueth. 
Lire here. Ku. 


864 


about opyuly by the citee, the infauntis 
hangid at brestis, thei castiden hem doun 
iby the? wallis. Forsothe other goynge 
to gidir to the next denns, and priuely 
wirshipynge the day of saboth, whan 
thei weren shewid to Philip, thei weren 
brente in flawmes, for thi that thei dred- 
den, ov shamyden, for religioun and ob- 
seruaunce, for to bere help to hem self 
izwith hond. Forsothe Y biseche hem, 
that ben to redynge this boke, that thei 
dreden not, ‘or haue not hydous*, for con- 
trarie casis’; bot rette thei tho thingns 
that bifellen not to perishing, bot for to 
13 bet to" amendynge of oure kynde. For- 
sothe for to not suffre by myche tyme 
synners for to do of sentence, or dome, 
bot anoon for to 3eue veniaunces, is shew- 
i4yng of grete benyfice”. Sothely, not as 
in other naciouns, the Lord abidith pa- 
ciently, that whan the day of dome shal 
cuine, he punyshe hem in plente of syn- 
isnys, so and in vs he ordeyneth, that oure 
syunys turned aboute in to the* eende, 
igsoY at the last he venge in vs. For 
whiche thing sothely he never remoueth 
his mercy fro vs; forsothe he chastis- 
ynge’ his peple, in aduersitees forsaakith 
i7not. Bot these ben said to 3ou in fewe 
to monestynge of men redynge; now 
forsothe it is to cume to the tellynge. 
is Therfore Eleasarus, oon of the former of 
scribis, o7 men of lawe, a man woxen in 
age, and fair in cheer, 3anynge with open 
mouth, was compellid for to ete swynys 
wflesh. And he biclippynge, or desijr- 
ynge, more gloriouse deth, than hateful 
lijf, wilfully wente byfore to tourment. 
20 Forsothe he byholdynge hou it bihoft 
for to go to, paciently susteynynge, or- 
deynyde for to not do vnleeful thingus 
21 for loue of lijf. Sothely these that stoden 
113, moued to gydre by wickid mercy, for 
olde frenship of the man, takynge hym 


q Om. 4. 


u Om. m, x Om. nu. 


Ww benyfices 1. 
© her brestis 1. 
hidouste e marg. 
et plures. 
desirede r. 


f Forsothe ceteri. 
hourer, iOm.r, 
Nandan. 


kin Rr. 


II. MACCABEES. 


T nether haue hidoustee u. or haue nol hidoustee G sec. m. 
Y so that w. 


VIL li——27. 


thei hadden circumcidid her children; and 
whanne thei hadden ledde hem aboute 
opynli bi the citee, with infauntis hangid 
at brestis®, thei castiden doun bi the wallis. 
Forsothe othere men 3eden togidere to the 11 
nexte dennes, and halewiden pryueli the 
dai of sabat, whanne thei weren schewid 
to Filip, thei weren brent in flawmes, for 
thei dredden for religioun and obseruaunce, 
for to bere help to hem silf with hond. 
Therforef Y biseche hem, that schulen 12 
rede this book, that thei ‘drede not® for 
aduersitees; but arette thei tho thingis 
that bifellen to be not to perischyng, but 
to amendyng of oure kyn. For whi fori3 
to not suffre bi myche tyme synneris for 
to do of sentence*, but anoon for to 3yue hat is 
veniaunces, is the schewing of greet» bene- i 
fice. For whi, not as in othere naciouns, 14 pe 
the Lord abidith pacientli, that whanne vv. 
the dai of dom schal come, he punysche 
hem in plente of synnes, so and in vs he1s 
ordeyneth, that whanne oure synnes ben 
turned aboute! in to ende, so at the laste 
he venge on* vs. For which thing sotheli is 
he neuer remoueth his merci fro vs; but 
he chastisith his puple, and forsakith not 
in aduersitees. But these thingis ben seid 17 
of vs in fewe wordis to the monestyng of 
men redynge; now forsothe it is to come 
to the tellyng. Therfor Eleasarus, oon of is 
the formere of! scribis™, a" man wexun in 
age, and ‘fair in cheer®, was coimpellid, 
‘janynge with open mouth?, for to ete 
swynes fleisch. And he ‘biclippide, ether 19 
chees, more glorious deth, than hateful 
lijf, and wilfuli wente bifore to turment. 
Forsothe he bihelde hou it bihofte for to 20 
go, and suffride pacientli, and ordeynede 
for to not do vnleueful thingis for the 
loue of lijf. Sotheli these that stoden ny3, 2! 
weren mouyd to gidere bi wickid merci, 
for eld frenschip of the man, and thei 
token hym priucli, and preiede that 


* chat is, as 


8 causis 4, t Om. G pr. m. 


2 chastynge H. 


& drede not, either haue not hidouste reuikmNosuX. elher haue 
: 1 of the n. 
° 3onyng with open mouthe in fair chere rR. 


m scribis, elher [or EPY] men of lawe c 
POm.R. 4 biclippede, or chees EPY. 


VI. 22——30. 


preuyly, preyden for to be brou3t to 
fleshis, whiche it was leeful hym for to 
ete, that it were feyned for to haue eten, 
as the kyng comaundide, of the fleshe” 
220f sacrifice; that this thing feyned, he 
were delyuered fro deth; and for olde 
frenship of the man, thei diden this hu- 
23manite, or curtasie, in hym. And he 
bigan for to thenke the worthi excellence 
of age, and his eelde, and the free born 
hoorenesse, 07 xobley, and fro childhode 
of beste lyuynge; and after the ordi- 
nauncis of holy lawe, and maad of God, 
he answerde soon, saiynge, hym for to 
24 wille to be sent bifore in to helle. So- 
thely he saith, It is not worthi to oure 
age for to feyne, that many 3unge men, 
demynge Eleazarus of fourescore 3eer® 
and ten, for to haue passid to lyif of4 
25 aliens, and thei be disceyued for my feyn- 
yng, and for litil tyme of corruptible lijf, 
and by this Y gete spott and execra- 
26 cioun, o7 cursidnesse, to myn eelde. For 
whi and 3if in this tyme Y be delyuerd 
fro tourmentis of men, bot nether quyck 
nether dead Y shal ascape the hond of 
27 Almi3ti®. Wherfore in passyng the lijf 
strongly, sothely Y shal appere worthi 
280ff age; forsothe Y shal leue stronge en- 
saumple to 3ungé men, 3if Y be perfitly 
sett in onest deth with redy inwitt, and 
strongly for the worthiest and holyest 
lawis. These thingis said, anoon he was 
zgdrawen to tourment. Forsothe these& 
that ledden him, and a litil byfore weren 
mylder, ben turned in to wrath, for these 
wordis said of hym, whom? thei demyden 
30 brou3t! forth by pride of herte. Bot 
whan he shulde be slayn with woundis, 
he inwardly* sorewide, and saide, Lord, 
that hast holy kunnyng, opynly thou 
wost, for whan Y my3t be delyuerd fro 
deth, Y susteyn! hard sorewis of body ; 
forsothe after™ soule wilfully Y suffre 


II. MACCABEES. 


865 


fleischis schulden be brou3t, whiche it was 
leueful to hym for to ete, that he were 
feyned to haue etun, as the kyng co- 
maundide, of the fleischis‘ of sacrifice ; that 22 

bi this dede he schulde be delyuered fro 
deth; and for eld frenschip of the man, 

thei dide this curtesie’ in hym. And he2 
bigan for to thenke the worthi excellence 

of age, and of his elde, and ‘fre borun® 
horenesse of noblei, and of best lyuyng 

fro child; and bi the ordynaunces of holi 
lawe‘, and maad of God, he answeride 
soone, seiynge, that he wolde be sent bi- 

fore in to helle. For he seide, It is not 24 
worthi to oure age for to feyne, that 
many 3onge men deme, that Eleasarus of 
foure score 3eer and ten, hath passid to 

the lijf of aliens, and that thei ben dis-2s5 
seyued for"® my feynyng, and for’ litil 
tyme of corruptible lijf, and that bi this 

Y gete spotte and” cursidnesse* to myn 
eelde. For whi thou3 in present tyme Y 26 

be delyuered fro turmentis of men, but 
nether quyk nether deed Y schal ascape 

the hond of Almy3ti. Wherfor in pass-27 
ynge the lijf strongli*, sotheli Y schal ap-— * passing she lif 
pere worthi of age; forsothe Y schal leue2s rapes 2 
stronge ensaumple to 3onge men, if Y vse amen : 
perfitliY onest? deth with redi wille, and ree ia 
strongli for the worthieste and holieste  rvy. 
lawis. Whanne these thingis weren seid, 
anoon he was drawun to turment. For-29 
sothe these that ledden hym, and a litil 
bifore weren myldere, weren turned in to 
wraththe, for the wordis seid of hym, 
whiche thei demyden brou3t forth bi pride 

of herte. But whanne he schulde be slayn 30 
with woundis, he sorewide inwardli, and 
seide, Lord, tbat hast hooli kunnyng, 
openli thou woost, that whanne Y my3te 

be delyuered fro deth, Y suffre* hard so- 
rewis of bodi; forsothe bi soule wilfuli Y 
suffre these thingis for thi drede. And>s1 
sotheli this man on this maner departidec 


bfleschis i. ©Om.Gpr.m. dasax. € the Almiztiasec.m.u. finn. 8& Om. G prim. 
bh whiche wordis wu. !wrou3t un. Kin. IJsusteynede un. ™ vp Hu. 

4 fleisch v. * humanite rR. humanyte, ether [or EPpy] curtesi c et coferi. 8 the fre born re. * Jaws 
Apr.m. ‘bir, Vthat forr. Ww ofc. * execracioun, or (ether plures) cursednesse EFGHIKMNPQSUXYe. 
execracioun R. yOm.F. Zand onest R, 4 suffrider. » Om. R. ©¢ partide Rr. 

VOL. III. 58 


866 


31 these thingus, for thi dreed. And sothely 
this man in this maner departide fro lijf; 
not oouly leeuynge the mynde of his deth 
to 3unge men, bot and to alle the folc, to 
ensaumple of vertu and strengthe. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Forsothe it bifelle, seuen bretheren 
taken to gidre with the modir, for to 
be constreyned of the kyng for to touche 
azeinus leeue" ‘swynys flesche®; hem tour- 
mentid with scourgyngis, and tourment 
2maad of bole lether. Forsothe oon of 
hem, that was the first?, saith thus, What 
seekist thou? and what wolt thou lerne 
of vs? we ben redy for to dye, more 
than to breke the fadre lawis9, or cuntree 
3lawis, of God. And so the kyng wrothe 
comaundide pannes of brasse, and brasen 
pottis for to be tendid. Whiche anoon 
4tendid, he comaundide the tunge for to 
be kitt off to hym that former spack, and 
skyn of the hed ‘to be’ drawen awey, and 
the hee3ist hondis and feet of hym for 
to be kitt byfore, the other bretheren of 
shym and the moder biholdynge. And 
whan he was maad nowe vnprofitable bi 
alle thingis, he comaundide fijr for to be 
moued to hym, and 3it vndirbrethinge*® 
tot be brent, or turned, in the brasen 
panne; in whiche whan he was longe 
tourmentid, the othir bretheren togidre 
with the modir, monestiden, or counfort- 
iden, hem to gidre for to dye strongly, 
6sayinge, The Lord God shal biholde 
trewthe, and he shal counforte, o7 3exe 
solace, in vs, as Moyses declaride in 


® leefulnesse G sec.m.u. 9% swyne flesches 1. 
$ vndirbrethinge, or groninge un. for to 1. 


4 and 1. 
Gare: ffswyn kz. & fleisch ne. 
for to Mse. m lawe Apr. m.R. 
C sec. mM. F sec.m. GIMNQSUX. 8 Om. EPy. 
hondis c sec. m. ¥ sec. m. 1KMSUX. 


C pr. il. F pr. m. He. awei EPY. awei bifore R. 


h bolis s. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


P first, or eldist G sec. m. H. 


® touche a pr.m.n. etec. touche, or [ether plures] ete EFGHIKMNPQSUXYe. 
i more redi c sec. m. F sec. m. IKMUX. 
n And therfor re. 
t first KAIQSUX. 
x his feet C sec. m. F sec. m. IKMSUX. 
® the othre ¥F. 


VI. 31—VII. 6. 


fro lijf; not oneli leaynge the mynde of 
his deth to 3onge men, but and to al the 
folc, to ensaumple of4 vertu and strengthe. 


CAP. VII. 


Forsothe it bifelle, that seuene britheren1 
takun togidere with the modir, weren con- 
streyned of the kyng for to taaste® a3eus 
thef lawe swynes® fleischis$; and weren 
turmentid with scourgyngis, and turment 
maad of bole" lether. Forsothe oon of2 
hem, that was the first, seide thus, What 
sekist thou? and what wolt thon lerne of 
vs? we ben redi! for to die, more* than 
to! breke the fadris lawes™ of God. Ther-3 
for” the kyng was wroth, and comaundide 
‘pannes of bras®, and brasun? pottis ford to 
be maad ful hoot. And whan tho anoon 
werin maad ful hoot, he comaundide the™4 
tunge for’ to be kit of fro hym that spak 
bifore'; and whanne the" skynne of the 
heed was drawun awei, ke bad bothe the 
hizeste partis of hondis* and of feet* ‘of 
hymY for to be kit of%, the while othere* 
britheren” and the modir ‘of hym>» biheld- 
en. And whanne he was maad¢ thannes 
vnprofitable bi alle thingis, he comaundide 
fier for to be brou3t? to him, and 3it ‘al 
quik" brethinge® for to bef brent in the 
brasun panne; in which whanne he was 
longe turmentid, the othere’ togidere with 
the modir, ‘conmfortiden hem? togidere! 
for to die strongli, seiynge’, The Lord6é 
God schal biholde treuthe, and schal ‘3yue 
solace in! vs, as Moises declaride ‘in bifure™ 


qOm. Hu. Om. u. 


f Om. & ef 
k Om. cFIKMUX. 
P brass. 2 Om. Epry. fF his 
u his C sec. m. F sec. m. GEMNQUX.  W his 
yOm.crikms. 2 of awei a pr.m. 
> brethren of him F pr.m.e. »b Om. e. 


© brasun pannes s. 


¢ymaade, ¢¢ Om. a pr.m. 4 mouydc pr. m.F pr.m.Hne. mened EPY. 44 Om. c pr.m. EPRYe. quyke 


F sup. ras. KNx. al vu. 
& othere bretheren c sec 
F sec. m.GIKMNQUX. monesteden, 


other s. i togideres c sec. m. F sec. m. MSX. 


© brethinge, or [cther ne] gronynge c pr.m. xuPYe. brennynge vu. £Om.F pr.m.s. 
.m. GIMNQsUX. tothere bretheren F sec. m. K. 


h counsailiden eche othere c sec. m. 


or [ether we] conforteden hem Rupye. monestiden x. coumfortiden ech 
Kk and seiden c sec. m. F sec. m. GIKMNQSUX. 


1 com fort 


Cpr.m.n. 3yue comfort among ¢ sec. m. F sec. m. GIKNQSUX. counforte, or [ether H] 3iue solace, in E1Pe. 


3yue comfort among solace in m. = byfore in s. 


VII. 7——17. 


byfore witnessynge of songe, and in his 
7seruauntis he" shal counforte. And so 
hym the first dead on this maner, thei 
ledden forth the suynge to’ be scornyd; 
and, the skyn of his hed drawen off, thei 
axiden, 3if he shulde eet, byfore that he 
were punyshid in al the body, by alle 
smembris by hem self. And he answer- 
yuge in cuntree voice, saide, Y shal not”. 
For whiche thing, and this in suynge 
place of the first, resceyuede tourmentis. 
9 And he ordeynyd in the last spirit, saith 
thus, Sothely thou most wickid, or cur's- 
id, leesist vs in this lijf, bot the kyng of 
the world shal reyse, in a3ein rysyng of 
euerlastynge lijf, vs dead for his lawis. 
10 After this the thrid was scorned ; and he 


axid, anoon bro3t forth the tunge, and. 


11stedfastly helde forth the hondis, and 
with trist saith, Of heuen Y weelde these 
thingus, bot for the lawis of God nowe 
Y dispise these same; for Y hope me to 
l2resceyuynge hem of hym. So that the 
kyng, and tho* that weren with hym, 
wondriden the inwitt of the 3unge man, 
that he ledde the tourmentis as nou3t. 
13 And this thus dead, thei traueiliden the 
iifourthe, also tourmentynge. And whan 
he was nowe at deth, he saith thus, Ra- 
ther it is, men 3ouen to deth of men, for 
to abijd hoope of God, beinge to he 
reysid ajeinY eft of hym; forsothe a3ein 
\srijsyng to lijf shal not be to thee. And 
whan thei hadden stirid to the fifthe, 
thei? traueiliden hym. And he bihold- 
ls yuge in to hym, saide, Thou hauynge 
power amonge men, whan thou art cor- 
ruptible, dost what thou wolt ; forsothe 
nyl thou gesse, oure kynn for to be for- 
17saken of God. Sothely susteyne thou 


uOm. G pr.m.  ¥ for to H. 


n his song € sec. m. F Sec. m. GIKMNQSUX. 
¥ suinge A pr.m.c pr.m. EHREe. s Om. I. 
place a pr. m. EFHPRYe. 
C pr. m. EFGUPRYE. 


b Om. EHPRye. 


for his lawes F sec. m. 
& hise 1. 


f his c scc. m. F sec. m, GIKMNQSUX. 
F sec. Mm. GIKMNQSUX, 
mentiden him c sec. m. F sec. m. IKS. 
Sthe deth r. tthe hope er. 
C pr.m, EF pr.m. HRYe. for the 1. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


¥ not do H. 


o in A pr. m. EHPRYe. 
t Om. A pr. m. EF pr. m. Ike. 
Vv Om. A pr.m. EFHPRYe. 
% cursid CGIKMNQRUX. wickid, or [either Fu] cursed EFIPY. 
euerlasting lif vs deed for his lawis EF pr.m. upye. in ajen risyng of euere lasting 
© axed EHPRYEe. 
bh seide with trist, Of a pr.m. EHPRYe. 
k thingis a pr.m. C pr.m. EMRe. 
P Om. EUPRYe. 
u for thei ¢ sec. m. F sec, mm. GIKMNQSUX, 
X of GIKMNQSUX. 


867 


witnessyng of song", and among? his seru- 
auntis he schal 3ife? coumforte. Therfor?7 
whanne thilke firste was deed in this ma- 
ner, thei ledden forth the nexte™ for to be 
scornyd; and whanne the skyn of his 
heed was drawun of, with the heeris, thei 
axiden, if he wolde ete, bifore that he 
were punyschid in al the bodi, bi alle 
membris bi hem silf. And he answerides 


bi the® vois of fadris*, and seide, Y schal  * that is, bi the 


6 8 5 *s hing. Lire 
not do z¢t. For which ‘cause this also, in here. ie. 
a place faste bi", resseyuede lijkY turinentis ele nae 
of the firste. And whanne” he was or-9 eng 


deyned* in the laste spirit, heY seide thus, 
Sotheli thou most wickid? lesist vs in this 
lijf, but the kyng of the world schal reise 
‘vs that ben deede for his lawis, in a3en- 
risinge of euerlastinge lijf*. After this the 10 
thridde was scorned; and whanne? he was 
bede®, he4 ‘profride soone® forth thef tunge, 
and stidfastli helde forth the® hondis, and 11 
‘seide, Of God of heuene Y welde! these 
lymes*, but for the! lawis of God now Y 
dispise these same; for Y hope, that Y 
schal resseyue tho of him. So that thete 
kyng, and’ thei that weren with hym, 
wondriden on the wisdom of the jonge 
man, that he™ ledde the turmentis as nou3t. 
And whanne this® was thus deed, thei13 
traueliden the fourthe, and turmentiden® 
in lijk maner. And whanne he was thanne 14 
at the deth, he seide thus, ‘Wel the? ra- 
ther it is ned4, that men 3ouun" to deth® 
of men, abide hopet of God, that" schulen 
be reisid a3en ‘eft of him’; for” a3en ris- 
yng to* lijft schal not be to thee. And 15+ thatis, en- 


; deedli lif 
whanne thei hadden brou3t the fyuethe, glorious, ae 
thei traueliden hym. And he bihelde in NGrotct ana 


to hym, and seide, Thou hast power ig “ere. EKPuy. 
among men, ‘and thou3 thou be” corrupt- 


xthein. y Om... 2 and thei n. 
p Om. A prem. eure, 49 Fort. 
u thing, and this in suing 
xOm. Er. Yanda 
a in ajenrising of 
lyif vs that ben deed 
€ soone brou3t ENPRYe. 
i haue c sec. m. 
ohethis3. © tur 


w Om. A pr. nt. EFGHPRYe. 


@ and ENPYe. 


10m.Rr. ™ Om. a. 
qOm. c pr.m. EHPRYe. r do A sec. m. sup. ras. 
vOm. x. ® forsothe a pr. 1. 


y whan thou art A pr. m. EHPRYe. 


582 


868 Il. MACCABEES. 


patiently, and thou shalt see the grete 
power of hym, hou he shal tourmente 
isthee, and thi seed. After this thei led- 
den to and the sixt; and this bygyn- 
nynge for to dye, saith thus, Nyl thou 
erre ydely; forsothe we suffren these 
thingus for oure* self, synnynge in to 
oure God, and thingus worthi of won- 
i9dryng ben maad in vs; forsothe deme 
thou not, to beynge with outen peyn to 
thee, that thou hast temptid for to fizte 
20a3einus God. Forsothe the moder won- 
derful aboue maner®, and worthi the 
mynde of good men, whiche biholdynge 
seuen sonys perishynge vnder tyme of oo 
day, suffride in good inwitt®, for hoope 
21that she hadde in to God; she monestide 
eche of hem by voice of cuntree, strongly 
fulfillid with wijsdam, and ynsettinge 
22mans ynwitt to wommans thou3t, saide 
to hem, Sonys, Y wote not how 3e ap- 
periden in my wombe; forsothe nether 
Y haue 3ouen to 30u spirit, and soule, 
and lijf, and Y my self ioynyde not to 
23gidre the membris of eche; bot sothely 
the maker of nou3t of the world, that 
fourmyde the birthe’ of man, and foonde 
bygynnynge of alle, shal 3eelde eft to 3ou 
spirit, and lijf, with mercye, as now 3e 
dispisen 3our self for the lawis of hym. 
24 Forsothe Antiochus demynge hym for to 
be dispisid, and also dispisid by voice of 
the repreuynge, whan 3it the 3unger was 
alyue®, not oonly he monestide by 
woordis, bot and with ooth he affermyde, 
to makynge hym rijche and blessid, and 
to hauynge freend, translatid fro cuntre 
lawis, and to 3euynge needful thingus. 
25 Bot whan the 3unge man was not bowid 
to these thingis, the kyng clepide the 
modir, and softly counseilide her, that shef 
shulde be maad to the 3unge man in to 


e 


VII. 18—25. 


ible, thou” doist what thou wolt; but nyl 
thon® gesse, that onure kyn is forsakun of 
God. But abide thou pacientli, and thou 17 
schalt se the greet power of hym, hou he 
schal turmente thee, and thi seed. After? 18 
thei ledden® also the sixte; and this‘ bi- 
gan for to die, and seide thus, Nyle thou® 
erre idili; for we suffren these thingis for 
vs’ silf, synnynge ajens oure God, and 
thingis worthi of wondryng ben maadé in 
vs; but deme thou not, that it schal be19 
with out peyne to thee, that thou hast 
temptid for to fizte azens God. Forsothe 20 
the ‘merueylous moder of hem}, and wor- 
thi the mynde of goode men, which bi- 
helde seuene sones perischynge vndur the 
tyme of o day, ‘and suffride aboue manere! 
with good wille, for the hope that sche 
hadde in to God; sche* monestide ech of21 
hem bi vois of fadris, ‘that is, acordynge 
to the techyng of hoolt fadris'!, and was 
strongli fillid with wisdom, and settide 
mannus witte to wommanys thou3t, and 22 
seide to hem, Sones, Y woot not hou 3e 
apperiden in my wombe; for nether Y 
haue 3ouun to 30u spirit, and soule, and 
lijf, and Y™ my silf ioynede not togidere 
the membris of ech; but the makere of23 
nou3t of® the world, that fourmyde na- 
tiuyte® of man, and foond bigyunyng of 
alle, schal 3elde eft to 30u spirit, and lijf, 
with merci, as nowP 3e dispisen’ 3ou' silf 
for the lawis of hym. Forsothe Antiok 24 
demyde hym for to be dispisid, and also* 
bi dispisable vois of a repreuere, and 
whanne 3it the 30ngere was ‘on lyue', not 
oneli he monestide bi wordis, but and" 
with an ooth he affirmyde, to make hym 
riche and blissful, and to haue frend’, 
trauslatid fro lawis of fadris, and to 3yue 
‘to hym® nedeful thingis. But whanne2s 
the 3onge man was not bowid to these 


avsH. > maner, or ful myche 1. © inwitt, or counseil u. ‘natyuyte uw. e@onlyue x. fOm.x. 


zand Apr.m.EHRe. ®3eR. > After this re. 


© brougten c sec. m. F sec.m. GIKMNQsUX. ‘4 he 


isl. € ee : 
this 1 ger. fourer. & doc sec.m. F sec.m. GIKMNQSUX. 1 modir is wondirful aboue manere, 


ae [or epy] ful miche c pr.m. EF pr.m.HPY. modir is wondirful aboue manere Re. 
pr.m.Enprye. aboue manere of kynde sutfride ¢ sec. m. F sec. m. G1KMNQSUX. 


Msec.m.Nqsux. andr. 1Om.re ™ Om, a. 
4 dispisiden kx. T30urE. 8 Om. R. 
to e sec. om. 


i and suffride 
k and sche cGIk 


nQOm.N. °the natiuitee Gc. P wis as GKMNQSUX. 
talyue rr UtOm.r. vhimafrendr. W Om. Re pr.m. 


VII. 26—37. 


26helthe. Forsothe whan he monestide® 
hir by many wordis, she bihi3te hir to 
27counseilinge hir sone. And so she bow- 
yde doun to hym, scornynge the cruel 
tyraunt, saith in cuntree voice, Sone, 
haue mercy on me, that bare thee in 
wombe nyne monethis, and 3aue mylk by 
three 3eere, and nurishide, and im to this 
28age fully brou3te. Y axe, chijld, that 
thou biholde to heuen and erthe, and alle 
thingus that ben in hem, and vndir- 
stonde, for God made hem of nou3t, and 
209 kynde of men. So it shal be maad, that 
thou dreede not this tourmentour, bot 
thou maad worthi to thi bretheren, re- 
sceyue deeth, that in that mercy doynge 
Y resceyue thee with thi bretheren. 
30 Whan she 3it said these thingus, the. 
3unge man saith, Whom susteyne 3e? 
Y obeye not to biddyng of the kyng, 
bot to precept of the lawe, that is 3ouen 
3ito vs by Moyses. Forsothe thou, that art 
maad* fynder of al malice in to Ebrues, 
seshalt not scape the hond of God. We 
sothely suffren these thingus for oure 
s3synnys; and 3if oure Lord be a litil 
wrothe to vs for blamynge and chastis- 
ynge, bot eft he shal be recounseild' to 
sihis seruauntis. Forsothe thou cursid, 
and of alle men most flagiciouse, or 
fullist of yuel doyngus, and stiryugus, 
nyl thou veyuly be enhaunsid, by veyn 
fourmys enflawmed in to his seruauntis ; 
sssothely* thou hast not scapid 3it the 
dom of almi3ty God, and biholdynge alle 
s6thingus. For whi my bretheren now a 
litil sorew suffriden, and! ben maad vndir 
the testament of euerlastynge lijf; thou 
sothely by dome of God shalt paye inst 
37 paynes of pride. Sothely Y, and as my 
bretheren, bitake my soule and body for 
the lawis of faders, or of cuntree; ynclep- 


8 amonestide nH. 4 Om. a4 pr. m. 


X woordis C sec. m. F sec. Ml. IMUX. 
rey © sec. m. &hauethoum. and rR. 


F sec.m. Gikmngsux. ff or Ery. 
A pr.m. CEFGHIKMNPQUXY. foormis Rs sup. ras. e. 
°as Y and my alure. 


IJ. MACCABEES. 


“was 3ouun to vs bi Moises. 


i recounseilid, or pesid 1. 


y him Gn sec. m. se sec.m. Om. Rn. 
© Om. nN. 
ee recounselid, either [or EPY] peesid ¥ et plures. recounselid, ether plesid 1. 
& Gloss om. in GIKMNQRSUX. 


869 


thingis*, the kyng clepide the modir, and 
softli counselide hir, that sche schulde be 
maad to the 3onge man in to helth. For-26 
sothe whanne he monestide hir bi many 
wordis, sche bihi3te hirY for to counsele 
hir sone. Therfor* sche bowide down to 27 
hym, and scornyde the crucl tiraunt, and 
seide in cuntrei”* vois, Sone, haue® merci on 
me, that bar thee in wombe nyne monethis, 
and 3af mylk bi thre 3eer, and nurschide, 
and fulli brou3te in to this age. Y axe, 28 
child, that thou biholde to heuene and 
erthe, and alle thingis that ben in hem, 
and vnderstonde, that God made hem of 
nou3t, and the kynde of men. So it schal29 
be don, that thou drede not this turmen- 
tour, but be thou maad worthi to thi bri- 
theren, and resseyue deth, that> in that 
merci doyng Y resseyue thee with thi bri- 
theren. Whanne sche seide 3it° these 30 
thingis, the 3ong man seide, Whom abiden 
3e? Y obeie not to biddyng? of the kyng, 
but to comaundement of the lawe, that 
Forsothe 31 
thou, that art maad fyndere of al malice 
ajens Ebrewis, schalt not ascape the hond 
of God. For we suffren these thingis for 32 
oure synnes; thou3® oure Lord be a litils3 
wroth to vs for blamyng and chastisyng, 
but eft he schal be recounselid®* to hise 
seruauntis. Forsothe thou cursid, and 34 
most flagiciouse’, ether® fulleste of yuel 
doyngis, and stiryugis®, of alle men, nyle 
thou veynli be enhaunsid, that art‘ en- 
flaumyd bi veyn hope* a3ens his seru- 
auntis; for thou hast not scapid! 3it™ the 3s 
dom of almy3ti God, and biholdynge alle 
thingis. ‘For whi" my britheren suffriden 36 
now a litil sorewe, and ben maad vndur 
testament of euerlastynge lijf; thou so- 
theli bi dom of God schalt paie iust peynes 
of pride. Sotheli ‘Y as my°® britheren, 37 


k forsothe nu. | Om. eu. 


z And therfor re. 22 cuntra- 
d the bidding r¢KMNQsUX. e and thou3 1. 
t cruel turmentour, ¢ sec. m. 
bh Om. ce prem. i1Om.a. * Om. 


lascapid cnx. ™ Om. Rr. " Fore prom. & prom. 


870 Il. MACCABEES. 


ynge God, more rijply for to be maad 
helpful to oure folc, and thee with tour- 
mentis and betyngus for to knowleche, 
3efor he is God aloone. For in me and in 
my bretheren the wrath of Almi3ty shal 
faile, whiche is iustly™ brou3t yn vpon alle 
soour kyn. Than the kyng kyndlid with 
wrath, was feers" in to hym more cruely 
aboue alle, berynge vnworthily hym self 
soscornyd. And he this sothely cleene 
dyede, by alle thingus tristynge in the 
41 Lord. Forsothe at the last the° modir 
is waastid, or dead, after the sonys. 
42 Therfor of sacrifices, and ouer grete cruel- 
tees, is ynow said. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Forsothe Judas Machabeus, and thei 
that weren with hym, entriden priuely 
in to castels; and thei, cleepynge to gidre 
cosyns, and frendis, and takynge to hem 
that dwelten in Jurye?, ledden out to 
2sixe thousand’ men. And thei inclep- 
iden the Lord, for to biholde in to the 
peple, that was defoulid of alle men; for 
to haue mercye of* the temple, that was 
3 defoulid of vnpitous men; and for to haue 
mercy of* distruyinge of the citee, that 
was anoon to be maad pleyn to gidre; 
and for to heere the voice of blood cry- 
4inge to him, and for to haue mynde of 
the wickidist dethis of lytil children in- 
nocentis, and of blasfemyes 3ouen to his 
name; and for to haue indignacioun on 
these thingus. And Machabeus, the mul- 
titude gadrid, was maad vnsuffreable to 
heithen men; forsothe the wrath of the 
sLord is conuertid in to mercye. And 
he aboue cummynge to castels and cytees, 
vnwarnyd, brente hem; ocupyinge couen- 
able places, 3aue not fewe sleayngis of 


VII. 38—VIII. 6. 


bitake my soule and bodi for lawis? of 
fadris; and Y clepe God to help, that 
more’ ripeli he be maad helpful to oure 
fole, and that thou knouleche with tur- 
mentis ‘and betyngis’, that he is God 
aloone. Forsothe the wraththe of Al-38 
my3ti® schal failet in me and in my bri- 
theren, which is iustli brou3te in on al 
oure kyn. Thanne the kyng was kyndlid 39 
with wrath, and was fers a3ens hym more 
crueli aboue alle; and bar vnworthili, ‘ether 
heuyli®, hym silf scorned. Therfor and’ 40 
this was” clene, and diede, tristynge bi 
alle thingis in the Lord. Forsothe’™ at the 41 
laste also the modir was wastid*, after the 
sones. TTherfor of sacrifices, and ouer 42 
greet crueltees, is ynow3 seid. 


CAP. VIII. 


Forsothe Judas Machabeus, and theil 
that weren with hym, entriden priueli in 
to castels; and? clepiden togidere cosyns, 
and frendis, and token hem that dwelten 


* in Judee, ether® in kepyng of the lawe 


of Jewis*, and ledden out men to sixe 
thousyndis. And thei clepiden the Lord2 
to help, for to biholde on the puple, that 
was defoulid of alle men; for to haue 
merci on the temple, that was defoulid of 
vupitouse men; and for to haue merci on3 
distriyng of the citee, that’ was anoon 
to be maad pleyn togidere; and for to 
here the vois of blood criynge to hym, 
and for to haue mynde ont the wikidiste 4 
dethis of litle children innocentis, and of 
blasfemyes 3ouun to his name; and for to 
haue indignacioun on these thingis. Ands 
Machabeus, with the multitude gaderid, 
was maad vnsuffrable to hethene men; 
for the wraththe of the Lord was con- 
uertid in to merci. And he aboue cam tof6 
castels and citees, vnwarned, and brente 
hem; and ocupiede couenable places, and 


™ just 4G pr.m. HK. © fers, or wood un. © andthe u. P Jewrye, or lond of Judee H. 4 thousandis H. 


Fon H. Sonu, 


P the lawis1. (the more r. Trof betingis E. Om.e. *% Almi3ti God c sec.m. ¥aikMNQRUXe. ¢ have 
an ende C see.m. F sec. m. GiKMNQUX. fallen. %Om.R. VY Om. CGIKMNQsUX. W was also € sec. m. GIK 
MNQSUX,  8W For apr.m. * wastid, ether deed cCFGHIKMNQSUXe. YuOW E. Zand thei N. or EPY. 
bOm. cn. ¢Glossom.iners. eofc. fintoc prem. 


VII. 7—16. 


zenmys. Sothely in ni3tist he was most 
born to syche out rennyngis; and fame 
of his vertu was shed out euery wher. 
8Forsothe Philip seeynge the man bi litil 
and litil for to cume to profit, or encrese, 
and ful ofte thingus bifalle to hym eesili, 
' or in prosperite, wrote to Tholome, duyk 
of Celescirie and Fenyce, that he shulde 
9 bere help to the kyngis needis. And he 
swiftly sente Nychanore of Patrode, 
frend of the former, or worthier, 3ouen 
to hym not lesse than twenti thousandis 
of armyd folkis meynt® to gidre, for to do 
awey al the kynde; and ioyned to hym 
Gorgie, a kni3tly man, and in thingus of 
10 bateil most expert. Forsothe Nychanore 
ordeynede to the kyng, that he shulde 


fulfille the tribute that was to be 3ouen . 


to Romayns, two thousand’ of talentis, 
of the caitifte of Jewis. And anoon he 
sente to cytees of the se coost, clepynge 
togidre to euyn byinge of boonde men of 
Jewis ; byhetynge hym to sellynge nynty 
boond men for oo talent, not byholdynge 
to veniaunce” that was to folewynge 
iwhym of the* Almi3ty. Forsothe wher 
Judas foonde, he shewide to these’ Jewis 
that weren with hym, the cummynge of 
13 Nychanore. Of whom? sume* inwardly 
dreedynge, and not byleenynge to ri3t- 
wisnesse> of God, weren turnyd in to 
14 flizt ; other sothely, 3if eny leften of hem, 
camen, and to gidre bisou3ten the Lord, 
for to delyuere hem of wickid Nycha- 
nore, whiche hadde solde hem bifore that 
ishe came ni3; and thou3 not for hem, for 
the testament that was to the fadris of 
hem, and for the® yncleepyng of his holy 
icname and grete on hem. Forsothe Ma- 
chabeus, clepid to gidre seuen thousandis 
that weren with hym, preyide, that thei 


shulden not be reconseilid, nether shul- — 


den dreed the multitude of enmyes wick- 
idly cummynge a3einus hem, bot strongly 


t my3tis H. 
® summe men G sec. m. UH. 


umeyngid H. ¥ thousandis n. 
> the riztwisnesse Hu. 


& shed, ether shewed K sec. m. marg. 


K ful esili nr. esili, ether [or upye] in prosperite c et ceteri. 
nn ¢ is deficient from this place to the beginning of the Prologue on Matthew. 
4 the cleping r. 


m Om. c. 
° or EPY. 


2 joynede R. 


00 Almi3ti God x. P but for EPy. 


II. MACCABEES. 


w the veniaunce H. 
¢ Om. u. 


h profit x. profit ether [or EPY] encrees c et celeri. 


871 


3af not fewe sleyngis of enemyes. Sotheli7 
in ni3tis he was most borun to seche out 
rennyngis; and fame of his vertu. was 
sched® out euery where. Forsothe Filips 
si3, that the man bi litil and liti] cam to 
encrees*, and that ful ofte thingis bifall- 
ideni to hym ‘in prosperite*; and he wroot 
to Tolome, duyk of Celessirie and of Fe- 
nice, that he schulde bere help to the 
kyngis nedis. And he swiftli sente Nyca-9 
nor of Patrode, of the formere! frendis, 
and 3af ‘to hym™ not lesse than twenti 
thousyndis of armed folkis meynt togidere, 
for to do awei al the kyn of Jewis; and 
ordeynede® to hym Gorgie, a kny3tli man, 
and most expert in thingis of batel. For- 10 
sothe Nycanor bihi3te stidfastly to the 
kyng, that he schulde fille the tribut that 
was to be 3ouun to Romayns, two thon- 
syndis of talentis, of the caitifte of Jewis. 
And"* anoon he sente to citees of the see1 
coost, and clepide togidere to euenbiyng 
of prisoneris, ether® of boonde men, of 
Jewis; and bihi3te, that he schal sille nynti 
boonde men for a talent, not biholdynge 
to the veniatince that schulde sue hym of 
Almi3ti?®. Forsothe whanne Judas foond, 12 
he schewide to these Jewis that weren 
with hym, the comyng of Nycanor. Of1is 
which summe inwardli dredden, and bi- 
leuyden not to the riz3twisnesse of God, 
and weren turned in to fli3t; othere so-14 
theli, if ony leften of hem, camen, and to- 
gidere bisou3ten the Lord, for to delyuere 
hem fro wyckid Nycanor, which hadde seld 
hem bifore that he cam ni3; and thou3 notis 
for hem, for? the testament that was to 
the fadris of hem, and for clepyng’? to 
help of his hooli name and greet on hem. 
Forsothe Machabeus clepide togidere se-16 
uene thousyndis that weren with hym, 
and preiede, that thei schulden not be 
recounselid to enemyes, nether schulden | 
drede the multitude of enemyes wickidli 


xOm. Hu. Ythe wn. 2 whiche 7. 


i bifellen Fr. 
1 formere, ether [or EPyY] worthier c et plures. 


872 II. MACCABEES. 


a 


i7shulden stryue, or fi3te; hauynge byfore 
the eezen the dispite that was ‘in brou3t? 
in the holy place vniustly of hem, and 
also the® wronge of citee’, had in scorn- 
ynge; 3it also the ordynaunces of olde 
ismen distruyed to gidre. For whi he 
saith, Thei sothely tristen in armers to 
gidre and hardynesse ; forsothe we tristen 
in the Lord almi3ty, that may do awey 
with oo lookyng, wille, or signe, and 
men cummynge ajeinus vs, andé al the 
i9 world. Forsothe he monestide hem and 
of helpis of God, that ben don a3einus 
faders; and that vndir Senacheryb an 
hundrid foure score and fyue thousand 
20 pershiden ; and of the batel that was to 
hem a3einus Galathas, in Babyloyn; wher 
3if it come to thing, or ¢rewthe, felowis 
Macedoyns doutynge, thei alle six thou- 
sandis alone slewen an hundrid and 
twenty thousandis, for help 3ouen to hem 
fro heuen; and for these thingus thei 
2ithadden ful many benyfices. By these 
wordis thei ben maad stedfast, and redy 
22for to dye for the lawis and cuntree. So- 
thely he ordeynyde his bretheren duykis, 
or leeders, to eche ordre, Symont, and 
Josephus, and Jonathas, to eche a thou- 
e3sand and fyue hundrid sugettid. Also 
to this thing, the holy boke red to hem 
Esdra', and a tokne 3ouen of Goddis 
help, in the first sheltrun he duyk, ioyn- 
21yde with Nychanore. And the Almi3ty 
maad help to hym, thei slewen ouer nyne 
thousande of men; forsothe thei con- 
streyneden the more part of Nychanoris 
oost, maad feble by woundis*, for to flee. 
25 Forsothe the moneys of hem that camen 
to the bying of hem taken vp, on eche 
assyde thei pursueden hem; bot thei 
turnyden ajein closid to gidre bi an 
houre; for whi it was bifore the saboth, 
for whiche cause thei lastiden not pur- 
27suynge. Forsothe thei gadringe the ar- 
mers of hem, and spuylis, diden saboth, 


dbrouz3t mn. © Om. G pr. m. 
k wound G pr. m. 


* striue, or [ether plures] f3te EFGNIKMNPQSUXYe. striue R. 
W or truthe epy. Om. R. 


wher if ceteri. 
z Om. Rr. 


¥ cometh r. 


f the citee G sec. m. H. 


VIII, 17-27. 


comynge a3ens hem, but strongli schulden 
fizte’; hauynge bifore the i3en the dispit 17 
that was don in the hooli place vniustli of 
hem, and also the wrong of the citee, had 
in scornyng; 3it also the ordenaunces of 
elde men distried. For whi he seide, Thei1s 
sotheli tristen in armeris togidere and 
hardynesse ; forsothe we tristen in the 
Lord almy3ti, that may do awei with o 
lokyng bothe hem that comen a3ens vs, 
and al the world. Forsothe he monestide 19 
hem also of helpis of God, that weren don 
a3ens fadris; and that vndur Senacherib 
an hundrid thousynde foure score thou- 
synde and fyue thousindes® perischiden ; 
and of thet batel that was to hem a3ens 20 
Galatas, in Babiloyne; ‘whether if" it 
come’ to the thing, ‘ethir treuthe*, 
whanne alle felowis Macedoyns doutiden, 
thei* sixe thousandis aloone slowen an 
hundrid thousynde and twenti thousyndis, 
for help 30ouun to hem fro beuene; and 
for these thingis thei hadden ful many 
benefices. Bi thes wordis thei weren maad 21 
stidfast, and redi for to die for lawis and 
cuntre. Therfor he ordeynede his brithe-22 
ren lederisY to ech ordre, Symount, and 
Josofus, and Jonathas, ‘and made suget 
to’ ech a thousynde and fyue hundrid. 
Also to this thing, whanne the hooli book 23 
was red to hem of Esra, and a tokene was 
jouun of Goddis help, he was duyk in the 
firste scheltrun, and ioynede batel with 
Nycanor. And for the Almy3ty was maad 24 
helpere to hem, thei slowen ouer nyne 
thousynde of men; forsothe thei con- 
streyneden the more part of Nycanoris 
oost, maad feble bi woundis, for to fle. 
Forsothe whanne the richessis of hem that 2s 
camen to the biyng of hem weren takun 
vp, on ech side thei pursueden hem; but26 
thei turneden ajen closid togidere bi an 
our; for whi it was bifor sabat, for which 
cause thei lastiden not pursuynge. For-27 
sothe thei gaderiden the armeris of hem, 


SinG pr.m. thousandis x. ! of Esdra w. 


Sthousend Hip. tQOm.1. ® where R. 


Xthe xn. Y dukes r. dukis, or lederis E el ceteri. 


VIIL. 28-—36. 


blessinge the Lord, that delyuerde hem 
in this day, droppynge in to hem bygyn- 
2snynge of mercye. Forsothe after the sa- 
both thei departiden spuylis to the feble, 
and fadirlesse, and modirlesse, and wi- 
dewis; and thei with hern hadden the 
29residues. These thingus thus don, and 
commounly of alle men bisechynge maad, 
thei axiden the mercyful Lord, for to be 
recounseilid in to the eend to his seru- 
soauntis. And of these that weren with 
Tymothe and Eachides, stryuynge a3einus 
hem, thei slewen ouer twenty thousandis, 
and thei weeldiden hee3 strengthis; and 
thei departiden mo preyes, euen porcioun 
to feble™, faderlesse, and moderlesse, and 
widues, bot and to eldre men makynge. 


31 And whan thei hadden gadrid the ar- 


mers of hem, diligently thei maden to 
gydre, or kepten, alle thingus in couen- 
able places; forsothe thei baren to® Je- 
z2rusalem the residue spuylis. And thei 
slewen Philarces, that was with Tymo- 
the, a man ful of grete trespassis, that 
had tourmentide Jewis in many thingus. 
33 And whan feestis for victorie weren don 
in Jerusalem, thei brenten hem that had- 
den brente holy® 3atis, that is to say, 
Calestenes, whan he hadde flowen in to 
sume hous; worthi meed 3oolden to hem 
3ifor her vnpitousnesse. Forsothe wick- 
idist Nychanore, that brou3te a thon- 
sand marchauntis to bying of Jewis, 
zsmeekid, o7 maad lowe, bi help of the 
Lord, of hem whiche he gessid noon; 
the clothe of glorie putte doun, by mydil 
erthe fleeinge aloone, cam to Antioche, 
hauynge hei3ist infelicitee, or most wretch- 
36 7dnesse, of the deeth of his oost. And 
he that bihij3te hym for to restore tribute 
to Romayns, of the caitiftee of men of 
Jerusalem, prechide Jewis for to haue 00 
defender God, and for hym to? be vnable 
for to be woundid, ford thei sueden Jawis 
maad of hym. 


lfeblis uw. ™ feblism. ®%in tom. 


a Om. EF pr.m. RYe. b Om. R. 
& folkis re. 5 to widewis R. 
Isnm eceteri, ™ Om. Re. 


plures] wrecchidnesse © et ceteri. P Om. ¥. 


VOL. III. 5T 


II. MACCABEES. 


© the holy u. 


© folk EPpy. 
i puttiden togidere, either kepten FGNIMNPQSUXe. 
n mekid, or maad low EFGIIMNPQSUXKYe. 


873 


and spuylis, and diden sabat, and blessiden 
the Lord, that delyuerede hem in this dai, 
droppynge in to hem bigynnyng of merci. 
Forsothe after the* sabat thei departiden 2s 
spuylis to the® feble folkis®, and fadirles, 
and? modirles, and widewis ; and thei with 
hern hadden the residues. Whanne these 29 
thingis weren thus don, aud comynli of 
alle men bysechyng was maad, thei axiden 
the merciful Lord, for to be recounselid in 
to the ende to* hise seruauntis. And of'30 
these that weren with Tymothe and Ba- 
chides, stryuynge a3ens hem silf, thei slow- 
en ouer twenti thousyndis‘, and thei weld- 
iden hize strengthis; and thei departiden 
mo preies, and maden euene porcioun to 
feble fole®, fadirles, and modirles, and wi- 
dewis®, but and to eldere men. And3i 
whanne thei hadden gaderid the armeris 
of hem, diligentli thei ‘puttiden togidere’ 
alle thingis in couenable places; forsothe 
thei baren to Jerusalem the residue spuylis. 
And thei slowen Filarces, that was with 32 
Tymothe, a man ful of grete trespassis, 
that hadde turmentide Jewis in many 
thingis. And whanne feestis of* victorie 3: 
weren don in Jerusalem, thei brenten hem 
that hadden brent hooli 3atis, that is to ° 
seie, Calastenes, whanne he hadde flowun 
in to an! hous; for whi worthi meede was 
joldun to hem for her vnpitousnessis. 
Forsothe the™ wickidist Nycanor, that 3 
brou3te a thousynde marchauntis to the 
sillyng of Jewis, was mekid" bi help of3s 
the Lord, of hem which he gesside noon; 
and whanne he hadde put awei the cloth 
of glorie, he fledde aloon bi priny places, 
and cam to Antiochie, and hadde hijzeste 
wretchidnesse® of the deth of his oost. 
And he that bihijte hym for? to restore 36 
tribute to Romayns, of the caitifte of men 
of Jerusalem, prechide now that Jewis 
hadde o defendere God, and for hym thei 
weren vuable for to be woundid, for thei 
sueden lawis ordeyned of hym. 


P for to cu. and for x. 

f thousend epy. 
k to Epy. for eeteri. 
© jnfelicite R. infelicite or [ether 


d Om. a. e of R. 


874 II. MACCABEES. IX. 1—9. 


CAP. IX. 


1 In the same tyme Antiochus turnyde 
2a3ein vnonestly fro Perse. Sothely he 
hadde entrid in to that citee, that is said 
Persibolis, and he temptide for to robbe 
the templis, and oppresse the citee; bot, 
the multitude rennynge togidre to armers, 
he is turned in to flizt; and so it bifelle, 
that Antiochus after the" fliz3t loodly 
3turnyde a3ein. And whan he came aboute 
Ebathana, he knewe what thingus ben‘ 
don ajeinus Nychanore and Tymothe. 
4Forsothe he wroth demede in wrath, 
hym for to mow turne in to Jewis the 
wronge of hem, that dryuen him. And 
therefore he bad‘ the chaar for to be 
led, with out ceesyng doynge iourney ; 
heuenly dom dryuynge", for that he spac 
so proudly, hym to cummyng to Jerusa- 
lem, and to makynge it ‘the gadrynge’ 
sof sepulcre’ of Jewis. Bot the Lord 
God of Yrael, that byholdith alle thingus, 
smote hym with a wound incurable and 
inuisible ; forsothe as he eendid this same 
word, an hard sorewe of entraylis toke 
hym, and bittir tourmentis of ynward 
6thingis. And sothely iustly ynow3, for- 
sothe he that hadde tourmentid the en- 
trailis of other men, with many and newe 
tourmentis, thou3 he in no manere ceesside 
7of his malice. Forsothe ouer this he ful- 
fillid with pride, brethinge* fijr in ynwitt 
in to Jewis, and hey comaundynge the 
neede’ for to be haastid, it byfelle, hym 
goyuge in fersnesse for to falle of the 
chaar, and the membris for to be tra- 
ueilid with the grenous hurtlyng to gidre 
sof body. And he that was seen to hym 
seelf for to comaunde also to the? wawis 
of the see, ouer mans maner fulfillid with 
pride, and for to weye in balauncis® the 
heiztis of hillis, nowe meekid to erthe, 
was born in a beere, witnessynge in hym 
9self the opyn vertu of God; so that 


CAP sibs 


In the same tyme Antiok turnede ajen1 
vuonestli fro Perses. For he hadde entrid2 
into that eztee, that is seid Persibolis*, and 
he temptide for to robbe the temple, and 
oppresse the citee; but for multitude ran 
togidere to armeris, thei weren turned in 
to fliz3t; and so it bifelle, that Antiok after 
fli3t_ viliche turnede a3en. And whannes 
he cam aboute Ebathana, he knew what 
thingis weren don ajens Nycanor and Ty- 
mothe. Forsothe he was enhaunsid in4 
wraththe, and demede that he my3te turne 
in to Jewis the wrong of hem, that had- 
den dryuun hym. And therfor he bad the 
chare for’ to be led in haste, doynge iour- 
ney with out ceessyng; for whi heuenli 
doom constreynede" hym, for that he spak 
so proudli, that he schal come to Jerusa- 
lem, and to make it a gaderyng of sepulcre 
of Jewis. But the Lord God of Israel,s 
that biholdith alle thingis, smoot hym 
with a wounde incurable and inuisible ; 
for as he endide this same word, an hard 
sorewe of entrails took hym, and bittere 
turmentis of inward thingis. And sothelis 
iustli ynow3, for he that hadde turmentid 
the entrails of othere men, with many and 
newe turmentis, thou3 he in no maner 
ceesside of his malice. Forsothe ouer this7 
he was fillid®’ with pride, and brethide 
fier in soule a3ens Jewis, and' comaund- 
ynge" the nede for to be hastid, it bifelle, 
that he goynge in fersnesse fallideY doun 
of the chare, and that the membris weren 
trauelid with the greuouse hurtlyng to- 
gidere of bodi. And he that semyde tos 
hym silf for to comaunde also to wawis of 
the see, and ouer mannus maner was fillid 
with pride, and for to weie in balaunce 
the hi3this of hillis, was” maad low to 
erthe, and was borun in a beere*, and wit- 
nesside in him silf the opyn vertu of God; 
so that wormes buyliden out of the bodiv 


Tr ° 
5 ae: uy. Swereny. 88 Om.G prem. thad aen. 4 constreynynge Gsec.m.u. V to gidre H. 
the sepulere G sec. m. a sepulere un. * brennynge GH. yOm.acu. *%nedyu. Om. acu. 
> balaunce acn. ; 
r ny it ° . 
a Om. yn, drof rery. droof, either constreynede FGHiIKMNQsuxe. _‘§ fulfillid re. ¢ and Jewis N. 


“ comaundide Gime. VY fel F, 


W was thanne xe sec.m. * bere, either hors litere FEHIMNQSUXe. 


* Persibolis, 
that is, the 
cheef citee of 
Persis. Lire 
here. ACEKPUY. 


IX. 10-—19. 


wormes buyliden out of the body of the 
vnpyteuous man, and the quyck fleshis 
of hym with sorewis fleetiden out. Also 
with sauour of hym, and stynkyng, the 
10oost was greeued; and he that a lytil 
byfore demyde hym to‘ touche the ster- 
ris¢ of heuen, no man mi3te beere hym, 
11 for vnsuffryng of stynke. Therfore here 
of he ledde doun of greuouse pride, bygan 
for to cum to knowynge of hym self, 
warnyd by Goddis plage, o7 vengeaunce, 
by alle momentis his sorewis takynge 
izencresis. And whan he mi3te not nowe 
suffre his stynke, thus he saith, It is iust 
for to be suget to God, and a deadly not 
i3for to feele euen thingus to God. For- 
sothe the cursid man preyede the Lord 


these thingis, of whom he was not to- 


ligetynge mercy. And the citee, to whom 
he hastynge came, for to leede it doun 
to erthe, and for to make a sepulcre of 
thingus born togidre, nowe he desijreth 
1sfor to 3eelde free. And the Jewis, whom 
he said hym self to hauynge nether so- 
thely worthi of sepulture, bot to betake- 
inge to foulis and wijld beestis, for to be 
to-drawen, and to distruyng with litil 
children, now he bihetith to makyng 
euen to Atynyens, ov men of Atenys; 
isalso to ournynge with best 3iftis the 
holy temple, whom® he robbide bifore, 
and to multipliynge holy vessels, and to 
3eeuynge of his rentis costis* perteyn- 
i7ynge to sacrifices; ouer these thingis 
and hym to beynge a Jewe, and to walk- 
yng by eche place of the lond, and to 
isprechynge the power of God. Bot so- 
rewis not ceesynge, forsothe the iust 
dome of God had aboue come in to hym, 
he dispeyrynge wrote to Jewis, in to 
maner of biseechynge, epistlis', conteyn- 
i9 ynge these thingis. To the best citeseyns, 
Jewis, most helthe, and wele for to fare, 
and to be ryche, or ix prosperite, the 


¢cOm. ns. 4 fortou. © sterre 1. 


ia pistle G see.m. u. 


Zhist. ® Om. ceteri. 
d sepulcre 1. 
k an epistle rpy. 


y Om. c. 
¢ Jede EnPrye. 


i Goddis power n. 1Om. R. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


f deedli creature G sec. m. iT. 


875 


of the vnpitouse man, and the quyke 
fleischis of hym fletiden out in sorewis. 
Also with the savour ‘of hym’, and stynk- 
ynge, the” oost ‘of hym* was greuyd ; and 10 
no man my3te bere hym, for vnsuffryng of 
stynk, that a litil bifore demyde hym for 
to touche the sterris of heuene. Therfor11 
herbi he was led doun fro greuouse pride, 
and bigan for to come to knowyng of hyim 
silf, and was warned bi Goddis veniaunce, 
for bi alle momentis his sorewis token 
encreessis. And whanne he my3te not 12 
thanne suffre his stynk, thus he seide, It 
is iust for to be suget to God, and that a 
deedli man feele not euene thingis to God. 
Forsothe the cursid man preiede the Lord 13 
of these thingis, of whom he schulde ‘not 
gete> merci. And now he desirith to 3elde 14 
fre the citee, to which he cam hastynge, 
for to drawe® doun it to erthe, and for to 
make a sepulcre of thingis borun togidere. 
And now he bihetith to make the Jewis 15 
euene to men of Athenys, whiche Jewis 
he seide that he schulde not haue worthi, 
3he, of sepulture’, but to bitake to foulis 
and wielde beestis, for to be ‘to-drawun*®, 
and for‘ to distrie with litle children; also 16 
to ourne£ with beste 3iftis the hooli tem- 
ple, which he robbide bifore, and to mul- 
tiplie hooli vessels, and to 3yuynge" of his 
rentis costis perteynynge to sacrifices ; 
ouer these thingis and that he schal be17 
maad a Jewe, and to walke bi ech place of 
the lond, and to preche ‘the power of God. 
But, for sorewis ceesiden not, the iust doom 18 
of God hadde aboue come on hym, he dis- 
peride, and wroot to Jewis, bi maner of 
bisechyng, ‘a pistle*, conteynynge thes 
thingis. To the beste citeseyns, Jewis, !9 
moost heelthe, and welfare, and! to be 
riche, ‘ether in prosperite™, the kyng and 
prince Antiok. If 3e faren wel, and 3oure 20 
sones, and alle thingis ben to 30u of sen-. - + thatis, bifalle 
tence*, we don moost thankyngis. And 21722" silles 


Lire here. v. 


g whiche n. b Om. G pr. m. 


b gete EFGHKMN pr. m. PQ pr.m. 8UX pr.m. gete NO N see. m. Q sec. m. 
e drawun EINPRY. 
m or in prosperite EP. Om. R. 


fOm.re. fonoureEpy. © 3yueR. jeuene. 


57TQ 


876 


ov kyng and prince Antiochus. 3if 3e faren 
wele, and 3oure sonys, of sentence alle 
thingus ben to 30u, we don most thank- 
21yngus. And Y in sekenesse ordeyned, 
sothely myndeful of 30u benygnly, turn- 
ynge a3ein fro places of Persis, and cau3te 
with greuouse enfirmytee, led needful for 
22to haue cure for comyn profit; not dis- 
peirynge my self, bot hauynge myche 
2shope of scapyng the’ enfirmyte’. For- 
sothe Y™ biholdynge that and my fadir, 
in what tymes he ledde oost in hee3er 
placis, shewide, who” after hym shulde 
zsresceyue princehod; that 3if eny con- 
trarie thing bifelle, or hard thing were 
told, theese that weren in cuntrees, wit- 
ynge to whom the summe, or charge, of 
alle thingus was left, shulden not be tru- 
2 blid. To these thingus Y biholdynge of 
next, alle mi3ty men and neizboris aspy- 
inge tyines, and abijdyuge cummynge, 
haue ordeyned my sone Antiochus kyng, 
whom Y, rennynge ajein oft in to hee3er 
rewmys, commendide, or foke in™ to 
keepyug, to many of 30u, and Y wrote to 
26hym what thingus ben suget. And so Y 
preye 30u, and axe, myndeful of benefices 
openly for to vse and priuyli, that eche 
of 30u kepe feith to me, and to my sone. 
27Forsothe Y trist, hym to do°® myldly, 
and manly, or curteysly, and suynge my 
28 purpose for to be comoun to 30u. Ther- 
fore the man queller and blasfeme smyten 
warst, and as he had tretide other, in pil- 
grimage in mounteyns, in wretchidful 
zodeth is sett fro lijf. Forsothe Philip, 
his euen souker, tranusferride the body ; 
whiche, dreedynge the sone of Antiochus, 
wente to Tholome Philometore, in to 
Egypt. 
CAP. X. 

i Forsothe Machabeus, and thei that wer- 
en with hym, the Lord defendynge hem, 
resceyuyde sothely the temple, and citee. 

2Forsothe he distruyide the auters, that 


k Om. #. 1 infirmytee, or sikenesse 1. 


© infirmyte, either siknesse FGHIMNQsUxXe. infirmite R. 


rhige a. 8 And therfor re, 


or [ether plures] tretable & et ceteri, vv dide a. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


m Om. H. 


t manli, or [ether plures] curteisli EFGHIMNPQSUXYe. 
w wreccheful rR. 


IX. 20—xX, 2. 


Y am ordeyned in sikenesse, and sotheli 
Yam myndeful benygneli of 30u, and Y 
turnede a3en fro places of Persis, and am 
cau3t with greuouse infirmyte, and Y ledde 
nedeful for to haue cure for comyn profit ; 
and Y dispeire not of my silf, but Y haue 22 
myche hope to ascape sikenesse®. For Y 23 
biholde that also my fadir, in what tymes 
he ledde oost in hizere places, schewide, 
who after hym schulde resseyne prinshod ; 
if that ony contrarie thing bifelle, or hard 24 
thing were teld, these that weren in cun- 
treis, schulden wite to whom the sunine, 
‘ether charge’, of thingis was left, and 
schulden not be troblid. To these thingis es 
Y bihelde of next, that alle the’ my3ti 
men and nei3bhoris aspien tymes, and 
abiden comynge, and Y haue ordeyned 
my sone Antiok kyng, whom Y, rennynge 
a3en ofte in to hize™ rewmes, comendide to 
many of 30u, and Y wroot to hym what 
thingis ben suget. Therfors Y preie 30u, 26 
and axe, that 3e ben myudeful of benefices 
opynli and priueli, and that ech of 3ou 
kepe feith to me, and to my sone. For27 
Y triste, that he schal do myldely, and 
manli', and sue my purpos, and be treta- 
ble" to 30u. Therfor the manquellere and 28 
blasfemere was smytun worst, and as he 
hadde tretid othere, he diede’ in pilgrim- 
age in mounteyns, in wretchidful® deth. 
Forsothe Filip, his euene soukere, trans- 29 
latide, ‘ether bar ouer*, the bodi; which 
dredde tlie sone of Antiok, and wente to 
Tolome Filomethore, in to Egipt. 


C2 


Forsothe Machabeus, aud thei thati 
weren with hym, for the Lord defendide 
hem, resseyuede sotheli the temple, and 
citee. Forsothe he distriede the anteris, 2 


a whom x. °° Own. cGpr.m, © doynge H. 

P or charge upy. Om. R. qa Om. ceteri. 
Ucomyn R. comyn, 
x or bar ouer HPY. Om. R. 


X.73—13. 


aliens maden bi streetis, and the? templis 
30f washyng. And the temple purgid, thei 
maden an other auter, and of stoon4 fijrid, 
or fiyntys, fijre conceyued, thei offriden 
sacrifices aftir’ two 3eer, and encense, 
and lanternys, and puttiden looues of 
4proposicioun. -Whiche thingus don, thei, 
cast doun in to erthe, preyeden the Lord, 
lest thei fellen more in to siche yuels, 
bot and 3if eny tyme thei hadden synnyd, 
that thei shulden be chastisid of hym 
more eysili, and shulden not be taken’ to 
barbaris, or heithen, and blasfeme men. 
5Forsothe in what day the temple was 
defoulid of aliens, it bifelle the sane day 
clensyng for to be maad, in the fyue and 
twentithe of the monethe, that was Casleu. 
6And with gladnesse int ei3te days thei 
diden in to maner of tabernaclis, bithenk- 
ynge that bifore a litil of tyme thei 
hadden don the solempne day of taber- 
naelis in hillis and dennys, in custum of 
7beestis. For whiche thing thei baren 
bifore cerclis, and greene braunchis, and 
palmes, to hym that 3aue prosperitee for 
sto clense his place. And thei demyden 
with commoun heest, and with dom, to 
alle the fole of Jewis, in alle 3eers for to 
9do these feest days. And the passyng, 
or eendyng, of lijf of Antiochus, that 
10 was clepid noble, had it thus. Now for- 
sothe we shulen telle of Eupator, the" 
sone of ynpitouse Antiochus, what thingis 
ben don, breggynge the euyls that ben 
11don in bateilis. This sothely, the rewme 
resceyuyd, ordeynyde on needis of the 
rewme summan Lisias, prince of kni3t- 
i2zhod, of Fenyce and Sirie. For whi Tho- 
lome, that was said Macer, ordeynyde for 
to beholdynge of iust a3einus Jewis, and 
most for wiekidnesse that was don in to 
hem, and pesibly for to do with hein. 
13 Bot for this thing he, accusid of freendis 
anentis Eupator, whan oft the traitour 
herde, for that he hadde forsaken Cypre, 
rand aftir x. 


POm. u. 4 stoones AGH. 


y Om. epry. or flynlis Fumuxe. 2 in to Re. 


© passing EP. passing, or (ether 1) ending FGIIIMNQsUXe. 


el ceteri. fthingis Epy. & Om. FE. 


II. MACCABEES. 


s bitakun H. 


a barbares, or (ether plures] hethene & et plures. 


877 


that aliens maden bi stretis, and also teim- 
plis of waisshyng. And whanne the temples 
was purgid, thei maden an other auter, 
and of stoonys firid, ‘ether flyntisy, bi 
fier conseyued, thei offriden sacrifices after 
two 3eer, and puttiden encense, and lan- 
ternes, and looues of proposicioun. And 4 
whanne these thingis weren don, thei 
weren cast doun to? erthe, and preieden 
the Lord, that thei schulden no more falle 
in siche yuelis, but thou3 in ony tyme 
thei hadden synned, that thei schulden be 
chastised of hym more esili, and schulden 
not be bitakun to barbaries, and blasfeine 
men. Forsothe in what dai the temples 
was defoulid of aliens, it bifelle that in 
the same dai clensyng was maad, in the 
fyue and twentithe dai of the monethe, 
that was Casleu. And with gladnesse ine 
ei3te daies thei diden bi maner of taberna- 
clis, bithenkynge that bifore a litil of tyime 
thei hadden don the solempne dai of ta- 
bernaclis in hillis and in dennys, bi custom 
of beestis. For which thing thei baren7 
byfore roddis, and grene braunchis, and 
palmes, to hym that 3af prosperite for to 
clense his place. And thei demyden with # 
comyn heest, and with doom, to alle the 
fole of Jewis, for to do these” feeste daies 
in alle 3eeris. And the endyng® of lijf of9 
Antiok, that was clepid noble, hadde it 
thus. Now forsothe we schulen telle of 10 
Eupator, sone of vnpitouse Antiok, what 
thingis weren don, and bregge, ‘ether 
schortli telle’, the yuelis that weren don 
in batels. For whanne this Mupator ii 
hadde resseyued tlie rewme, he ordeynede 
on nedis of the rewme a® man Lisias, 
prince of kny3thod, of Fenece and Sirie. 
For whi Tolome, that was setd Macer, iz 
ordeynede for to holde iust thiug’ ajens 
Jewis, and most for wickiduesse that was’ 
don ajens hem, and pesibli for to do with 
hem. But for this thing he was accnsid is 
of frendis anentis Eupator, whanne he 


tand c. Om. u. 4% Om. H. 


b ther. 


dor shorili telle ep. Oui. R. © sum 4 prem. 


878 


bitaken to hym of Philometore, and trans- 
latide to Antiochus noble’, also hadde 
gon awey fro hym, with venym eendide 
ithe lijf. Forsothe Gorgias, whan he was 
duyk of places, cumlingus taken to, oft 
isouercam Jewis in bateil. Forsothe Jewis 
that helden couenable strengthis, res- 
ceyueden men dryuen fro Jerusalem, and 
istemptiden for to fiz3te. These forsothe 
that weren with Machabee, by preyers 
preyinge the Lord, that he were helper 
to hem, maden feersnesse, o7 saué”, in 
17to strengthis of Ydumeys. And thei by 
myche strengthe a3ein stoondynge, weeld- 
iden places, slewen men rennynge a3ein, 
and strangliden alle to gidre, not lesse 
isthan fyue and twenty thousandis. For- 
sothe sume* whan thei fledden to gidre 
in to two toures ful stronge, hauynge al 
i9 apparel to ajein fizte, Machabeus to ouer 
eummynge of hem Symont left, and Jo- 
sephus, and eft Zachee, and hem that 
weren with hem, many ynow3, he is 
‘turned a3einY to thoo’ bateils that con- 
20streynyden more. Sothely these that 
weren with Symont, led by coueitise, of 
summe that weren in the toures ben 
conseilid by money; and senente thon- 
sand double dragmes taken, thei® leften 
21summe to? flee out. Forsothe whan that 
thing that was don, was tolde to Macha- 
beus, the princis of the® peple gadrid, he 
acuside, that thei hadden soulde bretheren 
for money, the’ aduersaries of hym dis- 
22mittid, or delyuered. Therfore he slew3 
these maad traitours, and anoon he® ocu- 
23pide the two toures. Forsothe in ar- 
mers and hondis doynge alle thingis 
welsumly‘, he slew3 in the two strengthis 
24more thau twenti thousandiss. And Ty- 
mothe, that byfore was ouereuinmen of 
Jewis, an oost of straunge multitude ga- 
drid togidre, and the ridyng, or horsmen, 
of Asie gadrid, came to as with armers, 
25to takynge Judee. Forsothe Machabeus, 


¥ the noble & sec. m. u. 
cOmr. 40m, x, 


Wa saut H. 
€ Om. 1. 


I]. MACCABEES. 


x summe men H. 
f welsumly, or bi prosperite 1. 


X. 14--25. 


herde ofte, Tou traitour, for that he hadde 
forsakun Cipre, bitakun' to hym of Filo- 
metor, and hadde translatid to Antiok 
noble, also he hadde go awei fro hym, 
with venym he endide the lijf. Forsothe 1 
Gorgias, whanne he was duyk of places, 
with comelyngis takun, oueream ofte Jewis 
in batel. Forsothe Jewis that helden coue-15 
nable strengthis, resseyueden men dryuun 
fro Jerusalem, and. saieden* for to fi3te. 
These forsothe that weren with Macha-16 
beus, preieden the Lord bi preieris, that 
he schulde be helpere to hem, and thei 
maden asawt! in to strengthis of Idumeis. 
And thei weren bisi bi myche strengthe, 17 
and weldiden places, and slowen men ren- 
nynge ajen, and strangliden alle togidere, 
not lesse than fyue and twenti thousandes. 
Forsothe whanne suimmne fledden togidere 18 
in to twei touris ful stronge, hauynge alle 
apparel to ajen fiz3te, Machabeus lefte Sy- 19 
mount, and Josofus, aud eft™ Sachee, and 
hem that weren with hem, many ynow, to 
the ouercomyng of hem; and he was con- 
uertid to tho batels that constreyneden 
more. Sotheli these that weren with Sy-20 
mount, weren led bi coueitise, and weren 
couuselid bi monei, of summe that weren 
in the touris; and whanne thei hadden 
take seuenti thousynde double" dragmes, 
thei leeten summe fle out. Forsothe2i 
whanne that thing that was don, was teld 
to Machabeus, he gaderide the® princes of 
puple?, and he accuside, that thei hadden 
seld britheren for monei, for thei delyuer- 
iden aduersaries of hem’. Therfor he 22 
slow these maad traitouris*, and anoon 
ocupiede the tweye touris. Forsothe in 23 
doynge alle thingis ‘in prosperite™ in ar- 
meris and hondis, he slow in the twei$ 
strengthis more than twenti thousyndis. 
And Tymothe, that bifore was ouercomun 24 
of Jewis, clepide togidere an oost of 
straunge multitude, and gaderide the mul- 
titude of horse men of Asie, and cam 


Yeconuertid y. Zthen. #®Om.u. > Om.H. 


& thousand #. 


i k : : . . " 
takun A sec. m. assaieden m. saieden, either temptiden vu. | feersnesse, or saui EP. fersnesse, either 


assault FEHIKMNQsuXe. ™ left nsec. m. 


aes t 1 of double ery. 
welsumly EPRy. welsumly, either bi prosperite PaHIKMNQSUXe. 


°Om. Fr. P the pnple Fpr.m. 4 him re. 


s Om. E. 


X. 26-—37. 


and thei that weren with hym, hym 
neiz3inge, bisoujten God, springinge the 
hed with erthe, and byfore gird the leendis 
26With heiris, thei fooldid doun at hee3- 
nesse of the auter, that he helpful to 
hem, forsothe were! enmye to the en- 
myes of hem, and to the aduersaries 
27 were aduersarie, as the lawe saith. And 
so after preyer, armers taken, thei goynge 
forth fer fro the citee, and, maad next to 
2senmyes, saten ajein. Forsothe in the 
firste rysynge of the sunne, bothe ioyn- 
eden; these sothely hauynge the Lord 
biheeter of victorie and prosperitee; thei 
forsothe hadden her owne inwitt, or 
29 wille, duyk of bateil. Bot whan grete 
fiz3t was, fyue faire men, in horsis with 
golden bridels, appeeriden to the! aduer- 
saries fro heuen, 3eeuyuge leedyng to 
so Jewis ; of ‘whom two™ hauynge Macha- 
beus in" the mydil, sett about with her 
armers, kepten sound®. Forsothe thei 
castiden dartis and leytis in to aduer- 
saries; of whiche thing and thei confusid 
in blyndnesse, and fulfillid with pertur- 
31 bacioun, fellen doun. Forsothe there ben 
slayn of fote men twenty thousand and 
fyue hundrid, and horsimen sixe hundrid. 
32Sothely Tymothe fledde in to a? stronge 
hold of Gasara, to whom? Cereas was 
s3souerayne, or keeper, Forsothe Macha- 
beus, and thei that weren with hym, glad- 
ynge, biseegiden the hold foure days. 
31 And thei that weren with ynne, tristinge 
in sikernesse of the place, aboue maner 
cursiden, and castiden cursid woordis. 
35 Bot whan the fifthe day shynyde, twenty 
3unge men of these that weren with 
Machabeus, kyndlid in inwittis for the 
blasfeme, manly wenten to the wall, and 
with feerse inwitt' goynge, thei® stieden 
36vp; bot and other also styinge vp, assail- 
iden for to brenne the toures and 3atis, 
and to gidre brenne the cursers quyck. 
37Forsothe by contynuel two days thei 


h he be G sec. m. 1. 
2QOm.u. © sound, or without harm u. 


tOnm. Epy. preieers epy. ¥ forsothe re. 
either with oute harm FGUIMNQSUXe. 


him n. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


i that he were G sec.m. u. 
P Om. 1. 


W in celeri. 
ahim. Forsothe rumuxe. of hym. Forsothe 1. 


879 


with armeris, as to take Judée. Forsothe 2s 
Machabeus, and thei that weren with hym, 
whanne he neizede, bisou3ten God; and 
bispreynten the heed with erthe, and bifor 
girdiden the leendis with heiris, and knel-2« 
iden doun at the brynke of the auter, that 
he schulde be helpful to hem, forsothe 
that to enemyes of hem he were eneinye, 
and were aduersarie to aduersaries, as the 
lawe seith. And so' after preier", whanne 27 
thei hadden take armeris, thei 3eden forth 
fer fro the citee, and thei weren maad 
nexte to enemyes, and saten. Forsothe 2s 
in the firste risyng of the sunne, bothe 
ioyneden batel; these sotheli hadden the 
Lord bihetere of victorie and prosperite; 
for’ thei hadden hardynesse the duyk of 
batel. But whanne greet fi3te was, fyue 2 
faire men*, on” horsis with goldun bridels, 
apperiden to aduersaries fro heuene, and 
3auen ledyng to Jewis; of whiche tweyne30 
hadden Machabeus in the myddil, and set 
aboute* with her armeris, and kepten 
hymY sownd?. Forsothe® thei castiden dartis 
and leitis ajens aduersaries; of which 
thing and thei weren schent with blynde- 
nesse, and weren fillid with perturbacioun, 
and fellen doun. Forsothe ther weren 31 
slayn of foote men twenti thousynde and 
fyue hundrid, and horse men sixe hun- 
drid. Sotheli Tyimothe fledde in to the32 
strong hold of Gasara, of which strong 
hold Cereas was souereyn. Forsothe Ma-33 
chabens, and thei that weren with hym, 
weren glad, and bisegiden the strong hold 
bi foure daies. And thei that werenai 
with ynne, tristiden in the sikirnesse of 
the place, and eursiden aboue maner, and : 
castident cursid wordis. But whanne the 35 +¢hacis, proud- 
fynethe dai schynede, twenti 3onge men Hi peer: 
of these that weren with Machabeus, i inmeehye 
were kyndlid in soulis for blasfemye, Lol OEMAT) 
aud wenten manli to the wal, and thei 

jeden with fers wille, and sticden vp; but 36 

and othere also stieden, and assailiden for 


* that is, aun- 
gelis in the lic- 
nesse of men. 

Lire here, KU. 


k Om. 2. 
a whiche Hu. 


™ whiche tweyne 


1Om. 6 pr. m. 
3 Om. #. 


rinwitt, or wille u. 


y Om. ruimuxe. 2 sound, 
b weren with 


x abone Nn. 


880 


waastynge the hold slewen Tymothe, 
hydynge hym self‘, founden in sume 
place; and thei slewen his brother Se- 

3s reas, and Appollofanes. Whiche thingis 
don, thei blessiden the Lord in ympnys 
and confessiouns, whiche dide gret thingus 
in Israel, aud 3aue to hem victorie. 


CAP. XI. 


1 Bot a litil tyme after, Lisias, procura- 
tour of the kyng, and ni3, and prepost of 
needis", beerynge greuously of these 

2thingis that bifellen, gadrid foure score 
thousandis, and al rydynge, or horsmen, 
came a3jeinus Jewis, demynge hym self 
to makynge the citee sothely taken a 

3dwellyng to heithen men, forsothe to 
hauynge the temple in to wynnynge of 
money, as other templis of heithen men, 
and by eche 3eeris prestehode vendible, 
sor able to be soold; not bythenkynge 
the power of God, bot in myndeY’ maad 
with outen bridil, tristide in multitude 
of fote men, and in thousaudis of hors- 
s5men, and in foure score olyfauntis. So- 
thely he gon in to Judee, and cummynge 
nj to Bethsura, that was in a streit 
place, fro Jerusalem in space of fyue fur- 
6longis, fau3te a3einus that strengthe. So- 
thely as Machabeus, and thei that weren 
with hym, knewe strengthis for to be 
ajeinus fou3te, with weepyng and teeris 
preyeden the Lord, and al the cumpany 
to gidre, for to sende a good aungel to 
7help* of Yrael. Aud he the first Macha- 
beus, armers taken, monestide other for 
to take* togidre perel with hym, and 
8bere help to her bretheren. And whan 
thei wenten forth togidre with redy in- 
witt fro Jerusalem, an horsmanyY apeer- 
ide goynge byfore hem in whijt clothe, 


'Om.G prim. 4 nedis, or causis u, 
¥ horsman, or kny3i 1. 


©Om.r. 4 priny place r. 
KMNPQsSUXYe. vendible rR. 
kina ceteri. 1Om. Rr. 

P Om. R, 


e Om. rR. 
h eneri EPpy. 


mOm.1. 32 Om. x. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


¥ mynde, or ondirstondynge 1. 


f Om. F. 


i mynde, or [ether plures] rndirstonding = et ceteri preter R. 
© an horsman, or [ether plures] kni3t = et celeri preter R, 


X. 38—XI. 8. 


to brenne touris and 3atis, and togidere 
brenne the curseris quyke. Forsothe by 37 
contynuel twei daies thei wastiden the 
strong hold, and slowen Tymothe, hidynge 
hym silf, foundun® in sum place’; and 
thei slowen his brother Cereas, and Appol- 
loffanes. Whanne these thingis weren 38 
don, thei blessiden the Lord in ympnes 
and confessiouns, whiche dide grete thingis 
in Israel, and 3af to® hem victorie. 


CAP. XI. 


But a litil tyme after, Lisias, the pro-1 
curatour of the kyng, and kynesman, and 
souereyn of offices, bar greuousli of these 
thingis that bifellen, and gederide foure2 
score thousyndis, and al the multitude of 
horse men, and cam ajens Jewis, and 
demyde hym silf‘ to make the citee takun 
a dwellyng to hethene men, forsothe to3 
haue the temple in to wynnyng of monei, 
as othere templis of hethene men, and 
presthod ‘set to sale® bi ech’ 3eer; and 4 
bithou3te not on the power of God, but in 
mynde! he was maad with out bridil, and 
tristide in multitude of foot men, and in 
thousyndis of horse men, and in foure 
score olifauntis. Sothely he 3ede in tos 
Judee, and cam ni3 to Bethsura, that was 
in® streit place, fro Jerusalem in space 
of fyue furlongis, and fau3t ajens that 
strengthe. Sotheli whanne Machabeus,¢ 
and thei that weren with hym, knewen 
that strengthis weren impugned, with 
wepyng and teeris thei preieden the Lord, 
and! al the cumpenye togidere, for to sende 
a good aungel to the™ helthe of Israel. 
And Machabeus hym silf took firste ar-7 
meris, and monestide othere for® to take 
togidere perel with hym, and bere help to  jjcnesse of an 
her britheren. And whanne thei wentens bos™n syns: 


nyfiyng victo- 
forth togidere with redi wille fro Jerusa- "to comynge 


to hem, bi flo- 


* that is, an 
aungel in the 


lem, an hors man®* apperide goynge?P bi- _ risching of the 
5 *. o schaft. Lire 
fore hem in whijt cloth, in goldun ar- here. v. 


Wheelthe yw. * make c. 


& vendible, or [ether plures] set fo sale EFGHI 


XI. 9—21. II. MACCABEES. 881 


and golden armers, florishynge a shaft. 
9Thanne alle to gidre blessiden the mer- 
eyful Lord, and woxen stronge in yn- 
wittis, and* redy* for to perse not oonly 
men, bot and most feers beestis, and» 
io‘yrun wallis®. Therfore thei wenten redy, 
hauynge of heuen an‘ helper, and the 
11 Lord hauynge mercy on hem. Sothely 
by custume of lyouns, in feersnesse thei 
hurlynge in to enmyes, castiden doun of 
hem ellenen thousand® of fotemen, and 
of horsmen a thousand and sixe hundrid. 
12Sothely thei turnyden alle in to flizt ; 
forsothe many of hem woundid, aseapiden 
nakid, bot and he Lisias fouly fleeynge 
izascapide. And for he was not witlesse, 
he rettynge with hym self the makyng 
lesse don a3einus hym, and vndirstoond- 
ynge the Ebrues for to be vnouercumen, 
enforsinge, or tristynge, to help of al- 
14mi3ty God, he sente to hem, and _ bihi3te 
hym to consentyng to alle thingus that 
ben iust, and to compellynge the kyng 
15 for to be maad freend. Forsothe Macha- 
beus grauntide to the preyers of Lisias, 
in alle thingis counseilynge to profit; and 
what euer thingis Machabeus wrote to 
Lisias of Jewis, the kyng grauntide hem. 
1s For whi epistlis weren wryten to Jewis 
fro Lisias, sothely conteynynge this ma- 
ner. Lisias to the peple of Jewis, helthie. 
17J0on and Abesalon, that ben sente fro 
3ou, bitakynge writtis, axiden, that Y 
fulfulle thoof thingis that weren signy- 
isfied by hem. Therfore what euer thingis 
mi3ten be bron3te forth to the kyng, Y 
expounyde, and whiche the kyng suf- 
iofride, Y grauntyde. Therfore 3if in 
needis 3e shuln kepe feith, also hennus 
forth Y shal tempte for to be cause of 
20good thingis to 3ou. Of other thingis 
sothely Y commaundide bi alle wordis, 
and to these and to hem that ben sente 
of me, for to speke to gidre with 3ou. 
21Fare 3e wel. In the hundrid 3eer and 
eiz3te and fourtithe, the foure and twen- 


meris, and9 florischynge a schaft. Thannes 

alle togidere blessiden the merciful Lord, 

and woxen" strong in soulis; and weren 

redi for to perse not oncli men, but and 

moost feerse beestis, and irun  wallis. 

Therfor thei wenten redi, hanynge ano 

helpere of heuene, and the Lord hauynge 

merci on hem. Sotheli bi custom of liouns, 11 

in feersnesse thei hurliden in to enemyes, 

and castiden doun of hem enleuene thou- 

syndis of foot men, and a thousynde and 

sixe hundrid of horse men. Sotheli thei te 
turneden alle in to fli3t; forsothe many of 

hem woundid, aseapiden nakid, but and 

Lisias hym silf fouli fleynge ascapide. 

And for he was not witles, he arettide 13 

with hym silf the makyng lesse don a3ens 

bym, and vndurstood that Ebrews ben 
vnouercomun, and tristen to help of al- 

my3ti God; and he sente to hem, and bi- 14 

hi3te hym to consente to alle thingis that 

ben iust, and to compelle the kyng for to 

be maad frend*. Forsothe Machabeus 15+ not bi vio- 
grauntide to® preieris of Lisias, and coun- aeieacra 
selide to profit in alle thingis; and what unc’: F* 
euere thingist Machabeus wroot of Jewis 

to Lisias, the kyng grauntide tho thingis. 

For whi epistlis weren writun to Jewis 16 

fro Lisias, conteynynge this maner. Lisias 

to the puple of Jewis, heelthe. Joon and17 
Abesalon, that ben" sent’ fro jou, bitoken” 

writtis, and axiden, that Y schulde fille 

tho thingis that weren signefied bi hem. 

Therfor what euere thingis mizten bes 

brou3t forth to the kyng, Y expownede, 

and whiche the thing suffridet, he graunt-_— t that is, was 
idet. Therfor if in nedis 3e kepen feith, iene 
also fro hennys forth Y schal enforse* for jets ‘te 


king graunt- 

to be cause of goode thingis to jou. Of 20 Fe ola gpa 

othere thingis sotheli Y comaundideY bi amendid. Lire 
. here. EPUY. 

alle wordis, both to these and to hem 

that ben sent of me, for to speke togidere 

with 3ou. Fare 3e wel. In the hundrid2i 

3eer and ei3te and fourtithe, in the foure 

and twentith dai of the monethe Dios- 4 that is, in 


corus|]|. Forscthe ‘the pistle? of the kyng222uny: &'** 


2 Om. am. ® yrun wallis redy 4g prom. 6 Om. ac pr.m.x. © Om. 4. 40m. 1. © thousandis 1. 


fthat sa pr.m.x. ff thyng @ sec. m. 


qa Om. ceferi. * wexiden sy. waxiden K. §& to thet. 


Xtempte nr. Ycomaunde nr. 2 epistle Ery. 
VOL. III. 


tthing Fr, Ywerenn. v¥Om.R. ® bitaking r. 


5U 


882 


tithe day of the® moneth Dyoscorus. 
22 Forsothe the pistle of the kyng conteyn- 
yde these thingis. Kyng Antyochus to 
23 Lisias, brother, helthe. Oure fadris * 
translatid amonge goddis, we willynge 
hem that ben in oure rewime for to do 
with oute noyse, and for to 3eue dili- 
24 gence to her thingis, han herd Jewis uot 
to haue assentid to the fadre, for to be 
translatid to the' custum of Greekis, bot 
wille for to holde* her ordynaunce, and 
therfore for to axe of vs, her lawful 
thingus for to be grauntid to hem. 
25 Therefore we willynge and this fole for 
to be quyet, ordeynynge han demyd, the 
temple for to be restorid to hem, that 
thei shulden do! after the custom of her 
26 gretter men. Therfore thou shalt do wel, 
3if thou shalt sende to hem, and shalt 
3eue the ri3thond; that, oure wille knowen, 
thei be in good inwitt, and serue to her 
270wne profitis. Sothely to the Jewis the 
kyngis pistle was siche. Kyng Auntio- 
chus to the senate™ of Jewis, and to 
28other Jewis, helthe. 3if 3ee faren welle, 
so it as we wolen, bot and we self" faren 
29wel. Menelaus came to vs, sayinge, 30u 
for to wilne for to go doun to 3oure", 
sothat ben anentis 30u. To these therfore 
that dwellen to gidre, til the thrittith 
day of the’? moneth Sandici we jeuen 
si rizjthondis of sykyruesse, that Jewis vse 
metis, and her lawis, as and? byfore; and 
no man ‘of hem? eny more’ suffre disese 
of these thingus, that ben don by igno- 
szraunce. Sothely we senten and Mene- 
33laus, that shal speke to 3ou. Fare 3e wel. 
In the hundrid 3eer and ei3te and four- 
tithe, the fiftenthe of the’ moneth San- 
3idici, also Romayns senten an_ epistle, 
hauynge its thus. Quintus Menius and 
Titus Manylius, legatis of Romayns, to 
3sthe peple of Jewis, helthe. Of these 
thingis that Lisias, cosyn of the kyng, 
36 grauntide to 3ou, aud we grauntiden. For- 
& Om. uy. 41 fadir un. 


> oure self G sec. m. #. 
Qmaner yu. ° Om.n. 


b Om. F. 


iOm.u. * beholde nm. 


8 Om. nu. 


a was N. ¢ Om. Fr. 


EPY. 2Om. r, 


II. MACCABEES. 


10m. 46 pr. m. K. 
° 30ure laweful thingis « see. m. H. 


4 but thei 1. 


‘di © quyeted r. 
senat, or [ether plures] eldere men EFGHIMNPQSUXY 


e. senat R. 


XI. 22—36. 


conteynede thes thingis. Kyng Antiok 
to Lisias, brother, heelthe. For oure fadir 23 
is* translatid among goddis, we wolen that 
thei that” ben in oure rewme do with out 
noise, and 3yue diligence to her thingis; 
we han herd that Jewis assentiden not to 24 
the fadir, fore to be translatid to the cts- 
tom of Grekis, bot’ wolen holde her ordy- 
naunce, and that therfor thei axen of vs, 
that her lawful thingis be grauntid to 
hem. Therfor we wolen that also this 25 
fole be quyet®, and han ordeyned and 
demed, that the temple be restorid to 
hem, that theif schulden do bi the custom 
of her grettere men. Therfor thou schalt 26 
do wel, if thou schalt sende to hem, and 
schalt 3yue ri3thond; that®, whanne onre 
wille is knowun, thei be in good coumfort, 
and serue to her owne profitis. Sotheli 27 
to the Jewis the kyngis pistle was sich. 
Kyng Antiok to the ‘eldre meu! of Jewis, 
and to othere Jewis, heelthe. If 3e faren 2s 
wel, so it 7s as we wolen, but and we silf 
faren wel. Menelaus cam to vs, and seide, 29 
that 3e wolen go doun to 3oure, that ben 
anentis vs. Therfor to these that gon to-30 
gidere, we 3yuen ri3thondis of sikirnesse 
til to the’ thrittith dai of the monethe 
Xandici*, that Jewis vse her metis, and 31 * that is, April. 
lawis, as and bifore ; and no man of hem **?°% 
in ony maner suffre disese of these thingis, 
that ben don bi ignoraunce. Sotheli we 32 
senten also Menelaus, that schal speke to 
jou. Fare 3e wel. In the hundrid 3eer33 
and ei3te and fourtithe', the fifteenthe dai 
of the monethe Xandici, also Romayns 34 
senten ‘a pistle™, hauynge it thus. Quin- 
tus Menneus and Titus Manylius, legatis 
of Romayns, to the puple of Jewis, heelthe. 
Of these thingis that Lisias, cosyn of the 3s 
kyng, hath grauntid to 3ou, and" also we 
grauntiden. Forsothe of whiche thingis 26 
he demyde to be teld aj3en to the kyng, 
anoon sende 3e summan; and speke je 
among 30u diligentiliere, that we deme as 


™m senate, or cheef gouernoure H. 
00 Om. Gc prom. P Om. G prim. PP Om. kK. 


f Om. n. 
k Om. 1. 


& than x. 


> epistle EPyY. 
1 fourti 3eer R. 


™ an epistle 


XI. 37-—XIL. 9. 


sothe of whiche thingus he demyde to be 
tolde a3ein to the kyng, anoon sende 3e 
sume man, diligentlyer spekyng amonge 
jou, that we deme as it acordith to 3ou. 
37 Forsothe we gon to Antiochie, aud ther- 
fore haste 3e for to a3ein write, that and 
38 we wite of what wille 3e ben. Fare 3e 
wel. 
CAT 2X1. 
In the hundrid 3eer and foure and 
fourtithe, the fiftenthe day of the moneth 
1Sandici, these couenauntis maad, Lisias 
wente to the kyng; forsothe Jewis 3auen 
2werk to erthe tiliyng. Bot these that 
dwelten, o7 wern resident, Tymothe, and 
Appollonye, sone of Genney, bot and Je- 
rom, and Demophon proud, and Nycha- 
nore, Cipriarchis, or prince of Cipre', 
suffriden not hem for to do in silence 
3and quyet. Forsothe men of Joppyn han 
don siche a felony; thei preyeden Jewis, 
with whiche thei dwelten, for to stye vp 
smale bootis, whiche thei hadden maad 
redy, with wyues, and sones, as noon 
enmytees amonge hem vndirliggynge. 
4Forsothe after the commonn dom of the 
citee, and hem acordynge, and for cause 
of pees, and hauynge no thing suspect, 
whan thei camen in to deep, thei drench- 
siden two hundrid, not lesse. Whiche 
cruelte as Judas knew3 don in to men 
of his fole, he comaundide to men that 
weren with hym; and, inclepid the iust 
6domesman God, he came ajein slears" of 
bretheren ; and sothely by ni3t brente the 
hauen, he brente the hootis, forsothe he 
slew3 by swerd hem that fledden fro fijre. 
7 Whan he hadde don thus these thingus, 
he wente awey, as eft to turnyng a3ein, 
and vtterly to distruye’ alle men of 
sJoppe. Bot whan he knew3, and hem 
that weren at Jamnie to wilne for to do 
liche manere to Jewis dwellynge with 
ohem, and to Jamnites he aboue came by 
ni3t, and brente the hauen, with shippis ; 


t Cipris 1. 


© ynto R. Pp Om. F. q Om. R. 


II. MACCABEES. 


u the sleers #. 


S quyet R. quiet, or [ether plures] reste & et eeteri. 
¥Om. Rr. *¥Om.R. * wenten ¥F. Y the fyr F. 


883 


it acordith to° 30u. For we gon to An-37 
tiochie, and therfor haste 3e for? to ajen 
write, that and we wite of what wille 3e 
hen. Fare 3e wel. 38 


CAP. XII. 


In the hundrid jeer and foure and 
fourtithe 3eer%, in the fiftenthe dai of the 
monethe Xandici, whanne these coue-1 
nauntis weren maad, Lisias wente to the 
king; forsothe Jewis 3auen werk to erthe 
tilyng. But these that dwelten", Tymothe, 2 
and Appollonye, the sone of Gennei, but 
and Jerom, and Demophon proud, and 
Nycanore, prince of Cipre, suffriden not 
hem for to do in silence and reste’. For-3 
sothe men of Joppe han do sich a felonye ; 
thei preyeden Jewis with whiche thei 
dwelten, fur to stie vp, with wyues, and 
sones, in to smale botis, whiche thei had- 
den maad redi, as if noon enemytees laien 
priueli among hem. Therfort bi the co-4 
myn dom of the citee, and for thei acord- 
iden, and for cause of pees hadden no 
thing suspect, whanne thei camen in to 
the" depthe, thei drenchiden two hundrid, 
not lesse. And as Judas knew this cruelte 5 
don ajens men of his fole, he comaundidé 
to men that weren with hyin; and he 
clepide ‘to help’ the iust domesman God, 
and he cam ajens the sleeris of britheren, 6 
and bi ny3t he brente the hauene, he 
brente the bootis, forsothe” he slow bi 
swerd hem that fledden* fro fiery. And7 
whanne he hadde don these thingis, he 
wente awei, as eft to? turnynge ajen, and 
vttirli to distriynge alle men of Joppe. 
But whanne he knew, that also thei thats 
weren at Jamnye wolden do in lijk maner 
to Jewis dwellynge with hem, also to9 
Jamnytes he aboue cam bi ny3t, and brente 
the hauene, with schippis ; so that the 1i;t 


v destruynge #1. 


t dwelten, or [ether plures} weren resident & et celeri preter R. 


t And therfor a pr. m. IR pr. m. u Om. R. 


2no I. 


5U 2 


884 


so that the” li3t apperide to Jerusalem 
fro two hundrid furlongis and fourty. 
io Whan now they hadden gon thennus by 
nyne furlongis, and maden iourney to 
Tymothe, men of Arabye ioynyden with 
hym, fyue thousand men, and horsmen 
ufyue hundrid. And whan stronge* fizte 
was maad, and by help of God wente, 
or byfelle, esily, or by prosperitee, the 
residue of men of Arabye axiden of Ju- 
das the ri3thondis for to be 3ouen to hem ; 
byheetynge hem self to 3euynge lese- 
12 wis, and other thingis to profityng. For- 
sothe Judas demynge verrely hem profit- 
able in many thingis, bihizte pees ; and, 
the ri3thondis taken, thei departiden to 
isher tabernaclis. Forsothe he assailide 
and sume sad citee by bryggis, and about 
sett byY wallis, whiche was enhabitid of 
cumpanyes of heithen men meynd?, bothe 
men aud wymmen, to whom* the name 
14Casphym. Forsothe these** that weren 
with ynne, tristinge in stablenesse of 
wallis, and in aparel of fodis, diden slow- 
licher®, to terynge, or terrynge, Judas 
with cursyngis®; and blasfemynge, and 
spekynge whiche thingus is not leeful. 
15 Sothely Machabeus, ynclepide the grete 
prince of the world, whiche with outen 
wetheris, chat ben engynes lijk to we- 
theris, and with outen engynes, in tymes 
of Jhesu, or Josue, castide doun Jerico, 
1éhe hurlide feersly to the wallis; and 
the citee taken by wille of the Lord, he 
dide vnnoumbreable sleayngis; so that the 
pool of stondynge water of two furlongis 
of breede infect, or meynd4, with blood 
'7was seen to® flowe. Fro thennus thei 
wenten seven hundreth and fifty fur- 
longis, and camen in to Caracha, to the 
1sJewis that ben clepid Tubianey. And 
sothely thei cau3ten not Tymothe in tho 
places ; and no need fully don, he turnyde 
ajein, most sad strengthe left in sume 


w Om. n. 


* greet, or stronge H. 
liere wz. 


Y with mw. 
© cursis, or waryingis 1. 


d mengid 1. 


® for eANPY. » bifallide r. 


& to-terringe, or [ether rire] terrin 


iOm rn. &Om.r. !hurlider. ™ the erry. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


z mengid #. 
e for to a. 


© or bi prosperite EPpy. Om. R. 
ge EF pr.m. He, terrynge R. 


XII. 1o—18. 


apperide to Jerusalem fro® two hundrid 
furlongis and fourty. Whanne thei had-10 
den go thanne fro thennus bi nyne fur- 
longis, and maden iournei to Tymothe, 
men of Arabie, fyue thousynde men, and 
horse men fyue hundrid, ioyneden batel 
with hyin. And whanne strong fi3t was1 
maad, and bi help of God it bifelle® esili, 
‘ether bi prosperite’, the residue of 4 men 
of Arabie, ‘that weren® onercomun, axiden 
of Judas the ri3thondis for to be 30uun to 
hem; bihetynge hem silf to 3yue lesewis, 
and to profitynge in othir thingis. For-12 
sothe Judas demyde verili hem profitable 
in many thingis, and bihi3te pees; and 
whanne thei hadden take ri3thondis, thei 
departiden to her tabernaclis. Forsothe i3 
he assailide also sum citee sad bi briggis, 
and aboute set with wallis, which was en- 
habitid of cumpenyes of hethene men 
meynd, bothe men and wymmen, to which 
the name was Caspliym. Forsothe these 14 
that weren with ynne, tristiden to’ the 
stablenesse of wallis, and in apparel of 
foodis, and diden slacliere, ‘to-terrynge® 
Judas with cursis, and blasfemynge, and 
speking whiche thingis it is not leuveful. 
Sotheli Machabeus clepide to help thes 
greet prince of the world, which with out 
wetheris, ‘that ben engynes lijk wetheris’, 
and with out engynes, in the tymes of 
Jhesu, ‘ether Josne*, castide doun Jericho ; 
and hurtlide! feersli to the wallis, and 16 
took the cytee bi wille of the Lord, and 
dide vnnoumbrable sleyngis ; so that the 
pool of stondynge watir of twei furlongis 
of brede, semyde to flowe with blood of 
slayn men. Fro thennus thei wenten se-17 
uene hundrid and fifti furlongis, and camen 
in to Characha, to tho™ Jewis that ben 
clepid Tubianei. And sotheli thei cau3ten 18 
not Tymothe in tho places; and whanne 
no iourney was fulli don, Zymothe turn- 
ede aj3en, while most sad strengthe was 


a whiche nu. 


aa Om. G pr.m. © slac- 


€Om.epy. ¢ Om. ceteri. f in ceteri. 
4 cursis, either weriyngis F@HMNQSUXE. 


XII. 19——27. 


19place. Forsothe Dositheus and Sosipa- 
ter, that weren duykis with Machabeus, 
slewen ten thousand men left of Tymothe 
20in the strengthe. And Machabeus sixe 
thousand ordeynyd aboute hym, and or- 
deynd by cumpanyes‘, wenten forth a3einus 
Tymothe, hauynge an hundrid ‘and fyue’ 
and twenty thousand of foot men, and 
of horsmen two thousand and fyue bun- 
aidrid. Forsothe the cummyng of Judas 
knowen, Tymothe bifore sente wymmen, 
and sonys, and other aparel in to a 
strengthe that is said Carmon; forsothe 
it was ‘vnable to be ouercummen?, and 
hard in goynge to, for streytnesse: of 
22places. And whan the first cumpaignye 
of Judas appeeride, dreed is yusmyten 
to the enmyes of the presence of God, 
that biholdith alle thingis; and thei ben 
turnyd in to fli3t, an other fro! an other, 
so that they weren cast doun of her own 
more, and with strookis of her swerdis 
23 thei™ weren feblid. Judas sothely a3ein- 
stode gretely, punyshynge vnholy men, 
and he keste" doun of hem thritty thon- 
zasand men®. Thymothe sothely felle in 
to the partis of Dositheus and Sosipatris ; 
and he axide by many preyers, that he 
were delyuerd quyek; for that he hadde 
fadris, and moderis, and bretheren,‘manye 
of ? Jewis, whom it shulde byfalle for?? to 
25be diseeyued by his deth. And whan 
he hadde 3o0uen feith, hym to restorynge 
hem after’ thing ordeynd, thei dismit- 
tiden hym vuhurt, for helthe of bretheren. 
26 Forsothe Judas turnyde a3ein fro Car- 
mon, slayn fyue and twenti thousandis. 
27 After the fli3t of these and deeth, he 
mouede the vost to Effron, a stronge 
citee, in whom’ the multitude of diuerse 
folc’ dwelte; and stronge 3unge men, 
stondynge togidre for wallis, strongly 
fou3ten ajeinus ; forsothe in this weren 


f cohortes, or cumpanyes of kny3lis u. 
i streytnessis 4c. * Om. aan. lto Hy. 


AG S€C.™M. HK prom. — PP Om. G prem Ivp un. 


o sum Apr. ™. EFIIRE. 


¥Om.r. W¥ forsothe rk. YW castiden Aq. 


b the strong EPY. 


II. MACCABEES. 


& Om. acu. 
m Om. Gi. 
r whiche 1, 


© cohortis, or c. of k. EPY. cumpanies R. 
8 vnexpungnable, or [ether plures} unable to be ouercume k et celert preter R. 
x delyuerid r. 


885 


left in ‘a certayn" place. Forsothe Dosi-19 
theus and Sosipater, that weren duykis 
with Machabeus, slowen ten thousend 
men left of Tymothe in the strengthe. 
And Maehabeus ordeynede aboute hyime2o 
sixe thousynde, and ordeynede bi ‘cohortis, 
ether cumpenyes of kny3tis°, and wente 
forth a3ens ‘Tymothe, hauynge with hym 
an hundrid thousynde? and twenti thou- 
synde of foot men, and of horse men twei 
thousynde and fyue hundrid. Forsothe21 
whanne the comyng of Judas’ was know- 
un, Tymothe bifore sente wymmen, and 
sones, and othere apparel in to a strengthe 
that is seid" Carmon; for it was ‘vnable 
to be ouercomun’, and hard in goynge to, 
for streytnessest of places. And whamne 22 
the firste cumpanye of Judas apperide, 
drede was maad to enemyes bi presence 
of God, that biholdith alle thingis; and 
thei weren turned in to flight, oon after" 
anothir, so that thei weren east doun 
more’ of her owne, and weren feblid with 
strokis of her swerdis. Judas sotheli™ 23 
contynuede greetli, punyschynge vnhooli 
men, and castide*” doun of hem thretti 
thousynde of men. Tymothe sotheli hym 24 
silf felle in to the partis of Dosithens and 
Sosipater ; and he axide bi many preieris, 
that he were dismittid* qnyk; for’ he 
hadde fadris, and modris, and britheren, of 
many of? Jewis, whiche it sehulde bifalle 
for to be disseyued bi his deth. And 25 
whanne he hadde 3ouun feith, that he 
schulde restore hem bi couenaunt, thei 
dismittiden* hym vnhirt, for heelthe of 
britheren. Forsothe Judas turnede ajen 26 
fro Carmon, after that he hadde slayn 
fyue and twenti thousyndis. Aftir the27 
fliz3t and deth of these, he mouyde the oost 
of Effron, strong? citee, in which the mul- 
titude of dyuerse folkis dwelte ; and stronge 
3onge men, stondynge togidere for wallis, 


h jnexpugnable, or enable ta be ouercomen u. 
2 castide H. © of men 4. P of manye 
8 folkis H. 


q Jewis A. * callid r. 
t streitnesse GNRS. U of R. 
z Om. ENPxy. 4 delyeriden r. 


P Om. R. 


¥ for that R. 


886 ll. MACCABEES. 


manye engynys, and appareils of dartis. 
os Bot whan thei ladden inclepid the Al- 
mizty, that by his power brekith togidre 
thet mi3tis of enimyes, thei token the citee, 
and castiden doun of hem that weren with 
29ynne fyue and twenty thousand. Fro 
thennus thei wenten to the citee of Scitis, 
whiche was fer fro Jerusalem sixe hun- 
sodrid furlongis. Forsothe witnessinge 
these Jewis that weren anentis Scitopo- 
listis, that thei weren had of hem be- 
nignly, 3he, in tymys of aduersite, and 
sithat thei diden myldly with hem, thei 
doynge thankyngis to hem, and also stir- 
ynge fro hennus forth for to be benigne 
a3einus her kyne, camen to Jerusalem, the 
32solempne day of weekis neiz3inge. And 
after Pentecost, thei wenten a3eins Gor- 
asgias, prepoost of Ydume. Sothely he 
wente out with thre thousand" fote men, 
stand foure hundrid horsmen; whiche gon 
to gidre, it befelle a fewe of Jewis for to 
35falle. Forsothe Dositheus, sum horsman 
of Bachenoris, a stronge man, heelde 
Gorgias; and whan he wolde take hym 
quyck, sum horsman of Tracis felle vpon’ 
hym, and kitte of his shuldre, and so 
36 Gorgias flei3 in to Maresame. And hem 
that were with Hesdrym lengre fi3tynge, 
and maad wery, Judas inclepide the Lord, 
helper, and duyk of bateil, for to be 
a7maad benigne, with cuntree voice, and 
with ympnys reisynge crye, smote fli3t 
3sto kniz3tis of Gorgias. Forsothe Judas, 
the oost gadrid, came in to the citee 
Odollam; and whan the seuenthe day 
aboue came, thei after® custom clensid, 
39in the place diden saboth. And in the 
suynge day Judas came with his, for to 
take awey the bodies of men cast donn, 
and for to putte with fadris, and inodris, 
4oin sepulcris of fadris. Forsothe thei 
founden vudir cootis of slayn men, of the 
3iftis of ydolis that weren at Jamniam, 
fro whom* the lawe forbedith Jewis; 
therfore it is maad knowen to alle men, 


tOm.u. 4% thousandis u. 


Xl. 28—4o. 


strongli fou3ten a3en; forsothe in this 
weren many engynes, and apparels of 
dartis. But whanne thei hadden clepid 2s 
to help the Almi3ti, that bi his power al 
to-brekith my3tis of enemyes, thei token 
the citee, and castiden doun of hem that 
weren with ynne fyue and twenti thou- 
synde. Fro thens thei wenten to the citee 29 
of Scitis, which was fer fro Jerusalem 
sixe hundrid furlongis. Forsothe for these 30 
Jewis that weren auentis Scitopolistis wit- 
nessiden, that thei weren had ‘of hem? 
benygneli, 3he, in tymes of aduersite, and 
that thei diden myldeli with hem, thei3 
diden thankyngis to hem; and also stirid- 
en! fro hennys forth for to be benygne a3ens 
her kyn, and came to Jerusalem, whanne 
the solempne dai of wokis neiz3ide. And 32 
aftir Pentecost, thei wenten a3ens Gorgias, 
souereyn of Idumee. Sotheli he wentess 
out with thre thousynde foot® men, and 
foure bundrid horse men; and whanne 34 
thei weren asemblid, it bifelle that a fewe 
Jewis' fellen doun. Forsothe Dositheus, 35 
an& horseman of Bachenoris, a strong 
man, helde Gorgias ; and whanne he wolde 
take hym quyk, an® horse man of Traces 
felle on hym, and kittide of his schuldre, 
and so Gorgias flei in to Maresam. And 36 
whanne thei that weren with Hesdrym 
fou3ten lengere, and thei weren maad 
wery, Judas inwardli clepide the Lord 
for to be maad helpere, and duyk of batel ; 
and he bigan with cuntrei vois, and with 37 
ympnes reiside cry, and made the kny3tis 
of Gorgias to! fle. Forsothe Judas with 3s 
the oost gaderid, cam in to the  citee! 
Odolla; and whanne the seuenthe dai cam 
aboue, thei weren clensid bi custom, and 
diden sabat in the same place. And in39 
the dai suynge Judas cam with hise", for 
to take awei the bodies™ of men cast 
doun, and for to putte with fadris, and 
modris, in sepulcris of fadris. Forsothe 49 
thei foundun vndur cootis of slayn men, of 
the 3iftis of idols that weren at Jamnyam, 


Yonu. Wypu. * whiche uy. 


d . . Sy 
Om. aa © of foot Epy. fof Jewisre. &€ suma pr.m.etceteri. sum apr.m.etceteri. 1 for 
to EPY. arEpy. Om. Fut. 1Om.1. UW his men upy. ™ dede bodies Epy. 


a 


XII. 43—XIII. 4. II. MACCABEES. 887 


for this cause hem for’ to haue fallen. 
41 And so alle blessiden the iust dom of the 
Lord, whiche maad priuy thingus know- 
szen. And so thei conuertid to preyers, 
preyeden, that thilk trespas that was 
don, were bitaken to for3etyng. And so- 
thely the strengist Judas monestide the 
peple, for to keepe hem with out synne, 
‘ vnder eejen seeynge, what thingus ben 
don for synnys of hem that ben cast 
43doun. And collacioun, or spekinge to 
gidre maad, he sente twelue thousand 
dragmes of syluer to Jerusalem, for to be 
offrid sacrifice? for synnes of dead men, 
wele and religiously bythenkynge of a3ein 
4arysyng; sothely 3if he hopide not, hem 
that fellen to rysynge a3ein, it was seen 
superflue and veyne for to preye for dead 
45men; and? for he biheelde, that thei that 
token slepynge, or deth, with pitee, had- 
46den best grace ket. Therfore holy and 
helthful thenkynge is, for to preye for 
dead men, that thei be vnbounden fro 
synnus. 


CAPSXIII. 


i In the hundrid and nyne and fourtithe 
jeer Judas knew3, Antiochus Eupator for 
to cume with multitude a5einus Judee; 

gand with hym Lisias, procuratoure and 
prepoost of needis, with hym hauynge an 
hundrid aud ten thousand of foot men, 
and of horsmen fyue thousand, and oly- 
fauntis? two and twenti, chaaris with 

3sykelis three hundrid. Forsothe and 
Menelaus ioynyde hym to hem, and with 
grete disceit bisou3te Antiochus, not for 
helthe of the cuntree, bot hopynge hym 
4for to be ordeynd in to princehod. Bot 
the kyng of kyngis reiside the ynwittis 
of Antiochus in to the synner; and Li- 
sias shewynge, o7 conseilynge at ere, 
him for to be cause of alle yuels, he 
comaundide, as custome is to hem, hym 


yOm. a prem. 2a sacrifice n. 


fro whiche the lawe forbedith Jewis ; 
therfor it was maad knowun to alle men, 
that thei ‘fellen doun” for this canse. And 41 
therfor alle blessiden the iust dom of the 
Lord, which made priuy thingis knowun. 
And so thei conuertiden to preieris, and 42 
preieden, that ‘the ilke® trespas that was 
don, were bitakun to for3etyng. And 
sotheli the strengeste Judas monestide the 
puple, for to kepe hem with out synne, 
seynge vndur i3en, what thingis weren don 
for syrnnes of hem that weren east doun. 
And whanne ‘spekyng togidere? was maad, 43 
he sente twelue thousynde dragmes of sil- 
uer to Jerusalem, to be offrid a sacrifice 
for synnes of deed men, and bithou3te wel 
and religiousli of a3enrisyng; for if he 44 
hopide not, that thei that fellen sehulden 
rise a3en, it was seyn superflu and veyn 
for to preye for deed men; and for he4s 
bihelde, that thei that token slepyng, ‘ether 
deth*, with pitee, hadden best grace kept. 
Therfor hooli and heelful thenkyng is, for 46 
to preie for deed men, that thei be releesid 
of* synnes. 


CAP. XIII. 


In the hundrid and nyne and fourtithe'i 
jeer Judas knew, that Antiok Eupator 
cam with roultitude ajens Judee; and with 2 
hym cam Lisias, procuratour and souereyn 
of offices, hauynge with hym an hundrid 
and ten thousynde of foot men, and of 
horse men fyue thousynde, and" olifauntis 
two and twenti, charis with sithis thre 
hundrid. Forsothe andY Menelans ioyn-3 
ede hym to hem, and with greet desseit 
bisou3te Antiok, not for heelthe of the 
cnntre, but hopynge that he schulde be 
ordeyned in to prinshod. But the kyngs 
of kyngis reiside the willis of Autiok ajens 
the synnere; and whamne Lisyas sehewide 
that he was cause of alle yuels, he co-- 
maundide, as custom is to hem, hyrm 
takun for to be slayn in the same place. 


zz Om. a. 4 of elifauntis u. 


n scholden don Fr. ° thilke 1. P collacioun R. collacioun or (ether plures] spetinge to gidre B et celert. 


4 for to celeri. r or deth Evy. Om. Rk. 8 fro R. 


¥ Om. 1. 


t fourti A prom. EFHMPYe. u and of F pr.m. 


888 Il. MACCABEES. XU. 5—15. 


taken to, for to be slayn in the same 
splace. Sothely in the same place was a 
toure of fifty cubitis, hanynge of eche syde 
an gadryng of ashe; this hadde bihold- 
syuge in to dounward. Fro thennus he 
comaundide the sacrileger, 07 cursid man, 
for to be cast doun in to the® ashe, alle 
men puttynge hym forth to the deth. 
7 And bi siche lawe it bifelle the breker of 
lawe for to dye, nether Menelaus for® to 
sbe 3ouen to erthe. And forsothe iustly 
ynow3; for whi for he dide many tres- 
passis ajeinus the auter of God, whos fijr 
and ashe was holy, he is dampnyd in 
9deth of ashe. Bot the kyng with out 
brydil in mynde4, came to shewynge hym 
10 wars to Jewis, than his fadir. Whiche 
thingis knowen, Judas comaundide the 
peple ni3t and day for to ynclepe the 
Lord; that as evermore, and nowe he 
i1shulde helpe hem; whiche sothely dred- 
den for to be prined of lawe, and cuntree, 
and of the holy temple; and that he 
suffride not the peple, that a whijl goon, 
hadde a litil quycknyd® a3ein, for to 
be suget eftsoonys to blasfeme naciouns. 
12And so alle men doynge togidere that 
thing, and axinge mercy of the Lord 
with weepyng, in fastyngis by alle three 
days cast doun, Jndas monestide hem 
isfor to make hem redy. Forsothe he 
with eldre men thou3te, bifore that the 
kyng mouede oost to Judee, and gate the 
citee, for to go out, and bitake to dom 
of the Lord the out goynge, or eende, of 
lathe thyng. And sof 3enynge power of 
alle thingis to God, maker of nou3t of 
the world, and monestynge hise for to 
fi3te strongly, and ‘vn to® deth, for lawes, 
temple, citee, cuutree, and citeseyns for 
to stonde, ordeynyde the oost aboute Mo- 
isdyn. And tokyn 30uen to his of victorie 
of God, the strongist 3unge men chosen, 
bi ny3t assaylinge the kyngis halle in 
tentis, he slew3 fourtene thousand men, 


bOm. uw. ¢ Om. H. 


whadde re. * or cursid man EPyY. Om. rR. 


Sotheli in the same place was a tour ofs 
fifti cubitis, hauynge on ech side a gader- 
yng of aische; this was biholdynge in to 
adiche. Fro thennus he comaundide thes 
sacrilegere, ‘ether cursid man, for to be 
caste doun in to aische, whanne alle men 
puttidenY forth hym to the deth. And bi7 
siche lawe it bifelle the brekere of lawe 
for to die, nether Menelaus for to be 3ouun 
to erthe. And forsothe iustly ynow3; fors 
whi for he dide many trespassis a3ens the 
auter of God, whos fier and aische was 
hooli, he was dampned in the? deth of 
aische. But the kyng with out bridil in» 
mynde’, cam to schewe hym worse to 
Jewis, than his fadir. And whanne these to 
thingis weren knowun, Judas comaundide 
the puple, that bi ny3t and dai thei schul- 
den clepe to help the Lord; that as euere 
more, also now he schulde helpe hem ; 
whiche sotheli® dredden for to be priuyd 11 
of lawe, and cuntree, and. hooli temple; and 
that he sunffride not the puple, that a while 
gon hadde a litil quykid a3en, for to be 
suget eftsoone to blasfeme naciouns. Ther- 12 
for whanne alle men diden togidere that 
thing, and axiden merci of the Lord with 
wepyng, in fastyngis® bi alle thre daies, 
and kneliden, Judas monestide hem for to 
make hem redi. Forsothe he with eldre13 
men thon3te for to go out, bifore that the 
kyng mouede oost? to Judee, and gat the 
citee, and to bitake the ende® of the thing 
to the dom of the Lord. Therfor he 3af14 
power of alle thingis to God, makere of 
nou3t of the world, and monestide hise‘ 
for€ to fi3te strongli, and stonde til to the 
deth, for lawis, temple}, citee, cuntre, and 
citeseyns; and he ordeynede the! oost 
abonte Modyn. And whanne a tokene1s 
was 30uun to hise of victorie of God, he 
chees the strengeste 30nge men, and bi 
niz3t he asailide the kyngis halle in tentis, 
and he slow fourtene thousynde men, and 
the moste of olifauntis, with these that 


4 mynde, or undirstondynge H. ¢quyckid nH. fsohen. & til to H. 


¥ : Y pultiden ursve. Z Om.re. ® mynde, or [ether plures 
vndirstonding EFGHIKMNPQSUXYe. b forsothe a y [ P 1 


outgoing, or [ether plures} ende x et ceteri. fOm.r. & Om. F. 


¢ fasting R. ‘the oost Apr.m.1. © outgoing R. 
tthe temple epy. i Om. Epy. 


XI. 16—XI1V. 1. 


and the mest of olyfauntis, with these" 
isthat weren pntt aboue. And with hee3ist 
dreed and distourblyng thei fulfillynge 
the tentis of enmyes, and thingus eisily, 
ijor welsumly', don, wenten awey. For- 
sothe this is don the day li3tynge, the 
proteccioun of the Lord helpynge hym. 
13 Bot the kyng, taken tast of hardynesse 
by craft of Jewis, temptide hardynessis* 
iwwof plaeis; and he mouede the tentis to 
Bethsura, that was a! stronge hold of 
Jewis; bot he was dryuen hurtlid and 
20menushid. Forsothe to these that weren 
withynne, Judas sente needful thingus. 
21 Forsothe Rodochus, summan of the™ 
oost of Jewis, telde out to enmyes pri- 
uytees; whiche sou3t is taken, and shitt 
22to gidre. Eftsone the kyng hadde word 
to hem that weren in Bethsura, jaue the 
23113t hond, reseeyuede, wente awey. Ioyn- 
yde with Judas is" ouercummen. For- 
sothe as he knew3 Philipp for to haue 
rebellid at Autiochie, whiche was left on 
needis, he astonyed in mynde’®, bisow3te 
Jewis, and suget to hem, swerith of alle 
thingis, of whiche it is seen just; and 
recouuseilinge offride saerefice, wirship- 
aside the temple, and puttide 3iftis. He 
byclippide? Machabeus, and made hym 
duyk and‘ prince fro Tholomaida yvntoT 
25Gerreyns. Sothely as he came to Tho- 
lomaida, men of Tholomaida baren greu- 
ously the aceordyng of frendship, hau- 
ynge indignacioun, lest perauenture thei 
26 braken pees. ‘Than Lisias styede vp the 
dom place, and expounyde resoun, and 
ceeside the peple, and turnyde® a3ein to 
Antioche; and this maner the kyngis 
goynge ont and turnynge aj3ein wente 
forth. 
CAP. XIV. 
i Bot after tyme of three 3eere Judas 
knew3, and thei that weren with hym, 
Demetrie Seleucus with stronge multi- 


h hem G see. m. u. 
° mynde, or ondirstondyuge H. 


iin prosperile n. 


k esili upry. esily, either in [bi 1] prosperite FaniKNsxe. 
© oostis 1. 


A prom. mynuyd, or wastid 1. = sum man 1. 
riimesuxe. or kissede Evy. Om. R. 


VOL. Hl. 


I]. MACCABEES. 


k of hardynesses 1, 
P becleppede, or kissede 1. 


889 


weren put aboue. And thei filliden thetic 
tentis of enemyes with hizeste drede and 
disturblyng, and whanne these _ thingis 
weren don ‘in prosperite*, thei wenten 
awei. Forsothe this was don in the daii7z 
li3tynge, for the proteccioun of the Lord 
helpide hym. But whame the kyngis 
hadde takun taast of hardynesse ‘of Jewis 
bi craft, he! asaiede hardynessis of places ; 
and mouede the tentis to Bethsura, that to 
was a strong hold of Jewis; but he was 
dryuun hurtlide and menusid™. Forsothe 20 
to these that weren with ynne, Judas sente 
nedeful thingis. Forsothe Rodochus, sum" 21 
of the oost® of Jewis, telde out priuetees 
to enemyes; which was sou3t, and takun, 
and prisoned. Eftsoone the kyng hadde 22 
word to hem that weren in Bethsura, and 
jaf the ri3thond, and resseyuede, and wente 
He ioynede batel with Judas, and 
Judas was ouercomun. Forsothe as? he 23 
knew that Filip hadde rebellid at Anti- 
ochie, which was left on nedis, he was 
astonyed in mynde4, and bisou3te Jewis, 
and was suget to hem, and swoor of alle 
thingis, of whiche it was seyn iust; and he 
was recounselid, and offride sacrifice, and 
worsehipide the temple, and puttide 3iftis. 
He biclippide, ‘ether kisside™, Machabeus, 21 
and made hym prinee and duyk fro Tolo- 
maida til to Garreyns. Sotheli as he cam 25 
to Tolomaida, men of Tolomaida baren 
greuousli acordyng of frendschip, and hadde 
indignacioun, leste perauenture thei wol- 
den breke pees. Thanne Lisias stiede vp 26 
m to the dom place, and expownede re- 
soun, and ceeside the puple, and turnyde 
a3en to Antiochie; aud in this maner the 
kingis goynge out and turnynge a3en 
wenten forth. 


awei. 


CAP. XIV. 
But aftir tyme of thre 3eer Judas knew, 1 
and thei that weren with hym, that De- 
metrie Seleucus stiede to couenable places, 


10m. nu, ™Om. 4H. ® Om. a. prem. 
qoru. ‘tiltou. § turneth u. 


lhe bi craft of Jewis re. m™ menuschid 
POm.r. 4 mynde, either undurstonding 


5X 


890 ll. MACCABEES. XIV. 2—13. 


tude, and shippis, by the hauen of Tri- 
polis for to haue styede to couenable 
2placis, and haue holden cuntrees a3einus 
3 Antiochus, and his duyk Lisias. For- 
sothe sum Alchymus, that was hee3ist 
prest, bot wilfully was defoulid in tyme 
of inengynge to gidre, biholdinge in no 
manere helthe for to be to hym, nether 
accesse, or cummyng to, to the auter, 
scame to kyng Demetrye, in the hundrid 
and fouretithe 3eer, offringe to hym a 
golden crown, and palme', ouer these 
thingis and offringe vessels, that weren 
seen for to be of the temple; and sothely 
sin that day was stille. Forsothe he get- 
ynge a couenable tyme of his woodnesse, 
and he" clepid of¥ Demetrie to counseile, 
and axid with what thingis and conseilis 
eJewis enforsiden, answerde, Thei that 
ben said Assideys of Jewis, to whom 
Judas Machabeus is souereyn, nuryshen 
bateils, and mouen discenciouns, nether 
;suffren the rewme for to be quyet. For 
whi and Y defraudid of glorie of fader and 
modir, sothely Y saye, of hee3ist prest- 
shod, came hidir, first sothely keepynge 
feith to the kyngis profitis, the secounde 
tyme sothely counseilynge to citesayns, 
for whi by shrewidnesse of hem alle our 
ykyn is traueilid not beste. Bot Y preye, 
thou kyng, alle these thingus knowen, by- 
holde to the cuntree and kyn, after” thi 
iomanlynesse* shewid to alle men. For 
whi as long as Judas is aboue, or alyuey, 
it is impossible pees for to be to needis. 
i1 Forsothe siche thingis said of hym, and 
other frendis, hauynge hem enmyly, 
enflawmiden Demetrie a3einus Judee. 
12 Whiche anoon sente Nychanore, prepost 
sof olifauntis, duyk in to Judee, co- 
maundementis 30uen for to take hym 
Judas quyck sothely, for to seatere so- 
thely hem that weren with hym, and for 
to ordeyn Alchymus hee3ist prest of the 


t 
apalme nw. tOmou. vOm.on. ¥ vp H. 


t sum EHPRYe. 


Fsec.m. acces R. Ytohim rue. YY Om. F. 
MNPQRsUXyYe. Om. a. 


with strong multitude, and schippis, bi 
the hauene of Tripolis, and hath holdun2 
cuntreis ajens Antiok, and his duyk Li- 
sias. Forsothe oont Alchimus, that was3 
hijeste prest, but wilfuli was defoulid in 
tymes of myngyng togidere, bihelde that 
in no maner heelthe was to bym, nether 
nei3yng" to the auter, and he cam to kyng4 
Demetrie, in the hundrid and fiftithe 3eer, 
and offride hym’ a goldun coroun, and 
palme, ouer these thingis and offride ves- 
sels, that weren seyn for'Y to be of the 
temple; and sotheli in that day he was 
stille. Forsothe he gat a conenable tymes 
of his woodnesse, and he“ was clepid of 
Demetrie to counsel, and was axid with 
what thingis and counsels Jewis enfors- 
iden, and he answeride, Thei that ben6 
seid® Assideis of Jewis, of whiche Judas 
Machabeus is souereyu, nurschenY batels, 
and mouen discenciouns, nether suffren the 
rewme for to be quyet. For whi and Y7 
am defraudid of glorie of fadir and modir, 
sotheli Y seie, of hijest presthod, and Y 
cam hidur, first sotheli kepyng feith tos 
the kyngis profitis, the secounde tyme 
sotheli counselynge also the? citeseyns, for 
whi bi schrewidnesse of hem al oure kyn 
is trauelid greetli. But Y preie, thou kyng, ® 
whanne alle these thingis ben knowun, bi- 
holde to the cuntre and kyn, by thi manly- 
nesse* schewid to alle men. For whi asl 
long as Judas lyueth, it is impossible that 
pees be to nedis. Forsothe whanne siche ! 
thingis weren seid of hym, and othere 
frendis, hauynge hem enemyly, enflawin- 
eden Demetrie a3ens Judas. Whiche anoon !2 
sente Nycanor, souereyn of olifauutis, a 
duyk in to Judee, with comaundementis !3 
3ouun for to take thilke Judas quyk, for 
to scatere sotheli hem that weren with 
hym, and for to ordeyne Alchymus hijeste 
prest of the moste holy® temple. Thanne 4 
hethene men that fledden Judas fro Judee, 


x manlynesse, or curtesye H. YY lyuyth u. 


u Che ° one «oe ee 
acces, or [ether plures] neizing EGHINPsxye. actis, neithir neiz33ing F pr. m. neiz3ing 

: i © Om. re. * Om. epy. Ynursheden EPpy. 2 to EFHIK 
manlinesse, or curfeste EGHIKMNPQsuUXYe. curtesie F sup. ras. © Om. ceteri. 


XIV. 14-—26. 


14most temple. Than heithen men that 
fledden Judas fro Judee, flocmele ioyn- 
yden hem to Nychanore, gessynge the 
myseistees and dethis of Jewis prosperi- 
istees of her thingus. And so the cum- 
minynge of Nychanore herd, and the* cumn- 
mynge to gidre of naciouns, Jewis spreynt 
with erthe preyeden hyin, that ordeynyde 
his peple in to with outen cende for to 
keepe, and whiche keuerde, or defendide, 
ichis part with opyn siguys. Forsothe the 
duyk comaundynge, anoon thei moueden 
fro* thennus, and cainen togidre to the? 
17 castel Dessau. Symont forsothe, brother 
of Judas, ioynyde with Nychanore, bot 
he is to gidre broken with sudeyn cum- 
ismynge of aduersaries. Nethelese Ny- 
chanore heerynge the vertu of Judas 
felowis, and gretenesse of ynwytt, whiche 
thei hadden for stryues of the cuntree, 
19dredde for to make dom of blood. Wher- 
fore he byfore sente Possydonye, and 
Theodoce, and Mathie, for to 3eue ri3t- 
20 hondis, and take. And whan longe coun- 
seil was don of these thingis, and he 
duyk hadde told to>» the® multitude, oo 
seittence was of alle, for to grannte to 
2ifrenshipis. And so thei ordeynyden a 
day, in whiche thei shulden do priuyli 
bitwixe hem self; and to eche sellis, or 
smale setis, ben brou3t forth, and putt. 
22 Forsothe Judas comaundide armed men 
for to be in couenable placis, lest per 
auenture of enmyes eny thyng of yuel 
spronge; and thei maden a couenable 
zaspeche to gidre. Forsothe Nychanore 
dwelte in Jerusalem, and no thing did 
yuel; and he lefte flockis of eumpanyes, 
24that weren gadrid. Forsothe he hadde 
Judas euermore derworth of ynwytt, and 
25 was bowid to the nan; and preyde hym 
for to wedde a wijf, and to? gendre 
sonys; and he made weddyngis, quyetly 
dide, and lyueden comounly, ov togidre. 
26 Alchymus forsothe, seeynge the charite 
bOm. H. 


zZOm.u. 8 Om. H. 


© keuereth r. kinerith, or [ether plures] defendith x et ceteri. 
f and sellis r. sellis. or [ether plures] smale seetis © et cetert. 


ialien, either other mennys thingis FHIKMNQSUXe. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


bb Om. Kk pr. m. 


891 


flokmel ioyneden hem to Nycanor, and 
gessiden the wretchidnessis and dethis of 
Jewis prosperitees of her thingis. Therfor 15 
whanne comyng of Nycanor was herd, 
and comyng togidere of naciouns, Jewis 
bispreynt with erthe preicden hym, that 
ordeynede his puple in to with outen ende 
for to kepe, and which defendith¢ his part 
with open signes. Forsothe for the duyk 16 
comaundide, anoon thei mouyden fro then- 
nus, and camen togidere to castcl4 Dessau. 
Symount forsothe, brother of Judas, jioyn-17 
ede batel with Nycanor, but he was al 
to-brokun with sudeyn comyng of aduer- 
saries. Netheles Nycanor herde the vertu 18 
of Judas felowis, and greetnesse of hardy- 
nesse, which thei hadden for stryunes of 
the cuntree, and dredde for to make dom 
bi blood. Wherfor he bifore sente Possi- 19 
donye, and Theodote, and Mathie, for to 
3yue ri3thondis, and take. And whanne2o 
longe counsel was don of these thingis, 
and the duyk hyin silf hadde teld to the 
multitude, o sentence was of alle, for to 
graunte to frenschipis. Therfor® thei or-2) 
deyneden a dai, in which thei schulden 
do priueli bitwixe hem silf; ‘smale setis‘ 
weren brou3t forth, and set to ech. For-22 
sothe Judas comaundide armed men for to 
be in couenable places, lest perauenture 
ony thing of yuel schulde rise sudenli of 
enemyes; and thei maden a couenable 
speche togidere. Forsothe Nycanor dwelte 23 
in Jerusalem, and no thing dide yuel; and 
he lefte flockis of eumpenyes, that weren 
gaderid. Forsothe he hadde Judas euere 2 
more dereworthe of herte, aid was bowid 
to the man; and preiede hym for to wedde 25 
a wijf, and gendre sones; and he made 
weddyngis, and® dide quyetli, and thei 
lyueden comynli, ‘ether togidere". Alchi-26 
mus forsothe si3 the charite of hem togi- 
dere, and acordyngis, and cam to Deme- 
trie, and seide, that Nycanor assentith to 
alyeni thingis, and hath ordeynede Judas, 


cOmu €Om. un. 


4 the eastel 1K. e And therfor r. 


g Om. Enprye. } or togidere py. Om. R. 


5x@ ss 


892 


of hem to gidre, and accoordyngus, came 
to Demetrie, and saide, Nychanore for to 
assente to alyen® thingis, and tof haue 
ordeynd Judas, traytour of the rewme, 
o7successoure to hym. And so the kyng 
maad sharp, and with siche warst accus- 
yngis terrid to wrath, wrote to Nycha- 
nore, sayinge, hym sothely for to bere 
greeuously of acoordyng of frenship, 
nethelese for to comaunde for to sende 
23 Machabeus bounden to Antiochie. Whiche 
thingis knowen, Nychanore was astonyed, 
and greuously bare, 3if he made void tho 
thingis that acordiden, he no thing hirt, 
290r harmed, of the man; bot for he mi3te 
not azeinstonde the kyng, he kepte co- 
uenabletee, in whiche he shulde_per- 
30fourme the maundement. And Macha- 
beus seeynge Nychanore for to do with 
hym more sternly, and feerslier 3euynge 
custumable cummyng to gidre, vndir- 
stondynge this feersnesse for to be not 
of good, a fewe of his gadrid, he® hid 
sihym fro Nychanore. Whiclie thing as 
he knew3, hym strongly byfore cummen 
of the man, he came to the most andi 
holiest temple, and he comaundide to the 
prestis offrynge wont oostis, or sacrifices, 
32 the man for to be taken‘ to hym. Whiche 
sayinge with othe, for to not wyte, wher 
he was that was sou3t, he stretchynge 
33 forth the hond to the temple, swore, 3if 
3e shuln not bitake to ine Judas bounden, 
Y shal leede donn this temple of God in 
to pleyn', and digge out the auter, and 
Y shal halewe this temple to the™ free 
3ifadir. And these thingis said, he wente 
awey. Forsothe the prestis holdynge forth 
hondis in to heuen, ynclepiden hym that 
euer is forfizter of the fole of hem, say- 
ssinge these thingus, Thou, Lord of vuy- 
uersitee, or of alle creatures, that of no 
thing hast need, woldist the temple of 
thin habitacioun for to be maad in vs. 


W. MACCABEES. 


XIV. 27—35. 


traitour of the rewme, successour to hym. 
Therfor the kyng was maad scharp, and 27 
terrid to‘ wraththe with siche worste ac- 
cusyngis, and wroot to Nycanor, and seide, 
that sotheli he bar greuously of acordyng 
of frendschipe, and netheles comaundide 
for to sende Machabeus boundun to An- 
tiochie. And whanne these thingis weren 2s 
knowun, Nycanor was astonyed, and greu- 
ousli bar, if he made voide tho thingis 
that weren acordid, and he was no thing 
harmed! of the man; but for he my3te not29 
ajen stonde the kyng, he kepte couena- 
blete, in which he schulde perfourme the 
maundement. And Machabeus si3, that3o 
Nycanor dide with hym most sterneli, and 
jaf fersliere customable comyng togidere, 
and he vndurstode that this sternesse 
was™ not of goode, and with a fewe of 
hise gaderid, he hidde hym fro Nyca- 
nor. And as he knew this thing, thats 
he was strongli bifore comun, ‘ether aspi- 
ed", of the man, he cam to the mooste 
and holieste temple, and he comaundide 
to the prestis offrynge customable’ sa- 
crifices’, that the man be takun” to hym. 
And whanne thei seiden with ooth, that 32 
thei wisten not, where he was that was 
sou3t, he stretchide forth the hond to the 
temple, and swoor, If 3e schulen not bitake 33 
to me Judas boundun, Y schal drawe’ 
doun this temple of God in to pleynesse, 
and digge out the auter, and Y schal 
halewe this temple to Liber*, ether' Ba- * riter; that 
chus, the fadir. And whanne he haddes4 *, god of a 
seid these thingis, he wente awei. For- 
sothe the’ prestis helden” forth hondis in 
to heuene, and clepiden hym to help that 
euere is forfijtere of the fole of hem, and 
seiden these thingis, Thou, Lord of ‘alle ss 
creaturis*, that of no thing hast nede, 
woldist that the temple of thin habitacioun 
be maad in vs. And now, thou Lord, 36 
hooli of alle hooli, kepe with outen ende . 


© alien, or other mennus un. fOm.n. & Om.c prom. wrothe x. bOm.u., i1Om.a prim. * bitaken 
G sec.m.n. ‘\playnesse nx. ™Om. Hu. 2 Om. n. 

kK wi 6 . 2 
an Aisa R. 1 hurt r. hert, or {ether plures] harmyd & et ceteri. MisR. "or aspied Epy. Om. R. 
: wont A pr.m. EMPRYe. 4 oostis, or [ether H] sacrificis nupye. * bitakun plures. 8 lede EHPRYe. 

or EPY. tOm.e, vy Om. 1. w holdyng r. 


crealuris B et ceteri, 


X yniuersite R. vuniuersite, or [ether plures] of alle 
P 


XIV. 36-—46, 


36 And nowe, thou holy of al holy, Lord, 
kepe in to with outen eende this hous 
vndefoulid, that a lytil goon was clensid. 

37 Forsothe Rasias, sum of the eldre men 
of Jerusalem, was accusid to Nychanore, 
a man, louer of the citee, and wel heer- 
ynge, that for affeccioun, 07 done, was 

38clepid fadre of Jewis. This man many 
tymes helde purpose of continence in 
Jewrie, apaied for to bitake body and 

39 soule of® perseueraunce, o7 lastyng. For- 
sothe Nychanore willynge for to shewe 
the hate, that he hadde ajeinis Jewis, 
sente fyue hundrid kni3tis, for to take 

4ohyin. Forsothe he gesside, 3if he hadde 
disceyuyde hym, hymself to 3euynge most 

sideth to Jewis. Forsothe cumpanyes co- 
ueitynge for to falle in to his hous, and 
for to breke the 3ate, and for to moue to 
fijr, whanne now he was taken, he axide, 

42 0r assailide, ym self with swerd ; chees- 
ynge for to dye nobly, rather than for? 
to be maad suget to synners, and azeinis 
his birthis for to be ledd with vnworthi 

43 wrongis. Bot whan by haastynge with 
vneerteyn stroke he hadde 3ouen wounde, 
and cumpanyes bitwixe dores brasten 
ynne, he rennynge a3ein hardily to the 
walle, castide doun hym self manly in to 

4sthe cumpanyes. Whiche swiftly 3euynge 
place to his fall, he came by the mydil 

45 hatrel4, and 3it whijl he brethide, he, in 
ynwitt kyndlid, roose. And whan his blood 
with grete flowynge flowide doun, aud 
with most grenos woundis he was wound- 
id, bi rennyng he passide the cumpanye ; 

4sand stoondynge vpon" sum hee3 stoon, 
and now maad with outen blood, biclip- 
pynge his entraylis with bothe hondis, 
castide forth on the cumpanyes, he yn- 
clepynge the lordshiper of lijf and spirit, 
that he shulde 3eelde eftsonys these thingis 
to hym; and thus he is dead fro lijf. 


© for G sec.m. H. =P Om. i. 


Y sum EMPRye. 
bOm. F. © sum EUPRYe. a F sup. ras. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


q haterel, or vémeste place of the necke u. 


2 affectioun, or [ether plures] lowe © et ccteri preter R. 


893 


this hous vndefoulid, that a litil agon was 
clensid. Forsothe Rasias, oon’ of the eldres7 
men of Jerusalem, was accusid to Nyca- 
nor; and Rasias was a man, louyere of 
the citee, and wel herynge, that for affec- 
cioun? was clepid fadir of Jewis. This 
man many tymes helde purpos of conty- 
nence in Judee, and was apayed for to 
bitake bodi and soule for perseueraunce, 
‘ether lastyng*. Forsothe Nycanor wolde 3» 
schewe the hatrede, that he hadde ajens 
Jewis, and sente fyue hundrid kny3tis, for 
to take him. For he gesside, if he hadde.w 
disseyued hym, that he shulde bringe in 
most deth to Jewis. Forsothe whannes: 
cumpenyes coueitiden for to falle in to his 
hous, and for to breke the 3ate, and for to 
moue to fier, whanne now he was takun*, 
he asailide hym silf with swerd; ches- 42 
ynge for to die nobli, rather than for? to 
be maad suget to synneris, and a3ens his 


birthis for to be led with vnworthi 
wrongis. But whanne bi hastyng he4s 
hadde 3jouun wounde with vuneerteyne 


strook, and cumpenyes bitwixe doris bras- 
ten in, he ran a3en hardli to the wal, and 
castide doun hym silf manli in to the 
cumpenyes. And whanne thei 3auen swiftli 44 
place to his fal, he cam bi the myddil of 
the nol, and 3it while he brethide, he was 45 
kyudlid in herte, and roos. And whanne 
his blood with greet flowyng flowide doun, 
and with most greuouse woundis he was 
woundid, bi rennyng he passide the cum- 
peny; and stood ou an® hee3 stoon, and 46 
now was maad with ont blood, and bi-. 
clippide his entrailis with both hondis, 
and castide forth on the cumpenyes, and 
clepide to helpe the lordschipere of lijf 
and spirit, that he schulde 3elde eftsoone 
these thingis to hym; and thus he was 
deed fro lijf. 


ron H. 


a or lastinge EFNPYe, Om. IR. 


894 


CAP. AV 


1 Forsothe as Nychanore foonde Judas 
for to be in placest of Samarye, he thou3te 
in the day of saboth with al feersnesse 

2for to ioyne bateil. Forsothe Jewis, that 
sueden hym by need, sayinge, Do thou 
not so feersly and heithenly, bot 3eue 
honour to thet day of halewyng, and 
wirshipe thou hym, that biholdith alle 

sthingus. And he vnblessid, axide, 3if 
there is a mi3ti in heuen, that comaund- 
ide the ‘day of sabothis’ for to be don ? 
4And hem answerynge, There is oo Lord, 
and he’ in heuen mi3ti, that comaundide 
sthe senenthe day for to be don. And he 
saith, And Y am* mi3ti vpon erthe, whiche 
comaundeY armers fur to be taken, and 
needis of the kyng for to be fulfillid. 
Nethelese he gate not, for to perfourme 
6counseil. And sothely Nychanore with 
souereyn pride enhaunsid, thou;te for to 
7ordeyne a comoun victorie of Judas. For- 
sothe Machabeus tristide euermore with 
al hope, help to cnmmynge to hym of the 

8 Lord,and monestide hise, that thei shulden 
not inwardly dreede at the cummynge to 
of naciouns, bot shulden haue in inynde the 
helpis don to hem of heuen, and nowe 
shulden hoope of Almi3ty the victorie to 

gycummyng to hem. And spekynge to hem 
of lawe, and prophetis, and monestinge? 
what thingis thei diden bifore, he ordeyn- 

loyde* hem redier. And so the ynwittis 
of hem reysid, he shewide to gidere the 

. falsnesse of heithen men, and brekyng of 

Noothis. Forsothe he armyde eche of hem, 
not bi strengthing of sheld and shaft, 
bot with best wordis and monestyngis, a 
sweuen worthi of byleeue expowned, by 

12whiche he gladide alle. Sothely the vi- 
sioun is? siche. Onye, that was hee;ist 
prest, a good man and benygne, shamfast 
in sist, and mylde in maners, and fair in 


t place. U Om. n. 
7 monestynge, or warnynge UL, 


tthe s. fand the x. 
1 maistirful ppy. 
epy. Om. r. 


£ Om. enpy. 


™ Om. EFGHIKMNPQRSUXYe. 
r Om. Rr. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


h comaundede Enip prem. sy. 
0 helthe F. 


XV. I—I12. 


CAP. XV. 


Forsothe as Nycanor foond that Judasi 
was in the place of Samarie, he thou3te 
for to ioyne batel in the dai of sabat with 
al fersnesse. Forsothe whanne Jewis,2 
that sueden hym bi nede, seiden, Do thou 
not so fersli and! hethenli, but 3yue 
thou onour to the dai of halewyng, and 
worschipe thou hym, that biholdith alle 
thingis. And he vnblesside, axide, If thers 
is a my3ti in heuene, that comaundide the 
dai of sabatis for to be don? And whannes 
thei answeriden, Ther is a quyk Lord, and 
he is iny3ti in heuene, that comaundide 
the seuenthe dai for to be don. And hes 
seide, And Y am my3ti on erthe, which 
comaunde! armeris for to be takun, and 
nedis of the kyng for to be fillid’. Ne- 
theles he gat not, for to perfourme coun- 
selk, And sotheli Nycanor was enhaunsid 6 
with souereyn! pride, and thou3te for to 
ordeyne a comyn victorie of Judas. For-7 
sothe Judas™ Machabeus tristide euere 
more with al hope, that help" schulde come 
to hym of the Lord, and he monestides 
hise, that thei schulden not inwardli drede . 
at® the comyng to of naciouns, but schul- 
den haue in mynde the helpis don to hem 
of heuene, and now schulden hope that 
the vietorie schulde come to hem of Al- 
nizti?, And he spak to hem of the lawe,9 
and profetis, and monestide, ‘ether warn- 
yde4, of batels which thei diden bifore, 
and® ordeynede hem rediere. And so 10 
whanne the soulis of hem weren reisid, 
he schewide to gidere the falsnesse of he- 
thene men, and brekyng of othis. For-11 
sothe he armede ech of hem, not bi 
strengthing of scheld and schaft, but with 
beste wordis and monestyngis, and ex- 
pownede a sweuene worthi of bileue, bi 
which he gladide alle. Sotheli the visioun 12 
was sich. Judas si3 Onyas, that was 


Vv +a 
day of saboth 4. seuenthe day. *¥ Om.n. * Om.c pr.m. ¥comaundide x. 
4 ordeynede, or confirmede 1, 


b was G see. m. H. 


i fulfillid re. 
P the Almy3ti r. 


k bi councel £. 


o of RK. q or warnede 


XV. 13——22. 


speche, and whiche was excersisid, or 
hauntid, in vertues fro a chijld, holdynge 
forth the hondis for to preye for al the 
ispeple of the* Jewis. After this thing 
and an other man for to haue apeerid, 
in age and glorie wondreful, and in hau- 
14 ynge of grete fairnesse aboute hym. For- 
sothe Onye answerynge. to haue saide, 
This is the® louer of bretheren, and of 
peple of Yrael; this is he, that myche 
preyeth for the peple, and for al the holy 
1scite, Jeremye, the prophete of God. For- 
sothe Jeremye for to haue strei;te forth 
the ri3thond, and to’ haue 3ouen a golden 
isswerd to Judas, sayinge, Take thon the 
holy swerd, a 3ift of God, in whiche 
thou shalt cast doun the adnersaries of 
i7my peple Yrael. And so thei monest- 
id“ with wordis of Judas ful goode, of 
whiche feersnesse mij3te be enhaunsid, 
and the® ynnewittis of 3unge men be® 
confortyd, thei ordeynyden for to fi3te, 
and tourmente to gidre strongly, that 
vertu shulde deme of needis*, for that the 
holy citee and temple weren in perel. 
18Sothely for wijues, and sonys, and also 
for bretheren, and cosyns, was lesse by- 
synesse, bot most and first dread was for 
19holyuesse of the temple. Bot not leste 
bysynesse hadde hem that weren in the 
citee, for these that weren to assailynge 
20to gidre. And whanne now alle men 
hopiden dom to beynge, and enmys 
camen, and oost was ordeynyd, beestis 
and horsmen putt to gidre in couenable 
21place, Machabeus biholdynge the cum- 
myng of multitude, and dyuers apparel 
of armers, and feersnesse of beestis, 
strecehynge out the hondis in to heuen, 
ynelepide the Lord doynge grete won- 
dris, whiche not after® power of armers, 
bot as it plesith to hym, 3eueth to worthi 
22men vietorie. Forsothe he saide, ynclep- 
inge this manere, Thou, Lord, that sent- 
ist thin aungel vnder Ezechie, kyng of 


aOm. Hn. »fortom ¢ Om. #. & Om. cH. 


causis H. & vp ti. 


8 excercisid, or [ether plures] hauntid & et celeri preter R. 
Y or fiztc ery. Om. R. 


causis Epye. Om. R. * in the rKNRe. 


II. MACCABEES. 


dd monestidid x. 


895 


hizeste prest, a good man and beuygne, 
schamefast in si3t, and mylde in maneres, 
and fair in speche, and which was exer- 
cisid® in vertues fro a child, holdynge forth 
the hondis for to preie for al the puple of 
Jewis. After this thing that also anothir1s 
man apperide, wondurful in age and glo- 
rie, aud in hauynge of greet fairnesse 
aboute hym. Forsothe ke si3 Onyas an-14 
swerynge for to haue seid, This is the 
louyere of britheren, and of the puple of 
Israel; this is he, that myche preicth for 
the puple, and al the hooli eitee, Jeremye, 
‘the profet of God. Forsothe he s73 that‘ 1s 
Jeremye" hath’ stre3t forth the ri3thond, 
and hath 3ouun a goldun swerd to Judas, 
and seide, Take thou the hooli swerd, atc 
3ift of God, in which thou schalt caste 
doun the aduersaries of my puple Israel. 
Therfor thei weren imonestid with ful17 
good wordis of Judas, of whiche fersnesse 
mi3te be enhaunsid, and soules of 3onge 
men be coumfortid, and thei ordeyneden for 
to fizte, and turmente togidere strongli, 
that vertu schulde deme of nedis, ‘ether 
causis’, for that the hooli citee and tem- 
ple weren in perel. For whi for wyues, 18 
and sones, and also for britheren, and 
cosyns, was lesse bisynesse, but the moste 
and firste drede was holynesse of the tem- 
ple. But not leste bisynesse hadde hem 19 
that weren in* eitee, for these that sehul- 
den asaile, ‘ether fiz3teY togidere. And 20 
whanne now alle men hopiden dom to be, 
and enemyes come, and the cost was or- 
deined, beestis and horse men put togi- 
dere in? eouenable place, Machabeus bi-2! 


’ helde the comyng of multitude, and dy- 


uerse* apparel of armeris, and fersnesse of 
beestis, and he stretchide out” the hondis 
to henene, and elepide to help the Lord 
doynge greet wondris, which not bi power 
of armeris, but as it plesith to hym, 3yueth 
victorie to worthi men. Forsothe he seide, 22 
clepynge to help in this maner, Thou Lord, 
f nedis, or 


eOm. HH. © Om. kK. 


vhauyng Rk. or 
b forth r. 


u Om. EY. 
8 of dyuerse F. 


t Om. r. 
Zin to R. 


896 Il. MACCABEES. 


Juda, and hast slayn of tentis, 07 oostis, 
of Senacherib, an hundrid foure seore 
sand fyue thousand; and now, lordshiper 
of heuens, sende thou thi good aungel 
bifore vs, in dreed and tremblyng of 
24 gretenesse of thin arm, that thei dreede, 
that cummen ajeinus thin holy peple. 
And bi these thingis thus he perfitly 
25 preyede. Forsothe Nychanore, and thei 
that weren with hym, with trumpis and 
26songis moneden to. Judas forsothe, and 
thei that weren with him, God ynelepid 
by preyers of knowlachyng, wenten to 
27gidre. Sothely in hond fijtynge, bot in 
hertis preyinge God, castiden doun fyue 
and thritty thousand, not lesse, by the! 
21presence of God gretely delytynge. And 
whanne thei hadden ceesid, and with 
ioye turnyden a3ein, thei knewen Nycha- 
nore for to haue fallen, with his armers. 
29 And so crie maad, and perturbacioun 
stirid, by cuntree voice thei blessiden the 
30 Lord almi3ty. Forsothe Judas comaund- 
ide, that by alle thingis in body and 
ynwitt was redy for to dye for citeseyns, 
the hed of Nychanore, and the hond with 
the’ shuldre gird off, for to be brou3t 
siforth to Jerusalem. Whidir whanne he 
fully came, men of his lynage clepid to 
gidre, and prestis to the auter, he clepide 
and hem that weren in the hee3 rock. 
32 And the hed of Nychanore shewid, and 
the cursid hond, whiche he holdynge 
forth ajeinus the holy hous of alimi;ty 
33God gretely gloriede, also he comaund- 
ide the tunge of vnpitous Nychanore kitt 
off, for to be 3ouen to briddis gobetinele ; 
forsothe the hond of the wood man for 
31 to be hongid vp ajeinus the temple. Ther- 
fore alle blessiden the Lord of heuen, 
sayinge, Blessid the Lord, that kepte his 
15 place vndefoulid. Forsothe he hangide 
vp Nychanoris hed in the heej3ist rock, 
that it were euydent, or knowen, and 
séopyn signe of helpe! of God. Therfore 


XV. 23-—36. 


that sentist thin aungel vndur Ezechie, 
kyng of Juda, and hast slayn of the tentis, 
‘ether oostis®, of Sennacherib, an hundrid 
thousynde foure score and fyue thousynde ; 
and now, Jordschipere of heuenes, sende 23 
thou thi good aungel bifore vs, in drede 
and tremblynge of greetnesse of thin arm, 
that thei drede, that comen with blas-24 
femye a3ens thin hooli puple. And sotheli 
thus he perfitli preiede. Forsothe Ny-2s 
canor, and thei that weren with hym, 
inoueden to with trumpis and songis. Ju- 26 
das forsothe, and thei that weren with 
hym, clepiden God to help bi preieris, and 
wenten togidere. Sotheli thei fiztynge with 27 
hond, but preiynge God in hertis, castiden* 
doun fyue and thretti thousynde, not lesse, 
and delitiden greetli bi presence of God. 
And whanne thei hadden ceessid, and with 2s 
ioye turneden a3en, thei knewen that Ny- 
canor hadde falle, with his armeris. her-29 
for whanne® cry was maad, and perturba- 
cioun styride’, bi cuntre vois thei blessiden 
the Lord almy3ti. Forsothe Judas, that so 
bi alle thingis in bodi and soule was redi 
for to die for citeseyns, bad, that the heed 
of Nycanor, and hond with the® schuldre 
gird of, schulde be brou3t forth to Jeru- 
salem. Whidur whanne he fulli cam,31 
whanne men of his lynage weren clepid 
togidere, and prestis to the auter, he clep- 
ide also hem that weren in the hi3 tour. 
And whanne the heed of Nycanor was3z 
schewid, and the cursid hond, which he 
holdynge forth ajens the hooli hous of 
almy3ti God greetli® gloriede, also hess 
comaundide the tunge of vnpitouse Nyca- 
nor kit of, for to be 3ouun to briddis 
gobet mel; forsothe he comaundide the 
hond of the wood man for to be hangid 
vp ajens the temple. Therfor alle bless- 34 
iden the Lord of heuene, and seiden, 
Blessid be the Lord, that kepte his place 
vudefoulid. Forsothe he! hangide vp*s:5 
Nycanoris heed in the hijeste tour, that 


iOm. nw. kKOm. Hu. | the helpe #.- 


a a : 
Om. Epry. ‘land castiden Rk. ¢Om.1. f was stired Repr.m. & Om, EFGHKMNPQRS pr. m. UXe. 
1Om.n. tOm.r. prem. thei rsec.m. k Om. v. 


XV. 37-40. 


alle men by commoun counseile demyden 
in no maner this day for to passe with- 
37oute worschiping, sothli for to haue 
worschipyng the thrittenthe day of the 
moneth Adar, that is said, by voice of 
38 Sirye, the first day of Mardochyus. Ther- 
fore these thingis don a3einus Nychanore, 
and of the™ tymes the citee weeldid of 
Ebrues, and Y in these thingis shal make 
39 an eend of word. And sotheli 3if wel and 
_as it acordith to the storye, this thing 
and Y wole; 3if ellis lesse worthily, it is 
soto be grauntid to me. Sothely as for to 
drinke euermore wyne, or euermore water, 
is contrarie, forsothe for to vse chaung- 
able, or now oon, now" another, is delit- 
able®; so to men redynge, 3if the word be 
euermore vuiustly axid, 07 @ein sou3t, it 
shal not be couenable, or plesinge ; ther- 
fore here it shal be eendid. 


Here endith the storie of Machabeus, 
the whiche is the laste book of the Olde 
Testament. And nowe bigynneth the 
Newe Testament ; first is the prolog of 
Matheu, apostle and enangelist?. 


™tho H. " and nowe H. 


leuident x. euident, or [ether plures] knowen & et cetert. : 
P delitable, or [either Kk} ikynge rouiKmnNgsue. delectable, either likynge x. 
r endid. Amen. s. 


° Om. R. 
or [ether plures] plesinge cEFGHIKMNPQsUYe. 


Il. MACCABEES. 


© delitable or likynge u. 


897 


it were knowun!, and an™ opyn signe of 
the help of God. Therfor alle men by 36 
comyn counsel demyden in no imaner for 
to passe this dai with out solempnytee, 
but for to haue solempnyte in the thret-37 
tenthe dai of the moneth Adar, that is 
seid, bi vois of Sirie, the firste dai of Mar- 
docheus. Therfor whanne these thingis xs 
weren don a3ens Nicanor, and of tho tymes 
whanne the citee was weldid of Ebrews, 
also Y in these thingis schal make an ende 
of word. And sotheli if wel and as its 
acordith to the stori, this thing and Y 
wolc; if ellis lesse worthili, it is to for- 
3yue to me. Sotheli as for to drynke4w 
euere more wyn, ether euere more watir, 
it is contrarie, but for to vse chaungeable, 
‘ether® ‘now oon, now another®, is delit- 
able?; so to men redynge, if the word be 
euer more sou3t to ech part, it schal not 
be plesynge’; therfor here it schal be 
eudid'. 


Here endith the secounde book of Ma- 
chabeus, which is eude of the Olde Tes- 
taments. 


P No final rubric in «Gn. 


nor EPpy. Om. R. 
4 couenable, 
§ From r. The Olde Testement endith 


m Om. EHKMQRsUe. 


here. c. Here endeth the secounde book of Machabeis ; blessid be the holt Trinyte. Amen, u. Here endith 
the secounde book of Machabeis, the whiche is the ende of the Olde Testament. 1. Here endeth the secounde 
book of Macabeus, and al the Olde Testament; se now the Newe Testament. x. Here endith the secounde 


book of Machabeus. me. Here endith the secunde book of Machabeus, and ; 
Here endith the secounde book of Machabeis, and here 
No final rubric in epasy. c and x are deficient. 


Machabeorum capitulum quintum decimum. RK. 
bigynneth Matheu. v. 


VOL. III. 


ery 


n. Finitum secundi 


4 


1344 4/2 








Swraseawse Sew eee ea FS 








peaches 


So Shes 











sein: 


Ay ab 
bhelapAselrseciae at 






von 
eee CA re. 
















Be ae 
Fy “ 


- THE HOLY BIBLE, 


CONTAINING 


THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. 


WITH THE APOCRYPHAL BOOKS, 


IN THE EARLIEST ENGLISH VERSIONS 


MADE FROM THE LATIN VULGATE BY 
JOHN WYCLIFFE AND HIS FOLLOWERS; 


EDITED BY 
THE REV. JOSIAH FORSHALL, F.R.S. etc. 
LATE FELLOW OF EXETER COLLEGE, y 
AND 


SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H. F.R.S. erc. 


KEEPER OF THE MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 
VOLUME IV. 


OXFORD, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


M.DCCC.L. 





‘ t 

\ 
/ 
¢ 
| . 

¢ 

i 

. 


f ; 
5) y . 
ack Oe / ‘| 

= a ha o? 

fy : raed 








MATTHE W. 





Here begynneth the prolouge on Mathew’. 


MaTHEW of Jewerye born, as he is ‘putt first in ordre, so first he wrote the gospel 
in Jewes langage, whas cleepyng to God was from peplicanis dedis ; he takynge bifore 
the bygynnyng is® of twey4, Abraham and Dauid, in the generacioun of Crist, of oon, 
that is, Abraham, of the whiche the first circumcisioun was in fleshe, of an other, 
Dauith, whas eleccioun was efter herte. Of bothe fadris forsothe Crist was bore. 
And so the noumbre of fourtene thries putte, he strecchynge forth the bygynnyng fro 
feyth¢ of bileuynge, that was in Abraham, in to the tyme of chesynge, that was in 
Dauith, and dressynge fro the chesyng anoon in to the day of transmygracioun, and 
diffynynge fro the day.of transmygracioun anoon in to Crist, he shewith the gene- 
racioun of the’ cummynge of Crist fulfillid, other passynge in renninge, that he, 
maakynge good bothe to the noumbre and to the tyme, bothe shulde shewe hym silf 
whiche" he were, and, in hym silf mynystrynge the work of God, also in hem, whas 
kynred he putte!, shulde not denye the witnesse of Crist workynge* fro the bygyn- 
nyng', Of alle whoche thingis the tyme, the ordre, the noumbre, the™ disposicioun, 
other® the resoun®, that Crist is God, that is necessarie to the feith, the whiche was 
maad of a? womman, maad vnder lawe, bore of a mayde’‘, suffride in fleshe, al thing 
ficchide in the cros, that he ouercommynge thilke" thingis in hym silfe, rysynge in 
body, bothe the’ name of the fadir in fadris to the sone, and sones‘ name to the fadir 
restoringe in sones, with outen bygynnyng, with oute eendynge, shewynge the fadir to 
‘be oon with hym, for he is oon. In the whiche" gospel it is profitable to men 
desyrynge God, so to knowe the first, the mydmeste’, other" the last, that thei, redynge 
bi alle thingis, vndirstonde bothe the clepynge of the apostil*, and’ the work of the 
gospel, and the loue? of God kennynge in fleshe, and thei biknowe* in hym, in the 
whiche thei beth> knowe, and desijryth® to knowe. To vs forsothe it was to stodye of 
preuynge, bothe to take the feith of thing do, and not to be stille to men sechynge 
bisiliche the ordynance of God worchynge to be vndirstonde. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynnith the gospel'. 


a From y. Prolog. x. Here bygynneth the Newe Testament in Englische. 0. No initial rubric in 
stvx. » first putt r. © bigynnynge o. 4twosx. ¢the feithe osyxy. fOm.o. & Om. os. 
hwhat ostrry. i put of o. k wrytynge K sec. m. leynnyng K ™Om. x. "ether o. or x. 
°resoun is osty. POm.x. 4maidenox. ‘thoox. thesilke vr. ®%Om.o. +t the sones osTrxy. 
"Om. K sec.m. Vv mydelmest 0. Wor sx. *apostlis 7. y and thei byknowe in hymin vy. # leste x. 
abe knowen x. > ben sx. ©¢desiren ox. desire y. 4 No final rubric in osrvxy. 


VOL. IV. 22 B 


~ 


2 


Q MATTHEW. loatgeze 


Here bigynneth the Newe Testament ; a prolog on Matheu’. 


Matheu that was of Judee, as he is set first in ordre” of the gospelleris, so he wroot 
first the gospel in Judee, and fro the office of a tolgaderer he was clepid to God. 
Whanne this Matheu hadde prechid first the gospel in Judee, and wolde go to 
hethene men, he wroot first the gospel in Ebreu, and lefte it to° mynde to’ Cristen 
men of the Jewis, fro whiche® he departide bodili; for as it was‘ nedeful, that the 
gospel were prechid to the confermyng of feith, so it was® nedeful, that it were writen 
also a3ens eretikis. Thou3 manye men han write the gospel, foure oonli, that is, 
Matheu, Mark, Luyk, and Joon, han the witnessyng of autorite. For thei tellen the 
feith of the Trynyte, bi foure partis of the world; and thei ben as foure wheelis in 
the foure horsid carte of the Lord, that berith' hym aboute bi preching! of the gospel ; 
and mankynde that was slayn bi foure dethis, shulde be qwikenyd bi the prechyng of 
hem. And therfor the gospels of otherek writers fellen doun, and ben not resceyued, 
for the Lord nolde’, that the forseid noumbre were destried, for the vertu of sacrament. 
Also the foure gospelleris ben vndirstonden bi foure figuris of goostli prenyte. Mathen 
is vndurstondun by man, for he duellith principali aboute the manhod of Crist; Mark 
is vndurstondun bi a lioun, for he tretith of Cristis risyng ajen; Luke is vndirstonden 
bi a calf, and tretith of presthod; Joon is vndurstondun bi an egle, and writeth hizlier 
the™ sacramentis ether® hooli priuytees of the Godhed. Forsothe Crist, whom thes 
gospelleris discryuen, was a nan borun of the virgyn; he was a calf, in offryng, ether® 
diynge on the cros; he was a lioun, in risynge a3en; and he was an egle, in ascencioun. 
Ethir the manhed of Crist is signified in man, presthod is signified in the calf, rewme 
is signified in the lioun, and the sacrament of Godhed? is signified in the egle; that is, 
by thes4 foure beestis it is declarid, that Jhesu Crist is God and man, king and prest. 


‘Jerom in his twet prologis on Matheu seith pleynli thus". 


Heere bigynneth the gospel of Matheu*. —§-Heere byginnith the gospel of Matheu*. 


CAP. I: CAP. I. 


The boke of generacioun? of Jhesn Crist, The book of the generacioun of Jhesu1 
the sone of Dauyd, the® sone of Abraham. Crist, the sone of Dauid, the sone of 
Abraham‘ gendride®, ‘or bigate', Ysaac. Abraham. Abrahain bigat Isaac. Isaac 2 


aFrom m. [Teere bigynneth the gospel of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. p. No initial rubric in aGKNogsTUrxY. 
b the generacioun acuNnpey. ¢Om.x. 4 Abraham forsothee. © gatx. f Om. og prim. rx. 


a8 Fromc. Prolog abh. Here biginneth the Newe Testament ; the firste prologe on Mathen. x. Heere 
begynnith the prologe of Jerom on the gospel of Matheu. 1. Heere bigynneth the prolog of Jerom on 
Matheu. kK. Here bigynneth a prologe upon [on u] Mather. mug. Here bigynneth the prolog on the gospel 
of Mathew. Q. Here bigynneth the prolog on Mathew. xk. Here bigynneth the prologe bifore the gospels of 
Mathew. ~ Here bigynneth a Newe Testament ; first the prologe on Matheu. c. Here bigynneth the prolog 
on Matheu, as Jerom in senteuce saith it. e. No initial rubric in xsi. > the ordrex. ©tothei. of i, 
* the whiche z.  fwere apr.m. were a. hberins. ithe preching kh. the othere x. 1 wolde 
not1. Mofthei. Om.b. of eK. or P. or EP passin. PtheGodhede x. thee. 1 Jerom 
in hise treie prologis on Matheu seith pleynli thus, and here bigynneth the gospel. crue. Heere endeth the 
prologe. 1. Jerom in hise two prologis on Matheu seith pleyuli al this. qa. Heere eendith the prolog, and 
bigenneth the first chapiter of Mathew. re. Jerom in hise tweyue prologis on Matheu, seith pleynly thus; 
aud here byginneth the gospel of Matheu. 2. No final rubric in xghik. aFrom 1. The bigynnynge of 
the euangely of Matheu. g. No initial rubric in the other Mss. | 


Ho Sue 


Ysaac forsothe bigate® Jacob. Jacob for- 
sothe bigate Judas and his bretheren. 
3Judas forsothe bigate Phares and Zaram, 
of Thamar. Phares forsothe bigate Esrom. 
4Esrom forsothe bigate Aram. Aram for- 
sothe bigate Amynadab. Amynadab for- 
sothe bigate Nason. Nason forsothe bi- 
5 gate Salmon. Salmon forsothe bigate Booz, 
of Raab. Booz forsothe bigate Obeth, of 
Ruth. Obeth forsothe bigate Gesse. Jesse 
eforsothe bigate Dauith the kyng. Dauith 
forsothe kyng® bigate Salomon, of that 
zwomman that was Uries wyf. Salomon 
forsothe bigate Roboam. Roboam forsothe 
bigat Abias. Abias forsothe bigate Asa. 
8Asa forsothe bigate Josophat. Josophat 
forsothe bigate Joram. Joram forsothe 
o9bigate Osias. Osias forsothe bigate Jo- 
athan. Joathan forsothe bigate Achaz. 
io Achaz forsothe bigate Ezechie. Ezechie 
forsothe bigate Manasses. Manasses for- 
sothe bigate Amon. Amon forsothe bigate 
uJosias. Josias forsothe bigate Jechonyas 
and his bretheren, ‘in to! transmigracyoun 
120f Babiloyne. And after the transmy- 
gracyoun of Babiloyne, Jeclonias bigate 
Salatiel. Salatiel forsothe bigate Zoroba- 
i3bel. Zorobabel forsothe begate Abyut. 
Abyut forsothe bygate Eliachim. Elia- 
1achym forsothe bigate Asor. Asor for- 
sothe bigate Sadoc. Sadoc forsothe bygate 
Achym. Achym forsothe bygate Elyut. 
is Elyut forsothe bygate Eleasar. Eleasar 
forsothe bigate Mathan. Mathan forsothe 
isbigate Jacob. Jacob forsothe bigate Jo- 
seph, the husbond of Marie, of whiche 
Marie Jesus is born, that* is clepid Crist. 
17'And so! alle generaciouns™ from Abraham 
‘til to" Dauith ben fourtene generaciouns, 
and fro Dauith ‘vnto® transmygracioun of 
Babiloyne ben fourtene generaciouns, and 
from the transmygracioun of Babiloyne 


& gendred o et v passim in hoc cap. gat x passim in hoc cap. 
1 Therfore our. 


the 4GauNopesurxy. whiche or. 


MATTHEW. J 


bigat Jacob. Jacob bigat Judas and 
hise britheren. Judas bigat Fares and3 
Zaram, of Tamar. Fares bigat Esrom. 
Esrom bigat Aram. Aram bigat Amyn-14 
adab. Amynadab bigat Naason. Naason 
bigat Salmon. Salmon bigat Booz, ofs 
Raab. Booz bigat Obeth, of Ruth. 
Obeth bigat Jesse. Jesse bigat Danid 
the king. Dauid the king bigat Sala-c 
mon, of hir that was Vries wijf. Salo-7 
mon bigat Roboam. Roboam bigat Abias. 
Abias bigat Asa. Asa bigat Josaphath.« 
Josaphath bigat Joram. Joram bigat 
Osias. Osias bigat Joathan. Joathano 
bigat Achaz. Achaz bigat Ezechie. 
Ezechie bigat Manasses. Manasses bi-10 
gat Amon. Amon bigat Josias. Josias 11 
bigat Jeconyas and his britheren, in to 
the transmygracioun of Babiloyne. And 12 
aftir the transmygracioun of Babiloyne, 
Jeconyas bigat Salatiel. Salatiel bigat 
Zorobabel. Zorobabel bigat Abyut. A-13 
byut bigat Eliachym. Eliachym bigat 
Asor. Asor bigat Sadoc. Sadoc bigat i. 
Achym. Achym bigat Elyut. Elyutis 
bigat Eleasar. Eleasar bigat Mathan. 
Mathan bigat Jacob. Jacob bigat Jo-16 
seph, the hosebonde of Marye, of whom 
Jhesus was borun, that is clepid Christ. 
And so alle” generaciouns fro Abraham 17 
to Dauid ben fourtene generacions, and 
fro Dauid to the trausmygracioun of 
Babiloyne ben fourtene generaciouns, 
and fro the transmygracioun of Babi- 
loyne to Crist ben fourtene generaciouns. 
But the generacioun of Crist was thus. is 
Whanne Marie, the modir of Jhesu, was 
spousid to Joseph, biforee thei camen 
togidere, she was foundun hauynge of 
the Hooli Goost in the wombe. And 19 
Joseph, hir hosebonde, for he was ri3tful, 
and wolde not puplische hir, he wolde 


h the kynge acmogsurxy. into — 


™ the generaciouns Mu. %vntouxy, ° til 


to the @ sec. m. MopesTur. til to 4G pr.m. vn to the NxY. 


b alle the 198 sup. ras. hi. 
BQ 


¢ bifore that s pr. m. 


4 MATTHEW. 


vntoP Crist ben fourtene generaciouns. 

18 Forsoth the generacioun of Crist was 
thus?. Whane Marie, ‘his modir', was 
spousid to Joseph, bifore that thei ‘shul- 
den come’ to gidre, she ist foundun han- 
ynge in the? wombe of the Holy Gost. 

19 Joseph forsothe, hir husbond, when he was 
iustY man, ‘or ri3tfud*, and woldeY not 
pupliche hir, ‘or lede hir ferther*, wolde 

20 priuyly forsake hire. Sothely hym thenk- 
ynge these thingus, lo! the* angel of the 
Lord aperide in sleepe, ‘or sweuen>, to 
hym, sayinge®, Joseph, the’ sone of Dauyd, 
nyl thou drede to take Marie, thi wyf; 
forsothe® thatf thing that is born in hire 

21is of€ the Holy Goost. Sothely she shal 
bere a sone, and thou shalt clepe his name 

Jesus; for he shal make his peple saif fro 

22her synnes. Forsothe al this thing was 
don, that it® shulde be fulfillid’, ‘that thing* 
that was seid! by a™ prophete, seiynge, 

23 Loo! a virgyne shal haue in wombe®, and 
she shal bere a sone, and his name shal 
be clepid Emanuel, that is interpretid, ‘or 

24 expountd?, God with us. Sothely Joseph 
rysynge vp? fro sleep, did as the angel of 

25the Lord comaundide’ hym, and toke’ his 
wijf; and he knewe hir nat, til she had 
boren hir first bygotenSsone, and clepidet his 
name Jhesus. 

CAP. II, 

1 herfore when Jhesus was born in 
Bethlem of Juda, in the days of" kyng 
Herode, loo! kyngis’, ‘or wijs men, ca- 

2men fro the eest to Jerusalem, sayinge, 
Wher is he, that is borun kyng* of 

Jewis? forsothe we ‘han seynY his sterre 
in the este, and we comen for? to wir- 

3shipe hym. ‘Sothely kyng Herode herynge 


1, 18—IL. 3. 


priueli haue left hir. But while he2 
thou3te’ thes thingis, lo! the aungel of 
the Lord apperide ‘in sleep to hym®, and 
seide, Joseph, the sone of Dauid, nyle 
thou drede to take Marie, thi wijf; for 
that thing that is borun in hir is of the 
Hooli Goost. And she shal bere a sone, 2: 
and thou shalt clepe his name Jhesus; 
for he schal make his puple saaf fro her 
synnes. For al this thing was don, that 22 
it schulde be fulfillid, that was seid of 
the Lord bi a prophete, seiynge, Lo! a23 
virgyn shal haue in wombe, and she 
schal bere a sone, and thei schulen clepe 
his name Emanuel, that is to seie, God 
with vs. And Joseph roos‘ fro sleepe, 24 
and dide as the aungel of the Lord 
comaundide hym, and took Marie, his 
wijf; and he knew her not, til she hadde 25 
borun her firste bigete sone, and& clepide 
his name Jhesus. 


CAR. tk 

Therfor whanne Jhesus was borun ini 
Bethleem of Juda, in the daies of king 
Eroude, lo! astromyenes" camen fro the 
eest to Jerusalem, and seiden, Where ise 
he, that is borun king of Jewis? for we 
hau seyn! his sterre in the eest, and we 
comen) to* worschipe him. But kings 
Eroude herde, and was trublid, and al 


P tilto agmNopostuy. 4 this Nn. r the moder of Jhesn s. § come U. camen oF. t was or. 
uOm. Pp. Ya iust mp. ry3tewise 0. W Om. our. * Om. ourx. Ynoldo. 2Om. our. a Om. our. 
> Om. ov. ¢and sayde ov. 40m. x. © for ov sec.m. ftheo. &Om.o, the thenge our sec. m 
i fillud ovr sec.m. & Om. ov see.m. lseid of the Lord Nn. ™ the ov. the wombe or scc.m. ° Om. 


oF sec. m, X. P Om. x. 
t sche cleped or sec. m. 
Yseieno. 20m. x, 


4 hade o pr.m. 
u of the Gc. 


4 bithouste Kshig. 


K fert. or ben come marg. k for to plures. 


r tok Marie Nour sec. m. 
y astronemyeris u marg. sec. m. 


© to Joseph in sleep c sup. ras. to hym in sleep ef. 
h astromeeris s pr.m,. astrouomeeris EPs sec. mt. astronomyens Kqha. kyngis k. 


8 gendred oy sec. m. goten x. 
Ww Om. ovx. * the kynge a. 


&§ and he 1. 
jhan come 


f roos vp AK. 
i seien 1. 


II. 4—15. 


is* trublid®, and al Jerusalem with him®. 
4 And he, gedrynge? to gidre alle the® princis 
of prestis, and scribis‘ of the peple, en- 
quiride of hem, wher Crist shulde be 
sborun. And thei seiden to hym, In 
Bethlem of Juda; ‘for so it is writen bi 
6a' prophete, And thou, Bethlem, ‘the lond* 
of Juda, thou! art nat the leste in the 
princis of Juda; for of thee a duk shal 
gon out, that shal gouerne my peple of™ 
7Yrael. Than ‘Herode, priuyli® the kyngis 
clepid ‘to hym®, ‘bisily lernyde? of hem 
the tyme of the sterre that apperide to 
shem. And he, sendynge hem in to Beth- 
lem, saide, Go 3ee, and axe 3ee bisily of 
the chyld, and whan 3ee han founden, 
tellel a3ein to me, that and" Y cummynge 
9wirshipe hym. The’ whiche, when thei 
hadden herde the kyng, wenten awey. 
And loo! the sterre, thet whiche thei 
sayen in este", wente bifore hem, til that 
it cummynge stood aboue, wher the child 
1owas. Forsothe thei, seeynge the sterre, 
11 joyeden with a ful grete ioye. And thei, 
entrynge the’ hous, founden the child with 
Marie, his modir; and thei fallynge doun 
worshipiden lyin. And her tresours opnyd, 
thei offreden to hym 3iftis, gold, encense, 
izand merre. And answer taken in sleep, 
that thei shulden not turne ajein to He- 
rode, thei ‘ben turned* by an other wey in 
13to herY cuntree. And when thei hadden 
gon awey’, loo! the* aungel of the Lord 
apperide in sleep to Joseph, sayynge, Ryse 
vp, aud take the child and his modir, and 
flee in to Egipt, and be thou? there, til 
that I‘seye to thee; sothely® it is ‘to 
cume‘, that Herode seeke the child, for® 
14to lesef hym. The& whiche Joseph, rys- 
ynge vp, toke the chijld and his modir 
isby ny3te, and wente into Egipt, and 


MATTHEW. 5 


Jerusalem with hym. And he gaderide4 
to gidre alle the prynces of prestis, and 
scribis of the puple, and enqueride of 
hem, where Crist shulde be borun. Ands 
thei seiden to hym, In Bethleem of Juda; 
for so it is writun bi a profete, And thou, 6 
Bethleem, the lond of Juda, art not the 
leest among the prynces of Juda; for of 
thee a duyk schal go out, that schal go- 
uerne my puple of! Israel. Thanne7 
Froude clepide pryueli the astromyens”™, 
and lernyde bisili of hem the tyme of the 
sterre that apperide to hem. And hes 
sente hem in to Bethleem, and seide, Go 
je, and axe 3e bisili of the child, and 
whanne 3ee han foundun, telle 3e z¢ to me, 
that Y also come, and worschipe hym. 
And whanne thei hadden herd the kyng, 9 
thei wenten forth. And lo! the sterre, 
that thei sijen" in the eest, wente bifore 
hem, til it cam, and stood aboue, where 
the child was. And thei sijen the sterre, 10 
and ioyeden with a ful greet ioye. Andi 
thei entriden in to the hous, and founden 
the child with Marie, his modir; and thei 
felden doun, and worschipiden him. And 
whanne thei hadden openyd her tresouris, 
thei offryden to hym 3iftis, gold, encense, 
and myrre. And whanne thei hadden 12 
take an aunswere in sleep, that thei schul- 
den not turne ajen™ to Eroude, thei 
turneden ajen bi anothir weie in to her 
cuntrey. And whanne thei weren goon, 13 
lo! the aungel of the Lord apperide to 
Joseph in sleep, and seide, Rise vp, and 
take the child and his modir, and fle in 
to Egipt, and be thou there, til that I seie 
to thee; for it is to come, that Eroude 
seke the child, to destrie hym. And Jo-14 
seph roos, and took the child and his 
modir bi ny3t, and wente in to Egipt, 


awasor. »turblid amnp. towrbled 0. ‘¢ Om. u pr.m. But kyng Heroude herde and was troublid 
and al Jerusalem with hym. u sec. m.marg. ‘gedredec. ¢Om.o.  f thescribes our.  § wheer 
that o. § so forsothe xy pr.m. ‘the our. * Om. ov. 1}Om.ov. ™Om.vx. 2 Om.r. 9 Om. or. 


P Eroude lerned bisily v. bisily lerede sx. Om. r. 
t Om. our sec.m. the eest oNPQSUXY. 

¥ sec.m. ¥ her owne n. Zz Om. U sec. m. 
comynge our scc.m. & Om. osy sec.m. £ slee o. 


10m. s sec. m. g prom. 


4 telle 3ee ourx. 
vin to the onur. 

@an UP. 
& Om. our sec. m. 


™ astronomeris EPS. astronomyens Kqha. 


§ Om. our sec. m. 
* turned ajen ov 
4 cume K. to 


r Om. ov. 
Ww all answere Q SC. Ml. 
bOm. tT. ¢ for our sec. m. 


Qsaien A. 29 Om, c. 


6 MATTHEW. 


was" there til to the! deth of Erode; that 
it shuld be fulfillid’, ‘that thing! that was 
said of the Lord by the™ prophete, say- 
inge, Fro Egypt Y haue clepide my sone. 
i6 Thanne Erode seeynge that® he was scorn- 
ed, ‘or disceyued°, of the kyngis?, was 
gretely wroth; and he sendynge slew34 
alle the children’, ‘that weren’ in Bethlem, 
and im alle the eendis ‘of it, fro two" 3eer 
age and with ynne, after’ the tyme that 
i7he hadde sou3t out of the kyngis”. Than 
it* was fulfillide’, ‘that thing? that was said 
1s by Jeremye, the prophete, sayinge, A voice 
is herd ‘an hee3ze*, weepynge and myche 
weilynge, Rachel weepynge? hir sonys, and 
she ‘wolde not* be comfortid, for thei ben 
19not. Sothely Erode dead, loo! the’ angel 
of the Lord apeeride in sleep to Joseph in 
20 Egipt, sayinge, Ryse vp, and take the® 
childe and his modir, and go in to the lond 
of Yrael; for thei that sou3ten the lijf of 
21the chyld ben dead. Thef whiche Josephs, 
rysynge vp, toke the child and his modir, 
22and cam in to the lond of Yrael.  For- 
sothe he heerynge that Archelaus' regnede 
in Jude for Eroude, his fadir, dred for* to 
go thidir. And he, monestid in sleep, 
23 wente in to the parties of Galilee; and he 
cummynge dwelte in a citee, that! is clepid 
Nazareth, that it™ shulde be fulfillid®, ‘that 
thing® that is? said by prophetis, For whit 
he shal be clepid ‘of Nazareth'. 


CAP. Ill. 
1 In thilke’ days came Joon Baptist, 
2 prechynge in thet desert of Jude, sayinge®, 
‘Do je” penaunce, for the kyngdom of 
3 heuens” shal nei3, ‘or cume ni3e*.. Forsothe 


iOm. x. 
P astronemyeris U sec. m. marg. 
Utwey F sec. m. 


b he was our sec. m. 
© Om. our sec.m. 
t therof our sec. m. 
¥ fillud ov. Zz Om. ou. 
Fr sec.m. an our sce.m. © thi v. 
brother v sec.m. *& Om. ur sec. m. x. 
¥ sec.m. — P was our sec. m. 
ilke y. tho osur sec. m. x. 

x Om. oeux. 


4 Om. our sec. m. 
t Om. p. 


ovnto K. tils. tiltog sec.m. Pa Ak. 
nomyens KqrRha. astronomeris Eps. 


C8 sup. Tas. Vv for to 8. Ww he wente s sup. Tas. 


k fillud our sec. m. 
qd kylled our sec. m. 
Vv vp our scc. m. 
4 in higthe o. in heei3 s. > bywepynge our sec. m. 
f Om. our sec. m. 

1 which ur sec. m. 
r Nazaray u pr.im.v sec.m. a Nazaren vu sec.m. 
u and seiynge our sec. m. 


4 scorned ether disseyued K. scorned s sup. ras. 
§ astronomeris Eps. astronomyens Kqha. 
x Om. K. 


t,o, & 


and he was there to® the deeth of1s 
Eroude; that it shulde be fulfillid, that 
was seid of the Lord hi theP profete, 
seiynge, Fro Egipt Y haue clepid my 
sone. Thanne Eroude seynge that hei 
was disseyued4 of the astromyens', was 
ful wrooth; and he sente, and slowe alle 
the children, that weren in Bethleem, and 
in alle the coostis therof, fro two jeer age 
and with inne, aftir the tyme that he had 
enquerid of the astromyens’. Thanne17 
‘it wast fulfillid, that was seid bi Jeremye, 
the profete, seiynge, A vois was herd an 18 
hi3, wepynge and moche weilyng, Rachel 
biwepynge hir sones, and she wolde not 
be coumfortid, for thei ben no3t. Butts 
whanne Eroude was deed, loo! the aun- 
gel of the Lord apperide to Joseph in 
sleep in Egipt, and seide, Ryse vp, and20 
take the child and his modir, and go in 
to the lond of Israel; for thei that sou3ten 
the lijf of the chijld ben deed. Joseph2i 
roos", and took the child and his modir, 
and cam in to the loond of Israel. And 22 
he herde that Archilaus regnede in Judee 
for Eroude, his fadir, and dredde to’ go 
thidir. And he was warned in sleep, and 
wente in to the parties of Galilee; and 2s 
cam, and dwelte in a citee, that ys clepid 
Nazareth, that it shulde be fulfillid, that 
was seid bi profetis, For he shal be 
clepid a Nazarey. 


CAP. III. 


In tho daies Joon Baptist cam, and1 
prechide in the* desert of Judee, and2 
seide, Do 3e penaunce, for the kyngdom 
of heuenesY shal neiz3e. For this is he, of 


Masx. 4% for our sec.m. 
tchilder x. 8 Om. G prim. 
W astronomyers U sec.m.marg.  * Om. x. 
© nolde ov. nolde not 
‘Om. ry sec.m. 1 Archelans, his 

0 fillud our see.m. © Om. ou 
s tho 
w heuen Go. 


1 Om. our sec. m. 


& Om. ovx. 
m Om. x. 


v doith @. doth xy pr. m. 


Y astro- 
t was it s. w roos vp 


y henene a. 


Il, 4—1I5- 


this is he, ‘of whom itY is said by Ysaye, 
the prophete?, A voice of a* cryinge” in 
desert, ‘Make 3e° redy the wayes@ of the® 
Lord; ‘make 3ef ri3tful the pathes of hym. 
4Forsothe ‘that ilk® Joon hadde cloth of 
the! heeris of cameylis, and a girdil of skyn 
aboute his leendis; sothely* his mete weren! 
slocustis™, and hony of the wode. Thaune 
Jerusalem wente out to hym, aud al Jude, 
6and al the cuntre aboute Jordan ; and thei” 
weren cristenyd® of hym in Jordan, know- 
7 lechynge there synues. Sothely he seeynge 
many of Pharisees and of Saducese com- 
mynge to his bapteme, saide to hem, Gene- 
raciouns of eddris, who shewide to 30u for? 
sto flee fro wrath to cumme1? Therfore do 
93ee worthi fruytis of penaunce, and nyl 
je say with ynne 30u, We han the fadir 
Abraham; sothely Y saye to 30u, for whi* 
God is mi3ti to reyse vp’ of these stonys 
10 the sonys of Abraham. For now thet axe is 
putt to the rote of the tree; sothely euery" 
tree that makith nat good fruyt, shal be 
kitt doun, and shal be sent in to fijr’. 
11 Forsothe” Y cristene* 30u in water, in to 
penaunce; forsothe he that is to cummeY 
after me is strenger than Y, whos shon Y 
am not worthi to bere; lhe shal baptise, ‘or 
cristen”, 3ow in the* Holy Goost and fijr>. 
12 Whos wynwing* cloth’, ‘or fan®, in his 
hond, and he shal fully clense his cornef 
floore, and shalé gedre his corne" in to his 
berne; but chaffis he shal breune withi 
fyr unquenchable, ‘or that neuer shal be 
isguenchid*, 'Thanne Jhesus came fro Ga- 
lilee in to, Jordan to Joon, ‘for to! be 
1scristned™ of hym. Soothly Joon forbeed 
hym, sayinge, ‘I owe for® to be cristned of 
15 thee, and ‘thou commmest® to me? Forsothe 
Jhesus answeringe saide to hym, Suffre 


Y which ur sec. m. 
¢ Makith oxy pr.m. 
clothe our sec. m. 
© weysche U sec. m. marg. 
our sce.m. tan our sec.m. 
Y comynge our sec.m. 2 Om. oqux. 
v sec.m. © Om. MNPXY pr.m. ether fan our. 
1 in ovr sec. m. k Om. ovux. 
n Om. os. Iowe ux. © comest thou ur sec. m. 


dweyec. ¢ourev. 
{Om.o. forsothe exy. 
P Om. ovr sec. m. X. 
" eche x. 


2 Om. a. 
plures. for to k. 


a knowlechinge c sup. ras. 
& fruytis igh. 


% prophet, seiynge 09 sec. m. UY sec. m. 
f makith exy pr.m. 
l was su. 
4 comynge our sec. m. 
Vv the fijr apowx. 
a Om. G pr.m. 

f Om. Nn. 
1 that he shulde ary pr.m. to osuv sce. m. x. 


b Om. plures et B. 
h oure fadir c pr.m.g. i 


MATTHEW. fe 


whom it is seid bi Ysaie’, the prophete, 
seyinge, A vois of a crier in desert, Make 
3e redi the weies of the Lord; make 3e 
ri3t the pathis of hym. And this Joon4 
hadde clothing of camels heeris, and a 
girdil of skynne aboute hise leendis ; and 
his mete was honysoukis, and hony of 
the wode. Thanne Jerusalem wente outs 
to hym, and al Judee, and al the cuntre 
aboute Jordan; and thei weren waischin 6 
of hyn in Jordan, ‘and knowlechiden* her 
synnes. But he si3 manye of the® Fary-7 
sees and of Saduceis comynge to his 
baptym, and seide to hem, Generaciouns® 
of eddris, who shewide to 30u to® fle fro 
thee wraththe that is tof come? Therfors 
do 3e worthi fruyte® of penaunce, andg 
nyle 3e seie with ynne 30u, We han Abra- 
ham to fadir'; for Y seie to 30u, that 
God is my3ti to reise vp of these stoones 
the sones of Abraham. And now the ax 10 
is put to the roote of the tree; therfore 
euery tree that makith not good fruyt, 
shal be kit doun', and shal be cast in to 
the* fier. Y waische 3ou in water, in ton 
penaunce; but he that shal come after me 
is strongere than Y, whos schoon Y am 
not worthi to bere; he shal baptise 3ou in 
the Hooli Goost and fier. Whos wynew- 12 
ing cloth zs in his hoond, and he shal 
fulli clense his corn flore, and shal gadere 
his whete in to liis berne; but the chaffe 
he shal brenne with fier that mai not be 
quenchid. Thanne Jhesus cam fro Ga-is 
lilee in to Jordan to Joon, to be baptised 
of hym. And Joon forbede him, andi 
seide, Y owe to be baptisid of thee, and 
thou comest tome? But Jhesus answer-1is 
ide, and seide to hym, Suffre nowe, for 
thus it fallith to vs to fulfille al ri3tful- 


a Om. k sec.m. aman Nn.  crier ov. 
¢ thilke ovy sec. m. that x. ba 
m honysoukis u sec. m.marg. 8 Om. @. 
tr Om. our sec.m. X. 8 Om. 
w Sothely e. * wesche u sec. m. marg. 
© wyndewyng 9. 4 tool ov 

bh wheet our sec. m. 
m baptizid u sec. m. 


bin fyer ovr. 
& he schall ovy sec. m. 


¢ Generacioun cb. 4 fortox. ¢€ Om. 


iadoun a. * Om. cmqubceg sec. m. h. 


8 MATTHEW. 


now, for so? it becummeth vs for’ to fulfille™ 
all ri3twisnesse®. Than Joon leete hym, ‘or 
i6left hym'. Forsothe Jhesus cristened stei3 
vp anoon fro the water; and loo! heuens 
ben" opened to hym, and he say the Spirit 
of God cummynge doun as a culuer, and’ 
17cummynge vpon” hym; and loo! a voice 
fro heuenes, sayinge, This is my byloued* 
sone, in they whiche Y haue plesid to me. 


CAP. IV. 
1 Thanne Jhesus was led in to desert of 
a spirit, ‘that he shulde” be temptid of the 
2deuel. And whanne he hadde fastid fourty 
days and fourety ni3tis*, afterward he hun- 
sgride. And the tempter cummynge ni3, 
saide to hym, 3if thou ‘be Goddis sone?, 
say that these stoons be maad_ looues. 
4 The® whiche answerynge said to hym, It 
is wryten, A man lyueth not in breed 
aloon, bot in euery4 word that cometh 
sforth fro the mouthe of God. Thanne the 
deuyl toke hym® in to anf hooly citee, and 
sette hym on the® pynacle of the temple, 
sand saide to hym, 3if thou ‘be Goddis 
sone", sende thee doun; sothely it is wryt- 
en, For to‘ his aungels he comaundide* of 
thee, and thei shulden take thee in hoondis!, 
lest perauenture thou hurte thi fote at a 
7stoon. Eftsone Jhesus saith™ to hym, It 
is writen, Thou shalt not tempte the Lord 
sthi God. Eftsone the deuel toke hym?® in 
to a ful hee3 hill, and shewide to hym alle 
the rewimys of the world, and the glorie of 
9hem; and saide to hym, Alle these thingis 
Y shal 3eue to thee, 3if thou fallynge doun 
ioshalt worshipe me. Than Jhesus saide to 
hym, Go, Sathanas ; ‘forsothe® it is wrytin, 
Thou shalt worshipe the Lord ‘thi God?, 
irand to hym alone thou shalt serne. Than 
the deuel lafte hym; and loo! aungelis 
12camen nize4, and serueden to hym. So- 


P so forsothe x. 4 Om. ovz. now for @. 


lefte GV sec. m. X. U wer o. weren UP. 
OUP sec. 7m. X. 2 too. 4 ny3t o. 

e hym vp @ sec. m. 
iQm.x. * hath commaunded ov. 
POm.G prim. 4 neizedden ov. 


1 ri3twisnesse Kash. 
E1KPRgk pr. m. a. 


m heuene Ka. 
¥ cometh forth s. 


r fill ovr sec. m. 
vy Om. x. Won ou. 
b art the sone of God our sec. m. 
f the av pr. m. Om. v sec. m. Ww sec. m. 


1 the hondes ou. 


1 wel pleesid K sec. m. 
s schal Y ae. 


Ill. 16—IV. 12. 


nesse!. —Thanne Joon suffride hym. And 16 
whanne Jhesus was baptisid, anoon he 
wente up fro the watir; and lo! heuenes 
weren openyd to hym, and he saie the 
Spirit of God comynge doun as a dowue, 
and comynge on hym; and loo! a voisi7 
fro heuenes™, seiynge, This is my louyd 
sone, in which Y haue plesid" to me. 


CAP. IV. 


Thanne Jhesus was led® of a spirit in1 
to desert, to be temptid of the feend. And 2 
whanne he hadde fastid fourti daies and 
fourti ny3tis, aftirward he hungride. And3 
the tempter cam ny3, and seide to hym, 
If thou art? Goddis sone, seie that thes 
stoones be maad looues. Which answer-4 
ide, and seide to hym, It is writun, Not 
oonli in breed luyeth man4, but in ech 
word that cometh of Goddis mouth. 
Thanne the feend took hym in to thes 
hooli citee, and settide hym on the py- 
nacle of the teinple, and seide to hym, Ife 
thou art Goddis sone, sende thee adoun; 
for it is writun, That to hise aungels he 
comaundide of thee, and thei schulen 
take thee in hondis, lest perauenture thou 
hirte thi foot at a stoon. Eftsoone Jhesus7 
seide to hym, It is writun, Thou shalt 
not tempte thi Lord God. Eftsoone thes 
feend took hym in to a ful hi3 hil, and 
schewide to hym alle the rewmes of the 
world, and the ioye of hem; and seide tog 
hym, Alle these ‘Y schal’ 3yue to thee, 
if thou falle doun and worschipe me. 
Thanne Jhesus seide to hym, Goo, Sa-1o0 
thanas; for it is writun, Thou schalt 
worschipe thi Lord God, and to hyim 
aloone thou shalt serue. Thanne the feend 11 
lafte hym; and lo! aungels camen ny3, 
and serueden to hym. But whanne Jhe-12 


$ rijtfulnesse uy sec.m. Om. ov. or 
x Joued aMGNOPQSUVWXY. y Om. 
¢ Om.ursec.m. ‘Teche x. 
h art the soon of God ov. 
Oo hym vp @sec.m. © for ov. 


amv. 
™ seide our sec. m. 


© lad out s sec.m. Pbes. 4Gaman 


IV. 13—25. 


thely whanne Jhesus hadde herde that Joon 
13was taken, he wente into Galilee. And 
the cite of Nazaret laft, he came, and 
dwelte in the citee of Caphernaum, beside 
the see, in the eendis’ of Zabulon and 
14Neptalym’, that itt shulde be fulfillid®, 
‘that thing’ that was said by Ysay, the 
15 prophete, The lond of Zabulon and the 
lond of Neptalym, the weye of” the see 
ouer* Jordan, of Galilee of hethene men, 
isthe peple that dwelte in derknessis say 
grete li3t, and men/ sittynge in the” cuntree 
of shadew® of deth, li3t ‘is sprunge to hem». 
17 Fro thennus Jhesus bygan for® to preche, 
and say‘, Do 3e penaunce, forsothe® the 
kyngdom‘ of henens® ‘shal cume ni3e?. 
18 Sothely Jhesus, walkynge? bisidis* the see 
of Galilee, say two! bretheren, Symon, that 
is clepid Petre, and Andrew, his brother, 
sendynge nett™ in to the see; forsothe thei 
19 weren fisheris. And he saide to hem, ‘Come 
je" after me, and I shal make 30n to be 
20 maad fisheris® of men. And anon her? nettis 
21forsakyn, they sueden hym. And he go- 
ynge forth fro that place, say tweyn? other 
bretheren, Jamys of Zebedee, and Joon, his 
brother, in the ship with Zebedee, her fadir, 
makynge a3ein, ‘or beetynge’, her nettis’, 
zzand he clepide hem. Sothely anoon the 
nettis forsaken and the fadir, thei sueden 
23hym. And Jhesus enuyraunyde al Galilee, 
techynge in the synagogis* of hem, and 
prechynge the gospel of kyngdam®, and 
helynge al sorow, ‘or ache’, and al seke- 
24nesse in the peple. And his ‘opynyoun, or 
fame, wente in to al Syrie; and thei offrid- 
en* to hym alle meny hauynge yuele, takyn 
with dyuers sorowis’” and tourmentis, and 
hem that hadden deuelis, and* lunatijk 
men, and men in palsie®, and he helide 
25hem. And ‘there sueden hym® many cum- 
panyes of Galilee, and of Decapoly, and of 


¥ coestis xy pr.m. §& of Nepthalim s. 
oOUV sec.m. Wouer K. X of ou. 
©Om.oux. 4 to say our sec.m. 
sec.m. Kbix. ltwet nur. 
ysec.m. two MPQSXY. 
t synogis 4. 
Vv sec.m, name U. openeoun xX. 
G prem. 


© for ou. 


* brou3ten u sec. m. 
b the palesie Nour sec. m. 


tOm.e. tt roos K. 


VOL. IV. 


t the thenge our sec.m. Om. X. 
Y to hem our sec. m. 

f rewme ou. 
Ma nett MNOPQTUY sec. m. 

¥ or mendynge o. either cloulynge uv scc.m. Om. x. 
u the kyngdom arpesxy. the rewme ou. rewme Pr. 


u heuene s. 


MATTHEW. 4) 


sus hadde herd that Joon was takun, 
he wente in to Galilee. And he lefte13 
the citee of Nazareth, and cam, and 
dwelte in the citee of Cafarnaum, biside. 
thet see, in the coostis of Zabulon and 
Neptalym, that it shulde be fulfillid, that 14 
was seid by Ysaie, the profete, seiynge, 
The lond of Sabulon and the lond of ts 
Neptalym, the weie of the see ouer Jor- 
dan, of Galilee of hethen men, the puple 16 
that walkide in derknessis saye greet li3t, 
and while men satten in the cuntre of 
shadewe of deth, li3t aroos*t to hem. Fro17 
that tyme Jhesus bigan to preche, and 
seie, Do 3e penaunce, for the kyngdom 
of heuenes" schal come ni3. And Jhe-18 
sus walkide bisidis the see of Galilee, 
and saye twei britheren, Symount, that 
is clepid Petre, and Andrewe, his bro- 
thir, castynge nettis in to the see; for 
thei weren fischeris. And he seide to19 
hem, Come 3e aftir me, and Y shal make 
jou to be maad’ fisscheris of men. And 20 
anoon thei leften the nettis, and sueden 
hym. And he 3ede forth fro that place, 2! 
and saie tweyne othere britheren, James 
of Zebede, and Joon, his brother, in a 
schip with Zebede, her fadir, amendynge 
her nettis, and he clepide hem. And 22 
anoon thei leften the” nettis and the 
fadir, and sueden hym. And Jhesus23 
3ede aboute al Galilee, techynge in the 
synagogis of hem, and prechynge the 
gospel of the kyngdom, and heelynge 
euery languor and eche sekenesse among 
the puple. And his fame wente in to24 
al Sirie; and thei brou3ten to hym alle 
that weren at male ese, and that weren 
take with dyuerse languores and tur- 
mentis, and hem that hadden feendis, 
and linatike men, and men in palesy, 
and he heelide hem. And ther sueden 25 


u filled ovy sec.m. Om. 
athe shadewe s.  » was risen ou. 
h hath neged ov. i walked s 
© the fisscheres 0. P the ogu 
$ nettis in the se N. 
Ww fame ou 
a Om. 


z Om. o. 
& henen o. 
n Cometh xy. 


v elhcr ache ov. Om. X. 


y Om. arx. 2 soores OU Sec. mt. F Sec. m. 


¢ Om. our sec. m. 


vOm.c. © her a. 


Cc 


10 ' MATTHEW. 


Jerusalem, and of Judee, and of be3onde 
Jordan’. 


CAP. V. 


1 Jhesus forsothe, seynge eumpanyes°, 
wentef vp® in to an hill; and when he 
hadde sete", his disciplis eamen nije to 
zhym. And he‘, openynge his mouthe, 
stau3te tok hem, sayinge, Blessid de! the™ 
pore" in spirit, for the kingdam in® he- 
4uenes? is heren. Blessid be’ mylde men", 
sfor thei shuln welde the eerthe. Blessid 
be® thei that mournen, for thei shuln be 
seomfortid. Blessid be thei that hungren 
and thristen rijtwisnesse", for thei shuln 
7ben fulfillid’y. Blessid be’ ‘mercyful men, 
sfor thei shuln geteY inereye. Blessid be’ 
thei* that ben of elene herte, for thei shuln 
ysee God). Blessid be* ‘pesible mex’, for thei 
ioshuln be clepid the sonys of God. Blessid 
be® thei that suffren persecucionn for 1i;t- 
wisnesse‘, for the kyngdam of heuenes? is 
iherun. 3ee ‘shulen be" blessid, when men 
shulen curse 3ou, and shulen' pursue 3ou, 
and shulen say al yuel a3eins 30n leezing*, 
12for me. Toye 3ee ‘with yn! forth™, and 
‘glade 3ee" ‘with out forth®, for joure meede 
is plentenouse in heuenes; forsothe so thei 
han pursued and° prophetis that weren 
13before 3ou. 3ee ben salt of the? erthe; 
that 3if the salt shal’ vanyshe awey, wher- 
yune shal it be saltid? To no thing it is 
worth ouer, no bot that it be sent’ out, 
4 and‘ defoulid of men. 3e ben 1i3t" of the 
world; a citee putt’ on an hill may nat be 
ishid; nether men tendyn” a lanterne, and 
putten it vndir a busshel, but on a eandil- 
stike, that it 3eue 1i3t to alle that ben in the 
ishous. So shyyne 3oure li3t before men, 


4 Jordan sueden him our sec. m. 
» sitten y. siten x. i Om. w. 
men vU. 9 of AGMNOPQSUI'XY. 
u riztfulnesse UF sec. m. sup. ras. 
ether followe Q sup. ras. 2 Om. x. 
pesiblex. ©€Om. x. f riztfulnesse r sec. m. 
1 with innen G sepius. 
m. also Q sec. m. V prem. 
list x. ¥ sette ovr sec. m. 


P Om. ¥ sec. m. 
W teenden not o. 


xthe1. Y heuene agh pr. m. 


> Blessid ben 3e s. © the profetes also s. 4 ben x. 


€ the kumpanyes x. 
k Om. 4GMNOPUY sec. m. XY. 
P heuene Now pr. m. 
V filled ovr sec. m. sup. ras. 

& men OUP sec. Mm. Sup. TAS. 
& heuene ux. 
™ forsothe @ pr.m. Om. our. 
q Om. x. 


YY ri;tfulnesse bg. 2 riztwijsnesse crmpRsxhaf. 


€ Om. rrqsegh. 


Vv. 1—16, 


hym myehe puple of Galile, and of De- 
eapoli, and of Jerusalem, and of Judee, 
and of bijende Jordan. 


CAP. V. 

And Jhesus, seynge the puple, wente1 
vp in to an* hil; and whanne he was 
set, hise disciplis camen to hym. And hee 
openyde his mouth, and tau3te hem, and 
seide, Blessed ben pore men in spirit,3 
for the kyngdom of heuenesY is herne. 
Blessid ben mylde men, for thei schulen 4 
welde the erthe. Blessid ben thei thats 
mornen, for thei sehulen be eoumfortid. 
Blessid bez thei that hungren and thrist-6 
en ri3twisnesse’Y, for thei sehulen be ful- 
fillid. Blessid dex merciful men, for thei7 
sehulen gete merci. Blessid bez thei thats 
ben of clene herte, for thei schulen se God. 
Blessid ben pesible men, for thei sehulen» 
be clepid Goddis ehildren. Blessid ben 10 
thei that suffren persecusioun for ri3tful- 
nesse”, for the kingdam of heuenes* is 
herne. ‘3e schulen be blessid®, whanue li 
men schulen eurse 30u, and schulen pur- 
sue 30u, and shulen seie al yuel ajens 30u 
liynge, for me. Joie 3e, and be 3e glad, 12 
for 3oure meede is plenteuouse in heuenes ; 
for so thei han pursued ‘also profetis¢ 
that weren? bifor 30u. 3e ben salt of the 13 
erthe; that if the salt vanysche awey, 
whereynne schal it be saltid? To no 
thing it is worth ouere, no® but that it be 
east out, and be defoulid of nen. 3e ben 14 
li3t of the world; a citee set on an hil 
inay not be hid; nef me teendith not™ ais 
lanterne, and puttith® it vndur a bussehel, 
but on a candilstike, that it 3yue lij3t to 
alle that ben in the hous. So schyne16é 
3oure li3t befor men, that thei se 3oure 


f steized our sec. m. & Om. F sec. m. 


1Om. x. m Om. Qu. 0 pore 

qOm x. ©'Omx. *%Om.x. tOm.x. 
wOm.x. *the merciful x.  ¥ gete, 

beood a pr.m. ¢Om.x. 4 the 

hben np. !Om. wpexy pr.m. * liende x. 
oeladeth xy. © ful onte ov. °° Om. our sec. 
rOm.o. ®cast vu. tand be ovr sec.m. the 


& heuene A pr. mm. EP. 


fneithers. ffOm.R. & putte ts. 


V 17-25. 


that thei see 3oure good werkis, and glo- 
\rifie 3oure fadir that® is in henens. Nyle 
3e gesse, ‘or deme, that? Y came to ‘vndo, 
or distruye*, the lawe, or» the prophetis ; 
I came not to vndoS ‘the lawe‘, but to ful- 
1sfillee. Forsothe I say to 3ou trewthe’, til 
heuen and erthe passe%, oon i!, ‘that ts 
leste lettre’, or' titil™, shal nat passe fro 
19 the lawe, til alle thingis be don. Therfore 
he that ‘vndoth, 07" breketh, oon of these 
leste maundementis®, and techith thus men, 
shal be clepid the? leste in the rewme of 
heuenes ; forsothe this that doth, and tech- 
ith, shal be clepid grete in the! kyngdame* 
200f heuenes. Forsothe Y say to jou, no* 
but 3if* 30ure riztwisnesse® shal’ be more 
plenteuouse than of scribis and Pharisees*, 
3ee shulen not entre in to kyngdam” of 
2iheuenes. 3ee han herde that? it is* said 
to olde men, Thou shal nat slea; forsothe 
he that sleeth®, shal be gylty of dome. 
22 But I say to 30n, that? euereche® that is 
wrothef to his brother, shal be gylty of 
dome; forsothe he that ‘shal say to his 
brother, Racha, that is, a word of scorn, 
shal be gylty of counseile; sothly he that 
‘shal say}, Fool, ‘that is, a word of dispis- 
ynge', shal be gylti of the fijr of helle. 
23 Therfore 3if thou offrist thi 3ift at the au- 
ter, and there‘ ‘shalt bythenke!, that thi 
24 brother hath sum what™ ajeins thee, leeue 
there thi 3ift before the auter, and go first 
for® to be recounseilid, o7* acordid, to thi 
brother, and thanne thou cummynge shalt 
25 Offre thi 3ifte. Be thou consentynge to 
thin aduersarie soon, the? whijle thou art 
in the way with hym, lest peranenture 
thin aduersarie take thee to the domes- 


x whiche ovr sec.m. YOm.oux. 4% for ur. 


G sec.m. ether our sec. m. 


a distruye ovr sec. m. vndon x. 
¢ distroie our sec. m. distroye, or undo ¥ pr.m. 


MATTHEW. 11 


goode werkis, and glorifie 30ure fadir 
that is in heuenes. Nil 3e deme, that Y17 
cam to vndo the lawe, or the profetis ; Y 
cam not to vndo the lawe, but to fulfille™. 
Forsothe Y seie! to 30u, til henene and 1s 
erthe passe*, o lettir or o! titel shal not 
passe fro the lawe, til alle thingis be 
doon. Therfor he that brekith oon of 1s 
these leeste maundementis™, and techith 
thus men, schal be clepid the leste in the 
rewme of heuenes; ‘but he" that doith, 
and techith, schal be clepid® greet in the 
kyngdom? of heuenes. And Y seie to20 
3ou, that but4 30ur ri3tfulnesse™ be more 
plenteuonse than of scribis and of Fari- 
sees, 3e schulen not entre into the kyng- 
dom of heuenes. 3e han herd that it21 
was seid to elde men, Thou schalt not 
slee ; and he that sleeth, schal be gilti to® 
doom. But Y seie to 3ou, that ech man 22 
that is wrooth to his brothir, schal be gilti 
to‘ doom; and he that seith to his bro- 
ther, Fy! schal be gilti to" the’ counseil ; 
but he that seith, Fool, schal be gilti to” 
the fier of helle. Therfor if thou offrist 23 
thi 3ifte ‘at the* auter, and ther thon 
bithenkist, that thi brothir hath sum 
what ajens thee, leeue there thi 3ifte bi-2 
for the auter, and go first to be recoun- 
selid to thi brothir, and thanne thou schalt 


‘come, and schalt offre thi 3ifte. Be thou 2s 


consentynge to thin aduersarie soone, 
while thou art in the weie with hym, 
lest perauenture thin aduersarie take thee 
to the domesman, and the domesman 
take thee to the mynystre, and thou be 
sent in to prisoun. ‘T'reuli Y seie to thee, 2¢ 
thou shalt not go out fro thennus, til 


b of G pr. m. and 


d Om. urscc.m. © fulfille 


it wp. fillo. Om. or sec.m. €&schal passe Nn. hong. ilettere uv. * that is, the leste lettre aGkLM 
Nposv prom. wy. Om. our sec.m. x. ether our sec.m. "a titil agarnposiyxy. oo tytil our sec. m. 
° Om. ovr sec.m. © commaundementes 0. POm.o. %@Om.aw. 'rewme ouyscc.m. § Om. GPpexY 


prem, that N. for no ursec.m. t Om. Tur sec. m. 


u riztfulnesse UV sec. m. 


vy Om. NP. W no more K. 


x of Pharisees 0. ¥ the kyngdom earnpsxy. the rewme our sec.m. % for our sec.m. ®wasu. > shal 
slen x. © Forsothe o. 4 for ur sec.m. ©heo.ech urx. fwrathed 0. & seieth ovr sec.m. 4 seieth 
our sec.m. iQOm. ov. k there thou c. Om. uv. 1 bythenkest ovr sec.m. ™ thenge our scc.m. ™ Om. 
ouvx. © ether ov elv fere passim. ® Om. oqur sec. m. : 


h fulfille ix. 4 seie truthe K sec. m. 
sothe this s sec.m. © Om. 8s sec. m. 
8 sup. ras. e. to the k. 
8 sup. Tas. a. x atte s. 


t of s sup. ras. to the k. 


k shal passe s pr. m. 
P rewme KS sec. m. 
a of 8 sup. ras. 


m comaundementis qhk. =® for- 
t riztwisnesse kha. § of 
win top. of 


laa. 
ano but s sec. m. 
v Om. ks sec. m. h. 


C2 


12 MATTHEW. 


man, aud the domesman? take thee to 
the mynystre, and thou be sente in to pri- 
26soun. Trewely I say to thee, Thou shalt 
not go thennes, ti] thou 3elde the last fer- 
27thing. 3e han herd for it was said to olde 
28men, Thou shalt nat do lecherye. For- 
sothe Y say to 30u, for why euery® mau 
that seeth a womman for‘ to coueite hire, 
now he" hath do lecherie by’ hire in his 
eyherte. That 3if thi ri3t eize sclaundre thee, 
pulle it out, and cast it” fro thee; for it 
speedith to thee, that oon of thi membris 
perishe, than* al thi body go in to helle. 
30 And 3if thi ri3t hond sclaundre’ thee, kitt 
it awey, and cast it? fro thee; for it sped- 
ith to thee, that oon of thi membris pe- 
rishe, than that al thi* body go in to helle. 
31 Forsothe it is said, Who euere shal] leeve 
his wyf, 3eue he to hir a libel, that is, a 
32 itil boke of forsakyng. Sothelyc Y say to 
30u, that’ enery® man that ‘shal leeuef his 
wyf, outaken canse’ of fornicacioun, he! 
makith hire do’ lecherie, and he that wed- 
dith the forsaken wijf*, doth anoutrie. 
33 Efte soonys 3ee han herd, that! it was said 
to olde men, Thou shalt not forswere, so- 
thely™ to the Lord" thou shalt 3eeld thin 
s4oethis. Forsothe Y say to 30u, to nat 
swere on al manere; neither by heuene, for 
soit is the trone of God; nether by the® 
erthe, for it is the stole of his feet; nei- 
ther by Jerusalem, for it is the citee of a? 
s6greet kyng; neither thou shalt swere by 
thin heued4, for thou maist™ not make oon® 
37 heer whyt*, or blak; but ‘be 3oure word" 
3ea, 3ea; Nay, nay; forsothe that” that is 
sg more ‘than this”, is of ynel. 3ee han herde 
that* it is’ said*, Eize for eize, toth* for 
sytoth. But Y say to 3ou, to nat ajein stonde 
yuel; but 3if any ‘shal smyte® thee in‘ the 
ri3t cheeke, 3eue to hym and® the tother ; 


4 iuge oUr sec. m. vr Om. our sec. im. X. 
Ywith x. ® Om. 4 sec. m. our sec. m. 
athe x. b& Om. vu. ¢ But our sec. m. 
& the cause our sec.m. h Om. our see. m. 
m but ovr sec.m. ® Loorde thi God o. 

Tmizst w. San Gexy. + white heer ur. 
theses. * for ouv sec.m. =Y was U. 

c smyteth OUV sec. m. 4 on our sec. m. 


W not doo Kar. * Om. plures. 
b sup. ras. bb Om. xq. 
€Om.s. f Om. erp. 


Y it crpsxeka. 
© Om. r. 
§ constreine s. 


8 eche our sec.m. X. 
x than that our sec. m. 

4 for ouV sec. m. 

ito do 4GMNOPQSUVY WXY. 
° Om. NPQsx. 

u3, w. be ur. 

z seid to the olde x. 

e also oUV see. m. 


Z caste hit Ks. 
ce an heer of thin s pr. m. 


V. 26—39. 


thou 3elde the last ferthing. 3e han herd 27 
that it was seid to elde men, Thou schalt 
‘do no letcherie. But Y seie to 30u, 28 
that every man that seeth a womman 
for* to coueite hir, hath now do letcherie 
bi hir in his herte. That if thi ri3t ize29 
sclaundre thee, pulle hymy out, and caste” 
fro thee ; for it spedith to thee, that oon 
of thi membris perische, than that al thi 
bodi go in to helle. And if thi ri3t hond so 
sclaundre thee, kitte hym? aweye, and 
caste fro thee; for it spedith to thee that 
oon of thi membris perische, than that al 
thi bodi go in to helle. And it hath bes: 
seyd, Who euere leeueth his wijf, 3yue 
he to hir a libel of forsakyng. But Y seiese 
to 3ou, that euery man that leeueth his 
wijf, outtakun cause of fornyeacioun, mak- 
ith hir to do letcherie, and he that wed- 
dith the forsakun wijf, doith auowtrye. 
Eftsoone 3e han herd, that it was seid 33 
to elde men, Thou schalt not forswere, but 
thou schalt 3elde thin othis to the Lord. 
But Y seie to 3o0u, that 3e swere not ‘for 3s 
ony thing’; nethir bi henene, for it is the 
trone of God ; nether bi the» erthe, for it 35 
is the stole of his feet; nether bi Jerusa- 
lem, for it is the citee of a greet kyng; 
nether thou shalt not° swere bi thin®¢ heed, 36 
for thou maist not make oon heere white, 
net blacke ; but be 30ure word, 3he, 3he ; 37 
Nay, nay; and that that is more than 
these, is of yuel. 3e han herd that it hath 3s 
be seid, I3e for ize, and tothe for tothe. 
But Y seie to 30u, that 3e ajenstonde not 39 
an yuel man; but if ony smyte thee in 
the rijt cheke, schewe to him also the 
tothirt; and to hym that wole stryue 40 
with thee in doom, and take awey thi 
coote, leeue thou® ‘to himf also thi man- 
til; and who euer constreyneth® thee a4! 


t Om. x. u Om. our sec. m. X. 
Ysclaundreth v. 2 Om. 4Nopury. 
€ eche our sec.m, x.  f forsaketh our sec. m. 
k Om. x.  ! for ovr see.m. 
q heed ampourw. hed nsx. 
w Om. ouv see. m. than 

b any man NUF sec. m. 


P Om. a. the o. 
Vv this our sec. m. 
8 and tooth ou. 


ait k. » in al maner kb marg. sec. m 
orc. nether kgh. 4 oother 1. 


V. 40-——VI. 5. 


4oand to hym that wole stryue with thee in 
dome, and take awey thi coote, leeue thouf 
41 to hym® and? thin ouer clothe; and who 
euere constraynethi thee a thousand pacis*, 
azgo thou with hym other tweyne!. For- 
sothe 3if™ to hym that axith of thee, and" 
turne thou nat awey fro hym that wol 
43 borwe of thee. 3ee han® herd that? it is4 
said, Thou shalt loue thin neizbore, and™ 
44hate thin enmy. But Y say to 3ou, loue 
jee 30ure enmyes, do* jee wel to hem that 
haten 30u, and preye 3ee for men pursu- 
45 ynge, and falsly chalengynge 30u ; that 3ee 
be the sonys of 3oure fadir that is in 
henenes, that makith his sune to ‘springe 
vp" vpon’ good and” yuel men, and rayn- 
eth vpon* iuste men’ and vniuste men. 
46 For 3if 3e louen hem? that louen 3ou, what 
meed shul 3ee haue? whether? and pupli- 
47eans® don nat this thing? And 3if 3ee 
greten, ‘or saluten®, 3oure bretheren oonly, 
what ‘more ouer® shul 3ee don¢? whether‘ 
48 and® paynymmys don nat this thing? Ther- 
fore be 3ee parfit, as and 3oure heuenly 
ifadir is parfitss. ‘Take 3ee" hede, lesti 
3e don 30ur ri3twisnesse* before nen, that 
jee be seen of hem, ellis 3e shule nat han 
meed at! 30ure fadir that™ is in heuenes. 
2Therfore when thou dost almesse, nyle 
thou synge byfore thee" ‘in a° trumpe, as 
ypoeritis don in synagogis and streetis, 
that thei ben ‘maad worshipful? of men; 
forsothe Y saye to 30u, thei han reseeyued 
sher meede. But ‘thee doynge4 almesse, 
knowe nat the™ left hond what thi ri3t 
ahond doth, that thi almes be in hidlis, and 
thi fadir that seeth in hidlis, shal jelde to 
thee. 
CAB V lp 
5s And’ when 3e shulnt preye, 3ee shuln 
nat be as ypocritis, the" whiche stondynge 


MATTHEW. 13 


thousynde pacis, go thou with hym 
othir tweyne. 3yue thou to hym that42 
axith of thee, and turne® not awey fro 
hym that wole borewe of thee. 3e hans: 
herd that it was seid, Thou shalt loue thi 
neiz3bore, and hate thin enemye. But Y 44 
seie to 30u, loue 3e 30ure enemyes, do! 3e 
wel to hem that hatiden* 30n, and preye 
3e for hem that pursuen, and sclaundren 
30u; that 3e be the sones of jour fadir4s 
that is in heuenes, that makith his sunue 
to rise vpon goode ‘and yuele men!, and 
reyneth on just men and yniuste. For 46 
if 3e louen hem that louen 30u, what 
mede schulen 3e han? whether™ pup- 
plicans doon not this?? And if 3e greten 47 
3oure britheren oonli, what schulen 3e do 
more? ne® doon not hethene men this ? 
Therfore be 3e parfit, as 3oure heuenli 4s 
fadir is parfit. 


CAP. VI. 


Takith? hede, that 3e do not joure! 
riz3twisnesse4 bifor men, to be seyn of 
hem, ellis 3e schulen haue no meede at 
3oure fadir that is in heuenes. Therfore2 
whanne thou doist almes, nyle thou 
trumpe tofore™ thee, as ypoeritis doon 
in synagogis and stretis, that thei be 
worschipid of men; sotheli Y seie to 3ou, 
they han resseyued her meede. But; 
whanne thou doist almes, knowe not 
thi left hond what thi rijt hond doith, 
that thin almes be in hidils, and thi4 
fadir that seeth in hiddils, sehal quyte 
thees. And whanne 3e preyen, 3e schulens 
not be as ipocritis, that louen to preye 
stondynge in synagogis and corneris of 
stretis, to be seyn of men; treuli Y.seie 


f thou also our sec. m. & Om. our sec.m. »Om.ovu. iconstreyne ns. * placis x. pas x. ! two Gmesxy. 


™ sif thou our sec.m. %Om.Ksec.m. © Om.o. P for ovrsec.m. wasu. 1 and thou schalt our 
scc.m. ®%anddox. 'twhiche our sec.m. rise ouy sec.m. Yon ogur sec.m.x. “Wandonvu. *on 
ouv sec.m.x. YOm.G. %men Nn. 2wher ovy. >the puplicanes 0. © Om.oux. 4 Om. our sec. m. 
€ do more our sec. m. fwhero. ¢& Om. ov. ge Cap. v. ends here in o. h Takith Gxy pr. m. 


ithat x. * riztfulnesse ur sec. m. 
with a vy sec.m. P worscheped our sec. m. 


Pgsur sec.m. wxy. §&Om.s. t Om, our sec.m. 


h turne thou erprk pr. m. 
« this thing s sup.ras. © Om.s. 
plures et aB. ® to thee R. 


P Take h. 


lof 0. ajentis Ur sec. m. 
4 thei doynge x. while thou doest our sec. m. 
u Om. our sec. m. 


k hatin s. 


i and do xshk pr. m. ; 
4 riztfulnesse cu pr. m. xbgh. rijtfulnessis R. 


Qmev. © wit ov. 
' thi 4GuNo 


m whiche ouyv sec. 71. 


m wher Epsxb. 


1men and yuele xs. 
Y bifore 


14 MATTHEW. 


Jouen to preye in synagogis and’ corners 
of streetis, that thei be seen of men; 
trewly Y say to 3ou, thei han resseyned 
6her meede. But whan thou shalt preye, 
entre in to thi couche, and the dore schet, 
preye” thi fadir in hidlis, and thi fadir 
that seeth in hidlis, shal 3eelde to thee. 
7Sothely* preyinge nyle 3ee speke’ moche, 
as hethen men don, for thei gessen that 
thei ben herd in theire moche speche. 
8 Therfore nyl 3e7 be maad liche* to hem, 
for 30ure fadir woot what is need? to 
950u, before that® 3e axen hym. Forsothe 
thus 5e shulen preyen, Oure fadir that art 
i0in heuenes, halwid be thi name; thi kyng- 
dom cumme to’; ‘be thi wille don® as in 
11 heuen and! in erthe ; 3if to vs this day oure 
12 breed ouer other substaunce; and forjeue 
to8 vs oure dettis, as" we forjeue to oure 
isdettours ; and leede vs nat in to tempta- 
cioun, but delyuere vs fro! yuel. ‘Amen, 
14 that is‘, ‘so be tt'. Forsothe 3if jee shulen 
for3ene to men her synnys, and 3oure he- 
uenly fadir shal for3eue to 30u 30ure® tres- 
1s passis®. Sothely 3if 3ee shulen for3eue not 
to men?, neither 3oure fadir shal‘ for3eue 
16to 30u 3oure synnes. But" when 3ee fasten, 
nyl 3e be maad as ypocritis sorweful, for 
thei putten her facis out of Ayndly termys, 
that thei seme fastynge to men; trewly Y 
say to 30u, thei han resseyued her meede. 
17 But whan thou fastist, anoynte thin hede', 
isand washe thi face, that thou be nat seen 
fastynge to nen, but to thi fadir that is 
in hidlis, and thi fadir that seeth in hidlis, 
ig Shal 3eelde to thee. Nyle 3e tresoure to jou 
tresours in‘ erthe, wher rust and mou3the® 
distruyeth, and wher theeues deluen out 
2eand stelen; but tresoure 3ee to 30u tre- 
souris in heuene, wher neither rust ne* 
mou3the distruyeth, and wher theues del- 
uen nat ont, ‘or undirmyne nat*, ney stelen. 


VY and in AoUy sec. m. 


W preye to G pr.m. preye thou our sec. m. 


VI. 6—20. 


to jou, thei han resseyued -her meede. 
But whanne thou schalt preye, entre ine 
to thi conche, and whanne the dore is 
schet, preye thi fadir in hidils, and thi 
fadir that seeth in hidils, schal 3elde to 
thee. Bunt in pretyng nyle 3ee speke7 
myche, as hethene men doon, for thei 
gessen that thei ben herd in her myche 
speche. Therfor nyle 3e be maad lichs 
to hem, for 30ur fadir woot what is 
nede to 30u, bifore that 3e axen hym.. 
And® thus 3e schulen preye, Oure fadirg 
that art in heuenes, halewid be thi 
name; thi kyngdgom come tot; be thito 
wille don® ‘in erthe as in heuene’; 3yue¥ 11 
to* vs this’ dai oure ‘breed ouer othir 
substaunce?; and for3yue to vs ourele2 
dettis, as we for3yuen to oure dettouris ; 
and lede vs not in to temptacioun, but is 
delyuere vs fro yuel. Amen*. For ifi 
je for3yuen to men her synnes, 3oure 
heuenli fadir schal for3yue to 3ou 3oure 
trespassis®. Sotheli if 3e forzyuen not tots 
men, nether 3oure fadir schal for3yue 
to 30u 30ure synnes. But whanne 3e16 
fasten, nyle 3e be maad as ypocritis so- 
rewful, for thei defacen hem silf, to seme 
fastyng to men; treuli Y seie to 3ou, 
they han resseyued her meede. Buti7 
whanne thou fastist, anoynte thin heed, 
and waische thi face, that thou be notis 
seen fastynge to men, but to thi fadir 
that is in hidlis, and thi fadir that seeth 
in priuey*, shal 3elde to thee. Nile 3e19 
tresoure to 30u tresouris in erthe, where 
ruste and mou3te destrieth*, and where 
theues deluen out and stelen; but ga-20 
dere® to jou tresouris in heuene, where 
nether ruste ne mou3te distrieth’, ana 
where theues deluen not out, ne stelen. 
Foré where thi tresoure is, there also thin 21 
herte is. The lanterne of thi bodi is22 


x Sotheli 3e nv. Ysey e. 2 Om. 


Gprom. licly xr. > needful oury sec.m. © Om. 6G prim. ‘tothe x. © thi wille be don uv sec. m. 
fson. &Om.u. has and c sec. m.uNnogsurx. ifroalle u pr.m. * Om.m. O Amen ux. ! Om. 
ouxX. ™weo. and joure N, © synnes s. P the synnes of hem @ marg. sec.m. 4 schal not o. * For- 
sothe ovr sec.m. Sheuedo. therein nN. tmou3ttisn. VOm.N. Wnether ovx. * Om. mour 
sec.m. X.Y neither ou, 

$s Buti. t to thee 1K. u jelon c. vas in heuene and in erthe q. in erthe as it is in heuene s. 
w3yne thou a. *Om.b. Ytoc. Zech dayes breed e, 8 Amen. Amen, that is, so be it c. Amen, 


that is, so be it EMP marg. Que marg. g. 


tresoure K. fdistroien k. & Forsothe s sec. m. 


btrespas c. ¢ hidlis 1K. 


4 distroien K. © gadere 3e 1Q sec. mr. 


VI. 21-—32. 


21 Forsothe wher thi tresour is, there and? thin 
22herte is. The lanterne of thi body is thin 
eje; 3if thin eize be* symple, al thi body 
23 shal be li3tful; bot® 3if thyn ei3e be wey- 
ward, al thi body shal be derkful. Ther- 
fore 3if the li3t that is in thee be derk- 
nessis‘, ‘how grete shulen thilk® derknessis 
2i4bef? No man may serue to’ two? lordis, 
forsothe! ethir* he shal haat ‘the toon!, and 
loue™ the tother®; other® he shal susteyn 
‘the toonP, and dispise4 ‘the tothir™. 3e 
mown’ nat serue tot God and richessis". 
23 Therfore Y say to 3ou, that 3e ben nat 
besie to 3oure lijf, what 3e shulen ete; 
othirY to 3oure body, with” what* 3e shuln 
be clothidy. Wher? 3oure® lijf is nat more 
than mete, and the body more than clothe®? 
26 Beholde 3e the ‘flee;inge foulis? of the eir, 
for thei sowen nat, nef repyn, neither’ ga- 
drei in to bernys ; and joure fadir of heuen 
fedith hem. Wher" 3e hen nat more worthi! 
27 than thei? Sothely who of 3ou thenkinge 
may ‘putte to! to™ his stature 00 cubite ? 
2s And of clothing what ben 3e besye? ‘Be- 
holde 3e" the lilies® of the feelde, how thei 
wexen. Thei traueilen nat, nether spyunen; 
29 trewly I say to 30u, for whi? neither Sala- 
mon in al his glorie was keuerid4 as oon 
300f thes. For" 3if God clothith thus the 
heye of the feeld, that to day is, and to 
morwe is sente in to the’ fourneyse, how 
31moche more 3ou of litil feith ? Therfore 
nyl 3e be bisie, sayinge, What shulen we 
ete? ort, What shulen we drynke? or’, 
With what thing” shulen we be keuered*? 
32 ForsotheY heithen men sechen alle these 
thingis; trewly 3oure fadir wote that? 3e 


Zalso Usec.m. 8 ig U sec. m. V Sec. m. 


esse Y. 
ou. 4h twel nr. 
m he schall loue our sec. a. 
oone ox. 4 he schal despise our sec. m. 
vsec.m. "“richesse MNPXY. 
z Whether GNosux. 4 the our sec.m. 
sec.m. fnor Nn. nether our sec.m. & ne ou. 
uy prom. Om. x.  bithenkynge ov. 1! adde ov. 
© lilyes, or floures Mv pr.m. P Om. our sec. m. X. 
ta aacaNopsurwxyY. either u. other v sec. m. 
ouy sec.m. 7% for ou. 


i Om. c pr. m.ur. for o. 


h these ge. tho h. 1 two aehk. 
© oother ran. 
rbek. is mete s. 


Y thei spynnen kK. 


t is not more s. 
z that Salomon 1. 


b sothely our see. m. 
e the ilke 4n. tho ilke m. tho ovr sec.m. ‘f the derknesses hou grete shul thei be? x. 
k other upy. or xX. outher s. 
1 that other G. the othir x. 
t that other g. the other x. 
Vv either NQs. nether our. or xX. 
b the meete o. 
h Whether Gn ef s passim, UVX pass. 

m Om. K pr. ml. MNPQTW. 
a clothid uv. koouered x. 


k that one qe. the oon s. 
P richesse rmqrsuxbegh sec. m. ko8. rizechesse K. riches e. 
u the cloth 1s. 
a Forsothe 1. 


MATTHEW. WB 


thin i3e; if thin ize be symple, al thi 
bodi shal be li3tful; but if thin ize he 2: 
weiward, al thi bodi shal be derk. If 
thanne the 1i3t that is in thee be derk- 
nessis, how grete schulen thilk® derk- 
nessis be? No man may serue tweyn'24 
lordis, for ethir he schal hate ‘the toon, 
and loue the tother'; ethir he shal sus- 
teyne ‘the toon™, and dispise the" tothir®. 
3e moun not serue God and richessis?. 
Therfor I seie to 30u, that 3e be not bisies 
to 3oure lijf, what 3e schulen ete; ne- 
ther? to 30ure bodi, with what 3e schulen 
be clothid. Whether‘ lijf is™ not more 
than meete’, and the bodie moret thau 
cloth"? Biholde 3e the’ foulis of the 2 
eire, for thei sowen not, nethir’’ repen, 
nethir gaderen in to bernes; and 3oure 
fadir of heuene fedith hem. Whether 
3e ben not more worthi” than thei? But27 
who of 30u thenkynge mai putte to his 
stature o cubit? And of clothing what 2s 
ben 3e bisye? Biholde 3e* the lilies of 
the feeld, how thei wexen. Thei trauelen 
not, nether spynnen’; and Y seie to 30u, 29 
Salomon? in al his glorie was not keuered 
as oon of these. And if God clothith 30 
thus the hei of the feeld, that to day is, 
and to morewe is cast in to an ouen, hou 
myche more 30n of lite] feith? Therfors1 
nyle 3e be bisi, seiynge, What schulen 
we ete? or, What schulen we drinke ? or, 
With what thing schulen we be keuered ? 
For* hethene men seken alle these thingis; 32 
and 3oure fadir woot, that 3e han nede 
to alle these thingis. Therfor seke 3e first 33 
the kyngdom of God, and his riztful- 


4 derk- 
£ Om. 
YM that oon c. the oone o. 
P that oon G. the 
8 mowe Gr. mai M. t Om. ov 
x what thing vu. Y clad x. 

4 Om.esw. ¢ volatyles our 
i worthee o. worth 
a Beholdeth exy pr. m. 
8 whiche ou. 


¢ Om. G pr. m. is UV sec. im. 
° ether ON@F. or SX. 
w Om. Q. 


e the clothe o. 


r Forsothe v. 


vether ov. ¥ Om. ovr see.m. *heled ov. Y For 
toother 1. ™ that oon iq. ® that Q. 

ques. 494 Wher plurcs. 

¥Om.c. YY nes. W worth nsece.m. * Om. a. 


16 MATTHEW. 


3shan need to alle these thingis. Therfore 
seke 3ee" first the kyngdam of God and 
his ri3twisnesse, and alle these thingis 

3ishulen be cast to 30u. Therfore nyle 3e 
be® besie in to the morwe, for the morew 
day shal be besie to it4 self; sothely® it 
sufficith to the day his malice. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Nyle 3e deme, that 3e be nat demyd ; 
2for in what dome 3e demen, 3e shulen ben 
demyd, and in what mesure 3e meten, it 
3shal be metenf to 30u. But what seest thou 
a festu, ‘or a® itil mote, in the eize of thi 
brother, and thou seest nat a beme in thin 
4owne eiz3e ? Or what! maner saist thou to 
thi brother, Brother, suffre that I caste out 
a ‘festu fro* thin eize, and loo! a beme is! 
5in thin owne ei3e? Ypocrite, cast out first 
a™ beme of thin eiz3e, and than thou shalt 
see for" to cast out a° festu of P the ei3e 
6of thi brother. Ny] 3e 3eue holy thing4 to 
houndis, nether sende* 3e 30ur margaritis, 
or® ‘preciouse stoonys', before swyne, lest 
perauenture thei defoulen hem with theire 
feet, and ‘lest houndis" turned to gidre al 
7to-breke jou. Axe 3e, and it shal be 3ouen 
to 30u; ‘seke 3e’, and 3e shulen fynde; 
‘knocke 3e”, and it shal be opnyd to 3ou. 
8 For eche* that axith, takith; and heY that 
sechith, fyndith; and it shal be opnyde to 
o‘a man? knokynge*. Other? who of 3ou is 
aman, whom 3if his sone axe* breed, wher? 
10he shal dresse to hym a stoon? Other? 3if 
he ‘shal axef a fishe, whers he shal dresse* 
11t0 hym a serpent? Therfore 3if 3e, when 
3e ben yuel men, ‘han knowen for to* 3ene 
good thingus! 30uen™ to 3oure sonys, hou 
myche more 30ure fadir that is in heuenes 
shal 3eue good thingis to men axinge® 


aOm.r. > riztfulnesse vu. ¢ Om. G pr. m. 
oux. Sor N. elher o. ether av. 
esee.m 1Om.e. ™ the carpxy. 
T caste U sec. m. sup. ras. 
¥ seketh G pr.m.gxy. scketh jee c see. m. 
pr.m. him ov. 4 that knocketh v. 
prim. x. © Ether aog. Either nvw. Or sx. 
‘kK connen ov. ! 3iftes ov. ™ Om. ou. 


5 rigtwisnesse EIKPQga. © it self s. 


ce. do out first plures et a8. 
k shal. ! to him sg. 


£ thin owne s. 


Naxeth Rk. ™ wher Esxe. 


dhym sGMNogsurwxy. 
h Ether ov. Other v scce.m. i 
n Om. osur see. m. X. 
5 elher o et U passim, ¥ sec. m. Om. x. 
w knockith exy. 
> Or ax. Either nsw. Ether oer. 
f axeth vu. 
2 askinge @. 


VI. 33-——VII. 11. 


nesse», and alle these thingis shulen be 
cast to jou. Therfor nyle 3e be bisy 34 
in to the morew, for the morew shal be 
bisi to ‘hym silf¢; for it suffisith to the 
dai his owen malice. 


CAP. VII. 


Nile 3e deme, ‘that 3e be not demed‘;1 
for in what doom 3e demen, 3e schulenz 
be demed, and in what mesure 3e meten, 
it schal be meten ajen to 30u. But whats 
seest thou a litil mote in the ije of thi 
brother, and seest not a beem in thin 
owne ize? Or hou seist thou to thi bro-« 
thir, Brothir, suffre® I schal do out a 
mote fro thin ije, and lo! a beem is in 
thin owne ize? Ipocrite, ‘do thou outs 
firstf the beem of thin ize, and thanne 
thou schalt se to%% do out the mote of the 
ize of thi brothir. Nile 3e 3yue hoolice 
thing" to houndis, nethir caste 3e joure 
margaritis bifore swyne, lest perauenture 
thei defoulen hem with her feet, and the 
houndis be turned, and al to-tere 30u. 
Axe je, and it schal be 30uun to 30u;7 
seke 3e, and 3e schulen fynde; knocke 3e, 
and it schal be openyd to 3ou. For echs 
that axith, takith; andi he that sekith, 
fyndith ; and it schal be openyd to hym, 
that knockith. What man of 3ou is, thats 
if his sone axe hym breed, whethiri he 
wole* take hym! a stoon? Or if he axellio 
fische, whether he wole™ take" hym® an 
edder? Therfor if 3e, whanne 3e benin 
yuele men, kunnen 3yue good 3iftis to 
joure sones, hou myche more 3oure . fa- 
dir that is in heuenes schal 3yue good 
thingis to men that axen hym? Ther-te 


€ forsothe ov. 
iin what ov. 
° the ar. 


f meten ajen 
k Om. 9 pr. m. a mote 

P fro ovr sec.m. 4 thingis 4GNs. 
tOm. x. 4 lest hondis a. thei ov. 
xechemann. YOm.x. *%mank 
Caxeth ov. 4 whethir scsr 
& whether aansx. bsiue x. Om. x. 


4 that 3e be not demed, and 3e schulen not be demed a pr.m. cm 
pub pr.m. ¢. and 3e shul not be demed 1 sup. ras. KQRSb sec. m. eghkP. 
&& for to a pr.m. 
Nn 3iue EI Sup. ras. Sec. Mm. a. 


f first do ont 
J wher Ese. 


€ suffre thou s, 
hthingis c. iOm.c. 
° to him s. 


iG 


wi 12—25. 


izhym? Therfore alle thingis, what euer 
thingis 3ee wolen that®° men don to jon, 
and 3e do? to hem, forsothe ‘these thingis4 
13 ben" the lawe and prophetis’. Entre 3e bi 
the streyt 3ate; for the gate ‘that ledith to 
perdicioun, or dampnacioun', is brode, and 
‘the weye" large, and ‘ther ben many’ that 
14entren bi it’. How streit is* the 3ate, and 
narewe the weye, that ledith to lijf, and 
15 ‘there ben feweY that fynden it. Perceyue? 
3e, and flee* fro fals prophetis, the? whiche 
cummen to 30u in clothingis® of sheepis4, 
bot wythynne thei ben rauyshynge wolues; 
16of her fruytis 3e shulen knowe hem. Whe- 
ther men gaderen grapis of thornys, or® 
17 fijgis of breeris ? So euery‘ good tree mak- 
ith good fruytis; sothely an yuel tree 
ismakith yuel fruytis. A good tree may 
nat make yuel fruytis, nether an yuel tree 
inmake® good fruytis. Euery" tree that 
makith nat good fruyt', shal be kitte doun, 
29 and shal be sent in to the fire. Therfore of 
2ther fruytis 3ee shulen knowe hem. Nat 
eche man* that saith to me, Lord, Lord, 
shal entre in to the kyngdam of heuenes ; 
but he that doth the wille of my fadir 
that! is in heuenes, he™ shal entre in to 
22the kyngdam® of heuenes. Many shul say 
to me in that day, Lord, Lord, whether® 
we han nat prophecied in thi name, and 
han cast out deuelis? in thi name, and han 
23don many vertues in thi name? And than 
Y shal knowliche to hem, For I knewe 
3ou neuer; departe! awey fro me, 3e that 
24 worchen wickidnesse. Therfore eche man 
that herith these" my wordis, and doth 
hem, shal be maad liehe to a wijse man, 
that hath bildid’ his hous vpont a stoon. 
25 And rayn came doun, and flodis eainen, 
and wyndis blewen", and rusheden’ in to 
that hous; and it felle nat doun, for it 


°©Om.N. P doth x. 
sec.m. * Om, oursec.m. that led. to perd. x. 
dampnacion, is ouv sec.m. Om. Qxy¥ pr.m. 
ouvsec.m. or be war T sec. m. 
a scheep GNoposur. © ether our sec. m. 
h Eyche our. ifruyteso. * Om, x. 
sec.m. © whar our. P feendes our sec. m. 
sec.m.X. blowen N. ¥ hurliden ur sec. m. 


9 Om. A sec. m. igh. 
* eueri 8. 


p Om.c. 


Q prom. ® departeth 1s. Ycam ¢. 


D 


4 this thing 4. this our sec. m. 
u wey is G sec. m. weie that ledeth to perdicion, ether 
v many ben our sec. m. 
4 fle 3e ur sec. m. fleeth x. 
f eche our sec. m. 
1 whiche our sec. m. 
4 departith Gosxy. 


t Wher s passim egk. 


Zinc. 


MATTHEW. 17 


for alle thingis, what euere thingis 3e 
wolen that men do to 30u, do 3e to hem, 
for this is the lawe and the prophetis. 
Entre 3e bi the streyt 3ate; for the 3ate 13 
that ledith to perdicioun is large, and the 
weie 7s? broode, and there ben many that 
entren bi it. Hou streit is the sate, and 14 
narw3 the weye, that ledith to lijf, and 
ther ben fewe that fynden it. Be 3e wars 
of fals prophetis, that comen to 3o0u in 
clothingis of scheep, but withynneforth 
thei ben as’ wolues of raueyn; of her tc¢ 
fruytis 3e schulen knowe hem. Whether’ 
men gaderei grapis of thornes, or figus 
of breris? So euery good tre makith 17 
good fruytis ; but an yuel tre makith yuel 
fruytis. A good tre may not make yuel is 
fruytis, nethir an yuel tre make good 
fruytis. Euery tre that makith not good 19 
fruyt, schal be kyt doun, and schal be 
cast in to the fier. Therfor of her fruytis 20 
se schulen knowe hem. Not ech*® manai 
that seith to me, Lord, Lord, schal entre 
in to the kyngdom of heuenes; but he 
that doith the wille of my fadir that is 
in heuenes, he schal entre in to the kyng- 
doom of heuenes. Many schulen seie to 22 
me in that dai, Lord, Lord, whethert we 
han not prophesied in thi name, and 
han” caste out feendis in thi name, and 
han doon many vertues in thi name ? 
And’ thanne Y schal knouleche to hem, 23 
That Y knewe 30u neuere; departe” awei 
fro me, je that worchen wickidnesse. 
Therfor ech* man that herith these my 24 
wordis, and doith hem, sehal be maad 
lijk to a wise man, that hath bildid his 
hous on a stoon. And reyn feldeY doun, 25 
and flodis camen, and wyndis blewen, 
and russchiden ‘in to? that hous; and it 
felde not doun, for it was foundun® on 


ys 4 sec. m. our sec.m. * the prophetes ov 
wOm.a@. *Om.N.  Y few ben 
b Om. ov. ¢clothinge no. clothis v. 
& may make ov sec. m. makith @. maken s. 
m Om. 4 sec. m. OUV sec.m. ™ rewme UY 
rthus vn. Sbild x. ton our 


Severis. twherek. twehauer Y Om, 


® foundid plures et of. 


18 MATTHEW. 


26 was foundid on a“ stoon. And euery* man 
that herith these my wordis, and doth hem 
nat, is licheY to a man fool, that hath bildid’ 

27 his hous on* ‘grauel, or soond’. And rayn 
came doun®, and floodis camen, and wyndis 
blewen, and thei hurliden in to that hous; 
and it felle doun, and the fallyng doun 

28 therof was grete. And it ist maad*, when 
Jhesus hadde eendid these wordis, the 

29 cumpanyes wondreden on his techyng; so- 
thely' he was techynge hem, as ‘a man& 
hanynge power, and nat as the" scribis of 
hem, andi Pharisees*. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Forsothe when Jhesus hadde comen 
doun fro the hil, many cumpanyes folew- 
giden' hym. And loo! a leprouse man cum- 
myuge worshipide hym, sayinge™, Lord, 
3if thou wolt, thou maist make me clene. 
3And Jhesus, holdynge forthe the hond, 
touchide hym, sayinge", I wole, be thou 
maad clene. And anoon the lepre of hym 
awas clensid. And Jhesus saith® to hym, 
‘See, say thou to no man; but go, shewe 
thee to prestis, and offre that? 3ifte that4 
Moyses comaundide, in to witnessing to 
shem. Sothely when he hadde entride in 
to Capharnaum, centurio neizide to hym, 
6preyinge hym, and saide', Lord, my child 
lyeth’ in the hous sike on‘ the" palsie, and 
zis yuel tourmentid. And Jhesus saith’ to 
hym, I shal cume, and shal” hele hym. 
sAnd centurio answerynge saith* to hym, 
Lord, I am not worthi, that thou entre 
vndir my roof; but oonly say bi word, and 
gmy child shal be helid. For whi andy I 
am a inan ordeynd vnder power, hauynge 
vndir ine kui3tis; and? I say to this, Go’, 
and he goth; and to an other, Come thou, 
and he cometh; and to my seruaunt, Do 
iothou this thing, and he doth. Sothely 


Wa sadde @ sec.m. * iche our sec. m. eche x. 


Y Jiechi n. lichi tiv. 


VII. 26—VILI. 10. 


a stoon. And euery man that herith 2 
these my wordis, and doith hem not, is 
lijk to” a fool, that hath bildid his hous 
on grauel. And reyn® cam doun, and 27 
floodis camen, and wyndis blewen, and 
thei®¢ hurliden ajen* that hous; and it 
felde doun, and the fallyng doun therof 
was greet. And it was doon, whanne 28 
Jhesus hadde endid these wordis, the 
puple wondride on his techyng; for he2 
tau3te hem, as he that hadde power, and 
not as the scribis ‘of hem®*, and thef Fa- 
riseesé. 


CAP. VIII. 

But whanne Jhesus was come dount 
fro the hil, mych puple suede hym. And2 
loo! a leprouse man cam, and worschip- 
ide hym, and seide, Lord, if thou wolt, 
thou maist" make me clene. And Jhesus3 
helde forth the hoond, and touchide hym, 
and seide, Y wole, be thou maad cleene. 
And anoon the lepre of him was clensidi. 
And Jhesus seide to hym, Se, seie thou 4 
to no man; but go, shewe thee to the 
prestis, and offre the 3ift that Moyses 
comaundide, in witnessyng to hem. And5 
whanne he hadde entrid in to Cafar- 
naum, ‘the centurien* neizede to him, 
and preiede him, and seide, Lord, my 6 
childe lijth in the hous sijk on the pale- 
sie, and is yuel turmentid. And Jhesus7 
seide to him, Y schal come, and schal! 
heele him. And the centurien answeride, 6 
and seide to hym, Lord, Y am not wor- 
thi, that thou entre vndur my roof; but 
oonli seie thou bi word, and my childe 
shal be heelid. For whi Y am a man» 
ordeyned vndur power, and haue kny3tis 
vndir me; and Y seie to this, Go, and 
he goith; and to another, Come, and he 
cometh; and to my seruaunt, Do this, 


2 hild x. 


a ypon a N. apon o. 


ona T. » soond our sec. m. granel x. ¢Om.@. was 4 sec. m. our sec.m. ¢& done uv sec.m. £ for 
our sec.m. &mano. Om. x. bOm. Nn. ifand as ur sce.m.  & the Pharisees our sec.m. 'suden 
OUF sec. m. ™ and seide ouv sec.m. and seide our sec.m. © seide our sec.m. P the our sec.m. 
4 which ur sec. m. T seiynge ouv sec.m. § liggeth ur sec.m. tin our sec.m. "Om.ou.  ¥ seide 
ouv sec.m. W I schal oguw pr.m.y. * seide oursec.m. YQOm.usec.m. 7% QOm.c prom.  ® Go thon 
OUP sce. m. 

>Om.s. ¢reines sgh. ¢¢Om.R. dagen tog pr.m. ¢Om.c. fOm. EIKMPRUXbeeghka. & Fari- 


sees of hem c. 


h mists. i maad clene s. 


k centurio s sup. ras. 


1] schal car. 


VIII. 11-—24. 


Jhesus, heerynge these thingis®, wondride, 
and saide to men snynge hym, Trewly¢ I 
saye to 30u, I fonde nat so grete feith in 
1Yrael. Sothely Y say to 3ou, that manye 
shulen come fro the est ‘and west", and 
shulen rest with Abraham and* Ysaac and 
12 Jacob in the kyngdam of heuenes ; forsothe 
the sonys of the rewme shulen be cast out 
in to vttremest® derknessis ; there shal he 
weepynge, and beetynge togidre of teeth. 
13And Jhesus saide§ to centurio, Go, and as 
thou hast bileeued, be it don to thee. And 
isthe child was helid fro that houre. And 
when Jhesus hadde comen in to the hous 
of Symond! Petre, he say his wyues mo- 
_ der liggynge', and shakun* with feueris!. 
15 And he touchide hir hond, and™ the feuer 
lefte hir; and she roose, and sernyde hem". 
16Sothely whan the enenyng® was maad, thei 
brou3;te to hym many? hauynge deuelys4, 
and he castide" out spiritis’ by word, and 
i7helide allet hauynge yuel’; that it shulde 
be fulfillid’, ‘that thing* that was said by 
Ysaie, the prophete, sayinge, He toke oure 
infirmytees, aud bere oureY sykenessis 7%. 
isSothely Jhesus seeynge many cumpanyes 
about hym, bad* zs disciplis go” over the 
ig water. And oo° scribe, or4 a® man of lawe’, 
‘commynge to’, saide to hym, Maistre, I 
shal sue thee, whidir ever thou shalt go. 
20 And Jhesus said to hym, Foxis han ‘dichis, 
or borowis", and briddis of the eir han 
nestis, but mannes sone hath nat wher 
2the reste! his heued*. Sotheli an other of 
his! disciplis saide to hym, Lord, suffre me 
22g0™ first, and birye my fadir. Forsothe 
Jhesus saide to hym, Sue thou ine, and 
23 late dede men birye her dead men. And 
‘Jhesu steyinge vp" in to a litel ship, his 
2: disciplis sueden hym. And loo! a grete 
steryng was° maad in the see, so that the 


d Om. o. 
ilyende x. 
™m and anoen xX pr.m. 


b wordis 9.  ¢ Sothely o. 
Sseivngeo. 4 Om. our sec. m. 
feueres our sec. m. 


e Om. ov. 
k schaking nu. shake s. shakende x. 
o him v pr.m. to hem y. 


MATTHEW. 19 


and he doith it. And Jhesus herde to 
these thingis, and wondride, and seide 
to men ‘that sueden™ him, Treuli Y seie 
to 30u, Y foond not so greet feith in Is- 
rael. And Y seie to 30n, that many 
schulen come fro the eest and” the? 
west, and schulen reste with Abraham 
and? Ysaac and Jacob in the kyugdom 
of heuenes ; but the sones of the’ rewme 12 
schulen be cast out in to vtmer" derk- 
nessis ; there schal be wepyng, and grynt- 
ing of teeth. And Jhesus seide to the* 1s 
centurioun, Go, and as thou hast  bi- 
leuyd, be it doon to thee. And the child 
was heelid fro that hour. And whannel4 
Jhesus was comun in to the hous of Sy- 
mount Petre, he say his wyues modir 
liggynge, and shakun! with feueris". And 5 
he touchide hir hoond, and the feuer 
lefte hir; and she roos, and seruede hem. 
And whanne it was euen, thei brou3ten 16 
to hyin manye that hadden deuelis, and 
he castide out spiritis bi word, and heel- 
ide alle that weren yuel at ese; that17 
it were fulfillid, that was seid by Ysaie, 
the profete, seiynge, He took oure in- 
firmytees, and bar oure siknessis. And 18 
Jhesus say myche puple aboute him, and 
bade hise disciplis go ouer the watir. 
And a scribe neijede, and seide to lym, 19 
Maistir, Y shal sue thee, whidir euer 
thou schaltY go. And Jhesus scide to20 
hym, Foxis han dennes, and briddis of 
heuene’ han nestis, but mannus sone 
hath not where* ‘he schalY reste his heed. 
Anothir of his disciplis seide to him,2} 
Lord, suffre me to go first, and birie 
my fader. But Jhesus seide to hym, Sue 22 
thou me, and? lete deed? men birie her 
deede men. And whanne he was goon 23 
vp in to a litil schip, his disciplis sueden 


f ytmere aviv. vtturmere GNopQsuUY. vtmer Xx. 
1 feuere o. the 


© euentide ur sec.m. —_P many 


menu. ‘ feendes our sec.m. * caste psx. kestQ. 8 vuclene spiritis Gsec.m. tall men ou. © siknesse o. 
*Om.x. W filled ov. * Om. ovr sec.m. Y Om. GNpswxy. 2 sikenesse vy sec.m.Y.  ® commaunded 
ouvV sec.m. © to go our sec. m. Caursec.m. ether ovy sec.m. ©€Om.os.  f Gloss om. in x. 
& neizynge ovr sec.m. 4 horrowes, or dennes o. dennes v. diches x. schal reste our sec.m. & hede 
nos. hed x. | theeso. ™to go ov. 1 and whan he stei3 ovr sec.m. © is 0. 

™suynge E. "tos. °frother. POm.xsegh. 4this1. 7 vttermere Knghk. outmeree. § Om. 1. 
ttakins. "the fenersk. VYOm.s. “the eirs. *wherinnes. Ytos. 7Omaq. 4thedede e1pk pr.m. 


DQ 


20 MATTHEW. 


litil ship was hilid with wawis; but? he 
zsslepte. And ‘his disciplisd camen ni3 to 
hym, and raysiden hym, sayinge, Lord, 
26 saue vs; we perishen. And Jhesus seith' to 
hem, What ben 3ee® of litil feith agast'? 
Thanne he rysynge” comaundide to the 
wyndis and the’ see, and a grete pesible- 
27 nesse is* maad. Forsothe men wondreden, 
sayinge, What manere man is he’ this, 
for the wyndis and the? see obeishen® to 
2shym? And whan Jhesus® hadde comen 
ouer the water in to the cuntre ‘of men 
of Genazereth*, twey® men hauynge de- 
uelisf runnen to hym, goynge out fro’ biri- 
elis, ful® feerse, ‘or wickid', so that no man 
29 mi3te passe by! that wey. And ‘loo! thei™ 
crieden, sayinge, What to vs and® to thee®, 
Jhesn, the sone of? God? hast thou comen 
hidir before the tyme for? to tourmente vs ? 
30 Sothely a ‘floc, o7* drove, of many hoggiss 
silesewynge was nat fer from hem. But the 
deuelist preyeden him, seyinge, 3if thou 
eastist out vs hennes", sende vs in to the 
szdroue of hoggis. And he saith’ to hem, 
Go 3ee. And thei goynge out wente in to 
‘the hoggis”; and loo! in a greet bire al 
the droue wente heedlynge* in to the see, 
ssand thei benY dead in watris. Forsothe 
the hirdes fledden awey, and? cummynge 
in to the citee, tolden alle these* thingis, 
34 aud of hem that hadden the? fendis®. And 
loo! al the citee wente! a3einis® Jhesu, ‘met- 
ynge hyinf; and hym seen, thei preiden 
hym, that he shulde passe fro" her coostis. 


CAP. IX. 
1 And Jhesus, ‘goyng vp! in to a boot, 
passide ouer the water, and came in to his 


P forsothe our sec. m. 4 thei our sec. m. 


S seyde GMNOPQSUFWXAY. 


VIII. 25 —IX. 1. 


hym. And loo! a greet stiring was 24 
maad in the see, so that the schip* was 
hilid with wawes; but he slepte. And 2s 
hise disciplis camen to hym, and reysiden 
hym, and seiden, Lord, saue vs; we pe- 
rischen. And Jhesus seide to hem, What es 
ben 3e of litil feith agaste? Thanne he 
roos, and comaundide to the wyndis and 
the» see, and a greet pesibilnesse was 
maad. And men wondriden, and seiden, 27 
What maner man is he* this, for the 
wyndis and the see obeischen® to him ? 
And whanne Jhesus was comun ouer the 28 
watir in to the cuntre of men of Gerasa, 
twey men metten hym, that’? hadden 
deuelis, and camen out of graues, ful 
woode, so that noo man my3te go bi that® 
weie. And lo! thei crieden, and seiden, 29 
What to vs and to thee, Jhesu, the sone 
of God? ‘art thou®® comun hidir bifore 
the tyme tof turmente ys? And not fer30 
fro hem was a flocke of many swyne 
lesewynge. And the deuelis preyeden31 
hym, and seiden, If thou castist out vs 
fro hennes, sende vs® in to the droue of 
swyne. And he seide to hem, Go 3e.32 
And thei 3eden out, and wenten in to 
the swyne; and loo! in a greet bire al 
the droue wente heedlyng in to the see, 
and thei weren deed in the watris. And 33 
the hirdis fledden awey, and camen in 
to the citee, and telden alle these thingis, 
and of hem that hadden the" feendis. 
And lo! al the citee wente out a3ens34 
Jhesu; and whanne thei hadden seyn 
hym, thei preieden, that he wolde passe 
fro her coostis. 


_CAP. IX. 
And Jhesus wente vp in to a boot,1 
and passide ouer! the watir, and cam in 


S3eemenc. + aferde our 


sec.m,  Urisynge up vu. V to the our sec. m,. W was OUV sec. m. y Om. osur sec. m. 2 Om. 
A SC. M. MNPSVW sec. m. x. a obeien our sec. m. obezen Xx. b he our sec. im. ¢Om.w. 4 Ge- 
rasa UV sec.m. © two GMPsuXY. and two Q. f feendes ovr sec.m. of ov. 4 thei ful our sec. m. 
i ether ful cruel o. or wicke s. ether crucl uv sec. m. Om. x. 10m. vu. ™ Om. o. thei uv. ® and what 
G prom °Om.eprm POm.o. 49 Om. our sec.m. x. * Om. ovyx. 8 swijn hoggis p. * feendes 
ouysec.m. from hennes our sec.m. seide our sec.m. *swyin Gpxy. *hedlynges N.Y wer 
ouv sec.m. and thei ovy scc.m. @Om. our sec.w. » Om.y prom. ¢ deuelis N. 4 went oute our 
seeom, €azen x. f Om. our sec.m. & Om. ov. 4 out of nN. i stizynge our sec. m. 

a litul schip rk sec.m. to the nck sec.m. © Om.c. ¢¢ obeieng, hea. 44 which Kk. ¢ the q. 


ec artow s. tfortoc. &vsouts. »b Om. xk. 


iOm. s. 


IX. 2—I5. 


2citee. And loo! thei offreden to hym a 
man syke in palsie, liggynge* in a bed. 
Forsothe Jhesus, seeynge the feith of hem, 
saide to the man sike in palsie, Sone, haue 
thou! trust; thi synnes ben forzeuen™ to 

3thee. And lo! sum of the scribis said 

4 with ynne hem self, This blasfemeth. And 
when Jhesus hadde seen her thou3tis, he 
said, Wherto thenken 3e yuel thingis in 

530ur hertis? What is" li3ter to saye, Thi 
synnes ben for3euen to thee, other® to saye, 

6Ryse thou, and walke? Forsothe that 3e 
wite, that? mannes sone hath power to 
for3eue synnes in erthé, thanne he saide to 
thilke? man? in’ palsie, ‘Ryse vp‘; take thi 

7 bed, and goin to thin house. And he roose, 

sand wente in to his house. Sothely the 
companyes seeynge dredden, and glorifi- 
eden God, that 3aue siche power to men. 

9And when Jhesus passide thennis", he sei3 
a man sittynge in a tolbothe, Matheu by 
name. And he saide to hym, Sue thou me. 

10 And he, rysynge, folowide’ hym. And it 
is” don, hym sittynge at the mete in the 
house, loo! many puplicanys and synneful 
men cummynge saten at the mete with 

uJhesu and his disciplis. And Pharisees 
seeynge saiden to his disciplis, Whi etith 
3oure maister with puplicanys and synful 

izmen? And Jhesus herynge saide, A leche 
is nat nede* to men that faren wel, but to 
13men hauynge yuel. Sothely 3ee goynge 
lerneY what it is, Y wole mercye, and nat 
sacrifice ; forsothe Y came, nat to clepe 
14ri3tful? men, bot synful men. Thanne the 
disciplis of Joon ‘camen nize to hym, say- 
inge, Whi we and Pharisees” fasten ofte, 
1s but thi disciplis fasten nat? And Jhesus 
saide to hem, Whether* the sonys of the@ 
spouse, ‘or husbonde*®, mow ‘weilen, orf 
mourne, how longe the spouse is with 
hem? Sothely days shulen come, when 
the spouse shal be taken awey fro hem, 


k liende sx. | Om. ovr see.m. 
N passim, wv. ether ov sec.m. _ P for ou sec. m. 
sec.m.xy. S&seke ino, t Ryse thou our sec. m. 
x nedefull ov. y lerneth capy. lereth x. 
Pharisees ou, © Wher o. 4 Om. nN. 


k is it plures ef a8. 10m.c. ™ sueede c. 


sees ia. § lerneth Ete. 


™ for3if 0. forzoue x. 
q the acnopsuy. the ilke sr. 

v fro thens ou. 
% just ouV sec. m. riztwis XY. 
€ Om. our sec.m. x. 


n Om. c. 
t men fo penaunce EP sec. m, sh sec. m. 


MATTHEW. 21 


to his citee. And lo! thei brou3ten toz 
hym a man sike in palesie, liggynge in 
a bed. And Jhesus saw the feith of hem, 
and seide to the man sike in palesye,’ 
Sone, hane thou trist; thi synnes ben 
forjouun to thee. And lo! summe of3 
the scribis seiden withynne hem silf, 
This blasfemeth. And whanne Jhesus4 
hadde seyn her thou3tis, he seide, Wher- 
to thenken 3e yuele thingis in 3oure 
hertis? What is* liztere to seye, This 
synnes ben for3ouun to thee, ethir ‘to seie!, 
Rise thou, and walke? But that 3e wites 
that mannus sone hath power to for3yue 
synnes in erthe, thanne he seide to the 
sijk man in palesie, Rise vp; take thi 
bed, and go in to thin hous. And he7 
roos, and wente in to his hous. <Ands 
the puple seynge dredde, and glorifiede 
God, that 3af suche power to men. Ands 
whanne Jhesus passide fro thennus, he 
say a man, Matheu bi name, sittynge in 
a tolbothe. And he seide to hym, Sue 
thou me. And he roos, and folewide™ 10 
hym. And it was don, the" while he 
sat ‘at the® mete in the hous, lo! many 
pupplicans and synful men camen, and 
saten ‘at the? mete with Jhesu and‘ hise 
disciplis. And Farisees* sien, and seiden 1 
to hise disciplis, Whi etith 30ure maister 
with pupplicans and synful men? And 12 
Jhesus herde, and seide, A leche is not 
nedeful to men that faren wel, but to 
men that ben yuel at ese. But go 3e,13 
and lerne® what it is, Y wole merci, and 
not sacrifice; for I cam, not to clepe 
ri3tful men, but synful men*. Thanne 14 
the disciplis of Joon camen to hym, and 
seiden, Whi we" and Farisees’ fasten” 
ofte, but thi disciplis fasten not? Andis 
Jhesus seide to hem, Whether the sones 
of the spouse moun morne, as long as 
the spouse is with hem? But daies 


Nis it AGMNOPQSUVIWXY. © or MSX. either 
¥ sik mau AGNPQSUF 
W was UV sec. 7m. 
b the 


¥v sued our sec. m. 
a neigeden our sec. m. 
f Om. our sec.m. X. 


qand with s. ° the Fari- 
vthe Farisees1. ¥ Om.1. 


%attes. P atte s. 
u fasten we 1. 


22 MATTHEW. 


isand thanne thei shulen faste. Sothely no 
iman sendith ynne a medlynge of rudee®, 
or” newe, clothe in to an‘ olde clothe; so- 
thely* he! takith awey the plente of it fro 
the clothe, and a™ wors kittyng is maad. 
17 Nether men senden™ newe wijne in to olde 
‘botelis, o7 wijn vesselis®, ellis the wijn ves- 
sels ben broken, and the wijn is shed out, 
and the wijn vessellis perishen. But men 
senden newe wijn in to newe wijn vessellis, 
isand bothe ben kept. Jhesu spekynge 
these thingis to hem, loo! oo? prince ‘came 
to’, and worshipid lym, sayinge", Lord, my 
dou3tir is now dead; but cume thou, and 
put thin hond vpon® hire, and she shal 
iglyue. And Jhesus rysynge suede hym, and 
2vhis disciplis. And loo! a womman. that 
suffride the flix, ‘or rennynge', of blood 
twelue 3eer, ‘cam to" byhynde, and touch- 
21ide the hemme of his clothe. Sothely she 
saide with ynne hir’ self, 3if I touche’ 
oonly the clothis* of hym, I shal be saaf. 
22And Jhesus turnyde, and seeynge hir, 
saide, Dou3ter, haue thou’ trust; thi faith 
hath made thee saaf. And the womman 
23 was maad saaf fro that houre. And when 
Jhesus came in to the hous of the prince, 
and? see} mynstrelis, and the companye® 
24 makynge noyse, he saide, Go 3e” awey, for 
the wenche® is nat dead, but slepith’, And 
25thei scornyden hym. And when the cum- 
panye was cast® out, he entride in’, and 
held hir honde; and? the wenche® roose 
2svp. And this fame wente out in to al the! 
27londe. And Jhesu passynge thennes*, twey! 
blynde men sueden hym"™, eryinge, and® 
sayinge, Thou sone of Dauith, hane mercy 
esof? ys. Sothely when ‘thei came home?, 
_the blynde men camen ni3? to hym; and 
Jhesus saith’ to hem, What wole 3e, that I 
do to 30? And thei seiden’, Lord, that 
oure ee3en ben opnyd. And Jhesus saide, 


& rude euNpstuwxy. Om. or sec.m. reude ¥ pr.m. 


IX. 16—28. 


schulen come, whanne the spouse schal 
be takun a wei fro hem, and thanne thei 
schulen faste. And no man putteth alé 
clout of buystous clothe in to an elde 
clothing; for it doith awey the fulnesse 
of the cloth, and a wers breking is maad. 
Nethir men putten newe wyne in to elde17 
botelis, ellis the botels* ben to-broke, 
and distried, and the wyn sched out. 
But men putten newe wyne in to newe 
botels, and bothe ben kept”. Whiles that 18 
Jhesns spak thes thingis to hem, lo! a 
prince cam, and worschipide hym, and 
seide, Lord, my dou3ter is now deed; 
but come thou, and putte thin hond on 
hir, and she schal lyue. And Jhesus 19 
roos, and ‘hise disciplis, and sueden hym)Y. 
And lo! a womman, that hadde the720 
blodi flux twelue 3ere, neizjede bihynde, 
and touchide the hem of his cloth. Foret 
sche seide with ynne hir self, 3if Y touche 
oonli the cloth of hym, Y schal be saaf. 
And Jhesus turnede, and say hir, and 22 
seide, Dou;tir, haue thou trist ; thi feith 
hath maad thee saaf. And the womman 
was hool fro that our. And whanne23 
Jhesus cam in to the hous of the prince, 
and say mynstrallis, and the* puple mak- 
ynge noise, he seide, Go 3e a wei, for the 24 
damysel is not deed, but slepith. And 
thei scornyden hym. And whanne the 25 
fole was put out, he wente in, and helde 
hir hond; and the damysel roos’, And 26 
this fame wente out in to al that loond. 
And whanne Jhesus passide fro thennus, 27 
twei® blynde men criynge sueden hym, 
and seiden, Thou sone of Dauid, haue 
merei on vs. And whanne he cam in 28 
to the hous, the blynde men camen to 
hym; and Jhesus-seide to hem, What 
wolen 3e, that I do to 30n? And thei 
seiden, Lord, that oure i3en be opened. 


h Om. ov see.m. iQOm.o. * For our sec.m. 


Vit GxY. 7m the vu. " putten usec.m. © wijn vesselis ovr sec. m. botelis x. P a GOUY Sec. m. XY. 
9 neized our sec.m. and seide our see.m. 8 on our scc.m.x. tOm. oursec.m.x, 4 neized ovr 
see.m. Vin hir vy. Wschal touche couxy. *clooth our sec.m. Y Om. oursec.m. Zheo., 4 com- 
panyeso. > Om. G pr.m.ypr.m. © damysell our sec.m. 4 sche sleepeth o. © put usec.m. f Om. 
our sec.m. 8& and seide, Maiden, rise, and @ sec.m.marg. » damysel our sec.m. ithat vn. * fro thens 
our sec.m. two pesuxy. ™Om.cprm. Om, usee.m. on AMNosUW.  P thei camen into 
the hous Gex. he had comme in to the house our sec.m. Om, our sec.m. * seideo. § Om, ca. 


x oold hotels 1. ¥ kept saafs. 
hise disciplis, and suede hyme. % a sbghi. 


yy sueden him his disciples K. hise disciplis sueden hym a pr. m.c. 
aOm,c. 


b roos vp Ksegh. © two 1Q. 
P gs 


IX. 29——X. 3. 


Bileene 3e, that I may do this thing ‘to 
3on'? And" thei sayn’, ‘Sothely, o7 3ea, 
209Lord. Than he touchide her eejen, say- 
30inge, Vp 30ur feith be it don to 30n. And 
the eejen of ‘bothe ben* opnyde. And 
Jhesus thretynyde to*hem, sayinge,See jee, 
sithat no man wite. But thei goynge out, 
defameden hym thorw3? al that> lond. 
32Sothely thei® gon out, loo! thei offriden* to 
hym a ‘man doumb’, hauynge a deuel-. 
33 And whan the deuel was cast out, the 
doumbe man spae. And the cumpanyes 
wondreden, sayinge, It aperede neuere so 
34in Yrael. But the Pharisees saiden, In the 
prince of deueliss he castith out deuelisé. 
35 And Jhesus compaside aboute” alle citees 
and castels, techynge in synagogis! of hem, 
and prechynge the gospel of kyngdam*, 
and helynge al ‘languyshynge, o7 ache’, 
4¢6and al siknesse. orsothe Jhesus, siynge 
cumpanyes, hadde™ rewthe of* hem; for 
thei weren traueilid, and liggynge as sheep 
37nat hauynge a slieperde. Thanne he saide 
to his disciplis, Sothely° ‘there is? moche 
ssrype corne’, but fewe werkmen. Therfore 
preye 3e" the lord of the rijpe corn, that 
he sende workmen into® his‘ rijp corn. 


CAPSX: 

1 And the" twelue disciplis clepid’ to gidre, 
he 3aue to hem power of vnelene spiritis, 
that thei shulde casten hem out, and that 
thei shulden heele al ache, and al siknesse. 

2These¥ ben the names of twelue* apo- 
stelis’; the first, Symoun, that? is* clepid 

3 Petre, and Andrew, his brother; ‘Philip, 
and Bartilmew”; Jamys of Zebedee, and 
Joon, his brother®; Thomas, and Matheu 
puplican; and‘ Jaines Alphei®, and Thadee‘; 


tOm.o. Om. sGMNOPQUY sec. mM. WXY. 
x hem weren our sec.m. _Y threetide rx. 
d brouzten u sec.m. © doumbe man @p. 
i the synagoges our sec. m. 
hadde xr. D on GMPQSUVIWXY. 
rOm.o. ‘8%yntog. tthe p. 
twelue g. YOm.o. 2 whiche ov. 
brother ; Philip and Bartilmeus ov. 


& was G. 
4 Om. o. 


4 seiden cKR pr.m. af. 
aboute qa. & Om.cka.  castels and cytees e. 
k prom. ® named Ksghif. seid cermpaqruxbeeka. 


Vv seiden gx. seyn to hym vu sec. m. 
z Om. ou. 
f feende our sec. m. 
k the kyngdam ovr sec. m. x. 
© Forsothe ovy sec. m. 
u Om. AGMNOSUVWXY. 
» Bartholomeu a. 
e of Alphei ov. 


e defameden ap pr. m. qnrsea8. famyden 1p sec.m. k. 
k Om. eKrbeeg pr. nm. lif, 


MATTHEW. 2% 


And Jhesus seide, Bileuen je, that Y mai 
do this thing to 301? Thei scien® to 
him, 3he, Lord. Thanne he touchide 2» 
her izen, and seide, Aftir 3oure feith be 
it doon to 30u. And the izen of hem 30 
were opened. And Jhesus ~thretenede 
hem, and seide, Se 3e, that no man wite. 
But thei 3eden out, and diffameden® hyms1 
thorou al that lond. And whanne theise 
weren gon out, loo! thei brou3ten to 
hym a doumbe man, hauynge a deuel. 
And whanne the deuel was cast out, thes: 
doumb man spak. And the puple wou- 
dride’, and seide, It hath not be say 
thus in Israel. But the Farisees seiden, 34 
In the prince of deuelis he castith out 
deuelis... And Jhesus wente ‘aboute alle 3s 
the" ‘citees and castels', techinge in the 
synagogis of hem, and prechynge the 
gospel of the kyngdom, and _ helynge 
euery langour and enery sijknesse. And 36 
he si3 the puple, and hadde reuthe on 
hem; for thei weren trauelid, and lig- 
gynge as scheep not hauynge a scheep- 
herde. Thanne he seide to hise disci-37 
plis, Sotheli there ts myche ripe corn, 
but fewe werk men. Therfor preye 3e 38 
the lord of the ripe corn, that he sende 
werke men in to his ripe corn. 


CAP Xx: 


And whanne his twelue disciplis weren | 
clepid togidere, he 3af to hem powere of 
vnclene spiritis, to caste hem out of men, 
and to! heele eueri langour, and sijknesse. 
And these ben the names of the twelue2 
apostlis; the firste, Symount™, that is 
clepid® Petre, and Andrew, his brothir; 
James of Zebede, and Joon, his brothir ; 
Filip, and Bartholomeu; Thomas, and; 
Matheu, pupplican; and James Alfey, 


w 3he our sec. m. 
abi our sec.m. the v. © hem or sce. nm. 

& feendes our sec.m. 4 Om. ouyv sec.m. 
lache ovr sec. m. languishing x. ™ and 

P Om. ur sec.m. 4 corne is UY sec. im. 
Vv gaderid np. Forsothe thees ov. * the 
‘ce Jamys of Zebedee and Joon his 


f Thadde, that is, Judas U. 


fwondres. & al 
tOm.c. ™ is Symound 


Q4 MATTHEW. 


4Symount Canane, and Judas Scarioth, thes 
swhiche betraiede Crist". Jhesus sente! 
these twelue, comaundynge to hem, and 
sayinge, Goth* 3e nat into the wey of hei- 
then men, and ‘entre 3e! nat in to the™ 
6citees of Samarietanys ; but rather goth” to 
the sheep of the hous of Yrael, that perish- 
ziden. Sothely 3ee goynge preche®, sayinge, 
for the kyngdam of heuenes shal nei3e; 
ehele 3e seke men, vpreyse’ 3ee dead men, 
clense 3e meselis, ‘cast 3e" out deuelis®; 
o frely 3e han taken, frely 3ene 3e. Nyl 3e 
welden gold, nether syluer, ne' money in 
1o30ure girdlis, not" a scripe in the weye, 
nether two’ cootis, nether shoon, nether 
3seerd”; for a workinan is worthi* his mete. 
11In to whateuer citee, or? castel, 3e shulen 
entre, axeth* who therinne is worthi, and 
there ‘dwelle 3c", tile that’ 3e gon out. 
12Forsothe 3e entrynge in to an* house, 
‘grete 3e', ‘or salute 3ee%, it, sayinge, Pees 
isto this hous. And" sothely 3if ‘that ilki 
hous be worthi, 3oure pees shal cume on it; 
forsothe 3if that house be nat worthy, 3oure 
14pees shall turne a3ein to 30u. And who 
euere shall nat resceyue jou, nether® heer 
3oure wordis, 3ee goynge forth! fro that 
hous, or™ cifee, smytith" awey the dust 
isfro® 3oure feet. Trewly I say to 30u, it shall 
be more suffreable to the lond of men of 
Sodom aud Gomor? in the day of inge- 
isment, than to that4 citee. Loo! I sende 
3ou as sheep in to" the mydils of wolues ; 
therforet be 3e ‘war, or wijse before", as 
17Serpentis, and symple as dowues’. For- 
sothe’ be 3e war of inen, for thei shuln 
taken 30u in counseilis, and thei shuln bete 
18 30u in there synagogis ; and to ‘presidentis, 
or meyris*, and to kyngis 3e shulen be 
led for me, in to witnessynge to hem, and 
19 hethenY men. But whenne thei shulen take, 


hhim ov. i seended o. 
AMNOPQSUYW. © precheth x. 
ouWw. t nether ov. 
2 ether ov. 
€ the ou. 
G prem. 
oof ¥. 

t Om. x. 


& Om.ovu. 
U nether ov. 


f preeteth esxy. 
i that 6 pr.m. pexy. thilk ous. 
P of Gomor ov, 
« prudent ether wise ou. 


Cin c. p heuene a prom. nes. Tnes. 


froc. * Om. Kf. 


k Go Gopesurwx. 
P reyse A4GMNOSUPWXY. 
Vv twel NovW. 

4 axe AMNVW, axe 3e OU. asketh Q. 

& or salem 3e AMNPY. or salu 3e QI. or salulith Gsy. Om. oux. 
k ne x. 
q that ilke se see.m. anv. thilk osu. 
v cnlueres ov. 
presidentis, and meyris G. iustices ou. presidentis x. 


s til that c. 


X. 4—19. 


and Tadee; Symount Chananee, and Ju-4 
das Scarioth, that bitrayede Crist. Jhesus 5 
sente these twelue, and comaundide hem, 
and seide, Go 3e not ‘in to® the weie of 
hethene men, aid entre 3e not in to the 
citees of Samaritans; but rather go 3e6 
to the scheep of the hous of Israel, that 
han perischid. And go 3e, and preche7 
3e, and seie, that the kyngdam of he- 
uenesP shal neizje; heele 3e sike men,s 
reise 3e deede men, clense 3e mesels, 
caste 3e out deuelis; freeli 3e han takun, 
freli 3yue 3e. Nyle 3e welde gold, ne-9 
ther? siluer, ne money in joure girdlis, 
not a scrippe in the weie, nether twei1o0 
cootis, nethir shoon, nether" a 3erde; for 
a werkman is worthi his mete. In tou 
what euere citee or castel 3e schulen en- 
tre, axe 3e who therynne is worthi, and 
there dwelle 3e, til’ 3e go out. Andie 
whanne 3e goon in to an hous, ‘grete 
je’ it, and seyn, Pees to this hous. Andis 
if thilk" hous be worthi, 3oure pees schal 
come on it; but if that hous be not 
worthi, 3oure pees schal turne ajen to 
3ou. And who euere resseyuetl: not 30u, 14 
nethir’ herith 3oure wordis, go 3e fro 
that hous or citee, and sprenge of the 
dust of 3oure feet. Treuly Y seie tots 
jou, it shal be more suffrable to the 
loond of men of Sodom and of Gommor 
in the dai of ingement, than to thilke 
citee. Lo! Y sende 30u as scheep inie 
the myddil of wolues; therfor be 3e sli3 
as serpentis, and symple as dowues. But 17 
be 3e war of men, for thei schulen take 
jou in counseilis, and thei schulen bete 
jou in her synagogis; and to meyris, ois 
presidentis, and to kyngis, 3e schulen 
be lad for me, in witnessyng to hem, and 
to the* hethen men. But whanne thei 19 


lentreth xy pr.m. ™ Om.4Q. 

4 leprose men ov. F castith exy. 
W a jerde ov. * worth vy pr. m. 
b dwellith xy. © to GXY. 


1 go 3e 

8 feendes 

Y mede o. 

ad Om. Goux. 

b Om. 

m ether ov. ™ smyte AMNOUFW. 

tr Om. aGNopesurwxy. § myddes s. 

w Sothely 0. * meyres, or presidentes aMNFW. 
y to hethen om. to the hethen vu. 


1 onte ov. 


tereetith c. "this kK. Yne1. W forth 


RX. 20~=-3 2. 


‘or bitraie”, 30u, ny! 3e thenke, how or* 
what thing® 3ee speeken®, forsothe? it shal 
be 3ouen to 30u in that hour, what 3e shuln 
20speke; for it ben nat 3e that speken, but 
the spirit of 3oure fadir, that spekith in 
2130u. Sothely® the’ brother shal take the 
brother in to deth, and the fadir the sone, 
and the® sonys shulen ryse a3eins’ fadir 
and modir, and shulen tourmente hem bii 
zzdeth. And 3e shulen be in* hate! to alle 
men, for my name; forsothe he that shall 
‘dwelle stille™ in to" the eende, this® shal be 
23saaf. Sothely whenne thei shulen pur- 
sue 30u in this citee, ‘flee 3eP ‘in to? an 
other. Trewly I saye to 30u, 3e shulen nat 
- eende the citees of Yrael, til™ that’ mannes 
24sone cume. The disciple is nat aboue thet 
maistre, ne" the seruaunt aboue’ his lord ; 
25it is ynow to the disciple, ‘that he’ be as 
his maistre, and to* the seruaunt as his 
lord. 3if thei han’ clepid the ‘husbonde 
man’, ‘or the fadir of meynee*, Belzebub, 
hou myche more his housholde meynee ? 
26 Therfore drede 3e nat hem; for no thing is 
couerid, ‘or hid», that shal nat be shewid ; 
and no thing is preuy, that® shal nat be 
ajwist. That? thing that Y say to 30u in 
dercnessis, saye 3ee in the® li;t; and preche 
3e vpon’ housis?, that® thing that 3ee heere 
agin erel. And nyl 3e dreede hein that sleen 
the body ; trewly thei mowen nat slea the 
soule; bot rather dreede 3e hym, that may 
29 lese soule* and body in to helle. Whether! 
twey™ sparwis ben not sold fer an hal- 
peny? and oon of hem shal nat falle" on° 
sothe? erthe withouten 3oure fadir. For- 
sothe alle the heeris of j3oure heued’ be 
sinoumbrid. Therfore nyle 3e drede; 3e ben 
32 better than many sparwis. Therfore euery' 
man that shal knowleche me before men, 
and® I shal knowleche hym byfore my 


zOm. oeux. ®ether ov. > Om. ou. 


¢ schulen speke Nou. 


MATTHEW. 2s 


take 3o0u, nyle 3e thenke*, hou or what 
thing 3e schulen speke, for it shal be 
3ouun ‘to 30u in that our, what 3e schulen 
speke; for it ben not 3e that speken, 20 
but the spirit of 3o0ure fadir, that spekith 
in 3ou. ‘And the brother? shal take*21 
the brother in to deeth, and the fader 
the sone, and sones® schulen rise ajens 
fadir and modir, and schulen® turmente 
hem bi deeth. And 3e schulen be in hate 22 
to alle men for my name; but he that 
shall dwelle stille’ in to the ende, shal 
be saaf®. And whanne thei pursuen23 
jou inf this citee, fle 3e in to anothir. 
Treuli Y seie to 30u, 3e schulen not ende 
the citees of Israel, tofor® that® mannus 
sone come. The disciple is not aboue24 
the maistir, ne the seruaunt aboue hys 
lord ; it is ynow3 to the disciple, that he 2s 
be as his maistir, and to the seruaunt 
as his lord. If thei han clepid the hose- 
bonde man Belsabub, hou myche more 
his houshold meyne? Therfor drede 3e 26 
not hem; for no thing is hid, that schal 
not be shewid; and no thing is priuey, 
that schal not be wist. That thing that 27 
Y seie to 30u in derknessis, seie 3e in 
the! li3t; and preche 3e on housis, that 
thing that 3e heeren in the® ere. And 2s 
nyle 3e drede hem that sleen the bodi; 
for thei moun not sle the soule; but 
rather drede je hym, that mai lese bothe 
soule and bodi in to helle. Whether!29 
twei™ sparewis ben not seeld for an 
halpeny? and oon of hem shal not falle 
on the erthe with outen j3o0ure fadir. 
‘And alle the heeris" of 3oure heed ben 30 
noumbrid. Therfor nyle 3e drede; 3e 
ben betere than many sparewis. Therfor 31 
euery man that schal knouleche me bi- 
fore men, Y shal knouleche hym bifor 


d for ov. © Forsothe ov. fa ov. 


& Om. G pr.m. opuwx. © in to ther Qsec.m.sup.ras. itoo. Kintoupr.m. } hatered ov. ™contynue 


ou. 4 vynto we. til in to ouwxy. 


© Om. 4 sec.m. mour. he this wpr.m. Om.w sec. im. 


P fleeth xy. 


Atile. ttog. 8Om.ov. thisn. “netherou. Yisabone ov. Wtoc. *Om.ou. Y haf o. 
z fader of meynee x. *Om.oux. » ether hid ov. Om.x. © whiche ovr sec.m. 4 This our sec. m. 
e Om. nour sec.m. {on our sec.m.X. &roones p. 4 this ovr sec.m. ithe eere our scc.m.  bothe 
soule our sec.m. 1% Wher ov. ™twocmpuxy. ®fayleo. °apono. P Om. ourscc.m. 4 beed pu 
et v passim, w. hed ex. *eche Nouv sec.m.x. § Om. xX. 

x bithenke a pr.m. YOm.rpr.m. 2 The broth. forsothe 1. # bitake nshi. i the sonesc. © thei 
‘-schul1. 40m.s. ¢maad saafspr.m. fintoKs. &biforex. » Om. hi. tOm.c. * Om. 1i, 


1 Wher s passim, e. 1 the soule r. 


m two 1qh ef i passim. 


u Alle the heeris forsothe 1. 
E 


26 MATTHEW. 


33fadir that is in heuenes. Sothely' he that 
shal denye me bifore men, and I'shall denize 
hym before my fadir whiche" is in he- 
ssuenes. Nyl 3ee deme, thaty I cam’ to 
sende pees in to erthe*; I cam not to sende 
35 pees ‘in to erthe’, but swerd. Sothely? Y 
cam to departe a man ajeins his fadir, and 
the dou3ter ajeinys hire modir, and the 
sonys wyf a3eins the* ‘wyues, or? hus- 
36 bondis, modir; and the enmyes of a° man 
37ben* his homly meynee. He that loueth 
fadir or® modir more than me, is nat ‘wor- 
thi of me’. And he that loueth sone or’ 
dou3ter ouer me, is nat worthi of me. 
38 And he that takith nat his crosse, and 
39 suethi me, is not worthi of me. He that 
fyndith his soule, that is, temporal * lyf", 
shal leese it; and he that lesith his soule™, 
4o‘that is, lif", for me, shal fynde it. He 
that resseyueth 3ou, resceyueth me; and 
he that resceyueth me, resceyueth hym that 
4isente me. And° he that resceyueth a pro- 
phete in the name of a prophete, shal 
take? the mede of a prophete. And he that 
resceyueth a just man in the? name of a 
inst man, shal take’ the meede of a iust 
4zman. And who euer 3iueth drynke to oon 
of these leste a cuppe of cold water oonly 
in the name of a disciple, trewly I saye to 
jou, he shal nat leese his mede. 


CAP. XI. 


i And it is'™ don, when Jhesus hadde eend- 
id, he, comaundynge to his twelue disciplis, 
passide fro thennes for’ to ‘preche and 

2techet in the citees of hem. Forsothe when 
Joon in boondis hadde herd the werkis of 
Crist, he, sendynge ‘two or three" of his 

3disciplis, seide’ to hym, Art thou he” that 
art to cummynge*, orY we? abiden® an 
4other? And Jhesus answerynge, seide to 


t But uv secom. that caresuxy. 
y Om. our sec. m. x. in to the citee y prom. W. 


¢Om.u. ¢Om. x. ¢ether ysec.m. f me wrthi x. 
kK Om. our sec. m. llif for me @. m )ijf ovr sec. m. 
° Om. our. 


P resseyue #. q Om. x. 


* teche and preche purw. 


* come GNPQSXY. Y ether our sec. m. 


P Om. c. 


Gthec. Tarens. 
v he schal 1. 


W sente to 5 pr. m, 


rr Om. Q. 
* two Qe. 


Vv for UV sec. m. 
2 For ovr sec. m. 


T resseyue ir. 
Utweyne 4NoQurM. two GPMSXY. 
2 Om, ¥ sec. m. 


S of a. 
y Artou s. 


X. 33——-XI. 4: 


my fadir that is in heuenes. But hess 
that shal denye me bifor men, andP I 
shal denye him bifor my fadir that is 
in heuenes. Nile 3e deme, that Y cam 3s 
to sende pees in to erthe; Y cam not to 
sende pees, but swerd. For Y cam to3s 
departe a man a3ens his fadir, and the 
dou3tir ajens hirl modir, and the sones 
wijf a3ens the housbondis modir; and the 36 
enemyes of a man bent ‘thei, that ben 
homeli with him. He that loueth fadir 37 
or modir more than me, is not worthi tos 
me. And he that loueth sone or dou3ter 
ouer*’ me, is not worthi to me. And 38 
he that takith not his croos, and sueth 
me, is not worthi to me. He that fynd-39 
ith his lijf, shal lose it; and‘ he that 
lesith his lijf for me, shal fynde it. He" 40 
that resseyueth jou, resseyueth me; and 
he that resseyueth me, resseyueth hym 
that sente me. He that resseyueth a pro-4r 
phete in the name of a prophete, shal 
take the mede of a prophete. And he 
that resseyueth a iust man in the name 
of a just man, schal’ take the mede of a 
just man. And who euer 3yueth drynke 42 
to oon of these leeste a cuppe of coolde 
watir oonli in the name of a disciple, 
treuli Y seie to 3ou, he shal not leese his 
mede. 


CAP. ee 


And it was doon, whanne Jhesus hadde 1 
endid, he comaundide to hise twelue dis- 
ciplis, and passide fro thennus to teche 
and preche in the citees of hem. Bute 
whanne Joon in boondis hadde herd the 
werkis of Crist, he sente’ tweyne* of 
hise disciplis, and seide to him, ‘Art; 
thou’ he that schal come, or we abiden 
another? And Jhesus answeride, and4 


¥ come uv passim. * the erthe uy pr. m. w. 

aher po. > Om. opour sec. m. x. 

& ether ovuv sec.m. %Om.x. isueth not v. 

0 that is, his iff cupy. Om. ouv sec. m. x. 

TY was AGOUV sec.m. %® Om. osuV sec. m. x. 

v and thei seiden 0. W Om. ovr sec.m. 
a byde o. abiden wee wy sec. m. 


88 more thanc. tt Om. c. 


u And he Ks. 


XI. 5—18. 


hem, 3ee goynge telle’ a3ein to Joon thee 
thingis that’ 3e han herde and seen. 
5Blynde men seen, crokid men wandrené, 
mesels ben maad clene, deef men heeren, 
dead men risen a3ein, pore men ben ‘taken 
to prechynge off the gospel, or ben? ‘maad 
skeepers of the gospel". And he is blessid, 
7that shal nat be sclaundrid in me. Sothely 
hemi goynge awey, Jhesus biganne for* to 
seye of Joon to the cumpanyes, What 
thing wenten 3e out for' to see in™ de- 
sert"? whether a reede wawid® with? 
swynd? But what thing wente 3e out4 
for’ to seen ? whether a man clothid’ with 
soft thingis'? Loo! thei that ben clothid® 
with softe thingis ben in housis’ of kyngis. 
9 But what thing wenten 3e out for’ to se? 
whether a prophete? 3e, I seie to 3ou, 
1oand more than a prophete. For this is he, 
of whom it is writyn, Loo! I sende myne 
aungel before thi face, that* shal make 
1iredy thi wey bifore thee. Trewly I say 
to 30u, ‘ther roose noon moreY than Joon 
Baptist amonge children? of wommen; for- 
sothe he that is lesse* in the kyngdam of 
iz heuenes, is more than he. Sothely fro the 
days of Joon Baptist til now the kyngdam 
of heuenes suffreth strengthe®, ‘or vio- 
isZence®, and violent men rauyshen it. For 
alle prophetis and® the lawe til Joon Bap- 
14tist® prophecieden; and 3if 3e wolen res- 
isseyuen, he is Ely that is to cume". He that 
ishath eeris of heerynge, heere he!. But to 
whom shal I gesse this generacioun lichy*? 
It is lichi* to children sittynge in cheep- 
ynge', the™ whiche, cryinge to her peeris, 
iz7seien, We han sungen to 3ou, and 3e han 
nat lippid"; we han mourned to 3o0u, and 
is3e han nat weilid. Sothely Joon cain nei- 
ther etyinge ne° drynkynge, and thei seien, 


btelleth xy. ¢ tho aGMNoPosurWwXY. 


‘g Om. ov. preched x. h Om. x. i thei v. 
into desert x. ™intoG pr.m.o, Om. ¥V sec. m. X. 
4 oute in to deserte o. TOm. x. clad x. 


x whiche our sce. m. 
b violence ou. 


w Om. x. 
ov sec.m, the leste vu. 
MNOSUY sec.m.W. & Om. our sec.m, 


¢ Om. cou. 


@ whiche ur sec. m. 
k Om. our sec. m. X. 
an Om. PF sec. m. x. 

* cloothingis 7 pr. m. 

Y none roose gretter OUP sec. m. 

d the profetis uw pr. m. 

h comynge our. 


MATTHEW. 27 


seide ‘to hem’, Go 3e, and telle* azen to 
Joon tho thingis that 3e han herd and 
seyn. Blynde men seen, crokid men goon, 5 
meselis ben maad clene, deefe men heren, 
deed men rysen a3en, pore men ben takun 
to ‘prechyng of” the gospel. And he ise 
blessid, that shal not be sclaundrid in 
me. And whanne thei weren goon awei,7 
Jhesus bigan to seie of Joon to the pu- 
ple, What thing wenten 3e out in to 
desert to® se? a reed wawed with the‘ 
wynd? Or what thing wenten 3e out to®s 
see? a man clothid with softe clothis ? 
Lo! thei that ben clothid with softe 
clothis ben in thef housis of kyngis. Buts 
what thing wenten 3e out to se? a pro- 
phete? 3he, Y seie to 30u, and more 
than a prophete. For this is he, of10 
whom it is writun, Lo! Y sende myn 
aungel bifor thi face, that shal make 
redi thi weye bifor thee. Treuli Y seie1 
to jou, ther roos noon more than Joon 
Baptist among the children of wymmen; 
but he that is lesse in the kyngdom of 
heuenes, is more than he. And fro the 12 
daies of Joon Baptist til now the kyng- 
dom of heuenes suffrith violence, and 
violent men rauyschen it. For alle pro-13 
phetis and the lawe ‘til to Joon pro- 
phecieden ; and if 3e wolen resseyue, he 14 
is Elie that is to come. He that hath is 
eris of heryng, here he. But to whom 1s 
schal Y gesse this generacioun lijk? It 
is lijk to children sittynge in> chepyng, 
that! crien to her peeris, and seien, We 17 
han songun to 30u, and 3e han not daun- 
sid; we han morned to 30u, and 3e han 
not weilid. For Joon cam nether etynge 18 
ne drynkynge, and thei seien, He hath 
a deuel. The sone of man cam etynge 19 


€ gon ou. goonv sec.m. f Om. G pr.im. 

lin to desert for ur sec. m. 
© wayued o. P with the nou. 
uclad x. V the houses our. 
Z the sones ovy sec.m. 4 the lesse 
€ ino. Ff til to 4G sec.m. 


{ Om. vr sec.m. k lyche cxy. lyke osur. 


la chepynge cpxy. ™ Om. our sec.m. "% lippid, or daunsid mp, daunsid Q. lopen s. lept x. © nether 
OUF sec. m. 

zOm.x. @telle 3ec. » preche c. the preching of 8. ¢fortoc. 4Om.age. ¢fortoc. fOm. 
plures eta, § vnto1. tilka. binthei. ‘ande. 


E2 


28 MATTHEW. 


19 He hath a deuel?. The sone of man came 
etynge ‘and drynkynge4, and thei seyen, 
Loo! a man deuourer, ‘or glotoun", ands 
drynkert of wyn, and frend of puplicanys 
and synful men. And wijsdam is iustified 

20 of her‘t sonys. Thanne Jhesus began for" to 
seie repreue to citees, in whiche ful manye 
vertues of hym ben’ don, for thei diden 

2inat penaunce. Woo to thee! Corozaym, 
woo to thee! Bethsaida; for 3if tho’ ver- 
tues that ben don in 3ou hadden ben don 
in Tyre and Sydon, sum tyme thei hadden 

22don penaunce in haire and asch*. Netheles 
I say**, itY shal be softer, 077 ‘lesse peyne*, 
to Tyre and Sydon than to 30u, m the day 
230f dome. And thou, Caphernaum, whe- 
ther til in to heuen thou shalt be ‘rerid 
vp¢? Thou shalt go doun til‘ into helle. 
For 3if the vertues that ben don in thee, 
hadden be don in Sodom®*, perauenture 
thei ‘shulden han‘ dwellid til ‘vn to% this 
2tday. Netheles Y saye to 30u, for to the 
lond of Sodom it shal be softer, ‘or desse 
peyne®, in the day of dome, than to thee. 

25 In ‘the ilk! tyme Jhesus answerynge saide, 
I knowleche to thee, fadir, lord of heuen 
and erthe*, for thou hast hid these thingis 
fro wijse men and. ware, or slee3 men', and 

26hast shewid hem to litil men™; so, fadir, 
for whi® so it was ‘plesynge tofore® thee. 

27 Alle thingis ben taken? to me of my fadir; 
and no man knewe‘4 the sone, no but the 
fadir, neither eny nan knewe" the fadir, 
no but the sone, and to whoin the sone 

28 wolde’ shewe. Alle 3e that traueilen, and 
ben chargid, comet to me, and IJ shal re- 

29 freshe, ‘or fulfille", 30u. Take 3e my 30c 
vpon’ 50u, and ‘lerne 3e¥ of me, for I am 
inylde and meeke in* herte; and 3e shulen 

so fynde reste in’ 30ure soulis. For my 3o0c is 
‘swete, or softe”, and my charge ‘li3t, oreisy?. 


P feende ov. 4 Om. x. t Om. our sec.m. x. 


§ Om. Q. 


XI. 19-30. 


and drynkynge, and thei seien, Lo! a 
man ai glotoun, and a drinkere of wijne, 
and a freend of pupplicans and of syn- 
ful men. And wisdom is iustified of her 
sones. Thanne Jhesus bigan toJ seye 20 
repreef to citees, in whiche ful manye 
vertues of him weren doon, for thei diden 
not penaunce. Wo to thee! Corosaym, 21 
woo to thee! Bethsaida; for if the ver- 
tues that ben doon in 3ou* hadden be 
doon in Tyre and Sidon, sumtyme thei 
hadden don penaunce in heyre and aische. 
Netheles Y seie to 30u, it! schal be lesse 22 
peyne to Tire and Sidon in the dai 
of doom, than to 3ou. And thou, Ca-23 
farnaum, whethir thou schalt be arerid™ 
vp in to heuene"? Thou shalt go doun in 
to helle. For if the vertues that ben don in 
thee, hadden be don in Sodom, perauen- 
ture thei schulden haue dwellid ‘in to™® 
this dai. Netheles Y seie to 30u, that to24 
the lond of Sodom’ it schal be ‘lesse peyne? 
in the dai of doom, than to thee. In thilke? 25 
tyme™ Jhesus answeride, and seide, Y 
knowleche to thee, fadir, lord of heuene 
and of erthe, for thou hast hid these 
thingis fro wijse men, and redi, and bast 
schewids hem to litle children; so, fadir, 26 
for so it was plesynge tofore’s thee. Alle 27 
thingis ben 3ouune to me of my fadir; 
and no man knewe the sone, but the fa- 
dir, nethir ony man knewe the fadir, 
but the sone, and to whom the sone 
wolde schewe. Alle 3e that traueilen, and 28 
ben chargid, comet to me, and Y schal 
fulfille 30u. Take 3e my 30k on 30u, and 29 
lerne 3e of me, for Y am mylde and 
meke in herte; and 3e schulen fynde 
reste to 3oure soulis. ‘For my 30k" is 30 
softe, and my charge 1i3t’. 


ta drynker cupx. ttther x. 4% Om. our 


sec. m. X. Y weren ouy. “the nour. * askes Ns pr.m. aske s sec.m. *X seye to 30w aMNoUY sec. m. Y hou 
it Vsec.m. Zethcr o fere pass. vsec.m.Om.x. ®esyerw. Om.x. wher or. ¢raysed oursec.m. 40m. 9. 
e Sydon ov. f hadenour sec.m. &into acmNourx. Om. our sec.m. x. ithat oursec.m. ‘of erthe nv. 
1 prudent our sec.m. war, or worldly slize men p. war x. ™childrenv, "Om. oursec.m. © pleesunt to ov. 
plesaunt bifore y sec. m plesing bifor x. P 3euen our sec.m. 4knowith opur sec.m. ™knoweth our sec.m. 
S wile x. cometh eupwxy. 4% Om. our sec.m.x. Von our sec.m.x. W lernith ey. lereth x. * of 
ow. YtoaGuNnopesuvwxy. 2 soft our scc.m. sweete x. 4 is eysi our sec. m. is lizt or esy Q. lizt x. 


Om. exer. jfortog. -Etheix. Ithatitc. ™rerid r. areisid b. "heuenesr. ™ til into @. 
omen of Sodom c. P softer b. esier k. @ that thilke h pr.m. that rh sec.m.ik8. ‘our Kgh. * 3ouun c. 
ss bifore gq. tcometh1. © my 3. forsothe 1. VY és lizt E1KR. 


XII. 114. 


CAP. XII. 


1 In that tyme Jhesus® wente by cornys 
on the sabot day; forsothe his disciplis, 
hungrynge, bigunnen to pluc eris of corn, 

zand to® ete. Sothely Pharisees seeynge, 
seiden to hym, Loo! thi disciplis don that‘ 
thing that is nat leeful to? hem to" do in 

3sabothis'. And he seide to hem, Whether* 
3e han nat rad, what Dauith didde, when 
he hungride, and thei that weren with 
4hym ? hou he entride in to the hous of God, 
and! ete loouis of proposicioun, ‘or puttynge 

Jorth™, the’ whiche Joouts® was? nat leeful 
to hym to eet, nether to hem that weren 

swith hym, no but to prestis only1? ‘Or 
whether’ 3e han nat rad in the lawe, for in 
sabothis® prestis in the temple defoulen the 
sabothis, and thei ben with outen grete 

esynnet? Sothely" Y saye to 3ou, for this’ 
zis more than the temple. Forsothe 3if 3e 
wisten, what it is, I wole* mercy, and nat 
sacrifice, 3e shulden* neuer hanY con- 
sdempnyd innocentis. Trewly* mannys 
gsone is, ‘jhe, lord* of the sabot. And 
whenne he passide thennus?, he came in to 
1othe synagoge of hem. And loo! a man 
hauynge a drye hond. And thei axiden 
hym, sayiuge’, 3if°¢ it is’ leeful to® heele 
in the sabot? that thei shulden acuse 
tihym. Sothely he seide to hem, Who shal 
be a man of 3o0u, that hath oo sheep, and 
3if it‘ shal falle doun® in to a dike! in the 
sabotis, whether! he shal nat holde, and 
12]ift it vp? Hou moche more ‘is a man‘ 
betre than a sheep? ‘And so! it is leeful to 
i3do good in the sabot. Thanne he seide to 
the man, Strecche forth thin hond. And 
he strei3te forth; and it is™ restorid ‘to 
i4helthe" as the’ tother?. TForsothe Phari- 


b that Jhesus 0. in our sec.m. 4 the corne uv. 
h for to 1GNPwsec.m. the sabbates our sec. m. 
settynge forth uv sec. m. . Om, our sec. m. 

G alloone ovr sec.m. * Ether whar our sec.m. 
sothe o. Y heer og sec. m. UF sec. m., IV sec.m, 
Z Forsothe our sec. m. 


d be g. 


secem. © Wher or sec.m. Whether v. 
b diche opesivx. iwher oviy. aman is ur sec.m. 
© that ow. P othir ivx. 


wOm. kaseghi. * the Farisees rrka. 
¢ defouliden b. 4 Om. cr pr.m.b. 


k wher plures. 1.0m. ceghi. ™ vother 1. 


k Wher or sec. m. iv. 
© Om, osur sec. m. X. 
s the sabbates o. 
w will o. wile x. 
8 lord also N. lorde, 3ee ovr sec. m. Ww. 
€ for to OUP sec. m. 


y Wher e. 
e Wher plures. 


MATTHEW. 29 


CAE sal: 


In that tyme Jhesus wente bi cornes1 
in the sabot day; and hise disciplis hun- 
griden, and bigunnen to plucke the” eris 
of corn, and to ete. And Fariseis*, se-2 
ynge, seiden to hym, Lo! thi disciplis 
don that thing that is not leneful to hem 
to do in sabatis. And he seide to hem,3 
Whether’ 3e han not red, what Dauid 
dide, whanne he hungride, and thei that 
weren with hym? hou he entride in to the 
hous of God, and eet looues of proposi- 
cioun, whiche* Jooues it was not leueful 
to hym to ete, nether to hem that weren 
with hym, but to prestis aloone? Ors 
whether® 3e han not red in the lawe, that 
in sabotis” prestis in the temple defoulen® 
the sabotis, and thei ben with oute blame? 
And Y seie to 30u, that here is a‘ gretter ¢ 
than the temple. And if 3e wisten, what 7 
it is, Y wole merci, and not sacrifice, 3e 
schulden neuer haue condempned inno- 
centis. For mannus Sone is lord, 3he, of s 
the sabat. And whanne he passide frog 
thennus, he cam in to the synagoge of 
hem. And lo! a man that hadde a drye ia 
hoond. And thei axiden hym, and seiden, 
Whether it be leueful to hele in the ~ 
sabot ? that thei schulden’ acuse hym. 
And he seide to hem, What man of 3ou11 
schal® be, that hath o scheep, and if it 
falle in to ai diche in the sabotis, whe- 
ther* he shal not holde, and lifte it vp? 
How myche more is a inan better than a iz 
scheep? Therfor it is leueful to do good 
in the! sabatis. Thanne he seide to the1s 
man, Stretche forth thin hoond. And he 
strau3te forth; and it was restorid to 
heelthe as the tothir™. And the Farisees 14 


f this Nouv sec.m. & Ont. a pr.m. 
Thou he ny. ™ Om. ox. ether 

P it was 4G sec. m, AENOSUF. 
t prime or synne V pr.m. —  For- 
y Om. our sec. m. 


e for to ou. 


x haden our sec. m. 
b fro thens our sec.m. ¢ and seiden our 
fthiso. g Om. ouy sec. m. 
mwas ou. ® Om. oF sec. m™. U prom. 


1 Also o. 


b the sabotis cae. 
haxic. i thee. 


%the whiche 1. ® wher e. 
fwolden 1. & schal ther t. 


30 MATTHEW. 


sees! goynge out, maden a counsel a3eins 
ishym, hou thei shulden leese hym. Sothely 
Jhesus witynge, wente awey thennes'; and 
inany sueden hym, and he helide hem 
isalle. And he comaundide to hem, that 
thei shulden nat make hym ‘opyn, or 
17 knowen® ; that that' thing shulde be ful- 
filled", that was said by Ysay, the pro- 
18 phete, seyinge, Loo! my chosen’ child, 
‘whom I haue chosen, my derlyng™, in 
whom it hath wel plesid to my soule; I 
shal putte my spirit on hym, and he shal 
19telle dome to heithen men. He shal nat 
stryue, ‘ne crye*, nether eny man shal here 
20his voice in stretis. He shal nat breke to 
gidre a schakenY reed, and he shal nat 
quenche smokynge flax, til that* he cast 
ztout dome to victorie; and hethen men 
22shulen hope in his name. Thanne a blynd 
man and* doumb, hauynge a deuel®, was 
offrid vp° to hym; aud he helide hym, so 
23that he spac, and say’. And alle the® 
cumpanyes wondreden, and saiden, Wher‘ 
2ithis bes the sone of Dauith? But the 
Pharisees, herynge", seiden, Hei this cast- 
ith notj out feendis, uo but in Belzabub, 
25 prince of fendis*. Sothely Jhesus, witynge 
her thou3tis, seide to hem, Eche kyngdam 
departid a3eius ‘hym self', shal be deso- 
lat™, ‘or discounfortid", and eche citee, or® 
hous, departid ajeins it? self, shal nat 
aéstonde. And 3if Sathanas castith? out Sa- 
thanas, he is departid ajeins hym self; 
therfore hou shal his kyngdam stonde ? 
27 And 3if I in Belzabub cast out deuelis‘, in 
whom, ‘or whos mi3t8, 30ure sonys casten 
out? Therfore thei shulen ben 3oure 
28domys men. Forsothe 3if I in the Spirit 
of God caste out fendis, therfore' the 
kyngdam of God is cummen in to 3o0u, ‘or 
22amonge 30u". Ether’ hou may eny man 


4 the Pharysees Guw sec. m. 
sec. m. u filled ovr sec. m. 
y schakid ry. 4 Om. our seem. 
4 seize 0. © Om. 4k prem. MNOQSYW. 
vsec.m. jOm.xK prim. * deuelis w. 
latid r. ™ Om. our sec.m. x. © ether ur sec. m. 
whose mi3t G sec. m. Om. our sec. m. X. 


n Wher creb. 
sones ta. $ Om.c. 


© Om. s. °° desolate r. 
t first he r. 


r fro thennes ovuy sec. m. 

v Om. our sec. m. Ww sec. m. 
@ and aU pr.m. 

f Whether sux. 
Uhys self 4. hem silf x. hit silf ovr sec. m. it silf x. 

P him a. 

t thanne U sec. m. 


P this ac. 


XII. 15-29. 


wenten out, and maden a counsel ajens 
hym, hou thei schulden distrie hym. 
And Jhesus knewe it, and wente aweils 
fro thennus; and many sueden hym, and 
he helide hem alle. And he comaundide 16 
to hem, that thei schulden not make hym 
knowun; that that thing were fulfillid, 17 
that was seid by Isaie, the prophete, sei- 
ynge, Lo! my child, whom Y>hauets 
chosun, my derling, in whom it hath wel 
plesid to my soule; Y shal put my spirit 
on him, and he shal telle dom to hethen 
men. He shal not stryue, ne crye, nethir 19 
ony man shal here his voice in stretis. A 20 
brisid rehed he shal not breke, and he 
schal not quenche smokynge flax, til he 
caste out doom to victorie; and hetheneai 
men schulen hope in his name. Thanne 22 
a man blynde and doumbe, that hadde a 
feend, was brou3t to hym; and he helide 
hym, so that he spak, and say. And al2s 
the puple wondride, and seide, Whether™ 
this be the sone of Dauid? But the Fa-2 
risees herden, and seiden, He this casteth 
not out® feendis, but in Belsabub, prince 
of feendis. And Jhesus, witynge hers 
thoustis, seide to hem, Eche kingdom 
departid a3ens it silf, schal be desolatid™, 
and eche cite, or hous, departid a3ens it 
self, schal not stonde. And if Satanas 26 
castith out Satanas, he is departid ajens 
him silf; therfor hou schal his? kingdom 
stonde ? And if Y in Belsabub caste out 27 
deuelis?, in ‘whom joure sones casten 
out"? Therfor thei schulen be 3oure 
domes men. But if Y in the’ Spirit of God 28 
caste out feendis, thanne the kyngdom of 
God is comen in to 3ou. Ethir hou may 29 
ony man entre in to the hous of a stronge 
man, and take awey hise vesselis, but ‘he 
firstt bynde the stronge man, and thanne 


S knowen our sec. m. open X. t the our 
w Om. o. X nether crie our sec. m. 
b feende ovr sec.m, © Om. our sec. m. W pr.m. 
gis oursecc.m. this heryngeo. + Om. ou 
™ deso- 
t fendes our sec.m. or in 
v Othir eas. 


q caste GX. 
4 Om. our sec. m. X. 


dfendisc. ° whos my3t casten out 3oure 


XII. 30-——41. 


entre in to the hous of a stronge man, and 
take awey his vesselis, no“ but* first he shal 
bynde the stronge man, and than he shal 
sorauyshe his hous? He that is nat with 
me, is a3einus me; and he that gadrith nat 
sito gidre with me, scatrith abrood. ‘Ther- 
fore Y seye to 30u, al synne and blasfemye 
shal be forz3ouen to men, but the ‘spirit of 
32 blasfemyeY shal nat be forjouen. And who 
euere shal seie a word a3eins mannys sone, 
it shal be forz3ouen to hym; forsothe ‘he 
that? shall seye a word a3eins the Holy 
Goost, it shal nat be forzouen to hym, ne- 
ther in this world, ne* in ‘the tother?. 
33 Ether® make 3e the tree good, and his 
fruyt good; ether’ make 3e the tree yuel, 
and his fruyt euyl; forsothe a tree is 
34 knowen of’the® fruyt. 3e generacioun of 
eddris, howe mowe 3e speke good thingis, 
when 3e ben yuel? Sothely the mouth 
spekith of the' grete plente? of the" herte. 
35 A good man brengith forth good thingis 
of good tresoure, and an yuel man bryng- 
36ith forth yuel thingis of yuel tresour. For- 
sothe Y seie to 30u, for whi! of euery* ydel 
word that men speken, thei shul 3elde re- 
37soun therof in the day of dome; for of thi 
wordis! thou shalt be iustified, and of thi 
38 wordis thou shalt be dampnyd™. Thanne 
sume of the scribes and" Pharisees an- 
swereden to hym, seyinge°, Maistre, we 
39 wolden? se a tokne of thee. The‘ whiche 
answerynge ‘seith to" hem, An iuel genera- 
cioun and auoutrere® sekith a tokne, and 
toknet shal nat be 3ouen to it, no but the 
4otokne of Jonas, the prophete. For as Jo- 
nas was" in the womb of a whiall three 
days and three ni3tis, so mannus sone shal 
be in the herte of the’ erthe three days 
sland three ni3tis. Men of Nynyue shal 
ryse in dome” with this generacioun, and 


Wnoto. Om. x. * but if x. 
8 nether or sec. m. 
& habundaunce our sec. m. 

dempned o. 1 and of the n. 
T seide vn to o. seide to UP sec. m. 


¥ Om. F sec. m. x. ™ the dome or sec.m. 


hOm.r. 


Y blasphemy of the Spirite our sec, m. W sup. ras. 
b that othir gw. the other x. 
i Om. our sec. m. 
° and seiden our sec. m. 

8 quoutresse OUV W sec. mM. 


MATTHEW. 31 


he schal spuyle his hous? He that is not so 
with me, is ajens me; and he that ga- 
derith not togidere with ime, scaterith. 
abrood. Therfor I seie to 30u, al synne3i 
and blasfemye shal be for3ouun to men, 
but ‘the spirit of blasfemyet shal not be 
forjouun. And who euere seith a word 32 
a3ens mannus sone, it shal be forjouun 
to him ; but who that seieth a word a3ens 
the Hooli Goost, it shal not be forjouun 
to hym, nether in this world, ne in ‘the 
tothir". Ethir make 3e the tree good, and 3: 
his fruyt good; ether make 3e the tree 
yuel and his fruyt yuel; for a tree is 
knowun of the’ fruyt. 3e generacioun” 34 
of eddris*, hou moun 3e speke goode 
thingis, whanne 3e ben yuele? ForY the 
mouth spekith of plente? of the* herte. A 35 
good man bryngith forth good thingis 
of good tresoure, and an yuel man bring- 
ith forth yuel thingis of yuel tresoure. 
And Y seie to 3ou, that of euery idels6 
word, that men speken, thei schulen 3elde 
resoun therof in the dai of doom; for of 37 
thi wordis thou schalt be iustified, and 
of thi wordis thou shalt be dampned. 
Thanne summe of the scribis and> Fari-38 
sees° answeriden to’ hym, and seiden, 
Mayster, we wolen se a tokne of thee. 
Which® answeride, and seide to hem, An: 
yuel kynrede and a spouse brekere sekith 
a tokene, and a tokene shal not be 3ouun 
to it, butf the tokene of Jonas, the pro- 
phete. For as Jonas was in the wombe 40 
of a whal thre daies and thre ny3tis, so 
mannus sone shal be in the herte of the 
erthe thre daies and thre ny3tis. Mens 
of Nynyue schulen rise in doom with this 
generacioun, and schulen" condempne it ; 
for thei diden penaunce in the prechyng 
of Jonas, and lo! here a! gretter than 


2 if a man our. 
ehiso. ff Om, w pr.m. 
lword G.  ™con- 
q Om. our sec. m. 

4 Om. 6 prem. 


e Or x. d or x. 
k yche our sec. m, x. 

P wil o. wolen i. wiln x. 

ta token oguvw sec. m. 


t blasfemye of the spirit ge. that othir cig. Vhise. W generaciouns a scc.m. RKB. * neddris P. 
addris @. Y Forsothe 1. 2 the plente cae pr. m. egi&. 8 Om.t. band of s.  ¢ the Farisees cegs. 
dOm.s. © The whicher. fno but ek pr.m. & Om.c. ) thei schul1, 1 Om’ a, isac. 


32 MATTHEW. 


shulen* condempne it; for thei diden pe- 
naunce in the prechynge of Jonas, and 
42loo! here ésY more than Jonas. The queen 
of the south shal ryse in dome? with this 
generation, and shal condempne it; for 
she came fro the eendis of the* ertlie, for” 
to here the wisdam of Salomon, and loo! 
asheere 7s more than Salomon. Forsothe 
whan an vnelene spirit ‘shal go* out fro a 
man, he goth by drye places, seekynge 
asreste, and he fyndyth nat’. Thanne he 
saith, I shal turne a3ein in to my hous, fro 
whennys Y came® out. And he curnmynge 
fyndith it voide, clensid with bismes, and 
4smaad faire. Thanne he goth, and takith 
seuen other spiritis with hym, worse than 
hym self; and thei entrynge yn‘ dwellen 
there. And the last thingis of that man 
ben maad worse than the former. So it 
shal be and® to this worst generacioun. 
46 it hyin spekynge to the cumpanyes ‘of 
peple®, loo! his modir and his bretheren 
stodeni with outeforth, seekyng for* to 
47speke to' hym. Sothely sum man saide to 
hym, Loo! thi modir and thi brethren 
as stonden with outforth, seekynge thee. And 
he™, answerynge to the man seiyuge to 
hym, seith", Who is my modir? and who 
49 ben my brethren? And he holdynge forth 
his hond in to his disciples, seide, Loo! 
somy modir and my bretheren; ‘treuly who- 
euer® doth the wil of my fadir that is in 
heuenes, he ‘is my brother, suster?, and 
modir. 
CAP. XIII. 
1 In that day Jhesus goynge out of the 
2hous, sat besidis the see. And manye 
cumpanyes ‘of peple1 ben’ gedrid to hym, 
so that he steyinge vp‘ in to a boot sat; 
and al the cumpanye stode in the brynke. 
3And he spak to hem many thingis in pa- 
rablis, seiynge, Loo! he that sowith, gotht 


XII. 42—XII1, 3. 


Jonas. The queene of the south shal rise 42 
in doom with this generacioun, and schal 
condempne it; for she cam fro the eendis 
of the™ erthe to here the wisdom of Sa- 
Jomon, and lo! here a gretter than Salo- 
mon. Whanne an vnelene spirit goith® 43 
out fro a man, he goith bi drie places, 
‘and sekith® rest, and fyndith not. Thanne 44 
he seith, Y shal turne aj3en in to myn 
hous, fro whannys Y wente out. And he 
cometh, and fyndith it voide, and clensid 
with besyms, and maad faire. Thanne4s 
he goith, and takith with him seuene 
othere spiritis? worse than hym silf; and 
thei entren, and dwellen there. And the 
laste thingis of that man ben maad worse 
than the formere. So it shal be to this 
worste generacioun. 3it whil he spak to 46 
the puple, lo! his modir and his brethe- 
ren stoden? withouteforth, sekynge to 
speke tot hym. And a man seide to47 
hym, Lo! thi modir and thi britheren 
stonden withouteforth, sekynge thee. . 
He® answeride to the man, that spak to4s 
hym, and seide, Who is my modir? and 
who ben my britheren? And he helde4s 
forth his hoond in to hise disciplis, and 
seide, Lo! my modir and my bretheren ; 
for who euer doith the wille of my fadirs0 
that is in heuenes, he is iny brothir, and 
sistir, and modir. 


CAP. XIII. 


In that dai Jhesus 3ede out of thei 
hous, and sat bisidis the see. And myche2 
puple was gaderid to hym, so that he 
wente up in to a boot, and sat; and al 
the puple stood on the brenke. And he3 
spac to hem many thingis in parablis, 
and seide, Lo! he that sowith, 3edet out 


_ * thei shulen x sec.m. Y Om. G prim.ox. 2 the dome or sec.m. 2Om.o0. »Om. x. © is goon o. 
hath gon uywsec.m. noon nN. & went ovr. fin x. Om. our sec.m. & alsso or sec.m, » of the 
peple c. Om, our sec.m. istonden p. * Om. our sec.m. x. J wit o. with x. ™Om. x. © seide 


our sec.m. he seith x. © whoeuere truly c. 
ourwsec.m. § Om. UP sec. m. 


m Om. R pr.m. 


ika8. 


n hath goon § sup. ras. 
8 And he gs sup. ras. ¢ wente kK. 


P and sister AmNPY prom. W. 
t sede our sec. m. 


° sekinge x. 


4 Om, uy sec.m. * weren 


POm.e. 4@stondencvu. °' with EIQ sec.m.s$ 


XIDIy 4—16. 


aout to sowe his seed. And the while he 
soweth, sum felden® byside the weye, and 
briddis of the eyre camen, and eeten hem. 
5Sothely other seedis” felden into stoony 
placis, wher thei hadden nat moche erthe; 
and anoon thei ben” sprungen vp, for* thei 
6hadde nat depnesse of erthe. Sothely the 
sunne sprung vp, thei swaliden’, ‘or bren- 
den for hete?, and for thei hadden nat* 
7roote, thei drieden vp. Forsothe other 
seedis> felden amonge thornis; and the° 
thornis wexen! vp, and strangliden hem. 
& But other seedis* felden in to good lond, 
and 3anen fruyt; sume an hundred fold, 
‘another§ sexti fold, another® thritti fold. 
9 He that hath eris of heerynge, heere hel. 
10 And discipliss ‘cummynge to! seiden to 
hym, Whi spekist thou in parablis to 
them? The™ whiche answerynge seith" to” 
hem, For to 3ou it is 3ouen for? to knowe 
the mysterie’, ‘or priuyte’, of the kyng- 
dam of heuenes; but it is nat 3ouen to hein. 
12 For it shal be 30uen to hym that hath, and 
he shal have plentee; trewly ‘who thatt 
hath" nat, that’ thing that he ‘is seen™ ‘to 
13 hane* shal be taken aweyfro hym. Therfore 
I speke to hem in parablis, for thei seeynge 
see nat,and thei heerynge heeren nat,nether 
14 vndirstonden ; that the prophecie of Ysay 
seiyngeY be fulfillid? in hem*, With heer- 
ynge 3e shulen heere, and 3ee shulen nat 
vnderstonde ; and 3ee seeynge shulen see, 
isand 3ee shulen nat see; for the herte of 
this peple is enfattid>, and° thei herden 
greuously with eris, and thei han closid 
her eez3en, that’ sum tyme thei see with 
eejen, and with eris heeren, and vndir- 
stonden in herte, and thei ben ‘to gidre 
isturned®, and I heele hem. Forsothe 
3oure eejen that seen ben blessid, and 


u felle o. fellen x. 
OUV sec. mM. X. 
fruyt 7 sec. m. 
v pr.m. * the disciples 0. | neizgynge our sec. m. 
P Om. ur sec.m. x. 4Om.o.  misteries ov. 
uhaue ov. V also that ourw sec. m. 
vsec.m. 7% filled ouvy sec. m. 
¢ Om. v. 4 lest og sec. m.uv. that not x. 
Vv pr. m. 


8none o. >» Om. ovx. 


Vv Om. our sec. m. W sec. m. X. 
¢ Om. our sec. m. Ww pr.m. 
& and other x. and an other p. other x. 
m Om. our sec. m. 
8 Om. oux. or priuytees VW sec. m. 
W semeth ou pr.m. rv. Om. U sec. m. 
4ahym Nn. hem, that seieth our sec. m. 

€ conuerted our sec. m. conuertid, eithere to gidere turned 


MATTHEW. 33 


to sowe his seed. And while he sowith,« 
summe seedis felden bisidis the weie, and 
briddis of the cir camen, and eeten hem". 
But -othere seedis felden in to stonys 
places, where thei hadden not myche 
erthe; and anoon thei sprongen vp, for 
thei hadden not depnesse of erthe’. Bute 
whanne the sonne was risun, thei swa- 
liden, and for thei hadden not roote, thei 
drieden vp. And other seedis felden7 
among thornes; and thornes” woxen* vp, 
and strangeleden hem. But othere seediss 
felden in to good lond, and 3auen fruyt ; 
sumine an hundrid foold, an othir sixti 
foold, an othir thritti foold. He that haths 
eris of heryng, here he. And the disci- 10 
plis camen ny3, and seiden to him, Whi 
spekist thou in parablis to hem? And hen 
answeride, and seide to hem, ‘For to jou’ 
it is 3ouun to knowe the priuytees of the 
kyngdom of heuenes ; but it is not jouun 
to hem. For it shal be 3ouun to hym that 12 
hath, and he shal haue plente; but if a 
man hath not, also that thing that he 
hath shal be takun awei fro hym. Ther-13 
for Y speke to hem in parablis, for thei 
seynge seen not, and thei herynge heren 
not, nether vndurstonden ; that the pro-l4 
phesie of Ysaie ‘seiynge be fulfillid? ‘in 
hem*, With heryng 3e schulen here, and 
3e Shulen not vndurstonde ; and 3e seynge 
schulen se, and 3e shulen not se; for the!5 
herte of this puple is greetli fattid, and 
thei herden heuyli with eeris, and thei 
han closed her ij3en, lest sumtime thei 
seen with izen, and with eeris heeren, 
and vudirstonden in herte, and thei* be 
conuertid, and Y heele hem. But 3oure 16 
ijen that seen ben blesside, and 30ure 
eeris that heren. Forsothe Y seie to17 


y welowiden vu. 2 Om. 
e Om. oux. f fold 
h and othir cg. and an other p. i Om. ov 
n seide our sec.m. 9% vnto o. 
t if a man OUF sec. m. 

x hath usec.m. Y Om. ov 
> gretly made fatt ovr sec. m. 


x Om. WW. 
d wexeden o. 


w Om. our. 


utho1. VY gronds. W the thornes1. * wexiden r1kprhik. y To 30u forsothe 1. 7 be fulf. seiynge 14. 


aOm.1a. > that seith, With s sup. ras. 


¢ Om. Q pr. nm. 
VOL. IV. F 


34 MATTHEW. 


i730ure eris that heeren. Forsothe I saye 
trewthef to 30u8, for many prophetis and 
juste inen coueitiden® to see thoo thingus 
that 3ee seen, and thei saien nat, and to! 
heeren thoo* thingis that 3ee heeren, and 
isthei herden nat. Therfore heere 5e the 
i9 parable of the ‘sowynge man!. Eche that 
heerith the word of rewme™, and vudir- 
stondith® nat, the yuel spirit cometh, and 
rauyschith that® that is sowyn in hisP 
herte; this is that’ is sowen besidis the 
20weye. Sothely" he that is séwen on the 
stoon’, ‘this it is‘, that heerith the word of 
21 God, and anoon with ioye takith it. For- 
sothe" he hath nat’ roote in hym self, but 
it’ is temporal ; ‘that is, it* lastith bot’ a 
litil tyme*. Forsothe® tribulacioun and per- 
secucioune maad? for the word, anoon he 
22is sclaundrid. Bot* he that is sowen in 
thornys, is this that herith the word, and 
the bysynesse of this world, aud the fals- 
nessis‘ of ritchessis stranglith® the word, 
23and it is maad with outen fruyt. ‘ Bot he 
that is sowen in to’ good lond, is this that 
herith the word, and vndirstondith®, and 
bryngthe forth fruyt. And sothely sume 
makith an hundrefold, treuly another six- 
24tyfold, forsothe another thrittifold. An- 
other” parable Jhesus putte! forth ‘to hem‘, 
seyinge, The kyngdam of heuenes is maad 
liche! to a man, that sew™ good seed in his 
25feeld. But®, when men slepten, his enmye 
came, and sew°® aboue dernel?, ‘or cokil 4, 
in the™ midils of whetet, and wente awey. 
26Sothely when the herbe hadde growid", 
and maad’ fruyt, thanne the dernel”, ‘or 
27 cokid*, apperiden. Forsothe the seruauntis 
of the husbondeman ‘comynge ni3Y, ‘seiden 


fOm.G. trewly 0. & 30u truthe «. 
sowende x. ™ the rewme puX. 
v Forsothe our sec. ni. 
sec.m. Forg prim. x. ‘nop, 
nat but K pr. m. MNPQSTY sec. Mm. Om. ovy sec. m. 
miaade our sec. m. ¢ For vu, 
fOm. o. & vnderstant x.) Thenne anothir a. 
N. lichy p. ™ hath sowe our sec. m. seeu3h x. 
ouv. cockil x. 
o. myddis ur. 
elis x. 


D ynderstant x. 


' the whete x." growen x, 


©coueitinge s. 4 Ech mang. © be sidens. 


h coueiten vu. 
© this our sec. m. 
Sin the stony londe o. in stony loud uv. on the stoony londe r. 
’ he our sec.m. Om. x. 
Z Gloss om. in x. 
@ falsnesse 4MNOPSTU prom.vaxy. fallase u sec. m. 
i puttide r sec. m. 
n Forsothe our w sec. m. 
4 Om. 40. either cockil vu. either cockles v sec.m. or cockils w sec. mn. 
v had made ov. 
x Om. s0sur sec. m. x. or coklis Garner prea wy, 


f Om. R sec. m. 


XI 17—27. 


jou, that manye profetis and iust men 
coueitiden® to se tho thingis that 3e seen, 
and_thei sayn not, and to heere tho 
thingis that 3e heren, and thei herden 
not. Therfor here 3e the parable of the 18 
sowere. Ech‘ that herith the word of 19 
the rewme, and vndirstondith not, the 
yuel spirit cometh, and rauyschith that 
that is sowun in his herte; this it is, 
that is sowun bisidis® the weie. But this 20 
that is sowun on thef stony loond, this it 
is, that herith the word of God, and anoon 
with ioye takith it. And he hath not21 
roote in hym silf, but is temporal. For 
whanne tribulacioun and persecucioun is 
maad for the word, anoon he is sclaun- 
drid. But he that is sowun in thornes, 22 
is this’ that heerith the word, and the" 
bisynesse! of thisk world, and the fallace 
of ritchessis strangwith the word, and 
it is maad with outen fruyt. But he2s 
that is sowun in to good loond, is this 
that herith the word, and vnderstondeth, 
and bryngith forth fruyt. And summe 
makith an hundrid fold, treuli anothir 
sixti fold, and another thritti fold. An-24 
othir! parable Jhesus puttide™ forth to 
hem, and seide, The kyngdom of heuenes 
is maad lijk to a man, that sewe good 
seed in his feld. And whanne men slepten, 25 
his enemy cam, and sewe aboue taris in 
the myddil of whete, and wente awei. 
But whanne the erbe was growed®, and 26 
made fruyt, thanne the taris apperiden. 
And the seruauntis of the hosebonde 27 
man camen, and seiden to hym, Lord, 
whether® hast thou not sowun good seed 
in thi feeld ? where of thanne hath it 


] sower our sec. m. 
q he that our sec. m. 
tis this our 
¥ no but av prom. ¥ pr. m, 
a Forsothe while ouy sec. m. P is 
© stranglen x. 
Vlichi arw. liccht 
P tarys 4. dernales 
FOm.o. & mydde 
¥ tares 4. dernelis Garorsurwy. cock- 
¥ nelginge our sec.m. 


i for to our sec.m. the p. 
P Om. N. 


X that is, osu. 


k Om. w prom, 
© segh x. 


fitisrprom &Om.s. © Om.c. 


i bisinessis c. K the apr.m. 1 And anothir c, ™ putte ra. © growen Krucghi§. © wher c ct alii passim. 


XIII. 28—36. 


to hym’, Lord, wher® thon hast nat sowen 
good seed in thi feeld ? wher of than hath 
28it dernel*®, ‘or cokil*¢? And he seith® to 
hem, The man enmye hath don this thing. 
Trewly the seruauntis seiden to him, Wolt 
29thou we® go, and gedren hem? And he 
saith’, Nay, lest perauenture 3e gedrynge 
dernels$, ‘or coclis*, draw vp by the roote 
30 togidre' with hem and‘ the whete. Suffre 
3e ‘hem bothe' wexe™ til to rype® corne ; 
and in tyme® of rype? eorn I shal seie to 
reperis4, First gedre 3ee ‘to gedre™ dernels’, 
‘or cockilist, and byndeth" hem to gidre in 
knytchis’, ‘or smale bundelis”, for* to be 
brent, but gedere 3e whete’ in to my berne. 
31 An other parable Jhesus* putte* forth to 
hem, seiynge, The kyngdam of heuenes is 
like to a corn of seneney, the? whiche a 
3zman takynge® sewe in his feeld. ‘The’ 
whieche trewly® is leest' of alle seedis, but 
when it hath wexen, it is most® of alle 
wortis, and is" maad a tree; so that 
briddis! of the eyre cummen, and dwellen 
33in ‘bowis, or beraunchis*, therof. An! 
other parable ‘Jhesus spae™ to hem, The 
kyngdam of heuenes is lic to soure dow3, 
the® whiche taken, a womman hidde® in 
three mesuris of meele, til it were al sowr- 
sidowid. Jhesus spac alle these thingis in 
parablis to the cumpanyes ‘of peple?, and 
he space nat to hem with outen parablis, 
othat it? shulde. be fulfillid’, ‘that thing that* 
is seid by the prophete, seyinge, I shal 
opyn my mouth in parablis; I shal ‘bolke 
out, ov ¢edle oute*, ‘hid thingus" fro mak- 
36yng’ of the world. Thanne the cumpa- 


z to hym, seiden x. 
neles ouy see. m. cockil ex. 
Ve sec. m. 
i Om. our see. m. k also our sec. m. 
Othetyme ouv. Ptheripeo. 4 the reperes o. 
nels uy. cockelis x. ¢ Om. our scc.m. X. 
w Om. sosvr sec. m. X. x Om. x. 

b Om. our sec.m. ¢ taken N. 
h it is uy sec. m. ithe breddes o. 
spake an o, He spake an UV sec. in. 
sec.m. of the peple sr. 
sec. Mm. 


P Woltow e. 9Om. alii et of. 
sec.m.8. VY Andanothirc. W putte Eraf. 
b of the ce. ¢ The whiche 1. 


¥Q 


a whether c ef s passim ux passim. 
ce Om. AOQSUY sec. m. X. 
& tarys a. darnel n. darnailes 0. the darnels uy. cockelis x. 
leuer either our sec. m,. 
r Om. our sec. m. 
ubynd x. bynde je os. 
y the whete mov. 
d Om. ovr sec.m. ¢ sothely pur. 
k the braunches ov. braunchis ¥ sec. m. the bowis x. 
m Om. our sec. m. 
4 the thenge ovr sec.m. Om, w sec.m. X. 
t telle out Novy sec. m. bowen out, or tellen x. 


r Om. ceteri et af. 


xOm.c. Ywase. 


MATTHEW. 35 


taris? And he seide to hem, An enemy 28 
hath do this thing. And the sernauntis 
seiden to him, ‘Wolt thou? that? we goon,. 
and gaderen hem? And he seide, Nay, 29 
lest perauenture 3e in gaderynge taris 
drawen vp with hem the whete bi the 
roote. Suffre 3e hem bothe to wexe in30 
to repyng tyme; and in the* tyme of ripet 
corne Y shal seie to the reperis, First ga- 
dere 3e to gidere the taris, and bynde hein 
to gidere in knytchis to be brent, but 
gadere 3e whete" in to my berne. An-31 
other’ parable Jhesus puttide’ forth to 
hem, and seide, The kyngdom of heuenes 
is lijk to a corn of seneuey, which a man 
took, and sewe in his feeld. Which is: 
the* leeste of alle seedis, but whanne it 
hath Y woxen, it'Y is the? moste of alle 
wortis, and is maad a tre; so that briddis 
of the eir comen, and dwellen in the 
bowis therof. Another parable Jhesus33 
spac to hem, The kyngdom of heuenes is 
lijk to sour dou3, which® a womman 


2 


- took, and hidde in thre mesuris of mele, 


til it were alle sowrid. Jhesus spac alle 34 
thes thingis in parablis to the puple, and 
he spae not to hem with out parablis, 
that it schulde be fulfillid, that is seid bi 35 
the prophete, seiynge, Y shal opene my 
mouth in parablis; Y shal telle out hid 
thingis fro the makyng of the world. 
Thanne he lefte the puple, and cam in36 
to an hous; and hise diseiplis camen to 
him, and seiden, Expowne to vs the pa- 
rable of > taris of the feeld. Which an-37 
sweride, and seide, He that sowith good 


> therfore our sec. m. ¢ tares 4. der- 
dseide oursec.m. ¢€that wevu.  f seide ov 

hor cockil Ne. Om. osu¥ sec. m. X. 
™ to wexen sx.  " the rype our. 
8 tares 4. derneiles o. the dar- 
Vv birthens ovr sec.m. knycchyns Ww. 
@ puttide ur sec. m. 
€ the moost ov. 
1 And he 
0 Qm.ursee.m. Chidithx. P Om. our 
r filled ovr sec.m. 8 whiche our 
¥ the makynge our sec. m. x. 


Zz he our sec. m. 
f the leest our. 


u thingis hid a. 


t the ripe hi. "the wheete KRx 
zOm.c. 4thewhicher. 


s Om. 1Rsef. 
yy Om. Q pr. m. 


36 MATTHEW. 


nyes” laft, he came into an hous; and his 
disciplis camen ni3 to hym, seiynge, Ex- 
poune* to vs the parableY of dernelis’, ‘or 
37 cokelis*, of the feeld. The whiche an- 
swerynge saith’, He that sowith good seed 
38is mannes sone; sothely the feld is the 
world; bot the good seed, these ben sonys* 
of the kyngdam®, dernels‘, ‘or cocklis®, 
39 forsothe" these! ben ‘yuel sonys*; but the 
enmye that soweth hem is the feend'; but™ 
the" ripe corn is the eendyng of the world, 
4sosothely® the repers ben angelis. Therfore 
as dernels? ben gedrid to gidre, and brent4 
in fijr’, so it shal be in the’ cendyng of the 
41world. Mannes sone shal sende his an- 
gels, and thei shulden gedre of his rewme 
alle sclaundris, and hem that don wickid- 
42nesse; and thei shulen sende hem into the 
chymney of fijr, there shal be weepynge 
ssand betynge togidre of teeth. Thanne 
just men shulen shyine as the sunne, in the 
rewme of her fadir. He that hath eris of 
4sheerynge, heere het. The kyngdame of 
heuenes is lijk to tresour" hid in a’ feeld, 
the’ whiche a man that fyndith, hidith ; 
and for ioye ‘of it* he goth, and sellith 
alle thingis that he hath, and bieth ‘the ilk’ 
4sfeeld. Eftsones? the kyngdam of heuenes 
is lic toa man marchaunt, seekyng good 
46margarytis® ; sothely 00 preciouse marga- 
rite» founden, he wente, and solde alle 
47 thingis that he hadde,and bou3te it. Eft 
the kingdam of heuenes is lic to a nette 
sent in to the see, and of alle kynd of fishis 
48 gedrynge; the’ whiche whan it was ful- 
fillid’, men ledynge out, and sittynge by- 
sidis the brynke*’, cheesiden® the good into 
her vessels, but thei sentenf out the yuel. 
49 So it shal be in the® eending of the world. 


* companyes of peple w pr. m. 
cockils wx. 
OUV sec. m. W. 
¥ Sec. mM, X. 


8 Om. 4osuy sec. m. X. or darnels w. 
© rewme OUP sec. mn. 
bh Om. oty sec. m. 
usec.m. | deuel our sec. m. 
cockelis x. 4 ben brent ourw sec. m. 
Vv Om.cG pr.m. the Nu. © Om. our sec. m. 
sec.m. ® peerles our sec. m. 
e chosen ux. f casten U sec. m. 


i Om. a pr. m., 
t the fire N. 


b perle our sec. m. 
& Om. G pr.m. 


4 Om. s sec. m. © the sones can pr. m. sei. 
dreris ck. 4 the whiche 1. i Eftsonec pr.m. x. 
it b. " chesiden cxe. © castiden kg. P ende kK. 


x Expowne thou n. 
b Om. our sec. m. 
f tares 4. forsothe darnailes our sec. m. cockelis x. 
k sones of the wicked ou pr.m. vr sec.m. wickyd sones 
m sothely our sec. m. 
8 Om. GMPIWXY. 
x ther of our sec. m. 

¢ Om. our sec. m. 


f Om. x. 
J Om. a. 
q thei schul rchic. 


XIU. 37—49. 


seed is mannus sone; the feeld is the3s 
world; but the good seed, these’ ben 
sones® of the kyngdom, but taris, these‘ 
ben yuele children; the enemye thats 
sowith hem is the feend; and the ripe 
corn is the endyng of the world, the re- 
peris ben aungels. Therfor as taris ben 40 
gaderid togidere, and ben brent in fier, 
so it shal be in the endyng of the world. 
Mannus sone shal sende hise aungels, 41 
and thei schulen gadere fro his rewme 
alle sclaundris?, and hem that doon wick- 
idnesse ; and thei schulen sende hem in 42 
to the chymney of fier, there shal be 
weping and betyng to gidere of teeth. 
Thanne iuste men schulen schyne as the 43 
sunne, in the rewme of her fadir. He 
that hath eeris of heryng, here he. The 44 
kyngdom of heuenes is lijk to tresour 
hid in a feld, which a man that fyndith, 
hidith ; and for ioye of it he goith, and 
sillith alle thingis that he hath, and bieth 
thilk feeld. Eftsoone the kyngdom of 45 
heuenes is lijk to a marchaunt, that sech- 
ith good margaritis ; but whanne he hath 46 
foundun o precious margarite, he wente, 
and selde alle thingis that he hadde, and 
bou3te it. Efti the kyngdom of heuenes 47 
is lijk toi a nette cast into the see, and 
that gaderith to gidere of al kynde* of 
fisschis; which! whanne it was ful, thei4s 
drowen™ vp, and seten bi the brenke, and 
chesen" the goode in to her vessels, but 
the yuel thei kesten® out. So it schal be+9 
in the endyng? of the world. Aungels 
schulen go out, and schulen4 departe yuel 
men fro the myddil of iuste men. And 50 
thei shulen sende hem in to the chymnei 
of fier; ther shal be weping and grynt- 


2 tares 4, the darnelis s. the 
¢ seide ovy sec.m. 4% the sones 
g Om. 4osu 


Y parablis x. 


© forsothe ouy sec.m. _P tares 4. 
t Om. ursec.m. a treesour o. 

y that x. that ylk y. 2 Efte ovr 
4 fylled ovr sec.m. 4 brynge x. 


n Om. ur. 


& sclaun- 


ff oadere togidere cx sup. ras. 
m drowen 


K kyndis c. ! the whiche 1. 


XII. 50—XIV. 5. 


Angelis shulen gon out, and” shulen' de- 
parte yuel men fro -the mydilk of iuste 
somen. And thei shulen sende! hem into 
the chymney of fijr™; there shal be weep- 
51 ynge and betynge togidre of teeth. Han 
3ee vnderstonden alle these thingis? Thei 
s2seien to hym, 3he. He seith to hem, 
Therfore every” wryter® tau3t in the kyng- 
dam? of heuenes, is lic to an husbonde 
man, that bryngith forth of his tresour 
ssnewe thingis and olde. And it is? don, 
whanne Jhesus hadde eendid these para- 
54bles, he passide fro thennis. And he’, 
cummynge in to his cuntree, tau3t hem in 
her synagogis, so that thei wondriden, and 
seiden, Wherof to hym this’ wisdam and 
35 vertues? Wher' is nat this the sone of a 
‘smyth, or carpenter® 2? Wher’ his modir 
be’ nat seid Marie? and his brethren, 
Jamys, aud Joseph, and Symount, and* Ju- 
56das? and ‘his sistrisY, wher? thei ‘alle ben 
nat* at vs? Therfore wherof to hym alle 
57 these thingis? And so thei weren sclaundrid 
in hym. Forsothe Jhesus seide to hem, A 
prophete is nat with outen wirshipe®, no 
but in his owne® cuntree, and in his owne® 
s8hous. And he dide nat there manye ver- 
tues, for the vnbyleue of hem. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 In that tyme® Eroude ‘tetrarcha, that 
is’, prince of the fourthe part, herde the 
2fame of Jhesu; and seide to his children, 
This is Jon Baptist, he? hath risen fro 
dead*, and therfore vertues worchen in 
3hym. Forsothe Eroude helde Joon, and 
bounde hym, and putte! him in to prisoun 
4for Erodias, the wif of his brother. For 
Joon saide to hym, It is nat leful to thee 
5for' to haue hir. And he willynge™ to" 


MATTHEW. 37 


yng of teeth. Han 3e vndirstonde alles 
these thingis? Thei' seien® to hym, 3he. 
He seith to hem, Therfor euery wise man 52 
of lawe in the kyngdom of heuenes, is 
lijk to an hosebonde man, that bryngith 
forth of his tresoure newe thingis and 
elde. And it was doon, whanue Jhesus 53 
hadde endid these parablis, he passide fro 
thennus. And het cam in to his euntrei, 54 
and tan3te hem in her synagogis, so that 
thei wondriden, and seiden, Fro whennus 
this “wisdam and vertues camen™ to 
this’? Whether ‘is not this* the sone ss 
of a carpentere? Whether his modir be 
not seid Marie? and hise britheren, James, 
and Joseph, and* Symount, and Judas ? 
and hise sistris, whether thei alle ben nots6 
among us? Fro whennus thanne ‘alle 
thes thingis’ camen? to this*? And sos7 
thei weren sclaundrid in hym. But 
Jhesus seide to hem, A profete is not 
with oute worschip”, but in his owen 
cuntre, and in his owen hous. And hese 
dide not there manye vertues, for the vn- 
bileue of hem. 


CAP. XIV. 


In that tyme Eroude tetrarke, prynce | 
of the fourthe part, herde the fame of 
Jhesu; and seide to hise children, This2 
is Joon Baptist, he is rysun fro deeth, 
and therfor vertues worchen in hym. 
For Heroude hadde holde Joon, ands 
bounde hym, and puttide® hym ‘in to@ 
prisoun for Herodias, the wijf of his 
brothir. For Joon seide to him, It is not 4 
leneful to thee to haue hir. And hes 


h and thei uy sec.m. i1QOm.o. k myddes ouv. !caste uv sec.m. ™the fyrG. " eche our sec. m. x. 


© writer, ether techer of the [om. v sec. m.] lawe ou pr. m. v sec. m. techer of the lawe U sce. 7m. 
t Whethir G passim MQsuX. 
¥ wher his sistres our sec. m. 


§ all this o. 
x Om. Ka. 


OUY sec.m. was our. Om. x. 
v Whether pswxy. W is our sec. m. 
ther sx. ® ben not all ouy sec. m. 
that o. fwaso. Om.u. 8 for he Q. 
™ wilnynge o. % for to G sec. m. Ww pr.m. 


rAnd thei rpr.m. sseidenrpr.m t Om. a. 
not1. *Om.c. Y comen alle these thingis 1. 
puttide 1. putte ghi, dine pr.m. 


b honour our sec. m. 
h dede men ov. 


u is this b. 
Z Om. 1. comen KQR. 


P rewme 
u carpenter ov. smyth x. 

z Om. ouv sec. m. whe- 
4 Om. our sec. m. © tyme 
1 Om. ovx. 


¢ Om. our sec. m. 
i putted ov. * Om. Gc pr.m. 


vhin thig1. this is 
bonourg. © he 


UU comen QR. 
a him this 1. 


38 MATTHEW. 


slea hym, drede the peple ; for thei hadden 
shym as a° prophete. Forsothe in the day of 
Eroudis birthe, the dou3ter of Erodias 
leepte? in the mydil, and pleside to4 
7Eroude. Wherfore with an ooth he by- 
hi;te™ for’ to 3eue to hir, what euer thinge 
sshe hadde axid of hym. And she bifore 
monestid', ‘or warnyd", of hir modir, seith, 
3eue thou to me hidir’ the hed of Joon 
9 Baptist in a dische. And the kyng was so- 
rowful, but” for the ooth, and* for hem that 
seeten to gidre at the mete, he comaundide 
oto be 3ouen. And he sente, and bihedideY 
uJoon in the? prisoun. And his heed? is® 
brou3t to® in a dische, and it4 is* 3ouen to 
the whenchef, and she bare it to hir modir. 
12 And his disciplis ‘cummynge to’ token his 
body, and biryeden it; and thei cum- 
i3mynge tolden to Jhesu. The® whiche 
thing when Jhesus hadde herd, he went 
fro thennus ‘in to! a boot, in to desert* 
place! besidis. And whenne the cumpanyes 
‘of peple™ hadden herd, thei folowiden® 
1thym and? on? the? feet" fro citees. And 
Jhesus, goynge out, saw a greet multitude’ 
‘of peplet, and hadde rewthe of" hem, and’ 
15heelide the’ sike men of hem. Sothely 
the* euenyngeY maad, his disciplis ‘camen 
ni3? to him, seiynge*, The place is desert, 
and the hour hath now passid ; leeue thou 
the cumpanyes ‘of peple‘, that thei, goynge 
16 in to castels, bigget meetis to hem. For- 
sothe Jhesus seide to hem, Thei han nat* 
neede to go; 3eue 3e tof hem for® to ete. 
17Thei answeriden, We han nat here, no® 
18but fiue looues and two! fishis. The* 
whiche seith! to hem, Brynge 3ee™ hem 
Whidir to me. And when he hadde co- 
inaundid the cumpanye for" to sitte to° 


qa Om. ov. 
w Om. KW pr. m. 
D was ouFW sec. m. 
& neizynge ov. bOm.ov. iin eupyxy. 
ou. ° goynge ov. Om. ¥. P vpon 6. 
r foote x. S company ov. t Om. ov. 
Gpr.m. Y euentyde our. 2 neizeden ou. 
Q. bie sx. € no Gpr.m.ou. 
I seide ov. ™ Om. @. 


°o Om. kK. 
u Om, oux. 
2 Om. ou. 


P lepe o. Jeep x. 
v heere Nn. 
a heued o. 


f Om. Ww sec. m. 
nQOm., ovx. © tothe vu. 


€ dredede s. 
the see Q pr. m. 


f ether tumblide K marg. 


Jand hea. *k Om.ag. |! Om. a. 


T hy3t GK pr. m. TY pr. m. 


¢ Om. v. 

k a deserte opuxy. 
q Om. ¢ pr.m. Ww prom. x. her our. ther pw sec. m. 

U on AGMNOPQSTUVIVXY. 
a and seiden ov. 
g Om. x. 


& Om. cE1 pr. m. phk pr. m. af. 
m two e cé alit pass. 


XIV. 6—19. 


willynge to sle hym, dredde® the puple ; 
for thei hadden hym as a prophete. Bute 
in the dai of Heroudis birthe, the dou3tir 
of Herodias daunsidef in the myddil, and 
pleside Heroude. Wherfor with an ooth 7 
he bihiz3te to 3yue to hir, what euere 
thing she hadde® axid of hym. And shes 
bifor warned of hir modir, seide, 3if 
thou to me here the heed of Joon Baptist 
ina disch. And the kyng was sorewful, 9 
but for the ooth, and for hem that saten 
to gidere at the mete, he comaundide to 
be 30uun. And he sente, and bihedide jo 
Joon in the prisoun. And his heed was}; 
brou3t in a dische, and it was 3ouun to 
the damysel, and she bar it to hir modir. 
And hise disciplis camen, and token his j2 
bodi, and birieden it; and thei camen, 
and tolden to Jhesu. And whanne Jhe-13 
sus hadde herd this thing, he wente fro 
thennus in a boot, in to" desert place bi- 
sides'?, And whanne the puple hadde 
herd, thei folewiden hym on her feet fro 
citees. And Jhesus 3ede out, and sai a4 
greet puple, and hadde reuthe on hem, 
andj heelide the’ sike men of hem. But; 
whanne the! euentid was com, hise disci- 
plis camen to him, and seiden, The place 
is desert, and the tyme is now passid ; lat 
the puple go in to townes, to bye hem 
inete. Jhesus seide to hem, Thei han 4, 
not nede to go; 3yue 3e hem sumwhat to 
ete. Thei answeriden, We han not heere, ,, 
but fyue looues and twei™ fischis. And jg 
he seide to hem, Brynge 3e hem hidur to 
me. And whanne he hadde comaundid ,,y 
the puple to sitte to meete on the heye, 
he took fyne looues and twei fischis, and 
he bihelde in to heuene, and blesside, aud 


® Om. ouwx. ¢ moued x. 
yY byheuedede 0. hedede x. 
© was our. f damisel ov. 
mQOm,.ou. suden 


x Om. 6 pr. m. 
d Om. o. 
1 places N. 


v and he v. 
¢ Om. ou, 
' tweye I. 


¥ Om.e6 prim. * Om. 
d by ov. bien 
k Om. ov. 


b thou now N. 
h Om. w prom. 


bh to acai sec.m.k. 1 bisidis 


XIV. 20—33. 


mete on hay?, fyue looues and two! fishis 
taken, he byholdynge in to heuen, blesside, 
and® brak, and 3aue* to his‘ disciplis; 
sothely the" disciplis 3auen to the’ cum- 
zo0panyes. And alle eeten, and weren ful- 
fillid’. And thei token the relifis of broken 
21 gobetis*, twelue cofyns ful. Forsothe theY 
noumbre of men etynge was fyue thou- 
sand of men, out taken wemmen and litel 
zechildren. And anon Jhesus compellide?, 
‘or comaundide*, the disciplis for to ‘go 
vp¢ in to a boot, and go bifore hym ouer® 
the see, til that he lefte the cumpanyes. 
23 Aud the cumpanyes* left, he steizide vps 
in to an hill aloone for® to preye. Sothely 
the euenyng! maad, he was there aloone. 
24Sothely* the boot in the mydil! see was 
throwen with wawis, forsothe™ the wynd 
25 was contrarie®. But® in the fourthe wak- 
yng of the ni3t, he came to hem walkynge 
26aboue? the see. And‘ thei, seeynge hym 
walkynge aboue the see, weren distour- 
blid’, seyinge, For it is’ a fantum ; and for 
27drede thei cryeden. And anoon Jhesus 
spac to hem, sayinge', Haue 3e trust, I 
28am; ny! 3e dreede. Sothely Petre an- 
swerynge seide,. Lord, 3if thou art, co- 
maunde me to" cume to thee vpon’ the 
29watris. And he seith®, Cume thou. And 
Petre goynge douu fro the bote, walkide 
on the wateris for* to cume to Jhesu. 
30 Trewly he, seeynge a strong wynde, ‘was 
aferde’; and whan he bygan for? to he 
drenchid, he cryede, seyinge, Lord, make 
zime saaf. And anoon Jhesus, holdynge 
forth the* hond, cau3te hym, and seith> to 
hym, Thou of litil feith, whi hast thou 
32doutid? And whenne he hadde stied vp‘ 
33in to the boot, the wynde cesside. Sothely 
thei, that weren in the boot, camen, and 


P the hey 4cmNopsurw. 
sec.m. ¢ Om. ourw. Om. uv. 
ned ov. comaundide 9 sec. m. 


vy Om. o. 
a Om. ogvx. 


4 twei 4 el N passim w. * Om. AGK sec. m. MNPSUFWY. 


Ww filled ov. 
b Om. ovx. 


MATTHEW. 39 


brak, and 3af to hise disciplis; and the 
disciplis 3auen to the puple. And alle 20 
eten, and weren fulfillid. And thei tooken 
the relifs of brokun gobetis, twelue co- 
fynes ful. And the noumbre of men that 21 
eten was fyue thousynde of men, outakun 
wymmen and lytle children. And anoon 22 
Jhesus compellide! the disciplis to go vp 
in to a hoot, and go bifor hym ouer the 
see, while he lefte the puple. And 2s 
whanne the puple was left, he stiede 
aloone in to an hil for™ to preie. But 
whanne the" euenyng® was come, he was 
there aloone. And the boot in the myd- 2s 
del of the see was schoggid with wawis, 
for the wynd was contrarie to hem. But 25 
in the fourthe wakyng of the ni3t, he 
cam to hem walkynge aboue? the4 see. 
And thei, seynge hym walking" on the26 
see, weren disturblid’, and seident, That it 
is" a fantum; and for drede thei erieden. 
And anoon Jhesus spac to hem, and27 
seide, Hane 3e trust, Y am; nyle 3e 
drede. And Petre answeride, and seide, 28 
Lord, if thou art, comaunde me to come 
to thee on the watris. And he seide, 29 
Come thou. And Petre jede doun fro 
the boot, and walkide on the watris to 
come to Jhesu. But he si3 the wynd so 
strong, and was aferde; and whanne he 
bigan to drenche, he criede, and seide, 
Lord, make me’ saaf. And anoon Jhesus 31 
helde forth his hoond, and took Petre, 
and seide to hym, Thou of litil feith, whi 
hast thou doutid ? And whanne he hadde 32 
stied in to the boot, the wynd ceessid. 
And thei, that weren in the boot, camen, 33 
and worschipiden hym”, and seiden, Verili, 
thou art Goddis sone. And whanne théiss 
hadden passid ouer the see, thei camen 


s 3af looues our i 
y Om. 0. 2 constrey- 
4 to go ov. to gon x. *in to nN. 


x gobetis or metis P. 
© steize ou. 


f companye acmNopsurxy. ff stei3 x. & Om.ou. Om, ovx. i enentyde ov. * Forsothe ov. ! myd- 


des csv. myddul of the n. middes of the ovy. myd x. 


m for ou. »® contrarie to hem Q sec. m. contra- 


rious x. ° Sothely ov. Pvpon ny. 9Om. ov. * disturbid x. Swasu. tand seide ov. 4 for to 4G 
NPyWwY. Von gsux. Wseide ov. *Om.oux. Ydredeou. %Om.oux, #hiso.  » seide ov. 
¢ Om. ov. 

l comaundide A sec. m. ™ Om. krs eghik sec.m. 2 Om.Q. ° cuentijd xq. P Om. a. on the ca. 
r walke a pr.m. 1qbee sec. vice ghik. 8 distrublid s. tseyng. “was Erc. 'Om.c. * Om. R. prem. 


. 


40 


worshipiden hy, seyinge, Veryly, thou art 

34Goddis sone. And whenne he had? pass- 
ide ouer the see, thei camen in to the lond 

35o0f Genesar®. And whenne men of that 
place hadden knowen hym', thei senten 
into al that® cuntree ; and thei offriden" to 

36hym ali hauynge yuel. And thei preyiden 
hym*, that thei shulden touche ether! the 
hem of ‘the clothing™ ‘of hym®; and who 
euer touchiden ben® maad saaf. 


CAPO XV. 


1 Thanne scribis and Pharisees ‘camen 
2ni3P to hym fro Jerusalem, seyinge, Whi e¢ 
thi disciplis ouerpassen4, ‘or breken™, the 
tradiciouns, ‘or statutis*, of elder men ? for 
thei washen nat hondis‘, whenne thei eten 
3sbreed. Sothely he answerynge seith" to 
hem, And’ ‘whi and 3e breken” the maunde- 
ment* of God for 3oure tradiciounY ? For 
4whi? God seide, Honoure thi? fadir and 
thi’ modir, and he that eursith fadir or® 
smodir, dye he? by deth. But 3e seyn, Who 
euere ‘shal saye® to fadirf or$ modir, What 
euere 3ifte is of me, it shal profite to thee ; 
éand he hath not worshipidi his* fadir or! 
modir; and 3e han made™ the maunde- 
ment" of God voide, ‘or idyl°, for 3oure 
7tradicioun’. Ipocritis, Ysay, the prophete, 
8 propheciede wel of 3o0u, seyinge?, This 
peple honoureth me with lippis, forsothe 
9her herte’ is fer fro me; trewly thei wor- 
shipen me with outen cause, techynge the 
10 doctrines and’ maundements of men. And 
the cumpanyes ‘of peplet clepid ‘to gidre" 
to hym, he seide to hem, Heere 3e’, and 
11 ynderstonde”. Nat that* thing that entrith 
in to the mouth, defoulith a man; but 
thatY thing that cummeth forth fro the 


dOm.w. ©€ Genazarezt our sec.m. f hem o. 
him o. Om.u. namely ov. other p. or x. 
ouvwy. ©weren our.  P neizedden ov. 

techinges OUX. 


uvy. 


MATTHEW. 


& the ov. 

m his clothe ov. his clothing prow sec. m. 
@ passen ouer answ. breken ov. 
t theire hondis exy. her hondis nz sec. m. the hondis mw. 
w whi breken and 3e & pr.m. whi breken 3e & sec. m. PxY. Whi also breken 3e ov. 


XIV. 34—XV. 11. 


in to the loond of Genesar. And whanne 35 
men of that place hadden knowe hym, 
thei senten in to al that cuntre; and thei 
brou3ten to hym alle that hadden sik- 
nesseY. And thei preieden hym, that thei ss 
schulden touche the hemme of his cloth- 
ing; and who euere touchiden weren 
maad saaf. 


CAP AUve 


Thanne the scribis and the’ Farisees! 
camen to hym fro Jerusalem, and seiden, 
Whi breken thi disciplis the tradiciouns2 
of eldere men? for thei waisschen not her 
hondis, whanne thei eten breed. He an-3 
sweride, and seide to hem, Whi breken 
je the maundement* of God for 3oure 
tradicioun ? For God seide, Honoure thi4 
fadir aud thi modir, and he that cursith 
fadir or modir, die» bi deeth. But 3e5 
seien, Who euer seith> to fadir or modir, 
What euere 3ifte is of me, it schal profite 
to thee; and he hath not worschipid hisé 
fadir or his® modir; and 3e han maad the 
maundement‘ of God voide for 3oure tra- 
dicioun. Ypocritis, Isaie, the prophete, 7 
prophesiede wel of 3ou, and seide, Thiss 
puple honourith me with lippis, but her 
herte is fer fro me; and® thei worschipen 9 
me ‘with outen cause‘, techynge the doc- 
trines$ and> maundementis of men, And 10 
whanne the puple!' weren* clepid to gidere 
to hym, he seide to hem, Here 3e, and 
‘vndurstonde 3e!. That™ thing that en-11 
trith in to the mouth, defoulith not a 
man; but that thing that cometh out of 
the mouth, defoulith a man.. Thanne12 


fall men ov. k to 
2 Om. G pr. m. 
r Om. oux. §& cther the 
v Om. 4GMNOS 

Xx commaund- 


b brou3ten u see. m. 


u seide ov. 


ment ov. Y tradiciouns o. 2Om.ov. ®Om.o. thouv. >%Om.ov. Cand x. 40m. ov. 
eseieth ov. seie x. fthefadire. ether ov. 4h schal 4 sec.m.ouwsee.m. 1 worschipe 4 sec. m. 
honour ov, k Om. v. lor his amnsw see. m. ether ov. m ymaad 1. © commaundement ov. 
© Om. oux. ? tradiciouns x. and seide ov. ‘herteso. ‘Sandthec. tOm.ov. toe prim. 
vy Om. o. W vnderstondeth ox. x this ov, Y this ov. 


Y sijknesses R. 2 Om. cbhik. 
4 comaundement k pr. m. 
k was cr. 1! vndirstondeth 1. 


a 


m That that hi. 


® comaundement crgf. 
€ withoute cause forsothe 1. 


¢ Om. c. 


bdie he a pr.m.K. >» seien R. 
i puplis a. 


f£Om.1. & doctryn b. 4 and thes. 


XV. 12——26. 


12mouth, defoulith a man. Thanne his * 
disciplis ‘cummynge ni3! seiden to hym, 
Wost thou, that™, this word herd, Phari- 

13Sees ben sclaundrid? And he auswerynge 
seith", Euery® plantynge, the? whiche my 
fadir of heuen hath nat plantid, shal be 

14drawen vp by the roote. Suffre je hem; 
thei? ben blynde, ‘and lederis of blynde 
men". Sothely 3if a blynd man 3eueS led- 
ynge to a blynd man, bothe fallen doun in 
15to the diche. Forsothe Petre answerynge 
saidet to hym, Expoun to vs this" parable. 

16 And he seide, 3it and’ 3e ben without vn- 

17derstondyng ? Wher 3e vnierstonde nat, 
that* al thing that entrith in to the mouth, 
goth in to the wombe, and is sent out in 

18 toY the? goyng awey? But tho thingis that 
cummen forth fro the mouth, gon out of 
the herte, and tho thingus defoulen a man. 

19 For of* the herte ‘gon out” yuel thou3tis, 
mausleayngis*, auoutries, fornicaciouns, 

20 theftis, ‘fals witnessis', blasfemyes. ‘These 
thingis it ben that defoulen a man; sothely 
for® to ete with houdis vnwashen‘, defoul- 

2ieth not a man. And Jhesus gon out fro 
thennys, wente into parties’ of Tyre and 

22Sidon. And loo! a womman of Canane 
gon out of the! costis, cryede, seyinge to 
hym, Lord, the son of Dauid, haue mercye 
on' me; my dou3ter is yuel traueilid of a 
23deuylk. The! whiche answerid nat to hir 
o™ word. And his disciplis ‘cummynge 
to" preyeden hym®, seyiuge, Leeue thou 
24hire, for she crieth after vs. Forsothe he 
answerynge seith?, J am nat sezt, no but 
to the sheep of the hous of Yrael that 

25 perishiden. Bot4 she came, and wirshipide 

26 hym, seyinge, Lord, help" me. The’ whiche 
answerynge seith', It is nat good for" to 
take the’ breed of sonys, and sende” to 


MATTHEW. 41 


hise disciplis camen, and seiden to hym, 
Thou knowist, that, if this word be herd, 
the Farisees ben sclaundrid? And he13 
ausweride, atid seide, Eueri plauntyng, 
that my fadir of heuene hath not plaunt- 
id, shal be drawun vp by the" roote. Suffre 14 
3e hem; thei ben blynde®, and leederis of 
blynde men. And if a blynd man lede a 
blynd man, bothe? fallen doun4 in to the® 
diche. Petre answeride, and seide to1s 
hym, Expowne to vs this parable. And 16 
he seide, 3it ‘3e ben® also' with oute vn- 
durstondyng ? Vudurstonden 3e not, that 17 
al thing that eutrith in to the mouth, 
goith in to the wombe, aud is sent out in 
to the goyng awei? But tho" thingis that 1s 
comen’ forth fro the mouth, goon out 
of” the herte, and tho thingis defoulen 
aX man. For’ of the herte goon out yuele 19 
thou3tis, mansleyngis, auowtries, forny- 
caciouns, theftis, fals witnessyngis, blas- 
femyes. Thes thingis it ben that de-20 
foulen a man; but to’ ete with hondis 
not waischui, defoulith not a man. Ande 
Jhesus 3ede out fro thennus, aud wente 
in to the coostis of Tire aud Sidon*. And ee 
lo! a womman of Canane 3ede out of 
tho* coostis, and criede, and seide to 
him, Lord, the sone of Dauid, haue 
merci on ine; my dou3ter is yuel tra- 
ueilid of a feeud. And he answeride not? 23 
to hir a® word. And hise disciplis camen, 
and preieden hym, and seiden, Leue thou 
hir, for she crieth aftir vs. He answer-24 
ide, and seide, Y am not sent, but to the 
scheep of the hous of Israel that perisch- 
iden*, And she cam, and worschipide 2s 
lym, and seide, Lord, helpe me. Which 26 
answeride, and seide, It is not good to 
take the breed of children, and caste! to 


k Om. 0. | camen ny3 G. neijynge ov. ™ for Gsec.m.our. Om.apr.m. ® seide ov. © Iche ov. 
Eche x. P Om. G pr. m. ourw sec. m. Y. Gifthei ww. * Om. o. $ 3eueth Gosu. t seith a. 
uthix. Valsousec.m. W Whether s passim u passim x. * for ourwsec.m. YOm.Q. *%Om.k 

4 oute of ov. > commeth o. ¢ manes sleyuges 0. 4.fals witnesynges our. ¢ Om. ovx. 


pr. m. NQY. 
f not waschen AGNOPUPXY. 
eprxy. feende ou. 

4 Ando. Tf help thou ww pr.m. 
seende ov. 


10m. ov. 
s Om. ou. 


P bothe thei 1. 
x the Ia. 
Cnoc. 


» Om. s. 
Uthec. cometh h. 
8 the Eksce pr. m. hir b. 


VOL. IV. 


° blynde men 1. 
W fro khi. 
b Om. c. 


& the partes amsiw. the partyes GNopQsurXxY. 
Ma GMNPQSUVWY. 
t seide ou. 


q Om. R prim. 
y Forsothe 1. 
4 han perischid 1. 


h tho wur. thoo opy. i of 
Oto himo.  P seide ou. 


» neizinge ou. 
w sende it Guxy¥. to 


uQOm. ovx. VY Om. x. 


Tac. Sbenjex. ¢ Om. xKegh pr.m. 
yy for tog. 2 of Sydon erxqnbefkaf. 
e The whiche 1. f 3eue @. 


42 MATTHEW. 


27houndis. And she seide, 3he, Lord; for- 
whi* and’ the’ litel whelpis eten of the 
crummys, that fallen doun fro the bord of 
28her lordis. Thanue Jhesus answeringe 
seith® to hir, O8! thou womman, thi feith 
is grete; be it don to thee, as thou wolt. 
And hir dou3ter was heelid fro that hour. 
29 And wheune J hesus hadde passide thennes*, 
he came bisidis the see of Galilee. And he 
sosteiynge in to an hyl, sat there. And 
many cumpanyes ‘camen ni3‘ to hym, hau- 
ynge with hem doumbe men and crokid®, 
feble aud blynde, and many othir; and 
eastidenf hem doun at his feet. And he 
3thelide hem, so that the cumpanyes won- 
driden, seeynge doumbe men spekynge, 
and crokid® goynge, blynd men seeynge ; 
s2and thei magnyfieden God of Yrael. Sothe- 
ly Jhesus, his: disciplis gedered* to gider, 
seide!, I haue rewthe of the cumpany ‘of 
peple™, for now ‘the thridde day" thei 
dwellen still with me, and thei han not® 
thing? whiche’ thei shulen ete; and Y ‘wole 
nat™ leeue hem fastynge, lest thei failen in 
33the weye. And the disciplis seyen to hym, 
Therfore wherof so many Joouys to vs in 
desert, that we fulfilles so grete at cum- 
stpanye ‘of peple'? And Jhesus seith’ to 
lem, Hou many loouys han 3ee ? And thei 
seiden, Seuene, and a” few smalle* fishis. 
35 And he comaundide toY the cumpany, that 
thei shulde sitt to the’ mete vpon® the 
3éerthe. And he takynge senen looues, and 
fishis>, and doynge thonkyngis, brak, and 
3aue to his disciplis ; and disciplis 3anen 
s7to the peple. And alle’ eten, and weren 
fulfillid®, and thei tokenf that? that was! 
ssouer of relyuesi, seuene lepis fulle. For- 
sothe thei* that eten weren foure thousand 
of! men, with outen litil children™ and 


XV. 27—38. 


houndis. And she seide, 3his, Lord; for 27 
whelpis eten of the crummes, that fallen 
doun fro the bord of her lordis. Thanne 2s 
Jhesus answeride, and: seide to hir, A! 
womman, thi feith is greet; be it doon 
to thee, as thon wolt. And hir don;tir 
was helid fro that hour. And.whanne 29 
Jhesus hadde passed fro thennus, he cam- 
bisidis the see of Galilee. And he 3ede 
vp in to an hil, and sat there. And 30 
myche puple cam to hym, and hadden 
with hem doumbe men and crokid, fe- 
ble and blynde, and many other; and 
thei castiden doun hem at hise feet. And 
he helide hem, so that the puple won-3! 
driden seynge doumbe men spekynge, 
and crokid goynge, blynde men seynge; 
and thei magnyfieden God of Israel. And 32 
Jhesus, whanne hise disciplis weren clep- 
id to gidere, seide to hem, Y haue reuthe 
of the puple, for thei han abiden now thre 
daies with me, and han" no thing to ete; 
and Y wole not leeue hem fastynge, lest 
thei failen in the weie. And the disciplis 33 
seien to him, Wherof thanne so many 
looues among vs in desert, to fulfille so 
greet a puple? And Jhesus seide to hem, 34 
Hou many looues han 3e? And thei 
seiden, Seuene, and a fewe smale fisshis. 
And he comaundide! to* the puple, to3s 
sitte to mete on the erthe. And he took 36 
seuene! looues and fyue™ fischis, and dide 
thankyngis, and brak*", and 3af to hise 
disciplis; and the disciplis 3auen to the 
puple. And alle eten, and weren ful-37 
fillid, and thei token that that was left of 
relifes, seuene lepis® fulle. And thei that 3s 
eten weren foure thousynde of men, with 
outen litle children and wymmen. And 39 
whaune he hadde left the puple, he wente 


* for ov. Yalsso ov. 7 Om. 4G pr.m. Nopurw sec.m. XY. 2 seide ov. > A! amnopurw. © fro thenes 


ou. ‘4neizjeden ov. —& croked men N. 


f thei castiden aNpurw sec. m. thei kesten Gxy. thei kest o. 


easten s._ & croked men oux. h Forsothe ov. i seide to his our. & cleped ovr. 10m. our. ™ Om. 
ou. "thre daiesov. no Gpxy.  P the thenge ov. qthat Gopuxy. nill ovx. 8 fill osux. 
tOm.w. “Om.ov. Vseide ov. W Om. vu. *litel ov. yOm. ov. 2% Om. samNnopsuywxy. on 
ogsu. the fisches p, ¢andthe a. ¢allemenv. €@ filled ov. f born awei3 N. & this ov. 2 lafte 
ov. ithe relefes ov. Kk tho o. 1 Om. Gpr.m.N. ™childre x pass. 

f Aa! asb pr.m.ca. & and feble ricghia3. thei han 1a. i comaunde s. k Om. hi. ! the seuene ta. ° 


™ the fyue hik sec.m. © brake hemi. © leep ta. 


XV. 39—KXVI. 13. 


39wemmen. And", the cumpanye ‘of peple® 
laft, he styede? vp1 in to a boot, and cam 


into the coostis™ of Magedan. 


CAPOXVI: 

i And Pharisees and Saduceis temptynge 
him’ ‘camen ni3* to hym, and preiden hym 
for" to shewe to hem a tokene fro heuene. 

2And he answerynge seith”Y to hem, The 
eeuenynge” maad, 3e seien, It shal be* 

3cleer, for the heuene is ‘lijk to reed’; and 
‘the morwe’, To? day tempest, for heuen 
ashyneth ‘heuy, ov sorwful». Therfore 3e 
‘han knowe® to deme wisely the face of 
heuen, but 3e mowen not wite® the tokenys® 
of tymes. The yuel generacioun and avow- 
trerf sekith a tokne; and a tokene shal nat 
be 3ouen to it, no but the tokne of Jonas, 
the prophete. And, hem forsaken, he 
swente awey. And whenne his disciplis 
camen® ouer the see, thei forjaten for" to 
6take loouys. The‘ whiche seide to hem, 
Beholde 3e, and beth* war of the sourdow3 
70f Pharisees! and Saducees™. And _ thei 
thou3ten amonge hem®, seiynge, For we 
shan nat taken loouys. Forsothe Jhesus 
witynge seide® to hem, What thenken 3e 
amonge 3ou of litil feith, for 3e han natP 
gloouys? 3it4 3e vndirstonden nat, nether" 
han mynde’ of fyue loouys in to fyue thou- 
sand of men, and hou many cofyns 3e 
iotoken? trewly nether of seuen loouys in 
to four thousand of men, and hou many 
ilepist 3ee token? Whi vndirstonden 3e 
nat, for I seide nat to 3ou of" breed, Be 
3e war of sourdow3” of Pharisees and of * 
izSaducees? Thanne thei vnderstoden, that 
he seide natY to be war of sourdow3? of 
loouys, bote of the techynge of Pharisees 
isand Saducees. Sothely Jhesus came in to 
the* parties ‘of Cesarie® of Philip, and 


° Oni. ov. 
Vv seide ov. 


® Cap. xvi. begins here in o. 
vwy. tneizedeno. 4% Om. ovx. 
Z morou tyde ov. 4 maad to N. 
ou. €signes ov. tokene r. 
1Om. ov. be amnopury. 1 Phariseis o. 
P not taken ov. 4 And 3it K sec.m.  * nor o. 
soure dow amNopuyw. W the Pharisees o. 
oux. #Om.r. » Om. o. 


P Om. IK. 
W not takun c. 


d and thei ta. * praijnge i. 
x 3e vndurst. not Kqseghi. 


P steiz x. 

W euentyde ov. 

> sorowful ar heuy o. sorowful vu. heuy x. 

f avoutresse OUVW sec. m. 

m of Saduceis ov. 
sin mynde vu. 

x Om. AMNIV pr. in. 


t beth Er. be 3e Q. 
y the Saduceis s. of Saducees ek. 


G2 


8 was A. 


MATTHEW. 43 


vp in to a boot, and cam in to the coostis 
of Magedan. 


CAP. XVI. 


And the Farisees and the? Saducees! 
camen to hym temptynge, and4 preieden" 
hym to schewe hem a tokene fro heuene. 
And he answeride, and scide to hem, 2 
Whanne the euentid is’ comun, 3e seicu, 
It schal be clere, for henene is rodi; and 3 
the morewtid, To dai tempest, for heuene 
schyneth heueli. Thanne 3e kunne deme 4 
the face of heuene, but 3e moun not wite 
the tokenes of tymes. An yuel genera- 
cioun and anoutresse sekith a tokene; and 
a tokene schal not be 3ouun to it, but the 
tokene of Jonas, the profete. And whanne 
he hadde left hem, he wente forth. And5 
whanne his disciplis cainen ouer the see, 
thei forjaten to take loones. And heé 
seide to hem, Biholde 3e, and bet war of 
tle" soure dow3 of Farisees and Sadu- 
cees. And thei thou3ten among hem, and 7 
seiden, For we han not take Jooues. Buts 
Jhesus witynge seide to hem, What 
thenken 3e among 30u of litel feith, for 
3e han not” looues? 3it ‘vndurstonden 9 
not 3e%, nether han mynde of fyue looues 
in to fyne thousynde of men, and hou 
many cofyns je token? nether of seuene 10 
looues in to foure thousynde of men, and 
hou many lepis 3e token? Whi vndur-!! 
stonden 3e not, for Y seide not to 30u of 
breed, Be 3e war of the sourdow3 of 
Farisees and of Saducees? Thanne thei !2 
vndurstooden, that he seide not to be 
war of sourdow3 of looues, but of the 
techyng of Farisees and Saducees’, And 13 
Jhesus cam in to the parties of Cesarie 
of Filip, and axide hise disciplis, and 


q Om. ovx. Teoosteo. § Om. K pr.m. opTuU 
xOm.T. Yrody o, reed cither rody v. 
¢ kunnen ov. 4 knowe 
h Om. oux. 

D hem self @sec.m.ou. © seith x. 
toflepis Ksce.m. Ynotofr, the 
Ynot tohem og. 2 the sourdow3 


& had went o. hadden comen vu. 


a Om, E1ra8. Vand of ibg. 


44 MATTHEW. 


axide® his disciplis, seyinge’, Whom seyn 
i4men to ben mannes sone? And thei seiden, 
Summe Joon Baptist; other forsothe® He- 
ly; ‘but otherf Jeremye, or® oon of the 
is prophetis. Jhesus seith* to hem, Sothely' 
iswhom seien 3e me to be? Symon Petre 
auswerynge seide, Thon art Crist, the sone 
izof ‘God lyuyngej. Forsothe Jhesus an- 
sweryuge seide to hym, Blessid art thou, 
Symon Bariona*, that is, the’ sone of cul- 
uer™; for flesh and blood shewide nat to 
thee, but my fadir that" is in heuenes. 
is And Y seye to thee, for thou art Petre, 
and vpon® this stoon I sha] bilde my 
churche, and the 3atis of helle shulen nat 
ighan mi3t, ‘or strevgthe?, azeins it. And 
to thee I shal 3eue the keies of the kyng- 
dam of heuenes ; and what euer thou shalt 
bynde vpon‘ erthe, shal be bounden and 
in henenes; and what ener thou shalt 
vnbynde vpon’ erthe, shal be vnbounden 
20andt in heuenes. Thanne he comaundide 
to his disciplis, that thei shuldenu seie to 
2ino man, that" he was Crist’. Fro that 
tyme Jhesus bygan for’ to shewe to his 
disciplis, that* it byhouithY hym to” go to 
Jerusalem, and suffre* many thingus of the 
eldris, and scribis*, and princis‘ of prestis; 
and be® sleyn, and thef thridde day ryse® 
22vp> asein. And Petre, takynge hym tol, 
began for* to blame hym, seyinge!, Fer be 
it fro thee, Lord™; this thing shal not be 
23to thee. The? whiche, turnyd, seide to 
Petre, Sathanas, go after me; thou art 
sclaundre to me; for thou ‘sauerist nat, ov 
vudirstondist nat°, tho thingis that ben of 
God, but tho thingis that ben of men. 
24 Thanne Jhesus seide to his disciplis, 3if 
eny man wole cume after me, denye he 
hym self, and take his crosse, and sue me; 


©he axed ov. 4 and seide ov. 
ou. Jquike God ov. * Bargena x. 
oux. P Om. ouvx. 4onoux. 
v Jhesu Criste aourw sec. m. Jhesus n. 
byhoned o. 
G. of scribes sopury. 4 of princes ov. 
*k Om. osux. land seide ou. 
vad. P. saucurest not x. 


€ somme o. 


m Om. uv. 


y that is, sone of a culuer ¢ text K marg. X marg. B text. 
€ to him p pr.m. c. 
k go thou 1. 


Isec.m. © for to A prom. Q. 


dhes. 
h and of ciak. 


1 Om. a pr.m. i Om. s. 


f other forsothe ou. 
1 Om. 4GNoperi sec. m. XY. 

r Om. c. alsso ou. 
w Om. osux. 
z Om. AGMNPSW sec. m. for to Wopr. mM. 
€ to be ov. fin the ou. 
a Om. ouw pr. m. 


XVI. 14—24. 


seide, Whom seien men to be mannus 
sone? And thei seiden, Summe Joon14 
Baptist; othere Elie; and othere Jeremye, 
or oon of the prophetis. Jhesus seide to15 
hem, But whom seien 3e me to be? Sy-16 
mount Petre answeride, and seide, Thou 
art Crist, the sone of God lyuynge. Jhe-17 
sus answeride, and seide to him, Blessid 
art thou, Symount Bariona’; for fleisch 
and blood schewide not to thee, but my 
fadir that is in heuenes. And Y seie18 
to thee, that? thou art Petre, and on this 
stoon Y schal bilde my chirche, and the 
jatis of helle schulen not haue mi3t* ajens 
it. And to thee Y shal 3yue the keies19 
of the kingdom of heuenes; and what 
euer thou shalt bynde on erthe, schal be 
boundun also in heuenes; and what euer 
thou schalt vnbynde on erthe, schal be 
vubounden also in henenes. Thanne he20 
comaundide to hise disciplis, that thei 
schulden seie to no man, that he was 
Crist», Fro that tyme Jhesus bigan to®21 
schewe to hise disciplis, that it? bihofte 
hyin® gof to Jerusalem, and suffre many 
thingis, of the eldere men, and of scribis&, 
and princis of prestis; and be slayn, 
and the! thridde dai to rise ajen. And 22 
Petre took hym, and bigan to blame 
him, and seide, Fer be it fro thee, Lord ; 
this thing) schal not be to thee. And he23 
turnede, and seide to Petre, Sathanas, 
go after me; thou art a’ sclaundre to me; 
for thou sauerist not tho thingis that ben 
of God, but tho thingis that ben of men. 
Thanne Jhesus seide to his disciplis, If24 
ony man wole come after me, denye he 
hym silf, and take his cros, and sue™ me; 
for he that wole make his lijf saaf, shal 25 
leese it; and he that schal leese his lijf 


h seide ov. ! But 
n whiche ov. © on 
u for oUVW sec, m. 
y bihofte avw sec. m. 
beldre men uv. © of the scribes 
& to rise osu. bOm.u. i Om. ou. 
© ynderstondist not au. sau. not, or 


& ether ou. 
™ @ culuer U. 
£Om. a. also ou. 
X for OUVIV sec. m. 
4 to soffer ou. 


8 on ou. 


b Jhesu Crist 
& the scribis cerc. 


2 Om. ea. ® power R pr.m. 
f to go ceirarscghikaf. 
10m. ci. ™ swe he khik. 


XVI. 25—=XVIL. 9. 


e5for he that wole make ‘his soule saaf?P, 
‘that is, his lyf 4, shal lese it; forsothe he 
that shal lese his soule', ‘that is, his lyf, 

26for me, shal fynde it. Sothely what pro- 
fitith itt to a man, ‘3if he’ wynne al the 
world, trewly he suffre peyrynge of” his 
soule ? or” what chaungynge shal a man 

27 3eue for his soule? For mannes sone ‘is 
to* come in glorieY of his fadir, with his 
angelis, and thanne he shal 3elde to euery” 

2aman aftir* his workis. Treuly I seie to 
30u, ‘there ben summe of men stondynge® 
heer, ‘the whiche? shul nat taaste deth, 
til thei seen mannys sone cummynge in® 
his kyngdom*, 


CAP. XVII. 


1 And after sexe dayes Jhesns toke Petre, 
and Jamys, and Joon, his brother, and 
2ledde hem asydis in to an hi3 hill, and was 
transfigured, ‘or turnyd into an other licke- 
nesse®, bifore hem. And his face schoon* 
as the sunne; forsothe his clothis were 
3maad white as snow. And lo! Moyses 
and Helye apperiden to hem, spekynge 
awithi hym. Sothely Petre answerynge 
seid‘ to Jhesu, Lord, it is good vs to be 
here. 3if thou wolt, make we here three 
tabernaclis; to thee oon, to Moyses oon, 
sand oon to Helie. 3it hym spekynge, loo! 
a.liz3ty! cloude shadewid hem; and loo! a 
vois of ™ the cloude, seyinge, This is my 
derworth sone, in whom I haue wel pleside 
sto me; heere 3e hym. And the disciplis, 
heerynge, fellen doun in to her facis, and 
7dredden gretely.* And Jhesus ‘came ni3°, 
and touchide hem, and seide to hem, ‘Ris 
svp°, nyl? 3e dreede. Forsothe thei, ‘rysynge 
vp? her ei3en, sawen no man, no but 
gJhesus aloon. And, hein™ cummynge doun 
fro the mounteyn’, Jhesus comaundide 


P safe his lijf ov. 4 Om. oux. 
too. Vinx. Wether ou. 
hem ov. © that stonden ov. 
oupr m. 8 schined ov. iton, 

9 rise ge ou. riseth x. P and nil our. 
Fr thei v. 5 hill ov. 


t lyf ov. 


x schal ov. 


kK seith a. 


° ether c. 
wand he rR. 
Band 1. 


™ peirement rR. 4% Om. hi. 
tzouc. %Om.q.  ¥ bisidis Q. 
EIPQ sec. m. § sup.Tas. ¢ pr. m. kaB. 


8 Om. aosux. that is, lijf vw sec. m.yY. 
Y the glorie ou. 
d whiche ov. that x. 
] brizte ov. lizt sr. litil x. 
4 rerynge 4MNS. reysynge GouY. reryng up Viv. reisende vp xX. 


Pin the c. 
x transfigurid c. 
b liftiden zxrRif. 


MATTHEW. 45 


for me, schal fynde it. For what profit- 26 
ith it to a man, if he wynne al the world, 
and suffre peiryng™ of his" soule? or® 
what chaunging schal a man 3yue for his 
soule? For mannes sone schal come in? 27 
glorie of his fader, with his aungels, and 
thamne he schal 3elde to ech’ man after" 
his werkis. Treuli Y seie to 30u, ‘theres 
ben sumine® of hem! that stonden here, 
whiche schulen not taste deth, til thei 
seen mannus sone comynge in his kyng- 
dom. 


CAP. XVII. 


And after sixe daies Jhesus took Pe-1 
tre, and James, and Joon, his brother, and 
ledde hem" aside’ in to an hi3 hil, ande 
was turned® in to an othir licnesse bifor 
hem. And his face schone as the sunne; 
and hise clothis weren maad white as 
snowe. And lo! Moises and Elie apper-3 
iden to hem**, and spaken with hym. And 4 
Petre answeride, and seide to Jhesu, 
Lord, it is good vs to be here. If thou 
wolt, make we here thre tabernaclis; to 
thee don, to Moises oon, and oon to Elye. 
3it the’ while he spak, lo! a bri3t cloudes 
ouerschadewide hem; and lo! a voice out? 
of the cloude, thate seide, This is my 
dereworth sone, in whom Y haue wel 
pleside to me; here 3e hym. And thee 
disciplis herden, and felden doun on her 
faces, and dredden greetli. And Jhesus7 
cam, and touchide hem, and seide to 
hem, Rise vp, and nyle je drede. Ands 
thei liften® vp her izen, and saien no man, 
but Jhesu aloone. And as thei camensy 
doun of the hille, Jhesus comaundide to 


t Om. x. 4% for 
avp ou. > sum men ben of 
f rewme ou. g Om. 
™ frou. " neized ov. 


2 eche ou. 
€ into K sec. m. 


q euery plures. rvpc. 8 sum men ben c. 
x<hymR. YOm.1s. 2 cam out 


46 MATTHEW. 


hem’, seyinge", Saie 3e to no man the vi- 
sioun, til’ mannes sone ryse a3ein fro 
iodead*. And his disciplis axiden hyin, 
seyinge*, What therfore seyn scribis, that 
11it behoueth Hely first come’? And he 
answerynge seith? to hem, Forsothe Hely 
‘is to® come, and he shal restore alle 
izthingis. Treuly Y seye to 3ou, that? Hely 
is now comen, and thei knewen hym nat, 
but thei diden in hym, what euere thingis® 
thei wolden ; so and mannys sone ‘is tot 
issuffre of hem. Thanne disciplis* vndir- 
stoden, that’ of Joon Baptist he hadde seid 
14to hem. And whanne he cain to’ the 
cumpanye ‘of peple®, a man ‘cam to hym, 
foldid' on knees byfore hym, seyinge!, 
Lord, haue mercy on™ my sone; for he is 
lunatyke, and suffrith yuel, for why" oft 
tymys® he fallith in to the? fijr, and oft 
1s tymys‘ in to water. And I offride' hym to 
thi disciplis, and thei my3ten nat hele 
ihym. Jhesus answerynge seith’, A! thou 
generacioun vnbyleeful, ‘or out of the 
feith', and weiward ; hou longe shal I be 
with 30u? hou longe shal I suffre 30u ? 
17 Brynge 3ee hym hidir to me. And Jhesus 
blamyde hym, and the deuel" wente out 
fro hym; and the child is’ helid fro that 
ishoure. Thanne disciplis” ‘eamen ni3* to 
Jhesu priuyly, and seiden to hym, Whi 
l9mizte nat we casten hym out? Jhesus 
seithY to hem, For 3oure vnbyleue*.. Treuly 
I seie to 30u, 3if 3e shulen haue feith, as a* 
corn of seneuey, 3e shulen seie to this hill, 
Passe thou henuus®, and it shal passe®; 
and no thing shal be impossible to 30u ; 
20 forsothe this kynde is nat cast out, no but 
21 by preyinge® and fastynge. Treuly, hem’ 
lyuynge togidre in Galilee, Jhesus seide to 
hem, Mannes sone ‘is to be bitraied® in to 
22the hondis of men; and thei shulen slea 


Vv til that e. 
b for ov. 


tto hem opx, “and seide ov. 
GPSx. 2seide ou. 4 schal ou. 
ouvwsec.m. €intoo. b Om. ov. 
tohim vu. land seide ov. ™ of c. 
T brouzte uv. § seide ov. ¢ Om. oux. 
Y seide o. 2 ynfeithfulnesse vu. @ the vu. 
4 yvnpossible N. © preier ov. f thei u. 


n Om. ou. 


¢ Om. c. 
cepsbechi. 


4 the Baptist a pr.m. be sec. m. ea3. 
bofa. ithe watir KRsv8. k Om. c. 


w deeth c. deed men ou. 

¢ thing p. 

i fell o. foldid vu. falt x. 

© QOm.u. time x. 
Vv was OU. 

b fro thens o. fro hennes vu. 

& schal be trayed ou. is to bitraied r. 


u feend ov. 


© of p. 
lin g. 


XVII. 10-—-22. 


hem, and seide, Seie 3e to no man the 
visioun, til mannus sone rise a3en fro 
deeth. And his disciplis axiden hym, 10 
and seiden, What thanne seien the scribis, 
that it bihoueth that Elie come first ? He tt 
answeride, and seide to hem, Elie schal 
come, and he schal restore alle thingis. 
And Y seie to 3on, that Elie is nowe lz 
comun, and thei knewen hym not, but 
thei diden in him what euer thingis thei 
wolden; and® so mannus sone schal suf- 
fre of hem. Thanne the disciplis vndur- 13 
stoden, that he seide to hem of Joon Bap- 
tist?. And whanne he cam to the puple, 14 
aman cain to hym, and felde doun on® 
hise’ kuees bifor hym, and seide, Lord, 
haue merci on my sone; for he is lnna- 
tike, and snffrith yuele, for ofte tymes he 
fallith in to the® fier, and ofte® tymes in 
to water, And Y brou3te hym to thiis 
disciplis, and thei my3ten not heele hyin. 
Jhesus answeride, and seide, A*! thou1s 
generacion vnbileueful and weiward ; hou 
long schal Y be with 30u? hou long 
schal Y suffre 30u? Brynge 3e hym hider 
to me. And Jhesus blamede hym, and 17 
the deuel wente out fro hym; and the 
child was heelid fro that our. Thanne 1s 
the disciplis camen to Jhesu priueli, aud 
seiden to hyn, Whi my3ten not we caste 
hym out? Jhesus seith to hem, For 3oure 19 
vnbileue. Treuli Y seie to 30u, if 3e hau 
feith, as a corn of seneueye, 3e schulen 
seie to this hil, Passe thou hennus, and it 
schal passe; and no thing schal be vn- 
possible to 30; but this kynde is not20 
caste out, but bi! preiyng™ and fastyng. 
And whilis thei weren abidynge togidere 21 
in Galilee, Jhesus seide to hem, Mannus 
sone schal be bitraied in to the hondis of 
men; and thei schulen sle hym, and 22 


X and seiden ov. Y to come 
4schall ov. © the disciples opu. — £ for 
k him, neizynge to him o. him, neijede 
P Om. oux. Om. ov. time x. 
W the disciples opux. * neizeden ou. 
¢ passe thennys Ww pr. m. 


f Om. ccteri ct a8. ff hane thou rn. & Om. 


m preier Kg. 


XVI. 23——-XVII. 7. 


hym, and the* thridde day he shal ryset 
a3ein. And thei ‘ben maad ful. sory”. 
23 And whanne ‘he came’ to Capharnaum, 
thei that token tribut, camen-to Petre, and 
seiden to hym, 3oure maister payeth nat 
24 tribute? And he seith’, 3he. And whenne 
he had entrid in to an house, Jhesus came 
bifore hym, seyinge*, Syniount, what sem- 
ethY to thee ? Of whiche taken the kyngis 
of erthe tribut, ‘or rent?? of her owne 
sonys, ether* of » alyenys, ‘or other mennys 
25 sones®? And he seide, Of ‘other mennus 
sonys’. Jhesus seide to hym, Therfore 
26sonys ben free. Forsothe® that we sclaun- 
dre nat hem, go thou to the see, and sendef 
au hoke, and take ‘the ilke® fishe that first 
cummeth vp; and, his mouth openyd, thou 
shalt fynde stater", ‘that is, a certeyn of 
moneye'; thou takyng it, 3euc* to! hem 
for me and for thee, 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 In that hour the disciplis ‘camen ni3™ 
to Jhesus, seiynge", Who, gessist® thou, is 
2more? in the kyngdam4 of heuenes? And 
Jhesus, clepynge to™ a litil child, putte® 
shym in the mydil' of hem; and seide, ‘1 
seie trewthe" to 3ou, no” but 3if” 3e shnulen 
be turnyd, and maad* as litil children, 3e 
shulen nat entren in to the kyngdamY of 
sheuenes. Therfore who euere ‘shal meeke? 
hym? as this litil child, he is more> in 
sthe kyngdam¢ of heuenes. And he? that 
resceyueth oon siche litil® in my uame, 
éresceyueth me. Forsothe ‘who shal sclaun- 
dref oon of these ‘smale leste’, that by- 
leeuen in me, it spedith to hym that a 
myln stoon of assis be hanged in his neeke, 
and! be drenchid in to the depnesse of 
;the see. Woo to the world, for sclaundris ; 


8 in the ou. 
W seide ou. 
€ Om. opux. 
K 3eue it u. 
r Om. ov. 
Y rewme ou. 


t arijse vy. 
x and seide ov. _Y semith it c. 
4 alienes opu. & But ov. 
1Om.v. ™ neijeden ov. 
Ssettou.  myddes ou. 
zmeketh opv. @ himself v. 


fifa man sclaundreth ov. who euere schal sclaundre 9. 


smale wp. smalest x. i and that he ov. 


othe erthe kbg. ° Om. c. 
A sec.m. take it and 1Q sec. m.a. 
vYerectc. W Om. A pr. m. Qc 


P go thou c. 
8 Om. M. 
* forsothe 1. 


u weren sorowful greetly ov. were maad ful sory r. 
z Om. x. ether rest v. 
f east U sec. m. 
n and seiden ou. 

u Trewly I seie ou. 
b the gretter ou. 


q that is, a certen of money K marg. 
t eamen ny3 KM. pr.m. 


MATTHEW. 47 


the thridde day he schal rise a3en to lijf. 
And thei weren ful sori. And whanne 2: 
thei camen to Cafarnaum, thei that tokeu 
tribute, camen to Petre, and seiden to 
hym, 3oure maister payeth not tribute ? 
And he seide, 3his. And whanne he was 24 
comen in to the hous, Jhesus cam bifor 
hym, and seide, Syinount, what semeth 
to thee ? Kyngis of erthe”, of whom taken 
thei tribute ? of her sones, ether of aliens? 
And? he seide, Of aliens. Jhesus seide to 2s 
hym, Thanne sones ben fre. But that we 26 
sclaundre hem not, go? to the see, and 
caste an hook, and take thilke fisch that 
first cometh vp; and, whanne his mouth 
is opened, thon schalt fynde a_stater’, 
and® 3yue for thee and for me. 


CAP. XVIII. 


In that our the’ diseiplis eamen* to1 
Jhesu, and seiden, Who, gessist thou, is 
gretter" in the kyngdom of heuenes ?- 
And Jhesus eclepide a litil child, and putte 2 
hym in the myddil of hem; and seide,3 
Y seie treuthe to 30u, but 3e be turned, 
and maad as litle children, 3e schulen 
not entre in to the kyngdom of leuenes. 
Therfor who euer mekith hym as this4 
litil child, he is gretter’ in the kyngdom 
of heuenes. And he that resseyueth 05 
siche litil child in my name, resseyueth 
me. But who so selaundrith oon of these 6 
smale, that bileuen in me, it spedith to 
hym that a mylnstoon ‘of assis” be hang- 
id in his necke, and he be drenchid in 
the depnesse of the see. Woo to the7 
world, for sclaundris; for* it is nede that 


v thei camen our. 
aor sx. other yw. >» Om. N. 
@ that x. ba stater 4eMNo sec. m. pu. § Om.x. 
o gessith K. Pthe moreov. 4 rewme ov. 
vOm. x. W Om.Gmourw. * be made ou. 
Crewmeovu. 4Om.c. © litil child . 
& lytil ov. smale 4s sec. m. viv sec.m. leeste 


r and take it, and 
" greet cr. this grettere @. 


48 MATTHEW. 


treuly it is neede, that sclaundris come ; 
netheles woo to ‘the ilk* man by whom a! 
ssclaundre cometh. Forsothe 3if thin hond 
or™ thi foot sclaundre" thee, kitt ‘it of, 
aud kastP awey fro thee. It is good to 
thee to1 entre in to lyf ‘feble, other crok- 
ed’, than hauynge two’ hondis ort two 
feet to be sent in to euerlastynge fijr. 
9 And 3if thin eije sclaundre" thee, pulle it 
out, and cast’ awey fro thee. It is good to 
thee with oon ei3e to” entre in to lyf, than 
hanynge two* eizen to be sente in toY ‘fijr 
100f helle?. Se 3e, that 3e dispise nat oon 
of these* litile. Trewly I seie to 30u, that 
the angelis of hem in hetenes seen euer- 
more® the face of my fadir that? is in 
1 heuenes. Forsothe mannys sone came for® 
12to saue that thing that perishide. What 
semethf to 30u? 3if ‘ther weren to summan’ 
an hundrid sheep", and oon of hem ‘shall 
erre!, wher“ he shal nat leeue nynty and 
nyne in desert!, and shal go for™ to seeke 
isthat® that erride ? And if it befalle° that 
he fyndeP it, trewly I seie to 30u, for he 
shal ioye theron more than of4 nyuty and 
iunyne that erriden nat. So it is nat will" 
before’ youre fadir thatt is in heuenes", 
isthat oon of these’ litil perishe. Forsoth 
3if thi brother ‘shal synne” in* thee, go 
thou, and reproueY hym, ‘or snxybbe?, bi- 
twixe* thee and hym aloone; 3if® he ‘shal 
heere® thee, thou hast wounen thi brother. 
16 Trewly 3if he ‘shal nat heere’ thee, take® 
with thee oon or two‘, that euery® word 
stonde in the mouthe of two or! three 
17 witnessis. That 3if he shal nat heere hem, 
seie thou to tle chirche. Forsothe 3if he 
shal not heere the chirche, be hee ‘to 
isthee* as an! hethen™ and a® puplicane. I 


k that ovx. 1 that o. Om. pri sec. m. x. 
P kast it o. 4 for to ov. 
u sclauudreth opuiy. Vv kast it o. 
fier vu. hell of fyer ov. this o. > for our. 
£ Om. ov. 4 scheep weren to oo man ou. 
V billes ou pr. m. the hillis @ sec. m. 
AMNPUFWX. Y¥thewilov. Sofo. t whiche vu. 
hane synned x. *ajens ou. Y blame thou ov. 
4 hereth not ov. haue not herd x. 


m ether ov. 
¥ croked, ether feble o. feble, or crokid px. 
’ for tou. Om. i. 
© euer ou. 
i hath erred ouvw sec. m. haue errid x. 

a thilke ov. 
u heuen o. 
Zz Om. oux. 
€ take thou o. take to p. 


m Om. osux. 


XVII. 8—18. 


sclaundris come; netheles wo to thilke 
man bi whom a’ seclaundre cometh. And 
if thin hoond or thi foot .sclaundreth? 
thee, kitte it of, and caste* awei fro 
thee. It is betere to thee to entre to Jijf 
feble, ethir crokid, than hauynge tweyne 
hoondis or twey feet to be sent in to 
euerlastynge fier. And if thin ije9 
sclaundre® thee, pulle it out, and caste* 
awei fro thee. It is betere to thee with 
oon ize to entre in to lijf, thanne han- 
yuge tweyn i3en to be sent in to the fier 
of helle. Se 3e, that 3e dispise not oon 10 
of these litle. For Y seie to 30u, that the 
aungels of hem in heuenes seen euermore 
the face of my fadir that is in heuenes. 
For mannus sone cam to saue that thing 11 
that perischide. What semeth to 30u ? 12 
If ther weren to sum® man an hundrid 
scheep, and von of hem hath errid, whe- 
thirf he schal not leeue nynti and nyne 
in desert, and schal go to8 seche that that 
erride? And if it falle that he fynde it, 13 
treuli Y seie to 3o0u, that he schal haue 
ioye theron" more than on! nynti and 
nyne that erriden not. So it is not the 14 
wille bifor’ j3oure fadir that is in heuenes, 
that oon of these litle perische. But ifts 
thi brother synueth aj3ens thee, go thou, 
and repreue hym, bitwixe thee and hym 
aloone; if! he herith thee, thou hast 
wonnun thi brother. And if he herith 16 
thee not, take with thee oon or tweyne, 
that euery word stonde in the mouth of 
tweyne or thre witnessis. And if he17 
herith™ not hein, seie thou to the chirche. 
But® if he herith® not the chirehe, be he 
as an hethen? and‘ a pupplican to thee. 
Y seie to 30u treuli, what euer thingis® 3e 18 


9° awey it ov. 
Stweyneuw. ether ov. 

Yto the acunestrywx. 2 helle 
€ Om. osux.  f semeth it o. 

k whether x. 
© bifalieth vu. Pfyndeth vu. don 
vthis g. Ww hath synned ov. synne nN. 
abitwen sx. Dandifa. c¢ hereth ou. 
f tweyne Novy ef w pass. & eche oux. 


® sclaundrith Garopuy. 


x tweyne iV. 
@ whiche ou. 


h stondeth w. teitherofu. kOm.o. lag. ™ hethen man opuW pr.m, © Om. aMNopsurW. 

yOm.crr. 2sclaundre cxik. 4 caste if Km pr-m. > sclaundrith km. caste if ck. 4 for to c. 
eat. fwherceleri. Gand x. Obthereofia. tofcb kKofx. landif xk. ™herei. ™® And. 
© here EQRcS. P hethene man cKR sec. m.b prom, ghi pr.m. B. Vorb. Om. tabe. § thing R. 


XVIII. 19-——29. 


seie to 30u trewli, what euere thingis 3ee 
shulen bynde vpon® erthe, tho? shulen be 
bounden and4 in heuenes'; and what euere 
thingis 3ee shulen vnubynde vpon® erthe, 
thot shulen be vnbounden and" in he- 
iguenes’. Eftsoone™ I seie to 30u, that* 3if 
two of 3ou shulen consente onY the? erthe, 
of every® thinge whateuer> thei shulen 
axe, it shal be don to hem of my fadir 
20that® is in heuenes. For where two or 
three shulen* be gedrid in my name, ther 
211 am in the midilf of hem. Thanne Petre, 
‘cummynge ni3% tohym, seide, Lord, hou ofte 
shal my brother synne in® me, and I shal 
for3eue hymi? Whether to seuen tymes! ? 
22 Jhesus seith™ to hym, I seie nat to thee, 
til seuen sithis; but to" seuenty sythis 
23seuene sithis. Therfore the kingdom® of 
heuenes is lickened? to a man kyng, that 
wolde putte1 resoun with his seruauntis. 
21 And whanne he began for’ to putte® re- 
soun, oon was offrid' to hym, that ow3te" 
25to hym ten thousand talentisy. Trewly 
whanne he hadde nat* wherof to 3elde, his 
lord comaundide hym to be sold, and his 
wif, and sonys’, and alle thingis that he 
26hadde, and to be payed. Forsothe ‘the 
ilk? seruaunt, fallynge doun, preide hym, 
seyinge*, Haue pacience in me, and alle 
.27thingis I shal j3eelde to thee. Sothely> the 
lord ‘of that seruaunt® hauynge’ mercy’, 
leetef hym, ‘or suffride hym&, and forjaue 
esto hym the dette. Trewly thilk" seruaunt 
goni out, fonde oon of his euen seruauntis, 
that ou3te* hym! an hundrid pens™; and 
he, holdynge hym", stranglide hym, sey- 
aginge®, 3eld that? thou owist. And his euen 
seruaunt preiede? hyin, seyinge’, Haue pa- 


©on ovx. POm.ovu. 
vheueneur, W Efte ov. * for ov. 
euer thenge ov. what G pr. m. 
comende nee3h x. > ajens ov. 
© rewme OU. P lych x. lije y. 
4 owid W. a3te x. 
2 thilke o. that x. 4 and seide ou. 
fdelinered ov. & Om. oux. 
him vx. ™penyeso. "Om. ov. and seide ov. 
that mpw sec. m. xy. thou that that w pr. m. 


¢ whiche ov. 
1to him vu. 
9 sette ov. 


b Forsothe ov. 


Pheuenesrpr.m. dmankyngr. *Om.c. 


sec.m.a. offrid qh sec. m. a. 
yOm. kxeghi. 4Om.apr.m. ® Om. c. 
VOL. IV. 


dalso ov. Om. eG prim. 
¥Y vpon G sec, m. 
d Om. ov. 

k till our. 

r Om, osux. 
v besauntes uv. besauntes or falentes Pp. 
¢ Om. op. 
h that ilke ew. the ilke ap. that x. 1 goynge o. 
P thou the thenge that ov. thou that @ sce. m. that 
4 fallinge doun, preyde @ sec. m. 


8 for to putte resoun b sec. m. a. 
Vv Verse 24 omitted in Eb pr. m. 


MATTHEW. 49 


bynden on erthe, tho schulen be boundun 
also in heuene? ; and what euer thingis 3e 
vnbynden on erthe, tho schulen be vn- 
boundun also in heuene. Eftsoone Y seie 19 
to 3ou, that if tweyne of 30u consenten 
on the" erthe, of euery thing what euer 
thei axen, it schal be don to hem of 
my fadir that is in heuenes. For where 20 
tweyne or thre ben gaderid in my name, 
there Y am in the myddil of hem. 
Thanne Petre cam to hym, and seide, 21 
Lord, how ofte schal my brother synne 
a3ens me, and Y schal forj3yue hym ? 
Whether til seuen tymes? Jhesus seith 22 
to hym, Y seie not to thee, til seuene 
sithis; but til seuenti sithis seuene sithis. 
Therfor the kyngdom of heuenes is lic- 23 
ned to a kyng‘, that wolde rekyn with 
hise sernauntis. Aud whanne he bigan to 24 
rekene*, oon that ou3te‘ ten thousynde 
talentis, was brou3t" to hym’. <And2s 
whanne he hadde not wherof to” 3elde, 
his lord comaundide hym to be seld, 
and his wijf, and children, and alle 
thingis that he hadde, and to be paicd. 
But thilke seruaunt felde doun, and 2s 
preiede hym, and seide, Hate pacience in 
me, and Y schal 3elde to thee alle thingis. 
And the lord hadde merci on that ser- 27 
uaunt, aud suffride hym to* go, and for- 
jaf toY hym the dette. But thilke ser-2s 
uaunt 3ede out, and foonde oon of his 
ellen seruauutis, that ou3te hym an hun- 
drid pens; and he* helde hym*, and 
stranglide hym, ard seide, 3elde that 
that thou owest. And his euen- sernaunt 29 
felle doun, and preyede hyim, and seide, 
Haue pacience in me, and Y schal quyte 


t heuene ur. 8 on UX. tOm.u. Ualsov. 
zQOm.opsux. ®icheov. eche x. » what- 

f myddes ov. & neizynge ou. 

1 sy3thes ov. m gseide o. 9 till ov. 
8 sette ou. t brou3te u sec. m. 

w And trenli x. * nou3te o. Y his sones ov. 
dhadde x. © mercy of that seruaunt op. 
k owed 0. ajte x. 1 to 


r and seide ov. 


t ou3zte to hym b 


whe shulde x. * Om. ceter? et af. 


H 


50 


cience in me, and ‘alle thingis I shal quyte® 
30 to thee. Forsothe he‘wolde nat; but wente, 
and sent hym in to pryson, til that" he’ 
3ipaide al the dette. Sothely his euen ser- 
uauntis, seeynge the’ thingis that weren 
don, ‘gretely hadden sorowe*. And thei 
camen, and tolden toY her lord alle the? 
32thingis that weren don. Thanne his lord 
clepide hym, and seide to hym, Weyward 
seruaunt, I for3af to thee al the dette, for 
33thou preidist me. Therfore wher* it be- 
houede” nat and‘ thee to haue mercy on 
thi euen seruaunt, as® I hadde mercy‘ of% 
3ithee ? And his lord wroth, tok hym to 
tourmenturs, til that’ he paiede* al the dette. 
35‘So and! my fadir of heuen shal do to 3ou, 
3if 3e ‘forzeue nat™ euery® man to his bro- 
ther, of 3oure hertis. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 And it is° don, whenne Jhesus hadde 
eendide these? wordis, he passide fro Ga- 
lilee, and came!’ in to ‘the eendis’ of* Ju- 

2dee ouer Jordan. And manye cumpanyes 

‘of men‘ sueden hym, and he helide hem 

3there. And Pharisees camen ni3 to hym, 
temptynge hym, and seyinge, Wher" it be’ 
leeful for” a man for™ to ‘leeue, o7 for- 

4 sake’, his wijf, ‘of what euer? cause ? The* 
whiche answerynge seith® to hem, Han nat 
jee rad, for he that made men® at the 
bygynnynge, male’ and female ‘he made 

shein®? And he seide, For this thing a man 
shal leeue fadir and modir, and he! shal 
cleue’, ‘or drawe*, to his wif; and thei 

cshulen be two in oo flesh. ‘And so! thei 
ben nat now two, bot oo flesh. Therfore! 
a mau departe nat that™ thing that? God 
jenioynyde®, ‘or knytte to gidre?. Thei 


t nolde ov. 
2 Om. opsux. 


8 I schall 3elde all thenges ov. 
sorowful greetly ov. Y Om. s. 
houeth ov. ¢also ov. 4 of ov. 
ov. iOm.ou.  * hade payed o. 
P thise. Whe cam ov. 


1 And go ov. 


MATTHEW. 


‘ 


u Om. ogu. 
tho rw sec. m. 
eas and Gpw. as also uv. 
m schal not for3if our. 
T eendes, either caostis u sec.m. Om. o. 


XVIII. 30——XIX. 7. 


alle thingis to thee. But he wolde not ; 30 
but wente out, and putte* hym in to? 
prisoun, til he paiede al the dette. And 31 
hise even seruauntis, seynge the® thingis 
that weren don, soreweden greetli. And 
thei camen, and telden to her lord alle 
the’ thingis that weren dou. Thanne3z 
his lord clepide hym, and seide to hym, 
Wickid seruaunt, Y for3af to thee al the 
dette, for thou preiedist me. Therfors3 
whether it bihouede®4 not also thee to 
haue merei on thin euen seruaunt, as Y 
hadde merci on thee? And his lord was 34 
wroth, and took hym to turmentouris, til 
he paiede al the dette. So my fadir of3s 
heuene schal do to 30u, if 3e for3yuen not 
euery® man to his brother, of 3oure hertes. 


CAP. XIX. 


And it was don, whanne Jhesus hadde1 
endid thesef wordis, he passide fro Ga- 
lilee, and cam in to the coostis of Judee 
ouer Jordan. And myche puple suede2 
him, aud he heelide hem there. And3 
Farisees® camen to him, temptynge him", 
and seiden, Whether it be leneful to a 
man to leeue his wijf, for ony cause ? 
Whichi answeride, and seide to hem,4 
Han je not red, for he that made men 
at the bigynnyng, made hem male and 
female? And he seide, For this thing as 
mau schal leeue fadir and modir, and he 
schal draw to his wijf; and thei schulen 
be tweyne in o fleisch. And so thei bene 
not now tweyne, but o fleisch. Therfor 
ak man departe not that thing that God 
hath ioyned. Thei seien to hym, What7 
thaune comaundide Moises, to 3yue a 


vhe hadde eg. Walltheo. thor. * weren 
a whether x. whether ands. > by- 
f mercy also o. 8 on auNsrwx. » bytoke 
Deiche ov. © was 4our. 


sOm.o0. tOm.ov. Whether x pass. 


Yisou. Wtomogstrurxy. Om.ap. *Om.ogsuxy. ¥ forsake ov. lefenx. 4% bi eny ov. for what- 
euere G. aOm.ouv. seideov. ¢manrpr.m. made hemmaleov. ¢€Om.o. f Om. ov. 
£ drawe vu. cleue top. bOm. oux. i Therfore 9 sec.m. Om. og prom. ‘Om. @. 1 And therefore 
Ksec.m. “the ov. "whiche thenge ov. © hath ioyned ov. ioynede x. P Om. ovx. ‘ 

a puttide x. &Om.c. ¢tho xk. 40m. cxbek. thon. 44 bihoueth r. ¢eche.  falle thes c. 


& the Farisees 1. Om. ce pr. m. 


i The whiche 1. 


k Om. 1. 


XIX. 8—r9. 


seyen to hym, What thanne? comaundide 
Moyses, to 3ene a litil boke of forsakynge, 
sand to ‘leeue off"? And he seith’ to hem, 
For Moyses, at the hardnesse of 3oure 
herte, suffride 3ou forsaket 30ure wyues ; 
forsothe at the begynnyng it was nat so. 
9Trewly I seie to 3o0u, that” who euer leeu- 
eth’ his wif, no¥ but for fornicacioun, 
and* weddith an other, doth a vowtrie; 
and he that weddith the forsaken wifey, 
iodoth avowtrie. His disciplis seien to hym, 
3if the cause of a man with a? wiljf is so, 
lit speedith nat to wedde*. The? whiche 
seith® to hem, Nat alle men taken this 
12 word; but to which‘ it is 3ouen. Sothely 
‘there ben geldyngis®, ‘the whichef ben 
thus born of: the’ modris wombe; and 
‘there ben geldyngis, thati ben maad of 
men, and ‘there ben geldyngis*, that! han 
geldid™ hem self, for the kyngdam® of 
heuenes. He® that may take, take hep. 
i3 Thanne litil children weren offrid4 vp" to 
hym, that he shulde putte hondis’ to hem, 
and preie. Sothely his‘ disciplis blameden 
ishem. But® Jhesus seithY to hem, Suffre 
3e litil childre cume to me, and ny! 3e for- 
bede hem ‘for to come to me“; for of siche 
isis the kyngdain of heuenes. And whenne 
he hadde putte to hem hondis, he wente 
isthennus*. And loo! oon, ‘cummynge to’, 
seith* to hym, Good maister, what of* good 
thing” shal I do, that I haue euerlastynge 
izlyf? Thee which seith? to hym, What 
axist thou me of good thing? ‘There is 
oof good God. For‘ 3if thou wolt entre in 
isto lif, kepeS the comaundementis®. He 
seith to hym, Whiche ? Trewly Jhesus 
seide, Thon shalt nat do man sleaynge, 
thou shalt nat do avowtrie, thou shalt nat 
do thefte, thou shalt nat seye fals witness- 
i9inge'; worshipe* thi fadir and thi modir, 


4 therfore ov. ‘forsake ov. % seyde ov. 
Xand heo. yOm.x. *% the ov. Om. x. 
© seide ouw sec.m. 4 whom Gpxy. 
ben ov. iwhiche ov.  geldynges ben ov. 

P Om. ouiv. 4 brou3te usec.m. * Om, ov. 
VY seide ov. W Om. 0. to comen to me sux. 

b Om. ov. © Om. ov. 4 seide ov. 
bh maundements uw.  ! wituesse x. 


1 Forsothe 1. 
Ymodir EP. § rewme CEIPQcaf. 


™ to Jeeue Knuxeghik. 
t tak 1. 


t to forsake osux. 
8 be weddit n. be wedded ov. be wedde a sec. m. 
€ geldynges hen ou. 
1 whiche ov. 

$ his hondis n. 
x fro thens ov. 

€ Oon is ov. There is 4G. 
k honour thou ov. 


0 forsakith c sup. ras. 
u The whiche 1. 


H 2 


MATTHEW. 51 


libel of forsakyng, and to lecue of ? Ande 
he seide to hem, For! Moises, for the 
hardnesse of 3oure herte, suffride jou 
leeue™ 3oure wyues ; but fro the bigynn- 
yng it was not so. And Y seie to 30u,9 
that who euer leeucth® his wijf, but for 
fornycacioun, and weddith another, doith 
letcherie; and he that weddith the for- 
sakun wzf, doith letcherie. His disciplis 10 
seien to him, If the cause of a man with 
a° wijf is so, it spedith not to be weddid. 
And he seide to hem, Not alle men taken 11 
this word; but? to whiche it is 3ouun. 
For ther ben geldingis, whiche ben thus4 iz 
born of the modris* wombe ; and ther ben 
geldyngis, that ben maad of men; and 
there ben geldyngis, that han geldid hem 
silf, for the kyngdom* of heuenes. He 
that may take, ‘take het. Thanne litle 1s 
children weren brou3te to hym, that he 
schulde putte hondis to hem, and preie. 
And the disciplis blamyden hem. But14 
Jhesus seide to hem, Snffre 3e that litle 
children come to me, and nyle 3e forbede 
hem; for of siche is the kyngdom of 
heuenes. And whanne he hadde put to!s 
hem hondis, he wente fro thennus. And 16 
lo! oon cam, and seide to hyin, Good 
maister, what good schal Y do, that Y 
haue euerlastynge lijf? Which" seith to17 
hym, What axist thou me of good thing ? 
There is o good God. But if thou wolt 
entre to’ lijf, kepe the comaundementis. 
He seith to hym, Whiche ? And Jhesus 18 
seide, Thou schalt not do mansleying, 
thou schalt not do auowtric, thou schalt 
not do thefte, thou schalt not seie fals 
witnessying ; worschipe thi fadir and thi» 
modir, and, thou schalt loue thi nei3bore 
as thi silf. The 3onge man seith to20 
hym, Y haue kept alle these thingis fro 


w Om. x. 
b Om. ov. 
f whiche ov. that x. Shervu. 4 geldynges 
™ geet x. Urewme ov. © And he K sec. m. 

tthe ov. 4 Forsothe v. Sothely o. 
Yneizynge ov. 2scide ov. ® Om. ov. 
f Forsothe ovr. & kepe thou o. 


u for ovr. Y forsaketh ov. 


Ohisik. Pbut thei rp. 450K. 


Vv into R. 


52 MATTHEW. 


and thou shalt looue thi nei3bore as thi self. 
20 The 3ung! man seith to hym, I haue kepte 
alle these thingis fro my 30uthe™, what 3it 
sifailith to me ? Jhesus seith to hym, 3if 
thou wolt be perfit, go, and selle alle 
thingus that thou hast, and 3eue to pore 
men, aud thon shalt haue tresour in he- 
e2uene; and cum, sue thou me. Forsothe 
whenne the 3ung™ man hadde herde these 
wordis, he wente awey sorwful, for he was 
23hauynge many possessiouns. Forsothe 
Jhesus seide® to his diseiplis, ‘I seie to 30u 
trewthe?, for a riche man ‘of hard" shal 
21entre in to the kyngdam’ of heuenes. And 
eftsonet I seie to jou, it" is ‘lizter, or 
eysier*, a camel for to passe thorw3 ‘a 
nedelis eije*, than a riche man toY entre 
»5 into the kyngdaim* of heuenes. Treuly these 
wordis® herd, the® disciplis wondriden 
gretely, seyinge, Who therfore may be 
2¢saaf? Forsothe Jhesus heholdynge seide 
to hem, Anentis men this thing is im- 
possible; but anentis God alle thingis ben 
27 possible. Thanne Petre answerynge seide 
to hym, Loo! we han forsaken alle thingis, 
and we han sued thee; what therfore shal 
28be to us? Jhesus forsothe seide to hem, 
Trewly Y seye to 30u, that 3e that han 
forsaken alle thingis, and sued® me, in re- 
generacioun, ‘or gerdrynge asein', whenne 
mannes sone shall sitte in the sete of his 
mageste, and® 3e shulen sitt on twelue 
setis, ‘or seegish, demynge the twelue 
»ykynredis of Yrael. And every! man that 
shal forsake hous‘, or! bretheren, or™ sis- 
tren, or® fadir, or® modir, or? wif, or4 
sonys', or® feeldis, for my name, het shal 
take an hundrid fold, and shal welde euere 
so lastynge lyf. Forsothe many™ shulen be, 
‘the firste’ the laste, and the’ laste the 
firste. 


l30ng wexinge ov. ™ 3ongthe o. 
of harde ov. *™Om.ou. Srewme ou. ¢t efte ov. 
hoole of an nedel eize o. the hoole of a nedle v. 
ansyw. 4Qm, xk. ©& han sued our. snen P. 
h Om. Gopuxy. i eche oux. 

-% ether ov. P ether ov. 
first epxy. many the firste K sec. m. 


k his hous v. 


¥ 3ongthe cikmbgi. W falleth r. 
bhaue ceraxa. © he schal 1. 


4 30ng wexinge ou. 

u for oO. 
y for to ov. 
f Om. or sec. m. X. or gadering a3en V pr. nt. 
l ether ov. 
4 ether ouw sup. ras. and kK. 
Vv Om. Gk sec. m. Pxy. of the firste o. 


x and Jhesus 1. 


XIX. 20-30. 


my 30uthe’, what 3it failith” to me ? 
Jhesus seith to hym, If thou wolt bea 
perfite, go, and sille alle thingis that 
thou hast, and 3yue to pore men, and 
thou schalt haue tresoure in heuene; and 
come, and sue me. And whanne the22 
jong man hadde herd these wordis, he 
wente awei sorewful, for he hadde many 
possessionns. And Jhesus seide to hise 23 
disciplis, Y seie to 30n treuthe, for a 
riche man of hard sehal entre in to the 
kyngdom of henenes. And eftsoone Y 24 
seie to 30u, it is li3ter a camel to passe 
thorou a needlis i3e, thanne a riche man 
to entre in to the kyngdom of heuens. 
Whanne these thingis weren herd, the 2s 
disciplis wondriden greetli, and seiden, 
Who thanne may be saaf? Jhesus bi-2¢ 
helde, and seide to hem, Anentis men 
this thing is impossible; but anentis God 
alle thingis ben possible. Thanne Petre 27 
answeride, and seide to hym, Lo! we 
han forsake alle thingis, and we han 
suede thee; what thanne schal be to vs? 
Jhesus* seide to hem, Truli I seie to 30u, 28 
that 3e that han forsake alle thingis, 
and han sued me, in theY regeneracioun 
whanne mannus sone schal sitte in the 
sete of his maieste, 3e schulen sitte on 
twelue setis, demynge the twelue kyn- 
redis of Israel. And euery man that for-29 
sakith hous, britheren or sistren’, fadir 
or inodir, wijf ethir® children, or feeldis, 
for my name, he schal take? an hundrid 
foold, and sehal® welde euerlastynge lijf. 
But manye schulen be, the firste theo 
laste, and the laste the firste. 


q for 

x the 
¢ Om. 
& also ov. 
m ether ou. « ether ov. Om. kK. 
8 ether our. Om. our. many 
Ww of the o. 


© seith vn. P Trewly I seie to jou o. 
Vv esier ov. lijtere x. W Om. osux. 
arewme o.  » thenges ov. 


T sone N. 


y Om. ceurparuxbekaS. % sistrisc. 2 or bek. 


XX. I—T4. 


CAP. XX. 


1 The kyngdam* of heuenes is lic to an 
husbond man, that wente out first erly, ‘or 
by the morweY, to hyre workemen in to his 

2‘vyne3erd*. Forsothe the* couenaunt maad 
with workmen, of a peny for the day, he 

3sente hem in to his ‘vyne 3erd>. And he, 
gon out about the thridde hour, say other 
4stondynge ydil in the chepyng. And he 
seide to hem, Go° ‘and 3ee4 in to my ‘vyne 
jerd’, and ‘that that shal be ri3tfulf, I shal 
53eue to;30u%. Sotheli thei wenten forth. 
Forsothe eftsoone* he wente out aboute 
the sixte hour, and the nynethe, and dide 
6on liche' manere. But aboute the elle- 
uenthe houre* he wente out, and foond 
other stondynge; and he seide to hem, 

7 What stonden 3e’ her ydil al day? Thei 
seien' to hym, For no man hath hirid us. 
He seith ‘to hem, Go™ ‘and 3e" in to-my 

8'vyne 3erd°. Forsothe whenne euenyngeP 
was maad, the lord of the ‘vyne 3erd4 seith 
to his procuratour’, Clepe* the workmen, 
and 3elde to hem her hijre, bygynnynge at 

y the laste ‘til to‘ the firste. Therfore whenne 
thei ‘weren commen®, that camen’ about 
the elleuenth hour, and” thei token syn- 
guler® pens, that is, eueryY man oo* peny, 

io Trewly and* the firste cummynge demed- 
en, that thei weren? to take more, ‘trewly 
and¢ thei token ‘echon by hym silf a peny?. 
i1And thei takynge grutcheden a3eins the 
i2zhusbond man, seyinge®, Thesef laste diden 
worches oon" our, and thou hast maad 
hem euen to vs, that han born the charge 
13 of the day and hete!? And he answerynge 
to oon of hem, seide, Frend, I do ‘thee no 
wronge*; whether! thou hast nat accordid 
14with me for a peny ? Take ‘that that is 
thine™, and go ; forsothe Y wole 3eue and® 


xrewme ou. Y Om. ouxy. #2 vinere ou. 


ou. f Om, ou. 


u camen OU. 


t til kw prom. 
b weren worthi ov. 


oupx. 4QOm.Q. 


a Om. x. 
 30u this that schall be rijteful ov. 
m Goth x. "3ealso ov. © vinere ov. P eventyde ou. 
v haden commen ov. 

© but also ov. 


Ww also ou. 


MATTHEW. 53 


CAP. XX. 

The kyngdom of heuenes is lije to an. 
housbonde man, that wente out first bi 
the morewe, to hire werk men in? to his 
vynezerd. And whanne the ecouenaunt2 
was maad with® werk men, of a peny for 
the dai, he sente hem in to his vynejerd. 
And he 3ede out aboute the thridde our, 3 


‘and say othere stondynge idel in the che- 


pyng. And he seide to hem, Go 3e also 
in to myn vynjerd, and that that schal 
be ri3tful, Y schal 3yue to 3ou. And theis 
wenten forth. Eftsoones he wente out 
aboute the sixte our, and the nynthie, 
and dide» in® lijk maner. But aboutes 
the elleyenthe our he wente out, and 
foond other stondynge ; and he? seide to 
hem, What stonden 3e idel here al dai? 
Thei seien to him, For no man hath7 
hirid vs. He seith to hem, Go 3e also 
in to my vyne3erd. And whanne euen-s 
yng was comun, the lord of the vyne3erd 
seith to his proeuratoure, Clepe® the werk 
men, and 3eldef to% hem her hire, aud bi- 
gynne thou at the laste til to the firste. 
And so whanne thei weren comun, that9 
eamen, aboute the elleuenthe our, also 
thei token eueryche of hem a peny. But 10 
the firste camen, and demeden, that thei 
schulden take more, but thei token ech 
oon bi hem silf-a peny; and in then 
takyng grutchiden® ajens the hosebonde 
man, and seiden, These laste wrou3ten 12 
oon our, and thou hast maad hem euen 
to vs, that han born the charge of the 
dai, and heete ? And he answeride to oon 13 
of hem, and seide, Freend, Y do thee noon 
wrong; whether thou hast not aeordid 
with me for a peny ? Take thou thati that 14 
is thin, and go; for Y wole 3yue to this 


bdvinerev. ¢ Goth x. 
heft ou. ilichy w. 
q viner ov. 


4 3e also ov. 
k Om. a prom. lseiden x. 

 procatour Ker. § Clepe thou ov. 
Xenen ou. Yiche ou. eche x. 24a 
4 euen pens ov. eche by hymself a peny x. echon 


€ vyner 


hi him self oo peny y. ¢ and seiden ov. f They. € Om, 4x pr. m. Nostuvx. 4 in on ov. 1 of the hecte 


o. the heete pu. * no wronge to thee ou. 


7 Om. Rn pr.m, 3 with the kK. b he dide i. 


& Om. R pr. m. 


1 whar o. 


© on Etaf. 
h thei grutchiden 4 sec.m. x sec.m. - 


™ thon the thenge that thine is ov. also ov. 


4Om.c. ¢ Clepe 3e bi prem. — f 3elde 3¢ 1. 


ithat thing c. Om. hi. 


54 MATTHEW. 


to this the® laste man?, as and‘ to thee. 
15 Wher" it is nat leful to me for’ to do thatt 
thatI wole ? Wher" thin eije is wickid’, forI 
isam good ? So ‘there shulen be the” last men 
the* firsteY, and the ‘firste men the? laste ; 
17 for many ben clepid, bot few chosun. And 
Jhesus, steyinge vp to Jerusalem, toke his 
twelue disciplis in priuytee, and seith® to 
ishem, Loo! we ‘gon vp* to Jerusalem, and 
mannies sone shal be taken® to princis of 
prestis, and scribis'; and thei shulen con- 
i9dempue hym by’ deth. And thei shulen 
bitake hym to hethen men, for® to be 
scornyd, and scourgid', and crucified ; and 
the‘ thridde day he shal ryse a3ein!. 
20 Thanne the modir of the sonis of Zebede 
‘came ni3™ to hym with hire sonys, ho- 
nourynge", and axinge sume thing of hym. 
21 The® whiche seide to hir, What wolt thou ? 
She seith? to hym, Seie? that these ‘two 
my* sonys sitten, oon at thi’ ri3thalf, and 
2200n at thi‘ lefthalf, in thi kyngdam". For- 
sothe Jhesus answerynge seide, 3e wyten 
nat what 3e axen’, or shulen axe*. Mowen 
3e drynke the cuppe that* I‘am to’ drynke? 
23 Thei seien? to hym, We mowen. He seith 
to hem, Forsothe 3e shal drynke my cuppe ; 
but* to sitte at> the® rijthalf or’ at® left- 
half, itfis nat myn to 3eue to jou; but to 
24 whiche® it is made redy of ny fadir. And 
the ten herynge hadden indignacioun of 
25 the" two! bretheren. Sothely Jhesus cle- 
pide hem to hym, and seith*, 3e witen, for 
princis! of heithen men ben lordis of hem, 
and thei that ben more™, hawnten" power 
26'in to? hem. It shal nat be so among 30u; 
bot who enere wole be maad more? among 
27 30u, be he 3oure mynystre ; and who euere 


© Om. pes. POm.ov. 4 also ou. 
u Or whether nv. Whether gpsuirx. 
laste ov. 2Om. pe. ‘4 laste the firste ov. 
urwsec.m. ftoscribesov. £ tooPx, 
™ neized ov. 
thou ov. =" my two ov, tweyne my JY. 
w Om. ovx or schulen aske a. 
Aouri. ‘ether ou. 
epxy. »Om.e. | tweyne i, 
©onour. P the gretter ou. 


$ the o. 
X whiche ov. 


Kk as myche asandK. '!Om.c.  ™schul be ther. 
scribes1, PP twor, 4ther. * of the er pr.m. 
Ywhomt. Wtwo1g. * gretiesic. Y grettest c, 


r Whether and «. Whether sx. 
vwicke x, W Om. G pr.m. 
b Om. uv. 
h Om. sx. 
« worchipynge ou. honourynge, or preiynge @ sec. m. 
t theo. 
¥ schall ov. 

© Om. 4GMNPsUWXY. at my oF sec. m. at the @ 
K seide our sec. m, 


8 that 1. 


XX. 15-—27. 


laste man, ask to thee. Whether it isis 
not leueful to me to do that that! Y wole? 
Whether thin ize is wickid, for Y am 
good ? So the laste schulen be the firste, 16 
and the firste the™ laste ; ‘for many™ ben 
clepid, but® fewe ben chosun. And Jhe-17 
sus wente vp to Jerusalem, and took hise 
twelue disciplis in priuetee, and seide to 
hem, Lo! we goon vp to Jerusalem, and 1s 
mannus sone schal be bitakun to princis 
of prestis, and scribis? ; and thei schulen 
condempne him to deeth. And thei schulen 19 
bitake hym to hethene men, for to be 
scorned, and scourgid, and crucified ; and 
the thridde day he schal rise ajen to lijf- 
Thanne the modir of the sones of Ze-20 
bedee cam to hym with hir sones, onour- 
ynge, and axynge sum thing of hym. 
And he seide to hir, What wolt thou? a1 
She seith to hym, Seie that thes tweyne?? 
my sones sitte, oon at thid ri3thalf, and 
oon at thid lefthalf, in thi kyngdom. Jhe-22 
sus answeride, and seide, 3e witen not 
what 3e axen. Moun 3e drynke the cuppe 
which’ Y schal't drynke"? Thei seien to 
hym, We moun. He seith to hem, 3e23 
schulen drinke my cuppe; but to sitte at 
my ri3thalf or lefthalf, it™" is not myn to 
3yue to 30u; but to whiche’ it is maad 
redi of my fadir. And the ten herynge, 24 
hadden indignacioun of the ,twei’ bri- 
theren. But Jhesus clepide hem to hym, 2s 
and seide, 3e witen, that princis of he- 
thene men ben lordis of hem, and thei 
that ben gretter*, vsen power on hem. It 26 
schal not be so among 30u ; but who euer 
wole be maad gretterY among 3ou, be he 
3oure mynystre; and who euer among 


8 Om. oux. 

x Om. Pa. 

6 seide ourw sec. m. 
i beeten ov. 


t the thenge ov. 
‘y the firste schulen be the 
4 stizen ov. © bitaken 
kintheov. !Om,eépr.m. 
0Om.ov. Pseideogux. 41 Seie 
Urewmeou. Vschulen axe o. asken @, 
Zseideno.  ®forsotheov. %onGg. Cm 
fOm.¢pr.m.ux. & whom 


Ithe princesov. ™ the gretterou, 4 vsen ov, 


n many forsothe 1. 


OandciR prima. P to 
tam toc, 4 drynke off 1 pr. m. 


uu Qm. c. 


XX. 28—XXI 7. 


amonge 30u wole be firste4, he shal be 
28 30ure seruaunt. As mannes sone came nat 
for™ to be served, but for’ to serue, and 
‘for tot 3eue his ‘soule, or lif", redemp- 
z9cioun for many. And hem’ goynge out of 
Jerico, manye cumpanyes of pepleY sueden 
30hym. And loo! two* blynd men sittynge 
besidisY the weye, herden that Jhesus pass- 
ide; and thei crieden, seyinge, Lord, the 
31sone of Dauyth, haue mercy on? vs. For- 
sothe the cumpanye* blamyde hem, ‘for to? 
be stille ; and thei crieden more ‘and more®, 
seiynge, Lord, the sone of Dauyth, haue 
32mercy on? vs. And Jhesus stood, and 
clepide hem, and seith®, What wolef 3e, 
33that I do to 300? Theis seien to hym, 
34Lord, that oure eijen be openyd. For- 
sothe Jhesus, hauynge mercy on hem, 
touchide her eizen ; and anoon thei sayen, 
and sueden hym. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 And whanne Jhesus' came ni3 to Jeru- 
salem, and cam to Bethfage, in* the mount 
of Olyfeet, thanne Jhesus sente his two! 

2disciplis, seyinge to hem, Go 3e in to the 
caste] that™ is a3einus 30u, and anon 3e shal 
fynde a she asse tyed, and a colt with hir; 

3vnbynde" 3e, and bryng® to me. And 3if 
eny man ‘shal seie? to 3ou eny thinge, ‘seie 
3e4, that’ the Lord hath need to hem; and 
aanoon he shal leeue hem. Trewly® als 
this was don, that thatt thing that was 
seid by the prophete shulde be fulfillid®, 
sseyinge, Seie 3e to the dou3ter of Syon, 
Loo! thi kyng cometh to thee, ‘homly, or 
meke¥, sittynge on ‘an asse¥, and a ‘fole, 
6the* soneY of a beest vndir 300k. For- 
sothe disciplis’, goynge*, diden as Jhesus 
7comaundide hem». And thei brou3ten to® 
a she asse, and ‘the fole’, and puttiden® 


MATTHEW. ae 


3ou wole be the firste, he schal be 3oure 
seruaunt. As mannus sone cain not to be oa 
seruyd, but toY serue, and to 3yue his lijf 
redempcioun for manye. And whanné2 
thei 3eden out of Jerico, miche puple 
suede him. And lo! twei* blynde men3o 
saten bisydis the weie, and herden that 
Jhesus passide; and thei crieden, and 
seiden, Lord, the sone of Dauid, haue 
merci on vs. And the puple blamedes: 
hem, that thei schulden be stille; and 
thei crieden the? more, aud seiden, Lord, 
the sone of Dauid, haue merci on vs. 
And Jhesus stood, and clepide hem, and 32 
seide, What wolen 3e, that Y do to 30u? 
Thei seien to him, Lord, that oure izen 33 
be opened. And Jhesus hadde merci on31 
hem, and touchide her izen; and anoon 
thei sayen, and sueden him. 


CAP. XXL 


And whanne Jhesus cam ny3 to Jerusa- ! 
lem, and cam to Bethfage>», at the mount 
of Olyuete, thanne sente he his twei® dis- 
ciplis, and seide to hem, Go 3e in® to2 
the caste] that is a3ens 30u, and anoon 3e 
schulen fynde an asse tied, and a colt 
with hir; vntien 3e, and brynge® to me. 
And if ony man seie to 3ou ony thing,3 
seie 3e, that the Lord hath nede to hem; 
and anoon he schal leeue hem. Al this 4 
was doon, that that thing schulde be ful- 
fillid, that was seid bi the prophete, sei- 
ynge, Seie 3e to the dou3ter of Syon, Lo!s 
thi kyng cometh to tliee, meke, sittynge 
on an asse, and a fole of az asse vnder 
jok. And the disciplis 3eden, and diden¢ 
as Jhesus comaundide hem. And theif7 
brou3ten au asse, and the® fole, and leid- 
en" her clothis on hem, and maden hym 


4 the firstov. *Om.sux. sOm.osux. 'Om.o.tosux. lifov. soulex. Ytheiv. “ Om. ov. 


Ybyo. 4 of G sec.m. Pxy. 
4 of G sec. m. PXY. € seide ou. 
ltweye w. 
T for ov. 


x tweyne Ww, 
OUVW sec. m. 
k too. at GMPQSTUVWXY. 
Pseieth ov. 4 seith s. seye Ww pr.m. 
v he mylde ov. homly, or mekely pr. Om. x. 


zthe disciplis pu. ® goynge forth Q sec. m. 
colt uv. © putten x. 
YfortoKk. 2ZOm.Rrprm "two. 
“4QOm.c. ¢ bryngeth Erqrca8. f Om. s. sec. m. 


wa sche asse ou. 
b to hem ov. 


b Om. Erb pr. m. caj3. 
Bak. here. 


companies o. > that thei schulden ov. to sx. % Om. 
fwilnx. & Andtheicx. tofasxy. ‘theov. 

m whiche ov. a vntye U sec. m. 9 bryngith esxy. 
s Forsothe ov. ‘s8asxK. ttheov. 4% filled ov. 


Y Om. U sec. mm. 
da colt o. the 


x caltes o. colt v. 
¢ Om. ou. two G prim. 


bb Beffage a. © two t ef Q passim. 


h thei leiden 1. 


56 MATTHEW. 


her clothis on hem, and maden hym sittef 
saboue. Forsothe ful muche cumpanye 
strewidené her clothis in the wey; sothely 
other" kittiden'! braunchis of trees, and 
gstrowiden in the weye. But* the cum- 
panyes that wenten before, and that sued- 
en, crieden, seyinge, Osanna, that is!, I 
preie, saue™, to the sone of Dauith; blessid 
ts" he that cummeth in the® name of the 
Lord; Osanna in ‘the hee3ist? thingis. 
10 And when he had entrid in to Jerusalem, 
al the cite was stirid, seyinge, Who is 
ithis? Treuly’ the peplis seiden, This is 
‘Jhesus, the prophete", of Nazareth of Ga- 
i2lilee. And Jhesus entride in to the temple 
of God, and kest* ont of the temple alle' 
‘sellynge and byinge"; and he turnyde vp- 
sadoun the bordis of’ chaungeris, and the 
ischaiers of men sellynge culueris. And he 
seith to hem, It is writen, My hous shal 
be clepid an hous of preiere; forsothe 3e 
shan made it a denne of thefes. And 
blynde* and crokid*® ‘camen ni3¥ to hyin 
is ‘in the temple’, aud he helide hem. For- 
sothe the princis of prestis* and _ scribis>, 
seeynge the® marueilouse’ thingis that he 
dide, and children cryinge in the temple, 
and seiynge, Osauna to the sone of Da- 
iguith, dedeyneden*®, and seiden to hym, 
Heerist thou what these seyen ? Sothely 
Jhesus seithf to hem, 3he; wher 3e han 
nat" rad, For of the mouth of children, 
that kunnen nat speke, and‘ of* soukynge 
mylk!, thou hast made parfite heryinge™ ? 
17 And, hem forsaken®, he wente forth out of 
the® citee, in to Betanye; and there he 
dwelte, and tauj3te hem of the kyngdaimP 
isof God. Forsothe on the morw, he, turn- 
19 ynge’ a3ein in to the citee, hungride. And 
he, seeynge a" fige tree bysidis the weye, 


fto sitten x. & spredden u sec. m. 


m saue thou or secem.u. 2 Om. x. © Om, P. 


h other men ov. 
P hei3 or sec. m. U. heyzest GNF pr. m. PQOSTIWXY. 


KX18-—I9. 


sitte aboue. And ful myche puple strew- 8 
ideni her clothis in the weie; othere kitt- 
iden braunchis of trees, and strewiden* 
in the weie. And the puple tbat wentes 
bifore, and that sueden, crieden, and 
seiden, Osanna to the sone of Dauid; 
blessid 7s he that cometh in the name of 
the Lord;.Osanna in hij thingis. And 10 
whanne he was entrid in to Jerusalem, 
al the citee was stirid, and seide, Who is 
this? But the puple seide, This is Jhe-11 
sus, the prophete, of Nazareth of Galilee. 
And Jhesus entride in to the temple of 12 
God, and castide! out of the temple alle 
that bou3ten and solden; and he turnede 
vpsedoun the bordis of chaungeris, and 
the chayeris of men that solden culueris. 
And he seith™ to hem, It is writun, Mynis 
hous schal be clepid an hous of preier; 
but 3e han maad it a denne of thenes. 
And blynde and crokid camen to hym 14 
in® the temple, and he heelide hem. But° 1s 
the princis of prestis and scribis?, seynge 
the merueilouse thingis that he dide, and4 
children criynge® in the temple, aud sei- 
ynge, Osanna’ to the sone of Dauid, had- 
dent indignacioun, and seiden to hym, 16 
Herist thou what these seien? And" 
Jhesus seide to hem, 3he’; whether 3e 
han neuer redde, That of the mouth of 
3onge children, and of soukynge childryn, 
thou hast. maad perfit heriyng? And iz 
whanne he hadde left hem, he wente 
forth out of the citee, in to Bethanye; 
and there he dwelte, and taujte hem of 
the kyngdom of God. [ut on the mo-1e 
rowe, he, turnynge ajen in to the citee, 
hungride. And he saye a fige tree bi-i9 
sidis the weie, and cam to it, and foond 
no thing ther ynne but leeues oneli. And 
k Forsothe ou. 


i kytten Gx. 1 is to saye T. 


q For- 


sothe ov. * the prophete Jhesuso. §castedor. alle men x.  biende and sillende x. ¥ and kei. 
and of r. © blinde men or scc.m.u. -* croked menovu. ¥ neized o, neizeden ru. 2Om. x. ® the 
prestes 0. » the scribesov. ¢ Om. x pr.m.or. 4 wonderfull or sec.m.u. © haden indignacionn or 


sec. m,.U. thei hadden dedegne x. f seide our. & whether Gus ef x passim. b neuere vuW sec. m. ior p. 


Kkoftheo. !Om.x. ™ preysinge cooxy. left xn. that Gg. Prewme or sec.m.u. 4 turned o. 
Tor séc.m W. 

i spredden 1agk sec. m. a. * strewen 8. | caste k prim. ™seldeKR. intoc. °Andc.  P the 
seribis c. 9 and the cs. r erieden s. § that is, I prey thec, saue vs X marg. t thei hadden ta. 
uOm.c. VYOm. 1. 


XXI. 20—29. 


came to it, and fonde no thing ‘ther ons 
no but leeuys oonly ; and he seith* to it, 
Neuer be” fruyt born’ of thee, in to with 
outen eende. And anoon the fijge tree 
20was dried vp. And disciplis” seeynge, 
21 wondreden, seyinge*, Hou ‘anon it driede’. 
Sothely Jhesus answerynge, seith? to hem, 
Trewly I seye to 3ou, 3if 3e shulen han 
feith, as a* corn of seneuey, and ‘douten 
nat>, nat oonly 3e shulen do of this® fijge 
tree, bot and¢ 3if 3e seien® to this hill, 
Takef thee, and caste thee in to the see, 
gg'and so® it shal be don. And alle thingis 
what euer 3e" shulen axe in preier byleu- 
23 ynge', 3ee shulen take. And whemnnek he 
came in! to the temple, the princis of 
prestis and eldre™ men of the peple camen 
ni3 to hym techynge, seyinge", In what 
power dost thou these thingis? and who 
243af to thee this power? Jhesus answer- 
ynge seide to hem, And I shal axe jou 
o° word, the? whiche 3if 3e shulen seie to 
me, and I shal seie to 30u, in what power 
25I do these’ thingis. Of whennes was the 
baptem of Joon; of heuene, or™ of men ? 
And thei thou;ten with inne ‘hem self®, 
26seyinge, 3if we shulen seie of heuene, he 
shal seie to vs, Whi therfore beleuen 3e 
nat to hym ? Sothely 3if we shulen seie of 
“men, we dreden the cumpanye ‘of peple', 
27for alle hadde Joon as a prophete. And 
thei answerynge to Jhesu seiden, We 
witen nat. And he seith" to hem, Nether 
I seie to 30u, in what power I do these 
28thingis. Forsothe what semeth to 3ou? 
Stm man hadde two’ sonys; and he‘cum- 
mynge ni3” to the firste seide, Sone, go 
‘for to worche* ‘this day’ in to? myn vyne- 
2v3erd*. Sothely he answerynge seith>, I 
nyle; forsothe® afterward he stirid by? 


8 ther ynne AGMNPQSTUrXY. 
w the disciplis pu. * and seyden vu sce. m. 
Zseyde our sec m. 4 the ou. 
seie our. f Take aweiour. &Om.our. 
eelder oy sec.m.U. ® and seiden or see.m. uv. 
ov sec.m.u. ® hem seluen o. t Om. or sec.m. vu. 


x Om. o. forth to worke s. thou for to worehe Ar sec. m. vu. 
d seide or sce. m. U. 


4 vinere for to worehe or scc. m. U. 


w And the crrreikf. 
ER see.m. sbhi sec.m. g scc.m. k, and seiden 1a. 
© Om. 1kms pr.m. pquxbeeka. 4 wil not 1. 


VOL. IV. 


MATTHEW. 


t seide ouri sec. m. 
y it dried anone o. it dried up anone U sec. m. anoon driede NP. 
b sehnl not dowte ovr see. m. 
h 

3e byleuynge our. 
© a ANO. 


* seyng A sec.m. 1g scc,m. seyn and A pr.m. seynge and ¢. 
2 euere thingis cr. 
¢ that oother 1. 


I 


57 


he seide to it, Neuer fruyt come forth of 
thee, in to with outen cende, And anoon 
the fige tre was dried vp. And” disciplis co 
‘sawen, and*® wondriden, seiynge’, Hou a- 
noon it driede. And Jhesns answeride, 21 
and seide to hem, Treuli Y seie to 30u, 
if 3e haue feith, and douten not, not oonli 
3e schulen do of the fige tree, but also if 
je seyn to this hil, Take, and caste thee in 
to the see, it schal be don so. And alle 22 
thingis what euere’ 3e bilenynge schulen 
axe in preyer, 3e schulen take. And23 
whanne he cam in to the temple, the 
princis of prestis and elder men of the 
puple camen to hym that tau3te, and 
seiden, In what power doist thou these 
thingis? and who 3af thee this power ? 
Jhesus answeride, and seide to hem, And 24 
Y schal axe 3ou o word, the which if 
3e tellen me*, Y schal seie to 30u, in 
what> power Y do these _thingis. Of2s 
whennys was the baptym of Joon; of he- 
uene, or of men? And thei thou3ten with 
ynne hem silf, seiynge, If we seien of26 
heuene, he schal seie to vs, Whi thanue 
bileuen 3e not to hym? If we seien of 
men, we dreden the puple, for alle hadden 
Joon as a prophete. And thei answer-27 
iden to Jhesu, and seiden, We witen 
not. And he seide to hem, Nether Y seie 
to 30u, in what power Y do these thingis. 
But what semeth to® jou? A man hadde 28 
twey sones; and he cain to the firste, and 
seide, Sone, go worche this dai in my 
vynezerd. And he answeride, and seide, 29 
Y nyle*; but afterward he forthon;te, 
and wente forth. But he cam to ‘the 3o 
tother®, and seide on‘ Hijk® maner. And 
he answeride, and seide, Lord, Y go; and 
he wente not. Who of the tweyne dide3! 


u Om. ov sce. m. U. v cuni forthe or sec. m. U. 


ethe our. 4also ovr, & schulen 
kOm.v. 1Om. x. ™ the 
4 this G passim. * ether 


W neijynge Or sce. m. U. 
z Om. Ww see. m. X. 


i Om. our. 

p Om. or sec. m. uv. 
u seide ovr. VY tweye w. 
Y to day or see. m. vu. 


© but or sec. m. vu. 4 with o. 


Y seynge A sec.m. 
&to me xk see.m.8. > whois kK. 


fin crea. §& the same Ia. 


58 MATTHEW. ° 


30 penaunce, ‘or forthenkynge®, wente. For- 
sothe he, cummyngef to ‘the tother’, seide 
And he answerynge seithi, 
31 Lord, I go; and he wente nat. Who of 
the’ two! dide the ‘fadris will"? hei 
seien to hym, The firste. Jhesus seith to 
hem, Trewly I seie to 3ou, for puplicanys 
and hooris shulen go before jou in to the 
32kyngdam® of God. Forsothe® Joon cam to 
jou in the weye of riz3twisnesse?, and 3e 
bileeneden? nat to hym; but" puplicanys 
and hooris beleueden to hym. Sothely’ 
3ee seeynge ‘nether hadde dont penaunce 
afterward, that 3e bileeuyden" to hym. 
33 Heere 3e an other parable. ‘Ther was an 
husbondman’, that plantide a‘vyne 3erd¥, 
and 3aue an hegge aboute*, and dalue a 
pressour®* therynne, and bildideY a toure, 
and ‘hiride, or” sette? it to ferme, to 
erthe tiliers, and wente ferre® in pilgrim- 
stage. Forsothe whenne the tyme of fruytis 
neizide*, he sente his seruauntis to the 
erthe tiliers, that thei token® fruytis of it. 
35 And, his sernauntis taken, the erthe tillers 
beeten ‘the toon’, ‘an other thei slewen8, 
‘but another! thei stoonyden! ‘to dethi. 
36 Eftsones* he sente other seruauntis, mo 
than the firste!, and ‘liche maner™ thei 
s7diden to hem". Forsothe at the laste he 
sent his sone to hem, seyinge®, Thei shulen 
38'shame, or drede?, my sone. Sothely the 
erthe tiliers, seeynge the sone, seiden with 
yune hem self, This is the eire; cume 3e, 
slea we hymn, and we shulen haue his4 
soeritage. And, ‘hym taken’, thei kesten® out 
of the vynjerd', and slewen". Therfore 
whenne the lord of the vyne3erd’ shal 


lic’ maner. 


€ Om. or sec.mux. f neiz3ynge OF scc. Mm. U. 
1 tweyne or sec. m. uir. 
P ri3tefulnesse or sec.m.u. 4 belenen v. 
GMV¥ sec.m. PesSWwxXY. 4 schulde byleue ou. 
x abowte hit oru sec. m. theraboute Gsx. 
hijride it, or p. 8 settide y sec. m. u. 


& thei kylden an other ov sec. m. vu. 
sec.m, PUX. to the decth w pr.m. 

nmianere Mir. 5h hem in like maner or sec. m. U. 
shamen x. Qtheop. * Om. aNnos¥ sec. m. 
casteden sup. ' vinere our sec. m. 


f seiden R pr. m. 
hiride 1, * And Rr. 
P On. EIPRef. 


§ Treuli, trenli, Be pr. m. 
1 thei beeten 1a. 


dtooken him x. © the xsghi. 


comyng ni3 GMPIr. 
h the liik ey. the lichy pw pr.m. lehi ww sec.m. in like ov see.m.u. the lizkli a. 
w will of the fader or sec. m. vu. 
Yr treuli v sec. m. 
v An husbandeman was or sec. m. U. 
XX pressure K. 
b Om. wPe@ prim. 
© schulden take the or sec. m. uiv sec.m. shulde take x. 
h forsothe or see. m. U. 
k Efte or sce.m.u. 


ukilden or sec. m. vu. 


h jin cermparsux pr. m. beehi. 
™ 90n 1. that oon e. the oon Ef. 


XXI. 30——40. 


the fadris wille? Thei seien‘ to hym, The 
firste. Jhesus seith to hem, Treulig Y 
seie to 30u, for pupplicans and hooris 
schulen go hifor 3ou ‘in to" the kyngdom 
of God. For Joon cam to jou in! thesz 
weie of ri3twisnesse, and 3e bileueden not 
to him; but pupplicans and hooris bi- 
leueden to hym. But 3e sayn, and had- 
den no forthenkyng aftir, that 3e bi- 
leneden to hym. Here 3e another parable. : 
There was an hosebonde man, that plaunt- 
ide a vynjerd, and heggide it aboute, and 
dalfe a presour ther ynne, and bildide a 
tour, and hiride/ it to erthe tilieris, and 
wente fer in pilgrimage. But* whanne 31 
the tyme of fruytis nei3jede, he sente his 
seruauntis to the erthe tilieris, to take 
fruytis of it. And the erthetilieris token 35 
his seruauntis, and beeten! ‘the toon™, 
thei" slowen another®, and thei? stonyden 
another. Eftsoone he sente othere ser-36 
uauntis, mo than the firste, and in lijk 
maner thei diden to hem. And at thes7 
laste he seute his sone to hem, and seide, 
Theit schulen drede my sone. But thess 
erthe tilieris, seynge the sone, seiden with 
ynne hem silf, This is the eire; come 3e, 
sle we hyin, and we schulen haue his 
eritage. And thei token‘, and castiden 3s 
hym out of the vynjerd, and slowen Aym. 
Therfor whanne the lord of the vynes3erd 40 
schal come, what schal he do to thilke 
erthe tilieris? Thei seien to hym, Hea 
schal leese yuele the yuele men, and he 
schal sette to hire his" vyne3erd to othere 
erthetilieris, whyche schulen 3elde to hym 
fruyt in her tymes. Jhesus seith to hem, 42 


yw 


3 


comende nee3h x. ¢ that other vu. 
iseide ov. & thes er. 
Rrewme OV Sec. im. U. © For or sec. ni U. 
s But ov. +t hade not ov. nethir hadden 
W viner oF sec. m. U. 
Y bilde x. Z Om. or sec. m. Q. sec. m. X. 

¢ forthe or sec.m.u. 4 had neijzed or see.m. vu. 
f oon mor sec. m. UP. that oon . the oon x. 
i stoneden another our sec.m. Jj Om. ov 
m Om. or sec.m.v. lichi 
P drede or sec. m. U. 


1 former or sec. m. U. 
° and seide oF sec. m. U. 


$ custeden him taken aNov sec. m. i. casten hym taken s. 


Vv vinere or sec. m.U. 


iinto1isec.m. jhe 


nandce. © the tother c. 


XXL 41-—XXII. 5. 


cume, what shal he do to ‘the ilk” erthe 
4itiliers ? Thei seien* to hym, He shal lese 
yuele theY yuel men, and sette’ to hire his 
vyueserd® to other” erthe tiliers, the 
whiche® shulen 3elde to hym fruytis in 
42her tymes. Jhesus seith to hem, Redden 
3e neuer in scripturis, The stoon ‘the 
whiche ‘beldynge men® reproueden, this 
is maad in to thef heued® of the corner ? 
‘Of the Lords this thing is maad}, and it is 
43 merueilous! in oure eijen. Therfore I seie 
to 30u, for the kyngdam* of God shal be 
taken! fro 30u, and shal™ be 3ouen to a® 
4ifolk doinge fruytis® ‘of itp. And he that 
shal falle on this stoon, shal be broken to- 
gidre; forsothe ‘vpon whom it shal falle4, 
45it shal ‘togidre poune’ hym’. And when 
the princis of prestis and Pharisees had- 
den herde his parablis, thei knewen that 
4¢he seide® ‘of hem’. And thei, seekynge to 
holde hym, dreden the cumpanyes ‘of pe- 
ple”, for thei hadden hym as a prophete. 


CAP. XXII. 


i And Jhesus answerynge ‘seide eftsone* 
2in parablis ‘to hem’, seiynge’, The kyng- 
dam of henenes is maad” lic to a man 
kyng that made weddingus to his sone. 
3 And he sente his seruauntis for* to clepe 
men beden to the weddyngis, and thei 
4wolden nat cume. Eftsoone? he sente 
other seruauntis, seiynge®, Seie 3ee to the4 
men beden to the® feeste, Loo! I haue 
made redy my mete’, my boles and vola- 
tiliss ben slayn, and alle thingis redy®; 
scumme 3e to the weddyngus’. Sothely 
thei dispisiden, ‘or recken nat*, and thei 
wenten awey, oon! in to his vynejerd™, 


w thilke Gog ef s passim v see.m. the p. tho x. 
our. ®vinere ouv sec.m. > the u pr. m. 


pass. P. hed ws et x pass. 88 Om. ou. 
our see.m. ‘taken awey ur see.m. 

sec. Mm. p therof uv sec. m. 
8 him (hem vj on whom it shall fall ouy sec. am. 
o. tohem vu. ¥ Om. ou. 
yOm.o. seide o. and seide uy see.m. 
seide ov. seyde r sec, m. 4 Om. orx. 


other my fatt beestes ov. my vol. other fatte beestis r. 
lan other our pr.m.w. 


ro3ten not s. or reckeden not sIT. 


8 the whiche s pr. m. k pr. m. 
x Om. hik. Y bedun plures. 


x seiden o. 
e¢ whiche our sec.m. that x. 
e men bildinge ourw pr. m. hilders 9 see. m. sup. ras. the bildende men x. 

h maade of the Lorde ov. 
m it schall our sec. m. 
q Om. our sec.m. on whom it shal falle x. 
t the Phariseis our see. mm. 
* to hem eft o speke eftsone @ sec.m. spak eft u sec. m. seide eft r see. m. 

zz Om. ¥. 
e Om. 4K pr.m. MNOQW see. m. 


t the beelderis errqns pr. m. af. 
z And eftsoone a pr. m. 


TED 


MATTHEW. 59 


Redden 3e neuer in scripturis, The stoon 
which* bilderis' repreueden, this is maad 
in to the heed of the corner? Of the 
Lord this thing is don, and it is" mer-" 
ueilous biforY oure izen. Therfor Y seie 43 
to 30u, that the kyngdom of God schal 
be takun fro 30u, and shal be 3ouun to 
a fole doynge fruytis of it. And he thats 
scha] falle on this stoon, schal be brokun; 
but on whom it schal falle, it schal al to- 
brise hym. And whaune the princes of 45 
prestis and Farisees hadden herd hise pa- 
rablis, thei knewen that he seide of hem. 
And thei sou3ten to holde hym, but theias 
dredden the puple, for thei hadden hym 
as a prophete. 


CAV IECXEL 


And Jhesus answeride, and spak eft-1 
soone in parablis to hem, and seide, Thee 
kyngdom of heuenes is maad lijk to’ a 
kyng that made weddyngis to his sone. 
And he sente hise sernauntis for* to clepes 
men that weren bode to the weddyngis, 
and thei wolden not come. Eftsoone* he4 
sente othere seruauntis, and seide, Seie 
3e" to the men that ben bode? to the 
feeste, Lo! Y haue maad redi my meete, 
my bolis and my volatilis ben slayn, and 
alle thingis ben redy; come 3e to the 
weddyngis. But thei dispisiden, ands 
wenten forth, oon in to his toun, anothir 


y Om. opur see.m. 2 he schal sette 
d which our sec. m. that x. 
f Om. @. & heed a ef 
i wonderfull our see. m. * rewme 
1 Om. G pr.m.oxy. © the froytes our 
t al to-powne our sec. m. 
u hadde seyde wv. =¥ Om. 


b Eft oy sec.m. and 
fmeetes 0. & my volatils, 
b ben redy our. iOm.o. * Om, scurx. or 
m toune A see.m. NOQ sec. mM. UF. 


& Om. osur sec. m. 


visnot re Vine. WOm.c. 


aQOm.cv. » bedun plures. 


60 MATTHEW. 


forsothe an other to" his marchaundise®. 
6But the other helden his seruauntis, and 
7slowen hem, ponished with contek?. For- 
sothe the kyug, whenne he hadde herde, 
was wroth; and, his hoostis sente, he loste, 
‘or distruyde4, the’ man quellers, and 
8brente her’ citee. Thanne he seith' to his 
sernauntis, Sothely the weddyngis ben 
redy, but thei that weren clepid to the 
ofeeste, wereu" nat worthi. Therfore go 
3ee to the outgoyngis’ of weyes, and whom” 
euere 3e shulen fynde, clepe* to the wed- 
lodyngis. And his seruauntis, gon out in to 
theY weyes, gedreden togidre alle that thei 
founden, good? and yuel; and the wed- 
dyngis of inen sittynge at mete* ben ful- 
1 fillid®. Forsothe the kyng entride, that he 
shulde see men sittynge at mete°; and he 
see} there a man nat elothid4 with brijd¢ 
12clothisf. And he seith® to hym, Frend, 
hon entridist” thou hidir, nat hauynge 
brijd clothe’? And he was doumbe. 
13 Thanne the kyng seide to the mynystris, 
His ‘hondis and feet! bounden, sende 3ee 
hym into vttermore™ derknessis ; there 
shal be weepyng and betyng to gidre of 
liteeth. Forsothe many ben clepid, but 
18fewe chosen”, Thanne Pharisees, goynge 
awey, token a®° counseile, that thei shulden 
stake Jhesus? in word. And thei? senden 
to hym her disciplis, with Erodyanys, ‘that 
ben men of Lroudis*, seiynge, Maister, we 
witen, that’ thou art sothfast, and thou 
techist in trewthe the weye of God, and 
‘there is no cure, or charge‘, to thee of 
eny man, for thou beholdist nat the per- 
t7soone of nen. Therfore seie" to vs, what 
it’ semeth to thee. Is it leful ‘to 3eue” to* 


‘into o. © marchaundye ou. 
t seide ourw scc.m. ™ ben o. 
GuPpwxy. cleep 3e our sec. m. 
wxysec.m.  » tilled ov. 
sec.m.  & seide ourw sec. m. 
m vtmiore 4aNSX. vtmer ow. 
OUV sec. m. 8 for OUV IW sec. m. 
is not cure X. " seie thou our sec. mn. 
that tribut be 3ouen F sec. m. 


h entryst c. 
0 ben chosen N. 


x Om. K pr. v. er. 


binto cu. ¢ Om. Kasbeghik. 4 Om. x. the 1peq{. 
ppr.m. hclothisr prem. i vttermer Ks. vttermore Rhif. 
trewe 1. ™ Om. Ksghi. © Om. c. 


P dispisynges our. 
¥ outgoyng uP. outgoyngis, or endis U sec. m. 

Y Om. 4 sec. m. GUNPQWXY. 
¢ the mete aGMosurwx. 

i clothes ar. 
° Om. o. y 
t ther is noon [not ns] cure, or ch. 4. no charge is ovr sec. m. ther 
Vv Om, our prim. 


XXII. 6—17. 


to” his marchaundise. But othere helden 
his seruauntis, and turmentiden hem, and 
slowen. But the kyng, whanne he hadde7 
herd, was wroth; and he sente hise 
oostis, and he distruyede tho? manquel- 
leris, and brente her citee. Thanne hes 
seide to hise seruauntis, The weddyngis 
ben redi, but thei that weren elepid to 
the feeste, weren® not worthi. Therfors 
go 3e to! the endis of weies, and whom 
euere 3e fynden, clepe 3e to the wed- 
dyngis. And hise seruauntis 3eden out 10 
in to weies’, and gadriden togider alle 
that thei fourden, good and yuele; and 
the bridale was fulfillid with men sittynge 
at the mete. And the kyng entride, to se 11 
inen sittynge at the mete ; and he size there 
ainan not clothid with bride cloth®, And 12 
he seide to hym, Freend, hou entridist 
thou hidir with out bride clothis? And 
he was doumbe. Thaune the kyng bad 13 
hise mynystris, Bynde hym bothe hondis 
aud feet, and sende 3e him in to vtiner! 
derknessis ; there schal be wepyng and 
grentyng) of teeth. For many ben clepid, 14 
but fewe ber chosun. Thanne Farisees 15 
3eden awei, and token a counsel to take 
Jhesu in word. And thei senden to lym 16 
her disciplis, with Erodians, aud seien‘, 
Maister, we witen, that thou art sothe- 
fast', and thou techist in treuthe the 
weie of God, and thou chargist not of 
ony inau, for thou biholdist not the per- 
soone of inen. Therfor seie to vs, what17 
it™ seemeth to thee. Is it leueful that 
tribute be 3ouun to the” emperoure, ether 
nay? And whanne Jhesus hadde knowe ts 
the wickiduesse of hem, he seide, Ypo- 


8 the o. 
* clepith 


¥ tho Mopurw. 
w whiche our. 
2 gode men ov. the mete 4GMNPsU 
€ bridale x. f cloothinge o. cloth ur 
Khis s. ! feete and [his uv] hondis ov. 
Phim our. hym Jhesu x. G9Om.Q. Om. 


q Om. our see. m. X. 


4 clad x. 


Ww that rent [or éalage u marg.] be 3ouen ov. 


€ ben c. 
3 grenching s. 


finto EIR pr. m. kaB. 


& the weyes 
k seiden cra. | 


1 sad 


XXH. 18—35. 


Cesar, ‘or emperoury, ‘rente, or tribut ? 
18 Forsothe, the wickednesse of hem knowen, 
Jhesus seith*, Ypocritis, what tempten 3ee 
igine 2? Shewe 3ee to me the prynte of the 
moneye. And thei offriden> to hym a 
zopeny. And Jhesus seith® to hem, Whos 
is this ymage, and the wrytyng aboue?? 
21 Thei seyen to hym, Of Cesar. Thanne 
‘he seith® to hem, Therfore 3elde 3ee to 
Cesar tho thingis that ben Cesaris‘, and to 
22God tho thingis that ben of God. And 
thei heerynge wondredeu; and, hym laft, 
a3thei wenten awey. In that day Saducees, 
that seyen ‘there is’ no rysyng ajein}, 
24.camen ni3! to hym, and axiden hym, sey- 
inge*, Maister, Moyses seide, 3if eny ‘man 
be! dead, nat hauynge a sone, that his 
brother wedde his wyf, and reyse seed 
25to his brother. Forsothe seuen bretheren 
weren at™ vs; and the first, a wijf weddid, 
is dead. And he nat hauynge seed, left.his 
26 wijf to his brother; also the secounde, and 
27 the thridde, til" to® the seuenthe. Forsothe 
theP laste of alle, and4 the womunan is 
esdead. Therefore in the rysynge a3ein, 
whos wijf of the’ seuene shal she be? for 
agalle hadden hir. Sothely Jhesus answer- 
ynge seith’ to hein, 3ee erren, nethert 
knowyuge the scripturis, nether the vertu 
300f God. Forsothe" in the rysyng ajeyn, 
neither thei wedden, nether ben” weddid ; 
but thei ben as the” aungelis of God in 
siheuene. Sothely* of the rysynge a3ein of 
dead men, ‘3ee hanY nat rad, that it is seid 
szof the Lord, seyinge to 3ou, I am God of 
Abraham, and? God of Ysaac, and God of 
Jacob? he is nat God of deed men, but of 
s3lyuynge men. And the cumpanyes ‘of pe- 
ple* heerynge, wondreden in his techynge. 
34 Forsothe Pharisees, heeryuge that he hadde 
put silence to Saducees, camen to gidre in 
35to oon. And oon of hem, a? techer of the 


y Om. ogur sec. m. X. 
tribute x. a seide our. 
e Jhesus seide ovy. f of Cesar arp. 
k and seiden our sec.m. 1 brother is our sec. m. 

P Om. w sec.m. also our sem. * Om. kTXY. 


MATTHEW. 61 


critis, what tempten 3e me? Schewe 3e 1 
to me the prynte of the® money. And 
thei brou3ten to hym a peny. And Jhe-20 
sus seide to hem, Whos is this ymage, 
and the writyng aboue? Thei scien? to2i 
hym, The emperouris. Thanne he seide 
to hem, Therfor 3elde 3e to the emperoure 
tho thingis that ben the emperouris, and 
to God tho thingis that ben of God. And 22 
thei herden, and wondriden; and thei 
leften hym, and wenten awey. In thats 
dai Saduceis, that seien there is no ris- 
yng a3en fo Uf, camen to hym, and ax- 
iden him, and seiden, Mayster, Moises 2s 
seide, if ony man is deed, not hauynge a 
sone, that his brother wedde his wijf, 
and reise seed to his brothir. And425 
seuen britheren weren™ at* vs; and the 
firste weddide a wijf, and is deed. And 
he hadde no seed, and lefte his wijf to 
his brother ; also the secounde, and the 26 
thridde, til to the seuenthe. But the27 
laste of alle, the woman is deed. Also in 23 
the risyng a3en to Lijf, whos wijf of the 
senene schal sche be? for alle hadden 
hir. Jhesus ausweride, and seide to hem, 29 
3e erren, ‘and 3e knowen not* scripturis, 
ne the vertu of God. For in the rysyng xo 
a3en to lijf, nether thei schulen wedde, 
nethir® schuJlen be weddid ; but thei ben 
as the aungels of God in heuene’. And si 
of the risyng ajen of deed men, ‘han je 
not red, that is seid of the Lord, that 
seith to 30u, Y ain God of Abraham, and 32 
God of Ysaac, and God of Jacob? he is 
not God of deede men, but of * lyuynge 
men. And the puple herynge, -won-33 
driden inY his techynge. And Fariseis? 3s 
herden that he hadde put silence to Sa- 
duceis, and camer togidere. And oon of 35 
hem, a techere of the lawe, axide Jhesu, 
and temptide him, Maistir, which is as¢ 


2 tribuyt, or renie mp. rente, ether naye our sec. m. rente, or nay Q sec. m. 
» offreden, or token mp. brou3ten r sec. 2. 
§ Om. o. that ur sec.m. » ajen is our sec.m. 
mM anentes ou. 

8 seide our sec, m. 


© seide our. 4 abowte o. 
i neigeden our sec.m. 
o Om. @ seewm,. 


n On. G prom. P. 
u For vur 


t not our sec. m. 


sec.m, Vtheibe ov pr.m. WOm.mup. *Forsothee. Yhanjen. 2Om.@ Om. our sec. m. 
b Om. o. 

©30ure1. Pseidencs. 4@Andther werent. 'Om.1. Stor, not knowynge thes. "nether 
thei ks. Yheuenesr prom. W3ehangr. *Godofcerp. Yonr. 2 the Farisees 1. 


62 MATTHEW. 


36 lawe, axede Jhesus, temptynge hym, Mais- 
tre, whiche is a greet maundement? in® the 
silawe ? Jhesus seidef to hym$, Thou shalt 
loue the" Lord thi God, of al thin herte, 
and in’ al thi soule, and in al thi mynde. 
38 This is the firste and the most maunde- 
39mentk, Forsothe the secounde is lie to 
this; Thou shalt loue thi nei3bore as thi 
40self. In these two! maundementis™ hang- 
41ith al the lawe and prophetis". Sothely 
the® Pharisees gedrid to gidre, Jhesus ax- 
aide hem, seyinge, What semeth to 3ou of 
Crist, whos sone is he? Thei seyen to 
a3hym, Of Dauith. He seith to hem, Ther- 
fore hou ‘Dauith in spirit clepith? hym 
a1 Lord, seyinge’, The Lord seide to my Lord, 
Sitte’ on my ri3thalf, til that® I put thin 
asenmyes a stole of thi feet? Therfore 3if 
Dauyd clepith him Lord, hou is he his 
46sone? And no man mi3t answere a word 
to hym, nether eny man was hardy fro 
that day, fort to axe hym more. 


CAP. XXIII. 


1 Thanne Jhesus spac to the cumpanyes 
2‘of peple*, and to his disciplis, seiynge, 
Vpon’ ‘the chaier of Moyses”, scribis and 
3 Pharisees seeten®. Therfore kepe 3ee, and 
do 3ee alle thingis, what euere thingisY 
But nyl 3ee do 
after ‘her werkis”; sothely® thei seien, and 
4don nat. Sothely thei bynden to® gre- 
uouse chargis, and vnportable, or¢ ‘that 
mown nat be bornt, and putten ‘in to8& 
shuldres" of nen; but with her fyngir thei 
swolen! nat moue hem. Therfore* thei 
don alle her werkis, that thei be seen of 
men; forsothe! thei alargen her filateries, 
that ‘ben smale scrowis", and’ magnyfie 
éhemmys?. Sothely thei louen the first 


thei shulen seie to 30u7. 


XXII. 46==X X16: 


greet maundement in the lawe? Jhesus37 
seide to him, Thou schalt loue thi Lord 
God, of al thin herte, and in al thi soule, 
and in al thi mynde. This is the firste 3s 
and the moste maundement. And thes9 
secounde is lijk to* this; Thon schalt 
loue thi neiz3ebore as thi silf. In these 40 
tweyY maundementis hangith al the lawe 
and the? profetis. And whanne the 4 
Farisees weren gederid togidere, Jhesus 


-axide hem, and seide, What semeth to 42 


3ou of Crist, whos sone is he? Thei 
seien to hym, Of Dauid. He seith tos 
hem, Hou thanne Dauid in spirit clepith 
hym Lord, and seith, The Lord seide to 44 
my Lord, Sitte on my ri3thalf, til? Y 
putte thin enemyes a stool of thi feet ? 
Thanne if Dauid clepith hym Lord, hou 4s 
is he his sone? And no man mi3te an-46 
swere a word to hym, nethir ony man 
was hardi fro that day, to axe hym 
more. 


CAP. XXIII. 


Thanne Jhesus spac to the puple, and 1 
to hise disciplis, and seide, On the chayere 2 
of Moises, scribis and Farisees han sete. 
Therfor kepe 3e, and do 3e alle thingis,3 
what euer thingis thei seien to you. 
But nyle 3e® do aftir her werkis; for thei 
seien, and don not. And thei bynden: 
greuouse chargis, and that moun not he 
borun, and putten on schuldris of men; 
but with her fyngur the: wolen not moue 
hem. Therfor thei don alle her werkiss 
‘that thei® be seen of men; for thei 
drawen abrood her filateries’, and mag- 
nifien hemmes. And thei louen the first 6 
sittyng placis in soperis, and the first 
chaieris in synagogis ; and salutaciowus7 


4 commaundement our sec.m. eof iw. fseith ar prmw. Shemr. bthinx, iofour. * com- 
miaundement our sec. mi. ltwel ow. ™ commaundementes our sec.m. the prophetes our sec. m. 
©Om. vu. P in spyryt clepith Danid cx. and seith our sec.m.  * Sitte thou ur sec.m. $8 Om, ovr 
sec.m.  € Om. ogsur sec.m. x. u Om. Aor sec. m. v¥Om. o. On x. W Om. or see. im. x saten 


redynge the lawe mp. schall sitte on the chayer of Moyses 0. saten on the chayer of Moyses ur sec. m. 


¥ Om. G prm.x. 2 30u of the lawe ey. 
our sec.m. 4 Om. our sec. m, 

schuldris muy sec.m. inil not o. 
© and thei ov. 


xOm.s. Y two. 


2 Om. ¢ prem. i. 
scrowis K marg. 


& vp our sec. m. 
© cther ov sec.m. and p. Om. xX. 
k Forsothe ovr sec.m. 
P her hemmus crx. their hemmes g. 


a as longe as 1. 


b the werkes of hem our sec.m. © for 
f Om. x. on ovr sec.m. 4 the 
1 for ovr sem. ™thoo. Om. x. 2 Om. x. 


bOm. rn prom tox. 4 that ben smale 


XXHI. 7-——~20. 


sittyng placis in‘ sopers, and the first 
7chaiers in synagogis; and salutaciouns" in 
the’ chepyng, and to ben clepid ‘of men 
smaistirs". Sothely’ nyl 3ee ben clepid 
maistir’; for oon is 30ure maistir, for- 
gsothe alle 3e ben brethren. And nyl 3e 
clepe to 3ou aX fadir on’ erthe, for oon is 
1o30ure fadir, that? is in heuenes. Nether 
be 3e* clepid maistirs, for oon is 3our 
11 maistre, Crist. He that is more of 30u, 
12shal be 3oure mynystre. Forsothe he that 
shal hie* hym self, shal be mekid; and he 
that shal meeke hym self, shal ben en- 
ishaunsid. Sothely woo to 30u, scribis and 
Pharisees, ypocritis, for 3e closen4 the 
kyngdam® of heuenes before men; sothe- 
ly® 3e entren nat, ne" suffre men entrynge 
11fort to entre. Woo to 3ou, scribis and 
Pharisees, ypocritis, that eten the housis 
of widues, in longe preier preyinge; ‘for 
this thing* 3e shulen take the! more dom. 
15 Woo to 30u, scribis and Pharisees, ypo- 
critis, that cumpasen the se and the™ lond, 
‘that 3ee" maken o proselite, that ts, a° 
conuertid to 30ure ordre; and whanne he 
‘shal be? maad, 3e maken hym a sone of 
iwhelle, double more than 30u9. Woo to 
jou, blynde lederis, that seien, Who euere 
‘shal swere™ by the temple of God, ‘no 
thing iss; sothely he that ‘shal swere' in 
the" gold of the temple, ‘owith, o7 is 
17defour’. 3ee folis and blynde, forsothe* 
what is more, the gold, or the temple 
isthat halowith the gold? And who euer 
‘shal swere* in the auter, ‘no thing is’; but 
he that ‘shal swere? in the 3ifte that* is on 
i9the auter, owith>. Blynde men, forsothe® 
what is more, the 3ift, or’ the auter that 
20halowith the 3ifte? Forsothe® he that 
swerith in the auter, swerith in it, and 


Gat x.  ° salutacioun o. 
sothely c. Forsothe our sec. m. 
2 whiche ouv sec. m. a Om. o. 
€ rewme our sec. m. f heuen o. 
iOm. sx. * Om. Nn. | Om. amnour sec.m. 
sec.m. 432 been ovvw sec. m. 
sec.m. Om.o. 
Yit is nou3t u sec. m. 
¢for ov. 4 ether ou sec.m. 


2 swereth ouv sec. m. 


8 Om. AMNOSUF sec. m. WW. 
W maystirs My sec. m,. 
b the more uv sec. m. 
& for o. forsothe uy sec. m. 
m Om. o. 
¥ swereth our sec.m. swere N. 
Vis detonr our sec. 1m. owith x. 
a whiche our sec. m. 
¢ Therfore our sec. m. 


MATTHEW. 63 


in chepyng, and to be clepid of meu 
maystir’. But® nyle 3e be clepid mais-s 
ter; for oon is 30ure maystir, and alle 3e, 
ben britheren. And nyle 3ef clepe to 30u9 
a fadir on erthe, for oon is jour fadir, 
that is in heuenes. Nether be je clepid 10 
maistris, for oon is 30ure inaister, Crist. 
He that is grettest among 30n, schal be 11 
3oure mynystre. For he that hieth him-12 
self, schal be mekid; and he that mekith 
hym silf, schal be enhaunsid. But wos 
to 30u, scribis and Farisees, ipocritis, that 
closen the kyngdom of heuenes_ bifore 
men; and 3e entren not, nether suffren 
men’ entrynge to entre. Wo to 3o0u,11 
scribis and Farisees, ipocritis, that eten 
the housis of widowis, and preien bi 
longe preier'; for this thing 3e schulen 
take more) doom. Wo to 30n, seribis and 15 
Farisees, ypocritis, that goon aboute the 
see and the loond, to make o* prosilite! ; 
and whanne he is maad, 3e maken hym 
a sone of helle, double more than 3e ben. 
Wo to 30u, blynde lederis, that seien, 16 
Who euer swerith bi the temple of God, 
it is ‘no thing™; but he that swerith in 
the gold of the temple, is dettoure. 3e17 
foolis and blynde, for what is grettere, 
the gold, or the temple that halewith the 
gold? And who ener swerith in thet 
auter, it is no thing; but he that swer- 
ith in the 3ifte that is on the auter, ow- 
ith. Blynde men, for what is more, the 19 
3ifte, or the auter that halewith the 3ifte? 
Therfor he that swerith in the auter, 20 
swerith in it, and in alle thingis that ben 
ther on. And he that swerith in the2 
temple, swerith in it, and in hym that 
dwellith in the temple. And he that 22 
swerith in henene, swerith in the trone 


tOm.c. 'mayster usec.m. Vv Of men 
x Om. KY pr. m. Y. Yapon on. in vu. 
¢hejgen x. hizen y. 4 Om. G pr.m. 

6 nether je ouv sec. m. neither s. 

© Om. ANOSUSF sec. ut. ¥. PP is our 
$ it is nou3t U sec.m. * swereth our 
w Om. o. for uv sec. m. xX swereth our sec. m. 
b is dettour our sec.m. owith it P. 


Nt0-u. 


d maistrisc. ¢Forgothe. fOm.a. & othirmenc. 4h for to krghi8. i preyeris a pr.m. J the more 
TKR sec.m.x secm.ka, & a rb. | proselite, that is, conuerted to 30ur [her k] ordre Kx sec.m.k8. ™ nou3t 1. 


64 
zialle® thingis that ben theron. And he 
that swerith in the temple, swerith in it, 
and im hym that dwellith in the temple. 
22 And he that swerith in heuene, swerith in 
the trone of God, and in hym that sittith' 
23theron$S. Woo to 3ou, scribis and Phari- 
sees, ypocritis, that tithen mente, anete", 
and comyn, and han! lefte tho thingis that 
ben ‘greuouser, or of more charge, of the 
lawe, dom!, and mercy, and feith. And 
‘these thingis™ it behofte, ‘or nedide®, for® 
24to do?, and not to leene hem‘. Blynde 
leders, ‘clensynge a™ gnatte, but swolow- 
25 ynge as camel. Woo to 30u, scribis and 
Pharisees, ipocritis, that maken clene that* 
thing of the cuppe and plater", that’ is 
with outforth ; forsothe with ynne 3e ben 
26ful of raueyne and vneclennesse’. Thou 
blynd Pharisee, clense first that thing of 
the cuppe and plater* thatY is ‘with ynne- 
forth?, that ‘and that* thing that is® with 
27outenforth be maad clene. Woo to 3ou, 
scribis and Pharisees, ipocritis, that ben 
lic to sepuleris maad whijt, the’ whiche 
with’ outen forth semen faire to men; 
sothely with ynne thei ben ful of boonys 
asof dead men, and al filthe. So and 3ee 
forsothe’ with outen forth® aperen juste‘ 
to®¥ men; but with ynne 3ce ben ful of 
2 ypoerisie and wickidnesse’, Woo to 3ou, 
seribis and Pharisees, ipocritis, that belden 
sepulcris’ of prophetis, and maken faire 
30 the birielis of iuste men, and seien, 3if we 
hadden ben in the dayes of our fadris, we 
shulden nat han* be here felowis in the 
siblood of prophetis. And so 3e ben in! 
witnessyng to 30u™ self, for 3e ben the 
sonys of hem that slowen the" prophetis. 
se And ‘3e fulfillen® the mesure of 3oure fa- 
asdris. 3ee sarpentis, fruytis, or buriown- 
g therin o. 


ein alle semNnopesurwxy.  f sit x. 


gretter our sec. ni. gr. and of m. ch. w. of more charge x. 


nede A. Om. sux. © Om. osx. 
sthe x. ttheo. 

the plater our sec. m. 
¢ Om. ouy sec.m. 4%Om.r see.m. 
nes 0. ithe sepulcres ovr sec.m. & haf o. 


je fill o. 3ee fulfilleth sx. fille 3¢ ur sec.m. 


y whiche our scc.m. 


nthes. °thec. 
t that thing A sec. m.1sec.m.e. Om. emRubeghikes. 
Vv Om. s. 


MATTHEW. 


P do thes thinges our sec. m. 
« of the plater opur sec. m. x¥ prom. 

2 within our. 
€ forth forsothe F sec. m. 
lin to @ 


P Om. A see. m. CEIPQR pr. m. cep. 
s Om. ks pr.m.b pr.m. ghi. 
W that is, burionnyng of eddris, that slecn her modris. K marg. 


XXIII. 21—33. 


of God, and in hym that sittith ther on. 
Wo to 30u, scribis and Farisees, ypo-23 
critis, that tithen mynte, anete, and cum- 
myn, and han left tho thingis that ben 
of more charge of the lawe, doom, and 
merci, and feith. And it bihofte to do 
these thingis, and not to leeue tho. 
Blynde lederis, clensinge a" gnatte, but 24 
swolewynge a® camel. Woo to 30u,25 
scribis and Farisees, ypocritis, that clen- 
sen the cuppe and the? plater with out- 
forth; but with ynne 3e ben ful of ra- 
ueyne and vnclennesse. Thou blynde26 
Farisee, clense1 the cuppe and the plater 
with ynneforth, that that’ that is with 
outforth be maad clene. Wo to 30u, 27 
seribis and Farisees, ipocritis, that ben 
lijk to® sepulcris whitid, whiche with 
outforth semen faire to men; but with 
ynne thei ben fulle of boonus of deed 
men, and of al filthe. So 3e with out-28 
forth semen inst to men; but with ynne 
3e ben ful of ypocrisy and‘ wickidnesse. 
Wo to 30u, scribis and Farisees, ipocritis, 29 
that bilden sepulcris of profetis, and 
maken faire the birielis of iust men, and 30 — 
seien, If we hadden be in the daies of 
oure fadris, we schulden not haue be her 
felowis in the blood of prophetis. And31 
so 3e ben in witnessyng to 30u silf, that 
3e ben the sones of hem that slowen the 
prophetis. And fulfille" 3e” the mesure 32 
of 3oure fadris. 3e eddris*, and eddris33 
briddis, hou schulen 3e fle fro the doom 
of helle? Therfor lo! Y sende to 30034 
profetis, and wise men, and scribis ; and 
of hem 3e schulen sle and crueifie, and 
of hem 3e schulen scourge in 3o0ure sina- 
gogis, and schulen pursue fro cite in to 
citee; that al the iust blood come on35 


hanese 9g. ihafo. 


k grenouser, or more ch. Nn. 
las dome GPxy. 


m Om. or sec.m. 4 or 
4 tho Our sec.m. xX. siende the x. 
Vv whiche our sec.m. Wwikkednes o. * of 

a alsso thilk our sec.m. that x. > was o. 
fristfuly. € Om.r. » of wikked- 
m™30ur emu. 2QOm.our. ° fulfille 5e ani. 


q clense rather A sec. m. clense firste Ke sec. m. 
tand of 1. * fille b. 





XXIM. 34-—X4XIV. 5. 
yngus?, ‘of eddris4, ‘that sleen her modris*, 
hou shulen 3ee flee fro the dotn® of helle ? 

34 Therfore loo! I sende tot 30u prophetis, 
and wise men, and scribis, ‘or writeris"; 
and of hem 3ee shulen’ slee, and crucifie, 
and of hem 3e shulen bete in 30ur syna- 
gogis, and shulen” pursue fro citee in* to 

35citee ; that al the iuste blode come vpon’ 
jou, that was shed? on® the? erthe, fro 
the blood of iust Abel til® the blood of 
Zacharie, the sone of Barachie, whom 3ee% 
slowen bitwixe® the temple and the auter. 

36 Trewli I seie to 30u, alle these’ thingis 

37shulen come vpon® this generacioun. Jeru- 
salem, Jerusalem, that sleest prophetis, and 
stonyst hem that ben sent to thee, hou oft 
wold I gedre to gidre thi sonys, as an 
henne gedreth togidre hir chikenys vndir 

sshir wengis, and thou woldist nat. Loo! 
3oure hous shal be lefte to 30u desert, ‘or 

so forsaken". Forsothe I seie to 30u, 3ee 
shulen nat see me fro hennys forth, til 
thati 3ee seien, Blessid ‘7s he‘, that cumeth 
in the! name of the Lord. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 And Jhesus, gon out of the™ temple, 
wente; and his disciplis ‘camen ni3” to 
hym, that thei shulden shewe to hym the 
2bildyngis of the temple. Forsothe he an- 
swerynge seith® to hem, Seen 3ee alle these 
thingis? Trewly I seie to 30u, a stoon 
shal nat be lefte here on a stoon, ‘the 
3whiche? shal nat4 be distruyed. Sothely 
hym sittynge on the hil of Olyuete, disci- 
plis" ‘camen ni3° to him priuely, seiynge, 
Seiet to vs, whanne thes thingis schulen 
be, and what tokene of thi comynge, and 
4of" ending of the world. And Jhesus 
answeringe seide to hem, Se 3e, that no 
sman disceyue 3ou. Many’ schulen come 
in my name, seyynge, IY am Crist; and 


MATTHEW. 65 


jou, that was sched on the erthe, fro the 
blood of iust Abel to the blood of Zaca- 
rie, the sone of Barachie, whom 3e slowen . 
bitwixe the temple and the auter. Treuli36 
Y seie to 30u, alle these thingis schulen 
come on this generacioun. Jerusalem, 37 
Jerusalem, that sleest prophetis, and 
stoonest hem that ben sent to thee, hou 
ofte wolde Y gadere togidere thi chil- 
dren, as an henne gaderith togidir her 
chikenes vndir hir wengis, and thou 
woldist not. Lo! joure hous schal be3s 
left to 3ou desert. And Y seie to 30u,39 
je schulen not se me fro hennus forth, 
til 3e seien, Blessid zs he, that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. 


CAP. XXIV. 


And Jhesus wente out of the temple; ! 
and his disciplis camen to hym, to schewe 
hym the bildyngis of the temple. Bute 
he answeride, and seide to hem, Seen 3e 
alle these thingis ? Treuli Y seie to 30u, 
a stoon schal not be left here* on aY stoon, 
that ne it schal be destried. And whannes 
he satte on the hille’Y of? Olyuete, hise 
disciplis camen to hym priueli, and seideu, 
Seie vs*, whanne these thingis schulen 
be, and what token of thi comyng, and 
of the ending of the world. And Jhesus4 
answeride, and seide to hem, Loke 3e, 
that no man disseyue 3ou. For manys 
schulen come in my name, and schulen 
seie, Yam Crist; and thei schulen dis- 


P f. of b.G. kyndeles our sec. m. frutis x. q Om. x. tOm.oux. $dampnaciounv. t Om.v. 
u ether w. our sec.m.w. Om. x. ¥Om. 6 pr.m. ® 3ee schulen cour sec.m.xy. * Om.u. Yon osur 
see.m. X. 2 sched onte our sec.m. aing. 6 Om. osur sec.m. x. etil to ourwsec.m. @ thei 
Gsec.m. &bitwe sx. fOm.epr.m. on mourwx. » Om. ovx. 1Om. ouy see.m. * Om. x. 
1Om.x. ™Om.N. ™neizeden our sec.m. © seide our sec.m. P whiche or. that ne it U see. m. 
that x. 9Om.u scc.m. his disciplis sour. the disciplis camxy. 8 nei3eden ouy see.m.  * Seie 
thou ur sec.m. “ofthe aux. v For many our sec.m. © that To. 

xOm. cEI prem.R. Yoa. Y¥mountKr. #4 Om. P prim. ato vs RX see.m.gkf. that I 


€ pr.nt. Ke pr.m. 
VOL. IV. 


66 MATTHEW. 


6thei schulen disceyue manye. Sothly 3e 
‘pen to* heere bateyls, and opynyouns of 
bateyls ; se 3e, that 3e ben not distroblid’; 
forsoth? it bihoueth thes thingis to? be 
7don, but not 3it is the ende. Folk? schal 
ryse to gidere ajen folk, and rewme ‘in to¢ 
rewine, and pestilencis’, and hungris, and 
serthemouyngis schulen be by placis; for- 
sothe alle thes thingis ben bigynnyngis of 
gsorwis. Thenne thei schulen bitake jou 
‘in to® tribulacioun, and thei sehulen slee 
3ou, and 3e schulen be in hate’ to alle 
10 folkis for my name. And thanne manye’ 
schulen be sclaundrid, and ‘to gidere® bi- 
traye, ori ‘ech other*, and ‘in hate haue! 
ito gidere. And many false prophetis 
12schulen ryse, and disceyue™ many. And® 
for wickidnesse schal ‘be plenteous®, the 
i3charite of manye? schal wexe coold; for- 
sothe he that schal dwelle stable4 vntot 
i4the ende, he’ this' schal be saaf. And 
this gospel of * kyngdom sehal be prechid 
in al the world, in to witnessinge to alle 
folkis; and thanne the ende" schal come’. 
15 Therfore whenne 3e schulen se the abho- 
mynacioun of discomfort’, that is seid of 
Danyel, the prophete, stondynge in the* 
hooly place; he that redith, vndirstonde’; 
isthanne thei that ben in Judee, fle? to 
17mounteyns; and he that zs in the hous 
roof, come not dowf to take ony thing of 
his hous; and he that zs in the feeld, 
i9turne not ajen to take his coote. Forsoth 
wo to wymmen? with childe and norys- 
20chinge® in tho dayes. Sothly preie 3e, that 
3onre fleynge be not maad in wyntir, or? 
2isaboth. Forsothe® thanne schal be greet 
tribulacioun, what maner was not fro thef 
bigyunyng of the world to& now, nethir 


x schulen our sec. m. 


folke ouy scc.m. © to G pr.m. ajens our. 


our sce.m. 4 thei schulen ovr sec. m. 

in hatered our sce.m. ™ thei schulen disceyne our sec. m. 
oUF sec. Mm. 4 stedfast our see. m. Tin to o. til into urw. 
tt ofthe vu. eendynge our sec.m. Vv he ouv sec. m. 


Y vnderstonde he o. 2 fle thei Garprxy. 
chen our sec.m. nurshende x. 
prem. ¥ sec. m. & til AMNOPTUFH. 


bb For folk R.  ¢ pestilence a. 
bitraye ee. — -b wax 1 sec. m. 
° hath not be c ct plures. 


i stille E1Q. 
90 til plures. 


¥ distnrbid sx. disturblid a1. 
4 pestilens o. 
i Om. G prom. oPUr sec.m. XY. 


@in to kK. 
4 ether in ov. ether in the 7 sce. m. 


4 Om. 1 sec. m. KQRXeghik. 
k into c. 
P thilke 1. 


XXIV. 6—21. 


seyue manye. For 3e schulen here batels, 6 
and opyniouns of batels; se 3e that 3e 
be not disturblid; for it byhoueth these 
thingis to be don, but not 3it is the ende. 
Folk®> schal rise togidere ajens fole, and7 
rewme aj3ens rewme, and pestilences*, and 
hungris, and the’ erthemouyngis schulen 
be bi placis; and alle these ben bigyn-s 
nyngis of sorewes. Thanne men schulen9 
bitake 30u in to tribulacion, and® schulen 
sle jou, and 3e schulen be in hate to alle 
folkf for my name. And thanne many 10 
schulen be sclaundrid, and bitraye® ech 
other, and thei schulen hate ech other. 
And many false prophetis schulen rise, 11 
and disseyue manye. And for wickidnesse 12 
schal ‘be plenteuouse", the charite of 
manye schal wexe coold; but he thatis 
schal dwelle stable! in to the ende, schal 
be saaf. And this gospel of the kyng-14 
dom schal be prechid in* al the world, 
in witnessyng to al fole; and thanneis 
the ende schal come. Therfor whanne 
je se the abhomynacioun of diseomfort, 
that is seid of Danyel, the prophete, 
stondynge in the hooli place; he that 
redith, vndirstonde he; thanue! thei that is 
ben in Judee, fle to the mounteyns ; 
and he that zs in the hous roof, come not 17 
doun to take ony thing of his hous; 
and he that zs in the feeld, turne notis 
a3en to take his coote. But wo to hemig 
that ben with child, and nurischen in tho 
daies. Preye 3e, that 3oure fleyng be not 20 
maad in wynter, or in the™ saboth®. For21 
thanne schal be greet tribulacioun, what 
maner ‘was not® fro the bigynnyng of 
the world to now, nether schal be maad. 
And but tho? daies hadden‘ be abreggide, 22 


2 for ou. 
& to o. 


@ for to GMOPF prem, W. b For 

f hatered our sec.m, & many men 
k Om. x. ! thei schulen haf 
nOm.G. ° waxe U sec.m. P many men 
8 Om. sur sec. m. t Om. uv sec. m. 
Ww discordinge o pr.m.vpr.m.  * Om. emp. 
> hem that ben our# sec. m. © noris- 

€ For our sec. m. f Om. u 


e and thei cr. f folkis c. 
1Om. c. m Om, R prom. 
q shulen c. 


& to gydere 
0 sabotis Erqa. 


XXIV. 22——32. 


22schal be maad*. And noi but* tho! dayes 
hadden be breggid™, al fleisch, ‘that is, 
mankynde®, ‘schulde not be maad saaf°; 
but tho? dayes schulen be maad schort, for 
23the chosun men. Thanne if ony man 
schal seie to 30u, Lo! here is Crist, or4 
2ithere, nyle 3e bileue. Forsothe™ false 
Cristis and false prophetis schulen ryse, 
and thei schulen 3yue grete tokenes* and 
wondris; ‘so thatt also" the chosyne’ be 
25ledd in to errour, if it may be don. Lo! 
26I haue bifore seid to 30u. Therfore if 
thei schulen seie to 3ou, Loo! he is in 
desert, nyle 3e go out; loo! in pryuey 
‘chambris, or placis*, nyle 3e bileue. 
27Sothlix as leyt goth out fro. the eest, and 
apperith ‘til in toY the west, so schal be 
28 and’ the comynge of mannus sone. Where 
euere the body schal* be, and the? eeglis 
29schulen be gederid thidur. Forsothe anoon 
aftir the tribulacioun of tho dayes, the sunne 
schal be maad derk, and the mone schal 
not 3yue hir li3t, and sterris schulen falle 
down fro heuene, and the‘ vertues of he- 
3onenes schulen be monyd®. And thanne 
the tokene of mannus sone schal appere 
in heuene, and thanne alle kynredis‘, ‘or 
lynagis®, of erthe schulen weyle; and thei 
schulen se mannus sone comynge in the 
clowdis of heuene, with moche vertu and 
3imageste. And he schal sende his angelis 
with a trumpe, and’ greet voice; and thei 
schulen gedere his chosyne fro foure 
wyndis ‘of heuene'!, fro the hijeste thingis 
of heuenes til* teermes!, ‘or endes™, of 
szhem. ‘Lerne je” the parable of a° fyge 
tree. Whenne? his ‘bou3, or braunche4, 
is now’ tendre, and leeuys sprungen, 3ee 


h Om. our see.m. i Om. 4x, 

o Om. x. © had not been saued o pr. v. 
OUF sec. m. t sothely o. u Om. G pr.m. KPX. 
ch. or placis, he is p. chaumbres x. 
OUV sec. 1m. aOm. x. b Om. o. 
8 Om. Gouxy pr.m. 
exy. til w. til to oPSUF sec. m. W sec. m. 
AO, or termes 8. ether the cendes u. Om. x. 
othe uv. P Now whan o. Whan now vu. 
F Om. our sec. im. 


d Om. g. 


k but 3if Gaperxy pr. m. 
P the n. 


x For our sec. m. 
€ stirred our sec. m. 
h Om. & pr.m. PoTW pr.m. XY. 
1 the teermes MoPuUr sec. m. X. endis s. 
n Forsothe lerne o. Lere 3ee sx. Forsothe lerne 3¢ ur. 

4 braunches o. braunche uv. bo3 x. bowis, or braunehe y. 


MATTHEW. 67 


ech flesch™ schulde not be maad saaf ; 
but tho daies schulen be maad schort, for 
the chosun men. Thanne if ony man2z3 
seie to 30u, Lo! here is Crist, or there’, 
nyle 3e bileue. For false Cristis and 24 
false prophetis schulen rise, and thei 
schulen 3yue grete tokenes and wondrys; 
so that also the chosun be led in to er- 
roure, if it may be done. Lo! Y hane2s 
bifor seid to 30u. Therfor if thei scie to 26 
3ou, Lo! he is in desert, nyle 3e go out; 
lo! int priney placis, nyle 3e trowe®. 
For as leit goith out fro the eest, and 27 
apperith in to the weste, so schal be also 
the coming of mannus sone. Where euer 28 
the bodi schal be, also the eglis schulen 
be gaderid thidur. And anoon after the 29 
tribulacioun of tho daies, the sunne schal 
be maad derk, and the moone schal not 
3yue hir 1i3t, and the sterris schulen falle 
fro heuene, and the vertues of heuenes 
schulen be moued. And thanne the30 
tokene of mannus sone schal appere in 
henene, and thanne’ alle kynredis” of 
the* erthe schulen weile; and thei schulen 
see mannus sone comynge in the clondis 
of heuene, with miche vertu and maieste. 
And he schal sende hise aungels with a31 
trumpe, and a greet vois; and thei schu- 
len gedere hise chosun fro foure wyndis, 
fro the hizest thingis of heuenes** to theY 
endis of hem. And lerne 3e the parable 32 
of a? fige tre. Whanne his braunche is 
now tendir, and the leenes ben* sprongun, 
3e witen that somer is ny3; ‘so and 3e33 
whanne 3e seen® alle these thingis, wite 
3e that it is ny3, in the 3atis. Treuli Y 31 
seie to 30u, for this generacioun schal not 


I the x. m abreged our sec. m. 
t For our sec.m. — $ signes 
v¥ chosen men OTUF sec. m. Ww placis our sec. m. 
Yin to 4¢x. til to x. Zin KP. also 
f the kynredes our sec. m. 
ii Om. our Ww sec. m. k ynto 
™ ether endes 


G ether our sec. m. 


iin ex. 


® thal is, mankinde K marg. ‘Slo!therec. theisin1. bileene k pr.m. YOm.c. © the kyn- 
redis bk. * Om.cxsei. **henenr. yOm.c. Zthes. ® ben now a pr.m.4iQ. ben nowe grene 
ipr.m. bandso3eK. ¢se a. schulensek. ¢¢ Om. R. 


K 2 


68 MATTHEW. 


33witen, that’ somer is ni3; so ‘and 3ee* 
whenne 3ee shulen se alle these thingis, 
witith” that it is nij, and’ in the 3atis. 
34 Trewly I seie to 30w, for this generacioun 
shal nat passe, til that” alle thingis ‘be 
35don*; henene and erthe shulen passe, 
36but my wordis shulen nat passe. For- 
sothe of thilkY day and hour no man woot, 
nether angelis? of* henenes, no> but the 
37fadir alone. Forsothe as it was in the 
dayes of Noye, so shal be and* the com- 
38yng of mannes sone. For as in the days 
bifore the grete flood, thei weren etynge 
and drinkynge, weddynge and takynge to 
weddynge, til in to that? day, in the® 
39 whiche Noe entride in to the ship; and 
‘thei knewen nat, til that’ the grete flood 
came, and toke alle men, so shal be the 
4ocummyng of mannes sone. Thanne twot 
shulen be in a feeld, oon shal be taken to", 
grand ‘an other left, or forsaken’; twok 
wymmen shulen be gryndynge in oo! 
querne™, oon shal be taken to", and ‘the 
other’ forsakenP; two! in oo" bed, ‘the 
toon’ shal be taken to‘, and the" tother’ 
42 forsaken”. Therfore wake 3ee, for 3ee 
witen nat in what houre j3oure* Lord ‘is toY 
azcumme. Sothely that thing wite 3ee, for 
3if the housbonde man wiste in what houre 
the theef ‘were to? cumme, trewly he 
shulde wake, and suffre nat his hous to be 
4avudirmynyd’. And? therfore and¢ ‘3ee be? 
redy, for® in what hour ‘3ee gessen natf, 
45 naimes sone ‘is to§ cumme. Who gessist 
thou is a trew® seruaunt and‘ prudent, 
‘or war’, whom his lord ordeynyde on his 
meynee, that he 3eue to! hem mete in 
sctyine? Blissid ¢s that seruaunt, whom 
his lord, wheune he sbhal™ cumme, shal 


8 for OUF sec, m. 
w Om. our sec. m. 
d the v. 


talsso our sec. m. 
X passe o. Y that sx. 
€ Om. Nour sec. m. X. 


u wite 3e 40UV sec. m. wite NV pr.m. iV. 
2 the aungeles ou. 
fOm.N pr.m.g. & tweien ou. 


leeft apx. oone schall be forsaken o. another schal be forsaken u sec. m. 


XXIV. 33—46. 


passe, til alle thingis be don; heuene3s 
and erthe schulen passe, but my wordis 
schulen not passe. But of thilke dai and 36 
our no inan wote, nethir aungels of he- 
uenes’, but the fadir aloone. But as it 37 
was in the daies of Noe, so schal be the 
comyng of mannus sone. For as in these 
daies bifore the greet flood, thei weren 
etynge and drynkynge, weddynge and 
takynge to weddyng, to® that dai, that 
Noe entride in to the schippe; and theis9 
knewen not, til the greet flood cam, and 
took alle men, sof schal be the comyng 
of mannus sone. Thanne tweyne* schu- 40 
len be in 08 feeld, oon schal be takun, 
and another’ left®; twey*® wymmen4- 
schulen be gryndynge in o! queerne, oon 
schal be takun, and ‘the tother left ; 
tweyn in ai bedde, ‘the toon* schal be 
takun, and the tother! left. Therfor 42 
wake 3e™, for 3e witen not in what our 
the Lord schal come. But wite 3e this, 43 
that if the hosebonde man wiste in what 
our the thefe were to come, certis he 
wolde wake, and suffre not his hous to 
be vndurmyned. And therfor be je redi, 44 
for in what our 3e gessen not, mannus 
sone schal come. Who gessist thou is a 4s 
trewe seruaunt and" prudent, whom his 
lord ordeyned on his meynee, to 3yue 
hem mete in tyme? Blessed és that 46 
seruaunt, whom ‘his lord, whanne he® 
schal come, schal fynde so doynge. Treuli 47 
Y seye to 30n, for on alle his goodis he 
schal ordeyne hym. But if thilke yuel 4s 
seruaunt seie in his herte, My lord tari- 
eth to come, and bigynneth to smyte hise 49 
euen seruauntis, and ete?, and drynke 
with drunken men; the lord of that ser- 50 


v Om. Goesrx. 
4 Om. 4. © also our scc. m. 
bh Om. nou. for to rT. 1 anothir 

k twei ov sec. m. tweyne 5. 


ain s. 


law. ™mylne x. 2 Om. ou. ° the tother amnrorr. that other Gus. an other i. P schal be 
forsaken ou. left x. q tweine ourm. Caur. $ that oon G. one oup#. the oon x. t Om. ou. 
uthat Gu. ‘other Gosux.  W schal be forsaken o. Xoure U. Yschalov. 2 schulde our sec. m. 
*myned ov. >bOm.s. also ov. 4 be 3¢ ur sec. m. 3ee beth x. © for 3e witen not ov. f Om. ov. 
&schal ov. »} feiz3ful ov. iandau. * Om. our sec.m.x. 1 Om. vu. ™ Om. o. E 
dheuene c. ¢ til 108. til in to Krsec.m.ksec.m. friz3tsor1. f€tworge. Sacet plures. e% the 
tother kK. 4 shal beleefts. bhtwog. ‘tar. iithat ootherr. joo. that oon rk. the oon rR. oone. 


l oothir 1. ™Om.c. ™ and a 1eghk sec.ni.a8. © his lord, whan his lord x. whanne his lord K.P to ete kK. 


XXIV. 47-——XXYV. 10. 


47fynde ‘doynge so". Trewly I seie to 30u, 
for vpon® alle his goodis he shal ordeyne 
4shym. Forsothe 3if thilk? ynel seruaunt 
shal? seie® in his herte, My lord makith 
49 ‘dwellynge, or taryinge’, to cum, and bi- 
gynne’ to smyte his euen seruauntis", 
sothely 3if- he ete’ and drynke” with 
so drunkenlewe men; the lord of thilk* ser- 
uaunt shal cume in the day in whiche he 
hopith nat, and in hour’ that? he kuow- 
s1ith nat, and shal* departe hym, and put> 
his part with ypocritis; there shal be 
weepynge, and betynge togidre of teeth. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Thanne the kyngdam® of heuenes shal 
be lic to ten virgynys, ‘the whiche’, tak- 
ynge her laumpis, wente out® meetynge 
the spouse, ‘or husbonde‘, and the’ spous- 

gesse", ‘or wijfi; forsothe fyue of hem 

3weren foolis, and fyue prudent. But the 
fyue foalis, her laumpis taken, token nat 

soyle with hem; forsothe the prudent * 
token oyle in her vessels with laumpis. 

5 Forsothe the spouse, ‘or housbonde', mak- 
ynge dwellynge™, alle nappiden and slept- 

cen. Sothely at myd ni3t a ery was maad, 
Loo! the spouse cummeth, go 3ee out 

7metynge to" hyim. Thanne® alle the 
virgynys rysen vp, and anourneden? her 
slaumpis. Sothely the foolis seiden to the 
wise, 3eue 3ee to vs of 3oure oile, for oure 
glaumpis ben qwenchid. The prudent an- 
swereden, seyinge4, Lest perauenture it 
suffise’ nat to us and to jou, go 3ee rather 
io to ‘inen sellynge*, and bye' to jou. ‘For- 
sothe the" while thei wenten for’ to bye, 
the spouse care; and tho that weren redy, 
entriden in” with hym to the weddyngis ; 


° so doynge Garx. 
dwelling x. 
our sec.m. W drenketh our sec. m. 
ou. © he schall putte ou. 
the hosbonde N. & Om, x. 
AOSUF Sec. m. X. ™ tariyng U. 
eden Gc. ourneden Nosux. 4Qm. o. 


9 on OUV sec. m. W sec.m,. X. 


x that oux. 
© rewine ou. 


P that x. 
t schal bygynne ¢ sec. m. bigynneth p. he bygyn o. if he bigynne v. 4 seruaunt o. ¥ eteth 
y the houre our sec. m. 
d@ whiche our sec. m. that x. 

h sponse GMOPQY pr. m. 
D ajens OU. to meetinge to x. 
T sufficeth o. 


MATTHEW. 69 


uaunt schal come in the? dai which" he 
hopith not, and in the our that he know- 
ith not, and schal departe hym, ands: 
putte’ his part with ypocritis; there 
schal be wepyng, and gryutyng of teeth. 


CAP. XXV. 


Thannet the kyngdoom of heuenes schal 1 
be lijk to" ten virgyns, whiche’ token her 
laumpis, and wenten out ajens the hose- 
bonde and the wijf; and fyue of heme 
weren foolis, and fyue prudent. But thes 
fyue foolis token her laumpis, and token 
not oile with hem; but the prudent4 
token oile in her vessels with the 
laumpis. And whilis the hosebonde tar-s 
iede, alle thei nappiden and slepten. Bute 
at mydny3t™ a cry3 was maad, Lo! the 
spouse cometh, go 3e oute to mete with 
him. |Thanne alle tho* virgyns risen’ 7 
vp, and araieden her laumpis. And thes 
foolis seiden to the wise, 3yue 3e to vs of 
3oure oile, for oure laumpis ben queuchid. 
The prudent” answeriden, and seiden,9 
Lest perauenture it suffice not to vs and 
to 30u, go 3e rather to men that sellen, 
and bie to 30u. And while thei wenten 10 
for* to bie, the spouse cam; and tho? that 
weren redi, entreden with him to the 
weddyngis; and the 3ate was schit. Andi 
at the last the othere® virgyns camen, and 


qOm. ov. ‘seithu. § taryinge sou. 
Zin whiche ov. 4 he schall 
€ out tox. f Om. aoux. or 
k fiue prudent x. ! Om. 
P hononureden 4. nour- 


t by 3¢ Nour see. m. 


i Om. our sec. m. X. 
o And than o. 
8 the selleres our sec. m. 


bieth sx. °% Sothely our sec. m. Y Om. osur sec. m. x. W Om, our sec. m. 


, 


Qthat kK. ‘in whiche bhi. %schal puttee pr.m. tOm.1. %Om. a. ¥ the whicher.  ¥ the 
mydny3t A. x the aria8. thilke 1. Y risiden K. resen Is. resin EP. z prudent virgyns K. 4 Om. 


A sec.m. forth Ee. thilke 1.  ¢ tothere K- 


70 MATTHEW. 


uland the 3ate is* shit. Sothely at the last 
andy the? other virgynys camen, seyinge, 
12 Lord, lord, opene* to vs. And he answer- 
ynge seith, Treuly I seie to 30u, I knowe 
i3‘nat 30u", And so wake 3ee, ‘and preye®, 
for 3ee witen nat the day ne4 the hour. 
i4Sothely as a man goynge fer in pilgrim- 
age, clepide his seruauntis, and bitoke to® 
ishem his goodis; and tof oon he 3aue fyue 
talentis, ‘or besauntis®, forsothe to an other 
two , but to an other oon, to eche after! his 
is owne vertu; and wente* forth anoon. For- 
sothe and he that hadde take fyue' talentis, 
wente forth, and wrou3te in hem, and wan 
170ther fyue. Also and™ he that hadde 
18taken two", wan other two®. Sothely he 
that hadde taken oon, goynge? forth, dalf4 
in to the’ erthe, and hidde the mone of his 
wlord. Bot’ after muche tyme, the lord of 
tho’ seruauntis came, and puttidet resoun 
20with hem. And he that hadde taken fyue 
talentis, ‘cummynge to", offride other fyue, 
seyinge, Lord, thou bitokist’ me” fyne 
talentis, ‘or besauntis*, loo! I haue ‘geten 
ziouer’ other fyue. His lord seith? to hym, 
Wel be thou, good seruaunt and feithful, 
‘or trewe*; for vpon> fewe thingis thou 
hast ben trewe®’, I shal ordeyne thee vpon# 
many thingis; entre thou in to the ioye 
220f thi lord. Forsothe and® he that hadde 
taken twof talentis, ‘came to’, and? seithi, 
Lord, thou bitokist* to! me two™ talentis ; 
23100! I haue ‘geten ouer® other two°. His 
lord seithP to him, Wel be‘ thou, good 
seruaunt and trewe'; for vpon’ fewe thingis 
thou hast ben trewe', I shal ordeyne thee 
vpon" many thingis; entre thou’ in to the 
24ioye of thi lord. Forsothe and he that 


X was ouv sec.m. —-¥ also our sec. m. 
¢ Om, om sec.m. urw sec. m. and pre3eth sx. 
h tweine ousy. i by our sec.m. 
© tweyne OUFIY sec.m. P wente U. 
mM pr.m. tputte sx. "neizinge our sec. m. 
UXY pr.m. Y ouergeten aMNourW. geten XY. 
¢ fei3ful ov. 
i seide or sec. m. offrede other tweyne, selynge U. 
n ouergeten AMNOUVIY, ° tweine ourw. 
Son our sec. m. x. * fey3ful our see. m. 


4 hesauntis K. f and her. 


k over I. 


€ Om. E1PQ@Rcaf. 
I besauntis kK. 


2 Om. our sec, m. 
4 nether ur sec. m. 
k he wente our sec.m. 
4 dalfe it Kp. and dalfue v. 
Y tokest o. bitoke x. 
Z seide oUY sec. m. 
don our sec.m.x. © Om. vu. f twei or sec.m. wv. § neized or sec. m. neigynge u. 4 Om. v. 
k bitoke sx. 
P seide our sec.m. 
“ oll OUFX Sec. mM. 


& dalf it Ep. 


XXV. TI—24. 


seiden, Lord, lord, opene to vs. And he1i2 
answeride, and seide, Treuli Y seie to jou, 
Y knowe 30u not. Therfor wake 3e, for 13 
3e witen not the dai ne the our. For as14 
a man that goith in pilgrimage, clepide 
hise seruauntis, and bitook to hem hise 
goodis ; and to oon he jaf fyne talentis4, 15 
and¢ to another tweyne, and to another 
oon, to ech after his owne vertu; and! 
wente forth anoon. And he that hadde i¢ 
fyue besauntis, wente forth, and wrou3te 
in hem, and wan othere fyue. Also and 17 
he that hadde takun tweyne, wan othere 
tweyne. But he that hadde takun oon, 18 
3ede forth, and dalfé in to" the erthe, and 
hidde the money of his lord. But afteri9 
long tyme, the lord of tho! seruauntis cam, 
and rekenede with hem. And he that 20 
hadde takun fyue besauntis, cam, and 
brou3te othere fyue, and seide, Lord, thou 
bytokist to me fyue besauntis, loo! Y 
haue getun aboue* fyue othere. His lord 21 
seide to hym, Wel be thou, good ser- 
uaunt and feithful ; for on fewe thingis 
thou hast be trewe, Y schal ordeyne thee 
on manye thingis; entre thou in to the 
ioye of thi lord. And he that hadde22 
takun twey talentis!, cam, and seide, Lord, 
thou bitokist to me twey besauntis; loo! 
Y haue wonnen ouer othir tweyne. His 23 
lord seide to him, Wel be thou, good ser- 
uaunt and trewe; for on fewe thingis 
thou hast be trewe, Y schal ordeyne thee 
on many thingis; eutre thou in to the 
ioie of thi lord. But he that hadde2 
takun o besaunt, cam, and seide, Lord, Y 
woot that thou art an hard man; thou 
repist where thou hast not sowe, and 


@ opene thon our sec.m. > 30u not x. 
€Om.o fOm.u. & Om. soux. 
Ithe fyne vy. ™ Om... 8 tweine our sec.m. 
rOm.s. § Forsothe our scc.m. § the 

W to me ou sec.m. * Om. AGOPS 
a Om. aGopuxy. » on our sec.m.x. 


10m. ow prom. ™ twey ourw. 
qbetothee uv. ° feizfull our sec. m. 
Vv Om. G pr.m. PX. 


4 Om. a pr.m. ceip pr.m. ‘the errbia. 


XXV. 25-——35. 


hadde taken oo talent, ‘cummynge to, 
seithY, Lord, I wote that? thou art an hard 
man; thou repist wher thou hast nat 
sewen, and thou gederist to gidre wher 
25 thou hast nat spreedde abrood; and I dred- 
ynge wente, and hidde thi talent in the 
erthe; loo! thou hast that that is thin. 
26Sothely his® lord answerynge, seide’ to 
hym, Yuel seruaunt and slowe, wistist thou 
that® I repe wher I sewe nat, and gederef 
27 to gidre wher I spradde nat abrood? Ther- 
fore it bihouyde® thee to" ‘sende, or be- 
taken’, my monee to chaungers, that* and! 
I cummynge shulde haue resceyned for- 
28 sothe™ that" that is myn with vsuris. And 
so ‘take 3e° awey fro hym the talent, and 
3eue 3e itP tof hym that hath ten talentis. 
29For to euery’ man hauynge it® shal be 
3ouen, and he shal haue plente'; and" to’ 
hym that hath nat, and’ that* that he sem- 
ethY to haue, shal be taken fro* hym. And 
30 caste 3ee out the ‘vnprofitable seruaunt?, 
‘and send** 3ee> hym® in to vttermoreé 
derknessis; there shal be weepynge, and 
31 betyng to gidre of teeth. Forsothe whanne 
mannes sone shal cume in his mageste, and 
alle his angelis with hym, thanne he shal 
32sitte on the sege® of his magestee; and alle 
33fulkis shulen be gederid before‘ hym, and 
he schal departe hem atwynne, as a shep- 
erde departith scheep fro kidis; andé sothli 
he schal seette the scheep on his® ri3thalf, 
34 the! kidis forsothe on the* lefthalf. Thanne 
the kyng schal seie to hem, that shulen be 
on his! riz3thalf, Come 3ee, the blessid of 
my fadir, welde 3ee, ‘or take 3ee in pos- 
sessioun™, the kyngdam maad redy to 30u 
fro the ‘bygynnynge, or makynge®, of the 
35 world. Forsothe® I was hungry?, and 3e 


x neizynge our. ¥ seide our sec. m. 
UFY sec. Mm. b the thenge our sec. m. 
f gadered gw. & byhouith eu. bihofte w. 
k Om. ANOQSTUFWXY sec. m. 1 On. p. 
sec. Mm. © takith GPxy. P Om. AMNOSUY. 
t plente, or encrese U sec.m. 1% forsothe our. 
thenge o. this uy see.m. bisemith G sec. m. 
aa Om. uw sec.m. > Om. w sec.m.W sec. m. 
vtmore x. € sete oUFVX. f tofore o. 
bigynnynge 9x. © For 0 sec. m. v. 

mhaue receyued K. % take 3e EKX sec.m. 
vttermere Ks. vttirmore rhik. ° grenching s. 
Ksb pr. m. gik. © ¥ and I easubghk. 


2 for GMopUVYWX sec.m. for that K pr. m. 
¢ the K sec. m. 
h Om. Q. 
™ sothely our sec.m. Om. s. forth xy. 
q Om. wv. 
V fro 40 sec. m. UV. 
2 of o. awei of UF. 
¢ Om, M sec.m, W. 
& Om. o. 
m Om, s0qux. or takith in possessioun Gsy pr.m. or take in possessioun M, 
P hungered our sec. m. 


o Om. cr. 
$ seete ce Kbck. 


MATTHEW. 71 


thou gederist togidere where thou hast 
not spred abrood ; and Y dredynge wente, 2: 
and hidde thi besaunt in the erthe; lo! 
thou hast that that is thin. His lord an-2« 
sweride, and seide to hym, Yuel seruanut 
and slowe, wistist thou that Y repe where 
Y sewe not, and gadir to gidere where Y 
spredde not abrood ? Therfor it bihofte 27 
thee to bitake my money to chaungeris, 
that whanne Y cam, Y schulde resseyue™ 
that that is myn with vsuris. Therfor2¢ 
take" awei fro hym the besaunt, and 3yue 
3e’ to hym that hath ten besauntis. For 29 
to euery man that hath me schal 3yue, 
and he schal encreese ; but fro hym that 
hath not, also that that hym®° semeth to 
haue, schal be taken awey fro? him. And 30 
caste 3e out the vnprofitable seruaunt in 
to vtmer? derknessis; ther schal be wep- 
yng, and gryntyng’ of teeth. Whanne31 
mannus sone schal come in his maieste, 
and alle hise aungels with hym, thanne 
he schal sitte on the sege® of his maieste; 
and alle folkis schulen be gaderid bifor 32 
hym, and he schal departe hem atwynne, 33 
as a scheeperde departith scheep from 
kidis ; and he schal sette the scheep on 
his ri3thalf, and the kidis on thet lefthalf. 
Thanne the kyng schal seie to hem, that 34 
schulen be on his ri3thalf, Come 3e, the" 
blessid of my fadir, take” 3e in posses- 
sioun the kyngdoom maad redi to 3ou fro 
the makyng of the world. For Y hun-3s 
gride, and 3e 3auen me to ete; Y™ thrist- 
ide, and 3e 3auen me to drynke; Y was 
herboreles, and 3e herboriden me; nakid, 36 
and 3e hiliden me; sijk, and 3e visitiden 
me; Y was in prisoun, and 3e cainen to 
me. Thanne iust men schulen answere: 


oh 


a Om. Gop 
dq seith c. € for OUP sec. m. 
i sende 4. take o. bitake ur sec. m. han sent x. 
n the thenge our 
tr eche our sec. m. X. 8 Om. G pr.m. x. 
W alsso our sec.m. Om. 9. * that 

& seruaunt unprofitable aNoursr. 
d ytmere sorviv. the vttermore TU. 
iandtheo. <khisox. !the x. 
n makyng 4Nopsury. 


h the q. 


4 the vtmere 1. 


oohe R. P of cbeghk. 
v and take 


this KR8. &% Om, k. 


72 MATTHEW. 


3auen to med for’ to ete; I thristide, and 
3ee 3euen to’ me fort to drynke; I was 
herberlesse, and 3ee ‘gederiden, or her- 
36 berden", me; nakid’, and 3ee heliden me; 
seik, and 3ee visitiden me; I was in pri- 
37 soun,and 3e camen to me. Thanne iust men 
shulen answere to hym, seyinge”, Lord, 
whenne sy3en we thee hungry, and we 
fedd thee; thristy, and we 3euen to* thee 
38drynkeY? whenne forsothe seien we thee 
herberlesse, and we gedriden? thee* ; or? 
so nakid, and we heliden thee? or® ‘whenne 
seien we thee seek’, or® in prisoun, and we 
4ocamen to thee‘? And he answerynge shal 
seie to hem, Treuly I seie to 3ou, ‘as long® 
as 3ee diden to oon of these my leste bre- 
aithren, 3ee diden to me. Thanne the kyng 
shal seie and to hem, that shulen be on 
his left half, Departi fro me, ‘jee cursid*, 
in to! euerlastynge fijr, ‘the whiche™ is maad 
42redy to the deuyl and his" angelis. Sothe- 
ly° I hungeryde, and 3e 3auen nat toP me 
for’ to ete; I thristide, and 3ee 3auen nat to 
43 me for’ to drynke ; I was herberlesse, and 
3ee gedriden’ nat me‘; nakid, and 3ee co- 
uereden nat me; seik, and in prisoun, and 
443ee visitiden nat me. Thanne and thei 
shulen answere to hym, seyinge’, Lord, 
whanne seien we thee hungrynge, or 
thristynge, or herberlesse, or" nakid, or” 
seik, or’ in prisoun, and we seruyden nat 
45to thee ? Thanne he shal answere to hem, 
seiynge*, Treuly I seie to 30u, houY longe 
jee diden nat to oon of these leste”, ‘nethere 
463ee diden® to me. And these shulen go in 
to euerlastynge tourment; forsothe the 
just men in to cuere lastinge lyf. 


qOm.v. * Om.sx. $ Om. vu. 
Wand seie our. ¥* Om. o. 
band p. ether our. ¢ Om. o. ether ur. 
visiteden thee o. $ als longe 0. Om. G pr. m., 
our sec. m. Departeth psxy. k Om. our sec. m. 
© For our sec.m. P Om. ou. 4 Om. sx. 
u also OUF sec. m. Vand sele our sec. m. 
2 lesse o. my leeste w pr.m. 


‘Om. sx. 


x and c. for s. Om. i. 


¥ leftsyde chi. 
b as long as K. 


u herberden or sec.m. gedereden x. 

y for to drynke w pr. m. 

d Om. o. 
h alsso ov. and also r sec. m. 

lto ther. 

r Om. sx. 

Ww ether our. 

a 3e diden not ov. 3ee neither diden x. 


2 Departeth Errqrca8. 


XXV. 36-—46. 


to hym, and seie, Lord, whanne siz3en we 
thee hungry, and we fedden thee ; thristi, 
and we 3auen to thee drynk? and3s 
whanne sayn we thee herborles, and we 
herboreden thee; or nakid, and we hil- 
iden thee? or* whanne sayn we thee39 
sijk, or in prisoun, and we camen to 
thee? And the kyng answerynge schal 40 
seie to hem, Treuli Y seie to 3ou, as longe 
as 3e diden to oon of these my leeste 
britheren, 3e diden to me. Thanne thea: 
kyng schal seie also to hem, that schulen 
be on his lefthalfy, Departe? fro me, 3e 
cursid, in to euerlastynge fijr, that is 
maad redi to the denel and hise aungels. 
For Y hungride, and 3e 3auen not me to4e 
ete; Y thristide, and 3e 3auen not me to 
drynke ; Y” was herborles, and 3e herb- 43 
erden not me; nakid, and 3e keuerden? 
not me; sijk, and in prisoun, and 3e 
visitiden not me. Thanne and thei schulen 44 
answere to hym, and schulen seie, Lord, 
whanne sayn we thee hungrynge, or 
thristynge, or herboreles, or nakid, or 
sijk, or in prisoun, and we serueden not 
to thee? Thanne he schal answere to 4s 
hein, and seie, Treuli Y seie to jou, ‘hou 
longe 3e diden not to oon of these leeste, 
nether 3e diden to me. And these schulen 4¢ 
goo in to euerlastynge turment; but the 
iust men schulen go in to euerlastynge 
lijf. 


Vv I was naked o. 
a thee to herbore ur sec. m. 
f the, ether seke and we 
i 3e cursed, departe 
m whiche our sec.m. that x. to his our. 
3 harberowed 0.  ‘ me to herbore ur sec. m. 
x and seie our sec. m. Y as OUF sec. am. 

b Om. our sec. m. 


z herberowed o. 
€ ether our. 


zz and I rR. a hiliden kK. 


XXVI. 1—16. 


CAP. XXVI. 


i And it is® don, whenne Jhesus hadde 
eendid alle these wordis, he seide to his 
2disciplis, Wite 3ee, for after two? dayes 
pask shal be maad, and mannes sone shal 
3be bitaken®, that he be crucified. Thanne 
the princis of prestis‘ and eldre’ men of 
the peple ben gedrid in to the halle of the! 
prince* of prestis, that was said Caiphas, 
4and maden! a counseile, that™ thei shul- 
den holde Jhesu with gile, and slea"; 
ssothly thei seiden, Nat in the ‘feste day, 
--lest per auenture noys were maad in the 
6peple. Forsothe? whenne Jhesus was in 
Betanye, in the’ house of Symount le- 
7 prous', a womman hauynge a boxe of ala- 
bastre of preciouse oynement, ‘came ni3* 
to hym, and shedde out on the heued' of 
shym restinge. Sothely disciplis" seeynge 
hadden dedeyn, seyinge, Wherto this losse? 
9 forsothe’ it” mi3te be* solde for myche’, 
1oand be 30uen to pore men. Sothely Jhe- 
sus wytinge, seith? to hem, What be 3e 
heuy, ‘07 sory", to this womman? ‘sothely 
a good work? she hath wrou3t* in me. 
11 For whi4 3ee shulen ‘euermore haue® pore 
men with 30u, but 3ee shulen nat algatis‘ 
izhaue me. Forsothe this womman send- 
-enge this oynement in to my body, made 
13fors to birye me. Treuly I seie to 30u, 
wher euer this gospel shal be prechid" ini 
al the world, it® shal be seide and! that 
this womman dide, in to mynde of hym. 
14 Thanne oon of the twelue, that was seide 
Judas Scarioth, wente forth™ to the princis 
15 of prestis, and seith® to hem, What wolen 
3ee 3eue to me, and I shal bitake° hym to 
jou? And thei ordeyneden to hym thritti 
16 platis of seluer. And fro that tyme he 


MATTHEW. 73 


CAP. XXVI. 


And it was doon, whanne Jhesus1 
hadde endid alle* these wordis, he seide to. 
hise disciplis, 3e witen, that aftir twei2 
daies pask schal be maad, and mannus 
sone schal be bitakun to be crucified. 
Than the princes of prestis and thes 
elder men of the puple were gaderid in 
to the halle of the prince? of prestis, that 
was seid Cayfas, and maden a counsel to4 
holde Jhesu with gile, and sle him; buts 
thei seiden, Not in the haliday, lest per- 
auenture noyse were maad in the puple. 
And° whanue Jhesus was in Betanye, ine 
the hous of Symount leprous’, 2 wom-7 
man that hadde a box of alabastre of 
precious oynement, cam to hym, and 
schedde® out on the heed of hym rest- 
ynge. And disciplis‘ seynge hadden de-s 
deyn, and seiden, Wherto this® loss? 
for® it my3te be seld for myche, and bes 
jouun to pore men. But Jhesus knewe, 10 
and seide to hem, What ben 3e heuyi to 
this womman ? for sche hath wrou3t in 
me a good werk. For 3e schulen euere11 
haue pore men with 3o0u, but 3e schulen 
not algatis haue me. This! womman1e 
sendynge this oynement in to my bodi, 
dide to birie me. Treuli™ Y seie to 30u, 13 
where euer this gospel schal be prechid 
in al the world, it schal be seid, that sche 
dide this, in mynde of hym. Thannets 
oon of the twelue, that was clepid Judas 
Scarioth, wente forth to the princis of 
prestis, and seide to hem, What wolen 3e 15 
jyue to me, and Y schal bitake hym to 
jou? And thei ordeyneden to hym 
thretti pans® of siluer. And fro thati6é 
tyme he sou3te oportunyte®, to bitraye 


Cwas ur. ‘twei ovsec.m.w. ¢takeno. f the presteso. & the eldere aNopsurw., ) weren ov. 
1Om.n. * princes c pr.m.v pr.m.w. thei madenov. ™houx. "slee him p, © haliday aun 
ourw. P Sothely 0. dao. * the leprous yoy prom. 8 neized our sec.m. heed amnpur et w pass. 
hed gs et x pass. the disciples emopuv sec.m.xy | Yfor ov. — W this ovr sec. m. x haf be o. 
ymekil n, 2seide ovr. ®Om. acopouy sec.m.xy. > Om. our sec.m. © wrou3te a gode werke 
ouv sec.m. 4QOm. our sec.m.  €haue euer ov. f euermore o. euer uy sec.m, & Om. sx. } rad 
wopr.m. ‘intoo. Kthato. 1Om.c. ™ Om. our sec.m. 4 seide ourw sec.m.xy. 9% taken x. 

aOm.9. » princes r. ¢ Bute pr.m. ‘the leprous a pr.m. cmsubceghiks. © schedde it 1. f the 

& is this 1a. hforsothe 1. iether sorie K marg.  forsothe 1. |! For 


disciplis r1kPhik. hise disciplis g. 


this EP scc.m. ™ And treuly 1. 


VOL. Iv. 


4 pens caRrf. penis Es. platis 1. pecis K. 


© or best tyme c marg. 


L 


74 MATTHEW. 


sou3te couenablete, ‘for to bitake? hym. 
17 Forsothe in the first day of ‘the fest of 
pask4 disciplis™ camen’ to Jhesu, seyinge*, 
Wher wolt thou we" make redy to thee, 
isfor’ to ete paske? And Jhesus seith”, 
Go 3ee in to the citee to sum man, and 
seie* to hym, The maister seith, My tyme 
is ni3; at thee I make paskeY with my 
igdisciplis. And the? disciplis diden, as Jhe- 
sus comaundide ‘to hem*; and thei maden 
zoredy pask. Forsothe euenyng® maad, he 
sat ‘at the® mete with his twelue? disciplis. 
21 And he seide to hem etynge, Treuly I seie 
to 3ou, for oon of 30u ‘is to® betraye me. 
a2And thei ‘ful sory bygunnyn’ eche® to 
a3seie, Lord, wher" I ami? And he an- 
swerynge seith*, He that ‘with me in put- 
tith' the hond in the plater, this™ shal bi- 
2itraye me. Forsothe mannes sone goth, as 
it is writen of hym; but woo to that man, 
bi whom mannys sone shal be bitrayed ; 
it were good to hym, 3if that" man hadde 
2snat ben boren. Forsothe Judas that bi- 
trayed hym, answeride, seyinge, Maister, 
wher ‘I am°? Ile seith? to hym, Thou 
2shast seid. Forsothe hem soupynge, Jhe- 
sus toke breed, and blisside!, and bracke, 
and 3aue to his disciplis, ‘and seith', Take 
27 3ee, and ete’; this is my body. And he 


takynge the cuppe, dede thankyngis, and _ 


3aue to hem, seyinge*, Drinke 3ee alle her- 
280f; this is my blood of the newe testa- 
ment, ‘the whiche" shal be shed out for 
zgmany, in to remissioun of synnys. For- 
sothe I seie to 30u, I shal nat drinke fro 
this tyme, of this fruyt of the vyne, til 
in to that’ day whenne I shal drinke it 
newe with jon, in the kyngdam” of my 
3ofadir. And an ympne, ‘or heriynge*, seid, 


P that he schuld hytraye ov. that he shulde bitaken r sec. m. to bitaken x. 


looues, that zs, the feste of paske v pr. m. w sec. m. 
seiden our sec.m. 4 that we o. 
AGNOS pr.m. UFW sec. m, XY. 
€ schal our sec. m. 
% all in special ovvy. Om. 9. 
me AMNourwy, with me puttith in p. 
our sec.m. 4 blissed it o. 
our sec. m. u whiche our sec. m. that x. 
[or v sec.m.] preysyng of God ur sec, m. 


z Om. ANsrw. 


Pamant, 


4 the euentijd Ksg. 
Om, b pr. m. 


titamI1. Tam he? K. 


Vv Om. our sec. m. x. 
8 Om. Nn. 
f made sorowe ful greetly, and thei bigunnen o. maad sorouful greteli, bigunnen ur. 
h whethir cu ef x pass. 
m Om. our sec. m. 
T seiynge o. and seide urw sec.m. 
Vv the w. 


iit am o. 


t wher c et alit passim. 
u seith K. 


XXXVI. 17—30. 


hym. And im the firste dai of therf17 
looues the disciplis camen to Jhesu, and 
seiden, Where wolt thou we make redi 
to thee, to ete paske? Jhesus seide, Gois 
3e into the citee to ‘sum man?, and seie 
to hym, The maistir seith, My tyme is 
ny3; at thee Y make paske with my dis- 
ciplis. And the disciplis diden, as Jhe-19 
sus comaundide to hem ; and thei maden 
the paske redi. And whanne euentid42o 
was come, he sat to mete with hise 
twelue disciplis. And he seide to hem, 21 
as thei eten, Treuli Y seie to 3o0u, that 
oon of 30u schal bitraye me. And thei 22 
ful sori bigunnen ech bi hym silf to seie, 
Lord, whether" ‘Y am'™? And he answer- 23 
ide, and seide, He that puttith with me 
his’ hoond in the plater, schal bitraye 
me. Forsothe mannus sone goith, as it24 
is writun of hym; but wo to that man, 
bi whom mannus sone schal be bitrayed ; 
it were good to hym, if that man hadde 
not be borun. But Judas that bitraiede 2s 
hym, ausweride, seiynge, Maister, whe- 
ther ‘Y amt? Jhesus seide® to hym, 
Thou hast seid. And while thei soup-26 
eden, Jhesus took breed, and _blesside, 
and brak, and 3af to hise disciplis, and 
seide, Take 3e, and ete’; this is my body. 
And he took the cuppe, and dide thank- 27 
yngis, and 3af to hem, and seide, Drynke 28 
je alle herof; this is my blood of the 
newe testament, which schal be sched for 
many, in to remissioun of synnes. And 29 
Y seie to jou, Y schal not drynke fro 
this tyme, of this fruyt of the vyne, in to 
that dai whanne Y schal drynke it newe 
with 3ou, in the kyngdom of my fadir. 
And whanne the ympne was seid, thei3o 


@ therf looues ov. therf 


tthe disciplis wopuxy. Sneizedenov. tand 
Wseide our. *seie 3e our sec.m. Y Om. 
benentyde our. ¢tooursec.m. 4Om. Ww. 


k seide ovr sec.m. |! putteth in with 
athilke our sec.m. °itamJo.  Pseide 
S eet 3e ovr. eteth sx. and seide 


WwW rewme OUV sec. m. x Om. ox. either 


mraamI?1. lamfhe? x. I? s. 8 the xk. 


Vv eteth 1. ete 3e sx marg. k. 


XXVI. 31—44. 


thei wenten out in to the mount of Olyuete. 
31 Thanne Jhesus seith to hem, Alle 3e shu- 
len suffre sclaundre in me, in’ this nit ; 


for it is wrytyn, I shal sinyte the sheperde, - 


and the sheep of the floc shulen be scatered. 
32 Forsothe after that I shal ryse a3ein, I* 
33shal go bifore 30u in to Galilee. Sothely 
Petre answerynge, seith* to him, ‘And 3if> 
alle shulen be sclaundrid in thee, I shal 
34neuere be sclaundrid. Jhesus seith’ to 
hym, Trewly I seie to thee, for in this 
ni3t bifore the cok crowe, thries thou shalt 
35denye me. Petre seith to hym, ‘And 3if¢ 
it shal behoue me to dye with thee, I 
shal nat denye thee. Alsof and alle disci- 
36 plis? seiden*, Thanne Jhesus came with 
hem in to a toun, that! is seid Gessemanye. 
And he seide to his disciplis, Sitte 3ee heer, 
the* while! I shal™ go thidir, and preie. 
37 And Petre taken to", and two° sonys of 
Zebedee, he began for? to be distourblid4, 
38‘or heuy", and’ sory’ in herte. Thanne" 
he seithY to hem, My soule is sorowful til 
to the deth; ‘susteyne 3ee, or abyde 3ee", 
39 here, and wake 3ee with me. And he gon 
forth a litil, felle doun in to his face, 
preyinge, and seyinge, My fadir, 3if it is 
possible, ‘passe this cuppe* fro me; nethe- 
4oles nat as I wole, but as thou wolt. And 
he came to his disciplis, and foonde hem 
slepynge. And he seithY to Petre, So, 
‘wher 3ee mi3te” nat oon hour wake with 
41me? Wake 3ee, and preie*, that 3ee en- 
tren nat in to temptacioun; forsothe the 
spirit is redy, bote the flesh seik>, ‘or vn- 
aestable’. Eft/the secounde tyme he wente, 
and preide, seyinge, My fadir, 3if this 
cuppe may nat passe, no? bote® I drynke 
43it, thi wille be don. And eftsone’ he 
came, and foonde hem slepynge ; forsothe 
asher e3en weren greued®. And hem left, 


MATTHEW. 75 


wenten out in to the mount of Olyuete. 
Thanne Jhesus seide to hem, Alle 3e31 
schulen suffre sclaundre in me, in this 
ni3t; for it is writun, Y schal smyte the 
scheeperde, and the scheep of the ‘flok 
schulen be scaterid. But aftir that Ye 
schal rise a3en, Y schal go bifore 3ou in - 
to Galilee. Petre answeride, and seide to33 
hym, Thou; alle schwlen be sclaundrid in 
thee, Y schal neuer be sclaundrid. Jhe-34 
sus seide to him, Treuli Y seie to thee, 
for in this ny3t bifor the cok crowe, 
thries thou schalt denye me. Peter seide as 
to him, 3he, thou3 it bilhoue” that Y die 
with thee, Y schal not denye thee. Also 
alle the disciplis seiden. Thanne Jhesus 36 
cam with hem in to a toun, that is seid 
Jessamanye. And he seide to his disci- 
plis, Sitte 3e here, the* while Y go thider, 
and preye. And whanne he hadde take37 
Peter, and twei** sones of Zebedee, heY 
bigan to be heuy and sori. Thanne he3s 
seide to hem, My soule is soreuful to the 
deeth ; abide 3e here, and wake 3e with 
me. And he 3ede forth a litil, and felde 39 
doun on his face, preiynge, and seiynge, 
My fader, if it is possible, passe this 
cuppe fro me; netheles not as Y wole, 
but as thou wolf. And he cam to his so 
disciplis, and foond hem slepynge. And 
he seide to Petir, So, whethir 3e my3ten 
not oon our wake with me? Wake 5e, 4: 
and preye 3e, that 3e entre not in to 
temptacioun ; for? the spirit is redi, but 
the fleisch ts sijk. Eft the secounde 42 
tyme he wente, and preyede, selynge, 
My fadir, if this cuppe may not passe, 
but* Y drynke hym?, thi wille be doon. 
And eftsoone he cam, and foond hem 43 
slepynge; for her ijen weren heuyed. 
And he lefte hem, and wente eftsoone, 44 


yOm. x. ZandI xsec.m. seiz3 0. seide s. © Thou3 our scc.m. Callemens. 4seiz3 0. © 5he 
thou3 ourw sec.m. Om. 0. & the disciples G sec.m.mopsiv. © seiden also 0. i whiche ov. * Om. 
our sce.m. \ while thato. ™ Om. opur sec.m. Om. our. © tweye ovr sec.m.w. P Om. sux. 


4 sorowful our sec.m. disturbid sx. 
u And y. v seide OUF sec. m. 
x this cuppe passe ur. Y seide our sec.m. 
sec.m. prezeth x. » is seke our sec. m. 
3if cmxy prim.  f efte our sec. m. 


w bihoueth cgk. * Om. ta, ** twoc et alii. 


r Om. ox. and heny Q sec. m. 
Ww abide 3ee ov. s. 3ee, or abijde P. 8. 3ee, or abidith s. sustene 3ee x. 
Z mizte 3e ov. whether 3ee mizten x. 


Sorascc.m. tt heny our sec.m. 


& praye 3e OU 


¢ Om. 4x. ether unstidfast ovv sec.m. Om. 4x. © but 
& greeuyd, or heuyed mp, heuyed vu scc. uw. marg. 
Yand A. %forsother. ®but that k. but if. © it rchia. 


L 2 


76 


he wente eftsone", and preide the thridde 
4styme, the same word seyinge. Thanne he 
came to his disciplis, and seithi to hem, 
Slepe 3ee nowe, and reste 3e; loo! the 
hour lath neized, and mannes sone shal 
be taken' in to the hondis of synners ; 
46ryse 3ee, go wee; loo! he that shal take™ 
47me, ‘shal neizje". And° 3it hym spekynge, 
loo! Judas, oon of the twelue?, and with 
hym came! a grete cumpanye, with swerdis 
and battis', sent of the princes of prestis, 
4gand of eldre’ men of the peple. For- 
sothe he that bitraiede hym, 3aue to hem 
a tokne, seilynge, Whom euer Y shal kisse, 
a9he it is; holde jee hym. And anon 
he ‘cummynge ni3‘ to Jhesu, seide, Haile, 
somaistre; and he kisside hym. And Jhe- 
sus seide to hym, Frend, wherto art thou 
comen? Thanne thei ‘camen ni3", and 
castiden’ hondis ‘in to¥ Jhesu, and helden 
sthym. And loo! oon of hem that weren 
with Jhesu, holdynge out the hond, drow3 
out? his* swerd; and he, smytynge the 
seruaunt of the prince® of prestis’, kitte® 
s2of his litilf ereeé. Thanne Jhesus seith™ to 
lym, Turne thi swerd in to his place; 
sothely! alle that shulen take swerd, shu- 
s3len perishe by swerd. Wher gessist thou, 
that‘ I may nat preie my fadir, and he 
shal 3eue to me now more than twelue 
54legions of angelis? Hou therfore! shulen 
the scripturis be fulfillid™? ‘for so" it be- 
5d5houeth to be don. In that hour Jhesus 
seide to the cumpanyes ‘of peple®, As to a 
theef 3ee han gon out, with swerdis and 
battis?, fort to cacche™ me; ‘day by day’ I 
satte at jou, techynge iu the temple, and 
563ee helden not me. Forsothe al this thing 
was don, that the scripturis of prophetis 
shulden be fulfillid". Thanne alle disciplis’ 
57fledden, hym forsaken. And thei hold- 


h efte ouv sec.m. 1 seide ourw sec. m. 
traye Pp. ™ hath neized ourw sec. m. 
8 the elder amMNopsury, 
ouv sec.m. —Y forth our. 
f£Om.Nnour. & rit ere Ns. h seide our. 
n forsothe x. © Om.our.  P staues our. 
«filled ovv. _v the disciples arsw. 


t neizeinge our. 
zOm.u. 8a0. 


€ bitaken EKRchika@. 
EP Sec. m. 1 more K. 
k Om.s sec. m. 


4 Om. rb. 


MATTHEW. 


k restith ex. 
© Om. our. 
U neizeden our. 
bao. 
i for our. 
q Om. surx. 


p e Om, ceKkgrbeghika’, 
it @ legioun ts sixe thousand sixe hundrid and sixty and size. x marg. 


XXVI. 45—57. 


and preiede the thridde tyme, and seide 
the same word. Thanne he cam to his 4s 
disciplis, and seide to hem, Slepe 3e now, 
and reste 3e; loo! the our hath nei3ed, 
and mannus sone schal be takun® in to 
the hondis of synneris; rise 3e, go we; 46 
loo! he that schal take me, is ny3. 3it 47 
the! while he spak, lo! Judas, oon of the 
twelue, cam, and with hym a greet cum- 
peny, with swerdis and battis, sent fro 
the princis of prestis, and fro the eldre 
men of the puple. And he that bitraiede 48 
hym, 3af to hem a tokene, and seide, 
Whom euer Y schal® kisse, he it is; 
holde 3e hym. And anoon he cam to49 
Jhesu, and seid, Haile, maister; and hese 
kisside hym. And Jhesus seide to hym, 
Freend, wherto art thou comun? Thanne 
thei camen ni3, and leiden hoondis on 
Jhesu, and helden hym. And lo! oons! 
of hem that weren with Jhesu, strei;tef 
out his hoond, and drou3 out his swerd ; 
and he smoot the seruaunt of the prince 
of prestis, and kitte’ of his ere’. Thannes2 
Jhesus seide to hym, Turne thi swerd 
in to his place; for alle that taken swerd, 
schulen perische bi swerd. Whetherss 
gessist thou, that Y may not preie my 
fadir, and he schal 3yue to me now mo! 
than twelue legiouns' of aungels? House 
thanne schulen the) scriptures be fulfil- 
led ? for so it bihoueth to be doon. Ins5s 
that our Jhesus seide to the puple, As to 
a theef 3e hank gon out, with swerdis 
and battis, to take me; dai bi dai Y sat 
among 30u, and tau3t in the temple, and 
je helden me not. But al this thing 96 
was don, that the scripturis of profetis 
schulden be fulfillid. Thanne alle the 
disciplis fledden, and leften hym. And57 
thei helden Jhesu, and ledden hym to 


1 bytrayed o. bitaken uy. ™ bytray our. 
Ptwelf cam our. 4Om.our.  * staues our. 
Vv setteden ovr. casten sx. x on 
4 the prestes 0. ¢ kitted or. 
1Om. o. m filled ovr. 
Seich day our. * Om. p. 


¢ princes 09. 
Kk for our. 
¥ take our. 


 strejcchide kK. & kittedec. 4 rizt eere 


3 Om. a. 


XXVI. 58—69. 


ynge Jhesu, ledden hym to Caiphas, prince 
of prestis, wher scribis* ‘and Pharisees’, 
and the’? eldre men of the* peple had- 
ssden cummen to gidre. Forsothe Petre 
suede hym afer, til in to the halle of the 
prince’ of prestis; and he gon ynne with 
ynne, sate with seruauntis*, that he shulde 
sose the® eend. Forsothe the princis’ of 
prestis, and alle the counseile sou3ten fals 
witnessynge aj3einus Jhesu, that thei 
coshulden take’ hym to deth'; and thei 
founden nat, whenne many fals witnessis 
hadden ‘cummen to. Treuly at the laste, 
61 twok fals witnessis camen, and seiden, This 
seide, I may distruye the temple of God, 
and after ‘the thridde day! bilde it a3ein. 
62 And the prince of prestis rysynge seith™ 
to hym, Answerist thou no thing to tho" 
thingis, ‘the whiche°® these witnessen 
63ajeinus thee? Forsothe Jhesus was stille. 
And the prince of prestis seith? to hym, 
I couniour thee by quycke God, that 
thou seie to vs, 3if thou be4 Crist, the sone 
610f God. Jhesus seide to hym, Thou hast 
seid; netheles I seie to jou, ‘an other 
tyme’, ‘or fro this tyme forth’, 3ee shulen 
se mannes sone sittynge at the ri3thalf of 
‘the vertue of God', and cummynge in" 
65cloudis of heuene. Thanne the prince of 
prestis kitte’, ‘or to-rente”, his clothis, 
seyinge, He hath blasfemed; what 3it 
nede han* we to witnessis? loo! now 3ee 
e¢han herd blasfemyeY; what semeth to 
jou? And thei answerynge seiden, He is 
e7gilty of deth. Thanne thei spitten? in to 
his face, and smyten* hym with buffetis ; 
forsothe other jouen strokis with the? 
sspawm of hondis in to his face, seyinge, 
Thou Crist, prophecie to vs, who is he 
69that smote thee? Sothely Petre sat ‘with 
outen® in the porche?; and an‘ hond 


wOm.1. with 9.  * the seribes our. 
¢ princis KQ. d the seruauntes our. 
our. ktwei novw. thre dayes o. 
our. Mart ourv. Tt fro hennes forth our. 
rente our. W Om.aourx. or rentec. * haf our. 
btheir c. Om. Nn. © wit oute forth our. 


e Om. o. 


1 princes A pr.m. 


k Om. plures et a. 
p the lyuynge hia. 


Psec.m ° Oms. 
t spittiden Khi. in tba. 


y Om. ourw sec.m, 
f prinee o. 
m seide our. 

8 Om. sourx. 
¥ blasfemynge r. 
4 halle 4 sec. m. OUVW sec. m. 


m hadden, or qweren K. 
qa And Jhesus c. 
¥ smeten ta. smitiden k. smoten plures ef B. 


MATTHEW. 77 


Cayfas, the prince of prestis, where the 
seribis and the* Farisees, and the eldre 
men of the puple weren comun togidere. 
But Petir swede him afer, in to the halless 
of the prince! of prestis; and he wente 
in, and sat with the seruauntis, to se the 
ende. And the prince of prestis, aud also 
the counsel sou3ten fals witnessing a3ens 
Jhesu, that thei schulden take hym to 
deeth; and thei founden not, whanne 
manye false witnessis weren™ commun. 
But at the laste, twei false witnessis 
cainen, and seiden, ‘This seide", Y may 61 
distruye the temple of God, and after 
the thridde dai bilde it ajen. And these 
prince of prestis roos, and seide to hym, 
Answerist thou no thing to tho thingis, 
that these witnessen ajens thee? Bute: 
Jhesus was stille. And the prince of 
prestis seide to hym, Y coniure thee® bi 
lyuynge? God, that thou seie to vs, if 
thou art Crist, the sone of God. Jhesus4 64 
seide to him, Thou hast seid; netheles 
Y seie to 30u, ‘fro hennus forth" 3e schu- 
len se mannus sone sittinge at’ the ri3t- 
half of the vertu of God, and comynge in 
the cloudis of heuene’’. Thanne the prince 6s 
of prestis to-rente his clothis, and seide, 
He hath blasfemed; what 3it han we 
nede to witnessis ? lo! now 3e han herd 
blasfemye; what semeth to 3ou? And 6 
thei answeriden, and seiden, He is gilti 
of deeth. Thanne thei spetent ‘im to"67 
his face, and smyten’ hyin with buffatis ; 
and othere 3auen strokis with the pawme 
of her hondis in’ his face, and seide, 6s 
Thou Crist, arede to vs, who is he that 
smoot thee? And Petir sat with outen cy 
in* the halle; and a damysel cam to 
hym, and seide, Thou were with Jhesu 
of Galilee. And he denyede bifor alle zo 


b Om. o. 


zOm. Gv. ® Om. Gpr.m. 
i neized 


& bytake ovr. } the deth x. 

© whiche uv. that ox. P seide 

t Goddes vertu ovv. inthe vr. * to- 

Z spetteden opey. ® beeted our. 
€ 00N AGMNOSUFIVY. one P. 


n these x. 


0 These seith rE. Om. p pr.m. This seith 
Sone pr.m. 88 heuenes R. 
WintoK, * Om.a. 


 herafter 1. 


78 MATTHEW. 


maydenf ‘came ni3® to hym, seyinge®, And 
jothou were with Jhesu of Galilee. And 
he denyede before alle men, seyinge, I 
71 woot nat whati thou saist. Forsothe hym 
goynge out the! j3ate, an other hond 
mayden™ say hym, and seith" to hem that 
weren there, And this was with Jhesu of 
72 Nazareth. And eftsone® he denyede with 
an? ooth, for he? knewe nat the man. 
72 And after a litil, thei that stoden ‘came 
ni3’, and seiden ‘to Petre’, Treuly' and 
thou art of" hem; for whi and’ thi speche 
7amakith thee opyn®. Thanne ‘he began* 
to waryeY and swere’, that he knewe nat 
7othe man. And anon the cok crew. And 
Petre bithou3te on the word* of Jhesu, 
that> he hadde seide, Bifore® the cok 
crewe’, thries thou shalt denye me. And 
he gon out, wepte bittirly. 


CAP. XXVII. 


1 Forsothe the® morwef maad, alle the 
princis of prestis®, and eldre" men of the 
peple token counseili azeins Jhesu, that 
2thei shulden take* hym to deth. And thei 
ladden hyin bounden, and bitoken hym! 
to™ Pilat of Pounce, ‘meire, or chef 
stustice®. Thanne Judas that bitrayede 
hym, seynge that he was dampnyd, he® 
led by penaunce?, ‘or forthenkynge 4, 
brou3te™ ajein thritti platis of seluer to 
the princis of prestis, and to the eldre 
4inen of the’ peple, seyinget, I haue synned, 
bitrayinge iust" blood. And thei seiden, 
5 What to vs? se thou. And the platis of 
seluer ‘cast awey’ in® the temple, he 
wente awey, and goyinge* awey heY hang- 
ide? hym* with a ‘grane, or a guare”. 
¢Forsothe the princis of prestis, taken the 


XXVI. 7o—XXVIL 6. 


men’, and seide, Y woot not what thou 
seist. And whanne he 3ede out at? the71 
3ate, another damysel say hym, and seide 
to hem that weren there, And this was 
with Jhesu of Nazareth. And eftsoone72 
he denyede with an ooth, For I? knewe 
not the man. And? a litil aftir, thei7s 
that stooden camen, and seiden to Petir, 
Treuli® thou art of? hem; for thi speche 
makith thee knowun. Thanne he bigan 74 
to warie and to® swere, that he knewe 
not the man. And anoon the cok crewe. 
And Petir bithou3te on the word of7s 
Jhesu, that he hadde seid, Bifore the cok 
crowe, thries thou schalt denye me. And 
he 3ede out, and wepte bitterli. 


CAP. XXVII. 


But whanne the morowtid was comun, } 
alle the princis of prestis, and the eldre 
men of the puple token counsel’ a3ens 
Jhesu, that thei schulden take hym to 
the deeth. And thei ledden him boundun, 2 
and bitoken to’ Pilat of Pounce, iustice. 
Thanne Judas that bitraiede hym, say3 
that he was dampned, he repentide, and 
brou3te ajen the thretti pans® to the 
princis of prestis, and to the elder men 
of the puple, and seide, Y haue synned, 4 
bitraiynge ri3tful blood. And thei seiden, 
What to vs? bise thee. And whanne hes 
hadde cast forth the siluer ini the temple, 
he passide forth, and 3ede, and hongide 
hym silf with a snare. And the princis6 
of prestis token the siluer, and seide, It 
is not leueful to putte it in to the tre- 


fmayde ovrv. &neized ovrv, and seide ovr. i Om. G prim. kKheo. atthe an. of the 
ourw sec.m. ™mayde our. % seide ouvwsec.m. efteouv. Panothero. QI our. * neizeden 
to Peter o. neizeden ur. camen ny3 to Peter x. &Om.ox. ¢tOm.vu. Yoonofo. also and o. 
also uy. = W knowen our. x bygan he o. ¥ curse our. Z to swere PUY. a wordis K sec. m. 
bwhiche ovr. © Bifore that our. 4crowe pwx. ¢Om.o. fmorewyn G. morowtide opuy. & the 
prestis o. 4 the elder ovr. ia counseil r,  bytake ovr. 10m. aemnpswxy. ™Om.N. © the 


lustice ovr. president x. © was our. 
$Om.Q. tand seide our. 4% riztwis x. 
yOm. our. Zheeng x. @himsilf ogur. 


snare OUV. gryue P. grynne, or snare Q. 


ahe ar. 
& him to kk. 


yOm.1prim. Z of a. 
e€Om.a. fa counceil r. 


P forthenkynge our, 
Vv casten forth o. cast forth ur. 
b grane asx, grane, or gnare GT. grane, or snare Nswy. 


b Om. EIKPXQR pr. ml. a. 
b penis s. 


a4 Om. aourx. T and bron3te our. 


W into og. * he goynge our. 


¢ Troliand x. 4 on of R sec.m. 


iin to K. 


XXVIL. 7—20. 


platis of seluer, seiden, It is nat Jeneful to 
sende hem in to the® tresorie, for it ‘is 
7the® pris of blood. Sothly couneeil taken, 
thei bou3ten with them'the feeld of a 
8 potter, ‘in to’ byryinge of ‘dead men®. For 
this thing ‘the ilkf feeld is elepid Achel- 
demak, that is, aS feeld of blood, til in to 
gthis day. Thanne it® is' fulfillid*, ‘that 
thing! that is!! seid by the prophete Jere- 
mye, seyynge, And thei token thritty platis 
of syluer, the™ pris of a man preysid", 
whom thei preysiden of the sonys of 
10 Yrael; and thei 3auen hem in to the™ 
feeld of a potter, as the Lord ordeyned to 
ime. Sothely Jhesus stood byfore the 
‘meyre, or domysman®; and the prese- 
dent? axide hym, seyinge, Art thou kyng 
of Jewis? Jhesus seith to hym, Thou 
i2seist. And whenne he was acusid of the’ 
princes’ of prestis, and eldre* men of the 
13peple, he answeride no thing. Than Pilat 
seith to hym, Herist thou nat, hou manyt 
witnessyngis" thei seien ajeinus thee ? 
i4And he answeride nat to hym to’ eny 
word, so that the presedent” wondride 
isgretely. Forsothe by aX solempne day the 
presedentY was wont? for* to delyuere to 
the peple oon bounden, whom thei wolden. 
is Forsothe® he® hadde? a ‘noble man‘ 
1;bounden, that was seid Barabas. Ther- 
fore Pilat seid to hem gedrid to gidre, 
Whoin wole_3ee, I ‘leeue, 07 delyuere®, to 
jou? wher Barabas, or Jhesu, that is 
isseid Crist? Sothely he wiste, that ‘by 
igenuye! thei betraieden* hym'. Forsothe 
hym sittynge for ‘iustise, or domysman™, 
his wyf sente to hym, seyinge", No thing 
to thee and to that® iust man; sothely?P 
I haue suffrid ‘this day’ many thingis for 
29 hym, by a visioun, ‘or sweuent. Forsothe 


¢Om.wprm c¢Om. xk. ‘in tothe v. 
fthat x. thee. 4 Om. ourw seem. x. 


m Qm. ov. ® the preisid x. ™° a mpgsuvwxy. 


MATTHEW. 79 


serie, for it is the prijs of blood. And7 
whanne thei hadden take counsel, thei 
bou3ten with it a feeld of a potter, in to 
biryyng of pilgrymys. Herfor thilke?s 
feeld is clepid Acheldemac, that is, a 
feeld of blood, in to this dai. Thanneg 
that' was fulfillid, that was seid bi the 
prophete Jeremye, seiynge, And thei han 
takun thretti pans, the prijs of a man 
preysid, whom thei preiseden of the chil- 
dren of Israel; and thei 3anen hem in to10 
a feeld of a potter, as the Lord hath or- 
denyd to me. And Jhesus stood bifori 
the domesman; and the iustice axide 
him, and seide, Art thou king of Jewis ? 
Jhesus seith to hym, Thou seist. And 12 
whanne he was accusid of the princis* 
of prestis, and of the eldere men of the 
puple, he answeride no thing. Thanne13 
Pilat seith to him, Herist thou not, hou 
many witnessyngis! thei seien ajens thee? 
And he answeride not ‘to hym™ ony14 
word, so that the iustice wondride greetli. 
But for a solempne dai the iustice wasis 
wont to" delynere to the puple oon 
boundun®, whom thei wolden. And heis 
hadde tho a famous? man boundun, that 
was seid Barrabas1. Therfor Pilate seide 17 
to hem, whanne thei weren to gidere, 
Whom wolen 3e, that Y delynere to" 30u ? 
whether Barabas, or Jhesu, that is seid 
Crist 2? For he wiste, that bi enuye thei ts 
bitraieden hym. And while he sat fori 
domesman’, his wijf sente to hym, and 
seide, No thing to thee and to that iust 
man; for Y haue suffrid this dai many 
thingis for hym, bi a visioun. Forsothe 20 
the princet of prestis, and the eldere men 
counseiliden" the puple, that thei sehul- 
den axe Barabas, but thei sehulden di- 


€ pilgrimes, or deedmen @ see.m. pylgrimes U see. m. xX. 
l was ur, 
© meire 4. instise Our. 


k filed ovr. Ithis thinge ovy. 4 was ur. 


P justise ouy. domesman Px. 


41Om.4Nns. ° prince Kg. § of the eldere ovr. t grete our. % wyttenessynge 0, ¥Om.s. W iustice our. 


domesman p,  * the our. 
¢ thei vu. 
8 delynere 4. schal delyuere our. lefe x. 


™ justise 4x. iuge ovy. ™ and seide our. 


hthis a. lit x. 
noble K marg. 


e prem. 


* prince cr. | thingis c. 


8 ether iustice K marg. ¢ princis Ksghi£. 


Y iustice ouy. domesman P. 

d hade than orw see. m. hadden than v. 

h ether our. 
© this o. 


m liym to acag. 
4 Barrabas, which for manslau3tir was put into prisoun EP sec. m. marg. 
« ether enliseden K marg. 


Z woned o. a Om. sx. 
© 00 P. O UFXY pr. mM. 
1Om.o. * bytoken our. 
P for our. 4 to day our. 


b Sothely our. 

f famos man our. 

1 him with enuy o. 
t Om. aourx. 


© in boundis1. P ether 
rQOm. s pr. m. 


v for to c. 


80 MATTHEW. 


the princis of prestis and thes eldre men 
‘tisiden, or counseilident, to" the peplis’, 
that thei shulden axe” Barabas, but Jhesu 
21thei shulden lese. Forsothe the president* 
answerynge seithY to hem, Whom of the? 
two* wolen 3ee to be ‘left, or delyuerid”, 
22to 300? And thei seiden, Barabas. Pilat 
seith to hem, What therfore shal I do of 
23 Jhesu, that® is seid Crist? Alle seien, Be 
he crucified. The presedent’ seith® to 
hem, Sothely what off yuel hath he don ? 
And’ thei crieden more, seyinge, Be he 
24erucified. Forsothe® Pilat seynge ‘that 
hei profitide no thing, but the more noyse* 
was maad, water taken, washide! the™ 
hondis byfore the peple, seyinge”, I am 
innocent, ‘or giltlesse®, fro? the blood of 
2sthis iust man; se 3ee. And al the peple 
answeryuge seide, His blood vpon‘ vs, and 
260n oure sonys. Thanne he lefte™ to hem 
Barabas, buts he toket to hem Jhesu 
scourgid, that he shulde" be crucified. 
27 Thanne kni3tis’ of the president” takynge 
Jhesu in the mote halle, gedriden to hym 
28alle the cumpanye* of kni3tis. And thei 
vnelothinge hym, diden aboute hym a rede 
zgmantel; and thei foldynge a crowne of 
thornis, puttidenY on his heued, and a reed 
in? his ri3t hond; and the knee bowid, ‘or 
folden*, bifore hym, thei seornyden hym, 
30seyinge®, Hayle, kyng of Jewis. And thei 
spittynge ‘in to® hym4, token a reed, and 
sismyten his heued. And after that® thei 
haddenf ‘scorned hym, thei vnelothiden® 
hym of" the mantel, and'thei clothiden* hym 
32 with his clothis,and ledden hym ‘for to cru- 
cifiel. Sothely thei goynge out, founden a 


8 Om. ux.  ¢ tisiden 4x. counseiliden our. 
Yseide our. these g. @ tweyne urw. 
€seide rp, fOm. our. &Om.¢. 4 Sothely o. 


l wasche to 6 pr.m. wasche G sec. m. he waschide uv. wesh x. 
r deliuered our. 


AOUFX. P of our. @ on OSUFW sec. m. X. 

leet x. ¥ Om, vu. ¥ the kny3tes our. 

y putten sx, Z in to our. a Om. s0gurx. or falt Ss. 
e€Om.e. f Om, oeurwx. 


vnelothiden y. h Om. x. i Om. KW pr.m. 


u Om. sour. 
b Jeft 4x. delyuered our. 


~ domesman GxXY. iustice our. 


k cladden sx. 


XXVIII. 21—326 


strye Jhesu. But the instice answeride, 21 
and seide to hem, Whom of the tweyn 
wolen 3e, that be delyuerit to 301? And 
thei seiden, Barabas. Pilat seith to hem, 22 
What thanne schal Y do of Jhesu, that is 
seid Crist? Alle’ seien*, ‘Be he* cruci-23 
fied. The iustice seith to hem, What 
yuel hath he doon? And thei crieden 
more, and seiden, Be he crucified. And 2a 
Pilat seynge that he profitide no thing, 
but that theY more noyse was maad, 
took? watir, and waischide hise hondis 
bifor the puple, and seide, Y am giltles 
of the blood of this ri3tful man; bise 
jou. And al the puple answeride, and 2s 
seide, His blood be on vs, and on oure 
children. Thanne he deliuerede to hem 26 
Barabas, but he took to hem Jhesu 
scourgid, to be crucified. Thanne kny3tis 27 
of the iustice token Jhesu in the moot 
halle, and gadriden to hym al the cum- 
peny ‘of kny3tis*. And thei vnelothiden 2s 
hym, and diden aboute hym a reed 
mantil; and thei foldiden> a coroun of29 
thornes, and® putten* on his heed, and a 
rehed in his ri3t hoond; and thei knel- 
iden bifore hym, and scornyden hym®, 
and seiden, Heil, kyng of Jewis. And 30 
thei spetenf on hym, and tooken a rehed, 
and smoot& his heed. And aftir thatsi 
thei hadden seorned him, thei vncloth- 
iden hym of the mantil, and thei cloth- 
iden hym with hise elothis, and ledden 
hym to ‘erucifien hym®. And as _ theise 
jeden out, thei founden a man of Cire- 
neni comynge fro the toun, Symont bi 
name; thei constreyneden hym to take 


x justice our. 


Vpepel o. W aske Q. 
4 iustice our. 


© whiche our. 
i for he auvw sec.m. for ito. * a noyse ourw. 
mhis wxy. and seide our. 9° Om. 
§ forsothe our. t bitoke our. 
X cumpanies G pr. m. 


band seiden ovr. Conour. 4 his face n. 


& vnclothid x. scornyden him, vnclothing 9. scorned hym, thei vneladden x. 


1 that he schulde be crucified our. 


for to be crucified Q sec. m. for to crucifye him w sec. m. to crucifien x. 


Vv Alle thei ta.  ¥ seiden R sec. m. B. 
EP sec.m. > foldinge E1xkmPpgrsuxbeghiaf. 
f spittiden Khi. spitten e. 


eghia8. to be crucified kk. i Serenen a. 


* to bec. 
¢ Om, 1 sec. m. Q sec. m. iaB. 
& smeten iu. sinytiden kK. smyten ms. 


2 and took acbe. he took k. 4 Om. 
4 puttiden cxghi. ¢ Om. x. 
h crucifien cupxe. crucifie 19@Rb pr. m. 


y Om. c. 


XXVIL. 33—46. 


man of Syrynen'‘, cummynge fro a* toun, 
Symont by name; thei constreyneden 
33 hym, that he shulde take ‘his crosse!. And 
thei camen ‘in to™ a place that" is clepid 
34 Golgatha, that is, the place of Caluarie. And 
thei 3auen hym? for? to drinke wiyn meyn- 
gid4 with galle ; and whenne he had tastid, 
35he wolde nat drinke. Sothely after that" 
thei hadden crucified hym, thei departiden 
his clothis, sendynge lot, that it’ shulde be 
fulfillid', that" is seid by the prophete, 
seyinge, Thei departiden’ to hem my 
clothis, and on* my cloth’ thei senten? lot. 
37 And thei sittynge kepten hym; and thei 
puttiden® on his heued the cause of hym 
wryten, This is Jhesus ‘of Nazareth, 
38 kyng* of Jewis. Thanne twot theeues ben® 
crucified with him, von on the ri3t half, 
39and oon! on the left half. Forsothe men 
passynge forth blasfemyden hym, moou- 
aoynge her heuedis®, and seyinge, ‘Vath, or 
Jie, ‘to thee’, that distroyist the temple of 
God, and in the thridde day ‘bildist it 
azein*; saue thou thi self; 3if thou art 
the sone of God, cume doun! of the crosse. 
41 Also™ and princis" of prestis scornynge, 
4a2with scribis and eldre men, seiden, He 
made other men saaf, he may nat make 
hym self saaf; 3if he is kyng® of Yrael, 
cume he nowe? doun fro’ the crosse, and 
43 we bileuen to hym; he trustith in God, 
delyuere he hym nowe, 3if he wole; for- 
sothe’ he seide, Fort I am ‘Goddis sone". 
44°Forsothe and’ the” theeuys, that weren 
crucified with hym, puttiden* to hym with 
4srepreue the same thing. Sothely fro the 
sixte hour dercnessis benY maad on‘ al the 
46erthe, ‘til to the nynethe hour. And 
about the nynthe houre Jhesus criede with 


i Cirenense Pp. k the our. 
nwhiche ovr. © to him or. 
our. that thing x. 
Y clothis w pr.m. Z casten U sec. m. 


P Om. sx. 


1 the crosse of Jhesu o. the crosse of hym ur. 
4 medled ovr. meynd pw. 
Vv partiden amNPasxy. partideden w. 

@ setteden ovr. putten s. 


MATTHEW. 81 


his cross. And thei camen in to a place3s 
that is clepid Golgatha, that is, the place 
of Caluarie. And thei jauen hym toss 
drynke wyne meynd* with galle; and’ 
whanne he hadde tastid, he wolde not 
drynke. And! aftir that thei hadden cru-3s 
cified hym, thei departiden" his clothis, 
and kesten™ lotte, to fulfille that is seid 
bi the prophete, seiynge, Thei partiden™ 
to hem my clothis, and on my clooth thei 
kesten® lott. And thei seten, and kepten 3s 
him; and setten? aboue his heed his37 
cause writun, This is Jhesu of Nazareth, 
kyng of Jewis. Thaune twey?? theues 38 
weren crucified with hym, oon on the 
ri3thalf, and oon on the lefthalf. And s9 
men that passiden forth blasfemeden 
hym, mouynge her heedis, and seiynge, 40 
Vath‘ fo thee, that distriest the temple of 
God, and in the thridde dai bildist it 
ajen; saue thou thi silf; if thou art 
the sone of God, come doun of the cross'. 
Also and princis of prestis scornynge, 41 
with scribis and elder men, seiden, He 42 
made’ othere men saaf, he may not make 
hym silf saaf; if he is kyng of Israel, 
come he now doun fro the crosse, and 
we bileuen to hym; he tristide in God ; 43 
delyuer he hym now, if he wole; for he 
seide, That Y am Goddis sone. And the 44 
theues, that weren crucified with hym, 
vpbreididen' hym of the same thing. But 4s 
fro the sixte our derknessis weren inaad 
on al the erthe, to® the nynthe our. And 46 
aboute the nynthe our Jhesus criede 
with a greet vois, and seide, Heli, Heli, 
lamazabatany, that is, My God, my God, 
whi hast thou forsake me? And sum-47 
men’ that stoden there, and herynge, 


™ to G prem. S. 
rOm.o. & Om. x. * filled 
whis vu. *vpon aemnpsivy. of uv. 

b Om. our. ¢ the kynge our. 


dtwey ri. ©werenovury. f another Nouv. & heedes mogswx. » Fiz ovrw. Vath x. ‘Om.x,  ajen- 
byldest it ovy. 1 thou doun ovr. ™ In like maner ovy. ® the princesouy. 9% the kynge ov. POm.N. 
qofo. «Andhex sec.m. for ovy. tOm.our. the Sone of God our. ¥ Also forsothe o. 
Forsothe also vu. w Om. o. x putten sx. Y weren our. Z ypon Gy. alonde ovr. > til An. 
vnto GSx. 

k meddlid crxea. !Om.1. "partiden go. ™kastiden khi. %departiden e1knga. © kastiden Ki. 
.? thei setten J. settiden i. PP twor. 4 that is, fi3e marg. * cros, and we bileuen to thee EP sec. m. 
marg. Shath maadr. ¢Om.c, ‘tt vpbraidenn. tiliba. ¥summe c. 


VOL. IV. 


82 MATTHEW. 


grete voice, seyinge, Hely, Hely, lamaza- 
batany, that is, My God, my God, ‘wherto, 
470r whi*, hast thou forsaken mee? Sothly 
summen® stondynge there, and heerynge, 
ssseiden, This clepith Hely. And anon oon 
of hem renuynge, fillide a spounge taken 
with ‘aycel, o7 vynegre*, and puttide’ to® 
a reed, and 3aue to hym for® to drinke. 
49 But other seiden, Suffre thou; see wei 
wher*® Hely cumme!, delynerynge™ hym. 
soForsothe Jhesus eftsones" eryynge with 
sigrete® voice, ‘sente out? the spirit. And 
loo! the veile of the temple is4 kitt, ‘or 
rent™, in to’ two parties, fro the hei3zest 
til doun®. And tlhe ertle is" moued, and 
sestoonys ben’ cleft”; and biriels ben* open- 
yd, and many bodies of seintesY that 
slepten, ‘or weren dead’, ‘rysen a3ein?. 
a3 And thei goynge out of her? biriels, after 
his resureecioun® camen in to the holy 
sieitee, and apeeriden to manye’. Treuly 
eenturio and thei that weren with hym 
kepinge Jhesu, the moouynge of the 
erthe seen, and thoo" thingis that weren 
3s done, dredden greteli, seyinge, Verrely this 
was Goddis sone. Forsothe ‘there weren 
there many wymmen® afer, that sueden 
Jhesu fro Galilee, mynystrynge to hym. 
56 Amonge whiehe was Marie Mawdeleyne, 
and Marie off Jamys, and ‘the modir§ of 
Joseph, and the modir of Zebedees sones. 
57 Forsothe when the euenyng" was maad, 
‘there came! a* riche man! fro Armathia, 
Joseph™ by naine, the® whiche and he 
58 Was diseiple® of Juesu. He wente to Pilate, 
and axideP the body of Jhesu. Thanue 
Pilate comaundide the body4 to be jolden’. 
59 Aud the body taken, Joseph wlappide it 
win a elene ‘sendel, or lynnen cloth’, and 
puttidet it" in” his newe biriel, that® he 


¢ wherto 2x. whi our. 


4 samme nvx. sum men wv. 


XXVII. 47—6o. 


seiden, This clepith Helye. And anoon 4s 
oon of hem rennynge, took and fillide a 
spounge with’ vynegre, and puttide” on a 
rehed, and 3af to hyin to drynke. But 4s 
othir seiden, Suffre thou; se we* whether 
Helie come to deliuer hym. Forsothe 50 
Jhesus eftsoone criedeY with a greet voyce, 
and 3af vp the goost. And lo! the veil of's: 
the temple was to-rent inY’ twey? parties, 
fro the hiest to the lowest. And the 
erthe schoke, and stoonus” weren cloue; 
and birielis weren openyd, and many se 
bodies of seyntis that hadden slepte, 
rysen® vp. And thei 3eden out of herss 
birielis, and aftir his resurreccioun thei 
ecamen in to the holi citee, and apperiden 
to many. And the centurien and theisa 
that weren with hym kepinge Jhesu, 
whanne thei saien the erthe schakynge, 
and tho thingis that weren doon, thei 
dredden greetli, and seiden, Verili thisss 
was Goddis sone. And ther weren there 
many wymmeu afer, that sueden Jhesu 
fro Galilee, and mynystriden to hym. 
Among whiche> was Marie Magdalene, 56 
and Marie, the modir of James, and of 
Joseph, and the modir of Zebedees 
sones. But whanne the euenyng wass7 
come, ther eam a riche man of Armathi, 
Joseph bi name, and he was a disciple 
of Jhesu. He wente to Pilat, and axidess 
the bodi of Jhesu. Thanne Pilat co-59 
maundide the bodie to be 3ouun. And 
whanne the bodi was takun, Joseph lap- 
pide it in a clene sendel, and leide it in60 
his newe biriel, that he hadde hewun in 
a stoon; and he walewide a greet stoon 
to the dore of the biriel, and wente awei. 
But Marie Maudelene and anothir Marie 61 
weren there, sittynge a3ens the sepulcre. 


© eisel ax. vynegre our. f putte sx. & it 


to @xy. onusec.m bOm.sx. iOm.n. whether p et x pass. ‘cometh x.  ™ to deliuer o. 
neft our. Cagreetg. P3yauevpusec.m. Gwasour. *Om.ourx. %Om.@.  ¢ to the lowist 
U see.m. “was our, YOm.o. werenur. Wclouen ex. * weren our. Yholy men ovy. 7 ether 
w.d.our. Om. x. han ryse our. the ovr. ¢rysynge ajen our. many men our. 44 the n. 


€ many wimimen weren theer our. 
iOm. our. Koop. man cam our. 
Paskide @. 4 bodi of Jhesu an. 


© 30fen 0. 
t putte sx. 4 Om. G prem. 


Vv into o. 


YofK. Wputtr. * Om. x. 


Y criynge g. 
b the whiche 1a. ¢ And her. 


f the modir of ovvw sec. m. 
m Joseph of Aramathie our. 


yy into hi. 


g Om. our sec. m. 
n Om. our. 


© euentide our. 
9 the disciple our. 


s sendel 4x. lynnen cloth our. sendel, or lyne cloth s. 
w whiche our. 


Ztwor. 72 the stoones K. 4 risiden c. 


XXVIII. 61——XXVIII. 7. 


hadde hewen in a stoon; and he walowid 
to* a grete stoon at the dore of the biriel, 
61and wente awey. Forsothe Marye Mawde- 
leyne and an othere Marye weren there, 
e2sittynge ajeins the sepulcre. Sothely on 
‘the tother? day, that® is after pascke 
euenynge>, the princis ‘of prestis® and 
63 Pharisees‘ camen to gidere to Pilate, sei- 
ynge®’, Sire, we han mynde, for ‘the ilkef 
‘traitour, or disseyuour®, sayde 3it lyu- 
ynge, Aftir thre dayes I shal ryse ajen. 
61 Therfore comaunde thou the sepulcre to> 
be kept til ‘in to! the thridde day; lest 
perauenture his disciplis comen, and stelen 
him, and seyen to the peple, He is* risun! 
fro deeth™; and the laste errour schal be 
6s worse than the formere. Pilat seith" to 
hem, 3e han the kepinge; go 3e, ‘kepe 
663e° as 3e kunnen. Forsoth thei goynge 
forth, kepten, ‘or wardiden?, the sepulcre, 
markinge, ‘or seelinge4, the stoon’, with 
keperis’. 
CAP. XXVIII. 

1 Forsothe int the euenyng" of the saboth, 
‘or haliday", that schyneth” in the firste 
day of the woke, Marie Mawdeleyn cam, 
and another Marie, for* to se the sepulcre. 

2And lo! ‘ther was maadY a greet erthe 
mouyng*; forsoth the® aungel of the Lord 
cam doun fro heuene, and ‘comynge to 
turnide awey the stoon, and sat® theron. 

3Sothli his lokyng was as leyt, and his 
+clothis’ as¢ snow; forsothe for dredef of 
him the keperis ben® afferid, and thei ben& 
smaad as deede men. Forsothe the aungel 
ausweringe seide to the wymmen, Nyle 3e¢ 
drede, for I woot that 3e seken Jhesu, that 
eis" crucified ; he is not here, sothli‘ he 
roos, as he seide ; come 3e, and seeth* the 
7place, where the Lord was putt. And 3e 


x Om. ourw sec.m. Y to ou sec. m. x. 
b enentide ov pr.m.v. even uv sec.m. © Om. U. 
ilke c pr.m. thilke G sec. m. ur. that x. 
i vnto 4Gs pr.m. MTXY. to G sec.m. 


z the other x. that other cmopsutvy. 
d the Pharisees aosuvw. 
& traytour 4x. disseyuour our. 
k hath 4GMNOPQSTUVIVXY. 


MATTHEW. 83 


And on ‘the tother® dai, that is aftirez 
pask euen, the’ princis of prestis and thee 
Farisees camen togidere to Pilat, and 6s 
seiden, Sir, we han mynde, that thilke 
giloure seide 3it lyuynge, Aftir thre daies 
Y schal rise azen to lijf. Therfor co- 64 
maunde thou, that the sepulcre be kept 
in to the thridde dai; lest hise disciplis 
comen, and stelen hym, and scie to the 
puple, He hath rise*4 fro deeth; and the 
laste errour schal be worse than the for- 
mere. Pilat seide to hem, 3e han thees 
kepyng; go 3e, kepe 3e' as 3e kunnen. 
And thei 3eden forth, and kepten the 6s 
sepulere, markynge® the stoon, with 
keperis. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


But in the euentid of the sabat, that 
bigynneth to schyne in the firste dai of 
the woke, Marie Mawdelene cam, and 
another Marie, to se the sepulcre. Ande 
lo! ther was maad a greet ertheschak- 
yng; for the aungel of the Lord cam 
doun fro heuene, and neizede, and turn- 
ede awei the stoon, and sat theron. Ands 
his lokyng was as leit, and hise clothis as 
snowe ; and for drede of hyin the keperis 4 
weren afeerd, and thei weren maad as 
deede men", But the aungel anusweride, 5 
and seide to the wymmen, Nyle 3e drede, 
for Y woot that 3e seken Jhesu, that was 
crucified ; he is not here, for he is risun, 6 
as he seide; come 3e, and se 3e the place, 
where the Lord was leid. And go 3e7 


a whiche our. 
€and seiden our.  f thet 

h for to AGMNPQTIVY. 
lrisen ajeen s. ™ deed amnps. 


deed men our. the deeth er.  seide ovr. © kepeth x. POm. sourx. 4 Om. aourx. * stones o. 
8 the keperes our. tOm.vu, 4 euentide our. VY Om. sourx. W shoen x. * Om.ourx. Y Om. our. 
2 mouynge was maade our. ®anour. bheneizinge ovr. Che sat o. 4clothinge 0. © white as @. 


fthe drede ovy. & weren ovy. 4 was our. 


i forsothe our. 


K se ANPIV. see 3¢ OUF. 


¢ that oothir1. 20m.a. 4 risen ajenr. € Om.K. f Om.1ka. & ether seelinge K marg. » Om. prem, 


M 2 


84 MATTHEW. 


goynge sone, seie! to his disciplis ‘and to 
Petre™, for he hath risun. And lo"! he 
schal go bifore 30u° in to Galilee; there 3e 
schulen se him. Lo! I haue bifore seid 
sto jou. And ‘Marie Mawdeleyn, and a- 
nother Marie? wenten out soone fro the 
buryel4, with drede and greet ioye, ren- 
onynge for? to telle’ his disciplis. And lo! 
Jhesus ‘ran ajens' hem, seyinge", Heil je. 
Forsothe thei ‘camen to’, and heelden his 
10 feet, and worschipiden him. Thanne Jhe- 
sus seith to hem, Nyle 3e drede; go 3e, 
‘telle 3e¥ to my britheren, that thei go in 
11 to Galilee; there thei schulen se me. ‘The 
whiche* whanne thei hadden gon, loo! 
summe of the keperis camen in to the 
cytee, and tolden to’ the princes? ‘of prestis* 
izalle thingis that weren don. And _ thei 
gedrid to gidre with the’ eldere men, a¢ 
counceil takun, 3aue to the kny3tis plen- 
13 teuous money, seyinge, Seie 3e, for his dis- 
ciplis camen by ni3te, and han stolen him, 
avs slepinge. And if this’ be® herd of the 
‘presedent, or zustise‘, we schulen conceile 
ishim, and make’ 3o0u sikir®. And the mo- 
ney takun, thei! diden, as thei weren 
tau3t. And this word is pupplissid at) the 
ig Jewis, til in to this day. Forsothe en- 
leuene disciplis wenten in to Galilee, in to 
an hil, where Jhesus hadde ordeyned tok 
izhem. And thei seynge him, worschip- 
isiden; sothli summe of hem doutiden. And 
Jhesus ‘comynge to!, spak to hem, sey- 
inge™, Al power is 3ouun to me, in he- 
igtene and in" erthe. Therfore 3e goynge 
teche® alle folkis, cristenynge hem in the 
name of the Fadir, and of the Sone, and 
200f the Hooly Gost; techinge hem for? 
to kepe alle thingis, what euere thingis 
I haue comaundid to4 3ou; and lo! I 


XXVIII. 8—20. 


soone, and seie 3e to his disciplis, that he 
is risun. And lo! he schal go bifore 30u 
in to Galilee; there 3e schulen se hym. 
Lo! Y haue biforseid to 3ou. And theis 
wenten out soone fro the biriels, with 
drede and greet ioye, rennynge to telle 
to hise disciplis. And lo! Jhesus mette9 
hem, and seide, Heile 3e. And thei nei3- 
eden, and heeldeni his feet, and worschip- 
iden him. Thanne Jhesus seide to hem, 10 
Nyle 3e drede; go 3e, ‘telle 3e% to my 
britheren, that thei go in to Galile; 
there thei schulen se me. And whannel 
thei weren goon, lo! sumine of the 
keperis camen in to the citee, and telden 
to the princis of prestis alle thingis that 
weren doon. And whanne thei weren12 
gaderid togidere with the elder men, 
and hadden take her counseil, thei 3auen 
to the knijtis miche monei, and seiden, 
Seie 3e, that hise disciplis camen bi ny3t, 13 
and han stolen hym, while 3e slepten. 
And if this! be herd of the iustice, we 14 
schulen counseile hym, and make 30u 
sikir. And whaune the monei was takun, 15 
thei diden, as thei weren tau3t. And this 
word is pupplischid among the Jewis, til 
in to this day. And the enleuen disci-16 
plis wenten in to Galilee, in to an hille, 
where Jhesus hadde ordeyned to hem. 
And thei sayn™ hym, and" worschip- 17 
iden; but summe of hem doutiden. 
And Jhesus cam ny3, and spak to hem, 18 
and seide, Al power in heuene and in 
erthe is 3ouun to me. Therfor go 3e, and 19 
teche® alle folkis, baptisynge hem in the 
name of the Fadir, and of the Sone, and 
of the Hooli Goost; techynge hem to20 
kepe alle thingis, what euer thingis Y 
haue comaundid to 30u; and lo! Y am 


I seie 3e Gory. seith x. ™Om. ourw sec.m. son. ©°Om.u. P thei ovuvwsec.m. 4 sepulcre 
our, *Om. osurx. §tellto ovvx. tmette our. and seide ovr. Vneizeden ovr. © telleth 
sv sec.m,X. * And ouvwsec.m. YOm.N. prince xk. ®Om.wopr.m. %Om.c. Candak. 
dthis thing v. ¢schal be ovr. f president asx. iustice ovr. & we schulen make ovr. >} suir v. 


J anentes our. k Om. o. 
P Om. G pr.m, Mogsurx. 


i and thei ec. 
© techeth sx. 


i bihelden c. 


K telleth 1. and telle 3e k. 
teche 3e ga. 


1 neizinge our. 
q Om. 4G pr.m. NTWX. 


I this word xk. 


m and seide our. 2 Om. G pr.m. 


mseynge c8. © Om.c. © techeth 1. 


XXVIII. 20. MATTHEW. 85 


am with 3ou in’ alle dayes, til‘ the end- with 30u in alle daies, in to the ende? of 


yng of the’ world. the world. 
Here endith the gospel of Matheu, and Here endith the gospel of Matheu, 
bigynneth the prolog of Mark». and here bigynneth the prolog vp on 
Marks, 


rOm. ux. § til to acNnosrw sec.m. x. tilintov. tOm.r. —°% Here endith the gospel of Mathew, 
and bigynneth the prologe on Mark, and aftir beginneth the gospel. n. Here endith Mathewe. 9. Here 
endith Matheu, and bigyuneth the prologe. v. Here cendith the gospels of Mathem, and here bigynneth the 
gospelis aftir the setynge of Mark. w. No final rubric in aeupstux. 


P eending c ef plures. 4 Here endith the gospel of Matheu, and bigynneth the prolog on the gospel of 
Mark Euangelist.c. Heere endith the gospel of Matheu, aud biginneth the prologe on the gospel of Mark. 
igregka. Here endith Mathew ; se now the prolog on Mark. x. Here endith Matheu, and here bigynneth 
the prologe vpon Mark. m. Here endith Matheu, and here biginnith the prologe on Mark. s. Here endith 
Matheu, and here bigynneth a prologe on Mark. x. Here endith the gospel of Mathew, and bigynneth the 
prolog of Mark. e. Here endith the book of Matheu, and now bygynneth the prologe of Mark. f. No final 
tubric in EPhi. 


MAR K. 





The prologe of Marke’*. 


MaRk, the euangelist, of God chosun, and Petris sone in> baptyme, and in Goddis 
word disciple, presthod® in Israel ledynge, aftir fleisch a dekene, he’, turnyd to thee 
feith of Crist, wroot the gospel in Ytayle; schewinge theron’ bothe? what he owide" 
to his kynrede and to Crist. For whi the bigynnyng of his principle he ordeyn- 
ynge! inj the’ vois of a! prophetis™ exclamacioun, schewith the ordre of dekenis 
eleccioun, that he, prechinge" ‘the for-ordenede® John, Zakaries sone, sent out in vois 
of an aungel tellynge, not oonly Goddis sone maad man, but the body of the Lord, 
‘that is, the churche’, in to alle thingis by the word of Goddis vois quykid4, schulde 
schewe in the bigynnynge of his prechinge of the gospel; that the which this redinge 
schulde knowe, to whom’ the bigynuyng of fleisch in the’ Lord, and Jhesu comynge 
to the habitacle, the fleisch schulde knowe, and in hym silf the word, ‘that is, Crist', 
of the vois ‘John Baptist", that in consonantis’, ‘that is, in forme fadris*, he hadde 
lost, schulde fynde. Forsoth hothe he*, the work of the fulfillid gospel entringe, 
‘and fro the baptym of the Lord bigynnyngeY to preche God, ne* trauelide not to 
seie the natiuyte of fleisch*, the which he hadde seene> in othere® bifore, but he 
expressinge the exposicioun of al the desert, hath schewid out the fastinge of noumbre, 
‘other the noumbre of fastinge’, the temptacioun of the fend, the congregacioun of 
beestis, and the seruyse of aungels, that he ordeynynge vs to vndirstonde, alle thingis 
in schort peyntynge to gidere, nother® the autorite of thing do ‘schulde do awey', and 
‘in parformynge® schulde not denye fulnesse to# the werki. Forsothe he is* seid to 
haue kit awey his thoumbe, that he my3te be hadd as vnworthi to presthod. But so 
moche my3te eleccioun bifore ordeyned, acordynge to the feith, that nothir so in the 
werk of the word he schulde leese, that rathire he hadde deseruyd ‘in kynde!. For 
of Alexandre he was bischop; of whom bi alle thingis werk, ‘othir intencioun™, was 
to kunne, bothe to dispose the seiyngis" of the gospel in ‘him silf°, and the? disciplyne 
of the’ lawe ‘to knowe’ in him silf, and ‘the nature of God to knowe in the fleisch', 
other® in¥ ‘the manhood of the Lord*, The* whiche thingis in vs silf first it 
behoueth to be requyrid ; aftirward we wollithY thingis sou3t to be knowe, hauynge 
the mede of exortacioun ; for he that plontith, and he that moistith, beth? the same ; 
but he that 3yueth the encrees, is God. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth the gospel*. 


a From ey. Prologe of Marke og. No initial rubric elsewhere. > of g. ¢ prechyde cxevy. 4 Om. x. 
€Om.g. ftheringsec.m & Om. 9 baztesx. jiordeyndev, jandx, kag. !thev. 
m prophete e. n preche x. © therfore ordeynede x. the bifore ordeynde uv. the forn ordeyned x. 
Pp Om. xX. that is, the charite y. quykened qu. 'whosy. §Sthatx. tOm.x. "that is, Jon 
Baptist s. Om. x. ¥ consonaunces yy. W ¢hat is, in formere fadris gs. Om. xX. *and kK.  Y Om. 6c. 
z2Om.x. the flesh x. %seyec. ¢the otheres. dQOm. x. ¢Om.9 Sf that he shulde not do 
awey Q sup. ras. & that he 9 sup. ras. ‘ofu. werk to be perfourmed g. * Om.e. ! vnkynde e. 
on kinde srxy. ™Om.x. ® signes 4GKk. seyngis sy. seeynges uy prm. Ohim x, Pin xy. 97Om. x. 
rOm.opr.m $SOm. x.  ‘t to vnderstonde Goddis nature of the Lord in flesshe 9 sup. ras. % or vu, 
that is, Qa. Om. x. v Om. esxy. w manhed @. of the Lord x. x Om. x. Y wolen @. wiln sx. 
2 hen sx. a No final rubric in Gesurxy. 


I, 1—3. MARK. 87 


Here byginneth the prologe of Marke*. 


Makk, the gospeller, was the chosun sernaunt of God, and the goostli sone of Petre 
in baptym, and the disciple in® Goddis word ; he* mynystride preesthod in Israel, that 
is, among Jewis, and was of the lynage of Leuy bi fleisch, and he was conuertid to 
the feith of Crist, and wroot the gospel in Ytalie, that ts, thee cuntrei of Rome, and 
schewide in the gospel, what he ou3te to his kyn and to Crist. Mark bigynneth at 
the sendyng of Joon Baptist, and tellith not the natiuite of Crist bi fleissche, but fro 
Cristis baptym, whanne he was ful man, he tellith of his fastyng bi fourti daies, and 
of his temptyng in desert, hou the deuel temptide hyin, and how weilde beestis weren 
gaderid there, and hou hooli aungels camen, and serueden Crist aftir his temptacioun, 
and ouercomyng therof. Aftir ‘he hadde resseyued Cristen feith®, he kittidef of his 
thombe, that he schulde be hadde repreuable to preesthod, that is, be unhable to be 
preest in the gospel, but the® chesyng ‘that was" bifor ordeyned consentynge to the 
feith, my3te do so myche, that he loste not in the! werk of word", that is, in prechyng 
of Goddis word, that that! he disseruede bifor in kyn, that 7s, as he was a prest bi 
kyn in the elde lawe among Jewis, so he was a prest in the gospel among Cristen 
men. For he was bischop of Alisaundre; and bi alle thingis it was his werk to kunne 
profesies, and to dispose in ‘hym silf™ the seiyngis® of the gospel, and to knowe in 
hym silf the techyng of lawe®, and to vndurstonde the? dyuyn kynde of the Lord in 
fleisch ; whiche thingis it bihoueth to be sou3t first in vs4. 


This seith Jerom in his prolog on the gospel of Mark. 


Here bygyuneth the gospel of Mark. Here bigynneth the gospel of Marks. 


CAT I. CRs: 


1 Tue bigynnynge of the gospel® of Jhesu TueE bigynnyng't of the gospel of Jhesu 1 
2Crist, thee sone of God. As it is writun Crist, the sone of God. As it is writune 
in Ysaie, the prophete, Lo! I sende myn in Ysaie, the prophete, Lo! Y sende myn 
angel bifore thi face, that schal make thi aungel bifor thi face, that schal make 
3weye redy bifore thee. The voice of oon thi" weie redi bifor thee. The vois of3 
cryinge in desert, Make 3e redy the weye a crier in desert, Make 3e redi the weie 
of the Lord, make 3e his pathis ri3tful. of the Lord, make 3e¥ hise paththis 


a From mo. Ifeere bigynneth Mark. p. Gospel of Marke. @. No initial rubric in agusrurwxy. 
bholi gospels. © Om. x. 


a From vt. Prolog on Mark. ech. Here biginnith Jeromus prolouge and the gospel of Mark the 
gospeler. x. Prologe of Marke. No. Here biginnith Jeroms prolog on the gospel of Mark. vp. No initial 
rubric in the other Mss. bofa. cCandher. Cin theakm pr.m. ‘4heschewide 1K. © cristen 
feith resceyued ceteri ef a. fkitte1. kut gv. & Om. plures eta. » Om. plures cia. 1Om.n. & the 
worde tT. 10Om.chi. ™hyme. "selyngq. thelawe ot. Pbes. bihi. 4 vs, for men planten 
and wateren, but God aloone 3evet encresyng. T. t Jerom in his prolog on Mark seith al this. esk. 
Heere endith the prologe, and biginnith the gospel of Mark. 1g. Jerom in his prologe on Mark seith this 
pleynli. k. This seith Jerom in his prologe on Mark. mub. Jerome in his prolog on this gospel seith this. n. 
This seith Jerom in his prolog on Mark, and here bigynneth the gospel of Mark. qca. Heere eendith the 
prolog ; the firste co, rR. No final rubric in the other Mss. 8 Here bigynneth the firste gospel of Mark 
the Euangelist. vu. The biginnyng of Mark. e. No initial rubric in the other Mss. t gynnyng vu. 
uthe hi. ¥ Om. me. 


88 MARK. 


4Jhon was in desert baptisynge, and prech- 
inge the baptym of penaunce, in to re- 
smiscioun of synnes. And alle men of 
Jerusalem wenten out to him, and al the 
cuntre of Judee; and? weren baptisid of 
him in the flood of¢ Jordan, knowlechinge 
sher synnes. And John was clothid‘ with® 
heeris of camelis", and a girdil of skyn 
abowte his leendis; and he eet locustus', 
and ‘hony of the wode‘, and! prechide, 
7seyinge, A strengere than I schal come 
aftir me, of whom I knelinge am not 
worthi for™ to ‘vndo, or unbynde™, the 
8thwong® of his schoon. J haue baptisid 
30u in water; forsothe he shal baptise jou 
yin the Holy Goost. And it is don in thoo 
dayes, Jhesus came fro Nazareth of Gali- 
lee, and was baptisid of Joon in Jordan. 
10And anoon he styinge vp of the water, 
say3 heuenes openyd, and the ‘Holy GoostP 
cummynge doun as a culuere, and dwell- 
itynge in hym. And a voys is? maad fro 
heuenes, Thon art my ‘sone loued", in thee 
121 haue plesid. And anon the Spirit put- 
istide* hym in to desert. And he was in 
desert fourty dayes and fourty ni3tis, and 
was temptid oft Sathanas, and was" with 
beestis, and angelis mynystriden to hym. 
14 Forsothe after that Joon was taken, Jhe- 
sus came in to Galilee, prechinge the 
isgospel of the kyngdam’ of God, and sei- 
ynge, For tyme” is fulfillid*, and the 
kyngdam’ of God shal ‘come ni3*; ‘for- 
thinke 3ee*, ‘or do 3ee penaunce’, and 
16‘bileue 3ee° to the gospel. And he pass- 
ynge® bisidis the see of Galilee, say Sy- 
mont, and Andrew, his brother, sendynge® 
nettis in to the see; sothelyf thei weren 
i7fishers. And Jhesus seide to hem, Come 
jee after me; I® shal inake 30u to be maad 
igfishers of men. And anoon the nettis 
i9forsaken, thei sueden hym. And he gon 


4 and thei ur. 
land he ur. ™Om. surx. 
sec.m. * loued sone cupxy. 
Vv rewme UVF sec. 7m. 
penaunce ur. 

f for ur see. m. 


eOm. ur. f clad x. 


W the tyme ur sec. m. 
b Om. aurx, 
& and I ur. 


¢ riztful car pr. m. c. 


) 4 companie ghi pr. m. 
bhynlouse1. iouc. 


k putte 1g. 


& with the v. 
a vnbynde sour. vado x. 
8 putte sx. puttide out ur. 
x fillid ur. 
¢ bileeueth cexy. 


e of Jordan K sec. m, 


I. 4——19. 


rijt®. Joon was in desert baptisynge, 4 
and prechynge the baptym of penaunce, 
in to remissioun of synnes. And al thes 
cuntre4 of Judee wente out to hym, and 
alle men of Jerusalem; and thei weren 
baptisid of hym in the flom Jordan®, ‘and 
knoulechidenf her synnes. And Joone 
was clothid with heeris of camels, and a 
girdil of skyn was about hise leendis; and 
he ete hony soukis, and wilde hony, and 
prechide, and seide, A stronger than Yi 
schal come aftir me, and Y am not wor- 
thi to knele doun, and& vniace® his 
schoone. Y haue baptisid 3ou in watir ;8 
but he schal baptise jou in the Hooli 
Goost. And it was don in tho daies,9 
Jhesus cam fro Nazareth of Galilee, and 
was baptisid of Joon in Jordan. And 10 
anoon he wente up of the watir, and 
saye heuenes opened, and the Hooli Goost 
comynge doun as a culuer, and dwell- 
ynge in! hym. And a vois was maad froin 
heuenes, Thou art my loued sone, in thee 
Y am plesid. And anoon the Spirit put-.i2 
tide hy forth in to deseert. And he13 
was in deseert fourti daies and fourti 
ny3tis, and was temptid of Sathanas, and 
he was with beestis, and aungels mynys- 
triden to hym. But aftir that Joon was 14 
takun, Jhesus cam in to Galilee, and 
prechide the gospel of the kyngdoom of 
God, and seide, That the tyme is fulfillid, 1s 
and the kyngdoom of God schal cume ny3; 
do 3e penaunce, and bileue 3e to the 
gospel. And as he passide bisidis the 16 
see of Galilee, he say Symount, and An- 
drew, his brother, castynge her nettis in 
to the see; for thei weren fisscheris. And 17 
Jhesus seide to hem, Come 3e aftir me; 
Y schal make 30u to be maad fisscheris 
of men. And anoon thei leften the nettis, 18 
and sueden hym. And he 3ede forth. fro 19 


h camel ur. 


ihonysoukis uv. * wilde hony v. 
© lace ur. 


P Spirit u pr.m.yv. 4 was ur 

t with o. °% he was Garopgur sec.m. XY. 
Yrewme ur. 2 neizje ur sec.m. 4 do 3¢ 
d passynge forth uy sec. m. © castynge U sec. m. 


fknowlechinge 1. —& to hi, 


IT. 20-—34. 


forth thennes a litil, say James of Zebede, 
and Joon, his brother, and hem in the 
20 boot makynge" nettis. And anoon he clep- 
ide hem; and Zebede, her fadir, left in 
the boot with hirid seruauntis, thei sueden 
2ihym. And thei ‘wenten forth! in to Ca- 
farnaum, and anoon in the* sabotis he gon 
22yn! into the™ synagoge, tau3te hem. And 
thei wondreden on his techynge; sothely™ 
he was techynge hem, as hauynge power, 
23and not as° seribis. And in the synagoge 
of hem was a inan in an vnelene spirit; 
g1and he criede?, seyinge, What to vs and 
to thee, thou Jhesu of Nazareth? haste 
thou cummen ‘bifore the tyme for" to de- 
stroie’ vs? Y woot that thou art the holy 
2,0f God. And Jhesus thretenyde" to’ hym, 
seyinge, Wexe’ dowmb, and go* out of 
26the man. And the vnclene goostY debrek- 
ynge? hym, and cryinge with grete vois, 
a7 wente awey* fro hym. And alle men 
wondriden, so that thei ‘sou3ten togidre> 
amonge hem‘, seyinge, What is this 
thinge? what is this newe techyng? for 
in power he comaundith to vnelene spi- 
agritis, aud thei obeyen’ to hym. And the 
tale’, ‘or tything', of hym wente forth 
29 anoon in to al the cuntree of Galilee. Ands 
anoon thei goynge out of the synagoge 
camen in to the hous of Symont and An- 
30drew", with James and Joon. Sothely 
and! the modir of Symontis wif ‘sik in 
feueris restide, or day*; and anoon thei 
3iseien to hym of hir. And he ‘cummynge 
to!, reride™ hir®™ vp°, ‘the hond of hir? 
taken, and anoon the feuere left hire, and 
seshe mynystride to hem. Forsothe the 
euenynge! maad, whenne the sone wente" 
doun, thei brou3ten to hym alle’ hauynge 
sayuel, and hanynge deuelist. And al the 
gicite was gaderid at the 3ate. And he 


i entren ur. 
G@art uy. 


h makynge, either cloulynge uv. 

Sasthe ur.  P criede out U sec. m. 
manasside uy. Y¥Om. uv sec.m. 
2 out Ur. b axeden ur. ¢ hem silf ur. 
lidyng mp. or teching T. & Om. GN. 
Gmpoy. lay syk in feueres ur. restede in feueris x. 
Phir hond vr. Geuentide ur. hadde go ur. 


l her nettis x. 
4 the feuers nr. 


VOL. IV. 


m™ Om. R pr.m.h. thei. 
Tat cxghiks. 


k Om. o. 
r Om. urx. 
w Wexe thou ur. 
4 obeyschen GupesTy. 
b of Andrew ur. 
' neizynge ur. 
Salle men ur. 


 to-hreidinge c. 


MARK. oo 


thennus a litil, and siz James of Zebedee, 
and Joon, his brother, in a boot makynge 
nettis!. And anoon he clepide hem ; and 20 
thei leften Zebedee, her fadir, in the boot’ 
with hiryd seruauutis, and thei suweden 
hym. And thei entriden in to Caphar-21 
naum, and anoon in the sabatys he 3ede 
in to a™ synagoge, and tau3te hem. And 22 
thei wondriden on his teching; for he 
tau3te hem, as he that hadde power, and 
not as scribis. And in the synagoge of 23 
hem was a man in an vuclene spirit, and 
he criede out, and seide, What to vs and 24 
to thee, thou Jhesu of Nazareth? hast 
thou come to distrie vs? Y woot that 
thou art the hooli of God. And Jhe-25 
sus thretenede hym, and seide, Wex 
douinbe, and go out of the man. And 26 
the vnelene spirit debreidynge" hym, 
and criynge with greet® vois, wente out 
fro hym. And alle men wondriden, so27 
that thei sou3ten? with ynne hem silf, 
and seiden, What thing is this? what 
newe doctrine is this? for in power he 
comaundith to vnclene spiritis, and thei 
obeyen to hym. And the fame of hym 2s 
wente forth anoon in to al the cuntree of 
Galilee. And anoon thei 3eden out of29 
the synagoge, and camen into the hous 
of Symount and of Andrewe, with James 
and Joon. And the modir of Symountis 30 
wijf lay sijk in fyueris?; and anoon thei 
seien to hym of hyr. And he cam ny3,31 
aud areride hir, aud whaune he hadde 
take hir hoond, anoon the feuer lefte hir, 
and sche seruede hem. But whanne thes2 
euentid was come, and the sonne was 
gon doun, thei brou3ten to hyin alle that 
weren of" male ese, and hem that had- 
den fendis. And al the citee was gader- 3s 
id at the 3ate. And he heelide many, 34 


m Om. ANO, a for UF. 
t for ur. u thretid o. 
xgothou vy. Y spirit ur. * to-braydynge ur. 
€e fame uy. ff Om, aurx. or 
k restide, or lay seeke in feuerys 
2Om.a. % Om. uv. 


10m. c. 
8 leese ur. 


i Om. nsur. 
m reiside ur. 
t fendis uy. 


Sagreect KB. P axiden k. thon3ten n. 


N 


90 MARK. 


helide many" that weren traueilide with 
dyuers soris*, and he castide” out many 
deuelis*, and he suffride hem nat forY to 
3sspeke, for thei knewen hym. And ‘in 
the* morewynge* ful erly he® rysynge, 
gon out, wente ‘in to® desert place, and 
36 preiede there. And Symont suede hym, 
azand thei that weren with hym. And 
whanne thei hadden founden® hym, thei 
seiden to hym, For alle men seeken thee. 
38 And he seith® to hem, Go we in to the 
nexte townes and citees, that and‘ there 
391 preche, ‘for to this thing® I came®. And 
he was prechynge in the synagogis of 
hem, and in alle Galilee, aud castynge out 
4ofendis. And a leprous man cam to hym, 
bisechynge hym, and, the knee folden’, 
seide*, 3if thou wolt, thou maist! clense 
41me. Forsothe Jhesus, hauynge mercy on™ 
hym, strei3t" out his? hond, andP, touch- 
ynge hym, seith4 to hym, I wole, be thou 
42maad clene. And whanne het hadde seide’, 
anoon the lepre partideé awey fro hym, 
43and he is clensid. And he’ thretenyde” 
to’ hym, and anoon ‘he putteY hym out, 
44and* seith to hym, Se thou, seie* to no 
man}; but go, shewe thee to the® princis4 
of prestis, and offre for thi clensynge tho 
thingis that Moyses badde, in to witness- 
45ynge tohem. And he, gon out, biganne 
to preche, and diffame®, ‘or puplishe', the 
word, so that nowe he mi3te nat opynly 
go® in to the citee, but be with out forth 
in deserte placis; and thei camen to gidre 
to hymn on alle” sydisi. 


CAP. 1: 


1 And eft he entride in to Capharnaum, 
2after ei3te days. And it isk herd, that he 
was in an hous, and many! camen togidre, 


umany men ur. VY sorwis Q. seeknesses ur. 
zOm. ur. a b Om. o. € into a UP. 
u pr. im. for herto u sec.m. for r. 


wkeste GkQx. caste s. 
d come to uV. 
h came for this thing u pr.m. vr. 


I. 35—-Il. 2. 


‘that hadden dyuerse sijknessis, and he 


castide’ out many feendis, and he suf- 
fride hem uot to speke, for thei knewen 
hyms. And he roos ful eerli, and 3ede 3s 
out, and wente in to a desert place, and 
preiede there. And Symount suede hym, 36 
and thei that weren with hym. And3s7 
whanne thei hadden founde hym, thei 
seiden to hym, That alle men seken 
thee. And he seide to hem, Go we in3s 
to the next townes and citees, that Y 


‘preche also there, for her to Y cam. 


And he prechide in the synagogis of39 
hem, and in al Galilee, and castide out 
feendis. And a leprouse man cam to40 
hym, and bisou3te, ‘and knelidet, and 
seide, If thou wolt, thou maist clense me. 
And Jhesus hadde mercy on hym, and 41 
streiz3te out his hoond, and towchyde hym, 
and seide to hym, I wole, be thon maad 
cleene. And whanne he hadde seide 42 
this, anoon the lepre partyde awey fro 
hym, and he was clensyd. And Jhesus 43 
thretenede hym, and anoontt Jhesus" 
putte’ hym out; and seyde to hym, Se44 
thou, seye to no man; but go, schewe 
thee to the’ pryncys* of prestys, and 
offre for thi clensynge in to wytnessyng 
to hein, tho thingis that Moyses bad. 
Aud he 3ede ont, and bigan to preche, 45 
and publischeY the word, so that now he 
my3te not go opynli in to the citee, but 
be withoutforth in desert placis; and thei 
camen to hym on alle sidis. 


CAsP Ae 
And eft he entride in to Cafarnaim,: 
aftir ei3te daies. And it was herd, that2 
he was in an hous, and many camen to 


y Om. surx. 
& forsothe 
k he seide ur. 


* fendis ur. 
€seide ur. falso uv. 
ifalt sx. bowid ur. 


1 my3t Gir. m of exy. n strecchede s. © the s. P and Jhesu ur. @ seide ur. r Jhesu ur. 
S seide this ur. t wente ur. U was UP. v Jhesu ur. w manasside ur. thratte x. x Om. ur. 
Y caste uv. castide r. 2 and Jhesu ur. 4 seie thou ur. » Om. a. thou theeuy. ¢ Om. Nn, 4 prince 
SUF. e publishe ur sec. m. f or pupplishen oul s. Om, ur sec. m, Xx. & entre ur, h eche ur. 
iside ur. k was qgsur. | many men r. 

Teaste 1. § him to be Crist cp marg. sec.m. tknelynger. ttOm.r. Om. EK. ¥ puttide x. 
wOm.ac * prince 1a8. YY greetly pupplische K. to pupplische acg. 


II. 3-—15. 


so that it™ tok® nat®, nether at the 3ate. 
3And he spac to hem a word. And ‘there 
camen to hym? men bryngynge? a ‘man 
sike" in palesies, ‘the whiche' was borun 
4of foure®. And whanne thei mi3te nat 
offre’ hym to hym™ for the campanye ‘of 
peple*, thei ‘maden the roof nakid’, wher 
he was; and? makynge opyn, thei® senten” 
doun the bedd, in whiehe the sike man in 
spalasie lay. Sothely whanne Jhesus say° 
the feith of hem, he seith* ‘vnto® the sike 
man in palasie, Sone, thi synnes ben for- 
63o0uen to thee. Forsothe ‘there werenf 
summes’ of the scribis” sittynuge, and 
7thenkynge in her hertis, What spekith 
hei thus? He blasfemeth; who inay for- 
a3zeue synnes, no* but God alone? The! 
whiche thing anoon knowen by the Holy 
Goost, for thei thou3ten so™ with inne 
hem self, Jhesus seith" to hem, What 
thenken 3ee these thingis in 3oure hertis ? 
9 What is li3tere for® to seie to the sike 
man in palasie, Synnes ben forjonen to 
thee, ‘or for? to seie, Ryse?, take thi bed, 
ioand walke™? Sothely that 3ee wite thats 
mannes sone hath powere in erthe to! for- 
3eue syines, he seith® to the sike man in 
11 palasie, I seie to thee, ryse vp’, take’ thi 
12bed, and go in to thin hous. And anoon 
he roos vp, and, the bed taken vp, he 
wente bifore alle men, so that alle men 
wondriden, aud honouriden God, seyinge, 
i3 For we sayen neuer so. And he wente 
out* eftsoneY to* the see, and al the cum- 
panye® of peple’ eam to hym; and he 
14taugte hem. And whenne he passide, he 
say Leui Alfey® sittynge at the’ tolbothe, 
and he seith® to hym, Sue thou! me. And 
ishe rysynge suede hym. And it is® don, 
whenne he sat at the mete in his! housi, 


™ the hous u pr.m. rv. Om. u sec. m. 


n Om. u sec.m. toke hem pr. 


MARK. 91 


gidir, so that thei mijzten uot be in the 
hous, ne at the 3ate. And he spak to 
hem the? word. And there eamen to3 
hym men that brou3ten a man sijk in 
palesie*, which was borun of foure. And 4 
whanne thei my3ten not brynge hyin to 
Jhesu for the puple, thei vnhileden the 
roof where he? was, and openede® it, and- 
thei? leten doun the bed in which the 
sijk man in palesie laye. And whannes 
Jhesus hadde seyn the feith of hem, he 
seide to the sijk man in palesie, Sone, thi 
synnes ben forjouun to thee. But there 6 
weren snmme of the scribis sittynge, 
aud thenkynge in her hertis, What spek-7 
ith he thus? He blasfemeth; who may 
for3yue synnes, but God aloone? Ands 
whanne Jhesus® hadde knowe this bi 
the Hooli Goost, that thei thou3ten so 
with ynne hem silf, he seith to hem, 
What thenken 3e these thingis in 3oure 
hertis? What is li3ter to seie to the sijk» 
man in palesie, Synnes ben for3ouun to 
thee, or to seie, Ryse, take thi bed, and 
walke? But that 3e wite that mannus1o 
sone hath power in erthe to for3yne 
synnes, he seide to the sijk man in pa- 
lesie, Y seie to thee, ryse vp‘, take thin 
bed, and go in to thin hous. And anoon 12 
he roos vp, and whanne he hadde take 
the bed, he wente bifer alle men, so that 
alle men wondriden, and onoureden God, 
and seiden, For we seien neter so. Andis 
he wente out eftsoone to the see, and al 
the puple eam to hym; and he tau3te 
hem. And whanne he passide, he sai3 14 
Leuy ‘of Alfei® sittynge at the tolbothe, 
and he seide to hym, Sue® me. And he 
roos, and suede hyin. And it was doon, 15 
whanne he sat at the mete in his hous, 


not hem u pr.m. thei 


my3ten nat be in the hous u sec. m. P Om. ur. 9 berynge vu. v seek man GMPQUrXY. § the 
palusye 0. that uv. © fonre mcn ogTy. foure men camen to him ur. VY brynge u sec.m. W Crist ur. 

x Om. uy,  Y vnhylide the roof u sec.m. Zand theiur. @Om.ur. » setten p. leten uv. ¢ hadde 
seen ur, ‘Useide uy. ¢ to acaNopesturxy. fOm.ur. &summe men N._ 2 scribis weren there ur. 
ihe this porxy. k Om. G prim. MXY prom. 10m.ur. ™Om.e. ®seides, ° Om urn. 

’ Peither ur. or x. @Risethouury. ‘'gour. sforur. tfortour. Useide ur. VY thou ur. 
wandtake ur. *Om.o. Yeftur. 7intox. ®cumpanyes vu. » of the pepilo. Om. ur.  ¢ of 
Alfey uv. TOm.w. &seide ur. f Om. acunopestwxy. &wasur., the nur. ihons of him ur. 
Zaascc.m. athe palsiek. > Cristk. ¢thei openyder, 4Om.1. ehec. fOmn. & Om.c. 


h Sue thou sk, 


NQ 


92 MARK. 


many puplicanys and synful men saten 
togidre at the mete with Jhesu and his 
disciplis ; sothely' there weren manye™ 
1éthat foleweden® hym. And _ scribis and 
Pharisees seeyinge, for he eet with pupli- 
canys and synful men, seiden to his disci- 
plis, Whi ‘3oure maister® etith? and drink- 
17ith4 with puplicanys and syuners? This 
thing herd, Jhesus seith™ to hem, Hoole 
men han no nede to a leche, but thei that 
han yuele; forsothe I cam not for* to clepe 
wiuste men, but synners. And disciplist of 
Joon" and the’ Pharisees weren fastynge ; 
and thei camen, and seien to hyin, Whi 
disciplis” of Joon and of* Pharisees 
fasten’, but thi disciplis fasten nat? And 
Jhesus seith? to hem, Whether the sonnys 
of weddyngis*# mown? faste, as long as 
the spouse is with hem? Hou longe tyme 
thei han the spouse with hem, thei mowe 
2zonat faste. Forsothe dayes shulen come, 
whenne the spouse shal be taken awey 
from hem, and thanue thei shulen faste 
21in thoo days. No man seweth a pacche 
of rude’, ‘or newe', clothe to an old clothe, 
ellis he® takith awey the newe supple- 
ment, ‘or pacche', and a more brekynge 
2is maad. And no man sendith® newe 
wyn in to oold botelis®, ‘or wyne vesselis', 
ellis the wyn shal berste* the wyn vesselis, 
and the! wyn shal be held™ out, and the 
wyne vesselis shulen perishe. But newe 
wyn shal" be sent® in to newe wyn ves- 
2selis. And it is? don eftsoone’, whanne™ 
‘the Lord’ walkide in the sabothis by thet 
cornes, and his disciplis bigunnyn to" 
24 passe’ forth, and” plucke eris*. Sothly 
the Pharysees seiden, Loo! what ‘don thi 
disciplisy in sabotis, that? is nat leeueful. 
25 And he seith* to hem, Radde 3ee neuere 


k Om. o. 
mayster MP. 
Q Sec. mM, SUVXY. 
disciples p. 


} forsothe ur. =. ™ many weren UF. 
4 drynkyth jour maystir exy. 

u Joon Baptist arp. 
x Om. G pr.m. oY prim. 


©newe ur. 4Om. aurx. ©¢ it x. 
i Om. aurx. k breke uv. breste xy. ! Om. w. 
Pwasu. ‘eft ur. eftsones oy. r and whau o. 


Wand to ur. * corne eeres 0. 


h seiden Errka. 


m the sabotisk. © that that k. 


Yr seide our. 

v Om. GNoQ sec. m. SXY. 
Y fasten oft vu. 
f either patche vu. Om. x. 
m schedde uF sec. ni. 


¥y thi disciplis don earxy. 


ithe spousayles R pr.m. k sec.m. the spousayle k pr. m. 


Il. 16—25. 


many pupplicans and synful men saten 
togidere at the mete with Jhesu and 
hise disciplis; for there weren many that 
folewiden hym. And scribis and Fari-16 
sees seynge, that he eet with pupplicans 
and synful men, seiden to hise disciplis, 
Whi etith and drynkith joure maystir 
with pupplicans and synneris? Whanne17 
this was herd, Jhesus seide to hem, 
Hoole men han no nede to a leche, but 
thei that ben yuel at eese; for Y cam 
not to clepe iust men, but synneris. ¢ 
Aud the disciplis of Joon and the Fari-18 
sees weren fastynge; and thei camen, and 
seien® to hym, Whi fasten the disciplis 
of Joon, and the Farisees fasten, but thi 
disciplis fasten not? And Jhesus seide is 
to hem, Whether the sones of sposailis! 
moun faste, as longe as the spouse is 
with hem? As long tyme as thei haue 
the spouse with hem, thei moun not 
faste. But daies schulen come, whanne 20 
the spouse schal be takun awei fro hem, 
and thanne thei schulen faste in tho 
daies. No man sewith a patche of newe2t 
clooth to an elde clooth, ellis he takith 
awei the newe patche fro the elde, and 
amore brekyng is maad. And no man22 
puttith newe wyn in to elde botelis, ellis 
the wyn schal breste* the botels, and the 
wyn schal be sched out, and the botels 
schulen perische. But newe wyn schal be 
put into newe botels. And it was doon 23 
eftsoones, whanne the Lord walkid in 
the sabotis bi the cornes, and hise disci- 
plis bigunnen to passe forth, and plucke 
eeris of the! corn. And the Farisees 24 
seiden to hym, Lo! what thi disciplis 
doon in sabotis™, that" is not leeueful. 
And he seide to hem, Radden 3e neuer 25 


a sweden ovr. °Om.cGupxy.  P etith 3oure 
s Om. esurx. t the discyples emp 
W the disciplis GarogsTurxy. tho 

® the weddingis x. > may o. 
& puttith u sec.m. b wyne vessels ur. 
© owith to ur. © put U sec. m. 


Z seide vu. 


$ Crist ur. tOm.or. fortog. Ygour. 
2 the thing that ur. 4 seide ur. 
kK breke hi. 1 Om. ck. 


II. 26—III. 10. 


what Dauyth dide, whanne he hadde 
neede, and he hungride, and thei that 
26weren with hym? Hou he wente? in¢ 
into the hous of God, vndir Abiathar, 
prince of prestis, and eete loouys of pro- 
posicioun’, the whiche® it was nat leeful 
to ete, no’ but to prestis alone, and he 3aue 
27to hem that weren with hym. And he 
seide to hem, The sabote is maad for man, 
and nat a® man for the sabote; and so 
mannys sone is lord also of the saboth. 


CAP. HI. 
1 And he entride eftsoone in to the syna- 
goge, and ther was a man hauynge a drye 
zhond. And thei aspieden hym, 3if he 
helide’ in* sabothis, ‘for to! accuse hym. 
3And he seith™ to the man hauynge a drye 
4hond, Ryse™ in to the mydil®. And he 
seith to hem, Is it leeuefil to do wel in 
the sabothis, or? yuele? for? to make a 
soule saaf, whether' to lese? And thei 
sweren stille. And he biholdynge hem 
aboute with wrathe’, hauynge sorwe' vp- 
on" the blyndnesse of her herte, seith to 
the man, Holde forth thin honde. And 
he helde forth, and the’ honde is” re- 
sstorid ‘to hym*. Sothely Pharisees’ go- 
ynge out anoon, maden a? counseil with 
Herodyans a3eins hym, hou thei shulden 
7lese* hym. Forsothe Jhesus with his dis- 
ciplis wente to the see; and myche cnm- 
panye from Galilee and Judee suede” hym, 
sand fro Jerusalem, and froc Ydume, and® 
bijendis Jordan, and thei that® aboute 
Tyre and Sydon, a grete multitude, ‘heer- 
ynge thef thingis that he dide®, camen to 
dhym. And Jhesus seith> to his disciplis, 
that the litili boot shulde serue hym, for 
the cumpanye ‘of peple*, lest thei op- 
10 pressiden hym ; sothely! he helide many”, 


b entride ur. € Om. AGHNPOQTUF. 


4 proposicioun, either of settyng forth u. 


MARK. 93 


what Dauid dide, whanne he hadde nede, 
and he hungride, and thei that weren 
with hym? Hou he wente in to the hous 26 
of God, vndur Abiathar, prince of prestis, 
and eete looues of proposicioun, which it 
was not? leeueful to ete, but to preestis 
aloone, and he 3af to hem that weren 
with hym. And he seide to hem, The 27 
sabat is maad for man?, and not af man 
for the sabat; and so mannus sone is lord 
also of the sabat. 


@xeP. IIT. 


And he entride eftsoone in to the syna-1 
goge, and there was a man hauynge a 
drye hoond. And thei aspieden hym, if2 
he helide in the sabatis, to accuse him. 
And he seide to the man that hadde a3 
drie hoond, Rise in to the myddil. And4 
he seith to hem, Is it leeueful to do wel 
in the sabatis, ether yuel? to14 make a 
soul saaf, ether to leese? And thei weren 
stille. And he biheeld hem aboute withs 
wraththe, and hadde sorewe on the 
blyndnesse of her herte, and seith to the 
man, Hold forth thin hoond. And he 
helde forth, and his hoond was restorid 
to hym. Sotheli Farisees 3eden outé 
anoon, and maden a counsel with Ero- 
dians a3ens hym, hou thei schulden lese™ 
hym. But Jhesus with hise disciplis7 
wente"™ to the see; and myche puple fro 
Galilee and* Judee suede hym, and fros 
Jerusalem, and fro Ydume, and fro bi- 
3ondis Jordan, and thei that weren 
aboute Tire and Sidon, a greet multi- 
tude, heringe thet thingis that he dide, 
and" cam’ to hym. And Jhesus seides 
to hise disciplis, that the boot schulde 
serue* hym, for the puple, lest thei 
thristen hym; for he heelide many, so10 


€ which looues ur. 


fOm.o. & Om. Gopsurxy. beft uv. iheelide him uy. * inthe v. 1 to x. that thei schulden ur. 
mseide uv. 1 Rise thou uy. © myddis uv. P whether ur. 4Om. suv sec.m. * wher o. ether 
u sec.m. whether or x. Sire uv. + soroufulnesse ur. Uon UVX, vhis uy sec.m. WY was ur. 
x Om. ur sec.m. Y¥ the Pharisees wopeTvy. 2 Om. peruvxy pr.m. fordo y sec.m.  » and sude o. 
¢Qm.4. Gand frouv. ¢that weren ur. fthocer. ‘“¢Om. x. Oseide as. 1Om. vy. * Om. ur. 
lfor uy. ™ manye men ur. 

Onos. Pthemani. 9 Om. Rbpr.m.ghik. 4 fortoapr.m. "fordor. "3edenR. § and fro 1. 
tthok. %Om.mRr. ‘*camen celeri. W kepe ga. serue to 1. 


94 MARK. 


so that thei felden fast to hym, that thei 
sbulden touche hym. Forsothe hon many 
Meuere hadden ‘soris, or woundis™, and 
vuclene spiritis, whenne thei seien hym, 
felden down to hym, and crieden, seyinge, 
12Thou art the sone of God. And gretely 
he manasside hem, that thei shulden nat 
i3make hyin opyn®, ‘or knowen?. And he 
styinge ind to an hil, clepide to hym 
whont he wolde; and thei camen to hym. 
14And he made, that ‘there weren twelue’ 
with hym, ‘and that he shuldet sende hem 
isfor® to preche. And he 3aue to’ hem 
power ‘of heelynge™ siknessis, and ‘of cast- 
iGynge* out fendis. And to Symount he 
17 putteY name Petre, and* James* of Zebede 
and Joon, the brother of James, and he? 
puttee to hem names Boonerges, that is, 
18the? sones of thondrynge®; and‘ Andrew 
and Philip, and Bartholomewe and Ma- 
thew, and Thomas and James Alfey 2, 
ig9and Thadee and Symount Cananee, and 
20 Judas Scarioth, that bitraide hym. And 
thei comen to® an hous, andi the cum- 
panye ‘of peple* came togidre eftsoone!, so 
that thei mi3te not nether™ ete breed. 
21And whanne his kynuesmen® hadden 
herdde, thei wenten out for® to holde 
hyms; sothelyP thei seiden, for? he ist 
22turnyd in to wodenesse. And the® scribis 
that camen doun fro Jerusalem, seiden, 
For he hath Belsebub, and for in the 
prince of deuelst he castith out fendis. 
23 And, hem gadrid" togidre, he seide to 
hem in parablis, Hou imay Sathanas caste 
2iout Sathanas? And if a rewme be’ de- 
partide in itself*, ‘the ilkeY rewme may 
25not stonde. And if an hous be* dispar- 
poilid* on it self, thilke® hous may not 
2cstonde. And if Sathanas hath risen a3eins 
hym self, he is disparpoilid’, and he shal 


n sores AMPX. woundes, or soores 0. woundes, either sijknesses ur. 
t to usec. m,. 
z and he elepide ur. 
f and he clepide u sec. m. 


4Om.r pr.m. tT whiche ur. 
x to caste Ur sec.m. Y puttide the ur. 
qur prem. Om. ur. © thundre v. 
eft ur. kOm. ur. 10m. ur. ™ Om. yn. 

Pforur. (that ur. was ur. § Om. ur. 
xhim silfo. ythat x. 2 is ur. 


§ twelne weren ur. 


n disciples, or kynnesmen mp. Om. vu prim. V. 
t fendis ur. 
8 dispoylid Gc. scaterid ur. 


I. 11 —26. 


that thei felden fast to hym, to touche 
hym. And hon many euer hadde syk- 
nessis, and vnelene spirits, whanne thei1l 
seyen hym, felden doun to hym, and cri- 
eden, seiynge, Thou art the sone of God. 
And greetli he manasside hem, that thei te 
schulden not make hym knowun. And13 
he wente in to an hille, and clepide to 
hym whom he wolde; and thei camen to 
hym. And he inade, that there weren 14 
twelue with hym, to sende hem to 
preche*%. And he 3af to hem pouwer to 1s 
heele sijknessis, and to caste out feendis. 
And to Symount he jaf a name Petre, 16 
and he clepide James of Zebede and Joon, 17 
the brother of James, and he 3af to hem 
names BoenargesY, that is, sones? of 
thundryng. And he clepide Andrew is 
aud Filip, and Bartholomew and Ma- 
theu, and Thomas and James Alfey, and 
Thadee, and Symount Cananee, and Ju-19 
das Scarioth, that bitraiede hym. And 20 
thei caien to an hous, and the puple 
cain togidere eftsovne, so that thei mi3ten — 
not ete breed. And whaune his syunys-21 
men hadden herd, thei wenten out ‘to 
holde® him; for thei seiden, that he is 
turned in to woodnesse. And the scribis>22 
that camen doun fro Jerusalem, seiden, , 
That he hath Belsabub, and that in the 
prince of deuelis he castith out fendis. 
And he clepide hem togidir, and° he 23 
seide to hem in parablis, Hou may Sa- 
thanas caste out Sathanas? And if a2s 
rewme be departid ajens it silf, thilke 
rewme may not stonde. And if an hous 2s 
be disparpoilid? on® it silf, thilke hous 
may not stonde. And if Sathanas hath 2c 
risun ajens hym silf, he is departid, and 
hef schal not mowe stonde, but hath an 
ende. No inan may go in to a stronge27 


P Om, aourx. 
W to heele ur. 


® knowen ur. 

u Om. surx. VY Om.o, 

ato Jame k. > Om. urpr.m. © puttide 

gof Alfey ur. bintour. , i and 

. o Om. surx. 
W ajens ur. 


uclepid uy. V is uv sec. m. 
4 scatered ur. 


bin p. ¢ that x. 


x preche the gospel EP sec.m.marg. Y of Boenarges x sec.m. 2% the sones b, 4 to biholde a pr.m. and 


helde b. 


» seribis and the Farisees EP sec.m. marg. © thanne k, 


4 departid ck. €azense. 'Om.k. 


Ill, 27—IV. 5. 


27not mowe stonde, but® hath anf ende. No 
man, gon in to a% stronge mannes hous, 
may take awey his vessels, no’ but he 
bynde firste the stronge inan, and thanne 
28 he shal diuersly! rauyshe his: hous. Trew- 
ly I seie to 30u, for alle synnes and _ blas- 
phemyes, by whichek thei han! blasfemed, 
shulen be forz3onen to the™ sones of inen. 
29 Sothely® he that ‘shal blasfeme? a3eins the 
Holy Gost, ‘shal not haue? remissioun in 
to with outen eend, but he shal be gilty 
300f euerlastynge trespas. For thei seiden, 
31 He hath an unclene spirit. And his modir 
and bretheren comen, and thei! stondynge 
with oute forth, senten to hym, clepyuge 
3zhym. And a cumpany sat aboute hym ; 
and thei seien* to hym, Lo! thi modir, 
and thei bretheren with outen forth selen 
33thee. And he answerynge to hem seith, 
Who is my modir and my bretheren ? 
31And' biholdynge hem aboute, that saten 
in the cumpas of hym, he" seith, Lo! my 
35modir and my bretheren. Forsoth who’ 
that doth the will of God, he’ is my bro- 
ther, and my* sister, and modir’. 


CAROL. 

1 And eft Jhesus bigan for? to teche at 
the see; and myche cumpany ‘of peple? is® 
gedrid to hym, so that he styiuge in to a 
boot, sat in the see, and al the cumpany 
‘of peple® was aboute the see, on the 

zlond. And he tauj3te hem in parablis 
inany thingis. And he seide to hem in 

shis techynge, Heere 3ee. Loo! a ‘man 
4sowynge! goth® out for’ tosowe. And the 
while he sowith, ‘an other? seed felde 
aboute' the wey, and briddis of heuene, 
sor of the cire', camen, and eeten it. For- 
sothe an other felde doun on stony placis, 
wher it had nat myche erthe; and anoon 
it sprong* vp, for it hadde nat! depnesse 


MARK. 95 


maunus hons, and take awey hise ves- 
sels, buts he bynde first the stronge man, 
and thaune he schal spoile his hous. 
Treuli Y seie to 30u, that alle synnes 2s 
and blasfemyes, bi whiche thei han blas- 
femed, schulen be for3ouun to the sones 
of men. But he that blasfemeth ajens 29 
the Hooli Goost, hath not reinissionn in 
to with onten ende, but he schal be gilty 
of enerlastynge trespas. For thei seiden, 30 
He hath an vnelene spirit. And his3) 
modir and britheren" camen, and_ thei! 
stoden withontforth, and senten to hym, 
and clepiden hym. And the puple sat 32 
aboute hym; and thei seien* to hym, Lo! 
thi modir and thi britheren with out- 
forth seken thee. And he answeride to33 
hem, and seide, Who is my modir and 
my britheren? And he bihelde thilke!s4 
that saten aboute hym, and seide, Lo! 
my modir and my britheren. For who35 
that doith the wille of God, he is my 
brothir, aud™ my" sistir, and modir. 


CAP. IV. 


And eft Jhesus bigan to teche at the} 
see; and myche puple was gaderid to 
hym, so that he wente in to a boot, and 
sat in the see, and al the puple was 
aboute the see on the loond. And he2 
tau3te hem in parablis many thingis. And 
he seide to hem in his techyng, Here3 
je. Lo! a man sowynge goith ont to 
sowe. And the® while he sowith, suinme4 
seed felde aboute the weie, and briddis 
of heuene camen, and eeten it. Otheres 
felde doun on stony places, where it had 
not myche erthe; and anoon it spronge 
vp, for it had not depnesse of erthe. Audé 
whanne the sunne roos vp, it welewideP 


éebntheur. fOm. x. ¢€Om.xK. bnot x. Om.o. tOm.ur. Kthewhiche o, !Om. ur, 
m™ Om. wopr.m. a Forsothe Gogur. © blasfemeth uv. shal blasfemye x: P hath not ur. 9 Om. 
gsec.m. ‘the uy. Sseidenu. tAndheppr.m.uy. %Om.ur. Vheur. WOm.ury. * Om. x. 
¥Ymy modir ur. 2 Om. surx. ®Om. ur. » Om. 8 prin. xy prom. was uy. © Om. ur. 4 sower ur. 


€gono,. wenteury. fOm. x. & summe ur. 


Yno eNnu. 


h his bretheren s. 
°Om.1. 


8 but if k pr. m. 
mOm.k. 4 Om. r pr.m. bek. 


h bisidis ur. 


i Om. b pr. m. 
P ether drizede K marg. 


iQm. aopruvx.  * is sprungun p. 


k Om. s pr.m. seiden s sec. m. lhem 1. 


96 MARK. 


sof erthe. And whenne the sunne rose 
vp", it welwide for heete, and it dried vp, 
7for it hadde not® roote. And an other 
felde doun into? thornes, and thornes4 
stieden vp, and strangliden it, and it 3aue 
snot® fruyt. And an other felde doun in to 
good lond, and 3aue* fruyt, styinge vp, 
and wexinge; and oon bron3te ‘thritty 
fold®, and oon sixtyfold, and oon an hun- 
odridfold. And he seide, He that hath eris 
10‘of heeryng’, heere. And whenne he was 
singuler, ‘or by hym silf*, the* twelue 
that weren with hym axidenY hym for% to 
l1expowne the parable. And he seide to 
hem, To 30u it is 30uen for* to knowe 
the» mysterie, ‘or pryuite®, of the kyng- 
dam‘ of God. Sothely® to hem that ben 
with oute forth, alle thingis ben maad in 
12 parablis, that thei seynge se, and se nat, 
and thei heerynge hecre, and vnderstonde 
not; that’ sum tyme thei be% connertid, 
i3and synnes be forjouen to hem. And he 
seith' to hem, Witen not 3ee this parable? 
and howe 3ee shulden knowe alle parablis? 
- He that sowith, sowith a word. ‘These 
sothly! ben* that! aboute the weye, where 
the word is sowun; and whenne thei han 
herd, anoon™ cometh Sathanas, and takith 
awey the® word that® is sowun in her 
ishertis. And also? these ben4 that hen 
sown on ‘a stoon', thes whiche whanne 
thei ‘han herdt the word, anoon taken it 
17 with ioye; and thei han nat roote in hem 
silf, bunt thei ben temporal, ‘that is, dasten" 
a’ lityl tyme’; afterward ‘tribulacioun 
sprongen vp, and persecucioun* for the 
isword, anoon thei ben sclaundrid. And 
‘there ben other’ that ben sowun in 
thornis; these it ben, that heeren the 
is word, and myseiste? of the world, and 
disseit® of richessis, and other charge® of 


nOm. ur. no Nur. Pamong ur. 
« thrithithe foold fruyt wsec.m. ¥ to heere ur. 
zOm. surx. @®Om. osurx. » Om. N. 


4 the thornes ur. 
W ether by himself ur. Om. x. 
¢ Om. 4x. or priuey thenge o. 


IV. 6—19. 


for heete, and it driede vp, for it hadde 
no? roote. And othere felde doun in to7 
thornes, and thornes sprongen vp, and 
strangliden it, and it 3af not" fruyt. 
And other felde doun in to good loond,8 
and 3af fruyt, springynge vp, and wex- 
ynge; and oon brou3te thretti foold, and 
oon sixti fold, and oon an hundrid fold. 
And he seide, He that hath eeris of9 
heryng, here he*. And whanne he was1io 
bi hym silf, thot twelue that weren with 
hym axiden hym to expowne the para- 
ble. And he seide to hem, To 3ou it ist 
3ouun" to knowe the prinete of the kyng- 
dom of God. But to hem that ben with 
outforth, alle thingis be maad in parablis, 
that thei seynge se, and se not, and thei12 
herynge here and vnderstonde not; lest 
sum tyme thei be conuertid, and synnes 
be for3jouun to hem. And he seide to13 
hem, Knowe not 3e this parable? and 
hou 3e schulen knowe alle parablis? Het 
that sowith, sowith a word. But these1s 
it ben that ben ahoute the weie, where 
the word is sowun; and whanne thei 
han herd, anoon cometh Satanas, and 
takith awei the word that is sowun in 
her hertis. And in lijk maner ben these 16 
that ben sowun on’ stony placis, whiche 
whanne thei han herd the word, anoon 
thei taken” it with ioye; and thei han 7 
not roote in hem silf, but thei ben last- 
ynge a litil tyme; aftirward whanne 
tribulacioun risith, and persecucioun for 
the word, anoon thei ben sclaundrid. 
And ther ben othir that ben sowun in18 
thornes; these it ben that heren the 
word*, and diseseY of the world, andis 
disseit of ritchessis, and othir charge of 
coueytise entrith, and stranglith the 
word, and it is maad with out fruyt. 


Sit3aue pur. anoon vu. 
x thogiv. Y askiden Q. 
€ Forsothe ur. 
m than o. 


Tno UF. 


ad rewme ur. 


flest uy. &benot N. bseide ur. i Forsothe these ur. kit ben Nur. J that ben nur. 

XaQ. Owhiche ur. Pinlyk manere ur. dit ben ur. ‘stony places ur. 8S Om.ur.  ¢herden 
pwsee.m. that lastyn G pr.m. that is, lastynge G sec.m.o. YY butap. ‘~ Om. x. * whan [the r] 
tribulacioun and persecucioun riseth ur. Y othere ben uy. 2 myseeses U. miysseyseis F. 8 disceytis 


wpr.m. > Dbisynesse ur. 


q not ER pr. m.cpr.m. egk sec. m. B. 
Usiuer Ying. Wtokena. *wordis s. 


T no gk pr.m. 
¥ mysesis 1. 


8 Om. Er pr.m. PQUXbeega. * the E1ghika. 


IV. 20——32. 


coueitise entrynge ynne*, strangulen® the 
word, and it is maad with outen fruyt. 
29 And these it ben that ben sowun on® good 
lond, ‘the whichef heren the word, and 
taken, and maken fruyt, oon thritti fold, 
2100n sixti fold, and oon an hundrids, And 
he seide to hem, Wher® a lanterne come’, 
that it be put vndir a bushel? wher not, 
22 that it be put vpon! a™ candil stike? For- 
sothe ‘ther is no thing" hid, that shal not 
be ‘maad opyn°®; nether ony thing isP 
preuy, ‘the whiche? shal not come ‘in tot 
azapert. If ony man haue’ eeris of heryng, 
2t4heere he. And he seide to hem, Se 3ee 
what 3ee heeren. In what mesure 3ee 
meten, it shal be meten tot 30n, and be® 
25kast to 30u. Sothely’ it shal be 3ouen to 
hym that hath, and ‘it shal be taken 
awey from hym ‘that hath not, also that 
2éthat he hath*. ‘And he seideY, So* the 
kingdom® of God is, as if a man caste 
27seed in to the® erthe, and it slepe’, and 
ryse® vp in ni3t and day, and brynge! 
forth seed, and wexe® faste, the® while he 
28 wote not. Forsothe the erthe by his owne 
worchynge! makith fruyt, first an erbe, 
‘or grene corn*, afterward an eere, after- 
zoward ful fruyt in the ere. And whanne 
of it silf it hath brou3t forth fruyt, anoon 
he sendith a! sikil, ‘or hook™, for" rype 
30corn cometh. And he seide, To what 
thing shulden_ we likene the kyngdom? of 
God? or to what parable shulen we com- 
31 parisoune it? As a corn of seneneye, the? 
which whann it is? sowun in the erthe, 
is lesse than alle seedis* that ben in erthe'; 
3zand whanne it is bredd*, ‘or quykened’, 
it sty3ethY vp* in to a tree, and is maad 


¢ Om. pur. 
& hundrid fold acneruriry. 


4 strangliden o. instranglen p. and stranglen y. 
h Whether Gu et x passim. 


MARK. 97 


And these it ben that ben sowun on 20 
good lond, whiche heren the word, and 
taken, and maken fruyt, oon thritti fold, 
oon? sixti fold, and oon an hundrid fold. 
And he seide to hem, Wher a lanterne 21 
cometh, that it be put vndur a buschel, 
or vndur a bed? nay, but that it be put 
on a candilstike ? Ther is no thing hid, 22 
that schal not be maad opyn; nethir ony 
thing is pryuey, that schal not come in to 
opyn. If ony man haue eeris of heryng, 23 
here he. And he seide to hem, Se 3e24 
what 3e heren. In what mesure 3e meten, 
it schal be metun to 3ou ajen, and be* 
cast to jou. For it schal be 3ounn to 25 
hym that hath, and it schal be takun 
awei fro him that hath not, also” that 
that he hath. And he seide, So the2e 
kingdom of God is, as if at man caste® 
seede in to the erthe, and he sleepe', and 27 
it® rise’ up niz3t and dai, and brynge” 
forth seede, and wexe) faste, while* he 
woot not. For the erthe makith fruyt, 28 
first the gras, aftirward the ere, and aftir 
ful fruyt in the ere. And whanne of it29 
silf it hath brou3t forth fruyt, anoon he 
sendith a sikil, for repyng tyme is come. 
And he seide, To what thing schulen we 30 
likne the kyngdom of God? or to what 
parable schulen we comparisoun it? Asst 
a corne of seneuei, which whanne it is 
sowun in the erthe, is lesse than alle 
seedis that ben! in the erthe; and3e 
whanne it is sprongun up, it waxith in 
to a tre, and is maad gretter than alle 
erbis; and it makith grete braunchis, so 
that briddis of heuene moun dwelle vn- 
dur the schadewe therof. And in many 33 


ein AN. f whiche ur. Om. x. 


i cometh uy. * bushel or vnder a bed o marg. 


U sec. m. marg. Q sec.m. x pr.m. bed u pr.m.v. lon urx. ™Om.N. "nothing is uy. © schewid ur. 
Pmaad ur. Qwhiche vy. that x. ‘in x. ‘hath pur. tagentour. Yitschalbe uy. Y For- 
sothe uy. © if aman hath not, he this that he bath schal ur. * Om. ur. yOm.o. 2 Lo xy. 


arewme uv. baseedn. ¢Om.ur. ‘he sleepeth a sec. m.o. it slepith pr. he slepe 9 sup. ras. ur. 
© it ryse G scc.m. 0. Q sup. ras. ¥. rysith pr. it ryseth vu. f bringeth p. & wexith p. h Om. ur. 
iwille uy. kOm.aox. 1!0Om.o. mOm. aouvx.  ™ for the @ pr.m. for the tyme of Q sec. m. 


© rewme Ur. P Om. ur. 4 was o. r Om. ur. 8 the seedis Gey. t the erthe 4cNoresTWwxy. 
Usowen vu. VY Om. aurx. W wexeth u sec.m. * Om. uy. 

zandoona. ®itschalber.Om.k. %3e1 ¢Om.h. @Om.k prim. & that castith k pr. m. 
fslepith k. slepte 8. f Om.n. €risith k. 4 bringith hk. !Om.hi. jwexith hk. the while k. 


Vben sowun b. 
VOL. IV. 0 


98 MARK. 


more than alle wortis, ‘or erbisY; and it 
‘shal make? grete braunchis, so that brid- 
dis* of heuene mowe dwelle vndir the 
33shadewe ther of. And in many siche pa- 
rablis he spac to hem a word, as thei 
3amizten heer; sothely he spak not to hem 
with outen parable. Forsothe he expoun- 
yde to” his disciplis alle thingis ‘on sidis 
3shond’, ‘or by hem self’. And he seith¢ 
to hem, in that day, whenne euenyng! was 
36maad, Passe we a3einward. And thei 
leenynge the cumpanye ‘of peple’, taken 
hym, so that he was in the boot; and 
370ther bootis weren with hym. And a” 
greet storme! of wynd is* maad', and 
selte™ wawis" in to the boot®, so that the 
38 boot? was ful4. And he was in the ‘hyn- 
dir part of the boot’, slepynge on a pi- 
lewe. And thei reysen hym, and seiens 
to hym, Maistre, perteneth itt nat to thee, 
s9 that" we perishen? And he rysynge vp, 
manasside to the’ wynd, and seide to the 
see, Be stille, wexe” doumb. And the 
wynd ceeside, and greet pesiblenesse is* 
4omaad, And he seithY to hem, What 
‘dreden 5ee?? Nat 3it han 3ee feith? And 
thei dredden with* greete dreed, and? 
seiden ‘to eche other’, Who, gessist thou, 
is this? for the wynd and the see obeysh- 
en? to hym. 
CAP: Y. 
1 And thei camen oner the wawe of the 
2see into the cuntree of Genazareth®. And 
anoon a man inf vnelene spirit ran out 
of ‘a biryel’, to hym goynge out of the 
3boot. “he whiche man" hadde an hous 
in graues', ‘or biriels*, and nether with 
chaynis now! mi3te eny man bynde hym. 
4 For oft tymes™ he bounden in stockis and 
chaynes, ‘hadde broken the chaynes®, and 


y Om. aurx. 4% maketh ur. 
halfe ur. 4 bi hymsilf 4. Om. x. 
i tempest @ sec.m.ur. k Om. 9. was ur. 
Q sup.ras.  P shippe @ sec. m. 
Gpr.m. for ur. Vv Om. our. 
drede fulur. by ur. © and thei ur. 
u sec.m. Gergeseus U pr.m. F. 
ibiriels ur. &k Om. aourx. 


€ seide ur. 


fin an Trurx, 
10m. G pr.m. 


m Om. k prom. 1 enentid b. 


whiche 1: 


a the briddis ur. 
f euentide ur. 
1Om. @ sec. m. 
9 fulfillid @ see.m. fillid uv. 
wand wexe o. wexe thou ur. 
¢ eche to othere ur. 

& the biriels uv. biriels rv. 
m Om. ur. 


° reisede EP. reisiden k. 
feith 1. 3e han not feith 3it s. Han 3e not feith 3it x. 


IV. 33-—~V. 4. 


suche parablis he spak to hem the word, 
as thei my3ten here; and he spak not to 3+ 
hem with out parable. Bunt he™ expown- 
ede to hise disciplis alle thingis bi hem- 
silf. And he seide to hem in that dai,ss 
whanne euenyng™ was come, Passe we 
a3jenward. And thei leften the puple, 36 
and token hym, so that he was in a 
boot ; and othere bootys weren with hym. 
And a greet storm of wynde was maad, 37 
and keste wawis in to the boot, so that 
the boot was ful. And he was in the3a 
hyndir part of the boot, and slepte on a 
pilewe. And thei reisen® hym, and seien? 
to hym, Maistir, perteyneth it not to 
thee, that we perischen? And he roos39 
vp, and manasside the wynde, and seide 
to the see, Be‘ stille, wexe doumbe. 
And the wynde ceesside, and greet pesi- 
blenesse was maad. And he seide to 40 
hem, What dreden 3e? ‘3e han no feith 
3it'? And thei dredden with greet drede, 
and seiden ‘ech to" other, Who, gessist 
thou, is this? for the wynde and the 
see obeschen’ to hym. 


CAPA. 

And thei camen ouer the see in tor 
the cuntree of Gerasenes. And aftir that 
he was goon out of the boot, anoon a 
man in an vneleene spirit ran out oft 
birielis to hym. Which” man hadde ans 
hous in biriels, and nether with cheynes 
now my3te ony man bynde hym. Fors 
ofte tymes he was boundun in stockis 
and chaynes, and he hadde, broke the 


\ 


bnottoa. ¢ Om. 4. on sydishondis o. a sides 
£ Om. ur. 4 ther was made a Q sec. m. 
™m cast u sec.m. © flodis @ scc.m. © shippe 
* shippe @ sec.m. Sseidenu. t Om. 

Xwasury. Yseideuy. 2 ben 3e 
d obeyen uy. © Gerasenes Q sup. ras. 
h whiehe man ur. that x. 
1 Om. Q pr.m. T. 


P seiden Ef. 
tr to ieh R. s obeien k. 


4 Be thous. * 3it 3e haue no 
tofther.  ° the 


Vv. 5—18. 


‘hadde brokun® the stockis to smale go- 
betis, and no man mi3te ‘daunte, o7 make 
stame?, hym. And euer more4, ni3t"™ and 
day, in biriels and hillis, he was eryinge, 
cand betynge hym silf with stoones. So- 
thely he seynge Jhesus afer, ran, and 
zworshipide hym. And he cryinge with 
greet voice, seide, What to me and to 
thee, thou Jhesu, the sone of God hieste ? 
I conioure thee bi God, that thou tour- 
smeute ‘not me’. Forsothe Jhesus seide to 
hym, Thou vnelene spirit, go out fro 
g9the man. And Jhesus axide hym, What 
name is to thee? And he seith to hym, 
A legioun is name to me; for we ben 
iomanye. And he preide hym inyche, that* 
he shulde nat put® hym out of the cun- 
1itreie. Forsothe there’ was there aboute 
the hill ‘a flock of * hoggis* ‘lesewynge in 
12feeldisY. And the spiritis preieden Jhesu?, 
seyinge, Sende vs into hoggis*, that we 
izentre into hem. And anoon Jhesus 
grauntide tob hem. And the vnclene spi- 
ritis® entriden in to the hoggis‘, and with 
greet bire, ‘or haste®, the floc’ was cast 
‘doun in to the see, ‘to tweyne® thousynde’, 
isand thei ben‘ strangelid! in the see. So- 
thely thei that fedden hem, fledden, and 
tolden in to the citee, and in to the™ 
feeldis ; and thei wenten out, for" to see 
is what was don. And thei cameu to Jhesu, 
and thei seen hym that was traueilid of 
the fend, sittynge clothid®, and of hoole 
igmynde; and thei dreden. And _ thei 
‘tolden to hem?P, that sayen, hou it was 
don to hym that hadde a fend, and of the 
izhoggis?. Aud thei byguunen for’ to preie 
hym, that he shulde go awey fro’ ‘her 
igcoostist. And when he® stiede in to a 
boot, he that was traueilid of the deuel’, 


© Om. Q sec.m. * P tame 4o. chastise uy. daunten x. 


MARK. 99 


chaynes, and’ hadde broke the stockis to 
smale gobetis, and 10 man my3te make 
hym tame. And euermore, ny3t and dai, 5 
in Dirielis and in hillis, he was criynge’ 
and betynge hym silf with stoonus. Andé 
he si3 Jhesus afer, and ran, and wor- 
schipide hym. And he criede with greet 7 
voice, and seide, What to me and to thee, 
thou Jhesu, the sone of the hij3est God? 
Y coniure thee” bi God, that thou tur- 
mente me not. And Jhesus seide tos 
hym, Thou vnelene spirit, go out fro the 
man. And Jhesus axide hym, What iso 
thi name? And he* seith to hym, A 
legioun** is my name; for we ben many. 
And he preiede Jhesu myche, that he 10 
schulde not putte hymy out of the? cun- 
trei. And there was there aboute thei 
hille a greet flok of swyn lesewynge. 
And the spiritis preieden Jhesu, andi2 
seiden, Sende vs into the swyn, that we 
entre in to hem. And anoon Jhesus1s 
grauntide to hem. And the vnelene spi- 
ritis 3eden out, and entriden in to the 
swyn, and with a greet birre”” the flocke 
was cast doun® in to the see, a.twei 
thousynde, and thei weren dreynt® in the 
see. And thei that kepten hem, fledden, 14 
and tolden in to the citee, and in to the 
feeldis; and thei wenten out, to se what 
was don. And thei camen to Jhesu, and 15 
sayn hym that hadde be trauelid of the 
feend, syttynge clothid, and of* hool 
mynde; and thei dredden. And thei that 16 
saien, hou it was don to hym that hadde 
a feend, and of the swyne, telden to hem. 
And thei bigunnen to preie hym, that 17 
he schulde? go awei fro her coostis. 
And whanne® he 3ede up in to a boot, 1s 
he that was trauelid of the deuel, bigan 


qOm.ur. ‘innitur. me not moxy. 


tforo. cast uy. poten x. Vv a greet droue of hoggis lesewynge uv. WOm.ur.  * swyne 40. 
Om. uy. YOm.ur, Zhimur. ®swyn ao. the hoggis rurx. %Om. x. © spiritis goynge out N 
@ see.m.uv. Iswynao, ¢ Om. aurx. droue ur. § to two MPXY. vnto two Q see.m. a two U sec. m. 
hthonsondis 0. 10m. Q sec.m.  * were g see.m.ur. dreyntev. ™ Om. murx,  ® Om. surx. 
clad sx. POm.ur. 4 swyn ao. hoggis tolden to hem ur. * Om. surx. Soutofopr.m. tthe 
eoostis of hem ur. “Jhesu uy. VY fend ur. 

Vand he b. w Om. P pr.m. x Om. E. xx 6666 c marg. y hem Erpxa. z Om. 5. that k. 


22 ether haast x marg. * heedlinge k. 


» ether strangled K marg. 


0 2 


eink. 4woldek. ©¢thanne k. 


100 


bygan to” preye hym, that he shulde be 
19 with hym. Sothly* Jhesus resceyued hym 
nat, but seithY to hym, Go thou in to thin 
hous to thine’, and telle to® hem, hou 
many” thingis the Lord hath don to thee, 
20and hadde mercy of thee. And he wente 
forth®, and bigan for? to preche in Deca- 
poly, that is, a cuntree of ten citees, hou 
manye® thingis Jhesus hadde don to hym; 
ziand alle men wondriden. And whanne 
Jhesus hadde stiedef in to the boot eft- 
soone® ouer the see, myche cumpanye ‘of 
peple" cam togidre to hym, and was 
22aboute the see. And oon of the princis 
of* synagogis, by name Jayrus, cam, and! 
23Seyinge hym™, fel doun at his feet, and 
preiede hym" myche, seyinge, For whi® 
my dou3ter is ‘in the laste thingis? ; come 
thou, putte thin hond on hire, that she be 
24saaf, and lyue. And he’ wente forth with 
hym, and myche cumpanye’ ‘of peple’ 
25suede hym, and oppressidet hym. Anda 
womman that was in the flux of blood 
26twelue 3ere, and hadde suffride many 
thingis of ful many lechis, and spendid® 
alle hir thingis, and ‘no thing prophitide’, 
27but ‘more hadde* worse, whanne she 
hadde herd of Jhesu, she cam in the cum- 
panye byhynde, and touchide his cloth, 
28 Sothly she seide, For if I shal touche or* 
29 his cloth, I shal be saaf. And anoon the 
welle of blood’ is* dried vp*, and she 
felide in body> that she was helid of the 
30 wound’, ‘or sikenesse’. And anoon Jhe- 
sus knowynge in hym silf the vertu that 
was® gon out of hym, hef, turned to the 
cumpenye, seith*, Who touchede my 
31clothis ? And his diseiplis seiden to hym, 
Thou seest the cumpenye pressinge! thee, 
szand seist thou*, Who touchide me? And 


MARK. 


Vv. 19-—32. 


to preie hym, that he schulde be with 
hym. But Jhesus resseyuede hy not, is 
but seide to hym, Go thou in to thin 
hous to thine, and telle to hem, hou grete 
thingis the Lord hath don to thee, and 
hadde merci of thee. And he wente20 
forth, and bigan to preche in Decapolif, 
hon grete thingis Jhesus hadde don to 
hym; and alle men wondriden. And2i 
whanne Jhesus hadde gon vp in to the 
boot eftsoone ouer the see, myche puple 
cam togidere to him, and was aboute the 
see. And oon of the princis of syna-22 
gogis, bi name Jayrus, cam, and si3 hym, 
and felde® doun at hise feet, and preyede 23 
hym myche, and seide, My dou3ter is 
ny3 deed; come thou, putte thin hoond 
ou her, that sche be saaf, and lyue. And 24 
he wente forth with hym, and myche 
puple suede hym, and thruste® hym. 
And a womman hadde! ben in the blodi2s 
fluxe twelue 3eer, and hadde resseyued* 26 
many thingis of ful many lechis, and 
hadde spendid al bir good, and was no- 
thing amendid, but was rather the wors, 
whanne sche hadde herd of Jhesu, sche 27 
cam among the puple bihynde, and 
touchide his cloth. For sche seide, That if 2s 
Y touche 3he! his cloth, Y schal be saaf. 
And anoon the welle of hir blood was 29 
dried vp, and sche felide in bodi" that 
sche was heelid of the siknesse. And 30 
anoon Jhesus knewe in hym silf the 
vertu that was goon out of hym, and 
turnede™ to the puple, and seide, Who 
touchide my clothis? And hise disciplis 3: 
seiden to hym, Thou seest the puple 
thristynge thee, and seist, Who touch- 
ide me? And Jhesus lokide aboute to32 
se hir that hadde don this thing. And 33 


wfortoo. *Andur. Yseide ur. thi meyne mpr. *®Om. mp. %greete ur. ¢ Om. ur. 
4Om.surx. ¢greete ur. fstizede up vu. sefteur, bOm.ur. isum mano. & of the esec.m, av. 
landhe uy. ™Jhesuur. %Om.P, OOm.ur. Pniz3deedusec.m. QJhesuur. Om. nN, 
sOm.ur. tthrustede uv sec.m. 'hadde3oue vy.  ¥ hadde not profitide ony thing vr. = hadde 


more GMPTW sec.m. XY. * 3he ur. 
seeknesse uy. 4Om. aurx. ¢ hadde mp. 
AG sece.m. MOP. * Om. G sec. m. MOPT. 


f Om. s. 


f that is, a cuntre of ten citees K marg. e marg. 
K sec.mk.  * ether suffride x marg. 1 Om. R. 


Y hir blood ur. 


& he fel 1. 
Nl hir Dodi 1. 


¢ the 
| oppressynge 


Zwasuy. 4Om. ur. 


» the body ur. 
g and seide ur. 


h cumpenyes s. 


h ether oppressede K marg. | that hadde 


™ he turnyde 1. 


Vo S93 Bo 


Jhesus lokide aboute, for! to see hir that™ 
33hadde don this thing. Forsothe the 
womman dredinge and quakynge", wit- 
ynge® that it was don in hir, cam, and fel 
down bifore him, and seide to hym al 
34treuthe?. Forsothe Jhesus seide to hir, 
Dou3tir, thi feith hath maad thee saf; 
goi in pees, and be saf* fro thi sykenes. 
353it him spekynge, messageris’ camen to 
the prince of at synagoge, seyinge, For thi 
dou3tir is deed; what traueilist thou the 
36 maistir ferthere"? Forsothe the word herd 
that was seide”, Jhesus seith to the prince 
of the synagoge, Nyle thou drede, oonly 
37byleue thou. And he resceyuede not* 
ony man to sue him, noY but Petre, and 
James, and John, the brother of James. 
38 And thei camen in to the hous of the 
prince of the synagoge. And he si3 noyse, 
and men wepinge and weilinge moche. 
39 And he gon yn, seith? to hem, What ben 
3ee troublid*, and wepyn? The wenche? 
4ois not deed, but slepith. And thei scorn- 
eden him. Forsothe alle kast* out, he 
takith the fadir and modir4 of the wenche®, 
and hem! that weren with him, and thei 
4ientren yn, where the wenche" lay. And 
he holdinge the hond of the wenche', 
seith* to hir, Tabita, cumy, that is inter- 
pretid', ‘or expowntd™, Wenche", to thee 
421 seie, rise thou®. And anon the wenche? 
roos, and walkide; sothly she was of 
twelue 3eer. And thei weren abaischt 
43with4 greet’ stoneyinge. And he co- 
maundide to hem greetly, that no man 
schulde wite it. And he comaundide to 
13iue to hir for’ to ete. And Jhesus gon 
out thennis', wente in to his owne" cun- 
tree; and his disciplis folwiden’ him. 


CAP. VI. 
2 And the saboth maad, Jhesus” bigan 


1Om. surx. m whiche ur. 


4 tremblynge ur. 


MARK. 101 


the womman dredde, and quakide, wit- 
ynge that it was doon in hir, and cam, 
and felde doun bifor hym, and seide to 
hym al the treuthe. And Jhesus seide 3s 
to hyr, Dou3tir, thi feith hath maad thee 
saaf; go" in pees, and be thou hool of 
thi sijknesse. 3it while he spak, mes-3s 
sangeris camen to the prince of the syna- 
goge, and seien, Thi dou3tir is deed; 
what traueilist thou the maistir ferther ? 
But whanne the word was herd that was 36 
seid, Jhesus seide to the prince of the 
synagoge, Nyle thou drede, oonli bilene 
thou. And he® took? no man to sue37 
hym, but Petir, and James, and Joon, 
the brother of James. And thei camen ss 
in to the hous of the prince of the syna- 
goge. And he saie noyse, and men wep- 
ynge and weilynge myche. And he 3ede39 
ynne, and seide to hem, What ben 3e 
troublid, and wepen? The damesel is not 
deed, but slepith. And thei scorneden 10 
hym. But whanne alle weren put out, 
he takith the fadir and the modir of the 
damesel, and hem that weren with hym, 
and thei entren?, where the damysel laye. 
And he® helde the hoond of the damesel, 41 
and seide to hir, Tabita, cumy, that is to 
seie, Damysel, Y seie to thee, arise. And 42 
anoon the damysel roos, and walkide; 
and sche was of twelue 3eer. And thei 
weren abaischid with a‘ greet stonying. 
And he comaundide to hem greetli, that 
no man schulde wite it. And he co-43 
maundide to 3yue hirt mete. 


CAP. VE 
And he 3ede out fro thennus, andi 
wente in to his owne cuntre; and hise 
disciplis folewiden him. And whanne2z 
the sabat was come, Jhesus bigan to 
teche in a synagoge. And many herden", 


° knowynge ur. P the treuthe ur. q go 


thou ur. ¥ thou hool ur. 8 messangeris GMPQTY. t the G sec. m. MOPW sec. m. u ferrer T. 
w seide ur. x not with him o. y Om. o. % seide ur. @ turblid seunpr. b damysel ur. 
¢ casted uv. 4 the modirc. ¢ damysel ur. ftheiv. &Om.uv. bdamysel ur. i damysel.ur. 
k seide ur. Jexpowned 40. ™Om. sourx. ® Damysel uy. ° Om. Pp. Pdamysel uy. 4 bi ur. 
T gretteste uv. *%Om.csx. frothennes ur, %Om. ur. Vsuedenuy. Whe ur. 

» go thou bhik. © Jhesusk. P ether receyuede K marg. 4 entriden hika®. * Om. ab. * Om. eghi. 


t to hir k, « herden hym r. 


102 


for® to teche in a synagoge. And manye 
heeringe wondriden in his techinge, sey- 
inge, Of whennis ‘to thisY alle these 
thingis?? and what is the wysdom that* 
is jouun to him, and suche vertues ‘the 
3whiche’ ben maad by his hond‘? Wher 
this is not a? smyth, ‘or carpenter®, the 
sone of Marie, the brother of James and 
Josephf and Judas$ and Symound? wher! 
and* his sistris ben nat here with vs? 
4And thei weren sclaundrid in him. And 
Jhesus seide to hem, For a prophete is 
not with outen honour!, no but in his 
owne™ cuntree, and in his hows, and in 
shis kyn. And he my3te not make there 
ony vertu, no but” heelide a fewe sike 
6inen, the hondis put to. And he won- 
dride for the vnbilene® of hem. And he 
wente aboute castelis in enuyrownP, tech- 
zyinge. And he clepide’ twelue, and bigan 
for™ to sende hem bi tweyne’; and 3aft to 
shem power of vnelene spiritis, and™ co- 
maundide hem, that thei schulde not take’ 
ony thing in the weye, no“ but a* 3erd 
oonly, not a scrippe, not’ bred, neither 
ymoney in the? girdil*, but schoon> with 
sandalies, ‘that ben® opyn aboue*, and that 
thei ‘weren not® clothid! with tweie’ cootis®. 
ioAnd he seide to hem, Whidir' euere 3ee 
schulen entre in to an hons, dwelle 3e 
ii there, till 3e gon out thennis*. And who! 
euere ‘schulen not resseyue™, ne" heere 
jou, 3e goynge out fro thennes shake® 
awey the powdreP fro4 joure feet, in to 
12witnessinge to hem. And thei goynge 
out’, prechidgen, that men schulden do pe- 
isnaunce. And thei castideuS out many 
fendis, and anoyntiden with oyle manye 
1asyke men, and thei weren heelid. And 
kyng Eronde herde, forsothet his name 


Y ben ur. to him this arp. 

dthempr. ¢€ Om. ax. 

k Om. Q. also ur. 
P cumpas Ur. 
wand he ur, 


x Om. G pr. m. SVX. 
Gurxy. Chondisur. 
i whether GomPTWXxyY. 
© ynfeithfulnesse ur. 
tweyne ur. the 3af ov. 
8 girdels uv. 
be ur. felad x. § two mpuxy. »} clothis n. 
seynen not U pr.m.¥V. resseyuen 30u Not U sec. mt. 
ur. qdofu. * out fro thens Ww pr.m. 


v bere ur. 


4 and he tk. 
iiand he ik. 


> comcthto1. ¢ Om. R. 
& nether ep. © here plures. 


MARK. 


f of Joseph ur. 
l worschype, or honour w pr.m. 
4 clepide togidere ur. 


b schood 4 sec. m. GMPSUT sec.m. shod QXY pr. m. 
i Where o. 

2 neither ur. 
® kestyn Gosxy. 


© ether shoon open aboue K marg. e marg. 


Vi. 3—14. 


and wondriden in his techyng, and seiden, 
Of whennus to” this alle these thingis ? 
and what is the wisdom that is 3ouun 
to hym, and siche vertues whiche ben 
maad bi hise hondis? Whether this is3 
not a carpenter, the sone of Marie, thé 
brother of James and of Joseph and of 
Judas and of Symount? whether hise 
sistris ben not here with vs? And thei 
weren sclaundrid in hym. And Jhesus4 
seide to hem, That a profete is not with- 
out onoure, but in his owne cuntrey, and 
among his kynne, and in his hous. Ands5 
he my3te not do there ony vertu, saue 
that® he helide a fewe sijk men, leiynge 
on hem hise hoondis. And he wondride6 
for the vnbileue of hem. And he wente 
aboute casteles on ech side, and tan3te. 
And he clepide togidere twelue, and bi-7 
gan to sende hem bi two togidere; and 
3af to hem power of vnclene spiritis, and?s 
comaundide hem, that thei schulde not 
take ony thing in the weie, but a 3erde 
oneli, not a scrippe, ne breed, nether 
money in the girdil, but seliod with san-9 
dalies®, and that thei schulden not be 
clothid with twei cootis. And he seide to 
to hem, Whidur euer 3e entren in to an 
hous, dwelle 3e there, til 3e goon out fro 
thennus. And who euer resseynethf joun 
not, ne’ herith" 30u, go 3e out fro then- 
nus, and schake awei the powdir fro 
3oure feet, in to witnessyng to hem. And 12 
thei 3eden forth, and prechiden, that men 
schulden do penaunce. And thei cast-13 
iden out many feendis, and anoyntiden 
with oyle many sijk men, and thei 
weren heelid. And kyng Eroude herde, 14 
for his name was maad opyn, and’ seide, 
That Joon Baptist hath risen a3en fro 


awhich ur. ® that 
& of Judas ur.) of Symount ur. 
mQOm.ur. 2% but he ur. 
r Om. sux. 8 two GMopexy. tweyne and 
xthen. Yneemwpxy. 2 there v. 
cisa. ‘4Om.urx. ¢ schulden not 
k fro thennis uy. lwhiche vr. ™ res- 
© shakith wopesTw sec.m. XY. P dust 
t for ur. 


2 thingis to this man ur. 


w Om. ov. 


f receyue plures. 


Vi. 15—26. 


was maad opyn, and ‘he seide", For Johne 
Baptist hath’ risun ajen fro deed men, and 
1s therfore vertues worchen” in hym.  So- 
thely othere* seiden, For’ it is Ely; but 
othere’ seiden, For it is a prophete, as oon 
isof*? prophetis. The? whiche thing herd, 
Eroude seith®, Whom? IJ haue® bihedidf, 
‘John, this$ hath risun® fro deed men. 
17 Forsothe the ilke Eroude sente, and held 
Joon, and bond him ini to prisoun, for 
Erodias, the wyf of Philip, his brother ; 
isfor he hadde weddid hir. Sothly Johne 
seide to Eroude, It is not leefful to thee, 
i9for* to haue the wyf of thi brother. Ero- 
dias forsothe ‘leide aspies! to him, and 
20wolde sle him, and mi3te not. Sothly 
Eroude drede John, witinge him a iust 
man and hooly, and kepte him. And 
him herd, he dide many thingis, and 
2i gladly herde hym™. And whanne a co- 
uenable day hadde® fallun®, Eroude ‘in 
his birthe dayP made a soupere’ to the 
princis, and tribunys, and to the firste, 
22or gretteste’, of Galilee. And whanne 
the dou3ter of thilket Erodias hadde en- 
trid yn", and lepte’, and pleside to’ 
Eroude, and also to* men restynge’, the 
kyng seide to the wenche’, Axe thou of 
me what thou wolt*, and I schal 3yue to 
o3thee. And he swoor to hir, For what 
euere? thou schalt axe, I schal 3yue to thee, 
aithou3 the half of my kyngdom*’. ‘The 
whiche*, whanne sche hadde gon out, 
seide® to hir modir, What schal I axe? 
And she seide, The heed‘ of John Bap- 
astistS. And whanne she hadde entrid 
anon with haste to the kyng, she axide, 
seyiuge, I wole that anoon thou 3yue to 
me in a dische the heed! of John Baptist. 
26And the kyng was sory! for* the ooth, 


uthey seiden uy. Vis o. 
aofthe vx. » Om. u. 
h rise agen uF. i Om. o. 
9 bifalle ur. P Om. ur. 
tthat x. tOm.uv. V daunside ur. 
sele uy. *wole uv. » euere thing ur. 
Baptist o. 5 hened og. i sorowful ur. 


© seide ur. 
k Om. urx. 


k of n. 


jJand k pr.m. lis Joon k. 
P ether tumblidek marg. 


tand he k. 


k of the k pr.m. 


*¥ ben wrou3t Q sup. ras. 
d This Jon whom ur. 
I settide tresoun ur. 
4 soper of his birthe ur. 
w Om. ur. 

© rewme UP. 


x Om. ur. 


m he is k. 
q the half Errreruxcekaf. 


MARK. 103 


deeth, and therfor vertues worchen in 
hym. Othir seiden, That it is Helie 315 
but othir seiden, That it is a profete, asi 
oon of* profetis. And whanue this thing 16 
was herd, Eroude seide, This Joon}, 
whom Y haue biheedide, is™ risun a3en 
fro deeth. For thilke Eroude sente, and 17 
helde Joon, and boond hym in to pri- 
soun, for Erodias, the wijf of Filip, his 
brothir; for he hadde weddid hir. For ts 
Joon seide to Eroude, It is not leueful 
to thee, to haue the wijf of thi brothir. 
And Erodias leide aspies to hym, and is 
wolde sle hym, and my3te not. And 20 
Eroude dredde Joon, and knewe hym a 
just man and hooli, aud kepte hym. And 
Eroude herde hym, and he dide many 
thingis, and gladli herde hym. Anda 
whanne a couenable dai was _ fallun, 
Eroude in his birthdai made a soper to 
the princis, and tribunes", and to® the 
grettest of Galilee. And whanne the22 
dou3ter of thilke Erodias was comun 
ynne, and daunside?, and pleside to 
Eroude, and also to men that saten at 
the mete, the kyng seide to the damysel, 
Axe thon of me what thou wolt, and Y 
schal 3yue to thee. And he swore to23 
hir, That what euer thou axe, Y schal 
3yue to thee, thon3 @ be half4 my" 
kyngdom’. And whanne sche hadde2s 
goon out, sche seide to hir modir, What 
schal Y axe? And sche seide, The heed 
of Joon Baptist. And whanne sche was 25 
comun ynne anoon with haast to the 
kyng, sche axide, and seide, Y wole that 
anoon thou 3yue to me in a dische the 
heed of Joon Baptist. And the kyng 26 
was sori for the ooth, and for men that 
saten togidere at the meete het wolde 


x othere men ur. Y Om. x. % othere men ur. 
€Om.e. fbyhenedid 0. € Om. ur. 
m herde him gladly vu. n was U. 
rOm. ur. 8 Om. AX. either grettest men ur. 
Y sittynge atte the mete ur. 2 damy- 


aAndv. €¢sche seideur. fheued coy. 8& the 


« the tribunes k pr. m. 
Tof my cEiKMPQRsUXbeegkaf. 


© Om. k pr. m. 
Srewme IEPQRX. 


104 


and for men sittinge ‘to gidere! at mete™ 
27he ‘wolde not" hir? be? maad4 sory'; but 
a manquellere sent, he comaundide the 
heeds of John Baptist‘ for" to be bron3t’. 
28 And he bibedide’ him in the prison, and 
brou3te his heed* in a dische, and 3af it to 
the wencheY, and the wench? 3af* to hir> 
z9modir. The which thing herd, his disci- 
plis camen, and token his body, and put- 
30tiden® it in a buriel. And apostlis® com- 
ynge to gidere to Jhesu, tolden tof hym 
alle thingis, that? thei hadden don, and 
3itau3t. And he seith® to hem, Come 3e 
‘by 30u selue! in to a desert place; reste 
3e a litel. Forsoth' ‘there weren manye™ 
that camen, and wenten ajen, and thei 
szhadden not space for" to ete. And thei 
stizynge° in to boot?, wenten in to a desert 
33place ‘by hem selue?. And thei sy3en 
hem goynge awey, and manye" knewen, 
ands goynge ont feet fro alle citees, thei® 
runnen to gidere thidir, and came bifore 
34hem. And Jhesus goynge out sy3 moche 
cumpanye, and hadde mercy on’ hem, for 
thei weren as scheepe not hauynge a shep- 
herde. And he bigan for” to teche hem 
3smanye thingis. And whanne moche onr* 
was maad now, his disciplis ‘camen ny3’, 
seyinge, This place is desert, and now the 
scour hath passid; leene* hem, that thei 
goynge in to the? nexte townes or? vilagis, 
bye to hem metis whiche‘ thei schulen 
sjete. And he answerynge seith’ to hem, 
3Byue 3e toe hem for’ to ete. And thei 
seiden to hym, Goynge bye we loues with’ 
two hundrid pens, and we schulen 3yue 
38to hem for! to ete. And he seith to hem, 
Hou many loues han 3e? Go 3e, and se*. 
And whanne thei hadden knowun, thei 


10m. 9. ™ the meet 4GmNOPQSTXY. 
Qsec.m. Theuy, or sory 9. 8 heued oy. 
brou3t forth w pr.m. W byheueded o. 
¢Om. ur. 4 putten sx, 


MARK. 


n nolde uy. 
t Om. ur. 
x heued or. 
© the apostlys coux. the postlis ry. 
i by 3ee jour selue G. by 3oure silf awogry. asides half ur. 


¥ damysel ur. 


VIL 27——38. 


not make hir sori; butt sente a man-27 
queller® and comaundide, that Joones 
heed were brou3t in a dissche. And he 
bihedide hym’ in the prisoun, and 26 
brou3te his heed in a disch, and 3af it* 
to the damysel, and the damysel 3af* to 
hir modir. And whanne this thing was29 
herd, hise disciplis camen, and token his 
bodi, and leiden it in a biriel. And the3o 
apostlis? camen togidere to Jhesu, and 
telden to hym alle thingis, that thei had- 
den don, and tau3t. And he seide to3i 
hem, Come 3e bi 30u* silf in to a desert 
place ; and reste 3e a litil. For there were 
many that camen, and wenten ajen, and 
thei hadden not space to ete. And thei32 
jeden” in to a boot, and wenten in to a 
desert place bi hem silf. And thei sayn 33 
hem go awei, and many knewen, and 
thei wenten afoote fro alle citees, and 
runnen thidur, and camen bifor hem. 
And Jhesus 3ede out, and sai3 myche34 
puple, and hadde reuth on hem, for thei 
weren as scheep not hauynge a scheep- 
herd. And he bigan to teche hem many 
thingis. And whanne it was forth daies, 35 
hise disciplis camen*, and seiden, This is 
a desert place, and the tyme is now 
passid; lete hem go in to the nexte36 
townes and villagis, to bie hem meete to 
ete. And he answeride, and seide to37 
hem, 3yue 3e to® hem tof ete. And thei 
seiden to hym, Go we, and bie we looues 
with two hundrid pens, and we schulen 
jyue to® hem to ete. And he seithse 
to hem, Hou many looues han 3e? Go 
3e, and se. And whanne thei hadden 
knowe, thei seien, Fyue, and two fischis. 
And he comaundide to hem, that thei39 


P Om. @sec.m. tobe s. 9 Om. 

Vv brou3t in a dische @ sec. m. ur. 
zdamysel ur. 43afite. » theo. 

fOm.a. &whichev. 2 seide ur. 
k and reste ur. 1 For ur. ™ man 


© make hir Q. 
u Om. sux. 


weren uy. 2 Om. Kk pr.m.surx. © stizeden x. steyende x. Pa boot mpurwxy. 4 asides half ur. 
*many men ur, Sandtheiur. touto. tOm.ur. Vofoxy. WOm.Nnsurx. * hour, or forth 
dayes MpT. Yneizedenur. 2 leeue, either delyuere thou uy, ®Om.s, » and acMNoPQsTUVWxXY. 
cthatx. 4seideur. ¢Om.o. fOm.sx. &forur. btwey o. iOm.sx. k seeth aosxy. seizeth o. 
tbut he rk. umansleerr. VJoonk. WOm.ispr.m.k. *Om.s. Y3af it tik. 2 postlis sb. 
a3zourhi. stiedenk. dcamentohimk. ¢Om.rprm.hikpr.m. fforto1  ¢ Om. hik pr.m. 


VI. 39-—54- 


z9seien, Fyue, and two fyschis. And he 
comaundide to hem, that thei schulden 
make alle men sitte! to mete aftir™ cum- 
40 penyes, vpon" greene hey. And thei saten 
down® by parties, by hundridis, and fyf- 
4ities. And the fyue looues taken, and two 
fyschis, he biholdynge in to heuene, bless- 
ide, and brak loouis?, and 3af4 to his dis- 
ciplis, that thei schulden putte’ bifore 
hem. And he departide two fyschis to 
szalle®; and alle‘ eeten, and weren fillid’. 
43 And thei token the relyues’ of broken 
mete, twelue coffyns full, and of the*™ 
44fyschis. Sothli thei that eeten, were 
45fyue thousynd* of men. And anon he 
constreynede his disciplis forY to stiz3e vp* 
in to a boot, that thei schulden passe* 
bifore him ouer the see to Bethsayda, the 
4swhile he lefte the peple. And whanne 
he hadde left hem, he wente in to an hil, 
47for® to preie. And whanne* euenyng 
was’, the boot was in ‘the myddilf see, 
4sand he aloone in the lond; and he sy3 
hem trauelinge in rowynge; sothli€ the 
wynd was contrarie to hem. And aboute 
the fourthe waking of the ny3t, he wan- 
drynge® oni the see cam to hem, and 
49 wolde passe hem. And thei, as thei sy3en 
him wandrynge* on the see, gessiden! 
sofor™ to be" a fantum, and crieden®; for- 
sothP alle sy3en hym, and thei? weren 
disturblid'. And anon he spak with 
hem, and seide to hem, Triste 3e, I am; 
sinyle 3e drede. And he ‘cam vp* ‘to hem! 
in to" the’ boot, and the wynd ceesside. 
And thei more wondriden with ynne hem"; 
sefor® thei vndirstoden not of the looues; 
s3sothliY her herte was blyndid. And 
whanne thei hadden passid ouer the see, 
thei camen in to the lond of Genazareth, 
ssand setten? to londe. And whanne thei 
hadden* gon out of the boot, anon thei 


Ito sitten sux. ™bi ur. aftir the w pr.m. 


wsec.m. “he3aue vu. Tsetten ur.  § alle men ur. 
Vrelyfe @pr.m.g. ¥Om.p,  * thousondes o. 
¢ Om. sx. d whan and o. € was maad G pr.m. 
&foru. bgoynge ur. ivpono.  * goynge ur. 
crieden vr. PP for uF. q Om. vr. 
uOm.v. Yau. hem silf ur. * forsothe ur. 
hOm.k. 1Om.1. Shiz bul iseeem. & wandrynge Errqnxa. 


VOL, IV. P 


non the ur. on x. 
y Om. surx. 
I thei gessiden x. 


t disturbid sx. troublide ur. 
y for ur. 


MARK. 105 


schulden make alle men sitte to mete bi 
cumpanyes, on greene heye. And thei4o 
saten doun bi parties, bi hundridis, and 
bi fifties. And whanne he hadde takeai 
the fyue looues, and twei fischis, he 
biheelde in to heuene, and blesside, and 
brak looues, and 3af to hise disciplis, 
that thei schulden sette bifor hem. And 
he departide twei fischis to alle; and 42 
alle eeten, and weren fulfillid. And thei 43 
token the relifs of brokun metis, twelue 
cofyns ful, and of the fischis. And thei 4s 
that eeten, weren fyue thousynde of men. 
And anoon he maad hise disciplis to go4s 
up in to a boot, to passe bifor hym ouer 
the se to Bethsaida, the! while he lefte the 
puple. And whanne he hadde left hem, 46 
he wente in to an hillej, to preye. And 47 
whanne it was euen, the boot was in the 
myddil of the see, and he aloone in the 
loond; and he say hem trauelynge in 48 
rowyng; for the wynde was contrarie to 
hem. And aboute the fourthe wakynge 
of the ny3t, he wandride* on the see, 
and! cam to hem, and wolde passe hem. 
And as thei sayn hym wandrynge on the 49 
see, thei gessiden that it weren a fan- 
tum, and crieden out ; for alle™ sayn hym, 50 
and thei weren afraied. And anoon he 
spak with hem, and seide to hem, Triste 
3e, Y am; nyle 3e drede. And he cams: 
vp to hem in to the boot, and the wynde 
ceesside. And thei wondriden more 
‘with ynne™ hem silf; for thei vndur-s2 
stoden not of the looues; for her herte 
was blyndid. And whanne thei werens3 
passid ouer the see, thei camen in to the 
lond of Genasareth, and settiden to loond. 
And whanne thei weren gon out of the 51 
boot, anoon thei knewen hym. And55 
thei raune thorou al that cuntre, and 
bigunnen to brynge sijk men in beddis 


© to mete ur. P the looues pur 
tallemen ur. ¥ fulfillid acuNopesTWxY. 
zOm.ur. ®gour, > Om. ur. 
f myddis the apr. myddis of the ur. the myd x. 
m Om. suvx. se xk. © thei 
8 stizede ur. t Om. ¥ sec.m. 


Z settiden ur. 8 weren Ur. 


10m. Erpexa. Malletheir. Oink, 


106 


55knewen him. And thei rennynge thur3? al 
that® cuntree’, bigunnen to® bere ‘aboute 
in beddis hem’ that hadden hem8 yuele, 

56 where thei herden him bet. And whidur 
euere he! entride yn to vilagis and townes, 
or* in to citees, thei puttiden' syke men in 
stretis, and™ preteden him, that thei schul- 
den touche either® the hem of his cloth; 
and how manye euere touchiden him, 
weren maad saf. 


CAP. VII. 


1 And Pharisees® and summe of scribis?P 
comynge fro Jerusalem, camen to gidere 
2to him. And whanne thei hadden seyn 
summe of his disciplis ete breed with 
comune hondis, that is, not waischun, thei 
3blamyden‘. Forsoth' Pharisees* and alle 
Jewis' eten not, no" but’ thei waisschen 
ofte her hondis, holdinge the tradiciouns, 
4 or statutis’, of eldere men. And thei turn- 
ynge a3en fro chepynge*, eten not, no 
but? thei ben waischun; and manye othere 
thingis ben*, that ben takun to hem for” 
to kepe, waischingis of cuppis, and cru- 
etis®, and of vessels of bras, and of beddis. 
5And Pharisees and scribis axiden him, 
seyinge, Whi gon not thi disciplis aftir? 
the tradicionn® of eldere men, but with 
scomyne houdis thei eten bred? And he 
ausweringe seide to hem, Ysaie prophe- 
ciede wel of 30u, ypocritis, as it is writun, 
This peple worschipith’ me with lippis, 
7forsotheS ‘her herte® is fer fro me; in 
veyn trewh thei worschipen me, techinge 
adoctrinys' and preceptis* of men**.  For- 
soth 3e forsakinge the maundement! of 
God, holden the tradiciouns of men, 
waischingis™ of cruetis", and cuppis®; 
and manye othere thingis lyke to thes 3e 


bin o. thorn; out v. 
eny xy. © to be wury. 
or x. ° the Pharisees ur. 

t the Jewis Nn. © Om. sox. 
athere ben o. © Om. sx. 
¢Om. vu. "the herte of hem ur. 
mentis K. comaundement ur. 


¢the serr. 4 citee K. 
ithatheo. * either ur. 

P the seribis ur. 
Vv but if x. 


© thei entriden k. 
x scc.m.k. +t For the k. 
k prim. ® wasshinge Esk. 


u Om, x. 
b Om. s pr.m. hi. 


MARK. 


€ for to o. 
1 putten sx. 

q blameden hem w sec. m. 

~ Om. 40x. 

© of watir vessellis ur. 

i the doctrines ur. 

m the waschyngis ur. 


4 setteden EP. 
¥ Om. ghi. 

¢ Om. s prim. hit. 
€ waischinge 1R sec. m. k sec.m.a. as waischinge k pr. im. 


P onther 1p. other mue. or x. 
Vv ther ben 1. 


VI. 55—VII. 8. 


on eche side, where thei herden that he 
was. And whidur euer ‘he entride® ins6 
to villagis, ethir? in to townes, or in to— 
citees, thei setten’ sijk men in stretis, 
and? preiden hym, that thei schulden 
touche namely the hemme of his cloth; 
and hou mauy that touchiden hym, weren 
maad saaf. 


CAP. VII. 


And the Farisees and summe of the! 
scribis camen fro Jerusalem togidir to 
hym. And whanne thei hadden seen2 
summe of hise disciplis ete breed with 
vnwaisschen hoondis, thei blameden§. 
The Farisees and alle" the Jewis etens 
not, but thei waisschen ofte her hoondis, 
holdynge the tradiciouns of eldere men. 
And whanne thei turnen ajen fro chep-4 
yng, thei eten not, but thei ben waisschen; 
and many other thingis ben’, ‘that ben’ 
taken* ‘to hemY to kepe?, wasschyngis® of 
cuppis, and of> watir vessels, and of 
vessels of bras, and of beddis. Ands 
Farisees and scribis axiden hyin, and 
seiden, Whi gon not thi disciplis aftir 
the tradicioun of eldere men, but with 
vnwasschen hondis thei eten breed? Andé 
he answeride, and seide to hem, Ysaie 
prophesiede wel of 30u, ypocritis, as it is 
writun, This puple worschipith me with 
lippis, but her herte is fer fro me; and7 
in veyn thei worschipen me, techinge 
the doctrines and the heestis of men. 
For 3e leeuen the maundement® of God,8 
and holden the tradiciouns of men, 
wasschyngis® of watir vessels, and of 
cuppis; and many othir thingis lijk to% 


f hem aboute in beddis pxy. 8% Om. ur. 
"and thei ur. © other w. namely ur. 
r For ur. § the Pharises n. 


x the chepynge wsec.m, YOm.ox. # but if x. 
d by ur. € tradiciouns uy. ‘f honoureth ur. 
k maundementis vr. kk me x. 1! maunde- 


n watir vessels ur. 9 of cuppis UY. 


rand their. § blameden hem k. 
xbitaken kK. yYOm.r. 2 kepe, as 
d maundementes A sec. m. EKPQRa. 


fOm.i. § Om. k. 


VII. g—24. 


gdon. And he seide to hem, Wel 3e han 
maad the maundement? of God voyde, 
1othat 3e kepe 3oure tradicioun. Forsoth4 
Moyses seide, Worschipe* thi fadir and thi 
modir; and he that ‘schal curse’ fadir ort 
ilmodir, ‘by deeth deie he%. SothliY 3e 
seyen, If¥ a man ‘schal seye* to fadir orY 
to’Y modir, Corban, thatis*, What euere 3ifte 
120f* me, schal? profite to thee ; and ouer® 3e 
suffren not him do* ony thing to fadir or® 
ismodir, brekynge' the word of God by 
1430ure tradicioun, that® 3e han 3ouun; and 
3e don manye ‘othere suche! thingis. And 
hei eftsoone* clepinge to! the cumpanye 
‘of peple™, seide to hem, 3e alle heere” me, 
15and vndirstonden®. No thing with outen 
man is entringe in to him, that may de- 
foule him; but tho thingis that? comen 
forth of man4, ‘tho it ben that defoulen a 
i6man'. Forsoth if’ ony man hauet eeris 
17‘of heeringe", heere he. And whanne he 
hadde entrid in to an hous, fro the cum- 
pany ‘of peple’, his disciplis axiden him the 
18parable. And he seith” to hem, So and 
3¢ ben vnprudent, ‘or vawyse*. Vndir- 
stonden 3e not, for al thing withoute forth 
entringe in to aY man, may not defoule 
i9him? for it hath not entrid into his herte, 
but in to the? wombe, and bynethe it goth 
20out, purgynge alle metis. Sothli he@ 
seide, For the? thingis that gon out of a° 
2iman, tho? defoulen a man. Forsoth fro 
withymne, of the herte of men comen forth 
yuele thou3tis, auvutries®, fornicaciouns, 
22 mausleyngis f, theftis, couctisess, ‘or ouer 
hard kepynge of goodis*, wickidnesses, 
gyle, vnchastite, yuel! y3e*, blasphemyes!, 
23 pride, folye™. Alle thes yuelis" fro with- 
ynne comen forth, and defoulen a° man. 
24 And Jhesus risynge thennis?, wente in to 


P comaundement uy. 4 For uv. 
v But uv. Ww That if o pr.m. 
is tou. » it schal ur. 


X seith ur. 
¢ ferther ur. 


MARK. 


t Honoure thou ur. 
Y either us’. 
d to don suv x. 


107 


these 3e doon. And he seide to hem,9 
Wel 3e han maad the maundement of 
God voide, ‘to kepe* 3oure tradicioun. 
For Moyses seide, Worschipe thi fadir 10 
and thi modir; and he that cursith fadir 
or modir, die he! by deeth. But 3e seien, 
If a man seie to fadir or modir, Corban, 
that is, What euer 3ifte is of me, it schal 
profite to thee; and ouer 3e suffren not 12 
hym do ony thing to fadir or modir, and 13 
je breken the word of God bi 3o0ure tra- 
dicioun, that 3e han 30uun; and 3e don 
many suche thingis. And he eftsoone14 
clepide the puple, and seide to hem, 3e 
alle here me, and vndurstonde. No thing 15 
that is withouten a man, that entrith in 
to hym, may defoule hin; but tho 
thingis that comen forth of a man, tho 
it ben that defoulen a man. If ony manic 
hauei eeris of hering, here he. And17 
whanne he was entrid in to an hous, 
fro the puple, hise disciplis axiden hym 
the parable. And he seide to hem, 3e18 
ben vnwise also. Vndurstonde 3e not, 
that al thing without forth that entreth 
in to a man, may not defoule hym? for 19 
it hath not entrid in to his herte, but in 
to the wombe, and bynethe it goith out, 
purgynge alle metis. But he seide, The* 20 
thingis that gon out of a man, tho de- 
foulena man. For fro with ynne, of the 2i 
herte of men comen! forth yuel thou3tis, 
auowtries, fornycaciouns, mansleyingis, 22 
theftis, auaricis, wickidnessis, gile, vn- 
chastite, yuel ize, blasfeinyes, pride, foli. 
Alle these yuels comen forth fro with 2s 
ynne, and defoulen a man. And Jhesus 24 
roos vp fro thennus, and wente in to the 
coostis of Tyre and of™ Sidon. And he 
3ede in to an hous, and wolde that no 


t either ur. 
zOm.¥. 
f se brekynge Ur. 


s eurseth ur. 
yy Om. ceteri. 
€ either to ur. 


u dye by deeth ur. 
4 is of Q sec. m. FW. 
g which ur. 


b suche liyk uy. iQm. ouxy. kefte Jhesu ur. 1Om. ur. ™Om.ur. "hereth sx. © vnder- 
stondith pstx.  P it ben that defoulen a man, whiche ur. 9aman purwxy. © Om. ur. tho defoulen 
aman x. ° Om.ur. thathur. ttoheereury. vYOm.ur. ¥seide ur. * Om. sox. or unstable, 
or unwyse wv pr.m. YOm.o. Zhisxy. 4Crist uy. >thoo cov. tho x. ¢Om.n. 4 Om. ur. 
© and auoutries x. f mannus sleyngis o. & auarisis G sec. m. ouv. eoucytise MPTW sec. m. Y. h or 


auarice A. Om. gurx. lan yuel ur. 
‘thingis vu. °Om.o.  P fro thennes ur. 


k yre @ prom. KSY. 


Ublasphemye cur. ™ and folye wperxy. 


4 fork. i Om.c et plures ef a8. j hath rnbehika. &k Tho rk. 1 cometh hi. ™ Om. cs pr.m. eghikap. 


PQ 


108 


the endes’ of Tyre and Sidon. And he 
gon in to an hows, wolde no" man wite’; 
and he mizte not ‘dare, or be priuy*. 
25 Sothli® a womman, anon as sche herde of 
him, ‘which wommanis’ dou3tir hadde an 
vnelene spirit, entride, and fel doun at” 
26his feet. Sothli the womman was he- 
thene, of the generacioun* of Sirefen ¥. 
And she preide him, that he wolde? caste 
27 0ut a deuel? fro” hir dou3tir. The° which 
seide to hir, Suffre thou the’ sones be® 
fulfild’ first; it is not good to take the 
bred of sones, and sende® to houndis. 
23 And she answeride, and seide to him, 
Forsothe!, Lord; for whi and* litle welpis 
eten vndir the bord, of the crummes of 
29children. And Jhesus' seith™ to hir, For 
this word go", the fend is° went out of 
30thi dou3tir. And whanne she hadde gon 
hom?, she fond the wenche! sittinge™ on’ 
the bedd, and thet deuel® gon out ‘fro hir’. 
31 And eftsoone* Jhesus goynge out fro* 
the endis’, ‘ov coostis?, of Tire, cam thur3* 
Sidon to the see of Galilee, ‘that is® bi- 
twixe® the myddil endis* of Decapoleos. 
32 And thei leeden ‘to him¢ a deef man and 
doumb, and‘ preieden him, that he putte 
33to him the hond. And he takynge him 
asydis® fro the cumpanye, sente" his fyn- 
gris' in to his litle* eeris; and! spetinge 
sitowchide his tunge. And he biholdynge 
in to heuene, sorwide withynne™, and 
seith", ‘Effeta, that is°, Be thou openyd, 
35 And anon his eeris? weren openyd, and 
the bond of his tunge is} unbounden, and 
ashe spak ri3tly. ‘And he comaundide to 
hem, that thei schulden seye to no man’; 
forsoth how moche he comaundide to 
hem, so moche more thei prechiden more, 


4 coostis UFXY pr.m. ™ that no ur. 


MARK. 


8 wite, or knowe MpeTy. to witen s. 


VII. 25-—36. 


man wiste; and he my3te not be hid. 
For a womman, anoon as sche herd of 25 
hym, whos dou3tir hadde an vnclene spi- 
rit, entride, and fel doun at hise feet. 
And the womman was hethen, of the ge-26 
neracioun of Sirofenyce. And sche prei- 
ede hymn, that he wolde caste out a deuel 
fro hir dou3ter. And he seide to hir,27 
Suffre thou, that the" children be fulfillid 
first ; for it is not good to take the breed 
of children, and 3yue to houndis. And 28 
sche answeride, and seide to him, 3is, 
Lord; for litil whelpis eten vndur the 
bord, of the crummes of children®. And 29 
Jhesus seide to hir, Go thou, for this 
word the feend wente out of thi doustir. 
And whanne sche was gon in to hir30 
hous home, sche foonde the damysel lig- 
gynge on the bed, and the deuel gon out 
fro? hir. And eftsoones Jhesus 3ede out 31 
fro the coostis of Tire, and cam thorou 
Sidon to the see of Galilee, bitwixe? the 
myddil of the coostis of Decapoleos. 
And thei bryngen to hym a man deef32 
and doumbe, and preieden hym to leye 
his hoond® on hym. And he took hym33 
asidis fro the puple, and puttide® hise 
fyngris in to hise eris; and he spetide’, 
and touchide his tonge. And he bihelde 34 
in to heuene, and sorewide with ynne, 
and seide, Effeta, that is, Be thou open- 
yd. And anoon hise eris weren openyd, 34 
and the boond of his tunge was vn- 
boundun, and he spak ri3tli, And he36 
comaundide to hem, that thei sechulden 
seie to no man; but hou myche he co- 
maundide to hem, so myche more? thei 
prechiden, and bi so myche more’ thei37 
wondriden, and seiden, He dide wel alle 


t be priuy 40. be hid ur. 


daren x. ° Forsothe ur. Y whois mperurxy. tour. *kyn ur. ¥ Sirofenysse apTxy pr.m. 
Sirofenice yr. 2 schuldo. @fendur. bofe. ¢Om.ur. that the uy. Om. xy prim. © to be 
psw sec.m. xy. ffillidur. ¢€Om.r. 2} 3yne it uv sec.m. sende it xy. i 3is, forsothe 9 sec. m. 
3he ur. alsour. 'theur. ™saide ogsuy. %goothon ur. © Om. 4Nourw sec.m. Pinto hir 
hous uy. 4damysel ur. ' liggynge vy. Svpono. tOm.ry. Ufendury. YVYOm.u. ~ efte ur. 
xofur. Ycoostisur. 2 Om. aovvx. aby ur. >&’ Om. ur.  ¢ bytween os. bitwe x. 4 coostis ur. 
ehimtovu. fandthei ur.  & asides half ur. aside x. 4 putte u pr.m. puttide u sec.m. i fyngre N. 
«Om. ur. land he ur. ™inwardely ur. ™ seith to him ne sec. m. seide uy. © Om. uv. P eeren o, 
qwas ur. °t Om. kK. 

»Om.k seeam. © litil children k prim. Pofe. @bitwenek. thondisk. § putter,  t spette 


EIPQRSXa. sputte c. the more shi. 


v the more 1. 


VI. 37——VIII. 12. 


37and by that the’ more thei wondriden, sey- 
inge, He dide wel alle thingis, and deef 
men he made to heere, and doumbet for 
to speke. 

CAP. VIII. 

1 In tho dayes, whanne moche cumpenye 
‘of peple’ was with Jhesu, and hadde not 
what thei schulden ete, his disciplis ga- 

aderid” to gidere, he seith* to hem, I haue 
rewthe onY the cuinpanye ‘of peple’, for 
lou! now ‘the thridde day* thei susteynen, 

‘or abyden” me, and han not what thei 

sschulen ete; and if I leeue® hem fastinge 
in to her? hous®, thei schulen faile in the 
weye; forsothe summe of hem camen 

4fro fer. And disciplis‘ answeriden% to 
lim, Wherof ‘a man schal® mowe fille 
hemi with looues here in wildirnesse* ? 
5And he axide hem, How manye looues 
han 3e? The! whiche seiden, Seuene. 
6And he comaundide the™ cumpanye to" 
sitt doun® on the erthe. And he takynge 
seueneP looues, and doynge thankynges, 
brak, and 3af to his disciplis, that thei 
schulden putted forth. And thei setten™ 
7forth to the cumpany. And thei hadden 
a fewe smale fischis; and he blesside hem, 
and comaundide for’ to bet put" forth. 
sAnd thei’ eeten, and ben” fulfild*; and 
thei token vp that lefte of relyf’, ‘or smale 
ygobatis?, seuene leepis*. Forsoth thei 
that eeten, weren as” foure thousand* of 
iomen; and he lefte hem. And anon he 
‘wente vp? in to a hoot, with his disciplis, 
and® cam® in to the partis of Dalmamy- 
i1tha. And Pharisees wenten out, and bi- 
gunnen to seke‘, ‘or axe*, with him, ax- 
ynge" a tokene of hymn fro heuene, teipt- 
iinge hym. And he sorwynge withynne! 
in spirit, seith*, What sekith this genera- 


sOm. kur. tdoumbe men uvy. 
z2Om.uv. 4bithredayesuy. » Om. ax. 
f the disciples spxy. hise disciplis ur. 
Kk desert uv. !Om.ur. ™ tothe n. 
4 putte hem p. sette uy.  settiden ur. 
Wweren uy. & fillid ur. 


MARK. 


v Om. ur, 
¢ schal delyuere ur. 
& answeringe Y. 
8 Om. QY prom. 

8 Om. osurx. 
y the relyf o. relyues ur. 


u Om. svx, 


109 


thingis, and® he made* deef men to here, 
and doumbe men to speke. 


CAP. VIII. 

In tho daies eftY, whanne myche puplet 
was with Jhesu, and hadden not what 
thei scliulden ete, whanne hise disciplis 
weren clepid togidir, he seide to hem, I2 
haue reuth on the puple, for lo! uow 
the thridde dai thei abiden me, and han’ 
not what to ete; and if Y leeue hem fast-3 
ynge in to her hous®, thei schulen faile 
in the weie; for summe of hem camen 
fro fer. And hise disciplis answerden to4 
hym, Wherof schal a man mowe? fille 
hem with looues here in wildirnesse>? ? 
And he axide hem, Hou many loouess 
han 3e? Whiche‘ seiden’, Seuene. Ande 
he comaundide the puple to sitte doun on 
the erthe. And he took the seuene looues, 
and dide thankyngis, and brak, and 3af 
to hise disciplis, that thei schulden sette 
forth. And thei settiden forth to the 
puple. And thei hadden a few smale7 
fischis; and he blesside hem, and co- 
maundide, that thei weren sette forth. 
And thei eten, and weren fulfillid; ands 
thei token vp that that lefte® of relifs‘, 
seuene lepis. And thei that eeten, weren 9 
as foure thousynde of men; and he lefte 
hem. And anoon he wente vp in to alo 
boot, with hise disciplis, and cam in to 
the coostis of Dalmamytha. And the) 
Farisees wenten out, and bigunuen to 
dispuyte with hym, and® axiden a tokne 
of hym fro heuene, and temptiden hym. 
And he sorewynge ‘with ynne! in spirit, 12 
seide, What sekith this generacioun a 
tokne? Treuli Y seie to 30u, a tokene schal 


Wclepide ur. *seide ur. Y of oa. 


4Qm. y prom. © housis wv. 

b schal a man purxy. i these men ur. 
©to mete uy. PP the senene eT sec. m. XY. 
tOm.n. Usett vy.  V thei alle @ sec. m. 
2 Om. mopesturw sec.m. xy.  * leepis ful 1. 


lepful xy. >% Om, 9. ¢thousandiso. 4styinge ur, e Om. uv. ¢e camen x. f speke 4. dispute ur. 
axe X. 8 Om. 4x. or toaxe Pruv. 4 seekinge Q sec.m. iinwardly uy. * seide ur. 

“ bothe 1. for Kghi. * bath maadt. yOm.k. Ztheihank. @housisk. » Om. k. >> this 
wildernesse n pr.m. © The whiche1. 4seiden to himk. ¢ was leite ts. the relifsh. & Om. k. 


band their. iOm.k. 


110 


cioun a tokene!? Treuly I seie to 30u, 
if™ a tokene” schal be° 30uun to this ge- 
ineracioun. And he leeuyuge hem, ‘wente 
vp” eftsoone’ in to a boot, and wente ouer 


i4the see. And thei forjaten to" take breed, . 


and thei hadden not with hem no’ but o 
15loof in the boot. And he comaundide to 
hem, seyinge, ‘Se 3e', and ‘be 3e" war of 
the sourdow3 of Pharisees, and’ sourdow3 
isof Eroude. And thei thouj3ten ‘oon to 
another, seiynge”, For we han not breed*. 
17TheY which thing knowun, Jhesus seith? 
to hem, What theuke 3e, for 3e han not 
breed*? 3it 3e knowen not, ne> vndir- 
stonden; 3it 3e han 3oure herte blyndid*. 
183e hauynge y3en, seen not, and 3e hauynge 
eeris, heeren not; nether 3e han mynde, 
i9whanne I brak fyue looues in to fine 
thousande‘, and hou manye coffyns ful of 
‘brokene mete® ‘3e token’ vp? Thei seyn 
20to him, Twelue. Whanne and& seuene 
looues in to four thousande" ‘of men’, how 
many leepis* of ‘brokene mete! ‘je token™ 
2ivp"? And thei seyen®, Seuene. And he 
seide to hem, How vndirstonden 3e uot 
223it? And thei comen to Bethsayda, and 
thei bryngen to him a blynd man, andP 
preieden hym, that he schulde4 touche 
23him. And the hond of the blynd man 
takun, he ledde him out of the streete, 
and’ spetynge in to his y3en, his hondis 
put to, he® axide him, if le sy3 ony thing. 
24And he biholdinge, seith', I se men as 
2strees walkynge". Aftirward eftsoones’ 
he’ puttide* hondis on his yjen, and he 
bigan forY to se, and he is? restorid, so 
26that he sy3 clerely alle thingis. And he 
sente him in to his hous, seyinge, Go* in 
to thi hous ; and if thou schalt go in to the 
27streete, seye® to no man. And Jhesus 


I signe, either myracle ur. 


MARK. 


™ Om. NQ sec. m.ur. 3if for o. 


VIII. 13-——27. 


not be 3ouun to this generacioun. And 13 

he lefte hem, and wente vp eftsoone in 

to a boot, and* wente ouer the see. And 14 

thei for3aten to take breed, and thei had- 

den not with hem but o loof in the boot. 

And he comaundide hem, and seide, Seis 

3e, and ‘be war! of the sowre dow3 of 
Farisees™, and of the sowrdow3 of E- 

roude. And thei thou3ten, and seiden ie 

oon to anothir, For we han not looues. 

And whanne this thing was knowun,17 
Jhesus seide to hem, What thenken 3e, 

for 3e han not looues? 3it 3e knowun 

not, ne" vndurstonden ; 3it 3e han 3oure 

herte blyndid. 3e hauynge izen, seen is 

not, and 3e hauynge eeris, heren not; 

nethir 3e han mynde, whanne Y_ brak 19 
fyue looues among fyue thousynde, and 

hou many cofynes ful® of brokun imeete 

3e tokunP vp? Thei seien’ to hym, 
Twelue. Whanne also’ seuene loones 20 
among foure thousynde of men, hou 

many lepis of brokun mete tokun je vp? 

And thei seien to hym, Seuene. And he2i 

seide to hem, Hou vndurstonden 3e not 

3it? And thei camen to Bethsaida, and 22 

thei bryngen’ to hym a blynde man, and 

thei preieden hym, that he schuldet 
touche hym. And whanne he hadde2s3 

take the blynde manius hoond, he ledde 

hym out of the street, and" spete’ in to 

hise i3en, and sette* hise hoondis on 

hym; and he axide hym, if he saye 

ony thing. And he tbihelde, and seide, 24 + he saw derkli 
Y se men as trees walkynge. Aftirward 25 tie boales 4 
eftsoones he sette hise hondis on hise  ¢je,bidere and 
izen, and he bigan to see, and he was /eere. x. 
restorid, so that he sai3 cleerli alle 
thingis. And he sente hym in to his26 
hous, and seide, Go in to thin hous; and 


D signe Ur. ° not be NQ see. m. UF. 


P steigede ur. = =defteur.  * for to o. s Om. 4. t Seeth x. ube opr. beth esxy. Vand of 
the prxy. W selynge ech to other ur. = looues urxy. = ¥ Om. ur. 2 seide ur. ® loones ur. 
D neither sur. ¢blynde o. 4thousondes 0, ¢relyues ur. f token 5e Gsce.m. perurxy. € also ur. 
h thousondis 0. i Om.1. k lepful ex. lepisful ¥. lrelyues ur. m token 5e G sec. m. POTUVXY. 
nOm.uv. seiden k. Pand thei ur. dwoldeur. tandheuv. s’Om.r. tseide uy. % goinge r. 
Vefte ur. Crist ur. * putte sx. ¥ Om. surx. 2 was ry. ®Gothon ur. © seye thou ur. 

kand he 1. ! beth war 1. biwar s. be 3e war hi. ™ the Farisees a8. ®neitherk. © Om. s pr.m. 


P token je 2. q seiden k. 
W settide i. sette to b. 


r Om. mb. 


s brou3ten k. 


t wolde 1. wand het. ¥ spettide i. 


VIII. 28—38. 


entride yn‘ and his disciplis in to the cas- 
tels of Sezarie oft Philip. And in the 
weye he axide his disciplis, seiynge to 
hem, Whom seyn men me for® to be? 
28 Thef whiche answeriden ‘to hym, seiynge®, 
Sunme!, John Baptist; othere' seyn, He- 
lye; but* othere! seyn, as oon of the pro- 
29 phetis. Thanne he seith to hem, But whom 
seye 3e me for™ to be? Petre answeringe, 
30seith to him, Thou ert Crist. And he 
thretenyde" hem, that thei schulden nat 
31seie to ony man of him. And he bigan 
for® to teche hem, for it bihoueth mannis 
sone suffre? manye thingis, and to be re- 
proued of the ‘hizeste prestis?, and of el- 
dere™ men’, and scribist, and to be slayn, 
and aftir thre dayes, for" to rise ajen. 
szAnd he” spak playnliv the word. And 
Petre takynge him*, bygan forY to blame 
33him*%, The* which turnyd, seynge his 
disciplis, manaside Petre‘, seiynge’, Go 
aftir me, Sathanas®; for thou sauerist’ not 
thot thingis that ben of God, but tho 
34thingis that ben of men. And the cum- 
panye ‘of peple" gederid', with his disci- 
plis, he seide to hem, If ony man wole 
sue‘ me, denye he him self, and take he! 
35 his cros, and sue he™ me. Sothly" ‘who so° 
wole make? his soule’, ‘that is, his lyf*, 
saf’, het schal leese it; forsothe he that 
schal leese his soule", ‘that is, his lyf, 
for me and the gospel, schal make it saf. 
36Sothli what ‘profiteth it* aY man, if he 
wymne’ al the world, and do peyringe to 
37his soule*? or’ what chaungyng schal a 
3sman 3yue for his sonle? Forsoth ‘who 
that® schal knoleche me, and my wordis@ 
in this generacioun auoutresse®, and man- 


¢ Om, suvx. f Om. uy. 
lothere men ur. 


d and o. 
k forsothe ur. 


¢ Om. ur. 
men UF. 


8 prestis ur. tof the scribis uy. % Om. surx. 


G sec.m. Q sec.m. turnynge and o. 


f vnderstondest ur. & Om. x. b Om. ur. 
mQOm.s. " For ur. %hethat uv. P make saf ur. 
SOm.ur. tOmur. Ulijfur. * Om. sosurx. 


*wynneth o. ® owne soule x. >} either uv. 


auoutresse and synneresse ur. 


x The whiche 1. y Summe sghk. 
© of 1s pr.m. ghi. Om. s sec. m. of the k, 


& seyinge tu hym ur. 
m Om. surx. 
P to suffre G sec.m. MposTxy. for to sofre ow sec. m. 
v Om. kK. 
% hym, and seide, Lord, be thou merciful to thee, for this schal not be. ur. 
€ to Petre amNoPerxy. 
i clepid togidere ur. 


¢ifa man ur. 


Zz othere men k pr.m. 
4 openly k. 


MARK. Mt 


if thou goist in to the streete, sele to no 
man. And Jhestis entride and hise dis-27 
ciplis in to the castels of Cesarye of 
Philip. And in the weie he axide hise 
disciplis, and seide to hera, Whom seien 
men that Y am? Whiche* answeriden 2a 
to hym, and seiden, Summeny’ seen, 
Joon Baptist; other? sete, Heli; and* 
other seien, as oon of the prophetis. 
Thanne he seith to hem, But whom 2s 
seien 3e that Y am? Petre answeride, 
and seide to hym, Thon art Crist. And 30 
he chargide hem, that thei schulden not 
seie of hym to ony man. And he bigan 3: 
to teche hem, that it bihoueth mannns 
sone to suffre many thingis, and to be 
repreued of the elder men, and of the 
hijest prestis, and the® scribis, and to be 
slayn, and aftir thre dayes, to rise ajen. 
And he spak pleynli? the word. And3s2 
Peter took hym, and bigan to blame 
hym, and seide, Lord, be thou merciful 
to thee, for this schal not be. And hess 
turnede, and sai3 hise disciplis, and ma- 
nasside Petir, and seide, Go after me, 
Satanas; for thou sauerist not tho thingis 
that ben of God, but tho thingis that 
ben of men. And whanne the pupless 
was clepid togidere, with hise disciplis, 
he seide to hem, If ony man wole come 
after me, denye he® hymn silf, and take 
his cros, and sue he me. For he that3s5 
wole make saaf his lijf, schal leese it; 
and he that leesith his lijf for me, and 
for the gospel, schal make it saaf. For36 
what profitith it to a man, if he wynne 
al the world, and dof peiryng to his 
soule? or what chaunging schal a man37 


h Summen seyn uv. 3 othere 
© manasside ur. thrette x. © On. surx. 
t the eelder o. the hijest ur. 

x Crist ur. Y Om. sx. 
a Om. uv. © turned and 
d and seide ur. € thou Suthanas ur. 
kK come aftir ur. tOm. sx. 
qliyfur, * Om. auvx. that is, lijf x. or lyf o. 

x schal it profite ur. ¥ to a 4GMNOPQSTUFY. 
dworde o. € auoutresse and synful 9 sec. m. 


q eldere men ur, 
W openli ur. 


a forsothe k pr.w. > othere men k prem. 


eOm.k. f dooth k. 


Itz MARK. 


nis sone schal knowleche him, whanne he 
schal come in the glory of his fadir, with 

39his aungels. And he seide to hem, Treuly 
I seie to 30u, for ‘ther ben summe! of men 
stondinge here, ‘the whiche® schulen not 
taste deeth®, til thei sen the rewme of God 
comynge in vertu. 


CAP. IX. 


1 And aftir sixe dayes Jhesus took Petre, 
andi James, and John, and ledith* hem by 
hem selue aloone! in to an hi3™ hil; and 

2he is transfigurid byfore hem. And his 
clothis ben maad schynynge and white 
ful moche as" snow, and® which? maner 
clothist a fullere, ‘or walkere of cloth*, 

3smay not make white on erthe. And 
Helye with Moyses apperide to hem, and 
4thei weren spekynge with Jhesu. And 
Petre answeringe seith® to Jhesu, Mais- 
tir, it is good vs fort to be here; make" 
we here thre tabernaclis, oon to thee, oon’ 
sto Moyses, and oon to Helye. Sothli he 
wiste not what he schulde seie ; forsothe’’ 
sthei weren agast* by drede. And ‘ther is 
maad* a cloudeY schadewinge* hem; and a 
voys cam of* the cloude, seyinge, This is 
my mooste deereworthe sone, heere 3¢ 
7him. And anon thei biholdinge aboute, 
sy3e no more any man, no? but Jhesus 
soonly with hem. And hem‘ comynge 
down fro the hil, he comaundide hem4, 
that thei schulde not telle to any man 
tho thingis that® thei hadde seyn, no! but 
whanne mannis sone hath risun® fro 
odeede spiritis». And thei heelden' the 
word at* hem silf, sekynge what! schulde 
be, whanne he hath™ risun® fro deede®. 
10 And thei axiden him, seyinge?, What 


VIII. 39—IX. 10. 


3yue for his soule? But who that knou-3s 
lechith me and my wordis in this gene- 
racioun avowtresse and synful, also man- 
nus sone schal knouleche him, whanne 
he schal come in the glorie of his fadir, 
with his aungels. And he seide to hem, 39 
Trenli Y seie to 3ou, that there ben sum- 
men stondynge here, whiche schulen not 
taste deth, til thei seen the rewme of 
God comynge in vertu. 


CAP. IX. 


And aftir sixe daies Jhesus took Petre, 1 
and James, and Joon, and ledde hem hi 
hem silf aloone in to an hi3® hille; and 
he was transfigurid bifor hem. And2 
hise clothis weren maad ful schynynge 
and white as snow, whiche maner white 
clothis a fuller may not make on erthe. 
And Helie with Moises apperide to3 
hem, and thei spaken with Jhesu. Anda 
Petre answeride, and seide to Jhesu, 
Maister, it is good vs8® to be here; and* 
make we here thre tabernaclis, oon to 
thee, oon to Moyses, and oon to Helie. 
For he wiste not what he schulde seie;5 
for thei weren agaste bi drede. Ande 
ther was maad a cloude overschadew- 
ynge hem; and a vois cam of! the cloude, 
and seide, This is my moost derworth 
sone, here 3e hym. And anoon thei7 
bihelden aboute, and sayn no more ony 
man, but Jhesu oonli with hem. Andgsg 
whanne thei cainen doun fro the hille, 
he comaundide hem, that thei schulden 
not telle to ony man tho thingis that 
thei hadden seen, but whanne mannus 
sone hath risun aj3en fro deeth. Ando 
thei helden the word at hem silf, sek- 
ynge what this schulde be, whanne he 
hadde risun a3en fro deth. And theiio 
axiden hym, and seiden, What thanne 


f snmme ben ur. ¢ whiche ur. that x. h the deeth o. iOm., v. k ledde nex. he ledith ur. 
1 aloone asides half ur. ™Om.r prim like o. 9°Om.ury. P what qurxy. 4 Om. wrpy pr.m. 
r Om. amoperw sec.m. x¥ pr.m. either touker uv. 8 seide ur. ‘Om. surx. and make ur. Vand 
oen x. for ur. Waferd ur. * Om.ur.  ¥clonde was maad ur. #% bischadowynge N. 8 fro ur. 
bOm.o ¢theiv. her. @tohemur. ¢whichevry. fnot nx. 8 rise ajenur. 4 deeth o. deed 
men ur. deade x. i heelden togidere o. * anentis ur. |! what thei v. ™schal haue q@sec.m. 9 rise 
agen ur. ©deth ogx. deed menr. P and seiden ur. 


s Om. R pr.m.k. 88 to vs k. 


h Om. a sec. m. Esec.m. b pr.m. 


i out of k. 


IX. 11—22. 


therfore seyn Pharisees‘ and scribis', for 
11it bihoueth Helye fors to come first. Thet 
which answeringe seith” to hem, Whanne 
Helye schal come first, he schal restore 
alle thingis; and hou it is writun ‘in to’ 
mannis sone, that he suffre many thingis, 
izand be despisid. But I seie to 30u, for 
and” Helye is comun, and thei diden to 
him what euere thingis thei wolden, as it 
13is writun of him. And he comynge to 
his disciplis, sy3 a greet cumpany aboute 
i4hem, and scribis* axyngeY with hem. And 
anon al the cumpanye’ seynge Jhesu, was 
astoneyed, and thei* dreden; and thei 
isrennynge to, greeten> him. And he axide 
1¢hem, What seken® 3e among 3ou? And 
oon of the cumpany answeringe seide, 
Maistir, I haue brou3t to thee my sone 
17 hauynge ‘an vnelene’ spirit; the® which 
wher euere hef ‘schal take’ hym, hirtith 
himi, and he frothith*, ‘or cometh}, and 
betith™ to gidere with teeth, and wexith 
drye. Aud I seide to thi disciplis, that thei 
schulden caste hym out, and thei my3ten 
isnot. The® which answeringe to hem 
seide, A°! thou? schrewid‘ generacioun ‘and 
out of bileue", hou longe schal I be at 30u, 
hou longe schal I suffre 30u ? ‘Brynge 3e™ 
ighym tome. And thei brou3ten ym to’. 
And whaune he hadde seyn him, anon the 
spirit troublidet him; and he cast doun 
in to the erthe, was" walewid frothinge ”. 
20And he axide his fadir, Hou moche of” 
tyme ‘it is*, sithen this thing felY to him? 
21 And he seith?, Fro childhod*; and ofte he 
hath sent> hiin¢ and? in to fier® and ‘in tof 
watir®, that he schulde leese him; but 
and” if thou maist ony thing, help vs, 
22hauynge' merey on* vs. Sothli Jhesus 
seith! to him, If thou maist bileue, alle 


9 the Pharisees ur. t the seribis ur. 


MARK. 


s Om. sury. 


113 


seien Farisees and scribis, for* it  bi- 
houeth ‘Helie to! come first. And he1l 
ausweride, and seide to hem, Whanne 
Helie cometh, he schal first restore alle 
thingis; and as it is writun of mannus 
sone, that he suffre many thingis, and be 
dispisid. And Y seie to 30u, that Helie 12 
is comun, and thei diden to hym what 
euer thingis thei wolden, as it is writun 
of hym. And he comynge to hise disci-13 
plis, sai3 a greet cumpany aboute hem, 
and seribis disputynge with hem. Andis 
anoon al the puple seynge Jhesu, was 
astonyed, and thei dredden; and thei ren- 
nynge gretten hym. And he axide hein, 15 
What disputen! 3e among jou? Andi 
oon of the cumpany answerde, and 
seide, Mayster, Y haue brou3t to thee 
my sone, that hath a doumbe spirit; 
and where euer he takith hym, he17z 
hurtlith™ hym doun, and he® fometh*, 
and betith togidir with teeth, and wex- 
ith drye. And Y seide to thi disciplis, 
that thei schnlden caste hym out, and 
thei my3ten not. And he answeride tois 
hem, and seide, A! thou generacioun 
out of bileue, hou longe schal Y be 
among 30u, houP longe schal Y suffre 
3ou? ‘Brynge 3e hym tome. And thei1g9 
brou3ten hym. And whanne he had seyn 
him, anoon the spirit troublide him; and 
was’ throw doun to grounde’, and wale- 
wide, and fomede. And he axide his20 
fadir, Hou longe ‘is it’, sith this ‘hath 
falle' to hym? And he seide, Fro child- 
hode; and ofte he hath put hym in to21 
fier", and in to watir, to’ leese hym; but 
if thou maiste*’ ony thing, helpe vs, and 
haue merci on vs. And Jhesus seide to22 
hym, If thou maiste bileue, alle thingis 
Yon vu. of r. 


t Om. urx. u seide Ur. 


walso uy. *theseribis uy. y disputynge ur. to gydere axinge m. togidere axende x. 2 peple ur. 
aOm.upxy. gretten ry. ¢disputen ur. dadoumbe vr. © Om.ur. fOm.u. & taketh ory. 
b hurtlith uy. ihimdoun vy. * vometh vy. 1Om. aurx. or fometh onwy. ™ Dditeth 4. 9 Om. ur. 
°O!o. Pthe x. @Om.ur.  ° vnbileeueful vr. t Bringith a. 8 Om.ur. — t turblide arp. 
u Om. ary. Yvomynge ur. WOm.ur. Xisit mpuxy.isy. yYbifeldeuv. 2seideuv. % 30nge 
childehod ur. %putu. ¢Om.7. 4¢Om.¢. bothe ur. the fyree. fOm.9. tor. §& watris N. 
hOm.urxy. ithou hauynge wprurw sec.m. ‘of y. ! seide v. 


k that x. I that Eliek. disputiden A pr.m. 
ether frotheth Kk marg. P and hou X sec. m. 
*itisinpr.m. ¢ hap fel ep. hath bifalle r. 


VOL. IV. 


m hurtith s. hurlith hi. 
q he was EPQR pr. m. 8 sec. Mm. X C SeC.m. a. 
u the fyr EIPR. 


Q 


nQOm.k. © vometh 1kqr. 


t the grounde e. 
Ww Om. b pr. m. k. 


Vv for tok. VY may i. 


114 MARK. 


thingis ben possible to a man bileuyage. 
23 And™ anon the ‘fadir of the child® cri- 
ynge° with teeris seideP, Lord, I bileue; 
2thelp thou myn vunbilenefulnesse4, And 
whanne Jhesus hadde seyn the company 
‘of peple™ rennynge to gidere, he manaside 
to’ the vnelene spirit, seyinge' to him, 
Thou deef and doumb spirit, I comaund 
thee, go" out fro him, and entre’ not 
2smore in to him. And he criynge, and 
moehe to-breidynge him, wente out fro 
him; and he is* maad as deed, so that 
26manyeY seiden, that he was deed. For- 
soth Jhesus holdynge his hond, ‘lifte vp 
27himyY’; and he roos. And whanne he 
hadde entrid in to an hous, his disciplis 
axiden him priuely, Whi my3ten not we 
28easte hym out? And he seyde to hem, 
This kynde* ‘in no thing* may” go out’, 
209no but in preier and fastinge. And thei 
gon fro thennis, wenten forth in to Galile ; 
noand he wolde no* man wite. He tau3te 
his disciplis, and seidef to hem, For man- 
nus sone schal be bitrayed in to the 
hondis of men8, and thei sehulen sle 
him, and he" slayn, oni the thridde day 
And thei knewen not 
the word, and dredden for to axe hint. 
sz And thei eamen to Cafarnaum, Which 
whenne ‘he was! in the hous, axide hem, 
33 What tretiden je in the weie? And thei 
weren stille ; sothli thei disputiden among 
hem™ in the weie, who" of hem schulde 
31be more®. And he sittinge clepide the 
twelue, and seithP to bem, If any man‘ 
wole be the first among 3ou, he schal be 
asthe laste’, and’ mynystre* of® alle. And 
he takinge a ehilde, ordeynede him in the 
myddil¥ of hem; whom whanne he hadde 
36 byelippid, he seithY to hem, Who euere 
‘schal receyue* oon of suche ehildren in 


3ischal rise a3en. 


m™ Om. Gpr.m. ® childes fadir 9. 
s Om. ur. tand seide ur. 
Y many men UF. 
aOm. uy. > may not uy. © out in eny thing ur. 
8 synneres N. » him ewoxy. fin ur. 
© gretter uv. the gretter ur. P he seide u. 
or seruauni MP. too. ¥ myddis ur. 


u go thon ur. 


y Om. asee.m. 2% Om.c. 
€ Forsothe rpr.m. and thei 1k. 


xa man ghi. 
d preiynge k. 


° criede x. 
v entre thou ur. to gon XY. 
yy reiside him ur. lifte him vp ati pr.m. vy. liftede hym vp x. 
4 not that ony ur. 
k Om. surx. 
@ Om. ¥ pr. m. 

W seide ur. 


8 ynbileuefulnesse c sec. m. k. 
ff wolde a pr. m. schal x. 


1X. 23-—36. 


ben possible to man* that bileueth. And 23 
anoon the fadir of the child criede with 
teeris, and seide, Lord, Y bileue; Lord’, 
helpe thou? myn vnbilene*.. And whanne 24 
Jhesus hadde seyn the puple rennynge 
togidere, he manasside the vnelene spi- 
rit, and seide to hym, Thou deef and 
doumbe spirit, Y comaunde thee, go out 
fro hym, and entre no more in to hym. 
And he criynge, and inyche to-breidynge® 25 
him, wente out fro hym; and he was 
maad as deed, so that many seiden, that 
he was deed. And Jhesus helde his26 
hoond, and lifte hym vp; and he roos. 
And whanne he hadde entrid in to an27 
hous, hise disciplis axiden hym priueli, 
Whi my3ten not we caste hym out? 
And he seide to hem, This kynde in no2s8 
thing may go® out, but in preier? and 
fastyng. And thei 3eden fro thennus, 29 
and wente forth in to Galile; and thei 
wolden not, that ony man wiste. And 30 
he tau3te hise disciplis, and seide to hem, 
For’ mannus sone schal be bitrayed in 
to the hondis of men, and thei schulen 
sle hym, and he slayn schal ryse ajen on 
the thridde day. And thei knewen nots: 
the word, and’ dredden to axe hym. 
And thei camen to Cafarnaum. And 32 
whanne thei weren in the hous, he axide 
hem, What tretiden je in the weie? 
And thei weren stille; for thei disput-s3 
iden among hem in the weie, who of 
hem schulde be grettest. And he sat, 3s 
and clepide the twelue, and seide to hem, 
If ony man wole' be the firste among 
jou, he schal be the laste of alle, and the 
mynyster of alle. And he took a ehild,35 
and sette’ hym in the myddil of hem; 
and whanne he hadde bielippid hym, he 
seide to hem, Who euer resseyueth oonse 


r Om. ur. 
x was UF, 
% kynd of deueles o. 
€ Forsothe he ur. f he seide s. 
lthei weren ur. ™ hem silf uy. © whiche o. 
r laste of alleur. ®and they. t mynystre 
x resseyueth ur. 


4 vnfeithfulnesse r. 
W no OUFXY. 


P seyende x. 


b debreiding be. ¢ he cast k. 


& settide k. 


IX. 37—~48. 


my name, he receyueth me; and who 
euere receyueth me, he receyueth not me 
37aloone, but him that sente me. John 
answeride to him, seyinge’, Maistir, we 
sy3en” sum oon? for? to* caste’ out fendis 
in thi name, the® whichf sueth not vs, and 
38 we han forbedun him. Sothli Jhesus seith® 
‘to him®, Nyle 3e forbede him; ‘ther is no 
man that doth vertu in my name, and 
39may soone speke yuele of me. Forsothe 
40he that is not a3ens vs!, is for vs™. Sothli 
who euere schal 3yue drynke to 3ou a 
cuppe of cold watir in my name, for 3e 
ben of Crist, treuly I seie to 30u, he schal 
4tnot leese his mede. And who euere ‘schal 
sclaundre® oon of thes litle bileuynge in°® 
me, itP is good to? hiin that a mylne stoon 
of assis" wére don aboute his necke, and 
42 were sent’ in to the see. And if thin hond 
sclaundret thee, kitt it awey; it is good to 
thee ‘feble to" entre in to lyf, than’ hau- 
ynge twey” hondis go* in to helle, in to 
43 fier ‘that neuere schal be quenchid?, where 
the worm of hem deieth not, and the fier? 
44is not quenchid. And if thi foot sclaun- 
dre? thee, kitt it of; it is good to thee ‘for 
to’ ‘entre crokid® in to4 euerlasting lyf, 
than® hauynge twey! feet to® be sent in to 
helle of fier, ‘that nener scha] be quench- 
45id', where the worm of hem deieth not, 
46and the fier is not quenchid. That if thin 
y3e sclaundre* thee, cast it out; it is good 
to thee ‘for to! entre™ gogil y3ed in to 
rewine" of God, than® hauynge twey? y3en 
47 for’ to be sent in to helle of? fier, where the 
worm of hem deieth not, and the fier is 
4snot quenchid. Forsoth euery® man schal 
be saltid, ‘or maad sauori', with fier, and 
euery" slayn sacrifice schal be sauorid’ 


yand seide uy. 2 han sein Nn. 


a Om. N. man ur. 


MARK. 115 


of such children in my name, he res- 
seyueth me; and who euer resseyueth 
me, he resseyueth not me aloone, but 
hym that sente me. Joon answeride to37 
hym, and seide, Maister, we sayn oon 
castynge out feendis im thi name, which 
sueth not vs, and we han forbodun hym. 
And Jhesus seide, Nyle 3e forbede him 338 
for ther is no man that doith vertu in 
my name, and may soone speke yuel of 
me. He that is not a3eus vs, is‘ for vs. 39 
And who euer 3yueth 30u' a cuppe of 40 
coold water to drynke in my name, for 
je ben of Crist, treuli Y seie to 3ou, he 
schal not leese his mede. And whol 
euer schali sclaundre oon of these litle* 
that bileuen** in me, it were betere to 
hym that a mylne stoon ‘of assis! were 
don aboute his necke, and he were cast 
in to the see. And if thin hoond sclaun- 42 
dre thee, kitte it awey; it is betere to 
thee to entre feble in to lijf, than haue™ 
two" hondis, and go in to helle®, in to 
fier? that neuer schal be quenchid, where 43 
the worm of hem dieth not, and the 
fier is not quenchid. And if thi foote 44 
sclaundre thee, kitte it of; it is betere 
to thee to entre crokid in to euerlastynge 
lijf, than haue4 twei feet, and be sent 
in to helle of fier, that neuer schal be 
quenchid, where the worme of hein dieth 45 
not, and the fier is not quenchid. ‘That 46 
if thin i3e sclaundre™ thee, cast it out; 
it is betere to thee to entre gogil ized in 
to the reume of God, than haue’ twey 
ijen, and be sent in to helle of fier, 
where the worme of hem dieth not, and 47 
the fier is not quenchid. And euery 48 
man schal be saltid with fier, and enery 


b Om. Qsec.m.suvxy. ¢ Om. Qsec.m. ur. 


‘ castinge @sec.m.ur. © Om. ur. fwhichmanur. &seide vy. btohem mw. Om. ur. for no 
manisuy. Kandhe x. !30u vy. ™gour. sclaundreth ur. Cintour. POm. xk. 4 more 
to Uv. Tanasse mpYpr.m. S cast u. *sclaundreth uy. ™ that thou feble ur. ¥ than that thou ur. 


W two MOoPUXY. * to go G sec.m. Osx. 
thatuvy. ¢thoucrokidentre uy. 4tothe o. 
i ynquencheable uy.  sclaundreth our. 

A pr.M. GMOPQSUVXY. © than that thou ur. 


urx. tOm.ax. ech mur. Vsaltid ur. 


* Om. eprom. 1Om.k. * Om. k. 
rrhi. Otwei er. tweyne Rx. ° hellis x. 
§ to Laue k sec. m. 


¥ vnquencheable ur. 

€than that thon ur. 
lto msxy. Om. p. that ur. 
P tweyne ar. two wPXY. 


kk bileeneth nr. 
P the fyr rsbk. 


4 sclaundreth uy. ? to sx. 
ftwompxy. g¢Om.ur. bOm. wPxy. 
m thou entre uy. ™ the rewme 
qOm.suvx. * Om. mo. § ech 


Z fier of hem o. 


1Om a pr. m. cEEPQuXD pr.m. cka. ™ to haue 
q to hane tk. r sclaundrith rbee. 


Q 2 


116 


4o9with salt. Salt is good thing; that if 
salt be’ vnsauori, in what thing schulen 
3e make it sauori? Haue 3e salt in 30u, 
and haue 3e* pees among 3ou. 


CAP. X. 


1 And Jhesus risynge vp fro thennis, cam 
in to the endis* of Jude ouerY Jordan; 
and eftsoones? the cumpanyes* ‘of peple 
camen® ‘to gidere? to him, and as he 
2was wont, eftsoone® he tau3te hem. And 
Pharisees ‘comynge ny3‘, axiden him®, If* 
it be! leefful to a man for* to leeue!, ‘or 
3 forsake™, his wyf? ‘temptinge him®. And 
he answeringe seith® to hem, What co- 
4maundide Moyses to 30u? The? whiche 
seiden, Moyses suffride to4 write a libel of 
sforsakinge, and to forsake. To whom' 
Jhesus answeringe seith’, To the hard- 
nesse of 30ure herte Moyses* wroot to j3ou 
sthis precept". Forsothe fro’ the bigyn- 
nyng of creature God made hem male 
zand female; and he seide, For this thing 
a man schal leeue’ fadir® and modir, and 
sschal clefe to his wif, and thei schulen be 
tweyneY in o fleisch. And so now thei 
yben not tweyne’, but o fleisch. Therfore” 
that thing that* God ioynede> to gidere, 
ono man departe’. And eftsoone’ in the 
hows his disciplis axiden him of the same 
iithing. And he seith® to hem, Who euere 
‘schal leeue® his wyf, and wedde® another, 
12he doth auoutrie vpon® hir. And if the 
wyf ‘schal leeue! hir hosebonde, and be‘ 
13 weddid to another, she doth auoutrie. And 
thei offriden to him litle children, that he 
schulde touche hem; sotheli disciplis! thret- 
1senyden™ to" men offringe. Whom? whanne 
Jhesus hadde seyn, he baar ‘heuye, or vn- 
worthili?, and seith4 to hem, Suffre 3e 
wOm. mw. * coostis r. 


vis our. Y bigonde ur. 


MARK. 


IX. 49-—-X. 14. 


slayn sacrifice schal be maad sauery with 
salt. Salt is good; if salt be vnsauery, 49 
in what thing schulen 3e make it sauery? 
Hane 3e salt among 30u, and haue 3e pees 
among 30u. 
CAP XxX 

And Jhesus roos vp fro thennus, and1 
cam in to the coostis of Judee ouer Jor- 
dan; and eftsoones the puple cam togi- 
dere to hym, and as he was wont, eft- 
soonet he tau3te hem. And the Farisees 2 
camen, and axiden hym, Whether" it he 
leueful to a man to leeue his wijf? and 
thei temptiden hym. And he answeride,3 
and seide to hem, What comaundide 
Moises to 300? And thei seiden, Moises 4 
suffride to write a libel of forsaking, 
and to forsake. ‘To whiche’ Jhesus** 5 
answeride’, and seide*, For the hard- 
nesse of 30ure herte Moises wroot to you 
this comaundement. But fro the bi-6 
gynnyng of creature God made-hem 
male and female; and seide, For this7 
thing a man schal leeue his’ fadir and 
modir, and schal drawe to hys wijf, ands 
thei schulen be tweyne? in o flesch. And 
so now thei ben not tweyne, but o flesch. 
Therfor that thing that God ioynede*s 
togidere, no man departe. And eftsoone iv 
in the hous hise disciplis axiden hym of 
the sane thing. And he seide to hem, 11 
Who euer leeuith his wijf, and weddith 
another, he doith auowtri on hir. Ande 
if the wijf leeue? hir housebonde, and 
be weddid to another man‘, sche doith 
letcherie. And thei brou3ten to hymis 
litle children, that he schulde touche 
hem; and the disciplis threteneden the 
men, that brou3ten hem. And whanne1s 
Jhesus hadde seyn hem, he baar heuy, 
bOm.ur. cam x. 


zefte uy. 8 company ox. 


4Om.ur. efte ur. fneizynge ur. & him, temptynge hym ur, 5 Whether uv. tisy. * Om. ogsrurx. 


1 forsake ur. ™Om.aovx. or to forsake Nn. 2 Om.ur. © seide ur. 
Vat UV. 
b hath ioynede ur. 
i forsake ur. 
© Which ur. 


Sseide ur. theur. " comaundement ur. 
% Therfor a man departe not ur, 4 which ur, 
f forsaketh uv. € weddeth ur. © on urx. 
manassiden ur. thratten x. ‘3 Om. ur. 

thili, or heweli uy. heuye x. 4 seide ur. 


teftk prim. 4 Wher ¢ et plures. 
be pr.m. @ pr. mg. 


x seide to hem neegk. 
plures, 


© Om. s prem. 


¥ To whom 1. And k. 
y Om. Ek. 


POm.urx. 4% fortoo. * whiche vr. 
W forsake uy. *his fadirv. Ytwo wpxy. 
eQm. ur. defte ur. ¢seide ur, 
kis uv. | the disciplis ur. ™ threteden s. 


P ynworthili 4, heuyly, or vnqvorthili 9. vnwor- 


vv he k. 
Ztwo l. 


w answeride to hem a pr.m.c. 
ahath ioined rk. » leueth c et 


X. 15—25. 


litle children for™ to come to me, and for- 
bede 3e hem not, forsoth® oft suche ‘is the 
kyngdom of God". Treuli I seie to 3ou, 
who euere ‘schal not reeeyue’ the kyng- 
dom of God as this* litle ehild, he schal 
1énot entre in to it. And he biclippinge 
hem, and puttinge hondis vponyY hem, 
17 blesside hem. And whanne Jhesus? was 
gon out in the weye, o* mau rennynge 
bifore, the® kne bowid*, preiede him, sei- 
yuge’, Goode maistir, what schal I do, that 
isI receyue enerlastinge lyf? Forsothe 
Jhesus seide to hiin, What seist thou me 
good? ‘No man® good‘, no but ‘God 
igaloone&. ‘Thon hast knowen* the co- 
maundementis, do thou non auoutrie, sle 
not, stele not, seie not! fals witnessinge, 
do no fraude, worsehipe thi fadir and mo- 
20dirs. And he answeringe seith! to him™, 
Maistir, I haue kept alle these thingis fro 
2imy 3outhe". Sothli Jhesus ‘biheld “him, 
and° louyde hym; and he? seide to him, 
O thing failith to thee; go thou’, selle 
thou? what euere thingis thou’ hast, and 
3yuet to pore men, and thou sehalt haue 
tresour in henene; and come", sue’ thou 
22me. The* whieh maad sorwful in the 
word, wente awey mornyuge, forsoth* 
23he was hauynge many possesciouns. And 
Jhesus biholdinge aboute, seithY to his 
diseiplis, How hard thei? that han money? 
schulen® entre in to the kyngdom® of God. 
21 Forsothe the diseiplis weren stoneyed? in 
his wordis, And Jhesus eftsoone® an- 
sweringe seith’ to hem, 3e8% litle sones, 
how hard thing? ‘it is‘, men* tristynge in 
richessis' for™ to entre in to the kyngdom" 
250f God. It is li3ter®, ‘ov esyer°, aP camel 
ford to’ passe thorw ‘a nedlis’ y3e, thant a 
riche man for" to’ entre in to the kyngdom 


MARK. 117 


and seide to hem, Suffre 3e litle children 
to’ come to me, and forbede 3¢ hem not, 
for of suche is the kyngdom of God. 
Treuli Y seie to jou, who ener res-15 
seyueth® not the kyugdom of God as a 
litil ehild, he schal not entre in to it. 
And he bielippide heim, and leide hise 16 
hondis on heim, and blisside hem. Andi7 
whanmne Jhesus was gon out in’ the weie, 
a man ranne bifore, and knelide bifor 
hym, and preiede hym, and seide, Good 
maister, what sehal Y do, that Y res- 
seyue euerlastynge lijf? Aud Jhesus is 
seide to hym, What seist thou, that Y 
am good? Ther is no man good, but 
God hym silf. Thou knowist the eo-159 
maundementis, do thou noon auowtrie, 
‘sle not, stele not’, seie not fals witness- 
yng, do no fraude, worsehipe thi fadir 
and thi modir. And he answeride, and 20 
seide to hym, Maister, Y hane kept alle 
these thingis fro my jongthe®. And2i 
Jhesus bihelde hym, and louede hym, 
and seide to hym, O thing faileth to 
thee; go thou, and sille alle thingis that 
thou hast, and 3yue to pore men, and 
thou schalt haue tresoure im henene; and 
come, sue thon me. And he was ful 22 
sori in the word, and wente awei morn- 
yng, for he hadde many possessiouns. 
And Jhesus bihelde aboute, and seide to 23 
hise disciplis, Hou hard thei that han 
ritehessis schulen entre in to the kyng- 
dom of God. And the disciplis weren 24 
astonyed in hise wordis*. And Jhesus 
eftsoone answeride, and seide ‘to hem!, 
3e litle ehildren, hou hard it is for men 
that tristen in ritchessis to entre in to 
the kyngdom of God. It is lizter a2s 
camele to passe thorou a nedlis ije, than 


r Om. MSUYF sec.m. x. sfor uv. tOm.ur. the rewme of God is of uy.‘ resseyueth not ur. 
Wrewmeur. *amuvy. Yonuvx. Zheur. ®a muvx. and theo. ©¢ bowid bifore him ur. 4 and 
seide ur. © Noon ur. fis good ur. ff Om. xr. 8 00God ur, 4h Hast thou knowe vr. ino vu. & thi 
modir ux. 'seide ur. ™ Crist ur.  %3ongthe uy. © byholdynge him o. POm. ur. 4 Om. ap. 
rOm.mp. $that thou x. ¢t3eue thou uy. Y%come thou uy. Yandsweo. WOm.ur.  * for ur. 
¥Yseide uy. 2schulen thei uy. 4richessis ur. >» Om.ur. ©rewme uy. ‘astoneyed pur. © efte ur. 
fseideur. ¢Om.ur. 6b Om.ur. tisit mur. that menur. -!lrichesse rp. ™Om.surx. ® rewme ur. 
0 liz3tlier kK. esier ur. 0° Om. gurxy. Pthataur. @Om.gsurvxy. *Om.ur.  § an edlis GKMP. 


tthan that ur. Om. surx. Y¥ Om. ur. 


d for to 1 pr.m. Om. g. 


€ resceyue hee. 
hFuls. iofhardk. word k. 


10m, k. 


f into I sec. m, k. 


W'yewme UP, 


ff stele not, sle not a. & 30uthe EPRsk. 


118 MARK. 


260f God. Whiche wondridenY more, sey- 
inge at? hem selue, And who may be 
27maad saf? And Jhesus biholdinge hem, 
seith® ‘to hem>, Anentis men it is impos- 
sible, but not anemptis God; for alle 
28 thingis ben possible anemptis God. And 
aftirward? Petre bigan for® to seye to 
him, Loo! we han left alle thingis, and 
2ohan sued thee. Jhesus answeringe seith’, 
Treuli I seie to 30u, ‘ther is no man’ that 
schal leeue" hous, or bretheren, or sistris', 
or fadir, or modir, or sones, or feeldis for me 
30and for the gospel, the‘ which schal not 
taken an hundridfold so moche now in this 
tyme, housis, and bretheren, and! sistris™, 
and modris, aud sones, and feldis, with per- 
secuciouns, and in” the world to comynge® 
sieuerlasting lyf. Forsoth many schulen 
be, the firste the laste, and the laste the 
se firste. Forsothe thei weren in the weye 
sti3ynge to Jerusalem; and Jhesus wente 
bifore hem, and thei wondriden, and? 
folowinge’ dredden. And eftsoone’ Jhe- 
sus’ takinge tot twelue, bygan to seye to 
hem, what thingis weren to come" to him. 
33For lo! we sti3en to Jerusalem, and 
mannus sone schal be bitrayed to the’ 
princes of prestis, and to scribis’, and to 
eldere* men; and thei schulen dampne 
him by deeth, and thei schulen bytake 
34him to hethene men. And thei schulen 
scorne him, and byspeeteY him, and beete‘ 
him; and thei schulen sle him, and in the 
ssthridde day he schal ryse a3en. And 
James and Jon, ‘Zebedees sones*, ‘camen 
ny3° to him, seyinge*®, Maistir, we wolen, 
that what euere’ we schulen® axe, thou do 
33to vs. And he seide to hem, What wolen 
373e that I do to 30ou? And thei seiden, 
3yue to vs, that we sitten ‘that oon® at® thil 
ri3thalf, and ‘the tothir* at ‘the left!, in thi 


X. 26—37. 


a riche man to entre in to the kyngdom 
of God. And thei wondriden more, and 26 
seiden among hem silf, And who may be 
sauyd? And Jhesus bihelde hem, and 97 
seide, Anentis men it is impossible®, but 
not anentis God; for alle thingis ben 
possible anentis God. And Petir bigan? 28 
to seie to hym, Lo! we han left alle 
thingis, and han sued thee. Jhesus an-29 
sweride, and seide, Treuli Y seie to 30u, 
ther is no man that leeueth hous, or bri- 
theren, or sistris, or fadir, or modir, or 
children, or feeldis for me and for the 
gospel, which schal not take an hundrid 30 
fold so myche now in this tyme, housis, 
and britheren, and sistris, and’ modris, 
and children, and feeldis, with persecu- 
ciouns, and in the world to comynge 
euerlastynge lijf. But many schulen be, 31 
the firste the last, and the last the firste. 
And thei weren in the weie goynge vp3e 
to Jerusalem; and Jhesus wente bifor 
hem, and thei wondriden, and foleweden, 
and dredden. And eftsoone Jhesus took 
the twelue, and bigan to seie to hem, 
what thiugis weren to come to hym. 
For lo! we stien to Jerusalem, and 33 
mannus sone schal be bitraied to the 
princis of prestis, and to scribis, and 
to the’ eldre men; and thei schulen 
dampne hym bi deth, and thei schn- 
len take hym to hethene meu. And 
thei schulen scorne hym, and _bispete 3a 
hym, and bete him; and thei schulen 
sle hym, and in the thridde dai he 
scha] rise ajen. And James and Joon, 35 
Zebedees sones, camen’ to hym, and 
seiden, Maister, we wolen, that what 
euer we axen, thout do to vs. And he3e6 
seide to hem, What wolen 3e that Y do 
to 300? And thei seiden, Grauute to"3; 


Ywondringe y. Zanentisuy. aseideuvr. »Om.ur. ¢ Om. xy. ¢Om.ur. ¢ Om. surxy. 
fseide uv. Snomanisuv. 4 forsake ur. isistrenu. Om. ur. !Om. w prem. ™ sisteren ou. 
Nin too. © comen sx. P and thei our. q suynge ur. t efte ur. She ur. tOm. nur. 


ucomynge ur. VY Om. px.  ™ the scribes sur. 
2 thei schulen beete ur. 
e Om. s. f 3ene thou ur. 


k that othir pe. the other x. 


© ynpossible Eps. 


P gan pqnuxb pr. m. ce. 
thou k pr. m. 


u Om. EI pr. m, PQR pr.m. X. 


x the eelder sosury. 
@ the sones of Zebedee ur. 
& the toon acnogty. the oon mwsur. the one Pirx. 
I thi left anrivx. thi left half ogury. 


q and fadris and k. 


y thei schulen bispete ur. 
fandseyn uy. 4 euere thing ur. 
hon w. i the ce. 


b neizen ur. 


¥Om.k. ‘Scomens. t that 


X. 38—49. 


ssglorie. Forsothe Jhesus ‘seith to hem®, 
3e witen not what 3e schulen axe; mown 
3e drynke the cuppe, the® which I ‘am toP 
drynke, or? be waischun" with’ the bap- 
s9tym, in which I am baptisid? And thei 
seiden to him, We mown. Sothli Jhesus 
seitht to hem, Treuli 3e schulen drynke 
the cuppe that" I drynke, and 3e schulen 
be waischun® with* the baptym, in which 
4oI am baptisid; sothliY for? to sitte at my 
ri3thalf or lefthalf is* not myn to 3yue to? 
. 4130u, but to which® it is ordeyned’, And 
the ten heeringe hadden® endignacioun! of 
a2James and John. Sothli Jhesus clepinge 
hem, seith® to hem, 3e witen, that” thei 
that semen’, ‘or ben seyn*, to haue prince- 
hed! on™ folkis, lordschipen®, ‘or ben lordis®, 
of hem, and the princes of hein han power 
as0f hem. Forsoth it is not so in 30u, but 
who euere schal? wolle be? maad more’, 
4aschal be 3oure inynystre, and who euere 
schal® wolle bet the" firste in 30u, schal be 
asseruaunt of alle. Forwhi and mannis 
sone cain not, that ‘it schulde be mynys- 
trid’ to him, but that he schulde mynys- 
tre’, and 3yue his soule*, ‘or lyf*, ‘re- 
dempcioun, or a3eu biyng’, for manye. 
4¢ And thei cainen® to Jerico; and him go- 
ynge forth” fro Jerico, and his disciplis, 
and a° ful moche cumpany ‘of peple‘, the 
sone of Tymey, Barthymeus, blynd, saat 
47 bisydis the weye beggynge. ‘The which® 
whanne he hadde herd, for it isf Jhesus of 
Nazareth, bigan’ to crie, and seye, Jhesu, 
the sone of Dauith, haue mercy on™ me. 
4s And manye thretuyden! hym, that he 
schulde be stille; and he criede moche 
more*, Jhesu, the sone of Dauith, haue 
agmercy on! me. And Jhesu stondinge 
comaundide hym for™ to be clepid; and 


D seide AGNOS. Seide to hem ury. 
tised ur. °SOm.s. inv. ¢ seide rv. 
SUFX. itis UrX. b Om. nsx. 
fdedeyne uy. &seide uy. } for ur. 
m of y. 2 ben lordis uy. © Om. moperurxy. 
t to be arn. be maad Q sup. ras. 
y Om. s10PQUVXY pr. m. 


acomen wvwv. Poutur. ¢ Om.ur. 


MARK. 


° Om. NoTUYW sec. m. XY. 
u which ur. 
¢ whom Mopsxy. 

i ben seyn urxy. 
P Om. ur. 
4 Om. MoQry pr. m. 
2 redempcionn Su ajenbiynge MPQxY pr. m. ajeinbyinge, or redempcioun T. 

Om. ur. 


W baptised ur. 


119 


vs, that we sitten ‘the toon’ at thi ri3t- 
half, and the tother’ at thi left half, in 
thi glorie. And Jhesus seide to hem,38 
3e witen not what 3e axen; moun 3e 
drynke the cuppe, which* Y schal drynke, 
or be waischun with the baptym, in which 
Y am baptisid? AndY thei seiden to39 
hym, We moun. And Jhesus seide to 
hem, 3e schilen drynke the cuppe that 
Y drynke, and 3e schulen be waschuu 
with the baptym, in which Y am bap- 
tisid; but to sitte at my ri3thalf or left- 40 
half is? not myn to 3yue to 30u, but to 
whiche® it is maad redi. And the tena) 
herden, and bigunnen to haue indigna- 
cioun of James and Joon. But Jhesus 42 
clepide hem, and seide to hem, 3e witen, 
that thei that semen to haue prynshode 
of folkis, ben lordis of hem, and the 
princes of hem han power of hem. But 43 
it is not so among 30u, but who ever wole 
be maad gretter, schal be 3oure mynys- 
ter; and who euer wole be the firste 44 
among 30u, schal be seruaunt of alle. For 45 
whi mannus sone cam not, that it schulde 
be mynystrid to hym, but that he schulde 
mynystre, and 3yue his lijf a3enbiyng for 
manye. And thei camen to Jerico; and 46 
whaune he 3ede forth fro Jerico, and 
hise disciplis, and a> ful myche puple, 
Barthymeus, a blynde man, the sone of 
Thimei, sat bisidis the weie, and beggide. 
And whanne he herde, that it is Jhesus 47 
of Nazareth, he bigan to crie, and seie4, 
Jhesu, the sone of Dauid, haue merci 
on me. And manye thretneden hym, 48 
that he schulde be stille; and he criede 
myche the more, Jhesu, the sone of Da- 
uid, haue merci on me. And Jhesus 49 
stood, and comaundide hym to be clepid ; 


P Om, ur. 
Xin uP. 
d maad redy ur. 


dVeither uy. ¥ bap- 
y forsothe ur. % Om. 
¢ bigunnen to haue ur. 
k Om. urxy. | princehod, or ben lordis o. 

4tobe vy. ‘tthe gretter ur. 8 Om. cr. 
Vv me schulde serue uy. Wserue uy. * lyf ur. 
f was U. 


e And ur. & he gan o. he bigan cr. 


hof xy. ithreteden sy. thratten x. * more, seiynge ur. ‘'ofoxy. ™ Om. surx. 


w oother 1. 
4 seide xhi, 


¥ the oon Ex. that oon qk. 
cpr.m.gka, ¢ was cka. 


x the which k. 


yOm.k. 2 itisk. b Om. 


4a whom 1, 


120 


thei clepiden” the blynde iman, seiynge to 
him, Be thou ‘of betere® herte, ryse vp?, 

sohe clepith thee. ‘The which4, his cloth 

stcast away, ‘sturtinge cam™ to him. And 
Jhesus answeringe seideS’ to him, What 
wolt thou I schalt do to thee? The" 
blynde man seide to him, Maistir, that I 

s2se. Sothli Jhesus seide to him, Go thou’, 
thi feith hath maad thee saaf. And anon 
he sy3, and suede him in the weye. 


CAP. XI. 


1 And whanne Jhesus ‘cam ny3" to Jeru- 
salem and to Betanye, to* the mount of 
Olyuete, he sendith? two* of his disciplis, 

_ gand seith to hem, Go 3e in to the castel 
that® is a3ens 301; and anon 3e entrynge 
in® thidur schulen fynde a colt tyed, on? 
thee which ‘non of men sat 3it; vn- 

3bynde$ 3e, and bryng® him. And if ony 
man ‘schal seie! ony thing to* 3ou’, seie 3e, 
that™ he is nedeful to the Lord, aid anon 
the schal leene him hidur. And thei go- 


ynge forth, founden a colt bounden® by- 


fore the 3ate with outeforth, in the meet- 
ing of tweye® weyes; and thei vnboundenP 
shim. And summe of men stondinge there 
seiden to hem, What don 3e, vnbyndinge’ 
6the colt? ‘And thei? seiden to hem, as 
Jhesus comaundides tot hem; and thei 
zleften* hem. And thei brou3ten the colt 
to Jhesu, and thei’ puttiden” to* him her 
sclothis, and Jhesus sat vponY him*%  For- 
sothe manye* strewiden her clothis in the 
weye, sotheli othere men kittiden bowis, 
‘or brauuchis®, fro4 trees, and strewiden 
gin the weye. And thei that wenten bi- 
fore, and that sueden, cryeden, seyinge, 
10 Osanna, blessid zs he that cometh in the® 
name of the Lord ; blessid thef kyngdom® 


© hetere of Kk. 


MARK. 


X. 50—XI. 10. 


and thei clepen® the blynde man, and! 
seienS to hym, Be thou of betere herte, 
rise vp, he clepith thee. And he eastide! so 
awei his cloth, and skippide, and cam to 
hym. And Jhesus answeride, and seidesi 
to hym, What wolt thou, that Y schal do 
to thee? The blynde man seide to hym, 
Maister, that Yse. Jhesus seide to hy, 52 
Go thou, thi feith hath maad thee saaf. 
And anoon he saye, and suede hym in 
the weie. 
CAP. XI; 

And whanne Jhesus cam ny3 to Jeru-1 
salem and to Betanye, to the mount of 
Olyues, he sendith tweyne! of hise disci- 
plis, and seith to hem, Go 3e in to thee 
eastel that is ajens 30u; and anoon as 3e 
entren there 3e schulen fynde a colt tied, 
on which* no man hath sete 3it; vntie 
3e, and brynge! hym. And if ony mans 
seye ony thing to 30u, What doen 3e? 
sele 3e, that he is nedeful to the Lord, 
and anoon he schal leeue hym hidir. 
And thei 3eden forth, and founden a colt 4 
tied bifor the 3ate with out forth, in the 
metyng of twei weies; and thei vn- 
tieden hym. And summe of hem thats 
stoden there seiden to hem, What doen 
3e, vutiynge the colt? And thei seidens 
to hem, as Jhesus comaundide hem; and 
thei leften it to hem. And thei brou3ten 7 
the colt to Jhesu, and thei leiden on 
hym her eclothis, and Jhesus sat on hym. 
And many strewiden her clothis in thes 
weie, othere™ men kittiden braunchis 
fro" trees, and strewiden in the weie. 
And thei that wenten bifor, and thats 
sueden, crieden, and seiden, Osanna, 
blissid 2s he that cometh in the name of 10 
the Lord; blessid be? the kyngdom of 


« clepen UF. P thou ur. 4 And vr. ‘he cam stertynge out ur. —® seith y. 

t Om. pxy. 4 Forsothe the ur. °Om. ap. WW neijede ur. Xatteur. yOm.ur. 2 sente 

- MNPXY. &tweyne Gur. tweyo, bwhichur. ¢Om.xr. Gvpono. ¢ Om.ur. fno mann. 

Svutye ur. bh brynge 3e nur. bringeth sx. —iseith ur. = K agens g@. ~— | 30n, What do 3e @ sec. m. 

mforur., “tyed uv. Otwo wpx et ¥ passim. Pvntyenur. 4Gyvntyinge ur. Tt Which ur. § hadde 

comaundide ur. Om. aeanpestrurx. leftentour. YOm.@  puttensurx. *onur. 

Yonsurx. #hems, many menur. Pkitten x. ¢Om. wopqurxy. ‘dofur. ¢ Om. pxy. 
fthat o. isthe ur. 8 rewme cr. 

¢clepiden Rhik. fandthei er. & scidenhik. caster. itworhi. ‘whom. ! brynge 3e Ek. 


mand otherb. Oofk. isc. 


XI. 11—23. 


‘that cometh’ of oure fadir Dauith!; O- 
11sanna in hi3tees*. Aud he entride in to 
Jerusalem, in to the temple; and alle 
thingis! seyn aboute, whanne ‘the our was 
now euenyng™, he wente" in to Betanye, 
12with twelue. And another day, whanne he 
13 wente out of° Betanye, he nungride. And 
whanne he hadde seyn a? fyge tree afer 
hauynge leeuys, he cam, if happily he 
schulde fynde ony thing therynne ; and 
whanne he cam? to it", he fond no thing, 
out taken leenys; for it was no’ tyme of 
14fygis. And Jhesus answeringe seide to 
it, Now no more with outen ende ony 
man ete fruyt of thee. And his disciples 
isherden; and thei cament to Jerusalem. 
And whanne he hadde entrid in to the 
temple, he bigan for" to caste out*® men 
sellinge and biggyngeY in the temple; 
and he turnyde vpsodoun the boordis of 
chaungeris, and the chaieris of men sell- 
16inge culueris; and he suffride not, that 
ony man schulde bere a vessel thur32 the 
iztemple. And he tau3te hem, seyinge?, 
Wher? it is not writun, For myn hous 
schal be clepid the* hous of: preiynge® to 
alle folkis? forsoth 5e han maad it a den 
180f thenes. The® which thing herd, the 
princes of prestis and seribis* sou3ten hou 
thei schulde leese him; forsoth thei 
dreden hym, for al the cumpanye ‘of pe- 
19pleS wondride on his teching. And 
whanne enenyug" was maad, he wente 
200ut of the citee. And whanne thei pass- 
iden eerly, thei sy3en the fige tree maad 
2idrye fro the rootis. And Petre hauynge 
mynde, seide to him, Maistir, lo! the fyge 
tree, whom! thou cursedist, hath dryed vp. 
22And Jhesus answeringe seith* to him), 
23 Haue 3e the feith of God ; trenli I seie to 
jou, that™ who euere seith™ to this hil, 


b Om. ur. 1 Dauith that cometh ur. 
tyde houre was o. our was now euenyng XY pr.m. 


P the uv. dhaddecomev. *Om. y. 

x Om. Kx. y hiynge acuNnoporurwy. biende sx. 
X passim. Canour. 4 prayere our. © Om. ur. 
euenyng x. iwhich ur. *seide ur. hem ur. 


P to come R pr. m. hi. 
k pr.m. 88 forsothe 1. 


VOL. TV. 


t the enenyng 1. 


k heisthis ap. hizse thingis ur. 
8 not GMNOTUFW sec. m. X. 


€ the seribis ur. 


4 hadde say a. si3 c. hadde seie s. 


MARK. 121 


oure fadir Dauid that is comeP; Osanna 
in hijest thingis. And he entride in tou 
Jerusalem, in to the temple; and whanne 
he ‘hadde seyn4 al thing" aboute, whanne 
it was enue", he wente out in to Betanye, 
with the twelue. And anothir daye, 12 
whanne he wente out of Betanye, he 
hungride. And whanne he hadde seynis 
a fige tree afer hauyuge leeues, he cam, 
if happili he schulde fynde ony thing 
theron; and wianne he cam to it, he 
foonde no thing, out takun leeues; for it 
was not’ tyme of figis. And Jhesus an-t4 
sweride and seide to it, Now neuer ete 
ony man fruyt of thee inore. Aud hise 
disciplis herden; and thei camen to1s 
Jerusalem. And whanne he was entrid 
in to the temple, he bigan to caste out 
silleris and biggeris in the temple; and 
he turnede vpsodoun the bordis of chaun- 
geris, aud the chayeris of men that selden 
culueris; and he suffride not, that ony 16 
man schulde bere a vessel thorou the 
temple. And he tau3te hem, and seide, 17 
Whether it is not writun,That myn hous 
schal be clepid the hous of preyng to 
alle folkis ? but 3e han maad it a denne 
of theues. And whaune this thing was is 
herd, the princis of prestis and scribis 
sou3ten hou thei schulden Jeese hym; 
for*s thei dredden hym, for al the puple 
wondride on his techyng. And whanne 19 
euenyngt was come, he wente out of the 
citee. And as thei passiden forth eerli, 20 
thei sayn the fige tree maad drye fro the 
rootis. And Petir bithon3te hym, and 2t 
seide to hym, Maister, lo! the fige tree, 
whom thou cursidist, is dried vp. And 22 
Jhesus answeride and seide to hem, 
Haue 3e the feith of God; treuli Y seie23 
to 30u, that who euer seijth to this hil, 


m now the euen- 
° fro G sec. m. O. 
tcomeneupy. 4 Om. surx. 

aand seide uy. © Whether 
g Om. ur. 4 euentide ur. the 
n that saith o. 


Imen ur. 
n wente out G sec. m. UF. 


2 thorow out N. 


™m for uv. 


tthingisc. 'euene R. § No EIPQX 


122 


Take®, and sende? in to the see; and dout- 
ith not in his herte, but bileueth, for what 
euere’ he ‘schal seye’, ‘be it’ maad, it schal 
24be maad‘ to him. Therfore I seie to 30u, 
alle thingis ‘what euere thingis" 3e prei- 
ynge schulen’ axe, bileue 3e that” 3e 
schulen take, and thei*¥ schulen come to 
2530u. And whanne 3e schulen stonde forY 
to preie, for3yue 3e, if 3e han ony thing 
a3ens ony man, that and” 3oure fadir that* 
is in heuenes, for3yue to 3ou 30ure symnes. 
26 That” if 3e ‘schulen not for3yue®, neither 
3oure fadir that’ is in heuenes, schal for- 
273yue 30u® 3oure synnesf, And eftsoone’ 
thei camen" to Jerusalem. And whanne! 
he walkide in tok the temple, the hijeste 
prestis, and scribis, and eldere men ‘camen 
28ni3! to him, and seien to him, In what 
power doist thou thes thingis? or™ who 
jaf to thee this power, that ‘thou do” thes 
29thingis ? Forsothe Jhesus answeringe 
seith to hem, And I schal axe 3ou° o word, 
and answere 3e to me, and I schal? seie to 
jou, in what power I do thes thingis. 
30 Whether was ‘the baptym of John4 of 
heuene, or’ of men? answere 3e to me. 
31 And thei thou3ten ‘with inne® hem selue, 
seiynge, If we schulen seie of heuene, he 
schal seie to vs, Whi therfore bileuent 3e 
sznot to him; if we schulen seie of men, 
we dreden the peple; for® alle men had- 
den John, for he was verily a prophete. 
33 And thei answeriuge seyen’ to Jhesu, We 
witen And Jhesn answeringe 
seith to bem, Neither I seie to jou, in 
what power I do thes thingis. 


heuere*, 


CAP. XII. 
1 And Jhesus bigan to speke* parably’, 
‘or in parablis?. A man plauntide a vyne- 
3erd*, and puttide> aboute® an hegge, and 


MARK. 


XI. 24-—XIE. 3. 


Be thou takun, and cast in to the see; 
and doute" not in his herte, but bileu- 
eth, that what euer he seie, scha) be don, 
it schal be don to hym. Therfor Y seie 24 
to 30u, alle thingis what euer thingis 3e 
preynge schulen axe, bileue 3e that 3e 
schulen take, and thei schulen come to 
3ou. And whatune je schulen stonde to25 
preye, for3yue 3e, if 5e han ony thing 
a3ens ony man, that 3oure fadir that is 
in heuenes, for3yue to 3ou 30ure synnes. 
And if 3e for3yuen not, nether joure fadir 26 
that is in heuenes, schal forjyue to jou 
joure synnes. And eftsoone thei camen 27 
to Jerusalem. And whanne he walkide in 
the temple, the hijeste prestis, and scribis, 
and the’ elder men camen to hym, and® 28 
seyn* to hym, In what power doist thou 
these thingis? or who 3af to thee this 
power, that thou do these thingis? Jhe-29 
sus answeride and seide to hem, And Y 
schal axe 30u o word, and answere 3e to 
me, and Y schal seie to 30u in what 
power Y do these thingis. Whether was 30 
the baptym of Joon of heuene, or of 
men? answere 3e to me. And _ thei3i 
thou3ten with ynne hem silf, seiynge, If 
we seien of heuene, he schal seie to vs, 
Whi thanne bileuenY 3e not to him; ifse 
we seien of men, we dreden the puple; 
for alle men hadden Joon, that he was 
verili a prophete. And thei answeryden, 33 
and seien” to Jhesu, We witen neuer?. 
And Jhesu answerde, and seide to hem, 
Nether Y seie to 30u, in what power Y 
do these thingis. 


CAL SE, 
And Jhesus bigan to speke to hem int 
parablis. A man plauntide a vynjerd, 
and sette> an hegge aboute it, and° dalf a 


© Be thou taken nur. P be thou sent nur. send thee x. deuer thing ur.‘ seith ur. 8 schal 
be vy. tdonur. whiche euereur. vYOm.ur. Wforury. *thour. YOm. surx. Zalso ur. 
awhich ur. > Forur. © forzjeuennotur. which vr. €toj3oumurxy. fOm.o. & eftev. 
b comen Gar ef W passim. Y. ? Om. v. k Om. ur. 1 comen ni3 iv. neizen uP. m either ur. 
odontoo. °ofjouNn., POm.o. 4 Joues bapteme ur. Ffeither ur. 8% with x. ¢ bileueden ur. 
« forsothe ur. Vseidenu. Wnotur, *speketo hem unpur. Yin parablis awpur, 7 Om. aNPUrX, 


ayvyner uy. »” putte wpsTx. 
y P 


v Om. b. 
b settide arhi, 


u doutith cermpqrsuxbeeghike?. 
2 seiden cshik. 4 not k. 


¢ abowt it Mopeury. 


wand thei k. 
¢ and he 1. 


x seiden cerprk. y bileniden 1. 


XIE. 2—14. 


dalf a lake, and bildide’ a tour, and hir- 
ede® it! to erthe tilieris, and wente forth? 
zin pilgrymage; and sente' to the erthe 
tilieris in tyme a seruaunt, that he schulde 
receyue! of the fruyt of the vynejerd* at! 
3the erthe tilieris. The™ whiche ‘beten 
4him takun", and leften him voyde. And 
eftsoone® he sente to hem another ser- 
uaunt, and thei woundiden him in the 
heed, and ponyseheden? with chidingis4, 
sor reprouyngis'. And eftsoone’ he sente 
another, and thei slowen't him, and othere 
mo, betynge" summe, but’ sleynge ¥ 
6othere. Therfore 3it he hauynge a* sone 
most dereworth, ‘and to hem he senteY 
him the laste, seyinge’, For by* hap thei 
schulen schame my sone, ‘or drede with 
7reuerence’. Forsothe the tenauntis seyden 
‘to hem self, ‘or to gidere®, This is the 
eler; come 3e, sle we him, and the eritage 
sschal be oure’. And thei takynge him®, 
castiden" out withoute the vyne3erdi, ‘and 
9slowen*. ‘Therfore what! schal the lord 
of the vyne3erd™ do? He schal come, and 
leese the" tenauntis, and 3yue® the vyne- 
103erd? to othere. Wher 3e han not rad 
this scripture, The stoon the’ which men 
bildinge han dispisid, this is maad in to 
the heed’ of the corner? This thing is 
maad of the Lord, and is wondirful in 
1z0ure y3en. And thei sou3ten fort to holde 
him, and thei dreden the eumpanye ‘of 
peple"; sothli thei knewen for to hem he 
seide this parable; and him left, thei 
i3wenten away. And thei senden to him 
summe of the Farisees andY Erodians, for” 
14 to* take hym in word. The whiche com- 
ynge seyn to hym, Maistir, we witen for 
thou ert sothfast, and reekist? not of? ony 


d bilde asx. © settide it to ferme ur. 
Kk vyner vy. lofy. ™QOm. ur. 
ynges ur. Om. G pr.m. urx. 
Ww thei killiden vr. * 0 aGNogsTuUVIVX. 
with reuerence ur. © Om. ourx. 4 togidere ur. 
hcasten sx. lvyner uy. * Om. nu. 
jeune UY. =P vyneruy. 4 Whether ux. 
vand of ur. w Om. esurx. 
a Om. aGNnasxyY. 


8 efte Ur. 


4 erthetiliers gk. © beoten him k. f eft g. 


wil ep. 1! kilden him x. 


© The whiche 1. © comen rR. P seiden c. 


MARK. 


f£Om.ur. & forsothe w sec. m. 

® takun, beten him arp. 

t killiden ur. 

Y sente also to hem ur. 

€ Om, ourx. 

1 What therfore rv. 
rOm. urxy. 


x that thei shulden Q sec. m. uv. 


& ether punizsshiden K marg. 
K castiden him 1KR pr.m. |! erthetilieris k. 


PP Om. R pr.m. 
R2 


123 


lake, and bildide a toure, and hiryde it 
to tilieris’, and wente forth in pilgrim- 
age. And he sente to the erthe tilieris2 
in tyme a seruaunt, to resseyue of the 
erthe tilieris of the fruyt of the vyn3erd. 
And thei token hym, and beeten*, ands 
leften hym voide. And eftsoone’ he4 
sente to hem anothir sernaunt, and thei 
woundiden hyin in the heed, and tur- 
mentiden® hym. And eftsoone he sentes 
another, and thei slowen hym, and othir 
mo, betynge summe, and sleynge othere. 
But 3it he hadde a moost derworth sone, 6 
and he sente hym last to hem, and seide, 
Perauenture thei schulen" drede my sone. 
But the erthetilieris seiden togidere, This7 
is the eire; come 3e, sle we hyim, and the 
eritage schal be ourun. And thei tokuns 
hym, and killideni, and castiden* out 
without the vyn3erd. Thanne whats 
schal the lord of the vynjerd do? He 
schal come, and lese the tilieris!, and 3yue 
the vynjerd to othere. Whether 3e han 1o 
not red this seripture, The stoon which 
the bilderis han disspisid, this is maad in 
to the heed of the corner? This thing 1 
is doon of the Lord, and is™ wondirful 
in ouré izen. And thei sou3ten to holde lz 
hym, ‘and thei dredden the puple; for 
thei knewen that to hem he seide this 
parable; and thei leften hym, and thei13 
wenten awei. And thei senten to hym 
sume of the Farisees and" Erodians, to 
take hym in word. Whiche® camen™, 14 
and seien? to hym, Maistir, we witen 
that thou art sothfast, and reckist not of 
ony man?P; for nethir thou  bihold- 
ist in to the’ face of man’, but thou 
techist the weie of God in treuthe. Is it 


hhe sent wopurm. itaker. 
P punsheden hym x. 4 repreu- 
u and thei beten ur. ¥ sotheli ur. 
Zand seide ur. ®in ur. » drede 
fourun aw. & him, killeden and nur. 
myyner ur. 2 Om.G prem. © he schal 
shened oy. tOm. surx. Om. ur. 
y Om. v. z thou reckest o. 


© efte ur. 


h wolden c. wolen plures. 
mifis1. ® and of the k pr. m, 


@ Om. ack. * oni man EIPR, 


124 


man; ‘sothly neither® thou seest* in to facet 
of man, but thou techist the wey of God in 
treuthe. Is it leefful for® ‘to 3yue tributef 
15to Cesar, or? we schulen not 3yue? Thel 
which witinge! herj priuey* falsnesse', 
seith™ to hem, What tempten 3e me”? 
is brynge 3e to mea peny, that I se°. And 
thei offriden? to him. And he seith4 to 
hem, Whos is this ymage, and the ‘in 
wrytinge’? hei seien to him, Cesaris. 
17Forsothe Jhesus answeringe scith* to 
hem, Therfore 3elde 3e to Cesar thatt ben 
of Cesar, and to God tho thingis that ben 
of God. And alle" wondriden on him. 
18And Saducees, that seyen no’ resur- 
ecioun” ‘to bex, camenY to him, and? ax- 
isiden him, seyinge*, Maistir, Moyses wroot 
to vs, that if the brother of a man were 
deed, and lefte a> wyf, and lefte not® 
sones, his brother take his wyf, and reyse 
20 vp‘ seed to his brothir. Therfore senene 
britheren weren; and the firste took a 
21wyf, and is® deed, nof seed left. And 
the secunde took hir, and he$ is deed, and 
neither this lefte seed. And the thridde 
~also'. Andi senene* tooken hir, and lefte 
not! seed. And the womman the™ laste of 
23 alle is deed. Thanne®" in the resureccioun®, 
whanne thei schulen rise a3en, whos wyf 
of these schal sche be? sothlyP seuene 
2thadden hir wyf. And Jhesus answeringe 
seithd to hem, Wher" 3e erren not ther- 
fore’, not knowinge‘ the scripturis, nother 
25the vertu of God? Forsothe whanne thei 
schulen rise aj3en fro ‘deed men", neither 
thei wedden’, nother” ben* weddid, but 
thei schulen be as aungels of God in 
aiheuenes’. Sothli of? deed men, that thei 


bforur. Cseestnotur. 4the face Moprurw sec 
ther uv. wher vy. b Om. ur. 
m seide uy. 4 me, ipocrites N. 
wrytynge N. wrytynge a. § seide ur. 
ajen uy. Xisuy. Y comen emp ef w passim, 
Cnour. C¢shaltake a. @ Om. urw prim. 
manere uy. i And in lyk manere ur. seuen me 
orysyng ajen ur. P forsothe uy. 4 seide ur. 
u sec.m. dead x. schulen wedde ur. 
z Om. kK. 


Omayse kK. Po 


8 The whiche 1. 88 writyng aboue Q pr.m. Rp 
Vv emperour Iv pr.m. Re sec. mi. W seiden c. x 
b no bk. ¢ Om. cerxk. 4 died hi, 


MARK. 


iknowynge ur. j Om. x. the ur. 
t tho thingis that ur. 
e he is urw pr.m. 


tr Whether x. 
Wne PTI sec. m. 


€ the seuene R pr.m. k. 


XIL. 15—26. 


leeueful that tribute be jouun to the 
emperoure, or we schulen not 3yue? 
Which* witynge her pryuei falsnesse, 15 
seide to hem, What tempten 3e me ? 
brynge 3e to me a peny, that Y se. And 16 
thei brou3ten to hym. And he seide to 
hem, Whos is this ymage, and the writ- 
yng’s? Thei® seien to him, The empe- 
rouris. And Jhesus answeride and seide 17 
to hem, Thanne 3elde 3e to the emperour 
tho thingis that ben of" the emperours’ ; 
and to God tho thingis that ben of God. 
And thei wondriden of hym. And Sa-18 
duces, that seien’ that ther is no ressur- 
reccioun, camen to hyim, and axeden 
hymn, and seiden, Maister, Moyses wroot 19 
to vs, that if the brother of a man were 
deed, and lefte his wijf, and haue no 
sones, his brother take his wijf, and reise 
vp seed to his brother. Thaune seuene 20 
britheren ther* weren; and the firste 
took a wijf, and diedeY, and lefte no 
seed. And the secounde took hir, and 2i 
he? diede, and nether this® lefte seed. 
Aud the thridde also. And in lijk ma-22 
nere the seuene token hir, and _ leften 
not? seed. And the womman the® laste 
of alle ‘is deed’. Thanne in the resur-23 
reccioun, whanne thei schulen rise a3en, 
whos wijf of these® schal sche be? for 
seuene hadden hir to wijf. And Jhesus 24 
ausweride, ard seide to hem, Whether 3e 
erren not therfor, that 3e knowe not 
scripturis, nethir the vertu of God? 
For’ whanne thei schulen rise a3en fro 25 
deeth, nether thei schulen wedde, nethir& 
schulen® be weddid, but thei schulen be 
as aungels of God in heuenes. And of 26 


m. €Om.surx. fthat tribute be 30uunur. & whe- 
k Om. kur. ! falsenesse of hem ur. 
ffreden, or token mp. brou3ten ur. @seide uy. Ton 
uthei uy. Vthat nour. W rysyng 

8and seiden uy. » the uy. Om. x. 
fnot kK. &Om.or. 4 in lyk 

m Om. anpg. © Therfor ur. 
*herfor ur. tkunnynge ur. ¥ deeth 


x thei ben nv. schulen be uy. Y heuene uv. 


z and thei ur. 


no. no urw pr.m. 


rem. 


Om. k. 


t And thei a pr.m. g. 
y he diede s sec. m. 
f Forsothe c. 


u Om. K pr. m. bik. 
z Om. s. ahek, 


Ener. 1 Om. R sec. 


XH. 27—36. 


rysen ajein, ‘han 3e* not rad in the hook 
of Moyses, on the bousche, hou God seide 
to him, seiynge, I am God of Abraham, 
27aud God of Ysaac, and God of Jacob? He 
is not God of deede men, but God* of 
lyuynge men; therfore 3e erren moche. 
28 And oon of the scribis, that hadde herd 
hem sekynge ‘to gidere*, ‘cam ni3‘, andé 
seyinge that® he! hadde wel* answerid 
hem!, axide hym, which was the firste 
29maundement of alle. Jhesus™ answeride 
to" him, that® the firste ‘of alle comaunde- 
mentis? is, ‘Heere, Israel4, the Lord thi 
30 God is oon"; and thou schal loue the® Lord 
thi God of al thin herte, and of* al thi 
soule, and of" al thi mynde, and of al thi 
vertu, or’ my3te’. This is the firste 
31 maundement*. Forsothe the secunde is 
lyk to this, Thou schalt loue thi neizebore 
as thi silf. ‘Ther is’ non othir maunde- 
32ment more? than these. And the scribe 
seith? to him, Maister, in treuthe thou 
hast wel seid; for o God is, and ‘ther is 
33non, out taken him; and that he be 
loued of al herte*, ‘and of al thon3t4, ‘or 
mynde®, and of al vndirstondinge‘, and of 
al thes soule, and of al strengthe", and to! 
loue the* neijebore as him silf, is more than 
3aalle brend offringis' and sacrificis. Jhesus 
forsothe seyinge that he hadde answerid 
wysely, seide to hin, Thou ert not fer fro 
35the kyngdom™ of God. And now" no 
mau durste axe him™, And Jhesus an- 
sweringe seide, techinge in the temple, 
Therfore® how seyn scribis?, Crist’ for" ‘to 
36 be* the sone of Dauith? ‘To whom! Da- 
uith him silf seide in the Hooly Gost, The 
Lord seide to my lord, Sitte® on my ri3t- 
half, til I putte thin enemyes the’ stool of 


asehan mpxy. >bvpono. ¢ Om. osu. 
€Om. ur. fneizede uy. Sand he uy. » for ur. 
m Forsothe Jhesn vy. 2 Om. ur. ° For ur. 


roo God ur. 8 thi o. 
y Om. ur. 
4 Om. our. 


4 Thou Israel, here ur. 
W strength o. | * comaundement uv. 
is not ¥ pr. am. © the herte ur. 
h the strengthe ur. '! for to ur. 
2Om. kK. him mere my. © Om. ur. 
t Forsothe uy. ¥Sitte thou ur. Ya ur. 


hofk. | ether sekinge K marg. 
n the strengthe crKRsx sec. m. hik. 
ghikg. 


MARK. 


Z is more UF. 
e Om. urx. 
k a G sec.m.o. Om. kK. thin w pr.m. 
P the scribis ur. 


k comaundement EePparsbegek. 
© sacrificis k. 


125 


deed men, that thei risen ajen, han 3e 
not red in® the book of Moises, on the 
buysch, hou God spak to hym, and scide, 
Y am God of Abraham, and God of 
Isaac, and God of Jacob? He is not27 
God of deed men, but of lynynge men; 
therfor 3e erren myche. And von of28 
the scribis, that hadde herde hein dis- 
puytynge! togidir, cam ny3, and sai3 that 
Jhesus had wel answeride hem, and ax- 
ide hym, which was the firste maunde- 
ment of alle. And Jhesus answeride to 29 
him, that the firste maundement* of alle 
is, Here thou, Israel, thi Lord God is o 
God; and thou schalt loue thi Lord 30 
God of al thin herte, and of al thi soule, 
and of al thi mynde, and of al thi my3t. 
This is the firste maundement!. And the31 
secounde is lijk to™ this, Thou schalt 
loue thi nei3bore as thi silf. Ther is 
noon other maundement gretter than 
these. And the scribe seide to hym,32 
Maister, in treuthe thou hast wel seid: 
for o God is, and ther is noon other, 
outakun hym; that he be loued of al thes 
herte, and of al the mynde, and of al the 
vndurstondynge, and of al the soule, and 
of al strengthe®, and to loue the neizbore 
as hym silf, is gretter than alle brent 
offryngis® and sacrifices? And Jhesus3s 
seyuge that he hadde answerid wiseli, 
seide to hym, Thou art not fer fro the 
kyngdom of God. And thanne no man35 
durste axe hym no4 more ony thing. And 
Jhesus answeride and seide, techynge in 
the temple, Hou seien scribis, that Crist 
is the sone of Dauid? For Dauid hymscs 
silf seide in the Hooli Goost, the Lord 
seide to my lord, Sitte on my ri3thalf, til 


4 spekynge Go sec. m. axynge MTW sec.m. disputynge ur. 
i Jesu ur. 
P of alle maundementis Pp. comaundement of alle ur. 


k Om. uy. !to hem nx. hem wel ur. 
t Om. w prom. x. uOm.w prom. VY ether rv. 
aseide ur.  » noon other is ur. ther 
f the understondynge uy. § Om. x. 
1 sacrifices V. ™ rewme uF. 
4 that Crist uy. * Om. surx. § is ur. 


leomaundement b. ™ Om. Ep. 


P offringis k. q Oi. CKME SCC. m. SUX sec. 1m. 


126 


37thi feet. Therfore Dauith him silf seith 
him a” lord, and wherof is he his sone? 
And moche cumpany gladli herde him. 
38 And he seide to hem in his teching, Be 
3e war of scribis, that wolen wandre* in 
39 stoolisY, and be salutid? in chepinge®, and 
sitte ‘in synagogis in the firste chaires?, 
aud the° firste sitting places in soperis ; 
40the’ whiche deuouren the housis of wi- 
dewis, vudir colour® of long preier; theif 
4itaken$ lenger® domi. And Jhesus sittinge 
ajeins the treserie, biheld hou the cum- 
pany ‘of peple* caste! money in to the 
tresoric; and manye riche™ castiden™ 
42many thingis. Sothli whanne 0° pore 
widowe hadde comen, sche sente tweye? 
a3inyuutis, that is, a ferthing. And‘ his 
disciplis ‘clepid to gidere’, he*® seith' to 
hem, Treuly I seie to 3ou, for this pore 
widowe sente more than alle", that sente 
44in to the tresorie. Sothli” alle sente of 
that thing that was plenteuous to hem ; 
but this ‘of hir myseste sente™ alle thingis 
that she hadde, al hir lyflode. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 And whanne he wente out of the tem- 
ple, oon of his disciples seith* to him, 
Maistir, bihold’, what maner stoones, and 

2what manere bildingis?. And he* answer- 
inge secith> to him’, Seeste thou alle thes 
greete bildingis ? ther4 schal not be left ‘a 
stoon® vponf a stoon, ‘the which® schal not 

3hbe distroyed. And whanne he sat in the 
inount of Olyuete! a3ens the temple, ‘thei 
axiden hymi by* hein! silue™, Petre, and 
4James, and John, and Andrew", Seie thou 
to vs, whanne thes thingis schulen be 


W Om. uw prem. * go ur. 
rwsec.m. Y. >in the f. ch. in synag. ur. 
f these G sec. m. uy. thees o. 


MARK. 


¥ scolys P. stolis, cther gaye clothis ur. 
© jin the MPW sec. m. Y. 
& schulen take spur. 


XIL. 37—XIII. 4. 


Y putte thin enemyes the" stool of thi 
feet. Thannet Dauid hym silf clepith37 
him lord, hou" thanne is he his sone ? 
And myche puple gladli herde hym. 
And he seide to hem in his techyng, Bess 
3e war of scribis, that wolen wandre in 
stolis, and be salutid in chepyng, and 39 
sitte in synagogis in the firste chaieris, 
and the’ firste sittyng placis in soperis ; 
whiche’ deuouren the housis of widewis 40 
vndur colour of long preier; thei schulen 
take the longer doom. And Jhesus sit-41 
tynge a3ens the tresorie, bihelde hou the 
puple castide* monei in to the tresorie ; 
and many riche men castiden many 
thingis. But whanne aY pore widewe 42 
was comun, sche keste? two? mynutis, 
that is, a> ferthing. And he clepide to-43 
gidere hise disciplis, and seide to hem, 
Treuli Y seie to 3ou, that this pore 
widewe keste more thanne alle, that 
kesten in to the tresorie. For alle 44 
kesten of that thing that thei hadden 
plente of; but this’ of her pouert keste 
alle thingis that sche hadde, al® hir lyue- 
lode. 
CAP. XIII. 

And whanne he wente out of the tem-1 
ple, oon of hise disciplis seide to hym, 
Maister, biholde, what maner stoonys, 
and what maner bildyngis. And Jhesne 
answeride, and seide to hym, Seest thou 
alle these grete bildingis ? ther scha) not 
be left a stoon on a stoon, which schal 
not be distried. And whanne he sat ins 
the mount of Olyues aj3ens the temple, 
Petir and James and Joon and Andrew 
axiden hym bi hem silf, Seie thou to vs,4 
whanne these thingis schulen be don, 


2 gret ur. & the chepyng upu 
d Om. ur. € the colour o. 


hb the lengere esx. doom, ether damnpaciom vr. 


k Om. uy. lcastide mpuvy, “riche men wpUrxXY. "®castensx. Sa xY. P two mopux. 4 And he 
clepynge togidere ur, TOm.ur. *%Om.ur. tseide vy. Uallemen ur. YForvu. sent of hir 
pouert ur. *seide uy. Ysee ur. *%byldyngo. @Jhesus Nur. » seide uy. hemo. 4a stoon ur. 
©€Om.ur. fon suvx. & which uy. that x. » Olynesur. iOm.ur.  & eche by @ sec.m. Om. ur. 
1Om. vr. ™Om.ur. © Andrew by hem silf axiden him ur. 

Tas. Svndirspr.m. Thanne if gs sec.m.ksec.m. tandhoua. Vinther. w the whiche 1. 


Xcaste1. Yoo E1gRceghik. 2 castide Ehik. 


¢ of g. and al k. 


a twey plures. 


boosg. Calle thei1s. 4 she this 1. 


XIE, §——15. 


maad°, and what tokene?, whanne alle 
thes thingis schulen bigynne for4 to be 
sendid'. And Jhesus answeringe bigan 
for’ to seie to hem, Se 3e, that no man 
6disceyue 3ou; for many schulen come in 
my name, seiynge, For I am; and thei 
7schulen disceyue manye'. Sothli* whanne 
3e schulen heere batels and opyniouns of 
bateils, drede 3e not; forsothe’ it  bi- 
houeth these” thingis for* to” be don, but 
snot? 3it ‘anon the ende*. For? folk schal 
rise vpon® folk, and rewme vpon* rewme, 
and°® erthe mouyng‘ schal® be by places 
‘and hungur'; bigynnyngis! of sorwis 
9these* thingis. Sothli se 3e 3ou! silf, for 
thei schulen take™ 30u in counceils", and 
3e schulen be beten in synagogis; and 3e 
schulen stonde bifore kyngis and domes- 
men for me, in to witnessing to hem. 
10 And?® in to alle folkis ‘it bihoueth first the 
11 gospel? for’ ‘to be prechid". And whanne 
thei schulen lede 30u bitrayinge*, nyle 3e 
thenke' what 3e schulen speke, but ‘speke 
3e" that ‘thing that’ schal be 3ouen to 30u 
in that our; sothli” 3e ben not spekinge, 
12but the Hooly Gost*. Forsothe aY brother 
schal bitraye the? brother in to deeth, and 
the fadir the sone, and sones* schulen 
ryse to gidre ajens fadris and modris, and 
13 ponysche hem by deeth. And 3e schulen 
be in hate® to alle men for my name; but 
he? that schal susteyne® in to the ende, 
i4this® schal be saf. Forsothe whanne 3e 
schulen se the abhomynacioun of discom- 
fort, stondinge wher it owith not; vndir- 
stonde he that redith; thanne® thei" that 
15 be in Judee, flee in to hillis. And he that 
is aboue the roof, come he! not doun in to 
the! hous, neithir™ entre he, that he take 


MARK. 


127 


and what tokene schal be, whanne alle 
these thingis schulen bigynne to be 
endid. And Jhesus answeride, and bi-s 
gan to seie to hem, Loke 3c, that 10 
man disseyue 30u; for manye schulene 
come in my name, seiynge, That Y am; 
and thei schulen disseyue manye. And7 
whanne 3e here batels and opynyouns of 
batels, drede 3e not; for it biloueth these 
thingis to be doon, but not 3it anoon is 
the ende. For folk schal rise on folk,s 
and rewme on rewme, and erthe mou- 
yugis and hungur schulen be bi placis; 
these thingis schulen be bigynuyngis‘ of 
sorewis. But se 3e 30u silf, for> theio 
schulen take 30u in counsels, and 3e 
schulen be betun in synagogis; and 3e 
schulen stonde bifor kyngis and domes- 
men for me, in witnessyng to hem. 
And it bihoueth, that the gospel be first 10 
prechid among al folk. And whannei 
thei taken 30u, and leden 3ou forth, nyle 
3e bifore thenke what 3e schulen speke, 
but speke je that thing that schal be 
jouun to 30u in that our; for 3e ben not 
the spekeris, but the Hooli Goost. For 12 
ai brother schal bitake the* brother in to 
deth, and the fadir the sone, and sones 
schulen rise togider a3ens fadris! and 
modris™, and punysche hem bi deeth. 
And 3e schulen be in hate to alle menis 
for my name; but he that lastith in to 
the ende, schal be saaf. But whanne 3e 14 
schulen se the abhomynacioun of dis- 
coumfort, stondynge where it owith not; 
he that redith, vndurstonde"™; thanne 
thei that be in Judee, fle ‘in to hillis°. 
And he that is aboue the? roof, come not is 
doun in to the hous, nethir entre he, to 


odon uy.  Psigneschal be ur. @Om.surx. 'donwpr.m. 8 Om. suvx. many men ur. 
‘t Forsothe ur. —-¥ for ur. w that these ur. x Om. surx. y Om. ur. % the eende is not ur. 
aQm.uv. » Forsothe uy. ¢©on sx. aensur. 4onsuvx. efandtheo. fmonynges ur. §& and 
hungre schulen be uy. 4 Om. ur. i hyginnynge GNosTUrW. k ben these mpey. =} gore Ney. 
™ bitake ur. © her connceils ur. © And first it bih. that the gosp. be prechid uy. P Om. ur. 4 Om. 
suvxy. 'Om.cury. Shitakyng ur.  tbiforethenke ur.  speketh x. Om. 0. ® for ur. 
x Gost, that spekith in gow @ sec.m. YOm. cx. theawprm. %2Om.G. a0. 4 the sones G pr. m. UF. 
> schulen punysche ur. ¢ hatrede ur. 4 this ur. Om. x. © susteyne, or suffre up. =f Om. ur. 
Sthatw. bOm.o. iQOm. coerurxy. *Om.u. This tr. ™ne ur. 

f beginninge rkpQs pr.m. beega. 8 30ur EPhi. } forsother, ither. kac. !fadirk. ™ modir k. 


8 yndirstonde he s pr. m. k. 


° to the mounteynes k. 


P in the 1 sec.m.k pr.m. 


128 


isouy thing of his hows; and he that schal 
be in the feeld, turne” not a3en byhynde 
17for® to take his cloth. Sothli wo to hem 
that ben with childe, and nori$chinge? in 
istho dayes. Therfore preie 3e, that thei4 
ig9ben not don in wyntir™. Forsoth® ‘the 
iket dayes of tribulacioun schulen be 
suche, whiche manere weren not fro the 
bygynnynge of creature, the’ which God 
20mnade, til now, neither schulen be. And 
no’ but’ the Lord hadde breiggid tho* 
dayes, al’ fleiseh, ‘or mankyude*, hadde 
not be saf; but for the chosene whom® he 
chees, the Lord hath breiggid® dayes’, ‘or 
aimaad schort’, And thanne if ony man 
schulde® seie to 30u, Lo! here is Crist, 
22loo! there, beleue 3e not. For fals Cristis 
and fals prophetis sehulen ryse vp‘, and 
schulen 3yue tokenes§ and grete’ wondris, 
to disceyue, if it may be don, 3he, thei 
23chosene*. Therfore se 3e; loo! I haue 
z4 bifore seid to 30u alle thingis. Buti tho 
dayes, aftir that tribulacioun, the sumne 
schal be maad derk, and the inone schal 
2onot 3yue hir schynyng, and sterris' of 
heuenes schal be fallinge doun, and ver- 
tues™ that be in heuenes, sehulen be 
asmouyd. And thanne thei schulen se 
mannis sone comynge in cloudis" of he- 
azuene, with greet vertu and glorie. And 
thanne he schal sende his aungels, and° 
schal? gedre his ehosene fro foure wyndis, 
fro the loweste4 thing of erthe vnto" the 
28hizeste thing of heuene. Forsothe of the 
fyge tree lerne® 3e thet parable. Whanne 
now his brauuche" ‘schal be’ tendre, and 
leeuys ben“ sprongen out, 3e witen*® for 
29somer is in the nexte. So and whanne 3e 
schulen’ se alle” these* thingis ben maad?, 
wite 3e, that® it is in the nexte in the 
sodoris’, Treuly I seye to 3ou, for this 


nturne he o. 9 Om. surx. 
or in sabaot 9 sec. m. 8 For ur. 
yYech uy. 2 Om. ox. 4 whiche ur. 
€ schal wpurxy. schul w. f Om. ur. 
sterris UF. ™ the vertues Ur. 
Tinto o. tiltour. § lere sx. taur. 
z Om. @ sec.m. ur. that these ur. 


P norischen ur. 
t tho x. 


4 tho thingisk. ° ech 1k. 


w Om. Epghika. 


MARK. 


4 3cure fleying @sec.m. tho thingis ur. 
u Om. mur. 
» abreggid ur. 
& signes ur. 
n the cloudis ux. 
U braunches og. 
b don Q see. m. UF. 


8 For manye k pr. m. 


XIII. 16-—30. 


take ony thing of his hous; and he that 16 
schal be in the feeld, turne not a3en bi- 
hynde to take his cloth. But wo to hem 17 
that ben with ehild, and norischen in tho 
daies. Therfor preye 3e, that theid bes 
not don in wyntir. But thilke daies of 19 
tribulacioun schulen be suche, whiche 
maner weren not fro the bigynnyng of 
creature, which God hath maad, til now, 
nethir sehulen be. And but the Lord 20 
hadde abredgide tho daies, al’ fleische 
hadde not be saaf; but for the chosun 
whiche he chees, the Lord hath maad 
schort the daies. And thanne if onyai 
man seie to 30u, Lo! here is Crist, 
lo! there, bileue 3e not. For’ false 22 
Cristis and false prophetis schulen rise, 
and* schulen 3yue tokenes and wondris, 
-to disseyue, if it may be don, 3he, hem 
that be chosun. ‘Therfor take 3e kepe; 23 
lo! Y haue bifor seid to 3ou_ alle 
thingis. But in tho daies, aftir thates 
tribulacioun, the sunne schal be-maad 
derk, and the moon schal not 3yue hir 


_ li3t, and the sterris of heuene schulen 2s 


falle doun, and the vertues that ben in 
heuenes, schulen be moued. Aud thanneg2e 
thei schulen se mannus sone comynge 
in" eloudis of heuene, with greet vertu 
and glorie. And thanne he schal sende27 
hise aungelis, and schal geder hise chosun 
fro the foure wyndis, fro the hijest thing 
of erthe til to the hizest thing of he- 
uene. But of the fige tree lerne 3e the2s8 
parable. Whanne now his braunche is 
tendre, and leeues ben sprongun out, 3e 
knowen that somer is ny3. So whanne29 
3e seen these thingis be’ don, wite 3e, 
that it is ny3 in the doris. Treuli Y 30 
seie to 30u, that this generacioun schal 
not passe awei, til alle these” thingis be 


T wynter, 
vOm. x. w but if x. x the KNuF. 
¢ the dayes wNnprur. tho dayes @. 4 Om. urx. 
hOm.ur. 'Om. ur. K chosen men ur. ! the 
9 and he vu. pOm. piv sec.m. WT hizeste ur. 
Visur WOm.o. *knowen r. Y Om.ur. 


efor uy. 4 dore ™. 


€ and thei 1. uin the e1iqgrhika. VY to be k. 


XIII. 31—XIV. 5. 


generacioun schal not passe awey%, til alle 
3ithese thingis be don. Heuene and erthe 
schal® passe, forsothef my wordis schulen 
sznot passe. Treuly§ of that day or® our 
no man woot, nethir aungelis in heuene, 
33 nether the sone, no! but the fadirk. Se 3e, 
‘wake 3e, and preie 3e!; sothli 3e witen 
sanot, whanne tyme™ is. For" as a man 
‘the which® gon? fer’ in pilgrimage, lefte 
his hous, and 3af to his seruauntis power 
of euery’ work, and comaundide to* the 
35 porter, that he schuldet wake. Therfore 
wake 3e, forsothe 3e witen not, whanne the 
lord of the hous cometh", in the euentide®*, 
or in’ the” mydny3t, or* kockis crowynge, 
36orY morwynge”; lest? whanne he schal 
37come sudenly, he fynde jou slepinge. For- 
sothe that> that I seie to jou, I seie to 
alle, ‘Wake 3e°. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Forsothe pask and the feeste of therf 
looues ‘withou3ten sourdow34 was aftir 
‘the secunde day®. And the hizeste prestis 
and scribis sou3ten, hou thei schulden holde 
2himf with gile, and sle& Sothli thei 
seiden, Not in the feeste day, lest per- 
auenture noyse were maad in the peple. 
3And whanne he was at Betanye, in the 
hous of Symount leprous, and restid®, a 
womman comynge', hauynge a box of* 
precious oynement spikanard; and the 
box! brokun, helde™ out on" his heed °. 
4Forsoth ‘ther weren summe? beringe vn- 
worthily, ‘or heuyli4, with ynne™ hem 
silf, ‘and seyinge’, Wherto ist this loss 
sof oynement maad? For this oynement 
my3te haue® be sold more’ than for’ 


MARK. : 129 


don. Heuene and erthe schulen passe, 31 
but my wordis schulen not passe. But sz 
of that dai or our no man woot, nether 
aungels in heuene, nether the sone, but’ 
the fadir. Se 3e, wake 3e, and preie 3e 333 
for 3e witen not, whanne the tyme is. 
For as a man that is gon fer in pilgrim-34 
age, lefte* his hous, and 3af to his ser- 
uauntis power of euery work, and co- 
maundideY to the porter, that he wake. 
Therfor wake 3e7, for 3e witen not,35 
whanne the lord of the hous cometh, in 
the euentide, or at mydny3t, or at cockis 
crowyng, or in® the mornyng;  leste26 
whanne he cometh” sodenli, he fynde 30u 
slepynge. Forsothe that that Y seie to37 
3o0u, Y seie to alle, Wake 3e. 


CAP. XIV. 

Pask and the feest of therf looues was! 
after tweic daies. And the hijest# preestis 
and scribis® sou3ten, hou thei schulden 
holde hym with gile, and sle. But thei2 
seiden, Not in the feeste dai, lest. perauen- 
ture af noyse were maad among the pu- 
ple. And whanne he was at Betanye,3 
in the hous of Symount leprous’, and 
restide, a womman cam, that hadde a 
boxe of alabastre of precious oynement 
spikenard; and whanne the boxe of ala- 
bastre was brokun, sche helde® it on 
his heed. But there weren summe that 4 
beren it heuyh with ynne hem silf, and 
seiden, Wher to is this losse of oynement 
maad? For this oynement my3te haue5 
be seld more! than for* thre hundrid 


thre hundrid pens, and be 3ouun to pore pens, and be 3ouun to pore men. And 

€@Om.ur. ¢shulenapw. fbut vu. 8 Forsotheur. beitherr. iOm.o. * fadir aloone uv. | wak- 
ith and prejeth x. ™ the tyme ur. 5 Om. uy. © which our. that x. pis gon MP. q forth ur. 
Teche sr. 8Om.nr. tOm.ury. “schal come ur. Yenen a. VYOm. x. Om. mpurx. * or in 


arpw sec.m. Yor in the wpw. 2 mornyng mpi. morowtide ur. morewenyng xy. 4lest that wp. > this ur. 


© Waketh x. ¢ Om. mopurx. 
h satte atte the mete uv. icam N¥.. come U. 
held it 0. she helde ap. sche schedde out ur. 

* seiynge withinne uv. & Om. urx, 


x and leftec. ¥ comaunde s. 
hik. shal comer. ¢two1q. 4 hize 1. 
schedde k, i for more cik. * Om.c. 


VOL. IV. 


© two dayes u pr.m. x. twey daies vr. 


Om. @ pr. im. 


2 Om, Rs prem. 
€ the scribis s. 


a Om. a pr.m. EPQbceghia. 


f Crist mp. & slee him px. 


k of alahaustre of ur. | box of alabaustre ur. ™ sche 
Xvpono. ©® heued oy. P summe werenur. % Om. urx. 
vu Om. r. for more vu. W Om. vu. 


b come cxmqrubceg 


fOm. EqrckB. § Om. spr.m. »} heelte vp. 


130 


men, And thei groyneden ‘in to* hir. 
GSothliY Jhesus seide, Suffre? hir; what 
be 3e heuy to hir? she hath wrou3t good? 
7work in® me. For ‘euer more® 3e schulen@ 
haue® pore men with 3ou, and whaine 3e 
schulenf wolle, 3e mown do wel to hem; 
forsoth 3e schulen not euermore® haue 
sme, She dide® that! that* she hadde ; 
sche bifore cam for! to anoynte my body 
ginto buriynge. Treuli I seie to 30u, 
where euere this gospel schal be prechid 
in al the world, and™ that this womman®™ 
hath done, schal be told in to mynde of 
1ohir. And Judas Scarioth, oon of the® 
twelue, wente to the’ hijeste prestis, that 
lithe schulde bitray him? to hem. ‘The! 
whiche heeryuge ioyeden, and bihi3ten 
hem to 3yue ‘him inoney’. And he sou3te 
how he schulde bitraye him’ couenably. 
12And the‘ firste day of therue loues, 
whenne ‘pask was offrid4, disciplisY seyu 
to him, Whidir” wolt thou we go, and 
make redy to thee, that thou ete pask ? 
13 And he sendith tweyne* of his disciplis, 
and seith to hem, Go 3e in to the citee, 
aud a man beringe a galoun of watir schal 
‘renne to 30u9, ‘or come azens 30n7; suwe 
143e him. And’ whidir euere he schal entre, 
seye je" to the lord of the hous, For the 
inaister seith, Wher is my fulfilling”, ‘or 
etyng place’, where I schal ete pask with 
ismy disciplis? And he schal shewe to 3ou 
a greet souping place strewid, and there 
ic6make 3e redy to vs. And his disciplis 
wenten forth, and“ camen in to the citee, 
and founde as he hadde® seid to hem; 
i7and thei maden redy pask. Sothlif euen® 
ismaad, he cam with twelue. And hem 
sittinge at the mete, and etinge, Jhesus 
seith’, Treuli I seie to 30u, for oon of jou 
i9that etith with me, schal bitraye me. And 


Y forsothe ur. 
e han euere uv. 


* agens UP. 
4 Om. ur. f Om. ur. 
Q prom. money to him Q sec. m. UF. 
ples p. the disciplis uy. = * Wher o, 
2Om.o. > fillyng ur. 
£ euentide ur. 4 seide ur. 


s Jhesu ur. 


1 grncheden CEIKMPORs sec. m. Uxbeeghik. 
oo And Rpr.m. Pschal be k. 4 sche this 1, 
vseiden Rk. W woltowe. * Om. cr prim. xbka. 


MARK. 


2 Snffre 3¢ viv sec.m. y. Suffreth s. 
& euere Ur. 
10m.sur. ™and this thing ur. 2Om.x. °Om.Gpr.m. °°Om.m. P Jhesu ur. 
tin the ur. 
* two MPX. 
© of etyng place Kx. Om. ur. 


m Forsothe 1. 
T the mynde s. 
y two, 


XIV. 6—19, 


thei groyneden! ajens hir. But Jhesus 6 
seide, Suffre 3e hir; .what be 3e heuy to 
hir? sche hath wrou3t a good werk in 
me. For™ euermore 3e schulen haue7 
pore men with 30u, and whanne 3e 
wolen", 3e moun do wel to hem; but je 
schulen not euer more haue me. Sches 
dide that that® sche hadde; sche cam 
bifore to anoynte iny bodi in to biriyng. 
Treuli°® Y seie to 30u, where ener thisg 
gospel be? prechid in al the world, and 
that that ‘this womman4 hath don, schal 
be told in to mynde"™ of hym. Andio 
Judas Scarioth, oon of the twelue, wente 
to the hizest* prestis, to bitraye hym to 
hem. And thei herden, and ioyeden,11 
and bihizten to 3yue hym money, And 
he sou3t hou he schulde bitraye hym 
couenabli. And the firste dai of therf12 
looues, whanne thei offriden" pask, the 
disciplis seyn’ to hym, Whidir ‘wilt 
thou that we go, and make redi to thee, 
that thou ete the® pask? And he send-13 
ith tweyn’ of hise disciplis, and seith to 
hein, Go 3e in to the citee, and a man 
berynge a galonn of watir schal meete 
jou; sue 3e hym. And whidur euer he 14 
entrith, seie 3e to the lord of the hous, 
That the maister seith, Where is myn 
etynge place, where Y schal ete pask 
with my disciplis ? And he schal schewe 15 
to 30u a grete soupyng place arayed, and 
there make 3e7 redi to vs, And _ hiseis 
disciplis wenten forth, and camen in to 
the citee, and founden as he hadde seid 
to hem; and thei maden. redy the pask. 
And whanne the eneutid was come, he17 
cam with the twelue. And whanne thei 18 
saten ‘at the* mete, and eeten, Jhesus 
seide, Trenli Y seie to 30u, that oon of 
3ou that etith with ine, schal bitray me. 


¢ Om. ur. 
ithat thing ur. * Om. a. 
q4Om.ur. money 
u thei offriden paske uv. his disci- 
Y come ajens jou ur. 20Om.urx. 22 Om. x. 
d and thei ur. €Om.o.  ! Forsothe ur. 


®agoodur. > into og. 


h saide o. 


B wil E ef P passim. 
shizxet. tin the. 
zOm.e. 4 alte p. 


o Om. K pr. im. 
U offren k sec. m. 


XIV. 20——-33- 


thei bigunnen for! to be sori', and ‘to seiel, 
20ech by hym silf, Whether™ I? The? 
which seith® to hem, Oon of twelue? that 
puttith yn the hond with me in the4 
21plater. And sothli mannis sone goth, as 
it is writun cof him; forsoth™ wo to that 
man, bi whom ‘mannis sone® schal be bi- 
trayd. It were good to him, if ‘that ilket 
zzman hadde not be borun. And hem 
etinge, Jhesus took bred, and blessinge" 
brak’, and 3af to” hem, and seith*, Take 
233e%; this is my body. And the euppe 
takun, he doynge gracis’ 3af to hem, and 
2salle drunkun therof. And he seith* to 
hem, This is my blood of the newe testa- 
ment, the? whieh schal be shedd out for 
zsmanye®. Treuly I seie to 30u, for now I 
sehal not dryuke of this fruit of vyne, til 
in to that? daye whanne I schal drynke it 
26 newe in the rewme of God. And the ympne, 
‘or heriynge®, seid, thei wenten out in-to 
27the hil of Olyues. And Jhesus seith’ to 
hem, Alle 3e sehulen be sclaundrid in me 
in this nijt; for it is writun, I schal smyte 
the schepherde, and the scheep of the floc 
2sschulen be disparplid’. But aftir that I 
schal ryse a3en, I schal go bifore 3ou in to 
29Galilee. Forsoth Petre seith® to him, 
‘And if‘ alle schulen be selaundrid, but 
3onot I. And Jhesus seith" to him, Treuly 
I seie to thee, for thou! to day bifore™ the 
cok" in® this ny3t ‘twyes 3yue vois?, thries 
3tthou ‘ert to? denye me. And he spak 
more, ‘And if" it bihoue’ me to dye to 
gidere with thee, I schal not denye thee. 
32 Sothlit and" lyk manere alleY seiden”. And 
thei eamen in to a place*, to whom’ the 
name? Gethsamany. And he seith to his 
disciplis, Sitte 3e here, the? while I preie. 
3s And he takith> Petre and James and John 


k sorowful ur. ! seide ur. 


T but ur. 


i Om. surx. 
MopoTurY. 4 Om.N. 
u blissed o. ¥ brak it ge. YW Om. aGNnogstTxy. 
b Om. ur. ¢ manye men UF. 4 the o. 
Escatered ur. 'seide uy. 1 Thou3 ur. 

2 cok crowe u pr.v. cok schal 3eue voice ur. 
s byhoueth x pr.m. og. schal bihoue ur. 
» seiden in lyk manere uy. * felde ur. 


b The whiche 1. ¢ the twelue rka8. 4 Jas 1. 


«x marg. 4 bihone c1k@. 


Ss 


m Wher opr. 

8 the sone of man Ur. 

x seide UP. 
e Om. ox. either preisynge of God uy. 
Kk seide vu. 

© twies in UF. 

t Forsothe ur. 

y which ur. 


e the whiche 1. 


MARK. 13] 


And thei bigunnen to be sori, and to19 
seie to hym, ech bi hei silf, Whether 
Y ? Which? seide to hem, Oon of twelue‘ 20 
that puttith the’ hoond with me in the’ 
platere. And sotheli mannus sone goith, 21 
as it is writun of hym; but wo to that 
man, by whom imannus sone schal be 
bitrayed. It were good to hym, yf thilke 
mau hadde not be borun. And while 22 
thei eeten, Jhesus took breed, and blessid, 
and brak, and 3af to hem, and seide, Take 
je; this is my bodi. And whanne he2s 
hadde take the cuppe, he dide thankyngis. 
and 3af to hem, and alle dronken therof. 
And he seide to hem, This is my blood 2: 
of the newe testament, which? schal be 
sched for many. Treuli Y seye to 3oun, 25 
for now Y schal not drynke of this fruyt 
of vynef, in to that dai whane Y schal 
drynke it newe in the rewme of God. 
And whanne the ympne was seid, thei 26 
wenten out in to the hil of Olyues. And 27 
Jhesus seide to hem, Alle 3e schulen 
be sclaundrid in me in this ny3t; for it 
is writun, Y schal smyte the scheep- 
herde, and the scheep of the flok schwlen 
be disparplid®. But aftir that Y schal2s 
rise aj3en, Y scha) go bifor 30u in to 
Galilee. And Petir seide to hym, Thou; 29 
alle schulen be sclaundrid, but not Y. 
And Jhesus seide to hyin, Treuli Y seie so 
to thee, that to dai bifore that the cok in 
this ni3t crowe twies, thou sehalt thries 
denye me. But he seide more, Thou3 it 21 
bihoueth®, that Y die togider with thee, 
Y sehal not forsake thee. And in lijk 
maner alle seiden. And thei camen in: 
to a place, whos name zs Gethsamany. 
And he seide to hise disciplis, Sitte 3c 
here, while Y preye. And he took Petirss 


P the twelue 

tt thei vu. 
= seide ur. 
f seide ur. 
1Om. vy. ™ bifore that pury. biforn that x. 

POm. uy. . 4schalt ur. ° Thon3 ur. 
uv Om. MpWwxy. Y and alle piv sec.m. Y. 
z place kK. name was vu. ®Om.ur. © took ur. 


nOm.uv. °seie to him ur. 
t the ilke wp. thilke ur. that x. 
yOm. rv. 2 thankyngis ur. 


fthe vyne ik.  & ether sprad abroud 


132 MARK. 


with him, and bigan for® to drede, and to 
3iheuye’. And he seith® to hem, My soule 
is sorwful tilf to the® deeth ; snsteyue! 3e, 
‘or abide 3e%, here, and preie! 3e ‘with 
35me™. And whanne he hadde gon forth a 
litel, he felde" down on the erthe, and 
preiede, ‘that, if® it my3te be, the our 
s6schulde passe fro him. And he seide, 
Fadir?, alle thingis ben possible to thee, 
turne fro me this cuppe; but not that I 
37 wole, but ‘that that? thou’. And he cam, 
and fond hem slepynge. And he seith* 
to Petre, Symomnnt, slepist thou? my3tist 
3sthou not wake with me oon our? Wake 
3e, and ‘preie 3e', that 3e entre not ‘in to” 
temptacioun; forsothe the spirit is redy, 
30 but the fleisch syk’. And eftsoone” he 
goynge preiede, the same word seyinge. 
4o And he turnyd ajen eftsoone*, fod hem 
slepinge ; sothli her y3en were greuyd. 
And thei knewenY not, what thei schulden 
41 answere to him. And he cam the thridde 
tyme, and seith? to hem, Slepe 3e nowe, 
and ‘reste 3e*; sothli> it sufficith. The our 
cometh; loo! mannis sone schal be bi- 
42 trayed in to hondis® of ‘synful men“. Ryse 
3e, go we; loo! he that schal bytraye me 
azis ny3. And, 3it him® spekinge, Judas 
Searioth, oon of thef twelue, cam, and 
with him moche cumpeny with swerdis 
and stanes®, sent fro the hijeste prestis, 
ssand scribis, and ‘fro the" eldere men. For- 
sothe the! traitour hadde 3ouun to hem a 
tokene*, seyinge, Whom euere I schal 
kisse, he it is; holde 3e him, and lede 
453e warly, ‘or queyntely!, And whanne 
he cam™, anon he cominge" to him®, 
agseith?, Maistir; and he kisside him. And 
thei layden hondis ‘in to4 him, and 


XIV. 34—47. 


and James and Joon with hym, and bi- 
gani tok drede, and to be anoyed'. Ands4 
he seide to hem, My soule is soreweful 
to the deeth; abide 3e here, and wake 
3e with me. And whanne he was gon3s 
forth a litil, ke felde doun on the erthe, 
and preiede, that if it my3te be, that the 
our schulde passe fro hym. And _ hese 
seide, Abba, fadir, alle thingis ben pos- 
sible to thee, bere ouer fro me_ this 
cuppe; but not that Y wole, bnt that 
thou wolt, be don. And he cam, and37 
foond hem slepynge. And he seide to 
Petir, Symount, slepist thou? my3tist 
thou not wake with me oon our? Wakes 


3e™, and ‘preie 3e", that 3e entre not in 


to temptacioun; for the spirit is redi, 
but the fleische zs sijk. And eftsoone he s9 
jede, and preiede, and seide the same 
word; and® turnede ajen eftsoone, and 40 
foond hem slepynge; for? her izen weren 
heuyed. And thei knewen not, what thei 
schulden answere to hym. And he cami 
the thridde tyme, and seide to hem, Slepe 
3e now, and reste 3e3 it suffisith. The 
hour is comun; lo! mannus sone schal 
be bitraied in to the hondis of synful 
men. Rise 3e, go we; lo! he that schal 42 
bitraye me is ny3. And 3it while hes 
spak, Judas Scarioth, oon of the twelue, 
cam, and with him miche puple with 
swerdis aud staues, sent fro the hijest4 
prestis, and the” scribis, and fro the eldre 
men. And his traytour hadde 3ouun to 44 
hem a tokene, and seide, Whom euer Y 
kisse, he it is; holde 3e hym, and lede 
jes warli. And whanne he cam, anoon 45 
he caine to hym, and seide, Maistir'; 
and he kisside hym. And thei leiden 46 


4j7heelden him. Sothli® oon of men’ stond- bondis on hym, and helden hym. But47 
¢ Om. sx. 4 Om. x. to be heny @ sec.m. F. € seide ur. fOm. Nn. gs Om. Tf. h Om. s. 
iabide uy.  & Om. ourx. or abideth s. ‘wake nur. ™Om.ur. fel w prom. xy. © if that uv. 
P Abba, fadir nur. 4 that at o hic et alibi. that apurw sec. m. t thou wolte Ww pr.m. 8 seide ur. 
t pregeth x. Ying prom. Vissike ouv. Wefteur. *efteur.  Ywisten sur. 2 sayde ovr. 
arestith x. > Om.ur. the hondes ur. 4 synneres ur. € it uv. f Om. n. & with staues o. 
hOm.ur. ihisy. signe vy. 1Om. ogurx. M™haddecome ur. ®nei3ynge ur. © Jhesu ur. 
Pseide vr. Gonury. * Forsothe ur. * the men mPW sec.m. 
ihe biganne 1k. for to cetrkmpgrs pr.m.xcegh8. ether heuy K marg. ™Om.hi. © preieth 1. 


Sandhe. Pforsothe1. Ghizjer * Om. rR. 


8 3e him s. 


t Heil, maistir k pr. m. 


XIV. 48—62. 


inge aboute, ledinge't out a swerd, smot 
the seruaunt of the hijeste prest, and kitte 
48 of" to’ him” an* eere. And Jhesus an- 
sweringe seithY to hem, As to a thef 3e 
han gon out with swerdis and staues, for? 
49to take me? Forsoth’ day by day I was 
at 3o0u, techinge in the temple, and 3e 
heelden not me; but that the seripturis 
30 be fulfillid®. Thanne ‘him forsakun‘, alle 
sihis disciplis fledden?. Sothli sum jong 
man, clothid® with ‘lynnen cloth’ on the 
bare, suede him; and thei heelden him. 
52 And the lynnen cloth forsakun, he nakid 
53flei3® awey fro hem. And thei tedden 
Jhesu to the hijeste prest. And all camen 
to gidere ‘in to" oon, the prestis and thei 
s4scribis and eldere men. Forsoth Petre 
suede him afer til) with ynne ‘in tok the 
halle of the hijeste prest. And he sat 
with the mynystris, aud warmyde him at 
ssthe fier. Forsothe the hijeste prestis, and 
al the! counceil, sou3ten witnessinge a3ens 
Jhesu™, that thei schulen 3yue" him to 
s6deeth ; nether thei founden. Sothlic manye 
seiden fals witnessinge a3ens him, and 
57 the witnessingis weren not couenable. And 
sume risynge sou3tenP fals witnessing 
ssajens hym, seyinge’, For we ‘han herd’ 
him seiynge*, I schal vndo this temple 
maad with hondis, and aftirt the thridde 
day I schal bilde another not maad with 
sd9hondis. And the witnessing of hem was 
60not couenable. Forsothe" the hi3este prest 
rysinge vp in to the myddel’, axide him”, 
seyinge*, Answerist thou ‘not ony’ thing 
to tho thingis that ben put to” thee of 
cithese*? Sothli he was stille, and no thing 
answeride. Eftsoone® the hizest prest 
axide him, and seide to him, Ert thou 
62Crist, the sone of blessid God? Sothli¢ 
Jhesus seide to him, I am; and 3e schulen 


MARK. 133 


oon of the men that stoden aboute, drow; 
out a swerd, and smoot the seruaunt of 
the hijest" preest, and kittide’ of his 
eere. And Jhesus answeride, and seide4s 
to hem, As to a theef 3e han gon out 
with swerdis and staues, to take me ? 
Dai bi dai Y was among 30u, and tau3te 49 
in the temple, and 3e helden not me; but 
that the scripturis be fulfillid®. Thanneso 
alle hise disciplis forsoken hym, and 
fledden. But a 3ong man, clothid withs1 
lynnun cloth on the bare, suede hym ; and 
thei helden hym. And he lefte these 
lynnyn clothing*, and flei3 nakid awei fro 
hem. And thei ledden Jhesu to thes: 
hi3est preest. And alle the prestis and 
scribis and eldere men camen_ togidir. 
But Petir suede hym afer in to the halle ss 
of the hizest preest. And he sat with 
the mynystris’, and warmede hym at the 
fier. And the hizest prestis, and al thes 
counsel, sou3ten witnessyng a3ens Jhesn 
to take hym to the* deeth; but thei 
founden not. For? manye seiden falsss 
witnessyng» ajens hym, and the wit- 
nessyngis weren not conenable. And 57 
summe risen vp, and baren fals witness- 
yng a3ens hym, and seiden, For we ‘han ss 
herd® hym seiynge, Y sehal vndo this 
temple maad with hondis, and aftir the 
thridde dai Y schal bilde another not 
maad with hondis. And the witness-s59 
yng? ‘of hem® was’ not couenable. And 60 
the hizest prest roos vp® in to the myd- 
dil, and axide Jhesu, and seide, An- 
swerist thou no thing to tho thingis that 
ben put ajens thee of these? But hee 
was stille, and answeride no thing. Eft- 
soone the hijest prest axide hym, and 
seide to hym, Art thou Crist, the sone 
of the blessid God? And Jhesus seide 62 


tdrawynge uy. Yawey ur. VYOm. our. WOm.ur. *alitle nw. hisury. yYseide uy. 2% Om. 
suvx. ®Om.ur. > fillid uy. ©¢Om.ur. 4 forsakynge him fledden ur. ¢@clad sx.  f sendel, or 
lynnen clooth mp. & fledde mu. binkx. iOm.empervwxy. jtilto xy. Kin x. her xk. ™him vu. 
0 take u. bitake y. © Forsothe ur. Pbaren uy. 4andseiden vy. 'herden ur.  § seye Q sec. m. 
thy vr. “Andury. Ymyddisury, WJhesuv. *andseideur. Ynoo. Zajensur. # these 
men uy. » Eft ur. ¢ Forsothe ur. 

thize r. Vkitte 1. filled hi. * clothes ep. Yseruanntisk. 2 0Om.b. ® Forsothe 1.» witness- 
yngis A sec.m.c prem. © herden 1. 4 witnessingis bk. e Om. k. f weren k. g Om. s sec. m. 


hize 1. 


134 


se mannis sone sittinge on the ri3t half 
of ‘the vertu of .God*, and comynge in 
e3cloudis> of heuene. Forsoth the hizest 
prest, kittinge his clothis, seith®, What 3it 
cadesyren we witnessis? 3e han herde blas- 
phemye. What semeth? to 30u? The® 
whiche alle condempneden him forf to be 
ogilty of deeth. And summe bigunnen for® 
to bispitte® him, and to! hide his y3en*, 
and smyte him! with boffatis™, and seie to 
him, Prophecie thou. And the mynystris 
beeten him with strokis", ‘or doffatis°. 
66 And whanne Petre was in the halle by- 
nethen, oon of the hand maydens”? of the 
67 hijest prest cam. And whanne sche hadde 
seyn Petre warmynge him, sche bihold- 
inge him seith?, And thou wast4 with 
seJhesu of Nazareth. And he denyede, 
seyinge, Nethir I woot, nether I haue 
knownn’, what thou seist. And he wente 
forth’ bifore the halle; and anon the cok 
svysongt. ‘Eftsone forsothe't whanne ‘a no- 
ther" ‘hand mayde* hadde seyn him, she 
bigan for“ to seie to men stondinge 
zoaboute, For this* is of hem. And he eft- 
soneY denyede. And aftir a litil, eftsoone’ 
thei that ‘stooden ny3*%, seiden to Petre, 
Verily thou ert of hem, forwhi> and‘ thou 
jiert of Galilee. Sothlit he bigan for* to 
curse and swere', For I knowg not this 
z2man, whom 3e seyn. And anon eftsoones’ 
the cok song". And Petre bithou3te oni 
the werd that Jhesus hadde seid to him, 
Bifore! the cok synge™ twyes, thries” thou 
schalt denye me®. And he bigan for? to 
iwepe. And anon ‘the morwe maad4, the 
hijeste prestis, makinge counceil with the 
eldere men, and scribis, and al the counceil, 
byndinge Jhesu, ledden, and bitooken to 
Pilat. 


MARK. 


XIV, 63—XV. 1. 


to hym, Y aim; and 3e schulen se man- 
nus sone sittynge on the ri3thalf of the 
vertu of God, and comynge in the cloudis 
of heuene. And the hijesti preest to-63 
rente hise clothis, and seide, What 3it 
dissirenk we witnessis? 3e han _ herd 64 
blasfemye. What semeth to 30u? And 
thei alle condempneden hyim to be gilti 
of deeth. And sumime bigunnen to bi-6s 
spete hyin, ‘and to hile his face!, and to 
smite hym" with buffetis, and seie™ to 
hym, Areede thou. And the mynystris 
beeten hym with strokis. And whanne 66 
Petir was in the halle bynethen, oon of 
the damesels of the hijzest" prest cam. 
And whanne sche hadde seyn Petir67 
warmynge hym, sche bihelde hym, and 
seide, And thou were with Jhesu of 
Nazareth. And he denyede, and seide, 68 
Nethir Y woot, nethir Y knowe, what 
thou seist. And he wente withont forth 
bifor the halle; and anoon the cok crewe. 
And eftsoone whanne another damesel 69 
hadde seyn hym, sche bigan to seye to 
men that stoden aboute, That this°® is of 
hem. And he eftsoone denyede. And70 
aftir a litil, eftsoone thei that stoden ny3, 
seiden to Petir, Verili thou art of hem, 
for thou art of Galilee also. But he7) 
bigan to curse and toP swere, For Y 
knowe not this man, whom4 3e seien. 
And anoon eftsoones the cok crew. And 72 
Petir bithou;te on the word that Jhesus 
hadde seide to hym, Bifor the cok crowe 
twies, thries thou schalt denye me. And 
he bigan to wepe. 


CAP 


And anoon in the morewtid the hi3-1 
este" prestis maden a counsel with the 


a Goddis vertu ur. » the cloudis ur. © seide ur. d is seyn N. e Om. ur. f Om. surx. 
8 Om. surx. bspete on ur. ifortoo. * face nur. 10m. 0. ™ strokis, or buffatis 4. © huffetis 
Meurw. °Om.aMopgurwx, hand mayden x. P seide ur, were aPsUVx. Was KM. ° kuowe Mur. 
S out with out forth ur. tereweur. tt Forsothe efte ur. 'anur. VY hand mayden acNoseTwxy. 
w Om. surx. »* hethiso. Yefte ur. z efte ur. a weren present UF. b for ur. ¢ also uF. 
4 Forsothe ur. © Om.surx. fto swere ur. & efte ur.eftsane x. bcrew mur. iofo. * which ur. 
| Bifore that ur. ™ songe 0. crowe UF. n Om. ur. o me thries UF. P Om. surx. 4 in the 
morowtide ur, 

bOm.R prm. ihizea.  & diserens. 1}Om. ep. "Om. 8 prim. ™ seiden c. to seie eka. seyne i- 
“hei. Ohethist. POm.e. Gofwhomk, thizset. 8 Om. k. 


XV. 2—16. 


CAP. Ks 
2 And Pilat axide him, Art thon kyng 
of Jewis? And he" answeringe seith*® to 
3him, Thou seyst. And the hi3este prestis 
saccusiden him in manye thingis. Pilat 
forsothe eftsoone' axide him, seyinge, 
‘Thou answerist" not ony thing? Seest 
thou, in how manye’ thingis thei accusen 
sthee? Forsothe Jhesus more no thing an- 
sweride, so that Pilat ‘schulde wondre’. 
6Forsoth by ‘a solemne* day he was wont 
to leeney to hem oon bonnden?, whom 
zenere thei axiden. Forsoth ‘there was he?* 
that was seid Barabas, that was boundun 
with ‘sleeris of men”, and¢ that hadde! 
don® manslan3tref in ‘seducioun, that ts, 
sdebaat in cytee®. And whanne the cum- 
pany ‘hadde ‘stize vp", he bigan for! to 
9preye, as he euermore® dide to hem. So- 
thely Pilat answeride to hem, and seide, 
Wolen 3e I' leeue™ to 30u the? kyng of 
10oJewis? Sothli® he wiste, that the hizeste 
i1prestis hadden taken? him by enuye. For- 
sothe the bischopis stireden4 the cum- 
penye ‘of peple', that more he schulde 
i2leeue® to hem Barabas. Forsoth eftsoone' 
Pilat answeringe seith" to hem, What 
therfore wolen 3e IY schal do to the kyng 
isof Jewis? And thei eftsoone” crieden, 
Crucifie* hym, or¥ ‘put hym on the cros?. 
ia Forsoth Pilat seide to hem, Sothli what 
of? yuel hath he don? And thei crieden 
ismore, Crucifie® him. Sothli¢ Pilat  will- 
inge’ fore to ‘do ynow‘ to the peple&, lefte® 
to hem Barahas, and bitooki ‘to hem* 
Jhesu, sinyten!, ‘or betun™, with scourgis, 
isthat he schulde be crucified. Forsothe 
kny3tis ledden him withynne, in to the 
floor of the moot halle, and clepiden" to 


rJhesu uy. ‘Sseideuy. tefte ur. 
feest uv. Y¥delyuer uy. 2 of the prisoneres ur. 
4 he hadde rv. € maad ur. f mansleyng ur. 
discencioun ur. sedicionn x. 4 stizede ur. 
nOm. xv. © Forsothe ur.  P bitake ur. 
Xseide uy. YVthat Ilo. W efte ur. 
aQOm. ur. © Crucifie thou ur. 
satisfaccioun ur. 


Ismytynge o. beeten ur. ™ Om. oqurx. 


t Om. k u Om. k. 
2 and Epa. 


€ that Y a pr. m.ciuka. 


prem. Vv hige 1. 


fhizer. § Om. k. 


MARK. 


uv Answ. thon ur. 

& oon Was UV. 
$ sedictoun, thal is, debaie in the citee mp. debate v. 
i Om. surx. 

4 excitiden ur. 

x Crucifie thou ur. 

¢ And sothly 0. Forsothe ur. 

& peple, or to fulfille her wille mp. 

n thei clepen vu. 


w the men 1. 
b that is, debate in eylee K marg. that is, in debate in a cylce e marg. 
h Om. cxp. 


135 


elder men, and the' scribis, and with al® 
the counsel, and bounden Jhesu and led- 
den, and bitoken hym to Pilat. And Pi-2 
lat axide hym, Art thon kynge of Jewis ? 
And Jhesus answeride, and seide to hym, 
Thou seist. And the hieste’ prestis ac-3 
cusiden hym in many thingis. But Pilat 4 
eftsoone axide hym, and seide, Answerist 
thou no thing? Seest thou in hou many 
thingis thei accusen thee? But Jhesuss 
answeride no more, so that Pilat won- 
dride. But bi the feeste dai he wase 
wont to leeue to hem oon of ten” 
boundun, whom euer® thei axiden*. And7 
‘oon ther was? that was seid Barabas, 
that was boundun with men of dissen- 
cioun, that hadden don manslau3tir in* 
seducioun®, And whanne the puple wass 
gon vp, he bigan to preie, as he ener 
more dide to hem. And Pilat® answer-9 
ide ‘to hem4, and seide, Wolen 3e Ye 
leene to 30n the kyng of Jewis? For he 10 
wiste, that the hizestef prestis hadden 
takun hym bi enuye. But the bischopis 11 
stireden the puple, that he schulde rather 
leeue to hem Barabas. And _ eftsoonet2 
Pilat answerde, and seide to hem, What 
thanne*® wolen 3e that Y schal’ do to the 
kyng of Jewis? And thei eftsoone cri-1s 
eden, Crucifie hym. But Pilat seide to. 
hem, What yuel hath he don? And 
thei crieden the more, Crucifie hym. 
And Pilat, willynge to make aseeth tots 
the puple, lefte! to hem Barabas, and* 
bitok to hem Jhesu, betun with scourgis, 
to be crucified. And kny3tis ledden hyin 16 
with ynneforth, in to the porche of the 
mote halle. And thei clepiden togidir 
al the cumpany of kny3tis, and! clothiden 17 


wwondride urx. *the 
¢ Om. our. 


Vv grete UP. 
b men of discencioun ur. 


keuere ur. that Iu. ™ delyuere ur. 
rOm.ur. &Sdelyuere ur.  t efte ur. 

y thal is 0. Om. mpgurx. 2 Om. wpeurx. 
4 wolnynge y. © Om. wsuvx. f make 


hdelyuerede ur. ihe bituke ur. = *& Om. r. 


Z ther was oon k. 
eOm.s. @ Om. k. 
land thei 1k. 


xOm.k. — ¥ wolden k, 


iiand leftek. © and het. 


136 


i7gidere al the cumpenye of kny3tis, and 
clothiden® him with purpur. And _ thei 
foldinge a corowne of thornes, puttiden? 
stot ‘him; and bigunnent for’ to greet him, 
1 sayinge*, Hail, thou" kyng of Jewis. And 
thei smyten’ his heed” with a reede, and 
bispatten® him; and¥ ‘puttinge her knees” 
20 thei? worshipiden him. And aftir that 
thei hadden scornyd him, thei vnecloth- 
iden» him fro purpur, and clothedyn4 
him with¢ his clothis, and ledden‘ his, 
2ithat thei schulde crucifie him. And thei 
constreyneden sum® man passynge forth, 
Symount of Syrenen"', comynge fro the 
town, the fadir of Alysandre and Rufe', 
22that he schulde take his cross. And thei 
ledden him in to a™ place Golgotha!, that 
is interpretid™, ‘oz expowned*, the place 
230f Caluarie. And thei 3auen him for° to 
drynke wyn meddelid with myrre, and he 
zstook not. And thei crucifiynge him de- 
partiden his clothis, sendinge? lot‘, who 
25 what’ schulde take’. Forsoth it was the 
thridde our, thatt ‘men clepen™ vndrun’, 
2zsand thei crucifieden him. And the title 
of lis cause was writun, Jhesus of Naza- 
27reth, kyng” of Jewis. And thei crucifien* 
with him twey’ thenes, oon ‘at the? ri3t- 
2 half, ‘and oon? at? his® lefthalf4. And the 
prophecie is fulfild® that seith, And he is 
gesside’, ‘or ordeyned®, with wickide® men. 
20 Andi passinge forth thei* blasfemyden him, 
mouynge her heedis!, and™ seyinge, Fy3"! 
thou® that distroyest the temple of God, 
soand in thre dayes a3en bildest it?; thon 
comynge down fro4 the cros, make thi self 
3isaf. Also* and the hizeste® prestes scorn- 


MARK. 


XVeV7 = Bile 


hym with purpur.. And thei writhen a 
coroun of thornes, and puttiden™ on hym. 
And thei bigunnen to grete hym, and is 
seiden, Heile, thou" kyng of Jewis. And 19 
thei smyten his heed with a reed, and 
bispatten hym; and thei kneliden, and 
worschipiden hym. And aftir that thei 20 
hadden scorned him, thei vnclothiden 
hym of purpur®, and clothiden hyn with 
hise clothis, and ledden out hym, to eru- 
cifie hym. And thei compelliden? a man2i 
that passide’ the weie, that cam fro the 
toun, Symount of Syrenen, the fader of 
Alisaundir and of Rufe, to bere his cross. 
And thei ledden hym in to a place Gol- 22 
gatha, that is to seie, the place of Caluari. 
And thei 3anen to hym to drynke wyn 23 
meddlid with mirre, and he took not: And 24 
thei crucifieden him, and departiden hise 
clothis, and kesten‘ lot on tho, who schulde 
take what. And it was the thridde2s 
our, and thei crucifeden hym. And 26 
the titil of his cause was* writun, Kyng* 
of Jewis. And thei crucifien® with hym 27 
twei theues, oon ‘at the’ rij3thalf and oon 
at his” lefthalf. And the scripture was 28 
fulfillid that seith, And he is ordeyned 
with wickid men. And as thei passiden 29 
forth, thei blasfemyden hym, mouynge 
her heedis, and seiynge, Vath*! thou that 
distriest the temple of God, and in ‘thre 
daies’ bildist it ajen ; come adoun’ fro the 30 
erosse, and make thi silf saaf. Also* thes1 
hizeste> prestis scorneden hym ech to 
othir with the‘ scribis, and seiden, He 
made! othir men saaf, he may not saue 
hym silf. Crist, kyng of Israel, comesz 


° eladden sx. elothen ur. P putten surx. on, ‘thei bigunnen ur. 8 Om. sx. t aud seie ur. 


uOm.apuy. ‘““Om.k. Ysmytynge o. han smyte ry. Wheued ov.  * boffuten x. bispittiden erxy. 
spetenonur. Yandtheiur. 2 puttynge, or bowinge, her knees ap. kneliden vu sec.m. ®Om.ur. » vn- 
claddenx. tofxy. (cladden x. ein ur. fthei leddenvy. 8 out him vy. avy. bSirenence wx. 
iof Rufe nr. Ethe ur. lof Golgatha ur. ™expowned 0. ® Om.ourx, ° Om. sx.  P eastynge 
usec.m. 4 lot on hem Q see. m. lot on tho ur. rOm. ur. Stake what ur. ¢ Om. ur. wis oO. 
Om. ur. ¥ vndren M. unduren o. vndur 9. Om. ur. undirne w, W the kyng ur.  * erucitieden nrx. 
y two Med P pass.Xy. 2 onhis N. athis s. onthe uy. another T. %on Nur. ¢theour. 4 left 
half ofhimy. ¢ tilled ur. f gessid o. arettid uy. ordeyned x. ¢ Om ourx. 'wickex. i And 
thei vr. kOm.cr.  !heuedisoy, ™Om.xy. 9% Vath, or fy wp. Vath u sec.m. marg. Om. x. 
9 on thee ur. POm.r. Gofur. tIn lyk manere ur. § heje s. 

m puttenk. "= Om.k. ©the purpurik. — P ether constreyneden K marg. 4 passide bic.  * east- 
iden hi. Sisk prom. tJh. of Naz. kynge. ° crucifieden a pr.m. ceimprubghikaS. VY atte Pp. W the 
cK sup. ras. ek,  * thal is, fzemarg. ¥ the thridde daiapr.m.,  *doun imsbe pr.m.ehi. 4 And 


kK prim. And also K sec.m. Also and R. 


> hize 1. 


¢QOm.k. 4 hath maad 1. 


XV. 32—42. 


ynget him, ech to other, with scribis", 
seiden, ‘Crist, kyng of Yrael, maade othere 
men’ saf, ‘he maye not saue him silue”. 
32 Come* he’ down now fro the cross, that 
we se, and bileue. And thei that weren 
crucified with him, puttedyn? wrong’, ‘or 
33 fals repref’, to him. And the sixte our, 
‘or mydday®, maad, derknessis ben? maad 
vpon® al the erthe til ‘in tof the nynthe 
34our, ‘¢hat is, noon®. And in the nynthe 
our Jhesus criede with greet vois, seyynge, 
‘Heloy, Heloy", lamazabatany, the! which 
‘interpretid isi, My God, my God, whi, ‘or 
3s wherto*, hast thou forsake me? And 
summe of men stondinge aboute heeringe! 
asseiden, Lo! he clepith Hely. Sothli oon 
rennynge, and fillinge a sponge with vyne- 
gre™, and puttinge aboute to a reede, 3aue” 
him drynke®, seyinge?, Suffre 3e, se we, if 
37 Hely come for? to do" hym down. For- 
soth Jhesus*, a greet vois sent out, deiedet, 
3s or sente out the breth®. And the veil of 
the temple is’ kitt in to” tweyne* fro the 
39 hizeste til to down’, ‘or byxethe?. Forsoth 
centurio seynge, ‘the which? stood euene 
aj3enst, for so criynge he hadde deied, 
seith”, Verrili, this man was ‘Goddis sone‘. 
40 Sothlic® ‘there weren and othere wymmen* 
biholdinge fro® affer, among whiche was 
Mary Mawdeleyn, and Mari of& James 
the lasse, and ‘modir of* Joseph, and 
41 Salome. And whanne Jhesus was in Ga- 
lilee, thei folowiden' him, and mynystriden 
to him, and manye othere wymmen, that* 
‘to gidere stijeden vp! with him to Jeru- 
azsalem. And whanne™ euentyd" was now 
maad, for it was the euentyd°® bifore the 


t scorneden g. 4 the scribis vu. 


gscc.m.uvy. YOm.u. 2 putten sx. 


v other he made @ see.m. he made othere men ur. 
may not make saue ¢ sec.m. he may not make saaf him self ur. 
a fals repref ur. 


MARK. 137 


doun now fro the cross, that we seen, 
and bilenen. And thei that weren cru- 
cified with hyim, dispiseden® hym. And33 
whanne the sixte hour was come, derk- 
nessis weren made on al thef erthe til in’ 
to the nynthe our. And in the nynthess 
our Jhesus criede with a grect vois, and 
seide, Heloy, Heloy, lamasabatany, that 
is to seie, My God, my God, whi hast 
thou forsakun me? And summe of men*3s 
that stoden aboute herden, and seiden, 
Lo! he clepith Helye. And oon! ranne,36 
and fillide a spounge with vynegre, and 
puttide aboute to a reede, and 3af tok 
hym drynkel, and seide, Suffre 3e, se we, 
if™ Helie come to do hym doun. And37 
Jhesus 3af out" a greet cry, and diede. 
And the veil of the temple was rent’ 3s 
atwo fro the hizeste to bynethe. But39 
the centurien that stood forn? a3ens4 
si3, that he so criynge hadde diede, and" 
seide, Verili, this man was Goddis sone. 
And ther weren also wymmen bihold- 40 
ynge fro afer, among whiche* was Marie 
Manudeleyn, and Marie, the modir of 
James the lesse, and of* Joseph, and of 
Salome. And whanne Jhesus was in4! 
Galilee, thei folewiden hyin, and myn- 
ystriden to hym, and many othere wym- 
men, that camen vp togidir with him to 
Jerusalem. And whanne enentid® was 42 
come, for it was the euentid which’ is* 
bifor the sabat, Joseph of Armathie*, theY 43 
noble decurioun, cam, and he abood the 
rewme of God; and? booldli he entride 
to Pilat, and axide the bodi of Jhesu. 
But Pilat wondride, if he were now 44 


w him self he 
x Crist, the kyng of Israel, come 


b Om. aogurx. © or ondurne AGMNPQSTY. 


Om. ovrx. 4werenur. ¢€onsuyx. e€ Om. soos. fvnto x. & Om. eur. » Hely, Hely aw. 
iOQm.ur. Jis interpretid wp. * or wherfore a. Om. ogurx. ‘and heringe p. ™aysel 0, 2” 3af to F. 
°todrinke v. Pand seide ur. @Om.surx. * putter. 8%Om.uy. t Jhesu sente out the spirit ur. 


4 Om. ox. either diede ur. Ywas ur. WOm. o. 


X two MPQXY. 


y binethe wpury. 2% Om. mopqurx. 


awhich wp. that urx. scide uv. and seide yr. ¢ the sone of Goduy. © And sothli x. 4 and 
wymmen weren uv. ther weren oth. wym. w prom. © Om. x. ffer vu. & the modir of vy. 4 Om. ur. 
isueden ur. * whiche uv. | hadden stized to gidere ur. ™Om.vu. euen mo. ° even aro. makyng 
redi, either vigile, which is ur. ‘ 

¢ ether puttiden wrong K marg. Om.crpu. €Om.k. bthe ment. i oon of hem A sce. m. FQ. 
k Om.sg. | to drynke a pr. m. a pr.m.segk. ™wherk. upk. torent er. torenk.  P aforn 
tsec.m.ehik. G3ensekpr.m. fandhekprm. Swhomr, tOm.kpr.m. “the euentijd 1. 
Ythatr. Wwasg. *Armath a prom YOm.tprom * Om. b, 


VOL. IV. 


138 


a3saboth, Joseph of Armathie®, the? noble 
decurioun, ‘that hadde ten men vudir him, 
cam, the’ which and’ he was abidinge the 
rewme of God; and hardily he entride in* 
to Pilat, and axide the body of Jhesu. 
44 Forsothe Pilat wondride, if he hadde now 
4sdeied. And centurio ‘axid to®, ‘or brou3t 
to’, he’ axide him, if he* were now deed; 
and whanne heY hadde knowun of cen- 
turio, he 3af the body of Jhesu to Joseph. 
46 Sothli Joseph’ byinge him* ‘lynnen cloth», 
and doynge him doun, wlappede® in the 
lynen eloth, and? puttide® in a ‘newe se- 
pulcref that was hewen in a stoon, ands& 
walewid to a stoon at” the mouthi of the 
sepulcre, 
CAP. XVI. 
47 Marie Mawdeleyn forsothe, and Marie 
of Joseph! biheelden, where he was putt. 
1And whanne the saboth hadde™ passid, 
Marie Mawdeleyn, and Marie of Jaines, 
and Salome" bou3ten oynementis, that thei 
zcomynge schulden anoynte® Jhesu. And 
ful eerly in oon of woke? dayes, thei 
camen to the sepulcre, the? sunne nowt 
3‘sprungen vp’. And thei seiden to gidere, 
Who schal ‘turne ajent to vs the stoon fro 
4the dore of the sepulere? And thei bi- 
holdinge sy3en the stoon walewid" awey, 
sforsoth it was ful greet. And thei go- 
ynge yn’ into the sepulere sy3en a 30ng 
oon, hilid with a whit stoole, sittinge at” 
the ri3t half; and thei weren abaist*, ‘or 
sgreetli aferdy, The* which seith to hem, 
Nyle 3e drede; 3e seken Jhesu of Nazareth 
crucified ; he hath risun, he is not heere ; 
lo! the place where thei puttiden® him. 
7 But go 3e, ‘seye 3e to his disciplis, and to 
Petre, for he schal go byfore jou in to 
Galilee ; there 3e schulen se him, as he 
sseide to 30u. And thei goynge out fledden 


o Armath x. 
w Pilat ur. 
VVXY. 
putte s. puttide him uy. putte it x. 


Pau, 
x Jhesu ur. 


4 Om. ourx. 
y Pilat ur. 


MARK. 


rOm. ur. § also ur. 
z Joseph forsothe 0, Forsothe Joseph ur. 


» sendel or lynnen cloth mp. a linen cloth x. 


XV. 43—XVI. 8. 


deed. And whanne the centurion’ was 4s 
clepid, he axide hym, if he were deed; 
and whanne he knewe of the centurion, 
he grauntide the bodi of Jhesu to Jo- 
seph. And Joseph houjte lynnen cloth, 46 
and took hym? doun, and wlappide in 
the lynnen cloth, and leide hym in a* 
sepulere that was hewun of a stoon, and” 
walewide a stoon to the dore of the 
sepulere. And Marie Maudeleyne and 47 
Marie of Joseph bihelden, where he was 
leid. 


CAP. XVI. 


And whanne the sabat was passid,1 
Marie Maudeleyne, and Marie of James, 
and Saloniee bou3ten swete smellynge 
oynementis, to come and to anoynte Jhe- 


‘su. And ful eerlti in oon of the woke2 


daies, thei camen to the sepulcre, whanne 
the sunne was risun. And thei seiden3 
togidere, Who schal meue awey to vs 
the stoon fro the dore of the sepulcre ? 
And thei bihelden, and seien the stoons 
walewid awei, for it was ful greet. Ands 
thei 3eden in to the sepulcre, and sayn a 
jouglyng, hilide with a white stole, sit- 
tynge ‘at the rij3thalf; and thei weren 
afeerd. Which* seith® to hem, Nyle 3e6 
drede; je seken Jhesu of Nazareth cru- 
cified; he is risun, he is not bere; lo! 
the place where thei leiden hym. But7 
go 3e, and seie 3ef to hise disciplis, and 
to Petir, that he schal go bifor jou in to 
Galilee; there 3e schulen se hym, as he 
seide to jou. And thei 3eden out, ands 


t Om. vu. v Om. urx. 


a Om. AGMNOPQSTU 


u clepid ur. 


¢ wlappide him ap. 4 and he ur. ¢& putte him mp. 


ferane ur. fofur, €€ Om.x. btox. idoreur.  graue ur, 
1 James and Joseph ny. ™ wasur. "of Salome xy prim. © oynten x. P the woke Gwopgur’. the 
wyke x. the weke y.  Gwhanthe ur. * Om. Nur.  $ was risen now uy.  t ajen turne wPxy. turne 


away uy. “turned uy. ¥ ingoynge apy. entrynge ur. ingoende x. Wonur,  * abaischid scogi. 
astonyed uy. abasht x, Y Om. sourx. 2Om. ur. ® putten sx. » seith x, 
yeenturioa, Zitc. athe ey. bandher. Catter. 4 The whicher. © seid sprom.  f Om, hi. 


XVI. g—19. 


fro the sepulcre; forsothe® drede‘’ and 
quakynge® hadde assaylid hem, ‘or gon in 
to hem‘, and to no man thei seiden ony 
9thing, forsoth® thei dredden. Sothly 
Jhesus, rysinge erly in the first day of the 
wouke, apperide firste to Mary Mawde- 
leyn, of ' whom he hadde cast out seuene 
1odeuelis*. She goynge tolde to hem! that 
weren with him, ‘kem weylinge and wep- 
liynge™. And thei heeringe that" he 
lyuede®, and? was seyn of hir, bileueden 
not. Sothlia after thes thingis ‘tweyne 
of hem wandringe’, he is’ sehewid in an 
other lyknesse, ‘or figure’, to hem" goynge’ 
13in to a toun. And thei goynge toolden 
to othere, nethir’ thei bileuyden to* hem. 
i4Forsoth at the laste, hem enleuene rest- 
inge’, Jhesus apperide to hem, and re- 
prouyde the vubileue” of hem, and the 
hardnesse of herte, for thei bileuyden not 
to hem’, that hadden seyn him to haue 
isrisun® fro deede®. And he seide to hem, 3e 
goynge in to al the world, preche the 
is gospel to ech creature. He that schal bi- 
leue, and schal be baptisid®, ‘or cristenyd', 
schal be sauyd®; sothli he that schal ‘bi- 
izleue not», schal be dampned.  Forsoth 
these! tokenes* schulen sue hem, that 
schulen bileue. In my name thei schulen 
cast out fendis; thei sehulen speke with 
isnewe tungis; thei schulen do awey ser- 
pentis; and if thei schulen drynke ony 
venym, ‘or deedli thing', ‘that bryngith 
deeth™, it schal not noye™ hem®. Thei 
schulen putteP hird hondis vypon" sike men, 
ig9and thei schulen haue’ wel. And sothli 
the Lord Jhesu, aftir that he‘hadde spoket 
to hem, is" takun vp in to heuene, and 


efor ur. Utremblynge ur. © drede ur. 
k fendis uy. 1 hem mournynge and wepynge ur. 
q Forsothe uy. 'Om.ur. 8 was ur. 
goynge ur. Wandur. * not to ur. 


brise agen ur. © deed men ur. deth x. 


f Om. mopourx. 
m Om. ur. 
t Om. sropqurx. 
Y sittinge atte the mete ur. 
d prechith arpx. prechyng yY. 


MARK. 139 


fledden fro the sepulcre; for drede and 
quakyng had assailed hem, and to no 
man thei seiden ony thing, for thei dred- 
den. And Jhesus roos eerli the firste dai9 
of the woke, and apperid firste to Marie 
Maudeleyne, fro whom he had caste 
out seuene deuelis. And sche 3ede, and 10 
tolde to hem that hadden ben with hym, 
whiche weren weilynge and wepynge. 
And thei herynge that he lyuyde, andi 
was seyn of hir, bileueden not. But.2 
after these thingis whanne tweyne of 
hem wandriden, he was schewid in an- 
othir liknesse to hem goynge in to a 
toun. And thei 3eden, and telden to1s 
the® othir®, and nether thei bileueden to 
hem. But ‘at the' laste, whanne the14 
enleuene disciplisi saten at the mete, 
Jhesus apperide to hem, and* repreuede 
the vnbileue of hem, and the hardnesse 
of herte, for thei bileueden not to hem, 
that hadden seyn that he was risun fro 
deeth. And he seide to hem, Go 3e in1s 
to al the world, and preche! the gospel 
to eche ereature. Who that bileueth, and 16 
is baptisid, schal be saaf; but he that 
bileueth not, schal be dampned. And 17 
these tokenes schulen sue hem, that bi- 
leuen. In my name thei schulen easte 
out feendis; thei™ schulen speke with 
newe tungis; thei schulen do awei ser- 18 
pentis; and if" thei drynke ony venym, 
it schal not noye® hem. Thei schulen 
sette her hondis on sijk men, and thei 
schulen wexe hoole. And the Lords 
Jhesn, aftir? he hadde spokun to hem, 
was’ takun vp’ in to heuene, and he 
sittith on the ri3thalf of God. And2o 


i fro ur. 
P Om. xy. 
¥ walkynge and 
2 vnfeithfulnesse ur. 8 these s. 
€cristened uy. f Om. ogurx. 


& for uy. 4 Forsothe ur. 
nfor uy. © lyuende xy. 
u tweyne of hem ur. 


& saaf acMNoPosTuYWwY. ‘not bileue apxy. ithe vy. *signes ur. !Om. eur. ™ that bryngith in 
deeth a sec.m. xy. Om. ogur. OB anoyeur. %tohemo. Psetteur. YOm.urv. tonurx. 8 haue 
hem wpy. tspake uy. “was ur. 

g Om. Eimpars pr.m.k8. » tother g. i atte p passim. aftir at the Rpr.m jJOm.R prem. * and 
he i. 1 preche 3e a pr.m. precheth 1. ™ and thei k. 9 thou3 k. ° anoye cnxb. P after that 
Emesuegka. Ghewaskpr.m. 'Om.c. 


sue 


140 MARK. XVI. 20. 


20sittith on the rijthalf of God. Sothliy thei 3eden forth, and prechiden euery 
thei gon forth prechiden euerywhere, the where, for the Lord wrou3te with hem, 
Lord worchinge with’, and conferminge and confermyde the word with signes 
the word with* signesY folowinge’. folewynge. 


Here endith the gospel of Mark, and Here endith the gospel of Mark, and 
bigynneth the prolog of Luk*. here bigynneti the prolog vpon Luyks. 


v Forsothe ur. to gidere uy. *Om.x. _¥ signes, either myracles uy. 2 suynge ur. * Here 
endith Mark, and now bigynneth Luk. a. Here endith the gospel of Mark, and here bigynneth the prolog 
on the gospel of Luke Euangelist. Jerom in his prolog seith pleynli this sentenee suynge. N. Here endith 
the gospeles of Marke, and here bigynneth the prolog of Luke. 9. Here endith Mark. tr. Here endith 
Mare, and bygynneth Lue. v. Here endeth the gospel of Mark, and bigynneth the gospel of Luke. w. 
Ende. y. No final rubric in emopsux. 


* Here endith the gospel of Mark, and (here x) bigynneth the prologe on the gospel of Luyk. cax. 
Heere endith the gospel of Mark, and biginnith the prologe on Luyk. irchi. Here endeth Mark ; se now 
the prologe on Luke. K. Here endith the gospel of Mark, and bigynnith a prologe on Luk. s. Here endith 
Mark, and here bigynneth a prologe an Luyk, ube. Here eendith the gospel of Mark. k. 


LUK E. 


The prologe of Luke". 


Lucas of Antyoche of Sirye nacioun, in craft a leche, was” a disciple of the 
apostlis ; aftirward he folowide Poul anon in‘ to his passioun, seruynge to the Lord 
with outen blame; forwhi he nother hauynge eny tyme wyf, neithir’ sones, of 
seuenty and foure 3eer age® deiede in Betanye‘, ful of the Hooly Gost. The which 
aftir that® the gospels weren writun, by Matheu forsothe in® Jewerie, by Mark 
sothli in Ytalie, stirynge the Hooly Gost, this gospel he wroot in ‘the cuntrees' of* 
Achaye!'; also signyfiynge him silf, that othere gospelis of Matheu and Mark 
weren writen bifore. To whom with oute ‘the ilke™ thingis, the whiche the ordre 
of the" disposinge of the gospel axith®, the mooste nede of traueil was, that first to 
the bileuyd men of GreesP bi alle profeciynge the manheed of Crist comynge in to 
fleisch schulde be maad opyn, lest thei, holde’ with Jewis fablis, in the oouly desyr" 
of the olde lawe schuldes be holde, and that he schulde trauele, lest thei', disceyued 
with eretikis fablis and foly" bisynessis, schulde falle fro the treuthe; and’ aftir that, in 
the bigynnynge of his gospel, the natiuyte of Jon take bifore, schulde schewe, to 
whom he wroot the gospel, and in whom ‘he chose” schulde wryte, makynge opyn 
him* in him silf to be fulfillid, that weren’ of othir bigunne’. To whom therfore® 
after the baptym of Goddis sone fro the perfeccioun of generacioun fulfillid® in 
Crist, and fro the bigynnynge of natyuyte of man to be ‘rehersid*®, power ‘was 
grauntid‘, that to men sechinge he schulde schewe, in whom he was apprehendinge 
bi the entringe of the generacionn of vndepartable® God, rennynge a3en ‘in to‘ 
God by Nathan$, the sone of Dauith, admittid, prechinge to men his Crist, schulde 
make by the ‘sone the® work of a perfit man furue azen ini to him silf, the which 
Tuk by Dauith the fadir to men comynge fo God 3af a wey in Crist. To the 
which Luk power in seruyse of the apostlis dedis to be write was joue, that God 
ful sehewide in to God, other to be God that was in the assencioun, and the sone 
of tresoun, that was Judas, acqueuchid*, the preier of the apostlis! maad, thorw™ 
the lot of Goddis choys", ‘the noumbre schulde be fulfild. So Poul fulfilliuge® schulde 
3yue to the? dedis of the apostlis, whom longe ‘to ajens‘ God’, that was Goddis wille, 
kikynge® the Lord hadde chose. That thou3‘ bothe ‘to men" redinge and sechinge God 
by alle thingis it were profitable to be spedde of vs, netheles’ we, knowinge that the 


2From 9. The prologe.v. Here bezynneth the proloug of Luk. y. No initial rubric in ux. b that 


wasQ. ©Om. ox. ‘deither uv. or x. other y. ¢inages.  f Bitynie cy. Bitomie yr. 8 Om. x. 
hthe xy. tOm.x prom. kOm.x. |! Achaies y. ™tho x. 2%Om.x.  Oaxid x. P Greek s. 
Graes y. dsholde sxy. Om. ur. 'thedesijrr. %SOm.sx. ‘they. “failyy. *% Om. cy. 

. e . 
w~Om.y. *Om.surx.  yIn Gxeand ya large portion of the prologue to the Ep. to the Romans is 
introduced here. 2 bigynnyng uv. bigunnen x. ®thatsore y. > fild x. ¢the hersid a. ‘is 3ouen x. 


© ynpartable vu. ‘vntog. § Mathank. %&Om.g. iOm.e. * quenchid sx. ! postlisy. ™ Om. e. 
. clothis x. © so Poul fulfillinge the noumbre should be fulfillid G sce.m. PthereG. 4 tojen x. "the 
good cosurx. the gode y. & kikende s. likynge K ef celerit. ttherec. Umentorprm., VY nener- 
theles Q. 


142 LUKE. 


traueilinge erthe tilier it bihoueth to ete of his frutis, hauith™ auoyded opyn curiouste, 
leste we schulde be seid" not to schewe God as wel to men willinge, as to profite to 
men aloothinge®. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth the gospel ®. 


Oo 


Here bygynneth the prologe on Luyke*. 


Luik was a man of Syrie bi nacioun, and of Antiochie, and was® a leche in 
craft, and a disciple of apostlis’. Aftirward® he suede Poul til tof his endyng, 
and seruede God, and was with out greet synne, for nethir he hadde a wijf in 
ony tyme, nether children, and he diede in Bithynye at ‘foure and seuentithe 3eer$, 
and was ful of the Hooli Goost. And whanne gospellis* weren writun bi Matheu 
in Judee, and bi Mark in Ytalie, Luk bi the! stiryng of the Hooli Goost wroot 
this gospel in the cuntreis* of Acaye. The moste nede! of his trauel ‘was this™, 
that the manhod of Crist schulde be opyn to feithful Grekis bi alle profetis, that 
God" schulde come in fleisch, that is, to schewe bi alle profetis, that Crist schulde 
be God and man togidir, lest cristen Grekis token heede to the fablis of Jewis, 
and weren holdun in desijr aloone of Moyses lawe. And Luyk trauelide, lest 
ether® thei weren disseyued bi fablis of eretikis, and fonned stelthis, and felden 
awei fro treuthe?. This Luyk bigynneth at the concepcioun and natyuyte of Joon 
Baptist, and discryueth the natyuyte, and baptym, and precbyng of Crist, and his 
deth, and risyng a3en, and assencioun. 


‘Jerom in his prolog on Luyk seith pleynli this sentence. 


Here bigynneth another prologe’. 


1 Forsothe for manye men enforceden to ordeyne the tellyng of thingis, whiche 
2ben fillid in vs, as thei that seyn atte the bigynnyng, and weren ministris of the 
sword, bitaken™, it is’ seen also to me, hauynge' alle thingis diligentli bi ordre, to 


4write to thee, thou best Theofile, that thou knowe the treuthe of tho wordis, 
of whiche thon art lerned"*. 


mhan s. hath x. = seie gy. seen sux. © lothende sx. —-P Here endith the prologe of Luke, and 
bigynnen the gospeles of Luke after the lettre. 9. No final rubric in xy. 4 From uv and ¢ marg. Pro- 
loge. v teat. 'bytookenr. %Om.r.  t hanynge frothe bygynnyng yr. Ulerudy. * These four 
prefatory verses are only found in two copies, uv and r, both of the early version. 


a From rortf. Prologe on Luyk.c. Prolog of Luke. x. Prologe. x. Here bigynueth the [a g) prolog 
on the gospel of Luk. gk. No initial rubric in rkMqrsux. > Om.x. ¢hewask. 4 the apostlis e. 
e And aftirward Es. f into Tr. & foure and seventi 3eer cerkPQruxbhik. ]xxiiij. 3eer ascegk. foure 
score foure 3eers x. thre scoore 3ere and four tenthe o. h the gospels oe. 1 Om. CEMNOSTUXQR 
beeghik. cuntrei bik. «10m.i. ™Om. 1, 0 Crist s sup. ras. aro.  P the truthe rsg. 
4 Jerom seith al this pleynli in his prologe on Luyk.c. Jerom in his prologe on Lwk seith this sentence. EPx. 
Heere endith the prologe. 1. Here endeth the prologe on Luke ; se now the book of Luk, kK. Jerom in his 
prolog seith al this pleynli. x. Thus eendith the prolog, and bigynneth the gospel of Luke. rn. Tere endith 
the prologe, and here bigynnith the book of Luk. s. This seith Jerome in his prologe on Luyk. vu. Here 


endith the prolog, and bigenneth the gospeil of the vangly of Luk. g. This seith Jerom in his prolog. hi. 
Jerom in his prolog ou Luk seith al this. k, Om. ore. ‘ 


I, 5—17. 


Here bygynneth the gospel of Luke’. 


5 Ther was sum prest, Zacharie by 
name, in the dayes of Eroude, kyng® of 
Judee, of the sort of Abia, and his wyf 
of the dou3tris of Aaron, and hir name 

6Elizabeth. Sothli thei bothe weren iuste 

‘biforet God, goynge in alle the maunde- 
mentis and iustifyingis of the Lord, with 

zouten pleynte. Andi a sone was not to 
hem, for that Elizabeth was bareyne, aud 
bothe hadden gon forth* fer! in her dayes. 

sSothli it was™ don, whanne" Sacharie was 
set ‘in presthod®, in the ordre of his sort 
9bifore God, vp? the custom of presthod, 
by sort he wente forth, that he entrid in 
to the temple of the Lord, schulde putte! 
loensence. And alle the multitude of the 
peple was withouteforth, preiynge in the 
rrour of encence. Sothli an aungel of the 
Lord apperide to him, stondinge on the 
iri3thalf ofS the auter of ensence. And 
Sacharie seynge was‘ disturblid", and 
isdrede felde’ doun on him. Forsoth the 
aungel seith to hym, Zacharie, drede thou 
not; for thi preier is herd, and Elizabcth, 
thi wyf, schal bere to thee a sone, and his 
ianame schal be clepid John. And ‘ioye 
and gladinge schal be to thee*’; and manye 
isschulen enioye™ in his natyuite. Sothli he 
schal be greet bifore the Lord, and he 
schal not drynke wyn and sydir*, and he 
schal be fulfillidY of? the’ Hooly Gost 3it 
igof> his modir® wombe. And he schal 
conuerte manye of the sones of Israel to 
i7the Lord God of hem; and he schal go 
bifore him in the spirit and vertu of 
Helye; and he schal turne the hertis of 


f From 0. Heere bigynneth Luke. 1m. Luk. vy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. 
k Om. eur. 
P aftir 4 pr.m. GMNOPQSW pr. m, X. 


Om. w prom. 4 toforu. !Om, vu. 
perxy. 9° Om. uri see.m. 
tis GMNOPeSTXY. % disturbid sx. distroublid r. 
be ioye to thee and gladynge @aNoperxy. 


2 with AGMNPQSTXY. a Om. G. bon vr. 


a Heere biginnith the gospel of Luyk. 1. 


bigynneth the firste chapitre of Luk. e. No initial nabrie in cEKPRsubeghik. 
the c. 


M prem. 
i Forsotlie 1. 
x prom. k. 


Om. rsgk. that e. © of k pr. m. 


LUKE. 


J ne ceimrgruxbehikef. nether Ksg. 


143 


Flere bigyuneth the gospel of Luyk*. 


In the daies of Eroude, kyng of Iudee, 5 
ther was a prest, Sakarie bi name, of the 
sorte of Abia, and his wijf was of the 
dou3tris of Aaron, and hir name was 
Elizabeth. And bothe® weren iust bifors 
God, goynge in alle the maundementis 
and iustifiyngis of the Lord, withouten 
pleynt. And thei hadden no child, for7 
Elizabeth was bareyn, and bothe weren 
of grete age in her daies. And it bifel,s 
that whanne Zacarie schulde do the office 
of preesthod, in the® ordre of his cours 
tofor God, aftir the custome of thes 
preesthod, he wente forth bi lot, and 
entride in to the temple, to® encense. 
And al the multitude of the puple was 10 
with outforth, and preiede in the our“of 
encensyng. And anf aungel of the Lord 1t 
apperide to hym, and stood on the ri3t- 
half of the auter of encense. And Za-12 
carie seynge was afraied, and drede fel 
vpon hym. And the aungel seide to1s 
hym, Zacarie, drede thon not; for thi 
preyer is herd, and Elizabeth, thi wilf, 
schal bere to thee a sone, and his name 
schal be clepid Joon. And ijoye andi4 
gladyng schal be to thee; and many 
schulen ‘haue ioye’ in his natynyte®. Foriis 
he schal be greet bifor the Lord, and he 
schal not drynke wyn andj sidir, and he 
schal be fulfillid with the Hooli Goost 
3it of* his modir! wombe. And he schal is 
conuerte many of the children of Israel 
to her Lord God; and he schal go bifor17 
hyin in the spirit and the! vertu of Helie; 
and he schal turne the hertis of the™ 


& the kynge o. 


1Om. x. ™is G prim. MNoPosTXY. " that 


q4Om. Gpr.m 'Om.r. Sono. 

v fallide emunv. fell o. fel x. fellid y. vv he schall 

“ joie ap w prom. * cyser rp. cyther ox, Y fillid ur. 
© modirs ur. d Om. operx. 

This is the gospel. q. This is the Gospel of Luye. x. Here 

> bothe thei r. ¢ Om. 


& be glad rR. 


» natyuyte, or birthe K. 
1 modris sb. 


k fro k. N Om. sk. ™ Om. ere 


144 LUKE. 


fadris in to sones*, and men out of bileuef 
to thes prudence of inste men, for" to 
make redy a parfyt peple to the Lord. 
1s And Zachari seide to the aungel, Wherof 
schal I wite this? for I am old, aud my 
i9wyf hath gon fer! in hir dayes. And the 
aungel answeringe seide to him, Forsoth 
I am Gabriel, that stonde ny3 bifore* 
God; and I am sent to thee for! to speke, 
and to™ euangelise, ‘or ¢ed/e", to thee thes 
20thingis. And loo! thou shalt be stille, 
‘or doumbe®, and thou schalt not mowe 
speke til in to the day, in which? thes 
thingis schulen be don; for that4 thou hast 
not’ bileayd to my wordis, whiche* schu- 
21 len be fillidt in her tyme. And the peple 
was abidinge Zacharie, and thei won- 
22 driden, for he tariede in the temple. For- 
soth he gon out my3te not speke to hem, 
and thei knewen that he hadde seyn a 
vicioun in the temple. And he was beken- 
23 ynge to hem, and dwellide doumb. And 
it was" maad’, as the dayes of his office 
weren fulfillid’, he wente in to his hous. 
21 Forsoth after dayes Elizabeth, his wyf, 
conseynede, and hidde hir fyne monethis, 
zsseyinge, For so the Lord dide to me In 
the dayes, in the* whiche he bihelde, forY 
to take a wey my schenschip among men. 
26 Sothely in the sixte monethe the aungel 
Gabriel was? sent fro God in to a citee of 
27 Galilee, to which® the name Nazareth, to 
a mayden>, weddid to a man, to whom 
the name was Joseph, of the honse of 
Dauith; and the name of the mayden 
23 Marie. And the aungel gon yn to hir 
seide, Heil*, ful of grace; the Lord be4 
with thee; blessid de® thou among! wym- 
29men. Which, whanne she had herd, was* 
troublid! in his word, and thon3te what 


€ the sones 4GMNPQTI pr.m.Y. 
bh Om. sx. i forth x. &k toforn xy. 
oOm. x. Pp the whiche 4emNnoprTiry. 
MNOPQSTW pr.m. XY. 
v don 4 sec.m. Gsec.m. sur. W fillid uv. 
OP@sTXY pr.m. *® whom zGMNOPESTXY. 
© Om. G prom. MNPQOSTXY prom. fyn a, 
xy prom. Om.o. i turblid myp. 


a Om. EX pr.m. 
33 Om. R. 


P knowe k. 
u maide EIP. 


© the bileue g. 
t maide E1rpaxk. 


f bileue, or that bilenen not acNestwy. the bileue ur. 
1 Om. x. 

q that that 4GMNPSTXY. 
t fulfilled acanopostTivrxy. tt thei k 
X Om, AGMNOPQSTUTWXY. 
b virgyn P. 

& The whiche scanpesTwxy. 


q Om. E1QR sec. m. begk pr. m. 
Visi. 


I. 18——209. 


fadris in to the® sones, and men out of 
bileue® to the prudence of iust men, to 
make redi a perfit puple to the Lord. 
And Zacarie seide to the aungel, Wherof 18 
schal Y wite? this? for Y am eld, and my 
wijf hath gon fer in to? hir daies. And 19 
the aungel answeride, and seide to hym, 
For’ Y am Gabriel, that stonde ni3 bifor 
God; and Y am sent to thee to speke, 
and to euangelize to thee these thingis. 
And Jo! thou schalt be doumbe, and 20 
thou schalt not mow speke til in to the 
dai, in which these thingis schulen be 
don; for thou hast not bileued to my 
wordis, whiche schulen be fulfillid in her 
tyine. And the puple was abidynge 21 
Zacarie, and thei wondriden, that he ta- 
riede in the temple. And he 3ede out, 22 
and my3te not speke to hem, and thei 
knewen that he hadde seyn a visioun in 
the temple. And he bikenyde to’ hem, 
and he** dwellide stille doumbe. And it 23 
was don, whanne the daies of his office 
weren fulfillid, he wente in to his hous. 
And aftir these daies Elizabeth, his wijf, 24 
conseyuede, and hidde hir fyue inonethis, 
and seide, For so the Lord dide to me in 25 
the daies, in whiche he bihelde, to take 
awel my repreef among men. But inee 
the sixte moncth the aungel Gabriel was 
sent fro God in to a citee of Galilee, 
whos name was Nazareth, to a maidyn’, 27 
weddid to a man, whos name was Jo- 
seph, of the hous of Dauid; and the 
name of the maidun® was Marie. And 2s 
the aungel entride to hir, and seide, 
Heil, ful of grace; the Lord ée’ with 
thee; blessid be thou among wymmen. 
Aud whanne sche hadde herd, sche was 29 
troublid in his word, and thou3te what 


g Om. x. 

n or schewe AGMNOPSTY. Om. QXx. 
T not now wpr.m.  § the whiche 46 
U is 4 pr. m. G pr. ml. MNOPQSTY pr. m. 
yOm.sx. Zisapr.m.Gprm.MN 
¢ Heil, Marie x. 4 Om. GuNopesTw pr.m. xy. 
his 4 pr.m. G pr. m. MNPQST 


m for to 0. 


t Forsothe 1. 8 Om. s. 


I. 30—44. 


3omaner salutacioun this was. And the 
aungel seide to hir, Ne drede thon, Marie, 
sothli thou hast founden grace anemptis" 
31God. oo! thou schalt conseyue in the’ 
wombe, and schalt® bere a sone, and thou 
seschalt clepe his name Jhesu. This* schal 
be greet, and he schal be clepid the** sone 
of the Hizeste; and the Lord God schal 
3yue to him the seete of Dauith, his fadir, 
and he schal regne in the hous of Jacob 
33 with outenY ende, and of his rewme schal 
34be non ende. Forsoth Marie seith? to 
the aungel, On what manere schal this 
thing be don, for I knowe* not man? 
36s And the aungel answeringe seide to hir, 
The Hooly Gost schal come fro aboue in 
to thee, and the vertu of the Hizeste schal 
schadewe vnto? thee; therfore and that 
hooly thing that schal be born of thee, 
3é6schal be clepid the sone of God. And 
loo! Elizabeth, thi cosyness*, and sche 
hath conceyued a sone in hir elde, and 
this monethe is the sixte to’ hir that is 
37clepid bareyne; for euery word schal not 
38be inpossible anemptis God. Forsoth 
Marie seide, Loo! the hand mayden® of 
the Lord; be it don to me aftir‘ thi word. 
39 Aud the aungel departide fro hir. Sothli 
Marie risinge vp in tho dayes, wente with 
haste in to the hilly placis, in to a citee 
4oof Judee. And sche entride yn to the 
hows of Zacharie, and grette Elizabeth. 
41 And it was® don, as Elizabeth herde the 
salutacionn of Marie, the 3onge child in 
hir wombe gladide. And Elizabeth ‘was 
42fillid® with the Hooly Gost, and criede 
with grete voys, and scide, Blessid bei 
thou a mong wymmen, and blessid de* the 
43fruyt of thi wombe. And wherof this! 
thing to me, that the modir of my Lord 
44come™ to me? Loo! forsothe as the vois of 
thi salutacioun was" maad in myn eeris, 


Waseyn N. Y Om, AGMNOPQSTW pr.m. XY. 
Yin to withouten x. 4% said AGMNOP@STUVIWXY. 
vVpr.m. Ccosyne Gmopexy. dof o. 
¥ prom, 
i Om. GMNPSSTXY pr.m. 
eth ur. is A pr. m. GMNOPQSTXY pr. mM. 


w Om. cir sec.m. X sce.m. —-*® thee ep. 
€ ynpossible rpk. 4 handmaideiak. ¢ Om. s. 


VOL. Iv. 


LUKE. 


w Om. GMoPoTi prim. XY. 

a knewe Mp. 
© mayde mor. 
h js fulfilde 4 pr.m. G pr. m. MNOPQSTXY pr.m. was fulfillid 4 sec. m. G sec. m. W pr.m. Y sec. mM. 
k Om. G pr.m. MNOPSTXY prim. 


y Om. c sec. m. 
f cometh k, 


145 


maner salutacioun this was. And _ theo 
aungel seide to hir, Ne¥ drede thou* 
not’, Marie, for thou hast foundun grace 
anentis God. Lo! thou schalt conceyue3 
in wombe, and schalt bere a sone, and 
thou schalt clepe his name Jhesus. This? 32 
schal be greet, and he schal be clepid the 
sone of the Hijeste; and the Lord God 
schal 3eue to hym the secte of Dauid, his 
fadir, and he schal regne in the hous of 
Jacob with outen ende, and of his rewmes33 
schal be noon ende. And Marie seide3s 
to the aungel, On what maner schal this 
thing be doon, for Y knowe not* man? 
And the aungel answeride, and seide to3s 
hir, The Hooly Goost schal come fro 
aboue in to thee, and the vertu of the 
Hijeste scha] ouerschadewe thee; and 
therfor that hooli thing that schal be 
borun of thee, schal be clepid the sone of 
God. And lo?! Elizabeth, thi cosyn, 36 
and sche also hath conceyued a sone in 
hir eelde, and this moneth is the sixte 
to hir that is clepid bareyn; for euery 37 
word schal not be inpossible* anentis 
God. And Marie seide, Lo! the hand-3s 
maydyn‘ of the Lord; be it don to me 
aftir thi word. And the aungel de- 
partide fro hir. And Marie roos vp in3o 
tho daies, and wente with haaste in to 
the niounteyns, in to a citee of Judee. 
And sche entride in to the hous of Za- 40 
carie, and grette Elizabeth. And it was41 
don, as Elizabeth herde the salutacioun 
of Marie, the 3ong child in hir wombe ~ 
gladide. And Elizabeth was fulfillid 
with the Hooli Goost, and criede with 42 
a greet vois, and seide, Blessid be thou 
among wymmen, and blessid Je the® 
fruyt of thi wombe. And whereof is43 
this thing to me, that the modir of my 
Lord comef to me? For lo! as the voice 44 


x Hevuy. *xX Om. mp. 
b to AGMNOPQSTUF scc.m. WXY. Into 
fvpuvwsec.m, fftho x. & is G sec.m. MOPETX 


lis this 4G sec. m. W prom. Y sec.m. ™ com- 


zZHethist. anok. »Om.kpr.m. 


146 


the 3onge child gladide’ with ioye in my 
4swombe. And blessid thouf ert8, that hast 
bileuyd, for tho® thingis that ben seid to 
thee fro the Lord, schulen be parfytli don. 
4sAnd Marie seide, My soule magnyfieth 
a7the Lord, and my spirit hath gladid‘ in 
4s God, myn heelthe). For he hath biholden 
49 the mekenesse of: his hand mayde*. Loo! 
forsoth of this alle generaciouns schulen 
seie me blessid. For he that is my3ti hath 
don grete thingis to me, and his name 7s! 
sohooly. And his mercy is™ fro kynredis" 
stin to kynredis, to men dredinge him. He 
made my3te in his arme, he scateride 
proude men with mynde of his herte. 
52 He® puttide? doun my3ty men fro seete’, 
53and enhaunside meke’. He hath fillid’ 
hungry men with goode thingis, and het 
54hath left ryche men voyde. He", hauynge 
mynde of his mercy, took vp Israel, his 
sschild; as he hath spoken to oure fadris, to 
Abraham and to his seed, in to worldis. 
56 Forsoth Marye dwellide with hir as three’ 
monethis, and turnyde a3en in to hir hous. 
s7Sothly the tyme of beringe child ‘was 
fillid* to Elizabeth, and sche childide a 
sssone. And the neiz3eboris and cosyns of 
hir herden’, for the Lord hadde? magny- 
fied his mercy with hir; and thei thank- 
sgiden® him». And it was* don, in the 
eijtethe day, thei camen for? to circumside 
the child; and thei clepiden® him Sacharie, 
coby name of his fadir. And his modir 
ausweringe seide, Nay, but‘ he schal be 
siclepid John. And thei seiden to hir, 
For no man is in thi kyn, that is clepid 
62bi® this name. Sothli thei maden a syngne 
to his fadir, whom he wolde him for" to 
63be clepid. And he axinge a poyntel, 
wroot, seyinge, John is his name. And 
csalle men wondriden. Forsoth his mouth 


4 ful ont gladide mp. © in AGMNOPQSTUFWXY. 
h thilk agnogsr. the ilke spw prmy. 
1 Om. & pr.m. MNOPQSTXY pr.m. 
y prom, And he y sec.m. 
t Om. w prom. %And kK. Vv Om. x. 
yseiden vu, “hath v. 4 to gydere ioyeden mp, 
dOm. sx. ¢clepynge o. fno but r. 


P putte sx. 


& tho 1, 
vp k pr. m. 


i Om, k. 
P Om. R pr.m. 


h handmaide E1ack. 
© the casyns hi. 


LUKE. 


f be thon 4G sec. m. Y¥ sec. m. 
i ful out gladid arp. j helthe siuer G sec.m.mop. © mayden ey. 
m Om. GIMNOPSQXY pr.m. 

4 the seete apr. 
xis fulfilde 4 pr.m. emNoposTxy pr.m. was fulfillid wy sec. m. 
b to hir arp. to him o. 
& Om. v pr.m. 


k Om. k. 
pp Om. e. 


I. 45—64. 


of thi salutacioun was maad in myn 
eeris, the 3ong child gladide in ioye in 
my wombe. And blessid be thou, thats 
hast bilened, for thilke® thingis that ben 
seid of the Lord to thee, schulen be par- 
fitli don. And Marie seide, Mi soule 46 
magnyfieth the Lord, and my spirit hath 47 
gladid in God, myn helthe. For he hath 48 
biholdun the mekenesse of his hand- 
maidun*. For lo! of this alle genera-49 
ciouns schulen seie that’ Y am _ blessid. 
For he that is my3ti hath don to me 
grete thingis, and his name is hooli. 
And his mercy is fro kynrede in toso 
kynredes, to men that dreden hym. Hes 
made my3t in his arme, he scaterede 
proude men with the* thouste of his 
herte. He sette! doun my3ti men fros2 
sete™, and enhaunside meke men. Hess 
hath fulfillid hungri men with goodis, 
and he hath left riche men voide. He, 54 
hauynge mynde of his mercy, took" Is- 
rael, his child; as he hath spokun to oure 55 
fadris, to Abraham and to his seed, in to 
worldis. And Marie dwellide with hir, 56 
as it were thre monethis, and turnede 
a3en in to hir hous. But the tyme ofs7 
beryng child was fulfillid to Elizabeth, 
and sche bare a sone. And the nei3borisss 
and cosyns? of hir herden, that the Lord 
hadde magnyfied his mercy with hir; 
and thei thankiden hym. And it wass9 
don in the ei3te dai, thei camen to cir- 
cumcide the child; and thei clepiden bym 
Zacarie, bi the? name of his fadir. And 60 
his moder answeride, and seide, Nay, but 
he schal be clepid Joon. And thei seiden 61 
to hir, For no man is in thi kynrede, 
that is clepid this name. And _ theic2 
bikeneden to his fadir, what he wolde 
that?? he were clepid. And he axyngees 


§ Om. AGMNOPOQSTXY. 


0 kynrede 4GMNOPQSTIVY. 
r meke men vu. 


o And ox 
8 fulfillid GaNopesTWwxy. 


Cis A pr. Mm. GMNOPQSTXY pr.m. 
h Om. surx. 


I settide R. putte k. ™ here seete 1. ® took 


I. 65—8o. 


was* openyd anon, and his tunge, and he 
ssspak, blessinge! God. And drede was™ 
maad on alle her nei3eboris, and thes" 
wordis weren pupplischid on® alle the? 
eshilly placis of Judee. And alle men that 
herden puttedyn4 in her’ herte, seyinge, 
Who, gessist thou, this child schal be? 
And sothli the hond of the Lord was® 
67 with him. And Zacharie, his fadir, ‘was 
fillidt with the Hooli Gost, and prophe- 
68 siede, seyinge", Blessid bev the Lord God 
of Israel, for he hath visitid, and maad 
c9redempcioun of his peple. And he hath 
rerid’ to vs an horn of* helthe in the 
7ohous of Dauith, his child. AsY he spak by 
the mouthe of ‘hooly prophetis’, that ben 
71 fro the world*. Helthe fro® oure enemyes, 
and fro* the hond of alle men? that hat- 
72 iden vs. To do® mercy with oure fadris,and 
tof haue mynde of8 his' hooly testament. 
73'The ooth that he swor to Abraham, oure 
74 fadir, ‘to 3yue him silfi to vs. That we 
‘withoute drede* deliuerid fro the hond of 
75 oure enemyes, serue! to him™, in hoolynesse 
and ri3tfulnesse" bifore him in® alle oure 
7edayes. And thou, child, schalt be clepid 
* theP prophete of the?P Hizeste; for thou 
schalt go bifore the face of the Lord, to4 
77make redy his weyes. For™ to 3yue the® 
science of helthe to his peple, in to remis- 
zscioun of her synnes; bi the entraylis of 
mercy‘ of onre God, in whiche" he spryng- 
zo ynge vp fro an hi3 hath visytid vs. For’ 
to 3yue 1i3t to hem that sitten in derk- 
nessis, and in schadewe of deth; for’ to 
dresse oure feet in to the wey of pees. 
soSothli the child waxide*, and was com- 


Kis a pr.m. GMNPQSTXY pr.m. 1 plesynge o. 


LUKE. 


147 


a poyntil, wroot, seiynge, Joon is his 
name. And alle men wondriden. -And 64 
anoon his mouth was openyd, and his 
tunge, and he spak, and blesside God. 
And drede was maad on alle her nei3- 65 
boris, and alle these wordis weren pup- 
plischid on alle the mounteyns of Judee. 
And alle men that herden puttiden ince 
her herte, and seiden, What maner child 
schal this be? For? the hoond of the 
Lord was with hym. And Zacarie, his 67 
fadir, was fulfillid with the Hooli Goost, 
and’ prophesiede, and seide, Blessid be ce 
the Lord God of Israel, for he hath 
visitid, and maad redempcioun of his 
puple. And he hath rerid® to vs ane 
horn of heelthe in the hous of Dauid, his 
child. As he spak bi the mouth of7o 
hiset hooli prophetis, that weren fro the 
world. Helthe fro oure enemyes, and fro71 
the hoond of alle men that hatiden vs. 
To do merci with oure fadris, and to72 
haue mynde of his hooli testament. The73 
greet ooth that he swoor to Abraham, 
oure fadir, to 3yue hym silf to" vs. That 74 
we with out drede delyuered’ fro the 
hoond of oure enemyes, serue to hym, in 75 
hoolynesse and ri3twisnesse” bifor hym 
in alle oure daies. And thou, child, 76 
schalt be clepid the prophete of the 
Hijest ; for thou schalt go bifor the face 
of the Lord, to make redi hise weies. To77 
3yue scyence of helthe to his puple, in to 
remyssioun of her synnes; bi the inward- 7s 
nesse of the merci of oure God, in the 
whiche he spryngynge vp fro an_ hi3 
hath visitid vs. To 3yue li3t to hem that 7 


mM is 4 pr. m. GMNOPQSTXY pr. m. 2 alle these 


uUvxX. © vpon AQMNOPQTW pr.m. Y. P Om. o. q putten s passin x. r Om. G pr.m. s Om. 
Q pr. m. t is fulfillid 4 pr. m. G sec. m. MNOPQSTXY pr.m. was fulfillid wy sec. m. u Om. Ww pr.m. 
v Om. 4 pr.m. G pr. m. MNPQSTW prom. XY prom. W reiside ur. xonhisu. ofhisy. y Andu. 


Zseyntis wp. 8 world his prophetes ap. 
4 Om.urw sec. m. x. 


1 gerue we QY pr. m. 
© Om. G pr.m, MNOPQSTW pr.m. XY pr.m. 
8 Om. 4GMNOPOSTY pr.m. XY. 


wpr.m Y¥. YOm.sx. “WOm.s. * wex x. 


4 forsothe 1. and he 1. 
 riztfulnesse sbhi. 


ua 


> of G pr. m. MNOPQTXY pr. m. 
© be done 4 pr.m. GMNOPQSTXY pr. m. 
ihym silf to 3if Gow sec. m. to 3iue him mpexy pr.m. hym to 3eue NT. 
m him withouten drede mogrxy pr.m. 

P Om. rv. 
t the mercy 4GMNOPQSTW pr.m. XY. 


8 arerid Evk. reisid b. 


© of GMNOPQTXY pr.m. 
Son aenst. b Om. K. 
k Om. mopeTxy pr.m. 
D rigztwysenesse AGMNOPQSTUIVXY. 

q for to acmNopeTuriny. * Om. x. 
u the whiche 4GMNopeT 


f Om. v pr.m. 


pp Om. o. 


tOm.kpr.m. uforb. ¥ be delyuered k pr. m. 


148 LUKE. 


fortid in spirit, and was in desert til toY 
the day of his schewinge to Israel. 


CAP. II. 


1 Forsothe it was’ don” in tho dayes, a 
maundement went out fro Cesar August, 
‘or noble*, that al the world schulde be 
2discryued. This firste discryuyng was 
3maad of Cyryne, iustice” of Cirye. And 
alle men‘ wenten, that thei schulde make 
profescioun, ‘or knowleching 1, ech by 
shim self in to his cite. Sothly and Josep 
stizede vp fro Galilee, of® the’ cite of & 
Nazareth, in to Jude, in®® to a cite of Da- 
uith, that is clepid Bedleem, for that he 
was of the hous and meyne of Dauith, 
sthat he schulde knowleche with Marie, 
6 with child spousid wyf to him". Sothli it 
was! don, whanne thei weren there, the 
dayes weren* fulfillid', that she schulde 
7bere™ child. And sche childide her firste 
born® sone, and wlappide him in clothis, 
and puttide® him in a cracche, for ther 
was not? place to hym in the comyn sta- 
sble. And schepherdis weren in the same 
cuntre, wakinge and kepinge the watchis 
90f4 the ny3t on™ her flok. And loo! the 
aungel of the Lord stood by sydis hem, 
and the‘ clerenesse of God schynedet aboute 
hem; and thei dredden with greet drede. 
10And the aungel seide to hem, Nyle 3e 
drede ; lo! sothli I euangelise* to 3ou a 
1 grete ioye, that schal be to al peple’. For 
a sauyour is borun to day to vs, that is 
Crist the® Lord, in the cite of Dauith. 
12And this* a tokene to 30u; 3e schulen 


y Om. g. in to viv prim. 
or keper AGMNPQSTW pr.m. Y. 
eg and kK. 
k ben 4 pr.m. MNPQTXY. 1 fillid ur. 
bigeten arp. goten x. 9 putte s ef x passim. 
GMNPQTXWY. ‘schoen s. 
W a G pr.m. MNOPQTXY pr. m. 


¢ Om. x. 


x the schadewe nr. shades. Y he wast. 


El pr.m. a. & ther. 


Z is A prin, GMNOPQSTXY pr. m. 
d Om. x. 
h spoused to him wijf, with childe emopeTxy. 
m first bere 1. 
P nov. 
u euaugelise, or preche AGMNOPQSTW pr.m. Y. 
x this ts Q sec.m. Ww pr. m. 


Z ynto 1. 
K marg. professioun, ether knonlechynge X sec. m. marg. 


Il, 1—-12. 


sitten in derknessis and in schadewe* of 
deeth; to dresse oure feet in to the weie 
of pees. And the child wexide, and was 80 
couinfortid in spirit, and wasY in desert 
placis ‘til to? the dai of his schewing to 
Israel. 

CAP. II. 

And it was don in tho daies, a maun-1 
dement wente out fro the emperour Au- 
gust, that al the world schulde be dis- 
eryued. This firste diseryuyng was maad 2 
of Cyryn, iustice of Sirie. And alle men3 
wenten to make professioun®, ech in toe 
his owne citee. And Joseph wente vp4 
fro Galilee, fro the citee Nazareth, in to 
Judee, in to a citee of Dauid, that is 
clepid Bethleem, for that he was of the 
hous and of the meyne of Dauid, that hes 
schulde knouleche with Marie, his wijf, 
that was weddid to hym, and was greet 
with child. And it was don, while theié 
weren there, the daies weren fulfillid, 
that sche schulde bere child. And sche7 
bare hir first borun sone, and wlappide® 
hym in clothis, and leide hym in a 
cratche, for ther was no place to hym in 
no® chaumbir. And scheepherdis werens 
in the same cuntre, wakynge and kep- 
ynge the’ watchis of the ny3t on her 
flok.. And lo! the aungel of the Lordo 
stood bisidis hem, and the cleernesse of 
God schinede aboute hem; and thei dred- 
den with greet drede. And the aungel 10 
seide to hem, Nyle 3e drede; for lo! Y 
preche to 30u a greet ioye, that schal be 
to al puple. For a& sauyoure is borun to 
dai to 30u, that is Crist the Lord, in the 
citee of Dauid. And this zs a tokene to12 
jou; 3e schulen fynde a 3ong child wlap- 


2ZQm. ko. ®Om.ox.  ? justice, 
©€Om. owpr.m Om. pu. & Om. moy. 
iis 4 pr.m. anos. Om. G pr. m. POTXY pr. m. 
0 bygoten 4 pr. m. G pr.m. NOQSTY pr. m. 

T ypon 4GMNOPOSTW pr.m.Y. §& Om. 
v the peple kouvw pr.m. 


dou Ww. 


b ether knowlech 


a Om. a pr. m. EIch pr.m., 
s €Om.1  £ Om. 


¢Om.i. 4 wrappide e. 


Il, 13-25. 


fynde a 30ng child wlappid in’ clothis, 
izand put in a eraecche. And sudenly ther 
is’? maad with the aungel a.multitude of 
heuenly kny3thod, heriynge God, and sey- 
14inge, Glorie be* in the hijzeste thingis to 
God, and in erthe pees be> to men of good 
15 Wille. And it was don, that’ whanne the® 
aungelis passiden awey fro hem in to 
heuene, the sclepherdis spaken to gidere, 
seiynge, Passef we ouer tilS tob Bedleem, 
and ‘se we! this word that is maad, the* 
‘whiche the Lorde maadk*, and schewid to 
igsvs. And thei hy3inge camen, and founden 
Marie and Joseph, and a 3ong child put 
17in a cracehe: Sothli thei seinge, knewen 
of the word that was seid to hem of this! 
ischild. And alle men that hadden herd 
wondriden, and of thes thingis that weren 
i9seide to hem of the schepherdis. Forsoth 
Marie kepte alle™ thes wordis, beringe to 
20 gidere in hir" herte. And the schepherdis 
turneden a3en, glorifiynge and heriynge 
God in alle thingis that thei hadden herd 
21and seyn, as it is® seydP to hem. And 
aftir that ei3te dayes weren endid, that 
the child schulde be cireumsidid, his 
name was elepid Jhesus, which" was 
clepid of the’ aungel, bifore he was con- 
geseyued in wombet And aftir that the 
dayes of purgacioun of Marie weren ful- 
fild", vp* Moyses lawe, thei token him inY 
to Jerusalem, that thei schulden offre him 
23to the Lord, as it is writun in the lawe 
of the Lord, For ech? male? kynde open- 
ynge the wombe ‘fo> go out‘, schal be 
asclepid hooly to the Lord; and that thei 
schulen 3yue an offrynge, vp’ that it® is 
seid in the lawe of the Lord, A peyre of 
2 turtris’, or twey# culuere briddis. And 
lo! a man was in Jerusalem, to whom the 
name Symeon!; and this man was! iust 


LUKE. 


149 


pid in clothis, and leid in a eratche. And 13 
sudenli ther was maad with the aungel 
a multitude of heuenli kny3thod, heri- 
ynge God, and seiynge, Glorie be in the 14 
hijeste thingis to God, and in erthe pees 
be" to men of good wille. And it was is 
don, as the ‘aungelis passiden! awei fro 
hem in to heuene, the scheephirdis spaken 
togider, and seiden, Go we ouer to Beth- 
leem, and se we this word that is maad, 
which the Lord hath ‘maad, and* schew- 
ide to vs. And thei hi3ynge camen, and 16 
founden Marie and Joseph, and the jong 
child leid in a cratche. And thei seynge, 17 
knewen of the word that was seid to 
hem of this child. And alle men that 1s 
herden wondriden, and of these thingis 
that weren seid to hem of the scheep- 
hirdis. But Marie kepte alle these is 
wordis, berynge togider in hir herte. 
And the seheepherdis turneden a3en, glo- 20 
rifyinge aud heriynge God in alle thingis 
that thei haddeun herd and seyn, as it 
was seid to hem. And aftir that the! 21 
ei3te daies weren endid, that the child 
schulde be eirenmeided, his naine was 
elepid Jhesus, which was clepid of the 
aungel, bifor that he was conceyued in 
the™ wombe. And aftir that the daies® 22 
of the® purgacioun? of Marie weren ful- 
fillid, aftir Moyses lawe, thei token hym 
into Jerusalem, to offre hym to the Lord, 
as it is writun in the lawe of the Lord, 23 
For euery male kynde openynge the 
woinbe, schal be elepid holi to the Lord; 
and that thei schulen 3yue an offryng, 24 
aftir that it is seid in the lawe of the 
Lord, A peire of turturis, or twei culuer 
briddis. And lo! a man was in Jern-25 
salem, whos name was Symeon; and this 
man was iust and vertuous4, and aboode 


Y with G pr.m.QxY pr.m. 7 was 4 sec.m. G@ sec.m. ouriv, ® Om. AGMNOPOSTI pr.m. xy. » Om. 
AGMNOPQSTW pr.m. XY. © is Apr.m.G prem. MNoPasTXY. Om. Kur. ¢€ Om. aunogwxy. f Go 
AGMNoPOsTWY. & Om. ANogxy. hOm.esriv. ischewen. k Om. xur. kk Om. x. ! the o. 
™stille v. "Om. wpr.m. © wasGouvw. Pseenvu. Vis 4 prem. mNPQSTX. Om. 0. * the whiche 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. Sani, tthe wombe ur. 4 fillid vu. Xaftir agcmnopestwxy. YOm, 0. 2 euery 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. ®mano, » fortoacmMNreerwy. ‘¢Om.o, 4aftir acmNopostivxy. ¢ Om. s. 


fturtlis yw. 8twompwxy.  » was Symeon o. 


hOm.k. | aungil passede sgk. 
0 eiz3te daies g. © Om. ERbe pr. m. egaf. 


k Om. k prom. 1 Om. hiaf. 


P purificacioun k. 


1Om. G prom. orxy pr.m. 


m Om. FIKMPQRSUX pr.m. beeghikas. 
4 ether dredeful K marg. 


150 


and dredful*, abidinge the comfort of Is- 
rael; and the Hooly Gost was in him. 
26 And he hadde taken answere of the Hooly 
Gost, ‘that he schal not! se deeth, no but 
27 he sai3 first the™ Crist of the Lord. And 
he cam in spirit in to the temple. And 
whenne his ‘fadir and modir™ ledden in°® 
the child Jhesu, that thei schulden do vp? 
283 the custom of lawe’ for’ him, and he took 
him in to his armes, and he blesside God, 
gvand seide, Lord, now thou leeuyst thi 
30seruaunt vp’ thi word in pees; for myn 
3ty3en han seyn thin helthe', the’ which 
thou hast maad redy bifore the face of 
szalle peplis; 1i3t to the’ schewing of he- 
thene”, and glorie of thi peple of* Israel. 
33 And his fadir and his’ modir weren won- 
dringe on” thes thingis, that weren seid of 
3thim. And Symeon blesside hem, and 
seide to Marie, his modir, Lo! this is put 
in® to the> fallinge and in® to the’ rysinge 
a3en of many men in* Israel, and in to a 
tokene, to whom it schal be a3einseid. 
35 And aswerd schal passe thorw thin owne® 
soule’, that thou3tis be schewid of manye 
s¢hertis. And Anna was a prophetisse, the 
dou3tir of Fanuel, of the lynage of® Aser. 
And® sche hadde gon forth in many dayes, 
and hadde lyued with hir hosebonde seuen 
37 3eer fro hir maydenhed. And this was a 
widowe ‘til to! foure score 3eer and foure ; 
which* departide not fro the temple, 
seruynge ny3t and day to! fastingis and 
38 bisechingis™. And this" in thilke° our 
aboue comynge, knowlechide to the Lord, 
and spak of him to alle that abiden? the 
so redempcioun of Israel. And as thei had- 
den perfytli doon alle thingis, by? the lawe 
of the Lord, thei turnyden a3jen in to 
40 Galilee, in to her citee Nazareth. Sothli 


k dredyngful o. 
PQTY. 
A pr. mM. GMNOPQSTWXY. 9 the lawe ca. 

G sec.m. MO sec.m. P. pees o pr.m. % Om. vu. 
y Om. uw. 2% vpon AGwNopestwy. 2 Om. o. 
f soule, the whiche is his x. & Om. Fr. 
lin xy. ™ bisechyng n. she this arp. 
¥sec.m. after aamNoposTWwxy. T and thei i. 


tOm, ux. to gE. 
a Om. EIPQXC pr. m. 


rOm.h pr.v.i. 8 Om. rE. 
yOm. hi. = 2 Om. rhi. 
hik sec.m.  ¢ sche this 5. 


LUKE. 


lhim not for to sNopery. him not to sx. that he schulde not v. 
0 eldres aNopeTXxyY. his fadir and his modir v. 
Tof nN. 
v Om. ¢. 
b Om. mop. 
h Om. rv. 
© that ax. the ilke y. 


vthe x, 
b sche this 1. 


Il, 26—4o. 


the coumfort of Israel; and the Hooli 
Goost was in hym. And he hadde takun26 
an’ answere of ‘the Hooli Goost, that he 
schulde not se deeth, but he saw3 first 
the Crist of the Lord. And he cam in27 
spirit into the temple. And whanne his 
fadir and modir ledden the child Jhesu 
to do aftir the custom of the’ lawe for 
hym, he took hym in to hise armes, and 28 
het blesside God, and seide, Lord, now29 
thou leuyst thi seruaunt aftir thi word 
in pees; for myn ijen han seyn thin3o0 
helthe, which thou hast maad redi biforsi 
the face of alle puplis; 1i3t to the schew-32 
yng of hethene men, and glorie of" thi’ 
puple Israel. And his fadir and his’%33 
modir weren wondrynge on these thingis, 
that weren seid of hym. And Symeonsa 
blesside hem, and seide to Marie, his 
modir, Lo! this” is set in to the fallyng 
doun and in to the* risyng a3en of many 
men in Israel, and in toY a? tokene, to 
whom it schal be azenseid. -And a*35 
swerd schal passe thorou thin owne soule, 
that the thou3tis ben schewid of many 
hertis. And Auna was a prophetesse, 36 
the dou3tir of Fanuel, of the lynage of 
Aser. And sche hadde goon forth in 
many daies, and hadde lyned with hir 
hosebonde seuene 3eer fro hir maydyn- 
hode. And this was a widewe to® foure 37 
scoor 3eer and foure; and sche depart- 
ide not fro the temple, but seruyde Zot 
God ny3t and dai in fastyngis and 
preieris. And this? cam vpon hem inss 
thilk our, and knoulechide to the Lord, 
and spak of hym to alle that abiden the 
redempcioun of Israel. And as _ theis9 
hadden ful don alle thingis, aftir the 
lawe of the Lord, thei turneden a3en in 


m Om. Gano 

© Om. G prim. MNOPQ prom. TXY. — P aftir 
S aftir a prom. GMNOPQSTXY. t helthe 3ifer 
whethen men acuNopestuvxy. *Om.s. 

¢Om.o. ¢40Om.os. 44 of g.. € Om. x. 
i vnto Gexy. k the whiche 4GmNOPQSTWXY. 
P han abiden 4 sec. m. G sec. m. oOUV WW 


x Om. be. 
d Om. 


vw Om. R sec.m. © he this 1. 
¢ Om. c. til 1. til to x sec. m. 


Il. 41—Iil. 1. 


the child wax’, and was coumfortid, ful 
of wysdom ; and the grace of God was in 
4thim. And ‘his fadir and modirt wenten 
by alle 3eeris in to Jerusalem, in the so- 
42lempne day of paske. And whanne Jhe- 
sus was aad of twelue 3eeris’, hem sti3- 
ynge vp” in to Jerusalem, by* custom 
4s0f the feeste day, and the dayes endid, 
whanne thei turneden a3en, the child 
dwelte in Jerusalem, and his fadir and 
44modir knewen not. Forsothe thei gess- 
inge him toY be in the felowschipe’, 
camen the wey* of a® day, and sou3ten 
him among his cosyns and knowen‘. 
45And thei not fyndinge, wenten ajen in to 
4sJerusalem, sekynge him. And it was 
don, aftir the thridde day thei founden 
him in the temple, sittinge in the® myd- 
dil of doctours, heeringe hem and axinge 
47hemf. Sothli alle men that herden him, 
wondriden on® the prudence and answeris 
4sof him. And thei seynge wondriden. 
And his modir seide to him, Sone, what 
hast thou don to vs thus? Lo! thi fadir 
agand I sorwynge han sou3t thee. And he 
seith to hem, What is it that 3e sou3ten 
me? wisten! 3e not, for* in tho thingis 
that ben ‘of my fadir!, it bihoneth me 
soto™ be? And” thei vndirstoden not the 
51 word, which® he spak to hem. And he 
cam doun with hem, and cam to Naza- 
reth, and was? suget’ to hem. And his 
modir kepte to gidere alle thes wordis, 
52 beringe to gidere in hir herte. And Jhesu 
profitide in wysdom, age, and’ grace, 
anemptis God and* men. 


CAP. III. 
1 Forsothe in the fyftenthe 3eer of the 
empyre of Tiberie, emperour‘, Pilat of 
Pounce kepinge" Judee, sothli Eroude, 


5 waxed o. 
x aftir the acmNOPOSTWXY. bi the r. 
companye, or felauschip mp. 
4 is 4 pr. m. Gat NOPQSTXY. 
wisten w. k that n. 
m for to AGMNOPQTWY. 
ondurloute AGMNPQSTWY. 
NopesTwy. procurende x. 


e Om. erry. 


n Om. T. 
r Om. x. 


f wenten vp x. 


t his eldris, that is, f. and m. a pr.m. GMNPOTY. his elderes x. 
Y for to AGMNOPQTWY. 
& weie, or iournei A pr.m. GMNOPQTY. 
f Om. KPW pr.m. 
I my fadris 4G pr.m. NoTW pr.m.Xy¥ pr.m. of my fadris G sec.m. W sec.m. Y sec.m. 

© the whiche 4cmNopesTwy. that x. 
s and anent x. 


& Om. i. 


LUKE. 151 


to Galilee, in to her citee Nazareth. And 40 
the child wexe, and was coumfortid, ful 
of wisdom; and the grace of God was in 
hym. And his fadir and modir wenten! 41 
ech 3eer in to Jerusalem, in the solempne 
dai of pask. And whanne Jhesus was4e 
twelue 3eer oold, thei wenten vp to Jeru- 
salem, aftir the custom of the feeste dai. 
And whanne the daies weren don, thei4s 
turneden aj3en; and the child abood in 
Jerusalem, and his fadir and modir 
knewen it not. For thei gessynge that 4s 
he hadde be in the felowschip, camen a 
daies iourney, and sou3ten hym® among 
hise cosyns and hise knouleche. And 4s 
whanne thei founden hym not, thei turn- 
eden a3en in to Jerusalem, and sou3ten 
hym. And it bifelle, that aftir the thridde 46 
dai thei founden hym in the temple, sit- 
tynge in the myddil of the doctours, 
herynge hem and axynge hem. And 47 
alle men that herden hym, wondriden on 
the prudence and the answeris of hym. 
And thei seyn, and wondriden. And 48 
his modir seide to hym, Sone, what hast 
thon do to vs thus? Lo! thi fadir and Y 
sorewynge han son3te thee. And heag 
seide to hem, What is it that 3e sou3ten 
me? wisten 3e not that in tho" thingis 
that ben of my fadir, it behoueth me to 
be? And thei vndurstoden not the word, 50 
whichi he spak to hem. And he camsi 
doun with hem, and cam to Nazareth, 
and was suget to hem. And his moder 
kepte togidir alle these wordis, and bare 
hem in hir herte. And Jhesus profitide 52 
in wisdom, age, and grace, anentis God 
and men. 
CAP. III. 

In the fiftenthe 3eer of the empire of 1 
Tiberie, the emperoure, whanne Pilat of 
Pounce gouernede Judee, and Eroude 


Ver x. WOm. F sce. m. 
Zz cuntre, or felawschipe 4 pr.m.GNoeTY. 
boa. oomp. © knowen men‘o. 
8 of ov. vpon mp. 8 Om. sex. 3 and 


P was a T. q suget, or 


¢ the emperour #v. " procnrynge, or kepynge acu 


hthep. Iithati. 


152 


prince of Galilee’, Philip forsoth, his bro- 
ther, prince of Ituree”, and of the cuntre 
of* Tracon, and Lisany, prince of Abilyn’, 
evndir the princis of prestis Annas and 
Cayfas, the word of the Lord is* maad 
on® John, the sone of Zacharie, in desert. 
3And he cam in to al the cuntre of Jor- 
dan, prechinge baptym of penaunce in to 
4remyscioun of synnes. As it is writun 
in the book of wordis of Ysaye, the pro- 
phete, The voys of oon criynge in desert, 
Make 3e redy the weye® of the Lord, 
omake 3e his pathis ri3t*. Ech valey 
schal be fulfillid’, and ‘ech mountaynf and 
‘litil hilS schal he maad lou3; and schrew- 
ide thingis schulen be in to dressid 
thingis, and scharpe thingis in to playne 
sweyes; and ech? fleisch, ‘or mani, schal 
7se the helthe* of God. Therfore he seide 
to the cumpanyes, ‘the whiche! wenten 
out, that thei schulden be baptysid of 
him, Kyndlis™ of eddris, who schewide to 
jon to” flee fro® wraththe to comynge?? 
sTherfore do 3e worthi fruytis of pen- 
aunce, and bigynne 3e not to4 seye, 
We han a fadir Abraham; sothli I seie 
to 30u, God is my3ti ‘to reise of thes 
9 stoones' the sones of Abraham. Forsothe 
now an ax is put to® the roote of thet 
tree; sothli ech" tree not makynge good 
fruyt, schal be kitt doun, and schal” be’ 
1osent in to the fier. And the cumpanyes 
axden him, seiynge, What therfore schu- 
\1len we do? Sothli he answeringe seide to 
hem, He that hath twey* cootis, 3yue ‘to 
him that hath nonY; and he that hath 
12metis, do on* lyk® manere. Sothli and 
pupplicans® camen for® to be baptised ; 
and thei seiden to him, Maistir, what 


V the fourth part of Galile 4 sec.m.caNopety. the ferthe part Galilee x. 
x Om. s. 
Z was A sec. m. G sec. m. OU. 
4 risty K. ri3tful 9. 


A sec, Mm. GMNOPQTY pr.m, the ferthe part Iturie x. 
opery pr.m. the ferthe part Abilyne x. 
> the wordis arp. ¢ weyes K. 
& hilloc 4 pr.m. GMpexy pr.m. litil hilloc y sec. m. 
Gsec,m.o.  ltwhiche ur. that x. 
AGMNOPOTY IVY, °& fro the GopeTirxy. 
stoonis 4GMNPQTUVY. of thels stoones to rayse 0. 

¥Om. 4GMNoposTWxXY. WOm. x. * two MPWXY. 


LUKE. 


» euery AGMNOPOSTIKY. 
m Fruitis, or kyndelyngis acNestwy. Kyndelyngis mop. 
P come sx. 
S at o. 
¥ to noon hauynge, or to hym that hath noon aGNTW. 


Til. 2—12. 


was prince of Galilee, and Filip, his 
brothir, was prince of Iturye, and of the 
cuntre of Tracon, and Lisanye was 
prince of Abilyn, vndir the princis of2 
prestis Annas and Caifas, the word of 
the Lord was maad on Joon, the sone 
of Zacarie, in desert. And he cam in3 
to al the cuntre of Jordan, and prechide 
baptym of penaunce in to remyssioun of 
synnes. As it is wrytun in the book of4 
the wordis of Isaye, the prophete, The 
voice of a crier in desert, Make 3e redi 
the weie of the Lord, make 3e hise 
pathis rijt. Ech valey schal be fulfillid, 5 
and euery hil and litil hil schal be maad 
lowe; and schrewid thingis schulen 
ben in to dressid thingis, and scharp 
thingis in to pleyn weies; and euery6é 
fleisch schal se the heelthe of God. 
Therfor he seid to the puple, which7 
wente out to be baptisid of hym, Kynd- 
lyngis of eddris, who schewide to 30u to 
fle fro the’ wraththe to comynge? Ther-s 
for do 3e worthi fruytis of penaunce, and 
bigynne 3e not to seie, We han a fadir 
Abraham ; for Y seie to 30u, that God is 
my3ti to reise of these stoonys the sones 
of Abraham. And now an axe is sett9 
to the roote of the tree; and therfor 
euery tre that makith no! good fruyt, 
schal be kit doun, and schal be cast in 
to the fier. And the puple axide hym, 10 
and seiden, What thanne schulen we do? 
He answeride, and seide to hem, He that 1 
hath twei cootis, 3yue™ to hym that hath 
noon; and he that hath metis, do in" lijk 
maner. And pupplicans camen to be 12 
baptisid ; and thei seiden to hym, Mais- 
ter, what schulen we do? And he seide 13 


w the fourth part of Yturie 
Y the fourth part of Ahilyn 4 sec.m. GMN 
& ypon A sec. m. GMNOQSTIVY. 
f euery hil acmMNoPosTWXyY. 
{Om. x. * helth gifer 
n for to 
tT for to reyse of thes 
u euery AGMNOPQSTUVWXY. 


e fillid ur. 


q for to AGMNOPETIWY. 
t Om. x. 


to noon hauynge wpey. to him noon hafinge o. to not hauende, or fo hym that hath noon s. to the noon 


hauende x. 2 on the 4GMNoPTIVY. 


k Om. cK prem. 


a licchy w. © the pupplicanis sew pr.m. xy. 


Tnot Kusxc sec. m. egka. 


© Om. sx. 


m™syue hea prom Monk. 


Ill, 13-——24. 


13schulen we don? And he seide to hem, 
Do 3e no thing more, than ‘that that® is 
itordeyned to 30u. Forsothe and kny3tis‘ 
axiden him, seiynge, What schulen also& 
we do? And he seith to hem, Smyte 3e 
wrongfullit no man, nether make 3e fals 
chalenge, and be! 3e* apaid! with 3oure 
issoudis. Forsoth al™ the peple gessinge, 
and alle men thenkinge in her hertis of 
John, lest® perauenture he were Crist, 
i6John ‘answeride, seyinge® to alle men, 
Sothli I baptise? 30u in watir; forsothe a4 
strengere than I schal come aftir me, ‘of 
which™ I am not worthi for’ to vnbynde 
the thwong of his schoon; he schal bap- 
tyse 30u in the Hooly Gost and_fyer. 
17 Whos wynewyng tool in his hond, and he 
schal purge his ‘corn floor‘, and" schal 
_ gedere the whete ‘in to” his” berne; 
sothli the chaffis he schal brenne in* fier 
1synquenchable. Forsoth and he monest- 
ingeY manye othere thingis, euangeliside 
19to the peple. Sothli Eroude, ‘the forthe 
prince’, whanne he was blamyd of John 
for* Herodias, wyf® of his brother, and of 
zoalle euels® that Eroud dide, addide® this 
ouer alle, and ‘closide® John in prisoun. 
21 Forsoth it wasf don, whanne al the peple 
was baptisid, and® Jhesu cristenyd, and 
22preiynge, heuene was” openyd. And the 
Hooly Gost cam doun in bodily licknesse, 
as aculuere in to him; and a voys was! 
maad fro heuene, Thou ert my dereworthe 
23sone, in thee it hath plesid to me. And 
‘Shesu him silf! was bygynnynge as™ of 
thritti jeer, that he was gessid the sone 
of Joseph, whicht was of Hely, which® 
2awas of Mathath, which? was of Leuy, 


4 he unsweringe Q sec. m. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. 4 wrongfulliche o. 
© ausweringe seide vu. 
AGMNOPQ Sec.m. STVWXY. of whom @ sec. m. 
hevry. Yinxr. WOm sr. 
stirynge og. stirende x. 
wif s. ¢ the yueles sams NOPQSTWXY. 
caste to x. € schutt 4aGNogsT. shitte mPIWxy. 
A pr. G pr.m. MNOPQSTW pr.m, XY. 
he Jhesus snpsTrxy. Jhesus @. 
rwy. that x. 


1 beth s. 


m Om. No. 


 paied R. © vanne 1. 


P is in gB. 
* he encreeside 1k pr. m. 


u heuenes k. 


LUKE. 


e that pw prom. that at o. this that v sec. im. 


P wasche, or baplyse AGNosTW. baptise, or wasche MPY. 
8 Om. sw pr. m. x. 
x with 4 sec. m. GMNOPQSTWXY. 
2 prince of the fourth part 4cMNoPesTWXY. 
d castide to aGNnoerivy. he castide to ap. caste to s. he 
d fis A prom. G pr. mm. MNOPQSTXY. 
iis 4 pr.m. G promt. MNOPQSTXY. 
» the whiche 4emNOPQsTWXY. 
P the whiche aemNnopasTwy. that x. 


a and he af. 
v wel plesid b. 


VOL. IV. x 


153 


to hem, Do 3e no thing more, than that 
that is ordeyned to 3ou. And kny3tis 14 
axiden hym, and seiden, What schulen 
also we do? And he seide to hem, Smyte 
3e wrongfuli no man, nethir make 3e 
fals chalenge, and be 3e apayed" with 
3oure sowdis. Whanne al the puple1s 
gesside, and alle men thou3ten in her 
hertis of Joon, lest perauenture he were 
Crist, Joon answeride, and seide to alleis 
men, Y baptize you in watir; but a 
stronger than Y schal come aftir me, of 
whom Y am not worthi to vnbynde the 
lace of his schoon; he schal baptize 3ou 
in the Hooli Goost and fier. Whos 17 
‘wynewyng tool? inP his hond, and he 
schal purge his floor of corn, and4 schal 
gadere the whete in to his berne; but the 
chaffis™ he schal brenne with fier vn- 
quenchable. And many othere thingis 18 
also he spak, and prechide to the puple. 
But Eroude tetrark’, whanne he was 
blamed of Joon for Erodias, the wijf of19 
his brother, and for alle the’* yuelis that 
Eroude dide, encresidet this ouer alle, and 20 
schitte Joon in prisoun. And it was2i 
don, whanne al the puple was baptised, 
and whanne Jhesu was baptised, and 
preiede, heuene was openyd. And the22 
Hooli Goost cam doun in bodili licnesse, 
as a dowue on hym; and a vois was 
maad fro heuene", Thou art my der- 
worth sone, in thee it hath plesid’ to 


‘me. And Jhesu hym silf was bigyn-2s 


ninge as of thritti 3eer, that he was 
gessid the sone of Joseph, which was of 
Heli, which was of Mathath, which was 24 
of Leuy, which was of Melchi, that was 


fthe kny3ttis Gc.  § and 

kOm.y. !pajidsx. ™Om. xk. "and lest o. 
9 oon oO. T whos 

t floore of corne 4GNogrywxy. and 


Y stirynge, or monestynge AGNSTWY. 
a of aemNopesTIxy. ? the 


& Om. k. h is 
k Om. xk. ! himsilf 4 sec.m. 
0 the whichle 4GMNoPes 


'chaff1. $ tetrark alsok pr.m. 88 Om. B. 


154 LUKE. III. 25—IV. 3. 


wich? was of Melchy, which’ was of 
25Jamne, that was of Joseph, that was of 
Mataty, that was of Amos, that was of 
Naum, that was of Hely, that was of 
26 Nagge, that was of Mathath, that was of 
Mathatye, that was of Semy, that was 
270f Joseph, that was of Juda, that was of 
Johanna, that was of Resa, that was of 
Zorobabel, that was of Salatiel, that was 
28of Nery, that was of Melchy, that was of 
Addy, that was of Cosan, that was of 
209 EImadan, that was of Her, that was of 
Jesu, that was of Eleasar, that was of Jo- 
rym, that was of Mathath, that was of 
30 Leuy, that was of Symeon, that was of 
Juda, that was of Joseph, that was of 
31 Jona, that was of Elyachim, that was of 
Melca, that was of Menna, that was of 
Mathatha, that was of Nathan, that was 
320f Dauith, that was of Jesse, that was 
of Obeth, that was of Booz, that was of 
33Salmon, that was of Nason, that was of 
Amynadab, that was of Aram, that was of 
34 Esrom, that was of Phares, that was of 
Judas, that was of Jacob, that was of Y- 
saac, that was of Abraham, that was of Tare, 
35that was of Nacor, that was of Seruch, 
that was of Ragau, that was of Phaleth, 
36 that was of Heber, that was of Sale, that 
was of Caynan, that was of Arfaxat, that 
was of Sem, that was of Noe, that was 
370f Lameth, that was of Matusale, that 
was of Enok, that was of Jareth, that was 
3s0f Malaliel, that was of Caynan, that was 
of Enos, that was of Seth, that was of 
Adam, that was of God. 


CAP,.1V. 
1 Forsothe Jhesu ful of the Hooly Gost 
turnede a3en fro Jordan, and was’ led by 
2the' spirit in to desert fourty dayes, and 
was" temptid ofY the deuyl, and eet* no 
thing in tho dayes; and tho dayes endid, 
3he hungride. Forsothe the deuel seide to 
him, If thou ert* Goddis sone, seye to this 


of Jamne, that was of Joseph, that was 26 
of Matatie, that was of Amos, that 
was of Naum, that was of Hely, that 
was of Nagge, that was of Mathath, 26 
that was of Matatie, that was of Semei, 
that was of Joseph, that was of Juda, 
that was of Johanna, that was of Re-27 
sa, that was of Zorobabel, that was of 
Salatiel, that was of Neri, that was ofes 
Melchi, that was of Addi, that was of 
Cosan, that was of Elmadan, that was of 
Her, that was of Jhesu, that was of29 
Eleasar, that was of Jorum, that was of 
Matath, that was of Leuy, that was of30 
Symeon, that was of Juda, that was of 
Joseph, that was of Jona, that was of 
Eliachym, that was of Melca, that was31 
of Menna, that of Mathatha, that was 
of Nathan, that was of Dauid, that was 32 
of Jesse, that was of Obeth, that was of 
Boz, that was of Salmon, that was of 
Nason, that was of Amynadab, that was 33 
of Aram, that was of Esrom, that was 
of Fares, that was of Judas, that was of 34 
Jacob, that was of Isaac, that was of 
Abraham, that was of Tare, that was 
of Nachor, that was of Seruth, that was 35 
of Ragau, that was of Faleth, that was 
of Heber, that was of Sale, that was36 
of Chaynan, that was of Arfaxath, that 
was of Sem, that was of Noe, that was 
of Lameth, that was of Matussale, that 37 
was of Enok, that was of Jareth, that 
was of Malaliel, that was of Cainan, 
that was of Enos, that was of Seth, that3s 
was of Adam, that was of God. 


CAP. IV. 

And Jhesus ful of the Hooli Goost1 
turnede a3en fro Jordan, and was” led 
bi the spirit into desert fourti daies, and 2 
was* temptid of the deuel, and eet no- 
thing in tho daies; and whanne tho 
daies weren endid, he hungride. And3 
the deuel seide to him, If thou art God- 


4 the whiche 4aemNnoperTwy. that sx. T that AGMNOPQSTUVWXY. she was kr. tOm.s. he 
was kr. bi MNoPQWwXY pr.m. with Tr. Wheeet Kv. *beo. 


whe was I. 


= he was 1. 


IV. 4—~18. 


4stoon, that it be maad bred. And Jhesus 
answeride to him, It is writun, For a man 
lyueth not inY ‘breed aloone’, but in euery 
sword of God. And the deny] ladde hym 
in to an hi3 hil, and schewide to him alle 
the rewmes of the roundnesse of erthe® in 
6a> moment of a° tyme; and seith® to him, 
I schal 3yue to thee al this power, and the 
glorie of hem, for to me thei ben 3ouun, 
zand to whom I wole I* 3yue hem; ther- 
fore if thou ‘fallinge doun‘ schalt wor- 
schipe® bifore me, alle thingis schulen be 
8thinet, And Jhesus answeringe! seide ‘to 
him*, It is writen, Thou schalt worschipe 
the! Lord thi God, and to hym aloone 
9thou schalt serne. And he ledde him in 
to Jerusalem, and settide™ on the pynacle 
of the temple, and seide to him, If thou 
art Goddis sone, sende" thi self fro° hennis 
10odown; for it is writen, For he hath co- 
maundid to his aungels of thee, that thei 
ilkepe thee in alle ‘thi weyes?, and for’ 
thei schulen ‘in hondis* take thee, lest per- 
auenture thou hirte thi foot at* a stoon. 
i2 And Jhesus answeringe seith to him, It is 
seid, Thou schalt not tempte the Lord thi 
i3God. And euery temptacioun endid, the 
deuyl* wente away fro him til to" a tyme. 
14And Jhesu turnyde a3en in the’ vertu of 
the spirit in to Galilee, and the fame wente 
15 forth of* him thur3 al the cuntre. And he 
tau3te in the synagogis* of hem, and was’ 
igmagnyfied of alle men. And he cam to* 
Nazareth, where he was norischid, and he 
entride by? custom in the ‘day of saboth> 
in to the® synagoge, and roos? for® to rede. 
17 And the book of Ysaie, the prophete, was‘ 
takun to him; and as he turnyde the 
book, he fond a place where it is writun, 
is The Spirit of the Lord on" me, for which 


¥ oonly in w pr. im, 
erthe g. » Om. semNnopstxy. ¢ Om, aur. 
& worschip me 0. hseefo. i answeride and o. 
mPQTxy. settide him ur. he sette hym rw. 
thee x. 4 for in hondes 4GuNOPQSTWXY. 
Om. nN. Y¥ Om, 40 pr.m, MOPXY. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. bi his ur. 
€ Om. sx. 


Wono, 


fis 4 pr. m. G pr. m. MNPQSTXY. 
P 


y Om. Eqbceg. 2 On. h. 


LUKE. 


z oonli breed asw sec. m. x. oonlyche breed Gunopory. breed W pr. m. 
d seide ur. 


n brynge u sec. m. 
t Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
x synagis K. 
b saboth day 4GMNoPesTIVXY. 
& was AGMNOPQSUVWXY. 


4 settide k. 
ee 


155 


dis sone, seie to this stoon, that it be 
maad breed. And Jhesus answeride to4 
hym, It is writun, That a man lyueth not 
in breed aloone, but in euery word of 
God. And the deuel ladde hym in’ to*s 
an hi3 hil, and schewide to hym alle the 
rewmes of the world in a moment of 
tyme; and seide to hym, Y schal 3yue toe 
thee al this power, and the glorie of hem, 
for to me thei ben 3o0uun, and to whom 
Y wole, Y 3yue hem; therfor if thou7 
falle doun, and worschipe bifore me, alle 
thingis schulen be thine. And Jhesuss 
answeride, and seide to hym, It is 
writun, Thou schalt worschipe thi Lord 
God, and to hym aloone thou schalt 
serue. And he ledde hym in to Jeru-9 
salem, and sette* hym on the pynacle of 
the temple, and seide to hym, If thou art 
Goddis sone, sende thi silf fro hennes 
doun; for it is writun, For he hathio 
comaundide to hise aungels of thee, that 
thei kepe thee in alle thi weies, and that u 
thei schulen take thee in hondis, lest 
perauenture thou hirte thi foote at a 
stoon. And Jhesus answeride, and seide ie 
to him, It is seid, Thou schalt not tempte 
thi Lord God. And whanne euery.3 
temptacioun was endid, the feend wente 
awei fro hym for atyme. And Jhesus j4 
turnede a3en in the vertu of the spirit 
in to Galilee, and the fame wente forth - 
of hym thorou al the cuntre. And hes 
tau3te in the synagogis of hem, and was 
magnyfied of alle men. And he cam to16 
Nazareth, where he was norisschid, and” 
entride aftir his custom iu the sabat dai 
in to a synagoge, and roos to® reed. And 17 
the book of Ysaye, the prophete, was 
takun to hym; and as he turnede the 


a the 
f Om. G prom. MNPQTXY pr.m., 
Ithiw. ™ sette 4GmNos. sette him 
© Om. AGMNOPQSTIWXY. P weies of 
Son Nn. ¢t fende 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
y he was ur. Zintomn. 4 after his 
Ca AGNOQSTWX. d he roos ur’. 
h vpon o. 


€ Om. vu. 
k Om. o. 


bandhe1 © for tok pr.m. 


156 


thing he anoyntide' me; he sente me for* 
to euaungelise to pore men, for! to heele 
19contrite men in herte, and for™ to preche 
remyscioun to" caytifs®, and si3t? to blynde 
meni; and for™ to delyuere’ brokun men 
in to renliscioun; fort to preche the 3eer 
of the Lord plesaunt", and the day of 
203eldynge’. And whanne he hadde closid” 
the book, he 3af* a3ein’ to the mynystre, 
and sat; and the y3en of alle men in the 
synagoge weren biholdinge in to him. 
21Sothli he bigan for? to seie to hem, For 
in this day this scripture is fulfillid® in 
2230ure eeris. And alle men 3auen wit- 
nessinge to him, and wondriden in the 
wordis of grace, that camen forth? of¢ his 
mouth. And thei seiden, Wher‘ this is 
23not the sone of Joseph? And he seide® 
to hem, Sothli 3e schulen seie to me this 
liknesse, Leeche, heele thi silf. ‘Thei say- 
den‘, Hou grete thingis han we herd don 
in Capharnaum, make thou and here in thi 
2gacuntre. Sothli he seith, Treulis I seie to 
30u, for no man ‘prophete is receyued® in 
2shis owne cuntre. In treuthe I seie to 30u, 
for manye widewis weren in the dayes of 
Elye, the prophete, in Israel, whanne 
heuene was closid thre 3eer and sixe 
monethis, whanne greet hungir was maad 
26.in euery lond'; and to non of hem was 
Elye sent, no* but to! Sarepta of Sydon, 
27t0 a womman widowe™. And manye 
meselis wereu in Israel, vudir Elyse, the 
prophete, and non of hem was clensid, no 
esbut Naman of” Sirie. And alle in the 
synagoge heeringe thes thingis, weren° 
e9fulfillid? with wraththe. And thei risen? 
vp, and castiden’ ‘out him® with oute the 


ioyntedes. kOm.sx. 10m. sx. 
t Om. sx. 
sty. accept, or plesaunt o. acceptid x. 
or 3elding s. retribucioun x. 
yOm. rp, 2Om.surx. 4 filled ur. 


f Om. KY sec. m. & Sothli x. 


b out o. 


LUKE. 


m Om. sx. 
8 lene, or delyuer aGmNopesTwy. lefen x. 


IV. 19——29. 


book, he foond a place, where it was 
wrytun, The Spirit of the Lord on? me, is 
for which thing he anoyntide me; he 
sente me to preche to pore men, to® hele 
contrite men in herte, and to preche1s 
remyssioun to prisoneris, and si3t to 
blynde men, and to delyuere brokun men 
in to remissioun; to preche the 3eer of 
the Lord plesaunt, and the dai of 3eld- 
yng a3en. And whanne he hadde closid 20 
the book, he 3af ajen to the mynystre, 
and sat; and the ijen of alle men in 
the synagoge were biholdynge in to hym. 
And he bigan to seie to hem, For in this 21 
dai this scripture is fulfillid in joure 
eeris. And alle men -3auen witnessyng 22 
to hym, and wondriden in the wordis of 
grace, that camen forth of his mouth. 
And thei seiden, Whether this is not the 
sone of Joseph? And he seide to hem, 23 
Sotheli 3e scliulen seie to me this lik- 
nesse, Leeche, heelef thi silf. The® Fari- 
sees seiden to Jhesu, Hou grete thingis 
han we herd don in Cafarnaum, do thou 
also here in -thi cuntre. And he seide, 24 
Treuli Y seie to 30u, that no profete is 
resseyued in his owne cuntre. In treuthe 2s 


. ¥ seie to 30u, that many widowis weren 


in the daies of Elie, the prophete, in 
Israel, whanne heuene was closid thre 
3eer and sixe monethis, whanne greet 
hungur was maad in al the! erthe; and 26 
to noon of hem was Elye sent, but in to 
Sarepta of Sydon, to a* widowe. And27 
many meseles weren in Israel, vndur 
Helisee, the prophete, and noon of hem 
was clensid, but Naaman of Sirye. And 28 
alle in the synagoge herynge these 


nofu. 9° captiuys P. 


Ply3tq. @Om. x. 
t Om. sx. 


u acceptid, or plesaunt AGMNPQ 


v retribucioun, or 3eldynge a3ein AGMNoPOTIVY. retribucioun, 
w folded, or closed acmNnoportwy. falt, or closid s. falt x. 
¢ fro Q. 
h prophete is accept. or resceyucd aGNotw. prophet is acceptid, or 


X 3af tf MOP. 


@ Whether wx. © saith agarNoperurwy. 


receyned sy. is a prophet acceptid o. a prophet is acceptid, or receyued P. a profete is resseyued vu. pro- 


fete is acceptid x. 
k Om. x. lin to AGMNOPQOSTVWAY,. 
q han rise 4 sec. m. G sec. m. KOUF. 


a is on g sec. m.k. 
K prom k. 


e and to k pr. im. 


f hele thou k. 
k a womman a x sec. m.k sec. m. marg. a womman 1ksg. 


iin al erthe, or every lond aGNsty. in al erthe wopex. on al erthe, or euery lond w. 
™m a widowe vu. 
Teasten sx. § him out woperwxy. him uv. 


n Om. x. © ben wmNopsxy.  P fillid ur. 


BAndthek. 4bdoonoftheek. Om. 


IV. 30-——41. 


-citee, and‘ ledde him to the cop of the hil 
on® which ‘the cite of hem’ is foundid, 
30 that thei schulden caste him doun. Sothly 
Jhesus passynge wente thorw’ the myddil 
310f hem; and he cam doun in to Cafar- 
naum, a* citee of Galilee, and there he 
setau3te hem in theY sabothis. And thei 
weren astonyed” in ‘his teching*, for his 
sa word was in power. And in the syna- 
goge? was a man hauynge an vnelene 
3a fend, and he‘ criede with greet vois, sey- 
inge, Suffre, what to vs and to thee, Jhe- 
sus of Nazareth? hast thou comen for‘ to 
leese vs? I knowe® thee, that thou art the 
35hooly of God. And Jhesu blamyde him, 
seyinge, Waxe doumbe, and go out fro 
him. And whanne ‘the fend’ hadde cast 
‘him forth’ in to the myddel, he wente 
awey fro him, and 3it noyede’ hym* ‘no 
asthing!, And drede is™ maad in" alle men, 
and thei spaken to gidere, seyinge, What 
is this word, for in power and vertu he 
comaundith to vnelene spiritis, and thei 
37gon out? And the fame was pupplischid 
of hym in to ech place of the cuntre. 
38 Forsothe Jhesu risynge of the synagoge, 
entride in to the hous of Symount; sothli 
the modir of Symondis wyf was holden 
with grete® feueris, and thei preieden 
39him for hir. And Jhesu stondinge on? 
hir, comaundide to the feuir, and it lefte 
hir; and anon sche risynge mynystride 
4oto hem. Forsoth whanne the sunne wente 
doun, alle that hadden sike men with 
dyuerse langwischingis 1, ledden hem to 
hym; and he, puttinge" hondis to ech by 
4ihim silf, heelide hem. Sothli fendis 
wenten out fro manye, criynge, and sey- 
inge, For thou ert the sone of God. And 
he blamynge suffride not hem for® to 
speke, for thei wisten him tot be Crist. 


uon the 4GMNOPQSTWY. in K. 
estTwxy. *ofatr. Y Om. aGMNoPQsTWXY. 
gsec.m ¢Om.u. 40m. sx. 
A S€C.m. G sec.m. UVW. no thenge GMNOPQSTXY. 
PQSTXY. Mwasuyw. Xtoo. 9° Om. w. 


t and thei ur. 


aGMpstTwy. languyschis, or aches N. languisches o. langwishynge Q. 


G sec. m. NOSVWX. t for to o. 

lhe came r. 
thee b sec. m. 
u himself 1. 


™ thou Jhesu s pr. m. 
POm. £&. 9 Om.e pr.m. 


2 stoneid x. 
© woot 4GMNPQSTIVXY. 

i anoyed iv pr. m. 
P vpon AGMNOPOQTIVY. ouer F. 


B for to M pr.m. 
' a gret s. 


LUKE. 157 


thingis, weren fillid with wraththe. And 29 
thei risen vp, and drouen hym out with 
out the citee, and Jedden hym to the cop 
of the hil on which her citee was bildid, 
to caste hyin doun. * But Jhesus passide, 30 
and wente thorou the myddil of hem; 
and cam! doun in to Cafarnaum, a citee 31 
of Galilee, and there he tau3te hem in 
sabotis. And thei weren astonyed ins 
his techyng, for his word was in power. 
And in her synagoge was a man hau-3s 
ynge an vuclene feend, and he criede 
with greet vois, and seide, Suffre, what 34 
to vs and to thee, Jhesu™ of Nazareth? 
art thou comun to" leese vs? Y knowe®, 
that thou art the hooli of? God. And3s 
Jhesus blamede hyin, and seide, Wexe 
doumbe, and go out fro hym. And 
whanne the feend hadde cast hym forth 
in tol the myddil, he wente awei fro 
hym, and he noyede hym no thing. And 36 
drede was maad in alle men, and thei 
spaken togider, and seiden, What is this 
word, for in power and vertu he co- 
maundith to vnelene spiritis, and thei 
gon out? And the fame was pupplischid 37 
of him in to ech place of the cuntre. 


_And. Jhesus roos vp fro the synagoge, 38 


and entride in to the hous of Symount ; 
and the modir of Symountis wijf was 
holdun with grete” fyueris, and thei 
preieden hym for hir. And Jhesus stood 39 
ouer hir, and comaundide to* the feuer, 
and it lefte hir; and anoon sche roos 
vp, and seruede hem. And whanne theo 
suune wente doun, alle that hadden sijke 
men with dyuerse langours, ledden* hem 
to hym; and he sette his hoondis on ech 
bi ‘hem silf", and heelide hem. And 41 
feendis wenten out fro manye, and eri- 
eden, and seiden, For thou art the sone 


v her cite A4GMNOPOSTUVWXY. W by 4GMNOP 

4 techynge of him o, > synagoge of hem 
fheo. 8 out that fende o. him rT. 2» it 
k to him o. Om. s. 1 Om. eno 
4 languyshyngis, or aches 
T puttide wv. 8 Om. 4 sec.m. 


° knowleche A pr. m. EPQS sup. ras. X. know 
8Om.c prm.k prem. * thei ledden k pr. m. 


158 LUKE. 


42Sothli, the day maad, he gon out, wente 
in to desert" place; and the cumpenyes 
of pepleY sou3ten him, and thei camen ‘til 
to” lim, and thei helden him, that he 

43schulde not go awey fro hem. To whiche* 
he seyde, For and to othere citees it bi- 
honeth me for’ to euaungelise the kyng- 
dom of God, for? therfore? I am sente. 

44 And he? was prechinge in the synagogis 
of Galilee. 


CAP. V. 


1 Sotheli it was* don, whanne cumpa- 
nyes’ of peple felden® ‘in tof Jhesu, ‘or 
camen fastes, that thei schulden heere the 
word of God, and he stood bisydis the 
2stondinge® watir of Genasereth, and sy3! 
twey* bootis stondinge bisydis the stond- 
ing! watir; sothli the fischeris hadden 
3gon doun, and waischide™ nettis. Sothli 
he sti3zynge in to a boot, that was Sy- 
moundis, preiede him to" lede a3en a litil 
fro the lond; and he sittinge tau3te the 
4cumpanyes fro the boot. Sothli as he 
ceesside® toP speke, he seide to Symound, 
Lede thou in to hi34, and slake 3e 3oure 
snettis in to the’ takinge. And Syniount 
answeringe seide to him, Comaundour, we 
trauelinge by al the ny3t token no thing, 
but in thi word I schal leye out the nett. 
6 And whanne thei hadden don this thing, 
thei closiden ‘to gidere® a plentenoust mul- 
titude of fysches; forsoth her nett was 
7broken. And thei bekenyden to" felowis, 
that weren in an othir boot, that thei 
schulden come, and helpe hem. And thei 
camen, and filliden bothe’ litle” bootis, so 
s that thei weren al moost drenchid. Which* 
thing whanne SymoundY Petre sy3%, he 
felde doun to the knees of Jhesu, seyinge, 


ua desert x. 


¥ peples ur. 
2 Om, u. 


atherto x. »b Om. kK. 


AGMNOPQSTXY. Om. Gpr.m. Kur. 
0 for to 4GMNOPQTIVX. © bygan o. 
u sec.m. the hig vy. 5 Om. AG@MNOPQSTUVIWXY. 
W the litil ore. Om. v. her litil w. 


VYwhom 1. Wand hi. * therto mgk9. 
b Om. cEpas sec.m. uxchif. 


W to o. vnto Q@wxy. 
€ is AG Sec. Mm. MNOPQSXY. 
Jfelden aaw. camen fast, or felden in mNstT. camen fast ogx. camen fast, or fledden y. 
ihe sauze o. 
P for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
s Om. xy¥ pr.m. 
x The whiche 4GMNPQSTIVXY. 


IV. 42——V. 8. 


of God. And he blamede, and suffride 
hem not to speke, for thei wisten hym, 
that he was Crist. And whanne the«2 
dai was come, he 3ede out, and wente in 
to a desert place; and the puple sou3ten 
hym, and thei camen to hym, and thei 
helden hym, that he schulde not go awei 
fro hem. ‘To whiche’ he seide, For also 43 
to othere citees it bihoneth me to preche 
the kyngdom of God, for” therfor* Y am 
sent. And he prechide in the synagogis 44 
of Galilee. 
CAP. V. 

And it was don, whanne the puple1 
camyY fast to Jhesu, to here the word of 
God, he stood bisidis the pool of Gena- 
sereth, and sai3 two bootis stondynge2 
bisidis the pool; and the fischeris weren 
go doun’, and waischiden her nettis. 
And he wente vp in to a boot, that was3 
Symoundis, and preiede hym to lede it 
a litil fro the loond; and he seet, and 
tau3te the puple out of the boot. And4 
as he ceesside to speke, he seide to Sy- 
mount, Lede thon* in to the? depthe, 
and slake® 3oure nettis to take fisch. 
And Symount answeride, and seide tos 
hym, Comaundoure, we traueliden al the 
ny3t, and token no thing, but in thi word 
Y schal leye out the net. And whannes. 
thei hadden do this thing, thei closiden 
togidir a greet multitude of fischis; and 
her net was brokun. And thei biken-7 
yden to felawis, that weren in anothir 
boot, that thei schulden come, and helpe 
hem. And thei camen, and filliden bothe 
the’ bootis, so that thei weren almost 
drenchid. And whanne Symount Petirs 
sai3 this thing, he felde doun to the 
knees of Jhesu, and seide, Lord, go fro 
me, for Y am a syuful man. For heg 


y Om. sx. 

© camen fast, or 

fto x. & Om. 

1Om. uv. ™ weshen sx, 

4 an hi3 » pr.m. p. the depthe 

t greet u. Ytwo xy. VY bothin x. 
y Om. ur. 2 hadde seen s, 


x whom apexy. the whiche o. 
4 the companyes @. 


k two MPWX. 


¥camen plures. #2 Om.k. 8 out Mm pr.m. thou out m sec.m. 
¢ slake 3e 1kk. 3e slake s. : 


4 Om. EIkM pr.m. Pasxbegs. 


Vv. 9—19. 


Lord, go fro me, for I am* a man synnere. 
9Sothli greet wondir hadde bigon ‘aboute 
him», and alle that weren with him, in the 
takinge of fisches whiche thei tooken. 
10Sothli in¢ lyk¢ manere James and John, 
the sones of Zebede, whiche® weren felowis 
of Symount Petre. And Jhesu seith to 
Symound‘, Nyle thou drede; now fro this 
lityme thou schalt be takynge men. And 
the bootis led vp to the lond, alle thingis 
12left®, thei sueden him. And it was" don, 
whanne he was in oon of the! citees, and 
lo! a man ful of leper; and* seynge Jhesu, 
and fallinge doun in to his face, preiede 
him, seyinge, Lord, if thou wolt, thou 
13maist' make me clene. And Jhesu hold- 
inge forth the hond, touchide him, seyinge, 
J wole, be thou maad clene. And anon the 
l4lepre passide awey frohym. And Jhesu 
comaundide to him, that he schulde seie 
to no man; But go thou™, schewe thou 
thee to a prest, and offre thou® for thi 
clensinge, as Moyses bad, in to witness- 
isinge to hem. Sothli the word walkide 
aboute the more of him; and manye cum- 
panyes camen to gidre, that thei schulden 
heere, and be heelid of her syknessis. 
16Forsothe he wente in to desert, and prei- 
iyede. And it was? don in oon of dayes%, 
and he sittinge tau3te; and there were 
Pharisees sittinge, and doctours of thet 
lawe, that camen of* ech castel of Galilee, 
and oft Judee, and of" Jerusalem; and the 
vertu of the Lord was for’ to heele syke 
tsmen. And loo! men beringe in a bed a 
man that was syk in palasye, and thei 
sou3ten for" to bere ‘in hym*, and toY 
19 putte bifore him. And thei not fyndinge 
in what part? thei schulde bere him yn, 
for the cumpenye of peple*, stizeden vp on 
the rof, and by the sclattis thei senten® 


a Om. ry pr.m. 


d lychy TW. € that 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 


b him abowte Gmopestwxy. hem aboute Nn. 
f Symount Petre v. 


LUKE. 159 


was on ech side astonyed, and alle that 
weren with hym, in the® takyng of 
fischis whiche thei token. Sotheli into 
lijk maner James and Joon, the sones of 
Zebedee, that weren felowis of Symount 
Petre. And Jhesus seide to Symount, 
Nyle thou drede; now fro this tyme thou 
schalt take men. And whanne the bootis11 
weren led vp to the loond, thei leften 
alle thingis, and thei sueden hym. Andie 
it was don, whanne he was in oon of the 
citees, lo! a man ful of lepre; and seynge 
Jhesu felle doun on his face, and prey- 
ede hym, and seide, Lord, if thou wolt, 
thou maist make me clene. And Jhesusi3 
held forth his hoond, and touchide hym, 
and seide, Y wole, be thou maad cleene. 
And anoon the lepre passide awei fro 
hym. And Jhesus comaundide to hym, 14 
that he schulde seie to no man; But go, 
schewe thouf thee to a preest, aud offre 
for thi clensyng, as Moises bad, in to 
witnessyng to hem. And the wordts 
walkide aboute the more of hym; and 
myche puple camen togidere, to here, and 
to be heelid of her siknessis. And heis 
wente in to desert, and preiede. And it17 
was don in oon of the® daies, he" sat, 
and tau3te; and there weren Farisees 
sittynge, and doctouris of the lawe, that 
camen of! eche castel of Galilee, and of 
Judee, and of Jerusalem; and the vertu 
of the Lord was to heele sike men. And 18 
lo! men beren in a bed a man that was 
sijk* in the! palsye, and thei sou3ten to 
bere hym in, and sette bifor hym. Andis 
thei founden not in what partie thei schul- 
den bere hym in, for the puple, ‘and thei™ 
wenten on" the roof, and bi the sclattis® 
thei leeten hym doun with the bed, in to 
the myddil?, bifor Jhesus. And whanne 20 


Con the 4GMNOPOTY. on sWxX. 
& left, or forsaken aGMNpstTWy. his 


A prom. MNoposTxy. ‘Om. Nostw. Kink. Imy3tw. ™Om. acmnopestvwxy. ® Om. gs. 
© Om. 4GMNOPQSTYWXY. Pis 4 pr.m.G pr.m, MNoPesTWXY. 4 the dayes vu. * Om. aGMNoPOsTWXY. 
8 fro UF. t Om. 4 pr.m. MNOPQSTWXY. u Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. v Om. Nsx. wOm. sx. 
xhym in x. y Om. MPIWwxy. Z party AGMNOPQTUPIWY. @ the peple w. b senden x. letten 
OU sec. m. 

©Om.k prom fOm.hi. &Om.b. band Jhesus a sce.m ifrok. &Om.ar. 10m. ce. 
m Om. a pr.m. CEK pr.m. b see.m. e prom. a. and Ib prem. e sec.m. gk. thei us pr. m. B. 4 ypon u. 


© ether tyles K marg. _P middis k. 


160 


him doun with the bed in to the myddil, 
20byfore Jhesu. The feith of whiche® as 
Jhesu sy3, he seide, Man, thi synnes ben 
2iforjouun to thee. And seribis and Pha- 
risees bigunnen for* to thenke, seyinge, 
Who is this, that spekith blaspheinyes ? 
who may for3yue synnes, no® but God 
azaloone? fF orsoth as Jhesu knew the 
thou3tis of hem, he answeringe seide to 
hem, What thenken 3e yuele thingis’ in 
2330ure hertis? What is liz3tere toS seye, 
Synnes ben for3ouun to thee, ethir™ toi 
24seie, Ryse vp, and walke? Sothli that 3e 
wite, for‘ mannis sone hath power in 
erthe to for3yue synnes, he seith to the 
syke man in palasy, To thee I seie, ryse 
vp, take thi bed, and go in to thin hous. 
25 And anon he risinge vp ‘bifore hem!, took 
the bed in which he lay, and wente in to 
2éhis hous, magnyfyinge God. And greet 
wondir took alle nen", and thei magnyfi- 
eden God; and thei” weren?® fulfillid? with 
greet drede, seyinge, For we han seyn mer- 
a7ueilouse thingis to day. And aftir thes 
thingis Jhesu wente out, and sy3 a pup- 
plican, Leeuy by naine, sittinge at the 
tolbothe. And he seith4 to him, Sue thou 
asine; and alle thingis forsaken, he risynge 
29suede him. And Leuy made to him a 
greet feeste in his hous; and there was a 
greet cumpanye of pupplicans, and of 
othere that weren with hem, sittinge at 
30the mete. And Farisees and the’ scribis 
of hem grucchiden, seyinge to his disci- 
plis, Whi eten 3e and drynken with pup- 
siplicans and synful men? And Jhesu 
answeringe seith to hem’, Thei that ben 
hoole han not nede to a leche, but thei 
sethat han-yuele; sothli I cam not to® 
clepe iust men, but synful men to pen- 
szgaunce. And thei seiden to him, Whi 
disciplis of John fasten oft, and maken 
bisechingis, also and of Pharisees, but 


LUKE. 


V. 20-——33, 


Jhesu sai3 the feith of hem, he seide, 
Man, thi synnes ben for3ouun to thee. 
And the scribis and Farisees? bigunnen 21 
to thenke, seiynge, Who is this, that 
spekith blasfemyes? who may for3yue 
synnes, but God aloone? And as Jhesus 22 
knewe the thou3tis of hem, he answeride, 
and seide to hem, What thenken 3e yuele 
thingis in 3oure hertes? What is li3ter 3 
to seie, Synnes ben forjouun to thee, or 
to seie, Rise vp, and walke? But thates 
3e wite, that mannus sone hath power in 
erthe to for3yue synnes, he seide to the 
sijk man in palesie, Y seie to thee, ryse 
vp, take thi bed, and go in to thin hous. 
And anoon he roos vp bifor hem, and 25 
took the bed in which he lay, and wente 
in to his hous, and magnyfiede God. 
And greet wondur took alle, and thei 
magnyfieden God; and thei weren ful- 
fillid with greet drede, and seiden, For 
we han seyn merueilouse thingis to dai. 
And after these thingis Jhesus wente 27 
out, and sai3 a pupplican, Leuy bi name, 
sittynge at the tolbothe. And he seide 
to hym, Sue thou me; and whanne hees 
hadde left alle thingis, he roos vp, and 
suede hym. And Leuy made to hym agg 
greet feeste in his hous; and ther was a 
greet cumpanye of pupplicans, and of 
othere that weren with hem, sittynge at 
the mete. And Farisees’ and the’ scribis 30 
of hem grutchiden, and seiden to hise 
disciplis, Whi eten 3e and drynken with 
pupplicans and synful men? And Jhesus 3) 
answeride, and seide to hem, Thei that 
ben hoole han no nede to a leche, but 
thei that ben sijke; for Y cam not tose 
clepe iuste men, but synful men to pen- 
aunce. And thei seiden to hym, Whis3 
the‘ disciplis of Joon fasten ofte, and 
maken preieris, also and of" Farisees’, 
but thine eten and drynken? To whiche” sa 


¢ whom 4 pr.m.G pr.m. MNopesTxy. 4Om.sx. ¢@Om. x. ‘fthengeo. 8 for to 4emMNoPeTWY. 
b or aGMNPQOSTWXY. iforto agcmnpeTyIy. Kthaty. !Om.o. ™ Om. acmNopeTwxy. ® Om. Q. 
oben 4 pr.m.G prom. MNoPQsTXY. * P fillid uy. fullid Ww. aseide as. = .' Om. ap. Shim x. 
tnot wo. for to 4amNoPesivy. VY of the Giwxy sec.m. the MPY pr. m. 

P the Farisees rei, is it Eb pr.m. 1 the Farisees K pr.m. x sec.m.ehik. § Om. mars. t Om. 1g, 
2 Om. b. 


Y the Farisees cerakmpqrsxbeeghikaf. 


¥ whom I. 


V. 34—VI. 6. 


3ithi® disciplis* eten and drynken. To 
whiche** he seith, Wher” 3e mown make 
the’ sones of the spouse for* to faste, the? 

38 while the spouse is with hem? Sothli 
dayes schulen come, whanne the spouse 
schal be taken awey fro hem, thanne thei 

3éschulen faste in tho dayes. Forsoth he 
seide to hem also‘ a liknesse; For no man 
‘sendith a medling? of newef cloth in’ to 
an old cloth-; ellis and he brekith the 
newe, and the medling" of the newe acord- 

37ith not to the oolde. And no man send- 
ith! newe wyn in to olde wyn vesselis; 
ellis the newe wyn schal breke the wyn 
vesselis, and the wyn schal be sched out, 

3sand the wyn vesselis schulen perische. But 
newe wyn is to be sent* in to newe wyn 

39 vesselis, and bothe ben kept. And no man 
drynkinge old, wole anon newe ; sothli he 
seith, The olde is the! betere. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Forsothe it is™ don in the ‘secunde 
firste" saboth, whanne he passide by cornes, 
his diseiplis pluekeden® eeris; and thei 
2frotinge with her? hondis, eeten. Sothli 
summe of the Pharisees seiden to hem, 
What don 3e ‘this, that’ is not leefful in 
3sabotis? And Jhesu answeringe seide to 
hem,‘ Neithir 3e han" rad this, that’ Dauith 
ide, whanne he hungride, and thei that 
4weren with him; hou he entride in to the 
hous of God, and took looues of propo- 
sicioun, and eet, and 3af to hem that 
weren with him; whiche Joowest it was 
not leefful to" ete, no’ but to” preestis 
saloone. And he seide to hein, For mannis 
6sone is lord, 3e, of the saboth. Sothli it 
was* don and’ in an other saboth, that he 
entride in to a synagoge, and tau3te. Aud 
a man was there, and his ri3thond was 


Wthine x. * Om. x. *X whom xr. 
© and 4GMNOPOQSTWXY. 
an newe Gyo. & and puttith it in u sec.m. 
k put u sec.m. 10m. s. 
oplucken wy. P Om. G pr.m. MNOPQTXY. 
r Han 3e not mp. 
vYOm. 0. W oonli aenrest. oonly to mivxy. 


x Forsothe 1. 
CEPQXa, ¢ Om. 3s. 


VOL. IV. 


yhim c. Om. » pr.m. 


y Whether x passim. 
4 taketh a pece u sec. m. 
h mengynge 4 pr.m. GMNOPQTWXY pr.m. 
™m was G sec. ml. UV W Sec. m. 
q that that acuNpostw sec.m. xy. that at o. that w pr.m. 
§ that that acmpesTuNWxy. that N. that at o. 
xis 4 prim. G pr.m. MNPQSTXY. 


z Om. a. 
4 the cornes cE1kmPQrsuxbceghia®. 


LUKE. 161 


he seide, Whether 3e moun make the 
sones of the spouse to faste, while the 
spouse is with hem? But daies schulen 35 
come, whanne the spouse sehal be takun 
awei fro hem, and thanne thei schulen 
faste in tho daies. And he seide to hem 36 
also a liknesse; For* no man takith a 
pece fro a newe cloth, and puttith 7 
in? to an oold clothing; ellis bothe* he 
brekith the newe, and the pece of the 
newe acordith not to the elde. And no37 
man puttith newe wyne in to oolde 
botels; ellis the newe wyn schal breke 
the botels, and the wyn sehal be sehed 
out, and the botels schulen perische. But 3: 
newe wyne owith to be put in to newe 
botels, and bothe ben kept. And no3o 
man drynkynge the elde, wole anoon the” 
newe; for he seith, The olde is the 
betere. 


CAP. VI. 


And it was don in® the secounde firste1 
sabat, whanne he passid bi cornes?, hise 
disciplis pluekiden eeris of corn; and thei 
frotynge with her hondis, eeten. Ande 
summe of the Farisees seiden to hem, 
What doon 3e that, that is not leeueful 
in the sabotis? And Jhesus answeride, 3 
and seide to hem, Han 3e not redde, 
what Dauith dide, whanue he hungride, 
and thei that weren with hym; hou hes 
entride in to the hous of God, and took 
looues of proposicioun, and eet, and 3af 
to hem that weren with hem; whiche 
looues it was not leeueful to eete, but 
oonli to prestis. And he seide to hem,5 
For mannus sone is lord, 3he, of the 
sabat. And it was don in another sabat,6 
that he entride in to a synagoge, and 
tau3te. And a man was there, and his 


ZOm. up. 2®Om. sx. »© Om. kK. 
fa newe AMNPQSTU sec.m. WXY. 
i puttith v sce. m. 
2 secounde sabot, first mu. firste secounde sabot x. 


€ fro U sec. m. 


" for to AGMNOPTUVIVY’. 
y Om. GN. 


t Om. x. 


a Om. e pr.m.k sce. m, and k pr. m. b Om. 


162 LUKE. 


7drye. Forsothe scribis and Pharisees 
aspieden him, if he schulde heele him in 
the saboth, that thei schulden fynde cause, 
swherof ‘thei schulden* accuse him. Sothli 
he wiste the thou3tis of hem, and he seith® 
to the man that hadde a drye hond, Rise 
vp, ‘and stond in to the myddel», And 
9he risinge stood. Sothli Jhesu seith to 
hem, I axe 30u, if¢ it is leefful to’ do wel 
in the sabot®, ether yuele? for? to make 
10a soule saf, ether" for’ to leese? And, 
alle men lookide aboute, he seide to the 
man, Hold forth thin hond. And he held 
forth, and his hond was* restorid to 
ihelthe. Sothli thei weren' fulfilld™ with 
vnwysdom", and spaken to gidere, what 
12thei schulden do of Jhesu. Forsothe it 
is° don in tho dayes, he wente out in to 
an hil for? to preye; and he was al ny3t 
i3dwellinge in the preier of God. And 
whanne the day was maad, he clepide his 
disciplis, and chees twelue of hem, whiche4 
it‘he clepide also apostlis'; Symound, whom 
he clepide Petre, and Andrew, his bro- 
ther, James and Jon, Philip and Bartol- 
ismew, Mathen and’ Thomas, James Al- 
phei, and Symound, that is clepid Zelotis, 
i6 Judas oft James, and Judas Scariot, that 
17 was" traitour. And Jhesu comynge doun 
fro the hil with hem, stood in a feeld’ 
place; and the cumpenye of his disciplis, 
and a plenteuous multitude of pore* peple, 
of al Judee, and ofY Jerusalem, and of ‘the 
se? coostis, and of Tire, and of* Sydon, 
18whiche> camen, that thei schulde heere 
hym, and that® thei schulden be heelid 
of her langwischingis?; and thei® that 
weren trauelid with! vnclene spiritis, weren 
iwheelid. And ech cumpeny of the® peple 


2 for to G pr.m. MPQTY. to NOX. 
nopTy. © sabboth day o. 
A prem. G prom. MNPQSTXY. 
AGNQSTIVY. 


a sayde o. 
f or AGMNOPQSTWAXY. 


was A sec.m. G sec.m. UV. 


G sec.m.w. “Om. K. 


y Om. 4GMNOPesTVWXY. 7 all thees o. the r. 


4 languisches, or achis acunpstwy. langwisches ogrx. 


AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


ce Om. R. 
I the peple crkuxrsgkaf. 


€ the Farisees Eehik. 
k of Sidon c. 


f Arise hi. 


VI. 7—19. 


rij3t hoond was drie. And the scribis7 
and Farisees® aspieden hym, if he wolde 
heele hym® in the sabat, that thei schul- 
den fynde cause, whereof thei schulden 
accuse hym. And he wiste the thou3tiss 
of hem, and he seide to the man that 
hadde a drie hoond, Risef vp, and stonde 
in to’ the myddil. And he roos, and 
stood. And Jhesus seide to hem, Y axey 
jou, if it is leueful to do wel in the 
sabat, or yuel? to make a soule saaf, or 
to leese? And whanne he hadde biholde io 
alle men aboute, he seide to the man, 
Hold forth thin hoond. And he held 
forth,and his hond was restorid to helthe. 
And thei weren fulfilltd with vnwisdom, 11 
and spaken togidir, what thei schulden 
do of Jhesu. And it was don in thot 
daies, he wente out in to an hil to preye; 
and he was al ny3t dwellynge iu the 
preier of God. And whanne the days 
was come, he clepide hise disciplis, and 
chees twelue of hem, whiche he clepide 
also apostlis ; Symount, whom he clepide 14 
Petir, and Andrew, his brothir, James and 
Joon, Filip and Bartholomew, Matheu and 15 
Thomas, James Alphei, and Symount, that 
is clepid Zelotes, Judas of* James, and 16 
Judas Scarioth, that was traytoure. And17 
Jhesus cam doun fro the hil with hem, 
and stood in a feeldi place; and the cum- 
peny of hise disciplis, and a! greet mul- 
titude of puple, of al Judee, and Jerusa- 
lem, and of the see coostis, and of Tyre 
and Sidon, that camen to here hym, and 1s 
to be heelid of her siknessis; and thei 
that weren trauelid of yncleene spiritis, 
were heelid. And al puple! sou3te to1s 
touche hym, for vertu wente out of hym, 


b into the myddle, and stoond wp. ¢Om.s. 4 for to scar 
gs Om. sx. 
1 ben 4 prom. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
Pp Om. x. 
ap, and apostles he clepide Nesrxy, and aposteles also he cleped o. 
Vv feeldi suvx. feelde y. 


iQm. sx. is 
« ynwysdam, or folie 
t and apostles he nempnede 
8 Om. GNoQTW pr.m,. xy. ‘and 
x smal, or pore AGMNPSTIV. smal ogx. the pore vu. 


h or AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
m fillid ur. 
4 whonl MNOPQTXY. 


a Om. wxy. b that 4GMNOPQSTWWXY. ¢ Om. wy. 
e Om. o. f of AGMNOPQSTWXY. & Om. 
& Om. Epaxhka. band a prim. iQm.k. 


VI, 20-—33.- 


sou3ten for® to touche him, for vertu 
20 wente out of him, and heelide alle. And, 
his y3en reysid! vp in to his disciplis, he* 
seide, Blessid be! 3e, pore men™, for the 
21kyngdom of God is 3oure. Blessid be® 3e, 
that ‘hungren now°, for 3e schulen be 
fillid?. Blessid be% 3e, that ‘wepen now’, 
22 for 3e schulen ley3e%. 3e schulen be bless- 
id, whanne men schulen hate 3ou, and 
schulent departe jou awey", and schulen’ 
putte schenschip oz 30u, and schulen™ caste 
out 3oure name as yuel, for mannis sone. 
23 Joye 3e 7m herte in that day, and glade 3e 
with oute forth; loo! sothli 30ure mede 
is moeche* in heuene; forsothe vp’ thes 
thingis the fadris of hem diden to pro- 
21phetis. Netheles woo to 30u, riche men, 
25that han joure comfort. Woo to 3ou 
that ben fulfillid?, for 3e schulen hungre. 
Woo to 3ou that ‘lau3hen now’, for 3e 
26schal morne, and wepe. Woo, whanne 
alle men schulen blesse jou‘; aftir® thes 
thingis the fadris of hem diden to pro- 
27 phetis‘. But I seie to 30u that heeren, 
loue 3e 3oure enemyes, ‘do 3e8 wel to hem 
28that haten®% 30u; blesse 3e to men curs- 
inge 30u, preie 3e for men ‘falsly chaleng- 
2vynge’ jou. And ‘to him* that! schal™ 
smyte thee ‘on o" cheke, 3yue also® the 
tother; and fro him that takith awey fro 
thee ‘a cloth?, 3he3, nyle thou forbede the 
socoote. Sothly 3yue to ech axinge™ thee, 
and who’ takith away tho thingis that 
31 ben thyne, axe thou not ajeyn'. And as 
je wolen that men do to 3ou, and do 3e to 
szhem in” lyk’ manere. And if 3e louen 
hem that louen 30u, what grace, ‘ethir 
thank”, isx to 30u? for whi and synful 
33men louen men louynge hem. Andy if 


h Om. sx. 1 cast 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 
emxy. ° fulfilde aamNopestwxy. 4Om.x. 
pestwxy. Om. mPx. V Om. AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
Nopostwxy. 2% fillid urx. 
Qpr.m.PTxY, Om. 7. © vp ur. 
i that falsly chalange 4cMNoPosTWXY. 


MNopPQTXY. to him also ww. 
clothis x. daud Nn. Tf askende x. 
etuywxy. Vlichy anTw. 


™ and he x sec.m. UX sec. m. bg sec. m. hik. 
P the oo eghik. 4 to him alsok.  * oothir 1. 


10Om. x. 
T now wepen GMXY. 
W Om. AGMNOPOSTIVXY. 
® now leizen GaPuy. now laujhen x. b Wo do 30" @ sec.m.u. © Om.G prim. 
f false prophetis mp. 
k who G sec. m. MNOPQTXY. 
on A. in to the oon G sec.m. oP. in to the toon MNTY. in the too Q. into the o x. 
P thi cloth wpw sec. m. clothis G pr.m.uvy. cloth Gc sec.m. w prom. thi 
8 he that 4GaNoPosTWwXY. 
W or thank a et ccteri. Om. x. 


k and he o. 


0 Om. cP pr.m, e priv. g. 
8 for synful k. 


¥2 


LUKE. 163 


and™ heelide alle. And whanne_hise2o 
i3en weren cast vp in to hise disciplis, 
he seide, Blessid be 3e", ‘pore men, for the 
kyngdom of God is 3oure. Blessid be 3e, 21 
that now hungren, for 3e schulen be ful- 
fillid. Blessid be 3e, that now wepen, 
for 3e sehulen leize. 3e schulen be bless-22 
id, whanne men schulen hate 3ou, and 
departe jou awei, and putte schenschip 
to 30u, and cast out 3oure name as yuel, 
for mannus sone. Joye 3e in that dai,23 
and be 3e glad; for lo! 3oure meede is 
myche in heuene; for aftir these thingis 
the fadris of hem diden to prophetis. 
Netheles wo to 3o0u, riche men, that han 24 
3oure coumfort. Wo to jou that ben2s 
fulfillid, for 3e schulen hungre. Wo to 
jou that now leijen, for 3e sehulen morne, 
and wepe. Wo ¢o 30u, whanne alle men 26 
schulen blesse 30u; aftir these thingis the 
fadris of hem diden to profetis. But27 
Y seie to 3ou that heren, loue 3e joure 
enemyes, do 3e wel to hem that hatiden 
jou; blesse 3e men that cursen 3on, 28 
preye 3e for men that defamen 30u. And 29 
to him that smytith thee on oP cheeke, 
schewe also‘ the tothir'; and fro hym 
that takith awei fro thee a cloth, nyle 
thou forbede the coote. And 3yue to30 
eche that axith thee, and if a man takith 
awei tho thingis that ben thine, axe thou 
not ajen. And as 3e wolen that men dost 
to 30u, do 3e also to hem in lijk maner. 
And if 3e louen hem that louen 3o0u, 32 
what thanke is to jou? for synful men 
louen men that louen hem. And if 3e33 
don wel to hem that don wel to jou, 
what grace is to 3ou? synful’ men don 
this thing. And if 3e leenen to hem of34 


m Om. x. © Om. x. 
5 Jauje u. lajhen x. 
x mochel o. 


° now hungren 
tOm. 4GMNo 
Y aftir 4aem 


ge haatiden » sec.m. 4 Om. xu. 
1Om. uNPxXxY. ™Om.N. on 
9° to him and 6& sec.m. 


& doth x. 


tajen with sirijf mp, on AGMNOP 


xOm.r. YOm. kK. 


9° forsothe 1. Om. k. 


164 LUKE. 


3e don wel to hem that don wel to 30u, 
what grace* is to 30w? sothly and synful 
3imen don this thing. And if 3e ‘3yuen 
borwynge* to hem, of whiche’ 3e hopen 
tot take a3en, what grace’ is to 3ou? for 
whi and synful men leenen to synful men, 
35 that thei taken a3eyn enene thingis. Ne- 
theles loue 3e 3oure enemyes, and do® 3ef 
wel, and 3yne% 3e° borwyng', ‘hopinge uo 
thingj therof, and 3o0ure mede schal be 
moche, aid 3e schulen be the* sones of the 
Hijeste, for he is benyngne! on™ vnkynde® 
36men° and yuele men. Therfore be 3e 
mereyful, as and 3oure fadir is inercyful. 
37 Nyle 3e deme, and 3e schulen not be de- 
myd. Nyle 3e condempne, and 3e schnlen 
not be condempned ; ‘for3yue 3e?, and it 
38schal be for3ounn to jou. 3yne je, and it 
schal be 3ouun to 30u. Thei schulen 3yue 
in to 3oure bosum a good mesure, and wel4 
fillid44, and shakun to gidere, and ouer- 
flowynge; forsothe by theT same mesure, 
by which’ 35e schulen mete, it schal be 
39 metent to 30u. Sothli he seide to hem and 
a liknesse", Whethir’ a blynd man” may 
leede the* blynde? whethir thei falle not 
40 bothe in to the dyche? A disciple is not 
aboue the maistir; sothli echY schal be 
4iperfyt, if he is* as his maistir. Sothh 
what seest thou in thi brotheris y3e ‘a 
festu, othir a mot*, but thou biholdist not 
a beem, ‘which is® in thi owne y3e? 
42Othir® hou maist’ thou seye to thi bro- 
ther, Brother, suffre, I schal caste out a 
festu® of thin y3e? thou biholdist not a 
beem in thin owne y3e? Ypocrite, first 
takf out the beem of thyn y3e, and thanne 
thou schalt biholde, that thou lede out a 
43 festuS of thi brotheris y3e. Forsothe it is 
not a good tree, that makith yuele frutis, 


% thank wPpu sec.m. 
etwy. 4 grace, or thank mp. thank u sec. m. 
U seem. Om. nw. 
1 benigne, or of good wille acuNPsTWy. 
MPXY, P for3ifeth o. 4a wel o. 
ech disciple mp. 2 be acMNopgsivy. shul ben x. 
a mot o. a festu x. 
or a moot 0. mot MPU sec.m. — f cast Q sec.m. 


' § moten R. t to 3o0u azen k. win ik. 


x out of Es. 


2 3yuen borewing, or leenen mp. leuen U sec.m. 
e doth cesxy. doith ap. f Om. aGMNOPQSUVIWXY. 
i borewing, or leeneth up. Om. u sec. m. 
™ ypon AGMNOPQSTIY. 

qq fulfillid @ pron. 

u licnesse, or ensaumple AGMNPTIY. licnesse, or exsaumple s. 
aa festu, or mot aGesTUFIWY. a festu, or a mol MNP. 
b that is acwNoPoTWwXxyY. Om. s. 
& mot WoPu sec. mM, 


v Ins k. 


VI. 34—43- 


whiche 3e hopen to take aj3en, what 
thanke is to 30u? for synful men leenen 
to synful men, to take ajen as myche. 
Netheles loue 3e 30ure eneniyes, and do35 
3e wel, and leene 3e, hopinge no thing 
therof, and 3oure mede schal be myche, 
and 3e schulen be the sones of the He3- 
est, for he is benygne on vnkynde men 
and yuele men. Therfor be 3e merciful, 36 
as 30ure fadir is merciful. Nyle 3e deme, 37 
and 3e schulen not be demed. Nyle 3e 
condempne, and je schulen not be con- 
dempned ; for3yue 3e, and it schal be 
forjouun to 30u. 3yue 3e, and it schal38 
be 3ouun to 30u. Thei schulen 3yue in 
to 3oure bosum a good mesure, and wel 
fillid, and schakun togidir, and ouerflow- 
ynge; for bi the same mesure, bi whiche 
je meeten, it schal be ‘metun’ ‘a3en to 
jou'. And he seide to hem a liknesse, 39 
Whether the blynde may leede the 
blynde? ne fallen thei not bothe ‘in to" 
the diche? A disciple is not aboue the’ 40 
maistir; but eche schal be perfite, if he 
be as his maister. And what seest thou 41 
in thi brotheris i3e a moot, but thou 
biholdist not a beem, that is in thin 
owne ije? Or hou maist thou seie to thi 42 
brother, Brothir, suffre, Y schal caste 
out the moot of thin ije, and thou bi- 
holdist not a beem in‘Y thin owne 13e? 
Ipocrite, first take out the beem of thin 
ize, and thanne thou schalt se to take” 
the moot of* thi brotheris ize. It is not43 
a good tree, that makith yuel fruytis, 
nether an yuel tree, that makith good 
fruytis; for euery tre is knowun of his 44 
fruyt. And men gaderen not figus of 
thornes, nethir men gaderen a grape of 
a buysche of breris. A good man of45 


© for to AGMNOP 
& leue 
j nothing hoping ewxy. * Om, o. 
nkynde ku. © Om. G pr.m. K sec. m. 
r Om. o. 8 the whiche o. t motun o. 
vy Whero. WOm. Tr. *Xao0. Yheo. 


b whom wpxy. 


¢ Or acMNopostWwxy. ‘Imizt aT. © festu, 


W that is in R prom, w take out rsk8, 


VI. 44—VII. 6. 


nother an yuele tree, that makith goode 
4ifruytis; sothli euery® tree is knowun of 
his fruyt. Sothli neither men gederyn 
fygis of thornes, neither men gederyn a 
45 grape of a boysch of breris. A good man 
of the goode tresour® of his herte bryngeth 
forth good thing, and an yuel man of 
yuel tresour, bryngith forth yuel thing; 
sothli of the‘ plente of the herte the 
46mouth spekith. Forsothe what clepen* 3e 
me, Lord, Lord, and don not tho thingis 
47that I seye. Ech that cometh to me, and 
heerith iny wordis, and doth hem, I schal 
4sschewe to 30u, to whom he is lyk!. He is 
lyk™ to a man bildinge an" hous, that°® 
diggideP deepe, and puttide’ the founde- 
ment on™ a stoon. Sothli greet flowing 
maad, flood was’ hurtlid to that hous, and 
it my3te not moue it, for it was foundid 
49on' a sad stoon. Sothli he that heerith, 
and doth not, is lyk to a man bildinge 
his hous on" erthe’ with oute foundenent; 
in to which the flood® was* hurlid’, and 
a non it felde doun; and the fallinge doun 
of that hous is aad greet. 


CAg. VII. 


1 Forsothe whanne he hadde fulfillid? alle 
his wordis in to the* eeris of the peple**, 
2he entride in to Capharnaum. Sothli> a 
seruaunt of sum man centurio, ‘that hadde 
an hundrid men vndir him’, hauynge 
yuel, was to deyinge, which® was precious 
3to him. And whanne he haddef herd of 
Jhesu, he sente to him the eldere men of 
Jewis, preiynge him, that he comme, and 
aheele his seruaunt. And, whanne® thei 
camen to Jhesu, thei’ preieden bisyli, sey- 
inge' to him, For he is worthi, that thou 
53yue to him this thing; for he loueth 
oure folk, and he* bildide! to vs a syna- 
sgoge. Sothly Jhesu wente with hem. 


geche x. othe tresourc. iOm. kx. 
P diggith aGuNoposTWXY. 
Uvpon 4GMNOPOTWY. Vtheerthe a. W flodes a. 


hurlid to »1Nops. hurtlid eux. 2 fillid vy. 


€Om. oex. dye 4GuNnopesTWwxy. 
h Om. emg pr.m. twx. ‘and saideno. * Om. o. 
*Om.c. y thing a sec.m. YY a gret 8. 


LUKE. 


k clepith y. 
q puttith oxy. putte s. 

X is AGMNopSTWXY. Om, Q. 
a Om. K sec.m. 
€ the whiche aeanopesTWXxyY. 


2 hurlid ciraxhia. 


165 


the* good tresoure of his herte bryngith 
forth good thingis’, and an yuel man of 
the yuel tresoure bryngith forth yuel 
thingis’; for of the plente of the herte 
the mouth spekith. And what clepen4s¢é 
je me, Lord, Lord, and doon not tho 
thingis that Y seie. Eche that cometh 47 
to me, and herith iny wordis, and doith 
hem, Y schal schewe to 30u, to whom 
he is lijk. He is lijk to a man that4e 
bildith an hous, that diggide deepe, and 
sette the foundement on a stoon. And 
whanne greet’ flood was maad, the flood 
was hurtlid? to that hous, and it mite 
not moue it, for it was foundid on a 
sad stoon. But he that herith, and 49 
doith not, is lijk to a man bildynge his 
hous on erthe with outen foundement ; 
in to which the flood was hurlid*, and 
anoon it felle doun; and the fallyng doun 
of that hous was maad greet. 


CAP. VIL. 


And whanne he hadde fulfillid allei 
hise’ wordis in to the eeris of the puple, 
he entride in to Cafarnaum. But az 
seruaunt of a centurien, that was pre- 
cious to hym, was sijk, and drawynge 
to the deeth. And whanne he hadde3 
herd of Jhesu, he sente to hym the 
eldere inen of Jewis, and preiede hym, 
that he wolde come, and heele his ser- 
uaunt. And whanne thei camen to Jhe- 4 
su, thei preieden hym bisili, and seiden 


to hym, For he is worthi, that thou 


graunte to hym this thing; for he loueth s 
oure folk, and he bildide to vs a syna- 
goge. And Jhesus wente with hem.« 


o and Pp. 
t ypon o. 
Y hurtlid to aerwy. 
aa pore puple agnostwy. > Forsothe o. 
fOm. wv. & thei, whan ewpwx. 


Vlichi arp. 
T vpon 0. 


mlychi apr. 9 Om. T. 
Sis 4 pr. m. MNOPQSTXY. 


I bilde sx. 


4 hurtlid ikrscegk@. » these k. 


166 


And whanne now he was not fer™ fro the 
hous, centurio sente to him frendis, sey- 


inge, Lord, nyle thou be trauelid, for I ; 


am not worthi, that thou entre vndir my 
7roof; for which thing and I demyde® not 
my° silf worthi, that I schulde come to 
thee; but seye thou by word, and my child 
sschal be heelid. For whi and I am a man 
ordeyned vndir power, hauynge ‘kny3tis 
vndir me?P; and [ seie to this, Go thou’, 
and he goth, and to anothir, Come thou’, 
and he cometh, and to my seruaunt, Do 
9thout this thing, and he doth". The’ which 
thing herd, Jhesu wondride; and he turn- 
yd, seide to the cumpanyes suynge him, 
Treuli I seye to jou, nethir“ in Israel I 
iofond so moche* feith. And thei that 
weren sent, turnyd ajen hom, founden the 
useruaunt hool, whichY was syk. And it 
was’ don aftirward Jhesu wente in to a 
cite, that is clepid Naym, and his disciplis; 
and@ ful? greet cumpanye of peple® ‘wente 
with him, Sothly whanne he cam ny3 
to the 3ate of the citee, loo! an oonlypi® 
sone of his modir was born out deed; and 
this was a widowe; and moche cumpany 
13 of the citee was! with hir. Whom whanne 
the Lord Jhesu hadde seyn, he meuyd by 
mercy on® hir, seide to hir, Nyle thou 
i4wepe. And he nei3zede’, and touchide the 
bere; andi thei that baren stooden. And 
he seith, jong man, I seie to thee, ryse vp. 
is And he that was deed sat vp*, and bigan 
to! speke; aud he 3af him to his modir. 
igSothli drede took alle men, and _ thei 
magnyfieden God, seyinge, For a greet 
prophete hath risun among vs, ‘and, For™ 
i7God_ hath visitid his peple®. And this 
word wente out of him ‘in to° al Judee, 
isand in to al the cuntre aboute. And dis- 


mOm.o. OdemerT. mex. 
8 Om. AGMNOPQSTUFWXY. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY, 
with him and 4 pr.m, GMNOPETIWXY. 
peTwx. © oonly o. 
cam Xx. i forsothe 4GMNOPQSUFIWXY. 


™ for and wp. for iv.  ™ pore peple acuNPosxy. 


¢ kny3tis hous k prom. 4 the whiche 1. 
i forsothe tr.  k baren the beere x. 1 seith vt. 


LUKE. 


P vndir me kny3tes Garxy. 
t Om. AGMNOPOQOSTIWXY. 
¥Y the whiche sGNogstTivxy. that mp. 
ba ful mpsw pr.m. xy. 
f Om. 4GNOQSTIY. cam MPXY. 
k agen 4GMNPQSWWXY. Vp azen oO. 


€ Om. R pr.m. gk prem. 
m he bigan k. 


VU. 7-——17- 


And whanne he was not fer fro the 
hous*, the centurien sente to hym 
freendis, and seide, Lord, nyle thou be 
trauelid, for Y am not worthi, that thou 
entre vnder my roof; for which* thing 7 
and¢ Y demedef not my silf worthi, that 
Y come to thee; but seie thon bi word, 
and my child schal be helid. For Y ams 
a man ordeyned vndur power, aud haue 
kny3tis vndur ine; and Y seie to this, 
Go, and he goith, and to anothir, Come, 
and he cometh, and to my seruaunt, Do 
this thing, and he doith. And whanne9s 
this thing was herd, Jhesus wondride; 
and seide to the puple suynge hym, 
Treuli Y seie to 30n, nether in Israel Y 
foond so greet feith, And thei that to 
weren sent, turneden a3en home, and 
founden the seruaunt hool, which’ was 
sijk. And it was don aftirward, Jhesus 11 
wente in to a citee, that is clepid Naym, 
and hise disciplis; and ful greet puple 
wente with hym. And whanne he cam (2 
ny3 to the 3ate of the citee, lo! the sone 
of a womman that hadde no mo children, 
was borun out deed; and this was a 
widowe; and myche puple of the citee 
with hir. And whanne the Lord Jhesu13 
hadde seyn hir, he hadde reuthe on hir, 
and seide to hir, Nyle thou wepe. Andi4 
he cam ny3", and touchide the beere ; 
and! thei that baren* stoden. And he 
seidel, 3onge man, Y seie to thee, rise vp. 
And he that was deed sat vp a3en, and ts 
bigan™ to speke ; and he 3af hym to his 
modir. And drede took alle men, and 16 
thei magnyfieden God, and seiden, For 
a grete profete is rysun among ys, and, 
For God hath visitid his puple. And17 
this word wente out of hym in to al 


qOm. kK. Om. AGMNOPQSTUVIVXY. 
udoith ¢ apwvy. v¥Om. vu. Wne mp. * greete 
Zis A prem. G prom, MNOPQSTXY. 4 wenlte 
¢the puple ry. 4 Om. «4 pr.m. GMNO 
€ vpon 4GMNoPeTY.  ) cam to AGMNOPQSIVY. 
1 for to AGMINOPQIVY. 
©in vr. 


fdemer. &thatr. bton. 


VII. 19—29. 


ciplis? of John tolden him4 of alle thes 
igthingis. And John clepide to gidere 
tweyne® of his disciplis, and sente to 
Jhesu, seyinge, Art thou that art to 
comynge', ‘other we abiden" another ? 
20Sothli whanne the men hadden come to 
him, thei seiden, John Baptist sente vs 
to thee, seyinge, Art thou that art to 
comynge’, other” we abiden another ? 
21Forsothe in that our he heelide many 
men of her sykenessis*, and woundis, andY 
yuele spiritis; and he 3af sizjt to manye 
22blynde men. And Jhesu answeringe seide 
to hem, 3e goynge telle* ajen to John tho 
thingis that 3e han herd and seyn; for 
blynde men seen, crokide men* gon, mese- 
lis ben maad clene, deef men heeren, deede” 
men rysen ajen, pore men ben takun to 
prechinge® of¢ the gospel, ‘ether ben maad 
a3keperis of the gospel*®. And ‘he that! 
schal not be sclaundrid in me, is% blessid. 
24And whanne the messangers" of John 
hadden gon away, he bigan to! seye of 
John to the cumpanyes, What wenten 3e 
out in to desert for* to se? a reed wawid 
25 with the! wynd? But what wente 3e out 
for™ to se? a man clothid" with softe 
clothis® ? Lo! thei that ben in a? precious 
cloth and in delices, ben in ‘housis of 
2kyngis’. But what thing wente 3e out 
for™ to se? a prophete? Sothli I seie to 
27 30U, and more than a prophete. This it* 
is‘, of whom it is writen, Lo! I sende myn 
aungel byfore thi face, ‘the which" schal 
2gmake thi weye redy bifore thee. Sothly 
I seye to 30u, among the’ childeren of 
wymmen, no man is more’ than John 
Baptist, prophete* ; sothli he that is lesse 
in they kyngdom of heuenes, is more than 
20he. And al the peple heeringe, and pup- 


P the disciples mop. 4% to him acMNopgsuWxy. 


MNOPQSWXY. 
wxy. *languischis 4GMNopQsuYWWxyY. 
deed w. © prechen cpex. 
y. Om. 09. ether ben maad keperis of the gospels v. 
wpr.m. h messageres Go passim Q. 
sx. clad sx. clothing 9g. P Om. mre. 
MNopeswxy. tis he w pr.m. 
phete AGMNOPQSWXY. 


1 Om. A pr.m. 1. 
t the children rke. 


° wawid pargka. wagid s. 
u Joon Baptist x sec. m. k. 


LUKE. 


‘thee. 


T sayinge of 4GMNOPQSWXY. 
u or ahide we 4GMNopsw. or we abiden oxy. 
y and of vu. of vy. 

4 Om. 4G pr.m. K prom. MP. 
f who euer 4 pr.m.G pr.m. MNOPOXY. 
i for to AGNOQIVY, 
4 kynges housis aGMNOPQSWXY. 
u that arpx. which K sec. m. uv. 
x Om. 4GMNoposwxyY. the profete ur. 


P Om. 1. 
Vv the baptym ceikmpqrstuxbceghikaf. 


167 


Judee, and in to" al the cuntre aboute. 
And Joones disciplis toolden hym of alle 1s 
these thingis. And Joon clepide tweyn 19 
of hise disciplis, and sente hem to Jhesu, 
and seide, Art thou he that is to come, 
or abiden we anothir? And whanne the 20 
men cam to hym, thei seiden, Joon Bap- 
tist sente vs to thee, and seide, Art thon 
he that is to come, or we abiden anothir ? 
And in that our he heelide many men of 2! 
her sijknessis, and woundis, and yuel 
spiritis; and he 3af si3t to many blynde 
men. And Jhesus answerde, and seide 22 
to hem, Go 3e a3en, and telle 3e to Joon 
tho thingis that 3e han herd and seyn; 
blynde men seyn, crokid men goen, me- 
sels ben maad cleene, deef men heren, 
deed men risen ajen, pore men ben 
takun to prechyng of the gospel. And 23 
he that schal not be sclaundrid in me, 
is blessid. And whanne the messangeris 24 
of Joon weren go forth, he bigan to seie 
of Joon to the puple, What wenten 325 
out in to desert to se? a reed waggid® 
with the? wynd? But what wenten 3e26 
out to se? a man clothid with softe 
clothis? Lo! thei that ben in precious 
cloth and in delicis, ben in kyngis housis. 
But what wenten 3e out to se? a pro- 
fete? 3he, Y seie to jou, and more than a 
profete. This is he, of whom it is writun, 27 
Lo! Y sende myn anngel bifor thi face, 
which4 schal make ‘thi weie redi* bifor 
Certis Y seie to 30u, there is nos 
man more’ prophete among children‘ of 
wymmen, than is Joon"; but he that is 
lesse in the kyngdom of heuenes, is more 
than he. And al the puple herynge, and 29 
pupplicans, that hadden be baptisid with 
baptym’ of Joon, iustifieden God; buts0 


8 two wPx. t come 4G 
Vv come AGMNOPQOSWXY. W or AGMNOPQS 
Ztelleth sx. 2 Om. acamnopowx. » and 
© or maad kepers of the gospel AGMNPSWX 
& schal be 
m Om. 

§ Om, AG 
Ww more pro- 


1Om. AGMNOPQSWXY. 
T Om. sx. 

v Om. AGMNOPQSWXY. 
y Om. o. 


k Om. sx. 


athatk. ‘redithi wey rk. $a more 1. 


168 


plicans, baptisid with baptym?’ of John, 
30iustifieden God; forsoth Pharisees and 
wyse men of the® lawe, not baptisid of 
him, dispiseden the conseil of God in> 
3ihem silf*. Sothli the Lord seyde, Ther- 
fore to whom schal I seye men of this 
generacioun lyk*, and to whom ben thei 
s2lyk"? Thei ben lyk@ to® children sittinge 
in chepinge‘, and spekynge to gidere, and 
seyinge, We han songun to 3on with pipis, 
and 3e han not daunsid*; we han maad 
33lamentacioun", and 3e han not wept. For- 
soth John Baptist cam, nethir etinge breed, 
nether! drynkynge wyn, and 3e seyn, He 
sihath a fend. Mannis sone cam etinge 
and drynkinge, and 3e seyn, Lo! a man 
‘deuourere, ether glotoun*, and drynkinge 
wyn, frend of pupplicans and of! synful 
zsmen. And wysdom is justified of alle 
3¢her sones. Forsoth sum Pharise™ preiede 
Jhesu, that he schulde ete with him. And 
he entringe in to the hous of the Pharise, 
37 sat at the mete. And lo! a womman syn- 
neresse”, that was in the citee, as sche 
knew, that Jhesu hadde sete® at the mete 
in the hous of the Pharisee, brou3te an 
38alabastre box of oynement.; and sche? 
stondinge byhynde bisydis his feet, bigan 
to moiste his feet with teeris, and wypide4 
with heeris of hir heed", and kiste his 
39 feet, and anoyntide* with oynement. Sothli 
the Pharise seynge, that clepide him, seith 
with ynne him silf, seiynge, If this were a 
prophete, sothli he schulde wite, who and 
what maner womman it were! that touch- 
40ith him, for she is a synneresse*, And 
Jhesu answeringe seide to him, Symound, 
I haue sum thing for’ to seye to thee. 
41 And he seith, Maistir, seie thou. And 
he answeride, Tweye” dettours were to 
sum* leenere, ‘ethir vsurer® ; oon ou3te 


? the baptym Gmwoqurwxy. 
hem silf o 4 lichi arn. 
daunsid Y. 


a Om. Fr. 
e Om. vu. 


G pr.m, MNPQXxyY. of the Pharisees G sec.m. o. 
qd wypede hem up. *hened oy, § oyntede s. 
Ww Two GMoPQIVx. 


w Om. rR. 
4 touchide k. 


¥ Om. 1M pr. m. TeB. 
bOm 1. ¢ Om. tT. 


LUKE. 


b agens 4G sec. m. in to MNOPQXY. azen si. 
fa chepyng arp. 
h lamentacioun, or mornynge AGMNPSIVY. 
psy. glotoun 0. devourer, or glotoun ew. vourere x. | Om. aGNogswxy. 
D synner GMOoPQIWXY. 

tis s. 
x summe 00 GMNOSXY, sum man 00 @. 


* the chepinge hi. 
€ the tothir Exmpstuxcghi. anothir rkba?. 


VII. 30—41. 


the Farisees and the wise men of the’ 
lawe, that weren not baptisid of hym, 
dispisiden the counsel of God a3ens hem 
silf. And the Lord seide, Therfor to31 
whom schal Y seie ‘men of“ this gene- 
racioun lijk, and to whom ben thei lijk ? 
Thei ben lijk to children sittynge in32 
chepyng*, and spekynge togider, andy 
seiynge, We han sungun to 30u with 
pipis, and 3e han not daunsid; we han 
maad mornyng, and 3e han not wept. 
For Joon Baptist cam, nethir etyngess 
breed, ne drynkynge wyne, and 3e seyen, 
He hath a feend. Mannus sone cam34 
etynge and drynkynge, and 3e seien, Lo! 
a man a* denourer, and drynkynge wyne, 
a* frend of pupplicans and of synful men?. 
And wisdom is instified of her sones. 35 
But oon of the Farisees preiede Jhesu, 36 
that he schulde ete with hym. And he 
eutride in to the hous of the Farise, and 
sat at the mete. And lo! a synful wom-37 
man, that was in the citee, as sche knewe, 
that Jhesu sat at the® mete in the hous 
of the Farisee, sche brou3te an alabaustre 
box of oynement; and sche stood bihyndess 
bysidis hise feet, and bigan to moiste 
hise feet with teeris, and wipide with 
the heeris of hir heed, and kiste hise feet, 
and anoyntide with oynement. And the39 
Farise seynge, that hadde clepide hym, 
seide within hym silf, seiynge, If this 
were a prophete, he schulde wite, who 
and what maner womman it were that 
touchith¢ hym, for sche is a synful wom- 
man. And Jhesus answeride, and seide 40 
to hym, Symount, Y haue sumthing to 
seie to thee. And he seide, Maistir, seie 
thou. And he answeride, Twei dettouris 41 
weren to o lener; and oon an3t fyue 
hundrid pans, and ‘the other® fifti; but 


¢ silf, or azens 
& lipped, or daunsid aemNnopesw. lepid or 
ine acamNposiwxy.  & vourer, or glotoun aGMN 
™ oon of the Farisees 4 prom. 
© sitten o. seten Gexy. P Om.o. 
Usynner 4 pr. m. GMNOPQSIWXY. ¥ Om. Nsx. 
y Om. 0. or vsurer GMPQWXY. 


yOm. 7. 2 Om. qx. anda. and krsbg. 


VII. 42—VIII. 3. 


fyue hundrid pens, and an other fyfty. 
42Sothli hem not hauynge wherof thei 
schulden 3elde, he 3af? frely* to ‘euer ey- 
43thir>. Who° therfore loueth him more? 
Symound answeringe seide, I gesse, for 
he to whom he ‘frely 3af¢ more. And he 
answeride® to him, Thou hast demyd 
4iriztly£ And he, turnyd to the womman, 
seide to Symound, Seest thou this wom- 
man? I entride in to thi hous, thou hast 
not 3ouun watir to my feet; forsoth this 
womman® hath moistid my feet with 
teeris, and hath" wypt with hir heeris. 
45 Thou hast not 3ouun to me a cosse; for- 
soth this wommani, sithen sche* entride, 
46‘ceesside not! to™ kisse my feet. Thou 
‘hast not anoyntid® myn heed® with oyle; 
forsothe? this oyntide’ my feet with oyne- 
47ment. For which thing I seie to thee, 
manye synnes ben for3ouun to hire, for 
sche hath’ loued myche; sothli he’ to 
whom is lesse for3ouun, loueth* lesse. 
48 Sothli Jhesu seide to hir, Synnes*t ben for- 
4930uun to thee. And thei that saten to gi- 
dere at the" mete, bigunne tov’ seie with 
ynne hem silf, Who is this” that* also 
sofor3yueth synnes? Forsothe he seide’ to 
the womman, Thi feith hath maad thee 
saf; go thou in pees. 


CAP .VMAII. 


1 And it was? don aftirward, and Jhesu 
made iorney by citees and castelis, prech- 
inge and euangelysinge the rewme of God, 

zand twelue with him; and summe wym- 
men that weren heelid of wickide? spiritis 
and syknessis, Marie, that is clepid Maw- 
deleyn’, of whom seuene deuelis wenten® 

3out, and Jone, the wyf of4 Chuse, procu- 
ratour of Eroude, and Susanne, and manye 
othere, whiche® mynystriden to him of her 


Z forzaf G pr.m. MOPQ sec. m. W pr.m. XY. 
© Who of hem mp. 
h Om. aGaNOPQSWXY. 
m for to AGMNOP@Y. 
Pforv. 4 anoynted acmNopquWX. 
wsec.m. UQOm.N, VY for to 4GNNOPOQWY. 
MNoPeSxY. ® wicke sx. > Magdalene ov. 


1 Om. 4GMNOPOQSWXY. 


r Om. x. 


ftor. & Om. rT. i not EPx. 


VOL. IV. 


h zafist KM. 


@ trevli 4. Om. Q sec. m. 
© answerynge o. 
k 1 4 pr.m. GMNOPQXY pr.m. 
2 anoyntedest not 4GMNOPQWXY. oyntedest not s. hast not oyntid r. 
8 Om. AGMNOPQSWXY. 
W that N. 
© weren cast U pr.m. 


4 3af answy. forjaue GaroPex. 


k sche this 1. 


LUKE. 169 


whanne thei hadden not wherof ‘thei 
schuldenf 3eelde, he for3af to bothe. Who 
thanne loueth hym more? Symount au-43 
sweride, and seide, Y gesse, that he to 
whom he for3af more. And he answeride 
to hym, Thou hast demyd ri3tli. And 44 
he turnede to the womman, and seide to 
Symount, Seest thou this womman? J 
entride into thin hous, thou 3af* noi 
watir to my feet; but this* hath moistid 
iny feet with teeris, and wipide with hir 
heeris. ‘Thou hast not 3ouun to me a4s 
cosse; but this, sithen sche entride, ceess- 
ide not to kisse my feet. Thou anoynt- 46 
idist not myn heed with oile; but this! 
anoyntide my feet with oynement. For 47 
the™ which thing Y seie to thee, many 
synnes ben for3jouun to hir, for sche hath 
loued myche; and to whom is lesse for- 
3ouun, he loueth lesse. And Jhesus seide 48 
to hir, Thi synnes ben forjouun to thee. 
Aud thei that saten to gider at the mete, 49 
bigunnen to seie with ynne hem silf, 
Who is this that for3yueth synnes. Butso 
he seide to the womman, Thi feith hath 
maad thee saaf; go thou in pees. 


CAP. VIII. 


And it was don aftirward, and Jhesus1 
made iourney bi citees and castels, prech- 
ynge and euangelisynge the rewme of 
God, and twelue with hym; and sume 
wymmen that weren heelid of wickid 
spiritis and sijknessis, Marie, that is 
clepid Maudeleyn, of whom seuene deuelis 
wenten out, and Joone, the wijf of Chuse, 3 
the procuratoure of Eroude, and Susanne, 
and many othir, that mynystriden to hym 


b booth aarNoesy. bothe prxy. 
friz3to. & Om. AGMNOPQSWXY. 
l hath not ceesed o. 
© hened oy. 
the loueth s. tt Thi synnes 
xwhich uy. Ysaitho. 2 is 4 pr.m. G prim. 
€Om.o. ¢ that acaNopQsTWXxY. 


Ische this1, ™ Om. ErKrsTxg. 


170 


4riches'. Forsoth whanne ful moche cum- 
panye cam to gidere, and fro citees hasti- 
5den to him, he seide® by" a‘ liknesse*, He 
that sowith, 3ede! out for™ to sowe his 
seed. And the while he sowith, sum felde 
by sydis the weye, and was” defoulid, and 
6briddis of the eyr eeten it. And another 
felde® doun? on a4 stoon, and it sprungen 
vp’ dryede’, for it hadde not* moisture. 
7And anothir felde doun among thornes, 
and the thornes sprungen vp to gidere 
sstrangliden it. And another felde doun 
in to good erthe", and it sprungun vp 
made an hundrid foold fruit. He’ seyinge 
thes thingis criede, He that hath eeris of 
dheeringe, heere he’. Sothli his disciplis 
10axiden him, what this parable was. To 
whiche* he seyde, To 30u it is 3o0uun to 
knowe the mysterie of the kyngdom of 
God; forsothe to othere men in parablis, 
that thei seynge se not, and thei heeringe 
llvndirstonde not. Sothli this is the para- 
12ble. The seed is Goddis word; sothl theiY 
that ben? bisydis the weye, ben thes that 
heeren; aftirward the fend cometh, and 
takith awey the word fro* her herte, lest 
isthei bileuynge be maad saaf. Forwhi? 
thei that ‘felden doun® on a stoon, ben 
these ‘men whiche® whenne thei han herd, 
receyuen the word with ioye. 
han not rootef; for at8 a® tyme thei bi- 
lenen, and in tyme of temptacioun thei gon 
l4awey. Forsothe ‘thes that’ felden* doun 
in! thornes, ben thes that herden, aud of ™ 
bysinessis”, and richessis, and lustis® of lyf 
thei goynge ben stranglid, and? bryngen 
isnot a3ein fruyt. Forsoth ‘this that4 felde 


f facultees, or ryches ar. facultees, or rychessis GuNPoswy. faculteis ox. richessis r. 


LUKE. 


And thes. 


VIN. 4—t15. 


of her ritchesse". And whanne myche4 
puple was come togidir, and men hizeden 
to hym fro the® citees, he seide bi a 
symylitude, He that sowith, 3ede out tos 
sowe his seed. And while he sowith, 
sum fel°® bisidis the weie, and was de- 
foulid, and briddis of the eir eten it. 
AndP othir® fel™ on a® stoon', and ité 
sprunge vp, and driede, for it hadde 
not moysture. And" othir’ fel¥ among? 
thornes, and the thornes sprongen vp 
togider, and straugliden it. And othirs 
fel¥ in to good erthe, and it sprunguny 
made an hundrid foold fruyt. He seide* 
these thingis, and criede, He that hath 
eeris of heryng, here he. But hise disci-9 
plis axiden him, what this parable was. 
And he seide to hem, To 3o0u it is grauntid 10 
to knowe the pryuete of the kyngdom of 
God; but to othir men in parablis, that 
thei seynge se not, and thei herynge vn- 
durstonde not. And this is the parable. 1 
The” seed is Goddis word; and thei that12 
ben bisidis the weie, ben these that heren; 
and aftirward the feend cometh, and 
takith awei the word fro her herte, lest 
thei bileaynge be maad saaf. But theiis 
that fel on a stoon, ben these that whanne 
thei han herd, resseyuen the word with 
ioye. And these han not* rootis; for at 
a tyme thei bileuen, and in tyme of 
temptacioun thei goen awei. But thatia 
that fel among thornes, ben these that 
herden, and of bisynessis®, and ritchessis, 
and lustis of lijf thei gon forth, and ben 
stranglid, and bryngen forth no fruyt. 
But that that fel in to good erthe, benis 


& saith o. } by 


hym r. iOm.o. & licnesse, or ensaumple AGMNPQTWY. ensaumple o. lykenesse, or exsaumple s. \ yoith 


G prim. MoPeTxXY. ™Om.urx. 
(the uv sec.m. ° Om. aAGMNOPQSTXY. 

KUF, xX whom mpoxy. Y tho mpewxy. 
U see.m. ¢ Om. aosturwx. fellen GMNPQ. 

frootis 4emMNoPesTWxY. & Om. ¢. bOm.g. 
k fel wx. lon. ™ of the semNopostiy. 
osTwxyY. P and that o. 


1 richessis EIKPQRSXchia. © Om. ghi. 
doun bpr.m. 8 the1. Om. k pr.m. af. 
r. felde doun b pr.m.a. — * felde doun b. 


up and Kpsbeghk pr.m. a8. sprung vp m pr. m. ik sec.m. 


nesse hi. 


Dis A prem. G pr.m. MNOPST. it is @xY. 
8 and dryede v. 

« felden G pr.m. fellen mpay. Om. Nosrx. 
d vpon 4GMNOPQTIVY. 
ithat that acuNnpestTivy. that at o. this that yr. that x. 

n hesynes Nu. the bisynesses x. 
4 that that acuNnposTwxy. that at o. 


°° felde doun b pr.m. 
t stonys k prim. a. 
Y sprung up and cm see.m, QRUX. sprungun up 1. sprungun 


© filu sec.m. P Om. vu see. m. 
vAndher. Om. 
aofo. > But 
© that 4cmNoposTwy. Om. x. 


tnor. lond x. 


° voluptees 4GMNOP 
t felde am. felle cy. Om. orw. fel x. 


r felde 
w felde 


4 another k. 


P Om. k prom. 
V another k. 


u Om. k prom. 


Zseith hi. 22 This rR. a8noehia. > bisi- 


VII. 16—25. 


doun® in to' good erthe, ben thes men" 
whiche’, in” good herte and best, heeringe 
the word holdun, and bryngen forth fruyt 
16in pacience. Forsoth no man li3tinge* a 
Janterne hilithY it with a vessel, ethir? 
puttith® vndir a bed, but on” a candil- 
17sticke, that men entringe se li3t. ‘Forsoth 
no thing is priuey‘, which® schal not be 
openyd, neither hid®, which’ schal not be 
18knowun, and come into% apert. Therfore 
se 3e, hou 3e heeren; forsothe it schal be 
j3ouun to him that hath, and who euere 
hath not, also this* he gessith' him silf! 
to! haue, schal be takun awey fro him. 
i9 Forsoth his modir and britheren camen 
to him; and thei my3ten not go fully to 
20him for the cumpany of peple. And it 
is™ told to him, Thi modir and thi bri- 
theren stonden with oute forth, willinge" 
21 to® se thee. Which? answeringe seide to 
hem, My moder and my britheren ben 
thes, whiche? heeren the word of God, 
ggand don’. Forsoth it was’ don in oon of 
dayes', and he sti3ede in to a boot and his 
disciplis. And he seith to hem, Passe we" 
ouer the stondinge watir. And thei sti3eden 
23vp. Sothli, hem rowynge, he slepte. And 
a tempest of wynd cam doun in to the 
watir, and thei weren driuen hidur and 


thidur with wawis, and weren in perel. ° 


24 Forsothe thei comynge ny3 reysiden him, 
seyinge, Comaundour, we perischen. And 
he risynge blamyde the wynd, and the 
tempest of watir’; and it ceesside, and 

25 pesyblete was¥ maad. Forsoth he seyde 
to hem, Where is 3oure feith? Whiche* 
dredinge wondriden, ‘seyinge to gidere/, 
Who, gessist thou, ‘is this*? for he co- 
maundith to wyndis* and to the? see, and 


8 Om. EMNOPOSTWXY. 
x iztenynge 4GNoQTIVY. 
NOPQTIVY. 
that x. 
SWXY. 
AGMNOPQSWXY. 1 for to AGMNOPOTWY. 
P The whiche ses NoposTWwxY. 
U sec. m. 


t Om. a. 
¥ heelyd w. 


e hid thenge 4GMNOPQsT sec. m. UWXY. 


8 is 4 pr. m. G pr. m. MNOPQSTXY. 
G pr.m. MNOPQSTX. 


athe windns x. » Om. AGNoPQsTW sec. m. XY. 


d yndnr b. 
1 the wyndis egk. 


c liztith Re. 


whiche 1. k Om. b. 


Z2 


u Om. AGMNOPOSTIXY, 

2 or GMOPQTWXY. 
¢ For there is not [no er] priuey thenge 4GMNOPQOSTIXY. 
f the whiche saemnogsTiy. that x. 
h that that acarnpswxy. that o. this that v. 
Dl was Gsec.m.uUrW. 
q that AGMNOPQOSTIVXY. 
t the dayes mp. 
x The whiche 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 


€ the daies plures. tho daies k. 


LUKE. 171 


these that, in a good herte, and best heren 
the word, and holdun, and brengen forth 
fruyt in pacience. No man litjneth® ai¢ 
lanterne, and hilith it with? a vessel, or 
puttith ¢¢ vndur a bed, but on a candil- 
stike, that men that entren scen 1li3t. 
For ther is no priuei thing, which schal 17 
not be openyd, nether hid thing, which 
schal not be knowun, and come in to 
open. Therfor se 3e, hou 3e heren; for 1s 
it schal be 3ouun to hym that hath, and 
who euer hath not, also that that he 
weneth that he haue, schal be takun 
awei fro hym. And his modir and19 
britheren camen to hym; and_ thei 
my3ten not come to hym for the puple. 
And it was teeld to hym, Thi modir and 20 
thi britheren stonden with outforth, wil- 
lynge to se thee. And he answeride, and 21 
seide to hem, My modir and my britheren 
ben these, that heren the word of God, 
and doon 7f. And it was don in oon of 22 
daies*, he wente vp in to a boot, and 
hise disciplis. And he seide to hem, 
Passe we ouer the see. And thei wenten 
vp. And while thei rowiden, he slepte. 23 
And af tempest of wynde cam doun in to 
the watir, and thei weren dryuun hidur 
and thidur with wawis, and weren in 
perel. And thei camen ny3, and reisiden 24 
hym, and seiden, Comaundoure, we pe- 
rischen. And he roos®, and blamyde the 
wynde, and the tempest of the watir; 
and it ceesside, and pesibilte was maad. 
And he seide to hem, Where is 3oure 25 
feith ? Which® dredynge wondriden, and 
seiden togidir, Who, gessist thou, is this? 
for he comaundith to wyndis! and to* 
the see, and thei obeien to hym. And 26 


W in to T. 
h vpon 46M 
4 the whiche 4GmNoQSTIVY. 
§ to AGMNOP 
iweneth sacmNopestwxy. kOm. 7. 10m. 
nwilnynge gwy. © for to 4GMNOPQOTYY, 
¥ don therafter ogw. don after it up. don it 
“3e 0. Vthe watirw. Wis 4 pr.m. 
Y togidere, seiende xy. 2 this is K pr.m. 


Vv that 4GMNOPOSTWXY. 
4 putteth Ait o. puttith i y. 


£Om.k prim. & roos vp xg. 4 The 


172 LUKE. VIII. 26—36. 


26thei obeyen to him. And thei rowiden 
toe the cuntree of Gerasenus4, which® is 
27 a3ens Galilee. And whanne he wente out 
to the lond, sum man ran to him, which‘ 
hadde a deuyl now longe® tymes, and 
was not elothid' with cloth, neither dwell- 
zgide in hous*, but in sepulcris. This as 
he sy3 Jhesu, felde doun bifore him, and 
criynge with greet voys seide, What to 
me and to thee, Jhesu, the sone of ‘God 
the hijeste!? I beseche thee, that thou 
zoturmente not me. Sothli he comaundide 
to the vnclene spirit, that he schulde go 
out fro the man. Forsothe he took him 
longe™ tymes, and he® kept in stockis was 
bounden with chaynes, and, the boondis 
broken, he was led of fendis® in desert. 
30Sothli Jhesu axide? him, seyinge, What 
name is to thee? And he seyde, A le- 
gioun; for manye fendis4 hadde entrid in 
sito him. And* thei preiden him, that he 
schulde not'T comaunde hem’, that thei 
s2'schulden got in to the" depnesse. For- 
sothe a flok of manye hoggis” ‘was there* 
lesewynge in an hil, and thei preieden 
himY, that he schulde suffre hem to” entre 
33‘in to‘ hem. And he suffride hem. Ther- 
fore fendis® wenten out fro the man, and 
entride in to hoggis®; and with bire the 


floc wente hedlinge’ in to the lake of- 


34 watir, and was® stranglid. Which‘ ‘thing, 
as thei that lesewiden sy3en don®, thei 
fledden, and tolden in to the citee, and in‘ 

35townes. Sothli thei 3eden* out to! se that 
thing that was™ don. And® thei founden 
the man sittinge clothid®, fro whom the 
fendis wenten out, and in hool mynde at 

36his feet; and thei dredden. Sothli and 


thei rowiden to the cuntree of Gerasenus, 
that is a3ens Galilee. And whanne he27 
wente out to the loond, a man ran to 
hym, that hadde a deuel long tyme, and 
he was not elothid with cloth, nether 
dwellide in hous, but in sepulcris. This!, 28 
whanne he sai3 Jhesu, fel doun_ bifor 
hym, and he criynge with a™ greet vois 
seide, What to me and to thee, Jhesu, 
the sone of the hijest God? Y biseche 
thee, that thou turmente ‘not me™™. For 29 
he comaundide the vncleene spirit, that 
he schulde go out fro the man. For he 
took hym ofte tymes, and he was boundun 
with cheynes, and kept in stockis, and, 
whanne the boondis weren brokun, he 
was lad of deuelis® in to desert. And 30 
Jhesus axide hym, and seide, What name 
is to thee? And he seide, A legiount; + A legioun is 
for many deuelis weren entrid in to hym. ae ee 
And thei preyden hym, that he schuldesi #*4 #4 sxe 
not comaunde hem, that thei schulden 
go™ in to helle. And there was a flok32 
of many swyne lesewynge in an hil, and 
thei preieden hym, that he schulde suffre 
hein to® entre in to hem. And he suffride 
hem. And so the deuelis wenten out fro33 
the man, and entriden in to the swyne; 
and with a birre the flok wente heed- 
lyng in to the pool, and was drenchid. 
And whanne the hirdis sayn this thing 34 
don, thei flowen?, and tolden in to the 
cite, and in to% the’ townes. And thei3s 
jeden out to se that thing that was don, 
‘And thei camen to Jhesu, and thei 
founden the man sittynge clothid, fro 
whom the deuelis* wenten out, and in 
hool mynde at hise feet; and thei dredden. 


“€in to Ww pr. m. 4 Genasareth G pr.m. mNpTxY. Jerasenoruth o. © that aGarnopestivxy. f the 
whiche 4acaNopesTivy. that x. & moche AGMNOPQSTWXY. h tyme M. i clad sx. k honsis i. 
Mhiest God apy. God hijest G prim. u. the hizest God wx. ™ moche AGMNOPSTWXY. mony @ Sec. m. 


2Om.o. © deuels 4GuNOoPesTWXY. P axinge V. 
58 to hem aGMNoPysTWyY. t wenten MNPOQTXY. 


4 deuels aGmNopestWxy. TOm. K. Om. G6 prim. 
uOm. x. VY ther was a 4GMNOPosTIXY. W swyin 


hoggis Gy. swyne 0. * Om. aGMNoposTwxy. YOm.o. 2 for to acMNopoTIy. tou. » deuels 
AGMNogsTWXyY. the deuels p. ¢ swyneo. the hoggis corxy. 4 heuedlynge 0. © is 4G pr.m.MNOPSXY. 
f The whiche aemnpesrwxy. Om.o. & thing as thei that leseweden or kepten in the lesewe sy3en don tw. 
thing as thei that lesewiden or kepten in lesewis sy3en don cawpy. thing as thei that leseweden or kepten in 
lesowe sy3en don ns. and whan the hirdis sawen this thenge 0. » Om. acuNopestivy. i Om. o. in to 
Qu pr.m.w. * camen G prim. MNopeTxy, ‘for to acMNOoPOTWY. “is Gpr.m.MNPQSTXY. ® and 


thei camen to Jhesu, and @ sec.m. © clod s. clad x. 


1 This man K. m Om. b. mm me not. R. 


a the deuel e pr.m. not goisec.m. °° Om.c. 


P fledden Epgxa. 9OQOm.EPQ. +*Om.cu. 8 fendis ceErkmPQrsuxbeeghika8. 


VIII. 37-—47- 


thei that sy3en tolden to hem, how he 
37was maad hool of the legioun. And al 
the multitude of the cuntree of Gerasenus? 
preieden him, that he schulde go fro hem, 
for thei weren holded with greet drede. 
Sothli he stizynge in to a boot turned 
3sasein. And the man of whom the" fendis* 
wente out, preied him, that he schulde be 
with him‘. Sothli Jhesu lefte him, sey- 
39inge, Go ajeyn in to thin hous, and telle 
hou grete" thingis God hath don to thee. 
And he wente thorw al the citee, prech- 
inge, hou grete’ thingis Jhesu” hadde* 
40don to him. Forsothe it wasY don, whanne 
Jhesu hadde gon a3eyn, the cumpanye of 
peple receyuede him; forsothe alle wereu 
a4labidinge him. And loo! a man, to whom 
the name was? Jayrus, and he* was a? 
prince of a synagoge; and he fel doun to*® 
the feet of Jhesu, preiynge him, that he 
42schulde entre in to his hous, for olypi4 
dou3tir was to him almoost of twelue 3eer, 
and this deiede. And it bifel, the® while 
he wente, he was throngunf of the cum- 
s3peny®. And sum womman was in flix 
of blood fro" twelue 3eer, which! hadde 
spendid al hir catel* in to lechis, nether 
4amy3te! be curid of ony, cam™ ny3 bihynde, 
and touchide the hem of his eclooth®, and 
45a non the flix® of hir blood stood’. And 
Jhesu seith?, Who is it that touchide 
me'? Sothlis alle men denyinge', Petre 
seide, and thei that weren with him, 
Comaundour, ‘cumpanyes thringen", and 
turmentyn’ thee, and thou seist, Who 
4¢touchide me? And Jhesus seide’, Sum 
man touchide* me, forwhiY ‘and I haue 
knowe? vertu ‘to haue gon* out of? me. 
47Sothly® the womman seynge, for it was 


Pp Genazareth snprxy. Gerasenorum o. 
Twxy. 8 denels scuNoposrwxy. t Om. 7. 
w~God ow. hath w. 
AGMNOPQSTUVWXY. Cat AGMNOPOSTIWXY. 


pepil o. cumpanyes of the peple vw. Om. 0, 


4 holden acmNoosTUXY. 
umany G pr.m. MOPQTXY. 
Yis 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXAY. 
dan oonlepy wop. oonlippy oTWwxy. 
or pressid AGMNPSTWY. throngen, or thrust u sec. m. 
ithe whiche 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 


LUKE. 173 


And thei that sayn tolden to hem, hous 
he was maad hool of the legioun. And 37 
al the multitude of the cuntre of Gera- 
senus preiede hym, that he schulde go 
fro hem, for thei werun holdun with 
greet drede. He‘ wente vp in to a" boot, 
and turnede a3en. And the man of whom 38 
the deuelis weren gon out, preide hym, 
that he schulde be with hym. Jhesus 
lefte hym, and seide, Go a3en in to thin39 
hous, and telle hou grete thingis God 
hath don to thee. And he wente thorow 
al the cite, and prechide, hou grete 
thingis Jhesus’ hadde don to hym. And 40 
it was don, whanne Jhesus was gon ajen, 
the puple resseyuede hym; for alle weren 
abidynge hym. And lo! a man, to whom 4! 
the name was Jayrus, aud he was prynce 
of a synagoge; and he” fel doun at the 
feet of Jhesu, and preiede hym, that he 
schulde entre in to his hous, for he42 
hadde but o dou3ter ‘almost of twelue 
3eer eelde*, and sche was deed. And 
it bifel, the while he wente, he was 
thrungun’ of the puple. And a womman 43 
that hadde a? flux of blood twelue seer, 
and hadde spendid al hir catel in leechis, 
and* sche” mi3te not be curid of ony, and 44 
sche cam ny3 bihynde, and touchide the 
hem of his cloth, and anoon the fluxe of 
hir blood ceesside. And Jhesus seide, 45 
Who is that® touchide me? And whanne 
alle men denyeden, Petre seide, and thei 
that weren with hym, Comaundour, the 
puple thristen, and disesen thee, and 
thou seist, Who touchide me? And Jhe-46 
sus seide, Sunmman hath touchid me, for 
that’ vertu 3ede out of me. And the47 
womman seynge, that it was not hid fro 


a9 turnedyn K. * Om. aGarnpos 
Vv many G pr.m. MOPQTXY. 

aOm. xy. > Om. 
€Om.o. f throngun, 
& cumpanyes of puple aemnpesTxy. company of 
k substaunce 4GMNOPO 


2 Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


sTwxy. sche miz3t 4cmNopesTWwxY. ™and sche cam o. sche came cey. clothis Tr. © fluxe y. 
Pceesedo. saydeo. *Om. 7. *%Andwhano. tdenydeno. 4 cumpanyes of puple thringen 
AGMNPOSTWXY. the pepil thristen 0. cumpenyes thringen, or thrustynge u sec.m. V diseseno. © saith o. 
*hath touchid 0. Yforo. 2Om.o. ®3eedo. %frogrpr.m. ¢ And o. 

tAndheb.  Om.h. VGodepr.m. WOm.k prim. * of t.3.¢.almest 1xsg.  » thrist 1. 
zther &Om. hi. >Om. reg. © that that E, it that 1c. this that mx pr.m. he thatk. 4 Om. 1. 


174 


not priney4, sche® tremblinge cam‘, and 
felde doun bifore® his feet, and for what 
cause sche hadde touchid him sche schew- 
ide byfore al the peple, and hou anon 
assche was! heelid. And hei seide to hir, 
Dou3tir, thi feith hath maad thee saaf; go 
49thou* in pees. ‘3it him spekinge!, sum™ 
man cam to" the prince of the® synagoge, 
seyinge? to him, For‘ thi dou3tir is deed, 
sonyle thou trauaile the maystir. Sothli* 
this word herd’, Jhesu answeride to the 
fadir of the damysele', Nyle thou drede, 
but ‘oonly bilene thou", and sche shal be 
stsaaf. And whanne he ‘had come’ to the 
hous, he suffride not ony man for” to 
entre with him, no*® but Petre andy John 
and James, and the fadir and the? modir 
s2of the damysele*. Sothli alle wepten, and 
biwayleden® hir. And he seide, Nyle 3e 
wepe, sothli the damysele‘ is not deed, 
s3but slepith. And thei scorniden him, 
stwitinge for’ sche was deed. Forsothe® 
he holdinge hir hond criede, seyinge, 
35 Damysel’, ryse$ vp. And hir spirit turn- 
yde azeyn, and sche roos anon. And he 
comaundide to 3ine to hir for! to ete. 
56 And hir fadir and modir wondriden gret- 
ly; to whiche* he comaundide, that thei 
schulden not seye to ony man! ‘the thing 
that™ was don. 


CAP. IX. 


1 Forsothe twelue" apostlis clepid to gi- 
dere, Jhesu 3af to hem vertu and power 
on°® alle deuelis, and that thei schulde 
2heele sykenessis?. And he sente hem for’ 
to preche the kyngdom of God, and for" 
3to heele syke men. And he seith to hem, 
‘Take 3e no thing* in the’ weye, nethir 
3erd, nethir" scrippe, nethir breed, nethir’ 


@ hidde fro him o, 
mp. kOm. x. 1 And 3itt while he spake o. 
tOm. 4aemnostTwxy. And whano. 8 was hard o. 
Ycam G pr.m. MNPQTXY. W Om. Nnosx. 
AGMNoPQSTWXY. > wayleden acauNopesTIXY. 
© Sothely o. f Wenche 4GMNOPOSTIVXY. 
i Om. s. k whom xy. 
twelue ar. twelue the p. 
q Om. x. t Om. sw prim. X. 
Vv ne AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


4 to hem pr. 


LUKE. 


f Om. Mopxy. 
Mao. 

t wenche 4GMNOPOSTWXY. 
x Om. MOP. mo Q. 


€ Om. o. she cam Py. cam X. 


© wenche 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
& to thee Y seie, rise @ sec. m. 
1 Om. aGarnopasTWwxy. 

© vpon AGMNOPQTWY. 
8 No thing take 3e xy. t 


© Om. ibcegk. 


VIII, 48—IX. 3. 


hym, cam tremblynge, and fel doun at 
hise feet, and for what cause sche hadde 
touchid hym sche schewide bifor al the 
puple, and hou anoon sche was _ helid. 
And he seide to hir, Dou3tir, thi feith 48 
hath maad thee saaf; go thon in pees. 
And 3it while he spak, a man cam fro49 
the prince of the synagoge, and seide to 
hym, Thi dou3tir is deed, nyle thou 
trauel the maister. And whanne thiss0 
word was herd, Jhesus answeride to the 
fadir of the damysel, Nyle thou drede, 
but bileue thou oonli, and sche schal be 
saaf. And whanne he cain to the hous, 51 
he suffride no man to entre with hym, 
but Petir and Joon and James, and the 
fadir and the modir of the damysel. And 52 
alle wepten, and biweileden hir. And he 
seide, Nyle 3e wepe, for the damysel is 
not deed, but slepith. And thei scorneden 53 
hym, and wisten that sche was deed. 
But he helde hir hoond, and criede, and 54 
seide, Damysel, rise vp. And hir spiritss 
turnede ajen, and sche roos anoou. And 
he comaundide to 3yue to hir to ete. And s6 
hir fadir and modir wondriden greetli; 
and he comaundide hem4, that thei 
schulden not seie to ony that thing that 
was don. 


CAP. IX. 


And whanne the twelue apostlis weren 1 
clepid togidir, Jhesus 3af to hem vertu 
and power on alle deuelis, and that thei 
schulden heele sijknessis. And he sente2 
hem for® to preche the kyngdom of God, 
and to heele sijk men. And he seide to3 
hem, No thing take 3e in the weie, nether 
jerdef, ne scrippe, nether breed, ne mo- 


2 at o. 
°Om. r. 


his acanposTxy. ' Crist 
Pand sayde 0. 4 Om. o. 
u bileeue thou only cxy. 
z Om. GMNPUVXY.  wenche 
d that 4GMNOPQOSTWXY. 
h for to AGMNOQTWY. 
m that that aearnpesTwxy. that at o. 0 the 
P langnyschyngis acmposTwxY. languischis No. 
Om. kK. Une A sec. m. GMNOPQSTWXY. 


a fro o. 


y Om. Nn. 


fa 3erde ixbg. 


IX. g——14. 


money, and” nethir* haue 3e tweyY cootis. 
4And in to what euere hous 3e schulen 
entre, ‘dwelle 3e7 there, and go 3e not out 
sthennis. And who euere schulen”* not 
receyue 30w, 3e goynge out® of that citee 
schake® of also® the poudir of 3oure feete 
6in to witnessinge on? hem. Sothli thei 
gon out, cumpassiden® bi castels, enange- 
7lisinge and heelinge euerewhere. Forsoth 
Eroude, ‘the fourthe princef, herde alle 
the® thingis that weren don of him», and 
she doutide, for that' it was seid of sum 
men*, for Joon roos! a3en™ fro deede 
men"; forsoth® of sum menP, for Elye 
apperide; sothli? of othere men", for oon 
9of the olde prophetis roos. And Eroude 
seith, I haue bihedid* Joon; sothli who is 
this, of whom I heere thes‘ thingis? And 
1ohe sou3te for" to se him. And apostlis’ 
turnynge” a3eyn toolden to him, what 
euere* thingis thei’ diden. And hem takun 
to, he wente on anothere half in to desert? 
11 place, which* is® Bethsayda. Which¢ thing 
whanne the cumpanyes? hadden knowen, 
thei folowiden him. And he receyuyde hem, 
and spak to hem of the kingdom of God ; 
and heelide hem that hadden nede of cure. 
i2Sothli the day bigan for® to bowe doun, 
and the twelue comynge ny3 seiden to 
him, Leeue the cumpanyes‘, that thei go- 
ynge ‘turne in to castels® and townes, that 
ben aboute, that thei fynde metis, for we 
i3ben here in a desert place. Forsothe he 
seith to hem, 3yue 3e” to hem to! ete. And 
thei seiden, Ther ben not to vs more than 
fyue loouys and tweye* fischis, no! but™ 
perauenture and" we go, and byen metis 
14°in to? al the? cumpany. Sothli the! men 


w Om. iv. 
Sx. Cal r. 


Xne MP. 
4 vpon AGMNOPOQSTIVY. 


Ytwe kK. two MorgTUWXY. 


z dwelleth x. 22 shal apx. 
€ enuyrowneden AGMNPQSTWXY. enuyrouned o. 


LUKE. 175 


ney, and nether haue 3e two cootis. And 4 
in to what hous that! 3e entren, dwelle 
3e there, and go 3e not out fro thennus. 
And who euer resseyuen not 30u, go 3e5 
out of that citee, and schake 3e of the 
poudir of 3oure feet in to witnessyng on’ 
hem. And thei jeden forth, and wenten 6 
aboute bi castels, prechynge and helynge 
euery where. And Eroude tetrak herde7 
alle thingis that weren don of hym, and 
he doutide, for that» it was seide ofs 
sum men, that Joon was risen fro deth; 
and of summen, that Elie hadde apperid; 
but of othere, that oon of the elde pro- 
phetis was risun. And Eroude seide, Y9 
haue biheedid Joon; and who is this, of 
whom Y here siche thingis? And he 
sou3te to se hym. And the apostlis!10 
turneden a3en, and tolden to hym alle 
thingis that* thei hadden don. And he 
took hem, and wente bisidis in to a de- 
sert place, that is Bethsada. And whanne i 
the puple knewen this, thei folewiden 
hym. And he resseyuede hem, and spak 
to hem of the kyngdom of God; and 
he heelide hem that hadden neede of 
cure. And the dai bigan to bowe doun, 12 
and the twelue camen, and seiden to 
hym, ‘Leeue the puple, that thei go, and 
turne in to castels! and townes, that ben 
aboute, that thei fynde mete, for we ben 
here in a™ desert place. And he seide13 
to hem, 3yue je to" hem to ete. And 
thei seideu°, Ther ben not to vs mo than 
fyue looues and twei fischis, but per- 
auenture thatP we go, and bie meetis to 
al thist puple’. And the men weren al-14 
most fyue thousynde. And he seide to 


® out thens o, » shaketh 
f prince of 


the fourth part smNnporx. fourthe prince 0. prince w. prince of the fourth part of Galilee e pr.m. y. 


& thes K. Om. cpsurivx. bh hem o. 
sywxy. Om. 4G pr.m. MNOPQUXY. 
sTWxyY. & byheueded oy. 
ow pr.m. xy. ™ turned AGMNOPQSTIVY. 
whiche zcmNopestwxy.  ? is clepid coy. 


iiOm. Krx. 
© sothely oxy. 
t soche 4GMNOQST. siche PY. suche wx. 
xOm. vy. 
¢ The whiche 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 


m Om. AGMNOPQ 
r Om. 4GMNOPQ 
Vv the apostlis emp 
2adesert sp. the 
d cumpanyes of puplis 


k Om. o. I hath risen xy. 
POm.o. 4 forsothe o. 
u Om. sx. 
y that thei 4 pr.m. T. 


A pt.m. MNPTY. cumpanye of puplis 4 see. m. cumpanyes of puple cesx. company of pepil ow. © Om. 
stx. f companyes of pepul acmnopostwxy.  & in to castelis turne x. "Om. Nn. i for to 4GmNopP 
eturwy. two caoreuwxy. 1Om.ox. ™butifx. 2™Om.o0. foro. tow prem. P this ap 
Q sec.m. 4Om. 7. 

fOm.k. &togk. of hi. © Om.1KR prom. bg. i postlistg, &*Om.b. _! the castels ingk. 
m Om. erg. %Om.thk. ©seidentohimk. POm.k. 4 the crkruc sec.m.k. Om. a pr.m. EMPQS 
beeghiog. ¥ puplis s. 


176 LUKE. 


weren almoost fyue thousynde. Forsothe 
he seith to his disciplis, Make" hem to’ 
ls sitte to mete by feestis', fyftyes". And 
thei diden so, and thei maden alle men 
16sitteY to’ the mete. Forsothe fyue looues 
and tweye* fysches takun, he byheld in to 
heuene, and blesside hem, and brak, and 
delide to his disciplis, that thei schulden 
17 putteY bifore the eumpanyes*. And alle 
‘ ~ men eeten, and ‘weren fillid*; and ‘this 
that lefte to hem ‘of broken metis® was¢ 
18 taken®, twelue coffyns’. And it was® don, 
whanne he was aloone preiynge, and his 
diseiplis weren with him, and he axide 
hem, seiynge", Whom ‘seyn the eumpanyes 
1i9imei tok be? And thei answeriden, and 
seiden, John Baptist, forsothe othere 
seyen' Elye, but othere seyen™, for o° 
20 prophete of the formere hath risun. Sothli 
he seide to hem, But whom seye 3e me 
to® be? Symonnd Petre answeringe seide, 
21 The? Crist of God. Aud he blamynge 
hem comaundide hem4 that thei schulden 
22seie to no man", ‘and seith’ ‘thes thingis*, 
For it bihoueth mannis sone to" suffre 
manye thingis, aud to’ be repreued of 
the” eldere men, and of* princes of prestis, 
and of seribis, and forY to be slayn, and 
23in? the thridde day to* ryse a3en. For- 
sothe he seide to alle men, If ony man? 
wole come aftir me, denye he him silf, and 
take he® his cross euery day, and sue he 
2zime. Sothli lhe that schal wilne’ toe make 
his lyff saaf, sehal leese it; forwhi he that 
schal leese his lyf@ for me, schal make it 
assaaf. Forsothe" what profitith it to ai 
man, if he wynne al the world, sothli* 
leese him silf, and do peyringe of! him 


v make 3e 4GMNOPSTW Sec.m. XY. make we @. 
u sec.m. —_V to sitte osx. 


8 for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
Wat AGMNOPQSTUVIWXY. 
@ ben fulfillid @ pr.m. woperxy. weren fulfillid & sec. m. w. 


IX. 15-——25. 


hise disciplis, Make 3e' hem sitte’ to 
mete bi cumpanyes, a fifti to gidir. And!s 
thei diden so, and thei maden alle men 
sitte to mete. And whanne he haddeisé 
take the fyne looues and twei fischis, he 
biheeld in to heuene, and blesside hem, 
and brak, and delide to hise disciplis, 
that thei sehulden sette forth' bifor the 
eumpanyes". And alle men eeten, and17 
weren fulfillid; and that that lefte to hem 
of brokun metis was takun vp, twelue 
eofyns. And it was don, whanne hes 
was aloone preiynge, hise disciplis weren 
with hiym, and he axide hem, and seide, 
Whom seien the puple that Y am? Andt9 
thei answeriden, and seiden, Joon Bap- 
tist, othir’ seien Elie, and othir sezen, o 
profete of the formere is risun. And20 
he seide to hem, But whov" seien 3e that 
Yam? Symount Petir answeride, and 
seide, The Crist of God. And he blam-21 
ynge hem comaundide that thei schulden 
seie to no man, and seide” these thingis, 22 
For it bihoueth mannus sone to suffre 
many thingis, and to be repreued of the 
elder men, and of the princis of prestis, 
and of scribis*, and to be slayn, and the 
thridde dai to rise ajen. And he seide23 
to alle, If ony wole come aftir me, denye 
he hym silf, and take he his cross euery 
dai, and sue he me. For he that wole24 
make his lijf saaf schal leese it; and he 
that leesith his lijf for me, schal make it 
saaf. And what profitith ity to* a man, 25 
if he wynne al the world, and leese hym- 
silf, and do peiryng of him silf. For26 
who so schameth me and my wordis, 
manuius sone schal schame hym, whanne 


tOm.g. 4 fifties togidere 
Yputtoe. 7 cumpanye Fr. 
b that that aemNnPposwxy. that at o. that 


X two MPUWXY. 


thei e. ¢Om.x. ¢is 4 pr.m.cpr.m.mNnpostxy. © taken vp acmNopsurywxy. { cofines of broke mete x. 


fis A prom. G pr.m. MNoPQsTXY. 4 Om. kK. 
lseiden kK. ™ Om. 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 
r man these thingis x. 
opTwy. WOm.o. * Om.orwxy. of the a. 


b Om. seuNoposTWwxy. © Om. Pur. 


that is his jf cey. soule osx. 


lto xy. 
r Om. g pr.m. 8 to sitte 8 sec.m. ghi. 
wWwhomr. Whe seidek pr.m.  * the scribis ea. 


i the kumpanyes seyn me xy. 
aA. oon M. one P. 
S sayinge AGMNOPQ@STWXY, 
y Om. sx. 
4 wole capy. wite x. 

his lijf acest pr.m. wy. soule, that is lijf mnpr sec. m. soul ox. 
h Sotheli caroperwxy. 


t Om. a. 


k for to 4GMNOPOTIVY. 
© for to AGMNoPETIWVY. POm.s. 4Om. x. 
tOm. x. forto 4cmNnopriw. VY for to AGMN 
z Om. Gmoperwxy. 2 for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
€ Om. acmopostwxy.  f soule, that is 

& soule, thai is lijf amnprw. soule, 
iOm. x. k forsothe 4GMNOPQOSTWXY. 


“cumpanye A pr.m. 


Vv othere men Kg. 
yOm.k. 2 Om.k prim. 


IX. 26—38. 


26silf? Forwhi who that schal schame me 
and my wordis, and mannis sone schal 
schame him, whanne he schal come in his 
mageste, and of the fadir™, and of the" 
27hooly aungels. Forsoth I seye to 30u, 
verily ther ben summe stondinge here, 
whiche® schulen not taste? deeth, til thei 
2sseen the rewme of God. Sothli it was‘ 
don aftir thes wordis almoost ei3te dayes, 
and he took Petre and James and John, 
and he stizede in to an hil, that he schulde 
29 preie. And the while he" preiede, the 
liknesse of his cheere was* maad othir 
maner, and his clothing‘ whit schynynge. 
30 And loo! tweye® men spaken with him, 
31forsothe Moyses and Elye weren seyn in 
mageste; and thei seyden his goynge out’, 
which’ he was to fillinge* in Jerusalem. 
32 Forsothe Petre, and thei that weren with 
him, weren greuyd’ with? sleep, and thei 
wakinge sy3en his mageste, and tweye* 
33men that stooden with him. And it was? 
don, whanne thei departiden fro him, 
Petre seith to Jhesu, Comandour, it is 
good to vs for® to be here, and¢ make we 
here thre tabernaclis, oon to thee, and® 
oon to Moyses, aud oon to Elye; not wit- 
ssinge what he schulde seye. Sothli him 
spekinge thes thingis, a cloude was’ maad, 
and schadewide hem; and thei dredden*, 
35hemi entringe in to the clowde*. And a 
voys was! muaad fro™ the clowde, seyinge, 
This is my dereworthe sone, heere 3e him. 
36 And the" while the vois was® maad, Jhesu 
was? founden aloone. And thei helden pees, 
and ‘seide to no man‘ in tho dayes ou3t 
of tho thingis, whiche" thei hadden herd’. 
37 Forsothe it wast don in the day snynge, 
hem" comynge doun’ of the hil, myche 
33cumpanye of peple” renneth to hem. And 


m fadris AGMNPQSTWXY. Om. ourwxy. 
AG pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. * that he xy. 
wxy. Y¥Om.T. 
or heuyed y. % or heuy of uv sec. m. marg. 
e¢Om. sux. 4Om. kK. ¢ Om. ur. 
uwxy. iOm.u. 
2Om.o. © Om. G prim. 
PQSTUVWXY.  § SeyN AGMNOPQSTUVIWXY. 
wprom.  W the peple v. 


a@Om.k. » fadir x sec. m.k. 


C3e A prem, 
§ thei seiden k prim.» ony b. 


i these b. 


VOL. IV. Aa 


© the whiche 4gmNnopoesTwy. that x. 
Sis 4 pr.m. G pr.m, MNOPQSTXY. 
W the whiche acanopostivy. that x. 
@ tho two MPX. two Hy. 
fis 4 prom. G prom. MNOPQSTXY. 
lis 4G prim. MNOPQSTXY. 
Pis 4 prom. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 


k cloude, thei dredden cupuwxy. 


tis 4 prom. G prem, MNOPQSTXY. 


4 seiden e sec. m. 


LUKE. 177 


he cometh in his maieste, and* of the 
fadris», and of the hooli aungels. And 27 
Y seie to 3ou, verily ther ben sumime 
stondynge here, whiche schulen not taste 
deeth, til thei® seen the rewme of God. 
And it was don aftir these wordis almest 28 
eijte daies, and he took Petre and James 
and Joon, and he stiede in to an hil, to 
preye. And while he preiede, the lic-29 
nesse of his cheer was chaungid, and _ his 
clothing was whit schynynge. And lo! 30 
two men spaken with hym, and Moises3: 
and Helie weren seen in maieste; and 
thei sayn? his goyng out, which he 
schulde fulfille in Jerusalem. And Petre, 32 
and thei that weren with hyim, weren 
heuy of sleep, and thei wakynge saien 
his majeste, and the twey men that 
stoden with hym. And it was don,s3 
whanne thei departiden fro hym, Petir 
seide to Jhesu, Comaundour, it is good 
that we be here, and make we here thre 
tabernaclis, oon to thee, and oon to 
Moises, and oon to Elie. And he wiste 
not what he schulde seie. But whiles+ 
he spak these thingis, a cloude was 
maad, and ouerschadewide hem; and thei 
dredden, whanne® thei entriden in to the 
cloude. Andf a vois was maad out of35 
the cloude, and seide, This is my der- 
worth sone, here 3e hym. And whiles« 
the vois was maad, Jhesu was foundun 
aloone. And thei weren stille, and to 
no man seiden& in tho daies ou3t® of 
tho! thingis, that thei hadden seyn. But37 
it was doon in the dai suynge, whanne 
thei camen doun of the hil, myche puple 
mette hem. And lo! a man of thess 
cumpany ecriede, and seide, Maister, Y 
biseche thee, biholde my sone, for Y 


Ptakeo. 4 is 
t cloth uv. two MPU passim. 
x fulfill 4G sec.m. MNOPQSTWXY. Y greuid, 
Dis a prim. G prom. MNOPQSTXY. 
£ Om. cwpxy. 6 Om. amp 
m of AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
r that 4GMNO 
va doun 


4 to no man seiden GxyY. 
u thei uv. 


e and whanne k pr.m. £Om.k pr.m. 


178 


loo! a man of the cumpanye criede, sey- 
inge, Maistir, I biseche thee, byhold in 
to my sone, for he is ‘oon aloone* to me; 
sgand lo! a spirit takith him, and sudenly 
he crieth, and hurtlithY down, and ‘to- 
drawith? him with froth, and vnnethe he 
40 goth awey to-drawinge him. And I preiede 
thi disciplis, that thei schulde caste him 
s1out, and thei my3ten not. Sothli Jhesu 
ausweringe seide to hem, A*! vnfeithful 
generacioun and weyward, hou longe schal 
I be anentis® 30u, and schal® suffre 30u ? 
a2leed hidur thi? sone. And whanne he 
cam ny3, the fend® hurlide’ him doun, and 
‘to-brayds. And Jhesu blamede the vn- 
clene spirit, and heelide the child, and 
433eld him to his fadir. Sothli alle men 
wondriden greetly in the greetnesse of 
God. And alle men wondringe" in alle 
thingis whiche' he dide, he seide to his 
4idisciplis, Putte 3e ‘thes wordis in 3oure 
hertis*, for’ it is to comynge™, that man- 
nis sone be bitrayed in to the hondis of 
asmen. And thei knewen not this word, 
and it was hid bifore hem, that thei feel- 
iden it" not; and thei dreden to® axe him 
4cof this word. Forsothe a thou3t entride 
in to hem, who of hem schulde be more. 
47And Jhesu seynge the thou3tis of the 
herte? of hem, takynge a child, settide4 
ashim bisydis him silf™; and seith’ to hem, 
Who euere schal receyue this child in my 
name, receyueth me; and who euere schal 
receyue me, receyueth hymn that sente me; 
for whi he that is lesse among jou alle, 
sjis‘t the" more. Forsoth John ‘answeringe 
seide’, Comaundour, we sy3en sum man 
castinge out fendis in thi name, and we 
han forbodyn hin, for he sueth not thee 
50 With vs. And Jhesu seith to him, Nyle 
3e” forbede, forsothe he that is not ajens 


x oonlepy 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 


LUKE. 


IX. 39—50. 


haue no mo; and lo! a spirit takithsy 
hym, and sudenli he crieth, and hurtlith* 
doun, and to-drawith hym with fome, 
and vnneth he. goith awei al to-draw- 
ynge hym. And Y preiede thi disciplis, 40 
that thei schulden caste hym out, and 
thei my3ten not. And Jhesus answerde 4! 
and seide to hem, A! vnfeithful genera- 
cioun and weiward, hou long schal Y be 
at! 30u, and suffre 30u? brynge hidur thi 
sone. And whanne he cam ny3, the 42 
deuel hurtlide hym doun, and to-braid- 
ide™ hym. And Jhesus blamyde the 
vuclene spirit, and heelide the child, and 
3eldide" him to his fadir. And alle men 43 
wondriden greetli in the® gretnesse of 
God. And whanne alle men wondriden 
in alle thingis that he dide, he seide to 
hise disciplis, Putte 3e these wordis in 44 
3oure hertis, for it is to come, that man- 
nus sone be bitrayed in to the hondis of 
men. And thei knewen not this? word, 4 
and it? was hid bifor hem, that thei 
feeliden it not; and thei dredden to axe 
hym of this word. But a thou3t entride 46 
in to hem, who of hem schulde be gret- 
test. And Jhesu, seynge the thou;tis 47 
of the herte of hem, took a child, and 
settide hym bisidis hym; and seide to 48 
hem, Who euer resseyueth this child in 
my name, resseyueth me; and who euer 
resseyuneth ime, resseiueth hiin that sente 
me; for he that is leest among 30u alle, 
is the grettest. And Joon answeride49 
and seide, Comaundoure, we sayn a man 
castynge out feendis in thi name, and 
we han forbedun hym, for he sueth not 
thee with vs. Aud Jhesus seide to hym, 50 
Nyle 3e forbede, for he that is not ajens 
vs, is for vs. And it was don, whanne 51! 
the daies of his takyng vp weren fulfillid, 


y hirtith a pr.m. Nor. hirtlith « sec.m. hirtith hym empexy. hirtlith 


hym w. 2 disparplith, or to-drawith aeaNnposrwy. disparplith, or trauaylith o. disparpileth x. 20 
oxy. Dat aeMNopestWwxy. © Om. AacMNopestwxy. ‘the x. ©&deuel acunopostwxy. f hirtled 
AGMNOPQSTUFXY.  & disparplid aeaNopestwxy.: » wondurden ox. ithat aemnopestwxy. * thes 
wordis in joure hert o. in joure hertis these wordis xy. I sothly agMNOPESTUWXY. ™ comme AGM 
NOPQSTIWXY. n him o. ° for to AGMNOPETIVY. P hertis Kr. 4 sette AGMNOPQSTIWXY. ° Om. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. 8 he saith 9. seide mw. t this is aeMNOPOSTIVXY. 


v answerd, salynge 4GMNOPQSTWXY.  3e not o. 


k hurtith g. | anentis 1. 


m to-braide E1:pRrbeeghike3, 


u Om. AG pr. m. MNOSTXY. 


» took qka. ©Om. 1 Pthek. 4 that k. 


IX. 51—X. 1. 


5130u*, is for 30u¥. Sothli it was? don, 
whanne the dayes of his takynge vp weren 
fillid*, and he settide” faste his face, that 
szhe schulde go in to Jerusalem; and he‘ 
sente messangeris’ bifore his si3t. And 
thei goynge entriden in to a citee of Sa- 
maritans, that thei schulden make redy to 
s3him. And thei receyueden not him, for 
the face ‘was of him*® goynge in to Jeru- 
5isalem. Forsothe whanne James and John, 
his disciplis, hadden seyn, thei seiden, 
Lord, wolt thou ‘we seye', that fier come 
doun fro heuene, and waaste hem, ‘as 
s5Helye did’? And he turned blamyde 
hem, seyinge, 3e witen not, whos spiritis® 
563e ben; forsothe mannis sone cam not for! 
to leese soulis*, but for! to saue™. And 
s7 thei wenten in to anotlier castel. Forsoth 
it was" don, hem® walkynge in the weye, 
sum man seide to him, I schal sue thee, 
58 whidur euere thou schalt go. And Jhesu 
seideP to him, Foxis han dennys4, and 
briddis of the eyr han™ nestis, but mannis 
sone lath not where’ he schal' reste his 
59 heed". Forsothe he seide to another, Sue 
thou me. Sothli he seide, Lord, suffre me 
60 first toY go, and to” burie my fadir. And 
Jhesu seide to him, Suffre that deede men 
burie her deede*; but go thou, and telle the 
sikyngdom of God. And anothir seide, 
Lord, I schal sue thee, but first suffre me 
toY telle a3en? to hem that ben at home. 
62 Forsothe Jhesu seith® to him, No man 
sendynge his hond to the plou3, and bi- 
holdinge a3en, is able to the rewme of 
God. 
CAP. X. 
1 Forsothe aftir thes thingis the Lord 
Jhesu ordeynede and? othere seuenty and 
tweyne’, and sente hem by tweyne*® and 
tweyne® bifore his face in to euery? citee 


X v8 A pr.m.G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
gstxyY. 4% fulfild acauNoposTWwxY. 
Oo passim. MpQsTWX. © of him was GarpuWwxy. 
b spirit @ sec.m. i Om. MPsx. 
nis 4 pr.m.G pr.m..MNoPQsTXY. © thei v. 
nes. dyches ex. dichis, or dennes TWy. 
mai N. % heued oy. 
Y for to AGMOPSTVR.. 


v for to AGMNOPQTUVIVY. 
z Om. KUrX. 


T sette k. 


8 of hym was A pr. m. 1Ks. 
w he sente sg. 


Yvs A pr.m. G prom. MNOPQSTXY,. 
b sett AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
f that we axe o. that we sey Ss. 
k mennes soulis 4GMNOPQTXY. 
P saith AGMNOPQSTUVWXY. 
Fr Om. AGMNPQSTWXY. 
Ww Om. 4GMNOPQSTUVWXY. 


agseide xy. also Kur. 


t shal reste x sec. m.k. 


LUKE. 179 


he settide" faste his face, to go to Jeru- 
salem, and sente messangeris bifor hisse 
si3t. And thei 3eden, and entriden in to 

a citee of Samaritans, to make redi to 
hym. And thei resseyueden not hym, ss 
for the face ‘was of hym* goynge in to 
Jerusalem. And whanne James and 5a 
Joon, hise disciplis, seyn, thei seiden, 
Lord, wolt thou that we seien, that fier 
come doun fro heuene, and waste hem ? 
And he turnede, and blamyde hem, and 55 
seide, 3e witen not, whos spiritis 3e ben ; 
for mannus sone cam not to leese men-5¢ 
nus soulits, but tosaue. And thei wenten 
in to another castel. And it was don, 57 
whanne thei walkeden in the weie, a 
man seide to hym, Y schal sue thee, 
whidur euer thou go. And Jhesus seide ss 
to hym, Foxis han dennes, and briddis 
of the eir Aan nestis, but mannus sone 
hath not where he reste his heed. Ands9 
he seide to another, Sue thou me. And 
he seide, Lord, suffre me first to go, and 
birie my fadir. And Jhesus seide toco 
hym, Suffre that deede men birie hir 
deede men; but go thou, and telle the 
kyngdom of God. And another seide, 6 
Lord, Y schal sue thee, but first suffre me 
to leeue ‘alle thingis" that ben at hoom. 
And Jhesus seide to hym, No man that 62 
puttith his hoond to the plou3, and bi- 
holdynge bacward, is able to the rewme’ 
of God. 


CAR. X. 


And aftir these thingis the Lord) 
Jhesu ordeynede also othir seuenti and 
tweyn, and sente” hem bi tweyn and 
tweyn bifor his face in to euery citee 


Zis A pr.m.G prim. MNoOP 
¢ Om. aGMNopesTWxy. 4 messageris 
§ Om. A sec.m. KU. 
™m sane hem ogw pr.m. Y. 
q dichis, and dennes AGM 
Swhereon o. t Om. aGMoPeTWwxy. 
x deed men G prin. i. 
©two Gmopewxy. 4eche x. 


1Om. x. 


wal thing a pr.m. vv kingdam x. 


AaQ 


180 


2and place, whidir he was to comynge®. And 
he seide to hem, Sothli myche ripe corn 
is‘, but fewe workmen®; therfore preie 3e 
the" lord of the ripe corn, that he sende 
3workmen in to his rype corn. Go 3e, lo! 
I sende 30u as lambren among wolues. 
4 Nyle 3e bere a sachel, nether' scrip, nether 
schoon, and greete 3e no man by the weye. 
sAnd* in to what euere hous 3e schulen 
entre, first seye 3e, Pees to this hous. 
«And if a sone of pees schal be there, 3oure 
pees schal reste on him; if! non, it schal 
zturne azen to 30u. Forsothe™ ‘dwelle 3e 
in the same hous", etynge and drynkinge 
tho thingis that ben at hem; forsothe a 
workman is worthi his hyre. Nyle 3e 
spasse fro hous in to hous. And in to 
what euere citee je schulen entre, and 
thei schulen receyue 30u, ete 3¢ tho thingis 
9 that ben put to 300; and heele 3e the® syke 
men that ben ‘ther ynne?. And seye 3e 
to hem, The kyngdom of God schal nei3e4 
10'in to jou. In to what euer citee 3¢ 
schulen entre, and thei schulen not re- 
ceyue 30u, 3e goynge out in to the streetis 
ii thereof’, seie', Also we wypen of in to 
3ou the poudere that clenyde to vs of 
3oure citee; nethelees wite 3e this thing, 
for the rewme of God schal come ny3. 
12Forsoth I seie to 30u, for to Sodom it 
schal be esyere", ‘other lasse peyne*, than 
isto that citee in thilkeYY day. Woo to 
thee, Corosaym; woo to thee, Bethsayda ; 
for if in Tyre and Sydon ‘the vertues had- 
den” ben don, whiche* ben don in thee’, 
sum tyme thei sittinge in heer and aische?, 
14schulden haue don penaunce. Netheles to 
Tyre and Sydon it schal he esyer in the 
isdom than to 30u. And thou, Cafarnaum, 
ert enhaunsid ‘til to* henene; thou schalt 
isbe drenchid> ‘til in to® helle. He that 
heerith 3ou, heerith me; and he that 


€ comme AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
ine wp. * Om. aGMNOPQSTUY sec. m. WXY. 
house dwelle ge xy. 9° Om. @. 


r Om. o. 8 of it AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
peyne GMPIVY. WwW that AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
that xY. Y 300 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 


€ in to No@xyY. til to uv. 


wQOm. a. *¥Om.s. ¥ And in xhi. 


LUKE. 


£ Om. amMNnpsTi sec.m. X. 
1 but if u sec. m. 
P in that cite acmMopagsTwy. in the citee N. in that x. 
t seien K. seieth apex. 
w hadden the vertues x¥. 
2 aisch, or dust ANSTW sec. m. 


% ynto Hi. til into rgk. 


X. 2—16. 


and place, whidir he was to come. And2 
he seide to hem, There zs myche ripe 
corn, and fewe werke men; therfor preie 
3e the lord of the ripe corn, that he 
sende werke men in to his ripe corn. 
Go 3e, lo! Y sende 30u as lambren among 3 
wolues. Therfor nyle 3e bere a sachel,4 
nethir scrippe, nethir schoon, and greete 
3e no man bi the weie. In to what houss 
that 3e entren, first seie 3e, Pees to this 
hous. And if a sone of pees be there, 6 
joure pees schal reste on hym; but if 
noon, it schal turne aj3en to 30u. And7 
dwelle 3e in the same hous, etynge and 
drynkynge tho thingis that ben at hem; 
for a werk man is worthi his hire. Nyle 
3e passe from hous in to hous. And ins 
to what euer citee 3e entren, and thei 
resseyuen 30, ete 3e tho thingis that ben 
set to 30u; and heele 3e the” sijke meng 
that ben in that citee. And seie 3e to 
hem, The kyngdom of God schal neize 
in*® to 3o0u. InY to what citee 3e entren, 10 
and thei resseyuen 30u not, go 3e out in 
to the streetis of it, and seie 3e, Wen 
wipen of azens 30u the poudir that cleued 
to vs of 3oure citee; netheles wite 3e this 
thing, that the rewme of God schal come 
ny3. Y seie to 3ou, that to Sodom12 
it schal be esiere than to that citee in 
that dai. Wo to thee, Corosaym; wo1s 
to thee, Bethsaida; for if in Tyre and 
Sidon the vertues hadden be don, whiche 
han be don in 30u, sum tyme thei 
wolden haue sete in heyre and asches, 
and hane don penaunce. Netheles tos 
Tire and Sidon it schal be esiere in the 
dooin than to jou. And thou,Cafarnaum, is 
art enhaunsid ‘til to? heuene; thou schalt 
be drenchid ‘til in to* helle. He thatie 
herith jou, herith me; and he that 
dispisith jou, dispisith me; and he that 


b Om. r. 

1 in the same 
q comme nije o. 
Vv Om. o@x. or lesse 
x the whiche 1cuNoparTiv. 
b drenchd doun y. 


& werkmen ben ogTW pr.m.Y. 
m Treuly 4 sec.m. Ww. 


v lesse peyne x. 


@in to Y. 


a ynto 1. til to hi. 


X. 17—28. 


dispisith 3ou, dispisith me; forsothe he 
that dispisith me, dispisith him that sente 
izme. -Forsoth two! and seuenty disciplis® 
turnedyn a3ein. with ioye, seyinge, Lord, 
also fendis' ben sujet to vs in thi name. 
18 And he seith to hem, I sy3 Sathanas fall- 
ig9inge doun fro heuene, as leit. And loo! 
I have 30uun to 30u power of defoulinge, 
‘othir tredinge®, on serpents, andi scor- 
piouns, and on* al the vertn of the enemy, 
20and no thing schal ‘anoye! 30u™. Netheles 
nyle 3e ‘haue ioye" in this thing, for 
fendis® ben sujet to 3ou; but ioye 3ee, 
that 3oure names ben writun in heuenes. 
21InP thilke1 our he gladide in the Hooly 
Goost, and seide, I knowleche to thee, 
fadir, Lord of heuene and erthe, which" 
hast hid thes thingis fro wyse men and 
prudent’, and hast schewid hem to litle‘. 
3he, fadir, for" so it pleside’ bifore™ thee. 
22 Alle thingis ben 3ouun* to me of my fadir, 
and no man woot, who is the sone, noY 
but the fadir; and who is the fadir, no? 
but the sone, and to whom the sone 
23wolde* schewe. And he turned to his 
disciplis, seide, Blessid ben thee y3en, 
whiche’ seen tho thingis that 3e seen. 
24Sothli I seie to 30u, for® many prophetis 
and kyngis wolden se tho thingis, whiehe’ 
je seen, and thei sy3en not; and heere 
tho thingis, that 3e heere, and thei herden 
2uot. And lo! a wyse man of the® lawe 
roos, temptinge him, and seyinge, Maistir, 
what thing doynge schal I welde euer- 
aclastinge lyf? And he seide to him, What 
is writun in the lawe? hou redist thou ? 
27 He answeringe seide, Thou schalt loue 
the Lord thi God of al thyn herte, and 
of al thi soule, ‘or /yf", and of alle thi 
iny3tis!, and of al thi mynde; and thi 
28 neijebore as thi silf. And Jhesu seide to 
him, Thou hast answerid ri3tly; do thou‘ 


e Om. K. 
lor x. k vpon 4GMNopeTIVY. 
© spiritis 4GMNOPQSTUVIVXY. 


d the two MP. 
AGMNOPQTIWY. 
AGMNOPQSTWX. 
that x. 


wile xy. > Om. 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNPQSTX. 
postwxy. f that aemnopostwxy, & Om. ur. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


b Om, erkanbeeghikaS.  ¢ noie hik. 


f deneles 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 

Tnoye G. noy3e P. nojen sx. 

P Om. w. 

8 prudent, or war AGNSTY. war 0. prudent men, or war Ww. 

Vplesith r. Wtog * taken 4 prom. G pr.m. MNoPQTXY. YOm.o. 2 Om. o. 
¢ Om. y. 

h Om. ox. 


din exgrbeeghika8. of 1 sec. m. 


LUKE. 181 


dispisith me, dispisith hym that sente 
me, And the two and seuenti disciplis17 
turneden azen with joye, and seiden, 
Lord, also deuelis ben suget to vs in thi 
name. And he seide to hem, Y saiz18 
Sathnas fallynge doun fro heuene, as 
leit. And lo! Y haue 3onun to 30u19 
power to trede on serpentis, and on? 
scorpyouns, and on al the vertu of the 
enemy, and nothing schal anoye* 3ou. 
Netheles nyle 3e ioye on‘ this thing, that 20 
spiritis ben suget® to 30u; but ioye 3e, 
that 3oure names ben writun in heuenes. 
In thilk our he gladide in the Hoolizi 
Goost, and seide, Y knouleehe to thee, 
fadir, Lord of heuene and of erthe, for 
thou hast hid these thingis fro wise men 
and prudent, and hast schewid hem to 
smale children. 3he, fadir, for so it ples- 
ide bifor thee. Alle thingis ben 3ouun 22 
to me of my fadir, and no man woot, 
who is the sone, but the fadir; and who 
is the fadir, but the sone, and to whom 
the sone wole schewe. And he turnede 23 
to hise disciplis, and seide, Blessid ben 
the izen, that seen tho thingis that je 
seen. For Y seie to 30u, that many pro- 21 
phetis and kyngis wolden haue seie tho 
thingis, that 3e seen, and thei sayn not: 
and here tho thingis, that 3e heren, and 
thei herden not. And lo! a wise man25 
of the lawe ros vp, temptynge hym, and 
seiynge, Maister, what thing schal Y do 
to haue euerlastynge lijf? And he seide 26 
to hym, What is writun in the lawe ? 
hou redist thou? He answeride, and 27 
seide, Thou schalt loue thi Lord God of 
al thin herte, and of al thi soule, and of 
alle thi strengthis, and of al thi mynde; 
and thi neiz3bore as thi silf. And Jhesus 22 
seide to hym, Thou hast answerid ri3tli; 
do this thing, and thou schalt lyue. But 29 


&§ Om. Guoprxy. or tredinge vw. vp on 
™ to 30n 0. ® enioye 

r the whiche 4GarNoPpesTry. 
t pore o pr.m. — 4 forsothe 9. 
a wil o. wole GmMPW. 
e that 4GMNO 
k Om. 


q that x. 


4 that A4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
1 strengthes AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


© sugetis A, 


182 


29this thing, and thou schalt lyne. For- 
sothe he willinge! to™ iustifye him silf, 
seide to Jhesu, And who is my nei3ebore? 
30 Sothli Jhesu biholdinge", seide, Sum man 
cam doun fro Jerusalem ‘in to® Jerico, and 
felde among? theuues, whiche4 also rob- 
biden him, and, woundis ‘putt in', wenten 
3iawey, the man lefte half quyk. Forsothe 
it byfel, that sum prest cam doun in the 
same weye, and, him seyn’, passidet forth. 
32 Also forsoth and a dekene, whanne he 
was bisydis the place, and sy3 him, pass- 
33ide forth. Forsoth® sum man‘ Samaritan, 
makynge iourney, cam bisydis the weye; 
and he seynge him, was stirid by mercy. 
34And he comynge nv3, bond to gidere his 
woundis, heeldynge yn oyle and wyn. 
And he puttinge on” his hors', ledde in 
to a stable, and dide* the cure of him. 
35 And another day he brou3te forth twey! 
pens, and 3af to the kepere of the stable, 
and seide™, Hane thou the" cure of him; 
and what euere thing® thou schalt 3yue 
ouer, I scha] 3elde to thee, whanne I schal 
36come ajen. Who of thes thre semeth to 
thee to haue be nei3ebore to him, that 
37felde ‘among the? theues? And he seide, 
He that dide mercy ont him. And Jhesu 
seith to him, Go thou, and do thou" in’ 
atlykt manere. Forsoth it was" don, while’ 
thei wenten, and he entride in to sum 
castel; and sum womiman, Martha bi 
3y name, recevuede him in to hir hous. And 
to this Martha” was a sister, Marie bi 
name, which* also sittinge by sydis the 
feet of theY Lord, herde the word of 
sohim. Forsothe Martha bisycde* aboute 
moche? seruvce. Which¢ stood, and seide®, 
Lord, is it® not of charge to thee, that my 
sistir lefte' me aloone, for? to mynystre” ? 


1 wilnynge gy. ™ for to GaopeTtiy. 


LUKE. 


2 biholdynge vp 4GMNoPosTWXY. 


X. 29—40. 


he willynge to iustifie hym silf, seide to 
Jhesu’, And who is my nei3bore? And 30 
Jhesu biheld, and seide, A man- cam 
doun fro Jerusalem in to-Jerico, and fel 
among theues, and thei robbiden hym, 
and woundiden hym, and wente awei, 
and leften the man half alyue. And its: 
bifel, that a prest cam doun the same 
weie, and passide forth, whanne he hadde 
seyn hym. Also a dekene, whanne hezz 
was bisidis the place, and sai3 him, pass- 
ide forth. But a Samaritan, goynge the 33 
weie, cam bisidis hvm; and he si3 hym, 
and hadde reuthe on hym; and cam to34 
hym, and boond togidir hise woundis, 
and helde in oyle and wynne; and leide 
hym on his beest, and leddef in to an 
ostrie, and dide the cure of hym. And3s 
another dai he brou3te forth twey pans, 
and 3af to the ostiler, and seide, Haue 
the cure of hym; and what euer thou 
schalt 3yue ouer, Y schal 3elde% to thee, 
whanne Y come ajen. Who of theses 
thre, semeth to thee, was neiz3bore to 
hym, that fel among thenes? And he37 
seide, He that dide merci in to hym. 
And Jhesus seide to hym, Go thou, and 
do thou on! lijk maner. And it wasss 
don, while thei wenten, he entride in to 
a castel; and a womman, Martha bi 
name, resseyuede hym in to hir hous. 
And to this was a sistir, Marie bi name, 39 
which also sat bisidis the feet of the 
Lord, and herde his word. But Martha 40 
bisiede abonte the ofte sernyce. And 
sche stood, and seide, Lord, takist thou 
‘no kepe, that my sistir hath left me 
aloone to serue? therfor seie thou to hir, 
that sche helpe me. And the Lord an-4) 
swerde, and seide to hir, Martha, Mar- 


Sto x. Pinto 4GMNoO 


eTwxy. 4the whiche semnopostTwxy. 'puttyn kK. ‘Sself Tr. +t he passide 4 sec. m. G sec. m. SW. 
Pan ed Z 

e Om. y. £ Om. 4GMNoPOSTWXY. 8 is A prem. G pr.m., MNOPQSTXY. h in to AGMNOPQSTWXY. 

i jument, or hors aGMNPQsTWY. inment x. k he did o. ltwo GuMPWwXY. M saith MNOPQSTWXY. 


n Om. AGMNPQSTXY. 
TWXY. to S pr.m. 
MNOPQSTXY. 


© Om. AGMNOPOSTWXY. 
r Om. x. 
¥ the while acmNoposTiIwxy. 
Y our o. 2 Sothly acanoposturwxy. 
myche ur. ¢ The whiche acmNopestwxy. 
h serne, or mynystre 1. 


ehimk. f Jedde him gsbg. 


P in to AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
8 on AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
w Om. AMNOPQSTWXY. 
8 bisyede hir K pr.m. 

a seith aNPQTXY. 


& 3eue hii. 


1 in to AGMNOPQS Sec. m,. 
tlychy Tw. liche y. Vis 4 prim. G prim. 
x the whiche 4GaINoPQsTWXY. 
b the oft 4emNoPosTWXY. the 


e€Om.nr. f hath left x. pe Omex. 


hOm.i prem. jin r. 


X. 4I—XI. 10. 


therfore! seye* to hir, that she helpe me. 
41 And the Lord answeringe seide to hir, 
Martha, Martha, thou ert bysi, and art 
troublid! anentis™ ful manye thingis ; 
43forsoth o thing is necessarie. Marie hath 
chose the beste" part, which® schal not be 
take a wey fro hir. 


CAP. XI. 

1 And it was? don, whanne he was prei- 
ynge in sum place, as he ceesside, oon of 
his disciplis seide to him, Lord, teche vs 
to? preye, as and John tau3te his disciplis. 

2 And he seide’ to hem, Whanne 3e preyen', 
seye 3e, Fadir‘, halewid be thi name. Thi 

akyngdom come to. 3yue to vs to day 

4oure eche dayes" breed. And for3yue to 
vs oure synnes, as and’ we for3yuen to 
ech owynge to vs. And leed ‘not vs" in 
sto* temptacioun. And he seith to hem, 
Who of 30u schal haue a frend, and schal 
go to him at mydny3t, and schal seie to 
éhim, Frend, leene to me thre loouys; for 
my frend cometh to me of the weye, and 
I haue not what I schal setteY bifore him. 
7And he withynne forth answeringe seye’, 
Nyle thou be noyful* to me; the dore is 
now schit, and my children beth> with 
me* in the cowche; I may no3t ryse, and 
83yue to thee. And if he schal contynue® 
knockynge, I seye to 3ou, thou3¢ he schal 
not 3yue to hym*, for he is a” frend, ne- 
theles for his vnresteftunesse! he schal rise, 
and 3yue to hym, ‘how manye* he hath 
gnedeful', And I seie to 30u, axe 3e, and 
it schal be 3ouun to 30u; seke 3e, and 3e 
schulen fynde ; knocke 3e, and it schal be 
loopenyd to 30u. Forsoth ech man™ that 
axith, takith; and he" that sekith, fynd- 
ith; and to a man knockynge, it schal be 


iand therfore x. * saye thou aGMNOPQSTUPXY. 
disturbid x. ™ ajens AGMNOPQSTIVY. a3en X. 
Pis 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
t Fader oure xy. u day y. 
sTWxY. 7 saith ogi. 
me now T. 4 dwell still aaarnoposTwxy. 
& that that he aemNopsTxyY. that he air. 
AGMNPQSTWXY. continuel axynge 0. 
n Om. s. 


v Om. Ww pr.m. 


h to thee kK. to; thi wil be don on erthe, as hit is in heuene x sec. m. k. 


\ the bed k. 


LUKE. 


q for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 


a heuy AGMNOPQSTUPWXY. 
e and if AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
bh his AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
k as manye as U sec.m. 


183 


tha, thou art bysi, and art troublid 
aboute ful many thingis; but o thing is42 
necessarie. Marie hath chosun the best43 


part, which schal not be takun awei fro 
hir. 


CAP. XI. 

And it was don, whanne he was prei-1 
ynge in a place, as he ceesside, oon of 
hise disciplis seide to hym, Lord, teche 
vs to preye, as Joon tau3te hise disciplis. 
And he seide to hem, Whanne 3e preien, 2 
seie 3e, Fadir, halewid be thi name. Thi 
kyngdom come to. 3yue ‘to vs! to dais 
oure ech daies breed. And for3yue to vs4 
oure synnes, as we for3yuen to ech man 
that owith to vs. And lede vs not in to 
temptacioun. And he seide to hem, Whos 
of 30u* schal haue a freend, and schal go 
to hym at mydny3t, and schal seie to 
hym, Freend, leene to ne thre looues; 
for my freend cometh to me fro thes 
weie, and Y haue not what Y schal sette 
bifor hym. And he with ynforth answere 7 
and seie, Nyle thou be heuy to me; the 
dore is now schit, and my children ben 
with me in bed!; Y may not rise, and 
3yue to thee. And if he schal dwelles 
stil knockynge, Y seie to 30u, thou3 he 
schal not rise, and 3yue to him, for that 
that he is his freend, netheles for his con- 
tynuel axyng he schal ryse, and 3yue to 
hym, as inany as he hath nede to. Ando 
Y seie to jou, axe 3e, and it schal be 
jouun to 30u; seke 3e, and 3e schulen 
fynde; knocke 3e, and it schal be openyd 
to 3ou. For ech that axith, takith, and. 
he that sekith, fyndith; and to a man 


Mdistonrblid amnoperw. distroublid cy. sturbid s. 
0 betere ur. © the whiche aemNopestwy. that x. 
T saith aamNopesTWxY. & schal praye o. 
“us not wy. x Om. Fv. Y putt 4GMNoP¢ 
b ben aemnoresturwxy. © with ynne giv. with 
fhim rysynge 4GMNOPQSTUFIVX. 

i improbite, or contynuel axynge 
'nede to vu sec.m. ™ Om. Garoperwxy. 


iOQm.ep. * 30u alle k prom. 


184 


iropenyd. Therfore who of 30u axith the® 
fadir breed, wher? he schal 3yue to him a 
stoon? ether? if he axith’ fysch, wher? he 
schal 3yue to’ him a serpent for thet 
izfysch ? ethir®’ if he schal axe’ an ey, whe- 
thir* he schal dresse to him a scorpioun ? 
13 Therfore if¥ 3e, whanne 3e ben yuele, 
‘kunne 3yue” ‘to 3oure children goode 
thingis 3ouun*, hou moche more 3oure fadir 
of heuene schal 3yue a good spirit to men 
luaxynge him. And Jhesu® was castinge 
out a fend, and he was doumbe. And 
whanne he hadde cast out the fend, the 
doumb man spak; and the cumpanyes® 
15 wondriden. Forsoth summe of hem 
seiden, In Belsebub, prince of deuelis’, he 
i¢castith out deuelis. And othere tempt- 
inge axiden of him a tokene fro heuene. 
17 Forsoth he*, as he sy3f the’ thou;tis of 
hem, seide to hem, Euery rewme depart- 
ide ‘a3ens it silf®, schal be desolat', and an 
ishous schal falle on* an hous. Forsoth 
aud if Sathanas is! departid a3ens him silf, 
how schal his rewme stonde? For 3e 
seyn, ‘that I™ caste ont fendis in Belse- 
ivbub. Forsoth if I in Belsebub caste out 
fendis, in whom ‘3oure sones casten” out ? 
Therfore thei schulen be 3oure domesmen. 
20 Forsoth if I caste out fendis in the fyngir, 
‘ether spirit®, of God, sothli the rewme of 
21 God is comen in to 30u. Whanne a strong 
armed? man kepith his hows, alle thingis 
22that he weldith ben in pees. Sothli if a 
strongere’ comynge aboue ouercome’ him, 
he schal take a wey alle* is armeris', in 
whiche he tristide, and schal dele abrood 
23his spuylis". He that is not with me, is 
ajens me; and he that gedrith not to gi- 


ohis x¥. 


P whether x passim. 
s Om. fT. 


t Om. a. U or AGMNOPQSTX, 


LUKE. 


4 OF AGMNPQSTIWXY. 
Vv axe hym s. 
knowen for to 3if 4 pr.m. G sec.m. MNopoTY. kunnen for to 3if 4 sec.m. han knowen to 3iue x. 


XI. 11—23. 


that knockith, it schal be openyd. Ther-11 
for who of 3ou axith his fadir breed, 
whether he schal 3yue hym a stoon? or 
if he axith fisch, whether he schal 3yue 
hym™ a serpent for the fisch? or if he1e 
axe" an eye, whether he schal areche 
hym a scorpioun ? Therfor if 3e, whanne 13 
3e ben yuel, kunnen 3yue good 3iftis to 
3oure children, hou myche more 3oure 
fadir of® heuene schal 3yue a good spirit? 
to men that axithd him. And Jhesus 1s 
was castynge out a‘ feend, and he® was 
doumbe. And whanue he hadde cast out 
the feend, the doumbe man spak; and 
the puple wondride. And sum of hemis 
seiden, In Belsabub, prince of deuelis, he 
castith out deuelis. And othir temptinge 1s 
axiden of hym a tokene fro heuene. And 17 
as he sai3 the thou3tis of hem, he seide 
to hem, Euery rewine departid ajens it 
silf, schal be desolat, and an hous schal 
falle on an hous. And if Sathanas bes 
departid ajens hym silf, hou schal his 
rewme stonde? For 3e seien, that Y 
caste out feendis in Belsabub. And ifi 
Y in Belsabub caste out fendis, in whom 
casten out' 30ure sones? Therfor thei 
schulen be 3oure domesmen. But if Y 20 
caste out fendis in the fyngir of God, 
thanne the rewme of God is comun 
among jou. Whanne a strong armed ei 
man kepith his hous, alle thingis that he 
weldith ben in pees. But if a stronger ee 
than he come" vpon hym, and ouercomeY 
hym, he schal take awei al his armere, 
in which he tristide, and schal® dele 
abrood his robries. He that is not with 2s 
me, is a3jens me; and he that gederith 


Taxe a4GMNopoTXY. shul axen hym s. 
x wher GuopeTwy. Y3euey. 2 han 


a goade 


thingis 3ouun to 3oure children pw. goode 3iftis to 30ure children Q sec.m. goode thingis to 30ure 


children xy. b he arnoporx. 
panyes pepil o. 4 he deueles s. 
mpexy. in him silf nosr. 
lbe aemnpostwxy. schal be o. 
° or sudil worchyng AGMNPSTWY. Om. ogx. 
cometh o. 8 Om. 7. 
robries N. 


€ Om. 7. 


t armes GMOPQTWXY. 


™ to him Eb prim. e¢ prom. 
S sec. mM. 9G axen CEIKMQRSXgha. 
VY ouercometh k. ~ W he schal k. 


0 axith cmquxhi. axe Aim e. 
Tofas prim. 


© cumpanyes of puple 4cmpgsTwxy. cumpanyes of puples N. com- 
f seeth o. 
i desolat, or discumfortid AemNpsTWx. desolatid o. 
™ me for to AGMNOPQTWY. me to sx. 

P Om. Tf. 


g Om. 7. h in itsilf 4 sup. ras. 

K vpon AGMNPOTIVY. 
® casten joure sones x. 
4 strenger than he acaNopesTxXY. —° oner~ 


u spuylis, or robberies acupsTivy. spoilis, or his 


© that is ins. 


P Om. s pr m. fruyt 
Sit A sec. m. t Om. 1. 


U cometh s sec. m. k. 


XI. 24—-34- 


24dere with me, scaterith abrood. Whanne’ 
an vnelene spirit ‘hath gon out of a man, 
he wandrith by drye placis, sekinge reste ; 
and he fyndynge* not, seith, I schal turne 
ajen in to myn hous, wherof I cam out. 
25 And whanneY he schal come, he fyndith it 
26clensid with beesmes, and ourned. Thanne 
he goth, and takith with him seuene othere 
spiritis werse than him silf, and thei ‘gon 
yn*, dwellen there. And the laste thingis 
of that? man ben maad worse than the 
27formere. Forsoth it was» don, whanne 
he seide® thes thingis, sum wommant of 
the cumpany reysinge® hir vois, seide‘, 
Blessid be the wombe that bar thee, and 
‘blessid be& the teetis whicheh thou hast 
2esokun. And he seide, Rathere! blessid 
ben thei, that heeren ‘Goddis word‘, and 
29kepen it. Forsothe the cumpanye! com- 
ynge™ to gidere, he bigan to" seye, This 
generacioun is a weyward generacioun ; 
it sekith a tokene, and a tokene schal not 
be 3ouun to it, no® but the tokene of 
30 Joonas, the? prophete. For whi as Joonas 
was a tokene toi men of Nynyue, so 
mannis sone schal be to this generacioun. 
31 The queene of the south schal ryse in 
dom with men of this generacioun, and 
schal condempne hem; for’ sche cam fro 
the endis* oft the erthe, to" heere the wys- 
dom of Salomon, and lo! here isY more” 
32than Salomon. Men of Nynyue schulen 
ryse in dom* with this generacioun, and 
schulen condempne it; for thei diden 
penaunce atY the prechinge of Joonas, and 
331lo! here is? more than Joonas. No man 
liztneth? a lanterne, and puttith in? hidlis™, 
other® vndir a boyschel, but on@ a candel 
si sticke, that thei that gon yn, se liz3t. The 
lanterne of thi body is thin y3e°; if thin y3e 


vy And whan tv. W schal go emNoPerxy. 


LUKE. 


x fyndith o. 


185 


not togidir with me, scaterith abrood. 
Whanne an vnelene spirit goith out of2: 
a man, he wandrith bi drie placis, and 
sekith reste; and he fyndynge* not 2 
seith*, Y schal turne ajen in to myn 
hous, fro whannes Y cam out. Anda 
whanne he cometh, he fyndith it clansid 
with besyms, and fayre arayed. Thanne2s 
he goith, and takith with hym seuene 


- othere spirits worse than hym silf, and 


thei entren, and dwellen there. And the 
laste thingis of that man ben maad 
worse than the formere. And it was27 
don, whanne he hadde?* seid these thingis, 
a womman of the cumpanye reride® hir 
vois, and seide to hym, Blessid be the 
wombe that bare thee, and blessid be the 
tetis that thou hast soken. And he seide, 28 
But 3he blessid be thei, that heren the 
word of God, and kepen it. And whanne 29 
the puple runnen togidere, he bigan to 
seie, This generacioun is a weiward ge- 
neracioun; it sekith a token, and a 
tokene schal not be jouun to it, but the 
tokene of Jonas, the profete. For as30 
Jonas was a tokene to men of Nynyue, 
so mannus sone schal be to this gene- 
racioun. The queen of the south schalsi 
rise in doom with men of this genera- 
cioun, and schal condempne hem; for 
sche cam fro the endis of the erthe, for® 
to here the wisdom of Salomon, and lo! 
here is a gretter than Salomon. Men?s2 
of Nynyue schulen rise in doom with 
this generacioun, and schulen condempne 
it; for thei diden penaunce in the prech- 
yung of Jonas, and lo®! here is a gretter 
than Jonas. No man tendith a lanterne, 3s 
and puttith’ in hidils, nether vndur a 
buyschel, but on a candilstike, that thei 


yOm.o. % Om. GaNope pr.m. XY. entride 


Q@sec.m. 4thiso. bis.4 pr.m.MNoposTxy. ¢ spake AGMNopgsTUVWXY. 4Om.o. © rerynge yp 
AGMNPQSTY. Yraysenge vp o. rerende x. {said tohim acunopswxy. ffOm. x. 8 Om.aQs. 4 that 
AGMNoPosTWXY. ‘or, Bud 3ec uv sec.m. marg. _* the word of God ac pr.m. MNoposTWwxyY.  ! com- 
panyes of pepil 4G pr.m. MNoPesTXY. cumpanyes of peples G sec. m. Ww. cumpenyes Ur. ™ renynge 
AGMNOPQSTWX. 0 for to AGMNOPQTWY. o Om. o. P Om. AGNTPXY. Gof7. — * for whi o. 
Swisdam o. ¢t Om. opeuy. 4 forto aemNopeTy. ‘Om. aGMNOPQSTWXY. © more, or grcttere 
Gsec.m. *thedomeo. Yino. 20m. 4GMNopesrwxy. 4 teendith samNopestwxy. ? it in o. 


bb hiddil o. © nether 4GMNoPQSTWXY. 


x fyndith h pr.m.k. Y noon g. 
¢Om.be. 4 And men b sec.m. 


VOL. IV. Bb 


d vpon AGMNOPQST prem. WY. 


z and seith h pr.m. k pr.m. 
€ Om. 1K pr.m. g. 


€ igen N. 


8 Om. be pr.m. > reiside b. areride hi, 


f puttith it k. 


186 LUKE. 


schal be symple, al thi body schal be 1i3t- 
fulf; forsoth if it schal be weyward, also 
3sthi body schal be derkful. Therfore se 
thou, lest the li3t which® is in thee, be" 
siderknessis. Therfore if al thi body schali 
be li3tful*, not hauynge ony part! of derk- 
nessis, it schal be al li3tful™, and as a® 
lanterne: of briztnesse° it schal 3yue 1li3t 
37to thee. And whanne he spak, sum Pha- 


risee praiede, that he schulde ete at hym.- 


3s And? he gon yn, ‘saat to the mete?. Sothli 
the Pharisee ‘bigan to seie", gessynge with 
ynne him silf*’, whi he was not waischun 
sy byfore the mete. And the Lord seith‘ to 
him, Now 3e Farisees clensen ‘that thing 
that" is with outenforth’ of the kuppe and 
plater; but that” thing ‘of 3ou* that is 
‘with ynneY, is ful of raueyn and wickid- 
sonesse. Foolis, wher? he that made ‘that 
thing that* is with oute forth, made not 
av‘also that thing that? is ‘with ynne®? Ne- 
theles ‘that thing that! is ouer, ‘ether su- 
perflu®, 3yue 3e almes, and lo! alle thingis 
42ben clene to 3ou. Bnt woo to 3ou, Pha- 
risees, that tythen mynte, and ruwe‘, and 
al wort, ‘ether herbe®, and passen dom 
and the charite of God. Forsoth it bi- 
hofte' to! do thes thingis, and not* for! 
43to™ leeue hem". Woo to 30u, Pharisees, 
that louen the firste chaieris in synagogis, 
4g4and salutaciouns in cheping®. Woo to 
3ou, that ben as sepulcris, whiche? apperyn 
not, and men walkynge aboue witen‘ not. 
4s Forsoth oon’ of the wyse men of lawe‘ 
answeringe, seidet to him, Maistir, thou 
seyinge thes thingis, ‘doist dispit also to 
ssvs". “He seide’, And* woo to 30u, wyse 


f listi aGMNOPQSTUVIWXY. 


n Om. iv. 
A sup. ras. G sec. m. W. restide MNPQSTXY. 


Vv with outen mv. 
% whether opqTiwxy. 
© within forthe 4GMNOPQSTXY. 
f rute v. 
1 Om. AGMNOPOSTWXY. 
4 wisten Ur. 


pPosTwxy. that at o. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
NOPQSTWXY,. 
X or sup. MY. 
k tho not x. 


QSTWXY. rsumme G see. 7m. O. 


& that 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
AGNSTW. li3t, or shijnyng MPy. schinynge o. 13t ex. 
o briztnesse, or schynynge AGMNPSTWY. 

r Om. 4 pr.m. G prom, MNPQTW see. mM. XY. 
4 prom. G prom, MNPQ pr.m, TXY. silf bigan to saye @ sec. m. W sec. m. 
w Om. N. 
a that that 4emNposTrivxy. that at o. 
4 that that seanposTWxy. that at o. 
g Om. ox. or herbe mpwy. 
m Om, AGNSTWX, 
8 the lawe rx. 


XI. 35—46. 


that goen in, se liz3t. The lanterne of 3s 
thi bodi is thin ize; if% thin i3e be sym- 
ple, al thi bodi schal be 1i3ti®; but if it 
be weyward, al thi bodi schal be derk- 
ful. Therfor se thou, lest the li3t thatss 
is in thee, be derknessis'. Therfor ifs¢ 
al thi bodi be* bri3t, and haue no part 
of derknessis, it schal be al bri3t, and as 
a lanterne of briztnesse it schal 3yue li3t 
to thee. And whanne he spak, a Fari-37 
see preiede him, that he schulde ete with 
hym. And he entride, and sat to the! 
meete. And the Farisee bigan to seie, 3¢ 
gessynge with ynne hym silf, whi he 
was not waschen bifor™ mete. And the 39 
Lord seide to hym, Now 3e Farisees 
clensen that that is with outenforth of 
the cuppe and the" plater; but that 
thing that is with ynne of 3o0u, is ful of 
raueyn and wickidnesse. Foolis, whe-40 
ther he that made that that is with- 
outenforth, made not also that that is 
with ynne? Netheles that that is ouer4! 
plus, 3yue 3e almes, and lo! alle thingis 
ben cleene to 3ou. But wo to jou, Fa-42 
risees, that tithen mynte, and° rue, and 
ech eerbe, and leeuen doom and the cha- 
rite of God. For? it bihofte to do these 
thingis, and not leeue’ tho’. Wo to 3ou, 43 


Farisees, that louen the firste chaieris in 


synagogis, and salutaciouns in chepyng. 
Wo to 30u, that ben as sepulcris, that 44 
ben not seyn, and men walkynge aboue 
witen® not. But oon of the wise men 45 
of thet lawe answeride, and seide to 
hym, Maystir, thou seiynge these thingis, 
also to vs doist dispit. And he seide, 46 


h schalbeo. iOm.y. & liz3ti, or schynynge 

] party o. m ]iz3ti aauNPesTWXY. lizt 0. 

P Forsothe 4GMNPQSTIWXY. q sat at the mete 
8 silf seide 
u that that 4Garv 

y within forth of 30u 
b and that that say 
¢ Om. paw 
i for to AGM NPQTIVY. 
© chepyngis 4No. P that acwNop 
t saith acaNopesTWwx. also to vs 


t seide w. 
x Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


h bihouede mopey. 
n Om. x. 


[thou Garpy] dost despite, or wronge acmNestTxy. also thou dost despit to vs o. also to vs thou dost 


dyspite @. also thou dost dispyt, or wrony iv. 


& and if x. 
fore s. 
A prem. 


h lizt i sec. m. k. 
1 of the sehik pr. m. 
t Om. cix. 


° Om. k. 


v And he saith scmoresrwx. He seith n. 


ial derknessis s pr. m. derknesse hi. 
P Forsothe 1. 


w Om. x. 


k shal be paw. 1} Om. a. Ma 
ato leene ikRehika. 'thilke 1. § and witen 


XI. 47-——XII. 3. 


men of lawe*, for 3e chargen men with 
birthins whicheY thei moun not bere, and 
3e 30n7 silf with 30ure* o fynger touchen 
ajnot the heuynessis®. Woo to 30u, that 
bilden birielis® of prophetis ; forsoth j3oure 
4sfadris slowen hem. Treuly 3e witnessen, 
that 3e consenten to the werkis of joure 
fadris; for sothli thei slowen hem, but 3e 
49bilden her sepulcris. Therfore and* the 
wysdom of God seide, I schal sende to 
hem prophetis, and apostlis, and of hem 
so0thei schulen slee and pursue, that the 
blood of alle prophetis®, that was’ sched 
out fro the makyng" of the world, be 
sl sou3t! of this generacioun; fro the blood 
of Abel ‘til tok the blood of Zacharie, 
which! perischide bytwix™ the auter and 
the hous. So I seie to jou, it schal be 
s2sou3t of this generacioun. Woo to 3o0u, 
wyse men of lawe, for 3e han take awey 
the keye of kunnynge; 3e 30u" silf en- 
triden not®, and 3e han forboden hem that 
ssentriden. Sothli whanne he spak thes 
thingis to hem, Pharisees and wyse men 
of lawe bigunnen greuously? to aj3en- 
stonden‘1, and oppresse’ his mouth ‘of 
simany thingis, aspiynge him‘, and sekinge 
tot take sum thing of his mouth, that thei 
schulden accuse him. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Sotheli manye cumpanyes" stondinge 
aboute, so that thei troden’ ech othir, he 
bigan to” seie to his disciplis, Be 3e war 
of * the sourdow3 of Pharisees, which’ is 

zypocrisye. Forsoth no thing is_ hilid, 
which? sclial not be schewid; nether hid, 

3that schal not be wist. Forwhi tho 
thingis that 3e han seyd in derknessis, 
schulen be seid in 1i3t?; and ‘this that” 


x the law o. 
© birielis, or toumbis AGMNPSTWY. toumbis o. 
npestxy. & held mnporxy.  ) bygynnynge o. 
l that aeaMNOPQSTUVWXY. 
not in GMNOPeTXY.  P grenoselyche o. 
of many thingis wpxy. 
AGMNOPOSTXY. eumpanyes of peple w. 
or touchyden tT. def. or trodeden w. 
fleeth fro s. and flee 3ee fro x. 
AGMNPOQSTWXY. that at o. 


Uszoure kK. VY Om. g. 
wise Esg. 4 the lawe b pr. m. hi. 


LUKE. 


y the whiehe acmNnopestw. that x. 

4 Om. x. 

i so3t out s. 
n jour GMNOPQY. 

q ajenstond him Gaopey. 

t for to aGMNoPETW sec.m.Y. that thei schulden w pr.m. 

¥v defouliden, or troden acmnposy. defouleden ox. defoulyden, 


m bytwen os. bitwe x. 


w for to AMNOPQSTIVY. 
y that AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


’ Om. cEIKPQRS see. m. Uxegka. 


band aspiynge k. © trediden 1. treeden q. traden rR. 


187 


Also wo to 30u, wise men of lawe, for 
3e chargen men with birthuns which 
thei moun not bere, and 3e 30u" silf with 
joure ov fyngur touchen not the heuy- 
nessis. Wo to 30u, that bilden toumbis 47 
of profetis ; and 3oure fadris slowen hem. 
Treuli 3e witnessen, that 3e consenten to 43 
the werkis of 3oure fadris ; for thei slowen 
hem, but 3e bilden her sepulecris. Ther-.49 
for the wisdom of God seide, Y schal 
sende to hem profetis and apostlis, and 
of hem thei schulen sle and pursue, that 50 
the blood of alle prophetis, that was 
sched fro the making of the world, be 
sou3t of this generacioun; fro the blood 51 
of the” iust Abel to the blood of Za- 
charie, that was slayn bitwixe the auter 
and the hous. So Y seie to 30u, it schal 
be soujst of this generacioun. Wo tosz 
30u, wise men of the* lawe, for 3e han 
takun awei the keye of kunnyng ; and 3e 
3owy silf entriden not, and 3e han for- 
beden hem that entriden. And whanne ss 
he seide these thingis to hem, the Fari- 
sees and wise? men of lawe* bigunnen 
greuousli to a3enstonde, and stoppe his 
mouth of many thingis, aspiynge® hym, ss 
and sekynge to take sum thing of his 
mouth, to accuse hym. 


CAP. XII. 


And whanne myche puple stood aboute, 1 
so that thei treden® ech on othir, he bi- 
gan to seie to hise disciplis, Be 3e war 
of the sourdou3 of the’ Farisees, that is 
ypocrisie. For no thing is hilid, that schal 2 
not be schewid; nether hid, that schal 
not be wist. For whi tho thingis that je 
han seid in derknessis, schulen be seid in 
li3t; and that that 3e han spokun in 


Z 30ur GMNOPQY. aQm.@. © heuynesse o. 
€ the prophetis nw. fis a pr.m. G pr.m. M 
k ynto cmpexy. til N. to o. in to Ww. 
© entreden not yn Asi, entren 
¥ to oppresse 4. 8 aspiynge him 
u companyes of peplis 


* fle 3e fro au. and flee fro GarnopoTrwy. 


zthat aGMNopesTWXY, ®sizty. » that that 


xOm.rk. Y30ure EP passim. 2 the 


d Om, 1Ksxg. 


Bb2 


188 


3e han spoken® in eere’ in the® cowchis, 
aschal be prechid in rooues. Forsothe I 
seie to 30u, my frendis, ‘be 3ef not afeerd 
of hem that slen the body, and aftir thes 
thingis han no more what thei schulen 
sdon. Sothli I schal schewe to 3ou, whom 
3e schulen drede; drede 3e him, which" 
aftir that! he hath slayn, hath power tok 
sende in to helle. So I seie to 30u, ‘drede 
63e) hym. Wher" fiue sparrowis ben not 
seeld for tweyne" halpens®; and oon of 
zhem is not in for3eting bifore God? But 
and alle the heeris of 3oure heed? ben 
noumbrid. Therfore nyle 3e drede; 3e 
ben of more priys than many sparowis. 
8 Treuli I seie to 30u, ‘ech man which euer4 
schal knowleche me byfore men, and 
mannis sone schal knowleche him bifore 
ythe aungelis of God. Forsoth he that 
schal denye me bifor men, schal be de- 
lonyed bifore the aungelis of God". And 
ech inans that seith a word a3ens the sone 
of man, it schal be for3jouun to him; 
sothlit it schal not be for3ouun to him, 
‘that blasfemeth" a3ens’ the Hooly Gost*. 
11 Forsoth whanne thei schulen leede 30u in 
to synagogis, and toY magestatis?, and to* 
potestatis®, nyle 3e be bisy, how ether® 
what 3e schulen answere’, ether® what 3e 
lzschulen seye. Forsoth the Hooly Gost 
schal teche 30u in that our, what it bi- 
i3houeth 30u tof seye. ForsothS sum man 
of the cumpany seith to him, Maistir, seie 
to my brother, that he departe with me 
14the eritage. And he seyde to him, A! 
man, who ordeynede me domesmani, ether‘ 
isdeparter, on! 300? And he seyde! to 
hem™, Se 3e, and ‘be 3e" war ‘of al 
auarice®; for ‘the lyf of a? man is not in 


¢seid s. 9% the cere ewerxy. 
h that 4GaNOPQsTIWXY. i Om. sopery. 
m Whether x. " two mMopaxy. 
r the Lord erxy. 8 Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
u schal blaspheme 4euNopostury. 
tratis Iv. a Om. AGMNPQSTUVIWXY. 


pwxy. Om.est. 4Om.s.  & or 4GMNOPOSTIWXY. 
WxY. b Om. AGMNOPOSTIVXY. iia domesman vu. 
ouero. lseyith tr. = =™ him x, 

of alle coueitise s.  P eny o. 


f Om. Kx sec. m. k. 
m the ea. 


e Om. Isa. 
1Om. K prem. 


LUKE. 


€ Om. GK pr. v. MOPQSTXY. 
k for to AGMNOPOTIVY. 
© ferthingis u pr. m. 
t he that shal blasfemen in to the Holi Gost, sothli xy. 
vin to G pr.m. MNPST. in Q. 
b potestatis, or powers AMNPSTIVY. powers G. 


n be aGMNoPprurwy. beth sx. 


& bisie jou hi. 


XII. 4—I5. 


eere in the® couchis, schal be prechid in 
roofes. And Y seie to 30u, my freendis, 4 
be 3e not aferd of hem that sleen the 
bodie, and aftir these thingis han no 
more what thei schulen do. But Y schals 
schewe to 3ou, whom 3e schulen drede; 
drede 3e hym, that aftir he hath slayn, 
hef hath power to sende in to helle. And 
so Y seie to 30u, drede 3e hym. Whe-s 
ther fyue sparowis ben not seld for twei 
halpens ; and oon of hem is not in for3et- 
yng bifor God? But also alle the heeris7 
of 3oure heed ben noumbrid. Therfor 
nyle 3e drede; 3¢ ben of more prijs than 
many sparowis. Treuli Y seie to 30u,8 
ech man that knoulechith me bifor men, 
mannus sone schal knouleche hym bifor 
the aungels of God. But he that denyeth 9 
me bifor men, schal be denyed bifor the 
aungels of God. And ech that seith alo 
word a3eus mannus sone, it schal be for- 
jouun to hym; but it schal not be for- 
3ouun to hym, that blasfemeth ajens the 
Hooli Goost. And whanne thei leden!) 
30u in to synagogis, and to magistratis, 
aud potestatis, nyle 3e ‘be bisie’, hou or 
what 3e schulen answere, or what 3e 
schulen seie. For the Hooli Goost schal !2 


‘teche 3ou in that our, what it bihoueth 


3ou to seie. And oon of the puple seide 13 
to hym, Maystir, seie to my brothir, that 
he departe with me the eritage. And he 14 
seyde to hym, Man, who ordeynede me 
a domesman, or a? departere, on 30u ? 
And he seide to hem, Se 3e, and be 3el15 
war of al coueytice; for the lijf of a* man 
is not in the! abundaunce of tho™ thingis, 
whiche he weldith. And he tolde to16 
hem a liknesse, and seide, The feeld of 


f beth Garnpexy. be tr.  & bodyes T. 
1 dredith x. dredith jee y. 
P heued o pass. ww. who euer GmNoPOTXY. 
y Om. arp. 

© or AGMNO 
ffor to acunopriv.  & Sothely agarnoresruv 
K or AGMNOPQSTFXY. ] vpon AGMNPQTIY. 

© fro all couaytyse 4GMNOPQTIWXY. 


‘x Om. xy. Z mages- 


hOm. erx. iOm. rrbgk prem.  * Om. ahig, 


XII. 16—28. 


the haboundanse‘ of tho thingis whiche™ 
ighe weldith. Sothli he seide to hem a 
liknesse, seiynge, The feeld of sum riche 
17man brou3te forth pleutenous fruytis. And 
he thou3te with ynne him silf, seyinge, 
What schal I do, fort™ I haue not whidir 
is schal gedere my fruytis? And he seith, 
‘I schal do this things; I schal distryet 
my bernis, and I” schal make grettere’, 
and thidir I schal gedere alle thingis that 
19 growen™ to me, and alle* my goodis. And 
I schal seye to my soule, Soule’, thou hast 
many goodis kept’ in to ful manye 3eeris ; 
reste thou, ete, drynke, and ‘ete thou 
20 plenteuously?. Sothli God seide to him, 
Fool, in this ny3t thei schulen” axe of 
thee thi soule. Forsothe whos schulen 
tho® thingis be, whiche’ thou hast maad 
2iredy? So is he that tresourith to® him 
22silf, and is not ryehe inf God. And he 
seide to his disciplis, Therfore I seie to 
jou, nyle 3e be bisy to 30ure lyf’, what 
3e schulen ete, nethir to 3oure body, with 
23what 3e schulen be clothidi., The* lyf! 
is more than mete™, and the body more 
24than clothing. Biholde 3e crowis, for 
thei sowen not, nether" repen, to whiche® 
is no celer, nether? beerne, and God fedith 
hem. How‘ myche more ‘3e ben" of more 
2sprys than thei’. Forsothe who of 3ou 
bythenkynget may adde" o cubite to his 
26stature? Therfore’ if 3e mown not” ‘this 
that® is theY leeste?, what ben 3e bisy of 
270there thingis? Biholde 3e lilies* of the 
feeld, how thei wexen; thei trauelen not, 
neither spynnen. Sothly I seye to 3ou, 
for nether Salomon in al his glorie was 
28clothid® as oon of these. Forsothe if God 


‘@ not in the [Om. 9] habundaunce of eny man is his lijf 4 pr. m.@ pr.m. MNOPeSTXY. 
8 This th. I sch. do wxy. 
W ben born 4 pr. m. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
% put, or kept a. put vp or kept GMNPSTiy. pit vp 09. put vp x. 

4 that AGMNOPOSTWXY. 
& soule, or lijf aemnposTivy. soul ox. 
m the meete sx. 
8 ben thai o. 


QSTWXY. 
Vv more AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


tr that 4 pr.m. GMNOPQTXY. 


ete plenteuously ur. schal o. ef alibi. ¢ the o. 
GMNOPQTXY. to A Sec. m. SUVW. 
k Thi y. 1! soule, or ijf amnptivy. soul ogsx. 
K sup.ras. Andhow Tr, — * ben 3e mpxy. 
wy. pitt o. potento x. Om. k. 


AGMNoPQSTWXY. left y. 4 the lilies ps. 


© and drynke qb pr. m.k. 


and alle k pr. m. 
t Om. af. 


‘the mete s. dhe clothing s. 
x Om. k prom. 


W not do MPu. 
b clad sx. 


P take awey k. 
X the crowis kaf. 


LUKE. 189 


a riehe man brou3te forth plenteuouse 
fruytis. And he thou3te with ynne hym 27 
silf, and seide, What schal Y do, for Y 
haue not whidur Y schal gadere my 
fruytis? And he seith, This thing Y 1s 
schal do; Y schal throwe doun my 
bernes, and Y schal make gretter, and 
thidir Y schal gadir alle thingis that 
growen to me, and" my goodis. And Y19 
schal seie to my soule, Soule, thou hast 
many goodis kept in to ful many 3ecris; 
rest thou, ete, drynke®, and make feeste. 
And Gad seide to hym, Fool, in this ny3t 20 
thei schulen take? thi lijf fro thee. And 
whos schulen tho thingis be, that thon 
hast arayed? So is he that tresourith 2! 
to hym silf, and ist not riche in God. 
And he seide to hise disciplis, Therfor 22 
Y seie to 30u, nyle 3e be’ bisy to 3oure 
lijf, what 3e schulen ete, nether to 3oure 
bodi, with what 3e schulen be clothid. 
The lijf is more than mete’, and the23 
body more than clothing’. Biholde 3e'24 
crowis", for’ thei sowen not, netliir 
repen, to whiche is nov’ celer, ne’ berne, 
and God fedith hem. Hou myche more 
3e ben of more prijs than thei. And 25 
who of 30u bithenkynge may put to* o 
cubit to his stature? Therfor if 3e moun 26 
not that that is leest, what ben 3e bisie 
of othere thingis? Biholde 3e the lilies 27 
of the feeld, hou thei wexen; thei 
trauelen not, nethir spynnen. And Y 
seie to 30u, that nethir Salomon in al 
his glorie was clothid as oon of these. 
And if God clothith thus the hey, that2e 
to dai is in the feeld, and to morewe is 
cast in to an ouen; hou myche more 3o0u 


T that AGMNOP 
t throwe doun u sec.m. % Om. a. 
x Om. acmMNopestwxy. YOm.o. 
a plenteuosly ete AGMNOPQSTIFXY. 
einto x. finto 4 pr.m. 
hand what w. ‘clad sx. 
© whom exy. P and 
U put to AGMNPOST 

y Om. 


none wx. 
t thenkende x. 
x that that acarneesTWxy. that at o. 


qq Om. Q pr.m. 


Vitis s pr.m. 
’ nether c. 


vhow x. YY nether 5. 


190 


clothith thus the hey, which® to day is in 
the feeld, and to morwe is sent? in to a 
furneys; how moche® more 3ou of litel 
20feith ? And nyle 3e seke, what 3e schulen 
ete, ethirf what 3e schulen drynke; and 
sonyle 3e be reysid® ‘in to" an‘ hi3. Forsoth 
folkis of the world seken alle thes thingis ; 
sothli 3oure fadir woot, for 3e neden thes* 
%1thingis. Nethelees seke 3e first the kyng- 
dom of God, and alle thes thingis schulen 
szhe cast to jou. Nyle 3e, litil floc, drede, 
for it pleside to 30ure fadir to! 3yue to 30u 
38a kyngdom. Sille 3e ‘tho thingis that 3e 
welden™, and 3yue 3e almes. Make 3e to 
3ou sachels that wexen uot olde, tresour 
‘not failinge" in heuenes, whidur a theef 
ney3eth not, neyther mow3te distryeth. 
34 Forsothe where ‘thi tresour is’, there also? 
35 thin herte schal be. Be 3oure leendes gird 
by fore, and lanternes brennynge in joure 
36hondis; and be™ 3e lyk to men abydinge 
her lord, whanne he schal turne ajen fro 
weddingis, that whanne he schal come, 
and knocke, anoon thei opene to him. 
37 Blessid den* tho seruauntis, whiche ¢ 
whanne the Lord sclial come, he schal 
fynde wakynge. ‘Treuli I seie to 3o0u, 
that he schal bifore girde him, and ‘he 
schal* inake hem’ to’ sitte at the mete, 
and he passinge schal mynystre to hem. 
ss And if he schal come in the secunde 
wakyng, and yf le schal come in the 
thridde wakynge, and schal fynde so, tho 
soseruauntis ben blessid. Forsoth wite 3e 
this thing, for if an hosebonde man wiste, 
in what our the theef wolde* come, sothli 
he schulde wake, and ‘not suffreY his hous 
40to* be mynyd. And be 3e redy, for in 
what our 3e gessen not, mannis sone sclial 
sicome. Forsothe Petre seith® to him, 
Lord, seist thou this parable to vs, ether 


4 cast U sec. m. 


© that 4GMNOPQSTUVWXY. 
i Om. 6 sec.m.o.  * all thees o. 


h Om. vu sec. m. 


faylith not uv sec.m. © is thi tr. xy. 
8 Om. ewNnoerxy. t whom GmNoporxy. 
stw. Om. ¥.  * schuld semanopesturwxy. 
b or MOPQTIWXY. 


Y oure b. yy han nede to r sec. 1m. 
heghik sec.m. a8. 
¢ Om. k prem. 


dwoldek. ¢ Om. Eb, 


LUKE. 


e Om. o. 
1 for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
in possessioun aemNPQosTIWXY. the thengis that 3e thoo thengis that 3e han in possession o. 


‘2 Om. K prem. R prem. 
b tresoureth p pr.m. tresour 3e to 30u tresour X sec, 17. k prem 


XW. 29-—41. 


of litil feith. And nyle 3e seke, what 3e 29 
schulen ete, or what 3e schulen drynke; 
and nyle 3e be reisid an hi3. For folkis 30 
of the world seken alle these thingis ; 
‘and 3o0ur’ fadir woot, that 3e nedenyY alle 
these thingis’. Netheles seke 3e first 31 
the kyngdom of God, and alle these 
thingis schulen be caste to 30u. Nile 3e,32 
litil flok, drede, for it pleside to joure 
fadir to 3yue 30u”” a kyngdom. Selle 3e33 
tho thingis that 3e hau in possessioun, 
and 3yue 3e almes. And make® to 3ou 
sachels that wexen not oolde, tresoure” 
that failith not in heuenes>», whidir a 
theef neizith not, nether mou3t destruy- 
eth. For where is thi tresoure, there34 
thin herte schal be. Be joure leendis 3% 
gird aboue, and lanternes brennynge in 
3oure hoondis; and Je 3e° lijk to men 36 
that abiden her lord, whanne he schal 
turne ajen fro the weddyngis, that 
whanne he schal come, and knocke, 
anoon thei openen to hym. Blessid be37 
tho seruauntis, that whanne the lord 
schal come, he schal fynde wakynge. 
Treuli Y seie to 30u, that he schal girde 
hym silf, and make hem sitte to mete, 
and he schal go, and serue hem. And3s 
if he come in the secounde wakynge, 
and if he come in the thridde wak- 
ynge, and fynde so, tho seruauntis ben 
blessid. And wite 3e this thing, for39 
if an hosebonde man wiste, in what our 
the theef wolde come, sotheli he schulde@ 
wake, and not suffre his hous to be 
myned. And be 3e redi, for in what4o0 
our 3e gessen not, mannus sone schal 
come. And Petre seide to hym, Lord, 41 
seist thou this parable to vs, or to alle? 
And the Lord seide, Who, gessist thou, 42 
is a trewe dispendere, and a® prudent, 


for operivxy. & taken vp MNOPQTXY. 


m tho thingis that 3e han 
n that 


Pand 4GMNoPesTWXY. gird vp vu. * Om. aGMNoPesTIVY. 
u Om. AGMNOPOSTIVXY. vhim wp. W for to AGafNoPQ 
Ysuffre not x. 2fortoo. ® said 4amNPQSTUVWXY. 


zzZto30u k.  & make 3e EIKOPRS 


bb henene rR. 


XII. 42—53- 


42to alle? Sothli the Lord seide, Who, gess- 
ist thou, is a° feithful? dispender, and pru- 
dent, whom the lord ordeynede on® his 
meyne, that he 3yue to hem in tyme af 
43mesure of whete? Blessid zs that ser- 
uaunt, whom whanne the lord schal come, 
4the schal fynde ‘doynge so". Veerili I seie 
to 30u, for oni alle thingis which* he 
45 weldith, he schal ordeyne him. That if 
thilke! seruaunt schal seye in his herte, 
My lord makith ‘tariynge to™ come; and 
bigynne® to® smyte children, and hand- 
maydens, and ete, and drynke, and be 
46fillidP over mesure, the lord of that ser- 
uaunt schal come, in the? day that he 
hopith not, and our’ that he wot not; 
and schal* departe him, and schalt putte 
47his part with vnfeithful men. Forsothe 
thilke® seruaunt that knew the wille of his 
lord, and made ‘not him’ redy, and dide 
not vp” his wille, schal be betun with 
48many woundisx. Sothli he that knew 
not, and dide worthi thingis ofY woundis, 
schal be beten with fewe. Forsoth to 
ech man to whom moche is 3ouun, moche 
schal be axid? of hym; and thei schulen 
axe more of him, to whom thei bitoken? 
49moche. I cam to sende fier in to erthe’, 
and what wole4 I, no® but thatf it be 
50kyndelid 2? Sothli I haue to® be baptisid 
with baptym, and hou ‘am I constreyn- 
stedi, tilk it be perfytli don? ‘Gessen 3e!, 
for I cam to™ 3yue pees in to erthe™? 
52 Nay, I seye to 30u, but® departynge. For- 
soth ‘fro this tyme? ther schulen be fyue 
departid in oon hous; thre ‘schulen be 
departid4 a3ens™ tweyne’, and tweyne*® 
53‘schulen be departidt aj3ens" thre’; the 
fadir ajens” the sone, and the sone ajens* 


4 trewe AGNOSTIVXY. 


¢ Om. Ww prem. 
h so doynge wpwxy. 


G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
AGMNOPQTWY. 

uthat sx. V him not xy. 
yOm. xX. 2 sou3t wNOPQTXY. 
erxy. 4wilo. ¢Om. wope. fOm. ar. 

k til that acuNPosTWXY. 1 3ee gessen WXY. 


P fulfillyd rx. q that o. 


but 7. P after this o. 4 Om. G sec. m.o. 
in x. 8twompestwxy. +t Om. sopwxy. 
WXY. Win to 4 pr. ml. MNOPQSTXY. 


fa mesure c. mesurisk.  & fillid plures. 
1 Om. Eras sec.m.xg. ™Om.k. © sende b. 


© vpon AGMNOPOQTIVY. 

i ypon AGMNOPQSTIVY, 
m dwellynge for to acuNnopoTwy. dwellinge to sx. 
rin hour o. 
Ww aftir AGMNOPOSTWXY. 

8 lenten MNOPQTXY. 
& for to AGMNOPIVY. 

m forto AGMNOPWY. 
tT in two, or ajens a pr.m. MPY. in to, or ajens NT. in to Q. 

nin to MNPQSTIVXY. 
xX jn to A pr. ml. MNOPQSTXY. 


hin the rm pr. m. xka. 


LUKE. 191 


whom the lord hath ordeyned on his 
meyne, to 3yue hem in tyme mesure’ of 
whete? Blessid zs that seruaunt, thats: 
the lord whanne he cometh, schal fynde 
so doynge. Verili Y seie to 30u, that+s 
on alle thingis that he weldith, he schal 
ordeyne hym. That if that seruaunt45 
seie in his herte, My lord tarieth to 
come; and bigynne to smyte children, and 
handmaydenes, and ete, and drynke, and 
be fulfillid? ouer mesure, the lord of that 46 
seruaunt schal come, in the dai that he 
hopith not, and the" our that he woot 
not; and schal departe hyim, and pntte 
his part with vnfeithful men. But47 
thilke seruaunt that knew the wille of 
his lord, and made not hym redi, and 
dide not aftir his wille, schal be betun 
with many betyngis. But he that knew 48 
not, and dide worthi thingis of strokis', 
schal be betun with fewe. For to eche 
man to whom myche is 3ouun, myche 
schal be axid of hym; and thei schulen 
axe more of hym, to whom thei bitoken 
myche. Y cam to sende fier ‘in tok the! 4 
erthe, and what wole Y, but that it be 
kyndlid? And Y haue to™ be baptisid 50 
with a baptysm, and hou am Y cou- 
streyned, til that it be perfitli don ? 
Wene 3e, that Y cam to 3yue" pees in to5! 
erthe? Nay, Y say to 3ou, but depart- 
yng. For fro this tyme ther schulen be 52 
fyue departid in oon hous; thre schulen 
be departid a3ens tweyne, and tweyne 
schulen be departid ajens thre; the fadir 5s 
a3ens the sone, and the sone ajens the 
fadir; the modir ajens the dou3tir, and 
the dou3tir ajens the modir; the hose- 
bondis modir a3ens the sones wijf, and 


£Om. operwxy. & Om. 4 prim. 


k that acmNopestiwxy. | that 
« bygynnyng T. © for to 
$s he schal o. t Om. AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
x plagis, or woundis AGMNPTW pr.m. plagis exY. 
b for to acmNopeTivy. © the erthe 4GMNoP 
hIamivxy. !yconstreynyd y. 
n the erth aGwopeTivy. no 


Vv thre schulen be departid arNops 


ibeetingis K sec.m. * in i pr.m. 


192 LUKE. 


his fadir; the modir ajens the dou3tir, 
and the dou3tir ajens the modir; the 
hosebondis modir a3ens the sones wyf, 
and the sones wyf a3ens hirY hosebondis 
s4modir. ‘Forsoth he? ‘seid and to the cum- 
panyes*, Whanne 3e schulen se a clonde 
rysinge fro the sunne goynge doun, anon 
je seyn, Reyn cometh; and so it is don. 
55 And whanne ‘3e seen *the south blowynge, 
3e seyen, For heete schal be; and so° it is 
s6don*, Ypocritis, 3e han knowe to® proue 
the face of heuene and off erthe, but® hou 
57 prouen 3e not this tyme? ‘Forsothe whi! 
andi of 3ou* silf deme 3e not ‘this thing 
ssthat! is iust? Forsothe™ whanne thou 
goist with thin aduersarie to the prince 
in the weye, 3yue thou bisynesse to” be 
delyuered fro him; lest peranenture he 
drawe thee to the domesman, and the 
domesman bitake® thee to the wrongful 
axere, and the wrongful axere sende thee 
s9in to prisoun. I seie to thee, Thou schalt 
not go thennis, til thon 3elde also the last 
ferthing. 
CAP. XIII. 
1 Forsothe sum men neizedenP ind that 
tyme, tellinge to him of Galilees, whos 
blood Pilat myngede with the" sacrificis 
2of hem. And he answeringe seide to hem, 
Wenen 3e, that thes men ‘of Galilee’™ weren 
synuneris byfore alle Galileis, for thei suf- 
3friden suche thingis? Nay, I seye to 30u; 
but alle 3e schulen perische in’ lyk' ma- 
nere, no" but’ 3e schulen haue penaunce. 
4And as tho’ ten and ei3te, ‘on which* the 
tour ofY Siloa felde? doun?, and slou3 hem, 
gessen 3e, for and? thei weren dettours 
more than alle men® dwellinge in Jeru- 
ssalem? Nay, I sei to 30u; but also 3e 
alle schulen perische, if 3e schulen not do 


y the sosTwx. 
U sec. m. b Om. AGMNOPOSTIVXY. 


AGMNOPOETWXY. ff Om. aGmMNoPEsSTUVWXY. 


2 Om. xu pr.m.v. And he gu sec.m. 
¢ Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
& sothely acMNoPOSTWXY. 


XI. §4—XIII. 5. 


and the sones wijf a3ens hir hosebondis 
modir. And he seide also to the puple, 54 
Whanne 3e seen a clonde risynge fro the 
sunne goynge doun, anoon 3e seien, Reyn 
cometh; and soit is don. And whannes5s 
je seen the south blowynge, 3e seien, 
That heete schal be; and it is don. Ypo-se 
critis, 3e kunnen preue the face of heuene 
and of erthe, but hou preuen 3e not this 
tyme. But what and of 30u° silf 3e57 
demen not that that is iust? Butss 
whanne thou goist with thin aduersarie 
in theP weie to the prince, do’ bisynesse 
to be delyuerid fro hym; lest perauen- 
ture he take thee to the domesman, and 
the domesman bitake thee to the’ mais- 
tirful axer, and the maistirful axer sende 
thee in to prisoun. Y® seie to thee, thou 59 
schalt not got fro thennus, til thou 3elde 
the laste ferthing. 


CAP. XIII. 


And sum men weren present in that! 
tyme, that telden to hym of the Galileis, 
whos blood Pilat myngide" with the 
sacrificis of hem. And he answeride,2 
and seide to hem, Wenen 3e, that these 
men of Galile weren synneris more than 
alle Galilees, for thei suffriden siche 
thingis? Y seie to jou, nay; alle 3e3 
schulen perische in lijk manere, but’ 3e 
han penaunce. And as tho" ei3tetene,4 
on which the toure in® Siloa fel doun, 
and slowe hem, gessen 3e, for’ thei 
weren dettouris more than alle men that 
dwellen in Jerusalem? Y seie to 30u,5 
nai; but also ‘3e alle? schulen perische, 


a Om. Ku pr.m.¥. seide also to the peple 
d maad 4GMNOPOQSTIWXY. e forto 
h Sothely what 2amNope 


stx¥. Forsothe what ur. What sothli w pr.m. itOm.r. * 30ur emogwy. | that that aemNposTiy. 
that at o. this that ur. m Sothli sy. 2 for to AGMNOQTIVY. © take o. P camen to AGMNPQSTY. 
cammen to ow. camen into x. 9@Om. x. ™Om.g. Om. G prem. Son x. tlichi wv. % Om. mos. 
Vv but 3if Gwpesxy. W the en, * vypon whiche 4. vpon whom GMNoPeTY. on whom x. Yin 4GMN 
pesturxy. Om. vw. 7 felo et alibi. adown 7. »&Om.o. © the mens. 

© 30ure E. Pp Om. 1. a do thi 1s sec. m. ? a CEMPQRUXDcehia8. 8 Truly Ik. t go out k. 
“medlide 1. v but ifs sup. ras.x. W the ge prom. ha®. * of e1kbg. Y that sxk. 2 je c. alle 3e k. 


XII. 6——17. 
6penaunce. Forsothe he seide this’ lyk- 
nesse. Sum man hadde a fyge tree 


plauntid in® his vyner‘, and he cam sek- 
zynge fruyt in it, and fond not. Sothli 
he seide to the tilier of ‘the vyner, Loo! 
thre 3eeris! ben, sithen I come* sekinge 
fruyt in this! fyge tree, and I™ fond" not; 
therfore kitt it doun, wherto occupieth it, 
a3he°, the erthe ? And he answeringe seide 
to him, Lord, suffre also? this jeer, til the 
while I delue aboute it, and sende4 
stoordis'; and if it schal make fruyt, ellis® 
in tyme tot comynge thou schalt kitte it 
1odoun. Forsothe he was techinge in the" 
l1synagoge’ of hem in sabotis. And loo! 
a wominan that haddeW a spirit of syke- 
nesse ten and ei3te jeeris*, and was bowid 
doun, nether ‘in ony manereY my3te looke 
i2vpward. Whom whanne Jhesu hadde 
seyn, he clepide? to hym, and seide* to 
hir, Womman, thou ert left> of thi syke- 
i3nesse. And he puttide* to hir the hoondis, 
and anon she ‘was reysid4, and glorifiede 
14God. Sothli the prince of synagoge® an- 
sweringe, hauynge dedeyn' for Jhesu 
hadde heelid in the saboth, seide to the 
cumpany8, ‘Sixe dayes ben‘, in whiche it 
bihoueth to* wirche; therfore come! in 
thes, and ‘be 3e™ heelid, and not in the™ 
isdayes® of saboth. Forsothe the Lord an- 
sweringe ‘to him? seide, Ypocrite, wher‘ 
ech ‘of 3ou".‘vntyeth not in the saboth* 
his oxe, ethirt asse, fro the stable", and 
iledith for’ to watre? Bihofte’ it* not 
this dou3tre of Abraham, whom Sathanas 
hath bounden, loo! ten and ei3te 3eeris’, 
to” be vnbounden of this® bond in the day 
170f saboth? And whanne he seide thes 


4and this o. © in to agMNOPQSTX. 
vyne 3erd AGMNopesTIWXY. this vyner K. i ser x. 
mOm.7T. ‘fynd acunopestuvwxy. © 3it o. 


r donge o. Om. vu see. m. 
uOm.o. VY synagogis ory. 
Qsec.m. saith 4GMNOPQSTXY. 
MNOPQSTXY. was reerid Ww. 
8 company of pepil acuNopesTiVxyY. 
lcumme je AGMNOPQSTUVWXY. 

4G whether x. Om. y. 


w had hade o. 


m beth x. 


f vine gerd AGMNOPOSTWXY. 


P it and 4GMNopQ@sSTWXY. 
8 if noon, or ellis acMNPQSTIVY. 3if none ox. 

X 3eer sx. 
> delynerid vu sec. m. 

€ the synagoge 4GMNOPQSTUWVXY, 
i Ther ben six dayes aGMNoPOSTWXY. 
n Om. @ 
8 in the sab. vnt. not wivxy, 


LUKE. 193 


if 3e doon not penaunce. ‘And he seides 
this liknesse, A man hadde a fige tre 
plauntid in his vyn3erd, and he cam sek- 
ynge fruyt in it, and foond noon. And7 
he seide to the tilier* of the vyn3erd, Lo! 
thre 3eeris ben, sithen Y come sekynge 
fruyt in this fige tre, and Y fynde noon; 
therfor kitte it doun, whereto ocupieth 
it the erthe? And he answerynge seides 
to hym, Lord, suffre it also this 3cer, 
the while Y delue aboute it, and Y schal 
donge it; if it schal make fruyt, ifs 
nay”, in tyme comynge thou schalt kitte 
it doun. And he was techinge in her1o 
synagoge in the sabatis. And lo! au 
womman, that hadde a spirit of sijk- 
nesse ei3tene 3eeris, and was crokid, and 
‘nethir ony maner my3te® loke vpward. 
Whom whanne Jhesus hadde seyn, hel2 
clepide to hyin, and seide to hir, Wom- 
man, thou art delyuerid of thi sijknesse. 
And he settide’ on hir his hoondis, and 13 
anoon sche stood upri3t, and glorifiede 
God. And the prince of the synagoge 14 
answerde, hauynge dedeyn for Jhests 
hadde heelid in the sabat; and he seide 
to the puple, Ther ben sixe dayes, in 
whiche it bihoueth to worche; therfor 
come 3e in these, and ‘be 3e° heelid, and 
not in the daie’ of sabat. But the Lords 
ausweride to hym, and seide, Ypocrite, 
whether ech of 3ou vntieth not in the 
sabat his oxe, or asse, fro the cratche, and 
ledith to watir? Bihofte it not thisi6 
dou3tir of Abraham, whom Satanas hath 
boundun, lo! ei3tetene 3eeris, to be vn- 
boundun of this boond in the dai of thet 
sabat? And whanne he seide these 17 


ffinto ge Shefondo. 4 the 
l this til aewNopostuvwxy. 

4 dounge it U sec.m. 

t Om. 4GMNOPQOSTIWXY. 
Y ony theng 4emNnoposTWxy. 2 elepide hir 

¢ pitt o. putte aposivxy. 4 is rered ac pr.m. 
f dedeyn, or wrathithe AGMNPswyY. 
k for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
© day AGMNOPQSTUVWWXY. P Om. @. 
u eracch, or séalle 


k came alii, 


t or AGMNPSWXY. or his o. 


AGMNPQSTY. cracche ox. VOm.sx. W Byhoueth ox. *Om.w. Y3er x. 2 for to 4GMNOPOTIY, 
a his 7. 
@ tilieris A pr.m. ?not1. © neither in ony maner my3te ca. my3te not k prim. ‘sette ur. © beth 1. 


ber pr.m. f daies a prom. & Om. begik8. 


VOL. IV. ce 


194 


thingis, alle his aduersaries weren ascham- 
yd. And al the? peple ioyede in al thingis, 
isthat weren don gloriously of him. Ther- 
fore he seide, To what thing is the 
rewme® of God lyk? and to what thing 
19schal? I gesse it to® be lyk? It is lyk to 
a corn of seneuey, which’ takun, a man 
sente® in to his 3erd ; and it wax, and was" 
maad in to a greet tree, and fowelis of 
the eyr restiden in the! brauuchis therof. 
20‘And eftsone he sayd*, To what thing 
schal I gesse the kyngdom ‘of God! lyk ? 
21It is lyk to sourdow3™, which" takun, a 
womman hidith® in? thre mesuris of mele, 
22til ‘al werel sourdowid'. And he weute 
by citees and castels, techinge and mak- 
23inge iurney in to Jerusalem. Sothli sum 
man seide to him, Lord, if there ben fewe, 
that ben sauyd? Sothli he seide to hem, 
21Stryue 3e for to entre by the streit 3ate ; 
for I seye to 30u, many ment seken for™ 
to entre’, and thei ‘schulen not mowe. 
25 Forsothe whanne the hosebonde man hath 
entrid, and closid the dore, 3e schulen bi- 
gynne to* stonde with onte forth, and 
knockeY the? dore, seyinge, Lord, opyne to 
vs. And he answeringe schal seye to 3ou, 
I knowe ‘not 30u*, of > whennis 3e_ ben. 
26 Thanne 3e schulen® bigynne to seye, We 
han ‘ete and drunke bifore thee®, and in 
27oure streetis thou hast tau3t. And he 
schal seye to 30u, I knowe ‘not 30u®, of 
whennis 3e ben; gof 3e8 awey fro me, 
28alle worcheris of wickidnesse. Ther schal 
be wepinge and betinge to gidere of teeth, 
whanne" 3e schulen se Abraham, and 
Ysaac, and Jacob, and alle prophetis in 
the kyngdom of God; sothli 30u to! be 
zo put out. And thei schulen come fro the 
eest and west, and fro the north and 


bOm. vy. ¢kyngdam acmunopesTwxy. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. & caste U sec. mt. 
Ku prom. ¥. And efte he seide uv sec.m. 


ohidde 4s. Pin to AGMNOPQSTI sec.m. XY. 
sOm. sx. t Om. acunopestwxy. Om. sx. 
may not ew prim. x. * for to 4GMNOPQI. 


30u not G sec.m. MPX. 3ee not Ww. > Om. v. 
€ sou not cupwx. f goth sx. 
AGMNPOQSTUPXY. 

h Om. apr.m.1K prom g. i waxide EKPQX. 
EPQa. goith x. 


LUKE. 


4 Om. 4GNogstwxy. 
his 4 prom. G pr. mt. MNOPQSTXY. 
1Om, g prim. 
@ it were Q pr.m. it were al Q sec. m. 
Vv entre in o, 
Yrynge AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
¢ sal o. 
& Om. AGMNOPSTIVY. 


k in cs sec. m. i prom. 
° gryntynge Qe. grenchinge s. grintinge k. 


XII. 18—29. 


thingis, alle" hise aduersaries weren 
aschamed, and al the puple ioiede in alle 
thingis, that weren gloriousli don of 
hym. Therfor he seide, To what thing 18 
is the kyngdom of God lijk? and to 
what thing schal Y gesse it to be lijk? 
It is lijk to a corn of seneuey, which ai9 
man took, and cast in to his 3erd; and it 
wax!, and was maad in to a greet tree, 
and foulis of the eire restiden in the 
braunchis therof. And eft soone he2o0 
seide, To what thing schal Y gesse the 
kyngdom of God lijk? It is lijk toa 
sourdou3, that a womman took, and 
hidde 7é ‘in to* thre mesuris of mele, til 
al! were sourid. And he wente bi22 
citees and castels, techynge and mak- 
ynge a™ journey in to Jerusalem. And 23 
a man seide to hym, Lord, if there ben 
fewe, that ben saned? And he seide to 
hem, Stryue 3e to entre bi the streite24 
3ate; for Y seie to 301, many seken to 
entre, and thei schulen not mowe. Fores 
whanne the hosebonde man is entrid, 
and the dore is closid, 3e schulen bi- 
gynne to stonde with out forth, and 
knocke at the dore, and seie, Lord, opyn 
to vs. And he schal answere, and seie 
to 30u, Y knowe 3o0u not, of whennus 
3e ben. Thanne 3e schulen bigynne26 
to seye, We han etun bifor thee and 
drunkun, and in oure streetis thou hast 
tau3t. And he schal seie to 3on, Y27 
know 30u not, of whennus 3e ben; go” 
awei fro me, alle 3e worcheris of wick- 
idnesse. There schal be wepyng and 2s 
gruntyng® of teeth, whanne 3e schulen se 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and alle 
the prophetis in the kyngdom of God; 
and 30n to be put out. And thei schulen 29 


€ for to antiv. Om. vy. f the whiche 
1Om. acunrestury. k Om. 
a the whiche wopeTivy. 
T souryd uv sce. m. 
W mizten not 4 pr.m. G pr.m, NNPST 
Zatte the v. 4 not G pr.m. 
4 eten bifore thee and drunken 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 

h aid whan y. i for to 1ewNopeTY. k Om. 


m a soure dow N. 


lite. ™Om.cx. "goth 


Sill go k1V. 


south, and sitte at the mete in the rewme 
300f God. And loo!! thei that weren firste™, 
ben the laste; and thei that weren the" 
atlast, ben the firste. In° that day summe 
of Pharisees? camen ny3, seyinge ‘to him4, 
Go out, and go henuis, for Eroude wole 
s2slee thee. And he seith to hem, Go 3e, 
and ‘seye 3e" to that fox, Loo! I caste out 
fendis, and I make perfitly heelthis, to day 
and to morwe, and the thridde day I‘ am 
ssendid. Netheles it bihoueth me to day, 
and to morwe, and the! ‘day suynge®, to’ 
walke; for it fallith not a” prophete to* 
saperische out of Jerusalem. Jerusalei, 
Jerusalem, that sleest prophetis, and stoon- 
est hem that ben sent to thee, hou ofte 
wolde I gedere ‘to gidereY thi? sones, as a 
brid his nest vnder pennes*, and thou 
35 noldist®. Loo! 3oure hous schal be left 
to 30u desert. Sothli I seie to 30u, for 3e 
schulen not se me, til it° come, whanne 3e 
schulen seye, Blessid 7s? he, that cometh 
in the name of the Lord. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 And it was® don, whanne he had entrid 
in to the hous of sum prince of Pharisees, 
in the saboth, tof ete breed, and thei 

2aspieden$ him. And loo! sum man syk 

3in ydropesie" was bifore him. And Jhe- 
su answeringe seide to the wyse men ‘of 
lawe', and to Pharysees*, seiyinge, Where! 
it is leeful for™ to heele in the” sabotis ? 
4And thei heelden pees. Forsothe Jhesu 
sheelide him takun to, and lefte. And he 
answeringe to hem, seyde, Whos° asse 
ether? oxe ‘of 3oure4 schal falle in to a 
pitt, and not anon ‘he schal* drawe® out' 


Iso uv. ™ the firste semNPQTIXY. 
T seith x. 8 Om. 9. t Om.a. 
G sec.m. Nosw. forao. * for to 4GMNOPWY. 
TWY. fetheris u. > woldest not seaNoposTWwXY. 
f for to AGMNOPQSTIVY. 
UVIVXY. 1 Om. x. of the lawe our sce. m. 
n Om. AGMNOPOQSTWXY. 
WXY. of 30uris MP. 


n Om. Q. 


¥ shal he mopogwxy. shal r. 


P the west k. 
A pr... 1 sec. m. 
2 shal he not sbg. 


q the south k. 
u I xqhi. 


Y atte s. 


LUKE. 


o And in nN. 
" suynge day mopeTivy. suende dai x. 
y Om. N. 

ec Y ur. 
& kepten, or aspieden AGMNPQSTWY. kepten x. 
k the Fariseis gs. 
° Whos of you 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 
8 be drawe rT. 


8 sele 3e CEI pr.m, KMPQRsUXbeeghkf. 
Vv and thei erars sec. m. hikf. 


195 


come fro the eest and west?, and fro the 
north and south‘, and schulen sitte ‘at 
the’ mete in the rewme of God. And30 
lo! thei that weren the firste, ben the 
laste; and thei that weren the laste, ben 
the firste. In that day sum of the Fa-3) 
risees camen ny3, and seiden to hym, Go 
out, and go fro hennus, for Eroude wole 
sle thee. And he seide to hem, Go 3e,32 
and seie’ to that foxe, Lo! Y caste out 
feendis, and Y make perfitli heelthis, to 
dai and to morew, and the thridde dai 
Yam endid. Netheles it bihoueth me33 
to dai, and to morewe, and the dai‘ that 
sueth, to walke; for it fallith not a pro- 
fete to perische out of Jerusalem. Jeru-31 
salem, Jerusalem, that sleest profetis, and 
stonest hem that ben sent to thee, hou 
ofte wolde Y gadre togider thi sones, as 
a brid gaderith his nest vndur fethris, 
and thou woldist not. Lo! 3oure hous 35 
schal be left to 30u desert. And Y seie to 
3ou, that 3e scliulen not se me, til it® 
come, whanne 3e schulen seie, Blessid 7s 
he, that cometh in the name of the Lord. 


CAP. XIV. 


And it was don, whanne he hadde! 
entrid in to the hous of a prince of Fa- 
risees, in the sabat, to ete breed, thei‘ 
aspieden hym. And lo! a man sijk in2 
the dropesie was bifor hym. And Jhe-3 
sus answerynge spak to the wise men of 
lawe, and to the Farisees, and seide, 
Whethir it is” leeueful to heele in the 
sabat? And thei helden pees. And4 
Jhesus took, and heelide hym, and let 
hym go. And he answeride to hem, and 5 
seide, Whos asse or oxe of 30u schial falle 
in to* aY pit, and ‘he schal not? anoon 


q Om. x. 
V for to AGMNOPOTIY. Wtoa 

@ pennes, or wengis AGMNPQS 
€ is 4 pr.m. G pr.m, MNOPSTXY. 
h the droopsye 4GMNoPpQsT 
13if acMNoPesTWXY. ™ Om. x. 
Por AGMNOPESTWWXY. 4 Om. AGNOQST 
typ Tr. 


P the Phariseis sow pr.m. 


Z the n. 
d Om. x. 


t thridde dai 


whe 1rxkbgk8. *Om.c.  Y the a. 


ce 


196 


6him on" the day of sabot’? And thei 
my3ten not answere to him to thes thingis. 
7Forsothe he seyde also’ a parable to men 
bodun* to a feeste, biholdinge how thei 
chesidenY the firste seetis’, seyinge to hem, 
8Whanne thon schalt be bedun* to wed- 
dingis®, sitte thou® not at the’ mete in the 
firste place; lest perauenture a worschip- 
ofullere® than thou be bedun’ of him, and 
he comynge that clepide thee and him, 
seye to thee, 3yue place to this, and 
thanne® thou schalt bigynne with schame 
ioto" holde the laste! place. But whanne 
thou schalt be bedun* to feeste!, go, and 
sitte doun in the laste place, that whanne 
he ‘schal come™, that bad thee to feeste”, 
he® seye to thee, Frend, sti3e? hizere. 
Thanne glorie schal be to thee’ bifore 
men syttinge ‘to gidere™ at® thet mete. 
1tFor ech that enhaunsith him silf", schal 
be ‘maad low3"; and he that mekith him 
i2silf", sehal be hised. Forsoth he seide 
also* to himY, that hadde? bedun* him to 
the> feeste, Whanne thou makist a ‘mete, 
ether souper®, nyle thou clepe thi frendis, 
nether thi britheren, nethir’ cosyns®, ne- 
thir neijeboris, nether riche men; lest per- 
anenture and thei bidde thee a3en to 
feestef, and ‘3eldinge a3en® be maad to 
i3thee’. But whanne thou makist a feeste, 
clepe pore men, feble meni, crokid, and* 
i4blynde, and thou schalt be blessid ; for 
thei han not, wher of to! 3elde™ to thee, 
forsoth it schal be 30ldun" to thee in the 
1s risyng® a3en of iuste men. Whanne sum 
man of? sittingel at the™ mete had herd 
thes thingis, he seide to hym, Blessid 2s‘ 


U in AGMNOPQSTUFIVX. ¥ the sabot a. 
xy. biden ow. —Y chosen sx. 
AGMNOPQSTUFWXY. 4Om. 0, 
worthier soex.  f hodun ow. 
l the feest ox. a feeste v. 
OPOTY. 

STVWXY. 
2 hadden ry. 
f the feeste vu. g 
opestuvwxy. k Om. aGMNPOSTWXY. 

a3en AGMNOPSTIVY. 3elde ajsen Q. quit x. 
rOm. ali. 8 Om. G prom. MPQ prom. TXY, 


£ Om. xv. 


® stie vp AGMNPQSTWX. 
V lowed AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
aboden w. >» Om. paix. 


t Om. EPquxbgh. Yofk. v hem hi. 
Zhim silf ik, @him selfi. > ne Ep. 
R prom, xb sec.m.k. & and hadde k. 


© ne EP, 


LUKE. 


Wand aGMopesx. Om. NTIVY. 
Z sittynge placis agmNoPesTWXY. 
e worthier, or a worschipfuller at. worthiere, or worschipfullere GNswy. 
h for to AGMNOPQETW. 
™ come G pr.m. cometh mopeTxy. 
q the togider o. 
Ww Om, AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
€ soper o. mete, or super MPIWXY, 
& retribucioun, or 3eldynge ajen AGMNPQSTWY. retribucioun Xx. 
) for to AGMNOPSTIW. 
© firste risyng K. 


r Om. o. 


whe biheeld crv. 
4 thi cosyns s. 


XIV. 6—t5. 


drawe hyin out in the dai of thet sabat ? 
And thei my3ten not answere to hym toe 
these thingis. He seide also a parable7 
to" imen*’ bodun to a feeste, and biheld* 
hou thei chesen* the first sittyng placis, 
and seide to hem, Whanne thou arts 
bodun to bridalis, sitte not ‘at theY mete 
in the firste place; lest perauenture a 
worthier than thou be bodun of hym, 
and lest he come that clepide thee ands 
hym, and seie to thee, 3yne place to this, 
and thanne thou schalt bigynne with 
schame to holde the lowest place. But io 
whanne thou art bedun to a feste, go, - 
and sitte doun in the laste place, that 
whanne he cometh, that bad thee to the 
feeste, he seie to thee, Freend, come 
hizer. Thanne worschip schal be to thee, 
bifor men that sitten at the mete. For 
ech that enhaunsith hym?, schal be low- 
id; and he that meketh hym*, schal be 
hi3zed. And he seide to hym, that hadde 12 
bodun hym to the feeste, Whanne thou 
makist a mete, or a soper, nyle thon clepe 
thi freendis, nether? thi britheren, nethir¢ 
cosyns?, nethir neizboris, ne® riche men ; 
lest perauenture thei bidde thee a3en to 
the feeste, and it be 30lde a3en to thee. 
But whanne thon makist a feeste, clepe 1s 
pore men, feble, crokid, and blynde, and 14 
thou schalt be blessid; for thei han not 
wherof to 3elde thee', for it schal be 
3oldun to thee in the risyng a3en of iust 
men. And whanne oon of hem thats 
saten togider at the mete hadde® herd 
these thingis, he seide to hym, Blessid zs 
he, that schal ete breed in the rewme of 


x beden 4GMNPOQST 
@boden o. 0» bridaliso. ¢ Om. 
ilowest anostw.  boden ov. 
nthe fest oerx. © Om. G pr.m. MN 
stor. tOm.uv. Om. 4GmuNoPe 

X and 4GMNOPQSTWXY. Y hem Y.c 
dne ur. © thi cosynes o. 
hzou 0. 1 Om. 46aN 
™ 3elde ajen 4GMNPQSTWXY. ™ quytte 
P of men ur. 4 the sittende x. 


x cheseden csxg. chosen iu. Yat b. tok. 
enethir x. to thee ckm pr.m. 


XIV. 16—28. 


he, that schal ete breed in the rewme of 
i6God. And he seide to him, Sum man 
maade a greet souper, and clepide’ manye. 
17And he sente his seruaunt in the our of 
souper, to" seye to men bedun’ to feeste”, 
that thei schulden come, for now alle 
i8thingis ben redy. And alle bigunnen to 
gidere to* excuse. The firste seideY, I 
haue bou3t a toun, and I haue nede to? 
go out, and to* se it; I preie thee, haue 
19me excusid. And the tothir® seide, I haue 
bou3t fyue 3o0kis of oxen, and I go to® 
proue hem; I preie thee, haue me ex- 
20cusid. And an othir seide, I haue weddid 
a wyf; and therfore I may not come. 
21 And the seruaunt turnyd a3eu, toolde thes 
thingis to the’ lord. TThanne the hose- 
bonde man wroth, seide to his seruaunt, 
Go out soone in to grete stretis and® smale 
streetis of the citee, and ‘brynge in hidur 
pore men, and feble, and blynde, and 
zezerokidf, And the seruaunt seith, Lord, 
it is don, as thou hast comaundid, and 3it 
23‘place isf. And the lord scith to the 
seruaunt, Go thou" into weyes and heggis, 
and constreyne fori to entre, that) myn 
2shous be fillid'. Forsothe I seie to 30u, 
for noone! of tho™ men that ben clepid, 
25schal taaste my souper. Sothli many 
cumpanyes wenten with him; and he 
a¢turned, seide to hem, If ony" cometh® to 


LUKE. 


leg 


God. And he seide to hym, A manic 
made a greet soper, and clepide many. 
And he sent his seruaunt iu the our of 17 
soper, to seie to men that weren bodun 
to the feeste, that thei schulden come, 
for now alle thingis ben redi. And alleis 
bigunnen togidir to excusen hem. The 
firste seide, Y haue bou3t a toun, and Y 
haue nede to go out, and se it; Y preye 
thee, haue me excusid. And the tother" 19 
seide, Y haue bou3t fyue 3ockis of oxun, 
and Y go to preue hem; Y preye thee, 
haue me excusid. And an othir seide, Y 20 
haue weddid a wijf; and therfor Y may 
not come. And the seruaunt turnede2i 
a3en, and tolde these thingis to his lord. 
Thanne the hosebonde man was wrooth, 
and seide to his seruaunt, Go out swithe 
in to the grete stretis and smali stretis 
of the citee, and brynge ynne hidir pore 
men, and feble, blynde*, and crokid. And 22 
the seruaunt seide, Lord, it is don, as 
thon hast comaundid, and 3it there is a 
void place. And the lord seide to the 2s 
seruaunt, Go out in to weies and heggis, 
and constreine mez! to entre, that myn 


.hons be fulfillid™. For Y seie to 30u, that 24 


noon of tho men that ben clepid, schal 
taaste my soper. And myche puple2s 
wenten with hym; and he turnede, and 
seide to hem, If ony man cometh to me, 26 


me, and hatith not his fadir, andP modir, 
and wyf, sones4, and britheren, and dou3- 
tris", 3it forsoth and® his lyft, he" may not 
2z7be my disciple. And he that berith not 
his cross, and ‘cometh aftirY me, may not 
agbe my disciple. Forsoth who of 30u will- 
inge to¥ bylde a tour, wher* he ‘sittinge 
countith not firstY the spensis that ben 


and hatitht not his fadir, and modir, 
and wijf, and sones, and britheren, and 
sistris", and 3it his owne lijf, he may not 
be my disciple. And he that berith not 27 
his cross, and cometh aftir me, may not 
be my disciple. For who of 30u_ will-28 
ynge to bilde a toure, whether he ‘first 
sitte not°, and countithP the spensis that 


+ that is, Jesse 
loueth hem 
than God. e. 


theclepid 0. °forto acunoperwy. Vboden ow.  W the feeste Ww pr.m.x.  * for to 4GMNO 
prwy. Yseide to him @ sec.m. 7 for to acMoperwy. ® Om. aGmNopesTxy. ?other rp. €¢ for to 
AGMNopoTwy. ‘his acMNopestuywx. ¢andintoN. — f pore men and feble, [and xy] blynde and 
crokid, brynge [thou Pp] yn hidir amperivxy. pore men, and crokid, blynd and feebel, brynge in hidir o. 
& there is place 4cMNoposwxy. there is a place 7. b out AGMNOQSTUVWXY., iQm. sx. Jjand v. 
k fulfild semNnopostTwxy. 1no man acaNopestwxy. ™Om.T. ony mane. °° come AGMNOP 
QsTIVy. P ne his o. 4 and sones 4GaNopsTuywxy. and his children @ sec. m. T snstris Q sec. m. 
s Om. N. t soule, that is [his eG] lijf acunestwy. soule orx. soule, or lijf p. u Om. 4GMNoY. 
Vfolewith s. W for to aecuNopeTwy. * whether x.  Y¥ first sittynge acountith [countith mpeTwxy] 
not AGMNOPQSTWX. 


h oother 1. m fllid hi. 


ithe small irs pr.m. begk. k blynde men 1Ksg. 1Om. 1 prem. 
1 sistren Rhi. 


© firste sitteth not R sec.m. sitte not first k. P counte EPs. 


198 LUKE. 


29 nedful, if he haue to* performe? Lest aftir? 
he hath sett® the foundement, and my3te 
not performe, alle that seen, bigynne to¢ 

zoscorne him, seyinge, For this man bigan 

sito" bilde, and my3te not ende. Ether® 
what kyng ‘to goynge to make! batel 
a3ens another kyng, wher’ he sittinge ‘by- 
thenkith not first4, if he may with ten 
thousynd go a3ens him that cometh to 

32 him with twenty thousynd ? Ellis! him jit 
doinge afer, he sendinge a messanger*, 

38 preieth tho thingis that ben of pees. So! 
therfore ech of 30u, that ‘renouncith not™ 
alle thingis whiche" he weeldith, may not 

sabe my disciple. Salt is good thing; for- 
soth if salt ‘schal vanysche®, in what thing 

35schal it be sauerid? Nether? in erthe, 
nether in the’ dunghil it is profitable, but 
it schal be sent out. He that hath eeris 
of heeringe, heere’. 


CAP. XV. 


1 Forsothe pupplicans and synful men 
weren nei3inge to him, that thei schulden 
2heere him. And Farisees and_ scribis 
grucchiden, seyinge, For this man’ re- 
ceyueth synful men, and etith with hem. 
3 And he seith to hem this parable, seiynge, 
4 What mau of 30u that hath an hundrid 
scheep, and if he ‘hath lostt oon of hem, 
wher" he leeuith’ not nynty and nyne in 
desert, and goth to it that perischide, til 
she fynde it? And whanne he hath 
founden it, he ioyinge puttith on™ his 
sshuldris; and heX comynge hoom clep- 
ith ‘to gidereY his frendis and nei3ebors, 
seyinge to hem, ‘Thanke 3e? me*, for I 
haue founden my? scheep, which* ‘hadde 


;perischid*. Sothly I seye to 3ou, so ioye 
zfortoo. 4 aftir that aewNnoposTxy. aftirward that Ww. 
petiwy. 4 forto 4GMNoPeTWY. © Or AGMNOPSTXY. 


XIV. 29—XvV. 7. 


ben nedeful, if he hane to perfourme ? 
Lest aftir that he hath set the founde-29 
ment, and mowe not perfourme, alle that 
seen’, bigynnen to scorne hym, and seie, 
For this man bigan to bilde, and my3te 30 
not make an’ ende. Or what kyng thats 
wole go to do a bataile a3ens anothir 
kyng, whether he sittith'™ not first, and 
bithenkith, if he may with ten thou- 
synde go ajens hym that cometh aj3ens 
hym with twenti thousynde? Ellis 3it 32 
while® he is afer, he sendynget a mes- 
sanger, preietl* tho thingis that ben of 
pees. So therfor ech of 30u, that for-33 
sakith not alle thingis that he hath, may 
not be my disciple. Salt is good; buts: 
if salt vanysche, in what thing schal it 
be sauerid? Nethir in erthe, nethir® in35 
donghille it is profitable, but it schal be 
cast out. He that hath eeris of herynge, 
here he. 
GAPE XV. 

And pupplicans and synful men weren 1 
nei3ynge to him, to here hym. And the2 
Farisees and scribis grutchiden, seiynge, 
For this’ resseyueth synful men, and 
etith with hem. And he spak to hems 
this parable, and seide, What man of 30u 4 
that hath an hundrith scheep, and if he 
hath lost oon of hem, whethir he leeueth 
not nynti and nyne in desert, and goith 
to it that perischide, til he fynde it? 
And whanne he hath foundun it, hes 
ioieth, and jeyith” it on hise schuldris ; 
and he cometh hoom, and clepith togidir 6 
hise freendis and nei3boris, and seith to 
hem, Be 3e glad with me, for Y haue 
founde my scheep, that hadde* perischid. 
And Y seie to 30u, so ioye schal be in7 


b put 4GaNopesTWwxyY. © for to AGMNo 
f to go for to sende, or maake 4G pr.m. MNP 


gTWy. is to go for to sende, or make G sec.m. is to go for to make o. to go to senden, or make s. to go- 


ynge out to make vu. to go to sende x. 
thenkith not x. 1 Orellis x. * messagere ogsx. 


stTwxy. vanischith o. |? Nother ry. 
twxy. tschal lese cuNopoTxyY. 

NopesTwxY. Y Om. x. 
MNPQTXY. © that GMNOPQOSTIVXY. 


u whether x. 


Gd him seens. "ands. 
this 1. W puttith b. 


tr sitte k. 8 whilis s. 
x hath epx. Om. qu. 


& whether wx. 
10m. o. 
peTwy. forsaketh not o. renounceth not, or forsaketh s. 
q Om. 4GMNOPQSTUWXY. 
V lene No. 

% Glade 3e with u sec. m. 


t sendith chi. 


h first bythenk not carnopeTiwy. first bi-7 
™ renounsith not, or forsakith not 4GuN 

O that acmNoposTxXY. © vanysche 4GMNPQ 
There he aow. 8 Om. 4GMNOPQS 
Win to 4GMNoPesTWXY. * Om. acm 
&to me G sec.m. MP. togider with me o. > the 


d J hadde lost wnrerxy. 


tt and preieth rchi, Uner. Y he 


XV. 8—18. 


schal be in heuene on of synful man 
doynge penaunce, than of® nynti and 
nyne iuste, that han no nede off pen- 
saunce. Ether’ what womman hauynge 
ten ‘dragmes, ether besauntis", and if sche 
‘hath lost! o dragme, wher* she 1i3teth! 
not a lanterne, and turneth vpsodoun 
the hous, and sekith diligently, til™ sche 
9fynde"? And whanne sche hath founden, 
sche clepith to gidere frendis and neije- 
boris, seyinge, “Thanke 3e° me?, for I 
haue founden the dragme, which’ I hadde 
iolost. So I seie to 3ou, ioye schal be to 
the' aungels of God ‘on o® synful man 


i1doynge penaunce. Forsothe he seith, Sum 


i2man hadde tweyet sones; and the 3ongere 
seide to the" fadir, Fadir, 3yue to’ me the 
porcioun of substaunce, ‘ethir catel”, that 
‘byfallith to* me. And ‘the fadirY de- 
i3spartide to him? the? substaunce. And 
not aftir manye dayes, alle thingis gederid 
to gidre, the 3ongere> sone wente in® pil- 
grymage in to a fer’ cuntree; and there 
he® wastide his substauncef in® lyuynge 
isleccherously. And aftir that he hadde 
endid alle thingis, a' strong hungir was! 
maad ink that! cuntree, and he bigan to™ 
ishaue nede. And he "wente, and cleuyde 
to oon of the citeseyns® of that cuntree. 
And he sente him in to his toun, that he 
igschulde feede hoggis. And he coueitide 
toP fille! his wombe of the coddis whiche" 
the hoggis eeten, and no man 3af to him. 
17Sothli he turned a3en in to him silf, seyde, 
Hou many hirid men in my fadir® hous, 
‘han plente of' looues; forsothe I perische 
ishere thur3" hungir. I schal ryse’, and ‘I 


doen x. © vpon AGMNOPQSTIVY. 
or besauntis empy. besauntis 0. dragmes x. 
1 teendith acuNoposTivxy. lizteneth ur. 
thanke 3e p. Glade 3e with u sec. m. 
OSTWXY. 
w or catel empiy. Om. ox. 
MOPQTUV sec.m. XY. % Om. 4 pr.m. MNPT. 
forth in vr. forth on 1 prem. 4 Om. G pr.m. 
pstwy. &Om.n. and x. 
AGMNOPQTWY. ™ Om. K. 
AG S€C.M. MNOPQSTWXY. * that 1GMNOPOSTIXY. 
habunden with o. abounden with x. 


f t0 AGMNOPQSTUVIWWXY. 
i sehal lese 4 pr.m. GMNOPQTXY. 


8 vpon 2 AT. Vpon 00 GMNPQSIVY. Vpon oon 0. 
* bifallith 4 pr.m.G@ prom. peTx. fallith o. 
b 3onge i. 
€ Om. AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
iis 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
° burgeis acnoruriv. burgeysis MoPsxy. 
8 fadres ANOSUY, 
in 4GMPESTXY. for No. in for Ww. 


LUKE. 199 


heuene on o synful man doynge pen- 
aunce, more than on nynti and nyne 
iuste, that han no nede to penaunce. Ore 
what womman hauynge ten besauntis, 
and if sche hath lost oo besaunt, whether 
sche teendith not a lanterne, and turneth 
vpsodoun the hows, and sekith diligentli, 
til thatY sche fynde it? And whanney 
sche hath foundun, sche clepith togidir 
freendis and neizboris, and scith, Be 3e 
glad with me, for Y haue founde the 
besaunt, that Y hadde lost. So Y seie to10 
3ou, ioye schal be bifor aungels’ of God 
on o synful man doynge penaunce. And 11 
he seide, A man hadde twei sones; and* 12 
the 3onger of hem seide to the fadir, Fadir, 
3yue me the porcioun of catel, that fallith 
to me. And he departide to hem! the 
eatel. And not aftir many daies, whanne 13 
alle thingis weren gederid togider, the 
3onger sone wente forth in pilgrymage 
in to a fer cuntre; and there he wastide 
hise® goodis in lyuynge lecherously. And 14 
aftir that he hadde endid alle thingis, a 
strong hungre was maad in that cuntre, 
and he bigan to haue nede. And hels 
wente, and drou3 hym to oon of the 
citeseyns of that cuntre. And he sente 
hym in to his toun, to fede swyn. And t6 
he coueitide to fille his wombe of the 
coddis that the’ hoggis eeten, and no 
man 3af hym®. And he turnede ajen tof 17 
hym silf, and seide, Hou many hirid men 
in’ my fadir® hous han plente of looues ; 
and Y perische here thorou3 hungir. Y 18 
schal rise vp, and go to my fadir, and Y 
schal seie to hym, Fadir, Y haue synned 


g Or acarnopestwxy. —} dragmes, 


k whethir ox. 


m til that acm NOPQSTWXY. a fyndeth o. © Togydere 
Ptogidertomeo.  4that 4emNopestivxy. "Om, AGMNOP 
ttwo mpqguwxy. tthiso. YOm.N. 


y he aemnopostwxy. 2% hem 
¢ fer on AGMNOPTW Sec.m. XY. fer in Qs. 
f substaunce, or goodis AGM 
kintoo. Ilthe asw. ™ for to 
P for to aGMNoPoTIVY. 4 fulfille 
t habounden in AGMNPOQSTUVIVY. 
Vv ryse vp AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 


y Om. Ee pr.m. e prom. z the aungels rk. a Om, Ake pr. m. eg. > him s prem. ¢ alle 
hise k prom. 4Om.1g.  ¢ to hym EMK sec.m. parsuxghik8, fin to erxuPQqrsuxbeeghi. © ben 
ink prem. 1» fadris crikmprsuxbeeghikaf. 


200 


schal” go to my fadir, and I schal seie to 
him, Fadir, I haue synned a3ens* heuene, 
igand bifore thee; now J am not worthi to’ 
be clepid thi sone, make me as oon of 
20thi hyrid men. And he rysinge cam to 
his fadir. Sothli whanne he was 3it fer, 
his fadir sy3 him, and ‘he was? stirid by 
mercy. And he rennynge to, ‘felde on* 
21his necke, and kiste him. And the sone 
seyde to him, Fadir, I hane synned ajens? 
heuene, and bifore thee; and now I am not 
22worthi to® be clepid thi sone. Forsoth 
the fadir seyde to his seruauutis, Soone 
bringe 3e forth the firste stoole, and clothe? 
3e® him, and 3yue 3e a ring in his hond, 
23and schoon inf to the’ feet; and ‘brynge 
3e" a calf maad fat, and sle 3e, and ete we, 
24and plenteuously ete wei. For this my 
sone was deed, and hath lyued ajen; he 
perischide, aud is founden. And _ alle! 
25 bigunnen to™ eat plenteuously®. Forsoth 
his eldere sone was in the feeld; and 
whanne he cam, and neijede to the hous, 
he herde a symphonye® and a crowdel. 
26 And he clepide oon of the sernauntis, and 
27axide, what ‘thingis thes’ weren. And 
he seide to him, Thi brodir is comen, and 
thi fadir ‘hath slayn™ a fat’ calf, for he 
28receyuede him saf. Forsoth he was wroth, 
and wolde not entre. Therfore his fadir 
20gon out, bigan tot preie him. And he 
answeringe to his fadir, seide, Lo! so 
manye 3eeris I serue to thee, and I ‘brak 
neuere" thi comanndement’; thou” ‘hast 
neuere* 3ouunY ‘a kyde to me’, that I 
30 schulde ‘ete largely with my frendis*. But 
aftir that this thi? sone, which® deuouride 
his substaunce with hooris, cam, thou 


Ww Om. AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
% 18 AG pr.m. MNOPQSTXY, was UF. 
G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. ¢ for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
¢ Om. 4 prim. G pr. mt. MNPQTXY. 


m for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
PgeTWwXY. a caroule, or croude Ns. 


p, sloo3 x. 8 fattid aempesTiVxyY. t for to or. 
neuer passid ouer ox. V comaundementis 9. 
OPQSTXY, Y 3yue Q. jeue Y. 

AGMNOPQSTWXY, > Om. 4Q prim. 


iOm. x. & he is rg. 


LUKE. 


Xin to 4 prom. G prom. MNOPQSTXY. 
a felde vpon aemNPQTY. fell vpon ow. fel on sx. 
4 clothith sx. 
h brynge 3e to 4emNoposTwy. bringeth to x. 
tenouse etynge 4 pr.m.G pr.m. MNPQTXY. in plentenos eetynge ete we o. 
n gladly 4 pr.m. GMNOPQSTXY. 
4 thees thengis 4GMNOPQSTUF WX. 


Wand thou AGMNOPQSTUFIVXY. 


% to me a kydde aguNopestwxy. 
€ that hath aGMNOPQSTWXY. 


1 sede cerxurgrsuxbeghikag. 


XV. 19-—30. 


in to heuene, and bifor thee; and now Y 19 
am not worthi to be clepid thi sone, 
make me as oon of thin hirid men. And 20 
he roos vp’, and cam to his fadir. And 
whanne he was 3it afer, his fadir sai3 
hym, and was stirrid bi mercy. And he 
ran, and fel on his necke, and kisside 
hym. And the sone seide to hym, Fadir, 21 
Y haue synned in to heuene, and bifor 
thee; and now Y am not worthi to be 
clepid thi sone. And the fadir seide to22 
hise seruauntis, Swithe brynge 3e forth 
the firste stoole, and clothe 3e hym, and 
3yue 3e a ryng in his hoond, and schoones 
on hise feet; and brynge 3e a fat calf, 
and sle 3e, and ete we, and make we 
feeste. For this my sone was deed, and 23 
hath lyued ajen; he perischid, and is* 
foundun. And alle men bigunnen to 
ete. But his eldere sone was in thee2s 
feeld ; and whanne he cam, and neijede 
to the hous, he herde a symfonye and a 
croude. Aud he clepide oon of the ser-26 
uauntis, and axide, what these thingis 
weren. And he seide to hym, Thi bro-27 
ther is comun, and thi fadir slewe a fat 
calf, for he resseyuede hym saaf. And 28 
he was wrooth, and wolde not come in. 
Therfor his fadir wente! out, and bigan 
to preye hym. And he answerde to his 29 
fadir, and seide, Lo! so many 3eeris Y 
serue thee, and Y neuer brak thi co- 
maundement; and thou neuer jaf to™ me 
a kidde, that Y with my freendis schulde 
haue ete. But aftir that this thi sone, 30 
that hath deuourid his substaunce with 
horis, cam, thou hast slayn to hym a fat 
calf. And he seide to hym, Sone, thous: 


Y for to AGMNOPQTW Sec. m. ¥. 
bin to 4 prom. 
€ Om. AGMNOPQSTAY. f Om. o. 
i glade we in plen- 
lalle men AGMNPOSTWXY. 

P caroule, or croude AGM 

r slow3e aeuNogsTWwy. slew 
& neuere passede ouer, or brak aGMNPQSTWY. 
x neuere hast 4GMN 
a with my frendis be fulfillid 


© sinfon Xx. 


m Om. k prim. 


XV. 31--XVI. 9. < 


3ihast slayn to him a fat® calf. And he 
seide to him, Sone, thou ert eueref with me, 

32 and alle myne thingis ben thyne. Forsothe 
it, bihofte toh ete plenteuously, and for! 
to ioye; for this thi brother was deed, and 
lyuede* a3eyn; he peryschide, and he! is 
founden. 

CAP. XVI. 

1 Forsothe he seide also™ to his disciplis, 
Ther was sum riche man, that hadde a 
‘fermour, ethir a baily®; and this® was? 
defamyd anentis’ him, as he hadde wastid 

2his goodis. And he clepide him, and seidet 
to him, What heere I this thing of thee ? 
3eld resoun of thi ferme, for now thou 

3schalt ‘not mowe® holde thit ferme. For- 
soth the fermour seide with ynne him silf, 
What schal I do, for my" lord takith 
awey fro me the ferme? ‘I may not delue*, 

4I ‘am aschamyd to* begge. I woot what 
I schal do, that whanne I schal be remouyd 
fro the ferme, thei receyue me in to her 

shousis. Andy alle the dettours of the? 
lord clepid to gidere, he seide to the firste, 

6 Hou moche owist thou tomy lord? And he 
seide to him, An hundrid barelis of oyle. 
And he seide to him, Taak thin* obli- 
gaciouu, and sitte soon, and wryt fyfti. 

7 Aftirward he seyde to another, Sothli hou 
moche owist thou? ‘Which seide*, An 
hundrid mesuris of whete. And he seide 
to him, Tak thi lettris, and wryt foure 

sscore. And the lord preiside the fermour 
of wickidnesse, for he hadde don pru- 
dently; for the sones of this? world ben 
more prudent® in her generacioun than 

othe sones of liz3t. ‘And I seie to jou, 
make to 30u frendes of the® richesse" of 
wickidnesse, that whan 3e shulen fayle, 
thei receyue 30u in to euerlastynge taber- 


e fattid 4 pr.m. GMoPaswxy. 
erivy. i Om. acmNopastwxy.  lyueth r. 
n fermour, or baily aGuNPQsTWY. bayle o. baili x. 
MPosSTXY. Om. N. Wat AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
a the o. W delue mai Y not moperwxy. 
AGMNPQSTWxyY. And loo! o. 
astivy. kaucioun x. 


f make 3e 4G sec.m. osur see.m.w. 8&8 Om. exy. 


3 bihoueth g. 
t bailyf erex. 


© to c et plures. 
2 Om. k pr.m. 


VOL. IV. Dd 


f euermore 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
1Om. aGMNopesTUNXY. 
© ther Ww pr.m. he w man. see. 
t saith AGMNOPQSTXY. 

X schame for to acGMNopeTIVY. shame to sx. 
Z his AGMNOPQSTUV WX. 
¢ The whiche saith aemNoPoesTwxy. 
h richesses 0. riches @. 


P a feeste Ec. 
v housis a sec.m. Kqhi. 


LUKE. 201 


art euer more with me, and alle my 
thingis ben thine. But it bihofte" for? to32 
make feeste?, and to haue ioye; for this 
thi brother was deed, and lynede4 ajen ; 
he perischide, and is foundun. 


CAP. XVI; 

He seide also to hise disciplis, Ther 
was a riche man, that hadde a baili’; and 
this was defamed to him, as he hadde 
wastid his goodis. And he clepide hym,2 
and seide to hym, What here Y this thing 
of thee? 3elde reckynyng of thi baili, 
for thou mi3te not now be bailis. And3 
the bailit seide with ynne him silf, What 
schal Y do, for my lord takith awei fro 
me the baili? delfe mai Y not, I schame 
to begge. Y woot what Y schal do, that4 
whanne Y am remeued fro the baili, thei 
resseyue me in to" her hous’. Therfors 
whanne alle the dettours of his lord 
weren clepid togider, he seide to the 
firste, Hou myche owist thou to my 
lord? And he seide, An hundrid barelis 6 
of oyle. And he seide to hym, Take thi 
caucioun, and sitte soone, and write fifti. 
Aftirward he seide to another, And hou7 
myche owist thou? Which answerde, An 
hundrid coris of whete. And he seide 
to hym, Take thi lettris, and write foure 
scoore. And the lord preiside the bailis 
of wickydnesse, for he hadde do pru- 
dentli; for the sones of this world ben 
more prudent in her generacioun than 
the sones of li3t. And Y seie to 3on,9 
make 3e to 30u freendis of the ritchesseY 
of wickidnesse, that whanne 3e schulen 
fayle, thei resseyue 3ou in to euerlastynge 
tabernaclis. He that is trewe in theo 


& byhoueth acuno. 4 for to 4emNnop 
m™ and 4aGMNOoPQSIWXY. Om. T. 
Pis Apr.m. G pr.m. 

tthe aGMNoPoTY. 
y And so 
athe vn. > caucioun, or obligacioun AGMNOP 
dthe x. © prudent, or war AGMNPSTY. 


8 no more U. 


4 lyueth g. r baylyf EPQx. 8 baylif EQ. 


W ritchessis chik. 


202 


10naclis‘. He that is feithful! in the leeste™ 
thing, ‘is feithful also in more"; and he 
that ‘is wickid in a litil thing®, ‘is wickid 
i1also in the more®®. Therfore if 3e weren 
not trewe in wicked? riches’, ‘who schal 
12bitake to 3ou this that is verri™? And if 
3e weren not trewe in ‘alien thing’, who 
13schal 3yue to 30u ‘this thatt is 3oure? No 
man seruauut may serue twey" lordis ; 
forsothe ether"" he schal hate oon’, and 
loue the tothir™; ether“* ‘he schal* cleue 
to oon’, and dispise ‘the tohir2. 3e mown 
14not serue to God and to? riches. Forsoth 
Farisees, that weren coueytouse, herden 
alle thes thingis, aud thei scornyden him. 
15 And he seide* to hem, 3e it ben, that iusti- 
fyen 30u bifore men; sothli God knowith¢ 
3oure hertis, for ‘that thing that® is hi3 
to men, is abominacioun anemptis God. 
16 The lawe and prophetis til to John; fro 
that’ tyme the rewme of God is prechid®, 
and ech man ‘makith violence in to it. 
17Forsothe it is lister heuene and erthe toi 
passe ouer, than o titil falle fro‘ the lawe. 
18Eeh! man that forsakith his wyf, and 
weddith another, doith auoutrie; and he 
that weddith the wyf™ forsakun of the 
19 hosebonde, doith auoutrie. Sum man was 
rich, and was?” clothid® in? purpur, and 
biys, ‘ether whit silk4, and he® eet echs 
20day schynyngli. And ther was sum beg- 
gere, Lazarus by name, that lay ful of 
2ibylis at his 3ate, coueytinge tot be fillid® 
of’ the crummes, that felden*® doun* fro 


‘k Om. K. m jasse 0. 


ful also in the more ur. 


ltrew aGMNOPOSTWXY. 


in the more is wickide 4GaNopeTwy. and in the more is wicke sx. 
pery. the wickid thing 4 sec. m. @ sec. m.ow. the wicke thinge s. the wicke x. 
that that is soth, who schal byleene, or bytake, to 300 4 pr.m. GMNPT 


of rychesse or. of richesses si. 


LUKE. 


° in a litil thing is wickide aaarnoporwy. in a litil thing is wicke sx. 


XVI, 10—21. 


leeste thing, is trewe also in the more; 
and he that is wickid in a* litil thing, is 
wickid also in the moreY. Therfor if 3e1! 
weren not trewe in the wickid thing of 
ritchesse*, who schal bitake to 30u that 
that is verry? And if 3e weren not trewe 12 
in othere mennus thing, who schal 3yue 
to 30u that that is 3oure? No seruaunt 13 
may serue to twei lordis; for ether he 
schal hate ‘the toon®, and loue the tothir>; 
ethir he schal drawe to ‘the toon‘, and 
schal dispise the tothir’. 3e moun not 
serne to God and to ritchesse®. But thet 
Farisees, that weren coueytous, herden 
alle these thingis, and thei scorneden 
hym. And he seide to hem, 3e it ben, 15 
that iustifien 3ou bifor men; but God 
hath knowun 3oure hertis, for that that 
is hi3 to men, is abhomynacioun bifor 
God. The lawe and prophetis‘ til toSi¢ 
Joon; fro that tyme the rewme of God is 
euaigelisid, and ech man doith violence 
in to it. Forsothe it is lijter heuene and 17 
erthe to passe, than that o titil falle fro 
the lawe. Euery man that forsakith his 1s 
wijf, and weddith an other, doith letch- 
erie; aud he that weddith the wijf for- 
sakun of the hosebonde, doith anowtrie. 
There was a riche man, and was clothid i9 
in purpur, and whit silk, and eete euery 
dai schynyngli. And there was a begger, 20 
Lazarus bi name, that lai at his 3ate ful 
of bilis, aud coueitide to be fulfillid® of 21 
the crummes, that fellen doun fro the 


» and in the more is trew 4GMNOPQSTWXY. is feith- 


oo and 
P the wickyd 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MN 
G of riches 4G sec.m. N. 


xy. that that is verrei, who shal bilene, or bitake, to 30 4 sec. m. si. that is sothe, who sal byleue to yon 


o. that that is soth, who shal byleue to jou @. 
prem, MNPQSTWXY. that G sec.m. o. 
¥ the toon 4GNopesTy. the oon m. that oon HH. 
Y the toon 4GNoperiy. the oon Mx. 
esses gsr. © seith 4GMNOPQSTIVX, 
at 0. f the o. % euanyelised aGMNOPQSTWXY. 
strengthe ox. i for to 4aMNoPeTITY. 
AGMNOPQSTWAXY. 2 Om.G prem. © clad sx. 
MNOPQSTWXY. §& euery AGMNOPQSTUFWXY. 
Ww fello. * Om. a. 


x Om. b. 
oon EQ. that oon 1k. 
bh nllid shi. 


yY more thing Kk. 
ce Om. K prem. 


§ other mennys thing 4gwNoPpesTIWXY. 
“ to twey ANT. to tWo GMNOPQIVY. two U. 
Ww other ax. 
« that othir w. the other ax. 
4 hath knowen AGMNOPOQSTIWXY. 


k of G sec. m. MNOPQTXY. 
P with o, 
t for to 0. 


2 richessis § Svc. m. XK. 
4 vother 1 


t that that 4G 
uu other mey. outher x. 
WWor MPQXY. * Om. 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
ato the c pr.m. Om. x. ? rich- 
e that that 4aeauNposTwxy. that 
h dothe strengthe, or violence aemNnpostTwy. doth 
1 Enery aganopestrxy, ™ Om. 
Gor awh. s. GMoperw. Om. xy. * Om. 4G 
u fulfillid cxNnoposrrxy. VY with Ww prim. 


€ the 
£ Om. E. 


@ the oen By. that oon rek. >» oother 1. 
€ ritche:sis ik. f the profetis rk. 


XVI. 22—XVII. 2. 


the riche mannis boord, and no man 3af 
to him; but and honndis camen, and 
22lickiden his bylis. Forsothe it wasY don, 
that the beggere deiede, and was borun 
230f aungels in to Abrahams bosum. For- 
sothe and the riche man is deed, and is 
biried in helle. Forsothe* he reysinge* 
his y3en, whanne he was in turmentis, sy3 
Abraham afer, and Lazarus in his bosum. 
24 Aud” he ‘criynge seyde‘, Fadir Abraham, 
haue mercy on me, and send Lazarus, 
that he dippe the laste part of his fyngur 
in watir, and4 kele® my tunge; for I am 
2sturmentid in this flawme. And Abraham 
seide to him, Sone, haue mynde, for thou 
hast receyued good thingis in thi lyf, and 
Lazarus also yuele thingis ; sothli he is now 
2¢comnfortid, but thou art turmentid. And‘ 
in alle thes thingis a greet derk place, 
‘ether depthe®, is stablischid® ‘by twixe' vs 
and 30n; that" thei that wolen fro hennis 
passe to 30u, mown not, nether! fro thennis 
27passe ouer hidur. And he seide™, Ther- 
fore I preye thee, fadir Abraham, that 
thou sende him in to the hous of my fadir. 
28 For® J haue fyue bretheren, that he wit- 
nesse to hem, lest also® thei come in to 
29thisP place of turmentis. And Abraham 
seide4 to him, Thei han Moyses and thet 
30 prophetis; heere thei hem. And he seide, 
Nay, fadir Abraham, but if ony of deede 
men® schal go to hem, thei schulen dot 
3ipenaunce. Forsothe he seyde" to him, If 
thei heere not Moyses and the” prophetis, 
neither if ony of deede men schal* ryse 
a3en, thei schulen bileue’ to him. 


CAP. XVII. 
1 And he seide? to his disciplis, It is in- 
possible that sclaundris come not; but® 
2 woo to him, by whom thei comen. It is 


Yis AG pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
© cried, seiynge Q. cryeing seyinge T. 
NOPQSTWX. h stablid ea nopesrx. 
« Sothely 4amNoposrwxy. 
AGMNOPQTWY. 8 Om, o. 
Xschulen o. Y not beleenen x. 
AGMNOPQSTWX. 


t not do @ sec. m. 


ihe wask. & reiside vp 1s pr.m. land k. 


°not dok prim.  P the profetis gk. 


LUKE. 


2 Sothely acarnopestwy. 
that he zasnopesTwxy. 
i bitwen s. 

© and AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
U gaith AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
2 saith AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


™ haue thou bhi. 
4 vnpossible k. 


203 


riche mannus boord, and no man jaf to 
hym; but houndis camen, and lickiden 
hise bilis. And it was don, that the22 
begger diede, and was borun of aungels 
in to Abrahams bosum. And the riche23 
man was deed also, and was? biried in 
helle. And he reiside* hise izen, whanne 
he was in turmentis, and say Abraham 
afer, and Lazarus in his bosum. Andez4 
he criede, and seide, Fadir Abraham, 
haue merci on ine, and sende Lazarus, 
that he dippe the ende of his fyngur in 
watir, to! kele my tunge; for Y am tur- 
mentid in this flawme. And Abraham2s 
seide to hym, Sone, haue™ mynde, for 
thon hast resseyned good thingis in thi 
lijf, and" Lazarus also yuel thingis; but 
he is now coumfortid, and thou art tur- 
mentid. And in alle these thingis a greet 26 
derk place is stablischid betwixe vs and 
jou; that thei that wolen fro hennus 
passe to 30u, moun not, nethir fro 
thennus passe ouer hidur. And he seide, 27 
Thaune Y preie thee, fadir, that thou: 
sende hym in to the hous of my fadir. 
For Y haue fyue britheren, that he wit- 2s 
nesse to hem, lest also thei come in to 
this place of turmentis. And Abraham 29 
seide to him, Thei han Moyses and the 
prophetis; here thei hem. And he seide, 30 
Nay, fadir Abraham, but if ony of deed 
men go to hem, thei schulen do® penaunce. 
And he seide to hym, If thei heren nots: 
Moises and prophetis’, nethir if ony of 
deed men rise a3en, thei schulen bilene 
to hym. 


CAP. XVII. 


And Jhesu seide to hise disciplis, Iti 
is impossible? that sclaundris come not; 
but wo to that man, bi whom thei comen. 


a castynge vp aGMNopesTWxXY. >» Om. wW. 
ekoole x. f Buto. $ Om. sam 
Ine thidur 7. ™ seith coperwxy. 
G4 seith 4GMNPQSTWXY. r Om. 

w Om. AGMNPQSTIVY. 
b that man 


K and 1. 
P the n. 


8 forsoth AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


2. Om. A pr. m. CEIKMPQRSxbeehika8, 


pdQ 


204 


more profitable to him, if a mylne stoon 
be put® aboute his necke, and he be cast 
in to the see, than that he sclaundre oon 
sof thes® litle. ‘Take 3e heede to 30u silf®; 
if thi brother ‘hath synned ajens® thee, 
blame him; and if he schal do penaunce, 
4for3yue to" him. And if seuene sithis in 
the day he schal syne ajens! thee, and 
seuene sithis in the day he* schal be con- 
uertid to thee, seyinge, It forthenkith me, 
5 for3yue to! him. {And ‘the postlis™ seiden 
6to the Lord, Encreesse ‘feith to vs". For- 
soth the Lord seyde®, If 3e ‘schulen haue? 
feith as the’ corn of syneuey, 3e schulen 
seye to this ‘more tree’, Be thou drawun 
vp by the roote, and be’ ‘plauntid ouvert in 
to the see, and it schal obeye" to 3ou. 
7Forsothe who of 3ou hauynge a seruaunt 
eringe, other’ lesewynge oxun, which* 
‘seith to him, turnyd a3en fro the feeld, 
sAnoonY go’, and* sitte to mete; and 
‘seith not* to him, Make thou! redy, that 
I soupe, and girde thee®, and mynystre to 
me, til I ete and drynke, and® aftir thes 
thingis thou schalt ete and drynke; 
9 wher he hath! grace* to that seruaunt, for 
he dide ‘this that! he comaundide to him? 
io Nay, I gesse. So also™ 3e” whanne 3e han 
don alle thingis that ben coimanndid to 
3ou, ‘seie 3e"", We ben vnprofitable ser- 
uauntis, ‘we han don? ‘this that? we ou3te 
ntod do™ Aud it was* done, the while 
Jhesu wente in to Jerusalem, he passide 
thorw the myddel of Samarie, and oft 
e this o. 


Cpitto, Om. acunopesTirxy. 


LUKE. 


Var 


It is more profitable to him, if a mylnez 
stoon be put aboute his necke, and he be 
cast in to the see, than that he sclaundre 
oon of these litle. Take 3e hede 3ou' silf;3 
if thi brothir hath synned ajens thee, 
blame hym; and if he do penaunce, for- 
3yue hym. And if seuene sithis in the4 
dai he do synne ajens thee, and seuene 
sithis in the dai he be conuertid to thee, 
and seie, It forthenkith me, for3yue thou 
hym’. And the apostlist seiden to thes 
Lord, Encrese to vs feith. And the Lord 6 
seide, If je han feith as the corn of 
seneuei, 3e schulen seie to this more tre, 
Be thou drawun yp bi the rote, and be 
ouerplauntid in to the see, and it schal 
obeie to 30u. But who of 3ou hath a7 
seruaunt erynge, or lesewynge oxis¥, 
which seith to hym, whanne he turneth 
ajen fro the feeld, Anoon go, and sitte to 
mete; and seith not to hym, Make redi,s 
that Y soupe, and girde thee, and serue 
me, while Y ete and drynke, and aftir this 
thou schalt ete and drynke; whethers 
he hath’ grace to that seruaunt, for he 
dide that that he comaundide hyin ? 
Nay, Y gesse. So 3e, whanne 3e hanio 
don alle thingis that ben comaundid to 
3ou, seie 3e, We ben vuprofitable ser- 
uauntis, we han do that that” we ou3ten 
to do. And it was do, the* while Jhesus 11 
wente inY to Jerusalem, he passide thorou 
the myddis? of Samarie, and Galilee. And 12 
whaune he entride in to a castel, ten 


f Perseyue to 30u silf, or take heede at. Perceyuith 


to 30u self, or takith heed cy. Perceyueth, or takith hede, to youre [50u psi] silf apsw. Perceyue, or take 


hede to 3oure silf x. ‘Take heede to 3o0ur silf o. Perceyueth to 3ow self ox. 
b Om. su. 


xy. haue synned in s. hath synned in sr. 
{ Chap. xvi1. commences here in swoperwxy. 
feith apxy. © said to hem o. 
t ouerplauntid moperwxy. 
oxen MT. oxes 0. 


P hadden aNopeTxy. 
u obesche mw. obeshen s. 
x the whiche 4GMNoresTWxY. 


& schal synne in MNOPQT 


iin MNOPQSTXY. k Om. x. 10m. e. 
™ the apostlis acmpquxy. apostlis NosTi. n to vs 
Qag. tree moor MopeTwxy, 8% be thou o. 


Yor mopoeTwxy. W the oxys acnpesmy. the 
¥ seith to hym, turned azen fro feeld, Anoon 


A sup. Tas. G sec.m.W sec.m, turnyd a3en fro feelde, he seith anoon to him 6 pr.m. arnpe. turned azen 
fro the feeld, seith anoon to him oy. turned ajeyn fro the feeld, he seith anoon to hym tT. turned a3ein 


fro the feeld, seith to hym anoon ty pr.m. turned ajzen fro feeld, seith anoen to hym x. 
b to the agnosur. at the MPQTIVXY. 
€ thee bifore 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 


W prem. a Om. 4GMNOPQESTIWXY. 
d Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
bh Whether wx pass. i hadde vu. 
mand 4GMNOPQOSTWXY. Om, K. 
that 4GMNPQSTWXy. that at o. 
TWXY. do, we han not don Nn. 


¥ to 30n cixe sec.m, ka. jour EPQ sec, m. Re Sec. mM. g. 
x Om. 1Rhi. 


® oxen KRk. v haue k, w Om. ci. 


beeghikeg. 


k prace, or loue G sec. m. 0. 
an seie AGMNPQTWY. seith sx. 
4 for to acMNoPQT. Om. U pr.m. rivy. 
SiS A pr.m. G pr.m. MNOPSTXY. 


2 Go thou 
¢ not seith MopeTwxy. 
f til that aGarNopesTUVWXY. & Om. kK. 
' that that awpsrivxy. that at o. 

0 Om. AGMNOPOSTWXY.  P that 
r do, we han don aGNopes 
t Om. 4GMNOPQSTUVIWXY. 


S to hym mRxb sec. m. hi, 


‘ postlis Isg. 
y Om. s sec. m. b. 


z myddil crimpqnsux 


XVII. 12——27. 


12Galilee. And whanne he entride in to 
sum castel, ten leprouse men camen ajens 
ishim, whiche" stoode afer, and reyside¥ 
the* vois, seiynge, Jhesu, comaundour, 
1shaue mercy on vs. WhicheY as? he sy3, 
he seide, Go 3e, ‘schewe 3e* 30n® to prestis. 
And it was don, the while thei wenten, 
1sthei weren® clensid. Forsothe oon of hem, 
as he sy3 for* he wasf clensid, weute a3en, 
lsmagnyfiynge God with greet vois. And 
he& felde doun in to the face bifore his 
feet, doynge thankingis"; and this was a 
i7Samaritan. Forsothe Jhesu answeringe 
seide, Wher ten ben not clensid, and where 
isben the nyne? ‘Noon is! foundun, that 
turnyde ajen, and 3af glorie to God, no* 
19 but this alien'. And he seith to him, Ryse 
thou™, go thou; for thi feith hath maad 
20thee saaf. ‘Forsothe he axid of" Phari- 
sees, whanne the rewme of God cometh, 
answeride® toP hem, and‘ seide, The 
rewme of God cometh not with aspy- 
21ing, nethir thei schuleu seye, Lo! here, 
ether® lo! there; forsothe lo! the rewme 
220f God is with ynne 30u. And he seide® 
to his disciplis, Dayes schulen come, 
whanne 3e schulen desyre tot se o" day 
of mannis sone, and 3e schulen not se. 
23 And thei schulen seye to 30u, Lo! here, 
and lo! there. Nyle 3e go, nether sue 3e; 
asfor’ as leit schynynge fro vndir heuene 
schyneth ‘on thoo” thingis that ben vndir 
heuene, so ‘mannis sone sehal be* in his 
aday. Forsothe first it bihoneth him toY 
suffre many thingis, and to* be reproued 
26of this generacioun. And as it was don 
in the dayes of Noe, so it scha] be in the 
e7dayes of mannis sone. Thei eeten and 
drunken, and* weddiden wyues, and weren 


u the whiche 4GMNOPQSTWWXY. 
y Whom mNoposTxy. 2 whanne Nn. 
4 ben 4 prim. G prim. MNPQSTXY. © ag XY. 


yngis AMNPSTWY. grace, or thankingis G. graces QX. 


lalien, or sfraunger aGMNPQSTW. straunger XY. 
Jhesus was axid of the Q sup. ras. 
answeride v. answerende x. P Om. MNXY. 

nopestwxy. ¢tforto aGaNoperwy., Ya a. 
in to the o. 


Om. ow pr.m.yY. 2 for to AGMNOPOQTIVY. 


© scheweth 1. 
8 Om. tg. 


Athe whiche 1. > Om. kb. 
f the Farisees raxc pr. m. k. 


w liften vp antiv. lifteden vp Gawoposxy. 
a shewith x. 
fis AGMNOPQSTWXY, 


@ yp AGK pr. m, MNOPQSTWXY. 
o answerynge KY. he answered o, and he answeride Q sec.m. Jhesu 
9 Om. xY. 
v for whi AGN NOPQSTXY. 
x shal mannus sone be ap. schal be manntis sone ogTiwxy. 
a Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


d Om. k. 


LUKE. 205 


leprouse men camen ajens hym, whiche* 
stoden afer, and reiseden her voys, and 13 
seiden, Jhesu, comaundoure, haue merci 
on vs. And as he say hem, he seide, Gos 
3e", ‘schewe 3e° 30u to the! prestis. And 
it was don, the® while thei wenten, thei 
weren clensid. And oon of hem, as he1s 
sai3 that he was clensid, wente a3en, 
magnifiynge God with grete® vois. And 16 
he fel doun on the face bifore hise feet, 
and dide thankyngis; and this was a 
Samaritan. And Jhesus answerde, and 17 
seide, Whether ten ben not clensid, and 
where ben the nyne? There is noonis 
foundun, that turnede a3en, and 3af glorie 
to God, but this alien. And he seide toi 
hym, Rise vp, go thou; for thi feith 
hath maad thee saaf. And he was axid 20 
of Farisees‘, whanne the rewme of God 
cometh. And he answerde to hem, and 
seide, The rewme of God cometh not 
with aspiyng, nether thei schulen seie, 21 
Lo! here, or lo there; for lo! the rewme 
of God is with ynne jon. And he seide 22 
to hise disciplis, Daies schulen come, 
whanne 3e schulen desire to se o dai of 
mannus soie, and 3e schulen not se. 
And thei schulen seie to 3ou, Lo! here, 23 
and lo there. Nyle 3e go, nether sue 3e8 ; 
for as leyt schynynge froin vudur heuene 24 
schyneth in to tho thingis that ben vn- 
dur heuene, so sclial mannus sone be in 
his dai. But first it bihoueth hym to2s 
suffre many thingis, and to be repreued 
of this generacioun. And as it was2 
doon in the daies of Noe, so it schal 
be in the daies of mannys sone. Thei27 
eeten and drunkun, weddiden wyues, and 
weren 30uun to weddyngis, til in to the 


Xa Gupoxy. her s. 
b Om. & prim. Cis AG pr.m,. MNOPSTXY. 
Om. x. =} graces, or thank- 
i Thare is noon AGMNOPQSTIFXY. k Om. ox. 
2 Sothely thenne 


ror moporwxy. Om. N. 8 saith acy 
Win to tho A4GNNPQSTIVXY. 
Y for to AGMNPQTW sce. m. 


€Om.thik. ¢¢ a greet ceakmrqrsuxbeghik. 


206 


3ouun to weddingis, til in to the day in 
which? Noe entride in to his® schip; and 
28 the’ greet flood cam, and loste alle. Also 
as® it was don in the dayes of Loth, 
thei eeten and drunken, bou3ten and 
29seelden, plantiden* and byldeden®; sothli 
in what day Loth wente out of Sodom, 
the Lord reynede fier and brymstoon fro 
30 heuene, and loste alle. Vp" this thing it 
schal be, in what day mannis sone schal 
31 be schewid. In that our! he that schal be 
in the roof, and his vesels in the hous, 
come he* not doun to! take hem awei; 
and he! that ‘schal be™ in the" feeld, 
szalso turne not a3en bihynde. Be 3e 
ss3myndeful of the wyf of Loth. Who 
euere schal seke to® make his lyf? saf, 
schal leese it; and who euere schal leese 
iit, schal quykene it. I seye to 3ou, in 
that nijt tweyne? schulen be in o bed, oon 
schal be receyued", and ‘the tother® ‘schal 
35 bet forsakun ; tweye wymmen schulen" be 
gryndinge to gidere, oon” schal be re- 
ceyued*, and ‘the totherY ‘schal be? for- 
sakun; tweyne in a* feeld, oon” schal be 
receyued’, ‘the tother® ‘schal be® forsakun. 
36 Thel answeringe seyden‘ to him, Where, 
37Lord ? Which seide to hem, Where 
euere’ the body schal be, ‘also the eglis 
schulen be gederid to gidere thidur'. 


CAPs XVII, 
1 Forsothe he seide ‘also a parable to 
hem, for it bihoueth to! preie euere™, and 
2‘to fayle not"; seyinge, ‘Sum iuge was® in 
sum? citee, which® dredde not God, nether" 
3schamede of* men. Forsothe sum widowe 


> the which mrperxy. 


& bylden rx. h Aftir 4GMNOPQSTIVX, 


1 Om. o. Mis AGMOQXY. Om. NPSTIV. n Om. N. 
AGMNPOSTIVY. soule OX. 4 two MOPQIVX ef Y passim. 
other gwx. tOm. acmunopesTivxy.  schal xk. 


oon W. X taken to AGMNOQSTIWY. taken x. 

aooo0. ? the tone sGnogsty. the oon ax. the one p. that’ oon i. 
and x. 4 that other sv. the other x. 

AGMNOPQSTWXY. b Om. x. 


shul be gedered togidere the eglis x. 
| for to aGMOPETIWY. 
© Ther was sum iuge 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 
G prom. MNOPQSTY. not X. 


Paa. 


hOm.1 i Om. hi. 
that oon e. © the oother 1. that other e. 
8 Om, sh prom, t he seide k prim. 


LUKE. 


¢ the AGMNOPQSTUFIWXY. 
iday MNOPTXY. 


y that othir wy. the other x. 


€ Om. AGMNOQSTWXY. 
i thidir schulen be gedered togider and the eglis acanoposTwy. thider 


k in the Ee sec. m. k prim. 
P that oon rek. 


XVII, 28-—XVIII. 3. 


dai in the! whych Noe entride in to the! 
schip; and the greet flood cam, and loste 
alle. Also as it was don in the daies of 28 
Loth, thei eeten and drunkun, bou3ten 
and seelden, plauntiden and_bildiden ; 
but the® dai that Loth wente out of So-29 
dome; the Lord reynede fier and brym- 
stoon fro heuene, and loste alle. Lijk this 30 
thing it schal be, in what dai mannys 
sone schal be schewid. In that our hesi 
that is in the roof, and his vessels in 
the hous, come he not doun to take hem 
awei; and he that schal be in the feeld, 
also turne not a3en bihynde. Be 3e32 
myndeful of the wijf of Loth. Whoss 
euer seketh! to make his lijf saaf, schal 
leese it; and who euer leesith it, schal 
quykene it. But Y seie to 30u, in that 34 
ny3t twei schulen be in o bed, oon schal 
be takun, and the tothir™ forsakun 5 twei3s 
wymmen schulen be gryndynge togidir, 
‘the toon” schal be takun, and ‘the tother® 
forsakun; twei in a feeld, ‘the toon? 
schal be takun, and ‘the tother4 left’. 
Thei answeren, and seien to hym, Where, 36 
Lord? Which seide to hem, Where37 
euer the bodi schal be, thidur schulen be 
gaderid togidere® also the eglis. 


CAP. XVIII. 


And he seide to hem also a parable, 
that it bihoueth to preye ener more, and 
not faile; and seidet, There was a iuge2 
in a citee, that dredde not God, nether 
schamede of men. And a widowe was3 


d Om. v. e Om. Q. 
k Om. ur. 


f and plaunteden s. 
l for to AGMNOPQTIWY. 
© for to AGMNOPOTIY. P soule, that is, lif 
taken to 4GMNopesTw. taken xY. 8 that 
wthe ton NGesTxy. the oon a. the one Pp. that 
Z Om. AGMNPQSTWXY. 
¢ taken to 4GmNoposTivY. taken 


f seien AGMNOPQSTWXY. & The whiche 


k in a parable to hem ar. to hem and a parable GuNnopesixy. 
M euer More AGMNOPQSTWXY, 
9 that 4GarNOoPQSTWXY. 


n not fayle 4eGMNOPQSTIVXY. not to faile ur. 
rne x. 8 Om. 4 prem. 


n the oon El. 
r forsaken k. 


lseke a et plures o8. ™ oother 1. 
4 the oother 1. that other e. 


XVIII. 4—15. 


was in that citee, and sche cam to him, 
seyinge, Venge me oft myn aduersarie ; 
4and he wolde not by myche tyme. Sothli 
aftir thes thingis he seide with ynne him 
silf, Thou3" I drede not God, and schame 
snot of’ man, netheles for this widowe is 
-heuy, ‘or diseseful, to me, I schal venge 
hir; lest at the Jaste sche comynge 
éstrangle me. Sothli the Lord seide*, 
Heere 3e, what the domesman of wickid- 
qnesse seith; forsoth wher God schal not 
do they veniaunce of his chosene, criynge 
to him ny3t and day, and schal haue pa- 
science in hem? Sothli I seie to 30u, for 
soone he schal do the? veniaunce of hem. 
Netheles gessist thou, mannis* sone com- 
gynge schal fynde feith in erthe? For- 
soth he seide also» to sum men®*, that 
tristiden in hei silf, as rijtful, and dis- 
piseden* othere, this parable, seyinge, 
io Tweye men sti3eden® in to the temple forf 
to preie; oon’ a’ Pharise, and! ‘the tothir* 
11a! pupplican. Forsothe the Farise stond- 
inge, praiede anentis him silf thes thingis, 
seyinge, God, I do thankingis to thee, for™ 
I am not as othere men", raueynouris®, 
vniust?, anouters4, ‘as also" this pupplican ; 
i2I faste twyes* in the woke, I 3yue tythis 
of alle thingist whiche® I haue in posses- 
issioun, And the pupplican stondinge ‘a 
fer’ nolde¥ nethir reyse* the y3en to he- 
uene, but smoot his brest, seyinge, God 
iabe mercyfulY to me, synnere. ‘Treuli I 
seye to 30u, this? ‘cam doun in to his hous 
iustified* of® him. For ech that enhauns- 
ith him silf¢ schal be maad lou3, and het 
that mekith him silf¢, schal be enhaunsid. 
is Forsothe thei brou3ten to him jonge chil- 
dren, that he schulde touch hem; whichf 


tono. And if aemNopesTWwXxY. 
x selth AaGMNPQSTIVXY. Y Om- AGMNOPOSTIVXY. 
AGMNoswy. Om. oprx. ¢ Om.o, 


m Om. x. 
ras r. also as Ww. 


other px. 1 Om. o. 
4 auoutreres MNOPOQTX. 
w wold not 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 
full o. helful x. helful, or merciful v. 
b fro acuNPSWXY. from o. 
whiche 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 


2 for this s. 


w that rek. 
ad nolde k, 


Vv Om. c. 
€ auouteris Is. 
ihim self hi, 


u 3eden s. 
b ranenons EP. 
bhym self i. 


¥ Om. 4 pr.m. G pr.m, MNOPQSTXY. 
Z Om. AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
dlispisen y. © stizeden vp AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
toon 4GNogsTy. the oon m. the one px. that oon Ww. 
n of men AGMNOPOSTIWXY. 
Stwy o. 
x lift vp 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 
a descendid justefied in to his hous aGsrNopesTWwXxY. 
© Om. AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 


X oon Erk. toon was kK. 
ad not 9. 


LUKE. 207 


in that citee, and sche cam to hym, and 
seide, Venge me of myn aduersarie; ands | 
he wolde not longe tyme. But aftir 
these thingis he seide with yune hym 
silf, Thou3 Y drede not God, and schame 
not of man, netheles for this widewe iss 
heuy to me, Y schal venge hir; lest at 
the laste sche comynge condempne me. 
And the Lord seide, Here 3e, what thee 
domesman of wickidnesse seith; and whe-7 
ther God schal not do veniaunce of hise 
chosun, criynge to hym dai and ny3t, 
and schal haue pacience in hem? Sothelis 
Y seie to 30u, for soone he schal do 
veniaunce of hem. Netheles gessist thou, 
that mannus sone comynge schal fynde 
feith in erthe? And he seide also to» 
sum men, that tristiden in hem silf, as 
thet weren ri3tful, and dispiseden othere, 
this parable, seiynge, Twei men wenten" 10 
vp’ in to the temple to preye; the” toon* 
a Farisee, andy the? tother? a pupplican. 
And the Farisee stood, and preiede bit 
hym silf these thingis, and seide, God, Y 
do thankyngis to thee, for Y am not as 
other men, raucinonris®, vuiust, auou- 
treris®, as also this pupplican; Y faste 12 
twies in the woke, Y 3yue tithis of alle 
thingis that Y haue in possessioun. 
And the pupplican stood afer, and wolde® 1s 
nether"! reise hise i3en to® heuene, but 
smoot his brest, and seide, God be mer- 
ciful to me, synnere. Treuli Y seie tot 
30u, this‘ 3ede doun in to his hous, and 
was iustified fro the other’. For ech 
that enhaunsith hym!, schal be maad 
low, and he that mekith hymi, schal be 
enhauusid. And thei broujten to hym ts 
jonge children, that he schulde touche 


Ww Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
&for mannus o. and 
fOm, x. §& the 
k that othir a7. the 
° ranaynour 0. P and vniust ur. 
tthenge 0. that acarnopesTwxy, * fer vu. 
y helpful, or merciful aemnpast. help- 


hwasae. iOm. ur. 


@4Om. xv. ¢ Om. scanopestwxy.  f the 


zthat 5. 8 oothir re. 
& touther EKPRsUXbghik. 


y Om. Ep. 


eintor. fhe this r. 


208 


thing whanne disciplis sy3en, thei blam- 
isyden hem. Sothli' Jhesu  clepinge to 
gidere hem, seide, Suffre 3e children to 
come to me, and nyle 3e forbede hem, 
for! of siche is the rewme™ of heuenes. 
17 Treuli I seie to 30u, who euere schal not 
take the kyngdom of God as a child, he™ 
18schal not entre in to it. And sum prince 
axide him, seyinge, Good maistir, what 
thing doynge schal I welde euerlastyng 
lwlyf? Sothli Jhesu seyde to him, What 
seist thou me good? No man ¢s° good, noP 
20but God aloone. Thou knowist’ the co- 
maundementis, Thou schalt not sle, Thou 
schalt not do leccherie, Thou schalt not 
do thefte, Thou schal not seye fals™ wit- 
nessyng, Worschipe fadir’ and modir‘. 
21 Which" seide’, I have kept alle thes 
22thingisY fro my 3outhe*. WhichY thing 
herd, Jhesu seide* to him, 3it o thing 
faylith to thee; sille thou alle, what 
‘euere thingis® thou hast, and 3yue to pore 
men, and thou schalt haue tresowr in 
23heuene; and come, and sue me. Thes 
thingis herd, he was sorwful, for he was 
2iful riche. Sothli Jhesu seinge him maad 
sorwful> seide, How hard thei that han 
richessis® schulen entre in to the rewme? 
250f God; forsoth it is esyer* a camel tof 
passe thur3 ‘a nedlis8 y3e, than a riche 
man for' to entre in to the kingdom of 
26God. And thei that herden thes thingis 
27seiden, And who may be maad saf? And 
he seide' to hem, Tho thingis that ben 
vnpossible* anemptis! men, ben possible 
28anemptis God. Forsoth Petre seide™, Loo! 
we han forsake" alle thingis, and ‘han 
29sued° thee. Which? seyde to hem, Treuly 
I seye to 30u, ‘uo man is%, that schal for- 


i Om, s. k for to AGMNOPETIVY, \ sothely aGMNOPQSTIVXY. - 
n Om. 4GMNOPOSTIVXY. 9° Om. 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNOPQSTXY. 
PQOSTWKY, T no fals o. to fals vy. 


stuwx, the modir ery. 
* 3ongthe opory. 
> sory AUMNOPQSTIWXY. 
PQSTWXY. f for to acmNPoTIWY. Oni. U. 
STWXY. k inpossible aemNopesTxy. 


NOPQSTWXY. © suen AGMOPOQSTIFXY. 
OPQSTWXY. 

kOm. er. to me ep prim. m Om. Ep. 
4 Om. s.  * vnpossible pk. 


LUKE. 


8 thi fader amnopestuwx. the fadir ery. 
u The whiche 4cmNopesTWwxy. 
y The whiche 4GmNoposTwxy. 
© money AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
g an edlis ewporw. 
lanent x passim. 
P The whiche aGarNoposTWxy. 


2 30uthe EpQk. 


XVIII. 16—29. 


hem; and whanne the disciplis saien this 
thing, thei blameden hem. But Jhesus ic 
clepide togider hem, and seide, Suffre 3e 
children to come to me, and nyle 3e for- 
bede hem, for of siche is the kyngdom 
of henenes. Treuli Y seie to 30u, who17 
euer schal not take the kyngdom of God 
as a child, he schal not entre in to it. 
And a prince axide hym, and seide,18 
Goode maister, ink what thing doynge 
schal Y weilde euerlastynge lijf? Andis 
Jhesus seide to hym, What seist thou 
me! good? No man zs good, but God 
aloone. Thou knowist the comaunde-20 
mentis, Thou schalt not sle, Thou schalt 
not do letcherie, Thou schalt not do 
theft, Thou schalt not seie fals witness- 
yng, Worschipe thi fadir and ¢hi™ mo- 
dir. Which seide, Y haue kept alle2i 
these thingis fro my jongthe™. And 22 
whanne this thing was herd, Jhesus 
seide to hym, 3it o thing failith ‘to thee®; 
sille thou alle thingis that thou hast, and 
3yue to pore men, and thou schalt haue 
tresour in heuene; and come, and sue 
thou me. Whanne? these thingis weren 23 
herd, he was soreful, for he was ful 
ryche. And Jhesus seynge hym maad 24 
sorie, seide, How hard thei that han 
money schulen entre in to the kyngdom 
of God; for it is lij3ter a camel to passe 25 
thorou a nedlis ize, than a riche man to 
entre in to the kyngdom of God. And 26 
thei that herden these thingis seiden, 
Who may be maad4 saaf? And he27 
seide to hem, Tho thingis that ben im- 
possible’ anentis men, ben possible anen- 
tis God. But Petir seide, Lo! we hanes 
left alle thingis, and han sued thee. And 29 


m kyngdam aGMNOPQSTIVAY. 
q hast knowen aGaNno 

t thi moder amopg 
Vv saith AGMNOPQSTWXY. w Om. nN. 
a thingis that euere vu. 
¢ lijter aGarno 
h Om. sx. i saith 4GuNoPQ 
M saith AGMNOPQSTIXY. 0 left AGM 
q ther is no man AGMN 

: 


p Om. o. 


Z saith AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
4 kyngdam aGaNoPQsTWXY. 


°Qm.xr. P And whanne a pr.m. 


XVIII. 30—XIX. I. 


sake hous, ether" fadir, ethir’ modir, ethirt 
britheren, ether' wyf, ethert sones, ether* 
30feeldis, for the rewme of God, and schal 
not receyue myche mo thingis in this 
tyme, and in the world to comynge’ euere- 
31 lasting lyf. Forsothe Jhesu took” twelue* 
disciplis, and seideY to hem, Lo! we 
stizen? to Jerusalem, and alle thingis schu- 
_ len be endid, that ben writun by the? 
32prophetis of mannis sone. Forsoth he 
schal be bitrayed to hethen men, and he 
schal be scorned, and scourgid, and bi- 
33spet®; and aftir that thei han scourgid®, 
thei schulen sle him, and® the thridde day 
34he schal ryse ajein. And thei vnder- 
stodenf no thing of these; and this word 
was hid fro hem, and thei vndirstoden 
35not tho thingis that’ weren seid. For- 
sothe it was% don, whanne Jhesu cam ny3 
to Jerico, sum blynd man saat bisydis the 
36weye beggynge. And whanne he herde 
the cumpany" passynge, he axide, what 
37 this thing was. Sothli thei seiden to him, 
38that Jhesu of Nazareth passide. And he 
cryede, seyinge, Jhesu, the sone of Danith, 
39haue mercy on me. And thei that wenten 
bifore blamyden him, that he schulde be 
stille; sothli he ‘cryede myche morel, Thon 
40sone of Dauith, haue mercy on me. For- 
sothe Jhesu stondinge comaundide him 
to be brou3t forth to him. And whanne 
4the cam ny3, he axide him, seyinge, What 
wolt thou I schal do to thee? And he 
4eseide, Lord, that I se. And Jhesu seide 
to him, Bihold thou!; thi feith hath maad 
43thee saaf. And anon he sy3, and suede 
him, magnyfiynge God. And al the peple, 
as™ it” sy3, 3af heriynge® to God. 


CAP. XIX. 
i And Jhesu goynge yn?, walkide thorw4 


¥ or AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
Ww toke to AGMNOPSTWXY. 
PQSTWXY. 8 Om. AGMNPQSTWXY. 
him o. ¢andaftir vu. f vndirstonden nw. 
MNOPQSTWXY. | miche more criede wPY. 
on he u prom. © praysynge 0. 


8 and modir ereqrbeeghia. or modir a pr. m. KskB. 


LUKE. 


- bisidis the weie, and beggide. 


8 and AGMNQSUVIVY. oF OPT. 
x his twelve AGMNPQSTWXY. 
» bispattid x. 
Sis a pr.m.G pr.m, MNOPSTX. 
k for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
P ajeyn @ sec. m. 


209 


he seide to hym, Treuli Y seie to 30u, 
there is no man that schal forsake hous, 


‘or fadir, modir‘, or britheren, or wijf, or 


children, or feeldis, for the rewme of 
God, and schal not resseyne many moz0 
thingis in this tyme, and in the world 
to comynge euerlastynge lijf. And Jhe-31 
sus took hise twelue disciplis, and seide 
to hem, Lo! we gon vp to Jerusalem, 
and alle thingis schulen be endid, that 
ben writun bi the prophetis of mannus 
sone. For he schal be bitraied to hethen sz 
men, and he schal be scorned, and 
scourgid, and bispat; and aftir thattss 
thei han scourgid", thei schulen sle hym, 
and the thridde dai he schal rise ajen. 
And thei vndurstoden no thing’ of these ; 34 
and this word was hid fro hem, and thei 
vndurstoden not tho thingis that weren 
seid. But it was don, whanne Jhesus3s 
cam ny3 to Jerico, a blynde man sat 
And 36 
whanne he herde the puple passynge, 
he axide, what this was. And theis37 


- seiden to hym, that Jhesus of Nazareth 


passide. And he criede, and seide, Jhe-3s 
su, the sone of Dauyd, haue mercy on 
me. And thei that wenten bifor blam- 9 
yden hym, that he schulde be stille; but 
he criede myche the more, Thou sone of 
Dauid, haue mercy on me. And Jhesus 40 
stood, and comaundide hym to be brou3t 
forth to hym. And whanne he cam ny3, 
he axide hym, and seide, What wolt thou 4) 
that Y schal do to thee? And he seide, 
Lord, that Y se. And Jhesus seide to 42 


- hym, Biholde; thi feith hath maad thee 


saaf. And anoon he say, and suede hym, 43 
and magnyfiede God. And al the puple, 
as it say, 3af heriyng to God. 


CAP. XIX. 
And Jhesus ‘goynge yn”, walkidet 


‘or AGMNOPQSTWXY. Ymoreo. VY comen sx. 
Ysaith acuNOQSTWX. 7 stijen vp 4GNO 
¢ scourgid, or betun AGMNPSTWX. scourged 

h cumpany of puple 4c 

1Om.4GMNoPpesTwxY. ™ that xy. 

q to G pr.m. MPQTXY. in to No. 

t Om. hi. 


uscourgid him k. _Y thingis hi. 


w wente ont and ckuc. turnede ajen and Epaqsba. wente yn e. 


VOL. IV. EC 


210 


2Jerico. And lo! a man, Zachee by name, 
and he was prince of pupplicans, and he 
3was* riche. Arid he sou3te tot see Jhesu, 
who he was, and he my3te not, for the 
cumpany", for he was litel in stature. 
4And he rennynge bifore, stizede” in to a 
sycamoure tree, that he schulde see Jhesu"; 
sfor he was to passinge* thennis. And 
Jhesu biholdinge vpward’, whanne he cam 
to the place, sy3 hiin, and seyde to him, 
Zachee, ‘hastinge cum doun’, for to day 
61 moot* dwelle in thin hous. And he hast- 
inge’ cam doun, and ioyinge reseyuede 
7him. And whanne alle men sayen, thei 
grucchiden, seyinge, For he hadde* turned 
8to a synful man. Forsoth Zachee stond- 
inge seide to the Lord, Lo! Lord, I 3yue 
the half of my goodis to pore men; and if 
I haue ony thing defraudid ony man, I 
93elde the’ fourefold®. Jhesu seidef to him, 
For in this day heelthe is maad to this? 
hous, for and* he is ‘the sone of Abraham; 
10forsothe mannis sone cam to® seke, and 
make! saaf this™ thing that perischede. 
it Hem® heringe thes thingis, he ‘puttinge 
to°, seide a parable, for? he was ny3 Jeru- 
salem, and for thei gessiden, that4 the 
kyngdom of God schulde be schewid ‘a 
12non’. Therfore he seide, Sum noble man 
wente in to a fer cuntree, to® take tot him 
13a" kyngdom, and to’ turne a3eyn. Sothli 
his ten seruauntis clepid, he 3af” to hem 
ten besanntis. And ‘he seide* to hem, 
14+ Marchaundise 3e, tily I come. Forsoth 
his? citeseyns hatiden him, and sente a 
messager" aftir him, seyinge, We ‘uyle, that 
1she> regne on® vs. And it was? don, that 
the rewme® takun, he turnede ajen; and! 


r this AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
of puple 4GanposTixyY. company of the pepil o. 
MNOPQSTWXY.  * passe AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
wy. cumme doun hijynge o. he3ende cum doun x. 
ende x. ¢Cwasu. 4Om.v. @& fourth foold o. 
PQsTWXY. that and N. 
NogsTWXY. ™ that 4GMNOPQSTIVY. 
anoon mivxy. ° Om. mivxy. 
w take o. x saith 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
and is referred to by the letter a. 
sauger TH. 
A prem. G pr.m. MNPSTXY. 


n Thei v. 


X to CEKPubec, too s. 


y Om. 1K prem. g. 
s sec, m, hia, 


¢ and he s. 


LUKE. 


8 Om. 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNPQSTXY. 
V stized vp 4GMNOPOSTIVY. stei3 vp Xx. 
¥ vp AGMNOPQSTWXY. 

@ most o. mut MP. 
f saith aGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
i Abrahames sone 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 
© addynge ur. 
8 for to AGMNOPOTW. 


2 goodis Qi. 


XIX. 2——15, 


thorou* Jericho. And lo! a man, Sache2 
bi name, and this was a prince of pup- 
plicans, and he was riche. And he sou3te3 
to se Jhesu, who he was, and he my3te 
not, for the puple, for he was litil in 
stature. And he ran bifore, and stijede4 
in to a sicomoure tree, to se hym; for he 
was to passe fro thennus. And Jhesuss 
biheld vp, whanne he cam to the place, 
and sai3 hym, and seide to hym, Sache, 
haste thee, and come doun, for to dai Y 
mot dwelle in thin hous. And he hi3yngee 
cam doun, and ioiynge resseyuede hym. 
And whanne alle men sayn, thei grutch-7 
iden seiynge, For he hadde turned to a 
synful man. But Sache stood, and seides 
to the Lord, Lo! Lord, Y 3yue theY half 
of my good? to pore men; and if Y haue 
ony thing defraudid ony man, Y 3elde 
foure so myche. Jhesus seith to hym,9 
For to dai heelthe is maad to this hous, 
for that he is Abrahams sone; for 1o 
mannus sone cam to seke, and make saaf 
that thing that perischide. Whanne thei 11 
herden these thingis, he addide*, and 
seide a parable, for that he was ny3** 
Jerusalem, ‘and for® thei gessiden, that 
anoon the kyngdom of God schulde be 
schewid. Therfor he seide, A worthile 
man wente in to a fer cuntre, to take to 
hym a kyngdom, and to turne ajen. Andis 
whanne hise ten sernauntis weren clepid, 
he® 3af to hem ten besauntis ; and seide to 
hem, Chaffare 3e, til Y come. But hise 14 
citeseyns hatiden hym, and senten a mies- 
sanger aftir hym, and seiden, We wolen 
not, that he regne on vs. And it was15 
don, that he turnede a3en, whan he hadde 


t for to AGMNOPOTWY. "™ cumpanye 

w him 4G 
z hiynge come doun 4GMNPQST 
b higynge 4acunopesTwy. hee3- 
gthin y. © that sear0 
k for to acuNopeTivy. !to make 4am 
P for that acarNopaswxy. 4 that 


tOm. xy. Yano. VY for to 4GMNOPOTH. 


t From this place onwards ms. uv agrees with the later version, 
y the while agauNoporx pr. m. Y. 
> wolen not him for to acarnoperwy. wilen not hym to sx. 
© kyngdam aguNopostTr. 


2 thees o. @ message K. mes- 
¢ ypon oPeTIrY. q is 
f Om. MNOPQTX. 


a addide to 1. 


* aniz3to@e.  » for that 


XIX. 16——29. 


he comaundide is seruauntis to be clepid, 
to whiche® he 3af money, that he schulde 
wite, hou moche ech hadde wunne by 
iéchaffaring. Forsoth the firste cam, sey- 
inge, Lord, thi besaunt hath wunne ten 
17 besauntis. He seide' to him, Wel be, thou 
goode seruaunt ; for in litil thing thou hast 
be trewe, thou schalt* haue! power on™ 
igten citees. And another" cam, seyinge, 
Lord, thi besaunt hath maad fyue be- 
19sauntis. And he seide® to this, And be 
2thou on? fyue citees. And the thridde 
cam, seyinge, Lord, lo! thi besaunt, which4 
I hadde, kept' in a sudarie, ‘ether sweting 
21 cloth’. Forsoth I dredde thee, for thou 
art an austerne man; thou takist awey 
‘this thing which‘ thou settist" not, and 
thou repist ‘this thing which’ thou hast 
22not sowe. He seith to him, Weyward 
seruaunt, of thi mouth I deme thee. Wistist 
thou, that I am ‘an hausterne man”, takinge 
awey this* thing whichY I settide? not, 
and repinge this* thing which> I ‘haue 
23not sowe®? and whi hast thou not 3onun 
my money to the boord, and‘ I comynge 
schulde haue receyued it sothli with vsuris? 
24 And he seide to hem‘ ‘that stooden® ny3, 
Take 3e awey fro him the besaunt, and 
3yue 3e°° to him that hath ten besauntis. 
25 And thei seiden to him, Lord, he hath ten 
26 besauntis. Sothli I seie to 30u, for to ech 
hauynge it schal be 3ouun, and hef schal 
‘be plenteuous® ; but fro him that hath not, 
‘also this thing? that he* hath, schal be 
27takun of! him. Netheles brynge 3e hidir 
tho myne enemyes, that nolde™ me to" 
28regne on® hem, and sle 3e bifore me. And 
thes thingis seyd, he wente bifore, stizynge 
29toP Jerusalem. And it was1 don, whanne 


& for to AGMNopoTWY. 4 whom mpoxy. 


AGMNOPQSTWXY. m vypon AGMNOPQTWY. 
oPpgsTWY. P vpon AGMNOPQTIVY. 
cox. or smetynge cloth amPy. 
NPOQOSTWXY. that at o. Waman austerne ogrxy. 
Z sett AGMNOPQSWXY. 4% that AGMNOPQSTIXY. 
see3 not x. ¢¢ that and arp. 
fit o. 
k Om. y. 
QTIvy. 


l fro x. 
P in to o. 


dheb. ©oother1. fI putte k. 


kk haddister. !anausterner. ™ Om. Eroxk. 


LUKE. 


i saith AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
n the tother acmNoposwxy. that other rT. 
q@ that AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
t that acoor. that that GMNPSIWXyY,. 

* that AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
b that 4GMNOPOSTIVXY. 

d men AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
8 abounde, or be plenteuvuse aGMNPQsTIY. abounde ox. 
m wolden not AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
Gis A pr. Mm. G pr. mM. MNOPQSTXY. 


& Om. xe pr.m. 
mm Om. Rpr.m. seien R sec.m. 


211 


take the kyngdom; and he comaundide 
hise seruauntis to be clepid, to whiche he 
hadde 3yue monei, to wite, hou myche 
ech’ hadde wonneé bi chaffaryng. And16 
the firste cam, and seide, Lord, thi besaunt 
hath wonne ten besauntis. He seide to17 
hym, Wel be, thou good seruaunt; for 
in Jitil thing thou hast be trewe, thou 
schalt be hauynge power on ten citees. 
And the tother® cam, and seide, Lord, 18 
thi besaunt hath maad fyue besauntis. 
And to this. he seide, And be thou on 19 
fyue citees. And the thridde cam, and 20 
seide, Lord, lo! thi besaunt, that Y hadde, 
putf vp% in a sudarie. For Y dredde thee, 21 
for thou art ‘a sternei man; thou takist 
awey that that thou settidist* not, and 
thou repist that that thou hast** not 
sowun. He seith to hym, Wickid ser-22 
uaunt, of thi mouth Y deme thee. Wist- 
ist thou, that Y am ‘a sterne! man, tak- 
ynge awei that thing that Y settide not, 
and repyng ethat thing that Y sewe not ? 
and whi hast thou not 3ouun my money 23 
to the bord, and Y comynge schulde haue 
axid it with vsuris? And he seide to men 24 
stondynge ny3, Take 3e™ awei fro hym 
the besaunt, and 3yne 3e to hym that 
hath ten bez3auntis. And thei seiden™™ 25 
to hym, Lord, he hath ten besauntis. 
And Y seie to 3ou, to ech man that hath, 26 
it schal be 30uun, and he schal encreese ; 
but fro him that hath not, also that thing 
that he hath, schal be takun of hym. 
Netheles brynge 3e hidur tho" myn ene- 27 
myes, that wolden not that Y regnede® 
on hem, and sle 3e bifor me. And whanne zs 
these thingis weren seid, he wente bifore, 
and 3ede vp to Jerusalem. And it was29 


k shalt and eg. | be hafynge 


° saith AGMN 
r put vp 4GMPQsTWxXY. put nN. § Om. 
" settidist carpy. VY that that 4em 

Y that AGMNOPQSIWWXY. 
© suwe not AGMNOPQSTIVY. 
e stondynge AGMNOPQSTWX. ece3e it arp, 
hand that aamNopestwxy. iOm.c. 
9 Om. AG pr.m. MNPQTW. © ypon AGMNOP 


k settist i. 
9° rezne Ehi. 


ian austerne I. 
n thilke 1. 


h Forsothe 1. 


EeQ 


212 LUKE. 


he cam ny3 to Bethfage and Betanye, at 
the mount, which4 is clepid of" Olyuete, 
30he sente his tweye disciplis, seyinge, Go 
3e in to the castel, which’ is a3ens 30u; in 
to whicht 3e entrynge schulen fynde a colt 
of a" she asse’, on*® which® non of men 
euere saat; vnbynde 3e him, and ‘brynge 
313eY to me. And if ony man schal? axe, 
whi 3e vnbynden, thus 3e schulen seye to 
him, For the Lord desyrith his work. 
32Forsothe thei that weren sent, wenten 
forth, and founden as he seyde. to hem, a 
33colt stondinge. Sothli hem vntyynge® the 
colt, the lordis of him seyde to hem, What? 
34yvntyen 3e the colt? And thei seiden, For 
35the Lord hath him nedful. And thei 
ledden him to Jhesu; and thei, castinge 
her clothis on‘ the colt, puttedyn? Jhesu 
360n him. Forsothe him® goynge, thei vn- 
37 dir strewiden her clothis in the weye. And 
whanne now! he cam ny3 to the comynge 
doun of the hil of Olyuete, alle the cum- 
panyes of men comynge doun bigunnensé 
ioyinge to® herie God with greet vois on 
3s alle the vertues, whiche! thei sy3en, seyinge, 
Blessid zs* the kyng, that cometh in the 
name of the Lord; pees in heuene, and 
3oglorie in hi3 thingis. And summe of the? 
Pharisees of the cumpanyes seyden to him, 
40 Maistir, blame thi disciplis. To whiche™ 
he seide", I seye to 30u, for if thes° schulen 
41 be stille, stoones schulen erye. And whanne 
he neizede, he seyuge the citee, wepte ouP 
42it? seyinge, For if* thou haddist knowe, 
and thou, and’ sotheli in this thit day, 
which" zs¥ to pees to thee; but now thei 
43 ben hid fro thin y3en. For daies schulen 
come into” thee, and thin enemyes schulen 
enuyroune thee ‘with pale*, andy schulen 
enuyroune thee, and ‘thei schulen? make 


q that 4GMNOPQOSTWXY. 
tied ACGMNOPQSTFXY. 
MNOPQSTXY. 
4 putten sx. © hem a. 
ithat acmnopostWxy. kOm.s. 
© these thinges N. P vpon og. 4 Om.a. 
MNPOSTIVXY. in whiche o. 
wp. ina valei with pale n. in the vale 0. Om. r. 


r Om. 4 prim. TrY. 
W to MNPQSTXY. 


f Om. kK. 


POm.a. @whomt.  ' it EPQS sec. m. Xa. 
u and setten AImRsxekf. and settiden Kghia. 
2 tho g. 


S that MPIWXxy. 
X whom MNOPQSTXY. 

a ynbyndynge aGMNoposTwxy. vnkyttinge F sec. m. 
& mount AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
1 Om. 4GMNOPSTWX. 
rOm. F. 
v Om. 4GMNOPQ pr.m. STXY. 


8 Om. N. 


Y and thei aceMNOPQSV WXY. 


8 it EPQxa. Om. k pr.m. 
¥ spredden 1. 


XIX. 30—43. 


don, whanne Jhesus cam ny3 to Bethfage 
and Betanye, at the mount, that is clepid 
of Olyuete, he sente hise twei? disciplis, 
and seide, Go 3e in to the castel, that is30 
ajens 30u; in to which as 3e entren, je 
schulen fynde a colt of an asse tied, on 
which? neuer man sat; vutye 3e hym, 
and brynge 3e to me. And if ony mansi 
axe jou, whi 3e vntien, thus 3e schulen 
seie to hym, For the Lord desirith his 
werk. And thei that weren sent, wenten 32 
forth, and fonden as he seide to hem, a 
colt stondynge. And whanne thei vn-33 
tieden the colt, the lordis of hym" seiden 
to hem, What vntien 3e the colt? And 34 
thei seiden, For the Lord hath nede to 
hym. And thei ledden hym’ to Jhesu ; 35 
and thei castynge‘ her clothis on the colt, 
setten” Jhesu oz hym. And whanne he36 
wente, thei strowiden’ her clothis in the 
weie. And whanne he cam ny3 to thes7 
comyng doun of the mount of Olyuete, 
al the puple that cam doun bygunnen to 
ioye, and to herie God with greet vois 
on alle the” vertues, that thei hadden 
sayn, and seiden, Blessid de the king, that 38 
cometh in the name of the Lord; pees 
in heuene, and glorie in hijze_ thingis. 
And sum of the Farisees of the puples9 
seiden to hym, Maister, blame thi disci- 
plis. And he seide to hem, Y seie to 3o0u, 40 
for if these ben stille, stoonus schulen 
erye. And whanune he neijede, ‘he sei3* 41 
the citee, and wepte onY it, and seide, For 42 
if thou haddist knowun, thou schuldist 
wepe also; for in this dai the? thingis ben 
in pees to thee, but now thei ben hid fro 
thin ijen. But daies schulen come ina3 
thee, and thin enemyes schulen enuyroun 
thee with a pale, and thei schulen go 


t the whiche o. 
¥ bringeth x. 
b Whi c. 
ee bigynnen K. 
m whom MPQXY. 


uQOm.@. YVasse 
z Om. 4 pr.m. G prim. 

© vpon AGMNOQTIVY. 

h for to AGMNOPOQTIVY. 

D saith 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
t Om. no pr.m. xy. ™ the whiche 46 
Win AGMNOPQSTWXY. tocr. * witha pale 
Z Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


t castiden 1xmRseghikaf. 


w Om. EPQRX. *seynges. Y vpon hi. 


XIX. 44-—XX. 8. 


44 thee streyt on alle sydis ; and ‘thei schulen?” 
caste thee doun to erthe®, and thi sones? 
that ben in thee; and thei schulen not 
leeue in thee a stoon on° a stoon, for® 
thou hast not knowe the tyme of thi visi- 

4stacioun. And he gon¢ in to the temple, 
bigan tof caste out men sellinge ther ynne 

4sand biggynge®, seyinge to hem, It is writun, 
For" myn hous is an hous of preier, for- 
sothe 3e han maad it a den of theuys. 
47And he was techinge euery day in the 
temple. Forsoth the princes! of prestis, 
and scribis*, and the princis! of the peple 
48sou3ten ‘to leese™ him; and thei founden 
not what thei schulden do to him, for® al 
the peple was ‘al ocupyed, heeringe® him. 


CAV Xx. 
1 And it was? don in oon of dayes, him 
techinge the peple in the temple, and 
‘prechinge the gospel, the princis™ of 
prestis and the’ scribis camen to gidere 
2 with the eldre men; and seiden', seyinge® 
to him, Seye to vs, in what power thou 
dost this thing, ether’ who 3af to thee this 
3power? Forsothe Jhesu answeringe seide” 
to hem, And* I schal axe 30u aY word; 
aanswere 3e to me. Was the baptym of 
5Joon of heuene, ether? of men? And thei 
thou3ten with ynne hem selue, seyinge, 
For if we schulen seye, Of heuene, he 
schal seye, Whi therfore bileuen* 3e not to 
shim? forsoth if we schulen seye, Of 
men, all the comyn peple schal stoone vs ; 
for thei ben certeyn, ‘that John is® a pro- 
7phete. And thei answeriden, ‘that thei 
switen not’, of whennis it was. And Jhesu 


Z Om. AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
4 for that that acuopostwxy. for that Nn. 
AGMNopPesTrVivy. biende x. 
1 Farisees K. 


LUKE. 


8 the erthe 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
€ gon in 4 sec. m. MNXY. 
h That acMNPOSTVIVXY. i 
m for to leese 1euNnPoTwy. for to slee 0. ° 


213 


aboute thee, and make thee streit on alle 
sidis, and caste thee doun to the erthe, 44 
and thi sones that ben in thee; and thei 
schulen not leeue in thee a stoon on* a 
stoon, for thou hast not knowin the 
tyme of thi visitacioun. And he entride 4s 
in to the temple, and bigan to caste out 
men Sellynge ther inne and biyuge*, and 46 
seide to hem, It is writun, That myn hous 
is> an hous of preyer, but 3e han maad it 

a den of thenes. And he was techynge 47 
euerydai in the temple. And the princis 
of prestis, and the scribis, and the princis 
of the puple sou3ten to leseS hym; and 4s 
thei founden not, what thei schulden do 
to hym, for al the puple was ocupied, 
and herde hym. 


CAP. XX. 


And it was don in oon of the daies,1 
whanne he tau3te the puple in the temple, 
and prechide the gospel, the princis of 
preestis and scribis camen togidere with 
the? elder men; and thei seiden to hym,2 
Seie to vs, in what power thou doist these 
thingis, or who is he that 3af to thee 
this power? And Jhesus answeride, and3 
seide to hem, And® Y schalf axe 30u o 
word ; answere 3e to me. Was the bap-4 
tym of Joon of henene, or of men? Ands 
thei thou3ten with ynne hem silf, sei- 
ynge, For if we seien, Of heuene, he 
schal seie, Whi thanne bileuen 3e not to 
hym? and if we seien, Of men, al thes 
puple schal stoone vs; for thei ben cer- 
teyn, that Joon is a prophete. And thei7 
answeriden, that thei knewen not, of 
whennus it was’. And Jhesus seide tos 


b childer Q sec.m. © vpon AGMNOPOTIVY. 
f for to 4GMNoPOTWY. & byynge 
k the scribis acMNOPOSTIVY. 


i prince of. 
© reisid 


n sothli aemnposTiwx. forsothe o. 


to God, or al ocupied, herynge 4 sup.ras. s._reysid to God, or ocupied, heringe c pr.m. iw. reysid up to 
God, or al ocupied, heringe & sec.m. hangid up, or al ocupyed, heringe MNporxy. reysed vp, fernently 


oceupide, for to here o. 
esTwy. euangelisyng sopx. * prince K. 
Yor AGMNoPgasTWXY. Wsaitho. * Om. o. 

b John for to be ucmoperwy. Joon to ben nsx. 


P is 4 pr. m. G pr. m. MNOPSTXY. 
8 Om. ACGMNOPQSTWXY. 
YO CQOTWXY. 00 GNSYF. 

¢ hem to not knowe, or wite 4 pr.m. GMNPXY. hem to 


4 enangelisynge, or prechynge the gospel AGN 
t selen aGMNOPESTWXY. ¥ Om.o. 
Zor cmorpeTwxy. % leefe x. 


not knowe 4 sec. m.Qs. hem not to knowe o. hem not to knowe, or wite T. hem to not knowe w. 


Sup i. vpon 8 sup. ras. 


4a bigynge R. 
4QOm.x. ¢ Om. a prim. i. 


f Om. h prim. i. 


b ys iclepid x sec. m. is clepid k pr.m. 
i 8 isa. 


¢ fordo 1. sle k. 


214 


seide® to hem, Neither I seie to 3ou, in 
9what power I do thes thingis. Forsothe 
he bigan tof seye to the comyn peple this 
parable. Sum man plantide a vyner®, and 
‘settide it to ferme? to tilieris; and he was 
loin pilgrymage many! tymes*. And in the! 
tyme of gedrynge of grapis, he sente a 
seruaunt to the tilieris, that thei schulden 
3yue to him of the fruyt of the vyner™; 
11 whiche® ‘leften him, betun®, voyde?. And 
he addide4% to" sende another seruaunt ; 
forsothe also thei betinge this, and po- 
nyschynge with dispisingis‘, leften voyde. 
1zAnd he addide" to” sende the thridde, 
whiche* alsoY woundinge him, castiden? 
10ut. Sothli the lord of the vyner? seide, 
What schal I do? I schal sende my dere- 
worthe> sone; perauenture whanne thei 
schulen se him, thei schulen ‘be ascham- 
14yd%. Whom whanne the tilieris hadden 
seyn, thei thou3ten with ynne hem selue, 
seyinge, This is the eyr, sle we him, that 
isthe eritage be maad oure. And thei kill- 
iden* him, cast out of the vyner®. What 
therfore schal the lord of the vyner‘ do to 
iéhem? He® schal come, and lese these 
tilieris, and ‘he schal" 3yue the vyner' to 
othere. Which* thing herd, thei seiden 
i7to him, ‘Fer be it!, Forsothe he bihold- 
inge hem, secide, What therfore is this 
thing that is writun, The stoon whom™ 
men bildinge reproueden, this is maad in 
18to the heed® of the corner? Ech that schal 
falle on°® that? stoon, schal be brysid4; 
forsothe on™ whom it schal falle, it schal 
19 breke’ him in‘ to smale parties. And the 
princes of prestis", and the’ scribis, sou3ten 


LUKE. 


XX. 9—19. 


hem, Nether Y seie to 30u, in what 
power Y do these thingis. And he bi-9 
gan to seie to the puple this parable. A 
man plauntide a vyn3erd, and hiride it 
to tilieris; and he was" in pilgrimage 
longe tyme. And in the tyme of gader-1o0 
ynge of grapis, he sente a sernaunt to 
the tilieris, that thei schulden 3yue to 
hym of the fruyt of the vyn3erd ; whiche 
beten hym, and leten hym go voide. 
Andi he thou3te 3it to sende another 
seruaunt; and thei beten this, and tur- 
mentiden hym sore, and leten hym got. 
And he thou3te 3it to sende the thridde, 12 
and hym also thei woundiden, and cast- 
iden! out. And the lord of the vynejerd 13 
seide, What schal Y do? Y schal sende 
my dereworthe sone; perauenture, whanne 
thei seen hym, thei schulen drede. Andi 
whanne the tilieris sayn hym, thei 
thou3ten with ynne hem silf, and seiden, 
This is the eire, sle we hym, that the 
eritage be oure. And thei castiden hym 1s 
out of the vyne3erd, and killiden hym™. 
What schal thanne the lord of the vyne- 
jerd do to hem? He schal come, and 16 
distruye these tilieris, and 3yue the vyne- 
3erd to othere. And whanne this thing 
was herd, thei seiden to hym, God for- 
bede. But" he bihelde hem, and seide, 17 
What thanne is this that is writun, The 
stoon which men bildynge repreueden, 
this is maad in to the heed of the cor- 
ner? Ech that schal falle on that stoon, 13 
schal be to-brisid®, but on whom it schal 
falle, it schal al? to-breke? him. Andig 
the princis of prestis, and scribis, sou3ten 


€ saith acmNnoposTixy. {for to acmNopeTWy. & vinejerd acMNoposTWxY. 4 hiryde it, or sette it 


to ferme aGMNPSTIVY. hijride it, or sette to ferme m. sett it to ferme o. hirid ite. sette it to hire x. 

m vinezerde 4GMNOPQOSTIVXY. 

P voyde, or withouten fruyt AGMNPOSTIVY. 
Sand AGMNOPQOSTWXY. 


ogry. miche wewx. EKtymec. 10m. na. 


Trwxy. © beten thai leften him o. 

XY. put og. ° for to 4emMNoporivy. 
contakes ox. 4 putte to 4GMNOPQOSTWXY. 
NOPQSTIVXY.  Y and AGMNOPQSTWAY. 


b derworthi y. ¢ schame 4GMNOPOSTWXY. 
fvinejerd aemNopesTwxy. & Andhey. 


v for to AGMNOPOQTIVY. 
z casten sx. castiden him y.° 
4 sloujen AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 

bh Om. AGMNOPOSTWXY. 


i moche 
0 the whiche 4gMNopags 

@ putte to AGMNPSTW 
t cuntekis, or wrongis AGMNPQSTWY. 
Wtotheo. *the whiche scar 
4 vynejerd AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
€ vinejerd AGMNOPQOSTWXY. 
i vynezerd GM NOPQSTIVXY, 


k The whiche cooxy. ! Be it fer, or God JSorbede acmnvostivy. Be it fer 0. God forbeede x. ™ whiche 


iw. M®heued owy. ° vpon aemNnoposTiry. 


ar broken o. shaken x. * vpon aGMNoPosTIVY. 


v Om. owx, 
bwasgoni. 10Om.c. go voidek prim. 
"Anda. ° brisid b pr.m. gik prim. 


P this @. 
8 to-breke r. 


1 castede him Ep. castiden him exak. 
P breke gk pr. m. 


q shakun, or brokun aGMNPQSTIY. scatered, 
t Om. mperwxy. 4 the prestis o. 


m Om. b sec. m. 
4 Om. g. 


XX. 20——33- 


& 


‘to sette’ hondis on him in that our, and 
thei dredden the peple; forsothe thei 
knewen that* to hem he seide this lyk- 
2onesse. And thei aspyinge’ senten aspieris, 
whiche? feyneden hem selue* iuste, that 
thei schulden take him in word, and ‘bi- 
take him> to the prince’, and to the? 
2tpower of the iustise®. And thei axiden 
. hin, seyinge, Maistir, we witen‘, that® thou 
seist® and techist ri3tly'; and thou takist 
not* persoone! of man, but thou techist in 
22treuth the wey of God. Is it leefful to vs 
to™ 3yue tribute to Cesar, ether™ nay ? 
23Forsothe he biholdinge the disseyt of 
hem, seide to hem, What tempte 3e me? 
24 ‘Schewe 3e° to me a peny; whos'ymage and 
writynge aboue? hath it? Thei answer- 
2singe seiden to him, Cesaris. And he 
seidei to hem, ‘Therfore 3elde 3e" to Cesar 
tho thingis that ben ‘of Cesar’, and tho 
2¢thingis that ben of God, to God. And 
thei my3ten not reproue his word bifore 
the pore peple; and thei wondringe in 
27 his answere, helden pees. Summe of thet 
Sadducees, that denyen" ‘a3en rysinge” to* 
28be, neizeden’, and axiden him, seyinge, 
Maistir, Moyses wrot to vs, if the bro- 
ther of ony man hauynge wyf? deiede*, 
and he was? with oute fre children, that 
his brother take his° wyf, and reyse seed 
29to his brother. Therfore¢ seuene bri- 
theren weren®. The firste took a wyf, and 
303s deed, with outen sonesf; and the bro- 
thers suwinge" took hir, and he is deed 
3iwith oute sone; and the thridde took 
hir; also and alle seuene, and leften noi 
32seed, but ben deede; ‘and the womman the 
33laste of alles is deed. Therfore in the 


® for to lay agarnopoTivy. to leyn sx. 
xy. thei 7. 9 Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
stvw. © meir, or iustise AGMNPQSTIVY. mayer ox. 
rizstly v. i Om. AcMNoPesTVWXY. K noo r. 
N or AGMNOPQSTIWWXY. © Sheweth x. 
ymage and superscripcioun ox. ymage or sup. Q. 
8 Cesars 4cMNPOSTWX. Om. Ww pr.m. 
Y camen to AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
b were x. ¢ the o. 
fre childre x. & Om. AGMNOPQSWXY. 


LUKE. 


X and y. 
» bitake him, or bitraye acmNnpesTwy. bytraye him o. 
cipat, or [and Q] power of the prince AcmNPosTWy. power of the prince 0. principat x. 
i f woten o. 
1 the persone AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
P ymage and superscripcioun, or writyng aboue AGMNPSTIVY. 
q seith AGMNPOQSTIVXY. 
u denyeden rv. 
Za wijf AGMNOPOSTVWXY. 
d Ther weren therfore x sec. mu. 
h secunde Q sec.m.T. suende x. 


215 


to leye on hym hoondis in that our, and 
thei dredden the puple; for thei knewen 
that to hem he seide this liknesse. And 20 
thei aspieden, and senten" aspicris, that 
feyneden hem iust, that thei schulden 
take hym® in word, and bitaak hym to 
the ‘power of the prince, and to the 
power of the iustice. And thei axiden2! 
hym’, and seiden", Maister, we witem 
that rijtli thou seist and teehist; and’ 
thou takist not the persoone of man, but 
thou techist in treuthe the weie of God. 
Is it leueful to vs to 3yue tribute to the 22 
emperoure, or“ nay? And he biheld2s 
the disseit of hem, and seide to hem, 
What tempten 3e me? Shewe 3e to me azs 
peny; whos ymage and superscripcioun 
hath it? Thei -answerden, and seiden 
to hym, The emperouris. And he seide25 
to hem, 3elde 3e therfor to the emperoure 
tho thingis that ben the emperours, and 
tho thingis that ben of God, to God. 
And thei my3ten not repreue his word 26 
bifor the puple; and thei wondriden in 
his answere, and heelden pees. Summe27 
of the Saduceis, that denyeden the a3en- 
risyng fro deeth to lijf, camen, and ax- 
iden hym*, and seiden, Maister, Moises 28 
wroot to vs, if the brother of ony man 
haue a wijf, and beY deed, and he was? 
with outen eiris, that his brothir take 
his wijf, and reise seed to his brother. 
And so there weren seuene britheren. 29 
The firste took a wijf, and is deed with 
outen eiris; and the brothir suynge took 30 
hir, and he is deed with outen sone; and 31 
the thridde took hir; also and alle seuene, 
aud leften? not seed, but ben deed; and: 


na 
Ww 


y kepynge AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 2 that AGMNOPQST 
¢ prin- 
d Om. amNoPp 
& for riz3tly acarNoPasTWWxY. 4 seist 


m for to AGMNOPQTWY. 


t 3elde 3e therfore mPwxy. 
W resurreccioun 0. ¥* for to AGMNOPETIVY. 

8 be deed acwNnopstTwxy. shal he dede @. 
e Om. x. f free children acarnoposTwy. 
i not AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


k the laste of alle and the womman is deed aemNnopostTivxy. 


ss Om. R. 
z were k. 


T settiden a pr.m. §® Om. i. 
x Om. sk prem. Yhe ber. 


t Om. h. 
4 thei leften 1. 


“ seiden to him hi. ¥Om.i. W either msxg. 


216 


risynge a3ein, whos wyf of hem schal 
sche be? forsothe seuene hadden hir wyf. 
31And Jhesu seide! to hem, Sones of this™ 
world wedden, and ben 3ouun to wedd- 
ssingis; forsothe thei that be" worthi to° 
that world, and? rysing a3en fro deede 
inen, neither ben weddid, nether wedden 
36 Wyules, nether? schulen mowe deye more’ ; 
forsoth thei ben euene with aungels, and 
ben the sones of God, sithen thei ben the® 
37 sones of rysinge a3en. Forsothe for deede 
men rysen a3en, alsot Moyses schewide 
bysyde the boysche, as he seith, The Lord 
God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and 
33God of Jacob. Forsoth God is not of 
deede men, but of lynynge men; forsoth 
sgalle men lyuen to hym. Sothli sumine of 
tlie" scribis ‘answeringe seide’, Maistir, 
4othou hast well seide. And thei durste no 
41more axe him ony thing. Forsoth he 
seide to hem, How seyn men, ‘that Crist 
42is® the sone of Danith, and Dauith 
him silf seith in the book of Salmes, The 
Lord seide to my lord, Sitte thou on my 
aari3t half, tilx I putte thin enemyes a stool 
aaof thi feet. Therfore Danith clepith him 
4slord, and how is he his sone? Sothli al 
the peple heeringe, he seyde to his disci- 
46 plis, Be 3e war of scribis, that wolen goY 
in stoolis’, and louen salutaciouns in the? 
cheping®, and the firste chayris in syna- 
gogis®, and the firste sitting places in 
47feestis!; whiche® denouren the housis of 
widowis, feynynge long preier‘; thes 
schulen takeff more dampnacioun. 


CAP. XXI. 
1 Forsothe he biholdinge sy3 ‘tho riche 
men, whiche’ senten her 3iftis in to the 


m the y. 
P and in Go. 


\ saith aGMNOPOSTWXAY. 
© of AGMNOPQOSTWXY. 


AGMNOQSTWXY. 8 Om. 4GMNPQSTYWXY. 
seyden Ww. answerynge seiden ry. 
STWXY. Y wandre AGMNOPQSTWXY. 2 scolis wx, 


LUKE. 


w Crist for to be aGuNopeTWy. Crist to ben sx. 


XX. 34-—XXI. 1. 


the laste of alle the womman is deed. 
Therfor in the ‘risyng ajzen’, whos wijf 3 
of hem schal sche be? for seuene hadden 
hir to wijf. And Jhesus seide to hem, 34 
Sones of this world wedden‘, and ben 
3ouun to weddyngis; but thei that schu- 3, 
len be had worthi of that world, and of 
the? ‘risyng a3en® fro deeth, nethir ben 
wedded, nethirf wedden wyues, nethir 3, 
schulen® owe die more; for thei ben 
euen with aungels, and ben the® sones 
of God, sithen thei ben the! sones of) 
‘risyng a3en* fro deeth. And that deed 3, 
men risen ajen, also Moises schewide 
bisidis the busch, as he seith, The Lord 
God of Abraham, and God! of Ysaac, 
and God of Jacob. And God is not of3g 
deed men, but of lyuynge men; for alle 
men lyuen to hym. And summe ofa 
scribis™ answeringe, seiden, Maistir, thou 
hast wel seid. And thei dursten no 4 
more axe hym ony thing. But he seide 4) 
to hem, How seien men, Crist to be the 
sone of Danid, and Dauid hym silf 4 
seith in the® book of Salmes, The Lord 
seide to my lord, Sitte thou on my ri3t- 
half, til that° Y putte thin enemyes a4 
stool of thi feet? Therfor Dauid clepith 4, 
hym lord, aud hou is he his sone? 
And in heryng of al the puple, he seide 45 
to hise disciplis, Be 3e war of scribis?, 46 
that wolen wandre in stolis??, and louen 
salutaciouns in chepyng4, and the firste 
chaieris in’ synagogis, and the firste sit- 
tynge placis in feestis ; that deuouren the 47 
housis of widewis, and feynen long prei- 
yng; these schulen take the more damp- 
nacioun. 
CAP. XXI. 

And he biheeld, and saye tho® riche, 

men, that castent her 3iftis in to the 


® schulen be had aemNoposrwxy. ben k pr.m. schulen be r. 
4 nether ouer 4gNogswxy. nether euere P. ne ouer 7. 
tand 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 


t Om. 
u Om. wprem. V answeriden, 

x til that 4emope 
¢ the synagogis or. 


8Om. xy. » chepyngis o. 


4 the festis o. © that 4GMNOPQSTWAY. f prayinge AGMNOPQSTIWXY. f€ make x. g hem that 4c 
MNOPQSTWXY. 

b agen risyng g. ¢ ben weddidk pr.m. 4 Om.1Kg. ¢Ca3enrisingek. ‘fnea. & thei schul ig. 
hOm.i. }Om.crxmsuxbeghik. Joftheb. * ajen risyngirsg. 1} Om.hsec.m.i. ™ the scribis xx 


hik. fariseis g. 
cheping Rbcehiaf. 


o Om. g. 


tinthei. 8 the hi. 


© Om. 1K pr.m. suxgk£. 
t castiden CEKPQxa. kesten R. 


P the scribis k. PP scoolis A pr.m. 4 the 


XXE. 2—14. 


2tresorie®; forsothe he! sy3 also sum litel 
pore widowe sendynge tweie! litle mo- 
sneys®, ethire ‘a ferthing?. And he seyde, 
Treuli I seye to 30u, for this pore widowe 
asente more than alle men. Forwhi alle 
thes senten in to 3iftis' of God, ‘of the 
thing plentenously to hem’; forsothe this 
widowe of thist thing that fayleth to hir, 
ssente al hir lyfloode, that she® hadde. And 
sum men’ seyinge of the temple, that it 
was ourned with goode stoones and 3yftis, 
she seyde, Thes thingis that 3e seen, dayes 
schulen come, in which® a stoon schal not 
be left on* a stoon, which’ schal not be 
7distroyed. Sothli thei axiden him, sey- 
inge, Comaundour, whanne schulen thes 
thingis be? and what tokene, whanne thei 
eschulen bigynne to? be don? Which?® 
seide, Se 3e, that 3e be not disceyued ; 
forsothe® manye schulen come in my name, 
seyinge, For I am, and the* tyme schal 
9nei3e; therfore nyle 3e go aftir hem. But@ 
whanne 3e schulen heere batels and dis- 
senciouns® ‘with ynnef, nyle 3e be aferd; 
it bihoueth first thes thingis to® be don, 
19 but not 3it anoon the" ende. Thanne he 
seide to hem, Folk schal ryse a3ens folk, 
liand rewme ajens rewme; and _ grete 
mouyngis of erthe schulen be by places, 
and pestilensis, and hungris, and dredis 
fro heuene, and grete tokenes schulen be. 
12 But bifore alle thes thingis thei schulen 
sette hir hondis on* 30u, and schulen 
pursuwe, bitakinge! in to synagogis and 
kepingis, ‘ether prisouns™, drawynge to 
iskingis and iustisis", for my name; for- 
sothe it schal bifalle® to 3ou in to wit- 
isnessing. Therfore putte 3e in 30ure hertis, 
not to thenke bifore, how 3e schulen an- 


h tresoury, ryche men 4GMNOPOSTIVXY. 
and two o. ™ mynutes aa. 


LUKE. 


iand he g. 
© or AGMNPOQSTIVY. that is o. Om, x. 


217 


treserie; but he saye also a litil porez 
widewe castynge twei ferthingis. Ands 
he seide, Treuli Y seic to 30u, that this 
pore widewe keste" more than alle men. 
For whi alle these of thing that was4 
plenteuouse to hem casten’ in to the 
3iftis of God; but this widewe of that 
thing that failide to hir, caste’ al hir 
liflode, that sche hadde. And whannes 
sum men seiden of the temple, that it 
was apparailid with gode stoonus and 
3iftis, he seide, These thingis that 3e6 
seen, daies schulen come, in whiche a 
stoon schal not be left on a stoon, which 
schal not be destried. And thei axiden7 
hym, and seiden, Comaundour, whanne 
schulen these thingis be? and what 
tokne schal be, whanne thei schulen bi- 
gynne to be don? And he seide, Se 3e, 8 
that 3e be not disseyued; for mauy 
schulen come in my name, seiynge, For 
Y am, and the tyme schal neije; therfor 
nyle 3e go aftir hem. And whanne 35e9 
schulen here batailis and stryues with 
ynne, nyle 3e be aferd; it bihoueth first 
these thingis to be don, but not 3it anoon 
7g an ende. Thanne he seide to hei,.10 
Folk schal rise a3ens folk, and rewme 
a3ens rewme; grete* mouyngis of ertheY 11 
schulen be bi placis, and pestilencis, and 
hungris, and dredis fro heuene, and grete 
tokenes schulen be. But bifore alle these 12 
thingis thei schulen sette her hoondis ou 
jou, and schulen pursue’, bitakynge in to 
synagogis and kepyngis*, drawynge ° to 
kyngis and to iusticis, for my name; but 13 
it schal falle to 30u in to witnessyng. 
Therfor putte 3e in® 30ure hertis, not4 '4 
to thenke bifore, hou 3e schulen answere; 


k and acmNnopstiwxy. Om. 9. two eupxy. 
P ferthingis AGMNPosTIWY. Om. x. 


4 thes of the aboundaunt [habundaunce Nn], or plenteuows, to hem acunposty. thees of the habundaunce 


to hem o. thes of the abundaunt of plenteuous to hem i. these of the abundaunt to hem x. 
8 Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
Y the whiche 4cmNopesTivy. that x. 


AG S€€.M. MNOPQSTWX. 
w the whiche 4GMNPQTIWY. * vpon o. 
a The whiche 4GMNoPasTWXY. 


> sothely 4cMNoPQSTIWXY. 
€ sediciouns, or stryues AGMNPSTWXY. Stryues 0. seduciouns Q, 


T the 3iftis 
uOm. y. v Om. s. 
z for to AGMNOPOQTIVY. 
etheno. 4 Forsoth 4camNoposTwxy. 
f with in forth acanopstwxy. Om. Q. 


t that AGMNOPQOSTWXY. 


ffferd G. & for to AGMNOPOQTHVY. ban AGMNOPQSTWXY. i put AGMNOPOQSTIWXY. k to AGMNOPOQSTIVXY. 


'bytrayinge o. bitakende x. 
© falle AGMNPQSTWXY. 


wcastede x. V casteden FE. kesten R. 
Z purswe 304 Kk. ® kepyngis, and ik prim. 


VOL. IV. 


m Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


Ww castede E. kest Rr. 
b drawinge 30u Kk. 


Ff 


a meyris, or iustisis AGMNPSTWY. meyres 0QX. 


y the erthe gk. 


x and grete C sec. m. R. 
4 Om, hi. 


bb se not hi. © into gk. 


218 


isswere; for? I schal 3yue to 30u mouth and 
wysdom, to whiche alle 3oure aduersaries 
schulen not mowe ajenstonde, and ajen- 
isseye. Sothli 3e schulen be bytrayed4 of 
fadir, and modir, and britheren, and cosyns, 
and frendis, and by deeth thei schulen tur- 
i7mente swmme® of* 30u; and 3e schulen 
abe hatidt of" alle men for my name. And 
an heer of 3oure heed’ schal not® perische ; 
19in 3oure pacience 3e schulen welde* 3oure 
20soulis. Forsoth whanne 3e schulen se Je- 
rusalem enuyrownedY of an oost of batel, 
thanne” wite 3e, that? the? desolacioun ¢ 
21 therof¢ schal nei3e. Thanne thei that ben 
in Judee, flee ‘in to hillis®; and thei that 
ben‘ in the® myddel of it, go awey; and 
thei that Ben" in the cuntreis, entre! not 
22in to it. For thes ben the*® dayes of ven- 
jaunce, that alle thingis that ben writun, 
23be fillid'. Forsothe wo to hem™, ‘that 
ben" with childe, and norischen® in tho 
dayes ;-for? a greet tribulacioun’ schal be 
on’ erthe’, and wraththe to this peple. 
24And thei schulen falle in the mouth of 
swerd, and thei schulen be ledd caytif* in 
to alle folkis; and Jerusalem schal be de- 
foulid® of hethen men, til the tymes’ of 
25naciouns be fillid”. And tokenes schulen 
be in the* sunne, and moone, and sterris; 
and in theY erthe ‘schad be? ouerleying of 
‘folkis, for confusion of sown of the see 
26and wawis>; men waxiuge drye for drede 
and¢ abidinge that schulen come on‘ al the 
world; forwhi vertues of heuene schulen 
27be mouyd. And thanne“! thei schulen se 
manis sone comynge in a cloude, with 
28greet power and maieste. Sothli® thes 
thingis bigynuynge tof be don®, biholde 


P forsoth 4GmMNOPQSTIVXY. 4 bitraied, or takun 
tin haate 4GMNOQSTIVXY. 
quiele AGMNPSTIVY. 
a for 4GMNoPesTIVx. »%Om.r. 
© to mountayns 4GMOPQSTIVXY. in to mountayns N. 
OPQSTWX. igo x. Om. acmNnopostywxy. 

XY. womman Ww. 2 Om. AGMNPOSTIVXY. 


4 pressure, or overleyinge AGMNPSTWY. pressure 0QX. 
U defoulid, or to-trodun AGMNPSTWY. 
Y Om. AGMNOPQSTVIVXY. 


or prisoneris AGMNPSTWY. caytifes o. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. x Om. AGMNPOQSTWXY. 
aQOm.r. » floodiso. ¢in N. 
opermwy. & maad 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 


eand of 1. f and of 1. 
this lipr.m. thek. ™tymek. 
Sintob. t heuene eqrghi. 


§ fle 5e k. 
n Om. e. 


LUKE. 


U to AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
y be enuyrowned 4G pr.m.mNPosTivy. to ben enuyrounde G sec. m. ox. 
¢ desolacioun, or discoumfort AGMNPSTIY. 


© nurishynge 4GMINPQSTWXY. 


4 to AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


hin to K sec. m. gk. in P. 
° Om. Rr. 


XXII. 15—28. 


for Y schal 3yue to 30u mouth and wis-1s 
dom, to whiche alle 3oure aduersaries 
schulen not mowe a3enstonde, and a3en- 
seie. And 3e schulen be takun of fadir, 16 
and modir, and® britheren, and cosyns, 
andf freendis, and bi deeth thei schulen 
turmente of 30u; and 3e schulen be ini7 
haate to alle men for my name. And ans 
heere of 3oure heed schal not perische ; 
in 30ure pacience 3e schulen welde 3oure 19 
soulis. But whanne 3e schulen se Je-20 
rusalem ben enuyround with au oost, 
thanne wite 3e, that the desolacioun of it 
schal neiz3e. Thanne thei that ben in21 
Judee, fle to" thet mountans; and thei 
that ben in the mydil of it, gon awei; 
and thei that ben in the cuntreis, entre 
not in to it. For these ben daies* of 
veniaunce, that alle thingis that ben 
writun, be fulfillid. And wo to hem, that 23 
ben with child, and norischen in tho 
daies; for a greet diseese schal be on the 
erthe, and wraththe to this! puple. And 24 
thei schulen falle bi the scharpnesse of 
swerd, and thei schulen be led prisoneris 
in to alle folkis; and Jerusalem schal be 
defoulid of hethene men, til the tymes™ 
of naciouns be fulfillid. And tokeneses 
schulen be in the sunne, and the” mone, 
and in the sterris; and in the® erthe 
ouerleiyng of folkis, for confusioun of 
sown? of the see and of floodis; for men 26 
schulen wexe drye for drede and abidyng 
that? schulen™ come to’ al the world; for 
vertues of heuenest schulen be mouyd. 
And thanne thei schulen se mannys sone 27 
comynge in a cloude, with greet power 
and maieste. And whanne these thingis 2s 


AGMNPSTWY. Om. aGMNoPosTWwXxY. S$ Om. g. 
v heued owy, Ww nos. x weelde, or haue in 
2 that xy¥. 


4 of it AGMNOPQSTWXY. 

fOm. amnposTwx. &€ Om. xy. b Om. saGMn 
l fulfilde acmNoPosTWXY. ™ wimmen AGMNOPQST 
P forsoth 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
8 the erth acunopesTwy.  ¢ caitif, 
¥tyme wpqivr. W¥ fulfilde 

Z Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
¢ Forsoth o. f for to 4GMN 


YOY 


dd Om. G pr.m. 


k the daies b. al 
¥ schal k. 


i Om. rksg. 


Pthe souncse. 4 that that k. 


XXI. 29—XNII. 4. 


3e", and reyse 3e! 3oure heedis*, for 3oure 
29‘azen bying! nei3ith. And he seide to hem 
a lienesse, Se 3e the fige tree, and alle 
30 trees, Whanne thei ‘bringen forth™ ‘of hem" 
aifruyt® now?, 3e witen for somer is ni3; so 
also’, whanne 3e schulen se thes thingis 
to™ be don, wite 3e", for the kyngdom of 
32God is ny3. Treuli I seie to 3ou, for this 
generacioun schal not passe, til alle thingis 
33be don. Heuene and erthe schulen passe, 
34 but’ my wordis schulen not passe. For- 
sothe ‘take 3e heedet to 30u" silf, lest per 
auenture 3oure hertis be greuyd with glo- 
tenye, and drunkenesse, and bisynessis’ of 
this lyf, and thilke* day come sudeyn on* 
3530u ; for** as a snareY it schal come ‘on alle 
men, that sitten? on* the face of al erthe. 
3¢And so wake? 3e, preiynge in ech tyme, 
that 3e be® worthi to‘ fle alle thes thingis 
that schulen® come, and tof stonde bifore 
37mannis sone. Forsoth in dayes he was 
techinge in the temple, but® he goynge 
out® dwellide ‘in ny3tis' in the hilk, which! 
3sis clepid of Olyuete. And al the peple 
‘roos erly™, to" come to him in the temple, 
for® to heere him?. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Forsothe the haliday of therf looues, 
2which! is seid" paske, neizede’. And the 
princes of prestis and thet scribis sou;ten, 
hou thei schulden slee Jhesu, but" thei 
3dredden the peple’. Sothli Sathanas en- 
tride in to Judas, that® was clepid Scari- 
sothY, oon of the twelue. And he wente, 


LUKE. 


219 


bigynnen to be maad, biholde 3e, and 
reise 3e 3oure heedis, for 30ure redemp- 
cioun neizeth. And he seide to hem a29 
liknesse, Se 3e the fige tre, and alle trees, 
whanne thei bryngen forth now of hem 30 
silf frnyt, 3e witen that somer is ny3; so31 
3e, whanne 3e seen these thingis to" be 
don, wite 3e, that the kyngdom of God 
is ny3. Treuli Y seie to 30u, that this 32 
generacioun schal not passe, til alle thingis 
be don. Heuene and erthe schulen passe, 33 
but my wordis schulen not passe. But34 
take 3e heede to 3ou” silf, lest perauen- 
ture 3oure hertis be greuyd with glotony, 
and drunkenesse, and bisynessis” of this 
lijf, and thilke dai come sodein* on 30u; 
for as a snare it schal come on alle men, 3s 
that sitten on the face of alertheY. Ther- 36 
for wake 3e, preiynge in ech tyme, that 
3e be hadde worthi to fle alle these thingis 
that ben to come, and to stonde bifor 
mannus sone. And in daies? he wass37 
techynge in the temple, but in ny3tis he 
3ede out, and dwellide in the mount, that 
is clepid of Olyuet. And al the pupless 
roos eerli, to come to hym in the temple, 
and to* here hym. 


CAP. XXII. 

And the halidai of therf  looues, that 
is seid pask, neizjede. And the princis of 2 
preestis and the® scribis sou3ten, hou thei 
schulden sle Jhesu, but thei dredden the 
puple. And Sathanas entride in to Ju-3 
das, that was? clepid Scarioth, oon of the 
twelue. And he wente, and spak witha 


bOm.o. 1Om. r. “henedis owy, 'redempcioun, or biynge ajen aGMNPTivY. redempcioun og. redemp- 


cioun, or ajeex biynge s. 
f. now T. bryngen now of hem forth wv. 
dqand 3e 4GMNopesTIWxy. * for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 


tr Om. GMPTY. 


m bryngen forth now aGaNnpesxy. bygynne for to brynge forth o. bringith 
2 Om. ory, 


° fruite now of hem vy. P Om. aGMNOPQSTVIVXY. 
8 sothely agaNoposxy. Om. T. for- 


sothe ww. +t perseyue 3e, or fake heede amT. parceyue 3ee, or take 3ee hede GNPw. perceyue je @. perceyue jee, 
or taketh heed 5. parceyueth x. parceyue, or take 3ee heede vy. “30ur MNogiy. VY bysynesse AGNOSF pr.m.w, 


bi synnes wp. blyndenessis T. W that x. 
or snare AGMPQTIWY. gnare, or snare N. grane s. 
Qsec.m. ®vpon acMNopoTivy. > walke amnp. 
€ ben to AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
i Om. 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
hastide, or came erly G pr. m. MNPQTY. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY.  ' clepid o. 


W pore pepil aGaNoposTWwxY. *Xand K. 


u Om. k. 
daies k pr.m., 


V3oure Ehi. W bisynesse 1bhi. 
a for to IKMRS pr.m. Xghi. 


x vpon AGMNOPIVY, 
z Om. & pr.m. MNPQ pr.m. TXY. into alle that sitten 
¢ ben had aGMNoposTWXyY. 
€ for to AGMNOPOTIVY. 
k mount AGMNOPQSTWXY, 
D for to AGMNOPQTIY. 


{ that aGMNOPOSTWXY. 


8 cam nije 4GMNOPQSTIVY. 
Y of Scarioth 4GmMNOPOQSTWX. 


x sodeynli c pr.m. R see. m. hik. 
b the therf ims pr.m.ehia8. .¢Om.k. is k. 


xX forsothe AGMNOPQSTIWXY. Y grane, 
d for to AGMNOPQTWY. 
& sothely in niztis aGMNOPOSTIVXY. h not y. 
m hastide, er roos 4 pr.m. 
°©Om. sx. POm.G prim. 4 that 


tOm. xy. 4% forsothe 4cmNoposTiWAY. 


y the erthe 1xgk. 2 tho 


Ff2 


220 


and spak with the princes of prestis, and 
‘with the? magestratis, how he schulde 
sbitraye him to hem. And thei ioyeden, 
and maden couenaunt to* 3yue ‘money 
sto him», And he bihizte, and he sou3te 
couenablete, that he schulde bitraye him, 
jwith oute the® cuimpanyes. Sothly the 
day of therf looues cam, in which? it was 
nede, that® pask, ‘that is, sacrifice of pask', 
8beS slayn. And he sente Petre and John, 
seyinge, 3e goynge make redy ‘pask to 
9vs, that we ete’. And thei seiden, Where 
1o wolt thou, that* we make redy? And he 
seide to hein, Lo! 30u! entringe in to the 
citee, sum man beringe a vessel with™ 
watir schal come a3ens 30u; sue 3e him in 
11) to the hous, ‘in to® which he entrith. And 
3e schulen seye to the hosebonde man of the 
hous, The maistir seith to thee, Where is 
the herborgerie, where I schal ete pask 
i2 with my disciplis? And he schal schewe 
to 30u a greet souping place strewid, and 
i3 there ‘make 3e° redy. Sothli thei goynge 
founden as he seide to hem, and there? 
i4thei maden redy the? paske. And whanne 
the’ onr was maad, he sat to the® mete, 
isaud twelue apostlis with him. And he 
seidet to hem, With desyr I haue desyrid 
to" ete with jou this pask, bifore that’ I 
issuffre ; forsothe I seie to 30n, for fro this 
tyme I shal not ete it, til it be fillid” in 
i7the rewme of God. And the cuppe takun, 
he dide thankingis*, and seide, ‘Take 3e’, 
isand ‘departe 3e* among 30u; forsothe® I 
seie to 3ou, I schal not drynke of the> 
generacioun of this vyne, til the rewme of 
19God coine. And the breed takun, he dide 
thaukingis®, and brak, and 3af to hem, 
seyinge, This is my body, which? schal be 
jonun ‘for 3ou°; do 3e this thing in to my 


zOm.o. 8 for to A4GMNOPQTIVY. 
whiche acmNnopesTivy. & Om. AGMNOPOSTIWX. 
g for to be 4GMNopeTivy. to be sx. » maketh x. 
k Om. 4GMNPQsTWXY. —'! 3ee Qs. thou T. 
“p Om. AGMNOPSTVWXY. q Om. wPex. 
AGMNOPQTIVY. ¥ Om. AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 
y Taketh x. 4 departeth sx. parte 3e 7. 
AGMNPSTW. graces QXY. 


€ the peple ixsx sec.m.gk. f€Om.s.  & at hi. 


LUKE. 


b him money 4GMNOPSTWXY. 


hOm. k. 


XXII. 5—19. 


the princis of preestis, and with the 
magistratis, hou he schulde bitray hym 
to hem. And thei ioyeden, and madens 
couenaunt to 3yue hym money. And hee 
bihiz3te, and he sou3te oportunyte, to bi- 
traye hym, with outen puple®. But the7z 
daies of therf looues eamen, in whiche it 
was neede, that the sacrifice of pask were 
slayn. And he sente Petre and Joon,s 
and seide, Go 3e, and make 3ef redi to vs 
the pask, that we ete. And thei seiden, 9 
Where wolt thou, that we make redi? 
And he seide to hem, Lo! whanne 3e10 
schulen entre in to the citee, a man 
berynge a vessel of watir schal meete 
jou; sue 3e hym in to the hous, in to 
which he entrith. And 3e schulen seien 
to the hosebonde man of the hous, The 
maister seith to thee, Where is a chaum- 
bre, where Y schal ete the pask with my 
disciplis ? And he schal schewe to 30u a12 
greet soupyng place strewid, and there 
make 3e redi, And thei jeden, and13 
founden as he seide to hem, and thei 
maden redi the pask. And whanne the 14 
our was come, he sat to® the® mete, and 
the twelue apostlis with hym. And he1s 
seide to hem, With desier Y haue desirid 
to ete with 30u this pask, bifor that Y 
suffre; for Y seie to 30u, that fro thisic¢ 
tyme Y schal not ete it, til it be fulfillid: 
in the rewme of God. And whanne hei; 
hadde take the cuppe, he dide gracis, and 
seide, Take 3e, and departe 3e* among 
jou; for Y seie to 30u, that Y schal not1s 
drynke of the kynde of this vyne, til the 
rewme of God come. And whanne he1o 
hadde take breed, he! dide thankyngis, 
and brak, and 3af to hem, and seide, This 
is my bodi, that schal be 3ouun for 30u; 


e Om. acmnopostviwxy. 4 the 


f that is, the sacrifice of pask AGMNPQSTIWY. Om. ox. 
1 to us, for to eet pask o. to vs pask, that we ete mPY. 

™ of AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
r Om. T. 

w fulfilde scarNoposTWwxyY. 
8 sothely 4GMNOPOQSTIWXY. 
4 that for jou 4GMNOPOSTIVXY. 


° maketh x. 
u for to 
X gracis AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
bthis ny. ¢ graces, or thankyngis 
€ Om. AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 


D and in to K, 


8 Om. waxy. t saith 4GaNOPOSTIXY. 


ifillid eprom. * Om.i. J and hi. 


XXII. 20——34. 


20comimemoracioun!, Also and the chalys, 
aftir that he hadde soupid, seyinge, This 
cuppe is the newe testament in my blood, 
21 whieh® schal be sched for 30u. Netheles 
lo! the hond of a" man bitrayinge me is 
22 with me in the bord. And sothli mannis 
sone goth, vp! that* it is determynd!; ne- 
theles wo to that man, bi whom he schal 
23be bitrayed. And thei bigynnen to™ seche 
among hem silf", who it was of hem, that 
24was to doynge® thisP thing. And stryf 
was maad among hem, which of hem 
25schulde be ‘seyn to" be more. Forsoth he 
seide to hem, Kyngis of* ‘hethen ment ‘ben 
lordis", ‘or lordschipen’,‘of hemv’, and thei 
that han power on” hem ben clepid goode 
263yueris*, butY 3e not so; but he that is 
the’ more in 30u, be* maad as the 3ongere, 
and he that is bifore goer, as a seruaunt. 
27 Forwhi who is the® more, he that restith, 
other? he that mynistrith ? wher® not he 
that restith ? Forsoth I am in the myddis‘ 


2s0f jou, as he that mynistrith. Sothli 3e | 


it ben, that han dwelt with me in’ my 
2utemptaciouns; and I dispose to 30u, as 
my fadir hath disposed to! me, a rewme, 
30that 3e ete and drynke on* my bord in 
my rewme, and sitte! on trones™, dem- 
31 yuge twelue” kynredis of Israel. Forsothe 
the Lord seide to Symount, Symount, 1o°! 
Sathanas hath axid 30u, that he sehulde 
s2ridele as whete; but? I haue preied for 
thee, that thi feith fayle not; and thon 
conuertid sum tyme, conferme thi bri- 
33theren. Which® seide to him, Lord’, I ain 
redi to’ go with thee, and‘ in to prisoun 
34and in to deeth. And he seide, I seie to 
thee, Peter", the koe sehal not crowe to 
day, til thou ‘thries forsake’ ‘to knowe” me. 


f commemoracioun, or in to mynde of me AGMNPQSTWXY. 
1 diffyned, or determyned acmNnpeTwxy. deffyned of hym, or 
u Om. AGMNOPQSTWX. 
T seen for to AGMNOPTIVY. 
v Om. Koorx. 
Y forsoth 4GMNOPQSTIVX. 
© Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
ff Om, AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
a the twelne GMPOXY. 
r Lo vr. 
w for to haue knowun acunperrry. for to haf knowen o. to han knowen sx. 


iafter acmnoposTivy. asx. k Om. x. 
determyned s. __™ for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
q is 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNOPQSTAY. 
MNoQTXY. Om. kK. —_" lordschipen o, Om. x. 

* doeris, or good 3yueris AGMNPSTIVY. doeris 00x. 
abe he rw sec. m. b Om. aGMNopesTWXyY. 

e whethir x. f myddel scunoposTWwxy. 
kin ny. vpon o. | sittinge i. 
NopesTwxy. 4 The whiche 4GmNoposTWwxy, 
uOm. kK. Y forsake thries x. 
© of hi. 


Mintoipr.m. asa. Pasa hi. 


Ksk. u The whiche 1. 


m twelue trones K. 


dis ahi. 


LUKE. 221 


do 3e this thing in™ mynde of me. He20 
took also the cuppe, aftir that he hadde 
soupid, and seide, This cuppe is the newe 
testament in my blood, that sehal be 
sehed for 30u. Netheles lo! the hoond2i 
of hym that bitraieth me, is with me at 
the table. And mannus sone goith, ‘aftir 22 
that® it is determyned; netheles wo to 
that man, bi whom he schal be bitraied. 
And thei bigunnen to seke among hem, 23 
who it was of hem, that was to do this 
thing. And strijf was maad among hem, 24 
which of hem sehulde be seyn to be 
grettest. But he seide to hem, Kyngis 25 
of hethen men ben lordis of hem, and 
thei that han power on® hem ben elepid 
good doeris, but 3e not so; but he that 26 
is grettest among 3ou, be maad as?P 3001- 
gere, and he that is4 bifor goere, as a 
seruaunt. For who is gretter, he that 27 
sittith at the mete, or he that mynystrith ? 
whether not he that sittith at the mete? 
And Y am in the myddil" of 30u, as he 
that mynystrith. And 3e ben, that hanes 
dwellid with me in my temptaciouns ; 
and Y dispose to you, as my fadir hath 29 
disposid to me, a rewme, that 3e ete and 30 
drynke on my boord in my rewme, and 
sitte’ on trones’, and deme the twelue 
kynredis of Israel. And the Lord seidesi 
to Symount, Symount, lo, Satanas hath 
axid 30u, that he schulde ridilet as whete ; 
but Y haue preyede for thee, that thi32 
feith faile not; and thou sum tyme con- 
uertid, econferme thi britheren. Which"33 
seide to hym, Lord, Y am redi to go in 
to prisoun and in to deeth with thee. 
And he seide, Y seie to thee, Petir, the 3+ 
eok sehal not erowe to dai, til thou thries 


& that seunopostwxy. 4 the G sec. m. o. 
© do AGMNOPQSTWXY. P that 9. 

8 Om. kK. t folkis 4 pr.m. @ pr.m. 
w Om. kK. W vpon AGMNOPOTIVY. 
2 Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
d or AGMNOPQSTWXY. 

h disposid w. i Om. N. 
°Om. x. P sothly 4G 
8 for to AGMNOPQTIVY. t Om. mw pr. m. 


& and k. 


rmyddeshi. $*thetronesi. t ridle 302 


222 LUKE. 


35 And he seide to hem, Whanne I sente 3o0u 
with oute sachel, and” scrip, and* schoon, 
36 wher ony thing failide to 3ou? And thei 
seiden, No thing. Therfore he seide to 
hem, But now he that hath a sachel, take 
also and a scrippe; and he that hath not, 
37selle his coote, and bye a swerd. Sothli 
I seie to 30u, for 3it it bihoueth thisY 
thing that is writun to? be fulfillid* in me, 
And he is demyd> with wickide® men ; 
forsothe tho thingis that ben of me han 
ssan? ende. And thei seiden, Lord, lo! 
tweye® swerdis here. And he seyde to 
sohem, It is ynow3. And he gon out, 
wente bif custom in to the hil of Olyues® ; 
yosothli and the" disciplis sueden him. And 
whanne he cam to the place, he seyde to 
hem, Preie 3e, lest! 3e entrek in to tempt- 
4,acioun. And he was! takun awey fro 
hem, ‘as myclie as is™ a stoones cast"; and 
yothe knees put, he preide, seyinge, Fadir, 
if thou wolt, turn over this cuppe" fro 
me; netheles not my wille ‘be don’, but 
agthin?. Forsoth an aungel apperide to 
him fro heuene, cumfortinge him. And 
he maad in agonye, ‘ether angwische 4, 
sapreiede lengere ; and his swoot wast 
maad as dropis of blood rennynge doun 
yin to the* erthe. And whanne he hadde 
rise fro preier, and haddet come to his 
disciplis, he fond hem slepinge" for heuy- 
And he seide* to hem, What 
slepen 3e? ‘Ryse 3e, and preie 3e%, that 
473¢ entre* not in to temptacioun. 3it him 
spekinge, lo! a cumpany, and he that 
was clepid Judas, oon of the twelue, 
wente bifore hem; and he neij3ede¥ to 
yg Jhesu, that? he schulde kisse him. Sothli 
Jhesu seide to him, Judas, ‘bitrayest thou® 
yg mannis sone ‘with a coss?? Forsoth* thei 


4g Hesse, 


wor Ny x or nN. 
b put, or demed AGMNPQSTWY, put x. 
faftir acuNopostwxy.  & Olyuete sy. 
entre not @ sec.m. lis 4GMNOPQSTXY. 
An cuppe, or passtoun G sem. © Om. o. 
& pr. Mm. MNOPQSTXY, 8 Om. K sec. m. Vv. 
w Rijse 3e, and preye w. Riseth, and pre3zeth x. 
Z and that K. 
b Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


¥ Om, EIK pr.m. R sec.m. seghik pr. m. 
Aiprom. Zasix, 8®Om.u. > hema, 


y that acmNnopstwx, that that G pr.m. oy. 
© wicke sx. 
h Om. 4GMNOPQSTIVXY. 
m how myche is acunpestivxy. hou myche as 0. 
P thine be done o. 
t Om. xy. 
x falle arNOPQTXY. 
a with a cosse thou bytrayest 4 pr.m. GMNPQTWXY. with a cosse bitrazist thou 4 sec. m. s. 
¢ Sothely aemnogsTiwxy. 


“ bie cpxMux. bye Pea. bize R. 
¢ Om. P prem. 


XXII. 35-—49. 


forsake that thou knowist me. And he3s 
seide to hem, Whanne Y sente 30u with 
outen sachel, and scrippe, and schone, 
whether ony thing failide to 300? And 36 
thei seiden, No thing. Therfor he seide 
to hem, But now he that hath a sachel, 
take also and’ a scrippe; and he that 
hath noon, selle his coote, and bigge’ a 
swerd. For Y seie to jou, that 3it its7 
bihoueth that thing that is writun to be 
fulfillid in me, And he is arettid with 
wickid men ; for tho thingis that ben of 
me han ende*. And thei seiden, Lord, 38 
lo! twei swerdis here. And he seide to 
hem, It is ynow3. And he 3ede out, and 39 
wente aftir the custom in to the hille of 
Olyues; and the disciplis sueden hym. 
And whanne he cam toY the place, he4o 
seide to hem, Preye 3e, lest 3e entren in 
to temptacioun. And he was taken awei 41 
fro hem, so* myche as is* a stonys cast ; 
and he knelide, and preyede, and seide, 49 
Fadir, if thou wolt, do awei this cuppe 
fro me; netheles not my wille be don, 
but thin. And an aungel apperide tos 
hym? fro heuene, and coumfortide hymn. 
And he was maad in agonye, and prey- 
ede the lenger; and his swot was maad 44 
as dropis of blood rennynge doun in to 
the erthe. And whanne he was rysun 45 
fro preier, and was comun to hise disci- 
plis, he foond hem slepynge for heuy- 
nesse. And he seide to hem, What 4¢ 
slepen 3e? Rise 3e, and preye 3e, that 3e 
entre not in to temptacioun. 3it while 47 
he spak, lo! a company, and he that was 
clepid Judas, oon of the twelue, wente 
bifor hem; and he cam to Jhesu, to 
kisse hym. And Jhesus seide to hym, 4s 
Judas*, ‘with a coss4 ‘thou bytrayest® 


@ fillid +. 
€ two GMOPQIVXY. 
k falle mNPTXY. 
D cast is o. 
Tis A pr.m. 
V saith AGMNOPQSTIVXY, 

¥y cam nize AGMNOPOSTIVXY, 


2 for to AGMNOPQTIVY. 
@ Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
i that @ sec. m. 


4 or strijf AGMNOPOSTWXY. 
vin slepynge y. 


xanende sb. Y into 


€QOm. Ep. € bitraiest thou cEPQxa. 


XXII. 50-—63. 


that weren aboute hym, seynge ‘the 
thing’ that was to comynge®’, seiden to 
him, Lord, wherf we smyten bys swerd ? 
50 And oon of hem smoot the seruaunt of 
the prince of the" prestis, and kittide’ of 
sihis litel ri3t eere. Forsothe Jhesu an- 
sweringe seyde*, Suffre 3e til hidur. And 
whaune he hadde touchid his Hitil eere, 
s2he heelide him. Forsothe Jhesu seide to 
hem, that camen to him, the prinees of 
prestis, and magestratis!, and eldere men, 
As to a theef 3e han gon out with swerdis 
ssand staues? Whanne I was eche day 
‘with 3o0u™ in the temple, 3e streiz3ten not 
out the” hondis into me; but this is 30ure 
54our, and the® power of derknessis. Sothli 
thei takinge him, ledden to the hous of 
‘the prince? of prestis; Petre forsothe suede 
sshim a fer. Sothli a fyer kyndlid in the 
myddel4 ‘greet hous’, and hem sittinge 
aboute, Petre was in the myddel of hem. 
56 Whom whanue sum handmayde’ hadde 
seyn sittinge at the li3t, and hadde biholde 
him, she seide, And thist was with him. 
s7And he denyede him, seiynge, Womman, 
s3I knowe® him not. And aftir a litil 
a nothir man seynge him, seide’, And thou 
ert of hem. Petre forsothe seide, A! 
soman, Iam not. And a space maad as* 
of oon our, sothli anothir affermyde, sey- 
inge, Treuli and this was with him; for- 
cowhi and ‘he is¥ of Galilee. And Petre 
seide”, Man, I ‘wot not* what thou seist>. 
And a non 3it him spekinge, a cok crew. 
61 And the Lord turned aj3en‘, bileeld Petre; 
and Petre hadde mynde of4 the word of 
Jhesu, as he hadde seid, For® bifore thate* 
the koc crew‘, thries thou schalt denye me. 
be And Petre gon forth, wepte bitturly. And 
the men that heelden him, scornyden him 


d that ucapstwxy. Om. o. that thing 9. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. Om, aGMNoPesTVWxy. 


Vmagestratis, or maistris, of the temple acMNPQsTWXY. 
T floor, or greet hows aGMNostwy. flore opx. 


P princes K. 4 myd x. 
the this o. 
Y this was G pr. me. 


©Om. xv. 4 on AGMNPQSWXY. 


2 saith AGMNOFOSTWXY. 
© Om. N. 


&kitte i. } til to hi, 
[ofs. P Om. b. 


fm. s. with a cosse EPQ. 
© ne wot 1. woot not Kb. 


LUKE. 


© come AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
i kitte AGaNOPQSTWXY. 


u knewe aGMNoPesTWXY. kne3 x. 
a note AGMNOQST. noot P. not Wxy. 
ce Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


i and the i. 
4 Om. k prim. 


223 


‘mannys sonef. And thei that weren 49 
aboute hym, and sayn that that was to 
come, seiden to hym, Lord, whether we 
smyten with swerd? And oon of hem 50 
smoot the seruaunt of the prince of 
preestis, and kittide? of his ri3t eere. 
But Jhesus answerde, and seide, Suffre 51 
3e til” hidir. And whanne he hadde 
touchid his eere, he heelide hym. And 52 
Jhesus seide to hem, that camen to lym, 
the princis of preestis, and' maiestratis 
of the temple, and eldre men, As to a 
theef 3e han gon out with swerdis and 
staues? Whanne Y was ech dai withs: 
3o0u in the temple, 3e streijten not out 
hondis in to me; but this is joure our, 
and the power of derknessis. And thei 54 
token him, and ledden to the hous of 
the prince of prestis; and Petir suede 
hym afer. And whanne a fier wass5 
kyndelid in the myddil of the greet 
hous, and thei saten aboute, Petir was 
in the myddil of hem. Whom whanmne 56 
a damysel hadde seyn sittynge ‘at the‘ 
ligt, and hadde biholdun hym, sche 
seide, And this! was with hym. Ands7 
he denyede hym, and seide, Womman, 
Y knowe hym not. And aftir a litilss 
another man si3 hym, and seide, And 
thou art of hem. But Petir seide, A! 
man, Y am not. And whanne a space s9 
was maad as of on our, another afferm- 
yd, and seide, Treuli this™ was with 
hym; for also he is of Galilee. And 60 
Petir seide, Man, Y noot" what thou 
seist. ‘And anoon 3it while he spak, the 
cok crewe. And the Lord turnede ajen, 61 
and bihelde Petre; and Petre hadde 
mynde on® the word of Jhesu, as he 
hadde seid, For? bifor that the cok 


tif AGMNOPQSTWXKY. fin 

k saith AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 

n Om. MPXY. o Om. NX. 

s hondmayden aGMNopasTxy. 

wQO! poxy. x Om. Q. 

D seith x. 
f crowe AMNPQSTVIWX. 


m Om. x. 


Vv saith ogTwx. 


K atte p pass. ‘he this: ™ he this 1. 


224. LUKE. 


6sbetinges. And thei veyliden him, ‘or 
hidden‘, and smyten* his face, and ax- 
‘iden him, seyinge, Prophesie thou, who 
6s ‘is he! that smoot thee. Also thei blas- 
phemynge seiden manye othere thingis 
ssa3ens him. And as the day was maad, 
the eldere meu of the peple, and the™ 
princes of prestis, and the scribis camen 
to gidere, and ledden him in to her coun- 
s7ceil, seyinge, If thou art Crist, seie to vs. 
6s And he seide" to hem, If I schal° seye to 
jou, 3e schulen not bileue to me; sothli 
and if I shal axe, 3e schulen not answere 
69to me, nether 3e schulen leue?. Forsoth 
aftir this tyme mannis sone schal be sit- 
tinge on the ri3thalf of the vertu of God. 
70 Therfore alle seiden, Therfore ert thou 
the sone of God? Which4 seide’, 3e seyn 
7tfor Iam. And thei seiden, What 3it de- 
syren we witnessing? forsoth we vs‘ selue 
han herd of his mouth. 


CAP. XXL: 


1 And al the multitude ‘risinge of hem, 
2ledden him to Pilat. Forsoth thei bi- 
gunnen to" accuse him, seyinge, We han 
founden this’ man” turnynge vpsodoun 
oure folk, and forbedinge tributis* to’ be 
jouun to Cesar, aud seyinge hiin silf to¥ 
3be Crist king. Forsothe Pilat axide him, 
seyinge, Ert thou kyng of Jewis? And 
4he answeringe seide*, Thou seist. For- 
sothe Pilat seide? to the princes of prestis, 
and to the cumpanyes* of peple®, I fynde 
5no thing of cause in¢ this man. And thei 
woxen strengere, seyinge, He moueth ‘to 
gidere’ the peple, techinge thorw al Judee, 
sbigynnynge fro Galilee tilé hidur. Pilat 


& smytynge, or betynge hym acuNestivy. smytynge 0Qx. 


Om. ox. han smyte K. 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. ° Om. 7. 
TWXY. S our MNOPQIWX, 
AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
4 companye IV. 


P byleue o. 
X tribute 4GMNOPOSTIWAY. 


bthe puple r. ¢to x. 


t Om. k pr. im. 
2 arisen up k. 


8 pryuce hi. 


t the prestis i. 
8 tribute k. 


baa 


lis it agmNOPOQTXY. is that tv. 
q The whiche aemMNoPOSTIVXY. 
t of hem risynge spe. 
y for to aGMNOPOQTWY. 
d Om. Q. 


uwil 1. 
© weren c. wexiden hi. 


XXIl. 64——X XIII. 6. 


crowe, thries thou schalt denye me. And ez 
Petre 3ede out, and wepte bittirli. Ande3 
the men that helden hym_ scorneden 
hym’*, and smyten hym. And thei blyn-64 
felden hym, and smyten his face, and 
axiden hym, and seiden, Arede, thou 
Crist, to vs, who is he that smoot thee? 
Also thei blasfemynge seiden a3ens hymes 
many other thingis. And as the dayee 
was come, the eldre men of the puple, 
and the princis* of prestis', and the 
scribis camen togidir, and ledden hym 
in to her councel, and seiden, If thoue7 
art Crist, seie to vs. And he seide to6s 
hem, If Y seie to 30u, 3e schulen™ not 
bileue to me; and if Y axe, 3e schulen’ 
not answere to me, nethir 3e” schulen* 
delyuere me. But aftir this tyme man-69 
nys sone schal be sittynge on the ri3t 
half of the vertu of God. Therfor alle ze 
seiden, Thanne art thou the sone of 
God? And he seide, 3e seien that Y am. 
And thei seiden, What 3it desiren we wit-7! 
nessyng? for we vs’ silf han herd of his 
mouth. 
CAP. XXIII. 

And al the multitude of hem arysen’,1 
and ledden hym to Pilat. And thei bi-2 
gunnen to accuse lym, and seiden, We 
han foundun this turnynge vpsodoun 
oure folk, and forbedynge tributis* to be 
3ouun to the emperour, and seiynge that 
hym silf is Crist and’ kyng. And Pilats 
axide hym, and seide, Art thou kyng of 
Jewis? And he answeride, and seide, 
Thou seist. And Pilat seide to thes 
princis of prestis, and to the puple, Y 
fynde no thing of cause in this man. 
And thei woxen‘’ stronger, and seiden,5 
He moueth the puple, techynge thorou 
al Judee, bigynnynge fro Galile til hidir. 


i or hidden him empwy. 
m Om. AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 4% saith 

¥ saith AGMNOPOS 
Vhym this 9. W Om. 
2 saith 4GMNOPOSTIVXY. 


h Om. eupry. 


u for to AGMNOPOTIVY. 


€ to ov. 


vwili, wWOm.s. *wolur. Yours. 


XXIII. 7—20. 


forsoth heeringe Galilee axide, if he were 
7a man of Galilee. And as he knew that 
he was off the power of Eroude, he 
sente him ajen to Eroude; which® and 
8he was at Jerusalem ‘in tho® dayes. For- 
sothe, him’ seyn, Hroude ioyede ful myche; 
for he was coueitinge of moche tyme to* 
se! him, for™ he herde many thingis of 
hym, and hopide to" se sum myracle® to? 
9be don’ of him. Sothli he axide him in 
manye wordis; and he no thing answeride 
loto' him. Forsothe the princes of prestis 
and the® scrybis stooden, stedfastli accus- 
linge him. Sothlit Eroude with" his oost 
‘dispiside him’, and scornyde him clothid” 
with a whit cloth*, and senteY ajen to 
12 Pilate. And Eroude and Pilate weren? 
maad frendis in thilke* day; forwhi ‘bi- 
foreto® thei weren enemyes to gidere. 
i3Sothli¢ the princes of prestis4 and the 
magestratis of the peple clepid to gidere, 
14 Pilat® seide to hem, 3e han offrid to me 
this man, as turnynge awey the peple, 
and lo! I axynge byfore 30u fynde no 
cause in this man of thes thingis, in 
iswhiche 3e accusen him; but‘ nethir 
Eroude, fors I» ‘a3ein sente! ‘3ou to him‘, 
and lo! no thing worthi of! deeth is don 
isto him. Therfore™ I schal delyuere® him 
izamended®. Forsothe he hadde nede toP 
deliuere? to hem oon by the feeste day. 
isSothli al the cumpanye criede’, seiynge, 
Do him awey, and deliuere ‘Barabas to 
19 vs; whicht was sent in to prison for sum 
dissencioun" maad in the citee, and for 
zomansleyng’. Forsoth eft* Pilat spak to 


€ for K. & the which agarnoposTWwxy. 
Postwy. here 4 pr.m.@ pr.m. MNOPTXY. 
© tokne AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
QxXY. t Forsothe sv pr.m. 
¥ Om. acanopestwxy. © sothly o. clad sx. 
OPQSTWXY. a that ilke 9. that x. thilke y. 
x pass. © Pylatesothliwxy. 4 the prestis r. 
b he 6 sec.m.No. i hath sent him agen nv. 
m Om. AGMNOPOSTIWXY. ™ lene AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
amendid, or del. chastised s. 
¥ criede togidre 4GMNOPQSTXY. 


sone AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


daskider. ¢thatr. fhymhi. & Oma. 
Imaystresa. Mandi,  % multitude a. 
whiche x. ini. 

VOL. IV. 


LUKE. 


h thees MNOPQTIVY. 
m for that AGMNOPQSTWXY. 

P for to 4cMNoPpoTIVY. Om. s. 
u forsoke, or dispiside him, with aeaNnpostwxy. forsoke him with o. 
x clooth him clothed o. 
b hyfore ae sec. m. MNoPposTIVY. Om. G pr.m. biforn 
e Om. cirxy. 

k him to jou G sec.m. 0. to vs N. 
© amendid, or delyuere hym chastised AGMNPQSTWY. 
P for to 4emNOPOTWY. 4 dismytte, or delyuere AGMNOPOSTIVY. dismytten x. 
8 to vs Barabas wxy. 
disturblyng acmnrotwy. distroublynge o. sedicioun, or disturbing sx. 


h askide r. 
° him awey 1kPqrsbeghik sec.m. a3. awey k pr.m. 


225 
And Pilat herynge Galile axide’, if hee 
were a man of Galilee And whanne he7 
knewe that he was of the powere of 
Eroude, he sente hyin to Eronde; whicht 
was at Jerusalem in tho daies. Ands 
whanne Eroude si3 Jhesu‘, he ioyede 
ful myche; for long tyme he coueitide to 
se hym, for he herde many thingis of 
hym, and hopide to see sum tokene ‘to 
beS don of hym. And he axide* hymo 
in many wordis; and he answeride no 
thing to hym. And the princis of10 
preestis and the scribis stoden, stidfastli' 
accusynge hym. But Eroude with his1 
oost dispiside hym, and scornede hym, 
and clothide* with a white cloth, and 
sente hym a3en to Pilat. And Eroudet2 
and Pilat weren maad freendis fro that 
dai; for bifor thei weren enemyes togidre. 
And Pilat clepide togider the princis of 13 
prestis and the maiestratis! of the puple, 
and seide to hem, 3e han brou3t to melt 
this man, as turnynge awey the puple, 
and lo! Y axynge bifor 30u fynde no 
cause in this man of these thingis, in 
whiche 3e accusen hym; nether Eroude, 15 
for™ he hath sent hym ajen to vs, and 
lo! no thing worthi of deth is don to 
hym. And therfor Y schal amende hym, 16 
and delyuere hym. But he moste nede17 
delyuer to hem oon bi the feest dai. 
And al the puple" criede togidir, and 18 
seide, Do ‘awei hym®, and delyuer to vs 
Barabas; which? was sent ‘in to? prisoun 19 
for disturblyng maad in the cite, and for 
mansleynge. And eftsoone Pilat spak 20 


i Jhesu @ sec.m.  * for to 4GMNo 
n for to AGMNOPOQTIVY. 
Qmaad aemNopoeTwxy. *™Om.o. §s Om. 


Ysente him y. 2 ben 4GMN 


& forwhi AGMOPSTWXY. 
1 the 4GMNOPOQSTWY. to X. 


fand o, 


U sedicioun, or 
Ww eft- 


t the whiche agaNnopaesTWXxY. 
Vv mnannes sleeynge GY. 


k clothide him rxreghika@. 


Ustifly a. 
P the 


Gg 


226 


2ihem, willinge* to’ delyuere Jhesu. And 
thei vndircryeden, seyinge, Crucifie, cru- 
22cifie him. Sothli the thridde tyme he 
seide to hem, Sothli what of yuel* hath 
he? don? I fynde no cause of deeth in 
him; therfore I schal chastise hym, and 
23° schal® delyuere. And thei contynueden 
axinge with greete voices, that he schulde 
be crucified; and the voyces of hem 
214woxen® stronge. And Pilat demyde her 
z5axinge tot be don. Sothli he deliuerede 
to hem him, that for mansleynge® and 
dissenciounf was sent in to® prisoun, whom 
thei axiden; sothli he bitook Jhesu to 
26 her wille. And whanne thei ledden® him, 
thei took sum man, Symount of Sirenen, 
comynge fro the toun, and thei puttiden! 
to him a* cross to! bere aftir Jhesu. 
27Sothli ther suede him moche cumpanye 
of peple™, and of wymmen that weileden, 
2sand bymoornyden him. Sothli Jhesu 
turnyd to hem seide®, Dou3tris of Jeru- 
salem, nyle 3e wepe on® me, but wepe 3e 
290n 30u? silf, and on 3oure sones. For lo! 
dayes schulen come, in whiche it schal be 
seid, Blessid be bareyn wymmen', and 
wombis* that han not gendrid, and the 
teetis whiche' han not 3ouun souke®. 
30 Thanne thei schulen bigynne to” seye to 
monteyns, Falle 3e doun on vs, and to 
31 litle* hillis, HileY 3e vs. For if thei don 
‘thes thingis? in a grene tree, what schal 
szbe don in a drye? Sothli and othere 
tweye* wickide> men weren led with him, 
a3that thei schulde be slayn. And aftir 
that thei camen in® to a place, which® is 
clepid of® Caluarie, there thei crucifieden 
him, and the theues, oon on the ri;thalf, 
34and ‘the tother‘ on the left half. Forsothe 
Jhesu seide, Fadir, for3yue to hem, for 


LUKE. 


XXII. 21—=34. 


to hem, and wolde delyuer Jhesu. And 21 
thei vndurcrieden, and seiden, Crucifie, 
crucifie hym. And the thridde tyme he2ze 
seide to hem, For what yuel hath this* 
don? Y fynde no cause of deeth in 
hym ; therfor Y schal chastise hym, and 
Ys schal delyuert. And thei contynu-2s 
eden with greet voicis" axynge’, that he 
schulde be crucified; and the voicis of 
hem woxen™ stronge. And Pilat dem-21 
yde her axyng* to be don. And he dely-25 
ueride to hem hym, that for mansleyng 
and sedicioun was sent in to prisoun, 
whom thei axiden’; but he bitook? Jhesu 
to her wille. And whanne thei ledden 26 
hym, thei token a man, Symon of Syre- 
nen, comynge® fro the toun, and thei 
leiden on hym the cross to bere aftir 
Jhesu. And there suede hym myche27 
puple, and wymmen that’ weiliden>, and 
bymorneden hym. And Jhesus turnede 2s 
to hem, and seide, Dou3tris of Jerusalem, 
nyle 3e wepe on me, but wepe 3e on 
joure® silf and on 3oure sones. For lo !29 
daies schulen come, in whiche it schal 
be seid, Blessid be bareyn wymmen, and 
wombis that han not borun children, 
and the tetis that han not 3ouun souke. 
Thanne thei schulen bigynne to seie to30 
mounteyns, Falle 3e doun on vs, and to 
smale hillis, Keuere 3e vs. For if in a3i 
greene tre thei don these thingis, what 
schal' be don in a drie? Also otherese 
tweit wickid men weren led with hym, 
to be slayn. And ‘aftir that® thei camenss 
in to a place, that is clepid of Caluerie, 
there thei crucifieden hym, and the 
thenes, oon on the ri3t half, and ‘the 
totherf on the left half. But Jhesusss 
seide, Fadir, for3yue hem, for thei witen 


x wilnynge wy. Yfor to 4GMNoperwy. 2 yuel thenge 4c pr.m. MNOPSTWXY. ®this mprivxy. > Om. 


G pr. m. MNOPQSTXY. schal G sec.m. © wexen My. wexden o.. 
b hadden a. 


f sedicion 4GMNoPsTWXyY. seducioun @. & Om. o. 


Noperwy. the puple yr. © and seyde w. Om. y. 
rOm. x. 8 the wombis w pr.m. t that 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
eTvY. Wvypono. *smale acuNPesixy. Om. o. 


for to 4GMNoOPETIWY. & mannys sleeynge y. 
i putten stx. kK the x. 1} for to acu 
°vpon Mor. vp Q@. P30ure GNegwy. 49 Om. x. 
usoke o. souken x.  -Y for to 4GaNOP 
y Keuer semnopestwxy. 7 this thenge cNno 


POTXY. ® two GMpeWwxyY. tweyne TY. © wicke sx. ©Om.o. ‘that sgarnopestwxy. © Om. Nry. 
f that othir w. the other x. 

ther prom. Rg8. he this 1 sec.m. this s sup. ras.- SOm.s. 'delyuere Aim KP prim. 4" vois k. 
vaskynge rR. and axidenk. Wwexidenhi. %askyngr. Yaskidenr. 72tooke ac. 4 goyngek. 


b biweiliden k. © 30u curqxabcegaf. 


4 two 1 sec. m. qhi. 


© whanne k. fthe oother 1. that other e. 


XXIII. 35—48. 


thei witen not what thei don. Forsothe 
thei departinge his eclothis, senten lottis. 
35 And the peple stood abydinge; and the 
princes? seornyden him with’ hem, sey- 
inge, Othere men he made saf; make he 
him silf saf, if ‘he is! Crist, the chosun 
3sof God. Forsoth and kny3tis nei3ynge* 
seornyden him, and offriden vynegre to 
azhim, seyinge, If thou ert kyng of Jewis, 
38make thee saf. Sothli and! the ‘wrytinge 
aboue™ was writun on him with ‘lettris 
of Greek", of Latyn, and of Ebrew, This 
39is the? kyng of Jewis. Forsoth oon of 
thoP theues that hangiden4, blasphemyde 
him, seyinge, If thou ert Crist, make thi 
4osilf saf and vs. Sothli ‘the tothir™ an- 
sweringe, blamyde’ him, seyiuge', Nethir 
thou dredist God, ‘that thon art" in the 
4isame dampnacioun? And treuly we’ 
iustly, for” we han reeceyued worthi 
thingis to dedis; sothli this* ‘hath don 
42no yuel?. And he seide to Jhesu, Lord, 
haue mynde on* me, whanne thou ‘sehalt 
4secome in to thi kingdom. And Jhesu 
seyde to him, Treuli I seie to thee, this 
day thou sehalt be with me in paradys. 
44Sothly it was almost the sixte our‘, and 
derknessist weren® maad in al erthef til 
45 to8 the nynthe our". And the sunne was! 
maad derk, and the veyl of the temple 
46was* kitt the myddel. And Jhesu cry- 
inge with greet voys, seide!, Fadir, in to 
thi hondis I bitake™ my spirit. And he 
seyinge thes thingis, sente out the spirit, 
47‘ether diede®. Forsothe centurio seynge 
the® thing that? was don, glorifiede God, 
asseyinge, Verily this man was iust. And 
al the eumpany of hem that weren there 


& prynces of prestus @ sec. m. h within Nv. 


estwxy. lint. 


iden 9. heengen sx. 1 that other w. 
vOm. x. W forwhi 4GMNoPQsTWY. 
AGMNOPQSTWAY. 4 of OXY. 
pery. 4 derkenes o. 


bart comen X. 


OPeSTWXY. 4 our, or none AGMNOPQSTWXY, 
esTxy. lsuaith acunopoestTWwxy. ™ take x. 
P Om. rT. 


h hath mad thi. 
© on A pr.m. Rsbeghif. 
u Om. Eqbckaf. 


& kestiden x. casten k. 
werkis 1. 1% he this 1. 
1pr.m, * criede E. 


i this be 4eMNOPQSTWXY. 
™ superscripcion AGM NOPQSTWXY. 
A prem, G prem. MNOPQTW pr. m. XY. Om. A S€€.m. G S€c.M. S. 

s answered blamynge o. 
x he this a Pq. 


Lis AG prom. MNOPQSTXY. 
n Om. ox. or dyede mpwy. 


{ Om. a. 
Pine prom k prom. 


LUKE. 227 


not what thei doon. And thei depart-3s 
iden his elothis, and kesten$ lottis. And 
the puple stood abidynge; and the prineis 
scorneden hym with hem, and seiden, 
Othere men he maad" saaf; make he 
hym silf saaf, if this be Crist, the 
ehosun of God. And the kny3tis nei3-36 
eden, and seorneden hym, and profreden 
vynegre to hym, and seiden, If thou art37 
king of Jewis, make thee saaf. And thess 
superseripcioun was writun over hym 
with Greke lettris, and of Latyn, and 
of Ebreu, This is the! kyng of Jewis. 
And oon of these* theues that hangiden, 39 
blasfemyde hym, and seide, If thou art 
Crist, make thi silf saaf and vs. But 40 
‘the tothir! answerynge, blamyde hym, 
and seide, Nether thou dredist God, that 
art in the samme dampnacioun? And4! 
treuli we iustli, for we han _ resseiued 


_worthi thingis to werkis™; but this" dide 


no thing of yuel. And he seide to Jhe-s2 
su, Lord, haue mynde of® me, whanne 
thou comest ‘in to? thi kyngdom. And 4s 
Jhesus seide to hym, Treuli Y seie to 
thee, this dai thou schalt be with me in 
paradise. And it was almest the sixte 44 
our, and derknessis weren maad in? al 
the" erthe ‘in to’ the nynthe our. And 4s 
the sun was maad derk, and the veile 
of the temple was to-rent atwo. And 46 
Jhesus eriynget with a® greet vois, seide, 
Fadir, in to thin hoondis Y bitake my 
spirit. And he seiynge these thingis, 
jaf vp the goost. And the centurien 47 
seynge that thing that was don, glori- 
fiede God, and seide, Verili this man was 
iust. And al the puple of hem thats 


k comynge nije aGMNoP 
n Greeke letteris aemNopostTwxy. © Jhesus 
P the ewnogx. Om. Pp. 1 thei hang- 

tand saiynge 0. 4 thou that art w. 
ydide acmnopestwxy. 2 thenge of yuel 


¢ our, or middai aG sup. ras. Ww. hour, or undirne HN 
eben 4 pr.m. G pr. mt. MNPQSTXY. 


f the world agmNopesTwxyY. & Om. AMN 
kis 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNOP 
© that AGMNOPQSTIWXY. 


k Om.i. I the oother 1. that othir ae. ™ oure 


don Eak. Om. Eps. §$ in 


a@g2 


228 LUKE. 


to gidere at this spectacle, and sy3en tho4 
thingis that weren don, smytinge™ her 
49brestis turneden ajeyn. Forsoth al his 
knowen stooden afer, and wymmen that 
sneden him fro Galilee, seynge thes thingis. 
50And lo! a man, Joseph bi name, that was 
a decurioun, ethers hauynge ten‘ vudir him, 
a good man and iust, of Aramathie, ‘a 
s1citee of Judee", he’ consentide not to the 
counceil® and* dedisY of hem’; which® and 
s2he abood the kingdom of God. He® cam 
ny3 to Pilat, and axide the body of Jhesu, 
s3and wlappide® it don’ doun in a lynnen 
cloth, and puttide® him in af graue hewun, 
ssin which not 3it ony man was put. And 
the day was ‘the makinge redy of pask®, 
ssand the saboth bygan to schyne. Sothli 
the wymmen suynge, that camen with 
hin fro Galilee, sy3en the graue, and hou 
schis body was put. And thei turnynge 
a3en, aden redy swete spices, aud oyne- 
mentis; and sothli in the saboth thei rest- 
iden, vp® the comaundement. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Forsothe in oon of the woke ful erly 
thei camen to the graue, bryngynge swete 
spicis, whiche! thei hadden maad redy. 
2And thei founden the stoone turned a wey 
3fro the graue. And thei gon yn, founden 
4not the body of Jhesu*. And it was! don, 
while™ thei weren astoneyed" in thou3t 
of this thing, loo! twey® men stooden bi- 
ssydis hem in ‘cloth schynynge?. Sothli 
whenne thei dredden, and bowiden her 
semelant in to erthe4, thei seiden to hem, 
What seke 3e the lyuynge with deede™ 
6mens? He is not here, but het hath rise. 
Haue 3e mynde, how he spak to 3o0u, 
7whanne ‘3it he was" in Galilee, seyinge, 


a4 theeso. fF smyten rT. 


W counseilis g9. *of x. Y tho dedis k prem 


8 that is 0. oF GMPQTWXY. 
G sec.m.M. of A. the c. of Judee neq sec.m. of A.of Judee G prom. @ pr.m. 


XXIlIeyo— Xe 


weren there togidir at this spectacle, and 
sayn tho thingis that weren don, smyten’ 
her brestis, and turneden ajen. But alle 49 
his knowun stoden afer, and wymmen 
that sueden hym fro Galile, seynge these 
thingis. And lo! a man, Joseph biso 
name, of Aramathie, a cite of Judee, 
that was a decurien, a good man and a 
iust, this az concentide not to thes: 
counseil and to the dedis of hem; and he 
abood the kyngdom of God. This Jo-s2 
seph cam to Pilat, and axide” the bodi 
of Jhesu, and took it doun, and wlap-s3 
pide it in a cleene lynen cloth, and leide 
hym in a graue hewun, in which not 3it 
ony man hadde be leid. And the dais 
was the euen of the halidai, and the 
sabat bigan to schyne. And the wym-ss 
men suynge, that camen with hym fro 
Galile, sayn the graue, and hou his bodi 
was leid. And thei turneden a3en, and sc 
maden redi swete smellynge spicis, and 
oynementis; but in the sabat thei rest- 
iden, aftir the comaunde:ent. 


CAP. XXIV. 


But in o dai of the woke ful eerli thei! 
camen to the graue, and brou3ten swete 
smellynge spices, that thei hadden aray- 
ed. And thei founden the stoon turned 2 
awei fro the graue. And thei 3eden in,3 
and founden not the bodi of the Lord 
Jhesu. And it was don, the while theis 
weren astonyed in thou3t of this thing, 
lo! twei* men stoden bisidis hem in 
schynynge cloth, And whanie theis 
dredden, and boweden her semblaunt Y 
in to the? erthe, thei seiden to hem, 
What seken 3e hym that lyueth with 
deed men? He is not here, but is? risun. 6 
Hane 3e mynde, hou he spak to 3on, 


u Om. p. of A. citee of Judee 
v this man AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 


t ten men s. 


zhem of A. of Judee c pr.m. xy. hem, of A. cite of Jude 


G sce.m. P. 4 the whiche 4GMNoPosTIVXY. b This AGMNOPQSTXWY. ¢ whappide 4. d Om. n. 
© putte sx. fOm.N.  & parassenes, that is, [was N] euen of the holy day acmMNoposTwxy. } aftir 4am 
NopasTWxY. ithat aguNnopostwxy. the Lord 4 sup. ras. sw. lis a pr.m.GMNPsTXY. ™ the 


while 4GMNoPQsTW sec.m.X. ® stoneid sx. 
clothing s. in schynynge cloth y. 


OPQSTWXY. t Om. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


¥ smetin EP, smytiden KmRqsuxbega. smeten 1. smooten c. 


z Om. EPQika, 4 he is Eraska, 


Oo two GMPQWXY. 
4 the erthe 4awNoPQesTWxY. 
whe was jit GMPIVXY. 


Pp schynynge in clothe c. in schynyng 
t the deade s. drede w. S Om. AGMN 


waskide R. * two pass. Y sembland s. 


XXIV, 8—20. 


For it bihoueth mannis sone be’ bitakun” 
in to hondis* of synful men, and to be 
crucified, and the thridde day to ryse 
sajen. And thei bithou3ten on his wordis. 
9 And thei gon ajen’ fro the graue, telden 
alle thes* thingis to the” enleuene, and to® 
loalle othere’. Forsothe ‘Mary Mawdeleyn 
was®, and Joone, and Marye of James, and 
othere wymmen that weren with hem, 
that seiden thes thingis to apostlis£. And 
thes’ wordis weren> seyn bifore hem as 
madnessel, ‘ether errour*, and thei bileu- 
izeden not to hem. Forsothe Petre rysinge, 
ran to the graue; and he bowynge doun, 
sy3 the lynnen clothis! put™ aloone". And 
he wente, woudrynge with® him silf ‘this 
isthing that? was don. And lo! tweyne4 
of hem wenten in that day to" a’ castel, 
that was fro Jerusalem in space' of sixty 
14furlongis, by name Emaws. And _ thei 
spaken to gidere of alle thes thingis that 
ishadden falle". And it was’ don, while” 
thei talkiden*, and sou3ten withY hem silf, 
and Jhesu him silf neizynge, wente with 
1éhem. Sothli her y3en weren holdun, lest 
17thei knewen him. And he seide* to hem, 
Whiche* ben thes wordis, that 3e speken 
to gidere goynge, and 3e ben sorwful? 
is And oon answeringe’, to whom the name 
was Cleofas, seide® ‘to him‘, Thou aloone 
ert a pilgrym of& Jerusalem, and hast 
thou not knowe, what thingis ben don in 
igit in thes dayes? To which" he seide, 
Whiche!? And thei seyden to him, Of 
Jhesu of Nazareth, that was a man pro- 
phete, my3ti m work and word bifore 
20God and al the peple; and hou the hi3- 
este’ prestis and oure princes bitoken him 
in to dampnacioun of deeth, and cruci- 


W taken 4 pr.m. G prom. NoQT. 


¥ to be GMa. 
erwy. Zawayo. 4Om.o. bthosy. ¢Om.N. 
AGMNNoposTWXY. [the apostolis x. & the 9. 


NPQSTWXY. k On. AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
© by AGMNOPQSTWXY. 


sthe G pr.m. ‘tthe space aGMNoPQOSTWXY. 


LUKE. 


x the hondis agaNorasTIWXy. 


h ben 4 pr. m. G pr.m. MNPQSTXY. 
1 clothis, or shelis AGMNPQSTWY, 
P that that acanPesTWXY. that at o. 
u hyfallen acunopotwy. failen x. 


229 


whanne he was 3it in Galile, and scide,7 
For it bihouetl mannys sone to be bi- 
takun® in to the hondis of synful men, 
and to be crucified, and the thridde dai 
to rise ajen. And thei bithou3ten ons 
hise wordis. And thei jeden a3en tro theg 
graue, and telden alle these thingis to 
the enleuene, and to alle othir. And1o 
ther was Marie Mawdeleyn, and Joone‘, 
and Marie of James, and other wymmen 
that weren with hem, that seiden to 
apostlis these thingis. And these wordis 11 
weren seyn bifort hein as madnesse, and 
thei bileueden not to hem. But Petirig 
roos vp, and ran to the graue; and he 
bowide doun, and say the lynen clothis 
liynge aloone. And he wente bi him 
silf, wondrynge on that that was don. 
And lo! tweyne of hein wenten in thatis 
dai in to a castel, that was fro Jerusalem 
the space of sixti furlongis, bi name 
Emaws. And thei spakeu togidir of 14 
alle these thingis that haddun_ bifallun. 
And it was don, the while thei talkiden, 15 
and sou3ten bi hem silf, Jhesus hym silf® 
neizjede, and wente with hem. But her is 
izen weren holdun, that thei knewen him 
not. And he seide to hem, What ben17 
these wordis, that 3e speken togidir wau- 
drynge, and 3e ben sorewful ? And oon, 18 
whos name was Cleofas, answerde, and 
seide, Thou thi silf art a pilgrym in 
Jerusalem, and hast thou not knowun, 
what thingis ben don in it in these 
daies? To whom he seide, What thingis? is 
And thei seiden to hym, Of Jhesu of 
Nazareth, that was a man_propliete 8, 
my3ti in werk and word bifor God and 
al the puple; and hou the hei3est® preestis 20 


Y for to 4GMNOP 
€ there was Mary Maudeleyn 
i madnesses 4GM 
™ Oin. Y. n aboue x. 

vr into POTVWXY. 
Vis A pr.m.G prem. 


4 the othire Nn. 


4 two MPQWXY. 


mNopsTX. Om. ¥. “the while acunopastwxy. * talkeden, or fableden acunesTWwy. Y by 4GMNO 
POSTWXY. 2 seith aGmNPesTWXY. & What acmNnopeswx. And what 7. > wandryng aGuNPesTWY. 
wonderynge o. wandrende x. ¢Om. y. 4 Om. sGMNnopesTyWxy. € answeringe seide y. -f Om. 
AGMNOPQSTWAY. & i AGNNOPQSYWXY. bwhom Gupexy. 1 What thingis aw sec.m. What GMNop 
qsw prom. xy. K heje x. 

> taken s. ¢ Jone PaQr. 4 the apostlis ir. € to X sec. m. f bi him self 1. 8 Om. R prem. 


h hije 1. 


ve 


230 LUKE. 


2ifieden him. Forsoth we hopiden, for™ he 
‘schulde a3en bye® Israel. And now ‘in 
alle° thingis the thridde day? is to day, 
22that thes thingis ben’ don. But and sum 
wymuinen of oure™ maden vs aferd, whiche® 
23bifore the li3t weren at the graue; and 
his bodi not foundun, thei camen, seyinge, 
‘that thei sy3en‘ a si3t of aungels, whiche® 
24seyn, ‘that he lyuethYy. And sum men” 
of oure* wenten to the graue, and theiY 
founden so? as the wymmen seiden, but 
25 thei* founden not him». And he seyde to 
hem, Ac! foolis, and slowe of herte for 
to bileue in alle thingis whiche® the pro- 
26 phetis han spoke. Where it bihofte® not 
Crist to4 suffre ‘thes thingis', and so for‘ 
27 to entre in to his glorie? And he bigyn- 
nynge at Moyses and alle prophetis', ex- 
pownede™ to hem in alle scripturis, 
28 whiche" weren of him. And thei camen 
ny3 to the castel, whidur thei wenten. And 
he nade cuntenaunce him to® go ferthere. 
29And thei constreyneden him, seyinge, 
Dwel with vs, for it drawith to ny3t?P, 
and the day is now bowid doun. And he 
soentride? with hem. And it was* don, 
while® he restide with hem', he took bred, 
and" blesside, and brac, and dresside’ to 
sihem. And the y3en of hem weren 
opened, and thei knewen him; and he 
3e vanyschide fro her y3en. And thei seiden 
to gidere, Wher* oure herte was not bren- 
nynge in vs, whileY he spac in the weye, 
s3and? openyde ‘scripturis to vs*? And 
thei risinge in the same our, wenten ajen 
in® to Jerusalem, and thei® founden en- 
leue’ gederid to gidere, and hem that 


m Om. G pr.m. 
P On. We q@ weren A SUP. Tas. G sup. ras. W. 
wy. that x. 
onres MPS.  Y so thei 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
GMPxY. 4Om. ogsx. & that 4qarNopeswy. 
NOPOTVWY. i Om. @ pr.m. pexy. 


2 was to hy asen AGMNOPQSTIVXY. 
¥ oures AGMNOPQSTY. 
t hem also for to haue seizen aaaNopestTwxy. hem also to haue seijen sx. 
v him for to lyne aeanopesrivxy. him to lyue sx. 

Z Om. AGMNOPOSTWXY. 

f Whether orqivxy. 
k Om. AGMNOPOQSTWXY. 

™ interpreted, or declaride aemnpesTwy. declared o. interpretede x. 


XXIV. 21—33. 


of oure princis bitoken hym! in to damp- 
nacioun of deeth, and crucifieden hym. 
But we hopiden, that he schulde haue*2i 
ajenbou3t Israel. And! now on alle 
these thingis the thridde dai is to dai, 
that these thingis weren don. But also 22 
summe wymmen of ouris maden vs afer- 
ed, whiche bifor dai weren at the graue; 
and whanne his bodi was not foundun, 23 
thei camen, and seiden, that thei syen 
also™ a si3t of" aungels, whiche® seien?, 
that he lyueth. And summe of oure424 
wenten to the graue, and thei founden so 
as the wymmen seiden, but thei founden 
not hym. And he seide to hem, A!25 
foolis, and slowe of herte to bileue in 
alle thingis that the prophetis han 
spokun. Whethir it bihofte not Crist’ 26 
to suffre these® thingis, and so to entre 
in to his glorie? And he bigan at27 
Moises and at alle thet prophetis, and 
declaride to hem in alle. scripturis, that 
weren of hym. And thei camen ny328 
the" caste], whidur thei wenten. And he 
made countenaunce that he wolde go 
ferthere. And thei constreyneden hym,29 
aud seiden, Dwelle with vs, for it draw- 
ith to ny3t’, and the dai is now bowid 
doun. And he entride with hem. And 30 
it was don, while” he sat at the mete 
with hem, he* took breed, and _ blesside, 
and brak, and took to hem. And the31 
i3en of hem weren openyd, and thei 
knewen hym; and he vanyschide fro her 
izen. And thei seiden togidir, Whether 32 
oure herte was not brennynge in vs, 
while he spakY in the weie, and openyde 


© vpon all thees agNopesTiy. on alle thes rx. 
8 the whiche 4GMNOPQSTIWXY. 
u the whiche 4GauNopPosT 
wQOm. os. * ouren 4GNOQTIVY. 
ahim theio. bOm.o ¢O! 

& byhoueth ory. 4 for to aaa 
1 the prophetis 4GuNoposTIWxY. 

u that 4GMNOPQSTWXY. ° for 


to AGMNoPeTWY. Ptheny3t wpr.m. 4entred in 4GMNOPQSTWXY. is A pr.m.G pr.m, MNOPSTXY. 


8 the while 4GMNOPQSTWXY. them at mete 9. 


. te vs scripturis arpa. 
GMNPSTWWXY. 


b Om. AGMNOPOSTWXY. 


i Om. k pr.m. 
c1Kubcea. oures xk. ¢ to Crista. § alle these s. 
~ the whileeg. *and hes pr.m. 


u Om. xy. 
esrxy, * Whether x. yY the while aemnopostwxy. Zand he Nn. 


¢ Om. AGMNOPQSTWXAY. 


k Om. hi. ' Buta. ™Om. ep. 


v3af wopr.m. When 4 pr.m. GMNOP 
@ to vs the scripturis aNosTwxy. 


4 enleuene ar. elleuene 


uOm.1. Othat3. Pp seiden pasake. 4 ouren 


t Om. isb pr.m,g. “to the cErax. VY the ny3t ak. 
Y spak to vs EPQS sup. 7'as. X pr.m. aB. 


XXIV. 34—50. 


34weren with hem, seyinge, For the Lord 
35 roos. verily, and aperide to Symount. And 
thei telden what thingis weren don in the 
weye, and hou thei knewen him in brek- 
36ynge of breed. © Forsothe while® thei 
spaken thes thingis, Jhesus stood in the 
myddel of hem, and seide to hem, Pees to 
3730; I am, nyle 3e drede. Sothli thei 
troublid’ ands agast*, gessiden hem to! se 
38a spirit. And he seide to hem, What ben 
3e troublid*, and thou3tis sty3en vp in to 
3930ure hertis? Se 3e myn hondis and my 
feet, for I my silfam. Feele 3e, and se 3e; 
for a spirit hath not fleisch, and boonys, 
4oas 3e seen me for! to haue. And whanne 
he hadde seyd this thing, he schewide 
4thondis and feet ‘to hem™. Forsoth 3it 
hem" not bileuynge, and wondringe for 
ioye, he seyde, Han 3e ony thing here® 
42that schal be etun? And thei offriden 
to him a part of aP fysch roostid, and a 
43coomb of hony. And whanne he hadde 
etun bifore hem, he takynge the relyfs, 
443af to hem. And he seyde to hem, Thes 
ben the wordis whiched I spak to 30un, 
whanne I was 3it' with jou; for it is 
nede that’ alle thingis ‘be fillid‘, whiche® 
ben writun in the lawe of Moyses, and in 
45 prophetis, and in salmes, of me. Thanne 
he openyd witt to hem, that thei schulde 
46 vndirstonde scripturis’. And he seyde to 
hem, For thus it is writun, and thus it 
bihofte’ Crist to* suffre, and toY ryse a3en 
47fro deed? men? in® the thridde day; and 
penaunce and remyssioun of synnes to® be 
prechid in his name to alle folkis, men 
ssbigynnynge at® Jerusalem. Forsothe 3e 
49 ben witnessis of thes thingis. And I sendef 
the biheeste® of my fadir in to 30u; sothli 
sitte 3e in the citee, til that 3e be clothid® 
50 with vertu fro an hi3. Forsoth he ledde 


e the while 4eanpostTwxy. whanne r. 
8 Om. x. bagastid o. 1 for to agarnoperwy. 
Q pr.m.xY. ™toheme@sec.m. °° Om. 0. 
AGMNOPQSTWAY. 
W byhoueth rxv. * for to agMNOPQTYWY. 
Nopestwxy. 4 Om. 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNPQTX. 
€ fro AGMNOPQSTWXY. 
thenge o. clad x. 


a8Om.R.  » to him xaea. 


£Om.k prim. 


Z resin EP. 
spoke g. 


f shal send 4 pr.m. G prom. MNPOQTXY. 


Cand he s. and hi. 
h to CEPQI pr.m. Ks pr.m. Xag. 


LUKE. 231 


to vs scripturis? ‘And thei risen? vp in33 
the same our, and wenten ajen in to 
Jerusalem, and founden the enleuene’ ga- 
derid togidir, and hem that weren-with 
hem, selynge, That the Lord is risun 34 
verrili, and .apperide to Symount. And 3s 
thei tolden what thingis weren don in 
the weie, and hou thei knewen hym in 
brekyng of breed. And the* while thei3¢ 
spaken these thingis, Jhesus stood in the 
myddil of hem, and seide to hem, Pees 
to 3ou; Y am, nyle 3e drede. But thei37 
weren affraied and agast, and gessiden 
hem to se a spirit. And he seide to38 
hem, What ben 3e troblid, and thou3tis 
comen vp in to 30ure hertis? Se 3e my 39 
hoondis and iny feet, for Y my silf am. 
Fele 3e, and se 3e; for a spirit hath not 
fleisch and boonys, as je seen that Y 
hane. And whanne he hadde seid this 40 
thing, he schewide hoondis and feet to 
hem. And 3it while thei bileueden not, 41 
and wondriden for ioye, he seide, Han 
3e here ony thing that schal be etun ? 
And thei proferden hym> a part of a42 
fisch rostid, and an hony combe. And 43 
whanne he hadde etun bifore hem, he* 
took that that lefte, and 3af to hem; and 44 
seide ‘to hem‘, These ben the® wordis 
that Y spakf to 30u, whanne Y was 3it 
with 30u; for it is nede that alle thingis 
ben fulfillid, that ben writun in the lawe 
of Moises,and in prophetis, and in salmes, 
of me. Thanne he openyde to hem wit, 45 
that thei schulden vnderstonde scripturis. 
And he seide to hem, For thus it is 46 
writun, and thus it bihofte Crist to suf- 
fre, and ryse azen fro deeth in& the 
thridde dai; and penaunce and remys-47 
sioun of synnes to be prechid in his name 
‘in to® alle folkis, bigynnynge at Jeru- 


f distourblid agcmnopery. disturbid s. distrublid wv. Om. x. 
K turblid arnp. 
P Om. w. 
t to hen fulfillid acarnopesTwxy. 
Y Om. 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
¢ for to AGMNOPOTIVY. 


1Om. sx. ™ Om. G prim, MNP 
athat aeuNopestwxy. Om. yy. % Om. 
uthat acuNopesTWwx. V the seripturis w pr. m. 
2 decth y sec.m. 2 Om. 4GM 
din to 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 
8 bihizt thing aemnpesTWwxy. bri3t 


40Om.apr.m ¢Om.hi.  f haue 


232 


hem forth in to Bethanye, and, his hondis 
streysidi, he blesside hem. And it was* don, 
while! he blesside hem, he departide fro 
52hem, and was borun in to heuene. And 
thei worshippinge wente a3en in™ to Je- 
ssrusalem with greet ioye; and weren 
euere" in the temple, heryinge and bless- 
inge God. 


Here endith the gospel of Luk, and 
bigyuneth the prolog of John°. 


ilift vp aeanoporwy. lifted vp sx. 
mQOm.N. ® evermore 4GMNOPQSTWXY. 


eendith the gospell of Luke. o. 


and next folewynge bigynneth Joon in the gospel. w. 


i Om. x pr.m. * thei weren k pr.m. 
of [on arc] John. cance. 
gospel of Joon. 1. 
and biginnith the prologe on the gospel of Jon. sa. 
Joon the Euangelist. v. 


LUKE. 


k is 4 pr.m. GMNOPSTXY. 

© Here endith Luk, and now bigynneth Joon. a. Here endith 
the gospel of Luke euangelist, and bigynneth the prolog on John, and aftir bigyneth the gospel. n. 
Here enden the gospelis of Luke, and bygynnen the prologe of Jon. Q. 
Here endith Luc, and bigynneth the prologe of Jon. v. 


XXIV. 5I1—53. 


salem. And 3e ben witnessis of these 48 
thingis. And Y schal sende the biheest 49 
of my fadir in to 3ou; but sitte 3e in the 
citee, til that! 3e be clothid with vertu 
from an hi3.° And he ledde hem forth 50 
in to Betanye, and whanne his hondis 
weren lift vp, he blesside hem. And its 
was don, the while he blesside hem, he 
departide fro hem, and was borun in to 
heuene. And thei worschipiden, and 52 
wenten a3en in to Jerusalem with greet 
joye, and weren* euermore in the temple, 53 
heriynge and blessynge God. 


Here endith Luyk'. 
I the while 4emNoPQSTVIVXY. 


Here 


Here eendith the gospel by the seiynge of Luke, 


No final rubric in GarpsTxy. 


1 Here endith the gospel of Luyk, and bigynneth the prolog 
Heere endith the gospel of Luyk, and biginneth the prologe of Jerom on the 
Here eendeth Luke ; se now the prologe on Joon. K. 


Here endith the gospel of Luyk, 


Here endith Luyk, and here bigynneth a prologe on 
Here endeth the gospel of Luyk, and here bigynneth the prolog on the gospel of 


Jon. xk. Here endith Luyk, and here bigynneth the prologe on the gospel of Joon. b. Here endith Luk, 


and bigynneth a prologe on Jon. hi. 


No final rubric in Empg. 


J OH N. 


Prolog of John’. 


Tuts is John euangelist®, oon of the® disciplis of God, the which a mayde* of God 
was chosun, whom“? fro the sposailis willinge be® weddid, God clepide; to whom 
double witnesse of maydenhod in the gospel is jeune; in that, that bothe bifore he is 
seid louyd of God, and to him God hangynge in the cross bitook his modir, that a8 
mayden® schulde kepe a mayde'. Forsothe he openynge in the gospel what he was, 
bigynnynge the work of an* vncoruptible word, ‘other Goddis sone}, he aloone wit- 
nessith Goddis sone to be maad man, and the 1i3t, ‘that is, Crist™, to haue be not 
comprehendid of derknessis, ‘that beth synneris"; puttinge the firste sygne°, that God 
made in? sposailis, that he schewinge what he was, schulde schewe to men redinge, 
that where the Lord was preied to mete, ou3t fayle’ the wyn of sposailis, and that 
oolde thingis chaungid, alle newe thingis that ben’ ordeyned of Crist schulde appere. 
This gospel forsothe he wrot in Asye, aftir that in the* yle of Pathmos he hadde 
write the Apocalips; that to whom ‘that in‘ the principal of canoun incoruptible prin- 
ciple is fornootid, to him" also’ incoruptible’ ende by a mayde* in the apocalips 
schulde ‘be 3oldeY; seiynge’ Crist, I am alpha and 0, that is, bigynnynge and? with 
outen ende. And this is** John, the which knowinge the day of his passinge® to haue 
be come ouer», his disciplis clepid to gidere in Ephesie, by many preuyngis of tokenes 
schewinge Crist, dessendid¢ in to a dolue’ place of his graue; and, preier maad®, he 
was put to his fadris‘, as straunge fro sorwe’ of deeth, as he is founde alien fro corup- 
cioun of fleisch. Neuertheles" aftir alle he wroot the gospel, and* that was! dewe to 
a mayde™. Of the" whiche thingis neuertheles® othir the? deposiscioun of the’ tyme of 
writingis, or the ordynaunce of bookis; therfore by alle thingis by vs is" not expowned, 
that to’ the ‘kunnynge desyr‘ y-sett", bothe to men sechinge, fruyt of traueyl, and to 
God the’ doctryne of maystrie’, be kept. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth the gospel *. 


a Here biginneth the prologe of Joon.c. The proloug of Joon. y. No initial rubric in osx. » the 


evangelist gsy. ¢©Om.coxy. 4maidensx. ‘4¢whane. etoben x.  f bifore other Q sec. m. 
&Om.9. bbmaider. maiden sx. kOm.ry.  lether G.s. qv. or G.s.s, Om.x. ™Om. x. 
0 that ben synneres esy. that beth synnes Qo. Om. x. © thing rv. P Om. @Q pr.m. 4 to faile sx. 
® beth ca. 5 Om. ey. t Om. Ga. in v. «whom KQ@. Vv also an Qsr. w fnsorrup ene es. 
xmaiden sx. Ybyholde x. 7 seynge x. seiende x. seeyngey. ®Om.y. 24 Om. c. passage 
cesrxy. >bbonertoc. ¢hedescendede x. 4 den x. ey-maad 9. ‘ffadir ky. & sorwen x. 
h Netheles syx. Om. r. 10m.y.  ™ maiden sx. .Om.x. Onethelessryx. POm.k. 
4Om.x. © Om.opr.m.x. ‘Sof. t desyr of kunnyng x. kunnynge desirith y. 4 set svx. Om. Y. 
V there ey. w maisterhed 9. * Here endith the prologe.e. Here endith the prologe of Joon, and 


byzynnen the gospels of Jon. 9. No final rubric in sy.xy. 
VOlos Ue lil 


234 ; JOHN. I. 13. 


Here liginnith the prologe on Joon*. 


This is Joon euangelist®, oon of the disciplis of the Lord, the which is® a virgyn 
chosun of God, whom God clepide fro the sposeilis, whanne he wolde be weddid; and 
double witnessef of virginyte is 3ouun to hym in the gospel; in this that he is seid 
loued of God byfor othere disciplis, and God’ hongynge in the cros bitook his modir 
in kepyng to hym, that a virgyn schulde kepe a virgyn. ‘This Joon in the gospel 
bigynneth aloone the werk of vncorruptible word, and witnessith, that the kyndeli 
sone of God is! maad man, and that* the li3t was not takun of derknessis!; and he 
schewith the firste myracle, whiche God™ dide at the weddyngis, to schewe where the 
Lord is preyed to the feeste, the’ wyn of the® weddyngis owith to faile, that whanne 
elde thingis ben chaungid, alle newe thingis that ben ordeyned of Crist, appere. 
Joon wroot this gospel in Asie, aftir that he hadde writun the Apocalips in the ile 
of Pathmos; netheles he wroot the gospel aftir alle the? gospeleris, that also an4 vncor- 
ruptible ende ‘schulde be 3oldun" bi a virgyn in the Apocalips to hym, to whom an 
vneorruptible bygynuyng is 3ouun in Genesis, in the bigynnyng of hooly scripture ; 
for Crist seith in the Apocalips, Y am the bygynnyng and the’ ende. And this 
Joon ist he, that kuewe that the day of his departyng was comun; and he clepide 
togidere hise disciplis in Effesie, and schewide Crist bi many prenyngis of myraclis, 
aud 3ede doun in to a doluyn place of his biriyng; and whanne he hadde maad preier, 
he was put to hise fadris, and was so" mycheY without sorewe of deth, hou myche he 

- is foundun cleene fro corrupcioun of fleisch. 


Jerom in his prolog on Joon seith al this*. 


ee 
ITeere bigynneth the gospel of Joon*. Here bigynneth the gospel of Joon*. 
CAP. CATO 
1 In the bigynnynge was the word, that "In the bigynnyng was the word, andi 


ts, Goddis sone, and the word was at the word was at God, and God was the 
2God, and God was the word. This was word. This was in the bigynnyng atz 
3in the bigynnynge at God. Alle thingis God. Alle thingis weren maad bi hym,s 
ben maad by hym, and with outen him and withouten hym was maad no thing, 


8 From a. Icere bigynneth Joon. p. Here bygynneth the gospel aftur the wrytynge of Jon. Tr. No ini- 
tial rubric in aGNesvwxy. 


a From £op. The prolog. a. Prolog on John. cbc. Prolog of Joon. x. Here biginnit the prologe on the 
gospel of Jhon. v. Prolog. x. Here bigynneth the prologe on the gospel of Joon. fg. No initial rubric in 
1kMQnsvuabcek, >» Om. b. ¢ the euangelist ock. ¢Om.o. © wasc. f witnessing tT. & the Lorde 1. 
hounr. twask prem. Kato. Om.s. 'derkenesse tT. ™ that God. that E., 9° Om. 1K pr.m. Qrs 
gk prim, POm.K prem. 9Om. 7. * Om. pr.m.ceKmNogasxabceghik, § Om. asee.m.bk. * was 0. 
«Om. A pr.m.cmNorstruxabeghi. as1.  Ymychetymeg. * Jerom in his prolog on the gospel of Jon 
seith al this.c. Jerom seith this in his prologe on Joon. np. Heere endith the prologe, and heere biginnith 
the gospel of Joon. 1. Jerom in his prologe on Joon seith al this ; se now the book. k. Jerom in his prolog 
vpon this gospel seith this. x. Jerom in his prolog on Joon seith al this, and here bigynneth the gospel. Q. 
Heere eendith the prolog. nr. This seith Jerom in his prologe on Joon. vu. Jerom in his prolog on Jon seith 
al this, and here bigynneth the gospel of Jon. x. Here endith the prologe, and now bigynneth the gospel of 
Joon. £. This seith Jerom in his prolog on the gospel of Jon. hi. Jerom in his prolog on Joon seith thus. k. 
No final rubric in ve. 8 From m. Here the jirste gospel. u. Here bigyuneth the jirste e°. of Joon. e. No 
initial rubric in AcErKoPaRsxabcghi. 3 


-1, 4——I9. 


is maad no3t, that thing that is maad. 
4Was lyf in him, and the lyf was the? li3t 
sof men; and the 1i3t schyneth in derk- 
énessis, and derknessis® tooken? not it. A 
._man was sent fro God, to whom the name 
7was Joon. This man® cam in to witness- 
inge, that he schulde bere witnessinge of 
thef li3t, that alle men schulden bileue bi 
shim. He was not the 1i3t, but that he 
9schulde bere witnessing of the liz3t. It 
was verri li3t, which! lizjtneth* ech man 
locomynge into this world. He was in the 
world, and the world was maad bi him, 
1rand the world knew him not. He cam 
in to his owne thingis, and hise receyueden 
ignot him. Forsothe hou manye euere re- 
ceyueden him, he jaf to! hem power for™ 
to be maad the sones of God, to hem that 
isbilenen® in his name; whiche® not of 
blodis, nether of the will of fleisch, nether 
of the will of man, but ben born of God. 
as And the word, ‘that ts, Goddis sone P, is 
maad fleisch, ‘or man4, and hath dwellid 
in vs, and we han seyn the glorie of him, 
the glorie as of the oon bigetun™ of the 
fadir, the sone ful of grace, and of® 
istreuthe. John berith witnessing of him, 
and cryeth, seyinge, This ‘it wast, whom 
I seide, He that cometh" aftir me, is 
maad bifore me, for he was ‘the formere 
isthan Iv; and of the plente of him we alle 
i7han takun, and grace for grace. For the 
lawe is 3ouun by Moyses; forsoth grace 
igand treuthe is maad by Jhesu Crist. No 
man euere sy3 God, no but the oon bi- 
getun” sone, that is in the* bosumY of the 
19fadir, he hath told out. And this is the 
witnessing of John, whanne Jewis senten 
fro Jerusalem prestis and dekenys to hym, 
that thei schulden axe him, Who art thon ? 


b Om. merx. © the derknessis ry. 


taken m. comprehenden x. comprehenden, or token Q. comprehendiden not, or tookyn v. 


JOHN. 


235 


that thing that was maad. In hym was4 
lijf, and the lijf was the 1i3t of men; 
and the? 1i3t schyneth in derknessis, ands 
derknessis comprehendiden® not it. Ac 
man was sent fro God, to whom thet 
name was Joon. This man cam in to7 
witnessyng, that he schulde bere witness- 
ing of the® lizt, that alle men schulden 
bileue bi hym. He was not thef li3t, buts 
that he schulde bere witnessing of the 
lijt. There was a very li3t, which liz3tneth » 
ech man that cometh in to this world. 
He was in the world, and the world was 10 
maad bi hym, and the world knew hym 
not. He cam in to his owne thingis, 11 
and hise resseyueden hym not. But houtz 
many euer resseyueden hym, he jaf to 
hem power to be maad the sones of God, 
to hem that bileueden$ in his name; the 
whiche not" of bloodis, nether of the wille 13 
of fleische, nether of the wille of man, 
but ben borun of God. And the word 14 
was maad man, and dwellyde among VS, 
and we han seyn the glorie of hym, as 
the glorie of the! ‘oon bigetunj sone of 
the fadir, ful of grace and of treuthe. 
Joon berith witnessyng of hym, and 1s 
crieth, and seith, This is*, whom Y seide, 
He that schal come aftir me, is maad 
bifore me, for he was tofor! me; and of is 
the™ plente of hym we alle han takun, 
and grace for grace. For the lawe was17 
3ouun bi Moises; but grace and treuthe 
‘is maad" bi Jhesu Crist. No man saiis 


. euer God, no° but the ‘oon bigetun? sone, 


that is in the bosum of the fadir, he hath 
teld out. And this is the witnessyng of 19 
Joon, whanne Jewis senten fro Jerusalem 
prestis and dekenes to hym, that thei 
schulden axe hym, Who art thou? He2o 


4 comprehendeden, or token agNpstwy. comprehenden, or 


e Om. x. 


f£Om.9. &Om.ox. 5Heo. ithe whiche acunposrw. that x. * li3teth x. 1 Om.s. ™ Om. x. 
5 byleueden xv. ° the whiche 4GMNPOSTYWXY. P Om. x. q Om. x. T goten x. 8 Om. 
AGMNPQSWY. tis G pr.m. NSxY. U is to come AGMNPQSTWXY., Vv formere than Y G pr.m. xy. 
Wgendrid vy. *QOm.r.  Y bosum, or preuy substaunce rv. 

> Om. a. © comprehenden cis. tookin EPqa. d Om. o. ¢ Om. ag. f that s. ff Om, o. 
& bileuen a see.m. evqshik sec.m. bisnotapr.m iOm.g. Ivnbigetiny.  « it ist. is he of k. 


° Om. Io. 


wh 


Nbifore keg. ™Om.Q. ™ Om.a. 


P vnbigetin F. 


2 


236 


29 And he knowelechide, and denyede not, 
and he knowlechide, For I am not Crist. 
21 And thei axiden him, What therfore? art 
thou Elye? And he seide, I am not. Art 
thou a? prophete? And he answeride, Nay. 
22 Therfore thei seyden to him, Who* art 
thou? that we 3yue answere? to thes that 
23Ssente vs. What seist thou of thi silf? He 
seith, I° a vois of¢ ‘the crying® in desert, 
Dresse 3e the wey of the Lord, as Ysaye, 
21 the prophete, seyde. And thei that weren 
assente, weren of thef Pharisees. And thei 
axiden him, and seiden to him, What ther- 
fore baptysist thou, if thon art not Crist, 
ssnethir Elye, nether prophete®? John an- 
sweride® to hem, seyinge, I baptise in 
watir, sothli the myddil man of 30u 
27stood, whom 3e knowen! not; he it is, 
that cometh* aftir me, that! is maad_ bi- 
fore me, of whom I am not worthi, that 
281 vnbynde the thwong of his schoo. hes 
thingis ben don in Bethany ouer Jordan, 
20 wher John was baptisinge. Another™ day 
John sy3 Jhesu comynge to him, and he 
seith, Lo! the lomb of God; lo! that” 
doith awey the® synnes of the world. 
30 This is?, of whom I seide, Aftir me cometh 
a man, that4 is maad bifore me; for he was 
31‘the formere® thanI. And I knewe‘not him’, 
but that he be schewid in Israel, therfore 
32] cam baptisinge in watir. And John bar 
witnessing, seyinge, For I siz the spirit 
‘comynge doun, as a culueret fro heuene, 
33and dwellinge on" him. And I knew ‘not 
him’; but he that sente me for” to bap- 
tise in watir, seyde to me, On* whom thou 
schalt se the Spirit comynge doun, and 
dwellinge onY him, this’ it® is, that bap- 
3itisith in the Hooly Gost. And I sy3, and 


2 the w sec.m. ® What x. 
4 Om. w prom. 
phet wnPow. 

1 which r. 

q which is r. 
NOQOTWY. Vhim not wxy. 
a Om. Tf. 


h answeringe Y. 

m And anothir Nn. 
Y formere MXY. 
w Om. sx. 


4 askiden rR. 
Vv Om. s sec.m. And e. 


P knoulechynge o. 
uto come hk pr.m. 


JOHN. 


b an answere MNPOrW. 
© a criynge AT. cryynge Gwy. a man criynge MNPQ. criende s. 
i knewen MPQ. 
n he that 9 sec.m. which r. 
8 him not GMPTriry. 
x Vpon AGMNPQSTIVY. 


r askiden rR. 
wab. 


I. 20—34. 


knoulechide?, and denyede not, and he 
knoulechide, For Y am not Crist. And2! 
thei axiden? hym, What thanne? Art 
thou Elie? And he seide, Y aim not. 
Art thou a profete? And he answeride, 
Nay. Therfor thei seiden to hym, Who22 
art thou? that we 3yue an answere to 
these that senten vs. What seist thou 
of thi silf? He seide, Y am a vois of a23 
crier in deseert, Dresse 3e the weie of the 
Lord, as Ysaie, the prophete, seide. And 24 
thei that weren sent, weren of the Fari- 
seis. And thei axiden” hym, and seiden 25 
to hym, What thanne baptisist thou, if 
thou art not Crist, nether Elie, nether a 
profete? Joon answeride to hem, and 26 
seide, Y baptise in watir, but in the 
myddil of 3ou hath stonde oon, that 3e 
knowen not; he it is, that schal come aftir 27 
me, that was maad bifor me, of whom 
Y am not worthi to louse the thwong* 
of his schoot. These thingis weren don 28 
in Bethanye bijende Jordan, where Joon 
was baptisyng. Anothir day Joon say 29 
Jhesu comynge to hym, and he seide, 
Lo! the lomb of God; lo! he that doith 
awei the synnes of the world. This is30 
he, that Y seide of, Aftir me is comun® 
aman, which was maad bifor me; for he 
was rather than Y. And Y knew hym3) 
not, but that he be schewid in Israel, 
therfor Y cam baptisynge in watir. And 32 
Joon bar witnessyng, and seide, That’ Y 
sai3 the” spirit comynge doun as a culuer 
fro heuene, and dwellide* on hym. And 33 
Y knew hym not; but he that sente me 
to baptise in watir, seide to me, On whom 
thou seest the Spirit comynge doun, and 
dwellynge on hym, this is he, that bap- 


¢ Lam a pr.m.G pr.m. MpoTw pr.m. Om. N. 
Om.r. 8a pro- 
k is to come AGMNPQSTWXY. is to comynge r. 
o Om. Q. Pis he pa. it is r. 
t culuere comynge donn x. vpon 4GM 
Yvpon 4GMNPQTWY. 2 that N. 


8 thong PE. thwongis s. t shoon s pr. am. hikp. 


x dwellinge 1gk. 


I. 35-—48. 


bar witnessing, for this is the> sone of 
35God. ‘Another day® John stood 4, and 
36 tweyne® of his disciplis; and he biholdinge 
. Jhesu walkynge‘, seith, Lo! the lomb of 
37God. And tweye disciplis herden him 
ssspekynge, and folwiden® Jhesu. Sothli 
Jhesu conuertid', and seynge hem su- 
wynge him, seith to hem, What seken 3e ? 
Whichei seiden to him, Raby, that is in- 
terpretid, Maistir, where dwellist thou ? 
39 He seith to hem, ‘Come 3e*, and ‘se jel. 
Thei camen, and sy3en where he dwelte; 
and thei™ dwelten at him in that day. 
4oSothli the our was as” the tenthe. For- 
sothe Andrew, brother® of Symount Petre, 
-was oon of the tweyne, that herden of 
41John, and hadde sued him. This fond 
first his brother Symount, and he seith 
to him, We han founde Messias, that is 
42interpretid Crist; and he ledde him to 
Jhesu. Sothli Jhesu biholdinge him, 
seide, Thou ert Symount, the sone of 
Johanna; thou schalt be clepid Cephas, 
a3that is interpretid Petre. Forsothe on? 
the morwe he wolde go out in to Galilee, 
and he fond Philip; and Jhesu seith to 
44him, Sue thou me. Philip was of Beth- 
sayda, the citee of Andreu and Petre. 
45 Philip fond Nathanael, and he seith to 
him, We han founden Jhesu, the sone of 
Joseph, of Nazareth, whom Moyses wroot 
46in the lawe and prophetis. And Na- 
thanael seide to him, Of Nazareth may 
sum ‘good thing’ be? Philip seith to 
47him, Come’, and se. Jhesu sy3 Nathanael 
comynge to him, and he seith of him, 
Lo! verily a man of Israel, in which* is 
4sno gile. Nathanael seith to him, Wherof 
hast thou knowe me? Jhesu answeride, 


b Om. @ pr.m. Y. c Eft vr. 
& thei sueden r. 
pestwxy. * Come ry. Cometh x. ! seeth x. 
Pin xy. 4 thing of good acmnpstywxy. 


A pr.m. GNTXY. whom MPQsW. 


y And another 8. 2 two thi. 


ssup.ras. ‘seidessup.ras. 4 the tone o. 


& the profetis c1xrs pr.m. vabeghk8. in the profetis o. 


JOHN. 


4 stood in another day r. 
h conuertid, or turned ajen AGMNPOSTWY. conuertid azeen x. 

m Om. AGMNPQSTWXY. 
© Come thou r. 


a seide 3 sup. ras. 
¢ Symount Petir o. 


237 


tisith in the Hooli Goost. And Y say, 3: 
and bar witnessyng, that this is the sone 
of God. AnothirY dai Joon stood, andss 
tweyne? of hise disciplis; and he biheeld 36 
Jhesu. walkinge, and seith 4, Lo! the 
lomb of God. And twei* disciplis herden 37 
hym spekynge, and folewiden Jhesu. sz 
And Jhesu turnede®, and say hem suynge 
hym, and seith* to hem, What seken 3e? 
And thei seiden to hym, Rabi, that is to 
seie, Maistir, where dwellist thon? And 39 
he seith? to hem, Come 3e, and se. And 
thei camen, and sayn where he dwellide; 
and dwelten with hym that dai. And it 
was as the tenthe our. And Andrewe, 40 
the brother of Symount Petir, was oon" 
of the tweyne, that herden of Joon, and 
hadden sued hym. This foond first his 41 
brother Symount*, and he seide to him, 
We han foundun Messias, that is to seie, 
Crist; and he ledde him to Jhesu. And 42 
Jhesus bihelde hym, and seide, Thou art 
Symount, the sone of Johanna; thou 
schalt be clepid Cefas, that is to seie, 
Petre. And on the morewe he wolde go 4s 
out®* inf to Galilee, and he foond Filip ; 
and he seith to hym, Sue thou me. Filip 44 
was of Bethsaida, the citee of Andrew 
and of Petre. Filip foond Nathanael, 45 
and seide to hym, We han foundun 
Jhesu, the sone of Joseph, of Nazareth, 
whom Moyses wroot in the lawe and 
profetist. And Nathanael seide to hym, 46 
Of Nazareth may sum good thing be? 
Filip seide to hym, Come, and se. Jhesus 47 
si3 Nathanael comynge to hym, and seide 
to" hym, Lo! verili a man of Israel, in 
whom is no gile. Nathanael seide tos 
hym, Wherof' hast thou knowun ime ? 


© two MPWX et Y pass. f goyinge F. 
i The whiche 4Gmn 
© the brother +. 

t the whiche 


Dat T. 
s Om. MPQTVWXY. 


b turnede ajen s sup. ras. © seide 
ec Om. A. f Om. P pr.m. 
i Wherfore o. 


aa two thi. 


h of a sec. m. 


238 JOHN. 


and seith" to him, Bifore that Philip cle- 
pide thee, whanne thou were vndir the 

49 fyge tree, I sy3 thee. Nathanael answeride 
to him, ‘and seith’, Rabi, thou ert the 
sone of God, thou ert kyng of Israel. 

50 And* Jhesu answeride, and seide to him, 
For I seyde to thee, I sy3 thee vndir the 
fige tree, thou bileuest; thou schalt se 

51moreY than these thingis*. And he seide 
to hem, Treuli I seie to 3on, 3e schulen se 
heuene® openyd, and the aungels of God 
sti3ynge vp and comynge doun on” mannis 
sone. 


CA Pall. 
1 And the thridde day weddingis ben 
maad in the Cane, ‘or town’, of Galilee; 
2and the modir of Jhesu was there. Sothli 
Jhesu is clepid, and his disciplis, to the 
sweddingis. And wyn faylinge, the modir 
of Jhesu seide to him, Thei han not wyn. 
4And Jhesu seith to hir, What to me and 
to thee, thon? womman? myn our cam 
snot 3it. The modir of him seith to the 
inynystris, What euere thing he schal seie 
6to 30u, do 3e. Forsothe ther weren put® 
sixe stoonun pottis, aftir’ the clensinge 
of Jewis, takinge ech tweyue® or thre 
7mesuris. Jhesu seith to hem, Fille 3e 
the pottis with water. And thei filliden 
shem, ‘til to the hizeste part. And Jhesu 
seith' to hem, Drawe 3e now, and ‘bere 3e* 
to! architriclyn, that is, prince m™ the 
hous of thre stagis. And thei token. 
yAnd as architriclyn tastide the watir 
maad wyn, and he wiste not wherof it 
was, sothli the mynystris wisten, that? 
drowen watir®, architriclyn clepith the 
lospouse, and seith to him, Ech man putt- 
ith first good wyn, and whaune men 


u seide G sec.m.s. W Om. N. and seide sw. 
a henenes Q pr.m. s. > vpon 4GMNPOSTWY. 
the towne G secem. Om. sx, 
vnto Gupexy. til r. to Ww prom. 


mofQ. whiche r. © the water wxy. 


x Om. AGMNPOSTVWVY. 
© or cuntre A pr.m. MNPQV. Or the cuntre G pr.m.T. or 
d Om. AGMNPOSTVWXY. 
i seide G sec. m. MNPQSV'W. 


1. 49—Il. Fo. 


Jhesus ‘answerde, andi seide to hym, Bi- 
for that Filip clepide thee, whanne thon 
were vndur the fige tree, Ysai3 thee. Na- 
thanaelj answerdeii to hym, ‘and seide*, 49 
Rabi, thou art the sone of God, thou art 
kyng of Israel. Jhesus answerde, and 50 
seide to hym, For Y seide to thee, Y saw3 
thee vndur the fige tre, thou bileuest ; 
thou schalt se more than these thingis. 
And he seide to hem, Treuli, treuli, Y 51 
seie to 30u, 3e schulen se heuene opened, 
and the aungels of God stiynge vp and 
comynge doun on mannys sone. 


CAP. II. 


And the thridde dai weddyngis weren ! 
maad in the Cane! of Galilee; and the 
modir of Jhesu was there. And Jhesus2 
was clepid, and hise disciplis, to the wed- 
dyngis. And whanne wijn failide, thes 
modir of Jhesu seide to hym, Thei han 
not wijn. And Jhesus seith to hir, What 4 
to me and to thee, womman? myn our 
cam not 3it. His modir seith to thes 
mynystris, What euere thing he seie™ to 
3ou, do 3e. And there weren set ‘sixes 
stonun cannes, aftir the clensyng of the® 
Jewis, holdynge ech tweyne?P ether4 thre 
metretis'. And Jhesus seith to hem,7 
Fille 3e the pottis with watir. And thei 
filliden hem, vp to the mouth. And Jhe-s 
sus seide to hem, Drawe 3e now, and bere 
3e to the architriclyn. And thei baren. 
And whanne the architriclyn hadde tastid 9 
the watir maad wiyn, and wiste not 
wherof it was, but the mynystris wisten 
that drowen the watir, the architriclyn 
clepith the spouse, and seith to hym, Ech 10 
man settith first good wiyn, and whanne 
men® ben fulfillid’s, thanne that that is 


Y more thingis ry. 7 Om.r. 
h to AN. 


€Om. xy. fypr. & two MPWxyY. 
i to the g. 


k berith apex. bere w pr.m. 


iansweringe 1. 3 And Natanaelk. Ji saido. &Om.o. 1 Canahi. ™seith ror. ™ sixe stenes E. 


° Om. Kprim.bpr.m. — P two rk. 


1ksaega. tato. Om. s. 


d or E et P passim. 


t ether mesuris K marg. &thaio.  §8 fillid 


Il. 11—=23. 


sechulen be fillid?, thanne that that is 
worse; sothli thou hast kept good wyn 
11 ‘til tol now. . Jhesu:dide this the’ bigyn- 
nynge of signes in the Cane of Galilee, 
and sehewide his glorie; and his disciplis 
12bileueden in to him. Aftir thes thingis 
he cam doun to® Capharnaum, and his 
modir, and his britheren, and his disciplis; 
and thei dwelten there not many dayes. 
13 And the paske of ,Jewis was ny3, and 
14Jhesu wente vp to Jerusalem... And he 
fond in the temple men sellinge scheep, 
and oxen, and culueris, and chaungeris' 
issittinge. And whanne he hadde maad 
‘as a scourge of smale coordis", he castide’ 
‘out alle” of the temple, and ‘oxen, and 
scheep*; and ‘he schedde out the moneye 
of chaungeris, and turnede vpsodoun the 
i¢bordis. And he seide to hem that selden 
eulueris, Take’ awey fro? hennis tlies 
thingis, and nyle 3e make the hous of my 
i7fadir an hous of marchaundise. Forsothe 
his disciplis hadden mynde, for it is writun, 
The* ‘feruour of loue® of thin hous hath 
isetun me. Therfore the Jewis answeriden, 
and seyden to him, What syngne, ‘oz ¢o- 
kene®, schewist thou to vs, for thou doist 
19 thes thingis? Jhesu answeride, and seyde 
to hem, Vndo 3e this temple, and in thre 
20 dayes I schal reyse it. Therfore the Jewis 
seyden to him, In fourty and sixe 3eeris! 
this temple is byldid®, and thou! in thre 
21 dayes schalt reyse® it? Forsothe he seide 
22of the temple of his body». Therfore 
whanne he hadde rysun fro ‘deed meni, 
his disciplis hadden mynde, for he seyde 
‘this thing‘; and thei bileneden to the 
seripture, and to the word that Jhesu 
a3seide. Forsothe whanne Jhesu was at Je- 
rusalem in pask, in the feeste day, manye 


P fulfillid searnpostTWwxy. 


4 vnto mpq. til nT. 


JOHN. 239 


worse; but thou hast kept the” good 
wiyn ‘in to? this tyme. Jhesus* dide this 11 
the bigynnyng of signes in the Cane? of 
Galilee, and schewide his glorie; and hise 
diseiplis bileueden in¢ hym. Aftir these 12 
thingis he cam doun to Cafarnauin, and 
his modir, and hise britheren, and hise 
disciplis; and thei dwelliden ‘there not? 
many daies. And the pask of Jewis was13 
ny3, and Jhesus wente vp® to® Jerusa- 
lem. And he foond in the temple men 14 
sillynge oxun, and scheep, and culueris, 
and chaungeris sittynge. And whaune1s 
he hadde maad as it were a scourge of 
smale cordis, he droof out alle of the 
temple, and oxun, and seheep; and he 
schedde tle money of chaungeris, and 
turnedef ypsedoun the boordis. And heis 
seide to hem that selden culueris, Take 
awei fro hennus these thingis, and nyle 
3e make the hous of my fadir an hous of 
marchaundise. And hise diseiplis hadden 17 
mynde, for it was writun, The fernent 
loue of thin hous hath etun me. Therfor1s8 
the Jewis answeriden, and seiden to hym, 
What token schewist thou to vs, that 
thou doist these thingis? Jhesus an-1i9 
swerde, and seide to hem, Vndo 3e this 
temple, and in thre daies Y schal reise 
it. Therfor the Jewis seiden to hym, In20 
fourti and sixe 3eer this temple was 
bildid, and sehalt thou in thre daies reise 
it? But he seide of the temple of his21 
bodi. Therfor whanne he was risun 22 
fro deeth, hise disciplis hadden mynde, 
that he seide these thingis of his bodi; 
and thei bileueden to the seripture, 
and to the word that Jhesus seide. And 23 
whanne Jhesus was at Jerusalem in® 
pask, in the feeste dai, many bileueden 
s in to @. 


r Om. asivx. t monyteri 


or chaungeris A pr.m. NT. monyeris, or chaungers Gy. money chaungeris mpesiv. moneieris x. Vig 


sm. cordis as a sc. GMPXY. 


x scheep, and oxen MPXY. y Takith mpeswx. 


JFeruour of loue acmNnposrvivy. zele, or the feruour or loue Tr. zeel x. 
& ajen reyse Miv pr.m. 
k this thing of his body @ sec. m. 


ebild sx.  f wher thou rv. 
1 deeth x. 


TWX. 
more MP. 


zyntoca. 4 And Jhesus rkg. 
€ Om. k pr.m. 


y Om. cixsgk. 
there EIPR pr.m. sg. 


a scourge of smale cordis Q. 
2 Om. AGMNPQSTVIWXY. 


b Cana t. 


e€intoo. fhe turned o. 


Vv caste MNPQSTVXY. w alle out x. 
a That n. » zele, or 
¢Om.ex. 4 3eer K sec. m. mQ 
h body, that with oute comparisoun was 


¢ in to crkmRsxb sec. m. ghik8. 4 not 


S atc. 


240 


bileuyden in his name, seynge the syngnes 
240f him that! he dide. Sothli Jhesu him 
silf bileuede not hym silf to hem, for 
23that he knew alle men; and for it was 
not nede to hym, that eny man schulde 
bere witnessing of man, sothli he wiste 
what was in man. ; 


CAP. III. 


1 Forsothe ther was a man of Pharisees™, 
Nicodeme bi name, a prince of Jewis. 
2He cam to Jhesu in the ny3te, and seide 
to him, Raby, we witen, for of God thou 
hast come a" maistir; soth]i no man may 
do thes signes® that thou dost, no but? God 
3were with him. Jhesu answeride, and 
seyde to him, Treuli, treuli, I seye to thee, 
nod but’ a man schal be born a3en, he 
4may not se the kyngdom of God. Nyco- 
deme seideS’ to him, How may a man be 
born, whanne he is olde? whert he may 
entre ajen in to his modris* wombe, and 
5 be born a3ein? Jhesus answeride’, Treuli, 
treuli, I seie to thee, no” but* a man schal 
be born ajen of watir, and of the Hooly 
Gost, he nay not entre in to the kyngdom 
60f God. That that is born of fleisch, is 
fleisch ; and that that is born of spirit’, is 
zspirit. Wondre thou not, for I seye? to 
thee, It bihoueth 3ou for? to be born ajein. 
8The spirit brethith> wher it® wole, and 
thou heerist his vois, but thou wost not, 
fro whennis he cometh, or whidir he® 
goth; so is ech man that is borun of the 
gspirit. Nycodeme answeride, and seide to 
him, Hou mown thes thingis be don? 
io Jhesu answeride, and seyde to him, ‘Art 
thou! a maistir in Israel, and knowist not 
thes thingis? Treuli, treuli, I seye to thee, 
for that that® we witen, we speken, and 


lwhiche y. ™ the Phariseis apes. 
W prem. X. 
Vv answeride to him 3 sec. m. 
2 seide AGMNPQSTVWX. 


gsec.m. f Thou art x. 


w Om. Pex. 
a Om. svx. 
& Om. Q. 


& witnessinge of man Ic sec. m. g. 
lwher x. ™Om.s sec. m. 
P the spirit rarbcegika3. 


. modir ERehi. 


JOHN. 


n Om. GMPYWXY. 
t but 3if 4 sec.m. G sec. m. MPQSWX. 
x but if 4 pr.m, G sec. m. MNPQTXY. 
b brethith, or quykeneth mpow. 


h Om. ciKR pr. m. sg. 
nn That at a. 
4 And the eraxaek pr. m. a. 


Tl, 24—{——IH. 11. 


in his name, seynge his signes that he 
dide. But Jhesus trowide not hym silfe4 
to hem, for he knewe alle men; and fores 
it was not nede to hym, that ony man 
schulde bere witnessyng%, for he wiste, 
what was in man. 


CAP. III. 


And there was a man of the Farisees, 1 
Nychodeme bi name, a prince of the 
Jewis. And he cam to Jhesu bi ni3t,2 
and seide to hym, Rabi, we witen, that 
thou art comun fro God maister‘; for 
no man may do these signes*, that thou 
doist, but God be with hym. Jhesus3 
answerde, and seide to hym, Treuli, treuli, 
Y seie to thee, but a man be borun a3en, 
he may not se the kyngdom of God. 
Nychodeme seide to hym, Hou may4 
a man be borun, whanne he is eeld? 
whether’ he may entre ajen™ in to his 
modris" wombe, and be borun ajen? 
Jhesus answeride, Treuli, treuli, Y seies 
to thee, but a man be borun ajen of 
watir, and of the Hooli Goost, he may 
not entre in to the kyngdom of God. 
‘That that"" is borun of the® fleisch, ise 
fleisch; and ‘that that°* is borun of spirit?, 
is spirit. Wondre thou not, for Y seide7 
to thee, It bihoueth 30u to be borun ajen. 
The’ spirit brethith where he wole, ands 
thou herist his vois, but thou wost not, 
fro whennus he% cometh, ne whidir he 
goith; so is ech man that is borun of the 
spirit. Nychodeme answeride, and seides 
to hym, Hou moun these thingis be don? 
Jhesus answeride, and seide to hym, Thou 10 
art a maister in Israel, and knowist not 
these thingis? Treuli, treuli, Y seie tou 


q Om. mPes 

U modir Wwxy. 
¥ the spirit sy. 
dit x. Cita 


°thinges w. P but if ar. 
S seith r. t whether mx. 


© he ANSTF. 


k thingis k pr. m. 


ia maistir s pr.m. 
00 that at o, 


© Om. Erkb pr. m. f. 
aq that he o. 


lI. 12—26. 


that that we han‘ seyn, we witnessen, 
and 3e taken not oure witnessing. If I 
haue seid to 30u ertheli thingis, and 3e 
bileuen not, how if I schal seie to 3o0u 
isheuenli thingis, schulen 3e bileue? And 
no man styeth* in to heuene, no! but he 
that cam doun fro heuene, ‘inannis sone™ 
14 that" is in henene. And as Moyses ‘reride 
vp° a serpent in desert, so it bihoueth 
ismannus sone for? to be areysid’ vp, that 
ech inan that bileueth ‘in to™ him, perische 
ignot, but haue ‘euerelastinge lyf’. Forsothe 
God ‘so louede' the world, that he 3af his 
oon bigetun sone, that ech man that bi- 
Jeueth in to him perische not, but haue 
izeuere lasting lyf. Sothli God sente not 
his sone in to the world, that he iuge the 
world, but that the world be sauyd by 
ishym. He that bileueth in to him, is not 
deinyd, ‘or dampnyd"; forsothe he that 
bileueth not, is now demed*, for he bi- 
leneth not in the name of the ‘oon bigetun” 
igsone of God. Sothli this is the dom, for 
lizt cam in to the world, and men louede 
more derknessis than 1i3t; forsoth her 
20 workis weren yuele. Sothli ech man that 
doth yuele, hatith lijt*; and he’ cometh 
not to the? li3t, that his workis be not 
2ireproued*, ‘or vndirnomun’, Sothli he 
that doth treuthe, cometh to the li;t, that 
his workis be schewid, for thei ben don 
ain God. Aftir thes thingis Jhesu cam, 
and his disciplis, in to the lond of Judee, 
and there he dwellide with hem, and bap- 
23 tiside, ‘or cristenede*, Sothli John was 
baptisynge in Ennon, bisydis Salym, for 
many watris were there; and thei camen, 
2gand weren baptisid. Sothli John was not 
253it sent in to prisoun. Sothli a questioun, 
‘or axyng®, is maad of Johnis disciplis 
with the’ Jewis, of the purificacioun, ‘or 


26clensing®. And thei camen to John, and 
iOm.r.  « steieth vp amposw.  'Om. are. 
P Om. sx. q@ arerid aT. reisid GMQvViVXY. rerid s. 
somMxY. %%QOm. x. Vdampned r. W onli geten x. 


* Om. ovir prem xY. 8 vudernomen X. 
fOm. civrxy. 8 Om. ex. 


rOm.a. Srerides sec.m. ¢t areisid k. 
x vnbegetin E. Ythiso. #Om.a. 40m. 0, 
VOL. IV. 


JOHN. 


b Om. ex. 


4 ynbigetin E. owne bigeten hi. 


Ti 


Q41 


thee, for we speken that that we witen, 
and we witnessen that that® we han seyu, 
and 3e taken not oure witnessyng. If Y 1 
haue seid to 30u ertheli thingis, and 3e 
bileuen not, hou if Y seie to 30u heueneli 
thingis, schulen 3e bilene? And no mans 
stieth in to heuene, but he that cain 
doun fro heuene, nannys sone that is in 
heuene. And as Moises areride’ a ser-14 
pent in desert, so it bihoueth mannys 
sone to be reisid', that ech man thats 
bileneth in hym, perische not, but haue 
enerlastynge lijf. Tor God louede so the is 
world, that he 3af his ‘oon bigetun" sone, 
that ech man that bileueth in him perische 
not, but haue euerlastynge lijf— For. 
God sente not his sone in to the’ world, 
that he iuge the world, but that the 
world be saued bi him. He that bileueth 1 
in* hym, is not demed; but he that bileu- 
eth not, is now demed, for he bileueth not 
in the name of the ‘oon bigetun* sone of 
God. And this is the dom, for li3t cam i9 
in to the’ world, and men loueden more 
derknessis than 1i3t; for her werkes weren 
yuele. For ech inan that doith yuele, 20 
hatith the li3t; and he cometh not to the 
li3t, that hise werkis be not repreued. 
But he that doith treuthe, cometh to thea: 
liz3t, that hise werkis be schewid, that 
thei ben don in God. Aftir these thingis 22 
Jhesus cain, and hise disciplis, in to the 
loond of Judee, and there he dwellide 
with hein, and baptiside. And? Joon 23 
was baptisinge in Ennon, bisidis Salym, 
for many watris weren there; and thei 
camen, and weren baptisid. And Joou2s 
was not 3it sent in to prisoun. Therfor 25 
a questioun was maad of Jonys disciplis 
with the Jewis, of the purificacioun. And 26 
thei camen to Joon, and seiden ‘to hym’, 
Maister, he that was with thee bizonde 


m the sone of man r. n which r. ° yeiside v. 
r tos. 8 lyf euerelastende x. t louede 

* the ly3t rxy. Y Om. aGMNPOsTVWXY. 
¢Om, anpesw. Om. wposwx. & Om. xy. 


Vthiso, Win toa prom. 


249 JOHN. 


seyde to him, Rabi, or maister, he that 
was with thee ouer Jordan, to whom 
thou hast born witnessinge, lo! he bap- 
27 tyseth, and alle men comen to him. John 
answeride, and seyde, A mau may not take 
ony thing, no} but* it be 30uun to him fro 
2shenene. 3e 30u! silf beren witnessing to 
me, that I seyde, I am not Crist, but for 
29] am sent bifore him. He that hath a™ 
‘spousesse™, 07° wyf?, is the spouse, or 
hosebonde%; forsothe a frend of the 
spouse, that stondith’, and heerith him, 
ioyeth in ioye, for the vois of the spouse. 
Therfore in this thing my ioye is fillid’. 
301t bihoueth him fort to wexe, forsoth me 
3tto" be ‘menusid, o7 aaad lesse’. He that 
cam fro aboue, is aboue® alle; he that is 
of the erthe, spekith of the erthe; he that 
32comith fro heuene, is aboue alle. And 
this thing that he sy3, and herde, he wit- 
nessith, and no man takith his witness- 
33ing. Forsoth he that ‘hath takun’ his 
witnessing, hath markid that? God is 
3;sothfast. Forsoth he whom God sente, 
spekith the wordis of God; forsothe not 
35to mesure God 3yueth the spirit. The 
fadir loueth the sone, and he hath 3ouun 
36alle thingis in his hond. He that bileueth 
in to the sone, hath euere lastinge lyf; 
forsothe he that is vnbileueful to the 
sone, schal not se euerelasting lyf, but the 
wraththe of God dwellith on* hym. 


CAPs IV. 


1 Therfore as Jhesu knew, that Pharisees? 
herden, that Jhesu makith mo disciplis 
zand baptysith, than John, thou3¢ Jhesu 
3baptiside not, but his disciplis, he lefte 
Judee, and wente a3en* in to Galilee. 
4Sothli it bihofte® him tof passe bi Sa- 
smarie. Therfore Jhesu cam ‘in to ab citee 


h Raby x. 1 Om. mex. 
poTwxy. ° Om. x. Pa wijfaupew. Om. x. 
AGMNPQSTWXY. t Om. sx. 
PesTWXY. Y taketh x. 
4Om,.r.  & bihoueth 7. 


k but 3if wenrxy. 


z for ¥ sec.m. X. 


x3oure Ehi. Yhosebondea. 4% Om. 3g. 


l sure GNeoY. 
q the housbounde Gpeswy. 
u for to AGMNPETITY. 


a vp on x. 
f Om. acmnpeswy. for to T. 


aintok. 


II. 27—IV. 5. 


Jordan, to whom thou hast borun wit- 
nessyng, lo! he baptisith, and alle men 
comen tohym. Joon answerde, and seide, 27 
A man may not take ony thing, but it 
be 3ouun to hym fro heuene. 3e 30u* silf28 
beren witnessyng to me, that Y seide, Y 
am not Crist, but that Y am sent bifore 
hym. He that hath a wijf, is the hose- 29 
bonde; but the freend of the spouse that 
stondith, and herith hym, ioieth with 
ioye, for the vois of the spouse. Therfor 
in this thing my ioye is fulfillid. It bi-30 
houeth hym to wexe, but me to be maad 
lesse. He that cam from aboue, is aboue 31 
alle; he that is of the erthe, spekith of the 
erthe; he that cometh from heuene, 1s 
aboue alle. And he witnessith that thing 32 
that he hath seie, and herde, and no man 
takith his witnessing. But he that takith 33 
his witnessyng, hath confermyd that God 
is sothefast. But he whom God hatha 
sent, spekith the wordis of God; for not 
to mesure God 3yueth the? spirit. Thess 
fadir loneth the sone, and he hath 3ouun 
alle thingis in? his hoond. He that bi-3e 
leueth in®* the sone, hath euerlastynge 
lijf; but he that is vnbileueful to the 
sone, schal not se enerlastynge lijf, but 
the wraththe of God dwellith on hym, 


CARR: 


Therfor as Jhesu knew, that the Fa-1 
risees herden, that Jhesu makith and 
baptisith mo disciplis than Joon, thou32 
Jhesus baptiside not, but hise disciplis, 
he lefte Judee, and wente a3en in tos 
Galilee. And it bihofte hyin to passe bia 
Samarie. Therfor Jhesus cam in to as 


mthe x. 2 spouse 4 sup. ras. GMN 
Tstaut x. $ fulfillid. 
Ymynusht x. Wcomethr. *vpon 4GMNn 
b the Phariseis acaNposTrwxy. © tho3 that x. 


Ebi acmnpstivxy. the Q sec. m. 


aaintoapr.m. > in Ebea. 


IV. 6—15. 


of Samarie, that is seyde Sycar, bisydis 
the ‘manere, or feeld', that Jacob 3af to 
6Joseph, his sone. Forsoth the. welle of 
Jacob was there; sothli Jhesu ‘maad 
wery, or feynt*, of the iurney, sat thus 
on the welle. Sothli the our was, as! 
7the sixte, ‘or vndurn™. A womman cam 
of Samarie, for™ to drawe watir. Jhesu 
seith to hir, 3yue to® me ‘for toP drynke. 
8Forsoth his disciplis hadden gon in to 
the citee, that thei schulden bye metis. 
9Therfore ‘the ilke1 womman of Samarie 
seith to him, How thou, whanne thou 
ert a Jew, axist of" me ‘for to’ drynke, 
whicht am a womman of Samarie? for- 
sothe Jewis® vsen not’ with Samaritans”. 
10 Jnesu answeride, aud seide* to hir, If thou 
wistist: the 3ifte of God, and who it is, 
that seith to thee, 3yue toY me for” ‘to 
drynke*, thou peranenture schuldest haue 
axid of him, and he schulde haue 3ouun 
11to thee quyk watir. The womman seith 
to him, Sire», nether thou hast in what 
thing thou schalt drawe, and the pitt is 
deep; therfore wherof hast thou quyk 
i2watir? Wher* thou art more than oure 
fadir Jacob, that 3aue to vs this’ pitt ? and 
he drank therof®, and his sones, and his 
13beestis. Jhesu answeride, and seide to 
hir, Ech man that drynkith of this watir, 
schal thirste eftsoone; forsothe he that 
sehal dryrike of the watir that I schal 
3yue to him, schal not thirste in to with 
14outen ende; but the watir that I schal 
3yue to him, schal be maad in him a ‘welle 
ofS watir, spryngynge" vp in to euere- 
islastinge lyf. The womman seith to him, 
Sire, 3yue to me this watir, that I thirste 
not, nether come hidir fori to drawe. 


i feeld x. 


JOHN. 


243 


citee of Samarie, that is seid¢ Sicar, bi- 
sidis the place, that Jacob 3af to Joseph, 
his sone. And the welle of Jacob was ¢ 
there; and Jhesus was weri of the 
journey, and sat thus? vpon® the welle. 
And the our was, as it were the sixte. 
And a womman cam fro Samarie, to7 
drawe watir. And Jhesus seith to hir, 
3yue me drynk. And hise disciplis werens 
gon in to the citee, to bie mete. Therfors 
thilke womman of Samarie seith to him, 
Hou thouf, ‘whanne thou’ art a Jewe, 
axist of me drynk®s, that am a womman 
of Samarie? for Jewis" vsiden' not ¢o 
dele with Samaritans. Jhesus answerde, 10 
and seide to hir, If thou wistist the 3ifte 
of God, and who ‘he is*, that seith to thee, 
3yue me drynk, thou perauenture woldist 
haue axid! of hym, and he sehulde haue 
3ouun to thee quyk watir. The womman 1 
seith to him, Sire, thou hast not where 
ynne to drawe, and the pit is deep; 
wherof thanne hast thou quik watir ? 
Whethir™ thou art grettere than™ oure 12 
fadir Jacob, that 3af to vs the pit? and he 
drank therof, and hise sones, and hise°® 
beestis. Jhesus answerde, and seide to13 
hir, 'Eche man that drynkith°® of this 
watir, schal thirste efte soone; but he that 
drynkith of the watir that Y schal 3yue 
hym, schal not thirste with outen ende ; 
but the watir that Y schal 3yue hym,14 
schal be maad in hym a welle ‘of watir?, 
spryngynge vp in to euerlastynge lijf. 
The womman seith to hym, Sire, 3yue15 
me this watir, that Y thirste not, nether 
come hidur to drawe. Jhesus seith to16 
hir, Go, clepe thin hosebonde, and come 
hidir. The womman answerde, and seide, 17 


k made wery ex. 10m. yn. ™m™ Om. x. or mydday vw. n Om, sx. © Om. M. 
Ptosx. 4thatx,. 'Om.wpr.m. $Stosx. tthat aemnpostwxy. “the Jewis s.  ¥ not for to 
comune G see.m. W. not to comyne MPes. w the Samaritanes s. x seith Nn. yOm w. 2 Om. sx. 


a drinken x. 
& Om. y. 


¢ Whether wx. 


b Om. wv pr. m. 
iOm. sx. 


b springe 1. 


d the AGMPQSTIVXY. 


© therfore wv. £ Om. ty pr.m. 


© clepid rksg@. d Om. eras see.m.a. © Om. 8. f than 8 sec. m. 8 sith thou 1Ksg. that o. 
g€ a drynk o. h the Jewis 1. ivsen K fext nbghi8. ether medlen K marg. k it is EPQs sec. m. eka, 
ise. Taskid rk. ™ Whereps. "%thataa. °Om.b. 0 schal drinke 0. P Om. 1. 


Ti@ 


244 


16 Jhesu seith to hir, Go, clepe thin hose- 
i7bonde, and come hidur. The womman 
answeride, and seide, I haue not an hose- 
bonde. Jhesn seith to hir, Thou seidist * 
is wel, For I haue ‘not an! hosebonde; for- 
soth thou hast had fyue hosebondis, and 
he whom thon hast™, is not thin hose- 
bonde. This thing thou seidist sothh. 
i9 The womman seith" to him, Lord, I se, 
20for thou art a prophete. Onure fadris 
worschipiden in this hil, and 3e seyn, for 
at Jerusalem is® a? place, wher it bihou- 
2teth for to worschipe. Jhesu seith to 
hir, Womman, bilene to me, for the our 
schal come, whanne nether in this hil, 
nether® ins Jerusalem, 3e schulen ‘preye, 07” 
22 worschipe', the fadir. 3e worschipen that 
that" 3e witen not; we worschipen that 
that’ we witen; for heelthe is” of Jewis. 
23 But the our cometh, and now it is, 
whanne trewe worschiperis schulen wor- 
schipe the fader in spirit and treuthe ; 
forwhi and the fadir sekith suche, that 
2aschulen worschipe him. God is a¥ spirit, 
and it bihoueth hem that worschipen him, 
forY to worschipe in spirit and treuth. 
2; The womman seith to him, I woot for 
Messias is comen, that is seid Crist; 
therfore whanne he schal come, he schal 
26telle to vs alle thingis. Jhesu seith to 
ajhir, I am, that speke with thee. And 
anon his disciplis camen, and wondriden, 
for he spak with a? womman; netheles no 
man seide, What sekist thou, or, What 
2sspekist thon with hir? Therfore the 
woman lefte the® watir pott, and wente 
in to the citee, and seith to tho men, 
29Come 3e, and ‘se 3e° the’ man, that seide 
to me alle thingis ‘what euere thingis* I 
30 haue don; wher he is$ Crist? And thei 
wenten out of the citee, and thei® camen 


JOHN. 


IV, 16—30, 


Y haue noon hosebonde. Jhesus seith to 
hir, Thou seidist wel, That Y haue noon 
hosebonde; for thou hast hadde fyue 18 
hosebondis, and he that thou hast, is not 
thin hosebonde. This thing thou seidist 
sotheli. The womman seith to hym,19 
Lord, Y se, that thou art a prophete. 
Oure fadris worschipiden? in this hil, 20 
and 3e seien, that at Jerusalem is a place, 
where it bihoueth to worschipe. Jhesus21 
seith to hir, Womman, bileue thou to 
me, for the our schal come, whanne 
nether in this hil, nethir in Jerusalem, 
3e schulen worschipe the fadir. 3e wor-22 
schipen that® 3e knowen not; we wor- 
schipen that that’ we knowen; for helthe 
is of the Jewis. But the tyme is comun, 23 
and now it is, whanne trewe worschiperis 
sclnuen worschipe the fadir in spirit and 
treuthe; for also the fadir sekith suche, 
that worschipen hym. God is a spirit, 24 
and it bihoneth hem that worschipen 
hym, to worschipe in spirit and treuthe. 
The womman seith to hym, Y woot thats 
Messias is comun, that is seid Crist; 
therfor whanne he cometh, he schal telle 
vst alle thingis. Jhesus seith to hir, Y 26 
am he, that spekith with thee. And anoon27 
hise disciplis camen, and wondriden, that 
he spak with the womman; netheles no 
man seide to hym, What sekist thou, 
or, What spekist thou with hir? Therfor gs 
the womman lefte hir watir pot, and 
wente in to the citee, and seide to tho" 
men, Come 3e, and se 3e% a man, that29 
seide® to me alle thingis that Y haue 
don; whether* he be Crist? And theigzo 
wenten out of the citee, and camen to 
hym. In the mene while hise disciplis 31 
preieden hym, and seiden, Maistir, ete. 
But he seide to hem, Y haue mete to ete, 32 


kK seist r=} noon N. m hast now x, N said N. Other is wpr.m. P Om, s. q Om. sx. 
Tnen, Sats. tprejen x. 8&Om. ag prim. MNPosTXY. YOm.N. WOm.r.  * Om. an. 
yOm, sx. 2the wposiy. @hir acunpostwxy. %the empry. seg. seeth x. 4a «GMnpes 
TriVxY. © what euere en. what euer thyng 7. fwhetherx. &bex. bOm. x. 

@ worsehipiden God k, = * that that rr. 5 Om.a. ato. ttovsaKseeom. “thechi. 7% Om.c. 


w hath seid ie. * wher c. 


1V. 31—45- 


sito hym. In the mene while his disciplis 
preieden him, seyinge, ‘Raby, or maistir', 
sgete. Sothli he seide to hem, I haue mete 
33for* to ete, that 3e witen not. Therfore 
the! disciplis seiden to gidere, Wher™ ony 
34man" brou3te to him for® to ete? Jhesu 
seith to hem, My mete is, that I do the 
will of him that sente me, andP that I 
35performe the work of him. Wher 3e 
seyn not, for 3it foure monethis ben, and 
rype corn cometh? Lo! I seie to 30u, 
lift" vp 30ure y3en, and ‘se 3e® the ‘re- 
giouns, o7 cuntrees', for now thei ben 
36 white to ripe corn. And he that repith 
takith hyre, ‘or mede”, and he that ge- 
derith, fruit in to euerelasting lyf; that 
and he that sowith hane ioye to gidere, 
3y7and he that repith. In this thing sothli 
‘the word is trewe’, for another is that 
33ssowith, and another that repith. I sente 
30u for* to repe, that that 3e traueliden 
not; othere inen traneliden, and: 3e en- 
39triden in to her tranelis. Forsoth of 
theY citee many? Samaritans bileueden in 
to him, for the word of the womman 
beringe witnessing, For he seide to me 
alle thingis, what euere thingis* I dide. 
40 Therfore whanne Samaritans camen to 
him, thei preieden him, that he schulde 
dwelle there; and he dwelte there twey> 
4idayes. And many mo bileueden® for his 
42word, and seyden to the womman, For 
now not for thi speche we bileuen; for- 
soth we han herd, and we witen, for 
this is’ verily the sanyour of the® world. 
43 Forsoth aftir twei dayes he wente then- 
4anis, and wente in to Galilee. ‘Sothli 
Jhesu! bar witnessing, for a prophete in 
his owne cuntree hath not honour, ‘or 
4sworschip&. TTherfore whanne he cam in 


JOHN. 


245 


that 3e knowen not. Therfor disciplisY 33 
seiden togidir, Whether? ony man hath 
brou3t him mete to ete? Jhesus seith* tos1 
hem, My mete is, that Y do the wille of 
hym that sente me, that Y perfourme 
the werk of hym. Whether 3e seien not, 35 
that 3it foure monethis ben, and rype 
corn cometh ? Lo! Y seie to 3ou, lifte vp 
joure i3en, and se 3e the feeldis, for now 
thei ben white to repe. And he thatse 
repith takith hire, and gaderith fruyt in 
to euerlastynge lijf; that bothe he that 
sowith, and he that repith, haue ioye to- 
gidere. In this thing is the word trewe, 37 
for anothir® is that sowith, and° anothir® 
that repith. Y sente 3ou to repe, thatss 
that"? 3e ‘haue not tranelid®; ‘othere men 
han trauelid', and 3e han entrid ‘in tof 
her trauels. And of that citee many39 
Samaritans bileneden in hym, for the 
word of the womman, that bare witness- 
yng, That he seide to me alle thingis that 
Y haue don. Therfor whanne Samari- 40 
tans camen to hym, thei preieden hym 
to dwelle there; and he dwelte there 
twey® daies. And many mo bileueden 41 


- for his word, and seiden to the womman, 42 


That, now not for thi speche we bileuen; 
for we han herd, and we witen, that this 
is verili the sanyour of the world. Andas 
aftir twei" daies he wente out fro thennus, 
and wente in to Galilee. And he bar wit-44 
nessyng, that a profete in his owne cuntre 
hath noon onour. Therfor whanne he is 
cam in to Galilee, men of Galilee ressey- 
ueden hym, whanne thei hadden seyn 
alle thingis that he hadde don in Jeru- 
salem in the feeste dai; for also thei 
hadden comun to the feeste dai. Therfor 46 
he cam eftsoone in to the Cane of Galile, 


i Rabisx. * Om. sx. Jhis ar. Om. Gypsrxy. ™ Whether wx. 2 Om.wpr.m.  ° Om. sx. 
Pp Om. ¥#. q Whether mx. T liftith sx. 5 seeth x. t regiouns xX. u Om. x. Vv is the 
word x. w an other is Ww. x Om. sx. Y that 4GMNPQOSTVIWXY. % many of AGMPQSTIWXY. 
many of the Nn. a Om. esi. > two mPIVx et ¥ pass. ¢ bilenyden in hym @ sec.m. d Om. 
y be m. ethisr.  f Sothely he eapesrwxy. Sothli he Jhesu x pr.m.r. Sothli the self Jhesu n. 
£ Om. ox. : 


Y the disciplis CKUX sec. m. aika. his disciplis 0. 
@another ise. “ato. © traueliden not c. _ 
h two cr ef alii. 


z Wher crasx. 
f Om. 4 pr. m. Eobceghik. 


boone. ¢ Om. ¥. 
& two cr et alti. 


a seid s sec. m. 
ff in i. 


246 


to Galilee, men of Galilee receyueden him, 
whanne thei hadden seyn alle thingis 
that he hadde don in® Jerusalem, in the 
feeste day, ‘or haliday'; and sothli thei 
4¢hadden come to the feeste day. Therfore 
he cam eftsoone in to Cana* of Galilee, 
where he made the watir wyn!, And 
sum™ litil king was, whos sone was syk 
47at Capharnaum. Whanne® this® hadde 
herd, for? Jhesu schulde come fro Judee 
in to Galilee, he wente to him, and prei- 
ede him, that he schulde come doun, and 
heele his sone; forsoth he bigan to4 deye. 
48 Therfore Jhesu seide to him, No" but’ 3e 
schulen se tokenes and grete wondris, 3e 
49bileuen not. The litil kyng seith to him, 
Lord, come doun, bifore my sone deye. 
soJhesu seith to him, Go, thi sone lyueth. 
The man bileuedet to the word, that 
Jhesu seide to hym, and he" wente. 
s1Sothli now him comynge doun, the 
seruauntis camen ajens him, and telden 
to him’, seyinge, For his sone lynede. 
52 Therfore he axide of hem the our, in 
whiche he ‘hadde betere*. And _ thei 
seiden to him, For 3istirday in the se- 
s3uenthe our the feuere lefte him. Ther- 
fore the fadir knew, that ‘the ilke* our it 
was, ‘in whichY Jhesu seide to him, Thi 
sone lyueth; and he bileuede, and al his 
sthous. Jhesu dide eft this secunde tokene, 
whanne he cam fro Judee in to Galilee. 


CAP. V. 


1 Aftir thes thingis was a feeste day of 
Jewis, and Jhesu wente vp to? Jerusa- 
2lem. Forsoth in* Jerusalem is a ‘stond- 
ing watir of beestis>, that in Ebrew 
is named Bethsayda, hauynge finé ‘litle 
33atis*. In thes’ lay a greet multitude of 
langwischinge men, blynde, krokid, drye, 


hatx. iOm. x. 


k the Cane acMNPOTWXY. 


JOHN. 


lin to wyne @. 


IV. 46—V. 3. 


where he made the watir wiyn. And ‘a 
litil kyng was', whos sone was sijk at 
Cafarnaum. Whanne this hadde herd, 47 
that Jhesu schulde come fro Judee in to 
Galilee, he wente to hym, and preiede 
hym, that he schulde come doun, and 
heele his sone; for he bigan to die. 
Therfor Jhesus seide to him, But* 3e48 
se tokenes and grete wondris, 3e bileuen 
not. The htil kyng seith to hym, Lord, 49 
come doun, bifor that my sone die. Jhe-50 
sus seith to hyim, Go, thi sone lyueth. 
The man bileuede to the word, that Jhe- 
sus seide to hym, and he wente. And31 
now whanne he cain doun, the seruauntis 
camen a3ens! hyin, and telden to hym, 
and seiden, That his sone lyuede. And 52 
he axide™ of hem the our, in which he 
was amendid. And thei seiden to hym, 
For" 3istirdai in the seuenthe our the 
feuer lefte him. Therfor the fadir knewe, 53 
that thilke our it was, in which Jhesus 
seide to hym, Thi sone lyueth; and he 
bileuede, and al his hous. Jhesus dide #4 
eft this secounde tokene, whanne he cam 
fro Judee in to Galilee. 


CAP. V. 


Aftir these thingis ther was a feeste1 
dai of Jewis®, and Jhesus wente vp to 
Jerusalem. And in Jerusalem isP az 
waissynge place, that in Ebrew is nam- 
ed? Bethsaida, and hath fyue porchis. 
In these lay a greet multitude of sikes 
men, blynde, crokid, and drie, abidynge 


maa. 12Andwhanx. Ohe 


this G sec.m. MPQSIWXY. P that wTrexy. 4 for to 4 pr.m. GMNPQTFIWY. rOm. x. * But if x. 

t bileneth WwW. uOm. x. Vv Om. AGMNPOSTIVXY. w had him betere ». x that x. Y that x. 

; Bete M. a at esi. > stondende watir s. stondinge watir i. ¢ litil atis, or entrees w. 
this Fr. 


k But if k. 
P was k. 


i ther was a lit. kyng 1. 


bhikB. © in to o. q clepid k. 


1 agen toa. 


™maskide R. ® Fro gaf. 


© the Jewis or sec. m. 


V. 4—17. 


4abidinge the stiring of the watir. For- 
sothe the aungel of the Lord ‘aftir tyme® 
cam doun in to the stonding watir, and 
the watir was moned; and he that first 
cam doun in to the sisterne, aftir thef 
mouyng of the watir, was maad hool of 
‘what euereS siknesse he was holdun". 
5Forsothe sum man was there, hauynge 
ei3te and thritti 3eeris' in his syknesse. 
6 Whanne Jhesu hadde seyn him liggynge*, 
and hadde knowe, for now he hadde 
moche tyme, he seith to him, Wolt thou 
7be maad hool? The syke man answeride 
to him, Lord, I haue not a man that 
whanne the water ‘schal be troublid!, he 
sende me in to the sisterne; forsoth the 
while I com, another goth down bifore 
sme. Jhesu seith to him, Ryse vp, taak 
othi bed, and wandre. And anon the 
man is maad hool, and took vp his bed, 
and wandride. And saboth was in that 
1oday. Therfore the Jewis seyden to him 
that was maad hool, It is saboth, it is 
not leefful to thee, for™ to take thi bed. 
il He answeride to hem, He that maade me 
hool®, seide to me, Taak thi bed, and 
izwandre. Therfore® thei axiden him, Who 
is that man, that seide to thee, Taak 
i3thi bed, and wandre? Sothli he that 
was maad hool, wiste not who it was. 
Forsothe Jhesu bowide him? fro the cum- 
pany ‘ordeyned, or seéé4, in the place. 
i4 Aftirward Jhesu fond him in the temple, 
and seide to him, Lo! thou ert maad hool; 
now nyle thou do’ synne, leste ony thing 
iasworse bifalle to thee. ‘The ilket man 
wente, and telde to the Jewis, for it was 
16 Jhesu that maad him hool. Therfore the" 
Jewis pursueden Jhesu, for he dide this 
i7thing in the’ saboth. Forsoth Jhesu 
answeride to hem, My fadir worchith til” 


e aftir the time ordeyned 9. aftir that tyme sv pr. m. 


Ww prem. i seer AGMNOQSTVIVY. k liende s. 
m Om. srx. 0 saf G pr.m. MTXY. 


8 Om. canpsTviwxy. nowg. t That x. 


t Om. k pr. m. 


8 Om. k pr.m. 
it 0. 


tink pr.m. 
ww And therfore 8 sec. m. 


X itis A. 


JOHN. 


© Forsothe r. 
u Om. N. 


u Om. k prem. 
y Om. 1Kb. 


247 


the mouyng of the watir. For the aun-4 
gel ‘of the Lord’ cam doun certeyne 
tymes in to the watir, and the watir 
was moued; and he that first cam doun 
in to the sisterne{, aftir the mouynge of 
the watir, was maad* hool of what euer 
sijknesse he was holdun. And a mans 
was there, hauynge ei3te and thritti 3eer 
in his sikenesse. And whanne Jhesuss 
hadde seyn hym liggynge, and hadde 
knowun, that he hadde myche tyme, he 
seith to hym, Wolt thou be maad hool ? 
The sijk man answerde to hym, Lord,7 
Y haue no man, that whanne the watir 
is moued, to putte me ‘in tot the® cis- 
terne; for the’ while Y come, anothir 
goith doun bifor me. Jhesus seith tos 
hym, Rise vp, take thi hed, and go. 
And anoon the man was maad hool, and9 
took vp’ his bed, and wente forth. And 
it was sabat in that dai. Therfor theo 
Jewis seiden to him that was maad hool, 
It is sabat, it’ is not leueful to thee, to 
take awei thi bed. He answeride tout 
hem, He that made me hool, seide to me, 
Take thi bed, and go. Therfor™” thei12 
axiden him, What man ‘is that*, that 
seide to thee, Take vpY thi bed, and go? 
But he that was maad?.hool, wiste notis 
who it was. And Jhesus bowide awei 
fro the puple, that was set in the place. 
Aftirward Jhesus foond hym in the tem-14 
ple, and seide to hym, Lo! thou art 
maad hool; now nyle thou do syune, lest 
any worse thing bifalle to thee. Thilke 1s 
man wente, and telde to the Jewis, that 
it was Jhesu that made hym_ hool. 
Therfor the Jewis pursueden Jhesu, 16 
for he dide this thing in the sabat. 
And Jhesus answeride to hem, My fadir 17 
worchith til now, and Y worche. Ther-1s 


f Om. sy. & what rr. b holdyn with 

1 is troublid 4 pr.m. cestwxy. is turblid arn. 

POm. ar. 4 ordeyne x. r Om. w prim. 
¥QOm. nN. W vnto @. til to w pr.m. 


vy Om. i. 
2Z to 0. 


wOm.b prom. W and 


2 Om. 1. 


+ that is, a 
watir gederid 
togidere, hau- 
inge no fizss. 
K. 


248 


isnow, and I worche*. Therfore thanne 
the Jewis sou3ten more forY to slee hym, 
for not oonly he brak the saboth, but 
and? he seide his fadir God, makinge him 
enene to God. And so Jhesu answeride, 
igand seide to hem, Treuli, treuli, I seie to 
3ou, the sone may not of him silf do ony 
thing, no* but that thing that he schal 
se the fadir doynge; what euere thingis 
sothli he doith, thes thingis and the sone 
20also doith, Forsothe the fadir loueth 
the sone, and schewith to him alle thingis 
that he doith; and he schal schewe to him 
more® workis than thes, that 3e wondre. 
21 Forsothe as the fadir reysith deede men, 
and quykeneth, ‘so and the sone quyken- 
g2eth whiche? he wole. Sothli neither the 
fader iugeth ony man, but hath 3ouun al 
23the dom to the sone, that alle® men 
honouref the sone, as thei hononren the 
fadir. He that honoureth not the sone, 
honoureth not the fadir that sente him. 
24 Treuli, treuli, I seye to 30u, for he that 
heerith my word, and bileueth to him 
that sente me, hath euere lasting lyf, and® 
cometh not in to dom, but passith" fro 
2adeeth' in to lyf. Treuli, treuli, I seye 
to 30u, for the our cometh, and now it is, 
whanne deede men schulen heere the vois 
of Goddis sone, and thei that schulen* 
26heere, schulen lyue. Sothli as the fader 
hath lyf in him silf, so he 3af and to the! 
27sone for™ to haue lyf in him silf; and he 
3af to" him power for® to make dom, for he 
28is mannis sone. Nyle 3e wondre this thing?, 
for the? our cometh, in which alle men 
that ben in buriels, schulen heere the vois 
290f Goddis sone. And thei that han do 
goode thingis, schulen come forth in to 
rysinge ajen of lyf; forsothe thei that 
han don yuele thingis, in to rysinge ajen 


JOHN. 


Vv. 18—a2g. 


for the Jewis sou3ten more to sle hym, 
for not oneli he brak the sabat, but® he 
seide that God was his fadir, and made 
hym euvene to God. Therfor Jhesus an-19 
swerde, and seide to hem, Treuli, treuli, 
Y seye to 30u, the sone may not of hym 
silf do ony thing, but that thing that he 
seeth the fadir doynge; for what euere 
thingis he doith, the sone doith in lijk 
maner tho thingis. For the fadir loneth 20 
the sone, and schewith to> hym alle 
thingis that he doith; and he schal 
schewe to hym grettere werkis than 
these, that 3e wondren. For as the fadir 21 
reisith deed men, and quykeneth, so the 
sone quykeneth whom he wole. For ne- 22 
thir the fadir iugith ony man, but hath 
3ouun ech>> doom to the sone, that alle23 
mien onoure the sone, as thei onouren the 
fadir. He that onourith not the sone, 
onourith not the fadir that sente hym. 
Treuli, treuli, Y seie to 30u, that he that 24 
herith my word, and bileueth to® hym 
that sente me, hath euerlastynge lijf, and 
he coineth not in to doom, but passith 
fro deeth* in*4 to lijf. Treuli, treuli Y 25 
seie to 30u, for the our cometh, and now 
it is, whanne deed men schulen here the 
vois of ‘Goddis sone®, and thei that heren, 
schulen lyne. For as the fadir hath lijf2e 
in hym silf, so he 3af to the sone, to haue 
lijf in him silf; and he 3af to hym power 27 
to make doom, for he is mannys sone. 
Nyle 3e° wondre this‘, for the our com-28 
eth, in which alle men that ben in 
birielis, schulen here the voice of Goddis 
sone. And thei that han do goode thingis, 29 
schulen go in to a3enrisyng of lijf; but 
thei that han done yuele thingis, in to 
ajenrisyng ofS doom. Y may no thing 30 
do of my silf, but as Y here, Y deme, 


x worche now @. YOm. wsxy. 2Om.r. not x. bOm.w. ¢mokpr.m. cand so w. 
: whom AGMNPQSTIVXY. e Om. vr. f honoureden 1. g and he w pr.m. h passide 4 sec. im. K. 
ithe deetth r, k Om. cuneestwxy. |Om. x. ™Om. sx. 2 Om. G prom. MNPQTXY. © Om. Sx. 
P forsothe r. 4 Om. 7. 

abut fork pr.m. > Om.1 sec.a.sprem.g.  >beneryo. Cink. intoa. 4deedi. 4% Om. o. 


€ the sone of God o. ¢¢ Om. a. 


fin this k pr.m. 


&E toc 


300f dom. 


34to the treuthe. 


37 me. 


39 whom he sente. 


V. 30———46. 


I may not of mysilf do ony 
thing, but as I heere, I inge, and my 
dom is iust, for I seke not my wille, but 
3ithe will of theh fadir that sente me. If 
I bere witnessing of my silf, my witness- 
szing is not trewe; another is that berith 
witnessing of me, and I woot for his 
witnessing is trewe, that he berith of me. 
33 3e senten to John, and he bar witnessing 
Sothly I take not wit- 
nessing of man; but I seie thes thingis, 
3sthat 3e be saf. Sothli! he was a lanterne 
brennynge and schynynge, ‘or 3yuynge 
liz3t*; forsothe 3e wolden glade at oon! 
3c our in his li3t. Sothli I haue™ more wit- 
nessing than John, forsoth the workis 
that my fadir 3af to” me that I performe 
hem, ‘the ilke® workis that I do beren 
witnessyng of me, that? the fadir sente 
And the fadir that sente me, he bar 
witnessing of me. Nethir 3e herden euere 
his vois, nethir say3en his licnesse, ‘or 
3g foorme’, And ‘3e han™ not his word dwell- 
inge in 30u; for 3e bileuen not to him, 
Seke 3e scripturis*’, in 
whichet 3e gessen" to’ haue euerlastinge 
lyf; and” tho it ben, that beren witness- 
4oing of me. And 3e wolen not come ‘to 
41me*, that 3e haue lyf. I take not cler- 
42nesseY of men; but I haue knowen 30u, 
for 3e han not the loue of God in 3ou. 
431 cam in the name of my fadir, and 3e 
token not me. If another schal come in 
his owne name, 3e schulen receyue him. 
44How mown 3¢e bileue, that receyuen? 
glorie ech of other, and 3e seken not the 
45glorie that is of God aloone? Nyle 3e 
gesse, that I am to accusinge* 30u anemptis 
the fadir; it is Moyses that accusith 3ou, 
46in whom 3e hopen. Forsoth if 3e bileu- 


hthat x. iOm. 4 pr.m. GMNPOSTVWXY. 
0 Om. GMNTXY. Otho ex. P for AGMNPQSTFIXY. 
in seripturis r. whom e. " weenen 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 


x Om. w pr.m. 
GMNPQSTIWXY. 


y clerenesse, or knowinge w pr.m. 


h 


my ¢. inot glade a pr.m. glade, or ioye kK. 

N that o. m of God that is EP. n gboue AEPea. 
ek sec. m. 

VOL. IV. Kk 


JOHN. 


k Om. esx. 


249 


and my doom is iust, for Y seke not my 
wille, but the wille of the> fadir that 
sente me. If Y bere witnessing of my 31 
silf, my witnessyng is not trewe; another 32 
is that berith witnessyng of me, and Y 
woot that his witnessyng is trewe, that 
he berith of me. 3e senten to Joon, and 33 
he bar witnessyng to treuthe. But Y34 
take not witnessyng of man; but Y seie 
these thingis, that 3e be saaf. He was35 
a Janterne brennynge and schynynge ; 
but 3e wolden glade! at an our in his 
li3t. But Y haue more witnessyng than 36 
Joon, for the werkis that my fadir 3af 
to me to perfourme hem, thilke werkis- 
that Y do beren witnessyng of me, that 
the fadir sente me. And the fadir that 37 
sente me, he bar witnessyng of me. Ne- 
ther 3e herden euere his vois, nether 3e 
seien his licnesse. And 3e han not his3s 
word dwellynge in 30u; for 3e byleuen 
not to hym, whom he sente. Seke 3e39 
scripturis*, in which 3e gessen to haue 
euerlastynge lijf; and tho it ben, that 
beren witnessyng of me. And 3e wolen4o 
not come to me, that 3e haue lijf. Yai 
take not clerenesse! of men; but Y haue42 
knowun 30u, that 3e han not the loue 
of God in jou. Y cam in the name of43 
my fadir, and 3e token not me. If an- 
other come in his owne name, 3e schulen 
resseyue hym. Hou moun 3e bileue, that 44 
resseyuen glorie ech of othere, and 3e 
seken not the! glorie ‘that is of God™ 
aloone"? Nyle 3e gesse, that Y am° to45 
accuse 30u allentis? the fadir; it is Moi- 
ses that accusith 30u, in whom 3e hopen. 
For if 3e bileueden to Moises, perauen- 46 
ture 3e schulden bileue also tol me; for 
he wroot of me. But if 3e bileuen not 47 


m haue and Q. 

8 the scriptures s. 
w Om. w prim. 

& accuse 


lan AGMNPQSTYXY. 
r that 3¢ had sr. 

v for to AGMOPTIVY. 

% receynen, or taken Qy pr. m. 


q Om. ex. 


1 the clernesse k. 


k the scripturis c. 
4 Om. b pr.m. 


° came R. P ajens c, 


250 


eden to Moyses, perauenture 3e schulden 
bileue and to me; sothli he wroot of me. 

47Sothli if 3e beleuen not to his lettris, how 
schulen 3e bileue to my wordis? 


CAP. VI. 


1 Aftir thes thingis Jhesu wente ouer the 
ase of Galilee, that is Tiberiadis. And a 
greet multitude suede him; for thei sy3en 
the tokenes, that he dide on hem that 
3weren syke. Therfore Jhesu wente in to 
an hil, and ‘there he sat? with his dis- 
aciplis. Forsoth> pask was ful uy3, a feeste 
sday of Jewis®. Therfore? whanne® Jhesu 
hadd lyftf vp the y3en, and hadde seyn, 
for a® greet multitude cam to hiin, he 
seith® to Philip, Wherof schulen we bie 
6loues, that thes men ete? Sothli he seide 
this thing, temptinge him; forsoth he 
zwiste what he was to doynge!. Philip 
answeride to him, The looues of two* 
hundrid pens suffysen not to hem, that 
sech man take a litle what. Oon of his 
disciplis, Andrew, the brother of Symount 
9 Petre, seith to him, O child is here, that 
hath fyue barley looues and _ tweye! 
fysches; but what ben thes thingis among 
1oso many men? Therfore Jhesu seith, 
Make 3c™ men for" to sitte at the mete. 
Forsoth there was myche hey in the 
place. Therfore men saten at the mete, 
11in noumbre as°® fyue tlousandis?, ‘Ther- 
fore Jhesu4 took fyue™ looues, and whanne 
he hadde do thankingis, he departide to 
men sittinge at’ mete, also and of the 
i2fischis, as myche as thei wolden. For- 
sothe as thei ben‘ fillid®, he seide to his 
disciplis, Gedere 3e the relyfs that ben 
isleft, that thei perischen not. Therfore 
thei gedriden, and filleden twelue coffyns 


JOHN. 


- for he wiste what he was to do. 


V. 47-——VI. 13. 


to hise lettris, hou schulen 3e bileue to 
iny? wordis ? 


CAP. Vir 


Aftir these thingis Jhesus wente ouere! 
the see of Galilee, that is Tiberias. And2 
a greet multitude? suede hym; for thei 
sayn the tokenes, that he dide on hem 
that weren sijke. Therfor Jhesus wente3 
in to an hil, and sat there with hise dis- 
ciplis. And the paske was ful ni3, a4 
feeste dai of the Jewis. Therfor whannes 
Jhesus hadde lift vp hise izen, and 
hadde seyn, that a greet multitude cain 
to hym, he seith to Filip, Wherof schu- 
len we bie looues, that these men ete? 
But he seide this thing, temptynge hym; 6 
Filip7 
answerde to hym, The looues of tweyn™ 
hundrid pans® sufficen not to hem, that 
ech man take a litil what. Oon of hises 
disciplis, Andrew, the brothir of Sy- 
mount Petre, seith to him, A cliild is9 
here, that hath fyue barli looues and 
twei' fischis ; but what ben these among 
somanye? Therfor Jhesus seith, Make 10 
3e" hem sitte to the’ mete. And there 
was myche hey in the place. And so 
men saten to the mete, as ‘fyue thou- 
synde in noumbre*. And Jhesus took 11 
fyue looues, and whanne he hadde do 
thankyngis, he departide to men* that 
saten toY the? mete, and also of the 
fischis, as myche as thei wolden. And iz 
whanne thei weren fillid®, he seide to 
hise disciplis, Gadir 3e the relifs that ben 
left, that thei perischen not. And soi3 
thei gadriden, and filliden twelue cofyns 


a sat there AGMNPQSTIVXY. > Forsoth the x prem. ¢ the Jewes Pa. d There vr. ¢ thanne 
woprem. ff liftid sx. afulwsec.m. bseider. idoacmunposrwxy. ktwey tT.  !two wx, 
m Om. Ww. n Om, sx. 0 of x. P thousond sx. 4 Jhesu therefore sr. t the flue psw. 


Sat the wx. t weren 1. 


v fulfillid semNPOSTWXY. 


Piso. 4 multitude of pepil 0. — * two cerpqacg. S pens Epsbeghia8. * two rrghi. 3 Om. 
ER pr. m. VY Om. ei. W in nonmbre fyue thousynde a. x the men 1kag. hem hi. Yat B. 
2QOm.k. @ fnlfillid s. 


VI. 14-25. 


of relyfs of the’ fyue barly looues and 
tweye” fischis, that leften to hem that 
14haddun etun. Therfore* tho! men, whanne 
thei hadden seyn the ‘tokene, or myracle*, 
that he. hadde don, seyden, For this* is 
verily the prophete, that is to comynge 
15In to the world. Therfore® whanne Jhesu 
hadde knowun, for’ thei weren to com- 
ynge® that thei schulden rauysche him, 
and make him kyng, he ‘aloone fledde! 
16eft in to an hil. Sothli as euentyd% was 
maad, his disciplis wenten doun to the 
itsee. And whanne thei hadden sti3ed 
vp in to the boot, thei camen ouer tlie 
see in to Capharnaum. And derknessis 
weren now maad, and Jhesu hadde not 
18comen to hem. Forsothe a greet wynde 
i9blowynge, the see roos vp. Therfore 
whanue thei hadden rowid as fyue and 
twenty furlongis or thritty, thei seen 
Jhesu walkinge on the see, and to be 
maad next to the boot; and thei dredden. 
20Sothli he seyde to hem, I am; nyle 3e 
eidrede. Therfore thei wolden take him 
‘in to! the boot, and anon the boot was at 
22the lond in* to which thei wenten. On 
‘the tothir! day the eumpanye, that stood 
ouer the see, sy3, for there was non othir 
boot there no™ but oon, and for Jhesu 
entride not with his disciplis in to the 
boot, but his disciplis ‘aloone wenten®. 
23 Forsothe othere bootis camen fro Tibe- 
riade bisydis the place, where® thei eeten 
24 breed, doynge thankingis to God. Ther- 
fore whanne the cumpany hadden seyn, 
for Jhesu was not there, nethere his dis- 
ciplis, thei stizeden in to bootis, and 
camen to Capharnaum, sekinge him P. 
25 And whanne thei hadden founden him 


vy Om. s. x Forsothe r. 
b come GMNPQSTIVXY. 
4 pr.m. GMNPQSTXY. fley aloone w. 
Aprm *Om.w. I! that other w. the other x. 


P Jhesu AGMNPOSTIWXY. 


W two pPwxy. 


atherelifo %twor ¢ Om. qpr.m. 
ffintoo. 8 sau3en 1. sawen K. saien R. sayen e. sizen k. seien i. 
other rae. J that oon o. k Om. k. 


cam plures. 


JOHN. 


4 comynge a. 


1 thei diden a pr.m. 


251 


of relif? of the fyue barli looues and 
twei® fischis, that lefte to hem that had- 
den etun. Therfor tho men, whanne thei 14 
hadden seyn the signe that he hadde 
don, seiden, For this is verili the profete, 
that is to come in to the world. Andis 
whanne Jhesus hadde knowun, that thei 
weren to® come! to take® hym, and make 
hym kyng, he flei3 ‘aloone cftf in to an 
hille. And whanne euentid was comun, 16 
his disciplis wenten doun to the see. 
And thei wenten vp in to a boot, and17 
thei carmen ouer the see in to Cafarnaum. 
And derknessis weren inaad thanne, and 
Jhesus was not come to hem. And for ais 
greet wynde blew, the see roos vp. Ther-19 
for whanne thei hadden rowid as fyue 
and twenti furlongis or thretti, thei 
seenS Jhesus walkynge on the see, and 
to be nei3 the boot; and thei dredden. 
And he seide to hem, Y am; nyle 3e20 
drede. Therfor thei wolden take’& hym ai 
in to the boot, and anoon the boot was 
at the loond, to which thei wenten. On22 
‘the tother' dai the puple, that stood ouer 
the see, say, that ther was noon other 
boot there but oon), and that* Jhesu 
entride not with hise disciplis in to the 
boot, but hise disciplis aloone wenten. 
But. othere bootis camen fro Tiberias 23 
bisidis the place, where thei hadden eetun 
breed, and diden! thankyngis to God. 
Therfor whanne the puple hadde seyn, 24 
that Jhesu was not there, nether hise 
disciplis, thei wenten vp in to bootis, 
and camen to™ Cafarnaum, sekynge Jhe- 
su. And whanne thei hadden foundun.; 
hym ouer the see, thei seiden to hym, 
Rabi, hou come” thou hidur? Jhesus 9 


y the n. 2 tocne x. a this man G sec. nt. WW. 


¢ Forsothe amNPOTXY. “that amrxy. © come GunposTWwxyY. f aloone fleize 
§ euen G pr.m. MPQSXY. 


baapr.m. G sec.m.qsvw. ‘in 


m Om. ew. ® wentenaloone vw. © ther w pr.m. 


f eftsvone k pr.m. 
hin tok. i that 
n camest !Ka. 


€ Om. I prim. g. 
gg haue o. 
m jin to k, 


Kk 2 


252 


ouer the see, thei seyden to him, Raby, 
s¢hou hast thou com hidur? Jhesu4 an- 
sweride to hem, and seyde, Treuli, treuli, 
_1 seie to 3ou, 3e seken me, not for 3e sy37 
the’ ‘tokenis, ov myraclis', but for je 
27eeten of looues, and ben fillid". Worche 
3e not mete that perischith, but that’ 
dwellith in to euerlastinge lyf, which 
mete mannis sone ‘schal 3yue* to 30n0 ; 
forsothe God the fadir ‘bitokenede, or 
23 markedey, him?. Therfore thei seiden to 
him, What schulen we do, that we worche 
29 the workis of God? Jhesu answeride, and 
seide to hem, This is the work of God, 
that 3e bileue in to him, whom he sente. 
30 Therefore thei seiden to him, Therfore 
what tokene doist thon, that we se, and 
bileue to thee? what worchist thou ? 
31Oure fadris eeten manna in desert, as it 
is writun, He 3af to hem breed fro® 
32 heuene for» to ete. Therfore Jhesu¢ seith 
to hem, Treuli, treuli, I seie to jou, not 
Moyses 3af to 3ou very breed fro heuene, 
but my fadir 3yueth to 3ou verri breed 
a3fro heuene; sothh it is verri breed that 
cometh doun fro heuene, and 3yueth lyf 
34to the world. Therfore thei seiden to 
him, Lord, euere’ 3yue to vs this breed. 
35Sothly Jhesu seide to hem, I am breed 
of lyf; he that cometh to me, schal not 
hungre; he that bileneth in me, schal 
aénenere thirste. But I seide to 30u, ‘for 
and 3e han seyn me, and 3e° bileueden 
sj7not. Al thing, that the fadir 3yueth to 
me, schal come to me; and I schal not 
3scaste ‘out him‘, that cometh to me. For 
I cam doun fro heuene, not that I do my 
wille, but the wille of him that sente me. 
30 Forsothe this is the wille of him’ that 
sente me, ‘the fadris*, that al thing that 
the fadir 3af to me, I leese noti of it, but 


a And Jhesus w. T saien vw. 
STWXY. v that that w. 
Y bytocnede x. 2 to hym mw pr.m. 
sTWwxy. © Om. wx. thim out wx. 


a of N. 


seen gk. Ptheloouesikhi. 4 that that k. 
ttOm.o. “seith a, v and he ok. 


y Om. k pr. m. 


JOHN. 


§ Om. oy pr.m. 
Ww the whiche 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWAY. 
b Om. sx. 
& the fader px. 


r Jastith i pr.m. 
vv haue seid a pr. m. 


VI. 26-—39 


answerde to hem, and seide, Treuli, treuli, 
Y seie to 30u, 3e seken me, not for 3e 
sayn® the myraclis, but for 3e eten of 
looues?, and weren fillid. Worche 3e not 27 
mete that perischith, but that’ dwell- 
ith’ in to euerlastynge lijf, which’ mete 
mannys sone schal 3yue to 30u; for God 
the fadir hath markid hym. Therfor2s 
thei seiden to hym, What schulen we do, 
that we worche the werkist of God? 
Jhesus answerde, and seide to hem, This 29 
is the werk of God, that 3e bileue to 
hym, whom he sente. Therfor thei30 
seiden to hym, What tokene thanne do- 
ist thou, that we seen, and bileue to 
thee? what worchist thou? Oure fa-31 
dris eeten manna in desert, as it is 
writun, He 3af to hem breed fro heuene 
to ete. Therfor Jhesus seith to hem, 32 
Treuli, treulitt, Y seie to 30u, Moyses 3af 
3ou not breed fro heuene, but my fadir 
3yueth 30u veri breed fro heuene ; for it 33 
is very breed that cometh doun fro he- 
uene, and 3yueth lijf to the world. Ther-3s 
for thei seiden to hym, Lord, euere 3yue 
vs this breed. And Jhesus seide" to35 
hem, Y am breed of lijf; he that cometh 
to me, schal not hungur; he’ that bileu- 
eth in me, schal neuere thirste. But Y36 
seid’ to 30u, that 3e han seyn me, and 
3e bileueden” not. Al thing, that the 37 
fadir 3yueth to me, schal come to me; 
and Y schal not caste hym out, that 
cometh to me. For Y cam doun fro3s 
heuene, not that Y do my wille, but the 
wille of hym that sente me. And this3¢ 
is the wille of the fadir that sente me, 
that al thing that the fadir 3af me*, Y 
leese not of it, but ajen reise it in the 
laste dai. And this is’ the wille of my 40 
fadir that sente me, that ech man that 


t toknes x. u fulfillid 4 prem. GMNPY 
x seneth 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
© her. 4 enermore 4 pr.m. GMNPQ 
h Om. pxy. the fader y. i no3t K prom. 


Sthe whiche 1. ¢ werk Ezeka. 


W bileenen agik. * Om. R pr.m. tome k. 


VI. 4o-——56. 


4oazen reise it in the laste day. Sothly 
this is the wille of my fadir that sente 
me, that ech man that seeth the sone, and 
bileueth in to him, haue euerlasting lyf; 
and I schal ajen reyse him in the laste 
aiday. Therfore Jewis grucchiden of him, 
for he hadde' seyd, Iam breed that cam 
42doun fro heuene. And thei seiden, Wher* 
this is not Jhesu, the sone of Joseph, 
whos fadir and modir we han knowun ? 
Therfore hou seith this!, Im cam doun fro 
43heuene? Therfore Jhesu answeride, and 
seide to hem, Nyle 3e grucche to gidere. 
44No man may come to me, no but the 
fadir that sente me, schal® drawe him®; 
and I schal a3en reyse him in the laste 
asday. ItP is writun in prophetis, And 
alle men schulen ben able to4 be tau3t of 
God. Ech man that herde™ of the fadir, 
4sand lernede’, cometh to me. Not for ony 
man sy3 the fadir, no but this ‘that is of 
47God, thist sy3 the fadir. Sothli, sothli, 
I seye to 30u, he that bileueth in" me, 
4shath euerlasting lyf. ‘Iam the breed of 
4olyf. 3oure fadris éeten manna in desert, 
soand ben deede. This is breed comynge 
doun fro heuene, that if ony man schal” 
siete therof, he deyeth* not. I am quyk 
52 breed, that cam doun fro heuene. If ony 
man schal ete of this bred, he schal lyue 
with outen ende. And the breed that I 
schal 3yue, is my fleisch for lyf of the 
ssworld. Therfore the Jewis chidden to 
gidere, seyinge, Hou may thisY 3yue to 
s4vs his fleisch for? to ete? Therfore Jhesu 
seith to hem, Treuly, treuli, I seye to 30u, 
no* but> 3e schulen ete the fleisch of 
mannis sone, and drynke his blood, 3e 
ssschulen not haue lyf in 30u. He that 
etith my fleisch, and drynketh my blood, 
hath euerlasting lyf, and I schal ajen 
ss6reyse him in the laste day. Forsoth 


{i Om. G prim. xy.  k Whether wx. 


n Om. NQ. Ohemw. P And it n. 
tOm.n. into. v Om. prea. 
y he this arpssy. ZQOm. sx. 40m. xX. 


8 he this 1a see. m. 
€Om.1. f hath herd k see. m. 


2 the Jewis hik. 
4 Om. ebk pr. m. 
k he this r. 


JOHN. 


l he this curoswxy. 

q for to 4 prim. GMNPOTIVY. 
w Om. 4G pr. m. NOTW pr. m. XY. 
b hut if x. 


b Om. R pr.m. 
& Om. k pr, m., 


253 


seeth the sone, and bileueth in hym, 
haue euerlastynge lijf; and Y schal ajen 
reyse hym in the laste dai. Therfor4i 
Jewis’ grutchiden of hym, for he hadde 
seid, Y am breed that cam doun fro 
heuene. And thei seiden, Whether this 42 
is not Jhesus, the sone of Joseph, whos 
fadir and modir we han knowun. Hou 
thanne seith this?, That Y cam doun fro 
henene? Therfor Jhesus answerde, and 43 
seide to hem, Nyle 3e" grutche togidere. 
No man may come to me, but if the 44 
fadir that sente me, drawe hym; and Y 
schal a3en reise hym in the laste dai. It 
is writun in prophetis"», And alle men 4s 
schulen be able for’ to be tau3t ‘of Gode. 
Ech man that herdef ofS the fadir, and 
hath lerned, cometh to me. Not for ony 46 
man hath sey the fadir, but this that is 
of God, hath sey the fadir. Sotheli, so-47 
theli, Y seie to 30u, he that bileueth in 
me, hath euerlastynge lijf. Y am breed 4s 
of lijf. 3oure fadris eeten manna in de-49 
sert, and ben! deed. This is breed com-30 
ynge doun fro heuene, that if ony man 
ete therof, he die not. Y am lyuyngesi 
breed, that cam doun fro heuene. If ony 52 
man- ete of this breed, he schal lyue 
withouten ende. And the breed that Y 
schal 3yue, is my fleisch for the lijf of the 
world. Therfor the Jewis chidden togi-s:3 
dere, and seiden, Hou may this* 3yue to 
vs his fleisch to ete? Therfor Jhesus 51 
seith to hem, Treuli, treuli, Y seie to jou, 
but 3e eten the fleisch of mannus sone, 
and drenken his blood, 3e schulen not 
haue lijf in 30u. He that etith myss 
fleisch, and drynkith my blood, hath 
euerlastynge lijf, and Y schal a3en reise 
hym in the laste dai. For my fleisch is 56 
veri mete, and my blood is very drynk. 
He that etith my fleisch, and drynkith 57 


m For I 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
’ hath herd eswy. & lerid x. 
x dye 4 sec. m. NQVW sec. m. X. 


¢ men of God 1. 


bb the prophetis o. 
i thei ben rg. 


h he this ra sec. m. 


254 


iny fleisch is verily® mete, and my blood 
sjis verily’ drynke. He that etith my 
fleisch, and drynkith my blood, dwellith 
ssin me, and Iin him. As my fadir lyu- 
ynge sente® me, and I lyue for the fadir, 
and he that etith me, schal® lyue for me. 
59 This is breed, that cam doun fro heuene. 
Not as 3oure fadris eeten manna", and ben 
deed ; he that etith this breed, schal lyne 
co with outen ende. He seide thes thingis 
in the synagoge, techinge in Capharnaum. 
61 Therfore manye of his disciplis heeringe’, 
seyden, This word is hard, who may heere 
czhim? Forsoth Jhesu witynge anemptis* 
him silf, for his disciplis grucchiden of 
this thing, seide to hem, This thing 
6sselaundrith 3ou? Therfore if 3e schulen 
se mannis sone stiynge vp, wher he was 
sibifore? It is the spirit that quykeneth, 
the fleysch profiteth nothing; the wordis 
that I haue spokun to 30u, ben spirit and 
sslyf. But ther ben summe of 30u that 
bileuen not. Sothli Jhesu! wiste at the 
bigynnynge, whiche weren bilenynge, and 
66who was to bitrayinge™ him. And he 
seide, Therfore I seide to 30u, that no 
inan may come to me, no but it were 
6730uun ‘to him"™ of my fadir. Fro this 
tyme manye of his disciplis wenten abak, 
6:aud now wenten not with him. Therfore 
Jhesu seide to the twelue, Where® and 
oo3e wolen go awey? Therfore Symount 
Petre answeride to him, Lord, to whom 
schulen we go? Thou hast wordis of 
wenerelasting lyf; and we han bileuyd, 
and knowun, for thou art Crist, the 
7isone of God. Therfore Jhesu answeride 
to hem, Wher? I chees not 30u twelue, 
z2and oon of 30u is a deuel?? Forsothe he 
seide of Judas of Symount, of Scarioth, 
forsoth this’ was to bitraiynge* him, 
whanne he was oont of twelue". 


© verrey WW. 


d verrey Ww. e hath sent sw. 
in desert N. 


i heringe this w pr. m. 


JOHN. 


& and he schal 4 pr. m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
k at GMNPQSTWXxy. 


VI. 57-72. 


my blood, dwellith in me, and Y in hym. 
Asi my fadir lyuynge sente me, and Y 58 
lyne for the* fadir, and he that etith me, 
he! schal lyue for me. This is breed, s9 
that cam doun fro heuene. Not as joure 
fadris eten manna™, and ben deed; he 
that etith this breed, schal lyne with- 
outen ende. He seide these thingis ino 
the synagoge, techynge in Cafarnaum. 
Therfor many of hise disciplis herynge, 61 
seiden, This word is hard, who may 
here it"? But Jhesus witynge at hymce 
silf, that hise disciplis grutchiden of this 
thing, seide to hem, This thing sclaun- 
drith 3010? Therfor if 3e seen mannus 63 
sone stiynge, where" he was bifor? Ites 
is the spirit that quykeneth, the fleisch 
profitith no thing; the wordis that Y 
haue spokun to 3ou, ben spirit and lijf. 
But ther ben sumimme of 30u that bileuen és 
not. For Jhesus wiste fro the bigyn- 
nynge, which weren bileuynge, and who 
was to bitraye hym. And he seide,6¢ 
Therfor Y seide to 30u, that no man may 
come to me, but it Were 3onun to hym 
of my fadir. Fro this tyme many ofe7 
hise disciplis wenten abak, and wenten 
not now with hym. Therfor Jhesus¢s 
seide to the twelue, Whether 3e wolen 
also go awei? And° Symount Petre an-s 
sweride to hym, Lord, to whom schulen 
we gon? Thou hast wordis of euerlast- 
ynge lijf; and we bileuen, and han? 7o 
knowun, that thou art Crist, the sone 
of God. Therfor Jhesus answerde to7: 
hem, Whether Y chees not 30u twelue, 
and oon of 3ou is a feend? And he72 
seide this of Judas of Symount Scarioth, 
for this? was to bitraye hym, whanne he 
was oon of the twelue. 


b manna 


The x. ™ bytraye 4 pr.m. GMNPOQSTWY. 


betrajen x. 8 Om. & pr. m. 0 Whether x. Pp Whether x. 4 feend semnestwxy.  * he this 
G sec. m. MPSW sec.m. —§ bytraye 4 pr.m.cMNpestTwxy. tOm.r. the twelue we. 

iAndaso. kKmyo. land he ok see.m. m manna in desertk. “himk pr.m. 4%" there o. 
°Om.k. 2 Om. k prim. 4 he this ra see. m. 


VIE, 1—16. 


CAP. VIL. 


1 Forsothe aftir thes thingis Jesu walk- 
ide in to Galilee, for he wolde not walke 
in to Judee, for the? Jewis sou3ten for? to 

2sle him. Sothli ther was in the nexte 
a feeste day of Jewis, Scenofegia, that is, 

aa feeste of tabernaclis. Forsothe his bre- 
theren seiden to him, Passe fro® hennis, 
and go in to Judee, that and thi disciplis 
ase thi werkis that thou doist; forsothe 
no man doth ony thing in ‘hid place, or 
priny®, and he‘4 sekith to® be ‘in tof opyn. 
If thou dost ‘thes thingis®, schewe thi silf 
sto the world. Forsothe nether his bri- 

Gtheren bileueden in to him. Therfore 
Jhesu seith to hem, My time cam not it, 

7but 3oure tyme is euermore redy. The 
world may not haue hatid 3ou, sothli it 
hatith me; for I bere witnessing therof, 

sfor the workis of it ben yuele. Stize 3e 
vp at this feeste day, but I schal not 
stize vp at this feeste day, for my tyme 
gis not 3it fillid>, _Whanne he hadde 
loseid thes thingis, he dwelte in Galilee. 
Forsothe as his britheren stijeden vp, 
thanne and he stijede vp at the feeste 
iiday, not opynli, but as iu pryuei. Ther- 

- fore the Jewis sou3ten him in the feeste 

i2zday, and seiden, Wher is he? And moche 
grucching was of him in the cumpany of 
peple. Forsothe summe seideni, For he is 
good; forsoth othere seiden, Nay, but he 

isdisceyueth the* cumpanyes; netheles no 
man spak opynly of him, for the drede of 
14Jewis. Forsothe now the feeste day 
medlinge, ‘or goynge bitwixe', Jhesu 
wente vp™ in to the temple, and tau3te. 
is And the Jewis wondriden, seyinge, Hou 
kan this man lettris, sithen he hath not 
islernyd"? Jhesu answeride to hem, and 
seide, My doctrine is not myn, but his 


JOHN. 


‘leueden in hym. 


20 
or 
Se 


CAP. VII. 


Aftir" these thingis Jhesus walkide ini 
to Galilee, for he wolde not walke in to 
Judee, for the Jewis sou3ten to’ sle hym. 
And ther was nei3 a feeste dai of the2 
Jewis, Senofegia. And hise britherens 
seiden to hym, Passe fro hennus, and 
got im to Judee, that also thi disciplis 
seen thi werkis that thou doist; for no4 
man doith ony thing in hiddlis, and hym 
silf sekith to be opyn. If thou doist 
these thingis, schewe thi silf to the 
world. For nether hise britheren bi-s 
Therfor Jhesus seith¢ 
to hem, My tyme cam" not 3it, but 
joure tyme’ is euermore redi. The7 
world may not hate 3ou, sothely it hat- 
ith me; for Y bere witnessyng therof, 
that the werkis of it ben yuele. Go 3e8 
vp to this’ feeste dai, but Y schal not 
go vp to this feeste dai”, for my tyme 
is not 3it fulfillid. Whanne he haddeg 
seid these thingis, he dwelte in Galilee. 
And aftir that* hise brithereu weren gon 10 
vp, thanne he 3edeY vp to the feeste dai, 
not opynli, but as in priuyte. Therfor1 
the Jewis souj3ten lym in the feeste dai, 
and seiden, Where is he? And myche 12 
grutchyng was of hym among the puple. 
For summe seiden, That he is good ; and 
othere seiden, Nai, but he disceyueth the 
puple; netheles no man spak opynli of 1s 
hym, for drede* of the Jewis*. Bunt.s 
whaune the myddil feeste dai cam, Jhe- 
sus wernte vp in to the temple, and 
tau3te. And the Jewis wondriden, and 15 
seiden, Hou can this saz lettris, sithen 
he hath not lerned?? Jhesus answerde 16 
to hem, aud seide, My doctryne is not 
myn, but his that sente me. If ony man 17 
wole do his wille, he schal knowe of the 


#Om. Gunpostywxy. b&Om.sx. ¢Om. anor. ‘hid place x. 4 Om.  ¢ for to prom. 
GMNPQTIVY. f in 4 prom. 9. Om. rx. 8 this thing 4 pr.m. MNPQT. h fulfllid Ganpostiry. 
fultilde x. i seyn K. k Om. rv. 1 or goynge bitwen s. Om. x. m Om. 4G prom. NPQTXY. 
» lerid sx. 

r And aftir a. 8% fortohi.  ¢ go we Bisa sec. m. b sec. m. wis R. v hour k. wv the k prom. 
w Om. 5 pr.m. fest day dons sec.m. * Om. nr prom. Ywente k. Zthedredes sec.m.  ® Judeis a. 


» leride a. 


256 


17that sente me. If ony man ‘schal wilne 
to® do his wille, he schal knowe of the 
techinge, wher? it be of God, wherd I 
isspeke of my silf. He that spekith of him- 
self, sekith his owne glorie; forsoth™ he* 
that sekith the glorie of him that sente 
him, this is sothfast, and vnri3tfulnesse‘ 
igis not in him. Wher" Moyses 3af not to 
30u a lawe, and no man of 30u doth’ the 
2olawe? What seken 3e to¥ sle me? “The 
cumpany answeride, and seide, ‘Thou hast 
21a deuyl; who sekith for* to sle thee? Jhe- 
su answeride, and seide to hem, I haue don 
220 work, and alle 3e wondren. Therfore 
Moyses 3af to 30u circumcisioun ; not for 
it is of Moyses, but of fadris; and in the 
23saboth 3e circumsididenY a man. If a man 
takith* circumcisioun in the saboth, that 
the lawe of Moyses be not brokun, han 3e 
indignacioun, ‘or wraththe*, to me, for I 
made al the man hool in the sabot? 
21 Nyle 3e deme vp the face, but deme® a 
25ri3tful dom. Therfore summe of Jerusa- 
lem seiden, Wher! this is not, whom the 
2¢ Jewis seken to® slee? and lo! he spekith 
opynly, and thei seyn no thing to him. 
Wher‘ the princes knewen verili, for this 
27is% Crist? But we witen this man, of 
whennis" he is; ‘forsoth whanne Crist 
schal come, no man wot of whennis® he 
asis. Therfore Jhesu criede in the temple, 
techinge hem’, and seyinge, And 3e witen 
me, and* of whennis I am!; and I cam 
not of my silf, but he is trewe that sente 
29me, whom 3e knowen not. I woot him, 
and if I schal seie for I ‘woot not him™, 
I schal be lyk to 30u, a lyere; and I woot 
him, for of him I am, and he sente me. 
30 Therfore thei sou3ten" for® to take him, 
and no man sente in to him hondis, for 


° wole GuNPOTIY. wile sx. P whether wx. 
t ynrijtwysenesse AGMNPQSTWXY. Whether x. 
Y circumciden 4 pr.m. G pr.m. NPQSTVWX. 
A pr. Mm. GMNPQSTWXY. 
f Whether wx. 
W prom. Y pr.m. 
° Om, K pr. m.°SX. 


g Om. kK. h whenne x. 


¢ ynriztfulnesse IK sup. ras. g. 
ffofo. & make o. 
techinge o. 
™ for to 1Kg. 


4 aio. 
ge Om 1 pr.m. gk pr.m. 
di whennis I am 3e knowen o, 


JOHN. 


4 whether trex. 
v kepith rv. 

Z take 4 pr.m. GMNPSIVY. toke T. 

¢ deme 3e 4GMNPOQSTV WX. 

i Om. 4 prom. GMNPQSTXY. 

lam, 3e knowen Nn. am, 3ee witen s sec.m. marg. 


k Om. b prom. e pr. m. hi. 


VIL. 17-—30. 


techyng, whethir it be of God, or Y 
speke of my silf. He that spekith of 1s 
hym silf, sekith his owne glorie; but he 
that sekith the glorie of hym that sente 
hym, is sothefast, and vnri3twisnesse® is 
not in hym. Whether Moises 3af not to19 
jou a lawe, and noon of 30u doith the 
lawe? What seken 3e to sle me? And20 
the puple answerde, and seide, Thou hast 
a deuel; who sekith to sle thee? Jhesus 21 
answerde, and seide to hem, Y haue don 
o! werk, and alle 3e wondren. Therfor 22 
Moises 3af to 30u circumcisioun ; not for 
it is of Moyses, but of the fadris; and 
in the sabat 3e circumciden® a man. If23 
af man take circumcicioun in the 
sabat, that the lawe of Moises be not 
brokun, han 3e indignacioun to me, for 
Y made’ als a man hool in the sabat ? 
Nile 3e deme aftir the face, but deme 3e 24 
a riz3tful' doom. Therfor summe of Je-25 
rusalem seiden, Whethir this is not he, 
whom the Jewis seken to sle? and lo!26 
he spekith opynli, and thei seien no 
thing to hym. Whether the princes 
knewen! verili, that this is Crist? Bute7 
we knowun this man, of whennus he is; 
but whanne Crist schal come, no man 
woot of whennus he is!’. Therfor Jhesus 28 
criede in the temple ‘techynge, and seidej, 
3e knowen me, and ‘3e knowen of 
whennus Y am; and Y cam not of my 
silf, but he is trewe that sente me, 
whom 3e knowen not. Y knowe hym,29 
and if Y seie thatk Y knowe hym not, 
Y schal be lijk to 30u, a liere; but! Y 
knowe hym, for of hym Y am, and he 
sente me. ‘Therfor thei sou3ten to™ take 30 
hym, and no man sette on hym hoondis, 
for his our cam not 3it. And many ofsi 


Ttrewly yr. 8 who GMNPOSTWXY. 
W for to AGMNPETVIVY., * Om. sx. 
aOm. x. » aftir 
© for to AGMNPQSTVWY, 

k Om. K pr.m. QF 


ad Whether 1x. 


™ wot hym not xy. 7” senten 7. 
€ circumcideden axgk@. circumcisiden ahi. f eny g. 
hristwiser. ‘tknowenk. #Om.o. J and said: 


1 but and a sec. m. Paced. 


VIL. 31-44. 


3ihis our cam not 3it. Sothli many of the 
cumpanye bileneden in to? him, and 
seiden, Whanne Crist schal come, wher 
he schal do mo tokenes, than this" doth ? 
32 Pharisees herden the cumpenye® of peple 
grucchinge of him thes thingis; and the 
princes oft Pharisees senten mynistris, 
33that thei schulden take him. Therfore 
Jhesu seide to hem, 3it a litel tyme I am 
with 3ou, and I go to the fadir, that sente 
34me. 3e schulen seke me, and 3e schulen 
not fynde; and where I am, 3e mown" not 
ascome. ‘Therfore the Jewis seiden to hem 
silf, Whidur ‘is this to goynge", for we 
schulen not fynde him? wher’ he is to 
goyinge® in to scateringe, ‘or distroyinge’, 
of hethene men, and ‘is to techinge” ‘he- 
36thene men? What is this word, which* 
he seide, 3e schulen seke me, and 3e schu- 
len not fynde; and where I am, 3e mown? 
37not come? Forsoth in the laste day of 
the grete feeste, Jhesu stood, and criede, 
seyinge, If ony man thirstith, come he to 
33me, and drynke he. He that bileueth in 
to» me, as the scripture seith, Flodis of 
quyke watir schulen flowe of his wombe. 
39Sothli he seide this thing of the Hooly 
Goost, whom men bileuynge in to him 
weren to takinge®; forsoth the Spirit was 
not 3it 3ouun, for Jhesus was not 3it glori- 
40fied. Therfore of that cumpanye, whanne 
thei hadden herde thes wordis of hin, thei 
4tseiden, This is‘ verili a prophete. Othere 
seiden, This is Crist. Forsoth summe 
seiden, Wher® Crist coineth fro Galilee ? 
42 Wher the scripture seith not, that of the 
seed of Dauith, and of the castel of Beth- 
leem, where Dauith was, Crist cometh ? 
43 And so dissencioun is maad in the 
44cumpany for him.  Forsothe summe of 
hem wolden take him, but no man sente® 


JOHN. 


257 


the puple bileueden in hym, and seiden, 
Whanne Crist schal come, whether he 
schal do mo tokenes, than tho that this 
doith ? Farisees™ herden the puples2 
musinge of hym these thingis; and the 
princis and" Farisees senten mynystris, 
to take hym. Therfor Jhesus seide to33 
hem, 3it a litil tyme Y am with 3o0u, and 
Y go to the fadir, that sente me. 3e34 
schulen seke me, and 3e schulen not 
fynde®; and where Y am, 3e may? not 
come. Therfor the Jewis seiden to hem 35 
silf, Whidur schal this gon, for we schu- 
len not fynde hym? whether he wole 
go in to the’ scateryng of hethene™4 men, 
and wole teche the hethene™? What is36 
this word, which he seide, 3e schulen 
seke me, and 3e® schulen not fyndet; and 
where Y am, je moun not come? But37 
in the laste dai of the greet feeste, Jhesus 
stood, and criede, and seide, If ony man 
thirstith, come he to me, and drynke. 
He that bileueth int me, as the scripture 3s 
seith, Floodis of quyk watir schulen 
flowe fro" his wombe. But he seide this 39 
thing of the Spirit, whom"" imen_ that 
bileueden in hym schulden take; for the 
Spirit was not 3it 3ouun, for Jhesus was 
not 3it glorified. Therfor of that cum-40 
panye, whanne thei hadden herd these 
wordis of hym, thei’ seiden, This‘Y is 
verili a prophete. Othere seiden, This 41 
is Crist. ‘But suinme™ seiden, Whether 
Crist cometh fro Galilee? Whether the 42 
scripture seith not, that of the seed of 
Dauid, and of the castel of Bethleem, 
where Dauid was, Crist cometh? Ther- 43 
for discencioun was maad among the 
puple for hym. For* summe of heim 44 
wolden haue take hym, but no man sette 
hondis on hym. Therfor the mynystris 45 


P Om. @. 4 whether wx. ‘that this 4 prim. GMNPQSTXY. 8 cumpanyes Fry. tand vinxy. 
tt may 4. Vis this to go GNer. is he this to go Mpswxy. Vv whether x. Whe this @. X go 
GMNPQSTWX. y Om. x. z is to teche GesTiv. to teche n. a the which acmMNnpetivy. that x. 
bmay mw. bb Om. sx. ¢take Gunpesrwxy. “Om. x. ¢ Whether w. f Whether wx. & sente to 


A prem MPT. 


m The Farisees k. 
4 Om. Ecegka. 4 the hethen o. 
U out of o. 


x But ig. And k. 


VOL. IV. 11 


a of apr.m.k pr. m. and the a sce.m. hi. 
t hethen men ceKpaehikag. 
uu whiche k pr.m. the whiche k sec. m. 


9° finde mc Kos pr.m. P moun plures. 
$Om.aa, Ftinde mex. tttoo, 


v Om. k. vy That this k. w And othere k. 


258 


4shondis on' him. Therfore the‘ mynistris 
eamen to the bischopis and Pharisees!, 
and thei seiden to hem, Whi brou3te 3e 
scnot him? The mynistris answeriden, 
Neuere man spak so, as this spekith. 
47 Therfore the Farisees answeriden to hem, 
48‘Wher and™ 3e be disceyned? wher® 
ony of the princes bileueden in to° him, or 
490f the Pharisees? But this eumpany of 
peple, that knew not the lawe, ben eursid. 
50 Nyeodeme seith to hem, he that cam to 
him in ny3te, that was oon of hem, 
51 Wher? oure lawe demeth a man, no? but" 
‘first it’ ‘haue herdt of him, and knowe 
szwhat he doth? ‘Thei answeriden, and 
seiden to him, Wher" and thou ert a man 
of Galilee? Seke thon scripturis, and se 
thou, for a prophete rysith not of Galilee. 
o3And thei turnedyn ajen, ech in to his 
hows. 
CAP. VIII. 
1 Forsothe Jhesu wente in to the monnt 
20f Olyuete. And erly eft’ he cam in to 
the temple; and al the peple cam to him; 
sand he sittinge tau3te hem. Sothli seribis 
and Pharisees bryngen* a womman take 
in auowtrie, and settiden* hir in they 
gmiddil, and seiden to him, Maistir, this 
5 woman is now takun in auoutrie. For- 
soth in the lawe Moyses comaundide vs 
for? to stoone siche; therfore what seist 
6thou? Sothli thei seiden this thing tempt- 
inge him, that thei my3teu aceuse him. 
Forsothe Jhesu bowinge ‘him silf doun’, 
wrot with the> fyngir in the erthe. 
7Sothly whanne thei ‘lastiden, o7 conty- 
nuede’, axinge him, he reiside him silf, 
and seide to hem, Which? of 3ou that is 
with oute synne, first sende a stoon in to 
shir, And® eft he bowinge doun! him 
osilf, wroot in the erthe. Sothli thei 
heeringe thes thingis, wenten awey oon 


ivpon 4 pr.m.GMNeerwy. k Om. 7, 
n whether x. © Om. IF prem. 
theere G pr.m. NerTx. % Whether ix. 
STWXY. senten NP, 
¢ Jasteden agupesTxyY. laften Niv. 


G Se. m. MNPQSTWXY. 


2 but if reh. 
© to vs vk. 


y the bishopis rkrsgk. 
hig. brouzten k pr. m. 


JOHN. 


1 to the Pharisees ary. 
P Whether Gx. 
v Om. G pr.m. 
Y to sw sec. m. to the Ww pr.m. 

d Fle a prem. GNestvwxy. He who mp. 


a And k. 
f for to 1Kghi. 


VII. 45—VIII. 9. 


camen to bischopisY and Farisees, and 
thei seiden to hem, Whi brou3ten 3e not 
hym? The mynystris answeriden, Ne-46 
uere man spak so, as this man spekith. 
Therfor the Farisees answeriden to hem, 47 
Whether 3e ben disseyued also? whether 48 
ony of the pryncis or of the Farisees 
bileueden in hym? But this puple, that49 
knowith not the lawe, ben cursid. Ny-so 
chodeme seith to hem, he that cam to 
hym bi ny3t, that was oon of hem, 
Whethir oure lawe demith a man, but*s1 
it haue first herde of hym, and knowe 
what he doith? Theil answeriden, andse 
seiden to hym, Whether thou art a man 
of Galilee also? Seke thon seripturis, and 
se thou, that a prophete risith not of 
Galilee. And thei turneden a3en, ech ins 
to his hous. 


CAP. VIII. 


But*® Jhesus wente in to the mount of 1 
Olyuete. And? eerli eft® he cam in to the2 
temple; and al the puple cam to hym; 
and he sat, and tau3te hem. And seribis3 
and Fariseis bryngen’ a womman takun 
in auoutrye, and thei settiden hir in the 
myddil, and seiden to hym, Maystir, this 4 
womman is now takun in auoutrie. And 5 
in the lawe Moises comaundide vs* tof 
stoone suche; therfor what seist thou? 
And thei seiden this thing temptyngeé 
hym, that thei my3ten accuse hym. And 
Jhesus bowide hym silf doun, and wroot 
with his fyngur in the erthe. And7 
whanne thei abiden® axynge® hym, he 
reiside hym silf, and seide to hem, He 
of 30u that is without symne, first caste 
a stoon in to hir. And eft he bowides 
hym silf, and wroot in the erthe. And9 
thei herynge these thingis, wenten awei 
oon aftir anothir, and thei bigunnen fro 


m Whether wx. Wher y pr. m. 
qOm. x. ‘batif x. | Sit first G prom. y. 

w ledden to GMNPQSTWXY. ~* setten GQ 
2 Om. sx. a doun him silf xy. vb his Nn. 
€ Om. @. f Om. 


bOm. x seem © Om. k prom. 
& abideden c. abedin Ep. 


4 bryngynge 
h askynge R. 


VIIL. 10——23. 


aftir an other, thei bigynnynge at® the 
eldere men; and Jhesu dwelte aloone, 
and the womman stondinge in the myd- 
1odel. Sothli Jhesu reisynge him silf seide 
to hir, Womman, wher ben thei that ac- 
cusiden thee? no man dampnede thee. 
1‘The whichi seyde, No man, Lord. Jhesu 
seith* to hir, Nether I schal dampne thee; 
go thou, and now! aftirward nyle thou ‘do 
12synne™. Therfore eft Jhesu spak to hem, 
seyinge, I am the" li3t of the world; he 
that sueth me, walkith® not in derknessis, 
13 but? schal haue the4 }i3t of lyf. Therfore 
the Pharisees seiden, Thou berist witness- 
ing of thi silf; thi witnessing is not 
14trewe. Jhesu answeride, and seide to hem, 
And if I bere witnessing of my silf, my 
Witnessing is trewe; for I woot fro™ 
1swhennis I cam, and whidur I go. For- 
sothe 3e witen not fro’ whennus I come, 
ort whidur I go. Forsoth 3e demen vp" 
16the fleisch, IY deme not ony man; and 
if I deme, my dom is trewe, for I am not 
aloone, but J and the fadir that sente me. 
17 And in 30ure lawe it is writun, for the 
18 witnessing of twei men is trewe*. I am, 
that bere witnessing of my silf, and the 
fadir that sente me, berith witnessing of 
19me. Therfore thei seiden to him, Wher 
is thi fadir? Jhesu answeride, Nether 3e 
witen, ‘or knowenY, me, nether 3e witen 
my fadir; ‘if 3e wisten me, perauenture 
20and 3e schulden wite my fader. Jhesu 
spak thes wordis? in the treserie, techinge 
in the temple; and no man took him, for 
2ihis our cam not 3it. Therfore eft Jhesu 
seide to hem, Lo! I go, and 3e schulen 
seche me, and je schuwen deye in 30ure 
synne; whidur I go, 3e mown not come. 
22 Therfore the Jewis seiden, Wher? he schal 
23sle him silf, for he seith, Whidur I go, 3e 
mowr not come? And he seide to hem, 
3e ben of bynethe, I am of aboue; 3e ben 


JOHN. 


259 


the! eldre men; and Jhesus dwelte aloone, 
and the womman stondynge in the myd- 
dil. And Jhesus reiside hym silf, and 10 
seide to hir, Womman, where ben thei 
that accusiden thee? no man_ hath 
dampned* thee. Sche seide, No man,11 
Lord. Jhesus seide ‘to Ai71, Nethir Y schal 
dampne thee; go thou, and now aftir- 
ward™ nyle thou synne more’. ‘Therfor 12 
eft Jhesus spak to hem, and seide, Y am 
the® li3t of the world; he that sueth me, 
walkith not in derknessis, but schal haue 
the®° }i3t of lijf. Therfor the Fariseisis 
seiden, Thou berist witnessyng? of thi 
silf; thi witnessyng is not trewe. Jliesus14 
answerde, and seide to hem, And if Y 
bere witnessyng of my silf, my witness- 
yng is trewe; for Y woot fro whennus 
Y cam, and whidur Y go. But 3e witen15 
not fro whennus Y cam, ne whidur Y go. 
For?? 3e demen aftir the fleisch, but Y deme 
no man; and if Y deme, my doom is16 
trewe, for Y am not aloone, but Y and the 
fadir that sente me. And in 3oure lawe17 
it is writun, that the witnessyng of twei4 
men is trewe. Y am, that bere witness-1s 
yng of my silf, and the fadir that sente 
me, -berith witnessyng of me. Therfori9 
thei seiden to hym, Where is thi fadir ? 
Jhesus answeride, Nether 3e knowen me, 
nethir 91 3e knowen my fadir; if 3e 
knewen me, perauenture 3e schulden 
knowe also my fadir. Jliesus spak these 20 
wordis in the tresorie, techynge in the 
temple; and no man took hym, for his 
our cam not 3it. Therfor eft ‘Jhesus 21 
seide to hem, Lo! Y go, and 3e schulen 
seke me, and 3e schulen die in j5oure 
synne; whidur Y go, 3e moun not 
come. Therfor the Jewis seiden, Whe- 22 
ther he schal sle hym silf, for he seith, 
Whidur Y go, 3e moun not come? And 23 
he seide to hem, 3e ben of bynethe, Y 


Sof acunrpostriwxy. 4 Om. cewxy. i Which rv. k said aeanpesywxy. |!Om. Nn. ™ synne 
GNeTXY. "Om. exy. © wandrith 7. P but he swerry. q Om. x. r of or. S of 9. tne Q. 
u aftir GMNPQSTWXY. ¥ forsothe I w pr. m. W two aX. * truthe Nn. y Om. x. z Om. Kk. 
a Whether sx. 

iOm.b. Kdemydeapr.m. %Om.1. ™aftirg. no more a pr.m. sa prom. bek prom.  ° Om. 
Ssec.m. © QOm.o. P wittenesseo. PP But foro. 4dtwor 499 ne Ebe. 


L12 


260 


of this world, I am not of this world. 
24 Therfore I seide to 3ou, For 3e sehulen 
dye in 30ure synnes; forsothe if 3e sehu- 
len not bileue for I am, 3e schulen deye 
25in 3joure synne>,. Therfore thei seiden to 
him, Who art thou? Jhesu seide to hem, 
The bigynnyng, ‘or the jirste of al thing’, 
26which* and® speke to 3ou. I haue many 
thingis for’ to speke, and deme% of 30, 
but he that sente me is sothfast; and I 
speke in the world thes thingis, that I 
27herde of him. And thei knewen not, for 
ashe seide his fadir God. Therfore Jhesu 
seith to hem, Whanne ‘3e han" reysid! 
mannis sone, thanne 3e schulen knowe, 
for I am, and of my silf I‘ do no thing; 
but! as my fadir tau3te me, I speke thes 
athingis. And he that sente me is with 
me, and Jefte ‘not me™ aloone; for I do 
enere® tho thingis, that ben plesaunt to 
sohim. Him spekinge thes thingis, many 
3imen® bileueden in to him. Therfore 
Jhesu seide to the? Jewis, that bileueden 
in to him, If 3e sehulen dwelle in my 
word, verili 3e schulen be my diseiplis ; 
szand 3e schulen knowe the treuthe, and the 
z3treuthe schal delyuere jou. Therfore 
the Jewis answeriden to him, We _ ben 
the seed of Abraham, and to 10 man we 
‘seruyden euere?; hou seist thou, 5e™ sehu- 
silen be free? Jhesu answeride to hein, 
Treuli, treuli, I sete to 30u, for eeh man 
that doth synne, is the’ seruaunt of 
sosynne. Sothli the seruaunt dwellith not in 
the hous, into withouten ende, the sone 
sc¢dwellith into withouten ende. Therfor 
if the sone schal delyuere jou, verili 3e 
37Sehulen be free. I woot for 3e ben Abra- 
hams sones, but 3e seken fort to sle me, 
ssfor my word takith not in 30u. And I 
speke tho thingis, that I sy3 at my fadir ; 
and 3e don tho thingis, that 3e sy3en at 
39 30ure fadir. The answeriden, and seiden 


b synnes AGMPQSTXY. 
eand Ir, f Om. sx. 
k Om. Nn. 1 for r. 

P hem, the airy. 


Mme not MXY. 
4 euere serueden axy. 


tT the rkb pr. m. g. 
Vv seide b. W plesaunt msabg. 


8 synne b pr. m. 
x dwelten k. 


JOHN. 


© or first of al thing a. Om. x. 
& to deeme G sec. m. MPI. 
D euermore AGMNPQSTWXAY. 
t For 3e 4 prea. GMNPQSTVIVXY. 


t synnes Eohiaf. 
y Om. 1. 


VII. 24——39. 


am of aboue; 3e ben of this’ world, Y 
am not of this world. Therfor Y seide to 24 
3ou, that 3e schulen die in 30ure synnes*; 
for if 3e bileuen not that Y am, 3e schu- 
len die in 3oure synne'. Therfor thei2zs 
seiden to hym, Who art thou? Jhesus 
seide to hem, The bigynnyng, whieh also 
speke to 30u. Y haue many thingis toa 
speke, and deme" of 30u, but he that 
sente me is sothefast; and Y speke in the 
world these thingis, that Y herde of 
hym. And thei knewen not, that he27 
clepide his fadir God. Therfor Jhesus 2s 
scithy to hem, Whanne 3e han areisid 
mannus sone, thanne 3e schulen knowe, 
that Y am, and of my silf Y do no thing ; 
but as my fadir tau3te me, Y speke these 
thingis. And he that sente me is with 29 
me, and lefte me not aloone; for Y do 
euermore tho thingis, that ben plesynge 
to hym. Whanne he spak these thingis, 30 
manye bileueden in hym. Therfor Jhe-31 
sus seide to the Jewis, that bileneden in 
hyin, If 3e dwellen* in my word, verili 
je schulen be my disciplis; and 3e sehu-32 
len knowe the treuthe, and theY treuthe 
schal make 30u fre. Therfor the Jewis 33 
answeriden’’ to hym, We ben the seed of 
Abraham, and we serueden neuere to 
man; hou seist thou, That 3e sehulen be 
fre? Jhesus ausweride to hem, Treuli, 34 
treuli, Y seie to 30u, eeh man that doith 
synne, is seruaunt of? synne. And the3s 
seruaunt dwellith not in the hows with 
outen ende, but the sone dwellith with 
outen ende. Therfor if the sone make36 
jou fre, verili 3e schulen be fre. Y woot 37 
that 3e ben Abrahams sones, but 3e 
seken to sle me, for my word takith not 
iu 30u. Y speke tho thingis, that Y say 38 
at my fadir; and 3e doen tho thingis, that 
je sayn at 30ure fadir. Thei answerden, 39 
and seiden to hym, Abraham is oure 


d the which 4 pro. GUNPOSTWXKY. 
h he hadde x. iareisid 4 pr m. GNQWY. 
° Om. 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTIVXY. 
sOm. w prom. t Om, sx. 


u to deme CEIKMOPQRSUXab sec. m. ceghikaf. 
y¥ sayden o, 2 tor. 


VIII. 40-—53. 


to him, Abraham is oure fadir. Jhesu 
seith to hem, If 3e ben the sones of Abra- 
ham, ‘do 3e" the werkis of Abraham. 
40Sothli now 3e seken to’ sle me, a man 
that haue spoken to 30u trenthe”, that I 
herde of God; Abraham dide not this 
41thing. 3e don the workis of 3oure fadir. 
And so thei seiden to him, We ben not 
born of fornycacioun; we han o fadir,God. 
42 Therfore Jhesu seide to hem, If God were 
joure fadir, sothli 3e schulden loue me; 
forsothe I ‘procedide, or cam forth*, of 
God, and cam; nether sothli I cam of 
43my silf, but he sente me. Whi knowen 
3e not my speche? for 3e mown not heere 
44my word. 3e ben of the fadir, the deuel, 
and 3e wolen do the desyris of 3oure fadir. 
He was a mansleere fro the bigynnyng, 
and in treuthe he stood not; for treuthe 
is not in him. Whanne he spekith aY 
lesinge, he spekith of his owne thingis ; 
45 for he is a lyiere*, and fadir of it. Sotheli 
for* I seye treuthe, 3e bileuen not to me. 
46 Who of 3ou schal reproue me of synne? 
if I seie treuthe, whi bilenen 3e not to 
47me? He that is of God, heerith the 
wordis of God; therfore 3e heeren not, 
48for 3e ben not of God. Therfore the 
Jewis answeriden, and seiden®, Where we 
seyn not wel, for thon art a Samaritan, 
49and hast a denel? Jhesu answeride, and 
seide, I hatte not a deuel, but I honoure 
my fadir, and 3e han yvnhonourid me. 
50 Forsothe I seke not my glorie; ther is, 
sithat ‘sekith, and demeth*. Treuli, treuli, 
I seie to 30u, if ony man schal kepe my 
word, he schal not ‘se, er ¢aaste*, deeth 
52in to with outen ende. Therfor the 
Jewis seiden, Now we han knowen, for 
thou hast a deuel. Abraham is deed, and 
the prophetis, and thou seist, If ony man 
schalf kepe my word, he schal not taaste 
s3deeth in to with outen ende. Wher 
thou ert more than oure fadir Abraham, 
that is deed, and the prophetis ben deede ; 


udoth x. Y for to 4 pr.m. GMNPQTIVY. 
G sup. ras. procedede x. Y Om. cupeswxy. 
wxy. »seidento him x. ¢ Whether x. 


AG pr.m. Nostxy. §& Whether wx. 


a Qm. A. 


JOHN. 


w the trenthe K pr.m.m. that 7. 
Z lyere, or lesynge mongere GTY. 
d seche and deme x. 


bmeni. © stode fadir B. 


261 


fadir. Jhesus seith to hem, If 3e ben 
the sones of Abraham, do 3e the* werkis 
of Abraham. But now 3e seken to sle 40 
‘me, a man? that haue spoken to 30u 
treuthe, that Y herde of God; Abraliam 
dide not this thing. 3e doen the werkis41 
of 3oure fadir. Therfor thei seiden to 
hym, We ben not borun of fornyeacioun ; 
we han o fadir, God. But Jhesus seith 42 
to hem, If God were 3oure fadir, sotheli 
3e schulden loue me; for Y passide forth 
of God, and cam; for nether Y cam of 
my silf, but he sente me. Whi knowen43 
3e not my speche? for 3e moun not here 
my word. 3e ben of the fadir, the deuel, 44 
and 3e wolen do the desyris of joure 
fadir. He was a mansleere fro the bi- 
gynnyng, and he stood not in treuthe; 
for treuthe is not in hym. Whanne he 
spekith lesyng, he spekith of his owne; 
for he is a liere, and fadir® of it. Butas 
for Y seie treuthe, 3e bileuen not to me. 
Who of 30u schal repreue me of synne ? 46 
if Y sey treuthe, whi bileuen 3e not to 
me? He that is of God, herith the47 
wordis of God; therfor 3e heren not, 
for 3e ben not of God. Therfor the4s 
Jewis answeriden, and seiden, Whether 
we seien not wel, that thou art a Sama- 
ritan, and hast a deuel? Jhesus an-49 
swerde, and seide, Y haue not a deuel, 
but Y onoure my fadir, and 3e han vn- 
hononrid me. For‘ Y seke not my glorye; 50 
there is he, that sekith, and demeth. 
Treuli, treuli, Y seie to 3ou, if ony man 5 
kepe my word, he schal not taste deth 
with outen ende. Therfor the Jewiss2 
seiden, Now we han knowun, that thou 
hast a deuel. Abraham is deed, and the 
prophetis, and thou seist, If ony man 
kepe my word, he schal not taste deth 
withouten ende. Whether thou art gret-53 
tere than oure fader Abrahain, that is 
deed, and the prophetis ben deed; whom 
makist thou thi silf? Jhesus answeride, 54 


X procedide, or wente forthe 
aif 4 prom. GMNPQST 


€ see GMQSIVY. taaste p. seen x. f Om. 


d Om. o. 


262 


s4whom makist thou thi silf? Jhesu an- 
sweride, If I glorifie my silf, my glorie 
is no3t; my fadir is, that glorifieth me, 
55 whom 3e seyn, for he is 3oure God. And 
3e han not knowen him, forsoth I haue 
knowe him; and if I schal® seye fori I 
‘woot not him", I shal be a lyere lyk to 
30u; but I woot him, and I kepe his word. 
56 Abraham, 3oure fader, ‘ful out ioyedel, ‘that 
he schulde se my day; and he sy3, and 
s7he™ ioyede. Therfore the Jewis seyden to 
him, Thou hast not 3it fifty 3eer, and hast 
ssthou seyn Abraham? Therfore Jhesu 
seide to hem, Treuli, treuli, I seye to 30u, 
bifore that Abraham was maad, I am. 
59 Therfore thei token stoones, that thei 
schulden caste in to him; sothli Jhesu 
hidde him, and wente out of the temple. 


COA LESS 
1 And Jhesu passinge, sy3 a man blynd 
2fro the birthe. And his" disciplis axiden 
him, Raby, ‘that is, Maistir®, who? syn- 
nede, this man 4, or his fadir and modir, 
sthat he schulde be born blynd? Jhesu 
answeride, Nether this man synnede, nei- 
ther his fadir and moder; but that the 
-awerkis of God be schewid in hym. It 
bihoueth me for’ to worche the werkis 
of him that sente me, the while thet day 
is; the ny3t schal come, whanne no man 
smmay worche. Hou longe I am in the 
6 world, I am the 1i3t of the world. Whanne 
he hadde" seid thes thingis, he spette in 
to erthe’, and made cley of the spotle, 
and leyde™, ‘or bawmede*, theY cley on his 
7y3en, and seide to him, Go, and be thou 
wayschen? in the watir, ‘or cisterne*, of 
Siloe, that is interpretid, Sent. Therfore 
he wente, and waischide’, and cam se- 
synge. And so nei3eboris, and thei that 
hadden seyn hym byfore, for he was a 
beggere, seiden, Wher this is not he, that 
gsat, and beggide? Othere men seiden, 


hOm. 6 prm. i Om. x. 


JOHN. 


VIL. 641k. 9, 


If Y glorifie my silf, my glorie is non3t 5 
my fadir, is that glorifieth me, whom 3e 
seien, that“ he is 3oure God. And 3e55 
han not knowun hym, but Y haue 
knowun hym; and if Y seie that Y 
knowe hym not, Y schal be a liere lich® 
to 30u; but Y knowe hym, and Y kepe 
his word. Abraham, 3oure fadir, gladide®* 56 
to se my dai; and he sai3, and ioyede. 
Thanne the Jewis setden to hym, Thous7 
hast not 3it fifti 3eer, and hast thou seien 
Abraham? Therfor Jhesus seide toss 
hem, Treuli, treuli, Y seie to 3ou, bifor 
that Abraham schulde be, Yam. Therfor 59 
thei token stonys, to caste to hym; but 
Jhesus hidde hym, and wente out of the 
temple. 


CAP. IX. 

And Jhesus passynge, sei3 a man 
blynd fro the birthe. And hise disciplis2 
axiden hym, Maistir, what‘ synnede this 
nan, or hise eldris, that he schulde be 
borun blynd? Jhesus answeride, Nether 3 
this man synnede, nether hise eldris ; 
but that the werkis of God be schewid 
in hyin. It bihoueth me to® worche the4 
werkis of hym that sente me, as longe 
as the dai is; the ny3t schal come, 
whanne no man may worche. As longes 
as Y am in the world, Y am the 1i3t of 
the world. Whanne he hadde seid theseé 
thingis, he spette in to the erthe, and 
made cley of the spotil, and anoyntide 
the cley on hise i3en, and seide to hym,7 
Go, and be thou waisschun in the watir 
of Siloe, that is to seie, Sent. Thanne 
he wente, and waisschide, and cam se- 
ynge. And so nei3boris, and thei" thats 
hadden seyn him bifor, fori he was a 
beggere, seiden, Whether this is not he, 
that sat, and beggide? Othere men9 
seiden, That this it is; othere" men seyden, 


k not hym not x. 1 gladide, or ful out ioyede acuNPstTwy. ™ Om. 4G 
MNPSWX¥Y. 2 Om. x. © Om. sx. P what a prom.cnery. 9Om.s. *Om. wprm. § Om. sx, 
tOm. ew. Om. a. V the erthe angsty pr.m. Xx. wbaumede x. ¥* Om. eswx. Y Om. sir, 


Zwasche nN. ®Om. wpswx. » wesh sx. 


44.Om.g. © lichi apr.m.bee. 


ee gloried o. 
hOm.o. 4bhthoo. i that 1. 


ii and othere k. 


fin wiche k sup. ras. who 1. 


© Whether mx. 


ffato. & for to 1K sec.m. 


IX, 10—22. 


For this it is; othere men forsothe, Nay, 
iobut it is a lyk? of¢ him. Forsoth he 
seide, For J am’. Therfore thei seiden 
to him, How ben thin y3en openyd ‘to 
iithee? He answeride, ‘The ilke® man, 
that is seid Jhesu, made cley, and anoynt- 
ide myn y3eu, and seide to me, Go thou 
to the watir, ‘or cisterne™, of Siloe, and 
waische; and I weute, and waischide', and 
igsy3. And thei seiden to him, Wher is he? 
13 He seith, I woot not. Thei leden* him that 
iswas blynd to the! Pharisees. Forsoth 
it was saboth, whanne Jhesu made cley, 
isand openyde his y3en. Eft Pharisees™ 
axiden him, how he hadde seyn. Sothly 
he seide to hem, He puttide" to me cley 
on the y3en; and I waischide®, and I se. 
i¢ Therfore summe of Pharisees? seiden, This 
man is not of God, for he kepith not the 
saboth. Othere men seyden, How may 
a man synnere do thes syngnys, ‘or my- 
raclist1? And dyuysioun was among hem. 
17 Therfore thei seyn eftsoone to the blynd 
man, What seist thou of him, that open- 
yde thin y3en? Sothli he seide, For he 
isis a prophete. ‘Therfore Jewis bileueden 
not of him, for he was blynd, and hadde 
seyn, til thei clepiden his fadir and modir, 
igthat hadde seyn’. And thei axiden hein, 
seyinge, ‘Is this 3oure sone, whom 3e 
seyn, for he is born blynd? hou therfore 
20seeth he now? His fadir and modir an- 
sweriden to hem, and seyden, We witen, 
for this is oure sone, and fort he is born 
2iblynd; sothli how he seeth now, we 
witen not¥, or who openyde his y3en, we 
witen not’; axe 3e him, he hath age, speke 
2zhe” of him silf. His fadir and modir 
seiden thes thingis, for thei dredden 
Jewis*; forsoth now the Jewis ‘hadden 
conspirid’, that if ony man knowlechide’ 
him Crist, he schulde be don* out of the 


JOHN. 


263 


Nai, but he is lije hym. But he seide, 10 
That* Y am. ‘Therfor thei seiden to 
hym, Hou ben thin izjen openyd? Hei 
answerde, Thilke man, that is seid Jhe- 
sus, made clei, and anoyntide myn i3en, 
and seide! to me, Go thou to the watre 
of Siloe, and wassche; and Y wente, and 
wasschide, and say. And thei seiden to 12 
hym, Where is he? He seide, Y woot 
not. Thei leden hym that was blynd tois 
the Farisees. And it was sabat, whanne 14 
Jhesus made cley, and openyde hise i3en. 
Eft the Farisees axiden hym, hou hes 
hadde seyn. And he seide to hem, He 
leide to me ecley on the i3en; and Y 
wasschide, and Y se. Therfor summe of i¢ 
the Fariseis seiden™, This man is not of 
God, that kepith not the sabat. Othere 
men seiden, Hou may a synful man do 
these signes. And strijf was" among 
hem. Therfor thei seien™ eftsoone to17 
the blynd man, What seist thou of hym, 
that openyde thin i3en? And he seide, 
That he is a prophete. Therfor Jewis® is 
bileueden? not of PP hym, that he was 
blynd', and hadde seyn, til thei clepiden 
his fadir and modir, that hadde seyn. 
And-thei axiden hem, and seiden, Is this 19 
joure sone, which34 3e seien was borun 
blynd ? hou thanne secth he now? His20 
fadir and modir ausweriden to hem, and 
seiden, We witen, that this is oure sone, 
and that he was borun blyud; but houai 
he seeth now, we witen neuer", or who 
openyde hise izen, we witen nere’; axe! 
je hym, he hath age, speke he of hym 
silf. His fader and modir seiden these 22 
thingis, for thei dredden the Jewis; for 
thanne the Jewis hadden conspirid, that 
if ony man knoulechide® hym Crist, he 
schulde be don out of the synagoge. 
Therfor his fadir and moadir seiden, That 23 


dlichy r. ¢tom,Om.x. fam he G sec.m. mpsw seem. € That x. )Om. wpswx. i wesh sx. 
k Jedden mporrivxy. 1Om.9. ™ the Pharisees G sec.m.mpw. © putt sx. °wesli sx. P the Phariseis 
AGNQTVXY. 4 Om. x. T seen hym Q. s This is m7xy¥. t Om. a. “nere MNPY. neuer QIWX. 


VYnete MNPIWY. neuer X. w Om. Tf. 


knowelechid w pr. m. 


m seiden to him k. 
4 born blynd 1c. 
taske rn. 4 knowleche Eba. 


k Om. a. lhe seide a. 
P bileuen g. PP to kr. 
cmuruxaekf. not k. 


x the Jewes 4G sec. m. MPWX. 
a maad G pr.m. NeTY. maad, or don G sec. m. 


” was maad bf. 
qq the whiche o. 


¥ conspiriden 9. z hadde 


9 the Jewis Ek. 
8 neuere 


no geiden 1. 
Yr nere ErqrsbchiaeS. not 1K. 


264 JOHN. 


axsynagoge. Therfore his fadir and modir 
seiden, For he hath age, axe 3e him. 
21 Therfore eftsoone thei clepiden the man, 
that was blynd, and seyden to him, 3yue 
thou glorie to God; we witen, for this 
2;man is a synner. Therfore he seide, If 
he is a synner, I woot not’; o thing I 
woot, for whanne I was blynd, now I se. 
26Therfore thei seiden to him, What dide 
he to thee? how openyde he thin y3en ? 
27 He answeride to hem, I seide to 30u now, 
and 3e herden; what wolen 3e eftsoone 
heere ? wher® and 3e wolen be maad his 
28disciplis ? TTherfore thei ‘wariden, or4 
cursiden, him*, and seiden, Be thou his 
29 disciple; we ben disciplis' of Moyses. We 
witen, for God spak to Moyses; forsoth 
we witen no3t this, of whennis he is. 
30 The ilke man® answeride, and seide to 
hem, Forsoth in this thing is wonderful, 
that’ 3e witen not of whennis he is, and 
3ithe hath opened myn y3en. Sothli we 
witen, for God heerith not synneris', but 
if ony mank is worshiper of God, and doth 
32 his wille, hym he heerith. Fro the world 
it is not herd, that ony man openyde the 
33y3en of a blynd bornt man; no™ but® 
this were of God, he my3te not do ony 
sithing. Thei answeriden, and seiden to 
him, Thou art al boren in synnes, and 
‘techist thou® vs? And thei castiden? ‘out 
sohim4, Jhesu herde, for thei ‘han cast? 
‘out him; and whanne he hadde founden 
him, he seide to him, Bileuest thou in to 
3¢the sone of God? He answeride, and 
seide, Lord, who is he, that I bileue in 
3s7to him? And Jhesu seide to him, And 
thou hast seyn him, and he it is, that 
sespekith with thee. And he seide’, Lord, 
I bileue. And he fallinge doun, worship- 
39ide him. Therfore Jhesu seide to him, 
I cam in to this world, in to dom, that 
thei that seen not, se, and thei that seen, 


b nener 4 pr.m™. G sec. m. TX. nere G prem, MNPQWY. 


f the disciplis & sec.m. mpsw., 8 Om. x. » for o. 
Gpr.m TY. ™Om. x. © but if x. 


A pr.m. MNPT. han casten gy. hadde caste r. 


Vv for we k pr.m. 
2 this thing k pr.m. 
ohik. © seide to him k. 


W not rkhi nere Eqrbegaf. 
abe x. 


fseith 1. & the kf. 


i synneris, or synful men AGNT. 
© thou techist xy. 
8 seith QTrIVXY. 


x and now k. 
b a worschiper Eka. 
hing. 


IX. 23-—39. 


he hath age, axe 3e hym. Therfor eft- 24 
soone thei clepiden the man, that was 
blynd, and seiden to hym, 3yue thou 
glorie to God; we’ witen, that this man 
is asynnere. Thanne he seide, If he is25 
a synnere, Y woot neuer”; o thing Y 
woot, that whanne Y was blynd, now* Y 
se. Therfor thei seiden to hym, What 26 
dide he to thee? hou openyde he thin 
isen? He answerde to hem, Y seide to27 
jou now, and 3e herden; what wolen 3e 
eftsoone here? whether 3e wolen be 
maad hise discyplis? Therfor thei curs- 28 
iden hym, and seiden, Be thou his disci- 
ple; weY ben disciplis’Y of Moises. We29 
witen, that God spak to Moises; but we 
knowen not this, of whennus he is. 
Thilke man answeride, and seide to hem, 30 
For in this? is a wondurful thing, that 
3e witen not, of whennus he is, and he 
hath openyd myn ijen. And we witen, 31 
that God herith not synful men, but if 
ony ‘man is* worschypere® of God, and 
doith his wille, he herith hym. Fro thes 
world it is not herd, that ony man open- 
yde the izen of a blynd borun man; 
but this® were of God, he my3t not do33 
ony thing. Thei answeriden, and seiden 34 
to hym, Thou art al borun in synnes, 
and techist thou vs? And thei putten? 
hym out. Jhesus herd, that thei hadden 3s 
putte hym out; and whanne he hadde 
founde hym, he seide to hym, Bileuest 
thou in the sone of God? He answerde, 36 
and seide*®, Lord, who is he, that Y bi- 
leue in hyin? And Jhesus seide to hy, 37 
And thou hast seyn him, and he it is, 
that spekith with thee. And he seidef,38 
Lord, Y bylene. And he felle donn, and 
worschipide hym. Therfore Jhesus seide 39 
to hym, Y cam in to this’ world, ‘in to" 
doom, that thei that seen not, see, and 
thei that seen, be maad blynde. And 40 


dOm. wpswx. ¢€ Om. a. 
kOm.e. !0Om. 
r han castid 


e whether wx. 
P casten sx. 4 him out xy. 
t see goostly Q.  ~ 


y for we b pr.m. 


yy the disciplis o. 
bb openeth o. 


¢ this man 1Q sec.m. 4 puttiden 


IX. 4o—-X. 12. 


4obe maad blynde. And" summe of the 
Pharisees herden, that weren with him, 
and thei seiden to him, Wher’ and we 

atben blynde? Jhesu seide to hem, If 3e 
weren blynde, 3e schulden not haue synne; 
but now 3e seyn, For we seen, 3oure 
synne dwellith. 


CAP. X. 

1 Treuli, treuli, I seie to jou, he that 
cometh not in by the dore in to the fold of 
the scheep, but stizjeth vp by another weye, 
2is* ny3t thef and day thef. Forsothe 
he that entrith by the dore, is* the schep- 
sherde of the scheep. To this the porter 
openeth, and the scheep heeren his vois, 
and he clepith his owne scheep by name, 
4and ledith out hem. And whanne he hath 
sent out his owne scheep, he goth bifore 
hem, and the scheep suwen him; for thei 
sknowen his vois. Sothli thei suwen not 
an’ alien, but fleen fro him; for thei han 
e6not knowen the voys of alyens. Jhesu 
seide to hem this prouerbe; forsoth thei 
7knewen not what he spak to hem. Ther- 
fore Jhesu seide to hem eftsoone, Treuli, 
treuli, I seie to jou, for J am the’ dore 
sof the? scheep. Alle how manye euere 
camen>, ben® ny3t theues and day theues, 
gbut the scheep herden not hem. I am 
the dore. If ony man schal entre by me, 
he schal be saued ; and he schal go yn, and 
schal go out, and he schal fynde lesewis. 
10 A ni3t theef cometh not®, nof but that he 
stele, and sle, and leese; I cam, that 
thei haue lyf, and haue more plenteuously. 
11I am a good schepherde®; a good schep- 
herde" 3yueth his ‘soule, that is, his lyf’, 
izfor his scheep. Forsoth a ‘marchaunt, 
or hyred hyne*, and that is not schep- 
herde!, whos ‘ben not the scheep™ his 
owne, seeth a wolf comynge, and he leeu- 
eth, ‘or forsaketh", the scheep, and fleeth ; 
and the wolf rauyschith, and disparplith, 

v Whether x. 


2 Om. kK. 
BINPSW. 
f Om. aps prim. x. 


& herde 9. h hirde 9. 


JOHN. 


Whe is GMNPQSTIWXY. 
b camen bifore me N. camen biside me Q. 
ihjf asnpesw. soule x. 


265 


summe of the Faryscis herden, that 
weren with hym, and thei seiden to 
hym, Whether we ben blynde? Jhesus 41 
seide to hem, If 3e weren blynde, 3e 
schulden not haue synne; but now 3e 
seien, That we seen, 3oure synne dwellith 
stille. 


CAP. X. 


Treuli, treuli, Y seie to 3ou, he thati 
cometh not in by the dore in to the 
foold of scheep, but stieth bi another 
weie, is a ny3t theef and a dai theef. But 2 
he that entrith bi the dore, is the scheep- 
herde of the scheep. To! this the porters 
openeth, and the scheep heren his vois, 
and he clepith his owne scheep bi name, 
and ledith hem out. And whanne he4 
hath don* out his owne scheep, he goith 
bifor hem, and the scheep suen hymn; for 
thei knowun his vois. But thei suen nots 
an alien, but fleen from hym; for thei 
han not knowun the vois of aliens. Jhe-6 
sus seide to hem this prouerbe; but thei 
knewen not what he spak to hem. Ther-7 
for Jhesus seide to hem eftsoone, Treuli, 
treuli, Y seie to 3ou, that! Y am the™ 
dore of the scheep. As many as han™8 
come, weren ny3t theues and day theues, 
but the scheep herden not hem. Y amo 
the dore. If ony man schal entre bi me, 
he schal be sauyd; and he schal go ynne, 
and schal go out, and he schal fynde 
lesewis. A ny3t theef cometh not, but io 
that he stele, sle, and leese; and Y cam, 
that thei han lijf, and haue more plen- 
teousli. I am a good scheepherde; aul 
good scheepherde 3yueth his lijf for hise 
scheep. But an hirid hyne, and that is12 
not the® scheepherde, whos ben not the 
scheep his owne, seeth a wolf eomynge, 
and he leeneth the scheep, and fleeth; 
and the wolf rauyschith, and disparplith 
the scheep. And the hirid hyne fleeth, 13 


zOm.Q. 3#Om. 
e Om. NW sec.m, 
k marchaunt x. Ja 


xheisn. yY Om. G prim.y. 
© ben thei t. ben the y. 


sheperd c sec. m. w. hirde 9. ™ the shepe ben not gwxy. 8 Om. aswx. 


1 And to k pr.m. 
VOL. IV. 


k don, ether sent K see.m. 


1 Om. 1k. 
Mm 


Mar "werent. 9 Om. 1 prim. 


266 JOHN. 


13‘07 scaterith®, the scheep. Forsoth the 
marchaunt fleeth, for he is ‘a marchaunt?, 
and it perteyneth not to him of the 

i4scheep. I am a good schepherde’, and I 
knowe my scheep, and my scheep knowen 

1sine. As my fadir hath knowun me, and 
I knowe the fadir; and I putte my lyf for 

1smy scheep. And I haue othere scheep, 
that ben not of this folde, and it bihoueth 
me for to ‘leede hem to*, and thei schulen 
heere my vois; and it schal be maad o fold 
17and o schepherde'. Therfore the fadir 
loueth me, for I putte my soule, that eft- 
1ssoone I take it. No man takith it fro 
me, but I putte it fro my silf. I haue 
power for" to putte it, and IY haue power 
for” to take it eftsoone*. This maunde- 
19ment I haue take of my fadir. And so 
dissencioun was maad among the Jewis 
20for thes wordis. Forsoth manye of hem 
seiden, He hath a deuel, and maddith, ‘or 

21 weaxith woody; what heeren 3e him? Othere 
men seiden, Thes wordis beth? not of @ 
man hauynge a fend*. Wher? a® deuel 
may opene the y3en of blynde men? 

22 Forsothe newe fcestis of halwing of the 
temple ben maad in Jerusalem, and it 

23was wyntir. And Jhesu walkide in the 

24temple, in the porche of Salomon. Ther- 
fore Jewis euyyrowneden him, and seiden 
to him, Hou longe dost thou a wey oure 
soule? if thou ert Crist, seie to vs opyn- 
gsly*. Jhesu answeride to hem, I speke to 
jou, and 3e bileuen not; the workis that 
I do in the name of my fadir, thes beren 

26 Witnessing® of me. But and 3e bileuen 

27not, for 3e ben not of my scheep. My 
scheepe heeren my vois, and I knowe hem, 

agand thei suen me. And I 3yue to hem 
euerelasting lyf, and thei schulen not 
perische in to with outen ende, and ony 
man schal not rauysche hem of! myn 
2ohond. That thing that my fadir 3af to 
me, is more than alle; therfore no man 


X. 13—29. 


for he is an hirid hyne, and it parteyn- 
eth not to hym of the scheep. Y am ais 
good scheepherde, and Y knowe my 
scheep, and my scheep knowen me. Asis 
the fadir hath knowun me, Y knowe the 
fadir; and Y putte my lijf for my scheep. 
Y haue othere scheep, that ben not of16 
this foolde, and it bihoueth me to brynge 
hem togidir, and thei schulen here my 
vois; and it? schal be maad o foolde and 
o scheepherde. Therfor the fadir lou-17 
eth me, for Y putte my lijf, that eftsoone 
Y take it. No man takith it fro me,1s 
but Y putte it of my silf. Y haue power 
to putte it, and Y haue power to take it 
agen. This manndement Y haue takun 
of my fadir. Eft dissencioun was maad 19 
among the Jewis for these wordis. And 20 
many of hem seiden, He hath a deuel, 
and maddith; what heren 3e hym ? 
Othere men seiden, These wordis ben not 21 
of a man that hath a feend’. Whether 
the devel may opene the izen of blynde14 
men? But the feestis of halewyng of 22 
the temple weren maad in Jerusalem, 
and it was wyntir. And Jhesus walkide 2s 
in the temple, in the porche of Salomon. 
Therfor the Jewis camen aboute hym, 24 
and seiden to hym, Hou long takist thou 
awei oure soule? if thou art Crist, seie 
thou to vs opynli. Jhesus answerde to25 
hem, Y speke to 30u, and je bileuen not; 
the werkis that Y do in the name of my 
fadir, beren witnessyng" of me. But 3e26 
bileuen not, for 3e ben not of my scheep. 
My scheep heren my vois, and Y knowe 27 
hem, and thei suen me. And Y 3yue to' 28 
hem euerelastynge lijf, and thei schulen 
not perische with outen ende, and noon 
schal ranysche hem fro* myn_hoond. 
That thing that my** fadir jaf to me, is 29 
more than alle thingis; and no man may 
rauysche fro my fadris hoond. Y and 30 
the fadir ben oon. Thet Jewis token vps 


°Om.9x. Pmarchaunt ny. Qhirdeg. tthe cwnpestwx. 8 Om. sx. ledeheme. + hirde g. 
u Om, sx. vOm. w. w Om. sx. X ajein, or efisoone GNVY. ajen MPQSIVX. y Om. ex. 
2 ben aGMNPosTYWxyY. 4deuely. > Whether wx. ¢thee. 4 pleynly, or opynly acunrostwy. 
pleynly x. © wittenesse rxy. f out of 9. 


Pther tr, 4Qdenel o. 494 blind born k pr.m. 


Yr witnesse o. 


trOm.c. Soutofo. 88the k. t Ando. 


X. 30——XI. 4. 


30may rauysche fro my fadris® hond. ‘I and 
3ithe fadir® ben o thing. Jewis token vp 
stoones, for! to stoone hym ‘to the deeth*. 
32Jhesu answeride to hem, I haue schewid 
to 3ou manye goode! werkis of my fadir, 
for which werk of lem stoonen 3e me? 
33 The Jewis answeriden to him, We stoonen 
‘not thee™ of good work, but of blas- 
phemye, and for thou, sithen thou art a 
34man, makist thi silf God. Jhesu answer- 
ide to hem, Wher® it is not writun in 
3oure lawe, For I seide, 3e ben goddis ? 
35 If he seide hem goddis, to whiche® the 
word of God is maad, and the scripture, 
36 which? the fadir halwide, and sente in to 
the world, may not be vndon, and 3e 
seyn, for I blaspheme, for I seide, I am 
37Goddis sone? If I do not the workis of 
assmy fadir, nyle 3e bileue to me; sothli 
if I do, thou3 3e wolen not bilene to me, 
‘bilete 3e1 to the workis; that 3e knowe 
and bileue, for the fadir is in me, and I 
39in the fadir. Therfore thei sou3ten for’ 
to take him, and he wente out of her 
4ohondis. And he wente eftsoone ouer 
Jordan, in to that place where John was 
first’ baptisinge, and het dwelte there. 
41And manye camen to him, and seiden, 
Forsoth" John dide no ‘signe, or myracle’; 
42forsothe alle thingis what euere* John 
seide of this, weren sothe. And manye 
bileueden in*'to him. 


CARs XI. 


1 Forsothe ther was sum’ syk man, La- 
zarus of Bethanye, of the castel of Mary 
2and Martha, his sistris. Forsoth Mary it 
was, which? anoyntide? the Lord with 
oynement, and wipte his feet with hir 
heeris, whos brother Lazarus was syk. 
3Therfore his sistris senten to him, sey- 
inge, Lord, lo! he’ whom thou louest, is 
asyk. Forsoth Jhesu heeringe seide® to 


JOHN. 267 


stoonys, to stoone hym. Jhesus answerde 32 
to hem, Y haue schewide to 3ou many 
good werkis of my fadir, for which werk 
of hem stonen 3e me? The Jewis an-33 
swerden to hym, We stoonen thee not 
of good werk, but of blasfemye, and for 
thou, sithen thou art a man, makist thi 
silf God. Jhesus answerde to hem,34 
Whether it is not writun in 3oure lawe, 
That Y seide, 3e ben goddis? Yf hess 
seide that thei weren goddis, to whichet 
the word of God was maad, and scrip- 
ture" may not be vndon, thilke that the3c 
fadir hath halewid, and hath sent in to 
the’" world, 3e” seien, That ‘thou blasfem- 
est’, for Y seide, YX am Goddis sone? 
Yf Y do not the werkis of my fadir, 37 
nyle 3e bileue to me; but if Y do, thou3 38 
3e wolen not bileue to me, bileue 3e to 
the werkis; that 3e knowe and bileue, 
that the fadir is in me, and Y in the 
fadir. Therfor thei souzten to take hyn, 39 
and he wente out of her hondis. And he 40 
wenteY eftsoone ouer Jordan, in to that 
place where Joon was firste baptisynge, 
and he dwelte there. And manye camen 41 
to hym, and seiden, For* Joon dide no 
myracle?; and alle thingis what euer 42 
Joon seide of this, weren sothe. And 
many bileueden in’ hym. 


CAP. XI. 


And ther was a sijk man, Lazarus of} 
Bethanye, of the castel of Marie and 
Martha, hise sistris. And it was Marye,2 
which anoyntide the Lord with oyne- 
ment, and wipte hise feet with hir 
heeris, whos brother Lazarus was sijk. 
Therfor hise sistris senten to hym, and3 
seide, Lord, lo! he whom thou louest¢, 
is sijk. And Jhesus herde, and seide to4 


& fadir ox. h And the fadir and Y e. i Om. sx. k to deth GMNPQSTYW sec.m. XY. 1!1Om, w. 
m thee not mperxy. ™ Whether wx. © whom GwNnpostTwxy. Pthewhichr. 4% beleueth x. ™Om. sx. 
®Om. x. tOm.eg. 4% for sothely scanpw sec.m. x. for Q. sothly T. Vsigne x. W euere thingis Q. 
=Om.ow. Yaow pr.m. %the whiche wporwxy, *oyntede x. bOm.@ ©¢seith n. 

twhom1. thescripturek. thiso. Vand3ebscc.m. Ww Y blasfemeb sec.m.g. * that I 
Ipr.m.Qq.  Ywente outs. 2% Thatr smyraclis1. >in to K sec. m.s pr.m. bsec.m.eg. © the 
whiche 0. ¢¢ Jouedist k pr.m. 


Mm Q 


268 


hem, This sicknesse is not to the deeth, 
but for the glorie of God, that Goddis*4 
ssone be glorified bi® itf. Sothli Jhesu 
louede Martha, and hir sistir Marye, and 
é6Lazarus. Therfore as Jhesu herde, for? 
he was syk, thanne sothli® he dwellide in 
7the same place tweye! dayes. Therof* 
aftir thes thingis he seide to his disciplis, 
8Go we ett in to Judee. Disciplis! seyen 
to him, ‘Raby, o7 maistir™, now the Jewis 
sou3ten for" to stoone thee, and eft ‘thou 
ggost® thidur? Jhesu answeride, Wher? 
ther ben not twelue ouris of 1 the day ? 
‘If ony man® ‘schal wandre* in the day, 
he hirtith not, for he seeth the li3t of 
Sothli if he schal wandre 
in thet ny3t, he hirtith, for li3t is not in 
uhim. ‘He seith thes thingis', and aftir 
thes thingis he seith to hem, Lazarus, 
oure frend, slepith, but I go for’ to reyse 
izhim fro slepe. Therfore his disciplis 
seiden, Lord, if he slepith’, he schal be 
izsaf. Forsothe Jhesu hadde seid of his 
deeth; but thei gessiden, that he seide 
140f theY slepinge of sleep. Thanne ther- 
fore Jhesu seide to hem opynli, Laza- 
isrus is deed; and J? enioye for 30u, that 3e 
beleue, for? J was not there; but go we 
isto him. Therfore Thomas, that is seid 
Didymus, seide to euen disciplis, And go 
17we, that we deye with him. And so 
Jhesu cam, and fond him hauynge now 
isfoure dayes in the graue. Sothli Bethanye 
was bisydis Jerusalem, as fiftene furlongis. 
19 Forsothe manye of Jewis camen to Marie 
and Martha, for to comforte hem of¢ her 
20 brother. Therfore as Martha herde, for 
Jhesu cam, she renneth to him; Marie 
2iforsothe sat at hom. Therfore Martha 
seide to Jhesu, Lord, if thou haddist be 
a2 here, my brother hadde not be deed. But 
and now I woot, that what enere thingis 
thou schalt axe of God, God schal 3yue to 


1othis world. 


dmannus Mparwxy. in txy. fhim erxy. 
therof r. 1 The disciplis G sec. m. apsw. 
P Whether x. in ns. + Whosoeuere x. 
¥ Om. sx. Wslepew. Y Om. aGMnposTWxy. 


& Om. cab. f And Jhesus o. 
i eleuene u. the euene k. 


d two 1, 
hh seide k. 


& that 9. 
m Maistir s. Rabi x. 

8 walkith n. schal go r. 
z therfore I n. 


f wandreth o. 


Japostlis a. * to Martha 1. 


JOHN. XI. 5—22. 


hem, This syknesse is not to the deth, 
but for the glorie of God, that mannus 
sone be glorified bi hym. And Jhesus; 
louyde Martha, and hir sistir Marie, and 
Lazarus. Therfor whanne Jhesus herde, ¢ 
that he was sijk, thanne he dwellide in 
the same place twei‘ daies. And after, 
these thingis he seide to hise disciplis, 
Go we eft in to Judee. The disciplis, 
seien to hym, Maister, now the Jewis 
sou3ten for® to stoone thee, and eft goist 
thou thidir? Jhesus* answerde, Whe-9 
ther ther ben not twelue ouris of the 
dai? If ony man wandre® in the dai, 
he hirtith? not, for he seeth the li3t of 
this world. But if he wandre®% in the jo 
ni3t, he stomblith, for li3t is not in® him. 
He seith®" these thingis, and aftir these }, 
thingis he seith to hem, Lazarus, oure 
freend, slepith, but Y go to reise hym fro 
sleep. Therfor hise disciplis seiden, Lord, ,2 
if he slepith, he schal be saaf. Buty, 
Jhesus hadde seid of his deth; but thei 
gessiden, that he seide of slepyng of 
sleep. Thanne therfor Jhesus seide toy, 
hem opynli, Lazarus is deed; and Y haue 1; 
loye for 30u, that 3e bileue, for Y was 
not there; but go we to hym. Therfor i¢ 
Thomas, that is seid Didymus, seide to 
euen! disciplis/, Go we also, that we dien 
with hym. And so Jhesus cam, and; 
foond hym hauynge thanne foure daies 
in the graue. And Bethany was bisidis 1, 
Jerusalem, as it were fiftene furlongis. 
And many of the Jewis camen to Mary ig 
and Martha‘, to coumforte hem of her 
brothir. Therfor as Martha herde, that 
Jhesu cam, sche ran to hym; but Mary 
sat at home. Therfor Martha seide to 
Jhesu, Lord, if thou haddist be here, 
my brother hadde not be deed, Butg 
now Y woot, that! what euere thingis!! 
thou schalt axe of God, God schal 3yue 


hOm. 7. itwoarpewxy. k Therfore 
2 Om. x. © gost thou alii. thou x. 
t Om. x. ™ Thes th. he seith x. 
athat x. bOm. sx. ¢on Xx. 


& offendith o, 8&8 wandretho. 45 toa. 


10m. k pr.m. 1 thenge o. 


XI. 23——-39. 


23thee. Jhesus seitl to hir, Thi brother 
24Schal ryse ajen. Martha seith to him, I 
woot, for he schal ryse aj3en in the a3en- 
2srysing in the laste day. Jhesu seith to 
hir, I am a3enrisyng and lyf; he that. 
bileueth in? me, 3he, if¢ he schal be deed, 
26schalf lyne; and ech that lyueth, and 
bileueth in* me, schal not deie with! onten 
a7ende. Bileuyst thon this thing? She* 
seith to him, ‘Forsothe, o7 3he', Lord, I 
haue bileuyd, for thou art Crist, the sone 
of quyk™ God, that hast come in to this 
23 world. And whanne she hadde seide this 
thing, she wente, and clepide Marie, hir 
sistir, in silence, ‘or stilnesse, seyinge, 
The maistir cometh, and clepith thee. 
29 She, as she herde, roos anon, and cam to 
sxohim. Sothli Jhesu cam not 3it in to the 
castel, but he was 3it in that place, wher 
31 Martha hadde comen ajens him. Ther- 
fore the Jewis that weren with hir in the 
hous, and comfortiden hir, whanne thei 
sijen Marie, for soone she roos, and wente 
out, sueden hir, seyinge, For she goth to 
s2the graue, for? to wepe there. Forsothe 
Marie, whanne she hadde seyn wher Jhesu 
was, seynge him felde’ to his feet, and 
seide to him, Lord, if thon haddist be here, 
33my brother hadde not be deed. ‘Therfore 
as’ Jhesu si3 hir wepynge, and the Jewis 
that weren with hir wepinge, he made 
34noyse in spirit, and troublide him silf, and 
seide, Wher han 3e putt him? Thei seyen 
35to him, Lord, come and se. And Jhesu 
s6wepte*’. Therfore the Jewis seiden, Lo! 
37hou he louede him. Forsothe summe of 
hem seiden, Whert this man that openyd 
the y3en of the born blynde", mijte not 
38inake that and this deiede not? Ther- 
forev Jhesu eft makynge noyse in him 
silf, cam to the graue. Forsothe ther 
was a denne, and a stoon was put theron. 
s9Jhesu seith, Take 3e" awey the stoon. 


din to 4 pr.m. GMNPESTWxY. © thou3 @. 


NPQSTWXY. 
n Om. ex. P Om. x. 
VY Therfore eftsones @. 


q fell doun 7. 
w Om. x. 


m Om. ciKae. 1% is come f. 
t Sire 1 sup. ras. tt Om. rhi. 
Yhethis1. % doel 1 sup. ras. 


© ros sag. 


f lie schal ow pr.m. xy. 
lin to with prem. GMNPQOSTWXY. 
r Therfore Q. 


P to R. 
4 mournide 1 sup. ras. 


JOHN. 269 


to thee. Jhesus seith to hir, Thi brother 2: 
schal rise ajen. Martha seith to hym, 21 
Y woot, that he schal rise ajen in the 
a3en risyng in the laste dai. Jhesus 25 
seith to hir, Y am a3en risyng and lijf; 
he that bileneth in me, 3he, thou3 he be 
deed, he schal lyue; and ech that lyneth, 26 
and bileueth in me, schal not die with 
outen ende. Bileuest thou this thing ? 
Sche seith to hym, 3he, Lord, Y haue27 
bileued, that thou art Crist, the sone of 
the™ lyuynge God, that hast come in to 
this world. And whanne sche hadde2s 
seid this thing, sche wente, and clepide 
Marie, hir sistir, in silence, and seide, 
The maister cometh", and clepith thee. 
Sche, as sche herd, aroos® anoon, and cam 29 
tohym. And Jhesus cam not 3it ‘in toP 30 
the castel, but he was 3it in that‘ place, 
where Martha hadde comun aj3ens* hym. 
Therfor the Jewis that weren with hir in31 
the hous, and coumfortiden hir, whanne 
thei sayn Marie, that sche roos swithe’, 
and wente out, thei sueden hir, and 
seiden, For sche goith to the graue, to 
wepe there. But whanne Marie was3z 
comun where Jhesus was, sche seynge 
hym felde doun to his feet, and seide to 
hym, Lord, if thon haddist be here, my 
brother hadde not be deed. And' ther-33 
for whanne Jhesu sai3 hir wepyng, and 
the Jewis wepynge that weren with hir, 
he ‘made noise" in spirit, and troblide 
hym silf, and seide, Where han 3e leid 34 
hym? Thei’ seien” to hym, Lord *, 
come, and se. And Jhesus wepte. Ther- 3? 
for the Jewis seiden, Lo! hou he louede 
hym. And summe of hem seiden, Whe- 37 
thir this man that openyde the ijen of 
the borun blynde man, my3te not make 
that thisY schulde not die? Therforss 
Jhesus eft makynge noise” in hym silf, 
cam to the graue. And there was a 


galg. hintoa prim. cu 
k Martha Q sec. 1m. 1 Forsothe x. m Om. v. 
Sweep x. t Whether sx. 4% blynde man @. 


Qthe cua. ‘tox. agen toa pr.m.  § anoon I. 
v And thei i. Wseiden ghik. * Sire 1 sup. ras. 


270 
Martha, the sistir of him that was deed, 
seith to him’, Lord, he stynkith now, 
so sothli he is of foure dayes’?. Jhesus seith 
to hir, ‘Wher I haue? not seid to thee, for 
if thou schalt bileue, thou schalt se the 
aighorie of God? Therfore thet tooken a 
wey the stoon. Forsothe the y3en reysid 
vpward, Jhesu seide, Fadir, I do thank- 
42yngis to thee, for thou herdist me; for- 
soth I wiste, for thou euere’ heerest me, 
but for the peple that stondith* aboute, I 
seide, that thei bilene, for thou hast sent 
same, Whanne he hadde seid thes thingis, 
he criede with greet? vois, Lazarus, come 
44‘thou out®. And anoon he that was deed, 
cam forth, bounden the hondis and feetf 
with bondis, and his face was boundun 
with a sudarie, or sweting clotht. Jhesu 
seith to hem, Vnbynde 3e him, and ‘suffre 
453e ‘go awey', Therfore manye of the 
Jewis that camen to Marie and Martha, 
and sy3en what thingis he! dide, bileueden 
4¢in to him. Sothli summe of hem wenten 
to Pharisees™, and seiden to hem, what 
47thingis he" dide. Therfore the bischops 
and Pharisees® gedriden a counceil a3ens 
Jhesu, and seiden, What don we? for this 
4sman doth ‘many signes, or myraclis?. If 
we leeue him thus, alle men schulen bi- 
leue in to him; and Romayns schulen 
come, and schulen’ take oure place and 
49flok™. Forsoth oon of hem, Cayfas by 
name, whanne he was bischop of that 3eer, 
svseide to hem, 3e witen no thing, nethir’ 
thenken, for it spedith to 30u, that o man 
deie for the peple, and that alle folkt 
siperische not. Forsoth he seide not this 
thing of him silf, but whanne he was 
bischop of that 3eer, he prophesiede, for 
s2Jhesu was to deyinge" for the folk, and 
not oonly for the folk, but that he schulde 


y Jhesu e. 
AGMNOQSTWXY. 


% dayes deed gw. 
estant x. 4a greet owxy. 


G pr.m.Y. thou forth mpi sec.m. forth os prim. x. 


JOHN. 


a Whether I haue 4 sup. ras. Haue I emnpestrxy. 
© thou forth, or out 4 prom. G sec.m. NT. forth, or out 


XI. 40-—52. 


denne, and a stoon was* leid theronne. 
And Jhesus seith, Take 3e awey the39 
stoon. Martha, the sistir of hym that 
was deed, seith to hym, Lord, he stynk- 
ith now, for he hath leye foure daies*. 
Jhesus seith to hir, Haue Y not seid to4o 
thee, that if thon bileuest, thou schalt se 
the glorie of God? Therfor thei token 4) 
awei the stoon. And Jhesus lifte vp 
hise i3en, and seide, Fadir, Y do thank- 
yngis to thee, for thou hast herd me; 
and Y wiste, that thou euermore herist 42 
me, but for the puple that stondith 
aboute, Y seide, that thei bileue, that 
thou hast sent me. Whanne he hadde43 
seid these thingis, he criede with a greet 
vois, Lazarus, come thou’ forth. And 44 
anoon he that was deed, cam out, boundun 
the hondis and feet with boondis, and 
his face boundun with a sudarie. And 
Jhesus seith to hem, Vnbynde 3e hym, 
and suffre 3e hym to go forth. Therfor 4s 
many of the Jewis that camen to Marie 
and Martha‘, and seyn what thingis 
Jhesus dide, bileueden in hym. Bute 
suinme of hem wente to the Farisees, 
and seiden to hem, what thingis Jhesus 
‘hadde don’, Therfor the bischopis and 47 
the Farisees gadriden a counsel ajens 
Jhesu, and seiden, What do we? for this 
man doith many myraclis. If we leeue4s 
hym thus, alle men schulen bileue in 
hym; and Romayns schulen come, and 
schulen take our place and oure folk. 
But oon of hem, Cayfas bi name, whanne 49 
he was hischop of that 3eer, seide to 
hem, 3e witen nothing, ne thenken, thats 
it spedith to 30u, that o man die for the 
puple, and that al the fole perische not. 
Buité he seide not this thing of hym silf,s1 
but whanne he was bischop of that 3eer, 


b evermore 


f the feet 1 pr.m. x. &@ Om. x. ) suffrith x. 


i him go aweie 4 pr.m. G pr.m. TW pr.m,¥. to gon awey sv. hym for to go awey @. hym to gon awei x. 


k Om. sx. !Jhesu eg. ™ the Phariseis wposw. 
manye Xx. 4 Om, G pr.m, NeTXY. 
AGMNPQSTFW sec.m. X¥. 4 die AGMNPQSTWXY. 


> And Martha k. 
g Om. a. 


a Om. £. 
Eqk. thei schul 1. 


r our folke aemns. folk privxy. 


¢ daies in the graue k. 


n Jhesus aewnposwxy. © the Fariseis w. P signes 
SneGmunposTtwxy. tthe folk 
€QOm.1 €to Marthark. fdideo. ff Om. 


XE ool, 7. 


gedere in to oon the sones of God that 
s3weren scaterid. Therfore fro that day 
s4thei thou3ten for’ to sle him. Therfore 
Jhesu walkide not now opynli at the 
Jewis; but he wente in to a cuntree™ bi- 
sydis the* desert, in to a citee, that is seid 
Effrem, and there he dwelte with his dis- 
ssciplis. Forsothe the’ pask of Jewis was 
next, and many of the cuntree stijeden vp 
to Jerusalem the day bifore pask, for” to 
s¢halowe hem selue. Therfore thei sou3teu 
Jhesu, and spaken to gidere, stondinge in 
the temple, What gessen 3e, for he cometh 
not to the feeste day? Forsothe the? 
bischopis and Pharisees** hadden 3ouun a 
maundement, that if ony man knew wher 
he is, he schewe, that thei> taken hym. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Therfore Jhesu bifore sixe dayes of 
pask cam to Bethanye, wher Lazarus 
2 was¢ deed, whom Jhesu reyside. Forsoth*¢ 
thei maden to him a sopere there, and 
Martha mynistride to hym; Lazarus for- 
sothe was oon of men? sittinge at the mete 
3with him. Therfore Marie took a pound 
of ‘oynement spikenard®, ‘or trewe narde’, 
precious, and anoyntide® the feet of Jhesu, 
and wipte lis feete with her heeris; and 
the hous ‘is fillid’ of the! sanour of oygne- 
ament*. Therfore Judas Scarioth, oon of 
his disciplis, that was to bitraynge’ hym, 
sseide, Whi ‘this oygnement is™ not seeld 
for thre hundrid pens, and is" 3ouun to 
snedy men? Forsoth he seide this thing, 
not for it perteynede to him of nedy men, 
but for he was a theef, and he® hauynge 
pursis? haar tho thingis that weren sent. 
7Therfore Jhesu seide, Suffre 3e hir, that 


v Om. sx. 
yOm.s. 2Om.sx. ® Om.r. 
€ trewe narde o. oynement precious spekenard wp. 
h fufillid 4 pr.m. auws. is fulfillid porwxy. 


JOHN. 


W region, or cuntre 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTIVY. regioun Xx. 
aa the Pharisees k pr.m. 

fOm.c¢ Giame MNPQSTW prim. XY. 
iOm. e. 


271 


he prophesiede, that Jhesu was to die 
for the folc, and not oneli for the fole, 52 
but that he schulde gadere in to oon the 
sones of God that weren scaterid. Ther-s53 
for fro that day thei son3ten" for to sle 
hym. Therfor Jhesus walkide not thanne 51 
opynli! among the Jewis; but he wente 
in to a cuntre bisidis desert, in to a citee, 
that is seid Effren, and there he dwellide 
with hise disciplis. And the pask of ss 
thes Jewis was ni3, and many of thet 
cuntrey wenten vp to Jerusalem bifor 
the pask, to halewe hem silf. Therfor 56 
thei sou3ten Jhesu, and spaken togidere, 
stondynge in the temple, What gessen 3e, 
for he cometh not to the feeste day ? 
For the bischopis and Farisees! hadden 
3ouun”! a maundement, that if ony man 
knowe where he is, that he schewe, that 
thei take hym. 


CAP. XI. 


Therfor Jhesus bifor sixe daies of! 
pask cam to Bethanye, where Lazarus 
hadde be deed, whom Jhesus reiside. 
And thei maden to hym a soopere there, 2 
and Martha mynystride to hym; and 
Lazarus was oon of men™ that saten at 
the mete with hym. Therfor® Maries 
took a pound of oynement of trewe 
narde precious, and anoyntide the feet 
of Jhesu, and wipte hise feet with hir 
heeris; and the hous was fulfillid® of°° 
the sauour of the oynement. Therfor4 
Judas Scarioth, oon of hise disciplis, that 
was to bitraye hym, seide, Whi is nots 
this oynement seeld for thre hundrid 
pens, and isP 30ouun to nedi1 men? Bute 
he seide this thing, not for it perteynede 
to hym of nedi men, but for he was a 
theef, and he’ hadde the’ pursis, and bar 
tho thingis that weren sent. Therfor7 


x Om. 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTVIVXY. 
cist, ¢¢ For n. 4 the men sxy. 
8 oyntede sx. 
! bytraye 


¥ he Ts 


the oynment AGMNPQSTYV IVY. 


A pr.m. GMNPQOSTWXY. ™ is this oynement wp. 4 Om. G pr.m.esxy. ° Om. x. P the pursis 9. 
h thoujten erkarbeeghik8. {only 1 sup. ras. * Om.iKr. kk thate. | the Pharisees o. | 3if 0. 
mthe menirhik8. %Om.1. oO fillide erg. O° witho. POm.iprem dporer Om. za. 


5 Om. b pr.m. g. 


272 


in to the day of my birying she kepe 
sthat; forsothe 3e schulen euer? haue pore 
men’ with 3ou, sothli 3e schulen not euere® 
ohaue me. Therfore myche cumpany of 
thet Jewis knewe, that Jhesu was there; 
and thei camen, not oonly for Jhesu, but 
for" to se Lazarus, whom he reysede fro 
1o‘deede men’. Forsothe the princes of 
iprestis thou3ten for” to sle Lazarus, for 
mauye of the* Jewis for hym wente awei, 
and beleueden in to’ Jhesu. Forsothe on 
the morwe a myche cumpany, that cam 
togidere at the feeste day, whanne thei 
hadden herd, for Jhesu cometh? to Jeru- 
i3salem, tooken braunchis of palmes, and 
camen forth ajens him, and crieden, O- 
sanna, blessid is he, that cometh in the 
laname of the Lord, ‘king of Israel*. And 
Jhesu fond a litil asse, and sat on> him, 
1sas it is writun, The* dou3tir of Syon, nyle 
thon drede; lo! thi king cometh‘, sittinge 
igon the® colt of a sche asse. His disciplis 
knewen not first thes thingis, but whanne 
Jhesu is glorified, thanne thei ‘recordiden, 
or hadden mynde', for thes thingis weren 
writen of him, and thes thingis thei diden 
i7to him. Therfore the cumpany _ baar 
witnessing, that was with him, whanne 
he clepide Lazarus fro the graue, and 
isreyside him fro ‘deede meni. Therfore 
and the cumpany cam metinge to* hiin, 
for thei herden ‘him to haue don this 
1gsigne. Therfore the Pharisees seiden to 
hem selue, 3e seen, for we profiten no 
thing; lo! al the world wente! aftir him. 
20 Forsothe ther weren summe hethen men, 
of hem that hadden sty3ed vp for™ to wor- 
2ischipe in the feeste day. Therfore thes 
camen to Philip, that was of Bethsaida 
of Galilee, and preieden him, seyinge, Sire, 
22we wolen® se Jhesu. Philip cometh, and 
seith to Andrew; eft Andrew and Philip 


q euermore AGMNPQSTIVXY. r Om. 1. 


v deed amnpst. deeth cowxy. w Om. sx. 
salein T. > vpon 4 prom. GMNPWY. ¢ Om. x. 
den mynde T. recordeden x. 
n wolden r. 


m the Jewis roehik. nsou3tenk. © frok., 


JOHN. 


$ euermore AGMNPQSTWXY. 
x Om. F. 

4 cometh to thee @. 
i deed cunpestxy. deeth w. 


P in to K sec.m. 


XII. 8B—22. 


Jhesus seide, Suffre 3e hir, that in to the 
day of my biriyng sche kepe that; fors 
3e schulen euermore haue pore men with 
3ou, but 3e schulen not euermore haue 
me. Therfore myche puple of Jewis™o 
knew, that Jhesus was there; and thei 
camen, not oonli for Jhesu, but to se 
Lazarus, whom he hadde reisid fro deth. 
But the princis of prestis thou3ten" to to 
sle Lazarus, for manye of the Jewisi 
wenten awei for® him, and _ bileueden 
in? Jhesu. But on the morew a? myche tz 
puple, that’ cam togidere to the feeste 
dai, whanne thei hadden herd, that Jhe- 
sus cam to Jerusalem, token braunchis 13 
of palmes, and camen forth a3ens hym, 
and crieden, Osanna, blessid is the kyng 
of Israel, that cometh in the name of the 
Lord. And Jhesus foond a 3onge asse, 14 
and sat on hym, as it is writun, Thetis 
dou3tir of Syon, nyle thou drede; lo! 
thi kyng cometh, sittynge on ‘an asse 
foles. Hise disciplis knewen not first ise 
these thingis, but whanne Jhesus was 
glorified, thanne thei hadden mynde, fort 
these thingis weren writun of hym, and 
these thingis thei diden to hym. Ther-17 
for the puple bar witnessyng, that was 
with hym, whanne he clepide Lazarus 
fro the graue, and reiside hym fro deth. 
And therfor the puple cam, and mette 1s 
with hym, for thei herden that he hadde 
don this signe. Therfor the Farisees 19 
seiden to hem silf, 3e seen, that we pro- 
fiten no thing; lo! al the world wente" 
aftir hym. And there weren summe 20 
hethene®® inen, of hem that hadden come 
vp to worschipe in the feeste dai. Andai 
these camen to Filip, that was of Beth- 
saida of Galilee, and preieden hym, and 
seiden, Sire, we wolen se Jhesu. Filip 22 
cometh, and seith to Andrew; eft’ An- 


t Om. s. u Om. sx. 


2 cam Q. a king of Jern- 
ea. f recorden, or had- 
lwendeth ea. ™ Om. sx. 


y Om. a. 


_ k Om. @. 


4 Om. K pr.m. g. r Om. k. 


s the colt on an asse fole a pr.m. on the colt of an asse A sec.m. on an asse and fool of an asse R sec.m. hi. 


tthat 1. .Y hath gon. of hethen o. 


v and eft o. 


XII. 23—36. 


23seiden to Jhesu. Sothli Jhesu answeride 
to hem, seyinge, The our cometh, that 
24mannis sone be clarified. Treuli, treuli, I 
seie to 30u, no? but4 a’ corn of whete fallinge 
25in to the erthe schal* be deed, it dwellith 
aloone ; sothli if it schal be deed, it bring- 
itht moche fruyt. He that loueth his 
soule, ‘that is, lyf", schal’ leese it; and he 
that hatith his soule, ‘that ts, lyf, in this 
world, kepith it in to euerelasting lyf. 
26If ony man seruith* to me, sue he me; 
and where I am, there and myY mynystre, 
‘or seruant”, schal be. If ony man schal 
mynistre to me, my fadir schal worschipe 
27him*. Now my soule is troublid, and 
what schal I seye? Fadir, saue me fro this 
our; but for that thing I cam in to this 
2sour; fadir, clarifie thi name. Therfore 
a vois cam fro heuene, seyinge, And I 
haue clarified, and eft> I schal clarifie. 
29 Therfore the cumpany that stood, and 
herde, seide, thundir to® be maad; othere 
30men seiden, an aungel spak to him. Jhe- 
su answeride, and seide, This vois cam 
31not for me, but for 30u. Now is dom of 
the world, now the prince of this world 
32schal be cast out. And if I schal be en- 
haunsid fro the erthe, I schal drawe alle 
33thingis to my silf. Sothli ‘he seide this 
thing’, signifiynge bi what deeth he was 
3ito deiynge®. The cumpany answeride to 
him, We han herd of the lawe, for’ Crist 
dwellith ‘in tof with outen ende; and hou 
seist thou, It bihoueth mannis sone for! 
to be arerid? Who is this mannis sone ? 
33 Therfore Jhesu seith to hem, 3it ai litil 
list is in sou; walke* 3e, the while 3e han 
li3t, that derknessis catche ‘not 3ou!; and 
he that wandrith in derknéssis, woot 
s¢nere whidur he goth. The while 3e han 
li3t, ‘byleue 3e™ ‘in to” list°, that 3e be 
the sones of 1i3t. Jhesu spak thes thingis, 


JOHN. 


273 


drew and Filip seiden to Jhesu. And 2s 
Jhesus answerde ‘to hem, and _ seide’’, 
The our cometh, that maunus sone be 
clarified. Treuli, treuli¥, Y seie to 3ou, 24 
but a corn of whete falle in to the 
erthe, and be deed, it dwellith aloone ; 25 
but if it be deed, it bryngith myche 
fruyt. He that loueth his lijf, schal 
leese it; and he that hatith his lijf in 
this world, kepith it in to euerlastynge 
lijf. If ony man serue me, sue he me; 26 
and where Y am, there my mynystre 
schal be. If ony man serue me, my 
fadir schal worschipe hym. Now my27 
soule is troublid, and* what schal Y seie? 
Fadir, saue me fro this our; but therfor 
Y cam in to this our; fadir, clarifie thi2s 
name. And a vois cam fro heuene, and 
seide, And Y haue clarified, and eft Y 
schal clarifie. Therfor the puple that 29 
stood, and herde, seide, that ‘thundur 
was maad**; othere men seide, any 
aungel spak to!¥ hym. Jhesus answerde, 30 
and seide, This vois cam not for me, but 
for 30u. Now is the doom of the world, 3! 
now the prince of this world schal be 
cast out. And if Y schal be enhaunsid 32 
fro the erthe, Y schal drawe alle thingis 
to my silf. And he seide this thing, 33 
signifiynge bi what deth he ‘was to? die. 
And the puple answeride to hym, We: 
han herd of the lawe, that Crist dwellith 
with outen ende; and hou seist thou, It 
bihoueth mannys sone to be arerid ? 
Who is this mannus sone? And thanne®3s 
Jhesus seith to hem, 3it a litil 1i3t is in 
jou; walke 3e, the while 3e han li3t, that 
derknessis** catche jou not; he that 
wandrith in derknessis, woot nere® whi- 
dur he goith. While je han list, bileue36 
3e in 1i3t*, that 3e be the children of 1i3t. 
Jhesus spak these thingis, and wente, 


P Om. x. q but if x. t the mpgs. 8 schulde 7. t bryngith forth 9. u Om. x, 
v he schal aery. w Om, asx. that is, his lijf v prom. X serue 4 prom. GMNPOTWXY. YOm.¥Y. 
2 Om. sx. a hym, that is, in heuenes x. dD sit 4 prom. G prom. MNPeTXY. Om. F. ¢ for to 
A pr.mt. GMNPQTWY. 4 this chine he seide mpxy. e dye 4 pr.m. GMNPQTWXY. f Om. 7. 
& Om. Gc pr.m.trxy. Om. sx. Om.e. -Kwaker., J30u notempxy. “Om, x. 2 Om. x. 
in gw pr.m. the liz3t r. Om. x, 

wand seid tohemo,. ¥Om.o. * Om. A pr.m. xX ther was maad athundir1. y that an ek. 


yy with k. 2 schulde k. 
VOL. IV. 


8 therfore 1. 


aa derkenesse 0, 
Nn 


b not 1. neuere Krsagk8. ¢ the li3t rk. 


274 


37and wente, and hidde him fro hem. Sothli 
whanne he hadde don so manye signes, 
‘or myraclis?, byfore hem, thei bileueden 
38not in to’ him; that the word of Ysaie, 
the prophete, schulde be fillid’, which he 
seide, Lord, who bileuede to oure heer- 
ing, and to whom is the arm‘ of ‘the 
39 Lord' schewid? Therfore thei my3ten 
sonot bileue, for eft? Ysaye seide, He hath 
blyndid her y3en, and he hath ‘endurid, 
or maad hard*, the herte of hem, that 
thei se not with y3en, and vndirstonde 
notY with herte; and that thei be con- 
uertid, ‘or al turned*, and I heele hem. 
41 Ysaie seid thes thingis, whanne he sy3 
42the glorie of hym, and spak of him. Ne- 
theles and of the princes manye bileueden 
in to* him, but for the Farisees thei? 
knowlechiden not, that thei sehulden not 
43be east out of the synagoge; forsothe* 
thei loueden the glorie of men, more than 
44the glorie of God. Forsothe Jhesu cryede, 
and seide, He that bileneth in to me, 
bileueth not? in to me, but in to him 
45that sente me. He that seeth me, seeth 
46him that sente me. If 1i3t eam in® to the® 
world, that ech man‘ that bileueth in to 
47me, dwelle not in derknessis. And if ony 
man schal heere my wordis, and ‘schal not 
kepe*, I deme ‘not him!; forsoth I cam 
not, that J deem the world, but that I 
48make the world saf. He that dispisith 
me, and takith not my wordis, hath him 
that sehal inge him; the word that I 
haue spoken, that sehal deme him in the 
49]aste day. For I haue no3t spokun of my 
silf, but the fadir, that sente me, 3af™ to 
me a maundement, what I sehal seie, and 
50 what I schal speke. And I woot, for his 
maundement is euerelasting lyf; therfore 
tho thingis" that I speke, as the fadir 
seide to me, so I speke. 


P Om. wpeswx. 
Veftsone G sec.m. mM. -* hardid x. 
not onlye. fOmy. 8 Om. w. 
lhim not exy. ™ he jaf emnporxy. 


a Om. apes. 


h this @. 
Om. 7. 


din cerkmprsuxabcehiaf. to gk. 
h manye of the princis k. 
kk ato. 1Om.1. 


; e saith o. 
1 Om. k prim. 
™speke K. " seye kK. 


JOHN. 


T fulfild 4 prom. GMNPSTWXY. 
y Om. wperwxy. 
1 Om. 4 pr. m. GMNPQSTWXY. 


f leued Ez. hath bileeued k. 
ii knowlechen o. 
° do g. 


XII. 37—50. 


and hidde hym fro hem. And whanne37 
he hadde don so many myraclis_bifor 
hem, thei bileneden not ‘in to’ hym; thats 
the word of Ysaie, the prophete, schulde 
be fulfillid, which he seide®, Lord, who 
bileuedef to oure heryng, and to whom 
is the arm of the Lord schewid? Ther-39 
for thei my3ten not bileue, for eft Ysaye 
seide, He hath blyndid her ijen, and he® 40 
hath maad hard the herte of hem, that 
thei se not with iz3en, and vndurstonde 
with herte; and that thei be conuertid, 
and Y heele hem. Ysaye seide these 41 
thingis, whanne he say the glorie of 
hym, and spak of hym. Netheles ‘of 42 
the pryncis manye" bileueden in hym, 
but for the! Farisees thei knowlechidenii 
not, that thei sehulden not be put out of 
the synagoge; for thei loueden the glorie 43 
of men, more than the glorie of God. 
And Jhesus criede, and seide, He that 4a 
bileueth in me, bileueth not in me, but 
in hym that sente me. He that seeth me, 45 
seeth hym that sente me. Y 1lijt cam4e 
in to the world, that ech that bileueth 
in me, dwelle not in derknessis. And if47 
ony man herith my words, and kepith 
hem“, Y deme hym not; for Y cam not, 
that Y deme the world, but thatkk Y 
make the world saaf. He that dispisith 48 
me, and takith not my wordis, hath hym 
that schal iuge hym; thilke word that Y 
haue spokun, schal deme hym in the last 
dai. For Y haue not spokun of my silf, 49 
but thilke fadir that sente me, 3af to me 

a maundement, what Y schal! seie™, and 
what Y schal speke". And Y woot, that 50 
his maundement is enerlastynge lijf; 
therfor tho thingis that Y speke, as the 
fadir seide to me, so Y speke®. 


t God mNnpoTxy. 
bthat vr. ¢ for N. 
k kepe hem ow pr. m. 


8 arm, or mizt Q. 


zOm. x. 8Om. Q, 


ffintoe. & Om.a. 
k hem not A pr.m.a. not hem ¢ sec. m. 


XID. I-14. 


CaP XITT. 


1 Forsothe bifore the feeste day of pask 
Jhesu witinge, for his our cometh, that he 
passe of° this world to the fadir, whanne 
he hadde?P loved hise that weren in the 
2world, in to the ende he lonede hem. And 
the souper maad, whanne the deuel hadde 
sent now in to the herte of Judas, ‘that 
Judas’ of Symount Scarioth schulde’ bi- 
straye him, he witinge for’ the fadur 3af 
alle thingis to him in to hondis*, and that 
he wente out fro God, and goth to God, 
srisith fro the souper, and puttith his 
clothis; and whanne he hadde takun a 
slynnen cloth, he bifore girde him. Aftir- 
ward he sente water in to a basyn, and 
bigan for’ to waische disciplis” feet, and 
to wype with the lynnen cloth, with 
6 which* he was biforeY gird. Therfore he 
cam to Symount Petre, and Petre seith 
to him, Lord, ‘waischist thow’Y to me the 
7feet? Jhesu answeride, and seide to him, 
What thingis I do, thou woost not now ; 
8forsothe thou schalt wite aftirward. Petre 
seith to him, Thou schalt not waische to 
me the? feet, in to with outen ende. Jhesu 
answeride to him, If I schal not waische 
thee, thou schalt not haue part with me. 
9Symount Petre seith to him, Lord, not 
oonly my feet, but and the* hondis and 
iothe heed. -Jhesu seide to him, He that 
is waischun, hath no nede no” but that he 
waische the feet, but he is clene al; and 
113e ben clene, but not alle. Forsothe he 
wiste®, who schulde bitraye him ; therfore 
izhe seide, 3e ben not clene alle. Therfore 
aftir that he waischide’ the feet of hem, 
he took his clothis; and whanne he hadde 
restid a3en, eft he seide to hem, ‘3e witen® 
iswhat I haue done to 30u. 3e clepen me 
maistir and lord, and 3e seyn wel; forsoth 
isl am. Therfore if I, lord and maistir, 


SConer kK. P Om. Q. 
hondis G see.m. MPQW. 
yy what thou waschist a. 
waschen 9. wesh sx. 


qa Om, gsr. 
v¥ Om, sx. 
zOm. mu. &®myna. 


JOHN. 


r that he shulde a. 
w his disciplis curpeswxy. 


275 


CAP. hk 

Bifor? the ‘feeste dai of pask? Jhesus 1 
witynge, that his our is comun, that he 
passe fro this%1 world to the fadir, 
whanne he hadde loued hise that weren 
in the world, in to the ende he louede 
hem. And whanne the souper was2 
maad, whanne the denel hadde put than 
in to the" herte, that Judas of Symount 
Scarioth schulde bitraye hym, he wit-3 
ynge™ that the fadir 3af alle thingis to 
hym in to hise’ hoondis, and that he 
wente out fro God, and goith to God, he4 
risith fro the souper, and doith of hise 
clothis; and whanne he hadde takun a 
lynun cloth, he girdet hyn. And aftir-s 
ward he putte watir in to a basyn, and 
biganne to waische the disciplis feet, and 
to wipe with the lynnen cloth, with 
which he was gird. And so he cam to6 
Symount Petre, and Petre seith to hym, 
Lord, waischist thou my feet? Jhesus7 
answerde, and seide to hym, What Y do, 
thou wost not now; but thou schalt wite 
aftirward. Petre seith to hym, Thous 
schalt neuere waische my feet. Jhesus 
answeride to hym, If Y_ schal not 
waische thee, thou schalt not haue part 
with me. Symount Petre seith to hym,9 
Lord, not oneli my feet, but bothe the" 
hoondis and the heed. Jhesus seide” to 10 
liym, He that is waischun, hath no nede 
but that he waische the feet, but he is 
al clene; and 3e ben clene, but not alle. 
For he wiste, who ‘was he* that schulde 11 
bitraye hym; therfor he seide, 3e ben 
not alle clene. And so aftir that hei2 
hadde waischun ‘the feet of hemY, he 
took hise clothis; and whanne he was 
set to mete ajen, eft he seide to hem, 3e 
witen what Y hane don to jou. 3e13 
clepen me inaistir and lord, and 3e seien 


that Judas schulde s. 
x the whiche a. 
b Om. ew prem. 


Sthate. . this 
y Om. ow pr.m. 
¢ wiste wel mprxy. ‘4% had 


€ 3e wyten not y. Wyten 3e Wy. 


P But bifor a, 
the Ep. ¢ girte Pp. 


qq the o. 
v seith a sec. m. osg. 


4 pask day i pr. v. 
u Om. g. 


r Om. A. 
W not a, 


Nn 2 


tr wittenessyng 0. § Om. A sec. m. Q. 
xit was k.  y her feet k. 


276 


haue waische 3oure feet, and 3e ‘owen tof 
1s waische another the totheris® feet; for I 
hane 3ouun ensaumple: to 30u, that as I 
ishaue don to 3ou, so and 3e do. Treuli, 
treuli, I seie to 30u, the seruaunt is not 
more than his lord, neither apostle is* 
17more! than he that sente him. If 3e witen 
thes thingis, 3e schulen be blessid, if 3e 
isschulen do hem. I seie not of alle 3ou, 
I woot whiche™ I haue chosun; but that 
the scripture be fillid", He that etith my 
breed, schal reyse his heele ajens ine. 
19 Treuli, treuli°®, I seie to 3ou, bifore it? be 
don, that? whanne it ‘schal be™ don, ‘3e 
20 bileue’ for‘ I am. Treuli, treuli, I seye to 
3ou, he that taketh whom euere I schal 
sende, receyueth me; forsothe he that re- 
ceyueth me, receyueth him that sente me. 
21Whanne Jhesu hadde seid thes thingis, 
he was troblid" ‘in spirit, and’ witness- 
ide’, and seide, Treuli, treuli I seie to 30u, 
2200n* of 30u sehal bitraye me. Therfore 
the disciplis lokiden to gidere, doutynge 
230f whom he seide. Therfore oon of his 
disciplis was restinge in the bosum of 
2iJhesu, whom Jhesu louede. Therfore 
Symount Petre bekenyde to him, and seith 
to him, Who is it, of whichY he seith ? 
25 And so whanne he hadde restid a3en on 
the brest of Jhesu, he seith to him, Lord, 
26who is it? Jhesn answeride, He it is, to 
whom I schal dresse breed dipped yn. 
And whanne he had ‘dippid yn? breed®, 
27 he 3af to Judas of Symount Scariot. And 
aftir the morsel, thanne Sathanas entride 
in to him. And Jhesu seith to him, What 
28thing> thou dost, do thou® summere. For- 
soth no man sittinge’ at thet mete wiste 
this thing, to what thing he seide to him. 
29 Forsothe suinme gessiden, for Judas hadde 


f schulen GaNPesTWXxY. & otheres sx. 
™ the whiche 4 prim. GuNPTY. whom Q., 
setrowe nN. fTisn. SOm.n. tthatn. 


G pr.m. MNPQTY. whom G sec. m. sv. 
b thingis 4 sec.m,. MNPST. 
the sittinge Om. aery. 


z Om. ab pr. m. 
40m. 1. ¢ jou alle r. 
and seide to him b sec. 7m. 


4 to 30u ens. k pr.m. 
f Treuli, treuli ¢ sec. m. 
ii Om. o. 


JOHN. 


h forsothe s. 
0D fulfilde cuNPQOSTWXAY. 
uturblid G pr.m. mp. 
G pr.m, MPQTXY. made protestacioun, or witnessede Nn. 
2 indippid upesi. 
© thon it giv prim. it x. 


b Om. he pr. m. e pr. m. gk pr.m. 
€ and doutinge k. 
Kk Om. k pr. m. 


XI. 15—~29. 


wel; for Yam. Therfor if Y, lord andis 
maistir, hane waischun 3oure feet, and? 
3e schulen waische oon anothers feet; forts 
Y haue 3ouun ‘ensaumple to 30u°, ‘that as 
I haue do to 30u, so do 3e. Treuli,i6 
treuli, Y seie to 30u, the seruaunt is not 
grettere than his lord, nether an® apostle 
is’ grettere than he that sente hym. If17 
3e witen these thingis, 3e schulen be 
blessid, if 3e doen hem. Y seie not of1s 
‘alle 30u°, Y woot whiche Y haue chosun; 
but that the scripture be fulfillid, He 
that etith my breed, schal reise his heele 
a3ens me. Treuly‘, Y seie to 30u biforis 
it be don, that whanne it is don, 3e 
bileue that Y am. ‘Treuli, treuli, Y seie2o 
to 30u, he that takith whom euere Y 
schal sende, resseyueth me; and he that 
resseyueth me, resseyueth hym that sente 
me. Whanne Jhesus hadde seid these 21 
thingis, he was troblid in spirit, and 
witnesside, and seide, Treuli, treuli, Y 
seie to 30u, that oon of 3ou schal bitraye 
me. Therfor the disciplis lokiden togi-22 
dere, doutynge’ of whom he seide. And 23 
so oon of hise disciplis was restynge in 
the bosum of Jhesu, who Jhesu lou- 
ede. Therfor Symount Petre bikeneth» 24 
to hym, ‘and seith to hymi, Who is it, 
of whom he seith? Andii so whanne he2s 
hadde restid a3en* on the brest of Jhe- 
su, he seith to hym, Lord}, who is it? 
Jhesus answerde, He it is, to whom Y 26 
schal areche a sop of breed. And whanne 
he hadde wet breed, he jaf to Judas of 
Symount Scarioth. And aftir the mus-27 
sel, thanne Sathanas entride in to hym. 
And Jhesus seith to hym, That thing 
that thou doist, do thou™ swithe®. And 2e 
noon of hem that saten at the mete 


iexsaumple sw. Om. 10m. e. 


°oOm. x. Pthatit ny. 4 that 
vOnm. & pr.m. mporxy. “Om. 
x for oon mPeTVWwxXY.  Y the whiche 4 pr.m., 
a breed, or awett [it Q] in wyn G sec.m. Q. 
d of sittinge aempern. of the sittende sx. of 


¢ Om. rkreghi. 
hb beckenede g8. ' Om. Eb pr. im. 


1Sirer. ™it k. 1 anoon1. 


XIII. 30——XIV. 4. 


pursis, that Jhesu hadde seid to him, Bye 
thou tho thingis, that ben nedeful to vs 
at the feeste day, or that he schulde 3yuef 


3osum thing to nedy men. Therfore whanne © 


he hadde take the morsel, he weute out 
zianon; forsoth it was ny3t. Therfore 
whanne he hadde gon out, Jhesu seide, 
Now mannis sone is clarified, and God is 
32clarified in him. If God is clarified in 
‘him, and God schal clarifye him in him 
33 silf, and anon he schal clarifie him. Litil 
sones, 3it a litil I am with 30u; 3e schulen 
seke me, and, as I seide to the Jewis, 
Whidur I go, 3e mown not come; and to 
3430u I seie now. I 3yue to 30u a newe 
maundement, that 3e loue to gidere, as I 
35 louede jou, that and 3e loue to gedere. In 
this thing alle men schulen knowe, fort 
3e ben my disciplis, if 3e ‘schulen haue® 
scloue' to gidere. Symount Petre seith to 
hym, Lord, whidir goist thou? Jhesu 
answeride, Whidir I go, thou maist* not 
sue me now, but thou schalt sue aftir- 
37ward. Petre seith to him, Whi may I 
not sue thee now? I schal putte my soule, 
38 that is, lyf', for thee. Jhesu answeride, 
Thou schalt putte thi soule, ‘that ts, lyf™, 
for me? Treuli, treuli®, I seie to thee, the 
koe schal not crowe, til" thou schalt 
denye me thries. 


CAL ANI: 


1 And he seith to his disciplis, *Be not 
3oure herte disturblid?, nether4 drede it; 
3e bileuen in to’ God, and bileue 3e in tos 
2me. In the hous of my fadir ben many 
dwellingis; if any thing lesse, I haddet 
seid to 30u, for I go for" to make redy 
3to 30u a place. And if’ I schal” go*, and 
schal make redy to 30u a place, eftsoone 
I schalY come, and I schal take 3ou to my 
asilf, that where I am, and je be. And 


fhaue jouen g. 8 thats. bhaue g. i loued a. 
™ that is, thi lijfa sec.m. pw. Om. x. 2 Om. m. 
NPosTWwxyY.  P distroublid yvivy. disturbid x. 
Gpr.m. MNPX. %Om. TYX. Vv Om. r. 
MPQTWXY, 


© forsothe 1. P Therfore r. 
t and at o. that s. 


q hadde r. 
Usue me sa. VY to Ick. 


k my3t 17. 
nn to Q. 
qd ne MPQTWXY. 

w Om. Ns. 


rand God 1. 
Ww schal come k pr. m. 


‘JOHN. O77 


wiste, wherto he seide to hym. Fore 
summe gessiden, for Judas hadde pursis, 
that Jhesus hadde seid to hym, Bie thou 
tho thingis, that ben nedeful to vs to the 
feeste dai, or that he schulde 3yue sum 
thing to nedi men. Therfor whanne he so 
hadde takun the mussel, he wente out 
anoon; and° it was ny3t. And? whannes1 
he was? gon out, Jhesus seide, Now 
mannis sone is clarified, and God is cla- 
rified in hym. If God is clarified in hym, 32 
God’ schal clarifie hym in hym silf, and 
anoon he schal clarifie hym. Litle sones, 3s 
3it a litil Yam with 30u; 3e schulen seke 
me, and, as Y seide to the Jewis, Whidur 
Y go, 3e moun not come; and to 30u Y 
seie now. Y 3yue to'30u a newe maunde-34 
ment, that 3e lowe togidir, as Y louedes 
30u, ‘and that* 3e loue togidir. In this3s 
thing alle men schulen knowe, that 3e 
ben my disciplis, if 3e han loue togidere. 
Symount Petre seith to hym, Lord, whi-36 
dur goist thou? Jhesus answeride, Whi- 
dur Y go, thou mayst not sue me now, 
but thou schalt sue" afterward. Petre 37 
seith to hym, Whi may Y not sue thee 
now? Y schal putte my lijf for thee. 
Jhesus answeride, Thou schalt putte thi 3e 
lijf for me? Treuli, treuli, Y seie to thee, 
the cok schal not crowe, til thou schalt 
denye me thries. And he seith to hise 
disciplis, : 
CAP. XIV. 

Be not joure herte afraied, ne drede1 
it; 3e bilenen in God, and bileue 3e in 
me. In the hous of my fadir ben many 2 
dwellyngis; if ony ‘thing lesse, Y hadde 
seid to 30u, for Y go to make redi to 3ou 
a place. And if Y go, and’ make redi3 
to 30u a place, eftsoones Y come’, and Y 
schal take 30u to my silf, that where Y 
am, 3e be. And whidur Y go, 3e witen,4 
and 3e witen the weie. Thomas seith tos 


! that is, my lif G sec.m. pw. Om. sx. 
* The chapter commences here in scm 

rOm.9. *Om.a.  t schulde hane 
X go awele 4 prom. GmMNPsTy.  Y Om. 


8 haue loued ta sec. m. k sec.m. loue k pr.mi. 


278 


whidur I go, 3e witen, and 3e witen the 
swey. Thomas seith to him, Lord, we 
witen not whidur thou goist, and hou 
6mown we wite the? weye? Jhesu seith 
to him, Iam weye, treuthe, and lyf; no 
man cometh to the fadir, no but by me. 
7 If 3e hadden knowen me, sothli 3e° hadden 
kuowen and my fadir; and aftirward 3e 
schulen knowe him, and 3e han seyn him. 
8 Philip seith to him, Lord, schewe to vs 
othe fadir, and it suffisith to vs. Jhesu 
seitht to him, So moche tyme I am with 
jou, and han 3e not knowun me? Philip, 
le that seeth me, seeth and the fadir. 
Hou seist thou, Schewe to vs the fadir ? 
10 Bileuest ‘not thou’, for I am in the fadir, 
and the fadir is in me? I speke not of my 
silf the wordis that I speke to 3ou; sothli 
the fadir dwellinge in me, he doith the 
1. workis. Beleue 3e not, for I am& in the 
12fadir, and the fadir is in me? Ellis bileue 
3e for thilke' workis. Treuli, treuli, I seie 
to 30u, he that bileueth in to! me, and he 
schal do the workis that I do; and he 
schal do more™ workis than" thes®, for I 
isgo to the fadir. And what euere thing 
je schulen axe the fadir in my name, I 
schal do this thing, that the fadir be glo- 
\srified in the sone. If 3e schulen axe ony 
isthing in my name, I schal do it. If 3e 
louen me, ‘kepe 3e? my comaundementis9. 
16 And I schal preie the fadir, and he schal 
17 3yue to 30u another coumfortour, ‘the spirit 
of treuthe', that he dwelle with 3ou into 
with outen ende; which’ spizi¢ the world 
may uot take, for it seeth ‘not him*', nei- 
ther woot him. Forsothe 3e schulen knowe 
him‘, for he schal dwelle at 3o0u, and he 
isschal be in 3ou. I schal not leeue 30u 
19 fadirlees, I schal come to 3ou. 3it a litil, 
and the world seeth not ‘me now"; forsoth 
3e schulen se me, for I lyue, and 3e schu- 
20len lyue. In that day 3e schulen knowe, 


> this 4 sec. m. K. Cand3e x. ‘4seide x. 
MNPTY. & Om. 4 pr.m. G pr.m. MNPTXY. 
m the more sx. D of sx. © hem x. 
spirit of treuthe, whiche emxy. 
MPXY. 


x hem k. 


Y myche 1. 
4 clarified k. 


e The whiche 1. 


Z haue not Rr. 
f Om. a. 


JOHN. 


e thou not GMPQTYWXY. 
i the s. tho x. ilke y. 
P kepith sx. 
ss him not GMxXY. 


@ that dwellith 1. 


XIV. 5~—20. 


hym, Lord, we witen not whidur thou 
goist, and hou moun we wite the weie? 
Jhesus seith to hym*, Y am weie, treuthe, 6 
and lijf; no man cometh to the fadir, 
but bi me. If 3e hadden knowe me,7 
sotheli 3e hadden knowe also my fadir; 
and aftirward 3e schulen knowe hym, 
and 3e han seyn hym. Filip seith tos 
hym, Lord, schewe to vs the fadir, and 
it suffisith to vs. Jhesus seith to hym,9 
So longY tyme Y am with 3ou, and ‘han 
je not? knowun me? Filip, he that seeth 
me, seeth also the fadir. Hou seist thou, 
schewe to vs the fadir? Bilenest thou 10 
not, that Y am in the fadir, and the 
fadir is in me? The wordis that Y speke 
to 30u, Y speke not of my silf; but the 
fadir hym silf dwellynge* in me, doith 
the werkis. Bileue 3e not, that Y am ini 
the fadir, and the fadir is in me? Ellis12 
bileue 3e for thilke werkis.  Treuli, 
treuli, Y seie to 30u, if a man bileneth 
in me, also he sehal do the werkis 
that Y do; and he schal do grettere 
werkis than these, for Y go to the fadir. 
And what euere thing» 3e axen® the1s 
fadir in my name, Y schal do this thing, 
that the fadir be glorified’ in the sone. 
If 3e axen ony thing’ in my name, Y 14 
schal do it. If 3e louen me, kepe 3e my 15 
comaundementis. And Y schal preye the 16 
fadir, and he schal 3yue to 3ou another 
coumfortour, the spirit of treuthe, to17 
dwelle with 3ou with outen ende; which® 
spirit the world may not take, for it 
seeth hym not, nether knowith hym. 
But 3e schulen knowe hym, for he schal 
dwelle with 3ou, and he schal be in 3ou. 
Y schal not leeue 30u fadirles, Y schal 18 
come to jou. jit a litil, and the world 19 
seeth not now! me; but 3e schulen se me, 
for Y lyue, and 3e schulen lyue. In that 20 
dai 3e schulen knowe, that Y am in my 


f Om. 4 pr.m. @ pr. m. 

k Om. a. 1 Om. exy. 
rOm. cmxy. §& the 

u now me GK pr.m. 


q maundementis xy. 
t Om. G pr.m. T. 


» thingis 1. Casken R passim. 


XIV. 21.—XV. 2. JOHN. 279 


for I am in my fadir, and 3ee in me, and 
21] in 30u. He that hath my comaunde- 
mentis’, and kepith hem, he it is that 
loueth me; sothli he that loueth me, schal 
be loued of my fadir, and I schal loue 
him, and I schal schewe to him my silf. 
22Judas seith to him, not he of Scarioth, 
Lord, what is don, for thou art to schewe” 
23 to vs thi silf, and not to the world? Jhesus 
answeride, and seide to him, If ony man 
loueth me, he schal kepe my word*; and 
my fadir schal loue him, and we schulen 
come to him, and we schulen make dwell- 
aingeY at him. He that loueth me not, 
kepith not my wordis; and the word 
which? 3e han herd, is not myn, but his 
25that sente me, the fadris. Thes thingis 
I haue spokun ‘to 30u*, dwellinge at jou; 
2é6forsoth the Hooly Gost, coumfortour, 
whom the fadir schal sende in my name, 
he schal teche 3ou alle thingis, and schal 
schewe, ‘or remembre®, to 30u alle thingis, 
what euer thingis? I schal seye to 3ou. 
27 Pees I leeue to® 3ou, my pees I 3yue to 
jou; not as the world 3yueth, I' 3yue to 
jou; be not 3oure herte disturblid®, nei- 
28ther drede it. 3e han herd, for I seide to 
30u, I go, and come to 3ou. If 3e louedyn 
me, forsoth 3e schulden ‘haue ioye', for I 
go to the fadir, for the fadir is more than 
29]. And now I haue seid to 30u, bifore it 
be don, that whanne it schal be don, 3e 
30bileue. Now I schal not speke many 
thingis to 3ou; forsoth the prince of this 
world cometh, and he hath not ‘ony thing 
31in me®. But that the world knowe, for 
I loue the fadir, and as the fadir 3af co- 
maundement to me, so Ido. Ryse 3e, go 
we hennis. 


CAP. XV. 


1 Jam a verri vyne, and my fadir is an 
2erthe tilier. Ech syoun, ‘or braunche’, 


Vv maundementis xy.  W shewinge 4 sup. ras. V. 


which 4 pr.m. GNTY. aOm. x. >bandhe ar. 


¢Om.y. f schallepr.my. & trublid arxy. 
mpoTWwxy. ‘ioye ww. * in me ony thing wxy, 


fadir, and 3e in me, and Y in 3ou. Heat 
that hath my comaundementis, and kep- 
ith hem, he it is that loueth me; and 
he that loueth me, schal be loned of my 
fadir, and Y schal loue hym, and Y schal 
schewe to hym my silf. Judas seith to22 
hym, not he of Scarioth, Lord, what is 
don, that thou schalt schewe thi silf to 
vs, and not to the world? Jhesus an-23 
swerde®, and seide ‘to hym®, If ony man 
loueth me, he schal kepe my word; and 
my fadir schal lone hym, and we schulen 
come to hym, and we schulen dwelle 
with hym. He that loueth me not, kep- 24 
ith not my wordis; and the word which 
3e han herd, is not myn, but the fadris, 
that sente me. These thingis Y haueos 
spokun to jou, dwellynge among 3o0u ; 
but thilke Hooli Goost, the coumfortour, 2¢ 
whom the fadir schal sende in my name, 
he schal teche 30u alle thingis, ‘and schal 
schewe to! 30u alle thingis*, what euere 
thingis Y schal seie to 3ou. Pees Y 27 
leeue to 30u, my pees Y 3yue to jou; 
not as the world 3yueth, Y jiue to jou; 
be not 3oure herte affrayed, ne drede it. 
3e han herd, that Y seide to 30u, Y GO, 28 
and come to 3ou. If 3e loueden me, for- 
sothe 3e schulden haue ioye, for Y go to 
the fadir, for the fadir is grettere than 
Y. And now Y haue seid to 3o0u, bifor 29 
that it be! don, that whanne it is don, 3e™ 
bileuen. Now Y schal not speke many 30 
thingis with jou; for the prince of this 
world cometh, and hath not in me ony 
thing. But that" the world knowe, thats: 
Y loue the fadir; and as the fadir jaf a 
comaundement™ to me, so Y do. ‘Rise 
3e°, go we hennus. 


CAP. XV. 


Y am a very vyne, and my fadir is! 
an erthe tilier. Ech braunch in me that2 


x wordis xy. YadwellyngGsec.m.m. 7 the 
© Om. 4G prom, MNPOTXY. ‘thing T. Om. wiv. 
turblid @ pr.m. disturbid s. distroublid vy.  ) ne 
10m. x. 


8 answeride tohimk. &Om.k. iOm.1pr.m.rc sec.m.eg8. ‘* Om. a pr.m. EKb pr.m. ¢ prem. 
lisk. ™that3ek pr.m. 2 ato. 9° maundement ERik pr.m, © Riseth 1. 


280 


not berynge fruit in me, he schal do ‘a wey 
it”; and ech that berith fruit, he schal 
spurge it, that it ‘more bere® fruit. Now 
3e ben clene, for the word that I haue 
4spokun to 30u. Dwell 3e in me, and I in 
30u; as a brauncheP may not make fruit 
of him4 silf, no™ but’ it schalt dwelle in the 
vyne", so nether 3e, no’ but 3e¥ schulen 
sdwelle in me. I am a* vyne¥, 3e ben? 
the? braunchis®. He® that dwellith in 
me, and I in him, this berith moche fruit, 
for with outen me 3e mown no thing do. 
6If ony man schal not dwelle in me, he 
schal be sent out as a braunche’, and 
schal wexe drye; and thei schulen gadere 
him; and thei schulen sende him in to 
7the® fier, and he brenneth. If 3e schulen 
dwelle in me, and my wordis schulen 
dwelle in 3ou, what euere thing 3e schulen 
wilne, 3e schulen axe, and it schal be do 
sto 30u. In this thing my fadir is clari- 
fied, that 3e brynge moost fruyt, and je 
9be maad my disciplis. As my fadir lou- 
ede me, and I louyde 30u; dwelle 3e in my 
ioloue. If 3e schulen kepe my comaunde- 
mentis‘, 3e schulen dwelle in my loue; as 
and I haue kept the comaundementis* of 
i1my fadir, and I dwelle in his loue. Thes 
thingis I spak to 3ou, that my ioye be in 
1230u, and 3oure ioye be fillid’. This is my 
comaundement, that 3e loue to gidere, as 
i3I louede 30ou. No man hath more loue 
than this, that ony man putte his soule, 
14‘that is, lyf’, for his frendis. 3e ben my 
frendis, if 3e schwlen do thok thingis, that 
15I comaunde! to! 30u. Now I schal not 
seye 30u seruauntis, for the seruaunt woot 
not, what his lord schal do; forsothe I 
haue seid 3ou frendis, for alle thingis 
what euere I herde of my fadir, I haue 


© bere more GMPQXY. 
r Om. Q. 


m it awey GMPXY. 
q it 4 pr. m, GMNPQSTVWXY. 
Vv Om. G sec. m. QW pr.m. 


JOHN. 


8 but 3if are. 
W if 3e 4 prom. MNPQTXY. 


XV. 3—15. 


berith not? fruyt, he schal take awey it; 
and ech that berith fruyt, he schal purge 
it, that it bere the more fruyt. Now 3e3 
ben clene, for the word that Y haue 
spokun to 30u. Dwelle 3e in me, and Y 4 
in jou; as a braunche may not make 
fruyt of it silf, but it dwelle in the vyne, 
so nether 3e, but 3e dwelle m me. Y ams 
al vyne, 3e" the® braunchis. Who that 
dwellith in me, and Y in hym, this* 
berith myche fruyt, for with outen me 
3e moun no thing do. If ony man dwell-6 
ith not in me, he schal be caste out as a 
braunche, and schal wexe drie; and thei 
schulen gadere hym, and thei schulen 
caste hym in to the fier, and he bren- 
neth". If 3e dwellen in me, and my7 
wordis dwelle in 30u, what euer thing 
3e wolen, 3e schulen axe, and it schal be 
don to 3ou. In this thing my fadir iss 
clarified, that 3e brynge forth ful myche 
fruyt, and that 3e be maad my disciplis. 
As my fadir louede me, YY haue loued9 
30u; dwelle 3e in my loue. If 3e kepen” to 
my comaundementis, 3e schwen dwelle 
in my loue; as Y haue kept the co- 
maundementis of my fadir, and Y* 
dwelleY in his loue. These thingis Yu 
spak to 3ou, that my ioye” be in 3o0u, and 
3oure ioye be fulfillid*. This is my co-12 
maundement, that 3e loue togidere, as Y 
louede? jou. No man hath more loue13 
than this, that a man putte his lijf 
for hise freendis. 3e° ben my freendis14 
if 3e doen tho thingis, that Y comaunde 
to 30u. Now Y schal not clepe’ 30u15 
seruauntis, for the sernaunt woot not, 
what his lord schal do; but® Y haue 
clepid' 30u freendis, for alle thingis what 
euere Y herde of my fadir, YS haue maad 


P syoun, or [a w] braunch aGMNpeTiy. sioun sx. 


t Om. a. 
x the gw pr.m. XY. 


uvyne tree 4 pr. m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
¥Y vyne tree 4 pr.m. GMN 


posTwxy. %Om.4pr.m.GMNPestwxy. *®Om.r. > syouns, or braunchis A pr.m. GMNPOQTWY. 
siounes sx. © Whoa pr.m.GMNPQsTWwX. 4 syoun 4 pr.m.GMNPosTWXY. ©Om. sv.  f maunde- 
mentes G¥xXY. & maundementes Guxy. h fulfillid 4 pr. m. GMNPQOSTWXY. iQm. mposx. that is, 
his lijf w.  * the asrnpsw. thes Tr. |! comaundide g. Om. m™. 

Pnoxka, Qthea. f and3ebpr.m. 3e beng. and3ebenk. $%Om.g. thethis1.  % schal 
brenne K. Vand Yb. Wschulkeper. *Om.npr.m.k.  ¥ haf dwellid o. dwelle3ek. 2 louec. 
a fillid r, » haue Joued 1x sec.m.k. © And je rk prom. sey 1. ¢forsothe 1, fseid1. Sand 11. 


XV. 16-—XVI. 2. 


16maad knowun to 30u. 3e han not chosun 
me, but I chees 30u; and ‘I have" put 30u, 
that 3e go, and brynge® fruit, and 3oure 
fruit dwelle; that what euere thing 3e 
schulen axe the fadir in my name, he 
173yue to 30u. Thes thingis I comaunde to 
1830u, that 3e loue to gidere. If the world 
hatith? 30u, wite 3e, for it hadde me in 
ishate first than 30u. If 3e hadden be of 
the world, the world schulde loue that 
thing that was his; but for 3e ben not of 
the world, but I chees 30u fro4 the world, 
20therfore the world hatith 3ou. Haue 3e 
mynde of” my word, which’ IJ seide to 
3ou, The seruaunt is not more than his 
lord. If thei han pursuwed me, and thei 
schulen pursue 30u ; if thei han kept my 
2i word, and thei schulen kepe joure. But 
thei schulen do to 30u alle thes thingis 
for my name, for thei witen not him that 
22sente me. If J hadde not come, and hadde 
not spoke tot hem, thei schulden not haue 
synne; forsoth now thei han not" excusa- 
23cioun’ of her synne. He that hatith me, 
24hatith and my fadir. If I hadde not don 
werkis in hem, whiche* non othir man 
dide, thei schulden not haue synne; for- 
soth now and thei han seyn, and hatid* 
2;me and my fadir. But that the word be 
fillidy, that is writun in ‘the lawe of hem?, 
For thei hadden me in hate with outen 
26cause, ‘or freely*. Forsoth whanne the 
cumfortour schal come, which” I schal 
sende to 30u fro the® fadir, a spirit of 
treuthe, thet whiche procedith®, ‘ov cometh 
JSorth', of the fadir, he schal bere witness- 
ing of me; and 3e schulen bere witnessing, 
for 3e ben with me fro the bigynnyng. 


CAP. XVI. 


i Thes thingis I haue spokun to 30u, 
2that 3¢ ben not sclaundrid. Thei schulen 


JOHN. 


281 


knowun to 30u. 3e han not chosun me, i6 
but Y chees 3ou; and Y haue put 3o0u, 
that 3e go, and brynge forth fruyt, and 
3oure fruyt dwelle; that what euere thing 
3e8% axen® the fadir in my name, he 3yue 
to 30u. These thingis Y comaunde to!i7 
jou, that 3e lone togidere. If the world is 
hatith* 3ou, wite 3e, that it hadde me in 
hate rather than 30u. If 3e hadden be1s 
of the world, the world schulde loue that 
thing that was! his; but for 3e ben not of 
the world, but Y chees jou fro the world, 
therfor the world hatith jou. Haue 3e20 
mynde of my word, which Y seide to 
jou, The seruaunt is not grettere than 
his lord. If thei han pursued me, thei 
schulen pursue 30u also; if thei han 
kept my word, thei schulen kepe 3oure 
also. But thei schulen do to 3o0u alle2i 
these thingis for my name, for thei 
knowen not hym that sente me. If Y22 
hadde not comun, and hadde not spokun 
to hem, thei schulden not haue synne ; 
but now thei haue noon excusacioun of 
her synne. He that hatith me, hatithes 
also my fadir. If Y hadde not doone 
werkis™ in hem, whiche noon other man 
dide,.thei schulden not haue synne; but 
now both thei han seyn, and hatid" me 
and my fadir. But that the word bezs 
fulfillid, that is writun in her lawe, For 
thei hadden me in hate with outen cause. 
But whanne the coumfortour schal come, 26 
which Y schal sende to 30u fro the fadir, 
a° spirit of treuthe, which cometh of 
the fadir, he schal bere witnessyng of 
me; and 3e schulen bere witnessyng, for 
3e ben with me fro the bigynnyng. 


CAP. XVI. 


These thingis Y haue, spokun to 3ou,1 
that 3e be not sclaundrid. Thei schulene 


a Om. 4 prim. G pr.m, MNPQSTXY. haue w. © bring forth s. P hate 4GMNPOQOSTIVX. 4 for 4. 
Ton mpxy. §&the which agapestivy. that x. twith wprm. noone. Vexcusing zx. W the 
which 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. x hatiden Gupsrivxy. ¥ fulfild 4 prom. GMNPOQSTWXY. Z 30ure 


lawe earnporiwy. the lawe s. her lawe x. 
Cmy nN. 4Om.rx. © precedeth yn. f Om. x. 


gg that3eo. baskenr. i Om. r pr.m. 
1 han hatid Erkpar sec. m. beeghika8. han herd s. 


VOL. IV. 


a Om. AGMNPQSTWXY. 


k hate A pr.m, E. 
© the k pr.m. 


b the which 4 pr.m. GMNPQTWXY. 


1 was of &. isa prom. ™ the werkis k. 


°° cometh forth o. 


282 


make’ 30u with oute synagogis, but the 
our cometh, that ech man that sleeth 30u, 
deme him silf" for! to 3yue sacrifice to 
3God. And thei schulen do to 30u thes 
thingis, for thei han not knowe the fadir, 
anethir me. But thes thingis I spak to 
30u, that whanne the our of hem schal 
come, 3e haue mynde, for I seide to jou. 
51 seide not to 30u thes thingis fro the 
bigynnyng, for I was with 3ou. And now 
I go to him that sente me, and no man 
of 30u askith! me, Whidur ‘thou goist™? 
ebut for I haue spokyn to 30u thes thingis, 
sorwe, ‘or henynesse", hath fulfillid 3oure 
7herte. But I seie to 30u treuthe, it sped- 
ith to 30u, that I go; sothli if I scha) not 
go awey, the counfortour schal not come 
to 30u; forsoth if I schal go a wey, I scha) 
ssende hym to 30u. And whamne he schal 
come, he schal reproue the world of synne, 
gand of ° ri3tfuluesse?, and of dom. For- 
sothe of synne, for thei han not bileuyd in 
10to me; forsothe4 of ri3tfulnesse’, for I go 
to the fadir, and now 3e schulen not se 
iiine; forsothe of dom, for the prince of this 
1zworld is now demyd. jit I hane many 
thingis for’ to seie to 30u, but 3e mown 
iznot bere now. Sotheli whanne ‘the ilket 
spirit of treuthe schal come, he schal teche 
3ou al treuthe; sothli he schal not speke 
of him self, but what euere thingis he 
schal heere, he schal speke; and he" schal 
telle to 30u the thingis that ben to com- 
uynge’. He schal clarifie me, for of myne 
ishe schal take, and schal telle to 30u. Alle 
thingis, what euere* thingis the fadir hath, 
ben myne; therfore I seide to 3ou, for of 
myne he schal take, and schal¥ telle to 30u. 
16 A litil, aud now 3e schulen not se me; and 
eft? a litil, and 3e schulen se me, for I go 
17to the fadir. Therfore summe of his dis- 
ciplis seiden to gidere, What is this thing 


g make, or do Gow pr.m. ¥. do x. 
laxith plures. m™ goyst thou mPesirx. 
4 sothely 4 pr.m. GMNPOSTVWXY. 
u Om. N. Ycome 4 prim, GUNPQSTWXY. 
2 eftsone 4GMNQSTIVXY. 


P Om. 1. 
t Om. cbek. 


PP demeth o. 
u the b. 


4 Om. o. 


JOHN. 


h Om. GMNPOQSTFIVXY. 
1 Om. x. 
T ristwisenesse 4GMNPOSTWXY. 
x kin 4 prom. GMNPQSTWXY. 


44 come of hem o. 
Vv what euer Ev. what euere thingis 1. W that 1. 


XVI. 3—17. 


make 3ou with outen the? synagogis, but 
the our cometh, that ech man that sleeth 
3ou, deme?? that he doith seruyce to God. 
And thei schulen do to 3ou these thingis, 3 
for thei han not knowun the fadir, ne- 
ther me. But these thingis Y spak to4 
jou, that whanne the our ‘of hem? schal 
come%, 3e haue mynde, that Y seide to 
jou. Y seide not to jou these thingiss 
fro the bigynnyng, for Y was with 3ou. 
And now Y go to hym that sente ie, 
and no man of jou axith me, Whidur 
‘thou goist'? but for Y haue spokun to 6 
30u these thingis, heuynesse hath fulfillid 
3oure herte. But Y seie to 3ou treuthe,7 
it spedith to 30u, that Y go; for if Y go 
not forth, the coumfortour schal not come 
to 30u; but if Y go forth, Y schal sende 
hym to 30u. And whanne he cometh, s 
he schal repreue the world of synne, and 
of ri3twisnesse, and of doom. Of synne, 9 
for thei han not bileued in" ine; and of 10 
rijtwisnesse, for Y go to the fadir, and 
now 3e* schulen not se me; but of doom, 1! 
for the prince of this world is now 
demed. 3it Y haue many thinugis fort to12 
seie to 30u, but 3e moun not bere hem 
now. But whanne thilke® spirit of13 
treuthe cometh, he schal teche 30u al 
trewthe; for he schal not speke of hym 
silf, but what euer thinges he schal here, 
he scha] speke; and he schal telle to 30u 
tho thingis that ben to come. He schal 14 
clarifie me, for of myne he schal take, 
and schal telle to 3ou. Alle thingis 1s 
‘whiche euer’ the fadir hath, ben myne; 
therfor Y seide to 30u, for” of inyne he 
schal take, and schal telle to jou. A litil, 16 
aud thanne 3e schulen not se me; and 
eftsoone a litil, and* 3e schulen se me, 
for Y go to the fadir. Therfor summe!7 
of hise disciplis seiden togidere, What is 


K seruise AGMNPQSTVWXY. 

P rigtwisenesse 4GMNPOSTWXY. 
8Om.sx. tthilke w pr.m. that x. 
y Om. G pr.m. MNPSXY. 


iOm. sx. 
° Om. Ww. 


tr tok. 
x and than o. 


t goost thou hik sec. m. 8. s thei g. 


XVI, 18——29. 


that he seith to vs, A litil, and 3e schulen 
not se me; and eft¢ a litil, and 3e schulen 
isse me, for I go to the fader? Therfore 
thei seiden, What is this, that he seith to 
vs, A litel? we witen not what he spekith. 
19 Forsothe Jhesu knew, for thei wolden axe 
him, and he seide to hem, Of this thing 3e 
seken among 3ou, for I seide, A litil, and 
3e schulen not se me; and eft* a litel, and 
203e schulen se me. Treuli, treuli, I seye 
to 30u, for 3e schulen morne and wepe, 
forsothe the world schal enioye; forsothe 
je schulen be sorwful, but 3oure sorwe® 
21schal turne in to ioye. Sothly a womman 
whanne sche berith child, hath sorwef, for 
hir our cometh ; forsothe whanne sche hath 
borun a sone, now sche thenkith not on’ 
the ‘pressure, or charge", for ioye, for a 
22man is borun in to the world. And ther- 
fore 3e han now sorwe, sothli eft! I schal 
se 30u, and 3oure herte schal enioye, and 
no man schal take fro 30u 3o0ure ioye. 
23 And in that day 3e schulen not axe me 
ony thing; treuli, treuli, I seie to 30u. if 
3e schulen axe the fadir ‘ony thing* in 
24my name, he schal 3yue! to 30u. Til now 
3e axiden not ony thing in my name; ‘axe 
3e™, and 3e schulen take, that 30ure ioye he 
2sful. I haue spokun to 30u thes thingis in 
prouerbis, ‘or derke® saumplis®; the our 
cometh, whanne now I schal not speke to 
30u in prouerbis, but opynly of my fadir I 
26schal telle to? 30u. In that day 3e schu- 
len axe in my name; ands I seie not* to 
3ou, for I schal preye the fadir for" 3ou; 
27forsothe he’ the fadir loueth 30u, for 3e 
han loued me, and han bilenyd, for I 
2a wente out fro God. I wente out fro the 
fadir, and I cam in to the world; eft- 
soones IJ leeue the world, and I” go to the 
eofadir. His disciplis seyen* to him, Lo! 
now thou spekist opynli, and thou seist 


© eftsone AGMNPQSTWXY. 
heuynesse, or sorowe Ww. 
SIPQSW. pressure X. 
2 Om. x. 
now GMPXY. t Om. mPW sec.m. XY. 
x saiden A pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 


yOm.o. 2 Om. 0. 
h see. m. ik prem. » And Ib prim. k prim. 


JOHN. 


4 eftsone 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
f sorwe, or heuynesse AGNPQTY. 

i eftsone 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 

0 ensaumplis AGMPTWY. exsaumplis s. Om. X. 

U of A pr. m, GMNPQSTIVXY. 


zz axeth 1. . @ that 3oure ioie be ful, and 3e schulen take obchik pr. m. 
¢ and eftsone ek pr. m. i 


283 


this thing that he seith to vs, A litil, and 
3e schulen not se me; and eftsoone a 
litil, and 3e schulen se me, for Y go ‘to 
the fadir? Therfor thei seiden, What is18 
this that he scith to vs, A litil? we 
witen not what he spekith. And Jhesus19 
knew, that thei wolden axe hym, and he 
seide to hem, Of this thing 3e seken 
among 30u, for Y seide, A litil, and 3e 
schulen not se me; and eftsoone a litil, 
and 3e schulen se me. Treuli, trewli, Y 20 
seie to 30u, that 3e schulen mourne and 
wepe, but the world schal haue ioye ; 
and 3e schulen be soreuful, but 3oure 
sorewe schal turne in to ioye. A wom-21 
man whanne sche berith child, hath 
heuynesse, for hir tyme is comun; but 
whanne sche hath borun a sone, now 
sche thenkith not ou the peyne, for ioye, 
for a man is borun in to the world. And 22 
therfor 3e han now sorew, but eftsoone 
Y schal se 30u, and 3oure herte schal 
haue joie, aud no man schal take fro 30u 
joure joie. And in that day 3e schulen 23 
not axe me ony thing; treuli, treuli, ‘Y 
seie to 3ouy, if 3e axen the fadir ony 
thing in my nante, he schal 3yue to 3ou. 
‘Til now 3e axiden no thing in mya 
name*; ‘axe 3e%, ‘and 3e schulen take, 
that 3oure ioie be ful*. Y haue spokunes 
to 3ou these thingis in prouerbis; the 
our cometh, whanne now Y schal not 
speke to 30u in prouerbis, but opynli of 
my fadir Y schal telle to 30u. In that26 
dai 3e schulen axe in my name; and Y 
seie not to 3ou, that Y schal preye the 
fadir of * 30u; for the fadir hym silf27 
loueth 30u, for 3e han loued me, and han 
bilened, that Y wente out fro God. Yos 
wente out fro the fadir, and Y cam in 
to the world; eftsoone® Y leeue the 
world, and Y go to the fadir. Hise 29 


€ sorwe, o7 heuynesse AGMNPQSTY. 


& of sow pr.m. xy. 4 pressure, or peyne 


k Om. fr. l3iue it wpxy. ™ axeth x. 
a4 Om. G pr. m.y. rOm. Q. 5 and 
Vv Om. QW pr. im. w Om. c. 


aa for 
cc Om. i. 


002 


284 


sono prouerbe. Now we witen, for thou 
wost alle thingis; and it is noY nede to 
thee, that ony man axe thee. Iny’ this 
thing we bileuen, for thou wentist out fro? 

31God. Jhesu answeride to hem, Now 3e 

s2bilenen. Lo! the our cometh, and now 
it cometh, that 3e be disparplid, ‘ov sca- 
terid*, ech in to his owne thingis, and 
leeue me aloone; and I am not aloone, for 

asthe fadir is with me. Thes thingis ] 
haue spokun to 3o0u, that 3e hane pees in 
me; in the world 3e schulen haue press- 
ing, ‘or ouerleying », but ‘triste 3e°, I haue 
ouercome the world. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 ‘Jhesu spak thes thingis’, and the y3en 
lift® vp inf to heuene, he seide, Fadir, the 
our cometh, clarifie thi sone, that thi sone 

2clarifie thee. As thou hast 3ouun to him 
power of ech fleisch, ‘or man8, that al 
thing that thou hast jounn to hym, he 

33yue to hem euerlasting lyf. Forsothe! 
this is' euerlasting lyf, that thei knowe 
thee aloone verry God, and whom thou 
4sentist, Jhesu Crist. I haue clarifyed thee 
on erthe*, I haue endid the werk, that thou 
shast 3ouun to me, that Ido. And now, 
fadir, clarifie thou’ me at thi silf, with 
clerenesse™ that I hadde at thee, bifore the 
cworld was maad. I hane schewid thi 
name to the" men, whiche® thou hast 
jouun to me of the world.; thei weren 
thine, and thou hast j3onun hem to me, 
zand thei han kept thi word. And now 
thei ban knownn, for alle thingis that 
sthou hast 3ouun to me, hen of thee. For 
the wordis that thou hast 3ouun to me, I 
3af to hem; and thei han takun, and han 
knowun verili, for I wente out fro thee; 
and thei bileuyden, for thon sentist me. 

oI preie for hem, not for the world, but for 

hem, that thou hast 3ouun to me, for thei 


Y not A pr.m.G pr.m., NTVW prom. Y. 
4 These th. Jh. sp. wpxy. € hiftid x. 
Apr.m.otry. Om. es. 


d wotist rR. € no b. f Om. a. 


LOm. c8. 


JOHN. 


yy And x. 
f£Om. ry. 
m cleennesse Q. the cleernesse s. 


8 of plures. 


XVI. 30—-XVII. 9. 


disciplis seiden to hym, Lo! now thon 
spekist opynli, and thou seist no pro- 
uerbe. Now we witen, that thou wost4s0 
alle thingis; and it is not® nede to thee, 
that ony man axe thee. In this thing 
we bileuen, that thou wentist out fro 
God. Jhesus answeride to hem, Now 3e:1 
bileuen. Lo! the our cometh, and now 32 
it cometh, that 3e be disparplid, ech in 
to hise owne thingis, and that 3e leeue 
me aloone; and Y am not aloone, for 
the fadir is with me. These thingis Y 33 
haue spokun to 30u, that 3e haue pees in 
me; in the world 3e schulen haue disese, 
but trust 3e, Y haue ouercomun the world. 


CAP. XVII. 


These thingis Jhesus spak, and whanne 1 
he hadde cast vp hise ij3en in to heuene, 
he seide, Fadir, the our cometh, clarifie 
thi sone, that thi sone clarifie thee. As2 
thou hast 3ouun tof hym power on® ech 
fleisch, that al thing that thou hast 
jouun to hym, he 3yue to hem euerlast- 
ynge lijf. And this is" euerlastynge lijf,3 
that thei knowe thee very God aloone, 
and whom thou hast sent, Jhesu Crist. 
Y hane clarified thee on the! erthe, Y4 
haue endid the werk, that thou hast 
3onun tok me to do. And now, fadir,s5 
clarifie thou' me at thi silf, with the 
clerenesse that Y hadde at thee, bifor the 
world was maad. Y haue schewid this 
name to tho men, whiche thou hast 3onun 
to me of the world; thei weren thine, 
and thou hast 3ouun hem to ine, and thei 
han kept thi word. And now thei han7 
knowun, that alle thingis that thou hast 
jouun to me, ben of thee. For the wordiss 
that thou hast j3ouun to me, Y 3af to 
hem; and thei han takun, and han 
knowun verili, that Y wente out fro thee; 
and thei bileueden, that thou sentist me. 
Y preie for hem, Y preye not for thes 


€ tristeth x. 
k the erthe 


Zofx. 20m. x. » Om. ex. 
gOm. x. 8Forn. iOmy. 
nQOm. x. © whom MPXyY. 


h Om. 1. iQm. c. k Om. R pr. m. bf. 


XVII. 10-—~24. 


1oben thine. And alle myne thingis ben 
thine, and thin thingis ben myne; and I 
11am clarified in hem. And now I am not 
in the world, and thes ben in the world, 
and I come to thee. Hooli fadir, kepe 
hem in thy name, whiche? thou ‘hast 
3ouun’ to me, that thei be oon, as and we. 
i2 Whanne I was with hem, I kepte hem in 
thi name; whiche’ thou ‘hast 30nunt to me, 
I kepte, and no man of hem perischide, 
no" but the sone of perdicioun, o7 damp- 
13 zacioun, that the scripture be fillid’. For- 
sothe now I come to thee, and ‘I speke 
thes thingis” in the world, that thei haue 
14my ioye fillid* in hem silf. I 3af to hem 
thi word, and the world hadde hem in 
hate; for thei ben not of the world, as andy 
15I am not of the world. I preie not, that 
thou take awey” hem fro* the world, but 
i¢that thon kepe hem fro yuel. Thei ben 
not of the world, as and» I am not of the 
17 world. Halwe thou hem in treuthe; thi 
is word is treuthe. As thou sentist® me in 
to the world, and I sente hem in to the 
i9world. And I halwe my silf for hem, that 
20and thei be halwid in treuthe. Sotheli I 
preie not oonli for hem, but and for hem 
that ben to bilenynge? in to me bi the 
zi.word of hem; that alle thei® be oon, as 
thou, fadir, in me, and I in thee, that and 
thei in vs be oon; that the world bileue, 
22forf thou -hast sent me. And I hane 
jouun to hem the clerenesse, that thou 
hast 3ouun to me, that thei be oon, as and 
23we ben oon; I in hem, and thou in me, 
that thei be endid in? oon; and that the 
world knowe, that thou sentist me, and 
hast louyd hem, as thou hast louyd andi 
aime. Fadir, I wole that and thei whiche* 
thou ‘hast 3ouun! to me, be with me where 
Tam, that thei se my cleernesse, that™ thou 


4 whom GMNPQTXY. 
geue sxy. "Om. ox. 
A pr. mM. GMNPQSTIWXY. 
b Om. eG prom. © sendist x. 
AGMNPOQSTVWXY. h as and ewposw. 
GMNPQTWY. 3eue sx.  ™ whiche psy. 


Uhast 30uen 1. ™ ben oon hik. as also o. 
PP ino. 4 anda sec. m. 


u Om. A. 


T ganest GMNPOTIV. 3eue SXY. 
¥ fulfild 4 prom. GaMNPSTIWXY. 
y Om. 4 pr. m. G pr. m. 

4 beleue AGMNPOSTWXY. 

i Om. eupesw. 


an Om. c. 
tT and I epqsb pr.m. chik pr. m. a. 


JOHN. 285 


world, but for hem that thou hast 3ouun 
to me, for thei ben thine. And alle my 10 
thingis ben thine, and thi thingis ben 
myne; and Y am clarified in hem. Andtt 
now Y am not in the world, and these 
ben in the world, and Y come to thee. 
Hooli fadir, kepe hem in thi name, 
whiche thou 3auest! to me, that thei ben 
oon, as we ber™. While Y was with 12 
hem, Y kepte hem in thi name; thilke 
that thou janest to me, Y kepte, and 
noon of hem perischide, but the sone of 
perdicioun, that the scripture be fulfillid. 
But now Y come to thee, and Y speke13 
these thingis in the world, that thei haue 
my ioie fulfillid in hem silf. Y 3af toi 
hem thi word, and the world hadde hem 
in hate; for thei ben not of the world, 
as" Y am not of the world. Y preye not, ts 
that thou take hem awei fro the world, 
but that thou kepe hem fro ynel. They 16 
ben not of the world, as Y am not of 
the world. Halewe thou™ hem in trenth®; 17 
thi word is treuthe. As thou sentist me 1s 
in to the world, also Y sente? hem ‘in 
toPP the world. And Y halewe my silfi9 
for hem, that also thei ben halewid in 
treuthe. And Y preye not oneli for20 
hem, but also for hem that schulden 
bilene in to me bi the word of hem; thatai 
all ben oon, as thou, fadir, in me, and Y 
in thee, that also thei in vs be oon; that 
the world bilene, that thou hast sent me. 
And Y haue 3ouun to hem the clerenesse, 22 
that thou hast 3ouun to me, that’ thei 
ben oon, as we ben oon; Y" in hem, 23 
and thou in me, that thei be endid in tos 
con; and that the world knowe, that thou 
sentist me, and hast loued hem, as thou 
hast loued also me. Fadir, thei** whiche 24 
thou 3auest' to me, Y wole that" where 


8 whom GMNPQTXY. t gauest GMNPOTIY. 


w these thingis I speke wpxy. x fulfild 
2 Om. G pr.m. TXY. 8 of G prom. MPQTXY. 
€ Om. acmnegstwxy. f that x. 8 in to 


k whom eunporxy. | 3anest 4 pr.m. 


P sende gk. 
t hast 3ouen 1. 


© the treuthe s prem. g 
§Om. R prem. §8 tho i. 


286 JOHN. 


hast 30uun to me"; for thou louedist me 

25bifor the makinge of the world. ‘Ri3tful 
fadir®, the world knew ‘not thee?, for- 
sothed I knew’ thee, and thes knowen’, for 

a6thou sentist me. And I haue maad thi 
name knowe to hem, and schal make 
knowe; that the loue by which thou hast 
loued me, be in hem, and I in hem. 


CAP. XVIII. 


1 Whanne Jhesu hadde seid thes thingis, 
he wente out with his disciplis ouer the 
strond of Cedron, where was a 3erd, ‘or a 
gardyn*, in to which he entride, and his 
edisciplis. Sothli and Judas, that bitrai- 
ede him, wiste the place, for ofte Jhesu 
cam to gidere thidur with his disciplis. 
3Therfore whanne Judas hadde takun a 
cumpany of kni3tis, and“ of the* bischopis 
and Pharisees mynystris, he camY with 
4lanternis, and brondis, and armys?. And 
so" Jhesu witinge alle thingis that weren 
to comynge> on® him’, wente forth, and 
5Sseith to hem, Whom seken 3e? Thei 
answeriden to him, Jhesu of Nazareth. 
Jhesu seith® to hem, Iam. Forsoth and 
Judas that bitrayede hym, stood with hem. 
6 Therfore as he seide to hem, I am, thei 


wenten ahbak, and felden doun in to 


zerthes. Eft" he axide' hem, Whom seken 
3e? Forsoth thei seiden, Jhesu Nazarenl. 
8 He answeride to hem, I seide to 30u, for 
Iam; therfore if 3e seken me, suffre 3e 
gthes to™ go awey. That the word which® 
he seide schulde be fillid°, For I loste not 
ony of hein, whiche? thon hast 30uun to 
iome. Forsothe’ Symount Petre hauynge 
a swerd, drou3 it" out, and smot the ser- 
uaunt of the bischop, and kitte of his litils 


Nn in-to kK. 
r knowe T. 
x Om. musiv. 
€vpon emnpTivy. Omg. 4 


s knewen AGMNPSTF NW. 


Om. 9. © seide e. 


© Fadir iust, or rijtful a pr.m.can~pestwy. Fader inst x. 
t Om. AGMNPQSTVIVXY. 
Z armeres s, 
£ the erthe wperwxy. 


Y cam thidur 4 pr.m. GUNPOSTWXY. 


XVII. 25——-X VIII. 10. 


Y am, that thei be with me, that thei see 
my clerenesse, that thou hast 3ouun to 
me; for thou louedist me bifor the mak- 
yng of the world. Fadir, ri3tfuli the2s 
world knew thee not, but Y knew thee, 
and these knewen, that thou sentist me. 
And Y haue maad thi name knownn to2e 
hem, and schal make knowun; that the 
loue bi which thou ‘hast loued" me, be 
in hem, and Y in hem. 


CAP. XVIII. 


Whanne Jhesus hadde seid these1 
thingis, he wente out with hise disciplis 
ouer the strond of Cedron, where was a 
jerd’, in to which he entride’’, and hise 
disciplis. And Judas, that bitrayede2 
hym, knew the place, for ofte Jhesus 
cam thidur with hise disciplis. Therfor3 
whanne Judas hadde takun a ecumpany 
of kny3tis, and mynystris of the bischopis 
and of the” Fariseis, he cam thidur with 
lanternys, and brondis, and armeris. And 4 
so Jhesus witynge alle thingis that weren 
to come on hym, wente forth, and seide 
to hem, Whom seken 3e? Thei answer-5 
iden* to hym, Jhesu of Nazareth. Jhe- 
sus seith to hem, Y am. And Judas 
that bitraiede hym, stood with hem. And 6 
whanne he seide to hem, Y am, thei 
wenten abak, and fellen doun on the 


erthe. And eft’ he axide hem, Whom7 
seken 3e? And thei seiden, Jhesu of 
Nazareth. He answeride? to hem, Y8 


seide to jou, that Y am; therfor if 3e 
seken me, suffre 3e these to go awei. 
That the word which he seide schuldes 
be fulfillid, For Y loste not ony of hem, 
whiche thou ‘hast 3ouun* to me. Ther-10 
for Symount Petre hadde a swerd, and 
drow it out, and smoot the seruaunt of 


P thee not wpxy. 4 for 9. 

w Om. Q. and mynistris 1 pr.m. 
@Om.r. come GMNPOSTIXY. 
h Eftsone 4 pr.m. GMNP 


astwwxy.  iseidetos. 1 of Nazaren x pr.m. w pr.m. of Nazareth x. = ™ for to MPpeTivy. n the 
which 4 pr.m.GaprTwy. © fulfild 4 pr.m.@unpestwxy.  P the which 4 pr.m.@unposriy. 4 Ther- 
fore 4 prom. @MNposTrWwxy, Om. x. $8 Om. W prim. 

¥ lonedist 0. ora gardyn x sec.m. marg. ‘YY wento. WOm.bpr.m. *saideno.  Y¥ eftsone o. 
2saido. 8 3af 0. 


XVI. 11-23. 


rij3t eere. Forsothe thet naine of" the 
liseruaunt was Malkus. Therfore Jhesu 
seide’ to Petre, Sende thou’ the swerd in 
to the schethe; wolt thou not, that I 
dryuke thilke* cuppe, that my fadir 3af to 
1zme? Therfore the cumpany of kny3tis, and 
theY tribune, and the mynystris of Jewis, 
istoken Jhesu, and bounden him, and ledden 
him “first to Annas’; sothli he was fadir? 
of Cayphas* wyf, that was bischop of that 
is3eer. Sothli it was Cayphas, that 3af 
counceil to the Jewis, that it spedith o? 
isman fore to deie for the peple. Ther- 
fore? Symount Petre suede Jhesu, and 
auother disciple; forsoth thilke® disciple 
was knowun to the bischop. And he en- 
tride yn with Jhesu, in to the halle of the 
igbischop ; sothly Petre stood at the dore 
withoute forth. Therfore the tothir‘ dis- 
ciple, that was knowun to the bischop, 
wente out, and seide to the womman kep- 
iz7inge the dore, and ledde yn Petre. Ther- 
fore the handmayde®%, kepere of the dore, 
seide to Petre, Wher" and thou art of the 
disciplis of this man? He seide, I am 
isnot. Forsoth the seruauutis and mynys- 
tris’ stooden at the colis, for it was coold, 
and thei warmyden hem; sothli and Petre 
was with hem, stondinge and warmynge 
ighin. Therfore the bischop axide Jhesu 
200f his disciplis, and of his teching. Jhesu 
answeride ‘to him, I haue spokun opynly 
to the world ; I tau3te euere/ in the* syna- 
goge, and in the* temple, whidur alle the 
Jewis camen to gidere, and in priuy! I 
aispak no thing. What axist thou me? 
axe™ hem that herden, what I haue 
spokun to hem; lo! thei witen, what 
zathingis I haue seyd. Whanne he hadde 
seid thes thingis, oon of the mynystris 
stondinge ny3, 3af a boffat to Jhesu, sey- 
inge, Answerist thou so to the byschop? 
23 Jhesn answeride to him, If I haue spokun 
yuele, bere thou witnessing of yuel; sothli 


tOm. x. %to mesyvw. Yseith xy. Ww Om. x. 
fader G sec.m.upsw. 4 Caifasis x. Dat. 
€that x. fother sx. & handmaiden 4cmNnpeswxy. 


J euer more 4 prom. GuNPasTIVxY. * Om. am. 


> kitte tse pr.m.hik. ¢Om.ca. 4 Om. k. 


€ herden me o. >} and o. 


JOHN. 


x that x. 
¢ Om. gsw sec. m. xX. 


1 preuyte @ sec. m. MPSIV sce. m. 


e the oother x. that other a. thilke othir k. 


287 


the bischop, and kittide® of his ri3t eer. 
And the name of the sernaunt was Mal- 
cus. Therfor Jhesus seide to Petre, Putte 11 
thou thi swerd in to thi schethe; wolt 
thou not, that® Y drynke the cuppe, that 
my fadir 3af to me? Therfor the cum-!2 
penye of kny3tis, and the tribune, and 
the’ mynystris of the Jewis, token Jhe- 
su, and bounden hym, and ledden hym 13 
first to Annas; for he was fadir of Caifas 
wijf, that was bischop of that 3eer. And 1s 
it was Caifas, that 3af counsel to the 
Jewis, that it spedith, that o man die 
for the puple. But Symount Petre suede 15 
Jhesu, and another disciple; and thilke 
disciple was knowun to the _ bischop. 
And he entride with Jhesu, in to the 
halle of the bischop; but Petre stood até 
the dore with outforth. Therfor ‘the 
tother¢ disciple, that was knowun to the 
bischop, wente out, and seide to the wom- 
man that kepte the dore, and brou3te in 
Petre. And the damysel, kepere of the 17 
dore, seide to Petre, Whether thou art 
also of this mannys disciplis? He seide, 
Yam not. And the seruantis ands 
mynystris stooden at the coolis, for it 
was: coold, and thei warmyden hein ; 
and Petre was with hem, stondynge 
and warmynge hym. And the bischop19 
axide Jhesuf of hise disciplis, and of his 
techyng. Jhesus answerde to hym, Y 20 
haue spokun opynli to the world; Y 
tau3te euermore in the synagoge, and in 
the temple, whider alle the Jewis cainen 
togidere, and in hiddlis Y spak no thing. 
What axist thou me? axe hem thatei 
herden’, what Y haue spokun to hem; 
lo"! thei witen, what thingis Y haue seid. 
Whanne he hadde seid these thingis, oon 22 
of the mynystris stondynge ni3, 3af a 
buffat to Jhesu, and seide, Answerist 
thou so to the bischop? Jhesus answer- 2 
ide to hym, If Y hane spokun yuel, bere 


yOm.x. yy to Annas first kK. 2 the 

4 Forsothe 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTFIVXY. 
h Whether x. i the ministris 4Garnpsi sec. m. 
m axe 3e JV pr. mM. 


f him o. 


288 JOHN. 


241f wel, whi smytist thou me? And Annas 
25sente him boundun to Cayfas, the® bischop. 
Forsothe Symount Petre was stondynge 
and warmynge him; therfore thei seiden 
to him, Wher? and thou art his disciple ? 
26 He denyede, and seyde, I am not. Oon 
of the bischopis seruauntis, cosyn of hym, 
whos .litel eere Petre kittidet of, seyde, 
Wher' I sy3 ‘not thee’ in the gardynt with 
2jzhym? Therfore ‘eft Petre’ denyede, and 
2sanoon the koc crew. Therfore thei leden 
Jhesu to Cayfas, in to the moot halle; sothli 
it was morwetyde”, and thai entriden not in 
to the moot halle, that thei schulden not be 
defoylid, but that thei schulden ete paske. 
29 Therfore Pilat wente out with oute forth 
to hem, and seide, What accusing brynge 
303e azens this man? Thei answeriden, and 
seiden to hym, If this were not* a mys- 
doer, we hadden® not bitakun hym to 
sithee. Therfore Pilat seith to hem, Take 
3e him, and ‘deme 3e him’, vp* 3oure lawe. 
Therfore thei seyden to him, It is not 
3zleefful to vs for> to slee ony man; that 
the word of Jhesu schulde be fillid®, which 
he seide, signyfiynge bi what deeth he was 
33to deiynge®. Therfore eftf Pilate entride 
in to the moot halle, and clepide Jhesu, 
and seide to him, Ert thou king of Jewis? 
34 Jhesu answeride, and seide to him, Seist 
thou this thing of thi silf, ether? othere 
35seiden to thee of me? Pilat answeride, 
Wherb I am a Jew? Thi folk and 
bischopis bytokun thee to me; what hast 
36thou don? Jhesu answeride, My kyng- 
dom is not of this world; if my kyngdom 
were of this world, sothly my mynystris 
schulden stryue, that I schulde not be 
takun to the Jewis; now forsothe my 
kyngdom is not of hennis', ‘or of this 
37 place*. And so Pilat seide to him, ‘Ther- 
fore art thou kyng!? Jhesu answeride, 


° Om. 4G prim. NTXY. 
t serd AGMNPQSTVIWXY. 
MSWX. xno s. y han n. 
A prom. GMNPOSTXY. fullyd wv. 
f eftsone 4 pr. m. GMNPQSTIWXY. 


P Whether x. 


z demeth x. 


kyng x. 
itoo. kOm.k sec.m. 10m, epgsx pr.m. abega. 
© token o. P wolden ia sec. m. 


q kitte 4GMNPQSTWXY. 
u Petir eftsone 4 pr.m. GMNPQOSTWXY. 

8 aftir GMNPOSTIVXY. 
4 the which 4 pr. m. GMNPQOSTWXY.' 

& or 1Q. outher x. 


XVIII. 24—37. 


thou witnessyng of yuel; but if Y seide 
wel, whi smytist thou me? And Annas2s 
sente hym boundun to Caifas, the bi- 
schop. And Symount Petre stood, and 2s 
warmyde him; and thei seiden to hym, 
Whether also thou art his disciple? He 
denyede, and seide, Y am not. Oon of26 
the bischops seruantis, cosyn of! hym, 
whos eere Petre kitte of, seide, Sa3 Y 
thee not in the 3erd with hym? And27 
Petre eftsoone denyede, and anoon the 
cok crew. Thanne thei ledden Jhesu2a 
to Cayfas, in to the moot halle; and it 
was eerli, and thei entriden not in to the 
moot halle, that thei schulden not be 
defoulid, but that thei schulden ete pask. 
Therfor Pilat wente out* with outforth 29 
to hem, and seide, What accusyng brynge 
3e azens this man? ‘Thei answeriden, 30 
and seiden to hym, If this were not a 
mysdoere, we hadden not bitakun hym 
to thee. Thanne Pilat seith to hem,31 
Take 3e hym, and deme 3e him, after 
joure lawe. And the Jewis seiden to 
hym, It is not leueful to vs to sle ony 
man; that the word of Jhesu schulde be3z 
fulfillid, whiche he seide, signifiynge bi 
what deth he schulde die. Therfor eft-33 
soone Pilat entride in to the moot halle, 
and clepide Jhesu, and seide to hym, 
Art thou kyng of Jewis? Jhesus an-34 
swerde, and seide to hym, Seist thou 
this thing of thi silf, ether™ othere han 
seid to thee of me? Pilat answeride,35 
Whether Y am a Jewe? Thi fole and 
bischops" bitoken® thee to me; what 
hast thou don? Jhesus answeride, My 36 
kingdom is not of this world; if my 
kingdom were of this world, my mynys- 
tris schulden? stryue, that Y schulde not 
be takun to the Jewis; but now my 
kingdom is not here. And so Pilat37 


t Whether x. 8 thee not wry. 
w morewynge GNPQTY. mornyng 

b Om, sx. ¢ fulfillid 
e dye 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY, 


h Whether x. ihenenesy. kOm. x. Ja 


moro, = thi bishops xhi. the bischopis a. 


XVII. 38——-XIX. 9. 


Thou seidist™, for [am akyng. To® this 
thing I° am born, and to this I cam in 
to the world, that I bere witnessing to 
treuthe. Ech? that is of treuthe, heerith 

3smy voys. Pilat seith to him, What is 
treuthe? And whanne he hadde seid this 
thing, eft? he wente out to the Jewis, and 
seide to hem, I fynde no cause in™ him. 

39 Forsoth it is a’ custom to 3ou, that I de- 
lyuert oon to 3ou in pask; therfore wolen 
3e ‘I schal dismytte" to 3ou the kyng of 

4oJewis? Therfore thei cryeden eft’ alle, 
seyinge, Not this, but Barabas. Forsothe 
Barabas was a theef. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Therfore” Pilat took thanne* Jhesu, 
2and scourgidey. And kny3tis foldinge a 
crowne of thornes, puttiden” on? his heed, 
and diden aboute him a cloth of purpur, 
sand camen to him, and seiden, Heyl, kyng 
4of Jewis. And thei 3auen to hym boffatis. 
Eft> Pilat wente out, and seide to hem, 
Lo! I lede him to 30u with oute forth, 
that 3e knowe, for I fynde no cause in 
shim. Therfore Jhesu wente out®, beringe 
a crowne of thornes, and a clooth of pur- 
pur. And he seith to hem, Loo! the 
6éman. Therfore whanne the bischopis and 
mynystris hadde seyn him, thei crieden, 
seyinge, Crucifie, crucifie him. Pilate 
seith to hem, Take 3e him, and ‘crucifie 
73e4, sothli I fynde no cause in him. The 
Jewis answeriden to him, We han a lawe, 
and vpon® the lawe he ‘owith tof deie, for 
she made him Goddis sone. Therfore 
whanne Pilat hadde herd this word, he 
9dredde more. And he wente® in to the® 
moot halle efti, and seyde to hym‘*, Of 
whennus art thou? Forsothe Jhesu 3af 


M saist AGMNPQSTFIVXY. 
P Ech man usw. 
s Om. y. 
wxy. W Therfore thanne uPpqgw. * Om. mPomr. 
estwxy, »> Eftsoone acmnpostwxy. ©¢ Om. K. 
GMNPSWXY. eft 4 sec.m. QT. 
1 eftsoone 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 


5 cam R. 
y Om, rih, 


4 art thou g. 


T this thing o. 
w heued o. 


x Om. o. 


JOHN. 


Tin 4 pr.m. G sec. m. MNPQTXY. 

q Eftsoone 4 pr.m. GMNPOQOSTWXY. 

tlefe x. leene, or delyuer aamnegstwy. 4 that I desmitte r. 

y scourgide him a sec. m. 
4 crucifie 3e him Nn. erneifieth x. 

f oweth w. shal 4 pr. m. GMNPOTY. 


k Jhesu 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTVWXY. 


t this EIP. 
2 eftsons o passin. 


VOL. IV. PP 


289 


seide to hym, Thanne ‘thou art‘ a king. 
Jhesus answeride, Thou seist, that Y am 
aking. To this thing Y am borun, and 
to this‘ Y ‘am comun® in to thet world, 
to bere witnessing to treuthe. Eche that 
is of treuthe, herith my vois. Pilat seith 38 
to hym, What is treuthe? And whanne 
he hadde seid this thing, eft he wente 
out to the Jewis, and seide to hem, Y 
fynde no cause in hym. But it is a cus-39 
tom to 3ou, that Y delyuere oon to jou 
in pask; therfor wole 3e that Y dely- 
uere to 30u the kyng of Jewis? Alle" 40 
crieden eftsoone, and seiden, Not this, 
but Baraban. And Barabas was a theef. 


CAP. XIX. 


Therfor Pilat took thanne Jhesu, and1 
scourgide’. And kni3tis writhen a coroun 2 
of thornes, and setten on his heed”, and 
diden abonte hym a cloth of purpur, and3 
camen to him, and seiden, Heil, kyng of 
Jewis. And thei 3auen to him buffatis. 
Eftsoone Pilat wente out, and seide to4 
hem, Lo! Y brynge hym out to 3ou, 
that 3e knowe, that Y fynde no cause in 
him. And so Jhesus wente out, berynge5 
a coroun of thornes, and a cloth of pur- 
pur. And he seith to hem, Lo! the man. 
But* whanne the bischopis and mynystris 6 
hadden seyn hym, thei crieden, and seiden, 
Crucifie, crucifie hym. Pilat seith to 
hem, Take 3e hym, and crucifie 3eY, for 
Y fynde no cause in hym. The Jewis7 
answeriden to hym, We han a lawe, and 
bi the lawe he owith to die, for he made 
hym Goddis sone. Therfor whannes 
Pilat hadde herd this word, he dredde 
the more. And he wente in to thes 
moot halle eftsoone”, and seide to Jhesu?, 
Of whennus art thou? But Jhesus 3af 


© Om. 4 pr.m. G sec. m. MNPQTXY. 
T a3ens 4 pr.m. NG pr.m. MPQTY. ajzen xX. 
¥ eftsoone 4 pr.m. GMNPQST 

2 putten sx. 4 to GMNP 
e aftir 4 pr. m. 


& wente in 4 prom.c. 4 Om. w. 


U alle thei 1. 
ahim 1. 


¥ scourgide him crkb sec. m. k. 


290 


lonot answere to him. Pilat seith to him, 
Spekest thou not to me? Wost thou not, 
for I hane power for! to crucifie thee, and 
11] haue power for™ to delyuere thee? Jhesu 
answeride, Thou schuldist not haue ony 
power a3ens me, no" but? it were 3ouuen to 
thee fro aboue; therfore he that bitook°®® 
12me to thee, hath the more synne. Ther- 
of, ‘or fro thennus?, Pilat sou3te for’ to 
delyuere Jhesu’; forsothe the Jewis cri- 
eden, seyinge, If thou leeuyst this® man, 
thou ert not frend" of Cesar; for ech man 
that makith him silf kyng, aj3en seith 
13Cesar. Therfore Pilat, whanne he hadde 
herd thes’ wordis, ledde* Jhesu forth, and 
saat for domesman in a place, that is seide* 
Licostratos, in Ebrew forsothe’ Golgatha, 
14 in® Englisch, place of Caluarie*®. Forsoth 
it was ‘the makinge redy, or euyn, of 
pask®, as the sixte our, ‘or mydday*. And 
he seith to the Jewis, Loo! 30ure kyng. 
15 Forsoth thei cryeden, seyinge, Do awey, 
do awey; crucifie hym. Pilat seith to 
hem, Schal I crucifie 30ure kyng? The 
hischopis answeriden, We han no* kyng 
1éno but Cesar. Therfore thanne Pilat 
bitook him to hem, that he schulde be 
crucifyed. Forsothe thei token Jhesu, 
17and leddenf out. And he berynge to him 
silf a cros wente out in to that’ place, that 
is seid of Caluarie, in Ebrew Golgatha; 
18where thei crucifieden him, and othere 
tweye! with him, on* this syde and on! 
that™ syde, forsothe Jhesu the myddil. 
19 Forsothe and® Pilat wroot a title, and 
puttide® on the cross; sothli it was writun, 
20 Jhesu Nazaren, kyng of Jewis. Therfore 
manye of the Jewis radden this title, for? 
the place where Jhesu was! crucifiede, was 
ny3 the citee, and it was writen in Ebrew, 


1Om.sx. ™Om.sx. "Om. x. © but if x. 
MNposTYWXY,  §& him this apsiv. hym thus @. 
w dred more and ledde w sec.m. X Om. mp. 
of Caluarie x. Om. x. 


JOHN. 


00 bitrayede w. POm. x. 9Om. sx. 
t Om. 4 pr. m. GMNPQSTVXY. 
¥ sothli 1 sec.m. 
» the makynge redi, or even a sup. ras. the euentide of paske G pr.m. MNPQTW 


XIX. 10-20. 


noon answere to him. Pilat seith to10 
him, Spekist thou not to me? Woost 
thou not, that Y haue power to crucifie 
thee, and Y haue power to delyuere thee? 
Jhesus answeride, Thou schuldist not1! 
‘haue ony power a3ens me, but* it were 
jouun to thee from aboue; therfor he 
that bitook me to thee, hath the more 
synne. Fro that tyme Pilat sou3te to12 
delyuere hym; but the Jewis crieden, 
and seiden, If thou delyuerist this man, 
thou art not the emperouris freend; for 
ech man that makith hyin silf king, ajen 
seith the emperoure. And Pilat, whanne 13 
he hadde herd these wordis, ledde Jhesu 
forth, and sat for domesman in a place, 
that is seid Licostratos, but in Ebrew 
Golgatha. And it was pask eue®, as it14 
were the sixte our. And he seith to the 
Jewis, Lo! 3oure king. But thei crieden, 1s 
and seiden, Take awei, take awei; cru- 
cifie him. Pilat seith to hem, Schal I 
erucifie 3oure king? The bischops an- 
sweriden, We han no king but the 
emperour. And thanne Pilat bitook him ie 
to hem, that he schulde be crucified. 
And thei token Jhesu, and ledden him 
out. And he bar to hym silf a cros, and 17 
wente out in to that place, that is seid 
off Caluarie, in Ebreu Golgatha; where is 
thei crucifieden him, and othere tweyne 
with him, ooz on this side and oon on 
that side, and Jhesus in the myddil. 
And Pilat wroot a title, and sette onig 
the cros; and it was writun, Jhesu of 
Nazareth, king of Jewis. Therfor manye 20 
of the Jewis redden this title, for the. 
place where Jhesus was crucified, was 
ni3 the citee, and it® was writun in 
Ebreu, Greek, and Latyn. Therfor thea 


r him 4 pr.m. G 
uthe frend s. ¥ the r. 


zOm. x. and x. 4 Englische, the place 


pr.m. xy, euen of paske G sec. m. the making redi, or exentid of pasch s. making redi, ether the euentyde, 


of paske Ww sce.m. © or undurne AaNeTY Om. sx. 


€thee. bOm. ns. 
™ this upg. ™ Om. 9. © putte 4GMNPQOSTWXY. 
b Wotist x. © but if K sec. m. 


CEIPQs sec.m. ea. & Om. 0. 


i 1 Om. ¥. 
‘tweyne ar. two Gwpsivxy. twei theeues N. 
P forsothe 1 pr.m. 


4 Om. cexmparsuxabceghika. 


€ nota cmNnpestWwxy. f ledden him e. 
kK oon on er. 1 oon on gr. 
Vis GMNPQSTW pr.m. XY. 


© euyn CEIKPQRUXacegka. f Om. 


XIX. 21—32. 


21 Greek, and Latyn. Therfore the bischops 
of Jewis" seiden to Pilat, Nyle thou write 
kyng of. Jewis, but for he seyde, I am 

akyng of Jewis. Pilat answeride, That 

23that I haue writen, I haue writen. Ther- 
fore the kny3tis whanne thei hadden 
crucified him, token his clothis, and maden 
foure partis, to ech kny3t a part, and a 
coote. Forsothe the coote was with out 
24seem, and abone wouun bi al. Therfore 
thei seiden to gidere, Kitte we not it, but 
leye we lott, whos it is; that the scripture 
be fillid’, seyinge, Thei partiden my clothis 
to hem, and in to my cloth thei senten 
lott. And sothli kny3tis diden thes 
2sthingis. Forsothe bisydis the cross of 
Jhesu stooden his modir, and ‘Marie Clea- 
phe, the sister of his modir‘', and Marie 

26 Maudeleyn. Therfore whanne Jhesu hadde 
seyn the" modir, and the disciple stondinge, 
whom he louede, he seith to his modir, 

27 Womman, lo! thi sone. Aftirward he seith 
to the disciple, Lo! thi modir. And fro 
that our the disciple took hire ‘in to¥ his 

28 thingis*. Aftirward Jhesu witinge, for 
now alle thingis ben endid, that the scrip- 
ture schulde be fillid*, he seith, I thirste. 

29Sothli a vessel was putt ful of vynegre. 
Thei forsothe puttinge aboueY with ysope 
the spounge ful of? vynegre, offriden to 

30his mouth. Therfore whanne Jhesu hadde 
take vynegre*, he seide, It is endid. And 
the heed® bowid doun, he bitook® the 
aispirit. Therfore for’ it was the® ‘makynge 
redy of pask‘, that the bodies schulde not 
dwelle in the cross in the saboth, for that® 
day of saboth was greet, the Jewis preieden 
Pilat, that the hupis of hem schulden be 
32brokun, and» takun awey. Therfore 
kny3tis camen, and sothly! thei braken 
the thizes of the firste, and of the tothir , 


t the Jewes Nn. 8 fulfild 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
uhis Q. Vin x. Wmodre cGMnpostwy. Om. x. 
POSTVIVY. z Om. P. 
4 Om. av. whanne g. e Om. GMNPOTY. 


Gunposwy. and thei schulden be x. iOm.o. 


hthatc. ‘that Yk. whan that o. 


JOHN. 


x fulfillid 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTIVXY. 
a the vinegre A4GMNPQSTVWXY. 
f paske euen GMNPOQTXY. 


leastiden Eopabgh sec.m.i. kesten Ra. 


291 


bischops of the Jewis seiden to Pilat, 
Nyle thou write kyng of Jewis, but 
for® he seide, Yi am king of Jewis. 
Pilat answeride, That that Y hanez 
writun, Y haue writun. Therfor the23 
kny3tis whanne* thei hadden crucified 
hym, token hise clothis, and maden foure 
partis, to ech kny3t a part, and a coot. 
And the coot was without seem, and 
wouun al aboute. Therfor thei seiden 24 
togidere, Kitte we not it, but caste we 
lot, whos it is; that the scripture be 
fulfillid, seilynge,Thei partiden my clothis 
to hem, and on my cloth thei casten! lot. 
And the knijtis diden these thingis. 
But bisidis the cros of Jhesu stoden 2s 
his modir, and the sistir of his modir, 
Marie Cleofe, and Marie Maudeleyne. 
Therfor whanne Jhesu hadde seyn his 26 
modir, and the disciple stondyuge, whom 
he louyde, he seith to hise modir, Wom- 
man, lo thi sone. Aftyrward he seith27 
to the disciple, Lo! thi modir. And fro 
that our the disciple took hir in to his 
modir. Aftirward Jhesus witynge, that 28 
now alle thingis ben endid, that the 
scripture were fulfillid, he seith, Y 
thirste. And a vessel was set ful of29 
vynegre™, And thei ‘leiden in isope aboute 
the spounge ful of vynegre™, and putten® 
to his mouth. Therfor? whanne Jhesus 30 
hadde ‘takun the ‘vynegre4, he seid, It is 
endid. And ‘whanne his heed was bowid 
doun’, ‘he 3af vp the goost’. Therfor fors1 
it was the' pask eue", that the bodies 
schulden not abide on the cros in the 
sabat, for that was a greet sabat dai, 
the Jewis preiden Pilat, that the hipis 
of hem schulden be brokun, and thei’ 
takun awei. Therfor” kny3tis camen, 32 
and thei braken the thies* of the firste, 


t the systir of his modir, Marie Cleophe arerxy. 
yY aboute 4GN 
¢ bitoke, or 3uf GNerTyY. 
& the ilke 4 pr.m. 


b heued a. 
ff no K. 
k other x. 


™ aysel a sec.m. eisel 1. 


4 leiden in isope aboute the spounge ful of aisel a sec. m. token a spounge full of eisel puttinge it aboute 


with ysope 1. Om. 8 pr.m. 
this eisel 1. * he bowide doun the hecd tr. 


QRstuxacegka. Y Om. R pr.m. 


© profriden it 1. puttiden EPK. 
8 and sente out the spirit 1. 
w And therfore ‘o. 


4 taken the aisel a sec. m. tastid 
u euyn CEKP 


p And 1. 
t Om. Era. 
x hippis 1. 


Pp2 


292 JO 


a3that was crucified with him. Forsothe 
whanne thei hadden come to Jhesu, as 
thei sy3en him deed thanne™, thei braken 
3inot his thizes; but oon of the kny3tis 
openyde his syde" with a sper, and anoon 
35 bloot and watir wente out. And he that 
sy3, bar witnessing°, and his witnessing 
is trewe; and he woot for he seith trewe 
sé6thingis, that 3e bileue. Forsothe thes 
thingis ben don, that the scripture schulde 
be fillid?, 3e schulen not breke, ‘or make 
37 esse’, a boon of him. And eft anothir 
scripture seith, Thei schulen se in to 
38 whom they pi3ten* thorw. Sotheli aftir 
thes thingis Joseph of Armathi preiede 
Pilat, that he schulde take awey the body 
of Jhesu, for that he was a disciple of 
Jhesu, forsothe priuey, for the drede of 
Jewis. And Pilat suffride. Therfore he 
cam, and took awey the body of Jhesu. 
39Sothli and Nycodeme cam, that hadde 
come ‘first to Jhesut ‘in the" ny3t, beringe 
a medlynge of myrre and aloes, as an 
4ohundrid pound. Therfore thei.token the 
body of Jhesu, and bounden it in lynnen 
clothis with oynementis*, as it is customY 


41 to Jewis for? to birye. Sothli in the place - 


wher he was crucified, was a 3erd, and in 
the 3erd a newe graue, in which* not 3it 
4zony man was put. Therfore there? for 
the ‘makynge redy*” of Jewis, for’ the 
graue! was ny3, thei puttiden® Jhesu. 


CAP. XX. 

Forsothe in thef oon® of the saboth, 
that is, of* the woke, Mary Mawdeleyn 
‘cain erly’, whanne ‘derkuessis weren 3it*, 
‘at the graue!, And she sy3 the stoon turn- 
2ed a3en fro the graue. Therfore she ran, 

and cam to Symount Petre, and to anothir 
disciple, whom Jhesu louyde, and seith to 


I 


mM now G sec.m. sw. Om. aGMNPQTXY. 
A pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. a Om. x. 
‘to Jhesn first wx. %bio, * swete oynementis, 


custome Q@ 7% Om. sx. 
MQW pr.m. XY. 4 sepulcre o. 


© putten sx. 
b Om. GMNPOSTYIVY. 


Yoother1. % were 1. 
KMegrsuxabceghikag. 
& puttiden xi. 


¢ Om. b. 
h yigile Eorbcehikes. 


n sides N. 
r eftsone 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTIVXY. 


athe which 4 pr.m. GNNPQSTWXY. 


icam eerly to the graue MPQSIV., 


& fillid carparxabceghia. 
4 priueli a prom. a. 
1 ful erly sg. 


HN. XIX. 33—-XX. 2. 


and of the tothereY, that was crucified 
with hym. But whanne thei werenss 
comun to Jhesu, as thei sayn him deed 
thanne, thei braken not hise thies; but 3s 
oon of the kny3tis openyde his side with 
a spere, and anoon blood and watir 
wenten out. And he that sai3, bare 3s 
witnessyng, and his witnessing is trewe ; 
and he woot that he seith trewe thingis, 
that 3e bileue. And these thingis weren 36 
don, that the scripture schulde be? ful- 
fillid*, 3e schulen not breke® a boon of 
hym. And eftsoone another scripture 37 
seith, Thei schulen se in®® whom thei 
pi3ten thorow. But after these thingis3s 
Joseph of Armathi preyede Pilat, that 
he schulde take awei the bodi of Jhesu, 
for that he was a° disciple of Jhesu, 
but priui¢ for drede of the Jewis. And 
Pilat suffride. And so he cam, and took 
awei the bodi of Jhesu. And Nycho-39 
deme cam also, that hadde come to hym 
first bi ny3t, and brou3te a meddlynge of 
myrre and aloes, as it were an hundrid 
pound. And thei token the bodi of4o 
Jhesu, and boundun it in lynun clothis 
with swete smellynge oynemeutis, as it 
is custom to Jewis for* to birie. And in41 
the place where he was crucified, was a 
jerd’, and in the 3erdf a newe graue, in 
which 3it no man was leid. ‘Therfor42 
there thei putten? Jhesu, for the vigilie® 
of Jewis feeste, for the sepulcre was ni3. 


CAP. XX. 


And in o dai of the wouke Marie! 
Maudeleyn cam eerli! to the graue, 
whanne it was 3it derk. And sche say 
the stoon moued* awei fro the graue. - 
Therfor sche ran, and cam to Symount2 
Petre, and to another disciple, whom Jhe- 
sus louede, and seith to hem, Thei han 


© witnessing therof Q. P fulfillid 
8 putteden mw. putten psir. 
or spicis AGMNPSTWY. swete oynementis Qx. —¥ the 
bOm. 7. >> pask euen mw. ©¢ for that 
fOm. aemNrostyiwxy.  & oon day Pw. 00 day MS. 
k sit derknessis weren x. | Om. mpesw. 


fullid r. bb in to cE 


f gardyn 1. 


> ether make lesse K marg. 
ad Om.rk prem. © gardyn 1. 
K ethir turned ajen K marg. 


XX. 3—17. 


hem, Thei han take the Lord fro the 
graue, and we witen not, where thei han 
3put him. 
thilke™ othere disciple, and thei camen 
ato the graue. Forsoth thei tweyne" run- 
nen to gidere, and thilke® other disciple 
ran bifore sunner than Petre, and cam 
sfirst to the graue. And whanne he hadde 
ynbowyd him, he sy3 the scheetis putt, ne- 
6 thelees he entride not?. Therfore Symount 
Petre cam suynge hym, and he entride 
in to the graue, and he sy3 the scheetis 
7putt, and the sudarie that was on his 
heed, not putt with the scheetis, but by 
sit silf wlappid in to o place. Therfore 
thanne and thilke’ disciple that cam first 
to the graue, entride, and sy3, and bileuede. 
9Forsothe thei wisten not the scripture, 
for it bihofte him for’ to ryse a3en fro 
1odeede men'. Therfore the disciplis wenten 
1ieft" to hem selue. ForsothY Marie stood 
at the graue withoute forth wepynge. 
Therfore while” she wepte, sche bowide 
12hir, and biheld forth in to the graue. And 
she sy3 twey* angelis sittynge in whyt, 
oon at the heed and oon at the feet, wher 
isthe body of Jhesu was putt. Thei seyn 
to hir, Womman, what wepist thou? She 
seid to hem, For thei han takun awey my 
lord, and I woot not, where thei han putt 
ishim. Whanne she hadde seid thes thingis, 
she was’? turnyd abak, and sy3 Jhesu 
stondinge, and wiste not for it was Jhesu. 
15 Jhesu seith to hir, Womman, what wepist 
thou? whom sekist thou? She gessinge 
for he was a gardener, seith to him, Sire, 
if thou hast takun him vp, seye to me, 
where thou hast put him, and I schal 
igtake him awey. Jhesu seith* to hir, 
Marie. She conuertid® seith to him, Rab- 
i7bony, that is seid, maistir. Jhesu seith 
to hir, Nyle thou touche me, for I haue 
not 3it sty3ed° to my fadir; forsothe go to 


m™ that x. two wpxy. 9° that x. 
8Om. sx. tOm. 4G prim. MNPQSTXY. 
while 4GMNPQSTVWXY. * two MPXY. 

b conuertid, or al turned Mp. 


1 Om. o. m ligginge EPQehiof. 
4 whanne A prom. Eb. ° Om. kK prem. 


Therfore Petre wente out, and. 


P not yn AGMNPOQTXY. 

u eftsoone 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
Zis A pr.m. G pr.m. MNPQSTXY. 
© ascendid, or stied vp 4 pr.m, GNeTY. ascendid mpsiwx. 


. heued o passim. 
8 Om. 8 pr.m. 


JOHN. 293 


takun the Lord fro the graue, and we 
witen not, where thei han leid hym. 
Therfor Petre wente out, and thilkes 
other disciple, and thei camen to the 
graue. And thei tweyne runnen togidre, 4 
and thilke othere disciple! ran bifor Petre, 
and cam first to the graue. And whaunes 
he stoupide, he sai the schetis liynge™, 
netheles he entride not. Therfor Sy-« 
mount Petre cam suynge hym, and he 
entride in to the graue, and he say the 
schetis leid, aud the sudarie that was on7 
his heed", not Jeid with the schetis, but 
bi it silf wlappid® in to a? place. Ther-s 
for thane’ thilke disciple that cam first 
to the graue, entride, and sai, and bileu- 
ede. For thei knewen not 3it" the scrip-9 
ture, that it behofte him to rise a3en fro 
deth. Therfor the disciplis wenten eft- 10 
soone to hem silf. But Marie stood ati 
the graue with outforth wepynge. And 
the® while sche wepte, sche bowide hir, 
and bihelde forth in to the grane. And 12 
sche sai twei aungels sittinge in white, 
oon at the heed and oon at the feet, 
where the bodi of Jhesu was leid. And 13 
thei seien to hir, Womman, what wepist 
thou.? Sche seide to hem, For thei han 
take awei my lord, and Y woot not, 
where thei han leid him. Whanne sche1s 
hadde seid these thingis, sche turnede 
bacward, and sai Jhesu stondinge, and 
wiste not that it was Jhesu. Jhesus1s 
seith to hir, Womman, what wepist 
thou? whom sekist thou? She gess- 
ynge that he was a‘ gardynere, seith to 
him, Sire, if thou hast takun him vp, 
seie to me, where thou hast leid him, 
and Y schal take hym awei. Jhesus 16 
seith to hir, Marie. Sche ‘turnede, and" 
seith to hym, Rabony, that is to seie, 
Maister. Jhesus seith to hir, Nyle thou :7 
touche me, for Y haue not 3it stied to 


Qthat x. Ff not 3it 4 prim. GNOSTIWXY. 
v¥ Therfore x.  W The 


a seide 4 pr. m. GMNPQOSTYIV. 


9 Jaid o. P Om. a pr.m. oo rknsabeg. 
tthe E. turned A sec. m. 


294 


my britheren, and seye to hem, I stye? 
to my fadir and 3oure fadir, to* my God 
isand 30ure God. Mary Mawdeleyn cam, 
tellinge to disciplis, For I sy38 the Lord, 
i9and thes thingis he seide to me. Ther- 
fore whanne euentid! was in that day,oon* 
of the sabotis, and the 3atis weren schitt, 
where disciplis weren gederid, for the! 
drede of Jewis"!, Jhesn cam, and stood in 
the™ myddel of hem", and seide® to hem, 
20 Pees to 30u. And whanne he hadde seid 
this thing?, he schewide to hem hondis‘ 
and the® syde; therfore the disciplis ioy- 
21eden, the Lord seyn. ‘Therfore he seith® 
to hem eft, Pees to jou; as the fadir 
22sente' me, and I sende 30u. Whanne he 
hadde seid" thes thingis, he* blew ynne, 
asand seide, Take 3e the Hooly Gost; whos 
synnes 3e schulen for3yue, thei ben for- 
jouun ; and whos synnesY 3e ‘schulen with- 
a4holde*, thei? ben withholdun. Forsothe 
Thomas, oon of the twelue, that is seid 
Didymus, was not with hem, whanne Jhe- 
25sucam. Therfore othere® disciplis seiden, 
We han seyn the Lord. Forsothe he 
seide to hem, No® but4 I¢ schal se in his 
hondis the ficching’ of naylis, and schal 
sende my fyngris? in to places of naylisi, 
and ‘I schal sende* myn honde in to his 
26syde, I schal not bileue. And aftir ei3te 
dayes eft! his disciplis weren with ynne, 
and Thomas with hem. Jhesu cam, the 
j3atis schitt, and stood in the myddel, and 
27Sseide, Pees to 30u. Aftirward he seith to 
Thomas, Bryng yn hidur thi fyngur, and 
se myn hondis, and bryng to thin hond, 
and send™ in to my syde, and nyle thou 
28 be vnbileueful, but feithful. Thomas an- 
sweride, and seide to him, My Lord and 
zamy God. Jhesu seith to him, Thomas, 


€ and to mw. 
ienen mPOXx. 


d stye vp 4 pr.m. GMNPQSIWXY. 
h Om. G prim. MNPETXY. 


JOHN. 


f the disciplis aposwxy. 
k jn oon G sec. m. MQ. 


XX. 18-29. 


my fadir; but go" to my britheren, and 
seie to hem, Y stie to my fadir and to 
3oure fadir, to my God and to 30ure God. 
Marie Maudeleyne cam, tellinge to the1s8 
disciplis, That Y sai the Lord, and these 
thingis he seide to me. Therfor whanne 19 
it was eue* in that dai, oonY of the sa- 
batis, and the 3atis weren schit, where 
the disciplis weren gaderid?, for drede of 
the Jewis, Jhesus cam, and stood in the 
myddil of the disciplis, and he seith to 
hem, Pees to 3ou. And whanne he hadde 20 
seid this, he schewide to hem hondis and 
side; therfor the disciplis ioieden, for the 
Lord was seyn. And he seith to hem2i 
eft, Pees to 30u; as the fadir sente me, 
Y sende 30. Whanne he had seid this, 22 
he blewe on hem, and seide, Take 3e 
the Hooli Goost; whos synnes 3e for-23 
3yuen, tho ben forjouun to hem; and 
whos* 3e withholden, tho ben with- 
holdun. But Thomas, oon of the twelue, 24 
that is» seid Didimus, was not with hem, 
whanne Jhesus cam. Therfor the othere 25 
disciplis seiden, We han seyn the Lord. 
And he seide to hem, But Y se in hise 
hondis the fitchinge® of the’ nailis, and 
putte my fyngur in to the places® of the 
nailis, and putte myn hond in to his 
side, Y schal not bileue. And after ei3te 26 
daies eftsoone hise disciplis weren with 
ynne, and Thomas with hem. Jhesusf 
cam, while’ the 3atis weren schit, and 
stood in the myddil, and seide, Pees to 
jou. Afterward he seith to Thomas, 27 
Putte in® here thi fyngur, and se myn 
hondis, and putte! hidur thin hond, and 
putte in to my side, and nyle thou be 
vnbileueful, but feithful. Thomas an-28 
sweride, and seide to him, My Lord and 


& haue seyn MPQsivxy. 
Om. N. inone Pp. 1 Om. acanpes 


trvxy, Uthe Jewes wnpostywxy. ™Om. ry. 4% the disciplis cupowxy. disciplis nst. © seith 
AGMNPQSTVWXY. °° betoK pr.m. POm.s. 4 his londes @. the hondis yr pr.m. * Om. apr pr.m. 
wsec.m. *seide gwxy. thath sent c sec.m.mpsw. seide tohem acmnreostTWxyY. *and he r. 
y Om. Ganpostyxy.  % schulen hold 4. withholden ow. ®and thei g sec.m. »Om.m. ¢ Om. x, 
€Butifx. eandI wprm. ffychyngissyx.  & fyngir acmpestvwx. 1} the places & sec. m. arP 
aswx. ithe naylis Gc sec.m. apsiv.  schal sende aaauNposTVW sec.m.¥Y. 1 eftsoone 4 pr.m. GMN 
pesTwxy. ™sende it c. sende, or putte, it mP. 


u go thou k, 
¢ fychyngis o. 
i putte in k. 


x euen plurcs. 


¥Y Om. b pr.m. 
4 Om. hk. 


% gaderid togidere k. 
€-place A sec. m. EORKa®. 


b was o. 


a whos synnes b. 
h thou g. 


fand Jhesus k. & whan o. 


XX. 30-——XXI. 9. 


for thou hast seyn ine, thou bileuedist ; 
blessid ben" thei, that sy3en not, and han 
30 bileuyd. Forsothe and ‘Jhesus dide manye 
othere signes® in the sy3t of his disciplis, 
whicheP ben not writun in this book. 
31 Forsothe thes ben writun, that 3e bileue, 
for Jhesu is Crist4, the sone of God, and 
that 3e bileuynge haue lyf in his name. 


CAP. XXI. 


i Aftirward Jhesu eft’ schewide him to 
his disciplis, at the see of Tyberias*. Sothli 
2he schewidet thus. Ther weren to gidere 
Symount Petre, and Thomas, that is seid‘ 
Didymus, and Nathanael, that was of the" 
Cane of Galilee, and the sones of Zebedee, 
3and tweye™ othere of his disciplis. Sy- 
mount Petre seith to hem, I go for’ to 
fysche. Thei seyn to him, And we comen 
with thee. And thei 3eden™ out, and sti3- 
eden in to a boot. And in that ni3t* thei 
atoken nothing. Forsoth the morwe maad, 
Jhesu stood in the brynke; nethelees 
theY disciplis knewen not, for it was? 
sJhesu. Therfore Jhesu seith to hem, 
Children*, wher® 3e han ony soupynge 
6thing? Thei answeriden’, Nay. He seide 
to hem, Send 3e the nett in to the ri3t- 
half of the rowyng, and 3e schulen fynde. 
Therfore thei senten the nett, and° now 
thei my3ten not drawe it, for multitude of 
7fyschis. Therfore thilke? disciple, whoim® 
Jhesu louede, seide to Petre, It is the 
Lord. Symount Petre, whanne he hadde 
herd for‘ it was® the Lord, girte him with 
a coote, sothli he was nakid, and sente 
shim in to the see. Sothli othere disciplis 
camen by boot, for thei weren not fer fro 
the lond, but asi two hundrid cubitis, 
9drawynge the nett of fischis. Therfore 
as thei camen doun in to the lond, thei 


n Om. 4 pr. im. GMUNPQSTWXY. 
A pr.m, GMNPQSTWXY. 
t schewed him G sec. m. 
TWKY, * thing K. 
© answerden to him N. 


tt Om. G pr.m.y. 
y Om. G prim. NTXY. 
4 that x. 


mis 0. 
4 Om. R prom. 


1 Crist is a. 
P Om. Kk pr.m. 


k answerd o. 
wenten out a. 


JOHN. 


° man. oth. sig. Jh. dide arxy. 
T eftsoone 4 pr.m. GUNPQSTWXY. Om. ¥. 
u Om. m. 
2 is AGMNPQSTVIWXY. 
€ that 9. the whiche wrxy. 
h boot, or rowyng A pr.m.GNTY. boot, or rowynge to the lond Q. 


n he wente k. 


295 


my God. Jhesus seith* to him, Thomas, 29 
for thon hast seyn me, thou bilenedist ; 
blessid ben thei, that seyn not, and han 
bileued. And Jhesus dide many othere 30 
signes in the si3t of hise disciplis, whiche 
ben not writun in this book. But theses1 
ben writun, that je bileue, that Jhesus ‘is 
Crist', the sone of God, and that 3e bi- 
leuynge haue lijf in his name. 


CAP. XXI. 


Afterward Jhesus eftsoone schewide! 
hym to hise disciplis, at the see of Tibe- 
rias. And he schewide him thus. There2 
weren togidere Symount Petre, and Tho- 
mas, that is seid Didimus, and Nathanael, 
that was™ of the Cane of Galilee, and the 
sones of Zebedee, and tweyne othere of 
hise disciplis. Symount Petre seith tos 
hem, Y go to fische. Thei seyn to hyin, 
And we comen with thee. And ‘thei 
wenten®" out, ‘and wenten® in to a boot. 
And in that ni3t thei token no thing. 
But whanne the morewe was comun,4 
Jhesus stood in the brenke; netheles the 
disciplis knewen not, that it was Jhesus. 
Therfor Jhesus seith to hem, Children,s 
whethir 3e han ony souping thing? Thei 
answeriden to hym, Nay. He seide to 
hem, Putte 3e the? nett in to the ri3té 
half of the rowing, and 3e schulen fynde. 
And thei puttiden the nett; and thanne 
thei miz3ten not drawe it for multitude 
of fischis. Therfor thilke disciple, whom 7 
Jhesus louede, seide to Petre, It is the 
Lord. Symount Petre, whanne he hadde 
herd that‘ it is the Lord, girte hym with 
a coote, for he was nakid, and wente in 
to the see. But the othere discipliss 
camen bi boot, for thei weren not fer fro 
the lond, but as a two hundrid cubitis, 
drawinge the nett of fischis. And as9 


P the whiche acmNnPosTWwxY. 9 Om. 

8 Tyberiadis 4 pr.m. GMNPQSTWXY. 

v Om. sx. W wenten 4GMNPQS 

aChilder sy. > whether x. 

fOm.s. & i8 AGMNPQSTVWXY. 
iag it were 4 pr.m. 8. 


VU two MPXY. 


© and stizeden K sup. ras. Om. Erpgeg. and 


296 


sy3en colis put, and a* fysch ‘put abouel, 
1oand™ breed. Jhesu seith to hym, Brynge 
3e of the fischis, whiche" 3e han taken now. 
11.Symount Petre stizede vp, and drow3 the 
nett in to the lond, ful of grete fischis, an 
hundrid fyfti and thre; and whanne thei 
weren so greete®, the nett is not brokun. 
i2Jhesu seith to hem, Come 3e, ‘ete 3e?. 
And no man of4 ‘the sittinge’ at mete’ 
durste axe him, Whot art thou, witinge 
i3for it is the Lord. And Jhesu cain, and 
took breed, and 3af to hem, and the" 
14fysch also. Now thisY thridde day” Jhesu 
is schewid to his disciplis, whanne he 
is ‘hadde rise* ajen fro deed men**. 'Ther- 
forey whanne thei hadden etyn, Jhesu 
seith to Symount Petre, Symount of John, 
louest thou me more than thes don?? He 
seith to hym, 3he, Lord, thou wost for I 
loue thee. Jhesu seith to him, Feede 
i¢thou* ny lambren. Eft he seith to hym, 
Symount of John, louest thou me? And> 
he seith to him, 3he, Lord, thou wost for 
171 loue thee. Ile seith to him, Feede thou 
my lambren. He seith to him the thridde 
tyme, Symount of John, louest thou me? 
Petre is sori®, for he seith* to him the 
thridde tyme, Lonest thou me, and he 
seith to him, Lord, thou wost alle thingis; 
thon wost for I loue thee. Jhesu seith to 
ishim, Feede thou® my scheep.  Treuli, 
treuli, I seie to thee, whanne thou were 
3ongere, thou girdedist’ thee, and wandrid- 
est where? thon woldist ; sothli whanne 
thou schalt wexe eldere, thou schalt holde 
forth thin hondis, and anothir schal girde 
thee, and leede thee whidir thou wolt not. 
19Sothli he seide this thing, signyfyinge by 
what deeth he was to glorifiynge® God. 
And whanne he hadde seid thes thingis, 
20 he seith to him, Sue thou me. Petre con- 
uertid' sy3 thilke* disciple, whom Jhesu 


k Om. G prom. xy. 
m Om. Nn. 
q Om. c. Y sittyng GNQTY. 
W tyme, or dai 4 sup. ras. GNQ@TY. tyme MPWX. 
GMNP@sTWXY. ® Om. x. 
€ Om. 4 pr. mi. GMNPQSTVYWXY. 
Twxy. iconuertid, or turned mnpsw.  * that x. 
t ligeynge ErPgehaZ. 8 Om. 1. 


yseidea. %Fedethouk. 4 girdest sack. 


JOHN. 


X rooS MNPQTXY. 
b Om. aGMNPOSTVYWXY. 
f girdist sNpQWwyY. girtest sx. 


t And Jhesus k. 


XXI, 10——20. 


thei camen doun in to the lond, thei 
sayn coolis liynge’, and a® fisch leid on, 
and breed. Jhesust seith to hem, Bringe 10 
3e of the fyschis, whiche 3e han takun 
now. Symount Petre wente vp, andi 
drow3 the nett in to the lond, ful of 
grete fischis, an hundrid fifti and thre; 
and whanne thei weren so manye, the 
nett was not brokun. Jhesus seith to12 
hem, Come 3e, ete® 3e. And no man of 
hem that saten at the mete, durste axe 
hymn, Who art thou, witinge that it is 
the Lord. And Jhesus cam, and took 13 
breed, and 3af to hem, and fisch” also. 
Now this thridde tyme Jhesus was14 
schewid to hise disciplis, whanne he 
hadde risun ajen fro deth. And whanneis 
thei¥ hadde etun, Jhesus seith to Si- 
mount Petre, Symount of Joon, louest 
thou me more than these? He seith to 
him, 3he, Lord, thou woost that Y lone 
thee. Jhesus seith to hym, Fede thou 
my lambren. Eft* he seith to hym, Sy-16 
mount of Joon, louest thou me? He 
seith to him, 3he, Lord, thou woost that 
Y loue thee. He seith to him, Fede 
thou my lambren. He seith to him the17 
thridde tyme, Simount of Joon, louest 
thou me? Petre was heuy, for he seithY 
to hym the thridde tyme, Louest thou 
me, and he seith to him, Lord, thou 
knowist alle thingis; thou woost that Y 
lone thee. Jhesus seith to hym, Fede? 
my scheep. Treuli, treuli, Y seie tois 
thee, whanne thou were 3ongere, thou 
girdidist® thee, and wandridist where 
thou woldist; but wharmne thou schalt 
waxe eldere, thou schalt holde forth thin 
hondis, and another schal girde thee, and 
schal lede thee whidur thou wolt not. 
He seide this thing, signifiynge bi what19 
deth he schulde glorifie God. And 


l putt vpon G pr.m. NeTIvY. putt thervpon G sce. m. MP. put theron s. put on x. 
© the whiche 4 prim. GuNnpoTwy. that x. 
8 the mete ANSTIVX. 


Oo many A pr.m.G pr.m. MNPQSTXY.  P etith x. 
twhot x. tOm.exy. ‘this is the nv. 
xxOm.m. yAndo. 2Om. 4 prim. 
© sorie, or heny a pr.m.GmMNposTWY. 4 seide x. 


& wherenere sx. 4 glorifie aemnpes 


1 disciple suynge mPerwxy. 


“andetek. Vfischisk. Wheb. * And eft o. 


XXII. 21——25. 


louede, ‘and which™ restide in the souper 
on his brest, and he" seide to hym, Lord, 
21 who is it, that schal bitraye thee? Ther- 
fore whanne Petre hadde seyn this dis- 
ciple®, he seith to Jhesu?, Lord, what for- 
22sothe this? Jhesu seith to him, So I wole 
him dwelle@ tilt I come, what to thee? 
23sue thou me. ‘Therfore this word wente 
out among britheren, for* thilke’ disciple 
deyeth not. Aud Jhesu seide not to" him, 
for he deieth not, but, So I wole him 
os dwelle’ til” I come, what to thee? This 
is thilke* disciple, that berith witnessing 
of thes thingis, and wroot thes thingis; 
and we witen, for his witnessing is trewe. 
25 ForsotheY there ben and? manye othere 
syngnes, ‘or myraclis*, that Jhesu dide, 
whiche? if thei ben writun by eche by ‘hem 
silue®, I deme® neither the world him silf 
‘to mowe® take tho® bookis, that ben to 
be writun!. 


Here endith the gospel of John, and 
now bigynneth the prolog of Seint Poul 
to Romayns8. 


m and the whiche 4 pr.m. amNposTWwyY. that x. 
Twxy. Phim aAsee.m.x. 1% to dwelle sx. 
Vv to dwelle sx. W til that G see. m. mposw. 
A pr. m. GMNPQSTWXY. 
moun x. them. writen. Amen. Nn. 
Jhesu Crist, aftir the foure euangelistis. m. 
prolog on this epistil to Romayns bi Jerom. n. 
Matheu, Mark, Luke, and Joon. p. 
prologe of Poule. 9. 
pistils to Romayns. Vv. 


JOHN. 


n Om. AKMPSW pr.m. X. 


chim silf aemNPQSTVIWXY. 

& Here endith Joon gospelis. c. Heere endith the gospel of 
Here endith the gospel of John euangelist, and bigynneth a 

Heere eenden the gospels of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, aftir 
Here endyn the gospelis of Jon after the lettre, and bygynucth the 
Here endith the gospel of Joon. tT. 
Here eendith Joon in the euangelye, and next here aftir bigynneth the prologe 


297 


whanne he hadde seid these thingis, he 
seith to hym, Sue thou me. Petre turn- 20 
ede, and say thilke disciple suynge, 
whom Jhesus louede, which also restid 
in the soper on his brest, and he? seide 
to hym, Lord, who is it, that schal bitraie 
thee? Therfor whanne Petre haddeai 
seyn this®, he seith to Jhesu, Lord, but 
what this?? Jhesus seith to him, So I 22 
wole that he dwelle til that Y come, 
what to thee? sne thou me. Therfores 
this word wente out among the bri- 
theren, that thilke disciple dieth not. 
And Jhesus seide not to hym, that he 
dieth not, but, So Y wole that he dwelle 
til Y come, what to thee? This is thilkeas 
disciple, that berith witnessyng of these 
thingis, and wroot hem; and we witen, 
that his witnessyng is trewe. And ther2s 
ben also manye othere thingis that Jhe- 
sus dide, whiche if thei benf writun bif 
ech bi hym silf, Y deme that the world 
hym!? silf schali not take tho bookis, that 
ben to be writun. 


Here endith the gospel of Joon'. 


© Om. 4 pr. m. GMNPQS 


T til that G sece.m. aps. Sthato. tthat x. "of 4. 
xthat x. y Ando. 20m. ex. ® Om. x. » the whiche 
4 gesse MW. = & mowe a pr. ™. GMNPQTWY. to 


Here endith the gospels, and bygyuneth Poulis 


stondinge bifore the epistlis that ben seyd to Romayns. w. Heere eendith the gospellis of Jon. y. No final 


rubric in Asx. 


b Om. 1. 


fwereno. & Om. 1Kxa sec.m.k prim.» it 1. 


to the Romains. K. 
apostle. M. 


Here endith the gospel of Jon, and here bigynneth a prolog on the pistle of Romayns. x. 
gospel of John, and bigynneth a kalender with a reule, ete. b. 
Here endith vangelis, and bigyneth a prologe on the Romayns. g. 


bigynnith the prologe to Romayns. c. 


¢ this disciple 1x see.m.ak. this man x pr.m. 
1 schulde k pr. m. 
gospel of John, and bigynneth a prolog on the pistle of Poul to Romaius. ce. 
Joon, and biginneth the firste prologe on the pistle to Romayns., 1. 
Here endith the gospel Joon, and here bigynneth a prologe on the pistles of Poul the 
Here endith the gospel of Joon, and bigynneth the prolog on the pistil to Romayns. qr. 


dhe this 19 see.m.k pr.m. © Om. k. 
k the bk. 1 Here endith the 
Heere endith the gospel of 
Here endeth Joon ; se now the prologe 


Here endith the 
Here endith the gospel of Joon, and here 


Here endith the gospel of Jou, and bigynneth a prolog to Romayns.h. Here eendith the gospel of Joon, 


aud here bigynneth the prolog on the firste pistil of Poul, that is to see, to the Romayns. k. 


rubric in EPu. 


VOL. IV. Qaq 


No final 


ROMANS. 





Here bygynneth the prologe of Jerome.in to the episteles of Poule 
to Romaynes*. 


UF rrst ‘vyndirstonden vs bihoueth’, to whom or* whi the apostil Powil writeth his 
epistolis. Forsothe it is not to trowen, hym® ‘after the gospelis, that benf the fulfillinge 
of the lawe, withoute cause to" han' writen these epistolis to alle chirches*; most sithen 
to vs in these epistolis, preceptus and exsaumples! of lyuynge ‘fulliest, o7™ most plente- 
nously", ben defied®. But in the bygynnynge of the kennende? chirche, new causes 
beende’, also questiounes to coment aftir, he excludede*; not onli this, the apostil, but 
also the profetes diden. Forwhi aftir the lawe of Moises 3ouen', in the whiche all 
the" maundementis weren contened, thei’ profetes” also¥ ceseden not with ther 
prechinge to thristen doun theY synnes of the puple, and in bokis* to* oure memorie 
senden, in to whom the eendes of the worldus® ben’ comen. He writeth therfore® 
to the Romaynes, the whiche beende! summe of Jewis, and summe of paynymes 
bileeuende$, wolden with proud contencioun vnderpoten either other. The Jewis 
forsothe seiden, Wee ben an holi fole, the! whiche God fro the bigynnynge hath‘ 
loued, and nurschid; wee of! the kinrede™ of Abraham, of an holi lynage han 
descendid ; wee" deliuered fro Egipt, han® passid the drie se on foote; for vs Farao 
drenchid? with his ost, diede1; to vs God man, ‘or aungelis mete", reynede in desert. 
And othere thingis the seiden, that to rehersen were ri3t long; onli heer wee seyn’, 
that thilket Lord, in whiche" also 3ee ben seen’ to beleuen, to vs of the lawe was 
bihoten. 3ee forsothe ben ‘Jentilis, or” paynymes, fro the bigynyng forsaken, the* 
whiche neuere hadden knouleche of God, but euere toY deueles han? serned. ‘Is it 
whether therfore* equite>, that 3ee, turned® todai fro maumetis4, to vs be* compa- 
risouned ; and not rathere 3ee be as men turned to the olde lawe, as euere 3ee ‘han 
ben‘ in the lawe of Moises ? And that same 3ee han,+ for myche merciful is God, the 


a From o. The prologe of Poulis pistle to Romayus.c. Prologe to Romayns. x. The prolog of 
Poule. 9. Prolog. s.  Prologus.v.  Heere bigynnyth the prologe on Romayns. y. Here bigynneth a 
prologe on the prsile to the Romayns. b. No initial rubric in wa. b The text of this first prologue is 
printed from s; there is no prologue in 4eypx, but in é& a rubric only. ¢ vs bihoueth vnderstonde 
ogvab. ether ovadb. othir ky. ¢hem ow. fbethor. &Om.w. bOm. xy. ihaue xvvab. haf o. 
‘k without cause etc... after the gospelles etc. of the lawe 0. 1! ensaumplis koryab. ™ fullokest, ether or. 
Om. b. " pleynly vab. © desired ovab. P kennynge kovwab. 4 beynge xovw. ° comynge Korivya. 
sexcludide vp kK. *izjyue ky. "%Om. xerwryab. VY thei3 x. WY Om. ogapr.m. Xaudi. yY Om. o. 
2 the bookis ab. of kwya. % seide kowy. Cworld Kowy. bethow. ¢ herforea. f beynge xovivab. 
& bileuynge Kovivab. & han o, beth y. i1Om.x. Khan ow. 10m.s. ™ kynneo. ® we weren ad. 
and han ab, P was drenchidab. 4 aud deide cd. Wmannak. *™Om.od. Sseith kowy. ¢ ilke niry. 
uthe whiche kow. Vseyn x. seide @. W Jentilis ether oy. Om.ab. * Om.orab. Ytheo. % haueth owy. 
a It is whether therfore x. Is it therfore o. Whether therfore is it ad. %Om.or. ¢ turneden K. that 
ben turned ab. 4 mawmetrye w. €3ee be s. tobe ab. fhaue hem x. t In exey the remaining part 
of this prologue is inserted in the prologue to Luke. 


ROMANS. — 299 


whiche wolde bringe 30u to oure® folowinge. The paynymes, ‘or Jentilis!, ajeenward 
answerden, In how myche the grettere benefises 3ee tellen* abouten 30u, in so myche 
3ee shulen shewe jouself! gilti the™ more blame. For euere to alle these thingis jee 
han" ben vnkinde, that aftir ‘the vois of God herd°, forgeden? 30n1 mawmetis. The 
whiche tho3 3ee haden not do’, thur3 that onli synne 3ee my3tens not taken for3yuenesse, 
that the ‘Lord, to 3ou' by ‘profetes voises" bihi3t, not onli 3ee wolden not resceyuen, 
but also 3ee slowen; whom’ wee vnderfongen*, whan of hym to vs no man hadde 
fornseidy. In hou myche therfore oure feith be betere, clerli it is open’. ‘Forsothe that* 
wee serueden to maumetis, was not of” rebelte, but of ignoraunce. Forsothe where 
wee knewen the treuthe, anoen wee foleweden, the sones of Abraham; not of fleshli 
birthe, but of the grace of Crist it was. To these thus® striuende® the apostil¢ putte 
hym a mene bitwen‘, shewende® to bothe puples®, neither circumcisioun to ben ost, 
neither ‘the kepti flesh*, but the feith that werkith bi charite; euere forsothe! ‘bi 
while™ mekende® hem?°. bi al the epistil with resownes and wittenesses?, counceilith® to 
onhed, and shewith neithir thur3 his ri3tfulnesse haue this deserued, but al what euere 
to be depute to the grace of God; shewende* the Jewis forsothe and the paynymes 
greuousli to han trespassid, and witendely; the Jewiss, for thei bit breking of the 
lawe han" vnwrshipid God ; the Gentilis’, for thei chaungeden the trenthe of God in 
to lesinge. It* is axid, whi ‘he wrotY no mo than ten epistolis to chirches? ‘Ten 
forsothe ben? epistolis*, with thilke that is seid to” Ebrues; for the othere foure to 
disciples homli weren sent, ‘or put forth’; for he wolde shewen the newe® ‘to not® 
discordenf fro the olde testament, and hymself not to don8® a3en the lawe of Moises, 
ordeynede his" epistolis to the noumbre of the firste maundementus! of the* decaloge. 
And with how manye preceptis he! Moyses ordeynede Jewis™ deliuered® fro Farao, 
with ri3t so manye epistolis® this? Powdl techeth men purchasid’ fro the deuel, and 
fro the’ seruage of mawmetrie. Forwhi also the two’ tables of ston to han had figure 
of the two® testamentis, ri3twel leredt men han" taken’, The epistil holly that’ to* 
Ebrues ys writen’, ‘or entitlid?, to ben noen of Powelis, summe affermen’, for so 
myche that it is not entitlid with his name, and for the> distaunce® of speche, and 
maner of writinge; but’ or® Barnabeis, aftir Tertullian, orf Luks, after summe, or’ 
certeyn Clementis, the disciple of the apostolis, aud aftir hem ordeyned bishop of 
Rome chirche. To whom! it is thus! to answern. If therfore it is not) Powilis episdd, 
for it hath not his name, eek* it shal be no! manes, for with no manes naine it is 
entytlid. The whiche thinge ¢o graunie if it be™ foul, his° it is most to be beleued? ¢o 
be, that so myche shyneth with’ the eloquence of his doctrine; or" certeyn, for that at 
the® Ebrues chirches' he was had" as’ destrozere of the lawe with fals suspecioun, he 


bsoure v. § ether Gentyles ovy. Om. ab, * tellith xy. 30nrsilfo. ™ of the ab. 1 haneth coy. 
© 3e hadden herd the vois of God ab. P 3e forgiden toab, @Om. x. ‘ydoxy. § ne my3te Ky. 
t Om. 9. u prophetis vois K. the voicis of prophetis ad. © v whanne y. Aym; whom ab. © 3¢ x. 
x vndirfongende s. vndirfenge x. Y forseid Gxey. biforeseid ab. 2 schewid ab. a That forsothe 
crogvyab, >Om.y. C¢this xk. 4strynyng Gxogryab. © apostlis x. f bitwixe xorab. & schew- 
ynge celeri. h the puplis aJ. i thei kepten x. k fleish, that is, prepuciea. 10m. s prim. ab. 
™ among ab. ™ mekinge Gkogvyab. ©Om.s. P witnessinge kK. 4 connceyles o. and counseilith ab. 
® schewynge ceteri. § Jewis trespassiden ab. *Om.v. haueth Gey.  Y paynyms frespassiden ab, 
x Here it GK. Y wroot he rv. 2 beth exey. there ben b. a pistlis Gx. b to the o. © ether 
put forth oy. Om. ab. 4 newe testament ab. € no3t K. not to ab, not celeri. f discordi axy. 
€Om. ab. ¢eOm.cr. theo. imaundementg. kOm.e@. be cx. Om. ab. ™ to the Jewis 
that weren ab. ® to be delyuered 9. © pisteles o. P these c. Om. ab. 4 ypurchasid cxey. that 
ben delyuered ab. r Om. y. 8 twei celeri. tlerned cxogvy. Uhaueth Gey. Vv ytake exer. 
wOm.y. *tothead. Yiwryteney. 2Om.o0b @affermyth cxey. > Om.a.  °¢ variannce b. 
1QOm.o. ©¢ other cxavy. ether ab. f other cey. ether ovab. g other exey. ether orab. } whiche 
ovb, the whichea. 1!Om.ab. jnot to c. noj3ttox. kthanne ab. lofnos. ™is kK. ® Poule a. ful y. 
° Om. a. P leeued Gxoryrab. q Om. vr. t other exgy. ether ovab. s Om. a. t chirche o. 
Yclepid ab. vasa Kovab. 


cal aq? 


300 ' ROMANS. 


wolde, his name beende’ stille, of the* figures of the lawe, and the treuthe of Crist 
3elde rekenynge; lest happili hate of the prelatis’ name, shulde exclude the profit* of 
the lessoun. It is no wnder holli* if he be wisere in his owne? langage, that is Ebru, 
than in® a straunge’, that is int Grw‘, in whiche speche othere epistolis ben’ writene. 
It moueth also summe men, whi that the® epistili of* Romaynes is put in first!, sythen 
resoun openeth™ it to han be writen aftir; for he witnesseth hymself to han writen 
this epistil, thanne goende® to Jerusalem, aftir thanne® that he? hadde amonestid4 with 
lettris, that weren™ epistolis, the’ Corintheis and othere, that theit shulden gedere the 
mynysterye, ‘or collect", that schulde be born with hym. Wherefore it is to” vnder- 
stonde, so‘Y alle the epistolis” to ben ordeyned, that thilke firste* shulde be putY, the 
whiche to lowere men in lyuyng was sent, and bi ‘alle, or eche’, epistolis fro gree to 
gree, thei shulden comen to parfitere thingis. Romaynes sothli* ri3t manye weren 
so vustedefast, that thei vnderstoden not hemself to be sauid thur3 Goddis grace, but 
thur3 here merytes; and for that two** puplis shulden not? striuen among hemself, 
therfore he afermeth hem nedi to be confermed, the vices* of her paynymrie rathere 
myndende?. To Corintheis sothly® he seith, the grace of science to be grauntid, and 
not as wel he blameth hem, as he repreueth whi thei vndernemen not otheref, whan 
he seith, Ther is herd amongis 3o0u fornycacioun; and eftsoone, My sperit with jou 
‘gedered togedere§, taketh® suchon to Sathanas. In the secounde epistil, forsothe 
thei ben preisid, and that! thei profite more and more, thei ben* counseilid. The 
men of Galas thanne of no blame ben! repreued, but for thei beleueden™ to fele" false 
apostolis. Effesienes® holli? noen vndernymyng, but myche‘ preising ben™ wrthi, for 
thei kepten* the feith of the apostolis. The Filipenses sothlyt myche more ben" 
preisid, for’ forsothe” neither* thei wolden heren falseY apostolis. The? Tessalony- 
censis netheles* in two? epistolis with alle preising® he ‘sueth forth’; for as myche 
as not only ‘thei kepten® ‘the feith of treuthe', vntosmyten®, but also in persecucioun 
of ther citeseynes thei weren founden stable. Colocensis sothli suche weren, that 
no nede shulden han, that thei shulden be seen fleshli of the apostil'. Forsothe to 
hem he bihiz3te neuere his comynge, to the whiche also he seith, And they; I be 
absent in bodi, but in spirit I am with jou, iojende* and seende! 3oure ordre. Of 
the Ebrues sothlim what shal I seie? Of whoin the Thessalonycenses, that gretly ben” 
preisid, ben® seid to be maad foleweres, as he seith, And 3ee, brethern, ben? maad 
foloweris off the chirches’ of God, that ben™ in Jewerie ; the same sothli also® 3ee hant 
suffrid of" 3oure kinrede, that also thei of Jewis. At thilke Ebreues also the same 
he remembreth, seiende’, Forwhi also to men bounden 3ee han® had compassioun, and 
raueyn of 30ure goodis with gladnesse 3ee han* suffrid, knowendeY 3ou to han betere 
and dwellende’” substaunce. 


Here eendeth the prologe, and bygynneth the epistel of Poule to Romaynus*. 


w beynge ceteri. *Om.r. YOm.cGxe. 7 propheteo. ‘namely ab. %Om.e. © Om. K. 
d strange tong o. straunge langage ab. © Om.o. {fGreikeo. f&bethey. Om. x. i epistlis ex. 
kto ab. ithe bigynnyng ab. ™ schewith ab. % goynge ceter?. ° Om. ab. P Om. Gk. 4 monestid Q. 


r ben ab. 8 of the o. t Om. y. 0 other the quylet ckoy. Om. oab. either quylet v. v Om. kK. 
vv so that r. W pistlis ab. x Om. ab. y put first in ordre ad. Z alle, other everyche GKoY. 
eueryche o. alle, either exerech v. alle ab. aforsothe 0. 8 twey ceteri. > Om. Gxeryb. © voycis 
GK. voyce orb. d ynmyndende s pr.m. myndyuge ceteri. € forsoth o. f ech oother ab. 
& gadere y. h bitakith ab. i ato. k beth ery. 1 beth exey. m leeuide cxoy. leeueden or. 
o many ab. © Ephesies oab. P namely ab. 4Om.ab. * beth cey. %kepen x. ¢ forsothe o. 4 beth ey. 
YOm. cx. Wsikirliad. *Om.ab.  Yno falseab. 2Om.ex. ®neuerethelees cxoy. > twey 
ceteri. € preysinges 0, 4 forsewith eg. forschewith xr. forth scheweth o. €Om.s. fOm. rd. 
§ Om. 0. vnsmytena. 4 falle ab.  iapostlisv. * ioyinge ceteri. | seeinge ceteri. ™ forsothe o. 


0 beth Gey. © bethaxey. P beth ay. 4d chirche o. * beth ekey. s Om.ad. t haueth gy. also of a. 
Yseiynge éhus a. seiynge ceferi. ®* haueth egy. *haueth coy. Y knowynge ceteri. 2 dwellynge ceteri. 
a From o. Heere endith the firste prologe on the pistil to Romayns. a. No final rubric in cosy wb. 


=, 


ROMANS. 301 


Here bigynneth a prolog on the pistil to the Romayns*. 


+ Romayns ben thei, that® of Jewis and of* hethene men gaderid* to gidere, bi- 
leeueden® inf Crist. And the cause of this? sendinge of the" pistili of Poul) is this, 
that whanne strijf was risen among hem silf, thei desiriden to sette hem silf ech aboue 
othere in worschip. For the Jewis seiden, We ben the peple of God, which* he hath 
loued and norischid fro the bigynnynge'; we™ ben circumcidid; and we" comen by 
dissent of Abrahams kynde, and holy lynage®; and herfore? God was oonly knowen 
at? Judee. We' weren delyuerd out of Egipt with tokenes and vertues of God, and 
passiden the see with drie foot, whanne moost heuy floodis drenchiden oure enemyes. 
To* us alsot God reynede doun aungils mete in" desert, and mynystride anv heuenly 
foode ‘to us”, as to hise owne sones; and a piler of cloude’ and of fier wente bifore us 
day and ny3t, for it schulde schewe to* us ‘oure passage’, ther was’ no wey vsid. Also 
thou3 we hen stille of alle?* benfetis wrou3t aboute us, we weren oonly worthi to take 
the lawe of God, and to heere the vois of God spekinge, and to* knowe his owne® wil. 
In which lawe Crist was bihote to us, to whom he hiinsilf witnesside® to come, and 
seide, I cam not® but® to the scheep, that ‘han perischid of the hous of Israel. And& 
sithen he clepith® 3ou houndis rather than men, ‘therfore it is' good equite, that 3e that 
this day first han forsake 3oure mawmettis, to whom 3e han" serued fro the bigynnynge, 
be! maad" nowe™ euene to us in worschip, but" rather® ben? 3e ordeyned4 in the stide 
of prosolitis and vndirlingis", bothe bi antorite of lawe’ and of custum? And 3it 3e 
disseruedent neuere this worschip, but for he of his plenteuous goodnes wolde resseyue 
jou" to” oure” secte*. AndY thanne the”? hethene men answeriden a3enward’, and 
seiden, Euere the grettir beenfetis of God, that 3e tellen that God hath doon to 3ou, 


t+ This prologue is printed from k, and another version of the same prologue is given below from a, in 
which copy alone it has been found. ® From o. Prolog. 1. No initial rubric in kmnpqr. > that ben Im. 
¢Om.Imopqr. 4 gaderiden k. ben gaderid n. ¢ and bileeueden k. fin tom. |& the lm. Om. q pr.m. 
» this Imopqr. iepistle Imopqr. J Poulisr. the whiche n. ! bigynnyng of the world 1. ™ for we n. 
2Qm.Imnopqr. © lyuyngek. Ptherforen. Vink, tAndwen. 8 Andton. tOm.Jm. “in ton. 
Ytovsann. Om. lmnopqr. Wwaclouder sec.m. * Om. Imopqr. Y¥ passinge l. oure passynge r. 
Zas was muopqr. 22 Om.r. ®Om.Imo. »% Om. Imopqr. © witnessith Ir. 4Om.1.  ¢no but mopq. 
f perischiden Imnopq. & Om. Imopgqr. h clepid Imopgr. iit is therefore lmnr. is it therfore opq. 
kOm.n. 1 be notk sec.m.toben. !Om.r. ™Om.n. ® nay butn. © rather that Imnopqr. POm. 
lopqr. ordeyne]. ‘vndir leiyngisk. ®%the lawel. tserueden k. * 30u to his goodnesse ]. Vin to n. 
W30ure mopq. * feetk. YOm.n. 2% Om. Impqr. ® Om. Imno. 


Also Romayns weren of Jewis aud hethene men, and bileeucden to Crist; and by proude stryf 
thei wolden enhaunce hem silf ech part abouc othere. For whi Jewis seiden, We ben the peple 
of God, whiche he louede and norischide fro the bigynnyng; we ben cireumeidid, and camen of 
the kyn and holy generacioun of Abraham; and God was knowen first oonly at Jewis. We 
weren delyuered fro Egipt by myraclis and vertues of God, and passiden the reed see with drie 
foot, whan greuouse wawis drenchiden oure enemyes; and reynede to us manna in the desert, and 
mynystride heuenly mete to vs, as to hise sonys. By day and ny3t God 3ede bifore vs in a piler 
of cloude and of fier, to schewe weye to vs in the place without weye. And that we holde stille 
othere benefices of God abonte vs, we aloone weren worthi to take the lawe of God, and to 
hecre the voys of the Lord spekynge, and to knowe his wille; in which lawe Crist was bihizte to 
vs. Also he witnesside, that he hymsilf was comen to vs, and seide, Y cam not, no but to the 
scheep of the hous of Israel, that weren perischide, whan he clepide 30u doggis rather than then. 
Therfor whether it is riztful, that 3e that forsaken ydols to day, whiche 3e serueden at the bigyn- 
nyng, be comparisond to vs, and be not rather arettid in to the place of comelynges, by auctorite 
of the lawe and by custome? And 3e disserueden not this, no but for Goddis merey, which is 
eucr large, wolde resseyue 30u to oure suynge, that is, to suc vs. Ajenward hethene men answer- 
eden thus, In as myche as 3e tellen gretter benefices of God anentis 3ou, by so myche 3¢ schulen 
schewe, that 3c ben gilty of gretter synne; for 3e weren ever vnkynde to alle tho benefiees. For with 


302 ROMANS. 


euere ‘the more® 3e schulden schewe 3ou gilti of the grettir trespassis®; for in alle 
these benfetis ‘that 3e tellen*, 3e weren euermore vnkynde. For with the same feet 
that 3e passiden the drie see, 3e pleieden® and daunsidenf bifore 3oure mawmettis that 
3e maden; and with the same mouth, that a litil bifore 3e® worschipiden God with 
song for slau3tir of 3oure enemyes, 3e axiden® 30ure mawmetis to be maad; and with 
thilke isen that 3e weren wont to biholde God in cloud or ini fier, 3e biheelden 
inwardly in* 3oure mawimettis. Also aungels mete was to 30u abhomynable; and 
enere 3e grucchiden a3ens the Lord in desert, desirynge to turne a3en in to Egipt, fro 
the! which God hadde brou3t ‘jou out™ with strong hond. What more? Thus 30ure 
fadris ‘with ofte terrynge" stiriden® God to wraththe, so that alle dieden in desert, and 
no mo of the eeldre inen but tweyne entriden in to the lond of biheeste. But wherto 
reherse we oolde thingis? sith? thou3 3e hadde neuere do these thingis, 3it of this aloone 
no man wolde deme 30u worthi?? forzeuenes’, that" 3e wolde ‘not resseyne oonly® oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist, that was euere' bihote to 30u bi the vois" of profetis; but also 3e 
distruyeden hii’ with moost dispitons deeth. And on” him we bileeueden, as soone 
as we herden of him; and 3it ther was no thing profecied ‘to us* bifore. Wherfore 
it is weel preued, that it schulde not be arettid to’ a? rotid? malice of oure wil, that 
we serueden to mawmettis, but to oure vnkunnynge. For thilke same God that we 
folowe now, sikirli? we wolde hane folowid bifore®, if we hadden rathir knowen as we 
knowen now. And truly if 3e boosten of nobley of kinde, as thou34 folowinge of gode 
maners made 30u not rather Goddis sones than fleischly birthe, sikerly® Esau and 
Ismael, thon3 thei ben’ of Abrahams lynage, thei ben not rikened among sones. And 
while® thei strynen thus, the apostilés putte him bitwene® as a! mene, distruynge alle her 
qwestiouns, as a good noumpere); strecchinge forth the* hond to hem, and spekyng 
brou3te hem alle! to oon acoord ; schewinge™ noon of hem ‘to be" saued thoru hise® 
owne meritis, but he preuede ‘bothe the? peplis, ‘that thei? hadden grenonsly trespassid. 


‘bOm. p. © trespas Imnopqr. ¢Om.Imnopqr. © plesiden 1. pleieden aftir pqr. £ dannciden aftir Imo. 
€Om.n. baskedeno. }Omm. *Om.1. !Om.mogr. "Om.n. © terriden ofte 1. with eft terriden r. 
°Om.k. Pforn. PP worthitor. 4 to haue forjeuenesse n. ‘'forn. 8 oonli not receyue lmogr. 
tOm.n. voicisopq YOmm. Winn, *Omn. yYinl 2% Om. Imnopqr. 4 Om. 1. roten r. 
bsothling. C¢rathern. 4thoru3k. ¢sothlimg. fwerenm. 8 while thatn.  &8 apostle Poul r. 
hbitwixe n. §Om.r. J vmpere Imopqr. * thatk. 'Om.k. ™ and schewide that n, ® Om. Impar. 
my3te ben. © her Imopq. of herr. P that both Imnopq. that bothe the r, 4 Om. Imopgq. 


the feet by whiche 3e passiden the drie see, 3e pleieden bifore ydols, whiche 3e maden; and by that 
mouth, by which 3e songen heriynges a litle bifore for the deeth of aduersaries, whiche God killide 
by myraele, 3e axiden symylacris to he maad to 30u. With tho i3en, by whiche 3e weren wont to 
hibholde the worchipful thingis of the Lord in the cloude either in fier, 3e bihelden symylacres, 
Also 3e wlatiden manna, and euer in the desert 3e grucchiden ajens the Lord, and wolden go ajen 
in to Egipt, fro whennes he hadde caste 30u out with strong hond. What moo thinges? 3oure fadres 
wraththiden so the Lord hi ofte terrynge to wraththe, that alle dieden in desert, and no mo of the 
oolde men of hem, no but tweyne, entriden in to the lond of biheest. But what rehersen we eelde 
synnes? sithen thou3 3e hadden not do tho, for this aloone, that not oonly 3e nolden resseyue the 
Lord Jesu Crist, bihi3t to 30u euere by the voices of profetes, but also 3e killiden him by worst 
deeth, no man schulde deme 30u worthi to have forzeuenesse. Which Lord we bileeueden anoon, 
afur that we knewen, thou3 no thing was bifore seid to vs of him. Wherby it is prened, that this, 
that we serneden ydols, schal not be aretted to hardnesse of synne, but to ignoraunee. For we that 
snen‘anoon the Lord knowen, wolden haue sued him in tyme passid, 3if we hadden knowe him 
bifore. And 3if 3e auaunten 30u of the nobley of kyn, as 3if the suynge of vertues maketh not to 
be sones of seyntes, more than fleishly natiuite doth, forsothe Esau and Ismael, thou3 thei ben 
of the generacioun of Abraham, ben not arettid either noumbred with sones. Therfor the postle 
setteth him a meene bitwixe the peples strinynge thus, and assoileth so the questiouns of the partyes, 
that he affermeth, that neuer neither of hem deseruyde helthe by bis owne ri3fulnesse, and that 
bothe peplis synneden wityngly and greuously; that Jewis dispisiden God by brekynge of the 


ROMANS. 303 


The Jewis hadden* trespassiden, for thei dishonouriden* God bi brekinge of the lawe ; 
and the hethene men trespassiden, ‘that siththet knowingli thei worschipiden a 
creature as maker of thet world; for thei chaungiden Goddis worschip into mawmetis 
maad with hond". Also’ he preuith euere ether peple to haue for3euenes, and to be 
euen in worschip, bi a¥ ful trewe resoun. And ‘nameli siththe* he schewith, that it 
was profeciedY in her owne lawe, that bothe of? Jewis and of* hethene men schulden 
be clepid to the feith of Crist. Wherfore bi dyuers tymes Poul mekede hem, and 
amonestide® hem‘ ‘to come? to pees and acord. 


Here endith the prolog to the Romayns®. 


rOm.n. § hadden dishonourid Imogr. * forn. ttOQm.r, ¥% hondis Imoqr. v And n. ¥ Om, Imogr. 
xalson. Y proferidm. 2 the lm. Om. nopqr. ®the 1. Om. mnopqr. > amonestith Imopq. monestith n. 
monestid r. Ctohemm. @Om.Jm. ¢ From o. Explicit. q. No final rubrie in kImnpr. 


lawe; and hethene men, whanne thei on;ten worschipe the creatour as God, whom thei knewen by 
creatures, chaungiden his glorie into symylacris maad with mannes hondis. Also the postle scheweth 
by verreiest resoun, that cuereither peple gat forzeuenesse, and ben euene; moost sithen he schew- 
eth, that it was bifore seid in the same lawe, that bothe Jewis and hethene men schulden be clepid 
to the feith of Crist. Wherfor Poule maketh hem meke, now this peple, and now that peple, and 
monesteth hem to pees and acordynge. 
Al this is set in a prologe writen in summe bookis on this pistle, and the Comyn Glose in the 
* bigynnynge at Poule, hath the same sentence. 


SS ee 
An other vpon Romayns?. Flere biginnith the prologe on Romains*. 
Romayns ‘the whiche* in‘ the Romayns ben? in the cuntree of Italye; thei¢ 


cite of Rome lyueden® in to Jhesu _ weren disseyued first of false profetis’, and vndur 
Crist, so off false apostlis were the name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist thei weren 
deprauyd, that vndir the name of  brou3t in to the lawe and profetis, that is, in to 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist in to the cerymonyes, ethir fleischli kepyng of Moyses 
olde lawe and circumcisioun thei awe and of prophetis, acordynge with tho® 
weren led. Thes reuokith the apo- cerymonyes, which vsyng is contrarie now to 
stle to the verrey and the gospels the treuthe and* fredom of Cristis gospel. Poul 
bileue, wrytynge to hem fro A-  a3enclepith these Romayns to veri‘ feith and 
thenys. treuthe® of the gospel, and writith ‘to hem? 
, _ this! pistlei fro Corynthe. 
Here endith the prolog, and bi- 
gynneth epistle to Romayns". This seith Jerom in his prologe on the pisile 
to the Romayns*. 


> No initial rubric in sy. © Om. xs. ‘@lyuedeniny. ¢lenedens,Om.r. fthat of ks. & Om. s. 
h Here eendeth the prologe, and bygynneth the epistel of Poule to Romaynus. 0. Here eendith the prologis 
to Romayns, and bigynneth the epistle. w. No final rubric in ery. 


® From Ec. Heere biginnith the ii. prologe on the pistle to Romayus. 1. Prolog to Romayns. N. Here 
bigynneth a prologe to Romayns. vu. Here bigynneth the first prologe on the pistlis of Poule.a. Another 
prolog to the Romayns. f. Here bigynneth the prolog on the pistil to Romayns. 0. No initial rubric in the 
other Mss. bben men so. ¢these rh. 4 prophetis, that is, [of n} false teehers cmnNqnuxan. & the 
Ebk. ofthea. ftheverein. & fredoms. bOm.c. tinthisa. Jepistlennfh. * This seith 
Jerom in his prologe on this (his x. the 0] pistle to Romayns. cexo. Heere endith the prologe, and here 
biginnith the pistle.1. Jerom seith this in his prologe to the Romayns ; se now the book. x. Jerom setth 
this in his prologe to Romayns. mbefh. Here endith the prolog on Poulis pistil to Romayns bi Jerom. n. 
Heere cendith the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle. n. This seith Jerom in his prologe. vu. Here eendith the 
prologe, and bigynneth the pistil to Romayns. e. Here endith the prologe, and bigyneth a pestile to the Ro- 
mayns. g. Jerom in his prolog on this pistil seith thus. k. 


304 


The epistle to Romayns*. 


CAP. I. 


1 Poul, seruaunt> of Jhesu Crist, clepid 
apostle, departid into® the’ euangelie® of 
2God; ‘the which he bihi3t bifore by his 
3prophetis in hooly scripturis of his sone, 
‘the which$ is maad ‘to him» of the seed 
4of Dauith aftir' the) fleisch, the which is 
predestynat, ‘or bifore ordeyned' bi grace, 
the sone of God in vertu, aftir™ the spirit 
of halewyng of the a3eyn rysynge of deed 
smen, of Jhesu Crist oure Lord, by whom 
we han resseyued grace and apostilhed, 
‘or stat of apostle”, to obeische to the feith 
sin alle folkis for his name, in® which? 
zand4 3e ben clepid™ of Jhesu Crist, to alle 
that ben at Rome, the loucde of God, clepid 
hooly, grace* to 30u, and pees of God oure 
a fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu Crist. Firste 
sothelyt I do thankyngis to my God, by 
Jhesu Crist, for alle 3ou, for 3our feith is 
gschewid in al the world. Forsoth God is 
a witnesse to me, to" whom I serue in my 
19 Spirit, in the gospel of his sone, for’ with 
outen ceessinge I make mynde of 30u 
euermoreW in my preieris, if* by ony 
maner aftirward sumtyme I haue esyY, 
‘or spedy’”, weie in the wille of God of* 
11comynge> to 3ou. Forsothe* I desyre for! 
to se 30u, that I 3yue to 30u sum thing of 
spiritual grace, to 30u to be confermyd, 
igthat is to seie, toe be comfortid to gidere 
in 30u, by that feith that is to gidere 30ure 
i3and myn, ‘or of ech to othir®. Sothly, 
britheren, I nyle 3ouh for‘ toi vnknowe, 
that ofte* I purposide for! to come to 30u, 


ROMANS. 


I, 1-13. 


Here bigynneth the pistle of Poul to 
Romayns*. 


CAPE 


Poul, the seruaunt of Jhesu Crist 5,1 
clepid® an? apostle, departid in to the 
gospel of God; which he hadde bihote2z 
tofore® bif his’ profetis in holi scripturis 
of his sone, which is maad to hym of the3 
seed of Dauid bi the flesch, and* he was4 
bifor ordeyned the sone of God in vertu, 
bi the spirit of halewyng of the a3en- 
risyng of deed men, of Jhesu Crist oure 
Lord, bi whom we han resseyued graces 
and the office of apostle, to obeie to the 
feith in alle folkis for his name, among6é 
whiche 3e ben also clepid of Jhesu 
Crist, to alle that ben at Rome, derlyngis7 
of God, and clepid hooli, grace to 3ou, 
and pees of God oure fadir, and of the 
Lord Jhesu Crist. First Y do thank-8 
yngis to my God, bi Jhesu Crist, for alle 
30u, for 30ure feith is schewid ini al the 
world. For God is a witnesse to me, to9 
whom Y serue in my spirit, in the gospel 
of his sone, that with outen ceessyng Y 10 
make mynde of 30u euere in my preieris, 
and biseche, if in ony maner sum tyme 
Y haue aX spedi weie in the wille of 
God to come to 30u. For Y desire tou 
se 30u, to parten sumwhat! of spiritual 
grace, that 3e be confermyd, that is, to12 
be coumfortid togidere in 3o0u, bi feith 
that is bothe 3oure and myn togidere. 
And, britheren, Y nyle, that 3e vn-13 
knowun, that ofte Y purposide to come 
to 30u, and™ Y am” lett® to? this tyme, 


that Y haue sum fruyt in jon, as in + orhethen 


5 . men of vn- 
othere folkis. To Grekis and to bar-14 von lane 


beryns}{, to wise men and to ynwise se. Lye 
here. e. 


and I am forbodyn til! 3it, that I haue 
sum fruyt in 30u, as and™ in othere folkis. 


a8 From mu. The pistle to Romayns. p. No initial rubric in ogvwxy. » the seruaunte 40. ¢ Om. Nn, 
4QOm.ivy. © gospel r. f which gospel ry. & which sone yr. bOm.q. ibir. jOm.a. *Om.r. 10m. x. 


mbir. "Om. x. Samongr. Pthe whiche ns. Galsor. the clepid 4g pr.m.mpsvy. §& grace 
ber. tOm.rpr.m %Om.n. Vthaty. “euere yr. * preiynge if y. and biseche ifr. Y¥ spedy o. 
2Om,. ox. ®torw. Pecomer. ¢Forr. Om. sx. ©¢ for to 4 sec.m.GK pr.m.MNPQVW. & or 
eeche to other acogsriv, Om. x. ob Om. r sec.m. iOm.sx. thatr. J3er. kefto. 10m. sx. 
Uto wp. ™ Om. gw. 

2 From ma. Poul to the Romayns. a. Here bigynneth the firste chapitre of the pistil ta the Romoyns. k. 


bOm.c. ¢Om.1. 
Usumwhat éo 30n k. 


4Om.k sec.m. ¢ biforea. ftok. ¢Om. 7. bas 
mand nowa. 20Om.k prim. © lettid kQRxbS. P til ET. 


No initial rubric in crxrstuxeg. 
rt. tintog *Om.s, 


I. 14——25. 


14To Grekis and™ barbaryns, ‘or hethene 
men®, to wyse men and vnwyse men, I 
15am dettour®, so that that? is in me is redy 
for™ to euangelyse’ and‘ to 3ou that ben at 
1¢6Rome. Forsoth" I sehame not the gospel, 
for it is the vertu of God in to helthe to 
ech man bileuynge, to the Jew first, and 
17to the” Greek. Sothely* the ri3twysnesse 
of God is shewid in it, of feith in to feith, 
as it is writun, Forsothe a iust man lyu- 
iseth of feith. Forsothe’ the wraththe of 
God is schewid fro heuene vpon’ al vnpite 
and vnri3twisnesse of tho* men, that with- 
holden, ‘or holden a bac”, the® treuthe of 
i9God in vnri3twysnesse. For that that is 
knowyn of God, is schewid, ‘or maad 
opyn*, to hem, forsothe® God schewidef 
zotos hem. ‘For the" inuysible thingis of 
hymi, of the creature ‘of the worldj, by 
tho thingis that ben maad, ‘vndirstondyn, 
ben biholdun*, and the euerlasting vertu 
of him and! the godhede, so that thei ben 
21vnexcusable. For whanne thei hadden 
knowe God, thei glorifieden not as God, 
‘or diden thankyngis™; but thei vanysch- 
eden in her thou3tis, and the vnwyse herte 
of hem is" derkid™", ‘or maad derk». 
22SothliP thei seyinge hem selue for‘ to 
23 be wyse men, ben’ maad foolis. And thei 
ehaungiden the glorie of God vneorrupt- 
ible, that*® ‘may not deie, ne be peirid', in 
to the" lyknesse’ ‘of an ymage™ of* corupt- 
ible man, and of briddis, and of foure 
24footide beestis, and of serpentis. For 
which thing God bytook hem in to the 
desyris of her herte, in? to vnelennesse, 
that thei ponysche with wrongis, ‘or dis- 
25 pitis®, her bodies in hem silf. The whiche 
men» chaungiden the treuthe of God in to 
leesyng*, and herieden and serueden to? a® 
creature rathere than to.thef creatour, 


ROMANS. 


305 


men, Y am dettour, so that that is in1s 

me is redi to preche the gospel also to 

jou that ben at Rome. For’ Y schame is 

not the gospel, for it is the vertu of God 

in to heelthe to ech man that bileueth, 

to the Jew first, and to the Greke. For17 

the ri3twisnesse of God is schewid in it, 

of feith in to feith, as it is writun, For ais 

iust man lyueth of feith. For the wraththe 

of God is schewid fro heuene on al vn- 

pite and wickidnesse of tho men, that 
withholden the treuthe of God in vnri3t- 

wisnes'. For that thing of God that isto 
knowun, is schewid to hem, for God hath 

schewid to hem. For the vnuysible 20 
thingis of hym, that ben vndurstondun, 

ben biholdun of the creaturet of the + that is, of 
world, bi tho thingis that ben aad, 3he, nee 
and the euerlastynge vertu of hym and 

the godhed, so that thei mowe not be 

excusid. For whanne thei hadden knowe 21 

God, thei glorifieden ym not as God, 

nether diden thankyngis; but thei va- 
nyschiden in her thou3ts, and the vnwise 

herte of hem was derkid. For thei ‘sei-22 

ynge that* hem silf weren wise, thei 

weren maad foolis. And thei chaungiden 23 

the glorie of ‘God vncorruptiblet{ in to  ¢ ether that 
the licnesse of an ymage of a deedli man, fe a ae 
and of briddis, and of foure footid beestis, a Pore 
and of serpentis. For which thing God 247° he fora: 
bitook"|| hem in to the desiris of her 

herte, in to vnelennesse, that thei pun- 

ysche with wrongis her bodies in hem i aioe 
silf. The whiche chaungiden the treuthe 25 Lyre here. e. 
of God in to leesyng’, and herieden and 

serueden a” creature rathere than to* the 

creatoure, that is blessid in to worldis 

of worldis. Amen. Therfor God bitook 26 

hem in to passiouns of schenschipe. For 

the wymmen of hem chaungiden the 


|| that is, sul- 
fride hem to 
be bitakun, in 


™ or y sup.ras. ™Om. ox. © doctour x. POm. cmpsx. ‘Tamo. *Om.srx. 8 preche 
the gospel r. t also r. u For vr. w Om. * Forwhi 7. y For r. Zon vx. athe w. 
bOm. ox. ¢Om.o. 4Om. ox. ¢forv. -fhath schewid x. &inG@sec.m. © Forsothe G sec.m. 
i hym, that ben vndirstonden, ben biholden rv. JOm.v. kOm. ry. linw. ™Om. o. neither 
diden thankingis r. nwas 7. ™™maad derko. °Om.ox. PForrv. 490m. ox. r weren 7. 
$ that is, that vy. Om. x. t Om. x. 2 Om. Q. Vv ymage lickenesse w pr.m. y. either }. w sec. m. 
w Om. ow. xX of ao. y Om. yn. 8 Om. ox. > Om. s. © the leesynge o. a leesyng or. 
dOmr. ¢eOmw. fan, 


4 Forsothe k sec.m. * vnri3tfulnesse s. 


God R pr.m. “took rk prom. ‘a lesing s. 


8 seynge.that Exb pr.m.gk pr.m. seiden s. 
Wto ain prem. T. 


VOL. IV. Rr 


t yncorruptible 
x Om. s. 


306 ROMANS. 


‘that is, maker of nou3t®, that» is blessid 
in to worldis, ‘ov with outen ende'. Amen, 
2¢0r so be it*. Therfore God bitook! hem 
in to passiouns™ of® yuel fame, ‘or schen- 
schip®. Forwhi the? wymmen of hem 
chaungiden the kyndely vss? in to that 
27vssi that is ajens kynde’. Also forsoth 
and* the mawlis, ‘or men', the" kyndeli 
vss of womman’ forsakyn”, brennyden* in 
her desyris to gidere, mawlis in to” mawlis 
worchinge filthhede, and receyuynge in 
liem silf the ‘mede, or hyre*, that byhofte 
28of* her errour. And as thei proueden not 
for® to haue God in knowinge, God bitook 
hem in to a reprouable witt, that thei do 
tho thingis that acoorden not, ‘or bysemen 
aynot®; hem® fulfillid with al wickidnesse, 
malice, fornycacioun, couetyse, weyward- 
nesse, ful of enuye, mansleynge®, stryf, 
gyle, yuel will, ‘priuey bacbyteris‘, ‘or 
30 soweris of discord®, detractouris®, ‘or opyn 
bacbyteris', hateful to God, wrongly* dis- 
pyseris ‘of othere men', proude, hy3e ouer- 
mesure™, fynderis of yuele thingis, not 
31 obeischinge® to ‘fadir and modir®, vnwyse, 
vncouenable in berynge with oute forth, 
with outen affeccioun, ‘or oue?, withouten 
32bond of pees, withouten mercy. The 
whiche whanne thei hadden knowen the 
rijtwisnesse of God, vndirstoden4 not, for" 
thei that don suche thingis ben worthi the 
deeth, not oonly thei that don tho® thingis, 
but also thei that consenten to men do- 
ynge. 
CAP. II. 

1 For which thing thou ert vnexcusable, 
thou ech man that demest, sothli" in what 
thing thou demest an othir man, thou con- 
dempnist thi’ silf; forsothe’ thou doist the 

zsame thingis whiche thou demest. Sothe- 
ly we witen, for the dom of God is vp* 


I. 26—--II. 2. 


kyndli vss in to that vss that is ajens 

kynde. Also the men forsoken the kyndli 27 

vss of womman, and brenneden in her 

desiris togidere, aud men in to men 

wrou3ten filthehed, and resseyueden in to 

hein silf the meede that bihofte of her 

errour. And as thei preneden that theios 

hadden not God in knowyng, God’ bi- 

took hem in to a repreuable wit, that 

thei do tho thingis that ben not couen- 

able; that thei ben fulfillid with al wick- 29 

idnesse, malice, fornycacioun, coueitise, 
weiwardnesse, ful? of enuye, mansleyngis, 

strijf, gile, yuel wille, preuy bacbiteris*, ean 
detractouris, hateful to God, debateris{, 30 of discord. 
proude, and hi3 ouer mesure, fynderis of ice ce 
yuele thingis, not obeschynge* to fadir dea ieers ois 
and modir, vnwise, vumanerli{, with- 31+ ether mco- 
outen loue, withouten boond of pees, na 
with outen merci. The whiche whanneo°" *: 
thei hadden knowe the rij3twisnesse of 

God, vndirstoden” not, that thei that 

don siche thingis ben worthi the deth, 

not oneli thei that don tho® thingis, but 

also thei that consenten to the doeris. 


CAP. II. 


Wherfor! thou art vnexcusable, ech} 
man that demest, for in what thing thou 
demest anothir man®, thou condempnest 
thi silf; for thou doist the same thingis 
whiche thou demest. And we witen,2 
that the doom of God is aftir treuthe 


8 Om. rx. which v. i ether withouten ende o. of worldis y pr.m. Om. v sec.m.x. © Om. Nosvx. 
ltoke 0. ™ passiouns, either lustis vy. "or gv. 9 Om. x. POm.G prm. Goyseo, the kynde o. 
sOm.n. ¢Om. x. ¥ forsoken the ry. Ywymmen ewnxp. WOm.r. * and brenneden r. brenten x. 
yOm.o. %mede ox. huyre, or medew. tow. bOm ox. © Om. x. Om. aprem. & man- 
sleyngis mpqvwxy. f soweris of discord x. & Om. x. } open bacbiteris x. 1Om. x. & wrongful No. 
1Om. Gmopx. ™ or ouer mesure g@. Om. x. 4 obeyende x. © © faderes or moduris 0. P Om. x. 
q vndurstonden K pr. m. QIVY. that r. 8 suche QIWxY. «for vy pr.m, thee kK. W for r. 
x aftir N. opon o. 

y so God s sec. m. 2 and ful s. 8 oliedient x. b ynderstonden csaek. © suche a. 4 -Ther- 


forer. © Om. a. 


II. 3-15. 


treuthe toY hem, that don siche thingis. 
3Gessist? thou, man, forsothe®, that demest 
hem that don suche thingis, and thou do- 
ist hem», for® thou schalt ascape’ the dom 
4of God? Wher ‘thon dispisist¢ the richessis 
of his goodnesse, and pacience, and longe 
abidyng? Vnknowest thou’, for? the be- 
nygnyte, ‘or good wille', of God ledith 
sthee to penaunce? Forsothe aftir* thi 
hardnesse and vnrepentaunt herte, thou 
tresourist to thee wraththe! in to™ the 
day of wraththe and of schewynge of the 
6ri3tful dom of God, that sehal 3elde to ech 
7man vp his workis; sothely to hem that 
vp" patience of good werk, glorie, and 
honour, and vncoripcioun, to hem sek- 
8ynge euerelasting lyf; forsothe to hem 
that ben of stryf, and that assenten not 
to treuthe, but bileuen to wickidnesse, 
9wraththe and indignacioun, tribulacioun 
and angwische’, in to ech soule of man 
worchinge yuel thing‘, of Jew first and 
10Greek"; sothely glorie, and honour, and 
pees, tov ech” worchinge* good thing, to 
iJewY first, and to Greek*. For accep- 
ciouns* of persoones, ‘that is, to putte oon 
bifore another withoute’ desert®, is not 
12anentist God. Forsothe® who euere syn- 
nen withoute lawe‘, schulen perische with- 
outen lawe%; and> who euere in the lawe 
synnen, schulen be demed by the lawe. 
13 Sothely' tlie heereris of lawe ben not iust 
anentis* God, but the docris of lawe! 
14schulen be maad iust. Forsoth™ whanne 
hethene" that han not lawe®, don kyndeli, 
‘or by stiryng of kynde?, tho thingis that 
ben of the lawe, thei not hauynge such 
maner lawe', ben lawe to hei silf, that 
isschewen the’ work of lawe writun in her 
hertis ; thet conscience of hem 3eldinge" to 


2 But gessist vr. 


Yin to opgmry. a3ens r. 
f this nv. 


€ dispisist thou K sec.m. ogviwx. 

1 the wrath G sec. m. m Om. rw. 
Greeke emp. of Grek oswxy. of the Greek r. 
Y the Jew r sec.m. z the Greek r. 
either withouten ¥ sec. m. ¢ gloss omitted in rx. 
lawe 1. h Om. Nn. i For r. 
AGMNOPYF, © lawe, that is, Moises lawe r. 
 3eeldith rv. 


& Wher plures et aB. 


mwerkis ak. 2©Om. Kk. ©Om.k prim. 


RT 


ROMANS. 


vin to w. 
@ accepcioun AGMNPV.X. excepcion o. 


k anent x passim. 
P Om. ox. 


4 thou dispisist riqbceka. 


307 


azens hem, that don siche thingis. Buts 
gessist thou, man, that demest hem that 
doen siche thingis, and thon doist tho 
thingis, that thou schalt ascape the doom 
of God? Whether’ ‘dispisist thou the4 
richessis of his goodnesse, and the pa- 
cience, and the long abidyng? Knowist 
thou not, that the benygnyte* of God 
ledith thee to! forthenkyng? But aftirs 
thin hardnesse and vnrepentaunt herte, 
thou tresorist to thee wraththe in the 
dai of wraththe and of schewyng of the 
ri3tful doom of God, that schal 3elde tos 
ech man aftir his werkis; sotheli to7 
hem that ben bi paciencet of good werk, 
glorie, and onour, and vncorrupcioun, to 
hem that seken euerlastynge lijf; but tos 
hem that ben of strijf{, and that as- 
senten not to treuthe, but bileuen to 
wickidnesse, wraththe and indignacioun, 
tribulacioun and angwisch, in to ech9 
soule of man that worchith yuel, to the 


Jew first, and to the Greke ; but glorie, 10 


and honour, and pees, to ech man that 
worchith good thing, to the Jew first, 
and to the Greke. For accepcioun of!! 
persones§ is not anentis God. 
euere han synned without the lawe, 
schulen perische withouten the’ lawe ; 
and who euere han synned in the lawe, 
thei schulen be demyd bi the lawe. For 13 
the hereris of lawe' ben not iust anentis 
God, but the doeris of the lawe schuwen 
be maad iust. For whanne hethene men l4 
that han not lawe, don kyndli_ tho 
thingis that ben of the lawe, thei not 
hauynge suche manere lawe, ben lawe to 
hein silf, that schewen the werk™ of thet 15 
lawe writun in her hertis. For the 
conscience of hem 3eldith to hem a° wit- 


aQm.v. thothingisy. ¢that or. 4 scapen x. 
& Knowest thou not 0. ‘bthatv. iOm. x. bi r. 
0 ben bi nN. ben up v. T anguisches o. tOm. r. u the 


X that worchin w. 

b thal is, withoulen o. 
e For vr. f the lawe w. & the 
m For r. D hethen men 
sOm.o. ¢t while the r. 


Ww eche man pr. 


d anent x. 
1 the lawe Nn. 
¥ of lawe o. 


iin to 7. kOm. x. ~ ! the lawe cruxagk. 


oO 


ve 


* ether good- 
wille. Ke. 


t pacience, 
that is, to hem 
that vsiden wel 
to worche God- 
dis pacience. 
Lyre here. e. 

t strijf, that 
is, to synneris 
endnrid. Lyre 
here. e. 


For who 12 § of persoones, 


that is, to putte 
oon bifore an- 
other without 
dissert. outen 
the lawe wri- 
tun, as hethen 
men that had- 
den not Moyses 
law. lawe wri- 
tun, for thei 
hadden kyndeli 
lawe schewinge 
good and yuel. 
not lawe, that 
is, Moyses lawe. 
Lyre here. e. 


308 


hem a* witnessinge and bitwixeY hem 
selue of thou3tis accusinge or also defend- 
isinge, in the day whanne God schal deme 
the pryuei thingis of men vp my gospel, by 
i7Jhesu Crist. Forsoth if thou ert namyd 
a Jew, and restist in the lawe, aud hast 
iwglorie in God, and hast knowe his wille, 
and thou lerned? by the lawe preuyst* 
i9more? profitable thingis, tristnest® thi silf 
for to be a ledere of blynde men, the li3t of 
zolem that beth® iu derknessis, a techere of 
vnwyse men, a maistir of 3onge children’, 
hauynge the foorme of science, ‘or kun- 
2nynge", and of treuthe in the lawe; ther- 
fore thou that techist anothir, techist! not 
thi silf? Thou that prechist to not stele, 
gzstelist ? Thou that seist to ‘not do* 
leccherie, doist leccherie? Thou that 
wlatist ydols, ‘or mawmetis', doist sacri- 
legie, ‘that is, thefte of hooly thingis™? 
23Thou that gloriest" in the lawe, by°® 
‘brekinge of the lawe? vuworschipist, ‘or 
21dispisist’, God? Forsoth™ the name of 
God by 3ou is blasfemyd among* hethene 
vsmel, as it is writun. Sothli circumcisioun 
profyteth, if thou kepe the lawe ; forsoth 
if thou be a trespassour of the lawe, thi 
circumcisioun is maad prepucie, ‘ov custom 
260f hethen ment. Therfore if prepucie, ‘or 
custom of hethen men“, kepe rijtwysnesse’ 
of the’ lawe, wher his prepucie schal not 
27 be rettid* in to circumcisioun? And the 
prepucie, thatY is of? kynde’, fullinge® the 
lawe, schal deme thee, that by lettre and 
circumcisioun ert trespassour of the lawe. 
23Forsoth® not he that is a Jew in opyn’, 
ne® thef circumcisioun that is in the® 
29 fleisch in opyn; but he that is a Jew in 
hidd, and the cirecumcisioun of herte in 
spirit, not in lettre, whos preisyng is not 
ofi men, but of God. 


ROMANS. 


Il. 16—29. 


nessyng bytwixe hem silf of thou3tis 
that ben accusynge or defendynge, in thei 
dai whanne God schal deme the priuy 
thingis of men aftir my gospel, bi Jhesu 
Crist. But if thou art named a Jew,17 
and restist in the lawe, and hast glorie 
in God, and hast knowe his wille, andis 
thou lerud? bi lawe4 preuest the more 
profitable thingis, and tristist thi silf to19 
be a ledere of blynde men, the 1i3t of 
hem that ben in derknessis, a techere of 20 
vuwise men, a maistir of 3onge children, 
that hast the foorme of kunnyng and of 
treuthe in the lawe; what thanne tech-21 
ist thou another, and techist not thi silf? 
Thou that prechist that me schal not 
stele, stelist ? Thou that techist that me2e 
schal ‘do no letcherie, doist letcherie ? 
Thou that wlatist aumetis, doist sacri- 
legie*? Thou that hast glorie in the 23* sacritegie, 


2 OaRD : i that is, thefte 
lawe, vnworschipist God bi brekyng of ¢; holy thinehe 


the Jawe? For the name of God lsat Nee 
, that is. 

blasfemed bi 30u among hethene men,  maad abhomy- 
nable to God, 


as is writun. For circumcisioun pro-95as hethen men 
. : : th 
fitith, if thou kepe the lawe; but if thou  ‘2&* hadden 


prepucie, weren 


be a‘ trespassour a3ens the lawe, thi ®vbomynable 

ke - ; to Jewis. 
circumsicioun is maad prepucie. Ther- 26% the kynde, 
that is, of the 


for if prepucie kepe the rijtwisnessis’ of — kynde of him 
: . : bi the doom of 

the lawe, whethir’ his prepucie schal not — kyndeli resoun. 

be arettid in to cireumcisioun? And the 27 fom ie he" 

prepucie of kynde that fulfillith the lawe, 

schal deme thee, that bi lettre and cir- 

cumcisioun art trespassour"® a3ens the 

lawe. For he that is in opene is not ags 

Jew, nether it is circumsicioun that is 

openli in the fleisch; but he that is a Jew 29 

in hid, and the’ circumcisioun of herte, 

in spirit, not bi the lettre, whos preisyng 

is not of men, but of God. 


man vacircum- 
sidid. Lyre 
here. e. 


xOm.o.  ¥ bitwen sx. 2 lerid asx. lernd em. a hast proued s. bthe more s. © tristest 
msx. tristeth o. trustest Q. and tristnist vy. and trustnest vy. é€ ben AGMNOPQSV WX. € childer x. 
hOm.ox. itecher. Kdonoo. 'tOm.ox. ™Om. x. "hast gloriery. © Om. 0g. P Om. o. 
40m. ox. *'Forr. Samongis x. tOm.r. or hethene kustum x. Om. ox. that is, an hethen 
man vneircumcidid ¥. VY riztwisnesses P. riztfulnessis vx. WY Om.Q. *arettid ysec.m. Y¥ which r. 
z Om. o. athe kynde r. b fulfillynge acarnoporw. fellende s. fulfillende x. ¢ For 7. 4 opyn, 
that is, eircumcisid in flesch he is preysable x. e neither vy. fOm.a primar. 8 Om. x. b Om. @. 


i Om. x. 


P lerned cemqtuxaegkoaf. lered 1. lernd x. 
1 Om. X pr.m.a. 8 riztwisnes E1QRTghka, 


4 the lawe cE1KMQRTUXabceghkoa. 
t wher cEigxg. 


r not do Erbegka. 


Ua trespassour k prem. Y Om. rtbs. 


Til, 1—16.. 


CAP. III. 
1 Therfore what_is more to a Jew, or 
2what profyt of circuincisioun ? Moche by 
alle maner; first sothli, for‘ the spekyngis 
3o0f God ben! bitakun to hem. What sothli 
if summe of hem bileueden not? Wher™ 
the vnbileue of hem hath auoydid" the 
afeith of God? Fer be it. Forsoth God is 
trewe, ‘or sothfast°, sothli ech man a lyere, 
‘or enstable?; as is’ writun, That thou be 
iustifyed, ‘or fonnden trewe", in thi wordis, 
and ouercome, whanne thou ert demed. 
5 Forsoth if oure* wickidnesse, ‘or vnequyte', 
comende the rij3twysnesse* of God, what 
schulen we seie? Wher’ God is wickid, 
6that bryngeth in wraththe? Vp man I 
seie. Fer be it. Ellis how ‘God schal 
7deme this world? Forsoth* if the** 
treuthe of God hath haboundidy, ‘er be 
plenteuous*, in my lesynge, in to the glorie 
of hym, what and* 3it am I demed as a 
ssynnere? And not as we ben blasfemyd, 
and as summe seyen vs for? to seye, Do 
we yuele thingis, that goode thingis come. 
9 Whos dampnacioun is iust. What ther- 
fore? Passen we hem? Nay; sothli* we 
han schewid by skile, Jewis' and Greekis 
10 alle® forf to be vndir symne, as it is writun, 
11 For ther is not ony man iust; ther is not 
a man vndirstondinge, neither sekinge 
12God. Alle bowedyn awey, to gidere thei 
ben maad)-vnprofitable; ther is not that 
doith' good thing’, ther is not til to oon. 
13‘A sepulcre openynge! is the throte of hem; 
with her tungis thei dideu gilyngly™, ‘or 
trecherously"; the venym of eddris®, ‘that 
14 ben clepid aspis?, vndur' her lippis. The 
mouth of whom’ is ful of cursyng, ‘or wa- 
lsriyng’, aud bitternesse; the feet of hem 
16bent swift for" to schede out blood. Con- 
tricioun’, ‘or defoulyng’’ togidere’, and 


k Om. x. ! weren r. 


ROMANS. 309 


CAP. III. 

What* thanne is more to a Jew, ort * What is 
what profit’ of circumcisioun ? Myche2 erie, (het es 
bi al wise; first, for the spekyngis of God him.as myche 
‘weren bitakun* to hem. And what ifs pion feu of 
summe of hem bileueden not? WhethirY — schai schewe 
the vnbileue of hem hath auoidid the eee. 
feith of God? God forbede. For Gods '”°*?** 
is sothefast, but ech man a?’ liere; as 
it is writun, That thou be iustified+ in 
thi wordis, and? ouercome, whanne thou 
art demed. But if oure wickidnesses 
comende the ri3twisnesse of God, what 
shulen we seie? Whether God is wick- 
id, that bryngith in wraththe ? 
man Y seie. God forbede. 
schal God deme this world? For if the7 ie pee e 
treuthe of God hath aboundid in my 
leesyng, in to the glorie of hym, what 
jit am Y demed as a synner? And nots 
as we ben blastemed, and as summen? 
scien that we seien, Do we yuele thingis, 
that gode thingis come. Whos damp- 
nacioun is iust. What thanne? Passeng 
we hem? Nay; for we han schewid bi - 
skile, that alle bothe Jewis and Grekis 
ben vndur synne, as it is writun, For1o 
ther .is no man iustt; ther is no man11¢ there is no 

4 ; man iust, with- 
vndurstondynge, nethir sekynge God. out the grace 
Alle bowiden awey, togidere thei ben 12 


+ be iuslified, 
that is, that the 
truthe of thi 
word appere nf 
the keping of 
the rewme, and 
of Crist ta be 
nore of me, as 
: thou bihiztist, 
Aftire seyde Dauith. 


. Vpe man I seye. 
Ellis hou that is, vpe men 


of God ; this is 
soth of perfizt 


. . c riztfulnesse 
maad vnprofitable ; ther is Be, _that ae ee 
doith good thing, there is noon? ‘til to® — man worthi 


‘ euerlastinge 
oon. The throte of hem is an opyn I3blis. Lire here. 


sepulcre; with her tungis thei diden gile- 
fuli; the venym of snakis 7s vndur her 
lippis. The mouth of whiche’ is ful of 14 
cursyng® and bitternesse; the feet of1s 
hem ben swifte to schede! blood. Sorewe i¢ 
and cursidnesse ben in the weies of hem, 
and thei knewen not the weie of pees 317 
the* drede of God is not bifor! her i3en.18 


™ Whether s passim x. anoyed@. © Om.oex. POm. ox, itiso. 
tTOm. x. = § jour G prim. t Om. emorx. or unguyet Y. 0 ristfulnesse vy. =Y Whether x passim. 
w shal God apy. * For vy. ** Om. p. Yabonnden wy. 2Om. ox. #Om.o0. %Om.sx. ©¢forr. 
4the Jewis w. ¢asw. fOm.sx. bmakedo. idony. dosx. &Om.x. ! An opin sepulcre r. 
m gylfully rv. gilendeli x. n Om. o. ® snakes r. P that is, aspis mM. Om. ov. aspis x. 4 is 
vndur vy. ‘which yr. 8 Om. Norx. tOm. osx. Om. G prim. mpswx. VSorwery. WW Om. or. 
w Onn, rv. 


W profiteth rR. * taken rt. Y Whert. 
summe Q pr.m.asec.m. ©no man Tt, 
hand ofk. ischede out rR. kand ther. 


2 isa EIT sec.m. k. 
d not R. no man t. 
1 tofore k. 


b summe men 1, 
& cursidnesse a. 


4 and that thon 1. 
€yntor. f whomt, 


310 


‘infelicite, ov cursidnesse*, inY the weies of 
izhem, and thei knewen not the wey? of 
is pees; the drede of God is not bifore her 
is y3en. Forsothe we witen, for* what euere 

thingis the lawe spekith, it spekith to 

hem that ben in the lawe, that ech mouth 
be stoppid, and ech world be” maad suget 
20to God. For of the workis of lawe ech 
fleisch>», ‘that is, mankynde®, schal not be 
iustifyed bifore him; forsothe? by* the 
zilawe is knowinge of synne. Forsothe 
now withouten the lawe the rij3twysnesse 
of God is schewid, witnessid of the lawe 
22and® prophetis. Sothli the ri3twysnesse of 
God is by thef feith of Jhesu Crist on® 
alle" that bileuen in to hym;  forsoth! 
ther is noj distynecioun*, ‘or departynge'. 
22 For alle men synneden, and han nede to 
2z4the glorie of God; thei iustified freely bi 
his grace, by the redemcioun™, ‘or the 
ajenbiyng", that is purposid® in Jhesu 
25 Crist. Whom God purposide? an helpere 
by feith in his blood, to the schewinge of 
his ri3twysnesse, for? remiscioun’ of" ‘bi- 
26fore goynge® synnes, in the sustentaciount, 
‘or beringe vp", of God, to the schewynge 
of his ristwysnesse in this tyme, that he 
be iust, and iustifyinge’ him that is of the 
27 feith of Jhesu Crist. Where is” therfore 
thi gloriynge*? It is excludid’, ‘or put 
out*®, By what lawe? Of dedis doynge ? 
28 Nay, but by the lawe of feith. Forsothe 
we demen a man for* to be iustifyed by 
29 feith, withouten workis of lawe’. Wher 
of Jewis is God oonly ? Wher* he is not 
and® of hethenef? 3is, and of hethenes. 
30 For sothely oon is God, that iustifyeth 
circumcisioun of} feith, and prepucie, ‘or 
sihethen meni, by feith. Therfore distrye 
we the lawe by the* feith? Fer be it; 
but we stablischen! the lawe™. 


x vnhappynesse o. cursidnesse rv. infelicite x. 
¢Om.orx. ‘dforr. © Om.o. & of kK. 
halle men. i For v prom. j not esec.m. 
biyng cmv, Om. Nox. © Om. AGMNOPQSFWXY. 
the y. Fredempcioun w. of his o, 
w Ow. 7 prim. * glorifyinge tv. 
AGMNOPQSVWXY. ©¢ Whether mp. 
4gsy. §& hethen men & pr.m.osr. 


¥ put out o. 


m rijgtfulnesse b. 
Crist R prem. k. 
w Wher 1. 


2 of the 1. Om. k pr.m, 
T joizynge R. 8 Of the h. 
x ther is oo God 1, 


ROMANS. 


© In to CK sec. m. ab sec. m. k. 
t Ow. k pr.m. 
Y of A sec.m. marg. a. 


TI. 17——31. 


And we witen, that what euere thingis 19 

the lawe spekith, it spekith to hem that 

ben in the lawe, that ech mouth be 

stoppid, and ech world be maad suget 

to God. For of the werkis of the lawe20 

ech fleisch schal not be iustified bifor 

hym; for bi the lawe ther is knowyng 

of synne. But now with outen the laweai 

the rijtwisnesse™ of God is schewid, that 

is witnessid of the lawe and the" pro- 

fetis. And the ri3twisnesse of God is bige 

the feith of Jhesu Crist in to alle men 

and on alle men that bileuen in® hym; 

for ther is no departyng. For alle men 23 

synneden, and han nede to the glorie 

of God*; and ben iustified freli bi his 24 * of God, that 
g . oe Vie is, to the grace 

grace, bi the a3enbiyng? that is in Crist of God, biwhich 

Jhesut. Whom God ordeynede for3yuer, 25 or eae 

bi feith in his blood, to the schewyng ieee 

of his rijtwisnesse, for remyssioun of pe ne 

biforgoynge synnes, in the beryng up of 26 of obseru- 

God, to the schewyng of his rizjtwisnesse fim’ thesis, 


in this tyme, that he be iust, and iusti- oa Laie 
fyynge hym that is of the feith of —hethen men. 


Lire here. e. 


Jhesu Crist. Where thanne is thi glo-27 
riyng"? It is excludid. Bi what lawe? 
Of dedis doyng? Nay, but by the lawe 
of feith, For we demen a man to be23 
iustified bi thet feith, with outen werkis" 
of the lawe. Whethir of Jewis’ is God 29 
oneli? Whether” he is not also of he- 
thene men? 3his, and of hethene men. 
For ‘oon God is*, that iustefieth circum-30 
cisioun biY feith, and prepucie bi feith. 
Distruye we therfor the lawe bi the%s1 
feith? God forbede; but we stablischen 
the lawe. 


Yben inv. Zweiyesmo. 4thaty. bOm.N. >> man r. 

f Om, pr. 

k diffinycioun a. 
P purposide, or ordeyned acmNnposvy. ordeyned o. 4 for 

8 biforn goende x. 

z Om. ox. 
d Whether a. Whether and x. 

hbiv. 1!Om.ox. kOm.saropx. I stablen emp. ™ lawe bi feith emp. 


& into alle and on Nn. into alle men and on Fr. 


10m. ox. ™ajenbiyng o. © or ajein- 
t beringe up o. susteyninge yr. Om. ox. 
aOm.sx. D?thefeith vw. ©¢ the law 


€ Om. wposx. also ry. f hethen men 


Pagenrisinge Tr. 4 Jhesu 
u the werkis a. ¥ the Jewis rv. 
z Om. Kk, 


IV. 1-13. 


CAP. IV. 
1 What therfore schulen we seye, ‘oure 
fadir Abraham’ for” ‘to haue* founden 
2vpY ‘the fleysch*? Forsoth* if Abraham be 
justified of the workis of lawe’, he hath 
3glorie, but not anentis® God. ‘What soth- 
li? seith the scripture ? Abraham bileuede 
to God, and it is® rettidf to him to ri3t- 
4wysuesse. Forsoth to him that worchith 
mede is not ‘3ouun to8, ‘or rettid®, vp 
sgrace, but vp dette. But! to hym that 
worchith not, forsoth* bileuynge! into him 
that iustifyeth the wickid™ man, ‘or vn- 
pitous”, his feith is rettid® to rijtwysnesse?, 
6vp the purposinge’ of Goddis grace. As 
and Dauid seith the blessidnesse of a 
man, to™ whom God acceptith® rij3twys- 
nesse withoute werkist ‘of the lawe%, 
7Blessid thei’, whos wickidnessis ben for- 
3ouun, and whos synnes ben keuered, ‘or 
shid*’. Blessid that® man, to whom God 
grettide* not synne. Therfore this blessid- 
nesse dwellith’ oonly in circuimcisioun, or 
also in prepucie, ‘or staat of hethene men?? 
Forsothe we seyn, for* the feith is> rettid® 
10to Abraham to ri3twysnesse. Hou ther- 
fore is’ jt rettid®? in circumcisioun, or in 
prepucie? Not in circumsioun, but in pre- 
upucie. And he took a signe of circum- 
cisioun, a markynge, ‘or tokenynge', of 
rijtwysnesse of feith that? is in prepucie, 
that he be-fadir of alle men bilenynge 
by prepucie, that it be rettid' and* to hem 
12to ri3twysnesse; and that he be fadir of 
circumcisioun, not oonly to hem that ben 
of circumcisioun, but and! to hem that 
suen his™ steppis ‘of the feith" ‘of our 
i3fadir Abraham, that is in prepucie®. For- 
sothe not by the lawe is biheesteP to 
Abraham, or to his seed, that he be4 the 


v Abraham oure fadir rx. 


ROMANS. 


Abraham oure fadir 


W vp the flesche for emp. Om. sx. vp the flesch v. 


311 
CAR ee 


What thanne schulen we seie, that 
aftir the flesch 
foond? For if Abraham is* iustified of 
werkis” of the lawe, he hath glorie, but 
not anentis God. For what seith thes 
scripture? Abraham bileued to God, 
and it was arettid to him to rijtwis- 
nesse. And to hym that worchith mede4 
is not arettid bi grace, but bi dette. 
Sotheli to hym that worchith not, buts 
bileueth in to hym that iustefieth a 
wickid man, his feith is arettid to ri3t- 
wisnesse, aftir the purpos of Goddis 
grace*, As Dauid seith the blessidnesse 6 
of a man, whom God acceptith, he 3yu- 
eth to hym rijtwisnesse with outen 
werkis of the lawe, Blessid ben thei,7 
whos wickidnessis® ben forjouun, aid 
whos synnes ben hid. Blessid ¢s thats 
man, to whom God arettide not synne. 
Thanne whether dwellith this blisful-9 
nesse® oneli in circumcisioun, or also* in 
prepucie? For we seien, that the feith 
was arettid to Abraham to ri3twisnesse. 
Hou thanne was it arettid ? in cireum- to 
cisioun, or in prepucie? Not in circun- 
cisioun, but in prepucie. 
a signe of circumcisioun, a tokenyng® of 
rijtwisnesse of the feith which is in pre- 
pucie, that he be fadir of alle men bi- 
leuynge bi prepucie, that it be arettid 
also to hem to ri3twisnesse; aud that he 12 
be fadir of circumcisioun, not onely to 
hem that ben of circumcisionn, but also 
to hem that suen the steppis of the feith, 
which feith is in prepucie of oure fader 
Abraham. For not bi the lawe is bi-13 
heest to Abraham, or to his seed, that 
he schulde be eir of the world, but bi 


xOm.r. YOm. empr, 


aftero. *Om.ampy. %Forv. » the lawe oy sec.m. x. ¢anent x passim. 4 For whi what r. 
ewas vy. farettid ry. § 30uun ox. arettid y. bOm.mopryx. ‘Sothelivy. but vy. | the byleuynge o. 
mmeke sx. ®" Om. ox. ©arettid y. Prijtfulnesse vy. 4 purposr. *Om. Nn. 8 acceptith, he 3eneth 
to hem Nn. acceptid s. tthe werkis gux. UQOm. x. VY be thei c sec.m.v. YY Om.,ox. Wisthat nr. 
the oswx. x arettide vr. y dwellith it gap. dwellith not 9. 2 Om. orx. @ that 7. > was F. 
Carettidy. dwasy. Carettidy. fOm.ox. 8 which pv. ' arettid rv. K also v. 10m. 
Gprm M™thenr. %Om.Gpr.m. © which feith is in prepucie of oure fadir Abraham r.  P the 
byheste x. 4 schulde be rv. 


® be ce1KmQrtuxabceghikaf. 
blessidnesse na. ¢ ellis rn. f into o. 


> the werkes mrrh. 
8 token E1KQeg. 


¢ wicknessis 1. wickidnes k. 41 ri3tfulnesse F. 


b the whiche 1. 


* grace, that 
is, by the ordir 
of grace, and 
not by the 
ordir of dette. 
circumcisioun, 
that is, in 
Jewis circum- 
cidid. prepucic, 
or staat of he- 
then men. Lire 
here. e. 


And he took 


312 


eyr of the world, but bi the riz3twysnesse 
uof feith. Sothlit if thei that ben of the 
lawe, ben eyris, feith is anentyschid’, ‘or 
is distroyed*, biheeste is don awey. Forsoth® 
the lawe worchith wraththe; sothli wher’ 
the lawe is not, nethir is¥ preuaricacioun, 
1s or trespassinge*. Therfore ofY the feith, 
that vp grace biheeste be stable’, ‘or stede- 
Jast*, to ech seed, not to that seed oonly 
that is of the lawe, but to that that is of 
the feith of Abraham, the® which is fadir 
170f vs alle. As it is writun, For I haue 
sett thee fadir of manye folkis, bifore God 
to whom thou hast bileuyd. Thet which 
God® quykeneth deedef men’, and clepith 
tho thingis that ben not, as tho that ben. 
is The® which Abraham a3ens hope bileu- 
ede in to* hope, that he schulde be maad 
fadir of manye folkis, vp that it! is seid 
to hym, Thus schal™ thi seed be, as 
sterris® of heuene?, and as grauel, ‘or 
sond4, that is in the’ brynke of the’ see. 
19 And he ist not maad" vnstedefast in the 
bilene, nethir he bikheld his body now’ 
ny3 deed, whanne he was almoost of” an 
hundrid 3cer, and the wombe of Sare ny3 
- 2deed. Also in the byheeste of God he 
doutide not with vntrust; but he is* com- 
fortid in bileue, 3yuynge glorie to God, 
2iwitinge moost fully for® what euere 
thingis God hath bihi3t, he is my3ti and? 
22for® to do. Therfore it is’ rettid® to him 
23to ri3twysnesse. Forsothe it is not writun 
oonly for hym, for it is‘ rettid® to him to 
24ri3twysnesse, but and for vs, to which it 
schal be rettid', beleuynge in to hym that 
reyside oure Lord Jhesu Crist fro deede 
25 spiritis', The™ which is" bitakun for 
oure synnes, and roos a3en for oure ius- 
tifyinge®. 


r Forsothe o. 


ROMANS. 


IV. 14—25. 


the riz3twisnesse of feith'. For if thei1 
that ben of the lawe*, ben eiris, feith is 
distried, biheest is don awey. For the1s 
lawe worchith wraththe; for where is no 
lawe, there is no trespas, nethir is tres- 
passyng. Therfor ri3tfulnesse* is of the! 16 
feith, that bi grace biheeste be™ stable” 
to ech seed, not to that seed oneli that 
is of the lawe, but to that that is of the 
feith of Abraham, which is fadir of vs 
alle. As it is writun, For Y haue set 17 
thee fadir of many folkis, bifor God to 
whom thou hast bileued. Which? God 
quykeneth?+ deed men, and clepith tho 
thingis that ben not, as tho that ben. 
Which Abraham a3ens hope bilenede in 1s 
to hope, that he schulde be maad fader 
of many folkis, as it was? seid to hym, 
Thus schal thi seed be, as the sterris of 
heuene, and as the granel that is in the 
brenke of the see. And he was" noti9 
maad vnstidfast in the bileue, nether he 
biheelde his bodi thanne ny3 deed, 
whanne he was almost of an hundrid 
jeer, ne the wombe of Sare ny3 deed. 
Also in the biheeste of God he doutide 20 
not with vntrist; but he was coumfortid 
in bileue, 3yuynge glorie to God, witynge 21 
-moost fulli that what euere thingis God 
hath bihijt, he is my3ti also to do. 
Therfor it was arettid to hym to ri3t-22 
wisnesse®’. And it is not writun oneli23 
for him, that it was arettid to hym to 
ri3twisnesse', but also for vs, to whiche™ 24 
it schal be arettid, that bileuen in him 
that reiside oure Lord Jhesu Crist: fro 
deeth. Which was bitakun for ourees 
synnes, and roos a3en for oure iustefi- 
yng”. 


8 distroyed o. t Om, ox. a Forwhi r. v whether G pr. m. w Om. s. 
xOm.0. — Y riztfulnesse is of v. Z stedefast o. a Om. ox. bOmr. cOmr. 40m.yr. 
e Om. x. fthe deade x. £Om. x. »b Om. vr. i Om. x. kOm.n. Ithat oe. ™ shal be x. 
nOm. x. Othe sterres x. Pthe heueno. 9@Om.nrx. tOm.x. %Om.o. twasy. %Om. 7. 
vthanne vy. WOm.o. Xwasry. &thaty. balsor. ¢ Om. syx. Gwasr. “arettid ry. fwas r. 
garettid r. btox. iarettidy, JOm. x. ™Om.r. Owasr. © iustifyingis x. 

ithe feith r. * riztwisnestT. 10m.c. Mist. XOstablid rn. © The whicher. P quykenyde a. 


Gis k prom. tis k prem. 


Ss ristfulnesse 8. 
¥ justifizynges Rh. 


t rijtfulnesse crkmQRUXabcehoa. u whom 1. 


* of the lawe, 
that is, of the 
werkis of lawe. 
Lire here. e. 


+ quikeneth by 
grace. deed 
men, that is, 
hethen men 
that weren 
deed by ydola- 
trie. that ben 
nol, that is, of 
hethen men 
that weren not 
of no remita- 
cioun bifore 
Jewis. that 
ben, that is, as 
Jewis that 
weren seid 
arettid bifore 
God more than 
othere puplis 
for the taking 
of Goddis lawe. 
Lyre here. e. 


V. I—14. 


CAPs V. 


1 Therfore we, iustified of feith, haue?P 
pees at God by oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 
2By whom we han‘ ‘accesse, o7* y3 go- 
ynge to, by feith in to this* grace, in 
which we stonden, and han glorie in the 
3hope of glorie of Goddis sones. Forsoth 
not oonly, but and we glorien in tribula- 
ciouns, witinge that tribulacioun worch- 
sith pacience, sothli pacience’ prouynge, 
sforsothe prouynge’ hope. Forsoth hope 
confoundith not, for the charite of God is 
spred abrood in oure hertis by the Hooly 
6Gost, that is 3ouun to vs. Wherto sothly 
deiede Crist’ for wickide* men, whanne 
we weren 3it syke’, ‘or vnstable?, ‘vp 
7tyme*? Sothli vnnethis® deieth eny man 
for the iust*; for whi for the goode* per- 
sauenture ‘sum man dar deye®. Forsoth 
God comendith his charite in vs; for if 
whanne wef weren 3it synners, ‘vp tyme’ 
9Crist is* deed for vs', moche more now we 
iustifyed in his blood, schulen be saaf* fro 
1owraththe by him. Sothli! if whenne we 
weren enemyes, we ben recouncilid to 
God by deeth of his sone, moche more we 
recounsylid schulen be saaf in the lyf ‘of 
ithim™. Forsothe not® oonly, but and we 
glorien in God, by oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 
by whom we han® receyued now recoun- 
12 cilyng, ‘er acordyng?. Therfore as by o 
man synne entride’ in to this™ world, and 
by synne deeth, so* ‘deeth passide forth in 
to alle men‘, in which man alle men syn- 
i3neden. Sothli til to the lawe synne was 
in the world; forsothe” synne was not 
‘wyitid, or rettid, whanne lawe™ was not. 
i4 But deeth regnyde fro Adam til to* Moy- 
ses, also inY to hem that synneden not in” 
licnesse of trespassinge of Adam, which® 


ROMANS. 


313 


CAPs 


Therfor we, iustified of feith, haue wei 
pees at God bi oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 
Bi whom we han ni3 goyng to, bi feith2 
in to this grace, in which we stonden, 
and han glorie in the hope of the” glorie 
of Goddis children*. And not this3 * thatis, of 


seintis, that 


oneli, but also we glorien in tribula- _ ben seid Goddis 
. . ‘ ‘ sones, for lik- 
ciouns, witynge that tribulacioun worch- jes of kynde 
0 . : and of grace 
ith pacience, and pacience preuyngt,4 *°¢° lone 
and preuyng hope. And hope confound-5 Lyre here. e. 
t preuyng ; 


ith not, for the charite of God is spred 
abrood* inY oure hertis bi the Hooli 
Goost, that is 3ouun to vs. And whileé 
that? we weren sijk aftir the tyme, what 
diede Crist for wickid men? For vnnethis7 
dieth ony man for the iust man; and 3it 
for a good man perauenture summan 
dar die. But God comendith his cha-s 
rite in vs; for if whanne we weren 3it 
synneris, aftir the tyme Crist was deeds 
for vs, thanne myche more now we ius- 

tified in his blood, schulen be saaf fro aoe Hg 
wraththe bi him. For if whanne we 10 aloundide; that 


is, passith more 


weren enemyes*, we? ben recounselid to in good, than 
the synne of 


that is, purging 
of synues. con- 
foundith not; 
that is, doith 
awey schame, in 
as myche as a 
man is not dis- 
seyued in that 
that he abood. 
jit sijk; hy sijk- 
nesse of synne, 
not for our me- 
ritis diede Crist, 
but for his pure 
charite. from 
wraththe ; that 
is, peyne of 
helle. not condi, 
we schulen be 


God bi the deth of his sone, myche Adam passede 
; in ynel. 
more we recounselid schulen be saaf in Hs ie 


buti11 that is, multi- 
plijnge of tres- 
passing suede 
the 3euyng of 


the lijf of hym. And not oneli this, 
also we glorien in God, bi oure Lord 
lawe, not [for] 


Jhesu Crist, bi whom we han resseyued 
: : the defaute of 
now recounseling. Therfor as bi o man 12 ¢helawe, but for 
. . . ? « the malice of 
synne entride in to this world, and GDI: es ihat en. 
synne deth, and so deth passide forth in ee 
5 orbeding, an 
to alle men, in which man alle men _ for the know- 
: ing of synne. 
synneden. For ‘til to® the lawe synne 13 which knowing 
. ns is maad bi the 
was in the world; but synne was not jaye, aggreg- 
rettid’, whanne lawe was not. But deth 14g#th synne. 
ane % Lyre here. e. 
regnyde from Adam ‘til to® Moises, also 
in to hem that synneden not in licnesse 
of the trespassyng of Adam, the which 


P haue wee x. q haf o. r Om. o. 8 his Q. ® pacience worehith v. Vv prouyng 
worchith vy. ~Cristuptyme vr. *wicke sx. Yvnstableo. 2Om. ox. and unstableqa. ®Om.¥. 
bynnethe wx. Ciuste manor. 4 goode manor. ¢€whodaredye? c. f3e0. &Om.r. bwasr. 
lyvguptyme vy. saved yn. 1! For rv. m Om. o. Nand not x. °hafo. Pp Om. ox. or ajen- 
cording V. 4 hath entrid o. Tr the o. $ and soo rx. t into alle men deth passede thur3 x. 
Usothely 0. *Om.o. w the law o. x Om. c. y Om. o. 2 into G sec. m. a the whiche 
AGMNPQSVWX. 

~Om.a. *Om.rprm. Yona imtog. 20m. K prim. k prim. © ether synneres K marg. 


b Om. K sec.m. © vnto IR. 


VOL. IV. 


4 arettid rg sec.m. k. 
Ss 


€ vnto I. 


314 


is foorme, ‘or dicnesse», of oon® to com- 
isynge’. But not as® gilt!, ‘or trespass, so 
and the 3ifte; sothli> if thorw the gilti 
of oon* manye ben deed, moche more the 
grace of God and 3ifte in the grace of o 
man Jhesu Crist hath haboundid in to 
ismany men. And not as by o synne, so 
and by! 3yfte; forwhi sothli dom of oon 
in to condempnacioun, grace forsothe of 
manye giltis, ‘or trespassingis™, in to 
17 iustificacioun. Forsoth" if in the gilt of 
oon deeth regnede thorw oon, moche more 
men takynge plente of grace, and? 3yu- 
ynge, and‘ riztwysnesse, ‘in lyf schulen 
isregue™ by oon Jhesu Crist. Therfore as 
by’ the gilt of oon in to alle men in to 
condempnacioun, so and by the ri3twys- 
nesse of oon in to alle men in to iustify- 
i9inge of lyf. Sothli as by* inobedience of 
o man manye ben ordeyned synneris, so 
and by obedience of oon manye schulen’ be 
20 ordeyned iust. ‘Forsoth the’ lawe entride, 
that gilt shulde be plenteuous; sothli 
wher gilt was plenteuous, and grace ha- 
21 boundide*, ‘or was plenteuousy. That as 
synne regnede in to deeth, so and grace 
regne by ri3twysnesse into euere lastynge 
lyf, by ‘Jhesu Crist oure Lord*. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Therfore what schulen we seye? Schu- 
len we dwelle in synne, that grace be 
2plentenous? Ferr be it. Sothli> we* 
that’ ben deed to*4 synne, ‘how schulen 
3we ‘3it lyue®® ther ynne? Wher, 
bretheren, ‘3e vnknowen8’, for* whiche 
euere we' ben baptysid*, ‘or cristened', 
in Crist Jhesu, ‘in his deeth we ben bap- 
4tysid™? Sothli® we ben to gidere biried 
with him bi cristendoim in to deeth; that 


b Om. ox. of lyckenesse w. 


ROMANS. 


V. 15-—VI. 4. 


is lienesse of Crist to comynge. But notis 


- as gilt, so the 3ifte; for if thorou3 the 


gilt of oon manye ben deed, myche 
more the grace of God and the 3ifte in 
thef grace of o man Jhesu Crist hath 
aboundids in to many inen. And not16é 
as bi o synne, so bi the 3ifte; for the 
doom of oon in to condempnacioun, but 
grace" of many giltis in to iustificacioun. 
For if in the gilt of oon deth regnede!17 
thorou3 oon, myche more men* that 
takyn! plente of grace, and of 3yuyng, 
and of rijtwisnesse, schulen regne in 
lijf bi oon Jhesu Crist. Therfor as bi!8 
the gilt of oon in to alle men in to 
condempnacioun, so bi the ri3twisnesse 
of oon in to alle men in to iustifiyng of 
lijf. For as bi inobedience of o man19 
manye ben maad synneris, so bi the 
obedience of oon manye schulen be iust. 
And the lawe entride, that gilt schulde 20 
be plenteuouse; but where gilt was 
plenteuouse, grace was more plenteu-2! 
ouse. That as synne regnede in to deth, 
so grace regne™ bi ri3twisnesse in to 
euerlastynge lijf, bi ‘Crist Jhesu" oure 
Lord. 


CAR. Vik 


Therfor what schulen we seie? Schu-1 * that is, bi the 


° vertu of his 
len we dwelle in synne, that grace be  deeth. in to 
plenteuouse ? God forbede. For houz (2th; that is 


in to liknesse 
of deeth, as to 
synful lijf. by 
bapiym ; that 


schulen we that ben deed to® synne, lyue 
3it ther ynne? Whether, britheren, 3e3 


: 5 is, maad lijk 

knowen not, that? whiche euere we ben  Cristis deeth 
eet . by baptim. to 
baptisid in Crist Jhesu, we ben bap-  synne that is 
‘cid 3 5 *? g for synne to be 

tisid in his deth*? For we ben togidere4 4, swell 


undir the lawe, 
of Moyses, that 
3af not grace. 
Lyre here. e. 


biried with hym bi baptym ‘in to% deth; 
that’ as Crist aroos® fro deth bi the‘ 


© Cristy. come x. asthe s. f trespasse o. gulty w. the gilte x. 
& Om. ox. 4 for rv. itrespaso. ko man x, lOm ry. ™Om.syx. %Forr.  pand of r. 
Gand of yr. *schulen rengne in lijfy. sOm.iw. tby thea. vOm.r.  Sothlix. *abounde r. 
y Om. ox. 4 oure Lord Jhesu Crist x. >% For vy. © hou schulen we vr. 4 Om. Nn, 44 bi a. € Om. r. 
ee lyne 3it wpyw. f Wherfor x. Om. 0. Whether sx. Whar 3e know not o. 3e knowen w. » that 7. 
t3e wxy.  cristened oo. 10m. Nosyx. ™ we ben baptysid in his deth y. For r. 
fOm.a. & woxen plentevons rR. bthegracer. iregnethr. k Om.1. 


Kgrt. that taking beeghof. 


m regneth R. 
dink prem. ¥ for Bega. 


§ roos EIQRTega, 


a Jhesu Crist cerkmquxabcegk@. 
t Om. R. 


Vwe takynge 1. tukinge 
oforT. POm.k. 


VI. 5-18. 


as Crist roos fro deede spiritis bi glorie 
of the fadir, so and we walke in the 
snewenesse of lyf. Forsoth® if we ‘plauntid 
to gidere? ben maad to the liknesse of his 
deeth, also and we schulen ben of his4 
6risyng a3en; witinge’ that oure oolde 
man is to gidere crucifyed, that the body 
of synne be distroyed, that we serue no 
7more to* synne. Sothlit he that is deed 
8 ‘to synne”, is iustified fro synne. Forsoth 
if we ben deed with’ Crist, we bileuen 
that also¥ we schulen lyue to gidere with 
shim; witinge for Crist, rysinge a3eu fro 
deede speritis?, now deieth not, deeth schal 
1ono more lordschipe* to® him. Forsoth ‘he 
that® is deed to synne, he is® deed oonys ; 
sothli ‘he that! lyueth, he® lyueth to God. 
11S0 and 3e deme" 30u! for* to be deed 
sothli to synne, forsoth! lyuynge to God 
izin Jhesu Crist oure Lord. Therfore regne 
not" synne in 3oure® deedly body, that 3e 
isoheische to his coueitingis. But neither 
3yue 3e 30ure membris aarmours of wick- 
idnesse to synne, but 3yne 3e 3o0uP self to 
God, as3 of deed men lyuynge’, and 3oure 
membris armers of ri3twisnesse to God. 
14 Forsothe synne schal not* lordschipe' to" 
jou; sothli 3e ben not vndir lawe’, but 
isvndir grace. What therfore? Schulen 
we synnen”, for we ben not vndir the* 
16 lawe, but vndir grace? Ferr be it. Witen’ 
3e not, for.to whom 3e 3yuen 30u ser- 
uauntis for? to obeische*, 3e ben seruauntis 
of that thing, to which 3e han obeischid¢, 
either’ of synue to deeth, othir® of obedi- 
1z7ence to ri3twysnesse ? Sothli I do thank- 
yngis to God, that 3e weren seruauntis of 
synne; forsoth 3e han obeyschid of herte 
in to that fourme of techyng, in which 3e 
isben bitakun’. Forsoth 3e delyuered fro 


ROMANS. 


315 


glorie of the fadir, so walke we in a 
newnesse of lijf. For if we plauntids 
togidere * ben maad to" the lienesse of 
his deth, also we schulen be of the lic- 
nesse of his risyng a3en; witynge thise 
thing, that oure olde man is crucified 
togidere, that the bodi of synne be dis- 
truyed, that we serue no more to synne. 
For he that is deed’, is iustefied fro7 
synne. And if we ben deed with Crist, 
we bileuen that also we schulen lyue to- 
gidere with hym; witinge for” Crist, rys-9 
ynge a3en fro deth, now dieth not, deeth 
schal no more haue lordschip on hym. 
For that he was deed to synne, he was 10 
deed onys; but that he lyueth*, he lineth 
to God. So 3e deme’ 30u silf to be deed 11 
to synne, but lyuynge to God in ‘Jhesu 
Crist” oure Lord. Therfor regne not 12 
synne in 3oure* deedli bodi, that 3e 
obeische> to hise coueityngis. Nether 13 
3yue 3e 3oure membris armuris of wick- 
idnesse to synne, but 3yue 3e 30u silf to 
God, as thei that lyuen of deed men, and 
3oure® membris armuris of ri3twisnesse 
to God. For synne schal not haue lord-14 
schipe on* 3ou; for 3e ben not vndur the 
lawe, but yndur grace. What therfor ? 15 
Schulen we do synne, for we ben not 
vndur the lawe, but vndur grace? Godt 
forbede. Witen 3e not, that to whom 3e 
3yuen 3ou° seruauntis to obeie to, 3e ben 


seruauntis of that thing, to which! 3e 


han obeschid’, ether of synne to deth, 
ether of obedience to rijtwisnesse? Buti7 
Y thanke God, that 3e weren seruauntis 
of synne; but 3e han obeischid" of herte 
in to that fourme of techyng, in which 
3e ben bitakuni, «And 3e delyuered frois 
synne, ben maad seruauntis of ri3twis- 


° Forr. P togidere plauntid cwp. 40m, aemposywx sec.m.y. theo, — * witinge this thing r. 
8Om.s. tForr. %Omr. VYtow. Wallewx. 2Om.x. hane lordschipe ry. >on rv. 
cthathe cwpy. dwasvy. ¢wasv. fthathecmpy. € Om. x. bdemeth x. ito 300 wx. 
k Om. sx. 1 but r. 2 noo F. © oure @sx pr.m. P 30ure GMINP. 4 as thei that lyuen r. 
rOm. Nr. Sno more w. thane lordschipe ry, "ony. Y the law 4@ sec.m. snopsy. W do synne r. 
x Om. swx. YWenen vy. 2Om, x. ® obeyen x. > whom emp. © obe3zid x. 4 other aps. outher x. 
© ether anor. other ap. onther x. f taken o. 

2Om.b.  Y deed to synne cxmQ sec.m. RrUXag sec.m.hko, Wthatr. *lyuer. y deme 3e RK. 
2 Christ Jhesu rk. 4 oure eR pr.m.eg. Pobeie R. © 3eue 3e 30urek prom. douer rt. ¢ 300 self KR. 
f which thing r. & obeicd rn. } obeied rR. i taken R. 


ss2 


¥ plauntid togi- 
dere; bi Cristis 
deeth we ben 
drawun out of 
synne, as out of 
yuel lond, and 
ben plauntid in 
the good lond 
of grace with 
Crist. oure elde 
mans that is, 
conuersacioun 
of synne. the 
bodi of synne ; 
that is, the heep 
of synnes. Lyre 
here. e. 


316 


synne, ben maad seruauntis of ri3twys- 
ignesse. I seie mannis thing, for the in- 
firmite, ‘or vnstabilnesse, of 3oure? fleisch. 
Sothlit as 3e han 3ouun 3oure membris 
for * to serue to vnclennes, and wickid- 
nesse to wickidnesse, so now 3yue 3e! 3oure 
membris for™ to serue to ri3twysnesse 
20in to hoolynesse. Forsothe? whanne 3e 
weren seruauntis of synne, 3e weren fre of 
a. rijtwysnesse®. ‘Therfore what fruyt hadden 
je thanne? in thoi thingis, in whiche 3e 
schamen now? ‘Now therfore™ the ende 
220f hem is deeth. Forsoth now 3e dely- 
uered fro synne, ‘maad sotheli® seruauntis 
to God, han 3oure fruyt in tot hoolynesse, 
the ende forsoth euerlastyng lyf. Treuli 
the hyris of synne, deeth’; the grace of 
God, everlasting” lyf in ‘Crist Jhesu* oure 
Lord. 
CAP. VII. 

1 Bretheren, wher’ 3e vnknowen’; forsoth 
I speke to men witinge the lawe; for the 
lawe hath lordschip in a man, hou longe 

2tyme it® lyueth ? Forwhi* that womman 
that is vnder an housbonde, is bounden to 
the lawe, ‘lyuynge the hosebonde?; sothli 
if hir hosebonde ‘be deed®, sche is dely- 
uered‘, ‘or unbounden®, fro the lawe of the 

3man>. Therfore ‘lyuynge the man’, she 
schal be clepid anoutresse, if she schal* be 
with another man!; forsothe if hir hose- 
bonde be™ deed, she is deliuered fro" 
lawe® of the man?, that sche be not auou- 
tresse, if she schal4 be with another man’. 

4 Treuli’, britheren, and 3e ben maad deed 
to the lawe thorw3' the body of Crist, that 
3e ben anotheris", that roos ajen fro deede 
spiritis’, that we” bere fruit to God. 

5Forsoth* whanne we weren in fleisch, 
passiouns of synnes, that weren bi the 


s Om. x. h the o. oure Pp. 
© riztfullnesse + sup. ras. 
v ben deeth o. is deeth r. 


i Forsoth o. 
P Om. & prim. 
W is enerlasting vy. 


ROMANS. 


k Om. sx. 
4 to tho N. to o. 
x Jhesu Crist 9. 


VI. I9—VII. 5. 


nesse. Y seie that thing that is of man, 19 

for the vnstidefastnesse* of 3oure fleisch. 

But as 3e han 3ouun 3oure membris to 

serue to vnclennesse, and to wickidnesse 

‘in to! wickidnesse, so now 3yue 3e 30ure 

membris to serue to ri3twisnesse in to 
hoolynesse. For whanne 3e weren ser-20 

uauntis of synne, 3e weren fre* of ri3t- 
fulnesse™. TTherfor what fruyt hadden2ai ee ate 
3e thanne in tho thingis, in whiche 3e "ie, * 4c” 
schamen" now? For the ende of hem Atlee GEE 
is deth. But now 3e delyuered fro22 

synne, and maad seruauntis to God, han 

jour fruyt in to holinesse, and the ende 
euerlastinge lijf. For the wagis of synne 

is deth; the grace of God zs euerlastynge 

lijf in Crist Jhesu our Lord. 


* that is, 


CAP. VII. 


Britheren, whethir® 3e knowun not ;1 
for Y speke to men ‘that knowen? the 
lawe; for the lawe hath lordschip in a 
man, as long tyme as it? lyueth? Fore 
that womman that is vndur an hose- 
bonde, is boundun to the lawe, while 
the hosebonde lyneth; but if hir hose- 
bonde is deed, sche is delyuered fro the 
lawe of the hosebonde. 'Therfor sches 
schal be clepid auoutresse, if sche be 
with another man, while the hosebonde 
lyueth ; but if hir hosebonde is deed, 


+ maad deed 
to the lawe of 
Moyses. by the 


: s body of Crist; 
sche is delyuered fro the* lawe of the iti for se 
hosebonde, that sche be not auoutresse, ben maad 

membris of 


And so, 4 Crist bi baptim, 
which is gene- 

racioun of newe 
and goostly lijf. 
in flesch; that 


if sche be with another mant. 

my britheren, 3e ben maad deed to the 

lawef bi the bodi of Crist, that 3e ben 

of another, that roos a3en fro deth, that ioaterar | 

3e bere fruyt to God. For whanne wes connersionn. 
° 4 ° passioun of 

weren in fleisch, passiouns of synnes, 


synnes ; that is, 


n For rv. 
t Om. esw. 
Zz know not o. 


10m. w. m Om. osx. 
r Forwhi vy. * and maad rv. 
y whether x. 


bhe en. © Forsothe o. 4 Jynynge hir hosebonde ow. while the husbonde lyueth vy. © dye o. is deed rv. 
f vnbounden 0. &§ Om. ox. husbonder. !Om. rv. * Om. x. ! man, while the husbonde lyueth vr. 
Misy. Mofw. Othelaweemneswxy. Phnsbonder, @Om. ry. %*Om.o. §& Therfore, my r. 
‘hiv, Yofanothirn. vVOm. x. W3er. * For r. 


k vnstablenesse CEIKMQRTUXabceghkoaf. 
© wher CIKMQUXa. P knowynge rR. 
K pr. nt. MQUX pr.m. o8. t Om. 1. 


1 for to mayntene I. 
that knowith bchof. 


™ ri3twisnesse ERahka. ™ aschamen a. 
@ he I sup. ras. KRTg sec. m. s Om. 


VII. 6——18. 


lawe, wrou3ten in oure membris, that thei? 
eschulden bere fruyt to deeth. Now for- 
sothe we ben vnbounden fro the lawe of 
deeth, in the? which we weren holde, so 
that we serue in newenesse of spirit, and 
7not in oldnesse of lettre. What therfore 
schulen we seie? The lawe is synne? 
Fer be it. But I knew not synne, no but 
by lawe™; forwhi I wiste not coneitynge 
for to be° synne, ‘no but? the lawe seide, 
8Thou schalt not coueite. Forsothe occa- 
sioun® takun, synne by the maundement 
hath wrou3te in me al coueityng‘, ‘or 
coueityse&; sothli® with oute the lawe, 
g9synne was deed. Forsothe I lyuede with 
oute the! lawe sum tyme; but whanne the 
comaundement hadde comen, synne lyuede 
loa3en. Sothli I am deed, and the* co- 
maundement! is™ founden to me, ‘that was 
to lyf, this thing" for® to be? to4 deeth. 
11Forwhi synne, occasioun™ takun bi the 
comaundement, disseyuede me, and bi it 
12slou3 me. ‘And so‘ the lawe sotheli hoo- 
ly", and the’ comaundement hooly”, and 
iziust, and good. Therfor ‘that that* is 
good, ‘to me is maad deethy? Fer be it. 
But that? synne appere?, ‘or be knowen*, 
synne, thorw good thing wrou3te deeth to 
me, that ther be maad synne synnynge 
ouer manere®, ‘or mesure’, by comaunde- 
14ment®. .Sothli we witen, for the lawe is 
spiritual, ‘or goostli®; forsoth I am 
15fleischly, sold vndir synne. Sothli! I vn- 
dirstonde not* that that I worche; sothly! 
I do not the good thing that I wole, but 
I do ‘the ilke™ yuel thing that I hate. 
i6 Forsoth if I do that thing that" I wole 
not, I consente to the lawe, for® it is good. 
17 Now sothely I worche not? now, but that4 
issynne’ that dwellith in me®. Sothh I wot, 
fort in me, that is, in my fleisch, dwellith 


ROMANS. 


317 


‘that weren bi the lawe, wrou3ten in 


oure membris, to bere fruyt to deth. 
But now we ben vnboundun fro thee 
lawe of deth, in which we weren holdun, 
so that we seruen in newnesse of spirit, 
and not in eldnesse of lettre*. What7 
therfor schulen we seie? The lawe is 
synne? God forbede. But Y knew not 
synne, but bi lawe; for Y wiste not 
that coueitynge was synne, but for the 
lawe seide, Thou schalt not coueyte. 
And thoru3 occasioun takun, synne bis 
the maundement” hath wrou3t in me al 
coueytise; for withouten the lawe, synne 
was deed. And Y lyuede withoutens 
the lawe sumtyme; but whanne the 
comaundement” was comun, synne lyu- 
ede a3en. But Y was deed, and thisio 
comaundement that was to lijf, was 
foundun to* me, to be toY deth. Foru 
synne, thorou3 occasioun takun bi the 
comaundement?, disceyuede me, and bi 
that it slow me. Therfor the lawe isle 
hooli, and the comaundement és hooli, 
and iust, and good. Is thanne that thing 13 
that is good, maad deth to me? God 
forbede. But synne, that it seme synne, 
thorou3 good thing* wrou3te deth to me, 
that me? synne ouer maner thorou3 the 
comaundement. And we witen, thati4 
the lawe is spiritual; but Y am fleischli, 
seld vndur synne. For Y vndurstonde® 1s 
not that that Y worche; for Y do not 
the good thing that Y wole, but Y do 
thilke yuel thing that Y hate. And ifie 
Y do that thing that Y wole not, Y 
consente to the lawe, that it is good. 
But now Y worche not it now4, but the17 
synne that dwellith in ime. But and® Y 18 
woot, that in ine, that is, in my fleisch, 
dwellith no good; for’ wille lieth to me, 


zweg. 8 Om. wporx. athe lawe wp. > Om.osrx. ¢Om.g. 4% but if x. © thourg occasioun r. 
f coneitise ry. & Om. orx. » forsothe o. forv. 1Om.x. kK this ry. 1 comaundement that was to lijf r. 
mwasy. "Om.r. °Om. sx. Phedono. %Om.¢. ¢t thour3 occasioun yr. Shithat ry. ¢ Ther- 
fore vy. “is holy cuoperw. Om. s. YOm.sw. wWishooliv. *that ato. Y is maad deth to me pr. 
zOm.r. that it apperey. »bOm.ox. ¢mesureo. 4¢Om.ox. ¢€maundement 4. f that r. 
& Om. ox. Om. x. iForr. k Om. wy. }forr. ™that x. 20Om.0, Othat ry. P not it aor. 
not that thing GuNpQ. it not swxy. ther. Om. x. "Om. x. Smesynne x. t that r. 


u the lettre b. 
2 maundement tr. 
k prom. 


Y¥ comaundement ¢ sec. m. hk. 
aOm.t. ment. my k. 
f for whi e sec. m. 


W maundement tT. 
¢ yndirstode rT. 


xink, 
d Om. x sec. m. k. 


y Om. EI pr.m, Kegop. 
e Om. A prim. 


fleschely coue- 
tisis. newenesse 
of spirit; thae 
is, bi the rule 
of the newe 
lawe. eldnesse 
of lettre ; that 
is, not bi the 
rule of the elde 
lawe, as to tho 
thingis that 
ben auoydid bi 
the newe testa- 
ment. fro the 
lawe of deeth ; 
that is, fro 
Moyses lawe. 
knew not synne; 
that is, to be 
yuel. occasioun 
takun ; that is, 
by oure part. 

T lyuede with- 
oul the lawe; 
that is, i¢ sem- 
ede to me to 
lyue, for I was 
not afeerd of 
deeth of synne, 
for it apperide 
not. synne lyu- 
ede azen; that 
is, was knowun 
tome. Lyre 
here. e. 


318 


no" good; forwhi wil lith™ to me, trewli 
‘for’ to performe good thing I fynde not’. 
19 Forsothe* I do not ‘the ilkeY good thing 
that I wole, but I do ‘the ilkeY yuel 
20 thing that I wole not. Sothli if I do that 
thing that I wole not, I worche not it, 
21 but the synne that dwellith in me. Ther- 
fore I fynde a? lawe to me willinge for* 
to do good thing, for> ‘to me® yuel thing 
lith’ to®. ‘Therfore the lawe is good to 
22mef willinge; forsoth® I delite to gidere 
to" the lawe of God, vp! the ynner man. 
23 Sothly I se an other lawe in my membris, 
a3enfiztinge to* the lawe of my soule, and 
makynge me caytyf in! the lawe of synne, 
2athat is in my membris. I a™ wooful man; 
who schal delyuere me fro the body of 
25this synne? Forsothe" the grace of God, 
bi Jhesu Crist oure Lorde. Therfore I 
my silf by ‘resoun of° the soule serue to 
the lawe of God; sothli? bi the? fleisch to 
the lawe of synne. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Therfore now no thing of dampnacioun 
is to hem that ben in ‘Crist Jhesu', the® 
whiche wandren not aftir the fleisch. 
2Forsotht the" spirit of lyf in Crist Jhesu 
hath delyuered me fro the lawe of synue, 
sand deeth. Forwhi that that was vnpos- 
sible to the lawe, in what¥ thing it was 
syk, ‘or freel, by fleisch, God sendinge* 
his sone in to the liknesse of fleisch of 
synne, ofY the? synne dampnede* synne in 
4fleisch; that the iustifiynge of lawe were 
fulfillid in vs, that not aftir the fleisch 
swandren’, but aftir the spirit. Forsoth¢ 
thei that ben aftir the fleisch, saueren tho 
thingis that ben of the® fleisch; but thei 
that ben after the spirit, feelen tho thingis 
6that ben of the spirit. Forwhi the pru- 


ROMANS. 


VII. 19—VIII. 6. 


but Y fynde not to performe good thing. 
For Y do not thilke good thing that Y 19 
wole, but Y do thilke® yuel thing that 
Y wole not. And if Y do that yuel2o 
thing that Y wole not, Y worche not 
it, but the synne that dwellith in me. 
Therfor Y fynde the lawe to me will-21 
ynge to do good thing, for yuel thing 
lieth to me. For Y delite togidere to the 22 
lawe of God, aftir the ynnere man. But 
Y se another lawe in my membris, a3en- 23 
fizjtynge> the lawe of my soule, and mak- 
ynge me caitif in the lawe of synne, that 
is in my membris. Y am an vneeliio4 
man; who schal delyuer me fro the 
bodi of this synne? The grace of God, 25 
bi Jhesu Crist oure Lord. Therfor Y 
my silf bi the soule serue to the lawe 
of God; but bi fleisch* to the lawe of 
synne. 


CAP. VIII. 


Therfor now no thing of dampnacioun } 
is to hem that ben in Crist Jhesu, 
whiche wandren not after the flesch. 
For the lawe of the spirit* of lijf ine 
Crist Jhesu hath delyuerid me fro the 
lawe of synne, and of deth. For thats 
that was vnpossible to the lawe, in what 
thing it was sijk bi flesch, God sente his 
sone in to the licknesse of fleisch of 
synnet, and of syune dampnede synne in 
fleisch ; that the iustefiyng of the lawe4 
were fulfillid in vs, that goen not aftir 
the fleisch, but aftir the spirit. For theis 
that ben aftir the fleisch, saueren tho 
thingis that ben of the fleisch; but thei 
that _ben after the spirit, feelen tho 
thingis that ben of the spirit. For the 


dence of fleisch is deeth; forsoth thef prudence of fleisch is deth; but thee 

Unot x. Uwhithto wp. vOm. sx, ‘w I fynde not for to perf. good thing vy. * For rv. Y that x. 
zther. 2Om.sx. 5 for whi n. the whicheg. ¢ Om. mporwxy. 4hjthto ap. ¢Om. anos. to me 
mpovwxy. fOm.r. ff willynge goody. Om. vr. &fory. hinv. iaftirs. kOm.r. linto x. 
mamav. ®Om. vy. °Om.¥. Pbutr. 90m. 4G sec.m. Nosywxy. my @ pr.m.MQ. * Shesu 
Crist mpe. 8 Om. rx. tForr. the laweof nr. vVthato. W Om. orx. *senter. Y and of or. 
z Om. 6 pr.m.mper. he dampnyde ampe. hath dampned x. » goon not y. © we wandren ¢. Om. r. 
4 For ov. ¢€ Om. x. f Om. w. 

8 ilke t. b fiztynge ajen R. a3zenseiynge a. i ether unhappi K marg. vnseely R. k the fleisch 


K sec. m. ak. 


* the lawe af 
spirit; that is, 
the lawe of the 
gospel. Lyre 
here. e. 

tT of synne; that 
is, of him silf, 
maad sacrifice 
for synne. 
dampnede 
synne; that is, 
he dide awey 
synne by his 
passioun. 

in flesch; that 
is, in man. of 
synne; that is, 
of God the fa- 
dir, quykene to 
lijf vndeedly. 
prudence of 
Jiesch 3 by which 
a man can sli3- 
ly gete and 
pursue fleischeli 
goodis. is deeth; 
that is, makith 
deeth of synne, 
and of helle, 
and ofte of 
kynde. Lyre 
here. e. 


VIII. 7——20. 


7prudence of spirit lyf* and® pees. For 
the wysdom of fleish is enemy to Gad; 
forsoth' it is not suget to the lawe of God, 
ssothly* nethir it may!. Forsoth™ thei 
that ben in fleisch, mown not plese to 
9God. Sothli 3e ben not in fleisch, but in 
spirit; ‘nethelees if" the spirit of God 
dwellith® in 3ow. Forsoth if ony? hath 
not the spirit of Crist, this is not his. 
10 Forsoth4 if Crist is" in 30u, sothli the 
body is deed for’ synne, but the spirit 
iilyueth for iustifiynge. For if the spirit 
of him that reiside Jhesu Crist fro deede 
spiritist dwellith" in 30u, he that reiside 
Jhesu Crist fro deede spiritis’, schal 
quykene and” 3oure deedli bodies, for 
12the spirit of him dwellinge* in 3ou. Ther- 
fore, bretheren, we ben dettours, not to 
the fleisch, that we lyue aftir the fleisch. 
13 ForsothY if 3e schulen lyue aftir the 
fleisch, 3e schulen deie; forsoth if 3e bi 
spirit? ‘schulen sle’* the deedis of fleish?, 
143e schulen lyue. Sothli who euere ben 
lad by the” spirit of God, thes ben the 
1ssones of God. Forsothe* 3e han not taken 
eftsoone the spirit of seruage in drede, 
but 3e han taken the spirit of adopcioun 
of sones, ‘that is, to be sones of God by 
grace, in which spirit® we cryen, Abba, 
iefadir. Forsoth ‘the ilke’ spirit 3eldith 
witnessyng to oure spirit, that we ben the 
17sones of God ; forsoth if sones, and eyris, 
sothli eyris of God, trewli® euene eyris of 
Crist ; if nethelees we ‘to gidere suffren®, 
isthat and we be glorified to gidere. Trewli 
I deme, that the passions! of this tyme 
ben not euene worthi* to the glorie to 
comynge', that schal be schewid in™ vs. 
i9 Forwhi® the abydinge of creature, ‘that és, 
man°, abidith the schewinge of the sones 
200f God. Sothli the creature is suget to 
vanyte, not willinge, but for him that 


ROMANS. 


319 


prudence of spirit zs lijf and pees. For7 

the wisdom of the! fleisch is enemye to 

God; for it is not suget to the lawe of 

God, for nether it may. And thei thats 

ben in fleisch, moun not plese to God. 

But 3e ben not in fleisch, but in spirit ;9 

if netheles the spirit of God dwellith in 

jou. But if ony™ hath not the spirit of 

Crist, this is not his. For if Crist is in10 

3ou, the bodi is deed for synne, but the 

spirit lyueth for iustefiyng. And if thei 

spirit of hym that reiside Jhesu Crist 

fro deth dwellith in 30u, he that reiside 

Jhesu Crist fro deth, shal quykene also 

joure deedli bodies, for the spirit of hym 

that dwellith in 30u. Therfor, britheren, 12 

we ben dettouris, not to the flesch, that 

we lyuen aftir the flesch. For if 3e"13 

lyuen aftir the fleisch, 3e schulen die; 

but if 3e bi the spirit sleen the dedis of 

the fleisch, 3e schulen lyue. For whois 

euere ben led bi the spirit of God, these 

ben the sones of God. For 3e han nots 

take eftsoone the spirit of seruage in 

drede, but 3e han taken the spirit of 
adopcioun® of sones*, in which we crien,  * that is, sones 
Abba, fadir. And the ilke spirit 3eldith 16 grace.” 
witnessyng to oure spirit, that we ben 

the sones of God; if sones, and eiris, 17 

‘and eiris? of God, and eiris’ togidere 

with Crist; if netheles we suffren togi- 

dere, that also we ben glorified togidere. 

And Y deme’, that the passiouns of this 18 

tyme ben not worthi' to the glorie to 

comynge, that schal be schewid in vs. SP shit 
For the abidyng of creaturet abidith the 19 Lyre here. &. 
schewyng of the sones of God. But the2o ponies decth 
creature is suget to vanyte{, not will. {odtumyee 
ynge, but for hym that made it® suget in eee 
hope; for the ilke creature schal be de- 21 synne of atk 
lyuered fro‘.seruage of corrupcioun in to _ wilful bi oure 
liberte" of the glorie of the sones of God. 


owne wille. 
Lire here. e. 


Sislijfv. bins. tfory. &forv. Imay be suget tothe lawen. ™ Foro. if netheles r. 
odwelle sx. Ponymang 4Sothelyo. ‘fisnotG@prm. &frony. tOm. x. dwelle sx. 
¥Om. ox. WOm.o. alsoy. *dwelleth ng. is dwellynge o. yFory. the spirit. 2% sleen r. 
a3oure flesch swxvy. >%Om.r. ¢ For ¥. m. x. €Om. x. fthat x. &sothely g. b suffren 
togidere vy. / passioun Nn. worth 4 sec.m. amnper. }comen sx. ™on wy. © For x. © Om. x. 

10m. 7. "ony mangprm. %weeb. © adopcioun, either purchase n. bifore ordeyned k marg. 
Peiris forsothe 1. Gtheeiresn. ‘'gesser. * euene worthi a sec.m 8Om. 1. tof. 4 libertee 


and fredom r. the liberte k. 


320 


‘sugetide it?, ‘or made it suget4, in hope; 
21for and ‘the ilke™ creature schal be dely- 
uered fro seruage ‘of corupcioun in to 
liberte of the® glorie of the sones of God. 
22Sothli we witen, that ech creature insor- 
witht, and childith’, ‘or worchith with an- 
23 @wis, til 3it. Forsoth not oonly it, but 
and we vs" silf, hauynge the firste fruytis 
of the spirit, and we vs* silf sorwen with 
ynne vs the” adopcioun’ of Goddis sones, 
‘that is, with greet mornynge desyren* the 
staat of Goddis sones bi grace, abidiuge 
2ithe ‘ajen bygging® of oure body. Sothli 
by hope we ben mad saaf. Forsoth the 
hope that is seyn, is not hope; forwhy 
what hopith a man that thing, that he 
a5seeth ? Forsoth’ if we hopen that thing 
that we seen not, we abiden by pacience. 
26 Also and the spirit helpith oure infirmyte, 
‘or vnstedefusinesse®; forwhy what we 
schulen preie, as it bihoueth, we witen 
not, but ‘the ilkef spirit axith for vs® with 
sorowyngis, that mown not ben toold out. 
27 Forsothe he that sekith® the hertis, wot 
what the spirit desyrith, for aftir God, 
‘that is, at’ Goddis wille*, he** axith for 
eshooly men. Forsoth we witen, for! to men 
louynge God alle thingis™ worchen to gi- 
dere into good thing", to hem that aftir 
a9 purpos ben clepid seyntis®. Forwhy and 
whom he wiste bifore, ‘and he ordeynede? 
‘by grace’ for" to be maad lychis oft the 
ymage of his sone, that he be the firste bi- 
30 getun" in many britheren. Sothely’ whom’ 
he bifore ordeynede to blisse, and hem he 
clepide ; and whom* he clepide, and hem 
he iustifiede; sothli whom* he iustifiede, 
siand hem he glorifiede. What therfore 
schulen we seye to thes thingis? If God 
32 forY vs, who ajens? vs? ‘The whicli® also 
sparide not his” owne sone, but for vs alle 


P made it soget yr. 4 Om. Norx. 1 that x. 


u traneilith with peyne yr. ¥ Om. rx. 
a we desiren NQ. desyringe o. 
unstablenesse swy. * that x. 
in x. kk Om. k. 1 that rv. 
AMNOPQSVWXY. ordeynede G. 
v¥Om. Kk. * whiche v. 


‘dD gloss om. in rx. 


m Om. F. 
q Om. x. 
x whichie v. 


w Om. R. 
d Om. 1. 


V adopcioun, or purchasyng R. 
ilke r, >Owhomi. © whom 1. 
for vs alle r. 


ROMANS. 


8 Om. GMPQsXx. 

W onre GMPQ. 

¢ ajeinbiyinge GuVxy. 

€ us, that is, makith us to axe v. 
n Om. x. 

r Om. s. 

y he for Goe. 


X sorowinge T. 
€ God is 1k. God be Ra sec. m, 


VIII. 21-32. 


And we witen, that ech creature sorew- 22 

ith, and trauelith with peyne til 3it. Andes 

not oneli it, but also we vs silf, that han 

the first fruytis of the spirit, and we vs 

silf sorewen with ynne vs for the adop- 

cioun’ of Goddis sonys*, abidynge the : 
a3enbiyng of oure bodi. But bi hope 24 some, 3 
we ben maad saaf. For hope that is 

seyn, is not hope; for who hopith that 

thing, that he seeth? And if we hopengs 

that thing that we seen not, we abiden 

bi pacience. And also the spirit helpith 26 

oure infirmyte; for what we schulen 

preie, as it bihoneth, we witen not, but 

the ilke spirit axith, for vs with sorew- 

yngis*, that moun not be teld out. O08 27 tert ant Ae 
he that sekith the hertis, woot what the agree 
spirit desirith, for bi God} he axith for + that is, at 
hooli men. And we witen, that to menes aera 
‘that louenY God, alle thingis worchen to- 

gidere in to good, to hem that aftir 

purpos|| ben clepid seyntis. For thilke?29 || after purpos; 


: = that is, predes- 
that he knewe bifor, he bifor ordenede _ tynacioun ether 


* that is, to be 


+ that is, mak- 


: ee bifore ordeyn- 
bi grace to be maad lijk to the ymage yng by grace. 
Lyre, Ausiyn 


of his sone, that he be the first bigetun whe ae 
among many britheren. And thilke* that 30 Aeve. e. 
he bifore ordeynede to blis, hem he clep- 

ide; and whiche? he clepide, hem he ius- 
tifiede ; and whiche® he iustifiede, and4 

hem he glorifiede. What thanne schulen 31 

we seie to these thingis? If God® for 

vs, who 7s ajens vs? Thef which alsose 
sparide not his owne sone, but ‘for vs 

alle bitook hym®’, hou also 3af he not to 

vs alle thingis with hym? Who schal33 
accuse a3ens the chosun men of God? It 

is God that iustifieth, who is it that34 
condempneth ? It is Jhesus Crist that 

was deed, 3he, the which roos a3en, the 

which is on the ri3t half of God, and the 

which preieth for vs. Who thanne schal 35 


t soroweth or. in sorwith withinne @. 
Xonre ewpg. Yforthe vy. 2 delineryng tytil o. 
4 For vy. ¢ Om. oex. or 
h scheergith x. lafter g. ‘* gloss om. 
© spirites Q. P and he byfore ordeyned 
8 liche cuopsx. lyiky. *Om.r7. % geten x. 
Zisazens og. % That x. » to his cape. 


zthoo Rr. ikke Tr. 2 thoo rR. 
fOm. rR. & bitook him 


y louynge R. 


VIII. 33—IX. 6. 


bitook him, how also 3af he not to vs alle 
ssthingis with him? Who schal accuse 
a3enus the chosene® sones* of God? God® 
3ithat’ iustifieth, who is it® that con- 
dempneth'? Jhesusi Crist that* is! deed, 
jhe, the which and roos a3en, the which is 
on the ri3thalf of God, and™ the which 
35 preieth for vs. Who therfore schal de- 
parte ‘vs from” the charite of God®? tri- 
bulacioun, or angwisch, or hungur, or 
nakidnesse, or persecucioun, or? perel, or 
scswerd ? As it is writun, For we ben slayn 
al day for thee; we ben gessid as shceep 
37to® slau3tir. But in‘ alle thes thingis we 
38ouercomen, for him that louede vs. Sothli 
I am certeyn, fort nether deeth, nether lyf, 
nether angels, nether pryncipatis, nether 
virtutes", ‘nether potestatis’, nether pre- 
sent thingis, nether thingis to comynge”, 
sgnether strengthe, nether hi3the, nether 
depnesse, nether othir creature schal* may’ 
departe vs fro the charite of God, that is 
in ‘Jhesu Crist? oure Lord. 


CAP. IX. 


1 I seye treuthe* in Crist Jhesu, I lye not, 
my? conscience beringe® witnessyng* to me 
2in the Hooly Goost, for® greet heuynesse is 
to me, and® continuel sorwe to myn herte. 
3Forsothef I my silf desyride for’ to be 
cursid®, ‘or departid', fro Crist for my 
bretheren, that ben my cosyns aftir the 
4fleisch, that ben Israelytis, ‘or of Israel *; 
whos is adopcioun of sones, and glorie, 
and testament, and 3yuynge of lawel, and 
sseruyse, and biheestis; whos ben the fa- 
dris, and of whom™ Crist® aftir the fleisch, 
that is God aboue alle thingis, blessid in 
6to worldis. Amen. Sothli not that the 
word of God hath falle doun, ‘or fuilide° 


ROMANS. 


321 


departe vs fro the charite of Crist? 
tribulacioun, or anguysch, or hungur, 
or nakidnesse, or persecucioun, or perel, 
or swerd? As it is writun, For we’ben 36 
slayn al dai for thee; we ben gessid as 
scheep of slau3tir. But in alle these37 
thingis we ouercomen, for hyin that lou- 
yde vs. But Y am certeyn, that nethir3e 
deeth, nether lijf, nether aungels, nethir 


.principatus, nether vertues', nether pre- 


sent thingis, nether thingis to comynge, 


nether strengthe, nether* hei3th, nether 39 


depnesse, nether noon! othir creature may 


. departe* vs fro the charite of God, that 


is in ‘Crist Jhesu™ oure Lord. 


CAP. IX. 


I seie treuthe in Crist Jhesu, Y lye! 
not, for my conscience berith witnessyng 
to me in the Hooli Goost, for greet2 
henynesse is to me, and contynuel sorewe 
to my herte}. For Y my silf desirides 
to be departid fro Crist for my _ bri- 
theren, that ben my cosyns aftir the 
fleisch, that ben men of Israel; whos is4° 
adopcioun of sones, and glorie, and tes- 
tament, and 3yuyng of the lawe, and 


. seruyce, and" biheestis; whos® ben thes 


fadris, and of which zs Crist after the 
fleisch, that is God aboue alle thingis, 
blessid in to worldis. Amen. But note 
that the word of God hath falle dounf. 


enfulfillid?, Sothlid not alle that ben of For not alle that ben of Israel, these ben 

¢chosynes wy. 40Om.swxy. meny. ¢ItisGodr. f isthat ogs. 8 Om. ox. 5 God con- 
dempneth w. condempne x. iltis Jhesusy. the whiche 0. Jwasy. ™Om.c¢ prim. ® fro vs 0. 
oCristy. POm.iv. Wofw. of aemNoposywxy. 8Om.w. tthat or. 4% vertnes 4cogsrwx. 
vyOm.r. Wceomenx,. *Om.¥. Ymowe sGMNopg. moun sx, 7 Crist Jesu cuerx. 4 trewly o. 
bformy 7. ¢berithy. 4 witnesse sxy. ¢forwhir. ¢€in x. {Forr. 8 Om.sx. 4 departid r. 
iOm.vx.  * either men of Israel vy. Om. x. \thelawo. ™whichev. is Cristy. © Om. rx. 
Ponfillid a. Om. rx. 4 For rv. 

h but wea. | virtutes A pr.m.ga. kneg. Jony rk. ™ Jhesu Crist1. of. © of whos R. 

VOL. IV. Tt 


* departe vs; 
Poul spekith 
here of hem 
that ben chosun 
of God to blis, 
that moun not 
fynali be de- 
partid fro Crist. 
Lire here. e. 


+ for the vn- 
feithfulnes of 
Jewis. Lyre 
here. e. 


t fro filling, for 
the vnfeithful- 
nesse of Jewis ; 
forwhi summe 
of hem, as the 
apostlis, and 
manye othere, 
token the feith 
of Crist, in 
which Goddis 
biheestis, ben 
fulfillid. Lyre 
here. e. 


322 


Israel, thes ben Israelitis, ‘or sones of Ja- 
z7cob*. Nether thei’ that ben seed‘ of Abra- 
ham, alle" ben sones’; but in’Y Ysaac seed 
sschal be clepid to thee; that is to seye, not 
thei that ben sones of the fleish, bez 
sones of God, but thei that ben sones of 
biheeste” ben demyd in seed ‘of biheeste*. 

9 Sothlix* this is the word of biheeste, Vp’ 
this tyme I schal come, and a sone schal 
1obe to Sare. Forsoth not oonly she, but 
and’ Rebecea, of o ‘liggynge by* hauynge 
11tweye sones of Ysaac, oure> fadir. Sothli 
whanne thei weren not 3it born, ether® 
hadden don ony thing of good or? yuel, 
that the purpos of God schulde dwelle vp° 
12 thef eleccioun, not of workis, but of God& 
is clepinge®, it is! seid to him‘, For! the more 
schal serne to the lasse, as it™ is writun, 
I louede® Jacob, forsothe ‘Esau I hadde in 
i4hate®. What therfore schulen we seie ? 
Wher wickidnesse be anentis God? Fer be 
isit. Forsoth? he seith to Moyses, I schal4 
haue mercy to’ whom I schal* haue imer- 
cy; and I schal 3yue merey tot whom I 
igschal haue mercy. Therfore it is not ne- 
ther of man" willinge, nether rennynge, 
17 but of God hauynge merey. Forsothe the 
scripture seith to Pharao, For’ in™ to this 
thing I haue stirid thee, that I schewe in 
thee ny vertu, and that my name be told 
isin al erthe*. Therfore of whom God 
wole, he hath mercy; and whom he wole, 
ighe endurith, ‘or hardenethy. ‘And so? 
thou seist to me, What thing is 3it* sou3t? 
20sothli® who withstondith¢ his will? Aa¢! 
man, who art thou, ‘the which’ answerist 
to God? Wher’ a potth, ‘or a maad 
thing’, seith to him that made it, What 
athast thou maad me so? Wher* a pottere 
of cley hath not power of the same gobet 


ROMANS. 


IX. 7-—21. 


Israelitis. Nethir thei that ben seed? of7 
Abraham, ‘alle-ben4 sonys; but in Ysaac 
the seed schal be clepid to thee; that iss 
to seie, not thei that ben sones of the 
fleisch, ben sones of God, but thei that 
ben sones' of biheeste ben demed in the’ 
seed. For whi this is the word of bi-9 
heest, Aftir this tyme Y sehal come, 
and a sone schal be to Sare. And not10 
oneli sche, but also Rebecca hadde twey' 
sones of o liggyng bi of Ysaac, oure 
fadir. And whanne thei weren not 3it1 
borun, nether hadden don ony thing of 
good ether of yuel, that the purpos of 
God schulde dwelle bi eleccioun, not of 12 
werkis, but of God clepynge, it was seid 
to hym, that the more schulde serue the 13 
lesse, as it is writun, Y louede Jacob, 
but Y hatide Esau. What therfor schu-14 
len we seie? Whether" wickidnesse’ be 
anentis God? God forbede. For hes 
seith to Moyses, Y schal haue merci* on 
whom Y haue’ merci; and Y schal 3yue 

merci on whom Y schal haue merci. ea as 


* in 3euynge 
grace in tyme. 
on whom ete., 


Therfor it is not nether of * man will- 16 Gon Hevea 
ynge, nethir rennynge, but of God hau-  ynseslorye in 
yuge mercy. And the scripture seith to17 in graumtinge | 
Farao, For to this thing Y haue stirid ee Aipeer 
thee, that Y sehewe in thee my vertu, ee eee 
and that my name be teld in al erthe. a aula 
Therfor of whom God wole, he hath ig thei ben vn- 
merei; and whom he wole, he endurith. ta im ae 
Thanne seist thou to me, What is sou3t 10°" j 

3it ? for who withstondith his wille? O! 20 

man, whoY art thou, that answerist to 

God? Whether a maad thing seith to 

hym that made it, What hast thou maad 

me so? Whether a potter of cley hath 21 

not power to make of the same gobet 07 

vessel in to honour, an othere in to dis- 


rOm. ox. *%Om.sx. ttheseed ewpo. 4thoo. Vhissonys@ ‘Wand x. W the hizeste x. 
xOm. rv. ¥* Forwhiy. y Vp aftir x. @alsor. ®kyndely knowinge c. ligginge by, or of 00 knoninge 
of man 9. lying by x. > of oure yr. € other wp. neither y. ether of oy. @nponw. fOm. srx. 
£Om. x. ™theclepende x. iwasy. Khirs. '!Thaty. ™Om.x. louery. oT hatide Esan v. 
pForry. 9Om.9. ‘of gs. ony. andtow. SOm.nr. tofg. onr., Yamansxy. VY Forwhi vr. 
wOm.r. %*theerthe sxy. yOm.x. % Therfore ry. 8 Om. x. > forwhiv. ® whothat 9. 4 ajen- 
stondith 4 pr.m.N. with stant sx. @ O! wposwxy. fwhichy. & Whether c. maad thing r. 


i Om. orx. or maad thing mpes. * Whether c. 


P seid the seed k pr.m. 4 ben aller. *Om. rR. 


W schal haue c pr. m. X prem. a prem. 


8 thi vr. 
Xnot rn. Om. k. 


t two. v wicknesse 1. 


Y what 1. 


u Wher I sepius. 
2a R. 


IX. 22——X. 1. 


for! to make sothli o vessel in to honour, 
anothir forsothe in to™ dispyt, ‘or low3 of- 
22fice? That if God willinge for® to schewe 
wraththe, and for? to make power 4 
knowun, susteynede in greet pacience the 
vessels of wraththe able in to perdicioun, 
23‘or dampnacioun’, that he schulde schewe 
the richessis of his glorie in to vesselis of 
mercy, ‘the whiche* he made redy in to 
24glorie. ‘And whichet he clepide not" oonli 
2of Jewis, but also of hethen men, as he 
seith in Osee’, I schal clepe not my peple 
my peple, and not my loued my loued, 
and not hauynge mercy hauynge mercy ; 
26and it schal be in place, wher it is seid’, 
Not 3e my peple, there thei schulen be 
27 clepid the sones of God lyuynge. Forsoth 
Ysai cryeth for Israel, If the noumbre of 
Israel shal be as the* grauel of the see, 
28 theY relifs schulen be maad saf. Forsoth 
a word endinge*, and abreggynge in 
equyte, for the Lord schal make a word 
breggid, ‘or maad short*, vpon? al¢ erthe. 
29 And as Ysaie bifore seide, ‘No but’ God 
hadde left to vs seed, we hadden ben maad 
as Sodom, and we hadden ben lyk as Go- 
3omor. Therfore what schulen we seye ? 
That hethene men that sueden‘ not ri3t- 
wysnesse, han kau3t® rijtwysnesse, sothli 
31 the® ri3twysnesse that is of feith. Forsoth 
Israel suynge the lawe! of rijtwisnesse, cam 
not parfytli in to the lawe of ri3twysnesse. 
32 Whi? For not of feith, but as of workis. 
Sothli thei offendiden ‘in to* the stoon of 
33 offencioun, ‘or spurnynge', as it is writun, 
Lo! I putte a stoon of offencioun in Syon, 
and a stoon of sclaundre; and ech that 
schal bileue in to it, schal not be con- 
foundid, ‘or schent™. 


CAP. X. 


1 Britheren, sothli the will of myn herte 
and my biseching is maad to God for 


ROMANS. 


323 


pit? That* if God willynge to schewe 22 
his wraththe, and to make his power 
knowun, hath suffrid in greet pacience 
vessels of wraththe able in to deth, to23 
schewe the? ri3tchessis of his glorie in 
to vessels of merci, whiche he made redi 
in to glorie. Whiche also he clepide not 21 
oneli of Jewis®, but also of hethene men, 
as he seith? in Osee, Y schal clepe not25 
my puple my puple, and not my loued 
my louyd, and not getynge mercy get- 
ynge merci; and it schal be in the26 
place, where it is seid to hem, Not 3e 
my puple, there thei® schulen be clepid 
the sones of ‘God lyuynge’. But Isaye27 
crieth for Israel, If the noumbre of Is- 
raelé schal be as grauel of the see, the 
relifs schulen be maad saaf. Forsothe2s 


a word makynge* an ende, and abreg-  * that is, the 
. h Lord schal 
gynge in equyte", for the Lord schal  inake. The 


make a word breggid on al the erthe. "7" ° 


And as Ysaye bifor seide, But God of29 
oostis hadde left to vs seed, we hadden 
be maad as Sodom, and we hadden be 
lijk as Gommor. 
we seie? That hethene’ men that sueden 
not ri3twisnesse“, han gete ri3twisnesse!, 
3he, the ri3twisnesse that is of feith. 
But Israel suynge the lawe of riz3twis-s 
nesse, cain not parfitli in™ to the lawe 
of ri3twisnesse. Whi? For not of feith, 32 
but as of werkys. And thei spurneden 
a3ens the stoon of offencioun, as it is33 
writun, Lo! Y putte a stoon of offen- 
sioun in Syon, and a stoon of sclaundre ; 
and ech that schal bileue ‘in it®, schal not 
be confoundid. 


+ as Sodom; 
that is, turned 
Therfor what schulen 3val awey fro 
truthe. Lyre 
here. e. 


CAP. X. 


Britheren, the wille of myn herte and1 
mi biseching is maad to God for hem in 


10m. sx. m Om. s. n Om. x. ° Om. sx. P Om. sx. a his power r. r Om. ex. 
8 whiche vy. that x. * Whiche also vy, Uvs not x. VY Osee, the prophete 0. W seid to hem G sec.m. Nor. 
xOm. er. YOm. xy. %makinge perfity. ®Om.x. bonvx. ¢Om.v. 4 Butif sx. © God of 


oostis G sec.m.v. fsueno. & getev. "bithe x. tlawethatisn. Kajensy. !Om.ox. ™ Om. x. 


aAnda. bhiser. C¢the Jewisa. 4 seide v. 
A sec.m. euennesse r. ithe hethen b. 
fulnesse g. ™ Om. Ra. ” in to it cxa. Om. 7. 


Tt2 


k riztwisnessis a. rijtfulnesse g8. the riztwijsnes k. 


& children of Israel 


© 3e R. ; 
1 ri3t- 


f lyuynge God r. 


324 


ROMANS. X. 2—15. 


2hem in to heelthe. Forsothe I bere wit- 


to helthe*. But Y bere witnessyng to2 * thatis, that 
nessinge to hem, for® thei han loue® of 


hem, that thei han loue® of God, but not ei,h cor ives 


3God, but not vp? kunnynge. Sothlid thei 
vnknowynge' Goddis ri3twysnesse, and 
sekinge for’ to ake stedefast her owne, 
ben not suget to the rijtwysnesse of God. 
4Forsothe the ende of the lawe Crist‘, to 
5ri3twysnesse to ech man bileuynge. Sothli 
Moyses wrot, For the man that schal do 
ri3twysnesse" that is of the lawe, schal 
6lyue in it. Forsoth’ the ri3twysnesse that 
is of byleue™, seith thus, Seie thou not in 
thin herte, Who schal sty3e into heuene ? 
that is to seie, for* to lede doun Crist; 
zor who schal go doun in to depnesse’, 
‘or helle?? that is, for® to ajen clepe Crist 
8fro the deede spiritis®. But what scith 
the scripture? The word is ny3 in thi 
mouth, and in thin herte; this is the 
word of bileue, ‘the which’ we prechen. 
9That if thou knowleche in thi mouth the 
Lord Jhesu Crist, and byleuest in thin 
herte, that God reiside him fro deede spv- 
loritis®, thou schalt be saaf. Forsoth’ by 
herte me® bileueth to rijtwysnesse, by 
mouth sothli knowleching is maad to 
11 helthe. Sothli' the* seripture seith, Ech that 


aftir kunnyng. For thei vnknowynges belthe. Lyre 


Goddis ri3twisnesse, and sekynge to make 
stidefast her owne 773t/ulnesse?, ben not 
suget to the ri3twisnesse1 of God. Fora 
the ende of the lawe is* Crist, to® ri3twis- 
nesse to ech man that bileuetht. Fors 
Moises wroot, For the man that sehal 
do ri3twisnesse that is of the lawe, schal 
lyue in it. But the rijtwisnesse that ise 
of bileue, seith thus, Seie thou not in 
thin herte, Who schal stie in to heuene? 
that is to seie, to lede doun Crist; or7 
who schal go doun in to helle? that is, 
to ajenelepe Crist fro deth. But whats 
seith the scripture? The word is ny3 in 
thi mouth, aud in thin herte; this is the 
word of bileue, which we prechen. Thato 
if thou knoulechist" in thi mouth the 
Lord Jhesu Crist, and bileuest in thin 
herte, that God reiside hym fro deth, 
thou schalt be saaf. For bi herte meio 
bileueth to rijtwisnesse, but bi mouth 
knowleching is maad to helthe. Forn 
whi the’ seripture seith, Eel that bi- 
leneth in” hym, sehal not be confoundid. 


bileueth into him, schal not be confoundid. 
12Sothli ther is no distyneeioun of Jew and 
Greek; for why the same Lord of alle, 
ls ryche! into alle, that inelepen™ him. For- 
soth ech man" who euere scelial inelepe® 
14the name of the Lord, sehal be saaf. How 
therfore schulen thei inelepyn? hym, into 
whom thei han not bileued? or how 
schulen thei bileue to hym, whom thei 
herden not? How forsoth sehulen thei 
1sheere, with outen the4 preechinge™? or’ 
how sehulen thei preche, not but if" thei 
be sent’? As it is writun, How faire the’ 
feet of ‘men euangelisinge* pees, of prech- 


And ther is no distinceioun ¢ of Jew and 12+ as to ristful- 
of Greke; for the same Lord of alle ts by even ea 
riche in* alle, that inwardli clepen hym. (rs Zure 
For ech man ‘who euereY schal inwardli is 

clepe the name of the Lord, schal be 

saaf. Hou thanne sechulen thei inwardli ta 

clepe hym, in to whom thei han not bi- 

leued? or hou seliulen thei bileue to hym, 

whom thei han not herd? Hou schulen 

thei here, with outen a prechour? and15 

hou schulen thei preche, but? thei be 

sent? As it is writun, Hou faire ben the 

feet of hem that prechen pees, of hem 

that prechen good thingis. But not16é 


that y. theloue x. Pofewpg. @Forv. *vnkunnende x. vnkunnynge y. 8 Om.sx. tis 
Crist 4 pr.m. Nogy. —_¥ the riztwisnesse x. v Buty. the bilene wp. *Om. sx. Ydepthe r. 
2 of helle wnweg. Om. ox. a Om. Nsx. b Om. AGMNPOQSFXY. e¢ Om. x. d whiche rv. that x. 
e Om. x. f For rv. & men o. i Forwhi r. k Om. anor. 1 Gs riche r. m clepen @. 
inwardly clepen vy. "Om. x. © inwardly clepe vy. P inwardly clepe yr. 9 Om. sGarpQ. aman N. ar. 
Tprechoury, Sbutv. tt Om. esx. Om, r. v sent, thei ben sent of God, that in werke and word 
suen Crist amp. Wbenthe vy. * hem that prechen r. : 


© the lone Q sec.m. =P riz3tmisnes ERTh8. 4 riz3tfulnesse rqgbega. "Om. 7. ‘Soft. tbileenec. 
«knowlechen rR. ¥ Om. £1 pr.m. Rbeegha8. Win to K. * in to crrab sec.m.k8. Y¥thatk. 2 but if k. 


X. 1621. 7. 


16ingeY goode thingis. But not alle men? 
obeischen? to the gospel. Forsoth> Ysaie 
seith, Lord*, who bileuyde to oure heer- 
1zinge? Therfore feith’ of heeringe, heer- 
ising forsoth by the word of Crist. But 
I seye, Wher! thei herden not? And 
sothli the word® of hem wente out into 
al erthe!, and into the endis of the round- 
ignesse of the! erthe ‘her wordis*. But I 
seie, Wher Israel knew not? First Moy- 
ses seith, I schal lede 30u to! enuye”, ‘into 
not a® folk; into an vnwys folk, I schal 
20sende 30u in to wraththe. Forsoth Ysaie 
dar, and seith, I am foundyn of men not 
sekinge me; openly I™ apperide to hem, 
2ithat axiden not me. Forsothe to Yrael 
he seith, Al day I streijte out my hondis 
to a peple not bileuynge to me, but a3en 
seyinge®. 
CAP. XI. 
1 Therfore I seye, Wher God hath putt 
awey his peple? Ferr be it. Forwhy and 
I am anP Israelyte, of the seed of Abra- 
2ham, of the lynage of Beniamyn. ‘The 
Lord4 ‘putte uot’ awey his peple, ‘the 
which’ he bifore wistet. Wher 3e witen 
not, ‘in Helye® ‘what the scripture seith’ ? 
3 How he preieth God a3eus Israel, Lord, 
thei han slayn thi prophetis, thei han 
vndirdoluen thin auteris, and I am left 
4aloone, and thei seken my lyf. But*what 
seith Goddis answere to him? I haue¥ 
left to mé seuene’ thousand* of men, that 
han not bowid her knees’ bifore* Baal. 
5So” therfore and? in this tyme’, the relyfs 
ben mad saaf, vp° the chesynge of the 
egrace of God. For if bi the’ grace of 
God, now not of workis; ellis grace is 
q7not now grace. What therfore? Israel 
hath not getyn® that’ that he sou3te, for- 
sothe eleccioun hath getyn; sothli the 


ROMANS. 


325 


alle men obeien* to the gospel. For Ysaie 
seith, Lord, who bileuede to oure her- 
yng? Therfor feith 7s of heryng, buti7 
heryng bi the word of Crist. But Yuis 
seie, Whether thei herden not? 3his, 
sothely the word of hem wente out in 
to al the erthe, and her wordis in to the 
endis of the world. But Y seie, Whe-i9 
ther Israel knewe not? First Moyses 
seith, Y schal lede 30u to® enuye, that 3e 
ben no fole; that 3e ben an vnwise folc, 
Y schal sende 3ou in to wraththe. And 20 
Ysaie is’ bold, and seith, Y am foundun 
of men that seken me not; opynli Y 
apperide to hem, that axiden not me. 
But to Israel he seith, Al dai Y strei3te 21 
out myn hondis* toa puple that bileuede 
not, but ajen seide me. 


CAPexls 


Therfor Y seie, Whether God hathi 
put awei his puple? God forbede. For 
Y am an Israelite, of the seed of Abra- 
hain, of the lynage of Beniamyn. God2 
hath not put awei his puple, which he 
bifor knew}. Whether® 3e witen not, 
what the scripture seith in Elie? Hou 
he preiethf God a3ens Israel, Lord, thei3 
han slayn thi prophetis, thei han vndur- 
doluun thin auteris, and Y am lefte 
aloone, and thei seken my lijf. Buta 
what seith Goddis answere tohym? Y 
haue left to me seuene thousyndes of 
men, that han not bowid ler knees bi- 
fore Baal. So therfor also in’ this tyme, 5 
the relifs ben maad saaf, bi the chesyng 
of the grace of God. And if i¢ be bi thee 
grace of God, 2¢ 2s not now of werkis{; ellis 
grace is not now grace. What thanne?7 
Israel hath not getun this that he sou;te, 
but eleccioun hath getun; and the othere 


yhem that prechen y. *Om.x.  obeienx. %¥Fory, ¢Om.a. ‘feithisgr. & by o. 
f Whether Gx passim. &soun x sec.m. 4 the erthe anosrxy. iOm.sx.  * the wordes of hem o. 
her wordis 3eden out v, lintoG. ™enuye for 3oure weywardenesse Q. % to not a mp. that 3e be no o. 
intonot x. "and x. © ajenseyinge tome vy. POm.N. God vy. thathnot put yr. § whom ¢. 
whiche rx. t knew +, u Om. Fr. V that the scripture seith wr. Om. 0. what the scripture seith 
in Eliey, *®Om.N. % thousandes 4 sec.m.GMNopor. Yknesx. Ztoo. %Lox. %®Om.o, 
bintymer. Cbiry. 4Om.s. now getteno. f this vr. 


b sown K sec. m. R Sec. m. 
& and qnrta, 


8 obedient rT. 
f preyede a pr.m. 


€ in to Q sec. m.. 


d forsothe isa. © Wher ¢ et plures. 


* hondis ; in 
jeuinge bene- 
fitis, in al the 
tyme of Moyses 
lawe. Lyre 
here. e 


+t knew; that is, 
bifore ordeyn- 
ede bi grace to 
blis. Lyre here. 
e 


t of lawe. this 
that he sou3le ;- 
that is, riztful- 
nesse bi the 
feith of Crist, 
whos comynge 
the Jewis abid- 
eden. the ches- 
ing; that is, 
apostlis and 
othere men 
chosnn herto. 
Lyre here. e 


326 


sothere ben blyndid. As it® is writun, Hei 
3af to hem a spirit of compunccioun, y3en/ 
that thei se not, and eeris, that thei heeren 
onot, til in to this day. And Dauith seith, 
Be the boord of hem maad ‘bifore hem in 
to a gnare*, and in to catchinge, and in to 
sclaundre, and into 3eldinge a3en to hem. 
10 Be the y3en of hem maad derke, that thei 
se not; and incroke! algatis the bak™ of 
ithem. Therfore I seye, Wher thei offend- 
iden® so, that thei schulden falle doun®? 
Fer be it. But bi? the’ gilt of hem heelthe 
is maad to hethene men, that thei sue 
izhem. That if the gilt of hem ben richessis 
of the world, and the menusinge’, ‘or mak- 
inge lesse’, ‘of hem‘ ben richessis of he- 
then men, hou moche more the plente of 
ishem? Sothli I seye to 3o0u‘', hethén men, 
hou longe sothli*® Iam apostle of hethen 
men, I schal honoure my mynysterie, ‘or 
14 seruyse’, if on” ony maner I stire my 
fleisch* forY to folwe, and? I make summe 
150f hem saaf. Forsoth* if the losse of hem 
is reconsilinge of the world, what> tak- 
inge’> vp*, not but lyf of® deede mente? 
16 For if the sacrifise’, ‘or litel part of tast- 
ynge*, be® hooly, and the hool gobet; and 
if the roote is hooly, and the braunchis. 
17 That if ony of the braunchis ben broken, 
thou sothli, whanne thou were a wylde 
olyue tre, art ‘sett yn‘ among hem, and ert 
maad felowe of the roote, and of fatnesse* 
isof the olyue tre, nyle thou glorie! a3eyns 
the braunchis™. For if thou gloriest, thou 
berist not the roote, but the roote thee”. 
19 Therfore thou seist, The braunchis ben 
20 broken®, that I be‘yn sett?. Wel, for vn- 
bileue the braunchis ben broken ; forsoth 
thou stondist by feith. Nyle thou sauere 
alhize thing’, but drede thou’, forsothe® if 


iGodr. iOm r. 
™ backis x. 


¢Om.r. 4Om. x. 
lintocroke o. bowe doun F. 
P foro. &@ Om. m. 
wsoo. Vor my seruyce G. Om. ox. 
Zand that yr. 3 Forr. 
€tog. ee Om.x. 
k the fatnes o. 
P graflid in v. 


f itil part of taasting r. 
Thane glorie r. 
4 thenges o. thing proude Q. 


iherden ‘. 
lin to R pr.m. 


h that is, enuie K marg. 
cap. XI. commences here. 


ROMANS. 


k grane K. or in to a grene o marg. snare Thhkf. 
m for b. 


XI. 8—21. 

ben blyndid. As it is writun, God 3afs 

to hem a spirit of compunccioun"}, izen + compunc- 

that thei se not, and eeris, that thei Cow "it’s 

here! not, in to this dai. And Dauitho pevts of hen 

seith, Be the boord of hem maad in to Crist and hise 
tikes’ as feithful men, 

a gryn* bifor hem, and in to catchyng, for which the 

and in to sclaundre, and in to 3eldyng Hua me 

tohem. Be the izen of hem maad derk, 10 3i7ne sale. 7 

that thei se not; and bowe thou down peor 

algatis the bak of hem. ||Therfor Y 11 cam fleschiy. 

seie, Whether thei offendiden so, that thei ate ie % 

schulden falle donn? God forbede. But 7av.tt'» 

bi the gilt of hem helthe is maad to! (rametiss Mat 

hethene men, that thei sue hem. That 12 able to be saned 

A , ’ a Ks bi feith. Lire 

if the gilt of hem ben richessis of the  tere.e. 

world, and the makyng lesse of hem ben 

richessis of héthene men, hou myche 

more the plente of hem? But Y seieis 

to 3ou, hethene men, for as longe as 

Y am apostle of hethene men, Y schal 

onoure my mynysterie, if in ony maner 14 

Y stire my fleisch for to folowe, and that 

Y make summe of hein saaf. For if the1s 

loss of hein is the recouncelyng of the 

world, what zs the takyng vp, but lijf 

of deede men? For if a litil part ofits 

that that is tastid be hooli, the hool gobet 

is hooli; and if the roote is hooli, also 

the braunchis. What if ony of the17 

braunchis ben brokun, whanne thou 

were a wielde olyue tre, art graffid 

among hem, and art maad felowe of the 

roote, and of the fatnesse of the olyue 

tre, nyle thou haue glorie a3ens thes 

braunchis. For if thou gloriest, thou 

berist not the roote, but the roote thee. 

Therfor thou seist, The braunchis ben 19 

brokun, that Y be graffid in. Wel, for20 

vnbileue the braunchis ben brokun; but™ 

thou stondist bi feith. Nyle thou sauere 


k bifore hem in to a grane ™. in to a gnare bifore hem r. 
® offenden c. 
T menushinge G. mynusching a. makinge lesse o. 
w Om. sx. in rv. 
b what the eaposxy. what is N. 
ff Om. or. 
™ braunchis, by pride, or enuye @. 
™ thou mekely, that thou falle not 9. 


© donn only with outen profyte to other 9. 
8Om.orx. tOm.o. tt Om. x. 

x fleische, that is, my lynage 9g. Y Om. sx. 
vb the taking w. © vp of hem mpg. 4 Om. 7. 
fis r. h gobet is hooly Q. isett p. grafiid r. 
" berith thee yr. © in-broken x. 
8 for ¥. 


Ina. 


XI. 22——33. 


God sparide not' the? kyndely. braunchis, 
lest’ perauenture he spare not thee. 
22Therfore se the goodnesse, and* feers- 
nesseY of God ; sothli feersnesse” in to hem 
that felden doun, sothli the goodnesse of 
God in thee, if thou ‘schalt dwelle® in 
goodnesse, ellis and thou schalt be kitt 
23down. But and thei schulen ben ynsett>, 
if thei ‘schulen not dwelle® in vnbileue. 
Forsoth! God is my3ty, eftsoone for® to 
24ynsette hem. Forwhif if thou ert kitt 
doun of the kyndely® wylde olyue tre, and 
ajens kynde ert® inseeti in to a good olyue 
tre, how moche more thei that by* kynde, 
.25schulen be ynsett! to™ her olyue tre? For- 
sothe, britheren, I nyle® 30u° vnknowe?P 
this mysterie!, that 3e ben not wyse to 
3ou' silf*; fort blyndnesse hath felde® of“ 
party in Israel, til the plente of hethen 
26men entriden*, and so al Israel schulde be 
maad saaf. As itY is writun, He schal 
come of Syon, that schal delyuere, and 
27turne awey the vnpite of Jacob. And 
this testament to? hem of me, whanne I 
28schal do awey her synnes. Sothli vp the 
gospel* enemyes® for 30u, forsothe® moost 
dereworthe vp the eleccioun for fadris. 
29Sothli the 3iftis and clepynge of God ben 
withouten forthinkynge, ‘or reuokynge °. 
30Sothli as sum tyme and! 3e bileueden not 
to God, ‘now forsothe? 3e han gete mercy 


31 for the" vnbileue of hem; so and thes now ; 


bileueden not in! to 3oure mercy, that and 
32thei gete mercy. Forsothe God closide to 
gidere alle thingis in* vnbileue!, that he™ 
33haue mercy on alle". A°! the hijnesse?, 
‘or depnesse4, of the richesse* of wysdom 
and kunnynge of God ; hou incomprehen- 
syble ben his domes, and his weyis vn- 


t not to G seem. 2Om. Gap. to thee g. 


v see thou lest G sec. m. dreed lest a. 


ROMANS, 327 


hize thing", but drede thou, for if God 21 
sparide not the kyndli braunchis, lest. 
perauenture he spare not thee. Therfor22 
se the goodnesse, and the fersnesse of 
God; 3he, the feersnesse in to hem that 
felden® doun, but the goodnesse of God 
in to thee, if thou dwellist in goodnesse, 
ellis also thou schalt be kit doun. 3he, 23 
and thei schulen be set yn, if thei 
dwellen not in vnbileue. For God is 
my3ti, to sette hem in eftsoone. For if24 
thou art kit doun of the kyndeli wielde 
olyue tre, and a3ens kynd art set in to 
a good olyue tre, hon myche more thei 
that bex bi kynde, schulen be set in her 


olyue tree? But, britheren, Y wole not 25 
that 3e vnknowen this mysterie}, that 3e + that is, God- 
é . . s te. 
be not wise to 30u silf; for blyndenesse feslomncnts that 
hath feld? a parti in Israel, til that the ras 
plente of hethene men entride, and so al 26 the newe testa- 

oo ment. Sor. Sa- 
Israel schulde be maad saaf. As it is @ris; thatis, for 
* the merytis of 
writun, He schal come of Syon, that fadris samme 
schal delyuere, and turne awei the wick- apne 
idnesse of Jacob. And this testament 2722 moschulen 
to hem of me, whanne Y schal do awei le sad 
her synnes. Aftir the gospel the? ben 28 mercy; that is, 
: hadden not the 
enemyes for 30u, but thei ben moost4 grace of feith 
dereworthe bi the eleccioun for the fa~ perc nce. 
dris. And the 3iftis and the cleping™ of 29° 
God ben with outen forthenkyng. And 30 
as sum tyme also 3e bileneden not to 
God, but now 3e han gete mercy for the 
vnbilene of hem; so and these now bi-31 
leueden not in to 3oure merci, that also 
thei geten merci. For God closide alle32 
thingis togidere in vnbileue, that he haue 
mercy on alle. O5! the heijnesset of the" 33 
ritchessis of the wisdom and of the’ 
kunnyng of God; hou incomprehensible 


W to thee G sec. mt. 


Ppr.m.Q. *andthe Gupoxy. Y feernesse gr. 7 the feersnesse wp. the feernesse gr. 8 dwellist r. 
bsettin vy. ¢dwellennot ry. 4@Forwhir. ¢Om.sx. fForv. &kynde no. 4 thou art xy. 
i sette ov x. k ben x. ben bi rv. 1 sett rv. m™intoo. inv. ®wole r. ° that 3e v. P to 
vnknow osx. 4 mysterie, or priuetee G sec.m. *30ur Guper. ‘lyfe. ¢tforwhirv. 4% fallen ex. 
W of aT. x hath entred o. y Om. x. 2 is to o. a gospel, that is, for the gospel Q. b thet 
ben enemyes y. but theibeny. Om.sx. ¢Omrx. fOm.o. sbutnowr. 4 Om. Nn. 
iQm.o. into wn. J vnbyleue, that is, bothe Jewes and hethen men 9. ™3e9. alle men G see.m. 


alle, that is, on hem bothe a. 
® richesses AGMNOPQSTVXY.- 


° thingis R pr.m. tk. © fellen 1 passim. 
* A! cexmaruxabceghkoa8,  t hizenessis a. 


9° O! GuNpesxy. 


P fillid Errgk@. fallen x, 
v Om. g. 


Pdepthe ry. 4@Om. a4 sec.m.orx. *Om.o. 


athe most b.  ” clepingis k. 


Y Om. EIQga. 


328 


34serchablet. Forsothe" who knew the witt 

35o0f God’, or who was his councelour? or 
who formere 3af to hym, and it schal be 

s6quyt a3en” to him? For of him, and by 
him, and in hym ben alle thingis. To 
him ‘honour and* glorieY in to worldis?. 
Amen’, 


CAP. XII. 


1 ‘And so>, britheren, I biseche 3ou by 
the mercy of God, that 3e 3yue 30ure bo- 
dyes a lynynge oost, ‘or sacrifice, hooly®, 
plesynge to God, 3oure seruyce resonable. 
2And nyle 3e be confoormed, ‘or maad lyk, 
to this world, but ‘be 3e® refoormed in 
newenesse of 3oure witt, that 3e proue 
which is the wille of God, good, and wel 
3plesynge, and parfyt. Forsoth I seie, bi 
the grace that is 3ouun to me, to alle 
that ben among 30u, for‘ to not® sauere, 
‘or kunne*, more than iti behoueth for* to 
kunne!, but for™ to kumne to sobrenesse® ; 
and to ech man, as God hath departid the 
amesure of feith®. Forsoth as in oo? body we 
han many membris, sothli4 alle the mem- 
sbris han not the same acte’, ‘or dede’; so 
we ‘ben manyet oo body in Crist, ech for- 
sothe membris" ‘the tother’ of an other”. 
6Therfore hauynge* 3iftis dyuersingeY, vp 
grace’ that is 3o0uun to vs, ether prophesie, 
7vp resoun of feith; ether® mynisterie, ‘or 
seruyce>, in mynistringe; ether® he that 
stechith, in techinge; he that stireth soft- 
ly’, in exhortacioun, ‘or monestinge®; he 
that 3yueth, in symplenesse; he that is 
byfore’, ‘or sowereyn§, in bisynesse ; he 
gthat hath mercy, in gladnesse. Loue 
with oute feynynge, hatynge yuel, cleu- 
ynge", ‘or faste drawynge', to good 
1othing*; lonynge to gidere the charite of 


ROMANS. 


* XI. 34——XII. 10. 


ben hise domes, and hise weies ben vn- 
serchable. For whi who knew the wit34 
of the Lord, or who was his counse- 
lour? or who formere 3af to hym, and3s 
it schal be quyt tohym? For of hym,36 
and bi hym, and in hym ben alle thingis. 
To hym 4e glorie” in to worldis*. Amen. 


CAP. XII. 


Therfore, britheren, Y biseche 3ou bit 
the mercy of God, that 3e 3yue 3oure 
bodies a lyuynge sacrifice, hooli, ples- 
ynge to God, and 3oure seruyse reson- 
able. And nyle 3e be confourmyd to2 
this’ world, but be 3e reformed in new- 


‘nesse of 30ure wit, that 3e preue which 


is the wille of God, good, and wel ples- 

ynge, and parfit. For Y seie, bi thes 

grace that is 3ouun to me, to alle that 

ben among 3o0u, that 3e sauere no? more 

than it bihoueth to sauere, but for to 

sauere to sobrenesse; and to ech man, as 

God hath departid the mesure of feith. 

For as in o bodi we han many membris, 4 

but alle the membris han not the same 

dede; so we many ben o bodi in Crist, 5 

and eche ben membrist oon of anothir. + that is, com- 
Therfor we that han 3iftis dyuersynge,6 yee ne, 


othere men 


aftir the grace that is 30uun to vs, ethir7 3s souun to 
vs, as membris 


prophecie®, aftir the resoun of feith; ethir of the bodi__ 

. : comynen to gi- 

serulse, in myuystryng; ether be that dere her officis. 
Lyre here. e. 


techith, in techyng; he that stirith softli,8 
in monestyng ; he that 3yueth, in symple- 
nesse; he that is souereyn, in bisynesse; 
he that hath merci, in gladnesse. Loue9 
with outen feynyng, hatynge yuel, draw- 
ynge to good; louynge.togidere the cha-10 
rite of britherhod. Eche come bifore to 
worschipen othere; not slow in bisy-11 
nesse, feruent in spirit, seruynge to the 


t ben vnserchable y. tForwhi vy. vtheLordr. *Om.r. xOm.r. y be glorie vy. % worldis 
of worldis n. world of worldes 0. @ Om. 7. » Therfore vy. © or holy sacrifice GQ. holi x. 4 Om. ox. 
®beth x, fOm.sx. €Om.9. bOm. ox. > iOm.o. Om. sx. 1! kunne, of priuey mysterie.o. 
sanouren xX. m Om, sx. « sobrenesse, with oulen presumpcioun Q. © the feith x. Pao. 
q forsothe 0. 1 dede rx. s Om. orx. ¢ many ben vr. u ben membres ov. YVoony. W® anothir 
hauynge need or seruyce Q. * we hauynge g. and we han ry. Ydiuerse o. *2the grace g. 4 other wp. 
: ia orx. ‘ors. 4sothelyo. ¢€ Om. rx. fprelaty. & Om. rx. »drawende x. 1 Om. ox. 

m, X. 


W honour and glorie rho. 


mgruxabceghkoa8, 8 the profecie a. 


x worldis of worldis A sec. m. Kk sec.m. a. 


Ythe kpr.m. 2 not cE1IK 


XII. 11——XIII. 3. 


britherhed ;: comynge bifore to gidere in 
iihonour, not slow in bisynesse, feruent’, 
‘or brennynge™, in spirit, seruynge to the 
i2 Lord, ioyinge in hope, pacient in tribu- 
izlacioun, bisy in preier, comunynge" to 
the nedis of seyntis, suynge, ‘or kep- 


inge°®, hospitalite, ‘that is, herboringe of - 


14pore men4, Blesse 3e men pursuynge 
3ou; blesse 3e, and nyle 3e curse, ‘or 
1; warie’; for’ to ioye with men ioyinge, 
16fort to wepe with men wepinge; feelynge 
the same thing to gidere ; not sauerynge, 
‘or kunnynge™, hi3e thingis’, but consent- 
ynge to meke thingis”. Nyle 3e be pru- 
17dent anentis 3ou* silf; to no man 3eldinge 
yuel for yuel, purueyingeY goode thingis, 
not oonly bifore God, but also bifore alle 
ismen. If it may be don, that that? is of 30u, 
i9hauynge’ pees with alle men. 3e moost 
dereworthe’ britheren, not defendynge, ‘or 
vengynge”, 30u° silf, but ‘3yue 3e4 place to 
ire’, ‘or wraththe!; forsoth® it is writun, 
The Lord seith, To me veniaunce", and I 
2z0schal 3elde ajen'. But if thin enemye 
‘schal hungre*, feede thou' him; if he 
thirstith™, 3yue thou" drynke to hym; for- 
sothe® thou? doynge ‘thes thingis4 schalt* 
21 gidere to gedre colis on his heed’. Nyle 
thou be ouercome of yuel thing‘, but ouer- 
come thou yuel thing" in’ good thing”. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Euery* soule, ‘or lyuynge many, be su- 
get to hijer poweris. Forsoth there is not? 
power no* but of God; sothli tho thingis 

2that ben of God, ben ordeyned’. ‘And so® 
he that ‘a3en stondith* power, a3en stond- 
ith® ‘the ordynaunce of God‘; forsoth thei 
that a3enstonden®, getith® to hem silf 


ROMANS. 


329 


Lord, ioiynge in hope, pacient in tribu-12 
lacioun, bisy in preier, 3yuynge good to13 
the> nedis of seyntis, kepynge hospita- 
lite’. Blesse 3e men that pursuen 30u; 14 
blesse 3e, and nyle 3e curse; for to ioye 15 
with men that ioyen, for to wepe with 
men that wepen. Fele 3e the same thing 16 
togidere; not sauerynge hei34 thingis, 
but consentynge to meke thingis. Nile 
3e be prudent anentis 3ou® silf; to no17 
man 3eldynge yuel for yuel, but pur- 
ueye 3e good thingis, not oneli bifor 
God, but also bifor alle men. If it may is 
be don, that that is of 30u, haue 3e pees 
with alle men. 3e moost dere britheren, i9 
not defendynge 3o0u% silf, but 3yue 3e 
place to wraththe; for it is writun, The 
Lord seith, To me veniaunce, and Y 
schal 3elde. But if thin enemy hun-20 
grith, fede thou hym; if. he thirstith, 
3yue thou drynke to hym; for thou do- 
ynge this thing schalt gidere togidere 
colist ou his heed. Nyle thou be ouer-21+ cots; that is, 
comun of yuel, but overcome thou yuel ie beet of 


charyte, ether 
bi good. of the Holy 


Goost, ether 
the brennyng 
heete of pen- 
aunce. on his 
heed; that is, 
sonle. The glos 
here rehersinge 
Austin. e. 


CAP. XIII. 

Euery soule{ be suget to heizere1 ¢ soue; thatis, 
powers. For ther is no power but of ne Oi 
God, and tho thingis that ben of God, 7”°"7** 
ben ordeyned. Therfor he that a3en-2 
stondith power, a3enstondith the ordy- 
naunce of God; and thei that a3en- 
stonden, geten to hem silf dampnacioun. 


sdampnacioun. Forwhi princis' ben not For princes ben not to the drede of goods 
1 brenning o. ™Om. ox. "% comyngo. °Om.ox. 4 Om. orx. 'Om.orx. & Om. sx. 
t Om. sx. “Om. ox. Vv thyngis, bauignge Sor these 3yftisQ. = Ww shits, Jolewynge meke fadris 9. 
X5our Net. Y but purueiende x. 2 Om a dere GMOPQTVXY. bOm. ox. © 3onr emPper. 
dsineth x. ¢wraththe o. fOm.orx. & = v. hthtveniannce 4 prom. iOm. vr. * hungrith r. 
10m. x. m schal therste o. 2QOm. x. Ofory. POm. x. 4thisthing y.  * thon shalt x. 
Sheuedc. ¢tOmorx. UOm.rx. bir. WOm.rx. %*Eche x. yOm.orx, no nsx. 


4 not N. 


b wele ondeyned g. ¢ Therfore rp. 
& ajeinstondith ry. 


getun AGMNOPQSTVX. 


b Om. a. 
8 50ur E. 


VOL. IV. 


4 azenstant sx. 
i pryncis of power Q. 


© that is, herborynge of pore men. e marg. 


uu 


€ ajenstant sx. f Godes ordenaunce ov. 


4tohizek. e€3onre rn. f Om. a sec. m. 


330 


to* the drede of good werk, but of yuel. 
Sothli! wilt thou not drede power? Do 
thou™ good thing", and thou schalt haue 
4preysyng of it; forsoth® he is the mynystre 
of God to thee into good?. Sothli if thou 
doist yuel thing4, drede thou’; for not 
withoute cause he berith the swerd*, for 
he is the mynistre of God, vengere into 
wraththe to him that doth yuel thing". 
sAnd therfore by nede be 3e suget, not 
oonly for wraththe, but and for consci- 
sence. Sothli’ therfore and 3e 3yuen tri- 
butis, thei ben the mynistris of God, ‘for 
7this same thing seruynge’. Therfore 
3elde 3e ‘to alle men dettis*, to whom tri- 
but, tribut, to whom tol, ‘or customY ‘for 
thingis borun aboute*, tol, ‘or such cus- 
tom*, to whom drede, drede, to whom 
shonour, honour. To no man owe 3e ony 
thing, no but that 3e loue to gidere. 
Sothlic he that loueth his neizbore, hath 
ofulfillid the lawe. Forwhy, Thou schalt 
‘do no leccherie, Thou schalt not sle, 
Thou schalt not stele, Thou schalt not 
seye fals witnessinge®, Thou schalt not! 
coueite the’ thing of thi neijbore, and 
if there be" ony othir maundement, it is 
instorid’, ‘or enclosid*, in this word, Thou 
10schalt loue thi neiz3bore as thi silf. The 
loue of thi! nei3bore worchith not yuel; 
therfore loue is the™ plente", ‘or fulfill- 
ummge°, of the? lawe. And we witinge4 
this tyme, for™ hour is now, vs* fort to" 
ryse of” slepe; sothli* now oure heelthe* 
121s neerY, than whanne we bileueden. The 
ny3t wente byfore, forsothe the day ‘schal 
neize”. Therfore caste we awey the workis 
of derknessis, and be we clothid® with» 
isthe armeris® of 1i3t. As in? day® wandre 
we honestly, not in ‘ofte etyngis’ and 


ROMANS. 


XIII. 4—13. 


work, but of yuel. But wilt thou, that 
thou drede not" power? Do thou good 
thing, and thou schalt have preisyng of 
itt; for he is the mynystre of God tos 
thee in to good. But if thou doist yuel, 
drede thou; for not with outen cause he 
berith the swerd, for he is the mynystre 
of God, vengere in to wraththet to hym 
that doith yuel. And therfor bi nedes 
be 3c suget, not oneli for wraththe, but 
also for conscience. For! therfor 3e6 
3yuen tributis, thei ben the mynystris 
of God, and seruen for* this! same thing. 
Therfor 3elde 3e to alle men dettis, to7 
whom tribut, tribut, to whom tol, tol, 
to whom drede, drede, to whom onour, 
onour. To no man owe 3e ony thing,s 
but that 3e loue togidere. For he that 
loueth his nei3bore, hath fulfillid the 
lawe. For, Thou schalt do no letcherie, 9 
Thou schalt not sle, Thou schalt not stele, 
Thou schalt not seie fals witnessyng, 
Thou schalt not coueyte the thing of 
thi nei3bore, and if ther be ony othere 
maundement, it is instorid™ in this 
word, Thou schalt Joue thi neiz3bore as 
thi silf. The loue of neiz3bore" worchith 10 
not yuel; therfor loue is the™ fulfillyng 
of the lawe. And we knowen this11 
tyme, that the our is now, that we rise 
fro sleep; for now® oure heelthe is? neer, 
than whanne we bileueden. The ny3t12 
wente bifore, but the dai hath neijed. 
Therfor caste we awei the werkis of 
derknessis, and be we clothid in4 the 
armeris of lij3t. As in dai wandre we 13 
onestli, not™ in superflu  feestis and 
drunkenessis, not in beddis and vn- 
chastitees, not in strijf and in enuye; 
but be 3e clothid in’ the Lord Jhesu t4 


k Om. Nn. ! But rv. m Om. x. n Om. x. © for r. P good, endettid to defende thee Q. 
q Om, rx. r Om. x. s vengeable swerd Q. n Om. Fx. v For r. w and seruen for this 
same thing yr.  *dettistoallemeny. yYOm.x. %Om.ox. ®Om.ox. > thing that 3e shulden 
notoweQ. ¢Forv. ‘dnotdosx. ewitnesex. fOm.y. fSnoy. iso.  finclosid o. 
k Om. orx. 10m. 4G sec.m. MNoPgsy. ™ Om. GMNP. a fulfilling « sup.ras.ox. © or plente a. 
Om. ox. P Om. ewpory. Gknowen vy. ‘thatthe vr. sthat wer. ¢ Om. G pr.m.mMpsvyx. "Om.r. 
Yfrosrvx. Wforvy. *Xheelo. Ynerer ca. nizjero. 7 hath neizjidy. clad sx. © Om. cap 
osTxy. in ny. Carmeso. dandinn. ¢theday r. f superflu feestis 7. 

hnoa. |! Forwhir. ‘kKtok. %IJthek. ™or includidasec.m.marg.  ™ thi nei3bore a pr: m. 
20 Om.ab. OnowisR. POm.R. dwiths. + not in ofte eetynggis, or Emarg. §% Om. R pr.m. 


tT preisinge of 
tt; 3he thou3 
the souereyn is 
an yuel man, 
while he is 
cause of gret- 
tere coroun to 
thee. The glos 
here rehersinge 
Austyn in a 
sermoun of 
Seint Laurence. 
t in to 
wraththe ; 

that is, into 
poneschinge. 
Lyre here. e. 


XII. 14—XIV. 10. 


drynkyngis®, not in couchis* and! vn- 
14chastitees, not in stryf and in enuye; but 
_be 3e clothid* in! the Lord Jhesu Crist, 
and do 3e not™ cure®, ‘or bisynesse°, of 
fleisch in desyris. 


CAP. XIV. 


1 Forsothe take 3e a syk man in bileue, 
not in deceptaciouns?, o74 dispeticiouns*, 
20f thou3tis. Sothli* anothirt bileueth him- 
silf for" to ete alle thingis; forsoth’ he that 
is syk, ‘or unstedefast”, ete he* wortis, ‘or 
spotagey’. He that etith, dispise not? ‘the 
man not etynge*; and he that etith not, 
deme not ‘the man etynge>. Sothlit God 
a4hath takyn him. Who art thou, that 
demest anothir¢ seruaunt? To his lord he 
stondith®, or fallith doun. Forsoth he 
schal stonde; forsoth* the Lord is my3ti 
forf to ‘ordeyne him*, ‘or make stedefast. 
5Forwhi anothir demeth a day bytwixe* 
day', another demeth ech day. Ech man 
habunde™, ‘or be plenteuous, in his witt. 
6 He that sanerith®, ‘or vndirstondith?, the 
day, vndirstondith’ to the Lord. And he 
that etith, etith™ to* the Lord, for he doith 
thankyngis to ‘the Lord‘. And he that 
etith not, etith not to the Lord", and do- 
7ith’ thankingis to God. Forsoth no man 
of vs lyueth to hym silf, and no man dei- 
seth to him silf. Sothli¥ where we lyuen, 
we lyuen to the Lord; where we deien, 
we deien td the Lord. Therfore wher we 
glyuen or deien, we ben ‘of the Lord*. In’ 
this thing sothli? Crist is@ deed, and ‘roos 
azen, that he be Lord and° of quike and 
10 of deede*. Forsothe® what demest thou thi 
brother? or whi dispisist thou thi brother? 
for! alle we schulen stonde bifore the trone 


& drunkennesses 4G sec. vice. MNOPSTVXY. 
BI pr.m. PQOSTXY. mno A. 
yngis Vv. 9 or ino. Om. x. 
whi vy. +t another man r. 


u Om. sx. VY but rv. 


h beddis r. 
«the cure GMNposTVxXY. besynesse o. 
’ dispitisouns amp. disputisouns Q. dispitouns y. Om. x. 
w Om. x. 


ROMANS. 331 


Crist, and do 3e not the bisynesse of 
fleischt in desiris *. * that is, in 
vnleful desiris. 
The glos here. 
ether in super- 
flu desiris. 
Lyre here. e. 


CAP. XIV. 
But take 3e a sijk man in bilene, noti 
in demyngis" of thou3tis. For another2 

man leueth, that he mai ete alle thingist; + ate 
but he that is sijk, ete wortis. He thats ie 
etith, dispise not hym that etith not; {me 
and he that etith not, deme not hym _ Pieueth; that 
that etith. For God hath take him to ‘uly ete alle 
hym. Who art thou, that demest an-4 fertialin a1 
othris seruaunt? To his lord he stond- oe 
ith, or fallith fro hym. But he schal 

stonde; for the Lord is my3ti to make 

hym parfit. For whi oon demeth as 

day{ bitwixe a dai, another demeth ech + demeth a 
dai. Ech man encrees in his wit. Hee taf denna 
that vnderstondith the dai, vnderstond- Monae ieee 
ith to the Lord. And he that etith, etith ynding not 
to the Lord, for he doith thankyngis to deeth. ¢¢ plen- 
God. And he that etith not, etith not wit; thatis, 
to the Lord, and doith thankyngis to Gere camel: 
God. For no man of vs lyneth to7 enn uebaces 
hymsilf, and no man dieth to hymself. sinning ot che 
For'whether we lyuen, we lyuen to thes Rese nate 
Lord; and whethir we dien, we dien es 

to the Lord. Therfor whethir we lyuen 

or dien, we ben of the Lord. For whig9 

for this thing Crist was deed, and roos 

a3en, that he be Lord bothe of quyke? 

and of? deed men. But what demest1o 

thou thi brothir? or whi dispisist thou 

thi brothir? for alle we schulen stonde 

bifore the trone of Crist. For it isi 

writun, Y lyue, seith the Lord, for to 


fandin a. & clad sx. 


10m. 4 prim. ¢ 
© Om. orx. P deem- 
Ss For- 


xOm. rv. Yor potage, or suche metis 


that norischen hym not to synneQ. Om. x. he not og. ®hym that etith not y. > hym that etith r. 
¢ Forwhi r. an alyen vy. anotheris x. ¢ stant sx. fFory. &Om.sx. make hym perfit vr. 
1Om. x. < bitwen sx. | the day @. m be plenteuous r. 1 Om. orx. 9 ynderstondith or. 
POm. orx. sauoureth x. ‘Teteg Sheton. Om.7r. [tGody. 2% Lord, that is, he absteyneth 


Vv he doth o. 
€ bothe r. 


hym for worschip of the Lord Q. 


zOm.v. &wasy. ? a3ein roose Gc. 


t joure flesch rR. ™ deemynge k. 


Ww For vr. 
d deede men r. 


z quike men Exkk pr. m. 


y And x. Forwhi for rv. 
f forsothe GmoeTV XY. 


x Lordis s pr.m. 
e But rv. 


aOm. kK prom. >» Om. kK. 


uug 


332 ROMANS. 


1iof Crist. For it is writun, I lyue, seith 
the Lord, for to me ech knee schal ben 
bowid, and ech tunge schal knowleche to 
12God. ‘And so" ech of vs schal 3elde re- 
13soun to God for him silf. Therfore no 
more deme we to gidere, ‘or ech othir'; 
but more deme 3e this thing, that 3e putte 
not hurtynge, ‘or sclaundre‘, to a brother. 
141 woot and truste in the Lord Jhesu, for! 
no thing is comune, ‘or vnclene™, by him, 
no® but to him that demeth ony thing 
for® to be vnelene, ‘to him it is vnclene?. 
15Sothli if thi brothir be maad sory‘, ‘or 
heuy in conscience’, for mete, now thou 
walkist uot aftir charite. Nyle thou 
thorw thi mete leese him, for whom Crist 
iediede. Therfore be not oure good thing 
i7blasfemyd, ‘or dispisid’. Sothli' the 
rewme of God is not mete and drynke, 
but ri3twysnesse’ and pees and ioye in 
isthe Hooly Gost. Forsoth he that in this 
thing serueth Crist’, plesith God", and* 
i9is prouyd to men. And soY sue we tho 
thingis that ben of pees, and kepe we tho 
thingis to gidere that ben of edificacioun, 
20‘that is, to bylde soulis to heuene*. Nyle 
thou for mete distroye the work of God. 
Sothli alle thingis ben cleene, but it is 
yuel to the man that etith by offendinge, 
21‘or sclaundre*. It is good for? to not ete 
fleisch, and for® to not drynke wyn, nether 
in what thing thi brothir offendith, ‘or is 
sclaundrid’, or is maad syk, ‘or vustede- 
2 fast’, Thou® that’ hast feith anentis thi 
silf, haue thou’ bifore God. Blessid is he 
that demeth not", ‘or dampneth not’, him 
23silf in that thing that he proueth. For- 
soth he that demeth*, ‘if he ete, is damp- 
ned!; for it™ is not of" feith. Forsoth al 
thing that is not of feith, is synne. 


XIV. 1123. 


me ech kne schal be bowid, and ech 

tunge schal knouleche to God. Therfor ie 

ech of vs schal 3elde resoun to God for 

hym silf. Therfor ‘no more deme we°13 

ech other; but more deme 3e this thing, 

that 3e putte not hirtyng, or sclaundre, 

to a brothir. I woot and triste in the14 

Lord Jhesu, that no thing is vnelene4 

bie hym, no but to him that demeth 

ony thing to be vnclene, to him it’ is 

vnclene. And if thi brother be maadis 

sori in conscience for mete, now thou 

walkist not aftir charite. Nyle thous 

thoron3 thi mete lese hym, for whom 

Crist diede. Therfor be not oure’ good 16 

thing blasfemed. For whi the rewme17 

of God is not mete and drynk, but ri3t- 

wisnesse and pees and ioye in the 

Hooli Goost. And he that in thisis 

thing’ serueth Crist, plesith God, and is 

proued to men. Therfor sue we thoio 

thingis that ben of pees, and kepe we 

togidere ‘tho thingis* that ben of! edi- 

ficaciount. -Nyle thou for mete distrie 20 + that is, to 
the werk of God. For alle thingis ben eater 
clene, but™ it is yuel to the? man that pete 
etith bi offendyng. It is good to not21 bimsif damp, 
ete fleisch, and to not drynke wyn, that he preu- 
nethir in what thing thi brother offend- Scam 
: . ° . te it is leful to 
ith, or is sclaundrid, or is maad sijk. him to ete 
Thou hast feith anentis thi silf, haue22 Pree 
thou bifore God.  Blessid is he that lave, while he 
demeth not hym silf in that thing that for the charyte 
he preueth. For he that deimeth, B28 dict even 


dampned, if he etith; for it is not of Gane time 

feith. And al thing that is not of feith, be doth this 

¥ not of consci- 

is syune. : ence. Lyre. 
here, e. 


h Therfore rv, i Om. ox. k Om. ox. I that r. m Om. x. 2 not o, Om. r. 
© Om. G pr.m.mposx. POm.op. 4 heuy in conscienceo. "Om,ox. %Om.x.  ¢ Forwhi rv. 
u riztfulnesse N. ¥ to Crist @ sec.m. to God G sec.m.x. *andhege. YTherforev. # Om. x. 
aQm. x. 6 Om.sx. ¢Om.sx. 4Om. x. ¢Thatthoux. fOm. rx. ¢ Om. sx. Om. rt. 
i Om. rx. k demyth this mete clene and this unclene Q. 1 if he ete the vnclene, is dampned Q. if he is 
dampned T. is dampned if he etith yr. =m why? for his etynge a. ™ Om. rT. 

¢ deme 3e no more k pr. in. 4 comun, or vacleene EX. comoun 1Qeg pr.m. € tok. f that a. 


§ Om. b ef ¢ pr.m. 


bh 3oure Rk pr.m. 
nak, 


i Om. R prim. 


k Om. E. 10m. Eg. toe. m for a. 


XV. I—I5. 


CAP. XV. 


1 Forsothe we saddere owen for® to sus- 
teyne, ‘or bere vp?, the feblenesse’ of syke 
men, ‘or unsadde in feith*, and not plese® 

ato vs‘ silf. Ech of vs plese to his nei3- 

3 bore in to good, to edificacioun. ‘And for- 
soth" Crist pleside not to hym silf, but, 
as it is writun, The reprouys, ‘or schen- 
schipis’, of men displesinge thee, felden” 

4on me. Forsothe what euere thingis ben 
writun, thei* ben writun to oure techinge, 
that by pacience and comfort of scripturis 

swe han hope. Forsothe God of pacience 
andy solace, ‘or comfort?, 3yue to 30u for* 
to vndirstonde the same thing, ech in to 
sothir aftir Jhesu Crist, that 3e of oo wille, 

‘or witt®, with oo mouth worschipe God 
and the fadir of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 

7 For which thing take 3e to gidere*, as and4 
Crist took 30u into the honour of God. 

sSothli I seie Jhesu® Crist for‘ ‘to haue bes 
a mynistre of circumcisioun for the treuthe 
of God, for® to conferme the biheestis of 

9fadris. Sothli hethene men for! to honoure 
God vpon* mercy; as it! is writun, Ther- 
fore, Lord, I schal knowleche to thee in 
hethene men, and I schal synge to thi 
ioname. And eftsoone™ he seith, Glade®, 
or° zoye?, 3e hethene men with4 his peple. 
1 And eftsoone', Alle hethene’ men, heryet 
3e the Lord; and alle peplis, magnyfie 3e 
izhim. And eft Ysaie seith, Ther schal be 
a roote of Jesse, and hethene men schulen 
hope in" him, that schal ryse’ for” to 
wgouerne hethene men. Forsoth God ‘of 
hope fulfille 3ou in al ioye and pees in 
bileuynge, that 3e habounde in hope and 
14vertu of the Hooly Gost. Sotheli, bri- 
theren, and I my silf am certeyn of 3on, 
‘for and* 3e 30u/ silf? ben ful of loue, 3he’, 
fulfillid® with al science, ‘or hunnynge®, 
1580 that 3e mown moneste ech other. So- 


°Om.sx. POm.x. 4 febilnessis rv. 
vOm. x. W fellen Garpo ef x passim. tho v. 
© to gidir upberynge the feble 9. d also rv. 
1 Om. sx. owen for v. K for v. on x. 
P enioye Q. Om. Tvx. 4 be glad with rv. 
Yriseupy. WOm. sx. * that also v7. 
¢ Om. x. : 


T eft ¥. 


ROMANS. 


r Om. x. 
y and of er. 

e that Jhesn vy. * 
1Om. x. 
8 Om. T. 

Y jour ewpor. Om. v. 


333 


CA aes 


But we saddere men owen to susteyne 1 
the feblenesses of sijke men, and -not 
plese to vs¥ silf. che of vs plese to2 
his nei3bore in good, to edificacioun. For3 
Crist pleside not to hym silf, as it is 
writun, The repreues of men dispisynge 
thee, felden on me. For what euere4 
thingis ben writun, tho ben writun to 
oure techynge, that bi pacience’ and 
coumfort of scripturis we haue* hope. 
But God of pacience and of solace 3yues 
to 30u to vndurstonde the same thing, 
ech in to othere aftir Jhesu Crist, thatc¢ 
3e of o wille with o mouth worschipe 
God and the fadir of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist. For which thing take 3e togidere,7 
as also Crist took 30u in to the onour 
of God. For Y seie, that Jhesu Criste 
was a mynystre of circumcisioun for the 
treuthe of God, to conferme the bi- 
heestisY of fadris. And hethene meng 
owen to onoure God for merci; as it is 
writun, Therfor, Lord, Y schal know- 
leche to thee among hethene men, and 
Y schal synge to thi name. And eft1e 
he seith, 3e hethene men, be 3e glad 
with his puple. And eft, Alle hetheneil 
men, herie 3e the Lord; and alle puplis, 
magnefie 3e hym. And eft Isaie seith, 12 
Ther schal be a roote of Jesse, that schal 
rise vp to gouerne hethene men, and 
hethene men schulen hope in hym. And1s3 
God of hope fulfille 3ou in al ioye and 
pees in bileuynge, that 3e encrees in 
hope and vertu of the Hooli Goost. 
And, britheren, Y my silf am certeyn 14 
of 30u, that also 3e ben ful of loue, and 


.je ben fillid with al kunnyng, so that 


3e moun moneste ech other. And, bri- 15 
theren, more boldli Y wroot to jou a 
parti, as bryngynge 30u in to mynde, 


u For whi pv. 
b Om. vx. 


t oure GPe. 
Z of comfort r. ® Om. sx. 
Om. srx. & was v. b Om, sx. 
-B Glade 3e r. Om. vy. = 9 Om. rrx. 
t preyse GMPQ. tin to AGMNQSTVXY. 
zOm.y. andjer. > fillid r. 


8 to pleese r. 


m eft r. 


Youreh. Wthe pacience rea, *Om.k prim.  Y biheeste k pr.m. 


334 ROMANS. 


theli, britheren, more hardily I wroot to 
jou ‘of party’, as ajen bryngynge 3ou in 
to mynde, for the grace that is 3ouun to 
i6me of God, that I be the mynistre of Crist 
Jhesu in hethene men; I® halwinge’ the 
gospel of God&, that the offringe of he- 
thene men” be maad acceptid', and halewid 
17in the Hooly Gost. Therfore I haue glorie 
isin Crist Jhesu to God. Forsoth* I dar 
not speke! ony thing of tho thingis, the™ 
whiche® Crist makith not by me, into 
obedyence of hethene men, in word and 
19 dedis, in vertu of tokenes and grete won- 
dris, in vertu of the Hooli Gost, so that 
from Jerusalem by cumpas, ‘or enuyroun®, 
til vntoP Iliryk I haue fulfillid4 the gospel 
200f Crist. Forsoth so I haue prechid this 
gospel, not where Crist was named", lest 
I bilde vpon’ otherist ground, but as it is 
21 writun, For to whom it is not told of him, 
thei schulen se, and thei that herden not, 
22schulen vndirstoude. For which thing I 
was lettid ful moche for* to come to 3ou, 
23and I am forbodyn til into’ 3it. Forsoth 
now I ‘not hauynge” ferthere* place’ in 
thes cuntrees, sothli? hauynge* couetyse 
‘of comynge® to 30u, of many 3eeris now 
2igoynge bifore, whanne I schal bygynne 
for® to passe in to Spayne, I hope that I 
passinge forth schal se 3ou, and of 3ou I 
schal be lad thidur, if I schal vsen 3ou 
25 first in party. Therfore now I schal passe 
forth to Jerusalem, fort to mynystre to 
26seyntis. Forsoth® Macedonye and Achaye 
proueden for’ to make sum collacioun, 
‘or gedrynge of moneye*, in to pore men 
27 0f seyntis, that ben in Jerusalem. Sothilii 
it pleside to hem, and* thei ben dettouris 
of hem; forwhi if! hethene men ben 
maad parteneris of her goostly thingis, 
thei owen and™ in fleischly thingis for" to 


da party 9 ¢ Om. 9. andl v. 


kForr. 10m.e. ™Om. rx.  % that x. 
r named, or prechide of fals apostelis 9. 


f hauende s. halewe r. 
bh men, thai thoru me offren hem silf to the bileeue Q. 
© Om. GMNPOEFX. 
s vp T. on X. 


XV. 16—27. 


for the grace that is 30ouun to me of 
God, that Y be the mynystre of Crist 16 
Jhesu among hethene men. And Y 
halewe the gospel of God, that the 
offryng of hethene men be acceptid, and 
halewid in the Hooli Goost. Therfor 17 
Y haue glorie in Crist Jhesu to God. 
For Y dar not speke ony thing of tho1s 
thingis, whiche Crist doith not bi me, in 
to obedience of hethene men, in word 
and dedis, in vertu of tokenes and grete 19 
woudris, in vertu of the Hooli Goost, so 
that fro Jerusalem bi cumpas to® the 
Illirik see Y haue fillid the gospel of 
Crist. And so Y haue prechid this gos-20 
pel, not where Crist was named, lest Y 
bilde vpon? anotheres ground, but as it 
is writun, For to whom it is not teld of21 
him, thei schulen se, and thei that 
herden not, schulen vndurstonde. For 22 
which thing Y was lettid ful myche to 
come to 30u, and Y am lettid4 to" this 
tyme. And now Y hane not ferthere23 
place+ in these cuntrees, but Y haue 
desire to come to jou, of many 3eris that 
ben passid. Whanne Y bygynne to24 
passe in to Spayne, Y hope that in my 


f that is, I hane 
no nede to 
dwelle lengir 
there; for whi 
bischopis and 
prestis ordeyn~ 
ed of him by 


goyng Y schal se 30u, and of 3ou Y cyeee ale 
é@ and con- 
schal be led thidur, if Y vse 30u first { nerte men, and 


therfore his 


in parti. Therfor now Y schal passe 25 presence was 
no more nede- 


forth to Jerusalem, to mynystre to Fa thee ie 
seyntis. For Macedonye and Acaie han26¢re. e. 
. is t vse 306 firste; 
assaied to make sum 3ifte to pore men tad a 
. : elyting in 
of seyntis, that ben in Jerusalem. For 27 sone cone 
it pleside to hem, and thei ben dettouris "ne 


feith. Mace- 
. ry donye; that is 
of hem 3 a nit men ben maad 5 netid’ 
arteneris o er goostli thingi s of the cuntreis. 
P ot ‘ 8 - ‘ ‘ sei sos preueden; that 
owen also int fleischli thingis to myn-__ is, consentiden 
h . to 3eue of hem 
ystre to hem. Therfor whanne Y haue 28 gooais to pore 
: : : : meee 
endid this thing, and haue asigned to fitem, pay 
hem this fruyt, Y schal passe bi jou in “7% 


8 God, that is, schewinge it to be holy 9. 
i accept 4G sec.m. MNPQT. acceptable G pr. m. 
Pto Gmuper. into Nn. 4 filled r. 
t anotheris nr. %Om. sx. VY vnto 4GMNPST. 


togr. Whauenotr. *ferrere 4n.  Y place, or cause of longer a Bis Qa. Z#butvy. 4] hauynge n. 
Ihave r. btocomer. ¢Om.sx. 40m. sx. ¢ Forwhi r. Om. sx. &3ifter. bOm. x. 
i Forv. § andthat xy. 1! Om.r. Mm™alsor. 20m. sx. 

© til to x sec. m, Rhk sec.m.o. P Om. K prem. G9Om.k prom. rtils. tilteK. 8 for if @ sec.m. 


cprm tof k. 


XV. 28—XVI. 7. 


asmynistre to hem. Therfore whanne I 
schal ende this thing, and assigne hem 
this fruit, bi 3ou I schal passe into Spayne. 

29Forsoth I woot, that I comynge to 3o0u, 
schal come intoP the haboundaunce, ‘or 

30 plente4, of the blessinge of Crist. Ther- 
fore, britheren, I beseche 30u by oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, and bi charite’ of the Hooly 
Gost, that 3e helpe me’ in joure prayeris 

3ifor me’ to the Lord, that I be delyuerid 
fro the vntrewe, ‘or unfeithful", men, that 
ben in Judee, and that the offrynge of 
my seruyce be acceptid in Jerusalem’ to 

s2seyntis; that I come to 30u in ioye, by the 
wille of God, and that I be refreschid 

33 with 3ou. Sothli God of pees be with 3ou 
alle. Amen. 

CAP. XVI. 

1 Forsoth, britheren, I comende to 3ou 
Feben, oure sister, that is in the seruyce 
2of the chirche that is in Teucris, that 3e 
resseyue hir in the Lord worthily to 
seyntis, and that 3e ‘stonde ny3¥, ‘or 
helpe*, hir in what euere nede’, ‘or thing’, 
she schal nede of 30u. Forsoth? and she 
‘stood ny3¥, ‘or helpide*,. to manye4, and 
3to mee silf. Saluwef 3e8, or ‘greete 3e), 
Priska and Aquyla, myn helperis in Crist 

aJhesu, the! whiche vndirputtiden * her 
neckis for my soule!, ‘or lyf™; to whiche® 
not I aloone do thankingis, but and alle 

5 the® chirchis of hethene men. And ‘greete 
3eP wel hird homeli® chirche’. ‘Grete 3e' 
wel Efenete", loued to me, that is the 

6firste of Asye in Crist Jhesu. Greete’ wel 
Marie, ‘the which” hath trauelid moche in 

z7vs. Greeteth* wel Andronyk and Juliane, 
myn cosyns, and myn euene ecaytifs, ‘or 
prisoneris’, the? whiche ben noble among 


ROMANS. 


335 


to Spayne. And Y woot, that Y com-2y 
ynge to 30u, schal come ‘in to" the 
abundaunce” of the blessing of Crist. 
Therfor, britheren, Y biseche 30u bi oure 30 
Lord Jhesn Crist, and bi¥ charite of the 
Hooli Goost, that 3e helpe me in 3oure 
preyeris to the Lord, that Y be de-31 
lyuerid fro the vnfeithful men, that ben 
in Judee, and that the offryng of my 
seruyce be acceptid in Jerusalem to 
seyntis ; that Y come to 3o0u in ioye, bisz 
the wille of God, and that Y be re- 
freischid with 3ou. And God of pees be 
with 3ou alle. Amen. 


CAP. XVI. 


And Y comende to 3ou Feben, oure) 
sister, which is in the seruyce of the 
chirche that is at Teucris, that 3e res-2 
seyue hir in the Lord worthili to seyntis, 
and ‘that 3e helpe* hir in what euere 
cause sche schal nede of 3ou. For sche 
helpideY many men, and my silf. Grete: 
je” Prisca and Aquyla, myn helperis in 
Crist Jhesu, which vndurputtiden her4 
neckis for my lijf; to whiche* not Y 
aloone do thankyngis, but also alle> the 
chirchis® of hethene men. And grete 3e5 
wel her meynealé chirchet. Grete® wel 
Efenete, louyd to me, that is the firste 
of Asie in Crist Jhesu. 
Marie, the whiche hath trauelid myche 
in vs. Grete® wel Andronyk and Julian,7 
my cosyns, and myn euen prisouneris, 
which ben noble among the apostlis, and 
whiche weren bifor me in Crist. Grete&s 
wel Ampliate, most dereworth to me in 


apostlis’, and the> whiche weren bifore me the Lord. Grete wel Vrban, ourey 

P Om. kK. q Om. x. r the charite v. s Om. F. t Om. Nor. u Om. GuPex. or the 
onfeithful y. Visatnr. Whelpery. *Om.rx. Ythyng@. causey. 20m. erx. 2% Forwhi r. 
bhelpide vr. ¢orhalps. Om.vx. 4Umanymeny. ¢&myemposyx. fSaluter. 8&8 Om. Garper. 
h greeteth sx, Om. vr. k vndirputten sx. Ljijf v. m Om, rx. « whom 9. ° Om. Pp. 
P greeteth x. q their cg. ther wp. r meynyal vy. 8 chirche, or meynee Q. * Gretith Guporx. 
Greete ry. tAphenete c. ¥ Gretith carpox. Wthat x. *Gretevy. YOm. x. 2Om. rx. 4 the 
postles a. the apostlis pg, >» Om. vr. 

Rin Re pr.m. ¥ haboundaunce, eithir plenteer. Ww bithe bhk. * helpejek. y hath holpen 1. 


2 3e wel KQ sec.m. bk. wel k. Om. 8. 3% whom 1. 
rhk see. m. 


3e KR. 


v to alle K sec. m. al arhk sec.m. hi B. 
4 ether homeli K marg. hoomly k pr.m. 


¢ chirche 


€ Grete 3e EkRbhkogs, f Grete je EK. & Grete 


Grete! welé ; 


t that is, con- 
gregacioun of 
feithfnl men in 
her hows. Lyre 
ere. 


336 ROMANS. 


sin Crist. Greeteth® wel Ampliate, moost 
odereworthe to me in the Lord. Greete 
wel Vrban, oure helper in Crist Jhesu, 


loand Stacchen, my loned. Greete® wel Ap-. 


11 pellem, noblef in Crist. GreeteS wel hem 
that ben of Aristoblis hous. Greete™ wel 
Erodyon, my cosyn. ‘Greete we! hem 
that ben of Narcisties* hous, that ben! in 

i2the Lord. Greete™ wel Triphenam and 
Triphonam, the" whiche wymmen trauelen 
in the Lord. Greete® wel Persida, moost 
dereworthe womman?, that hath moche 

13trauelid in the Lord. Greete4 wel Rufus, 
chosun in the Lord, and his modir, and 
iumyn. Greete’ wel Ansicrete, Flegoncia, 
Hermen, Patroban, Herman, and britheren 
i5that ben with hem. Greeted wel Filolo- 
gus, and Julyan, and Venerum’, and his 
sistir, and Olympiades, and alle the seyntis 


1éthat ben with hem. Greetith® wel’ to 
gidere in hooly coss. Alle the chirchis 
twele. Loo! 170f Crist greeten 30u welt. Forsoth, bri- 
fas ae a theren, I preie jou, that 3e aspye hem that 
Tal the sone maken discenciouns and hirtyngis, o7" 
oe sclaundris, bisydis the doctryn that je 
Bea et han lernyd’, and ‘bowe 3e” awey fro hem. 
prestis, that for 18 Sothely* siche men seruen not to the Lord 
er coucitie | Crist, but to her wombe, and by swete 
ae wordis and blessingis disseyuen’ the hertis 
i9o0f innosent men. Sothli 3oure obedience 

is pupplischid into euery place, therfore 

I ioye? in 30u. But I wole 30n* for? to® be 

wyse in good thing, and symple in yuel 

zothing’. Forsothe God of pees defoule 

Sathanas vndir joure feet sweftly. The 

grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist be with 

2130u. Tymothe, myn helpere, greetith 3ou 

wel, and also Lucius, and Jason, and Sosi- 

22 pater, my cosyns. ‘I the thridde® greete 

3ou wel, that’ haue writyn the$ epistle®, in 

a3the Lord. Gayus, my herborgere, greet- 


XVI. 8 —23. 


helpere in Crist Jhesus, and Stacchen, 
my derlyng. Grete wel Appellem, the 10 
noble in Crist. Grete! wel hem that ben 11 
of Aristoblis hous. Grete™ wel Ero- 
dion, my cosyn. Grete™ wel-hem that 
ben of Narciscies hous, that ben in the 
Lord. Grete™ wel Trifenam and Trifo-12 
sam, whiche wymmen trauelen in the 
Lord. Grete™ wel Persida, most dere- 
worthe womman, that hath trauelid 
myche in the Lord. Grete" wel Rufus, 13 
chosun in the Lord, and his modir, and 
myn. Grete? wel Ansicrete, Flegoncia, 14 
Hermen, Patroban, Herman, and _bri- 
theren that ben with hem. Grete" wells 
Filologus, and Julian, and Nereum, and 
his sistir, and Olympiades, and alle the 
seyntis that ben with hem. Grete 3e16 
wel togidere in hooli coss. Alle the 
chirches of Crist greten 30u wel. But,17 
britheren, Y preye 30u, that 3e aspie hem 
that maken discenciouns and hirtyngis, 
bisidis the doctryne that 3e han lerned?, 
and bowe 3e1 awei fro hem. For sucheis 
men seruen not to the Lord Crist, but 
to her wombe, and bi swete wordis and 
blessyngis™ disseyuen® the hertis of in- 
nocent men. But j3oure obedience isi 
pupplischid in to euery place, therfor Y 
haue ioye in jou. But Y wole that 3e 
be wise in good- thing, and symple in 
yuel. And! God of pees tredde Sathanas 20 
vndur4 3oure feet swiftliv. The grace 
of oure Lord Jhesu Crist be with 3o0u. 
Tymothe, myn helpere, gretith 3ou wel, 23 
and also Lucius, and Jason, and Sosi- 
pater, my cosyns. Y Tercius grete 30u 22 
wel, that wroot this epistle’, in the 
Lord. Gayus, myn oost, gretith 30u wel, 23 
and al the chirche. Erastus, tresorere* 
of the city, gretith 30u wel, and Quartus 


¢ Grete r. 4 Greteth canposx. ¢ Gretith capex. Grete 3ee s. f the noble man cq. the noble arp. 
& Gretith aarpex. Grete see s. 4 Greteth ewpos.  # Gretith wel acanpesx. Grete wel ry. * Par- 
cisies c. Narcisijs 1. Marcisies ex. 1 ben feithfulle 9. m Gretith eurosx. 2O0Om.r. © Gretith 
Gmpesx. ?Om.x. 4Gretith ewposx.  'Nereumyv. 'sGrete Tv. twele3ov9. and xy. 
Vv lerud 4. lered s. leride xv. W bowith x. * Forwhiv. y thei disceyuenc. 7 haueioie 7, & that 
seer. bOm. sx. COm.r. %Om.r. © And I Tercyus G sec.v. I Tercius notorie 9. I Tercius r. 
fwhich vy. & this caper. 4 epistlis r. 


k Grete 3e KR. |! Grete 3e kK. ™ Grete je KR. 
ynges a pr.m. ‘8 thei disseyuen kK. 
x or kepere of the comyn whycche e. 


n Grete 3e KR. 
t Bute k sec. m. 


Plerudr 9@Om. =. 
v Om. R. 


t bisech- 


u swiftli vndir R. W pistle bk. 


XVI. 24—27. 


ith 3ou wel, and al the chirche. Erastus 
tresorer, ‘or kepere', of the cite, greetith 
2430u wel, and Quartus, brother*. The! grace 


of oure Lord Jhesu Crist with™ jon alle.. 


2;Amen. Forsoth to” him, that is my3ty 
for® to conferme 30u by my gospel, and 
preching of? Jhesu Crist, vp4 the reve- 
lacioun of mysterie holdun stille, ‘haz zs, 
26not schewid, in tymes euerlastynge; the* 
which mysteries’ is now maad opyn by 
scripturis of prophetis, vp the comaunde- 
ment of God withouten bygynnynge and 
endynge, to the obedyence of feith in* 
27alle hethene men, the mysterie knowunt to 
God aloone wyse ‘by Jhesu Crist", to whom 
honour’ and glorie into worldis of worldis. 
Amen. 
Here endith the epistle to Romayns, 
and now bigynneth the prolog to the firste 
epistle to Corinthis™. 


{QOm.nrx. the brother G sec.m.o. !Om.r. ™ be with no. 


Pinr. Qbir. .Om.y. §Om.x. 8S and K. 


ROMANS. 


t knowen by Jhesu Crist rv. 


337 


brother. The grace of oure Lord Jhesu24 
Crist beY with 3ou alle. Amen. And?25 
onour and glorie be to hym, that is 
my3ti to conferme 30u bi my gospel, and 
prechyng of Jhesu Crist, bi the reuela- 
cioun of mysterie holdun stylle in tymes 
euerlastinge ; which mysterie is now26 
maad opyn bi scripturis of prophetis, bi 
the comaundement* of God with outen 
bigynnyng and endyng, to the obedience 
of feith in alle hethene men, the mys- 
terie knowun bi Jhesu Crist to God 27 
aloone wiss, to whom be onour and glo- 
rie in to worldis of worldis®. Amen. 


Here endith the pistle to Romayns, 
and bigynneth the prologe on the firste 
pistle to Corinthies. 


© onour and glorie be to yr. ° Om. sx. 
a Om.v. Y be onour r, 


w Here endith the epistle of Poul to the Romaynys, and now bigynneth the epistle to the Corinthis. a. 


Here endith the pistil to Romayns, and bigynneth the prolog to Corynthis. n. 
Romayns, now bygynneth the epistle of Corinthies. T. 


the prologe upon the firste pistle to Corintheis. v. 


yOm.1. 2Om.c. ® comaundementis k pr.m. 


> world 1. 
to Romayns; now bigynneth the firste pistle to Corinthies, with the prologe bifore. M. 
pistle to Romayns, and bigynneth the prolog on the pistle to Corinthies. R. 
and bigynneth a prologe on the firste pistle to Corinthes. x. 
here bigynnith the prologe on the firste pistle to Corynthis. bo. 


Here endith the pistel [of] 


Here endith the pistles to Romayns; now bigynneth 
No final rubric in emPpesxy. 


¢ From ciqacgh. Here endith the pistle 
Heere eendith the 
Here endith Poul to Romayns, 
Here endeth the firste pistle to Romayns, and 
Here eendith the pistil to Romayns, and 


[here k] bigynneth the prologe to the firste Corinthies. ek. No final rubric in arku. 


VOL. 1V. X 


I. CORINTHIANS. 





Prolog to the firste Corinthies*. 


CorRINTHIES ben men of Achaye, and 
thes also of the> apostelis hadden herd 
the word of treuthe, and thei weren 
ouerturned in many maneris of false 
apostelis; summe of wordy eloquence of 
philosophie, suinme to the secte of Jewis 
lawe yledd®. Thes reuoketh the apostle 
to the trewe and gospels wysdom, writ- 
ynge to hem fro Effecie, by Tymothe, his 
disciple. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth 
the epistele. 


Here biginnith the prologe of Jerom 
on Corinthis*. 


Corintuies ben? of Acaye, and thei® in 
lijk maner herden of the postle’ the word 
of treuthe, and weren peruertid in many 
maneres of false apostlis. Summe weren 
peruertid of eloquence of filosofie ful of 
wordis, othere men® weren led in to the 
sect of thef lawe of Jewis, that is, to 
holde it nedeful with the gospel. The 
apostle§ ‘clepith a3en these Corynthies 
to very! feith and wisdom of the gospel, 
‘and writith* to hem fro Efesie, bi Ty- 
mothe, his disciple. 


This seith Jerom in his prolog on the 
Jirste pistle to Corynthies?. 


a 


The firste pistle of Poul to Corinthis®. 


CAP. I. 
i Poul, clepid apostle of Jhesu Crist, bi 
2the wille of God, and Sostenes, brothir, to 
the chirche of God that is at Corinthe, 
to the halowid in Crist Jhesu, clepid 


Here bigynneth the firste pistle to 
the Corynthies*. 


CAP. I. 

Poul, clepid apostle of Jhesu Crist, bii 
the wille of God, and Sostenes, brothir, 
to the chirche of God that is at Co-2 
rynthe, to hem that ben halewid in Crist 


a Here bygynneth the prolouge of the first Corinthyes. y. No initial rubric in sy. No prologue in acsPpox. 


In N and 7 the prologue is of the second text. 


pistle to the Coryuthies. 9. 


b Om. rv. 
bigynneth the first Corinthis. v, No final rubric in sy. 


fled vy. 4 Here endith the prologe, and here 
® The first epistle to Corinthijs. mp. The firste 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


From &. Prologe cx. Here bigynneth a prologe of Jerom on the firste pistle to Corinthies. x. Prolog 


to Corynthes i. N. 


ithe verric. Om. nr. * writynge r. 


Prologus v. Here bigynneth a prologe to Corynthies. vu. A prolog on the firste epistle 
to Corynthies. f. No initial rubric in a and the other Mss. 
EMRTXeh. ©Qm.t. f Om. ceikmuNgrtuxabcefghkoa8. 


b ben men cKmexabho. ¢ Om. tT. 4 apostle 
& postle ceKNQquxabega. 4 agen clepith cartho. 


1 Jerom in his prologe seith al this. K. Here endith the prolog on 


this epistle, that is seid bi Jerom. x. Jerom in his prologe on this pistle seith al this. xa. Here endith [the] 
prologe, and bigynneth the first pistile to the Corinthies. g. Jerom in his prolog on this pistil seith thus. k. 


No final rubric in Ee. 


a The firste eptstle to the Cortuthies. Re. No initial rubric in c1kmquxa. 


I. 3——17. 


seyntis, with alle that inclepyn® the name 
of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, in ech place of 
3hem and° oure, grace ‘and pees to 30u°° 
of God, oure fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu 
aCrist. I do thankyngis to my God euer- 
more for 30u, in the grace of God that is 
s3ouun to 3on in Crist Jhesu. For in alle 
thingis 3e ben? ryche in® him, in ech 
word, and in ech kunnynge, ‘or science’, 
sas the witnessynge of Crist is confermyd 
zin 30u; so that no thing fayle to 30u in 
ony grace, abidynge the renelacioun, ‘ov 
schewynge®, of oure Lord Jhesu Crist ; 
gthe' which and! schal conferme 30u til 
into the ende withouten cryme, ‘or greet 
synne*, in the day of the comynge of 
goure Lord Jhesu Crist. Forsoth! God zs 
trewe, bi whom 3e ben clepid in to the 
felowschip of his sone Jhesu Crist oure 
io Lord. Forsothe, britheren, I biseche 3o0u", 
bi the name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 
that 3e alle seye the same thing, and that 
scismes, or" dyuysiouns, dissenciouns®, ‘or 
discordis?, be not among 30w; sothlid be 
3e parfyt in the same witt, and in the 
isame knnnynge. Forsothe, britheren’, it 
is signyfied, ‘or ¢oold*, to me of hem that 
ben of Cloes, for stryues ben among 30u. 
12 Forsoth I seye this thing, that* ech of 
jou seith, Forsoth I am of Poul, forsoth 
I* of Appollo, treuly IY of Cephas, ‘thad is, 
13-Petre™, forsoth I* of Crist. Wher Crist 
is departid? wher Poul is crucifyed for 
3ou, ethirY ben 3e baptysid in the name 
1s40f Poul? I do thankyngis to God?, that I 
baptiside no man of 3ou, no but Crispus 
isand Gayus; lest ony man seye, that 3e ben 
is baptysid in my name. Sothli ‘and I bap- 
tyside® the hous of Stenene, @ womman, 
but I woot not, if I baptiside ony othir. 
17For> Crist sente me not fore to baptise, 
but for’ to euangelyse, ‘or preche the gos- 
pel®; not in wysdom of word, that the 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


339 


Jhesu, and clepid seyntis, with alle that 
inwardli clepen the name of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, in ech place of hem and of® 
oure, grace to 30u and pees of God,3 
oure fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu Crist. 
Y do thankyngis to my God eueremore4 
for 30u, inthe grace of God that is 3ouun 
to 30 in Crist Jhesu. For in alle thingiss 
3e ben maad riche in hym, in ech word, 
and in ech kunnyng, as the witnessyng 6 
of Crist is confermyd in 30u; so that no7 
thing faile to 3ou in ony grace, that 
abiden the schewyng of oure Lord Jhe- 
su Crist; which also schal conferme 30u8 
in to the ende with outen cryme, in the 
dai of the comyng of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist. ‘A trewe God*, bi whom 3e ben» 
clepid in to the felouschipe of his sone 
Jhesu Crist oure Lord. But, britheren, 10 
Y biseche 30u, bi the name of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, that 3e alle seie the same 
thing, and that dissenciouns® be not 
among 30n; but be 3e perfit in the same 
wit, and in the same kunnyng. For, my 1 
britheren, it is teld to me of hem® that 
ben at Cloes, that stryues ben among 
jou. And Y seie that, that’ ech of 3ou 12 
seith, For Y am of Poul, and Y am of 
Apollo, and Y aw of Cefas%, but Y am 
of Crist. Whether Crist is departid ? 1s 
whether Poul was crucified for 3oun, 
ether 3e ben baptisid in the name of 
Poul? Y do thankyngis to my God, 14 
that Y baptiside noon of 30u, but Crispus 
and Gayus; lest ony man seie, that 3e15 
ben baptisid in my name. And Y bap-16 
tiside also the hous of Stephani, but Y 
woot not, that Y baptiside ony other. 
For Crist sente me not to baptise, but17 
to preche the gospel; not in wisdom of 
word, that the cros of Crist be not voidid 
awei. For the word of the cros is foliis 
to hem that perischen; but to hem that 


binwardly clepen vy. Candin ng. ¢ to 30u and pees plures. ben maad nr. & bi v sup ras. ° 
fOm.x. € Om. x. bOm.ry. ialsor, Om. x. 1Omr. “Omer. ™Om. x. 8 Om. rx. 
°Om. x. POm vx. 4buty. ‘my brithereny. 8 Om. x. %atp. twhichy. Iam or. 
VYIamr. WOm. x. *LTamyv. Y¥ other a ef P passim. ors. %my Gody. 1 baptyside also r. 
» Forwhiv. ¢ Om.sx. 4Om.sx. ¢ Om. x. 

bOm. a. © Forsothe God is trwe K sup. ras. 4d ether dyuisions K marg. © z0u 1 sec.m. f Om, 


U pr.m. ae prim.  & that is, Petir e marg. 


h no man a. 


i Stephan, a womman k. 


eee 


340 


iscros of Crist be not voydid awey. For 
the word of the cros® is folye sothli to 
‘men perischinge»; forsoth to hem that 
ben maad saaf, that is to seye, to vs, it is 
i9the vertu of God. Sothli it is writun, I 
schal lese the wysdom of wyse men, and 
I schal reproue the prudence of prudent 
zomen. Where is the wyse man? where 
is the writere®, ‘or man of lawe'? where 
is the purchasour of this" world? Wher 
God hath not maad the wysdom of this!! 
21 world foltisch™, ‘or fool". Forwhi for in 
the wysdom of God the world knew not 
God by wysdom, it pleside® to God for?P 
to make ‘men saaf4 bileuyng, by the 
22folie of prechinge. For and Jewis seken 
23signes, and Greekis seken wisdom ; for- 
soth’ we prechen Crist crucified, to Jewis 
sothli sclaundre’, to hethene men ‘forsoth 
24foly'; forsoth' to ‘hem clepid’, Jewis” 
and Greekis*, CristY the vertu of God, and 
25the wysdom of God. For’ that that is 
foly thing of God*, is wyser than men; 
and that that is syk> thing, ‘or freel*, of 
26 God‘, is strenger than men. Forsoth® se 
3e jouref clepinge, britheren®; for mot 
manye wyse men aftir the fleisch, not 
27many my3ty, not many noble. But God 
chees tho thingis that ben foltysch® of the! 
28 world, that he confounde wyse men; and 
God chees the syke thingis, ‘or freel*, of 
the world, that he confounde the stronge™ 
thingis ; and God chees the vnnoble thingis 
and dispisable thingis® of the world, and 
tho® thingis that ben not?, that he schulde 
29distroye tho thingis that ben; that ech 
fleisch", ‘or man’, ‘glorie not* in his" si3t. 
30 Forsoth of him 3e ben in Crist Jhesu, the’ 
which is maad to vs wysdom and ri3twys- 
31 nesse, and hoolynesse, and a3enbying ; that, 


& crosse, that is, passioun @. » hem that perischen r. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


I. 18—31. 


ben maad saaf*, that is to seie, to vs, it 
is the vertu of God. For it is writun, 19 
Y¥ schal distruye the wisdom of wise 
men, and Y schal reproue the prudence 
of prudent men. Where is the wise20 
man ? where is the wise lawiere ? 
where is the! purchasour of this world ? 
Whether God hath not maad the wis- 
dom of this world fonned? For the 21 
world in wisdom of God knewe not God 
bi wisdom, it pleside to God, bi foli of 
prechyng, ‘to maken™ hem saaf that bi- 
leueden. For Jewis seken signes, and 22 
Grekis seken wisdom; but we prechen 23 
Crist crucified, to" Jewis sclaundre, and 
to® hethene men folis but to tho? Jewis2¢ 
and Grekis? that ben clepid, we prechen 
Crist the vertu of God and the wisdom 
of God. For that that is foli thing of2s 
God, is wiser than mens and that that 
is the feble* thing of God, is strengere 
than men. But, britheren, se 3e 30ure 26 
clepyng; for not many wise men aftir 
the fleisch, not many my3ti', not many 
noble". But God chees tho thingis that 27 
ben fonned of the world, to confounde 
wise men; and God chees the feble2s 
thingis of the world, to confounde the’ 
stronge thingis; and God chees the vn- 
noble thingis ‘and dispisable thingis” of 
the world, and tho thingis that ben not, 
to distruye tho thingis that ben; that 29 
ech man haue not* glorie in his si3t. 
But of hym 3e ben in Crist Jhesu, 30 
which is maad of God to vs wisdom, and 
rijtwisnesse, and holynesse, and ajen- 
biyng; that, as it is wrytun, He that3t 
glorieth, haue glorie in the Lord. 


i For vr. wise maw of lawe v. lor the maw 


of lawe r.Om.vx. Wthe x. ™fonned yr. 2 or fooly 19. Om. rx. ° pleese y pr.m. POm.sx. 4 saaf 


men x. 'butv. %it issclaundre 9. _ sotheli fooly p. foley forsothe v. foly w. “buty. Vv Om. vy, 
Ww the Jewis vy. * Grekis to the feith 0. Greekis, that ben elepid r.  ¥ ts knowen Crist to be Q. we prechen 
Crist y, 2 Forwhiv. 8 God, as Cristis passioun and deth g. the syke rx. Om. x. 4 God, as 
to cheese ydiotis to vencuse the world 9. € Pease brethren 7, foure 4 sec.m.n. &Om.r. » foltes 
mporw. fonued yr. ithis iv. & Om. wx,  ™ strenger go 8Om. x. this. P not of ony prys Q. 
4 ben in gret pris 9. tmany. 8Om.rx. thatie-not glorie vr. bis own. ¥ Om. r- 

ksaddea. 10m.4. ™ that makea. to thehk prem. ° to the k prom. P the Ermexaeghk. 
4 to Greekis a, ° Om. EKQbega. s ether yeek or freel K marg. t my3ti men k. @ noble men k. 
© Om.k prim. ¥ Om, Bg. * Om. 9g pregn. h pr. ne 


Il, 1—13. 


“as it is writun, He that glorieth, glorie” in 
the Lord. 

CAP. II. 

1 And I, britheren, whanne I cam to jou, 
cam not in* hijnesse of word, orY wysdom, 
tellinge, ‘or schewinge?, ‘to 30u* the wit- 

enessing of Crist. Sothli* I schewide’, ‘or 
demyde‘, not me® for to wite8, ‘or kunne, 
ony thing among 30u, not but Crist 

3Jhesu, and him crucifyed. And IJ in syk- 
nesse, and drede, and moche tremblyng, 
sor quakyng', was anentis 30u; and my 
word and my preching not* in persuablel, 

‘or sutile glosynge™, wordis of mannis 
wysdoin, but in schewynge of spirit and 

svertu; that 3oure feith be not in the" 
wysdom of men, but in the vertu of God. 

cForsoth we speken wysdom among perfyt 
men, forsoth® not wysdom of this world, 
nether of princes of this world, that ben 
7distroyed; but we speken the wysdom 
of? God, that4 ‘is hid" in mysterie, ‘or 
priuytes; thet which wysdom" God bifore 
ordeynede bifore worldis’ in to oure glo- 
grie, the” which no man of the princes of 
this world knew; for if thei hadden 
knowen, thei schulden neuere haue cru- 
gcified the Lord of glorie. But as it is 
writun, That y3e sy3 not, ne eere herde*, 
nether it stizede in to herteY of man, what 
thingis God made redy bifore to hem that 
1olouen him; forsoth God schewyde to vs 
by his spirit. Forsoth? the spirit sekith 
alle thingis, 3he, the deepe thingis of God. 
11Sotheli who of inen woot, what thingis 
ben of man, no* but the* spirit of man 
that is in him? So and what thingis ben 
of God, no man knowith, no but the spirit 
120f God. Forsoth we han not resseyued 
the spirit of this world, but the spirit that 
is of God, that we witen what thingis ben 
1330uun to vs of God. The” whiche thingis 
we speken, not® in tau3t wordis of mannis 


Xin the v. 
f Om. srvx. 
m™ Om. v. 

u Om. x. 
2 Om. x. 


w hane glorie rv. 
dQOm.rx. ¢inme kK. 
1 persnasible Nn. sotil styringe r. 

r Om. 9. s Om. x. t Om. vr. 
Ythe herte srxy. 2 Forwhi rv. 


Yin myche a see. m. 1. 


© the herte a pr.m.cekRxaegh. 4 hath greithid 1. 


Y of sw. either of rv. 
&§ kunne rx. 
n Om. MPOT. 
v worldlis at e¢ P passim. 
aa of kK, 


Z sotil K. ether glosinge K marg. sutel cB. sutilte h. 
€ Om. R. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 341 


CAP. II. 


And Y, britheren, whanne Y cam to! 
jou, cam not in the heiznesse of word, 
ethir of wisdoin, tellynge to 3ou the wit- 
nessyng of Crist. For Y demede not2 
me to kunne ony thing among 3ou, but 
Crist Jhesn, and hym crucified. Ands 
Y in sikenesse, and drede, and mycheY 
trembling, was among 30u; and my word 4 
and my preching was not in suteli? stur- 
yng wordis of mannus wisdom, but in 
schewyng of spirit and of vertu; thats 
3oure feith be not in the wisdom of men, 
but in the vertu of God. For we speken é 
wisdom among perfit men, but not wis- 
dom of this world, nether of princes of 
this world, that ben distried; but we7 
speken the wisdom of God in mysterie, 
‘which wisdom is hid*; which wisdom 
God bifor ordeynede bifor worldis in to 
oure glorie, which noon of the princess 
of this world knew; for if thei hadden 
knowe, thei schulden nenere haue cru- 
cified the Lord of glorie. But as it is9 
writun, That ize say not, ne eere herde, 
nether it stiede in to herte® of man, what 
thingis God arayede‘ to hem that louen 
hym; but God schewide to vs bi hisio0 
spirit. For whi the spirit serchith alle 
thingis, 3he, the depe thingis of God. 
And who of men woot, what thingis ben 1 
of man, but the spirit of man that is in 


hym? So what thingis ben of God, no ¢ that worldly 
ay iy cunnyng and 
man knowith, but the spirit of God. lone, bi the 


whiche a man 


And we han not resseiued the spirit} of !2is dryuen to 

this world, but the spirit that is of God, cauly thingie. 
that we wite what thingis ben jouun to *Piry! of Gods 
vs of God. Whiche thingis we speken i s-eulwnyane 


that is, loue 
c a . na yuyne 
also, not in wise wordis of mannus wWis- _ thingis. exam- 


yned ; that is, 


dom, but in the doctryn of the® spirit, goostii good is 
: +e oo tee knowun verili. 
and maken a liknesse of spiritual thingis Lyvaveerel es 


2Om.s. »bForyv., ¢ demede rx. 
1Om. mnperx.  * was not gr. 
P hidde of g. ‘% the which arper. 
w Om. rv. * herde not g. 


z Om. rx. 
h Om, vx. 
o but 


bQOm.v. © also not vr. 


2Om. rR. ? the ize a. 


342 


wysdom, but in? doctryne of the spirit, 
comparisonynge® spiritual thingis to gostly 
amen. Forsoth a beestli man perseyueth 
not tho thingis that ben of the spirit of 
God; sothli it is foly to him, and hef may 
not vnderstonde®, for he is examyned, ‘or 
isasayed', gostly. Forsoth a spiritual man 
demeth alle thingis, and he is demyd, ‘or 
isdampued*, of no man’. As it is writun, 
Who sothli knew the witt of the Lord, 
or who tau3te him? Forsoth we han the 
witt of Crist™. 
CAP. III. 
1 And I, britheren, my3te not speke to 
30u as to spiritual men, but as to fleischli"; 
zas to litile children® in Crist, I 3af to 
30u. mylk drynke®, not mete; sothli? 3e 
my3ten not 3it vndirstonde, but nether 
‘now sothli 3e mown4, for 3it 3e ben 
3fleischly. WhanneT enuye and stryf is a- 
mong 30u, wher 3e ben not fleischli, and 
aaftir man 3e gon? Fort whanne summe 
seith, I sothli am of Poul, another forsoth, 
I am of Apollo, wher 3e ben not men"? 
What therfore is Apollo, what forsoth 
sPoul? Thei ben mynistris’, ‘or ser- 
nauntis”, of him, to whom 3e han bileu- 
yd; and to ech man as God hath 3ouun. 
61 plauntide, Apollo watride, ‘or moystide*, 
7but God 3af encresynge. ‘And soy neither 
he that plauntith is ony thing, neither he 
that moystith, but God that 3yueth en- 
scresynge. Forsoth he that plauntith, and 
he that moystith, ben oo thing; sothli ech 
schal take his propre hyre, after his tra- 
gueil. For we ben the helperis of God; 
3e ben the erthe tilyinge of God, 3e ben 
iothe byldinge of God. Aftir the grace of 
God that is 30ouun to me, as a wys car- 
peuter” I sette the fundement*; forsothe 
another bildeth aboue’. Sothlic ech man 
se4, hou ‘and what thingis® he byldeth 


dinthe vy. €and comparisonenr. f it w. 


Iman to his harme 9. 
oo to drinke mw. ~~ P forwhi r. 
u fleischly men Q. ¥ mynistris, thei ben x. 
carpenter ry. 4 foundement, the feith of Crist @. 
¢ Om. r. 


f Om. hko. 
Q Sec. m. c. 
P Om. R. 


g mylke toa. Om. c pr.m. 
k enuye and strijf a sec.m. 
q bildide Ec. 


1 wher 1k. 
r Om. k prim. 


TI. CORINTHIANS. 


™ Crist, to chese tho thingis that ben of Crist @. 
4 3e moun now sothly r. 
WwW Om. ex. 
> aboue, good werkis 9. 


h Om. a. 
m and an othir R pr.m. 


UW. 14—-lll. 10. 


to goostli men. For a beestli man per-14 
seyueth not tho thingis that ben of the 
spirit of God; for it is foli to hym, 
and he may not vndurstonde, for it is 
examyned goostli. But a spiritual manis 
demeth alle thingis, and he is demed of 
no man. As it is writun, And who knew1s 
the wit of the Lord, or who tau3te hym? 
And we han thef wit of Crist. 


CAP. III. 


And Y, britheren, my3te not speke to} 
3ou as to spiritual men, but as to fleischli 
men; as to litle children in Crist, Y 3af2 
to 3ou mylk” drynke'}, not mete; for + that is, I 
3e my3ten not 3it), nether 3e moun now, or eee, 
for 3it 3e ben fleischli. For while strijf*s cients 
is among 30u, whether! 3e ben not ee 
fleischli, and 3e gon aftir man? For4 as longe as 3e 

. dwellen in sich 

whanne summe seith, Y am of Poul, _ fteischelynesse. 
another™, But Y am of Apollo, whethir 3e Lyre 
ben not men? What therfor is Apollo, 
and what Poul? Thei ben mynystris ofs 
hym, to whom 3e han bileuyd; and to 
ech man as God hath 3ouun. Y plaunt-6 
ide, Apollo moystide, but God 3af en- 
creessyng. Therfor nether he that7 
plauntith is ony thing, nethir he that 
moistith, but God that 3iueth encreess- 
yng. And he that plauntith, and hes 
that moistith, ben oon}; and ech schal 
take his owne mede, aftir his trauel. 
For we ben the helperis of God; 3e beng 
the erthetiliyng of God, 3e ben the bild- therfore oon 
yng of God. Aftir the grace ‘of God 10 bifore, and an- 
3 cane other dispisid. 
that is 3ouun to me, as a wise maistir Lyre here. e. 
carpenter Y settide the°® foundement ; 
andP another bildith? aboue. But ech 
man se, hou he bildith aboue. Foru 
no’ man may sette another foundement, 


¢ that is, in 
condicioun of 
kynde, and in 
worchinge of 
seruice; and 


& be vndirstonde w. Mbitr. iOm.x. & Om. rx. 
n fleschli men ¥. © childer x. 
r For whanne vy. & Om. r. +t Forsothe x. 


y Therfore r. 
¢ But -. 


x Om, MPOTX. Z princepal 


ad see he empr. 


J 3it vadirstonde 
© Om. k pr.m. 


i to drinke Exek pr.m. 
n Om. R. 


III. r1—IV. 2. 


iiyponf. Sothlié no man may sette another 
foundement, ‘bi sydis" that that is sett, the! 
izwhich is Crist Jhesus. Forsoth if eny/ 
man bylde ouer! vpon™ this foundement, 
gold, siluer, precyous stoones, stickis, hey, 
i3stuble, euery mannis work schal be open, 
the" day of the Lord schal declare; for 
‘ech mannis work® schal be schewid in 
fyer, ‘what maner it is?, the fier schal 
14proues. If the werk of ony man schal 
dwelle, the’ which’ he byldide** vpon‘, he 
1sschal receyue mede. If eny mannis work 
schal" brenne, it’ schal suffre peyringe ; 
forsoth” he schal be saaf, so nethelees as 
isby fyer. Wite 3e not, for 3e ben the 
temple of God, and the spirit of God 
17dwellith in 3ou? Forsoth if onyY ‘schal 
defoule? the temple of God, God schal dis- 
parple? him*, ‘or distroye”; forsoth the 
temple of God is hooly, the® which 3e 
1sben. No man disseyue him silf. If eny 
man among 3o0u is seyn for’ to be wyse® 
in thist® world, be he maadf a foolS, that 
19he be wyse®. Forsoth! the wysdom of 
this world is foly anentis God; forsoth it 
is writun, I schal catche wyse men in her 
20 fell! wysdom, ‘or sutil gyle™; and eft, 
The Lord ‘hath knowyn® the thou3tis of 
21 wyse® men, for thei ben veyn. ‘And so? 
22no man glorie? in men. Forsoth™ alle 
thingis ben 3oure’, either Poul, either 
Apollo, eithir Cephas, ‘that is, Petre», 
eithir thé world, either lyf, eithir deeth, 
either thingis present, eithir thingis to 
comynge’s forsothe alle thingis ben 3oure, 
233e" forsoth of Crist, Crist sotheli of * God. 


CAP. IV. 
1 So aman gesse, ‘or demey, vs, as myn- 
_istris of Crist, and dispenderis of the 
2mynisteries? of God. Now it is sou3t 


h ontaken r. 
P Om. ¥. 


faboue ry. 8 Forwhi r. 
a forsothe the vy. ° it r. 
Sthat x. 8 bildith p. taboue vy. on x. 
2 defouleth v. 4 leese y. distrozen x. 
G pron. MPQsTX. © wyse to hym silf Q. 
God9q. iForvy. kKthex. ! fool. 


ee the kK, 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


i Om. r. 
4 preue the werk of ech man, what maner werk it is 7. 
uOm. x. 
aa Om. arp. 

f Om. r. 


™QOm. x. 4 knowith r. 


343 


outtakun that that is sett, which is 
Crist Jhesus. For if ony® bildith ouer 12 
this foundement, gold, siluer, preciouse 
stoonys, stickis, hey, or stobil, every 
mannus werk schal be open; for the13 
dai of the Lord schal declare, for it 
schal be schewid in fier; the fier schal 
preue the werk‘ of ech man, what ma- 
ner" werk it is. If the werk of ony 14 
man dwelle stille, which he _ bildide’ 
aboue, he schal resseyue mede. If ony 15 
mannus werk brenne, he schal suffre 
harm”; but he schal be saaf, so netheles 
as bi fier. Witen 3e not, that 3e ben the16 
temple of God, and the spirit of God 
dwellith in 30u? And if ony defoulith 17 
the temple of God, God schal leese hym ; 
for the temple of God is hooli, which 
je ben. No mau disseyue hym silf. Ifis 
ony man among 30u is seyn to be wiys 
in this world, be he maad a fool, that 
he be wijs. For the wisdom of this19 
world is foli anentis God; for it is 
writun, Y schal catche wise men in her 
fel wisdom; and eft, The Lord knowith 20 
the thou3tis of wise* men, for tho ben 
veyn. Therfor no man haue glorie in21 
men. For alle thingis ben 3o0ure, ethir 22 
Poul, ether Apollo, ether Cefas, ether the 
world, ether lijf, ether deth, ether thingis 
present, ethir thingis to comynge; for 
alle thingis ben 3onre, and 3e ben of23 
Crist, and Crist 7s of God. 


CAP. IV. 


So a man gesse vs, as mynystrisY of1 
Crist, and dispenderis of the mynys- 
teries? of God. Now it is sou3t here*2 


m Om. x. 
r Om. vx. 

Vhey. Wbnty. Xthat ry. Yany man wn. 
b Om. rx. or destriehim mp. ©Om. ry. 40m. 
& fool anentis hym silfg. » wyse anentis 
° wyise worldly q. »P Therfore r. 


jOm. x. *bijldithy. 10m. 


q haue glorie y. * Forwhiv. 8 3oure, that is, alle thinges ben ordeyned to serue 30u 9. * other a et P passim. 
outher x. %Om. Nx. Ycomen sx. W3e benv. *isofv. YOm. vx. #% mynystris G. mysteries Q. 


S eny man a. 


t werkis k pr.m. 
x Om. R pr.m. 


¥ the mynystris k sec.m. 


a euere k prim. 
% mysteries cif, 


Vv bildeth rhkof. 


w ether peyring K marg. 
a@ Om. 1 prom. 


344 


here among the dispenderis, that a man 
3be founden trewe. Forsoth to me it is 
for the leeste thing, that I be demyd of? 
jou, or of mannis day*; but nethir I deme 
amy silf. Sothli* Iam no thing gilty to 
my silf, but not in this thing ‘I am¢ ius- 
tified’; forsoth he that demeth* me, is’ the 
sLord. ‘And so® nyle 3e deme bi fore the 
tyme, til that the Lord come, the which 
‘and schali aliz3tne* the hid thingis of 
derknessis, and schal schewe the counceils 
of hertis; and thanne preisynge schal be 
6to ech man of God}. Sotheli, britheren, 
‘this thing™ I haue transfigurid" in to® me 
and into? Apollo‘; that in vs 3e lerne’, lest 
that® ouer that itt is writun, oon ajens 
anothir be inblowyn” ‘with pride’ for’ 
7anothir man. Who forsoth demeth thee ? 
What sothli hast thou, that thou hast not 
resseyued ? Sothli if thou hast resseyued, 
what gloriest thou, as thou haddist not 
sresseyued ? Now 3e ben fulfillid’, now 3e 
ben maad ryche; 3e regnen with oute vs; 
and I wolde 3e* regne, ‘that andY we 
9regneden? with 30u. Sothli I wene’, that 
God schewide vs the laste apostelis, as 
maad redy to deeth®; for we ben maad 
a spectacle to the world, and to aungels, 
toand tomen. We foolis for Crist®, 3e for- 
sothe prudent in Crist’; we syke®, 3e for- 
sothe strongef; 3e noble, we forsoth® vn- 
itnoble. Til into this hour ‘and we hungren, 
and thirsten, and ben nakid, and ben 
smytun with boffatis, and we ben vnsta- 
12 ble’, and we trauelen worchinge with oure 
hondis; we ben cursid, and we blessen; 
we suffren persecucioun, and we susteynen, 
i3‘or abyden longe*; we ben blasfemyd, 
and we bisechen!; as clensyngis of this 
world we ben maad, the pariugis, ‘ov out- 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


IV. 3——13- 


among the dispenderis, that a man be 
foundun trewe. And to me it is for thes 
leest thing, that Y be demyd of 30n, or 
of mannus dai; but nether Y deme my 
silf. For Y am no thing ouer trowynge4 
to my silf, but not® in this thing Y am°¢ 
iustified ; for he that demeth me, is the 
Lord. Therfor nyle 3e deme bifore thes 
tyme, til that the Lord come, which 
schal li3tne the hyd thingis of derk- 
nessis, and schal schewe the counseils of 
hertis ; and thanne preisyng schal be to 
ech man of God. And, britheren, Y haues 
transfigurid these thingis in to me and 
in to Apollo, for 3ou; that in vs 3e lerne, 
lest ouer that it is writun, oon ajens 
another be blowun with pride for an- 
other. Who demeth thee? And what7 
hast thou, that thou hast not resseyned ? 
And‘ if thou hast resseyued, what glori- 
est thou, as thou haddist not resseyued ? een ae 


f with the doc- 
trin of feith. 


A I 
Nowe 3e ben fyllidt, now 3e ben maad 8 schewe that 
: ° her presump- 
riche; 3e regnen with outen vs; and Y na wo 
to be scorned. 
. . is, ben in the 
regnen with jou. And Y gesse, that 9 * > aire 
God schewide vse the laste apostlis‘, as 1 
gessinge. Lyre 
here. e. 
ben maad a spectacle to the world, and ‘ 
: that is, han no 
to aungels, and to men. We foolis for 10stidfaste dwell- 
clensingis; that 
‘“ is, as filthis de- 
but 3e stronge; 3e noble, but we vnno-  gulinge the 
ble. Til in to this our we hungren, and 11 Word, that 
moued ; forwhi 
‘ : Jewis and 
with buffatis, and we ben vnstablet, and 12hethen men 
. 4 den, that the 
we trauelen worchynge with oure hondis; world ¥ 
fect ether poi- 
sened by the 
fren persecucioun, and we abiden longe ; tae of tb 
we ben blasfemyd, and we bisechen ; as 13 apostlis, and so 
purgid by the 
deeth of hem. 


the ‘out castyng$ of alle thingis ‘til 3it®. 


Zforw. 4 day, that is, herein this lyfq. %¥Forv. Cami x. 4 iustified, or made ry3twyse Q. 
edeemysQ. fOm.cG pr.m.r. 8 Therfore ry. 8 Om.r. J schal bothe yr. * listne carpsrr. aliztte Nn. 
al listnen x, 1 God, aflir his deseruynge @. m Om. Vv.  transfigurid these thingis y. ° Om. s. 
POm.s. ‘Apollo for3our. ‘leres, ®Om. nr. tthat x, 4% blowen x. v Om. x. WW fro x. 
w fillid v. x that 3e F. Y and that rv. 2 regne orx. & gesse F. b the deeth scunp 
estvwxy. © Crist, prechinge his passioun, and suffrynge therfore repreues 9. 4 Crist ben gessid, beynge 
stille @. e seeke, for turmentynge Q. f stronge, in 3oure mageste Q. & sothely AGMNPQSTWXY. 


4 we bothe vy. i vnstable, mouynge fro place to place 9. * Om. x. | bisechen God for hem Q. 


b Om. R. 
b Om. R. 


famnotr. 4Om.k prim. ¢tovsx. fof apostlis cao.  & out castynges til 3it Rr. 


cioun is worthi 
wolde that 3e regnen, that also we 32 yeonen; that 
cioun by 3oure 
thilke that ben sent to the deth; for we 
t unstable; 
; . : a ing place. as 
Crist, but 3e prudent in Crist; we sike,  cinsi 
z rn owen to be re- 
thirsten, and ben nakid, and ben smytun 
world was in- 
we ben cursid, and we blessen; we suf- 
lijf and tech- 
: . it schulde be 
clensyngis of this world we ben maad 
Lyre here. es 


IV. i4—V. 4. 


14 castinge", of alle thingis til° 3it. I write 
not thes thingis, that I confounde 30u, but 
I amoneste?, ‘or warne4, as my moost 
isdereworthe sones. Forwhi if 3e han ten 
thousandis" of litle maistris in ‘Crist Jhe- 
su’, but not manye fadris; forwhi in 
Crist Jhesu I haue gendrid 30u by* the 
isgospel. Therfore" I preie jou, be 3e 
17 foloweris of me, as and I of Crist. Ther- 
fore I sente to 30u Tymothe, that is my 
mooste dereworthe sone, and feithful in 
the Lord, the’ which .schal moneste 3o0u, 
‘or teche*, my weyes, that ben in Crist 
Jhesu; as I teche euerywhere in ech 
ischirche. - As* Iy ‘be not? to come to 30u°, 
so summen® ben ynblowen ‘with pride‘; 
i191 schal come to 30u soone, if God schal@ 
wylne®; and I schal knowe not the word 
of hem that ben ynblowenf ‘with prides, 
20 but the vertu, Sothli' the rewme of God‘ 
21is not in word, but in vertu™. What 
wolen 3e? Schal I come ‘to 30u" in a° 
3jerd?, or? in charite, and in spirit of 
bonernesse’, ‘or myldenesse’? 


CAPOV: 


1 Al ‘out, or alt maner", fornycacioun* 
is herd among 30u, and such fornycacioun, 
what maner nether among hethen men, 
so that sum” man haue the wyf of his 

2fadir. And 3e ben bolnun* ‘with pride’, 
and not? more hadden weylynge, that he 
that dide this work*, be taken awey fro 

3the myddil of 3ou. Sothli I absent in 
body, but present in spirit, now haue 
ademyd as present ‘in the name of oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist’, him that ‘thus hath¢ 
wrou3t, ‘jou and my spirit’ gaderid to- 
gidere®, with the vertu of thef Lord Jhe- 


1 outcastyngis AgGMNPOTW. Om. Xx. 
moneste x. 4Om. x. 
britheren ry. VOm. vy. YW Om. x. x Asif 7. 
lellinge G pr.m. 30u for speedful lettynge a. 
to come Q. Om. X. Om.y.  & wole empr. 
i Forwhi rv. 

G prem. QTIVX. 


° to G. 


P 3erd of chastisynge 9. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


P warne 30u A pr.m. moneste 30u S. 
¥ thowsynde 4 sec. m. GMNPQSTFX. 
y Om. 7. 
b summe 4 sec.m. GMPSV WY. 
f blowen rv. 
k God, or cause to hane the rewme Q. 
q either a. 


345 


’ Y write not these thingis, that Y con- 14 
founde 30u, but Y warne! as my moste 
dereworthe sones. For whi if 3e han ten 15 
thousynde of vndur maistris in Crist, 
but not many fadris; for in Crist Jhesu 
Y haue gendrid 30u bi the gospel. 
Therfor, britheren, Y preye 30u, be 3e1¢ 
foleweris of me, as Y of Crist. Therfor17 
Y sente to 30u Tymothe, which is my 
most dereworthe sone, and feithful in the 
Lord, which schal teche 301 my weies, 
that ben in Crist Jhesu; as Y teche 
euery where in ech chirche. As thou318 
Y schulde not come to 30u, so summe* 
ben blowun with pride; but Y schaliy 
come to 30u soone, if God wole; and Y 
schal knowe not the word of hem that 
ben blowun with pride, but the vertu. 
For the rewme of God is not in word, 20 
but in vertu. What wole 3e? Schal Y21 
come to 30u in a 3erde, or in charite, and 
in spirit! of myldenesse ? 


CAP. V. 

In™ al maner fornycacioun” is herd. 
among 30u, and siche fornyeacioun, which 
is not among hethene men®, so that swn- 
manP haue the wijf of his fadir. And‘ 
je ben bolnyd’ with pride, and not more 
hadden weilyng, that he that dide this 
werk, be takun awei fro the myddil of 
jou. And Y absent in bodi, but presents 
in spirit, now haue deimyd as present 
hym that hath thus wrou3t, whanne 
3e ben gaderid togidere in the name of4 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, and my spirit, 
with the vertu of the Lord Jhesu, tos 


amoneste 50u 6. 
s Jhesu Crist x. tin w. 4 Therfore, 
Z not beinge G sec.m. am not 7. 300 
€ with pride, not deemynge 
£Om. x. » vertu in good wirchynge y. 
™ vertu of byleeue Q. n Om. rT. 0 Om. 
tr debonernesse Guper. %Om. x. ¢Om. 


G sec.m. out, or in aly. out x. %Om. x.  Y fornyeaciouns 7. wWnow. ox. * blownn aes. in- 
blowen x. yOm.nx. Znow. ®abhomynable werk Qa. %Om.r. ¢Om.¥. 4 while je ben r. 
€ togidere in the name of onr Lord Jhesn Crist and my spirit v. —f onre N. 


i warne 30u a secc.m.k. * summen R. 
fornycacioun A pr.m. © Om. R pr.m. 
K sup. ras. k. bollid wm. bollen x. 


VOL. IV. 


la spirit R. ‘m 3it a. And but k pr.m. And k sec. m. 
P somme man 1. 


n of 


qaOm.@. * bolnun ciquabceghoag. blowen 


Bey. 


346 


ssu, for to bitake® sich a man to Sathanas 
in to! perischinge of fleisch*, that the 
spirit be saf in the day of oure Lord 
6Jhesu Crist. 3oure gloriynge is not good!. 
Witen 3e not, for™ a litil sourdow3 co- 
rumpith", ‘or defoulith®, al the gobet? 
7 Clense 3e? out oold sourdow3, that 3e ben 
hewe spryngynge’ to gidere, as 3e ben 
therf, ‘or withoute™ ‘sour things. Forsoth' 
sCrist ‘is offrid" oure pask. ‘And so™ ete 
we, not in old sourdou3, nethir in sour- 
dou; of malice and weywardnesse, but in 
otherf thingis of clennesse aud treuthe. J 
wroot to 3ou in ‘a pistle’, that 3e be not 
meynd™, ‘or comunen not*, with lecchours’, 
10sothli not with lecchours of this world’, 
or® coucitouse men, or” raneynours, or 
with men seruynge to ydols, ellis 3e° 
i1schulden haue gon out of this world. Now 
sothli? I wroot to 30u, fore to not be 
meynd‘, ‘or comune not®. If he that is 
namyd a brothir among 3o0u, and" is a 
lecchour, or coueitous, or seruynge to ydols, 
or cursere, ‘or wariere', or ful of drunkén- 
nesse, or* raueynour, with siche neither 
12for! to take mete. Forsothe™ what to me 
for® to deme of hem that ben withoute- 
forth® ? Wher? 3e demen not of hem 
13that ben with ynne? Forwhi God schal 
deme hein that ben withoutenforth. ‘Do 
3e" awey® yuel thing* of 30u" silf’. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Dar ony of 30w, hauynge™ a cause a3ens 
anothir, be demed at wickyde* men, and 
2not at seyntis’, ‘or hooly men”? Wher 3e 
witen not, for” seyntis® shulen deme of 
this world? And if the world schal be 


& Om. sx. 4 taken x. 
Srynge siche on amonge 30u @. 
ynge N sec. m. r Om. x. 
Vepistle g. an epistil s. a epistle 7. 
MOUR Q. Y lecherouse men o. 
4 forsothe o. ¢ Om. sx. 
iOm. emoperx. ether o. 
of the chirche 9. P Whether e.  ¢ Doth x. 
where with 3e be fyled 9. that hath r. 
bthat vy. © holy men o. 


m that v. 


Z2wrd x. 
f meyngid GarpesTx. 


8 bitake Kuxae sec.m. +t Om. rb. 
mith i. * haue write 1. write R. Y medlid 1. 
EQRhcega. © not rkQegk pr. m.a. Om. o. 

g Om. k pr.m. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


ito the AGMNPSTVIVXY. 

2 defouleth o. 
8 sowryng 4n. Om. x. 

Ww meyngd eaposTx. 
4 or wyth Q. 
g Om. ox. or comoun not with siche Q. 
1 je owe Q. Om. sx. 
8 awey therfore Q. 
xX wicke sx. 


u peirynge a pr.m. 
z Om. A. 
4 suche men R pr.m. 


V.5—SVieee 


take’ siche a man to Sathanas, in to thet 
perischyng" of fleisch*, that the spirit be 
saaf in the dai of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 
3oure gloriyng is not good. Witen 3e6 
not, that a litil sourdowT{ apeyrith al 
the gobet ? Clense 3e out the old sour-7 
dow{, that 3e be new sprengyng togi- 
dere, as 3e ben therf. For Crist offrid 
is oure pask. Therfor ete we, not ins 
eld sourdow3, nether in sourdow3 of ma- 
lice and’ weywardnesse, but in therf 
thingis of clernesse and of treuthe. I9 
wroot to 30u in a pistle, that 3e be not 


* that is, tur- 
ment therof, 
that so he do 
penauuce while 
the peyne tech- 
ith. Lyre here. 
e. 
+ that is, the 
consent of this 
synne which is 
knowun and is 
not repreued, 
defoulith alle 
that moun re- 
preue, and doen 
not. The Glos 
here. e. 

t oold sour- 
dou3; that is, 
in castinge out 
fro 30u him 
that corrump- 
ith jou. The 


medlid with letchours, not with letch- 10 Gs 4ere. e. 


ours of this world, ne” coneitous men, 
ne raueynours, ne with men seruynge to 
mawmetis, ellis 3e schulden haue go out 
of this world. 
3ou, that 3e be not meynd’. But? if he 
that is named a brother among 3ou, and 
is a letchour, or coueitouse, or seruynge 
to ydols, or cursere*, or ful of drunke- 
nesse, or raueynour, to take no* mete 
with siche’. 
deme of hem that ben with oute forth ? 
Whether 3e demen not of thingis that 
ben with ynne forth ? 
deme hem that ben withouten forth. Do 
3e awei yuel|| fro 3o0u® silf. 


CAP. Vin 


Dar any of 3ou that hath a cause) 
ajens another, be demed at wickid men, 
and not at hooli men? Whether 3e2 
witen not, that seyntis schulen deme of% 
this world? And if the world schal be 


k flesch, that is, turment therof v. 1 good, suf- 

© Om. ewoperx. P Clenseth x. 4 sprenk- 

t Forwhi vy. 4 offrid is r. uu Therfore r. 
x Om. emprx. nether comyn 0. ne co- 
b ether o. or with a. © thei w prom. 
bh Om. @. 
° wythonte forth, oud 
uUsour PeT. -V silf, 
a Whether Gc. 


n forwhi Fr. 
‘Om. v. 
z Om. ox. 


m Om. sx. 


Y hooly men o. 


v and of EImqruxab pr.m. ceghkoa®. ne 
@ a cursere EKQRbceghkoa8. » a raueynour 
€soure ER. Wher c1 et plures. 


But now Y wroot* ton 


For what ¢s it to me to12 


For God sehal 1s 


ll yuele; that 
is, departe 3e 
yuele Cristen 
men bi curs. 
yuge, that thei 
be amendid so 
by peyne. e. 


VI. 3—~13- 


demed in® 30u, ben 3e vnworthi that® 
3demen off leest thingis? Witen 3e not, 
fors we schulen deme aungels"? how 
4moche more! worldly thingis? Therfore 
if 3e ‘schulen haue* worldly nedis!, ordeyne 
3e tho™ contemptyble men, ‘or of litil re- 
putacioun", that ben in the® chirche, for? 
sto deme. I4 seie™ to 30ure schame. So 
ther is not ony wys man, that may deme 
6 bitwixe® a brother and his brothir; but a 
brother with brothirt stryueth in dome, 
z7and that" anentis vnfeithful men. Now 
forsoth trespas is algatisy in 3ou, for 3e 
han domes among 30u. Whi more taken 
3e not® wrong? Whi ‘not more* suf- 
sfren 3e fraude’, ‘or disceyt?? But and 
3e don wrong, and defrauden*, ‘or bz- 
ygilen>, and that® to britheren. Wher? 3e 
witen not, for® wickidef men schulen not 
welde the kingdom of God? Nyle 3e 
erre; neithir lecchours’, nethir men seru- 


loynge to ydols, nether auouters®, neither * 


neische', neither lecchours of men, that 
don‘ synne' of Sodom, nethir theuys, ne- 
ther coueitouse™ men, or" nygardis°, ne- 
ther? ‘ful of drunkenesse’, nethir curseris, 
‘or wariers'*, nether raueynours, schulen 
inweelde the kyngdom of God. And ‘thes 
thingis* 3e werent sum tyme”; but 3e ben 
waisclien, but 3e ben halowid, but 3e ben 
justifyed in the name of oure Lord Jhesu 
12Crist, and in the spirit of oure God. Alle 
thingis ben leefful ‘to me’, but not alle 
thingis speden. Alle thingis ben leefful to 
me, but I ‘vndir no mannis power schal* 
i3be brou3t down’. Mete to the wombe, 
and the wombe to metis; forsoth God 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


347 


demed bi 30u, be 3e vnworthi to deme 

of" the leste thingis? Witen 3e not, thats 

we schulen deme aungels? hou myche 

more worldli thingis? Therfor if, 3e4 

han worldli domes, ordeyne 3e tho! con- 

temptiblet men, that ben in the chirche, ; 
to deme. Y seie to make 30u aschamed. 5 Pan acon 
So ther is not ony wise man, that may “”*** 
deme bitwixe a brothir and his brothir; 

but a* brothir with brothir! stryueth ine 

dom, and that among vnfeithful men. 

And now trespas is algatis in™ 3ou, for7 

je han domes among 30u. Whi rather 

take 3e no" wrong? whi rather suffre 3e 

not disseit? But and° 3e doen wrong,s 

and doen fraude, and that to britheren. 

Whether? 3e witen not, that wickid meng 

schulen not welde the kyngdom of God ? 

Nyle 3e erre; nethir? letchours, nether 

men that seruen' mawmetis, nether 

auouteris®, nether letchouris a3en kynde}, 10 ¢ that is, de- 
nether thei that doon letcheri with men, ee 
nether theues, nether auerouse men, ne- he cern 
thirt ‘ful of drunkenesse", nether curseris, eae ee in 
nether rauenours, schulen welde the 

kyngdom of God. And 3e weren sum1i 

tyme these thingis; but 3e ben waischun, 

but 3e ben halewid, but 3e ben iustefied 

in the name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 

and in the spirit of oure God. Allei2 

thingis ben leeueful to me, but not alle 

thingis ben spedeful. Alle thingis ben 

leeueful to me, but Y schal not be brou3t 

doun vndur ony mannus power. Mete1s 

to the wombe], and the wombe to metis; plawotabe fe 
and God schal distruye bothe this and ve 
that. And the bodi not to fornyca- 


t that is, of 


Abi sup. ras. tov. thatzeex. fthev. ofthe wx. gthatv. » aungelis, that fellen o. 
iOm. r. khan vy. Imeedisg. domes ny. ™the wnreor, ™Om. x. Om... P Om. sx. 
q And x. T seye thisg. *%bitwen sx. his brothir 9. a brothir mw. uthis 7. Vv algate x passim. 
wnoo. X more not xX. Y wrong 0, z Om. GMopx. or despite Q. a frande cg. frauden a. 
b Om. ox. ¢ this v. d Whether ex. e that vy. f wicke sx. & lecherouse o. h auowtrerys 
AMNOPT. i neische, or lecchours a3ens hynde Nn. k is, that donv. ‘| the synue s. ™ querous F, 
n ether o. Om. x. © Om. x. P nether men GmPerx. q drunklew men o, tr Om. GMoperx. 
8 sothly ry. ¢ weren, or dideng. tyme these thingis y. ¥Y Om. 4G pr.m. MopsTwxy. W Om, rx. 


x schal not vr. 


h Om. k pr.m. i thilke r. 
0 not Q sec. m. R Sec. mM. @ SCC. Mm. 
T geruen to KX sec.m. g sec.m. k, 
men R. 


k Om. A sec. m. E. 
© also ce1kmQRuxXhceghkaf. and also a. 
§ auoutreris E1KQxaeghka. 


y doun vndir eny mannes power ry. doun vnder no manys power x. 


1g brothir knk sec. m. A. ™ among gk pr. m. 
Pp Wher 1x. 4 for neithir r. 
t neither men K sec. m.Qk. ™ dronkelew 


yy2 


348 


schal distroye and* this and that. Sothli> 
the body not to fornycacioun, but to the 
14 Lord, and the Lord to the body. For- 
sothe and® God reyside the? Lord, and 
isschal reise vs by® his vertu. Witen 3e 
not, forf 3oure® bodyes ben membris of 
Crist? Therfore takinge" membrisi of 
Crist *, schal! I make™ membris of an 
ichoore? Fer be it. Wher 3e witen not, 
for" he that cleueth to an hoore, is maad 
oo body°? Sothli? he seith, Ther’ schulen 
17 be tweyne® in 00 fleish. Forsothe he that 
iscleuith to God, is oo spirit. Fle 3e for- 
nycacioun; al synne what euere synnet a 
man ‘schal do", is withouten’, ‘or by 
sidis“, the body*; forsothY he that doth 
fornycacioun, synneth ‘in to” his body®. 
19 Wher” 3e witen not, for¢ 30ure membris 
ben the temple of the Hooli Gost, that is 
in 30ow, whom 3e han of 4 God, and 3e ben 
20not 3oure owne? Forsoth® 3e be bou3t 
with greet prys. Glorifie 3ef, and bere? 
God in 3oure body. 


CAP. VII. 
1 Forsothe of whiche thingis 3e han 
writun to me, it is good to a man for" to 
2touche noti a womman. Sothli* for for- 
nycacioun ech man haue his owne wyf, 
and ech womman haue hir' hosebonde. 
3The hosebonde 3elde dette to the wyf, 
also sothli and™ the wyf to the hosebonde. 
4 The womman hath not power of hir body, 
but the hosebonde; also forsoth the" hose- 
bonde hath not power of his body, but the 
swomman®. Nyle 3e? defraude to gidere, 
no but perauenture of consent to" a tyme, 
that® 3e 3yue tent to preier; and eft 
turne 3e' ajen in to the same thing, lest 
Sathanas tempte 3ou for 3oure inconty- 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


VI. 14——VII. 5. 


cioun*, but to the Lord, and the Lord — * not to forny- 
to the bodi. For God reiside the Lord, 14 Se eat 
and schal reise vs bi his vertu. Witen 1s ;fornveacioun, 
3e not, that 3oure bodies ben membris pera 
of Crist? Schal Y thanne take the he schal reise it 
membris of Crist, and schal Y make’ po ee a 
the membris of an hoore? God forbede. "°° 
Whether 3e witen not, that he thatic 

cleueth to an hoore, is maad o bodi? 

For he seith, Ther schulen be tweyne 

in o fleisch. And he that cleueth to the17 

Lord}, is 0 spirit. Fle 3e fornycacioun ; 18+ by feith and 
al synne what euere synne a man doith, le “7 *7re 
is with out the bodi; but he that doith 
fornycacioun, synneth a3ens his bodi. 

Whether 3e witen not, that 3oure” mem-19 

bris ben the temple of the Hooli Goost, 

that is in 3ou, whom 3e han of God, and 

3e ben not 3oure owne? For 3e ben bou3t 20 

with greet prijs. Glorifie* 3e, and bere 

3e God in joure bodi. 


CAP. VII. 


But of thilke thingis that je han1 
write to me, it is good to a man to 
touche not a womman. But for forny-2 
cacioun eche man haue his owne wijf, 
and ech womman haue hir owne hose- 
bonde. The hosebonde jelde dette tos 
the wijf, and also the wijf to the hose- 
bonde. The womman hath not power4 
of hir bodi, but the hosebonde; and the 
hosebonde hath not power of his bodi, 
but the womman. Nyle 3eY defraudes 
eche to othere, but? perauenture of con- 
sent to* a tyme, that 3e 5yue tent to 
preier; and eft turne 3e> ajen to the 
same thing}, lest Sathanas tempte 3ou § 


t that is, to 
selde dette, 
whanne the 
tyme of preier 
is endid. ve. 

§ temple 30u ; 
of auoutrie. ve. 


8 Om. 9. bothe vy. > Forwhiv. ¢Om.er. 4 bothe ther. ¢ingpr.m.mpoer.  f that pr. 
Zouren. hschalI take vy. ‘the membris carpervyx. kOm.y. land schal vy. ™ make hem no. 
make the rT. n that rv. © body to hir Q pr.m. body with hir @ sec. m. P Forv. 4 Here o. 3e w. 
‘two cupestx. tOm.x. dothy. VY bisidiso. W Om. cmoporrx. * body, filynge the soule 9. 
y but he rv. Z azens V. 8 body, wastynge it @. > Whether a. ethaty. ding. ¢& For vy. 
f 3e, and glorye 3e wv. & bere 3¢ 4GuNOPOesTVIVY. berth x. hOm cupostTx. i not touche wv. 
k Buty. |'hiroweno. ™Om.v. andthe woery. owiifo. POm Fr. 4 togider, withdrawynge 
joure delteg. ‘of. § that the more bisyly 9. +t Om. r. 

- make hem A sec.m. Ela sec.m.ega. “oure ze. ¥* Gloriec8. YOm.R prem. 7 no but k prim. 
4 for a. 


> Om, E1 pr.m. Qb pr. m, eghka. 


VII. 6—17. 


é6nence’. Forsoth I seye this thing vp‘ 
indulgence, ‘or for3yuenesse*, not vp. co- 
7maundement. Sothli I wole alle? men for* 
to» be as mi silf*. But ech man hath his 
propre? 3ifte of God ; sothli another thus®, 
but another thus’. Forsothé to not" wed- 
did and widewis, it is good to hem, if thei 
o9dwellen so as and I. For' if thei con- 
teynen not hem silf, ‘or ben not chast*, 
‘weddid be thei!; forsoth™ it is bettere 
for® to be weddid, than for® to be brent. 
10 Forsoth to hein that ben ioyned? in ma- 
trymonye, I4 comaunde, not I‘, but the 
Lord, the® wyf fort ‘to not departe" fro the 
11hosebonde; for’ if sche ‘schal departe™, 
for® toY dwell vnweddid, or for* to? be 
reconsilid, ‘ov acordid”, to hir hosebonde; 
and the hosebonde forsake not the wyf. 
12Forwhi to othere I seye, not the Lord. 
If ony brothir haue* an vnfeithful, ‘or he- 
then‘, wyf, and sche consentith® for to 
dwelle with hym‘, leue he, ‘or forsakes, 
ishir not. And if the’ womman hathi an 
hosebonde vnfeithful, and this consentith 
for‘ to dwelle with hir, leeue she not the 
14hosebonde. Forsoth! the vnfeithful hose- 
bonde is halowid by the feithful wom- 
man, and the vnfeithful womman is ha- 
lowid by the feithful hosebonde. Ellis 
joure children weren vnclene, now forsoth 
isthei ben hvoly. That if the vnfeithful 
departith", departe he°. Forsoth? the4 
brothir or’sistir is not suget to seruage" in 
suche; forsoth God clepith’ vs in pees. 
16 Sothli wherof wost thou, womman, if thou 
schalt' make the man saaf; or wherof wost 
thou, man, if thou schalt® make the wom- 
i7man saaf? No but as the Lord hath de- 
partid to ech, as’ God hath clepid ech 


¥ contynence w. W vpon o. bi r. 
a Om. G prom. mposvx., » Om. Fr. 
lyue in matrimonye Q. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


x or counseyle o. Om. x. 
€ mysilf chast Q. 
& Sothely o. Forsothe, I seye svx. 


349 


for 30ure vncontynence. But Y seies 
this thing as 3yuyng leene*, not bi co- 
maundement. For Y wole, that alle7 
men be as my silf+. But eche man hath 
his propre 3ifte of God; oon thus, and 
another thus. But Y seie to hem, thata 
ben not weddid, and to widewis, it is 
good to hem, if thei dwellen so as Y. 
That? if thei conteynen not hem silf, bes 
thei weddid; for it is betere to be wed- 
did, than to be brent. But to hem that.io 
ben ioyned in matrymonye, Y comaunde, 
not Y, but the Lord, that the wijf de- 
parte not fro the hosebonde; and that¢11 
if sche departith*, that sche dwelle vn- 
weddid, or be recounselid to hir hose- 
bonde; and the hosebonde forsake not 
the wijf. But to othere Y seie, not the 12 
Lord. Iff ony brother hath an vnfeith- 
ful wijf, and sche consenteth to dwelle 
with hym}, leeue he hir not. And if ony 13 
woman hath an vunfeithful hosebonde, 
and this® consentith to dwelle with hir, 
leene sche not the hosebonde. For the14 
vnfeithful hosebonde is halewid§ bi the 
feithful womman, and the vnfeithful 
wominan is halewid bi the feithful hose- 
bonde. Ellis 3oure children weren vn- 
cleene, but now thei ben hooli. That! 1s 
if the vnfeithfn) departith , departe he. 
For whi the brother or sistir is not suget 
to seruage in siche; for God hath clepid 
vs in pees. And wherof wost! thou, 16 
womman, if thou schalt make the man 
saaf; or wherof wost* thou, man, if thou 
schalt make the womiman saaf? But asi7 
the Lord hath departid to ech, and as 
God hath clepid ech inan, so go he, as 
Y teche in alle chirchis. A man cir-18 


Y¥ vp on o. bi r. 2 that alle r. 
€ thus to lyue chast Q.  * thus lo 
h hem that ben not ry. the not x pr.m. 


4 propirte rv. 


iThatry. & Om. ox. !be thei weddid cwpry. ™fory. ™Om.sx. © Om. nsx. P wedded o. 
40m. x. *Om.cor. Sthatthe yr. Om. syvx. "departe not 7. Vthat ewerr. Ww departith v. 
x Om. sx. thatr. Ysche ry. 2 Om. syx. 40m. rx. & Om. cwoperx. Chath y. ¢ Om. Gurerwx. 
© consente sv.x. & Om. ox. or forsake he pq. beny nv. i haue x. & Om. osx.  ! Forwhi r. 
° he or sche G sec. m. P Forwhi 7. q Om. c. ' do seruage s. 8 clepide eupeTrxy. cleped o. 
t shul x. “shul x. Vand as rv. 


¢ And Eqruxabceghkoas. Om. k. ¢ Om. Rr, 


i wotist r.- * wotist Rr. 


e departe R. 


f Forifa. @ hethis1. 4% Fora. 


* 3euynge leue; 
that is, suf- 
fraunee, for 
whanne the 
husbonde delith 
with his wijf 
oonly for chil- 
dren ether to 
3elde dett, it is 
meritorye ; 
whanne he do- 
ith for oner- 
myehe lust, it 
is venyal syne. 
not Y; that is, 
Y eomaunde 
not by myn 
owne stiringe, 
but by autorite 
of God. departe 
not; no but for 
fornycacioun. 
if sehe depart- 
ith; for cause 
of fornyea- 
cioun. e. 

t+ alle men be 
as myself; that 
is, that alle men 
kepe virginite, 
forwhi Poul 
was a virgine, 
and therfore 
whanne he was 
bihedid, my{ik] 
ran out of his 
bodi, in to wit- 
nessing of his 
virginite. Lire 
here. v. 

t him; [pes- 
ibly and e) 
withouten di- 
spising of Cris- 
ten feith. ve. 

§ halewid ; that 
is, eonuiertid to 
Cristen feith. 
v. 


q departith; 
for the haterede 
of Cristen feith. 
Lyre here. ve. 


350 


man, and” so go, he and as I teche in 
isalle chirchis. Sum man circumsidid is 
clepid, brynge he not to prepucie. Sum 
man is clepid in prepucie, be he not cir- 
locumsidid. Circumcisioun is no3t*, and 
prepucie is nou3t, but the kepinge of ¥ 
2ocomaundementis of God. Ech man in 
what clepyng he is clepid, in that dwelle 
2ihe. Thou seruaunt? ert clepid, be it not 
to? charge to thee; but if thou maist> be 
22fre, more vse thou’. He that ‘in the Lord 
is clepid seruaunt*, is fre man of the Lord. 
Also and he that® fre man is’ clepid, is 
23 the seruaunt of Crist. With prys 3e ben 
bou3t; nyle 3e be maad sernauntis of men®. 
24‘Ech man therfor" in what clepinge he is 
clepid', ‘in that dwelle he* anentis God. 
25Forsoth of virgyns I haue not! precept™ 
of God; sothli® I 3yne counceil, as hau- 
ynge mercy of the Lord, that I be trewe. 
26 Therfor I gesse, ‘or deme®, this? thing for’ 
‘to be%4 good for present nede; for it is good 
27 to" a man for* to* be so. Thou art boundyn 
to" a wyf, nyle thou seke vnbyndyng ; 
thou ert vnboundyn fro a wyf, nyle thou 
2sseke a wyf. Forsoth if thou hast taken 
a wyf, thou hast not synned; and if’ a 
mayden be’ weddid, she synned not; ne- 
thelees suche schulen haue tribulacioun of 
29 fleisch. Forsoth I spare 30u. ‘And so’, 
britheren, I seye this thing, The tyme is 
schort. The ‘tothir thing’ is, that and? thei 
sothat han wyues, be as not hauynge; and 
thei that wepen, as not wepynge; and thei 
that ioyen, as not ioyinge; and thei that 
ai byen, as not hauynge; and thei that vsen 
this world, as* ‘thei that vsen® not’, For- 
soth the figure® of this world passith. 
32 Forsothe I wole 3ouf for to? be withoute 
bisynesse. Sothli he that is withoute wyf 


w Om. or. 
a Om. @. 
f and is v. 
a brother Fr. 
this v. 
fore Fr. 
d Om. w. 


bmy3t w. —¢ thou fredam a. 

* dwelle he inthis ry. 1 no nr. 

q Om. svx. Vis y. ° for or. 

Yresiduevr. 2Om.N, 
dd Forwhi r. 


Om. K pr.m. Q sec. m. 
hkoa8. 9 not rk. 
art k prom. 


P be maad 5. 
tmaider. 4 thei that r. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


x nou3t, that is, doth nou3t to heelthe v. 
4 js seruaunt and is clepid in the Lord rv. 
& men, that 3e putte mannes seruyce byfore Godis seruyce Q. 
™ comaundement F. 
s Om. sx. 

8 as not vsinge I. 
© figure, or feirenesse, or prosperite Q. 


m that is K sec.m. MUahk sec. m. 0. 
q vse it rathir 1. 
Vv wepen a. 


VII. 18—32. 


cumcidid is clepid, brynge he not to 
1 ° % e . e 2 * i} . . 
the’ prepucie wos man is clepid in pre aes 
pucie, be he not circumcidid. Circum- 19 tom of hethen 
cisioun is nou3t, and prepucie is nou3t, pe a 
but the kepyng of the maundementis" ecto 
of God. Ech man in what clepyng he 20 Moises, that 
i . ceeside in deth 
is clepid, in that dwelle he. Thou ser-21 of Crist. v. 
taunt art clepidf, be it no® charge to + to feith. not 
; ° ‘ charge to thee; 
thee; but if thou maist beP fre, ‘the  thatis, bere 
rather vse thou’. He that is a SOP 22 OF uiclonn, 
uaunt, and is clepid in the Lord, is a peaaomd 23 
freman of the Lord. Also he that is a in hise mem- 

. 5 . bris. seruauntis 
freman, and is clepid, is the seruannt of of men; that 
Crist. With prijs 3e ben bou3t ; nyle23 273° for 
3e be maad seruauntis of men. Therfor ag nyse ae oe 
ech man in what thing he is clepid a pomp 
brothir, dwelle he in this anentis God. a 
But of virgyns Y haue no comaunde-25 
ment of God; but Y 3yue counseil, as he 
that hath mercy’ of the Lord, that Y 
be trewe. Therfor Y gesse, that this26 
thing is good for the present nede; for 
it is good toa man to be so. Thou art27 
boundun to a wijf, nyle thou seke vn- 
byndyng; thou art® vnboundun fro a 
wijf, nyle thou seke a wijf. But if thou 28 
hast takun a wijf, thou hast not synned ; 
and if a maidun‘ is weddid, sche synnede 
not; nethelesse siche schulen hane tri- 
bulacioun of fleisch. But Y spare 30u. 29 
Therfor, britheren, Y seie this thing, 

The tyme is schort. Another is this, 
that thei that han wyues, be as thou3 
thei hadden noon; and thei that wepen, 30 
as thei® weptenY not; and thei that ioien, 
as thei ioieden not; and thei that bien, 
as thei hadden not; and thei that vsen31 
this world, as thei that vsen not. For 
whi the figure of this world passith. 
But Y wole, that 3e be without bisy-32 


y of the aGmNopesTrw. 2a seruaunt arpa. 
e that isa rv. 
h Therfor ech man ry. § clepid 
nbutr. © Om. orx.  P that 
vOm. kK. Wis vr. * Ther- 

© ysen it cwpotT. Om. w. 


g Om. srx. 1 Om. v. 


tOm rv. utillo. 
> Om. w. thei xy. 
f that 3e v. 


1 comaundementis CEIKMQRUXabceg 


T gete mercy A sec.m. 1Ka. the mercy x. $ that 


VII. 33——VIIE. 1. 


is bysy what thingis ben of the Lord, how 
33he schal plese to' God. Forsoth* he that 
is with a wyf, is bisy what thingis ben of 
the world, how he schal plese the! wyf, 
34and he is departid™. And a womman 
vnweddid and mayden" thenkith®? what 
thingis ben of the Lord, that sche be 
hooly in body and spirit. Forsoth she that 
is weddid, thenkith what thingis ben of 
the world, how sche schal plese the? hose- 
35bonde. Sotheli I seye thes thingis to 3oure 
profyt, not that I caste to’ jon a snare, 
but to ‘that that is honest, and’ 3yueth 
faculte, ‘or esynesse‘, with oute letting 
36for" to biseche to’ the Lord. Sothli if 
ony* demeY him silf for? to be seyn foul 
on his virgyne, that she is ‘wel old*, and 
so it bihoueth> ‘for tot be don*, do shee 
that’ she wole; sche’ synneth not, if sche! 
37be weddid. Forwhi he that ordeynede 
stable’, ‘or stedefust', in his herte, not 
hauynge nede, but hauynge power of his 
wille, and hath demyd in his herte ‘this 
thing™, for" to kepe his virgyn°, doth well. 
38 Therfor he that ioyneth his virgyn in 
matrimonye, doth wel; and he that ioyn- 
39eth not, doith bettere. The womman is 
boundyn to the lawe, how moche tyme 
hir hosebonde lyueth; that if hir hose- 
bonde ‘schal slepe?, ‘that is, die4, sche is 
delyuered fro the lawe, be she weddid to 
40 whom she wole, oonly in the Lord. For- 
soth® sche schal be more blessid, if sche 
‘schal thus dwelle', aftir my counceil; for- 
soth I wene, that and" I haue the Spirit 
of God’. 


CAP. VIII. 
Forsothe of thes thingis that ben offrid” 
to ydols, ‘that ben symulacris maad to 
mannis liknessex, we witen, for alle we 


1 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


351 


nesse, for he that is without wijf, is bisi 
what thingis ben of the Lord, hou he 
schal plese God. But he that is with ss 
a wijf, is bysy what thingis ben of 
the world, hou he schal plese the wijf, 
and he is departid. And a womman 34 
vnweddid and maidun thenkith what 
thingis ben of the Lord, that sche be 
hooli in bodi and spirit. But sche that 
is weddid, thenkith what thingis ben of 
the world, hou sche schal plese the hose- 
bonde. And Y seie these thingis toss 
3oure profit, not that Y caste to jou a 
snare, but to that that is onest, and that 
3yueth esynesse, with outen lettyng to 
make preieris to the Lord*. And if ony 36 
man gessith hym silf to be seyn foule 
ou his virgyn, that sche is ful woxun, 
and so it bihoneth to be doon, do sche 
that that sche wole; sche synneth not, 
if sche be weddid. For he that ordeyn-37 
ede” stabli in his herte, not hauynge 
nede, but hauynge power of his wille, 
and hath demed in his herte this thing, 


to kepe his virgyn, doith wel. Therfore* 38 


he that ioyneth his virgyn in matryimo- 
nye, doith wel; and he that ioyneth not, 
doith betere. 
to the lawe, as longe tyme as hir hose- 
bonde lyueth; and if hir hosebonde is 
deed, sche is delyuered fro the lawe of 
the hosebonde, be sche weddid to whom 


The womman is boundun 39 


* Lord; that 
is, serue [him 
e) holili. Lyre 
here. Ve. 


t Lord; so that 
he be a Cristen 


sche wole, oneli in the Lord}. But sche 40 Ver “reve 


schal be more blessid, if sche dwellith 
thus, aftir my counsel; and Y wene, that 
Y haue the Spirit of God. 


CAP. VIII. 
But of these thingis that ben sacri-1 
fiedY to ydols{, we witen, for alle we han 
kunnyng. But kunnyng blowith, charite 


iOm.r. Buty. This w. ™ departid, sumdel to God and sumdel to the world 9. ® a maiden N. 
othenken x. Phir eaper, G@Om. x. ‘'thatato. Sandthaty. tOm.ox. %Om. sx. ¥ Om. 
V sec. m. x ony keper of virgyns 9. eny man PF. Y gessith v. z Om. sx. a ful woxen r. 
bbihoue x. ¢thatit Gapor. tos. 4 don that sche take an hosbonde @. © hir keper 9. f what wpor. 
that that ry. Shes. bheampost. ihe cms. & stabilly y. 1 ether stedefasto. Om. vx. ™ thees 
thenges 0. Om. sx. ©virginiteo. Pisdedy. 44 Om. orx. § But vy. t shal dwelle thus arp. 


dwellith thus vy. 4 Om. G pr.m. or. 


w is ordeyned b. 


¥ God 3euynge this counseil @. 


x For a prim. 


W sacrified r X Om. x. 


y sacrificed Exrbgk. 


} that is, sy- 
mulacris maade 
to mannus lik- 
nesse. we 
witen : that 
of tho thingis 
getende no 
filthe nether 
halewing ther- 
bi. Here he 
spekith of wise 
men, not of 
symple men. 
Lyre here. e. 


352 I. CORINTHIANS. 


han kunnynge. Sothli science’, ‘or kun- 
nynge*, inblowith? ‘with pride; charite® 
2edifieth. Forsoth if ony man‘ gesse®, ‘or 
deme’, him® for> ‘to wyte! ony thing, he 
hath not 3it knowyn how it* bihoueth 
3hym! for™ to kunne. Forsoth if ony man 
4loueth God, this is knowun of him. For- 
soth of metis that ben offrid to ydols, we 
witen, for" an ydol is no thing in the world, 
sand that® ther is no God but? oon. For- 
why ‘and if4 ther ben that ben" seide god- 
dis, ether in heuene, ether in® erthe, for- 
soth ther ben many goddis, and many 
slordis; nethelees to vs is oo God, the fadir, 
of whom allet thingis, and we in him; 
and oo Lord, Jhesu Crist, by whom alle" 
7thingis, and we by him. But not in alle 
men is kunnynge. Sothli summe’ with 
conscience of ydol til now eten as thing 
offrid to ydols; and her conscience is vn- 
sclenex, whanne it is syk. Mete’ comend- 
ith vs not to God; ‘neithir forsothe? we® 
schulen faylen, if we ‘schulen not ete‘, 
‘nethir if we eten, we schulen habounde?, 
oor haue plente®. Sef 3e8 forsoth", lest 
perauenture this 30ure leue! be maad hirt- 
inge, ‘or selaundre*, to syke men, ‘or 
io freele', Sothli if ony man schal se him 


that hath kunnynge, restinge” in a place - 


wher ydols ben worschipid, wher® his con- 
science, sith? it is syk, schal not be edy- 
fyed4 for™ to ete thingis offrid to ydols? 
11 And the syke* brothir, for whom Crist 


deyede, schal perische in thi kunnynge. - 


12Forsotht thus" 3e synnynge’ ‘in to” bri- 
theren, and smytinge hir syke conscience, 

issynnen in* Crist. Wherfor if mete sclaun- 
drithY my brother, I scha] not ete fleisch 
‘in to? withouten ende, lest I sclaundre my 
brothir. 


yOm.o. 2 kunnynge Om. srx. 
€ may gesse N. gessith r. 
10m. wx. ™ Om. sx. 
Gpr.m.  Sors. then alle r. 
2 for neither r. a if we x. 
qd Om. x. e€ Om. Guoprx. in feith Q. 
or leeue Gupor. k Om. ox. 
P sithen Gvx. sen o. 
u Om. K pr. m. 


f Om. norx. 
nthatr. °Om.s. 


« ben alle r. 


4 edified, or styrid @. 
Vv synnynge thus x pr.m. 


y Om. 1 prom. 
g prom 


z Om. I pr.m. Q. 
© or lycence @ sec. m. marg. 


a inblowe x. blowith r. 
& Om. r. 
P no but GuposTrivy. 
Y sommen r. 
b eten, we shuln abounden, neither we shuin failen x. 
f But see r. 
10m. cox. in feith 9. 
rOm. sx. 
W a3ens Fr. 


ain e prim. gk. 
f Om. k pr. m. 


VIII. 3——-13. 


edefieth. But if ony man’ gessith, that2 
he kan ony thing, he hath not 3it knowe 

hou it bihoueth hym to kunne. -And3 
if ony man loueth God, this is knowun 

of hym. But of metis that ben offrid4 
to idols, we witen, that an idol is no 

thing in the world, and that ther is no 

God but oon. For thou3 ther ben summes 
that ben seid goddis, ethir in heuene, 

ether in erthe, as ther ben many goddis, 

and many lordis; netheles to vs is o God,« 
the? fadir, of whom ben alle thingis, and 

we in hym; and o Lord Jhesu Crist, bi 

whom ben alle thingis, and we bi* hym. 

But not in alle men is kunnyng. For7 
summen with conscience* of ydol® til now 

eten as® thing offrid to idolist; and her 

conscience is defoulid, for it is sijk. 

Mete comendith vs not to God; for ne-8 + idols; that 

ther we schulen faile, if we eten not, iss wun 
nether if we eten, we schulen haue 7" © lr. 
plente. But se 3e, lest perauenture thiss 

jour? leeue® be maad hurtyng to sijke 

men. For if ony man schal se hym, that 10 

hath kunnyng, etynge in a place where 

idols ben worschipid, whethir his con- 

science, sithen it is sijke, schal not be 

edified to ete thingis offrid to idols? 

And the sijk brothir, for whom Crist 11 

diede, schal perische in thi kunnyng. 

For thus 3e synnyng a3ens_ britheren, 12 

andf smytynge her sijk conscience synnen 

ajens Crist. Wherfor if mete sclaundrith 13 

my brother, Y schal neuere ete fleisch, 

lest Y sclaundre my brothir. 


* that is, thei 
gessen that the 
idol is sum 
dyuyn thing. 
ve. 


b Om. Nn. 
h Om. srx. 


¢ but charite x. 4 Om. ©. 
ithat he can vy. * him prx. 

4 thou3 yr. and w. + Om. 
x defoulid r. y Forsothe mete Nn. 
€ eten not r. 
h therfore s. Om. vy. licence, 
Xetinge vy. © whether s ef x passim. 
8 seek, or unstidefast @. t For thus x. 
Xasensr. Ysclaundre curer. 2 Om. Fr. 


& Om. N. 
m For r. 


bidolis gk. © Om.k prem. 4 oure EQ prim. 


IX. 1—13. 


CAV. IX. 


1 Wher? I am not fre? Am I not apo- 
stle? Wher I sy3 not Crist Jhesu, oure 
Lord? Wher 3e ben not my work in the 

2Lord? And thou3 to othere I am not 
apostle, but® nethelees to 30u I am; for- 
why 3e ben the sygnacle®, ‘or itil signe4, 

30f myn apostilhed in the Lord. My de- 
4fence to hem that axen me, is"4 this. Wher 
we han not power for® to ete and drynke? 
5s Wher we han not power for‘ to lede 
aboute a womman sistir, as and othere 
apostlis, and britheren of the Lord, and 
6Cephas, ‘that is, Petret? Or I aloone and 
Barnabas han not power for to worche 
7thes! thingis? Who fiz3teth, ‘or holdith 
kny3thod *, ony tyme with his owne 
soudis? Who plauntith a vynejerd, and 
etith not of ‘his frnyt'!? Who feedith™, ‘or 
lesuwith*, a floc, and etith not of the mylk 
sof the flok? Wher aftir man I seye thes 
thingis? wher and the lawe seith® not 
gthes thingis? Forsoth it is writun in the 
lawe of Moyses, Thou schalt not bynde? 
the mouth of the oxe threischinge, ‘or 
trauelynge’, Whethir of oxen is charge 
1oto God ? Whether for" vs sothli ‘he seith® 
thes thingis? Forwhi ‘for vs thei ben 
writunt; for he that erith, owith to ere 
in hope,.and he that threischith, ‘or ¢ra- 
uelith", inv hope for’ to perseyue* fruitis. 

11 ForsothY yf we sowen? spiritual thingis to 
3ou, ‘it is not? greet, if we repen 3oure 

i2fleischly thingis? If othere ben parce- 
neris of 3oure power, whi not ‘rathere 
wet? But we vsen not this power, but we 
susteynen’, ‘or suffren®, alle thingis, that 
we jeuen not! lettinge, ‘or sclaundres, to 

13 the euangelie of Crist. Witen 3e not, for® 
thei that wirchen in the sacrarie’, ‘that is, 
a place where hooly thingis ben kept*, eten 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


353 


CAP. Ix 

Whether Y am not fre? Am Y not1 
apostle? Whether Y sai3 not ‘Crist Jhe- 
su%, ‘oure Lord"? Whether 3e ben not 
my werk in the Lord? And thou3 toz 
othere Y am not apostle, but netheles to 
jou Y am; for 3e ben the litle signe 
of myn apostlehed in the Lord. Mys 
defense to* hem that axen me, that is. 
Whether we han not power to ete and4 
drynke? Whether we han not powers 
to lede aboute a womman aK sistir, as 
also othere apostlis, and britheren of the 
Lord, and Cefas? Or Y aloone andé 
Barnabas han not power to worche these 
thingis? Who traueilith ony tyme with7 
hise owne wagis? Who plauntith a vyn- 
jerd, and etith not of his fruyt? Who 
kepith a flok, and etith not of the mylk 
of the flok? Whether aftir man Y seys 
these thingis? whether also the lawe 
seith not these thingis? For it iso 
writun in the lawe of Moises, Thou 
schalt not bynde the mouth of the ox 
threischynge'. Whethir of oxun is 
charge to God? Whether for vs he io 
seith these thingis? For whi tho ben 
writun for vs; for he that erith, owith 
to ere in hope, and he that threischith, 
in™ hope to take fruytis". If we sowen11 
spiritual thingis to 3ou, is it grete, if we 
repen 3oure fleischli thingis? If othere* 12* that is, false 
ben parteneris of 3oure power, whi not ae 
rathere we? But we vsen not this = tebe ial 
power, but we suffren alle thingis, that — beinge in joure 
we 3yuen no° lettyng to the euangelie  Aere. ve. 
of Crist. Witen 3e not, that thei thats 
worchen in the templet, eten tho thingis 
that ben of the temple, and thei that 
seruen to the auter, ben partyneris of P ee tas 
the auter? So the Lord ordeynede to 14/7 © 


+t ether sacra- 
rie; that is, a 
place where 


a Whether 6 passim in hoc cap. x passin. ®Om.o. © token 0. 4Om. ox. 44Om.y. ¢Om. sx. fOm. 


sx, 8 Om.ox. Om, osrx. isocheo, * Om. ox. 1! the froytes o. his fruytes w. ™ lesewith o. 
kepith yr. ® Om. orx. °seie wg. Pbyndeupn. @Om.ox. ‘fofo. “Stheiseien nN. ¢ tho ben 
writen for us v. Om. ox. ¥ threschith inv. Ww Om. sx. xtake yr. YOm.v. #% soweth o. 
itis aNgwx. is it GMopsrvy. ‘® oure A4GMNOPOTW sec.m. ¢werather Gg. 4snffren vy. ¢€ Om. orx. 
fnos. notenyy. & Om.ovx. that ry. i! temple, cither sacrariev. & Om. ox. 

& Jhesu Cristq. bOm.1. lTintor. * Om.bsec.m. that threischith r1xqruabceghkaf. that 


threischinge m. that thristith o. 


m threschith in rho. 
VOL. IV. ZZ 


nfrnyt RB. nota, Pto a. 


354 


tho thingis that ben of the sacrarie!, and 
that™ tho® that seruen to the auter, taken 
14part with the auter? So and the Lord 
ordeynede to hem that tellen the gospel, 
isfor® to lyue of? the gospel. Forsoth’ I 
vsidet ‘none of’ thes thingis; sothli I wroot 
not thes thingis, that thei' be don so in 
me; forsoth" it is good to me more for’ 
to deie, than that ony man avoyde my 
isglorie. Forwhi if I schal spreche the 
gospel, glorie is not to me, forsoth* nede** 
lithY to ine; forsoth? wo to* me, if I 
i7‘schal not euangelise. Forsoth if I will- 
inge® do this thing‘, I haue mede; sothly° 
iff ajens my wil, dispensacioun® is bitake 
isto me, What therfore is" my hyre, ‘or 
medei? That I prechingi the gospel, putte 
the gospel with oute spence ‘takynge, or 
sustenaunce therfore’, that I mysvse not 
i9my power in the gospel. Forwhi whanne 
I was fre of alle men, I made me seruaunt 
of alle men, that I schulde wynne mo men. 
20 And to Jewis I am maad as! a Jew, that I 
2ischulde wynne Jewis; to hem that ben 
vndir the lawe, as I were vndir the lawe, 
whanne I was not vndir the lawe, that I 
schulde wynne hem that weren vndir the 
lawe; to hem that weren with oute the™ 
lawe, as" I were withoute the° lawe, 
whanne I was not withoute the? lawe of 
God, but I was in the lawe of Crist, that 
Ir? schulde wynne hem that weren with 
z2oute lawe’. I am maad syk to syke men, 
that I schulde wynne syke men; to alle 
men J am maad alle thingis, that I schuldeé 
23make alle men saaf. Forsoth I do alle 
thingis for the gospel, that I be" maad 
asparcener of it. Witen 3e not, that thei 
that rennen in a furlong, alle forsoth ren- 
nen, but oon takith the priys? So renne 


m Om. 4GMNOPOTYYY. % thei Fr. 


ufor ry. VOm.sx. WOm. Pr. 


] sacraries Q. 
t thoo r. 


J preche k. 


thou3 0. °Om.o. POm.o. PP Om. y. 


ad and Erarxbeeghk sec. m. a8. sotheli and x. 
reloysynge voyde Q sec. m. 
cxbe pr.m. ekp. 


Y the lawe cigrxabegkoaf. 
K marg. ¢ thing a. 


d to R prem. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


o Om. sx. 
x forwhi r. 
» preche not the gospel y. ©Om.r, 4 thing wilfully r. © forsothe o. 
h me, fo profile lo othere men, al be it that for myn yuel wille I profite not to mysilf @. 
Kk Om. ox. eithir laking of susteynaunce therfore v. 
4 the lawe Nswxy. 


t thei b. 
vor nede lijth to me K marg. 
2 Om. rh. 
© an vncerteyn IKMQRUXaD prem. cea. 


IX. 14-—24. 


hem that tellen the gospel, to lyue of 

the gospel. Bunt Y vside noon of theseis 
thingis; sotheli? Y wroot not these 

thingis, that tho" be don so in me; for 

it is good ‘to me rather* to die, than that 

ony man ‘auoyde my glorie'. For if Y ic 

preche the gospel, glorie is not to me, 

for nedelich" Y mot don it; for wo to 

me, if Y preche not the gospel. But if17 

Y do this thing wilfuli, Y haune mede; 

but if ajens my wille, dispending is bi- 

takun to me*. What thanne is my mede? 18 * that is, I pro- 
That Y prechynge the gospel, putte the gr ae 
gospel with outen -otheris cost’, that Y pele 4 ee 
vse not my power in the gospel. For-19 ve. 

whi whanne Y was fre of alle men, Y 

made me seruaunt of alle men, to wynne 

the mo men. And to Jewis Y am2o 

maad as a Jew, to wynne the Jewis; 

to hem that ben vndur the lawe, as Y 21 

were vndur the lawe, whanne Y was not 

vndur the lawe, to wynne hem: that 

weren vndur the lawe; to hem that 

weren with out lawe*, as Y were with 

out laweY, whanne Y was not with out 

the? lawe of God, but Y was in the lawe 

of Crist, to wynne hem that weren with 

out lawe*. Y ain maad sijk to sike men, 22 

to wynne sike men; to alle men Y am 

maad alle thingis, to make alle men saaf. 

But Y do alle thingis for the gospel, 22 

that Y be maad partener of it. Witenos 

je not, that thei that rennen in a fur- 

long», alle rennen, but oon takith the 

prijs? So renne 3e, that 3e catche. 

Ech man that stryueth in fi3t, absteyn- 25 

eth hym fro alle thingis*; and thei,'that — + that letten 
thei take a corruptible coroun, but we Bieta of 
an vneorrupt. 


batell. The - 
Therfor Y renne so, not 26 Cisse here, 

eee ror Lire here. e. 

as ‘in tod vneerteyn® thing; thus Y fizte, [hire here. e] 


Pong. 4 Buty. vse eg. § not x. 
xX meede y. Yneijith y. 2% forwhi vy. 2Om.o. 
tif I do this vy. & dispending r. 
hh Om. y. !Om. ox. 

m.Q. ™Om. GwopeTr. as 
v shulde be sxy. 


8 rather for me q sec.m. * shulde make my 
Vor spense K marg. “Om. R. * the lawe 
athe lawe E1:qrbegkaS. ether gleyue 


IX, 25-—X. 11. 


253e, that 3e catche. Ech man that stryueth 
in fy3t, absteyneth him fro alle thingis‘; 
and thei forsoth', that thei take a corupt- 
ible crowne, ‘we forsothe" vncorupt ’. 
26 Therfore I renne so, not as into vncerteyn 
thing; thus I fiz3te, not as betynge the eyr ; 
27 but I chastise my body, and brynge” in to 
seruage; lest perauenture whanne I ‘haue 
prechid* to othere, I my silf be maad 
reprouable. 
CAREX. 
1 Sotheli, britheren, I nyle 3ou for’ to” 
vuknowe, for* alle oure fadris weren vndir 
2cloude, and alle passiden the see; and 
alle ben‘ baptysid in Moyses, in the 
3cloude and in the see; and alle eeten the 
4same spiritual’ breed*, and alle dronken 
the same spiritualf drynke; forsoth thei 


dronken of the spiritual, a® stoon folow- 


yuge hem; forsoth the stoon was Crist. 
s But not in ful manye of hem it was! wel 
plesant to God; forwhi ‘thei ben! cast 
6 doun in the!! desert. Forsoth thes™ thingis 
ben don in figure of vs, that we ben not 
coueyteris® of yuelis, as and thei coueit- 
ziden. Neithir be 3e maad ydolatreris®, 
‘that is, worschiperis of false mawmetis?, 
as summe of hem; as it is writun, The 
peple sat for’ to ete and drynke, and thei 
shan risun vp" for’ to pleie. Neither do 
we fornycacioun, as summe of hem diden 
fornyeacioun', and thre and twenty thou- 
sandis" felden’, ‘or deteden“, in o day. 
os Neither tempte we Crist, as summe of 
hem temptiden, and perischeden of ser- 
1opentis. Neither grucche 3e*, as summe of 
hem grucchiden, and thei perischiden of a¥ 
i1 wastour, ‘or distrier?.. Forsothe alle thes 
thingis* felden to hem in¢ figure; sothli 
thei? ben writun to® oure coreccioun, ‘or 


8 thingis that letten hym a. 
w bringe it mp. *preche vy, Y Om. srx. 
cloude, defendynge hem fro the Egipciens q. 
f gostely o. & goostly drinke o. h Om. r. 
Om. ox. ™ thus y. 
tOm.o.  ° thousand sox. 
z Om. ox. 4 Om. N. 


f wile not 1. & and thei 1. 
mwek. % ether waster K marg. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


t forsothe that stryuen in fizt 0. 

2 to be G prim. that 3e Vv. 

© weren F. 
iis G. 

1 coucitous x.° © ydolateris «. 

v fellen emposTx. deiteden o. 

» bifellen cv. fellen aposTx. 


h same spiritual 1. 
© fellen Et pass. h8. felden qr. 


355 


not as betynge the eir; but Y chastise27 
my bodi, and bryng ?7¢ in to seruage; 
lest perauenture whaune Y preche to 
othere, Y my silf be maad repreuable. 


CAR. X. 


Britheren, Y nyle’, that 3e vnknowe,1 
that alle oure fadris weren vndur cloude, 
and alle passiden the see; and alle weren2 
baptisid in Moises*, in the cloude and in 
the see; and alle eeten the same spiritual 
mete, and alle drunken the same spiri-4 
tual drynke; thei drunken of the spi- 
ritual® stoon+ folewynge hem{; and the 
stoon was Crist. But not in ful manyes 
of hem it was wel! pleasaunt to God; for 
whi thei weren cast doun in desert. Bute 
these thingis ben* don in figure of vs, that 
we be not coueyteris of yuele thingis, 
as thei coueitiden. Nether be 3e maad7 
idolatreris, as summe of hem; as it is 
writun, The puple sat to ete and drynke, 
and thei risen vp to pleie. Nether dos 
we fornycacioun, as summe of hem diden 
fornicacioun, and thre and twenti thou- 
syndis! weren deed in o dai. Nethirg 
tempte we Crist, as summe of hem 
temptiden, and perischiden of serpentis. 
Nether grutche 3e™, as summe of hem io 
grutchiden, and thei perischiden of a 
distrier". And alle these thingis fell-11 
iden® to hem in figure; but thei ben 
writun to owre amendyng, in to whiche? 
the endis of the worldis ben comun. 
Therfor he that gessith hym4, ‘that he 12 


u but we rv. van vncorrupt @. 

athat vy. >a cloude expr. a 

€ breed manna Q@. mete Vv. 

1 thei weren vy. ben thei w. 

triseden vy. & Om. sx. 

X wees.  Y the emPoQrT. 
ein w, 


4 goostly o. 
k Om. ov. 
P Om. ox. 910m. sx. 
w Om. ox. 


cinto ce. 4thor. 


iOm. a. k weren h prim. I thousand Eck. 


Pwhoms 4 him silf 1. 


Z2Z2 


* that is, in the 
leedinge of 
Moises. Lyre 
here. Ves 


T spiritual 
stoon; that is, 
drinke 3ouen 
to hem bi gost- 
li vertu. ve. 

t folewinge 
hem; that is, 
the stoon obei- 
eden to her de- 
siris bi Goddis 
uertu. v. It is 
seid a gostli 
ston, for it fi- 
guride the wa- 
ter of grace to 
be 30uen bi 
Crist. Lire 
here. Ve. 


356 


amendynge', in to whom the endis of the 
12world" han comen. ‘And so! he that gess- 
ith him for* to stonde, se!, that he falle 
isnot. Temptacioun take not 3ou, no but 
mannus™; forsoth God is trewe, the" 
which® schal not suffre 30u for? to be 
temptid ouer ‘that that’ 3e mown; but he 
schal make with temptacioun" also’ pur- 
14uyaunce, that 3e mown susteyne’. Wher- 
fore, 3e moost dereworthe to me, fle" fro 
15 worschipinge of ydols. As to prudent men 
I speke, 3e jou" silf deme that thing* that 
16I seye. TheY cuppe of blessynge ‘the which? 
we blessen, ‘wher it is not the comenynge 
of Cristis blood*? and? the breed which¢ 
we breken, wher‘ it® is not the ‘delynge, 
or& ‘part takynge®, ‘of the body' of the 
17Lord? For ‘o breed and o body* we 
manye ben!, alle we that taken part of o 
18breed and of o cuppe. 
the fleisch, wher thei that eten oostis, ‘or 
sacrifices™, ben not parceneris of the au- 
igter? What" therfore seye I, that thing? 
offrid to ydols is ony thing, or that the? 
20 ydole is ony thing4? But tho thingis that 
hethene men offren, thei offren to deuelis, 
and not to God. Forsoth I nyle 3ou for" 
to’ be maad felowis of fendis ; for 3e mown 
not drynke the cuppe of the Lord, and the 
21 cuppe of fendis*s; 3e mown not be parce- 
neris of the boord of the Lord, and oft 
22the boord of fendis. Wher we" ‘suwen 
by™ enuye the’ Lord ? wher” we ben 
strengere than he? Alle thingis ben leef- 
ful to me, but not alle thingis speden’. 
23 Alle thingis ben leefful*, but notY alle 
24 thingis edifyen?. No man seke* that thing 
that is his owne, but that thing that is of 
2, another’. Al thing that cometh® in the 


fOm.ox. &whiche vr. 1 worldis r. 
temptacioun vy. %Om.rx. © that x. 

salso with G pr.m.  t suffre rv. 
y Wher is not the com. of Cristes blood the r. 

€ the whiche cmorperiwy. 4 whether c. Om. r. 
G prom. k Om. rv. 
n Om. sxy. °%a thing 7. 
fendis y. t Om. v. 

x leeueful to me mor. 
edifie another 9. 


P Om. G pr. in. 
U3e 0, whan vy. 


Cis seld vr. 


T to stonde 1. that he stonde a. 
VYgoure E. W part takynge Rr. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


Se 3e Israel aftir 


- seke that thing that is his owne, but 


I Therfore rv. 
P Om. sx. 
a flee 3e capy. fleeth sx. 
2 to whom o. which rx. 
eOm.r. 
1 ben oo breed and oo bodi r. 
4 thing, as who say nay Q. 
w whethir y. 
yOm. 9. 2 edifien not my neizbore 9. 4% sekith ao. » another, that is, that may 


Vv to the r. 


S 30u not IR. 
x and alle k pr.m, 


X. 12——25. 


stondith’, se he, that he falle not. 
Temptacioun take ‘not 30u‘*, but mannus 13 


* that is, lede 
not 30u into 
consent and 


temptaciount ; for God is trewe, which Wohing. ve. 
a t no but man- 
schal not suffre 30u to be temptid aboue nes tempta- 
that thatt 3e moun; but he schal make ee oie 
: . cioun that mai 
with temptacioun also purueyaunce, that foun ta 


3e moun suffre. Wherfor, 3e most dere-14eschewid of , 
pes man in presen 
worthe to me, fle 3e fro" worschiping of _ lijf; that is, 
: temptaci f 
maumetis. As to prudent men Y speke, 15 yenial synne. 
us $ * Lire here and 
deme 3e 30u” silf that thing that Y seie. le Clon 
Whether the cuppe of blessyng which Ie een ae 
we blessen, is not the comynyng of  acioun is, that 
Core a man set 
Cristis blood? and whether the breed nede either tri- 
which we breken, is not the takyng™ of pak ot re 
the bodi of the Lord? For we manye 171m seekinge ie 
ben o breed and o bodi, alle* we that Peers ie 
suure tor Uris) 
taken part of o breed and of o cuppe. is mannes 
: . : temptacionn, bi 
Se 3e Israel aftir the fleisch, whethir 18 which a man 
thei that eeten sacrifices, ben not par-  Progith anen- 
tyneris of the auter? What therfor seie19 a a bai 
Y, that a thing that is offrid to idols is brose. Either 
° . . mannes tempt- 
ony thing, or that the idol is ony 


acioun is to 


thing? But tho thingis that hethene 20 (yuna in 
men offren, thei offren to deuelis, and then the 
reuthe is, and 
not to God. But Y nyle’, that 3e ben tis ¥ith won 
. . entent; as 
maad felowis of feendis; for 3e moun  whanne aman 


with good en- 


not drynke the cuppe of the Lord, and tent failith in 
the cuppe of fendis; 3e moun not bea) tence 
parteneris of the boord of the Lord, and 


either whanne 
: he is stirid to 
of the bord of feendis. Whether we han 22 ae ce bie 
ae rother. 
enuye to the Lord? whether we ben for cause of a- 
Pil di 
strengere then he? Alle thingis ben than Cinen 
leeueful to me, but not alle thingis ben peesiblenesse 
peas axith; but it is 
spedeful. Alle thingis ben leeueful} to 23 the deueles pre- 
ede > snmpcioun, that 
me, but not alle thingis edifien. No man 24a man loueouer 
myche his owne 
sentence [ve] 

: ° : o- either haue 
that thing that is of an othere. A] thing 25 (iis to betere 
that is seld in the bocherie, ete 3e, ax- men, and de- 

. a arte comun- 
ynge no thing for conscience, The erthe 26 ynge, and make 


k Om. sx. Ilsee he mopar. ™ mannes 
q that ato. Om. w,  ° the temptacioun sx. 
¥3oure 0. Wdemethsx. * Om. o. 
20m. ry. » and wher r. 
fOm. Ww. & Om. ox. » parting c. i1Om. 
m or sacrificis in the lawe of Moyses 9. Om. x. 

TOm.sy. Sthat3er. §§ the 
W speden, or helpen to my course Q. 


t Om, rk prem. " fro the mac. Om. h pr. m. 


Y wole not Ia. 


X. 26—XI. 5. 


bocherie’, ‘ete 3e°, no thing axynge for 
26consciencef, The erthe and the plente of 
27it, is ‘the Lordis’. Forsoth if ony of bb 
vnfeithful', ‘or hethen men‘, clepith 30u to 
souper', and 3e wolen go, al thing that is 
sett to 3ou, ‘ete 3e™, nothing axynge for 
28conscience. If" ony man sothli® ‘schal 
seieP, This thing’ is offrid to ydols, nyle 
je ete, for him that schewide', and for 
29conscience ; forsothe I seie not, thi con- 
science, but of anothir®. Sothli wherto is 
my liberte', ‘or freedom", demyd of an- 
30 othir mannus conscience? Therfore if’ I 
take part with grace’, what am I blas- 
femyd, ‘for that I do graces*, ‘or thank- 
3iyngisY? Therfore where? 3e eten, or 
drynken, or don any othir thing, do je 
szalle thingis in to* glorie? of God. Be 3e 
withoute offencioun, ‘or sclaundre*, to 
Jewis, and* hethene men, and to the 
33chirche of God; as and I by alle thingis 
plese to alle men®, not sechinge what is 
profitable to me, but ‘that that® to! many 
meni, that thei be maad saaf, 


CAP. Xk 


1 Be 3e ‘my foloweris*, as and I of Crist. 
2¥Forsoth, britheren', I preise 3ou, that bi 
alle thingis 3e be myndeful of™ me"; ‘as 
and° IJ bitook to? 30u my comaundementis, 
33e kepen?. Forsothe™ I wole ‘30u for to® 
wite, that Crist is the heed' of ech man; 
forsoth® the heed of the womman is the 
man; forsoth the heed of Crist, God’. 
4Ech* man preyinge, or prophesyinge, 
5‘the heed* hilidY, defoulith his heed. For- 
soth ech womman preiynge, or prophesy- 
inge, ‘the heed? not hilid, defoulith hir 
heed; forsoth® it is oon, as 3if sche be 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


357 


and the. plente of it is, the Lordis. If*27 
ony of hethene men clepith* 30u to soper, 
and 3e wole go, al’ thing that is set to 
jou, ete 3e, axynge no thing for con- 
science. But if ony man seith, This2s 
thing is offrid to idols, nyle 3e ete, for 
hym that schewide, and for conscience ; 
and Y seie not, thi conscienee, but of an 29 
othere. But wherto is my fredom dem- 
ed of an othere mannus conscience ? 
Therfor if Y take part with grace, what 30 
am Y blasfemed, for that that Y do 
thankyngis? Therfor whether 3e eten, or3! 
drynken, or don ony other thing, do 3e 
alle thingis ‘in to® the’ glorie of God. 
Be 3e with outen sclaundre to Jewis, 32 
and to hethene men, and to the chirche 
of God; as Y bi alle thingis plese to alles 
men, not sekynge that that is profitable 
to me, but that that zs profitable to 
manye men, that thei be maad saaf, 


CAP. XI. 


Be 3e my foleweris, as Y am of Crist. 1 
And, britheren, Y preise jou, that bi alle2 
thingis 3e ben myndeful of me; and as 
Y bitook to 301 my comaundementis®, 3e 
holden. But Y wole that 3e wite, that3 
Crist is heed of ech man; but the heed 
of the womman is the man; and the heed 
of Crist 7s God. Ech man* preiynge, or 4 
profeciynge, whanne his heed is hilid, 
defoulith his heed. But ech womman 5 
preiynge, or profeciynge, whanne hir heed 
is not hilid, defoulith hir heed; for it is 
oon, as if sche were pollid§ And if aé 


d hocherie, or in the plater cupr, © eteth x. f conscience of this mete or of this Q. & of the Lord carper. 


hOm.y. 41 Om. y pr.m. i unfeithful men r. 
mesurable Q. eteth x. " Butif r. 
mete Q. * scheweth o. shewide this thing Q. 
W grace, or thanckyng Q. 
Gprm. the glorie aemnopesTywxy. 
f that at o. that that vy. & that at o. 
folewers of me eT. | brethere. ™ too. 
POm.r. 4dholden vy. * For forsothe c. 
vis God syxy.  ® Forsoth ech s. 
a for y. 


2 For if a pr.m, And if cb sec. m. k prem. 
€ comaundement k.  f ballid a sec. m. 


k Om. ox. 
© forsothe o. Om. r. 
8 another mans Q. 
x Om. o, for that that I do graces r. 

¢ Om. ox. 

h is profitable to vr. 
> me, or of my autorite or power Q. 
8 30u to sx. that 3e r. 
x whanne the hed is r. 


a clepe x. clepen h. 


Ithe soper w. ™ ete 3e, 3if it nede 3ou, 
P seith v. sey to 300 x pr.m. 4 thing, or this 
tfredom o. %Om. ox. Vv Om, w. 
yOm. ox. 2 whether cox. ?#Om. 
d and to w. ®& men withouten slaundre @. 
i men profitith Q. k the folowers of me Ga. 
© and as GmgTrx. and w. 
t heuyd G et s passim fere. ™ but rv. 
¥ veilid s. | whanne the hed is not rv. 


bthato. ¢toapr.m. 4Om.c., 


discencioun and 
the sacrilegie of 
eresie. The 
Glose here, re- 
hersinge Aus- 
lin in his book 
of the Lordis 
Sermoun in the 
hill, and in his 
book of Baptim. 


t that is, it is 
leeueful to me 
to ete thingis 
offrid to idols. 
alle thingis ben 
leeueful to me; 
that is, meetis 
forbeden in 
Moises lawe be 
Jeenefu] to me. 
Lire here. v. 


* The man is 
vndirstonden 
the resoun of 
the soule, the 
womman is the 
sensualite either 
lyking of body; 
the spirit and 
resoun schal be 
ocupied aboute 
gostly thingis, 
and it schal 
reule the soule 
and refreyne 
sensnalite, that 
it be not occu- 
pied ouer myche 
aboute temporal 
thingis ; ellis if 
this processe of 
Poule here is 
not referrid to 
sum goostly 
thing, but to 
the nakid let- 
tre, it is a veyn 
thing. Forwhi 
a man is maad 
to the ymage of 
God, bi the 
soule, and not 
bi the bodi ; 
and thus is a 
womman also 
in her soule. 
The Glose here, 
rehersinge Aus- 
tyn in his book 
of the Trinite, 
and on Genesis. 
ve. 


358 


6maad ballid, ‘pollid, or clippid®. For® if 
a wominan be not veylid, ‘or keuerid4, be 
she pollid; for® if it is foul thing tof a 
womman for® to be pollid', or for’ to‘ be 
maad! ballid™, veyle", ‘or hyde®, she hir 
z7heed. Sothly a man schal not veyle?, ‘or 
hyde‘, his heed, for he is the ymage and 
glorie™ of God; forsothe a womman is 
sthe glorie of man. Sothlis a man is not 
oft the womman, but the womman of the 
yman. ‘And forsothe™ the man is not 
maad’ for the womman”, but the wom- 
ioman for the man*. Therfore the wom- 
man schal haue aY veyle on hir heed, and 
ufor aungels*. Netheles neithir the man? 
withouten womman?, neither the® wom- 
izman* withouten man®, in the Lord. For- 
whi as the wommanf of mans, so and 
man* by woman‘; forsothe alle thingis 
i30f* God. 3e 3o0u! silf deme™; bicometh®, 
‘or bisemeth®, it a womman not veylidP 
i1forl to preye God? Neither the kynde it 
silf techith vs", forsoth® thatt if a man 
norische" long heer’, it is yuel fame, ‘or 
15 sclaundre*, to him; but if a womman 
norische long heerx, it is glorie to hir, 
forY heeris ben 3ouun to hir for veyle, ‘or 
wheuneryng?. Forsoth if ony man is seyn 
for* to be ful of stryf ‘among 3o0u", we 
han not such custom, neither the chirche 
170f God “hath sich*®. Sothli this thing I 
comaunde’, not preisynge, that 3e comen 
to gidere not in to betere thing, but into 
isworse. First forsoth ‘jou comynge® to 
gidere into chirche, I heere’ ‘departyngis, 
or dissenciouns®, for' ‘to be, and of partye 


> Om. Ge prim. mperx. or polled o. either pollid, either clippid r. 
1 Om. GwPesTx. 

4 Om. ox. or veilen s. or hile vr. 
u For whi r. 


£ Om. cupstx. 4+ balled ox. 
° Om. Nox. or hile vy. P hiden s. 
8 For whi rv. + firste mude of @. 


fOm. s. 
n veile sche ¥. 
glorie sxy. 
ouerlede hir Q. 
igs vy. >the womman aNogswx. ¢ Om. 4. 
man sx. hmanisr. ithe womman s. 

© or semeth A. Om. ox. 
osywxy. ™noryscheth o. 
Jirste trespas and obeischaunce Q. 
opetx. hath such custom v. 

8 heere that r. 


V heer, for his lust @. 
¥ for whi r. 


& Om. Rr. 
n jour E. 
gruabeeghk sec. m. oa8. 
eth eh. W heeres R. 
ruxab pr. m. ceghk sec. m. oaf. 


h Om. k prim. 
© do EQeg. for to m pr.m. to doc. 
F nursheth rh. 


x Om. EIgg. Y Om. EFio. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


x man, to helpe him and obeische to hym Q. 
4 womman zs Pr. 
k ben of ov. 
P veylid, or couerid mpeT. 4 Om. GmpesTx. 
w Om. ox. 
z Om. Nox. 
4 comaunde to 30u x pr. m. 
h discension o. discensiouns x. - i Om. srx. 


ithe womman 1 pr.m. b. 
P preieris EQeeg. preier R pr. m. 
8 heeris KR. 
2 ether departingis K marg. 
> the whiche k pr.m. 


XI. 6—18. 


womman be not keuered, be sche pollid ; 
and if it is foul thing to a womman to 
be pollid, or to be maad ballid, hile sche 
hir heed. But a man schal not’ hile7 
his heed, for he is theé ymage and the 
glorie of God; but a womman is the 
glorie of man. For a man is not of thes 
womman, but the womman of the man. 
And the man is not maad for the wom-9 
man, but the womman for the man. 
Therfor the womman schal haue an hil-10 
yng on hir heed, also for aungelis. Ne-11 
theles nether the man 7s with outen 
womman!, nether the womman zs* with 
oute man, in the Lord. Forwhi as the1e 
womman 7s of man!, so the man ts™ bi 
the womman; but alle thingis ben of 
God. Deme 3e 30" silf; bisemeth it a13 
womman not hilid on the heed to® preye? 
God4? Nether the kynde it silf techith 14 
vs, for if a man nursche” longe heer’, it 
is schenschipet to hym; but if a" wom-1s 
man nurische’ longe heer’, it is glorie 
to hir, for heeris ben 3ouun to hir for 
keueryng. But if ony man is seyn to16 
be ful of strijf, we han noon siche cus- 
tom, nethir the chirche of God. But thisi7 
thing Y comaunde, not preisynge, that 
3e comen togidere not in to the* betere, 
but in to they worse. First for whanne1s 
je comen: togidere in to the chirche, Y 
here that discenciouns’ ben, and in parti 
Y bileue*. For it bihoueth eresies to be, 19 
that thei that’ ben prouyd, ben opynli 
knowun in 30u. Therfor whanne 3e20 
comen togidere in to oon, now it is not 


4Om. o. ©& forsothe r. 
1Om. x. ™ polled ox. 
rOm. a. ' the 
W woman, to mysuse hir, or 
ythe o. 4 aungeles, or prestes NQ. ® man 
ethe man wv. fwommanisr. & the 

m demeth sx. ® bisemeth o. 
rvs thateg. %forv. t Om. 
x heer, not for pride, but knowynge hir 
2Om.sx. > Om. r. © Om. 6 prim m 
¢ whanne 5e comen ry. _—f the ehirche r. 
k ben Fr. 


e Om. sx. 
k Om. empex. 


v Om. o. 


lsour GMPeT. 


Ithe mana. ™Om.a. 

4 to God EIkw 
a Om.a. ¥ nursh- 
8 leeue © sec. m. EIKM 


k Om. k pr. m. 


t ether yuel fame K marg. 


XI. 19—30. 


191 bileue. Forwhi! it bihoueth heresies 
for™ to be, that thei ‘the which" ben prou- 
20yd, be maad knowun® in? 30u. Therfore 
‘jou comynge! to gidere into oon; now it 
21is not for™ to ete the Lordis sopere’; for- 
soth' ech man ‘bifore takith" his sopere 
for’ to ete, and sothely anothir” is* hun- 
22grie, another’ forsoth is drunkyn. Wher’ 
3e han not housis for* to ete and drynke®, 
or 3e dispisen the chirche of God, and 
confounden® hem that han not? What 
schal I seye to 30u? I preise 30u; in this 
23sthing I preise’ not. Forsothe I haue 
takun of the Lord that thing, ‘the which¢ 
and I haue bytakun‘ to jou. For the 
Lord Jhesu&, in what ny3t he was by- 
2strayed, took breed, and ‘doynge graces*, 
‘or thankyngis', he* brak, and seide, Take 
3e, and ‘ete 3e!; this is my body, the™ 
which schal be bitrayd for 30u; do 3e 
asthis thing ‘in to my mynde. Also and 
he took the cuppe, aftir® he hath? soupid, 
seiynge, This cuppe is the newe testament 
in my blood; do 3e this thing, how ofte 
euere 3e schulen drynke‘, in to my mynde. 
26Sothli® how ofte euere 3e schulen ete this 
breed, and schulen® drynke the cuppe, 3e 
schulen schewe' the deeth of the Lord, 
27til he come. ‘And so" who euere ‘schal 
ete’ the breed, or drynke” the cuppe of 
the Lord vnworthily, he schal be gilty of 
28the body and* blood of the Lord. For- 
soth proue a man him silf, and so ete he 
of ‘the ilkeY breed, and drynkeYY of the 
zgcuppe. Forsoth’ he that etith and drynk- 
ith vnworthily, etith and drynkith dom, 
‘or danpnacioun*, to hym», not wysely 
30 demynge the* body of the Lord. Therfore 
among 30u manye® syke, and vnstronge’, 
‘or feble’, and manye slepen, ‘or deien®, 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


359 


- to ete the Lordis soper; for whi ech man ai 


bifor takith his soper to ete, and oon is 
hungry, and another is® drunkun. Whe- 22 
ther 3e han not housis to ete and 
drynke, or 3e dispisen the chirche of 


_God,. and confounden hem that han 


noon? What schal Y seie to jou? Y 

preise 30u, but here yn Y precise 307 not. 

For Y haue takun of the Lord that 2s 
thing, which? Y haue bitakun to 3o0u. 

For the Lord Jhesu, in what ni3t he 

was bitraied, took breed, and dide thank- 24 
yngis, and brak, and seide, Take 3e, and 

ete 3e; this is my bodi, which schal be 
bitraied for. 30u; do 3e this thing in to 

my mynde. Also the cuppe, aftir that 25 

he hadde soupid, and seide, This cuppe 

is the newe testament in my blood; do 3e 

this thing, as ofte as 3e schulen drynke, 

in to my myude. For as ofte as 3e schu-26 

len ete this breed, and schulen® drynke 

thef cuppe, 3e schulen telle the deth* of —* in represent- 
the Lord, til that he come. Therfor who 27 pane La 
euere etith the breed, or drynkith the aa ue 
cuppe of the Lord vnworthili, he schal "7" ¥ 
be gilti of the? bodi and of the" blood of 

the Lord. But preue a man hym silf,2s 

and so ete he of ‘the ilke! breed, and 
dryrike* of the cuppe. For he that etitl 29 

and drinkith vnworthili, etith and drink- 

ith doom to hym, not wiseli demyng the 

bodi of the Lord. Therfor among 30u30 
many ben sijke and feble, and manye 

slepen, And if we demyden! wiseli vss 

silf, we schulden not be demyd; buts 
while we ben dcemyd of the Lord, we 

ben chastisid, that we be not dampnyd 

with this world. Therfor, my britheren, 3s 
whanne 3e comen togidere to ete, abide 

3e togidere. If ony man hungrith, ete 3: 


. | Forwhi and x..™Om. nsx, ® that yx. S open s pr.m. Pto cmper. Iwhanne 3ecomeny, * Om.sx. 


$ soper, sith 3e ben departide fro oon hede @. t forwhi rv. ¥ presumeth o. v Om. sx, W and an- 
othere w. x Om. y and anothir n. 2 Whether c. a Om. s. b drynke rather at home @. 
© confounden, or schamen Q. 4 preise 30 cunPQT. © Om. 4. which y. f30fen o, & Jhesu Crist n, 
h dide thankingis r. i Om. anovivx. or thankis cup. kaondy. ‘etithx, ™m™Om.ry. 2 in xy. 
° aftur that ry. Phadde wy. had op. 4drynke iQ. *Fory. *Om.emor. ttelle y.  Therfore r. 
Vv etith rv. w drinkith pv. x and of the x. Y that x, yy drinke he m. 2 For v. a Om. Nx. 
bhym silf w pr.m. © the worthynesse of the @. 4 ben manye cer, many ben v. feeble vy. f Om. 
ovx. & Om. x. ; 

¢ Om. A. d that 1k. e€Om.1 fthist & Om. m, bh Om. A, i thilke 1k pass, that r. 


k drynke he Ka. ! deemen gk. 


360 


31 For if we demeden® wysely vsi silf, forsoth 
32we schulden not be demed; sothli the 
while we ben demed of the Lord, we ben 
chastysid, that we ben not dampned with 
a3this world. ‘And so*, my_britheren, 
whatne 3e comen to gidere for! to ete, 
abyde 3e to gidere™. If ony man hun- 
sigrith", ete he at hom®, that 3e come not 
to gidere in to dom. Sothli I schal dis- 
pose othere thingis, whanne I schal come. 


CAP. XII. 
1 Forsothe of spiritual? thingis, britheren, 
2I nyle ‘30u for to? vnknowe. Sothly™ 3e 
witen, for‘ whanne 3e weren hethen men, 
ast 3e weren ledd goynge to doumbe symy- 
3lacris. Therfore® I make knowun to 3ou, 
that no man spekinge in the spirit of God, 
seith departynge fro Jhesu; and no man 
may’ seye the Lord Jhesu is”, no* but in 
4the Hooly Gost. Sothli departingis of 
gracis ben, forsothe’ the same Spirit’; 
sand departyngis of seruyngis*, forsothe® 
6the same Lord’; and departingis of 
worchingis ben‘, forsoth® the same God’, 
that worchith alle thingis in alle thingis. 
7¥Forsoth to ech man the’ schewynge of 
spirit is 3ouun to profyt. To anothir for- 
soth by spirit the word of wysdoim is 
830uun; to anothir sothli the word of 
skunnynge, aftir® the same spirit; feith 
to another, in the same spirit; to another, 
10 grace of heelthis', in o spirit; to another, 
the worchinge of vertues ; to another, pro- 
phesye ; to another, discrescioun, ‘or verrey 
huowynge*, of spiritis; to another, kyndis 
of tungis, ‘or dangagis'; to another, in- 
terpretynge™, ‘or expownyng", of wordis. 
11Forsoth alle thes thingis oon and° the 
same spirit worchith, departynge to ech 
i2by him? silf as he wole. Sothli4 as ther 
is o body, and hath many membris, for- 


b demeno. ioure caper. * Therfore r. 


jow alle g. ®% hungre G pr.m. 
@ 30u to sx. 3e that je r. 
xOm.sy.  Y¥ but r. 

departer Q. Lord is r. 
k Om. ox. ! Om. ox. 


t For r. 8 that r. 


dOm.s. ©& but r. 
™ expounynges o. 


mitalisa prim. it is al EKR sec.m. b pr.m.k. al R prom. b see. m. 


Rprm.ke Pina prim. k prom. 4 Om. rho. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


10m. sx. 
° home, in priuyte, that he sclaundre not in apert Q. 
thou F. 
z Spirit is the 3ewer 9. Spirit is v. 

f God is r. 
2 Om. ox. 


XI. 31——XII. 12. 


he at home, that 3e come not -togidere 
in to doom*, And Y schal dispose othere 
thingis, whanne Y come. 


CAP. XII. 

But of spiritual thingis, britheren, Y1 
nyle that 3e vnknowun. For 3e witen,2 
that whanne 3e weren hethene men, hou 
3e weren led goynge to doumbe man- 
metis. Therfor Y make knowun to 30u,3 
that no man spekynge in the spirit of 
God, seith departyng fro Jhesu; and no 
man may seie the Lord Jhesu, but in the 
Hooli Goost. And dyuerse graces ther 4 
ben, but 7¢ ¢s al oon Spirit; and dyuerses 
seruyces ther ben, but zt ts al oon Lord; 
and dyuerse worchingis ther ben, but ‘alé 
is™ oon God, that worchith alle thingis 
in alle thingis. And to ech man the7 
schewyng of spirit is jouun to profit. 
The" word of wisdom is 3ouun to oon bi 
spirit; to another the word of kunnyng,s 
bi the same spirit; feith to another, in theg 
same spirit; to anothere, grace of helthis, 
in o spirit; to another, the? worchyng of 10 
vertues; to another, profecie; to another, 
very knowyng of spiritis; to another, 
kyndis of langagis; to another, expown- 
yng of wordis. And oon and? the same 
spirit worchith alle these thingis, depart- 
ynge to ech bi hem silf as he wole. For tz 
as ther is o body, and hath many mem- 
bris, and alle the? inembris of the bodi 
whanne tho ben manye, ben o bodi, so 
also Crist. For in o spirit alle we ben 1s 


m to gedir, that an acceptable sacrifice be of 
P the spirituel @. 
w Om, x. 

bdbut vr. ¢ Lord is the 
hton. bir. i heeles o. 
Phem acmopestyw. 4 For r. 


u Forsothe 0. v Om. a. 
@ seruyngis ben r. 
& Om. G& pr.m. 


in op. 


. And the k prim. © Om. 


* that is, into 
joure dampna- 
cioun. Lyre 
here. ve. 


XII. 1328. 


soth alle the membris of the body, whanne4 
thei ben manye,-ben o body, so and Crist. 
13‘And sotheli® in o spirit alle we ben bap- 
tisid in to o body, either’ Jewis, eithert 
hethene", either’ seruauntis, either’ fre; 
and alle we ‘han drunken” in o spirit. 
14Forwhi and the body is not o membre, 
isbut manye. If* the foot ‘schal seye’, For 
I am not the honde, I am not of the body; 
isnot therfore ‘it is not? of the body. And 
if the eere ‘schal seye*, For I am not the 
y3e,1 am not of the body; not therfore ‘it is 
iz7not® of the body. If al the body be? y3e, 
where is heringe®? and if a) the body bef 
is heeringe, where is smellinge®? Now for- 
soth God hath put membris, and ech of 
i9hem in the body, as he wolde. ‘That if 
alle" weren o membre, where! the body ? 
29 But now sothli many membris, sothli o 
21body. Forsoth the y3e ‘schal not mowe* 
seye to the hond, I haue no! nede to thi 
werk; or eft the heed to the feet, -3e ben 
2enot necessarie to me. But moche more 
tho that ben seyn for™ to be more syke, 
‘or lowere®, membris of the body, ben 
23 more nedeful; and to hem that® we gessen 
for? to be vnnoblere? membris of the body, 
we 3yuen more honour ‘in cumpas'; and 
tho membris that ben vnhonest *’, han 
24more honeste. Forsoth oure honest mem- 
bris ‘of noon han nede'; but" God tem- 
pride’ the body, 3yuynge more worschipe 
asto it, to whom it failide, that debaat be 
not in the body, but that the membris 
ben bisy into the same thing for ech 
26othir. And if o membre suffrith” ony 
thing, alle membris suffren  therwith ; 
ethir if o membre glorieth*, alle membris 
27ioyen to gidere. Forsoth 3e ben the body 
2s of Crist,.and membris of membre’. And 
sothli God puttide? summe? in the chirche, 
first apostlis, the secunde tyme? prophetis, 


Gand whan w. * For whi r. 


fillid with drink y. * Andifyv. Y seith 7. 
the v. be the cuxy. €theheering xy. fis v. 
werev. Kmaynotvy. IJnot x. ™ Om. sx. 


tin enmpas, ofte tymes clothinge hem q. abonten x. 


hut kK. ‘tempreths. Wsuffre x. * glories. 
b Om. x. 
Tink. $sthif. tschal seiek prim. seie k sec. m. 


Ytohemwer. 2Om.R. 4 thingis R. 


8 other 1 et P passin. 
Z is it not o. 
& the smelling x. 
n Om. x. 
S more vnhonest o. 
Y membris sx. 


b suffre k. 
VOL. Iv. 3A 


I. CORINTHIANS. 361 


-baptisid ‘in to" o bodi, ether Jewis, ether 


hethene, ether seruauntis, ether free ; 
and alle we ben fillid with drink in o 
spirit. For the bodi is not 0 membre, 14 
but manye. If the® foot seith', For Y15 
am not the hoond, Y am" not of the 
bodi; not therfor it is uot of the bodi. 
And if the ere seith, For Y am not thes 
ize, Y am not of the bodi; not therfor it 
is not of the bodi. If al the bodi is the17 
ize, where*is heryng? and if al the 
bodi is heryng, where is smellyng? Butis 
now God hath set membris, and ech of 
hem in the bodi, as he wolde’. That” 19 
if alle weren o membre, where were the 
bodi? But now ther ben many mem- 20 
bris, but o bodi. And the ize may not21 
seie to the hond, Y haue no nede to thi 
werkis; or eft the heed to the feet, 3e 
ben not necessarie to me. But myche22 
more tho that ben seyn to be the lowere 
membris of the bodi, ben more nedeful; 
and .thilke that we gessen to be the*23 
vuworthier membris of the bodi, wey 
3yuen more honour ‘to hem?; and tho 
membris that ben vnonest, han more 
oneste. For oure oneste membris han2+ 
nede of noon; but God tempride tlie 
bodi, 3yuynge more worschip to it, to 
who it failide, that debate be not in25 
the bedi, but that the membris be bisi 
in to the same thing* ech for othere. 
And if o membre suffrith> ony thing, 26 
alle membris suffren therwith; ethir if 
o membre ioieth, alle membris ioien to- 
gidere. And 3e ben the bodi of Crist, 27 
and membris of membre. But God sette 28 
sum men in the chirche, fyrst apostlis, 
the secunde tyme prophetis, the thridde 
techeris, aftirward vertues, aftirward© 
graces of heelyngis, helpyngis. gouern- 
ails, kyndis of langagis, interpretaciouns 


Yors. W ben 

d were o. is 
i wher is nog. where 
POm.sx. 4 vnnoble rv. 
than nede of noon Fr." no 
2 putte GuPesTx. %summen fr. 


u hethen men GaNPOT. 

aseith vy. © is it not o. 
h alle men rv. 
© that that N. 


tors. 


uOm. Rr. Ywoler. W Anda. * Om. bk. 


° after rR. 


362 


the thridde® techeris4, aftirward vertues, 
aftirward graces® of heelingis, helpingis, 
governaylis, ‘or gonernyngis', kyndis of 
langagis, interpretaciouns of wordis. 

29 Wher® alle® apostlis ? wher! alle‘ prophe- 

3otis? wher alle techeris? wher! alle ver- 
tues? wher! alle men han grace of heel- 
ingis? wher alle speken with langages? 
wher! alle interpreten™, ‘or expownen® ? 

31 Forsoth sue 3e the bettere gostli 3yftis°. 
And 3it I schewe to 30u a more excellent?, 
‘or worthi4, weye'. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 If Ispeke with tungis of men and® aun- 
gels, ‘sothli It haue not charite, I am maad 
as bras sownnynge, or a symbal tynkynge. 

2 And if I schal® haue prophesye’, and ‘haue 
knowun” alle mysteries, and al kunnynge, 
‘or setencex, and if I schalY haue al feith, so 
that I‘bere ouere? hillis ‘fo 0 place to an- 
othe7*, forsoth if I‘schal not haue® charite, 

31am no3t. And if I schal¢ departe alle my 
goodis into metis of pore men, and if I schal¢ 
bytake my body, so that I brenne, forsothe 
if I‘schal not hauef charite, it profitith to 

4me no thing. Charite is pacient®, it is be- 
nygne, ‘or of good will", charite enuyeth 
not, it doth not! gyle, it is not inblowyn* 
swith pride', it is not ambicious, ‘or co- 
ueitous of worschipis™, it sekith not tho 
thingis that ben her™ owne, it is not stir- 
cid to wraththe, it thenkith® not yuel, it 
joyeth not im? wickidnesse, forsoth it 
zioyeth togidere to4 treuthe; it suffrith alle 
thingis, it bileueth alle thingis', it hopith 
alle thingis, it susteyneth alle thingis. 
sCharite fallith not’ down‘, where" pro- 
phecyes schulen be voydid*, ether” lan- 
gagis schulen ceesse, ether” science schal 
9be distroyed. Forsoth* of party we han 


¢ thridde tyme aro. 4 doctouris x. 


© grace N. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


f Om. ox. 


XI. 29—XIII. 9. 


of wordis. Whether alle apostlis? whe- 29 
thir alle prophetis? whether alle tech- 
eris ? whether alle vertues? whether 30 
alle men* han grace of heelyngis ? whe- 
ther alle speken with langagis? whether 
alle expownen? But sue 3e® the betere3i 
goostli 3iftis. And 3it Y schewe to 30u 
a more exellent weye. 


CAP. XIII. 


If Y speke with tungis of men andi 
of aungels, and Y haue not charite, Y 
am maad as bras sownynge, or a cymbal 
tynkyngef. And if Y haue prophecie,2 
and knowe alle mysteries, and al kun- 
nynge, aud if Y haue al feith, so that Y 
meue hillis fro her place, and Y hane 
not charite, Y am nou3t. And if Y de-3 
parte alle my goodis in to the metis of 
pore men, and yf Y bitake my bodi, so 
that Y brenne, and if Y haue not® cha- 
rite, it profitith to me no thing. Charites 
is pacient, it is benygne; charite enuyeth 
not, it doith not wickidli®, it is not 
blowun, it is not coueytouse, it sekiths 
not tho thingis that ben hise owne, it is 
not stirid to wraththe, it thenkith not 
yuel, it ioyeth not on wickidnesse, but ite 
ioieth togidere to treuthe; it suffrith alle7 
thingis, it bileueth alle thingis, it hopith 
alle thingis, it susteyneth alle thingis. 
Charite fallith neuere doun, whethers 
prophecies schulen be voidid, ethir lan- 
gagis schulen ceesse, ethir science schal 
be distried. For a parti we knowun,y 
and a parti we prophecien; but whanne 10 
that schal come that is parfit, that 
i whe- 


& Whether cg. halle ben emper. 


ther ex. alle bee pr.m. whether ex. ™ expowneno. ®%®Om.ox. © 3iftis, as is charite Q. 
Pexcellence y. or worthier 4. Om. orx. +f hy3e weyeo. Sandofr. ¢t sotheli if I ner. and I 
sothely 0. %Om. 7. ¥ prophecies o. *knowe vy. *Om.ox. yYOm. vr. 2 ouer bere cGuNopor. 
2 Om. ox. froo place til anothir yy. »forv. ¢ hauenotyr. 4@Om.r. e¢€ Om.r.  f hane not r. 
& pacient, or suffringe G sec.m. 2Om.ox. inoov. -*bloweny. 1Om. x. ™Om. x. his or. 
osekith y. Pon aGMNPQSTVX. of oY. of noon Ww. Gwith vy. of xy.  * thinges that ben to byleue g. 
Sneuere y. €Om.o. "whether caopgx. Vvoideg. Wors. * Fory. yOm. 7. 
dOm. Rr. & we egeg. Om. 1 prom. ftinglinge ». tynclynge ta. &noR. 4 cther gilefulli K marg. 


XIII. 10-—XIV. 7. 


10knowen, and of party we prophesien ; for- 
sothe' whanne that schal come* that is 
perfyt, that thing that is! of party, schal 
11 be avoydid™. Whanne I was a litil child, 
I spak as a litil child, I vndirstood as a 
litil child, I thou3te as a litil child; for- 
soth whanne I was maad man, I auoyd- 
ide® tho thingis that weren of a litil child. 
12 Forsoth we seen now by a myrour in aP 
derknesse, thanne forsothe face to face; 
now I knowe of party, ‘thanne forsoth® I 
13schal knowe, as and I am knowyn. Now 
forsothe dwellen feith, hope, and charite, 
thes thre; forsoth’ the mooste’ of thest is 
charite. . 
CAP. XIV. 
1 Sue 3e charite, loue 3e spiritual thingis, 
zmore forsoth that 3e prophecie. Sothli 
he that spekith in tunge, spekith not to 
men, but to God; forsoth" no man heer- 
ith. Sothli the spirit spekith mysteries. 
3Forwhi he that prophecieth, spekith to 
men, to edificacioun, and monestynge, and 
acomfortynge, ‘or solasynge’. He that 
spekith in tunge, edifieth him silf; for- 
soth he that prophecieth, edyfieth the 
schirche of God. Forsothe I wole ‘jou 
alle’ for* toY speke in tungis, ‘but more* 
‘for to* prophecie. Forwhi he that pro- 
phecieth, is more> than he that spekith 
in® tungis, ‘or dangagis’; no® but’ per- 
auenture he interprete’, ‘or declare’, that 
cthe chirche take edificacioun. Now for- 
soth, britheren, if! I schal* come to 3ou, 
spekynge! in™ tungis, what schal I" pro- 
fyte°, noP but if I schal? speke to 30u 
ether’ in® reuelacioun, ethirt in science", 
ether’ in prophecie, ether’ in techinge™? 
7Nethelees tho* thingis that ben with 
oute soule, ‘or lyf¥, 3yuynge voyces, 
ether pype, ether? harpe, no* but? thei¢ 


_men, but to God; for no man herith. But 


I. CORINTHIANS. 363 


thing that is of parti schal be auoidid. 
Whanne Y was a litil child, Y spak asi1 
a litil child, Y vndurstood as a litil child, 
Y thou3te as a litil child; but whanne 
Y was maad a man, Y auoidide! tho 
thingis that weren of a litil child. And iz 
we seen now bi a myrour in derknesse, 
but thanne face to face; now Y knowe 
of* parti, but thanne Y schal knowe, as 
Yam knowun. And now dwellen! feith, 13 
hope, and™ charite, these thre; but the 
most of these is charite. 


CAP. XIV. 
Sue 3e charite, loue 3e spiritual thingis, 1 
but more that 3e prophecien. And he2 
that spekith* in tunge, spekith not to 


* to speke iu 
tunge is to 
speke a thing 
not vndir- 
For hes stonden. no 
man heerith ; 


that is, vndir- 


the spirit spekith mysteries. 
that prophecieth, spekith to men to edi- 
ficacioun, and monestyng, and coumfort- _ stondith the 

. sentence hid 
yng. He that spekith in tunge", edifieth4 withinne. pro- 
hym silf; but he that prophecieth, edifi- pt ay 
eth the chirche of God. And Y wole,s cee ee 
that alle 3e speke in tungis, but more  % himeither 
that 3e prophecie. For he that prophe- saa) 
cieth, is more than he that spekith in profit of men. 
langagis; but perauenture he expoune, ee 
that the chirche take edificacioun. Bute 
now, britheren, if Y come to jou, and 
speke in langagis®, what schal Y profite 
to 30u, but if Y speke to 30u ethir in 
reuelacioun, ethir in science, ethir in 
prophecie, ether in techyng? For tho7 
thingis that ben withouten souleP, and 
3yueth4 voices, ethir pipe, ether harpe, 
but tho 3yuen distinccioun of sownyngis, 
hou sehal it be knowun that" is sungun, 
ether that that is trumpid? For if as 


ifory. Kecumtogpr.m. lschallbeo. ™voidid sx. %aman aGMNopsTYWwxy. © voidede sx. 
POm. ap. 4thanne s. but thanne ry. 'sothly s. 8 more aguNoposTivx. them & pr.m. MPQT. 
« forwhi ry. ¥ Om. GMNoprrx. or counseilynge 9. W that alle3eer. * Om. svx. yOm.r. 2 more 
forsothe x. tos. that 3e rx. >more worthy ye. ¢with ox. 4Om.noy. ¢€ Om. x. f but if x. 
& declare o. bOm. ox. 1Om. x pr.my. * On. rv. land speke vy. ™witho. itv. © profite to 
jour. POm.x. 9Om.r. ‘other wet Pp passim.ors. ‘inthe x. tor nsx. "the science r. 
Yorsx. Wtechyngis 9. *theeso. Y ether lijfo. Om. x. Zorsx. ®Om. x. » but if agmNoperx. 
© tho v. 

ivoidide rq. kan. 1 dwelleth rg. mOm.kpr.m. 9 tunge, that is, in straunge langage K. 


tungisk prom. Pthesouler. 4 3yuen xa. 


t that that ek sec. om. 


3AQ 


364 


schulen4 3yue distinccioun® of f ‘sownyngis, 
how schal it be kowd’ that is songun, 
sether® ‘that that! is harpid ? ‘And sothli* 
if the trumpe 3yue vneerteyn vois, who 
9schal make ‘him silf! redy to bateil? So™ 
and ‘no but® 3e° schulen? 3yue an opyn 
word by tunge, how schal ‘that that‘ is 
seid be knowun? Sothli? 3e schulen be 
1o spekynge in’ the eiris', ‘so manye as ben” 
tungis, ‘or dangagis’, in” this world, and 
ino thing is withoute voys. Therfore if I 
‘schal not knowe* the vertu of vois, I 
schal beY to him, to whom I schal speke, 
a barbar’, ‘or not vudirstondun*; and he 
12that spekith, to me ‘a barbar’. So and 
3e, for 3e ben loueris of spiritis*, to’ edifi- 
cacioun of the chirche seke® that 3ef be 
13 plenteuous. And therfore he that spekith 
in tunge, preie’, that he interprete, ‘or 
isexpowne. Forwhi if I preye in tunge, 
my spirit preieth; forsoth! my mynde, 
is‘or resoun*, is withoute fruyt. Therfore 
what thing is? I schal preie in spirit, I 
schal preie and in mynde, ‘or resoun); J 
schal seie salm in spirit, I schal seye salm 
Gin™ mynde, ‘or vesoun®. Forwhi if thou 
‘schalt. blesse® in spirit, who fulfillith? the 
place of an ydiote, ‘or vrlerid man4, how 
schal he" seie Amen vpon® thi‘ blessing, 
17 for he woot not, what thou seist ? Forwhi 
thon sothli doist wel gracis, ‘or thank- 
yngis", but another man’ is not edified. 
18I do graces” to my God, for I speke in 
i9the langagis* of alle 30u; but in the 
chirche I wole speke fyne wordis in iny 
witt, that and I teche othere men, than 
ten thousandisY of? wordis in tunge’ 
20 Britheren, nyle 3e be maad children in 
wittis, but in malice ‘be 3e litil; forsoth 


I, CORINTHIANS. 


XIV. 8—20. 


trumpe 3yue an vneerteyn soune, who: 
schal make hym silf redi to batel? Soo 
but 3e 3yuen an opyn word bi tunge, 
hou schal that that is seid be knowun ? 
For 3e schulen be spekynge in veyn. 
There ben many kyndis of langagis in10 
this world, and no thing is with outen 
vois. But if Y knowe not the vertu of11 
a vois, Y schal be to hym, to whom Y 
schal speke, a barbarik*; and he that 
spekith to me, schal be a barbarik. So12 
3e, for 3e ben loueris of spiritis, seke 3e 
that 3e be plenteuouse to edificacioun of 
the chirche. And therfor he that spek-13 
ith in langage, preie, that he expowne. 
For if Y preye in tunge, my spirit* prei-14* Porcine 
eth; myn vndurstondyng is with outen remedy Ga 
fruyt. What thanne? Y schal preye inis “”“"* °° 
spirit, Y schal preye in mynde; Y schal 
seie salm in spirit, Y schal seie sali 
alsot in mynde. For if thou blessist in 16 
spirit, who fillith® the place of an ydiot,: 
hou schal he seie Amen on thi bless- 
yng, for he woot not, what thou seist ? 
For thou doist wel thankyngis, but an17 
othir man is not edefied. Y thanke my 1s 
God, for Y speke-in the’ langage of alle 
jou; but in the chirche Y wole*® speke 19 
fyue wordis in my wit, that also Y teche 
othere inen, than ten thousynde* of Y 
wordis in tunge. Britheren, nyle 3e be 20 
maad children in wittis, but in malice 
be 3e children; but in? wittis be 3e parfit. 
For in the lawe it is writun, That® ina 
othere tungis and othere lippis Y schal 
speke to this puple, and nether so thei 
schulen here me, seith the Lord. Ther-22 
for langagis ben in to tokene, not to 
feithful men, but to men out of the 


4Om.v. ¢diserecioun x. f of vnderstondinge c sec.m. 8 eunde o. knowen vr. »orsx. 1 that 
ato. & For whiv. Jhymn. ™Om.o. obutifx. Oand3ew. POm.y. that ato. © For r. 
Sinton. teyre @ sec.m. eeres K. eiris, or firmament N. eir ry. ¥® As so inany kindis of yr. Vv Om. ox. 
w ben in rv. x knowe not r. Y not be o. z barbarik r. a Om. ox. > schal be a barbarik r. 
© spiritis, desirynge his 3iflis 9. spiritis, that is, of goostly 3iftis re. tothe cap. © seke 3e N. seketh 
sx. !Om.n. heo. 8 preyehe x, 4Om. nx. i Om. r.  * Om. ox. or vndirstondinge vy. 1 Om. 
norx. ™alsoin y. and in x sec.m. ™ Om. osrx. © blessist vy. P fillith yr. 9 Om. ox. or valerned 
manvw. TIN, Sonvx. tthe ewper, 'Om. x, Y¥QOm.os. Wthankynges 0. * langage sviry. 
tunge y. Y thousande ewpestx. 7% Om. x. @ tunge not undurstonde o. tunge oonly, mith outen de- 
clarynge @. > beth sx. 


8 that is, not undurstonden K marg. a barbarik, eithir straunge R. 
x thousandis 1kRehoa. 


ithk, v¥Om.a.  wW wille to 1 sec. m. 
that a pr.m. cab sec. m. 


u fnlfill- 
a For 


t Om. k pr. m. o sec. m. 
yOm. Ek prim. 2 witha. 


XIV. 21—32. 


2l1in wittis ‘be 3e perfyt. Sothly® in the 
lawe it is writun, For in othere tungis 
and othere’ lippis I schal speke to this 
peple, and nethir so ‘it schal¢ heere me, 
ezseith the Lord. ‘And sof langagis ben in 
to tokene, not to feithful men, but to 
men out of the feith; forsotlh prophe- 
syes: nots to men out of feith*, but to 
23feithful men. Therfore if al the chirche 
come to gidere in to oon, and alle men 
speke in tungis', sothli if ydiotesi entren*, 
‘or men out of the feith', wher thei ‘seyn 
24not™, What ben 3e wood"? Forsoth if 
alle men prophecien®, forsoth if ony vn- 
feithful man or ydiot entre, he is conuict 
250f alle, he is wyseli demed of alle?. For- 
soth? the hid thingis of his herte ben 
knowen, and‘ so he fallinge* doun ‘in tot 
the face, schal" worschipe God, schewinge’ 
26verily that God ‘in 3ou is’. Therfor, 
britheren, what* is? Whanne 3e coinen 
to gidere, ech of 30u hath a salin, he hath 
techinge, he hath apocalips, ‘or rewela- 
ciouny, he hath tunge, he hath ‘interpret- 
yuge’, ‘or expownynge*; be alle thingis 
27don. to edificacioun. Whethir a man 
spekith> in tunge, aftir® tweyne’, ‘or as 
moche thre®, and by partis‘, that oon in- 
28terprete®. Forsoth if ther be not an 
interpretour, be he stille, ‘or speke not}, 
in' the chirche; sothli speke he to him 
29 silf, and to God. Sothli* prophetis tweyne! 
or thre seye™, and othere” wysely° deme. 
30 That if ony thing? schal' be schewid to 
31 oon sittinge’, ‘the formere bet stille. For- 
soth® 3e mown proplicie alle, by’ ech bi 
him silf, that alle men lerne’, and alle* 
3zmoneste. And the spiritis of prophetis 


¢For y. 4 in other wx. 
feith acmNoPosTrVwxy. i tungis sonli a. 
entren vy. ™schulen not seie vy. ® voyde o. 
3 schal falle vy. tony. "and schal rv. 
Z expownyng 0. Om. Nox. ?speke x. 
men FV. 
spekynge in the chirche @. alle partis v pr.m. 
speke he not v. ithat spekith in a. * Om. v. 
men G sec. m. o wyse T. 
t be the former Gm PorT. 


b beth sx. 


a For vy. Vv Om. oer. 


b But a. 
b parties 1K. 
o and k prim. 


¢ Om. R pr.m. 
i be it doon K marg. 
P alle men K see.in. 


k ether ca. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


€ thei schulen r. 
J ydols x. 
° prophecieden wv. 
v and sehewe r. 
© be this don bi rv. 
® or as michel thre acoperwy. or as moche after thre 9. either thre at the mooste r. 
& interprete, or declare to the pepul Q. 
ltwo GmposTx. 
P deme what thei seyn Q. 
Ww lere sx. 


4 that is, reuelacioun K marg. 
10m. k prim. 


QI techeinn. Om. Rk, 


365 


feith ; but prophecies ben not to men 
out. of the feith, but to feithful men. 
Therfor if alle the chirche come togidere 23 
in to oon, and alle men speken in tungis, 
if idiotis, ether men out of the feith, 
entren, whether: thei schulen not seie, 
What ben 3e woode? But if alle men24 
prophecien, if ony vnfeithful man or idiot 
entre, he is conuyct of alle, he is wiseli 
demyd of alle. For the hid thingis 25 
of his® herte ben knowun, and so he 
schal falle doun on the face, and schal 
worschipe God, and schewe verili that 
God is in 30u. What thanne, britheren ? 26 
Whanne 3e comen togidere, ech of 3ou 
hath a salm, he hath techyng, he hath 


apocalips’, he hath tunge, he hath ex- 
pownyng; alle thingis be® thei’ don to 
edificacioun. Whether a man spekith in 27 
tunge, bi twei? men, ethir thre at the 
moste, and bi partis», that oon inter- 
prete'. But if there be not an inter-28 
pretour, be he stille in the chirche, and Veo 
. 3s AS 
speke he to hym silf and to God. Pro-29 man Js vnder- 
. « . stonden, the 
phetis tweine or* thre seie, and! othere™  softnesse or vn- 
pape : : stablenesse, that 
wiseli deme. But if ony thing be30;.  corupcoun 
schewid to a sittere, the formere be of fesche. Eche 
d ‘4 orsoth man 
stille. For 3e moun ‘prophecie alle", ech: 31 that is eels 
. e In mynade, ali 
bi hym silf, that? alle inen lerne, and _ slowe in bilene 
Pa and corrupt in 
alle? moneste. And the spiritis of pro- 32 werkis, uA sf 
phetis ben suget to prophetis; for whtisa fei a sie 
God is not of discencioun, but of pees; be is vndir- 
" . 7 : Ree stonden a wom- 
as in4 alle chirchis of hooli men ‘Y an ag 
° . « . é 1s not houm-= 
teche'. *Wymmen in chirchis be stille 5 34 bria with 
o, . intes. To al 
for it is not suffrid to hem to speke, Sire womman- 
= ysche men Y 
but to be suget, as the lawe oe But 35 yndirstonde 
if thei wolen ony thing lerne, ‘at ome’  Poule to bidde 
: : ae silence in the 
axe thei her hosebondis'; for it is fonle  chirche. o. 


f Therforer. ff Om. x. & ben not err. » the 
kOm.v. 1.0m. o. either men out of the feith 
P alle culpable 9. 4 For vr. * Om.o. 
Wisin jou cmerr. *in what w. Y Om.ox. 
4 two GapsTx. two logidere 9. twey 
f partis 
h Om. ox. or 
™ sey thei G sec.m. seith T. ® other 
d thing ofhardea *Om. ry. Sasittere r. 
x alle men Q. 


eOm.e. fOm.abpr.m. & two pass. 
m another k. 2 alle profecie nr. 


sOm. Rr. +t husbondis at hoome rR. 


366 


3aben sugetisY to prophetis?; sothli® God 
is not of dissencioun, but of pees; as? 
and¢ in alle chirchis of hooly men I teche*. 
34 Wymmen in chirchis be stille; sothli¢ 
it is not suffrid to hem for‘ to speke, but 
35 for to be suget, as the lawe seith. For- 
soth® if thei wolen ony thing lerne, at 
hom axe thei her hosebondis* ; forsothi it 
is foul thing* to! womman for™ to speke 
36in chirche". Whether of 30u the word of 
God cam forth, or to 30u aloone it cam? 
37 If ony man is seyn for® to be a prophete, 
‘or spiritual’, knowe he tho! thingis that 
I wryte to 3ou, for thei’ ben the co- 
38maundementis of the Lord. Forsothe if 
ony man vnknowith, he schal be vn- 
39knowen. ‘And so‘, bretheren, loue 3e fort 
to prophecie, and nyle 3e forbede for" to 
4ospeke in tungis’. Forsoth be alle thingis” 
don honestli*, and vp ordre in? 30u°. 


CAP. XV. 

1 Sotheli, britheren, I make the gospel 
knowun to 30n, ‘the which” I haue prech- 
id to 30u, thee which and 3e han takun, in 

2which and 3e stonden, by which and 3e 
ben® saued; by which resoun I haue 
prechid to 30u, if 3e hoolden, if 3e han not 

3bileuyd ydeli. Forsothf I bitook to 3ou 
in the firste that thing ‘that andg I took); 
for’ Crist was* deed for oure syunes, vp! 
4the scriptures; and for™ he was biried, and 
for™ he roos a3en in® the thridde day, vp° 
5the? scripturis; and for! he was seyn to 
Cephas, ‘that is, Petre', and aftir ‘this 
6things to enleuene; aftirwardt he was 
seyu to mo than fyue hundrid britheren 
to gidere, of the’ whiche manye dwellen 


¥ soget v. 


band aswxy. ¢ Om. 4G prim, NTWXy. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


z prophetis, eche mekely lernynge of other and comynyng with other Q. 
4 preche GarPor. 


XIV. 33—XV. 6. 


thing to a womman to speke in chirche’. 
Whether ‘of 30u’ the word of God cam3e 
forth’, or to* 3ou aloone it cam? If37 
ony man is seyn to be a prophete, or 
spiritual, knowe he tho thingisY that Y 
write to 3ou, for tho ben the comaunde- 
mentis of the Lord. And if ony man3s 
vnknowith, he schal be vnknowun. 
‘Therfor, britheren’, loue 3e to prophe-39 
cie, and nyle 3e forbede to speke in 
tungis. But be alle thingis don onestli, 40 
and bi due ordre in 3ou. 


CAP. XV. 


‘Sotheli, britheren*, Y make the gospel 
knowun to 30u, which Y haue prechid to 
30u, the which also 3e han takun, in which 
3e stonden, also® bi which’ 3e schulen be2 
sauyd ; ‘bi which resoun Y® haue prech- 
id to 30u, iff 3e holden’, ‘if 3e han not 
bileuyd ideli>, For Y bitook to 30u at3 
the bigynnyng that thing which also Y 
haue resseyued ; that Crist was deed for 
oure synnes, bi the! scripturis; and that 
he was biried, and that he roos a3en in 
the thridde dai, after scripturis; and thats 
he was seyn to Cephas, and aftir these 
thingis to enleuene; aftirward* he wase 
seyn! to mo than fyue hundrid britheren 
togidere, of whiche manye lyuen 3it, but 


a forwhi r. 


efory. fOm.sx.  & For v prim. 


h hosehondis, feithful in the Lord Q. iforv. ¥ Om.o. ltoa amnopostyxy.ac. ™Om.s. ® the 
chirche Gcunper. ° Om. x. FP Om.sx. Gtheo. ‘thor. 8s Therforer. tOm.sx. ¥% Om. nsx. 
¥ tungis, myche more for[be]de 3e not prophetis 9. Wthing n. * honestly with pees e. ¥ after Q. bi 
due y. “Z among o. 4 30u difore seyde go. > which v. thatx. ©Om.x. 4Om. x. ¢schulen be r. 
f For rv. & which also r. h bytoke, of the Holy Gost myth outen feynynge Q. i that vy. K is x. 
lafter caper. biv. ™thaty. ®Om.or. after cmopor. biv. POm.mpe. dthatr. 'Om. 
wox. S these thinges nvx. tand afterwardeo. Om. rv. 

u the chirche Kbg sec. m. kof. %¥Om.1. Wforthofjour *ofk. yOm.rprm 7Om 1. 
& Britheren EkmQRUxabeghkoa8. Bretheren sothli: see.m. % Om, Etga. ¢and alsoa. Om.R. 4 which 


also R. 


inveynt, iOm,1 ‘Kafterr. 1! yseyna, 


€ bi resoun of whiche saluacioun thou3 I 1. 


f but 1. & holden it 1. =} _-3e han bileened 


XV. 7-23. 


‘til to 3it”, forsothe summe* han slepte, 
zor dyedeY; aftirward he was seyn to 
sJames, aftirward to alle apostlis?. For- 
soth at the laste of alle, he was seyn and® 
9to me, as to a mysborn child. Forsoth® I 
am the leeste of apostlis, that am not 
worthi for® to be clepid apostle, for I 
1opursuede the chirche of God. Forsothe 
by the grace of God, I am that thing that 
Iam; and his grace was not voyde, ‘or 
ydel*, in me. But I trauelide more plen- 
tenously than alle thei; forsoth not I, but 
1ithe grace of God with me. Sothli whe- 
ther I, whether thei, so we han prechid, 
1zgand so 3e° han bileuyd. Forsoth if Crist 
is prechid, that he roos a3en fro deed 
spiritis’, hou’ ‘sume seyn® ‘in 3ou', fork 
the! azen rysinge of deed men is not? 
13 Forsoth if the™ a3en rysinge of deed men 
14is not, nether Crist roos". Sothli if Crist 
roos not, oure prechinge is veyn, oure 
isfeith is veyn. Forsoth and we® ben found 
fals witnessis of God, for we han seyd 
witnessynge a3ens God, that he reyside 
Crist, whom he reiside not, if deed men 
ieérysen not aj3en. Forwhy if deede men 
rysen not ajen, nether Crist roosP ajen ; 
i7that if Crist roos not a3en, oure feith is 
veyn4; forsoth’ 3it 3e ben in j3oure 
issynnes’. Therefore and*’ thei that slep- 
tent, ‘or dyeden", in Crist’, ‘han perischid. 
19 If in this lyf oonly we ben hopinge in 
Crist, we ben more wrecchis than alle 
zomen. Now forsoth Crist roos a3en, ‘fro 
deede men*, the firste fruytis of slepyngeY 
21inen, ‘or deyinge’; for sothli ‘bye a man 
deeth*, and bye a man? a3en rysinge of 
gzdeed men*. And as in Adam alle men 
deyen‘, so and® in Crist alle men schulen 
a3be quykenyd. Ech man forsothe in his 
ordre‘; first fruytis®, Crist, aftirward thei 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


367 


summe ben deed; aftirward he was seyu 
to James, and aftirward to alle the™7 
apostlis. And last of alle he was seyns 
also to me, as to a deed" borun child. 
For Y am the leste of apostlis®, that am9 
not worthi to be clepid apostle, for Y 
pursuede the chirche of God. But bi10 
the grace of God Y am that thing that 
Y am; and his grace was? not voide in 
me. For Y trauelide more plenteuously 
than alle thei; but not Y, but the grace 
of God with me. But whether Y, ori 
thei, so we han prechid, and so 3e1 han 
bileuyd. And if Crist is prechid, that 12 
he roos a3en fro deeth, hou seien sum- 
men among 30u, that the a3enrisyng of 
deed men is not? And if the ajenrisyng 13 
of deed men is not, nethir Crist roos ajen 
fro deeth. And if Crist roos not, oure 14 
preching is veyn, oure feith is veyn. And 15 
we ben foundun false witnessis of God, 
for we han seid witnessyng a3ens God, 
that he reiside Crist, whom he reiside 
not, if deed men risen not ajen. For- 16 
whi if deed men risen not a3en, nether 
Crist roos a3jen; and if Crist roos not 17 
a3en, oure feith is veyn; and 3it 3e ben 
in 30ure synnes. And thanne thei that is 
han diede in Crist, han perischid. If ints 
this life oneli we ben hoping in Crist, 
we ben more wretchis than alle meu. 
But now Crist roos™ a3en fro deth, the 20 
firste fruit of deed men; for deeth zas bi2i 
a man, and bi a man 2s* a3enrisyng fro 
deth. And as in Adam alle men dien, 22 
so in Crist alle men schulen be quyk- 
enyd. But ech man in his ordre; thes 
firste fruit, Crist, afterward thei that ben 
of Crist, that bileueden in the comyng 
of Crist; aftirward an ende, whanne heed 
schal bitake the kyngdom to God and to 


¥ to nowe 0. to 3it feithful in that byleue Q. X summe nitnessis in the same byleue Q. y Om. x. 
z the apostlis empr. a Om. G pr.m. MNPOT. v For r. ¢ Om. sx. Om. ox. € we o. 
fOm. x. & Om.o. 4 sayn summe emper. seien in 30u summeny. iQOm.r. that ov. 10m. sx. 
m Om. s. 2roosajen vy. ° Om. v. P roos not W. q voyde o. ‘for ry. 5 synnys, net tromynge 
his vprisyngeQ. 88Om.r. tdyedeno. Om. Nox. VY Crist, thal is, in his feith a. perish- 
eden x. *Om.x. Ydyingo. 2Om.ox. 4 deth was bia man r. manisy. ¢ Om. x. 
d dieden n. e Om. xk. f ordre, or dignyte 9. & fruyt is x. fru3tis of men slepinge, or diynge N. 


h Crist, for he worthely hath the firste and moost dignite Q. 


m Om. b. 


8 ether mysborn K marg. 
k pr. m. 


© the apostlis a. 


Pisiga. Gwer. tThathrisenz. § Om. 


368 


that ben of Crist, that bileueden in! the‘ 
2icomynge ‘of Crist!; aftirward an ende, 
whanne ‘he schal bitake the. kyngdom to 
God and to the fadir, whanne he schal 
auoyde™ al princehede, and power, and 
25vertu. Sothli it bihoueth him for" to 
regne, til he putte alle his enemyes vn- 
asdir his feet. Forsoth at the laste, the° 
enemy deeth schal be distroyed ; forsoth? 
he hath maad suget alle thingis vndir 
a7his feet. Forsoth whanne he seith, alle 
thingis ben sugetis? to him, withouten 
doute out taken him that sugettide alle 
2sthingis to him. Sothli whanne alle thingis 
schulen be suget™ to hym, thanne he* the 
sonet schal be suget to hym, that sugettide 
alle thingis to him, that God be alle 
20thingis in alle thingis. Ellis what schulen 
thei don, that ben baptysid for deede 
men", if in al manere deede men rysen 
30not ajen’? Wherto and we ben in perel 
3ieuery hour? Ech day I deie’ for 3oure 
glorie, britheren, the* which glorie’ I haue 
sein ‘Crist Jhesu oure Lord’. If vp? man 
I haue fou3te to beestis® at Epheci, what 
‘profitith it° to me, if deede men rysen not 
ajen? Ete’ we, and drynke we, ‘to mor- 
33 we® forsothf we schulen deye®. Nyle 3e 
be disseyued"; forsoth! yuele spechis* co- 
rumpen, ‘or distroyen', goode thewis, ‘or 
34 vertues™. Awake™ 3e, iuste men®, and 
nyle 3eP synne; forsothe summe! han ig- 
noraunce of God", to reuerence I speke 
35to jou’. But ‘summan seitht, How schu- 
len deede men ryse ajen, or in what 
36maner body schulen thei come? Vnwyse? 
man, that thing that’ thou sowist, is not 
a7quykenyd, no but* it deie first; and that 
thing’ that thou sowist, not the body that 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


XV. 24—37. 


the fadir, whanne he schal auoide alt 
princehod, ‘and power, and vertu. But2s 
it bihoueth hym to regne, til he putte 
alle hise enemyes vndur hise feet. And"26 
at the laste, deth the enemye schal be 
distried; forY he hath maad suget alle 
thingis vndur hise feet. And whanne27 
he seith, alle thingis ben suget to hym, 
with outen doubt outakun hym that suget- 
ide alle thingis to hym. And* whanne2 
alle thingis benY suget? to hym, thaune the 
sone hym silf schal be suget* to hym, that 
made ‘alle thingis suget to hym, that 
God be alle thingis in alle thingis. Ellis 29 
what schulen thei do, that ben baptisid 
for deed* men, if in no wise® deed men 
risen a3en? wherto ben thei baptisid oa 


* that is, for 
deedly synnes, 
that ben deede 


for hem? And wherto ben we in perel 30 whiche to be 
euery our? Ech® dai Y diet for 3oures1 Nenad ot 
glorie, britheren®, which’ géorte Y haue  ceyued. Lire 
in Crist Jhesu oure Lord. If aftir man 324 that is, sete 
Y haue fou3ten to beestis at Efesi, what ake He 
profitith it to me, if deed men risen not for 3oure glorie, 
a3en? Ete we, and drynke we, for we robe Ea 
schulen die to morewe. Nyle 3e be dis-33 ere. ie 
seyued ; for yuel spechis distrien good es 
thewis%. Awake 3e, iuste men, and nyle ae UE 
3e do synne; for summen han ignoraunce 

of God, but to reuerence{ Y speke to 30u.  ¢ that is, to 
But summan seith, Hou schulen deed mapa ge | 
men rise aj3en, or in what maner bodi 

schulen thei come? Vnwise man, that 36 

thing that thou sowist, is not quykened, 

but it die first ; and that thing that thou3; 

sowist, ‘thou sowist®® not the bodi that is 

to come", but a nakid corn, as** of whete, 

or of summe othere seedis; and Gods 

3yueth to it a bodi, as he wole, and to 

ech of seedis a propir bodi. Not echao 


ijintog. Khise. 1Om.¢@. ™voiden x. 2 Om. sx. 9° Om. x. Pforr. 4suget amnr. sogetid s. 
rsugetted 0. SOm.r. tsone himself yr, Uthingis r. Y azen? wherto and [also r] ben thei baptised 
for hem? nr. W dye, or am in perel of deth Q. x On. F, y Om. sx. 2 onre Lord Jh. Xt. x. 


a vp aftir nN. aftir rv. 
eOm.r.  f forsothe, or hastely @. for v. 
whi rv. * spechis, or false doctryne 0. 
Ps3sedor. &summen Fr. 
hem that byleuen not @. 
if x. yOm.N. 


10m. ox. 


t sim men seyen o. 


b beest o. beestis, or azein beestis Q. 

& dize to morewe F. 
™ of vertues K. Om. ox. 
’ God, not bileuynge that Crist ros Q. 
uO! vnwise x. 


© profet is it 0. d 3if it be so, ete 9. 

h disceyued by fals techinge y. i for 
n Wake sx. ° Om. x. 
8 30u, thal 3e schame to consente to 
Yato. Wnot Gc pr.m. Om. x. * but 


tthe b. ¥ Forsothe k. Vv forsothe k pr.m. W Forsothe k. * Sothelik. yschulen be k. 2 sugettid r. 


asugettid R. > suget alle thingis 1a. 


© wey L. 
whiche 1. & thingis k. 


ss Om. a pr.m. 


4 And britheren, ech k pr. m. 
h come thou sowist not a pr. m. 


© Om. k pr.m. f the 


hh Om. k. 


XV. 38—s1. 


is to come thou sowist, but a nakid corn, 
3sas of whete, or of sum of? the* othir>; for- 
sothe God 3yueth to it a body as he wole, 
and to ech of seedis the® propre body. 
39 Not ech fleisch the’ same fleisch®, but ‘for- 
sothe anothir’ off men, anothir sothli of 
beestis, anothir forsothe of! briddis, an- 
4oothir® of fischis. And heuenly bodyes!, 
and ertheli bodyes™; but forsothe anothir 
glorie of" heuenli bodies, anothir forsoth 
4iof° ertheli?. Anothir clerenesse of4 the 
sunne, anothir clerenesse of' the mone, 
and* anothir clerenesse oft the" sterris; 
forsothe a sterre diuersith fro a sterre 
42in clerenesse. So and the’ ajen rysinge 
of* deede men. It is sowun in corup- 
43 cioun, it schal ryse in vncorupcioun; it is 
sowun in vnnobley, it schal ryse in glorie; 
it is sownn in infirmyte, it schal ryse in 
a4vertu; it is sowun a beestly body, it schal 
ryse a spiritual body. If there is a beestly 
body, ther is and* a spiritual body; as it 
45is writun, The firste man Adam isY maad 
in to a soule lyuynge, the? laste Adam in 
46to a spirit quykenynge. But not first 
that* that® is spiritual, but that that is 
beestlich, aftirward that that° is spiritual. 
47 The firste man‘ of erthe, ertheli®; the se- 
ascunde manf of heuene, heuenli8. What* 
maner the ertheli mani, suchj the* ertheli 
men; and what maner the heuenli man}, 
49such the™ heuenli men. Therfore as we han 
born the ymage of the” ertheli man, bere 
so we and the ymage of the° heuenly. Bri- 
theren, I seye this thing, for? fleisch and 
blood mown‘ not welde the kyngdom of 
God", nethir corupcioun schal weelde in- 
slcorupcioun’. Lo! J seye to 30u mysteriet, 
‘or priuyte", of hooly thingis. Forsothe 
alle we’ schulen ryse a3en, but not alle we 


‘ 


2Om.r. 8 Om. r, 
foone r. Sisoftry. bisofy. is of v. 
ben. isofy. Cis ofr. P erthly bodyes or. 
«Om. 4 sec.m.Gupstywxy. ‘VY Om.¥ prim. 
that body 9. & Om. G. ato pr.m. ato pr.m. 
is heuenlich ry. 6 That what . i man is vr. 
mand the n. benalsothe vr. ™ Om. N, 
hede be purgid 4. 8 vncorrupcioun ¥ passim. 
good and yuel Q. i 


iis of grak. * ther ben heuenli bodies 1. 
sterris A pr.m. Eh pr.m. kB. © arise R. 
k pr.m. heueneli rk. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


b othere sedis NVW sec. m. 
k an other forsothe Gmposrx. 
Gis of F. 
w fro GT. 
4 man, or body Q. 
j suche ben vr. 

© Om. Ky. 
t priuite o. 


P arise R. 
v henenly man 1a sec. m. mary. 


VOL. IV. 3B 


369 


fleisch zs the same fleisch, but oon zs of 

men, another zs of beestis, another zs 

of briddis, an othere of: fischis. Ando 

‘heuenli bodies ben‘, and ‘ertheli bodies 

ben'; but oon glorie is of heuenely 

bodies, and anothir zs of ertheli. Anal 

othere™ clerenesse 7s of the sunne, an- 

othere clerenesse 7s of the moone, and 

anothere clerenesse 7s of sterris"; and a 

sterre dyuersith fro a sterre in clere- 

nesse. And so the a3enrisyng of deed 42 

men. It is sowun in corrupcioun, it 

schal rise in vncorrupcioun; it is sowun43 

in vnnoblei, it schal rise° in glorie; it is 

sowun in infirmyte, it schal riseP in 

vertu; it is sowun a‘ beestly bodi, it 44 

schal rise’ a’ spiritual bodi. If ther is 

a beestli bodi, ther is also a spiritnal 

bodi; as it is writun, The firste mans 

Adam was maad in to a soule lyuynge, 

the laste Adam in to a spirit quyken- ly lustis, 
ynge. But the firste zs not that that* is 46lices. Lire here 
spiritual, but that that is beestlich, aftir- ice 
ward that that is spiritual. The firste 47 4 
man of erthe 7s ertheli; the secounde man ee 
of heuene is henenelich®. 


+ that is, men 
3ouen to flesch- 


Such as the 4g the wombe and 

: . J eccherie. The 
ertheli man 7s, such ben the ertheli men; — Guse here, re 
and such as the heueneli man zs, suche 


hersinge Am- 
brose. Either 
ben also the heueneli men. Therfor as49 


bi flesch and 


blood is vndir- 
we han bore the ymage of the ertheli  stonden the 

corupcionn of 
man, bere we also the ymage of the  fiesch and of 


blood; this cor- 


heuenlhi’. Britheren, Y sele this thing, 50 rnpeioun schal 


. in th 
that fleischt and bloud moun not welde Pore 
the kyngdom of God, nethir corrupcioun — '* the sub- 

staunce of 


Lo! Y sete 51 flesch schal be 


schal welde vncorrupcioun. 
there vneor- 


to 30u priuyte of hooli thingis. And alle  ruptitle. The 
. Glose here, re- 
we schulen rise ajen, but not alle we  jersinge Aus- 


lyn. Vv. 

t to the state 

of glorie. Lire 
and the Glose 

here. ve. 


schulen be chauugid{; in a moment, in” 52 
the twynklyng of an ize, in the laste 
trumpe; for the trumpe schal sowne, and 


cao. drsthe rsecm.r. ¢€ Om. s prim. 
| bodies ben vy. ™ bodies 
Fisofrv. 8 Om. GMNoper. tis of v, 
xOm. kK. Ywasrv. Zand the ap. 8 was 
eis eerthly r. {man, or spirit ¢. 
kand the x. ands. Iman ts r. 
P that Fr. Qmayo. * God, to a fleischely 


u Om. ox. ¥ Om. G prim. we, bothe 


l ther ben ertheli bodies. ™ And another ab. © the 
qinak. Fariser. Sinak prom. Om. 
w of b. 


370 


seschulen be inchaungid”; in a moment, 
in* theY sinytinge of an y3e, in the laste 
trumpe*; forsoth the trumpe schal synge, 
and deede men ‘that ben® ‘in Crist® schulen 
ryse a3en, ‘the firste® incorupt, and we 
s3schulen be inchaungid?. Forsoth® it by- 
houeth this coruptible thing! clothe’ in- 
corupcioun, and this deedly thing for to 
siclothe! vndeedlynesse. Forsothe whanne 
this deedly thing schal clothe vndeedly- 
nesse, thanne schal be maad* the word 
that is writun, Deeth! is sopun™ vp in 
55 Victorie®. Deeth, wher is thi victorie ? 
56 Deeth, wher is thi pricke? Forsoth the° 
pricke of deeth is synne; forsoth theP 
a7 vertu of synue is lawe. Forsoth thank- 
ingis tol God, that 3af to vs victorie by 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, ‘that was deed’ 
58‘for vs*. ‘And sot, my dereworthe bri- 
theren, ‘be 3e" stidefast and vnmouable, 
beynge plentenous in work of the Lord, 
euermore witynge that joure’ trauel is 
not ydel in the Lord. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 Forsothe of the collectis, or” gader- 
ingis* of moneye, that ben maad in to 
seyntis, as Y ordeyned in the chirchisY of 
2Galathi, so and do 3e by oon? of the 
woke. Ech of jou kepe, or* deye vp, at 
hym silf, kepinge that that ‘schal plese® 
to him, that not whanne I schal come, 
3thanne be maad collectis*?. Forsothe 
whanne I schal be present, whom® 3e 
schulen proue hi epistlis, hem I schal 
sende for to perfytly bere 30ure grace in 
4to Jerusalem. For’ if it schal be worthi 
that and I go, thei schulen go with me. 
5Sothli I schal come to 30u, whanne I schal 
passe by Macedonye; forwhi I schal passe 
cby Macedonye. Sothli‘ perauenture I 


W chaungid rv. x and N. Yao. 
Gpr.mv. b%Omyr. ¢ Om. Ne. 
to clothin x. bh Om. sx. ivnclothe rv. 
0 victorie, that is, in general resurreceion Q. 
8Om.v. ¢ Therfore vy. beth x. 


4 chaungid rv. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


2 of trumpe G pr.m. trump, alle men shulen rise Q. 

e For v. 

k made, or fulfillid ¢. 
° Om. o, 

Vv oure G pr.m. MPQT. 


XV. 52——XVI. 6. 


deed men schulen rise a3en, with oute 
corrupcioun, and we schulen be chaung- 
id. For it byhoueth this corruptibless 
thing to clothe vncorrupcioun, and this 
deedli thing to putte awei vndeedlinesse. 
But whanne this deedli thing schalss 
clothe vndeedlynesse, thanne schal the 
word be doon, that is writun, Deth is 
sopun vp in victorie. Deth, where isss 
thi victorie? Deth, where is thi pricke ? 
But the pricke of deth is synne; ands¢ 
the vertut of synne is the lawe. Buts7+ that is, en- 


do we thankyngis to God, that 3af to naw 
vs victorie bi oure Lord Jhesu Crist. whanne the 


y lawe was 30uen, 
Therfore, my dereworthe britheren, be 58 fleschti coueitise 


: was ful stron 
je stidefast, and vnmouable, beynge plen- ana came 
: izede ; forwhi 
teuouse in werk of the Lord, euere more fhe tawein for. 
witynge that 3oure* trauel is not idel in 


the lawe in for- 
bedinge encres- 
the Lord. 


ith coueitise of 
synne, no but 
the Holy Gost 
sprede abrood 
charite. The 
Glose here, re- 
hersinge Aus- 
tyn. ve. 


CAP. XVI. 


But of the gaderyngisY of money that 
ben maad in to seyntis, as Y ordeynede? 
in the chirchis of Galathie, so also do 3e 
o dai of the wouke. Ech of jou kepe2 
at” hym silf, kepynge that that plesith 
to him, that whanne Y come, the gader- 
yngis* ben? not maad. And whanne Y3 
schal be present, whiche men 3e preuen, 
Y schal sende hem bi epistlis to bere 
3oure grace in to Jerusalem. That ifs 
it° be worthi that also Y go, thei schulen 
go with me. But Y schal come to 3ou,5 
whanne Y schal passe bi Macedonye ; 
for whi Y schal passe bi Macedonye. 
But perauenture Y schal dwelle at 30u,6 
or also dwelle the wynter, that and@ 3e 


a Om. 
& for to clothe vw. 
1 Deth, of body ge. ™ soupid exper. 
P Om. woevir. Iweowentog. * Om. sr. 
Wor of then. Om. x. * gederynge o. 


f thyng, or body Q. 


Om. x. — ¥ chirche o. 2 oon day G sec.m.Q. oo day vy. and x. Pato. Om. rw. © plesith vr. 
a gederynges 0. @whichemeny. fOm,sx. & Thaty. 4 Om. pr.m. i But r. 

xourek. Ygaderingek pr.m. 7 kaue ordeyned rhoS. 22 anentis1. 4gadryngr. >ber 
ela. @Om. a sec, m. cRIKQRUXb pr.m. cghkoaf. 


XVI. 7—20. 


schal dwelle at 3ou, or also dwelle by 
wyntir, that and 3e lede me whidir euere 
71 schal go. Sothli I wole not now se 30u 
in passynge, forsothe* I hope ‘sum what! 
of tyme for™ to dwelle at jou, if God" 
8schal suffre. Forsoth I schal dwelle at 
9 Effecy, til to° Witsuntide. SothliP a greet 
dore and euident, ‘or opyn4, is openyd' to 
lome, and manye aduersaries’. Sothli if 
Tymothe schal come, se 3e that het be 
withoute drede at" 30u, for he worchith 
lithe work of the Lord, as and I. Therfore 
no man dispise him; forsoth’ lede 3e him” 
in pees, that he come to me; forsoth* I 
\abyde hym with britheren. Forsoth, bri- 
theren, I make knowun to 30u of Apollo, 
forY I preiede hym moche, that he schulde 
come to 30u, with britheren. And sothli 
it was not his wille, ‘that he schulde2 
come now; forsoth? he schal come, whanne 
13 it schal be able? to hym’. Wake 3e, and 
‘stonde 3e° iu the feith; do 3e manly, and 
14‘be 3e% coumfortid in the Lord, and be alle 
1s30ure thingis don in charite. Forsothe, 
britheren, I beseche jou, 3e han" knowen 
the hous of Stheuene, the’ womman*, and 
of Fortunati, and Acayel, for thei ben the 
firste fruytis of Acaye, and in to mynys- 
terie™ of seyntis thei han ordeyned hem 
wsilf; that and 3e be sugettis to such, and 
to ech worchinge to gidere and trauelinge. 
i7Forsothe I enioye™ in the presence of 
Stheuene,. ‘the womman°, and of Fortu- 
nate, and AcayeP; for thei fulfilliden4 that 
isthing that faylide to 30u; forsoth' thei 
han ‘fulfillid and'™ my spirit and 3oure. 
Therfore knowe 3e hem, that ben suche 
19maner men*. Alle the’ chirchis" of Asye 
greeten 3ou wel. Aquyla and Prisca’ 
greeten 30u moche in the Lord, at ‘the 
whiche* and* J am _ herborid, ‘with her 
20homely chircheY. Alle britheren greeten 


k for y. lin sumwhat x pr.m. bi sumwhat 7. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


m Om. sx. 


371 


lede me whidir euere Y schal go. And7 
Y wole not now se 30u in my passyng, 
for Y hope to dwelle with 3ou awhile, 
if the Lord schal suffre. But Y schals 
dwelle at Efesi, ‘til toe Witsuntide. For9 
a grete dore and an opyn is openyd to 
me, and many aduersaries. And if Thi-10 
mothe come, se 3e that he be with out 
drede with 3ou, for he worcheth the 
werk of the Lord, as Y. Therfor nou 
man dispise hym; but lede 3ef hym forth 
in pees, that he come to me; for Y abide 
hym with britheren. But, britheren, Y 2 
make knowun to 30u of Apollo, that Y 
preiede him myche, that he schulde come 
to 30u, with britheren. But it was not 
his wille to come now; but he schal 
come, whanne he schal haue _leiser. 
Walke 3e, and stonde 3e in the feith ; 13 
do 3e manli, and be 3e coumfortid in the 
Lord, and be alle 30ure thingis don in14 
charite. And, britheren, Y biseche 3ou, 15 
3e knowen the hous of Stephan’, and of 
Fortunati, and Aecaicy, for thei ben the 
firste fruytis of Acaie, and in to myn- 
ystrie of seyntis thei han ordeyned hem 
silf; that also 3e be sugetis to suche, and 16 
to ech worchynge togidere and trauel- 
ynge. For Y haue ioie in the presence of 17 
Stephan, and of" Fortunate, and Acaici; 
for thei filliden that thing that failideis 
to 30u; for thei han refreischid bothe 
my spirit and 3oure. Therfor knowe 3¢ 
hem, that ben suche maner men. Allei9 
the chirchis of Asie greten 30u wel. 
Aquila and Prisca, with her homeli 
chirche, greten 3ou myche in the Lord, 
at the whiche also Y am herborid. Alle2o 
bretheren greten 3on wel. Grete 3e wel - 
togidere in hooli cos. My gretyng biz 
Poulis hoond. If ony man loueth not 22 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, be he cursid, 


othe Lord yr. ° Om. x. P For whi r. 


4 or opyn, or the herte of many hereris 9. Om. x. * Om.o. open x. 8 aduersarie 9. ¢3e 7. % amongis o. 


vYbut vy. Whim forth y. * For 7. Y that vr. 
auaile 9. 9 Walke vy. © stondith x. f Om. mpe. 
1 Acaici vy. ™ mysterie oxy. ™ haue ioie vy. 


tr refreschid bothe r. 
Ww whom GMNPOT. 


8Om. x. t Om, wxy. 
x Om. G pr.m. MPT. 


f Om. b. 


© vnto I. 


2 for to Vv. 
& be v. ben x. 
© Om. G prim. MPQTX, 
u churche n. 

y Om. rv. 


abut ry. > voide G sec.m.@. © hym, or not 
hOmy. iaw.Om.x. k Om. x. 

P Acaici y. 4 filleden v. .* for y. 
v Prisca, with her homly chirche r. 


& this Stephan was a womman anco. Stephan, the womman cxe, this was a wom- 
man Eg. that was a womman K marg, Stephan was a womman k. 


h Om. a. 


3B2 


372 I. CORINTHIANS. XVI. 21—24. 


3ou wel. Greeteth? 3e wel to gidere in| Maranatha’. The grace of oure Lord 2s 
zthooly coss*. My greetynge> by Poulis Jhesu Crist be with 3ou. My charite2s 
2zhond’. If ony man loue? not oure Lord be with jou alle in Crist Jhesu* oure 
Jhesu Crist, be he cursid, Maranatha, ‘that Lord. Amen. 
a3is, tu the comynge of the Lord*. The 
grace of oure Lord Jhesn Crist be with 
2430u. My charite be with 30u alle in Crist 


Jhesu oure Lord. Amen. : ; 
Here endith the firste pistle to Co- 


Here endith the firste pistle to Co-  rynthies, and bigynneth the prologe on 
rinthis, and now bigynneth the prolog to the secunde pistle to Corinthies'. 
the secunde®. 


Z Grete AGMNOPQSTVIVXY. 4 cosse, shewynge eche to other tokene of hertly loue ¢. » gretynge is 
writen, or sente to 30u Q. © hond, that 3e knowe it to be of hym a. Aloueth ov. ¢ Om. G pr.m. wpr. that 
is, to the cominge of the Lord & sec.im. f Here endith the first pistle to the Corynthies, and now bi- 
gynneth the secounde. a. Here endith the first pistil to Corynthis, and bigynneth the prolog on the secunde 
pistil, N. Here eendeth the first epistil to Corinthies, and bygynneth the prologe of the secound epistel to 
the same Corinthies. 0. Here endeth the jirste pistle to the Corynthyes, and bygynneth the secounde pistle 
to the Corinthies. 9. Here endith the firste pistle to Corinthis, and here bigynneth the prologe up the 
secundé to Corintheis. v. Here eendith the first pistle to Corinthis, and bigynneth the prolog to fore the 
epistle of the secunde Corinthis. w. No final rubric in empsTxy. 


i Maranatha, that is, in the comyng of the Lord apt marg. KQ marg. sec.m. xabcegko. Maranatha, that 
is, in the day of doom rn. * Om. k. 1 From ermabhko. Here eendeth the firste pistle to Corinthies ; 
se now a prologe on the secunde pistle to Corinthies. x. Here cndith the firste pistle to Corynthies, and 
bigynneth the prolog on the secunde. ac. Here endith the firste pistle to Corinthes, and here bigynneth a 
prologe on the secounde. x. Here eendith the firste Corinthies, and biginneth the prologe on the ij. e. 
Here endith the first pistil, and bigynneth the prologe on ij. of Corinthies. g. No final rubric in aEKu. 


Il. CORINTHIANS. 





Prolog to the secunde pistle to Co- 
rinthijs*. 


AFTIR penaunce don”, a comfortable 
pistlee he wrytith to hem fro Troade, by 
Tite; and preisynge hem he counceilith 
to betre, schewynge hem ‘y sorowid‘, but 
sothli amendide. 


Ende of the prolog ; bigynnynge the 
secunde pisile'. 


The secunde epistle to Corinthijs®. 


CAP. I. 
1 Poul, apostle of Jhesu Crist, bi the 
wille of God, and Tymothe, brothir, to 
the chirche of God that is at Corinthi, 
with alle seyntis that ben in al Acaye, 
2grace to 3ou, and pees of God oure fadir, 
3and of the Lord Jhesu Crist. Blessid beh 
God and fadiri of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 
fadir of mercies, and God of al comfort, 
4 or solace*, that! comfortith™ vs ‘in al" 


@ Prologe s. 
uPQx. In Nn of the later version. 


AGKNOQSTVWXY. h Om. x. 


D alle in N. 


Jeroms prologe on the secounde epistle 
to Corinthes*. 


AFTER> penaunce doon, Poul writith to 
Corynthies a pistle of coumfort fro Tro- 
ade, bi Titus; and he preisith hem, and 
excitith® to betere thingis, and schewith, 
that thei weren maad sori, but amendid. 


Jerom in his prolog on this pistle seith 
this, 


LTere bigynneth the secounde pistle to 
Corynthies®. 


CAL. I. 


Poul, apostle of Jhesu Crist, bi the: 
wille of God, and Tymothe, brothir, to 
the chirche of God that is at Corinthi, 
with alle seyntis that ben in al Acaie, 
grace to 30u, and pees of God oure fadir2 
and of the Lord Jhesu Crist. Blessid 3 
be God and the fadir of oure Lord Jhe- 
su Crist, fadir of mercies, and God of al 
coumfort, which coumfortith vs in al4 


The prolougus of the ij. Corinthies. y. No initial rubric in kovw. No prologue in ac 
b ido o. idon rv. 
f Here eendith the prologe, and bygynneth the secound epistel to Corinthies. o. 
and bigynneth the secunde epistle. w. No final rubric in sry. 
i the fader svx. 


d sorewid s. € amend kK. 
Here eendeth the prolog, 
& From mp. No initial rubric in 
1 which rv. m coumfortide ¢. 


¢ epistil sy. 


k Om. ox. 


a From £. The prolog of the secunde pistil. nN. A prolog on the pistle to Corinthies. n. The prologe on 


the secunde epistle to the Corinthies. T pr.m. 
Corynthis. uf. No initial rubric in crk1gxa. 
and biginnith the pistle. 1. 


Prologus t sec.m. <A prologe on the secounde pistil to [the f] 
b For a. 
Jerom in his prologe seith al this. x. 


¢ exciteth hem x. 4 Here endith the prologe, 


Jerom in his p. on this epistil suynge 


seith this sentence. N. Jerom in his p. on this epistle, seith pleynli al this. a. Heere eendith the prolog, and 


bigynneth the ij. pistle to Corinthies. rR. 
p. on this secounde pistle to Corinthis, seith this. x. 


This seith Jerom in his prolog on the tj. pistle. v. 
Jerom in his prolog seith thus. a. 
loge on this pistle.b. Jcrom in his p. on this pistle seith thus. k. No final rubric in wref. 
Corinthies. E. Here biginneth the firste pistil to the tj. Corinthes. a. 


Jerom in his 
Jerom in his pro- 
© Poul to 
No initial rubric in the other Mss. 


374 


oure tribulacioun, that and we mown 
coinforte hem, that ben in al pressure®, ‘ov 
ouerleyinge?, by the4 exortacioun’, ‘or 
monestynge*®, by which and we ben mo- 
snestid of God. For ast the passiouns of 
Crist ben plenteuous in vs, so and by Crist 
6oure counfort is plenteuous. Forsoth wher 
we" ben trowblid’, ‘or pursuwed™, for 
3oure techinge* and helthe, ethirY we? ben 
comfortid, for* 3oure> comfort, ethir we 
ben monestid, for® 3oure monestinge and 
heelthe. het which worchith in 3ou the 
suffryng of the same passiouns, the® whiche 
z7and we suffren, that oure hope be sadd 
for 30u; witynge for as 3e ben felowis off 
passiouns, so 3e schulen be and of comfort. 
8 Forsothe’, britheren®, we wolen ‘not 3ou 
fori to vnwite* of oure tribulacioun, that 
is' don in Asye; for ouer maner we ben™ 
greuyd aboue vertu", ‘or my3fe°, so that 
9it anoy3ede? vs, 3he, ford to lyne. But" we 
silfs in vs' silf hadden answere" of deeth, 
that we be not tristinge in vs’ silf”, but 
10in God that reysith* deede men. The’ 
which delyuerede vs, ‘and delyuereth? fro 
so* greet perelis, in to® whom we hopen, 
iifor and 3it he schal delyuere, ‘helpynge 
and* 30u? in prayere for vs; that of the 
persoones of manye faces of that 3yuynge 
that is in 30u*, by‘ manye parceneris$, 
‘graces, or thankyngis", ben don to God 
i2for vs, Forwhi oure glorie is this, the wit- 
nessinge of oure conscience, that in sym- 
plenesse and clennesse of God, and not in* 
fleischly wysdom, but in the grace of God, 
we lyuen! in this world, forsoth more 
i3plenteuously to™ 3ou. Sothli we wryten 
not othere thingis", than tho that 3e han 
rad and knowen, forsoth I hope that til 
14to° the ende je schulen knowe, as and 3e 
qa Om. o. 


9 pressour w. P Om. ox. 


in tribulacioun r. 
ait is for Vv. 
iOm. sx. 
G pr.m. MOPTX. 
self x. 
z Om. s. 


Doure xY. itis for r. 

P anoye G pr.m. noizide sx. 

toure GMPOQT. 4% answer, or cerleynte Q. 
athe cetwx. Om. s. > Om. 6 prim. 
‘iOm.r. * of swxy. 


graces Xx. 1 lyneden rv. 


© we b. 
i oure giorie h. 


bd also we 1KR et alii. 
h the more b pr. m. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


T monestynge o. 
Ww Om. ox. or ben pursued, it is ¥. 
d Om. r. 

‘E not 30u for to vnknowen 0. that 3e wite r. 
4 Om, sx. 
VY oure GMPQ. 
cin G pr.m. T. 
fbe wp. with o, gracis, or thankingis, ben don for us bi r. 
m J write to Q 


4 Om. 1 prim. 


I, 5—14. 


oure tribulacioun, that also we moun 
coumforte hem, that ben in al diseese, bi 
the monestyng bi which also we ben 
monestid of God. For as the passiounss 
of Crist ben plenteuouse in vs, so also bi 
Crist oure coumfort is plenteuouse. And6é 
whether we ben in tribulacioun, for 3oure 
tribujacioun and heelthe, ethir we ben 
coumfortid, for 3oure coumfort, ethir we 
ben monestid, for 3oure monestyng and 
heelthe. Which worchith in 30u the suf- 
fring of the same passiouns, whiche ‘we 
also” suffren, that oure hope be sad for7 
3ou; witynge for as 3e° ben felowis of 
passiouns, so 3e schulen ben also? of 
coumfort. For, britheren, we wolen thats 
3e wite of oure tribulacioun, that was 
don in Asie; for ouer maner® we weren 
greued ouer my3t, so that it anoiede vs, 
jhe, to lyue. But we in vs silf haddeng 
answere of deth, that we truste not in 
ys, but in God that reisith deed men. 
Which delyuerede vs, and delyuerith fro 10 
so grete perelis, in to whom we hopen, 
also 3itf he schal delyuere, while® also1 
3e helpen in preier for vs; that of the 
persones of many faces* of that 3yuyng 
that is in vs, thankyngis ben don for vs uerse agis, con- 
bi many ment to God. For oure glorie 12 ore nrechings 
is this, the witnessyng of oure con- pee 
science, that in symplenesse and clen- 1 : 
nesse of God, and not in fleischli wis- 


* that is, of 
persones of di- 


of diuerse me- 
ritis and diuerse 


vertues, The 
dom, but in the grace of God, we lyu- ©? "ere ve 
; h T by manye 
eden in this world, but more® plenteu- men; that is, 
: : feithful 
ousli to jou. And we writen not othere 13 parceners. of 
: : that 3euing ; 
thingis to 30u, than tho that 3e han red ati hauynge 
and knowe, and Y hope that in to the the same sifte 


of feith which 
ende 3e schulen knowe, as also 3e han Misinus. The 


: Glose here. ve, 
knowe vs a parti; for we ben j3oure 
glorie, as also 3e ben oure! in the dai of 


s Om, ox. 


talleg. "seq. VY turblid are. 
* exciting r. 


Yorx. 2 Om. GxmoTiwxy. 
eOm.r. fino. 8 For whir. 4 brether cr. 
lwasy. ™werenv. XOmy3teo. ° Om. 
r But and x.‘ $ oure silf 9. Om, 7. vs 
~ Om, vr. *reysed ow. yY Om. vr. 
‘d while also [ze] helpen vr. ¢ us r. 
& parteners cay. men vy. 4 thankesm Per. 
. thingis to 30u v. © in to Nr. 


€ mesure a sec.m. marg. fandx. § which k. 


I, r5——II. 2. 


han knowen vs of party; for we ben 3oure 
glorie, ‘and 3e? oure in the day of oure 
15Lord Jhesu Crist. And in this trist- 
nynge‘ I wolde firste come to jou, that 3e 
ighadden’ the secunde grace’, and ‘that I 
schuldet ‘by 3ou passe® in to Macedonye, 
and eft’ fro Macedonye ‘I schulde” come 
to 30u, and of 3ou be ledd in to Judee. 
17 Forsoth* whanne I wolde this thing, wher 
I vside li3tnesseY, or tho thingis that I 
thenke, J” thenke aftir the fleisch, that ‘at 
me be’, ‘is and not, or 3hke and nay’? 
18 Forsoth God is trewe‘, for oure word ‘the 
which® was at 30u, ‘ther is not in it! ist 
and nay", but ‘in it is is*, ‘that is, treuthe'. 
i9Sotheli™ Jhesus Crist, the sone of God, 
the" which® is prechid in? 3ou by vs, by 
me, and Syluan?, and Tymothe, ther was 
not in him ist and nay, but* ‘in hym is 
20was', ‘that is, stedefast treuthe*. For- 
soth"* how many euere ben biheestis of 
God, in him’ ‘is, that is, ben fulfillid~. 
Therefore and by him we seyn amen to 
21God, to oure ioye%. “The which sothliy 
confermeth vs with 3ou in Crist, and the 
22 which God anoyutide’ vs, and that? mark- 
ide” vs, and 3af ‘a wed’, ‘or eernes', of the 
agspirit in oure hertis. Forsoth I inclepe 
God witnesse ‘in to® my soule, that I 
sparinge 30u cam not ouer‘ Corinthe; not 
for we ben lordis of 3oure feith, but we 
ben helperis of 3oure ioye; forwhis thorw 
bileue 3e stonden. 


CAP. II. 


1 Forsoth I ordeynede this ilke! thing at 
me, that I schulde not come eftsoone in 
2to* sorwe to 3ou. Sothli! if I make 30u 


q tristinge GTxy. 


P as and 3e ben v. 
w Om. Fr. 


& passe by jou v. -V after o. 

G sec. m. a ther be at me x. 
€ Om. v. that x. f Om. r. 
othat x. ? among v. 


whiv. Om. rx. 


hym was is @ sec. m. in hym was Q. is was in hym 7. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


r schulden haue 7. 
x But v. 
b Om. G pr.m. MPOT. 
& 3ea Ger. jhe MNP. 
it is 3he 9. in it is s. is, that is, treuthe, is in it v. is in it was x. 
i q by Siluan 7. 


375 


oure Lord Jhesu Crist. And in thisis 
tristyng* Y wolde first come to 30u, that 
3e schulden haue the secounde grace, and 16 
passe bi 30u in to Macedonye, and. eft 
fro Macedonye come to 3ou, and of 30u 
be led in to Judee. But whanne Y17 
wolde this thing, whether Y vside vn- 
stidfastnesse, ether tho thingis that Y 
thenke, Y thenke aftir the fleisch, that 
at me be!, it is!’ and it™ is not*? Butis 
God is trewe, for oure word that was at 
30u is and is not, is not ther ynne, but ist 
isin it. For whi Jhesus Crist, the sone19 
of God, which is prechid among 3ou bi 
vs, bi me, and Syluan, and Tymothe, 
ther was not in hym is and is not, but 
is was in hym. For whi hou many2o0 
euer ben biheestis of God, in thilke is, 
‘that is", ben fillid®. And? therfor and4 
bi hym we seien amen to God, to oure 
glorie. Sotheli it is God that conferin-21 
eth vs with jou in Crist, and the’ which 
God®* anoyntide vs, and whicht markide 22 
vs, and 3af ernes of the spirit in oure 
hertis. For Y clepide® God to witnessee3 
a3jens my soule, that Y sparynge jou 
cam not ouer to Corynthe; not that we 
ben lordis of joure feith, but we ben 
helperis of 30ure ioye; for thorou3 bileue 
je stonden. 


CAP. II. 


And Y ordeynede this ilke” thing ati 
me, that Y schulde not come eftsoone in 
heuynes to 30u. For if Y make 3ou2 


8 grace, or confermynge Q. Om, rv. 
y liztnesse, eithir unstedfastnesse v. % whether I 
¢ nay, or doublenesse Q. 4 trenthe r. 

» nay is not in it r. k is is in it G sec. m. 
] that is, trewe Gt. Om. x. = =™ For 

Fr 3ea Gc. she mpgr. S$ but 3heg. tin 


uOm. vx. WForwhivy. vthilke x. is, 


that is, fulfillid G pr.m. is, that is, thei ben fulfillid in him @ sec.m. ben fulfillid x. ben fillid 0. is, that 


is, in hym ben fulfillide Q. is x. * glorie rv. 
which y. Omakedo. Cernesy. ‘4 Om. orx. 
ithilkk eg. Om. sxy. * Om. rv. 1! For rv. 


k tristenyng cmgruxabceghoaS. | it be a sec. m. 
maQruaceghk sec.m.oa8. ° fulfillid c et ceteri. 
‘Om. E1ceg. t the which h. 


y Sothli it is God that rv. 
© ajens Fr. 


Nl js, thad is, treuthe aKco. 
P Om. cmp pr.m. xb. 
« clepe £ sec. m. KMRUXabchkoaf. 


a ato. Om. 7. 


z oyntide x. 
h ordeyne r. 


fonertov. 8 for x. 


n Om. E1K 
r Om. e. 


m Om. 4. 
q Om. E1KQuacegka. 
v¥ Om. Exqrabceghkoa8. 


* and it is 
not; that is, 
doubilnesse and 
falsenesse. Lire 
here. 

either is and 
not; that is, a 
lesing. The 
Glose here. v. 


+ butis; that 
is, affermynge 
of truthe oonli. 
The Glos here. 


that is, afferm- 
yng of treuthe 
oonly. The 
Glose. v. 


376 


sori, ‘or heuy™, and" who is he that glad- 
dith me, no but he that is sorowful of 
3me? And this same thing I wroot to 30u, 
that whanne I schal come, I haue not 
sorwe vp* sorwe, ‘of hem? of ‘the whiche? 
it bihofte™ me for’ to*s ioye. Tristynge' in 
3ou alle, for* my ioye is of% 3ou alle’. 
4For whi of moche tribulacioun and an- 
gwische of herte I wroot to 30u by manye 
teeris, ‘that 3e be not* sori, but that’ 3e 
wite what charite I haue more plenteu- 
sously in 3ou. Forsoth if ony man hath 
maad me sorwful, he hath not maad me? 
sorwful but in* party, that I charge, ‘or 
6diseese’, not 30u alle. This blamynge 
that is maad of many, sufficith to him, 
7that is such maner? man; so that ajen- 
ward 3ef 3yue® more® and! comforte*, lest 
perauenture he that is such maner! man™, 
be sopun vp, ‘or dispeire", by more greet 
sheuynesse. For which thing I biseche 
3ou, that 3e couferme charite in to him®. 
9 Forsoth? therfore and I wroot4, ‘that I* 
knowe 3oure asayinge, wher in alle thingis 
103e ben obedyent. Forsoth to whom 3e 
han ‘ony thing" 3ouen*, and I‘. Forwhi 
and I that" I 3af’, ‘if I ony thing jaf”, 
haue* 3ouunY for 30u in the persoone of 
11Crist, that we be not disseyued of Sa- 
thanas?; sothli? we ‘vnknowen not? his 
i2thou3tis®. Forsoth whanne I hadde4 
comeu to Trowade for the gospel of Crist, 
and a® doref was openyd’ to me in the 
i3 Lord, I hadde not reste tot my spirit, for 
that! I fond not my brothir Tite, but I 
seyinge* to hem far! wel, passide™ into 
14Macedonye. Therfor™ thankingis® to God, 


mQOm.o. 0 Om. orx. 
bihouede mpr. S Om.sx. 88 to haue r. 
alle 30u vy. * not that 3e ber. Yato. Om. r. 
4g maner Q. 


hOm. 4. 1 Om. 6 pr.m. orr. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


° vp on AGMNOPSTWY. On VX. 

t And I triste r. 

a of AGMNOPSTVWXY. 

€ man, doynge opyn sclaundre with his fadir wyf Q. 
coumforte to him GMPor. 


Tl, 3——14. 


sori, who is he that gladith me, but he 

that is soreuful of me? And this sames 

thing Y wroot to 3ou, that whanne Y 

come, Y haue not sorewe on sorewe, 

of the* whiche it behofteY me to haue 

joie. And Y triste in jou alle, that my 

joye is of alle 3ou. For of myche tri-4 

bulacioun and angwisch of herte Y 

wroot to 30u by many teeris, not that 

3e be sori”, but that 3e wite what charite 

Y haue more? plenteuously in jou. Fors 

if ony man hath maad me soreuful, he 

hath not maad me sorewful* but a?  * also that the 

parti, that Y charge not 3o0u alle. Thise a en, 

blamyng that ys maad of manye, suffis- Ze Peeve 

ith to hym, that is sich oon; so that7 76 only sw 

ajenward 3e rathir for3yuen and coum- = The Glose here. 

fort, lest perauenture he that is suche a¢ 

maner man, be sopun} vp bi more grete 

heuynesse. For which thing Y biseches 

3ou, that 3e conferme charite in to hym. 

For whi therfor Y wroot this, that Yo 

knowe joure preuyng®, whether in alle 

thingis 3e ben obedient. For to whom 3e 10 

han for3yuen ony thing, also Y haue 

for3yue. For Y that that Y for3af, 3if Y 

forzaf ony thing, haue 3ouun' for 3ou in 

the persone of Crist, that we be noti 

disseyuedt of Sathanas; for we knowen® + that he make 
. . him for to di- 

hise thou3tis. But whanne Y was comun 12 speire bi ouer 

to Troade for the gospel of Crist, and a ™¥che scharp- 


nesse. ve. hise 
dore was opened to me in the Lord, Y 13 “oustiss that 


+ bi dispeir. 
Lire here. v. 


is, felnessis, he 
hadde not rest to my spirit, for Y foond makith hem 
not my brother Tite, but Y seide to hem wrhiche He ot 
farewel, and Y passide in to Macedonye. 7 ascevae)) 
And Y do thankyngis to God, that euere 14 ©”% "7 ve. 
more makith vs to haue victorie in Crist 


POm.r. Gwhom aper. * byhofeth o. 

uQm.s. thaty. VYOm.s. YW Om. s. 
> charge not yr. ¢ Om. ox. 
f Om. N. & forzeue G sec. m. 
Ta maner eupeTr. ™OQOm. x. © Om. rx. 


ohym, forthinkinge the synne Q. P Forwhi r. 4 wroot this r. ' for to o. ' eny thenges 0. 8 forzouen G sec.m. 


jonen, or forzeucn 9. 
forzeuenes Q. 
xX pr.m. Om. o. if I 3af eny thing r. 

us eny maliceg. afarr. » knowen r. 
f dore, that is, redy hertis Q. & opun o. 


tT haue forzeuen Q. 


passide ry. 4 Forsothe I do r, 
wforah, * Om. £5.  ¥ bihoueth gk. 
K sec.m. © Om. A prim. 


& knowen not KR pr.im. 


5 that that aemNpTrX. that at o. 
w 3if eny thing 3ouen and I forzaue c pr.m. 3if eny thing @ sec.m. if ony thing 3af m7 
* I haue emer. 
© thouztis, how he wolde hym to dispeyre Q. 

h in ow. 
© doeth thankingis o. be thanckyngis ¢. 


® ether heuye K marg. 
40m. g. © preef erqrceghkoa. assayng K. 


V forzaue G sec.m. 3ane of 


% Satanas, kepinge withinne 
dwasy. &Om.iry. 
| fareth s. ™ and I 


Y forzouen G sec. 1m. 
iOm. or.  * seide r. 


& Om. EI pr.m. qe pr.m.g.  » of 
t forzouun xa sec.m. bhk. 


Il. 15——III. 9. 


that euermore? makith vs to haue victorie 
in Crist Jhesu, and schewith by4 vs the 
15 0dour’ of his knowynge in ech place; for 
we ben the good odour, ‘or sauour’, of 
Crist to God, in thes that ben maad saaf, 
isand in thes that perischen. ‘To othere 
sothlit odour of deeth in to deeth, to othere 
forsoth odour" of lyf-into lyf. And to 
i7thes thingis who’ so able? Sothli¥ we 
ben not as ful manye, auoutrynge* the 
word of God, but ofY clennesse, but? as of 
God, bifore God in Crist ‘we speken’. 


CAP. III. 


1 Bigynne we eftsoone for> to comende, 
‘or preise®, vs? silf? or wher we neden, as 
summe®, preisynge lettrisf to 3ou, or of 
230u? 3e ben oure® pistle", writun in 3oure! 
hertis, the* which is kowd! and radd of 
3alle men; 3e" maad® opyn, for 3e ben the 
pistle® of Crist mynistrid? of vs, and wri- 
tun, not with’ enke, but by? the spirit of 
quyk God; not in stoony tablis, but in 
4fleischly tablis of herte. Forsoth we han 
ssuch trist by Crist to God; not that we 
ben sufficient for’ to thenke ony thing of 
ys', as of" vs, but oure sufficience is of 
6God. The’ which and made vs able myn- 
istris of the newe’’ testament, not bi let- 
tre, but by spirit; for” the lettre sleith, 
7forsoth the spirit quykeneth. For if the 
mynistracioun of deeth defformyd by let- 
tris in stoones was in glorie, so that the* 
children of Israel my3ten not biholde in 
to the face of Moyses, for the glorie of 
his cheere, theY which glorie? is auoydid*, 
shou not more the mynistracioun of spirit 
oschal be in glorie? Forwhi if the myn- 
istracioun of dampnacioun is? in glorie, 
moche more the mynisterie, ‘or seruynge®, 
of ri3twysnesse is plenteuous in glorie. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


377 


Jhesu, and schewith bi vs the odour of 


his knowing in ech place; for we ben1s 


the good odour of Crist to God, among 
these that ben maad saaf, and among 
these that perischen. 
odour* of deth in to deth, but to othere® 
we ben odour of lijf in to lijf. And to 
these thingis who zs so! able? 
ben not as many, that don auoutrie bi 
the word of God, but we speken of clen- 
nesse, as of God, bifor God in Crist. 


CAP. III. 


Bigynnen we therfor eftsoone to preise 1 
vs silf? or’ whether we neden, as sum- 
men, pistlis! of preisinge to 3ou, or of 
3ou? 3e ben’oure pistle™, writun in oure 2 
hertis, which is knowun and red of alle 
men, and maad opyn, for 3e ben thes 
pistle" of Crist mynystrid of vs, and 
writun, not with enke, but bi the spirit 
of the® lyuynge God; not in stony? ta- 
blis, bnt in fleischli tablis of herte. For 4 
we han such trist bi Crist to God; nots 
that we ben sufficient to thenke ony 
thing of vs, as of vs, but oure sufficience 
is of God. Which also made vs ablec 
mynystris of the newe testament, not 
bi lettre, but bi spirit; for the lettre 
sleeth}, but the spirit qnykeneth. And7 
if the mynystracioun of deth write bi 
lettris1 in stoonys was in glorie, so that 
the’ children of Israel my3ten not bi- 
holde in to the face of Moises, for the 
glorie of his cheer, which is auoidid, 
hou schal not the mynystracioun of thes 
spirit be more in glorie? For if thes 
mynystracioun of dampnacioun was in 
glorie, myche more the mynysterie® of 


To othere sotheli is 


For wel7 


* odour ; 

that is, of en- 
uie and yuel 
fame leding in 
to deth euer- 
lasting. of lijf; 
that is, of loue 
and good fame 
leedinge into 
lijf euerlast- 
inge. The Glose 
here. ve. 


+ For whi the 
olde testament 
3af knowing of 
synne, and 3af 
not grace. And 
so it encreeside 
coueitise, bi 
occasioun for 
mannes malis 
that enforsith 
euere ajens for- 
beding. And 
so it encreeside 
synne, that 
sleeth. the 
spirit; that is, 
the Hooly Gost, 
of whom the 
newe lawe was 
3onen. Lire 
here. vV. Either 
thus, the lettre, 
without the 
spirit, sleeth, 
while it makith 
to do synne 
witingly, and 
encreesith tres- 
passing. the 
spirit quyken- 
ith; for he 
makith to vn- 
derstonde 
goostly, and to 
fille that that 
lettre comaund- 
ide. The Glose 
rehersinge Aus- 


rij3twisnesse is plenteuonse in glorie. For 10 ign here. ve. 


peuere N. too. “° odour, or savour N. odour, or swetnes Qa. SOm.ox. +t Sothili to othere we 
benv. “we benodoury. Ywhoits ney.  Fory. * that don auoutrie biy. Y we speken of r. 
zZOmy. 20m. vr. > Om. sx. ¢Om.ox. dorGgpr.m. oure MPT. €summe men N. summen ser. 
f pistlis vy. & 3oure 4. hepistils. jtourenr. kOm. 4. 1 knowen Fr. m And 3e ben ¥ 
n Om. G pr.m. © epistel osx. P which pistle is mynystrid yr. dof mogr, 'Om.v. & Om. sx. 
tvs self carer, “Om. rv. ¥Om.r, YY Om. Pp. ¥ forsothe eg. * Om. pr.m. YOm. vy. % Om. sx. 
8 now auoidid s. bwasrv. ¢ Om. ox. 


h the othere a pr.m. K pr. m. be. 
mepistle ER.  epistle x. 
8 ministracioun R pr. m. 


VOL. IV. 


© Om. 1KRbe. 


i Om, K see. m. 
P stonen EIKMQRUXabcegkoaf, 


3C 


k other a. 1 epistlis er. ether lettris « marg. 


4 lettre 1gega. =F Om. a. 


378 


10 Forwhi nether ‘that that? was cleer ‘in 
this part*, ‘was glorified‘ for excellent glo- 
iirie®; sothly> if ‘that that' is auoydid, is* 
bi glorie, moche more ‘that that! dwellith 
i2is in glorie. Therfore we hauynge such 
13hope, vsen moche trist; and not as Moy- 
ses puttide™ a veyl on his face, that the 
children of Israel schulde not byholde in 
to his face, the" which veyl° is auoydid?. 
14 But the wittis of hem ben astoneyed4; 
sothli’ til in to this day the same vey] in 
redinge® of the oolde testament dwellith 
‘not schewid', for" in Crist it is auoydid, 
is but til in to this day, whanne Moyses is 
radd, the vey] is putt vpon’ her hertis". 
16 Forsoth whanne Israel scha] be conuertid 
17to God, the veyl schal be don awey. For- 
soth the Lord®* is spirit’; forsoth where is” 
isthe spirit of God’, there zs liberte>. For- 
soth alle we with schewid face biholdinge® 
the’ glorie of the Lord, ben transformyd 
into the same ymage, fro clerenesse into® 
clerenesse, as of the spirit of the Lord. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Therfore we hauyuge this administra- 
ciouns, ‘or office®, vp which we han getun 
2mercy, faylen not, but dou awey the pri- 
uey thingis of schame, not walkynge in 
sutil gyle, nether auoutrynge! the word of 
God, but in* schewinge of treuthe! co- 
mendinge™ vs" silf to ech conscience of 
smen bifore God. For if also oure gospel 
is° keuerid?, ‘or hid4, in these that pe- 
a4Vischen it is kenerid; in whiche the God 
of this world’ hath blyndid the soules of 
men out of the’ bileue, ‘or vnfeithful 
men, that the liz3tnynge' of the gospel of 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


Ill. 10—IV. 4. 


nether that that was cleer was glorified 
in this part* for the excellent glorie; 
and if that that ist auoidid", was’ bi¥ 1 
glorie, myche more that that dwellith 
stille is in glorie. Therfor we that han 12 
suche hope, vsen myche trist; and uot 13 
as Moises leide a veil on his face, that 
the children of Israel schulden not bi- 
holde in to his face, which* ve? is 
auoidid. But the wittis of hem beni4s 
astonyed; for in to this dai the same veil 
in reding of the olde testament dwellith 
not schewid, forY it is auoidid? in Crist, 
but in to this dai, whaune Moises is15 
red, the veil is put on her hertis. 
whanne Israel schal be conuertid to God, 
the veil schal be don awei. And thei7 
spirit is the Lord; and where the spirit 
of the Lord is, there és fredom. And alle 12 
we that with open face seen the glorie 
of the Lord, ben transformed in to the 
same ymage, fro clerenesse in to clere- 
nesse, as of the spirit of the Lord. 


CAP. IV. 


Therfor* we that han this admyn-1 
ystracioun, aftir this that we han getun 
merci, faile we not, but do we awei® thee 
preue thingis of schame, not walkinge in 
sutil gile, nether doynge auoutrye bi the 
word of Gad, but in schewynge of the 
treuthe comendynge vs silf to ech con- 
science of men bifor God. For if also3 
oure gospel is kynerid‘, in these that 
perischen it is kyuerid; in which God*+} 4 
hath blent® the soulis of vnfeithful men 
of this world, that the li3tnyng of the 
gospel of the glorie of Crist, which is the 


the glorie of Crist, that" is the ymage of | ymage of God, schyne not. But wes 
dthat ato.  ¢in this part, as the chere of Moyses oe. was gl. in this party. fOm.r.  & glorie of 
the newe testament @. hforwhir. ithatato. kwasy. !thatato. ™puttesx, .Om.r. 
© veyle, thai is, dercnesse of scripturis 9, P anoided by grace of Criste. stoneid s. *forrv. the 
reedynge G. t vnshewid x. 4“ for whi r. von srx.  W hertis hat byleuen not 9. x spirit Vv. 
Ya spirit cunper. the Lord r. % Om. F. 8 the Lord is r. b liberte, or fredum Q. a liberte r. 
Cseeinge n. 4Om.s. ¢too. fmynystraciouny. &Om.sx. + this that vy. the whiche x. 
i suoutryng, ether dockynge o. domge auoutrie bir. *Om.r. the treuthe acunpestyw. ™ the 


°be mT, 
58 Om. GMOPETX. 


comendinge K. © oure GarpeT. 
or pryde Q. § Om, perx. 


twas tsup.ras.b pr.m.  ™ voided E. 
y but b. 2 voidid rk. 4 Herfore tqa. 
4 God of this world, that is, the deuel a. 


P hid s. 
t lizting osx. 


4 Om. ox. or couered 8. 


Vis A Sec. m. EQe pr. m. ga. 
» ether forsake K marg. 


e blendid k. 


t world, that is, the deuyl, 
" which rv. “ 


wofh sec.m. * the whiche 1. 
¢ kyuered, or hid 1. ether hid K marg. 


* that is, the 
olde testament 
was not glori- 
fied in this 
part, that is, in 
comparison to 
the newe testa- 
ment, which is 
oure part and 
eritage. Lire 
here. ve. 


But 16 


t that is, very 
God, maker of 
this world. 
hath tlyndid ; 
that is, with 
drawe iustly 
fro hem the li3t 
of his grace, for 
her synne ; 
either the deuel 
is seid god of 
this world, as he 
is seid prince of 
this world, that 
is, of men lyn- 
ynge worldly. 
Lire here and 
the Glose, re- 
hersing Austyn. 
ve. 


IV. 5—16. 


sGod inuysible’, schyne not. Sothli we 
prechen not vs" silf, but Jhesu Crist oure 
Lord; forsothe vs* 3oure seruauntis by 
eJhesu. For God, that seide the ly3t forY 
to schyne of derknessis, he hath ynli3tid? 
in oure hertis, to the illumynynge?® of the> 
sciencee of the cleernesse of God, into 
7the® face of Jhesu Crist. Forsothe we 
han this tresour’ in brotil vesselis%, that 
the hijnesse be of Goddis vertu, and not 
sof vs. In alle thingis we snffren tribu- 
lacioun, but we ben not ‘maad streit'; 
we ben maad pore, but we ben not di- 
ystroyed!; we suffren persecucioun, but we 
ben not forsaken; we ben maad lowe, 
but we ben not confoundid; we ben 
locast down, but we perischen not; euer- 
more beringe aboute the mortifyinge* of 
Jhesu Crist! in oure body, that and the 
lyf™ of. Jhesu" be schewid in oure bo- 
iidies®. Sothli? euermore we that lyuen, 
ben takun? in to deeth for Jhesu, that 
and the lyf of Jhesu be schewid in oure 
izdeedly* fleisch. Therfore deeth worchith 
13in vs’, lyf sothli int 3ou'. Forsoth hau- 
ynge the same spirit of feith, as it" is 
writun, I haue bileued, for which thing 
I spak; and we bileuen, for which thing 
isand’ we speken; witynge for” he that 
reiside Jhesu, schal reise and* vs with 
Jhesu’, and schal ordeyne vs* with 30u?. 
isSothli® alle thingis for® 30u, that grace 
beynge plenteuous by manye’ in doynge 
of thankingis® be plenteuous into glorie 
isof God. For which thing we faylen not®, 
but thou3} ‘the ilke that is withouteforth, 
oure man* be coruptid!; nethelees that 
mau that is withinne forth™, is renewid", 


v¥Om. vy. Wourecwper. * God made vs 9. 
yng or. »6Om.r. C¢conscienceg. din rv. 
oure coruptible bodies 9. 
destitute, either caste amey rv. 
1Om. rv. ™]y3t 9. 2 Jhesu Crist o. 
opr.m, 8 vs, for oure pacience 9. + worchith in r. 
wand o. thaty. *alsor. Y hym sx. 
suffren 0 marg. sec. m. © ben don for 9. 
& not in tribulaciouns 9. thurw x. 


I corumped ox. corupt s. corrumptid y. corrupt coruptid y. 


f Jhesu Crist aa. & maad streit c. 
ahceghkoaf. 


and R. ™ reise vp a sec. m. 


Il. CORINTHIANS. 


y Om. sx, 
e Om. rT. 
b angwischid therby in soule 9. 


° bodi sxy. 


h vs lacketh Ece. vs wantith rga. 
I wherfore Y a sec.m. 1 sec.m.a. for which thing Y c sec.m. K sec. m. 8. for which thing 
0 newid EI pr. m. geg. 


379 


prechen not vs silf, but oure Lord Jhe- 
su Crist; and vs 3oure seruauntis bi 
Jhesuf. For God, that seide li3t toe 
schyne of derknessis, he hath 3oue 1i3t in 
oure hertis, to the li3tnyng of the science 
of the clerenesse of God, in the face of 
Jhesu Crist. And we han this tresour7 
in britil vessels, that the worthinesse be 
of Goddis vertu, and not of vs. In alles 
thingis we suffren tribulacioun, but we 
ben not angwischid&, 07 annoyed; we 
ben maad pore, but ‘we lacken} nothing ; 
we suffren persecucioun, but we ben nots 
forsakun; we ben maad lowe, but we 
ben not confoundid; we ben cast doun, 
but we perischen not. And euere more i0 
we heren aboute the sleyng of Jhesui in 
oure bodi, that also the lijf of Jhesu be 
schewid in oure bodies. For euere more! 
we that lyuen, ben takun in to deth for 
Jhesu, that the lijf of Jhesu be schewid 
in oure deedli fleisch. Therfor deth12 
worchith in vs, but lijf worchith* in 30u. 
And we han the same spirit of feith, as 13 
it is writun, Y haue bileuyd, Y' hane 
spoke; and we bileuen, wherfor also we 
speken; witynge that he that reiside 14 
Jhesu, schal reise™ also vs with Jhesu, 
and schal ordeyne with 30u. And alle1s 
thingis for 3ou, that a plenteuouse grace 
bi many thankyngis be plenteuouse in to 
the glorie of God. For which thing we 16 
failen not, for thou3 oure vtter man be 
corruptid; netheles the ynner man is re- 
newid" fro dai to dai. But that 1i3t17 
thing of oure tribulacioun that lastith 
now, but as it were by a moment, worch- 
ith in vs ouer mesure an euerlastynge 


2 inlisted, either 30ue liz3t vy. lizten- 
f tresoure, or wisdom 9. § vessels, that ben 
i distruyede fro oure tresoure hid in Crist ¢. 


k slaw3ter o. mortifyinge, that is, the dyuerse tourmentynge Q. sleeing r. 

P For whi rv. 
tt 30u, bot not euerelastynge Q. 
2 Om. rv. 
d many men Fr. 
i thilk that o pass. 9. the ilke that that xy. 


4 bitaken s. to taken y. * bodyly 
20m. x. YOm.o. 
@ 30u, tn euerlastynge blisse 9. > Sothely we 
ethanckis 9. £ thing, that 3 sue vs 9. 
k man, or fleische Q. 


mQOm. rv. © renewlid 4Gmporr. 


1 Crista. *& Om. cerKMQnUx 


3C2 


380 


‘or maad newe a3en°, fro day into? day. 
17Forsoth that that? is ‘in present’, ‘or 
now’, ‘a litil moment lastynge', and 1i3t, 
‘or esy", thing of oure tribulacioun, 
worchith ouer manere, ‘o7 mesure’, into” 
hijnesse the* euerelasting weizte of glorie 
18in vs, vsY not biholdynge tho thingis that 
ben seyn, but tho? that ben not seyn. 
Sothli* tho thingis that ben seyn, ben 
temperal, ‘or durynge by* short tyme”; 
forsothe tho thingis that ben not seyn, ben 
euerlastinge®, ‘or withouten ende*. 


CAP. V. 


1 Sotheli we witen, for if oure erthely 
hous of this dwellyng be dissolued4, that 
we han a bildyng of God, an hous not 
maad by hondis, euerlastinge in heuenes. 

2Forwhi and in this thing we mornen, 
coueitynge® for‘ to be clothid? aboue oure 

3dwellinge of! heuene; if netheles we ben 
4founden clothid*, and not nakid. Forwhi 
and we that ben in this tabernacle, sorwen 

‘with inneforth! greuyd, for that we wolen" 
not™ be dispoylid", but be® clothid? aboue; 
that ‘the ilke4 thing that is deedli, be 

ssopun vp of lyf. Forsothe he that mak- 
ith’ vs intot this" thing, 7s God, that 3af 
to vs aY wedd”, ‘or ecernes*, of spirit Y. 

6 Therfore we beynge® hardy alle gatis, and 
witinge® for? the whyle we ben in this 
body, we gon in pilgrymage fro the Lord; 

7forsoth® we wallken by feith, and not by 

scleer sijte. Forsoth we ben hardy, and 
han good wille, more for’ to be in pil- 
grymage fro® the body, and for! to be 

9 present toGod. And therfore we stryuen, 
whether absent, whethir present, for® to 

10 plese hym". Forsothe! it byhoueth vs alle 

© Om. G pr.m. MoPETX. 


PtoGprm. Gato. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


F present NQ. now o. 


IV. 17—V. 10. 


birthin in to the heiznesse of glorie; 
while that we biholden not tho thingis is 
that ben seyn, but tho that ben not 
seyn. For tho thingis that ben seyn, ben 
but durynge for a schort tyme; but tho 
thingis that ben not seyn, ben euerlast- 


ynge. 


CAP. V. 


And we witen, that if oure erthelit 
hous of this dwellynge be dissoluyd, that 
we han a bildyng of God, an hous not 
maad bi® hondis, euerlastynge in he- 
uenes. For whi in this thing we mor-2 
nen, coueitynge to be clothid aboue with 
oure dwellyng, which? is of 1 henene; 
if netheles we ben foundun clothid, and3 
not nakid. For whi and’ we that ben4 
in this tabernacle, sorewen with ynne, 
and ben heuyed, for that we wolen not 
be spuylid, but be clothid aboue; that 
the ilke thing that is deedli, be sopun vp 
of lijf. But who is it’ that makith vs ins 
to thist same thing? God, that 3af to 
vs the ernes" of the spirit. Therfor weé 
ben hardi algatis, and witen’ that’ the* 
while weY ben in this bodi, we goen in 
pilgrymage fro the Lord; for we walken?7 
bi feith, and not bi cleer si3t. But we8 
ben hardi, and han good wille, more to 
be in pilgrymage fro the bodi, and to be 
present toGod. And therfor we stryuen, 9 
whether absent, whether present, to plese 
hym, For it bihoueth vs alle to belo 


* Om. ovx. t lastinge bia 


moment y. tOm. ox. or orelyy. YOm.ox. Win vy. *thaty. ¥ Om. Nn. 2 tho thingis q. ® Forwhi r. 


aa but emer. Om. o. ‘> Gloss om. in x. 
body Gsec.m. 4 dissolued, or distruyed G sec.m. Q. 
i that is of G see.m. in px. which is of 7. 
n dissolued o. spoiled yx. © Om. o. 
ttorv. Uthissamer. VY the rp. 

- & wyten Gr. b that rv. ¢ for r. 
G sec.m. x. 1 For vr. 


P clad sx. 
W ernest F. 
4d Om, sx. 


© with rn. 
8 that rR. 
y that we h. 


P the whiche k. 


t the kof. U ether wed K marg. 


bb eterne Q. 
€ coueitid 7. 
k clad sx. 
q that x. 
x Om. orx, 
e for K. 


4 Om. ER prom. inh. 
Vv witing x. 


¢ Om. ox. or euerelastynge 9. °* house, or 
fOm.osx. g clad sx. hwith onre ry, 
0 wolith r, ™ Om. G pr.m. MT. 
vp, or don aweye Q. Om. r. § markith rv. 
Y spirit, to fulfille this thing 9. 7 ben r. 

f Om, sx. 6& Om. sx. h to him 


1 with inne r. 


r Om. A sec. m. ELKMQRUD pr. m. ceghkoaf. 
w that we schulen Rr. x Om. k. 


V. tI—21. 


fork to be schewid bifore the trone of 
Crist, that euery man resceyuel, ‘or telle 
a3en™, the propre thingis of body", as he 
ithath don, ether good, ethir yuel. Ther- 
fore we witynge the drede of the Lord, 
softly™" mouen, ‘or counceilen®, toP men‘, 
_forsoth? to God we ben opyn’; sothly I 
hope, and‘ in 3oure consciencis" vs’ for’ 
12'to be knowun*. We comenden not vs’ silf 
eftsoone to 30u, but we 3yuen to 30u occa- 
cioun? for@ to glorie> for vs, that 3e haue® 
to hem that glorien in the face’, and not 
i3in the herte®. Sothli wher we by mynde, 
‘or resoun', passen to8 God», wher we ben 
i4sobre to! 30? Sothli* the charite of Crist 
dryueth! vs; gessinge™, ‘or demynge", this 
thing, for® if oon is deed? for alle, ther- 
isfore alle ben deede. And Crist deyde for 
alle, that and thei that lyueu, lyue not 
now to hem silf4, but to him that deyede 
i¢for hem, and roos ajen. ‘And so we fro 
this tyme’ ‘han knowet no man" vp’ the” 
fleisch*; ‘and ifY we knowen* Crist“ vp* 
the? fleisch®, but ri3tt now we ‘han not 
izknowen*. Therfore if ony newe creature 
is in Crist, oolde! thingis han passid, and 
islo! alle thingis ben maad newe. Forsothe 
alle thingis of§ God, the" whichi recon- 
cilede, ‘or acordide*, vs to him by Crist, 
and 3af to vs the! mynisterie, ‘or seruyse™, 
190f reconcilinge. Sothli® for God was in 
Crist, reconcilynge to him the world, not 
rettinge to hem her giltis, and puttide® 
201m? vs the word of reconcilinge. Ther- 
fore we ‘ben sett in‘ legacie", ‘or message’, 
for Crist, as‘ God monestinge" by vs; we 
bisechen 30u’ for Crist, be 3e reconcilid to 
21God. God the fadir made him the* synne 


k Om. sx. 1 schewe Q. bere rv. 
© Om. ox. P Om. r. 
his trewe loueres Q. 
Om. ry. W Om. srx. 
aOm. sx. » glorifie w. haue glorie r. 
© hert, in spiritual thinges Q. £ Om. x. 


. we bi mynde* passen to God}, ether we 


™ Om. ox. either suffre v. 
g men, that they dreed the dome Q. 

t Om. G pr.m.7T. that we ben opin also rv. 

* to be knowen feithful a. Om. r. 

¢ haue undurstondynge Q. 

& itis to v. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 381 


schewid bifor the trone of Crist, that 

euery man telle the propre thingis of the 

bodi, as he hath don, ethir good, ether 

yuel. Thertor we witynge the drede of 11 

the Lord, councelen men, for to God we 

ben opyn; and Y hope, that we ben opyn 

also in 30ure consciencis*. We comenden 12 

not vs silf eftsoone to 30u, but we 3yuen 

to 3ou occasioun to haue glorie for vs, 

that 3e haue to hem that glorien in the 

face, and not in the herte. For ethir 1s 

* bi contem. 

ben sobre to 30u. For the charite of Crist 14 Lenina 

dryueth vs; gessynge this thing, that if nee ee 

oon died for alle, thanne alle weren 2 Sah aan 

deed. And Crist diede for alle, that thei 15 30%; that is, to 
, 3oure profit. 

that lyuen, lyue not now to hem silf, but — The Giese here. 

to hym that diede for hem, and roos 

a3en. Therfor we fro this tyme knowen 16 

no man aftir the fleische; thou3 we 

knowun Crist aftir the fleisch, but nowe® 

we knowun not». Therfor if ony newe!7 

creature is in Crist, the elde thingis ben 

passid. And° lo! alle thingis ben of1s 

God, which recounselide vs to hym bi 

Crist, and 3af to vs the sernyce of re- 

counselyng. And God was in Crist, re- 19 

counselynge to hym the world, not rett- 

ynge to hem her giltes, and puttide in 

vs the word of recounselyng. Therfor 20 

we vsen message for Crist, as if God 


monestith bi vs; we bisechen® for Crist, 


be 3e recounselid to God. God the fadir2! 
made hym synnet for vs, which knewe  ¢ thatis, sacri- 
not synne, that we schulden be maad 


fice for synne. 
Austyn. act 
ri3twisnesse of God in hym. 


et plures. 
Lire here and 
the Glose re- 
hersinge Aus- 
lyn. Vae. 


1 the body a9. nn sothly x. 
tT sothely Garpe. 8 opyn, or knowen 

u conscience GOTY. Vv and vs s. 
Youre GwpeT. 2 occasioun, or maéer Q. 
4 face, with oute forth as ypocritis Q. 
h God, by goostly byholdynge Q. + it ts to ¥. 


k Forwhi vy. | constreyneth o. ™ demynge o, "Om. cmoporvx. © that r. P deed by Adam ¢. 
4 silf, scekyng erthely thing 0. * Therforev, tyme ofgraceg. tknoweny. 4 man lyzynge ¢. 
vafter caper. ¥ Om. x. * fleische, that coueiteth to regne 9. Ythou;y. % knewen mpey. 22% wyth 
Crist q. after emupr. %Om.x. © fleische, byfore his uprysynge deedly 9. %Om.Q. © han not 
knowen hym deedly 9. knowen not v. — f know he for olde 9. Bbenoferv. bOm. rx. ‘that x. 
k Om. cyoprx. 10m.9. ™Om. ox. 4 Forsothe y. © putte sx. Ptok. “vsen vy. * message o. 
5 Om. ox. tasifv. monestithy. Ytoj3ousy. WOm. 7. 


h not now nr. 
€ bisechen 30u a sec. m. 


2 conscience k. a Om. R. 
4 ether legacie K marg. 


¢ Lo} alle thyngis ben maad ewe, and k sec. m. marg. 


382 


for vs, ‘that is, redempcioun, or sacrifice 
for synne*, theY which? knew not synne, 
that we schulde be maad* rijtwysnesse of 
God in hym. 
CAP. VI. 
1 Forsothe we helpinge® monestyn’, that 
3e resceyuen not the grace of God in veyn. 
2Sothlit he seith, In tyme accept®, ‘or wel 
plesynge’, I haue herd thee, and in the® 
day of helthe I have helpid® thee. Lo! 
now a tyme acceptable, lo! now a day of 
3heelthe. ‘To no man 3yuynge! ony offen- 
CoEM, ‘or hurtynge*, that oure mynisterie, 
sor seruyse', be not reprouyd; but in alle 
thingis 3yue we™ vs" silf as mynistris of 
God, in moche pacience, in® tribulaciouns, 
sandP in nedis, int angwischis, in™ betyngis, 
‘or scorgingis*, in prisouns, in dissen- 
ciounst with ynne forth’, in trauelis, in 
6 wakyngis, in fastingis, in chastite, in sci- 
ence’, ‘or kunnynge*, in long abydinge, in 
swetnesse, in the Hooly Goost, in charite 
7not feyned, in the* word of treuthe, in the 
vertu of God; by armers of ri3twysnesse 
son the ri3t half andy left half; by glorie 
and vnnobley; by yuel fame and good 
fame; as disseyueris, and trewe? men; as 
thei that beu vnknowen’, and knowun?; 
9as men deyinge’, and ‘lo! we lyuen*; as 
10 chastisid®, and not maad deed; as sorow- 
ful, forsothf euermore ioyinge; as ‘hau- 
ynge nede8, ‘or as nedy men», sothlyi 
makynge manye riche; as no thing hau- 
llynge, and weldinge alle thingis. A*! 5e 
Corynthis, oure mouth is opyn to 3o0u, 
izoure herte is alargid!; ‘be 3e™ not maad 
streit in vs, but ‘be 3e" maad streit® in 
1s30ure entrailis. Forsothe we? hauynge 
the same reward, I seye as to sones, and 
14 be 3e alargid’. Nyle 3e lede 30k with vn- 


Z that x. 
© acceptid x. 


x Om. rx. Y Om. rx. 
gon n. 4 For v. 
kOm. ox. !Om.ox. ™Om.c pr.m, 
rand ino. Om. s. Ss Om. oox. 
Ysciencis Gr. kunnynge 0. Ww om ox. 
2 good 0. ® vnknowen of God @. 
4 3it lynyng o. lo! we lyue in good werkis Q. 
“h or as maad nedy men ANgQ. Om. ox. 
ben yr. © streit, ar be 3e Pres Q. 
hope in Crist 9. largid sx. 


f Om. ox. 


P 3e QF. 


& holpen rk. 
A sec.m. ka. 


b 3ek, 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


& made the g. 
& Om. GMpr. 
mn oure GMPQT. 
t seduciouns Q. 
x Om. G pr.m. MPT. 

> of hym known and prouyd 9. 
e chastisid of greet trespasse Q. 
i forsothe emper. 


i Om. EI pr.m. Qe pr.m. ga. 
2 inwardnesse a sup. ras. EI pr.m. Qegh pr. m. 


VI, I-14. 


CAP. VI. 


But we helpynge monesten, that 3e! 
resseyuen not the grace of God in veyn. | 
For he seith, In tyme wel plesinge Y2 
haue herd thee, and in the dai of heelthe 
Y haue helpid® thee. Lo! now a tyme 
acceptable, lo! now a dai of heelthe. 
3yue we" to no man ony?! offencioun,3 
that oure seruyce be not repreued; but 4 
in alle thingis 3yue we vs silf* as the 
mynystris of God, in myche pacience, in 
tribulaciouns, in nedis, in angwischis, ins 
betyngis, in prisouns, in dissensiouns! 
with ynne, in trauels, in wakyngis, in 
fastyngis, in chastite, in kunnyng, iné 
long abiding, in swetnesse, in the Hooli 
Goost, in charite not feined, in the word7 
of treuthe, in the vertu of God; bi ar- 
meris of ri3twisnesse on the ri3thalf and 
on the lefthalf; bi glorie and vnnoblei; bis 
yuel fame and good fame; as disseyueris, 
and trewe men; as thei that ben vn- 
knowun, and knowun; as men diynge, and » 
lo! we lyuen; as chastisid, and not maad 
deed; as sorewful, euere™ more ioiynge ; 10 
as hauynge nede, but makynge inany 
men riche; as no thing* hauynge, and 
weldynge alle thingisf. A! 3e Coryn-117 on‘ wealaly 
thies, oure mouth is open to 30u, oure ™"** 
herte is alargid ; 3e ben not angwischid 12 
in vs, but 3e ben anguischid in joure 
inwardnessis". And Y seie as to sones, 13 
je that han the same reward, be 3e 
alargid. Nyle 3e bere the 30k with® vn-14 
feithful men. For what parting of ri3t- 
wisnes with wickidnesse? or what felou- 


* Li pal of 


b helpynge 3o0u in werk and word Q. © monesten 
hholpen s. i 3yue we to no man r. 
© and sx. Pp Om. Fr. Gand n. 
u forth, or mouyngis of peple 9. Om. r. 
Yand the nr. and on the ox. 

¢ diynge, fallynge fro vice into vice Q. 
fbut o. & nedy men o. 
k O! caper. llargid sx. ™3eber. 3e 
dQ alargid, with plente of kunnyng of vertues and of 


k Om. R pr.m. ™ and euer 


I striues a. 
° of E. : 


VI. 15—-VIL. 7° 


feithful men. Sothli what partynge, ‘or 
comunynge’, of ri3twysnesse with wickid- 
nesse ? or what felowschip of li3t’ to derk- 
isnessis? sothli what acordinge of Crist 
to Belial? or what part of a‘ feithful, ‘or 
cristen® man’, with vnfeithful”, ‘or he- 
isthene*? but what consent toY the temple 
of God? with ydols? Forsoth 3e ben the 
temple of quyk God, as the Lord seith, 
For I schal dwelle in hem, ‘and I schal 
walken® in®; and I schal be the God of 
hem, and thei schulen be to me a peple. 

17 For which thing go 3e out of the myddel 
of hem, and be 3e departid, seith the Lord, 

igand touche 3e° not vnclene thing; and I 
schal resceyue 30u, and I‘ schal be to 
jou in to a fadir, and 3e schulen be to me 
into sones and dou3tris, seith the Lord 
almy3ti. 

CAP. VII. 

1 Therfore, moost dereworthe britheren®, 
we hauyuge thes 3iftis‘, clense’ vs fro alle 
filthe of fleisch and spirit", perfytli mak- 
ynge halowynge in the drede of ‘the 

2Lordi. Take 3e vs*; we han hurt no 
man!, we han corupt no man, we han 

sbigylid no man. I seye not™ for" 3oure 
condempnynge; forsoth® I seide? bifore, 
that 3e ben in oure’ hertis, for’ to deie to 
4gidere, and lyne to gidere. Moche trist is 
to me anentis 30u, moche gloriynge is to 
me for 30u. Iam fulfillid’ with comfort, 
I abounde, “or am plenteuous', in ioye in 
sal oure tribulacioun. Forwhi and whanne 
we hadden comen to Macedonye, oure 
fleisch hadde no reste, but we suffriden® 
al’ tribulacioun; forsoth” withouteforth, 
6fiz3tingis””, ‘with ynneforth, dredis*. But 
heY that comfortith meeke men, God? 
comfortide* vs in the comynge of Tyte. 

7 Forsoth not oonli in the comynge of him, 

but also in the comfort by which he ‘com- 


IJ. CORINTHIANS. 


383 


schipe of li3t to derknessis? and whats 
acording of Crist to Belial? or what 
part of a feithful with the vnfeithful ? 
and what consent to the temple of God is 
with mawmetis? And 3e ben the tein- 
ple of the lyuynge God, as the Lord 
seith, For Y schal dwelle in hem, and 
Y schal walke among hem; and Y schal 
be God of hem, and thei schulen be a 
puple to me. For which thing go 3e17 
out of the myddil of hem, and be 3e 
departid, seith the Lord, and touche 3e? 
not vnclene thing; and Y schal resseyue 18 
3ou, and schali be to 30u in to a’ fadir, 
and 3e schulen be to me in to sones and 
dou3tris, seith the Lord almy3ti. 


CAP. VII. 


Therfor, most dereworthe britheren, i 
we that han these biheestis, clense we vs 
fro al filthe of the’ fleische and of the 
spirit, doynge holynesse in the drede of 
God. Taket 3e vs; we han hirt no man,z 
we han apeirid" no man, we han bigilid’ 
noman. Y seie not to 30ure condemp-3 
nyng ; for Y seide bifor, that 3e ben in 
3oure” hertis, to die togidere and to* 
lyue togidere. Myche trist is to me4 
anentis 30u, myche gloriyng is to me for 
jou. Y am fillid with coumfort, Y am 
plenteuouse in ioie in al oure tribula- 
cioun. For whanne we weren comuns5 
to Macedonye, oure fleisch hadde noy 
reste, but we suffriden al tribulacioun; 
with outforth fi3tingis, and dredis? with 
ynne. But God that coumfortith meke*« 
men, coumfortide vs in the comyng of 
Tite. And not oneli in the comyng of7 
him, but also in the coumfort bi which 
he was coumfortid in 30n, tellinge to vs 


rOm. ox. 8 ljtneso. Om. x. Om. ox. cristeng. YOm.x. © vnfeythfull meno.  * or 
hethen men AN. Om. 09x. Ywith x. 2 quyk Gods. 8 Om. G prm.g. » Om. G pr.m. me. emongis 
G sec.m. amonghemy. ¢Om.o. Om... ¢Om.x. fbiheestisy. 8 clense we mpg.  } spirit, 
outward and inward @. i God vy. * vs, to 30ure lederis 9g. 1 man, by yuel ensaumple Q. ™ not these 
thinges Q. 9 to AG sec.m. MNoPT. Om. G pr.m.F. °forv. Pseye x. 4 3oureky. Om. sx. 
$fillid y. ¢Om.ox. suffren y. Val oure w. “Om.r. Ww fy3tynge y. * dredis weren withinne r. 
¥God ry. %Om. r+. ®comfortith y. > and vs G pr.m. mor. 


P Om. EK pr.m. 


Vgilidk. Wourer. * Om. EIQ pr.m. ga. 


q I sehal exux sec. m. a sec.m.k. 
Ynot nr. 


t And take r. 
aOm.h. 


rOm.5. 3 Om. kK. 
2 drede is a pr.m. 


u peyrid 1. 


384 Il. CORINTHIANS. 


fortide met in 30u, tellinge to vs 3oure 
desyr, 3oure wepinge, 3oure loue for me, 
sso that I ioyede" more. For ‘and if’ I 
made 30u sori in ‘a pistle’, now* it rewith 
‘me not’; and if? it rewide, I* seynge 
that’ thou3° I¢ made 30u sory ‘in that® 
9 pistlef at an hour, now ‘haue I ioye; not 
for 3e weren maad sorowful, but for 3e 
weren maad sorowful to penaunce. Sothlii 
3e ben maad sory aftir God, that in no 
10 thing 3e suffre peirement of vs‘. Forsoth! 
that!! sorwe that is aftir God, worchith 
penaunce in to stedefast heelthe; forsoth 
11sorwe of the world worchith deeth. Lo! 
sotheli this same thing, 30u for™ to be 
sorowful aftir God, how moche bisynesse 
it worchith in 30u"; but defending®, but 
indignacioun?, but drede, but desyr, but 
loue, but veniaunce’. Int alle thingis 3e han 
jouun’ jou’ silf fort to be vndefoulid in 
rgcause"’, ‘or nede*. Therfore ‘and if* I 
wroot to 3ou, not* for himY that dide 
iniurie, nether for him that suffride, but 
for? to schewe oure bysynesse, the* which 
iswe han for 30u° bifore God. Therfore 
we ben comfortid‘, forsothe in oure® com- 
fort moref plenteuously we ioyeden® more 
on the ioye of Tyte, for his spirit is 
1ifulfillid of alle 30u". And if I gloriede 
ony thing anentis him of 3ou', I am not 
confoundid, ‘or schamyd*; but as we han 
spokun to 3ou alle thingis ‘in treuthe!, 
so! and oure™ glorie that was at Tyte, is 
ismaad treuthe. And the entraylis of him" 
ben more plenteuously® in 30u, ‘of him?P 
hauynge in mynde the obedience of 30u 
alle, how with drede and tremblinge 3e 
isresseyueden him. I haue’ ioye, that in 
alle thingis I triste" in 3ou. 


t was comfortid r. 


“ joye N. 
x Om. r. 


Y not me GuPerT. 


V thou3 F. 
z thou r. 
doynge profitith to 30u conuertid 9. 1 Forwhi r. 
not onely amending it wirchith @. 


ynge his yuel g. 4 veniaunce, fo punysche syune Q. 


VII. 8—16. 


3oure desire, 3oure weping, 30ure loue 
for me, so that Y ioiede more. Fors 
thou3 Y made 3o0u sorie in a pistle, it 
rewith me aot; thou3 it rewide, seynge 
that thou3 thilke pistle? made 30u sori 
at an> our, now Y haue ioie; not for 3e9 
weren maad soreuful, but for j3e weren 
maad soreuful to penaunce. For whi 3e 
ben maad sori aftir God, that in no 
thing 3e suffre peirement of vs. For‘ the 10 
sorewe that is aftir God, worchith pen- 
aunce in to stidfast heelthe; but sorewe 
of the world worchith deth. For lo!1 
this same thing, that 3e ben soreuful 
aftir God, hou myche bisynesse it worch- 
ith in 30u; but defendyng, but indigna- 
cioun, but drede, but desire, but loue, 
but veniaunce. In alle thingis 3e han 
jouun 30u silf to be vndefoulid in the 
cause. ‘Therfor thou; Y wroot to 30u, 12 
Y wroot not for hyin that dide the 
iniurie, nether for hym that suffride, but 
to schewe oure bisinesse, which we han 
for 30u bifor God. Therfor we ben1s 
coumfortid, but in 3oure coumfort more 
pleuteuousli we ioyeden more on the 
ioie of Tite, for his spirit is fulfillid’ of 
alle 30u. And if Y gloriede ony thing 
anentis hym of 3o0u, Y am not con- 
foundid; but as we han spoke to 30u 
alle thingis, so also oure glorie that was 
at Tite, is maad treuthe. And the in-1s 
wardnesse of hym be more plenteuousli 
in 30u, which hath in mynde the obe- 
dience of 30u alle, hou with drede and 
trembling 3e resseyueden® hym. Y haue 16 
ioye, that in alle thingis Y triste in 
30u. 


w epistle nN. pistle, forthinkynge 30ure synuc Q. an epistil s. 
a Om. r. 
eOm.rv. fepistell eNogsr. Om.r. & I haue cuper. haue xy. © sory o. 
Om. sx. the r. 
° defendyng, fro efte fallynge Q. 
r And kK. 


bOm.r. © thou3 thilk pistle r. 4 Om. r. 
i Forwhi rv. * vs, for al oure 
m Om. sx. ® 30u, of amendyug, and 
P indignacionn a3ein hym silf, sham- 


trOm. x. §30urempr. tOm sx. ™the 


cause Fr. V¥ Om. orx. or ueed that 3¢e dog. *thou3 vy. * I wroot not vy. Yhym onely I wrote 9. 2 Om. x. 


20m. 7. ” to G prim. Mper. 
iden, and speedfully it byfelle 9. © 30ure r. 
yuge Q. 4 30u, commending 30u Q. 
inward affecciauns Q. 


k Om. ox. 
° plenteuous Tf. 


aepistle eR. » oon E. 


© 3ou alle, for 30ur amendyng Q. 
f forsothe more o. 
1Om, Nn. 

P Om. Gmuoper. and of hym w. hym x. 


© For whi a pr.m. 


4 coumfortide, for this thing we purpos- 
Sioyen o. 1 30u, hopynge 30ure amend- 
Nas Nn. M™goure y. hym, that is, his 
q Om. Gc. ° tristid r. 


d fillid R pr.m. © resseyuen Q. 


VIII. 1-—12. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Britheren, forsothe we maken knowe 
to 3ou the grace of God, that is 3ouun in 
2the chirchis* of Macedonye, and‘ that in 
moche asayinge of tribulacioun, the ha- 
boundaunce, ‘or plente", of the ioye of 
hem was, and the hijeste pouert” of hem 
was plenteuous into the” richessis* of the 
ssymplenesse of hem. For I bere witness- 
inge andY to hem, vp vertu’, ‘or power’, 
4‘and aboue vertu thei weren wilful», with* 
moche monestynge bisechinge vs? the 
grace and comenynge of mynysterie®, that 
sis maad inf to hooly men®. And not as 
we hopiden, but” thei 3auen hem silf first 
to the Lord, aftirward to vs by the wille 
sof God. So that we preieden Tyte, that 
as he bigan, so and he perfoorme in 30u 
zalso this grace. But as 3e! abounden in 
alle thingis, in feith, word‘, and science, 
‘or kunnynge™, and al" bisynesse, more- 
ouer and® in 3oure charite in to vs, that 
sand? in this’ grace 3e habounde. I seie 
not as comaundinge, but by the bisynesse 
of othere men ‘also prouynge to gidere™ 
sthe good wit of 3oure’ charite. Sothli 3e 
witen the grace of oure Lord Jhesu Christ, 
forwhi he was made nedy for vs', whanne 
he was ryche, that 3e schulden be maad 
ryche by his myseste", ‘or nedynessev. 
w And I 3yue counceil in this thing; sothli 
this is profitable to 30u, that not ‘oonly 
bigynnen” for* to do, but and for’ to 
11 wilne? fro the formere 3eer. Now forsothe 
and in dede performe 3e, that as the yn- 
witt* of wil is redy”, so be it and of per- 
formynge® of that thing that 3e han. 
12 Sothli¢ if the wille be redy, it is acceptid vp* 


Il. CORINTHIANS. 


385 


CAPS VIVE 


But’, britheren, we® maken knowun! 
to.30u the grace of God, that is 3ouun 
in the chirchis of Macedonye, that in2 
myche asaiyng of tribulacioun, the plente 
of the ioye of hem was, and the hijeste 
pouert of hem was plenteuouse ‘in to> 
the richessis of the symplenesse of hem. 
For Y bere witnessyng to hem, aftirs 
mi3t and aboue mi3t thei weren wilful, 
with myche monestyng bisechynge vs4 
the grace and the comynyng of myn- 
ystring, that is maad to hooli men. 
And not as we hopiden, but thei 3auens 
hem silf first to the Lord, aftirward to 
vs bi the wille of God. So that wes 
preyeden Tite, that as he bigan, so also 
he performe in 30u this grace. But as7 
3e abounden in alle thingis, in feith, 
and! word, and kunnyng, and al bisy- 
nesse, more ouer and in 3oure charite 
in to vs, that and* in this grace 3e 
abounden. Y seie not as comaundinge,é 
but bi the bisynesse of othere men ap- 
preuynge also the good wit of 3oure 
charite. And 3e witen the grace of oure» 
Lord Jhesu Crist, for he was maad 
nedi for 30u, whanne he was riche, that 
je schulden be maad riche bi his nedy- 
nesse. And Y! 3yue counsel in this10 
thing; for this is profitable to 3ou, that 
not oneli han™ bigunne to do, but also 
3e bigunnen to haue wille fro the for- 
mere 3ere. But now parfourme 3e int! 
deed, that as the discrecioun of wille is 
redi, so be it also of parformyng of that 
that 3e han. For if the wille be redi, 12 
it is acceptid aftir that that" it hath, 


Schirche mp. tOm.v. "Om. ox. Yprofitg. Om. cGmper. *richesse x. Y Om. aGMNnposT 
ywxy. %thevertuor. ®Om.ox. %Om.g. ©Om.T. 40Om.s. ¢ the ministerie 0, mysterie r. 
fOm. ry. 8 men, how thei my3ten make her propre goodis comoun to the need of holy men.e. 4 Om. a. 
iOm.o. kKandwordy. !kunnyngeo. ™Om.ox. al goodo. °Om.v. pOm.N. ther. 
T appering also yr. $ joure aller g. ‘t30u¥. Ymysese N. nedynesse 0. Y Om. ox. W han bigunne Fr. 
xOm. sx. YOm. x. ‘4 onely for to do mynystracioun of 3oure goodis to pore men, but and for to wolen 
3e bygynne @. @ discrescioun ¥. > redy to wilne good Q. © perfourmynge, in dede doynge 9. 

orv. €aftir GMNPQT. 

fAndr. Ib. Pink. iinb. also cerkmquxabceghkoaf. alsoand rx. ! Om. gg pri. 
i hath rk. 5 Om. a. 


VOL. IV. 3D 


386 


that that‘ it hath’, not vp® that that! 
isit hath not. Forsoth not ‘that it be re- 
myssioun*, ‘o7 slouthe', to othere™, forsoth 
14to 30u tribulacioun"; but® of euenesse, in 
theP present tyme joure haboundaunce4 
fulfille the myseste’ of hem’, that and‘ the 
haboundaunce of hem" be ‘supplement, 07" 
Suljillinge, of 3oure myseste™, that euenesse 
1sbe maad; as it* is writun, He that hath 
mocheY, haboundide not, and he that’ litil®, 
ishadde> not lasse®. Forsoth I do thank- 
yngis to God, that 3af? the same bysy- 
iznesse for 30u in the herte of Tyte, for 
sotheli he reseeyuede exortacioun®, ‘or 
monestynge’; but whanne he was bisyere, 
with his wille he wente forth to 30u. 
is Forsoth we senten with hym oure® bro- 
ther’, whos preisynge is in the gospel* by 
i alle chirchis. Forsoth not oonly', but and 
he is ordeyned of chirchis the felowe of 
oure pilgrymage into this grace, that is 
mynystrid of vs to the glorie of the Lord, 
29 and to oure ordeyned wille; eschewinge™ 
this thing, that no man blame, ‘or dispise™, 
vs in this® plente, that is mynystrid of vs 
21 to the glorie of the Lord. Sothli we pur- 
ueyen goode thingis, not oonly bifore God, 
22but also bifore alle men. Forsoth we 
senten with hem and oure brother’, whom 
we han prouyd in manye thingis ofte, for‘ 
to be bisy, now forsoth moche bisyer, in" 
23 moche trist in’ jou, ethirt for Tyte, that is 
my felowe, and in 30u helpere, ether oure" 
britheren, apostlis of chirchis’ of the glorie 
210f Crist. Therfor schewe 3e in to” the 
faces* of chirchis, theY schewynge that is 
of joure charite and of oure’ glorie for 


f Om. NX. ato. 
k that the lurgenesse of 30ur almes be slewthe Q. 
othere men ¥r. 
4 aboundauuce of worldly goodis Q. 
the plente of her goostly help @. 
2 that hade 9. a gaderide litil rv. 


rmysese N. 
v Om. ox. 
b hath n. 


hav. i brother, Luke or Barnabas Q. 
preysinge of hym is in the gospel @. 
qOm.sx. 'forr S ton, 
ensaumple 9. to hem rv. 


Xface vy. Y that rv. 


° Om. R prom. k prim. 
nesting MUXa. exortacioun, or stiring 1. 
sQm.k8. +t oure K see. m. x. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


& hath, in 3ewynge to releeue the need of nedy men Q. 
1 Om. oex. or ydilnesse r. 
® tribulacioun, for 30ure foly 3euynge Q. 


W mysese, or nede N. 

¢ Jessid N. 
f or amonestynge Gupr. Om. ox. of amonestynge to enfourme 30u to abounde in this symplenesse Q. 
kK gospel, in writynge or prechynge Q. 
m ethchewynge GQ. 
t other w et P passim. 


VIE. 1324. 


not aftir that that it hath not. And not13 
that it be remyssioun to othere men, 
and to 30u tribulacioun; but of euenesse 14 
in the present tyme 3oure aboundance 
fulfille the myseese of hem, that also the 
aboundaunee of hem be a° fulfillynge 
of joure myseise, that euenesse be maad ; 
as it is writun, He that gaderide myche, 15 
was not encresid, and he that gaderide 
litil, hadde not lesse. And Y do thank-16 
yngis to God, that 3af the same bisy- 
nesse for 30u in the herte of Tite, for17 
he resseyuede exortacioun? ; but whanne 
he was bisier, bi his wille he wente 
forth to 3ou. And we senten with hymis 
a brother, whose preisyng is in the gospel 
bi alle chirchis. And not oneli4, buti9 
also he is ordeyned of chirchis the 
felowe of oure pilgrimage in to this 
grace, that is mynystrid of vs to the 
glorie of the Lord, and to oure ordeyned 
wille; eschewynge this thing, that no2o 
man blame vs in this plente, that is 
mynystrid of vs to the glorye of the 
Lord. For we purueyen good thingis, 21 
not onely bifor God, but also bifor alle 
inen. For we senten with hem alsoe2 
oure brothir, whom we han preued in 
many thingis ofte, that he was bisi, but 
nowe myche bisier, for myche trist in 
3ou, ethir for Tite, that is my felowe23 
and helpere in 30u, ethir for’ oure bri- 
theren, apostlis of the chirches of the 
glorie of Crist. Therfor schewe 3e in*24 
to hem in the face of chirchis, that 
schewynge that is of 3oure' charite and 
of oure glorie for 30u. 


h aftir cunper. 1 Om. nr. ato. 
™ other that taken it 9. 
© bot T wole a. P this GNeT. Om. MP. 
8 hem thai ben nedy 9. t*Om. x. “hem, that is, 
x Om. x. y gaderide myche r. 
4 hath jouen N. © oxre exortacioun @. 
ge bir. 
1 oonli hym n. onely the 

nOm.ox. Othe n. — P brother Apollo e. 
wothere v. VY chirchis, opynly, that othere taken 
2 30ure GSTVXY pr.m. 


P exortacioun, or monesting EKQRceghk sec. m. oa8. exortacioun, either mo- 
4 oonli preisid R sec.m. 


r Om. cEr pr. m. KMQRUXabceghkop. 


IX, 1—10. 


i30u ‘into hem*. Forwhi of” the myn- 
ysterie that is maad into® hooly men, it is 
to me of4 ‘haboundaunt, o7 plente®*, for‘ to 
wryte to jou. 

CAP. IX. 

2 Forsoth I woot® 3oure ynwitt" redy', 
for the which I haue glorie of jou anentis 
Macedonyes, for and* Acaye is redi fro a 
3eer passid, and 30ure loue hath stirid ful 

3manye. Forsoth we han sent britheren!, 
that that™ thing that we glorien in” 3ou, 
be not auoydid in this partie®, that as I 

4seyde, 3e be redy?. Lest when Macedonyes 
schulen4 come with me, and schulen" fynde 
3ou vnredy, we schamen’, that wet seye" 

530u not, in this substaunce’. Therfore I 
gesside necessarie for” to praye britheren, 
that thei come bifore to 30u, and make 
redy this bihi3t blessynge* forY to be redy, 

680 as blessinge’, not* as auarice>, This 
thing forsothe I seye, for® he that sowith 
scarsly, schal and‘ scarsly repe; and he 
that sowith in blessingis, schal repe and° 

7of blessyngis. Ech man as he castide! in 
his herte, not of heuynesse®, ‘or of nede; 

sforsoth God loueth a glad 3yuere. For- 
sothe! God is my3ty for* to make al grace 
abounde! in jou, that 3e in alle thingis 
euermore hauynge™ al sufficience, abounde 
gin to al good work; as it" is writun, He 
delide abrood, he 3af to pore men, his 
ri3twisnesse dwellith® into? ‘withouten 
ioende’. Forsoth he that" mynistrith seed 
to the ‘man sowynge’, and‘ schal 3yue" 
breed for’ to ete, and he schal multiplie 
3oure” seed, and make moche the encres- 


2 Om.v. 8a Chapter IX. commences here in r. 


ogsx. &knower. hwiller. i Om. rv. 
3e be redy Q. = Sthisr. Moff. © part sx. 
8 ben schamed vy. tI G pr.m. MNpor. 
pore men, to be redye y. w Om. sx. 

z blessing, for 30ure good wille and diserecioun @. 
to plenteuously g@. © Om. rv. also v. 
sehame Q. 
pore go. Om. x. 
P Om. ¥. 
8 sowere FY. sowende x. 


€ also Fr. 


i For whiv. * Om. sx. 


tOm. vy. % 3yue also F. 


Vv was b. 
2 Om. E£1Q pr.m. e pr.m. g. 
4 to abounde k prim. 


« Forwhi cab see. m. ¢ sec. m. 
sauzen 1. sy3e b. 
e sec.m. forsothe a. 
wexen k pr. m. 


Il. CORINTHIANS. 


band of s. 
or plente GMpstvy. abound. or a plente o. aboundaunce, or plente ouer mesure Q. aboundaunce x. 
k Om. N. 
P redye, and mys in doynge Q. 
U size MP. sai N. saye Q. 
x blessyng, thal causith everlastynge blessing Q. 
®and not GMPTY. see.m. 
f castide, or ordeynede Q. easte SX. 
h or of need, constreyned, but of pure lowe wilfully to the needye, 3eue he his blessynge to the 
1 for to abounde @. 
4 withouten ende world of world G pr.m. wpa. world of world G see. m. 
v Om. sx. 


w for A pr.m. 
8 also repe Ra. 
e Om. Rr. 


387 


CAP. IX. 

For" of the mynystrie that is’ maad 1! 
to hooli men, it is to me of plente to 
write to jou. For Y knowe 3oure wille, 2 
for the which Y haue glorie of 3ou 
anentis Macedonyes, for also Acaie is 
redi froY a 3eer passid, and 3oure loue 
hath stirid ful manye. And we han3 
sent britheren, that this thing that we 
glorien of 30u, be not auoidid in this* 
parti, that as Y seide, 3e be redi. Lest 
whanne Macedonyes comen with me, and 
fynden 30u vnredi, we be schamed, that 
we seienY 30u not, in this substaunce. 
Therfor Y gesside necessarie to preies 
britheren, that thei come bifore to 3on, 
and make redi” this bihizt blessyng to be 
redi, so as blessing, and not as aueryce. 
For Y seie this thing, he that sowith« 
scarseli, schal also repe scarseli; and he 
that sowith in blessyngis, schal ‘repe 
also* of blessyngis. Ech man as he7 
castide in his herte, not of heuynesse, or 
of nede; for® God loueth a glad 3yuere. 
And God is mi3ti to make al graces 
abounde! in 30u, that 3e in alle thingis 
euere more han al sufficience, and 
abounde in to al good werk; as it iss 
writan, He delide abrood, he 3af to pore 
men, his ri3twisnesse dwellith withouten 
ende. And he that mynystrith seed to 10 
the sowere, schal 3yue also breed to ete, 
and he schal multiplie 30ure seed, and 
make myche® the encreessingis of fruytis 
of 30ure ri3twisnesse; that in alle thingis 
3e maadf riche waxen’ plenteuouse in to 


1 


€ aboundaunce, 
Om, 
1 pritheren fo 30u, to enfourme 30u diseretly that 
qOm ry. Om. r. 
v substaunce, or 32/t thal releeueth 
y Om. sx. 
b auerice, or nygardye, nether 
§ hevynesse, or 


ctor. Om. an. 


mhafo. Om. x. © Om. 6 pr.m. 
t Om. & pr.m. 


W 3ou G pr. m. 


x Om. EQ pr.m. egk. ¥ sijen ERgoaB. 
binb. © forwhi a pr.m. cb see. am. 
f ben maad k pr.m. 8 wexen grh ef alti. and 


3D 2 


388 


yngis* of fruytis of 3oure ri3twysnesse ; 
1ithatY in alle thingis 3e* maad ryche ha- 
bounde ‘in to® alle symplenesse >, the® 
which worchith by vs doynge of thank- 
1zyngis? to God. For the mynisterie® of 
this office not oonly fillith tho thingis that 
faylen tof hooly men, but also aboundith 
by manye’ in doynge of thankingis to" 
13the Lord, by prouynge of this mynysterie’, 
glorifiynge God in the obedience of 3oure 
knowleching in the gospel of Crist, and in 
symplenesse of comynycacioun into hem 
14and into alle!, and in™ the" bisechinge of 
hem for 30u°, desyringe 3ou? for the clere4 
1s grace” in 30u. I do* thankingis to God* 
vpon" the ‘vnenarrable, or that may not 

\ be told, 3ifte of hym. *’Forsoth IY Poul 
biseche jou, by the homlynesse*, ‘or mylde- 
nesse’, and softenesse, ‘or pacience’, of 
Crist, the* which sothely in the face” ain 
meek among jou, forsoth I absent triste 
in 30u. 

CAP. X. 

2 Forsothe, britheren‘’, I preie jou, that 
I present be not hardy by® ‘the ilke® trist, 
in which I am gessid for‘ to be hardy in 
to summe®’, the" whiche deme vs, as we 

3wandren! vp) the fleisch. Forsoth* we 
walkynge ink* fleisch, ‘fizten not!, ‘or hold- 

sen not kny3thod™, vp" the fleisch. For- 
whi the armers of oure kny3thod ben not 
fleischly, but imy3ty to° God to? the de- 
struccioun of wardingis, ‘or strengthis4; 
swe' distroyinge® counceils', and al hi3- 
nesse" reysinge’ him” ajens the science of 
God, and dryuynge* into caytifte alY vn- 
dirstondinge into the’ seruyse of Crist ; 
salso? hauynge® in redynesse for to venge 


X encresynge 0. y that 3e Garper. 
¢Om.v, 4thankis apo. & mysterie N. 
kingpr.m. ‘alle othere. ™ into c. 
9 excelent vr, 


fin rv. 


w I myself rv. * holynesse T. y Om. ox. 
¢brether cx. Om. r. “intog. ethat x. fOm. sx. 
jJaftircarpety. * Forr. kkinthey. !beren ont a. 


Dn aftir GMPQTY. 
counseiles Q. 
x dryuen r. 
© Om. sx. 


° by pery see.m. P Om. Q. 


Y in that that in vs is ale. % Om. o. 


b glorifiynge a. i knowing k pr. m. 


II, CORINTHIANS. 


7 Om. GaPor. 
& manye men G see. m. 
° Om. emer. 
¥ grace, or charite 9. grace of God r. 
v ynuenerable G pr.m. vntelable 0. vnnarrable y. vnnoumbrable x. 
z Om. ox. 


q Om, ox. 
u heiznesse of worldly wise men Q. hiznesses X pr.m. 
a and also cr. and also we 9. and rv. 


E ether hoomlynesse K marg. 
hardi Kk marg. 2 wandrynge b. © the flesch R. P ether wardyngis K marg. Vvntoa. * Om. R. 


IX. 11—xX. 6. 


al symplenesse, which worchith bi vs 
doing of thankingis to God. For thelz 
mynystrie of this office not oneli fillith 
tho thingis that failen to holi men, but 
also multiplieth many thankyngis to 
God, bi the preuyng of this mynystrie, 13 
which glorifien’ God in the obedience 
of 3oure knouleching‘ in the gospel of 
Crist, and in symplenesse of comynyca- 
cioun in to hem and in to alle, and ini 
the biseching of hem for 30u, that desiren 
3ou for the excellent grace of God in 
jou. Y do thankyngis to God of the1s 
3ifte of hym, that may not be teld. 


CAP. X. 


And Y my silf Poul biseche 30u, bit 
the myldenesse* and softnesse! of Crist, 
which in the face am meke among 3ou, 
aud Y absent triste in 30u. For Y preie2 
3ou, that lest Y present be not bold bi 
the trist, in which Y am gessid to be 
bold™ in to summe, that demen vs, as if 
we wandren aftir the fleisch. For we3 
walkynge® in fleisch®, fizten not aftir the 
fleisch. For the armuris of oure kny3t-4 
hod ben not fleischli, but my3ti bi God 
to the distruccioun of strengthisP. And 
we distrien counsels, and alle hiznesses 
that hizeth it silf a3ens the science of 
God, and dryuen ‘in to4 caitifte al vn- 
dirstonding in to the" seruyce of Crist. 
And we han redi to venge al vnobedi-6 
ence, whanne 3oure obedience schal be 
fillid. Se 3e the thingis that ben after? 
the face. If ony man® trustith to him 
silf, that he is of Crist, thenke he this 


ainG prom. vt. © symplenesse of herte 9. 
hin Gsec.m.y. ‘4 mysterie Q. 
© 30n to God @. ‘P30 éo be in blisse Q. 
8 3if o. t God for 3on x. uvp o. of ¥. 
vv Chapter X. begins here in r. 
a Om. F. b face, or wythouteforth a. 

€ sum vncorrect 9. »& Om. vy. } wandriden y. 
m Om. ox. fizlinge azein the world and the dewyl @. 
rOm. 9, and wer. $distroieny. * the 
Vreiside 9. W Om. Q. itself r. 
b we han Fr. 


m ether 
8 Om. a. 


| ether pacience K marg. 


X.7—I17. 


al vnobedience, whanne 3oure obedience 
7schal be fulfillid?. Se® 3e the’ thingis that 
ben vpon® the face*. If ony man tristith to 
him silf, himi for* ‘to be! of Crist, thenke 
she this thing eft anentis himsilf, for as 
he is Cristis”, so and we. Forwhi and 
if I schal glorie ony thing more of oure 
power, the" which the Lord 3af to vs into 
edifyinge, and not into 3oure distruccioun, 
9I schal not schame®. Forsothe that I he 
not gessid as for? to feere 30u by epistlis, 
10 forwhi thei seyn, The epistlis ben‘ heuye", 
‘or greuouse’, and strong, but the presence 
of body sijk', and the word contemptible, 
ior worthi for to be dispysid’. He that 
is such ‘maner man”, thenke this, for what 
maner enx we ‘ben absent’ by epistlis’, 
suche maner men* vs> present in dede. 
' 12 Sothli® we doren® not putte vs among, ‘or 
comparisowne ys° to summe’, that comen- 
den hem silf; but we metinge®, ‘or mesur- 
inge®,‘ys in' ‘vs silf*, and comparisownynge! 
13 vs™ silf to® vs, sothli? we schulden notP 
glorie’ ‘into ful moche’, but vp* the mesure 
of reule, bit which God mesuride to vs, the 
l4mesure of strecchinge til" to jou. For- 
sothY not” as we* not’ strecchinge to* 30u, 
‘ouerholden vs». Forsoth¢ ‘til to’ 30u we 
iscamen in the gospel of Crist, not glory- 
inge ‘into ful moche® in othere mennis 
trauelis. Sothly we hauynge’ hope of 
3oure feith waxynge in 30u for® to be 
magnyfied vp* oure! reule in habound- 
igaunce, also for* to preche into tho thingis 
that ben by3andes 30u, not for! to glorie™ 
in othir mennis" reule®, in thes thingis 
ijthat ben maad redy. Forsothe he that 


d fillid vy. e@Soo. fthoo Gc. tho per. 
sTVX pr.m, k Om, syx. | that he is r. 
P Om. sx. 4@sothli ben. * grenous ir. 
seek, or unmy3ty Q. ts syk vy. 4Om. s. 
absent thoron3 woord n. absent ben in word r. 
nite g. Om. x. bwebenv. ¢ For ry. 
meten V. b Om. ox. or mesuren r. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


& aftir omPeTV. vp NoswXY. 
m of Crist aap. of Cristis y. 
s Om. ox. or greuouse to vndurstonde Q. or heuy w. 
‘¥ Om. gloss ox. 
2 the pistlis G. pistolis sx. pystlis vy. 
4 duro, durn x. 
i Om. nN, 


389 


thing eft’ aneutis hym silf, for as hes 
is Cristis, so also we. For! if Y schal 
glorie ony thing more of oure power, 
which the Lord 3af to vs in to edifiyng, 
and not in to 3oure distruccioun, Y schal 
not be schamed. But that Y be noty 
gessid as to fere 30u bi epistlis", for’ thei 10 
seien, That epistlis” ben greuouse and 
stronge, but the presence of the bodi és 
feble, and the word worthi to be dis- 
pisid. He that is suche oon, thenke this, 11 
for suche as we absent ben in word bi 
pistlis*, suche we ben present in dede. 
For we doren not putteY vs among, or12 
comparisoune vs to suminen, that co- 
imenden hem silf; but we mesuren vs in 
vs silf, and comparisounen vs silf to vs. 
For we schulen not haue glorie ouer me- 13 
sure, but bi the mesure of the reule 
which God mesuride to vs, the mesure 
that stretchith to 30u. For we ouer-14 
stretchen not forth? vs*, as not stretch- 
inge to 30u. For to 3ou we camen in the 
gospel of Crist, not gloriynge ouer me-15 
sure in othere mennus trauelis. For we 
‘han hope" of 3oure® feith that wexith 
in 3ou to be magnefied bi oure reule in 
abundaunce, also to preche in to thois 
thingis that ben bizendis 30u, not to haue 
glorie in othere mennus? reule, in these 
thingis that ben maad redi. He that17 
glorieth, haue glorie in the Lord. For ts 
not he that comendith hym silf is preu- 
yd, but whom God comendith. 


h face, or opynly g. i Om. 
n Om. evx. © be schamed r. 
t Om. kK. 
xOm. x. Yben 
a of men G, men 
eOm.o. fsummenrv. & mesourynge 0. 
k oure silf capr. oure silf, that is, byholdynge 


w Om. ox. a manere many. 


in to oure conscience Q. 1 comparisonen r. M oure GMPQT. nin Q. © forsothe Fr. P Om. r. 
q haue glorie r. Yr oner mesure Fr. 8 after cmpert. bi Fr. tthe o. Om, rv. uOm.e.  Y For r. 
W we onerstrecchin not forth vs r. x Om. rv. y Om. n. a vnto G sec. m.Q. til to r. b we ouer- 
holden vs G sec.m. Om. 7. ouerhelden x. e¢ For r. d yuto GMPT. € ouer mesure V. fhan rv. 


Om.sx. )biv. isoure c sec.m. &k Om. sx. 


© renle, or tcchynge Q. 


8Om.).  ' Forwhi a pr.m.b sec.m. k. 
b seem. k prom. pistlis mk. 


k prom. © oure k sec.m. 4 mannus Ebcgka. 


10m. nsx. 


u the epistlis ce1KmMQruxabceghkoa8. 
x epistlis Er pr.m. k. 


m haue glorie NV. ™ mans GNPQsYiV. 


Vv forwhi A prem. © 


y ether menge Kk. 4 for goB. * this 8. » hopen 


390 


isglorieth, glorie? in the Lord. Forsoth4 
not he that comendith him silf is proued, 
but whom God comendith, ‘or pretsith’. 


CAP. XI. 
1 I wolde ‘3e schulden’ susteyne! a litil 
thing of myn vnwysdom, but and" sup- 
2 porte’ me, ‘or bere vp me*. Sothlyy I 
lone 30u? by the loue of God; sothli* I 
haue bihi3t, ‘or bicome borwe, for’ to 
3yue’ 30n® a chast virgynef to a% manb, 
3 Crist’. Forsoth I drede, lest as the ser- 
pent disceyuede Eue with) his sutil wordis*, 
so 3o0ure! wittis ben corupt™, and falle doun 
afro the symplenesse that is in Crist. For- 
whi if he that cometh, prechith anothir 
Crist, whom we prechen™ not, or if 3e 
taken anothir spirit, whom 3e resseyueden® 
not, or anothir gospel, the? which 3e re- 
sceyueden not, ri3tly 3e schulden suffre. 
sSothlit I wene™ ‘for to haue* don no thing 
6 lasset fro" the greete apostlis. Forwhi thou3* 
I be vnlerned™ in sermoun, ‘07 word*, but 
not in science’, ‘er kunnyng’. Forsoth 
in alle thingis? Iam schewid”, ‘or maad 
zknowe*’, to 30u. Or whethir I haue do 
synne, mekynge, ‘or makinge low3, my 
silf, that 3e ben enhaunsid, for freely 
I enangeliside® to 30u the euangelie! of 
sGod? I spoilide’, ‘or made nakide, or took 
3¢/tis", of' othir chirchis, takynge* soude! 
ato 3oure seruyse. And whenne I was 
anentis 30u, and nedide, I was chargeous 
to no man; forwhi britheren that camen 
fro Macedonye, ‘supplieden, or fulfilden™, 
that that" failide to me. And in alle thingis 
I haue kept°, and schal kepe me? withoute 
iocharge to 30u. The treuthe of Crist is’ 
in me; for this glorie schal not be brokun 
in™ me, in the ‘regiouns, or kuntrees*’, of 


P glorie he g. haue glorier. 4 For r. 


¥ supporteth x.  ¥ 3e me r. 

a for r. > Om. ox. or spousid r. 
SoanstTwxy. Omer. ’Om.r. i of Crist r. 
™ corupt, bi lije fraude g. ®™ prechiden r. 
haf o. to have sx. that IT haue rr. t Om. s. 
x Om. ox. curiously spekynge 9. ¥Y kunnynge o. 
b maad knowen o. opin ry. © Om. or x. 
hOm. orx. i Om. rx. Kand I took r. 
Gmupex. filleden or. © theng that o. 

8 regiouns GMPQ. contre 0. 


e Forwhi a prem. ca. © gretter o. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


rOm. ox. § that 3e wolden r. 
x Om. ox. or bere me vp MPQ. or berith vp s 

¢ Om. sx. to oon husbonde r. 
jbi». 
© token r. 
% to o. than F. 
z Om. ox. or kunnyng I am vnlernyd Q. 
d Om. ox. 

1 sowede G. 
° kept me o. 


f vnlernid qrgka8. unlernd Ke. 


X. 18—XI. to. 


CAP. XI. 


I wolde that 3e wolden suffre a litil! 
thing of myn vnwisdom, but also sup- 
porte 3e me. For Y loue 3ou bi the loue2 
of God; for Y haue spousid 30u to oon 
hosebonde, to 3elde a chast virgyn to 
Crist. Bunt Y drede, lest as the serpent 3 
disseyuede Eue with his sutil fraude, so 
joure wittis ben corrupt, and fallen doun 
fro the symplenesse that is in Crist. 
For® if he that cometh, prechith anothir4 
Crist, whom we precheden not, or if 3e 
taken another spirit, whom 3e token not, 
or another gospel, which 3e resseyueden 
not, riz3tli 3e schulden suffre. For Y5 
wene that Y haue don no thing lesse 
than the grete®e apostlis. For thou3 Y6 
be vnlerudf in word, but not in kun- 
nyng. For in alle thingis Y am open to 
jou. Or whether Y haue don synne,7 
mekynge my silf, that 3e be enhaunsid, 
for freli Y prechide to 30u the gospel 
of God? Y made nakid othere chirchis, * 
and Y took sowde to 30ure seruyce. 
And whanne Y was among 3ou, and9 
hadde nede, Y was chargeouse to no man; 
for britheren that camen fro Macedonye, 
fulfilliden that that failide to me. And 
in alle thingis Y haue kept, and schal 
kepe me with outen charge to jou. Theo 
treuthe of Crist is in me; for this 
glorie schal not be brokun in me in the 
cuntreis of Acaie. Whi? for Y louell 
not 30u? God woot. For that that’ Y12 
do, and that Y schal do, 2s that Y kitte 
awei the occasioun of hem that wolen 


t sustene, or suffreg. Yalsor. 


y For r. z Om. F. 
d take epg. © Om. vy. f maidens. 
k frawde aGmMNogsTFWxy. loure TIVY. pr.m. 
POm. or. @Forr. ‘wente w. 5 for I 
v3if@. W not lernid apa. vnlerid srx. 
a Om. Nn. 
© preched r. f gospel yr. & made nakid r. 
m snpplieden, or filliden ansrwy. fulflliden 

P Om. o. q Om. o. r Om. G pr.m. 


& Om. b pr.m. 


XI, 11—25. 


11Achaye. Whit? for I loue not 30u? 
12God woot". ‘For that’ that I do, and I 
schal do, that I kitte awey ‘the occa- 
sioun” of hem, that wolen occasioun, ‘or 
plente, or power*, that in the thing, in 
which thei glorien, thei be founde sucheY 
i3as and we. Forwhi suche false apostlis 
ben trecherous’, ‘or gylous*, work men, 
14transfiguringe hem into apostlis. And not® 
wondir; sothli4 he® Sathanas‘ transfygur- 
15ith® him into an® aungel of ly3t. Therfor 
it is not greet, if his inynistris ben trans- 
figurid as the mynistris of rijtwysnesse, 
16 whos ende schal be aftir hir workis. Eft 
I seye, lest ony man deme! me* vnwyse! ; 
ellis take 3e me vnwyse™, that and® I haue 
17glorie a litil what. ‘That that® I speke, I 
speke not vp? God, but as into? vnwys- 
isdom’, in this substaunce of glorie. For- 
whi many men glorien vp* the fleisch, and 
19I schal glorie'. Forsoth" 3e suffren gladly 
vnwyse men, whanne 3e” silf ben wyse. 
20 Sothli¥ 3e susteynen*, if ony man dryueY 
jou into seruage, if ony man deuourith, if 
ony man takith, if ony man is enhaunsid 
‘bt pride?, if ony man smytith® 3o0u ‘into 
21face®. Vp‘ vnnobley, I seye, as® we weren 
syke in this partye’. In what thing ony 
man dar, in vnawysdoms IJ seie, and I dar. 
22Thei ben Ebrewis®, and Ii; thei ben Ys- 
raelitis, and I*; thei ben the! seed of A- 
23 braham, and I; thei ben the™ mynistris of 
Crist, and I. As lasse wys I seye, ‘I more"; 
in ful manye trauels, in prisouns more 
plenteuously, in woundis aboue ‘manere, 
2407 ouer mesure®, in deethis ofte tymes. I 
resceyuede of the Jewis fyue sythis fourty 
25 strokis oon lesse; thries I was betun with 
3erdis, onys I was stoonyd, thryes YP maad 


tOm. G prom. 4 wote for I loue 30u 9. 
siouns K. occasioun, or plente or power N. 
2 trechours Ty. ® Om. ox. gileful s. 
e Om. rv. 
G prem. 1 to be vnwise r. 
ato. Pafter cmpev. in Nv. to 9. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


v Forsothe 46mNogs. Forsothe that prvivxy. 
x Om. Nox. take o sec. m. marg. 

b aposteles of Crist GuoPoTVWXxY. 

§ transfigured Ns. 

™ as vnwijs MOPQVWXY. 

t wisdom Yr. 


f Satanas, her heed y. Satanas him self r. 


8 after GMPOr. 


391 


occasioun, that in the thing, in which 

thei glorien, thei be foundun as we. 

For® siche false apostlis ben trecherouse 1% 

werk men, and trausfiguren hein in ‘to 

apostlis of Crist. And no wondur, for 14 

Sathanas hym silf transfigurith' hym in 

to an aungel of light. Therfor it isis 

not greet, if hise mynystris ben trans- 

figurid as the mynystris of ri;twisnesse, 

whos ende schal be aftir her werkis. 

Eft Y seie, lest ony man gesse me toi 

be vnwise; ellis take 3e me as vuwise, 

that also Y haue glorie a litil what. 

That that Y speke*, Y speke not aftir17* that 1 speke; 
God}, but as in vnwisdom, in this sub- Tees bee 
staunce of glorie. For many men B10 18 ar af 
rien aftir the fleisch, and Y schal glo- HAE iat 
rie. For 3e suffren gladli vnwise men, 19 wordis, no glo- 


y . rie risith of 
whanne 3e* silf! ben wise™. For" 3€ 20 flesch anentis 
s ‘ God, for whi 

oO > 
susteynen®, if ony man dryueth? 30u in (oo Ly 


glorie anentis 


to seruage, if ony man deuourith, if ony — slorie atentis 
man takith, if ony man is enhaunsid4, — fere. _ 
. . Either not aftir 
if ony man smytith 3ou on™ the® face. Goa, but us in 
Bi vnnoblei Y seie, as if we weren sike2 77 qe 
in this parti. In what thing ony man  Withonta re- 
dar, in vuwisdom Y seie, and Y dar. pecan 
Thei ben Ebrewis, and Y; thei ben22 
Israelitis, and Y; thei ben the seed of 

Abraham, and Y; thei ben the myn-23 

ystris of Crist, and Y. As lesse wise Y 

seie, Y more; in ful many trauelis, in 

prisouns more plenteuousli, in woundis 

aboue' maner, in deethis ofte tymes. Y 24 
resseyuede" of the Jewis fyue sithis 

fourti sfrokis oon lesse; thries Y was 25 

betun with 3erdis, onys Y was stonyd, 

thries Y was at shipbreche, a’ ny3t and 

a’ dai Y was in the depnesse of the 

see; in weies ofte, in perelis of floodis, 26 


W occa- 
y Om. r. 
¢nonv. 4 forwhi ¥. 
hOm. ov. igesser. k Om. 
5 Om. G prom. o And that x. that 
t glorie, that siche be repreuede Q. 


« For vy. Y¥ 3ee 30ur Gpgy sec. m. je 30u aw. 30u sx. * For whiv. *suffreng. Ydriuethy. 7 Om. x. 
asmytynge N. smyte x. bony. © the face acmopasxy sec.m. 4 Afterampg. Bir. asif rv. 
fpart x. € wisdom o. 4 Jewiss. iOm.epr.m. * Om. cprm !Om.0o. "Om. ns. ™ more I 
GMPQ. © maner O pr.m, X. mesure O sec.m. P Om. o. 

h Forwhi a pr.m.ca. i transfiguridek. * 30ur 5. 3e 30u Ka. jouk. |} Om.1. ™ wise men?. 
= Forwhi a pr.m.c. ©suffrens. Pdriueca. 4 enhauncid bi pride rh. * intoKsee.m. *% Om. 
Apr.m.b. toueri. Uresseyue k prom. Yv Om. A sec.m. 1a-sec.m.a. * Om. a. 


392 


perisching in schip, ny3t% and day I was 
2¢6in depuesse’ of the see; in weies ofte, in 
perelis of flodis, in perels of theues, in 
perelis of kyn, in perels of hethen men, 
‘in perelss in cite', in perels in desert, in 
perels in see", in perels in false britheren, 
27in traueil andY myseste’, in many wak- 
yugis, in hungir and* thirst, inY many fast- 
28ingis, in cold and? in* nakidnesse. With- 
oute tho thingis that ben withouteforth ; 
myn eche dayes? wakynge*, ‘or studyinge’, 
29the® bisynesse of alle chirchis. Who is 
syk, and Iam not syk? who is sclaundrid, 
and I am not brend!? 


CAP. XII. 


30 If it bihoueth for® to glorie, I schal glorie 
in tho thingis that ben of myn infirmyte, 
sor freelte", God' and the fadir of oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist, that is blessid into the* 
worldis, woot, that I ‘gabbe not, or' lyie 
sznot. The prouost™, o7 kepere®, of Da- 
maske, of the king of the folk Arethe’, 
kepte the cite of Damascenys for? to take 
33me; and by a wyndow in a leep I was 
latun down by the‘ wal, and so I scapide" 
this hondis. ‘If it bihoueth’ fort to glo- 
rie, sothli it spedith not; forsoth I schal 
come to the visyouns and reuelaciouns of 
2the Lord. I woot a man in Crist bifore 
fourtene 3eer; wher in body, wher out of 
body, I woot not, God woot; sich a man 
srauyschid ‘til to’ the thridde heuene. And 
I woot such a man; wher in body, or* out 
4of body, I nootY, God woot; for he was 
rauyschid into paradys, and herde priuey 
wordes, the? whiche it is not leefful to a? 
sman for to speke. For sich maner thing® 
I schal glorie; forsothe for me no thing, 
éno* but in myn infirmitees. Forwhi and 
if I schal wilne® for‘ to$ glorie, I schal not 


Il. CORINTHIANS. 


XL. 26-——XII. 6. 


in perelis of theues, in perelis of kyn, 
in perelis of hethene men, in perelis in 
citee, in perelis in desert, in perelis in 
the see, in perelis among false britheren, 
in trauel* and nedynesse, in many wak-27 
yngis, in hungur, in thirst, in many fast- 
yngis, in coold and nakidnesse. With-28 
outen tho thingis that ben withoutforth, 
myn ech daies trauelyng zs the bisynesse 
of alle chirchis. Who is sijk, and Y amg 
not sijk? who is sclaundrid, and Y am 
not brent? If it bihoueth to glorie, Y so 
schal glorie 2x tho thingis that ben of 
myn infirmyte. God and the fadir ofs: 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, that is blessid 
in to worldis, woot that Y lie not. The3z 
preuost of Damask, of the kyng of the 
folk Arethe’, kepte the citee of Dama- 
scenes to? take me; and bi a wyndow in33 
a leep Y was latun doun bi the* wal, and 
so Y ascapide? hise hondis. 


CAP Aci. 


If it bihoueth to haue glorie, it sped-1 
ith not; but Y schal come to the visiouns 
and to® the reuelaciouns of the Lord. 
I woot a man in Crist that bifore foure-2 
tene 3eer; whether in bodi, whether out 
of the’ bodi, Y woot not, God woot; that 
siche a man was rauyschid ‘til to® the 
thridde heuene. And Y woot sich a3 
man; whether in bodi, or out of bodi, Y 
noot', God woot; that he was rauyschid 4 
in to paradis, and herde preuy wordis, 
whiche it is not leueful to a man to 
speke. For such maner thingis Y schals 
glorie; but for me no thing, nos but in 
myn infirmytees. For" if Y schal wilnes 
to glorie, Y schal not be vnwijs, for Y 


dany3t x. ‘peril 7. sOm.c prim tthe cite sx. Uthe seeastxy. Vino. W nedynesse, either 
mysseiste Vr. Xin ky. Yando. 27Om.w. ® Om. aemnoper. > day acmposTywxy. © traueiling r. 
d Om. ox. € is the rv. f brent, or purgid with multitude of sclaundris Q. g Om, sx. h Om. ox. 
i Foro. k Om. srx. !Om. acmnopestywxy. ™kepere x. ° Om. oxy. © of Arethe 4 pr.m. Nox. 
POm.sx. 4Gax. Fascapider. ' Cap. XII. begins herein r. §behonesx. tOm.sx. "the 
body aosTvxy¥ pr.m. vnto empa. til x. WOm.G pr.m. *whether x. Ynot wots. 2% Om. r. 
aenye. 6 Om. sx. Cthingisy. dnoto. ¢ wille a. wolene. fOm. sx. 8 Om. sx. 

x traueilisk. yof Arethe trcdk. 7 fortob. a E1gega. » scapide bpr.m. ¢Om.r. ¢Om. 
ckmRaeghk, €vntol. fne woot. wot not kK. 8 Om.b. > Forwhi a pr.m.c. 


XI. 7-16. 


be vnwys; sothli* I schal seye treuthe; 
forsoth! I spare, lest ony man gesse me 
ouer that thing that he seeth in me, or 
vheerith ony thing of me. And lest the 
grectnesse of reuelaciouns* enhaunce me 
‘in pride’, the pricke of™ fleisch, an aun- 
gel of Sathanas, is 3ouun to me, ‘the which 
8 boffatith® me. For which° thing thries I 
preide the Lord, that it schuld go awey 
ofro me. And he seide to me, My grace 
sufficith to thee; forwhi vertu is perfitly 
maad in infirmite. Therfore gladly I schal 
glorie in myn infirmytees, that the vertu 
10 of Crist dwelle in°° me. For which thing 
I plese to me? in myn infirmitees, in 
wrong’ dispisyngis, ‘or reprouyngis*, in 
nedis, in persecuciouns, in angwyschis, for 
Crist; sothlis whanne I am syk, thanne 
uI am my3ty. I‘ am maad vnwitty", 3e 
constreyneden me’. Forsoth I ‘schulde, 
or* ow3te, forY to be comendid of 30u; 
sothli? I dide no thing lesse ‘fro hem? that 
ben apostlis aboue manere®. Forwhi® 
12 thou34 I be® nou3t', nethelees the? sygnes 
of ‘myn apostilhed® ben maad oni 3o0u, in* 
al pacience, and singnes, ‘or miraclis!, and 
13 grete wondris, and vertues. Sothli what 
is it, that 3e hadden lasse™ bifore" othere 
chirchis, no but that I my silf greuyde 3ou 
not°? For3yue 3e to me this wrong ?. 
14 Loo! this thridde tyme I am redy for? to 
come to 30u, and I schal not be greuons 
to 30u; forsothe’ I seke not tho thingis 
that ben 3oure, but 30ou. Forsoth® nethir 
sones owen tot tresoure, ‘or make tresour, 
to fadir and modir, but the’ fadir and 
1smodir” to the* sones. ForsothY I moost 
wilfully schal 3yue, and I? my silf schal 
be ‘ouer3ouun* for 3oure soulis; thou3 I 
is more louynge?, be lesse loned. But be it; 
I greuyd not 3ou, but whanne I was sutil 


II. CORINTHIANS. 393 


schal seie treuthe; but Y spare, lest ony 
man gesse me ouer that thing that he 
seeth in me, or herith ony thing of me. 
And lest the greetnesse of reuelaciouns!7 
enhaunse me iz* pride, the pricke of 
my fleisch, an aungel of Sathanas, is 
jouun to me, that he buffate me. Fors 
whiche thing thries Y preiede the Lord, 
that it schulde go awei frome. And heg 
seide to me, My grace suffisith to thee; 
for vertu is parfitli maad in infirmyte. 
Therfor gladli Y schal glorie in myn 
infirmytees, that the vertu of Crist 
dwelle in me. For which thing Y am 
plesid in myn infirmytees, in dispisyngis, 
in nedis, in persecuciouns, in anguyschis, 
for Crist; for whanne Y am sijk, thanne 
Y am mi3ti. Y am maad vnwitti, 3e11 
constreyneden me. For Y ou3te to be 
comendid of 3ou; for Y dide no thing 
lesse than thei that ben apostlis ‘aboue 
maner!, Thou3 Y am nou3t, netheles 12 
the signes of myn apostilhed ben maad 
on 30, in al pacience, and signes, and 
grete wondris, and vertues. And whati: 
is it, that 3e hadden lesse than othere 
chirchis, but that Y my silf grenyde 3ou 
not? For3yue 3e to me this wrong. 
Lo! ‘this thridde tyme Y am redi toi 
come to 3ou, and Y schal not be greuous 
to 30u; for Y seke not tho thingis that 
ben 3oure™, but 3ou. For nether sones 
owen to tresoure to fadir and modir, 
but the fadir and modir to the sones. 
For Y schal 3yue moost wilfuli, and Y 15 
my silf schal be 3ouun aboue® for 3oure 
soulis; thou3 Y more loue 3o0u, and be 
lesse lonyd. But be it; Y° greuyde not 16 
3ou, but whanne Y was sutil, Y took 3ou 
with gile. Whether Y disseyuede 30u 17 
bi ony of hem, which Y sente to 30u ? 


h for vy. ‘tsothely 0. kreuelacioun x. |! Om. x. “™ofmy vr. ® that he buffate ry. that buffete x. 
° the whiche s. °° Om. x. P me, or gretly deliteg. @Om.v. tOm. emoperx. ‘*forry. tand n. 
a vnwitty, thus commendyng my silf Q. ¥ me, for thoru3 30ure blame I was constreynede Q. — W For r. 
Sothly x. *Om.orx. yOm.sx. Zforv. a4thantheiy. » my manerQ. COm.r. 4 3if a. 
fam ry. £f not apostle, as it semeth to summeng. &theser. 4 my postlehed c pr.m.mpe. iin xy. 
kon rxy. 10m. oex. ™ lesse of lechyngeg. “thanv. ° not, bitakynge of 30u¢.  P thing g. 
40m. sx. ‘forr. § Forwhirv. tforto@mnrorr. Om. mopex. VY the goostly 9. W the modir Nn. 
*Om.o. YForr. 20m. G prim. mpeg. 2 30nen ouer ry. > louynge 30u ¥. 


i reuelacioun k. * to 8. 


1 ouer mesure 1. 
VOL. IV. 3 E 


™M3oures,R. °ouerz. © and Y¥ a. 


394 


izwyse’, I¢ took® 30u with gyle. Wher I 
disceyuede 30u by‘ ony of hem, ‘the whiches 
isi sente® to 30u? I preiede Tyte, and I 
sente with him a brothir. Wher! Tyte 
bigylide* 30u? wher we gon! not in the 
same spiryt? wher not in™ the same step- 
i9pis"? Sum tyme 3e wenen, that we schu- 
len excuse vs anentis 30u. Bifore God in® 
Crist we speken; forsothe, moost dere 
britheren, alle thingis for 3oure edyfy- 
2vingeP. Sotheli I drede, lest perauenture 
whanne I schal come, I schal fynde% 3ouT 
not® which maneret I wole, and I schal be 
founde of" 30wY’ which maner” 3e wolen 
not*; lest peranenture stryuyngis, enuyes, 
sturdynessis, dissenciouns and detrac- 
ciouns, priuey spechis ofY discord, boln- 
ynges? bi* pride, debatis be among 30u; 
21lest® eftsoone whanne I schal come, God 
make me lou3¢ anentis 30u, and* I weylef 
manye of hem, that bifore synneden, and 
diden not penaunce of% the vnclennesse, 
and fornycacioun, and vnchastite, that thei 
han" don. 
CAP. XIII. 
1 Lo! this thridde tyme I come to jou, 
and in the mouth of tweyne! or thre wit- 
2nessis euery word schal stonde. I seide 
bifore, and* seye bifore, as present twyes, 
and now absent, to hem that bifore han 
synned, and to alle othere; for if I schal 
3scome eftsoone, I schal not spare. Wher 
3e seken asayinge! of him™ that spekith in 
me, Crist", the® which is not syk? in 3ou, 
4but is? my3ty in vs? Forwhi thou3 he 
was crucified of infirmyte’, but he lyueth 
of the vertu of God. Forwhi and we ben 
syke in hym, but we schulen lyue with 
shim of the vertu of God in vs. Asaye® 
3ou" silf, if 3e ben in the” feith; 3e 30u* 


¢ Om. ev. willy stxy prim. wille w. 4 Om. 7. 


€ whom Garpe. whiche yr.) sende o. 
or werkis Q. Oandins.  P edificacioun N. 
men Q. vat Nn. ¥ 300 GMPTX. 
Yor kK. 2 bolnynge x. a with o. Om. x. 
€sothatandg. fbiweilery. 8 on r. 
ment, or asdiynge GMNPQY marg., ™ that Crist r. 
qa Om. G pr.m. mp. he is @.  ¥ 300 ¥. 
Asajeth s. Asaye 3e x. VY 30ure Gra, thi o. 


P schal not R pr.m. 
Ywere i. jour E. 


q Om. R prem. 


II. CORINTHIANS. 


€ disceued G sec. m. toke, or disceyuede Q. 
i Whether pro. 
4 not fynde Garpe. 
W maner man Q. 
b Om. x. 
h haden o. 
nQOm. Nn. 

8 infirmyte of mankynd Q. 
w Om. TY. 


r Om. aA. 


XII. 17——XIII. 5. 


Y preiede Tite, and Y sente with hymis 
a brother. Whether Tite begilide 30u? 
whether we 3eden not in the same spi- 
rit? whether not in the same steppis? 
Sum tyme 3e wenen, that we schulenis 
excuse vs anentis 3ou. Bifor God in 
Crist we speken; and, moost dere bri- 
theren, alle thingis for 3oure edifiyng. 
But Y drede, lest whanne Y come, Y 20 
schal? fynde 30u not4 suche as Y wole, 
and Y schal be foundun of 3ou suche as 
3e wolen not; lest perauenture stryu- 
yngis, enuyes, sturdynessis, dissenciouns 
and* detraccions, preuy spechis of dis- 
cord, bolnyngis 6: pride, debatis ben 
among 30u; and lest eftsoone whanne Y 21 
come, God make me low anentis 3ou, 
and Y biweile many of hem, that bifor 
synneden, and diden not penaunce on 
the vnelennesse, and fornicacioun, and 
vnehastite, that thei han don. 


CAP. XIII. 

Lo! this thridde tyme Y come to 3ou,1! 
and in the mouth of tweyne’ ort of thre 
witnessis euery word schal stonde. Y2 
seide bifor, and seie bifor, as present 
twies, and now absent, to hem that bifor 
han synned, and to alle othere; for if Y 
come eftsoone, Y scha] not spare. Whe-3 
ther 3e seken the preef of that Crist, 
that" spekith in me, which is not feble 
in 30u? For thou3 he was’ crucified of 
infirmyte, but he lyueth of the vertu 
of God. For also we ben sijk in hym, 
but we schulen lyue with him of the 
vertu of God in vs. Asaie 3on silf, ifs 
3e ben in the feith; 3e 30u™ silf preue. 


f with o. 
l3eden y. ™and mpg. ® steppis, 
TOm.o. *sOm.cap. +t maner 
X not, scharpely punyschynge 30u. I dreede 9. 
¢ I dreede lest 9. 4 humble, or low e@. 
itwo cape pass. ‘and I wpox. Jan experi- 
9 Om. N.  P made seek, or vumy3ty ¢. 
tand 3if ga. % Tempte, or asaye Q. 

x 3oure GPQ. 


k giled o. 


$ two 1 eé alii. t other a. 


u Om. ag pr. im. 


XIII. 6—13. 


silf proueYy. Wher 3e knowen not 30u’ silf, 
for Crist Jhesu is in 3ou? no* but® 3e 
6ben repreuable. Forsoth I hope, that® 3e 
7knowen! for® we ben not repreuable. So- 
thely we preien the Lord, that 3e don no 
thing of yuel; not’ that we seme prouyds, 
but that® 3e do that that! is good, forsoth 
sthat* we be! repreuable. Forsothe™ we 
mowen no thing ajens treuthe", but for 
atreuthe®’. Forsoth? we ioyen, for! we ben 
syke', forsoth 3e° ben my3ty; and‘ we 
io preien this thing, 3oure endinge". Sothli’ 
therfore I absent write ‘this thing”, that 
I present do not hardere, vp* the power, 
the’ which the Lord 3af to me into edifi- 
11cacioun, and not into distruccioun”. Bri- 
theren, hennis forward* ioye 3e, ‘be 3e 
perfyt, and ‘teche 3e°; ‘vndirstonde 3e4 the 
same thing; haue 3e pees, and God of pees 
1zand loue® schal be with jou. Greete 3ef 
wel to gidere in hooly coss. Alle. hooly 
13men greeten 30u wel. The grace of oure® 
Lord Jhesu Crist, and the charite of God, 
and the comunynge of the Hooly Gost, be 
with 30u alle. Amen. 


Here endith the secunde pistle to Co- 
rinthis, and now bigynneth the prolog to 
Galathies». 


Y proueth sx. 2 joure GAIPQ. a Om. x. 


¢foremp. 4 woot o. ¢thatv. f we preyen not Q. 
iOQm.«. ato, ‘that that wv. !ben as er. 
AGMNOPQSTVIVXY. P For r. 4 whanne yr. 


Il. CORINTHIANS. 


m For r. 
t seek, xo thing mowinge of oure silf Q. 


395 


Whether 3e knowen not* 3ou’ silf, for 
Crist Jhesu is in jou? but in happe 3e 
ben repreuable. But Y hope, that 3e6 
knowen, that we ben not repreuable. 
And we preien the Lord, that 3e do no7 
thing of yuel; not that we seme preued*, 
but that 3e do that that is good, and i 
that we ben as* repreuable. For wes ae 
moun no thing ajens treuthe, but for the Bike aia 
treuthe. For we ioyeu, whanne we ben® oe cee 
sijk, but 3e ben my3ti; and we preien power in uen- 
this thing, 3oure perfeccioun. 


* preued; that 
is, perfit and 
grete men in 


iauncis. re- 


Therfor 10 prevable; that 


a ey : is, without 

Y absent write these thingis, that Y  jower, and 
s haue not what 

present do not hardere, bi the powere, estat 
which the Lord 3af to me in to edifi-  venge. The 
Glos here. ve. 


Either as re- 

* - reuable; that 
Britheren, ‘hennus forward? ioye 11 as leesing 
power of pun- 
suhing, bi 3oure 
innocence. Lire 
here. v. 


cacioun, and not in to 3oure distruc- 
cioun. 
je, be 3e perfit, excite 3e; vndurstonde 3e 
the same thing; haue 3e pees, and God 
of pees and of loue schal be with 3o0u. 
Grete 3e wel togidere in hooli® cos. Alle 12 
hooli men greten 3ou wel. The grace 13 
of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, and the cha- 
rite of God, and the comynyng of the 
Hooli Gost, be with‘ 3ou alle®. Amen. 


Eere endith the secunde pistle to Co- 
rinthies, and* bigynneth the* prologe on 
the pistle to Galuthies*. 


b bot perauenture 9. but in hap r. but if happili x. 


& prouyd of God, in vsynge oure power Q. ato. 
prouyd 9 LYNE P 

2 the treuthe sxy pr.m. © the treuthe 
Swe Kk. ¢ not 


dredynge; and g. " eendyng, thai 3e be perfijt oe. perfeccioun vy, ¥Om.v. W these thingis vy. * aftir ape. 


bir. y Om. 7. 4 soure districcioun NV. 
dynderstondeth x. ¢ of loueor. t Om. x. 


bigynneth the prolog on the pistil to Galathies. n. 
bygynneth the prologe of the epistil to Galathies. o. 
neth the pistel to the Galathies. Q. 
to Galathies. tr. 


GMPSXY. 


8 forthward . forth @. 
& 30ure r. 
rynthys, and heere bigynneth epistle to Galathies. a. 


D beth x. ¢ excite 3e v. techeth x. 
h Heere endith the seeounde pistle to Co- 
Here endith the secunde pistil to Corynthis, and 


Here eendeth the seeounde epistel to Coriuthies, and 
Here endeth the pistles to the Corinthies, and bygyn- 
Here endith the seeounde epistle to Corinthies, aud bigynneth the prologe 
Heere endith the secunde Coriuthies, and here bigynneth the prologe to Galathies. v. 
Here eendith the secounde pistil to Corinthis, and bigynneth a prologe to Galathies. w. 


No final rubric in 


xOm.a. Y3jourz. 2Om.a. hens forth ward ek. bthe hoolib. Caller. alle jou A pr. m. CEKMRaeioa, 


dand herem. & ama, 
loge on the pisile to Galathies. x. 


f From crmqacoa. Here endeth the seeounde pistle to Corinthies; se now the pro- 
Here endith the seeounde pistle to Coryuthis; here bygynneth the prologe 


to Galathies. bh. Here endith the pistlis of the Corinthies, and bigynneth a prologe on the pistele of Gal- 
thenes. g. Here eendith the secunde Corinthies, aud here bigynneth the prologe on the pistel to Galathies. k. 


No final rubric in aERUe. 


BE 


GALATIANS. 





The prolog to Galathies*. 


Ga.atTuies ben Greekis. Thes the? 
word of treuthe first tooken of the° 
apostle; but aftir his departyng, thei 
weren temptid of false apostlis, that thei 
schulden be turned into the olde lawe 
and® circumcisioun. Thes reuoketh the 
apostle to the feith of treuthe, writinge 
to hem fro Ephesye. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth 
the episile®. 


The epistle to the Galathiis*. 


CAP. I. 
1 Poul apostle, not? of men, neither by 
man’, but bi Jhesn Crist, and God the 
2fadir, that reyside him fro deede men, and 
alle the britheren that ben with me, to 
3the chirchis’ of Galathie, grace to 30u, and 
pees of God the fadir, and of oure Lord 


Here bigynneth a prologe to Galathies*. 


GaLaTHIES ben Grekis. Thei token 
first of the postle’ the word of treuthe ; 
but aftir his goyng awei, thei weren 
temptid of false apostlis, that thei weren‘ 
turned in to lawe’ and® circumcisioun. 
The! postleS azen clepith hem to the 
feith of treuthe, and writith to hem fro 
Efesus". 


Jerom in his prolog to Galathies writ- 
ith this. 


Here bigynneth the epistle to 
Galathies?. 


GA Pd. 

Poul the apostle, not of men, ne bili 
man, but bi Jhesu Crist, and God the 
fadir, that reiside hym fro deth, and alle 
the britheren that ben with me, to the 


chirchis of Galathie, grace to 30u ands 
pees of God the fadir, and of the Lord 


a Prolog. s. Prologus y. No initial rubric in ory. No prologue in acmpex. InN the prologue is 


of the second text. b Om. r. e Om. rv. 
the epistel to Galathies. ow. 
rubric in svy¥. 


iaitial rubric in the other Mss. b not chosen Q. 


d of x. 
Here endith the prologe to Galathis, and bigynneth the pistel. T. 
a From mu. The pistle to Galathies. po. Here begynneth the boke of Galathis. y. No 


€ Here eendith the prologe, and bygynneth 
No final 


€meng. 4 chirche a. 


a From u. Jerom on Galthas. x. The prolog to Galathies. x. A prolog on the pistle to Galathies. n. 


Here bigynneth the prologe on Ga[la]thies. e. Prolog. f. No initial rubric in acrkmQa. 
d the lawe cerkmnruabcefghknoa@. 
i Jerom in his prologe on this pistle to Galathies writith this. c. 
Jerom in his prologe seith al this. K. 
Thus endeth the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle. R. 


e£qreghoa. ¢ Om. R pr. m. 
8 apostle rrhk. =} Effecies E1gega. 
Heere endith the prologe, and biginnith the pistle. 1. 
the prolog that is seid bi Jerom on this epistle. n. 


b apostle 


¢ of h. f And the k pr. m. 


Here endith 


Jerom seith this to Galathies. vu. Here endith prologe, and bigyneth epistil. g. This seith Jerom in his 


prolog to Galathies. h. 
on this epistle seith this. a. 
AcIKQRuabcghko. 


Jerom in his prolog on the pistil to Galathies writith thus. k. _Jerom in his prolog 
No final rubric in ef. 


a Poul to Galathies. =. No initial rubric in 


I. 4——17. GALATIANS. 397 


4Jhesu Crist, thee which 3af him silf for 
oure synnes, that he schulde delyuere vs off 
this’ present weyward world, vp" the wil 
sof God and oure fadir, to whom is ‘honour 
andi glorie in to worldis of worldis. Amen; 
cso be it*. I wondre, that thus so! soone 
3e ben born ouer fro him that clepide 3ou 
into the grace of Crist, into an other 
7gospel; the™ which is not other®, ‘no but° 
ther ben summe that disturblenP 30u, and 
wolen mysturne the euangelie of Crist. 
8 But thou3 we, or an aungel of heuene, 
euangelise to 30u, bisydis that that we 
9han euangelisid to 30u, cursid be he. As 
I bifore seide, and now eftsoone I seye, if 
ony? ‘schal euangelise™ out taken that that 
103e" han takun, cursid be he. ‘I counceile 
now" to men, or to God? or ‘I seke™ for* 
to plese toY men? If I ‘3it pleside” to 
men, I were not the seruaunt of Crist. 
11Sotheli, britheren, I make the gospel 
knowun to 30u, the* which is euangelisid?, 
‘or prechid®, of me, for it is not vp? man; 
i2sothli® nether I took’ it of man, nether 
lernyde$, but by the" reuelacioun of Jhesu 
i3sCrist. Forsothe 3e herden my lyuynge 
sum tyme in the! Juwerie, for ouer* ma- 
nere! I pursuwide the chirche of God, and 
14fau3te ajens it. And I profitide in Jurye™ 
aboue many myn” euene eeldis in my 
kyn, beynge more haboundantly louere®, 
‘or folower?, of my fadryn’ tradiciouns’. 
is Forsoth® whanne it pleside to him, that 
departide me fro the wombe of my modir, 
igand clepid by his grace, that he schulde 
schewe in me his sone, that I schulde 
preche hym int hethene men, anoon I acor- 
17dide" not to fleisch® and blood*; nether 
I cam to Jerusalem to my bifore goeris 
apostlis, but I wente forth into Arabye, 


e€Om.v. ffrop, ¢Om.r. 4» after empe. bir. 


Jhesu Crist, that 3af hym silf for oure4 
synnes, to delyuere vs fro the present 
wickid world, bi the wille of God and 
of» oure fadir, to whom is worschip and 5 
glorie in to worldis of worldis. Amen. 
I wondur, that so soone 3e be thus6 
moued fro hym that clepid jou in to the 
grace of Crist, in to another euangelie; 
which is not anothir, but that ther ben7 
summe that troublen® 30u, and wolen 
mysturne the euangelie of Crist. Buts 
thou3 we, or an aungel of heuene, prech- 
ide to 30u, bisidis that that we han 
prechid to 30u, be he acursid. As Y9 
haue seid bifore, and now eftsoones Y 
seie, if ony? preche to 30u bisidis that 
that 3e han vndurfongun, be he cursid¢. 
For now whether counsele Y men, or 1 
God ? or whether Y seche to plese men ? 
If Y pleside 3it men‘, Y were not Cristis 
seruaunt, For, britheren, Y make knowun11 
to 30u the euangelie, that was prechid 
of me, for it is not bi man; ne Y took iz 
it of man, ne lernyde, but bi reuelacioun 
of Jhesu Crist. For 3e han herd myis 
conuersacioun sumtyme in the Jurie, 
ands that Y pursuede passyngli® the 
chirche of God, and fau3t ajen it. Andi 
Y profitide in the Jurie aboue many of 
myn eueneldis! in my kynrede, and was 
more* aboundauntli a folewere of my 
fadris tradiciouns. But whanne it ples-15 
ide hym, that departide me fro my mo- 
dir! wombe, and clepide bi his grace, to1¢ 
schewe his sone in me, that Y schulde 
preche hym among the hethene™, anoon 
Y drow3" me not to fleisch and blood; 
ne Y cam to Jerusalem to the apostlis, 17 
that weren tofor® me, but Y wente in 
to Arabie, and eftsoones Y turnede a3en 


iOm.r. * Om. eupoerx. 1}Om.nq. ™ Om. r. 


Danother yr. ° but if x. P disturben sx. distroublen rv. deny man Y pr.m. ¥ euangelizith r. 
twee. 4 Now counseile I cpa. Forwhi counseile I now r. Counceile I now x. Wseke I ape. speke r. 
x Om. wpgsx. YOm. x. # wolde 3it pleese 7. 2 Om.r. > prechid 0. © Om. exopex. or preching K. 


dafter emper. ¢forv. ftake rt. § lerede sz. 


hOm. G pr.m.op. iOm.c prom. upa.  * wick- 
edly ouer o. 1 maner, or mesure Q. ™ the Jurie n. 
P Om. x. 4 fadres Gaopory sec.m. * tradicioun Nn. 


amen ky. © the louer G sec.m. a loneere r. 
8 Buty. tamong ry. "coorded G prem. ¥ the 


flesche r. * to blood o. blood, that is, nether to vices of my fleische, nether to kynred of blode @. 


h Om. e1rqrbeeghkoa8. © troublith b. 4 ony manu pr.m.bpr.m. © acursid cerkmqnuabceghkoag. 
fto men K. & Om. £1Q pr.m. ga3. 4 Om.k. i euene eldris tgegha. & Om. a pr.m.a. ! modris cer 
mQracegka. ™ hethene men K sec.m. R. % ether acordide K marg. © ether biforgoers K marg. bifore a. 


398 


and eftsoone I turnede* a3en toy Damask. 
is Aftirward aftir thre 3eeris* I cam to Jeru- 
salem, for* to se Petre, and dwellide® 
iwanentis him fifteene dayes; forsothe I 
say3 non other man of apostlis®, uo but 
20 James, the brothir of the Lord. Forsoth 
what thingis I wryte to 30u, loo! bifore 
21God for? I lye not, ‘or gabbe not®. Aftir- 
ward I cam into the parties of Sirye and 
22Cilicie. Forsoth I was vnknowyn bi facef 
to the chirchis of Judee, that weren in 
23 Crist ; oonly forsoth thei hadden heeringe, 
fors he that pursuwede vs sumtyme, now 
enangelisith the feith, ajens® which he 
21fau3ztes sumtyme; and in me! thei clarifi- 
eden God. 
CAP. IL. 
1 Aftirward aftir™ fourtene 3eer, eftsoone 
I stijede to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and 
2Tyte takyn to. Forsoth I stizede vp" reue- 
lacioun, and ‘to gidere seyde®°, ‘or disput- 
ideP, with hem the gospel, the’ which’ I 
preche among hethene men; forsoth a 
sydis hond, ‘or by hem siff’, tot hem that 
weren seyn for" to be sumwhat, lest per- 
auenture J schulde renne in veyn, or hadde 
3runne*. But nether Tyte, that was with 
me, whanne he was hethene, was compellid 
sfor* to be circumsidid; but for false bri- 
theren ‘vndirbrou3t yn’, the* whiche pri- 
uely entriden for> to aspie oure liberte®, 
that? we han in Crist Jhesu, that thei 
sschulden dryue vs into seruage. To‘ 
whiche® nether at oon! hour we 3auen 
stedes to subieccioun®, that the treuthe of 
:the gospel dwelle ati jou. Forsothe of 
liem that weren seyen for* to be sumwhat ; 
what maner men! thei weren sum tyme, 
it perteyneth no thing to me, forsothe™ 
God takith not the persoone of man; for- 


Xturne ¥. Yinto@. 7 geer capex. 
4 tokyuge hym to witnesse that Qe. Om. x. 
ff chirche y. & that r. b Om. G sec. m. 
Cristis byleeue 9. ™ Om. Nn, 
q4Om. rx, Fthatx. $s Om. ox. 
broujtyn Gapey. priuely bron3t in r. 
¢whom empa. f an AGMNOPQSTFIWXY. 
ianentise. * Om. sx. 


t Om. x. 
a Om. Fr. 


10m. ox. ™ for whi r. 


P that tofor v. 
1 pr.m. Kqabegka. 


u ether asides K marg. 
¥ perteynide aq, 


GALATIANS. 


a Om. sx. 
€ Om, AGMNOPOSTYWXY. 

i whom e¢. 
2 yp after c. aftir @. bi r. 
u Om. s. 
b Om. sx. 
& stide, or place N. 


a for Ya prem. that Y Kurachko. 
¥ nethir c et plures. 


I. 18—II. 6. 


in to Damask. And sith thre 3eer aftir Y 18 
cam to Jerusalem, to se Petre, and Y 
dwellide with hym fiftene daies; but Y 19 
saw3 noon othere of the apostlis, but 
James, oure Lordis brother. And these 20 
thingis which Y write to 3ou, lo! to- 
for? God Y4 lie not. Afterward Y cam 2i 
in to the™ coostis of Syrie and Cilicie. 
But Y was vnknowun bi face to thee2 
chirchis of Judee, that weren in Crist; 
and thei hadden oonli an heryng, thats 
he that pursuede vs sum tyme, prechide* . 
now the feith, a3ens which he fau;te sum 
tyme; and in me thei glorifieden God. 24 


CAP: WN. 
And sith fourtene 3eer aftir, eftsones1! 
Y wente vp to Jerusalem with Barna- 
bas, and took with me Tite. Y wentez 


. vp bi reuelacioun, and spak with hem 


the euangelie, which Y prechet among 
the hethene; and bi hem silf" to these 
that semeden to be sumwhat, lest Y 
runne, or hadde runne in veyne. And 3 
nother’ Tite, that hadde be with me, 
while he was hethene, was compellid to 
be circumsidid; but for false britheren 4 
that weren brou3t ynne, whiche hadden 
entrid to aspie oure fredom, which we 
han in Jhesu Crist, to bring” vs in to 
seruage. But we 3yue* no place tos 
subieccioun, that the treuthe of the gos- 
pel schulde dwelle with 3ou. But ofe 
these that semeden to be sumwhat; 
whiche thei weren sum tyme, it perteyn- 
eth’ not to me, for God takith not the 
persoone of man; for thei that semeden 
to be sumwhat, 3auen me no thing. But; 
a3enward, whanne thei hadden seyn, that 


> I dwelte p. I dwellide oy. ¢ the apostlis era. 


f face, or presence of body Q. 
Kk fangte azeins Gc. 1 me, or in my turnynge to 
° dispntide o. seide togidere yr. P Om. orx. 

Wrunne iv veyny. *Om.sx. 2 vnder 
¢fredam g. 4whichy. 44 The x. 
h snbieccioun, as conuict of the lawe @. 


TOm. R prem. § prechith h. 


W ether dryue K. 


t prechide cE 
x 3euen ek, 3ene o. 


II. 7—16. 


soth" thei that weren seen for® to be sum- 
what, no thing to me 3auen ‘to gidere?. 
7 But aj3enward, whanne thei hadden seyn, 
that the gospel of prepucie’, ‘or hethene 
men‘, is’ bitakunt to me, as" of circumci- 
ssioun to Petre; for he that wroujte to’ 
Petre into’ apostelhed of circumcisioun, 
wrou3te and* to me among hethene men; 
9and whanne thei hadden knowe the grace 
‘of God, that is jouun to me, James, and 
Cephas, ‘or Petre, and John, the® whiche> 
weren seyn for‘ to be pileris, 3auen to me 
and Barnabas the ri3t hondis of felowschip, 
that we‘ among hethene men, thei forsoth® 
10into circumcisioun ; oonly that we schulde 
be myndeful of pore men, that also I was 
11 bisy for® to do the® same thing. Forsothe 
whanne Cephas', ‘or Petre*, cam to An- 
tioche, I ‘stood a3ens! hym™ in to the® 
face’, for he was reprehensyble?, ‘or wor- 
12 tht for’ to be reprouyd™. Forsoth*-bifore 
that summet camen fro James, he eet with 
hethen men ; forsoth® whanne thei camen, 
he withdrow3*, and departide hym, dred- 
-ynge hem that weren of circumcisioun. 
13 And othere™ conscentiden to his feynynge, 
so that* Barnabas was ledd of hem into 
14thatY feynynge. But whanne I’ hadde 
seyn, that thei walkiden not ri3tly to the 
treuthe of the gospel, I seide to ‘Cephas, 
or Petre*, bifore alle men, If thou, sithen 
thou ert a. Jew, lyuest hethenli, and not 
Jewly, hou constreynest thou hethene 
ismen for> to bicome Jewis? We ben Jewis 
of kynde, and not synners of hethene 
igmen‘; forsoth* witynge® forf a man is not 
justified’ of the workis of lawe>, no but 
by the! feith of Jhesu Crist, and we in 
Crist Jhesu bileuen, that we be iustyfied 
of* the feith of Crist!, and not of the 


GALATIANS. 399 


the euangelie of prepuciet was 3ouun to + thavis, the 
me, as the euangelie of circumcisioun Veins (enee 
was 30uun to Petre; for he that wrou3tes Haba 
to Petre in apostlehed of circumeisioun, “ire here. ve. 
wrou3te also to me among the hethene ; 

and whanne thei hadden knowe the grace9 

of God, that was 3ouun to me, James, 

and Petre, and Joon, whiche weren seyn 

to be the’ pileris, thei 3auen ri3thond* 

of felowschip to me and to Barnabas, 

that we among the hethene, and thei in 

to” circumcisioun; oneli that we hadde1o 

mynde of pore men ‘of Crist°, the which 

thing Y was ful bisi to doon. Buti 
whanne Petre was comun to Antioche, 

Y ajenstood hym in the face, for he was 

worthi to be vndirnommen. For bifor 12 

that ther camen summen fro James, .he 

eete with the! hethene men; but whanne 

thei weren comun, he withdrow3, and 

departide hym, dredinge hem that weren 

of circumcisioun. And the® othere Jewis 13 
assentiden to his feynyng, so that Bar- 

nabas was drawun of hem in to that 

feynyng. But whanne Y saw3, that theit4 
walkiden not ri3tli to the treuthe of the 

gospel, Y seide to Petre bifor alle men, 

If thou, that art a Jew, lyuest hethen- 

lich, and not Jewelich, hou constreynest 

thou hethene menf to bicome Jewis ? 

We Jewis of kynde, and not synful men 15 

of the hethene, knowen that a man isi6 

not iustified of the werkis of lawe’, but 

bi the feith of Jhesu Crist; and. we 

bileuen in Jhesu Crist, that we ben 

iustified of the feith of Crist, and not 

of the werkis of lawei. Wherfor of 

the* werkis of lawe! ech fleisch schal not 

be iustified. And if we sechen to be17 
iustified in Crist, we oure™ silf ben 


a fory. °Om.sx. POm.y. 4the prepucieo.  ' Om. ox. of hethenmeny. was v. 
ttaken oy. Uasandy. Vinton. “inp, XOm.o. alsoy. YOm.y. 2ZOm. opex. ®Om. rx. 
bOm. x. ©¢Om.sx. we precheng. ¢sothely cup. fforr. £Om.sx. bthisry. i Petre o. 


k Om. Nogsx. | ajens stood vy. ™ Om, r. 
Gupg. worthe for to be reprouyd 0. 9% Om.s. 
Jewis 9. “but vr. VY withdrew3 hym ca. 
4 Cephas osx. Petre wpe. » Om. sx. 
emp. netheles sothely 9. © we witen gr. 

iOm.srxy. kbisxy. !Jhesu Crist rry. 


b to the abchko. 


=Om. Ebb. 4 the rijthond r. 
4 Om. rb. 


fOm.a. & the awe rba. 


‘his G sup. ras. MP@. 
‘r Om. GuoPQx. 
W other Jewis v. 
© men, nines onclene thing, ncther doyng mawmetrie @. 4 sothely 

that v. 


¢ Om. A see.m. EIQeghka. 
i the lawe b. 


© face, or opynly 9. 
8s Forwhi rv. 
x that also rv. 


P repreuable 
tsum men G. sum 
yOm. 6 prm, 2 that Io. 


& maad ri;twiise capa. =) the lawe cuNnpe. 


e€ Om. k. 


d Om. £1Qega, 


k Om. b. [the lawe b. ™ vs 1agk. 


400 


workis of lawe™. Wherfore of the workis 
of lawe" ech fleisch®, ‘or manP, schal not 
1; be iustified??. That if we sekynge for’ to 
be iustified in Crist, and' we vs® silf be 
founden synners, wher Crist ist mynistre 
isof synne? Fer be it. Sothliv if I bilde 
ajen tho’ thingis that I distroyede”, I 
19make me for* ‘to bey a trespassour. For- 
soth? by the lawe I am deed to the lawe, 
that I lyue to God; with Crist I am 
20ficchid to the cross. Forsoth I lyue now, 
not J, but Crist lyueth in me. Forsoth 
that I lyue now in fleisch, I* lyue in the 
feith of Goddis sone, the? which louyde 
2zime, and bitook him silf for me. I caste 
not awey the grace of God; forsoth® if 
ri3twysnesse is by the! lawe, Crist® deiede 
‘with outef cause. 


CAP. III. 


1 A8! 3e witlees men of Galathie>, who 
disceyuede 30u for! to ‘not bileue* to the 
treuthe? bifore whos y3en ‘Jhesu Crist** is 
dampnyd, ‘or excilid', and in™ 30u cruci- 

afyed®. This thing oonli wole I lerne® of 
jou, han? 3e take the spirit of4 the’ workis 
of the’ lawe, wherof' the* heeringe of 

3bileue? So 3e ben foolis, that whanne 3e 
bigunne by spirit, now 3e ben endid by 
afleisch. 3e han suffrid so’ many thingis 
withoute cause, nethelees if with oute 
scause. Therfore he that 3yueth to 30u the 
spirit, and worchith vertues in 3ou, whe- 
thir of the worchis of Iawe’, or of heer- 
singe of feith? As it* is writun, Abraham 
bileuyde to God, and it is’ rettid? to him 
7to ristwysnesse. Therfore knowe 3e, that* 
thei that® ben of the* feith, thei’ ben 
ssones® of Abraham. Forsothe thef scrip- 
tures purueyinge, for God iustifieth of 


™m the lawe GsTx. 


GALATIANS. 


Il. 17—II1. 8. 


foundun synful men, whether Crist be 
mynystre of synne? God forbede. Andis 
if Y bylde a3en thingis that Y haue 
distruyed, Y make my silf a trespassour. 
For bi the lawe Y am deed to the lawe®, 19 
and° Y am fitchid to the crosse, that Y 
lyue to God with Crist. And now lyue 20 
not Y, but Crist lyneth in me. But that 
Y lyue now in fleisch, Y lyue in the 
feith of Goddis sone, that louede me, and 
jaf hym silf for me. Y caste not awey 21 
the grace of God; for if riztwisnesse? be 
thoru3 lawe, thanne Crist diede with out 
cause. : 


CA Polls 

Vnwitti1 Galathies', tofor whos ijen1 
Jhesu Crist is exilid, and is crucified 
in 30u, who hath disseyued you, that 3e 
obeyen not to treuthe? ‘This oneli Y2 
wilne to lerne of 30u, whether 3e han 
vndurfonge the spirit of* werkis of the 
lawe, or of heryng of bileue? So 3e bens 
foolis, that whanne 3e han bigunne in 
spirit, 3e ben endid in fleisch. So grete4 
thingis 3e han suffrid without cause, ift 
it be withoute cause. He that 3yueths 
to 30u spirit, and worchith vertues in 
jou, whether of werkis of the lawe, or 
of hering of bilene? As it is writun,6 
Abraham bileuede to God, and it was 
rettid" to hym to rijtfulnesse’. And7 
therfor knowe 3e, that” these that ben of 
bileue, ben the sones of Abraham. Ands 
the scripture seynge afer, that God* ius- 
tifieth the hethene, of bileue told toforY 


Othelawe sx. Omanvy. POm.orx. PP maad riz3twiise rpg. 4 Om. sx. 
Talsor. Soureempo. tisnoty. %Forwhiry. Vthese ry. Wdistruyee. * Om. svywx. y Om. 
vox. %Fory. @®ando. >Om.r. ¢forv. 4Om. x. ¢ therfore Crist y. fveyne, or with outen Q. 
¢O!empo. 5 Galathieso. iOm.sx. * obeie not y. kk Crist Jhesus a. ! Om. ox. ™ in too, 
a jsecrucified y, ©leren x. Pwherhanr. Gbir. tOm.s. *%Om.Gpr.m,mpo. tor of o. bir. 
u Om. G prim. mpg. YOm. 4. the lawe eG pr.m.s. *Om.x. Ywasr. Zarettid yr. 4 for o. 
bOm.cpr.m. ¢COm.Nn. ‘that thei go Om.r. ¢thesonesvx. fOm.o. & spirit Nv. 


9 Jawe, that Y lyne to God a sec. m. lawe, that I lyue to God with Crist k. 
4 O! vnwitti ckarehkog. A! vnwitti 1abege. 
U arettid Khk. 


nesse EIQRbeeghkoaf. 
the cEI pr.m. qega.  ‘tandif k pr.m. 


x Om, Ac pr.m, E1qbe-pr.m. gk pr.m. Y bifore r. 


© Om. ahof.  P ri3tful- 
r Galathians cevabeghoaf. § of 
V riztwisnesse EKab. = ® Om. Eggk pr. m. 


Il. Q——20. 


feith hethen men, toold bifore to Abra- 
ham, For in thee alle folkis®, ‘or hethene 
9men', schulen be blessid. Therfore thei 
that ben of the* feith, schulen be blessid 
10with feithful Abraham. Forsoth! who 
euere ben of the workis of lawe™, ben 
vndir curs; for it is writun, Cursid ech" 
man, that ‘schal not dwelle® in alle thingis 
that ben writun in the booke of lawe, that 
ithe do hemP. Forsoth for? no man is 
justified’ in the lawe anentis God, it is 
knowen, for a ri3tful man lyueth of* feith. 
12 Forsoth the lawe is not of bileue', but he 
that ‘schal do” tho’ thingis, scha] lyuen in 


GALATIANS. 


401 


to Abraham, That in thee alle the? 
hethene schulen be blessid. And ther-9 
for these that ben of bileue, schulen be 
blessid with feithful Abraham. For alle to 
that ben of the* werkis of the> lawe, ben 
vndur curse; for it is writun, Ech man 
is cursid, that abidith not in alle thingis 
that ben writun in the book of the lawe, 
to do tho thingis. And that no man isi 
iustified in the lawe bifor God, it is 
opyn, for a ri3tful man lyueth of bileue. 
But the lawe is not of bileue, but he12 
that doith tho thingis of the lawe, schal 
lyue in hem. But Crist aj3enbou3te usi3 


fro the curse of the lawe, and was maad 

acursid*+ for vs; for it is writun, Ech _ ¢ that is, sut- 

man zs cursid that hangith in the tre; He 
that among the hethene the blessyng of 4 Ge mion. 

Abraham were maad in ‘Crist Jhesn4, i” Je70™- ve. 
that we vndurfonge the biheeste of spirit 

thoru3 bileue. Britheren, Y seie aftir 1s 

man, no man dispisith the testament of 

a® man that is confermed, or ordeyneth' 

aboue. The biheestis weren seid to A-16 

braham and to his seed; he seith not, 

In seedis, as in many, but as in oon, 

And to thi seed, that is, Crist®. But Y17 

seie, this testament 7s confermed of God ; 

the lawe that was maad after foure 

hundrid and thritti jeer, makith> not 

the testament veyn to auoide awei the 

biheest. For if eritage were of the lawe, 18 

it were not now’ of biheeste. But God 

grauntide to Abrahain thoru3 biheest. 

What thanne the lawe{? It was sett 19 +that is, Wher- 
for trespassing*, to! the seed!! come™, to eee 

whom he hadde maad his" biheest. 7/7 ** 
Whiche® lawe was ordeyned bi aungels, 


13hem*, Crist deliuerede* vs fro the curs 
of the lawe, maad’ for vs curs’, ‘that is, 
sacrifice for* curs? ; for it is writun, Cursid 
1475» ech¢ that hangith inthe tree; that bless- 
inge’ of Abraham in hethen men schulde 
be maad in Crist Jhesu, that we take the 
15 biheeste of spirit by feith. Britheren, I 
seye vp® man, nethelees no man dispisith 
the testament! of aS man, or ‘ordeyneth 
igaboue’. Biheestis ben seid to Abraham 
and to his seed; he seith* not, In seedis™, 
as in manye, but as in oon, And in® thi 
17seed, that is, Crist. Forsoth I seie this, a 
testament confermyd of God, the® which? 
aftir foure hundrid 3eeris9 and thritti ‘is 
maad' lawe’, makith not voydet ‘for to a- 
1s voyde" the biheeste’. Forwhy if of lawe 
the’ heritage, now not of biheeste. For- 
soth God 3af to Abraham bi ajenbiheeste*. 
i9 What therfore’ lawe? For trespassynge 
it” is putt, til the seed cam, to whom God 
bihi3te* thingis® ordeyned by aungelis, in 
20the hond of a medyatour. Forsoth a¢ 
mediatour is not of o4 thing. Forsoth God 
k Om. N. n 7s ech or. 


h folkis of kynde 9g. iOm. Gmopey. 1 Forwhiy. ™ the lawe cos. 


° dwellith not vy. cvebokisy. Pthoor. Qthatvy. made rijtwijsse carpe. by o. +t bylene, 
bot of dreed of peyng. “dothy. ‘theo. Wthoor. *a3zenbou3tev. Yandwasmaady. 2 the 
curse G. cursed 0. of o. bglossom.in rx.  »b Om. m. € eche man 0g. 4 the blessyng 
AGUNOPQVWY sec.m. © after eupev.  confermyde testament GwPoey sec.m. € Om. Nsvy. ) man 
confermed ny. ' aboue ordeyneth emp. aboue ordeyneth other thing a. * seide srxy. ™ the seedes 


G. nto vy. o the lawe r. P which was maad r. 4 3er sx. tr Om. r. Sa lawe sx. Om. r. 
tOm.o. Om. o. to auoiden s. for to do aweye @. to voyden x. Vheest vy. Wis the ampe. were 
they. * ajein bihest, that is, by feith 9.  Y therfore profitith thee. 2Om.c6. 4 hadde bihi3zt r. 


bthelawe vr. ©Om.n. 40m. c. 


z2Om.r. 20Om.g. »% Om. cErgega, ¢cursid1. 4 Jhesu Crist h. 
acegka. €in Crist r. h ne makith K pr.m. be pr.m. i Om, x1 pring. 
1 til to ckmanuabcegkoaf. til eth. N that is, Crist x marg. 
taegka8. © The whiche 1. 


VOL. IV. ODE 


¢ Om. rR. f ordeyned cEar 
k ether trespassoures K marg. 
m cam EchS. cameirn. % the x. Om. 


402 . GALATIANS. 


21is oon. Therfore the® lawe anentis‘, ‘or 
contrarie to&, the heestis" of God? Fer 
be it. Sothli if ther were a lawe 3o0uun, 
the* which! my3te quykene, vereily™ ri3t- 
22wysnesse were of lawe. But the scrip- 
ture enclosyde alle thingis vndir synne, 
that biheeste schulde be 3ouun of the" 
feith of Jhesu Crist to men bileuynge. 
23Forsothe bifore that the feith cam, we 
weren kept vndir the lawe, schette to gi- 
dere in to that faith that was to be schew- 
24id. ‘And so° the lawe? was oure litil maistir 
in Crist, that we be iustified? of the’ feith. 
25 But where’ the feith cam, now we ben 
26not' vndir the litil maistir’. Forsothv 
alle 3e” ben the sones of God by feith in 
27‘Crist Jhesu*. ForsotheY who euere 3e ben 
baptysid in Crist’, 3e han clothid* Crist. 
28 Ther is not Jew, neither Greek; ther is 
not sernaunt, nethir>® fre man; ther is 
not® male, nether female’; sotheli® ‘alle 
293e ben oon! in Crist Jhesu. Forsoth if 3e 
ben of Crist, therfore 3e ben seed’ of A- 
braham, vp" biheeste eyris’. 


CAP. IV. 


1 I seye forsothe, how moche tyme the 
eyr is litil, he dyuersith no thing fro a 
2seruaunt, whanne he is lord of alle; but 
he is vndir tutouris! and actouris™, ‘til to® 
3the tyme determyned® of the fadir. So 
and? we, whanne we weren litile’, weren 
seruynge vndir the elementis of thet 
aworld’. But wheret the plente of tyme 
cam, God sente his sone, maad of a" wom- 
sian, maad yndir the lawe, that ‘he schulde 
a3enbye hem that weren vndir the lawe, 
that’ we schulde resceyue the. adopcioun” 


© is the ar. 
GNSTIVXY, 
© Therfore r. 
that y. ¢t Om. & prem, 
Y Forwhi vy. 2 Crist Jhesu x. 
wnclothid Crist, that ben baptized in hym ¢. 
empg. bithe r. 1 5e ben eyris a. 
GmpqQ. © determynyd, or byfore ordeyncd 9. 
is, ondir the lawe that passide as elementis Q. 
3ift 9. adopcioun, either gracious purchasing Vv. 


i Forsothe az. For r. k Om. rx. 


Pofoon rR. 4 biheest Rr. 
Vv no mRuUXah see. mn. 
Jhesu b. 
tyme R, 


t the scripture Egk. 
W no KMRUKXach sec. m. 0, 
a Crist Jhesu r. aa of b sec. m. 


f asens AGNOPSTFIWY. ajen MX. ajeines Q. 


P lawe, for it kept us fro vuleful thing a, 

u maistir, by constreynynge of lawe Q. 

4 clothid in N. clad sx. 

© Forwhi r. 

k 9 litil child a. 

P Om. nN. 
t aftir that r. 


8 the synne Q pr.m. 
X no mRuxach sec. m. 
b vndir tutours a. 


III, 21—-IV. 5. 


in the boond of a mediatour. But a me- 
diatour is not of oon. But God is oon?P. 


. Is thanne the lawe azens the biheestis421 


of God? God forbede. For if the lawe 
were 30uun, that my3te.quikene, verili 
were ri3tfulnesse of lawe. But scrip-22 
ture’ hath concludid alle thingis vndir 
synne’, that the biheeste of the feith of 
Jhesu Crist were 3vuen to hem that 
bileuen. And tofor that bileue cam, 23 
thei weren kept vndur the lawe, enclosid 
in to that bileue that was to be schewid. 
And so the lawe was oure vndirmaister 24 
in Crist, that we ben iustified of bileue. 
But aftir that bileue cam, we ben not25 
now vndur the vndurmaistir. For alle 3e2¢ 
ben the children of God thoru3 the bi- 
leue of Jhesu Crist. For alle 3e that ben 27 
baptisid, ben clothid with Crist. Ther is 28 
no Jewe, net Greke, ne" bond man, ne’ 
fre man, ne* male, ne* female; for alle 3e 
ben oonY in ‘Jhesu Crist®. And if 3e ben2s 
oon in ‘Jhesu Crist*, thanne 3e ben the 
seed of Abraham, azd eiris bi** biheest. 


CAP. IV. 

But Y seie, as long tyme as the eir is! 
a litil child, he dyuersith no thing fro 
a seruaunt, whanne he is lord of alle 
thingis; but he is vndur keperis and2 
tutoris®, in to the tyme determyned of 
the fadir. So we, whanne we weren litle3 
children, we serueden vndur the ele- 
mentis of the world. But aftir thats 
the® fulfilling of tyme? cam, God sente 
his sone, aad of a womman, maad vn-5 
dur the lawe, that he schulde a3enbie 
hem that weren vndur the lawe, that we 


& or contraricth to Gc. Om. ogx.  » bihestis 


1 that x. ™m verre SXY. verey T. a Om, N. 
4 maad riztwijse aupe. 'Om. or. 8 aftir 
vForv. Wwea. * Jhesu Crist x. 
buneg. ¢not nether e. 4 female, that hath 
foen 3e ben sxy. &theseed v. 4 after the 
lkeperis yr. ™autours wv. kepersQ. © vnto 
q litil children nN, ‘this sxy. § world, that 


uOm.x. VYOm.0o. © gracious, or 


Uno KMRUXA&CO. 
2 Crist 
a the 


t no Rvac. 
¥ of oon R pr. m. 
bb Om. h. ¢ Om. a. 


IV. 6——22. 


6of sones. Forsoth for 3e ben the sones of 
God, God sente the spirit of his sone into 
3oure hertis, criynge, Abba, ‘that is*, fadir. 
7-And soY now ther is not seruaunt, but 
sone; that if sone, thanne’ and eyr bi God. 
8But thanne sothli 3e vnknowynge God, 
seruyden to hem that weren not goddis, 
9in kynde*. Now forsoth whanne 3e han 
knowen? God, 3he°, rathere 3e ben knowen 
of God, hou ben 3e turned to gidere eft- 
soone to syke, ‘or freel*, and nedy ele- 
mentis, to whiche® 3e wolen serue eft- 
1osoone? 3e kepenf dayes, and monethis, 
ii‘and tymes$, and® 3eeris!, Forsoth* I drede 
3ou', lest perauenture I haue™ trauelid in 
1230U withonte cause. Be 3e" as I°, for and 
‘I as 3e?. Britheren, I biseche 3ou, 3e han 
isno thing hirt me’. Sothli 3e witen, fort 
by infirmyte of fleisch I haue euangelisid 
to 30u now’ bifore; and 30ure temptacioun 
14in my fleisch 3e dispisedent not, neither 
forsoken, bnt 3e resceyneden me as an 
isaungel of God, as Crist Jhesu*. ‘Therfore 
wher isY 30ure blessinge”? Sothli I bere 
witnessinge* to 30u, forY if* it my3te be 
don, 3e schulden* haue put out 3oure y3en, 
ig6and haue 3ouun to me. Therfore am I 
maad enemy to 30u, seiynge trewe thing? 
i7to0 300? ~Forsothe® thei? louen ‘jou not® 
wel, but thei wolen exclude’ jou, that 3e 
issue hem. Forsothe sue 3e good® euerinore 
in good, and not oonly whanne I am pre- 
igsent anentis 30u. My litle sones, whom" 
I childe, ‘or brynge forth by traueyli, eft- 
20soone, til Crist be fourmyd in 30u, for- 
sothe I wolde now be at 30u, and* chaunge 
my vois!, for I am confoundid, ‘or scham- 
21ed™, in 30u. Seie 3e to me, that wolen 
be vndir lawe", han 3e not radd the lawe ? 
22Sothli it is writun, for Abraham hadde 


x Om. osx. Y Therfore r. z Om. Nr. 


¢Om.v. 40m. ox. & whome @. 
whiche ben oon, whiche another Q. 

now Q. ° I, byleuynge in Crist a. 
bacbiters accuside 30u to me Q.  * that r. 
therfore ape. 
awolde v. > Om. 6 pr.m. 
30x oule of byleue a. & God k. 
that ben at 30u 9. ™ Om, ox. 


kK Om. r. 


h whiche r. 


© adopcioun, either purchasyng RK. 


kK 3e han rbe pr.m. ehk sec.m. 08. 1 twei ceqk. 


GALATIANS. 


a kynde, bot in opynyoun of men Q. 
f kepen, or weyten @. 
1 sou, for 30ur unstablenesse Q. 
P I was as and 3e ben now keepynge olde tradiciouns Q. 
8 Om. v7. +t dispisen 6. 
Ww blessidnes, that 3e haden byfore tyme? 9. 
¢ Sothely carpe. Om. rv. 
iOm. ox, 
the lawe aeuNnopstvwxy. the lawe fleischly a. 


f the whiche 1. 


403 


schulden vnderfonge the adopcioun® of 

sones. And for 3e ben Goddis sones,6 

God sente his spirit in to 3onre hertis, 

criynge, Abba, fadir. And so ther is7 

not now a sernaunt, but a sone; and if 

he ts a sone, he is an eir bi God. Buts 

thanne 3e vnknowynge God, serneden to 

hem that! in kynde weren not goddis. 

But now whanne 3e han knowe God, and 9 

ben knowun of God, hou ben 3e turned 

eftsoone to the febil and nedi elementis, 

to the whiche 3e wolen eft serne? 3e10 

taken kepe to daies, and monethis, and 

tymes, and 3eris. But Y drede jou, lest 11 

without cause Y haue trauelid among 

jou. Be 3e as Y, for Y am as 3e.12 

Britheren, Y biseche 30u, 3e han hurt 

me no thing. But 3e knowen, that bi13 

infrmyte of fleisch Y haue prechid to 

jou now bifore; and 3e dispiseden not, 14 

nether forsoken 3oure temptacioun in my 

fleisch, but 3e% resseyueden me as an 

aungel of God, as ‘Crist Jhesu", Where ts 

thanne is 5o0ure blessyng? For Y bere 3ou 

witnesse, that if it my3te haue be don. 

3e wolden haue put out 3oure i3en, and 

haue 3yuen hem to me. Am Y thanne ic 

maad an eneimye to 3o0u, seiynge to 300 

the sothe? Thei louen not 30u wel, but 17 

thei wolen exclude 3ouf, that je suen = ¢ that is, fro 
: treuthe of the 

hem. But sue 3e the good evermore 11118 gospel. sue 

good, and not oneli whanne Y am pre- “5 in 0b, 

seut with jou. My smale children, 19 Mviss lve. | 

whiche! Y bere eftsoones, til that Crist 

be fourmed in 30u, and Y wolde now 20 

be at 30u, and chaunge my vois, for Y 

am confoundid among 30u. Seie to me, 21 

3e that wolen be vndir the lawe, ‘han 

3e* not red the lawe? For it is writun,o9 

that Abrahain hadde two! sones, oon of 


b vnknowen x. 
bof srxy¥ prim. 1 3eerIs, 

m Om. G prem. Q. 9 3 
a me, thou3 
u Jhesu hade cumen 9. VY Wher is 
X witnesse swxy. Ythatr. 7 3ite. 
4 we Jewis 9. ¢not30u 6. f exclude, or pul 
kIo. 1 voice, tz to scharpe reproue of hem 


& Om. G pr. m. 


§ Om. R prem. 4 Jhesu Crist x. ithe which k. 


3 FQ 


404 


twey? sones, oon of the hand mayden, and 
2300n of the freP wyf Forsoth® he that" of* 
the ‘hand maydent, vp" the fleisch ‘was 
borun’; but’ he that* of the freY wyf, by” 
24a3enbiheeste*. The> whiche thingis ben 
seid by allegorie, ‘or goostly vndirstond- 
inge*. Sothlit thes thingis ben twey* testa- 
mentis; sothli ‘that oonf in the mount of 
Syna, gendringe® in to seruage, that! is 
25Agar. Forsoth* Syna is an hil in Arabie, 
the! which is ioyned to it that now is 
Jerusalem, and seruith with her sones. 
26 Forsothe that Jerusalem that is aboue, is 
27 free, the™ which is oure modir. Forsoth"™ 
it is writun, Be glad, thou bareyne, that 
childist not, or° bryngist not forth child? ; 
brek out and crie, thou that childist not; 
for1 manye sones of* the ‘desert, or deft® 
wommant, more than of hir that hath an 
28housbonde. Forsothe, britheren, we ben 
29 vp" Isaac the’ sones of biheeste; but how’ 
thanne he that was* borun vp’ the’ fleisch 
pursuwide him that* vp? the spirit, so and 
30uow. But what seith the scripture? Cast 
out the hand mayden and hir sone, for- 
soth¢ the sone of the hand mayden! schal 
not be eyr with the® sone of thet frees wyf. 
31‘ And sol, britheren, ‘we beni not sones of the 
hand maydeni, but of the free wyf*, by 
which liberte Crist hath! ‘maad vs free™. 


CAP. V. 


1 Therfore stonde 3e, and eftsoone" nyle 
je be to gidere holdun in 30k° of seruage. 
2Loo! I Poul seie to 30u, for? if 3e ben 
circumcidid’, Crist schal profite to 30u no- 
3thing. Sothli I bere witnessinge eftsoone 
to euery’ man circumsiding him silf, for’ 
he is dettour' of al the lawe for" to be don. 


POm. x. 4 But r. 
u after GaMNoPQ. bi Fr. 


° two GMPQX. 
hond mayde was born p. 
bornv. YOm. x. 2 was born by a. 


GALATIANS. 


r that was er. 
v Om. mPQ. 
a byhest @. 
undirstondinge & sec.m. or gospelles undirstondinge 0. 
AGNosTY. the oou mp, the to éestament was Q. oon ¥. 


IV. 23-—V. 3. 


a™ sernaunt, and oon of a fre womman. 
But he that sas of the seruaunt, was 23 
borun after® the flesh; but he that was° 
of the fre womman, by a biheeste. The24 
whiche thingis ben seid bi an othir vn- 
dirstonding}. For these ben two? testa- 
mentis; oon in the hille of Synai, gen- 
dringe in to seruage, which is Agar. For 2s 
Syna is an hille ¢hat4 is in™ Arabie, 
which fille is ioyned to it that is now 
Jerusalem, and seruith with’ hir chil- 
dren. But that Jerusalem that is aboue, 26 
is fre, whiche is oure modir. For it is27 
writun, Be glad, thou bareyn, that berist 
not; breke out and crye, that bringist 
forth no children; for many sones ben of 
hir that is left of hir hosebonde, more 
than of hir that hath an hosebonde. 
For', britheren, we ben sones of biheeste 28 
aftir Isaac; but now as this" that was 29 
borun after the fleisch pursuede him 
that was aftir the spirit, so now’. But30 
what seith the scripture? Caste ont the 
seruaunt and hir sone, for the sone of 
the seruaunt schal not be eir with the 
sone of the fre wzjf. Aud so, britheren, 31 
we ben not sones of the seruaunt, but of 
the fre wzjf, bi which fredom Crist hath 
maad vs fre. 


t bi gosth vn- 

dirstonding, 

thou; it is fer 

fro Jerusalem 

bi space of 

londis. Lire 
ere. Ve. 


CAB. 


Stonde 3e therfor, and ny! 3e eftsoones 1 
be holdun in the 30k of seruage. Lo!2 
Y Poul seie to 3ou, that if 3e ben cir- 
cumcidid, Crist schal no thing profite to 
jou. And Y witnesse eftsoones to ech3 
man that cireumcidith hym silf, that he 
is dettour’ of al the lawe to be don. And4 


8 born of ys t houd maiden was born mNno. 
W forsoth vy. * that was 9. that was 

bOm.r. ¢ Om. Gpr.m. mpx. or by another 
4 Forwhir. © two Gupo pass. x. f the toon 
& Om. G pr.m. MNOPQF. hb gendride r. 


iwhich vy. & For whir. 1Om.y. ™Om.sy. 2 Forv. or that mpo. P children AGMNPOTYW. 
Gloss om. in ox. childer s. q forwhi r. t ben of v. 8 lefte G pr.m. wp. forsaken og. desert x. 
tOm. x. Utaftercwpgy. vYOm.sx. Wasy. *Om.o. Yafteremupo. biy. 2Om.sx. 4 that 
mas born ev. after capa. bir. ¢fory. 4dmeyde cpa. ¢€ Om. pea. fOm.epr.m. 8 Om. a. 
h Therfore vy. ibe3ze x. ijJmaydeopey,. * Om. x. 10m. Nn. ™deliuered vs 0. 1 Om. 0 sec.m. 
© the 50k 4 pr.m. Gsec.m. Pthat vy. circumcised n. Teche x. ‘that vy. tdoctour x. 4 Om. sx. 

M™thea. "ofe. was borunk pr.m. Ptweiek. Gwhiche. ‘'toRpr.m. Stok. t But 


eEkQRbeeghkoa®. Uhethis1. Vand uow R. 


Ww a dettour k. 


‘V. 4-20. 


43e ben auoydid® fro Crist, 3e that ben ius- 
tified in the lawe han fallen awey fro 
sgrace. ForsothY we by spirit of feith 
6abiden the” hope of ri3twysnesse. Forwhi 
in Crist Jhesu nethir circumcisioun is ony 
thing worth*, nether prepucie, ‘that ts, 
maner of hethen men¥, but feith that 
7worchith by charite. 3e ‘runnen wel?; 
who lettide 30u for? to not obeische” to 
streuthe®? To no man consente 3e¢; for- 
soth this persuacioun®, ‘or softe mouynge’, 
9is not of hym®’ that clepide 30u. A litil 
10sourdow3 cornmpith* al the gobet. I 
truste of 30u in the Lord, that 3e schulen 
vndirstonde noon othir thing’. Forsothe 
he that disturblith* 30u, schal bere dom!, 
11 who euere he is. Forsothe, britheren, if 
I preche 3it circumcisioun™, what 3it suffre 
I persecucioun ? therfore the" sclaundre 
of the cross is avoydid®. I wolde andP 
13 thei that disturblen® 3o0u, be" kitt of. For- 
soth, britheren, 3e ben clepid into® libertet 
oonly ; ‘3yue 3e not" liberte in to occasioun 
of fleisch, but by charite of spirit™ serue 
143e to gidere. Forsoth” al the lawe is ful- 
fillid* in o word, Thou schalt loue thi 
isneiz3bore as thi silf. ForY if 3e biten to 
gidere, and eten, se 3e, lest 3e be waastid 
isfro* atwynne®, ‘or ech fro othir>. For- 
soth I seie 2x Crist, wandre 3e° in spirit, 
and 3e schulen not perfoorme the desyris 
170f fleisch¢. For the fleisch coueitith a3en 
the spirit, sothli the spirit a3ens the fleisch ; 
forsothe® thes ben aduersaries to hem silf 
to gidere, that 3e do not tho thingis, what 
iseuere thingis’ 3e wolen. For’ if 3e ben 
led by the spirit, 3e ben not vndir the 
i9lawe. Forsothe the workis of the fleisch 
ben opyn, the® whiche ben fornycacioun, 
20 vuclennesse’, vnchastite, leccherie, seruynge 


uyoidid x. YY Forr. ¥ Om. x. * wrthis. 
2Om. sx. > obeyen x. ¢ the treuthe s. 
or counceling vy. § Godg. » maketh sour r. 
troubleth rw. 1 the dome a. 
Pthat vy. 4 disturben sx. distroublen rw. 
je sx. that 3e5yue not y. = V_the spirit 7. 
twynny ny. &Om. ox. ©€ Om. y.: 
iand vnclennesse NX. 


xOm.c prim. — ¥ riztwesnesse EKRb. 
mofing K marg. CC aperith a. 4 distroubleth r. 
blenk. 8 Om. R prim. 
E1KgrRbeeghko8. | the whiche 1. 


y Om. ox. 
d 3e, that drawcth 30u fro Crist 9. 
i thing, bot that I haue tau3te 0. 
™ circumcisioun, as bacbiters seyn Q. 
Tr weren @. be also rv. 

w For r. 
4 the flesche og. 


z abiden gE. 
€ voidid E1QRbcegk sec. m. oa8. voide h. 
h to jou Rg sec.m. k sec.m. Om. ak prim. 
™ ether doynges of venym K marg. 


GALATIANS. 405 f 


je ben voidid awei fro Crist, and 3e 
that be iustified in the lawe, je han 
fallen awei fro grace. For we thoru3s5 
the* spirit of bileue abiden the hope of 
ri3tfulnesseY. For in Jhesu Crist nether 
circumcisioun is ony thing worth, nether 
prepucie, but the bileue that worchith bi 
charite. 3e runnen wel; who lettide 3007 
that 3e obeyede’ not to* treuthe>? Con-s 
sente 3e to no manf{; for this counsel ys + that is, of 
not of hym that hath clepid 30u. Ao oy oP... 
litil souredow3 apeirith® al the gobet. [10 ¥° 
trust on jou in oure Lord, that 3e 
schulden vndurstonde noon other thing. 
And who that disturblith? jou, schal bere 
dom, who euere he be. And, britheren, 11 
if Y preche jit circumcisioun, what 
suffre Y 3it persecucioun? thanne the 
sclaundre of the crosse is auoidid®. Y 12 
wolde that thei weren cut awei, that 
disturblenf 30u. For, britheren, 3e ben 13 
clepid in to fredom; oneli 3yue 3e8 not 
fredom in to occasioun of fleisch, but bi 
charite of spirit serue 3e togidere. For 14 
euery lawe is fulfillid in o word, Thou 
schalt loue thi neiz3bore as thi silf. And 15 
if 3e bite, and ete ech othere, se 3e, lest 
3e be wastid ech fro othere. And Y seie 16 
30u" tn Crist, walke! 3e in spirit, and 3e 
schulen not performe the desiris of the 
fleisch. For the fleisch coucitith azens the 17 
spirit, and the spirit a3en the fleisch ; 
for these ben aduersaries togidere, that 
3e don not alle thingis that 3e wolen. 
That if 3e be led bi spirit, 3e ben notis 
vnder the lawe. And werkis* of the1s 
fleisch ben opyn, whiche! ben fornica- 
cioun, vnclennes, vnchastite, letcherie, 
seruice of false goddis, witchecraftis™, 20 
enmytees, striuyngis, indignaciouns, 


z ranne wele, doynge werkis of feith 9. 
€ exciting vy. f Om. ox. 
k disturbith sx. dis- 
n Om. GmPe. © voidid ox. 

t the liberte x. 4 ne syue 
y That rv. z Om. N. aa 
fOm.9. g§ Thatr. bOm. Fr. 


Sin N. 
x fillid r. 


e for r. 


@Om.rh. » thetruthe rag. ©¢ ether soft 


fdistrou - 


i wandre ig. kK the werkis 


406 


of* ydols!, ‘or false goddis™, doyugis of 
2ivenyin”, enemytees, stryues, enuyes®, ‘or 
folowyngis in yuel?, wraththis, chidingis, 
dissenciouns, sectis, ‘or heresyes4, enuyes, 
imansleyngis, drunkenessis, glotenyes, and 
lyche® thingis to thes, the’ whiche I preche’ 
to 30u, as I" bifore seide, for thei that don 
suche’ thingis, schulen not haue the king- 
22dom of God. Forsothe the fruyt of the 
spirit is charite, ioye, pees, pacience, be- 
nygnyte, ‘or good will”, goodnesse, long 
23abydynge, myldenesse, feith, temperaunce, 
contynence, chastite; a3ens such thingis 
24the lawe is not. Forsoth thei that ben of 
Crist, han crucified her fleisch with vices 
25 and concupiscencis*, o7Y couettisis, If we 
lyuen by spirit, ‘by spirit and* walke we; 
26be we not maad coueitous of veyn glorie, 
to gidere stiringe to wratbthe*, hauynge 
enuye to gidere. 


CAP. VI. 


1 Britheren, and if a man be bifore” occu- 
pied, ‘or ouercomen®, in ony gilt, ‘or ¢res- 
pas*, 3e that ben spiritual, teche® siche a 
inaner mau inf spirit of softnesse, ‘or meke- 
nesse, biholdinge thi silf, that and thou 

2be not temptid'. Bere 3e chargis* the to- 
thir of the tothir', and so 3e schulen ful- 

sfille™ the lawe of Crist. Forwhi if ony 
man gessith him silf" for® to be ou3t, 
whanne he is no3t, he disceyueth him silf. 
4Forsoth ech man proue his owne werk?, 
and so he schal haue glorie oonly4 in hym 
ssilf, and not in an othir’. Forsoth® ech 
éinan schal bere his owne charge. Forsoth 
he that is tau3t by word, comune to*’s him 
that techith him, in alle good thingis. 

i Nyle 3e erre, God is not scornyd; for- 
sothe' what thingis a man ‘schal sowe®, 
and’ thes thinges” he schal repe. For* he 


Kktog. | the ydolys «. 
® indignaciouns vy. P Om. ox. 4 Om. x. 
w Om, ox. —* concupiscens 0. Om. 9. 
Gc prm. ©€Om. x. Om. ox. ©& techeth rex. 
fallynge in the same wyse Q. * the chargis s. 
°QOm. sx. P warkeso. 9 Om. Q. 
VYalsov. W thing x. Om. a, 


m Om. o@x. 
y Om. @. 
r other man o. 
x Forsothe x. 

n heresyes X sec. m, marg. 


bifore b sec.m. k pr.m. 
k prom. 


© mansleyingis k. 
s Om. ali. 


x ether enfoormed K marg. Yin K. 


GALATIANS. 


P and dronkenessis Rr. 
t bifore Eb pr. m. k. 
2 al goodnes k. 


V. 21—VI. 8. 


wraththis, chidingis, discenciouns, sectis®, 
ennyes, manslau3tris®, dronkennessis P, 21 
vnmesurable4 etyngis, and thingis lijk to . 
these, whiche Y seie to 30u", as Y haue 
told to® 30u ‘to fore', for thei that doon 
suche thingis, schulen not haue the kyng- 
dom of God. But the fruyt of the spi-22 
rit is charite, ioye, pees, pacience, long 
abidyng, benygnyte, goodnesse, mylde-e2: 
nesse, feith, temperaunce, contynence, 
chastite ; a3en suche thingis is no lawe. 
And they that ben of Crist, han crucified 24 
her fleisch with vices and coueytyngis. 
If we lyuen bi spirit, walke we bi spirit; 25 
be we not made coueytouse of veyn glo- 26 
rie, stirynge ech othere to wraththe, or 
hauynge enuye ech to othere. 


CAP. VI. 


Britheren, if a" man be occupied in! 
ony gilt, 3e that ben spiritual, enforme 
3e such oon in spirit of softnesse, bihold- 
inge thi silf, lest that thou be temptid. 
Ech bere othere’ chargis, and so 3e2 
schulen fulfille the lawe of Crist. Fors 
who that trowith that he be oust, 
whanne he is nou3t, he bigilith him silf. 
But ech man” preue his owne werk, and 4 
so he schal haue glorie in him silf, and 
not in an othere. For ech man schal beres 
his owne charge. He that is tanjt* bi’ 6 
word, comune he with him that techith 
hym, in ‘alle goodis’. Nyle 3e erre, God 
is not scorned; for tho thingis that a8 
man sowith, tho thingis he schal repe. 
For he that sowith in his? fleisch, of the 
fleisch he schal repe corrupcioun ; but 
he that sowith in the spirit, of the spirit 


. venym, or wicchecraflis N marg. venym, or venymouse dedis Q. 
T licchi Ww. 
z and by spirit GQ. bi spirit arp. 
fin the x. 
1 tother, or eche of other o. 
8 Forwhi rv. 


u Om. 6a. Y these Q. 
awin p. > fore 
& Om, GMopex. hOm.x. i temptid, 
m fille vy. ™ Om. G prim. 

t forwhi 7. 4 sowith r. 


8 Om.r. t bifore seie rv. 


88 with r. 


q and vnmesnrable 8. 
wouy R.  Y otheris EIQRceghkaf. 
4 Om. k. 


F 30u 


w Om. 


VI. 9—18. 


that sowith in his fleisch, and* of the 
fleisch heY schal repe corupcioun; forsoth 
he that sowith? in spirit, of the spirit schal 
9repe euerlastyng lyf. Forsoth we doynge 
good, fayle* not; sothli® in his tyme we 
10schulen repe, not faylinge. Therfore the 
while we han tyme, worche we good to 
alle men; forsoth® moost to the houshold 
imeyne of the feith. Se 3e, with what ma- 
ner lettris I haue writun to jou by myn 
12hond*. Sothli who euere wolen plese in 
fleisch, thes constreynen 30u for® to be cir- 
cumsidid, oonly that thei suffre not! thet 
13persecucioun of Cristis cross. Forsothh 
neither thei that ben circumsidid kepen the 
lawe; but thei! wolen 3ou for to be cir- 
cumsidid, that thei glorie! in 3oure fleisch. 
14 Forsoth™ be it ferr to me for" to glorie®, 
no but in the? cross of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist’, by whom the world is crucified to 
isme, and I to the world. Forsothe™ in Crist 
Jhesu nethir cireumcisioun is ou3t worth, 
nether prepucie, ‘that is, maner of hethen 
16 men’, but a newe creature. And who euere 
schulent suwe this rewle, pees vpon" hem, 
iz7and mercy, and vpon’ Israel of God. Fro 
hennis forth no man be heuy to me; for- 
sothY I bere in my body the tokenis* of 
isoure Lord Jhesu Crist. The grace of oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist with’ 3oure spirit, bri- 
theren. Amen. 


Here endith the epistle to Galathies, 
and now bigynneth the prolog to E:phe- 
syes”. 


x Om. stwxy. alsov. Y Om. GyNOPQr. 
3€ be not disceyuede by other false lettris Q. 
ithei that vy. k Om. x. | haue glorie rv. 

t For r. 
wforr.  * toknys, or woundis Q. 
bigynneth epistle to Ephesians. a. 

epistel to the Ephesies in this maner. o. 
to Effecis. 9. 


Y be with rv. 


eendith the pistle of Galathies, and bigynneth the prologe to Lfesies. w. Here endith Poul. y. 


rubric in GMPSTX. 


> the good a pr.m. b sec.m. © Om. 1. 3e R. 
R pr.m. hoomly k. 


uxa sec.m. beeghkoa8. +Om. ko. 


GALATIANS. 


z Om. @Q. 
©€ Om. sx. 
m But vy. ® Om. sx. 


8 that is, heithen men [mennus mp] custome aupe. Om. osx. 


Here endith the pistle to the Galathies, and here bigynneth the prologe to Effesies. v. 


ce schulen A pr.m. 
f he this constreynith 1. these coustreynen Rk. 

J and here mbh. 
pistel to Galathies; se now the prologe on the pistle to Effesies. x. 
thies, and bigynneth the prolog on the epistle to Effesies. qe. 


407 


he schal repe euerelastynge lijf, And» 
doynge good? faile we° not; for in his 
tyme we schal® repe, not failinge. Ther- 10 
for while’ we han tyme, worche we good 
to alle men; but most to hem that ben 
homliche® of the feith. Se 3e, what ma-11 
ner lettris Y haue write to 3ou with 
myn owne hoond. For who euere wole 12 
plese in the fleisch, ‘this constreyneth‘ 
3ou to be circumcidid, oonli that thei 
suffren not the persecucioun of Cristis 
crosse. For nether thei that ben cir-13 
cumcidid’ kepen the lawe; but thei 
wolen that 3e be circumcidid, that thei 
haue glorie in 3oure fleisch. But fer be 14 
it fro me to haue glorie, no® but in the 
crosse of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, bi 
whom the world is crucified to me, and 
Y to the world. For in Jhesu Crist 1s 
nether circumcisioun is ony thing worth, 
ne prepucie, but a newe creature. And 16 
who euere suwen this reule, pees on 
hem, and merci, aud on Israel of God. 
And heraftir no man be heuy to me317 
for Y bere in my bodi the tokenes of 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist. The grace of is 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist be with 3oure 
spirit, britheren’, Amen. 


Here endith the pistle to Galathies, 
andi bigynneth thei prologe on the pistle 
to Eiffecies*. 


bfor vy. ¢butr. 4 hond, thaé 

& Om. G pr.m. apg. 4 For rv. 
© haue glorie vy. POm. Nn. 4 Om. o. 
tOmrv. Yonsrx. VYonry. 
2 Heere endith the epistle to Galathies, and now 


& fayle we 9. 
f not of Jewis Q. 


Here endeth the epistel to Galathies, and bygynneth the prologe of the 
Here endith the pistle to the Galathies, and biginneth the pistle 


Here 
No final 


d the while r. 
&circumcicid k. =) Om. cerKMR | 
k From cruxabgkoa. Here endeth the 
Here endith the epistle to Gala- 
Here endith the pistle to Galathies, and 


€ the hoomly 


Ui aa. 


bigynneth the prolog to Effecies. h. No final rubric in azRve. 


‘ 


EPHESIANS. 





Here bigynneth the prologe to Eiffeseies*. 


Eruecyes sothli ben Asyanys; and 
thes the® word of treuthe takun‘, stooden 
stedefast in the bileue. Thes preisith the 
apostle, writynge to hem fro Rome cite 
out of prisoun, by Tyte, a dekene. 


Here eendith the prologe, and bygynneth 
the Eipistel to Ephesies®. 


Here bigynneth a prologe to Eiffesies*. 


EFFESIANS ben? of Asie; these whanne 
thei hadden resseyued the word of treuthe, 
abiden stedfastli in the feith. The apo- 
stle® preisith hem, writinge to hem fro 
Rome out of prisoun, bi Titicus, the 
dekene. 


Jerom in his prologe on this pistle 
seith this4, 


meee: namie 


The Epistle to Ephesiis*. 


CAPE 


1 Poul, apostle of Crist», by the will of 
God, to alle hooly men ‘that ben* at Ephecy 
2and® feithful® in Crist Jhesu, grace to 30u 
and pees of God, oure fadir, and of the 
3Lord Jhesu Crist. ‘Blessid bef God and 
the fadir of oure Lord Jhesu Crist&, that 
blesside vs in al spiritual blessinge in 
sheuenli thingis in Crist, as he chees vs in 
him bifore the makyng of the world, that 


a From y. 
No prologue in aGupex. 
4 itake ory. 
a From M. 
fescies. ¥. 
men ¥. 


The pistle to Ephesies. pe. 
No initial rubric in 4GKNos. 
fOm. x. ‘8 Om. o. 


aFrom vu. The prolog. a. 


Prolog to Ephecyes K running title. 
In w and rf the prologue is of the second text. 
e From ow. Ende of prolog, bigynnynge capitulum primum. x. 
The pistel to the Ephesies. tT. 
b Jhesu Crist vx. 


Jeroms prologe on Effesians. &. 


Here bigynneth the pistle to Eeffesies*. 


CAP. I." 


Poul, the apostle of Jhesu Crist, bit 
the wille of God, to alle seyntis® that ben 
at Effesie, and to the feithful men in 
Jhesu Crist, grace be to 30u and pees of2 
God, oure fader, and oure® Lord Jhesu 
Crist. Blessid be God and the fadir of3 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, that hath blessid 
vs in al spiritual blessing in heuenli 
thingis in Crist, as he hath chosun vs in4 


Prologus. 0. ‘Prolog. s. No initial rubric in vw. 
b beth o. ¢ Om. r. 
No final rubric in sry. 
Here bygynneth the bok of Ef- 
¢Om. ap. dandtogrr.  & feithful 


The prolog of the pistil to Ephesies. n. 


Heere sueth the prolog on the pistle to Effesies. n. Prologus. r. Here bigynneth the prologe on Effesies. e. 


A prolog on the epistle to the Effesies. £.. No initial rubric in c1kmxabeghkoa. 


¢ postle EKqcegoa. 4 From cmabhko. 
this epistil to Ephesies seith al this. n. 
endith the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle. Rr. 
prologe on Effecies seith al this. x. 
Jerom in his prolog on this epistle seith al this. a. 
Here biginneth the pistil of Effesies. e. 
oure xagk. Om. h. 


b ben men EKNab sec.m. k. 


Jerom in his prologe seith al this. K. Jerome in his prolog on 
Jerom in his prolog on this epistle to Effesies seith this. ac. 
This seith Jerom to Effesies in his prologe. v. 
Here endith the prologe, and bigynnelh the pistil to the Effesies. g. 
No final rubric in aErref. 
No initial rubric in c1kqruxabeghkoa. 


Heere 
Jerom in his 


a Poul to Effecians. E. 
b the semtis k. ¢ of 


I, 5-—18. 


we schulden be hooli, and with oute 
wemme, ‘or vndefoulid®, in his si3t, in 
scharite. The! which bifore ordeynede vs 
into the*® adopcioun! of sones by™ Jhesu 
Crist into him, vp" the® purpos of his 
6will, into? heriynge’ of the glorie of his 
7grace; in™ thes’ which he made vs able to 
his grace, ‘or made dereworthe', in his 
dereworthe sone. In* whom we han a3en 
byinge by’ his blood, and” remissioun of 
asynnes, vp* the richessis of his grace, that 
haboundide greetly in vs in all wysdom 
gand prudence, that he schulde make the 
sacrament of his will knowen to vs, vpY 
the good plesaunce of him, that? he pur- 
10poside in him in the dispensacioun of 
plente of tymes for to instore alle thingis 
in Crist, the? whiche ben in heuenes and 
nin¢ erthe, in him. In whom also and‘ we 
by sorte’, or! grace®, ben clepid, bifore 
ordeyned vp" the purpos of him that 
worchith alle thingis vp! the counceil of 
i2his will; that we be into the* heryinge! of 
his glorie, ‘we that™ bifore hopiden in 
13Crist. In whom and 3e, whamne 3e" had- 
den herd the word of treuthe, resceyu- 
eden™ the gospel of 3oure® heelthe, in 
which and 3e bileuynge ben markid with? 
isthe Hooly Gost of biheeste, that? is ‘a 
wed, o7* eernes*, of 30ure' heritage, into 
the redempcioun of" purchasinge, into 
isheryinge’ of his glorie. Therfore and I 
heeringe 3oure feith, that is in Crist Jhesu, 
isand louynge into alle seyntis, ceesse* not 
doynge thankyngis for 30u*, makynge 
i7mynde ofY 30u in my preieris; that God 
of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, fadir? of glorie, 
3yue to 30u the spirit of wysdom and of 
reuelacioun, into the knowynge of him ; 
isthe* y3en of 3oure® herte inli3tened°, that 
3e wite, which is the hope of his clepinge, 


EPHESIANS. 


409 


hym silf bifor the makyng of the world, 

that we weren hooli, and with out wem 

in his sij3t, in charite. Which hath bifors 

ordeyned vs in to adopcioun of sones bi 

Jhesu Crist in to hym, bi the purpos 

of his wille, in to the heriyng of thes 

glorie of his grace; in which he hath7 

glorified vs in his dereworthe sone. In 

whom we han redempcioun bi his blood, 

for3yuenesse of synnes, aftir the ritch- 

essis of his grace, that aboundide greetlis 

in vs in al wisdom and prudence, to9 

make knowun to vs the sacrament of 

his wille, bi the good plesaunce of hym ; 

the which sacrament he purposide in 

hym in the dispensacioun of plente of 10 

tymes to enstore alle thingis in Crist, 

whiche ben in heuenes, and whiche ben 

in erthe, in hym. In whom we ben! 

clepid bi sort{, bifor ordeyned bi the ¢ either by 
f Lee grace, either bi 

purpos of hym that worchith alle thingis — Goudis chees- 

bi the counsel of his wille; that we be1!27,) pa ae 

in to the heriyng of his glorie, we that pene 

han hopid bifor in Crist. In whom also 1s 

3e weren clepid, whanne 3e herden the 

word of treuthe, the’ gospel of 3oure* 

heelthe, in whom 3e bileuynge ben merk- 

id with the Hooli Goost of biheest, 

which! is the ernes of oure eritage, in to14 

the? redeimpcioun of purchasyng, in to 

heriyng of his glorie. Therfor and Y her-15 

ynge 3o0ure feith, that is in Crist Jhesu, 

and the loue in to alle seyntis, ceesse 16 

not to do thankyngis for 30u, makynge 

mynde of j3ou in my preieris; that God 17 

of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, the fadir of 

glorie, 3yue to 30u the spirit of wisdoin 

and of reuelacioun, in to the knowyng 

of hym; and the ijen of 3oure herte'1s 

liztned, that 3e wite, which is the hope 

of his clepyng, and whiche ben the 


h Om. euoperx,. iOm.v. & Om. enex.  !adopcioun, or purchas or. “ofr. 4 after cpr. 
bir. ©°Om.c. Pandton. 4 preisyng cwpr. the preisynge@. ‘Tintoo. SOm.rx. Om. 
G pr.m. MOPQTX. u Into xy. Vin o. “ and in baptem Nn. in s. Om. r. X after Guper. bi F. 
Yafter cupor. bivy. *whichvy. ®Om.sx. b0Om-r. ¢ which beninyr. @Om.er.  & lotr. 
fofo.Om.rx. & Om.vx. bafter cwper. bir. iafter caper. bir. *Om.o. 1! preysinges Gc. preys- 
ing moper. ™ whiche ry. "Om.x. 9° Om.y¥. Soure ny. Pino. Gwhichy. *Om.or. a wed x. 
$the ernes yr. Om. x. tourer. ‘orsy. VY preysinge cpor. the preysinge 1. WI cese or. * all 
jouo. Y fore. 2the fadirr. inthe a. 3eve the vy. » oure 4. © inlizstid sx. liztned r. 


4 of the k pr.m. 
VOL. IV. 


€ oure EQgha. 


f the which k. 
3G 


Om. 1k. © hertis k. 


410 


and whiche the richessis of the’? glorie 
i90f his heritage in seyntis; and which is 
the ouersemynge® greetnesse of his vertu 
into vs that han bileuyd, vpf the worch- 
20inge of the my3t of his vertu’, the" which 
he! wron3te in Crist, reysinge him fro 
deed men*, and settinge! on his ri3thalf in 
aiheuenly thingis, aboue ech principat, ‘or 
power of princes™, and potestate, and 
vertu, and lordschiping", and ech® name 
that is named, not oonly in this world, 
22but inP the world to come4; and made™ 
alle thingis suget vndir his feet, and 3af 
23him heed vpont al ‘the chirche", that is 
the bodi of him, and the plente of him, 
the’ which” alle thingis in alle thingis is 
fulfillid®. 
CAP. II. 


1 And whanne je weren deede in 3oure 
2giltis and synnes, in which 3e wandreden 
sum tyme vp’ the space’, ‘or lastinge*, of 
this world, vp> the prince of the® power 
of this eir, of the spirit that worchith now 
in to the sones of vuntrust, ‘or vabilene4; 
3in ‘the which® wef alle lyueden sum tyme 
in desyris of oure fleisch, doynge the 
willes of® fleisch and thou3tis!, and we 
weren by kynde the sones of wraththe, as 
4and othere*; forsoth God, that is riche 
in' mercy, for his ful moche™ charite in 
swhich he louede vs, and" whanne we 
weren deede in synnes, quykenede® vs to 
gidere in Crist, by whos grace 3e ben 
ssauyd, and to gidere ajen reyside, and to 
gidere made to” sitte ind heuenly thingis 
7in Crist Jhesu; that he schulde schewe in" 
the worldis comynge ouer the pleuteuouse 
richessis of his grace in’ goodnesse vpont 
svs in Crist Jhesu. Forsothe" by grace 3e 
ben saued bi feith, and not’ of jou; 


EPHESIANS. 


I. 19—Il. 8. 


richessis of the glorie of‘ his eritage in 
seyntis; and whych is the excellenti9 
greetnesse of his vertu in to vs that han 
bileuyd, bi the worchyng of the my3t 
of his vertu, which he wrou3te in Crist,20 
reisynge hym fro deth, and settynge him 
on his ri3t half in heuenli thingis, aboue21 
ech principat, and potestat, aud vertu, 
aud domynacioun, and aboue ech name 
that is named, not oneli in this world, 
but also in the world to comynge; and 22 
made alle thingis suget vndur hise feet, 
and 3af hym to be heed ouer al the 
chirche, that is the bodi of hym, and*e3 
the plente of hym+, which is alle thingis 
in alle thingis fulfillid. 


+ that is, the 
fulnesse of 
Cristis gostly 
bodi is maad 
perfit bi Crist, 


CAP. II. which bi the 
nertu of his 
And whanne 3e weren deed in 3oure1 Godhed woreh- 


Soke " i 9 ith alle goode 
giltis and synnes, in which 3e wandriden2 werkis in alle 


sum tyme aftir the cours of this world, Jere. ae 
aftir the prince of the power of this eir, 
of the spirit that worchith now in to 
the sones of vnbileue; in which also we3 
‘alle Iyueden'’ sum tyme in the desiris 
of oure fleisch, doynge the willis of the 
fleisch and of thou3tis™, and we weren 
bi kynde the sones of wraththe, as” 
othere men; but God, that is riche in4 
merci, for his ful myche charite in which 
he louyde vs, 3he, whanne we werens 
deed in synnes, quikenede® vs togidere 
in Crist, bi whos grace 3e ben sauyd, 
and ajen reiside togidere, and made to-6 
gidere to sitte in heuenli thingis in Crist 
Jhesu; that he schulde schewe in the7 
worldis aboue comynge the plenteuouse 
ritchessis of his grace in goodnesse on 
vs in Crist Jhesu. For bi grace 3e bens 
sauyd bi feith, and this not of 30u; for 


dbenthe ry. 4dhis gv. © excellent, either souereyn v. Ff after cuper. bir.  & vertu in to Us N. 
hOm.y. iOm.ap. k Om. x. | settynge hyn nN. ™ Om. ox. "%domynacioun vy, © aboue ech r. 
Pandin s. alsoiny. dcomynger. the madeer. sheuedor. tovery. on x. % chirche ansvv. 


chirches 0. ¥ Om. rv. 
et. either custom rv. 
we Nn. also we Vv. 

n she r. 
ton rx. 


wwhich zs vy. = fillid v. 
> after GarpoTr. 

£ willis vy. > of oure cer. 

© he quyckenede Gurper. quikende x. 

«For pv. 


ignd of k. 


King. 
° he quikenide k. 


Yafter awperr. 
¢ Om. oar. 
i of thou3tis vr. 

P Om. KY prem. 
Vv that 7s not N. that not e7. this not Vv. 


1 lyueden alle 1. lyueden g. 


2lijfy. 2 Om.ox. and lastynge 
e whome er. whiche rx. ‘fand 
k othere men vy. lofo. ™mychil s. 
qinto kK. ‘intoo. Sand K. 


4 Om. ox. 


m the thouztis hk sce.m. as and k see. mn, 


Il. 9—22. 


9sothli” it is the 3ifte of God, not of werkis, 
1othat no man glorie*. ForsothY we ben 
the makinge of hym, maad of no3t in Crist 
Jhesu, in good workis, that? God made 
itredy bifore, that in hem* we go. For 
which thing be 3e myndeful, that sum 
tyme 3e that® weren hethene in fleisch, 
thee whiche weren seid prepucie, fro ‘that 
that¢ is‘ seid circumcisioun in fleisch maad 
12bi hand; that® weren in” that tyme with- 
outen Crist, alyened, ‘or maad straunge', 
fro the lyuynge of Israel, and herborid 
men, ‘or gestis*, of testamentis, not hau- 
ynge hope of biheeste, and with outen 
13 God! in this world ; ‘now forsoth™ in Crist 
Jhesu 3e that weren sum tyme ferr, ben 
14maad ny3 in the blood of Crist. Forsoth" 
he is oure pees, that made both oon°, and? 
the myddel wal of a long’ wal’ vnbynd- 
singe, enemytees in his fleisch; anuoydinge 
the lawe of maundementis by domes, that 
he make twey® peplis in him silf into at 
i6énewe man, makinge pees, that he recon- 
cile bothe in o body to God by the cross, 
17sleynge the enemytees" in him silf. And 
he comynge euangelisyde pees to 30u that 
weren ferr, and pees to hem that weren 
isny3; for by him we both han ny3 com- 
i9ynge in o spirit to the fadir. Therfore 
now 3e ben not ‘herborid men’ and” gestis, 
‘or® comelingis’, but 3e ben citeseyns of 
seyntis, and? houshold? meyne of God; 
20 aboue bildid® on® the’ foundement of apo- 
stlis and of prophetis, bi that hijestef 
21corner stoon, Crist Jhesu; in whom ech 
bildynge maad wexith in to an hooly tem- 
22 ple in the Lord. In whom and8 ‘be 3e%% 
bildid® to gidere into the habitacle of God, 
in the Hooli Gost. 


EPHESIANS. 411 


it is the 3ifte of God, not of werkis, that» 
no man haue glorie. For we ben the to 
makyng of hym, maad of nou3t in Crist 
Jhesu, in good werkis, whiche God hath 
ordeyned, that we go in tho werkis. 
For which thing be 3e myndeful, that 1! 
sumtyme 3e weren hethene in fleisch, 
which? weren seid prepucie, fro that that 
is seid circumcisioun maad bi hond in 
fleisch ; and 3e weren in‘ that time with 12 
out Crist, alienyd fro the lyuyng of 
Israel, and gestis of testamentis’, not 
hauynge hope of biheest, and with outen 
God in this world. But now in Crist 13 
Jhesu 3e that weren sum tyme fer, ben 
maad ny3 in the blood of Crist. For he14 
is oure pees, that made bothe oon, and 
vnbyndynge the myddil wal of a wal 
with out morter, enmytees in his fleisch ; 
and® auoidide the lawe of maundementis 15 
bi domes, that he make twei in hym silf 
in to at newe man, makynge pees, to16 
recounsele bothe in o bodi to God bi the 
cros, sleynge the enemytees in hym silf. 
And he comynge prechide pees to 30017 
that weren fer, and pees to hem that 
weren ni3; for bi hym we bothe han ni318 
comyng in o spirit to the fadir. Therfor !9 
now 3e ben not gestis and straungeris®, 
but 3e ben citeseyns’ of seyntis, and 
houshold meine of God; aboue bildid on 20 
the foundement of apostlis and of pro- 
fetis, vpon that” hijeste corner stoon, 
Crist* Jhesu; in whom ech bildyng2i 
maad waxith in to an hooli temple in 
the Lord. In whom also ‘be 3eY bildid 22 
togidere in to the habitacle of God, in 
the Hooli Goost. 


w for whiv., *hanegloriey. yForv. Zwhichey. in tho werkisy. % Om.r. ¢ Om. rx. 
d for o. © that at o passim. fwast.itisvy. gand3ev. bOm.o. itOm.ox. * Om.ox. | God, or 
knowynge of hym or. ™ But now vy. "Fory. © the pepuloon gr. Pandvnbindinge yr. 4 Om. r. 
t wal, that is, their olde obseruauneis he er. wal without morter Vv. 8 two GMPETX. + oo NFW. 0 OUX. 
u enmyte, thal is, syne QT. YOm.er. Worn. Omer. and aunrpoer. Y Om. ox. and the 
GeuNnpoT. ®heuenly Q. homely r. > bilds. ¢inG@ sec.m. vpon Tr. oner x. 4Om. x. © Om. x. 


fhizpnw. 8 Om. x. 88 3e bens. » bild s. 


P the which k. 9 Om. k. 
u ether herbored men K marg. 
ben h pr m. 


¥ the testamentis 1n pr. m. 
¥ the citezenes R pr.m. Wthe hk. * of Crist e1 prem. qprem.g. Y¥3e 


8 and he ta see.m. t Om. o pr.m. oa sec. m. 


3G2 


412 


CAP. III. 


1 For grace‘ of thisk thing I Poul, the! 
boundyn of ‘Jhesu Crist™, for 30u hethene 
amen, if nethelees 3e han herd the dispen- 
sacioun of Goddis grace, that is 3ouun to 
3me in jou. For vp" reuelacioun the sa- 
crament is maad knowun to me, as I 
aaboue wroot in schort thing, as 3e redinge 
mown vndirstonde my prudence in the 
amysterie® of Crist. The? which is not 
knowun to othere generaciouns to the 
sones of men, as it is now schewid to his 
hooly apostlis and prophetis in the4 spirit, 
shethen men for to be euene eiris, and to 
gidere bodily* and to gidere parceneris** of 
his biheeste in Crist Jhesu by the euan- 
7gelie; whos mynistre Iam maad, vpt the 
3ifte of Goddis grace, the? which is 3ouun 
to me vp’ the worchinge of his vertu. 
sForsoth’ to me, leest of alle seyntis, this 
grace is 3ouun for* to euangelise in he- 
then men the vnserchable richessis, ‘ory 
9that mown not be souzt out?, of Crist, and 
for? to ynliz3tne alle men‘, which is the? 
disperisacioun of sacrament® hid fro worldis 
10 in God, that made alle thingis of no3t; that 
the mochefold wysdom of God be knowun 
to princes and! potestatis in heuenli thingis 
iby the chirche, aftir® the settinge" of 
worldis, the! which he made in Crist Jhe- 
izsu oure Lord. In whom we han trust and 
ny3 comynge*, in! trustnynge™ by the feith 
of him. For which thing I aske", that 3e 
fayle not in my tribulaciouns for 30u, that° 
i4is 30ure glorie. For grace of this thing 
I bowe my knees to the fadir of oure 
is Lord Jhesu Crist, of whom ech fadirheed 
16inP heuenes? and in™ erthe is named, that 
he 3yue to 30u, vp’ the‘ richessis of his 
glorie, vertu for" to be strengthid by his 

N 


ithe grace r.  & this holy o. 


o mynysterie x. POm. 7. GOm. erx. © Om. sx. 
bivy. %Om. Nn. V after carnpet. bir. WOm. rv. 
in ogT. ® Om. sx. > liztne ry ¢ Om. x. 4 Om. Ne. 
8biv. hb bifore ordynaunce yr. i Om. Nn. 
AGMOPQTVWXY. © which yr. P of G pr.m. MPQT. 
tOm.s.  ¥% Om. srx. 


% mynysterie CEKMQRUXabceghkoag. 


settinge K marg. ‘tristyngea. & Om. k prom. 


EPHESIANS. 


1Om. 9. am the r. 


k 
comyng to s. 
q henen Nos. 


a cther that may not be sou3t K marg. 


WI. 1—16. 


CAP. III. 

For the grace of this thing I Poul,i 
the boundun of Crist Jhesn, for 30u 
hethene men, if netheles 3e han herd the2 
dispensacioun of Goddis grace, that is 
jouun to me in jou. For bi reuelacioun3 
the sacrament is maad knowun to me, 
as Y aboue wroot in schort thing, as 3e4 
moun rede, and vndurstonde my pru- 
dence in the mysterie” of Crist. Whichs 
was not knowun to othere generaciouns 
to the sones of men, as it is now schewid 
to his hooli apostlis and prophetis in the 
spirit, that hethene men ben euen eiris, ¢ 
and of oo bodi, and parteneris togidere 
of his bihcest in Crist Jhesu bi the 
euangelie; whos mynystre Y am maad,7 
bi the 3ifte of Goddis grace, which is 
jouun to me bi the worchyng of his 
vertu. To me, leeste of alle seyntis, this s 
grace is 3ouun to preche ainong hethene 
men the vnserchable® richessis of Crist, 
and to li3tne alle men, which is the dis-9 
pensacioun of sacrament hid fro worldis 
in God, that made alle thingis of nou3t ; 
that the myche® fold wisdom of God be io 
knowun to princis and potestatis in 
heuenli thingis bi the chirche, bi theit 
bifore ordinaunce® of worldis, which he 
made in Crist Jhesu oure Lord. Ini2 
whom we han trist and ny3 comyng, in 
tristenyng’ bi the feith of hym. Foris 
which thing Y axe, that 3e faile not in 
my tribulaciouns for 30u, which is joure 
glorie. For grace of this thing Y bowe1s 
my knees to the fadir of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, of whom ech fadirhod injs 
heuenes and in erthe is named, that he16 
3yue to 30u, aftir the® richessis of his 
glorie, vertu to be strengthid bi his spirit 


m Crist Jhesu sopevx. after emnper. bi vr. 


sholy 0. 88 parseyuers Gxy. + after GMNPOT. 

xOm. x. yY Om. aemnpsxy. ‘2 Gloss om. 
e the sacrament Gx. sacrementis nN. f and to N. 
land o. ™ tristinge GsTX. n axe 
roof er. 8 after cunpoT. bir. 


bmychel a. © ether 


MI. 17—IV. 11. 


i7spirit in the ynnere man, Crist for’ to 
dwelle by feith in 3oure hertis ; 3e* rootid 

igand groundid in charite, that*® 3e¥ mown? 
comprehende* with alle seyntis, which is 
the brede’, and lengthe’, and hiznesse4, 

19and depnesse®; also for’ to wite the cha- 
rite of Crist ‘aboue semynge® to science, 
that 3e be fulfillid’ into* al the plente of 

29God. Forsothe to him that is my3ti for! 
to make alle thingis more plentenously 
than we axen or vndirstonden, vp” the 

21 vertu that worchith in vs, to him be glorie 
in the chirche, and in Crist Jhesu, into 
alle" generaciouns of the world® of worldis. 
Amen. ‘So be it?. 


CAP. 1V; 


1 ‘And soi I bounden in™ the Lord by- 
seche’, that 3e walke worthily in the clep- 
ginge, in which 3e ben clepid, with al 
mekenesse and myldenesse, with pacience 
3 Supportinge®’ to gidere in charite, bisy for' 
to kepe vnite of spirit in the bond of 
,pees. O body and o spirit, as 3e ben clepid 
sin oon hope of 3oure clepinge ; o Lord, o 
gfeith, o baptym, o God and fadir of alle®, 
the’ which is aboue alle men, and by alle 
;thingis, and in vs alle. To” ech of vs 
grace is 3ouun vp* the mesure of the’ 
g3yuynge of Crist; for which” thing he* 
seith, He sty3inge into hi3*, ledde caitiftet 
caytif, ‘or prysonynge prisoned®, he 3af 
93iftis to men. Forsoth that hef assendide®, 
what is it, no but forb he dessendide’ first* 
1o into the lowere partis! of the™ erthe? He 


it" is that cam down, and that® stizede vp? _ 


on’ alle heuenes, that he schulde fulfille’ 
uialle thingis. And he 3af summe sotheli 
apostlis, summe forsoth prophetis, othere 
forsothe euangelistis, othere forsoth schep- 


EPHESIANS. 


413 


inf the ynnere man, that Crist dwelle bi17 
feith in joure hertis; that 3e rootid and 
groundid in charite, moun comprehende is 
with alle seyntis, which is the breede, 
and the lengthe, and the hijnesse, and 
the depnesse ; also to wite the charite of i9 
Crist more excellent® than science, that 
3e be fillid in al the" plentee of God. 
And to hym that is my3ti to do alle2o 
thingis more plenteuousli than we axen 
or vudurstondun, bi the vertu that 
worchith in vs, to hym be glorie in the2) 
chirche, and in Crist Jhesu, in to alle 
the generaciouns of the! world of worldis. 
Amen. 


CAP. IV. 


Therfor Y boundun for the Lord bi-1 
seche 30u, that 3e walke worthili in the 
clepyng, in which 3e ben clepid, with alz 
mekenesse and myldenesse, with pacience 
supportinge ech other in charite, bisi tos 
kepe vnyte of spirit in the boond of 
pees. O bodi and o spirit, as 3e bena 
clepid in oon hope of 3oure cleping; 05 
Lord, o feith, 0 baptym, o God and fa-« 
dir* of alle’, which is aboue alle men, 
and bi alle thingis, and in vs alle. But7 
to ech of vs grace is 30uun bi the me- 
sure of the 3yuyng of Crist; for which s 
thing he seith, He stiynge an hi3, ledde 


eaitiftet caitif, he 3af 3iftis to men. Buto i that is, men 
tolden pri- 


what is it, that he stiede vp, no™ but soners of the 
‘ lenel, Cri 
that also he cam doun first in to the feye? Crist. 


0 uischide fro the 
deuel, and made 
soget vndir the 
esy 30c of Crist, 


lowere partis of the erthe? He it is that! 
cam doun, and that stiede on alle he- 
uenes, that he schulde fille alle thingis. and brouste 

: hem fro helle 
Aud he 3af summe apostlis, samme pro-1) to henene. Tie 
phetis, othere euangelistis, othere scheep- hace wis 
herdis and techeris, to the ful endyng 124. ve: 


vOm. nsx. Wthatjer. Omox. *Om.r. YOm.r. 2% main. a cumprehende, or fake fo 
gedir oT.  » breed of charite gr. © lengthe of longe perseucraunce gt. © Om. sx. 4 hee3nesse of 
euerelastynge meed [lif r] or. © depnesse of the priuy dredeful dome gt. £Om.N. & more excellent rv. 
h than r. ifilidy, Kinwy. 10m. syx.  ™ after eunper. bi rv. 1 alle the GaNPQSTVXY. 
9 worldus s. P Om. eanpostx. that is, so be itv. 4 Ando. Therfore vy. "for. 8 byseche 30u err. 
88 supportynge, or wp berynge eT. *tOm.sx. Uvsalley. YOm.v. © Forsothe tov. * after Gun 
pest. biv. YOm.o. %thewhiche x. Crist n. Panv. Cheisthe o. 4 the caitiftee er. 
€Om.ox. fOm.c pr.m. & stizede vp vy. 4 and G pr.m. for and 4G sec. m. wNPQsV sec.m. Y. and far o. 


fcamdounvy. *Om.o. | partyes cmopT. ™Om.o. "Om. x. Sato. POm.y. 7OmN. f fille nv. 


f bi egka, 
thingis k. 


& ether ahoue semyng K marg. 
1 Om. b 


h Om. b. 


i Om. 8 pr. m. kK the fadirk.  lalle 


414 


izherdis and techeris, to the ful endynge of 
seyntis, into the work of mynisterie, into® 
isedificacioun of Cristis body, til we rennen 
alle, int vnyte of feith and of" knowynge 
of Goddis sone, into a parfyt man, into 
the’ mesure of age of the plente of Crist; 
14that we ben not now litile children, mou- 
ynge as wawis, and be” borun aboute with 
al wynd of techinge, in the weywardnesse 
of men, in sutil witt, to the disceyuynge 
15 of errour. Forsoth* we ‘doynge treuthe in 
charite, wexen’ in him bi alle thingis, that 
16is Crist the’ heed*; of whom al the body 
sett to gidere, and boundyn to gidere by 
ech ioynture of vndirseruyng, vp> worch- 
ing into mesure® of ech membre, makith 
encresynge of the body, into? edificacioun 
17of it® in charite. herfore this thing I 
seie, and witnesse it’ in the Lord, that 3e 
walke not now, as and hethen men walken, 
18in the vanyte® of her witt, ‘in derknessis?; 
hauynge vndirstondyng! derkened*, alyen- 
ed, ‘or maad ferr', fro the lyf of God, bi 
ignoraunce, ‘or vrkunnynge™, that is in 
hem, for the blyndnesse of her herte. 
19 Thei® dispeiringe° bitoken hem silf to 
vnchastite, in to? worchinge of al vnclen- 
20nesse in‘ coueityse. Forsothe 3e han not 
21so lerud® Crist’, if nethelees je herden 
hym, and ben tau3t in him, as ist treuthe 
22in Jhesu. ‘Do 3e" awey vp’ the firste¥ 
lyuyng the olde man, that is corupt vp* 
23the desyris of ‘errour; forsoth ‘be 3eY re- 
newid’, ‘or maad newe azen*, by” spirit¢ 
240f 30ure nynde*; and clothe 3e the newe 
man, that® vp God is maad of no3t in 
ri3twysnesse and hoolynesse of treuthe. 
25 For which thing 3e8 puttinge awey lees- 
yng, speke® treuthe ech man with his 
nei3bore, for we ben membris to gidere. 
26° Be 3e' wroth, and nyle 3e synne*; the 


EPHESIANS. 


IV. 12—26. 


of seyntis, in to the werk of mynystrie, 
in to edificacioun of Cristis bodi, til we13 
rennen alle, in to vnyte of feith and of 
knowyng of Goddis sone, in to a parfit 
man, aftir the mesure of age® of the 
plente of Crist ; that we be not now litle 14 
children, mouynge as wawis, and be not 
borun aboute with ech wynd of teching, 
in the weiwardnesse of men, in sutil wit, 
to the disseyuyng of errour. But do wes 
treuthe in charite, and wexe in him by 
alle thingis, that is Crist oure heed; of is 
whom alle the bodi set® togidere, and 
boundun togidere bi ech ioynture of 
vuder seruyng, bi worching in to the 
mesure of ech membre, makith encrees- 
yng of the bodi, in to edificacioun of it 
silf in charite. Therfor Y seie and wit-17 
nesse this thing in the Lord, that 3e 
walke not now, as hethene men walken, 
in the vanyte of her wit; that han vn-18 
durstondyng derkned with derknessis?, 
and ben alienyd fro the lijf of God, bi 
ignoraunce that is in hem, for the 
blyndenesse of her herte. Which‘ dis-19 
peirynge bitoken hem silf to vnchastite, 
in to the worchyng of al vnclennesse in 
coueitise. But 3e han not so lerud* Crist’, 20 
if netheles 3e herden hym, and ben tau3t 21 
in hym, as is** treuthe in Jhesu. Do 3e22 
awey bi the elde lyuyng the elde man, 
that is corrupt bi the desiris of errour ; 
and be je renewlid® in the spirit of 3oure 23 
soule; and clothe 3e the newe man, which 24 
is maad aftir God in rij3twisnesse and 
hoolynesse of treuthe. For which thing 25 
‘se putte’ awei leesyng, and speke 3e 
treuthe ech man with his neijbore, for 
we ben membris ech to othere. Be 3e26 
wrooth, and nyle 3e* do synne; the 
sunne falle not doun on 3oure wraththe. 


Sintothe p. tintor. tOm. x. vOm.o. wWbenotr. * Buty, Ywexewe or. 7 oure 7. 
ahened coor. after gr. biy. ¢the mesureGmnoporr. 4 intothe wpor. ¢ itself yr. £ this 
thing y. &vnyteeg, Om. r. i her vndurstondynge er. * derkned with derknessis v. 1Om. ox. 
mOm.ox. "%Whicher. ©°Om.0. P tothe semnopestrwxy. and 4 prim. Gnet.  * lernyd 
cmpetvy. § by Crist cer. tOm.a prim. "Doth x. Vale sec.m. aftir mper. bir. W elde r. 
x after emper. bir. Ybeth x. 2renewlid scspr pr.m.vwy. 8 Om, Gyoporx. biny. ¢the 
spirit or. dsoule y. ¢@ which y. fafter ampery. & Om.c. © speketh x. i Beth x. * doo synne r. 


"the age x. is set k pr.m. 


P of synne X sec.m. marg. k. 


a The whiche 1. 1 lernid rqnekoa. 


lernd K8. $ of Crist kk prom. SS itis a prem. that a. ™renewid KRaa8. VY putte 3e E1K sec, m. Rk. 


w Om. t prem. 


Iv. 27—V. 8. 


sunne falle not down on! 3oure wraththe. 
3? Nyle 3e 3yue stede to the devel. He that 
staal, now stele™ not; ‘more forsoth" tra- 
ueile he in worchinge with his hondis 
‘that that® is good thing?, that he haue 
wherof he schal 3yue to a man suffringe 
zonede. Ech yuel word go not out’ of 3oure 
mouth; but if ony is good to" edificacioun 
of feith, that it 3yue grace to men’ heer- 
soinge. And nyle 3e** make the Hooly Gost 
of God sori, ‘or heuy', in the® which” 3e 
ben markid in the day of redempcioun. 
31 Al bitternesse, and wraththe, and indig- 
nacioun, and cry, and blasphemye be takun 
3zawey fro 30u, with al malice; forsoth be 
3e to gidere benygne, ‘or of good will, 
mercyful, 3yuynge* ‘to gidere’, as and? 
God 3af* to 30u in Crist. 


CAR. V. 


1 Therfore be 3e foloweris of God, as 
2moost dereworthe sones; and walke 3e in 
loue, as and Crist louede vs, and 3af him 
silf for vs an offryng and sacrifice to God, 
3in to the odour of swetnesse. Fornyca- 
cioun forsoth, and al vnclennesse, or auar- 
ice, be not named in 30u, as it bicometh 
4hooly men; ether filthe, or> foly speche, or 
harlotrie, that perteyneth not to thing’, 
5 but more doynge of thankyngis. Forsoth 
‘this thing wyte 3e, vndirstondinge? that 
ech fornycatour*, or vnclene man, or co- 
ueytous’, that is seruageS of ydols, ‘or 
mawmetis", hath not heritage in the king- 
cdom of Crist and! God. No man disceyue 
jou by veyne wordis; forsoth* for thes 
thingis the wraththe of God cam into! the 
7sones of yntrist™, ‘or vunbileue®. Therfore 
snyle 3e be maad parteneris of hem. For- 
soth® 3e weren sum tyme derknessis, ‘now 
forsoth? ‘3e ben4 li3t in the Lord". Walke 


lypon 7. ™ stele he mopory sec. m. 
tT to the aemNOPOSTVWXY. §& the er. 
vwhom er. W Om. ox. 
v of «a. eithir Nn. 

f auerouse man QT. 
GMPQT. 


¢ the theng o. profit ry. 
§ seruinge 09. 4 Om. ox. 
1 Om. Gaoperx. © For y. 


x more rather 1, 
of Exghkoa. fro rR. 


a Om. bg. 
rathir 1. 


f this thing a sec.m. & word Ecg. 


EPHESIANS. 


a but more r. 

88 3e to gydere PETY sec. m. 
x forjzeuynge G sec. m. QTV. 
a wite 3e vnderst. this thing r. 
iand of or. 

P but now r. 


y the nedie cEIKQR sec. m. xaga8, the nedynesse R pr.m. 
b ether heuy3 K marg. 
h upon i. 


415 


Nyle 3e 3yue stide to the deuel. He3, 
that stal, now stele he not; but more* 
trauele he in worchinge with hise hondis 
that that is good, that he haue whereof 
he schal 3yue to nediY. Ech yuel word 29 
go not of? 3oure mouth; but if ony is 
good to the? edificacioun of feith, that it 
3yne grace to men that heren. And30 
nyle 3e make the Hooli Goost of God 
sori>, in which 3e ben markid in the dai 
of redempcioun. AI bitternesse, and31 
wraththe, and indignacioun, and cry, 
and blasfemye be takun awey fro 3ou, 
with al malice; and be 3e togidere be-32 
nygne, merciful, for3yuynge togidere, as 
also God for3af to 30u in Crist. 


CAP. V. 


Therfor be 3e foloweris of God, as1 
moost dereworthe sones; and walke 3e2 
in Ioue, as Crist louyde vs, and 3af hym 
silf for vs an offryng and a sacrifice to 
God, in to the odour of swetnesse. 
And¢ fornycacioun, and al vnclennesse,3 
or aueryce, be not named among 30u, 
as it bicometh holi men; ethir filthe, or 4 
foli speche, or harlatrye, that perteyn- 
eth* not to profit, but more® doyng of 
thankyngis. For wite 3e this‘, and vu-s 
durstonde, that ech letchour, or vnelene 
man, or coueytouse, that serueth to 
mawmetis, hath not eritage in the king- 
dom of Crist and of God. No mané 
disseyue 30n bi veyn wordis®; for whi 
for these thingis the wraththe of God 
cam on! the sones of vnbileue. Therfor7 
nyle 3e be naadi parteneris of hem. Fors 
je weren sui tyme derknessis, but now 
‘3e ben* lizt in the Lord. Walke 3e as 


© that at o passim. 
t Om. x. 
2 Om. s. 


POm. rx. GOm.r. 
u Om. G pr.m. MPQTVX. 
a forzaue G sec. m. QTY. 

€ lechour eper. 
Yon vy. ™ mysbileene 


y Om. Tt. 


k forwhi r. 


q Om. ox. * world r. 


Z forth of A sec. m. 1. out 
4 profitith k. © more 
k Om. erxarbeghkoa8. 


¢ Om. 1a sec. m. 
i Om. k prim. 


416 


93e° as sonest of li3t. Forsothe" the fruyt 
of 1i3t’ is in al goodnesse, and ri3twys- 
le nesse, and treuthe; prouynge” what is wel 
11 plesynge to God. And nyle 3e comune* 
toY vnfruytouse workes of derknessis ; 
12 forsothe* more reproue 3e*. Forsothe’ what 
thingis ben don of hem and° in priuey, 
izit is foul and for® to seye. Forsoth alle 
thingis that ben prouydf of the® 1i3t, ben 
maad opyn; forsoth® ‘al thing! that is 
14 schewid®, is li3t!. For which thing he seith, 
Ryse thou that slepist™, and ‘ryse vp" fro 
deede thingis®, and Crist schal illumyne? 
isthee. ‘And so4, britheren, se 3e, how 
warly 3e schulen go; not as vnwyse men, 


ig but as wyse men’, ajen byinge tyme’, for ~ 


i7the dayes ben yuele. Therfore nyle 3e 
be maad vnprudent, butt vndirstondinge 
iswhich is the will of ‘the Lord". And 
nyle 3e be fulfillid’, ‘or be drunkun™, with* 
wyn, in which’ ‘luxurie is’, but be 3e ful- 
19 fillid* with the Hooly Gost; spekinge® to 
jou’ silf in psalines, and ymnes, and spiri- 
tual songis, syngynge and seyinge psalme4 
20in 3oure hertis® to the Lord; euermore 
doynge thankyngis for alle thingis in the 
name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist to God 
2iand the fadir, 5e' suget to gidere in the 
2drede of Crist. Be wymmen suget® to 
her ‘men, 07 housbondis", as to the Lord; 
23for the man is heed' of the womman, as 
Crist is heed* of the chirche; he! sauyour 
210f™ his body. But as the chirche is suget 
to Crist, so and wymmen to her house- 
25 bondis in alle thingis. Men, loue je joure 
wyues, as and Crist louede the chirche, 
agand 3af him silf for" it, that he schulde 
make it hooly; clensynge it with the 
waisching stoon® of watir, in the word of 


sOm.r. tthe sones semNnopestywxy.  Forwhi r. 
y Om. F. into wxy. 2 but. 8 3e hem or. 
GeTy sec.m. 3her., ¢ Om. sx.  f reproued err. 


® made opyn @. 
Om. x. 


! ly3t, chat may be knowen er. 
P liztne Garoperr. illumyne, or liztue N. 
je eT. God r, 
xofv. Y¥ whome eper. 
speke 3e F. © 3our GaPeT. 
h men ox. hosebondis err. 
™ of the chirche er. of K. 


d salmes at. 


EPHESIANS. 


b Forwhi r. 


m slepist, in synne Q. 
q Therfore rv. 

¥ maad drunken caper. drunken r. drunke x. 
Z leccherie is ansx. is luxurie Gper. is leccherie r. 
e herte K. 
i heued co. heued, or gouernoure QT. 
© stoon, or lauoutoure oT. Om. vr. 


Vv. 9o—26. 


the sones of li3t. For the fruyt! of lizto 
is in al goodnesse, and rijtwisuesse, and 
treuthe. And preue 3e what ‘thing is™10 
wel plesynge to God. And nyle 3e co-11 
myne to vnfruytouse werkis of derk- 
nessis ; but more” repreue 3e. For what iz 
thingis ben don of hem in priuy, it is 
foule, 3he, to speke. And alle thingisis 
that ben repreuyd} of the 1i3t, ben 
opynli schewid; for® al thing that is i 
schewid, is li3t. For which thing heuer ae 
seith, Rise thou that slepist, and rise vp “8 *ere. ve. 
fro deth, and Crist schal liz3tne thee. 

Therfor, britheren?, se 3e, hou warli 3e15 

schulen go; not as vnwise men, but asic 

wise men, a3enbiynge tyme4, for the 

daies ben yuele. Therfor nyle 3e bei7 

maad' vnwise, but vndurstondynge which‘ 

is the wille of God. And nyle 3e beis 

drunkun of wyn, in which is letcherie, 

but be 3e fillid with the Hooli Goost; 

and speke 3e to 3ou silf in salmes, and 19 

ymnes, and spiritual songis, syngynge 

and seiynge salm in 30ure hertis to 

the Lord; evermore doynge thankingis 20 

for alle thingis in the name of oure 

Lord Jhesu Crist to God and to the 

fadir. Be 3e suget togidere in the drede2i 

of Crist. Wymmen, be thei suget to22 

her hosebondis, as to the Lord, for the2s 

man is heed of the wymman, as Crist 

is heed of the chirche; he zs sauyour of 

his bodi. But as the chirche is suget 2: 

to Crist, sot wymmen to her hosebondis 

in alle thingis". Men, lone 3e 3oure25 

wyues, as Crist louyde the chirche, and 

jaf hym silf for it, to make it holi; and 26 

clenside it with the waisching of watir, 

in the word of lijf, to 3yue the chirche27 


t that is, of 
holy men and 
good, that ben 


Vv ligtenesse 0. W and preue je vr. * come y. 
¢ Om. aMNOPSFWXY. ce in hem in 
¢Om.sxy. © for whiv.  ialle thingis c. 
2 a3ein ryse QT. © thing @. 
TOm. x. Sthetymes. + bot be 

Ww Om. Gmworerrx. or drunken s. 
afillid 7. » aud 

& sugetis Gp. 


l he is earper. 


f Be 3ce coor. Om. x. 
k heued coer. 


‘spiritk. ™ thingis ben k prem. more rathir 1. © forwhi a pr.m. ak pr.m. P my brithereu r. 


(the tyme R, ‘mana. § the which k prim. 


t so and A pr.m. a sec.m. ¢ pr.m. ho8. 


u thingis leeful R. 


Vv. 27-——VI. 8. 


2ajlyf; that he schulde 3yue? the chirche 
glorious to him silf, not hauynge wem, 
‘or spot4, or" ryuelyng®, or ony such thing*, 
28 but that it be hooli and vndefoulid". So 
and men schulen loue her wyues, as her 
owne bodies. He that loueth his wyf, lou- 
29eth himsilf; forsothY no man _ hatide’ 
euere his fleisch, but norischith* and fos- 
trith it, as and Crist doth the chirche. 
30 For we ben membris of his body, of his 
31 fleisch, and of his boonesY. For this thing” 
a man schal* forsake his” fadir and his* mo- 
dir, and he schal clyue to his wyf*; and 
thei schulen be tweyne® in o fleisch’. 
32 Forsoths this sacrament is greet; forsoth® 
331 seye in Crist, andi in his‘ chirche!. Ne- 
theles and 3e alle, ech man loue his wyf 
as him silf; forsoth the wyf drede hir 
hosebonde. 
CAPR. Vi. 
1 Sones, obeische™ 3e to 30ure" fadir® and 
modir?, in the Lord; forsothe this thing 
2is iust, ‘or ri3tful™. Honoure thou thi fadir 
and thi® modir, that is the firste maunde- 
3ment in thet biheeste’; that it ‘be wel’ to 
thee, and that thou be longe lyuynge ou” 
4the* erthe. And, 3eY fadris, nyle 3e terre 
joure sones to wraththe”; but norische 3e* 
hem in the discipline” and correccioun’, ‘or 
schastysing*, of the Lord. Seruauntis, 
obeysche® 3e° to fleishly lordis with dredef 
and tremblyng, in? symplenesse® of 3oure 
chertel, as to Crist; not seruynge at y3e*, 
as plesynge to men, but as seruauutis of 
Crist ; doynge the will of God ‘of ynwitt', 
7 or resoun™, with good will seruynge as 
sto the Lord, and not to men; witynge 
that ech man, what euere good thing" he 


Ptake er. 4 Om. emopor. Om. x. 
Vv for v. W hatith rv. X nirschith i rT. 
holy or. 2 thing, that is, for this trewe love er. 


d wyf, or felawschipe hym to hir in holynesse or. 


EPHESIANS. 


8 wrincle 0. Om. x. 


417 


gloriouse to hym silf, that it hadde no 
wem, ne ryueling’, or ony siche thing, 
but that it be hooli and vndefoulid. Sos 
and men ‘schulen loue* her wyues, as 
her owne bodies. He that loueth his 
wijf, loueth hym silf; for no man hatide29 
euere his owne fleisch, but nurischith 
and fostrith it, as Crist dotth the chirche. 
And we ben membris of his bodi, of his 30 
fleisch, and of his boonys. For this31 
thing a man schal forsake his fadir and 
modir, and he schal drawe to his wijf; 
and thei schulen be tweyne in o fleisch. 
This sacrament is greet; 3he, Y seie in 32 
Crist, and in the chirche. Netheles 3e33 
alle, ech man loue his wijf as hym silf; 
and the wijf drede hir hosebonde. 


CAP. VI. 

Sones, obeische* 3e toY 3oure” fadir1 
and modir, in the Lord; for this thing is 
ri3tful. Onoure thou thi fadir and thi*e 
modir, that is the firste maundement in 
biheest® ; that it be wel to thee, and thats 
thou be long lyuynge on the® erthe. 
And, fadris, nyle 3e terre 30ure sones to4 
wraththe; but nurische 3e hem in the 
teching and chastising of the Lord. 
Seruauntis, obeische® 3e to fleischli lordis s 
with drede and trembling, in simplenesse 
of 3oure herte, as to Crist; not seruynges 
at the ize, as plesinge to men, but as 
seruauntis of Crist; doynge the wille of 
God bi discrecioun, with good wille7 
seruynge as to the Lord, and not as to 
mel; witinge that ech man, what euere s 
good thing he schal do, he schal resseyue 


t thyng, of syne er. 4 ynfoulid x. 


Y boonys, semme 324 seek ar freele, and summe stronge and 
4 Om. G pr.m. 
© two GMPQSTX. 


b Om. kK. ¢ Om. emNnpervir. 
f fleische, acordynge in oo good 


wille or. g Om. r. h for o. iias q. k the AGMNOPQSTV WXY. l chirche, (his sacrament 
of wedlake to be kepte in this fourme or. “™obeieT. % Om. x. © fadereso.  P moderes 0. modir 
ofj3ou x. for whiv. Om. ogrx. *Om.G pr.m.s.  t Om. aGuNnopostyiv. 4 byheest, of the 
secounde table or. Vv wele be Gmpor. W vpon 7. x Om, rx. y Om. v. 2 wrath fuinesse r. 
8Om.T. )teching ry. © corepcioun xr pr.m. 4Om. ox. ,@ obeie rx. © Om. y.  f loxe, drede or. 
& with w. h symplenesse, or mekenesse or. i hertes os pr.an. k the eje srr. 1 bi discre- 
cioun vy. ™Om.ox. © Om. 7. 


¥ ether wrynkele K marg. W loue thei CEKMQRUXa pr.m. bceghoa8. schulen loue thet k pr.m. * obeie 
3e R. obeie koa. YOm. kK prom. 4% Om. «5. @Om. EL prem. qnga. the biheest rk. ¢ Om. 8. 
4 Om. E1qgke. € obeie ka. 


VOL. IV. 


3H 


418 


schal do, ‘this he schal resceyue® of the 
Lord, whethir seruaunt, whether fre man. 
9 And, 3e lordis, do? the same thingis4 tot 
hem, for3yuynge manacis ; witynge for’ her 
Lord and 3oure is in heuenes, and takynge 
loof persoones is not anentis God. Here 
aftirward, britheren, be 3e comfortid in 
the Lord, and in the my3t of his vertu. 
11 Clothe’ 30u with the armer" of God, that 
3e mown stonde ajens aspyingis’, ‘or 
izasaylyngis’, of the deuel. For* stryu- 
yngeY is not to vs a3ens fleisch and ‘blood, 
but azens* the*® princes and potestatis, 
a3ens gouernours of the world of thes 
derknessis >, a3ens spiritual thingis of 
13 wickidnesse, in® heuenli thingis’. Ther- 
fore take 3e the armer of God, that 3e 
mown a3enstonde in the® yuel day; and 
i4in alle thingis stonde parfyt. Therfore 
‘stonde 3ef, gird ‘aboute 3oure® leendis in 
sothfastnesse, and clothid> the’ haberioun 
15 of ri3twysnesse, and ‘schood the feet in 
makynge redy of! the gospel of pees™; 
isin alle thingis takinge the" scheeld of 
feith, in the® which 3e mown quenche alle 
the firy? dartis of the worste enmye4. 
i7 And take 3e the helm* of heelthe, and the 
swerd of the Gost, that is, the word of 
13God ; by al preier and bisechinge preiynge 
al tyme in spirit, and’ in’s himt wakynge in 
al bysynesse, and byseching for alle hooly, 
igand for me; that word’ be 30uun to me 
in openynge of my mouth, with trist for¥ 
to make knowun the mysterie* of the gos- 
20 pel, for which’ I am sett in legacie’, ‘or 
message*, in this cheyne; so that in it I 
be hardy for® to speke, as it bihoueth me‘. 
21Forsothe that aud 3e wite, what thingis 


EPHESIANS. 


VI. g-——21- 


this of the Lord, whether seruaunt, whe- 
ther fre man. And, 3e lordis, dof theo 
same thingis to hem, forjyuynge ma- 
naasis$ ; witinge that bothe her Lord and 
3oure is in heuenes, and the taking of 
persones is not anentis God. Her aftir-10 
ward, britheren, be 3e coumfortid in the 
Lord, and in" the mi3t of his vertu. 
Clothe’ 30u with the* armere! of God, i1 
that 3e moun stonde ajens™ aspiynges" 
of the deuel. For whi stryuyng is not toi2 
vs ajens fleisch and blood, but a3ens 
princis® and potestatis, azens gouernours 
of the world of these derknessis, a3ens 
spiritual thingis of wickidnesse, in he- 
uenli thingis. Therfor take 3e? the® ar-1s 
mere of God, that 3e moun ajenstonde 
in the yuel dai; and in alle thingis 
stonde’ perfits. Therfor stonde 3e, andi 
bet gird aboute" j3oure leendis in sothe- 
fastnesse, and clothid with the haburioun 
of rizjtwisnesse, and 3oure feet schood ints 
making redi of the gospel of pees. Inie 
alle thingis take 3e the scheld of feith, 
in which’ 3e moun quenche alle the firy 
dartis of ‘the worste’. And take 3e* the 17 
helm of helthe, and the swerd of the 
Goost, that is, the word of God. Bi alis 
preier and bisechyng preie 3e al tyme 
in spirit, and in hym wakinge in al 
bisynesse, and bisechyng for alle hooli 
men, and for me; that word be 3ouun is 
to me in openyng of my mouth, with 
trist to make knowun the mysterie” of 
the gospel, for which Y am set in mes-20 
sage in a chayne; so that in it Y be 
hardi to speke, as it bihoueth me. Andat 
je wite, what thingis ben aboute me, 


 schal resceyue this vy. P doth n. do 3ee @sTxy pr.m. 4theng oer. Tin. § that bothe vy. * Cloth- 


ith x. Uarmeso. VY the aspyingis er. 


wOm. ox. * For whi rv. 


¥ stryuynge, or batel er. 2 blood, 


that is, it is not (to vs T} to gesse that we mown vtterly distruye onre owne fleischely stiryngis, bot stryuc 


me in hope to owercome a3eines Qr. a Om. ox. 
aboue joure K. abonte the o. clad sx. 
that 3e prechynge touche not erthely affeccioun qr. 

T helm, thaé ts, hope er. 8 Om. o. ss Om. kK. 
spirit gr. seyntis N. holy men err. 
or priuytee QT. Y whiche gospel 9. 2 message o. 
the woord of God mai not be bounden Nn. 


fdoith Ex. do 3¢ KRegka. | § manassynges a. 
laarmers gk. ™ ajens the 1a. the k. 


prm. 4Om.8. ‘stonde 3e k.  § perfiztly a. 


¥ the woord of God Nn. the word y. 
8 Om. ox. 


hOm.k prom. 
0 assailyngis k. 
t be 3e KRabegkoaf. beth 1. 
k, W him that ts moost wickid 1. the worste enemy xke. 


b derenessis, whiche ben the deuyl and his lymes gr. 
¢ is to siryue in gr. “% thingis, or gostly vertues QT. © Om. G pr.m. 
i with the nr. 

Om. Nn. 


f stondith x. & aboute in 3oure 4. 
k the feet schod euper. !Om. Nn. ™ pees, 

°0Om. rx. Pfyrenn. 9 Om. o. deuel r. 
t On. G pr.m, swxy. hym, [it 7] that is, in that 
wOm, sx. * mysterie, 


bay. ¢€Om.sx. 4 me éo speke out ; 


i Clothe ye a pr.m. eg. = Om. h. 
othe princis curkmQruxabceghkoa8. P Om. 19 
waboue a. Y the which 


x Om. k pr.m. - ¥ mynysterie ag. 


210f the Lord Jhesu Crist. 


VI. 22——~24. 


ben aboute me®, what J schalf do, Titicus, 
my moost dere brother, and trewe myn- 
istre in the Lord, schal make alle thingis 
22knowun to 30u; whom I sente to 3o0u in- 
to® this same thing, that 3e knowe what 
thingis ben aboute vs, and' that he com- 
23forte 3oure hertis. Pees to britheren, and 
charite, with feith of God oure fadir, and 
Grace with alle 
meni that louen oure Lord Jhesu Crist in 
vneorupcioun. Ament. 


Here endith the epistle to E:phecies, and 
bigynneth the prolog to Philipencis’. 


eOm.tr. fOm.r. & forr. 


be it. y. 


EPHESIANS. 


bh Om. GANPOQT. 
| Here endith the epistle to the Effecies, and now bigynneth the epistle to the Philippenses. a. 


419 


what Y do, Titicus, my moost dere bro- 
ther, and trewe mynystre in the Lord, 
schal make alle thingis knowun to 30u; 
whom Y sente to 3ou for this same22 
thing, that 3e knowe what thingis ben 
aboute vs, and that he* coumforte 3oure 
hertis. Pees to britheren, and charite, 23 
with feith of God oure fadir, and of the 
Lord Jhesu Crist. Grace with alle men24 
that lonen oure Lord Jhesu Crist in vn- 
corrupcioun. Amen, ‘that is, So be tt. 


Flere endith the pistle to Efffecies®, 
and bigynneth the prologe on the pistle 
to Philippensis*. 


i Om. & pr.m. men. Amen. sxy.  * Amen. So 


Here eendith the epistel to Ephesies, and bygynneth the prologe of the epistel to Philippenses.o. Her 


endith the pistle to Ephesies, and bigynneth the pistle to Philipenses. a. 
No final rubric in Garpstx. 


neth the prologe to Philipensis. y. 


a Om. irhkfg. So be it. S 


Z 5e A pr.m. 


b Effesians 1. 


Here eendith Effesies, and bigyn- 


© and here mo. 4 From cimxacgkoa. 


Here endeth the pistle to Effesies; se now the prologe on the pistle to Filipensis. x. Here endith the epistle 


to Effesies, and bigynneth the prolog on the pistle to Colocensis. q. 
here bigynneth ptstle to Philippensis, with the prologe bifore. v. 


here bigineth the yistle to Filippensis. bh. 


Here endith the pistle to Effesies, and 
Heere endeth the pistle to Effesies, and 


No final rubric in aERe. 


3H 2 


PHILIPPIANS. 





The prologe in the pistle to Philip- 


enses*, 


PHILIPENCIs ben” men of Macedonye. 
Thes the® word of treuthe ytake’, stede- 
fastly stoode in the feith, neithir thei 
token false apostlis. ‘These the® apostle 
preiseth, wrytinge to hem by Epifrodith, 
fro Rome, out of prisoun. 


Here eendith the prologe, and bygynneth 
the epistel to the Philippenses*. 


The Epistle to Philipensis*. 


CAP. 


i Poul and Tymothe, seruauntis of Jhesu 
Crist, to alle ‘the hooly® men in Crist 
Jhesu, that ben at Philippis*®, with bi- 
2schopis and dekenes, grace to 30u and 
pees of God oure fadir, and of¢ the Lord 
3Jhesu Crist. If do thankyngis to my God 
sin al mynde of 30u evermore in alle my 


Here bigynneth the prologe on the pistil 
to Filippensis*. 


PHILIPENSIS ben> of Macedoyne. 
These whanne thei hadden resceyued the 
word of treuthe, stoden stidfastli® in the 
feith, and thei’ resceyueden not false 
apostlis. The apostle® preisith these‘, 
writynge to hem fro Rome, out of prisoun, 
bi Epafrodite. 


Jerom in his prologe on this pistle seith 
thuss. 


Here bigynneth the pistle to Fili- 


pensis*, 


CAP. I. 

Poul and Tymothe, seruauntis of Jhe-1 
su Crist, to alle the” hooli men in Crist 
Jhesu, that ben at Filippis, with bi- 
schopis and dekenes, grace and pees to2 
jou of God oure fadir, and of the Lord 
Jhesu Crist. I do thankyngis to my Gods 
in al mynde of 30u euere more in alle, 


2 From G. Prolog to Philipensis x, No initial rubric in osywy. No prologue in ampex. Inga 
rubric only. In n and T the prologue is of the second text. betho. ¢Om.vprm. 4 taken s. 


e Om. vr. f From o. Ende of prolo 


Sy 


bigynnynge the epistle. x. Here eendith the prologe, and bigyn- 


neth the epistil. w. No final rubric in syy. 2 From m. The pistle to Philipensis. py. No initial rubric 
in aGKNSTXY. homeli nN. hooly ¢. ¢ Philippensisxy. 4theo. ¢Om.r. fI forsothe ny. 


a Frome. Prolog. a. Jerom on Philpencis. &. The prologe of the pistil to Philipensis. Nn. Heere sueth 
the prolog on the pistil to the Philpensis. r. Prologus. r. No initial rubric in cr1xmquxabefghkoa. » ben 


men b. ©stiflyag. 4 Om.x pr.m. ¢ postleg. f hem. & From cqabchkoa. Here endith the prologe. 1. 

Jerom in his prologe seith al this. x. Jerome in his prolog on this epistle seith [al nx] this. MNX. 

Thus endith the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle to Philipensis. rR. Jerom in his prologe seith this on this 

pistle. vu. Here endith [the] prologe, and bigynneth the pistl. g No final rubric in aevef. @ Poul 

4 Philipencis. &, Here bigynuceth the firste pistle to Philippensis. m. No initial rubric in crxQruxabeghko. 
Om. b. 


I, 5-19. 


preieris for alle 3ou with ioye, makynge a 
sbisechinge on 30ure comunynge® in the 
gospel of Crist, fro the firste day? tili 
snow; tristnynge* this ilke thing, for! he 
that bigan in 30u a good work, schal per- 
7 forme til into the day of Jhesu Crist. As 
it is iust to me for™ to feele this thing 
for ‘alle 30u", for that I haue 3ou in herte, 
and in my boondis, and in defendyng and 
confermyng® of the gospel, ‘alle 3ouP for4 
sto" be felowis of my ioye. Forsothe God 
is a witnesse to me, hou I coueite 30u alle 
9in the bowelis of Jhesu Crist. And this 
thing I preye’, that 3oure charite be plen- 
tenuous more and more in science', ‘or 
1okunnynge, and in al witt; that 3e proue 
bettere” thingis, that 3e be clene and with- 
11 0ute offence” in the day of Crist; fulfillid* 
with the fruyt of ri3twysnesse by Jhesu 
Crist, into the heriyngeY and’ glorie of 
i2God. Forsoth, britheren, I wole 30w? for» 
to® wite, that the’ thingis that ben aboute 
me han comyn ‘more to the® profyte of 
13the gospel, so that my boondis weren 
maad knowun inf Crist, in ech moot halle, 
14and in alle othere placis; that mo of% 
britheren in the. Lord tristenynge® ini my 
boondis, more* plentenously! dursten with 
150ute drede speke the word of God. Summe 
forsoth and for ennye and stryf™, summe 
forsoth and for good wille, prechen Crist ; 
issumme forsoth of charite, witinge for" I 
17am putt in the defence of the gospel. For- 
soth summe of contencioun, ‘or stryf?, 
schewen Crist not ‘clenly, gessinge? hem 
for? to" reyse pressure’ to my boondis. 
18 What sothly ? ‘the whilet in" al maner, 
ether by contencioun’, ether” by treuthe, 
Crist is schewid; and in this thing I have 
ioye, but and* ‘in this thingy I schal haue 


PHILIPPIANS. 


421 


my preyeris for alle 30u with ioye, and 
make a® bisechyng on 3oure comynyng 5 
in the gospel of Crist, fro the firste day 
til nowe; tristenynge’ this ilke® thing, « 
that he that bigan in 30u a good werk, 
schal perfourme zt til in to the dai of 
Jhesu Crist. As it is iust to me to feele7 
this thing for alle 30u, for that Y haue 
3ou in herte, and‘ in my boondis, and in 
defending and confermyng of the gospel, 
that alle 3e be felowis of my ioye. Fors 
God is a witnesse to me, hou Y coueyte 
alle 30u in the bowelis® of Jhesu Crist. 
And this thing Y preie, that 3oure cha-9 
rite be plentenouse more .and more in 
kunnyng, and in al wit; that 3e preue 10 
the betere thingis, that 3e be clene and 
without offence in the dai of Crist; fillid1 
with the fruyt of ri3twysnesse bi Jhesu 
Crist, in to the glory and the® heriyng 
of God. For, britheren, Y wole that 3e 12 
wite, that the thingis that ben aboute 
me han comun more to the’ profit of the 
gospel, so that my boondis weren maad 13 
knowun in Crist, in ech moot halle, and 
in alle other placis; that mo of britheren 14 
tristinge* in the Lord more plentenously 
for my boondis, dursten without drede 
speke the word of God. But! summels 
for enuye and strijf, summe for good 
wille, prechen Crist; and summe of™16 
charite, witinge that Y am put in the 
defense of the gospel. But" summe of17 
strijf schewen Crist not cleneli, gessynge 
hein to reise tribulacioun to my boondis. 
But what? the°® while on al maner, ethir 1s 
bi oceasioun, ethir bi treuthe, Crist is 
schewid; and in this thing Y haue ioye, 
but also Y schal haue ioye. And Y19 
woot, that this thing schal come to me 


igioye. Sothli I woot, that this thing schal in to heelthe bi 30ure preyer, and the? 
€comyng co. 4QOm.s. ito Gcmpersec.m. vato Tpr.m. tristyng o. tristende sx. | that r. 
mOm.s. "30ualle caper. °coumforting vy. Pthatallese 7. 4Om.srx. 'Om.r.  § preye 
jou Q. tkunnyngeo. tQOm.ox. ‘the bettir n. offence, or greuance o. * 3¢ fillid y. ¥ preys- 
ingecmpor, Zofo. athatzevy. >%Om.srx,. COmv. Om. x. ¢ tomoreg. f tox. 
Zofthe o. 4} tristinge mNpostvw. trostende x. imorefory. kOm.v. | tristily o. ™ for strif x. 
that yr. ° Om. x.  P cleerly clensyng o. cleerly gessinge er. clerly gessende x. 4 Om. x. * Om. s. 
8 pressure, ether tribulacioun v. t Om. r. U on AGMNOPOSTVWX. Y occasioun ¥. W other arp. 
outher x. *Om.G prim. Y Om. r. 
C3eab. Om. k prim. 4 tristinge Ek. ¢Om.eprm.k. fOm.b. & entrailisr. Om. q. i Om. 


Ra sec.m. * tristenynge g. 1 Anda. ™ for aek. 


a For a. 


°Om.cprm. P bi the rR. Om. h. 


422 PHILIPPIANS. 


come to me into heelthe by 3oure preier, 
and the vndirmynistringe of the spirit of 
20 Jhesu Crist, vp? myn abidyng and* hope. 
For in no thing I schal be confoundid, ‘or 
schamed», but in al trist as euermore and 
now, Crist schal be magnyfied in my body, 
21ether by lyf, ether by deeth. Forsothe to 
me for‘ to lyue Crist is’, and for“4 to deie 
22wynnyng*. That if for‘ to lyue in fleisch, 
this is fruyt of work to me, and what 
231 schal cheese, I knowe not. Forsoth I 
am constreyned’ of twey" thingis, hau- 
ynge desyr fori to be dissolued, ‘or de- 
partid the soule fro body*, and for! to be 
with Crist, it is moche™ more bettere"; 
24forsoth® for? to dwelle in fleisch, it is 
asnedeful for 30u. And I tristinge this 
thing, wot that I schal dwelle", and* par- 
fitly dwelle to alle 3ou, to ‘3oure profyit* 
2¢6and ioye of" feith, that 3oure thankyng 
habounde in Crist Jhesu in me, by my 
27comynge eftsoone to 30u. Oonly lyue 3e 
worthily to the gospel of Crist, that 
where’ I schal come and se 30n, ether* 
absent I schalY heere of 30u, for? 3e stonden 
in o spirit of o wille, trauelinge to gidere 
28 to the feith of the gospel. And in no thing 
he 3e aferd of aduersaries*, the? which is 
to hem cause® of perdicioun, ‘or of dam- 
29 nacioun*; forsoth to 30u cause of heelthe. 
And this“ thing of¢ God. For it is 3ouun to 
30u for Crist, that not oonly 3e bileuen in 
to him, but also that 3e suffren for him ; 
30 hauynge the® same stryf‘, what ‘maner 
and‘ 3e sy3en in me, and now 3e han herd 
of me. 
,CAP. II. 

1 Therfore if ony comfort in Crist, if ony 
solace of charite, if ony felowschip of spi- 
rit, if ony’ entraylis® of mercy doyngel, 

2fulfille’ 3e my ioye, that 3e vndirstonde 


z after auper. bir. &in@. » Om. ox. 
v. fOm.sx. §& constreynynge @. 
1Om. sx. ™Om. rT. © beter éo me Gmper. 
dwelle vy. SandIschal x. t profit of you x. 
2 that y. 4 aduersaries, that pursuen 30u QT. 
or damnaeioun G sec.m. svwy. 4 this is ¥. 
er. &Om.T. } entrailis, or affecciouns er. 


q vndirstonding k. 
X see.m. 
aitish. 


t Crist Jhesu a. 8 in Eg. 


» abounde, eithir be plenteuous R. 


¢ Om. sx. 
htwo cmpetx. t Om. sx. 

° but 7. 

"and & pr.m. 
b Om, rx. 
€ is of QT. 
i doynge be in jou er. 


t aschamed 1. 
X that is, to be departid the body fro the soule k marg. departid R. 
¢ the k pr. m. 


I, 20—IIL. 2. 


vndurmynystring4 of the spirit of ‘Jhesu 
Crist", bi myn abidyng and* hope. For 20 
in no thing Y schal be schamed', but in 
al trist as euere more and now, Crist 
schal be magnefied in my bodi, ether bi 
lijf, ether bi deth. For me to lyue is2i 
Crist, and to die is wynnyng. That if to 22 
lyue in fleisch, is fruyt of werk to me, 
lo! what Y schal" chese, Y knowe not. 
But Y am constreyned of twei thingis, 23 
Y haue desire’ to” be dissolued*, and to 
be with Crist, 7¢¥ 2s myche more betere; 
but to? dwelle in fleisch, is? nedeful for 24 
3ou. And Y tristinge this thing, woot2s 
that Y schal dwelle; and perfitli dwelle 
to alle 30u, to 30ure profit and ioye of 
feith, that 3oure thanking abounde” ines 


_Crist Jhesu in me, bi my comyng eft- 


soone to 30u. Oneli lyue 3e worthili to27 
the gospel of Crist, that whether whanne 
Y come and se 30u, ethir absent Y here 
of 30u, that 3e stonden in o¢ spirit of of 
wille, trauelinge togidere to the feith of 
the gospel. And in no thing be 3e aferd 28 
of aduersaries, which is to hem cause of 
perdicioun, but to 30u cause® of heelthe. 29 
And this thing zs of God. For it is 
3ouun to 30u for Crist, that not oneli 3e 
bileuen in hym, but also that 3e suffren 
for hym; hauynge the same strijf, which 30 
3e saien in me, and now 3e han herd of 
me. 


CAP. II. 

Therfor if ony coumfort zs in Crist,1 
if ony solace of’ charite, if ony felou- 
schipe of spirit, if ony inwardnesse of 
merci doyng, fille 3e my ioye, that 3e2 


dis the cause gr. 44 Om, sx. ¢ is wynnyng 
K the body AGMNPSTY. gloss om. in ox. 
POm. sx. 4@ Om. 4GMNopsTYWwX. fT not 
wwhanneI y. *orax. yYOm. Fr. 
¢On.e@ pr.m. 4 Om. G pr.m, MNopeTX. 
ee Om. ¥. f stryf ajein enmyes oT. ff Om. 
k fille r. 


v desired Ek. 
y for it k. 
€ a cause Q. 


u Om. E. w for to 
Z for to e. 


d Om. k pr.m. fin k pr.m. 


Il. 3——~17- 


the same thing, hauynge the same! cha- 
rite, of o wille, feelinge the same thing ; 
3‘nothing™ by stryf, nether by veyn glorie, 
but in mekenesse, demynge ‘hi3ere to hem 
silf to gidere", ‘or ech® holdinge othere 
shizer in? vertud; not ech by him’ silf bi- 
holdinge what thingis ben her owne’, but 
5 tho’ thingis that ben of othere*. Forsothe 
feele 5e this thing in 30u, the" which and’ 
cin” Crist Jhesu; the* which whanne he 
was in the foorme of God, demyde not 
raueyn, him silfY for? to be enene to God ; 
7but he lowyde* him silf, takynge the 
foorme of a seruaunt, into? lyknesse of 
men maad, and in habyt founden as a 
gman. He mekede him silf, maad obedient* 
‘til to’ the® deeth, forsoth to thef deeth of 
seross®. For which thing and God en- 
hauncide him, and 3af to him a name that 
wis aboue al name’; that in the name of 
Jhesu ech kne be bowid, of heuenly thingis 
iand* erthely', and of hellis; and ech tunge 
knowleche, for™ the Lord Jhesu Crist is 
izin the glorie of God the fadir. ‘And so, 
my mooste dereworthe®, as euermore 3e 
han obeischid, not? in my presence oonly4, 
but moche more now in myn absence, 
worche 3e" with drede and tremblinge 
i330ure heelthe. Forsoth® it is God that 
worchith in 3ou, and‘ for" to wille’, and 
14for to perfoorme, for good wille.. Forsoth 
do 3e alle thingis withouten grucchingis 
isand doutyugis; that 3e be withoute pleynt, 
and the* symple sones’ of God, withoute 
reprof, in the myddel of a schrewid nacioun 
and weyward; among whom? 3e schynen 
igas 3yueris of 1i3t in? the world; holdynge 
to gidere the word of lyf to my glorie in 
the day of Crist; for I haue not runnen in 
17 veyn, ‘nether in veyn? tranelid®. But ‘and 


1Om. g@. ™ nothyng doynge, nethir er. 


thier eT. hizere than hemself togidere v. or holdende other he3ere x. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


4.23 


vndurstonde the same thing, and haue 
the same charite, of o wille, and feelen 
the same thing ; no thing bi strijf, nether s 
by veyn glorie, but in mekenesse, dem- 
ynge eche othere® to be hei3er than hym 
silf; not biholdinge ech bi hym silf what 4 
thingis ben his owne, but tho thingis 
that ben of othere men. And fele 3e thiss 
thing in 3ou, which" also! in‘ Crist Jhe- 
su; that! whanne he was in the formec 
of God, demyde not raueyn, that hym 
silf were euene to God; but he lowide7 
hym silf, takinge the forme of a ser- 
uaunt, and was maad in to the™ lick- 
nesse of men", and in abite was foundun 
asaman. He mekide hym silf, and wass 
maad obedient to the deth, 3he, to the 
deth of the cross. For which thing God 9 
enhaunside hym, and 3af to hym a name 
that is aboue al® name?; that in theio 
name of Jhesu ech kne be?P bowid, of 
heuenli thingis, of ertheli thingis, and 
of hellis; and ech tunge knouleche, that 11 
the Lord Jhesu Crist is in the glorie of 
God the fadir. Therfor, my most dere- iz 
worthe britheren, as euere more 3e han 
obeischid4, not in my presence onely, but 
myche more now in myn absence, worche 
3e with drede and trembling 3oure 
heelthe. For it is God that worchith inis 
30u, bothe to wilne', and to performe, for 
good wille. And do 3e alle thingis with 14 
out grutchingis and doutyngis; that 3e15 
be with out playnt, and symple as the 
sones of God, with out repreef, in the 
myddil of a schrewid nacioun and a 
weiward; among whiche 3e schynen as 
3yueris of 1i3t in the world. And holdei6 
3e togidere the word of lijf to my glorie 
in the day of Crist; for Y haue not run- 


. other an other to gydere to hem silf hee3er, or wor- 


°Om. w. PinecheQ. 4 Gloss 


omitted in ox. hem 4acmunporw. 3Om.r. 83 them. totheremenv. Om. rv. Y was as and 9. was and 
T. ~Om.9g. *Om. rx. YOm.s. 2 Om. sx. 4 meekide caper. lowide moost vy. loweth iw. » and 
toc. ¢ obedience 0. 4 vnto caper. *Om. ns. £Om. 7. & the cros sryxy. Om. Nn. inames o. 
k of ry. Om. x. lerthely thingis yx. ™thatv. = Therfore y. © derworthe britheren vy.  P? not oonly 
GMPQT. q Om. Guper. rOm.7T. §&Forv. t bother. tOm.sx. vwilney. WOm. sx. 
xOm.y. Yassonesy. “whiche y. ®into swxy. »& Om. xk. nether in voyde o. ¢I hane trauelid r. 

€Om.k prom. 4 which thing e. iwasalsot. & isin rR sec.m.g sec.m. ‘whicher, ™ Om. R. 
oman k., © ech ta sec.m. Punamesk pr.m. PP is A prom. obeied x. F wil k prim. 


424 


if4 I be offrid, ‘or slayn®, vponf the sacri- 
fice and seruyce of 3oure feith, I haue ioye, 
igand ‘to gidere® thank 30u alle. The same 
thing forsothe and 3e haueb ioye, andi ‘to 
iggidere) thanke* me. Forsoth I: hope ia 
the Lord Jhesu!, me for™ to" sende Ty- 
mothe soone to 30u, that and I be in® 
good ynwitt?, ‘or gladnesse4, tho" thingis 
20knowun® that ben att 3ou. Forsothe" I 
haue no man so of o wille, ‘or aeoord’, 
that is bisy for 30u with clene affeccioun, 
2i‘or desyre*. Forsoth* alle men seken tho 
thingis that ben her owne, not thoy that 
2eben of Crist Jhesu. Forsoth knowe 3e 
‘the assay’ of him, for as a sone to the 
fadir he seruyde with me in the gospel. 
23 Forsothe* I hope me? for® to sende hym 
to 30u, a noon as? I schal se what thingis 
24ben abowte me®. Sothely in the Lord I 
triste, for and I my silf schal come to 30u 
25soone. Forsothe I gesside it nedeful fort 
to sende to 30u Epaphrodite, my brother 
and euene worchere, and myn euene kny3t', 
forsothe 3oure apostle, and‘ the mynystre! 
260f my nede™, For" sothely he desyride 
3ou alle, and he was sorwful, ‘for that and° 
273e herden him maad syk. Forwhi and he 
was maad syk to? the deeth, but God 
hadde mercy on! hym; forsoth™ not oonly 
on’ hym, but also and on‘ me, lest I hadde 
2sheuynesse vpon® heuynesse. Therfore 
more hastely I sente hym, that ‘him seyn’, 
eft 3e haue ioye, and I be withoute heuy- 
zgnesse. ‘And so” resceyue 3e him with al 
ioye in the Lord, and haue 3e such maner 
so men* with honourY. Forwhi for the work 
of Crist ‘til tot deeth* he wente, 3yuynge 
his soule®, ‘that is, lyf*, that he schulde 
fulfille that that faylide to’ 3ou anentis 
my seruyse. 


4thon3 vy. © Om.ox. fonrx. er. 
eth sx. !Om. oa. ™ Om. srx. 
tho v. *ben knowen v. t abonte vy. ™ For rv. 
¢ Om. svx. 4 when r. 
tyme QT. ikny3t in aduersitee gr. 
and o. 9° therfore that rv. 
¥ whanne 3e han seyn rv. 


asTxy. >liyferr. * Om. oerrx. 


kin Gg. 

» til to r. 
w Therfore r. 
a of ry. 


8 ether togidere thanke K marg. 


K marg. VOm.k prim. Wsendeg. * Om. a. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


bh haneth sx. han rT. 
0 that I sehal r. 
v Om. ox. 
2 the ysaye G pr.m. that Y saye G sec.m. the experiment, or asaie gr. 
© me, or what schal byfalle of me or. 
1 sernannt GMPET. 
Gof emper. * Om. o. 
x Om. x. 


t for the 1a sec. m. on the R pr.m, in the h sec. m. 
y For for a sec. m. 


Il. 18—3o0. 


nen in veyn, nether Y haue trauelid in 
veyn. But thou3 Y be offrid or slayn on 17 
the sacrifice and seruyce of 30ure feith, 
Y haue ioye, and Y thanke® 30u alle. 
And thet same thing haue 3e ioye, and 1s 
thanke 3e me. And Y hope in the Lord 19 
Jhesu, that Y schal sende Tymothe soone 
to 3ou, that Y be of good coumfort, 
whanne tho thingis ben knowun that 
ben aboute 30u. For Y haue no man so20 
of o wille", that is bisi for 30u with 
clene affeccioun. For alle men seken tho21 
thingis that ben her owne, not tho that 
ben of Crist Jhesu. But knowe 3e the 22 
asaie of hym, for as a sone to the fadir 
he hath seruyd with me in the gospel. 
Therfor Y hope that Y schal sende hym 23 
to 30u, anoon as Y se what thingis ben 
aboute me. And Y triste in the Lord, 21 
that also my silf schalY come to 30u 
soone. And Y gesside it nedeful to sende 2s 
to 3ou Epafrodite, my brother and euene 
worchere, aud myn euene kny3t, but 
joure apostle, and the mynystre of my 
nede. For he desiride 30u alle, and hes 
was sorewful, therfor that 3e herden that 
he was sijk. For he was sijk to the deth, 27 
but God hadde merci on him; and not 
oneli on hym, but also on me, lest Y 
hadde heuynesse on heuynesse. Ther-28 
for more hastili Y sente~ hym, that 
whanne 3e han seyn hym, 3e haue ioye 
eft, and Y be withouten heuynesse. 
Therfor resseyue 3e* hym with al ioye29 
in the Lord, and haue 3e suche with al 
onour. For’ the werk of Crist he wente30 
to deth’, 3yuynge his lijf, that he schulde 
fulfille that that failide of 3ou anentis 
my seruyce. 


iandsog. jiOm.r. & thank- 
P coumfort vy. 4 Om. orx. ° whanne 

w Om. ox. * Forwhi rv. y¥ tho fhinges n. 
a Therfore r.  » that I schal r. 
fthatr. ¢€ Om.sx. 4} gon in mene 
™m need, mynystrynge to me oT. © For 
sofampor. tof GaNnpor. ton svx. 
Yalonourr. 2vntoGmuper. the deeth carp 


oof F. 


U ether accord 
2 the deeth r. 


Iii, 1-13. 


CAP. III. 


i Hennef forthward", my britheren, haue 
3e ioye in the Lord. For® to write to 3ou 
the same thingis*, forsoth to me not slow, 

2forsoth* to 30u! necessarie. Se 3e houndis, 
se 3e ynel workmen, se 3e dynisioun™. 

3Sothli we ben circumcisioun, that" bi spirit 
seruen to God, and glorien in Crist Jhesu, 
and not hauynge trist in the fleisch, 
4thou3 I haue trist and° in the fleisch ?. 
If ony other man is seyn for toT triste in 

5 fleisch’, I more, circumsidid' in the ei3tith* 
day, of the kyn" of Israel, of the lynage 
of Beniamyn, an Ebrew of Ebrews, vp 

6the lawe a Pharise, vp’ lone pursuwinge 
the chirche of God, vp’ ri3twysnesse that 
is in the lawe lyuynge withonte pleynt. 

7But whiche thingis weren to me wyn- 
nyngis, I haue demyde these" peiringis for 
sCrist. Netheles* I gesse alle thingis forY 
to be peyrement for the cleer science of 
Jhesu Crist. For whom I made alle thingis 
peirement, and I deme as toordis*, that I 
ywynne Crist, and that I be foundyn in 
him,-not hauynge iny ri3twysnesse that is 
of the lawe, bnt ‘that that” is of the feith 
of Crist®, that is of God rij3twysnesse® in 
10 feith, for® to knowe him, and the vertu of 
his rysinge a3en, and the felowschip of his 
passioun, J configurid, ‘or made lyk, to his 
udeeth, if on" ony maner Ii schal come, ‘or 
renne a3ens*, to! the™ resurreccioun that 
zis of deede men". Not that now I haue 
takun, or now am° parfyit; forsoth I sue, 
if on? ony maner I schal1 comprehende’, 
‘and in what thing’ I am comprehendid 
isoft Crist Jhesu. Bretheren, I deme me 
not for® to’ haue comprehendid; o thing 
forsothe, I forjetinge sothli tho thingis 


f Hennus cupsy. Thenne n. Hennes err. 
ibe it not er. wtisnotr. Kbuto. 130u tis vr. 


P fleische, that haue more matir 3if it were spedeful, than eny other oT. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


and to 30u 7 zs necessarie. 


425 


CAP. III. 

Hennus® forward, my britheren, hane1 
3e ioye in the Lord. To write to 3ou 
the same thingis, to me if is not slow, 
Se je2 
houndis, se 3e yuele werk men, se 3e 
dyuysioun. For we ben circumcisioun,3 
which bi spirit seruen to God, and glo- 
rien in Crist Jhesu, and han not trist in 
the fleisch, thou3 Y haue trust, 3he, ina 
the fleisch. If ony othere man is seyn¢ 
to triste in the® fleisch, Y more, thats 
was circumcidid in the ei3tthe dai, of the 
kyn® of Israel, of the lynage of Benia- 
myn, an Ebrew of Ebrewis, bi the lawe 
a Farisee, bi loue pursuynge the chirche 6 
of God, bi ri3twisnesse that is in the 
lawe lynynge with out playnt. But7 
whiche thingis were to me wynnyngis, 
Y hane demed these apeyryngisf for 
Crist. Netheles Y gesse alle thingis tos 
be peirement® for the cleer science" of 
Jhesu Crist my Lord. For whom Y made 
alle thingis peyrement, and Y deme as 
drit, that Y wynne Crist, and that Y be9 
foundun in hym, not hauynge iy ri3t- 
wisnesse that is of the lawe, but that 
that is of the feith of Crist Jhesu, that 
is of God the ri3twisnesse in feith, to 10 
knowe hym, aud the vertu of his risyng 
ajen, and tlie felouschiipe of his passioun, 
and be! maad lijk to his deeth, if on ony 1} 
maner Y come to the resurreccioun that 
is fro deth. Not that now Y hauet2 
takun, or now am parfit; but Y sue, if 
in ony maner Y comprehende, in which 
thing! also Y am comprehendid of Crist 
Jhesu. Bretheren, Y deme me™ noti3 
that Y haue" compreliendid; bunt o thing, 


fi forward aGNogTV Wy. g Om. sx. h theng o. 
™ conscisioun s. 4% whiche 7. © Om. ar. 3he rv. 
90m. stx. ttohafo. 8 the 


fleische Garper. ¢ circumcidid vir. tt ey3te y. " kynrede Guper. kynde x. Y after empor. bir. ¥ Om.o. 


these thingis 9. *Nereless. yYOm.sx. 2 Crist, my Lordy.  filthis sy. >that ato.  ¢ Crist 
Jhesu y. 4 the ristwisnesse y. ¢ Om. sx. fOm.c prom. mop. 8 Om. x. bofo. Om. x. iOm. r. 
* Om. or. lintor, ™Om.7r. "Om. x. Slama. P Om. acwnopesxy. 4 Om.r. © compre- 
hende, or éake oT. 8 in which thing alsoy. tonx. ino. UOm.svx. Vthat Iv. 


a Henne Kbe. Hen eh. > forthward ec. c yseyna. Om. E1kabceghkoa8. e¢kyndek. fas 
femee C pr.m.ac. &apeirement k. 4 conscience k prim. ito be ceimquac sec. m. e sec. m, ghko8. 
Tam gk. !Om.k prom. ™Om.k prim. "amb, 


VOL. IV. 31 


426 


that ben bihyndis, strecchinge my silf for- 
soth to tho thingis that ben the’ formere, 
14to the ordeyned thing, pursue to the pris 
of the hiz3e cleping of God in Crist Jhesu. 
is Therefore who euere we ben parfyt, feele 
we this thing’. And if 3e* vndirstonden 
othirY maner ony thing, and? that® thing 
16God schal schewe to 30u. Netheles to 
what thing we han comen, that we vndir- 
stonde the same thing, and that we par- 
17 fytli dwelle in the same reule. Britheren, 
be 3e my” foloweris, and wayte 3e hem 
that walken so’, as 3e han oure foorme. 
is Forsoth’ manye walken, whom® I hane 
seide oft to 30u, forsoth now and‘ I wep- 
inge seie®, the enemyes of Cristis cross, 
i9 whos ende deeth , ‘or perisching', whos 
god is the wombe, and glorie! in™ con- 
fusioun of hem, that saueren®, ‘or vndir- 
20 stonden®, ertheli thingis. Forsoth oure 
lynynge is in heuenes?; ‘wher of also we 
abyden the sanyour oure™ Lord Jhesu 
21 Crist, thes’ which schal refoorme the body 
of oure mekenesse, configurid, ‘or maad 
lyk*, to the body of his cleernesse, vp" the 
worchinge by which he may also make 
alle thingis suget to bym. 


CAP. IV. 

1 ‘And so’, my britheren moost derewor- 
the and moost desyrid, my ioye and my 
crowne, so stonde 3e in the Lord, moost 

2dere britheren*. I preie Eucodiam, and 
I bisech Syntesem, for* to vndirstonde the 

3same thing in the Lord. Also andy I* 
preie thee*, german felowe®, helpe thou 
‘the ilke® wymmen that traueliden? with 
me in the gospel, with Clement and othere 
my helperis, whos names ben in the book 

4of lyf. Ioye 3e in the Lord ener more; 

seft I seie, ioye 3e%. Be 30ure temperaunce’, 

‘or paciences, knowun to alle men; the 


PHILIPPIANS. 


I. 14—~IV. 5. 


Y for3ete tho thingis that ben bihyndis, 
and stretche® forth my silf to tho thingis 
that ben bifore, and pursue to the or-14 
deyned mede? of the4 hi3 clepyng of 
God in Crist Jhesu. Therfor who euere !5 
we ben perfit, feele we this thing. And 
if 3e vndurstonden in othere manere ony 
thing, this thing God schal schewe to 
jou. Netheles to what thing we han1é 
comun, that we vndurstonden the same 
thing, and that we perfitli dwelle in the 
same reule. Britheren, be 3e my folew-17 
eris', and weyte 3e hem that walken so, 
as 3e han oure fourme. For many walken, 18 
whiche Y haue seid ofte to 30u, but now 
Y wepinge seie, the enemyes of Cristis 
cros, whos ende zs deth, whos god is19 
the wombe, and the glorie in confusioun 
of hem, that saneren ertheli thingis. 
But oure lyuyng is in heuenes; fro20 
whennus also we abiden the sauyour 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, which schal re-2) 
forme the bodi of oure mekenesse, that 
is maad lijk to the bodi of his clere- 
nesse, bi the worching bi which he mai 
‘also make" alle thingis suget to hym. 


CAP. IV. 

Therfor, my britheren most derewor-} 
the and most desirid, my ioye and my 
coroun, so stonde 3e in the Lord, most 
dere britheren. Y preye Eucodiam, and 2 
biseches Synticem, to vndurstonde the 
same thing in the Lord. Also Y preye3 
and‘ thee, german felow, helpe thou the 
ilke wymmen that traueliden with me in 
the gospel, with Clement and othere myn 
helperis, whos names ben in the book 
of lijf. Toye 3e in the Lord euere more ;4 
eft Y seie, ioye 3e. Be 3oure pacyences 
knowun to alle men; the Lord is ni3. 


v Om. s. Ww thing, that is, this course or rennynge QT. X we SX¥Y. Y in other ry. 2 and in o. 
athisy. >» Om.o. © 80, ¢hal is, diligently byholde 3ee hem or. 4 ¥Forwhir. © whiche r. f Om. sx 
¥ prim, &seye hem Q. bis deeth cerv. 1 Om. oex. of whome cer. | the glorie sy. ™ in the r. 
into x. "vndirstondeno. © Om. emoposTrx. P heuen er. q whennus also QT. =‘ of oure r. 
8 Om. cmupeTr. tOm.osx. aftercuper. bir. vTherforer. WOm. x. *Om.sx. 3 Om. 
asvwxy. 2Om.Q. and thee aempervivxy. ?enen felaw x. ¢tho x. 4traueilen er. ¢ Om. r. 
f tholmoundenesse gr. § Om. ox. 

© strecchinge a1b. strecchide k, P ether prys K marg. 4Om.1pr.m. *folewisa. ' make also Rr. 


8 Y biseche b. +t Om. b. 


Iv. 6—18. 


6 Lord is ny3. Be 3e" no thing bisy, but in 
al preier and biseching, with doynge of 
thankingis, be 3oure axingis knowun at 

7God. .And the pees of God, that passith 
al witt, kepe joure hertis and vndirstond- 

aingis in Crist Jhesu ‘oure Lord‘. Fro 
hennus forth, britheren*, what euere thingis 
ben sothe, what euere thingis! chast, what™ 
euere thingis"® iust, what euere thingis® 
hooly, what euere thingis? amyable, or 
able for to be loued"*, what euere thingis® 
of good fame, if ony vertu, if ony preis- 
inge of* disciplyn, thenke 3e these thingis, 

9 that" and 3e han lerud’, and take, and herd, 
and seyn in me. Do 3e these thingis”, 

10and God of pees* schal be with 3ou. For- 
soth, britheren’, I ioyede greetly in the 

Lord, for sumtyme aftirward 3e ‘flouriden 
a3en” for* to feele for me, as and 3e fee]- 

i1iden>, Forsoth 3e weren ocupied’, I seie 
not as for nede, forsoth* I haue lerude, in 
whiche thingis I am, sufficient for‘ to be. 

121 can and& be lowid", ‘or mekid', I can 
and abounde, ‘or haue plente'. Kuery where 
and in alle thingis I am ordeyned™, and 
‘I can be fulfillid", and to® hungre, and? 

13to? habounde, and to™ suffre myseste’. I 
may alle thingis in him that comfortith 

iime. Netheles 3e han don wel, comunynge* 

isto my tribulacioun. Forsoth and 3e, Phi- 
lipencis, witen, that in the higynnyng of 
the gospel, whanne I wente forth fro Ma- 
cedonye, no chirche comunede" with me 
in resoun of ‘thing 3ouun’ and takun, no 
is but 3e allone. ‘For and to Tessalonyk 3e 
senten® oonis* and twyes ‘in toY vss to me. 

17 Not for I? seke 3ifte, but I requyre*, ‘or 
seke a3en, fruyt haboundynge in 3oure 

isresoun. Forsoth I haue alle thingis®, and 

i Om. rv. 


bh Om. rv. k Om. r prem. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


10m. or. 


427 


Be 3e nothing bisi, but in al preyer andé 
biseching, with doyng of thankyngis, be 
joure axyngis" knowun at God. And7 
the’ pees of God, that passith al wit, 
kepe 3oure hertis and vndurstondingis 
in Crist Jhesu. Fro hennus forth, bri-s - 
theren, what euere” thingis ben sothe, 
what euere thingis chast, what euere 
thingis just, what euere thingis hooli, 
what euere thingis able to be louyd, 
what euere thingis of good fame, if ony 
vertu, if ony preising of discipline, 
thenke 3e these thingis, that also 3e hany 
lerud*, and take, and heed, and seyn in 
me. Do 3e these thingis, and God of 
pees schal be with 3ou. But Y ioyede io 
greetli in the Lord, that sum tyme aftir- 
ward 3e floureden ajen to feele for me, 
as also 3e feeliden. But 3e weren ocupied, 
Y seie not as for nede, for Y haue lerudY 11 
to be sufficient in whiche thingis Y am. 
And Y can also be lowid, Y can also tz 
haue plentee. Euery where and in alle 
thingis Y am tau3t to be fillid, and to 
hungur, and to abounde’, and to suffre 
myseiste”*, Y may alle thingis in hyin1s 
that coumfortith me. Netheles 3e han14 
doon wel, comynynge to my tribulacioun. 
For* and 3e, Filipensis, witen®, that ini 
the bigynnyng of the gospel, whanne Y 
wente forth fro Macedonye, no chirche 
comynede with me in resoun of thing 
jouun and takun, but 3e aloone. Whiche i¢ 
senten to Tessalonyk onys and twies 
also in to vss to me. Not for Y seke 17 
3ifte, but Y requyre fruyt aboundinge 
in joure resoun. For Y haue alle thingis, 18 
and abounde®; Y am fillid with tho 
thingis takun of Epafrodite, whiche 3e 
° Om. 


mand what sy. %® Om. G pr.m. mper. 


empeT. P Om. Gauper. thing y. 4 loneable oor. Om. x. 'Om.esw. 1 Gloss.om.x. ‘Om. or. toro. 


u the whiche Garpery sec. m. 
Y brether r. 
or undurstoden QT. 
f£Om.srvx. SandIo. 4 bowid r. 

D to be fillid 7, 9° Om. esrx. POm.s. 
U comynge G pr.m. comounynge & sec. m. 
oonesN. Yalsointovr. 7 too. 


i Om. ox. 


mopeTvx. © this o, 
_ waxynge k. askyngiso. VYOm.b. WOm.R. 
eithir to be plenteuous R. 2% myseyse 1g. 8 Om.e. 


a sec. m. b pr.m. ho. 


Vv lernyd ewperwy. lernd r. 
Z ajein florischeden G pr.m. gr. azein floureden G sec. m. MP. 
© ocupiede in sum aduersite [aduersitees T] QT. 
k and I o. 
q Om. erx. 

Vv gouun thing ex. 
a 3ein seek G pr.m. azein seke arpeT. seke azen 0. 


x lernid EkqRegkoaf. 


b witen also Kmva sec. m. b pr.m. hof. 


W thinges in me @. * pees and of loue sr. 
® Om. svx._  feeliden, 
d for ov. ¢€ lerned pry. lerid ariv. 
10m. x. ™ ordeyned, either tau3t . 
rOm.qstx. Smysese N. * comyng G pr.m. o. 
Ww Whiche seuten to Tessalonik r. * and 
b Om. G prim. 


ylerned alii, 7% abounde, 
a8 also CEQxa pr.m. b sec. m, cegka. Om. KuRU 
¢ J abonnde ek. 


312 


428 


habounde; I am repleet4 with tho thingis 
takun of Epafrodite, thee which 3e sente 
into the odour of swetnesse, af couenable 
19 oost8, ‘or sacrifice’, plesynge to God. For- 
soth my God fulfille' al 3oure desyr, vp* 
20 his richessis in glorie in Crist Jhesu. For- 
soth to God and oure fadir be glorie into 
2iworldis of worldis. Amen. ‘Greete 3e! 
wel euery™ hooly man® in Crist Jhesu. 
22 Tho® britheren that ben with me, greeten 
3ou wel. Alle hooli men greeten 30u wel, 
moost sothli tho? that ben of Cesaris hous. 
23 The grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist be 
with 3oure spirit. Amen. 


Here endith the epistle to Philipensis, 
and bigynneth prolog to Colocencis4. 


4 fulfillid caper. fillid vy. © Om. vy. 
ifilr. after caper. vpon nN. bi v. 
P thei GuPeTVIVXY. 
censis. A. 


fand s. 


pensis, and bigynneth the prologe to Colosencis. v. 


4Om.k. © and here mko. fag. 
now the prologe ou the pistle to Colocensis. K. 
pistle to Colosensis with the prologe. v. 
Colocensis. b. No final rubric in aERe. 


PHILIPPIANS. 


& sacrifice G pr.m. s1PQT. 
1 Greeteth s. 
4 Here endith the epistle to Philippensis, and here bigynneth the epistle to Colo- 
Here eendeth the epistel to Philipensis, and bygynneth the prologe of the epistel to Colosenses. o. 
Here endith the pistel to the Philipenses, and bigynneth the pistle to the Colosences. Q. 


IV. 19—23.- 


senten in to the odour of swetnesse, a 
couenable sacrifice, plesynge to God. 
And my God fil alle 3oure desire, by 19 
hise richessis in glorie in Crist Jhesu. 
But to God and‘ oure fadir be glorie 20 
in to worldis of worldis. Amen. Grete2! 
3e wel euery hooli man in Crist Jhesu. 
Tho britheren that ben with me, greten 22 
3ou wel. Alle hooli men greten 30u wel, 
moost sotheli thei that ben of the empe- 
rouris hous. The grace of oure Lord 23 
Jhesu Crist be with 3oure spirit. Amen. 


Here endith the pistle to Philippensis, 
and: bigynneth the! prologe on the pistle 
to Colocensis. 


h Om. G pr.m. MOPOTX. 


Meche x. 2 Om. x. © The cwporty see.m. 


Here endith Phili- 


Here eendith the pistil to Filippensis, and bigynneth the 
prologe to Coloeensis. w. No final rubric in GupsTxy. 


& From crmqxacghkoa. Here endeth the pistle to Filipensis ; se 
Here endith the pistle to Filipensis, and here bigynneth the 
Here endith epistle to Filipensis, and here bigynneth the prologe to 


COLOSSIANS. 





Prolouge?. 


Co.LocEnsis> also thes as Laodicensis 
ben® men of Asye, and thei weren forgon® 
of false apostlis. And to thes the® apostle 
cam not him self, but thes also he corect- 
ith by his pistle‘; thei hadden herd sothli 
the word of treuthe of Archippis, the 
which took mynisterie into hem. Ther- 
fore the apostle, thennis' boundyn’, writ- 
ith* to hem fro Effecie bi Tyte, a dekene, 
‘and Honesym, acolite™. 


Here endeth the prologe®. 


The epistle to the Colocensis*. 


CAP. I. 


1 Poul, apostle of ‘Crist Jhesu, by the 
2wille of God, and Tymothe, brother, to 

hem that ben® at Colose’, hooly and feith- 
3ful britheren® in Crist Jhesu, grace to 30u 


a From y. No initial rubric in Kkosvw. 
the second text. » To Colocensis xy. 
£Om.o. than o. thenne sw. thanne r. 


pistle to Colosensis. Pa. 


GMNopeTVY. ¢betho. 4 Colocense Gunper. 


a Frome. Jeroms prologe on Colocencis. 5. 
the prolog on the pistle to Colocensis. n. 
¢ postle ceiKQuxabegoa. 4 postle g. 


on this pistle seith al this. Q. 
on the pistle of Poul to Colocencis seith al this. x. 
Colociensis. g. No final rubric in arrref. 
Here bigynneth the pistil of Colosencis. e. 
k sec.m.a.  ¢ Jhesu Crist ERcof. 


No prologue in 4empox. 
¢ beth ry sec. m. 
i ybounde ory sec. m. 
» From o. Ende of the prolog ; bigynnynge the epistle. K. 
Here bigynneth the pistle. wv. No initial rubric in aensrr. 
€ brether er. 


The prolog of the epistle to Colocensis. n. 
Prologus. 7. 
¢ From cunuabchkea. 
Here endith the prologe on this pistle, and here bigynneth the pistle to Colocensis. m. 
Thus endith the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle. n. 


Here bigynneth the prologe on Colosencis*. 


CoLocENnsis ben also Laodicensis. 
These ben of Asie, and thei hadden be 
disseyued bi» false apostlis. The apo- 
stlee hym silf cam not to hem, but he 
bringith hem a3en to correccioun bi epi- 
stle; for thei hadden herd the word of 
Archippus, that hadde vndurfonge the 
mynysterie in to hem. Therfor the 
apostle’, now boundun, wroot to hem 
from Effesie bi Titicus, the dekene, and 
Onesimus, the acolit. 


Jerome in his prolog on this epistle 
seith thise. 


Here bigynneth the pistle to Colocensis*. 


CAPs 1: 


Poul, apostle® of ‘Crist Jhesu®, bi the1 
wille of God, and Tymothe, brother, toz 
hem that ben at Colose, hooli and feith- 
ful britheren in Crist Jhesu, grace ands 


In w and rT tbe prologue is of 
4 foregoeris y. © Om.v. f epistell osyw. 
k wroot ovy. writsw. ™ Om. osrivy. 
No final rubric in spivy. 4 Fromm. The 
b Jhesu Crist 


Heere sucth 
No initial rubric in crkmguxacf. » of Eeko. 
Jerom in his prologe seith al this. k. 

Jerom in his prolog 
Jerom in his prologe 


Here endeth the prologe, and bigynneth the pistil to 
a Poulis cpistle to Colocencis. %. Here biginneth the pistle. t. 
No initial rubric in ckmqruxabeghko. 


b the apostle Eqgh 


430 


and pees of God oure‘ fadir and of the 
Lord Jhesu Crist. We don thankingis to 
God, and’ the fadir of oure Lord Jhesu 
4Crist, euermore ‘for 30u preiynge?’, we 
heeringe 3oure feith in Crist Jhesu, and 
the loue that 3e han into! alle hooly men, 
sfor the hope that is kept to 3ou in* he- 
uenes. The! which 3e herden in the word 
sof treuthe of the gospel, that cam to 3o0u, 
as and it is in al the world, and makith 
fruyt, and wexith, as™ in jou, of" that day 
in which 3e herden and knewen the grace® 
zin treuthe. As 3e lerneden? of Epaphras, 
oure etlene seruaunt moost dereworthe, 
the which is a trewe mynistre of Jhesu 
aCrist for 30u; the’ which also schewide 
gto vs 30ure louyng® in spirit. Therfore 
and we fro the day in which we herden, 
ceessen not for 30u preiynge, and axyuge, 
that 3e be fulfilled' with the’ knowynge 
of his will in al wysdom and goostly vn- 
iodirstondyng; that 3e walke worthily to 
God ‘by alle plesynge’ thingis, makingeW 
fruit in al good werk, and wexynge in 
ithe science of God, ‘in al vertu comfortid* 
vp’ the my3t of his cleernesse, in al pa- 
wcience and? long abidinge with ioye, do- 
ynge thankingis to God the* fadir, the? 
which® made vs‘ worthi in to the® partf 
13 of sort® of hooly men in 1i3t*. The! which 
delyuerede* vs fro the! power of derk- 
nessis™, and translatide into™ the kyng- 
14dom of the® sone ‘of his? louynge, in 
whom we han a3enbyinge and remyscioun 
isof synnes. The which is the ymage of 
God inuysible’, ‘that may not be seyn’, 
isthe firste bigetun of ech creature. For in 
hym alle thingis ben maad, in heuenes 
and in erthe, visyble and invisyble, ether 
trones, ether domynaciouns, ethir princi- 
patis, ether potestates‘', alle thingis ben 


COLOSSIANS. 


I. 4—16. 


pees to 30u of God oure fadir and of the 
Lord Jhesu Crist. We don thankyngis 
to God, and to the fader of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, euermore preiynge for 30u, 
herynge 3oure feith in Crist Jhesu, and 4 
the loue that 3e han to alle hooli men, 
for the hope that is kept to 3ou ins 
heuenes. Which 3e herden in the word of 
treuthe of the gospel, that cam to 30u, as6 
also it is in al the world, and makith 
fruyt, and wexith, as in 3ou, fro that dai 
in which 3e herden and knewen the 
grace of God in treuthe. As 3e lerneden7 
of Epafras, oure felawe most dereworthe, 
which is a trewe mynystre of Jhesu 
Crist for 30u; which also schewide to vss 
soure louyng in spirit. Therfort we frog 
the dai in which we herden, ceessen® not 
to preye for 30u, and to axe, that 3e be 
fillid’ with the knowing of his wille in 
al wisdom and goostli vndurstondyng ; 
that 3e walke worthili to God plesynge1o 
bi alle thingis, and make fruyt in al 
good werk, and wexe in® the science of 
God, and ben coumfortid in al vertu bi 
the mi3t of his clerenesse, in al pacience 
and long abiding with ioye, that 3e doiz 
thankyngis to God and to the fadir, 
which made 3ou worthi in to the part 
of eritage of hooli men in 1i3t. Whichis 
delyueride vs fro the power of derk- 
nessis, aud translatide in to the kyng- 
dom of the sone of his louyng, in whom 14 
we han a3enbiyng and remyssioun" of 
synnes. Which is the ymage of God1s 
vnuysible!, the first bigetun of ech crea- 
ture. For in hym alle thingis ben maad, 16 
in heuenes and in erthe, visible and yn- 
uysible*, ether trones, ether domina- 
ciouns, ether princehodes, ethir poweris, 
alle thingis ben maad of nou3t bi hym, 


ftheo. gandton. Om.o. 8&8 preiynge for3ou vy. bOm.sx. itorx. Kintog. 1Om.yr. 
m as it is N. as and or. 0 fro Fr. ° grace of God Nr. P lereden sx. q Om. Fr. r Om. Vv. 
slyuyng x. ¢ fillidy. %Om.sy pr.m. VY pleesinge by alle yr. that 3e make s. * coumfortid in 
al vertu y. Yaftercapor. biv. Zingr. ®andthev. >%Om.rx. Cthatx. sour, ¢ Om. 
Gprm. f party o. sort, or grace eT. eritage vy. bheig3ts. 'Om.r. kK delyuerec. |! Om. c. 
m derknesse ¥. vsintonr. ¢his wy prem. POm.Gpr.m. 4Om.¥. * visible o. vnuysible r 
passim. 8% Om. emoporx. either that may not be seynv.  * potestis c. 


d And therfore rR. 
k inuisible a. 


€ ceesiden b. 


f fulfillid k pr. m. 


fintok. Mbremissiounsk.  inuisible a. 


I. 17—28. 


17maad of no3t by him, and in him, and he 
is bifore alle, and alle thingis ben in hym. 
is And he is heed" of the body of the chirche; 
the’ which is the” bigynnynge, ‘or the 
Jirste thing of alle*, and theY firste bi- 
getun? of deede men’, that he be holdinge 
primacie>, ‘or the jirste dignyte*, in alle 
igthingis. For in hym it‘ pleside ‘to gidere® 
20al plente for‘ to inhabite, and by him alle 
thingis for’ to be reconsylid in to hym, 
he pesynge® by the blood of his cross, 
ether tho thingis that ben in erthis, ether! 
2ithat ben in heuenes. And whanne 3e weren 
sum tyme aliened, ‘or maad straunge*, 
2zand enemyes by witt in yuel werkis, now 
forsothe he hath recouncilid 30z' in the body 
of his fleisch bi deeth, for™ to haue 30u 
hooly, and vnwemmid, and with oute re- 
23 prof bifore hym. If nethelees 3e dwellen in 
the feith, foundid, and stable®, and vnmou- 
able fro® the hope of the gospel that 3e 
han herd, the? which is prechid in al4 
creature that is vndir heuene. Of which’ I 
24 Poul am maad mynistre, ‘the which now’ 


I* haue ioye in passiouns" for jou, and’ 


fulfille* tho* thingis ‘that faylen of the 
passiouns of CristY in my fleisch, for his 
25 body, that is the chirche. Of the* which 
I Poul am maad mynistre®, ‘or seruaunt?, 
vp® the dispensacioun of God, that is 
jouun to me in 3ou, that I fulfille’ the 
26word of God, the mysterie, ‘or priuete®, 
that was hid fro worldis’ and genera- 
ciouns. Now forsoth it is schewid to his 
27seyntis, to whom® God wolde" make ‘the 
richessis knowun' of the glorie of this* 
sacrament in hethen men, that! is Crist 
28in 30u, the hope of glorie. Whom we™ 
schewen, reprouynge ech man, and tech- 
inge ech man in al wysdom, that we 


v Om. rx. 
2 geten x. 


uheuyd Gc. heued oer. 
alle sy pr.m. YOm.oar. 
fOm.sx. 8 Om. sx. 
straunge s. 1Om. Gprm.o. ™ Om. sx. 
sand now y. *Om.sx. 4 passioun rv. 
fulle s. I fille y. * the prrx. 


w Om. xy. 
aOm. x. »} the firste dignyte 0. ¢Om.ox. 40m. s. ¢ Om.r. 
h pesing, or maad pees N. pesende to s pr.m. 

n stabled o. 
vand I er. 
¥ Crist, the whiche in my lot fallen to me to fuljille or. 


COLOSSIANS. 431 


and in hym, and he is bifor alle, and 17 
alle thingis ben in hym. And he is heed 18 
of the bodi of the chirche; which is the 
bigynnyng and the firste bigetun of 
deede men, that he holde the firste dig- 
nyte in alle thingis. For in hym it ples- 19 
ide al plente to inhabite, and bi hym20 
alle thingis to be recounselid in to hym, 
and made pees bi the blood of his cros, 
tho thingis that ben in erthis, ether that 
ben in heuenes. And whanne 3e weren 21 
sumtyme aliened, and enemyes bi wit in 
yuele werkis, now he hath recounselid 22 
3ou in the bodi of his fleisch bi deth, to 
haue 30u hooli, and vnwemmyd, and with 
out repreef bifor hym. If netheles 3e23 
dwellen in the feith, foundid, and stable, 
and vnmouable fro the hope of the gos- 
pel that 3e han herd, which is prechid 
in al creature that is vndur heuene. Of 
which Y Poul am maad mynystre!, and 24 
now Y haue ioye in™ passioun for 3o0u, 
and Y fille tho thingis that failen® of 
the® passiouns of Crist in my fleisch, for 
his bodi, that is the chirche. Of which 25 
Y Poul am inaad mynystre bi the dis- 
pensacioun of God, that is 3ouun to me 
in 30u, that Y fille the word of God, the 26 
priuyte, that was hid fro worldis and 
generaciouns. But now it is schewid to 
his seyntis, to whiche? God wold make 27 
knowun the richessis of the glorie of 
this sacrament in hethene men, which is 
Crist in jou, the hope of glorie. Whom 2s 
wei schewen, repreuynge ech man, and 
techinge ‘ech man" in al wisdom, that 
we offre ech man perfit in Crist Jhesu. 
In which thing also Y trauele in stryu-29 
ynge bi the worching of hym, that he 
worchith in me in vertu. 


x Om. ox. or jirste thing of alle 9. or the firste of 


ior gx. k Om. ox. and maad 

© forg. POm. ry. 9Om.x. * the whiche s. 
Ww fulfille, as is ordeyned to me and eche seynte QT. 
2 Om. QsTX. 


4 seruaunt @. aseruaunt r. %Om.oprx. Cafterer. bir. 4 filley. ¢ Om.ox. ‘the world s. 
the worldis xy. 8 whiche ry. h wills. wole y. i knowun the richessis yr. * his er. the whiche 
sacrament Qt. which yr. ™ 3e G. 

1'amynistrer1. ™ inthe K pr.m.R. % failidenk. ©Om.e. Pwhomi. 4 3e1pr.m. ‘alle 


men Q. 


432 


29 3yuen" ech man parfyt° in Crist Jhesu. In 
which thing and I trauele, stryuynge? vp4 
the worchinge of him, that he worchith in 
mie in vertu. : 

CAP. II. 

1 Sothli I wole ‘jou for to’ wite, what 
bisynesse I haue for 30u, and for hem that 
ben at Laodice, and whiche euere sayen 

2not my face in fleisch, that ‘the hertis of 
hem beS comfortid‘, thei" tau3t in charite, 
and ‘in to’ alle richessis of plente of vn- 
dirstonding, into the* knowyng of mys- 

3terie* of God, the fadir of Jhesu Crist, in 
whom ben’ al the? tresours ‘hid of wys- 

4dom and science*. Forsoth this thing I 

- seie, that no man disceyue jou in hi3the 

sof wordis. Forwhi ‘and if> I be absent in 
body, but by spirit I am with 30u, ioy- 
inge and seinge 3oure ordre® and the? 
sadnesse of that® 3oure bilene that is inf 

6Crist. Therfore as 3e han takun Jhesu 
7Crist oure Lord, walke 3e in hym, 3e% 
rootid and byldid® aboue in Cristi, and 
confermyd in the bileue, as and 3e han 
lerud’, haboundinge in hym in! doynge 
sof thankyngis™. Se 3e that no man dis- 
seyue 30u by philosofye and veyn fallace, 

‘or gilouse falshede", vp® the tradicioun 
of men, vp? elementis of this? world, and 

9not vp' Crist. For in hym dwellith bodilich 

19al plente of Godhede’. And 3e ben fulfillid' 
in him, that is" heedv of al principat and 

11 power. In whom and 3e ben circumsidid 
in circumcisioun not maad with hond, in 
nakidnesse of the body of fleisch, but in” 

12¢ircumcisioun of Crist; to gidere biryed 
to* hym in baptym, in whom and 3e han 
risun a3en by feith of the worching of 
God, that reyside hym fro deede men. 

13 And whanne 3e weren deede in giltis, and 
in the prepucie* of 3oure fleisch, he quyk- 


COLOSSIANS. 


I. 29—II. 13. 


CAP. II. 


But Y wole that 3e wite, what bisy-1 
nesse Y haue for 3ou, and for hem that 
ben at Laodice, and whiche euere saien 
not my face in fleisch, that her hertis2 
ben coumfortid, and thei ben tau3t in 
charite, in to alle the richessis of the 
plente_of the’ vndurstondyng, in to the 
knowyng of mysterie of God, the fadir 
of Jhesu Crist, in whom alle the tre-3 
souris of wisdom and of science ben hid. 
For this thing Y seie, that no man dis-4 
seyue 30u in hei3the of wordis. For thou3s 
Y be absent in bodi, bi spirit Y am with 
30u, ioiynge and seynge 3oure ordre and 
the sadnesse of 30ure bileue that is in 
Crist. Therfor as 3e han takun Jhesue 
Crist oure Lord, walke 3e in hym, and7 
be 3e rootid and bieldid aboue in hyin, 
and confermyd in the bileue, as 3e han 
lerud', aboundinge in hym in doynge of 
thankyngis. Se 3e that no man dis-8 
seyue 30u bi filosofie and veyn fallace, 
aftir the tradicioun of men, aftir the ele- 
mentis of the world, and not aftir Crist. 
For in hym dwellith bodilich al the ful-9 
nesse of the" Godhed. And 3e ben fillid 10 
in hyi, that is heed of al principat and _ 
power. In whom also 3e ben cireumcidid | 
in circumcisioun not maad with hoond, 
in dispoyling’ of the bodi of fleisch, but 
in circumcisioun of Crist; and 3e ben12 
biried togidere with hym in baptim, in 
whom also 3e han rise aj3en bi feith of 
the worching of God, that reiside hym 
fro deth. And whanne 3e weren deed i3 
in giltis”, and in the* prepucie of 3oure 


offre vy. © perfit, bothe Jewe and hethen man er. Pin stryuynge r. after er. bir. 1 30u to sx. 


that 3e yr. § he not o. 


‘t thei coumforte the hertis of hem r. 


uOm. GaPeTy sec.m. Vin tT. WOm. 


G pr.m. P@TY sec.m. * the priuytee er. YOm.r. 2Om.carper. and science of wisdam s. of wisedom 


and science ben hid v. of wisdam and kunnyng hid x. and science of wisdom hid y. 
4 Om. sx. of y. 
land in x. Om. y. 
q the rv. 


¢ ordre, or 30ure ordynel maner QT. 
hbild sx. ihim vr. * lernyd eanpory. 
emper. bir. P after aaperr. vp the sy prem. 


band p. thou3 r. 
g Om. GMpesTXY sec.m. 

n Om. ox. ° after 
$ the Godhede easrer. 


f Om. o. 
™ thankis cpr. 
T after GMPQTP. 


e Om. o. 


tfillid ry. “Om.o ¥ henyd cer, W Om. sy. * with yr. ¥ Om. x. 2 prepucie, or custom or. 


8 Om. E1KRbcehk sec. m. oa8. 
K marg. © 30ure giltis k. * Om. ca. 


tlernd Ke passim. lerned alii. 


uOm. EI pr.m. aga. V ether nakidnesse 


II. 14——Ill. 1. 


enyde to gidere 30u with hym; for3yuynge 
14to* 30u alle giltis, ‘or trespassis*, doynge 
awey that® wryting@ of decree, ‘or dome, 
‘that was ajens‘ 30u8, that was contrarie 
to 3ou>; and he took that' fro the myddel*, 
1spicchinge! it to™ the cross®, spoylinge® 
princepatis and poweris?, led out tristily4, 
openly ouercomynge hem in him silf. 
is Therfore no man iuge 30u in mete, or™ 
drynke, or in part’ of feeste day, or neo- 
i7menye', or of" sabotis, the’ whiche ben 
schadowe of thingis to come"; forsoth the 
18 body zs of Crist*. No man disseyue 3ou, 
willingeY in? mekenesse, and religioun* of 
aungels, the’ whiche thingis he hath not 
seyn, walkynge veynly; ynblowyn® with 
19 witt of his fleisch, and not holdynge* the 
heed®, of which al the body, by bondis 
and ioynyngis to gidere vndirmynistrid 
and maad, wexith into the® encreessyng 
200f God. Forsothe if 3e ben deede with 
Crist4 fro the! elementis of this worlde, 
what 3it as men lyuynge to the world 
2ideme 3e? Nether ‘3e schulen touche, ne- 
22ther taste, nether trete with hondis ‘tho 
thingis!, the™ which alle ben into deeth 
by ‘the ilke® vss, vp° preceptisP and tech- 
23ingis of men; the? whiche ben sotheli hau- 
ynge resoun of wysdom in supersticioun, 
‘or veyn religioun, or honour’, and meke- 
nesse’, and not fort to spare the body", 
not in’ ony. honour to the fulnesse of 
fleisch”. 
CAP. III. 
1 Therfore if 3e han risun to gidere with* 
Crist, ‘seke 3eY tho thingis that ben aboue, 
where Crist is sittinge in the ri3thalf of 


aOm.s. 6Om.cmoperx. then. 
Om. x. busy. iawey that r. 
on ¥. 2 crosse, clensynge it by his blode gr. 
atristily fra hem his chosen gr. Torin vr. 
mone, or of cryinge oT. “Om. osx. VY Om. F. 
this shadew signefieth Crist or, 
they. ¢bolnedy. 4 byholdyng o. 
that is, ful departid er. 1 Om. x. 
ampeT. bir. P comaundementis y. 4 Om, r. 
by these sygnys thei mown most desceyue Qr. 
V hauynge itin er.  fleische, as thei feynen or. 


Y ether synne K marg. 
fand veynly b. 4 the k. 


VOL. IV. 


2 of the gk. 
©€Om.r. fonb. 


COLOSSIANS. 


4 wryting, or obligacioun v. 
k mydil of 30u the synne of Adam or. 
° and he spoilinge r. 
8 party s. 
Ww comynge Fr. 
¥ willinge to teche rv. 
© heued cer. 
K touche 3e vr. 
r Om. ox. or veyn religioun svwy. 
t Om. sx. 
x in Crist with n. 


a ether doom k marg. 


3K 


433 


fleisch, he quikenyde togidere 30u with © 
hym; for3yuynge to 3ou alle giltisY, do-14 
ynge awei that writing of” decre® that 
was a3ens VS, that was contrarie to vs; 
and he took awei that fro the myddil, 
pitchinge it on the cros; and he spuylide 1s 
principatis and poweris, and ledde out 
tristili, opynli ouercomynge hem in hym 
silf. Therfor no man iuge 30u in mete, 16 
or in drink, or in part of feeste dai, or 
of neomenye?, or of sabatis, whiche ben17 
schadewe of thingis to comynge; for the 
bodi zs of Crist. No man disseyue 3ou, 18 
willynge to ¢eche in mekenesse, and re- 
ligioun of aungelis, tho thingis whiche 
he hath not seyn, walkinge veynli°, 
bolnyd with wit of his fleisch, and not19 
holdynge the heed, of which al the bodi, 
bi boondis and ioynyngis togidere vndur 
mynystrid and maad, wexith in to en- 
creessing of God. For if 3e ben deed 20 
with Crist fro the elementis of this4 
world, what 3it as men lyuynge to the 
world demen 3e? That 3e touche not, ne-21 
ther taaste, nether trete with hoondis tho ee 
thingis, whiche alle ben in to deth bi 
the ilke vss, aftir the comaundementis 
and the® techingis of men; whiche han 23 
a resoun of wisdom in veyn religioun 
and mekenesse, and not to spare the 
bodi, not in ony onour to the fulfillyng 
of the fleisch. 


CAP. Til. 


Therfor if 3e han risun togidere with1 
Crist, seke 3e tho thingis that ben aboue, 
where Crist is sittynge in’ the ri3thalf 


€Om.x. fOmx. gusy. 
1 puttinge Gc. ™in tor. 

P poweris, or feendis or. 

t neomenye, that is, the feste ae T] newe 
* Crist; that is, the treuthe hid vndir 


zOm.Nn. @thereligiomn vy. > tho thingis 
fwhome exper. & Om. G pr.m.y.  b Crist, 
10m.c prm. ™Om. rx. "that x. 9° after 


8 mekenes, for 
u bodie, sugettynge it with penaunce or. 
Y seketh x. 


b neomenye, etthir newe moon RK. 


434 


2God. Sauere’, ‘or vndirstonde*, 3e tho 
thingis that ben aboue, not tho that ben® 
svpont the® erthe. Forsoth’ 3e ben deede, 
and 3oure lyf is hid with Crist in God. 
4Forsothef whanne Crist schal appere®, 
3oure lyf, thanne and 3e schulen appeere 
swith him in glorie. Therfore sle 3e" 3o0ure 
membris, the! whiche* ben on! the™ erthe, 
fornycacioun, vnclennesse, leccherie, yuel 
couetyse, and auarice, the" which is seru- 
éage of symylacris ; for whiche thingis the 
wraththe of God cam vpon® the? sones of 
7vuobileuet; in the’ whiche and 3e walkiden 
sumtyme, whanne 3e lyueden in hem. 
3’Now forsoth® and ‘3e putte' awey alle 
thingis, wraththe, indignacioun, malice, 
blasfemye, foul word of 3oure mouth. 
9 Nyle 3e lyie, ‘or gabbe", to gidere, spul- 
luingeY the olde man with his deedis, and 
clothinge* the newe man, that is maad 
newe a3en into the knowynge of God, vpY 
uithe ymage of him that maad hym; wher 
is? not male and female, hethen man and 
Jew, circumcisioun and prepucie, barbar* 
and Scita, seruaunt, ‘or thrall”, and fre 
man®, but alle thingis and in alle thingis 
12Crist. Therfore clothe? 3ou, as the chosun 
of God, and hooly, and‘ the® loued ‘of 
God", the! entrailis of mercy, benygnite, 
and mekenesse, temperaunce, and* paci- 
igence; supportinge!, ‘or beringe™ vp to gi- 
dere, and 3yuynge® to 30u° silf, if ony man 
a3ens any hath ‘querel, or pleynt?; as and 
the Lord Crist4 3af™ to 3ou, so and 3e. 
14Forsoth vpon’ alle thes thingis' haue 3e 
charite, that" is the" bond of perfeccioun. 
is And the pees of Crist enioye™ in 3oure 
hertis, in the’ which and 3e ben clepid in 
o body, and ‘be 3e" kynde, ‘or fre of good 


COLOSSIANS. 


TH. 2—15- 


.of God. Sauere 3e tho thingis, that benz 
aboue, not tho that ben on the® erthe. 
For 3e ben deed, and 3oure lijf is hids 
with Crist in God. For whanne Crist 4 
schal appere, joure lijf, thanne also 3e 
schulen appere with hym in glorie. 
Therfor sle 3e 30ure membris, whiches 
ben on the erthe, fornycacioun, vnclen- 
nesse, letcherie, yuel coueitise, and auer- 
yse, which is seruyse of mawmetis; fore 
whiche thingis the wraththe of God cam 
on the sones of yvnbileue; in whiche7 
also 3e walkiden sum tyme, whanne 3e 
lyueden in hem. But now putte 3e aweis 
alle thingis, wraththe, indignacioun, ma- 
lice, blasfemye and foule word" of 3oure 
mouth. Nyle 3e lie togidere; spuyles 
je 30u fro the elde man with his dedes, 
and clothe 3e the newe man, that isio 
maad newe a3en in to the knowing of 
God, aftir the ymage of hym that made 
hyin; where is not male and female, he-11 
thene man and Jew, circumcisioun and 
prepucie, barbarus! and Scitaj, bonde man 
and fre man‘, but alle thingis and in 
alle thingis Crist. Therfor 3e, as thee 
chosun of God, hooli and louyd, clothe 
jou with the entrailis of merci, be- 
nygnite, and mekenesse, temperaunce, 
pacience ; and support 3e echon! other, 13 
and for3yue to 30u silf, if ony man a3ens 
ony hath a querele; as the Lord for3af 
to 30u, so also 3e. And vpon alle these 14 
thingis haue 3e charite, that is the boond 
of perfeccioun™. And the pees of Cristis 
enioye in 3oure hertis, in which 3e ben 
clepid in o bodi, and be 3e kynde. Thee 
word of Crist dwelle in 3ou plenteuousli, 
in al wisdom; and teche and moneste 


z Vndirstonde o. a Om. G pr.m. MopoTX. or vadirstondeth s.§ >%Om. x. ¢Om.x. on rx. 
© Om. sx. fForv. &appere, or schewe er. %Om.cpr.m iOmorx. that x. lofo. 
mQOm. x. 2"Om.r. Sonrx. Psucheo. 4d mysbeleues. 'Om.rx. § Butnowr.  ¢* putte 3e 


MPQT. potith s. 3e potteth x. 
x clad sx. clothid y. 
Yraely. ©Om.ox. 4 clotheth s. clothe 3e v. 
cety. iwith the r. k Om. ce pr.m. pesTrwxy. 
GMPQgT.  P pleynt, or querel s. querel x. 
bisily er. tt the whiche eaper. 


Yaftiry. Zitis@. 


u Om. GaP. 


& Om. EI pr.m. Q prom. ga. wordis k. 


man Rk. * Om. ir. 


u Om. AGK pr.m. MNOPQSTVWXY. 
4 barbara pery. barbarus r. 

€ Om. G sec.m. sv. 
1 beringe o. 
q Om. 7. 
uu enioie 3e rv. 


i barbarus, eithir straunge man R. 
lech x pr.m. gk. ech oon R sec.m. ha, “™ parfitenesse R. 


¥ spoilinge jou fro ry. W Om. G pr.m. 
b Om. cg pr.m. MopeTx. of 
fOm. up. £Om.e6mpery. » Om. 
m Om. ox. "%for3jeuynge err. ° 30ur 
‘forzaf ery. “onyx.  thingis, that is, more 
vOm. 7. Ww beth sx. 


J Scita, eithir knowen 


Ill. 16—IV. 4. 


is will or 37fte*. The word of Crist dwelle 
in 3ou plenteuously, in al wysdom, tech- 
inge and monestinge 30u silf in salmes, 
and ymnes, and spiritual’ songis, in? grace 
17 syngynge in 30ure hertis to the Lord. Al 
thing, what euere thing? 3e don, in word 
or in? dede, alle thingis in the name of 
thee Lord Jhesu Crist, doynge thankyngis 
isto God the’ fadir by hym. Wymmen, be 
.3e® sugetf to 30ure housbondis, as it  bi- 
ighoueth in the Lord. Men, loue 3e 3oure 
wyues, and nyle 3e be bitter to hem. 
20Sones, obeye® 3e4 to! fadir ‘and modir* 
by! alle thingis; forsothe this is wel ples- 
21 ynge™ to" the Lord. Fadris, nyle 3e terre 
3oure sones to° indignacioun, that thei be 
not maad of litel ynwitt, ‘or resoun?. 
22Seruauntis, obeye?? 3e by alle thingis to 
fleischly lordis’, not seruynge at y3e, as 
plesynge to men, but in symplenesse of 
azherte, dredinge the Lord’. What euere 
3e don, worche 3e of ynwitt’, as to the 
21 Lord and not to men; witinge that of 
the Lord 3e schulen take ‘retribucioun, o7 
3eldinge a3en', of heritage. Serue 3e to 
asthe Lord Crist. Forsoth" he that doth in- 
jurie’, ‘or wrong, schal resseyue that 
that he dide yuele; and accepcioun’ of 
persoones is not anentis God. 


CAP. IV. 


1 - Lordis, that that is iust and euene 
3yue* 3e to seruauntis, witinge that ‘and 
23e" han a° Lord in heuene. 
to? preier, wakinge in it, in doyngis® of 
3thankyngis; preiynge to gidere and for 
vs, that God opene to vs the dore of word, 
forf to speke the mysterie® of Crist; for 
awhich also I am boundun, that I schewe 


Be 3e bisy © 


COLOSSIANS. 435 


30u silf in salmes, and ympnes, and spiri- 
tual songis, in grace synginge in 3oure 
hertis to the Lord. Al thing, what euere 17 
thing" 3e don, in word or in dede, alle 
thingis in the name of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist, doynge thankyngis to God and to 
the fadir bi hym. Wymmen, be 3e su- 18 
getis® to 3oure hosebondis, as it bihoueth 
in the Lord. Men, loue 3e 3oure wyues, 19 
and nyle 3e be? bittere to hem. Sones, 20 
obeie 3e to 30ure fadir and modir bi alle 
thingis; for this is wel plesinge in the 
Lord. Fadris, nyle 3e terre 3oure sones21 
to1 indignacioun, that thei be not maad* 
feble hertid. Seruauntis, obeie 3e bi alle 22 
thingis to fleischli lordis, not seruynge 
at ize, as plesynge to men, but in sym- 
plenesse of herte, dredinge the Lord. 
What euer 3e doen, worche 3e of wille, 23 
as to the Lord and not to men; witinge 24 
that of the Lord 3e schulen take 3elding 
of eritage. Serne 3e to the Lord Crist. 
For he that doith iniurie‘, schal resseyue 25 
that that he dide yuele; and accepta- 
cioun® of persoones is not anentis God. 


CAP. IV. 


Lordis, 3yue 3e to seruauutis that that. 
is inst and enene, witinge that also 3e 
han a Lord in heuene. Be 3e bisi ine 
preier, and wake in it, in doynge of 
thankyngis; and preie’ ech for othere,3 
and for vs, that God opene to vs the 
dore of word, to speke the misterie” of 
Crist; for which also Yam boundun, that Y 4 


= Om. 0. lastynge in 00 good wille in alle these er. of good wil x. Ygoostlyo. Zandca. 20m. 
empor. © Om. er. © oure 4caMNopsywxy. dandthevy. ¢Om.v. fsngettes oy. & obesche msx. 
hOm.e. i to jour Gv. to the n. kOm.r. lino. M™plesidn. inv. o jin s. in to x. 
P Om. ox. PP obesche ar. 4 lordis, lordschipyng aftur the flesche vr. ® Lord God er. 8 witte rv. 
t retribucioun, or a3ein 3eeldinge ampor. reward o. 3eldinge vy. retribucioun x. 4% For vy.  Y¥ wrong o. 
w Om. ox. ¥ acceptacioun 4. takynge o. azeldeo. balsother. ¢coom.Om.x. 4inr. 
© doynge cunpostvrwxy. fOm.sx. & mynysterie xy. 

Xthingis R pr.m. © suget CErKMQRUXabceghkoo8. POm.@hpr.m. intoko.  * ymaad a. 
8 the ize Rk sec.m. 8. —* thal is, wrong e marg. _“ accepcioun cE1kmQruxabceghkoaf. _V preieth E. 


preie 3e R. W mynysterie bek. 


3K2 


436 


sit, so as it bihoueth me for" to speke. In 
wysdom walke 3e to hem that ben with- 
soute forth, ajen byynge tyme!. 3oure 
word be sauerid in salt, ‘that is, wysdom*, 
euermore in grace; that! 3e wite, hou ‘it 
bihoueth 30u™ for" to answere to ech man. 
7 Titicus, moost dere brother, and feithful 
mynystre, and euene seruaunt in the Lord, 
schal make alle thingis knowun to 3ou, 
sthat ben aboute me. Whom I sente to 3ou 
to this° same thing, that he knowe what 
thingis ben aboute 30u, and comforte 3oure 
ghertis, with Onesyme, moost dere and 
feithful brother, the? which is of 3ou; 
the? which’ schal make alle thingis that 
10 ben don’ here, knowun to 30u. Aristark, 
myne euene caytyf, ‘or prisoner with met, 
greetith 30u wel, and Mark, the cosyn of 
Barnabas, of whom 3e han take maunde- 
mentis"; if he schal’ come to 3ou, resceyue 
113e him; and Jhesus”, that is seid* Just; 
the’ whiche ben of cirecumcisioun; thei 
aloone ben myne helperis in the kingdom 
12 0f God, that weren to me in? solace. Epa- 
phras, that is? of 30n, the seruaunt of 
Jhesu Crist, greetith 3ou wel; euere bisy 
for 30u in preieris, that je stonde perfyt 
i3and ful in al the wyll of God. Sothli I 
bere witnessyng to him, that he hath 
moche trauel> for jou, and for hem that 
ben at Laodice, and that ben at Ierepo- 
uulym. Luk, leche® moost dere, and Demas, 
Isgreeten 30u wel. Greetith’ 3e wel the 
britheren that ben at Laodice, and Nym- 
pham’, and the chirche that is in his‘ hous. 
is And whanne this pistle’ ‘schal be! rad at 
30u, do 3e, that it be rad in the chirche of 
Laodicencis; and ‘that that! is of Laodi- 
17censis ‘be rad at* jou’, And seie 3e to 
Archyp, Se the mynisterie™, that thou hast 
takun of" the Lord, that thou fulfille® it. 
18 My salutacioun, by the hond of Poul. Be 


COLOSSIANS. 


IV. 5—18. 


schewe it, so as it bihoueth me to speke. 
Walke 3e in wisdom to hem that bens 
with outen forth, ajenbiynge tyme. 3oure 6 
word be sauered in* salt eueremore in 
grace; that 3e wite, hou it bihoueth 3ou 
to answere to ech man. ‘Titicus, most7 
dere brother, and feithful mynyster, and 
my felowe in the Lord, scha] make alle 
thingis knowun to 30u, that hen aboute 
me. Whom Y sente to 30u to this sames 
thing, that he knowe what thingis ben 
aboute 30u, and coumforte 3oure hertis, 
with Onesyme, mostY dere and feithfuls 
brother, which is of 30u; whiche schulen 
make alle thingis that ben doon here, 
knowun to 30u. Aristark, prisoner with 10 
me, gretith 30u wel, and Mark, the co- 
syn of Barnabas, of whom 3e han take 
maundementis; if he come to 3ou, res- 
seyue 3¢ hym; and Jhesus, that is seid 11 
Just; whiche ben of circumcisioun; thei 
aloone ben myn helperis in the kingdom 
of God, that weren to me in solace. 
Epafras, that is of 3ou, the seruaunt of 12 
Jhesu Crist, gretith 30u wel; euere bisi 
for 30u in preyeris, that 3e stonde perfit 
and ful in al the wille of God. And Y13 
bere witnessyng to hym, that he hath 
myche trauel for 3ou, and for hem that 
ben at Loadice’Y, and that ben at Ierapo- 
lim. Luk, the leche most dere, and De-14 
mas, greten 30u wel. Grete 3e wel the 1s 
britheren that ben at Loadicey’, and the 
womman Nynfam, and the chirche that 
is in hir hous. And whanne this pistle 16 
is red among 30u, do 3e, that it be red 
in the chirche of Loadicensis?; and rede 
3e that pzstle that is of** Loadicensis’. 
And seie 3e to Archippus, Se the myn-17 
ysterie, that thou hast takun in the Lord, 
that thou fille it. My salutacioun, bi the 18 
hoond of Poul. Be 3e myndeful of my 


h Om. sx. ityme, by prudence hou 3c schulen best edefie the pepul or. kOm.x. Jand that n. 
m 30u bihoneth x. 28 Om. sx. Othe x. POm.y. @Om. rx. that x. %Om.o0. Om. ox. 
u maundementis, how he departide frome or. vVOm.r. Wech wv. *Om.mur. YOm.r. 2 Om. 0. 
awaso. > tranelid an. ¢ the leche cuNnpoty sec.m.. Grete GmnposTyWwx. & the womman Nym- 
famvy. fherr. & episteleo. bisy. irede3e that pistlethaty. to emnpsxy. ‘10m. r. 
mmysterieg, inv. ° filler. 


x with gk. Ymy moost k. 


yy Laodice c et alii. 


z Laodicencis c ef alii. 22 at b. 


COLOSSIANS. 437 


3e myndeful of my boondis. The grace of boondis. The grace of the* Lord Jhesu 
the? Lord Jhesu4 be with 3ou. Amen. Crist> be with 3ou. Amen. 


Here endith the epistle to Colocensis, Here endith the pistle to Colocensis, 
and bigynneth the prolog to Tessalony- and bigynneth the° prologe on the firste 
censis", pistle to Tessalonicensis4, 


Poure ogT. ‘%Jhesu Crist ogr. * Here endith the pistle to Colocensis, and here bygynneth the fyrste 
epistle to Tessalonycensis. a. Here endith the pistic to Colocensis, and bigynneth the prolog, and aftur | 
the pistil to Thessalonycensis. n. Here endith the epistel to Colocensis, and bygynneth the prologe of the 
Jfirst epistel to Thessalonicenses. 0. Here endith the pistel to the Colocense, and bygynneth the fyrste pistel 
lo the Tessalonycenses. 9. Here endith Colocensts, and bigynneth the prologe to the firste ptstle af Tes- 
salonicensis. v. Here eendith Colosencis, and bigynneth prologe. w. No final rubric in eupsrxy. 


aourer. bOm.EQRbceghko. ©aa. 4 From crqxaca. Here endeth the pistle to Colocensis; se now the 
prologe af the firste pistel to Tessalonicensis. kK. Here endith the pistle to Colocensis, and here bigynneth the 
prologe on the pistle to Tessalonicensis. mgo. Here endith the pistle to Colocensis, and here bigynneth the 
firste pistie ta Tessalonycensis, with the prologe. vu. Here endith the pistle to Colocensis, and here begynneth 
the praloge on the firste pistle to Tessalonycensis. b. Here endith the pistle to Colocensis, and bigynneth the 
prolog to Tessalonicensis.h. Heere endith the pistle to Calocensis, and bigynneth the prologe ta Laodi- 
censis.n. Here eendith the pistil to [the x] Colosensis, and bigynneth a prolog on the pistil to Laodisensis. 
px. Here eendith the pistil to Colosensis, and bigynneth the prolog on the pistil to Laodicensis. s. Here 
endith the pistil to Colocensis, and biginneth the pistil to Laodicensis. w. No final rubric in arrek. 


LAODICEANS. 





+ Here bigynneth a prolog on the pistil to Laodicensis*. 


LAODICENSIS ben also Colocenses, as tweye townes and oo peple in maners. 
These ben of Asie, and among hem hadden be false apostlis, and disceynede manye. 
Therfore the postle® bringith hem to mynde of his connersacion and trewe preching 
of the gospel, and excitith hem® to be stidfast in the trewe witt and loue of Crist‘, 
and to be of oo wil. ‘But this pistil is not in comyn Latyn bookis, and therfor it 
was but late translatid into Englisch tunge®. 1 


Thus endith the prolog, and biginneth the pistil to Laodicensis*. 


Here bigynneth the epistle to the Laodicenses, which is not in the canon*. 


Poul, apostle, not of men, ne by man, but bi Jhesu Crist, ‘to the britheren that 
ben at Laodice, grace to 30u, and pees of God the® fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu 
Crist’. I do thankyngis to my God bi al my preier, that 3e be dwelling and 
lastyng in him, abiding the biheest in the day of doom. For neithir the veyn spek- 
yng of summe vnwise® men hath lettide jou, the whiche wolden turne 30u fro the 
treuthe of the gospel, that is prechid of me. And now hem that ben of me, to 
the profist of truthe’ of the gospel, God schal make disseruyng, and doyng be- 
nygnyte of werkis, and helthe? of" euerlasting lijf. And now my boondis ben 
open, which Y suffrei in Crist Jhesu, in whiche Y glade and ioie. And that* is 


* Poul, apostle, not of men, ne bi man, but bi Jhesu Crist, to the britheren that ben of Laodice, 
grace to 30n, and pees of God the fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu Crist. Gracis I do to Crist bi al 
myn orisoun, that 3e be dwellinge in him and lastinge, bi the biheest abidinge in the dai of doom. 
Ne he vnordeynede vs of sum veyn speche feynynge, that vs ouerturne fro the sothfastnesse of the 
gospel, that of me is prechid. Also now sehal God do hem leuynge, and doynge of blessidnesse 
of werkis, which heelthe of lyf is. And now openli ben my boondis, whiche I suffre in Crist 
Jhesu, in whiche I glade and ioie. And that is to me heelthe enerlastynge, that that I dide with 


+ This prologue and the version next following of the epistle to the Laodiceans are only found in 
mopgqrst uwx, and are printed from o. 4% The prolog to Laodicensis.q. Heere bigynneth the prolog to 
Laodicenses.t. No initial rubric in mprsuwx. b apostle mpqrstuwx. ©Om.m. © Crist Jhesu x. 
d epistle mqstuw. ‘¢ This paragraph is omitted in p. t Jerom in his prologe on this epistle seith 
thus. m, Jerom in his prolog seith this. sw. Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle.u. No 
final rnbric in pqrtx. 4 From t. No initial rubric in mopqrsux. b the apostle mt. ¢ oure rx, 
‘d Om. mtu. © of vnwise rx. f the truthe mt. 8 of helthe pqst. band mu. isuffrido. * Om. o. 


¢ This version of the epistle is taken from w, where alone it has been found. 


LAODICEANS. 439 


to me to euerlastyng helthe, that this same thing be doon by 3oure preiers, and 
mynystryng of the Holi Goost, either bi lijf, either bi deeth. Forsothe to me it 
is lijf to lyue in Crist, and to die ioie. And his mercy schal do in 3ou the! same 
thing, that 3e moun haue the same loue, and that 3e be of oo will. Therfore, 3e 
weel biloued britheren, holde 3e, and do 3e in the dreede of God, as 3e han herde 
the presence of met; and lijf schal be to 30u withouten eende. Sotheli it is God 
that worchith in 3ou. And, my weel biloued britheren, do 3e without eny with- 
drawyng what ever thingis 3e" don. Joie 3e in Crist, and eschewe 3e men defoulid 
in" lucre, ‘either foul wynnyng®. Be alle 3oure askyngis? open anentis God, and be 
3e stidefast in the witt of Crist. And do 3e tho thingis that ben hool4, and trewe, 
‘and chaast", and iust, and able to be loued; and kepe 3e in herte tho thingis that 
3e haue herd and take; and pees schal be to 30u. Alle holi men greten 30u weel!. 
The grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist be with 3oure spirit. And do 3e that pistil of* 
Colocensis to be red to 30u. 


Here eendith the pistil to Laodicensis*. 


oure preieris, and mynystringe the Holy Spirit, bi lijf or bi deeth. It is forsothe to me lijf into 
Crist, and to die ioie withouten eende. In vs he schal do his merci, that 3e haue the same louynge, 
and that 3c be of o wil. Therfore, derlyngis, as 3e han herd in presence of me, hold 3e, and do 3e 
in drede of God; and it schal be to 3o0u lijf withouten eende. It is forsothe God that worehith in 
vs. And do 3e withouten ony withdrawinge, what soeuere 3e doon. And that it is, derlyngis, ioie 
3e in Crist, and fice 3e maad foul in clay. Alle 3oure axingis ben open anentis God, and be 3e 
fastned in the witt of Crist. And whiche been hool, and sooth, and chast, and rightwijs, and 
lonable, do 3e; and whiche herden and take in herte, hold 3e; and it schal be to 3ou pees. Holi 
men greeten 30u weel, in the grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, with the Holi Goost. And do 3e 
that pistil of Colosensis to be red to 3ou. Amen. 


Here eendith the pistil to Laodicensis, and bigynneth a prolog on the firste pistil to 
Tessalonicensis. 


lthat mqrstux. + Ms.uendshere. ™ that 3e mpqrstx. “withs. ©°Om.q. P axingis mpqsx. 
4 goode-rx. *Om.st. 8*Om.s. *§Om.x. +¢ Heere endith the pistle to Laodicensis, and sueth the 
prologe on the first epistle to Tessalonicensis.m. Here endith the pistil to Laodisensis, and bigynneth the 
prologe on the -i. pistil to Tessalonicensis. ps. _ Here endith the pistle to Laodicensis, and bigynneth the 
prolog. i. Tess.q. Here endith the pistil to Laodisensis, and bigynneth the prologe to the firste Tessalo- 
nycencis. x. No final rubric in t. 


I THESSALONIANS. 





Prolog to the first pistle to Tessa- The prolog of the firste pistil to Thes- 
lonycensis*. salonycensis*. 
TESSALONYCENSIS ben men of Mace- THESSALONICENSIS ben Macedonyes 


donya. Thes the word of treuthe takun’, in Jhesu Crist. Whanne thei hadden 
stooden perfytly in the feith, and thanne  resseyued the word of treuthe, thei 
in pursuynge of her citeseyns; ferther- stoden stidfastli® in the feith, and also 
more also thei resseyueden not false® apo- _in persecucioun of her owene citeseynys; 
stlis, nethir the ilke thingis that weren ferthermore thei resseyueden not false 
seid of false apostlis. These the apostle’ apostlis, ne® tho thingis that weren seid 
preisith, writinge to hem fro Athenis, by of false apostlis. These the apostle@ 
Tyte and Onesym. preisith, writinge to hem from Atenys, 
bi Titicus and Onesimus. 


Ende of prolog ; bigynnyng the firste Jerome in his prolog on this pistle seith 
pistle®. this®. 


The first epistle to Tessalonycense*. Here bigynneth the firste pistle to 
Tessalonicensis*. 
CAP. I. CAP. I. 
1 Poul, apostle, and Siluan, and Tymo- Poul, and Siluan, and Tymothe, to thei 


the, to the chirche of Tessalonycensis*, chirche of Tessalonicensis, in God the 
in God, oure! fadir, and thee Lord Jhesu _fadir, and in the Lord Jhesu Crist, grace2 
2Crist, ‘grace to 30u, and pees’. We don and pees to 30u. We doon thankyngis 
thankingis to God euermore for alle 30u, to God euere more for alle 30u, and we 
makinge® mynde of 30u in oure preieris maken mynde of 30u in oure preyeris 


a The prologe in the first pistle to Tessalonycense.G. Prologus.v. Prologe.y. No initial rubric in swy. 
No prologue in acwpex; but in Garubric. In n and r the prologue is of the second text. » ytake or. 
‘the false s. apostlis x. ¢ Here endith the prologe, and bygynneth the epistil. o. No final rubric in 
SVIVY. 4From wu. The firste pistile to Tessalonycensis. pq. The first epistil to the Tessalonicenses. 1. 
Here bigynneth the first pistil to Tessalonisencis. w. No initial rubric in acknsvxy. >» Om.r. ¢ Tes- 
salonycense Pp. ‘theo. eoureo. inthe yr. f grace and pees to30u ry. & and we maken v. 


a From x. Jeroms prologe ta Thessalonicencis on the firste epistile. zr. Heere sueth a prolog on the 
Jirste pistle to Thessalonicenses. n. Prologus.'r. Here begynneth the prologe on the firste Thessaloni- 
sensis.e. The prolog on the firste pistil to Tessalonycensis.k. No initial rubric in actkmquxabefgho. 
b stifliag. ¢neither nN. 4 pistil b. postle egko. | © From cxmnxabchoa. Heere endith the prolog, and 
bigynneth the pisile. x. Jerom in his prologe seith this to Tessalonicensis. vu. Here endith the prologe, and 
bigynneth the pistile to Tessalonicienseis. g. No final rubric in aErrefk. % Poul to Thesalonicencis. gE. 
Heere biginnith the pistle. 1. No initial rubric in ckgruxabeghko. 


I. 4——II. 4. 


withoute ceessynge; we myndeful of 
‘zoure werk of feith', and traueil, and 
charite, and susteynyng™ of the hope of 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, bifore ‘the Lord! 
4and oure fadir. We witynge, 3e™ moost™ 
loued britheren of ‘the Lord®, 3oure ches- 
syng; for oure gospel was not at 3ou in 
word oonli, but inP vertu, and in the 
Hooly Goost, and in! moche plente; as 
je witen, what maner men we weren in 
630u for 3oun; and 3e ben maad oure 
foloweris, and of the Lord, resceyuynge 
the word in moche tribulacioun, with ioye 
70f the Hooly Goost; so that 3e ben maad 
fourme, ‘or ensaumple™, to alle men bi- 
leuynge, in Macedonye and in* Achaye. 
8Forsotht of 30u the word of the Lord is 
defamyd®, ‘or moche told’, not oonly in 
Macedonye and Achaye”, but in ech place 
joure" feith that is to* God, is parfyt’; so 
that it” is not? nede for? to speke ‘to-30u° 
g‘ony thing’. Forsoth® thei schewen of 
3ou, what maner entre we hadden to 3ou, 
and lou 3e ben conuertid to God fro 
symylacris, forf to serue to quyk God 
ioand very; and for to abide his sone fro 
heuenes, whom he reisyde fro deede men®, 
Jhesu*, that delyuerede vs fro wraththe to 
comynge'. 
CAP. II. 
1 Forwhi 3e witen, britheren, oure entre 
2to 30u, for it.was not veyn; but first we* 
suffrid', and™ punyschid with wrongis, ‘or 
Sals reprouyng™, as 3e witen in Philippis, 
hadden® trust in oure Lord, for? to speke 
‘to 30u% the gospel of God in moche bysy- 
3nesse. Sothli oure exortacioun’, ‘or fech- 
inge*, not* of errour, nether of" vnclen- 
4nesseé, nether in gile, but as we ben proued 
of God, that the gospel’ schulde be takyn” 
to vs, so we speken; not as plesynge to 
men, but to God that proueth oure hertis. 


hOm.x. i the werk of joure feith ry. * abyding r. 

T or exsaumple s. Om. x. 

V or greetly tolde cup. Om. ox. or greetly told oute to othir or. 

bOm.s. to us for r. 

i comen sx. 

q Om. a. 
W knowen r. 


Palsoinvy. 4Om. Ka. 
plischid r. 
xOm.o. Y goon forth r. 
fOm. sx. 8&8 Om. x. 

n Om. GMoPeTFX. 


fs not v. nether x. 


2Om.6 pr.m. no x. 
b the Lord Jhesu rv. 
° we hadde Nogr. 

u Om. x. 


P Om. sx. 


b bilowed b. 


K marg. 


¢ for to CEIK sec. m. Qxaheghkoaf. 
& Filipensis k, } ether teching K marg. 


VOL. IV. ry) 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


¥ gospel of God r. 


4 Om. rbh. 


441 


withouten ceessyng; hauynge mynde3 
of the werk of 3oure feith, and trauel, 
and charite, and abyding of the hope of 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, bifor God and 
oure fadir. 3e louyde? britheren of God, 4 
we witinge 3oure chesing; for oure gospel 5 
was not at 3ou in word oneli, but also in 
vertu, and in the Hooli Goost, and in 
myche plente; as 3e witen, whiche we 
weren among 30u for 30u; and 3e bené 
maad foleweris of vs, and of the Lord, 
resseyuynge the word in myche tribula- 
cioun, with ioye of the Hooli Goost; 
so that 3e ben maad ensaumple to alle7 
men that bileuen, in Macedonye and in 
Acaie. For of 3ou the word of thes 
Lord is pupplischid, not oneli in Mace- 
donye and Acaie, but 3oure feith that 
is to God, in ech place is gon forth; so 
that it is not nede to vs to® speke ony 
thing. For thei schewen of 30u, what9 
mauer entre we hadden to 30u, and hou 
3e ben conuertid to God fro maumettis, 
to serue to thet lyuynge God and veri; 
and® to abide his sone fro heuenes, whom 10 
he reiside fro deth, the Lord Jhesu, 
that delyuerede us fro wraththe to com- 


yee. 
CAP. II. 


For, britheren, 3e witen oure entre to! 
jou, for it was not veyn; but first we2 
suffriden, and weren punyschid with 
wrongis, as 3e witen in Filippist, and 
hadden trust in oure Lord, to speke to 
jou the gospel of God in myche bisy- 
nesse. And oure exortacioun® 7s not of3 
errour, nether of vnclennesse, nether in 
gile, but as we ben preued of God, that 4 
the gospel of God schulde be takun to 
vs, SO we speken; not as plesynge to 
men, but to God that preucth oure 


1God vr. ™Om.esr. ®the c.Om.r. © God r. 
8 Om. euper. tt For v. tmoche told o. pup- 
win Acaie sw. WW oure ¥. 
cOm.r. 1Om.o. ©& For r. 
lsuffring vy. ™and ben or. 
8QOm.ox. ¢ was not PET. 


k Om. x. 
T techinge o. 


eOm.b.  f ether false repreuynges 


442 


5 Forsoth* nethir we weren ony tyme in 
word of glosyng’, as 3e? witen, nether in 
Goccasioun of auarice; God is witnesse; ne- 
thir sekinge glorie of men, nethir of 30u, 
7nethir of othere, whanne we my3ten be* 
to charge® to 3ou, as Cristis apostelis’. 
But we ben® maad litle in the myddil of 
830u, as if a noryse fostre hir sones; so we 
desyringe 30u coueityngly, ‘or with greet 
loue', wolden bitake to 3ou, not oonly 
the gospel of God, but also oure soules8, 
‘or lyues*, for 3e ben maad to vs moost 
odereworthe. Forsothe!, britheren, 3e ben 
myndeful of oure traueil and werynesse ; 
ny3t and day we* worchinge, that we 
schulden not greue ony of 30u, prechiden! 
loin™ 3ou the euangelie of God. 3e ben 
witnessis, and" God, how hoolily, and 
iustli, and withouten querel’, ‘or pleynt?, 
11 to1 30u that bileueden, ‘we weren’. As 3e 
witen, how ech’ of 30u, as the fadir his 
12 sones, ‘preiynge and comfortynge 30u', we't 
han witnessid, that 3e schulden go worthili 
to God, that clepide 30u into" his kyngdom 
i3and glorie. Therfore and we don thank- 
ingis to God with oute ceessinge. F or 
whanne 3e hadden takun of vs the word 
of the heringe of God, 3e token it not as 
the word of men, but as it is verily, the’ 
word of God, that worchith in 30u that 
ishan’ bileued”. Sothli*, britheren, 3e ben 
maad foloweris of the chirchis of God, 
that ben in Judee, in Crist Jhesu, for and 
je han suffrid the same thinges’ of joure 
iseuene lynagis, as and thei of Jewis. The? 
whiche slowen and? the Lord Jhesu and 
the prophetis, and pursuwent vs, and thei 
plesen not to God, and to alle men thei 
1¢ben aduersaries’; forbedinge vs for® to 
speke to hethen men, that ‘the hethen 
men® be maad saaf, that thei fulfillee her 
synnes euermore; forsoth® the wraththe 


x For y. Y flaterynge or. 2 we K. 
4 apostlis, fo whome 3¢ schulden mynystre QT. 
mpetr. » Om. G prim. Mopyx. 3 Forwhi r. 
cofo. °pleynt Gmoper. P Om. Gsopx. 
coumfortinge ech y. *Om.r. Om. rv. 
x Forwhir. Ything x. 2Om.r. 2 bothe rv, 
e€Om. sx. f thei caroper. the heithin wx. 


i Om. R prem. 
Pwek. 9@Om.a. 


k Om. K pr.m. 
F Om. ak. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


a han ben er. 
© weren V. 
k Om. G pr. m. MPQSTX, 
q we weren to Vr. 
u too. 
b Jesu Crist ¢ sec.m. 
8 fille rv. 


-l wrou3ten re. worche ko. 


Il. 5—16- 


hertis. For nether we weren ony tymes 
in word of glosing, as 3e witen, nether 
in occasioun of auerise; God is witnesse ; 
nether sekinge glorie of men, nether of6 
jou, nether of othere, whanne we, as7 
Cristis apostlis, mi3ten haue be in charge 
to 30u. But wei weren maad litle in 
the myddil of 3ou, as if a nursche fostre 
hir sones; so we desiringe 30u with’ greet s 
loue, wolden haue bitake to jou, not oneli 
the gospel of God, but also oure lyues, 
for 3e ben maad* most dereworthe to vs. 
For, britheren, 3e ben myndeful of oure9 
trauel and werynesse; we worchiden! 
ny3t and day, that we schulden not 
greue ony of 30u, and prechiden to 3ou 
the euangelie™ of God. God and 3e bene 
witnessis, hou holili, and instli, and with 
outen pleynt, we weren to jou that bi- 
leueden. As 3e witen, hou we preyeden 11 
jou, and coumfortiden ech of jou, as the 
fadir hise sones, and we han witnessid, 12 
that 3e schulden go worthili to God, that 
clepide 3ou in to his kingdom and glorie. 
Therfor we doon thankingis to God with 13 
outen ceessyng. For whanne 3e hadden 
take of vs the word ‘of the heryng of 
God®, 3e token it not as the word of 
men, but as ‘it is® verili, the word of 
God, that worchith in 3ou that han bi- 
lened. For, britheren, 3e? ben maad 14 
foleweris of the chirchis of God, that. 
ben in Jude, in Crist Jhesu, for 3e han 
suffrid the same thingis of 3oure euene 
lynagis, as thei of the! Jewis. Whiche1s 
slowen bothe the Lord Jhesu and the 
profetis, and pursueden vs, and thei plesen 
not to God, and thei ben aduersaries to 
alle men; forbedinge vs to speke to he-i6 
thene inen, that thei be maad saaf, that 
thei fille her synnes euere more; for the 
wraththe of God cam on hem in to the 


> Om. G pr.m. MPQTY sec. m.. 
f£Om. ox. with etd loue QT. 


¢ chargeouse QT. 
& lyues G pr.m. 
we precheden os. ™ to Gor. 
TOm.ry. §& we preyinge 30u and 
vhisc prim. Whathy. W bileued into hym N. 
© pursueden viv. 4 aduersarie x. 


bh for v. 


mgospelR. "%Om.g. °Om.a. 


H. 17——Ill. re. 


of God bifore' cam vpon* hem til into the 
izende. Forsoth, britheren, we! desolat™ 
fro" 3ou ‘at the tyme® ‘of an hour?, ind 
bihooldynge’, not in herte, more plenteu- 
ously* han* hijzed for to se 3oure face 
18 with greet desyr. For’ we wolden comeW 
to 3ou, sotheli I Poul, and oones and eft- 
19soone*, but Sathanas lettide vs. Sothliy 
what is oure hope, or ioye, or crowne of? 
glorie? Wher* 3e> ben not bifore oure 
20 Lord Jhesu Crist in his comynge? For- 
soth”® 3e ben oure glorie and ioye. 


CAP. III. 
i For which® thing we susteynynge? no 
lengere, it® pleside to vs for to dwelle at 
2 Athenis aloone; and senten® T'ymothe, oure 
brother, and mynistre of God in the euan- 
gelie of Crist, to 30u, for to be conferm- 
yd, and tau3t', ‘or monestid*, for 3oure 
3feith, that no man be moued in thes tri- 
bulaciouns. Sothely! 3e™ silf witen, that 
4in this thing we ben putt. Forwhi and 
whanne we weren at 3on, we bifore seyden 
to 30u, vs to suffre tribulaciouns; as and 
sit is don, and 3e witen. Therfore and I 
Poul, not susteynynge", ‘or abidynge°, 
more, sente for? to knowe 3oure feith, lest 
perauenture he that temptith schal4 tempte 
jou", and oure* traueil be maad veyn. 
6 Now forsotht Tymothe comynge" to vs 
fro 30u, and tellingeY to vs 3oure feith and 
charite, and for* 3e han euermore’ good 
mynde of vs, desyringe” for® to se vs, as 
7we also 30u; therfore, britheren, we ben 
comfortid in 30u, in’ al oure nede and 
stribulacioun, by* 3oure feith. For now we 
9lyuen, if4 3e® stonden in the Lord. Sothlif 
what doynge of thankyngis mown’ we 
3elde to God for 3ou, in al ioye, in which 
10we ioyen for 30u bifore oure Lord? ny3t 
and day more plenteuously preiynge, that 


iOm.or. Konorx. !we ben n. 
tyme x. the tyme y sec.m. P by mouth err. 
antly cmpeT. twehan gr. %Qm.sx. ¥ For sothly vr. 


er. YForwhiv. or er. 
d suffrynge or. suffriden r. 
y sec.m. ‘to be tau3t r. 


© and it rv. 
k Om. Gmuoperx. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


m desolate, or withdrawen or. 
q Om. er. 


a Whether carperx. 

f Om. sx. 
i For rv. 

°Om.orx. POm.sx. 7Om.y. 'Om.v. $8 30nre F. 


4.43 


ende. And, britheren, we desolat fro 17 
3ou for a tyme, bi mouth and in bihold- 
ing, but not in herte, han hi3ed more 
plenteuousli to se 3oure face with greet 
desir. For we wolden come to 30u, 3he, 18 
Y Poul, onys and eftsoone, but Sathanas 
lettide vs. For whi what is oure hope, 19 
or ioye, or coroun of glorie? Whether 
3e ben not bifore oure Lord Jhesu Crist 
in his comyng? For 3e ben oure glorie2o 
and ioye. 


CAP. Ip 


For which thing we suffriden no len-1 
gere, and it pleside to vs to dwelle aloone 
at Atenys; and we senten Tymothe,2 
oure brother, and mynystre of God in‘ 
the euangelie of Crist, to 30u to be con- 
fermyd, and to be tau3t for 3oure feith, 
that no man be mouyd in these tribu-3 
laciouns. For 3e' silf witen, that in this 
this thing we ben set. For whanne we4 
weren at 30u, we biforseiden to 30u, that 
we schulden suffre tribulaciouns; as it is 
don, and 3e witen. Therfor Y Poul, nos 
lenger abidinge, sente to knowe 3oure 
feith, lest perauenture he that temptith 
tempte 3ou, and 3oure trauel be maad 
veyn. But now, whanne Tymothe schal 6 
come to vs fro 30u, and telle to vs 3oure 
feith and charite, and that 3e han good 
mynde of vs, euere desyringe to se ys, 
as. we also 30u; therfor, britheren, we7 
ben coumfortid in 30u, in al oure nede 
and tribulacioun, bi 3o0ure feith. Fors 
now we lyuen, if 3e stonden in the Lord. 
For what doyng of thankingis moun we9 
3elde to God for 30u, in al ioye, in which 
we ioyen for 30u bifor oure Lord? ny3t 10 
and dai more plenteuousli preiynge, that 
we se 30ure face, and fulfille tho thingis 


° for K ef alii, © Om. er. at 
¥ byholdynge, as in presence eT. 8 abound- 
whan cume gr. * eftesoone wold haue cumme 
bweer. bb Forrv. ¢ the whiche ery sec. m. 
& we senten r. h Om. 4 sec.m. GMNPQSTVIWX 
™ 3e 3006 GMPQTY sec.m. jou Sx. % suffringe r. 
t But now whanne rv. 4 schal come vy. ¥ telle r. 


~Om.o. x that 7. yOm.r. 2 euere desijringe r. 2Om.sx. Pandin kx. ¢forg. Ithat vy. © we mor. 


{For whir. & now nN, 


Sintok. 


t 30ur E. je jou R. 


toe) Bree 


444 I. THESSALONIANS. 


we se 3oure face, and fulfille tho thingis 

i1that failen of ® 3oure feith. Forsothe ‘the 
same Godi oure fadir, and the Lord Jhesu 

i2 Crist, dresse oure wey to 30u. Forsothe 
the Lord multiplye 3o0u, and make joure 
charite for’ to habounde in' to gidere™, 

13and into alle", as and we in® 30u; to 3oure 
hertis to be confermyd with outen pleynt 
in hoolynesse, bifore God and oure fadir, 
in the comynge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist 
with alle his seyntis. Amen. . 


CAP. IV. 

1 Therfore, britheren, ‘hennis forthward? 
we preyen 3o0u, and biseche in the Lord 
Jhesn, that as 3e han resceyued of vs how 
it bihoueth 30u ford to go and plese to 
God, so and walke 3e, that 3e habounde 

zinore. Sothely’ 3e wyten what comaunde- 
mentis I haue jounn to jou by the Lord 

sJhesu. Forsoth* this is the wille of God, 
3oure® makinge hooly", that 3e absteyne 30u 
4fro fornyeacioun. That ech of 30u kunne 
welde his vessel’ in ‘makynge hooly, ‘or 

5 hoolynesse*, andY honour ; not in passioun? 
of desyr*, as and ‘hethen men? that knowen 

snot God. And that no man ouergo*, nether 
disseyue his brother in cause, ‘or nede®. 
For the Lord is venger of alle thes thingis, 
as we bifore seiden to 3ou, and han wit- 

znessid, ‘or prouyd by autorite!, Sothlis 
God clepide not vs into vnelennesse, but 
sinto hoolynesse. ‘And so" he that dispisith 
thes thingis, dispisith not man, but God, 
ythat jaf! his hooly spirit in vs. Forsothe 
of the* charite of britherhed we hadden 
uot nede for! to wryte to 303; sothli™ 3e" 
silf han lerud® of God, that 3e loue to gi- 
iodere; ‘and forsothe? 3e don that4 into® alle 
britheren in al Macedonye. Forsothe, bri- 
theren, we preyen 3o0u, that 3e habounde 
limore; and 3yue werk’, ‘or bisynesse*, that 


III. 11—IV. tt. 


that failen to jouré feith, But Godu 


-hym silf and oure fadir, and the Lord 


Jhesu Crist, dresse oure weye to jou. 
And the Lord multiplie 30n, and make 12 
3oure charite to be plenteuouse of ech 
to othere, and in to alle men, as also we 
in 30u; that 3oure hertis ben confermyd 13 
withouten pleynt in holynesse, bifor God 
and oure fadir, in the comyng of oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist with alle hise seyntis. 
Alen. 


CAP. IV. 


Therfor, britheren, fro hennus for-1 
ward we preien 30u, and bisechen in the 
Lord Jhesu, that as 3e han resseyued 
of vs, hou it bikoueth 30u to go and to 
plese God, so walke 3e, that 3e abounde 
thet more. For 3e witen what co-2 
maundementis Y haue 3ouun to 30u bi 
the Lord Jhesu. For this is the wille of 
God, 3oure holynesse, that 3e absteyne 
jou fro fornycacioun. That ech of 3ou4 
kunne welde his vessel in holynesse, and 
onour; not in passioun of lust, as he-s 
thene men that knowen not God. Andé 
that no man ouergo, nethir disseyueY 
his brothir in chaffaring. For the Lord 
is venger of alle these thingis, as we 
biforseiden to 30u, and han witnessid. 
For God clepide not vs in to vnelennesse, 7 
but in to holynesse. Therfor he thats 
dispisith these thingis, dispisith not man, ° 
but God, that also 3af his holi spirit in 
vs. But of the’ charite of britherhed 9 
we hadden no nede to write to jou; 3e 
silf* han lerudY of God, that 3e loue 
togidere; for 3e don that in to alle bri-10 
theren in al Macedonye. And, britheren, 
we preyen 3ou, that 3e abounde more; 
and taken kepe, that 3e be quyet; and u 
that 3e do 30ure nede, and? ‘3e worche* 


htor. i God himself andr. kKOm.sx. 1Om.r. ™ togedir lo 30uresilf or. "alle men oT. °into G, 


P fro hens forward cr. hennes forward ety. henforward w. 


w holy, or 30ure halewynge or. 


v vessel, that is, his bodye, the whiche is vesset of the soule Qr. 


qa Om.sx. ' Fory. § For whi v. ¢ oure o. 
w halew- 


ynge gr. ¥Om. ogrx. Yandiner. % passioun, eithir coueitise yr marg. ® lust o. » folk of kynde auper. 


© by violence ouer go gr. 4 chaffaringe cause o. 
ialso jaf vy sec.m. kOm.y. 1Om. x. 
poy. lerid w. Pforv. that thing or. Tin vr, 


e Om. ox. 
m forwhi vy. 4 3¢ 30ur GMPQTY Sec. m. 30U OSX. 


8 traneile v. bisynesse x. 


h Therfore rv. 
© lernyd Gun 
t Om. ox. of bysynesse y. 


f£ Om. ovx. & For whi r. 


uOm.a. ¥ that is, in cause ether nede K marg. "Om.g. *30u silf xa. Y lerned plures. lered 1. 


Zand that K sec.m.  worche 3e IR. 


IV. 12——-V. 4. 


je be quyet", and do’ 3oure nede”, that* 
3e worche with 3oure hondis’, as we? han 
comaundid to 30u; and that 3e* wandre 
honestly to hem that ben withouteforth, 
that® of no mannis 3e desyre ony thing. 
12 Forsoth, britheren, we wolen not 30u ‘for 
to® vnknowe of men slepynge, ‘or dei- 
yuge®, that 3e ben not sorwful, as and 
i30there that han not’ hope®. Sothli" if we 
bileuen, that Jhesus was deed, and roos 
a3en, so and God schal lede with him hem 
uthat ‘slepten, or deteden', by Jhesu. So- 
theli this thing we seien to 3ou in the 
word of! the Lord™, for" we that lyuen, 
that ben residue’®, ‘or deft?, in the comynge 
of the? Lord, schulen not come bifore hem 
isthat slepten", ‘or deteden’. For he" the 
Lord" ‘schal come down fro heuene’, in 
the” comaundyng, and in the* voys off 
archaungel, and in the trumpe of God‘; 
and the deede men that ben in Crist, 
i¢schulen ryse a3en first. Aftirward we that 
lyuen, that ben left, schulen be rauyschid 
to gidere with hem in cloudis, meetynge 
to* Crist into” the eyr; ‘and so® euermore 
17 we schulen be with the Lord. ‘And so be 
3e comfortid’ to gidere in thes wordis. 


GALS V. 


1 Forsoth, britheren, of ‘tymes and mo- 
mentis® 3ef neden not that I write to 3ou. 
2 Also& 3e silf diligentli witen, fori the day 
of the Lord, as a theef in ny3t, so schal* 
scome. Sothli! whanne thei schulen seye 
pees™ and sikurnesse, thanne sudeyn® 
perischinge, ‘or deeth®, schal come ‘aboue 
toP hem, as sorwe to a womman ‘beringe 
4child4, and" thei schulen not scape. For- 
soth, britheren, 3e ben not in derknessis’, 
that ‘the ilket day as a theef catche 3ou. 


u quyetid w. VY that 3e do v7. doth w. Wowne need er. * and vr. and that x. 
b and that r. 
h For v. 
© left o. 
tt Om. or. 


we v. 4 that and 3e ¥ pr.m, and 3e V sec.m. 
fnone o. not in y.  & hope of a3einrisynge er. 
m Lord, for he techide it us eT. 9 that rv. 
bifore or. slepin w. §% Om. Nogsrx. ¢ Forwhi v. 
GMper. * Om. GmMper. 
40Om.r, bin cupeTxy. ¢so and ¥. 
f whenne this general resureccioun schal be, 3e ar. 
ithaty. & schalit er. ! For rv. ™ pees ts rv. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


Y of the Gaper. of an sy. 
4 Therfore coumforte 3e r. 

&§ For v. 
» sodeynli sx. 


445 


with 3oure hoondis, as we han comaundid 
to 30u; and that 3e wandre onestli to 
hem that ben with outforth, and that 
of no mannus® 3e desir ony thing. For, 12 
britheren, we wolen not, that je vn- 
knowe of inen that dien, that 3e be not, 
soreuful, as othere that han not hope. 
For if we bileuen, that Jhesu was deed, 13 
and roos ajen, so God schal lede with 
hym hem that ben deed bi Jhesu. And 14 
we seien this thing to 3ou in the word 
of the Lord, that we that lyuen, that ben 
left in the comyng of the Lord, schulen 
not come bifor hem that ben deed. For 15 
the Lord hym silf schal come doun fro 
heuene, in¢ the comaundement*, and in 
the vois of an archaungel, and in the 
trumpe of God; and the deed men that 
ben in Crist, schulen rise a3en_ first. 
Afterward we that lyuen, that ben left, 16 
schulen be rauyschid togidere with hem 
in cloudis, metinge Crist ‘in to? the eir; 
and so euere more we schulen be with 
the Lord. Therfor be 3e coumfortid 17 
togidere in these wordis. 


CAREY. 


But, britheren, of tymes and momentis 1 
3e neden not that Y write to 3ou. Fore 
3e silf® witen diligenth, that the dai of 
the Lord schal come, as a theef in the 
ni3t. For whanne thei schulen seie pees3 
és, and sikimesse, thanne sudeyn deth 
schal come on hem, as sorewe to a womn- 
man that is with child, and thei schulen 
not scape’. But, britheren, 3e ben not4 
in derknessis, that the ilke dai as a theef 
eatche jou. For alle 3e ben the soness 


Yowne hondis r. % and 
© to sx, that 5er. ddeiynge o. ¢ Om.ox. 
i dyen o. slepten x. k Om. exper. Jin s. 
pOm.ox. oureo. *' deieden o. slepten longe 
u Lord himself vy. ¥ Om. sper. ¥ Om. 
% God shal come doun fro [of er] henene sper. 
€ of momentus and of tymes sivxy. 
h 3e 30ure GPQTY sec.m. 3e 30U M. 30U OSX. 
°Om.eTx. Ptoo. ony. 4 hauynge 


in the wombe y. ‘that o. 8 derknessis of ignoraunce or. that x. 


* 


bman Kr. Cintoa. ¢¢ comaundementes q. 4 in K1K sec.m. b prom. ka, © 39ur self . 30u silf 1Ka. 


f ascape ef, 


446 
5Sothli" alle 3e ben the sones of ly3t’, and 
sones of day”; we* ben not of ny3t, nethir 
6of derknessis. Therfore slepe we not as 
and’ othere’; but wake*, and be we sobre. 
7Forsoth® thei that slepen, slepen in the 
ny3t°, and thei that ben drunken, ben 
sdrunken in ny3t*. Forsoth we that ben 
of the day, ben® sobre‘, clothid® the® ha- 
burioun of feith andi charite, and* the 
9helm, hope of heelthe. For! God puttide™ 
not vs into wraththe, but into" the® pur- 
chasyng of heelthe by oure Lord Jhesu 
10Crist, that was deed for vs; that where? 
we waken‘, where" we slepens, we lyue to 
i1gidere with him. For which thing ‘be 3e 
comfortid' to gidere, and ‘edifie 3e" ech 
l20thir, as and 3e don. Forsoth, britheren, 
we prelen 30u, that 3e schulen’ knowe hem 
that tranelen among 3ou, and ben bifore” 
to 3ou in the Lord, and monesten*, ‘or 
13 techeny, 30u, that 3e haue hem more ha- 
boundantli in charite; for? the work of 
i4hem, haue 3e pees with hem. Forsoth, 
britheren, we preien 3ou, reproue*, ‘ov 
chastyse*, 3e° vnquyete men. Comforte 3e 
men of litil herte’, resceyue 3e° syke men, 
15 be 3e pacient to alle men. Se 3e, that no 
man 3elde yuel for yuelf; but ewermore sue 
3e that that is good, togidere and into 
iralle men®. Euermore ioye 3e; with oute 
i8ceessynge preie 3e; in alle thingis do 3e 
thankyngish, Forsothe’ this is the wille 
of God in Crist Jhesu, and* in alle 3o0u. 
3 Nyle 3e ‘quenche the spirit!; nyle 3e dis- 
2ipise prophecies. Forsoth™ proue je alle 
thingis, holde 3e that thing that is good. 
22 Absteyne™ 30u° fro al yuel spice, ‘or Lik- 
23nesse?. Forsothe ‘the same God4 of pees 
make 3o0u hooly by alle thingis, that 3oure 
spirit be kept hool, and soule, and body, 


with oute playnt, in the comynge of oure 


«For py. ¥ ly3t, or of byleue er. 

M pr.m. Netr. walke y.  » For r. 
we sobre G@ sec. m. 
by er. and in r. 1 For whi yr, 
4 waaken, lyuynge here er. 
v Om. y. ¥ souereyns F. 

or chastiseth s. 
to eny man FP. 


W the day or. 


m putte sx. 


x techen o. 

¢ Om. GuPosTx. 
& Om. x. 
© 3e jou 0. 


POm. sx. 4 God himself r. 


& Om. Ehkop. h for a. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


X 3e OT. 
© ny3t of vices er. 
8 clad sx. clothid, or defendide by or. hinthe ry. i-and of err. 
Din Q. 
t whether emoroTvwxy. 
y Om. ox. 2 and for r. 
d herte, that they dispeire not or. 
h thanckyngis éo God er. 
grace of God in 30u Q. quenche the spirit, or hide the grace of God in 30u T. 


i Om. R prim. 


Vv. 5 —23. 


of li3t, and sones of dai; we ben not of 

ni3t, nether of derknessis. Therfor slepes 

we not as othere; but wake we, and be 

we sobre. For thei that slepent, slepen in7 + in tustis and 

the ni3t, and thei that ben drunkun, ben (moar 

drunkun in the niz3t. But we that bens (morauiee, 

of the dai, ben sobre, clothid in the 

haburioun of feith and of charite, and 

in the helme of hope of heelthe. Forg ie ee 

God puttide not vs in to wraththe, but 476, Euver 

in to the® purchasing of heelthe bi oure 7s! thatis, 

Lord Jhesu Crist, that was deed for vs; 10 bia zi ie 
herto, that thei 

that" whether we waken, whether we _ forsete ever 

slepen, we lyue togidere with him. Foru mere 

which thing comforte 3e togidere, and hese temporal 

edefie 3e ech other, as 3e doon. And, 12 Glose here. ve. 

britheren, we preien 30u, that 3e knowen 

hem that trauelen among 3ou, and ben 

souereyns to 30u in the Lord, and techien 

3ou, that 3e han hem more aboundantliis 

in charyte; and for the werk of hem, 

haue 3e pees with hem. And, britheren, 14 

we preien 30u, repreue 3e! vnpesible men, 

Coumforte 3e men of litil herte, resseyue 

3e sijke men, be 3e pacient to alle men. 

Se 3e, that no man 3elde yuel for. yuel is 

to ony man; but euere more sue 3e that 

that is good, ech to othere and to alle 

men. Kuere more ioye 3e; without - 

ceessing preye 3e; in alle thingis do 3e18 

thankyngis. For this is the wille of God 

in Crist Jhesu, in alle 3ou. Nyle 3e19 

quenche the spirit; nyle 3e dispise pro-20 

phecies. But preue 3e alle thingis, and 21 

holde 3e that thing that is good. Ab-22 

steyne* 3ou fro al yuel spice. And God 23 

hym silf of pees make 3ou hooli bi alle 

thingis, that 3oure spirit be kept hool, 

and soule, and bodi, without pleynt, in 

the comyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 

God is trewe, that clepide 30u, which 24 


sofre seith in 
iii. bok fe of] 
Etikis, ech yuel 


y Om. a. 
4 the ny3t srr. 


Z other don eT. ® wake we 
€ be @ sec.m. f Om.c pr.m. 
k Om, esp. and 
P whether GmopeTriwxy. 

t coumforte 3e vy. ¥ edefieth x. 
a repreue 3ee GupesTrx. > Om. o. 
© 3e, as good leches or. f yuel 
k Om. rv. | quenche, or hyde the 
m™ Bot v. -2 Absteneth s. 


° Om. emer. 
® dyen gr. 


i For whi r. 


k And absteyne k. 


V. 24—28, I. THESSALONIANS. 447 


21Lord Jhesu Crist. God is trewe, that also schal do. Britheren, preye 3e for 25 
clepide 30u', the’ which also schal do‘. vs. Grete 3e wel alle britheren in hooli26 
+? Britheren, preie 3e for vs. ‘Greete 3e" wel cos. Y coniure! 30u bi the Lord, that 27 
27alle’ britheren in hooly coss. I coniure this pistle™ be red to alle hooli britheren. 
3ou by the Lord, that this pistle” be rad The grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist be26 
2g to alle hooly britheren. The grace of oure with 3ou". Amen. 


Lord Jhesu Crist be with 3ou allex. Amen. 
: Here endeth the firste pistle to Tes- 


Here endith the firste pistle to Tessa- _ salonicensis, and bigynneth the prologe 
lonycensis, and bigynneth the prologe to on the secunde pistle to Tessalonicensis®. 
the secunde pistley. 


F3outolyfer. sOm.v. do mere of grace in jou QT. %Greeteth s. vall holy o, W epistyl sx. 
x Om. Fr. y Here endith the firste pistle to Tessalonycensis, and now bigynneth the secounde. a. Here 
eendith the first epistil to Thessalonicenses, and bygynneth the prolog of the secound to the same.o. Here 
endith the firste pistle to Tessalonicenses, and bigynneth the ii. pistle to the Tessalonicenses.Q. Here 
eendith the pistil to Tessalonicencis i., and bigynneth the prologe to Tess. ti. w. No final rubric in ca 
PSTXY. 


1 charge b sec. m. comaunde gka. ™ epistle z. "30u alle k. © From crxa. Here endeth the firste pistle 
to Tessalonicensis; se now the prologe on the secunde pistle to Tessalonicensis. K. Here endith the firste pistle 
to Tessalonicensis, and here bigynneth the [a a] prologe on the secounde pistle. mqa. Here endith the firste 
pistle to Tessalonycensis, and here bigynneth the secounde with the prologe. vu. Here endith the firste pistle 
to Tessalonycensis, and here bigynneth the prologe on the secounde pistle to Tessalonycensis. ho. Here 
endith the firste pistle to Tessalonicensis, and bigynneth the prologe on the secunde. ch. Here endeth the 
Jirste, and bigynneth the prologe to secounde pistil to Tessalonicensis. g. No final rubric in aErek. 


1 


3of the Lord Jhesu Crist. 


Il. THESSALONIANS. 





The prologe in the secunde pistle*. 


To Tessalonycensis the apostle wrytith 
the secunde pistle>, and makith knowe to 
hem of the laste tymes, and° of the dis- 
truccioun of the aduersarie, that ts, anti- 
crist; wrytinge this pistle’ from Athenys 
by Titicus, a dekene, and Honesyin 4, 
acolyt. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth 
the secunde pistle to Tessalonyeensis®. 


The secounde epistle to Tessalonycense*. 


CAP.».I1, 


Poul, and Siluan, and Tymothe, to the 
chirche of Tessalonycensis®, in God oure 


2fadir, and in the Lord Jhesu Crist*, grace 


to 30u and pees of God, oure fadir, and 
We schullen‘, 


aFrom 6. Prolog. s. 
prologue in acmpex ; but in 6 a rubric. 
cOm.o.  ¢¢ epistell osr. 
epistel to Thessalonicensis. o. 
nycensis. PQT. 
b Tessalonycense P. 


4 Honesymum ov. 
¢ Om. @. 


a From £. 
Prologus. v. 


Jeroms prolog on the secunde episile to 
Thessaloniceneis*. 


THE apostle? writith the secounde epi- 
stle® to the! Tessalonicensis, and makith 
knowun to hem of the laste tymes, and 
of the comyng of the aduersarie, and of 
the throwyng doun of hym. He writith 
this epistle® from Athenis bi Titicus, the 
deken, and Onesimus, thef acolit$. 


Here endith the prologe, and bigyneth 
the secunde pistil. 


Here bigynneth the seeounde pisile to 
Tessalonicensis*. 


CAP. I. 


Poul, and Siluan, and Tymothe, to the: 
chirche of Tessalonicensis, in God oure 
fadir, and in the Lord Jhesu Crist, grace 2 
to 30u and pees of God, oure fadir, and 
of the Lord Jhesu Crist. We owen tos 


The prologe of the secounde Tessalonycensis. y. No initial rnbric im yw. No 
In n and 7 the prologue is of the second text. 


b epistell os. 


¢ Here endith the prologe, and bygynneth the secound 
No final rubric in sry. 
Here biginneth the secunde epistle to Tessalonisencis. w. No initial rubric in acxnsrxy. 
d Om. Ga. owen rx. 


a From mM. The secound pistle to Tessalo- 


The prolog of the secunde pistil. x. A prolog on the secunde pistle to Thessalonicensis. R. 
Here bigynneth the prologe on tj. Tessalonicensis. e. 


The prolog on the sccounde epistle to 


Tessalonicensis. f£. Here bigynneth the prolog on the secunde pistil to Tessolonycensis. k. No initial rubric 


in c1kuquxabegho. b postle cExkmQuabegkoa. 
abcefghkoa. € pistle krghko. f Om. 7. 
this. cmKxabco. 


No final rubric in Errtefk, 


cis.e. No initial rubric in crkqgruxabeghko. 


¢ pistil crkmnquxabghko. 
& colit Bho. 
Jcrom in his prolog on this epistle seith al this. na. 

writith this. g. Jerom in his prologe on the secounde pistle seith this. vu. 
a Poul to Thessalonicencis. 5. 


4 Om. cEIKMNQRTUX 
b Jerom in his prologe on this epistle seith 
Jerom in his prologe on this pistle 

This seith Jerom in his prolog. h. 
Here biginneth the pistel to Thessalonisen- 


I. 4——II. 2. 


‘or owen*, dof thankyngis evermore’ to 
God for 3o0u8%, britheren, so as it is worthi, 
for6 3oure feith ouerwexith', and the cha- 
arite of ech of 30u to gidere haboundith. So 
that we silf glorien in 3ou in the chirchis 
of God, for 3oure pacience and feith in 
alle 3oure persecuciouns and tribulaciouns. 
5 The! whiche™ 3e" susteynen?® into the? en- 
saumple! of the’ iust dom of God, that 3e 
be had worthi in the kyngdom of God, 
6for which’ and! 3e suffren. If netheles it 
is iust at God for" to quyte 3eldyng’ to 
zhem that trublen” 3ou, and to 3ou that 
ben trublid*, reste with vs in the schew- 
inge of oureY Lord Jhesu Crist? fro he- 
suene, with aungels of his vertu, in the 
flawme of fyer, 3yuynge veniaunce to hem 
that knewen* not God, and that obeyen? 
not to the euangelie of oure Lord Jhesu 
9Crist. The° whiche schulen 3yue‘, ‘or suf 
fre®, euere lastinge peynes, in perisching 
fro the face of thef Lord, and fro the 
10 glorie of his vertu, whanne he schal come 
for’ to be glorified in his seyntis, and for? 
to be maad wondirful in alle men that 
bileueden, for oure witnessyng is bileued 
l1on 30u, in that day. In which thing also 
we preien euermore for 30u, that oure 
God ‘fouchesaf for" to clepe 3ou in hisi 
clepyng, and fulfille* al! the wille of his™ 
goodnesse, and the werk of feith in vertu ; 
12that the name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist 
be clarified in 3ou, and 3e in it®, vp® the 
grace of oure ‘God, and of the? Lord Jhesu 
Crist. 
CAP. II. 
1 Forsothe, britheren, we preien 30u by 
the comynge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 
and oure congregacioun into the same 
athing, that 3e be not moued soone fro 
joure witt, nether be agast", nethir bi 
spirit, nethir by word, nether by epistle as 
sent by vs, as* the day of the' Lord be 


Il. THESSALONIANS. 449 


do thankyngis eueremore to God for 30u, 
britheren, so as it is worthi, for 3oure 
feith ouer wexith, and the charite of ech 
of 30u to othere aboundith. So that wé4 
silf® glorien in 3ou in the chirchis of 
God, for 3oure pacience and feith in alle 
3oure persecuciouns and_ tribulaciouns. 
Whiche 3e susteynen in to the ensaum-s 
ple of the iust dom of God, that 3e be 
had worthi in the kingdom of God, for 
which 3e suffren. If netheles it is inst 
tofor God to quite tribulacioun to hem 
that troblen 30u, and to jou that ben7 
troblid, rest with vs in® the schewing of 
the Lord Jhesu fro heuene, with aungelis 
of his vertu, in the flawme of fier, thats 
schal 3yue veniaunce to hem that knowen 
not God, and that obeien not to the 
euangelie? of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 
Whiche schulen suffre. euere lastinge9 
peynes, in perischinge fro the face of the 
Lord, and fro the glorie of his vertu, 
whanne he schal come to be glorified in 10 
hise seyntis, and to be maad wondurful 
in alle men that bileueden, for oure wit- 
nessing is bileuyd on 3o0u, in that dai. 
In which thing also we preien euere 1 
more for 30u, that owre God make 30u 
worthi to his cleping, and fille® al the 
wille of his goodnesse, and the werk of 
feith in vertu; that the name of oure12 
Lord Jhesu Crist be clarified in 3ou, and 
3e in hym, bi the grace of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist. 


CAP. II. 

But, britheren, we preien 30u bi the1 
comyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, and 
of oure congregacioun in to the same 
comyng, that 3e be not mouyd soone2 
fro joure witt, nether be aferd, nether 
bi spirit, nether bi word, nether bi epistle 
as sent bi vs, as if the dai of the Lord 


¢Om.cmuoreTrx. ftodonsx. f@enere a, e88zourey, hforwhiv. i euer waxith carpety. 
k oure GMoPpoTY sec.m. vs sx. 1Om. rx. ™that x. ® weo. © suffren er. POm.o. 4 exsaumple 
sx. °Om.c. %whomer. t*Omr. tOm. sx. Ytribulacioun yr. Wturblen mp. * turblid ap. 
Yther. 2ZOm.r. ®knowen nog. » obeschen m. obeieden No. © Om.r. 4 suffre yr. © Om. orx. 
or paye at. fonreo. £Om.sx. 48 Om. sx. ‘imake 30u worthitohisr. * filler. 10m. a. 
mOm.r. himr. aftercuper. bir. POm.r. be 3e cwper. beth sx. ‘aferdry. 8 asif r. 
t oure o. 


b vs silf mkak. CintoK sec.m. ‘gospel nr. © to fille k. 


VOL. IV. 


3M 


450 


3ny3. That no man disceyue 3ou in" ony 
maner. For’ no” but* ‘departyng aweyY, 
‘or dissencioun®, schal* come first, and the 
man of synne schal be schewid, the sone 
4of perdicioun, that is aduersarie®, and is 
enhaunsid? ypon® al thing that is seid 
God, or that is worschipid, so that he 
sitte in the temple, ‘or into the temple', of 
God, schewinge’ him silf ast he be! God. 
5 Wher 3e holden not*, that 3it whanne I 
was at 30u, I seide thes thingis to jou? 
6 And now what withholdith!, 3e witen, that 
7he be schewid in his tyme. Forwhi the 
mysterie™, ‘or priuyte®, of wickidnesse 
worchith now®; oonly that he that holdith 
now?, holde4, til it be maad of the myddel". 
sAnd thanne® ‘the ilket wickid" man schal 
be schewid, whom the Lord Jhesu schal 
sle with the spirit of his mouth, and schal 
distroyeY with the’ illumynyng*, ‘or 
schynyng’, of his comyng*. ‘\Jhesus schal 
» sle* him, whos comyng is vp» the worch- 
ing of Sathanas, in al vertu, and signes, 
and grete® wondris, lyinge4, ‘or fals®, 
ioand! in al disseit of wickidnesse, to hem 
that perischen. For that thei resceyueden 
not the charite of treuthe, that thei schul- 
den be maad saaf. Therfores God schal 
sende to hem a" worching of errour, that 
itthei bileue to leesyng, ‘or gabbyng', that 
alle be demyd, ‘or dampned*, the! whiche™ 
bileueden not to treuthe, but consentiden 
12to0 wickidnesse. Forsoth we” owen for® 
to do thankingis euermore to God for 30u, 
3e? ‘bretheren loued of God4, that God 
chees vs primyssis", ‘or jirste fruytis’, into 
heelthe', in halowyng of spirit and feith" 
i3 Of treuthe; in the’ which and” he clepide 


Uon ANOSVWXY. 
cioun QT. 2 Om. ogrrx. or discessioun 8. 
dhauncid x. © over r. on Xx. 
k not in mynde er. 
and 3it schal or. P now the feith or. 
w Om. svxy. 
8 Om. osrx. after caper. bir. ¢ Om. o. 
therfore vr. © Om. x. i Om. sgunopesTvwxy. 
loued of God, we ry. 9° Om. sx. 
fruytis y. 8 Om. ogrx. tt helpe o. 


hym or. 


fon Kgrabceghkoa8. & nok. 
partyng, or departisoun k marg. i alle thingis k, 
geting agk. © Om. bk. P lerned alii. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


v For the Lord schal not come to the dom v. 
aOm. 7. 
f Om. 6 see. m. OQSTYX. 
1 withholdeth, or letécth o. withholdith hym or. 
9 holdith rv. 
opyn in the inydil of hem that ben chosen to kuowe it or. 
x illumyng 4. schynyng o. liztnyng rv. 
fals or. lesingis x. 
k Om. ox. 
P Om. GMPQsTYXY sec. m. 
« of feith n. in feith rv. 


Tl, 3-13. 


be ny3. No man disseyue 30u in’ onyS3 
manere. For but dissencioun" come first, 
and the man of synne be schewid, the 
sonne of perdicioun, that is aduersarie,4 
and is enhaunsid ouer ‘al thing! that is 
seid God, or that is worschipid, so that 
he sitte in the temple of God, and schewe 
hym silfj as if he were God. Whethers 
3e holden not, that 3it whanne Y was at 
30u, Y seide these thingis to jou? Ande 
now what withholdith, 3e witen, that he 
be schewid in.his tyme. For the priuete; 
of wickidnesse worchith now; oneli that 
he that holdith now, holde®, til he be do 
awei. And thanne thilke wickid mans 
schal be schewid, whom the Lord Jhesu 
schal sle with the spirit of his mouth, 
and schal distrie with li3tnyng of his 
comyng; hym, whos comyng is bi the! 
worching of Sathanas, in al vertu, and 
signes, and grete wondris, false, and into 
al disseit of wickidnesse, to hem that 
perischen. For that thei resseyueden not 
the charite of treuthe, that thei schulden 
be maad saaf. And therfor God schal 
sende to hem a worching of errour, that 
thei bileue to leesing, that alle be demed, 11 
whiche bileueden not to treuthe, but 
consentiden to wickidnesse. But, bri-12 
theren lonyd of God, we owen to do 
thankyngis euermore to God for 3ou, 
that God chees vs the firste fruytis in to 
heelthe, in™ halewing of spirit and in 
feith of treuthe; in which also he clepide 1s 
30u bi oure gospel, in to geting" of the 
glorie of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. Ther-14 
for, britheren, stonde 3e, and holde. 3e 
the® tradiciouns, that 3e han lerud?, ethir 


wOm. erx. *butyfx.  ¥ discen- 
> Om. r. ¢ aduersarie, o Antecrist qr. 
sand schewe v. hasthato. asify. fis r. 
m priuyte o. ™2 Om. ox. ° now, 
t mydil, that is, to the power of Antcerist be maad 
8 Om. x. tthat x. 'wicke sx. VY dystruye 
y Om. ogrx. 2 cleer cummynge or. 
€ Om. orx. fOm. x. & And 
10m. rx. ™that x. 2 britheren 
qOm.r. ° firste fruytis oor. the first 
¥Om.sr. Walso vr. 


h ether departing awey K marg. discessioun k text. discessioun, er de- 
3 Om. a. 


k holdith k. !1Om.k. ™Manda. ® the 


Il. 14—IIl. 9. 


jou by oure gospel, into getynge of the 

14glorie of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. ‘And 
so*, britheren, stonde 3e, and ‘holde 3eY the 
tradiciouns, ‘or techingis*, that 3e han le- 
rud®, ethir by word, ethir® by oure® pistle’. 

15 Forsothe oure Lord Jhesn Crist him silf, 
and God and® oure fadir, thef which? 
louede 30u4, and 3af euerlasting comfort 

and good hope in grace, stirre, ‘or mo- 
neste’, 30ure hertis*, and conferme! in al 
‘werk and good™ word’. 


CAP. III. 
1 Britheren, ‘hennis forthward® preie 3e 
for vs, that the word of God renne, and 
2be clarified?, as and anentis 30u; and that 
we be delyuered fro vncouenable4, ‘or 
noyous™, and yuele men; sothliS feith is 
3not of alle men. Forsoth the Lord is 
trewe, that schal conferme vs‘, and schal® 
4kepeY fro yuel. Sothli, britheren, we 
tristen of 3ou in the Lord, for what 
euere thingis we bydden’, and* 3e don 
sand* schulen don. Forsoth> the Lord 
dresse joure hertis, in the® charite of God, 
sand? pacience of Crist. Forsothe, bri- 
theren, we denouncen to 3ou in the name 
of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, that 3e with- 
drawe 30u fro ech brother wandrynge vn- 
ordynatly, ‘or a3ens good ordre®, and not 
vp! the tradicioun’, that thei resceyueden 
7of vs. Sothli® 3e 3e! silf witen, how it 
bihoueth fork to sue vs. For we weren 
not ‘inquyet!, ‘or reste, or in pesyble™, 
gamong 30u, nether frely, ‘or withoute oure 
owne traueil", we eeten breed of ony man, 
but in travel and werynesse ny3t and day 
worchinge, that we greueden® noon of 30u. 
9 Not as we hadden not power, but that we 


x Therfore vy. ¥ holdith x. 
4 epistell aemNoposTy. epistil of vs x. 
k herte empor. 1 conferme 3ou @r. 
9 hennes forward cogrivy. fro hennesforward r. 


e Om. vr. 


2 Om, x. or techinge y. 


™ good werk and eupestywx. good werkis y. 
P clarified, or cleer to undurstonde to other folk or. 


Il. THESSALONIANS. 451 


bi word, ethir bi oure pistle?. And oure1s 
Lord Jhesu Crist him silf, and God oure 
fadir, which louyde vs, and 3af euerlast- 
inge coumfort and good hope in grace, 
stire j3oure hertis, and conferme in alis 
good werk and word. 


CAP. III. 


Britheren, fro hennus forward preye! 
3e for vs, that the word of God renne, 
and be clarified, as ¢¢ 27s anentis jou; and2 
that we be delynered fro noyous" and 
yuele men; for feith is not of alle men. 
But the Lord is trewe, that schal con-3 
ferme 30u, and schal kepe fro yuel. 
And, britheren, we trusten of 30u in4 
the Lord, for what euere thingis we 
comaunden to 30u, bothe 3e don and 
schulen do. And the Lord dresse 3oure5 
hertis, in the charite of God, and in the 
pacience of Crist. But, britheren, wes 
denouncen® to 3ou in the name of oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist, that 3e withdrawe 3ou 
from ech brother that wandrith out of 
ordre, and not aftir the ,techyng, that 
thei resseyneden of vs. For ‘3e silf'7 
witen, hou it bihoueth to sue vs. For we 
weren not vnpesible* among 3ou, nethirs 
with outen oure owne trauel we eeten 
breed of ony man, but in trauel and 
werynesse worchiden’ ni3t and dai, that 
we greuyden noon of 3ou. Not as wes 
hadden not power, but that we schulden 
3yue vs silf ensaumple to 30u to sue vs. 


@lernyd emnpoty. Porx. ¢ Om. x. 
fOm. rx. &that x. busy. 1Om. emoperrx. 
n Om. y. 


4 vurestful v. r Om. ogrx. aud noyous vw. ‘*®forwhir. +t jour. tOm.sx. VY kepe vs Nn. 
Won Nn. <%*forwhiy. Ycomaundento3our. 2O0Om.or. bothe 7. ®and3e emper. > For n. 
©Om. pe. dandinther. © Om.ox. faftirempery. &teching y. 4% For whiv. 1 30ur emPory 
sec. m. Om. 0. 30U Sx. k Om. sx. ] vnquyet @ sce.m. QTY. ™ or reste G pr.m. MP. oF un- 


resteful @ sec.m. Om. Nox. or unpesible oT. or impcesible V. or reste unpeysyble Y. 
is, not with outen oure owne traueile 9. that is, with outen oure one traueil T. 


9 epistil ErqRegka. 
3e jou silf mxak. 4 ether uneesie K marg. 


¥ ether uncouenable K marg. the noious k. 
v worchynge 1. wrou3ten R. 


1 Om. ox. that 
i] greuell Qr. 


8 ether shewen K marg. +* 30ur self Eh. 


3M 2 


452 Il. THESSALONIANS. III. 10——18. 


schulden 3yue vs? silf a1 foorme, ‘or en- For also whanne we weren among 30u, 10 
10 saumple", for’ to sue vs. Forwhi and we denounsiden this thing to 30u, that 
whanne we weren anentis 30u, this thing if ony man wole not worche, nethir ete 
we denounsiden, ‘or warnedent, to 30u, he. For we han herd that summe among 11 
for" if ony man wole not worche, nether 30u goon in reste, and no thing worchen, 
liete he. Sothliv we han herd summe” but don curiousli. But we denouncen 12 
among 30u ‘for to* wandrey ‘inquyet, 07 — to hem that ben suche men, and bisechen 
reste, or in pesibli*, no thing worchinge, in the Lord Jhesu Crist, that thei 
12but doynge* curiously. Forsoth we de-  worchen with silence, and ete her owne 
nounsen> to hem that ben siche maner breed. But nyle 3e, britheren, faile wel 1s 
men’, and@ bisechen in the Lord Jhesu doynge. That if ony man obeie” not to14 
Crist, that thei with silense*, ‘or stilnesse‘, | oure word bi epistle, marke 3e him, and 
13 worchinge, ete her owne breed. Forsothe’ comyne 3e not with hym, that he be 
nyle 3e, britheren, fayle wel® doynge ‘in schamed*; and nyle 3e gesse hym as1s 
14Crist Jhesu oure Lord’. That if ony man an enemye, but repreue 3e hym as a 
‘schal not obeie* to oure word by! epistle, brother. And God hym silf of pees 3yue 
marke 3e hym, and comune 3e™ not with to 3ou euerlastinge pees in al place. Theis 
him, that he be confoundid, ‘or schamed®; Lord be with ‘zon alle**. My saluta-17 
15and° nyle 3e gesse hym as an enemy’, but __cioun bi the hoond of Poul; which signe 
‘reproue 3e1 him" as a brother. Forsothe in ech epistleY Y write thus. The grace 18 
‘the ilke Gods of pees 3yue to 30u euerlast- of oure Lord Jhesn Crist be with ‘alle 
i6yng pees in al place. The Lord be with  30u%. Amen. 
alle 3ou. My salutacioun by the hond of 
Poul; ‘that is‘ signe in ech epistle". I 
write’ thus. The grace of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist be with ‘alle jou". Amen. Here endith the secounde pistle to 
Tessalonycensis, and bigynneth a pro- 
Here endith the secunde pistle to Tes- loge on the firste pistle to Tymothe?. 
salonycensis, and bigyuneth the prolog to 
the firste pistle to Tymothe*. 


Poure GupeTt. 4Om.G prim. mer. © to 30u for err. Om. sx. *Om.ox. tOm.ox. "that r. 
v For y. Wthatsumme vr. *tosx. Omr. ¥ goon ry. 2 inquiete, or reste, or unpesible ay. in quyete 
O pr.m. X, vnquyetli G see.m. in quyet, or reste NPY. in vnpesible o. vnquyetly, or vvpesiblely or. in 
quyete, or reste, or vnpesibly w. % goende sx. goinge w. »% denounseden sxy. © Om.x. ‘and we gr. 


© stilnesse oo. fOm.ox. £& Buty. -bOm.epr.m. iOm.r. — * schal not obesche at. schal not 
obeshen s. obeieth not yr. l sent by or. ™Om. or. %Om.ox. %Om.¢.  Penmye, ennying to 
hym gr. repreueth x. "hym tm loue er. 8 God himself r. that God x. t which yr. 4 pistle y. 
v Y wryte as. that I write or. W 30u all acuNest. alle y. x Here endeth the secounde pistle to 


Tessalonycensis, and now bigynneth the first pistle to Tymothe. 4. Here eendeth the secounde epistel to 
Thessalonicenses, and bygynneth the prologe of the first to T: ‘ymothe. o. Here endith the ti. pistle to the 
Tessalonycenses, and bigynneth the firste pistle to Tymothe. 9. Here cendith the secunde pistle to Tessalo- 
nysencis, and bigynneth the prologe to [of ¥) Tymothe. wy. No final rubric in eapsrx. 


W obeieth k, x aschamed tbe. xx alle 30u Ebeghoaf. ¥ pistil gkog. Z 30u alle k. 
a From cimxabeo. Here endeth the seeunde pistle to Tessalonicensis; se now the prologe on the firste pistle 
to Tymothee. x. Here endith the secunde pistle to Tessalonicensis, and bigynneth the prolog on the firste 
io Tymothe. Q. Here endith the ij. pistle to T essalonycensis, and here bigynneth the firste pistle to Ty- 
mothe. u. Here endith Tessalonicences, and bigynith a prologe on the firste pistile to Tymothe. g. Here 


endith the epistle to Tessalonycensis, and bigynneth the prolog on the firste pistle to Tymothe.h. No final 
Trubric in aERek. 


I TIMOTHY. 





Prolog to the firste pistle to Tymothe*. Jeroms prologe on the jirste epistle to 
Timothe*. - 
TYMOTHE the apostle enfoormeth and He enformeth and techith Tymothe of 


techith of the ordynaunce of byschophood, the ordinaunce of bischops office, and of 
and of the dekenchood, and of al the dekenes office, and of” euerych® disci- 
chirchis disciplyne, writinge fro Rome _ plyne? of hooli chirche, writynge to hym 


cite. fro Macedonye, bi Titicus, the dekene. 
Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth Jerome in his prolog on this pistil 
the firste pistle4. seith this®. 


+ Thimothe the apostell enformeth and thecheth of the ordinaunce of bischophode, and of 
dekenhode, and of all the chirches discipline; forthermore enfourmeth him to schrewed aposteles 
to him bakbytyng mot answere resoun 3eldyng, that of the pursuere he be saaf, whan Crist 
hath comen to deliuer all synneres at the last; otherwyse teching, monest he to be fledde. Writyn 
fro Rome cyte. 

Here cendeth the prologe, and byganneth the epistel. 


rir 
The first epistle to Tymothe*. Here bigynneth the firste pistle to 
Tymothe*. 
CAP. I. CAP. I. 
1 Poul, apostle> of ‘Crist Jhesu’, vp* the Poul, apostle ‘of Jhesu Crist», bi the 


comaundement of God oure sauyour, and® comaundement of God oure sauyour, and 
2Jhesu Crist oure hope, to Tymothe, by- of Jhesu Crist oure hope, to Tymothe, 2 


a The prologe in Tymothe c. The prologe. s. No initial rubric in vwy. No prologue in acaPox ; 
but a rubric in G. In n and r the prologue is of the later text. Dory. .¢Om.svw. 4 No final 
rubrie in svivy. + This prologue is from o. @ From ar. The firste pistle to Tymothe. po. Here 
bigynneth the pistle to Tymothe. w. No initial rubric in aGKNsx. » the apostell oy. ¢ Jhesu Crist 
empoy. ‘aftir spor. biv.  ¢ and of or. 


a From. Prolog. a. The prolog of the first pistil to Tymothe. nk. Here sueth a prolog on the firste 
pistil to Tymothe. x. Prologus.. The prologe on the firste pistle to Tymothe. b. Here biginneth the 
prologe on the firste Tymothe.e. No initial rubric in cikmuxacfghoa. b Om. ENRrbceghoaf. 
©eueri &. eche Keko. 4 lore r. ¢ From ckmnxabcoa. Jerom in his prolog on this epistle seith’ al 
this. 9. Jeromin his prologe seith this. u. This seith Jerom in his prolog. h. No final rubric in eirvefgk. 
* Pouls epistle to Timothe. E. Heere biginnith the pistle. 1. No initial rubric in cxguxabeghkoa. 
» Crist Jhesu thcke. 


454 


louyd sone in the feith, grace and mercy 
and pees, of God the fadir, and Jhesu 
3Crist, oure Lord. As I preiede thee, that 
thou scliuldist dwelle at Ephesy, whanne 
I wente to® Macedonye, that thou schuld- 
ist denounce to summe’, that thei schulden 
4not teche othere weye*, nethir! 3yue tent to 
fablis and genologies™ ‘withouten endes®, 
the® whiche 3yuen questiouns?, more than 
edificacioun of God, that is in the’ feith. 
5 Forsoth 
charite of clene herte, and good conscience, 
6and feith’ not feyned. Fro whiche thingis 
‘sum ment erringe, ben turned to gidere 
7into veyn speche; willinge for® to” be 
techeris of the lawe, not vndirstondinge, 
nethir what thingis ‘ben spokun’, nether 
8of what thingis thei affermen. Forsoth 
we witen for* the lawe is good, if ony 
9 man vse** it lawefully; witinge this thing, 
that the lawe ‘is not putY to a iust 
man, but to* yniust* and not suget, to 
vnpitouse men and synneris, to curside 
men and defoulid, to sleeris of fadir®, and 
10sleeris of modir®, to ‘men sleeris® and for- 
nycatours, to hem that trespassen’ with 
malis ‘ajens kynde®, silleris', ‘or stelerisi, 
or ‘draweris awey*, of men, lesyngmon- 
geris' and forsworn™, and if ony othir 
thing is coutrarie to" holsum teching, that 
is vp® the euangelie of the? glorie of 
blessid God, the’ which gospel" is bitakun 
12to me’. I do thankingis to him, that com- 
fortidet me in Crist Jhesu oure Lord, for 
he gessidett me feithful, ‘or ¢rewe, putt- 
13inge me in mynisterie’, the” which I* first 


f the loued caper. loued x. in tov. 
k weye, than we tauzlen Q. weies, than we tauzien Q. 
eendid Qs pr. vice. Tr. withoute ende x. ° Om. r. 
comaundement eT. 8 of feith er. 
speken r, = that r. xX ysith ar. 
b men, ether unfeithful men r. 
leccherie r. 


© fadris GuPQTY, 
8 either synne of Sodom ry. Om. x. 


I. TMMIOTH ¥-. 


the ende of comaundement' is 


h denounce, or marne QT. 


P questiown s. 
t summen amMoQr. summe GNSTXY. 
Y it not puttith x. 


I. 3—13. 


bilouyd® sone in the feith, grace and 
merci and pees, of God the fadir, and4 of 
Jhesu Crist, oure Lord. As Y preyedes 
thee, that thou ‘schuldist dwelle at Effesi, 
whanne Y wente into Macedonye, that 
thou schuldist denounce to summe men, 
that thei schulden not teche othere weie®, 
nether 3yue tent to fablis and genologies 4 
that. ben vncerteyn, whiche 3yuen ques- 
tiouns, more than edificacioun of God,-: 
that is in the feith. For the ende of ‘s 
comaundement is charite of clene herte, 
and good conscience, and of feith not 
feyned. Fro® whiche thingis sum mené6 
han errid, and ben turned in to veyn 
speche; and willith® to be techeris of the7 
lawe, and vndurstonden‘ not what thingis 
thei speken, nether of what thingis thei 
affermen. And we witen that the lawes 
is good, if ony man vse it lawefulli; and9 
witinge this thing, that the lawe is not 
set to a iust man, but to vniust men 
and not suget, to wickid men and to 
synneris, to cursid men and defoulid, to 
sleeris of fadir, and sleeris of modir, to 


‘men sleeris* and! lechouris, to hem that 10 


don leteherie with men, lesingmongeris 
and forsworun, and if ony othere thing 
is contrarie to the hoolsum teching, that 1 
is aftir the euangelie™ of the glorie of 
blessid® God, which is bitakun to me. 
Y do thankingis to hyin, that coumfort- 12 
ide® me in Crist Jhesu oure Lord, for he 
gesside me feithful, and putte? me in 
mynystrie, that first was a blasfeme4, 13 
and a® pursuere, and ful of wrongis. 


i summe fecheris eT. summen Fr. 

™ genelogye G. -® vn- 
¥ gcomaundementis K. the 
vOm. x. ®¥ thei 
Z to an GMOPQSTY. @ yniust men V. 
d modris Garpery. © mansleeris x. f don 
h to hem that putten woundis to men, sellers c. 


1 nether the herers er. 
q Om. r. 
uQm. sx. 


hem, that putten wonndes to men, sillers arpy sec.m. to hem that putten woundes to men N. to hem that 


putten woundis to men, or fo sellers gr. to beteris of men, either sillers r. 
1 to lesynge mongeris @r. 
°° nangelie x. 
u Om, Garoperx. 


k draweris N. or withdrawers coer. Om. rx. 
men er. "tothe vy. after GuPerr. 
t hath coumfortide peTry sec. im. 


tt gessith ¥. 
or seruice QT. = =W Om. r. 


x Om. GarPesTx. 


¢ my loued k. 4Om.k. 
wilnen r. wilneth a. 
m gospel rR. the blessid kak. © coumfortith k. 
o pr.m. 8. ether a dispiser of God & marg. 


€ wijse cerkMQRuxaheeghkoaf, 
i yndirstoden a. vndirstondith 08. 

P puttide be. 
r Om. ao, 


i Om. r. and stelers wx. 

m forswerers N. to forsworn 
qOm.y. rOm.x. %men@. 
Vv mysterie N. seruice o. mysterie, 


P Om. swxy. 


f of the bk. & Forg. hb willen cerxgxgka. 
k monsleeirs ©. mansleeris Rh. and to r. 
q blasfemere ¢ sec. m. EQ sec.m. Bg 


I. 14—II. 6. 


was a blasfemeY, ‘or dispiser of God”, and 
pursuwer*, and ful of wrongis. But I 
have getun the? mercy of God, for I vn- 
uknowyng dide in vnbileue. Sothh the 
grace of oure Lord* over habounde’, with 
isfeith and loue that is in Crist Jhesu. A 
trewe worde and worthi al resceyuyng®, 
for Crist Jhesu caam into this world for‘ 
to make synful men saaf, of whiche® I 
isam the firste. But therfore I haue getyn 
mercy, that Crist Jhesu schulde schewe in 
me first al pacience, to the enfoormyng of 
hem that ‘ben to" bileuynge! to him into 
17euere lastynge lyf. Forsoth to the kyng 
of worldis, vndeedly and invisyble* God! 
aloone, honour™ and glorie into worldis of 
is worldis. Amen. I comende®,‘or bitake°, 
this presept?, ‘or biddyng4, to thee, thout 
sone Tymothe, vp* prophecies bifore go- 
ynge in thee, that thou fizte', ‘or holde*, 
i9in hem a good kny3thood, hauynge .feith 
and’ good conscience, the” which ‘sum 
men* castynge a wey, perischeden aboute 
20 the feith’. Of which? is Emyneus* and? 
Alisaundre, whom‘ I bitook to Sathanas‘, 
that thei lerne® for‘ ‘to not’ blaspheme*. 


CAP. II. 


1 Therfore I bisechei first of alle thingis*, 
for! to be maad bisechingis, preieris, ax- 
yngis, doynge™ of thankyngis, for alle 

2men, for kyngis and alle” that ben sett in 
hijnesse, ‘or greet stat°, that we lede 
quyet and pesyble lyf, in al pite and 

schastite. Forsoth? this thing is good and 
gacceptid bifore God, oure sauyour, that 
wole alle men for? to be maad saaf, and 
for! to come to the knowynge of treuthe. 
sSothlit o God and mediatour of’ God and 
cmen, at man ‘Jhesus Crist", that 3af him 


¥Y blasfemye 4¢. blasfemere N. 
¢ Lord to me or. 


GMPOQT. h schulen ry. 1! bileue nv. beleeven sx. 
m be onour ry. 4 bitake 0. © Om. ox. 
tholde vy. 2Om. ovx. VYino. ¥*¥ Om. v. 


the feith er. % whome cer. 
suffrynge hym to tourmente hem or. 
blasfemee rT. i 
men G sec. m. 
tand a or. 


e lere s. 
i biseche thee to tcche er. 
© or greet astaal aNnosvy. of stat x. 


Sherd to forek. tOm.k. % whom 1. 


I. TIMOTHY. 


2 or a dispiser of God empa. Om. ox. 
4 haboundide semuopstrwxy. haboundeth n. 


P comaundement vy. 
x summe ASY. summen GMPQP. 
a Hymeneus ewpr. Heuenes Q. 

f Om. G pr.m. MPQsTX. 
k theng xk. 
P For whi r. 
u Crist @ pr.m. Crist Jhesus G sec.m. MPQTVXY. 


v not to hkp, 


455 


But Y haue getun the merci of God, 
for Y vnknowinge dide in vnbileue. But 14 
the grace of oure Lord ouer aboundide, 
with feith and loue that is in Crist 
Jhesu. A trewe word and worthi alis 
resseyuyng, for Crist Jhesu cam in to 
this world to make synful men saaf, of 
whiche Y am the firste. But therfor Y 16 
haue getun merci, that Crist Jhesu 
schulde schewe in me first al pacience, 
to the enfourmyng of hem that schulen 
bileue to hym in to euerlastinge lijf. 
And to the king of worldis, vndeedli and 17 
vnvysible God aloone, be onour and glo- 
rie in to worldis of worldis. Amen. 
I bitake this comaundement to thee, thou 18 
sone Timothe, after the prophecies that 
han be hertofore® in thee, that thou 
traueile in hem a good trauel, hauynge 19 
feith and good conscience, which sum- 
men casten awei, and perischiden aboute 
the feith. Of whiche is‘ Ymeneus and 20 
Alisaundre, which® Y bitook to Sathanas, 
that thei lerne ‘to not” blasfeme. 


CAP. 


Therfor Y biseche first of alle thingis,1 
that bisechingis, preieris, axyngis, do- 
yngis” of thankyngis, ben maad for alle 
men, for kingis and alle that ben set in2 
hij3nesse, that we leden a quyet and a 
pesible lijf, in al pite and chastite. For® 
this thing is good and acceptid bifor 
God, oure sauyour, that wole that alle 
men ben maad saaf, and that thei come 
to the knowyng of treuthe. For o Gods 
and a* mediatour 7s of God and of men, 
a man Crist Jhesus, that 3af him silfeé 


ao pursuer ewpT. > Om. x. 
f Om. sx. & whome 
k vnsi3table 0. vnvisible r. 1 to God o scc.m. 
qa Om. orx. Om. x. § after gr. bi r. 
y feith, nol with inne in 
ewhiche vy. 4 Satanas, 
h blasphemye 4. 

n alle 
5 as of ¥. 


€ praysynge o. 


b Om. G pr.m. 

& not to r. 
™ doyngis ASvxyY. 

t For whi v. 


10m. sx. 
q Om. sx. 


wdoinge KRo. * 0 Xa. 


456 I. TIMOTHY. 


silf redempcioun’ for alle men. Whos wit- 
7nessinge is confermyd in his tymes; in 
the” which I am putt a prechour and 
apostle. Sothlix I seie treuthe ‘in Crist 
JhesuY, and I lye not?, a techer of hethen 
gmen in feith and in* treuthe. Therfore I 
wole, ‘menf or to? preie in al* place, lift- 
ynge vp clene hondis with oute wraththe 
gand disputyng, ‘or stryf‘. Also and 
wymmen ‘in ourned®, ‘or couenable', abite, 
with schamfastnesse and sobrenesse ourn- 
ynge hem silf, not in writhun heeris, 
ethir® in gold, ethir’ margaritis, ‘that ben 
10 peerlis', ether* precious cloth'!; but that 
that bicometh wymmen™, bihetynge pite 
11bi goode werkis. A womman lerne” in 
12silence, with al subieccioun®. Forsothe I 
suffre not a? womman‘ for to tech, nether 
for’ to haue lordschip into' the man, ‘or 
hosebonde", but for’ to be in silence. 
13 ForsothY Adam was first foormyd, aftir- 
award Eue; and Adam was not* dis- 
ceyued ‘2x feithY, forsoth? the? womman 
was disceyued ‘ta feith®, in preuarica- 
wscioun’, ‘or brekyng of the lawe*. Sothli 
sche schal be saued by generacioun® of 
sones‘, if sche ‘schal dwelle® perfytli in 
feith, and loue, and hoolynesse, with so- 
brenesse. 
CAP. III. 
1 A feithful word’. If ony man desyre! a 
byschopriche, he desyrith a good werk*. 
2 Therfore it bihoueth a byschop for! to be 
irreprehensyble™, ‘or withoute reproue®, 
and°® the hosebonde of oo wyf?, sobre4, 
prudent", ourned’, chast, holdynge hospi- 
3talite, techer‘; not 30uun moche to wyn, 
not smyter, but temperaunt®, ‘or pacient’, 


Vajzenbyseynge 0. WOm.svx. * For r. 
GMPQTX. b men to esx. that men r. 
f Om. ox. or in couenable vr. & other arp. 
Om. x. * other mp. 
0 Jerne sche 9. lere sx. serue sche 7. 


aQOm. ox. VY Om. sx. W For whi r. 
sent and deed gt. Om. svx. 
or good werkis gr. —& dwellith rv. 
trauelous; no dignyte, ne delices or. 
Moperx. ° Om. F. 
and drynkynge ov. 

G sec.m. a trem techer gv. 


10m. sx. 


y Om. alii. “orr. or ER, 


y Om. r. 
¢ eche o. 
h or cpor. Om. x. 
I cloth, that 3e 3euen oceasion of lechorie a. 
© subieccioun, or obeischyng er. 
4 womman, that is unstable 9. wymmen, that is unstable T. 
X not firste er. 
© brekynge of the lawe ogrr. 
h word I sehal seye or. 
m withouten repreue G pr.m. MOPQT. 
P wyf, feithfully gouernynge the ehirche in oonhed of loue or. 
¥ prudent, ajein the sleizte of enmyes QT. 
4 temperat asx. pacient o. tholmound er. 


88 toa a prem, 


Il. 7—~IIl. 3. 


redempcioun for alle men. Whos witness- 
ing is confermyd in his tymes; in which? 
Y am set a prechour and an’ apostle. For 
Y seye treuthe, and Y lie not, that am 
a techere of hethene men in feith and 
in treuthe. Therfor Y wole, that mens 
preye in al place, liftinge vp clene 
hondis with outen wraththe and strijf. 
Also wymmen in conenable abite, with 9 
schamefastnesse and sobrenesse araiynge 
hem silf, not in writhun heeris, ethir in 
gold, ethir? peerlis, ethir* preciouse cloth; 
but that that bicometh wymmen, biheet- 10 
inge pite bi good werkis. A womman!! 
lerne in silence, with al subieccioun. But !2 
Y suffre not a** womman to teche, nether 
to haue lordschip on the hosebonde, but 
to be in silence. For Adam was first !3 
formed, aftirward Eue; and Adamt was !4t in bileuinge 


5 A that was sothe, 
not disseyued, but the womiman was dis- that the deuel 


seide, 3e schn- 


seyued, in breking of the lawe. But! jen teas god- 
sche schal be sauyd bi generacioun of ek ie pet 
children, if sche dwellith” perfitli in feith, herein 


and loue, aud hoolynesse, with sobre- 
nesse. 


CAP. IIL. 


A feithful word. If ony man desirith! 
a bishopriche, he desirith a good werk. 
Therfor it bihoueth a byschop to be2 
with out repreef, the hosebonde of o 
wijf, sobre, prudent, chast, vertewous, 
holdinge hospitalite, a techere; not 3ouun 3 
myche to wyn, not a smytere, but tem- 
perat®, not ful of chiding, not coueitouse, 


7 not in eny part, the whiche am oT. ® Om. 

d Om, ox. € enourned Ger. in couenable o. 
i perlis, that 3euen occacioun of leccherie T. 
m wymmen, for her firste gull or. 
P to a AMNOPQSV see.m. XY. 

s Om. sx. t in s. on F. 
Zbut rp. 2®Om.s. > in con- 
e generaciouns Ny. f sonys, 
idesyreth cunpostyxy. * werk, and 
2 Om. G pr.m. 

q sobre, in etynge 
ta techer 


r Om. sx. 
y Om. estrx. 
d Om. ogrrx. 


8 ournyd with vertues OT. 
v Om. oorx. 


b dweller. © temperat, or manerly R. 


I. 4—16. I. TIMOTHY. 457 


not litigious*, ‘or ful of stryf, or chid- 
a4yngY, not coueitous, wel rewlynge his 
hous, hauynge sones suget with al chas- 
stite?; forsoth if ony man kan not go- 
uerne his hous*, how schal he haue dili- 
egence> of the chirche of God®? not4 newe 
conuertid into® feith, lest hef borun vp 
into pride, falle® into the? dom, ‘or synnei, 
yof the deuyl. Forsoth it bihoueth hym 
for‘ to haue good witnessyng and! of hem 
that ben withoute forth, that he falle not 
into schenschip™, ‘or reprof™, and into the® 
esnare of the deuyl. Also ‘it byhouethP 
dekenes for’ to be chast, not dowble tung- 
id, not 3ouun ‘to moche’ wyn, not suynge® 
gfoul wynnyng; hauynge the mysterie' of 
10feith in clene conscience. And forsoth be 
thei proued first, that" thei mynystre so, 
hauynge no’ cryme™, ‘or greet synne*. 
Also ‘it bihouethY wymmen for? to be 
chast, not bacbitinge, sobre, feithful in alle 
12thingis. Dekenes be thei? hosebondis of o 
wyf; the> whiche dekenes* gouerne wel 
isher sones and her housis. Sothli? thei 
that ‘schulen mynistre® wel, schulen gete 
af good degree to hem silf, and moche trist 
14in the feith, that is in Crist Jhesu. Sone 
Tymothe, I write to thee thes thingis, 
hopinge me for® to come soone to thee; 
isforsoth® if I schal tarie, that thou wite, 
how it bihoueth thee for! to lyue in the 
hous of God, that is the chirche of quyk 
16 God, a piler and sadnesse of treuthe. And 
opynly* it is! a greet sacrament of pite, 
that™ that" is schewid in fleisch®, is? iusti- 
fied in spirit‘, it apperide to aungels*, it is 
prechid to hethen men, it is byleuyd in the® 
world, it is takyn vp in glorie. 


x ful of stryf oor. ful of chiding x, y Om. oarx. 


wel reulinge his hous, and haue sones4 
suget with al chastite; for if ony mans 
kan not gouerne his house, hou schal he 
haue diligence of the chirche of God? 
not new conuertid to the feith, lest hes 
be’ borun vp in to pride, andé falle in to 
doom of the deuel. For it bihoueth hym7 
to haue also good witnessing of hem that 
ben with outforth, that he falle not in 
to repreef, and in to thef snare of the 
deuel. Also z¢ bihoueth dekenes to bes 
chast, not double tungid, not 3ouun 
myche to wyn, not suynge foul wyn- 
nyng; that han the mysterie of feith in» 
clene conscience. But be thei preued first, 10 
and mynystre so&, hauynge no cryme. 
Also z¢ bihoueth wymmen to be chast,11 
not bacbitinge, sobre, feithful in alle 
thingis. Dekenes be hosebondis of 012 
wijf; whiche gouerne wel her sones and 
her housis. For thei that mynystren 13 
wel, schulen gete a good degre to hem 
silf, and myche triste in the feith, that 
is in Crist Jhesu. Sone Timothe, Y14 
write to thee these thingis, hopinge that 
Y schal come soon to thee; but if Yis 
tarie, that thou wite, hou it bihoueth 
thee to lyue in the hous of God, that 
is the chirche of lyuynge God, a pilere 
and sadnesse of treuthe. And opynli itié 
is a greet sacrament of pitee, that thing 
that was schewid in fleisch, it is iusti- 
fied in spirit, it apperid to aungels, it 
is prechid to hethene men, it is bileuyd 
in the world, it is takun vp in} glorie. 


z charite @. 4 house, of litil meynee or. ? dili- 


gence, or keepynge yt. ¢ God, wherynne ben manye and dyuerse? ot. 4 He that schat be a bischop or 
prest, schulde be preued sad in byleue, not eT. © to the aamNosTVX. tog. f he benpor. & and falle er. 


h Om. ox. i of synne a. Om. ox, k Om. sx. 


1 Om. auperrx. ™ repreue Gert. reprof mp. 


. or schenschip amp. Om. ogTtx. Om. ox. POm. x. @Om.sx. ‘Fmychetor.  § folowyuge 
emper, tministerie o. priuytee or. Uand ry. ‘not er. W greet gilter. *Om.orx. yY Om. ox. 
zOm.sx. 8Om.y. bOm vy. ¢Om.x. 4Forrv. ¢mynistreny. fande prim & Om. sx. 
h for vy pr.m. iOm. sx. — & apertly, or openly amp. apertly or. lis schewid gr.  ™ which r. 
"Om, osy. » fleisch takynge oT. Pitisy. 4 spirit, for he conceyued of the Holy Gost et. * aungelis, 


Sor they prophecteden it or. * Om. x. 


4QOm.R pr.m ¢Om.Rprm fOm.a 8theisor. Mintok. 


VOL. IV. 3N 


458 I. TIMOTHY. IV. 1—t14. 


CAP. IV. 
1 Forsoth the spirit seith opynli, fort in 
the laste tymes summe" schulen departe 
fro the feith, 3yuynge tent to spiritis of 
2errour, and to techingisY of deuels; in 
ypocrisye spekinge lesyng, and hauynge 
3her conscience brent”, forbedynge for* to 
wedde’, for? to absteyne fro metis, the* 
whiche God made ‘of no3t® for’ to take 
with doynge® of thankingis®, to feithful 
men, and hem that han’ knowen the 
4treuthe. For ech" creature of God is 
good, and no thing is to be cast awey, thei 
which is takun with doynge of thankingis; 
sforsoth* it is halwid by ‘the word of God!, 
_ cand ‘by preier™. Thou puttinge forth these 
thingis to britheren, schalt be a good nyn- 
istre of Crist Jhesu; ¢ow® norischid with 
wordis of feith and of good® doctryne, 
7that? thou hast gete ‘in suynge’. Forsothe 
schonye" thou vncouenable fablis and veyn’; 
ssothlit haunte thi silf to pite. Forwhi 
bodili ‘excercitacioun, or traueling, or ab- 
stinence®, to litil thing is profytable ; for- 
soth’ pite is profytable to alle thingis, 
hauynge biheeste of lyf that now is, and 
9 to” comynge*. A trewe word, and worthi 
walY accepcioun’. Sothli in this thing* we 
traueilen, and ben cursid, for we hopen in 
quyk God, that is sauyour of alle men, 
1 moost of feithful nen. Comaunde thou 
12this thing, and teche. No man dispise thi 
3ongthe?, but be thou ensaumple® of feith- 
ful men in word, in lyuynge, in charite, 
i3in feith, in® chastite. The while I! come, 
taak tent to redinge, to exortacioun$, ‘or 
14 monestyng*, and teching. Nyle thou dis- 


CAP. IV. 


But the spirit seith opynli, that ini 
the laste tymes summen schulen departe 
fro the feith, 3yuynge tent to spiritis 
of errour, and to techingis of deuelis; 
that speken leesing! in ipocrisie, ande 
haue her conscience corrupt*, forbedinges 
to be weddid, to! absteyne fro metis, 


. whiche God made to take with doyng 


of thankingis, to feithful men, and hem™ 
that han knowe the treuthe. For ech4 
creature of God is good, and no thing 
is to be cast awei, which is takun with 
doyng of thankyngis; for it is halewids 
bi the word of God, and bi preyer. 
Thou puttynge forth these thingis toe 
britheren, schalt be a good mynystre of 
Crist Jhesu; nurschid with wordis of 
feith and of good doctryne, which thou 
hast gete. But eschewe thou vncouen-7 
able fablis, and elde wymmenus" fabiis; 
haunte thi silf to pitee. For bodili ex-g 
ercitation® is profitable to litle thing; 
but pitee is profitable to alle thingis, 
that hath a biheest of lif that now is, 
and that is to come. A trewe word, andy 
worthi al acceptacioun?. And in this1o 
thing we trauelen, and ben cursid, for 
we hopen in lyuyng God, that is sa- 
uyour of alle men, moost of feithful 
men. Comaunde thou this thing, andi 
teche. No man dispise thi 3ongthe, but12 
be thou ensaumple of feithful men in 
word, in lyuyng, in charite, in feith, in 
chastite. Tyl Y come, take tent to red-i3 
yng, to exortacioun and teching. Nyle14 
thou litil charge? the grace which is in 


tthat vy. 'summen ampey. sum men No. summe men ¥._ * techinge o. © brent, or corrupt er. 


x Om. sx. Y be weddid ry. 2 Om. sx. 4 Om. wrx. 


b that x. © or ordeynede to man gr. 4 Om. sx. 


€doyngus sy. €€ thankingis; forsoth it is doynge of thankingis x. fof x. & Om, or. 4 which ¥. 


iOmy. for r. I doinge of thankyngis r. 


m preiynge o. preier, fro the unclennesse QT. ™ Om. 


GMsx. thato. °agooder. Pwhichr. @Om.r.  * shone aunpsx. shunne Gr. eschewe or. 
8 veyn, or olde wymmens fablis ac sec.m. Nsy. elde wommenus fablis vy. ¢Om. 7. © traueylinge, or 
abstenence, or exortacioun G. excitacioun, or tr. or abst. K. traueling, or abstynence, or excercitacioun MP. eX- 
cercitacioun, or traueling o. traueilynge, or abstinence Q. traueile, or abstinence TV. V¥ but 7. * is to o. 
X come sx. YQOm. sy. 7 acceptacioun 4. accepcioun, is this that I seye of pyte er. a thing, that we 
ben constreyned by pyte oT. © 30uthe x. © exsaumple sx. dandin s sec.m. y. © and G pr.m. 


fthei yr. & monestyng er. » Om. ogrx. 


ilesingisk. ether broken K marg. and toRsec.m.k, ™ to hem kK sec.m. ™ wommen gk. 
© excercitacioun, eithir bisynesse R. P accepcioun cCE1KMQRUXabceghkoa8. 4 ether despice K marg. 


IV. 15——-V. 10. 


pise’, ‘or littl charge‘, the grace ‘of God 
that! is in thee, that is 3ouun to thee by 
prophecie™, with puttynge to" of hondis® 

150f prestisP, ‘or presthod’. Thenk thou 
thes thingis', in these be thou’, that thi 
profytyng be schewid, ‘or knowunt, to alle 

ismen. Tak tent to thi silf* and doctryn’; 
be” bisy in hem*. SothliY thou doynge 
thes thingis, schalt make ‘thi silf? saf, and 
hem that heeren thee. 


CAP. V. 


1 Blame thou not an elder man?, but bi- 
sech” as a‘ fadir, 3onge men, as britheren ; 
2olde wymmen, as modris, 3onge wymmen, 
3as sistris, in al chastite. +Honoure thou? 
4widewis, that ben verrey widewis. For- 
soth if ony widew hath sone®, or children‘ 
of sones*, lerne! sche first* for! to gouerne 
hir hous", and ‘chaungable while™, ‘or ech 
to othir®, 3elde° to fadir and modir?; soth- 
51i4 this thing is aceptid’ bifore God. For- 
soth she that is a widowe verily, and* de- 
solat, ‘or discomfortid*, hope® into’ God, 
and wake’, ‘or be byst*, in bisechingis and 
6preieris ny3t and day. Forwhi scheY that 
zis lynynge in delycis*, is deed*. And this 
thing comaunde thou, that thei be with- 
soute reprof. Forsoth if ony man haue? 
not cure of his owne‘’, and moost of his 
houshold men‘, he hath denyed the feith, 
and is worse than an vnfeithful, ‘or he- 
gthen®, man. A widewe be ‘not chosun 
lessef than sixty® 3eer, that was wyf of oon 
iohosebonde, hauynge witnessinge in goode 
workis, if she norische sones!, if she res- 
seyue* pore men to herbore, if she hath! 


i not dispise er. k Om. x. 1 which r. 
AGM NOPQSTVY. 

r thingis bisily or. 
¥ to doctrine ogT. 
z hothe thiself rv. 
@ tho s. the y. 
GMP. cosyns QT. 


while togidere r. 


8 thou myndeful er. 


a man ynauisely gr. 

© sones AGMNOPQSTYVY. 
i lere sx. k Om. er. 
n Om. ery x. 


I. TIMOTHY. 


™ prophecie, ar inspiracioun QT. 
P prest Garo. prestis, my3ty in good werkis gt. presthood v. the prest x. 
t Om. Gmoperx. outher knowen s. 
W hou thee owe to teche, and be er. 
» biseche hym Qr. 

f childre cusx. Om. er. 
10m. sx. 
© to 3elde ox. Om. grr. 


459 


thee, that is 3ouun to thee bi profecie, 
with putting on of the hondis of preest- 
hod. Thenke thou these thingis, in 1s 
these be thou, that thi profiting be 
schewid to alle men. Take tent to thiié 
silf and to doctryn; be bisi in hem. For 
thou doynge these thingis, schalt ‘make 
bothe™ thi silf saaf, and hem that heren 
thee. Blame thou not an eldere man,! 
but biseche as a fadir, 3onge men as bri- 
theren; elde wymmen as modris, 3onge2 
wymmen as sistris, in al chastite. 


CAP. V. 

Honoure thou widewis, that ben very3 
widewis. But if ony widewe hath chil-4 
dren of sones, lerne sche first to gouerne 
her hous, and quyte’ to fadir and modirt; 
for this thing is acceptid bifor God. 
And sche that is a widewe verili, ands 
desolate', hope" in to God, and be bisy 
in bisechingis and preieris nijt and dai. 
For sche that is lyuynge in delicis, isé 
deed. And comaunde thou this thing,7 
that thei be withouten repreef. For if8 
ony man hath not cure of his owne, and 
most of hise household men’, he hath 
denyed the feith, and is worse than an 
vnfeithful man. A widewe be chosunt# 
not lesse than sixti 3eer, that was wijf 
of oon hosebonde, and hath witnessing 10 
in good werkis, if sche nurschede chil- 
dren, if sche resseyuede pore men to 
herbore, if sche hath waischun”’ the feet 
of hooli men, if sche mynystride to men 
that suffriden* tribulacioun, if sche fo- 


° the hondes 
q Om. oerx. 
u sylf, how thou lyuist er. 
x hem that thou profyte et. ¥ Om. tT. For r. 
¢ Om. np. t Chapt. V. begins here in rv. 

g Om. or. h sonys cosyns 
m togidere 3eelde while er. 3elde 
P to modur 0. modir, the whiche thing we 


Non F. 


il meynee QT. 


don iustly, whenne we norisehen, ar enfourmen hem that ben with us, with the samc lawe that we weren no- 


risched gr. 4 for whi ¥. 
sche aT. Vin QT. 
4 deed, in soule or. 


bhath r. © meyne gr. 


i sonys in the lame gr. 


© bothe make x. 


“hope sche rk. Ymeyneak. W iwaschea a. 


r accept GMPQT see. m. 8 and is sy. 
w wake bisily 9. take bisili r. be besy rv. 
d meyne ogrx. 
lesse acmNesyxy. chosen iz to the temple, not lesse er. 


k resceyued AGMNOPQSV XY. 


8 to quyte chauniable while K sec. m. 3eelde x. 
x suffren kof. 5 


t or left alone oT. Om. x. % hoop 
x Om.GcmopeTrx. Yeche o. 2 delites N. 
€ Om. ox. hethen gr. f chosen not 

& of sixty erx. =) norsched scmNopgsyxy. 
lhaue caper. 


t ether discoumfortid K marg. 


3N2 


+ that is, in 
jeuinge reuer- 
ence to hem, 
and in mynis- 
tringe nesces- 
saries, if thei 
ben nedi, as 
sche was fed 
of hem. Lire 
here. ve. 


t chosun; to 
be sustenid bi 
the goodis of 
the chirche, if 
sche is pore. 
Lire and the 
Glose here. ve. 


460 : , J. TIMOTHY. V. 11—2I. 


waischyn the feet of hooly men, if she 
vndirmynistride™ to" men suffringe tribu- 
lacioun, if she folowide® al good work. 
11Forsoth eschewe? 3ongere widewis‘; for- 
sothet whanne thei han don leccherie in 
12Crist’, thei wolen be weddid', hanynge 
dampnacioun", for thei han maad the firste 
i3feithY voide. Also forsothe and thei ydel 
lernen” forx to enuyrowne’ housis, not 
oonly forsoth ydel, but and? ful of wordis* 
and curiouse>, spekinge what thing¢ ‘it 
u4bihoueth? not. Therfore I wole, 3ongere® 
for‘ to’ be weddid®, for! to’ brynge forth 
-sones!, for™ to" be hosewyues®, for? to 3yue 
noon? occasioun to the aduersarie’, bicause 
isof cursid thing. ‘Now forsoth’ summe' 
i¢ben turned abac aftir Sathanas*. If ony 
feithful man hath widewis’, vndirmyn- 
istre* he to hem, that the chirche be not 
greuyd, that it suffice to hem that ben verri 
17 widewis’. The prestis that ben? wel bi- 
fore’, ‘that is, treuly kepen* presthod, be 
thei? hadd worthi double honour; moost 
thei that trauelen in word and teching®. 
1s Sothlif the scripture seith, Thou schalt not 
bridele the mouth to the® oxe threischinge, 
igand, A werkman is worthi his hyre. Nyle 
thou resceyne accusyng ajens a! prest, no 
29 but vndir tweye* or thre witnessis!. For- 
sothe™ ‘repreue thou men synnynge bifore 
alle men", that and°® othere haue drede. 
ail preie, o7? coniure’, thee’ bifore God, and 
‘Crist Jhesu’, and his chosne angels, that 
thou kepe thes thingis, and withouten' 
bifore dom ‘doynge nothing", bowynge’ 


lewideY al? good werk. But eschewe*®i1 

thou> 3ongere widewis; for whanne thei 

“han do® letcherie{, thei wolen be weddid = + deccherye ; 
: . . - __ aftir a vow of 
in Crist, hauynge dampnacioun, for thei 12 chastite. Lire 
han maad voide the firste feith. Also 13 ¢™4 *e Gis 
thei idil lernen to go aboute housis, not 

oneli ydel, but ful of wordis and curi- 

ouse, spekynge thingis that4 bihoueth 

not. Therfor Y wole, that 3ongere wi-14 

dewis be weddid, and bringe forth chil- 

dren, and ben hosewyues, to 3yue noon 

occasioun to the aduersarie, bi cause of 

cursid thing. For now summe_ ben1s 

turned abak aftir Sathanas. If ony 16 
feithful man hath widewis, mynystre he 

to hem, that the chirche be not grenyd®, 

that it suffice to hem that ben very 

widewis. The‘ prestis that ben wel17 
gouernoures, be thei had worthi to dou- 

ble onour; moost thei that trauelen in 

word and teching. For scripture® seith, 18 

Thou schalt not bridil® the mouth of 

the oxe threischinge, and, A werk man 

is worthi his hire. Nyle thou resseyue 19 
accusyng a3ens a preest, but vndur 

tweyne or thre witnessis. But reproue 20 

thou men that synnen bifor alle men, 

that also othere haue drede. Y preie2i 

bifor God, and Jhesu Crist, and hise 

chosun aungelis, that thou kepe these 

thingis with oute preiudice, and do no 

thing in bowynge ‘in to* the! othere™ 

side. Put thou hondis to no man, ne-22 

ther anoon comyne thou" with othere 

mennus synnes. Kepe thi silf chast. 


™ mynistride vy. © qith oute desire of preisynge to gr. ° schewid g. P eschewe thou vy. 4 widues, 
not doynge these thingis Qr. t for F. Sin Crist, vowinge to him chastite gr. Om. v. — t weddid in 
Crist y. %dampnacioun, in her defoulid conscience eT. ¥ feith to Crist gr. Wleren sx. * Om. sx. 
y go aboute ry. 2 they ben oT. aword 7. > curiosite 0. curiouse werkis gr. © thenges 4eMNOPQSsTVY. 
4 byhouen or. & that sungere widewis yr. f£Om.svx. & Om. rv. © weddid, that these thingis byfallen 
hem not QT. i Om. srx. k Om. rv. l sonys, in dreed of the Lord gr. m Om. srx. n Om. rv. 
© huswijues, wele reulynge her meynee QT. P Om, sx. 4 to noon @. r aduersarie, in ydelnesse Qr. 
8 For nowy. tsumme widues oT, & Satanas, folewynge her lustis or. VY of his kynne verre widues @r. 


x mynistre vy. Y widues, and han noon othere help or. 


2 gon QT. ® souereyns VF. borer. © kepen 


well ox. d Om. r. © for to hem men owen to obeien goosily, and to mynystre to hem nescessarie 


lyflode, et e contrario peruersis. 6 marg. For whir. 


gofr. bans. Om.y. 1Om.r. * two eaposrx. 


tweyne ry, 1 witnessis, that is undir witnesse of the olde lawe and the newe, and the autore of hem 
bothe gr. ™ Om. or. 4 Men synnynge before alle men reprene thou gr. °Om.G prm. P Om. x. 
4a adiure gr. Om. x. =* Om. opyxy. § Jhesu Crist vy. ¢ do noo thing withouten ry. %Om.7. Vin 


bowinge r. 


yfolowek. Zak. a@ethchewer. >%Om. rR prim. ©Om.a. ‘that ita. ¢chargidk. f Om. b. 
& the scripture 1kak. 5 thaé is, werne necessaries to the prechour of the gospel, K marg. k toe prim. k. 


lthatc Om. 08. ™ tother xa. thou not k. 


V. 22—VI. 8. 


2zinto another part*. ‘To no man soone 
thou schalt putte hondis’, nether ‘thou 
schalt comune? with othere mennis synnes*. 

23 Kepe thi silf chast. Nyle thou 3it drynke 
watir”, but use a litil wyn for thi stomak, 
2aand thin ofte falling infirmytees. ‘Sum 
mennis® synnes ben opyn, ‘bifore goynge® 
to dom; forsoth of ‘sum men® and‘ thei 
2ssuen’. Also and goode dedis ben opyn, 
and thok that han hem** othirwysel, 
mown™ not be hid. 
CAP. VI. 

1 Who" euere ‘seruauntis ben® vndir 30k, 
deme? thei her lordis’ worthi al honour, 
lest the name of ‘the Lord™ and™ doctryn* 

2be blasfemyd*. Forsoth thei that han 
feithful’, ‘or cristene’, lordis, dispise not’, 
for thei ben britheren*; but more serue 
thei’, for thei ben feithful and loued, the? 
whiche ben parceners of benefice*, ‘o7 good 
doyng». “These thingis teche thou‘, and 

3 these thingis moneste thou’. If ony man 
techith® othirwyse, and acordith not to the 
hoole’, ‘or holsum&, wordis of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, and to that teching that is 

4vp! pite, is* proud!, ‘no thing kunnynge™, 
but langwischinge® aboute® questiouns and 
fiz3tingis of wordis, of the? whiche ben 
brou3t forth enuyes, stryues, blasfemyes, 

syuele suspiciouns, fi3tingis of men corupt 
in soule, ‘or resoun', and that ben priued* 
fro’ treuthe, demynge wynnynge for* to be 
spite. Forsoth a greet wynnyng* is pite, 
7with sufficience. Forsoth" we brou3ten’ 
no thing” in to this world, no dowte, for* 
swe mown not bere awei ony thing. For- 
sotheY hauynge foodis, and with what 
thingis’ we schulen be clothid*, ‘with these 


x Om. 7. 


I. TIMOTHY. 


461 


Nyle® thou 3it? drinke watir, but vse a23 
litil wyn, for thi stomac, and ‘for thin 
ofte fallynge’ infirmytees. Sum mennus24 
synnes ben opyn, bifor goynge to dom; 
but of summent thei comen aftir. And 2s 
also goode dedis ben opyn, and tho that 
han hem in othere maner, moun not be 
hid. 


CAP. VI. 

What euere seruauntis ben vndur 30k,1 
deme thei her lordis worthi al onour, 
lest the name of the Lord and the doc- 
tryn be blasfemyd. And thei that hane 
feithful lordis, dispise hem not, for thei 
ben britheren; but more serue thei, for 
thei ben feithful and louyd, whiche ben 
parceneris of benefice. ‘Teche thou these 
thingis, and moneste thou these thingis. 
If ony man techith® othere wise, ands 
acordith not to the hoolsum wordis. of 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, and to that tech- 
ing that is bi pitee, he is proud, and4 
kan no thing, but langwischith aboute 
questiouns and stryuyng*t of wordis, of 
the whiche .ben brou3t forth enuyes, 
stryués, blasfemyes", yuele suspiciouns, 
fi3tingis of men, that ben corrupt ins 
soule, and that ben pryued fro treuthe, 
that’ demen wynnyng to be pitee. Buté 
a greet wynnyng is pitee, with suffici- 
ence. For we brou3ten in no thing in7 
to this world, and no doute, that we 
moun not bere ‘awey ony thing’. Buts 
we hauynge foodis, and with what 
thingus we schulen be hilid, be we paied* 


y To no man soone thou schalt putten thin hondis G sec.m.N. To no man soone t. s.p. 


hondis, but bisily preue hem gr. Put thou hondis to no man sone v. To no m.t.s. p. hondis soone y. 


Z comune thou r. 
¢ Summen car. 
vndirfolewen or. thei earper. 
sernauntis GupeT. P gesse gr. 4 lord sy. 
t blasfemyd, by her grucchynge or. 
God grt. Y thei hem er. z Om. vr. 
and for to cumme gr. © Teche thon thes thingis r. 
AN. hoolsum vx. § Om. orvx. ithe vr. 
™ and can noo thing vy. ™ languischith v. 
sfor K. 88 Om. sx. + euerelastynge wynnynge @r. 
y But wey. thing o. 4 clad sx. hilid vr. 


d goende biforn s. 
kk herd ry. 


© And nyle k. 


P Om. R prom. 
* striuyngis R. 


t and blasfemes a. 


vand k. 


& synnes, im consent Q. synners, in consent T. 
© summen AGMNPeY. summe sTx. f 
lin other manere r. 
Ther Lord God er. 
u feithful lordis vy. 
a benefices Gor. 
4 moneste thou thes thingis r. 

i after capor. bi r. 
© after o. 
u For vy, 


q lest thou haunte thine r. 
¥ eny thing awey rR. 


b watir, for thy grete besenesse or. 
Om. er.  & folewen carp. 
mmayo. ™ Whaty. © ben 
Tt Om. up. 8 Om. m. his doctrine er. 
vOm. x. — W hem not or. x britheren in 
b Om. orx. or good doynge, that is now 
eteche T.  £ holi 
k he this or. he is ry. 1 pronyd «x. 
P Om. sx. Om. x. * priued, or departide or. 
Y bro3ten in x. Wthinginc. ¥* that r. 


Tsumme men I. summe QR. 
x apaied hk. 


8 teche g. 


462 


ythingis> be we° payed’. Forwhi thei that 
wolen be maad® riche, fallen into tempta- 
cioun, and into gnaref of the deuels, and® 
manye vuprofitable desyris and noyowsi, 
the* whiche drenchen men into the! deeth 
1oand perdicioun. Sothly™ the roote of alle 
ynels is couetyse, the’ which ‘sum men° 
coueitynge, ‘or desyringe?, erreden fro the 
feith, and bisettiden? hem with many sor- 
uwis. Forsoth™ thou, man of God, fle thes 
thingis; sothli sue thon rijtwysnesse, pite, 
i2 feith, charite’, pacience, myldenesse. Stryue 
thout a good strif of" feith, catche euer- 
lastyng lyf, into which thou art clepid, and 
hast knowlechid a good knowleching bi- 
13fore many witnesses. I comaunde to thee 
bifore God, that quykeneth alle thingis, 
and” Crist Jhesu, that 3eldeX a witnessing 
vndir Pilat of Pounce, a good confessioun, 
usthat thou kepe the comaundement with- 
outen wem, irreprehensible, til into the 
iscomyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist; whom 
the blessid and alooneY my3ty kyng of 
kingis, and Lord of lordis, schal schewe in 
ishis? tymes. The* which aloone hath im- 
mortalite’, and dwellith in li3t, to which‘ 
no man may come’; whom noon of men 
sy3°, but nether may se; to whom glorie, 
and honour, and empire into’ withouten 
iyende. Amen. Comaunde thou to ‘riche 
men& of this world, for® ‘to not sauere’, 
‘or undirstonde*, hi3zly', nethir™ for" to° 
hope in vneerteynte of richessis, but in 
quyk God, that 3yueth to vs alle? thingis 
isplenteuously fort to vse; for™ to do wel, 
for’ to be maad riche in goode werkis, 
19li3tli fort to 3yue, for® to comune, for" to 
tresoure to hem silf a good foundement 
into tyme to’ comynge”, that thei catche 


I. TIMOTHY. 


VI. 9-19. 


with these thingis. For thei that wolen9 
be maad riche, fallen in to temptacioun, 
and ‘in to’ snare of the deuel, and in to 
many vuprofitable desiris and noyous, 
whiche drenchen men in to deth and 
perdicioun. For the rote of alle yuelis 10 
is coueytise?, which summen coueitinge 
erriden fro the feith, and bisettiden hem 
with many sorewis. But, thou, man of11 
God, fle these thingis; but sue thon ri3t- 
wisnesse, pite, feith, charite, pacience, 
myldenesse. Stryue thou a good strijfie 
of feith, catche euerlastinge lijf, in to 
which? thou art clepid, and hast knou- 
lechid a good knouleching bifor many 
witnessis. I comaunde” to thee bifor is 
God, that quikeneth® alle thingis, and 
bifor Crist Jhesu, that 3eldide a witness- 
ing vnder Pilat of Pounce, a good con- 
fessioun, that thon kepe the comaunde-14 
ment with out wem, with out repreef, 
in to the comyng of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist; whom the blessid and aloone “15 
mi3ti® king of kyngis and Lord of lordis 
schal schewe in his tymes. Whichie 
aloone hath vndeedlynesse, and dwellith 
in 1i3t, to whichf no man may come; 
whom no man say, nether may se; to 
whom glorie, and honour, and empire be 
with out ende. Amen. Comaunde thou 17 
to thes riche men of this world, that thei 
vndurstonde not hi3li, nether that thei 
hope in vneerteynte of richessis, but in 
the® lynynge God, that 3yueth to vs alle 
thingis plentenously to vse; to do wel, 18 
to be maad riche in good werkis, 1i3tli 
to 3yule, to comyne, to tresoure to hem1g9 
silf a good foundement in to tyme to 
comynge, that thei catche euerlastinge 


b sufficient thingis eT. Om, r. ¢QOm.e@pr.m. 4 payed with these thingis vy. © Om.r.  f the 
gnare 4G. the snare 0. snaare yr, €&feendeo. and into ery. inoyeso, kOm.r. 10m. 4 sec.m. 
GMNPQSTVXY. ™ For whiy. 20Om.r. ©summen szcupy. P Om. Gwoperx. 4 graffiden G sec. vice. 


bisetteden, or graffeden mp. ingraffiden er. hisetten sx. bysettynge y. 
t thou, with discrecioun of deed, that it profite to other gr. 


x 3eeldide cperr. hath 3elden n. 
GMPQTY. © whome er. 
emy. the rijche r. 
mne xX. 

u Om. sx. 


Y all oon a. 


h Om. sx. that r. 
1 Om. sx. that yr. © thei r. 
YOm. ¥.  ¥ comen sx. 


Y into the r sec. m. 


% yuel coueitise k. 
4 aboue k. 


€ almizti q pr.m. f whiche i3¢ 1. 


Zz his couenable er. Om. sy. 
4 come, with outen hym or. 
i thei vndirstonde not 7. 

P Om. rf. 


a the whiche 1 sec. m. 
& Om. R. 


r But r. 8 and charite Tr. 
w On. M, in N. and bifore r. 
aOm. +r. > vndeadlynesse 

fbev. the riche men 
k Om. orx. Lhigly, or proudly or. 
rOm. sx. Om. sx, t Om. sx. 


u of the s. 
© sawe as he ts QT. 
q Om. sx. 


b comaundide a. = © quyketh c. 


h Om. Rr. 


VI. 20, 21. I. TIMOTHY. 463 


goeuerlasting lyif. Thou Tymothe, kepe  lijf. Thou Tymothe, kepe the thing 20 
the* depoost, or thing bitakun to thee, bitakun to thee, eschewynge cursid no- 
eschewinge’ curside noueltees’ of * voyces, _ueltees of voicis, and opynyouns of fals 
and opynyouns®_of fals name of kun- name of kunnyng; which summen bi-21 

2inyng; the® which? ‘sum men® bihetynge’, _ hetinge, aboute the feith fellen doun. The 
falliden$ doun aboute the feith. The grace grace of God be with thee. Amen. 
of God with® thee. Amen. 


Here endith the firste pistle to Tymo- Here endith the firste pistle to Tymo- 
the, and bigynneth the prolog to the se- the, and bigynneth the prologe on the 
cunde pistle’, secounde pistle to Tymothei. 


xthi carrer. Y of schewid c. ethcbewyng Tr. 2 nouelte gr. 2 or p. > opynioune ox. ¢ Om. Fr. 
d whiche kunnynge oT. © summen 4GMpgTy, summe Ns. f bileuynge g.  & fellen carpox. fallen sr. 
h Je with r. i Here endeth the first pistle to Tymothe, and now bigynneth the secounde. a.  Heere 
endith the ferste pistil to Tymothe, and bygynneth the prologe of [oon N.} the secounde pistil yn. Here 
eendith the first epistel to Thimothe, and bygynneth the prologe of the ij. 0. Here endith the firste pistle to 
Tymothe, and bygynneth the secounde pystle to Tymothe. 9. Here endith the pistle to Tymothe, and bigynne 
the prologe upon the secunde pistle. v. No final rubric in eupsTx. 


i From cxaca. Heere endith the t. pistle to Thymothie, and biginnith the prologe on the ti. 1g. Here 
endeth the firste pistle to Tymothe ; se now the prologe of the secunde pistle to Tymothe.&. Here endith 
the firste pistle to Tymothe, and here bigynneth a prologe on the secounde. mq. Here endith the firste pistle 
to Tymothe, and here bigynneth the secounde, with the prologe. vu. Here endith the firste pistle to Tymothe, 
and here bigynneth the prologe on the secounde pistle. bh. Here endith the firste pistle to Tymothe, and 
here bigynneth the secounde pistle to Tymothe. 0. No final rubric in aERek, 


Il, TIMOTHY. 





Prolog to the secunde pistle to Tymothe*. 


Axso he wrytith to Tymothe of the? 
exortacioun of martirdom, and of al the 
reule of treuthe; and what* beth to com- 
ynge® in the laste tymes, and of his owne 
passioun; writinge to him fro Rome cite. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth 
the pistle?. 


The secunde epistle to T'ymothe*. 


CAPS I. 
1 Poul, apostle’ of Jhesu Crist, bi the 
wille of God, vp° the biheeste of lyf that 
2is in Crist Jhesu, to Tymothe, his mooste 
dereworthe® sone, grace, mercy, and pees® 
of God ouref fadir, and’ Jhesu Crist, oure 
3Lord. I do thankyngis to my God, to 
whom I serue fro my progenitours® in 
clene conscience, for' withouten ceessyng 
I haue mynde of thee in my preieris, ny3t 
aand day, desyringe for* to se thee; I! 


Jeroms prolog on Poulis epistle to Thi- 


mothe®, 


He writith also to Tymothe of? ex- 
ortacioun of martirdom, and of euery 
reule of treuthe; and what schal come in 
the laste tymes,and of his owne! passioun; 
wrytynge to hym fro the citee of Rome. 


Jerom in his prologe on this pistle seith 
this®. 


The seeunde pistle to Tymothe?. 


CAP. I. 

Poul, apostle of Jhesu Crist, bi thet 
wille of God, bi the biheest of lijf that 
is in Crist Jhesu, to Tymothe, his moost2 
dereworthe sone, grace, merci, and pees 
of God the fadir, and of Jhesu Crist, oure 
Lord. I do thankyngis to my God, to3 
whom Y serue fro my progenytouris in 
clene conscience, that with outen ceess- 
yng Y haue mynde of? thee in my 
preyeris, ni3t and dai, desirynge to se4 


a Prologe s. No initial rubric in y. No prologue in acaex. In nr of the second text. b Om. o. 
¢ what thenges 0. 4benos. bevy. &comens. f Here cendeth the prologe, and bygynneth the secoun{de] 
epistle to Tymothe. 0. The secound pistle to Tymothe. pot. No final rubric in sry. aFrom ™. No 


initial rubric in the other Mss. > the apostell o. 


cafter cupor. bir. 4deres. © pees be to thee r. 


fthe ry. fandof yr.  progenytoure N. progenitours, either auncetris vy. ‘that yr. k Om. sx. 1Om. 


G pr.m. PSx. beynge gt. And I am r. 


a From £. The prolog of the secunde pistil. n. 


Heere sueth the prolog on the ij¢. pistle to Tymothe. nr. 


Prologus. v. Here bigynneth the prologe on the ij. Tymothe.e. Here bigynneth the prolog on the firste 
(sic) pistil to Tymothe. k. No initial rubric in acikmquxabefgho. Sof the v. © to KaRbceghoa. 
d Om. 1 prem. € From ckmgxbchoa. Jerome in his prolog on this pistil seyth this sentence. n. 
Thus eendith the prolog, and bigynneth the ij*. pistle to Tymothe. x. Jerom in his prologe seith this. v. 
Here endith the (prologe] and bigynneth pistil. g. No final rubric in azrrefk. 4 Poulis secunde epistle 
to Thimothe.. Here bigynneth the secounde pistle to Tymothe. me. No initial rubric in crkeRuxabeghko. 


> on R. 


I. 5—~16. 


myndeful of thi teeris, that I be™ with ioye 
5fulfillid"; takinge® recordinge?, ‘or mynde, 
of that feith, that is in thee not feyned, 
the’ whiche and® dwellide’* first in thin 
aunte Loyde, and in thi modir Ennyce. 
Sothli I am certeyn, that and‘ in thee". 
é6For which cause I moneste’, that thou 
reyse ajen the grace of God, that is in 
thee bi the” ‘on puttinge* of myne hondis. 
7Sothliz* God 3af not to vs the spirit of 
dredey, but of vertu, and of lone, and? so- 
sbrenesse. ‘And so* nyle thou** schame the 
witnessing of oure Lord Jhesu®, nether me, 
thee boundyn of him; but trauele ‘with 
me? in the gospel vp* the vertu of God; 
9that delyuerede vs, and clepide with his‘ 
hooli clepyng, not aftir oure workis, but 
vp? his _purpos and grace, that is 30ouyn 
‘to vs? in Crist Jhesu bifore worldli tymes; 
1onow forsoth it is opyn bi the lizjtnyng' of 
oure sauyour Jhesu Crist, the* which sothli 
distruyede deeth, forsothe™ lijtnede® lyf 
11and vncorupcioun® bi the ‘gospel. InP the’ 
which I am sett a prechour and apostle, 
12and maistir of hethen men’. For which’ 
cause also I suffre thes thingis; butt I am 
not confoundid. Forsoth" I woot to whom 
I haue bileuyd, and I am certeyn for’ he 
is my3ti for” to kepe my depoost*, ‘or 
thing putt in kepingY, into that day. 
13‘Haue thou? the foorme of hool* wordis, 
the> whiche thou herdist of me in feith 
isand loue in Crist Jhesu. Kepe thou a 
good depoost, ‘or a thing takyn to thi 
keping*, bi the Hooly Gost, that dwellith 
isin vs. Sothlid thou woost, that® alle that 
benf in Asye ben turned® fro me, of 
is whiche" is Figelus' and. Ermogenes*. The 
Lord 3yue mercy to the hous of Onoze- 


m be fillid rv. 
8 Om. T. also vy. 88 dwellith y. 
X setting on vy. -**X Forwhi r. 
b Jhesu Crist 4cmNnoporv. 
GMpor. bir. 4Om. ¢. 
cioun G prem. P Om. & pr.m. 
whiche s. tando. 4 For r. 
ahoolsum vy. > Om. r. 
is, thin office ot. or thing taken to thi keping v. 
awey F. . 4 whome per. 
Philegius 7. k Ermogenes, moost contrarie ov. 


2Om.r. © and I take r. 
t Om. o. 
¥ fals drede er. 

€ Om, sy. 

ilisting x. &k Om. r. 

qa Om. sx. 

Vv that or. 


© the whiche 1. 


Ij. TIMOTHY. 


P in recording sxy. 
u thee it is or. 
Z and of GmMPpeTr. 
4 thon togidere r. 

mand r. 
rmen, for the muttitude that sueth me in byleue gr. 
w Om. sx. 
© or a thing taken to thi keepynge [or G sec. m.] office cup. Om. Nosx. that 
4Om. v. 
i Phigelius cg. Filetus n. in aliis libris Figelius ct Philegus n marg. 


. 4 Om. erkarbceghkoag. 
VOL. IV. 30 


465 


thee; hauynge mynde of thi teeris, that 
Y be fillid with ioye. And Y bithenkes. 
of that feith, that is in thee not feyned, 
which also dwellide firste in thin aunte 
Loide, and in thi modir Eunyce. And Y 
am certeyn, that also in thee. Fors 
which® cause Y moneste thee, that thou 
reise a3en the grace of God, that is in 
thee bi the settyng on of myn hondis. 
For whi God 3af not to vs the spirit of7 
drede, but of vertu, and of loue, and of | 
sobrenesse. Therfor nyl thou schames 
the witnessyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 
nether me, his prisoner; but trauele thou 
togidere in the gospel bi the vertu of 
God; that delyueride vs, and clepides 
with his hooli clepyng, not after oure 
werkis, but bi his purpos and grace, that 
is 30uun in Crist Jhesu bifore worldli 
tymes; but now it is opyn bi the 1lizt-10 
nyng of oure sauyour Jhesu Crist, which 
destriede deth, and li3tnede lijf and vn- 
corrupcioun bi the gospel. In which Yu 
an) set a prechour and apostle, and 
maistir of hethene men. For which cause 12 
also Y suffre these thingis; but Y am 
not confoundid. For Y woot to whom Y 
haue ‘bileuyd, and Y am certeyne that 
he is mi3ti for’ to kepe that is take to 
my keping in to that dai. Haue thou13 
the fourme of hoolsum wordis, whiche 
thon herdist of me in feith and loue 
in Crist Jhesu. Kepe thou the good 14 
takun to thi kepyng bi the Hooli Goost, 
that dwellith in vs. Thou wost this, is 
that alle that ben in Asie ben turnyd 
awey fro me, of whiche is Figelus and 
Ermogenes. The Lord 3yue merci toi6 
the hous of Onesyforus, for ofte he re- 


rOm.r. 


4 Om. G pr.m. ox. 
w Om. 0. 


v monestede G. moneste thee nr. 
a Therfore ry. 24 thou not y. 
eafterampot. bir. fthisry. & after 
0 he liztnyde gr. liztede x. © corrup- 
5 the 
z Hanynge sr. 


xhelthe er. Y Om. erx. 


e this that r. f dwell o. § turned 


© ether putt K marz. 


466 


pherus, for ofte he refreischide me, and 
17schamyde not my chayne. But whanne he 
cam to Rome, he sou3te me! bisyli, and 
isfond™. The Lord 3yue to" him for? to 
fynde mercy of God in that dayP. And 
how grete thingis he mynistride to me at 
Ephecy, thou ‘hast betere knowe’4. 


CAP. II. 


1 Therfore thou, my sone, be comfortid 
2in grace that is in Crist Jhesu. And what 
thingis thou hast herd of me by many 
witnessis, bitake thou these to feithful 
men, the’ whiche® schulen be able and 
3for" to teche othere men. Trauele thou 
das av good kny3t of ‘Crist Jhesu”. No 
man holdinge kny3thod to God, inwlap- 
pith* him silf with worldli nedis, that he 
plese to him, to whom he hath prouyd 
shim silf. Forwhi and’ he that stryueth?, 
‘or fi3tith*, in batel, schal not be crowned, 
6‘no but® he schal4 fizt® lawfully. It bi- 
houeth an erthe tilier for‘ to resceyune first 
jof the fruytist. Vndirstond thou what 
thingis I seie. Sothli' the Lord schal 3yue 
sto thee in alle thingis vndirstondyng. Be 
thou myndeful the* Lord Jhesu Crist! 
‘for to™ haue" risyn a3en fro deede men°, 
9‘of the seed of Dauid?, vp’ my gospel, in 
which I trauele ‘til to™ boondis, as yuel 
worchinge, but the word of God is not 
10 boundyn. Therfore J susteyne‘ alle thingis 
for the chosene, that and‘ thei gete the 
heelthe, that is in Crist Jhesu, with he- 
uuenly glorie. A trewe word", forwhi if 
we ben to gidere deedev, and we schulen 
izlyue to gidere’ ; if we schulen* susteyne’, 
and? we schulen regne to gidere*; if we 
schulen® denye’, and he schal denye vs; 
i3if we bileuen not, he dwellith feithful, he 
i4may not denye him silf*. Forsoth® thes 


10m.er. ™ foond me er. © Om.s. 
ist betere ry, Om. yx.  §& that x. 

x jnwrappith er. inwlappid vy. Y Om. er. 
¢bot sif ogr, 4Om. rr. © fizteth rv. 
i Forwhi vy. * that the v. 
q after GuporT. bi r. 
to the world or. © to gyder in blisse ar. 
ato gyder with Crist chief martre or. b Om. r. 
mysbyleue, and vs puite doun, vpreise feithful or. 


Tynto GMPeT. §&suffre r. 


f the mercy a. 


Il. TIMOTHY. 


© Om. G pr.m. MPQSTX. 
t Oni. o. also r. 
z fiztith oy. 
f Om. sx. 
1 Crist of the seed of Dauid r. 
t Om. c. 
x Om. ¥. 
© denye hym or. 
€ Teche thou rv. 


& also be able 19. be able also xreehko. be able b. 


I. 17-——II. 14. 


freischide me, and schamyde not my 
chayne. But whanne he cam to Rome, 17 
he sou3te me bisili, and foond. Theis 
Lord 3yue to hym to fynde merci! of 
God in that dai. And hou grete thingis 
he mynystride to me at Effesi, thou 
knowist betere. 


CAP. II. 


Therfor thou, my sone, be coumfortid 1 
in grace that is in Crist Jhesu. And whate 
thingis thou hast herd of me bi many 
witnessis, bitake thou these to feithful 
men, whiche schulen ‘be also able® to 
teche othere men. Trauele thou as a3 
good kny3t of Crist Jhesu. No man4 
holdinge kny3thod to God, wlappith hym 
silf with worldli nedis, that he plese to 
hym, to whom he hath preuyd hym silf. 
For he that fijtith in a" batel, schal nots 
be corowned, but he fij3te lawfuli. Ite 
bihoneth an erthetiliere to resseyue first 
of the fruytis. Vndurstonde thou what7 
thingis Y seie. For the Lord schal 3yue 
to thee vndurstonding in alle thingis. 
Be thou myndeful that the Lord Jhesus 
Crist of the seed of Danid hath rise 
a3en fro deth, aftir my gospel, in whicho 
Y trauele ‘til to! boondis, as worching 
yuele, but the word of God is not 
boundun. Therfor Y suffre alle thingis 10 
for the chosun, that also thei gete the 
heelthe, that is in Crist Jhesu, with he- 
uenli glorie. A trewe word, that if wei 
ben deed togidere, also we schulen line 
togidere; if we suffren, we schulen regne 12 
togidere; if we denyen, he schal denye 
vs; if we bileuen not, he dwellith feith- 13 
ful, he mai not denye hym silf. Teche1s 
thou these thingis, witnessinge bifore 
God. Nyle thou stryue in wordis; for 


P day of hys cummynge eT. 4 know- 
uQOm. sx. YOm.rr. W® Jhesu Crist r. 

a Om. osx. or stryueth y. bina ox. 
& fruytis, that he traueileth ot. fruts. » Om. x. 
mQOm.syx. Shathy. °Om.x. POm.r. 
u word is this that I seye oT. Y deed 
y suffre as martires gr. suffren vy. 7 Om. er. 
d silf, that he mot punysche oure 


h Om. b. 


i vnto 1. 


Il, (5-25. 


thingis ‘I moneste‘, witnessinge® bifore 
God. Nyle thou stryue in wordis; forsoth* 
to no thing it is profitable, no but to the 
issubvertyng! of men heeringe. Forsothe* 
bisyli! cure™, ‘or kepe®, for® to 3yue ‘thi 
selfP prouable’, ‘or able", werk man to 
God, vnschamyd’, ‘or worthi not fort to be 
schamed™, ri3tli tretinge the word of 
i6treuthe. Forsoth schonye’ thou vnhooli 
and veyn spechis, sothli® thei* profiten 
i7moche to vnpite’, and the word of hem? 
crepith as a kankir. Of ‘the which? Philete 
isis, and Imeneus, the> whiche felden® doun 
fro the’ treuthe, seyinge ‘risynge a3en® 
now don, and‘ subuertiden’ the feith of 
igsum men. But the sad foundement of God 
stondith', hauynge this litili marke", The 
Lord! ‘hath knowyn™ whiche ben hise, and, 
Ech man that nameth" the name of the 
20 Lord®, departith? fro wickidnesse. Forsoth 
in thet greet hows ben not oonli ‘goldyn 
vessels’ and silueren’, but and‘ treene" and 
brutil’, ‘or ertheli*; and sothli summe ‘in 
to* honour, summe forsoth into dispit. 
21 Therfore if ony man ‘schal clense’ him silf 
fro these?, he schal be a? vessel halwid 
into honour, and profytable to the Lord, 
garedy to? al good work. Forsothe fle thou 
the® desyris of 3outhe’; sothli sue thou 
ri3twisnesse, feith, charite, pees, with hem 
that inclepen® the Lord of af clene herte. 
23 Forsoth schonye® thou foltische questiouns, 
and withoute disciplyne, wityuge for! 
2ithei* gendren chidingis. Forsoth it bi- 
houeth the seruaunt of ‘the Lord! for™ to 
not chyde"; but for® to be? mylde to alle 
2,men, able for4 to teche, pacient, with 


fOm. +. & witnessinge hem or. » forwhi rv. 


™ cure thi self carrer. charge thou o. 


Il. TIMOTHY. 


. ri3tli tretinge the word of treuthe. 


i turnynge vpsedoun mper. 
n Om. GMoPerX. 


467 


to no thing it is profitable, but to the 
subuerting of men that heren. Bisilits 
kepe to 3yue thi silf a preued preisable 
werkman to God, with oute schame*, 
But 16 
eschewe thou vnhooli and veyn spechis, 
for whi tho profiten myche to vnfeith- 
fulnesse, and the word of hem crepith17 
as a canker. Of whiche!' Filete is, and 
Ymeneus, whiche felden doun fro thete 
treuthe, seiynge that the rising a3en is 
now doon, and thei subuertiden the feith 
of summen. But the sad foundement of 19 
God stondith, hauynge this marke, The 
Lord knowith whiche ben hise, and, Ech 
man that nameth the name of the Lord, 
departith fro wickidnesse. But in a20 
greet hous ben uot oneli vessels of gold 
and of siluer, but also of tree and of 
erthe ; and so summen™ Jen in to onour, 
and summe®” in to dispit. Therfor if2! 
ony man clensith hym silf fro these, he 
schal be a vessel halewid in to onour, 
and profitable to the Lord, redi to al 
good werk. And fle thou desiris of 22 
3ongthe, but sue thou ri3twisnesse, feith, 
charite, pees, with hem that inwardli 
clepen the Lord of a clene herte. And 23 
eschewe thou foltische questiouns, and 
without kunnyng®, wytynge that tho 
gendren chidyngis. But it bihouethP 21 
the seruaunt of the Lord to chide not4; 
but to be mylde to alle men, able to 
teche, paciente, with temperaunce repreu-25 
ynge hem that a3enstonden the’ treuthe, 
that sum tyme God 3yue to hem for- 
thenkyng, that thei knowen the treuthe, 


k Om. v. 


I bisy a. 
© Om. ox. for thiself ry. 


P thee caPeT. 


Om. sy. 4 a prouable ewperr. r Om. ewperx. an able o. or preisable rv. 8 ynschameful 7. 
tOm.s. ‘4 Gloss om. emoperx. or not worthi for to be schamed vy. ¥ schunne cer. schone MNPsX. 
eschewe ov. Wforwhivy. *thoy. Yvnfeithfulnesse y. 4% hem, by li and litiler. whom mor. 
which yx. >Om.r. C¢fellen post. 4Om.sy. © ajenrisyngo. fandthei vy. & turneden vpsa- 
doun exper. 2 stant sx. iQOm.r. * marke, either signetv. 1 Lord God ry. ™ knowith r. 
nnemneth ewer. inclepith ny. © Lord verrelye or. Pdepartesx. dacmpor.  ° vessels of gold r. 
Sofsyluery. talsov. treenen wr. treen 9. of treey. Voferther. WOm.orx. ben 


intoy. inv.  Y clensith r. 


z these, that ben into dispite or. 


20Om.Nn. Pintoer. ¢ Om. ene 


esyxy. Ugongthe mr. © inwardly clepenv. fOm.4 pr.m.or. & schunne Gor. shone Px. schone o. 
eschewe y. bkunnyngy. ithaty. ¥thorx. !Godx. ™Om.s. “tochiden x. © Om. sx, 
POm. rx. 4Om.s. 


K ether worthi to be shamed K marg. 


Msummen rc. © knowinge k.  P bihoneth not rR. 


Iwhom 1. the whiche k. 
q Om. R. 


™M gumme A sec.m. summe men IQ. 
r Om. Rk. 


303% 


468 


temperaunce reprouynge hem that a3en- 
stonden the’ treuthe, that’ sam tyme God 
jyue hem‘ penaunce for" to knowe the 

eg treuthe, and’ thei ryse a3en fro snaris of 
the deuyl, of whom thei ben holdyn cay- 
tif at his wille. 


CAP. III. 


1 Forsothe wite thou this thing, that in 
the laste dayes perelouse tynies schulen 
2‘stonde ny3*, and men schulen be louynge 
hem silf, coueitous, hi3 of beringe, proude, 
blasfemesY, not obedient to fadir and mo- 
3dir’, vnkynde, cursid, withoute affeccioun, 
‘or good wille*, withoute pees, fals blam- 
eris®, vncontynent®, vnamylde, withoute be- 
4nygnyte, traitours, proterue’, ‘or ouer- 
thwert®, bollunf ‘with proude thou3tis®, 
sloueris® of lustis more than of God, hau- 
ynge sothli the spice’, ‘or aenesse*, of pite, 
forsothe! denyinge the vertu of it. And 
6eschewe™ thou these". Of these ‘sothli thei® 
ben that peersen housis, and leeden litle 
wymmen caytifs? chargid?? with synnes4, 
the’ whiche’ ben ledd with diuerse desyris, 
7euermore lernynget, and neuere" perfitly 
scomyng tov science’ of treuthe. Forsoth 
as Jannes and Mambre* a3en stooden Moy- 
ses, so and these ‘ajen stondenY treuthe, 
men? corupt in soule, ‘ov vndirstondynge’, 
9reproued” aboute the feith. But ferther 
thei schulen not® profyte, sothli the vn- 
wysdom of hem schal be knowen to alle 
lomen, as and hern was’. Forsoth thou 
hast getyn® my teching‘, ‘and ordynaunce, 
purposyng", feith, longe abidyng, loue, pa- 
ll cience, persecuciouns', passiouns, what ma- 
ner ben maad to me at Antyoche, at Ico- 
nye, at Listris, what maner persecuciouns 


r Om. Gmoper. 
Xneije v.  Y blasfemers rv. 
b chalengers rT. © yncontynent, or unchast er. 
werd G. or ouerwhert, frowerd mp. Om. ogrx. 
louers rv. i licnesse GMOPQT. 
® forsothe thei gc. forsothe it o. 
hem or. © Om. Nv. 
sTrxy. W kunnynge Gmpor. 
G prim. MOPOTX. 
by Moyses er. € folowid G sec. ni. QT. 
G pr.m. purpos G sec.m. my purpose er. 


Sand G pr. m. 


P caytif o. 


x Mambres err. 


s Om. cEIQga, 
¥ a3enstoden k. 


t Om. k pr. am. 
Z the treuthe o. 


Il. TIMOTHY. 


t to hem pr. 
2 modir, in leful thing @. modir, in leueful thingis T. 
4 ovuerthwert ox. froward 9. frauward 7. 
f holned & sec. m. o. blowen x. 
k Om. GMopeTx. 
PP chargen y. 
8 whiche caitif wymmen er. 
¥ agenstoden rx. 
b the proued y pr.m. the reproued y sec. m. 
f doctrine Guper. 
i persecucioun x. 


II, 26——III. 17.° 


and that thei rise ajen fro the’ snares 26 
of the deuel, of whom thei ben holdun 
prisoneris at his wille. 


CAP. III. . 


But wite thou this thing, that in thet} 
laste daies perelouse tymes schulen neije, 
and men schulen be louynge hem silf®,2 
coueitouse, hi3 of bering, proude, blas- 
femeris, not obedient to fadir and modir, 
vnkynde, cursid, with outen ‘affeccioun, 3 
with out pees, false blameris, vnconty- 
nent’, vnmylde, with out benygnyte, trai-4 
touris, ouerthwert”, bollun with proude 
thou3tis, blynde, loueris of lustis more 
than of God, hauynge the licknesse ofs 
pitee*, but denyynge the vertu of it. 
And eschewe thou these men. Of thesee 
thei ben that persen housis, and !eden 
wyinmen caitifs chargid with synnes, - 
whiche ben led with dyuerse desiris, 
euere more lernynge, and neuere perfitli7 
comynge to the science of treuthe. Ands 
as Jannes and Mambres a3enstoden Moi- 
ses, so these ajenstonden’ treuthe*, men 
corrupt in vndirstonding, repreuyd aboute 
the feith. But ferthere thei schulen not9 
profite, for the vnwisdom of hem schal 
be knowun to alle men, as hern was. 
But thou hast getun my teching, ordi-10 
naunce, purposing, feith, long abiding, 
loue, pacience, persecuciouns, passiouns, 1! 
whiche weren maad to me at Antioche, 
at Yeony, at Listris, what maner perse- 
cucyouns Y suffride, and the Lord hath 
delyuered me of alle. And alle men1i2 


uQm.sx. Vthatandr. caytiffis empor. 

2 Om. MoPOTX. 
€ or fra- 
= Om. x. 4 blinde 
1 but rv. m ethchewe rT. 0 these men QTV. 
4 synnys; for vertuouse mwymmen dispisen 
uneuermore x. VY to the 4GuNQ 
z these men ben er. ® Om. 
© not ower this present tyme QT. d was 


Om. o. ordynaunce yr. =» purposen 


t lerende s. 


u QOm.a. Yvnchaast R. ¥ ouirwhert rR. * ether of religion K marg. 


III, 12—IV. 6. 


I suffride, and the Lord hath* delyuered 
12me ‘of alle. And?! alle men that wolen lyue 
piteuously™ in Crist Jhesu, schulen sufire 
13persecucioun. Forsoth yuel men and dis- 
ceyueris schulen profyte" into worse, err- 
14ynge°, and sendyng? into errour. But 
dwelle thou in these thingis that thou hast 
lerd4, and ben bitakun™ to thee, witynge 
150f whom thou hast lerud*’; and for thou 
hast knowun hooly lettris fro thi 3ongthe‘, 
‘or childhod™, the’ whiche mouwn lerne” 
thee to heelth, by feith that is in Crist 
is Jhesu. Forsoth* al ‘scripture of GodY yn- 
spyrid’ is profitable to teche, to arguwe?, 
‘or proue, to® reproue’, for‘ to lernes 
in rijtwysnesse, that the man of God be 
perfyt, lerud® ‘to al good werk’. 


CAP. IV. 

1 I witnesse, ‘or preze, or coniure*, bifore 
God and! Crist Jhesu, that ‘is to™ dem- 
ynge" the® quyk and deed?, by’ the com- 
ynge’ of hym, and the kyngdom of him, 

2preche the word, be thou bisy ‘couenably 
with oute reste’, arguwe‘, ‘or proue", bi- 
seche’, blame’ in al pacience and doctryn. 

3Forsoth* tyme schal be’, whanne men 
schulen not susteyne’, ‘or saffre*, ‘hool, 
or holsum, teching®, but at’ her desyris 
thei schulen gadere to gidere® maistris 
3itchinge‘, ‘or plesynge®, to the® eeris. 
4And treuly’ thei schulen turne awey thei 
heeringe fro treuthe, but to fablis thei 
sschulen turne* to gidere. Forsothe wake 
thou, in alle thingis trauele thou!, do™ the 
work of ® euangelist®, fulfille? thi seruyse, 
sor offices, be thou sobre. Forsoth™ I ain 


oe 


U. TIMOTHY. 


469 


that wolen lyue feithfuli in Crist Jhesu; 
schulen suffre persecucioun. But yuele 1s 
men and disseyueris schulen encreese in 
to worse, errynge, and sendinge in to 
errour. But dwelle thou in these thingis 14 
that thou hast lerud*, and that ben bi- 
takun to thee, witinge of whom thou 
hast lerud®; for thou hast knowun hooli 1s 
lettris fro thi 3outhe®, whiche moun lerne 
thee to heelthe, bi feith that is in Crist 
Jhesu. For al scripture inspirid of God 16 
is profitable to teche, to repreue, to 
chastice, to lerne in ri3twisnes, that the 
man of God be parfit, lerud® to al good 
werk. 


CARB SIV: 

I witnesse bifore God and Crist Jhesu, 1 
that schal deme the quike and the? deed, 
and® bi the comyng of hym, and the 
kyngdom of hym, prechef the word, bez 
thou bisi conenabli with outen rest, re- 
preue thou, biseche thou, blame thou in 
al pacience and doctryn. For tyme3 
schal be, whanne men schulen not suffre 
hoolsum teching, but at her desiris thei 
schulen gadere ‘togidere to hein silf 
maistris 3itchinge® to the eeris. And4 
treuli thei schulen turne awei the her- ° 
yng fro treuthe, but to fablis thei schu- 
len turne. But wake thon, in alles 
thingis traueile thou, do the werk of 
ani euangelist, fulfille thi* seruyce, be 
thou sobre. For Y am sacrifisid now, and 6 
the tyne of my departyng! is ny3. Y7 


_¥Om.e. landofo. ™ pitously, or feithfully v. 4 profite, either encreeser. © errynge hem 
silf qr. P sendynge othere or. 4 lerned emnoporvy. lerid x. ttaken sy. 8 lerned cwnpry. lernyd, 
tor of the Holy Gost er. t southe alii. u Om. GwoPrerx. YOm.v. W enfourme Q7. lere sx. 


x Forwhi r. ¥ godly scripture, of whom God is autoure QT. 2 enspirid of hym qr. a repreue F. 
b Om. orx. © for to r. d reproue with emp. repreue with the wicked gr. chastise y. or for x. 
Om. esTx. & leren sx. b lernyd eunperry. i Om. o. to alle good werkis y. k Om. 
GMoperx. link. ™schaly. - 4demensx.demer. ©°Om.0. pthedeadry. 4and bir. 
tT kunnynge K. 8 to couenable and vncouenable gr. t repreue gr. repreue thou yr. =" ~or reproue M. 
Om. gstvx. ¥ biseche thou r. whblame thou vy. *Forwhiy. Ycomens. 2 suffre ewopoTr. 
2 Om. caopervx. »Om.cmopgryx. © doctrine capest. ‘andto Nn. © togidere to hem silf v. 


f plesinge er. colourende x. & Om. erx. 
to edefie britheren Qr. m do thou o. 
spoken eT. Piilley. 9 Om. emoporx. 


© Jerned alii. 
K this gk. 


@lerned alii. » 30ngthe alii. 
h ether plesynge K marg. 4 Om.a. 


b her ychynge or. i here er. 
4 of the emo. 
© For vr. 


4 Om. c. 
1 ether decth K marg. 


k be turnyd ewper. | thon, 
9° evangelist, that is, to fulfille in dede treuthe 


€Om.xa, fprechethour. #&§ Om.@ 


470 U. TIMOTHY. IV. jae 


sacrifysid® now, and the tyme of my ‘reso- 
zlucioun, or deeth', is ny3. I haue stryuyn 
a good stryf, I haue endid the cours, I 
shaue kept the feith. In the tothir tyme" 
a crowne of rij3twysnesse is kept to me, 
the’ which the Lord ‘schal 3elde to me in 
that day, iust domesman™”; forsoth not 
oonly to me, but ‘and to these* that louen’ 
his comyng. Hize” for? to come to me 
9soone. Forsoth® Demas ‘hath forsakyn me, 
louynge this world‘, and wente to’ Tessa- 
1olonyk, Cressens into Galathie®, Tyte into 
11 Dalmatichy£; Luk aloone is with me. 
Taak’ Mark, and lede to! with thee; for- 
soth* he is profitable to me into seruyse'. 
13Penulam™, ‘that is", cloth of° Ro- 
mayns?, ‘or book’, which I lefte at Tro- 


haue stryuun a good strijf, Y haue endid 

the cours, Y haue kept the feith. Ins 

‘the tothir™ tyme a coroun of ri3twis- 

nesse is kept to me, which the Lord, a 

just domesman, schal 3elde to me in that 

dai; and" not oneli to me, but also to 

these that louen his comyng. Hy3e9 

thou to come to me soone. For Demas, 

louynge this world, hath forsakun me, 

and wente to Tessalonyk, Crescens in 10 

to Galathi, Tite in to Dalmacie; Luki1 

aloone is with me. Take thou Mark, 

and brynge with thee; for he is profit- 

able to me in to seruyce. Forsothe Y 12 

sente Titicus to® Effesi. The clothPt13+t pd ae 
INAYNAS. 


which Y lefte at Troade at Carpe, [ire and the 
Glose here. v. 


ade at’ Carpe, thou comyng bryng* with 
thee, and the bookis, moost forsothe par- 
l4chemynus*. Alisaundre, the  tresorer, 
schewide to me manye ‘yuele thingis®; 
the’ Lord schal 3elde to hym vp” his 
15 workis*. Whom and thou eschewe’; ‘ful 
greetli forsoth he ajenstood* my* wordis. 
16 In my firste defence no man ‘was to? me, 
but alle forsoken me; be it not rettid® to 
izhem. Forsoth the Lord ‘stood ny3 to4 
me, and comfortide me, that the preching 
be® fulfillid’ by me, and that alle folkis 
heere, and’ I am delyuered fro mouth! 
isof the lyoun. Forsoth the Lord dely- 
uerede me fro al yuel werk, and schal 
make! saaf into hisi heuenli kingdom, to 
whom glorieé into worldis' of worldis. 
i9Amen. Greete wel Prisca, and Aquyla, 
zoand the hows of Onosephorus. Forsoth 
Erastus dwelte™, ‘or lefte®, at Corynthi®. 
Forsoth? I lefte Trophymus syk at My- 


S$ sacrified 7. 
cumme QT. v Om. Fr. 
Y loueth y. 2 Hize thou r. 
dintoo. © Galathie is sent or. 
k for v. 

m Penula er. 


a Om. sx. 
f Dalmacie n. 


2Om.er. a clothe c. Om. er. 


t deth, or resolucioun cmp. dethe er. departing, or deth v. resolucioun x. 
w just domesman schal 3elde to me in that day r. 
b forwhi r. 
& Take thou r. 
1 seruyse. Titicus sotheli I sente to Ephesi x. seruice. Forsothe I sente Titicus to Effesi rv. 
© Om. eT. 


whanne thou comest, bringe with thee, 
and the bookis, but moost parchemyne?. 
Alisaundre, the tresorer, schewide to me 14 
myche’ yuele; ‘the Lord schal® 3elde to 
hym aftir his werkis'. Whom also thou 15 
eschewe; for he a3enstood ful greetli oure 
wordis. In my firste defence no man i¢é 
helpide me, but alle forsoken me; be it 
not arettid to hem. But the Lord help-17 
ide me, and coumfortide me, that the 
preching be fillid bi me, and that alle 
folkis here, that Y am delyueride fro the 
mouth of the lioun. And the Lord de-1s 
lyueride me fro al yuel werk, and schal 
make me saaf in to his heuenly king- 
dom, to whom be glorie in to worldis 
of worldis. Amen. Grete wel Prisca, 19 
and Aquila, and the hous of Oneseforus. 
Erastus lefte’ at Corynthi, and’ Y lefte 20 
Trofymus sijk at Mylete. H13e thou to21 
come bifore wyntir. Eubolus, and Pru- 
dent, and Lynus, and Claudia, and alle 


U tyme fo 
x to hem eupaq. hem rT. 
¢ louynge this world, hath forsakyn me r. 
hbringe yr, 1 Om. nv. to Aidre or. 


P the Romayns cup. Om. er. Rome x. 


q Om. G prim. apr. or a booke @ sec.m. after Jerom is clepid a bake, and after Haymound a clothe of the 


Romayns. er. Gloss om. in vy. anentis emer. 


8 brynge i er. 


t the parchemynus 4. parchemyne 


cup. be thou myndeful to brenge parchemyne gr. Yyuelsy. Om. a. Wafter carpery. * werk x. 
Yethchewe 7. 2 for he ajenstod ful greetlir. ®ourer. helpider. Carettid r. 4 helpide r. 
Cofhis word bear. ffullid r. fillidy. gthats. 6 the mouth ansrxy. imake me ery sec.m. 


jOm. a. * be glorie y. J alle worldis c. 


™ the oother £1. that othre r. 


athe parchemyn K. ' moost a. % Om. k. 


™ lefte o. 


» Om. £1 prom. ggk. 
‘t Clause om. in q. 


nOm. Gaopostx. © Corynthe eaner. P For 7. 


Sinto bk. P that ts, of Remayns K marg. 
u Jefte me gk. W forsothe and A pr.m. 


1s iy BMs 


2ailete. Sothlia hize thou? for™ to come bi- 
fore wynter. Embolus’, and Prudent, 
and Lynus, and Claudia, and alle bri- 

2zatheren, greeten theet wel. Oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist with" thi spirit. The grace 
of God with’ jou". Amen. 


Here endith the secunde pistle to 
Tymothe, and bigynneth the prolog to 
Tyte*. 


qQOm.ry. 92 Om. a. YY Om. sx. 


5 Eubolus erx. 


Il. TIMOTHY. AT) 


Oure Lord 22 
The 


britheren, greten thee wel. 
Jhesu Crist be with thi spirit. 
grace of God be with 30u. Amen. 


Here endith the secounde pistle to 
Tymothe, and’ bigynneth the prologe on 
the pisile to Tite. 


t3ou Tr. Ube with ery. VY be with vy. W thee s. 


x Heere endith the secounde pistle to Tymothe, and now bigynneth epistle to Tyte. a. Here eendeth the second 
epistel to Thimothe, and bygynneth the prologe of the epistel to Tyte.o. Here endeth the secounde pistle 
to Tymothe, and bygynneth the pistle to Tyte. 9. Here endith the secunde pistle to Tymothe, and bigyn- 
neth the pistle to Tite, with the prologe. vy. No final rubric in empstx. 


vand here bo. © From crqxabchoa. Here endeth the seconde pistle to Tymothe ; se now the prolog 
on the pistle to Tyte. K. Here endith the secounde pistle to Tymothe, and here bigynneth the pistle to 
Tite. m. Here endith the laste pistil ta Tymothe, and bigynneth a prologe on the pistil to Tite. gz. No 
final rubric in arRruek. 


PPP uUs. | 





Prolog to the epistle to Tyte*. Jeroms prolog on Tite*. 


TyTeE he counceilith, and enformeth HE warneth Tite, and enfourmeth 
of the ordynacioun> ‘of prest and®» of —hym of the ordynaunce of presthod, and 
spiritual conuersacioun®, and of heretikis of spiritual conuersacioun, and of here- 
‘to be’ auoydide, the whiche bileuen‘ in’ tikis to ben eschewid, that leeueth> in 
Jewis wrytinge"; he writith fro Nico- the Jewis wrytingis; writinge to him 


polis. fro Nycopolis®. 
Here endith the prolog, and bigynneth Jerom in his prologe on this pistle seith 
the epistle to Tyte*. this? 
oe 
The epistle to Tyte*. Here bigynneth the pistle to Tyte*. 
CAP. I. CAP. 4: 
1 Poul, the seruaunt of God, apostle? of Poul, the seruaunt of God, and apostle 1 


Jhesu Crist, vp® the feith of the chosene of Jhesu Crist, bi the feith of the chosun 
of God, and? knowynge of the treuthe, . of God, and bi the? knowing of the 
2the® which is vp‘ pite, in? hope of euere treuthe, whiche is aftir pitee, in to thee 
lastyng lyf, that God bihi3te', that lyeth hope of euerlastinge lijf, whiche jf God 
snot’, bifore ‘worldly tymes!; forsoth he that lieth not, bihiz3te’ bifore tymes of 
schewide in his tymes his word,‘or sone™, the world®; but he hath’ schewid in hise3 
in preching, that is bitakyn to me vp" the tymes his word in preching, that is 


* Prologe. s. No initial rubric in y. No prologue in acwpeex. In nr of later text. b ordi- 
naunce os, »>b Om. K. of prestes and o. © conuersacionns y. ‘that ben y. ¢ voided s.  f bileeuith 
vy. €Om.y. 4 writynges osyy. i Nicopolypis xy. No final rubricin sy. ®@ From a. The pistle 
to Tyfe perxy. No initial rubric in the other Mss. _b forsothe apostle vr. ¢ after wpor. biv. 4 and 
bither. ©€Om.y. fafter wpory. intother. whichlijfr. iOm.r.  * not, bihigte r. 
1 tymes of the world ry. ™ or his sone Crist er. Om. x. PB after arper. bi r. 


* From x. Prolog. a. The prolog of the pistil to Tite.x. A prolog on the pistle to Tite. x. Pro- 
logus. t. Here bigynneth a prologe on the pistle to Tyte. uv. Here bigynneth the prologe to Tyte.e. Pro- 


log on Tite. k. No initial rubric in c1xmaxabefgho. b bileuen crikaNngrregkoa. bileueth uxabe. 
¢ Mycopolis ac pr.m. EYKMQUX pr. m. abceghkoag. 4 From cuxh. Jerom in his prologe seith this. Kuo. 


Jerome in his prolog on this emstil seith al this sentence. x. Jerom in his prolog here seith this. qbca. 
Jerom in his prologe here seith thus... Here endith the prologe, and bigynneth the pistil to Tite. g. No 
final rubric in arintefk. @ The epistle to Tite. ». Heere sueth the pistle to Tite. x. No initial rubric 
in cxquxabeghko. >Om.R. ¢the whicher. 4 hath bihijt k. © worldisr pr.m. f that hath k. 


I. 4-15. 


4comaundement of oure sauyour God, to 
Tyte, biloued® sone vp? the comun feith, 
grace and pees of God the fadir, and of 
5Crist Jhesu, oure sauyour. For grace4, 
‘or cause", of this thing I lefte thee at 
Crete, that thon amende tho thingis that 
faylen, and ordeyne ‘by cytees prestis‘, as 
éand I disposide to thee. If ony man is 
withouten cryme, ‘or greet synne', hous- 
bonde of o wyf", hauynge feithful sones, 
not in accusacioun of leccherie, or not 
7suget. ForsothY it bihoueth a bischop 
for” to be withoute crime, as* dispendourY 
of God, not proud, not wrathful, not 
‘vynolent, that is¥Y, ‘moche 30uun to wyn?, 
not® smytere, not coueitous of foul wyn- 
snynge; but holdinge hospitalite, benygne, 
prudent, sobre, iust, hooly, contynent °, 
obiclippyng that4 ‘trewe word’, ‘that is vp 
doctryn'; that he be .my3ti fors to amo- 
neste in hoolsum teching"*, and to re- 
10 proue hem that ‘a3en seyn'. Forsoth* ther 
ben manye vnobedient, and veyn spekeris, 
and disceyuers, moost! thei that ben of cir- 
1lcumcisioun, whom™ it bihoueth for to be 
reprouyd ; the® whiche subuerten? alle4 
housis, teching whiche:thingis™ it bihou- 
eth not, for grace’, ‘or loue', of foul wyn- 
l2nyng. Summe oon" of hem, ‘the propre 
prophete of ¥ hem, seide, Men of Crete 
euermore lyeris, yuel beestis*, ‘slow of ¥ 
13wombe”. This witnessing is trewe. For 
what* cause blame hem sore, that thei be 
14hool in feith, not 3yuynge tent to fablis of 
Jewis, and to maundementis of men, turn- 
15 ynge ‘hem awey‘ fro treuthe. Sotheli alle 
thingis ben clene to clene men’; forsoth 
to vnclene men and vnfeithful no thing is 


° the bylouyd er. moost derworthe r. 


bi citees 7. t or greet gylt mpoT. Om, ox. 
vy Forry. WOm.sx. *asaegr. y dispensatur y. 
ofwynv. ®notagr. > wynnynges o. 


of seyntis isa QT. a Y sec.m. © wrd trewe x. 
& Om. sx. 4b monesten x. 
forsothe 0. ™ whiche ry. ® Om. sx. 
cause T. theloue yr. +t Om. mopsrv.x. 
knew3 Q. her propre prophete that knewe rt. 
x beestis thristynge blood or. Y of slou3 v. 
© awey hem xk pr.m. VX. 


o Om. 7. 


8 oure sauyour God E1qb pr.m. gk. h dere rR. 


™notar1 20Om.R. © whiche 1. 


VOL. IV. 3 P 


TITUS. 


P aftir wpor. bi v. 


P vpturnen QT. 
u Om. er. 
w Creete derkid in vice (vices Tr] ben or. Crete ben r. 
2 wombe, or lustye QT. 
4 men, in her kynde and significacioun gr. 


473 


bitakun to me bi the comaundement of 
‘God oure sauyour®, to Tite, most dere-4 
worthe" sone bi the comyni feith, grace 
and pees of God the fadir, and of Crist 
Jhesu, oure sauyour. For cause of thiss 
thing Y lefte thee at Crete, that thou 
amende tho thingis that failen, and or- 
deyne preestis bi citees, as also Y dis- 
poside* to thee. If ony man is withoutes 
cryme, an hosebonde of o wijf, and hath 
feithful sones, not in accusacioun! of 
letcherie, or not suget. For it bihoueth7 
a bischop to be without cryme, a dis- 
pendour of God, not proud, not wrath- 
ful, not drunkelew, not™ smytere, not 
coueytouse of foul wynnyng; but hold-s 
inge hospitalite, benygne, prudent, sobre, 
iust, hooli, contynent, takinge that trewe» 
word, that is aftir doctryn; that he be 
mi3ti to amoneste in hoolsum techyng, 
and to repreue hem that a3enseien. For 10 
ther ben many vnobedient, and veyn 
spekeris, and disseyueris, moost thei that 
ben of circumcisyoun, whiche it bihoueth 1) 
to be repreued; whiche subuerten alle 
housis, techinge whiche thingis it bi- 
houeth not, for the" loue of foul wyn- 
nyng. And oon of hem, her propre12 
profete, seide, Men of Crete ben euere 
more lyeris, yuele beestis, of slowe 
wombe. This witnessyng is trewe. For !3 
what® cause blame hem sore, that thei 
be hool in feith, not 3yuynge tent to14 
fablis of Jewis, and to maundementis? 
of men, that turnen awei hem fro 
treuthe. And alle thingis ben clene to1s 
clene men; but to vnelene men and to 
vnfeithful no thing is clene, for the 
r Om. vx. 


q the cause 7. 8 prestis 


u wif, kepynge withouten wemme the unyte of baptem or. 


yy Om. ogrvx. % 30uen myche to wyn QrTx. ful 


© contynent fro vuleful thing or. . 4 hym that after doctrine 
f Om. er. that is after doctryn rv. that is on doctryn x. 
bh doctrine, ur techinge o. 


i agen seyn the treuth gr. * For vy. 1 moost 
qOm. er. ‘thengeo. 8 loue o. 
v ther propre prophet, of p. their prophete éhat 


the whiche er. > thing r. 


i comyng of k. k dispose 1. 1 oecacioun k. 


P comaundementis b. 


ATA 


clene®, but and the soule, ‘or resoun', ands 
conscience ‘of hem ben maad vnclenei. 
i¢ Thei knowlechen hem* for! ‘to haue™ 
knowe God, forsoth by dedis thei denyen"; 
whanne thei ben abomynable, and vnby- 
lueful®, and reprouable to al good werk?. 


CAP. II. 


1 ‘Forsothe speke thou’ the" thingis that 
2 bicomen’ hoolsum teching ; that olde men 
be sobre, chast, prudent, hool in feith, in‘ 
3loue, and pacience; also olde” wymmen 
in’ hooly habite”, not* bacbiteris’, ‘or sey- 
inge fals blame on othere men’, not seru- 
4ynge moche to wyn, wel®* techinge, that 
thei teche prudence; 3onge> wymmen‘, 
that thei loue her housebondis‘, that thei 
sloue sones®; theif prudent, chast, sobre, 
hauynge cure of ‘the hous*, benyngne, 
suget to her housebondis, that the word 
sof God be not blasfemyd. Also moneste! 
73onge men, that thei be sobre. In alle 
thingis 3yue thi silf ensaumple* of good 
werkis, in teching, in hoolnesse', ‘withoute 
ssclaundre™, in sadnesse". An°® hool? word4, 
vnreprouable’; that he that is on’ ‘that 
othirt syde", be aschamed’, ‘or aferd™, hau- 
yhge noon yuel thing for* to seye ofY 30u. 
9 Seruauntis*, for* to be suget to her lordis ; 
in alle thingis plesinge, not a3en seiynge, 
1onot defraudinge, but in alle thingis schew- 
ynge good feith, that thei ourne® in alle 
thingis the doctryn of ‘oure sanyour God*. 
11 Forsoth the grace of God‘, oure sauyour, 
izhath apperid to alle men, techinge °, ‘or 
lernynge', vs, that we, forsakynge’ vn- 
pite, and worldly desyris, lyue sobreli?, 


€ cleen, for her unworthinesse rT. 
iclene r. k hem by word or. Om. yr. 1 Om. srx. 
P werkis y. 4 Thou forsothe speke mer. 
Vv amoneste thou to be elothid in er. 


wele gr. b moneste thou 3unge r. 
€ sonys, chastisynge hem er. 
i moneste thou err. 
nesse of vertues gr. © be thi er. in sv. and y. 
medicinable g. and vnreprenable ry. § of 7. 
u side, or aduersarie QT. YV shamid sy. 


k exsaumple s. 


our Mpgr. 4QOm.o. 


€ and tau3te r. 
silf er. 
9 her dedis k. 


¥ ether bacbiters K marg. 
afeerd K marg. 


’ oure Sauyour God b. 


TITUS. 


for resoun of hem mopot. Om. x. 
m that thei r. 
r tho mwporr. 
Ww habit of shamefastnesse QT. 
z Om. ox. putiynge fals blame to othere men QT. or seyinge fals eryme on othere men rv. 
© wymmen amonest thou QT. 
f be they er. teche thei 3unge wymmen to be r. g 
Vholynesse ap. holynesse of lyuynge er. 
P Om. er. hoolsum rv. 
t the tother 4nosy. the other wrorx. the contrarie r. 
wor ferd ansy. Om. Mopgrvx. 
2 Amoneste thou seruauntes er. Moneste thou sernauntes r. 
f Om. moporrx. or lerende s. 


8 Om, R. 
x oure Sauyour God b. 


I, 16—IL. 12. 


soule and conscience of hem ben maad 
vnelene. Thei knoulechen that theiis 
knowen God, but bi dedis4 thei denyen ; 
whanne thei ben abhominable, and vn- 
bileueful, and repreuable to al good 
werk. 


GAP. ably 


But speke thou tho thingis that bi-1 
semen hoolsum teching; that elde men2 
be sobre, chast, prudent, hool in feith, 
in loue, and pacience; also olde wym-3 
men in hooli abite, not sclaundereris’, not 
seruynge myche to wyn, wel techynge, 
that thei teche prudence. Moneste thous 
3onge wymmen, that thei loue here hose- 
bondis, that thei loue her children; ands 
that thei be prudent, chast, sobre, hau- 
ynge cure of the hous, benygne, suget to 
her hosebondis, that the word of God 
be not blasfemyd. Also moneste thou‘é 
jonge men, that thei be sobre. In alle7 
thingis 3yue thi silf ensaumple of good 
werkis, in teching, in hoolnesse ft‘, in 
sadnesse. 
repreuable; that he that is of the con- 
trarie side, be aschamed’, hauynge noon 
yuel thing to seie of 30u. Moneste thous 
seruauntis to be suget to her lordis; in 
alle thingis plesinge, not ajenseiynge, 
not defraudynge, but in alle thingis 10 
schewinge good feith, that thei onoure 
in alle thingis the doctryn of ‘God, oure 
sauyour’. For the grace of ‘God, oure 
sauyour*, hath apperid to alle men, and 12 
tau3te vs, that we forsake wickidnesse’, 
and worldli desyris, lyue* sobreli, and 


+ that is, in 
clennesse of 
An" hoolsum word, and vn-8 soute and bodi. 


Lire here. v. 


Zand the o. b Om. mper. 
n denyen hym or. © vncleenfull o. 
8 bysemen o. becometh x. tOm.o. Om. 7. 
x not tobe er. Y sclaundereris r. 
a be they 
d husbondis, in vnyle of feith or. 
her meynee Qr. 
m Om. er. ® sad- 
q word medicynal srp7. word 


x Om. mosTx. Y to ogT. 
¢ God oure Sany- 
b sobreli 7x oure 


b onoure r. 
& forsake r. 


2 Om. s. 


ina. VY ether 
z and lyue 1. 


t hoolynesse a pr.m.c et alii. 
y alle wickidnesse R. 


U. 13—IlI. 8. 


and iustli/, and piteuously*, in this world, 

izabidinge the blesside hope and the com- 
ynge of the glorie of greet God, and oure 

usauyour Jhesu Crist; that 3af hym silf for 
vs, that he schulde ajen bye vs fro al! 
wickidnesse, and ‘made clene™ a peple® 
acceptable ‘to him silf°, suere of good 

iswerkis. Speke thou these thingis, and 
monesteP, and arguwe’, ‘or proue, or re- 
proue’, with al comaundement, ‘or hardy- 
nesses’; not man” dispise thee. 


CAP. III. 


1 Armoneste’, ‘or comaunde, hem, for* to 
be sugettis’ to princes, and poweris; for? 
to obeische* to” seyinge*, for’ to be redy 

2to al good werk®; for’ to blasfeme no man, 
for to be not litygious®, ‘or ful of chid- 
ing’, but temperaunt*, ‘or pacient', schew- 

3inge al myldenesse to alle men. For- 


soth" and we weren sum tyme viwyse, - 


vnbileueful, erringe, and seruynge to de- 
syris, and dyuerse voluptees®, in®° malice 
and enuye doynge?, hateful, ‘or worthi 
4 for’ to be hatid', hatynge to gidere. For- 
soth whanne the benygnyte, and huma- 
nite’, ‘or manhed', of ‘oure sauyour God" 
sapperide, not of workis of ri3twysnesse 
that we diden, but vp’ his mercy he made 
vs saaf, by waischynge”, ‘or baptym*, of 
ajen bigetyngY, and a3en newyng of the 
6 Hooly Gost, whom he schedde out in to vs 
plenteuously by Jhesu Crist, oure sauyour, 
7that we iustifyed bi his grace, be eyris 
svp? hope of euerlastyng lyf. A trewe 
word is*, and of thes thingis I wole thee 
for’ to® conferme othere men, that thei 
that’ bileuen to God, curen®, ‘or do bisy- 
nesse‘, for® to be bifore in® goode werkis. 


i justely £0 oure neizbore or. 
make to hymsilf gr. make clene to him silf r. 
qd repreue gr. blame thou r. 
for thy symplenesse QT. 
_2 Om. sx. obeye s. © to the or. 
g Om. sx. 4» ful of chiding oor. 
ery. doingeinr. POm.7. 
or large mercye QT. 
x Om. x. y biheetynge er. 
¢that thou yr. 40m. x. 
nesseT. & Om. SX. 


{ Om. ogrx. 


h to x. 


aOm.r. »bOm.o. 
h rijtfulnesse a. i saad a. 


¢ obeie of. 
k biynge a. ! and of r. 


Ter wes. 


k pitously to God or. 
. cleen pepul or. 
T or reproue mPy. Om. oQrx. 
v Amoneste thou sper. Moneste x. 

¢ seynge, or word of hem er. 
k temperat mTrVx. 
q Om. AMNPOQSTVY. 
« God oure Sauyour mper. 

z aftir wpor. bi rv. 
€ chargen o. be besy r. 


d temperat, eithir mesurable r. 
m schewide k. 


475 


iustli, ‘and piteuousli® in this world, 
abidinge the blessid hope and the com-13 
yng of the glorie of the greet God, and 
of* oure sauyour Jhesu Crist; that 3af 14 
hym silf for vs, to ajenbie vs fro al 
wickidnesse, and make clene to hym silf 
a puple acceptable, and suere of good 
werkis. Speke thou these thingis, and ts 
moneste thou, and repreue thou with al 
comaundement}; no man dispise thee. 


CAP. IIl. 


Amoneste hem to be sugetis tol 
prynces, and to poweris; to obeische® 
to that that is seid, and to be redi to 
al good werk; to blasfeme no man, to be2 
not ful of chiding, but temperat*, schew- 
ynge al myldenesse to alle men. Fors 
we weren sum tyme vuwise, vnbileueful, 
errynge, and seruynge to desiris, and to 
dyuerse lustis, doynge in® malice and 
enuye, worthi to be hatid, hatinge ech 
othere. But whanne the benygnyte and 4 
thef manhed of oure sauyour Godé aper- 
ide, not of werkis of ri3twisnesse" thats 
we diden, but bi his merci he made vs 
saaf',- bi waischyng of a3en bigetyng*, 
and! a3jen newyng of the Hooli Goost, 
whom he schedde™ into vs plenteuouslié 
bi Jhesu Crist, oure saueour, that we7 
iustified bi his grace, ben eiris by hope 
of euerlastinge lijf. A trewe word is, 
and of these thingis Y wole that thou 
conferme othere, that thei that bileuen 
to" God, be bisy to be aboue othere in 
good werkis. These thingis ben good, 
and profitable to men. And eschewes 
thou foltische questiouns, and genologies, 


10Q0m.s.  ™schulde clense n. make clene ps. 


© Om. err. P moneste thou r. 
8 Om. Mopervyx. tSee,noo. man, 
Ww Om. woperx. *Om.sx. Y sugette ox. 
4Qm. sx. ¢ werkis y. f Om. sx. 
1Om.ox. .Forv. © lustis 
r Gloss om. in ox. ‘Smanhedo. tt Om. ox. 
Vaftir upoT. bi v. W the waschinge arpor. 
a Om. mp. is this or. b Om. MPosTVX. 

f Om. ovx. or helen Q. or helen, or do her bisy- 


einalk. fOm. Rr. 


‘in gk. 


£ Om. Q. 


3P2 


+ that is, power. 
The Glose here. 
Either with the 
antorite of bi- 
schop. Lire 
here. Vv. 


476 


Thes thingis ben goode and profitable to 
g9men. Forsoth eschewe' thou foltische 
questiouns, and genelogies, and stryues, 
and fiztingis* of the lawe; forsoth! thei 
1oben vnprofitable and veyn. Schonye™ 
thou a man heretyk, aftir oon and the 
secunde coreccioun, ‘or correpcioun, or re- 
l1prouyng"; witinge for® he that is suchP 
maner’ man is subuertid, and trespassith', 
12 dampned bi his owne dom*®. Sothliss whanne 
I schal sende to thee Arteman, or Tytik, 
hy3e, ‘or haste‘, thon for" to come to me 
to Nicopolis; forsothY I haue purposid 
13forY to dwelle in winter ther. Bisily 
‘sende bifore* Zenam, aY wyse man of 
lawe, and Apollo, that no thing fayle to 
i4hem. Forsothe and oure men lerne’ for* 
to be bifore in good werkis, to necessarie 
is vses®, that thei be not vnfruytouse. Alle 
men that ben with me greeten thee wel. 
Greete thou wel hem, that louen vs in 
feithe. The grace of God with? 3o0u alle®. 
Amen. 


Here endith the epistle' to Tyte, and 
bygynneth the prolog to Filomon®. 


iethchewe r.  « fi3tynges, that thei maken or. 
Eschewe ry. or reprouynge MST. Om. 0Qx. 
maner AMNPQSTY. T trespassid kK. 


TITUS. 


1 for vr. 
© that Parr. 
8 dome, for wityngly he errith or. 


Ill. 9—15. 


and° stryues?, and fi3tyngis of the lawe ; 

for tho ben vnprofitable and veyn. 

Eschewe thou a man eretik}, aftir oon 10+ The comoun 
and4 the secound correccioun ; witinge 11 paren ee 
that he that is siche a maner man is eet 
subuertid' {, and trespassith, and is ee ae 
dampned bi his owne dom. Whanne Y 12 the lawe. r. 
sende to thee Arteman, or Titieus, hi3 ja ee” 
thou to ‘come to® me to Nycopolist; for 7 Glose here. 
Y haue purposid to dwelle in wyntir 

there. Bisili byfor sende* Zenam, a13 

wise man of lawe, and Apollo, that no 

thing faile to hem. Thei that ben of14 

ouris, lerne’ to be gouernouris in good 

werkis, to necessarie vsis, that thei be not 

with out fruyt. Alle men that ben with 15 

me greeten thee wel. Grete thou wel 

hem, that lonen vs in feith. The grace 

of God be with 30u alle. Amen. 


Here endith the pistle to Tite, and 
bigynneth the prologe on the pistle to 
Filemon*. 


m Schone mp. Schoon o. Schunne orx. 
P that is, uncorrigible v marg. qa 
88 Forsothe o. Om. r. 


t Om. moperrx. %Om.s. Yforv. WYOm.s. *sende thou bifore gr. bifore sende vy.  y the or. 
zJerne they gr. leresx. ® Om. sx.  » vses, to hem silf and othere Tr. the feith x. 4 be with r. 
e Om. a. f pistil y. & Here endeth the pistle to Tite, and here bigynneth the pistle to Philemon. a. 
Here eudith the epistil to Tite, and bygynneth the prolog on the pistil to Philemon. Nn. No final rubric in 
GMPQSTX. 

Sofa. Pstryuyngesk. York. * subuertid, either turned amys rn. sOm.k. ¢ Mycopolis a pr. m. 
Kabo. sendethou r. Vlerne thei rn. W and here mbo. * From cimexabcho. Here endeth the pistle 


to Tite; se now the prologe to Filomen. x. 


rubric in aERvuek, Z 


Here eudith the [pistil to] Tyte, and bigennith a prologe on 
the pistil to Felemon. g. Here endith the pistle to Tite, and bigynneth a prolog to Filemon. a. 


No final 


PHILEMON. 





Prolog to the pistle to Filomon®. 


To Filomon he makith homly lettris 
for Honesyme his seruaunt; he writith 
sothli to him fro Rome cite. 


Here endith the prolog, and bigyuneth 
the episile to Filomon®. - 


The prolog of Filemon?. 


HE makith ‘famyliar, or homelt®, let- 
tris to Filemon, for Onesimus, his seru- 
aunt; writinge to hym fro the citee of 
Rome, out of prisoun, bi the forseid 
Onesimus. 


Jerom in his prologe on this pistle seith 
thus. 


+ To Phylemon hoomly lettris the apostle maketh for Onesimo, his seruaunt ; nie he writith 
to him of the prisone fro the cyte of Rome, by the same Onesimo. 





The pistle to Philemon*. 


1 Poul, the boundun of ‘Crist Jhesu®, and 
Tymothe, brothir, to Filomon, bilouyd, 
zand oure® helper °*, and to Apya, moost 
dere sistir, and to Archip, oure euene 
kny3t*, and to the chirch that is in thin 
shous, grace® to 30u, and pees of God 
ouref fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu Crist. 
4I do thankyngis to my God, euer more 
makynge mynde of thee in my preieris, 
5 heeringe thi charite and feith, that thou hast 


Here big igynneth the pisile to Filemon*. 


Poul, the boundun of Crist Jhesu,1 
and Timothe, brother, to Filemon, bi- 
louyd, and oure helpere, and to Appia, 2 
most dere sister, and to Archip, oure 
euene kni3t, and to the chirche that is 
in thin hous, grace be to 30u, and peess 
of God oure fader, and of the Lord Jhesu 
Crist. I do thankingis to my God, euere4 
more makinge mynde of thee in my 
preieris, heringe thi charite and feith,s 


8 Prologe. c. No initial rubric in syy. No prologue in ampox. In nr of later text. » No final 
rubric in esry. + This version of the prologue is taken from er. @From a. The pistle to Philo- 


mon. PT. Here bigynneth the pistle to Tyte. (sic) @. 


No initial rubric in the other Mss. >’ Jhesu 


Crist Tr. © goure rT. ¢¢ helpere, either oure enene worchere v. 4 kny3t, and ouercoming of enmyes vr. 


© grace be c sup.ras.y. f the or. 


a From x. Prolog. a. The prolog of the pistil to Philemon. x. A prolog vpon the pistle to File- 
mon. R. Prologus. vr. Here bigynneth a prologe on the pistle to Filemon. vu. Here biginneth the prologe 
to Filemon.e. The prolog on Filymon. k. No initial rubric in crxmqxabcgho. bhomeli rf. © From 
cxmabchoa. Jerome in his prolog on this epistil to Philemon seith this. nx. Jerom in his prolog on this 


pistle seith al this. q. Thus endith the prolog. x. 


This seith Jerom on this pistie. vu. No final rubric in 


AE itefgk. 8 Poulis epistle to Filemon. x. Here biginneth the pistil to Filemon.e. Here bigynith the 


pistil to Filemon. g. No initial rubric in crkqruxachk. 


478 


in the Lord Jhesu, and in} to alle hooly 
6men, that the comunynge! of thi feith be 
maad opyn, in knowynge of al good thing 
zin Crist Jhesu. Forsoth* I hadde greet 
ioye and comfort in thi charite, for the 
entraylis of hooly men restiden! by thee, 
sbrothir. For which thing I hauynge 
moche trust in Crist Jhesu, for™ to co- 
maunde to thee that that perteyneth to" 
sthing®, ‘or profiteth?; for charite™ I° be- 
seche more’, sithen thou art such as ‘Poul 
old", now forsoth and’ the boundyn of 
10 Jhesu Crist”. I* biseche thee for my sone 
11 Onesyme, whom I in bondis bigat™, theY 
which sum tyme was ‘to thee vnprofit- 
able*, forsothe now® profitable and® to 
12‘thee and to me»; whom‘ I sente a3en to 
thee. Forsoth resceyue thou him as myn 
i3entraylis?; whom J wolde withholde® with 
me, that he schulde serue for thee to me 
i4in bondis of the gospel; forsoth withoute 
thi counceil I wolde not do’, that thi 
good schulde not be as of nede’, but 
15 willeful. ‘Forsoth perauenture® therfore 
he departide fro thee at* oon* our', that 
thou schuldist resceyue hym into™ with- 
16 outen ende; now not as a” seruaunt, but® 
for? ‘a seruaunt? a* moost® dere brother, 
moost' to me; forsoth how moche more" 
to thee, andv in” fleisch and* in the Lord? 
17 Therfore if thou hast me a felowe, re- 
issceyue him as me; forsoth if he hathY 
ony thing anoyed? thee, ‘or owith?, rette” 
19thou this thing to me. I Poul wroot with 
myn hond, I schal 3elde; that I seye not 
to thee, that and thou owist to me thi silf. 
20So, brother, I schal vse thee in the Lord; 
21 fulfille’ myn entraylis in Crist®. I trist- 
nynge’ of thin obedyence wroot to thee, 


h Om. c sec. m. ¥. 
no Q. 
Om. ¥. 


i comynge K. 
© profit c sup. ras. F. 
rOm.cry. 8 Om Fr. 


xOm. rT. ** bigaat to the bileue r. 
bb me and to thee ry. ¢ and whom s. 
c sup.ras.¥. & need, or constreynyng T. 
an A S€C.m. GMNOPQSTFXY, aC sup. ras. 
oer. 9° Om. Q. Pmorethan x. 4 Om. a. 
derworihe he is T. both c sup. ras. rv. 
nojid x. 8 Om. ex. either onith rv. 
entreilis, or affecciouns T. 


y Om. F. 


» arette rv. 


¢ Om. rk. 


4 mer. 


PHILEMON. 


k And c sec. m. 
P Om. crx. or profit sy. or profiteth to thee tT. 
t more for charite cv. thee T. thee more Y see. m. 
Poule the olde n. old Poule, to whom bicometh preier T. 
2 ynprofitable to thee r. 
4 entrailis, or sone rT. 
h Om. r. For perauenture r. 
1 tyme c sup. ras. houre, or schort lyine Tr. 
r Om. Nn. and o. 
Win the 7. 
¢ fulfille thou 7. fille thou r. 
© Crist, rescetuyng Onesyme T. 


© resceyue thou k. 


6-21. 


that thou hast in the Lord Jhesu, and 
to alle hooli men, that the comynyng 6 
of thi feith be maad opyn, in knowing 
of al good thing in Crist Jhesu. And7 
Y hadde greet ioye and coumfort in thi 
charite, for the entrailis of hooli men 
restiden bi thee, brother. For whichs 
thing Y hauynge myche trist in Crist 
Jhesu, to comaaunde to thee that that 
perteyneth to profit; but Y biseche mores 
for charite, sithen thou art siche as the 
elde Poul, and now the boundun of Jhesu 
Crist. Y biseche thee for my sone One-10 
syme, whom Y in boondis bigat, whichis 
sumtyme was vnprofitable to thee, but 
now profitable bothe to thee and to me; 
whom Y sente ajen to thee. And res-12 
seyue thou hym as myn entrailis ; whom 13 
Y wolde withholde with me, that he 
schulde serue for thee to me in boondis 
of the gospel; but with out thi counseil 1s 
Y wolde not do ony thing, that thi good 
schulde not be as of nede, but wilful. 
For perauenture therfor he departide fro 15 
thee’ for a tyme, that thou schuldist 
resseyue hym with outen ende; nowié 
not as a seruaunt, but for a seruaunt 
a most dere brother, most to me; and 
how myche more to thee, bothe in 
fleisch and in the Lord? Therfor if thou 17 
hast me a felowe, resseyue® hym as me; 
for if he hath ony thing anoied thee, is 
ethir owith, arette thou this thing to me. 
Y Poul wroot with myn hoond, Y schal ig 
3elde; that Y seie not to thee, that also 
thou owist to me thi silf. So, brothir, e¢ 
Y schal vse thee in the Lord; fille 
thou myn entrails in Crist. Y trist- a1 
nynge’ of thin obedience wroot to thee, 


m Om. sx. 
g but c. more for 7. 

u olde Poule carp. 
w Crist in prisoun T. 
8 now he is T. bothe r. 
¢ holde c sup. ras.o. do ony thing 
i for c sup.ras. & Om. 4 pr.m, 
mQOm.r. © Om. 
Smore rT. t most derworthe Tr. ®™ more 
X s0 muchc moreand tr. Yhaue T. 2 noied s. 
4 entrayles, or desiris o. 
f tristinge Gauprr. tristende x. 


l restiden, or weren refreschide r. 


v Om. o. and I 1. 


f tristynge E1Rak. 


22—26. PHILEMON. 479 


witynge for® thou schalt do and? ouer that 
zethat I seye. Also forsoth and make! redy 
to me an ooste*, or! hous™ for® to dwelle 
inne°; forwhi I hope by? 3o0ure preieris 
23me for? to" be 3ouun to 3ou. Epefras, 
myn euene caytif’, or' prisoner® ‘to gi- 
dere’, ‘in Crist Jhesu, greetith thee wel”, 
eiand Mark, Aristark, Demas, Lucas*, myn 
2shelpers. The grace of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist withY 3oure spirit. Amen. 


Here endith the epistle to Filomon, 
and bigynneth the prolog to the pistle to 
Ebrews*. 


witynge that thou schalt do ouer that 
that Y seie. Also make thon redi to me 22 
an hous to dwelle in; for Y hope that 
bi 3oure preyeris Y schal be 3ouun to 
jou. Epafras, prisoner with me in Crist 23 
Jhesu, greetith thee" wel, and Mark, 24 
Aristark, Demas, Lucas, myn _helperis. 
The grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist be 25 
with 3oure spirit. Amen. 


Heere endith the pistle to Philemon, 
and: biginnith the prologe on the pistle 
to Ebrewits*, 


fthat ry. hOm.v. imake thou ry. k Om. c. herberewe x. !}Om.c. ™ an hous Nt. © Om. s. 
© Gloss om. in x. P that biy. @Om.svx. 'Ischaly. *Om.c. tOm.cx. *Om. x. ¥ Om. cox. 
w greetith thee wel in Crist Jhesu xy. * and Lucas wp. y be with ry. 7Om.cx. 4 Here endith the 
pistle to Philomon, and here bigynneth the pistle to the Ebrewys. 4. Here endith the pistle to Filemon, and 
bigynneth the prologe on the pistle to Ebrews.c. Here endith the epistil to Philemon, and bigynneth the 
prolog on the epistil to Ebrews suynge. n. Here endith the epistil to Philomon, and byginneth the prologe 
of the epistil to Ebreues. 0. Here Filemon endith, and bigynneth the prologe vpon Ebreus. v. Here endith 
the pistil to Filomon, and bygynneth the prologe to Ebrewis. y. No final rubric in empesrx. 


&Om.r. 5 30u gk. iand here mqabo. * From mmaxabcoa. Here endeth the pistle to Filomen; se 
now the prologe on the pistle to Ebrewes. Kk. Here endith the pistil of Felemon, and bigyneth prologe on 
the pistel to the Ebrewis. g. Here endith Filemon, and bigynneth the prologe on the pistle to Ebrewis. h. 


No final rubric in aEurek. 


HEBREWS. 





Prolog to the pistle to Ebrews*. The prolog ou* the pistle to Ebrews*. 


IN the firste it is to seie, whi the apo- First it is to seye®, whi Poul, the 
stle Poul in this pistle’ ‘in wrytynge’ apostle, in this® epistle’ ‘in writinge® 
ne® kepte not his maner, or his‘ custom, kepith not his vsage‘, discryuynge his 
that he wroot othir§ the word of his name, name, or the® dignyte of his ordre. 
othir> the dignyte of ordre. This is the This is the cause, that he writynge to 
cause, that he wrytinge to hem that of hem that of circumcisioun bileueden(, 
circumcisioun hadde bileuyd, was as! an wroot as the apostle of hethene men, 
apostle‘ of paymes!, and not of Ebrewis; and not of Jewis; and he knowynge 
knowynge also her pride, schewynge also her pride, and schewinge his oweue 
his mekenesse by feith, the merit of his humblenesse!, nolde™ not" putte bifore 
office he wolde not™ seie" bifore. For in the dissert of his office. And in lijk ma- 
lyche maner John apostle®, for mekenesse, _nere also Joon, the apostle, for humble- 
in his pistle? his name by’ the same re- _nesse®, in? his epistle? for the same skile 
soun putte" not bifore. This’ pistlet ther- sette not his name tofore’. As® it is 
fore" the apostle is seid to hane sent to seid, the apostlet sente this epistle" to 
Ebrews ywrite’ in Ebrew tunge; whos the Ebrewis writun in Ebrew tunge; 
witt and ordre holdynge, Luk, the euan- and after the deth of Poul, the apostle, 
gelist, aftir the passinge of blessid Poul, Luk, the’ euangelist, made it in Greek” 
‘the apostle’, made in Grew langage. speche, holdinge the vndurstondynge and 

the ordre of it. . 


Here endith the prolog, and bigyuneth Jerom in this prologe on this pistle 
the epistle*. seith this*. 


a The prologe to Ebrues.G. No initial rubric in sry. No prologue in agwpx ; but in G a rubric. 
In n and r the prologue is of the second text. > Om. or. ¢epistilsr. 4Om.r7. ¢Om.s. ¢ of ky. 
either vy. £Om. or. €ethero. 4 ether or. ors. i Om.o. * postle y. |! paynymes osy. ™ Om. r. 
D sette Ysec.m. Otheapostle ry. Pepistil osy. dino. * putteth o. 8 Therfore this s. ¢ epistell osr. 
uOm.s. VY writen s. w Om. o. apostil s. x Here eendith the prologe, and bygineth the epistil to 
Ebrewes. 0. No final rubric in sry. 


aofn. 38 Jeroms prolog on Paulis epistle to Ebreis.. A prolog on the pistle to Ebrewis. rn. Pro- 
logus. tr. Here bigynneth a prologe on the pisile to Ebreus. vu. Here bigynneth the prologe to Ebrews. e. 
A prolog to the Ebrenis.f. No initial rubric in crxmqxabeghko. bwitex, ©Om.b. 4 pistil k. 
eOm.R. fvsage in writynger. & Om. «bo. 2} weren of a pr.m. 51 pr.m. KQnuxa pr.m. beeghka. 
i that bileueden a pr.m.a. and bileueden r. k postle n. 1 mekenesse 1x. humelnesse Q et aliz. 
m wolde a pr.m. cIKRxc. ® Om. emgrghko sec.m.a. © mekenesse 1K. humelnesse Q ef alii. P of n. 
a pistle bk. ‘biforeenk. s And. ¢ postlex. pistil’k. vOm.n. WGrewer. * Jerom 
in his prologe on this pistle seith thus. cxa. Jerom in his prologe ou this pistle seith this. Kqubhoa. Here 
endith the prologe, and here bigynneth the pistle to Ebrews.m. Jerome in his prolog on this epistle to 
Ebrews seith al this. nN. Thus endith the prolog, and bigynneth the pistle. Rn. Here endith the prologe, 
and bigyneth the pistil to the Ebrewis. g. No final rubric in arrrefk. 


1, I—trt. 


The epistle to the Ebrues*. 


CAP. I. 


1  Manyfold> and® many maners sum 
tyme God spekinge to fadris in‘ pro- 
2phetis, at the laste in thes daies spak® to 
vs inf the sone; whom he ordeynede eyr 
of alle thingis, by whom he made and 
3the worldis. The which whanne he is the 
schynynge of glorie, and figure! of his* 
substaunce, and berynge alle thingis bi 
word of his vertu, makynge purgacioun 
of synnes, sittith on the ri3thalf of ma- 
ageste in hi3 thingis; so moche! maad™ 
betere than aungelis, by how moche he 
hath inherited a more different, ‘or excel- 
slent®, name bifore hem. Forsoth® to 
which? of the’ aungels seide God ony 
tyme, Thou art my sone, I haue™ ‘gendrid 
thee to day’? And eftsoone, I schal be 
to him into fadirt, and he schal be to me 
sinto sone"? And whanne eftsoone he 
bryngeth yn the firste bigetyn’ into” the 
roundnesse of the* erthe, he seith, And 
alle** theY aungels of God worschipe thei 
zhym. And sothli ‘to aungels he seith’, 
The* which makith his aungels spiritis, 
sand his mynystris flawme of fyer. For- 
soth to the sone’, God, thi trone® into the 
world of world*; a 3erd of equyte thef 
93erd of thi rewme; thou hast louyd ri3t- 
wysnesse, and hatedist wickidnesse ; ther- 
fore God", thi God, anoyntide! thee with 
oyle of gladnesse*, ‘or coye!, bifore™ thi 
iofelowis. And, Thou, Lord, in the bigyn- 
nyng foundedist" the erthe, and heuenes 
i1 ben werkis of thin hondis; thei schulen 
perische, forsoth thou schalt perfitly 
dwelle; and alle schulen wexe olde as a 


@ From ». 


The pistle to Ebrues. p. 
the Hebrues. rT. 


No initial rubrie in rx. 


Here bygynneth Poule pistel to the Ebrewes. Q. 
> By manyfolde speche r. 


HEBREWS. 481 


To Ebrews'. 


CAP. 1 


God, that spak sum tyme bi prophetis! 
in many? maneres to oure fadris, at the 
laste in these daies he hath spoke to vs2 
bi the sone; whom he hath ordeyned eir 
of alle thingis, and bi whom he made 
the worldis. Which whanne also he is3 
the bri3tnesse of glorie, and figure of his 
substaunce, and berith alle thingis bi 
word of his vertu, he makith purgacioun 
of synnes, and syttith on® the ri3thalf of 
the maieste in heuenes; and so myche is4 
maad betere than aungels, bi hou myche 
he hath eneritid a more dyuerse’ name 
bifor hem. For to whiche of the aungelss 
seide God ony tyme, Thou art my sone, 
Y¥ haue gendrid thee to dai? And eft- 
soone, Y schal be to hym in to a fadir, 
and he schal be to me in to a sone? 
And whanne eftsoone he bryngith in thee 
firste bigetun sone in to the world, he 
seith, And alle the aungels of God wor- 
schipe hym. Bnt he seith to aungels,7 
He that makith hise aungels spiritis, and 
hise mynystris flawme of fier. But tos 
the sone he setth, God, thi trone 7s in to 
the world of world; a 3erde of équite® zs 
the 3erde of thi rewme; thou hast louyd9 
ri3twisnesse, and hatidistf wickidnesse ; 
therfor the God, thi God, anoyntide thee 
with oile of ioye, more than thi felowis. 


- And, Thou, Lord, in the bigynnyug to 


foundidist the® erthe, and heuenes ben 

werkis of thin hondis; thei schulen pe-11 

rische, but thou schalt perfitli dwelle; 

and alle schulen wexe elde as a cloth, 

and thou schalt chaunge hem as a cloth, 12 
@ 


The pistel to 
Canding pr.m.t. ‘bir. 


¢ he spake c sec.m. mot. fbivy. &Om.y, Om. 7. ithe figurex. ‘theo, 10m. é pr.m. 
™ he is maad rt. 2 Om. x. © Forwhiv. P whom 7. 40m. st. *Om. x. § to day gendrid thee mp. 
ta fadre cor. “asone gt. Vbigeten sone Tr. Wing. *Om.s. ** Om. vy. Y Om. a pr.m. mpry. 
z he seith to aungels r. a2QOm.v. sone he seith v. e trone is ¥. d worldes o. € and a ex. 
fisthev. &theo. thou Godr. toyntede x.  fuloutioiey. 10m. emoperrx. ™ more 
than vy.  foundest Noy. 


a Poulis epistle to Ebreus. £. 
uxabeghko. 
f hast hatid ir. 


» ether manyfold K marg. © inc. 


& Om. a sec. m. 


VOL. IV. 3Q 


Here bigynneth the sda to Ebrews. e. 


No initial rubric in AcIKMQR 
ether excelent K marg. © equite, eithir euenes R. 


482 


1z2cloth, and thou schalt chaunge hem as ‘an 
amyte°, ‘or girdyng aboute?, and thei 
schulen be chaungid. Forsoth thou ert 
the same thi silf4, and thi 3eeris schulen 

isnot faylen. Forsoth? to which’ of thet 
aungels seide God ony" tyme, Sitte thou 
on my ri3thalf, til I schalY putte thin ene- 

i4myes a stool of thi feet? Wher" thei 
‘alle ben not* seruyng spiritis, sent into 
mynysterieY for hem that taken? the heri- 
tage of heelthe ? 


CAP. II. 


1 herfore ‘more plenteuously? it bihon- 
eth vs for® to kepe® tho thingis, that we 
han herd, lest perauenture we fleten awey. 

2Forsoth? if ‘the ilke® word‘ that is® seyd 
by aungels® is’ maad sad", and ech tres- 
passyng, ‘or breking of the lawe}, and 
vnobedience took™ iust retribucioun" of? 

3mede?P, how schulen we ascape’, if we schu- 
len’ despise so greet heelthe? The’ which, 
whanne it hadde takun bigynnynge fort to 
be told out by the Lord", of hem ‘that 
sherden is confermyd into vs; God” ‘to 
gidere witnessynge” by sygnes*, wondris’, 
and greete merueylis, and dyuerse vertues, 
and distribuciouns of the Hooly Gost, vp? 
shis wille. Forsoth not to aungelis God 
sugetide the roundnesse of erthe® to com- 
synge?, of which® we speken. Sothli sum 
man witnesside in sum place, seiynge, 
What thing is man, that thou art mynde- 

ful of him, or mannis sone, for thou vi- 

7sitidest* him? Thou ‘hast maad® him litilf, 
a® litil® lesse fro! aungelis; thou hast crown- 
ed him with glorie and onoureJ; thou* hast 
ordeyned him vpon! werkis™ of thin hondis. 

8Thou hast maad alle thingis suget vudir 
his feet. Forsoth in that thing that he 
sugetide alle thingis to hiin, he lefte no 


° amyte Ty. a cloth rv. 
8 whome emr. t Om. emst. 
y the ministerie 0. seruice rT. 2 token 7. 
4Forr, ethatx. fOm.x. & wasr. 
10m. orx. ™tobeg. agen 3eldinge 0. 
sOm.v. tQOm.sx. ¥% Lord Jesu Crist 7. 
yaud wondris uprv. Zafter ewpr. bi vr. 
est AGMNPSTPXY. 
ithan vy. jouer kK. 


a in eny T. 


k and thon wy. Jon rx. 


h Om. kK. i speke gk. 


HEBREWS. 


P Om. ov. or chaunging clothe r. 
v Om. r. 
a Om. emupr. 
h aungelis fo Moises rT. 
° Om. ex. or sy. 
v for God ¥. 
a the eerthe coy. 
© madist emp. hast mynuschid 7. 


kis k. 


I. 12—II. 8. 


and thei schulen be chaungid. But thou 
art the same thi silf, and thi 3eeris 
schulen not faile. But to whiche of the13 
aungels seide God at® ony tyme, Sitte 
thou on my ri3thalf, till Y putte thin 
enemyes a stool of thi feet? Whether 14 
thei alle ben not seruynge spiritis, sente 
to seruen for hem that taken the eritage 
of heelthe ? 


CAP. II. 


Therfor more plenteuousli it bihoueth: 
vs to kepe! tho thingis, that we han herd, 
lest perauenture we fleten awei. For if 
the ilke word that was* seid bi aungels, 
was maad sad, and ech brekyng of the 
lawe and vnobedience took iust retribu- 
cioun of meede, hou schulen we ascape,3 
if we despisen so greet an heelthe? 
Which, whanne it hadde takun bigyn- 
nyng to be teld out by the Lord, of hem 
that herden is confermyd in to vs. For4 
God witnesside to gidere bi myraclis, 
and wondris, and grete merueilis, and 
dyuerse vertues, and departyngis of the 
Hooli Goost, bi his wille. But not tos 
aungels God sugetide the world that 
is to comynge, of which we speken. 
But sum man witnesside in a place, andé 
seide, What thing is man, that thou art 
myndeful of hym, or mannus sone, for 
thou visitist hym? Thou hast maad hym? 
a litil lesse than aungels; thou hast 
corowned hym with glorie and onour; and 
thou hast ordeyned him on the werkis 
of thin hondis. Thou hast maad alles 
thingis suget vndur hise feet. And in 
that that he sugetide alle thingis to hym, 
he lefte no thing vnsuget! to him. But 


a silf unchaungable r. * But r. 
w Whether s. x schal be not xk. 
¢ kepe more plenteously empr. 
iwasy. sad, or affermyd r. 
POm.ex. 4dscapen sx. * Om. r. 

w witnesside togidere y. _* myraclis Fr. 
b come sx. ¢the whiche cupr. ¢ visyt- 
f Om. e. alitil r. § Om. 6 pr.m.t. & Om. 7. 


b Om. sx. 


m the werkis GupsTVx. 


1 vnsugettid k. 


Il. 9-——IH. J. 


thing vnsuget" to him. Forsoth® now we 
9seen not 3it alle thingis suget to him; for- 
soth we seen hym, that a litil is? maad 
lesse than aungelis, Jhesu, for passioun of 
deeth crowned with glorie and honour, 
that he thorw grace‘ of God schulde taaste 
1odeeth for alle men. Forsoth" it bicaam 
him, for whom alle thingis, and by whom 
alle thingis’, thet which hadde ‘led to gi- 
dere’ manye sones into glorie, ‘the maker 
of’ the” ‘heelthe of hem*, forY to ende? by 
11 passiouns*. Sothely® he that halowith, and 
thei that ben halowid, of¢ oon alle’; for 
which cause he is not confoundid, ‘or 
schamed®, for! to clepe hem britheren, 
12seiynge, I schal telle thi name to my bri- 
theren; in the myddil of the chirche I schal 
13herieS thee. And eftsoone, I schal be trist- 
ynge® into! him; and eftsoone, Lo! I and 
my children‘, the! whiche God 3af to me. 
1:Therfore for children comuneden™ to 
fleisch and blood", and he ‘also took? part 
of the same, that by deeth he schulde 
distroye hym that hadde lordschip of 
isdeeth, that is to seie, the deuel, and 
schuldeP? delyuere hem that by drede of 
deeth, by al lyfa weren boundun to ser- 
lsuage. Forsoth he cau3te', ‘or took to, 
neuere® aungels, but he cau3te' the seed 
i7of Abraham. Wherfore he ou3te to" be 
licned to britheren by alle thingis, that 
he schulde ‘be maad mercyful and feithful 
byschop to God, that he schulde be mer- 
cyful to the’ trespassis’’, ‘or gultis’, of 
isthe peple. Forsothe* in that thing in 
which he suffride, and was temptid, he 
is my3ty for? to helpe and? hem that ben 
temptid. 
CAP. ITI. 
1 Wherfore, hooly britheren, parceners* 
of heuenly cleping, biholde 3e the apostle? 


= vnsugetted GuNopoT. © Buty.  P was yr, 
tOm. 7. “Ubrou3ty. vOm.r. W Om. er. 
& passiouns the maker of the heelthe of hem r. 
€ Om. ox. Om. sx. & preyse or. 
comeneden ¥. 
9 her lijf r. 
to GmpT. took rx. tau3te yY. 


GmMpTx., *Forry. YOm. sx. Zalsor. 


0 Om. a. 
t aungelis kynde k. 


™ Om. EI pr.m. agk. 
TOm.k.  #and bik. 


HEBREWS. 


q the grace «a. 
x Om. FP. 
> For rv. 
h tristnynge r. 
” blood, that is, thei weren of body and soule T. 
T neuer toke to GmpT. took nenere rx. tauzte ¥. 
u for to AGMNOPOTY. 
8 parte o. 


° aschamed rb pr.m. g sec. ni. h. 
u Om. k. 


483 


now we seen not 3it alle thingis suget 
to hym; but we seen hym that was maad9 
a litil lesse than aungels, Jhesu, for the 
passioun of deth crowned with glorie 
and onour, that he thoron3 grace of God 
schulde taste deth for alle men. For it 10 
bisemede hym, for whom alle thingis, 
and bi whom ‘alle thingis™ weren maad, 
which hadde brou3t many sones into 
glorie, and was auctour of the" heelthe 
of hem, that he hadde an ende bi pas- 
sioun. For he that halewith, and theiii 
that ben halewid, ben alle of oon; for 
which cause he is not schamed® to clepe 
hem britheren, seiynge, Y schal telle thi 12 
name to my britheren; in the myddil of 
the chirche Y schal herie thee. And eft-13 
soone, Y schal be tristnynge? in to hym; 
and eftsoone, Lo! Y and my children, 
whiche God 3af to me. Therfor ford14 
children comyneden to fleisch and blood, 
and he also took part of the same, that 
bi deth he schulde destrie hym that hadde 
lordschipe of deth, that is to seie, the 
deuel, and* that he schulde delyuere hem ts 
that bi drede of deth, ‘bi al® lijf weren 
boundun to seruage. And he took neuere 16 
aungelis', but he took the seed of Abra- 
ham. Wherfor he ou3te to be likned to17 
britheren bi alle thingis, that he schulde 
be maad merciful and a feithful bischop 
to God, that he schulde be merciful to 
the" trespassis of the puple. For in that 1s 
thing in which he suffride, and was 
temptid, he is mi3ti to helpe also hem 
that ben temptid. 


CAP. III. 
Therfor, hooli britheren, and parce- 
neris of Hteuenli cleping, biholde 3e the’ 


° For r. 
yY Om. sx. 


8 thingis weren maad r. 

z ende, eithir make perfit v. 

Cbenalle ofr. 4 thei ben alle r. Om. r. 

itoo, childer x. !Om.¥. ™ comyden ¢. 

© schall take o. | P that he schulde r. 

5 Om. emprvx. or tok, nenere s. t toke 

¥Om. 4 prim. Gmpty. VY gylteso. Om. 
» postle acuNpsr. pistel y. 


P tristynge Erk. 4 Om. k. 


v Om. k. 


3Q2 


484 


and bischop of oure confessioun, Jhesu, 
2the® which? is trewe® to him that made 
hym, as and Moyses in al the hous of 
shym. Forsoth this bzschop is had worthi 
of more glorie byforef Moyses, by how 
moche ‘than the hous’, hath he more 
shonour', that made iti, Forwhi ech hous 
is maad of sum man; forsoth he that 
smade alle thingis* of no3t, is God. And 
sothli Moyses was trewe in al his hows!, 
as a™ sernaunt, into witnessyng of tho 
6thingis that weren to be seid; forsothe" 
Crist as a sone in his hous. The® which 
hous we ben, if we holden trist? and‘ 
7glorie of hope ‘til to" ‘sad feith’. Wherforet 
as the Hooly Gost seith, To day, if 3e han 
sherd his vois, nyle 3e hardne 30ure hertis, 
as in wraththing, vp" the day of temp- 
gtacioun in desert; where 3oure fadris 
temptiden me, prouedyn, and syen’ my 
10 werkis*. Wherfore fourty* 3eeris’ I was 
offendid, ‘ov wroth?, to this generacioun, 
and I seide, Euermore thei erren* in herte, 
uforsoth thei knewen> not my weyes; to 
whom? I swoor in my wraththe, if thei 
izschulen entre® into my reste’. Brithereu, 
se 3e, lest perauenture in ony of 3ou be an 
yutel herte of vnbileue, for’ to departe fro 
i3quyk God. But moneste® jou! silf by alle 
dayes*, the while! to day is named®, that 
noon of 30u be hardned" by falsnesse® of 
14synne. Sothli? we ben maad parceners of 
Crist, if netheles we holden the bigynnyug 
15 0f his substaunce sad into the ende?. While 
it is seid, to day, if 3e han herd the vois 
of him, nyle 3e hardne 3oure hertis, as in 
1¢that’ wraththing. Sothli summe* heeringe 
wraththiden, but not alle thei that wenten 
170ut of Egipt by Moysest. To whiche" 
forsothe was he wraththid fourty 3eeris’? 


€ treuthe a. 

1 hous, or meyne T. 
8 the end Nr. 
Y 3ere emopsTx. Om. nv. 
bknew3 g. know o. ¢whiche yr. 4 Om. nr. 
€ Om. sx. bamonest nr. monesteth s. 
mp. nemned, that is, tyme of grace T. ™ hardid s. 
that is bygynnyng of al good werke. tT. 
uwhom fr. VY 3er sx. 


¢Om. rx. 4 that x. 
hous vy. * theng o. 
r into GQ. vnto MPT. 
jeeris NV. * Om. NP. 


W temptaciouns a pr. ni. 


x Om. g. 
lace, cithir disceite R. 


ewhomr. 4 daies k. 


HEBREWS. 


f bi than rp. 
m Om. Tr. 
t Therfore nv. 
2 or wrathihid nt. Om. x. 
© not entre Nr. 
i sour GPT. 
© fallace N. 
r what o. 


Y 3oure E. 3e 30u K sec. m. 


Ill. 2—17. 


apostle and the bischop of oure confes- 

sioun, Jhesu, which is trewe to hyme 

that made hyim, as also Moises in al the 

hous of hym. But this byschop is hads 

worthi of more glorie than Moises, bi as 

myche as he hath more honour of the 

hous, that made the hous. For ech hous 4 

js maad of sum man; he that made alle 

thingis of nou3t is God. And Moisess 

was trewe in al his hous, as a seruaunt, 

in to witnessyng of tho thingis that 

weren to be seid; but Crist as a sones 

in his hous. Which hous we ben, if we 

holden sad trist and glorie of hope in to 

the ende. Wherfor as the Hooli Goost7 

seith, To dai, if 3e han herd his vois, 

nyle 3e hardne 3oure hertis, as in wrath-8 

thing, lijk the dai of temptacioun” in 

desert; where 3oure fadris temptiden me, 9 

and preueden, and sijen my werkis fourti © 

jeeris. Wherfor Y was wrooth to this 10 
generacioun, and Y seide, Euere more 

thei erren in herte, for thei knewen not 

my weies; to whiche Y swore in myU 
wraththe, thei schulen not entre in to 

my reste. Britheren, se 3e, lest perauen-12 

ture in ony of 3ou be an yuel herte of 

vnbileue, to departe fro the* lyuynge 

God. But moneste jou’ silf bi alle daies, 13 

the while to? dai is named, that noon of 

3ou be hardned? bi fallas? of synne. For 14 

we ben maad parceneris of Crist, if ne- 

theles we holden the bigynnyngt of his + thatis, feith, 
substaunce sad in to the ende. While Ape 
it is seid, to dai, if 3e han herd the vois eee 
of hym, nyle 3e hardne 3oure hertis, as i inus. Pi 
in that wraththing. For summen heringe 16 meas ‘aa an 
wraththiden, but not alle thei that wenten — of Goddis sub- 
out of Egipt bi Moises. But to whiche®17 5 te nee 
was he wraththid fourti 3eeris4? Whether 


goodis ; bi 
which feith God 


h honour of the hous nr.. ? thilke 
°Om. ry. Psadtrist NV. Gin kK. 
V saiden G sec.m. ¥® werkis fourti 
8 erreden T. erren and yY. 
f rest, no man schal be schitt out T. 
lwhiche cy. ™nemned Gc. nempned 
P For v.49 eend, that is, the rizt feith, 
t Moyses, as Calep and Josue T. 


& Om. nr. 
n But r. 
U oftir GMPT. 


kK day r. 
S summen r. 
b fal- 


z the K sec.m.R. 4hard k. 


ily. 18—IV. ro. 


Wher’ not to hem that synneden, whos 
iscareyns ben* cast doun inY desert? To 
whiche? he® swoor sothli, for® to not entre 
into ‘the reste of hym‘, no but to hem 
19that weren vnbileueful? And we seen, 
for’ thei my3ten not entre into the rest of 
him for® vnbileue. 


CAP. IV. 


1 ‘“Therfore drede we‘, britheren’, lest 
perauenture the" biheeste of entrynge-into 
‘his reste! left*, ‘or forsakyn', ‘ony of vs 
be™ gessid", ‘or demed?, for? ‘to be? aweye". 

2Forsoth’ it is told tot vs, as and to hem. 
And the word herd profitide" not to hem, 
not meynt’ to feith of these thingis that 

3thei herden. Forsoth” we that han by- 
leuyd schulen entre into rest, as he seyde, 
As I swoor in my wraththe, if* thei schu- 
lenY entre into my reste. And sotheli the” 
werkis maad* parfyt fro’ the ordynaunce 
4aof the world, forsothe® he seide thus in 
sum place of the seueneth day, And God 
restide in the seueneth day from alle his 
swerkis. And in this’ eftsoone, If¢ thei 
éschulen entref into my reste. Therfore 
for® it leeueth®, ‘or zs ower, summen* for! 
to™ entre into it, and thei" to whiche® 
the? firsted it is’ told, entriden not for her 
zvnbileue. Eftsoone he termyneth sum day, 
‘To day’, seyinge in Dauith', aftir so 
moche of tyme; as it is bifore seid, To day 
if 3e han herd his vois", nyle 3e hardne 
3oure hertis, ‘as in the ilke wraththing’. 
8Forwhi if Jhesus hadde’ 30uyn reste to 
hem, he schulde neuere speke of othere 
gaftir that’ day. Therfore ‘saboth halow- 

10 ing* is left to the peple of God. ForsothY 

he that entride? into his reste, and he? 
w Whether esx. 


Xweren vr. Yin tos. 


HEBREWS. 


2 whome GMPT. 


485 


not to hem that synneden, whos careyns 
weren cast doun in desert? And® to1s 
whichef swoor he, that thei schulden not 
entre in to the reste of hym, not’ but to 
hem that weren vnbileueful? And we19 
seen, that thei my3ten not entre in to 
the reste of hym for vnbileue. 


CARE, IV; 


Therfor drede we, lest perauenture1 
while the biheest of entryng in to his! 
reste is left, thati ony of vs be gessid to 
be awei. For it is told also to vs, as2 
to hem. And the word that was herd 
profitide not to hem, not meynd to feith 
of tho* thingis that thei herden. For we3 
that han bileued, schulen entre in to 
reste!, as he seide, As Y swoor in my 
wraththe, thei schulen not entre in to my 
reste. And whanne the werkis weren 
maad perfit at the ordynaunce of the 
world, he seide thus in a place of the4 
seuenthe dai, And God restide in the 
seuenthe dai from alle hise™ werkis. And 5 
in this place eftsoone, Thei schulen not 
entre in to my reste. Therfor for ite 
sueth, that summen" schulen entre in to 
it, and thei to whiche it was teld to bifor, 
entriden not for her vnbileue. Eftsoone7 
he termyneth sum dai, and seith in Da- 
uith, To dai, aftir so myche tyme of 
tyme, as it is biforseid,:To dai if 3e han 
herd his vois, nyle 3e hardne 3oure hertis. 
For if Jhesus* hadde 3ouun reste to hem, 8 * thatis, Josue. 

. Lire and the 
he schulde neuere speke of othere aftir — Glose here. ve. 
this dai. Therfor the sabat is left tos 
the puple of God. For he that is entrid 10 
in to his reste, restide of hise werkis, as 
also God of hise. Therfor haste we toll 
¢ his rest o. 


aOm. G6 pr.m. 4 Om. sx. 


reste of hym or. ¢¢seyen x. (thaty. ¢ for the c. f Drede we therfore cupr. &Om.y. » while the r. 


ithe rest of him c. ¥ forsaken o. is left rv. 


2 Om. G pr.m. mpstx. 9Om.mpr. * faile er. 
cupstx. ™® Forv. *X Om, Nr. 
¢QOm.r. ‘this placey. & Om. nr. 

i Om. orx. ouer rT. k that summen 7. 
POm.or. @Om. rr. 'Twasy. §$ Om. 


as in that wrathing x. Wthis ry. * reste v. 


f whom I. 
I the reste gko. 


ein k. 


k ony k. m Om. b. 


lor forsake, or demyd & pr.m, mp. Om. orx. 
vs for to be G pr.m. for to be ony of vs be wpq. Om. T. 
s For rv. 
y scholen not nr. 
f scholen not NY. 
1Om. srx. 

t Dauith, To dai rv. 
y For rv. 


& no ciKMQuxabceghkoa@. ne £. 
n summe men Q. 


™ ony of 
© Om. GMoPTrx. 
u profitith Tr. Y mengyd 
a weren maad ry. forsothe o. 

€ Om. G pr.m.o. 4 sueth rv. is ouer x. 
mschulen y. "thei first r. © whom Tf. 
u voice, in tyme of grace T. ¥ Om. r. 
Zentrith r, ® he that rv. 


n demed ox. Om. ft. 
t also to rv. 
2 whanne the r. 


h this x sup. ras. i that if rag sec.m. hof. 


486 


restide of his werkis, as and God of 
ithise. Therfore haste we for? to entre into 
that reste, that no man falle into the 
12same ensaumple® of vnbileue. Forsoth the 
word of God is quyk, and spedy in? 
worching, and more ‘able for to perse® 
than alf tweyneS eggid swerd, and en- 
trynge®, ‘or strecchinge’, ‘til tok departyng! 
of soule, ‘or dyf™, and spirit, and of 
ioyntouris and merewis, and° departer?, 
‘or demer', of thou3tis and intenciouns’ of 
ishertis. And no creature is invisyble in 
the si3t of God. Forsothe alle thingis 
ben nakid and opyn to his y3en, to whom 
14a word to vs. Therfore we hauynge a 
greet bischop, that perside heuenes, Jhesu, 
the sone of God, holde’ the confessiount, 
1s ‘or knowleching", of oure feithY. Forsoth 
we han not a byschop, that may not suffre 
to gidere, ‘or haue compassioun*, toY oure 
infirmytees’, but temptid* by alle thingis 
isfor lyknesse, withoute> synne. Therfore 
go we with trist® to the trone of his grace, 
that we gete mercy, and fynde grace in 
couenable help*. 


CAP. V. 


1 Forwhi ech bysshop takyn® of men, is 
ordeyned for men in these® thingis that 
ben tof God, that he offre 3yftis and 

2sacryficis for synnes. The which may to 
gidere sorwe with hem, that vnknowen* 
and erren; for and he is ennyrowned' with 

sinfirmyte*. And therfore he owith, as and 
for the peple, so also! and for hym silf, 
4offre™ for synnes. Neithir ony man takith 
to" him honour, no° but he that is clepid 
sof God, as? Aaron’. So and Crist clari- 
fiede not hym silf, that he were bisshop, 
but he that spak to him, Thou art my 
6sone, to day I gendride thee. As and in 


b Om. sx. 4 and o. 
GMPST. twei x. 


k ynto GMPT. 


¢ exsaumple sx. 


Vdepartyd x. 


HEBREWS. 


© able to perse sx. peersable 7. 
h strecchinge out G. strecchinge mpr. strengin r. 
m Om. MopTrXx. 


Iv. 11—V. 6. 


entre in to that reste, that no man falle 

in to the same ensaumple of vnbileue. 

For the word of God is quyk, and spedi 12 

in worching, and more able to perse 

than any tweyne eggid swerd, and 

stretchith forth to the departynge of 

the soule* and of the spiritf, and of the 

joynturis {| and° merewis, and demere of + spirit; that 

thou3tis, and of intentis and? hertis. And 1a‘ yesomabe 

no creature is vnuisible in the si3t of 47. ve. 
seas . t The comoun 

God. For alle thingis ben nakid and opyn Grose seith, that 

to hise izjen, to whom a word to vs. ee niet 

Therfor we that han a greet bischop, 14% sider and 

that perside heuenes, Jhesu, the sone of poe Ney of 

God, holde we the knoulechyng of oure 

hope. For we han‘ not a bischop, that 15 

may not haue compassioun on oure in- 

firmytees, but was temptid bi alle thingis 

bi lycnesse, with oute synne. Therfor 16 

go we with trist to the trone of his 

grace, that we gete merci, and fynde 

grace in couenable help. 


* that is, sen- 
sualite. ve. 


CAP. Y.. 


For ech bischop takun of men, is or-1 
deyned for men in these thingis ‘that 
ben4 to God, that he offre 3iftis and sa- 
crifices for synnes. Which may togidere2 
sorewe with hem, that beth’ vnkunnynge 
and erren; for also he is enuyrounned 
with infirmytee. And therfor he owith,3 
as for the puple, so also for hym silf, to 
offre for synnes. Nethir ony nan takeths4 
to hym onour, but he that is clepid of 
God, as Aaron was. So Crist clarifiedes 
not hym silf, that he were bischop, but 
he that spak to hym, Thou art my sone, 
to dai Y gendride thee. As ‘in anothere6é 


fany N. ao. § two 
i Om. caoprrx. of strecchynge Q. 


n Om. x. © and the cmp. and it is the rT. 


P the departer y. demer yr. 9 Om. yx. * intencioun o. ententis ry. * holde wecupsry. t knowleching o. 


u Om. Gmoprx. Vhope ny. W For y, 
a temptid, or prouid cmpr. 
ethoo. f into r. 


™ to offre 4 pr.m. GMNPT. 


g Om. pr. 


2Om. ry. °Om.r. 


Sofk. Pofbsec.m. h. ink. 


x Om. GMopr. 
b the whiche was withouten rT. 
b knowen not F. 
P as and o. 


9 Om. R pr.m. 


Z infirmitees, or freeltese GMPT. 
bb Crist x. ¢helthe s. 4takun vp wpr. 
ivmbylapped o.  infirmytees op. 10m. s, 
q Aaron nas ¥. 


Yon ¥v. 


t ben cerkmRxXabceghkoaf. 8 take a. 


Vv. 7—VI. 4. 


othere’ place he seith, Thou art a prest 
into® with outen ende, vp* the ordre of 

7 Melchisedech. The" which in the’ dayes 
of his fleisch” offringe* preieris and bi- 
sechingis to God’ that my3te make him 

_saf fro deeth, ‘with greet cry and teeris’, 

sis* herd for his renerence. And sothli 
whanne he was Goddis sone, he lernede” 
obedience of thes thingis that he suffride; 

yand he endid® is maad cause of everlasting 
10heelthe to alle’ obeishinge to him, clepid® 
of God a- bischop, bisydis the ordre of 
11 Melchisedech. Of whom to® vs a greet 
word, and able" for! to be interpretid*, for! 
to seye, for 3e ben maad feble for™ to 
i2heere. Forsothe" whanne 3e schulen® be 
maistris for tyme?, eftsoone 3e neden that 
je be taujt, whiche ben the! elementis, 
‘or lettris', of the bigynnyng of Goddis 
wordis. And 3e ben maade, ‘tho to’ whom! 
13is nede of mylk, and" not sad’ mete. For- 
soth” ech that is parcener of mylk, is 
withoute part of the word of ri3twysnesse, 
14forsoth* he is a litil child. Forsoth of 
parfit men is sad mete, of hem that for 
‘the ilkeY custom han wittis? excersysid’, 

‘or trauelid’, to discrecioun of good and 
yuel. 

“CAP. VI. 

1  Wherfore® we leenynge a while the 
word of the®* bigynnynge of Crist, be’ born 
to the® perfeccioun ‘of him‘, not eftsoone 
leggynge® the foundament of penaunce fro 

2deede werkis, and of feith® to God, of 
waisshingis', ‘or baptyms*, of teching', and 
of™ leying on of hondis, and of rysing 
ajen of deed men, and of euerlastyng 

3dom. And this thing we schulen do, if 
4God schal suffre. Sothli it is impossible, 
hem" that oonys ben illumyned®, han 


HEBREWS. 


487 


place he seitht, Thou art a prest with 
outen ende, aftir the ordre of Melchi- 
sedech. Which in the daies of his fleisch7 
offride, with greet cry and teeris, preieris 
and bisechingis to hym that my3te make 
hym saaf fro deth, and was herd for his 
reverence. And whanne he was Goddiss 
sone, he lernyde obedience of these 
thingis that be suffride; and he brou3t9 
to the ende is maad cause of euer- 
lastinge heelthe to alle that obeischen to" 
hym, and is clepid of God a bischop, bi 10 
the ordre of Melchisedech. Of whom11 
ther is to vs a greet word for to 
seie, and able to be expowned, for je 
ben maad” feble to* here. For whanne 12 
3e ou3ten to be maistris for tyme’, eft- 
soone je neden that 3e be tau3t, whiche 
ben the lettris of the bigynnyng of 
Goddis wordis. And 3e ben maad thilke, 
to whiche? is nede of mylk, and not sad 
mete. For ech that is parcenere of13 
mylk*, is with out partt of the word of  * that is, hath 
ri3twisnesse, for he is a litil child. But 14 teching. ve. 


of perfit men is sad mete, of hem that 1 withow part; 
that is, unable 


for custom han wittis exercisid to dis- take hard 
F thing. Lire 
crecioun of good and of yuel. here. ve 


CAP. VI. 


Therfor? we bringinge” in a word of: 
the bigynnyng{ of Crist, be we borun 
to the perfeccioun of hym, not eftsoone 
leggynge the foundement of penaunce Crs" besyn- 
fro deed werkis, and of the feith to God, eo Blose 
and of teching of baptimys, and of: 
leiynge on of hondis, and of risyng a3en 
of deed men, and of the® euerlastinge 
doom. And this thing we schulen do,3 
if God schal suffre. But it is impossible‘, 4 
that thei that ben onys lijtned, and ‘han 


¢ that is, of the 
higynning 
feith wherbi 


ran otherox. SOm.v. tafturr. biv. "Om.r. VYOm.g. Om. rv. * offringe with greet 
ery and teeris y. Yhymsvy.Om.y. 2Om.y. ®wasy. Plerede sx. ¢led to perfeccioun yr. “alle 
men T. ©andisclepidy. fbinvy. Sistor. bvnabler. 10m. sx, k expounned, or interpretid G. 
expouned interpretid wp. expowned r. !Om.sTx. ™Om.e@mpsx. For vy. © ou3ten to be r. 
P tyme of long knowyng T. a tyme ¥ prim. 4 Om. r. r Om. x. Sinto K. tov, t whiche r. 
uQOm. rv. Yofsads. W Forwhiv. *fory. Ythe x. Om. v. that x. 2 the wittis c. her wittis 7. 
& hauntid emwoprt. traueiliden v. b Om. ox. ¢ Therfore alii, ccOm.y. 4Om. mp. ¢ Om. 
Gprmy. fOm.r. & lygynge amp. leiende sx. 4 the feith y. ibaptemyscupr. — or wasch- 


yngis apt. Om. ox. 1 techingis erx. 


' he seith in another place rR. % Om.a. ¥ ymaad a. 
a Wherfore reghka. » bryngen gk. ¢ Om. Eb. 


™ Om. G pr.m. MPT. 


a that thei y. © ligtened or. 


xfortoR. Yatyme a sec.m. tko8. 4% whom 1. 


4 ynpossible erk. 


488 


tastid also heuenly 3ifte, and ben maad 
sparceners of the? Hooly Gost, nethelees 
tastiden’ the good word of God, and ver- 
ctues of the world to comynge’, and ben 
sliden fer awey, eftsoone® fort to be" re- 
newlid’, ‘or maad newe”, to penaunce ; 
eftsoones crucifyinge to hem silf the sone 
7of God, and hauynge* to scorn. ForsotheY 
the erthe drynkynge reyn ofte comynge 
vpon” it; and bryngynge forth couenable 
eerbe to hem of whom? it is tilid, takith 
sblessing of God. Forsoth it bryngynge 
forth thornes and breris, is reprouable, 
and next to curs’, whos endyng® schal be 
9into brennyng. Forsoth, 3e moost dere- 
worthe, we tristen of jou betere thingis, 
and neer to heelthe’, nethelees® thou3 we 
1ospeken sof. Sothlig God is not vniust, that 
he for3ete joure workis® and loue, the! 
whiche* 3e han schewid in his name; for 
3e han mynistrid to seyntis, and mynistren. 
i1 Forsothe we coueiten ech! of 30u for™ to® 
schewe the same bysynesse to the™ ful- 
12 fillyng® of hope? tild into™ the ende; that 
3e be not maad slow, but also suweris of 
hem, ‘the whiche® by feith and pacience 
isschulen enherite biheestist. Forwhi God 
biheetynge to Abraham, for he hadde ‘no 
man" more, by whom he schulde swere, 
laswoor by hym silf, seiynge, No but I 
blessynge schalY blesse thee, and I multi- 
isplyinge schal multiplie thee; and” so he 
longe suffringe* gaat ‘repromyscioun, or 
is biheeste a3en¥. Forsothe? men swere?* 
by the more of hem, and the ende of al 
her controuersye>, ‘or debate*, is an ooth 
17to confermacioun. In the’ which thing 
God willinge for® to schewef to the eyris 
of his biheesteS the vnmouablenesse, ‘or 
sadnesse", of his conseil, puti bitwixe* an 


POm.c. 4 thei tastiden 7. ' comen sx. 
Vvrenewid sx. Om. vy. W Om. eaoprrx. 
b curse, or dampnacioun T. © euydence T. 
scharpli tr. & Forwhiv. 6 werke sgunopesTr. 


HEBREWS. 


VIL 5-——17. 


tastid also® an heuenly 3ifte, and ben 
maad parceneris of the Hooli Goost, ands 
netheles han tastid the good word of 
God, and the vertues of the world to 
comynge, and ben slidun fer awei, thate 
thei be renewid™ eftsoone to ‘penauncet. 
Whiche eftsones crucifient{ to hem silf 
the sone of God, and han to® scorn||. 
For the erthe that drinkith' reyn ofte7 
comynge on it, and bringith forth coue- 
nable erbe to hem of whiche it is tilid, 
takith blessing of God. But that thats 
is bringinge forth thornes and breris, is 
repreuable, and next to curs, whos end- 
yng schal be in to brennyng. But, 3e9 
moost dereworthe, we tristen of 3ou 
betere thingis, and. neer to helthe, thou3 
we speken so. 
that he for3ete 3oure werk and loue, 
whiche 3e han schewid in his name; for 
3e han mynystrid to seyntis, ‘and mynis- 
tren*. 
schewe the same bisynesse to the fillyng 


of hope in to the ende; that 3e be not12 


maad slowe, but also sueris of hem, 
whiche bi feith and pacience schulen 
enherite the biheestis. 
tinge to Abraham, for he hadde noon 
grettere, bi whom he schulde swere, 


And we coueiten that ech of 3ou 1) 


* reneuyd ; 
that is, to be 
cristned eft ; 
netheles thei 
mowen be san- 
id bi uerey pe- 
naunce, but 
thei moun not 
be maad newe 
bi the secunde 
cristenynge ; 
forwhi cristen- 
ing may not be 
don twyees in 
oo man. The 
Glose and Lire 
here. ve. 
Either it is im- 
possible; that 
is, ful hard, 
that thei be 
maad newe to 
penaunce, but 
it is not vtterly 
impossible as 
longe as thei 
ben in this lijf; 
and this expo- 
sicioun seemith 
for to acorde 


For God is not vniust, 10 more to the 


lettre. Lire 
here v. 

t+ maad newe to 
penaunce; ech 
man may be in 
this lif. Lyre 
here. e. 

t thei that 
wolen be crist- 
ned twyes, ben 
lijk the cruci- 
fiers and scorn- 
ers of Crist, 
and thou; thei 
crucifien Crist 


For God _bihe- 13 nt in dede, 


thei crucifien 

him as to him- 
self; that is,don 
therto as myche 


swoor bi hym silf, and seide, Y bless- 14 28,"¢i mowen. 


inge schal blesse thee!, and Y multipli- 


ynge schal multiplie thee§; and so hes 


long abidinge hadde the biheeste. 
men sweren bi a grettere{ than hem silf, 
and the ende of al her ple™ is an ooth 
to confirmacioun. 
willynge to schewe plenteuouslier to the 
eiris of his biheest the sadnesse of his 


counsel, puttide® bitwixe® an ooth, that 18 


bi twey? thingis vnmeuable, bi whiche 


5 ben maad newe eftsoone ry. t Om. srx. 2Om. r. 

x hanyng hym 1.  Y Forwhiv. %Om.srx. 4 whiehe r. 
d helth éhan breres and thornes r. © Om. v. f Om. 0. so 
iOm. svx. k that x. I that ech 7. ™ Om. srx. 


"Om.r. 2° Om.g. © fillinge yr. P the hopeg. 4Om.7. tog. 8 whiehe ry. that x. t the bihestis x. 


“noonry. VIshuls. WOm.o.  * suffringe aduersitees Tr. _ Y the ajein biheest carp. a3en byhest o. 
the bihest 7. repromissionn x. %Forwhi ry. ®sworen ory. » debate og. ¢Om.ooex. 40m. rx. 
€ Om. sx. f schewe plenteuousliere ry. & bihestiss. 4 Om. ox. 1 puttide vy. * bitwen s. 


€ also haue taastid r. 


f rennlid gk. 
k Om. gk. 1 Om. gk. 


™ ether debate K marg. 


8 crucifyinge A ef alii. 
1 putte k. 


bh him to K sec. m. 


i Om. R prem. 
© hitwene o. P two. 


In which thing God17 


The Glose and 
Lire here. ve. 
to scorn; as 
myche as is in 
hem thei cru- 


For 16 cifien eft God- 


dis sone and 
scornen him, 
that dispisen 
his grace and 
liggen in syn- 
nes. The Glose 
here rehersinge 
Crisostom. ve. 
§ I schal mul- 
tiplie thee ; 
vndirstonde 
thou, if I do 


VI. 18—VII. 9. 


igoth, that by tweye! thingis vnmouable, 
by whiche it is inpossible God™ for" to° 
lye, we haue strengest solace, ‘or confort?, 
the! whiche fleen to gidere for™ to holde 

igthe hope put forth. The’ which as ant 
ankir we han sikir to the soule", and sad, 
and’ yngoinge til to the ynner™ thingis of 

290 hydyng ; where the forgoere* ‘for vs entride 
yn’, Jhesus, maad bischop into? withouten 
ende vp? the ordre of Melchisedech?. 


CAP. VII. 


1 Sotbli this Melchisedech, kyng® of Sa- 
lem, the® prest of the hizeste God, the? 
which mette with Abraham gon® a3en fro 

2sleynge! of kyngis, and blesside him; to 
whom and Abraham departide® tythes of 
alle thingis; first sothli the’ which is 
interpretid kyng of rijtwysnesse, aftir- 
ward forsothe and kyng of Salem, that is 

3to seie, kyng' of pees, with oute fadir, 
with oute modir, with oute genelogie, ne- 
thir hauynge bigynnynge of dayes, nethir 
ende of lyf*; forsoth he licned to the 
sone of God, dwellith prest into! with- 
aouten ende. Forsoth biholde 3e hou greet 

‘is this man™, to whom and® Abraham 
patriark 3af tithes of the° beste thingis. 

5 And sotheli men takynge presthod of the 
sones of Leeuy han maundement for? to 
take tythes of the peple, vp1 the lawe’, 
that is to seye, of her britheren, thou3 
and thei wenten out of the leendis of 

cAbraham. Forsoth he* whos generacioun 
is not noumbrid* in hem, tooke tithis of ® 
Abraham; and he blesside this Abraham, 

7the which hadde repromyssiouns’. For- 
soth withoute” a3enseyinge, that that is 
glesse, is blessid of the betere. And here 
sothli men deiynge taken tithis; forsoth 
gther ‘it is witnessid*, that he lyueth. And 


ltwo empstx. ™that God r. 2 Om. srx, 
$Om.r. tOm.o. "soule, to stable it tr. 
yOm.y. 7Om.r. after cupr. bir. 
cmupr, 4Om.r. ¢ goynge or.  f fleinge 7. 
k lijf in knowinge r. Om... ™ this is x. 
empr, biv. f° lawe, and not othernijse T. 
Vof this 0, ¥ repromyssioun N. 


4 we that fieen togidre n1qegk. that we fleen togidere x pr.m. that fleen to gidere K sec. m. 
t ether entringe K marg. 
Y repromissiouns, ezthir bikecstis n. repromyssioun k. 


FikQabcego see.m. $ Om. E1KQegk. 
deecth K marg. * the kinges k. 


VOL. IV. BR 


HEBREWS. 


° Om. r. 
v Om. Pr pr.m. 
b Melchisedech entride for vs r. 
& partide K. jaf x pr.v. 
2 Om. T. 
8 Om. exy. 
w withoute ony MopoTrx. 


489 
it is impossible that God lie, wed han a‘ not this, no 
‘ : man hileue to 
strengeste solace, ‘we that fleen togidere® me in eny 
to holde the hope that is put forth to vs. cee 
Which hope as an ankir we han sikir CO eran 


le, and sad, and tj he _ «chal faile, if 
VETO 3 ‘ ooo ae yb ues this is not don. 


ynnere thingis of hiding; where the bifore 20 ae 
goere, Jhesus, that is maad bischop with ‘tes Br bi God, 
outen ende bi the ordre of Melchisedech, 


which aloone 
is sothfast of 
entride for vs. 


hymself. The 
Glose here. ve. 


CAP. VII. 

And this Melchisedech, king of Salem, 1 
and preest of the hijeste God, which 
mette with" Abraham, as he turnede 
a3en fro the’ sleyng” of kyngis*, and 
blesside hym; to whom also Abraham 2 
departide tithis of alle thingis; first he is 
seid king of rij3twisnesse, and aftirward 
kyng of Salem, that is to seie, king of 
pees, with out fadir, with out modir,3 
with out genologie, nether hauynge bi- 
gynnyng of daies, nether ende of lijf; 
and he zs lickened to the sone of God, 
and dwellith preest with outen ende. 
But biholde 3e how greet is this, to4 
whomw Abraham the patriark jaf tithis 
of the ‘beste thingis. For men of thes 
sones of Leuy takinge presthod han 
maundement to take tithis of the puple, 
bi the lawe, that is to sete, of her bri- 
theren, thou3 also thei wenten out of 
the leendis of Abraham. But he whosé 
generacioun is not noumbrid in hem, 
took tithis of Abraham; and he blesside 
this Abraham, which hadde repromys- 
siounsy. With outen ony ajenseiyng, that 7 
that is lesse, is blessid of the betere. 
And? heere deedli men taken tithis; buts 
there he berith witnessyng, that he lyu- 
eth. And that it be seid so, bi Abraham 9 


obey, POm x. @Om.r. 6 Om. sx. 
Winnermore eupr. * biforegoere r. 
bb was kyng y. © Om. 
hOm. ry. ia kyng r. 

°Om.G prom. mer. P Om. sx. after 
88 noumbre vy. +t hem, that is, Melchisedec tT. 
* he berith witnessinge r. 


r Om. 
vy Om. Kop. *¥ ether 


Z But a. 


u Om. R pr. m. 


490 


that it isY so” seid, by Abraham, and? 
1Leeuy, that took tithis, is tithid; for- 
soth?® and 3it he was in his fadris* leendis, 
whanne Melchisedech mette with him. 
1Therfore if endyng® was by presthod of 
Leeuy, forsothef vndir hym the peple took 
the lawe, what 3it was it nedeful, an- 
other prest for’ to ryse, vp" the ordre of 
Melchisedech, and not for‘ to be seid vp* 
i2the ordre of Aaron? Forsothe! the prest- 
hod translatid™, it is nede" that and° 
istranslacioun? of lawe1 be maad. Forsothe 
he in whom thes thingis ben seid, is of 
another lynage, of the’ which no man 
14 was’ prestt, ‘or vedy", to the auter. Soth- 
liv it is opynly” knowun*, that oure Lord 
is born of Y Juda, in which lynage Moyses 
isspak no thing of prestis. And more 3it 
it is knowun’, if vp* the ordre of Mel- 
iéchisedech another prest rysith; the> which 
is not maad vp° the lawe of fleischly 
maundement, but vp‘ vertu® of lyf inso- 
lible ©, ‘or that’ ‘may not be vndone. 
17 Sothli® he witnessith, For‘ thou art a prest 
into* withouten ende, vp! the ordre of 
18 Melchisedech ; forsoth reprouyng of the 
maundement bifore goynge is maad, for 
19 the™ vnsadnesse and vnprofyt of it. For- 
soth" the lawe brou3te no thing to ‘perfit 
thing®, forsoth the bryngyng yn of betere 
20 hope, by which we neijen to God?. And 
hou greet it is, not withoute sweringe‘; 
forsoth othere ben maad prestis™ with 
21oute an’ oth; ‘forsoth this prestt with" 
an oth, by hym that seide to hym, The 
Lord swoor, and it schal not rewe him, 
Thou ert a prest into’ withouten ende, 
aevp” the ordre of Melchisedech; in so 
moche Jhesu is maad* biheterY of the be- 


Yber. 2 Om. a prom. 
ffory. 8&8 Om. sx. 
™m is translatid r. 2 nedeful sy. o also Vr. 
Siso. tredyr. UOm.or. VY For. 
eMnypT. biv. 6Om.r. © after cupr. bi vr. 
to be vndon o. f or that that yr. Om. x. 
lafter caper. biv. ™ Om. rT. 


aalso vr. > was r. 
hafter ewpr. bi rv. 


2 Forwhi r. 


HEBREWS. 


i Om. esx. 

P the translacioun AN. 
W opyn kK. 
4 after amNPT. bi. 
& may not be don KQ. Om. x. 


; _ br [ © perfeccioun 7. 
inge, that Crist is maad prist aftur the ordre of Melchisedec T. 


VII. 10—22. 


also Leuy, that took tithis, was tithid ; 
and 3it he was in his fadris leendis, 10 
whanne Melchisedech mette with? hym. 
Therfor if perfeccioun was bi the preest-11 
hood of Leuy, for vndur hym the puple 
took the lawe, what 3it was it nedeful, 
another preest to rise, bi the ordre of 
Melchisedech, and not to be seid bi the 
ordre of Aaron? For whi whanne the? 12 
preesthod is translatid, it is nede that 
also translacioun of the® lawe be maad. 
But he in whom these thingis ben seid, 13 
is of another lynage, of which no man 
was preest“ to the auter. For it is opyn, 14 
that oure Lord is borun of Juda, in 
which lynage Moises spak no thing of 
preestis. And more 3it it is knowun, ifts 
bi the ordre of Melchisedech another 
preest is risun vp; which is not maadi6 
bi the lawe of fleischli maundement®, but 
bi vertu of lijf that may not be vndon. 
For he witnessith, That thou art a preest 17 
with outen ende, bi the ordre of Melchi- 
sedech; that repreuyng of the maunde-is 
ment bifor goynge is maad, for the vn- 
sadnesse and‘ vnprofit® of it. For whit 
the lawe brou3t no thing to perfeccioun, 
but there is a bringing in of a betere 
hope, bi which we nei3en to God. And 20 
hou greet it is, not with out sweryng ; 
but the othere ben maad preestis with 
outen an ooth; but this preest with an2i 
ooth, bi hym that seide ‘to hym", The 
Lord swoor, and it schal not rewe hym, 
Thou art a preest with outen ende, hi 
the ordre of Melchisedech; in so myche 22 
Jhesus is maad biheetere of the betere 
testament. And the othere! weren* maad 23 
manye preestis', ‘therfor for™ thei weren 


bb for r. cCthes. 4 fadir spr. 


e perfeccioun F. 
k after cupr. bi v. 


1 Forwhi whanne rv. 
athe lawe cox. Om. rx. 
Yino. 2Ztoknowe x. after 
e the vertu gsx. © not able 
h For y. iThaty. * Om. Fr. 
P God, is maad bi Crist v. 4 swer- 
t pristis in the old lawe r. § Om. Gmpr. 


x Om. r. 


t this forsothe s. but this prest 7. is maad withy. VvOm.v. W after aapr. biy. * maad betre 
empT. Y Om. mp. 

aOm.r. 6 Om. x. ¢ Om. CEIKMQRUXabcegkoa®. Cin egk. 4 prest, cithir redi Rr. © comaunde- 
ment FIK sec.m.Q pr.m.gka. fand the gac. 8 profyte. bOm.rpr.m. ‘othirmok. * benk. 


prestis vp the lawe k.  ™ for that that k. 


VII. 23-—VIII. 5. 


23tere testament. And sothli othere mo 
ben” maad prestis vp* ‘the lawe?, ‘for that® 
that’ thei-weren forbeden by deeth for® to 

24dwelle; forsoth‘ this man8, for that» he 
dwelle’ into* withouten ende, hath! euere- 

2slastyng presthod. Wherfore and he may 
saue into™ withouten ende, comynge ny3 
bi hym silf" ‘to God, evermore lyuynge 

26for® to preye for vs. Forsoth it bycaam 
that such a man were bischop to vs, 
hooly, innosent, inpolute?, ‘or ful clene4, 
departid fro ‘synful men’, and maad hi3er 

27than heuenes; the’ which hath not nede 
ech day, as prestis, first for his owne 
giltis fort to offre oostis", ‘or sacrificisy, 
aftirward” for the peple; sothli* he dide 

28 this thing, ‘onys offrynge him silfY. For- 
soth the lawe ordeynede men prestis hau- 
ynge sykenesse’, ‘or freelte*; forsoth® the 
word of swering, the® which is aftir the 
lawe, ordeynede the sone perfyt into? 
withouten ende. 


CAP. VIII. 
1 Forsothe a® capitle vponf tho thingis 
that ben seid. We han such a bischop, 
that saat to gidere in’ the ri3thalf of the 
2seete of greetnesse in henenes, mynistre® 
of seyntis and of the verri tabernacle, that 
3God sette', and not man. Forsothe* ech 
bischop is ordeyned for! to offre 3iftis and 
oostis™; wherfore it" is nede, and® this 
man? ‘for tol haue sum thing that he 
4schal’ offre. Therfore if he* were vpont 
erthe, lie were no" prest, whanne ther 
weren that schulden offre 3iftis vp’ the 
slawe, the’ whiche seruen to the saum- 
pler* and schadewe of heuenly thingis. As 
it isY answerid to Moyses, whanne he 
schulde ende? the tabernacle, Se*, he” 


HEBREWS. 


491 


forbedun bi deth to dwelle stille; but24 
this", for® he dwellith with outen ende, 
hath an euerlastynge preesthod. Wher-2s 


for also he may saue with outen ende, 


comynge ny3 bi hym silf to God, and 
euermore lyueth to preye for vs. For it26 
bisemyde that sich aP man4 were a bi- 
schop to vs, hooli, innocent, vndefoulid, 
clene, departid fro synful men, and maad 
hizere than heuenes; which hath not nede 27 
ech dai, as prestis, first for hise owne 
giltis to offre sacrifices, and aftirward 
for the puple; for he dide this thing in 
offringe hym silf onys. And the lawe 28 
ordeynede men prestis hanynge sijknesse; 
but the word of swering, which is after 
the lawe, ordeynede the sone perfit with 
outen ende. . 


CAP. VIII. 

But a capitlet on tho thingis that*ben1 
seid. We han siche™ a bischop, that sat : 
in* the ri3thalf of the seete of greetnesse 
in henenes, the mynystre of seyntis, and 2 


‘of the veri tabernacle, that God made, 


and not man. For ech bischop is or-3 
deyned to offre 3iftis and sacrificis ; 
wherfor it is nede, that also this bischop 
haue sum thing that he schal offre. 
Therfor if he were on erthe, he were no4 
preest, whanne ther weren that schulden 
offre 3iftis bi the lawe, whiche seruen tos 
the saumpler and schadewe of heueneli 
thingis. As it was answerid to Moises, 
whanne he schulde ende the tabernacle, * 
Se, he seide, make thou alle thingis bi the 


Zweren vy. @afterampr. Om.y. %Om.r. ¢therforer. 4Om.s. for vy sec.m. & Om. sx. 
fsothely capr. €Om. x. bOm. vy. idwelleth aemnopesryxy. ‘Om. rv. lThaue «4. ™Onm. rv. 
nalsov, Om. osx.  P vnfyled o. 4 or vrdefoulid cmptr. Om. ox. fsynners mT.  *% Om. ¥. 
tOm.sx. tOm.o. VOm.ox. W and afterwardeo. * for. Yin offringe himself oonys r. 
2 syknessis y. 8 Om.ox. Pbutr. ¢Omr. Omer. & this 7. f is maad vpon T. on VX. 
Zonsx. bthemynystrevy. isettider. - Forwhir. 'Om.sx. ™sacrificis 7,  ™ and it s. 
® that also y. Om. x. P man Crist tT. bischop vy. Om. x. TOm.r. tox. schulder. sit 7. 
tonyvx., Unot ry. Vafteremupr. biv. ¥Om.y. *saumpler, or figure tT. Ywasv. % make 7. 
® See thou G sec.m. » the Lord r. 

"he this 1. thismank. © for that thatk. Pp Om. ek prom. 9Om.r. ' Om. gk. 8 on bgk. 


3RQ 


t+ acapilil ; 
that is, a schort 
comprehending 
of many thingis. 
The Glose here. 
ve. 


492 


seith®, make thou alle thingis vp? the 
saumpler, that is schewid to thee in the 
smount. Now forsoth he hath getyn a 
betre mynysterie, by how moche and he 
is® a mediatour of af betere testament, 
the’ which is halewid", ‘or confermyd', 
7with betere biheestis. For if ‘the ilke* 
firste hadde be voydid' fro blame™, sothli 
a place’ of the secunde schulde not be 
ssou;t. Forsoth® reprouynge hem he? 
seith, Loo! dayes comen, seith the Lord, 
and I schal ende4 a newe testament vpon' 
the hous of Ysrael, and vpons the house of 
9Juda; not vpt the testament that I made 
to her fadris, in" the day in which’ I 
cau3te her hond, that I schulde leede hem 
out of the lond of Egipt; for thei dwell- 
iden not perfitly in my testament, and I 
10 haue dispysid” hem, seith the Lord. For* 
this is the testament, ‘the whichY I schal 
dispose to the hous of Israel aftir? tho* 
dayes, seith the Lord, in 3yuynge my 
lawis into the soulis of hem, and into the 
hertis ‘of hem I¢ schal aboue wryte hem; 
and ‘I schal be to hem into God, and thei 
11schulen be to me into a peple. And ech 
man schal not teche his nei3bore, and ech 
man his brother, seyinge, Knowe thou the 
Lord; for alle men schulen wite4, ‘or 
knowe®, me, fro the lessef ‘til tof the more 
120f hem. For I schal be helpful®, ‘or mer- 
cyfuli, to the wickidnesse* of hem, and 
now I schal not bithenke! on™ the synnes 
130f hem. Forsoth in seyinge newe, the 
formere wexiden" olde; forsoth that that 
is of many dayes, and wexith® olde, is ny3 
the? deeth. 
CAP. IX. 
1 Sotheli and‘ the formere™ hadde iusti- 
fyingis of worschipe, and hooly thing 
worldhi, ‘that ts, duringe for a tyme’. 


© seide vr. 


HEBREWS... 


VIII. 6—IX. 1. 


saumplert, that is schewid to thee in the 
mount. But now he hath getun a betereé 
mynysterie, bi so myche as he is a medi- 
atour of a betere testament, which is 
confermyd with betere biheestis. For if7 
the ilke firste hadde lackid blame, the 
place of the secounde schulde not haue be 
sou3t. For he repreuynge hem seith,s 
Lo! daies comen, seith the Lord, and Y 
schal make perfit a newe testament on 
the hous of Israel, and on the hous of 
Juda; not lijk the testament that Y made» 
to her fadris, ‘in the dai" in which Y 
cau;te her hond, that Y schulde lede hem 
out of the loond of Egipt; for thei dwell- 
iden not perfitli in my testament, and Y 
haue dispisid hem, seith the Lord. But 10 
this is the’ testament, which Y schal dis- 
pose to the hous of Israel aftir tho” 
daies, seith the Lord, in* 3yuynge my 
lawis in to the soulis of hem, and in to 
the hertis of hem I schal aboue write 
hem; and Y schal be to hem in to a’ 
God, and they schulen be to me in toa 
puple. And ech man schal not teche his 11 
nei3ebore, and ech man his brother, sei- 
ynge, Knowe thou the Lord; for alle 
men schulen knowe me, fro the lesse*? to? 
the more of hem. For Y schal be mer- te 
ciful to the wickidnesse of hem, and now 
Y schal not bithenke on the synnes of 
hem. But in selynge a newe, the formere 13 
wexide eeld; and that that is of many 
daies, and wexith eeld, is ny3 the® deeth. 


CAP. IX. 
And the former testament hadde ius-1 
tefiyngis® of worschip, and hooli thing 
duringe foratyme. For the tabernacle 2 


daftur r. biv. ¢ismaads. fOm.nr. &Om.r. bconfeermed yr. i Om. orx. 
k that x. 1 voyde 4GMNoPSTYXY. ™ blaam, pertily clensynge men T. —_® place, or opportunite T. 
°Forhe vy. POm.y, 4 make perfity. onyx. Son svx. tafter Gupr. vpon o. biy. *tOm. s. 
¥ the whiche n. W disposid Nn. x Forwhi rv. Ywhiche sv. that x. and after gsy. the 7. 
bOm. 7. ¢andx. 4knowe or. ¢€Om.orx. fleesteo. &vnto mpr. merciful o. i Om. ox. 
k wickidnessis s. 1 thenken s. ™ of mT. ™ wex s. wexide vy. wexen x. wexe Y. © wexide GPT. 
POm. x. 9Om. 7. © formere testament y. 8 Om. o. 


t ensaumpler rR. 


u Om. Egk. ¥ Om. bk. 
@ til to K sec. m. 


b to the k sec. m. g. 


W the R pr.m. 
¢ justifiynge k. 


xsIk. yOm.Rprem. 2 leste gk. 


IX. 2——~13. 


2Forsoth the tabernacle was maad first, in 
which weren candelstickis, and boord', and 
puttinge forth of looues, that” is seid hooly. 
3Forsoth aftir the veil, ‘or hydyng’, the 
secunde tabernacle, ‘that is seid” ‘sancta 
sanctorum, that ¢s*, hooly of hooli thingis; 
4hauynge a goldin sencer, and the arke of 
testament, keuerid aboute on ech syde with 
gold, in they which a? pot of gold hanynge 
manna, and the 3erd of Aaron that flo- 
rischide, and the* tablis of testament»; 
svpon® whiche? thingis weren chernbyns of 
glorie, schadewinge the propiciatorie*; of 
whiche thingis it is not now for‘ to seye 
6by alleé. Forsoth thes" maad thus to gi- 
dere, sothli in! the formere tabernacle * 
prestis entriden yn' evermore™, endinge 
7 the officis" of sacramentis®; forsoth in the 
secunde tabernacle, ‘onys in the 3eer? the 
bisshop aloone’, not withoute blood’, the’ 
which he offrith for his ignoraunce and 
8the peplis. Thet Hooly Gost signyfiynge" 
this thing, not” 3it the wei of seyntis for” 
‘to be* openyd, 31tY the former tabernacle 
yhauynge? state. The® which parable is* 
of this present time, bisydis’ which 3iftis 
and oostis®, ‘or sacrifysis‘, ben offrid, thes 
whiche mown not make a® man seruynge 
perfit by conscience, oonly in metis, and 
10 drynkis, and dyuerse waischingis, and ri3t- 
wysnessis of fleisch, puti ‘til to* the! tyme 
1of coreccioun™. Forsoth Crist beynge" a 
bischop of goodis to comynge®, by? a larger 
and perfiter4 tabernacle, not inaad by hond, 
1gthat is to seye, not of this makyng, nether 
by blood of gootbuckis, or of* caluys, but 
bi his owne blood, entride oonys into hooly 
thingis, enerlasting® redemciount foundyn®. 
13 Forsoth’ if the blood of goot buckis, and 


s 
t a bord eur. 2 which r. Y¥ Om. orx. 
yOm. sy. 2wasav. %®Om. &@ prim. MPT. 
€ propiciatorie, or merciable place r. {£ Om. sx. 
these weren F. iand x. Om.r. & Om.r. 


HEBREWS. 


b the testament Gpesr. 
€ alle circumstauncis T. 
10m. vx. 


493 


was maad first, in which weren candil- 
stikis, and boord, and setting forth of 
looues, which is seid booli. And after’s 
the veil’, the secounde tabernacle, that 
is seid sancta sanctorum, that is, hooli 
of hooli thingis; hauynge a goldun cen-4 
rer, and the arke of the testament, keuered 
aboute on ech side with gold, in which 
was a pot of gold hauynge manna, and 
the 3erde of Aaron that florischide, and 
the tablis of the testament; on whiches 
thingisf weren cherubyns of glorie, ouer- 
schadewinge the propiciatorie; of whiche 
thingis it is not now to seie bi alle. Buts 
whanne these weren maad thus togidere, 
preestis entriden eueremore in the formere 
tabernacle, doynge the offices of sacrifices; 
but in the secounde fabernacle, the7 
bischop eztride onys in the 3eer, not 
without blood, which he offride for his 
ignoraunce and the puplis. For thes 
Hooli Goost signefiede this thing, that 
not 3it the weie of seyntis was openyd, 
while the formere tabernacle hadde staat. 
Which parable is of this present tyme, 9 
bi which also 3iftis and sacrifices ben 
offrid, whiche moun not make a man 
seruynge perfit bi conscience, oneli in 
metis, and drynkis, and dyuerse waisch-10 
ingis, and ri3twisnessis of fleisch, that 
weren sett to the tyme of correccioun. 
But Crist beynge a bischop of goodis toi 
comynge, extride bi a largere and per- 
fitere tabernacle, not maad bi hoond, that 
is to seye, not of this makyng, nether bi12 
blood of goot buckis, or of calues, but bi 
his owne blood, entride onys in to the! 
hooli thingis, that weren foundun bi an 
euerlastinge redempcioun. For if the1s 


w that x. that is p. is said ryx. x Om. o. 

€on vx. ‘1 the whiche o. 
b thes faberuaclis T. whanne 
m eneremore, or cche day T. eneremore 


in the formere tabernacle vy. —® offis gsx. © sacrifices y. POm.¥v. 4 aloone enéride oonis in the 
jeer vr. ‘blood entridr. *Om.v.  Forwhi'the vy.  singnifiede y. that not r. W Om. srx. 
xwasy. Ywhile ry. Zhadde 3it 7. staat, or during r. >%Om.7. ¢Om. wpr. ‘bir. © sacri- 
ficesy. fOm,ovx, €Om.v. &Om. x. i pntinn. kyntompr. 10Om.s.  ™correpcioun 
Gpr.m. " beeinge present vy. ©comens. Pentridebiv. 4 profitablere sy. perfit Tr. * Om. Ner. 
® whanne enerlastinge yr. tajenbygeyng 0. % was fonnden vy. ¥ For rv. 

4 Om. b.  ¢ or hidynge x sec.m. marg. Om. x.  & ether shewed K marg. ona. i Om. £1K 


grbcehoas. 


494 


bolis, and asche™ of a* cow calf spreyndy, 
halowith vnelene men to the clensyng of 
14 fleisch, how moche more the blood of Crist, 
the* which by the Hooly Gost offride hym? 
vnwemmyd to God, schal clense oure con- 
science fro deede workis, for’ to serue to 
15‘God lyuynge®? And therfore he is a’ me- 
diatour of* new testament, that deethf 
fallinge bitwixeS, into" redempcioun of the! 
trespassyngis that weren vndir the former 
testament, thei that ben clepid take repro- 
16 myscioun* of euerlasting eritage. Sotheli! 
where is™ a® testament®, it is nede, that 
the deeth of the testament maker come 
17 bitwixe?. Forsoth’ the testament is con- 
fermyd in deede ment; ellis it is nots 
worth', the while he" lyueth, that made 
18the testament’. Wherfore sothli nether 
the firste testament is” halowid withoute 
19 blood®, Forsoth** ech maundement of the 
lawe raddY of Moyses to al the peple, he 
takynge’ the blood of calues, and of buckis 
of geet, with watir, and reed wolle, and 
ysope, spreyngde® and ‘the ilke® book# 
20and al the peple, seyinge®, This is the 
blood’ of the testament, that God  co- 
21maundide to jou. Also he spreyngde® by® 
blood the tabernacle, and alle the! vessels 
of mynysterie‘, ‘or seruyses', in lich™ ma- 
2znere. And almost alle thinges" ben clensid 
in blood vp® the lawe; and withoute sched 
ing of blood remyssioun? of synnes’ is not 
23maad". Therfore it’ is nede thet saumpleris 
forsoth" of heuenli thingis for’ to be clens- 
id with these thingis; forsoth ‘the ilke* 
heuenly thingis with betere oostis’ than 
24thes’. Forsoth Jhesus entride not into 
hooly? thingis maad by® hondis, the saum- 


w the asche aemNopeTrx. the asshes sy. 
>’ Om. sx. ¢lyuynge God carr. 4 Om. 7. 
to the nw. ‘thoo rv. tho ry. 
° testament is Fr. 
wiluessis T. S00, 
therfro tT. W was r. 
AGMNPQTY. and bispreynd r. 
writen T. and seide ry. f book x. 
mpt. 10m. moprx. or seruyse Qs. 
repromyssioun xX. 4 synne MPT. 
vOm. wpstyvx., WOm. Tr. *thilk o. tho x. 
clensid r, 4 lalowid r. » with o. 


t worthi gx. "that he 7. 


™ lichy Q. 


K to God a pr.m. b sec.m. ! the urg. 


HEBREWS. 


x Om. g. 
€ of the GarpesTxy. 

k the repromissionn mM. the biheeste r. 

P bitwen sx. bitwixe to conferme it T. 


> that w. Om. 7. both ry. al x. 
& spreynde AGMNPQTYY. 
n Om. K. 
¥ maade iz the lawe tT. 

Y sacrificis r. 
© the whiche ben t. 


m Om. R. 


IX. 14——24. 


blood of gootbuckis, and of boolis, and 

the aische of a cow calf spreynd, halew- 

ith vnclene men to the clensing of 

fleisch, hou myche more the blood of 14 

Crist, which bi the Hooli Goost offride 

hym silf vynwemmyd to God, schal clense 

oure conscience fro deed werkis, to serue 

God* that lyueth? And therfor he is ais 
mediatour of the newe testament, that bi 

deth fallinge bitwixe, in to redempcioun 

of tho! trespassyngis that weren vndur 

the formere testament, thei that ben 

clepid take the biheest of euerlastinge 

eritage. For where a testament is, it is 16 

nede, that the deth of the™ testament 

makere come bitwixe. For a testament 17 

is confermed in deed men; ellis it is not 

worthe, while he lyueth, that made the 
testament. Wherfor nether the firste tes-18 

tament was halewid without blood. For 19 

whanne ech maundement of the lawe 

was red of Moises to al the puple, he 

took the blood of calues, and of® buckis 

of geet, with watirf, and reed wolle, 

and ysope, and bispreynde bothe thilke Si0ve ath that 
book and al the puple, and seide, This 20¢th hanteme, 
is the blood of the testament, that God vent charite, 
comaundide to 30u. Also he spreynde2i roe 
with blood the tabernacle, and alle the 

vessels of the seruyce in lijk maner. And 22 

almest alle thingis ben clensid in blood 

bi the lawe; and without scheding of 

blood remyssioun of synnes® is not maad. 

Therfor it is nede, that the saumpleris? 23 

of henenli thingis be clensid with these 

thingis; but thilke heuenli thingis with 

betere sacrificis than these. For Jhesus 24 

entride not in to hooli thingis maad bi 


+ The comoun 


z Om. r. 
f bi deth r. 
1 For whi r. 
@ Forwhi r. 


Y sprengd s, ahymself canprv. 
& bitwen sx. bin 
Om. Fr. 2 Om. N. 


T men, that is, bi the deeth of 


Vv testament, for he may chaunge it 3if he wole, or slid 
* blood, in token of the tothere rr. 


xx For r. Ywasredd ry. * took v. ® spreynd 
ethat x. 4 hook, wherin the lawe was 

hwith ewoprr. iOm.o. * sernices 
° after GupT. bir. P remyssiouns r. 
Ssothely itr. tthatthe rr. Om. 7. 


z thes, for bi Cristes blood thei ben 


2 Om.a. %synne i prim. P saumpler k. 


IX, 25——X. 7. 


plers of verri thingis, but into ‘the ilke 
heuene’, that he appere® now to cheref, 

25or face’, of God for’ vs; nether" that he 
offre him silf ofte, as the bischop entride 
into hooli thingis by! alle 3eeris in alien 

26blood*, ellis it bilofte hym ofte! for™ to 
suffre" fro the bigynnyng of the world; 
now forsoth onys in the endyng® of the? 
worldis, to4 distruccioun of synne by his 

27 oost, ‘or sacrifice’, he apperide’, and as it* 
is ordeyned to men, oonys for" to deie. 


CoP. Xx. 


es Forsoth aftir this dom’, so and Crist 
was offrid onys, for” to auoyde* the synnes 
of many men; the secunde ¢ymeY he schal 
appere withoute synne to men abydinge 
him into the’ heelthe* ‘of hem by feith>. 
1+Forsoth the lawe’ hauynge schadowe of 
goodis to comynge®, not ‘the ilkef ymage 
of thingis, ‘by alle 3eeris by the ilke same? 
oostis', whiche! ‘thei offren withoute ceess- 
inge‘, ‘neuere may’ make men ‘comynge 
2ny3™ perfyt"; ellis thei schulden haue ceess- 
id for® to be offrid, therfore that the wor- 
schipers clensid oonys, hadden no? con- 
3science of synne ferthermore1. But in 
hem? mynde of synnes’ is maad by alle 
43eeris. Forsoth' it is ynpossible synnes" 
for’ to¥ be don* awey by blood of bolis, 
sand buckis of geet. Therfore he entrynge 
into the world, seith, Thou woldist not 
‘an oost’, ‘or sacrifice’, and offring ; for- 
soth? thou? hast* shapyn? a bedy® tof me; 
sand® brent sacrificis for" synne! pleside 
7not to thee. Thanne I seyde, Loo! I come; 
in the heed, ‘or bigynnyng', of the book 
it is writyn of me, that I do thi wille™. 


4 heuens itself ry. that heuene x. 


HEBREWS. 


€ apperide ky. f the chere ewoprrx. 


495 


hoondis, that ben saumpleris’ of very 
thingis, but in to heuene it silf, that he 
appere now to the cheer of God for vs; 
nether that he offre him silf ofte, as the 25 
bischop entride in to hooli thingis bi 
alle 3eeris in alien blood, ellis it bihofte 2s 
hym to suffre ofte fro the bigynnyng of 
the world; but now onys in the ending 
of worldis', to’ distruccioun of synne bi 
his sacrifice he apperide. Andt as it is27 
ordeynede to men, onys to die, buts 
aftir this 7s the dom, so Crist was offrid 
onys, to auoyde® the synnes of inany men; 
the secounde tyme he schal appere with 
outen synne to men that abiden him in 
to heelthe. 


GAP AX. 


For the lawe hauinge a schadewe of} 
good thingis ‘that benY to come, not the 
ilke image of thingis, mai neuer make 
men nei3inge perfit bi the ilke same sacri- 
fices”, which thei offren without ceessing 
bi alle 3eeris; ellis thei schulden hauez 
ceessid to be offrid, for as myche as the 
worschiperis clensid onys, hadden not* © 
ferthermore conscience of synne. But ins 
hem‘ mynde of synnes is maad bi alle 
jeris. For it is impossible that synnes 4 
be doon awei bi blood of boolis, and of 
buckis of geet. Therfor he entrynge ins 
to the world, seith, Thou woldist not sa- 
crifice and offryng; but thou hast schapun 
a bodi to me; brent sacrificisY also foré 
synne plesiden not to thee. Thanne Y7 
seide, Lo! Y come; in the bigynnyng 
of the book it is writun of me, that Y do 
thi wille, God. He seiynge bifor, Thats 


g Om. cmoprx. of face N. 


ssofy. hneheentrider. iin. blood of beestist. 1Om.v. ™ Om. sx. © suffre ofte rv. 
°eendingesg. POm. mestvx. 4tothesx. «Om. Gmopx. 8 aperid to the fader tr. t Om. rr. 
uQOm. eupstx. VYisthedom ry. WOm.sx. * voiden s. avoid, or do away tT. YOm. x. 2Om, Fr. 
aheste a. >&Om.ry. Tf In the chapter begins here. ‘old lawe tr. ¢comen sx. fthat x. & Om.r. 
bi alle 3eris bi tho same x. —_} oostis, that the lawe comaundith r. Om.v. i Om.v. that x. k Om. r. 


Imay nevere yr. ™ neizinge v. 


4 perfyt, bi thilke same sacr. whiche thei offren without ceesing bi alle 


3eeris v. © Om. sx. P not ferthermore yr. 4Om.y, * hem by oft offring tr, %synne tr. * For r. 
uthat synnes vy. VOm.stvx,. WOm.r. *Om. nN. Ysacrifice ry. %Om.caroprvx. ®buty. 
b Om. 7. © schalt G. Om. r. 4 Om, rt. © body fo suffre and dye T. f thou hast jouun to 7. 
&Om.r. hand fory. isynnes x. k heuyd ar. bigynnyng 0. ! Om. amopx. or the bygynnynge y. 


m wille, God r. wille, thou God r. 


t the worldis nr. 
x Om. g prim. k. 


4 ensaumplers E1k. 
W sacrifice a pr.m. 


8 to the k. 
Y sacrifice A pr... K prom. R pr. m. 


t Not a. 


« ether do awey K marg. Y Om. R prim. 


496 


8 He ‘seying aboue", ‘or bifore°, For thou 
woldist not oostis?, and offringis, and brent 
sacrificis, and4 for synne, ne" tho thingis 
ben plesaunt to thee, ‘the whiche® ben 

9offrid vp' the lawe, thanne I seide, Lo! I 
come, that I do thi" wille, God’. He 
doith awey the firste”, that he make* theY 

losecunde”. In which wil we ben halewid 
by the offring of the body of Crist Jhesu 

lloonys. And sothli ech prest is redy ‘ech 
day mynystringe*, ‘and ofte tymes? off- 
ringe the same oostis‘, ‘the whiche’ mown 
l2nenere do awey synnes®. Forsoth this 
man offringe an® oost for synnes, for euer- 
more sittith on the riz3thalf of God the 
3fadir; fro theunis forth abidynge, til his 
14enemyes ben put a stool of* his feet. Sothli 
by oon offryng he endide’ for euermore 

15 halowide men. Forsoth and the Hooly Gost 
witnessith to™ vs"; forsoth® aftirward? he 

16seide, Forsoth this is the testament, ‘the 
which‘ I schal witnesse to hem aftir thot 
dayes, ‘the Lord seith', in‘ 3yuynge my 
lawis in the hertist of hem, and in the 
soulis" of hem IY schal aboue wryte hem ; 

1j7and now I schal no more thenke on the 
lgsynnes and* wickidnessis of hem. For- 
sothe where ‘is remissioun of these’, now? 
i9non offring for synne. ‘And so*, britheren, 
hauynge? trist® into the entring of seyntis* 
2oin the blood of Crist, ‘the which® hef 
halowideS to vs a new wey, and lyuyng 
bi a veyl,‘or keuering®, that is to seye, his 

21 fleisch, and! the greet prest on! the hous” 

220f God, go" we to® with verri herte into? 
the plentel of feith; we" spreynt’ the 
hertis fro yuel conscience, and waiscliyn 

23the body with clene watir, holdet the con- 


n aboue sayinge cpr. bifore seyinge 0. seyinge bifore r. 
t after GMPT. 


tT Om.o. § whiche r. that x. 
x ordeyned 7. make stedfast r. 


G $éce.m, 
ses T. y Om. rf. 
f man Crist tr. Om. x. 
l eendid, or halowed T. maade parfit rv. 
Qwhiche vy. that x. 99 the y. 

Vandlo. Wofmr. * and ona. 
ynge mr. ‘ trist fe entre mr. 4 hooly thingis r. 
bigan sy. halewede, either bigan ¥. 
eupT. of @. ™ hous, or puple T. 
8 spreynd, or clensid Gupr. sprengd x. 


m Om. 7. 


n nei3 TY. 


2 that is, the alde testament K marg. 
&lawe b.  f wickidnesse xa. & al k. 


HEBREWS. 


z second jouun by Crist 7. 
> Om. G pr.m. ofte tymes and G sec.m. ofte tyme T. 
§ Om. AN. 00n GMOPTX. 00 F. 
n ys trewe in this saying T. 
T seith the Lord Gapsr. 

Y remissioun of these is rv. 
e which v. that x. 
4 Om. ox. or hiling v. 
© Om. r. 
t holde we eupsr. 


a that is, the newe testament K mare. 


X. 8—23. 


thou woldist not sacrificis, and offringis, 

and brent sacrifices for synne, ne tho 

thingis ben plesaunt to thee, whiche ben 

offrid bi the lawet, thanne Y seide, Lo!» + What ben 
thei worth than 

Y come, that Y do thi wille, God. He _ that ben offria 

doith awei the firste*, that he make stid- fae a 

fast the secounde*. In which wille we10 

ben halewid bi the offring of the bodi of 

Crist Jhesu onys. And ech prest is redill 

mynystrynge ech dai, and ofte tymes 

offringe the same sacrifices, whiche moun 

nevere do awei synnes. But this mani 

offringe o° sacrifice for synnes, for euere 

more sittith in the riz3thalf of God the 

fadir; fro thennus forth abidinge, til13 

hise enemyes ben put a stool of hise feet. 

For bi oon offring he made perfit for14 

euere halewid men. And the Hooli Goost 15 

witnessith to vs; for aftir that he seide, 

This is the® testament, which Y schal wit- 16 

nesse to hem after’ tho daies, the Lord 

seith, in 3yuynge my lawes® in the hertis 

of hem, and in the soulis of hem Y schal 

aboue write hem; and now Y schal no17 

more thenke on the synnes and the 

wickidnessis of hem. And where remys- 1s 

sioun of these is, now is ther noon offring 

for synne. Therfor, britheren, hauynge 19 

trist in to the entring of hooli thingis in 

the blood of Crist, which halewide to vs20 

a newe weie, and lyuynge bi the hiling, 

that is to seie, his fleisch, and we hau-21 

yuge the greet preest on the hous of God, 

nei3e we with very herte in the plente of 22 

feith; and be oure hertis spreined fro an& 

yuel conscience, and oure bodies waischun 

with clene watir, and holde we the con- 23 

fessioun of oure hope, bowinge to no side; 


P sacrifices yr. 9 Om. 
W first 30uun bi Mot- 
@ mynystringe ech day r. 
d whiche ry, that x. © synne sy. 
b sacrifice vy. in aeunptyx. * ynder x. 
ofor rv. P aftir that r. 
therte T. " sones K. 

a Therfore yr. > we han- 
f£ Om. estxy. & halewede, or 
iand we hauynge y. * tothe T. !vpon 
Piny. 4temple x pr.m. 1tOm.s. 


o Om. GMoPrx. 
uthe xg. Y of God xa. 


¢ sacrifices rv. 


8 I schal 3if in o. 
Z now is Vr. 


baag Cab. dinb. 


X, 24—34. HEBREWS. 497 


fessioun of oure hope vnbowynge", ‘or that 
may not be foldyn’; forsoth” he is trewe 
24 that ‘bihijte a3en*. And biholde we ‘in to’ 
gidere in? the stiringe* of charite and of 
25 goode werkis; not forsakynge” oure geder- 
inge to gidere, as it is of © custom to! sum 
men, but comfortinge®, and by so moche 
thef more, by how% moche 3e schulen se* 
a¢the day! neizinge*. Forsoth' to™ vs syn- 
nynge wilfully, aftir the knowyng of 
treuthe takun, ‘now an oost® for® synnes? 
27is4 not" lefts. For whi sum abyding of 
doom is dredful, and thet suyng of fyer, 
the® which’ is” to* waastyngeY aduer- 
agsaries’. Ony® man makynge voyde, ‘or 
brekinge®, the lawe of Moyses, deieth with 
outen ony mercy, by tweyne® or thre wit- 
29nessis; how moche more? gessen 3e, hime 
for to disserue’ worse turmentis, ‘the 
which? ‘schal defoule! the sone of God, and 
schal* leede!, ‘or holde™, the blood of the 
testament polute®, in ‘the which°® he is 
halewid?, and ‘schal do’ wrong", ‘or dispit’, 
,9to the spirit of grace? Sotheli we witent 
hym that seide, To me veniaunce, and I 
schal 3elde. And eft, For the Lord schal 
3, deme his peple. It is feerful for" to falle 
32into hondis’ of ‘God lyuynge*. Forsoth 
haue 5e mynde on the formere dayes, in 
they whiche 3e li3tned susteyneden’ greet 
sy Stryf, ‘or fi3é*, of passiouns. And sothly in 
‘that other? 3e maad® a spectacle’ hi schen- 
schips and® tribulaciouns; in thef tothir$ 
forsothe 3e ben! maad felowis of men 
s,lyuynge sol. For whi and to boundun 
men 3e hadden compassioun, and 3e res- 
seyueden with ioye the raueyne of joure 
goodis*, knowynge 3ou for’ to haue a 


for he is trewe" that hath made the 

biheeste. And biholde we togidere in 24 

the stiring of charite and of good werkis; 

not forsakinge oure gadering togideref, as 25 if ie 2 
it is of! custom to sum men, but coum- whom in feith 
fortinge, and bi so myche the more, bi yn 
hou myche 3e seen the dai neizynge. 

Forwhi now a sacrifice for synnes is 26 

not left to vs, that synnen wilfuli, aftir 

that we han take the knowyng of treuthe. 

For whi sum abiding of the! dom is dreed- 27 

ful, and the suyng of fier, which schal 

waste aduersaries. Who that brekith™ 28 

Moises lawe, dieth withouten ony merci, 

bi tweine" or thre witnessis; hou myche 29 

more® gessen 3e, that he disserueth worse 
turmentis, which defouleth the sone of 

God, and holdith the blood of the testa- 

ment pollut, in which he is halewid, and 

doith dispit to the spirit of grace? For 30 

we knowen him that seide, To me veni- 

aunce, and Y schal 3elde. And eft, For 

the Lord schal deme his puple. It is31 

ferdful to falle in to the°° hondis of God 

lyuynge. And haue 3e mynde on thes 
formere daies, in which 3e weren lijtned, ~ 

and suffriden greet strijf of passionns. 


- And in the ‘tothir? 3e1 weren maad a33 


spectacle bi schenschipis and tribula- 
ciouns; in an othir 3e weren maad felowis 
of men lyuynge so. For also to%4 boundiun 34 
men 3e hadden compassioun, and 3e res- 
seyueden with ioye the robbyng of 3oure 
goodis, knowinge that 3e han a betere 
and a’ dwellinge substaunce. Therfor 3s 
nyle 3e leese 30ure trist, which hath greet 
rewarding. For pacience is nedeful to 30u, 36 
that 3e do the wille of God, and bringe 


u vnhlowynge 7. v vnpliable ox. or that mai not be folt s. or that mai nol be folden to flesche by 
desiris T. —'™” for ¥. x azenbihijte carp. azein bihizt ého thingis that we hoopen T. Ytory. Zin 
togr. 4sty3inge v. > forsakynge in tyme of persecucioun T. © Om. 1. 4ofs. © counseling hem rT. 


fOm.o. gsoxy. bseenv. day of passioun r. 
synnes is not left tous 7. %Om.r. of 9. Om. rv. 


knei3 tr, 1 Forwhiv. ™ now a sacrifice for 
POm.r. 9Om.er. "'Om.r. 5 laft, as 


was in the old lawe, for verre eontricioun with feith purgith synne Tr, Om. vy. = t Om. sry. u Om. rx. 
Vthat x. W¥Om.@. schaly. *Om.or. Ywastensyx. the aduersaries tr. 2®Av. Om. ox. 


CtwocmpsTx. %Om. 7. ¢thather. f Om. srx. 


ffOm. 7. & disserneth y. » whiche vr. that x. 


idefoulith ry. k Om.r. lholde o. holdith ry» m™ Om.ovx. ® pollutid y. ° whom Garpr. which svxy. 
P halowed, or clensid r. doth ry. ° dispit vy. ®Om.ovx. tknowen ov. %Om.sx. ¥ the hoondes No. 
x lyuynge God emt. YOm.rx. Zsuffriden mpry. ®Om.ox. » the tother scmNopstyxy. © ben made T. 
weren maad y. 4 spectacle,or wondringe cupr. Cin kK. ‘that. € tother sijd r. othir eg. » Om. N. 


weren v. iso suffring for Crist, as his apostlis rT. 


k voodis, or rauisching of hem T. 1. Om. sx. 


hfrek. ithe x, Om. rb. k ofa sup.ras. 1.0m. EIgk. ™ ether maketh voyde K marg. ™ two. 


© Om, EI pr.m.qgk. 09 Om. a prom. P oothir 1. 


qOm.o. 4and toa pr.m *Om. R. 
VOL. IV. 38 


498 


x5 betere and™ dwelling substaunce. ‘And 
so" nyle 3e leese 30ure trist, ‘the which°® 
séhath greet rewardyng. Forsoth pacience 
is nedeful to? 30u, that 3e doynge the wille 
s7of God, brynge ajen the biheeste. it 
sotheli a litil, how euere litil4, he that is 
to comynge" schal come, and he schal not 
38 tarie. Forsoth my iust man lyueth of feith; 
that if he ‘schal withdrawe’ ‘him silft, he 
39schal not plese to my soule. Forsoth we 
ben not the sones of withdrawynge awei 
into perdicioun, but of feith into the” get- 
yng of soule. 
CAP. XI. 
1 Forsothe feith is the substaunce of 
thingis to be hopid, an’ argument, ‘or 
2certeynte”, of thingis not* apperinge. So- 
theli in this fecth olde menY han? getun* 
3witnessyng’. Bi feith we vndirstonden 
the® worldis for‘ to® be schapun, ‘or maad‘, 
bi Goddis word, that visyble thingis weren 
4maad of vnuysible thingis. By’ feith Abel 
offride ful’ moche more oosti, ‘or sacri- 
Jice*, ‘than Cayn to God!, by the™ which 
he gat witnessing for® to be iust, God° 
beringe? witnessyng to his 3iftis; and by 
sthat feith he deed spekith 3itt. By feith 
Enok is" translatid, that he schulde not 
se deeth; and he was not founden, for 
the Lord translatide him. Forsothe bifore 
translacioun’ he hadde' witnessing for" ‘to 
shaue’ plesid God”. Forsothe it is in- 
possible ‘ony man* forY to plese* God 
withoute feith. Forsoth? it bihoueth a> 
man comynge to God, for® to’ bileue for® 
he is, and ‘he is rewarder® of® men yn- 
7sekinge! him*. Bi feith Noe!, answere™ 
take of these thingis that 3it weren not 
seyn, dredinge" schapide® an? ark?, ‘or 
schip®, into the helthe of his hows’; bi 
which he dampnyde the world", and is* 


2 Therfore r. 
thym fro the bileue rt. % Om, rv. 
»b witnessinge of riztwisnesse T. 

i sacrifice vy. &k Om. orx. 


™ and a MSTXY. 
drawith r. 
4 greet V. 
h Om. x. 


HEBREWS. 


© whiche rv. that x. 
Vand Q. 

© that the rv. 

1to God than Caym empx. 


X. 35—-XL. 7. 


a3en the biheest. For 3it a litil, and’ he37 
that is to comynge' schal come, and he 
schal not tarie. For my just man lyueth 3s 
of feith; that if he withdrawith hym silf, 
he schal not plese to my soule. But wes3g 
ben not the sones of withdrawing awei 
in to perdicioun, but of feith in to get- 
ynge of soule. 


GAP. XI. 

But feith is the substaunce of thingis1 
that ben to be hopid, and an argument 
of thingis not-apperynge. And in this2 
Jeith elde men han gete witnessyng. Bis 
feith we vudurstonden that the worldis 
weren maad bi Goddis word, that visible 
thingis weren maad of vnuysible" thingis. 
Bi feith Abel offride a myche more sacri-4 
fice than Cayin to God, bi which he gat 
witnessyng to be iust, for God bar wit- 
nessyng to hise 3iftis; and bi that feith 
he deed spekith 3it. Bi feith Ennoks 
was translatid, that he schulde not se 
deth; and he was not foundun, for the 
Lord translatide him. For bifore transla- 
cioun he hadde witnessing that he pleside 
God. And it is impossible to plese God « 
without feith. For it bihoueth that a 
man comynge to God, bileue that he is, 
and that he is rewardere to’ men that 
seken hym. Bi feith Noe dredde, thorou37 
answere takun of these thingis that 3it 
weren not seyn, and schapide a schip in 
to the’ helthe of his hous; bi which he 
dampnede the world, and is ordeyned eir 
of rijtwisnesse, which is bi feith. Bys 
feith he that is clepid Abraham, obeiede 


Tcome sx. § with- 
¥ fadris tr. 7 Om. 9. 
fOm. x. & Foro. 


n Om. srx. 


Pin tT. 4 litil tyme o. 
wOm. orx. * Om. Q. 

dOm.srx. ¢ Om.r. 
m Om. 4 pr.m. sv. 


© forGody. Pbarv. 4 3itt, for his werkis ben not quenchid by his dying T. ity. *wasy. § the translacioun 


emptT. thadde not kx. %Om.syx. VY that he rv. 
aForry. Pthatary. ¢Om.srx. 40m. r. 
s reward Tr. ) to acmnopestrxy. ' seekinge v. 


answere AG Sec. m. MNPSXY. dreedinge thoru3 answere r. 


W to God Tr. 
© that oTV. 
k hym he is rT. 


xOm.y. yYOm.sx. # haue plesed o, 
f that he beac. the Tr. that he is rv. 

1 Noon r. Nowe y sup. ras. ™an 
2QOm.v. °schop s. scapid 7. shoop x. 


PampT. 4schip cpr. TOm.Guprx, § meine Tr. t whome empr. % world not bileuyng rT. V he is 7. 


£Om.R prim. come I sec. m. a sec. m. 


u inuisible a passim. 


vofi. W Om. Rk. 


XI. 8—19. 


instued™, o7* ordeyned, eir of ri3twys- 
snesse, theY which is by feith. By feith 
he that is clepid Abraham, obeiede? for? to 
go> into a place, which he was to takinge® 
into heritage; and he wente out, not wit- 
9inge whidur he schulde go. By feith he 
dwelte in the lond of a3enbiheeste, as in? 
an alien®, in‘ litel housis dwellinge® with 
Ysaac and Jacob, euene eyris of the same 
loazenbyheeste, Sothelii he abood aJ cite 
hauynge fundamentis, whos crafty man 
l1and maker is God. By feith and ‘the ilke* 
Sare bareyn, took vertu into! conseyuing 
of seed, 3he, ‘bi sydis™, ‘or withoute", the® 
tyme of age; for sche bileuide him trewe, 
12that hadde ajenbihi3t. For which? thing 
and4 of oon, and him ny3 deed, men™ ben 
borun as sterris of heuen in multitude, and 
as grauel, ‘or soond’, that is at see side 
isvnnoumbrable. By feith alle thes ben 
deede, the" a3enbiheestis’ not* takun, but 
thei* biholdinge hem aferr’, and gretinge 
wel, and knowlechinge for? thei ben* pil- 
grymes, and herborid men vpon” the 
iserthe. Sothli thei that seyn thes thingis, 
signifien hem‘ fore tof seke® a cuntre. 
is And forsothe if thei hadden had mynde of 
‘the ilke>, of the' which thei ‘wenten out, 
sothli thei! hadden tyme of turnyng a3en; 
isnow forsoth thei desyren a betere, that is 
to seye, heuenly. Therfore God is not 
confoundid, ‘or schamed™, for" to be clepid 
the God of hem; forsothe® he made redy 
17to hem a cite. Bi feith Abraham offride 
Ysaac, whanne he was temptid?; and he 
offride the oon bigetyn4, the’ which hadde 
takyn repromyssiouns’, ‘or ajenbiheestis' ; 
isto whom it was seid, For" in Ysaac seed 
19 schal be clepid to thee; demynge, for’ and 
fro deed men God is iny3ty for* to reise 


w Om. & sec.m. X. instewed oT. instifyed Y. 


HEBREWS. 


x Om. atxy. and Pr. 


apo 


to go out in to a place, whiche he schulde 
take in to eritage; and he wente out, not 
witinge whidur he schulde go. Bi feitho 
he dwelte in the loond of biheest, as in 
an alien loond, dwellynge in litle housis 
with Ysaac and Jacob, euene heiris of 
the same biheest. For he abood a citee 10 
hauynge foundementis, whos crafti man 
and maker is God. Bi feith also the ilke1i 
Sara bareyn, took vertu in consceyuyng of 
seed, 3he, a3en* the tyme of age; for 
sche bileuede hym trewe, that hadde bi- 
hi3te. For which thing of oon, and 3it 12 
ny3 deed, ther ben® borun as sterris of 
heuene in multitude, and as grauel that 
is at the see side out of noumbre. Biis 
feith alle these ben deed, whanne the 
biheestis weren not takun, but thei bi- 
helden hem afer, and gretynge hem wel, 
and knoulechide that thei weren pil- 
gryms, and herboryd men¢ on the? erthe. 
And thei that sayn these thingis, signi-14 
fien® that thei sechen a cuntre. ‘If thei1s 
hadden hadde mynde of the ilke, of 
which thei wenten out, thei hadden tyme 
of turnyng a3en; but now thei desiren a 16 
betere, that is to seie, heuenli. Therfor 
God is not confoundid! to be clepid the 
God of hem; for he made redi to hem 
acitee. Bi feith Abraham offride Ysaac, 17 
whanne he was temptid; and he offride 
the oon bigetun, whych had takun the 
biheestis; to whom it was seid, For ini 
Ysaac the® seed schal be clepid to thee. 
For he demyde, that God is my3ti toi 
reise hym, 3he, fro deth; wherfor he took 
hym also in to a parable. Bi feith also 20 
of thingis to comynge, Ysaac_ blesside 
Jacob and Esau. Bi feith Jacob diynge 2: 
blesside alle the sones of Joseph, and 


yOm. 7. 2 obeschide as. 


@Om.sx. ?goont moprrxy. ¢taken sx. 4Om.N. alien lond G sec.m.marg. rv. dwellinge in r. 
£Om.r. 4 bihest r. i Fory. Jatay. Kthatx. Jiny. M™outeofy. 20Om.orx. ° Om. 7. 
P the whiche 9. 4 Om.o. * men for gret age r. Om. x. & Om. mopryx. tat the m.in tT. 4 whanne 
the yr, Va3enbiheest y. Wwerennot vy. *Om.y. Yafterg. %that thei y. @werenv. on sr. 
©Om.rx. ‘thattheiy. ©Om.srx. fOm.y. 8 seenv. bthatx. 1 Om.sry. * ont wenten eupr. 
'Om.r. ™ Om. ox. %Om.sx. %fory. P temptid, or assaied r. 4 bigeten sone r. * Om. F. 
S ajein biheestis Gupr. t or repromyssiouns GmpT. Om. ox. or ajen byheest y. 4% Om. G. pr.m. MPT. 
Ythaty. WOm.r. * Om. sx. 


b weren R pr. m. 
& Om. k sec. m. 


8 ajen of A pr.m. g pr.m. 
f confoundid, eithir schamed nr. 


382 


¢ men, eithir gestis R. 


4Qm.k. © signyfieden gk. 


500 


hym’; wherof* he took him and? into a 
20 parable. By feith and® of thingis to com- 
ynge®, Ysaac blesside’ Jacob and Esau. 
21 By feith Jacob deyinge®, by’ alle? the® 
sones of Joseph blesside!, and honouride‘ 
22 the hijnesse of his! 3erde. By feith Joseph 
deyinge hadde mynde of the passynge forth 
of the sones of Israel, and comaundide of 
23his boones™. By feith Moyses born, was 
hid thre monethis of his fadir and modir, 
for that thei sijen the 3o0nge child fair", 
‘or semely®; and thei dredden not the 
2i4maundementP of the kyng. By feith 
Moyses maad greet’, denyede him for" to 
25be the sone of Pharaois doustir, chesynge 
nore’ fort to be turmeutid with the peple 
of God, than for" to haue inyrthe of tem- 
26peral synne; demynge the reproue’ of 
Crist more richessis” than the tresouris of 
Egipsians*; forsotheY he bihelde* ‘into 
27the rewardyng*. By feith he forsook 
Egipt, ‘not schamynge®, ‘or dredynge®, the 
hardnesse? of the kyng; forsoth® he‘ as 
2aseynge susteynede® the inuisyble. By 
feith he halowide pask, and” schedinge! of 
blood *, lest he that distryede the firste 
thingis of Zgipsiens', schulde touche hem. 
29 By feith thei passiden the reede see, as bi 
drye lond, the™ which thing" Egipciens 
30asayinge weren deuourid®. By feith the 
wallis of Jerico felden? doun, by cumpass- 
sling of senene dayes. By feith Raab hoore 
‘perischide not’ with' vnbileueful’ ment, 
she" takynge’, or receyuynge™, the aspiers* 
32 with’ pees’. And what 3it* schal® I seye ? 
Sotheli tyme schal fayle me® tellinge of 
Gedeon, Barach, Sampson, Jepte, Dauith, 


y hym, 3hee, fro deede men v. 
also yr. ©comen sx. 4 blesside to x. 


© Om. oeTrx. P comaundement FP pr.m. 


HEBREWS. 


Zz wherof and a. wherfore r. 
€ doynge s pr.m. 
the @ pr.m, mnostxy. 1Om. vr. ¥ hononrnede a. | this r. 


XI, 20—32. 


onouride the hijnesse of his 3erde. Bizz 
feith Joseph dyynge hadde mynde of the 
passyng forth of the children of Israel, 
and comaundide of hise boonys. Bi feith 23 
Moyses borun, was hid thre monethis of 
his fadir and modir, for that thei seizen 
the 3onge child fair"; and thei dredden 
not the maundementi of the king. Bias 
feith Moises* was maad greet, and deny- 
ede that he was the sone of Faraos dou3- 
tir, and chees more to be turmentid with 25 
the puple of God, than to haue myrthe 
of temporal synne; demynge the repreef 26 
of Crist more richessis than the tresours 
of! Egipcians; for he bihelde in to the 
rewarding. Bi feith he forsook Egipt, 27 
and dredde not the hardynesse of the 
king; for he abood, as seinge hym that 
was vnuysible. Bi feith he halewide2s 
pask, and the scheding out of blood, that 
he that distriede the firste thingis of 
Tigipciaus, schulde not touche hem. 
Bi feith thei passiden the reed see, as29 
bi drye lond, which thing Egipcians 
asaiynge weren deuourid. Bi feith theso 
wallis of Jerico felden doun, bi cumpass- 
yng of seuene daies. Bi feith Raab hoor™ a1 
resseyuede the aspieris with pees, and 
perischide not with vnbileneful men. And 32 
what 3it schal Y seie? For tyme schal 
faile to me tellynge of Gedeon, Barak, 
Sampson, Jepte, Dauid, and Samuel, and 
of” othere prophetis; whiche bi feith ouer-33 
camen rewmes, wrou3ten ri3twisnesse, 
gaten repromyssiouus; thei stoppiden the 
mouthis of liouns, thei quenchiden the 34 
feersnesse of fier, thei dryueden® awei the 


4Om.m. alsor. 88Om. y. >» Om. o. 
f blesside bi r. Gilecke oone nN. of 
™ bones to be had thennus Tr. © semely T. 


4 greet, sleu3 an Egipcien, consydringe the sorewe of his bre- 


theren.Bi feith Moyses maad greet @ sec. m. marg. greet, slon3 the Egipcien, biholdynge the sorowe of his 
bretheren. Bi feith Moyses maad greet Nn. ‘Om. sx. S rather o. t Om, sx. 4 Om. sx. Y reprenes 0. 


wrichesse 7. *the Egipciens Tr. Y for 7. 
dreedynge garpr. and dredde not r. 


fhe abood ry. & abood pacientli r. Om. r. 


Z biholde o. 
© or schamynge amp. Om. oTrx. 
h and in Q. in MPT. 


a Om, o. in to the rewardynges 9. _—_—> not 
dhardynesse wpx. © for r. 


i scheuding out yr. * blood, anoyntyng 


the dore postis T. 1 the Egipcias r. ™Om.r. ™ thengesoex. © denourid in watris r. P fellen GuNops. 


q the hoor r. r Om. rv. with the x. 
vreceynynge emp, W Om. Gaopx. 
leeful men y, #® Om. 7. 


tr Om. Fr. 


b Om, «6 prim. 


h ether semeli k marg. 1 comaundement gk. 
the sorewe of hise britheren. Bi feith Moyses r. 
© drynen A. sec. m, AK. dreuen LE. 


8 vnfeithfu) s. Om. r. 
X spyes 0. spieris x. 
© to me F. 


t Om. rx. Onn. emPr. 


Yofr. 2 pees, perischide not with vnbi- 


k Moyses maad greet slow3e the Egipcian, considrynge 


I for ¢ sec. m. ™ the hoore bof. n Om. R. 


XI. 33—XII. 3. HEBREWS. 501 


33and Samuel, and othere prophetis; the 
whiche® by feith ouercamen rewmes, 
wrou3ten riz3twysnesse’, gaten repromys- 
siouns; thei stoppiden the mouthis of ly- 
siouns, thei quenchiden the feernesse® of 
fyer, thei dryuen" awey the egge of swerd, 
thei keuereden of syknesse', thei weren 
maad strong in batel, thei turneden the 
35 castels, ‘or oostis*, of aliens. Wymmen re- 
‘ ceyueden her deede! of a3enrysing; for- 
sothe othere ben™ holdun forth, ‘o7 deede", 
not takinge redempcioun®, that thei schul- 
3sden fynde betere aj3enrysyng. Forsoth 
othere assayeden scornyngis and betyngis, 
37 more ouer and boondis and prisouns. Thei 
weren stoonyd, thei weren kitt, thei weren 
temptid, thei weren deed in sleynge of 
swerd.. Thei wenten aboute in brokP 
skynnes, and in skynnes of geet, nedy, 
ssangwysschid, turmentid; to which4 the 
world was not worthi; thei erringe in wil- 
dirnessis’, in‘ mounteyns, and dennys, and 
agcauys' of erthe". And alle these, proued 
by witnessing of feith, tooken not’ repro- 
4omyssioun ; God” purueyinge* sum betere 
thing for vs, that thei schulden not be 
fulfillidY withouten vs. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Forsothe? ‘and we* hauynge so greet a 
cloud of witnessis put to>, doynge® awey 
al charge’, and synne stondinge aboute vs, 
by® pacience rennef to the stryf8, ‘or /i3¢4, 

2purposid to vs, biholdinge into the maker 
of feith and enderi, Jhesu; the* which 
ioye! purposid™ to him, suffride the cross, 
confusioun" dispisid®, and sittith on the 

3rizthalf of the seete of God. Forsoth bi- 
thenke 3e on him that susteynede? such’ 
a3en seyinge of synful ren ajens him silf, 


egge of swerd, thei coucriden of sijknesse, 
thei weren maad strong in batel?, thei 
turneden the oostis of aliens. Wymmen ss 
resseyueden her deed children fro deth 
to lijf; but othere weren holduu forth, 
not takinge redempcioun, that thei schul- 
den fynde a betere ajenrising. And 36 
othere asaieden scornyngis and betiugis, 
more ouer and boondis and _prisouns. 
Thei weren stoned, thei weren sawid,37 
thei weren temptid, thei weren deed int 
sleyng of swerd. Thei wenten aboute in 
broc™ skynnes, and in skynnes of geet, 
nedi, angwischid, turmentid; to whiche 3s 
the world was not worthi. Thei er- 
riden in wildernessis*, mt mounteynes 
and dennes, and caues of the erthe. And 31 
alle these, preued bi witnessing of feith, 
token not repromyssioun ; for God pur- 40 
ueiede sum betere thing for vs, that 
thei schulden not be maad perfit with 
outen vs. 


CAP. XII. 


Therfor we that han so greet a cloude1 
of witnessis put to, do we awei al charge, 
and synne stondinge aboute vs, and bi 
pacience renne we to the" batel’ pur- 
posid to vs, biholdinge in to the makere 2 
of feith, and the perfit endere, Jhesu ; 
which whanne ioye was _ purposid to 
hym, he suffride the cros, and dispiside 
confusioun, and sittith on the ri3thalf of 
the seet of God. And bithenke 3e on; 
hym that suffride siche ‘ajen seiynge” of 


4Om.rx. ¢that x. friztwisnesses sy. & feersnesse ampeasT sec. vice. vx.  driuedeny. i syk- 
nesses s. * Om. ox.  Idede children nv. dede men o, deed frendis T. , ™ weren r. 0 or deed as 
many martris of bothe testamentis Tr. Om. x. © redempcioun, or ascapyng fro enmyes T. P brockis mNsx. 
q the whiche r. T wildernesse aor. ‘Sand mp. andint. tincaanesT. Utheerthe 7. ¥ not 


3itt ful T. W for whi God r. x purneyde r. 


btovs, wet. ¢dov. 4charite r. © and bi r. 


y maad perfit y. 2 Therfore sopory. 2 Om. s. 
Frenne wee st. & bateil y. 4 Om. ovx. / perfit 


endere vy. & Om. v. Ilwhanneioie yr. ™ was purposid y, and dispiside confusioun y. © dispite 7. 


Om. 7. P suffrede, or susteynede cup. suffrid Tv. 


4 of suche a. 


P bateilis k. ofa. * brockis BK. sec.m. 8 wildernesse RhkS. tandink. %Om.b. ‘strijf r. 


W ajenseiyngis k. 


502 HEBREWS. 


that 3e be not maad wery, faylinge™ in 
430ure™ inwittis’. Forsoth 3e ajenstooden' 
not 3it ‘til to" blood, fiztinge a3ens synne. 
»And 3e han for3ete the comfort that spek- 
ith to 30u as to sones, seyinge’, My sone, 
nyle thou dispise the disciplyn” of the 
Lord, nether be thou maad wery, the 
«while thou art chastysid of hym. For- 
soth* the Lordy chastisith ‘nym that he 
loueth’’; forsoth he scourgith? euery sone* 
jthat® he receyueth. Laste® 3e stille? in 
disciplyn®; God offrithf him to jou as to 
sones8. Sothli what sone is it, whom the 
fadir ‘schal not reproue®, ‘or chastyse'? 
sThat if 3e ben* out! of disciplyn™, ‘of 
which alle" ben maad parceners®, therfore 
93e ben auowtreris?, and not sones. Aftir- 
ward sothli we hadden fadris of oure 
fleisch, lerneris!, and we with reuerence 
dreden' hem. Wher not moche more we 
schulen obeische* to the fadir of spiritis, 
ioand we schulen lyue? And thei sothli in 
tyme of fewe dayes vp‘ her will lerneden" 
vs’; forsoth this fadir to” that thing 
that is profitable, in receyuynge the ha- 
itlowing of him*. Forsoth ech disciplyn’ 
in this? present tyme* ‘is seyn? trewly for‘ 
to be not of ioye, but of sorwe ; aftirward 
forsoth it schal 3elde fruyt of ri3twysnesse 
most peesyble to men excersisid 4, ‘or 
wzhauntid®, by it. For which thing reise 
3e vp® slowe hondis, and knees vnboundun, 
isand make! ri3tful goyngis, ‘or steppis', 
tok 3oure feet; that no man haltinge erre, 
1abut more be! heelid. Sue 3e pees with 
alle men, and™ hoolynesse, withoute which 
isno man schal se God; biholdinge” that no 
man fayle to the grace of God, that no 
roote of bitternesse ‘vpward burionynge® 


‘fallyngo. ‘'30u ¥. § wittis 9. soulis r. 
pline, or correccioun T. teching r. 
Zbetith ry. @Om. 7r. whom rt. ¢ Leste x. 
& sones chastising 30u T. F chastisith not Tr. 
4 alle 3e N. 
teres sy. 4 lereris x. ‘'dredinge T. § obeie 7, 
vOm. ry. © éechith to r. 
aQOm. x. %seemithy. ¢ Om. sx. 
h make 3ee carpyx. makith s. 


© buriounynge vpward r. 


i Om. emoprx. 


ajens synne. 


t ajeynstonden r. 
x Forsothe whom euere T. For r. 
d full o. therfore r. 
i Om. o7rx. 
‘o whos parcenerys ben 3e alle maad of N. whos parceners ben 3e alle maad T. 
tafter capr. tau3ten us bi F. 
x him, that is, his discipline that maketh vs holi rv. 
e Om. ox. or ofte hauntid T. 
k into 7. 


4 hauntid o. 


XII. 4—15. 


synful men ajens hym silf, that 3e be not 
maad wery, failinge in 3oure soulis. For4 
3e ajenstoden not 3it ‘til to* blood, fiztyng 
And 3e han for3et thes 
coumfort that spekith to 30u as to sones, 
and seith, My sone, nyle thou dispise the 
teching of the Lord, nether be thou maad 
weri, the while thou art chastisid of 
hym. For the Lord chastisith hym that« 
he loueth; he betith euery sone that he 
resseyueth. Abide 3e stille in chastising ; 7 
God proferithY hym to 3ou as to sones. 
For what sone is it, whom the fadir 
chastisith not? That if 3e ‘ben out? ofs 
chastising, whos parteneris ben 3e alle 
maad, thanne 3e ben auowtreris, and 
not sones. And aftirward we haddens 
fadris of oure fleisch, techeris, and we 
with reuerence dredden hem. Whethir 
not myche more we schulen obeische to 
the fadir of spiritis, and we schulen 
lyue? And thei in tyme of fewe dayes1o 
tan3ten vs bi her wille; but this fadir 
techith to that thing that is profitable, 
in resseyuynge the halewing of hym. 
And ech chastisyng in present tyme 
semeth to be not of ioye, but of sorewe ; 
but aftirward it schal 3elde fruyt of ri3t- 
wisnesse moost pesible to men exercisid 
bi it. For whiche thing reise 3e slowe 12 
hondis, and knees vnboundun, and make 1s 
3e rijtful steppis to 3oure feet; that no 
man haltinge erre, but more be heelid. 
Sue 3e pees with alle men, and holy-1 
nesse, with out which no man schal se 
God. Biholde 3e, that no man faile tots 
the grace of God, that no roote of bit- 
tirnesse buriownynge vpward lette, and 
manye ben defoulid bi it; that no manie 


uynto pr. Vandseith r.  disci- 
y Lord Joveth he r. yy Om. rT. 

€ chastysing y.  proferith v. 
k beth x 10m.r. ™ chastising v7. 
P auou- 
" Jereden sx. Om. Fr. 
Y chastysing yr. 2 Om. r. 
f But r. & Om. r. 
a biholde «. 


I be he rT. min Q 


xvntor. Yprenith gk. 2 be not a. 


XII. 16—26. HEBREWS. 503 


lette?, and bii it foulid™ be’ manyt men"; 
isthat no man be lecchour, ether’ vnhooli, 
‘ar cursid’, as Esau, the* which’ for oo 
17 mete” solde his firste thingis*. Sothli wite 
3e, for® and aftirward he coueytinge for* 
to anherite blessing, was reproued. For- 
soth® he found not place of penaunce, 
isthou3 he sou3te it with teeris. Forsoth 
3e han not come to the tretable fyer, ‘or 
able for to touche’, and able to® come to’, 
and* ‘greet wynd!, ‘or™ whirlwynd®, and° 
i9myst?, and tempest, and sown of trumpe4, 
and vois of wordis; the’ which thei that 
herden, excuseden hem, that the word 
2oschulde not’ be maad to hem. Forsotht 
thei baren not that that was seid, And 
if a beest touchide the hil, it ‘schal be" 
21stooned. And so dredful it was that’ 
was” seyn, Moyses* seide, I am aferd, and 
22ful of tremblyng. But 3e han come ny3 
to ‘Syon hil’, and the? citee of ‘God lyu- 
ynge*, heuenli Jerusalem, and the> mul- 
23titude of many thousynd aungels, and to 
the chirche of the‘ firste men, the’ whiche 
ben writun in heuenes, and God®, domes- 
man of alle, and thef spirit® of iuste perfit 
21men, and to Jhesu, mediatour of the newe 
testament, and the® sprengynge! of blood, 
25 betere spekinge than Abel‘. ‘Se je!, that™ 
3e ‘forsake not" the spekinge®; ‘forsothe 
if? thei? forsakinge’ him that spak on‘ 
the' erthe, ascapiden® not’, moche more 
we that turnen” awey ‘fro him* ‘spekinge 
26to vsY fro heuenes. Whos vois thanne 
mouede the erthe, now forsothe’ he ‘ajen 
byhetith*, seiynge, 3it onys and I schal 
moue not oonly erthe®, but also® heuene. 


P lette vs r. 4 be o. many men ben foulid bi r. 


be letchour, ether vnhooli, as Esau?, 
which for o mete seelde hise firste 
thingis®. For wite 3e°, that afterward 17 
he coueitinge to enherite blessing, was 
repreued. For he foond not place of4 
penaunce, thou3 he sou3te it® with teeris. 
But 3e han not come to the fier able to1s 
be touchid, and able to come to, and to 
thef whirlewynd, and myst, and tempest, 
and soun of trumpe, and vois of wordis ; 19 
which thei that herden, excusiden hem, 
that the word schulde not be maad to 
hem. For thei beren not that that was 20 
seid, And if a beeste touchide the hil, 
it was stonyd. And so dredeful it was 21 
that was seyn, that Moises seide, Y am 
aferd, and ful of trembling. But 3e han 2 
come ny3 to the hil Sion’, and to the 
cite of God lyuynge, the heuenli Jeru- 
salem, and to the multitude of many 
thousynde aungels, and to the chirche23 
of the firste men, whiche ben writun in 
heuenes, and to God, domesman of alle, 
and to the spirit of iust perfit men, and 24 
to Jhesu, mediatour of the newe testa- 
ment, and to the sprenging of blood, 
‘betere spekinge® than Abel. Se 3e, that 25 
je forsake not the spekere; for if thei 
that forsaken him that spak on the 
erthe, aschapide' not, myche more we 
that turnen awei fro him that spekith 
to vs‘ fro heuenes. Whos vois than26 
mouyde the erthe, but now he a3en bi- 
hetith, and seith, 3it onys and Y schal 
moue not oneli erthe!, but also heuene. 
And that he seith, 3it onys, he declarith 27 
the translacioun of mouable thingis, as 


 defoulid a. be defoulid p. Om. ory. § by op. 


Om. vy. tOm.v. 2 Om. pr. defoulide er. Yor esxy. W Om. rx. * Om. nrx. ythat x. 2 meelis 
mete T. 4 thingis, or erittage Tr. >that vy. ¢Om.sx. ‘4enherite cunstyx. ¢Fory. e Om. 7. 
fOm. capt.  & or toucheable cmpt. Om. ox. or able to touche s. » for to a pr.m. i to fijre @ sec. m. 
Om. 9. * Om. 6 prom. and tothe r. 10m. 6 sec.m. wynd T. whirlewind ry. =™ Om. pr.m. rx. 
and Gg sec.m.  "Om.orvx. © ne toucheth the hill that offendith God blasfeminge, and G. _P to myst 
G sec.m, the trumpe cupr. 'Om.y. *®Om. oxy. tFory. Uuwasvy. YOm. 6 pr.m. ato. 


that that @. W Om. 6 pr.m. * forwhi Moises r. 


y the hil of Syon spr. the hil Syon vy. 2% to the rr. 


alyuynge God cpr. Ptothe rr. ¢Om.r. 1Om.r. ¢toGodervy. ftothe ry. & spiritis. cnr. 
htothe rvx. isprengyng, or clensyng r. Abels blood r. =! Sec pr.m. mr. Seeth x. ™ lest x. 
0 refusen x. © spekere rv. P for if vy. if forsothe x. 9 thei seapeden not x. T refusende x. 


Sopyn7. tQOm.aprx. "scapeden s. Om. x. 


vOm.x. Wturnedeno. *Om. x. Y to vs the 


spekende x. 2 sothli x. 4 bihotith ajeen x. >the erthe wr. ¢ and x. 


a Esau was x sec.m.k. > bigynnyngis n pr. m. 


¢Om.irpr.m. ‘tok. ¢Om.k prom. f Om. x. 


& of Sion xc pr.m. a8. 4 spekynge bettir R. ‘iaseapena. ‘him1. ! the erthe Ka. 


504 HEBREWS. 


27‘Forsoth that4 ‘he seith, 3it onys*, hef 
declarith the’ translacioun" of mouable 
thingis, as of maad thingis, that tho 
thingis dwelle, that ben vnmouable. 


CAP. XIII. 
ox ‘And so! we receyuynge* the ‘kyngdom 
vnmonable!, han grace, by whieh™ serne 
we plesynge to God with drede" and 
2yreuerence. And® forsoth? oure God is fyer 
iwastynge. ‘The charite of brotherhed 
2dwelle in 30u, and ‘nyle 3e for3ete hospi- 
talite™; forsoth’ by this summe plesiden 
3 to aungels receyuede to herbore. ‘Thenke 
3e" on” boundun men, as 3e togidere 
boundun, and of’ trauelinge men*, as and 
43eY silf dwellinge in the? body*. Honor- 
able® wedding* in‘ alle thingis*, and ‘bed 
vnwembid!; forsothS God schal deme? 
5 fornycatouris and‘ auoutreris*. Be! ma- 
ners withoute coueytise™, payd" with ‘pre- 
sent thingis®; sothli? he seide, I schal not 
gleue thee, nether forsake‘, so" that ‘we 
tristily seie’, The Lord is ant helper" to me; 
I schal not drede, what” a” man schal* do 
z7to me. ‘Haue 3e myndeY of 3oure sone- 
reyns*, that ‘han spokun? to 30u the word 
of God; of whom® 3e biholdinge® the® go- 
ynge out of lyuynge', ‘suwe 3e% feith’, 
sJhesn Crist, 3istirday', and to day‘, he and! 
ginto worldis™. Nile" 3e be ledd awey 
‘with dyuerse techingis, and® ‘pilgrym, or 
straunge?. ‘Forsoth it is best’ for" to® 
stable the herte ‘with gracet, net with 
metis, ‘the whiche" profiten’ not to” men 


4 That sothi x. Forsoth he that yr. 
h tribulacioun T. i Therfore r. 
mwhom 7. ‘quaking x. © Om. arrx. 
r hospitalite wileth not forzeten x. 8 for ¥. 
the x. * Om. x.  Y 30ur GMPT. 30u sx. 
e wedding is yr. 4 be in 7. 
sec.m. PT. viwemmed Q. the bed vndefoulid x. 


€ 3it ones he seith x. seith 3it onys y. 

k takende x. 
P forwhi ry. sothli x. 
t to God rt. 
2 Om. AGMPTX. 
© men T. thingis hon. r. 
& forwhi ry. fornicaries sothli and auouteres x. 


XII. 27-——XIII. 9. 


of maad thingis, that tho thingis dwelle, 
that ben vnmouable. Therfor we res-28 
seyuynge the kingdom vnmouable, haue 
we grace, bi which serue we plesynge to 
God with drede and reverence. For oure 29 
God is fier that wastith. 


CAP. XIII. 


The charite of britherhod dwelle ini 
3ou, and nyle 3e for3ete hospitalite; for2 
bi this summen plesiden to aungels, that 
weren resseyued to herborewe. Thenke3 
3e on boundun men, as 3e weren togidere 
boundun, and of trauelinge men, as 3e™ 
silf dwellinge® in the body. ‘Wedding 7s° 4 
in alle thingis onourable, and bed vn- 
wemmed; for God schal deme forniea- 
touris and auouteris?. Be joure ma-s5 
neres withoute coueitise, apaied with 
present thingis; for he seide, Y schal not 
leeue thee, nether forsake, so that wee 
seie tristily, The Lord is an helpere to 
me; Y schal not drede, what a man 
schal do to me. Haue 3e inynde of 30ure7 
souereyns, that han spokun to 3on the 
word of God; of whiche’ ‘biholde 3e™ the 
goyng out of lyuynge’, and‘ sue 3e the 
feith of hem, Jhesu Crist, 3istirdai, ands 
to dai, he zs also into worldis. Nyle 3e9 
be led awei with dyuerse ‘techingis, and 
straunge". For it is best to stable the 
herte with grace, not with metis, whiche 
profitiden not to men wandringe in hem. 


f Om. x. & too. 
1 vnmouable kingdom #p. vnmouable rewme x. 
4 Chap. XII. begins here in rx. 

v Be 3e myndeful x. VYofrx. W of 
2 body of caytifte or traueile tr. » Om. r. 
f ynwemyd bed G pr.m. u. an vnwemyd bed c 
bh deme, 


or dampne T. i Om. x. k anouteris sr. Om. x. 1Om. eG pr.m. Be 30ur G sec.m. T. Be the x. 
mauaryce x. Mapaied r. %thenges beyngo. P for rv. 4I shal forsaken x. Om. x. § we seie 
trustly v. tristili we seye x. ‘Om. rx. %Om.r. — Y¥ what thing x. w Om. Gx. x Om. ox. 
y Beth inyndeful x. Zon N. @ souerayns, that ben sette bifore 30u T. prouostis x. b speken x. 


e whiche y. 4 biholde r. © issu or x. 


eth x. her feith r. i 3isterday, that is, in the tyme passide T. 3istai x. 
Lalso vy. ™ worldis to come schal defende hem that bileuen in hym T. 
nyle x. ° Om. x. 


straunge 7. Om. x. 
u whiche ry. that x. ¥ profiteden wNpsrxy. 
. dwelliden k. 

t biholde kK sec.m. 3e biholdyng o. 


m jour E. 3¢ jou 1a. 
4 whom 1. 


f conuersacioun x. 


© Weddingis 4 ef plures. 
s lynage a. 


8 suwe the aGmop. sue 3e the ns. folew- 
k day, that is, now present T. 
n Bi dyners doctrines and pilgrime 


P pilgryms, or strange Ny. pilgrimages 0. pilgrimis, sireyng forth Jro bileue vr. 
4 For it is best v. Best is sothli x. 
W to the x. 


rOm.sTx. Sbigracetox. ‘Om. x. 


P auoutreris ErkQReghkoa8. 


t Om. x sec.m. and straunge techingis Rr. 


XIII, to-——-21. 


io wandrynge* in hem. We han an auter, 
of theY which thei that? seruen to* taber- 
nacle ‘of the body”, ‘han not® power for® 
i‘to ete. Forsoths of whiche® beestis the! 
blood is borun yn for synne into hooly 
thingis bi the bisshop, ‘the bodies of hem* 
12 ben brent with oute the castels. For which 
thing and Jhesu, that he sehulde halwe 
the peple by his blood, suffride withoute 
13the 3ate. ‘Therfore go we out™ ‘to him" 
with oute eastels®, beringe his repreue?, 
i4‘or schenschip’. Sothlit we han not here 
a ‘citee dwellinge’, but we seken ‘a citee 
15 to" eomynge’. “Therfore bi him offre we 
‘an oost* of heriyngeY euermore’? to God, 
that is to seie, the? fruyt of lippis know- 
islechinge to his name. -Forsoth> nyle 3e° 
for3ete? ‘of wel doynge’, ‘or 3yuynge’, 
ands of ® comunyng'; forsoth* by! suche 
1700stis™ God is disseruyd®. ‘Obeye 3e° to 
3oure prouostis?, ‘or prelatiss, and ‘vndir 
ligge™ to hem’; theit perfytly* waken, as 
to 3eldinge” resoun for 3oure soulis, that 
thei do ‘this thing” with ioye, and not 
issorwynge*; ‘forsoth thisY thing spedith 
not? to* 30u>. ‘Preie 3e° for vs, sothli we 
tristen for we han good conscience in alle 
19 thingis’, willinge for® to lyue wel. ‘More 
ouer! forsothe® I biseche" 3ou for! to do, 
that! I ‘the sonnere be restorid™ to 3ou. 
20 ‘Sotheli God* of pees, that ledde out® fro 
deede men¥ the’ greet schepherde of 
scheep, in,the blood of" everlasting testa- 
21ment, ‘oure Lord Jhesu Crist’, ‘sechape, or 
make able, 3out in al" good thing’, that 


*goende x. Y¥Y Om. rx. 
4 power, or lecue Tr. Om. x. 
k of hem the bodies x. 
Jleschely desijris T. the castels x. 


€ Om. sx. 


HEBREWS. 


z han no power to eten that x. 
f Om. x. 
m Go wee onte therfore x. 
P shenshipe x. 


505 


We han an auter, of which thei thatio 
seruien to the tabernacle’, han not power 
to ete. For of whiche beestis the blood 11 
is borun in for synne in to hooli thingis 
bi the bischop, the bodies of hem ben 
brent with out the” castels. For which 12 
thing Jhesu, that he schulde halewe the 
puple bi his blood, suffride with out the 
gate. Therfor go we ont* to hym with is 
out the castels, berynge his repreef. For 14 
we han not here a citee dwellynge, but 
we seken a citee to comynge. Therfor is 
bi hym offre we a sacrifice of heriyng 
euere more to God, that is to seye, the 
fruyt of lippis knoulechinge toy his 
name. And nyle 3e for3ete wel doynge, 16 
and comynyng; for bi siche sacrifices 
God is disserned*. Obeie 3e to 30ure17 
souereyns*, and be 3e suget to hem; for 
thei perfitli waken, as to 3eldinge resoun 
for 30ure soulis, that thei do this thing 
with joie, and not sorewinge; for this 
thing spedith not to 30u. Preie 3e foris 
vs, and we tristen that we han good 
conscience in alle thingis, willynge to 
lyue wel. More ouer Y biseche 30u to19 
do, that Y be restorid the sunnere to 3ou. 
And God .of pees, that ladde out fro2o 
deth the greet scheepherd of scheep, in 
the blood of euerlastinge testament, oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist, schape 30u in al good 21 
thing, that 3e do the wille of hym; and 
he do in 30u that thing that schal plese 
bifor hym, bi Jhesu Crist, to whom be 


glorie in to” worldis of worldis. Amen. 
atothe opstx. bOmr ¢ Om. x, 
& Sothli-x. h the whiche r. iOm. x. 


© the castels, thai is, with outen 
r For v. 8 dwelling citee mp. 


nQOm. s. 
q Om. ox. 


dwellende cite x. t the to comen wee x. u Om. x. Y¥comen s. Om. x w Bi him therfore x. 
Xa sacrifice r. Y preisynge Tx. “ allwey x. aOm. Xx. b OF wel doing and comunyoun x. 
¢ Om. v. 4 forzetinge s. © Om. x. !Om. orx. Om. x. 4Om. rx. 1 comunyng 3oure 


goodis to gidre r. Om. x. — & for r. sothli x. 
G see.m. dissernyd, or wel apaied T. seruid x. 


ox. ° vnderleye 3e Garpst. be 3e suget v. vnderly 3ee x. 
w these thingis s prim. this thing, or diligence for 


thei r. thei sothlix.  bisili 7.  ¥ 3elden sx. 
jou T. * weilende x. 
weiwardnesse thei be maad sori or heuy T. 


S sothly x. bpreye x. 1 Om. sx. 


be restorid the sunnere rv. hastiliere I be restorid x. 
8 Om. x. 


4 our Lord Jhesu Crist, the x.  * of the x. 
able 30u x. Yeche x. V thenges o. werk x. 


¥ tabernacle of the bodi a sec. m. ErgRe sec. m. gka. 
b to the a. 


VOL. IV. 3 T 


“deserned R, 8 souereyns, or pretatis k. 


lof or. with x. 
© Obesheth x. 


y forwhi this vy. this sothli x. 
¢ Preseth x. 
k do this thing TX. 


™ sacrifices r. 9 desernyd, or plesid 
P prelatis 0. souereyns y. = 4 Om. 
Shem reverence T. thei forsothe r. for 
z Om. x. 
ad men T. 


aQm.v. > 300, that for sour 

e€ Om. sx. f The more x. 
1biwhiche x. ™ be the sunner restorid ap. 
0 God sothlia. © ont, or vpreisid Tr. =P Om. x. 
t shape, or make 30u able mp. make 30u able o. 


x Om. k. y Om. B prem. 


w Om. I prem. 


506 


3e do ‘the wille of him”; he* doyngeY in 
30u that ‘thing that? schal* plese bifore 
him, by Jhesu Crist, to whom is? glorie® 
22into worldis of worldis. Amen. For- 
sothe!, britheren, I preie 3ou®, that 3e suf- 
fre‘ a8 word of solace, ‘or coumfort; for- 
sothe! by ful‘ fewe thingis! I haue writyn 
23to 30u. ‘Knowe 3e™ oure brother Tymo- 
the left", with whom if he°® schal come 
2i‘more hasteli?, I schal se 30u. Greete4 
wel alle 3oure souereyns", and alle ‘hooly 
men’. The‘ bretheren of Ytalye greeten 
2530u wel. The" grace ‘of God’ with” 30u 
allex. Amen. 


Here enden the epistlis of Poul, and 
now bigynneth the prolog to Actus Apo- 
stolorumy. 


whis wil x. * Om. mop. andher. ydor. 
glorie x. 4Sothlix. ¢ Om. o. f bere vp x. 
kK feethful vy. Om. x. 1Om. x. ™ Knowith s. 
4 Grete 3e arvx. Greteth s. 
uOm. x. YOm. x. 


W be with yp. * Om. x. 


HEBREWS. 


Z Om. G pr.m. x. 


0 lefte, or sent fro me T. 
T prouostes T. prepostis x. 


XIII. 22—25. 


And, britheren, Y preie 30u, that 3e suf-22 
fre a word of solace; for bi ful fewe 
thingis Y have writun to jou. Knowe23 
3e oure® brother Tymothe, that is sent 
forth, with whom if he schal come more 
hastili, Y schal se 30u. Grete 3e wel 
alle 3oure souereyns, and alle hooli men. 
The britheren of Italie greten 30u wel. 
The grace of God be with 30u alle. 25 
Amen. 


Here endith the pistle’ to Ebrews, 


. and? bigynneth the prologe on the Dedis 


of Apostlis’. 


a Om. x. 
h Om. Gmopx. 


bbe vr. ©¢ honour and 

i for ry. and sothli x. 
© hastiliere he x. P Om. x. 
S homeli men Nn. seyntis x. t Om. x. 


& the x. 


y Here endeth the pistle to Ebrews, and here bigynneth 
Actus Apostolorum, that is, the book of Apostlys Dedis. a. 


Here endith the epistil to Ebrews, and bigyn- 


neth the prolog on the Dedis of Apostlis suynge. N. Here eendith the epistel to the Ebrewes, and bygyn- 


neth the prologe of Dedis of Apostels. o. 


rubric in GMPsTxyY. 


© 3o0ure ghk. 4 enisile mo. © and here mbo. 


Here endeth the epistlis of Poule, and bigynneth the Apostlis 
Dedis. 9. Here endith Poul, and bigynneth here the prologe vpon the Deedis of Apostlis. v. 


No final 


f From cimquxabchoa. Here endeth the pistel to 


Ebrewes ; se now the prologe on the Dedis of Apostlis. K. Here endith the pistil to the Ebrwis, and bigyn- 


ith a prologe on the Deid of Postlis. g. 


No final rubric in arrek. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 





Prolog to Actus Apostolorum®. 


Lux of Sirye by nacioun, whos preis- 
inge in the euangelye is writun, at An- 
tioche noble of craft of medicyne, and 
the disciple of the apostlis of Crist; aftir 
folowinge Poul anoon to confescioun, 
other» the® deeth, withoute blame dwell- 
inge in maydenhod‘, chees to serne God; 
the which goynge foure skore 3eer of age, 
in Bithyniye deiede ful of the Hooly Gost. 
Thise thorw the Hooly Gost stiringe, in 
thef cuntrees of Achaye wrytynge the 
gospel to Grekis bileuyde, the incarna- 
cioun of the Lord with trewe tale schew- 
ide; and the same Crist he schewide to 
haue dessendid of the stok and progeny 
of Dauith. To whom not withoute desert 
power of wrytinge the dedis of the apo- 
stlis€ was’ 3yue” in mynistre!, that God 
in* God ful, aud the sone of ‘lost aquent, 
preier™ of the apostlis ymaad", thorw lott 
of Goddis eleccioun the noumbre schulde 
be fulfillid; and so Poul schulde 3yue 
fulfillinge to the apostlis dedis, whom 
long kykynge™" to® azens?, the goode God 
hadde chose’. The which thing to men 
redynge and sechinge God he wolde ra- 
thir schewe® in schort word, than to 


Here bigynneth prolog on the Dedis of 
A postlis*. 


Luk of Antiochie of> the nacioun of 
Sirie, whos preisyng is teld in the gospel, 
at Antioche he was a worthi man of 
leche craft, and afterward a disciple of 
Cristis apostlis, and suwede Poul, the 
apostle. He serued God in maidynhod 
with out blame; and whanne he was 
foure scoor 3eer* eld and foure, he diede 
in Bithynye® ful of the Hooli Goost. And 
he® thur3 stiring of the Hooli Goost, in 
the coostis of Acaie wroot the gospel to 
feithful Grekis, and schewide the incar- 
nacioun of the Lord bi a trewe telling; 
and ‘schewide also, that he was comun 
of the kynrede of Dauid. To him not 
without desert was 3yue power to write 
the doyngis' of apostlis$ in her minys- 
terie, that God beinge ful in God, whanne 
the sone of perdicioun was deed, and the 
apostlis* hadden maad her preier, thoru3 
lot of the Lordis eleccioun the noumbre 
of the apostlis were fulfillid; and also 
that Poul schulde ende the doyngis of 
the! apostlis, whom the Lord hadde 
chosun, that long tyme wynside a3en* 
the pricke. And to hem that reden! and 
sechen™ God, he wolde schewe it bi 


2 Prolog. s. Noinitialrubric in *. No prologue in ampoxy ; space leftin ¢; in nT of the second text. 


bors. ¢Om.os. 4 manhed r. 


terie y. kin tos. 
kosr. evidently by error. 


°Om. s.  P 3if 0. 


e Thees ov. Thei x. 
1a blank space here in 0. loss quenchid s. 
4 ychoose o. 


f Om. o. 
™ the preier v. 
¥ shewen to men s. 


i mynys- 


& postolis s.  y3if a. 
on Jykynge 


1 maad s. 


a Jeroms prologe on the Dedis of Apostlis. x. The prolog of the Deedis of Apostlis. Nx. Heere sueth the 


prolog on the Dedis of Apostlis. R. 
rubric in cmgTuxaghio. bOm. 7. © 3eeris c. 
& the apostlis carruacfhko. —_— postlis Ka. 
™ sechith crvabf. 


Prologe on Dedis of Apostlis. b. 
d Bethanie rtk. 
i Om. ExNbeo. 


Prolog on Aetus.c. No initial 
€QOm.xk.  f dedis b. doynge k. 
kasenst T. J redit r. redeth vabf. 


BER2 


508 


haue schewid ony thing lengir to men 
aloothinge*; whom Goddis grace so fo- 
lowyde, that not oonly to bodyes, but also 
to soulis his medicyne schulde profyte. 


FTere endith the prolog, and bigynneth 
the lessoun'. 


FTeere bigynnen the Apostles Dedes*. 


CAP. I. 


1 Forsothe, thou Theophile, first I made 
a sermoun, ‘or word», of alle the® thingis, 
2that Jhesus bygan for‘ to do and teche, til* 
into the day, in which’ he comaundinge’ 
to® apostlis' ‘bi the Hooly Gost*, whom! 
3he chees, was™ takyn vp; to" which® and 
he 3af hym silf alyue?, ‘or guyhe4, aftir 
his passioun, in’ manye argumentis, ‘or 
prouyngiss, by fourty dayes* apperinge to 
hem, and spekinge of the rewme of God. 
4And het etinge" to gidere, comaundide’ to 
hem, that thei schulden not departe fro 
Jerusalem, but’ schulden abyde the* bi- 
heeste of the fadir, theY which 3e herden, 
she seith?, by my mouth; for® sotheli® John 
baptiside in watir, but 3e schulen be bap- 
tysid in the Hooly Gost, not aftir these 
é6manye dayes. Therfore thei that camen‘ 
to gidere, axiden’ him, seyinge, Lord, if ¢ 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


I. 1—6. 


schort telling, rather than schewe forth 
ony thing more lenger to hem that wla- 
ten” longe thingis; knowinge that it bi- 
houeth the tilier that worchith to cte of 
his owne fruytis. And he foond so miche 
grace of God, that not oneli his medicyne 
profitide to bodies, but also to® soulis. 


Here endith the prolog ». 


Here biginneth Apostlis Dedis*. 


CAP..1. 


Theofle, first ‘Y made” a sermoun of 1 
alle thingis, that Jhesu bigan to do and 
to® teche*, in to the daie of his ascen-2 
cioun, in? which he comaundide bi the 
Hooli Goost to hise apostlis, whiche® he 
hadde chosun; to whiche! he schewides 
hyin silf ‘alyue® aftir his passioun, by 
many arguinentis, apperinge to hem 
fourti daies, and spekinge of the rewme 
of God+. And he ete with hem, and4 
comaindide, that thei schulden not de- 
parte fro" Jerusalem, but abide the bi- 
heest of the fadir, which 3e herden, he 
seide, bi my mouth; for Joon baptisides 
in watir, but 3e schulen be baptisid in 
the Hooli Goost, aftir these fewe daies. 
Therfor thei that weren come to gidere, 6 
axiden hym, and seiden, Lord, whether 
in this time thou schalt restore the king- 


* to do and 
teche; Jest he 
were lije to 
seribes and Fa- 
rises, of which 
he saith in re- 
preninge hem 
in 23 e°. of Mt. 
Thei seien and 
do not; forwhi 
to teche wel 
and to lyue 
yuele is noon 
other thing 
than to dampne 
himself bi his 
owne vois. éil 
in to the day; 
of ascencionn. 
in which he 
ecomaundede bi 
the Hooly Gost 
fo apostlis ; 
that thei schul- 
den preche the 
gospel thour3 
al the world, in 
16 c°. of Mare. 
whiche he 
chees; bifore 
othere men, to 
the office of 
apostelhed. 

was taken vp; 
fro erthe to he- 
uen, in his man- 
hed; for bi the 
Godhed which 
is nedliche 
enery where, it 
acordith not to 
him to go fro 
place to place. 
Lire here. ve. 


+ of the reume 
of God; that 
is, of henenly 
blisse. and he 
eet togidere ; 
that is, Jhesu 
eet with the 
postlis, [ve] to 
whiche sittinge 
at the mete he 
aperide in the 
day of ascen- 
cionn, as Mare 
seith in the 
ende. not de- 
parte fro Jeru- 
salem; til thei 


weren maad able bi the Hooly Goost to puplische the gospel. baptisid in the Holy Gost; bi this baptym is vndirstonden the resseyuinge of the 
Holy Gost in visible singne, which is seid baptym bi figuratif speehe ; for the grace of the Holi Gost is seid anoynting, therfore the Glose of Raban 
seith here that in sum bookis it is thus, 3e schulen be anoyntid with the Holy Gost; but bi resoun and holy doetouris it is opin, that the postlis 
weren eristned in watir, as Crist tau3te, in iij. c°. of Joon. Lire here. v. 


S lothinge o. lothende s. 
rubric in s+. a From a. 


Aposths Dedes. p. The Apostle Dedis. rv. 


No initial rubric in asvxy. 


t ere endeth the prologe, and bygyneth Dedis of Apostelles. 0. No final 
The Apostles Dedes. G. 


The Dedes of Apostlis. Noe. Here bigynneth the 


b Om. ox. either word vr. 


¢Om.erx. ¢€Om. osx. ¢Om.o. fthe whiche e@. & comaundede gtr. » bi the Hooly Gost to r. 
ithe apostlis cuopery. kOm.r. Uwhiche r. “and wasv. "and to r. Ywhom mpry. P quik r. 
gOm. orx. thir. 8 Om. ox. either prouyngis vr. SSdaye x. them ex. eet rv. ¥ he comaundede s. 
and comaundede r. W but thei wper. * Om. r. YOm. rx. 2 seyde or. 20Om.anr. > forsothe Nn. 
€hadden comen x. 4askeden e. © wher pr. 


awlatith wuabh. 9% the nga. to the 1. 


P Jerom in his prologe oa this book seith thus. ca. 


Jerome 


here in his prologe seith this. Kuub. Jerome in his prolog on thecse Dedis of Apostlis suynge seith al this. n. 


Jerom in his prolog on the Dedis of Apostlis seith al this. qxoa. 
rum seith this. c. Here endith the prologe, and bygyneth the Deidis of Apostlis. g. 
No final rubric in eref. 

Here bigynneth the Apostlis Deedis. e. 
a and Eg. 


log on the Dedis of Apostlis. k. 
gynnen the Dedis of Apostlis. m. 
eghko. b ymade b. made o. 


¢ Om. R prim. 
h awey fro R. 
'y 


Jerom in his prologe on Actus Apostelo- 
Here eendith the pro- 
Dedis of Apostlis. a. Here bi- 
No initial rubric in crKqruxah 
€whomi. fwhomi. 8 on lijfr. 


a From E. 


I. 7—16. 


in this tyme schalt thou restore the 
z7kyngdom of Israel? Forsoth he seide to 
hem, It is not 3ouref for? to haue® knowe 
tymes' or* momentis, the! whiche the fa- 
sdir hath put in his power; but 3e schulen 
take the vertu of the Hooli Gost comynge 
fro aboue into 3o0n, and 3e schulen be 
witnessis to ine in Jerusalem, and™ in al 
Judee, and Samarye, and ‘til to" the vt- 
omeste® of erthe?. And whanne he hadde 
seid thes thingis, ‘hem seynge1, he was 
lift™ vp, and a cloud receynede hym fro 
lothe y3en of hem. And whanne thei bi- 
helden™ into’ heuene ‘him goynge', lo! 
twey" men stoodyn ny3 bisydis hem in 
ilwhite clothis, the’ whiche and” seiden, 
Men of Galilee, what stonde 3e bihold- 
inge into heuene? This Jhesus, that* is 
takyn vp fro 3ou into heuene, ‘so schal 
come’, as 3e sy3en him goynge into he- 
wuene. Thanne thei turneden ajen to* Je- 
rusalem, fro the hil that is clepid? Oly- 
uete?, ‘the which® is bisydis Jerusalem, 
ishauynge’ the iurney of a* saboth. And 
whanne thei hadden entride into thef 
‘soupyng places, thei wenten vp in*to! 
‘the hizere* thingis!, where thei dwelten, 
Petre and John, James and Andrew, Phi- 
lip and Thomas, Bartelmew and Mathew, 
James of Alfey, and Symound Zelotes, and 
14Judas of James. Alle thes weren dwell- 
inge, ‘or lastinge™, ‘to gidere® in preier, 
with wymmen, and Marie, the modir of 
15Jhesu, and with his bretheren. In tho 
dayes Petre rysynge® vp in the myddel 
of bretheren, seide?; forsoth ther was a 
cumpeny of men to gidere, almest an hun- 
i6drid and twenty; Men bretheren, it bi- 
houeth the’ scripture for" to* be fulfillid', 
which the Hooly Gost bifore seyde by the 
mouth of Dauith, of Judas that was leder 


gOm. srx. 4Om. Fr. 

Oo vtermest GMNPQTY. 
t biholdinge y. § hym goynge into GmNPeTry. 
wOm.rv. * which vy. Yschal come soo r. 
e which v. that x. and hathr. ¢Om.s. 
khige sx. Omir. |! Om. r. 
P and seide r. 9 that the r. 


f z0nren N. 
2 ynto GMPQTY. 


itweyner. in to heuene fro 30n Rr. 
K marg. and Jamesx.  P Jastinge gk. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


ithe tymes aurry. 
P the erthe r. 
t Om. GuNPQTYY. 
Zin to 0. 
f Om. @. 
™ Jastyngly, either contynuynge r. Om. x. 

t Om. mPosTrxy. 


lin to rn. 
4 Into k. 


509 


dom of Israel? And he seide to hem,7 
It is not 3oure to knowe the tymes 
ether momentis, whiche the fadir hath 
put in his power; but 3e schulen takes 
the vertu* of the Hooli Goost comynge 
fro aboue in to 30u, and 3e schulen be 
my witnessis in Jerusalem, and in al 
Judee, and Samarie, and to the vtmeste 
of the erthe. And whaiine he had seido 
these thingis, in her si3t he was lift vp, 
and a cloude resseyuede him fro her 
ijen. 
goynge in to heuene, lo! ‘twei meni+ 
stoden bisidis hem in white clothing, 


* take the ver- 
tu, ete.s that 
is, to preche 
stedfastly and 
speedly the 
gospel thour3 
al the world. 
Lire here. ve. 
tT twey men ; 
that is, aungels 
in the licnesse 
of men. Live 
here. ve. what 
stonden, etc.; 
[as} if thei 
seien, Abide 3e 
not, that Jhesu 
dwelle more 
hodili with 30n, 
as he dide bi- 


And whanne thei biheelden hym 10 fore. ie schat 


come, etc.; that 
is, as he stizide 
in the fourme 

of manhed glo- 


and seiden, Men of Galile, what stonden 11 tiouse, so he 


3e biholdinge in to heuene? This Jhe- 
su, which is takun vp ‘fro 30u in to 
heuenek, schal come, as 3e seyn hyin go- 
ynge in to heuene. 
eden a3en to! Jerusalem, fro the hille 
that is clepid ‘the hille™ of Olyuete, 
which is bisidis Jerusalem an halidaies 


schal come ta 
deme. entrid, 
etc.; this is a 
figuratif speche, 
and singnefieth, 
that thei stoden 


Thanne thet turn-12 ftst, and aftir- 


ward entrid in- 
to the soler. 
James the sone 
of Alfey; tothe 
difference of 
the formere 


journey. And whanne thei weren entrid 133™es; that 


in to the hous, where thei dwelliden, thei 
wenten vp in to the soler", Petir and 
Joon, James® and Andreu, Philip and 
Thomas, Bartholomew and Matheu, 
James of Alphei, and Symount Zelotes, 
and Judas of James. 
lastingli? contynuynge witli o wille in 
preier, with wymmen, and Marie, the 
moder of Jhesu, and with hise britheren. 


was the sone of 
Zebedei. Judas 
the brother af 
James; to dif- 
ference of Ju- 
das the traitour. 
his bretheren; 
that is, cosins. 
noumbrid 
among Us; 


Alle these weren !4 that is, was 


oon of the 
twelue apostlis. 
gat the part of 
this seruice ; 
that is, the dig- 
nite of apostle, 


In tho daies Petre roos vp in4 the myd- 15 not bilot, but bi 


dil of the britheren, and seide; and ther 
was a company of men togidere, almest 
an hundrid and twenti; Britheren, it) 
bihoneth that the scripture be fillid, 
whiche the Hooly Goost bifore seide bi 
the mouth of Dauith, of Judas that was 


ledere of hem that token Jhesu; and17 


was noumbrid among vs, and gat a part 


kK either y. 1 Om. rx. 

q while thei sijen v. T liftid sx. 
utwo cMresty. VOm.¥. 
» of Olyuete wrry. hil of Olyuete rv. 
Ssoler ry. bOm.r. iOm. G prim. ¥. 
» with oo wille yr. © ros F. 


t fillid vr. 


m Om. G pr.m. 
a seyde 0. 
s Om. Fr. 


m Om. EI pr.m. agka. © ether souping place 


chesing of Crist, 
in 18 c°. of 
Math. and 6 
c°. of Joon. he 


6 weldide, etc. s 


that is, maad 
to be weldid of 
othere, for he 
castide forth in 
the temple 30 
pens, for which 
he had seeld 
Crist wickidly ; 
hy whiche pens 
the princis of 


510 


i7of hem that tooken Jhesu; the" which was 
noumbrid in™ vs, and gat the sort’ of 
is this” mynysterie*. And forsoth this’ weeld- 
ide* a feeld of the hyre of wickidnesse, 
and he hangid*, to-barst the myddel, and 
walle> his entrailis ben® sehed abrood. And 
it ist maad knowun to alle men dwellinge 
in Jerusalem, so that thilke® feeld was 
clepid Achildemak in the langage‘ of hem, 
20that is, the feeld of blood. Forsoth® it 
is writun in the book of Salmes, The 
habitacioun" of him’ be maad desert, and 
be there not that dwellith* in it, and an- 
21uther take the bisshopryche of him. Ther- 
fore it bihoueth of these men, that ben 
gederid to gidere with vs in al tyme, in 
which the Lord Jhesu entride yn', and 
22wente out among vs, bigynnynge™ fro 
baptym" of John ‘til into® the day in 
which he was takyn vp fro vs, oon of 
these for? to be maad a witnesse of his 
23resurexcioun with vs. And thei ordeyn- 
eden? tweyne’, Joseph, that is’ clepidt 
Barsabas, that is namyd" Justus’, and 
24Mathi. And thei preiynge™ seiden, Thou, 
Lord, that ‘hast knowe* the hertis of 
meny, sechewe whom thou hast ehosun of 
25thes tweyne’, oon for® to take the place 
of this mynisterie and apostilhed, of the® 
whieh Judas trespasside, that he schulde 
26g0 into his place. And thei 3auen lottis 
to hem, and the lot felde to’ Mathi; and 
he was noumbrid ‘to gidere® with en- 
lenenef apostlis. 


CAPS UL 
1 And whanne the® ‘dayes Pentecostes", 
‘that is, fyfti', weren fulfillid®, alle disei- 
plis! weren to gidere in the same place. 
2And sudenly ther was maad a sown fro 
heuene, as of™ a greet spirit” comynge 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


I. 17—II. 2. 


of this seruyce. And this Judas hadde 18 prestis bousten 


. F epee a feeld for the 

a feeld of the hire of wickidnesse, and sepulture of 
: i serine 
het was hangid, and ‘to-brast® the myd- pilgrims ae 


28 c°. of Mt. « 


4 : - an other; that 
dil, and alle hise entrailes weren sehed i Mane 


abrood. And it was maad knowun to19 ‘eke the bi- 


schopricke of 
alle men that dwelten in Jerusalem, so  Aym; that is, 


that the ilke feeld was clepid Achelde- suchen ean ‘ 
mak in the langage of hem, that is, the ee, r 


feeld of blood. And it is writun in the 20 oa 

book of Salmes, The abitacioun of hem _ seid the sucses- 

be maad desert, and be ther noon that See 
dwelle in it, and an other take his bi- ‘netoume-ip 
shopriche. Therfor it bihoueth of these 2t’™ ¥- 

men, that ben gaderid togidere with vs 

in al the tyme, in which the Lord Jhe- 

su entride, and wente out among vs, 

and bigan fro the baptym of Joon til int22+ and thei or- ' 


1] ; : deyneden 
to the dai in whieh he was takun vp fro loibea, 
ys, that oon of these be maad a witnesse ‘@Partden 


these tweyne 
of his resurreceioun with vs. And _ theigs ‘e other dis- 


ciplis, not bi 
ordeyneden tweynt+, Joseph, that was _ lot, but bi 
clepid Barsabas, that was named Just, 


chesing, as 
excellentere in 
and Mathie. And thei preieden, and 24 


riztfulnesse and 


in experiense 

seiden, Thou, Lord, that knowist the of the dedis of 

f Crist. Thou3 
hertis of alle men, sehewe whom thou _ thei hadden 
chose these 


hast chosun of these" tweyne, that oon 25 tweyne as ex- 
take the place of this sernyce and apo- coe ental 
stlehed, of which Judas trespasside, that {i risen not 
he sehulde go in to his place. And thei 26 ¥¢re vorthiere 
3auen lottis to hem, and the lot felde on 

Mathie; and he was noumbrid with’ 


to apostlelied ; 
herfore thei 
enleueu apostlis. 


besou3ten God- 
dis dom on this 
thing, bi send- 
ing of lottis. 

on Mathie ; 
this Joseph 
was the cosyn 
of Crist, in 4 ¢°. 
of Mt.; but 
Crist settide © 


CAP. I, Mathie bifore 
. c this Joseph 
And whanne the daies of Pentecost®1 574 shewide 
weren fillid, alle the disciplis weren to- i this that 
: men shulen 
gidre in the same place. 
ther was maad a sown fro heuene, as of 


And sodevnli2 riot be auaunsid 
y to offices of the 
a greet wynde comynge, and it fillide al 


chirche for 
kynrede. Lire 


here. Ve. 
uOm.r. “amongr. vVpartr. Wtheo. hiswpry. *seruiser. Ythis Judas. 72 ou3zte o. 
a was hangid, andr. => Om. sx. ¢Cwereny. 4wasy. ¢that x, ilke y. ftungex. 8 For r. 
h dwellynge steed 0. ihemsx. ‘kdwellecawpestry. 'Om.o. and bigany. 1 the baptyme 
empsry, Ovnto Mpoery, POm.sx. 4 iourneyden r. ‘two GmMNnopesrxy. Swasr.  ¢ ycleped g. 
uynamed g. Just y. W preieden, andr. *knowist r. Yallemenr. 2 two etalii. ® Om. sx. 
h mynysterie, or seruise yr. © Om. x. ¢on acmnopstyxy. ¢Om.r.  f the elleuen cwpry. twelue 
Ss prem & Om. «. h Pentecostes dayes cupry. dayes of Pentecostes Noy. Pentecost dayes 9. 
iOm. x. K fillidr. 'the disciplis er, ™ Om. ¢ prom. ™ spirit, either wynd r. 
‘Om.o.  § to-barste rkqck. to-barstinrk. tOm.b. "the g.  v with the hk. 


K marg. Pentecost, either Witsontide nr. 


¥ thal is, fifti 


If. 3-—16. 


to°, and it fulfillideP al the hous where 
3thei weren sittinge. And tungis dyuersly 
partid as fyer apperiden to hem, and it 
4saat vpon? ech of hem. And alle ‘ben 
fulfillid® with the Hooli Gost, and thei 
bigunnen for’ to speke witht dyuerse lan- 
gagis", as the Hooli Gost 3af to hem for’ 
sto speke. Forsoth ther weren in Jerusa- 
lem dwellinge’ Jewis, religiouse men, of 
éech nacioun that is vndir heuene. Sothh, 
‘this vois* maad, the multitude cam to 
gidere, and in soule, ‘or wndirstondyng’, 
‘was confoundid?, ‘or stoneyd*, for ech 
man herde hein spekynge in his langage. 
7¥orsoth alle men weren ‘astoneyd® ‘in 
witt4, and wondriden, seyinge to gidere, 
Wher® not alle these that speken ben 
8Galilees, and how ‘we herdenf ech man 
ohis langage? in which we ben born? Party, 
and Medy, and Elamyte, and thei that 
dwellen int Mesopotamye, Judee, and Ca- 
10 padocie, Ponte, and Asie, Frigie, and Pam- 
philie, Egipt, and the! parties of Libie, that 
is aboute* Sirenen, and cumelingis Ro- 
iimayns, and Jewis, and proselitis', men of 


Crete and Arabye™, we han herd hem. 


spekynge in oure langagis" the greete 
2thingis of God. Forsothe alle weren 
stoneyd® ‘in witt?, and wondriden, sey- 
izingel, What wole this thing be? Forsoth 
othere scornyden, seyinge, For thei' ben 
i4ful of must. Forsoth Petre stondinge* 
with enleuene’, reyside" his vois, and spak 
to hem, Men J ewis, and alle that dwellen 
in’ Jerusalem, be this thing knowun to 
jou, and with eeris perseyue’ my wordis. 
is Sothely* not as 3e demenY, ‘or gessen?, 
these be drunkun, whanne’ it is the 
ic thridde our of the day, ‘or vndirne; but 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


511 


the hous where thei saten*. And di-s 
uerse* tungis as fier apperiden to hem, 
and it sat on ech of hem. And alles 
weren fillid with the Hooli Goost, and 
thei bigunnen to speke diuerseY langagis, 
as the Hooli Goost 3af to hem for* to 
speke. And ther weren in Jerusalem s 
dwellinge Jewis, religiouse men, of ech 
nacioun that is vndur heuene. Andé 
whanne this vois was maad, the multi- 
tude cam togidere, and thei* weren asto- 
nyed in thou3t, for ech man herde hem 
spekinge in his’ langage. And _ alle7 
weren astonyed, and wondriden, and 
seiden togidere, Whether not alle these 
that speken ben men of Galyle, ands 
hou herden we ech man his* langage in 
which we ben borun? Parthi4, and Medi, 9 
and Elamyte, and thei that dwellen at 
Mesopotami, Judee, and Capodosie, and® 


* siltinge; that 
is, dwellinge, 
for the postlis 
weren thanue 
in preier, which 
is not maad 
comunly in sit- 
tinge, but in 
kneeling, either 
stondinge. in 
diuerse lun- 
gagis ; as the 
Glos seith here, 
the postlis 
spaken not 
oonly in di- 
uerse langagis, 
and vndir- 
stoden alle lan- 
gagis, but also 
whanne thei 
spaken in oo 
langage, what 
euer it was, alle 
that herden, of 
what euere di- 
uerse langagis 
thei weren, ech 
vndirstod his 
owne langage, 
bi Goddis vertu 
doinge this. 
religiouse men ; 
that is, deuout 
in the worch- 


ing of God. 


Ponte, and Asie, Frigie, and Pamfilie, 10 Jewis; that is, 


Egipt, and the parties of Libie, that is 
abouef Sirenen, and ‘comelingis Ro- 


mayns&®, and Jewis, and proselitis, men 1! 


of Crete, and of Arabie, we han herd 
hem spekynge in oure langagis the grete 
thingis of God. 
nyed, ‘and wondriden, ‘and seideni togi- 
dere, What wole this thing be? 
othere scorneden, and seiden, For these 
men ben ful of must. 
with the* enleuene, and reiside vp his 
vois, and spak to hem, 3e Jewis, and 
alle that dwellen at Jerusalem, be this! 
knowun to 30u, and with eris perseyue 
je my wordis. 
these ben dronkun, whanne it is the 


But Petre stood 14 


thei of the lyn- 
age of Juda. 
proselytis; that 
is, conuersis fro 
hethennesse to 
the feith of 
Jewis. ve. 

f nol as 3e 
gessen; bi er- 
rour. ve. the 


And alle weren asto-}2 jpridde our: 


as if he seide, 
it is not 3it nur 


And 13 of eting and 


drinking, for 
thanne meu 
higynnen to ete 
comunly at the 
sixte our, either 
mydday, and 
moost the 
Jewis, that 
weren more 
atempre, for 
thei weren the 
worschiperis of 


For not as 3e wenenf, 15 Goa, and moost 


in Jerusalem, 
where this wor- 


thridde our of the dai; but this it is, that 16 schiping was 


was seid bi the prophete Johel, And it17 


in plente. ve. 
in the laste 
duies ; that is, 


in the daies of the newe testament, that ben seid the laste, for noon other testament scha) come aftir this. Lire here. v. 


oOm. sy. P fillide r. 
w men dwellende x. 
a Om. orx. 
f han we herd G pr.m. mpqty. herden we vr. 
1 proselitis, cither conuersis r. 
POm.y. 4 seyinge togidere r. 
Y al AGMNOPQSTVXY. 
@ and whanne F. 


don sry. 
x whanne this vois was rv. 


r these men F. 


b Om. ox, 


r weren fillid r. 
¥ either vndirstondyng v. Om. x. 
b owne langagis c. owne langage T. tunge x. 
& tunge x. 

m of Arabie 4 sec. m. GMNOQSV XY. 
8 stood v. 
W parceyueth osx. perseyue jee rv. 


v Om. sx. 
2 it was astonied r. 

¢ stoneid sx. 4Om.v. ¢& Whether esx. 
h at acMNopesTVxXY. iQm.xk. « aboue rv. 
n thingis x. © astonyed vr. 
t the elleuene mpry. and reiside r. 
x For rv. Y gessen V. z Om. orx. 


$Om.sx. tiny. 4 tungis x. 


* ether dyuerseli departid k marg. ¥ in dyuerse x sec.m. 7 Om.R. #Om.R prom. } his owne k prim. 


© oure K sec. m. 
K sec. m, 


4 of Parthi 1xqroof. ¢ Om. R. 
k Om. kK pr.m.o. | this thing a. 


f aboute Re. 


& Romayns comelyngis nx. 3 seiinge 


512 


this ‘thing it is°, that was’ seid by the 
17prophete Johel, And it schal be in the 
laste dayes, the Lord seith, I schal heelde 
out of® my spirit on ‘al fleisch‘; and 3oure 
sones and 3o0ure dou3tris schulen prophe- 
cie, and 3oure 3onge® schulen se visyouns, 
and 3oure eldris schulen dreme meetels?, 
1s‘or sweuens', And sotheli on my ‘ser- 
uauntis men* and! myne handmaydens in 
tho dayes I schal schede out of my spirit, 
19and thei schulen prophecie. And I schal 
3yue greete wondris in heuene aboue, and 
signes in erthe bynethe, blood, and fyer, 
20and vapour™ of smoke. The sunne schal 
be turned into derknessis, and the mone 
into blood, bifore that" the gret and° 
21opyn day of the Lord schal come. And? 
ech man which‘ euere™ schal inclepe® the 
22name of the Lord, schal be saf. 3e men 
of Israel, heeritht thes wordis. Jhesu of 
Nazareth, a man prouyd of God in" 30u 
by vertues, ‘ov myraclis’, and wondris, 
and tokenes, the” whiche God dide by 
him in the myddel of 30u, as 3e ‘witen, 
23hym, the counceil determyned, ‘or endid*, 
and by the prescienceY, ‘or bifore know- 
ynge*, of God, bitakun, ‘or trayed*, by 
the hondis of wickid® 3e turmentinge 
24slowen®, Whom God reyside, ‘the sorwis* 
of helle vnboundun’, ‘vp thatf it was in- 
possible him® for® to be holdyn of it. 
25 Sothli' Dauith seith into him!, I purueyde 
the Lord bifore me euermore, for he is on 
26my ri;thalf, that I be not moued. For 
this thing myn herte ioyede, and my 
tunge gladide™, more ouer and my fleisch 
27schal reste in hope. For thou sechalt not 
forsake my soule in helle, ‘nethir thou 
schalt 3yue" thin hooli for® to se corup- 


2ecioun. Thou hast maad knowun to me 


Cis the thing x. “dis x. ¢ Om. or. 
i Om. mpxy. either sweuens ¥. 
eprom  °Om.N.  P And it schal be r. 

help 7. t here 4GMNOPTYY. u bifore r. 


Y bifore knowynge 0. 4% Om. oex. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


f ech man r. 
kK men seruauntes Guery. seruauntis 7. 
4 the which 4 pr.m. who earpery. 

Vv Om. ox. etther myraclis r. 
® or bytrayed GMpry. Om. ox. 


Il. 17-28. 


* on ech man; 
that is, on 
Jewis and he- 
thene men, 
without differ- 


schal be in the laste daies, the Lord: 
ech fleisch*; and 3oure sones and 3oure 
dou3tris schulen prophesie, and joure ence. ve. either 
Sock on ech man, 
3onge men schulen se visiouns, and 3oure 
schal he teudir 
at the maner 
my seruauntis and myn™ handmaidens of Aesch, and 
in tho daies Y schal schede" out of° my _ synnes, as Rabi 

3 te ° 6 Salamon seith 
spirit, and thei schulen prophecie. And 1961 Joel. For- 
Y schal 3yue grete wondris in heuene ge 
aboue, and signes in erthe bynethe, ‘eren tendre 

bi denocionn, 
blood, and fier, and leete of P smoke. ug disposid to 
s t @ resseyu- 
The sunne schal be turned in to derk-20ynge of the 
; : : Holy Gost. 
nessis4, and the moone in to blood, bifor j5ur> sonee and 
that the greet and the opyn dai of the 37 desis; 
Lord come. And it schal be, ech man 2 oo eee 
uen 
which euere schal clepe to help the name _ indifferently to 
men and to 
of the Lord, schal be saaf. 3e men of 22wymmen; 

x r J 1 wherfore and 
Israel’, here 3e these wordis. Jhesu of 5, the day of 
Nazareth, a man preued of God bifor  fenticost, ether 

. . ? 
30u bi vertues, aud wondris, aud tokenes, Vreven 

‘ 3 5 ‘ é with the apo- 
which God dide bi hym in the myddil 

: . that - 
of 3ou, as 3e witen, 3e turmentiden, and 28 cin the Holy 
killiden hym bi the hoondis of wyekid Goes with 

ar. c° Filip 
: hadde fonre 
takun bi the forknouwyng of God. dangerin pro- 

eo. > ecyinge. V. 
Whom God reisidet, whanne sorewis of 24 sefuten drome 
helle weren vuboundun, bi that that it ‘is? that 

haue Goddis 
1 » , i reuelacioun in 
it. For Dauid seith of hym, Y sai3 afer 25 sleep, [ve] and 
e i to perseyue 
the Lord bifore me euermore, for he is _ tho, the soule 
on my ri3thalf, that Y be not mouyd. thane, for the 
restinge of — 
outermere wit- 
tunge made ful out ioye, and more ouere 2 
: uaunitis, ele. ; 
iny fleisch schal reste in hope}. For thou 27 for in the firste 
: 6 chirche the 
schalt not leeue my soule in helle, nethir 
was jouen ge- 
neraly hi set~ 
cioun. Thou hast maad knowun, to megs ting on of the 
, : i hondis of apo- 
the weies of lijf, thou schalt fille me in" _ stlis; and this 
myrthe with thi face. Britheren, be it 29 singne to alle 


seith, Y schal helde out my spirit on. 

whose herte 
eldris schulen dreme. sweuenes. And on1é 

not ohstynat in 

stlis, in 1. c% 

hem; and in 
men, bi counseil determyned* and_ bi- 

is, schulen 
was impossible that he were holdun of 

is more disposid 
For this thing myn herte ioiede, and my 26 

tis. on my ser- 

Hooly Goost 
thou schalt 3iue thin hooli to se corrup- 

is a visible 

cristned ; and 


jit he is 3onen vnuisibly to alle cristned, if thei setten not lettinge. Lire here. v. 


h swenens GMOPETY. 

m heete r. 2 Om. 
rQm.s.  § clepe to 
w Om. vr. x Om. 0ex. 
b wicked men Gaéopey. wicke sx. 


§ 3onge men GNQTF. 
land on @. 


‘c witen, 3e turmentiden and killeden him bi the hondis of wickide men, bi counseil determyned and bi- 


taken bi the foreknowing of God r. 


¢Om.o 4Om.sx. i Forr. to G prim. of r. 
° Om. sx. 
monmyn rR. Om.a. Mheelde1. © Om. b pr.m. hof. 


* Jernsalem c. 5 ether eendid % marg. 


d whanne sorewis Fr. 


t areiside k. 


f bi that that r. 
one schalt 3if o. 


e€ weren vnbonnden Fr. 


lit xk. ™ made ful out icie 7. 


Pand c pr.m. x sec.m.a. 4 derknes hk§. 


u with a. 


Il. 29—40. 


the weies of lyf, thou schalt fulfille? me 
29in3 myrthe with thi face. Men bretheren, 
be it leefful boldly for’ to seye to 3o0u of 
the patriark Dauith, for’ he is deed and 
biried, and his sepulcre is at vs til into 
sothis day. Therfore whanne he was a 
prophete, and wiste, fort with an ooth 
God hadde sworn to him, of the fruyt of 
3this leende" for’ to sitte on his seete, he 
purueyinge” spak of the resurexcioun* of 
Crist, for nethir he isY left in helle, nethir? 
szhis fleisch si;* corupcioun. God reiside 
this Jhesu, to whom we alle ben wit- 
asnessis. Therfore he? enhaunsid by the 
ri3t hond of God, and* the biheeste? of the® 
Hooli Gost takyn of the fadir, he schedde 
3¢out this’, that 3e seen and heeren. For- 
soth Dauith assendide® not into heuene; 
forsoth he seith, The Lord seide to my 
35 Lord, Sitti on my ri3thalf, til I schal* 
putte thin enemyes the stool of thi feet. 
36 Therfore moost certeynly wite al the hous 
of Israel, for' God reyside™ and" hym the® 
Lord and? Crist, this Jhesu4, whom 3e 
ajerucifieden. ‘These thingis herd’, thei 
weren compunct’ in herte; and thei seiden 
to Petre and to othere apostlis, Men bre- 
38theren, what schulen we do? Petre for- 
soth seitht to hem, Penaunce, he seith‘, 
do 3e, and ech of 30u be cristened in the 
name of Jhesu Crist, into remiscioun of 
3oure synnes; and 3e schulen take the 
39 3ifte" of the Hooly Gost. Forsoth’ repro- 
miscioun, ‘or eft biheeste*, is to 30u, and 
to 3oure sones, and to alle that ben ferr, 
whomY euere the Lord oure* God hath 
soclepid to*. Sothli® with othere wordis® 
ful manye he witnesside to hem, and mo- 
nestide hem*, seyinge*, Be 3e saued fro 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


513 


leueful boldli to seie to 30u of the pa- + in hope; 
triark Dauid, for he is deed and biried, iiliog a 
and his sepulcre is among vs in to this 1893. Jer- 
dai. 


sake my soule ; 
phete, and wiste, that with a greet ooth 


Therfore whanne he was a pro-3o departid ee 
that is, in the 
God hadde sworn to hym, that of the sat hap 
fruyt of his leende’ schulde oon sitte on 
his seete, he seynge afer spak of thesi 
resurreccioun of Crist, for nether he was 
left in helle, nether his fleisch sai3 cor- 
rupcioun. God reiside this Jhesu, to32 
whom we alle ben witnessis. Therfor33 
he was enhaunsid bi the ri3thoond of 
God, and thorou3 the biheest of the 
Hooli Goost that he took of the fadir, he 
schedde out this spzrit, that 3e seen and 
heren. For Dauid stiede not in to he-34 
uene; but he seith, The Lord seide to 
my Lord, Sitte thou on my ri3t half, tilss 
Y putte thin enemyes a” stool of thi 
feet. Therfor moost certeynli wite al36 
the hous of Israel, that God made hym 
bothe Lord and Crist, this Jhesu, whom 
3e crucefieden. Whanne thei herdens7 
these thingis, thei weren compunct in 
herte; and thei seiden to Petre and 
othere apostlis, Britheren, what schulen 
we do? And Petre seide to hem, Do 3e33 
penaunce, and eche of 3ou be baptisid in 
the name of Jhesu Crist, in to remis- 
sioun of 3o0ure synnes; and 3e schulen 
take the 3ifte of the Hooli Goost. For 39 
the biheest is to 30u, and to 30ure sones, 
and to alle that ben fer, which ever oure 
Lord God hath clepid. Also with othere* 40 
wordis ful many he witnesside to hem, 
and monestide hem, and seide, Be 3e 
sauyd fro this schrewid generacioun. 
Thanne thei that resseyueden his word 41 


seintis, that was 
in the hizere 


part of helle. 
neither thou 
schalt 3eue ; 
that is, suffre 
to be 3onen. ve. 
thin hooly ; 
that is, my 
body halewid. 
to see corrup- 
cioun ; that is, 
rotynge. v. 
with thi face ; 
that is, with 
cleer sizt of thi 
beeing, ve. 
whieh sizt the 
soule of Crist 
hadde, fro the 
firste moment 
of his erea- 
cioun. v. 

sched out this 
spirit that 3e 
seen; in tungis 
of fier. and 
heren; in di-+ 
uerse langagis. 
The Lords the 
fadir. seide io 
my Lord; that 
is, to his sone 
maad man. ve. 
Sitte thou on 
my rizthalf ; 
that is, at the 
euennesse of 
the fadir bi the 
godhed, and in 
betere goodis 
bi manhed. v. 
ul I putte ; 
that is, with- 
outen ende. 
thin enemyes 

a stool; that 
is, hooliche so- 
get to thee, and 
this schal be in 
to the ende of 
the world, ve. 
aud whanne 
he sehal 3eue 
meede to goode 
men and peyne 
to yuele men. v. 
God ; that is, 
al the Trinite. 
made him, ‘etc. 
in ioynynge the 


manhed of him to the kyndely sone of God, and in enhauusinge him to the riztside of the fadir. crucifieden; bi ignoraunce as to the comune 


puple, and bi malice, as to the prineis of prestis. v. 


e 


Pfilley. with x. 'Om.sx. *thatr. tthatr. leendesox. Y¥Om.sx. ™ purneiede and r. 
Xazenrysyng 0. Ywasy. %neo. Aseeth er. sayy. bhewasyv. ¢and bi mpery. and thour3 r. 
dhyzest 7. © Om. ry. fthis spiritr. & stizjide vy. bvntoo. i Sitthon sy. kOm.r. 'thatr. 
mmadev. %Om.mptvy. © Om.mpory. bothe vy. POm.o. is 7. ™ Whanne thei herden these 
thingis r. § compunct, or soreuful G sec.m. compuncted o. t seide rv. U 3iftes Q. v For r. 
wOm.ox. Ywhicher, *Omr. ®Om. 7. > Also. Cword kK. 4tohem e pr.m. rT. 
© and seide F. 

V leendis cgk pr. m. w the eErKgrbeghf. x Om. 1. 


VOL. IV. 


3U 


514 


this wickid!, ‘or schrewid®, generacioun. 
41 Therfore® thei that receyueden his wordis', 
weren baptysid, and in that day soulis* 
42 ben! putt to, aboute thre thousynd™. For- 
soth thei weren lastynge in" techinge of 
apostlis®, and in? comunynge of brekinge 
430f breed, and in preieris, Forsoth drede 
was maad to ech soule?, And many won- 
dris and sygnes weren don by apostlis" in 
Jerusalem, and greet drede was in alle. 
44Also alle men that bileuyden weren to 
gidere, and hadden alle thingis comyn’. 
45 Thei selden possesciouns and substaunees*, 
‘or goodis*, aud departiden allev thingis 
46to alle men, as it was nede to ech. ‘For- 
soth day bi day” thei ‘lastinge to gidere* 
in the temple, and brekingeY breed aboute 
housis, token? mete with gladyng* and 
47symplenesse of herte, heriynge® to gidere 
God, and hauynge® grace to al the peple. 
Forsoth the Lord enereside hem that 
weren maad saaf, ech day into the same 
thing. 
CAP. III. 
1 Forsothe Petre and John stizeden‘ into 
the temple, at the nynthe our of preiyng®. 
2And sum! man that was lame fro the 
wombe of his modir, was borun, whom 
thei puttiden® ech day at the” 3ate of the 
temple, that is seid fair, that he schulde 
axe almes of men entrynge into the tem- 
3ple. This, whanne he sy3 Petre and John 
bigynnynge for! to entre into the temple, 
4preiede that he schulde take almes. For- 
soth Petre with John biholdinge* him, 
sseide!, Bihold™ into vs. And he biheeld 
into hem, hopinge™ him to° take? sum 
ething of hem. Forsoth Petre seide, Sil- 
uerd and' gold is not’ to me; forsoth' that 
that I haue, I 3yue to thee. In the name 
of Jhesu Crist of Nazareth, ryse thou’, 


f wicke sx. schrewid vy. § Om. ogrx. 
upy. 10Om.7. weren yr. ™ thousynd soules mpy. 
4many. ‘the apostlis wpgry. § in comoun ex. 
w Also ech day 7. 
ful out ioie v. > preysyng o. and herieden rv. 
preyero. fagapery. & putten sx. 54 Om. a. 
holde thon v. "and hopide vy. © for to o. 
sOm.rv. tsothely 0. 4 Om. x. 


Y Om. b. 


z in the ER pr.m. gk. 
€ Om. Rr. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


h For o. 

 stabilly in the rv. 
t snbstannce o. 
x dwellinge stabily with oo wille r. 
¢ hadden rv. 
i Om. sx. 
P takynge empry. 


a was maad K pr.m. 


ll. 41—Ill. 6. 


weren baptisid, and in that dai* soulis  * in tat day; 
weren encreessid, aboute thre thousinde; ? Woon 
and weren lastynge stabli in the teching 42 
of theY apostlis, and in? comynyng of the 

breking of breed, and in preieris. And 43 vyners. sub- 
drede was maad to ech man. And many ic, beets ma 
wondris and signes weren don bi the ie tings | 
apostlis in Jerusalem, and greet drede prnesereey 
was* in alle. And alle that bileueden 44 weren saued bi 
weren togidre, and hadden alle thingis ae Rev 
comyn. Thei selden possessiouns and 45 
eatel, and departiden tho thingis to alle 
men, as it was nede to ech. And ech 
dai thei dwelliden stabli with o wille in 
the temple, and braken breed aboute 
housis, and token mete with ful out ioye 
and symplenesse of herte, and herieden 47 
togidere God, and hadden grace to al 
the folk. And the Lord encreside hem 
that weren maad saaf, ech dai in to the 
same thing. 


ta ech soule ; 
that is, to ech 
man. posses- 
siouns 3 that 
is, feeldis and 


+ into the same 
thing; that is, 
in to oonhed of 
teching of apo- 
stlis. Lire here. 

CAP. III. ve. 

And Petre and Joon wenten vp in to! 

the temple, at the nynthe our of preiyng. 

And a man that was lame fro the wombe2 

of his modir, was borun‘, and was leid 

ech dai at the 3ate of the temple, that is 

seid feir, to axe almes of men that en- 

triden in to the temple. This‘, whannes 

he say Petre and Joon bigynnynge to 

entre in to the temple, preyede that he 

sechulde take almes. And Petre with 

Joon bihelde on hym, and seide, Biholde 

thou in to vs. And he biheelde in tos 

hem, and hopide, that he schulde take 

sumwhat of hem. But Petre seide, Y¥ ¢ 

haue nether siluer ne gold; but that that 

Y haue, Y 3iue to thee. In the name 

of Jhesu Crist of Nazareth, rise thou® 


kK soules, or men and wimmen o. Om. 
othe apostlis wpoery. POm.r. 
u Om, ox. either goodis v. thor. 
Ybraken y. Zandtookeny. 4 gladness. 
d stizeden vp GNT. ¢ the preynge G pr. m. 
k biheeld on vy. Jand seide vy. ™ Bi. 
4 Neither siluer vy. ‘* neither rv. 


i word rv. 


bOm.r. ¢hroustr pr.m. 4 He this 1. 


Ill. 7—18. 


jand go. And ‘his ri3thond’ takun, he 
lifte‘ him vp’; and anoon’ the groundis* 
and® plauntis>, ‘or solis*, of him ben? 
ssaddid to gidere; and he lippinge® stood, 
and wandride. And he entride with hem 
into the temple, wandrynge’, ‘and lippinge®, 
sand" heriynge! God. And al the peple sy3 
10 him walkinge, and heriynge! God. Forsoth 
thei knewyn him, for* he it was that sat at 
almes! at the fair gate of the temple. And 
thei weren fulfillid™ with wondryng*, and 
exstasie®, ‘that is, leesyng of mynde of? 
‘resoun and lettyng of tunges, in that 
i1thing that bifel to him. Sothli whanne 
thei sy3en Petre and John, al" the peple 
ran to hein at the porche that ‘was clepids 
iz0f Salomon, wondringet greetly. Forsoth 
Petre seynge" answeride to the peple, Men 
of Israel, what wondren’ 3e in” this* 
thing? orY what biholden 3e vs, as by 
oure vertu ‘or power* we maden* this> 
i3for® to walke? God of Abraham, and 
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, God of 
oure fadris, ‘hath glorified® his sone Jhesu, 
whom 3e sothlif bitraieden, and denyeden 
bifore the face of Pilate, ‘him demynge’ 
isfor® to be dismyttid}, ‘or deft*. ‘3e for- 
sothe! denyeden the hooly and iust™, and® 
axiden® a ‘man homeside, or? mansleer, 
15 for’ to be 3ouun to 30u. Forsoth 3e slowen 
the maker of lyf, whom God reiside fro 
deed men™, of whom we ben witnessis. 
is And in the® feith of his name he hath 
eonfermyd this‘, whom 3e seen and han 
knowe"; the name of him, and the feith 
that is by him, 3af this ful heelthe in the" 
178i3t of alle 30u. And now, bretheren, I 
woot that by” vnwittinge* 3e diden, as 
igand 3o0ure princes. ‘God forsothY ‘that bi- 
fore” toolde bi the mouth of alle prophetis 


w Petir rv. 


v whanne his rizthond was r. 
» solis ox. 


emPpy. Om. Q. or the T. 
f walkinge rv. & Om. rv. and lepende x. 

m fillid vy. © wonder o. © stonying Yr. 

8 is clepid nN. isseyde 0. t and wondriden r. 
Yeither vy. 2 either piteev. 4 maken r. 
£Om. rv. 8 whanne he demede yr. 5 Om. srx. 
™ iust mano. and 3e Mpery. © askeden Q. 
3Om. sx. tthismanrv. % knowen rv. 
z Om. o. 


f lifte r. & saddide K sec. m. 
stonyinge of mynde hkoB. i Om. a. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


 liftede s. reyside rv. 
¢ Om. ox. either solis v. 
b Om. x. 
P and AGMNOPQSTXY. 
u siz, and rv. 

b this man or. 
1 left o. 
P Om. GuopoTy. man a vy. man x. 
v Om. Nn. 


515 


vp, and go. And he took hym bi the7 
riz3thoond, and heuedef hym vp; and 
anoon hise leggis* and hise feet weren 


‘sowdid® togidere; and he lippide, ands 


stood, and wandride. And he entride 
with hem in to the temple, and wan- 
dride, and lippide, and heriede God. And9 
al the puple sai hym walkinge, and heri- 
ynge God. And thei knewen hym, that 10 
he it was that sat at almes at the feire 
j3ate of the temple. And thei weren fillid 
with wondryng, and stoniynge', in that 
thing that byfelde to hym. But whannei 
thei sien Petre and Joon, al the puple 
ran to hem at the! porche that was 
clepid of Salomon, and wondriden greetli. 
And Petre si3, and answeride to the pu- 12 
ple, Men of Israel, what wondren 3e in 
this thing ? ether what biholden je vs, as 
by cure vertue ethir power we maden 
this man for to walke? God of Abra-13 
ham, and God of Ysaac, and God of 
Jacob, God of oure fadris, hath glorified 
his sone Jhesu, whom 3e bitraieden, and 
denyeden bifor the face of Pilat, whanne 
het demede hym to be delyuered. But14 
3e denyeden the hooli and the ri3tful, 
and axiden a mansleer to be 3ouun to 
jou. And 3e slowen the maker of lijf,1s 
whom God reiside fro deth*, of whom 
we ben witnessis. And in! the feith of 16 
his name he" hath confermyd this man, 
whom 3e seen and knowen; the name of 
hym, and the feith that is bi him, 3af to 
this man ful heelthe in the si3t of alle 
3ou. And now, britheren, Y woot that17 
bi vnwityng 3e diden, as also joure 
princis. But God that bifor telde bi the1s 
mouth of alle ‘profetis, that his Crist 
schulde suffre, hath fillid® so. Therfor 19 


yOm.rs 2Om.9. and the 


dweren y. ¢ lippide and rv. lepende x. 
i preysyng o. k that r. 1 the almes o. 
‘d gloss om. in vy. fT and al err. 
vY wondriden ry. Wonop. * Om. T. 
¢Om. sx. 4dandGodr. © glorifiede x. 
k Om. ogx. or delyuered v. 1 But 3e v. 
qOm.s. * Om. ex. 


wOm.n. *the vnwetinge 7. Y But God r. 


h that is, lesing of mynde, and reson, and lettyng of tonge K marg. 
k deeth to lijf k. 


10m.ca. ™3hec. 4" fulfild x. fillid it r. 


Bure 


¥* groundis ; 
that is, thies 
and leggis, on 
whiche the bir- 
then of the 
bodi restith. 
plauntis ; either 
soolis, that is, 
the feet, in to 
the loweste 
part. Lire here. 
v. 


+ whanne he; 
that is, Pilat. 
demede; Jhesu, 
as innocent, ve. 
to be delyuered, 
diden unwit- 
inge; the 
princes that 
weren lettrid 
men, knewen 
first that Jhesu 
of Nazareth 
was Crist bihist 
in the lawe and 
prophetis; and 
thei knewen 
this bi serip- 
turis, that 
weren biforseid 
of Crist and his 
werk, as it was 
seid fulliere on 
21 c°. of Ma- 
then, the erthe- 
tilieris seiden, 
this is the eir, 
ete. But for 
Jhesn bigun to 
preche opinly 
ajens her vices, 
thei consceyu- 
eden ennie and 
hatride a3ens 
hym, and so 
the forseid 
knowing was 
distroied in 
hem ; for the 
corrupcioun of 
affeccioun cor- 
rumpith the 
dom of resoun, 
and to encrees- 
ing of her ma- 
lis, thei dis- 
ceyueden the 
symple peple, 
and bron3ten 
in hem to axe 
the deth, in 27 
e°. of Mathen. 
Lire here. v. 


516 


19 his Crist for* to suffre, fulfillide® so. Ther- 
fore be® 3e repentaunt’, and be 3e conuert- 
20 id, that 3oure synnes be do awey, whanne® 
the tymesf of kelyngeS, ‘or refreischinge, 
fro the si3t of the Lord schulen come, and 
he schal sende him! that is now prechid 
21to 30u, ‘Jhesu Crist*. Whom sotheli it bi- 
houeth heuene for! to resceyue, til into 
the tyme™ of restitucioun of alle thingis, 
the" whiche the Lord spak by the mouth 
220f his hooli prophetis fro the world. For- 
sothe Moyses seide, For the Lord 3oure 
God schal reyse to 30u a prophete, of 3oure 
britheren ; as me, 3e schulen heere him 
vp® alle the? thingis, what euere he sclial 
a3 speke to 30u. Forsoth it schal be, euery 
soule? that schal not heere ‘the ilke™ pro- 
phete, schal be distryed* of* the peple. 
a4 And alle prophetis fro Samuel and aftir- 
25 ward, that spaken, tolden thes dayes. 3e 
forsothe ben the sones of prophetis, and 
of the testament, that God ordeynede to 
oure" fadris, seiynge’ to Abraham, In thi 
seed alle the meynees of erthe schulen be 
26 blessid. God reysinge” his sone first to 
jou, sente* him blessinge 30u, that ech 
man conuert him fro his wickydunesse. 


CAP. IV. 
1 Forsothe ‘hem spekingeY to the peple, 
prestis and magistratis of the temple? 
gcamen vpon, and Sadducees, sorwynge* 
that’ thei ‘schulden teche® the peple, and 
toolden into’ Jhesu a3en rysinge fro deed 
3men®, And thei leydenf hondis into® hem, 
and puttiden" hem into kepinge til into 
the morwe; sothlii it was ‘now enent. 
4¥Forsoth manye of hem that hadden herd 
the word, bileuyden; and the noumbre of 
5 hem is! maad fyue thousendis™. Forsothe 
in the morwe it is" don, that the princes 
of hem, and eldere men and _ scribes 
6 schulden be® gederid in Jerusalem; and 


a Om. sx. b fulfille x. hath fillid r. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


¢ Om. x. 


Ill. 19—IV. 6. 


be 3e repentaunt, and be 3e conuertid, 
that 3oure synnes be don awei, that20 
whanne the tymes of refresching® schu- 
len come from the si3t of the Lord, and 
he schal sende thilke Jhesu Crist, that 2! 
is now prechid to 3ou. Whom it bihoueth 
heuene to resseyue, in to the tymes of 
restitucioun of alle thingis, which the 
Lord spak bi the mouth of hise hooli 
prophetis fro the world. For Moises 22 
seide, For the Lord 3oure God schal 
reise to 30u a profete, of 3oure britheren ; 
as me, 3e schulen here hym bi alle 
thingis, what euer he schal speke to 30u. 
And it schal be, that euery man that23 
schal not here the ilke profete, schal be 
distried fro the puple*. And alle pro-24 
phetis fro Samuel and aftirward, that 
spaken, telden these daies. But 3e ben 2s 
the sones of prophetis, and of the testa- 
ment, that God ordeynede to oure fadris, 
and seide to Abraham, In thi seed alle 
the meynes of erthe schulen be blessid. 
God reiside his sone first to 3ou, and 26 
sente hym blessynge jou, that ech man 
conuerte hym frum his wickidnesse. 


CAP. IV. 


And while? thei spaken to the puple,1 
the preestis and magistratis? of the tem- 
ple, and the’ Saduceis camen vpon hem, 
and soreweden, that thei tau3ten the pu-2 
ple, and telden in Jhesu the a3enrisyng 
fro deth. And thei leiden hondis on3 
hem, and puttiden hem in to wardet in 
to the morewe; for it was thanne euen- 
tid. But manye of hem that hadden4 
herd the word, bileueden ; and the noum- 
bre of men was maad fyue thousyndis. 
And amorewe it was don, that thes 
princis of hem{, and eldres men and 
scribis weren gadirid in Jerusalem; andé 


4 yepentaunt beth x. € that whanne rv. 


ftyme 9. refreshing x. } either refreischinge yr. Om. x. i thilke Jhesu Crist vy. kOm.v. 1 Om. sx. 


™ tymes 4GMoPesTrXY. Om. erx. © vpon mPeTY. biy. P Om. moperxy. many. T that ox. 
thilke apry. the r. 8 destried, or exijlid Mpry. ‘frov. “%30ureNn. Vand seide vy. W reyside v. 
Xand sente vy, Y while thei spaken yr. 2 puple sx. 4 and soreweden vy. and that sx. © taugten r. 
4tor. biv. €Om.ex. fleddenx. ino, ony. 4} pnttensx. iforry.  * thanne euentid rv. 
1 men was yr. ™ thousynde 4gMNPQsTXY., "was 7. © weren FV. ' 

© ether kelyng K marg. P whan. 4 the magistratesa. "Om. Ra. § the eeldre xrqagka. 


* that is, fro 
the felauschipe 
of seintis. sones 
of prophetis ; 
that is, nursch- 
id in the scrip- 
turis of hem. 
of testament ; 
that is, of bi- 
heest. reiside 
that is, schew- 
ide. Lire here. 
ve. 


t into keping; 
that is, in pri- 
soun, for the 
our was passid 
thanne to lede 
hem to the 
dom. v. fyue 
thousind ; with 
hem that weren 
conuertid bifore 
bi the preching 
of Petir; and 
bi this ther 
weren ei3te 
thousind, and 
this semith the 
trewere wele. 
Lire here. ve. 
t the princes of 
hem, elc.; many 
men and grete 
weren gaderid 
togidere, that 
the postlis 
schulden be 
maad aferd 
herby, and be 
taken in her 
wordis. in the 
myddil and ax- 
iden; of diuerse 
partis, to make 
hem astonied. 
in what uertu, 
ete.; as if thei 
seiden, It is 
schewid opinly, 
that 3e diden 
this bi wicch- 
craft ; wherfore 
and this man 
that was curid, 
was hoolden 
with hem as 
partener of 
wycch craft. 

if we hen dem- 
ed; that is, for 
we ben drawen 
to the dom, as 
mysdoeris. in 
the good dede of 
a sijk man; 
that is, for the 
benefice of the 
curyng of hym. 
3¢ crucifieden ; 
bi the knisztis of 
the cheef jus- 
tise, and this 
for 3oure enuie 


1V. 7—18. 


Annas, prince of prestis, and Cayphas, 
and Joon, and Alisaundre, and how ma- 
nye euere weren of the kynde? of preestis. 
7 And thei ordeynynge’ hem in the myddel 
axiden’, In what vertu, ‘or what name’, 
shan 3e don this thing? Thanne Petre 
fulfillidt with the Hooly Gost, seide" to 
hem, 3e princes of the peple, and’ eldre 
9men, heere’, If we to day ben demyd in 
the good dedis* of a syke man, in they 
10 which this* is maad saaf, be it knowun to 
30u alle, and to al the peple of Israel, for* 
in the? name of ‘oure Lord¢ Jhesu Crist 
of Nazareth, whom 3e crucifieden, whom 
God reyside fro deed men, in this this 
i1man stondith® hool bifore 30u. This is 
the stoon, which’ was reproued of 3o0u 
bildinge, the? which is maad into the 


12heed! of the corner; and heelthe is not- 


in ony othir. Forsothi nethir othir* name 
is vndir heuene 3ouun to men, in the! 
which it bihoueth vs to™ be maad saf. 
13 Forsoth thei seynge” the stedfastnesse of 
Petre and John, founden® that thei weren 
men with oute lettris, and idiotis, won- 
driden?, and‘ knewen for" thei weren with 
i4 Jhesu. And seynge® the man stondinge with 
hem, that was heelid, theit my3ten no thing 
15 withseye". Forsoth thei comaundiden hem 
for’ to go forth withoute the counceil. 
16 And thei spaken to gidere, seyinge, What 
schulen we do to thes men? for sotlhili the 
sygne is maad knowun by hem to alle 
men, dwellinge” at Jerusalem ; it is opyn, 
17and we mown not denye. But that it be no 
more pupplischid into the peple, manase 
we to hem, that thei speke no more in 
isthis name to ony of* men. And thei clep- 
inge hem denounsiden’, that on no maner 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


517 


and wickid- 
nesse. in this; 
that is, in the 


Annas, prince of preestis, and Caifas, 
and Joon, and Alisaundre, and hou ma- 
- —_feith of this 
nye euere weren of the kynde of preestis. eae 
‘ s t ‘ ‘ hool; uereyly 
And thei settiden' hem in the myddil,7 (°4' i. 
and axiden, In what vertue, ether™ in  ynely. Lire 


“ - ere. Vs 
what name, han 3e don this thing?  * she stoon; 


3V id¥ wi :, that is, Crist. 
Thanne Petre was fillid¥ with the Hoolis of sou bildinge s 
Goost, and* seide to hem, Ye pryncis of | that is, of 3on 
prestis and 
the puple, aud 3e eldre men, here 3e. Ifo fice of ie 
. . lawe, to whos 
we to dai be demyd in the good dede of _ afiis it perteyn- 
es . ‘ . eth to bijlde 
a sijk man, in whom this man is maad the puple in 
saaf, be it knowun to 30u alle, and to al io {ith and ver- 
A tues. ve. i ta 
the puple of Israel, that in the name of te heed of the 
: corner; ioyn- 
Jhesu Crist of Nazareth, whom 3e cru- _ inge Jewis and 
B 
. oe 7 hethene men 
cifieden, whom God reiside fro deth, in togidere, as 
s : O ‘ twey wallis in- 
this this man stondith hool bifor 3ou. () 2, Yay 
This is the stoon*, which was repreued of i1 bis ss nie 
3ou bildinge, which is maad in to the there; thavis, 
: . bi eny other, 
heed of the corner; and heelthe is not in 12 ‘or he aloone is 
. diat f 
ony othir. For nether other name vndur Gog and of. 
heuene is 30uun to men, in which it bi- men. reiiher 
othir name, ete.; 
houeth vs to be maad saaf. And thei 13 thet ee 
nn ing signefie 
sijen the stidfastnesset of Petre and of bi the name of 
a -  Saniour is not 
Joon, forY it was foundun that thei — jouen to an- 
weren men vnlettrid, and lewid men, and? BS a 
thei wondriden, and* knewen hem that  “tist aloone, 
i : BY es that is God and 
thei weren with Jhesu. And thei sijen 14 man. Lire here. 
° ° . v. 
the man that was helid, stondinge with + stedfastnesse, 
a 5 : tees for th 
hem, and thei my3ten no thing ajenseie. jyoctis weren 
But thei comaundiden hem to go forth 15 20 *stenyed, 
neither weren 
with out the counsel. And thei spaken poe 
‘ f eny thing. v. 
togidere, and seiden, What schulen we 16 without lettris ; 
3 
5 : and natheles 
do to these men? for the signe is maad thei aleggiden 
scripture. and 
knowun bi hem to alle men, that dwel- jgigic, that is, 
len> at Jerusalem; it is opyn, and we ‘y™ple men _ 
: and of litel wit, 
moun not denye. But that it be no 17either sotilte. 
6 ‘ fe ve. wondriden; 
more pupplischid in to the puple, ma- for thei knewen 
: t th . 
nasse we to hem, that thei speke no thatis the 
‘ . € anoyntyng of 
more in this name to ony men®. And1s3° Holy Gost 
that techith of 


alle thing, in firste of Joon, ii. e°. What schulen we do to these men? as if thei seiden, we moun not dampne hem to deth, nethir to presoun. v. the 
singne, etc.; that is, the myracle maad bi hem; and so in sleeing either presouning hem, we schulen rise al the puple asens us; thon; the princes 
and scribes saien the myracle so opin, thei bileeueden not, far her malice blindid hem; and therfore thei arettiden that dede to the vertu of fendis, 
as thei diden also the deedis of Crist, in ix. e°. of Mathen. Lire here. ve. manase we to hem; vndir the peyne of deth. speke noo more in this name ; 


that is, of Jhesu of Nazareth. Lire here. v. 


P kynrede er. q settiden r. 
wand seide vy. Vand 3e Fr. 
zthismanv. 4thatvy. »Om.o. 
8Om.r. hbheued coetry. i For r. 


was founden vy. P and thei wondriden r. 


¢Om. 7. 
Kany N. 


T and axiden r. 
where see Gopery. hereth sx. 

d him o. 
1Om. srx, 


4Om.o. Tf that o. hem that r. 


8 Om. @. either in what name r. t was fillid r. 

X dede 4GMNoPQSTVXY. Y Om. Fx. 
€ stant sx. {the whiche scaNoposTty. 
™ for to AGMNoPry. "sizen vy. © for it 
$ thei sijen vy. t and thei r. 


U ajenseye AGMNOPQSTVYXY. VYOm. sx. Wthat dwellen x. * Om. Pp. Y denounseden to hem r. 
tsettenr. 1 either alii. ¥Om. kk prim. © fulfild x. x Om. Kk pr.m. — ¥ and whanne 1. 
7Om.1. Aand their, > dwellidens. ¢ man g. 


518 


thei schulden speke, ne’ teche, in the name 
i9of Jhesu. Forsothe Petre and John an- 
sweringe’, seiden to hem, If it be? ri3tful 
in the si3t of God for® to heere 30u rathere 
20than God, deme 3e. Forsoth® we ‘mown 
not not? speke“d thee thingis that we han 
21 seyn and herd. And thei manasinge leften 
hem, ‘not fyndynge’ how thei schulden 
ponysche hem, for the peple; for alle men 
clarifieden that thing that was don in that 
22thing" that bifel. Forsothe! the man was 
more than of fourty 3eeris*, in ‘the which! 
23 this sygne of heelthe was maad™. For- 
soth thei left", camen to hern®, and toolden 
to hem, how manye? thingis the princes? 
24and eldere men seiden to hem’. The‘ 
whiche whanne thei herden, with oon 
herte reysiden voys to the Lord, and 
seiden, Lord, thou thatt madist lheuene 
and erthe, see, and alle thingis that ben 
25in hem, the" which by’ the Hooly Gost, by 
the mouth of oure fadir Dauith, thi cbild, 
seidist*, Whi hethene men wraththiden*, 
‘or beten with teeth to gidereY, and peplis 
26 thou3ten veyn thingis? Kyngis of the erthe 
stooden ny3, and princes camen to gidere 
into oon, ajens the Lord, and ajens his 
27Crist. For thei? camen to gidere verily® 
in this citee ajens thi hooly child Jhesu, 
whom thou anoyntidest, Heroude and 
Pounce Pilat, with hethene men, and 
28peplis of Israel, fore to do the’ thingis, 
that thin hond and thi counceil demiden 
29fore to be don. And now, Lord, bihold 
into the thretingis' of hem, and 3yue to 
thi seruauntis with al trist for’ to speke 
30thi word, in that thing that thou holde® 
forth thin hond, heelthis' and signes and 
wondris for’ to be maad by the name of 
31thin hooly! sone Jhesu. And whanne thei 
hadden preied, the place was moued, in 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


IV. 19-31. 


* that moten 
nedis speke ; 
leuefully. that 
we han seyn ; 
that is, the mi- 
raclis of Cristis 
rising ajen and 


thei clepiden hem, and denounsiden to 
hem, that on no maner thei schulden 
speke, nether teche, in’ the name of Jhe- 
su. But Petre and Joon answeriden, and 19 


seiden to‘hem, If ‘it: be ri3tful in the sizt sting in to he- 
nene. herd; of 
of God to here 30u ‘rather than God,  bovly aungels, 


a that Jhesus 
deme 3e. For we moten nedis speke* tho 20 schal come to 
os the general 
thingis, that we han sayn and herd. dom. Lire here. 
: sianaaeens 25 
And thei manassiden’, and leften hem, 21 tiga ale 
and foundun not hou thei schulden ag ” 
1 
punische hem, for the puple; for alle men veyne, whanne 
5 . . the purpos is 
clarifieden that thing that was don in Eoiad, bet 
that that was bifalle. For the man was 22 more the con- 
more than of fourty 3eer£, in whichs these hethene 
men and Jewis 
this signe of heelthe was maad. And 2 ee 
’ ‘ e . quenche the 
whanne thei weren delyuerid, thei camen ies of Crist 
j : bi his deth, but 
to her felowis, and telden to hem, hou bi this his same 
. . ° . ° was more en- 
grete thingis the princis of preestis and  jannad end 
the eldre men hadden seid to hem. And 24 Ce RoE 
whanne thei herden, with oon herte thei ede his singe 
: . és azen and sti3- 
reiseden vois to the Lord, and seiden, _ inge into he- 
p nene, the send- 
Lord, thou that madist heuene and erthe, ing ofthe Hooly 
see, and alle thingis that ben in hem, eae 
which seidist bi the Hooli Goost, bi the 25 ing of te pe: 
' e ; . . stlis. v. 
mouth of oure fadir Dauid, thi child, — cingis of erthe; 
i i ‘ 5 that is, Eronde 
Whi hethen men gnastiden’ with teeth and Pilat; for 
. : k 5 Eroude was the 
togidre', and the puplis thou3ten veyn jyince of Gali. 
thingist ? Kyngis of the! erthe stoden 26 tbr rey 
ny3, and princis camen togidre ‘in to™ re 
: c cheef gouern- 
oon, aj3ens the Lord, and ajens his Crist. our e] vndir 
‘70 . : th 
For verili Eroude and Pounce Pilat, with 27 ofthe tnd of 
hethene men, and puplis of Israel, camen ae 
togidre in this citee a3ens thin hooli of Jewia. wate 
e Lord; 
child Jhesu, whom thou anoyntidist, to28 the ue) a” 
ee, ak , 6 los bi wicki 
do the” thingis, that thin hoond and thi wile on her 
counsel demyden tobe don. And now, Lord, 29 3975, ute _ 
hiholde® in to the thretnyngis? of hem, ‘i power. thi 
2 % counceil 3 that 
and graunte to thi seruauntis to speke _ is, ordynaunce. 
: : . . s deemeden to be 
thi word with al trist, in that thing that30 don; bi moost 
3 . ite and me 
thou holde forth thin hond, that’ heelthis  yGoadis syde, 
4 x . : and bi moost 
and signes and wondris be maad bi the Quvite and 


Z neither +. 2 answeriden and y. 34ism. bOm.sx. ¢ For rv. 4 mown not acmy. most nede nN. 
moten nedis r. ¢¢ Om.acay. ¢€tho nsyx. &@ herd, not speke acay. fmanasiden andr. & and 
founden not y. 4 Om. yr. i Forry, & 3er sx. 1 whom aapety. whiche syx. ™dono. ™ weren left, 
and vy. ° her bretheren G sec.m. her frendes 0. hem sx. Pgrete vy. 4 princes of prestis r.  hern 
ssecm. SOm.r. tOm.x. "Om. r. VY seidist Div. vOm.r. * gnastiden r. beeten togidere with 
teeth x. Y or gnaysteden with her teeth o. Om. ex. 7 Om.v. 2Om.0. >Om.r. ¢Om.sx. 4 thes 7. 


€ Om. sx. f threetnyngis r. © Om.sx. » helde s. 1in heelthis o. that heelthisr. kOm.svx. !Om.r. 


d manassiden hem a. 
™m jn CEIKMQRUAabceghkof. 
q and a, 


© Om. Bgk pr. m. 
0 tho g sec. m. hkg. 


f seer celd k. 
° biholde thon x. 


iOm.1 -Om.r. 10m. 1. 
P thretingis x. thretenynge abo. 


& whom 1. 


1V. 32—V. 4. 


which. thei weren gederid™; and alle ‘ben 
fulfillid" with the Hooli Gost, and spaken 
32the word of God with trist. Forsoth of° 
the multitude of men bileuynge ther? was 
oon herte and oon soule, ‘or wdle4; nethir 
ony man seide ony thing" ‘of tho thingis* 
that he weeldide fort to be his owne, but 
33 alle thingis weren comune to hem. And 
with greet vertu apostlis" 30ldun’ witness- 
yng of the aj3en rysynge of Jhesu Crist 
oure Lord, and greet grace was in ‘alle 
3ihem™”. Forsoth* nethir ony nedy man 
was among, hem, for how many euere 
weren possescioners’, ‘or weelders*, of 
feeldis or* howsis, thei sellynge” brou3ten 
toc the prices’ of tho thingis that thei 
35solden, and puttiden® bifore the feet of 
apostlis. Forsoth ‘thei departiden’ to ech, 
36as it was nede to ech. Forsoth Joseph, 
that is" named Barnabas of! apostlis, that 
is interpretid, the sone of coumfort, a 
37 dekene, of the kynde* of Cypre, whanne 
he hadde a feeld, solde it, and brou3te to! 
the prijs, and puttide™ bifore the feet of 
apostlis. 


CAP. V. 


1 Forsoth sum" man, Ananye by name, 
with Safyra, his wife, seelden® a feeld, 
zand defraudide of the priys?, his wyf 
gilty’, ‘or witinge'. And he bryngynge® 
sum part, puttide’ bifore the" feet of apo- 
3stlisy. Forsoth Petre sede’, Anany, why 
hath Sathanas temtid thin herte, thee for* 
to lye to the Hooly Gost, and for* to de- 
afraude of the prijs of the feeld? Wher it 
dwellinge dwelte not to thee; and it sold 
was in thi power? Whi hast thou put this 
thing in thin herte? Thou hast not lyed 


m gedered togider 0. ® weren fillid r. 
tQm. sx. the apostles mopery. 
posTxy. weelders 0. 2Om. oex. 
putten sx. f of the earpsry. 
either of the lynage of Leuy, a man r. 
solde x. P prijs of the feeld, whanne r. 


putte sx. and put r. 


8 either of r. 


10m. r. 


8 Om. ceteri. 
y the apostlis bgo. 


t fulfild x. 
wOm.1. *nedy g. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


o Om. K. 
¥ 3eldiden r. 

b seelden and r. 
& it was departid r. 
m putte Nsx, 
4 was gilty r. 

uQOm.o. .¥ the apostlis empery. 


w hem alle apy. 


* thing KmRxabcehof. 
z Om. gk pr.m. 


519 
name of thin hooli sone Jhesu. And 31 obedyence on 
5 “nistis part, 
whanne thei hadden preyed, the place ian and God. 
into the threten- 


was moued, in which thei wereu gader- 
id; and alle weren fillid™ with the Hooli 
Goost, and spaken the word of God with 


yngis; of hem, 
that we be not 
mad aferd bi 
thoo. place was 


0 A ds 
trist. And of als the multitude of men 32 augneee ee 


bileuynge was oon herte and oon wille; 
nether ony man seide ony thingis* of tho 
thingis that he weldide to be his owne, 
but alle thingis weren comyn to hem. 


her preier was 
herd, that is, 
that the glori- 
fyinge of Cristis 
name schulde 
not be lettid bi 
erthely powers, 
but that fynaly 


And with greet vertu the apostlis 3eld-33 erthely powers 


iden witnessyng of the a3enrysyng of 
Jhesu Crist oure Lord, and greet grace 
was in alle hem. 
man was among hem, for how manye 
euere weren possessouris" of feeldis, ether 
of housis, thei seelden, and brou3ten the 
pricis’ of tho thingis that thei seelden, 


schuldeu be 
maad t to 
the 30c of Crist. 
And this was 


For nether ony nedi3s fillid, for the 


feith and name 
of Crist was 
encreesid moost 
in the tyme of 
persecuscioun 
of the chirche. 


* aman of 


and leiden bifor the feet of the” apostlis.35 Cypre; that is, 


And it was departid to ech, as it was 


nede* to ech. Forsothe Joseph, that was3e 


named Barsabas of apostlis, that is to 
seie, the sone of coumfort, of the lynage 


born at Cipre. 
hadde a feeld ; 
thou3 dekenes 
hadden not 
feeldis in Judee, 
natheles thei 
my3ten have in 
another lond ; 


of Leuy, a man of Cipre*, whanne he37 Lire here. ve. 


hadde a feeld, seelde it, and brou3te the 
prijs, and leide it bifor the feet of apostlisY. 


CAR. Ve 


But a man, Anany bi name, with Sa-1 
fira, his wijf, seelde a feeld, and defraud-2 
idet of? the prijs of the feeld; and his 
wijf was witinge*. And he brou3te a 
part, and leide bifor the feet of the? 
apostlis. And Petre seide to hym,3 
Anany, whi hath Sathanas temptid thin 
herte, that thou lye to the Hooli Goost, 
and to defraude of the prijs of the feeld ? 
Whethir it vnseld was not thin; anda 
whanne it was seld, it was in thi power? 
Whi hast thou put this thing in thin 


POm.r. @Om.ex. ‘thingisy. 8 Om. r. 
x For vy. ¥ possessouris 4GMN 
d pris perxy. © put o. 
k Leuyte bi kyn, 
naGmoTy. © seelde 4GMNPSYVY. 
Om. oox. § brou3t v. ¢ puttide it Garper. 


Wseide to him vy. * Om. sx. 


¢ Om. ov. 


hwas rv. iof the cmnpor. 


¥ possessiouneris Erkgghka. Vv priys HIqRghko. 
8 ether gilty k marg. » Om. x. 


for in the tyme 
of Antiok, ei- 
ther of another 
tyraunt, the 
fadir and modir 
of this Barna- 
bas weren 
translatid to 
yle of Cipre, 
where thei 
my3ten leue- 
fully haue 
feeldis and sille 
thoo. Lire here. 


T defraudide ; 
alle men of that 
felanschip bi- 
hizten to lyue 
withont propir 
good, either 
synguler to a 
man himself. 
He liede to God, 
in appropering 
to himself a 
part of the 
prijs; he liede 
also to men, in 


520 


sto men, but to God. Forsoth Ananye 
heeryngeY thes wordis felde* doun, and 
deiede. And greet drede was maad into* 
salle that herden. Forsoth 3onge men 
rysinge® mouedyn hym awey, and ‘ber- 
7ynge out® birieden. Forsothe ther was 
maad as the space of thre houris, and the 
wyf of him ‘not knowynge‘ that thing 
sthat was don, ‘entride yn®. Forsothe 
Petre answeride to hir, Womman, seyef 
to me, if& 3e solden the feeld for so 
moche? And she seide, 3he, so moche. 
9Forsoth Petre seide to hir, What sothli 
‘eam to gidere to jou', ‘or acordide*, for! 
to tempte the spirit of the Lord? Lo! 
the feet of hem that han biried thin hose- 
bonde at™ the dore, and thei schulen bere 
10thee out. Anoon she felde down at his" 
feet, and deiede. Forsoth the 3onge men 
entrynge® founden hir deed, and thei 
barenP out, and birieden to? hir hose- 
ubonde. And greet drede is’ maad in al 
the chirche, and into alle that herden thes 
12thingis. Forsothe by the hondis of apo- 
stlis signes and many wondris ben* maad 
in the peple. And alle weren ‘to gidere* 
13in the porche of Salomon. Forsoth no 
man of othere durste ioyne him silf with 
14hem, but the peple magnyfiede hem. For- 
soth the multitude of men and wymmen" 
bileuynge in the Lord was more encresid, 
15so that into streetis thei brou3ten out sike 
men, and puttiden’ in” litle beddis and 
cowchis, that* Petre comynge’, namely the 
schadowe of him schulde schadowe ech of 
hem, and thei weren” dilyuered fro ‘al 
16syknesse*. Forsoth the? multitude ‘of 
citees® ny34 to Jerusalem ran, brynginge 
to® syk men, and trauelid of vnclene spi- 
17 ritis, thef whiche weren heelid alle. For- 
soth the prince of prestis rysinge", and 


Yherde vy. 2 and felde r. 
entride. vy. fandseiyeo. & wher 7. 
acordide, to 30u vr. 1 Om. sx. ™ ben at v. 
Twas ry. 8 weren AGMNOPQSTVXY. 
x that whanne y. Ycam vr. 2 schulden be r. 
dthatny3 7. © Om.v. fOm yr. & Om. Nn. 


4onv. 


¢ residen c. 


4d Om. K pr.m. 
h Om. c. 


iOm.rprm. * Om.c. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


b riseden and r. 

h for so r. 
B the o. 

t of oon acorde r. 

@ alle sijknessis a. her syknessis r. 
h rising vp N. roos vp Vv. 


€ sche entride k. 
1 sijknesse a. 


Vv. 5—17. 


herte? Thou hast not lied to menf, but — seyinge that it 

to God. Anany herde these wordis, and5 cheat ode 
felde doun, and was deed. And greet {ji¥3,e and 
drede was maad on alle that herden. ‘wonlden in 
And 3jonge men risen®, and mouydene pec gan 
hym awei, and baren hym out, and biri- _ silling, and to 

eden. 


defraude of the 
And ther was maad as? a space 7 prijs of the 


a eA ’ se feeld; for whi 
of thre ouris, and his wijf knewe not  {Ohoide tohim. 
that thing that was don, and entride®, ‘elf aloone that 

i that is comune 

And Petre answerde to hir, Womman, 8 nd preuely, is 

é to defraude the 
seie to me, whether 3e seelden the feeld  comunte. v. 
. i dwelte not to 
for so mych? And sche seide, 3he, for  jices that is, 

d hifore the auaw. 
soinych. And Petre seide to hyr, WV thao amie ct,5 
bifeldef to 30u, to tempte the spirit of the ate pede; 

ou my3test 
Lord? Lo! the feet of hem that han ie 
oaks . oolde stille th 
birieden thin hosebonde ben at the dore,  fecld, and do 
° . thi wille of the 
and thei schulen bere thee out. Anoom 10 iris ‘Tire here. 
sche felde doun at hise feet, and diede. *° pis 
And the 3onge men entriden, and founden ede to make'a 
° 5 5 vow, and entre 
hir deed, and thei baren hir out, and _ into this co- 
birieden to hir hosebonde. And greet 1] things thetis, 
: for of the half 
in& to> alle that herden these thingis. of a 
4 A 3 i volde haue 
And bi the! hoondis of the* apostlis 12 costis, as othere 
i : Z men, and of the 
signes and many wondris weren maad els half of 
: the prijs he 
in the puple. And alle weren of oon wolde lyue de- 
acord in the porche of Salomon. But no 1 ae 
man of othere durste ioyne hymsilf with 
tT not lyed to 
men oonly, but 
° also fo God. 
And the multitude of men and of wym- 14 jeciden the feeld 
men bileuynge in the Lord was more pha Min 
. A % , and no 
encreessid, so that thei broujten out sike 15 more, as thin 

‘ 4 re “ tf hushonde 
men in to stretis, and leiden in litle 

comunte. 3he. 

Sor so ee 
cam, nameli the schadew of hym schulde 3%4"p more. 
schadewe ech of hem, and thei schulden 
be delyuerid fro her syknessis!.. And 16 
the multitude of citees ni3 to Jerusalem 
ran, bryngynge sijk men, and that weren 
trauelid of vnelene spiritis, whiche alle 


ve. aud noo 
drede was maad in al the chirche, and 2efreidgyle; 

here. v. 
hem, but the puple magnyfiede hem. 

brou3te in the 
beddis and couchis, that whanne Petre 
weren heelid. But the prince of preestis 17 


¢ baren out, and vy. dknewnot rv. e and 

ibifelde r. * Om. ox. or is cordid os. either 
© entriden and y. P haren hir apery. 4 hir too. 
uofwymmen vy. Y putten sx. W in to Q. 
bOm.x. © Om.a. 


f ether cam to gidere K marg. §& Om. B prim. 


Vv. 18—28. 


alle that weren with him, that is the 
heresye of Saducees, ‘ben fulfillid' with 
isennye; and leiden hondis into* apostlis!, 
and puttiden™ hem in comuu kepyng. 
ig Forsoth the aungel of the Lord by ny3te 
openynge" the 3ate° of the prisoun, and 
2oledingeP hem out, seyde?, Go 3e, and ‘3e 
stondinge’ speke* in the temple to the 
21 peple alle the wordis of this lyf. Thet 
whiche whanne thei hadden herd, entriden 
erly into the temple, and tau3ten. For- 
soth the" prince of prestis comynge’, and 
thei that weren with him, clepiden™ to- 
gidere the counceil, and alle the eldere 
men of the sones of Israel; and senten to 
the prisoun, that thei schulden be brou3t 
22 forth. Sothli whanne the mynistris camen, 
and*, the prisounY openyd, ‘founden hem 
23hot?, thei turned* ajen telden>, seiyng, 
Forsoth we founden the prisoun schit 
with al diligence, and the keperis stond- 
inge at the 3atis; forsoth we openynge® 
24founden no man ther ynne. Sothli as the 
magestratis of the temple, and the princes 
of prestis herden these wordis, thei dout- 
iden ‘of hem’, what ‘schulde bef don. 
23 Forsothes sum man ‘comynge to, tolde 
to hem, For lo! thoi men whom* 3e han 
put into! prisoun, ben in the temple, stond- 
26 inge™, and techinge the peple. Thanne the 
magestrat" wente with® mynistris, and 
brou3ten? hem to? with outen strengthe' ; 
forsoth® thei dredden the peple, lest thei 
27schulden be stooned ‘to deeth'. And 
whanne thei hadden brou3t hem to”, 
thei ordeyneden’ in the counceil; and” 
2g the* princes’ of prestis axiden? hem, sey- 
inge*, In comaundinge we comaundiden? 
jou’, that 3e schulden not teche in this 


i weren fillid 7. kon. 1! the apostlis spory. 
Gand seide vy. _—‘* stonde 3e, and v. stondende x. 
Ycam Fr. w and clepide r. 
zQOm.v.° ®turneden vy. » and telden r. 
shulde of hem x. & Sothely o. 
Om. y. 1 magistrates ory. 
8forvy. tOm.svx. tOm.r. Ysettiden r. 
GMNPQSTXY. ®and seide y. © comaunden AN. 


land thei 1. ™putten ie. 1 speke 3e rak. 
founden 1qugkoa. thei founden K sec. m. MRX. 
g sec.m. hise diligense k. 4 prince R. 
Y prince a pr.m. cKRuabe pr. m. hof. 
k pr.m. 4name Jhesus ga. name of Jhesu k. 


VOL. IV. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


m putten sx. 
8 preche N. speketh osx. 
x and founden hem not, and whanne 7. 
© openyden and r. 
4 cam and telde v. i the ar. 
© with the 4GMNPSVXY. 
W that n. 
© to 300 G sec. m. SX. 


9° and thei 1. 
8 haue founden R pr.m. 

Vv magestrates R pr.m. k. 
Z the prestis h. 


3X 


521 


roos vp, and alle that weren with hym, 

that is the eresye of Saduceis, and weren 

fillid with enuye; and! leiden hondis on18 

the apostlis, and puttiden™ hei in the 

comyn warde. But the aungel of the19 

Lord openyde bi ny3t the 3atis of the 

prisoun, and ledde hem out, and seide, 

Go 3e, and stonde 3e, and speke" in the20 

temple to the puple alle the wordis of 

this lijf Whom whanne thei hadden2zi 

herd, thei entriden eerli in to the temple, 

and tau3ten. And the prince of preestis 

cam, and thei that weren with him, and 

clepiden togidre the counsel, and alle 

the eldre men of the children of Israel; 

and°® senten to? the prisoun, that thei 

schulden be brou3t forth. And whanne 22 

the mynystris camen, founden’ heim not, 

and for the prisoun was openyd, thei 

turneden a3en, and teelden, and seiden, 23 

We founden’ the prisoun schit with al 

diligencet, and the keperis stondynge at 

the 3atis; but we opneden, and founden 

no man ther ynne. And as the maies-24 

tratis of the temple, and the princis" of 

preestis herden these wordis, thei dout- 

iden of hem, what was don. But a man25 

cam, and teelde to hem, For lo! tho men 

whiche 3e han put in to prisoun, ben in 

the temple, and stonden, and techen the 

puple. Thanne the magistrat’ wente 26 

with the mynystris, and brou3te hem 

with out violence’; for thei dredden the 

puple, lest thei schulden be stonyd. And 27¢ in comaund- 
whanne thei hadden brou3t hem, thei Le es 
settiden* hem in the counsel; and the pi yistopis we 
princes’ of prestis’axiden® hem, and seiden, 28 posers ee 
In comaundement} we comaundiden 3ou?, _ of Jhesu of Na- 


, . zareth. Lire 
that 3e schulden not teche in this° name, tere. v. - 


Oo 3atis v. P ledde rv. 
t Om. rv. u Om. x. 
Y prisounes o. prisoun was Fr. 

athe prestes 0, ¢ Om. x. f was vr. 
k whiche 7. |ino. ™ and stondinge vr. 

P brou3te 7. q Om. ¥. r violence rv. 

xOm.o. Y prince GMNeSTYXY. 7% axide 


0 openyd Nr. 


Pinto gk pr.m. 4Om.gk. Ff and 
t Om. g pr.m. his wards 
* setten 1. 


w ether distresse K marg. 
€ the 


aaskide o. » to 30u eg sec. m. ho pr.m. 


522 


name, and lo! 3e han fulfillid’ Jerusalem 
with 3oure teching, and 3e wolen brynge 
z9yn on vs the blood of this man. Forsoth 
Petre answeringe, and apostlis®, seiden, It 
bihoueth for‘ to obeye® to God, more than 
30to men. The8% God of oure® fadris reyside 
Jhesu, whom 3e slowen, hangynge in a 
sitree. God enhaunside with his ri3thond 
this prince and sauyour, for™ to 3yue pe- 
naunce to Israel, and remyscioun of symnes. 
32 And we ben witnessis of thes wordis, and 
the Hooly Gost, whom God 3af! to alle 
33 obeischinge to him. Whanne thei herden 
thes thingis, thei weren turmentid, and 
34thou3ten for’ to sle hem. Forsoth sum 
man rysinge! in the counceil, a Pharise, 
Gamaliel by name, a doctour of the lawe, 
a worschipful man to al the peple, co- 
maundide™ men for? to be maad? with- 
35outeforth toP a schort tyme. And he 
seide to hem, 3e meu of Israel, take’ tent 
to 3ou" silf on thes men, what 3e be to 
36doynge’. Forsotht bifore thes dayes ‘The- 
odas" was, seyinge him silf for’ to be sum 
man”, to whom a noumbre of men consent- 
ide, aboute foure hundrid; the* which isY 
slayn, and alle whiche’ euere bileueden® to 
him, ben” disparplid’, and brou3t to nou3t. 
37 Aftir this, Judas Galilee’ was in tho® 
dayes of profescioun, and turnede awey 
the peple aftir him; and alle how manye 
euere consentiden to him, ben® scaterid, 
ssand he perischide. And now sothli® I 
seie to 30u, departe je fro thes men, and 
suffre 3e hem; for if iti ‘is of men this 
39 counceil or werk, it schal be vndon; for- 
sothe if it is of God, 3e mown not vndo 
hem. ‘But suffre 3e hem!, lest perauen- 
ture and™ 3e be foundun for" to repugne 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


V. 29—39- 


and lo! 3e han fillid Jerusalem with + Petir aun- 
3oure teching, and 3e wolen bringe on vs dace a cae 
the blood of this man. And Petre an-29 sve and 

. : ‘ whanne it was 
sweride+, and the apostlis, and seiden, 


3auen, the apo- 
E . stlis appreueden 
It bihoueth to obeie to God, more than 
to men. 


it as her owne. 
: shake And the Glos 
God of oure fadris reiside Jhe-30 entitynarie, 


° that seith here. 
su, whom 3e slowen, hangynge in a tre. that the postlis 


God enhaunside with his ri3thond this 31 were meued 
: of feruour, and 
prince and sauyour, that penaunce were _ suffriden ay 
. oon to speke 
3yue to Israel, and remyssioun of synnes. for alle, is not 
And b it . f th iene. antentik, sithen 
nd we ben witnessis of these wordis, 32 i is a glose of 
and the Hooli Goost, whom God jaf to %™ maistir. 
. : ‘ i with his rizt- 
alle obeischinge to him. Whanne thei 33 hon¢s ioe 
ae : is uertu. ¢, 
herden these thingis, thei weren tur- these wordis ; 
4 that is, of rys- 
mentid, and thou3ten to sle hem. Buts4ing asen of 
. . Crist, of ascen- 
aman roos in the counsel, a Farise, Ga- cioan, and of 
maliel bi name, a doctour of the lawe, a Neen ha 
worschipful man to al the puple, and  Gamatitel ; 
d s Gamaliel, as 
comaundide the men to be put without _ the Glose seith, 
: : disciple 
forth for a while. And he seide to hem, 35 Rie ete: ao 
; theles preuy. 
3e men of Israel, take tent to 30u silf on dias Heaednide 
these men, what 3e schulen do. For bi-ge ee 
: y worste conn- 
fore these daies Teodas, that seide hym ceils of Jewis. 
lf b a Farise; in 
silf to be sum man, to whom a noumbre this, that he bi- 
of men consentiden®, aboute foure hun- penne 
drid; which was slayn, and alle that bi- eee ; 
. . . ¢ ute) 
leueden to hym, weren‘ disparplit, and irae nay the 
mauwbce o ari- 
brou3t to nou3t. 


Aftir this, Judas of 37 sees. comaund- 


: 2 : ' ide the men s 
Galilee was in the daies of professioun, that is, the po- 
and turnyde awei the puple aftir hym; at a 


3onen for hem, 


and alle hou manye euere consentiden as 
jhe, in her ab- 
sence, schulde 


to hym, weren scatered, and he perisch- 
< . e more speed- 
ide. And now therfor Y seie to jou, 38‘. v. depiadé 
3ee fro these 
departe 3e8 fro these men, and suffre 3¢ nen; that is, 
hem; for if this counsel ether werk is ae eae 
of men, it schal be vndon; but if it is 39 “his eounceil is 
5 of men; that 
of God, 3e moun not vndo' hem, lest per- __ is, if the tech- 
ee ae 
auenture 3e be foundun to repugne God*. eae een 
s G Cee + . Lire here. ve. 
And thei consentiden to him; and theisos ne, oe 


inge,etc,;sothat 


thei suffriden adnersitees not oonly paciently but also ioifully, and in this stondith the moost excellent degre of goostly strengthe. ceesiden not, etc.s 
in nothing thei weren aferd bi betyingis, bnt more hertid to preche Crist stronglyere. Lire here. v. 


dfillid y. _€ the apostles wopgry. othere apostolis x. fOm.sx. & obesche ms. && Om. caory. 
hgoure vy. bb Om. sx. i3euethe. Om. sx. }roosy. and comaundide the ry. ™ Om. osx. 
Odons. Paty. 4 taketh sx. ¥ 30ur GOT. s don sx. t For vr. u there was a man Theodas 
T sec.m. sum man Theodas was x. VOm.sx. man greet Tsec.m. *Om.yv. Ywasv. 2 who 
mpeTy. bileeueny. > weren ry. © sparplyd s. disparulid x. 4 of Galilee a pr.m.v. ¢ the merr, 
&werenv. htherforeyv. iOm.rx.  * be of men this counceil or werk wpy. this counceil either werk 


is of men rv. is of men this councell x. } Om. r. 


€ concentide nc. f was R. 


God k. 


g Om. Kk pr.m. 


m Om. ox. 


h be R pr.m. 


2 Om. s. 


ifordo1. to God k sec.m. ajen 


V. 40—-VI. 7- 


God°. Forsoth thei consentiden to him; 
4oand thei clepinge? ‘to gidere’ apostlis*, 
denounciden® to hem betunt, that thei 
schulde no more speke in the name of 
41 Jhesu, and leften" hem. And sothli thei 
wenten ioyinge fro the si3t of the coun- 
ceil, for thei ben’ had worthi for” to 
suffre dispysing, ‘or wrong *, for the 
azname of Jhesu. Forsoth ech day thei 
ceessiden not in the temple, and aboute 
honsis, techinge and euangelisynge Jhesu 
Crist. 
CAP. VI. 
1 Forsoth in tho dayes, they noumbre of 
disciplis wexynge”, grucchinge of Greekis 
is? maad a3ens Ebrews, for that the wi- 
dewis of hem weren dispisid in euery 
2daies mynistring. Forsoth the twelue 
clepinge” to gidere the multitude’ of dis- 
ciplis, seiden*, It is not euene thing®, ‘vs 
tof forsake the word of God, and for$ to 
3mynistre to bordis. Therfore, bretheren, 
biholde 3e men of! 30u, of good witness- 
ing, ‘or fame*, seuene, ful of the Hooly 
Gost and wysdom, whom! we™ schulen or- 
4deyne on" this werk; forsoth we scliulen 
be hisy to® preier and mynisterie?, ‘or 
spreching%, of* the word’. And the word 
pleside tot al the multitude; and thei 
cheesiden" Stheuene, a man ful of feith 
and’’ the Hooly Gost, and Philip, and 
Protore, and Nichanore, and Tymon, and 
Permanam, and Nichol, a gest”, ‘or come- 
slyng*, AntiocheneY. Thei ordeyneden 
these bifore the si3t of apostlis’, and thei 
preiynge* puttiden> the hondis to hem. 
7 And the word of the Lord wexide‘, and 
the noumbre of disciplis in Jerusalem was 
multiplied moche; also moche cumpanye 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


523 


clepiden togidere the apostlis, and de- 
nounsiden to hem, that weren betun, 
that thei schulden no more speke in the 
name of Jhesu, and thei leten hem go. 
And thei wenten ioiynget{ fro the sijt of 41 
the counsel, that thei weren had worthi 
to suffre dispisyng for the name of Jhe- 
su. But ech dai thei ceessiden not in42 
the temple, and aboute housis, to teche 
and to! preche Jhesu Crist. 


CAP. VI. 


But in tho daies, whanne the noum-1 
bre of disciplis encreesside, the Grekis 
grutchiden a3ens the Ebrews, for that 
her widewis weren dispisid* in euery 
daies mynystryng. And the twelue clep-2 
iden togidere the multitude of disciplis, 
and seiden, It is not ry3tful, that we 
leeuen the word} of God, and mynystren 
to boordis. Therfor, britheren, biholde™3 
3e men of 30u of good fame, ful of the 
Hooli Goost and of wisdom, whiche™ we 
schulen ordeyne on this werk; for wea 
schulen be bisi to preier, and preche® the 
word of God. And the word pleside bi-s 
for al the multitude; and thei chesiden? 
Styuen, a man ful of feith and of the 
Hooli Goost, and Filip, and Procore, and 
Nycanor, and Tymon, and Parmanam, 
and Nycol, a comelyng, a man of Anti- 
oche. Theit ordeyneden these bifor the16 
si3t of apostlis', and theiS preyeden, and 
leiden hoondis on hem. And the word7 
of the Lord wexide, and the noumbre of 
thet disciplis in Jerusalem was myche 
multiplied; also myche" cumpany of 
preestis obeiede’ to the feith. And Ste-s 


* dispysid ; that 
is, the Greek 
widewis, as 
more rude ei- 
ther boistouse, 
wercn put awey 
of Ebreis, that 
tho schulden 
not mynystre ; 
either that nes- 
cessaries were 
not mynystrid 
so wel to Greek 
widewis, as to 
Ebrew widewis. 
Lire here. v. 


t+ forsake the 
word ; that is, 
the preching of 
Goddis word, 
for goostly 
thingis schulen 
be sett bifore 
temporal 
thingis. of yood 
witnessing ; 
that is, of good 
fame. fulle of 
the Hooly Goost 
and wisdom ; 
as myche as... 
may appere by 
vtermere 
singnes. on 
this werk; that 
is, on the myn- 
ystracioun of 
temporal 
thingis. to 
preier; bi 
which we sti3- 
eth in to God. 
to the mynys- 
terie of the 
word; bi which 
-.. comyng 
doun to nei3ze- 
hore is maad, 
hi the maner 
of aungels sti3- 
ing and goyng 
doun in the 
laddre of Jacob. 
Steuene ful of 
Jeith; that is, 
of feithfulnesse, 
and therfore 
such office 
my3te sykirly 
be bitaken to 
hym. a comy- 
ling; that is, 
connertid fro 
hethennesse to 
the lawe of 
Jewis. Lire 
here. Vv. 

t Thei; that is, 
thei hadden 
choose these 


men. thei preieden; that is, the postlis preieden. and puttiden hondis to hem ; in ordringe hem into dekenes. of prestis ; for myraclis whiche they 
sien opinly; natheles thei weren cristen preuyly, as Gamaliel, and for the same resonn. fud of grace; to worche wel. and strengthe ; to suffre 
aduersitees. made wondris; to conferme the treuthe of cristen feith. Lyre here. v. 


© to God pery. 


Pelepiden y. 4«4Om.o. ‘the apostlis cwopery. 8 and denounsiden vy. ¢ by- 
dene o. “theilefteny. YVwereny. WOm.sx. *Om.oex. YOm.o. 2 wexide, either encrees. 
idev. ®wasry. bclepiden vy. ‘noumbreo. ‘and seyden vy. ©¢ thing, either riziful vy. {to us to o. 
vs for to MpoTY. that wey. &Om.svx, hOm.v. jiins. Om. ogx. Iwhicher. ™3e x. 
‘too. inv. Pprechingo. 4QOm.ogx. 'Om.r. SwordofGodvy. tbiforer. 4 chosen sx. 
wandofy. ™comelyngyx. *Om. ogyx. ¥ Antioche x. aman of Antioche v. 2 the apostlis s. 
8 preieden y. © putten osx. and puttiden vy. © wexe sx. 


1Om. rR pr.m. 


™ chese ggka. 
s Om. R. 


t Om. ckmxbeo. ta mich r. 


" whom r. ‘°° to preche r. 
Vv obeishide 1gk. 


Pchesen a. 40m. Qq. * the apostlis ra. 


3x2 


524 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


sof prestis obeieden’ to the® feith. ‘Sthe- 
uene, ful' of grace and strengthe, made’ 
wondris and grete signes in the peple. 
9Forsothe summe risen* of the synagoge, 
that was clepid of Libertyns, and Cirenen- 
sis, and of men of Alisaundre, and of hem 
that weren of! Cilice and Asye, disput- 
loynge with Stheuene. And thei my3ten 
not withstonde to* the wysdom and spirit, 
uthat spak. Thanne! thei priuely senten 
men, that schulden seye, hem™ haue" herd? 
him seyinge? wordis of blasphemye into‘ 
12 Moyses and God. And" so thei moueden 
to gidere the peple, and* eldere men, and 
scribis; and thei rennynge‘ to gidere ra- 
uyscheden" him, and brou3ten to’ into the 
iscounceil. And thei ordeyneden false wit- 
nessis, seyinge, This man ceessith not for” 
to speke wordis a3ens the hooly place, and 
14lawe. Forsoth* we herden hym seyinge, 
ForY this Jhesus of Nazareth schal dis- 
troye this place, and schal chaunge tra- 
diciouns, the? whiche Moyses bytook to 
isvs. And alle men that saten in the coun- 
ceil biholdinge him, sy3en the face of him 
1as the face of an aungel. +Forsoth the 
prince of prestis seide to Stheuene, If thes 
2thingis han hem so? The* which seith, 


CAP. VII. 


Men? bretheren, and fadris, heere 3e. 
God* of glorie apperide to oure fadir Abra- 
ham, whanne he was in Mesopotanye, bi- 

3fore he dwelte in Carram, and seide to 
him, Go out of thi lond, and of4 thi cog- 
nacioun®, ‘or kynrede', and come into the 
lond, ‘the which’ I schal schewe to thee. 
4 Thanne he wente out of the lond of Cal- 
deys, and dwelte in Carram. And thennis" 
aftir that his! fadir was deed, he trans- 
latide hym into this lond, in which 3e 
sdwellen now. And he 3af not to him 
heritage in it, nother a paas of foot, but 


VI. 8—VIL. 5. 


uen, ful of grace and of strengthe, made 
wondris and grete signes in the puple. 
But summe rysen™ of the synagoge, that9 
was clepid of Libertyns, and Cirenensis, 
and of men of Alisaundre, and of hem 
that weren of Cilice and of Asie, and 
disputiden with Steuene. And_ thei 10 
mi3ten not withstonde the wisdom and 
the spirit, that spak. Thanne thei pri-11 
ueli senten} men, that schulden seie, that f Paes ee 
thei herden hym seiynge wordis of blas- — enformeden 
4 preuely and 
femye a3ens Moises and God. And s012gitefuly, to | 
thei moueden togidere the puple, and the Pex ‘cimesine 
eldre men, and the* scribis; and thei ere 
rannenY togidre, and token hym, and pres 
broujten in to the counsel. And _ thei 13is, the grettere 
ordeyneden false witnessis, that seiden, jie. pene 
This man ceessith not to speke wordis ‘pat '® techers 
ajens the hooli place, and the lawe. For lamar; the 
we herden hym seiynge, That this Jhesus Ree 
of Nazareth schal destrye this place, and pride. ceesish 
schal chaunge the tradiciouns, whiche ee ge 
Moyses bitook to us. And alle men that a ae a 
seten in the counsel bihelden hym, and en ta 
sayn his face as the face of an aungel. fice Sl 
CAP. VIL. cones 
of bis holynesse 
And the prynce? of prestis Sc1d ER tO yo ee 
Steuene, Whethir these thingis han hem elton 
so? Which® seide, Britheren and fadris,2 her malice, ei- 
here 3e. God of glorie apperide to oure eer ne 
fadir Abraham, whanne he was in Me- Be bire here. 
sopotamie, bifor that he dwelte in Car- 
ram, and seide to hym, Go out of this 
loond, and of thi kynrede, and come in 
to the loond, which Y schal schewe to 
thee. Thanne he wente out of the loond4 
of Caldeis, and dwelte in Carram. And 
fro thens aftir that his fader was deed, 
he translatide him in to this loond, in 
which 3e dwellen now. And he 3af nots 
to» hym eritage in it, nethir a paas of a° 
foot, but he bihi3te to 3yue hym it in to 


4 obeschide ax. oheyede yr. ¢ Om. r. f Steuene forsothe ful o. Forsothe Stenene was ful y. $ and 
made y. dide x. briseden vr. risende x. iinn. kOm.r. 1Thato. ™ that thei y. ® to han sx. 
Om. vy. Cherdenr. Ptohanseid x. 4 ajens Fr. t Therfore r. Sof Kk. trenneny. "and 
raueschyden Fr. VYOm. nT. WOm.svx. ¥* For er. y That r. «Om. FP. t Here commences 
Chap VIL. iny. 20m. rx. >»Myo. ¢ The Godr. 40Om.s. ¢kynredeno. f either kynrede v. 
Om. ogx. & whom expery. which r. that x. » frothennes yr. i Om. N. 


Wrisidenc. *Om.k.  Y¥ camen a. 


% princis b. 


2 The whyche 1. > Om.k. ¢o00R. 


VII. 6—17. 


he a3enbihi;te for* to 3yue to him it into 
possescioun, and to his seed aftir him, 
é6whanne he hadde not a sone. Forsoth 
God spak to him, For! his seed schal™ be 
cumelyng", ‘or gest, in an alien lond, and 
thei schulen ‘sugette hem? to seruage, and 
schulen yuele trete hem, foure hundrid 
73eerisi ‘and thritty™; and I schal inge the 
folk, to which® thei schulen serue, seith 
the Lord. And aftir these thingis thei 
schulen go out, and thei schulen serue to 
me in this place. And he 3af to him‘ 
the® testament of circumcisioun; and so 
he gendride Ysaac, and circumcidide him 
in the ei3tith day. And Ysaac gendride’ 
Jacob, and Jacob” the twelue patriarkis. 
9 Aud the patriarkis hauynge* enuye to Jo- 
seph, soldenY hym into Egipt. And God 
10 was with hym, and delyuerede him of alle 
his tribulaciouns, and 3af to him grace 
and wysdom in the siz3t of Pharao, kyng 
of Egipt. And he ordeynede him pre- 
post’, ‘or souereyn*, on> Egipt, and® on al 
uhis hous. Forsoth hungir cam into al 
Egipt, and Canaan, and greet tribula- 
cioun; and oure fadris founden not metis. 
i2 Forsoth whanne Jacob herde®, whete ‘for 
to be® in Egipt, he sente oure fadris first. 
isAnd inf the secunde tyme Josep was 
knowyn of his britheren, and his kyn is? 
14maad knowun to Pharao. Forsothe Jo- 
sep sendynge" clepide to! Jacob, his fa- 
dir, and al his cognacioun, in* soulis! 
isseuenty and fyue. And Jacob dessend- 
ide™ into Egipt, and is" deed, he and oure 
igfadris; and thei ben® translatid into Si- 
chen, and ben? putt in the sepulcre, that 
Abraham bou3te by priys of siluer of the 
17sones of Emor, the sone of Sichen. FT or- 
soth whanne the tyme of biheeste cam 
ny3, the! which God hadde knowlechid to 
Abraham, the peple waxe, and was" mul- 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 525 


possessioun, and to his seed aftir hym, 
whanne he hadde not a sone. And Gode 
spak to hym, That his seed schal be com- 
ling? in an alien lond, and thei schulen 
make hem suget to seruage, and schulen 
yuel trete hem, foure hundrid 3eris and 
thritti; and Y schal iuge the folk, to7 
whiché thei schulen serue, seith the Lord. 
And after these thingis thei schulen go 
out, and thei schulen serue to me in this 
place. And he 3af to hym the testament s 
of circumcisioun; and so he gendride 
Ysaac, and circumcididef hym in the 
eij3t€ dai. And Isaac gendride Jacob, 
and Jacob gendride the twelue patri- 
arkis. And the patriarkis hadden enuye» 
to Joseph, and selden hym in to Egipt. 
And God was with hym, and delyuerede 10 
hym!# of alle hise tribulaciouns, and 3af 
to' hym grace and wisdom in the si3t of 
Farao, king of Egipt. And he ordeyn- 
ede hym souereyn on Egipt, and on al 
his hous. And hungur cam in to alu 
Egipt, and Canaan, and greet tribula- 
cioun; and oure fadris founden not mete. 
But whanne Jacob hadde herd, that12 
whete was in Egipt, he sente oure fadris 
first. “And in the secounde tyme Joseph 13 
was knowun of hise britheren, and his 
kyn was maad* knowun to Farao. And i4 
Joseph sente, and clepide Jacob, his fadir, 
and al his kynrede, seuenti and fyue 
men. And Jacob cam doun in to Egipt, 1s 
and was deed, he! and oure fadris; and 16 
thei weren translatid in to Sichen, and 
weren leid in the sepulcre, that Abra- 
ham bou3te bi prijs of siluer of ™ the” 
sones of Emor, the sone of Sichen. And17z 
whanne the tyme of biheeste cam _ni3, 
which God hadde knoulechid to Abra- 
ham, the puple waxede, and multipliede 
in Kgipt, til another kyng roos in Egipt, 1s 


kOm. x. JThaty. ™shnlde x. .acomelyng apety. °° Om. ogyx. P make hem soget r. 
Q3er sx. 'Om.o. §Sthewhiches. themo. Ya per. *¥Om. x. ¥ Jacob gendride vy. * had- 
den rv. y and seelden v. 2 prouoost MPQTY. souereyn 0. a Om. 0x. in K. ¢ Om. G. 
4 hadde herd that y. © to be sx sec.m. was v. to be sold x pr.m. fOm.Nn. 8 wasy. }sente and 
clepide yr. itohimoer. Om.y. Kintog, %'!meny. ™camdouny. “wasy. © werenr. 
Pwereny. @Omvy. Om. v. 

4 ether gest kK marg. whom. fcircumcideb. 8 eiztthe Exkcegoa8. bOm.Qpr.m. iOm. 


K prom. k Om. R prim. 1 Om. ak prim. 


™ and of gk prim. 


n Om. gk. 


526 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. VIL. 18—31. 


istiplied in Egipt, til another kyng roos in 
19 Egipt, thes which knew not Joseph. This  oure kyn, and turmentide onre fadris, 
bigylinget oure peple", turmentide oure that thei schulden putte awey her 3onge 


which knewe not Joseph. This® bigilide 19 * ke gesside 


that hise bri- 

thern ; that is, 
Ebreus. 3euen 
to hem helthe ; 


fadris, that thei schulden putte out her children, for thei schulden not lyue. In 20" Ged hadde 


3onge children, lest thei were quykened. the same tyme Moyses was borun, and 
20In the same tyme Moyses was born, and he was louyd of God; and he was no- 
he was acceptid, ‘or douyd’, of God; and _ rischid thre monethis in the hous of his 


‘he was norischid thre monethis in the  fadir. And whanne he was put out in21 


21 hous of his fadir. Forsoth him” putt out, the flood, the dou3ter of Farao took hym 
the dou3tir of Pharao took him vp, and vp, and nurischide hym in to hir sone. 


enspyrid 
thanne to Moi- 
ses, that he 
schulde bi Moi- 
ses delyuere 
the puple fro 
the seruage of 
Egipt. And so 
he was ordeyn- 
ed thanne of 
God to be 
kepere and de- 


22norischide him into a sone to hir. And And Moises was lerned in al the wisdom 22 fendere of the 


Moyses was lernd* inY al? the* wysdom of Egipcians, and he was my3ti in? his 


puple; wher- 
fore he synnede 


of Egipcians, and he was my3ty in his wordis and werkis?. But whanne the 232% i" doinge 


23wordis and werkis. Forsoth whanne the — tyme of fourti 3eer™ was fillid to hym, it 
tyme of twenti> 3eer was fulfillid® to him, —_roos vp ‘in to® his herte, that he schulde 
it stizjede vp into’ his herte, that he visite hise britheren, the sones of Israel. 


schulde visite his bretheren, the sones of . And whanne he say a man suffringe 21 


24Israel. And whanne he sy3 sum® man wronge, he vengide hym, and dide ven- 
suffringe wrong, he vengide him, and dide _iaunce for hym that suffride thet wronge, 


veniaunce to him that suffride wrong; and he" killide the Egipcian. For he2s 


25thef Egipcian slayn’. Forsoth he gesside _—_gesside that his britheren* schulden vn- 
bretheren" ‘for to! vndirstonde, for’ God  durstonde, that God schulde 3yue to hem 
by the hond of hym schulde 3yue to hem _helthe bi the hoond of hym; but thei 


that veniaunce. 
And this parti- 
cular delyuier- 
annce was 
singne and fi- 
gure of the ge- 
neral delyuer- 
aunce of al the 
puple, that 
schulde be 
maad bi the 
hond of Moises, 
fourti 3eer fro 
the tyme of his 
fleing fro Egipt. 
v. an angel ap- 
peride to him; 
it is seid in 3.c°. 
of Exodi, that 


26heelthe; but thei vndirstoden not. For-  vndurstoden not. For in’ the dai su-26 God apperide to 


soth in the day suynge he apperide to ynge he apperide to hem chidinge, and 
hem chidinge, and! recounsilide hem in he acordide hem in pees, and seide, Men, 
pees, seyinge™, Men, 3e ben bretheren";  3e ben britheren; whi noyen 3e ech 


27 wherto® noyen 3e ech othir?? Forsoth he othere? But he that dide the wronge27 


that dide wrong to his nei3ebore, puttide’ to his neiz3bore, puttide hym awey, and 
him awey, seyinge, Who ordeynede thee _ seide, Who ordeynede thee prince and 


28prince and domesman vpon’ vs? Wher’ domesman on vs? Whethir thou woltes 


thou wolt sle me, as 3istirday thou killid- | sle me, as jistirdai thou killidist the® 


him, in treuthe 
it was an aun- 
gel, as it is seid 
here, but for he 
representide the 
persone of God, 
and spac in the 
persone of God, 
therfore sum- 
tyme he is 
nemyd God, 
and sumtyme 
an aungel. Lire 
here. ve. 


+ in fijer of 


29ist the Egipcian? Forsothe in this word LEgipcian? And in this word Moises 29/aune, etc.; 


Moyses fly3, and was maad a comeling  flei, and was maad* a comeling in the 
in‘ the lond of Madian, where he gendride loond of Madian, where he bigat twei 
30twey" sones. And fourty’ 3eer fulfillid”, | sones. And whanne he hadde fillid fourtis 
an aungel apperide to him in fyer of jeer, an aungel apperide to hym in fier 
flame of a boisch, in desert of the mount of flawmet of a buysch, in desert of the 


3lof Syna. Forsothe Moyses seynge* won- mount of Syna. And Moises si3, ands1 


the aungel ap- 
peride in the 

licnesse of fijer 
brennyng, but 


9 not wastinge, 


to singnefie that 
the puple of Is- 
rael schulde not 
be waastid in 
the tribulacioun 
of Egipt, but 
be purgid. vn- 


bynde [do of e] the schoon, etc.; it was the custom of elde men, and most of Ebreys, to entre not into hooly placis while thei weren schood. And 
Zarazenes usen this 3it. ve. with the hond; that is, power of the aungel, and so Moises was a mynystre ioyned to him. v. wordis of lijf; the ten 
heestis ben seid wordis of lijf, not for tho brou3ten lijf of grace iustefyinge, as it is seid in 4 c°. to Romayns, A man is not iustified bi the werkis of 
lawe, Lire here. ve. bi ri3tfulnesse that makith worthi to enerlasting lijf, thou3 tho justifieden bi temporal riztfulnesse; for thei that kepten the 
comaundementis, runnen not in to temporal deth, that was 3ouen to brekeris of the lawe. maden a calf; for thei constreyneden Aaron to make it. 


Lire here. v. 


s Om. Fr. t bigilide r. ukyn and r. v Om. oex. w whanne he was r. x Jernd aMNQSTX. 
yOm.n. 7Om. 4. 9Om.s. > fourtiny, ¢fillid. toa prom.n. in sx. ¢Om.G prim. a 
mpoTy. fandhekyllide they. &Om.r. that his brothery. ito sx. schnide vy.  * that or. 
land he aemNorestvxy. M™andseide yr. brether x. Owhir. Ptoothere rT. ‘%putosx. fon 


MPQSVXY. in T. 8 Whether x. t into o. U two GMPQSTY. v whanne he hadde fillid fourty r. 
wOm. vr.  * siz, and r. 


> And thisk. Pandb. in hise werkis kK. '3eeris R. $%in g pr.m.o. tok pr.m. 


t Om. K pr.m. 
rab prom.a, YOmoibprem. ¥Om.k prom. WOm. 1. * Om. RB pr.m. 


VI. 32—42. 


dride the’ siz3t. And ‘him comynge to 
that he schulde* biholde, the vois of the 
32 Lord is* maad to” him, seyinge‘, I am God 
of 3oure fadris, God of Abraham, God? of 
Ysaac, God® of Jacob. Moyses maad 
a3tremeling, durste® not biholde. Forsothe 
God seide to him, Vnbynd the schon* of 
thi feet, for the place in which thou 
34stondist' is hooli erthe. I seyng sy3 the 
affliccioun", ‘or turmentyng', of my peple 
that is in Egipt, and I herde the morn- 
yng of hem, and I caam down for™ to 
delyuere hem. And now come thou, and 
351 schal sende thee into Egipt. This 
Moyses, whom thei denyeden, seyinge, 
Who ordeyned thee prince and domes- 
man on® vs? God sente this prince and 
ajenbyer, with the hond of the aungel, 
36that apperide to hym in the boisch. This°® 
ledde hem out, doynge? wondris and 
sygnes in the lond of Egipt, and in the 
37reede see, ind desert fourty 3eeris'. This 
is Moyses, that seide to the sones of Israel, 
God schal reise to 30u a prophete of 3oure 
bretheren, as* me 3e schulen heere him. 
38 This is‘, that was in the chirche in wil- 
dirnesse, with the" aungel that spak to 
him in the mount Syna’, and with oure™ 
fadris ; the* which took wordis of lyf forY 
39to 3yue to vs. To whom oure fadris 
wolden not obeye”, but puttiden® him 
awei, and ben” turned awei in her hertis 
40into Egipt, seiynge to Aaron, Make thou 
to vs goddis, that schulen go bifore® vs ; 
forsothe’ to this Moyses, that ledde vs out 
of the lond of Egipt, we witen not, what 
41is don® to him. And thei maden a calf 
in tho dayes, and offriden ‘an oost' to the 
symylacre; and thei gladiden® in the 
42 werkis of her hondis. Forsoth God turn- 
yde, and bitook hem ‘for to serue" to the 
kny3thod of heuene, as it is writun in the 


yonthe v. 2 whanne hee neizhede to r. 
God g sec.m. sx. and Tr. f was maad F. 
k turmentyng 0. 


Pand dide yr. Qandin wpeTvyy. ‘3ers. 8 and aso. 
Ws3ouren. *Om. vy. YOm.sx. 2 obesche mx. 
€todon r. fa sacrifice vy. & weren glad r. 


y ether unbinde K marg. 2sek. a Om. b. 


€ Om. k pr. m. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


& was V. 
& and durste r. 
1 Om. oox. either turmentyng rv. 


b sende ac. 


527 


wondride on the si3t. And whanne he 

nei3ede to biholde, the vois of the Lord 

was maad to hym, and seide, Y am God 32 

of 3oure fadris, God of Abraham, God of 

Ysaac, God of Jacob. Moises was maad 

tremblynge, and durste not biholde. But33 

God seide to hym, Do of the schoon of 

thi feet, for the place in which thou 

stondist is hooli erthe. Y seynge say*34 

the turmentyng of my puple that is in 

Egipt, and Y herde the mornyng of hem, 

and Y* cam doun to delyuere hem. And 

now come thou, and Y schal sende thee 

in to Egipt. This Moises whom theiss 

denyeden, seiynge, Who ordeynede thee 

prince and domesman on vs? God sente” 

this prince and a3enbiere, with the hoond 

of the aungel, that apperide to hym in 

the busch. This Moises ledde hem out, 36 

and dide wondris and signes in the loond 

of Egipt, and in the reed see, and in 

desert fourti 3eeris. This is Moises, that 37 

seide to the sones of Israel, God schal 

reise to 30u a profete of 3oure bretheren, 

as me 3e schulen here hiin. This it is, 3s 

that was in the chirche in wildirnesse, 

with the aungel that spak to hym in the 

mount of© Syna, and with oure fadris; 

which took words of lijf to 3yue to vs. * God turnede, 

To whom oure fadris wolden not obeie, 39 oes He 

but puttiden hym awei, and weren turn-__ be tuned, and 

ed awei in hertis’ in to Egipt, seiynge 40 fondly is 

to Aaron, Make thou to vs goddis, that — puple. to serue 
‘6 . to the kni3thod, 

schulen go bifore vs; for to this Moyses etc. ; it is not 

that ledde vs out of the lond of Egipt, 7b ‘atts | 

we witen not what is don to hym. And 41 'ymein which 

thei maden a calf in tho daies, and desert, but aftir 

. . that thei en- 

offriden a sacrifice to the mawmet; and __ triden into the 

thei weren glad in the werkis of her Sa craw 

hondis. And God turnede*, and? bitook 42.27%" ts 

hem to serue to the kny3thod of heuene,  fetis, which ix 

as it is writun in the book of profetis, cre. ve. 


Cand seide vy. and Gods. ¢ and 
h shoo mpy. sho est. i stanst x. 


bin y, 


m Om. sx. 0 ypon N. 9° This Moises v. 
titisy, %Om.c prim, Vv of Synay caposry. 
aputten sx. bwereny. Ctoforeo. 4 for r. 


h Om. s. to seruen x. 


c¢ Om. ceteri. ‘her hertis x sec. m. 


528 


book of prophetis', Where* 3e! offriden to 
me slayn sacrificis, ‘or oostis™, fourty 
43 3eeris" in desert, 3e° ‘hous of IsraelP? And 
3e han takun the4 tabernacle of Moloc, 
and the sterre of 3oure god Rempham, 
figuris that 3e han maad for’ to worshipe 
hem; and I schal translate 30u into Ba- 
4ibiloyne. The tabernacle of witnessing 
was with oure fadris in desert, as God 
disposide to hem, spekinge* to Moyses, 
that he schulde make it vpt the foorme 
45that he sy3. The" which and oure fadris 
takinge’ ‘with Jhesu, brou3ten” into pos- 
sescioun*® of hethen men, the’ which God 
puttide? awey fro the face of oure fadris, 
46til in? the dayes" of Dauith, that fond grace 
anentis God, and axide that he schulde 
47fynde a tabernacle to God of Jacob. Sa- 
lomon forsothe bildide® an hows to him. 
48 But the hize" dwellith not in maade thingis 
49 by hond, as he seith by the prophete, He- 
niene is a® seete to me, thef erthe forsoth® 
the stool of my feet; what hous schulen 
3e bylde to me, seith the Lord, or! whati 
50 place of my resting? Wher myn hond 
simade not alle thes! thingis? With hard 
nol, and™ vncircumsidid hertis and eeris 3e 
withstonden" evermore the Hooly Goost ; 
szas and° 30ure fadris, so and 3e. Whom 
of the prophetis han not 3oure fadris pur- 
sued, and han slayn hem? that bifore 
teelden of the comynge of the iust4, whos 
traitours and mansleeris' 3e weren now? 
53 The’ whiche token the lawe int ordy- 
naunce of aungels, and han not kept. 
s4Forsothe thei heeringe" thes thingis, 
weren’ dyuersly turmentid in her’ hertis, 
and gnastiden, ‘or grennyden*, intoY him. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. , 


VII. 43——54. 


Whether 3e, hous of Israel, offriden to + the hise God 

wee eee 7 . dwellith notin 
me slayn sacrificis, ether sacrificis’, fourti singis maad 
3eris® in desert ? 


» bi hond; for he 
And 3e han take the 435. yrcompre- 
tabernacle of Moloc, and the sterre of  bensible, and 
of goostly 


joure god Renfam, figuris that 3e han kinde; he seith 
, this, to put 
maad to worschipe hem; and Y schal  awey the er- 


rour of summe 
The ta-44 Jewis, whiche 


translate 30u in to Babiloyn. 

1 7 4 h_— gessiden that 
bernacle of witnessing was with oure® Goa dwellide 
fadris in desert, as God disposide to hem, i the temple, 

as a man dwell- 
and spak to Moyses, that he schulde _ ith in his hons. 
G é heuene is a seete 
make it aftir the fourme that he say. me; thisisa 
Which also oure fadris token with Jhesui, a5 (ey"" pene 
and brou3ten in to the* possessioun of spe 
hethene men, whiche God puttide awey where, in he- 
. “7 1 uene and in 
fro the face of oure fadris, til in to! the — erthe; for he 
. . . hath » 
daies of Dauid, that fonde grace anentis 46 pris of body. ve. 
God, and axide™ that he schulde fynde what hous schu~ 
len 3 bilde to 
a tabernacle to God of Jacob. But Sa- 477; to dwelle 
aw % in maner bifore 
lomon bildide the hous ‘to hym™. But 4sseid; as if he 
. . . Sere seide, noon. 
the hi3 God dwellith not in thingis maad paar place of 
bi hoondf, as he seith bi the profete, He- 49 774.7032" ™ 
‘> 
uene is a seete to me, and the erthe zs Te ee 
? 
the stool of my feet; what hous schulen ae aa 
re 5 1th tn himse! 
3e bilde to me, seith the Lord, ether  forhe blisfal’ 
: hi himself, 
what place is of my restyng? Whether so ee 
tnoig 2 that offringe of 
myn hoond made not alle these thingis : preiers rae 
With hard nol, and vneircumcidid hertis Bl as 
. ° maa ere to 
and eris 3e withstoden® eueremore the ae v. with 
e ‘i ard nol; that 
Hooli Goost; and? as 3o0ure fadris, so 3e. is, obstipatte in 
* o soule. uncir- 
Whom of the’ profetis han not 3oure 52 cumeidid hertis; 
fadris pursued, and han slayn hem that #,vices bi 
bifor telden of the comyng of the ri3tful pale fro bes 

: 5 3 emyes and de- 
man, whos traitouris and mansleeris 3e  tracciouns. ve. 

; : ith stoden 
weren now? Whiche token the lawe ins3 ine Holy Goost; 
. : spekinge in 
ordynaunce of aungels, and han not kept {rier 4 7 
at. And thei herden these thingis, and 54 ftis. v. of the 

% hee. a comyng of the 
weren dyuersli turmentid in her hertis, ius; that is, 

r § F of Crist, which 
and’ grenneden® with teeth on hym. But 5s is seid inst bi 
excellence. Lire 


here. ve. whos trattouris; in tretinge with Judas. mansleeris ; in procuringe his deth. Lire here. v. 


ithe prophetis w. & Whether s et x passim. 


1 se hous of Israel r. 


m Om. 0gXx. either sacrifices Vv. 


Sjerx. Othe x. Omy. POm.y. GOm. x. 'Om.sx. Sandspacy. tbir. % Om. rx. 
Ytoken y.  bro3ten with Jhesu s. with Jhesus, and broujten vy. _* the possessioun apvy. Y Om. P. 
z putte sx. 4 into G sec.m. mp. bday xk. © bilde sx. 4 hee3 God env. alderhezest r. ¢ Om. N. 
fando. &sotheli wery. forsothe is v. beither yr. iwhiche is the cupery. ‘isofy. 10Om.s. 
™and with o. " withstoden p. °Om.o. POm.o. Giust man ano. *menslearscupy. % Om. vr. 
tand an. Uherdeny. and weren r. w Om. & pr.m. x Om. ex. either grennden with teeth v. 
Yon rv. 


f sacrifice K pr. m. sacrificis of vostis gka. 
c marg. Naue k sec.m. marg. 
© withstonden rk. P Om. gk. 
grentyn k. 


k Om. K pr.m. 
q Om. 1. 


& 3eer 19k. 
10m. exgrbecegkof. 
and thei 1. 


» goure gk pr.m. i Jhesu, that mas Josue 
m askide 0. © Om. K pr.m. 
8 gryntiden ER. ether gnastiden K marg. 


VII. 55—VIII. 6. 


55 Forsothe whanne Stheuene was ful? of the 
Hooly Gost, he biholdinge* into heuene, 
sy3° the glorie of God, and Jhesu stond- 
inge on® the ri3thalf of the vertu of God. 
And he seith*, Lo! I see heuenes openyd, 
and the sone of man stondinge on - the 

s6ri3t half of the vertu of God. Forsoth 
thei criynge® with grete voises‘, heelden® 
to gidere her eeris, and maden ‘to gidere* 

s7Tasau3t, ‘or feersnesse’, in to him. And 
thei castinge™ him out of the cytee stoon- 
yden®. And witnessis® diden of her 
clothis, bisydis the feet of a 30ng man, 

58that was clepid Saul. And thei stoonyden 
Steuene ynclepinge?, and seyinge, Lord 

so Jhesu, receyuel my spirit. Forsoth ‘the 
knees putt’, he criede with greet vois, sey- 
inge, Lord, sette’ not to hem this synne ; 
‘for thei witen not what thei don’. And 
whanne he hadde seid this thing, he 
slepte" in the Lord. ‘{Forsoth Saul was 
consentynge to his deeth. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 Forsoth greet persecucioun was maad 
in that day in the chirche, that was in 
Jerusalem. And alle men weren scaterid 
by the cuntrees of Judee and Samarie, 
2out takun apostlis. Forsoth men drede- 
ful ‘curiden, or” birieden, Stheuene, and 
3maden greet moornyng on him. Forsoth 
Saul greetli”Y distroyede the chirche, en- 
tringe’ by howsis, drawynge* men and 
wymmen, bitook into kepyng, ‘or prisoun’. 
4Therfore thei that weren scaterid, pass- 
yden forth, euangelisynge’ the word of 
5God. Forsoth Philip comynge* down in- 
to a citee of Samarie, prechide? to hem 
6Crist. Forsoth the cumpanyes 3auen tent 
to thes® thingis’ that weren seid of Phi- 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


529 


whanne Steuene was ful of the Hooli 
Goost, he bihelde in to heuene, and say 
the glorie of God, and Jhesu stondinge 
on the ri3thalft of the vertu of God. 
And he seide, Lo! Y se henenes openyd, 
and mannus sone stondynge on the ri3t- 


* he knelide ; 
that is, in prey- 
inge the manere 
schulde be de- 
uont. ve. criedc 
with greet vois; 
for it cam forth 
of gret desijr to 
the helthe of 
neizeboris. v. 
sette not to hem, 


half of the vertu of God. And thei eri-56 etc.; in reseru- 


eden with a greet vois, and stoppiden™ 
her eris, and maden with o wille an’ 
assau3t” in to hym. 
hym out of the citee, and stonyden. And 

the witnessis diden of her clothis, bisidis 

the feet of a 3ong man, that was clepid 

Saule. And thei stonyden Steuene, thats 
clepide God to help, seiynge, Lord Jhesu, 

resseyue my spirit. 
and criede with a greet vois, and seide, 
Lord, sette not to hem this synne. And 
whanne he hadde seid this thing, he 
diede. 


CAP. VIII. 


But Saul was consentynge to his deth. 
And greet persecucioun was maad that! 
dai+ in the chirche, that was in* Jeru- 
salem. And alle men weren scatered bi 
the cuntrees of Judee and Samarie, ou- 
takun the apostlis. But good men} biri-2 
eden Steuene, and maden greet mornyng 
on hym. But Saul greetli distruyedes 
the chirche, and entryde bi housis, and 
droweY men and wymmen, and _ bitook 
hem in to prisoun. And thei that weren4 
scaterid, passiden forth, prechynge the 
word of God. And Filip cam doun ins 
to a citee of Samarie, and prechide to 
hem Crist. And the puple 3af tent toc 
thes thingis that weren seid of Filip, 


And thei brou3ten 57 


ynge euerlast- 
inge peyne to 
hem, but 3eue 
verey penaunce 
to hem. Lire 
here. ve. In 
summe bookis 
it sneth, for 
thei witen not 
what thei don, 
but this is not 


8 of the text, 


neither is in 
bookis amend- 
id; forsothe 


And he knelide*, 59 men namely 


for greet ... 
weren more 
styrid bi 
wraththe, than 
bi yngno- 
raunce, and the 
yngnoraunce of 
many men was 
causid of malice 
bifore goinge, 
thatis, for bater- 
hed and enuye 
asens Crist. 
Lire here. Vv. 

+ in that dai; 
that is, in that 
tyme; for 
thilke persecu- 
scioun duride 
many daies. 
Lire here. ve. 
t men dreed- 
Sul; that is, 
dredinge God, 
among whiche 
Gamaliel was 
the principal, 
as it is seid in 
the legende of 
the fyndinge of 
the bodi of seint 
Stenene. ve 
greetly distroi- 
ede the chirche; 
and enforside 
to brynge it 
[to] non3t. 
drow in to kep- 
ing; that is, in 
to presonn ; it 
is not seid that 
he killede, for 
as the Glose 
seith, God bi- 


fore kept. hise hondis, that tho weren not defonlid with the blood of innocent men; and therfore as Austyn seith, God is so almy3ti and good, that 


of yueles he drawith ont goodis ; therfore of this persecuscioun he drow out the good of sowing abrood of Cristen feith. Lire here. ve. 


Wherfore it 


sneth, therfore thei that weren scaterid, passid forth bi dinerse citees, euangelising the word of God to Jewis dwellinge in tho citees. Filip; this was 


Filip, tbe secunde dekene. Lire here. v. 


% fulfillide 9. ®biheeld ry. bandsayr. cCofr. 4seidev. ¢criedeny. f voice cuNPSTVXY. 
noys Q. and heelden vy. ihereno. with oo willey. 1Om.x. ™castiden y. © stooned him o. 
and stoneden r. © the witnessis PeTy. P clepinge to help rv. q take o. r he kneelide, and rv. 


Ssette thou ry. *Om.r. ¥sleeped, or dyde o. 
vv Om. y. Wand entride y. * and drow rv. 
thos s. 4QOm. rv. 


triz3t hond a. 4 ether heulden togidere K marg. 


marg. “ata. Y drou3 out k pr. m. 
VOL. IV. 


+ Chap. VIII. begins here in rv. 
y Om. oex. 


v Om. 1Ka see. m. 


3 Y 


v Om. mopeTry. 


2 prechyng o. #cam vy. » and prechide Fr. 


wa sau3t 1. ether feersnesse K. 


530 


lip, ‘to gidere® heeringe and seynge the 
7signes that he dide. Forsothef manye of 
hem that hadden vnelene spiritis, cryinge® 
swith greet vois, wenten ont. Forsothe 
manye syke in palasye, and crokid, beni 
9heelid. Therfore gret ioye isk maad in 
that citee. Forsoth ther was sum! man, 
Symound by name, the™ which bifore was 
in the citee a wicche, disseyuynge the folk 
of Samarie, seiynge him silf for® to be 
losum greet man. ‘T’o® whom alle herken- 
yden, fro the leeste tilP tod the mooste, 
seiynge", This is the vertu of ™ God, thes 
11 which is clepid greet. Forsothe alle bi- 
helden him, for this thing, that moche 
tyme he hadde maad hem mad", ‘or wood’, 
12 with his wicchingis. Sothliv¥ whanne thei 
hadden bileuyde to Philip, euangelysinge 
of the kyngdom of God, in the name of 
Jhesu Crist, men and wynimen weren bap- 
13 tiside. Thanne* Syimound ‘and he’ bileuyde; 
and whanne he was baptysid, he clyuede? 
to Philip; he seynge* signes® and moost 
vertues ‘for to be® maad, dredinge’ won- 
isdride. Forsoth whanne apostlis® that 
weren at Jerusalem, hadden herd for’ Sa- 
marie receyuedeS the word of God, thei 
issenten to hem Petre and John. The 
whiche whanne thei camen, preieden for 
hem, that thei schulden receyue the Hooly 
16 Gost ; forsothi not 3it he cam into ony of 
hem, but thei weren baptysid oonly in the 
i7name of the Lord Jhesu. Thanne thei 
puttiden* hondis on hem, and thei receyu- 
iseden the Hooly Gost. Forsoth whanne 
Symound hadde seyn, for! the Hooli Gost 
was 30uun by puttyng on™ of the hond® of 
l9 apostlis®, he offrideP to hem money, sey- 
inge4, ‘S3yue je" to me and this power, 
that* to‘ whom euere I schal putte on 
hondis, he receyue” the Hooly Gost. For- 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. : 


VILL. 7—19. 


with o wille herynge and seynge the 

signes that he dide. For manye of hem7 

that hadden vnelene spirits, crieden with 

a‘ greet vois, and wenten out. And manyes 

sijk* in the palsi, and crokid, weren heel- + whanne apo- 
: 2 f tlis, ete. thi 

id. Therfor greet ioye was maad in that9 Pilip was oonly 
: . a dekene, ther- 

citee. But there was a man in_ that foe thot 

citee, whos name was Symount, a witche, mnlste eristis 

. 4 e miz3te not 
that hadde disseyued the folc of Samarie, _ set on hondis, 

: Z ‘ either con- 
seiynge, that him silf was sum greet ane. ae 
man. Whom alle herkeneden, fro the leest IO Meeerr ee 
to the moost, and seiden, This is the eae Male 
vertu of God, which is clepid greet. And 1) this perteynede 

; to the postlis ; 
thei leueden hym, for long tyme he therfore bi- 

. 3 2 5 chopis al 
hadde maddid>® hem with his witche fhathen ssc, 
craftis. But whanne thei hadden bie 1a ee 

,in a. 
leued to Filip, ‘that prechide® of the ae in 
p novo testamen- 
kingdom of God, men and wymmen 10, setten on 
epee fi hondis, either 
weren baptisid in the name of Jhesu  confermen. 
Crist. And thanne also Symount him SG aes 
bileued; and whanne he was baptisid, ae ee 
he drou3 to Filip; and he sai also that  schulden come 

: in to Samarie, 

signes aud grete vertues weren don, he that thei schul- 
d d divide: Biteah den fille that 
was astonyed, and wondride. But whanne 14 ghing that per- 
the apostlist that weren at Jerusalem,  jeynde not w 
hadden herd that Samarie hadde res- “ere. ve. 
seyued the word of God, thei senten to ¢cam tate in 
4 to eny of hem; 
hem Petre and Joon. And whanne thei 5 that is, in 
. . ° i isibl 
camen, thei preieden for hem, that thei fateeshe ” 
g 5 cam to hem 
schulden resseyue the Hooli Goost ; for 16 oisibly, ze 
he cam not 3it in to ony of hem{, but ey a 
: ae wer aptym, Lap- 
thei weren baptisid oonli in the name of “ oonly in 
. ‘ the name of the 
the Lord Jhesu. Thanne thei leiden 17 tor thecs. 
hoondis on hem, and thei resseyueden Heeb iee 
the Hooli Goost. And whaime Symount 18 Persqones in 
hadde seyn, that the Hooly Goost was rho a enclos- 
7 x id in the name 
jouun bi leiyng on of the’ hoondis of cf Jiesn, but 
. iS in exchidi 
the apostlis, and he proferide to hem mo- die meni 

: * hadden not 
ney, and seide, 3yue 3e also to me this 1 maied'the 
power, that whom® euere Y schal leyef pee ee 
on myn& hoondis, that he resseyue the 


ondis. Lire 
here. v. 


€ with oo willey. Forry. &criedeny. 4andwentery. iwereny. ‘kwasy. 1a spory. 
Om.y. ™Om.y. "Om. mpesrxy. 9Om.r. POm.o. 4Om.e pr.m. and seiden ¥, ™Om.x. 
sOm.r. tthei ry. “wood o. Y Om. oex. WForsoth o. *Thannealsor. Yhimself yr. 2 drew o. 
@say v. > also signes acamNopesTy. also that singnesy. © tobe sx. wereny. 4 and he dredde, 
andy. © the apostlis poery. fthaty. @resceyne x. bOm.y. ifory. &putten x. | that or. 
Mto@. hondiso. © the apostolis sr. P profridery. and seide y. * 3iue os. 3iue jee also r. 
Rifeth x, SOm.y. tono. 4 resceyued Q prom. Tr. 

2Om.gka. sijk menk. ether wodid k marg. © prechinge g sec. vice. k prom. 4 Om. BIQR 
ghkoa8. ¢ to whom kK sec.m. on whom R sec.m. putk. & Om. gk. 


VIII. 20—32. 


20soth Petre seide to him, Thi money be 
with thee into perdicioun, for thou gess- 
idist the 3ifte of God for’ to be had, ‘or 
21 weeldid”, by* money. Part is not to thee, 
nethir sort’, in this word, for thin herte is 
2znot ri3tful bifore God. ‘And so? do thou 
penaunce fro* this thi wickidnesse, and 
preie God, if perauenture this thou3t of 
23 thin herte be for3ouun** to thee. Forsoth> 
in galle of bittirnesse and* bond of wick- 
2sidnesse ‘I se thee for? to be®. Forsoth 
Symound answeringe’, seide, Preie je for 
me to the Lord, that no thing of thes 
2sthat 3e han seid, come on me. And thei 
witnessinge" and‘ spekinge* the word of 
the Lord, 3eden' ajen to Jerusalem, and 
euangelisiden to manye cuntrees of Sama- 
2éritans. .Forsoth an aungel of the Lord 
spak to Philip, seyinge™, Ryse thou, and 
go a3ens the south", to the weye that goth 
doun fro Jerusalem into® Gasam; this is 
27 desert weye?. And he risynge4, wente 
forth. And lo! a man of Ethiopie, ‘geld- 
yng, my3ti' of the queene Candace of 
Ethiopiens’, thet which was on‘ alle hir 
richessis, cam for" to worschipe in Jeru- 
sssalem. And he turnyde a3en, sittinge on 
his chare, and redynge Ysaie, the pro- 
29 phete. Forsoth the spirit seide to Philip, 
‘Come to’, and ioyne thee to this chare. 
30 Forsoth Philip ‘rennynge to’, herde hym 
redinge Ysaie, the prophete. And he 
seyde, Gessist thou, wher thou vndir- 
31 stondist, what thingis thou redist? The* 
which seithY, And how may I’, if ‘sum 
man schal not* schewe to me? And he 
preiede Philip, that he schulde stize vp, 
szand sitte with him. Forsothe the place 
of scripture that he radde, was this, As a 
scheep to sleyng he was led, and as a 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


531 


Hooli Goost. But Petir seide to hym, 20+ 4 man; bi 


. ; . oe his that it is 
Thi money be with thee into perdicioun, fail ea, it 
for thou gessidist" the! 3ifte of God iy S7gncied 


that he is not 
schulde be had for monei. Ther is no21%!4 4 gelding, 


but kitting of 
part, ne sort to thee, in this word, for Be Ae 
. ° ° . o gen ring: 
thin herte is not ri3tful bifor God. Ther-22 but of chastite 
: ea d onest of 
for do thou penaunce for this wickid- Yertues. for to 
. . 7 hi Pr 
nesse of thee, and preie God, if perauen- Fasilonee for 
ture this thou3t of thin herte be forjouun  ™any hethene 
e eame of deuo- 
to thee. For Y se that thou art in the 23cioun for 10 
° ° worschipe (r 
gall of bitternesse and in the boond of jn Jerusalem, 
wickidnesse. And Symount answeride, 
and seide, Preie 3e for me to the Lord, 
that uo thing of these thingis* that 3e fro hethenesse 
1 it <a to the feith of 
han seid, com on! ne. And thei witness- 25 Jewis. as a 


in xii. c°. of 

hap this man 
. cheep he was 
iden, and spaken the word of the Lord, aac 


24 Joon 3 ether in 
was conuertid 
ledde to sleeing; 


3 whanne he 
and 3eden a3en to Jerusalem, and prech-  Wnre t 
iden to many cuntrees of Samaritans, ™y3te cast 


mn doun alle his 
And an aungel of the Lord spak to Filip, 26 aduersaries, he 
* suffride himself 
and scide, Ryse thou, and go ajens the tu be led to 
* : sleeing. and asx 
south, to the weie that goith doun fro Qiond, ete; 
Jerusalem in to Gasa; this is desert. ft he 3eldide 
not wrongful 
And he roos, and wente forth. And lo! 27 wordis for 
Speaks . wrongis 5 
a mant of Ethiopie, a my3ti man seru-_ whanne he was 
. accusid falsl 
aunt, a 3elding of Candace, the queen of  pifore Pilat, he 
Ethiopieus, which was on alle her rich-  “@ele in 
essis, cain to worschipe in Jerusalem. ear 
(i was 
And he turnede ajen, sittinge on his 28 taken ep; in 
; . liii. c°. of Esaie, 
chare, and redinge Isaie, the profete. thus he was 
ss : sy: ° taken fro an- 
And the spirit seide to Filip, Nei3e thou, 29 cuishe and 
and ioyne thee to this chare. And Filip 30 See 
‘ran to™, and herde hym redynge Ysaie, cee ee — 
: om, bi whi 
the prophete. And he” seide, Gessist alle men that 
. ° dizeden, wi 
thou, whether thou vndirstondist, what jdidon bi God- 
Cee sadist 2 ° dis sentense in 
thingis thou redist? And he seide, Hows Pee ne ores 
may Y, if no man schewe to me? And __ taken up bi 
s Re. power of his 
he preiede Filip, that he schulde come _ rising oe 
: . and in the 
vp, and sitte with hym. And the place 32 same manere 
. . hi hi 
of the scripture that he redde, was this, ae a 
in mekenesse ; 
As a scheep he was led to sleyng, and '}” is, bi decth 
which he suf- 


fride meekely in manhed taken. his dom; that is, Goddis sentence, that was his, in as myche as he is God. was taken up; for whanne Crist roos 
ajeen, hooly men that weren withholden in helle, weren taken up fro thennes. who schal telle out the generacioun of hym ; that is, the multiplying 
of feithful men, that ben gendrid ajen in Crist by baptym. Lire here. v. 


v Om. sx. w Om.oex. *witho. Ygracey. %Therforevy. ®forv. 94 forjiue w. > For I see 
that thou arty. Candiny. 4Om.sx. ‘eOm.y. fanswerideand vy. §& this o. 4 witnessiden r. 
iinx. kspakeny. ‘andyedenvy. ™andseide vy. ™soneo. too. P deseert, either forsaken v. 


q roos and rv. 
onest and chaast rv. 


8 Ethiopiis mopery. 
andy. *Om. F. 


Yseide r. 21 vadirstonde v. 


b gessist k8. i that the 1 see.m. 


ta my3ty geldinge GuEGDY bs geldyng my3ti N. migti gelding sx. a mi3ty man seruaunt 
m. ¥. 


k Om. o. 


tt vpon wy. tOm.sx. VY Neij thoury. Wrun to, 
anoon vy. » Om. G pr.m. 
Itoa. ™rancb pr.m. cama. ® Om. a. + 


3Y 2 


532 


lomb bifore a man scheringe® him is 
doumb with oute vois, so he openyde not 
33his mouth. In mekenesse his dom is@ 
takyn vp; who schal telle out the gene- 
racioun of hym? For his lyf schal be 
3itakyn awey fro the® erthe. Forsoth the 
‘gelding answeringe’ to Philip, seide®, I 
biseche thee, of what prophete seith he 
this thing? of him}, or! of ony othir ? 
35 Forsothe Philip openynge* his mouth, and 
bigynnynge! at this scripture, euangelis- 
36ide™ to hym Jhesu. And the” while thei 
wenten bi the weye, thei camen to sum 
watir. And the ‘geldyng seith®, Loo! wa- 
tir; who forbedith me for? to be baptysid? 
37 Forsoth Philip seide4, If thou bilenyst of" 
al the® herte, it is leefful. And he an- 
sweringe', seith*, I bileue they sone of 
as God ‘for to be Jhesu”. And he comaund- 
ide the chare for* to stonde. And thei 
wenten doun bothe into the watir, Philip 
and the gelding’, and he” baptisyde him. 
39 Forsothe whanue ‘he sti3ede* vp of” the 
watir, the spirit of the Lord rauyschide 
Philip, and the geldyng* sy3¢ him no more. 
Forsoth he wente ioyinge by his weye. 
40 Forsoth Philip is* foundun in Asotof; and 
he ‘passinge forth®, euangeliside to alle 
citees, til he cam to Cesarye. 


CAP. IX. 


1 Saul, 3it" brethere, ‘or blowere', of ma- 
nassis and* betyng, ‘or sleyng'!, into™ 
disciplis of the Lord, cam ny3 to the 
2 princes" of prestis, and axide of him epi- 
stlis® into Damaske, to synagogis; that if 
he founde ony men and wyinmen of this 
lyf, he schulde lede? boundyn to Jerusa- 
3lem. And whanne he made iourney, it 
bifel, that he cam ny3 to Damaske. And 


€ clippynge Nn. @ was r. € Om. n. 
bh him silf wopry. ‘either vy. ¥ openide r. 
aunt and chaast seide rv. P Om. sx. q seith o. 


u seide N. and seide rx. 
Y onest sernaunt and chaast r. 
dseeth r. €wasv. f Azotus Pr. 
10m. ogrx. ™ azens rv. 
aboute 9. lede hem rv. 


2 Filip r. 
0 prince 4GMNOQSTXY. 
© schere abcof. 


P whom Kk prem. 4 or Eh. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. © 


f onest seruaunt and chast answeride r. 
! bigan rp. 
Tino. 
vin the n. that Jhesu Crist is the rv. 
a thei stizeden r. 
& passide forth and rv. 
© letteres 0. epistlis, either comyssiouns ¥. 


Tan k sec. m. 


VIL. 33——IX.. 3. 


as a lomb'bifor a man that scherith° 

him is doumb with out vois, so he open- 

yde not his mouth. In mekenesse his33 

dom was takun vp; who schal telle out 

the generacioun of hym? For his lijf 

schal be takun awei fro the erthe. And34 

the gelding answeride to Filip, and seide, 

Y biseche thee, of ‘what profete? seith 

he this thing ? of him silf, ethir? of ony* 

othere? And Filip openyde his mouth, 35 

and bigan at this scripture, and prechide 

to him Jhesn. And the’ while theise 

wenten bi the weie, thei camen to a +c brethere, ei- 

water. Aud the gelding seide, Lo! wa- oe 

tir; who forbedith me to be baptisid ? ji!) tint 

And Filip seide, If thou bilenest of al 37 self and othere 

thet herte, it is leueful. And he auswer- greet wynd the 

ide, and seide, Y bileue that Jhesu Crist eee ae 

is the sone of God. And he comaundide3s pestle 

the chare to stonde stille. And thei poe es 

wenten doun bothe into the watir, Filip sree 

and the gelding, and Filip baptiside with betingis 

hym. And whanne thei weren come vp39 pene 

of the watir, the spirit of the Lord ‘a ere 

rauyschide Filip, and the gelding say in to Cae 

hym no more’. And Filip was foundun 40 thanne disci- 

in Azotus; and he passide forth, and’ edadebate 

prechide to alle citees, til he cam to apa 

Cesarie. to the prince ; 
he was not 
clepid herto, 

CAP. IX. nggiecb ear dl 

as enflaumed 


° ° Ww 
But Saul, 3it a blower’ of manassis! with wille of 
Capen Cie Sie 1S anoyinge. 
and of betingis a3ens the disciplis of the a phim 
Lord, cam to the prince of preestis, and 2 <piséis;, that 
i ine bi autorite 
axide of hym lettris in to Damask, to he mygte more 
* . anole Teitniu 
the synagogis; that if he fond ony men men, in to De- 
cage > that h 
and* wymmen of this lijf, he schulde eae ince 
lede hem boundun to Jerusalem. And3_ there fetthful 


Sine: , F men, as he 

whanne he made his iourney, it bifelde, pg ude in 
erusaiem. 

that he cam ny3 to Damask. And su- Lire here. v. 


£ and seide r. 
m and euangelizide yr. 4too. © onest seru- 
8 Om. & pr.m. thin og. —_t answeride r. 

Ww to be Jhesu sx. Om. yr. * Om. sx. 
b fro o. © onest seruaunt and chaast 7. 
hsita wnporvy. iOm.ex. * and of rr. 
P leden 


sOm.1. tthinb. more; but he 


wente in his weie ioying A sec.m. marg. more; and he wente in his weye ioiynge R. more [and he wente 


» joyinge bi his weye] 8. Vand he a. 


Ww brether, or a blower K. 


X or R. 


IX. 4——16. 


sudeynly li3t fro heuene schon aboute 
ahym; and he fallinge’ into’ the erthe, 
herde’ a vois seyinge to hym, Saul, Saul, 
swhat pursuest thou me? Thet which" 
seide, Who art thou, Lord? And he’, I 
am Jhesu of Nazareth, whom thou pursu- 
est. It is hard to thee, for” to kyke aj3ens 
6the pricke. And he ‘tremblinge and won- 
dringe*, seide, Lord, what wolt thou ‘me 
7for to doy. And the Lord to* him, Ryse 
thou, and entre in to the citee, and it 
schal be seide to thee, what ‘it bihoueth 
thee? for> to do. Forsothe tho men that 
wenten with him, stooden maad ferd®, ‘or 
out of mynde4; sothli heeringe® a vois, 
8forsothe seyngef no man. Forsothe Saul 
roos fro the erthe; and ‘the y3en openyds, 
he® sy3 no thing. Forsoth thei drawinge' 
9him to* hondis, ledden! into Damask. And 
he was thre daies not seynge; and he eet 
ionot, nether drank. Forsoth sum™ disciple 
was at Damask, by name Ananye. And 
the Lord seide to him in a uisioun, Ana- 
ilnye. And he seith", Lo! I, Lord. And 
the Lord to® him, Ryse thou, and go into 
a streete that is clepid Rectus; and seke, 
in the hous of Judas, Saul by name Tar- 
12sence. Forsoth? lo! he preieth; and he sy3 
a man Ananye by name, entringe and 
puttinge to hym hondis, that he receyue 
13si3t. Forsothe Ananye ausweride, Lord, 
I haue herd of manye of this man, how 
“manye yuele thingis‘ he dide to thi seyntis 
14in Jerusalem; and this hath power of the™ 
princes of prestis, for’ to bynde alle men 
1sthat ‘inclepen thi name‘. Forsoth" the 
Lord seide to him, Go thou, for this is to 
me a vessel of chesyng, that he bere my 
name bifore hethen men, and kingis, and 
16the sones of Israel. Forsothe I schal 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


. Suest. 


533 


denli a 1i3t from heuene schoon aboute 
hym; and he fallideY to the erthe, and 4 
herde a vois seiynge to hym, Saul, Saul, 
what pursuest thou me*? And he seide,s 
Who art thou, Lord? And he seide, Y 
am Jhesu of Nazareth, whom thou pur- 
It is hard to thee, to kike a3ens 
the pricke. And he tremblide, and won-6 
dride, and seide, Lord, what wolt thou 
that Y do? And the Lord seide to hym,7 
Rise vp, and entre in to the citee, and 
it schal be seide to thee, what it bihoueth 
thee todo. And tho men that wenten 
with hym, stoden astonyed; for thei 
herden a vois, but thei sien no man. 
And Saul roos fro the earth; ands 
whanne hise i3en weren opened, he say 
no thing. And thei drowen hym bi the 
hondis, and ledden hym in to Damask. 
And he was* thre daies not seynge};9 
‘and he eete not’, nether drank. Ando 
a disciple, Ananye bi name, was at Da- 
mask. And the Lord seide to hym in 
‘a visioun>, Ananye. And he seide, Lo! 
Y, Lord. And the Lord seide to hym,u 
Rise thou, and go in to a streete that is 
clepid Rectus; and seke, in the hous of 
Judas, Saul bi name of Tharse. For® lo?! 
he preieth; and he say{ a man, Ananye12 
bi name, entringe and leiynge on hym 
hoondis, that he resseyue si3t. Andis 
Ananye answerde, Lord, Y haue herd of 
many of this man, how greete yuelis® he 
dide to thi seyntis in Jerusalem; and 14 
this hath power of the princis‘ of preestis, 
to bynde alle men that clepen thi name 
to helpe. And the Lord seide to hym, 15 
Go thou, for this is to me a vessel of 
chesing, that he bere my name bifore 
hethene men, and kingis, and tofore® the 


* what pursuest 
thou me; in 
my membris, 
whiche Saul 
pursnede, and 
not Crist in his 
propir persone, 
that was glori- 
ouse and sat at 
the rizthalf of 
the fadir. to 
kike, etc.; that 
is, ajenstonde 
him that is 
strongere than 
thon withouten 
comparisoun. 
ve. tremblide 
and wondride ; 
of Cristis power 
knowen, whom 
he bileenede 
not hifore for 
to rengne in 
henene, hut 
more to be 
dampned as a 
fals prophete. 
Lord, what wolt 
thow; as if he 
seide, fro this 
tyne forth, 1 
am redy to 
oheie to thee in 
alle thingis. v. 
thei herden a 
vois; that is, 
the vois of 
Poul, but not 
of Crist, ve. 
that spac with 
Poul, in 22 c°. 
withinne; and 
therfore thei 
stood astonied. 
Lire here. v. 


t+ not seeing; 

hi bodily sist, 
but he si3 bi 
goostly sist, 
either hi si3t of 
sonle. For as 
dovtonris seieu 
comunily, in tho 
thre daies he 
was ranyschid 
til to the 
thridde heuene, 
and hadde that 
excellent rene- 
lacioun, in 2. 
pistle to Cor. 
12°. he cet 
not, neither 
drank; he was 
susteyned bi 
that visioun, as 
also Moises was 
xl. daies in the 
hil. Lire here. 
ve. 


t he say; hi the renelacioun of God. puttinge to him hondis; this setting on of hondis was not lijc that, of which it is seid of the chapitre bifore 
goinge, that bi the setting on of hondis of apostlis the Hooly Goost was 3onen in sensible singne; but this settinge on of hondis here was to bodily 
heelthe, as seint Laurence puttide hondis on blynde men, and thei resseyueden siz3t. Lire here. v. 


q fallide rv. T to or. s and herde r. 
x tremblide and wondride and rv. 
bOm.sx. © aferd rx. 
izen vy. 5 Om.o. i drowen rv. 


P For vy. 4 greet yuelis v. 


4d Om. oex. 
k bi o. with r. 


rOm. x. % Om. sx. 


Z was there kK sec.m. 
& bifore EKR. 


¥ felde plures. fel um. 
¢yuela. f prince b. 


t Om. r. 
Y me to do sx. that I do r. 
€ thei herden rv. 
Vand ledden rv. 
* clepen thi name to help r. 


4 neither he eet r. 


v he seide anv. w Om. sx. 
Z seide to NV. a thee byhoueth o. 
f but thei sien vy. & whanne he openide the 
Ma mpory. seide vy. © seide to NF. 


u And o. 


u and he o. 


b sleep ggk. ¢©Om.c. 4 Om. a. 


534 


schewe to him, how manye thingis it bi- 
houeth him forY to suffre for my name. 
17 And” Ananye wente, and entride into the 
hous ; and ‘he puttinge* to him the hondis, 
seideY, Saul brothir, the Lord Jhesu sente 
me, that apperide to thee in the weye, in 


which thou camest?, that thou se, and be. 


isfulfillid with the Hooli Gost. And anon 
ther* felden from his y3en as scalis, and 
he receyuede si3t. And he ‘risinge is® 
l9baptisid. And whanne he hadde takun 
mete, he was comfortid. Forsoth he was 
with disciplis®, that weren at Damask, by 
20summe dayes. And anoon he entrynget 
into the synagogis, prechide® the Lord 
21 Jhesu, for this is thef sone of God. For- 
soth alle men that herden him, wondriden, 
and seiden, Wher’ ‘this is not" that in- 
pugnide in Jerusalem hem that inclepiden! 
this name? and hidir tok this thing he cam, 
that he schulde lede hem bounden to the 
22 princes of prestis. Forsothe Saul moche 
more wexide! strong, and confoundide the 
Jewis that dwelliden at Damask, ‘afferm- 
23ynge for™ this is Crist. Forsoth whanne 
manye dayes weren fulfillid", Jewis maden 
a counceil, that thei schulden slee him. 
24Forsothe® the aspies of hem ben? maad 
knowun to Saul. Forsothe4 thei kepten 
and the 3atis day and ny3t, that thei 
2sschulden sle him. Forsothe his disciplis 
‘takynge him in’ ny3t, ‘bi the wal leften 
26him, sendinge doun in a leep'. Forsoth 
whanne he cam into" Jerusalem, he ‘tempt- 
ide, or” asaiede’, for* to ioyne him to 
disciplisY; and alle dredden him, ‘not bi- 
27 leuynge” that he was a disciple. Forsoth 
Barnabas ‘ledde him takun* to apostlis®, 
and telde to hem, how® in the weye he 
hadde seyn the Lord, and for’ he spak to 
him, and how in Damask he dide tristily 
28in the name of Jhesu. And he was with 


v Om. sx. w Om. sx. 
b roos and was ry. © apostelles o. the disciplis py. 
ther ¢ ef s passim x. 4 is not he nor. 
yde that yr. fillidy. © Ando. Pp weren r. 
x Om. sx. 
MPQTY. 


Y¥ the disciplis wpery. 
¢ how that 9. 4 that r. 


bh me fo thee k. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


x puttide vy. puttende x. 
4 entride r. 
i clepide to helpe r. 
4 Forsothe and o. 
t and leften him, and senten doun in a leep bi the walle r. 


z and bileeneden not r. 


i the more ErKQRbceghkoaf. 


IX. 17—~28. 


sones of Israel. For Y schal schewe to16 
hym, how:grete thingis it bihoueth hym 
to suffre for my name. And Ananye17 
wente, and entride in to the hous; and 
leide on hym his hondis, and seide, Saul 
brothir, the Lord Jhesu sente me®, that 
apperide to thee in the weie, in which 
thou camest, that thou se, and be ful- 
fillid with the Hooli Goost. And anoon 1s 
as the scalis felden fro hise izen, he res- 
seyuede si3t. And he roos, and was bap- 
tisid. And whanne he hadde takun 19 
mete, he was coumfortid. And he was 
bi sum daies with the disciplis, that 
weren at Damask. And anoon he en-20 
tride in to the synagogis, and prechide 
the Lord Jhesu, for this is the sone of 
God. And alle men that herden hym,2! 
wondriden, and seiden, Whether this is 
not he that impugnede in Jerusalem hem 
that clepiden to help this name? and 
hidir he cam for this thing, that he 
schulde leede hem boundun to the princis 
of preestis ?. But Saul myche more’ wex- 22 


ede strong, and confoundide the Jewis 

that dwelliden at Damask, and affermyde 

daics weren fillid, Jewis maden a coun- [eis Jhet 

sel, that thei schulden sle hym. And 24 “rst veryly 
lawe and pro- 

: é 5 hetis ; and h 
to Saul. And thei kepten the 3atis dai edar ¥ ‘ 
and ni3t, that thei schulden sle him. But2s ee 

he lerned first 
delyuereden hym, and leeten him doun  °f Gamaliel, 
in a leep bi the wal. And whanne he 26 myche perfit- 

liere of God 
ioyne hym to the disciplis; and alle navmeminy 

k 
dredden hym, and* leueden not that he Meade (athe 

3 til to his com- 
ledde hym to the apostlis, and telde to yng asen fro 
hem, how in the weie he hadde seyn the Damask. Lyre 
here. v. 


that this is Crist}. And whanne manye 23+ sis is Crist ; 
E bihizt in the 
the aspies of hein weren maad knowun 
declaride this 
hise disciplis token hym bi ny3t, and ‘ment which 
ve. afterward 
cam in to Jerusalem, he assaiede to _ lystnynge hym. 
Jfilid ; that 
was a disciple. But Barnabas took, and 27 dayes of Saule 
Arabie in to 
Lord, and that he spak to hym, and hou 


Z came SX. a Om. r. 
€ and prechide r. fOm.s. & Whe- 
k for ry. | wax mesrxy. ™ and affeerm- 
rOm. or. 8 tooken him bi r. 
"to Tx prom. ‘Om. ox.  ™ saide T. 

4 took and led him r, > the apostlis 


Y and seide 


k and thei 1. 


IX. 29—40, DEEDS 


hem,*entringe and goynge® out in’ Jeru- 
salem, doynge® tristily in thet name of the 
29 Lord. And he spaak to* hethene men, 
and disputide with Grekis. Forsothe thei 
30sou3ten for! to sle him. The™ which 
thing whanne bretheren hadden knowe, 
thei ledden him in ny3t to Cesarie, and 
31 leften to Tarsis. Sothli the chirche by 
al Judee, and Galile, and Samarie hadde 
pees, and was edifyed, walkinge in the" 
drede of the Lord, and was fulfillid? with? 
szcomfort of the Hooly Gost. Forsoth it is4 
maad, that Petre, the’ while'™ he passide 
alle’, cam to the hooly men that dwelliden 
33at Lidde. Forsothe he fond there sum 
man, Eneas by naine, fro ei3te 3eris' lig- 
ynge" in bedd; the’ which was’ syke in 
3ipalesye. And Petre seith* to him, Eneas, 
the Lord Jhesu Crist heele thee; ryse 
thou, and dresseY to thee. And anoon he 
ssroos. And alle men? that dwelliden at 
Lidde, and Sarone, sy3en hym, the* whiche 
36ben> conuertid to the Lord. Forsoth in 
Joppe was sum disciplisse®, bi name Ta- 
byta, the’ which interpretid, is seid Dor- 
cas. This was ful of goode werkis and 
37almesdedis, that sche dide. Forsoth it is® 
maad in tho dayes, that sche ‘maad syk‘ 
deiede. The® whiche whanne thei hadde 
wayschun, thei puttiden® hiri in a ‘soup- 
ssyng place’. Forsoth whanne Lidda was 
ny3 fro Joppe, disciplis ‘heeringe for! Petre 
was in it, senten™ twey men to him, prei- 
ynge", That thou tarie not for® to come ‘til 
39to1 vs. Sothli Petre ‘rysinge vp" cam 
with hem. And whanne he cam’, thei 
ledden him into the ‘souping place. And 
alle widewis" stooden aboute hym, wep- 
inge, and schewinge cootis and clothis, 
40the’ whiche Dorcas maade to hem. For- 
sothe ‘alle men” cast* out withouteforth, 


f forth o. 
n Om. mper. 


e and entride and 3ede r. 
k with vx. 10m. sx. ™ Om. rx. 
rr while that wy. 
Yaraie vy. 2%the men x. ®OQOm.y7. 
sOm.v. 4) putten sx. iQOm.o. 
© Om. alii. 4 vnto MPY. to oeT. 
¥Om. vx. WW whanne alle men weren r. 


b weren r. 
k soler vy. 


m Om. k. 
4 and thei 3. 


linto k, 
K marg. 


1 Om. K@o. 
Fr alle the 1 sec. m. 


OF APOSTLES. 


& Om. G pr.m. MPY. of sx. 

© filide rv. 

8 by alle r. aboute alle rv. t 3er s passim. “liende sx. vOm.v. ¥Om.71. 
© disciple x. 

l herden that r. 

T yoos up and vy. 8 was comen Pr. 

x don 0, put r. 


© beedrede E. 


535 


in Damask he dide tristili in the name 
of Jhesu. And he was with hem, and 2s 


entride, and 3ede out in! Jerusalem, and 
dide tristili in the name of Jhesu. And 29 
tT disputide 
ks ’ with Greekis; 
with Grekist. And thei sou3ten to sle 
. a z Jewis born in 
hym. Which thing whanne the™ bri-30 the ond of 
seatering of 
bi ny3t to Cesarie, and leten hym go to Jews mad in 
Tarsis. And the chirche bi al Judee, 31 king Antyoke; 
and Galilee, and Samarie, hadde pees, and this dis- 
and was edefied, and walkide in the ‘une “esi 
the text schew- 
: ith, thou3 the 
coumfort of the Hooli Goost. ; 
é ¥ s here seith, that 
bifelde, that Petre, the while he passide _ it was in the 
s p 
toward Sirie 
dwelliden at Lidde. And he foond a33%¢ Clee. 
litil to charge 
eee i of this Glose. 
he” hadde leie ‘in bed®; and he was sijk “ire here. v. 
. ax700 + that Petir 
m palsy . while he puss- 
Eneas, the Lord Jhesu Crist heele thee; i aowe alle ; 
rise thou, and araye? thee. And anoon __ in to Crist that 
dwelliden in 
s ‘ . of Jude. And 
Lidde, and at Sarone, saien hym, whiche  petis as « good 
oe ran aboute to 
Joppe was a disciplesse, whos name was conferme hem 
Tabita, that is to seie, Dorcas. This cam to the holy 
men; that is, 
fs x 0 ° ay Crist, that ben 
that sche dide. And it bifelde in tho37,7°3 0%: Bae 
daies, that sche was sijk, and diede. 
ta; thus sche 
was clepid in 


he spak with hethene men, and disputide 
these weren 
theren hadden knowe, thei ledden hym SUC E Eye e 
the tyme of 
Lire here. ve. 
Jerusalem, as 
drede of the Lord, and was fillid with 
And _ it 32 magistral Glose 
fj weye i inge 
aboute allet, cam to the hooli men that toward Scie 
Therfore it is 
man, Eneas bi name, that fro ei3te 3eer 
And Petre seide to hym, 34+ 
men bileeuynge 
he roos. And alle men that dwelten at 35 dinerse placis 
weren conuertid to the Lord. And in36%hepheerde 
in the feith. 
was‘ful of good werkis and almesdedis,  bitceuing in ¢o 
tym. v. Tali. 
And whanne thei hadden waischun hir, 
Ebreu. it is 


thei leiden hir in a soler. And for 38 seid Dorcas; 
5 Se ac in Greek word, 
Lidda was ny3 Joppe, the disciplis Qherimne Lax 


wroot this book, 
and euer either 
name in Latyn 
singnefieth a 


herden that Petre was thereynne, and4 
senten twei inen to hym, and preieden, 
That thou tarie not to come to vs. And 39 capret either 
. doo. which 
Petre roos vp, and cam with hem. And duress made 
° to hems that 
whanne he was comun, thei ledden hym 3. hh to be 
in to the soler. And alle’ widewis stoden ™2#4 to hem 
aboute hym, wepynge, and schewynge _ tothe cloth and 
E : A furre. Lire here. 
cootis and clothis, which: Dorcas made ye. 


at her costis, as 


h and dide v. 
Pinthe nN. 4 was 7. 


i Om. upry. 
r Om. mopery. 
x seide v. 
dOm.yv. €wasry.  f was sik and vy. 
™m and senten vy. 4 and preieden r. 
tsoler vy. the widewes wpeTy. 


00 the palesie k. P ether dresse, ether make reedy 


536 DEEDS 


Petre ‘puttinge the knees’, preiede. And 
he turnyd to the body, seide”, Tabita, ryse 
thou?. And sche openyde the? y3en, and 

41‘Petre seyn‘’, saat? vp ajen. Forsoth he 
3yuynge® to hir the-hond, reysidef hir. 
And whanne he hadde clepid hooly men 

4zand widewis, he assignede hir quyk. For- 
soth it is? maad knowun by al Joppe; 

43and thei" bileuyden in the Lord. Forsoth 
it is' maad, that many dayes he dwellide 
in Joppe, at Symound, sum* coriour, ‘or 
tawier'. 


CAP. X. 


1 Forsoth sum inan was in Cesarie, Cor- 
neli by name, centurio, ‘that is, hauynge 
an hundrid men™ vndir hym*, of the® 
cumpanye of kny3tis, that is seid of Yta- 

2lie; a religious man, and dredinge the 
Lord, with al his meyne; doynge manye 
alinessis? to the peple, and preiynge the 

3 Lord euermore. This sy3% in’ a uysioun 
opynli, as in the nynthe hour’, ‘or noon, 
an aungel of God entrynge into hym, and 

4seyinge ‘to him", Corneli. And he bihold- 
inge hym, takyn’ with drede seyde¥, Who 
art thou, Lord? Forsoth he seide to him, 
Thi preieris and thin almesdedis han sti3- 
ed vp into mynde, in* the si3t of the Lord. 

sAnd now sendeY men into Joppe, and 
clepe ‘sum man*, Symound, that is namyd 

6 Petre. This? is herborid at sum man‘, 
Symound, coriour*’, whos hous is bisydis 
‘the see. This schal seie to thee, what it 

7bihoueth thee for® to do. And whanne 
the aungel that spak to him, hadde gon 
awey, he clepide®’ tweynef ‘his homely 
men&, and a kny3t dredinge the Lord, of 

shem that obeischiden® to him. To whichi, 
whanne he hadde told alle thingis, he 


¥ knelide and r. 2 and seide r. 
¢ whanne sche si3 Petir r. 
i was ry. kao. 
°Om.o.  P almes Q. 
taken y. Wand seide r. 
bampery. ¢Om. x. 
&§ men of his hons r. 


d she sat aperry. 


4 seeth er. 
x of sx, 

4 curryour, or tawer a. 
h obeieden s. 


r Om. Tr. 


S arise k. 


€ Om. R prin. 
hym K marg. 


u Om. k prom. 
¥ Om. gk pr. m. 


Y clepe thou b. 


OF APOSTLES. 


4 yp o. thou, in name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist mpory. 

e 3af Fr. 

lor lawer aGMTY. Om. QXx. either tawiere ¥. 

S our of the dai r. 
Zaman GMPQTY. sum SX. 

e Oni. sx. 

ithe which 4. whom emupery. 


Y sende thou r. 


v And a gk. 
z He this 1. 


IX: 4i1—xX. 8. 


to hem. And whanne alle men weren 40 
put with out forth, Petre knelide, and 
preiede. And he turnede to the bodi, 
and seide, Tabita, rise’ thou. And sche 
openyde hir i3en, and whanne sche si3 
Petre, sche sat vp a3en*. And he took41 
hir bi the hond, and reiside hir. And 
whanne he hadde clepid the hooli men 
and widewis, he assignede hir alyue. And 42 
it was maad" knowun bi al Joppe; and 
many bileueden in the Lord. And it43 
was maad, that many daies he dwellide 


in Joppe, at oon Symount, a curiour. 


CAP. X. 


AY man was in Cesarie, Cornelie bil 
name, a centurien” of the cumpanye of 
kny3tis, that is seid of Italie; a religious 
inant, and* dredinge the Lord, with al 
his meyne; doynge many almessis to 
the puple, and preynge the Lord enere 
more. This say in a visioun opinli, as3 
in the nynthe oure of the dai, an aungel 
of God entringe in to hym, and seiynge 
to hym, Cornelie. And he bihelde hym, 4 
and was adred, and seide, Who art 
thou, Lord? And he seide to hym, Thi 
preieris and thin almesdedis han stied 
vp in to mynde, in the si3t of the Lord. 
And now sende thou men in to Joppe,s 
and clepeY oon Symount, that is named 
Petre. This’ is herborid at a man Sy-6 
mount, curiour, whos hous is bisidis the 
see. This schal seie to thee, what it 
bihoueth thee to do. And’ whanne the7 
aungel that spak to hym, was gon awei, 
he clepide twei men of his hous, and a 
kny3t that dredde the Lord, whiche 
weren at his bidding. And whanne hes 
hadde told hem? alle these thingis, he 
sente hem in to Joppe. And on the dai9 


bher r. 
&wasr. © many F. 
‘2 Gloss om. in 9x. 
uQOm.o. VY was 

a That o. He this r. 
ftwo GpesTx. to MY. 


f and reiside r. 
m knizlis v. 
t Om. ox. 


ee clepide to y. 


W that is, a man hauyng c. kny3tis vndir 
@ to hem a. 


t+ a religious 
man; in wor- 
schiping 00 
God, as many 
hethen men 
doon, that han 
not the lawe of 
Moises. to the 
puple; that is, 
to the poore 
Jewis. prey- 
inge to the Lord 
euermore; that 
is, in alle tymes 
able herto, that 
the Lord 
schulde dresse 
him in to the 
weie of heelthe. 
Doctouris seien 
comunly bi this 
place, that if a 
papym turneth 
him to biseche 
verey God, the 
firste cause of 
alle thingis, in 
preyinge that 
God dresse him 
to his heelthe, 
if he kepith 
himself fro 
synnes, God 
schal schewe to 
hym of Cristen 
feith, as myche 
as is needful to 
helthe, either 
God schal sende 
a techere to 
hym. Lire here. 
ve. 


X. O—22. 


g9sente hem into Joppe. Forsoth on the 
day suynge, ‘hem makinge* journey, and 
nei3ynge! to the citee, Petre stijede vp 
into the™ hizere" thingis of the hous, that 
he schulde preie, aboute the sixte hour. 
10 And whanne he hungride, he wolde taste, 
‘or ete’. Forsoth ‘hem makinge? redy, an 
axcess of soule, ‘or rauysching of spirit, 
1ifel on hym; and he sy3" heuene openyd, 
and sums vessel comynge doun, as a greet 
scheete with foure cordis, fort to be sent” 
12 doun fro heuene into’ erthe, in the” which 
weren alle foure footide beestis, and crep- 
inge thingis of erthe, and volatils of he- 
isuene, ‘or eyr*. And aY vois is? maad to 
i4hym, Ryse’, Petre, slee>, and ete. For- 
sothe Petre seith®, Lord, ferr be it ‘fro 
me‘, for I neuere eet al° comyn thing and 
isvnclene. And eft the secunde tyme the 
vois tof him, That thing that God hath 
clensid, ‘thou schalt not seie& vnclene. 
16 Forsoth this thing is® don by thries; and 
anon the vessel isi receyued into heuene. 
17 And the while Petre with ynne hym* 
doutide, what the visioun was which! he 
sy3, lo! the men, that weren sent fro 
Cornelie, sekinge the hous of Symound, 
isstooden ny3 at the 3ate. And whanne 
thei hadden clepid, thei axiden if™ Sy- 
mound, that was" named Petre, hadde ther 
wherbore. Forsothe ‘Petre thenkinge® onP 
the visioun, a spirit seide to him, Lo! 
20 thre men seken thee. ‘And so4 ryse thou, 
and go doun, and go with hem, ‘no thing 
21 doutynge’, for I sente hem. Forsoth Pe- 
tre comynge® doun to the men, seide', I 
am, whom 3e seken; what is the cause, 
22for which 3e han comen? The" whiche 
seiden, Cornelie, centurio, a iust man, and 
dredinge God, and hauynge good’ wit- 
nessing of alle the folk of Jewis, took 
answer of an hooly aungel, for® to clepe 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


537 


suyuge, while’ thei maden iournei, and 

nei3eden to the citee, Petre wente vp in 

to® the’ hiest place of the hous to preie, 

aboute the sixte our. And whamne heio 

was hungrid, he wolde haue ete. But 

while thei maden redi, a rauysching of 

spirit*} felde on’ hym; and he say heuene 11 t 22 exces of 
openyd, and a vessel comynge doun, as a Fen 
greet scheet with foure corneris’, to be Wits v. he 
lette doun fro heuene in to erthe, SUP eae 
which weren alle foure footid beestis, cer te 
and crepinge of the erthe, and volatilis of scripture seith, 
heuene. Anda vois was maad to hym, ices 
Rise thou, Petre, and sle, and ete. And 14 a oe 
Petre seide, Lord, forbede, for Y neuer  /#id beestis ; 


that is, vnclene 


And 15 beestis, bi the 
lawe of Moises; 
bi whiche 


ete ony comun thing and vnclene. 
eft the secounde tyine the vois was maad 
: . beesti , 
to him, That thing that God hath clens-  ynairstonden 
id, seye thou not vnelene. And_ this16 beter men, 
thing was don bi thries; and anoon the Jewis wlatiden 
1 5 as vnelene men, 
vessel was resseyued ajen". And while 17 neither eornuin- 
. . . eden with hem. 
that Petre doutide with ynne hym silf, 
what the visioun was that he say, lo! {2d beestis 
stoden aueronse 
men ; bi creep- 
sou3ten the hous of Symount, and stoden ; 
ben vndir- 
i Re ‘ . fl of 
clepid, thei axiden if Symount, that is arene. 
named Petre, hadde there herbore. 


goostly bi fonre 
hen vndir- 
the men, that weren sent fro Corneli, 
inge thingis, 
at the 3ate. And whanne thei hadden 18 stonden men 
And tg bi volatilis, ben 


singnefied 
while Petre thou3te on the visioun, the Proude men. 
Koss ri slee ; in slee- 
spirit seide to hym, Lo! thre men seken _ ing vices in 


hem. ete; in 
Therfor ryse thou, and go doun, 20 makinge hem 
membris of 
hooly chirche 
bi feith and 
sacramentis. 
Lyre here. ve. 


thee. 
and go with hem, and doute thou no 
thing, for Y sente hem. And Petre cam2i 
doun to the men, and seide, Lo! Y am, 
whom 3e seken; what is the cause, for 
which 3e ben come? And thei seiden, 22 
Cornelie, the centurien, a iust man, and 
dredinge God, and hath! good witness- 
yng of alle the fole of Jewis, took aun- 
swere of an hooli aungel, to clepe thee 
in to his hous, and to here wordis of 
thee. Therfor he ledde hem inne‘, and 23 


oOm. x. P while thei made rv. he 
SacmpeTy. tOm.sx. "latyno. 


k while thei maden ry. neizeden vy. ™ Om. 7. 
makynge y. 4 or rauysching of mynde s. Om. x. 
Ytor. ¥ Om.vx. * Om. oex. either of the er vy, yOm.o. 2% was r., 4 Risethou vy. » and slee rv. 
eseider. 4Om.r. eenyr. fwasmaadtor. &seiethounoty. Om. x. was ry. i was r. 
k hymsilf cupory. | the whiche nN. that ewpoT. "wher o. "is N. © while Petir thouste yr. P of ewpxy. 


8 hige Q. 
T seeth r. 


4 Therfore y, * and doute thou noo thing yr. Scamy. tandseider. 2Om.y, v¥Om.n. Om. sx. 
: >the whilek. ¢Om.apr.m.g. 4Om.k prim. © the spiritk. fvponr. £cordisn. 4 azen 
into heuen a sec. m. Q sec.m. xa sec.m. 08. ‘ihauynger. * in tok sec.m. 


VOL. IV. 32 


538 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


thee into his* hous, and forY to heere 
23 wordis of thee. Thherfore he ledinge’ hem 
with ynne, receyuede* in herbore. For- 
soth in the day suynge he rysinge®, wente 
forth with hem; and summe of bretheren 
fro Joppe folowiden hym, ‘that thei be 
24 witnessis to Petre’. Forsoth an other 
day he entride into Cesarie. Forsoth 
Cornelie abood hem, his® cosyns and ne- 
25 cessarie frendis clepid to gidere. And! it is® 
don, whanne Petre hadde entrid, Cornelie 
cam metinge him, and fallinge® doun at 
26 his feet, he! worschipede Aim. Petre sothli 
reyside him, seiynge*, ‘Ryse, and! I my 
27silf am a man, as and thou. And he 
spekinge™ with him, ‘entride yn”, and fond 
28manye that camen to gidere. And he 
seide to hem, 3e witen, how abhomynable 
it is to a man°® Jew, for? to be ioyned ‘or 
for to’ come to an alien; but God schew- 
ide to me, no™ man “for to* seie a man 
2vcomyn, or vnelene. For whicht thing" I 
‘clepid cam’. Therfore I axe 30u", for 
30 what cause han 3e clepid me? And Cor- 
nelie seith*, Fro the fourthe day passid 
til to this hour, I fastinge’ was preiynge 
in the nynthe hour in myn hous. And 
lo! a man stood bifore me in a whit cloth, 
sland seith’, Cornelie, thi preier is herd, 
and thin almesdedis ben in mynde in? the 
32si3t of God. Therfore sende into Joppe, 
and clepe Symound, that is named Petre; 
-this is herborid in the hous of Symound 
coriour, bisydis the see. This, whan he 
33schal come, schal speke to thee. Therfore 
anon I sente to thee, and thou didist wel 
in comynge to vs. Now therfore we alle 
ben present in thi si3t, for® to heere the 
wordis, what euere ben comaundid to thee 
34of the Lord. Forsoth Petre openynge? his 
mouth, seide*, In treuthe I haue foundyn, 


ot 






xthiso. Om. sx,  “*Jedde r. 
ewith hisy. fOny. Kory. 8 was vr. h fallide r. 
nandentnile yr. °Om.o. P Om. sx. 


m spac V. 
Sto sx. Om. Fr. 
y fastide and rv. 
f that rv. 


tthe whiche s. "Om. @. 
Zseide ¥. of r. 


l tother cEKRxbeof. ™ to be comyn k. 


a and resseyuede r. 
q or to Gupest. either for to 7. or x. 


VY cam clepid without doute rv. 
» sende thon r. 


0 yherd a. 


X. 23-——35. 


resseyuede in herbore; and that ny3t 

thei dwelliden with hym. And in the 

dai suynge he roos, and wente forth 

with hem; and sum of the britherent 1 

folewiden hym fro Joppe, that thei be is, biteeuinge 

witnessis to Petre. And the other! dai2s itr hat 

he entride in to Cesarie. And Cornelie eee 

abood hem, with hise cousyns, and ne-  summe bookis, 
x sae ' that thei be wit- 

cessarie freendis, that weren clepid to- nese to Petir, 

gidere. And it was don, whanne Petre 25 tere nuthe is 

was come ynne, Corneli cam metynge etn ia 

hym, and felle doun at hise feet, and ae da 

worschipide him. But Petre reiside26narie,and aftr. 

hym, and seide, Aryse thou, also Y my Mek ale’ 

silf am a man, as thou. And he spak 27 'gnoramnee oF 

with hym, and wente in, and foonde meee ee 

many that weren come togidere. And 2p olds and te 

he seide to hem, 3e witen, how abho-  here.v.— 

mynable it is to a Jewe, to be ioyned 

ether to come to an alien; but God 

schewide to me, that no man seye a man 

comyn™, ethir vnclene. For which thing 29 

Y cam, whanne Y was clepid, with out 

douting. Therfor Y axe 30u, for what 

cause han 3e clepid me? And Cornelie3o0 

seide, To dai foure daies in to this our, 

Y was preiynge and fastynge in the 

nynthe our in myn hous. And lo! a 

man stood bifore me in a whijt cloth, 

and seide, Cornelie, thi preier is herd®, 31 

and thin almesdedis ben in mynde in the 

si3t of God. Therfor sende thou in to32 

Joppe, and clepe Symount, that is named 

Petre; this is herborid in the hous of 

Symount coriour, bisidis the see. This°, 

whanne he schal come, schal speke to 

thee. Therfor anoon Y sente to thee, 33 

and thou didist wel in comynge to vs. 

‘Now therfor? we alle ben present in thi 

si3t, to here the wordis, what euer ben 

comaundid to thee of the Lord. And 34 

Petre openyde his mouth, and seide, In 

trewthe Y haue foundun, that God is 


Croosandry. 40m. r. 
1 Rise thou, also r. 
t that noo r. 
Wof3zou sx. *seide rv. 
€ and seide r. 


b Om. r. 


iand vr.  k and seide +. 


© Om. sx. 


4 openyde rv. 


© He this1. P Therfore now gk. ' 


X. 36—48. 


worchith ri3twysnesse®, is accept" to him. 
36God sente a word to the sones! of Israel, 
schewinge pees by Jhesu Crist; this) is* 
37 God! of alle men. 3e witen the word that 
is maad bi al Judee, ‘forsoth bigynnynge 
fro™ Galilee, aftir the baptym that John 
38prechide, Jhesu of Nazareth; how God 
anoyntide” him with the Hooly Gost, and 
vertu; the® which ‘thorw passideP in 
wel doynge, and heelinge alle men op- 
pressid of the deuyl, for God was with 
39him. And we ben witnessis of alle 
thingis, ‘the whiche’ he dide in the cun- 
tree of Jewis, and' Jerusalem; whom thei 
40slowen, hongynge in‘ a tree. God reyside 
this in the thridde day, and 3af him for' 
41to ‘be maad" knowun, not to ech’ peple, 
but to witnessis bifore ordeyned ‘of God"; 
to vs that eetyn and drunkyn with hin, 
aftir that he roos aj3en fro deed men*. 
42 And he comaundide to vs for? to preche 
to the peple, and for’ to witnesse, ‘for 
he is’, that is ordeyned of God domes- 
43man of quyke and deede’. To this alle 
prophetis beren witnessing’, alle? men 
that bileuen into® lim, ‘for tof re- 
ceyue remyscioun of synnes by his name. 
44°3it Petre spekinge® thes wordis, the 
Hooli Gost fell on alle that herden the 
4sword. And the feithful, ‘or cristen', 
men* of cireumcisioun wondriden, that 
camen with Petre, and! for into™ naciouns 
the grace of the Hooli Gost is sched out. 
46 Forsoth thei herden hem spekinge” ‘with 
tungis, or langagis°®, and maguyfiynge 
47God. Thanne Petre answeride, Wher ony 
man may forbede watir, that these be not 
baptysid, that han receyued the Hooly 
48Gost as and we? And he comaundide 
hem for? to be baptisid in the1 name of 
the’ Lord Jhesu Crist. Thanne thei prei- 
eden him, that he schulde dwelle with’ 
hem summe dayes. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 539 


no acceptor of persoones; but in echess 

folk he that dredith God, and worchith 
ri3twisnesse, is accept to hym. God sente 36 

a word to the children of Israel, schew- 

inge pees bi Jhesu Crist; this is Lord of 

alle thingis. 3e witen the word* that is37* se word; 


A that is, th 
maad‘ thorou’ al Judee, and bigan at hitieat teed 
* fs bi word. Jhesu 
Galile, aftir the baptym that Joon prech- 3p Nosarcth; 


men, that beu 
For 46 deed bi deth of 
synne. alle pro- 
phetis beren 
witnessing; as 
if he seide, not 
oonly we ben 


ide, Jhesu of Nazareth; hou God anoynt- 3s cine is, oe 
if é x esu cam to 
ide hym with the Hooli Goost, and ver- 
hou God 
anoyntide him ; 
and heelynge alle men oppressid of the in narkinde. 
deuel, for God was with hym. And we 39 “ith the Holy 
with the ful- 
: é E F nesse of grace 
dide in the cuntrei of Jewis, and of Je- : 
P : worching of 
rusalem ; whom thei sloweu, hangynge  miraclis, in 
thridde dai, and 3af hym" to be maad_ ‘ 
z instrument 
knowun, not to al puple’, but to wit-41 ioyned to the 
here. ve. 
eeten and drunken with hym, after that 1, whieh pass- 
And he co- 42 doinge wel, as 
3 to enfoormyng 
maundide to vs to preche to the puple, 
curing of sijke 
men, oppresid 
ordeyned of God domesman of the quyk 7° 4 ai, 
and of deede*}. To this alle prophetis 437 God was 
fulnesse of uer- 
5 tu, and bi oon- 
leuen- in hym, schulen resseyue remys- 
: a : the kyndel 
sioun of synnes bi his name. And 3it44e oe ean” 
Hooli Goost felde on alle that herden the  juyke and deede 
men; that is, 
aise ‘ that lyuen bi 
cisioun, that camen with Petre, won- Tif of grace, 
driden, that also in to naciouns the grace 
thei herden hem spekynge in langagis, 
and magnyfiynge God. Thanne Petre 47 
: witnessis of 
bede watir, that these ben not baptisid, him, but also 
that han also resseyued the Hooli Goost _ phetis enspirid 
of God, beryn 
baptisid in the name of the Lord Jhesu btm Mire here. 
Crist. Thanne thei preieden hym, that 


preche heelthe. 
tu; which passide forth in doynge welt, 
that is, Jhesu, 
: ; é : : Gost ; that is, 
ben witnessis of alle thingis, whiche’ he 
and nertu in 
Tih fy a B® whiche the 
int a tre. And God reiside this in the 407 VOR 
Crist was an 
. f odhed. Lyre 
nessis bifor ordeyned of God; to vs that 7 ; 
id forth in 
he roos a3en fro deth. 
of uertues, and 
and to witnesse, that he it is, that is 
of the deuel, in 
; : with him; bi 
beren witnessing, that alle men that bi- 
yng of persoone 
while that Petre spak these wordis, the “i” #ere. v- 
domesman of 
word. And the feithful men of circum- 45 o¢ just men, 
and of wickid 
of the Hooli Goost is sched out. 
answeride, Whether ony man may for- 
alle elde pro- 
as we? And he comaundide hem to beas saneaine co 
he schulde dwelle with hem sum daies. 


& ry3tfulnesse 9. 4 accepted Nosx. isone x. jthatan. *Om.s. ! the Lord y. ™ and bigan at r. 
n oyntede sx. © Om. pr. P passide forth y. 4 whiche yr. that x. Tand of vx. Sonoy. t Om. sx. 
uOm.o. Vallethev. wWOm.9. * Om. x. yOm. sx. Om. sx, ®thatheitisr. > deede 
men r. ¢ witnesseg. dthataller. ¢ono. tos. fto osx. schulenv. & The while Petir spac jit r. 
hthe vp. iOm.ox. kOm. x. !'!Om.cpr.m.xK. ™toG pr.m.stT. spekens. © in langagis r. 
with tungis x. POm.sx. 4Om.mpr. Tourey. Satyr, 

Vymaada. "biK seeem. Sthat rn. tona. to him xigka. Vthe peplek. W the dede c et alii. 


329 


540 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


CAP? #1: 


1 Forsoth apostliss herden‘, that were in 
Judee, ‘for and" hethene men receyueden 
the word of God, and thei glorifieden God. 

2Forsoth whanne Petre cam to Jerusalem, 
thei that weren of circumcisioun, disput- 

3iden a3ens’ him, seiynge”, Whi entridist 
thou to men hauynge prepucie, and hast 
aete with hem? Petre sothli* bigynnynge’, 

5expownede’ to hem the ordre, seiynge*, I 
was in the citee of Joppe preiynge®, and 
I sy3 in ‘excess of my soule® a visioun, 
sum? vessel comynge down as a greet 
scheete, ‘or lynnen clooth*, with foure 
cordis’ ‘for to be? sent down fro heuene; 

sand it cam ‘til to" me. Into! which I 
biholdinge biheeld, and sy3 foure footide 
thingis of erthe, and beestis, and crepinge 

7thingis, and volatils of the eyr. Forsoth 

I herde and* a voys seyinge to me, Petre, 

sryse!, sle, and ete. Forsoth I seide, Nay, 

Lord; comyn™ thing or" vnclene, entride 

gueuere into my mouth. Sothli the vois 
answeride the secunde tyme fro heuene, 

‘Tho tbingis® that God hath clensid, ‘thou 

1oschalt not seye? vnelene. Forsoth this is? 
don bi thries, and alle thingis ben’ re- 
11ceyued a3en into henene. And lo! thre 
men anon stooden ny3 in the hous, in 
which I was, sentt fro Cesarie to me. 
12Forsoth a" spirit seide to me, that I 
schulde go with hem, ‘no thing doutynge’. 

Forsoth and thes sixe bretheren camen 

with me, and we entriden into the hous 
isof the man. Sothli he teelde*, how he 
sy3 an aungel in his hous, stondinge and 
seyinge to him, Sende* into Joppe, and 
1aclepe Symound, that is namyd Petre, theY 
which schal speke to thee wordis, in 
whiche’ thou schalt be saf*, and al thin 
ishous. Forsoth whanne I hadde bigunne 
for> to speke, the Hooly Gost fel on hem, 


XI. I-15. 


CAP. XI. 


And the apostlis, and the britheren: 
that weren in Judee, herden that also 
hethene men resseyueden the word of 
God, and thei glorifieden God. But2 
whanne Petre cam to Jerusalem, thei 
that weren of circumcisioun, disputiden 
ajens hym, and seiden, Whi entridist3 
thou to men that han prepucie, and hast 
eete with hem? And Petre bigan, and4 
expownede to hem bi ordre, and seide, Y 5 
was in the citee of Joppe, and preiede, 
and Y* sai in rauysching of my mynde 
a visioun, that a vessel cam doun, as a 
greet scheete with foure coordis, and was 
sent doun fro heuene; and it cam to me. 
In to which Y lokinge biheld, and sais 
foure footid beestis of the erthe, and 
beestis, and crepynge beestis, and vola- 
tils of heuene. And Y herde also a vois7 
that seide to me, Petre, rise thou, and 
sle, and eete. But Y seide, Nay, Lord; 3s 
for comyn thing ether vnelene entride 
nener in to my mouth. And the vois9 
answeride the secounde tyme fro heuene, 
That thing that God hath clensid, seie 
thou not vnclene. And thisY was don bi10 
thries, and alle thingis weren resseyued 
a3jen in to heuene. And lo! thre meni 
anoon? stooden in the hous, in which Y 
was; and thei weren sent fro Cesarie to 
me. And the spirit seide to me, that Y 12 
schulde go with hem, and doute no thing. 
3he, and these sixe britheren camen with 
me, and we entriden in to the hous of 
the man. And he telde to vs, how he say 13 
an aungel in his hous, stondinge and sei- 
ynge to hym, Sende thou in to Joppe, 
and clepe Symount, that is named Petre, 
which schal speke to thee wordis, in1i4 
whiche thou schalt be saaf, and al thin 
hous. And whanne Y* hadde bigunnun 15 


8 apostlis and bretheren nv. the apostlis cupesrx. ¢dredeno. thatalsoy. Vwitho. Wand 
seiden vy. X forsothe 0. Y bigan andy. declared o. 4 seiynge to hem Nn. and seide y. © and prei- 
ede vy. ¢rauysching of my mynde ry. 4thatsum ry. ¢Om.oex. f corners G sec.m. 8 to be sx. 
was V. h vnto GMQTY sec. m. i And to Nn. k Om. 0. also vy. ‘I rise thou r. m for comun Vv. 
“eithery. © That thing ry. Pseie thou not yr. dwasy. ‘thethingescmpgr. 8 werenv. and thei 
weren sent y. “the vy, Vand doute nothing vy. ‘*teldetovsy. *Sendethoury. YOm.v. 2 the 
whiche 0. 4maad saafo. » Om. sx. 

xOm.r. Ythisthinga. 20Om.ksec.m. ahek. 


XI. 16—-26. ’ 


isas and® into vs in the bygynnyng. For- 
soth I bithou3te on? the word of the Lord, 
as he seide, Sothli John baptiside in wa- 
tir, forsoth® 3e schulen be baptisid in 
17the Hooly Goost. Therfore if God 3af 
tof hem the same grace, as and to vs that 
bileuyden into the Lord Jhesu Crist, who 
was I, that my3te forbede ‘the Lord, ‘that 
he schulde not 3yue the Hooly Gost to 
men bileuynge in the name of Jhesu 
isCrist"? ‘These thingis herd!, thei heelden 
pees, and glorifieden God, seiynge*, Ther- 
fore and to! hethene men God hath 3ouun 
19 penaunce to the™ lyf. And sotheli thei 
that weren scaterid of the tribulacioun 
that was maad vndir Stheuene, walkiden 
forth til to Fenyse, and Cypre, and An- 
tiochie, ‘to no man spekinge the word", no 
20but to Jewis aloone. Forsoth summe® of 
hem? weren men of Cypre and4 Cyrenen; 
the’ whiche whanne thei entriden’ into 
Antiochie, spaken to Greekis, schewinge' 
2aithe Lord Jhesu. And the hond of the 
Lord was with hem, and moche noumbre 
of men bileuynge is" conuertid to the 
22Lord. Forsoth the word cam to the eeris 
of the chirche, that was at Jerusalem, on 
thes thingis; and thei senten Barnabas ‘til 
23toY Antiochie. The” which whanne he 
hadde come, and seyn the grace of the 
Lord, ioyede, and monestide* alle men in 
purpos of herte for’ to dwelle in the 
24 Lord; for he was a good man, and ful 
of the Hooly Gost, and feith*. And moche 
25cumpanye is* putt® to the Lord. Forsoth 
he wente forth to Tarsis, ‘that he schulde 
seke® Saul; whom whanne he hadde 
26founden, he ledde to Antiochie. And al 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


541 


to speke, the Hooli Goost felle on hem, 
as in to? vs in the bigynnyngf. And Y ice 
bithou3te® on the word of the Lord, as 
he seide, For Joon baptiside in watir, te word; t 
but 3e schulen be baptisid in the Hooli ee 
Goost. Therfor if God 3af to hem thei7 {pS Goe‘in 


same grace, as to vs that bileneden in the sensible singne, 
is seid a maner 


t in the bigyn- 
nyng; that is, 
in the day of 
Witsuntid. ve. 
I bithouzte on 
the word ; bi 


Lord Jhesu Crist, who was Y, that my3te of peor 
forbeede the Lord, that he 3yue not the Ta 
Hooli Goost to hem that bileneden in “0%@’2us 


the name of Jhesu Crist? Whanne these 18 /"% ¢yeeueden 
thingis weren herd, thei helden pees, and pee ; 
. as 1 é selde. 
glorifieden God, and seiden, Therfor also : 
either prepucie 
doth nothing 
to lijf. And thei that weren scaterid of 19 feith of Shesn 
the tribulacioun that was maad vndir Crist. v. who 
am dust and 
‘ : asche, that 
to Cipre, and to Antioche, and spaken ‘ 
5 God, that i 
the word to no man, but to Jewis aloone. Hy me 
plesannce. ve. 
and of Cirenen; whiche whanne thei had- apeea is 
3 R : : : id in summe 
den entride in to Antioche, thei spaken _ bookis, that he 
3eue the Hooly 
a 
Jhesu. And the hond of the Lord wasai.."* ° ™ 
with hem, and myche noumbre of men the name of | 
Jhesn Crist, is 
And the word cam to the eris of the 22 in bookis 
: amendid, but 
chirche, that was at Jerusalem, on these Eee 
and set in the 
s v. helden pees; 
si3 the grace of the Lord, he ioyede, and® _ fro blamyng of 
monestide alle men to dwelle in the Lord 
deede. ve. gio- 


in to the Lord 
circumcisionn 
to hethene men God hath 3ouun penatice 
herto, but the 
h was I, that 
Steuene, walkiden forth to Fenyce, and 
mizte forbede 
But sum of hem weren men of Cipre, 20 bis e004 
: : schnide not 
to the’ Grekis, and prechiden the Lord 
bileeuinge in 
bileuynge was conuertid to the Lord. — 20t in the text, 
neither is had 
it was a gloos 
thingis; and thei senten Barnabas to An-  *utlynarie, 
tioche. And whanne he was come, and 23 text by writeris. 
Petir, and ap- 
preneden his 
in purpos of herte; for he was a good 24 jiieden God; 


man, and ful of the Hooli Goost, and of teins € 
feith. And myche puple was encresid _ this, that he 


hadde strecchid 
And he wente forth 0 25 forth grace to 
hethene men. 
penaunce to 
lijf ; that is, 
tyme and place 
of penaunce, to 


to the Lord. 
Tharsis, to seke Saul; and whanne he 
hadde foundun hym, he ledde to Anti- 


gete everlastinge lijf. v. scaterid of the tribulacioun, etc.; that is, for the tribulacioun that was maad in the deeth of Stenene. men of Cipre and af 
Sirenen ; these weren hethene men conuertid first to the lawe of Jewis, and aftirward to Crist. ve. to Greekis; that is, to hethene men ; that as 
Jewis bi nacioun wrou3te to the connersioun of Jewis, so the men born of hethen men wron3ten to the connersionn of hethene men. v. ¢he hend 
of the Lord; that is, his uertu in merueilouse werkis, was with hem to the confermyng of her teching. singnefiede bi the spirit; that is, denounside 
bi the spirit of prophecie. Lire here. ve. disciplis ; that weren at Antioche. us ech hadde ; that is, bi his catil, not after his wille; for gladly thei 
wolden haue do more, if thei mi3ten. in to mynysterie to britheren, ete. in Judee ; that is, in Jerusalem; for thei as more religiouse men renonns- 
eden either forsoken propirte, and seelden possessiouns, that puruyaunce schulde be maad therof to the comnnte, in 4 c°. bifore; also thei weren 
spoyled of meuable goodis in the persecuscioun that was stirid in the deeth of Steuene; wherfore thei hadden nede to be helpid of othere cristen 


men, moost in the tyme of hunger. Live here. v. 


€ sothely 0, but r. 
1to the s. 


©Om.or. dink. 
weren herd vy. and seiden r. 
°©Om.7T. P the men MPQTY sec.m. 
Uwasy. Yvnto GMPOTY sec.m. WOm.r. 
awasv. byputtee. © to seeke r. 


b Om. k pr. im. 


f ynto o. 
m Om, GMPQTrX. 
4 and of vr. 
x he monestide Gu per. monest o. 


¢ thou3te b. 


§Godr. 4 Om.r. i Whanne these thingis 
1 and spaken the word to noo man F. 
S hadden entrid y, — t and telden r. 


y Om.sx. 2 of feithe o. 


r Om. ¥. 


4QOm.k. ¢andhek. 


542 


a? 3eer thei lyueden there in the chirche, 
and tau3ten moche cumpanye, so that ‘first 
cristen disciplis weren namyd at Anti- 
270chie®. Forsothe in thes daies prophetis 
camen ouer fro Jerusalem to Antiochie. 
22And oon of hem rysingef, Agabus by 
name, signyfiede® bi the® spirit a greet 
hungir to comynge! in al the roundnesse* 
of erthis', that™ is" maad vndir Claudius. 
29 Forsoth disciplis® purposiden alle?, as ech 
hadde, for’ to sende, mynisterie™ to bre- 
sotheren dwellinge in Judee. The* which 
thing and‘ thei diden, sendinge to the 
eldere men, bi the hondis of Barnabas and 
Saul. 


CAP. XII. 


1 Forsoth in the same tyme Heroude 
kyng" sente hondis, for’ to turmente sum 
2men of the chirche. Forsoth he slou3 
by swerd James, the brother of John. 
3Forsoth he ‘seynge for* it pleside to 
Jewis*, puttideY to* for® to ‘catche and 
Petre; forsoth the dayes of therf looues 
4weren. Whom whanne he hadde cau3t, 
he sente into prisoun, and bitakinge*® to 
foure quaternyouns of kny3tis, that ech 
hadde foure men‘ vndir him, fore to kepe 
him, willinge’ aftir paske for$ to brynge 
shim forth to the peple. And sothli Petre 
was kept in prisoun; forsothe preier was 
maad of the chirche withoute ceessinge to 
6God for him. Forsothe whanne Heroude 
was to bryngynge! forth him, in* that ny3t 
Petre was slepinge bitwixe! twey!! kny3tis, 
boundun™ with twey chaynes; and keperis 
7bifore the dore kepten the" prisoun. And 
loo! an aungel of the Lord stood ny3, and 
]3t schoon ajen in’ the habytacle?. And 
‘the syde of Petre smytun??, he reyside, 
‘or wakide, him", seiynge’, Ryse thout 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XI. 27-—XI1. 7. 


oche. And al a jeer thei lyueden ther 26 
in the chirche, and tau3ten myche puple, 
so that the disciplis weren namyd first 
at Antioche cristen men. And in these27 
daies profetis camen ouer fro Jerusalem 
to Antioche. And oon of hem roos vp, 28 
Agabus bi name, and signefiede bi the 
spirit a greet hungur to comynge in al 
the world, which hungur was maad vn- 
dur Claudius. And alle the disciplis29 
purposiden, after that ech hadde, for to 
sende in to mynysterie to britheren that 
dwelliden in Judee. Which thing alsozo 
thei diden, and sente z¢' to the eldre men, 
bi the hoondis of Barnabas and Saul. 


CAP. XII. 


And in the same tyme Eroude the! 
king sente power, to turmente sum men 
of the chirche. And he slowe bi swerd2 
James, the brothir of Joon. And he si33 
that it pleside to Jewis8, and keste to 
take also Petre; and the! daies of therf 
looues weren. And whanne he hadde4 
cau3te Petre, he sente hym in to prisoun; 
and bitook! to foure quaternyouns* of 
kny3tis, to kepe hym, and wolde aftir 
pask bringe hym forth to the puple. 
And Petre was kept in prisoun; buts 
preier was maad of the chirche with out 
ceessing to God for hym. But! whannee 
Eroude schulde bringe hym forth, in 
that ny3t Petre was slepinge bitwixe™ 
twei kny3tis, and was boundun with twei 
cheynes; and the keperis bifor the dore 
kepten the prisoun. And lo! an aungel7 
of the Lord stoode ny3, and li3t schoon 
in the prisoun hous. And whanne he 
hadde smyte the side of Petre, he reiside 
hym, and seide, Rise thou swiftli. And 
anoon the cheynes felden doun fro hise 


dthe g.  ¢ disciplis weren named first at Antioche cristene men yr. froosy. & and singnefiede r. 
hOm.x. icomensx. * roundnessis T. 1 the erthis r. londisy. ™ the whiche « sec.m. MP. whiche @. 
mwas y. © the disciplis carnper. alle disciplisy. »Om.y. 4Om.sx. Tinto mynysterie r. s Om.r. 
talsov. uthekynge eupoery. vOm.sx. ‘si3that ry. *the JewisGmpery. Y pntte sx. and 
puttidey. 27Om.7r. &8Om.sx. btakealsoy. ¢bitook yr. 4 kniztis v. © Om. sx. £ wilnyng o. 
and wolden yr. &§ Om. svx. 4Om.y. i brynge aeunpyosxy. Kkand an. ! bitwen ost. bitwe x. 


W two Gwpe et s pass. TX. 
the prisoun 7. 
t Om. Gmoperty sec. m. 


£Om.k prom. 6 the Jewisk. © Om. a. 
Soure kniztis undir him x marg. 1 And R. 


m and was bounden Fr. 
PP aftir that he hadde smyte the syde of Petir v. 


i bitoke him b sec.m. 
m bitwene a. 


1 the dore of 0. tos. P dwellinge place of 


gOm.evx. "Om.e¢. Sand seide r. 


K @ quaternion is he that hath 


t+ Eroude the 
king; this was 
Eroude Agrip- 
pa. The first 


of Jude, was 
clepid Eroude 
de Ascolonyta, 
either of Asco- 
lon, vndir 
whom Crist 
was born. 

The secunde 
Eroude, prince 
of Galilee, was 
clepid Antipas, 
thatkillide Joon 
Baptist. The 
thridde Eroude, 
king, was clepid 
Agrippa, that 
killed James, 
and prisonede 
Petir. Lire 
here. Ve. 

daies of therf- 
looues ; whanne 
he took Petir; 
this is added to 
singnefie the 
cause, whi he 
killide not Pe- 
tir anoon, as 
he hadde do of 
James, for he 
wolde abyde 

til the solem- 
nyte of Pask 
were passid, 
where inne 
Jewis vsiden 
therf looues bi 
seuene daies. 

to foure qua- 
ternyouns; he 
is seid a qua- 
ternyoun, that 
hath foure 
knistis vndir 
hym. bringe 
him forth to the 
puple; that is, 
put him to 
deeth, bi the 
wille of the pu- 
ple. Lire here. 
v. 


XII. 8—18. 


swiftli, And anoon the chaynes felden 
adoun of" his hondis. Forsoth the aungel 
seide to him, Be thou gurd bifore, and do 
on thi hosis’. And he dide so. And he 
seide to him, Do aboute to thee thi cloth, 
gand sue me. And he ‘goynge out*, suede 
him; and he wiste not forY ‘it is? soth, that 
was* maad> bi the aungel; forsoth he 
10gesside him silf to® se a visioun. Forsoth 
thei passinge’ the firste and the secunde 
kepyng, camen® to the irun 3ate that leed- 
ith to the citee, thef which ‘wilfully is 
opened to hem. And thei goynge" outi, 
camen* forth! into o streete, and anoon 
i1the aungel passide awey fro him. And 
Petre turnynge™ a3en to him silf, seide", 
Now I woot verily, for® the Lord sente 
his aungel, and delyuerede me fro the 
hond of Eroude, and of? al abydinge of 
12the peple of Jewis. And he biholdinge 
cam to the hous of Marie, modir of 
John, that is named Marcus, where manye 
weren gederid to gidere, and preiynge. 
13Forsoth ‘him knockynge’ at the dore of 
the 3ate, a wenche, Rode by name, cam 
14forth fort to se. And, as sche knew the 
vois of Petre, for ioye she openede not the 
3ate, but rennynge" yn, tolde’ Petre for” 
15‘to stonde* bifore the 3ate. And thei 
seiden to hir, Thou maddist, ‘or art 
wood’. Sothli she affermyde’, for* to haue 


him so. Forsoth thei seiden, It is his 
isaungel. Forsoth Petre® lastide knock- 
ynge. Sothli whanne thei hadden open- 


17yd"4, thei sy3en him, and wondriden. Sothli 
he bekenynge® to hem with hond for‘ to 
be stille, tolde’ hou the Lord hadde ledd 
him out of" prisoun. And he seide, Telle 
3e to James andi bretheren thes thingis. 
And he ‘gon outk, wente into another 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


543 


hoondis. And the aungel seide to hym,s 

Girde thee, and do on thin hoosis. And 

he dide so. And he seide to hym, Do 

aboute thee thi clothis, and sue me. 

And he 3ede out, and suede hym; and9 

he wiste not that it was soth, that was 

don bi the aungel; for he gesside hym {yrs for thet 

silf to haue sey a visioun. And _ thei” 10 his delyner- 
e aunce schulde 

passiden the first and the secounde te arettid to 

warde, and camen to the iren j3ate that Bee OPE 

ledith to the citee, which anoon was 


t not litil trou- 


and so it was 
don. sow3t hym; 
that is, Petir. 


opened? to hem. And thei 3eden out, and 2n¢ ek hd 
x e@ jatis o' 
camen in? to o street, and anoon the _ the presoun 


3 . weren founden 
aungel passide awei frohym. And Pe-11 opin. comaund- 
: ; ide to h 
tre turnede aj3en to hym silf, and seide, Deets tigi 
Now Y woot verili, that the Lord sente alee 
his aungel, ‘and delyueridet me fro the  deyneraunce 
ee. of Petir, tha 
hoond of Eroude, and fro al the abiding _ thei schulden 
: 5 bee punschid 
of the puple of Jewis. And he bihelde, 12 aftirward, but 
: : Eroude was 
and cam to the hous of Marie, modir‘ of lettid, and was 
Joon, that is named Marcus, where many _ Pifore taken hi 
: , ; 4 swift deth. fro 
weren gaderid togidre, and preiynge. pedec ye, 
, ro verusalem 
And whanne he knockid at the dore of 13 which is set in 
: the hisest ph 
the 3ate, a damysel, Rode bi name, cam of Voper sae 
8 t i Cesarie; of 
forth to set. And whanne sche knewe 14 patestyn, in the 
the vois of Petre, for ioye sche openyde  jparche of Pa- 
2 yu and o 
not the 3ate, but ran in, and telde, that roe v. 
: é the puple cri- 
Petre stood at the 3ate. And thei seiden 15 ede: in flacer- 
\ ‘ou : inge Eronde. 
to hir", Thou maddist. But sche afferm- i¢ ysis of God, 
yde, that it was so. And thei seiden, It + for the 
df : . puple seide that 
is his aungel. But Petre abood Stille, 16 such eloquence 
é iS was not of man 
and knockide. And whanne thei hadden __ only, but of 
3 h 
opened the dore, thei sayen hym, and paiva: 

‘ smoot him; with 
wondriden. And he bekenyde to hemij7°" ei oe 
with his hoond to be stille, and telde Sai v. 

€ NOL 30UE 

hou the Lord hadde led hym out of the’ panei cod | 
. : in hihoeldinge 

prisoun. And he seide, Telle 3e to James his owne frecl- 
. Aa te, but and hi 

and to the britheren these thingis. And iovede more of 
: this, that the 

= 3ede out, and wente in to an othere rie sat God- 

place. 


And whanne the dai was comie, 18 ‘is ononr to 
hym. Lire here. 


isplace. Sothli ‘the day maad!, ther was ther was not" lytil troubling} among the — ve. 
ufroy. Vhosens. *3edeontandy. Ythatvy. 2wasoy. @isx. bdonv. ©¢ for to sam 
nopetvy. 4 passideny. ¢ andcameny. fOm.r. — & at her owne wille wasv. 5 5eden rr. 
iforthe o. Kandcamen vy. !Om.o. ™turned or. “andseider. °thaty. Pfrov. 4 biheeld 
and ¥. * whanne he knockide r. t Om. apesx. U ran ¥. vand telde that yr. WwW Om. srx. 
X stood r. y Om. sx. z affermende s. a Om. x. ban k. chev. 4 openid the dore Fr. 
€bekenide vr. f€Om.sx. &tolde heme. andtelde ry. hofthe nsr. iandtoemperx. 3ede 
out and y. |! whanne the day was maad r. 
thoasec.m. opener. POm.k pr.m. 4todelynerek. ‘the modirk. %forcg. see him 


apr.m. %QOm.agk. ¥ Om. K pr.m. bo. 


W not a bko. 


544 


not lytil trowblyng™ among" the kny3tis, 
19 what was don® of Petre. Sothli whanne 
Eroud had sou3t hym ajen, and nou3tP 
founde, inquicisioun4, ‘or sekyng™, maad’ 
of keperis', he comaundide hem for" to be 
brou3t. And he comynge’ doun fro Judee 
20into Cesarie, dwellide” there. Forsoth he 
was wroth to men of Tyre and of* Si- 
don. And thei of oon acoord camen to 
him, and Blastis’, that was on? the 
cowche* of the kyng, softli> stirid*, thei 
axiden pees, for’ that her® cuntrees weren 
21 norisched, ‘or susteyned‘, byS him. For- 
soth ‘a day" ordeyned, Eroud clothid' with 
kingis clothinge, saat* for domesman, and 
22spak to hem. Forsoth the peple cryede, 
23The vois! of God, not™ of man. Sothly 
anoon® an aungel of the Lord smoot him, 
for he hadde not .don® honour to God; and 
athe waastidP of wormes, deiede?. Sotheli 
the word of the Lord wexide’, and was 
25 multiplied. Forsoth Barnabas and Saul 
turnyden ajen fro Jerusalem, ‘the mynis- 
terie® fulfillid', ‘John takyn to", that was’ 
namyd Markus. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 Forsoth ‘ther weren™ in the chirche that 
was* at Antioche, ‘prophetis and doctours’, 
in whiche Barnabas, and Symound, that 
is? clepid Blak, and Lucius Cironense, and 
Manaen, that was the* sowkynge feere of 
Eroud tetrarke, that is, prince of the 

2fourthe part*, and Saul*. Forsoth ‘hem 
mynistringe in? the Lord, and fastynge®, 
the Hooly Gost seide to hem, Departe 3e 
to me Saul and Barnabas, into the work 

sto which I haue takyn hem. Thanne 
thei ‘fastinge, and preiynge, and puttingef 


™ turblyng arp. ® maad among x pr.m. 
aftir that he hadde maad enquering r. 
Ycam F. Ww and dwellide rv. 
b sotheli n. Om. ry. ©COm.r. 
iclad sx. was clothid vy. © and sat r. 
waastid y. 4 and dizede r. 
wand tooken Joon vy. Vis x. 
svx. © party o. gloss om. in x. 
f fastiden, and preieden, and puttiden r. 


x Om. 7. 


T wex SX. 


x Blastus a sec.m. Yas K pr.m. Qk. 
1secm k prom. cis k. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


© to don rT. 
t Om. oTrx. 
y bi Blastns councelid rv. 
d for thi GwPery sec.m. 
1 voices GMPQSTF.X. 
8 whanne the mynysterie v. the mysterie x. 
W and doctouris weren r. 

¢ Saul weren rv. 


z By a sec.m. 
4 that is, prince of the fourthe part K marg. gka. 


XI. 19—XIII. 3. 


kny3tis, what was don of Petre. Andi9 
whanne Eroude hadde sou3t hym, and 
foonde not, aftir that he hadde made 
enqueryng of the keperis, he comaundide 
hem to be brou3t to hym. And he cam 
doun fro Judee in to Cesarie, and dwell- 
ide there. And he was wroth to men of 20 
Tyre and of Sidon. And thei of oon 
acord camen to hym, whanne thei had- 
den counseilid with Bastus*, that was 
the kingis chaumbirleyn, thei axiden 
pees, for as myche that’ her cuntrees 
weren vitailid of hym. And in a dai2) 
that was ordeyned, Eroude was clothid 
with kyngis clothing, and sat for domes- 
man, and spak to hem. And the puple22 
criede, The* voicis* of God, and not of 
man. And anoon an aungel of the Lord 23 
smoot hym, for he hadde not 3ouun 
onour to God; and he was wastid of 
wormes, and diede. And the word of24 
the Lord waxide, and was multiplied. 
And Barnabas and Saul turneden a3en 25 
fro» Jerusalem, whanne® the mynystrie 
was fillid, and token Joon, that was‘¢ 
named Marcus. 


CAP. XIII. 


And profetis and doctouris weren in! 
the chirche that was at Antioche, in 
which Barnabas, and Symount, that was 
clepid Blac, and Lucius Cironense, and 
Manaen, that was the soukynge fere of 
Eroude tetrarke4*, and Saul weren®. 
And whanne thei mynystriden to the2 
Lord, and fastiden, the Hooli Goost seide 
to hem, Departe 3e to me Saul and Bar- 
nabas, in to the werkt to which Y haue 
takun hem. Thanne thei fastiden, and3 
preieden, and leiden hondis on hem, and 
P not wPrX. 4 inquisiciouns x. 
t the keepers caper. Om. sx. 

Zoone of o«. oner vy. 4 hed ¢. 
f£Om.ox. &ofr. b in the day r. 
2QOm.N. © 30ue Fr. P was 
t was fillid r. 


Zwasvy. 4Om. 
e fastiden r. 


s Om. vr, 


e thayre o. 
m and not r. 


xOm. x. yY Om. F. 
d whanne thei mynystriden to 7. 


btok pr.m. © and whanne 


& vois xago8. 
€ Om. gk prim. 


* that is, prince 
of the fourthe 
part. ve. 
t into the werk; 
that is, into the 
werk of pnp- 
lisching of the 
gospel, as othere 
apostlis weren 
taken to this 
thing. also Joon 
in mynysterie ; 
that is, of 
preching. a 
wycche ; which 
bi his malices 
hadde disseyu- 
ed the procoun- 
soul and the 
puple. Bariesu; 
thus it is in 
Greek, and in 
ookis amend- 
id, and it sown- 
ith in La 
the sone of Jhe- 
su. Elymas; 
that is inter- 
pretid, the me- 
sure either the 
wit of my God; 
he made hym- 
self to he clepid 
so, that he 
schulde he bi- 
leeuid the mes- 
sanger of God. 
Saul which and 
Poul; that is, 
he that was 
clepid Saul bi- 
fore, and now 
Poul, for he 
conuertide the 
proconsul Ser- 
gius Poul to 
cristene feith. 
Lire here. ve. 
Jjillid with the 
Hooly Goost ; 
bi whos uertu 
he si3 tho 
thingis that 
weren hid to 
othere men. 
the sone of the 
deuel ; bi su- 
ynge ia werkis. 
to distroie; as 
myche as is in 
thee. the riziful 
weies; that is, 
feith and uer- 
tues. the hond 
of the Lord ; 
that is, his ven- 
iaunce. Lire 
here. Vv. 


XIU. 4—14. 


4hondis tof hem, leften' hem. And sothli 
thei sent! of the Hooly Gost, wenten* forth 
to Seleucia, and fro thennis thei wenten 
sby boot to Cypre. And whanne thei 
camen to Salamyne, thei prechiden the 
word of God in synagogis of Jewis; for- 
soth thei hadden and! John in mynisterie, 
6‘or seruyse™. And whanne thei hadden 
walkide® by® al? the yle ‘til tot Pafum, 
thei founden sum’ ‘man wicche’, a fals 
prophete, Jew’, to whom the name was 
7 Barieu", that was with the proconsul Ser- 
gius Poul, prudent’ man. This*, Barna- 
bas and Poul ‘clepid to*, desyrideY for? to 
sheere the word of God. Sotheli Elymas 
wicche* withstood hem; ‘so sothli is in- 
terpretid his name>; sekinge for® to turne 
gawey the proconsul fro bileue. Forsoth 
Saul, which ‘and Poul‘, fulfillid® with the 
Hooly Gost, biholdyngef into him, seides, 
10 A! thou ful of al® gyle, and ali falsnesse, 
‘thou sone" of the deuel, thou! enemye of 
al ri3twysnesse™, thou leeuyst" not for® to 
subuerte, ‘or distroye?, the ri3tful weyes% 
llof the Lord. And ‘now lo"! the hond® of 
the Lord ont thee, and thou schalt be 
blynd, and not" seynge sunne til’ a tyme. 
And anoon a myst fel” down on hym and* 
derknesseY; and he‘ goynge abonte’, sou3te 
hym? that schulde 3yne the hond to him. 
12Thanne the proconsul, whanne he hadde 
seyn the dede, bilenyde, wondrynge on? 
izsthe teching of the Lord. And whanne 
fro Pafum Poul hadde go by boot*, and 
thei that weren with him, thei camen to 
Pergen of Pamfili; forsoth John depart- 
inge’ fro hem, turnyde® a3en tof Jerusa- 
u4lem. Sothli thei goynge? to Pergen,camen> 
to Antioche of Persidie; and thei gon* 


£ in to Nn. h and leften r. i weren sent r. 


a wakede @ pr.m. ° Om. Ns. 
awicche nv. ta Jew mpoTvy sec.m 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


k and wenten r. 
POm.Gpr.mT. 4 vn to GMP@r. 


u Bariesu rv. 


545 


leten hem go. But thei weren sent of4 
the Hooli Goost, and wenten forth to 
Seleucia, and fro thennus thei wenten bi 
boot to Cipre. And whamnne thei camens 
to Salamyne, thei prechiden the word of 
God in the synagogis' of Jewis; and thei 
hadden also Joon in mynystries. Andsé 
whanne thei hadden walkid bi al the ile 
to" Pafum, thei founden a man, a witche, 
a false profete, a Jewe, to whom the 
name was Bariesu, that was with the7 
proconsul Sergius Paule, a prudent man. 
This' clepide Barnabas and Poul, and 
desiride to here the word of God. Buts 
Elymas witche* withstoode hem; for 
his name is expowned so; and he son3te 
to turne awei the proconsul fro bileue. 
But Saul, which 7s se7d also Paul, waso 
fillid with the Hooli Goost, and bihelde 
in to hym, and seide, A! thou ful of al!io 
gile, and al™ falsnesse, thou sone of the 
deuel, thou enemye of al ri3twisnesse, 
thou leeuest not to turne vpsodoun the 
ri3tful weies of the Lord. And now lo!i 
the hoond of the Lord 7s on thee, and 
thou schalt be blynde, and not seynge the 
sunne in to a tyme. And anoon myste 
and derknesse” felden doun on hym; and 
he 3ede aboute, and sou3te hymn that 
schulde 3yue hoond to hym. Thannei2 
the proconsul, whanne he hadde seyn the 
dede, bilenede, wondringe on the tech- 
yng of the Lord. And whanne fro Pa-is 
fum Poul hadde go bi a®° boot, and thei 
that weren with hym, thei camen to 
Pergen of Pamfilie; but Joon departide 
fro hem, and turnede ajen to Jerusalem. 
And thei 3eden to? Pergen, and camen to14 
Antioche of Persidie; and thei entriden 


10m. wn. also r. m Om. ox. 
TaMpeT.  § grete man G. man 
‘a prudent nsvy. W This Sergius clepide r. 


*Om. y. Yand desiride ry. 2Om.sx. ®the whiche x. > for his name is interpretid so r. © Om. sx. 
4 and Poul is clepid er. is seid and Poule Nn. is seid also Poul r. e was fillid r. f and biheeld r. 
Sand seider. 4Om.n. iofallo. *Omn. !Om.n. ™truthe ny. © bileuest 7. © Om. sx. 
POm.ox. Gweie any. ‘lo!nowr. Shondisk prim. tisonv. “nor. VY til to anosrxy. 
vnto GupeT, Wand derknes felden yr. *in x, Om. vy. Y derknessis 7, Om. rv. 2% 3ede aboute and r. 
aOm.r. bofrx. aboot ry. 4ddepartide v. ¢andturnedev. ffrox. 8 jeden v. } and camen r. 
forn.  entriden v. goende x. 


t synagoge ahk sec. m. 


witche Kr. 1Om. erg. ™ of . of al tk. 


& ether seruise k marg. gk. 
n derknessis k. 


VOL. IV. 4a 


i He this 1. 
P fro A sec. m. 


b of cikxa. til to wR. k the 


° Om. k prem. 


546 


into ‘the synagoge! the™ day of sabatis, 
issaten". Sothli aftir the® redinge of laweP 
and prophetis, the princes of the syna- 
‘gogue senten to hem, seyinge’, Men bre- 
theren, if ony word of exortacioun, ‘or 
teching’, to the peple is in 30u, seye 3e. 
is Forsoth Poul rysynge*, and with hond 
biddynget sylence, seith", Men of Israel, 
izand 3e that dreden God, heere’. God of 
the peple of Israel chees oure fadris, and 
enhaunside the peple, whanne thei weren 
comelingis in the lond of Egipt, and in an 
18hi3 arm he ledde hem out of it; and bi 
the tyme of fourti 3eeris he susteynede” 
19her maneris in desert. And he distroy- 
inge* seuene folkis in the lond of Canaan, 
byY sort departide to hem the lond of hem, 
20as aftir foure hundrid? and fyfti 3eeris*. 
And after ‘thes thingis® he 3af domesmen, 
2i‘til tof Samuel, the prophete. And fro 
thennis? thei axiden® a kyng, and hef 3af 
tos hem Saul, the sone of Cis, a man of 
the lynage of Beniamyn, by fourty 3eeris?. 
22And ‘him don’ awey, he reyside to hem 
Dauith king‘, to whom he beringe! wit- 
nessing seyde™, I haue foundun’ Dauith, 
the sone of Jesse, a man vp" myn herte, 
23the® which schal do alle my willis. Of 
whos seed vp? biheeste God ledde out to4 
24Israel a sauyour Jhesu, ‘John prechinge" 
bi fore the face of his comyng the baptym 
of penaunce to al the peple*® of Israel. 
25 Forsoth whanne John fulfillidet his cours, 
he seyde, Whom" 3e demen me for’ to be, 
‘I am not”; but lo*! ther cometh aftir me, 
of whos’ I am not worthi for? to vnbynde 
26the schoon of his feet. Men bretheren, 
sones of the kynde of Abraham, and that* 
in 3ou dreden God, to jou the word of 
27 heelthe® is sent. Sothelit thei that dwell- 
iden at Jerusalem, and princes of it, vn- 


D and saten Yr. 
8 roos V. 


1 synagoges 0. ™ in the r. 
T either teching v. Om. x. 
w suffride vy. Xdistroyede ry. Y and bi r. 
mper. dthattyme ry. €askiden ge. f God rv. 
kyng asy. ‘Jbarv. ™and seide r. 
T while Joon prechide yr. —8 folk 9. 
xOm.T. Ywhom nsx. 7Om.s. 


t fillide rv. 


4Om. x pr.m, tthe kyng ka. 8 wille r. 


w dwellen K sec. m. bgk. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


© Om. mpor. 
t holding o. bad r. 
2 hundrid jer s. 
& Om. a. 

D aftir G prim. MPQTY sec. m. 


8 whiche that r. 


t vndoon A sec. m. b. 


XIII. 15-——27. 


in to the synagoge in the dai of sabatis, 
and saten. And after the redyng of the ts 
lawe and of the prophetis, the princis of 
the synagoge senten to hem, and seiden, 
Britheren, if ony word of exortacioun to 
the puple is in 30u, seie 3e. And Poulie 
roos, and with hoond baad silence, and 
seide, Men of Israel, and 3e that dreden 
God, here 3e. God of the puple of Is-17 
rael chees oure fadris, and enhaunside 
the puple, whanne thei weren comelingis 
in the loond of Egipt, and in an hi3 
arme he ledde hein out of it; and bits 
the tyme of fourti 3eeris he suffride her 
maneres in desert. And he destriedei9 
seuene folkis in the loond of Canaan, and 
bi sort departide to hem her lond, as420 
aftir foure hundrid and fifti 3eeris. And 
aftir these thingis he 3af domesmen, to 
Samuel, the profete. And fro that tyme 2: 
thei axiden a kyng, and God jaf to hem 
Saul, the sone of Cis, a man of the lyn- 
age of Beniamyn, bi fourti 3eeris. And 22 
whanne he was don awei, he reiside to 
hem Dauid king", to whom he bar wit- 
nessing, and seide, Y haue foundun Da- 
uid, the sone of Jesse, a nan aftir myn 
herte, which schal do alle my willis’. Of es 
whos seed bi the biheest God hath led 
out to Israel a sauyoure Jhesu, whanne 24 
Joon prechide bifor the face of his com- 
yng the baptym of penaunce to al the 
puple of Israel. But whanne Joon fillide 25 
his cours, he seide, Y am not he, whom 
je demen me to be; but lo! he cometh 
aftir me, and Y am not worthi to doont 
of" the schoon of hise feet. Britheren, 2¢ 
and sones of the kynde of Abraham, and 
whiche that in 30u dreden God, to 30u 
the word of helthe’ is sent. For thei2; 
that dwelliden” at Jerusalem, and princis 


P the lawe acmNnpory. ‘and seiden r. 
“and seide vy. VY heerith GmoPpesTXY sec. m. 

®3er sx. bthis thing N. © too. vnto 
her x. itwhanne he wasdonr. the 
°Om.r. Pbither. Gof nN. 
u I am not he whom r. Vv Om. sx. w On. 7. 
® the helth c. ¢ For v. 


uQm.b._ ¥Y this helthe a sec. m. 


XUHE. 28—41. 


knowynge® ‘this Jhesu, and the voysis® of 
prophetis, that by euery sabotis‘ ben radd, 
2a‘demynge fulfilliden?; and thei fyndinge® 
in him noi cause of deeth, axiden* of Pi- 
golate, that thei schulden slee him. And 
whanne thei hadden endid alle thingis 
that weren writun of him, thei puttinge! 
him doun of the tree, puttiden™ him in a 
3ograue. Forsoth God reyside him fro 
deede men" in® the thridde day; the? 
which is? seyn by many dayes to hem 
3ithat to gidere sti3eden vp fro Galilee into 
Jerusalem, the’ whiche ben til* now his 
32 witnessis to the peple. And we schewen** 
to 30u the ilke that is maad ‘biheeste a3en‘ 
33 to oure” fadris; for God hath fulfillid this 
to oure” sones, ‘a3en rysinge” Jhesu; as 
and* inthe secunde salm it is writun, 
Thou art my sone, to day I gendride thee. 
34 Forsoth that he ajen reyside him fro deede 
men, now ‘no more? to turnynge® into? 
corupcioun, thus he seith*, For I schal 
3yue to 30u the hooly trewe thingis of 
35 Dauith. And‘ therfore® and‘ on another 
stide he seith, Thou schalt not 3yue thin 
36 hooli for to se corupcioun. Forsoth Da- 
uith in his generacioun, whanne he hadde 
mnynystrid to the wille of God, slepte', ‘or 
deiede*, and is! putt to his fadris, and sy3 
37 corupcioun ; sothli he whom God reiside 
38 fro deede men, sy3 not corupcioun. Ther- 
fore, men bretheren, be it knowun to 3ou, 
for™ by him remyssioun of synnes is told 
to 30u, fro alle synnes, of the" whiche 3e 
my3ten not be iustified in the lawe of 
39 Moyses. In this ech man that bileueth, 
40is justified. Therfore se 3e, that it come 
‘mot to 30u, that is aboue® seid in pro- 
41 phetis?, ‘Se 3e, dispiseris!, and wondre 3e", 
and be 3e sceaterid abrood; for I worche 
a work in 3oure daies, a werk that 3e 


d ynknowe o. that knowen not r. 
£ demeden and filleden rv. h founden r. 
™ putten sx. and puttiden yr. Om. x. 
88 scheweden G. * ajeen biheste x. 
xOm.o. yOm.x. ZnotN. 4 turnen sx. 
y sec.m. Om. acmery. & in GMP. 
"Om. svx. © bifore vy. P the prophetes o. 


x fulfilleden rn. 


y the deeth K pr. m. 
> in cxa. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


€ this Jhesu and the vois n. Om. o. 
i not x. 

© Om. sx. 

u 3o0ure T. 

b azeen into x. 

h Om. osx. 

4 3e dispisers, see r. 


z he that cerk sec. m. gxe sec. m. gk pr.m. 


547 


of it, that knewen not this Jhesu, and 
the voicis of prophetis, that by euery 
sabat ben red, demyden*, and filliden*; 
and thei founden in hym no cause of28 
deth, and axiden of Pilat, that thei 
schulden sle hym. And whanne thei29 
hadden endid alle thingis that weren 
writun of hym, thei token hym doun of 
the tre, and leiden hym in a graue. And 30 
God reiside hym fro dethY in the thridde 
dai; which was seyn bi mony daies to 
hem that wenten vp togidere with hymai 
fro Galilee in to Jerusalem, which ben 
til now his witnessis to the puple. Ands3e 
we schewen to 3ou the biheest that was 


* demeden ; 
Jhesu to he 
worthi the deth. 
filleden ; the 
prophecies bi- 
fore seid of his 
passioun. 
knewen not this 
Jhesu; of Na- 
zareth to be 
Crist the Sauy- 
our, bihi3t in 
the lawe and 
prophetis ; this 
ignoraunce of 
the princes was 
of malice, that 
agreggide the 
synne, aud the 
ignorannee of 
the puple was 
bi disseit of 
prestis. ve. 
and bi voices 3 
of profetis that 
spaken of Crist; 
whiche profe- 


niaad to oure fadris; for God hath ful-3s cies the prestis 


fillid this to her sones, and a3enreisid 
Jhesu; as in the secounde salm it is 
writun, Thou art my sone, to dai Y bi- 
gat thee. 
deth, that he schulde not turne a3en in 
to corrupcioun, seide thus, For Y schal 
3yue to 30u the hooli trewe thingis of 
Danid. And* therfor and on” an otheress 
stide he seith, Thou schalt not 3yue thin 
hooli to se corrupcioun. But Dauid in3¢ 
his generacioun, whanne he hadde myn- 
ystrid'to the wille of God, diede, and 
was leid with hise fadris, and say cor- 
rupcioun; but he whom God reiside fro37 
deth, say not corrupcioun. Therfor, bri-3s 
theren, be it knowun to 3ou, that bi hym 
remyssioun of synnes is teld to 3ou, fro 
alle synnes, of whiche 3e my3ten not be 
iustified in the lawe of Moises. In this39 
ech man that bileuetht, is iustified. Ther- 40 
for se 3e, that it come not to 3o0u, that is 
biforeseid in the profetis, 3e dispiserist, 41 
se 3e, and wondre 3e, and be 3e scaterid 
abrood; for Y worche a werk in 3oure 
daies, a werk that 3e schulen not bileue, 


f sabot AGMNOPSVXY. 

k askeden 9. and axiden r. 1 puttiden rv. 

POm.yr. dwasy. Om. 7. 8 to GmQrT. 

VY 30ure 4GMNOPQSTYXY. |W and agen reyside r. 

Cseide vy. @Om.o0. ©¢ herfore wpeT 

k Om. ox. Ilwasv. ™ that rv. 
rOm., r. 


i deiede o. 


a Om. A prom. 


4A 2 


and techeris of 
the lawe that 
weren blyndid 
hi enuie, inter- 
pretiden yuele, 
and so thei dis- 


And he? a3enreiside hym fro 34 seyueden the 


puple. whanne 
thei hadden 
endid; that is, 
yuel Jewis had- 
den endid alle 
thingis. thei ; 
that is, goode 
ewis, as Jo- 
seph and Ny- 
codeme. put- 
tiden hym 
doun ; for holy 
scripture vndir 
oo resoun either 
sentence pass- 
ith ofte fra good 
to yuele men, 
and a3enward. 
Lire herel v. 
t bileeuith ; bi 
feith foormed 
bi charite. Lire 
here. V. 
t dispiseris ; 
of Goddis bi- 
heest fillid bi 
Crist. wondre 
3ee ; on the 
grectnesse of 
yuel to comyng 
on 30u. seater- 
id; bi Ro- 
mayns, ve. 
whiche for 
peyne of Cristis 
deth, distroi- 
eden the citee 


548 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. XII. 42—52. 


schulen not bileue, if ony man schal telle if ony man schal telle 2 to 3ou. And 42 and temple, and 
° . e ° leaden ie 
42 out to 30u. Forsoth ‘hein goynge’ out, thei © whanne thei 3eden out, thei preieden, that _ puple in partie, 


preieden, that ‘another suynge saboth' thei in the sabat suynge thei schulden speke Sern 


; . . parti, and 
43sclulden speke to hem thes wordis. And to hem these wordis. And whanne thes ee ee 


whanne the synagoge was left, manye of | synagoge was left, manye of Jewis® and thoursrell 
Jewis aud of comelingis worschipinge" of comelingis worschypynge God su- werk; of Cristis 
incarnacioun 


sueden Poul and Barnabas; the’ whiche eden Poul and Barnabas; that spaken, ang passioun, 


‘spekinge, softli¥ counceiliden hem, that and® counseliden hem, that thei schulden °"4 ane 


thei schulden dwelle in the grace of God. dwelle in the grace of God. And in the 44 oe ee ie 
44Sothly in saboth* suynge almoost al the sabat suynge almest al the citee cam to- Jewis bileeu- 


sins den at th 
cyte cam to gidere, forY to heere the word __ gidir, to here the word of God. . And4s Facute of 


° a 7 . Crist and of his 
4so0f God. Forsoth Jewis seynge’ the cum- Jewis sien the puple, and weren fillid  joohis nathe- 


panyes* of peple, ben? fulfillid with enuye, | with enuye, and a3enseiden these thingis _ 1¢s thei weren 
and a3en seiden thes thingis that weren that weren seyd of Poul, and blasfem- penpoune 
46 seid of Poul, blasphemynge®. Thanne Poul yden. Thanne Poul and Barnabas stid- 46 leeueden not. v. 


. i ° ° . hanne thei ; 
and Barnabas stedefastly seyden, To 30u _fastli® seiden, To 30u it bihofte! first to thatis, Poule 


it bihofte first for’ to speke* the word of _ speke the word of God; but for 3e putten 3) Pamalns 


God; but for 3e putten it awey, and han it awei, and han demyd 30u vnworthi to Mpg 

demed vs‘ vnworthi of% euere lasting lyf, euerlastiage lijf, lo! we turnen to hethen alt te synagnge 
° ° preiden mah- 

lo! we turnen to gidere to hethene men. men. For so the Lord comaundide vs*, 17 ciously, as ex- 


47 Forsothe’ so the Lord comaundide vsi, IY haue set! thee in tol! li3t™ to” hethen tna the glose 


haue putt thee into‘ li3t to hethene men, men, that thou be in to helthe to® the?  semith to 


meene the 
that thou be into heelthe ‘til to! the vt- vtmest4 of erthe’. And hethen men ieee ie 
4smoste™ of erthe". Sothli hethen men — herden, ‘and ioieden’, and glorifieden the — asens Poul and 


° . f . Barnahas, Lire 
heeringe® ioyeden, and glorifieden the word of the Lord; and bileueden, aS ere. ve. for 


: . Poule seid 
word of the Lord; and bileuyden, how manye as weren bifore ordeyned to euer- 442: thei aiste 


manye euere weren byfore? ordeyned to  lastinge lijf. And the word of the Lord 49 7 be iustified 
5 : in the lawe of 
49euere lastyng lyf. Forsoth the word of | was sowun bi‘ al the" cuntre. But the 0 Moises. fd 
° ee ee eriore eit thei 

the Lord was ferr sowun by al the cun- Jewis stiriden religiouse wymmen, and _ wolden here 


> i a eis . . this of his 
sotree. Sothli Jewis stiredyn religiouse  onest, and the worthiest men of the citee, jrouth, that so 


se : s Vv thei schulden 
wymmen, and honest, and the firste men and stireden persecucioun’ a3ens Poul hate aeenitae 


of the cytee, and stiriden persecucioun and Barnabas, and dryuen hem out of 10 Pile 
> 


intod Poul and Barnabas, and castiden* her cuntreis. And thei* schoken awei{ 51 thei diden aftir- 


: : d. 
5lhem out of her cuntrees. And thei’, the in to hem the duste of her feet, and coats Te 


‘ . ‘oatalt f th nes 
powdir of feet ‘shakun awey' into hem, camen to Yconye. And the discipliss2 biteeis ates 
szcamet" to Iconye. And disciplis’ weren weren fillid with ioye and the Hooli pease 2 of 
fulfilid” with ioye and the* Hooly Gost. Goost. that is, con- 
e uersis froo he- 
thenesse to the 
lawe of Jewis, worschipinge God. dwelle in the grace of Gad; that is, stonde stedfastly in the feith of Crist, to whiche thei weren clepid bi [the 
grace) of God. Lire here. v. t schaoken awey, ete. in witnessing of her owne traueile to the conuersioun of vnfeithful men, and of obsty- 
nacie of Jewis that nolden resseyue. to Vconie; as Crist seide in 18 c°. of Matheu, whanne thei pursnen 30u in oo citee, fle 3e in to another; not 
for drede of turment, but for loue of puppliscbing of the gospel. Lire here. ve. 


8 he goynge x. whanne thei 3eden r. t in sabot suyng r. 4 worschipinge God r. Vv Om. r. 
wspaken and vy. * the saboth emopestvy. YOm.sx. sien 7. 8 kumpanye s. > and weren r. 
€ and blasfemeden vy. 4@ Om. sx. € preche Nn. fsour. tor. bForr. itovsos. kino. 
l ynto euPer. m vyttermest GMPeTY. 1 the erthe er. © herden and r. Pp Om. @. 4 ajens V. 
®casten sx. § thei schooken awey yr. €Om.r. and camenr. VY the disciplis caper. W fillid vx. 
x with the er. 


© the Jewis rErkrbce. fOm.rQqgka.  g and softlix sec.m. 4stiflia. 1 bihoueth g sec. m. k. 
Ktovsk. I sent nag. "Om.a. ™ the lis3th. of ghk. oOintor, POm.xprim. 4 vitermast K. 
*the erthe kK, sOm.q. tin x. Uthat x. VY persecuciounsa. W Om. 5. 


XIV. 1—12.° 


Ces A1V. 


1 Forsoth it is’ don at Iconye, that to 
gidere thei entriden into a’ synagoge of 
Jewis, and spaken, so that a plenteuous 
multitude of Jewis and Greekis bileueden. 
2Forsoth the Jewis that weren vnbileueful, 
reisiden persecucioun, and to wraththe 
stiriden the soulis of hethen men ajens 
3bretheren*. Therfore thei dwelliden moche 
tyme, doynge tristyli in the Lord, beringe 
witnessinge to the word® of his grace, 
jyuynge sygnes and wondris for® to be 
4maad by the hondis of hem. Forsothe 
thet multitude of the citee is* departid, 
and sotheli summe weren with Jewis, 
ssumme sothli with apostlisf. Forsoth 
whanne asawt of hethen men and Jewis 
was’ maad, with her princes, for> to pon- 
ische with dispisingis, ‘or fals blamyngis’, 
céand* stoone hem, thei vndirstondinge! 
fledden to gidere to the citees of Licao- 
nye, Listris™ and Derben, and al the cun- 
tree inuyroun". And thei weren there 
prechinge the gospel, and al the multi- 
tude is® moued to gidere in the teching? 
of hem. Poul sothli4 and Barnabas 
7dwelten at Listris. And’ sum’ man at 
Listris, syk' in the feet, saat" crokid fro 
his modris*® wombe, the’ which’ neuere 
thadde gon. This* herde Poul spekinge; 
they ‘which biholdynge” him, and ‘seynge, 
for? he hadde feith, that he schulde be 
g9maad saaf, seide> with greet vois, Ryse 
thou ri3t° on thi feet. And he lepide’, 
1oand walkide®. Forsoth the cumpanyes, 
whanne thei hadden seyn that that Poul 
dide, reriden her voys in Lycaon tunge, 
seiynge, Godis maad lyk to men camen 
11doun to vs. And thei clepiden Barnabas 
Jouem‘, Poul sothli Mercurie, for he was 
i2ledere of the word. And the prest of 


yYwasry. %Om. xk. the osyx. 
sx. 4Om.o0. ¢€wasy.  f the apostlis eanper, 
empest. | vndirstoden and y.. ™ and Listris x. 
owas v. Ptechyngis s. 4 forsothe o. 
vOm. vv. W which man vy. * He this r. 
seide vy. ¢vprizjt vy. leep sx. 


wAnditr. * felde kK prim. 


vp b prim. gk prim. 4% Om. k pr.m. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


a britheren ; forsothe the Lord 3af soone pees r. 

& weren N. 
. in enuyroun G sec.m. M. enuyrouned o. in compas V. 
rFOm.o. a0. 
y Om. r. 


€ walked forthe o. 


y Om. k prim. 


549 


CAP. XIV. 


But it” bifelde* at Yconye, that theii 
entriden togidir in to the synagoge of 
Jewis, and spaken, so that ful greet mul- 
titude of Jewis and Grekis bileueden. 
But the Jewis that weren vnbileueful, 


‘ reiseden persecucioun, and stiriden to 


wraththe the’ soulis of hethene men 
ajens the britheren; but the Lord 3af 
soone pees. Therfor thei dwellidens 
myche tyme, and diden tristili in the 
Lord, berynge witnessyng to the word 
of his grace, 3yuynge signes and wondris 
to be maad bi the hondis of hem. Buta 
the multitude of the citee was departid, 
and sum weren with the Jewis, and sum 
with the apostlis. But whanne thers 
was maad ‘an asaute”* of the hethene 
men and the? Jewis, with her princis, 
to turmenten and to stonen hem, theié 
vndurstoden, and fledden togidere to the 
citees of Licaonye, and Listris, and 
Derben, and into al the cuntre aboute. 
Aud thei prechiden there the gospel, 
and al the multitude was moued togider 
in the teching of hem. Poul and Bar- 
nabas dwelten at Listris. And a man7 
at Listris was sijk in the feet, and hadde 
sete crokid fro his modris wombe, which - 
neuer hadde goen. This herde Pouls 
spekinge; and Poul biheld hym, and 
si3 that he hadde feith, that he schulde 
be maad saaf, and seide with a greet» 
vois, Rise thou ‘vp ri3t° on thi feet. And 
he lippide, and walkide. And the puple, 10 
whanne thei hadde seyn that? that Poul 
dide, reriden her vois in Licaon tunge, 
and seiden, Goddis maad lijk to men ben 
comun doun to vs. And thei clepidenu 
Barnabas Jubiter, and Poul Mercurie, 
for he was ledere of the word. And the 12 


b Lord x. 
i Om. oex. 


¢ Om. 
Lb Om. sx. K and to 
uu modir wY. 


twas syk vy. “and sat rv. 
b and 


2 which Poul biheeld r. 
f Jubiter vy. & Om. p. 


8 si3 that rv. 


Zasauzt 1. assaunteo, 28Om.R.  » He this 1. 


550 


Jubiter, that was bifore the citee, bryng- 
ynge" to! bolis and crownes bifore the 
jatis, with peplis, wolde* make sacrifice. 
13 The! which thing™ whanne apostlis", Bar- 
nabas and Poul, herden, ‘her® cootis kitt 
to gidere?, thei scipten? out into the cum- 


14 panyes, ‘cryinge, and seiynge’, Men, what 


don 3e this thing? and we ben deedly 
‘men lyk’ tot 30u, schewinge® to jou, ‘for 
to be’ conuertid” fro these veyne thingis 
to quyk God, that made heuene, and 
erthe, and the see, and alle thingis that 
isben in hem; the* which in generaciouns 
passid lefte alle folkis entre’ into her? 
igs weyes. And sotheli not withoute wit- 
nessyng he ‘wel doynge* lefte hym silf, 
fro heuene 3yuynge reyues and tymis ber- 
inge fruyt, fulfillinge> with mete and glad- 
i7nesse 30ure® hertis. And thei? seyinge 
thes thingis, vnnethe swagiden the cum- 
panyes®, that thei offriden not to hem. 
18 Forsothe summe Jewis camen out‘ fro 
Antiochie and Iconye, and%, the cumpa- 
nyes sweteli" ‘stirid, thei! stoonynge* Poul, 
drowen! out of the citee, gessinge™ ‘him 
i9for to be® deed. Sothli disciplis® enuy- 
rownynge? hym, he rysinge? entride into 
the citee; and" the suynge day he wente 
20forth with Barnabas into Derben. And 
whanne thei hadden euangelysid to ‘the 
ilke’ citee, and tau3t manye, thei turneden 
a3en to Listris, and Iconye, and Antiochie; 
21confermynge the soulis of disciplis, and 
monesting, that thei schulden dwelle in 
feith', and seiynge, For* by manye tribu- 
laciouns it bihoueth vs for’ to entre into 
22the kingdom of heuenes. And whanne 
thei hadden ordeyned prestis to hem by 
alle citees, and hadden preied with fast- 
ingis, thei bitoken hem to the Lord, into 
23 whom thei bilenyden. And thei passinge’ 


h brou3te r. itwo xe. Om. rv. k and wolde r. 
othe ny. ‘P thei to-renten her cootis, and r. 
Slyke men x. ¢Om.v. ¥ and schewen r. 
to entre GMPQTY sec.m. wente N. 
ad hem per. € kumpanye x. 
iQm.s.  stoneden y. 1 and drowen Fr. 
disciplis GuNpeT. whanne disciplis r. 


tthe feithe 0. u Thatr. Y Om. ansx. 


© cootis kitt togidere K sec. m. 


kK fillide b. ! drowen him x sec.m.a. ™ into k. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


1Om. sr. 
4 clepiden 7. slipten y. 
Vv to be sx. that 3e ben rv. 
Zz her owne MPQTY sec.m. 
f ouer MOPQTVXY. 
m and gessiden r. 
P cumpassiden r. 
W passiden r. 


fthei crieden k. & and Egk. 


0 the disciplis k. 


XIV. 13—23. 


preest of Jubiter that was bifor the 
citee, brou3te boolis and crownes bifor 
the 3atis, with puplis, and wolde haue 
maad sacrifice. And whanne the apo-13 
stlis Barnabas and Poul herden this, thei 
to-renten her cootis*; and thei skipten 
out among the puple, and crieden‘, and 14 
seiden, Men, what don 3e this thing ? 
and we ben deedli men lijk jou, and 
schewen to 30u, that 3e be conuertid fro 
these veyn thingis to the lyuynge God, 
that maad heuene, and erthe, and the see, 
and alle thingis that ben in hem; which 15 
in generaciouns passid suffride alle folkis 
to gon in to her owne weies. And 3it 16 
he lefte not hym silf with out witness- 
ing in§ wel doyng, for he 3af reyns fro 
heuene", and times beringe! fruyt, and 
fulfillide* joure hertis with meete and 
gladnesse. And thei seiynge these thingis, 17 
vnnethis swagiden the puple, that thei 
offriden not to hem. But sum Jewis1s 
camen ouer fro Antioche and Iconye, 
and counseilden the puple, and stonyden 
Poul, and drowen! out of the citee, and 
gessiden that he was deed. But whanne1s 
disciplis weren comun aboute him, he 
roos, and wente in to the citee; and in 
the dai suynge he wente forth with Bar- 
nabas in to Derben. And whanne thei20 
hadden prechid to the ilk citee, and 
tau3te manye, thei turneden ajen to™ 
Listris, and Iconye, and to Antioche ; 
confermynge the soulis of disciplis", and 21 
monestinge, that thei schulden dwelle in 
feith®, and seiden, That? bi many tribula- 
ciouns it bihoueth vs to entre in to the 
kingdom of heuenes. And whanne thei 22 
hadden ordeined prestis to hem bi alle 
citees, and hadden preied with fastyngis, 
thei bitoken hem to the Lord, in whom 


mthingis x. 8 the apostlis cupesTx. 
§ P 


¥ and crieden and seiden Fr. 
Wturned 0. XOm.y. Y for 
a weldinge ry. » fillinge vy. ¢in 50ure N. 
& and counceiliden r. h Om. or. swiftely 9. 
a him to be sx. that he was 7. © the 
Groosandy. Tin N. andinr. §& that x. 


i of beringe b. 
P Om. k pr.m. 


h heuenes a pr.m. a. 
© the feith Eigkaf. 


XIV. 24—=v.. 7. 


24 Persidie, camen* to Pamphilie; and thei 
spekingeY the word of the Lord in Per- 

25 gen, camen” down in to Atalie. And fro 
thennis thei wenten bi boot to Antiochie, 
fro whennis thei weren takun to the 
grace of God, in to the werk that thei 

26fulfilliden®. Sothli whanne thei camen, 
andgedriden® the chirche, thei telden how 
manye! thingis God dide with hem, for® 
he hadde opened to hethene men the dore 

270f feith. Forsothe thei dwelliden a tyme 
not litil with disciplis‘. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And summe comynge® doun fro Judee, 
tau3ten" bretheren, For! no* but! 3e be cir- 
cumsidid vp™ the lawe of Moyses, 3e 

2mown not be ‘maad saaf". Therfore ‘se- 
dicioun, 07° dissencioun, maad? not leest 
to Poul and Barnabas a3ens hem, thei 
ordeyneden, that Poul and Barnabas, and 
summe othere of hem, schulden gon vp to 
apostlis4 and prestis int Jerusalem, on this 

3questioun. Therfore thei, ledd’ forth of 
the chirche, passident by Fenyse and Sa- 
marie; tellinge’ the lyuynge of hethen 
men, and thei maaden greet ioye to alle 
sbretheren. Sothli whanne thei camen to 
Jerusalem, thei weren receyued of the 
chirche, and of apostlis’, and eldere men, 
tellinge” how manye thingis God dide 
swith hem. Forsoth sum of the eresye of 
Pharisees, that bileuyden, risen*, seyinge, 
For’ it bihoueth hem for? to be circum- 
sidid, and for? to comaunde for* to kepe 
6the lawe of Moyses. And apostlis® and 
eldre men camen to gidere, for® to se of 
7this word. Forsoth whanne greet sekyng 

‘to gidere’ was maad, Petre rysinge®, seide 
to hem, Men bretheren, 3e witen, for’ of 
oolde dayes in 30u God chees by my 


xand camen F. JY spaken r. 
eand that ry. _f the disciplis earper. 
y sec.m. | but if woporxy sec.m. if 7. 
either v. Pwasmaad vy. 4 the apostlis emper. 
thei telden vy. _¥ the apostlis empory sec. m. 
2Om. sx. and for vy.  » the apostlis caroper. 
andy. f that r. 


4 Om. K pr. m. ® but if b. 


F summen ag. 
w these wordis gk. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


2 and camen P. 
& camen rv. 
m after empor. bi 7. 
T to o. 
w and telden r. 
¢ Om. sx. 


551 


thei bileueden. And thei passiden Per-23 
sidie, and camen to Pamfilie; and thei24 
spaken the word ‘of the Lord4 in Per- 
gen, and camen doun in to Italie. And2s5 
fro thennys thei wenten bi boot to An- 
tiochie, fro whennus thei weren takun 
to the grace of God, in to the werk that 
thei filliden. And whanne thei weren26 
comun, and hadden gaderid the chirche, 
thei telden hou grete thingis God dide 
with hem, and that he hadde openyde 
to hethene men the dore of: feith. And 27 
thei dwelliden not a litil tyme with the 
disciplis. 
CAP. XV. 

And summe'} camen doun fro Judee, ! 
and tau3ten britheren, That but’ 3e ben 
circumcidid after the lawe of Moises, 3e 
moun not be maad saaf. Therfor whanne2 
ther was maad not a litil discencioun to 
Poul and Barnabas a3ens hem, thei or- 
deyneden, that Poul and Barnabas, and 
summe othere of hem, scliulden go vp to 
the apostlis and preestis in Jerusalem, on 
this questioun. And so thei weren led3 
forth of the chirche, and passiden bi 
Fenyce and Samarie; and thei telden 
the conuersacioun of hethene men, and 
thei maden greet‘ ioie to alle the" bri- 
theren. And whanne thei camen to Je-4 
rusalem, thei weren resseyued of the 
chirche and of the apostlis, and of the 
eldre men, and telden, hou greet thingis 
God dide with hem. But summe of thes 
erise of Fariseis*, that bileueden, risen 
vp, and seiden, That it bihoueth hem to 
be circumsidid, and to comaunde to kepe 
also the lawe of Moises. And the apo-6 
stlis and eldre men camen togidre, to se 
of ‘this word”. And whanne there was7 
maad a greet sekyng herof, Petre roos, 
and seide to hem, Britheren, 3e witen, 


a filliden r. © hadden gaderid rv. d grete r. 
hand tau3ten 7. %$iThaty. k Om. mporrx 
Nsaned o. 9% Om. o. whanne sediscioun, 
sweren led y. tand passiden 7. and 
Xriseden ry. YThatv. 2 Om. sx. 
d togidere, either disputyinge v. © roos 


ta greet Apr.m. Om. EK pr.m. Y the Farisees r. 


+ And summe ; 
conuertid of the 
secte of Farises. 
tau3ten brithe- 
rens conuertid 
fro hethennesse. 
whanne sedis- 
cioun, etc. to 
Pout and Bar- 
nabas; that 
affermeden the 
contrarie of 
thes Farisees ; 
for whi to seie 
that Moises 
Jawe must nedis 
he kept, is to 
anoide the gos- 
pel. Lire here. 
ve. 


552 


mouth hethen men&, for to heere the 
word of the gospel, and for to bileue ; 
sand God that knew hertis, bar witnessing, 
3yuynge' to hem the Hooli Gost, as and 
gto vs; and no thing dyuerside* bitwixe! ‘vs 
and hem™, ‘bi feith clensynge® the hertis 
100of hem®. Now therfore what tempten? 
3e God, for’ to putte a 30k on the nol, ‘or 
necke*, of disciplis’, thet which nether we, 
11nether oure fadris my3ten bere? But bi 
the grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist we 
bileuen for" to be sauyd, as and_ thei. 
12 Forsoth al the multitude heeld pees, and 
herden Barnaban and Poul, tellinge how 
many signes and wondris God dide by 
ishem in hethen men. And aftir that thei 
helden pees, James answeride, seyinge, 
14 Men bretheren, ‘heere 3e’ me. Symound 
telde, how first God visytide, for’ to take 
150f hethen men a peple to his name. And 
to him the wordis of prophetis acorden, 
ieas it is writun, Aftir this I schal turne 
a3en, and bylde the tabernacle of Dauith, 
that felde doun; and I schal bylde a3en the 
cast doun thingis of it, and I schal reyse 
17it; that othere of* men a3en** seke the 
Lord, and alle folkis on whiche my name 
is inclepid’; the Lord doynge this thing, 
igseith. Fro the world, to? the Lord ‘his 
19 werk is knowun*. For which thing I deme 
hem that of> hethen men ben conuertid 
to God, for® to be not vnquyetid, ‘or 
29 disesid 4, but for® to wryte to hem, that 
thei absteyne hem fro defoulingis’ of sy- 
mulacris, and fornycacioun, and stranglid 
2ithingis, and bloods. ‘Moyses sothli* of 
olde tymes hath in alle citees hem that 
‘prechen him’ in synagogis, where by ech 
22Ssaboth he is rad. Thanne it pleside to 
apostlis*, and eldre men, with al the 
chirche, for! to chese men of hem, and 
sende to Antiochie, with Poul and Barna- 
bas, Judas, that was named Barsabas, 


£ Om. r. h Om. sx. i and 3af r. 
nand clenside r. © hem bifeith yr. P tempted o. 
u Om. sx. Vheere x. hereth x. WW Oni. sx. 

2 the werk of the Lord is knowen to r. a Om. r. 
fdefouling s. £ bloody thingis 7. » For Moises r. 


x hethene men Ka. 
£ whom 1. 


y the hertis r. 
4 defoulyng xb8. ¢ Om. b. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


K he dyuerside er. 
q Om. sx. 
x Om. m. 


ihem x sec. m. 


z clansinge K sec, m. 


XV. 8—z22. 


t Aftir this ; 
that is, aftir 
the tyme of the 
elde testament. 
I schal turne 
a3en; to man- 
kinde, in tak- 
inge manhed. 


that of elde daies in 3ou God chees bi 
my mouth hethene*, to here the word of 


the gospel, and to bileue; and God, thats 
knewe hertis’, bar witnessing, and 3af to 
hem the Hooli Goost, as also to vs; and9 jie the iaber- 
. 8 af * . nacle of Da- 
no thing diuerside bitwixe vs and hem, with; that 1s 
‘and clenside? the hertis of hem bi feith. verte oe 
A od, either o 
Now thanne what tempten 3e God, Coe ee Chee 
60 ing of Crist and 
putte a 30k on the necke* of the disci-  Gfapostiis, that 
. : 2 felde doun hy 
plis, which nether we, nether oure fadris  jranye synnes, 
mi3ten bere? But bi the grace of oure M Miisie. bale 
Lord Jhesu Crist we bileuen to be saued, 3cen the cast 
2 . doun thingis, 
as also thei. And al the multitude 12 et:.; for he- 
thene 
helde pees, and herden Barnaban and — weren departid 
s x ‘ _ _ bi many foold 
Poul, tellinge hou grete Signes and won ydolatrie, and 
dris God dide bi hem in hethene men.  Jewis weren 
: K hrooken and 
And aftir that thei helden pees, James 13 departid bi 
e . a many errouris; 
answeride, and seide, Britheren, here 3e ve. it snumme 
canes den voi 
me. Symount telde, hou God visitide,14 (ayn yo, 
first to take of hethene men a puple to ‘* her tradi- 
i ‘ e cionns 3 and 
his name. And the wordis of prophetis 1salle al 
‘ a . 5 " rourls hen put 
acorden” to him, as it is writun, Aftir 16 awey bi the 

: ; bing of 
thist Y schal turne ajen, and bilde the Crist ad hise 
tabernacle of Dauid, that felle doun; and tone 
Y schal bilde azen the cast doun thingis and areca 

, S maa 0 
of it, and Y schal reise it; that other 17 enhaunsing of 
6 cristen feith. v. 
men seke the Lord, and alle folkis on. shat oshere of 
which® my name is clepid to helpe; the 7772, that is 
: ; : : 

° ik 1g ve. tro the 
Lord doynge this thing, seith. Fro the Be eee 
world, the werk of the Lord is knowun _ fro withont bi- 

. gynnyng. v. 
to the Lord. For which thing Y deme 19 jo defoulynge 
. lacris ; 
hem that of hethene men ben conuertid ee ite 
° ° ingis of thingis 
to God, to be not disesid, but to write to20 9 anes 
hem, that thei absteyne hem fro defoul-  ¥e a 
ingis’ of maumetis, and fro fornicacioun, — blood ; for the 
° ° ° connersls 0: 
and stranglid thingis, and blood. For 21 Jewis wiatiden 
A _ this mete ; 
Moyses of elde tyines hath in alle citees thevfore thos 
: ‘ G the mete were 
hem that prechen him In synagogis, jorefal nshe. 
where bi ech sabat he is red. Thanne fos ae 
. . : ul felauschipe, 
it pleside to® the apostlis, and to the hethene men 
! ‘ hulden ab. 
eldre men, with al the chirche, to chees ene fro suche 
* 9 thingis til the 
men of hem, and sende to Autioche, with [une ae 
Poul and Barnabas, Judas, that was 


gospel were 
knowen. Lire 
here. Vv. 
! bitwen osx. m hem and vs F, 
rOm. x. § the disciples 0. * Om. r. 
xx Om.o.  Yclepid p. clepid to help r. 
b Om. r. ©Om. sx. 4Om.x. ¢& Om. sx. 
k the apostlis carr. 1 Om. sx. 


a ether nolle K marg. » acordiden R. 


XV. 23—36. 


and Sylam, the firste men in bretheren; 
23 wrytinge by the hondis of hem, Apostlis 
and eldere bretheren to hem that ben at 
Antiochie, and Cirie, and Cilice, bretheren 
of hethen men, greetyng, or® heelthe°. 
21 For we herden that summe ‘of vsP ‘goynge 
out’, troubliden™ 30u with wordis, turn- 
ynge®’ vpsodoun 3oure soulis, to whiche 
25men we comaundiden not, it pleside to vs 
gederid into‘ oon, for" to cheese men, and 
sende to 3ou, with oure mooste dereworthe 
26 Barnabas and Poul, men’ that bitoken, 
‘or 3auen™, her soulis*, ‘or dyuwes’, for the 
27name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. Ther- 
fore we senten Judas and Sylas, ‘the 
whiche’? and thei schulen telle the same 
28thingis to 3ou by wordis. Forsothe® it is 
seyn to the Hooly Gost and* vs, for? to 
putte to 30u no thing more of charge, than 
29 these nedeful thingis, that 3e absteyne 3ou 
fro the® offrid thingis of symulacris, and 
blood stranglid, and fornycacioun. Fro 
whiche 3e kepinge 30u, schulen do wel. 
30Fare 3e wel. Therfore thei dismittid, 
camen down to Antiochie; and, the! mul- 
titude gederid®, thei bitaken the epistle; 
3ithe" which whanne thei hadden radd, 
32thei ioyeden' on the comfort. Forsoth 
Judas and Sylas and thei, whanne thei 
weren prophetis, ‘with ful moche word 
coumfortiden bretheren, and confermyden!. 
33Sothli sum™ litil tyme maad® there, thei 
weren dismittid, ‘or left°, with pees of 
bretheren, to hem that hadden sent hem. 
34 Forsoth it isP seyn to Silas, ford to dwelle 
there; - Judas sothli wente aloone' to Je- 
3srusalem. Forsoth Poul and Barnabas 
dwelliden at Antiochie, techinge and 
euangelysinge the word of the Lord, with 
3¢‘othere manye®’. Forsothe aftir summe 
dayest, Poul seide to Barnabas, ‘We® 
turnynge’ a3en, visite’ oure* bretheren by 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


553 

named Barsabas, and Silas, the firste 

ment among britheren ; and wroten! bi23+ the sirste 

the hondis of hem, Apostlis and eldre  fhocy thee 

britheren to hem that ben at Antioche, “ra a a 

and Sirie, and Silice, britheren of he- thei weren of 
. the principal 

thene men, greting. For we herden that 24 mea aftir the 

summe wenten out fro vs, and trobliden’ Manone: 

3ou with wordis, and turneden vpsodoun Ni, ata 

joure soulis, to whiche® men we co- pet ei 

maundideni not, it pleside to vs gaderid 2p forthe vias of 

in to oon, to chese men, and sede to su Crist; that 

jou, with oure* most dereworthe Barna- er the 

bas and Poul, men that 3auen her lyues 20 ee 

for the name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. of “urge: of 

nbseruaunces of 

Therfor we senten Judas and Silas, and 27 Moises lawe. v. 

thei schulen telle the same thingis to 30u Ta dns: 

bi wordis. For it is seyn to the Hooly 2s ve comny 

Goost and to vs, to putte to 3ou no with Jewisin 

thing more of charge, than these nedeful eer 

thingis, that 3e absteyne jou fro the29 

offrid thingis of maumetis, and blood 

stranglid, and fornicacioun. Fro whiche 

3e kepinge 30u, schulen do wel. Fare 3e 

wel. Therfor thei weren let go, and30 

camen doun to Antioche; and whanne 

the multitude was gaderid, thei token 

the epistle”™; which whanne thei hadden 3: 

red, thei ioyden on the coumfort. And 32 

Judas and Silas and thei, for thei weren 

prophetis, coumfortiden britheren, and 

confermyden with ful many wordis. But33 

aftir that thei hadden be there a lytil 

while, thei weren let go of britheren 

with pees, to hem that hadden sent aN cee 

hem. {But it was seyn to Silas, toss sihefowle ond 

dwelle there; and Judas wente aloone — #t in Greek, 

to Jerusalem. And Poul and Barnabas anend- 


. A id, but first it 
bas dwelten at Antioche, techinge and was set be the 
manere of a 


prechinge the word of the Lord, dice arid after- 
with othere manye. But after summe 36 wet it was set 

. ‘ in the text bi 
daies, Poul seide to Barnabas, Turne 


ignorannce of 
eee " ie writeris, Lire 
we a3en, and visite” britheren bi alle 


here. v. 


nando. Om. x. ©Om. x. POm.r. 4 3eden out frovs y. * turbliden wNp. and troubleden r. 
sandtumeden ry. ttoo. ue Om.sx. VYOm.o0. WOm.o0gx. *lyuesor. Y Om. orx. 7% Om. r. 
aForrprm. bofo. by tT. ino. ¢Om.sx. ¢€Om.sx. fwhannethe y. & was gaderid r. 


hOm. vr.  iioyeden with gret ioye e.  * Om. r. 
fermeder with ful myche word r. 
sx. Tal oonli N. 


8 many othere mp. 
esrx. and visite v. 


x Om. 7. 


f wreten 1. wryten K. writen Rhkf, 
m pistle o. ® visite we Ka. 


VOL. IV. 4B 


™m aftir that sum r. 
* of dages x. 


& troublen k. 


! conformeden hem a. confermyden hem MT. con- 
nwasmaad vy. © Om.ox. Pwasv. 4Om. 
uOm.svx. ‘Turne wer. W visite we GMP 


hthe whiche 1. {comaunden gk. * Om. k. 


554 


alle citees, in whiche we han prechid the 
word of the Lord, how theiY han hem. 
37 Barnabas forsothe wolde take with him 
3sand? John, that was namyd Markus. Poul 
sothli preiede him, that he that departide* 
tro hem fro Pamphilie, and wente not 
with hem? into werk, schulde not be re- 
soceyued. Forsoth® dissencionn is’ maad, 
so that thei departiden atwyny®. And 
Barnabas ‘sothli, Mark takyn tof, bi boot 
4ocam§ to Cypre. Forsoth Poul, ‘Silas cho- 
sun>, wente forth, takun to the grace of 
41God fro britheren. Forsoth he wente bi 
Sirie and Cilice, confermynget the chirche, 
comaundinge for* to kepe the preceptis of 
lapostlis! and eldre men. +Sothli he cam 
in to Derben and Listram. 


CAP. XVI. 


And lo! sum disciple was there, by 
name Tymothe, the sone of a womman? 
widowe® feithful, ‘or cristen?, the fadir 

2hethen. Bretheren™ that weren in Listris 
and Iconye, 3elden’ good witnessing‘ to 
shim. Poul wolde him" ‘for to go” forth 
with him silf’, and he ‘takinge to*, cir- 
cumcide’ him, for Jewis that weren in 
‘the ilke? places. Sothely* alle wisten, that 
4his fadir was hethen. Forsoth whanne 
thei passiden bi citees, thei bitoken to 
hem for? to kepe the techingis, that weren 
demed of apostlis and eldere men, that 
sweren at Jerusalem. And sothly the 
chirchis weren confermyd in feith, and 
éhaboundiden in noumbre ech day. For. 
soth thei passinge® Frigye, and the cun- 
tree of Galathie, werent forbodyn of the 
Hooly Gost for® to speke the word of God 
7in Asya. Sothli whanne thei camen into 
Misye, thei temptiden' for’ to go into 
Bithinie, and the spirit of Jhesu suffride 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XV. 37-—XVI. 8. 


citees, in whiche we han prechid the 
word of the Lord, hou thei han hein. 
And Barnabas wolde take with hym37 
Joon, that was named Marcus. But3s 
Poul preiede him*, that he that depart- 
ide fro hem fro. Pamfilie, and wente not 
with hem in to the® werk, schulde not 
be resseyued. And dissencioun+ was39 
maad, so that thei departiden a twynny?P. 
And Barnabas took Mark, and cam bi 
boot to Cipre. And Poul chees Silas, 40 
and wente forth fro the britheren, and 
was bitakun to the grace of God. And 41 
he wente bi Sirie and Silice, and con- 
fermyde the chirche, comaundinge to 
kepe the heestis of apostlis’ and" eldre 
men. 


CAP. XV i 


And he cam in to Derben and Lis-! 
tram. And Jo! a disciple was there, bi 
name Timothe, the sone of a Jewesse 
cristen, and of the fadir hethen. And2 
britheren that weren in Listris and’ Ico- 
nye, 3eldiden good witnessing to hym. 
And Poul wolde that this man schulde3 
go forth with him, and he took, and 
circumsididet hym{, for Jewis that weren 
in the® places. For alle wisten, that his 
fadir was hethen. Whanne thei pass-4 
iden’ bi citees, thei bitoken™ to hem to 
kepe the techingis, that weren demyd of 
apostlis and eldre men, that weren at 
Jerusalem. And the chirches weren con-5 
fermed in feith, and encreseden in noumn- 
bre eche dai. And thei passiden Frigie, 6 
and the cuntre of Galathi, and weren 
forbedun of the Hooli Goost to speke the 
word of God in Asie. And whanne thei7 
cainen in* to Mysie, thei assaieden to go 
in to Bithynye, and the spirit of Jhesu 


snot hemi, Sothli whanne thei hadden  suffride not hem. But whanne thei had-s 

Ywer. Zalsor. @wentex. bhimn. ¢Sothely cup. Cwasr. & a twynne s4GMOPQSTXY. 
f took Mark, and cam vy. 8 Om.v. 1 chees Silas, and y. ‘and confeermyde ry. Om. sx. ! the 
apostles 9. + Chap. XVI. commences here in yr. "Om. ox. © Jewesse vy. P Om. 0g. or cristned 7. 
Qofthe y. 1 The bretheren Garpry sec.m. 8 3eldiden cy. t wittenesseo. that thismany. to 
go sx. schulde goo yr. * Om.r. saafy. *took andy. Ycirenmcided acunopestyx. 2 that ilke g. 
tho x. @Fory. %Om.sx. ¢passideny. 4and werenvy. © Om.sx. fassaiedeny. & Om. sx. 
bOm.r. them not ear. : 

°Om.k prim. Patwynne irgho. 4 the apostlis rh. ‘'andofik. ‘sandinz.  ¢ circumciside b. 


u tho 4 sec.m. Kk. VY passiden forth k. 


w token gk pr. m. 


x Om. K pr.m. 


* preiede him ; 
that is, Barna- 
bas, that he 
schulde abstene 
fro the felan- 
schipe of Joon. 
he that depart- 
ede fro hem; 
Joon departide 
for dreede of 
perels neisinge, 
either for ouer 
greet fleschly 
lone to his mo- 
dir dwellinge 
in Jerusalem, 
either in hap 
for euer either ; 
wherfore Poule 
forsook hym, 
for thei that 
goon to preche, 
awen to be sted- 
fast, and de- 
partid fro 
fleschly loue ; 
and moost 
whanne thei 
goon among 
vnfeithful men 
and pursueris, 
as it was in this 
poynt. Lire 
here. Vv. 


t+ Not contrarie 
to charite, for 
ech of hem 
wolde good, and 
oon was moned 
bi oo resoun, 
and another bi 
another resoun ; 
and more good 
fruit of preeh- 
ing byfelde her- 
by. Lire here. 
v. 


t cireumcide 
him; this cir- 
cumcfisi]oun 
was not feyned, 
thou3 Jerom 
seith so, hnt 
verey circum- 
cisionn, as Ans- 
tin seith. For 
in that tyme 
Jewis conuertid 
to cristen feith, 
mizten kepe 
obseruauncis of 
Moises lawe, 
neither Poul 
dide yuele in 
this, but wel, 
to eschewe tbe 
sclaundre of 
Jewis. Lire 
here. Vv. 


XVI. g—18. 


passid by Misye, thei camen down to 
9Troade; and a visioun by* ny3t was 
schewid to Poul. Sum man of Macedonye 
was stondinge, and preiynge him, and 
seyinge, ‘Thou goynge! into Macedonye, 
1ohelp™ vs. Sothli as he sy3 the visioun, 
anoon we sou3ten for® to go forth into 
Macedonye, maad° certeyn that God hadde 
11 clepid vs for? to euangelise to hem. Sotheli 
we goynge! by boot, ‘or seylinge', with’ 
strei3t* cours camen" to Samatrachia; and 
12the’ day suynge to Neapolis; and fro 
thennis to Philippis, that is the firste part 
of Macedonye, the citee colonye”. Sothli 
we weren in this citee summe dayes, spek- 
i3inge* to gidere. Sothli in the day’ of 
sabotis we wenten out? withoute* the 3ate® 
bisydis the flood, wher preier was° seyn 
for’ to be; and we sittinge’, spaken to 
14wymmen that camen to gidere. And sum 
womman, Lidda bi name, purpuresse! of 
the citee of Tiatirens, worschipinge God, 
herde; whos herte the Lord openyde for® 
to 3yue tent to these thingis, that weren 
isseid of Poul. Forsothe whanne she was 
baptysid and hir hous, she preiede, sei- 
ynge, If 3e han demyd me for" to be feith- 
ful to the Lord, entre 3e into myn hous, 
aud dwelle’, And sche constreynede vs. 
16 Forsothe it is* don, ‘vs goynge! to preier, 
sum wenche hauynge a spirit of dyuyn- 
acioun, ‘for ‘to mete™ vs", the® which 3af 
greet? wynnyng to hir lordis in dyuyn- 
yng, that is, tellinge hid thingis\ bi the 
ijdeuelis craft. This suynge™ Poul and vs, 
criede’, seyinge, Thes men ben seruauntis 
of hize God, that tellen to jou the wey of 
ishelthe. Forsothe this thing she dide in 
many dayes. Sothli Poul sorwinge', and 
conuertid", seide to the spirit, I comaunde 
! Go thou rv. 


k in o. ™ and helpe v. 


uOm.7. Vinthe expry sec.m.  W of colonye svx. 
2Om. or. >3atesox. Cwerer. 40m. sx. 
purpurr. & Om. sx. bOm. sx. i dwellith sx. 
mette Fr. ® with vs G sec. m. o Om. 7. 


t sorewede nr’. 


Z there was a K see. m. 


y Om. k pr.m. 
4 Om. a prom. k see.m. B. 


¢ of colonye k pr. m. 
h Om. pr. i dwelleth 1. dwelle 3e nr. 
! Sche this 1. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


a Om. sx. 
T or seilynge fro Troade N. Om. ex. either seyleden, fro Troade, and camen r. 


e saten and v. 


Pa greet N. 
" conuerted, or turned o. turnede and r. 


a Om. hk see. m. 
¢ the k sec. m. 
* that is, tellinge hidde thingis bi the deuels crafte x et 0 marg. 


555 


den passid bi Mysie, thei camen doun to 
Troade; and a visioun ‘bi ny3tY was9 
schewid to Poul. But a? man of Mace- 
donye that stoode, preiede hym, and 
seide, Go thou in to Macedonye, and 
helpe vs. And as he hadde® sei” thei 
visioun, anoon we sou3ten to go forth 
in to Macedonye, and weren maad cer- 
teyn, that-God hadde clepid vs to preche 
to hem. And we 3eden bi schip fro1 
Troade, and camen to Samatrachia with 
strei3t cours; and the dai suynge to 
Neapolis; and fro thennus to Filippis, 12 
that is the firste part of Macedonye, the 
citee colonye®. And we‘ weren in this® 
citee summe daies, and spaken togidere. 
Andf in the dai of sabotis we wenten 13 
forth with out the 3ate bisidis the flood, 
where preier semyde® to be; and we 
saten, and spaken to wyimmen._ that 
camen togidere. And a womman, Lidda 14 
bi name, a purpuresse of the cite of* 
Tiatirens, worschipinge God, herde; whos 
herte the Lord openyde to 3yue tente to 
these thingis, that weren seid of Poul. 
And whanne sche was baptisid and hir1s 
hous, sche preyede, and seide, If 3e han 
demyd that Y am feithful to the Lord, 
entre 3e in to myn hons, and dwelle’. 
And sche constreynede vs. And it was 16 
don, whanne we 3eden to preier, that a 
damysel that hadde a spirit of diuyna- 
cioun, mette vs, which 3af greet wynnyng 
to her lordis in dyuynynge*. This! suede 17 
Poul and vs, and criede, and seide, These 
men ben seruauntis of the hi3 God, that 
tellen to 30u the weie of helthe. Andis 
this sche dide in many daies. And Poul 
sorewide, and turnede, and seide to the 
spirit, Y comaunde thee in the name of 


oand weren maad yr. POm. sx. 4 3iden r. 
sOm.o. t Om. er. 
xand spaken vy. Ydayes Gestx. 2 forth r. 


fa purpiresse, either momman makinge 
I whanne we 3eden vr. ™ to mete sx. 
Tsuede ry. 8 and criede r. 


k was rv. 
4 thing Mr. 


b seen k pr.m. saw k sec. m. seyn a. 
£ Om. hk see.m. — & bisemyde xa. 


4B2 


556 


to thee in the name of Jhesu Crist, ‘for to 
go’ out of hir. And he wente out in the 
igsame honr. Sothli the lordis of hir, se- 
ynge for the hope of hir wynnyng wente 
a wey, catchinge* Poul and Silas leddenY 
into* cheping*, or dom place, to the 
20princes. And thei offringe® hem to the 
magestratis, seyden®, These men disturb- 
len® oure citee, whanne thei ben Jewis, 
21and schewen a custom, the® which it! is 
not leueful to vs fors to receyue, nether do, 
z2sythen we ben Romayns. And the peple 
ran ajens hemi ‘and magestratis*, and 
‘the cootis of hem kitt!, thei. comaundiden 
23hem for™ to be betyn with 3erdis. And 
whanne thei hadden 30uun to hem many 
woundis, thei senten hem into prisoun, 
comaundinge® to the kepere, that he dili- 
2igentli schulde kepe hem. The°® which, 
whanne he hadde takyn such a precept, 
sente hem into the ynner prisoun, and 
25 streynede the feet of hem in a tree. Sothli 
at mydny3t Poul and Silas worschipinge?, 
herieden? God; and thei that weren in 
26keping’ herden hem. Forsoth sudenli a 
greet erthe mouyng is’ maad, so that the 
foundementis of the prisoun weren mou- 
yd. And anoon alle thet doris ben" 
openyd, and the’ bondis of alle ben” vn- 
27 bounden. 
soun maadY wakyn, and seynge’ the 3atis 
of the prisoun openyd, the* swerd drawun 
out, wolde® sle hym silf, wenynge® the 
28 boundyn men ‘for to haue? fled. Forsoth 
Poul criede with greet vois, seyinge, Do 
thou no thing of yuel to thi silf, forsoth® 
29alle we ben here. And ‘li3t axid, hef en- 
tride’ yn", and ‘tremblinge he feli down 
30to Poul and Silas at the feet. And he 
‘bringinge hem* withoute forth, seith}, 


v to go sx. that thou goo r. w that vr. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


Sothli the kepere of the* pri- 


x and thei tooken r. 


XVI. 19——39- 


Jhesu Crist, that thou go out of hir. 
And he wente out in the same our. And 19 
the lordis of hir sizen, that the hope of 
her wynnyng wente awei, and thei 
token Poul and Silas, and ledden in to 
the ‘dom place™, to the princis. And 20 
thei brou3ten hem to the magistratis, 
and seiden, These men disturblen® oure 
citee, for thei ben Jewis, and schewen a2 
custom, which it® is not leueful to? vs to 
resseyue, nether do, sithen we ben Ro- 
mayns?. And the puple ‘and magistratis 22 
runnen a3ens hem, and when thei badden 
to-rente the cootis of hem, thei comaund- 
iden hein to be betun with 3erdis. And 23 
whanne thei hadden 3o0uun to hem many 
woundis, thei senten hem into prisoun, 
and comaundiden to the kepere, that he 
schulde kepe hem diligentli. And whanne 24 
he hadde take siche a precept, he putte 
hem into the ynnere prisoun, and streyn- 
ede the feet of hem in a tre. And atos 
mydni3t Poul and Silas worschipide, and 
heriden God; and thei that weren in 
kepyng herden hem. And sudenli a26 
greet erthe mouyng was maad, so that 
the foundementis of the prisoun weren 
moued. And anoon alle the doris weren 
openyd, and the boondis of alle weren 
lousid. And the kepere of the prisoun 27 
was awakid’, and si3 the 3atis ‘of the 
prisount openyd, and with a swerd 
drawun out he wolde haue slawe" hym 
silf, and gesside that the men that weren 
boundun, hadden fled. But Poul criede 28 
with a greet vois, and seide, Do thou 
noon harm to thi silf, for alle we ben 
here. And he axide’ 1i3t, and entride, 29 
and tremblide, and felle doun to Poul 
and to Silas at her feet. And he brou3te so 


y thei ledden pry sec. m. and 


ledden v. 2 heminto mpy sec.m. 4the chepyng 4GmNoPosrxy. the elepyng Tr. » brouzten ry. ¢ and 
seiden vy. 4 disturben sx. distroublen rv. eOm.sx. fOm.nor. 8 Om.sx. 4 and magistratis 
runnen F. ihymt. Om. vr. and the magistratis x. 1 whanne thei hadden to-rent the cootis of 
hem y. ™ Om. sx. "and comaundiden y. © Om.vx. P worschipiden and ry. 4 preyseden 0. © the 
kepynge 0. Swasy. tOm.osx. %werenr. VOm.r. Wwereny. *Om.7.  y was maad r. 
2833”. aand withthe yr. bhewolde vy. Cand gesside that 7. ‘to hane sx. haddenry. © for Fr. 
fhe axide list, and yr, S went o. »Om.y. itremblide and felde y. * brouste him ry. ! and seide r. 


™ cheping, ether dom place K sec. m. 
4 men Romayns gk pr. m. r Om. R. 
V askide ao. 


n distroublen ro. 
8 nakit £. wakid g8. 


© Om. EIK sec. m. gk pr.m. 


P Om. g. 
t Om. h. 


u slayn CEIKMQXabceghko. 


XVI. 31—XVII. 2. 


Lordis, what bihoueth me for™ to do, that 
31I be maad saf? And thei seiden, Bileue 
thou in to the Lord Jhesu, and thou 
32schalt be saf, and thin hows. And thei 
spaken to him the word of the Lord, with 
33alle that weren in his hous. And he 
takinge™ hem in ‘the ilke® hour of ny3t, 
waischideP her woundis??. And he is‘ bap- 
34 tysid, and al his hous anoon. And whanne 
he hadde led hem into his hous, he sette" 
to hem a boord. And he gladide’ with al 
35 his hous, bileaynget to God. And whanne 
day was maad, the magistratis senten ‘lit- 
toures, that ben mynistris of ponysching", 
seyinge’, Dismitte”, ‘or delyuere, 3e*% tho 
36men. Forsoth the keper of prisoun telde 
thes wordis to Poul, For’ the magestratis 
han sent, that 3e be delyuered; now ther- 
37fore ‘3e goynge’ out, goth* in pees. For- 
soth Poul seide to hem, Thei senten into 
prisoun vs, betyn opynly vndampnyd, men 
Romayns, and now priuely thei casten vs 
38o0ut; not so, but come thei, and® thei¢ silf 
caste’ vs out. Sothli the mynistris of 
peyne telden thes wordis to the mages- 
tratis; and thei dredden, herd® that thei 
39 weren Romayns. And thei comynge’, bi- 
secheden$ hem, and thei ledinge" forth, 
preieden', that thei schulden go out of the 
socitee. Sothli thei goynge* out of the! 
prisoun, ‘entriden into™ Lidie. And, ‘the 
bretheren seyn", thei coumfortiden hem, 
and wenten forth. 


CAP. XVIL 
1 Sotheli, whanne thei hadden® passid? bi 
Amphipolis and Apolonye, thei camen to 
Tessalonyk, wher was a synagoge of 
2Jewis. Sothli vp% custom Poul eutride 
into" hem, and by thre sabotis he declar- 


mQOm.sx. "took pr. 
G prom. T. was VF. 


© thilke wp. that x. 
rsettide vy. 8 was glad rv. 


& go AGMNOPTY. and goo ¥. 
herden vy. f camen and +. 
m and entriden to P. 
aftir mpr. by or. 


b Om. o. 
& bisozten sx. 


Ttor. 


W broujt kK. = sette ER. 


pun3zsshing K marg. > bisou3ten mk. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


P wesh sx. and waschide r. 
t and bileeuede r. 
w Dismitte 3ee Gnopost. Dismytte thou v. Delyuere je x. 
*hem empt. her o, them s. 

b ledden r. 
® whanne thei sijen britheren r. 


y hadden gk pr.m. hath of. 
¢ goinge 1agka. 


BOT 
hem with out forth, and seide, Lordis, 
what bihoueth me to do, that Y be maad 
saaf? And thei seiden, Bileue thou ins) 
the Lord Jhesu, and thou schalt be saaf, 
and thin hous. And thei spaken to hym sz 
the word of the Lord, with alle that 
weren in his hous. And he took hem33 
in the ilke our of the ni3t, and waschide 
her woundis. And he was baptisid, and 
al his hous anoon. And whanne hes 
hadde led* hem in to his hous, he set- 
tide* to hem a boord. And he was glad 
with al his hous, and bileuede to God. 
And whanne dai was come, the magis-35 
tratis senten catchepollis, and seiden, De- 
lyuere thou tho men. And the kepere sé 
of the prisoun telde these wordis to Poul, 
That the magistratis hanY sent, that 3e be 
delyuered; now therfor go 3e out, and 
go 3e in pees. And Poul seide to hem, 37 
Thei senten vs men of Rome in to pri- 
soun, that weren betun openli and vn- 
dampned, and now priueli thei bringen 
vs out; not so, but? come thei hem silf, 
and delynere vs out. And the catche-ss 
pollis* telden these wordis to the magis- 
tratis; and thei dredden, for thei herden 
that ‘thei weren Romayns. And _theisg 
camen, and bisechiden® hem, and thei 
brou3ten hem out, and preieden, that 
thei schulden go out of the citee. And 40 
thei 3eden® out of the’ prisoun, and®¢ 
entriden tof Lidie. And whanne thei 
sizjen britheren, thei coumfortiden hem, 
and 3eden forth. 


CAP. XVII. 


And whanne thei hadden passid bil 
Amfipolis and Appollonye, thei camen to 
Thessolonyk, where was a synagoge of 
Jewis. And bi custom Poul entride to2 
hem, and bi thre sabatis he declaride to 


Pp hondis kK. 9 Om. 
«tormentonres o. and seide r. 
x Om. GuMNnopeTvx. Y That or. 2 gojer. 
4 and cast o. e for thei 
K3eden vy. 10m. o. 

4 after the G pr. m. 


i and preieden r. 
© Om.¢@.  P passiden g. 


Z Om. K pr.m. 


@ thai ben ministris of 
d Om. ragkaf. 


€ Om. 1ggka. fin to b. 


558 


side to hem of scripturis, ‘openynge and 
schewynge for’ it bihouetht Crist't for" to 
suffre, and ryse ajen fro deede men’, and 
for’ this is Jhesus Crist, whom I ‘tolde, 
sor schewide*, to 30u. And summe of hein 
bileueden, and ben’ ioyned to Poul.and 
Silas; and of hethen men worschipinge’ a 
greet multitude, and noble wymmen not 
sfewe. Sothli Jewis hauynge* enuye, and 
takinge> of the comune* summe yuele 
men, and a‘ cumpanye maad, thei moueden 
the citee. And thei stondinge® ny3‘ Jasons 
hous, sou3ten$ hem for" to bringe forth 
sinto! the peple. And whanne thei founden 
hem not, thei drowen Jason and summe 
bretheren to the princes of ‘the citee, 
‘eriynge, For! these it ben, that mouen the 
7world, and hidir thei camen, whom™ Ja- 
son receyuede. And ‘thes alle" don ajens 
the maundementis of Cesar, ‘seiynge, an 
sother Jhesu® ‘for to be? kyng’. Forsoth 
thei mouyden the peple, and princes" of 
athe citee, heeringe thes thingis. And ‘sa- 
tisfaccioun takun’ of Jason and of othere, 
iothei leften hem. Forsoth anoon by ny3te 
bretheren dismittident Poul and Silas in 
to Beroan. The" whiche whanne thei 
camen, entriden into the synagoge of 
uJewis. Sothli thes weren’ the nobelere 
of hem that ben at Tessalonyk, whiche’ 
resceyueden the* word with al desyr, ech 
day sekynge scripturis’, if* these thingis 
1280 hadden hem. And sotheli manye of 
hem bileuyden, and of ‘hethen wymmen 
1shoneste? and men not fewe. Forsothe 
whanne Jewis in Tessalonyk hadden 
knowe, ‘for and¢ at Beroan the word 
of God is’ prechid of Poul, thei camen 
and¢ thidur, mouynge and disturblinget 
14the multitude. And anon bretheren dis- 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XVII. 3—14. 


hem of& scripturis, and openyde, and3 
schewide that it bihofte Crist to suffre, 
and rise ajen fro deth, and that this is 
Jhesus Crist, whom Y telle to jou. And4 
summe of hem bileueden, and weren 
ioyned to Poul and to Silas; and a greet 
multitude of hethene men worschipide 
God, and noble wymmen not a fewe. 
But the Jewis hadden enuye, and tokens 
of the comyn puple summe yuele men, 
and whanne thei hadden maad a cum- 
penye, thei moueden the citee. And thei 
camen to Jasouns hous, and sou3ten hem} 
to brynge! forth among the puple. Ande 
whanne thei founden hem not, thei 
drowen Jasoun and summe britheren to 
the princis of the citee, and crieden, That 
these it ben, that mouen* the world, and 
hidir thei camen, whiche! Jason resseyu-7 
ede. And these alle don ajens the 
maundementis™ of the emperour, and" 
seien®, that Jhesu is anothir king. Ands 
thei moueden the puple, and the princis 
of the citee, herynge these thingis. Ando 
whanne satisfaccioun was takun of Ja- 
son, and of othere, thei Jeten Poul and 
Silas go. And anoon bi ni3t britheren 10 
leten Silas go in to Beroan. And whanne 
thei camen thidur, thei entriden in to 
the synagoge of the? Jewis. But these 
weren the worthier of hem that ben at 
Thessolonik, whiche resseyueden the 
word with al desire, eche dai sekinge 
scripturis, if these thingis hadden hem 
so. And manye of hem bileueden and 12 
of? hethen wymmen onest and men not 
a fewe. But whanne the Jewis in™ Tes-13 
salonyk hadden knowe, that also at Bero 
the word of God was prechid of Poul, 
thei camen thidir, mouynge and disturb- 


8 and openide and schewide that vy. t bihofte amNnoposrxy. bihoued c. tt Om. x et alii. 4 Om. s. 
vOm. x. Wthat vy. * telle, or schewe acmnopsty. telle gvx. YOm.N. weren ry. 7% worschiping 
God ry. 4hadden rr. » token vr. © comynte GmpT. comyne puple Nr. dwithav. €stoden r. 
f ny3 to 4 sec.m. GMNQSTVXY sec.m. €and souz3ten vy. 4Om.sx. itos, vntox.  & prestis Q. 
land crieden, That vy. ™whiche vy. "alle these cup. © and seien that Jhesu ry. P to be sx. is v. 
4 another king vy. 7 the princes G sec.m. 8 whanne satisfaccioun was taken vy. tsenten.N. tOm.r. 


Vben x.  W the whiche o. x Om. Nn. 
batx. ¢thatalsor. GUwasr. € Om. o. also r. 
Sthea. bOm.k. i brynge hem 1k. 


«and thei Erkb sec.m. gkoa, © seiden E. 


Y the scripturis r. 


k moueden k pr. m. 
P Om. go. 


Zofo, 2 honest heithen wymmen cp. 
f disturbende sx. distroublinge 7. 


lwhom 1. ™ comaundementes nak. 


Vofthe b. "at hk see.m. 


XVII. 15-——24. 


mittiden Poul thanne, that he schulde go 
‘til to’ the see; forsoth Silas and Ty- 
ismothe dwelten there. Sothli® thei that 
ledden forth Poul, ledden him ‘til to! 
Athenes. And ‘maundement takyn* of him 
-to! Silas and Tymothe, that ful hi3yngh 
thei schulden come to him, thei wenten 
isforth. Forsoth whanne Poul abood hem 
at Athenys, his spirit was mouyd in him, 
17seynge the citee 3ouun to ydolatrie. Ther- 
fore he disputide in the synagoge with 
Jewis, and men worschipinge™, in the" 
‘chepinge, or dom place®, bi alle dayes to 
ishem that herden. Forsothe summe Epi- 
cureis,and Stoycis?, and philosotris disput- 
iden, ‘or ¢retiden’, with him. And summe 
seiden, What wole this sowere of wordis 
seie ? ‘Sothli othere seiden, He is seyn 
for to be a tellere of newe deuelis*; for 
he telde to hem Jhesu, and‘ aj3en rysing. 
i9 And thei ‘ledden him takun" to Ariopage’, 
that is, comun™ scole, seyinge, Mown we 
wite, what is this newe doctryn, that is 
zoseid of thee? Sothli* thou bringist yn 
sum newe thingis’ to oure eeris; therfore 
we wolen wite, what these thingis? wolen 
2ibe. Sothli alle men of Athenis and come- 
lingis, herborid* men, 3auen tent to noon 
othir thing, no but ethir® for4 to seye, 
ethir® forf to heere, ony® thing of newe. 
22 Forsoth Poul stondinge® in the myddel of 
Areopage’, seithi, Men of Athenis*, bi alle 
thingis I se 30u as veyn worschiperis. 
23°Sothli I passinge!, and seynge™ joure sy- 
inulacris, foond" and® an auter, in which 
was writun, To vnknowun God. Therfore 
which? thing 3e vnknowynge worschipen, 
2ithis thing I schewe to 30n. God that 
inade the world and alle thingis that ben 
in it, this, whanne he is Lord of heuene 
and erthe, dwellith not in templis maad 
i ynto GMpr. to Q. 


& vnto cuwpr. 4 Forsothe n. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


k whanne thei hadden take a maundement r. 


559 


lynge’ the multitude. And thot anoon is 
britheren delyuerden Poul, that he 
schulde go to the see; but Sylas and 
Tymothe dwelten there. And thei that 1s 
ledden forth Poul, ledden hym to Atenes. 
And whanne thei hadden take maunde- 
ment" of him to Silas and to’ Tymothe, 
that ful hi3yngli thei schulden come to 
hym, thei wenten forth. And while Poul 1s 
abood hem at Atenys, his spirit was 
moued in him, for he sai3 the citee 
3onun” to* ydolatrie. Therfor he dis-17 
putide ‘in the synagoge with theY Jewis, 
and with men that worschipiden? God, 
and in the dom place, by alle daies to 
hem that herden. And summe Epei- is 
cureis, and Stoisens, and filosofris dis- 
putiden* with hym. And summe seiden, 
What wole this sowere of wordis seie ? 
And othere seiden, He semeth to be a 
tellere of newe fendis®+; for he telde to 
hem Jhesu, and the ajenrisyng. And 19 
thei token, and ledden hym to Ario- 
page’, and seide, Moun we wite, what is 
this newe doctryne, that is seid of thee ? 
For thou bringist ynne summe newe20 
thingis to oure eeris; therfor we wolen 
wite, what these thingis wolen be. For 2! 
alle men of Athenys and comlingis her- 
borid 3auen tent to noon other thing, but 
ether to seie’, ethir to here, sum newe 
thing. And Poul stood in the myddil 22 
of Ariopage, and seide, Men of Athenys, 
bi alle thingis Y se jou as veyn wor- 
schipers. For Y passide, and si3 3oure 23 
mauinetis, and foond an auter, in which 
was writun, To the vnknowun God. 
Therfor which thing 3e vnknowynge 
worschipen, this thing Y schew to 3ou. 
God that made the world and alle thingis 24 
that ben in it, this, for he is Lord of he- 


lofo. 


™ worschiping God, and yr. ®Om.@ pr.m. rr pr.m. © dome place, or chepyng o. cheping x. P Stoisens x. 


1Om. eerx. 'Om.sx. $Sfeendisy, tOm.or. "tooken and ledden hym 7. Vv the Ariopage o. 
“a comoun GMpT. * For vy. Ydoctrineo. 2 newe thingiso. and herborewid c sec.m.upr. »Om.r. 
Cother wp. 4Om.sx. €or nex. other wp. fOm.Nn, &any othirn. 4 stood vy. i Ariopage, 
or comun scole Gupgsty. ijiand seyde rv.  Athenyencis y. 1 For I passidev. ™sizv. 4 and 
foond y. in x. Om.o. alsov. P the whiche Nn. 

s distroublynge no. thus g sec.m.k. a maundement fiK sec. m. mqnruxabceghkoaf. Y Om. k. 
w was j3ofen K pr.m. *todobpr.m. YOm.R. %worschipeng. 4 ether tretiden K marg. ? that is, 


neme sciencis maad bi feendis 0 marg. 


¢ that is, a comun scole K et o marg. 


d}Jerne EK sec.m. gk pr.m. 


+ that is, of 
newe sciencis. 
Lire here. v. 


560 


25 bid hond, nether is worschipid by mannis 
hondis, ‘hauynge nede™ of ony thing, 
whanne he 3yueth lyf to alle men, ‘and 

26 ynbrething*, and alle thingis; and maad 
of‘ von al the kynde of men for" to en- 
habite onY al the face of erthe, determyn- 
ynge tymes ordeyned, and termes of ‘habi- 

27 tacioun”, ‘or dwelling*, of hem, forY to 
seke God, if perauenture thei feelen him, 
ethir fynden, thou3 he be not fer fro ‘ech 

28o0f% 30u. Sotheli? in him we lyuen, and 
ben moued, and ben. As and summe of 
joure poetis seiden, Sotheli we> ben and° 

29the kynde! of him. Therfore sithen we 
ben the kynde® of God, we schulen not 
deme’, ‘or gesse®, godly" thing ‘for to bet 
lyk to* gold, and! siluer, or™ stoon, to 

30 grauyng of craft and" thou3t of man. And 
sotheli God dispisinge® the tymes of this 
vnkunnynge, now? schewith to men, that 

3ialle euerywhere do penaunce; for that he 
ordeynede a day, in which he ‘is to? dem- 
ynge’ the world in equyte, in a man in 
which he ordeynede, ‘feith 3yuynge® to 

szallet, reysinge" him fro deede meu’. So- 
theli whanne thei ‘hadden herd” the a3en 
rysing of deede men*, sothli summe scorn- 
eden, samme forsothe seiden, We schulen 

asheere thee eftY of ‘this thing’. So Poul 

3i4wente out of the* myddil of hem. For- 
sothe summe? cliuynge® to him, bilen- 
yden*. In the® whiche and Dionyse Ario- 
pagite, or greet’ man of» comun scole}, 
and a womman, by name Damaris, and 
othere men* with hem. 


CAP. XVIII. 
1 Aftir thes thingis ‘he gon! out of A- 
2thenis, cam™ to Corinthe. And fyndynge® 
a man Jew, by name Aquyla, of Ponte 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XVII. 25——XVIII. 2. 


uene and of erthe, dwellith not in tem- 
plis maad with hoond, nethir is’ wor- 25 
schipid bi mannus hoondis’*, nether hath 
nede of ony thing, for he 3yueth lijf to bi sacrifi 
alle men, and brethinge, and alle thingis; pita 
and made of oon" al the kinde of men to26hont® “7 
enhabite on al the face of the erthe, de- 
termynynge tymes ordeyned, and termes 

of the dwellynge of hem, to seke God, if27 
perauenture thei felen hym, ether fynden, 

thou3 he be not fer fro eche of 30u. Fores 

in hym we lyuen, and mouen, and ben. 

As also summe of 3oure poetis seiden, 

And we ben also the kynde of hym. 

Therfor sithen we ben the kynde! of29 

God, we schulen not deme, that godli 

thing is lijk gold, and siluer, ethir stoon, 

ethir to grauyng of craft and thou3t of 

man. For God dispisith the tymes of30 

this vnkunnyng, and now* schewith to 

men, that alle euery where doon pen- 

aunce; for that he hath ordeyned a dai,31 

in which he schal deme the world in 

equite, in! a man in which he ordeynede, 

and 3af feitht to alle men, and reiside 1 and a 
hym fro deth. And whanne thei hadden 32 . cae 
herd the a3enrysing of deed men, summe CeCe 
scorneden, and summe seiden, We schu- pane 
len here thee eft of this thing. So Poul 33 oes yen 
wente out of the myddil of hem. But34 Lire here. ve. 
summen™ drowen to hym, and bileueden. 

Among whiche™ Dynyse Aropagite® was, 

and a womman, bi name Damaris, and 

othere men with hem. 


* by mannus 
hondis; that is, 
bi sacrifices of- 


CAP. XVIII. 


Aftir these thingis Poul 3ede out of1 
Atenes, and cam to Corinthie. And hee 
fonde a man, a Jewe, Aquila bi name, of 


q with o. T neither hath nede r. Sinbreething ry. tonn. "tOm.ospr.m. Vv Om. sx. 
w dwelling 0, * Om. 0g. YOm.sx. 7Om.n. 4Forr. band wee x. Calsor. Om. x. 4kyn r. 
ekynr. fgesseo. € Om.ogrx. hb that godly r. itobesx.isr. Omer. loro. Mand x. 
n or N. either v fere passim, © dispisith yr. Pandnowr. 4schaly. "demens. deme rx. 8 and 
jaf feith y. ‘tallemeny. and reysider. vOm.x. Wherdenn. *Om.x.  Y eftsoone x. 
z thees thenges o. this 7. a Om. r. b summen er. ¢ecleueden ry. 4and bileeueden yr. € Om. 
orx. 8a grete empT. bins, iGlossom.in x. * Om. prim. MPT. ™ and cam Fr. 


n he foond yr. %a Jew Fr. 


€ Om. e1Q9g pr.m. ka, fhe ist. 
is, of Adam, the first man x marg, 1 Om. xogk. 
© that is, a greete man of comune scole  marg. 


& that is, sacrifices offrid to hien bi mannes hondis o marg. 
kK now he 1. 


! Poul 3ede rv. 


h that 


land Erg. n whom 1. 


™ summe KQRka. 


XVHI. 3——14. 


bi kynde, that late cam fro Italie, and 
Priscille, his wyf, for that Claudius co- 
maundide alle Jewis for® to departe fro 
3 Rome, cam? to hem. And‘ for he was of 
the same craft, he dwellide at hem, and 
wrou3te; sothli' thei weren of cenefectories 
craft, that is, to make hilingis' to trauel- 
4inge men. And he disputide in the syna- 
goge by ech saboth, ‘by twixe" puttinge 
the name of the’ Lord Jhesu; and he 
softly” counceilide to* Jewis and Greekis. 
5Sotheli whanne Silas and Tymothe camen 
fro Macedonye, Poul 3af bisynesse to the 
word, witnessingeY to the Jewis, ‘Jhesu 
for to be? Crist. Forsothe ‘hem a3en sey- 
inge and blasfemynge”, he schakynge® of? 
his clothis, seide® to hem, 3oure blood onf 
3oure heed; I clene® fro hennis forth, 
7schal" go to hethene men. And he pass- 
inge' thennis, entride* into the hous of 
sum iust man, by name Tyte, worschip- 
ynge God, whos hous was ioyned to the 
ssynagoge. Crispe sothli, prince of the 
synagoge, bileuyde to the Lord, with al 
his hows. And manye of the Corinthies 
heeringe! bileuyden, and weren cristenyd. 
9Forsoth the Lord seide by ny3te to Poul 
by a visioun, Nyle thou drede, but spek, 
1oand be not stille; for which thing I am 
with thee, and no man schal be put to 
thee that he anoye™ thee, for moche 
11 peple is to me in this citee. Forsoth he 
saat” ther a 3eer and sixe monethis, tech- 
inge at hem the® word? of ‘the Lord4. 
12Sothli Gallion™ proconsul of Achaye, 
Jewis® risent vp" with oon ynwitt’, ‘or 
wille’, into* Poul, and ledde hym toY 
13the? dom, seiynge*, For’ a3ens the lawe 
this councelith men for* to worschipe God. 
14Sothli ‘Poul bigynnynge? for® to opene 
the mouth, Gallion seide to Jewis, Forsoth 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 561 


Ponte bi kynde, that late cam from Ytalie, 

and Priscille, his wijf, for that? Claudius 

comaundide alle Jewis to departe fro 

Rome; and he cam to hem. And for‘%s 

he was of the same craft, he dwellide 

with hem, and wrou3te+; and thei ft wrowse; 
A Poul wrou3te 

weren of roopmakeris craft. And he4 inthis craft, 

disputide in the synagoge bi ech sabat, ean 


bernaclis other 
puttynge among the name of the Lord  [cnts. to Bete 


bis lyfloode ; 


Jhesu; and he counselide Jewis and __ that he schulde 
6 s not greue hem 
Grekis. And whanne Silas and T'ymo-5. to whiche he 


prechide, in 


the camen fro Macedonye, Poul 3af bisy- 
nesse to the word, and witnesside to the that false apo- 
Jewis, that Jhesu is Crist. But whannes eee oo 
thei a3enseiden and blasfemyden, he ry 
schoke awei hise clothis, and seide to  awey bi this. 
hem, 3oure blood be on 3oure heed; Y EO 
schal be clene from hennus forth, and" 

schal go to hethene men. And he pass-7 

ide fro thennus, and entride in to the 

hous of a iust man, Tite bi name, that 
worschipide God, whos hous was ioyned 

to the synagoge. And Crispe, prince ofs 

the synagoge, bileuede to the Lord, with 

al his hous. And many of the Corin- 

thies herden, and bileueden, and weren 

cristened. And the Lord seide bi ny3t9 

to Poul bi a visioun, Nyle thou drede, 

but speke, and be not stille; for Y aniio 

with thee, and no man schal be put to 

thee to noye’ thee, fort myche puple is 

to me in this citee. And he dwellidei 

there a 3eer and sixe monethis, techinge 

among hem the word of God. Butiez 

whanne Gallion was proconsul of Acaye, 

Jewis risen vp with oo wille a3ens Poul, 

and ledden hym to the doom, and seiden, 13 

Ajens the lawe this" counselith men to 

worschipe God. And whanne Poul bi-t4 

gan to opene his mouth, Gallion seide 

to the Jewis, If there were ony wickid 


takinge costis 
of hem; and 


© Om. sx. P and he cam Fr. q Om. o. r forsothe o. 8 cenefectoryes 0. t roopis, either 
hylyngis vy. ™ bitwen sx. VYoureo. WOm.y. *Om.r. Yand witnessede yr, % Om. 0. tho sx. 
a Jhesu to be sx. that Jhesu is y. > whanne thei ajenseiden and blasfemyden vy. ¢ schook y. 4 Om. N. 
awey vy. ®andseide yr. fin osx. of r. beon vy. & schal be clene y. and schal ry. i passide fro r. 
k and entride vy. lherden andy. ™ noye GunpesTrx. Bdwellide yr. © inthe nN. P woordis N. 
4God ry. * whanne Gallyon was y. 8 the Jewis cupr. triseden yr. %Om. 98x. V witt o. wille rv. 
wOm.orx. ‘*ajensvy. YintoGpr.m. 2%QOm.o. and seyden ry. %Om.r. © Om, sx, 


4 whanne Ponl bigan yr. & Om. esx. 


POm.k prim. 4 forthatk. tand I ixo. 


VOL. IV. 4c 


S anoye R. 


t Om. gk prom. ™ he this 1. 


562 


if ther were ony wickid‘ thing, or® worst 
trespas, je men Jewis, ri3tly I schulde sus- 
1s teyne! 30u; forsoth if questiouns ben of the 
word, and names of 3oure lawe, 3e! silf se ; 
I wole* not be domesman of thes wordis'. 
i16And he drof them fro the™ dom place. 
17 Forsothe alle takynge" Sostenen, prince of 
the synagoge, smyten® him bifore the dom 
place; and no thing of these was to charge 
isto Gallion. Poul forsothe whanne 3it he 
hadde susteyned? many dayes, seiynge4 
far wel to bretheren, by™ boot cam‘ to 
Sirie, and ‘with him‘ Priscille and A- 
quyla", the’ whiche hadden clippid’* to 
hem the* heedY in Tencris?; ‘sothli thei 
19hadden* a vow. And he cam to Ephesy, 
and there he lefte hem; sothli he goynge” 
into the synagoge, disputide® with Jewis. 
20Sothli ‘hem preiynge’ that he schulde 
21dwelle more tyme, he consentide not, but 
he makinge® farwel, and seiynge’, ‘It bi- 
houeth me for’ to make the solempne! 
day comynge to! at Jerusalem, and* eft I 
schal turne aj3en to jou, ‘God willinge’, 
22wente™ forth fro Ephesi. And he com- 
ynge™ doun to"" Cesarie, sti3ede° vp, and 
grette the chirche, and cam doun to An- 
And, there? sumwhat of tyme 
maad4, he wente forth, walkinge by ordre 
thorw the cuntree of Galathie, and Frigie, 
24confermynge’ alle disciplis’. Sothli sum 
Jew, Apollo by name, a man of Alysaun- 
dre’ of kynde, a man eloquent, cam to 
25 Ephesie, my3ti' in seripturis. This man 
was tau3t the wey of the Lord, and fer- 
nent" in spirit spak’, and tau3te diligentli 
tho thingis that weren of Jhesu, know- 
26inge” oonli the baptyim of John. Sothhi 
this man bigan for* to do tristily in the 
synagoge. Whom whanne Priscille and 
Aquyla herden, thei token ‘him to’, and 


23 tiochie. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XVII. 15—26. 


thing, ether yuel trespas, 3e Jewis, rijtli 
Y schulde suffre 30u; but if questiouns 15 
ben’ of the word, and of names of 3oure 
lawe, bisee 3ou" silf; Y wole not be 
domesman of these thingis. And het 
droof hem fro the doom place. And17 
alle} token Sostenes, prince of the syna- 
goge, and smoten him bifor the doom 
place; and no thing of these was to {hb hie 
charge to Gallion. And whanne Poul 1s} tufts 
Z : : em that ben 
hadde abidun many daies, he seide fare put so awey of 
P 2 i the inge. Lire 
wel to britheren, and bi boot cam* to 
Syrie{. And Priscille and Aquila camen 
that is, toward 


+ that is, alle 
themynystris of 
the proconsul, 


here. ve. 

t cam to Sirie; 
with hym, whiche hadden clippid his _ girie,frthanne 
heed in Tencris; for he had a vow. And 19 NRE as 

3 
he cam to Effesie, and there he lefte not ee 
hem; and he 3ede in to the synagoge, This clause, 1¢ 
. : : 5 bihoueth, etc. 
and disputide with Jewis. And whanne 20 ¢i thidir, at se- 
thei preieden, that he schulde dwelle more ncn we 
time, he consentide not, but he made: ther is had in 
% di bookis amend- 
‘fare wel’, and seide, Eft Y schal turned; for Poule 
5 3ede not thanne 
a3en to 30u, if God wole; and he wente to Jerusalem, 
hut longe aftir. 
forth fro Effesi. And he cam doun to22y. 1 Fal 
3 R hich is th 
Cesarie, and he? 3ede vp, and grette the Ghar citee of 
chirehe, and cam doun to Antiochie. And 23 C2padocie, as 
: the Glose seith; 
whanne he hadde dwellide there sum- an other Cesa- 
: . rie of Filip is in 
what of time, he wente forth, walkinge _ the prouynce of 
: ; Se walt d 
bi rewe® thorou the cuntrei of Galathie, jnorhe: Cesarie 
ae 3 is in Palesteyn. 
and Frigie, and confermyde alle the dis- 737 neve vo. 
ciplis. But a Jewe, Apollo bi name, a24 
man of Alisaundre of kinde, a man elo- 
quent, cam to Effesie; and he was my3ti 
in scripturis®. This man was tau3t the25 + 
weie of the Lord, and was feruent in 
spirit, and spak, and tau3te diligentli tho 
thingis that weren of Jhesu, and knew 
oonli the baptym of Joon. And _ this26 
man bigan to do tristili in the synagoge. 
Whom whanne Priscille and Aquila 
herden, thei token hym, and more dili- 
gentli expowneden to hym the weie of 


f wicke sx. & either ¥ pass. fere. h suifre r. i 3e 30u M. 30U Sx. Kk nilo. 1 thingis r. 
™Om.Nn. tooken vy. and smytideny. Pabedeny. aQseidevy. fandbiry. S hecams. 
tOm.r. 8 Aquila camen with himr. VOm.r. Welippen y. Whimr. *Om. 7. Yheued or. 
2 Tencris toun mpr.  ® for he hadder. > 3ede rv. ¢anddisputide y. 4 whanne thei preieden r. 
emader. fseider. €Om.sx. Om r. iOm.s. ‘*Om. vy. lif God wole y. ™ he went 
MPTY sec.m. and he wenter. ™camv. ™ froo. and stizede yr. P whanne he hadde dwellid there r. 


a4Om.r. * and confermyde r. 


u was feruent y. Vand spak y. W and knew ¥. 


¥ Om. A pr.m. 
marg. 


W3our 5. * he cam 1k. 


b scripture a. 


8 the disciplis Gpry sec.m. 
x Om. sx. 


y fare wel to britheren r. 


ss Alexandryne w. * and he was my3ty r. 
Yto hym v pr.m. hym v sec.m. 


zOm. Rg. 4 ether ordre K 


XVIII. 27-—XIX. ro. DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 563 


more diligently expowneden to him the 
27wey of the Lord. Sothli whanne he 
wolde go to” Achaie, bretheren monestid?, 

‘or councelid», writen® to disciplis*, that 
thei schulden resceyue him; which whanne 
he cam, 3af moche to hem that  bileu- 

2syden. Forsothe® he greetly ouercam Jewis, 
schewingef openly by scripturis, ‘Jhesu for 
to bes Crist. 

CAP. XIX. 

1 Forsoth it is* don, whanne Apollo was 
at Corinthe, that! the hizer* partis! gon,!! 
Poul™ cam to Ephesi, and fond summe® 

2of disciplis®°. And he seide to hem, If? 
je han resceyued the Hooli Gost bileu- 
yngei? And thei seiden to him, But ne- 
thir we han herd, if the Hooli Gost is. 

3Sothly he seith', Therfore in what thing 
ben 3e baptysid ? Whiche’ seiden, In bap- 
4tymt of John. Forsoth Poul seide, John 
baptyside in baptym of penaunce the pe- 
ple, seyinge", that thei schulde byleue 
into’ him that was to comynge” aftir him, 
sthat is, into* Jhesu. ‘These thingis herd’, 
thei ben? baptisid in the name of the Lord 
6Jhesu. And whanne Poul hadde putt to 
hem the® hondis, the Hooli Gost cam on 
hem, and thei spaken with langagis, and 
7prophesieden. Forsoth alle weren almest 
stwelue men. Sothli he gon? into the sy- 
nagoge, ‘with trist spak*, by thre monethis 
disputinge’ and softli4 mouynge® of the 
9kyngdom of God. Sothli whanne summe 
weren endurid, ‘or maad hard‘, and bi- 
leuyden not, cursinge’ the wey of the 
Lord bifore multitude*, he goynge! awey 
fro hem, departide* disciplis!, ‘ech day dis- 
putinge™ in scole" of sum tyraunt®, ‘or 
lostrong man?. This is@ don by twey' 
3eeris’, so that alle that dwelliden in Asie 
herden the word of ‘the Lordt, Jewis and 


Z into @ sec.m. excitideny. > Om. ox. 


fand schewide vy. & Jhesu to be sx. that Jhesu is r. 


the Lord. And whanne he wolde go to27 
Acaie, britheren excitiden!, and wroten™ 
to the disciplis, that thei schulden res- 
seyue hym; which whanne he cam, 3af 
myche" to hem that bileneden. For he2s 
greetli ouercain Jewis, and schewide 
opynli bi scripturis, that Jhesu is Crist. 


CAP. XIX. 


And it bifelle, whanne Apollo was at1 
Corinthi, that Poul whanne he hadde go 
the hijer coostis, he cam to Efesie, and 
foond summe of? disciplis. And he seide2 
to hem, Whethir 3e that bileuen han 
resseyued the Hooli Goost? And thei 
seiden to hym, But nether ‘han we? herd, 
if the Hooli Goost is. And he seide,3 
Therfor in what thing ben 3e baptisid ? 
And thei seiden, In the baptym of Joon. 
And Poul seide, Joon baptiside the puple 4 
in baptym? of penaunce, and tau3te, that 
thei schulden bileue in hym that was to 
comynge ‘after hym', that is, in Jhesu. 
Whanne thei herden these thingis, theis 
weren baptisid in the name of the Lord 
Jhesu. And whanne Poul hadde leid ons 
hem- his hoondis, the Hooli Goost cam 
in’ hem, and thei spaken with langagis, 
and profecieden. And alle weren almest7 
twelue men. And he 3ede in to thes 
synagoge, and spak with trist thre mo- 
nethis, disputinge and tretinge of the 
kingdom of God. But whanne summe9 
weren hardid, and bileueden not, and 
cursiden the weie of the Lord bifor the 
multitude, he 3ede awei fro hem, and 
departide the disciplis, and disputide in 
the scole of a my3ti man eche dai. This 10 
was doon bi twei 3eeris, so that alle that 
dwelliden in Asie herden the word of the 


Cand writeden y. ‘the disciplis wpr. © For r. 


hwas ry. ithat Poul ap. that Poule, whanne he 


hadde goo yr. k hizse vy. | parties ss UOm.y. ™ Om. ap. of summery. ° the disciplis c. P Wher 
bileenynge r. @Om.y. ‘seide vy. §& The whiche esx. tthe baptymyv. and tauzter. ¥ too. 
Wcomen sx. *QOm.o.  Y¥ Whanne thei herden these thingisv. %werenv. 20m. x. >» 3ede r. 
¢ and spak with trist ry. 4 sotelly 0. Om.v. © treetinge v» f Om. ox. or hardid s. & and enrsiden r. 
hthe multitude wpesrx. 4 3eder. and departide y. | the disciplis cupr. ™ and disputide r. 


"the scoles 0. © my3ty man ech day y. P Om. orx. 


laxidenk. ™ writen ErReS.  ® coumforl o marg. 
haner. wek. 4 the baptym hko. * Om. b pr.m. g. 


402 


qwas ry. 'two mpTx. S3ersx. t God o. 


9 of the KRahk. =P we han EKQRbceghaf. we 
8 in to KR scc.m. 


564 
i1hethene men. And" vertues whiche euere’ 
12‘the Lord dide* by the hond of Poul, so 

that on syke men theY sudaries, ‘or swe¢- 

yng clothis", or* ‘ny3t clothis®, or girdils, 
weren® borun fro his body, and sikenessis 
departiden fro hem, and wickide® spiritis 
i3wenten out. Forsothe and summe of the 

Jewis exorcistis, 07 coniureris, comynge® 

aboute, temptide for’ to inclepe® the name 

of the Lord Jhesu Crist on hem that had- 
den yuele spiritis, seiynge", I coniure jou! 
isby Jhesu, whom Poul prechith. Sotheli 

ther weren summe seuene sones of a 

Jewe, Sceuej, prince of prestis, that diden 
isthis thing. Sothli the yuel spirit answer- 

inge*, seide to hem, I haue! knowe Jhesu, 

and I woot™ Poul; forsoth® whiche® ben 
163¢2 And the man in which? was the 
worste deuel, ‘lippinge into? hem, and 
hauynge’ lordschips of bothe, wast strong 
a3ens hem, that" thei’ nakid and woundid 
17 fledden” awey fro that hous. Forsoth this 
thing was maad knowun to alle Jewis* 
and hethene men, that dwelliden at Ephesi; 
and drede fel doun on hem alle, and thei 
magnyfieden the name of the’ Lord Jhesu. 
isAnd manye of* men*® bileuynge cainen, 
19 knowlechinge and tellinge her dedis. So- 
theli manye of hem that sueden curiouse 
thingis, brou3ten to gidere bookis, and 
brennyden hem bifore alle men; and the® 
prisis® of hem® acountid*, thei founden 
20money of fifty thousynd pens; so strongly 
the word of God wexidef, and was con- 
2ifermyd. Sothli€ ‘thes thingis fulfillid®, 

Poul purposide in spirit, Macedonye! pass- 

id and Achaye, for* to go to Jerusalem, 

seiynge!, For aftir that I schal™ be there, 
221t bihoueth me for" to se° Rome. Forsoth 

he sendinge? into Macedonye tweyne‘ of 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XIX. (1-22. 


Lord, Jewis and hethene men. And God1! 
dide vertues not smale bi the hoond of 
Poul, so that on sijk ment the sudaries" 12 
weren borun fro his bodye, and sijknessis 
departiden fro hem, and wickid spiritis 
wenten out. But also summe of the 13 
Jewis exorsisists” jeden aboute, and as- 
saieden to clepe the name of the Lord 
Jhesu Crist on hem that hadden yuele 
spiritis, and seiden, Y coniure 3o0u bi 
Jhesu, whom Poul prechith. And ther1s 
weren seuene sones of a Jewe*, Steuen’, 
a prince of preestis, that diden this thing. 
But the yuel spirit answeride, and seide 1s 
to hem, Y knowe Jhesu, and Y knowe 
Poul; but who ben 3e? And the man ie 
in which was the worste deuel, lippide 
on hem, and hadde? victorie of* bothe, 
and was stronge a3ens hem, that thei 
nakid and woundid fledden awei fro that 
hous. And this thing was maad knowun 17 
to alle the? Jewis and to* hethene men, 
that dwelliden® at Effesie; and drede 
felle doun on hem alle, and thei magny- 
fieden the name of the Lord Jhesu. And 1s 
many men bileueden, and camen, know- 
lechinge and tellynge her dedis. Andy 
manye of them that sueden curiouse 
thingis®, brou3ten togidere bookis, and 
brenneden hem bifor alle men; and 
whanne the prices of tho weren acountid, 
thei founden monet of fifti thousynd 
pens; so stronglif the word of God wex-20 
ide, and was confermyd. And whanne2i 
these thingis weren fillid, Poul purposide 
in spirit, aftir that Macedony was passid 
and Acaie, to go to Jerusalem, and seide, 
For aftir that Y schal be there, it bihou- 
eth me ‘to se also§ Rome. And he sente 22 
in to Macedonye twey men, that myn- 


uOm. try. YOm.r. God wperr. * dide vertnes not litel r yYOm. sx. 2 Om.ox. @Om.o. 
bOm. 0. ¢that werengsx. ‘wicke sx. ¢goinger. fOm.sx. &clepey and seiden r. 
iOm. y. J Steuen no. Scene by name rT. Stene r. k answeride and r. 1Om. rv. m knowe F. 
abut vy. who apr. whos vy. P whom spr, 4 lippide on vy. Fhadde vr. §& the lordshipe sx. ¢ and 
was v. Usothat capr. YOm. Gap. W thei fledden cupr. * the Jewis ut. Yonree. 2 Om. wPr. 
ahem. > whannethe vy. © preestis cr. 4thoo yr. © weren aconntid yr. fwex sx. & Forsothe o. 


h whanne these thingis weren fillid r. 


mhaueo. 9 Om. sx. o©seealsor. Pp sente Fr. 


t Om. k pr. m. 
I sec. m. marg. * ernel Jewe nr. 
aonr. > Om. cEtKmQuxabceghkoap. 
fstronge b. Salsotose qgk. band r. 


¢ Om. R. 


i aftir that Macidonie was r. 
4 two GMPSTX. 


¥ ether swetinge clothes K marg. 
y Stene ebeg. that is, a man K marg. Scene K sec.m. a. 
4 dwellen Eg. 


k Om. sx. 1 and seide r. 


W exorsistis 1Kk. or coniurers 
Zhe hadde r. 
© that is, wicche craftis o et V marg. 


v Om. K pr.m. 


XIX. 23-—33- 


men mynistringe to him, Tymothe and 
Eraste, dwellide™ at a tyme in Asie. 
23 Therfore® thert was maad in that day ‘a 
sturbling" ‘not leest’, of” the wey of the 
24Lord. Forsoth* sum man, Demetrie by 
name, argentarieY, makinge? siluerene 
housis* to Dian, ‘that is, fals* goddesse4, 
3af® to crafty men ‘not litil’ wynnyng; 
25 whom he clepinge" to gidere, and hem that 
weren suche manere! werk men, seide*, 
Men, 3e witen for! of this craft ‘is to 3o0u 
26wynnyng™; and 3e seen and heeren, for" 
not oonly of Ephesi, but almest of al Asie, 
this Poul councelinge® turneth awey moche 
cumpany?, seiynge’, for™ thei ben not god- 
27 dis, that ben maad by hondis. Forsoth’ 
not oonli this part schal be in perel to vs, 
fort to come into reprof, but" the temple 
of greet Dian schal be acountid’ into” 
no3t; but and the mageste of hir schal be* 
distroyed, whom al Asie worschipith and 
2sthe world. “These thingis herd’, thei ‘ben 
fulfillid? with ire, and cryeden, seiynge, 
29Greet*? Dian of Ephesians. And the 
citee ‘is fulfillid® with confusioun, and thei 
maden a sawt with ‘oon ynwit4, ‘or awdle®, 
in to the teatre, or comune biholdyng 
place, ‘Gayus rauyschid’ and Aristark, 
30men of Macedonye, felowis of Poul. Sothli 
‘Poul willinges for® toi entre into the 
sipeple, disciplisk suffriden not. Forsoth 
summe! and™ of the princes of Asie, that 
weren his frendis, senten to him, prei- 
ynge", that he schulde not 3yue him silf 
32into the teatre. Sothli othere men cry- 
eden othir thing’; sothli? the chirche was 
confusid, and manye wisten uot of4 what 
a3cause thei camen to gidere. Sothili of the 
cumpanye thei withdrowen™ sum man Ali- 


r he dwelte p. he dwellide ary sec. m. and he dwellide r. 
turbling aay. a trublynge ces7x. a tourbelyng o. turbling p. Om. r. 
2 makide r. 


Yan argentarie Nn. a worchere in siluer r. 
4Om. x. ¢andgafv. fmyche vy.  & whiche r. 
™m™ wynnyng isto vs vy. that v. 
8 Sothely 0. ¢Om.sx. 4 bnt also rv. 

thingis weren herd y. 2 weren fillid 7. 
4 90 wille yr. © Om. ox. 
k the disciplis apy sec. m. 
Pfor vy. Gory. * drowen doun r. 


i that is, a maker of housis to false goddis k marg. 
© Om. CK see. m. 
© that is, comyn biheldyng place « marg. thal is, a comyn place o marg. 


9 that is, an ymage of a ladi o marg. 
8 Om. Io. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


h clepide v. 
© counceileth and 7. 
¥ counted sx. 
a Greet ts . 
f and rauyschen Gayus r. 
1 snmmen T. also summe r. 


¥ of a. 


565 


ystriden to hym, Tymothe, and Eraste, 
and he dwellide for a tyme in Asie. 
And a greet troubling was maad in that 23 
dai, of the weie of the Lord. For a2 
man, Demetrie bi name, a worcher' in* 
siluer, makide! siluer™ housis to Diane’, 
and 3af to crafti men myche wyunyng; 
which he® clepide togidere ‘hem that 25 
weren? suche maner werkmen, and seide, 
Men, 3e witen that of this craft wyn- 
nyng is to vs; and 3e seen and heren, 26 
that this Poul counseilith and turneth 
awei myche puple, not oonli of Effesie, 
but almest of? al Asie, and seith, that 
thei ben not goddis, that ben maad with 
hoondis. And not oonli this part schal27 
be in perel to vs, to come in to repreef, 
but also the temple of the greet Dian 
schal be acountid in to nou3t; 3he, and 
the maieste of hir schal bigynne to be 
destried, whom al Asie and the world 
worschipith. Whanne these thingis 28 
weren herd, thei weren fillid with ire, 
and crieden, and seiden, Greet 7s the 
Dian of Effesians™'. And the citee was 29 
fillid with econfusioun, and thei maden 
an’ asaut with oon wille in to the tea- 
atret; and tooken Gayus and Aristark, 
men of Macedonye, felawis of" Poul. 
And whanne Poul would haue entrid in30 
to the peple, the disciplis suffriden not. 
And also summe of the princis of Asie, 31 
that weren hise freendis, senten to him, 
and preieden, that he schulde not 3yue 
hym silf in to the teatre. And othere 32 
men crieden othir thing; for the chirche 
was confusid, and many wisten not for 
what cause thei weren come togidere. 
But of the puple thei drowen awei oon 33 


8 Forsothe r. ta greet troubling r a 
YOm. ry. Win esx. * Forr. 
bOm. x. ¢a fals cupry. Om. x. 
iQm.n. Kandseide vy. ! that r. 

Pcompanyeso. 4andseith vy. * that or. 
Wtog. *bigynne tobe vy. Y Whanne these 

bthe Deane x. ¢ was fillid yx. = ce of y. 
& whanne Poul wolde vy. bOm.syx. iOm.rx. 
mOm. ry. "and preieden vy. © thenges 0. 


a house G. 


1 made cxrxahko§. 
pP Om. a. q Om. a. 


m siluerne EKQRcgea. 
t the Effesians rR. 
U to a. 


566 


saundre, Jewis* puttinge' him, ‘or jer 
schowfynge". Forsothe Alisaundre, silence 
axid® with the” hond, wolde* 3elde resoun 
34to the peple. Whom as thei knewen forY 
to be a Jew, o vois of alle men was maad, 
criynge as by twey* houris, Greet Dian 
330f Ephisians. And whanne the scribe? 
hadde ceessid the cumpanyes, he seide, 
Men of Ephesi, who sothli is ‘of men‘, 
that knowith not, the’ citee of Ephisians 
‘for to be® worschiper of greet Dian, and 
360f the sone Jubiter? Therfore whanne 
it may not be ajen seid to thes thingis, 
it bihoneth 3ou for" to be ceessid', ‘or 
swagid*, and for' to do no thing folily; 
37sothli™ 3e han brou3t thes men, nether 
sacrilegeris®, nether blasfemynge j3oure 
‘ssgoddesse. That if Demetrie, and the° 
werkmen that ben with him, han cause 
ajens ony man, comyngisP to gidere of 
dom? ben? don, and proconsuls, ‘or tus- 
39 tisist, ben; accuse thei hem to gidere. If 
3e seken ou3t of ony othir thing, it may be 
soasoylid in the laweful chirche. Forwhi 
and we ben in perel for’ to be reproued 
of this dayes seducioun, ‘or dissencioun', 
sithen no man is gilty, of whom we mown 
3elde resoun of this rennyng to gidere. 
And whanne he hadde seid this thing, he 
lefte", ‘or delyuerede’, the chirche. 


CAP. XX. 
1 Forsothe aftir that the noyse ceesside, 
‘disciplis” clepid, Poul monestinge* hem, 
seideY farwel; and he wente forth, for’ 
2to go into Macedonye. Sothli whanne he 
hadde walkid bi the* partis’, and hadde 
monestid hem by moche word, he cam to 
3Greece. Where whanie he hadde be thre® 
monethis, asspies in yuel? of the’ Jewis 
weren maad to him, to® schippinge’ into 


8 while Jewis r. t pultyng @. pultiden rv. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XIX. 34—-XX. 3. 


Alisaundre, while Jewis puttiden hym 
forth. And Alisaundre axide with -his 
hoond silence, and wolde 3elde aY resoun 
to the puple. And as thei knewen that 34 
he was a Jew, o vois of alle men was 
maad, criynge as bi tweyn ouris, Greet” 
Dian of Effesians. And whanne the 3s 
scribe* haddeY ceessid the puple, he seide, 
Men of Effesie, what man is he, that 
knowith not, that the citee of Effesians 
is the worschipere of greet? Dian, and of 
the child of* Jubiter? Therfor whanne36 
it may not be ajenseid to these thingis, 
it behoueth jou to be ceessid, and to do 
no thing folili; for 3e han brou3t these 37 
men, nethir sacrilegeris, nethir blasfem- 
ynge joure goddesse. That if Demetrie, 3s 
and the werk men that ben with hym, 
han cause aj3ens ony man, there ben 
courtis, and> domes, and iugis; accusen 
thei eche other. If 3e seken ou3t of ony 39 
othir thing, it may be assoylid in the 
lawful chirche. For whi we ben in4o 
perel to be repreuyd of this daies dis- 
sencioun, sithen no man is gilti, of whom 
we moun 3elde resoun of this rennyng 
togidre. And whanne he hadde seid this 
thing, he lete the puple go. 


CAR. XX. 


And aftir the noise ceesside, Poult 
clepide the disciplis, and monestide hem, 
and seide fare wel; and he wente forth, 
to go in to Macedonye. And whanne he2 
hadde walkid bi tho® coostis, and hadde 
monestid hem bi many wordis, he cain 
to Greece. Where whanne he hadde be3 
thre monethis, the Jewis leiden aspies 
for hym, that was to saile in to Sirie; 


u or fer chewynge at. or fer schewinge MPY sec. ni. 


Om. or. Vv asked Q. w Om. GMNPST. x and wolde r. y Om. sx. a two Ga el § pass. TX. 
» scribe, cither clerke of the citeev. &themano. 4thatther. ¢&tobesx.isr. f the greet o. 
schijld of y. »Om.sx. iswagido. k Om.ogx. 10Om.sx. ™for rv.  ™ sacrilegeso. © Om. o. 
Pecomynge r. domes acmNopsyx. Q4meny. "Om. x. %Om.sx. tOm.ex. 4 delyuerede x. 
¥ Om. ox. W the disciplis apr. ‘x Poul clepide disciplis, and monestide y. Y and seide y, 7 Om. sx. 
athoo aupry. __» parties wpsT. partis, either cuntrees Vr. ¢ the three Nn. 4d ynel, either tresoun r. 
ddQm.m. © Om. pr. f shipen sx. 

¥Om. a0. W Greet is 8. * scribis EQg. thal is, a town clerk oo marg. Y hadden Eqg. # the grete 
erhko. ®Om.o0. of a pr.m. EqRbego. ¢these g. 4 the eghk. 


XX. 4—15. DEEDS 


Sirie; and he hadde counceil ‘of turnynge® 
4a3en into" Macedonye. Sothli Sossipater 
Pirri' Beroence folowide him; of Tessalo- 
nisensis forsothe Aristark, and Secunde, 
and Gayus, Derbeus, and Tymothe; sothli 
5 Asians, Tyticus and Trophimus. These 
whanne thei wenten bifore, ‘susteyneden, 
cor abiden*, vs at Troade. Forsoth we 
schipiden! aftir dayes™ of ‘therf looues® 
fro Philippis, and camen to hem at 
Troade in fyue daies, where we dwelten 
7senene dayes. Sothli ‘o day of saboth™", 
whanne we camen for® to breke breed, 
Poul disputide with hem, ‘he to? goynge 
in the morwe; and he.drow along the 
sword’ til into’ mydny3t'. Sothli plenteu- 
ous laumpis weren in the ‘souping place", 
9 where we weren gederid to gidere. Sothli 
sum’ 3ong man, Euticus bi name, sittinge’ 
on the wyndow, whanne* he was dreynt 
with a greuous sleep, ‘Poul disputingeY 
longe, he ledd? by sleep fel* down fro the 
thridde stage, ‘or souping place’; and he 
iotakun® vp, ‘is offrid4 deed. To whom 
whanne Poul cam down, he lay on him, 
and biclippinge® seide, Nyle 3e be treu- 
blidf; forsoth* the soule of him is in him. 
And he goynge® vps, and brekinge® 
breed, and tastinge’, and spak ynow til 
into the 1li3t; and so he wente forth. 
12Sothli thei brou3ten* to! the child lyu- 
ynge™, and thei ben” comfortid ‘not leest®. 
13 Sothli we sti3ynge’ vp into a schip, schip- 
piden’ into Asson, ‘fro thennus we? to re- 
ceyuynge® Poul'; sothli# so he hadde dis- 
14 posid, to makingeY journey bi lond. For- 
soth® whanne he fond vs in Asson, ‘him 
istakyn to*, we camen to Mitilene. And 
fro thennis schippinge’, in the day suynge 
we? camen a3ens Chyum, and an other day 
we haueneden at Samum, and in the day 


OF APOSTLES. | 567 


and he hadde counsel to turne ajen bi 
Macedonye. And Sosipater of Pirri4 
Boroense folowide hym; of Thessolony- 
censes, Astirak®, and Secoundus, and 
Gayus Derbeus, and Tymothe; and Asi- 
ans, Titicus and Trofimus. These fors 
thei wenten bifore, aboden vs at Troade. 
For we schippiden aftir the daies of therf« 
looues fro Filippis, and cam to hem at 
Troade in fyue daies, where we dwelten 
seuene daies. And in the first dai of the7 
woke, whanne we camen to breke breed, 
Poul disputide with hem, and schulde . 
go forth in the morew; and hef drows 
along the sermoun til in to mydny3t. And 
many laumpes weren in the soler; where 
we weren gaderyd togidir. And a 3ong9 
mau, Enticus bi name, sat on the$ wyn- 
dowe, whanne he was fallun in to an 
heny sleep, while Poul disputide long, 
al slepynge he felle doun fro the thridde 
stage; and he was takun vp, and was 
brou3t deed. To whom whanne Poul 10 
cam doun, he lay on hym, and biclippide, 
and seide, Nyle 3e be troblid; for his 
soule is in hym. And he wente vp, andi 
brak breed, and eete, and spak ynow3 
vnto." the dai; and so he wente forth. 
And thei brou3ten the childe alyue, and 12 
thei weren coumfortid greetli. And we 1s 
wenten vp in to a schip, and schippiden 
in to Asson, to take Poul fro thennus; 
for so he hadde disposid to make iourney 
bi loond. And whanne he foond vs in14 
Asson, we token hym, and caimen to 
Mitilene. And fro thennus we schip-15 
piden in the dai suynge, and we camen 
a3ens Chyum, and another dai we hauen- 
yden at Samum, and in the dai suynge 
we camen to Mylete. And Poul purposide 1é 
to schip ouer to Efesi, lest ony tariyng 


Stoturnery. bhbir. ithe sone of Pirry y.  k aboden o. abiden y. susteneden x. ! schippeden 
in N. m the dates v. BD pask o. no in the firste dai of the woike r. © Om. sx. P to o. 
and schulde rv. q go forth vy. gon x. T sermoun F. § to Q. t the mydny3t o. u soler 
Yao. Wsatvy, where rT. Y while Poule disputide 7. 2wasled vy. @andfelder, » Om. oex. 
either soler ¥. ¢ was taken r. 4 and was brou3t r. © biclippe and r. fturblid wwp. ff for r. 
8 stiziede yr. 68 Om. or. hbrakyny. itaastide y. © lynynge brouzten yr. 1Om.r. ™ Om. 4. 
oweren vy. greetly ov, Pstizedeny. and schepideny. Om. Tr. $8 receyue msx. take v. 
t Poul fro thennes y. for vy. Ymaken sx. Ww Sothh rv. *wetoken him andr. Y we schepiden s. 
Z and we r. 


€ Aristark be. 


f Om. Eqgk pr. im. 8. 


far, binton. 


568 


issuynge we* camen to Milete. Sothli Poul 
purposide for’ to schippe ouer to® Ephesi, 
lest ony dwelling were maad to him in 
Asie; forsoth? he hijede, if it were pos- 
sible to him, that he schulde make the 
izday of Pentecoste at Jerusalem. Fro Mi- 
lete sothli he sendynge® to Ephesy, clepide’ 
the more’ thorw birthe" of the chirche. 
1s Whichi whanne thei camen to him, and 
weren to gidere, he seide to hem, 3e witen 
fro’ the firste day, in which I cam into! 
Asie, hou with 3ou by ech tyme I was, 
i9seruynge to the Lord with al mekenesse, 
and myldnesse, and teeris, and tempta- 
ciouns, that felden to me of aspyingis™ of 
20 Jewis; how I withdrow3 no3t of" profit- 
able® thingis to jou, that I telde not to 
ou, and tau3te 30u openly, and bi housis; 
21 witnessinge? to Jewis and hethene men 
‘into God penaunce’, and feith into oure 
22Lord Jhesu Crist. And ‘now lot! I 
boundun’ in spirit, got into Jerusalem; 
what" thingis in it ‘ben to" comynge’ to 
23me vnknowynge™, no but that the Hooly 
Gost by alle citees witnessith to me, sey- 
inge*, for bondisY and tribulaciouns at Je- 
24rusalem ‘dwellen to? me. But I schame’, 
‘or drede», no thing of these, nether I 
make my ‘soule, that ts, lyf*, preciouser 
than my silf, ‘the while’ I ende, ‘or ful- 
jille*, my cours, and the mynysterie of the 
word, thef which I receyuede of the Lord 
Jhesu, for® to witnesse the gospel of the 
2s grace of God. And now lo! I woot, for® 
3e schulen no more se my face, alle 3e by 
whom I passide, prechinge the kingdom 
260f God. Wherfore I witnesse 3ou* this 
day, for! I am clene of the blood, ‘or 
27 synne™, of alle men. Forsoth” I flei; not 
awey, that I tau3te°, ‘or ¢eelde?, not to 
2330u al the councel of God. Take‘ tent to 
3ou, and to al the folk", in which the 


aOm.s. > Om. sx. 
either the eldre men rv. 
vnprofitable r. 


¢Om. x. 4 for r. 
iAndr. £ for in vr. 
P and I witnesside r. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


© sente v. 
lto vy. 
4 penaunce into God r. 


XX. 16—28. 


were maad to hym in Asie; for he hi3- 
ede, if it were possible to hym, that he 
schulde be in the dai of Pentecost at 
Jerusalem. Fro Mylete he sente to Ef-17 
fesi, and clepide the grettest men of 
birthe of the chirche. And whanne thei 1s 
camen to hym, and weren togidir, he 
seide to hem, 3e witen fro the firste dai, 
in which Y cam in to Asie, hou with 
30u bi eche tyme Y was, seruynge to the 19 
Lord with al mekenesse, and milduesse, 
and teeris, and temptaciouns, that felden 
to me of aspiyngis* of Jewis; hou Y20 
withdrowe not of profitable thingis to 
3ou, that Y telde not to 3ou, and tau3te 
jou! opynli, and bi housis; and Y wit-21 
nesside to Jewis and to hethene men 
penaunce in to God, and feith in to oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist. And now lo! Y am22 
boundun in spirit, and go in to Jerusa- 
lem; and Y knowe not what thingis 
schulen come to ine in it, but that the2s 
Hooli Goost ‘bi alle citees! witnessith to 
mne, and seith, that boondis and tribula- 
ciouns at Jerusalein abiden me. But Y 24 
drede no thing of these, nether Y make 
my lijf preciousere than my silf, so that 
Y end.my cours, and the mynysterie of 
the word, which Y resseyuede of the 
Lord Jhesu, to witnesse the gospel of 
the grace of God. And ‘now lo™! Y2s 
woot, that 3e schulen no more se my 
face, alle 3e bi whiche Y passide, prech- 
ynge the kingdom of God. Wherfor Y 26 
Witnesse to 30u this day, that Y am cleen 
of the blood of alle men. For Y fley® not 27 
awey, that Y telde not to 3o0u al the 
counsel of God. Take 3e tente to 30u,23 
and to al the flocke®, in which the Hooli 
Goost hath set 3ou bischops, to reule the 
chirche of God, which? he purchaside 
with his blood. Y woot, that aftir my29 


fand clepide r. & more men NP. 
Maspying 0. Om. Fr. 
T lo! now arp. 


h birthe, 
© the profitable c. 
$ am bounden rv. 


tand goor. tt and I knowe not whatr. schuleny. Yecomensx. comer. WOm.r.  * and 
seith y, Ythat bondisr. 2Zabyden ry. @dreeder. » Om. oerx. © lyf or. soule x. 4 so that +. 
€ Om. oex, either fillev. fOm.uprx. g¢ Om. sx. bthatr. iwhich r. * to 30u mwperx. I that r. 


mOm.ax. "%Forr. %telde vr. P Om. ovx. 49 Taketh ps. 1 flok wprrx. 


iin rb. aspiyng b. 


10m. & prem. 
P the which k. 


1 Om, rR. 


mlo! now ar. fledder. © folk ak sec. m. 


XX. 29——XXI. 3. 


Hooly Gost sette* 30u bischopis, for‘ to 
reule the chirche of God, which he pur- 
29 chaside" with his blood. I woot for’ aftir 
my departyng, rauyschinge wolues schulen 
entre in to 30u, ‘not sparinge™ the flok; 
3oand of 30u silf men spekinge weyward 
thingis schulen ryse, that thei leden* dis- 
siciplis aftir hem. For which thing wake 
3e, holdinge in’ mynde that by thre 3eer 
ny3t and? day I ceesside not with teeris 
32monestinge ech of 30u. And now I bitake 
3ou to God and to the word of his grace, 
that is my3ty for? to edifie and 3yue heri- 
33tage in alle maad hooly. Forsoth of no 
man I coueitide siluer, and gold, or cloth, 
34as 3e> silf witen; but® to tho thingis that 
weren nede® to me, and to these® that benf 
35 with me, these hondis mynistriden. Alle 
these thingis I schewide to 30u, for so it 
bihoueth men& trauelinge for® to resceyue 
the syke’, and for* to haue mynde of the 
word of the Lord Jhesu; for he seide, It! 
is more blessid for™ to 3yue, more than 
3cfor™ to receyue. And whanne he hadde 
seide these thingis, ‘his knees putt®, he 
37 preiede with alle hem. Sothli greet wep- 
yng of? alle men was4 maad; and thei 
fallinge’ in’ the necke of Poul, kissedent 
38 him, sorwinge" moost in the word that he 
seide, for thei werenY no* more to* se- 
ynge’ his face. And thei ledden him to? 
the schip. 
CAP. XXI. 

1 Sotheli whanne it was don, that we 
schulden* schippe”, drawun awey fro hem, 
strei3t° cours wet camen to Choum, and 
the day suynge to Rodum, and fro thennis 

2to Patiram, ‘fro thennis into® Iram’. And 
whanne& we founden a schip passinge 
ouer into Fenyse, we ‘stizynge vp", schip- 

3peden, ‘or seiliden'. Sothli whanne we 


8 pute G pr.m. hath pute @ sce.m. sente T. settide rv. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


569 


t I schewide to 


departyng, rauyschinge? wolues schulen 
jou; for en- 
saumple of per- 


entre in to 30u, ‘and spare not’ the flok; 

° * ol was feccioun. so 6i- 
and men spekinge schrewid thingis schu-30 joyce: men tra. 
len rise of 30u’ silf, that thei leden awei ““#inges that 

- see : : ; is, lyuynge of 
disciplis aftir hem. For which thing 31 her owne la- 


wake 3e, holdinge in mynde that bi thre eee 


to the teching 
: : ; f feith, syk 
jeer ny3t and dai Y ceesside not with eon ini sei 
teeris monestinge ech of 3ou. And now32 eae 
Y bitake 30u to God and to the word of oe 
: : : : my3te take 
his grace, that is my3ti to edifie and 3yue _ costis of hem 
é : ; to whiche he 
eritage in alle that ben maad hooli. And 33 prechide, 3it he 
of no man Y coueitide siluer, and gold, *s*ne% ofe, 
ether cloth, as 30u‘ silf witen; for to tho 34° Preching 
ee, schulde be let- 
thingis that weren nedeful to me, and to Ban RED for 
- i whi for her 
these that ben with me, these hoondis _ auerise, thei 
: segs wolden be with- 
mynystriden. Alle these thingis Y schew- 35 arawen Bee 
ide to 30u}, for so it bihoueth men tra- pa ee 
uelinge to resseyue sike men, and to haue  “essid for to 
. jeue more, ete. ; 
mynde of the ‘word of the" Lord Jhesu; as Poule dide; 
fi . for in the book 
for he seide, It is more blesful to 3yue, of techingis of 
ree 
than to resseyue. And whanne he hadde36 Teigeteean 
seid these thingis, he knelide, and heY (ii f00d with 
preiede with alle hem. And greet wep-37 Hes gals 
; , _ ing, to 3ene 
ing of alle men was maad; and thei goodis to pore 
ee men, but it is 
felden on the necke of Poul, and kissiden _ hetere to seue 
hym, and sorewiden moost in the word 38%) {osidere for 
that he seide, for thei schulen no more CT and to be 
se his.face. And thei ledden hym to the _ relesid of besy- 
. nesse, and to be 
schip. nedy with Crist. 
And Jerom 
azens Vigilan- 
cius accordith 
in sentence. 
Lire here. ve. 


CAP. XXI. 


And whanne it was don, that we schul-1 
den seile, and weren passid awei fro hem, 
with strei3t cours we carnen to Choum, and 
the day suynge to Rodis, and fro thennus 
to Patiram, and fro thennus to Myram. 
And whanne we founden a schip passinge2 
ouer to Fenyce, we wenten vp in to it, 
and sailden forth. And whanne we apper-3 


t Om. sx. hath purchaside 7, ¥ that r. 


wand spare not yr. *ledenawey yr. YOm.x. Znoro, 8Om.sx. >» 3ee 30ur Gr. 3e 30u wP. jou sx. 


jour y sup. ras. ¢fory. 4needfuly. ¢thao. fwereno. &men, »Om.sx. isyke men r. 
k Om. sx. 1 Forito. mOm.sx. °Om.cpsx. Oheknelideandr. Pisofs. ont. 4Om.s. 
Tfelden vy. &%onaGmMNnopesty. tandkissideny. ‘and sorewideny. Vschuldeny. not Nn. 
xOm.v. Yseensx. ser. ZintoT. ®Om. x. ?saile, and we v. shipeden x. © with streizt rv. 
dOmr. ¢too. fOm.y. &Om.sx. hstizeden andy. '!Om. oox. 

drauenynge b8. ‘not sparyngeR. S30urR. t3zourk. 4%Om. gk prom. v Om. E1Kko. 


VOL. IV. 4D 


570 


apperiden to Cypre, we leenynge* it at 
the left half, schipiden' into Cyrie, and 
camen to Tyre. Sotheli™ there the schip 
4was to puttinge® out the charge. Sothli 
‘disciplis foundun®, we dwelliden there 
seuene dayes; the? whiche seiden bi 
spirit to Poul, that he schulde not stize 
sto Jerusalem. And ‘the dayes fulfillid4, 
we goinge forth wenten, alle’ men with 
wyues and fre children ledinge* forth vs 
til tot withoute the citee; and ‘the knees 
putt® in the see brynke, we’ preieden. 
6 And whanne we hadden maad farwel to 
gidere, we wenten vp into the schip; 
sothli thei turneden a3en into her owne 
7thingis. Sothli the” schip seiling fulfillid* 
fro Tyre, we dessendidenY to Tolomayda, 
and ‘the bretheren gret wel”, we dwelliden 
80% day at hem. Forsothe an other day we 
gon? forth, camen? to Cesarie. And we en- 
tringe® into the hous of Philip euangelist, 
that was oon of the seuene, dwelliden? at 
ghim. Sothli to this weren foure doun3tris, 
lovirgyns, prophesiynge. And whanne we 
dwelliden there bi® sum dayes, sum man 
prophete, Agabus by name, cam ouer fro 
iJudee. This whanne he cam to vs, took 
the girdil of Poul, and byndyngef to gi- 
dere ‘to him® the® feet and hondis, seide’, 
The Hooli Gost seith thes thingis, Thus 
Jewis* schulen bynde in Jerusalem the 
man, whos is this girdil; and thei schulen 
12 bitake! into hethene mennis hondis. Which 
thing whanne we herden, we preieden, 
and thei that weren of that place, that he 
13schulde not stize to Jerusalem. Thanne 
Poul answeride, and seide, What do 3e, 
wepinge and turmentynge myn _ herte? 
Sothli I am redy, not onli for™ to be 
boundun, but and to deie in® Jerusalem 
14for® the name of the Lord Jhesu. And 
whanne we my3ten not councele him, we 


k leften y. 1 and schipiden r. m For sx. 


founden disciplis y. ? Om. r. 
AGMNOPQSTVXY. “twekneliden y. VY and we r. 
z whanne we hadden gret wel the britheren r. 
dand dwelliden yr» ©&Om.s.  f boond r. 

1 bitake him empry sec.m. ™ Om. sx. 


xOm.A. Yacko, 2 the othir R. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


n poten F. 

4 whanne the daies weren fillid rv. 

w whanne the r. 
2ZZay. 

& his r. 

ain to G prem. 


a Om. k. 


XXII. 4——14. 


iden to Cipre, we leften it at the left 
half, and seiliden in to Sirie, and camen 
to Tire. For there the schip schulde be 
vnehargid. And whanne we foundun4 
disciplis, we dwelliden there seuene daies; 
whiche seiden bi spiritt to Poul, that he 
schulde not go vp to Jerusalem. Ands 
whanne the daies weren fillid, we 3eden 
forth, and alle men with wyues and 
children ledden forth vs with outen the 
citee; and we kneliden in the see brenke, 
and we preieden. And whanne we had-6 
den maad fare wel togidre, we* wenten 
vp into theY schip; and thei turneden a3en 
in to her owne places. And whanne the7 
schip sailinge was fillid fro Tire, we 
camen doun to Tolamayda, and whanne 
we hadden gret wel the britheren, we 
dwelliden o dai at hem. And another?s 
dai we 3eden forth, and camen to Ce- 
sarie. And we entriden in to the hous 
of Fihp euangelist, that was oon of the 
senene, and dwelliden at hym. And too 
hym weren foure dou3tris, virgyns, that 
profecieden. And whanne we dwelliden 10 
there bi* summe daies, a profete, Agabus 
bi name, cam ouer fro Judee. This*11 
whanne he cam to vs, took the girdil of 
Poul, and boond togidere hise feet and 
hoondis, and seide, The Hooli Goost seith 
these thingis, Thus Jewis schulen bynde 
in Jerusalem the man, whos is this gir- 
dil; and thei schulen bytake into® he- 
thene mennys hoondis. Which thing 12 
whaune we herden, we preieden, and 
thei that weren of that place, that he 
schulde not go vp to Jerusalem. Thanne is 
Poul answeride, and seide, What doen 
3e, wepinge and turmentinge myn herte? 
For Y¥ am redi, not oonli to be boundun, 
but also to die in Jerusalem for the 
name of the Lord Jhesu. And whanne14 


° the disciples foundun o. whanne we 
Tandalle y. Sleddenvy. t Om. 
xX was fillid 7. Y camen doun r. 
@sedenv. bandcamenr. © entriden rv. 
hOm.or. iandseide vy. * the Jewis ex. 
°in K. fro 7. 


b Hethis1. © Aim into rk. 


+ setden bi spi- 
rit; thei seiden 
not bi the Hooly 
Goost without 
meene, that 
Poul schulde 
not stize to Je- 
rusalem ; for 
the Hooly Goost 
seide to Poule, 
that he schulde 
stize thidir; but 
these disciplis 
hadden bi the 
spirit of profe- 
cie, that if Poule 
stizide to Jeru- 
salem, he 
schulde suffre 
persecuscioun 
there; wher- 
fore thei had- 
den compas- 
sioun on hym, 
and counceil- 
eden bi her 
owne spirit, 
that he schulde 
not stize thider. 
Lire here. ve. 


XXI. 15——26. 


weren stille, ‘or restiden?, seyinge, The 
15 wille of the Lord be don. Sotheli aftir 
thes dayes we maad redy, sti3eden to Je- 
iérusalem. Sothli summe of disciplis camen 
with vs fro Cesarie, ledinge’ with hem 
sum man, Jason of Cypre, an old disciple, 
17at whom we schulden be herborid. And 
whanne we camen to Jerusalem, bretheren 
igresceyueden vs wilfulli. Sothli in the day 
suynge Poul entride with vs to James, and 
ig alle the’ eldere men ben’ gederid. Whom‘ 
whanne he hadde grett, he tolde- bi alle 
thingis, what thingis God hadde don in® 
hethene men, by the mynisterie of him. 
20And thei whanne thei herden, magnifi- 
eden God, and seiden to him, Thou, bro- 
thir, seest how manye thousandis ben in 
Jewis, that han bileuyd to God, and alle 
21 ben sueris, ‘or doueris’, of the lawe. Sothli 
thei herden of thee, for” thou techist de- 
parting fro Moyses of ‘the ilke* Jewis 
that ben by hethene inen, seiynge, that 
thei owedenY not for? to circumside her 
sones, nether owen for* to entre? vp* cus- 
22tom. Therfore what is4? Sothli® it bi- 
houeth af multitude come to gidere; for- 
sothe" thei schulen heere ‘thee, for to haue! 
23come ouer. Therfore do thou this thing, 
that we seyn to thee. There ben to vs 
24foure men, hauynge* a vow on hem. “These 
takun to!, halowe thee with hem; and 
‘coste in™ hem, that thei schaue her” 
heedis®; and? allel men wite, that the 
thingis that thei herden of thee ben false, 
but thou walkist™ and’ thi silf kepinge* 
asthe lawe. Of these sothli that bileuyden 
of hethene men, we writen', demynge that 
thei absteyne hem fro thingis® offrid to 
ydols, and blood, and stranglid thing’, and 
26fornicacioun. Thanne ‘the men takyn to, 
Poul” in the* day suynge purified’ with 
hem, entride” into the temple, schewinge* 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


571 


we my3ten not counseile hym, we weren 
stille, and seiden, The wille of the Lord 
be don. And aftir these daies we weren 15 
maad redi, and wenten vp to Jerusalem. 
And summe of the disciplis camen with 16 
vs fro Cesarie, and ledden with hem a 
man, Jason of Cipre, an elde disciple, at 
whom we schulden be herborid. And17 
whanne we camen to Jerusalem, brithe- 
ren resseyueden vs wilfulli. And in the1s 
dai suynge Poul entride with vs to 
James, and alle the eldre men weren 
gaderid. Whiche whanne he hadde gret,19 
he telde bi alle thingis, what God hadde 
doon in hethene men, bi the mynysterie 
of hym. And whanne thei herden, thei 20 
magnyfiden God, and seiden to hym, 
Brothir, thou seest how many thousyndis 
ben in Jewis, that han bileued to God, 
and alle ben loueris of the lawe. And2i 
thei herden of thee, that thou techist 
departing fro Moises of thilk Jewis that 
ben bi hethene men, that seien, that thei 
owen not circumcide® her sones, nether 
owen to entre by custom. Therfor what 22 


. is? It bihoueth that the multitude come 


togidre; for thei schulen here, that thou 

art come. Therfor do thou this thing, 23 

that we seien to thee. Ther ben to vs‘ 

foure men, that han a vow on hem. 

Take thouft these men, and halowe thee 24 + seve thou, 
with hem; honge on hem, that thei mnie 


make thou an 
5 fFri ith 
schaue her heedis $ and that alle men eaeee 


hem, whiche is 


wite, that the’ thingis that thei herden ‘et tobe 

: maad in suche 
of thee ben false, but that thou walkist, — thingis. v. 
and thi silf kepist the lawe. But of2s 


these that bileueden of hethene men, we 
writen’, demynge that thei absteyne hem 
fro thing offrid to idols, and fro blood, 
and also fro stranglid thing, and fro for- 
nicacioun. Thanne Poul took the men, 26 
and in the dai suynge he was purified 


P Om. oex. 4and ledden vy. sendende x. *Om. Kk. ‘Swereny. t Whiche ry. °%forn. ¥Om. 
oQx. w that rv. * tho sx. Y owen AGMNOPQSTVXY. z Om. sx. @ Om. sx. > entre in to 
the temple @ sec.m. ¢binr. upby 9. ¢isthis? 7. ¢ Forsothe n. ‘thatthe ry. & comynge o. 


h sothely 0. for rv. 
and vy, ™ 3ene thou among r. 
Sin N. 88 kepist 7. 
wmen takyn to o. Poule tooke the men and r. 
a and schewide r. 


n Om. G pr.m. 


4Om.1. © to circumcide cerkmanuxabceghkoaf. 


i thee to haue sx. that thon hast r. 

© henedes T. 
t han writen G see.m. writiden r. 

x that 4 prom. N. 


f these a. tho k. 


k that han x. 1 Take thou these men, 
POm.n. (Qthatalle vy. * wawest o. 
uthing agmNposTrxy. ¥ thenges o. 
y was purified vy. 2 and entride r. 


h dayes g. 


& han writen K pr. m. 


4D 2 


572 


the fulfilling? of dayes of purifiyng, til 
27 offring was offrid for ech of hem. Sothli 
whanne seuene dayes weren endid, the 
Jewis that weren of? Asie, whanne thei 
sy3en hyin in the temple, stiriden al the 
peple, and leiden hondis on him, criynge®, 
28 Menf of Israel, helpe 3e vs. This is the 
man, that a3ens pepleS and lawe and this 
place techinge’ euery where alle men, 
more ouer and hath! ledd yn* hethen 
men into the temple, and hath defoulid 
29this hooly place. Forsothe! thei sy3en 
Trophimus of Ephesi in the citee with 
him, whom thei gessiden for™ Poul hadde 
30 brou3t into the temple. And al the citee 
is” mouyd, and a rennynge to gidere of 
peple® is? maad. And thei ‘catchinge Poul4, 
drowyn him out of the temple; and anoon 
3ithe 3atis ben’ closid. Sothli ‘hem sek- 
ynge® fort to sle hym, it is" toold to the 
tribune of the cumpanye of kny3tis, for’ 
32al Jerusalem is confoundid. The” which 
anoon ‘kny3tis takun to*, and centuriouns, 
ranY to hem. Whiche whanne thei hadden 
seyn the’ tribune and kny3tis, ceessiden 
33for® to smyte Poul. Thanne the tribune 
‘comynge to, kau3te him, and comaundide 
for® to be boundyn with twey chaynes ; 
and axide®, who it! was, and what he 
34hadde don. Sothli othere crieden othir 
thing in the cumpanye. And whanne he 
my3te not knowe certeyn§ thing for the 
noyse, he comaundide him for! to be ledd 
35into the’ castels. And whanne Poul cam 
to grees!, it bifel that he was born of 
36 kny3tis, for strengthe of the peple. For- 
sothe™ multitude" of peple suede him, 
37 criynge®, Take him awey. And whanne 
Poul bigan for? to be ledd in to the’ cas- 
tels, he seith’ to the tribune, If’ it is leef- 
ful to me, fort to speke ony thing to thee? 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XXI. 27—37. 


with hem, and entride in to the temple, 
and schewide the filling of daies of puri- 
fying, til the offring was offrid for ech 
of hem. And whanne seuene daies weren 27 
endid, the Jewis that weren of Asie, 
whanne thei saien him in the temple, 
stiriden al the puple, and leyden hondis 
on hym, and crieden, Men of Israel, helpe 28 
je vs. This is the man, that ajens the 
puple and the lawe and this place tech- 
ith enery where alle men, more ouer and 
hath led hethene men in to the temple, 
and hath defoulid this hooli place. For 29 
thei seyen Trofimus of Effesi in the citee 
with hym, whom thei gessiden that Poul 
hadde brou3t' in to the temple. And also 
the citee was moued, and a rennyng to- 
gider of the puple was maad. And thei 
token Poul, and drowen him out of the 
temple; and anoon the 3atis weren closid. 
And whanne thei sou3ten to sle hym, its) 
was teld to the tribune of the cumpany 
of kny3tis, that al Jerusalem is con- 
foundid. Which anoon took kny3tis, 32 
and centuriens, and ran to hem. And 
whanne thei hadden seen the tribunet, 
and the! kny3tis, thei ceessiden to smyte 
Poul. Thanne the tribune cam, and33 
cau3te hym, and comaundide, that he 
were bouudun with twei cheynes; and 
axide™, who he was, and what he hadde 
don. But othere crieden other thing 34 
among the puple. And whanne he mi3te 
‘knowe no" certeyn thing for the noise, 
he comaundide hym to be led in to the 
castels. And whanne Poul cam to the3s 
grees, it bifel that he was borun of 
kni3tis, for strengthe of the puple. Forse 
the multitude of the® puple suede hym, 
and criede, Take hym awei. And whanne 37 
Poul bigan to be led in to the castels, he 


bfillng y. ¢thopr. ato. eandcriedenv. f 3eemenx. & the pepule Guoprrxy sec. m. 
btechith ry. ihe hath @sec.m. hadde r. kOm.y. '!Forv. ™thator. wasr. © the pepel o. 
Pwas ¥. tooken Poul and 7. Tweren ry. $s whanne thei souz3ten yr. tOm.sx. twasy. V that r. 
wOm.r. * took knistis r. yoandranv. #Om.o. ®Om.sx. cam'and ry. ¢Om.sx. 4 two MPT. 
tweyne y. asked 9. fhe orx. 8 the certeyn Gapy sec.m. > Om.GarpT. i Om.sx. k Om. é pr.m. 
sxy pr.m. \the grees acmnposyxy.  ™ For r. 2a multitude o. the multitude cupry. © and 
eriede vy. POm.sx. 4Om.s. ‘seidey. §&Om.o. Wherry. t Om. sx, 


i brou3t with him a. centurien r. 


° Om. ErKgabceghos. 


10m. Ko. 


m askide o. 2 not knowe kK. not knowe no g. 


MT, gS =X XI. 7. 


Which seide, Thou" ‘Greek hast thou 

38knowun’Y? Wher thou ert not the Egip- 
cian, the” which bifore thes dayes mouedist 
a noyse, and laddist out into* desert foure 

39 thousand ofY men, mensleeris? And Poul 
seide to him, Sothli I am a man Jew, of 
Tarse of Cilicie, a citeseyn, ‘or burgeys’, 
‘of a citee* not vaknowun. Forsoth I preie 
thee, suffre> me ‘for to® speke to the peple. 

4o And whanne he suffride, Poul stondinge4 
in® the grees’, bekenyde® with the hond to 
the peple. And a} greet silence maad, he 
spak to! in Ebrew tunge, seyinge, 


CAP. XXII. 


1 Men, bretheren and fadris, heere je 
2what resoun I ;elde now to 30u. Forsoth, 
whanne summe herden for* in Ebrew 
tunge he spak to hem, thei 3auen more 
3silence. And he seide, I ‘a man! Jew, 
born at Tarse of Cilicie, norischid forsoth 
in this citee bisydis the feet of Gamaliel, 
lerud™ vp" the® treuthe of fadris lawe, 
folower?, ‘ov louer4, of the lawe, as and* 
43e alle® ben to day. The** whichet I't pur- 
suede this wey til to the deeth, byndinge 
to" gidere and drawinge’ into holdis men 
sand wymmen, as the prince of prestis 
jeldith” witnessing to me, and alle* the 
more in birthe. Of which ‘and I takingeY 
pistlis? ‘to bretheren*, wente® to Damask, 
that I schulde brynge fro thennis bounden® 
into Jerusalem, that thei schulden ben 
6peyned. Forsoth it is’ don, ‘me goynge, 
and neiz3ynge® tof Damask, in the mydday 
sudenli ‘fro heuene’ ‘a copious" 1i3t schon 
zaboute me. And I ‘fallinge into! the erthe, 
herde* a vois fro heuene, seiynge to me, 
Saul, Saul, what pursuest thou me? It 
is hard to! thee for™ to kyke a3ens the 


w Om. rv. 
4 stood v. 


v Canst thou Greek rv. 
¢ Om. o. 
k that vy. 


a Om. ov. 
to suffre o. to sx. 
ito hem wpg. Om. rv. 
Pa folewere vy. @Om.oex. TOm.o. § Omo. 
Ybitakinge vy. W3eldes 0. * to alle oxy. 
band wente vy. © men bounden +. 
han hidouse o. i felde doun to r. 


d was y. 


P Om. K pr.m. 4 voisc. F to Ro. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


Xin v. 
© vpon o. 
lamampT. am aman x. 
8s And v. 
¥ I takynge @ pr.m. up. I took rv. 

€ while I 3ede and neizede r. 
Kk and herde r. 


8 of cErkMQRUXabceghkof. 


573 


seide to the tribune, Whether it is leue- 
ful ‘to me?, to speke ony thing to thee ? 
And he seide, Kanst thou Greek? Whe-3s 
ther thou art not the Egipcian, which 
bifor these daies monedist a noise, and 
leddist out in to desert foure thousynde 
of men, mensleeris? And Poul seide to39 
hym, For Y am a Jew, of Tharse of 
Cilicie, a citeseyn, which citee is not vn- 
knowun. And Y preye thee, suffre me to 
speke to the puple. And whanne he4o 
suffride, Poul stood in the grees, and 
bikenede with the hoond to the puple. 
And whanne a greet silence was maad, 
he spak in Ebrew tunge, and seide, 


CAP. XXII. 


- Britheren and fadris, here 3e what re-1 
soun Y 3elde now to 3ou. And whanne2 
sum herden that in Ebrew tunge he spak 
to hem, thei 3auen the more silence. And3 
he seide, Y am a man a Jew, borun at 
Tharse of Cilicie, nurischid and in this 
citee bisidis the feet of Gamaliel, tau3t 
bi the treuthe of fadris lawe, a louyere 
of the lawe, as also 3e alle ben to dai. 
And Y pursuede this weie til to the4 
deth, byndynge and bitakinge ‘in to™ 
holdis men and wymmen, as the princes 
of prestis 3eldith witnessyng to me, and 
alle the grettest in’ birth. Of whom also 
Y took pistlist to britheren, and wente 
to Damask, to bring fro thennys men 
boundun in to Jerusalem, that thei schul- 
den be peyned. And it was don, whiles 
Y 3ede, and neizede to Damask, at myd- 
dai sudeynli fro heuene a greet plente 
of li3t schoon aboute me. And Y felde7 
doun to the erthe, and herde a voice fro 
heuene, seiynge to me, Saul, Saul, what 
pursuest thou me? It is hard to thee 
to" kike ajens the pricke. And Y an-8 


yOm. x. 7Om.ogx. #Om.o. >» far 
fgreex. Sand bekenyde y. 6 whannea r. 
mlernyd wp. after empr. bi vy. °Om.s. 
tOm. x. ttQm. 6 pr.m.sx. 2 Om. F. 
z epistolis s. @ Om. s. 

fintox. 8 Om. o. 


1 for o. - ™ Om. sx. 


t epistlis e. 9 Om. 1. 


‘ 


574 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. XXII. 8—22. 


spricke. Forsothe I answeride, Who art 
thou, Lord? And he seide to me, J am 
Jhesu of Nazareth, whom thou pursuest. 
9 And thei that weren with me sy3en sothli 
the” li3t, forsothe® thei herden not the vois 
1oof him, that spak with? me. And I seide, 
Lord, what schal Ido? Sothli the Lord 
seide to me, ‘Thou risynge4, go to Damask; 
and there it schal be seid to thee, of alle 
thingis whiche it bihoueth thee for" to do. 
11And whanne IJ sy3 not, for the clerete of 
that’ 1i3t, I leddt to" hondis of felowis, 
igcam’ to Damask. Forsoth summan”, Ana- 
nye, vp* the lawe hauynge witnessing of 
isalle Jewis dwellinge in Damask, comyngeY 
to me, and stondinge’ ny3, seide*, Saul, 
brother, bihold. And I in the same hour 
i4biheld in to him. And he seide, God of 
oure fadris ordeynede” thee, that thou 
schuldist knowe the wille of him, and 
schuldist se iust thing, and heere the vois 
isof his mouth. For thou schalt be his wit- 
nesse to alle men, of tho thingis that thou 
ishast seyn and herd. And now, what 
dwellist thou? Ryse vp, and be baptisid, 
and waisch awey thi synnes, ‘ynclepid4 
i7the name of him®. Forsoth it is‘ don to 
me, turnynge ajen into Jerusalem, and 
preinge in the temple, ‘me for to beS maad 
isin rauyssching of soule, and to se him sey- 
inge to me, Hije thou, and go out faste 
of Jerusalem, for thei schulen not receyue 
19thi witnessyng of" me. And I seide, Lord, 
thei witen, for I was closynge to gidere 
into prisoun, and betynge by synagogis 
2ohem that bileueden ‘in toi thee. And 
whanne the blood of Stheuene, thi wit- 
nesse, was sched‘, I stood ny3, and con- 
sentide, and kepte the clothis of men sle- 
2i1ynge him. And he seide to me, Go thou, 
for I schal sende thee ferr to naciouns. 
22 Forsoth! thei herden him til to™ this word ; 
and thei reysiden her vois, seyinge, Take 


nthisn. ° but r. POm.o. 4 Rise thou and r. 


sweride, Who art thou, Lord? And he 
seide to me, Y am Jhesu of Nazareth, 
whom thou pursuest. And thei that? 
weren with me sien but the 1i3t, but thei 
herden not the vois of hym, that spak 
with me. And Y seide, Lord, what schal io 
Y do? And the Lord seide to me, Rise 
thou, and go to Damask; and there it 
schal be seid to thee, of’ alle thingis 
which’ it bihoueth thee to do. And 
whanne Y saye not, for the* clerete of 
that 1i3t, Y was led bi the hond of fe- 
lowis, and Y cam to Damask. And al2 
man, Ananye, that bi the lawe hadde 
wytnessyng of alle Jewis dwellinge in 
Damask, cam to me, and stood ni3, and 13 
seide to me, Saul, brother, biholde. And 
Y in the same onr biheelde in to hym. 
And he seide, God of oure fadris hath 14 
bifor ordeyned thee, that thou schuldist 
knowe the wille of him, and schuldist se 
the ri3tful man, and here the vois of his 
mouth. For thou schalt be his witnesse 15 
to alle men, of thoY thingis that thou 
hast seyn and herd. And now, whatie 
dwellist thou? Rise vp, and be bap- 
tisid, and waische awei thi synnes, bi 
the name of hym clepid to help. And17 
it was don to me, as Y turnede a3en in 
to Jerusalem, and preyede* in the tem- 
ple, that? Y was maad in rauysching of 
soule, and Y si3 him seiynge to me, Hije 1s 
thou>, and go out faste of Jerusalem, for 
thei schulen not resseyue thi witnessing 
of me. And Y seide, Lord, thei witen, 19 
that Y was closing togidir ‘in to pri- 
soun, and betinge bi synagogis hem that 
bileueden ‘in to’ thee. And whanne the20 
blood of Steuene, thi witnesse, was sched 
out, Y stood ni3, and consentide, and 
kept the clothis of men that slowen hym. 
And he seide to me, Go thou, for Y schal21 
sende thee fer to nactouns. And thei 22 


TOm.sx. Stheo, twasled vr. «by vo. Vand 


Icamy. WOm.o. * vp aftir @ pr.m. vp, or aflir mpr. div. Ycamr. stood 7.  ® and seide to 
mer. hath bifore ordeynede ry. © Cristy. ‘inclepe x.  ‘¢ bi the name of him clepid to help r. 
f was r. ff to ox. & for to be o. me to be sx. that I was r. h to o. iin o.  Esched out r. 


lAndo ™Om. yr. 


YOm.k. Wwhatk. *Om.r. ythea. 4 prechidek. ®Om. ugk. andg. » thee hk sec.m. 


cinb. 4dtok, 


XXIL. 23-——X XIII. 2. 


fro the erthe such a maner man; forsoth® 
23it is not leefful, ‘him for to° lyue. Sothli? 
‘hem cryinge in voys, and castinge1 a wey 
her clothis, and throwinge™ dowst in to 
24the eyr, the tribune comaundide hym for* 
to be ledd in to castelst, and for® to be 
betyn with scourgis, and him’ for” to be 
turmentid, that he schulde wite, for what 
25 cause thei cryeden so to him. And whanne 
thei hadden streyned hym with boondis, 
‘or roopis*, Poul seide to a centurioun 
stondinge ny3 to him, If” it is leefful to 
jou, for’ to scourge a man Romayn, and 
2svndampned? ‘Which thing® herd, centu- 
rioun” wente to the tribune, and tolde to 
him, seiynge®, What art thou to doinge’? 
forsoth® this man is a citeseyn Romaynt. 
27 Forsoth the tribune ‘comynge toS, seide to 
him, Seie thou to me, if* thou art a Ro- 
esmayn? And he seide, 3he. And the tri- 
bune answeride, ‘How liztly! seist thou 
thee a Romayn citeseyn*? I with moche 
summe gat this ciuylite. And Poul seith™, 
29‘T sothli and am" borun®. Therfore anoon 
thei? that weren to turmentinge’ him, de- 
partiden awey fro him. And the tribune 
dredde, aftir that he wiste a3en", for’ he 
was a citeseyn of Rome, and fort he hadde 
3oboundyn him. Forsoth in the day su- 
ynge he willinge" ‘for to’ wite more dili- 
gently, of* what cause he were accusid of 
Jewis, vnbound* him, and comaundide 
prestisY ‘for to come’, and al the counseil*. 
And he? bryngynge* forth Poul, ordeyn- 
ede’ him among hem. 


CAP. XXIII. 


i Poul forsoth biholdinge® in to the coun- 
seil, seith', Men bretheren, I with al good 
conscience haue lyued bifore God, til into 

athis day. Sothli Anany, prince of prestis, 


nforv. °himtosx.thathev. P Forsothe o. 
iden vy. %Om.osx. tthe castels prx. 
y Wherr. 2 Om. osx. 
seide v. Udonsx. & For vr. 
y sec.m. ‘Kk Om. rx. 
and Iwas vy. © born a ceteceyn of Rome rv. 
tthato. "twoldey. Vtosx. Om. r. 

togider carpxy. to come s. Om. r. 
ordeynede y. ¢biheeld y.  f and seide r. 


f of Rome r. 


€ the castels hka. fon k. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


4 whanne thei crieden and castiden r. 
uOm. sx. ¥Om.G prim. aprvy sec.m. WOm. sx. * Om. ox. 
a And whanne this thing was r. 
§ cam nj3 and 7. 
1 eyuylitee, either fraunchise, either dignite of citeceyn v. 

P and thei r. 
wfor vy. * and vnboond r.' 
a counceil for to come togidere r. 


& be b. 


575 


herden him til this word; and thei reis- 
eden her vois, and seiden, Take awei fro 
the erthe siche a maner man; for it is 
not leueful, that he lyue. And whanne23 
thei crieden, and kesten awei her clothis, 
and threwen dust in to the eir, the tri-24 
bune comaundide hym to be led in to 
castels*, and to be betun with scourgis, 
and to be turmentid, that he wiste, for 
what cause thei crieden so tof him. And a5 
whanne thei hadden boundun hym with 
cordis, Poul seide to a centurien stondinge 
ni3 to hym, Whether it is® leueful to 30u, 
to scourge a Romayn, and vndampned ? 
And whanne this thing was herd, thee 
centurien wente to the tribune, and telde 
to hym, and seide, What art thou to 
doynge? for this man is a citeseyn of 
Rome. And the tribune cam ni3, and 27 
seide to hym, Seie thou to me, whether 
thou art a Romayn? And he seide, 3he. 2s 
And the tribune answeride, Y with 
myche summe gat this fredom. And 
Poul seide, And Y was borun a citeseyn 
of ome. Therfor anoon thei that schul-29 
den haue turmentid hym, departiden 
awei frohym. And the tribune dredde, 
aftir that he wiste, that he was a cite 
seyn of Rome, and for he hadde boundun 
hym. But in the dai suynge he wolde3o 
wite more diligentli, for what cause he 
were accusid of the Jewis, and vnbounde 
hym, and comaundide prestis and al the 
counsel to come togidir. And he’ brou3te 
forth Poul, and sette hym among hem. 


CAP. XXIII. 

And Poul bihelde in to the counsel, 1! 
and seide, Britheren, Y with al good . 
conscience haue lyued bifore God, ‘til in 
to’ this dai, And Anany, prince of? 


r thei throw- 


b the centurien G pr.m. MNPT. © and 
hwher yr. 1 liztly, or boldly cupr 
™ seide vy. © Sothly 
rOm. vy. 8 that or. 
« for to come 
4 and 


q tormenten osx. 
Y the prestes o. 
bOm. x.  ¢ brou3te rv. 


bhOm.k. itil to b. 


576 


comaundide to men stondinge ny38, for to 
3smyte his mouth. Thanne Poul seide to 
him, Wali maad whi3t, God schal smyte 
thee; and thou sittinge* demest me vp! the 
lawe, and ajenst the lawe comaundist me 
4for™ to be smytyn. And thei that stooden 
ny3, seiden, Cursist thou the hijeste" prest 
sof God? Sothli Poul seide, Bretheren, I 
wiste not, for® he is prince® of prestis ; 
forsoth? it is writun, Thou schalt not 
6curse’ the prince of thit? peple. Forsothe 
Poul ‘witinge, for™ o'" party was of Sadu- 
cees, and ‘that othir® of Pharisees, het 
eryede in the counceil, Men bretheren, I 
am a" Pharise, the sone of Pharisees; of 
the hope and a3en rysing of"" deede men’ 
71am demed. And whanne he hadde seid 
this thing, dissencioun is” maad_ bitwixe* 
Pharisees and Saducees, and the multitude 
sisY departid. Forsoth Saducees seyn, for? 
‘to be? ‘no rysinge a3en> of deede men®, 
nether aungel, nether spirit; forsothe4 
9Pharisees knowlechen bothe®. Sothlif a 
greet cry is’ maad. And summe of Phari- 
sees rysinge vp, fou3teni, seyinge, We 
fynde* no thing of yuel in this man; 
what if a spirit! spak to him, ‘or aungel™? 
10And whanne" greet dissencioun was° 
maad, the? tribune dredinge', lest Poul 
schulde be to-drawunt ‘a mong* hem, co- 
maundidet kny3tis for* to go doun, and to 
rauysche him of’ the” myddil of hem, and 
i1for* to lede him in to castels. Sothli in 
the ny3t suynge the Lord stondingeY ny3 
to him, seith?, Be thou stedefast; sothli® 
as thou hast witnessid of me in Jerusalem, 
so it bihoueth thee for’ to witnesse and° 
12at Rome. Forsothe ‘the day4 maad, summe 
of the Jewis gederiden hem, and maden a 


€nitohimy. Om. sx. 

mOm.sx. hizge g. © that or. 
Tay. 8 the tother AGMNOPQSTPXY. 
x bitwen s. bitwe x. Ywasvy. 2 Om. sx. that r. 
¢Om.sx. ‘but r. © ener either r. 
k founden nN. 1 spirit, either aungel v. 
rdrawun 4 pr.m. x. 8 of AGMNOPQSTYXY. 
vfrov. WOm.s. *Om.sx.  Y stood r. 
d whanne the day was r. 


9 the prince G. 


K ny3 to hk see. m. 
Paud Yb. 4 Om. ah. 
k sec.m. of the xka. 


1 prynce gk pr. m. 


Vrisen ali?zw WW Om. rR. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


i Thou wal eg sec. m. 
P for v. 
t and he r. 
2Om. vy. 
f Forsothe o. 
™ Om. Pr. 

t he comaundide s. and he comaundide r. 
2 and seide vr. seide x. 


m the xak pr. m. 
¥ Om. cEIK pr.m. Mgruxabch. 
Xx a castel 1. the castels rk. 


XXII. 3—12. 


prestis, comaundide to men that stoden 
ny3* hym, that thei schulden smyte his 
mouth. Thanne Poul seide to hym,3 
Thou whitid wal, God smyte thee; thou 
sittist, and demest me bi the lawe, and 
aj3ens the law thou comaundist me to 
be smytun. And thei that stoden ni3,4 
seiden, Cursist thon the hijest prest! of 
God? And Poul seide, Britheren, Ys 
wiste not, that he is prince of preestis ; 
for it is writun, Thou schalt not curse 
the prince of thi™ puple. But Poule 
wiste, that o parti" was of Saduceis, and 
the othere® of Fariseis; and he criede in 
the counsel, Britheren, Y am a Farisee, 
the sone of Farisees; Y? am demyd of 
the hope and‘ of the’ a3en rising of deed 
men. And whanne he hadde seid this7 
thing, dissencioun was maad bitwixe the 
Fariseis and the’ Saduceis, and the mul- 
titude was departid. For Saduceis seien, 8 
that no ‘rysing a3ent of deed men is, 
nether aungel, nether spirit ; but Fariseis 
knowlechen euer eithir. And a greets 
cry was maad. And summe of" Fari- 
sees rosen’ vp, and” fou3ten, seiynge, We 
fynden no thing of yuel in this man; 
what if a spirit, ether an aungel spak to 
hym? And whanne greet discencioun 10 
was maad, the tribune dredde, lest Poul 
schulde be to-drawun of hem; and he 
comaundide kny3tis to go doun, and to 
take hym fro the myddil of hem, and to 
lede hym in to castels*. And in the ni3ti1 
suynge the Lord stood ni3 to hym, and 
seide, Be thou stidfast ; for as thou hast 
witnessid of me in Jerusalem, so it bi- 
houeth thee to witnesse also at Rome. 
And whanne the dai was come, summe 12 


1 vp, or after eupt. bi r. 
Qcurse tos. the y. * wiste that r. 
uOm.e. wWfoy. VOm.x. WW wasr. 
b non a3enrysyng 0. noo rising a3en is Vv. 

hrisiden r. ‘and fou3ten r. 
ciso. POm.v. 4 dredde r. 
u Om. sx. 

¢ also r. 


Kk sittidist and r. 


& was r. 
a Om. o. 


afor ry. > Om. sx. 


2 part af. © tothir ckgxahgkoa. 
sOm.R. trising gk pr.m. a3en rising 


XXII. 13—22. 


vow, seyinge, hem¢ nether tof etingeS, ne- 
ther to® drynkinge’, til thei slowen Poul. 
13 Forsoth ther weren mo* than fourty men, 
that .maden this coniuracioun!, ‘or swer- 
ising to gidere™. The® whiche wenten to 
the princes? of prestis, and eldre men, and 
seiden, With deuocioun we han avowid 
vs? ‘to no thing tastinge9, til we slen Poul. 
15 Now therfore make 3e knowun to the tri- 
bune, with’ the counceil, that he leede 
forth him to 3ou, as 3e to knowinge* sum 
thing more certeynli of him; sothli we 
ben redy fort to sle him, bifore that he® 
16come ny3. Which’ thing whanne the sone 
of Poulis sistir hadde herd the aspies, ‘o7" 
tresoun*, he cam, and entride in to the 
17castels, and tolde Poul*. Sothli ‘he clep- 
ingeY to him oon of the centuriouns, seith’, 
Leed this 3onge man to the tribune, for 
he hath sum thing for* to schewe to him. 
is And he forsothe takinge® him ‘to, ledde® 
to the tribune, and seith*, Boundyn Poul 
preiede me, for to lede to thee this 30nge 
man, hauynge sum thing for’ to speke to 
ig9thee. Sothli the tribune takinge® his 
hond, wente' with him asydis half, and 
axide* him, What thing is it, that thou 
20 hast to! schewe to me? Forsoth he seide, 
It bifallith™ to the Jewis for" to preie 
thee, that to morwe day thou® bringe forth 
Poul into the counceil, ‘as thei ben to? 
21sekingel sum thing certeynere’. Sothlis 
bileue thou not to hem; forsothet more" 
than fourty men of hem aspien him, the’ 
whiche han avowid, ‘hem for to¥ not ete 
ne* drynke, til thei slen him; and now 
thei ben redy, abidinge ‘thi biheeste ¥. 
22 Therfore the tribune lefte the 3onge man, 
comaundinge’, that he schulde speke to 
no man, for? he hadde maad thes thingis 


e that thei schulden vy. f Om. 7. 
k more GMNPTVXY. | schewyng togidere o. 
we F. 
sx. U3eN. Y The whiche x. 
seide yr. %Om.sx.  » took 7. 
hOm.n. iandwente vy. asked 9. 
thou Ns. Pas if thei schulen r. 
of himr. 8 Buty. ¢t for rv. 
y the heizest 0. 2% and comaundide r. 


Umo Ns. 
8 that or. 


Y an avou3 R. avow beg. 
€ ne ik. 


VOL. IV. 


z han slayn k, 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


8 eten sx. ete vy. 
m Om. ox. 
4 to no thing tasten sx. schulen not taste eny thing r. 
W either tresouns v. Om. x. 

¢ and ledde r. 
1 for to AGMOPTVY. 
4 enquere nr. seken sx. 
v Om. ¥. 


@ spies k pr. mt. 


577 


of the Jewis gaderiden hem, and maden 

‘avowY, and seiden, that thei schulden 

nether eete, ne drinke, til thei slowen 

Poul. And there weren mo than fourtiis 

men, that maden this sweryng togider. 

And thei wenten to the princis of prestis, 14 

and eldre men, and seiden, With deuo- 

cioun we han avowid, that we schulen 

not taste ony thing, til we sleen? Poul. 

Now therfor make 3e knowun to the tri-1s 

bune, with the counsel, that he bringe 

hym forth to 30u, as if 3e schulden knowe 

sum thing more certeynli of hym; and 

we ben redi to sle hym, bifor that he 

come. And whanne the sone of Poulis t¢ 

sister hadde herd the aspies*, he cam, and 

entride in to the castels, and telde to 

Poul. And Poul clepide to hym oon of 17 

the centuriens, and seide, Lede this 3onge 

man to the tribune, for he hath sum 

thing to schewe tohym. And he tookis 

hym, and ledde to the tribune, and seide, 

Poul, that is boundun, preide me to lede 

to thee this 3onge man, that hath sum 

thing to speke to thee. And the tribune 19 

took his hoond, and wente with hym 

asidis half, and axide? hym, What thing 

is it, that thou hast to schewe to me? 

And he seide, The Jewis ben acordid} to 20 + é acordide, 
ete.; that is, 

preye thee, that to morewe thou brynge , Jewis maden 

forth Poul in to the counsel, as if thei coms ether 

schulden enquere sum thing more cer- “ie “ere. ve. 

teynli of hym. But bilene thou not to2! 

hem; for mo than fourti men of hem 

aspien® hym, which han a vowid, that 

thei schulen not eete nether® drynke, til 

thei sleen hym; and now thei ben redi, 

abidinge thi biheest. Therfor the tri-22 

bune lefte the 3onge man, and comaund- 

ide, that he schulde speke to no man, 


i drinken sx. drinke r. 
Pp Om. o. that 


h Om. GaNopry. 
n Om. ¥. © prince 0. 

T and to o. 8 knowe sx. t Om. 
xto Poulry. Y Poulclepide vy. 7 and 
e Om. sx. fOm.sx.  & took v 

m acordide vy. ™Om.sx. ° that 

T more certeynly of him n. certeyncre 

x neither ¥. 


qd seide rv. 


W hem to sx. that thei schulen rv. 


baskideo. Caspiedeng. 4 nether k. 


4E 


578 


23knownn to him. And tweye> centuriouns 
clepid® to gidire, he’ seide to hem, Make 
3e redy tweyne® hundrid kny3tis, that thei 
go til to Cesarie, and horsmen senenty, 
and sper men tweyn® hundrid, fro the 
2ithridde hour of thef ny3t. And make 3e 
redy ‘iumentis, or hors®, that thei put- 
tinge Poul vponi, schulden* lede him saf 
25 to Felix, president. ‘Sothli he dredde, lest 
perauenture Jewis schulden rauysche him!, 
and slee, and he aftirward schulde suffre 
chalenge, as he were to takinge™ money"; 
26 writinge® to him ‘an epistle?, conteynynge 
thes thingis. Claudius Lisias to the’ best 
27 Felix, precident, heelthe. This man takyn 
of Jewis, and bigynnynge for’ to be slayn 
of hem, I ‘aboue comynge’™ ‘with cum- 
pany® delyuerede’, ‘knowun for" he is a 
28Romayn. And I willingeY ‘for to¥ wite the 
cause, the* which’ thei puttiden? a3ens 
him, ledde® him in to the counceil of hem. 
29 Whom I fond for® to ben aceusid of ques- 
tiouns of the lawe of hem, forsoth hau- 
ynge no cryme worthi the deeth, ‘or bon- 
sodis®. And whanne it was teeld to me of 
the aspies, ‘or fresouns®, that thei maden 
redy’, I sente him to thee, ‘denounsinge 
andé to" accusatours, that thei seie at thee. 
31 Farwel. Sothli! kny3tis, vp* thing! co- 
maundid to hem, ‘takinge to™ Poul, ledden" 
szhim by, ny3t into Antipatriden. And in 
the day suynge, ‘the horsmen® left, that 
thei schulden go with him, thei turnyden 
33.a3en ‘to the? castels. Thed whiche whanne 
thei camen to Cesarie, and token the 
pystle’ to the president, thei setten’ bifore 
34hym and‘ Poul. Forsoth whanne he hadde 
rad, and axid, of what prouynce he was, 
and ‘knowinge for™ he was of Cilice, I 
schal heere thee, he seith’, whanne thi 


b two GMPST. 4 and he r. 


he clepide rv. 
kOm.o. 1Om. x. ™ take srx. ‘2 Om. r. 
py. thee x. 'Om.sx. ‘' cam aboue r. 

vwolder. Wtosx. Om.r. * Om rx. 

© either bounden vy. 4 Om. esrx. & Om. ox. 
tothe upr. i Therforer. & bi vr. 
° whanne the horse meu weren r. 


tOm.o. alsov. Uknewthat vy. VY seide r. 


fosifk. & He x sec.m. 


™ spies k prom. 2Om.h prim. ° epistle E. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


© two GMPST pass. 
horsis GMOPQTY pr.m. iumentis, either horsis vy. inmentis x. 
° For and the tribune wroot ¥. 
s Om. o. 
Y that x. 
f redy to him r. 
I thingis @ pr.m. 
P into x pr.m. to X sec. m. 


XNITI. 23-—-34- 


that he hadde maad these thingis knowun 

to hym. And he clepide togidre twei 23 
centuriens, and he seide to hem, Make 

3e redi twei hundrid kny3tis, that thei 

go to Cesarie, and horse men seuenti, 

and spere men twey hundrid, fro the 

thridde our of the ny3t. And make 3e21 

redy an hors, for Poul to ride on, to lede 

hym saaf to Felix, the presydent. Fors 

the tribune dreddef, lest the Jewis wol- + Forhedredde, 
den take hym bi the weie, and sle hym, eam 
and aftirward he mi3te be chalengid, as‘ 


word, to taking 

money, be pass- 
he hadde take money. And$ wroot hym} 2¢ ‘4, is not of the 

text, neither is 


‘a pistle’, conteynynge these thingis. Clau- _ in bookis 


amendid, but 
first it was a 
glose 3eldinge 
the cause whi 
the tribune 
sente Poul with 
so greet sykir- 
nesse, and aftir- 
ward this glose 


dius Lisias to the* beste Felix, president, 
heelthe. This man that was take of the 27 
Jewis, and bigan to be slayn, Y cam vp- 
on hem with myn oost, and delyuerede 
hym fro hem, whanne Y knewe that he 
was a Romayn. And Y wolde wite the 2s text eae 
cause, which thei puttiden ajens hym; Pynsnesse of 
and Y ledde hym to! the counsel of hem. re. ve. 
And Y foond, that he was accusid of29 
questiouns of her lawe, but he hadde no 

cryme worthi the deth, ethir boondis. 

And whanne it was teeld me of theso 

aspies™, that thei arayden for hym, Y 

sente hym to thee, and Y warnede also 

the accuseris, that thei seie at thee. Fare 

wel. And so the kny3tis, as thei weren3! 
comaundid, token Poul, and ledde hym 

bi ny3t into Antipatriden. And in thes2 

dai suynge, whanne the horsmen weren 

left, that schulden go with hym, thei 

turneden a3en to the® castels. And33 

whanne thei camen to Cesarie, thet token 

the pistle® to the president, and thei set- 

ten also Poul byfore him. And whanne3s 

he hadde red, and? axide’, of what pro- 

uynce he was, and knewe that he was of 


f Om. wpotyvy.  & iumentis, or 
h schulden sette rv. i aboue and r. 
p and epistle c. a pistle 

u for it was knowen that r. 
aandIledde ry. »% Om. sx. 
& and I denounside also yr. two x. 
m token vy. taken hym x. =” and ledden r. 
4QOm.r. ‘epistle GNost. § settiden r. 


t and delyueride r. 
% putten sx. 


h to him ckurxabk pr.m. 08. iepistle ze. * thee ac sec.m. 1 into bho. 
P he a. 


4 askide o. 


XXUI. 35-——-XXIV. 12. 


3saccuseris” ‘schulen come*. And he co- 
maundide him for to be kept in the pre- 
torie, or moote halle, of Heroude*. 


CAP. XXIV. 


1 Forsoth aftir fyue dayes, Ananye, prince 
of prestis, cam doun with sum eldre men, 
and Terculle, sum ‘oratour, or fair speker, 
or avocat*, whiche wenten to the prese- 

2dent ajeyns Poul. And, Poul? somenyd, 
Terculle bigan for® to ‘accuse, seyinge®, 
Whanne in moche pees we don bi thee, 
and manye thingis ben amendid bi thi 

3 prouydence®, ‘or wysdom', euermore and 
euerywhere, thou best Felix, we han re- 

4ceyued with al doynge of thankingis. For- 
soth lest I tarie thee lengere, I preie thee, 

sschortly heere vs for thi mekenesse. We 


han foundun this man beringe venym’, ‘or _ 


pestilence, and stiringe sedicionn, ‘or dis- 
sencioun', to alle Jewis* in al the world, 
and auctour of seducioun of the secte of 
6 Nazarenst; the! which also enforside for™ 
to defoule the temple; whom ‘and takun to, 
7we® wolden deme, aftir oure lawe. Sothli 
Lisias, the tribune, ‘aboue comynge with 
greet strengthe®, delyuerede him fro? oure 
shondis; comaundinge! his accuseris for™ to 
come to thee, of whom thou demynge, 
maist knowe of* alle thes thingis, of 
owhiche we accusen him. Forsoth and 
Jewis castident to, seyinge thes" thingis* 
10 for to haue® hem so. Forsoth Poul an- 
sweride, ‘grauntinge the presedent* toY 
him for? to seie, Of manye 3eeris I know- 
inge® thee for> to be domesman to this 
folk, schal° do ynow for me with good yn- 
11 Witt®, ‘or resoun!, Sothlif thou maist knowe, 
for to me ben not® more than twelne 
dayes, sithen* I stizede vp for! to worschipe 
12in Jerusalem; and nethir in the temple 


Ww accusatoures 0. X comen o. cometh Q. 
auocat Vv. oratour, or auoket x. 
dom o. f Om. ox. 
here wanting in y. !Om.ry. ™ Om. sx. 
andy. Poute of o. 4 and comaundide r. 
whan mw. to haue sx. hadden rv. 
@knowe vy. © Om. sx. ¢and I schal r. 
1Om. sx. 


& pestilence rv. 


Tintob. 8 ether aduocal K marg. 


* of this x. ofthesea. ybyk. 7 Om. x. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


y Om. sx. 
b whanne Poul was r. 
h Om. erx. 

0 also we tooken and r. 
rOm. sx. 
x for the president grauntide rv. 
€ resoun or. 


tthe a. Om. 1. 


579 


Cilicie, Y schal here thee, he seide, whanne 35 
thin accuseris comen. And he comaund- 
ide hym to be kept in™ the moot halle of 
Eroude. 

CAP. XXIV. 

And aftir fyue daies, Ananye, prince! 
of preestis, cam doun with summe eldere 
men, and Terculle, a feir speker’, which 
wenten to the precident ajens Poul. And2 
whanne Poul was somened, Terculle bi- 
gan to accuse hym, and seide, Whanne 
in myche pees we doon bi thee, and 
many thingis ben amendid bi thi wis-- 
dom, euere more and euery where, thous 
best Felix, we han resseyued with al 
doyng of thankingis. But lest Y tarie4 
thee‘ lengere, Y preie thee, schortly here 
vs for thi mekenesse. We han founduns 
this wickid man stirynge dissencioun to 
alle Jewis in al the world, and auctour 
of dissencioun of the secte of Nazarenus; 
and he also enforside to defoule the tem-6 
ple; whom also we token, and wolden 
deme, after oure lawe. But Lisias, the7 
trybune,cam" with greet strengthe aboue’, 
and delyuerede hym fro oure hoondis ; 
and comaundide hise accuseris to comes 
to thee, of whom thou demynge, maist 
knowe of alle these thingis, of whiche we 
accusen hym. And Jewis putten” to,9 
and seiden, that these thingis hadden 
hem so. And Poul answeride, whanne io 
the president grauntide hym to seie, Of 
mony 3eeris Y knowe thee, that thou art 
domesman ‘to this* folk, and Y schal do 
ynow3 for me with’ good resoun. For 1! 
thou maist knowe, for to me ben not 
more than twelue daies, sithen Y cam vp 
to worschipe in Jerusalem; and nether 12 
in the* temple thei founden me disput- 
inge with ony man, nether makynge con- 


2 Herodes ox. 
¢ Om. sx. 
i Om. ox. 


& faire spekere, either 
4 accuse hym, and seide vy. © wys- 
k the Jewis Gc pr.m. t A leaf is 

° cam with greet strengthe aboue, 
t casten sx. "that these r. ¥Om.o. 
yY of n. Om. o. 2 Om. sx. 
&Forvy. hnon. &sizeno. 


3 Om. 0. 


f Om. orx. 


Ucam aboofr. VOm.R. 


w puttiden hk. 


4EQ2 


580 


thei founden me disputinge with ony man, 
or™ makinge coucurs®, ‘or rennyng to gt- 
dere’, of the cumpany ‘of peple?, nether 
isin synagogis, nether in citee; nether thei 
mown proue to thee, of the’ whiche thingis 
i4thei now™ accusen me. Sotheli I know- 
leche to thee this thing, that vp* the secte 
which thei seyn eresie, so I serue to God 
the' fadir, bileuynge" to’ alle thingis that 
ben writun in the lawe and prophetis ; 
ishauynge” hope in to God, the* whiche 
and thei hem silf abyden, the ajen rysing 
isto comyngeY of iust men and wickid%. In 
this thing and I studie withouten hirtyng, 
for* to haue conscience to God, and to men 
i7euermore. Forsoth aftir mo* 3eeris, I cam 
to doynge’ almesdedis into my folk, and 
18 offringis, and vowis; in whiche thei founden 
me purified in the temple, not with cum- 
panye, nethir with noyse®. And thei 
cau3ten me, theif ‘eryinge, and seiynge®, 
i9 Take awei oure enemy. Sothli suinme 
Jewis of Asie, whom" it bihofte! for* to 
be now present, ‘or redy', at thee, and 
accuse, if thei hadden ony thing a3ens 
2me™, or® these hem silf seye, if thei 
founden in me ony thing of wickidnesse, 
aisithen J stonde in the counceil, no but 
oonli of this 0° vois, by which I cryede 
stondinge among hem, For of? the ajen 
rysing of deede men‘ I am demyd this day 
220f 30u. Sothli Felix deferride hem, moost' 
certeynli ‘he witinge®’ of the weye, sei- 
yuge', Whanne Lisias, the tribune, schal 
23come", I schal heere jou. And he co- 
maundide to” centurioun for’ to kepe him, 
and for* to hane reste, nethir for’ to for- 
bede ony man for? to mynystre of? his 
210wne thingis to him. Sotheli aftir samme 
dayes, Felix comynge> with Drusille, his 
wyf, that was a Jewesse, clepide® Poul, 


m neither v. n rennynge togidere o. 
mowen T. Sbiv. tmy Fr. 
zwicke s. @ Om. sx. 
seiden v. © whiche rv. 
maden noise v. either vy. © Om. sr. 
Om. v. tandseide 7. ®% come doun r. 
zOm. esx. ‘®anyeofn. > cam Fr. 


u and I bileeue r. 
more T. 4 do osr. 
i bihoneth r. 


z ether rennyng togidere K marg. 
which b. f3e 08.  & bileeuynge rR. 
u ether differride K marg. © Om. R. 


h of o. 
P for to g. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


© Om. ox. 
v Om. o. 
€ voice T. 
k Om. x. 
P Om. r. 
VY to a G pr.m. MNPQTY. 
¢ and clepide rv. 


a the peple cee 
m. Q. 


XXIV. 13-24. 


cours? of puple*, nether in> synagogis*, 
nether in citee; nether thei moun preue 13 
to thee, of the’ whiche thingis thei now 
accusen me. But Y knowleche to thee1s 
this thing, that aftir the secte which® 
theif seien eresie, so Y serue to God the 
fadir, ‘and Y bileue® to alle thingis that 
ben writun in the lawe and? profetis; 
and Y haue hope in God, whiche alsois 
thei hem silf abiden, the a3enrisyng ‘to 
comynge! of iust men and wickid. Inie 
this thing Y studie with outen hirtyng, 
to haue concience to God, and to men 
euermore. But after many 3eeris, Y cam 17 
to do almes dedis to my fole, and of- 
fryngis, and auowis; in whiche theiis 
founden me purified in the temple, not 
with company, nether with noise. And 
thei cau3ten me, and thei* crieden, and 
seiden, Take awei oure enemye. Andis 
summe Jewis of Asie, whiche it behofte 
to be now present at thee, and accuse, 
if thei hadden ony thing a3ens me, ether! 20 
these hem silf seie, if thei founden in 
me ony thing of wickidnesse, sithen Y 
stonde ‘in the counsel, but oneli of this21 
vois, by which Y criede stondynge™ 
among hem, For of the a3enrisyng of 
deed men Y am demyd this dai of 3o0u. 
Sothely Felix delayede" hem, and knewe 22 
moost certeynli® of the weie, and seide, 
Whanne Lisias, the tribune, schal come 
doun, Y schal here jou. And he co-23 
maundide to a centurien to kepe hym, 
and that he hadde reste, nethir to? for- 
bede ony man to mynystre of his owne 
thingis to him. And after summe dayes 24 
Felix cam, with Drussille his wijf, that 
was a Jewesse, and clepide Poul, and 
herde of him the feith that is in Crist 
Jhesu. And while he disputide of ri3t- 25 


P Om. N. q Om. sx. 
wand I hauer. * Om. r. 
f Om. wpesrx. and thei rv. 
10m. ox. 
4Om. x. 


r Om. G pr. m. 
¥ coomen sx. 
& crieden and 

™ me, founden me in the temple, and 

rand knew most y. 5 witinge sx. 

w Om. sx. * Om. sx. Y Om. sx. 


4Qm.h. eof 


m Om. gk pr.m. 


bin the 1. 


© synagoge E. 
k Om. aq. 


I neither ¢. 


XXIV. 25-—XXV. 8. 


and herde of him the feith that is into 

25 Jhesu Crist’. Sothli ‘him disputinge® of 
ri3twysnesse, and chastite, and off dom to 
comynge®, Felix maad> tremblinge, an- 
sweride!, That perteyneth now, go; sothli 
in tyme couenable I schal clepe thee tok. 

26 Also and hopinge!, that money schulde be 
3ouun to him of Poul; for whiche thing 
and ofte he clepinge™ him to", spak°® with 

o7him. SothliP twey4 3eeris‘ fulfillid’, Felix 
took a successour, ‘Festus of Ponte; for- 
soth Felix willinge" ‘for to” 3yue" grace 
to Jewis, lefte? Poul boundun. 


CAP. XXV. 


1 Therfore whanne* Festus cam into pro- 
uynce’, aftir the thridde day he assendide 
ato Jerusalem fro Cesarie. And the 
princes? of prestis, and the firste of Jewis 
wenten to him ajens Poul, and preieden 
shim’, axinge> grace a3ens him, that he 
schulde comaunde him for‘ to be led to 
Jerusalem ; settinge! aspies for® to sle hym 
4in the weye. Sothli Festus answeride, 
Poulf ‘for to be& kepte in Cesarie; ‘him 
sothly to" goynge! forth more rypeli*, ‘or 
shasteli!. Therfore he seith™, Thei that in 
3ou ben my3ti", comynge® doun to gidere ; 
if? ony cryme is in the man, accuse? him. 
6Sothli he dwellinge™ a mong hem no more 
than ei3te or® tent dayes, cam" doun to 
Cesarie; and ‘that othiry day he sat for 
domesman, and comaundide Poul for” to 
7 be ‘ledd to*. Which whanne heY was ledd?, 
Jewis stooden ‘aboute him’, the> whiche 
camen doun fro Jerusalem, puttinge* a3ens4 
manye and® greuouse causis, whiche thei 
smy3fen not proue. Sothlif Poul 3eldinge? 
resoun", For nethir into! the lawe of Jewis, 


4 Jhesu o. Crist Jhesu aporrx. 
i and answeride r. kOm.r. | he hopide r. 
whanne yr. two emMporx. T 3er x. 
sx. Om.r. Wdos. %and lefte r. 
2Om.n. Paskyngeg. © Om. sx. 
Poule r. & to be sx. schulde be r. 
10m. ox. Mseider. 1 in my3ti x. 
Seither vy fere pass. ttwelfo. and cam vr. 
yOm. acxestx. 7” brou3t forth vr. a ny3 s. 
€ Om. ¢ pr.m. stv. f For sothli v. 


q Whider it a sec. m. 1. Whither a sec. m. k sec. m. a. 
Y othir rrh. 


tenk. 4 ether ripeli, or hastli K marg. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


e while he disputide r. 
m clepide r. 
8 weren fillid r. 
xx thanne K. 
ce in to G sec. m. 
h gothli that he himself schulde r. 
° come VF. 
Vv the tother 4GMNOPQSTVX. 
b Om. r. 
& 3eeldide rv. 


581 


wisnesse, and chastite, and of dom to 
comynge, Felix was maad tremblinge, 
and answerde, That‘ perteneth now, go; 
but in-tyme couenable Y schal clepe 
thee. Also he hopide, that money schulde 26 
be 30uun to hym of Poul; for which 
thing eft he clepide hym, and spak with 
hym. And whanne twei 3eeris" weren 27 
fillid, Felix took a successoure, Porcius 
Festus; and Felix wolde 3yue grace to 
Jewis’, and lefte Poul boundun. 


CAP. XXV. 


Therfor whanne Festus cam in to the 
prouynce, aftir the thridde dai he wente 
vp to Jerusalem fro Cesarie. And thez 
princis of prestis, and the worthieste of 
the Jewis wenten to hym a3ens Poul, and 
preieden lym, and axiden grace ajens3 
hym, that he schulde comaunde hym to 
be led to Jerusalem; and thei settident 
aspies to sle hym in the weie. But Festus 4 
answerde, that Poul schulde be kept in 
Cesarie; sotheli that he hym silf schulde 
procede more auisili". Therfor he seide, 
Thei-that in 3on ben my3ti, come douns 
togidere; and if ony crime is in the man, 
accuse thei hym. And he dwellede among « 
hem no inore than ei3te ether ten daies, 
and cam doun to Cesarie; and the to- 
ther’ dai he sat for domesman, and com- 
aundide Poul to be brou3t. And whanne7 
he was brou3t forth, Jewis stoden aboute 
hym, whiche camen doun fro Jerusalem, 
puttynge a3ens hym many and greuouse 
causis, whiche thei mi3ten not preue. Fors 
Poul 3eldide resoun in alle thingis, That 


f Om. x. 
2 Om. Vv. 
t Porcius Festus r. 
¥ the prouynce G sec.m. NsVxX. % prynce N. 
4 and thei settiden ry. ¢ Om. sx. f that 
k hasteli o. 
q accuse thei rv. —-* dwellide r. 
wOm. sx. * brou3t r. 
4 a3ens him Gotr. 
i azens Fr. 


& come sx. 5 was maad r. 
Sand spac vy. P Sothli 
uwolde vy. ¥ to 


igo svx. 
P and if v. 


¢ and puttinge v. 
b resoun in alle thingis rv. 


Tseer1. 8 the Jewis K prim. bko.  * set- 


582 


nether ‘in to* the temple, nether into! Cesar, 
9I synnede ony thing. Forsoth Festus 
willinge™ ‘for to" 3yue grace to the Jewis, 
answeringe® to Poul, seide?, Wolt thou as- 
sende to Jerusalem, and there be demed of 
io these thingis at me? Sothli Poul seide, At 
the dom place of Cesar I stonde, where it 
bihoueth me for? to be demyd. I haue 
not noyed to the Jewis, as thou ‘hast betere 
1 knowun'. Sothlis if I haue noyed, or don 
ony thing worthi deeth, J forsake not for‘ 
to deie; sothli if no thing of these” is, that 
thei accusen me, no man may 3yue me to 
12hem. ‘Cesar I apele’. Thanne Festus 
spekinge” with the counceil, answeride*, 
CesarY thou hast apelid, to Cesar thou 
isschalt go. And whanne summe dayes 
weren passid, Agrippa kyng’, and Bernyse 
camen doun to Cesarie, for? to greete wel 
14 Festus. And whanne thei dwelliden there 
manye dayes, Festus schewide to the king 
of Poul, seiynge>, Sum man is left boundun 
150f Felix, of which*, whanne J was at Jeru- 
salem, princes of prestis and eldere men of 
Jewis camen to me, axinge’ dampnacioun 
16 a3ens him. To whom? J answeride, It‘ is not 
custom to Romayns, for’ to dampne® ony 
man, ‘bifore thati he that is accusid haue 
his accuseris present, and* take place of 
defendyng, for! to waysche awey crymes, 
‘or greet trespassis™, that ben putt azens”. 
17 Therfore whanne thei camen to gedire 
hidur, withoute ony delay, in the day su- 
ynge lI sittinge® for domesman, comaundide? 
isthe man for? to be ‘ladd tot. Of whom 
whanne the’ accuseris stooden ny3', thei 
seyden no cause, of whiche thingis" I hadde 
i9suspicioun of yuel. Sothli thei hadden 
a3ens hym summe questiouns of her veyn 
worschiping’, ‘or religioun™”, and of sum* 
Jhesu deed, whom Poul affermyde for’ to 
20lyue. Sothli I doutinge* of such maner 


Kagens vy. Jazens ry. ™ wolde r. 


r knowest betere yr. § For 7. 
ide vy. Y To Cesar rv. 

askynge Q. © whiche r. 
1Om.sx. ™Om.ox. 1 ajens him spor. 
S Om. mopervx. t Om. 4GMNnPOsTVX. 
giounv. * Om. mp. 


t Om. sx. 
Zakyng Tr. ®Om. sx. 
i That it r. 


y hym for 9g. Om. sx. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


1 to sx. Om. Fr. 

u tho v. 

b and seide Fr. 

& Om. sx. 
0 sat VF. 

= theng o. 

z dowted or. 


XXV. g—20. 


nether a3ens the lawe of Jewis, nether 
ajens the temple, nether a3ens the empe- 
roure, Y synnede ony thing. But Festus9 
wolde do grace to the” Jewis, and an- 
sweride to Poul, and seide, Wolt thou 
gon vp to Jerusalem, and there be demyd 
of these thingis bifore me? And Poulio 
seide, At the domplace of the emperour 
Y stonde, where it bihoueth me to be 
demed. Y haue not noied the Jewis, as 
thou knowist wel. For if Y haue noyed, 11 
ether don ony thing worthi deth, Y for- 
sake not to die; but if no thing of tho 
is, that thei accusen me, no man may 
3yue me to hem. Y appele to the em- 
perour. Thanne Festus spak with the1ez 
counsel, and answerde, To the emperoure 
thou hast appelid, to the emperoure thou 
schalt go. And whanne summe daies 13 
weren passid, Agrippa kyng, and Bero- 
nyce camen doun to Cesarie, to welcome 
Festus. And whanne thei dwelliden 14 
there many daies, Festus schewide to 
the king of Poul, and seide, A man is 
left boundun of Felix, of which, whanne1s 
Y was at Jerusalem, princis of preestis 
and the* eldre men of JewisY camen to 
me, and axiden dampnacioun ajens hym. 
To whiche* Y answeride, That it is not 6 
custom to Romayns, to dampne ony man, 
bifore that he that is accusid haue hise 
accuseris present, and take place of de- 
fending, to putte awei the crymes, that 
ben putte ajens Aym. Therfor whanne 17 
thei camen togidere hidir, withouten ony 
delaye, in the dai suynge Y sat for 
domesman, and comaundide the man to 
be brou3t. And whanne hise accuseris 18 
stoden, thei seiden no cause, of whiche 
thingis* Y hadde suspicioun of yuel. But 19 
thei hadden ajens hym summe questiouns 
of her veyn worschiping’, and of oon 


© and answeride vy. Pand seide vy. 4 Om. sx. 
vlapele to Cesar ry. Wspac ry. * and answer- 
¢the whiche s, 4 and axden or. 
h 3eue, either dampnev. taro, * Om. nN, 
P and comaundide yr. 4 Om. sx. ¢ bron3t ¥. 
Vv worschipingus s. W Om, ox. either veyn rely- 


wOm.a. *Om.o. Ythe Jewisa. #whomt. *®Om.R._ ? ether religion K marg. 


XXV. 21-——XXVI. 2. DEEDS OF APOSTLES. ; 583 


questioun®, seide®, If¢ he wolde go to Jeru- 
salem, and there ‘for to’ be demyd of these 
21thingis? Forsoth® Poul apelinge‘, that he 
schulde be kept to theS knowinge of the em- 
perour, Icomaundide him for to be kept, til 
22 I schal‘ sende him to Cesar. Sothli Agrippa 
seide to Festus, And I my silf wolde* heere 
the man. ‘Festus answeride!, To morwe, he 
23 seith™, thou schalt heere him. Sotheli on 
‘that othir" day,-whanne Agrippa and Ber- 
nyce camen with moche ambicioun, o7 
pryde of staat, and entriden into the au- 
ditorie, with tribunis and principal men of 
the citee, Festus biddinge®, Poul ‘is lad to?. 
24And Festus seide, Kyng Agrippa, and alle 
men that ben with vs, 3e seen this‘, of the" 
which al the multitude of Jewis preiede 
me at Jerusalem, ‘axinge, and cryinge’, himt 
for" ‘to not bihoueY ‘for to” ‘lyne more*. 
25 Forsoth I fond, ‘him for to haueY don no 
thing worthi of deeth; sothli ‘him apelinge 
this thing to the emperour, I deme’ for? to 
26sende*. Of which man J#* haue not, what 
thing® certeyn‘ I schal wryte to the lord. 
For which thing I brou3te him ‘to jou®, 
and moost to thee, Of kyng Agrippa, that® 
axyng maad®, I haue what! I schal wryte. 
27 Forsoth* it is seyn to me withoute resoun, 
for! to sende a boundun man, and not to™ 
signifie the" cause of him. 


CAP. XXVI. 

1 Agrippa sothli° seith to Poul, It is suf- 
frid to thee, for? to speke for thi silf. 
Thanne Poul, ‘the hond holdun forth4, 

2bigan for’ to 3elde resoun. Of alle thingis, 
in whiche I am accusid*, thou kyng Agrip- 


Jhesu deed, whom Poul affermyde to 
lyne. And Y doutide of siche maner 20 
questioun’, and seide, Whether he wolde 
go to Jerusalem, and ther be’ demyd of 
these thingis? But for Poul appelide, 21 
that he schulde be kept to the knowing 
of the emperoure, Y comaundide him to 
be kept, til Y sende hym to the empe- 
roure. And Agrippa seide to Festus, Y 22 
my® silf wolde here the man. And he 
seide, To morew thou schalt here hym. 
And on the totherf day, whanne Agrippa23 
and Beronyce camen with greet desire, 
and entriden in to the auditorie, with 
tribunes and the® principal men of the 
citee, whanne Festus bad, Poul was 
brou3t. And Festus seide, King Agrippa, 24 
and alle men that ben with vs, 3e seen 
this man, of which al the multitude of 
Jewis preyede me at Jerusalem, and 
axide", and criede, that he schulde lyue 
no lenger. But Y foond, that he hadde 25 
don nothing worthi of deth; and Y deme! 
to sende hym to the emperoure, for he 
appelide this thing. Of which man Y 26 
haue not certeyne, what thing Y schal 
write to the lord. For which thing Y 
brou3te hym to 30u, and moost to thee, 
thou king Agrippa, that whanne axing* is 
maad, Y haue what Y schal write. For 27 
it is seyn to me with out resoun, to sende 

a boundun man}, and not to™ signifie the 
cause of hym. 


CAP. XXVI. 

And Agrippa seide to Poul, It is suf-1 
frid to thee, to speke for thi silf. Thanne 
Poul helde forth the hoond, and bigan to 
3elde resoun. Of alle thingis, in whiche2 
Y am accusid of the Jewis, thou king 


4 of questioun Gor. questiouns N. > seying o. und seide vy. © Wherr. ¢Om.osx. ¢ For r. 


fappelide yr. &Om.o. Om. sx. !Om. rv. 


kwillo. 1Om. wperrx. ™seide vr. ® the to- 


ther 4emNopostr. the other x. © whanne Festus bad vy. P was brou3t y. Wthis man amptry. * Om. 
MpTvyx. ‘Sand axideand criede vy. tOm.y. «Om. svx.  Y that it bihoueth not ry. ¥ Om. 4GNN 


opsTx. to Q. that he r. x more to lyue sx. 


y him to have sx. that he hadde r. yy deemede c. 


zOm. sx. ‘8 I deme for to sende to the emperor, for he appelide this thing yr. 488 Om. x. > not cer- 
teyn ry, COm.0o. 4Omr. ¢Om.r. f£Om. Nn. thou y. & that whanne Ny. bis maad nr. + what 
thengo. kFory. !Om.sx. ™Om.r. %Om.esx. © forsothe r POm.sx. 4 heeld forth 
the hond, and vy. *Om.sx. 8 accusid of the Jewis r. 


© questiouns ERhk. 4 to be igracekp. me a. fothir rh. On. Kk prem. }askide o. 


idemyde b, *askyngao. !Om.r. ™Om.r. 


584 


pa, I gesse me blessid at thee, whanne I 
3‘am to" defendingeY me this day ; moost 
‘thee witinge” alle thingis that ben at 
Jewis, customs and questiouns. For which 
4thing, I beseche, heere me paciently. And 
sothli alle Jewis ‘bifore witinge* me fro 
the bigynnyng, hanY knowun my lyf fro 
3ongthe’; that fro the bigynnyng was in 
smy folk in Jerusalem, if thei wolen bere 
witnesse’, ‘for vp> the moost certeyn secte 
sof oure religioun, I lyuede a Farisee. And 
now in® the hope of repromyscioun, that is 
maad to oure fadris of God, I stonde suget 
7in dom; in which? oure twelue lynagis 
seruynge ny3t and day, hopen for® to be- 
come; of which hope, thou king, I am 
saccusid of Jewis. What vnbileefful thing 
is demyd at 3ou, if God reysith deede men? 
9 And sotheli I gesside, ‘me a3ens the name 
of Jhesn Nazarene, fors to owe do! manye 
locontrarie thingis*. Which thing! and I dide 
in Jerusalem, and I! encloside manye of 
_ seyntis™ in prisouns, ‘power takun® of the® 
princes of prestis. And whanne thei weren 
ilslayn, J 3af the sentence. And bi alle 
synagogis ofte I ponyschinge4 hem, con- 
streynede" for to blasfeme; and more I 
waxynge’ wood a3ens hem, ‘pursuede to" 
12aliene citees. In whiche, the while I wente 
to Damask, with power and suffring of 
13 princes of prestis, in the mydday, in the 
wey I sy3, thou kyng, fro” heuene li3t ‘haue 
schyned* aboute me, ouer the schynyng of 
they sunne, and hem that weren? to gidere 
14with me. And whanne we alle hadden 
fallun doun into the erthe, J herde a voys 
seyinge to me in Ebrew tunge, Saul, Saul, 
what pursuest thou me? it is hard to* 
15 thee, for? to kike a3ens the pricke. For- 
soth I seide, Who art thou, Lord? Sotheli 
the Lord seide, I am Jhesus, whom thou 


v defenden sx. defende 1. 
Z30uthe x. ® witnessing 7. >that bir. ¢ for r. 
£Om.sx. hOm.o. ito do G sec. m. x. 
of Jhesu of Nazarene yr. _‘! thingis x. 
°Om. GyNnPT. 4 punschide rv. 
into vy. W that fro r. 
> Om. sx. 


u schal rv. 


n knowen beghko8. © 30uthe rk. 
mM prm.a. tof Nazareth k pr.m. 
w wexide Eghk pr.m. woxee. * Om. R. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


W for thou knowist r. 

4 which hope rv. 
‘k that I ou3te do many contrarie thingis ajens the name 
Om. G pr.m. 
T and constreynede r. 
x to han shynen sx. schynede rv. 


P reiside R. reise h. 
u Om. gk prem. 
Y the princes R sec. m. 


XXXVI. 3—15. 


Agrippa, Y gesse me blessid at theet, 
whanne Y schal defende me this dai; 
moost for thou knowist alle thingis thats 
ben among Jewis, customes and ques- 
tiouns. For which thing, Y biseche, here 
me pacientli. For alle Jewis that bifor 4 
knewen me fro the bigynnyng, knewen" 
my lijf fro 3ongthe°; that fro the bigyn- 
nyng was in my folc in Jerusalem, if theis 
wolen bere witnessing, that bi the moost 
certeyn sect of oure religioun, Y lyuede a 
Farisee. And now for the hope of repro-6 
myssioun, that is maad to oure fadris of 
God, Y stonde suget in dom; in which7 
hope oure twelue lynagis seruynge ni3t 
and dai hopen to come; of which hope, 
sir king, Y am accusid of the Jewis. 
What vnbileueful thing is demed at 3o0u,8 
if God reisith? deed men? And sotheli Y9 
gesside!, that Y ou3te do™ many contrarie 
thingis a3ens the name of* Jhesu Naza- 
rene‘. Which thing also Y dide in Jeru-1o 
salem, and Y encloside manye of" the’ 
seyntis in prisoun, whanne Y hadde take 
powere of the princis’’ of preestis. And 
whanne thei weren slayn, Y brou3te the 
sentence. And bi alle synagogis ofte Yu 
punyschide hem, and constreynede to 
blasfeme ; and more Y wex” wood a3ens 
hem, and pursuede in to alien citees. In12 
whiche, the* while Y wente to Damask, 
with power and suffring of princisY of 
preestis, at myddai, in the weie Y say, sir 13 
king, that fro heuene li3t? schynede aboute® 
me, passing the schynyng of the sunne, 
and aboute hem that weren togidir with 
me. And whanne we alle hadden falle14 
doun in to the erthe, Y herde a vois sei- 
ynge to me in Ebrew tunge, Saul, Saul, 
what pursuest thou me? it is hard to 
thee, to kicke ajens the pricke. And Y15 


y Om. r. 
ff demede x. 


X that bifore knewen r. 
€Om.sx. fofs. 


™ holy men o. 2 whanne I took power Fr. 
sOm.sx. ‘twaxer. and pursuede til 
y¥ Om.G pr.m.MsT. %wenteng. 4 for 7. 


s Om. 


vv prince b. 


4 gesse EQgka. ° to do Egk pr.m. 
v Om. acerkmqruxabceghkoag. 
Zaliz3t b. 4 abone a. 


+ blessid at 
thee; that is, 
to be demed 
of thee, that I 
am innocent. 
Lire here. ve. 


XXVI. 16—26. 


16pursuest. But ryse vp, and stond on thi 
feet. Sothli® to this thing I aperide to thee, 
that I ordeyne thee mynistre and witnesse 
of tho thingis that thou hast seyn, and of 
tho in whiche I schal apeere¢ to thee ; 
17delyuerynge® thee fro peplis and folkis®, 
winto" whiche now I sende thee, for! to 
opene the y3en of hem, that thei be con- 
uertid* fro derknessis to 1i3t, and fro power 
of Sathanas to God, that thei take remys- 
cioun of synnes, and sort, ‘or paré™, among 
19seyntis, by feith that is in me. Wherfore, 
thou kyng Agrippa, I was not vubileefful 
20to henenly visioun; but to" hem that ben 
at Damask first, and Jerusalem, and bi al 
the cuntree of Judee, and to hethen men, ‘I 
schewide’, ‘or folde?, that thei schulden do 
penaunce, and be conuertid to God, doynge1 
21 worthi workis of penaunce. Of? this cause 
Jewis temptiden’ me takyn to', whanne I 
was in the temple, willinge" ‘for to’ sle me. 
22 Sothli I holpyn” by the help of God into* 
this day, stondeY, witnessinge to lasse and 
more’; ‘no thing* ‘withoute seyinge? than 
whiche thingis® the prophetis and Moyses 
23spaken ‘for to be’ comynge®, if Crist pas- 
sible’, ‘or able to suffre®, if the firste of 
the a3en rysing of deede men! is) to schew- 
inge* lijt to the peple and! hethen men. 
21‘ Him spekinge™ thes thingis, and 3eldinge" 
resoun, Festus ‘with greet vois seyde°, 
Poul, thou ‘maddist, ‘or weaxist wood? ; 
manye lettris turnen thee to! woodnesse. 
25 And Poul seith', I madde not, thou best 
Festus, but I speke out the wordus of 
26treuthe and* sobrenesse. Sothli and‘ the 
kyng, to whom I speke stedefastly, woot of 
these thingis ; sothlit I deme no’ thing of 
these ‘for to” ‘dare him, o7 vnknowe*. 
Forsoth’ nether in a corner is? 0u3t of these 


e¢ For whi rv. 
htor. 
OQOVX. 


4 tho thenges o. 
iOQm.sx. turned o. | part or. 

qanddov. ¢'Forr.  § asaieden r. 
helpid vy. * tilin too. ¥ and stonde r. 
Om.r. ¢ thing sx. 4 to be sx. that schulen r. 
fis passyble vy. & or able for to suffre r. Om. x. 
m Whanne he spac r. _—® 3eldide rv. 
sandofy. tforalsov. 4% for r. 


e Om. rhk. 
h telle k prim. 


b tho thingis q. 
aghkag, 


40m. b. 


€ appere, etther schewe v. 
m Om. or x. 
t Om. r. 

2 to more o. 


e wickidnes k. derkenessis o. 
1 Om. a pr.m. for a sec.m. 


VOL. IV. 4F 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 585 


seide, Who art thou, Lord? And the 
Lord seide, Y am Jhesus, whom thou 
pursuest. But rise vp, and stoond on thi1s 
feet. For whi to this thing Y apperide to 
thee, that Y ordeyne thee mynystre and 
witnesse of tho thingis that thou hast 
seyn, and of tho> in® whiche Y schal 
schewe to thee. And Y schal delyuere 17 
thee fro puplis aud folkis, to whiche 
now Y sende thee, to opene the izen ofits 
hem, that thei? ben conuertid fro derk- 
nesse® to ]i3t, and fro power of Sathnas 
to God, that thei take remyssioun of 
synnes, and part among seyntis, bi feith 
that is in me. Wherfor, sir kyng is 
Agrippa, Y was not vnbileueful to the 
heuenli visioun; but Y tolde to hem that 20 
been at Damask first, and at Jerusalem, 
and bi al the cuntre of Judee, and to 
hethene men, that thei schulden do pen- 
aunce, and be conuertid to God, and do 
worthi werkis of penaunce. For this21 
cause Jewis token me, whanne Y was in 
the temple, to sle me. But Y was holpun ze 
bi the helpe of God in to this dai, and 
stonde, witnessinge to lesse and to more. 
And Y seye no thing ellis than whiche 
thingis the prophetis and Moises spaken 
that schulen come, if Crist 7s to suffre, 2 
if he is the firste of the’ a3enrising of 
deed men, that schal schewe 113t to the 
puple and to hethene men. Whanne he 24 
spak these thingis, and 3eldide resoun, 
Festus seide with greet vois, Poul, thou 
maddist; many lettris turnen thee to 
woodnesse. And Poul seide, Y maddea2s 
not, thou beste Festus, but. Y speke® out 
the wordis of treuthe and of sobernesse. 
For also the king, to whom Y speke26 
stidfastli, woot of! these thingis; for Y 


fand I schal delynere r. 
n foro. Itelde tor. © Om. 7. P Om. 
wand wolden yr. Ytosx. Om.y. Yam 
a and I seie noo thing ellis yr.» seiyng oner o. 


& pepeles o. 


€ to comynge MPQTY. comen Ss. come VY. to comen X. 
h Om. os. 

® seyde with greet vois . 
Vv that noo r. 
be hidde fro him o, is hed fro hym y. daren hym x. 


kK shewen sx. ! of Nn. 
Vintor. * seide vr. 
x dare hym, or hid fro hym wn. 
Z was ¥. 


{Om.x. Jit x. 
P Om. x. 

W to sx. Om. rv. 
Y Om. o. For r. 


fandtoa. 8 Om. EMQRX 


586 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. XXVI. 27——XXVIL 6. 


27thingis don. Bileuest thou, kyng Agrippa, 
to prophetis? I woot for* thou bilenest. 

28 Sothli Agrippa seide to Poul, ‘In litil thing? 
thou councelist me ‘for to® be maad a cris- 

29ten man. And Poul’, I desyre anentis 
God, and® in litil and in greet, not oonly 
thee, but and alle these that heeren to day, 
forf to be maad suche what manere and I 

30am, out takun thes bondis. And the kyng 
roos vp, and the president, and Bernyce, 

3land thei that saten ny3 to hem. The 
whiche whanne thei wenten awey, spaken 
to gidere, seyinge, For® this man hath not 
don ony thing worthi deeth, or! bondis. 

32Forsoth Agrippa seide to Festus, This 
man my3te be dismittid’, ‘or delyuered', 
if he hadde not apelid to™ Cesar. 


CAP. XXVII. 
1 Sothli as it is* demed hiin for® to 
schippe into Italie, and? thei bitoken Poul 
with othere kept? to a centurioun'’, by 
name Julius, of the cumpanye of kny3tis 
2of the emperour. Sothli we sti3ynge® into 
the’ schip of Adrymetis, and bigynnynge" 
for’ to seyle, baren” vp aboute the placis of 
Asie, ‘lastinge stille with vs Aristark of 
3 Macedonye, Tessalonycense*. Forsoth the** 
day suynge we camen to Sidon; sothhi 
Julius tretyngeY manly, or kurteysly, 
Poule, suffride® for? to go to frendis, and 
4do® the® cure’, ‘or nede4, of hym. And 
whanne ‘we haddun® takun vp fro thennis, 
we vndirsailiden to Cypre, for that wyndis 
sweren contrarie. And‘ the see of Silicie 
and Pamphilie ‘we seilinge’, camen® to 
6Listris, that is Licie. And there centu- 
rioun' fyndinge* a schip of Alisaundre, 
seilinge into Italie, puttide! vs ouer in to 


deme, that no thing of these* is hid fro 

hym ; for nether in a cornere was ou3t of 

these thingis! don. Bileuest thou, king™ 27 

Agrippa, ‘to prophetis"? Y woot that 

thou bileuest. And Agrippa seide to28 

Poul, In litil thing thou counseilist mef to — + that is, sum- 
be maad acristen man. And Poul seide, 29 ne ee 
Y desire anentis God, bothe in litil and pera, “e 
in greet, not oneli thee, but alle these 

that heren to dai, to be maad sich as Y 

am, outakun these boondis. And the30 

kyng roos vp, and the president, and Be- 

ronyce, and thei that saten ni3 to hem. 

And whanne thei wenten awei, thei3i 

spaken togider, and seiden, That this man 

hath not don ony thing worthi deth°, 

nether boondis. And Agrippa seide to32 

Festus, This man mi3t be delyuerid, if he 

hadde not appelid to the emperour. 


CAP. XXVII. 

But as it was demed hym to schippe1 
into Ytalie, thei bitoken Poul with othere? 
kepers to a centurien, bi name Julius, of 
the cumpeny of kny3tis of the emperoure. 
And we wenten vp in to the schip of2 
Adrymetis, and bigunnen to seile, and 
weren borun aboute the placis of Asie, 
while Aristark of Macedonye, Tessalony- 
cence, dwellide stille with vs. And ins 
the?? dai suynge, we camen to Sydon; and 
Julius tretyde curteislid Poul, and’suffride 
to go to frendis, and dot his nedis. And 4 
whanne we remouede fro thennus, we 
vndurseiliden to Cipre, for that wyndis 
weren contrarie. And we seiliden in thes 
see of Silicie and Pamfilie, and camen to 
Listris, that is Licie. And there the cen-6 
turien foond a schip of Alisaundre, seil- 
inge in to Ytalie, and puttide’ vs ouer 
in to it. And whanne in many daies we7 


athaty. >A lytillo. ¢tosrx. Om.r. 4 Poule seyde ov. ebother. fOm.sx. & Om r. 
h That vy. ineither vy.  * delyuered o. 10m. No. m Om. AGNQSTXY. Rwasvy. © Om. sx. 
POm. ny. men kepte c sec.m. kepers N.  ‘'"centuriox.  Sstisideny. tao.  bigunnen r. 
v Om. sx. Wand baren vy. * the while Aristark of Macydonie, Tessalonicense, dwellide stille with vs r. 
xxinthe y. Ytreedide y. 2 suffride hym ns, and suffride 7. ®Om.sx. todo arper. © Om.T. 
cenedeo. 4Om.ox. e¢hehadder. fin x. And wesailedeniny. &Om.ry. 4 and camen r. 
i the centurioun N. centurio x.  foond vy. 1 putten s. and puttide v. putte x. 


kthish. ]1Om.q. ™sirkingk pr.m. ®Om.r. othe deethk. Pothersk. PP Om. a prim. 


4 ether manlik marg. ‘todorgk. % puttynge 1. 


XXVIII. 7—18. 


7it. And whanne many™ dayes we seiliden® 
slowli, and vnnethe camen ajens Gnydum, 
‘the wynd forbedinge® vs, we seiliden to? 
sCreete, bi sydis Salomona. And vnnethe 
we ‘bi sydis seylinge’, camen into sum 
place, that ‘is clepid’ of good hauene, to 
9whom the citee Tessala was ny3. For- 
sothe ‘moche tyme’ passid, and wlhianne 
nowt ‘seylinge was not sykir", for that 
10 fasting passide, Poul coumfortide hem, sei- 
ynge’ to hem, Men, I se for with wrong 
and harm*, not oonly of charge and’ 
schipp, but also of oure soulis’, ‘or dyues*, 
1‘bygynneth seiling> fort to be’. Sothli 
centurioun bileuede more to the gouernour, 
and to the lord of the schipp, than to these 
12thingis® that weren seid of Poul. And 
whanne the hauene was not able for to 
dwelle in wyntir, ful manye ordeyneden 
counceil for? to seile thennis*, if oni ony 
maner thei my3ten come to Fenyce, ford to 
‘wynterne in‘ the hauene! of Crete, bihold- 
\3inge™ to Affryk*, and to Chorum®. Sothli 
‘the south blowynge?, thei gessinge? hem 
for™ to holde purpos, whanne thei hadden 
takun vp fro Asson, seiliden* to Crete. 
14Sothli not aftir moche', the wynd Tiffonyk, 
that is clepid north eest, ‘or wynd of tem- 
15 pest", sente him a3ens it. And whanne the 
schipp was rauyschid, and my3te not en- 
forse into’ the wyud, the” schipp 3ouun to 
16 blowingis, ‘we were borun*. Sothli we’ 
rennynge” into sum yle that is clepid 
Canda, ‘vnnethe my3te* gete a litil boot. 
17°The which? takun vp ‘with helpis, thei 
vseden® girdyng to gidere of4 schipp, 
dredynge® lest thei schulden falle into 
sandy! placis; ‘the vessel’ vndirsent, so 
isthei were borun. Sothli vs' throwun 


m in many £. 
and ry. °'Om.o. 
thanne was not sykir r. 
Z]yues ov. ® Om. orx. 
& Om. sx. 4 fro thennes r. 
m which Fenyce bihooldith rv. 


0 seylynge o. 
8 whanne myehe tyme was r. 
Vv and seide v. 


ijn op. Om. s. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


© for the wynd forbeed, ezther lettid v. 
t Om. rv. 
W that sailing bigynneth to be rv. 
¢ Om. sx. 
3 Om. sx. 
B Affrik, that is, south west v. 


b seylynge, or perile o. 


587 


seilden slowli, and vnnethe camen a3ens 

Guydum'‘, for the winde lettide vs, we 

seiliden to Crete, bisidis Salomona. Ands 

vnnethe we seilden bisidis, and camen 

into a place, that is clepid of good hauen, 

to whom the cite Tessala was ni3. Ando 

whanne miche time was passid, and 

whanne seiling thanne" was not sikir, 

for that fasting* was passid, Poul coum-  * fasting ; this 
fortide hem, and seide to hem, Men, Nida. 
set that seiling bigynneth to be with {0 the tempest 


the schipmen 


wrong and myche harm, not oonli of  baddenooleiser 
to ete, no bnt 


charge’ and’ of the schip, but also of _ litel, for the 


ag : gouernaile of 
oure lyues. But the centurien bilenede 11 the schip; and 


thi 
more to the* gouernour, and to the lord jadden no 
A ee leiser to ete, 
of the schip, thanne to these thingis that iG .cade, 


weren seid of Poul. And whanne the 12 wherfore ee 

hauene was not able to dwelle in wynter, —maad more fe- 
. hle. Lire here. 

ful many ordeyneden counsel to seile fro ve. 

thennus, if onY ony maner thei imizten Tees 

come to Fenyce, to dwelle in wynter at sie. with wrong 

the hauene of Crete, which biholdith to ite 

Affrik?, and to Corum*. And whanne 13 Mitel 

the south blew, thei gessidenb hem to __ beties. Lire 

holde purpos; and whanne thei hadden 

removed fro Asson, thei seiliden to Crete. 

And not aftir miche, the wynde Tifonyk, 14 

that is clepid north eest, was a3ens it. 

And whanne the schip was rauyschid, 15 

and my3te not enforse aj3ens the wynde, 

whanne the schip was 3ouun to the® 

blowynges? of the wynde, we weren 

borun with cours into an ile, that isis 

clepid Canda; and vnethe we mi3ten 

gete a litil boot. And whanne thus was 17 

takun vp, thei vsiden helpis, girdinge 

togidere the schippe; and dredden, lest 

thei schulden falle into sondi® placis. 

And whanne the vessel was vndur set, 


Pintoo. 4 saileden bisidis 
4 was no sikir sayling apr. seylyinge 
xmyche harm rv. Y of F. 
‘dOm. rv. ¢wordeso. f Om. sx. ‘ 
k dwelle in wynter atv. ‘ T hanenes sx. 
© Chorum, that is, north west ¥. 


P whanne sonth blew ry. 4 gessid nN. gessiden vy. Om. sx. thei sailedeny. t myehe tyme x. 
uOm. ox. Yajens vy. Wwe weren borninthey. *Om.y. YOm.sx. 2eameny. 4 and vunethe 
we my3ten yr. > And whanne this was vy. © thei vsiden helpis yr. 4 the acanopestyxy. © and dred- 
den vy. fthesondy ex. & and whanne the vessel was vy. 4 for we weren r. 

t Gwydum EeiKebceghkoa. %Om.k prim. v the eharge ckrxo. W Om. bk. *oure a. Y Om. z. 
ink, 2 or south west c marg. thai is, south west o marg. 8 or north west c marg. that is, north west 
omarg. » assaieden k pr.m. ¢ Om.cxxo. 4 blowynge g8 © sodein E. 


4FQ 


588 DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


with greet! tempest, in. the day suynge 
i9thei maden castyng out. And the thridde 
day with her hondis thei castiden* awey 
2) the! instrumentis of the schipp. Sothely 
nether™ sunue nether sterris apperinge” bi 
mo® dayes, and tempest not litil ‘schewinge 
ny3’, now al the hope of oure heeltle was 
2idon awey. And whanne moche fasting 
hadde be, thanne Poul stondinge’ in the 
myddel of hem, seyde', A’! men, it bihoftet 
‘me herd", for’ to not take awey fro Crete, 
aud make wynne* this wrong and casting 
x2out. And now IJ counceile jou forY to be 
of good ynwitt”, ‘or kerte*; sothli> ‘ther 
schal be® loss of no soule’ of 30u°, out 
23takun of the schipp. Forsothf an aungel 
of God, whos’ I am, and to whom I serue, 
24stood ny3 to me this" ny3t, seyinge’, Poul, 
drede thou not; it bihoueth thee for to 
stonde ny3 to Cesar. And lo! God hath 
jouun to thee alle that ben in schipp! 
25 With thee. For which thing, 3e men, be™ 
of good ynwitt", ‘or herte°®; forsoth? I bi- 
leue to my God, for? so it schal be, as it is 
2oseid to me. Sothli it bihoueth vs for’ to 
But aftirward that 
int fourteneth day the ny3t cam aboue to vs 
seilinge in the stoony" see, aboute mydny3t 
the schipmen supposiden ‘sum regioun, ‘07 
escuntre’, for to appere to hem. The* 
whiche sendingeY doun a plomet, founden? 
twenty pasis* of depnesse. And aftir a 
litil thei departid* thennis, founden? fiftene 
29 pasis*“’, Sothli thei dredinge® lest we 
schulden falle into scharp places, frof the 
laste part of the schipp sendinge® foure 
ancris, desireden' day! ‘for to be*® maad. 
30 Sothli ‘the schippmen sekinge' for™ to fle 
of" the schipp, whanne thei hadden sente 
a litel boot in to the see, vndir colour as 


27come Into’ sum yle. 


K casten sx. 
Tand seide r. 


i strong r. 
4 stood Fr, 
schip fro rv. 


10m. g. 
sO!n, 


m whanne the vr. 
t byhoueth er. 


XXVIII. 19—30. 


so thei weren borun. And for we weren is 
throwun with strong tempest, in the dai 
suynge thei maden casting out. And the 19 
thridde dai with her hoondis thei castiden‘ 
awei the’ instrumentis of the schip. And 20 
whanne the sunne nether the! sterris 
weren seie bi many daies, and tempest 
not a litil neizede’, now al the hope of 
oure helthe was don awei. And whanne2i 
myche fasting hadde be, thanne Poul 
stood in the myddil of hem, and seide, 
A! men, it bihofte, whanne 3e herden 
me, not to haue* take awei the schip fro 
Crete, and gete this wronge and casting 
out. And now Y counsel 30u to be of22 
goad coumfort, for los of no persoone of 
30u schal be, outakun of! the schip. For 23 
an aungel of God, whos Y ain, and to 
whom Y serue, stood ni3 to me in this 
ni3t, and seide, Poul, drede thou not; it 24 
bihoueth thee to stonde bifore the em- 
perour. And lo! God hath 3o0uun to 
thee alle that ben in the schip with thee. 
For which thing, 3e men, be 3e™ of good 25 
coumfort; for Y bileue to my God, that 
so it schal be, as it is seid tome. And 26 
it bihoueth vs to come into sum yle. 
But aftirward" that in the fourtenthe 27 
dai the ni3t cam on vs seilinge in the 
stony see, aboute mydni3t the schipmen 
supposiden suin cuntre to appere to hem. 
And thei kesten® doun a plommet, and 28 
founden twenti pasis ef depnesse. And 
aftir a litil thei weren departid fro then- 
nus, aud foundun fifteueP pasis. And 29 
thei dredden, lest we schulden haue fallun 
in to scharp placis; and fro the last parti 
of the schip thei senten foure ankeris, 
and desiriden that the dai hadde be come. 
And whanne the schipmen sou3ten to fle so 


X appereden ov. © manye NP. 


P neizede r. 
« sothly for to here, and rv. 


v Om. svx. W® the 


* to wylne MPY sec. m, to wyumen ST. y Om. sx. Z coumfort r. a Oni. orx. 
b for whiy. ©Om.r. ¢persooney. © 30uschalbe ry. f Forr. 8 of whom mpr. } in this r. 
iand seide yr. k Om. sx. 1 the schip ox. m beth esx. “coumfort r. ° Om. novx. Pforr. 
Qthaty. © Om.sx. Sino. tin the aemnopesTyxy. south Nn. VOm.ox. ¥ Om.sx. * Om.r. 
ysenten vy, Zand foundeny. @pass, 6 Om. 7. ©¢ partid cupr. departiden x. weren departid fro r. 
4 and founden y. 4d pas sx. e¢dreddenr. fand fro rv. 8 thei senten yr. hand desijreden ry. i that 
the day yr. ¥ tobe sx. were y. 1 whanne the schipmen son3ten yr. ™ Om. sx.” fro r. 
fkesten rk. § Om. xg. 6 Om. cexxbehkof. 1 schewide niz3 x marg. * Om.Rr. |} Om. b pr.m. 
one pr.m.b. ®aftirk prim. © casteden s. kesteden K. ether senten K marg. casten ka. P fifty 1. 
q Om. k. 


XXVIII. 31—42. 


thei schulden bigynne fro the former part 
of the schipp for® to strecche forth the? 
3, ancris, Poul seide to the? centurioun' and 
kny3tis, ‘No but’ these ‘schulen dwellet in 
the schipp, 3e mown not be maad saf. 
32 Thanne kny3tis" kittiden’ awey the cordis 
of the litil boot, and suffriden it for” to 
33 falle fro. And whanne 1i3t bigan for’ to 
be maad, Poul preiede alle men for? to 
take mete, seiynge®, The fourtenthe day 
this day 3e abidinge>, dwellen® fastinge, 
34 no thing takynge’. For which thiuge I 
preie 30u for‘ to take mete, for 3oure helthe; 
for of noon of 30u the heer of the heede’ 
3;schal perische. And whanne he hadde 
seid these thingis, ‘he takinge! breed dide! 
thankingis to God in the si3t of alle men; 
and whanne he hadde brokyn, he bigan 
3; for* to ete. Forsoth alle ‘maad more pa- 
cient!, ‘or herty™, and thei token to” mete. 
3; sothli we weren alle ‘the soulis® in the 
schipp, two hundrid seuenti? and sixe. 
3g And thei fulfillid? with mete, discargeden™ 
the schipp, castinge* whete' in to the see. 
39 Sothli whanne day was maad, thei knewen 
not lond; forsothe® thei biheelden’ sum 
hauene hauynge a water banke, into which 
thei thou;ten, if thei my3ten, for” to caste 
aothe schipp. And whanne thei hadden 
takun vp the ancris, thei bitoken hem to* 
the see, ‘to gidere slakingeY the ioyntours 
of? gouernaylis. And a* litil seil lift® vp, 
vp* blowinge of the wynd thei wenten to 
aithe banke. And whanne we felden into 
a®* place of grauel gon al aboute with the 
see, thei hurtliden’ the schipp. And® the 
formere part ficchid‘, dwellides vnmouable; 
sothli the laste part" was brokyn of 
42Strengthe! of the see. Sothli counceil* of 
the .kny3tis was, for' to sle men in the 


©Om.sx. POm.o. 
v kitten x. W Om. sx. 
ynge y sce.m. 4 and taken no thing r. 
dide r. k Om. sx. 
P and seuenty r. 
castiden r. tthe whete x. 
togidere r. Zand Pp. or @. 
e And whanne r. 
1Om. sx. 


4 Om. sx. ° centurio x. 
Xawey y. » Om. sx. 


4 weren fillid rv. 
¥ sothly osx. 

a with ar. 
f was fiechid +. 


T these men A sec.m. CK pr.m. Roa. 
U ether herte K marg. uu thel a pr.m. 


yOm.bko. 2 hurliden co. 4 into the k pr.m. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


8 But if x. 
z Om. sx. 
€Om.r. f Om. srx. 
lalle weren maad of betere coumfort r. 
' dischargeden wpx. and dischargiden r. 
Vv bileueden 4. 
b liftid x. 


& it dwelled ov. } party o. 


s abidinge 1. 
Vkesten rn. casten h. 


589 


fro the schip, whanne thei hadden sent 
a litil boot in to the see, vndur colour as 
thei schulden bigynne to stretche forth 
the ankeris fro the formere part of the 
schip, Poul seide to the centurien and tos 
the kny3tis, But these™ dwellen in tlie 
schip, 3e moun not be maad saaf. Thanne 32 
kny3tis kittiden awei the cordis of the 
liti] boot, and suffriden it to falle awei. 
And whanne tlie dai was come, Poul33 
preiede alle men to take mete, and seide, 
The fourtenthe dai this dai 3e ‘abiden, 
and* dwellen fastinge, and taken no 
thing. Wherfor Y preie 30u to take mete, 34 
for 50ure helthe ; for of noou of 3ou the 
heer of the heed schal perische. And35 
whanne he hadde seid these thingis, 
Poul took breed, and dide thankyngis' 
to God in the si3t of alle men; and 
whanne he hadde brokun, he bigan to 
eete. And alle weren maad'' of betere 6 
coumfort", and thei token mete. And 37 
wet" weren alle men in the sehip, two 
hundrid seuenti and sexe. And thei weren 3s 
fillid with mete, and dischargiden the 
schip, and castiden’ whete in to the see. 
And whanne the dai was comun, thei3 
knewen no lond; and thei bibelden an 
hauene that hadde a watir bank, in to 
which” thei thou3ten, if thei mi3ten, to 
bringe vp the schip. And whanne thei 40 
hadden take vp the ankeris, thei bitoken 
hem to the see, and slakiden togidir the 
ioyntours of gouernails. And with a 
litil seil lift vp, bi blowyng of the wynde 
thei wenten to the* hank. And whanne 4; 
we feldeu into a place of grauel gon al¥ 
aboute with the see, thei hurtliden? the* 
schip. And whanne the formere part was 
fitchid, it dwellide vnmouable, and the 


u Om. «x. the kny3tus ¢. 
babiden and vy. ¢ dwell- 
&heued o. & Poultook y. iand 
mQOm. rx. %Om.er. Omenr. 
8 castende out s. and 
Xintov. Yand slakiden 
ee the ¥. d hurten s. 
ithe strengthe gs. * the conseyle os. 


t dwellen rv. 
a and seide r. 


w Om. sx. 
€ Om. cr. bi vr. 


tthankis g. thankynge 8, = *t Om. ke pr. m. 


w whiche thing K pr. m. xak. 


590 


keping, lest ony schulde scape™, whanne 

43he hadde swymmed?® out. Forsoth® the? 
centurioun? willinge™ ‘for to’ kepe Poul, 
forbeed' for" to be don. And he comaund- 
ide hem that my3te swymme, for’ to sende 
hem the firste into* the see, and scape, 

asand go out to the lond. And ‘summe othere 
thei barenY in boordis, summe on tho 
thingis that weren of the schipp. And ‘it 
is’ maad, that alle the ‘soulis, or lyuynge 
men, scapiden® to the lond. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


1 And whanne we hadden scapid, thanne 
we knewen that the yle was clepid Miti- 
lene. Sothli barbaris, ‘or hethene men”, 
3auen to vs not litil humanyte, ‘or cur- 

2tesye’. YForsoth ‘a fyer’ kyndlid, thei ‘re- 
fetiden, or* refreischiden, vs alle, for the 

sreyn that cam ny3, and cold.  Sothli 
whanne Poul hadde gederid sum imulti- 
tude of kittingis of vynes, and ynputtf on 
the fyer, an eddre, whanne she cam forth 
4fro the heete, asailide his hond. Therfore 
as barbares sy3en the beest hangynge in 
his hond, thei seiden to gidere, Sothli this 
man is a man quellere; which? whanne® 
he! scapidej fro the see, Goddis veniaunce 
ssuffrith him not for to lyue. And ‘he sothli 
schakinge of! the beest into the fyer, suf- 
6fride! no thing of™ yuel. And thei gess- 
iden ‘him to" be turned"” into® swellinge, 
and sudenly ‘to fallinge?, and ‘for to4 deie. 
Forsothe ‘hem longe abidinge, and seynge* 
no thing of yuel ‘for to be’ don int him, 
thei turnynge" to gidere, seiden’ ‘him for 
7to he* God. Forsothe in tho places weren 
mauieres, ‘or feeldis*, of the prince of the 
yle, Puplius by name, theY which resceyu- 


™ ascape QT. © swommen osx. © But rv. 
wolde Fr. Stosx. Om. x. +t and forbeed r. 
xin ¥ pr.m. y thei baren summe other r. 
b Om. x. ¢ Om, x. 4 whanne a fier was rv. 
i Om. Ky prom. J he hath scaped o. 
mQm.xk. that he schulde r. 
4 to sx. Om. F. 


8D to turnen s. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


P Om. 4MNOPQSXY. 

1 Om. sx. 
2 so it was V. 
e Om. orx. 
k Om. esx. 
Oo in A sec.m. NVY prem. 
r whanne thei abideden longe, and sizen that r. 


XXVII. 43-—XXVIII. 7. 


last part was brokun of strengthe? of the 
see. And counsel of the® kni3tis was, to 42 
sle men that weren in warde, lest ony 
schulde ascape, whanne he hadde swym- 
med out. But the centurien wolde kepe 43 
Poul, and forbede it to be don. And he 
comaundide hem that mi3te swymme, to 
go in to the see, and scape‘, and go out 
to® the loond. And thei baren summe 4s 
othere on boordis, summe on thof thingis 
that weren of the schip. And so it was 
don, that alle men ascapiden to the lond. 


CAP. XXVIII. 


And whanne we hadden ascapid, thanne 1 
we knewen that the ile was clepid Mili- 
tenes. And the hethene men diden to 
vs not litil® curtesie. And whanne a fier2 
was kyndelid, thei refreschiden vs alle, 
for the reyn that cam, and the! coold. But3 
whanne Poul hadde gederid ‘a quantite* of 
kittingis of vines, and leide on the fier, an 
edder sche! cam forth fro the heete, and™ 
took hym bi the hoond. And whanne the 
hethene men of the ile si3jen the beest 
hangynge in his hoond, thei seiden to- 
gidir, For this man™ is a manquellere®; 
and whanne he scapide? fro the see, 
Goddis veniaunce suffrith hym not to 
lyue in erthe. But he schoke’ awei thes 
beest in to the fier, and hadde noon 
harm. And thei gessiden that he schuldes 
be turned ‘in to" swellyng, and falle doun 
sudenli, and die. But whanne thei 
abiden longe, and sien that no thing of 
yuel was don in him, thei turneden hem 
togider, and seiden, that he was God. 
And in tho placis weren maners of the7 
prince of the ile, Puplius bi name, which 
resseyuede vs bi thre daies benygnli, and 


dcenturio x.  wilnynge o. 
vOm. sx. W Om. emoposTyxy sec.m. 
@ men ascapeden v. soulis scapeden x. 

fput nor. andy. 4Om.N. 
1 sothly he schook awey r. ll and suffride rv. 
P to fallen sx. falle doun r. 


Sto be sx. was Vr. t Om. s. 


uturneden hem vy. Vand seideny. whim to be sx. thathe wasy. *Om.x. Y Om. rp. 
» the strenkthe k pr.m. ¢ Om. bgk. @ascape ckabkos. ¢ intor fotherk. & Mytilene x. ba 
litil kxabhko, |} Om. pghk. * Om. gk. J! whanne sche kK sec.m. Om. h. ™ Om. x sec.m. "Om. 


x prom. Oman sleerk. — P ascapide of. 


4 smote R. 


rin A pr. Mm. 


XXVIH. 8—18. 


ynge” vs thre* dayes benygnely, ‘or with 
sgood loue, fond* vs. Sothli it bifel, the! 
fadir of Puplius ‘for to ligge® trauelid with 
feueres and dissenterie, ‘or fia’. To whom 
Poul entride, and whanne he hadde preied, 
and putt the hondis to him, he sauyde 
9him. ‘Which thing? don, alle that in the 
yle hadden sykenessis, camen to, and weren 
iocurid®, ‘or heelid'. Whiche also honowr- 
iden* vs in many worschipis, and ‘to vs 
schippinge, ynputtiden! what thingis weren 
iinecessarie™. Forsoth aftir thre monethis 
we schippiden in a schip of Alisaundre, 
that hadde wyntrid in the yle, to which" 
12 was ‘a noble thing of castels°. And whanne 
we camen to Siracusan, we dwelliden there 
isthre dayes. Fro? thennis we schippinge’ 
aboute,. bicamen™ to Regioum’; and aftir o 
day, ‘the south blowynge', in the secunde 
1sday we camen to Puteolos. Where ‘bre- 
theren foundun", we ben’ preied for” to 
dwelle there anentis hem seuene dayes. 
1sAnd so we camen to Rome. And fro 
thennus, whanne bretheren hadden herd, 
thei runnen to vs til to* the’ cheping’’ of 
Appius, and to” a place that is clepid 
Thre* tauernes. Whom? whanne +Poul 
hadde seyn, he doynge® thankinges to God, 
istoke® trist. Sotheli whan we camen to 
Rome, it isf suffrid to Poul for? to dwelle 
to" him silf, with oo! kni3t kepynge him. 
17Forsothe aftir the thridde day, he clepide 
to gydere* the firste of Jewis!. And whan 
thei camen, he seide to hem, Meu brithe- 
rei, I doynge™ no thing a3ens the puple 
or custom of fadirs, I" bounden at Jeru- 
salem, am°® bitakun in to the hondes of 
is Romayns. Whiche whan thei hadden ax- 
ingeP of me, wolden dismytte me, for? that 


a hi thre rx. 
© to lyn sx. lay v. 
k hononrende o. 


Z resseynede y. resseynen Y. 
© and foond vy. 4 that the rv. 
was y. “heelid o. i Om. ox. 
tiden rv. 


eden r. f we camen K. camen ox. and camen Pr. 
sonth blew vy. ™ whanne we founden britheren rv. 
y¥cleping kK. 27Om.ypr.m. of Thre r. 
text is taken from w. 4dide vy. © and took r. 


1 the Jewes er. ™dide r. 


The k. 8 and k pr.m. and he k sec.m. 
x Om. Eg. Y ether a noble thing K marg. 
tauernes K marg. %hecamk. © askid ao. 


*m puttiden what thingis weren necessarie to vs schippinge rv. 
© an excellent singne of Castorus, whiche hethene men clepiden goddis of the se. v. 


Vv weren /. 
b whiche rv. 
f was V. 


n Om. sx. and Iwas vr. © and was r. 


t weren in k. 
% ether schippiden K marg. 
d thei wolden EkRx sec. m. of. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 591 


foond vs. And it bifel, that the faders 
of Pupplius lai trauelid with fyueris and 
blodi flux. To whom Poul entride, and 
whanne he hadde preied, and* leid his 
hondis on hym, he® helide hym. Ando 
whanne this thing was don, alle that int 
the" ile hadden’ sijknesses, camen, and 
weren heelid. Which also onouriden vs 10 
inY many worschipis, and puttiden what 
thingis weren necessarie to vs, whanne 
we schippiden. And after thre monethis 11 
we schippiden in a schip of Alisaundre, 
that hadde wyntrid in the ile, to which 
was* an excellentY singne of Castours. 
And whanne we camen to Siracusan, we 12 
dwelliden there thre daies. Fro thennus 13 
we seiliden? aboute, and camen to Re- 
gyum; and aftir oo dai, while the south 
blew, in the secounde dai we camen to 
Puteolos. Where whanne we foundenl4 
britheren, we weren preied to dwelle 
there anentis hem seuene daies. And so 
we camen to Romef. And fro thennus 15+ shee is, nys 
whanne britheren hadden herd, thei here. v. 
camen to vs to the cheping of Appius, 
and to the Thre tauernes*. And whanne 16¢ 
Poul hadde seyn hem, he dide thank- 
yngis to God, and took trist. And 
whanne ‘we camen” to Rome, it was 
suffrid to Poul to dwelle bi hym silf, 
with a kni3t_ kepinge him. And after17 
the thridde dai, he clepide togidir the 
worthieste of the Jewis. And wharnne 
thei camen, he seide to hem, Britheren, 
Y dide no thing a3ens the puple ether 
custom of fadris, and Y was boundun 
at Jerusalem, and was bitakum in to the 
hondis of Romayns. And whanne thei 1s 
hadden axid* of me, wolden* haue dely- 


> or with good wille aaup. Om. oex. or good wille tr. 
t either flux of wombe rv. 
‘and puttiden 4. and puttinge Nn. in putten sx. put- 


s§ And whanne this thing 


a the whiche rv. which schip r. 
P And fro o. 4 sayl- 
8 Regium acuosy. the Regyum p. — * while the 
wOm.sx. *Om.G prim. y Om. @. 
t+ Ms. x ends here; in what follows the 

hbiv. taanogsrxy. * him o. 
Paxid ny. a thing y pr.m. so 0. 


¢ Om. s. 


¥ and hadden k. ¥ with eExqrgka. 
& that is, to a place clepid Thre 


u that R. 


592 


19no cause of deeth was in me. But ‘Jewis 
a3enseiynge’, I am! constreyned for! to 
apeele Cesar‘; not as hauynge ony thing 
20 for! to accuse my folk. Therfore for this 
cause I preyede for™ to see 3o0u, and 
speke" to; forsothe for the hope of Yrael 
211 am gyrd aboute with this cheyne. And 
thei seiden to him, Nether we han receyu- 
ed lettres of thee from Judee, nether ony 
of britheren comynge to° schewide, or? 
egspake ony yuel thing’ of thee. Sotheli 
we preyen ‘for’ to here of thee, what 
thingis thou feelist; forwhi of this secte it 
is knownn to vs, for’ euery where it is 
23a3en seid tot it¥. Sotheli whan thei had- 
den ordeyned a day to him, mo” caimen 
to him in to the hoost’, ‘or herbore*. To 
whom’ he expounede, witnessinge the 
kyngdom of God, and counseilede hem of 
Jhesu, of the lawe of Moyses, and? pro- 
24 phetis, fro the moru til to* euentijde. And 
suinme bileneden to thes thingis that 
weren seid of Poul, summe bileueden not. 
25Whan thei weren not consentinge to gy- 
dere, thei departiden, ‘Poul seiynge> oo* 
word, For the Holy Goost spake wel by 
26 Ysaie, the prophet, to oure fadirs, sei- 
yng’, Go thon to this puple, and seie to 
hem, With ere®* 3e shulen here, and 3e 
shulen not vudirstonde; and 3e seeynge 
shulen see, and 3e shulen not biholde. 
27 The herte of this puple is infattid®, and 
with eris thei herden greuousli, and thei 
pressiden to gydere her i3en, lest perauen- 
ture thei seen with i3en, and with erys 
here, and bi herte vndirstonde, and be 
28 conuertid, and I heele hem. Therfore be it 
knowen to jon, for® to hethen men this 
helthe ‘of Godi is sent, and thei shulen 
29here. And whan he hadde seid thes 
thinges, Jewis wenten out fro him, hau- 
ynge* miche questioun}, ‘or seking ™, 
soamong hem silf". Sotheli he dwellide alle 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


XXXVI. 19—30. 


uerid me, for that no cause of deth was 
in me. But for Jewis® ajenseiden, Y 19 
was constreyned to appele to the empe- 
rour; not as hauynge ony thing to accuse 
iny puple. Therfor for this cause Y 20 
preiede to se 30u, and speke to 30n; for? 
for the hope of Israel Y am gird aboute 
with this chayne. And thei seiden to2i 
hym, Nether we han resseyued lettris of : 
thee fro Judee, nether ony of britheren 
comynge schewide, ether spak ony yuel 
thing of thee. But we preyen to here22 
of thee, what thingis thou felist; for of 
this sect it is knowun to vs, that euery- 
where me a3enseith it. And whanne23 
thei hadden ordeined a dai to hym, 
many men camen to hym in to the in. 
To whiche he expownede, witnessinge 
the kyngdom ‘of God4, and counseilide 
hem of Jhesu, of the lawe of Moyses, 
and profetis, for the morewe’ til to’ 
euentid'. And summe bileueden to these 24 
thingis that weren seid of Poul, summe 
bileneden not. And whanne thei weren 25 
not consentinge togidir, thei departiden. 
And Poul seide o word, For the Hooli 
Goost spak wel bi Ysaye, the profete, to 
oure fadris, and seide, Go thou to this 26 
puple, and seie to hem, With eere 3e 
schulen here, and 3e schulen not vndir- 
stonde ; and 3e seynge schulen se, and 3e 
schnlen not biholde. For the herte of27 
this puple is greetli fattid{, and with 
eeris thei herden heuyli, and thei closiden 
togider her iz3en, lest perauenture thei se 
with izen, and with eeris here, and bi 
herte vndurstonde, and be conuertid, and ‘ 

5 stranglith bo- 
Y hele hem. Therfor be it knowun to28 dily ij, so the 
jou, that this helthe of God is sent to anes 8 
hethen men, and thei schulen here. And 29 oho cae 
whanue he hadde seid these thingis, ie in hem 
Jewis wenten out fro hym, and hadden 
myche questioun, e¢hir" musyng, among 


+ for the herte 
of this puple is 
greetly fattid ; 
this is a figura- 
tif speche, for 
as fatnesse ga- 
derid aboute 
the herte, 


goostly lijf. 
Lire here. ve. 


& for Jewis azenseiden r. h was r. iOm. sx. k to Cesar r. 1Om. sx. m Om. sx. 
“spake kK. 9 Om. rr. Peitherr. 4dOm.e. rOm.sx. 8% Om N. forwhy @. that ry. t Om. eNop 
astvxy. UOm.cnr. ‘many men. W herbore o. ostrie x. * Om. ox. in either vr. Y whiche 
Anogsyxy. Zand ofs. tothe r. > whanne Ponle seide v. seiende Powil x. ¢ayn. 4 and seide r. 
feresx. fforthey.  § greetly fattid yr.  bthatr. iOm.s. and haddenr.  ! seking o. 
mQOm. ox. Om. Nn. 

° the Jewis gk. P Om. nr. forsotheb. dOmr * morowtijd Kxa. $% Om.k prim. * the enentide 


KMR. "or Ek. 


XXVIII. 31. DEEDS OF APOSTLES.  .- 593 


two® jeer in his hijrid place; and he re- hem silf. And he dwellide ful twei 3eer 30 
3iceyuede alle that entriden to him, prech- in his hirid place; and he resseyuede alle 
inge? the kyngdom! of God, and tech- that entryden to hyin, and prechide thest 
inge' what* thinges bent of the Lord kingdom of God, and tau3te tho thingis 
Jhesu Crist, ‘with al trist", with outen that ben of the Lord Jhesu Crist, with 
forbeding’. al trist, with out forbedyng. Amen’. 


Here endith the Dedis of Aposths, Here endith” the Deedis ‘of Apostlis*, 
and now bigynneth the epistle of Seynt andy bigynneth a prologe on the pistlis 
James the apostle”. of Cristen feith, that ben seuene in 

ordre’. 


otwey anry. Pandprechide r.. Grewme N. ‘tanzter. § thoy. tthatbeny, Om. o. 
v forbeding. Amen. aNogsry. Amen. For he is Jhesu Crist, the sone of God lyuyng, bi whom al the world 
schal bigynn for to be endid. s marg. sec.m. w From 4. Here endith the book of Apostle Deedis. cr. 
Here enden the Dedis of Apostlis, and bygynneth a prolog on the epistlis of Cristen feith, and the epistlis 
of hem that ben seuene in ordre suynge. N. Here endeth the Dedis of Aposteles, and ‘bygynneth the epistel 
of James the apostel. 0g. Here endith the Decdis of Apostlis, and bigynneth the prologe vpon the smale 
pistles, that is to sete, James, Petir, Joon, and Judas. v. Here eendith the Apostlis Deedis, and bigynneth 
the prologe of the epistle of Jamys. y. No final rubric in wpsx. 


v For he is Jhesu Crist, the sone of lyuynge God, bi whom al the world schal biginne for to be demed 
feendid k] egka. Wendena. *Om.u.  ¥ and here ab. 2 From cuxabo. Heere enden the Dedis 
of Apostlis, and heere biginnith a prologe on the pistlis of Cristen feith, that ben senene in ordre, id est, 
Canonicus. 1. Here enden the Dedis of Apostlis; se now a prolog on the pistlis of Cristen feith, that ben 
seuene in ordre. x. Here enden the Dedis of Apostlis, and here big izynneth the prologe an the pistlis of 
James, Peter, and Joon, and Judas, apostlis, that ben clepid the pisths of Cristene feith, that ben seuene in 
ordre. m. Here enden. the Dedis of Apostlis, and bigynneth a prologe on Cristene feith, that ben seuene in 
ordre, that is, oon of Jamis, two of Petir, thre of Joon, and oon of Jude. a. Heere endith the Dedis of 
Apostlis, and sueth the prologe on the pistle of James. x. Here endith the book of Apostlis Dedis, and 
bigynneth a prologe on seuene pistlis in ordre of Cristen feith of James j., of Petre ij., of John itj., and 
of Jude j.c. Here eendith the Apostlis Deedis, and bigynneth the preloge on the smate pistlis of Cristin 
feith.e. Her endith the Deedis, and bigynneth a prologe on the smale pistilis, on to James, and twene 
to Petre, and thre to Jon, and on to Judais. g. Here endith thé Dedis of Apostlis, and bigynneth a prolog 
on the smale pistles. h. Here eendith the Deedis of Apostlis, and bigynneth the viz. epistlis that ben 
clepid cananysed. k. Here enden the Dedis of Apostlis, and bigynneth a prolog on the epistlis of Cristen 
Feith that ben vij. in ordre, that is, i. of James, twei of Peter, it7. of Joon, and oon of Juda. a, No final 
rubric in AE. 


VOL. IV. 4G 


JAMES. 





[Prologue on the Catholic Epistles*. ] 


Nor the same ordre is at Greekis, that holly sauouren‘, and the rizte feith? 
folewen4, of the seuene epistolis that ben clepid canonysid, as in Latyn bokys. It is 
founden sothly, that Petir is the® firste in noumbre‘ of apostolis’, also his epistolis 
shulden ben first in thes ordre of othere; but as the euangelistis ‘sum tym to the lyne 
of treuthe® now we han correctid, so these epistolis to ther owne ordre, God helpende, 
we han 3olden. The firste sothli of hem is of Jamys, two' of Petir, thre of Jon, 
oen of Jude. The whiche, if as of hem theiJ weren mad‘, so also of! interpretouris, 
or vndoeris, in™ to" Latyn speche thei ‘were turned® treuly, neither doute to men 
redende thei shulde make, neither diuersete of wordes shulde enpugne themself; in 
that? place, nameli??, where in’ the onhed of the Trynyte, in the firste epistil of John 
wee reden' set’, in whichet also wee finden't myche thing to ben errid of vntrewe trans- 
latouris, potende hem ‘the names onli® of thre, of watir, of blod, and of the’ spirit, in 
thilke her making, and leuende the witnesse of the Fadir, and of the Sone, and of the 
Holi Gost, in the whiche most bothe the feith of rijt beleue is strengthid, and oen sub- 
staunce of the Godhed of the Fadir, and Sone’, and* Holi Gost is proued. In othere 
epistolis sothly, hou myche fro oure otheris making discordith, I leue to the prudence 
of the redere. But thou, maiden’ of Crist, Eustache’, whil of me the treuthe of scrip- 
ture* bisili thou enquerist, myn eelde sum what thou potest to the teeth of enuyous 
men to ‘be gnawen>; the whiche pronouncen® me to be a falsere, ‘and a‘ distro3ere, ‘or 
apeirere*, of holi scripturis. But I in such werk neither drede the enuye of myn 
enemys, neither® I will denyen the treuthe of scripture to men askende‘. 


Here endith the prologe, and bygynneth the first epistel of Petirs. 
et 


Here bigynneth a prolog on the pistlis of cristen feith, that ben seuene im ordre’. 


The ordre of the” seuene epistlis, whiche ben clepid canonysid, is not so among the 
Grekis, that fulli saueren the feith, and suwen the ri3t ordre of the® epistlis?, as it is 


a This prologue is from s. No prologue in wpex s a space left in c; of the later text in n and r. 
b Thou3 7. ¢sauerithy. °ccOm.r. ‘weyo. 44 folewithy. ¢€Om. ory. fthe noumbre ory. 
$ the aposteles ovy. &8Om.y. 1 in the singne of treuthe sum tyme y. sumtyme to the lyf of treuthe y. 
itweyne ory. jOm.y. EKymaadovy. lasy. ™soino. =®Om.r. Oturnedeny.  P ilke o. 
thilke y. thulke y. pPPoonly y. dofovy. Treditho, redy y. Sysetteoy. the whiche ory. 
tt fyndeth y. "oonly the names y. YOm.v. W of the Sone vr. the Sone y. * and of the rv. and the y. 
Ymaide ovy. 7 Enstochie vy. scriptures o. the scripture 7. > by gnawe rv. © pronounceth oy. 
dory. ¢Om.o, eno y. faxynge ory. & From o. No final rubric in sry. 


a Here biginnith a prologe on the epistlis of cristen feith, that ben sewene in ordre, that oon of James, 
ij. of Petre, t1. of Joon, and oon of Jude. 8, The prolog of the vit. epistlis. x. Prologus.. Prologe on the 
smale pistlis. c. The prolog. k. No initial rubric in cr1xmgruxa. > Om.b. ¢Om.x pr.m.b. 4 pistlis k. 


My fice JAMES. 595 


foundun in Latyn bokis. For for® as myche as Petre is the firste in the’ ordre of 
the® apostlis, his epistlis ben the firste of hem in ordre; but as we not long sithen 
correctiden the euangelistis to the lijf' of treuthe, so we han set these, thour3 the help 
of God, in her owne ordre. For the firste of hem is ‘an epistles of James, two of 
Petris, thre of Jones, and oon of Jude. The whiche epistlis!, if thei hadden be treuli 
turned™ of the translatouris in to Latyn speche, as thei weren maad of the apostlis, 
thei schulden haue maad ne doute to° the? rederis, ne1 variaunce of wordis schulde 
not haue inpugnid it silf; nameli, in that place in the firste epistle™ of Joon, where 
we reden of the* oonhed of the Trynite, where we fynden that ther hath be greet 
errour of vntrewe translatouris fro the treuthe of the‘ feith, while thei setten in her 
translaciouns oneli the names" of thre thingis, that is, of water, of blood, and of spirit’, 
and leueth” the witnessing of the Fadur, and of the Sone, and of the Spirit*, ‘in 
which witnesing oure comun bileue is most strengthid, and itY is preued, that there 
is oon substaunce of Godhed of the Fadir, and of the Sone, and of the Hooli Spirit. 
But in othere epistlis*? hou myche oure translacioun dyuersith fro otheris, Y leeue to 
the prudence of the rederis. But thou, Goddis maide®, Eustachium, while thou 
enquerist® bisili of me® the treuthe of scripture, thou puttist out myn elde to be gnawe 
off enuyouse mennus teeth, whiche seyn, that Y am an® apeirer® of hooli scripturis. 
But Y! in such a werk drede* not the enuye of myn enemyes, ne! Y schal not™ denye 
to hem, that axen" the treuthe of hooli scripture®. 


Jerom on this pistle seith al this’. 


a 
The epistle of James*. Here bigynneth the pistle of James*. 
CAP. I. CAP. I. 
1 James, the seruaunt of God, and of James, the seruaunt of God, and of1 


oure Lord Jhesu Crist, to the twelue kyn- oure Lord Jhesu Crist, to the twelue 
redis, that ben in scateringe abrood, helthe. _kinredis, that ben in scatering abrood, 
2 My britheren, gesse 3e°, ‘or deme*, alioye, helthe. My britheren, deme 3e al ioye,2 
whan 3e shulen falle in to dinerse tempta- | whanne 3e fallen in to diuerse tempta- 
sciouns, ‘or tribulaciouns4, witynge, that ciouns, witynge, that the preuyng ofs 
the prouyng of 3oure feith werchith pa- 3oure feith worchith pacience; and pa-4 
4cience; sotheli pacience hath® parfijt werk, cience hath a perfit werk, that 3e be 


2 The pistle of James. ep. Jamys epistle. r. Now bigynneth the epistel of Jamys. y. No initial rubric 


in acNogsvx. Qm.agr. © or deme 3e a4NQ. Om. ox. or demeth s. either deme3e 4. 4 Om. ox. 
e hath a ox. 

€ Om. emtab sec. m. e see.m. gka. bin. fOm. tk see.m. €Om.Q. 1 pistlesk. i line a sec. m. 
Nsec.m, weyeo. ka pistle rhk. |! pistles rko. ™ yturneda. "Om. rhko. Oofo. P Om. EaQgn. 
4 ne the cErkmQRuUXabcefghkaf. neithir N. ne no T. t pistle xbhko. 8 Om. K prem t Om. gk. 


“name xo. Y the spirit cekmNeQqrtubcefha. Wleuen Tt. * Holi Goost tr. y Om. gk prm. ‘2 Om. T. 
apistlesh. b6Om.b. ¢maydent. ‘querist tr. €Om.7r. fwithr. 8 Om. ErKNrabeor, ba 
peirer 1Kea. 1Om.bpr.m. k Y dredeb. !neither rv. ™Om.csee.m. ®asken ao. © scripturis hk. 
P Jerom on thes pisths seith al this in his prologe.c. This seith Jerom on these epistlis that folowen. &. 
Heere endith the prologe, and bigynnith the epistle.1. Jerom in his prolog seith al this; se now the pistel 
of James. «x. Jerom in his prolog on these apostlis and epistlis suynge scith this. N. Jerom in his prologe 
on these epistlis seith this. oc. Thus endith the prologe, and bigynneth the pistle. x. Jerom in his prologe 
on these seuene episths, seth al this. x. Here eendith the prologe, and bigyunith the pistil of James. eg. 
This seith Jerom in his prolog on this pistle.h. Jerom on these pistlis seith al this.o. Jerom in his 
prolog on this pistle seith this.a, No final rubric in Tafk. a James. u. No initial rubric in cE1KPQR 
xbeeghoa. 
4G2 


596 


that 3e be parfijt and hool, inf no thing 
sfaylinge’. Forsothe if ony of 3ou nedith 
wisdom, axe he of God, ‘the which! 3iueth 
to alle men largeli, and vpbraydith not; 
eand it shal be 3ouun to him. Sotheli axe 
he* in feith, no! thing doutynge™; forsothe? 
he that doutith, is lijk to a wawe of the 
se, the® which ‘of wijnd? is moued and 
7born aboute’. Therfore gesse not ‘the 
ilke™ man, that he shal take ony thing of 
sthe Lord. A man double of inwit® is 
9vnstable in alle his weyes. Forsothe a 
meke brother gloryet in his enhaunsinge, 
10sotheli a riche man in his mekenesse”; for 
as the’ flour of hay, ‘or grasse*, he shal 
11 passe. Sotheli* the sunne ‘is sprungun vpY 
with brennynge, ‘ov heete*, and driede the 
hay, and the flour of it fel* doun, and the 
fayrnesse of his cheere perischide ; ‘so and? 
12a riche man welewith in his weies. Bles- 
sid zs the man, that suffrith temptacioun; 
for whan he shal be proued, he shal re- 
ceyue the crown of lijf, the which God 
3a3en bihi3te to men louynge him. No 


man whan he is temptid, seie, fort he is” 


temptid of God; sotheli® God is vn- 
tempter’ of yuel thingis, forsothe® he 
Mtemptith no man. Sotheli ech man is 
temptid of his coneitinge, drawuni fro re- 
15 soun, and snaarid*, ‘or deceyued', Thanne™ 
coueityng, whan it hath conceyued, bring- 
ith forth synne; sotheli synne, whan it 
16is fulfillid", gendrith deeth. ‘And so°, my 
moost derworth britheren’, nyle 3e erre. 
17 Ech best ‘thing 3ouun‘, and al parfijt 3ift 
is fro aboue, comynge doun of" the fadir 
of li3tis, anentis whom is not onerchaung- 
inge’, nether schadewing of whileness, ‘or 
is¢yme'. Forsothe" wilfully he gendride vs 
with’ the word of treuthe, that we be sum 
lg bigynnyng of the creature of him. Wite 
3e, my britheren moost loued, be ech man* 


JAMES. 


I. 5—19. 


perfit and hole, and faile in no thing. 
And if ony of 30u nedith wisdom, axe hes 
of God, which 3yueth to alle men largeli, 
un to hym. But axe. he® in feith, and6 * doulith; of 
‘ ‘ 2 Goddis power, 
doute no thing; for he that doutith*, is 
wille. Ifa man 
doutith for his 
moued and borun aboute of wynde®. jet he axe in 
Therfor gesse not the ilke man, that he7 Ynsuficient 
schal take ony thing of the Lord. A8 beering of Be 
et 3 ‘4 axing is no 
man dowble in soule is vnstable in alle 
douting. a meke 
glorie in his enhaunsyng, and a riche 10,82 and 
in his enhauns- 
gras he schal passe. The sunne roos vp 11 ings that schal 
with heete, and driede the gras, and the  thingis. aryche 
man hane glorie 
y a G GANG . the Glose seith 
of his chere perischide; and so a riche here, that this 
man welewith in hise weies. Blessid zs 12's seid in scorn, 


and vpbreidith not; and it schal be 3ou- 
ether of Goddis 
lijk to a wawe of the see, which is 
owne defante, 
maner, the 
lettid for such 
hise weies. And® a meke brother haue9 Grothers that 
man in his lownesse; for as the flour of — ther oppressid. 
be in henenly 
flour of it felde doun, and the fairnesse jn his cownesse; 
and the lettre 


the man, that suffrith temptacioun ; for — suynge acordith 
herto. fur as 
whanne he schal be preued, he schal res- the four of hey, 


eo ° tes that is, hi 
seyue thef coroun of lijf, which God fae min, a 


bihe3teé to men that louen hym. Noiaifie sone 
man whanne he is temptidf, seie, that he + whenne he is 
is temptid of God; for whi God is not a sata eet 
temptere of yuele thingis, for he temptith *¥mmebemrl- 
no man. But ech man is temptid, Dyan a 
drawun and stirid of his owne coueiting. 


but of goode 
. . . thingis oonly, 
Aftirward coueityng, whanne it hath 15as in xsij. ¢*. 


Rive f Oenesis, God 

conseyued, bringith forth synne; but  tonptide Abre- 
ene sh . ham, that his 

synne, whanne it is fillid", gendrith deth. ae 


Therfor, my most dereworthe britheren, 16 schulde be 
maad knowen 
nyle 3e erre. 


Ech good 3ifte, and ech 17 to othere men, 
: - and be 3ouen to 
perfit 3ifte is from aboue, and cometh hem in to en- 
: Cro : lene 
doun fro the fadir of li;tis, anentis jon otun noo 
1 H . man; that is. 
whom is noon other chaungyng, ne OEE iranck nce 
schadewyng of reward’. For wilfulli he 18 do i ae 
: ty a est 3:fies that 
bigat vs bi the! word of treuthe, that we is, good of me- 
° . : rit, that makith 
be a bigynnyng of his creature. Wite 194 man worthi 


~ enerlastinge 
3e, my britheren moost loued, be ech IE. perft sifles 
man swift to here, but™ slow to speke, hat is, good o 


fand faileiny, &€Om.r. baskeg. iwhiche vy. that x. K3e 7. landdoutenoy. ™Om. rv. 
afory. °Om.r. POm.r. Gabouteof wynd ry. ‘that x. ‘willey. thaueglorier. * low- 
nesse ry. YOm.s. W Om. ox. either grasv. * Forv. Yroosv. %Om.ox. either hete v. 4 feldide rv. 
bandsor. ©Om.r. dthatr. ¢forwhir. fnotatempterer. & for 7. bhisoweno. ' and is 
drawen y, kis snarid 7, !1Om.ox, ™ Aftirward y. "fillid yr. © Therfore ry. P Om. s. 4 3ifte 7. 
tfroo. Senychaungyngs. tOm.ox. Forr. Vbir. ¥Om.s. 

baske ao. C3en. Om. gq. the wynd kragk. ¢Om.b. fark. §& hath bihizt a. 4 fulfillid xr. 


i ouer EK sec.m. b pr.m. g pr.m.a. 


kK ether wilinesse K marg. 


1Om. xk prim. M™and kK. 


I. 20——II. 3. 


swift for* to here, forsothe sloweY for? to 
20speke, and slowe to wraththe; sotheli® 
the wrath of man werchith not the ri3t- 
21wisnesse of God. For which thing ‘3e 
castinge” awey al vnclennesse, aud plente 
of malice, in® myldenesse,; ‘or homely- 
nesse*, ‘receyue 3e° the word! insenté, ‘or 
22 oyned", that mai saue 30ure soules. For- 
sothe be 3e doers of the word, and not 
23sherers onely, deceyuynge jou! silf. For 
if ony man is herer ‘of the word*, and not 
doer, this shal be comparsound, ‘or likned', 
to a man biholdinge the cheere of his 
24birthe in a myrour; sotheli™ he biheld" 
him silf, and wente®, and anoon he for3at 
25‘what maner? he was. Forsothe he that 
‘shal parfijtly biholde™ in the lawe of par- 
fijt fredom’, and ‘shal dwellet in it, not 
maad a® for3etful herer, but a¥ doer of 
werk, this shal be blessid in his dede. 
2s Forsothe if ony man gessith” him silf for* 
to be religious, ‘not refreynynge’ his tunge, 
but deceyuynge’ his herte, the religioun of 
27him is veyn. This is a clene religioun, 
and vnwemmyd anentis God and the fadir, 
for? to visite ‘pupilles, that is>, fadirles or 
modirles’, or bothe4, and widewes in her 
tribulacioun, and for® to kepe him silf vn- 
defoulid fro this’ world. 


CAP. I. 
1 My britheren, nyle 3e ‘in accepcioun’, 
‘or takinge, ‘of personys', haue the feith 
2of oure Lord Jhesu Crist of glorie’. For- 
sothe! if ‘ther shal entre in -to 3oure 
couent™, ‘or gedering® ‘to gydere°, a man 
hauynge a? golden? ryng, in whijt, ‘or 
Jayr’, cloth’, forsothe and" a pore iman 
‘shal entre’ in“ foul* habite, ‘or cloothy, 
3and? 3e biholde in to him that is clothid* 


Y slow, either slac vy. % Om. sx. 


f Om. o. 


x Om, sx. 
€ resceyneth ox. 
lor licnessid nN. Om. QX. ™ forsothe o. for v. 
manermanery. 4Q0Om. Fr. ° biholdith r. 
NosvX. Wgesse QT. * Om. sx. 
€ modirles children Q. 4 bothe N. Om. og. 
k glorie in accepcioun, either taking, of persones r. 
P Om. Tr. q gold s. 8 Om. ox. 


uOm.Q. andif ry. VYentrith yr. * into 7. 


5 ether prentid K marg. 
uhauynge k. V elene k. 


oz0ur E. P he this 1. 
Ww Om. k pr.m. 


JAMES. 


a for rv. 
& in sette osx. plauntid r. 

4 biholdyng 7. 
s freedom perfitly rv. 
y and refreyneth not rv. 
e Om. osx. 
1 For r. 
t cloth, entrith in to 30ure couent, eithir gadering togidere v. 
X a fowl 4Q. 


4 into R. 


597 


of man worchith not the rijtwisnesse of 

God. For which thing caste 3e awei al2i 
vnclennesse, and plentee of malice, and 

in myldenesse resseyue 3e the word that 

is plauntid", that may saue 3oure soulis. 

But be 3e doeris of the word, and not22 

hereris oueli, disseiuynge 30u° silf. For 23 

if ony man is au herere of the word, and 

not a doere, this? schal be licned to a 

man that biholdith the cheer of his birthe 

in a mirour ; for he bihelde hym silf, and 24 

wente awei, and anoon he for3at which 

he was. But he that biholdith in425 

the lawe of perfit fredom, aud dwellith 

in it, and is not maad a for3etful herere, 

but a doere of werk, this’ schal be blessid 

in his dede. And if ony man gessith 26 

hym silf to be religiouse*, and refreyneth 

not his tunge, but disseyueth his herte, and perfit Cris- 
the religioun of him is veyn. A clene27 be tate 


*® religiouse ; 
that is, a veri 


Ae . Jedith not to 
5 
religioun, and an‘ vnwemmed anentis God jie onde. Lire 
and the fadir, is this, to visite fadirlest ere ve 
7 é panic + that is, to vse 
and modirles children, and widewis in fara an 
° . a WePrkKIs 0} mersy 
her tribulacioun, and tot kepe hym silf  anentis thi 


nei3bore, and 
werkis of clen- 
nesse ajens 
himself. Lire 
here. v. 


vndefoulid fro this world. 


CARI. 


Mi britheren, nyle 3e haue the feith of1 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist of glorie, in accep- 
cioun of persoones. For if a man ‘that2 
hath" a goldun ring, and in a feire cloth- 
ing, cometh in 3oure cumpany, and a 
pore man entrith'in a foul clothing, and3 
if 3e biholden in to hym that is clothid 
with clere’ clothing, and if” 3e seie to 
hym, Sitte thou here wel; but to the 


beaste3e vr. Candin ry. 4 Om. oerx. 
h Om. oerx. f3our cery sec.m. * Om. x. 
° wente awey ¥. P what kynes o. what 
tdwellith ry. u%Om.s. Y Om. 
zdisseyneth yr. 20m. sx. > Om. o. 
ftheo. ¢ Om. r. Om. ogrx. iOm. rv. 
mOm rv. %Om. erx. © Om. oerx. 
4 clad sx. 


y Om. ox. Zand if vy. 


the this1. s Om. 5ceg. ¢ Om. k pr.m. 


598 


with ful cleer clooth, and if 3e shulen4 seie 
to him, Thou sitte heere wel; sotheli to 
the pore man 3e® seie, Stonde thou there, 
aor sitte vndir the stool of my feet; wher 
je deme not anentis 3o0u® silf, and ben 
5maad domesmen of wickid" thou3tis? Here 
3e, my moost dereworthe' britheren, wher 
God chees not pore men in this world, 
riche‘ in feith, and eyris of the kyngdom, 
that God ‘bihi3te a3en! to men louynge 
shim? Forsothe 3e han despisid the pore 
man. Wher riche men oppresen not 30u 
bi power, and™ drawen 30u to domys ? 
z Wher thei blasfeme not the" good name, 
s that is inclepid on® 3ou? Netheles if 3e per- 
formen the kynges lawe, vp? scriptures’, 
Thou shalt loue thi nei3ebore as thi silf, 
93e don wel. Sotheli if 3e taken persones, 
3e werchen synne, 3e" ben’ reproued of 
10 the lawe, as trespassoures'. Forsothe who 
euer ‘shal kepe" al the lawe, sotheli’ of- 
fende* in oon, he is maad gylty of alle. 
11For he that seide, Thou shalt not do 
leccherie, seide and*, Thou shalt not sle ; 
that if thou ‘shalt not doY leccherie, but 
thou? sleest, thou art maad trespassour? of 
12the lawe. Thus speke 3e, and thus do 3e, 
as bigynnynge for’ to be demyd bi lawe¢ 
130f parfijt? fredom. Sotheli® doom with 
outen mersy tof him that doith not® mersy ; 
14forsothe mersy aboue reisith doom. Mi 
britheren, what shal it profite, if" ony 
man seie! him for* to haue feith, werkes! 
forsothe™ he" haue® not?? wher feith shal 
1smowe saue him? Forsothe if a4 brother 
or systir be nakid, and han nede of eche 
ieday™ lijflode, forsothe ony*® of 30u seie to 
hem, Go 3e* in pees, be 3e maad hoot, and 
be 3e fulfillid"; sotheli if 3e ‘shulen not 
3iueY to hem what" thinges ben* necessarie 
of¥ body, what shal it profite ‘to 30u*? 


JAMES. 


Il. 4—16. 


pore man 3e seien, Stonde thou there, 
ethir sitte vndur the stool of my feet; 
whether 3e demen not anentis 30u* silf, 4 
and ben maad domesmen of wickid 
thou3tis ? Heere 3e, my moost dere-s 
worthe britheren, whethir God chees not 
pore men in this world, riche in feith, 
and eiris of the kyngdom, that God bi- 
hiz3te to men that louen him? But 3e6 
han dispisid the pore man. Whether 


riche men oppressen not 30u bi power, 
and thei drawen 30u to domes? Whether? 
thei blasfemen not the good name, that ; 
: ® ¥ * he is maad 
is clepid to help on 30u? Netheles if 3e8 silty of gee 
ae *, . i as to payne o 
performen the kingis lawe, bi scripturis, harm, either 
Thou schalt lone thi neizbour as thi silf, peri a 
‘ ing of Goddis 
3e don wel. But if 3e taken persones, 3e9 cist, but he 
worchen synne, and ben repreued of the  setith tee! 
é peyne of wit, 
lawe, as trespasseris. AndY who euere 10 either of feel- 
. : q ing. that doth 
kepith al the lawe, but offendith in oon, rhe Gitathoal 
he is maad gilti of? alle*. For he that 11 509,that this is 
seide, Thou schalt do no letcherie, seide ‘he peyneof 
; harm, the lettre 
also, Thou schalt not sle; that if thou pee ay 
2 ‘ ynge, whanne 
doist not? letcherie, but thou sleest, thou itis seid, for 
he that sei 
art maad trespassour of the lawe. Thus 12 phon esnd not 
speke 3e, and thus do 3e, as bigynnynge eae 
to be demyd bi the lawe of¢ fredom. For ee i 
e . o. 0a > an 
whi dom with out merci zs to hym, that _ therfore he is 
ith ane 6 eee offendid, for 
doith no mercy; but merci aboue reisith the breking of 
dom. Mi britheren, what schal it pro-140™ “7 "7: 
fite, if ony man seie that he hath feith, sca! see; 

6 phos LE 
bnt he hath not the’ werkis ? whether _ seie resonably 
, : in reprenin 
feith schal mowe saue hym? And if aishim that be 

SPO, : leeneth 
brother ethir® sister be nakid, and han eye 
sige * werkis saneth. 
nede of ech daies lyuelode, and if ony ofi6 jo ‘yeith 


30u seie to hem, Go 3e in pees, be 3e maad hae Sues 

hoot, and be 3e fillid; but if 3e 3yuen me thi feith 

not to hem tho thingis that ben neces- Nite | 

sarie to bodi‘, what schal it profite? So17 Ce Tee 
for I hane 


also feith, if it hath not" werkis, is deed abauie) 
Bae : f werkis. Lire 
in it silf. But summan schal seie+, Thou 18 «ve. ve. 


¢QOm.s. 90m.r. ¢thous sup.ras. fethir vy. & 30ure cory. 4 wicke sx. i derworthest o. 
Kand riche o. ! azen byhigzto. “and thei anogsyvx. tot. CofNn. Pbiv. scripture rv. 
Tandy. §&Om.a«Nosx. ttransgressoureso. "kepith y. forsoth o. but y. ¥ offende he wn. 
xOm.T. Ydostnotr. %2QOm.s. 4 atrespassourg. > Om.sx. ‘¢thelawes. 40m. r. 
e For whir. fistonr. &noory, hOm.s. iOm.s. £Om.sx. !1Om.r. ™butr. ® Om.r. 
hath oy. Pnot werkisy. 4Om.o. ‘daiesnex. Sifenyr. tOm.n. 4 fillid y. ¥ 3euen not r. 
wthor. *thatbeny. Ytor. 270m. r. tohem x. 

xzourE. YOm.gk prom. Zink. ®nogb. Pazensk. ¢of perfiter. 4Om.Q. or ER. 
f the bodi 1gk. here bodir. &hauergk. noa. 


Il, 17——IIl. 5. 


17So and feith, if it haue* not werkes, is 
isdeed in it silf. But sum man shal seie, 
Thou hast feith, and I haue werkes; 
shewe thou to> me thi feith with outen 
werkes, and J shal shewe to thee my feith 
190f werkis. Thou bileuest, fore oo God is; 
thou doist wel; and deuels bileuen, and 
20togydere tremblen. Forsothe’ wolt thou 
wite, thou veyn® man, for‘ feith with outen 
2iwerkes is ydel? Abraham®, oure fadir, 
wher" he was not iustified of werkis, of- 
fringe Ysaac, his sone, on the auter? 
22 Therfore! thou seest, for* feith wrou3te 
with his! werkis, and his feith is™ fulfillid® 
230f werkis. And the scripture is® fulfillid?, 
seiynge, Abraham bileuede to God, and it 
isd rettid‘ to him to ri3twisnesse, and he is* 
24clepid the frend of God. 3e seen fort a 
man is iustified of werkis, and not of feith 
2,onely. Also" forsothe andy Raab, hoore, 
‘wher she” was not iystifyed of werkis, 
receyuynge* the messageres, and’ bi an 
other weie ‘doynge out?, ‘or sendinge out*? 
26 Forsothe® as a° body with oute spirit is 
deed, so and feith with oute werkis is deed. 


Crear. TET. 


1 My britheren, nyle 3e4 be maad many 
maystirs, witynge for® 3e taken the more 
2doom. Sotheli® alle" we offenden in many 
thingis. If ony man offendith not in 
word, this is a parfijt man; forsothei 
he mai ‘with a bridel* lede aboute al the 
3body!. Forsothe if we putten to horsis™ 
bridles in® to mouthis, for® to consente to 
vs, and we berenP ‘ther with’ aboute al 
4the body of hem. And* lo*! shippes, 
whan thei ben greete, and ben dryuen of 
stronge wijudis, sotheli thei ben born 
aboute of a litel gouernayle, where the biret 
sof a" man dressinge shal’ wole. ‘So and” 
the tunge sotheli* is a litel membre, and 


JAMES. 


599 


hast feith, and Y haue werkis; schewe 
thou to me thi feith with out werkis, 
and Y schal schewe to thee my feith of 
werkis. Thou bileuest, that o God is;19 
thou doist wel; and deuelis bileuen, and 
tremblen. But wolt thou wite, thou 20 
veyn man, that feith with out werkis is 
idul? Whether! Abraham, oure fadir,21 
was not iustified of werkis, offringe Ysaac, 
his sone, on the auter? Therfor thou22 
seest, that feith wrou3te with hise werkis, 
and his feith was fillid of werkis. Andes 
the scripture was fillid, selynge, Abraham 
bileuede to God, and it was arettid to 
hym to rijtwisnesse, and he was clepid 
the freend of God. 3e seen that a man24 
is iustified of werkis, and not of feith 
oneli. In lijk maner, and* whether also 25 
Raab, the hoore, was not iustified of 
werkis, and resseyuede the! messangeris, 
and sente hem" out bi anothir weie? For 26 
as the bodi with out spirit is deed, so also 
feith with out werkis is deed. 


CAP. ITI. 


Mi britheren, nyle 3e be maad many1 
maistris, witynge that 3e taken the more 
doom*. For alle we offenden in manye 
thingis. If ony man offendith not in 
word, this is a perfit man; for also he 
may lede aboute al the bodi with a 
bridil. For if we putten bridlis ‘in to"s 
horsis® mouthis, for to consente to vs, 
and we leden aboute al the bodi of hem. 
And lo! schippis, whanne thei ben grete, 4 
and ben dryuun of stronge? wyndis, 3it 
thei ben borun about of a litil gouernaile, 
where the meuyng of the gouernour wole. 
So also the tunge is but a litil membre, 5 
and reisith grete thingist. Lo! hou litil 


ahathy. bOm.r. C¢thator. 4d Buty. ¢idil nw. fthatv. & Wher Abraham r. 4 Om. r. 
i Forsothe 0. Kthaty. 1Om.7. ™wasy. Ofillidy. Owasy. Pfillidy. Gdwasy. © yrettid 9. 
arettid vy, Swasvy, tthat vy. %Inlyk maner vy. Ywherandy. WOm.r, * she resseyuyny ANQ. 
and resseynede vy. Yand sent outy. 2 Om.yr. sendende out x. ® Om. ox. or sendendes. » For r. 
¢the nogsx. Om.y. ¢thatyr. fOm.x. g§ Fory. band tr. iforalsor. kOm.r. ! body 
with a brydel ry. ™horssx. 0 Om. x. © Om. sx. Pledeny. 40m. snogsyx. "Om. N. $808. 
* birth 4. bire, or meuyng N. tOm. x. YOm. ov. WAndsorv. * Om. rv. 


?Wherer, *Om.r. 1Om.a. ™Om.k prom. ink pr.m.toR. hors). P grete 1. 


* dom; that is, 
dampnacioun. 
This is seid 
a3ens presump- 
tuous maistres, 
that techen that 
that they kun- 
nen not, and 
maken many 
men for to erre, 
and bi this they 
getteo many- 
Yoold dampna- 
cioun. Lire 
here. ve. 


tT reisith grete 
thingis ; that 
is, stirith greete 
yuels, hou 
myche fijer ; 
that is, how 
hitil fijer. oure 
yuel tunge is 
Jijer, kyndling 
stryues and de- 
batis and other 
yuelis. ve. the 
vniuersite of 
wickidnesse ; 
that is, an ynuel 
tunge is the 
vniuersite of 
wickidnesse. v. 
enflawmed of 
helle; that is, 
of the deuel, 
which is asingn- 
ed to helle. 
enflawmeth the 
wheel of oure 
birthe; that is, 
the cours of 
oure lijf, which 
is licned to a 
wheel, that by- 
gynnith and 
endith in the 
same poynt; so 
a man is born 
vumy3ty and 
vnkunnyng ; 
and if hé dizeth 
kindely, he goth 
ajen to the 
same staat bi 
comun cours. 
Lire here. ve. 


600 JAMES. 


reysith greete thinges. Lo! hou miche 
6fijr kyndlithY hou greete a? wode. And 
oure tunge is fijr, the vniuersite® of wickid- 
nesse. The tunge is ordeyned in oure 
membris, the? which defoulith al the body; 
aud it® enflaumed, ‘or set afijre, of helle, 
enflaumeth® the wheel of oure birthe. 
7Sotheli al the* kynde of beestis, and" 
foulis, and! serpentis, and‘ of othere, ‘ben 
onercomel, ‘or vadir30kid™, and ben" maad 
8taame, of mannus® kynde; forsothe? noon 
of men mai daunte4, ‘or chastise’, the 
tunge, sotheliS it is an vnquyet, ‘or vn- 
pesible, yuelt thing", and ful of deedly 
9venym. In it we blessen God, the fadir, 
and in it we cursen imen, that ben maad to 
10 the licnesse of God. Of the same mouth 
cometh forth blessyng and’ cursyng. My 
britheren, it bihoueth not thes thinges for 
11to be maad so. Wher* a welle of the 
saame hole bringeY forth swete and salt 
12 watir? My britheren, wher* a fijge tree 
mai make grapes, or a vijne fyges? So 
nether salt watir mai make swete watir. 
13 Who és wijse, and disciplined’, ‘or chas- 
tisyd*, among 30u? shewe he of good 
lyuynge his werk>, in myldenesse of wis- 
dom’. That if 3e han bittir zeel4, ‘or 
enny’, and striuynges‘ ben in joure hertis, 
nyle 3e glorye’, and be lizers a3ens the 
istreuthe. Forsothe! this wisdom ist not 
fro! aboue comynge doun, but ertheli, 
16 beestly™, fendli®. For wher is enuye and 
strijf, there® vnstedefastnesse and al? 
17shrewid werk. Forsothe wisdom that is 
fro aboue, first sotheli it is chaast, aftir- 
ward pesible, mylde, suadible, that ts, esy 
Jor' to treete, ‘and to" ‘be treetid’, conseut- 
ynge to goode thingis, ful of mersy and 
goode fruytis, demynge with oute feyn- 
isynge. Sotheli the fruytes of ri3twisnesse 
ben‘ sowun in pees, to men makinge pees. 


WI. 6—18. 


fier brenneth a ful greet wode. And oureé 

tunge is fier, the vniuersite of wickid- 

nesse. The tunge is ordeyned in oure 

membris, which defoulith al the bodi; 

and it is enflawmed of helle, and en- 

flawimeth‘ the wheel of oure birthe. And7 

a] the kynde of beestis, and of foulis, and 

of serpentis, and of othere is chastisid, 

and tho ben maad tame of mannus kinde; 

but uo man mniai chastise the tunge, fors 

it is an vnpesible yuel, and ful of deedli 

venym*, In it we blessen God, the fadir,9 * fut of dedly 
and in it we cursen men, that ben maad echintee o 
to the licnesse of God. Of the same1o®Pacbitere 
mouth passith forth blessing aud cursing. Saree: he 
My britheren, it bihoueth not that these — yuel fame, and 
thingis be don so. Whether a welle of 11 it heerith uae 
the same hoole bringith forth" swete ae 
and salt watir? My britheren, whether 127@ ve. 

a fige tre may make grapis, ethir a vyne 

figus? So nethir salt watir mai make 

swete watir. Who 7s wijs, and tau3tI3 

among 30u? schewe he of good lyuyng 

his worching, in myldenesse of his wis- 

dom. That if 3e han bitter enuye, and 14 
stryuyngis ben in 3oure hertis, nyle 3e 

haue glorye, and be lyeris a3ens the 

treuthe. For this wisdom is not frois 

aboue comynge doun, but ertheli, ands 

beesth, and feendli. For where is enuye 16 

and strijf, there 7s vnstidfastnesse and al 

schrewid werk. But wisdom that is17 

from aboue, first it is chast, aftirward 

pesible', mylde, able to be counseilid, con- 

sentinge to goode thingis, ful of merci 

and of goode fruytis, demynge with out 

feynyng. And the fruyt" of riztwis-is 

nesse is sowun in pees, to men that 

maken pees. 


y kyndlith, or brenneth n. % Om. aNogsvx. 4 vniuersite, or al gcderinge togidere G sec.m. » Om. V. 
citisy. ¢Om.x. ¢andenflawmeth vy. ffyreo. 8 Om.s. or G@pr.m. prt. and of y. iand of r. 
k Om. tr. 1 is chastisid y. ™ Om. oorx. "tho beny. mans. Pbuty. chastise or. Om. 
ovx. Sfor.v, tOm.o. yuel ox. %Om.r. Yorn. *Om.sx. * Whether ens. Y bringith osr. 
* tau3t ¥. a Om. oex. b worching r. chis wisdom vy. ‘enuyo. ¢Om.ox.  £striues s. 
strengthis r. &haue gloriey. bOm. wos. iForr. kKitist. !1Om.n. ™and beestly y. ® and 
feendly vy. ©thereisor. POm.g. 9Om.sx. ' and ansv. and for to ct. oro, Om.g. § Om. ¢. 
Cis rr. 


4brennethe * Om. K prem. * Om, rk. 


tit is pesible 1. 


u fruytis a pr.m. cabcehk sec. m. 


IV. I—13. 


GaP. DV. 


1 ‘Wherof" bateyles and ‘cheestes, o7* 
chidinges, among 301? Wher” not of 
30ure coueytisis*, that fizten in 3oure mem- 
2bris? 3e coueyten, and je han not; 3eY 
sleen, and? han ennye, and 3e mowen 
not gete. 3e chijden, and maken bateyl; 
and 3e han not, for ‘which thing 3e han 
snot axid?, 3e axen>, and 3e receynen not; 
for that 3e axen® yuel, as° in 3oure coneyt- 
aise’ ‘3e shewen®. Auoutrerers‘, witen not 
3e, for’ the frendschip of this world is 
enemy" to God? Therfore who ever shal! 
wole for* to! be freend of this world, is 
sordeyned the™ enemy of® God. Wher 
‘weenen 3e°, that veynlyP? the scripture 
seitht, The spirit that dwellith in 3o0u, 
écoueytith to enuye? Forsothe he 3iuetl 
more grace; for which thing he seith, 
God withstondith™ proude men, forsothe® 
7to meke men he 3iueth grace. Therfore be 
3e suget to God; forsothe' withstonde 3e 
sthe deuel, and he shal flee fro 30u. Neize 
3e to God, and he shal neize to 300. 3e 
synners,:clense" the’ hondes”, and 3e dou- 
ble of inwit*, ‘or wille’, purge” the hertes*. 
9 Be 3e wrecches” ‘in 30ure owne 23en°, and 
‘weyle 3e", ‘and wepe 3e°; 3oure leiz3ing be 
itf turned in to wepyng, and 3oure® ioye 
loin to sorewe of herte. Be 3e mekid in the 
sizt of the Lord, and he shal enhaunse 3ou. 
11 Mi britheren, nyle 3e bakbite ech other. 
He that bakbitith his brothir, or’ that 
demeth his brother, bakbitith the lawe, 
and* demeth the lawe. Forsothe if thou 
demest the lawe, thou art not doer of the 
vzlawe, but domesman. Sotheli oon is 
speker!, ‘or maker™, of the lawe, and inge, 
isthat mai leese, and delyuere. J*orsothe 


uw Therof o. Wherof ben ry. ¥% Om. ox. 
Zand 3e alii, 8 3e axen not worthily rv. 
eOm.v. f Auouteeris svx.  & that rv. 
Stoo. 3egessenv. P Om. F. 
je or. clenseth esx. Vv Om.o. 
2 purgeth osx. &hondis x. > wrecchide a. 
ANOSVX. f Om. anogsrx. £ Om. anogsrx. 
m Om. oor x. 


Y or chidingis c sec.m. chidingis ro. 
btoo. ¢ Om. gk pr.m. 


VOL. IV. 45 


w Whether a ef s pass. x. 

b asken Q. 
h enme Tr. 
4 seith veynly r. 

w hondis, that is, werkis v. hertis x. 

¢ Om. 4Qrvx. in 30ure eizen G. 

h either rv. 


w for that 1. * asken ao. 


4 the crixvabeek pr. m. oa8. 5¢ the mM. 


JAMES. 601 


CAR aly. 


Wherof ben batelis and cheestis” among 1 
jou? Whether not of jo0ure coueitisis, 
that fizten in 3joure membris ? 3e coueit- 2 
en, and 3e han not; 3e sleen, and 3e han 
enuye, and 3e moun not gete. 3e chiden, 
and maken batel; and 3e han not, for™ 3e 
axenX not. 3e axen*, and 3e resseyuen3 
not; for that 3e axen* yuele, as 3e schewen 
opynli in 3o0ure coueitisis. Auowtreris, 4 
witen not 3e, that the frenschip of this 
world is enemye to God? Therfor who 
enere’ wole be frend? of this world, is 
maad the® enemye of® God. Whether 3e5 
gessen, that the scripture seith veynli, 
The spirit that dwellith in 3ou, coneitith 
to enuye? But he 3yueth the mores 
grace; for which thing he seith, God 
withstondith proude men, but® to meke 
men he 3yueth grace. Therfor be 3e7 
suget to God; but withstonde:3e the 
detiel, and he schal fle fro 3ou. Neize 3e8 
to God, and he schal neize to 3ou. 3e 
synueris, clense 3e" hondis, and 3e double 
in soule*, purge 3e the hertis. Be 3e9 
wretchis, and weile 3e; 3oure leizyng be 
turned in to weping, and ioye in to so- 
rewe of herte. Be 3e mekid in the si3t10 
of the Lord, and he schal enhaunse 3ou. 
My britheren, nyle 3e bacbite ech othere.11 
He that bachitith his brothir, ethir that 
demeth his brothir, bacbitith the lawe, 
and demeth the lawe. And if thou 
demest the lawe, thou art not a doere of 
the lawe, but a domesman. But oon is 12 
makere of the lawe, and iuge, that may 
lese, and delyuere. And who art thou, is 
that demest thi nei3bore? Lo! now 3e, 
that seien, To dai ethir to morewe we 


x coneitise ry. Yand 3e F. 

¢ that 3e take fnlly r. 4 coueitisis anogsr x. 
iOm.r. kOm.srx. 1Om.r. ™Om. No. 
rwith stant sx. Sbutrv. tbut vr. clense 
x wille rv. y Om. ooFx. 
d weileith s. © Om. 


1 Om. or. k or NQ. I makere Fr. 


y that k. 


% the frend k. @ Om. xo. 
€ sonlis a. “ 


602 


who art thou, that demest thi neizebore ? 
Lo! now 3e that seien, To day or to 
moru" we shulen go in to ‘the ilke® citee, 
and there sotlicli we shulen make? a jeer, 
and we shulen make marchaundise, and 
14we shulen make wynnyng; ‘the whiche! 
witen not, what is to 30u in the morewe. 
15 Forsothe™ what is 3oure lijf? A vapour’, 
‘or smoke*, to" a litel semynge’, and after- 
ward it shal be waastid. Therfore that 
je seie, If the Lord shal” wole, and if we 
shulen lyue, we shulen do this thing* or 
isthat thingy. Now forsothe 3e gladen? in 
3oure pridis; euery sich ioying is wickid*. 
17 Therfore to” ‘a man® kunnynge? for® tof do 
good, and ‘not doynge®, ‘synne is to him®. 


CAP V 
1 Do! now, 5e* riche men, ‘wepe 3e', 3o0ul- 
yuge™ in 3oure’ wrecchidnessis® that 
zshulen come to jou. 3oure richesses ben 
maad roten, and 3oure clothes ben eten of 
smou3tis®. 3oure gold and‘ siluer hath 
rustid, and rust of hem shal be to 3ou in" 
to witnessing, and shal ete 3oure flesches*, 
as fijr. 3e han tressourid to 30u wrath in 
athe laste dayes. Lo! the hijre of 3oure 
werkmen, that repiden 3oure cuntrees, 
thatt is fraudid® of 3ou, crieth; and the 
cry of hem entride in to the erys of the 
5 Lord of hoostis. 3e han ete on the erthe, 
and in 3oure” leccheries 3e han nurchid 
63oure hertes. In” the day of sleynge 3e 
‘ledden to*, and slewen the iust man, and 
z7he ‘ajenstode not 3ouy. Therfore, bri- 
theren, be 3e pacient, til to the comyng of 
the Lord. Lo! an erthe tilyer abijdith? 
precious® fruyt of the erthe, paciently suf- 
fringe, til he receyue tymeful and lateful?. 
8 And be 3e pacient, and conferme® 3e% 30ure 


JAMES. 


IV. 14—V. 8. 


schulen go in to thilke citee, and there we 
schulen dwelle a 3eer, and we schulen 
make marchaundise, and we _ schulen 
make wynning ; whiche witen not, what 14 
is to 30u in the morewe. For what is15 
soure lijf? Af smoke apperinge at a% 
litil", andi aftirward it schal be wastid. 
Therfor that 3e seie, If the Lord wole, 
and if we linen, we schulen do this 
thing, ether that thing. And now 3e16 
maken ful out ioye in 3oure pridis; 
euery siche ioye* is wickyd. Therfor it 17 
is syune to hym, that kan do good, and 
doith not. 


CA Pra. 

Do! now, 3e riche men, wepe 3e, jellinge |! 
in 3oure wretchiduessis that schulen come 
to 3ou. 3oure richessis ben rotun, and 2 
joure clothis ben etun of™ mou3tis. 
3oure gold and siluer hath rustid, ands 
the rust of hem schal be to 3ou in to 
witnessyng, and schal ete 3oure fleischis, 
as fier. 3e han tresourid to 30u wraththe 
in the last daies. Lo! the hire of 3oure4 
werke men, that repiden 3o0ure feeldis, 
which is frandid® of 30u, crieth; and the 
cry of hem hath entrid in to tbe eeris of 
the Lord of oostis. 3e han ete on thes 
erthe, and in 3oure letcheries 3e han 
nurschid 3oure hertis. In the dai of 
sleyng 3e brou3ten, and slowen the iust« 
man, and he a3enstood not 30u. Therfor,7 
britheren, be 3e pacient, til to® the com- 
yng of the Lord. Lo! an erthetilier 
abidith preciouse fruyt of the erthe, pa- 
ciently suffrynge, til he resseyue ‘tymeful 
and latefulP fruyt'r, And be 3e4 pacient,s 


Nmorewe yxy. that x. P make, or dwelle n. make, either dwelle v. Gwhiche v. that x. ¥ For- 
whi F. § smoke r. t Om. vx. W appering at r. vOm. rv. *¥Om.r. *Om.s. YOm. x. 
2 maken ful ont ioie r. 8 wicke sx. bitissynnetor. ¢himy. 4knno. thateany, ¢ Om. srx. 
fOm. svx. €dothnotry. bOm.r. iDoths. k Om. s. ! weepith sx. ™3elling yy. 2 Om. s. 
© wrechednesse o. P moththis y. mo3zhis x. 4 and 3oure gs. *'Om.o. §& flesh sx. ¢ which r. 
u fraudis N. defraudid x. vYOm.o. “ Andins. ¥*bronzteny. Y withstod 30u nots. 2 abit s. 


4 the precions s. > Jateful fruit r. 


g Om. a. 
n defraudid hk. 


f As Eqeghkoa. 


™ with k. © in to k pr.m. 


is tidi and ripe u. 40m. g. 


¢ confermeth s. 


i Om. o. 
P tidi and ripe a sec. m. marg.1. tideful and lateful Eqega. 
tymeful tidy and ripe and lateful « pr.m. tymeful and lateful, ether tidi and ripe x. 


b itil tyme k pr. m. 


4 Om. 4 pr.m. os. 
k joying Erbceghkoa8. } Doith reegk. 


pp fruyt, that 


V. 9-—20. 


hertes, for the comyng of the Lord shal 
yneize. Britheren, nyle 3e° be soreweful! 
ech in® to other, that 3e be not demed. 
Lo! the iustise" stondith' ny3 bifore the 
io3at. Britheren, take 3e ensaumple® of 
yuel goynge out, and of long abijdinge of 
trauele, and pacience, the! prophetes, that 
11 spaken to jou in name™ of the Lord. Lo! 
we blessen hem that suffreden. 3e herden 
the suffring", ‘or pacience®, of Job, and 3e 
sizjen the ende of the Lord, for the Lord is 
2imerciful, and doynge mercy. Bifore alle 
thingis, my britheren, nyle 3e swere, ne- 
ther bi heuene, ne? bi erthe, nether bi 
‘what euere other? ooth. Forsothe’ be 
joure words, ‘Is, is', Nay, nay, that 3e falle 
13not vndir doom. Sotheli" ony’ of 30u is 
soruful, ‘or keuy™, preye he with ‘enene 
isinwit*, and seie he psalme. OnyY of jou 
is’ sijke, lede he in prestis of the chirche, 
and preye thei on? hii, anoyntinge> with 
isoyle in name> of the Lord; and the 
preier of feith shal saue the sijke*, and the 
Lord shal discharge‘, ‘or make him li3t? ; 
and if he be in synnes, thei shulen be 
1éforzine to him. Therfore knowleche 3e 
oon’ to an other 3oure synnes, and preye 
3e ‘for eche® other, that 3e be saued. For- 
sothe® the contynuel preyer of a iust man 
17is miche worth. Helye was a man lijk to! 
us passible‘, ‘or able for to suffre', and in 
preyer he preyede, that it shulde not reyne 
on the™ erthe, and it reynede not thre 
183eeres” and sixe monethes. And eftsoone 
he preyede, and henen 3af reyn, and the 
igerthe 3af his fruyt. Britheren, forsothe if 
ony of 30u ‘shal erre® fro the? treuthe, and 
20ony ‘shal conuerte? him, he owith for" to 
wite, for’ he ‘that shalt‘ make" a synner 
for’ to be turned fro the errour of his weie, 


JAMES. 603 


and conferme 3e 3oure hertis, for the 
comyng of the Lord schal neize. Bri-9 
theren, nyle 3e be sorewful ech to other, 
that 3e be not demed. Lo! the iuge 
stondith ni3 bifor the 3ate. Britheren, 10 
take 3e ensaumple of yuel goyng out, 
and of long abidyng, and trauel*, and of 
pacience, the’ prophetis, that speken to 
3on in the name of the Lord. Lo! wen 
blessen hem that suffrident. 3e herden" 


d 8 thingis nyle 3¢ 
Lord is merciful, and doynge merci. 
5 A oure wordis 
sweret, nether bi heuene, nether bierthe, 3), é 
remeue the er- 
fallen not vndir doom. And if ony of 13 thi ooth owith 
x. e€°. of Deut?. 
is sijk, lede he in preestis of the chirche, Sere of Gods 
G 5 a sykenesse $ s: 
the preier of feith schal saue the sijk i : 
to helpe de- 
; eth not to an- 
ech to othere 3oure synnes, and preye 3e 
of nede to con- 
cas Y . ‘ swere bi a crea- 
lijk vsy, and in preier he preiede, that it 


the ‘suffring, ethir” pacience™”, of Joob, 
and 3e sayn the ende of the Lord, for the Bire alle 
swere; that is, 
é oi é 2 sette 3@ nat an 
Bifor alle thingis, my britheren, nyle 3e 12 ooth bifore al 
and biheestis. 
nethir bi what euere other ooth. But be This is seid to 
rd 3 raur of hem 
joure word 3he, 3he, Nay, nay, that 3e Peeeeat lat 
6 4 6 to be vsid afte, 
3ou is sorewful, preye he with pacient for itis seid in 
soule, and seie he asalm. If ony of 30W14 pho) Schalt 
swere bi the 
and preie thei for hyin, and anoynte for as medicyne 
6 4 e 1s NOt sou3t, 
with* oile in the name of the Lord; and 15 no but to helpe 
it is of an ooth; 
‘ “4, foritis not 
man, and the Lord schal make hym li3t 3 soist, no but 
and if he be in synnes, thei schulen be 
‘ faute, whanne 
forjounn to hym. Therfor knouleche 3e 1600 man bileen- 
other, for me 
hal not 
ech for othere, that 3e be sauyd. For fo but in cass’ 
the contynuel preyer of a iust man is fai ie oF 
inyche worth. Elye was a deedli man17treuthe. To 
ture bi itself js 
5 valeeful. vndir 
schulde not reyne on the erthe, and it dom; that is, 
‘ : dampnacioun 
., z 
reynede not thre 3eeris’ and sixe mone-  }i ote rrowe 


this. And eftsoone he preiede, and 1ssering in fall- 
; inge into false 
henene jaf reyn, and the erthe 3af his  swering. ie 
In 23 €°. of 


fruyt. And, britheren, if ony of 301.19 Becci. a man 
errith fro trewthe, and ony conuertith aM Saad ke 
hym, he owith to wite, that he that2o 


fillid with wick. 
‘ idnesse. Lire 
makitli a synner to be turned fro the 


here. v. 


¢€QOm.r. fscornfuln. 8 Om.y. »inuger. istantsx. exsaumple sx. lofthe x. ™ the 
Naame 4NOSX. 4 pacienceo. © Om. ogx. Pnethir anogsyx. 4 other what evere sox. F But r. 
*wordes 0.  t is, 3is G. She, ghe ey. "% Forsoth o.  3ifony or sec.m.y. WwW Om. ox. * pacient 
soule vy. yIfeny ov. *Om.s. for. >and anoynte ry. oyntende x. > the name Gc sec.m. ef alii. 
esyk manr. 4 make him lizt o. discharge him rx. © or make lizt n. Om. ogx. fech y. & eche for o. 
bh For y. iOm.r. & able for to suffre o. hee was passible y. 10m. vex. or able to suffre s. ™ Om. x. 
U3er x. errithy, POm. 4noyvx, ‘conuertithy,. "Om.sx. sthaty. tOm.r. 4 makith v. 
v¥ Om. sx. 

Toftrauel ko pr.m. ‘ofr. tsuffrena. Uhanherdr. vOm.r. W the paciencek. = thei 
him with K sec.m. Rr. him withk. Ytousr. 7 3eer 1. 


4H 2 


604 JAMES. 


shal saue the soule of him fro deeth, and _ errour of his weye, schal saue the soule of 
couerith the multitude of synnys”. hym fro deth, and keuereth® the multi- 
tude of synnes. 
Here endith the pistlis of James, and 
now bigynneth the fyrst pistle of seynt Here endith the pistle of James, and 


Petre apostle*. here bigynneth the firste pistle of Petir”. 
w synnes. Amen. N. x Here endith the cpistil of James, and bigynneth the first epistil of Petre. n. 


Here endith the epistil of James, and bygynneth the prologe into the epistil of Petir. 0. Here endeth the 
pistil of James, and bigynneth the pistel of Petre. 9. Here endith the pistle of James, and here bigynneth 
the firste pistle of Petir.v. Heere eendith the epistlis of Jamys, and bigynneth the prologe of Petre. y. 
Then is added as follows, Also heere bygynneth the forseyde prologe of Petre, anoon aflir the eendynge of 
Jamys cpistlis; for in treuthe and iust setlynge as it parteyneth, Petris epistlis stoondith heere neat, as ordre 
askith; and heere bygynneth the first epistle of Petre, and is rad on the first seynt Petris day. y. No final 
rubric in GMPSTX. 


a keuere k. » From cmquxabeghoa. Icere endith the epistle of James, and biginnith the firste 
epistle of Petre. 1. Here endeth the pistle of James ; se now the firste pistle of Petre. k. No final rubric 
iw anrehk. 


I. PETER. 





The first pistle of Petre’. 


GAP. 1. 


1 PETRE, apostle of Jhesu Crist, to the? 
chosen gestis‘, ‘or comelingis', of disper- 
sioun®, ‘or seateringe abroad‘, of Ponte, of & 
Galathie, of Capodosie, of Asye, and of Bi- 

2tynye, up" the prescience’, ‘or bifore know- 
inge*, of God, the fadir, ‘in to! halewinge 
of the™ spirit, ‘in to" obedience®, and 
sprengynge of theP blood of Jhesu Crist, 
grace and pees ‘to 30u be multiplied4. 

3Blessid be God, and the fadir of oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist, the’ which up' his greet 
mercy a3en gendride” us in to quik hope, 
bi the ajen rijsyng of Jhesu Crist fro 
4deede men’, in to heritage vncoruptible, 
and vndefoulid, and vnwelewable, ‘that shal 
snot fade”, kept in heuenes in* 30u, that 
in the vertu of God ben kept bi the feith 
in to helthe, maad redy for’ to be shewid 
6inYY the laste tyme. In which 3e shulen 
ioye’, if” it bihoueth® now a litel for” to be 
7sory in diuerse temptaciouns; that the 
prouyng of 3oure feith be miche preciouser 
than gold, that is proued bi fijr; bee it? 
founde in to® heriyng, and glory, and 
honour, ‘in tof the renelacioun of Jhesu 
8Crist. Whom whan 3e han not seyn, 3e 
louen; in to whom also now 3e not seynge, 
bileuen; forsothe 3e bilenynge shulen haue 


a The firste epistle of Petre. tT. No initial rubric in acagsv. 
& and T. 
© the obedience s. 


d Om. or. f Om. og. 


€ scateringe abrood 0. 
lin v. 


mQOm.ovx.  ®biv. 
®Om.y. thiv. %gendringe cr. vOm. ox. 
yOm. 8x. YYintoG. % make ful out ioye rv. 
4d Om. GNoosTVxyY sec.m. tothes. finv. 


a The firste episile of Petir. x. 
abegho. » forknowing Kqr. Cin R. 


22 thou3 v. 


Heere sueth the firste pistle of Petir. n. 
d gat K pr.m. 


Here bigynneth the first pistle of Petre. 


CAP, I. 


PETRE, apostle of Jhesu Crist, to thei 
chosun men, to the comelingis{ of scater- 
yng abrood, of Ponte, of Galathie, of 
Capadosie, of Asye, and of Bitynye, bi2 
the ‘bifor knowyng? of God, the fadir, in 
halewyng of spirit, bi obedience, and 
springyng of the blood of Jhesu Crist, 
grace and pees be multiplied to® 3ou. 
Blessid be God, and the fadir of oures 
Lord Jhesu Crist, which bi his greet 
merci bigat4 vs ajen in to® lyuynge hope, 
bi the ajen risyng of Jhesu Crist fro 
deth, in to eritage vneorruptible, and vn-4 
defoulid, and that schal not fade, that is 
kept in heuenes for 30u, that in the vertu s 
of God ben kept bi the feith in to heelthe, 
and is redi to be schewid in the last 
tyme. In which 3e schulen make ioye, ¢ 
thou3 it bihoueth now a litil to be seri in 
dynerse temptaciouns'; that the preuyng7 
of 30ure feith be myche more preciouse 
than gold, that is prenyd bi fier ; and be 
foundun in to heriyng, and glorie, and 
onour, in the renelacioun of Jhesu Crist. 
Who whanne je han not seyn, 3¢ louen; # 
in to whom also now 3e not seynge, bi- 
leuen; but 3e that bileuen schulen haue 
ioye, and gladnesse that may not be teld 


bOm. 7. © comelingis ox, men r. 
bbiv. ibifore knowinge 0. * Om, ox. 
P Om. osx. 4 be multiplied to jou v.  * Om. ¥. 
w Om. o¢x. that is, that shal not fade vy. * for v. 


® bihoue sx. bOm.osx. © and be r. 


No initial rubric in crkaqux 
¢tothe hk. -f temptacioun a pr. im. ef alit. 


tT comelingis ; 
that ben con- 
uertid fro he- 
thennesse. bi 
the prescience 5 
this is referred 
to that that ix 
seid bifore. to 
chosen men ; 
presciense ix 


take here for 


predestina- 
cioun, that ix, 
graciouse bifore 
ordynaunice to 
Lhinse. Lire 
here. Vv. 


606 


ioye with oute forth in? gladnesse vnenar- 
rable’, ‘that mai not be told out*, and 
glorified, bringynge* ajen the ende of 
jouret feith, the helthe of 3oure soulis. 
10Of whiche helthe prophetes sou3ten out, 
and enserchiden, that prophecieden of the 
llgrace to comynge" in’ 30u, sekinge* which 
or what maner tyme* the spirit of Crist 
signyfiede in hem, ‘bifore tellingeY the* 
passiouns, that ben in Crist, and latter 
izglories. 'To whom? it is® shewid, for not 
to hem silf, sotheli® to 30u thei mynistriden 
tho thingis, that now ben told to 30u bi 
hem that euangelizeden? to jou the® Holy 
Goost sent fro heuene, in to whom aungels 
13 desijren forf to biholde. For whiche thing 
3e8 gyrd the leendes of 3oure soule, sobre, 
parfijt, hope? in toi ‘the ilke* grace that is 
offrid to 30u ‘in to! the™ reuelacioun®, ‘or 
11 shewinge®, of Jhesu Crist, as sones of 
obedience, not ‘to gydere liknyd? to the 
1sformer desijris of 3oure ignoraunse, but 
up? him’ that clepide 30u holy’; that and 
16 30ure silft be holy in al lynynge; for it is 
write, 3e shulen be holy, for I am holy. 
17 And if 3e inclepen" him fadir, ‘the whiche¥ 
with oute accepcioun of personys demeth” 
up* the werk of eche man, lyue 3e in drede 
inY tyme of 3oure pilgrimage, ‘or litel 
18 dwellinge* ‘in erthe*; witinge that not bi 
corruptible gold, or siluer, 3e ben bou3t 
a3en of 30ure veyn lyuynge of fadirs tra- 
isdicioun, but bi the precious blood of® the 
lomb vndefoulid® and vnspottid?, Crist 
20Jhesu, bifore knowun sotheli bifore the® 
making of thef world, forsothe’ shewid in 
zi the laste tymes, for 30u that bi him ben 
feithful in God; that reiside him fro deede 
inen, and 3af to him euerelastinge glory, 
that 3oure feith and hope were in God. 
22‘3e makinge! chaast 3oure soules in obe- 


Pand y. @ Om.o. vnable to be told out x. 


I. PETER. 


I. 9-22. 


out, and 3e schulen be glorified, and hanes 
the ende of 3oure feith, the helthe of 
joure soulis. Of which helthe profetis 10 
sou3ten, and enserchiden, that profecieden 
of the grace to comyng in 30u, and sou3t- 1) 
en which euer® what maner tyme the 
spirit of Crist signyfiede in hem, ‘and 
bifor telde tho passiouns, that ben in 
Crist, and the latere glories’. To which 12 
it was schewid, for not to hem silf, but 
to 30u thei mynystriden tho thingis, that 
now ben teld to 30u bi hem that prechid- 
en! to 30u bi the Hooli Goost sent fro 
heuene, in to whom aungelis desiren to 
biholde. For which thing be 3e girdt 13+ that is, be 
the leendis of 3oure soule, sobre, perfit, cease 
and hope 3e in to the ilke grace that is “"*“* 
profrid to 30u bi the schewyng of Jhesu 
Crist, as sones of obedience, not made 
hijk to the formere desiris of 3o0ure vn- 
kunnyngnesse, but lijk him that hath 1s 
‘clepid 30u hooli*; that also ‘se silf! be 
hooli in ‘al lyunyng™; for it is writun, 3e16 
schulen be hooli, for Yam hooli. And17 
if 3e inwardli clepe him fadir, which 
demeth withouten accepcioun of per- 
soones bi the werk of ech man, lyue 3e 
in drede in the time of 3oure” pilgrimage; 
witynge that not bi corruptible gold, 18 
ethir siluer, 3e ben bou3t ajen of 30ure 
veyn liuynge of fadris tradicioun, but bit9 
the® precious blood as? of the lomb vn- 
defoulid and vnspottid, Crist Jhesu, that 20 
was knowun bifor the makyng of the 
world, but he is schewid in the laste 
tymes, for 30u that bi hym ben feithful 21 
in God ; that reiside hym fro deth, and 
3af tol hym euerlastynge glorie, that 
3oure feith and hope were in God. And 22 
make 3e chast 30ure soulis in obedience of 
charite, in loue of britherhod ; of simple 


r Om. ox. that is, that may not be told out ¥. § bringe r. 
t oure NY Ucomen s. vin to osx. Wand sou3ten r. * of tyme T. y and bifore telde r. 
zOm.s. thoovx.  @whiche vr. >» was r. ¢ forsothe 0. but ry. ‘euangelisen x.  ¢ bi the r. 
fOm. sx. &he3er. bhopeth sx. andhopez3ery. iOm.o. ‘kthatx. hiv. ™Om.r. 
 shewinge 0. © Om. ogx. Pmaadlijky. bir. ‘him holy ry. 8Om.r. t3ees. 3e silf er. 300 
silf x. inwardly clepin 7. which demeth y. that x. WOm.r. *bir. Ythex. 2 Om. ox. 
@ Om. ox. > as of AG sec.m. Nosrx. ¢ynfoulid x. vnwemmedo. ¢€Om.s. fthiso. & but r. 
htyme yn. i And make 3e r. 
Setherik. ioiesr. i prechen k. kK hooli clepid 300 a pr.m.h. 1 3e 30u silf 1K. 30ure bh. 
™althing1, ™ourec, °Om.b. P Om. gk prim. 4 Om.k prim. 


I, 23—II. 9. 


dience of charite, in loue of britherhed; of 
symple herte loue 3e to gydere bisiloker*; 
23born a3en not of coruptible seed, but of! 
vneoruptible, bi the word of quike God, 
2iand dwellinge in to with outen ende. For 
eche flesch hay™, and al the glorie of it as 
flour® of hay; the hay drieth® up, and 
23his? flour fel doun; forsothe the word of 
the Lord dwellith in to with outen ende. 
Sotheli this is the word, that is euangelized 
to 30u. 
CA It. 
1 Therfore puttinge? awey al malice, and 
al gyle, and symulaciouns', ‘or feynynges*, 
2‘and enuyes', and ‘al detraecioun"; as now 
gendrid 3onge children’, resonable, with 
oute gyle, coueyte 3e mylk”, that in it 3e 
3 wexe i to helthe; if netheles 3e taastiden, 
4for* the Lord is swete. ‘To whom 3e go- 
ynge ny3e", a quyk stoon, reproued sotheli 
of men, forsothe’ chosen of God, and ho- 
snourid, and 3oure* silf as quike stoones be? 
aboue bildid® spiritual housis, holy prest- 
hod, for? to offre spiritual hoostes®, ‘ov 
offringes’, acceptable to God bi Jhesu 
6Crist. For which thing the scripture 
holdith, Lo! I shal putte in Syon ‘the 
hizest stoon%, corner" stoon, chosen, pre- 
cious; and he that shal bileue in to him, 
7shal not be confoundid. Therfore honour 
to 30u bileuynge; forsothe to men not 
bileuynge, the stoon whom ‘thei bildynge' 
reproueden, this is maad in to the heed* 
sof the! corner; and the stoon of offencioun™, 
‘or hirtynge™, and stoon® of sclaundre, to 
hem that offenden? bi word, nether bileuen, 
gin which and‘ thei ben put. Forsothe 3e 
ben a ‘kynde chosun', kyngly’ presthod, 
holy folk, puple of purchasinge, that 3e 
telle the vertues of him, that clepide 3ou 
fro derknesses in to hist wondirful li3t. 


I. PETER. 


607 


herte loue 3e togidre more bisili. zd 23 * aboue biluia 
4 ; in spiritual 
be 3¢ borun ajen, not of corruptible seed, —jousis; that is, 
‘but vucorruptible', bi the word of lyu-  jiesPijtl 
ynge God, and dwellynge in to with 


housis. hooly 
presthood; as 
outen ende. 


5 Crist man is 
For ech fleisch 7s hey, and 24 the temple of 


fi wee God, for une 
al the glorie of it 7s as flour* of hey; —Godhed dwell- 
: d ; ith in him, and 
the hei driede vp, and his flour felde  jeis ieee had 
. ‘ sacrifice, in 
doun ; but the word of the Lord dwell-25* fapeheme 
ith with outen ende. And this is the 


offride himself 
Z é to God the fa- 
word, that is preehid to 3ou. 


dir for helthe 
of the world; 
so feithful men 
that ben con- 


AP ale pee 
< uertid to him 
Cate é . oy and ben con- 
Therfor putte 3e awel al malice, andl jriea hen the 
al gile, and‘ feynyngis, and enuyes, and ear ee 
a . emple of G 
alle bacbityngis; as now" borun 3o0nge?2 inas myche as 
: ‘ - 5 he dwellith in 
children, resonable, with out gile, coueite hem bi grace 3 
Gea 0 . . also thei ben 
je mylk, that in it 3e wexe in to helthe; Hraqirand 2: 
if netheles 3e han tastid, that the Lord is3 eee ae 
swete. And neize 3¢ to hym, that is a4 offren hemself 
‘ to God bi de- 
lyuyng stoon, and repreuyd of men, but — uocioun and 
: hooly worching. 
chosun of God, and onourid; and 3e%5 Therfore it an 
° = “112 eth, for do offre 
silf as quyle stoonys be 3e aboue bildid stat sacri. 
in to spiritual housis*, and an hooli fe, not flessh- 
ony ae y sacrifices, as 
preesthod, to offre spiritual sacrifices, ac- in the olde’ 
ey 6 lawe. in Syon; 
ceptable to God bi Jhesu Crist. Fors that is, hooly 
Q : i ‘ ! chirche, stoon 
which thing the scripture seith, Lo! Y higest s that is, 
schal sette in¥ Syon the hizeste corner Crist. corner 
: p stoon ; for whi 
stoon, chosun and preciouse; and he that ie jomsele 
. . togidere Jews 
schal believe in* hym, schal not be con- and hethene 
3 aa 5 men as twey 
foundid. Therfor onour’ to 3ou that7 wanisin oo 
bileuen; but to men that bileuen not, the shirche Dy. 
leeue ; bi feiuh 
stoon whom the bilderis repreuyden, this cone! ee 
. chante. t7 i@ 
is maad in to the heed of the corner; sim; een 
: our of alle men. 
and the stoon of hirtyng, and stoon? of 8 schal not bc 


pea , confoundid ; 
sclaundre, to hem that offenden® to the jufécnal be 
word, nethir bileuen 7¢, in which thei ben eee 


set. But 3e ben a chosun kynf, a kyngli® sidderis; that 

3 - is, scribis either 
preesthod, hooli fole, a puple of purchas-  techerisof lawe, 
ing, that 3e telle the vertues of hym, that 


and the prestis 
clepide 30un fro derknessis in to his won- 


of Jewis. Lire 
here. ve. 
dirful 1i3t. 


T a chosen 


Which sum tyme were not alo #ye; bi bap- 
lym in which 


k hisier anosx. bisily 9. besyliere vr. 1! Om. angsrx. ™is hey rv.  » a floure g. the flour sx. 
o driede aNogsvyx. Ptheo. 4 putteje rv. *'feynyngeso. *Om.oex. +tOm.o. "al detracciouns 
G pr.m. N. oold tradicions o. alie detraccionns y. VY childre s.  ¥ mylk of ful teching vy. * that Nv. 
y And neize 3e tohimy. Zbut vy. 83¢ any. 30n osx. 3¢ 30ure @. > beth esx.  ¢ hildid in to r. 
4Om. sx. © sacrifices y. Om, ovx. £&astoon heizest anogsyx. bacorner ry. i the bylderis v. 
Khenedo. 1 1Om. ov. M™hirtyngeo. 2 Om.oex. the stoon x. poffendedeng. 4 Om. r. 


tchosenkyn r. §Skyndely 0. Om. s. 
Om. A prom. £g. but k pr.m. 
jourKa. Wona. *in to K sec.m. 


idenk, © kindely rgh. 


® the flour k. 
y Om. a pr.m. Egk prom. b prim. 


t and alle rk sec.m. 4% Om. g. 


Z the stoon xek. 


Vv jgoure E. 3¢ 
4 offend- 


608 ° 


10 The" whiche sum tyme not’ the” puple of 
God, ‘now sotheli* the puple of God; theY 
which ‘not hauyng* mersy, ‘now forsothe 

ii hauyng* mersy. Moost dere, I beseche 30u 
as comelinges, ‘or gestes>, and pilgrimes, 
for® to abstene 3o0u fro fleschly desijris, 

12 that? fizten ajens the soule; hauynge® joure 
conuersacioun, ‘or dijf', good among hethen 
men, that in that thing that thei bacbiten, 
‘or yuele treeten’, of 30u, as of mysdoers, 
thei biholdinge 30u of goode werkis, glo- 

isrifie God in the day of visitacioun. Be 3e 
suget to eche creature of" man, for God; 
other! to the’ kyng, as precellent!, ‘or more 

us worthi™ ‘in staat”, other® to dukis, as sent 
of him to the veniaunce of mysdedis?, ‘or 
mysdoeris', forsothe to the preysinge of 
1s goode dedis', ‘or goode men’. For so is 
the wille of God, that 3e doynget wel, make" 
the yvnkunnyngnesse of vnprudent’ men 

16 for" to be doumbe. As fre men, and not as 
hauynge fredom the couering of malice, 

i7but as the seruauntes of God. Honoure 
3e alle men, loue 3e britherhed, drede je 
God, make* 3e they kyng honourable’. 

isSeruauntes, be 3e suget* in al drede to 
lordis, not onely to goode and mylde*, 
is but also” to tirauntes®. Forsothe4 this is 
grace, if for conscience of God ony man® 
suffrith sorewes, ‘or heuynesses‘, suffringe® 
2ovniustly. Sotheli® what grace is it, if 3e 
synnynge! and* buffatid suffren!? But if 
3e ‘wel doynge™ suffren", this is grace® 
zianentis God. Forsotlie? ind this thing 3e 
ben clepid. For" Crist suffride for vs, 
leenynge’ to 30u ensaumple’, that 3e folewe 
22the steppes of him. The" which dide not 
synne, nether gyle is’ founde” in his mouth. 
23 Which* whan he was cursid, curside not; 


I. PETER. 


Il. 10—23. 


je ben maad 
the sones of 


puple of God, but now 3e ben the puple 
: ; ec God that | 
of God; which hadden not merci, but ficial er 
now 3e han merci. Moost dere, Y bi-11 grace, and so 
E x 3e ben of the 
seche you, as comelyngis and pilgrymys, — kyn of God. 
to absteine 3ou fro fleischli desiris, that 


a kingly prest- 
hod ; that is, 
aad lije Crist 
fizten ajens the soule; and hane 3e joure!2 Witch is king” 
"eA P] and prest bi the 
conuersacioun good among hethene 0 A 
that in that thing that thei bacbite of chit oes 
. Pas was king an 
3ou, as of mysdoeris, thei biholden 30u of _ prest in xiii 
. . ; »  c°. of Genesis, 
good werkis, and glorifie God in the dai and so itis of 
wos i nae veri Cristen 
of visitacioun. Be 3e suget to ech CYC Oy von chat ben 
ture’, for God; ethir to the kyng, as to petal Se bi 
eae : : foun, 
hym that is hijer in* state®, ethir fone ee Hs 
. e sacrince Of de~ 
duykis, as to thilkef that ben sent of hym  uout preier; 
é therfore in th 
to the veniaunce of mysdoers, and to the 5%. of Apoca- 
wat . of lips, Thou hast 
preisyng of good men. For so is® the 1s (Ps 1 hou 
wille of God, that 3e do wel, and make ree a 
presthod to 
the vnkunnyngnesse of vuprudent men to _ onre God. an 
hooly fole; that 
be doumb. As fre men, and not as hau- 16420240 ha 
a ‘ h — clensid bi bap- 
ynge fredom the keuering of malice, but nya. of pute 
as the seruauntis of God. Onoure 3e17 “sing; bi the 
aidan preciouse blood 
alle men, loue 3e brithirhod, drede 3e of Crist. that 5e 
‘ ‘ delle, etc.; di 
God, onoure 3e the kingt. Seruauntis, 18 woord of hooly 
be je! sugetis in al drede to lordis, not  frecnns: Lire 
oneli to good and to! mylde, but also to Ae es 
tyrauntis™. For this is grace, if for con- 1y the pera 
. ~ o . ina 
science of God ony man suffrith heuy- — dreede ; that 
: frith 3 li F " is, perfit dreede, 
nessis, and suffrith vniustli. or what20 whannea man 
eer o . eschewith of- 
grace is it, if 3e synnen, and ben buffatid, goicis of God, 
and suffren? But if 3e don wel", and payne a 
suffren pacientli, this is grace anentis fri; pectin 
« . ° peynes don vn- 
God. For to this thingt 3e ben clepid. 21 justly to him. 
e e this i 3 
For also Crist suffride for vs, and lefte thatis’a gra- 
ensaumple to jou, that 3e folewe the Pa 
steppis of hym. Which dide not synne,22he v. 
. . . . + nat ls, at 3e 
nethir gile was foundun in his mouth. _ suffre wrongis 
. CET ae paciently. for 
And whanne he was cursid, he curside 23 Crist sufride 
a es . for us; |vk 
not; whanne he suffride, he manasside meynilé Gad 
not; but® he bitook hym silf to hyim, m™yche grettere. 
ss Lire here. v. 


2Om.r. Ywerenot ry. WOm.r. * but now 5ebenr. YOm. vy. “haden not ry. 8 but now 
gehan vy. bOm. cevx. ¢Om.sx. the whiche o, ¢andhanejey. fOm.oex. & Om. ox. 
hwhichis 7. iether orx. & Om.o. |lmore worthio. ™Om.ox. ‘ofastateo. © ether orx. 
P mysdoeris rx. 9 Om. orx. "menry. Om. x. 8 Om.orx. tdorv. and maker. VY vnwise x. 
wOm.sx. *ononrey. YOm.er. 2Om.¥. 4 sogetiss. 8 treweo. > Om. 9. © tryuanntis carp. 
tryuauntis, either tyrauntis vy. 4¥Forv. © Om. y prim. fOm. ogx. 8 and suffrith ry. » For whi r. 
isynnen ry. kand henry. ‘and suffreny. ™donwelandr. %snffren paciently yr. © Om. r. 
P¥ory. ator, %'Foralsory. 8 and lefter. ¢t exsaumple sx. UOm. vx. Vwasr. W not 


founden o. * The whiche x. 


¢ creature of man M sec. m. Q nary. xb see. m. oa. 
k suget alti. 


Sitisb bOm. gk prm. iOm.x. 
2Om. gk prem. © Om. gk prem. 


dof. ¢ the staat c. astaatx. filke xg. thoo rR. 
1Om. a prim. R. 


mM trynauntis CEIKRUA sec. m. e. 


Il. 24—III. 9. 


whan he suffride, heY manaside not; 
sotheli he bitoke him? to ‘a man* demynge 
24 him vniustly. Whiche? he him silf suffride‘, 
‘or bar‘, oure synues in his body on the® 
tree, that we’ deede to synnes, lyue® to 
ri3twisnesse, bi whois wounde® ‘3e ben! 
25heelid. Forsothe* 3e weren as sheep er- 
ringe, but 3e ben conuertid now to the 
sheperde, and bischop of 3oure! soulis. 


.CAP. III. 


1 Also and™ wymmen be suget to her 
husbondis; that if ony" bileuen not to the 
word, bi the conuersacioun of wymmen ‘be 

2thei® wonnen with outen word, biholdinge 

3in drede 3oure holy conuersacioun. Of the? 
whiche be not with outeforth curious 
ournyng of heer, or! doyng aboute of gold, 
ori ournyng of clothinge™ of vestymentis’; 
4but ‘the ilke® that is the" hid man of herte, 
in vncoruptibilite’ of * quyete*, ‘or pesibley, 
and mylde spirit, the’ which is riche in 
sthe si3t of God. Sotheli? so and? holy 
wymmen hopinge in God, ‘not in ourne- 
ment of clothinge® ourneden, ‘or maden 
clene’, hem silf, suget® to her owne hus- 
sbondes. As Sare obeschidef to Abraham, 
clepinge® him lord; of whom 3e ben dou3- 
tres wel doynge, and not dredinge ony 
7perturbacioun. Also men ‘to gydere dwel- 
linge", up! science, ‘or kuanynge', jeuynge™ 
honour to the wommans vessel, ‘or body", 
as to the more sijk, as and° to the? euene 
eyris of grace of lijf, that 3oure preyers 
sben not lettid. Forsothe in feith alle of 
oon vndirstondinge, ‘or wiles, in preyer 
be 3e compacient", ‘or ech suffring with 
other’, louers of fraternyte', merciful, 
9mylde, meke; not 3eldinge yuel for yuel, 
nether cursyng for cursyng, but a3enward 
blessyng; for in this thing 3e ben clepid, 


I. PETER. 


609 


that demyde hym vniustli. And he hym 24 
silf bar oure synnes in his bodi on a tre, 
that we be deed to synnes, and lyue to 
ri3twisnesse, bi whos wan wounde 3e ben 
heelid. For 3e weren as scheep errynge, 25 
but 3e ben now turned to the schipherde, 
and bischop of 3oure soulis. 


CAP. III. 


Also wyimen be thei suget? to heri 
hosebondis; that if ony man* bileue not 
to the word, bi the conuersacioun of 
wymmen thei be wonnun with out word. 
And biholde 3e in drede 30ure hooli con-2 
uersacioun. Of whiche ‘ther be’ not withs 
outforth curious ournyng® of heer, ether 
doyng aboute of gold, ethir ournyng of 
clothing ; but thilke that is the hid man4 
of herte, in vneorrupcioun, and‘ of mylde 
spirit, which is riche in the sijt of God. 
For so sumtyme hooli wymmen hopinges 
in God ourneden hem silf, and weren 
suget" to her owne hosebondis. As Saras 
obeied to Abraham, and clepide hym 
lord ; of whom 3e ben dou3tris wel 
doynge; and not dredynge ony pertur- 
bacioun’. Also men dwelle” togidre,7 
and bi kunnyng 3yue 3e onoure to the 
wommanus freeltee, as to the more feble, 
and as to euen eiris of grace and of lijf, 
that 3oure preieris be not lettid. And ins 
feith alle of oon wille in preier be 3e eche 
suffringe with othere, loueris of brither- 
hod, merciful, nylde, meke; not 3eldinges 
yuel for yuel, nether cursing for cursing, 
but aj3enward blessinge; for in this thing 
3e ben clepid, that 3e welde blessinge bi 
eritage. For he that wole loue lijf, and 10 
se goode daies, constreyne his tunge from 


yOm.os. Zhimselfv. ‘the x. Pandy. C¢barx. @Om. x. ¢anogsrx. fwebev. 
& and lyue ry. wan woundey. ibe3e 0. wee ben x. * For rv. toure x. ™Om.v. 1 eny man r. 
Othei ben yr. POm.vx. 4Om.G pr.m. either vy. ‘cloothisn. ‘%clothisy. tthat x. 'Om.s. 
¥ vncorruptible no. yndefoulingnesse y. = ¥ or n. and o. x pesibleo. ¥Om.oex. 7 Om. sy. 
aFory. sum tyme and rx. ¢Om.rx. 4Om.oorx. © and weren soget vy. f obeyede aNnogrry. 
& and clepide v. '  dwelle togidere vy. iandbiv. *kunnyngeo. 10m. oex. ™3euer, 2 Om. x. 
°Om.T. P Om. aNogsr7x. 40m. ox. ‘* suffiryng togider 0. pacient e. %’ Om. ogsx. + brother- 
hode or. 

Psugetisek. dwhoms. ‘'bethert. ‘%honourynga. tOm.k prim. Usugetis ek. ¥ ethir 


troublinge x sec.m. marg. W dwelle 3e ne. 


VOL. IV. 


41 


* if eny man; 
that is, hous- 
bondis. bileeue 
not to the word 
of preching, bi 
the conuersa- 
cioun, ete.; 
that is, bi the 
holy conuersa- 
cioun of her 
wynes. thei ben 
wonnen; that 
is, connertid to 
Cristen feith. v. 
without word; 
that is, of co- 
mnn preching. 
ve. the ourn~ 
yng of clothing 
of clothis ; that 
is, oner presci- 
ous either curi- 
ous clothing; 
therfore it is 
seid the clooth- 
ing of clothis 
bi excellence, as 
a roose is seid 
the flour of 
flours. the hid 
man of herte ; 
that is, the 
soule itself, 
which is seid 
the innere mai. 
ve. ourneden ; 
hemself dily- 
gently by in- 
nere onrnement 
of vertues, and 
chargiden not 
of vttermere 
ournement. 
Lire here. v. 


610 


1othat 3e welde blessyng bi heritage.. For- 
sothe® he that woldeY loue lijf, and see 
goode dayes, constreyne his tunge fro yuel, 
and his lijppis, that thei speke not” gyle. 
11Sotheli bowe he fro yuel; and do good; 
12seke he* pees, and parfijtly sue it’. For 
the iz3en of the Lord on? iust men, and the 
eres of him in to the preyers of hem ; for- 
sothe the cheer* of the Lord on> men 
isdoynge ‘yuele thinges«. And‘ who. is it 
that shal ‘noye to® 30u, if 3e shulen be 
i4‘goode suers!? Buts if 3e suffren ony thing 
for rijtwisnesse, 3e ben blessid ; sotheli® 
drede 3e not the drede of hem, that 3e be 
isnot disturblid‘, Forsothe halewe 3e the 
Lord Crist in 3oure hertis, euermore* redy 
to do! satisfaccioun to eche man axinge 
3ou resoun™ of that feith and hope that is 
i¢in 30u, but with myldenesse and drede, 
hauynge good conscience; that in ‘that 
thing" that thei bacbiten of? 30u, thei be 
confoundid, the°® whiche chalengen falseli 
17 30ure? good conuersacioun in Crist. Sothe- 
li it is betere, ‘if the wille of God wole’, 
3e° wel doyriget ‘for to" suffre’, than ‘yuele 
isdoynge”. For and* Crist oonys dyede for 
oure synnes, he iust for vniuste, that he 
shulde offre ‘us to God’, maad deede sothe- 
li? in flesch, forsothe* maad quike in spirit. 
19 In» which thing® and‘ to hem that weren 
closid to gydere in prisoun ‘he comynge in 
20spirit? prechide; the® whiche weren suni- 
tyme vnbileueful, whan thei abiden‘ the 
pacience of God in the dayes of Noe, whan 
the ark&, ‘or schip", was maad, in which a 


I. PETER. 


Ill. 10——20, 


yuel, and hise lippis, that thei speke not  * the cheere; 
of wraththe and 


gile. And bowe he from yuel;:and do 1) indignacioun; 
? ‘ 5 aa: - ° : in Ebreu it is 
good; seke he pees, and perfitli sue it. in 36 Saim, the 


For the izen of the Lord den on iust men, 12 &7ahthe of the 
Lord on hem 


and hise eris on the preieris of hem; but “hat don joes, 
- . to punische 
the cheer* of the Lord 7s on men that hem. drede 3ce 


don yuels. And who is it that schal 13 inn dean 


; . < fro vertu. dis- 
anoye 30u, if 3e ben sueris and louyeris (hia: in 
of goodnesse? But also if 3e suffren ony 14 ting aduer- 

7 4 2 s sites vnpacient- 

thing for riztwisnesse, 3e ben blessid; ly. Aulewe ses 

: ; that is, make 3e 

but drede 3e not the drede of hem, that  stedefast. it és 

je be not disturblid®. But halewe 3e715 977i 

the Lord Crist in 3oure hertis, and euer- Yorhing with 
. . . > . 

more be.3e redi to satisfaccioun to ech _ alle aduersitees. 

: A tf the wille, etc.; 

man axynge? 30u resoun of that feith and for the prening 

h hy ay as ° of feithful men. 
ope that is in 30u, but with myldenesse 16 shan doinge 

and drede, hauynge good conscience; that "2/5 tit is, 


a3enstonding 

in that thing that thei bacbiten of 30u, duly. maad 
i é deed in flesch; 
thei ben confoundid, whiche chalengen — that is, maad 
without feling 


falsly 3oure good conuersacioun in Crist. 
For it is betere that 3e do wel, and suffre, 17 
if the wille of God wole, than doynge fit? ine ona 


to desijris of 
flesch. maad 
quic in spirit ; 
that is, maad 


of the Hooly 
schulde offre to God vs, -maad deed in 

ing of synneris 
to hem that weren closid togidre in pri- 

and prechide ; 

spijride to make 
pacience of God in the daies of Noe, 

aunce, thou; the 
maad saaf bi water. And so baptym of” 21 te the persoone 


yuele. For also Crist. onys diede for 1s able to stire to 
Goost. for 
fleisch, but maad quik in spirit... For 1g ‘t's * sine- 
to penaunce. 
soun prechide; whiche weren sum tyme 20 thatis, bi Noee, 
the schip, and 
whanne the schip was maad, in which a 
manhed of 
Crist was not 
aie * a of Crist is with- 
lijk formet+ makith vs saaf; not the put- Quien bigyn- 


_ 2 fe 2 sve the exciting 
oure synnes; he itist for vniust,. that he 
which thing ; 
nefie the clep- 
which thing he cam in spirit, and also 
he cam in spirit, 
vnbileueful, whanne thei abididen® the ‘.7tom been- 
to preche pen- 
few, that is to seie, ei3te soulis weren 
thanne; nathe- 
nynge. Vv. 


cloasid togidere in presoun; that is, in the custom of synne. ve. and this was in the tyme of Noce in the vj. c°. of Genesis. whiche weren vnbileeue- 
ful; to God himself, spekinge bi Noee, for thei bileueden not that the greet flood schulde flowe. whanne the pactence af God abood ; synners to pen- 
aunce of an hundrid and xx. [3eer], in vi. c°. of Genesis. maad saf bi watir ; in as myche as the watir reiside the schip an hi3 fro erthe. Thus the 
Glose of doctouris comunly expounen this place, but the presoun may be taken to the lettre, for the hijere place of helle, and thei that weren first 


vnbileeueful and diden penaunce in the flood weren there. Lire here. v. 


t baptim of lijk foorme; that is, in lije maner; for fewe men ben 


saued bi baptym, in comparisoun of hem that hen not saned, and for grace 30ven in baptym [saueth ?] sunlis fro erthly desijris to heuenly thingis, 
as the watir of the greet flood sanede Noee bodily, and hem that weren with him, in reysing hem to hi3ere thingis. not the puttinge awey of filthis 
of fiesch; as if he seide, the vertu of baptym is not oonly in the wasching of body, but principaly in the wasching of soule. Lire here. ve. but the 
axing of good conscience; bi feith foormeth with charite, for such feith makith a good conscience to go in to God. swolewith; eithir distroieth 
deeth; for he roos a3een to lijf vndeedly, and for he took awey fro vs the deth of synne. aungels ; heere ben expressid thre ordris of aungels, and 


alle othere ben vndirstonden bi these. Zire here. v. 


uForr., Vwolev. wilex. Wnog *Om. Fr. 


cyuelsy. 4 Om. r prim. © anoie r. 

rsec.m. 4 but yv. but and x, i disturbid sx. distroublid rv. 
mOm.g, tOmr %°Omr. Om. Fr. 

t Om. r. u Om. G prem. o. to sx. and Fr, 


x Om. ¢ pr.m, alsov. Y¥ to God vs rx. 
dandalsov, 44 Om.y. ¢ Om. F. 


x distroublid no, 
bink. 


y Om. x prim. 


f sueris and loueris of goodnesse r. 


P of 3oure s. 
¥ suffre, if the wille of God wole r. 
2 Om. Fr. 
f abideden r. 


Z askynge ao. 


aface o.. ison Fr. 
& But and 4G sec.m. Ns 

1 Om. nogsrx. 

8 that 3e do r. 
w doinge yuele Fr. 
b For y. © thing he cam in spirit r. 
h Om. oex. 


Yheit r. ' 2 ben on v. 


k and euermore be 3e /. 
qForr. Om... 


a but r. 
& ship o. 


a abooden Ec. abeden 1. abiden kK pr. m. Rxagkca. 


TIt. 21—Iv. 8. 


fewe, that is ‘to seie!, ei3te soules, ben* 
2imaad saaf bi water. The! which thing 
and baptym of™>lijk"® foorme makith us 
saaf; not the® puttinge awey of ‘flesch of 
filthis?, but the axing4 of good conscience 
in to God, bi the a3enrisynge of oure Lord 
22 Shesu Crist, that is in the ri3thalf of God, 
het ‘swolewinge deeth, or destriynge’, that 
we shulde be maad eyres of euerlastinge 
lijf; he gont in to heuen, aungels", and’ 
powers, and vertues, maad® sugettes to 
him. 
CAP. IV. 

1 Therfore Crist* suffringe’ in flesch, and 
be 3e armed bi? the same thenking; for he 
that ‘suffride? in flesch ceesith> fro synnes, 

ethat he lyue not now to the desijris of 
men, but to the wille of.God, that® is more 

30f4 tyme in flesch. Sotheli® the tyme 
passid is ynow3 to the wille of hethen 
men to be endid, thef whiche walkiden in 
leccheries, in desijris, in miche drinkinge of 
wijn, ofte’ etyngis, drinkingis", and vn- 
4leeueful worschepingis' .of ydolis. In‘ 
which now thei ben ‘a feerd'‘on ech sijde™, 
in which thing thei wondren", 30u° ‘to 
gydere not rennynge? in to the same con- 
sfusioun of leccherie, blasfemynge’. The" 
whiche shulen -3iue resoun to him, that is 
eredy to’\deme the quike and deede*. Sothe- 
li* for this thing and* to deede men it is 
euangelizid”,: that thei be denyd sotheli 
up* men ‘inY flesch, sotheli? that thei lyue 
7up* God-in® spirit.» Forsothe the® ende of 
alle thingis shal neize. ‘And sot be 3e 

3 prudent, and ‘wake 3e°® in preyers; bifore 
alle thingis forsothe hauynge’ charite ech 
to other in 3ou8 silf algatis lastinge; for 
charite couerith the multitude of synnes, 


I. PETER. 


611 


tyng awei of the filthis of fleisch, but the 
axyng® of a’ good conscience in God,'bi 
the a3enrysyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist,’ 
that is in the ri3t half of God, and swole- 22 
with® deth, that we scliulden be made 
eiris of euerlastinge lijf. He 3ede in to 
heuene, and aungelis, and powers, and 
vertues, ben maad sugetis‘ to hym. 


CY PRA. 


Therfor for Crist suffride in fleisch*,1 
be 3e also armed bi the same thenkynge; 
for he that suffride in fleisch ceesside fro 
synnes, that that is lefts now8s in fleische 
lyue not now to the desiris of men, but to 
the wille of God. For the time that 'iss 


-passid is ynow to the wille of hethene'men 


to be endid, whiche walkiden in letcheries, 
and lustis, in®.myche drinking of wyn, 


-ini ynmesurable etyngis, and drynkyngis, 


and vnleueful worschiping* of mawmetis. 
In whiche now thei ben astonyed!,’ in4 
which thing thei wondren,’ for 3e ren- 
nen not togidere ‘in to” the same con- 
fusioun of letcherie, and -blasfemen. Ands 
thei schulen 3yue resoun to hym, that is 
redi to deme the quyke and the deed. 


‘For whi for this thing it is prechid alsos ° 
to deed ment}, that thei be demed bi 
‘men in fleisch, and ‘that thei‘lyue-bi God 


in spirit. For the ende of alle" thingis7 
schal neizje. Therfor be 3e prudent, and 
wake 3e in preyeris; bifore alle thingiss 
haue 3e charite ech to other in 3ou° silf 
algatis lastynge; for charite couerith the 
multitude of synnes. Holde 3e hospita-9 


Iwith wy. -Kkwereny. !Om. vx. ™ino. ®lichi ang. such s. © Om. Noosx.  P filthes of 
flessche 0. daskyngeQ. "Om. N. andy. 8 died o. swolwyng deeth ex. swolewith deth, either dis- 
troieth ve. ‘t3eder. "andaungelsyr. YOm.o. Wbenmaadv. ~* for Cristy. Y snffride r. 
Zino. ®@soffrith nox. ceesidey. that thatysec.m. Om. 7. ¢Forry. fOm.y. fin 
ofte ry. band drynkynges nsyx. Om. p. i worschipes Q. -worschiping y. &Ofo. | astonyed r. 
mQm.or. ®%wondridenr. °forje vy. Prennen not togiderey. and blasfemenr. 'Om.r. 
Sforto aNogy. the deede anosrx. the deede men.r. aForwhir. vOm.y, W¥ euangelizid 
alsoy, *bivy. Yand Nn. 2sosothely o. buty. *biv. inx. band nw. ¢Om.o. 4 Therefore r. 
¢waketh s. fhauejer. $ 30ur GT. f ” ‘ 

Caskyng a0. 40Om.k pr.m. ©&swolewena. ‘fsuget Eo. & leeft a. leest A pr.m.ac. && now 
of tyme A sec.m. marg. banda. land b.  worschipyngis a. 1 ether afeerde x marg. ™ ink pr.m. 
nallekynr. © 30ure £. 


412 


* suffride in 
Jlesch; that is, 
brou3t his flesch 
into obedience 
of soule. de- 
sijris of men ; 
that is, to lustis 
of flesch. Lire 
here. Vv. 

t ta deede men; 
that is, vnfeith- 
ful men. that 
thei be demed ; 
that is, that 
men bileeuyng 
in Crist be con- 
dempned. &i 
men in flesch ; 
that is, of men 
linyng ficschly. 
ve, This suede 
bi occasioun of 
yuele men at 
the conuersioun 
to Cristen feith. 
dyue bi God in 
spirit; this su- 
ede bi erronr of 
men preching 
the feith. keuer- 
ith, etc. ; that 
tho be not seyn 
as worthi to he 
-punischid iu 
Goddis dom. as 
the wordis of 
God ; that is, 
arette he al the 
good to God, 
and not to him 
self. as of the 
uerlu, etc.; 
that is, if eny 
man mynys- 
trith temporal 
goodis to nedy 
men, arette he 
this to God that 
jaf to hym wille 
and power to 
do this. Lire 
here. v. 


612 I. PETER. 


»holdinge® hospitalite to gydere with outen 
10 grucchinge; ech man as he receyuede grace, 
mynistringe ‘it in to ech! other, as goode 
dispenderes of the manyfolde grace of God. 
ulIf ony man spekith, speke he as the 
wordes* of God; if ony man myuistrith, 
as of the vertu which’ God mynistrith; 
that God be honourid in alle thingis bi 
Jhesu Crist oure Lord, to whom is glory 
and lordship in to worldlis of worldlis. 
12Amen. Moost dere", nyle 3e go in pil- 
grimage in feruour, that is maad to 30u to™ 
temptacioun, as" ony of° newe thing bi- 
13falleP to 30u; but 3e1 comunynge’ to® the 
passiouns! of Crist, haue" ioye, that andv 
3e gladinge” with oute forth, haue* ioye in 
l4the reuelacioun of his glory. If 3e ben 
despisid inY the name of Crist, 3e shuleu be 
blessid; for that that is of the? ‘glory and 
vertu? of God, and the spirit that is his, 
isrestith® on® 30u. Forsothe’ no man of 3o0u 
suffre as a mansleer, or® theef‘, or? curser, 
16 or8 desijrer of othere mennus thingis ; for- 
sothe if as a cristen men, shame he not, 
17sotheli! glorifie he God in this name. Fork 
tyme is, that doom bigynne of! Goddis 
hous; sotheli if first of" us, what ende® 
of hem, that bileuen not to the gospel? 
is And sotheli if a° iust man vnnethe shal be 
saued, where shal the? vnpitous? man” and 
igsynners’ apeere? ‘And so‘ and thei that 
suffren up" the wille of God, bitaken her 
soulis in’ goode deedis to the feithful 
maker of nou3t. 


CARS V: 


1 Therfore I, euene eldre’, biseche the 
eldre men that ben in 30u, ‘and I witnesse 


IV. 9-—V. I. 


lite togidere with out grutching ;. ech 10* nyle xe goo in 
man as he hath resseyued grace, mynys- Tata, Peed 
tringe it in to ech othere, as good dispen- ff, '7 boty: fr 
deris of the manyfold grace of God. If 11 deth neisinge. 
A cenit in feruour of 
ony man spekith, speke he as the wordis pétescuscisiin 
of God; if ony man mynystrith, as of jeenefl ae 
the vertu which God mynystrith; that 


leeneful to flee, 
it is profitere 
to abide, no but 


God be onourid in alle thingis bi Jhesu whanne the 
3 i : persecuscioun 
Crist oure Lord, to whom is glorie and is maad for a 
certeyn per- 


lordschip in to worldis ‘of worldis?. soone. And 


whanne more 


Amen. Moost dere brytheren, nyle 3€12 good of the 

' ’ *# ] ‘ chirche apper- 
go in pilgrymage* in feruour, that 1S ith bi the fist, 
maad to 30u to% teinptacioun, as if ony 4s Poul fiedde 


. ‘ _” fro Damask 
newe thing} bifalle to 30u; but comyne13and fro Jeru- 


; : : alem, in 9 c°. 
3e with the passiouns of Crist, and haue of Delisof A po- 
3e ioye, that also 3e be glad, and haue 


stlis. ¢o cempt- 
acioun ; that is, 
ioye in the reuelacioun of his glorie. If 14 2PPreuyng of 
ee. i 3oure feith. 
3e ben dispisid for the name of Crist, 3e Lire here. ve. 
schulen be blessid; for that that is of +as i eny of 
2 newe thing. 
the onour, and of the glorie, and of the jy.) that %s, 
vertu of God, and the spirit that is his, hee jn 
n 
schal reste on 30u. But no man of 30u 45 maners bifor- 
s seid, as if per- 
suffre as a mansleere, ethir a theef, ether — secuscioun to 
4 ‘hi dish Svat deth is eny new 
cursere, ethir a disirere of othere mennus thing, for many 
o08) « re - men bifore 300 
goodis; but if as" a cristen man, schame 16 sifiriden ee 
he not, but glorifie he God in this namet. i Lire 
For tyme is, that doom bigynne at God- 17 
: a ee tin thi : 
dis hous; and if 7 bigynne first at vs, oa Saat 
what ende schal be of hem, that bileuen  %)")r5.0c?i# 
) 1 7 cristene man, 
not to the gospel : And if a iust man jg justene a il 
vnnethe schal be sauid, where schulen ee = 
> TIst Dl mMar- 
the vnfeithful man and the synnere ap-  tirdom. that 
‘ - doom; that i 
pere? Therfor and thei that suffren bi19 condempning” 
‘ : same to deth. bigynne 
the wille of God, bitaken her soulis in 1) Cons jeg 
good dedis to the feithful makere of  thatis, at feith- 
ful men of 
nou3t. Crist; if such 
condempaing 
CAP. V. bigynneth first 
- at vs, what 
Therfor Y, an euene eldre man, and aj ende, etc.;.as 
witnesse of Cristis passiouns, which also _ if be seie, con- 
dempning to 
euerlastinge 


deth, which is hardere as without comparisoun. vnnethe, etc.; for it bihoueth hym entre bi many tribulaciouns into the rewme of henenes. where 
schulen, etc.; as if he seide, in noo place, for thei schulen be hid in the depthe of helle. suffren; martirdom. ditaken, etc.; and so he kepith hem 


sikirly, and corouneth hem gloriously with aungels. Lire here. v. 


hholde3e rv. jiechetoo. * word x. 
ify. °Om.s. Pfallega 4Oms. 
u hanyng N. haueth gs. and haue 3e 7. 
the onour and 7. 


v Om. rv. 
4 vertu and glorie x. 
fatheefs. Seithery. bhebeopr.m. i but r. 
°Om.7r. POm.N. vnfeithfuly. men Nn. 

vand her n. to o. 


P Om. t prim. 


1 the whiche s. 
T comynge ANQT. comune 3e F. 


8 synners N. the synners x, 
w eldre and a witnesse of Cristis passiouns r. 


q into Re. 


Mintoo. as 
t passioun o. 


Nl dere britheren v. 
8 with r. 


wheglady. *andhauer. Yfory. %Om.T. 
b schal reste rv. C ing. 4d But rv. © either r. 
k Forwhir. Jaty. M™Matr. ende schal be rv. 


t Therfore vy. bi vr. 


T he suffre as 1. 


V. 2—I4. 


of Cristis passioun*, which andY comuner? 
of that glorye that ‘is to* be shewid in 
2tyme to comynge>. Fede 3e the flok of 
God, that is in 30u, purueiynge® not con- 
streynyngli, but wilfulli, up’ God; not for 
grace, ‘or loue®, of foul wynnynge, but wil- 
3fully, nether as hauynge lordshipe in the 
clergie, but maad foorme, ‘or ensaumple', 
4of the flok®, and of inwit*. And whan 
the prince of shiperdis shal apeere, 3e 
shulen receyue the vnwelewable crowne of 
sglory, ‘or that shal neuere faade'. Also, 
3e 30nge* men, ‘be 3e! suget to eldre men, 
forsothe ‘schewe 3e alle™ to gydere meke- 
nesse; for® the Lord withstondith® proude 
men, forsothe? he 3iueth grace to meke 
émen. Therfore be 3e mekid’ vndir the 
mi3ty hond of God, that he reise 3ou in 
ithe day' of visitacioun, ‘3e castinge® ‘in to 
him al 3oure bisinesse‘, for to him is cure” 
sof 30u. Be 3e sobre, and ‘wake 3e", for 
3oure aduersarie, the deuel, as a roryng 
lyoun goith aboute, sekinge whom he shal 
9deuoure. ‘To’ whom a3enstonde 3e, stronge 
in feith*, wityngeY the same passioun for” 
to* be? to ‘the ilke® ‘3oure britherhed‘, that 
lois in the world. Forsothe God of alle 
grace, that clepide® in to his euerelastinge 
glorye, 30u! suffringe a litel§, he shal par- 
11 forme, conferme®, and make! sad*. To him 
glory! and lordschip in to worldlis of world- 
izlis. Amen. Bi Siluane, a™ feithful brother 
to 30u as I deme, I wroot shortly; bisech- 
inge, and witnessinge this" for® ‘to be? the 
verrey grace of God, in whiche 3e stonden. 
13 The chirche that is gederid in’ Babyloyne 
‘gretith 3ou wel’, and Markus, my sone‘. 
1a‘Grete 3e' wel to gydere in holy cosse. 


x Om. vy. and I witnessere of Cristus passioun x. 


I. PETER. 


613 


am a comynere of that glorie, that schal 
be schewid in tyme to* comynge‘; byseche 
je" the” eldre men, that ben among 3ou;2 
fede 3e the flok of God, that is among 3ou, 
and puruey 3e, not as constreyned, but 
wilfulli, bi God; not* for loue of foule 
wynnyng, but wilfulli, nether as hauynge3 
lordschip in the clergie, but that .3e ben 
maad ensaumple of* the floc’, of wille’. 
And whanne the prince of scheepherdis 4 
schal appere, 3e schulen resseyue the co- 
roun of glorie, that may neuere fade. 
Also, 3e 3onge men, be 3e suget to eldres 
men, and alle schewe 3e togidere meke- 
nesse; for the Lord withstondith® proude 
men, but he 3yueth grace to meke men. 
Therfor be 3e mekid vndir the my3tié 
hoond of God, that he reise 30u in the 
tyme of visitacioun, and caste 3e al 30ure7 
bisynesse* in to hym, for to hym is cure 
of jou. Be 3e sobre, and wake 3e>, fors 
3oure aduersarie, the deuel, as a rorynge 
lioun goith aboute, sechinge whom he 
schal deuoure. Whom ajenstonde® 3e,9 
stronge in the feith, witynge that the 
same passioun is maad to thilke brithir- 


* al 30ure besy- 
nesse, ele.; not 
that thei leue 
out to do that 
that is in hem, 
forwhi this 
were to tempte 
God, but that 
thei triste sadly 
to gete al good 
bi the vertu of 

od. deuoure ; 
in makinge him 
a membre of 
his cursid con- 
gregacioun hi 
deedly synne. 
ve. stronge in 
Jfeith; foormed 
with charite, 
which is suffi. 
cient armure 
to ajenstonde 
hym. the same 
passioun; that 
is, assailing and 
tempting of the 
deuel. to thilke 
britherhed of 
jou, etc.; that 
is, to soure bri- 
theren scaterid 
thnru3 the 
world, as if he 
seie, a3enstonde 
3ee the deuel, 
as also 3o0ure 


hode of 30u, that is in the world. And 10britheren don. 


God of al grace, that clepide 3ou in to 
his euerlastinge glorie, 30u suffrynge a 
litil, he schal performe, and schal con- 
ferme, and schal make sad4. 
be glorie and lordschip, in to worldis of 
worldis. Amen. 
brother to 30u as Y deme, Y wroot 
schortli; bisechinge, and witnessinge that 
this is the very grace of God, in which 
3e stonden. 
in Babiloyne, and Marcus, my sone, 


YamwNn sup. ras. also am v. 2 a comuner F. 


aschaly. >comensx. ' © and purueyez3er. 4bivr. ¢&Om.ox.  £ or exsaumple s. Om. x. 
Sfolke o. hentent, either willev. 4Om.ogx. k3ongero. Ibe anyx. bethos. ™ alle schewe 
je rx. ®forsotho. © withstant sx. Pbutv. dmeke x. 'tymev. % and caste 3e vy. castende x. 
t al 30ure bisinesse into hym vy. "charge o. vY wakithsx. WOm.rv. *the feith anosy. Y witinge 
thaty. 2Om.srvx. *%Om.y. >bedonsx. isvy. that x. ‘britherhed of jou. © cleeped 
gjouo. fOm.o.  & litil in Crist Jhesu x. h shal conferme sNovx. and shal confermen s. i shal 
make ansvx. salmakeo. saafr. lbegloriey. ™Om.anogsvx. %thatthisy. © Om. svx. 
Pisy, dato. tOm. rv. 8 sone greetith 30u wel yr. +t Greteth see s. 

sofE. tcomek. Om. A sec.m. K sec.m.k secom. YOm.5. Wandnot x. *tok. Y¥ folk x. 


* wille, eithir of soule c. wille of soule EKmQnuxabcegk pr. m. oa. 


© azenstondith g. 4 saaf gh. 


aazenstondith b. > Om. x pr.m. 


Bi Siluan, feithful 12 


The chirche that is gaderid 13 


biseechinge ; 
that is, monest- 
inge with meek 
preiers. v. in 
Babiloyne ; 
that is, Rome, 


To hym 11 as Jerom seith, 


foras Babiloyne 
was the grettest 
citee, and 30uen 
to ydolatrie, so 
was Rome aftir- 

ard in hir 
tyme. my sone; 
that is, my 
goostly sone in 
baptym and 
teching. Lire 
here. ve. 


614 I. PETER. 


Grace to" 3ou alle that ben in Crist. gretith® 30u wel. Grete 3e welf togidere is 
Amen. in hooli cos. Grace be to 30u alle that 
ben in Crist. Amen. 
Here endeth the fyrst pisile of Petre, 
and here bigynneth the secounde’. Here endith the firste pistle of Petir, 
and here bigynneth the secounde’. 


U be to vr. v From 49. Here endith the firste epistle of Petre, and bigynneth the secunde of him. n. 
Here endith the first pistel of Petir, and bygynneth the secound epistel. ovy. No.final rubric in cupsrx. 


e greeten x. fOm.R. & From cmxabega. Here endeth the firste pistle of Petre; se now the secounde. x. 
Here endith the firste pistle, and bigynneth the secunde.q. Here endith the firste pistil of Petre, and bigyn- 
neth the secunde pistil. hk. No final rubric in aErnveo. 


Il. PETER. 





The secounde epistle of Petre*. 


CAP. I. 

1 SyYMOUNT PETRE, seruant and apostle 
of> Jhesu Crist, to hem that han take with 
us the® euene miche! feith, in® rijtwisnesse 
of oure God and sauyour Jhesu Crist, 

2gracef to 30u ‘and pees be fulfillidg, in® the 

3knowinge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. Hou 
alle thinges of his godliche vertu, that ben 
to! lijf and pitee, ben 3ouun to us, bi the 
knowing of him, that clepide us for his 
4owne glory and vertu. Bi whom* he 3af to 
us moost and preciouse biheestes; that bi 
thes thingis 3e shulden be maad felawes of 
Goddis kynde, fleynge' the corupcioun of 
5that™ coueytise, that isin the world. For- 
sothe ‘3e vndir beringe”, ‘or 3euynge°, al 
cureP, mynistre? in joure feith vertu, so- 
6theli in vertu science’, ‘or kunnynge’; in 
sciencet sotheli abstinence, in abstinence 
forsothe pacience, in pacience sotheli pi- 
7tee; in pitee sotheli loue of britherhede, 
forsothe in loue of britherhede charite. 

8 Forsothe" if thes ben with 3ou, and ouer- 
comen, ‘or ben plenteuous’, thei shulen 
not ordeyne 30u voyde, ne” with outen 
fruyt, in the knowinge of oure Lord Jhesu 

9Crist. Forsothe to whom thes ben not 
redy, he is blynd, and bi hond temptynge, 


a The secunde pistil of Petre. ep. 
4QOm.r. ¢inthe rv. 
land fleery. ™Onm. 7. 
je y. mynystrith x. 

W neither 7. 


2 bringe 3e in r. 
r kunnynge o. 


4 Here biginnith the secounde epistle of Petir. Eo. 


rubric in cKm@abeghka. 
© ether asaieth K marg. 


b Crist Jhesu x pr. mt. 


No initial rubric in sogsrxy. 
f grace and pees be fillid v. 

© Om. erx. 
58 Om. ogsv x. 


© Om. xbh pr.m. 


The secounde pistle of Petre*. 


CAP. I. 
SIMOUNT PETRE, seruaunt and apo-! 
stle of ‘Jhesu Crist», to hem* that han 
take with vs the euene feith, in the® ri3t- 


* to hem, ete.; 
that is, to he- 
thene men con- 


. ertid. with 
wisnesse of oure God and sauyour Jhesu us; Jewis. in 

6 ° * the riztwisnesse 
Crist, grace and pees be fillid to jou, bi2 of Gory that 
the knowing of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. — is,3owen biGod. 


Lire here. ve. 


Hou alle thingis of his godlich vertu,3 
that ben to lijf and pitee, ben 30uun to vs, 
bi the knowyng of hym, that clepide vs 
for his owne glorie and vertu. Bi whom4 
he 3af to vs moost preciouse biheestis ; 
that bi these thingis 3e schulen be maad 
felows of Goddis kynde, and fle the cor- 
rupcioun of that coueytise, that is in the 
world. And bringe 3e in alle bisynesse,s 
and mynystre 3e4 in 3oure feith vertu, 
and ‘in vertu’? kunnyng; in kunnyngé 
abstinence, in abstynence pacience, in pa- 
cience pitee; in pitee, love of britherhod, 7 
and in loue of britherhod charite. For ifs 
these ben with 3ou, and ouercomen, thei 
schulen not make 3ou voide, nethir with 
out fruyt, in the knowyng of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist. But to whom these beng 
not redi, he is blynd, and gropith® with 
his hoond, and for3etith the purgyng of 
his elde trespassis. Wherfor, britheren, 10 


b of our Lord o. ¢ Om. 7. 
hbiv. iintov. * whom andr. 
P cure, either bisynesse vy. and mynystre 
t kunyng o. u For -. v Om. evx. 


& Om. r. 


Heere biginnith the tj. of Petre.1. No initial 
40Om.o. 440m. a4 pr.m. 


616 


‘or assayinge*, receyuynge for3etingnes’ 
of the? purgynge’ of his olde trespassis. 
10 Wherfore, britheren, more” bisye 3e°, that 
bi goode werkis 3e make 3oure clepynge 
‘and chesynge‘ certeyn; sotheli® 3e doynge 
thes thinges, shulen not synne’ ony tyme. 
Forsothe® thus the" entringe ‘in to! euere- 
lastinge kyngdom of oure Lord* ‘Jhesu 
Crist! ‘and sauyour™, shal be mynistrid to 
1230u plenteuously". For which thing I 
shal bigynne for® to moneste 30u euermore 
of thes thingis; and sotheli I wole 3ouP 
wityng? and confermid in present treuthe. 
13 Forsothe I deme iust, ‘hou longe™ I am in 
this tabernacle, for’ to reyse 30u in mon- 
isestinge; It certeyn for" the puttyng’ off 
of* my tabernacle is swift*, upY that’ oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist hath signyfied* to me. 
15 Forsothe I shal 3iue werk®, ‘or bisynesse®, 
and ofte! for® to’ ‘haue 3ouf aftir my deeth®, 
16that 3e do the mynde of hem. Sotheli! 
we not suynge vnwijse taales, han maad 
knowun to 30u the vertu and prescience’, 
‘or bifore knowing*, of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist; but maad! biholders of his greet- 
iznesse. Sotheli™ he takinge* of God the 
fadir honour and glory, sich° maner voys 
sliden doun to hin fro the greet glory, 
This is my ‘loued sone?, in whom I haue 
isplesid to me; ‘here 3e3 him. And we 
herden this voys brou3t to™ fro heuene, 
whan we weren with him in the* holy 
ighyl. And we han a sadder word of the 
prophet, to which 3e* 3euynge tent” don 
wel, as to a lantern 3euynge li3t in a 
derk”, ‘or mysty*, place, tilY the day bi- 
gynne for’ to 3iue 1iz3t, and the day sterre 
20 springe in 3oure? hertis. First® vndirstond- 
inge® this thing, that ech prophecie of 


x Om. Qx. or saiende s. 
dmores. © for F. 
1 Crist Jhesu p. 
5 Om. sx. 


Y forzeuenes Q. 
fdosynne ry. 6 For Fr. 
mQOm.r. ® pleynly s. 
tOm. sx. andIlamr. that 7. 
Xwisto. Ybithisy. 2 that at o. 
4 eft o. e Om, svx, ee that vy. 
i bifore knowing 0. k Om. oex. 
loued x. Qhereths. °Om. Pr. 
Ytilton. 20Om.sx. 4 oure sr. 


S his r. 


fin chesynga. & Therfor a. 


Thaue3er. ™Om.b. ©Om.R. © Om.1. 


IJ. PETER. 1. 


z Om. o. 

h Om. x. 

© Om, sx. 

Vv of putting G sec. m. putting awey r. 
4 singnefied, either schewid r. 
f 3e haue rv. 

l we weren maad F. 

twe m. 


b And firste y. © vndirstonde 3e r. 


b tabernacle, ether this lijf 1. 


I10o—20,. 
be 3e more bisi, that by goode werkis 3e 
f : 
roake 30ure clepyng and chesyng’ certeyn; — « sehuten not 
me; that is, 
do synne ony tyme*. For thus the en-_ if3e don goode 
tryng in to euerlastynge kyngdom of oure _ nuely, 3e schn- 
len not deedly 
be mynystrid to 30u plenteuousili. Fora eo 
which thing Y schal bigynne to m 
g By STS ly. I schal bi- 
I schal do this 
wole that 3e be kunnynge, and confermyd _ fernently, as if 
in this present treuthe. iaAttecbyeya 
deme iustli, as long as Y am in this Dynge. asJam 
tabernacle", to reise 30u in monesting ;  %acles that is, 
am (Iyuynge e] 
p ‘ ie hich is sei 
of my tabernacle is swift, bi this that [ecawree 
oure Lord Jhesu Crist hath schewid to {, 
ire here. ve. 
d of the 
after my deth 3e* haue! mynde of these eae this 
Dauith in the 
han maad knowun to 30u the vertu and __ 4s- salm, where 
the biforknowyng of oure Lord Jhesu to Crist, Thou 
art my sone, 

6 : gendrid thee. 
his greetnesse. For he took of God the 17 this prophecie 
fadir onour and glorie, bi siche maner node 

the wordis of 
glorie, This is my loued sone, in whom 
xf moost excellent 
Y haue plesid to me; here 3e hym. And 18 prophete. Lire 
this word of 
whanne we weren with hym in the hoolj Dauith was 
hil. And we han a™ saddere word of i9 Jewis dwell- 


for 3e doynge these thingis schulen not 11 6 syne ony 
werkis conty-~ 
Lord and sauyour Jhesu Crist, schal syne, forwhi 
eschewid vtter- 
3ou euere more of these thingis; and Y  gynne; thatis, 
Forsothes Y 13 {vere euere 
in this taber- 
and Y am certeyn, that the putting awei I4 in the body, 
of the soule. 
me. But Y schal 3yue bisynesse, and! ofte 15+ a suddere 
thingis. For we not suynge vnwise talis, 168 re word of 
the fadir seide 
Crist; but we weren maad biholderis of to day J haue 
of Dauith was 
vois slidun doun to hym fro the greet 
othere profetis ; 
for he was 
we herden this vois brou3t from heuene, 7% V® Either 
saddere to the 
* ° inge amonge 
propheciet, to which 3e 3yuynge tent _ hethene men, 


don wel, as to” a° lanterne that 3yueth Scher 
liz3t in a derk place, til the dai bigynne to ae Seales 


3yue 1i3t, and the dai sterre sprenge in el 


3oure hertis. And firste vndurstonde 3e¢ 20 Crist saf to the 
: : ° : ostlis witte t 

this thing, that ech prophesie of scrip- ast : 

ture is not maad bi propre interpreta- j2rPtu's re 
ciount; for prophesie was not brou3t 21+ that aa 
‘ - »  mannes wille. 

ony tyme bi mannus wille, but the hooli v. 


bbe more vy. ¢ Om. Fr. 

k Lord and sauyour r. 
4kunnynge vy. "as long as r. 
w Om. GNsx. 
¢ Om. oerx. 
h For v. 

P sone 
x Om. Noarx. 


@ purgingnesse x. 
i into the o. 
P that 3e be r. 


» besynesse 7. 
& deth, mynde of my monestingis r. 
mForv. took ry. ° bi such vr. 
U entent x. Wimysty o. 


ithat 10. k Om.R. that 3e x sec. m. 


I. 21-——II. 9. 


scripture is not maad bi propre, ‘or owne4, 
21interpretacioun®. Forsothe’ prophecie is® 
not brou3t to* bi mannus wille, but the 
holy men of God inspirid with the Holy 
Goost spaken. 
CAP. II. 
1 Forsothe ther* weren' and™ false pro- 
phetes" of the® puple, as and? in 3ou 
shulen be maystirs’ liz3ers, that" shulen 
bringe in sectes of perdicioun; and thei 
denyen™ ‘the ilke’ Lord that bou3te hem, 
‘aboue ledynge tot hem silf hasty perdi- 
2cioun", ‘or dampnacioun’. And many 
shulen sue her leccheries, bi whiche the 
sweye of treuthe shal be blasfeinyd; and 
thei shulen marchaundise™ of 30u iu 
coueitise bi feynyd wordis. To whom*'now 
doomY ‘sum tyme? ceesith not, and the per- 
sdicioun of hem? nappith not. Forsothe> 
if God sparide not to® aungels*, but bitoke 
hem ‘to be® turmentid, drawenf with 
boondis of helle in to helle, for’ to be 
skept in to" doom; and sparide! not to* the 
first world, but kepte Noe, the ei3tthe!, 
bifore goer of ri3twisnesse, bringynge™ in 
the ‘diluuye, 07" greet flood, to the world 
6 of vupitouse’ men; and he? driuynge’in to 
poudre the citees of men of Sodom and of 
men of Gomor, dampnide™ bis turnynge 
upsedoun, puttinget ensaumple" of hem 
that weren to doynge’ yuel, ‘or vnpitously”; 
zand™” delineride iust Loth, oppressid fro* 
the wrong ‘of curside men’, and leccherous 
sconuersacioun’; sotheli® in si3t and heringe 
he was iust, dwellinge anentis hem that 
fro day in to day turmentiden with wick- 
9 ide» werkis a iust soule. The* Lord knew! 
fore tof delyuere pitouse men of® tempta- 
cioun, sotheli for" to! kepe wickide* men 


4 Om. oer x. ¢interpretacionn of man r. 


II. PETER. 


f For whi r. 


617 


men of God inspirid with the Hooli 
Goost spaken. 


CAP. It. 


But also false prophetis weren in the1 
puple, as in 30u sehulen be maistris? 
lieris, that schulen bringe in sectis of 
perdicioun ; and thei denyen? thilke Lord 
that bou3te hem, and bringen™ on hem 
silf hasti perdicioun. And many schulen2 
sue her letcheries, bi whiche® the weie of 
treuthe schal be blasfemyd; and thei3 
schulen make marchaundiet of jou in 
coueytise bi feyned wordis. To whiche" 


doom now a while ago ceessith not*, and — « now a while, 
the perdicioun of hem nappith not. For4 ee 
if God sparide not aungels synnynge, but ey Meson is 
bitook hem to be turmentid, and to be Lire here. ve. 
drawun doun with boondis of helle in to 

helle, to be kept in to dom’}; and sparide5 + in to dom; 
not the firste world, but kept Noe, the tn tie 
ei3the man, the biforgoere” of riz3twis- ‘is vathr 
nesse, and brou3te in the greet flood to ait 
the world of vnfeithful men; and he6& eretikis. Lire 
droof in to poudre the citees of men of gee 
Sodom and of men of Gommor, and 

dampnede bi turnyng vpsedoun, and 

putte hem the ensaumple of hem that 

weren to doynge yuele; and delyuerid7 

the iust Loth, oppressid of the wrong, 

and of the letcheronse conuersacioun of 

cursid men; for in si3t and hering hes 

was iust, and dwellide amongst hem that 

fro dai in to dai turmentiden with wickid 

werkis a iust soule. For the Lord kang 

delyuere pitenouse men fro temptacioun, 

and kepe wickid men ‘in to* the dai of 


Swasvy. hOm.s. eny tyme rv. i bi sx. 
k Om. rv. 10m. r. m Om. o. also v. 0 profetis weren rv. oinry. POm. vy. 4 maistir sx. 
t whiche x. 1 deneyinge G. sec.m. ‘Sthat x. ‘and bringenonv. 'dampnaciouno. ¥ Om. oex. 
w make marchaundise vy. * whiche ry. Ydom now prx. Za while agoo v. *hem nowo. ©» For if r. 
e¢Om.r. ‘anungelssynnynge rx. ¢€Om.o.  f drawen doun rv. ¢Om.sx. bOm.o. the 
sparide T. kKOm.r. Jeiz3the man, the ry. ™brou3tiny. .%Om.o. © vnfeithfulr. Pp Om. x. 
ddroofy. ‘anddampnider. &bithe s. tand puttinge yr. Uexsaumple sx. dons. do x. 
wOm. oerx. ‘*” andheesec.m. *ofv. YOm.v. 4 connersacioun of curside men vy. 4 for F. 
bwicke sx. ¢Forther. @eanr. ¢Omisrx. fOmr. Efror bOmsrx. iOmey. 
k wicke sx. 
P maistir Eqacghoag. 4 schul denye 1. Y bryng yn. ether aboue leeden K marg. = whom 1. 


t marchaundise Ekaghkoaf. 
VOL. IV. 


«whom 1 


¥ the doom k pr. m. 
4K 


W fore goerer. *ink prim. 


618 I. PETER. 


in to the day of dome for! to be turmentid; 
1oforsothe more hem that walken aftir flesch, 
in coueitinge of vnclennesse, and despijsen 
lordscheping, bolde™, dreden not to" bringe 
in sectes ‘plesinge to hem®, blasfemynge; 
iuwher aungels, whan thei ben more in 
strengthe and vertu beren not a3ens hem 
i2the execrable?, ‘or cursid4’, doom. ‘Thes 
sotheli? as vnresounable beestes, kyndeli in 
to capcioun’, ‘or takinge', aud in to deeth, 
blasfemynge in thes thingis that thei 
knowen not, shulen" perische in her co- 
13rupcioun, receyuynge* the hijre of vnri3t- 
wisnesse, gessynge™ ‘the voluptees of* theY 
day’ delijces of defoulinge and of wemine’, 
‘with delijcis> flowinge, in her feestis® 
14doynge leccherie with 3ou, hauynge® ijen 
ful of auoutrie, and vneesynge trespasse, 
deceynynge vnstedefast soules, hauynge the 
herte excercisid® in coueitise, the sones of 
15 cursynge, forsakinge thef ri3t weie, erreden, 
suynge’ the weie of Balaam of Bosor, the 
ig which louede hijre! of wickidnesse. So- 
theli he hadde correpcioun*, ‘or reprouyng’, 
of his woodnesse; a doumbe beest vndir 
30k, spekinge with voys of man!!, forbede 
17the vnwisdom of the prophet. Thes ben 
welles with oute watir, and cloudis™, ‘or 
mijstis®, driuun with ‘whirlinge wijndis®, 
to whom? the? thicke' mijst of derkuessis is 
isreserued. Sotheli thei spekinge in pride of* 
vanyte, deceyuen' in desijris of flesch of 
leccherie hem, that ‘a litel scapen*. The’ 
ig9whiche lyuynge” in errour, bihotinge* 
liberte’, ‘or fredom?, to hem, whan thei 
ben seruauntes of corupcioun. Sotheli* of 
whom ony man is ouercome, ‘of him? and¢ 


due to her malice. Lire here. ve. 


deth, blasfemynge in these thingis that 


1I. 10—19.- 

Q 5 : reserueth hem ; 
that walken aftir the fleisch, in coueyt- that is, eretikis 
‘ aN to be turment- 
inge of vnclennesse, and dispisen lord- 

Rise . tonris sei 
schiping, and ben boold, plesynge hem silf, comunly, that 
eretikis schnlen 
femynge’; where aungels, whanne thei 11 greuousliere 
an feendis 
ben more’ in strengthe and vertu, beren and othere syn- 
not ‘that was* the execrable’ doom ajens — whiche reint 
Petir settide 
saumplis bifore, 
beestis, kyndli in to takyng, and in to eat kee 
able, that 
princes of eresie, 


dom to be turmentid; but more hem*10* ™7e God 
id. Exposi- 
and dreden not to bringe in sectis, blas-  ( nccnid 
ful men, of 
hem. But these ben as vnresonablei2 
and this seem- 
and defonlid 


thei knowen not, and schulen perische in 


: : ith oth 
her corrupcioun, and resseyue the hire of 13 fleschly ries 
vnri3twisnesse. And thei gessen delicis  ‘chulen be 
x . punschid more 
of defouling} and of wemme, to belikyngis — than comun 


5 ss f, . feendis, and 
of dai‘, flowynge in her feestis with de- — euen with prin 

ke 3 0 cipal fendis, f 
licis, doynge letcherie with 30u, and han 14 whi eresie x 
° : the chief Spice 
izen ful of auowtrie, and vneeessynge of yiteicnta, 

i oe vnstidfa i nesse, and in 
trespas, disseyuynge att st soulis, gee 
and han the herte excercisid¢ to coueitise; al) schnlen 

e summe 
the sones of® cursyng, that forsaken the 1s dampned arn 

-. A 5 ° aftir decrees 
ri3t weie, and erriden, suynge the weie of of synnes. v. 
Balaam of Bosor, which‘ louyde the hire  “sPisiz dora- 

schiping; that 
of wickidnesse. But he hadde repreuyng 6 Cas toed 
; of lordis. sectis ¢ 
of his woodnesse; a doumb beest vndur of eresie. eun- 
G . gelis; that i 
30k, that spak® with vois of man, that  jyuele aunge, 
‘ beren not; that 
forbede the vnwisdom of the profete. j.vinethis 
These ben wellis with out watir, and17 oahu te 
loom ; 
mystis dryuun with ‘whirlinge wyndys®, _ that is, peyne, 
which is seid 


to whiche! the thicke mijst of derknessis abomynable, 

, : ; for feendi 

is reseruyd*. And thei speken in pryde 18 game sto. 
8 tn! oat mynable as 

of vanyte, and disseyuen in’ desiris of vniust 3 but it 

fleisch of letcherie hem, that scapen™ a __ is iust, in as 


my 7 " ‘ myche as it is 
litil. Whiche lyuen in errour, and biheten I9 ordeyned of 


. od. in her 
fredom to hem, whanne thei ben ser-  corrupcioun; 
uauntis of corrupcioun. For of whom 


that is, corrup 
with the hijre 
ony man is ouercomun, of hym also he is 


of vnriziful- 
nesse; that is, 
peyne 3one 


t+ of defouling; that is, of leccherie. and of wem; that is, of glatonie. to be lykinges of day; that is, 


leeneful and onest. ve. tn desijris of flesch of leccherie; that is, of fleschly leccherie. v. scapin a litel; that is, withdrawen heinself sumdel from 
the teching of holy chirche. for suche men ben soone disseyued of eretikis. ve. whiche eretikis (yuen in errour; that is, ben hardid therynne. v. 
liberte; in seyinge that thei moun leenefully vse lustis of flesch. Lire here. ve. 


1Om. sx. 
4 Om. ox. either abomynable vy. © But thes vr. 
resceyue 7. Wandtheigessenr. * Om. r. 
of day y. wommen y. > Om. F. 
&sueden Tr, Om. rv. ithe hire anogsrx. 
nh Om. 00x. o whirle windis sr. P whiche r. 
disseyuen ry, 4% a liti] ascapeu Tr. scapin a litil r. 
dom o. z2Om. oex. ?®Forr. 6 Om. N. 


y of blasfeminge b. 2 maad more 1. 
X sec.m. marg. © the dai b. 
wyndis 1. 1 whom 1. 


4 hauntid rr. 
k resseyued ¢1 pr.m. ach. 


m and ben boold, pleesinge hemself, and r. 

S takinge orx. 

y Om. anogsrx. 

¢ feestis with delicis r. 

k repronynge or. 1 Om. oerx. 
q Om. o. 
v Om. F. 

¢ Om. No. also r. 


4 that that was E. Om. Qx sec. m. a. 
€ ino. 
lin the k. 


°Om.r. P cursid o. 
wand schulen vy. VY and 
a wemme fo be lykingis 
e haunted 0. f Om. anosr. 
Namany. ™mystis o. 
r thilke e. ilke r. Sand x. ‘tand 
Wlyuen vy. *andbiheeten vy. Y¥ fre- 


0 for to AG sec. m. OOF. 
t Om, orx. 

z Om. rv. 
d and han r. 


b ether cursid K marg. 


fthe whiche k. & spak fohimk. 4 whirle 


™ ascapen b. 


Il. 20—111. 7. 


20‘he ist seruaunt®. Forsothe! if men for- 
sakingeS the defoulinges*, ‘or vaclennesses', 
of the world, in* the! knowinge of oure 
‘Lord and sauyour™ Jhesu Crist, eftsoone" 
inwlappid° in thesP, ben® ouercome, the 
latter thingis ben maad to hem" worse 

21than the former. Sotheli’ it was' betere 
‘to hem" for’ to not knowe the weie of 
ri3twisnesse, than for” to turne a3en 
aftir the knowinge, fro that holy maunde- 

22ment that was bitakun to hem. Sotheli* 
‘the ilkeY thing of verrey prouerbe bifel to 
hem, An? hound turned* a3en to his 
woom), ‘or castyng vp*, and a® sowe 
waschun in the® walewinge', ‘or slowes, 
of cley®, ‘or fen. 


Crab, ITE 
1 Lok! I wrijte to 30u! this™ secounde epi- 
stle®, in which I stire j3oure cleer® soule in? 
2monestinge to gydere, that 3e be myndeful 
of the? wordis, that I bifore seide of holy" 
prophetis, and of the maundementis of 
sholy apostlis of’ the Lord sauyour'; first 
witynge" this thing, that in the laste dayes 
illusours’, ‘or scorners, or deceyuours™, 
shulen come* in deceyt, goynge aftir hir 
4 owne coueitinges, selynge, Whereis biheste’, 
or the? comyng, of him? forsothe* sith 
fadirs slepten?, so alle thinges lasten fro 
athe bigynnynge of creature. Sotheli it 
daarith® hem willinge this thing, that 
heuenes weren bifore’, and the® erthe of 
watir and bi watir beynge, ‘or stondingef, 
é6to gydere bi Goddis word; bi whiche 
thingis ‘that ilke§ world clensid thanne 
7perischide. Forsothe the" heuenes that 
now ben, and the erthe’, bi the same word 


his Nn. © seruaunt he is N. 
i Om. noex. or unclennes T. * in to N. bi v. 
and eftsoone yr. © Om. Nn. ben wlappid r. 
G sup. ras. uOm.o. YVOm. sx. 
4 turnynge o. 
40m. 7, a0. Om. s. fslow3 0. vomyng s. 
dereworthe britheren r. 1} 30, moost dere Nn. 
4 tho asyvx. ‘the hooly y. 8 and of o. 


a for forsothe s. For r. 
& that thilk qc. thilke s, that x. 1 Om. s. 


8 vnclennes o. 
4 ether slow of cley K marg. * of R. 


$ pistle b. 
EQgk pr.m.a8.  ¥ thilk Enka. B 


Il. PETER. 


f Sotheli x. For r. 
1Om. g. 
P the same N. 
w Om. sx. 
b womyt 4. vome GT. castyng up ox. voom Pp. vomyt es. spuyng V. 
& Om. orx. 
m the 4. 
t and Sauyour r. 
w Om. 0. or seorners Q. either disseyuouris v. or disseyueris x. 
» slepten, either dijeden rv. 
i erthe ben put ajen r. 


© rijtwisnessis a. truwe riz3twijsnes k pr. m. 
t ether dareth K marg. % hi ExQnbcegoaf. 


619 


seruaunt. For if men forsaken the vn-20 
cleunessis” of the world, bi the knowyng 
of oure Lord and sauyour Jhesu Crist, 
and eftsone ben wlappid in these, and 
ben ouercomun, the lattere thingis ben 
maad to hem worse than the formere. 
For it was betere to hem to not knowe2! 
the weie of rijtwisnesse®, than to turne 
ajen aftir the knowyng, fro that hooli 
maundement that was bitakun to hem. 
For thilke very prouerb bifelde to hem, 22 
The hound turnede ajen to his castyng?, 
and a sowe 7s waiscliun in walwyng% int 
fenne. 


CAP. III. 


Lo! 3e moost dereworth britheren, Y1 
write to 3o0u this secounde epistles, in 
which* Y stire 3oure elere soule bi mon- 
esting togidere, that 3e be myndeful of2 
tho wordis, that Y biforseide of the 
hooli prophetis, and of the maundementis 
of the hooli apostlis of the Lord and 
sauyour. First wite 3e this thing, thats 
in the laste daies disseyueris schulen 
come in disseit, goynge aftir her owne 
coueityngis, seilynge, Where is the bi-4 
heest, or the comyng of hym? for sithen 
the fadris dieden, alle thingis lasten fro 
the bigynnyng of creature. But it iss 
hid‘ fro hem willynge this thing, that 
henenest were bifore, and the erthe of 
water was stondynge bi watir, of" Goddis 
word; bi which that’ ilke¥ world clensid, 6 
thanne bi watir perischide. But the7 
henenes that now ben, and the erthe, 


& fleynge x. forsaken ry. 4 vnclennessis No. 
m Sauyour and oure Lord ny." and eft Nn. 
Vand ben ry. ‘hima. § Forr. +t were 

x For r. y that x. z Asano. And ans. 

¢ Om. ox. 

i Om. ovx. * Loo, 3e most 

Oclene T, P and sex. bi r. 

u wite 3ee y. Y deceyuours o. scorneris Vv. 
x bicome T. Ythe beheste x. 7 Om.¢@. 

dfirsto. ¢€Om.o. fOm.e. 


b fen vy. 
" pistle pe. 


¢ is hid fro r. 


Pp vomyte, or caslynge 1. spuwing c. 
vOn. 


4kKQ 


* in whiche ; 
that is, the 
firste and the 
secunde pistle. 
Lire here. v. 


ft heuenes; that 
is, the hizere 
part of the 
lower part of 
the eir. as a 
thousind 3eeres; 
anentis us, and 
bi a thousind is 
vndirstonden 
whateuer turn- 
yng aboute of 
tymes, which is 
itil and of noo 
reputacioun iu 
comparisoun of 
Goddis euer- 
lastingnesse. 
God farieth not 
his biheest ; 
that is, in the 
3eelding of his 
bikheestis he 
tarieth not ouer 
duete, thou3 
summen gessen 
this bi err([our] 
and denyen 
herfore the dom 
to comynge. 
doith paciently; 
in delayinge the 
doom. for 30u; 
that goode men 
encreese in me- 
rit, and yuele 
men turne a3en 
bi penaunce. 
Lire here. ve. 
wole not that 
eny men pe- 
rische; as 
myche as per- 
teyneth to him- 
self. Lire here. 
v. 


620 


‘put a3en*, ben kept to fijr' in to the day of 
dome and perdicioun™ of vnpitouse men. 
8 Forsothe, 3e" moost dere, 00 thing ‘daare 
3ou not’, ‘or be not unknowun?, for’ oo 
day anentis God as" a® thousynd 3eeres*, 
gand a thousynd 3eer* asY oo day. The 
Lord tarieth not his biheest, as ‘sum men* 
gessenY, but he doith paciently for 30u, ‘not 
willinge* ony for to® perische, but® alle 
10 for® tof turne ajen to penaunce. Forsothe 
the day of the Lord shal come as a theef, 
in which heuenes with greet bire, ‘or Jeers- 
nesse®, shulen passe, sotheli elementes 
shulen be dissolued bi heete, forsothe! the 
erthe, and alle werkes that ben in it, shulen 
11be brent. Therefore whan alle thes thinges 
shulen be ‘to be* dissolued', what maner 
men bihoueth™ 3ou for" to be in holy 
12lyuyngis and pitees, abidynge° and hi3inge 
in to the comynge of the day of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist, bi whom? heuenes_bren- 
nynge shulen be dissolued, and‘ elementes* 
bi brennynge’, ‘or heete', of fijr’ ‘shulen 
13 fayle’. Sotheli we abijden up his biheestes* 
newe heuenes and newe erthe, in whiche 
14ri3twisnesse dwellith. For which thing, 
3e moost dere, abijdinge thes** thinges, 
bisyeY for? to be founde to him in pees 
1s vnspottid and vnfoulid*. And deme 3e 
the longe abijdinge of oure Lord 3oure 
helthe, as and> oure moost dere® brother 
Poul wroot to 30u, up® wisdom 3ouun to 
1éhim. As and in alle epistlis spekingef ‘in 
hem of thes thingis; in whiche ben summe 
harde thinges in vndirstondinge, the 
whiche vnwijse', ‘or vutau3t*, and vnstable 
men deprauen, as and! othere scriptures", 
17to her owne perdicioun®. Therfore 3e°, 
britheren, bifore witynge kepe? 30u4 silf, 
lest 3e ouerled, ‘or deceyued', bi errour of 


kK and v. 1 the fier Nn. 


Il. PETER. 


Ill. 8—17. 


ben kept bi the same word, and ben re- 
seruyd to fier in to the dai of doom and 
perdicioun of wickid men. But, 3e moosts 
dere, this o thing be not hid to* 30u, that 
o dai anentis God ts as a thousynde 3eeris, 
and a thousynde 3eeris ben as o dai. Theo 
Lord tarieth not his biheest, as summe 
gessen, but he doith pacientli for 3ou, 
and wole not that ony men’ perische, but 
that alle turne ajen to penaunce. Foro 
the dai of the Lord schal come as a theef, 
in which heuenes with greet bire? schulen 
passe, and elementis schulen be dissoluyd® 
bi heete, and the erthe, and alle the werkis 
that ben in it, schulen be brent. Ther-11 
for whanne alle these thingis schulen be 
dissolued, what mauner men bihoueth it 
30u to be in hooli lyuyngis and pitees, 
abidinge® and hi3ynge in to the comyngiz 
of the dai of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, bi 
whom heuenes brennynge schulen be dis- 
soluyd, and elementis schulen faile bi 
brennyng of fier. Also we abiden bi hise 1s 
biheestis newe heuenes and newe erthe, 
in which ri3twisnesse dwellith. Fors 
which thing, 3e moost dere, abidynge 
these thingis, be 3e bisye to be foundun 
to hym in pees vnspottid and vndefoulid. 
And deme 3e long abiding of oure Lord 1s 
Jhesu Crist j3oure heelthe, as also oure 
moost dere’ brother Poul wroot to 3ou, 
bi wisdom 3ouun to hym. As and in allefi6 
epistlis he spekith ‘in hem& of these 
thingis; in" which ben summe hard thingis 
to vndurstonde, whiche' ynwise and vn- 
stable men deprauen, as also thei don 
othere scripturis, to her owne perdicioun. 
Therfor 3e, britheren, bifor witynge kepe 17 
3ouk silf, lest 3e be disseyued bi errour of 
vnwise men, and falle awei fro 3oure 


mlesyngo. Amyo. . ° benothidtojouv. POm.orx. 4thatr. 
risasy. SOm.N. t3er x. U3eeris aNogy. VY benasy. W bihestis x. * summen GT. summe Nos. 
Ywenen N. Zand wole not ry, ®thatenymenvy. 6 Om. syx. ¢Om.r. 4 but thatr. © Om. srx. 
fOm.r. oureo. & Om. oex. or feerdenesse T. 4 bipasse T. J sothely 0. * Om. orx. dis. 
solued, ether departid vy. ™ it byhoueth anogsx. bihoueth it yr. 2" Om. sx. © hydynge o. P which r. 
aOm.o. ' elementis schulen faile yr. s heeteo. ¢tQOm.oox. the fyero. VOm.r. WbiF. 
* biheest nN. ** Om.o. Y¥ bisieth anx. be besy yr. %Om. sx. ®%vndefoulid srr. bOm.o. © dere- 
worthe g. 4Om.og. ¢biv. fhespekingec. €Om.o. 5 Om. r. i yntau3t o. * Om. Noerx. 
1Om. 0. ™ scripture s. ™ perdicioun, either dampnacioun vy. °Om.s. Pkepith esx. 4 30ure Gor. 
r Om. x. 
* froo. Y man Eeo8. 4 ether hast k marg. ®lousid R. » pitee rR. © abidingisk. 4 dereworthe r. 
© Om. Rgoa8. fallehiso. Sandr. bofr. ithe whichek. * 3oure r. 


Ill. 18. 


vnwijse men, falle’ awey fro 3oure owne 
18sadnesse. Forsothe' wexe 3e in grace" and 
knowinge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist and 
oure Sauyour; to him’ glory and’ now 
and in to* the day of euerelastingenesse. 
Amen. 


HHeere endeth the secounde pistle of 
seynt Petre, and now bigynneth the first 
pistle of seynt Joony. 


S 3ee falle s. t But v. 


y From 4. 


Il. PETER. 


4 the grace AGNOSTVXY. 
Here endith the secunde epistil of Petre, and bigynneth the firste of John. Nn. 
secound pistel of Petir, and bygynneth the epistil of Joon. o. 
and here bigynneth the firste pistel of Jon apostle. Q. 


621 


owne! sadnesse. But wexe 3e in theis 
grace and the knowyng of oure Lord 
Jhesu Crist and oure Sauyour; to hym 
be glorie now and in to the dai of euer- 
lastyngnesse. Amen. 


Here endith the secounde pistle of 
Petir, and here bigynneth the firste 
pistle of John™. 


Vv him be rv. W bothe rv. x Om. s. 
Here endith the 
Here endith the secounde pistil of Petre, 


Here endith the secunde pistel of Petre, and here 


bigynneth the firste pistel of Joon. vy. No final rubric in carpsrx. 


1 Om. Eb pr.m. gk. 


m From cmquxabcegha. 
the j. epistle of Jon. 10. 


Heere endeth the tj. epistle of Petre, and biginnith 
Here endeth the secounde pistle of Petre; se now the jirste pistle of Joon. x. 
Here endith the wi. pistil of Peter, and sueth i. of Johne. n. 


No final rubric in ark. 


I. 


JOHN. 





The first epistle of Joon*. 


CAP. I. 

1 WuicHeE? thing was fro® thet bigyn- 
nynge, which we herden, which we si3en 
with oure ijeu, whiche we bihelden, and 
oure hondes tretiden to gydere, ‘or touch- 

27den®, of the word of lijf; and the lijf is 
shewid. And we sijen, and we witnessen, 
and tellen to 30u euerelastinge lijf, that 
was anentis the fadir, and apperide to us. 

3Therfore' that thing, that we siz3en, and 
herden®, we tellen to 30u", that andi 3e 
haue felaushippe with us, and oure felau- 
schip be with the fadir, and his sone 
4Jhesu Crist. And ‘this thing we writen‘ 
to 30u, that 3e haue ioye, and 3oure ioye 
sbe ful. And this is the tellyng, that we 
herden of him, and tellen to 30u, for! God 
is li3t, and ony derknesses ben not in him. 
6If we ‘shulen seie™, for" we han felan- 
schip with hin, and we wandreu in derk- 
nessis, we lijen, and we® don not treuthe. 
7Sotheli if we walken in li3t, as and? he is 
in‘ ]i3t, we han felauschip to gydere; and 
the blood of Jhesu', his sone, clensith us 
sfro al synne. If we ‘shulen seie’, fort we 
han not synne, we ‘oure silf" deceyuen us’, 
gand treuthe is not in us. If we know- 
lechen oure synnes, he is feithful and iust, 


8 The firste epistle of Joon is this. c. 


The first pistle of Joon. p. 


Flere bigynneth the firste pistle of Joon’. 


CAP. A: 


THAT thing* that was fro the bigyn-1 
nyng, which we herden, which we sayn 
with oure i3zen, which we bihelden, and 
oure hondis touchiden, of the word of 
lijf; and the lijf is schewid. And we sayn, 2 
aud we” wituessen, and tellen to jon thee 
euerlastynge lijf, that was anentis the 
fadir, and apperide to vs. Therfor ‘wes 
tellen to 30u that thing, that we seyn, 
and herden®, that also 3e haue felow- 
schipe with vs, and oure felowschip be 
with the fadir, and with his sone Jhesu 
Crist. And we writen this thing to 3o0u, 4 
that 3e haue ioye, and that 3oure ioye be 
ful. And this is the tellyng, that wes 
herden of hym, and tellen to jou, that 
God is 1i3t, and ther ben no derknessis 
in him. If we seien, that we han felaw-6 
schip with hym, and we wandren in 
derknessis, we lien, and don not treuthe. 
But if we walken in 1i3t, as also he is in7 
li3t, we han felawschip togidere; and the 
blood of Jhesu Crist, his sone, clensith vs 
fro al synne. If we seien, that we hans 
nof synne, we disseyuen vs® silf, and 
treuthe is not in vs. If we knowlechen 9 
oure synues, he is feithful and iust, that 


No prologue in any of the Mss. ; 


but in 6 a space left for it, with this rubric, The prolag of Joon. No initial rubric in aogsvxy. > What r. 


caty. 4Om. an. © Om. ex. f Therfore wee tellen to jou y. &hanherd x. »Om.r. i Om. rv. 
k we writen this thing yr, Ithaty. ™seieny. "thaty. °Om.rx. POm.o. 9Om.r, *Om.o. 
Sseien ry. tthaty. 4silf anesx, Om. or. Vv vs silf or. 

® The firste pistle of John. c. No initial rubric in crkmqruxabeghoa, >» Om. Rh. ¢ Om, EK pr.m. 


k prim. a8. 4 Om. kK. 


€ herden, we teller to 30u xk. 


f not hk sec.m. o8.  & our Eh, 


* That thing; 
thus the lettre 
schulde be 
joyned; we 
tellen to 30u 
that thing, ete.; 
that is, Goddis 
kindely sone, 
that was born 
without bigyn- 
nyng of the 
fadir. which we 
herden; of 
Joon Baptist, 
that was bifore 
goere of Goddis 
kindely sone 
maad man. his 
word is not in 
us; that is, 
Crist, whicb is 
seid the word 
of the fadir, is 
not in us bi 
grace halew- 
inge. Lire here. 
ve. 


I. 10o—II. 13. 


that he for3iue to us oure synnes, and 
10¢clense us fro al wickidnesse. If we ‘shulen 

seie’, for* we han not synned, we maken 

him a lizer, and his word is not in us. 


CAP. II. 

1 My litel sones, I wrijte to 30u thes 
thinges, that ‘3e synne not’. But and7if ony 
man ‘shal synne?, we han auoket anentis 

2 the fadir, Jhesu Crist iust, and he is help- 
yng for oure synnes; sotheli> not onely 
for oure’®, but also for’ of¢ al the world. 

3 And in this thing we witen, forf we han? 
knowun him, if we kepen his commaunde- 

4mentes. He* that seith him’ for* to! ‘haue 
knowe™ God, and kepith not his com- 
maundementes, is a lijer, and treuthe is 

snot in him. Forsothe who® kepith his® 
word, ‘verily in him is parfijt charite?. 
In this thing we witen, for’ we ben in 
chim, if we shulen' be parfijt in him. He 
that seith him’ fort to® dwelle’ in him, and 
he* owith for* to walke, as he walkide. 
7Moost dere’, I wrijte to 30u, not a newe 
maundement, but the olde maundement, 
that 3e hadden fro” the* bigynnyng. The 
olde maundement is the word, that 3e 
sherden. Eftsoone I wrijte to jou a newe 
maundement, that is trewe® and¢ in? him 
and in 30u; for derknesses® passeden, and 

9 verrey! 1i3t ‘now shijneth®. He that seith 
him® for! to* be! in 1i3t, and haatith his 

l0brother, is in derknesse™ til to 3it. He 
that loueth his brothir, dwellith in 1i3t, 

liand sclaundre is not in him. Sotheli he 
that haatith his brother, is in derknessis, 
and ‘in derknessis wandrith", and woot 
not whidir he goith; for derknesses han 
12blyndid his i3en. Lite] sones, I wrijte to 
30u, for® 3oure synnes ben for3ouun to 30u 


I. JOHN. 


623 


he’ for3yue to vs oure synnes, and clense 


.vs from al wickidnesse. And if we seien, 10 


we? han not synned, we maken hym a 
liere, and his word is not in vs. 


CAP. II. 
Mi litle sones, Y write to 30u these! 
thingis, that 3e synnen not. But if ony 
man synneth, we han ani aduocat* anentis 


- the fadir, Jhesu Crist, and he is the for-2 


3yuenes! for™ oure synnes”; and not oneli 
for oure syxnes, but also for the synnes 
of al the world}. And in this thing we3 
witen, that we knowen hym, if we kepen 
hise comaundementis. He that seith4 
that he knowith God, and kepith not hise 
comaundementis, is a liere, and trewthe is 
not in hym. But the charite of God iss 
perfit verili in hym, that kepith his word. 
In° this thing we witen, that we ben in 
hym, if we ben perfit in hym. He thate 
seith, that he dwellith in hym, he owith 
for? to walke, as he walkide. Moost7 
dere britheren, Y write to 30u, not a 
newe maundement, but the elde maunde- 
ment, that 3e hadden fro the bigynnyng. 
The elde maundement is the word, that 
3e herden. Eftsoone Y write to 30u a8 
newe maundement, that is trewe botle in 
hym and in 3ou; for derknessis ben 
passid, and veri 1i3t schyneth now. Heo 
that seith, that he is in Hi3t, and hatith 
his brother, is in derknesse‘ 3it. He that 10 
loneth his brothir, dwellith in 1i3t, and 
sclaundre is not in hym. But he thati 
hatith his brother, is in derknessis, and 
wandrith in derknessis, and woot not whi- 
dir he goith; for derknessis han™ blindid 
hise i3en. Litle sones, Y write to 30u, that 12 
joure syunes ben for3ouun to 30u for his 


i3for his name. Fadirs, I wrijte to jou, name. Fadris, Y write to 30u, for 3e hanis 

wseien vy. Xthatoy. Ydonoosynner. 20m, oeT. @synnethy. »Om.o0. © ourn Tr. oure 
synnes¥. TOm. 7. & Om. ex sec.m. the synnes of vy. fthaty. 8 Om.rv. hAndheo. i that 
he vy. kOm.srx. 1Om.r. ™knowith vy, "the charite of God is perfit verily in him that kepith r. 
othiss. P Om. F. q that r. r Om. r. Sthathe vr. t Om. srx,. uOm. ry.  V dwellith rv. 
whimo. * Om. sx. y dere britheren vy. Zatyr. aOm. rx. Ptreuthe r.. © that o. bothe r. 
dintor. €derkenesseo. fvereyly y. &shynethnowry. thathe ry. {'Om.srx. * Om. r. 
lis y. ™ derknesses pst. ™ wandrith in derknessis y. © that r. 


h that we Egka. 
2Om. Eg. © And in gk prim. 


i Om. b pr.m. o. 


P Om. 1Kbehko§. 


k ether a mediatour K marg. } ether helper K marg. ™ of 1vao. 
4 derknessis kRxho. 


t hath b. 


T for the synnes 
of al the world ; 
as to sufficience, 
but oonly for 
chosen men as 
to affect, for 
othere men set- 
ten letting. 
Jhesn Crist is 
oure auocat 
anentis the fa- 
dir, and shew- 
eth his woundis 
to the fadir, v. 
and sithen Jlie- 
su is iust, he 
preieth not for 
al manere syn- 
neris, but oonly 
for hem that 
repenten verei- 
ly. ve. in this 
we witen that 
we ben in him; 
kunnyng is 
taken here 
largely for 
preuable con- 
lecting, either 
supposing, no 
but Goddis re- 
uelacioun be 
had on this 
thing. Thisthat 
sueth in summe 
hookis, if we 
ben perfit in 
hin, is not in 
bookis amend- 
id. Lire heere. 
v. 


624 


for? 3e han knowun him, that is fro4 the’ 
bigynnynge. 3onge men, I wrijte to 3o0u, 
14 for’ 3e han ouercome the wickid'. I wrijte 
to 30u, infauntis", ‘or 30nge children’, for’ 
je han knowe the fadir. I wrijte to 3ou* 
jonge men, ‘or of mydle age, for? 3e ben 
stronge, and the word of God dwellith in 
1530u, and 3e ouercamen the wickid’. Nyle 
3e loue the world, nether? tho thinges that 
ben in the world. If ony man loueth the 
world, the charite of the fadir is not in 
ishim. Forwhi al thing that is in the 
world, is coueytise of flesch, and coueytise 
of izjen, and pride of lijf, whiche is not of 
17 the fadir, but it is of the world. And the 
world shal passe, and the coueytise of it 5 
sotheli he that doith the wille of God, 
isdwellith ‘in to with outen ende. Mi litel 
sones, the last hour is; and as 3e han herd 
for’ antecrist cometh, now many antecristes 
ben made; ‘wher of we witen, for’ it is the 
last hour. Thei wenten forth’ fro us, but 
thei weren not of us; forwhi if thei hadden 
be of us, sotheli thei hadden dwelt with 
us; but that thei be knowun, for" thei ben 
zonot of us. But 3e han vnecioun' of the 
Holy Goost*, and han! knowe alle thinges. 
21I wroot not to 3ou as to men vnknowinge™ 
treuthe, but as to" knowinge it*, and for? 
ggech lesyng ‘is not of treuthe’, Who is a 
lijer, no” but this that denyeth for’ Jhesus 
is not Crist? This is antecrist, that deny- 
aseth the fadir and the sone. Sothielit ech 
that denyeth the sone, ‘nether hath" the 
fadir; forsothe he that knowlechith the 
aisone, hath and’ the fadir. That thing 
that 3e herden fro’ the begynnynge, dwelle* 
in 30u; for if itY ‘shal dwelle? in 3ou, the? 
which 3e herden at the bigynuynge, and 3e 
shulen dwelle in the sone and the fadir. 
25 And this is the ajen bileest, that he bihizte 
26to us, euerelastyng lijf. I wroot® thes 


I. JOHN. 


Il. 14-——26. 

I } . + Nile 3e loue 
knowun hym, that is fro the bigynnyng ae 
3onge men, Y write to 30u, for 3e han ouer- is, men vee 

° . ° in vndne 
comun the wickid. Y write to jou, 3onge 14 the aeliavle. 

. . thingis of the 
children, for 3e han knowe the fadir. Y Sa etheds 
write to 30u, britheren, for 3e han knowen the Kinde of 

x aoe i hem is worthi 
hym, that is fro the bigynnyng. Y write beiloser, 
natheles the 
to 30u, 3onge men, for 3e ben stronge, and _ synne is worthi 
Q O to he hatid and 
the word of God dwellith in 30u, and 3e fea. neither 
han ouercomun the wickid. Nyle 3e loue 15 {40 *hingis ees 
Sy 
the world}, ne tho thingis that ben in Ne 
the world. If ony man loueth the world, the world, for 
e. . . resouns 0: 
the charite of the fader is not in hym.  synnes. a/ thing 
For al thing that is in the world, is Unda 
coueitise of fleisch, and coueitise of izen, jy oes 
and pride of lijf, which is not of the fadir, eee . 
an te at is, the vj. 
but it is of the world. And the world 17 and the last age 
schal thee eye pane of the world 
schal passe, and the* coueitise of 1t; but he that renneth 
* . : togidere with 
that doith the wille of God, dwellith the vij. age, ve. 
with outen ende. My litle sones, the 18 which is the 
r age of hem that 
laste our is; and as 3e han herd, that Ge Sd a 
° fs 5 uene fro the 
antecrist cometh, now many antecristis tyme of Cristis 
° OA Si bi 
ben maad ; wherfor we witen, that it is iin tz. sate 
the laste our. Thei wenten forth fro vs, 19 ea cae, 
but thei weren not of vs; for if thei either ne laste 
Q our is the.... 
hadden be of vs, thei hadden dwelte — of anticrist, 

‘ : which is seid 
with vs; but that thei be knowun, that the jaste our, 

] t . . for it schal 
thei ben not‘ of vs. But 3e han anoint-20 71s anonte 
yng of the Hooli Goost, and knowen alle the ende of the 

ae world; nathe- 
thingis. Y wroot not to 30u, as to men 21 les this tyme 
bigan in a ma- 
that knowen" not treuthe’, but as to men  nere in the 
wy ° * tyme of seint 
that knowen™ it, and for ecli leesing is 

‘d D wane °c 99 Ebion and Che- 
not of treuthe. Who is a liere, but this 22 ymca 
that denyeth that Jhesu is not Crist ?  othere eretikis 
This is antecrist, that denyeth the fadir, that ben the 

figure of anti- 
crist. anticrist 
sone, hath not the fadir; but he that 5."\a.ci come 
knowlechith the sone, hath also the fadir. eae 
That thing that 3e herden at the bigyn- 24 cristis ; that is, 
rumping the 
dwellith in 30u, which 3e herden at the gospel, as anti- 
crist schal do. 
sone and in the fadir. And this is the 2s9f us; bi ener- 
lastinge predes- 


Joon, whanne 
camen forth 
and the sone. So* ech that denyeth thes 
cometh ; that 
in his tyme. v. 
os . J eretikis cor- 
uyng, dwelle it in 30u; for if that thing 
treuthe of the 
bigynnyng, 3e schulen dwelle in the (soe O 
tinacionn of 


God. Live here. ve. Alle eretikis; alle that distroien bi deedis the feith which thei knonlechyn ; ‘alle that ben contrarie to Crist ben anticristis. 


The Glose here. ve. 


P that vr. Gat rv. r Om. ogrx. 


Sthatr.  t wicke sx. 4 30nge children 0. VY Om. ogx. 
wthat yr. *Om.0o. yOm. x. Zthat ry. a@wickesx. Dnev. COm.v. that r. ¢ wherfore r. 
fthaty. Soutx. bhthaty. ianoyntyngy. Om. x. !Om.r. ™ not knowinge r. 4 men 
knowinginr. °Om. 7. Pthaty. TOm.0 "Om x. Sthator. tSor. hath not vr. 
Valsor, Watr. *dwelletho. Ythat thing vy. 2 dwellith yr. #Om.r. > inthe oer. © write r. 
8QOm.b. tnotalle Kk prim. %knewen be. Vv the treuthe k pr.m. Wknewen be8. * For a. 


II, 27——IIl. 8. 


thinges to 30u, of hem that deceyuen 30u ; 

27‘and the’ anoyntyng®, ‘the which‘ 3e re- 
ceyueden of him, dwelle in 3ou. And 3e han 
not nede, that ony man teche 3ou, but as 
his anoyntyng® techith 30u of alle thingis, 
and it is trewe, and it is not lesyng; and 

agas he tau3te 30u, dwelle 3e in him. And 
now, 3e¢ litel sones, dwellith> in him, that 
whan he shal appere, we han! trist, and 
be not confoundid of him in his comynge. 

ag If 3e* witen, for! he is iust, ‘wite 3e™ 
for" and® ech that doith riztwisnesse, is 
born of him. 


CAP. III. 


See 3e what maner charite the fadir 3af 
to us, that we be named the sones of God, 
and be. For this thing the world knew? 
2not us, for it knew? not him. Moost dere’, 

now we* ben the sones of God, and 3it it* 
apperide not, what we shulen be. We 
witen, for" whan he shal appere, we shulen 
be lijkY to” him, for we shulen see him as 
3he is. And ech man that hath this hope 
in him, makith him silf holy, as and’ he is 
4holy. Ech man that doith synne, doith 
and? wickidnesse, and synne is wickidnesse. 
5 And 3e witen, for? he apperide that he 
shulde do awey synnes, and synne is not 
6in him. Ech man that dwellith in him, 
synneth not; and ech that synneth, seeth 
not him, ne’ knew* him. Litel sones, no 
man deceyue 30u; he that doith ri3twis- 
gnesse, is iust, as and4 he is inst. He that 
‘doith synne®, is of the deuel; for the 
‘deuel synneth at’ the bigynnynge. In 


1 


I. JOHN. 


625 


* the world 
knowith not 
us; bi know- 
ing of appreu- 
yng, forwhi 
worldly men 
appreuen not, 
but reprenen 
hem that dis- 
pisen erthely 
thingis, and 
guon to heuen- 
ly eritage, and 
aretten hem 
foolis and 
wrecchis ; and 
the cause su- 
eth, for it 
knowith not 
hymy for di 
this, that men 
ben al s0uen to 
29 worldly thingis, 
thei ben turned 
awey from 
knowing of the 
fadir, as myche 
as he is 3euere 
«f heuenly eri- 
tage; wherfore 
thei appreuen 
not dispiseris of 
erthely thingis 
and desijreris 


biheeste, that he bihizte to vs euerlastinge 
lijf. Y wroot these thingis to 30u, of 26 
hem that disseynen jou, and that the27 
anoyntyng which 3e resseyueden of hym, 
dwelle in 30u. And 3e han not nede, 
that ony man teche 3on, but as his anoynt- 
yng techith 30u of alle thingis, and it is 
trewe, and it is not leesyng; and as he 
tau3te 30u, dwelle 3e in hym. And now, 28 
3e litle sones, dwelle 3e in hym, that 
whanne he schal appere, we haue aY trist, 
and be not confoundid of hym in his coin- 
yng. If 3e witen that he is iust, wite 3e 
that also ech that doith riz3twisnesse, is 
borun of hym. 


CAP. III. 


Se 3e what maner charite the fadir! 
jaf to vs, that we be named the sones of 


God, and ben hise soues. For this thing pene 
5 thingis. Lire 
the world knewe not vs*, for it knew tere. ve. 


t Ech man that 
dwellith in 
him; bi feith 
foormed with 
charite. syn- 
neth not; as 
longe as he 
dwellith so, 
noo that a man 
hauynge feith 
foormed with 


not hym. Moost dere britheren, now we2 
ben the sones of God, and 3it it apperide 
not, what we schulen be. We witen, 
that whanne he schal appere, we schulen 
be lijk hym, for we schulen se hym as he 
is. And ech man that hath this hope in3 
: ° * ° charite may 
hym, makith hym silf hooli, as he is [ye ene. 
hooli. Ech man that doith synne, doith 4 AE 
‘ae . cies Lg eo 
also wickidnesse, and synne is wickid- — yuele, but that 
i 3 no man vsinge 
nesse. And 3e witen, that he apperide to5 in cede feith 
‘ i és foor ith 
do awei synnes’, and synne is not in hym,  yomed wih 
Ech man that dwellith in hymt, synneth 6 a ene 
? . 
not; and ech that synneth, seeth not hym, mia ol 
f neuner mew 
nether knew hym. Litle sones, no man7 him; bi feith 
. . : fe ed with 
disseyue 30u; he that doith ri3twysnesse, ea ke 
ss os ‘ deuel synneth 
is iust, as also he is iust. He that doiths art ee 
synue, is of the deuel; for the deuel syn-  *ynsei, 
maad yuel in his 


creacioun, but sith he synnede he contynned euere in synne; for his synne is vncurable, and he brou3te men to synne. doth not synne; in as myche 
as he is born of God, forwhi feith foormed with charite stondith not with deedly synne. the sced of God; that is, grace suffrith not such synne 
with it. he may not do synne; in as myche as he hath grace that mai not be resoun to do synne, natheles he mai do synne bi mysusing of free 
wille, which is not confermed hi grace. we witen that we he translatid, etc.; that is, we witen certeynly; if this is referrid to the postlis that resseyu- 
eden the Hooly Goost in visible syngne, and weren confermed in grace, and of this thei weren certified bi Goddis reuelacioun ; if this word, we 
witen, is referrid to othere men, wite is taken here for preuable coniecting. v. fro deth; of synne. to lijf; of grace. ve. putte lyues for britheren ; 
that is, set forth to perel and deth oure dedly lijf for the goostly heelthe of hem; ech man is bounden to in tyme of nede, if he see his brother in 
goostly perel, and may not he helpid in othere manere, no but he that seeth put forth him self to bodily deth ; but hischopis and othere prelatis and 
curatis be hoolden to putte hemself to bodyly deth for the heelth of sogetis, if a woolf entrith the floc to corumpe it in feith and vertues, ellis thei 
weren not scheepherdis, but hijred hynes, as Crist seith in the ten e°. of Joon. Lire here. v. 


40m. s. © oynting x. {which sy. that x. 8 oynting x. 5 dwelle av. dwell 3e nos. i haue or. 
k wee x. Ithat oy. ™witeth x. Othaty. °Om.N. Pknowith y. 4knowith vy. * dere bri- 
therenv. %3eT. tOm. x. Uthaty. Viichye. wOm.r. yOm.r. 2%O0Om-.o. also vr. in y. 
"that ov, nether anosyx. © knowith 4. 4Om.o. €synneo pr.m. synneth o sec.m. {fro r. 


y Om. 1K pr.v. h. 


VOL. IV. AL 


2 synne a. 


626 


this thing the sone of God apperide, that 
ohe vndo the werkes of the deuel. Ech 
man that is born of God, doith not synne; 
for the seed of God dwellith in him, and 
he mai not synne®, for he is born of God. 
10In this thing the sones of God ben know- 
un, and the sones of the fend. Ech man 
that is not iust, is not of God, and he that 
11 loueth not his brother. For this is the tell- 
yng, that 3e herden at the! bigynnyng, that 
123e loue ech other; not* as Caym, that was 
of the yuel!, and slow his brother. And 
for what thing slew he™ him? for his 
werkes werei .yuele, sotheli his brotheris 
isiust". Britheren, nyle 3e wondre, if the 
14world haatith® jou. We witen, for? we 
ben translatid fro deeth to lijf, for we loue 
britheren. He that loueth not, dwellith in 
1sdeeth. Ech man that haatith his brother, 
is a manqueller; and je witen, for! ech 
manqueller* hath not euerlasting lijf dwell- 
linge in him. In this thing we han knowe 
the charite of God, for he puttide’ his 
soule', ‘or jf", for vs, and we owen for’ 
17to putte oure” soules* for britheren. He 
that ‘shal haueY the? substaunse® of this 
world, and ‘shal see” his® hrother for® to® 
hauef nede, and ‘shal close? his entrayles> 
fro him, hou dwellith the charite of God 
18in him? Mi litel sones, lone we noti in 
word, nether in tunge, but in werk and 
i9treuthe. In this thing we knowen, for 
we ben of treuthe, and in his sijt we 
z0monesten! oure hertes. For if oure herte 
shal™ reproue” us, ‘or vndernyme™, God 
is more than oure herte, and knew? alle 
2ithinges. Moost dere?, if oure herte ‘shal 
22 not4 reproue’ us, we han trist to God ; and 
what euer we shulen axe’, we shulen re- 
ceyue of him, for we kepen his comaunde- 
mentes, and we don tho thinges, that ben 


I. JOHN. 


UI. g-—22. 


neth? fro the bigynnyng. In this thing 

the sone of God apperide, that he vndo 

the werkis of the deuel. Ech man thats 

is borun of God, doith not synne; for 

the seed of God dwellith in hym, and he 

may not do synne, for he is borun of God. 

In this thing the sones of God ben know- 10 

un, and the sones of the feend. Ech man 

that “is not iust, is not of God, and he 

that loueth not his brothir>., For this is11 

the tellyng, that 3e herden at the bigyn- 

nyng, that 3e loue ech othere; not asi2 

Caym, that was of the yuele‘, and slou3 

his brother. And for what thing slou3 he 

him ? for hise werkis weren yuele, and 

hise brotheris iust. Britheren, nyle 3e13 

wondre, if the world hatith 3ou. We) ae 
witen, that we ben translatid fro deeth to _ perftu richessis 
lijf, for we louen britheren. He that ith'h ne 


ith him and his 
‘ ° staat, than it 
loueth not, dwellith in deth. Ech man 157 °G2adis heest 


that hatith his brother, is a man sleere; ee ee 
and 3e witen, that ech mansleere hath of Luk. hath 


not euerlastinge lijf dwellinge in hym. Od a ad 
In this thing we han knowe the charite 16 ae Ae 
of God, for he puttidet his lijf for vs, [peter hemey 
and we owen to putte oure lyues for oure nee aed 
britheren. He that hath the catel®* of Ma 


this world, and seeth that his brothir holden to jene 
also of nedful 
hym? Mi litle sones, lone we' not in 18self, and ellis 
such nede, as 
we ben of treuthe, and in his si3t we 40 oe: 
repreueth' vs, God is more than oure _ hii. Lire here. 
fals either trec- 


hath nede, and closith his entrailis fro ae eS 
hym, hou dwellith the charite of God in 3% : 

thing to him- 

ae “ he sleeth him 

wordt, nethir in tunge, but in werk and _ that is sete in 
treuthe. In this thing we knowen, that 19 Austyn seith, 
and Basile, and 

monesten oure hertis. For if oure herte& 20 xvij- distine- 
cioun, €. sicut 

* e ‘ v. 

hert, and knowith alle thingis. Moost 21} not in word 
. 2 ly, nether i 
dere britheren, if oure herte repreueth fa. Yih hee 
a ’ 9 29 cherous ¢unge. 

not vs, we han trust to God; and what cine 


euer we schulen axe', we schulen resseyue ue rom i 
. 5 either fais. ig 
of hym, for we kepen hise comaunde- tere. v, 


&dosynne r. =} brother, is not of God yr. iOm.ory. kbe3zenoty. Ideuelr. ™Om. x. 
" werkis weren iust ¥. hate gs. Pthat vy. that r. * mansleer 4 sup. ras. Nogsvx. § putte sx. 
thijfor. 4% Om. orx. thal is, ijfe. YOm. sx. * Om. anogsyx. *lyuesy. Yhathy. 2Om.s. 
acatel yr. >seethy. ¢thathisy. 4Om.srx. eOm.rx. fhathr. &closithy. > mynde o. 
inether 0. that vy. | monesten, either maken tristiv. ™Om.r. repreueth ry. ®° or undurnym 
vs o. or vndirnemeth y. © knowith vy. P dere brithereny. 4Om.r. ‘vndurnym o. repreueth 
not r. Saske Q. ; . 


a synnede gh. 


b brothir, is not of God nehkoaf. 
orcaleLK. '3e bd. 


Shertis a. 4 repreuen a. 


¢deuela. 4 puttith a. putte R. © substaunce, 


iaske o. 


Ill. 23-—IV. 12. 


23plesaunt bifore him. And this is the 
comaundement of him', that we bileue in 
the name of his sone Jhesu Crist, and" 

24]oue ech other, as he 3af heest to vs. And 
he that kepith his maundementes’, dwellith 
in him, and he in him. And in’ this thing 
we witen, for* he dwellith in us, ofY the 
spirit, whom? he jaf to us. 


GAR. 1V. 


1 Moost dere®, nyle 3e bileue to eche spirit, 
but proue 3e spiritis, if thei ben of God ; 
for many false prophetes wenten out in 

2to the world. In this thing the spirit of 
God is knowun; ech spirit that know- 
lechith Crist? for® to? haue® comen in 

3flesch, is of God; and ech spirit that 
dissolueth‘, ‘or fordoith®, Jhesu, is not of 
God. And this is antecrist, of whom 3e 
herden, for® he cometh; and ri3t now he 
4is in the world. 3e, litel sones, ben of 
God, and 3e han ouercome him‘; for he 
that is in 30u is more, than he that in* the 
sworld. Thei ben of the world, therfore 
thei speken of the world, and the world 
csherith hem. We ben of God; he that 
knew! God, herith us; he™ that is not of 
God, herith not us. In this thing we 
knowen the spirit of treuthe, and the" 
spirit of errour. Moost dere°, loue we 
to gydere, for charite is of God; and ech 
man that loueth his brother, is born of 

God, and knowith God. He that loueth 
not, hath? not4 charite’, ‘nether knew’ God; 

»for God is charite. In this thing the 
charite of God apperide im us, for God 
sente his oon bigeten sone in to the world, 

lothat we lyue bi him. In this thing is 
charite, not as we hadden loued God, ‘but 
for he first louede us‘, and sente his sone 

iihelpinge for oure synnes. 3e moost dere”, 
if’ God louede us, and we owen for” to 
i2loue ech other. No man size euere God ; 


I. JOHN. 


627 


mentis, and we don tho thingis that ben 
plesaunt bifor hym. And this is thes 
comaundement of God, that we bileue in 
the name of his sone Jhesu Crist, and 
that we loue ech othere, as he 3af heeste 
to vs. And he that kepith hise coim-24 
aundementis, dwellith in hym, and he in 
hym. And in this thing we witen, that 
he dwellith in vs, bi the spirit, whom he 
jaf to vs. 
CAP. IV. 

Moost dere britheren, nyle 3e bilene to1 
ech spirit, but preue 3e spiritis*, if thei 
ben of God; for many false prophetis 
wenten out in to the world. In thise 
thing the spirit of God is knowun; ech 
spirit that knowlechith that Jhesu Crist 
hath come in fleisch, is of God; and echs3 
spirit that fordoith' Jhesu, is not of God. 
And this is antecrist, of whom 3e herden™, 
that he cometh; and ri3t now he is in the 
world. 3e, litle sones, ben of God, and4 
3e han ouercome hym; for he that is in 
30u is more, than he that zs in the world. 
Thei ben of the world, therfor thei speken 5 
of the world, and the world herith hem. 
We ben of God; he that knowith God, « 
herith vs; he that is not of God, herith 
not vs. In this thing we knowen the 
spirit of treuthe, and the spirit of errour. 
Moost dere britheren, loue we" togidere, 7 
for charite is of God; and ech that loueth 
his brother, is borun of God, and knowith 
God. He that loueth not, knowith nots 
God; for God is charite. In this thing» 
the charite of God apperide in vs, for 
God sente hise oon bigetun sone in to 
the world, that we lyue bi hym. In this 10 
thing is charite, not as we hadden loued 
God, but for he firste louede vs, and 
sente hise sone forj3yuenesse for oure 
synnes. 3e moost dere britheren, if God 11 
louede vs, we owen to loue ech other. 
No man say euer God; if we louen to- 12 


tGod vy. and that we vy. Ycomaundementis 9. W Om. anogsx. *thaty. Ybiv. 2 that o. 
@ dere britheren v. b Jhesu Crist anosx. that Jhesu Crist vy. ¢Om.srx. 4Om.r. e hath r. 
f fordoith o. & Om. ox. or undoith r. that v. ‘him, that is, antecrist y. is in aG sec.m. TY. 
lknowth o. knowith rv. m and he o. 2 Om. ANOS? X. © dere britheren Vv. P Om. v. dno o. 
Om. vy. *Om.v. 8 knoweth not vy. tOm.o. 4 dere britheren vy. vfory. WOm. sx. 
k the spiritis o. | forbedith ghk. ™hanherd1. 3e eqgk. 


4L2 


628 


if we louen to gydere, God dwellith in us, 
and the charite of him is parfijt in us. 
13In* this thing we knowen, forY we dwellen 
in him, and he in us; for of his spirit he 
143af to us. And we sizen, and witnessen, 
‘for the fadir* sente his sone sauyour of 
isthe world. Who euere ‘shal knowleche?, 
for’ Jhesus is the sone of God, God dwell- 
igith in him, and he in God. And we han 
knowen, and bileuen to the charite, that 
God hath in us. God is charite, and he 
that dwellith in charite, dwellith in God, 
i7and God in him. In this thing is the 
parfijt charite of God with® us, that we 
haue? trist in the day of dome; for as® he 
i8is, and we ben in this world. Drede is 
not in charite, but parfijt charite sendith 
out drede; forf drede hath peyne. For- 
sothe he that dredith, is not parfijt in 
ig9charite. Therfore loue we God, for he 
20former® louede us’, If ony man ‘shal 
seie!, fork I loue God, and ‘shal haate! his 
brother, he is a lizer. Sotheli™ he that 
loueth not his brother, whiche" he seeth, 
hou mai he® loue God, whom he seeth not ? 
21 And we han this precept? of God, that he 
that loueth God, loue4 and* his brother. 


CAP. V: 


1 Eche man that bileueth, that Jhesus is 
Crist, is born of God; and eche man that 
loueth him that gendrith, loueth him that 

zis born of him. In this thing we knowen, 
for’ we louen the children of God, whan 
we louen God, and don his maundementes*’, 

3Sothelit this is charite' of God, that we 
kepe his maundementes’; and his maunde- 
4mentes ben not greuouse. For al thing 
that is born of God, ouercometh the world; 
and this is the victorie that ouercometh 
sthe world, oure feith. ‘Forsothe who is 
it* that ouercometh the world, no but he 
that bileueth for* Jhesus is the sone of 


I. JOHN. 


zheo, that the fadir r. 


IV. 13——V. 5S. 


gidre, God dwellith in vs, and the charite 
of hym is perfit in vs. In this thing we1s 
knowen, that we dwellen in hym, and he 
in vs; for of his spirit he 3af to vs. And 14 
we sayen, and witnessen, that the fadir 
sente his sone sauyour of the world. 
Who euer knowlechith, that Jhesu_ isis 
the sone of God, God dwellith in him, 
and he in God. And we han knowun, 16 
and bilenen to the charite, that God hath 
in vs. God is charite, and he that 
dwellith in charite, dwellith in God, and 
God in hym. In this thing is the perfit 17 
charite of God with vs, that we haue 
trist in the dai of dom; for as he is*, 
also we ben in this world. 
in charite, but perfit charite puttith out 
drede; for drede hath peyne. But he 
that dredith, is not perfit in charite. 


* as he ig; in 
heuene, and 
doth good fra 
enene to inst 
men and vniust 
men. and we 
ben in this 
world ; that is, 
we loven bathe 
freendis and 
enemyes for his 
loue, as he co- 
maundith in vy. 
c°. of Matheu. 
Dreede is, ete. ; 
that is, seruile 
dreede is not in 
perfit charite. 


Drede is not 18 dreede hath 


peyne; that is, 
peyne is due to 
seruile dreede, 
for it makith 
to eschewe 
synne, oonly 


Therfor loue we God, for he louede vs 19 that it be not 


bifore. 
God, and hatith his brother, he is a liere. 
For he that loueth not his brothir, which? 
he seeth, hon mai he loue God, whom™ 
he seeth not? And we han this com-2l 
aundement of God, that he that loueth 
God, loue also his brothir. 


GAP. OV, 


Ech man that bilenetht that Jhesus is1 
Crist, is borun of God; and ech man 
that loueth hym that gendride, loueth 
hym that is borun of hym. In this thing2 
we knowen, that we touen the children 
of God, whanne we louen God, and don 
his maundementis. For this is the charite3 
of God, that we kepe hise maundementis‘; 
and his maundementis ben not heuy. 
For al thing that is borun of God, ouer-4 
cometh the world; and this is the victorie 
that ouercometh the world, oure feith. 
And who is he that ouercometh thes 
world, but he that bileueth that Jhesus 


x And n. y if o. that r. @ knowlechith r. b that v. € in No. 
4Om.r. as ando. f for whi r. & bifore x. Om. Fr. h vs bifore rv. iseith vy. * that vr. 
lhateth or. ™Forry. %whomx see.m. ©°Om.o. Pcomaundementy. dlouehe r. *Om.o. 
also vy. ‘Sthatr. 8 comaundementis 9, ¢ Forwhiy. the charitery. Y comaundementise. ¥ Who 


is sotheli nv. * that rv. 


© Om. h. 
g prom. B. 


P he loueth qe scc.m. he loue ¢ pr.m. 


4 whom R. rwhich q. 8 comaundementis 


unschid, not 


: p 
If ony man seith, that® “Y lowe? 20 for the abomy- 
y 


nacioun of 
synne, neither 
tu eschewe the 
offence of God. 
Lire here. v. 

t bileeuith ; 

bi feith foorm- 
ed with charite. 
that Thesu of 
Nazareth és 
Crist; bihizt 
in the lawe and 
profetis. loucth 
him that gen- 
dride; that is, 
God. loueth him, 
ete.; ech feith- 
ful man. be 2of 
grewouse ; to 
him that lou- 
eth, for whi the 
loue of God 
and the hoope 
of meede mak- 
ith the thingis 
esy, that ben 
harde and 
scharpe of her 
kynde. born of 
God ; hi Feith 
foormed with 
charite. ouer- 
cometh the 
world; that is, 
temptaciouns 
and persecu- 
sciouns of the 
world. Lire 
here. v. 


Vv. 6—19. I. J 


6God? This is Jhesu Crist, that cam bi 
watir and blood; not in watir onely, but 
in watir and blood. And the spirit is he 
7that witnessith, for’ Crist is treuthe*. For 
thre ben, that 3iuen* witnessing” in heuen, 
the Fadir, the Word, ‘or Sone‘, and the 
8 Hooly Goost ; and thes thre ben oon. And 
thre ben, that 3iuen witnessing in erthe, 
the spirit, watir, and blood; and thes thre 
dhen oon. If we receyuen witnessing’ of 
men, the witnessing of God is more; for 
this is the witnessing of God, that is more, 
lofor he witnesside of his sone. He that 
bileueth in to the sone of God, hath the® 
witnessing of God in him. He that bileu- 
eth not to the sone, makith him a lizer; for 
he bileueth not inf the® witnessinge, that 
11God witnesside ‘of his sone”. This! is the 
witnessing, for God 3af to us euerelasting 
i2lijf, and this lijf is in his sone. He that 
hath the sone‘, hath and! lijf; he that hath 
isnot the sone of God, hath not lijf. I 
wrijte to jou thes thinges, that 3e wile, 
for™ 3e han euerelastyng lijf, the’ whiche 
14 bileuen in the name of Goddis sone. And 
this is the trist that® we han to? God, for 
what euere thing we’ shulen axe‘ upt his 
15 wille, he shal here us. And we witen, for® 
he herith us, what euer thing we shulen’ 
axe”; we witen, for. we han the axynges’, 
16 Whiche we axen? of him. He that woot 
his* brother for to synne‘ a® synne not to 
thef deeth, axe® he", and lijf shal be jouun 
to him, ‘synnynge not! to the‘ deeth. Ther 
is a synne to deeth’; not for it I seie, that 
170ny man preye. Eche wickidnesse is synne, 
isand there is synne! to deeth. We witen, 
for™ ech man that is born of God, synneth 
not; but the generacioun of God kepith 
him, and the wickid" touehith him not. 
i9 We witen, for® we ben of God, and? al the 


2 the treuthe r, 8 baaren o. 
€Om.o. f too. into @. 


y that v. 
wittenesynge Norvx. 
1Qm. o. and the s. also r. m that r. 
saskeg. tbiv. "“thaty. YOm. 7. Waske a. 
bOm.srx. ¢Om.r. 4synneth yr. ¢ anda. 

k Om. ogrx. thedeth vy. "la synne y prom. 


Vand thea 


tOm.r. the treuthe k pr.m. 
b asken ao. 


= sone of God k pr.m. 4 asken ao. 
f the deeth K pr.m. Roa. 8 aske ao. 


™ preie for it b. pray not for it hko. " the deeth 


b wittenesse o. 
& Om. a. 
n Om. sp. 


h Om. behko. 


OHN. 629 


is the sone of God? This is Jhesus Crist', 6 
that cam hi watir and blood; not in 
water oonli, but in watir and blood. And 
the spirit is he that witnessith, that Crist 
is treuthe". For thre ben, that 3yuen7 
witnessing in heuene, the Fadir, the’ 
Sone, and the Hooli Goost; and these 
thre ben oon}. ‘And thre ben, that 3ynens 
witnessing in erthe, the spirit, water, 
and blood; and these thre ben oon”. 
If we resseyuen the witnessing of men,9 
the witnessing of God is more; for this 
is the witnessing of God, that is more, 
for he witnesside of his sone. 
bileueth in* the sone of God, hath the 
witnessing of God in hym. He that bi- 
leueth not toY the sone’, makith hym a 
liere ; for he bileneth not in the witness- 
ing, that God witnesside of his sone. 


And this is the witnessyng, for God 3af11 


to 30u euerlastinge lijf, and this lijf is in 
his sone. 
God, hath also lijf; he that hath not the 


He that hath the sone ofi2 


T these thre ben 
oon; that is, 
for these three 
acorden in af- 
fermyng of 00 
treuthe. syn- 
neth a synne 
not to deth; in 
exeludinge fy- 
nal ynrepent- 
anunce, bi which 
a man dieth in 
dcedly synne. 
Lif schal be 
30ucn lo him ; 
for such a syn- 
nere schal die 
in grace. a 
synne to deeth ; 
that is, fynal 
vnrepentannce, 
bi which a man 
dieth in deedli 


He that 10 syne. preie 


not for it; for 
itis not [to] 
preie for hem 
that ben damp- 
ned. born of 
God; bi grace 
of baptym. syz- 
neth not; bi 
deedly synne, 
as longe as he 
stondith in that 
grace. the ge- 
neracioun of 
God ; that is, 
grace 30uen in 
baptim, bi 
whieh he is 


sone of God, hath not lijf. I write to 13set in a dynyn 


jou these thingis, that 3e wite, that 3e 
han euerlastynge lijf, which bileuen in 
the name of Goddis sone. 
the trist which we han to God, that 
what euer thing we axen® aftir his wille, 
he schal here vs. 
herith vs, what euer thing we axen>; we 
witen, that we han the axyngis°, which 
we axen® of hym. 
his brother synneth a synne not to deth’, 
axeS he, and hijf sehal be 3ouun to hym 
that synneth not to deth. Ther is a 
synne to deth; ‘not for it" Y seie', that 
ony man! preie™. Ech wiekidnesse is 
synne, and ther is synne to deth®. We 
witen, that ech man that is borun of God, 
synneth not; but the generacioun of God 


© or the Sone G sec.m.er. Om. x. «the 
hOm.o. |! And this vy. sone of God rv. 
Owhich ry. Pino. 4thatv. * that we o. 
xthat yr. Yaskingesg. ZaskenQ. @ that his v. 
fOm.orx. 8askeg. bOm. rv. i not synnende x. 
Mthatv. Owieke sx. Othat yr. P Om.o. 


Y into r. 
© asken ao. 
1 Om. a. 


seco.m. Om. g prim.  * into KQRoaf. 
¢ askynges ao. axinge k pr.m. 4 that Kk. 
i seie not b. k that not for it e. 
b. 


And we witen, that he1s 


Bin, 


being aboue 
kynde. kepith 
him; as myehe 
as perteyneth 


And this is 14 to the grace it- 


self. the wickid 
toucheth not 
him; in led- 
inge him to 
deedly synne, 
ve. noo but he 
bewe awey wil- 
fully fre staat 
of graee, in 
makinge him- 


He that woot that 16 self soget to the 


wicked denel 
bi deedly synne, 
and bi mysus- 
ing of fre wille. 
v. al the world; 
that is, men 
setting her ende 
in delytingis of 


17 the world. is 


set in the wick- 
that is, in 
the ynel fijer of 
coucitise. Lire 
here. ve. 


630 I. JOHN. 


20 world is put? in wickid'. And we witen, 
for’ the sone of God cam, ‘and clothide 
flesch for cause of us, and suffride, and 
roos a3en fro deede inen‘, and toke us to", 
and 3af to us wit, that we knowe verrey 
God’, and be in the verrey sone” of him. 
This is* verrey God, and euerelastyng 

ailijf. Litel sones, kepe 3e 30u fro simu- 
lacris, ‘o7 coneytisey. 


Heere endith the first pistle of Joon, 
and now bigynneth the secounde’. 


4 puttid 7. set Vv. tTwicke s. 5 that v. 
Jhesu s pr.m, * Om. ¥. 
of Joon, and bygynneth the secound. Nog. 


secunde. vy. No final rubric in wprx. 


oheb. Pknowe him g sec. m. 


t Om. x. 
Y or couetise. Amen. Nosy. Om. x. 


q Om. K pr.m. ho. 
of Joon, and biginnith the yj. 1g. Here endeth the jirste pistle of Joon; se now the secuude. K. 
endith the firste pistil of Joon, and bigynneth the secunde pistle. axa. 


V.-20, 21. 


kepith hym, and the wickid touchith 
hym not. We witen, that we ben of God, 19 
and al the world is set in yuel. And we20 
witen, that the sone of God cam in fleisch, 
and 3af to vs wit, that we° know? veri 
God, and be in the veri sone of hym. 
This is veri God, and euerlastynge lijf.21 
My litle sones, kepe 3e1 30u fro mau- 
metis. 


Here endith the firste pistle of John, 
and here bigynneth the secounde*. 


‘ 
‘u Omitted in v. vOm. vy. ® sone 
2 From 4. Here endith the first epistil 


Here endith the first pistle of Joon, and here bigynneth the 


* From cmabch. Heere endith the 7. epistle 
Here 


No final rubric in arRueko. 


II. 


JOHN. 





The secounde epistil of Joon*. 


i THE eldre man to the ‘chosen lady?, 
and to hir children, thee whiche I loue in 
treuthe; and not I aloone, but and alle 

2men that knewen! treuthe; for the treuthe 
that dwellith in 3ou, and with 3ou shal ben 

3‘in to® with onuten ende. Grace be with 
30u, mercy, and pees of God the fadir, and 
of Jhesu Crist, the sone of the‘ fadir, in 
atreuthe and charite. I ioyede ful miche, 
for I foond of thi sones goynge in treuthe, 
as we receyueden maundement of the fadir. 

»And now I preye thee, lady, not as writ- 
inge a newe inaundement to thee, but that 
that we hadden at the bigynnynge, that 

swe loue eche other. And this is charite, 
that we walke up? his maundementes. 
Sotheli® this is the! comaundement, that 
as 5e herden at* the! bigynnynge, ‘in him 

7walke 3e™. For many deceyuours wenten 
out in to the world, whiche knowlechen" 
not Jhesu® Crist for? toi haue™ come in 
flesch; this is deceyuour and antecrist. 

8 See 3e 30ure’ silf, lest 3e leese the thinges 
that 3e han wrought, but*' that 3e receyue 

9ful meede; witynge that ech man that 
goith awey", and dwellith not in the tech- 
inge of Crist, hath not God. He that dwell- 
ith in the techinge’, hath and* the sone 


Here bigynneth the secounde pistle of 
Joon*. 


THE eldere man, to the chosun Jadi,1 
and to her children, whiche Y loue in 
treuthe; and not Y aloone, but also alle 
men that knowen treuthe; for the treuthe 2 
that dwellith in 30u, and with 3ou schal 
be with outen ende. Grace be with 30u,3 
merci, and pees of God the fadir, and of 
Jhesu Crist, the sone of the fadir, in 
treuthe and charite. I ioiede ful myche, 4 
for Y foond of* thi sones goynge in 
treuthe, as we resseyueden maundement 
of the fadir. And now Y preye thee,s 
ladi, not as writinge a newe maundement 
to thee, but that that we hadden fro the 
bigynnyng, that we loue ech other. Ando 
this is charite, that we walke after his 
maundementis’. For this is the com- 
aundement, that as 3e herden at the bi- 
gynnyng, walke 3e in hym. For many7 
disseyueris wenten out in to the world, 
which knoulechen® not that Jhesu Crist 
hath come in fleisch; this is a dis- 
seyuere and antecrist. Se 3e' 30u8 silf,s 
lest 3e lesen the thingis®% that 3e han 
wrou3t, that" 3e resseyue ful mede; wit-9 
ynge that ech man that goith bifore, and 
dwellith not in the teching of Crist, hath 
not God. He that dwellith in the tech- 


a From pru. The secounde pistle. m. No initial rubric in aogsvy. > lady Electay. ¢ Om. srx. 
dknowen Nogx. ©Om.vx. £Om.s. &biv. h For whiv. 1 Om. anogsyvx. “ins. 10m. anor. 
™ walke 3e inhim vy. knoulecheden o. that Jhesuy. POm.syvx. @Om.y. ‘hath vy. 8 30n 
ANoQSYX. * but conlynue 3¢e so in good y. “bifore vy. V techyng of Crist 0. W both or. 


a Here sueth the secunde pistil of John. Rr. 
abegha. Oincharitea. ¢ Om.k prim. 
S3oure ge. 88 thing k sec. m. 


The secunde pistil of Joon. k. No initial rubric in c1KmQx 
4 comaundementis rgk. 
h but contynue 3¢ so in God, that e. 


e knoulechiden ghk. £Om. kr. 


632 


joand the fadir. If ony man* cometh to 
3ou, and bringeth ‘not toY this teching, 
nyle 3e receyue him in to hous, nether ‘3e 

nshulen seie? to him, Heyl. Sotheli® he 
that seith to him, Heyl, comuneth with his 
yuele werkis. Lo! I bifore seide to 30u, 
that 3e be not confoundid in the day of 

i2oure Lord Jhesu Crist. I hauynge® mo 
thinges for¢ to wrijte to 3ou, wolde’ not bi 
parchemyn® and ynke; sotheli I hope ‘me 
tof comynge® to 30u, and speke! mouth to 

13 mouth, that 3oure ioye be ful. The sones*, 
‘or dou3tres', of thi systir™ chosen® greten 
thee wel. The grace of God with? thee. 
Amen. 


Here endith the secounde pistle of Joon, 
and here bigynneth the thridde?. 


x Om. v prem. 
4 nolde o. and wolde rv. 
hcome svx. iY speke 9. 
with rr. P From ner. 
the same. o. 
final rubric in wpsTx. 


k dou3tris osx. 


i And if b. 


 oure g. © From cmxabea. 


Il. JOHN. 


Y to not Q. not to not Ty. not r. 
© parchemyn, or book ans. parchemyn, either book ¥. 
10m. esrx. 
Here endeth the secound epistil of Joon, and bygynneth the thredde epistil of 
Heere eendith the secounde epistle of Joon, and heere next bigynneth the thridde. y. 


k the hous 1. 30ure hous h sec. m. k. 
Heere endith the ij. epistle of Joon, and biginnith the iij. 1. 


10-13. 


ing, hath bothe the sone and the fadir. 
If! ony man cometh to 3ou, and bryngith 10 
not this teching, nyle 3e resseyue hym in 
to hous, nether seie 3e! to hym, Heil. 
For he that seith to hym, Heil, comy-1: 
neth with hise yuel werkis. Lo! Y 
biforseide to jou, that 3e be not con- 
foundid in the dai of oure Lord Jhesu 
Crist. Y haue mo thingis to write to12 
jou, and Y wolde not bi parchemyn™ and 
enke ; for Y hope that Y schal come to 
jou, and speke mouth to mouth, that 
3our" ioye be ful. The sones of thi chos- 13 
un sistir greten thee wel. The} grace 
of God be with thee. Amen. 


ITere endith the secounde pistle of John, 
and heere bigynneth the thridde®. 


Nhaue nr. © Om. osx. 
ffor vy. & that I schal r. 
™ sistir sone asx. " Electav, © be 


Zseie3e yr. 8 For rv. 


No 


1Om, &k pr.m. gka m ether book K marg. 


Here endeth 


the seconde pistle of Joon: se now the thridde. x. Here endith the secunde pistle of Joon, and bigynneth the 
thridde pistle of Joon. Q. Here endith secund, and bigynnith threde. g. Here endith the secounde pistel of 


Joon, and bygynneth the thridde pistle. ho. 


No final rubric in arRuek. 


+ This vers is 
not in bookis 
amendid. Lire 
here. Vv. 


Ill JOHN. 





The thrid pistle of Joon?. 


1 THE eldre man to Gayus?, moost dere®, 
2whom I lone in trenthe. ‘Moost dere‘, of 
alle thingis I make preyer, thee® for’ tof 
entre, and® fare welsumly, as thi soule 
3doth' welsumly*. I ioyede ful’ greetly, 
britheren™ comynge™, and° witnessyng? 
beringe’ to’ thi® treuthe, as thou walkist 
4in treuthe. I haue not more grace of thes 
thingis, than that I here my sones fort to® 
5walke in treuthe. Moost dere’, thou doist 
feithfully, what euer thou werchist in to 
britheren, and this thing in to pilgrimys, 
é6whiche 3elden witnessing to thi charite in 
si3t” of the* chirche; whom thou ‘wel 
7doyng ledist forth? worthily to God. So- 
theli? for’ his name ‘thei wenten forth‘, 
‘nothing takinge’ of hethen men. Ther- 
fore we owen for® to receyue siche manere 
men‘, that we be euene werchers of treuthe. 
91 ‘shulde haue® write perauenture to the 
chirche, but this Diotropis, that loueth 
for® to bere primacye' in hem, receyueth 
ionot us. For this thing, if I shal come, I 
shal moneste his werkes, whiche he doith, 
‘garringe, or chidinge*, ‘in to! us with yuele 
wordis. And as™ thes thinges suffisen not 
to him”, nether he receyueth britheren, 


Here bigynneth the thridde pistle of 
Joon*. 


THE eldere man to Gayus, most dere 
brother, whom Y loue in treuthe. Most2 
dere brothir, of alle thingis Y make 
preyer, that thou entre, and fare wele- 
fuly, as thi soule doith welefuli. Y ioyedes 
greetli, for britheren camen, and baren 
witnessing to thi treuthe,‘as thou walkist 
in treuthe>. Y haue not more grace of4 
these thingis, than that Y here® that¢ my 
sones walke in treuthe. Most dere bro-5 
ther, thou doist feithfuli, what euer thou 
worchist in britheren, and that in to pil- 
grymys*, which 3eldiden® witnessing to this 
charite, in the si3t of the chirche; which 
thou leddist forth, and doist wel worthili 
to God. For thei wenten forth} for his7 
name, and token no thing of hethene 
men. Therfor we owen to resseyue8 
sichef, that we be euen worcheris of 
treuthe. I hadde write perauenture to9 
the chirche, but this Diotrepes, that loueth 
to bere primacie in hem, resseyueth® not 
vs". For this thing, if Y schal come, Y 10 
schal moneste hise werkis, whiche he 
doith, chidinge ajens vs with yuel word- 
is. And as if these thingis suffisen' not 
to hym, nether he resseyueth britheren, 


a The thridde epistil of Joon. N. No initial rubric in aogsrvy. > Agayus x. © dere brother r. 
4 Om. ny. dere brother vy. ¢thatthouvy, fOm.syx. ¢Om.y. hOm.o. Ilfaretho. * wille- 
fullin. !Om.o. ™ for britheren y. "cameny. Oandbaren vy. P wittenesseo. 4 Om. rx sec.m. 
Tofo. Sthen. tOm.strx. Om.r. — Y dere brother r. W the si3t aNogsrx. thi an. 
ywhich y. 2 leddist forth and dost wel y. &Fory. > thei wenten forth fory. ¢Om.r7. 4 and 
tooken noo thing vy. € Om. gsvx. fofmenr. &haddev. »Om.sx. i primacye, or cheef places o. 
k chatirynge o. chydinge v. garrende, or chidende x. ‘ajensv. ™asifv. hem No. 


a The thridde epistle of Joon. x. 
No initial rubric in crkMQxabeghoa. 
f suche maner men xhof. 


VOL. IV. 


§ reseeiuen Egk. 
aM 


Here sueth the tii. pistil of John. n. 
b Om. gk prin. 
h Om. Rr. 


The thridde pistil of Joon. k. 
cherde 8. 4 Om. EQk pr.m. © jeelden x. 
i snfficeden ghk pr. ia. 


* pilgrimes ; 
here pilgrimes 
ben seid feith- 
ful men, whiche 
the vnfeithful 
men castiden 
out of her citees 
for the feith of 
Crist. whiche ; 
pilgrimes, 
whanne thei 
comen to thee. 
thou leddest 
forth; that is, 
susteynest with 
thin almesse 
deedis, that 
thei passe fro 
thennes to 
othere placis. 
ve. worthily to 
God ; that is, 
to Goddis on- 
our, Lire here. 


v. 
tT wenten forth ; 
that is, weren 
compellid to 
goo out of her 
placis, and 
weren spoilid 
either robbid 
of her owne 
goodis. ve. for 
his name; that 
is, for the feith 
of o verey God. 
taken noo thing 
of hethene men: 
that is, of her 
citeseyns, and 
men of her 
lynagis, asthe 
Glose seith, not 
these feithful 
men my3ten 
not take, but 
for vnfeithful 


634 


and forbedith hem that receyuen, and 
1icastith out of the chirche. Moost dere®, 
nyle thou sue yuel thing, but ‘that that? 
is good thing. He that doith wel, is of 
God; he that doith yuel, seeth ‘him not. 
12 Witnessing is 30lde to Demetrie of alle 
men, and of treuthe it silf; but and we 
beren witnessing, and thou ‘hast knowun’, 
isfor® oure witnessing is trewe'. I hadde 
many thinges for" to wrijte to thee, but Y 
wolde not wrijte to thee bi ynke and 
14penne. Forsothe I hope anoon for’ to see 
thee, and we shulen speke mouth to mouth. 
Pees to” thee. Frendes greten thee wel. 
Grete thou wel frendes bix name. 


Here endith the thridde epistle of Joon, 
and here bigynneth the pistle of Judas, 
the brother of James’. 


° dere brother vy.‘ P that at o. 
uQm. sx. YOm.sx. W betor. 
and bygyuneth the epistil of Judas. nog. 
Judas. v. No final rubric in upsrx. 


x bi my r. 


k3ek. 


WI. JOHN. 


q not God n. him God r. 
y From 4. Here endith the thridde epistil of John, 
Here endith the pistle of Joon, and here bigynneth the pistle of 


ti—14. 

and forbedith hem that resseyuen, and ig ea 
puttith out of the chirche. Moost dere 11 schulde be 
brothir, nyle thou sue yuel thing, but nel emit 


come a3en bi 
ydolatrie of 


that that is good thing. He that doith 
wel, is of God; he that doith yuel, seeth — hethene puple. 
“ f ° we owen res- 
not God. Witnessing is 3oldun to Deme-12 sey ete. 
‘ : with oure 
trie of alle men, and of treuthe it silfs  costis. Joon 
. ° seith this, not 
but also we beren witnessing, and thou for he hadde 
* : » ° richecchis, but 
knowist, that oure witnessing 1s trewe. for riche ee 
Y hadde many thingis to wryte to thee, 13 sua 
but Y wolde not write to thee bi enke  connceil, and 
for he dispend- 
and penne. For Y hope soone to se thee, 14 ide in Etfesus 
the goodis of 
and we schulen speke mouth to mouth. jhe thirche. 
s 3ouen for pore 
Pees be to thee. Frendis greten thee raetgat olla 
wel. Greete thou wel frendis bi name. —pestlis in Je- 
tusalem in iiij- 
c®. of Deedis. 
‘ ‘e . Lire here. v. 
Here endith the thridde pistle of 


John, and bigynneth the pistle of Ju- 
das}, 


rknowist vy. ‘Sthaty. ttreuthe r. 


1 From coxacha. Heere endith the thridde epistle of Joon, and biginnith the epistle of Judas. t. 
Here endeth the thridde pistle of Joon; se now the pistle of Judas. x. 


Here endith the thridde pistle of 


Joon, and here bigynneth the pistle of Judas. mb. Here endith the pistilis of Jon, and bigynith the pistil of 
Judais. g. Here endith the iij¢. pistil of Joon, and bigynneth the pistil of Judas, the brother of James. o. 


Heere eendith the thridde pistil of Joon, and now bigynneth the pistil of Jude. y. 


AaERuek. 


No final rubric in 


JUDE. 


The epistle of Jude*. 


CAP. I. 


1 Jupas, the® seruaunt of Jhesu Crist, 
brother forsothe of Jamys, to thes loued, 
that ben in God the fadir, and ‘of Jhesu 

2 Crist kept and clepid’, mercy ‘to 30u4, and¢ 

3 pees, and charite be fulfillid’. Moost dere®, 
I makinge al bisynesse ‘of writinge® to 3on 
of 30ure comoun helthe, hadde! neede for‘ 
to wrijte to 30u, preyinge! for™ to stryue" 
vpon® the feith oonys bitakun? of4 seyntis. 

4Sotheli' summen’ priuyli entriden, that 
sumtyme weren bifore write in to this 
doom, ‘vnpitous men‘, ouerturnynge" the 
grace of oureY God" in to leccherie, and 
denyinge* the aloone lordschiper and oure 

sLord Jhesu Crist. Forsothe I wole ‘to 
gydereY monéste 30u, witynge’ oonys alle 
thinges, for? Jhesus sauynge? his puple of¢ 
the lond of Egipt, the’ secounde tyme loste 
shem that bileueden not. Sotheli aungels® 
that keptenf not his’ princehed, but for- 
soken his* hous, he! reseruede* in to the! 
doom of greet God, in™ euerelastinge 

; boondis® ‘vndir derknesse®. As Sodom, and 
Gomor, and ny3 coostid? citees, on4 liche™ 
manere doynge fornycacioun, and goynge 
awey aftir other flesch, ben maad® en- 


a The epistil of Judas. Nn. 


The pistle of Jude. p. 


Here biginneth the epistil of Judas*. 


CAP. I. 

Jupas, the seruaunt of Jhesu Crist, 
and brother of James, to these that ben 
louyd, that ben in God the fadir, and to 
hem that ben clepid and kept of Jhesu 
Crist, mercy, and pees, and charite be2 
fillid to 3ou. Moost dere britheren, Y3 
doynge al bisynesse to write to 30u of 
joure comyn helthe, hadde nede to write 
to 30u, and preye to striue strongli for 
the feith that is onys* takun to seyntis. 
For summe vnfeithful men priueli en-4 
triden, that sum tyme weren bifore 
writun in to this dom, and ouerturnen the 
grace of oure God in to letcherie, and 
denyen hym that is oneli a Lord, oure 
Lord Jhesu Crist. But Y wole monestes 
jou onys, that witen alle thingis, that 
Jhesus sauyde his puple fro the lond of 
Egipt, and the secunde tyme loste hem 
that bileueden not. And he reseruede6 
vndur derknesse aungels, that kepten not 
her prinshod, but forsoken her hous, in 
to the dom of the greet God, in to euer- 
lastynge bondis. As Sodom, and Gomorre, 7 
and the ny3 coostid citees, that in lijk 
maner diden fornycacioun, and 3eden 


No initial rubric in soesTyxy. b Om. 4noo 


€to hem that ben clepid and kept of Jhesu Crist y. of Jhesu Crist clepid and kept x. 


Vv sec. m. 
4Om.r. ¢Om.yn. f fillidto 30n vy. & dere britheren v. 4 to writer. ‘than hadeo. Om. sx. 
lpreyevy. ™Om.sx. "stryuestronglyy. °onsx. fory. Ptakeno. tor. * Forsothe o. 
Forwhi vy. 8 sum men 4N. summe men s. summe vnfeithful men vy. tOm.v. and onerturnen r. 
¥Om.9. “Lordo. Xdenyeny. YOm.r. Zwritendex. @thatvy. %saneder. ¢ fro sx. 
dand the vy. © he resernede vndir derknesse aungels y. f kepeno. f&hervy. bhervy. iOm. rv, 
k resseynede ant. Om. y. !Om.ex. ™tov. “hondeser. Om. 7. Pcoostissy, inv, 
Tlichy e. § Om. x. 


a From Ekve. 


The pistil of Judas. nr. 


No initial rnbric in c1xkmQxabeghoa. 


4M 2 


* oonys; that 
is, parfitly. bi- 
taken; of Crist 
to seintis; that 
is, to the hooly 
apostlis. bifore 
writen; that is, 
bifore knowen, 
either betere, 
bifore figured. 
in to this dom: 
that is, damp- 
nacioun. Lire 
here. v. 


636 


saumple’, sustenynge" peyne of euerlastinge 

sfijr’. Also” and thes that defoulen sotheli* 
the flesch, forsotheY despijsen? lordschip- 

sing, forsothe* blasfemen> mageste*. Whan 
Mychael, ‘the archaungel¢, disputinge ° 
with the deuel, strooff of Moyses body, he* 
was not hardy for" to 3iue doom of blas- 
femye', but seide, The Lord comaunde* to 

1othee. Forsothe thes! blasfemen, what 
euere thinges thei ‘sotheli vnknowen™. 
Sotheli" what euere thinges thei ‘han 
knowe® kyndely as doumbe beestis, in thes 
thei ben corupt. 


+CAP. IL 


1 ~©Wo to hem that wenten the weye of 
Caym, and‘ bi errour of Balaam for meede 
‘ben shed out', and’ perschiden in the 

izaj3en seiynge of Chore. Thes ben in her 
metys filthes, ‘or defoulinges*, feestinge" 
to gydere, with outen dreede fedynge hem 
silf; cloudes’ with outen watir, that ben 
born aboute of wijndis”; heruest* trees 
with outen fruyt, twies deede, drawun up 

isbi the roote; wawesY of the wijlde, ‘or 
woode’, se, frothinge? out” her confusiouns; 
erringe® sterres, ‘or fallinge doun*, to 
whom® the tempest of derknessis is kept 
14‘in tof with outen ende. Forsothe Enosé, 
the seuenthe fro Adam, propheciede of 
thes, seiynget, Lo! the Lord cometh ini 
ishis holy thousyndis, for* to do doom a3ens 
alle men!, and for™ to reproue alle vn- 
pitous" men of alle the werkis of the 
vnpitee of hem, bi whiche thei diden vn- 
pitously, and of alle harde thingis®, that 
‘vnpitous synners? han spoke a3ens God. 
16Thes ben grucchers pleynynge, ‘or ful of 
pleyutis%, wandringe up* her desijres; and 


JUDE. 


1. 8-——II. 16. 


awei aftir othir fleisch, and ben maad 
ensaumple, suffrynge peyne of euerelast- 
inge fier. In lijk maner also these thats 
defoulen the fleisch>, and dispisen lord- 
schip, and blasfemen mageste®. Whannes 
My3hel, arkaungel, disputide with the 


deuel, and stroof of Moisest bodi, he was  ¢ stroof of Mui- 
: : body s 
not hardi to? brynge in dom of® blas- ae te 


schewe the bodi 
of Moises to 
But these men blasfemen, what 10 Jewis ‘enclyn- 
aunt to [redi to 
syane iu K] 
idolatrie, that 
thei schulden 
worschipe him 
as God; but 
thanne My3hel, 
that was prince 
of the synagoge, 


CAP. II. 
wolde lette 


Wo to hem that wenten the weie of 11 [either defende 
: K] this. Kv. 
Caym, and that ben sched out bi errour bi havi Bs 
of Balaam for mede, and perischiden in 3%¢40 of bas- 
the ajenseiyng of Chore. These ben in 12 the devel for 


femye, but seide, The Lord comaundef 
to thee. 
euer thingis thei knowen not. For what 
euer thingis thei knowen kyndli as 
doumbe beestis, in these thei ben corupt. 


t dom; of con- 
dempnacioun, 
azen alle men, 
that is, asens 
alle repreuable 
men, for the 
dom of chosen 
men schal not 
. M be azens hem, 
These ben grutcheris ful™ of 16but for hem. 
Lire here. v. 


femie; ajzeos 
his kynde, that 
her metis, feestynge togidere to filthe, was good and 
with out drede fedinge hemsilf. These tiestre te ee 
ben cloudis with out watir, that ben  fameGod whos 
borun aboute of the wyndis; heruest pense 
trees with out fruyt, twies deed, drawun most greuous 
vp bi the roote; wawis of the woode pie voll 
see, fomynge! out her confusiouns; errynge 

sterris, to whiche the tempest of derk- 

nessis is kept with outen ende. Buti 

Enoch, the seuenthe* fro Adam, profe- 

ciede of these, and seide, Lo! the Lord 

cometh with hise hooli thousandis, to do 15 

dom¢ a3ens alle men, and! to repreue alle 

vnfeithful men of alle the werkis of the 
wickidnesse of hem, bi whiche thei diden 

wickidli, and of alle the harde wordis, 

that wyckid synneris han spoke a3ens 
God. 
pleyntis", wandrynge aftir her desiris ; 
and the mouth of hem spekith pride, 


texsanmple sx. suffringer. Viijf x. WInlijemanery. *Om.Gpr.m.nr. Yanudr, 
% dispisynge 4. aand rv. b blasphemyng wn. ¢ maieste disseruen to be dampned vy. 4 archanngel 
ANngsvx. Om. 0. &disputide ry. fand stroof vy. §Om.n. hOm. sx. i blasfemynge Qe. * comaund- 
ide anogT. thesemenv. ™knowen not vr. ®Forsothe saogsr. © knowen Pr. + No division of 
chapters ins. 4 and woo to hem that ben sched out vy. "Om.v. 8 and woo tohemthatr. tt Om. 
0gx. or defoulynge tr.  festend o. Vv these ben clowdis ny. W the wyndes ansvy, * these ben her- 
vest y. Y these ben wawisv. 2% Om. ogx, 4 frothing, either formyng v. witho.  °¢ these ben 
erringe vy. 40Om.ex. ¢ whiche anogsrx. fOm.r. & Enoch vy. handseider. i with rv. 
k es sx. 1Om.r. ™Om.sx. 1° vnfeithful y. ° wordis y. P synners vupitouse Fx. 4 Om. oox. 
t bi v. 


b fleigss euerlasting K pr.m. 
a prom. et alii. & Om. gr. 4} ether wilde K marg. 
k sec.m. hog. 10m. re prem. ™and ful k. 


¢ the maieste K sec. m. 
iether frothinge kK marg. 
0 ether pleyning K marg. 


4 for to hk sec.m. 8. andi. f comaundide 


k seuenthe man Rg sec. m. 


iI. 17—-25- 


the mouth of hem spekith pride, won- 
dringe, ‘or worschipinge’, persones, bi 
izeause of wynnynge. Forsothe, 3e moost 
dere', ‘be 3e" myndeful of the wordis, 
whiche’ ben bifore seid of apostlis” of 
igoure Lord Jhesu Crist ; the* whiche seiden 
to 30u, for’ in the laste tymes ther shulen 
come scorners, wandringe up” her desijres, 
19not in pitee. Thes ben, ‘the whiche* de- 
parten hem silf, beestly>, not hauynge 
20spirit. Forsothe 3e, moost dere‘, aboue 
byldinge? 3oue silf tof 30ure moost hooly 
21 feith, iné the Hooly Goost preyinge", kepe! 
3ouk silf in the Joue of God, abijdinge! the 
mersy of oure Lord Jhesu Crist in to lijf 
azeuerelastinge. And sotheli reproue 3e thes 
23men demyd, forsothe ‘saue 3e™ hem, 
rauyschinge" of° the fijr. Sotheli do 3e 
mersy to othere? ini drede™ of God, ‘hat- 
ynge and* ‘the ilke’ defoulid coote, ‘the 
24 which" is fleschly’. Forsothe to him that 
is my3ty for” to kepe to gydere 30u with 
oute synne, and for* to ordeyne bifore the 
si3t of his glorye 3ou vnwemmyd in glad- 
inge’, ‘or zoyinge with oute forth*, in the 
25comynge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, to God 
aloone oure sauyour*, bi Jhesu Crist oure 
Lord, glorye and magnyfiyng, empire, ‘or 
greet lordschip®, and power bifore alle 
worldis, and now, and¢ in to alle worldlis 
of worldlis.- Amen. 


Here endith the pistle of Judas, and 
now bigynneth A pocalips, or Reuelacioun, 
of Joon Euangelist'. 


JUDE. 


637 


worschipinge persoones, bi cause of wyn- 

nyng. And 3e, moost dere britheren, be 17 

myndeful of the wordis, whiche ben bifor 

seid of apostlis of oure Lord Jhesu Crist; 

whiche seiden to 30u, that in the laste 1s 

tymes ther schulen come gilours®, wand- 

ringe aftir her owne desiris, not in pitee. 

These ben, whiche departen hemsilf,19 

beestli men, not hauynge spirit*. But 3e, Ce te 

moost dere britheren, aboue bilde 30u? te Mer piat 

silf on 30ure moost hooli feith, and preye eee ee ne 
3e in the Hooli Goost, and kepe 3ou4 silf21'* ae 

in the loue of God, and abide 3e the ee Ues 

merci of oure Lord Jhesu Crist in to lijf stinat eretikis 

euerlastynge. And repreue 3e" these 29 Tike ees 

men that ben demed, but saue 3ef hem, 23+ peu bi 

and take 3e hem fro the fier. And do 3e teahing. hen? 
merci to othere men, in the’ drede of eee te 

God, and hate 3e also thilke defoulid ae 
coote, which is fleischli. But to him2 merce aie = 
that is mi3ti to kepe 3ou with out synne,  defouled cole : 
and to ordeyne bifore the si3t of his eo 
glorie 30u vnwemmed in ful out ioye, in “”"* ** 
the comynge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, 

to God aloone oure sauyour, bi Jhesue2s 

Crist oure Lord, be glorie, and magne- 

fiyng; empire, and power, bifore alle 

worldis, ‘and now and in tot alle worldis" 

of worldis. Amen. 


Here endith the pistle of Judee, and 
here bigynneth the prologe on the Apo- 
calips’. 


sOm. x. ‘dere brithereny. be anov. beth osx. that x. the apostoliss. * Om. rv. 
ythatvy. 4%bir. 4whiche gsv. that x. > heestly men vy. ¢ dere brithereny. bijlde vy. © 30ur 
cor. 3e N. fonv. Sand preyezeiny. bOm.v. ikepeth ex. andkepevy. k30urer. ! and 
abijde 3e vy. . ™saueth s sec. m. " raueshende them s sec.m. and rauesche y. °fror.  P othere 
men vy. 4tbatins. "the dreed 4c sec.m. ogyx. sand hate 3e also r. t whiche y. that x. 4 that x. 
v flesh x. WOm. sx. *Om.s.  Y¥ ful ont ioie v. gladinge withoute forth x. 2Om.ox. 4 fader 
sauyouro. »%Om.ox. ¢ Om. NP. 4 From 4. Here endith the epistil of Jude, and here bygynneth 


the Apocalips, or Reuelacioun, of Joon Euangelist, with the prologe. o. 


bigynneth the Apocalips. 9. 
lacioun, of Joon. v. 


° ether scorners K marg. 
Y¥ From cqha. 
the Ieuelacioun of seint Joon. 1. 


P3our x. 4 30ur E. 


* Om. k pr.m. 
Heere endith the epistle of Judas, and heere bigynnith a prologe of the Apocalips, that is, 
Here endeth the pistle of Judas ; se now a prolog on the Apocalips. x. 


Here endeth the pistel of Jude, and 


Here endith the pistel of Judas, and here bigynneth the Apocalips, either Reue- 
Heere eendith the pistil of Jude. y. 


No final rubric in GarnpsTx. 


8Om.a. tink prom. ‘Y Om. R. 


Here endith Judas, and here bigynneth a prologe on the Apocalips. mb. Here endith the pistle of Judas, 


the laste of epistlis, that ben clegad of Cristen feith, and here bigynneth the prologe on Apocalips. x. 
endeth the pistle of Judas, and bigynneth a prologe on the Apocalips. a. 


and bigynneth the prologe on Apocalips. c. 


the Apocalipis. g. No final rubric in arrueko. 


Here 
Here endith the pistle of Judas, 


Here endith the smale pistilis, and bigyneth the prologe on 


APOCALYPSE. 





+ Prologe’. 


Jon, the apostil and euangelist of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, chosen” and loued, in so 
gret loue of dileccioun is had, that in the cene® on® his brest he shulde lyn*, and at 
the cros he hadde bitaken his owne modir to hyin stondende alone, that’ whom will- 
ende to be weddid to the cleping of maidenhed he hadde clepid®, to hym also he 
shulde han bitake" a maideni to be kept. This* also, whan for the word of God and 
the! witnesse of Jhesu Crist with outlaweri shulde be born in to the ile of Pathmos, 
there of the same the™ Apocalips forth shewid was writen, that as in the bigynnyng 
of canon, that is, of the bok of Genesis, an° vncoruptible principle is fornotid, so an 
vucoruptible ende bi a maiden? in the Apocalips shulde be 3oue‘ of Crist, seiende, I am 
alfa and oo, bygynnyng and ending’. This is Jon, the whiche knowende the dai of 
passing fro bodi to han becomen‘ to hym, his disciplis in Effesy clepid* togidere, wente 
doun in to a delf* place of his birielis, and, pre3eere" fullfild’, he 3eld™ the gost, as wel 
fro the* sorewe of deth made’ straunge, as fro corupcioun of flesh he is knowen alyen. 
Of whose scripture netheles? the ‘disposing, or the* ordynaunce, of the boc ‘therfore of? 
vs bit alle thingis is not expowned, that to men not®° kuowende desyr of seching be set. 
and to men sechende frut of trauaile, and to God the doctrine of maisterhed be kept. 


Here endith the prologe, and bygynneth the Apocalips®. 


Here bigynneth the prolog on the Apocalips*. 


Alle men that wolen lyue mekeli> in Crist*, as the apostle’ seith, suffren® perse- 
cucioun; aftir that, thon sone, thatf neizest to the seruyce of God, stonde thou in 
ri3twisnesse, and in drede, and make redi thi soule to temptacioun. For temptacioun 
is a mannus lijf on the’ erthe. But that feithful men faile not in hem, the Lord 
coumfortith hem, and confermeth, seiynge, Y am with jou ‘vn to the ende! of the 


t This prologue is from s. 8 Prologus. 0. No prologue in ampex ; a space left in @; in N and T 
of the later version. No initial rubricin vy. > ychose ovy. ¢sopero. ‘4vponory. ®& lygge ory. 
fOm.o. fOm.y. Sycleepedo. take or. imayde ory. *Thesery. 1Om.r. ™Om. nN. 
n affore o. for vy. ©Om.o. Pmayde ory. 3oldenor. ‘eendeo. *beicome ry. *§ yclepid y. 
t delued o. dew3 vy. prayereso. Vifulfillid ry pr.m. W3eldedo, *Om.ory. Yimaad ry. 
= neuertheles ry. ®Om. oy. disposynge other y. > theroftoo. ©Om.o. of y sec.m. 40m. o. 
¢ From 0. Heere cendith the prologe of Joun. y. No final rubric in sr. 


a The prolog of the Apocalips. XN. Heere sueth the prologe on the Apocalips. rn. Here biginnit a prologe 
on the Apocalips. tf. A prologe on the Apocalips. vu. Prologe on Apocalips. ec. No initial rubric in crmx 
abgha. > feithfulli gk. © Crist Jhesu'r. 4 postleabk. = ¢ schuln suffre ito. f Om. R see.m. k. 
ffisink sec.m. 8Om.T. bintoxrak. i endyngo. 


APOCALYPSE. 639 


world ; and, Litil flok*, nyle 3e drede. Therfor God the Fadir, seynge the tribula- 
ciouns whiche hooli chirche was to suffre, that was foundid! of the apostlis on Crist 
the stoon, disposid with the Sone and™ the Hooli Goost to schewen hem, that me 
dredde" hem the lesse. And al the Trinyte schewide it Crist® in his manhed, and 
Crist to Joon bi an aungel, and Joon to hooli chirche; of which reuelacioun Joon 
made this book. Wherfore this book is seid Apocalips, that is to seie, Reuelacioun, 
for here it is conteyned that God schewide to Joon, and Joon to? hooli chirche, hou 
grete thingis hooli chirche suffride in the firste tyme, and now suffrith, and schal 
suffre in the laste tymes4 of Antecrist; whanne tribulacioun schal be so greet, that 
if it mowe be, thei that ben™ chosun’, ben meuyd; and whiche meedis® sche‘ schal 
resseyue for these tribulaciouns, now and" tyme’ to come, that meedis” that ben 
hihote maken’ hem? glad, whom the tribulaciouns that ben teld makith* aferd. Ther- 
for this book among othere scripturis of the Newe Testament is clepid bi> the>» name 
of prophecie; and it is more excellent than® prophetis’. For as the Newe Testament 
is worthier than the Olde, and the gospel than the lawe, so this prophesie passith 
the profecies of the Olde Testament, for it schewith sacramentis, that ben® now a 
parti fulfillid of Crist, and of hooli chirche. Or ellis, for to othere is oon maner pro- 
phecie, but to this is thre maner prophecie’ 3eue togidre, that is, of that that is passid, 
and of that that is present, and of that that‘ is to come. And to conferme the auto- 
rite of it, ther cometh the autorite of hym that sendeth, and of hym that berith, and 
of hym that resseyueth. He that sendith, is the Trynite; he that berith, thet 
aungel; he? that resseyueth, Joon’. But* whanne these thingis ben schewid to Joon 
in visioun, and ther ben! thre kyndis of visiouns, it! is to seen vndur which kynde 
this™ be" conteyned®. For sum visioun is bodili, as whanne we seen eny thing with 
bodili izen; sum is spiritual, or ymaginarie, as whanne we seen slepinge, or ellis? 
wakinge we biholden the ymagis‘ of thingis, bi whiche sum other thing is signefied ; 
as Farao slepinge si3 eeris of corn, and Moyses wakinge si3 the buisch brenne. An- 
othir visioun is of vndirstonding, as whanne thoru3 reuelacioun" of the Hooli Goost, 
thoru3 vndirstonding of thou3t, we conseyuen’ the treuthe of mysteries'; as Joon sau3 
tho thingis, that ben" conteyned in this book. For not oneli he sau3 in spirit the 
figuris, but also he vndirstode’ in thou3t the’ thingis that weren signyfied bi hem. 
Joon sau3*, and wroot in the yle of Pathmos, whanne he was exilid of Domitian, the 
most wickid prince; and a cause compellide hym to write. For while he was holdun 
in outlawerie of Domycian, in the ile of Pathmos, in the chirchis, thatY he hadde 
gouerned, ther were spronge many vices and dyuerse heresies. For there weren 
summe heretikis there, that seiden, that Crist was not tofore? Marie, for as myche as 
he was in tyme borun of hir; whiche heretikis Joon in the bigynnyng of his gospel, 
vndurnymmeth, and seith, In the bigynnyng was the Sone; and in this book whanne 
he seith, Y am alpha and oo, that is, the bigynnyng and the® ende. Summe also 
seiden, that hooli chirche schulde ende tofore> the ende® of the world, for charge of 
tribulaciouns‘, and that it schulde not vndurfonge for her® traueile euerlastinge mede, 
Therfor Joon wilnynge to distruye the errouris of these, schewith that Crist was 


k folk na. 10m. 7. foundenh. ™ and with r, dredideb. © to Crist 1 sec.m. RT. P to the Nn. 
atime rT. ‘beth ruao. 8 ychosentT. *medekpr.m. tOm.n. %Om. Er. Vin tyme c sec. m. 
1 sec.m. RU sec.m. xb. in the time E. the meedis R. * beth rego. Om. ek pr.m.a. Y makith egk. 
zhir eqgka. ®maken Erntcegko. %Om.7. >> Om. x sec.m. © than other EaRga. 4 prophe- 
cies qa. ¢heth va. fpropheciesa. Om. kK pr.m 8isthe nT. bandher. iis Joon r. 
kOm.r. isk. beetho. thata. ™ these rtko. ben rtko. 9° conccyued Tr. P Om. xEgk pr. m.o. 
4 ymage N. ‘the reuelacioun b. sconceyueth b. t mynystries b. “beth ca. ¥ vndurstonde a pr. m. 
Wthoagk. *sigitk. Ytherv. biforer. 2Om.Rr. > bifore enn. CendyngN. 4 tribula- 
ciounc. ¢hisn. willinge kartceghka. 


640 APOCALYPSE. 


bigynnyng and ende. Wherfor Isaie seith, Tofor me was no God fourmed, and 
after me ther schal not be. And that hooli chirche thorru3 exercise of tribulaciouns®, 
schal not be endid, but schal profite, and for hem resseyuen an euerlastinge meede. 
Joon writith to the seuene chirchis of Asie, and to her seuene bischopis of! the 
forseid thingis; enfourmynge and techinge bi hem al the general hooli chirche. And 
so the mater of Joon in this‘ werk is speciali of the chirche! of Asie, and also of al 
hooli chirche, what sche™ schal suffre in this present tyme, and what sche schal 
vndurfonge in tyme to come. And his entent is to stire to pacience, which is to be 
kept; for the traueile is schort, and the meede grete®°. The maner of his tretyng is 
suche; firste he sette? bifor a prolog, and a‘ salutacioun, wher he makith the" hereris 
benygne, and takynge wel tente. And whanne he hath sette it ‘to fore’, he cometh 
to the telling; but ‘to fore' his telling he schewith that Crist is euere with oute 
bigynnyng and with outen ende, rehersynge hym that spekith, Y am alpha and oo, 
bigynnyng and ende. Aftirward he cometh to his telling, and departith it in to 
seulene visiouns; and whanne thei ben endid, this book is endid. He settith ‘to fore" 
the prolog, and seith, The Apocalips of Jhesus Crist; vndurstonde’, that this is, as 
it is in other, the Visioun of Ysaye, and also the Parablis of Salomon. 


Jerom in his prologe on the Apocalips seith this~. 


Heere bigynneth the Apocalips*. Here bigynneth the Apocalips*. 


CAP. I. 

Apoca.ips® of Jhesu Crist, which God : 
jaf to hym to make open to hise ser- 
uauntis, whiche thingis it bihoueth to be 
maad soone. And he signyfiede, sending 
bi his aungel to® his seruaunt Joon, 
whiche bar witnessing to the word of2 
God, and witnessing of Jhesu Crist, in 


CAP. I. 

1 Avoca.ips®, or renelacioun, of Jhesu 
Crist, the’ whiche God 3af to him for® to 
make opyn to his seruauntis, whiche 
thinges it bihoueth for’ to be maadé soone. 
And he signyfiede, sendinge bi® his aungel 

2to his seruaunt Joon, the! which bar wit- 
nessing to the word of God, and witnessing 


of Jhesu Crist, in* thes thingis, what euere 
3thinges he size. Blessid he! that redith™, 
and he that herith the wordes" of this pro- 
phecie, and kepith®" tho thinges that ben 
writen in it; forsothe® the tyme is ny3. 
4Joon to seuen chirchis that ben in Asye, 


these thingis, what euer thingis he say. 
Blessid 7s he that redith, and he thats 
herith the wordis of this prophecie, and 
kepith tho thingis that ben writun in it ; 
for the tyme is ni3. Joon® to’ seuenes 
chirchis, that ben in Asie, grace and pees 


a No initial rubric in agNoesrrxy. > Apocalipsis 4. © either v. or they. ¢Om.y. ¢ Om. sx. 
fOm.sx. &doneo. bOmn. iOmy. Ktoo. I‘beheor. ishe sy. ™ratx. ® word o. 
on keepen y. © for ¥. 

€ tribulacioun a. & Om. EK. thesea. iand oft. khisr. !chirchisb. ™ that is what Nb sec.m. 


ocomynge gk. © is grete rv. 
tbifore r. bifore rz. ¥ vndurstondinge a. 


1gRg. Jerom in this prolog on this Apocalips seith this. x. 
Jerom in his prologe on Apocalips seith this afore writun. x. 
and bigynneth the book. h. Al this seith Jerom on the prolog of the Apocalips. o. 
No final rubric in Emruabefk. 
Here bigynneth the firste chapiter of the Apocalips. e. 


this sentence. N. 


on this Apocalips seith al this. a. 
of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. m. 


Apocalips of Joon. k. No initial rubric in rkqRcho. 


0 Om. kprm. ¢IJoonh. 4 tothe xho. 


P setteth EK sec. m. RTO. 
w Heer endith the prologe, and biginnith the Apocalips. 


90m. bprm.o. Om. 7.  § bifore E. 
Jerom in his prolog on the Apocalips seith 
Here endith the prolog, 
Jerom in his prolog 
a Here bigynneth the Apocalips 
Here bigynneth the 


aa that is, reuelacioun, ether shewing K mars. 


I. 5——15. 


grace ‘to 3ou?, and pees, of him that is, 
and that was, and that is to comynge'; 
and of the seuen spiritis, that ben in the 
5si3t of his trone; and of Jhesu Crist, that 
is a feithful witnesse, the first begeten of 
deede men’, and prince of kingis oft erthe; 
the" which louede us, and waschide’ us 
6fro oure synnes in his blood, and made us 
a kingdom, and prestes to God and to* his 
fadir; to himY glory aud empire in to 
7worldlis of worldlis. Amen. Lo! he 
cometh with cloudis, and ech ize shal see 
him, and thei that? pungeden®, ‘or pricke- 
den», him; and alle thee kynredes’, ‘or Ly- 
nages®, of erthe shulen weile‘ hem silf on 
shim. 3he, Amen. I am alpha and oo, 
the bigynnyng and endyng’, seith the Lord 
God, that is, and that was, and that is to 
scomynge', almi3ty. I Joon, 3oure brother, 
and parcener in tribulacioun, and kingdom, 
and* pacience in Crist Jhesu, was in an 
yle, that is clepid Pathmos, for the word 
ioof God, and! witnessing of Jhesu. I was 
in spirit in the sunday”, and I herde aftir® 
l1me a greet voys, as of a trumpe, seiynge®, 
That? thing that thou seest, ‘wrijte in? at 
book’, and sende to thet seuene chirchis 
that ben in Asye; to Epheso", and’ Smyr- 
ma, and’ Pergamo*, and** Tyatira, andY 
Sardo?, and? Philadelfia, and Laodicia**. 
12And I® turnede, that I shulde see the 
voys that spake with me; and I turned 
i3size® seuene candilstickes of gold, and in 
the mydle of the’ seuene golden candel- 
stickis ‘a liche® to the sone of man, clothidf 
with a long prestly clooth’, and_ bifore 
gyrd at the teetis with a golden gyrdel. 
14Sotheli the heed® of him and heeres weren 
white, as whijt wulle, and! as‘ snow; and 
isthe iz3en of him as flaume of fijr; and his 


APOCALYPSE. 


641 


to 30u, of him that is, and that was, and 
that is to comynge; and of the seuené 
spiritis, that ben in the si3t of his trone; 
and of Jhesu Crist, that is a feithfuls 
witnesse, the firste bigetunt of deed men, 
and prince of kingis of the erthe ; which 
louyde vs, and waischide vs fro oure 
synnes in his blood, and made vs a kyng-6 
dom, and preestis to God and to his fader; 
to hym 4e glorie and empire in to worldis 
of worldis. Amen. Lo! he cometh? 
with clowdis, and ech i3e schal se hym, 
and thei that prickiden® hym; and alle 
the kynredis‘ of the erthe schulen be- 
weile hem silf on hym. 3he, Amen! Ys 
am alpha and oo, the bigynnyng and the 
ende, seith the Lord God, that is, and 
that was, and that is to comynge, al- 
my3ti. I, Joon, 30ure brothir, and parte-9 
ner in tribulacioun, and kingdom, and 
pacience in Crist Jhesu, was in an ile, 
that is clepid Pathmos, for the word of 
God, and for the witnessyng of Jhesu. 
Y was in spirit in the Lordis dai, and Y 10 
herde bihynde me a greet vois, as of a 
trumpe, seiynge ¢o me, Write thou in ail 
book that! thing that thou seest, and 
sende to the seuene chirchis that ben in 
Asie; to Ephesus, to Smyrma, and* to 
Pergamus, and to! Tiatira, and to Sardis, 
and to Filadelfia, and to Loadicia™. And 12 
Y turnede, that Y schulde se the vois 
that spak with ne; and Y turnede, and 
Y" say seuene candelstikis of gold, and 13 
in the myddil of the° seuene goldun can- 
delstikis oon lijk to? the sone of man, 
clothid with a long garnement4, and gird 
at the tetis with a goldun girdil. Andi 
the heed of hym and his heeris weren 
whijt, as whijt wolle", and as snow; and 


POm.y. peestojour. comensx. %SOm. x. tinn, "Om.r. Yweshsx, WOm. 
ANOQSVXY. XOm.x. Yhimébev. 7Om.o. ®prickedeny. » Om. ox. either crucifyeden v. 
¢Om.o. 4 linagis x. ¢ Om. oorx. fbiweiley. &ende x. 4Om.a@pr.m.r. icomen sx. Kino, 
land for 7. ™ Lordisday ry. ™bihynde ry. ©seyinge tomer. P Write in book thaty. 94 Om. r. 


© Om. aogsyxy. *Om.v. * Om. anogsyxy. % Ephesus anry. Ephesyes o. Effesi sx. Y to aNosyxy. 


wOm.o. andtov. ¥* Pargamus ansvy. Pargamieso. **andtor. Yandtoyv sup.ras. 2 Sardis 
ANosyxy. and tov. Loadiciac. >ITamae. CandIsay y. 4 Om.anoesry. ¢a lichi ang. liche c. 
I saw a liche o. oon liche r. oon lijk vy. {clad sx. & cloth,oranaube Tr. hheued r ioro. kOm, x. 
© ether crucifieden K marg.  f ether lynagis x marg. & Om.ca sec.mh. » Om.k prem. itheo. 
kOm. 8. !Om. 5, ™ Laodicia & ef alii, o8. © Om.x. °Om.g. P Om. gk prim.o. 4 garment 
A pr.m. ether an awbe K marg. * as wolle a. 
VOL. Iv. 4N 


t the firste bi- 
geten ; that is, 
the first among 
hem that risen 
agen fro dede 
men to vndeed- 
ly and blisful 
hijf, Lire here. 
ve. 


642 


feet lijke! to ‘drosse of gold™, ‘or /atoun®, 
as ina brennynge chymeney; and the voys 
isof him as the voys of many watris. And 
he hadde in his ri3thond seuen sterres, and 
a swerd sharp on? bothe? sijdis’ wente out 
of his mouth; and his face shijneth' as the 
17sunne’ in his vertu’. And whan I hadde 
seyn him, I fel doun at his feet, as deed. 
And he puttide his riz3thond’ on” me, 
seiynge*, Nyle thou drede; I am the first 
isand the last; and Iam alyue, and I was 
deed; and lo! I am lyuynge in to worldlis 
of worldlis, and I haue the’ keyes of deeth 
igand helle. Therefore wrijte thou whiche 
thinges thou hast seyn, and whiche ben’, 
and whiche it? bihoueth for? to be don 
soaftir thes thinges. The mysterie’, ‘or 
priuytee’, of seuene sterris, whom? thou 
sizef in my ri3thalff, and the! seuen 
golden candelstickes; the seuen sterres 
ben aungels: of* seuene chirchis, and the! 
seuene candelstickes ben seuene™ chirches. 


CARA. 


1 And to the aungel of the chirche of 
Ephesus" wrijte thou, Thes thinges seith 
le, that holdith® seuen? sterres in4 his* 
rijthalfs, thet which® walkith in the mydle 
2of seuen golden candelstickis. I woot thi 
werkes, and’ trauel, and thi pacyence, and 
for thon mayst not suffre* yuel men; 
and thou hast temptid’,‘or asayed?, hem 
that seien hem silf for* to be apostles, and> 
ben not, and thou hast founden hem lijers; 
sand thou hast pacience, and thou hast 
sustenyd® for my name, and fayledist not. 
4But I haue ajen thee fewe thinges, that? 
sthou hast left thie first charite. ‘And sof 
be thou myndeful off whennus thou hast 


Ylichi ane. ™ Jatoun 7. 


side r. r Om. 4Nnosrxy. 

u putte sx. Vrij3t half anogsx. W vpon rT. 
2Qm.e. > Om. sx. © prinytee o. sacrament r. 
hast seen x. & riz3thond rr. bh Om. anogsyxy. 
kofthe r. !Om.anoesyxy. ™ the senen rv. 
‘theo. 8 rizj3t hound rr. t Om.rx. "that x. 
Yasayed or. 2 Om. orx. or sayed s. 2 Om. sx. 


£Therfore vy. & fro sGNoQgsTVXY. 


8 ether dross of gold K marg. 


APOCALYPSE. 


§ sunne shyneth angsyxY. sunne moost bri3t o. 
x and seyde r. 
d Om. oex. 


n Effecie nx. 


v and thi G sec. m. T. 
bd and thei Nn. 


t Om. k. 


I. 16-——IE. 5." 


the i3jen of hym as flawme of fier, and is 
hise feet lijk to Jatoun’, as in a bren- 
nynge chymney; and the vois of hym as 
the vois of many watris. And he hadde iw 
in his rijt hoond seuene sterris, and a 
swerd scharp on ener ethir side wente 
out of his mouth; and his face as the 
sunne schyneth in his virtu. Andi7 
whanne Y hadde seyn hym, Y felde doun 
at hise feet, as deed. And he puttide his 
rijt hond on me, and seide, Nyle thou 
drede; Y am the firste and the laste; 
and Y am alyue, and Y was deed; andts 
lo! Y am lyuynge in to worldis of 
worldis, and Y haue the keyes of deth 
and of helle. Therfor write thou whiche 19 
thingis thou hast seyn, and whiche ben, 
and whiche it bihoueth to be don aftir 
these thingis. The sacrament of the2o 
seuene sterris, which thou seijest in my 
ri3t hond, and the seuene goldun candel- 
stikis; the seuene sterris ben aungels+ 
of the sevene chirchis, and the seuene 
candelstikis ben seuene chirchis. 


CAP elk 


And to the aungel of the chirche of1 
Efesus write thou, These thingis seith 
he, that holdith the seuene sterris in his 
ri3t hond, which walkith in the middil 
of thet seuene goldun candilstikis. Y2 
woot thi werkis, and trauel", and thi 
pacience, aud that thou maist not suffre 
yuele men; and thou hast asaied hem 
that seien that thei ben apostlis, and 
ben not, and thou hast foundun hem 
lieris ; and thou’ hast pacience, and thous 
hast suftrid for my name, and failidist 
not. But Y haue ajens thee a fewea 
thingis, that thou hast left thi firste 
charite. Therfor be thou myndeful fros 


8 or [either v] latoun, or [either v| metal wellid of many thingis [thing 0] 
ANosv marg. Om. err. or metal wellid of manye thingis x. 


oof ny. Peuereithiry. 4 the sydis r. 
t vertue, or myddai r. 
y Om. aNogsrxy pr.m. 7 ben now T. 

e whiche anogsxy. f saiest aNoery. 
i the aungelis, or predatis sent into messagis Tr. 
ohalt x. PtheseuentT. don sy, 
Wthat vy. * susteyne aNogsxY. 


Csuffrid ry. 4Om.N. € the a. 


u thi traueile gk. VY Om. a. 


T ben aungels; 
that is, bi- 
schopis of the 
chirches ; an 
aungel, which 
is interpretid 
sent, is here 
the name of 
bischop office, 
and in ij. c°. of 
Malachi a prest 
is clepid an 
aungel of the 
Lord. ve. for a 
bischop is the 
principal prest 
in a diocese. 
Lire here. v. 


Il. 6——14. 


falle, and do penaunce, and do the firste 
werkes; ‘if not", I come soone to thee, and 
shal' moue thi candelsticke of* his place, 
6‘no but! thou shalt do penaunce. But 
thou hast this good thing, for™ thou 
hatedist" ‘the dedes of Nycholaytis, ‘or 
JSolewers of Nychols, the’ whiche® and I 
Thatede'. He that hath eres, here, what 
the spirit ‘shal seie" to the’ chirchis. To 
‘the ouercomynge” I shal 3iue for* to ete 
of the tree of lijf, that is in paradise’ of 
smy God. And to the aungel of the chirche 
of Smyrma, wrijte thou, Thes thinges 
seith the first and the last, that was deed, 
gand lyneth. I woot thi tribulacioun, and 
thi pouert, but thou art riche?; and thon 
art blasfemyd of hem, that seien hem silf 
for? to be Jewes, and ben not, but thei? 
toben the synagoge of Sathanas. Drede 
thou no thing of thes‘ whiche thou ‘art 
to! suffringe’4, Lo! the deuel ‘is to® send- 
ingef summe of 30u in to prisoun, that 3e 
be temptid®; and 3e shulen haue tribula- 
cioun in ten dayes. Be thou feithful vnto 
the deeth, and I shal 3iue to thee a coroun 
11o0f lijf. He that hath eres, here, what the! 
spirit ‘shal seieJ to the* chirchis. He that 
shal ouercome, shal not be hirt of the 
12secounde deeth. And to the aungel of the 
chirche of Pergame! wrijte thou, Thes 
thinges seith he, that hath the swerd 
issharp on™ ‘either sijde®. I woot where 
thou dwellist, where the® seete of Sathanas 
is; aud thou holdist my name, and denyest? 
not my feith. And in tho dayes?? Anti- 
phas, my? feithful witnesse, that was sleyn 
l4at 30u, where Sathanas dwellith. But I 
haue a3ens thee fewe" thinges; for thou 
hast* there ment holdinge the teching of 
Balaam, ‘the which” tau3te Balac for’ to 


h ellis sothely G sec. m. or ellis N. 3if not thou do penaunce T. either ellis r. 


APOCALYPSE. 


643 


* whennus thou hast falle, and do penaunce, 


and do the firste werkis ; ether” ellis, Y 
come* soone to thee, and Y schal moue 
thi candilstike fro his place, but ‘thou doY 
penaunce. But thou hast this goode 
thing, that thou hatidist the dedis of 
Nycholaitist, the? whiche also Y hate. 
He that hath eeris, here he, what the7 
spirit seith to the® chirchis. To hym 
that ouercometh Y schal 3yue to ete of 
the tre of lijf, that is in the paradis of 
my God. And to the aungel of thes 
chirche of Smyrma write thou, These 
thingis seith the firste and the laste, that 
was deed, and lyueth. Y woot thi tri-9 
bulacioun, and thi pouert, but thou art 
riche; and thou art blasfemyd of hem, 
that seien, that thei ben Jewis, and ben 
not, but ben the synagoge of Sathanas. 
Drede thou no thing of these thingis, 10 
whiche thou schalt suffre. Lo! the 
denel schal sende summe of 30u in to 
prisoun, that 5e be temptid; and 3e schu- 
len haue tribulacioun ten daies. Be thou 
feithful to® the deth, and Y schal 3yue to 
thee a coroun of lijf. He that hath eeris, 1 
here he, what the spirit seith to the* 
chirchis. He that ouercometh, schal not 
be hirt’ of the secounde deth. And to12 
the aungel of the chirche of Pergaimus 
write thou, These thingis seith he, that 
hath the swerd scharp on ech® side. Y 13 
woot where thou dwellist, where the 
seete of Sathanas is; and thou holdist my 
name, and denyedist' not my feith. And 
in tho daies was Autifas, my feithful 
witnesse, that was slayn at jou, where 
Sathanas dwellith. But Y hane ajens14 
thee a fewe thingis; for thou hast ‘there 
men! holdinge the teching of Balaam, 


iY schal scopestrx. 


Kk fronv. Ibutifox. ™thatr. Mhatist ry. 9 Om. N. 4 that saiden men schulden haue her mijues 
in comoun T. Om. X. 'Om.es. Swhomrtr. thater. Uscith ry. *Y Om. anesyxy. Whim that 
ouercometh y. * Om. osx. Ythe paradise 4c sec.m. Novy. “riche in gracer. %®Om.sx. » Om. 
ANOQSVXY. Cthes perelis T. schalt yr. 44 suffrin sx. suffre vy. @schal vy. {senden sx. sende F. 
& taasted o. proued 7. h til into 4 pr.m. til to 4 sec.m. G pr.m. NOQSVXY. i Om. o. J seith rv. 
k Om. anesvy. | Pergamus ansrxy. ™in sy. ®eche part aNosyx sec.m.y. eche side Q. 9° Om. Q. 
P denyedest Nosvxy. PP daies was vy. .2 ino. Ta fewe oxy. the fewe rT. Sholdest 0. men 
techynge g. which y. that x, vOm. sx. 


wor rgk. shal come K sec. m. 
¢ Om. b. 4 onercomeng. ©¢ eithir re. 


¥ do thou 5 pr.m. 
f denyest k pr.m, 


z Om. ER. 
€ Om. Rr. 


aQm. beg. » til to map. 
hb Antipas 1.‘ inen there k. 


4N2 


+ Nicol hadde 
a fair wijf, and 
it was put to 
him, that he 
louede hire 
gelously ouer 
myche; and to 
schewe the con- 
trarie, he set- 
tide her forth 
toothere Cristin 
men, and seide 
bi errour, that 
wyues schulde 
be comune, as 
othere thingis. 
Lire here. ve. 


644 


sende sclaundre bifore the*® sones* of 
Yrael, that is to sete, forY to ete of sacri- 
ficis of ydolis, and for? to do fornycacioun ; 
isso and thou hast men holdinge the teching 
isof Nycholaytis. Also do thou penaunce; 
if not’, I shal ‘soone come** to thee, and I 
shal fi3te with hem in? swerd of my mouth. 
17He that hath eres, here, what the spirit 
‘shal seie» to thee chirchis. To ‘the ouer- 
comynge!? I shal 3iue® ‘manna hid, or aun- 
gel mete’; and I shal 3iue to him a whijt 
stoon, and in the stoon a newe name writ- 
un, the? which no man woot", no but he 
isthat takithi. And to the aungel of the 
chirche of Tyatira wrijte thou, Thes 
thinges seith the sone of God, that hath 
izen as flaume of fijr, and his feet lijk to* 
i9'drosse of gold’. I haue™ knowe thi 
werkes, and feith, and charite, and ‘my- 
nisterie, 07" seruice®, and thi? pacience, 
and thi laste werkes mo? than the" for- 
zomer. But I haue ajzens thee a fewe 
thinges; for thou suffrist’ the womman 
Jezabel, thet which" seith hir’ for” to be 
a prophetesse, for* to teche and deceyue 
my seruauntes, forY to do leccherie, and 
for’ to ete of thingis* offrid to ydolis. 
21And I 3af to hir tyme, ‘that she shulde 
do penaunce, and she wole not do penaunce 
20f hir fornicacioun. Lo*! I sende hir in 
to a bed, and thei that don leccherie with 
hir shulen be in moost tribulacioun, no4 
but if¢ thei do penaunce off her werkis. 
23And I® shal slee hir sones in" deeth, and 
alle chirches shulen wite, for! Iam sekinge 
reynes and hertes; and I shal 3iue to ech 
21man of 30u aftir* his! werkes. Forsothe 
I seie to 3ou, ‘and™ othere that ben at 
Tyatire, who euere han" not this teching, 
and that knewen® not the hiz3nesse of Sa- 
thanas, hou thei seien, I shal not sende on? 


wOm.n. children o. YOm.sx. 2 Om. sx. 
inthe vy. >bseith ry. ¢ Om. anogsvxy prem. 
to hym 46 sec. m. Nogsxy pr. m. 
bknowith vy. itakithit 7. ‘kthe r. 
suffrid sy. 
a thing gs. 
i that v. 


tOm. vx. 4% that x. 

bfortor. ¢ And lo! r. 
K vp aogsxy. bir. 10m. G prim. 

k Om. R. 
p Om. bg, 


1 for to R. 
@ aungelis EK. 


™ sacrifice b. 


APOCALYPSE. 


4 the ouercomere s. hym that ouercometh r. 
f aungels met hid anogs. aungel mete hid yxy pr.m. 
by !jatoun T. gold, either latoun v. 
mynysterie, ether vy. mynysterie x. © thi seruice T. Om. x. 
¥ hir self r. 
4 Om. rx. 
m and to F. 


n fornicaciouns E. 
T that is, manna X marg. sec.m. 


il. 15-24. 


which tau3te Balaac for‘ to sende sclaun- 
dre bifor the sones of Israel, to! ete of 
sacrificis™ of ydols, and to do fornica- 
cioun"; so also thou hast men holdinge 1s 
the teching of Nycholaitis. Also do thou 16 
penaunce; ‘3if ony thing lesse®, Y schal 
come soone to thee, and Y schal fizte 
with hem with the swerd of my mouth. 
He that hath eeris, here he, what the17 
spirit seith to the? chirches. To him 
that ouercometh Y schal 3yue aungel! 
mete hid’; and Y schal 3yue to hym a 
whiit stoon, and in the stoon a newe 
name writun, which no man knowith, 
but he that takith. And to the aungelis 
of the chirche of Tiatira write thou, 
These thingis seith the sone of God, 
that hath izen as flawme of fier, and hise 
feet lijk* latoun. Y knowe thi werkis, 19 
and feith, and charite, and thi seruyce, 
and thi pacience, and‘ thi laste werkis 
mo than the formere. But Y haue ajens 20 
thee a fewe thingis; for thou suffrist the 
womman Jesabel, which seith that sche 
is a prophetesse, to teche and disseyue 
my seruauntis, to do letcherie, and to ete 
of thingis offrid to idols. And Y 3af to21 
hir time, that sche schulde do penaunce, 
and sche wolde not do penaunce of hir 
fornycacioun. And lo! Y sende hir in2z 
to a bed, and thei that doen letcherie 
with hir schulen be in moost tribulacioun, 
but thei don penaunce of hir werkis. 
And Y schal slee hir sones in to deth, 23 
and alle chirchis schulen wite, that Y 
am serchinge reynes and hertis ; and Y 
schal 3yue to ech man of 30u after hise 
werkis. And Y seie to 30u, and to othere 24 
that ben at Tiatire, who euer han not 
this teching, and that knewen not the 
hij3nesse of Sathanas, hou thei seien, Y 


a eny thing lesse r. b with @. 

© jyue 
g Om. rv. 
a Om. o. the 


rthir. 8s hast 


a4 come soone VY. 


m Om. F. 
pOm.o. 4Gmorer. 
wOm. sx. *Om.sx. yYOm.sx. 2 Om. sx. 
€ Om. 4nogsy. fforr. g¢ Om 7. into r. 
nhath y. 9° knowen ne. P vpon T. to x. 


© and bote thou do A sec. m. sup. ras. 
8 ijk to h see.m. k sec.m. * Om. b. 


Ii. 25—Ill. 8. 


2530u an other charge; netheles that? that4 

263e han, holdith™ tils I come. And to him 
that shal overcome, and‘ shal kepe til in 
to the ende my werkes, I shal 3iue‘to him" 

27power on’ folkes, and he shal gouerne 
hem in an yren 3erd; and thei shulen be 

28 broke to gydere, as vessel* of a potter, ‘as 
and** I receyuede of my fadir; and I shal 

293iue to him a moreweY sterre. He that 
hath eres, here, what the spirit ‘shal seie” 
to the* chirchis. 


CAP. II. 

i And to the ‘aungel of the” chirche of 
Sardis write thou’, Thes thinges seith he, 
that hath the? seuen spirites of God, ‘and 
seuen sterres®. I woot thi werkes, for 
thou hast name, that thou lyuest, and thou 

zart deed. Be thou wakinge, and confirme 
othere thinges, that weren to diynge‘; 
forsothe® I fynde not thi werkes ful bi- 

sfore my God. Therfore haue thou in 
mynde’, hou thou receyuedist, and herdist ; 
and kepe, and do penaunce. Therefore if 
thou shalt not*wake, I shal come to thee 
as a ny3t theef, and thou shalt not wite in 

4 what hour I shal come to thee. But thou 
hast a fewe names in Sardis, the* whiche 
defouleden! not her clothes; and thei shulen 
walke with me in whijte thingis, for thei 

sben worthi. He that shal onercome, shal 
be clothid™ thus" with whijte clothis® ; 
and I shal not do awey his name of? the 
boke of lijf, and I4 shal knowleche his 
name bifore my fadir, and bifore his aun- 

é6gels. He that hath eres, here, what the 
7spirit ‘shal seie™ to chirchis’. And to the 
aungel of the chirche of Philadelphe wrijte 
thou, Thes thinges seith the holy and 
trewe, that hath the keye of Dauid; thet 
which" openith, and no man closith, he’ 
sclosith, and no man openith. I woot thi 


P hold that sanogry. holdeth that s. 
1Qm.r. ¥ vpon 7. 
8 Om. ANQSVY pr.m. 
hmy Nn. 
ANOQSY. 


q Om. o. 


b Om. o. 
i mynde, or sonle ansy. 
Pfrov. 4 hen. 


¢ Om. Tf. 
k Om. v. 
T seith vy. 


u Om. gk prim. ¥ Om. a. 


APOCALYPSE. 


r Om. ANoQsry. 
x vessels Q. 
4 Om. o. 

1 defoulen Nn. 

8 the chirchis cr. 


was the sy. asa G sec.m. ¥. 


w Om. k pr. m. 


645 


schal not sende on 30u another charge; 
netheles holde 3e that that 3e han, til Y 25 
come. And to hym that schal ouercome, 26 
and that schal kepe til" in to the ende 
my werkis, Y schal 3yue power on folkis, 
and he schal gouerne hem in an yrun27 
3erde; and thei schulen be brokun to 
gidre, as a vessel of a pottere, as also Y 28 
resseyuede of my fadir; and Y schal 
3yue to hym a morewe sterre. He that29 
hath eeris, here he, what the spirit seith 
to the’ chirchis. 


CAP. III. 


And to the aungel of the chirche of 
Sardis write thou, These thingis seith 
he, that hath the seuene spiritis of God, 
and the seuene sterris. Y woot thi 
werkis, for thou hast a name, that thou 
lyuest, and thou art deed. Be thoueg 
wakynge, and conferme thou othere 
thingis, that weren to diynge; for Y 
fynde not thi werkis fulle bifore my God. 
Therfor haue thou in¥ mynde, hou thous 
resseyuedist, and herdist ; and kepe, and 
do penaunce. Therfor if thou wake not, 
Y schal come as a ny3t theef to thee, and 
thou schalt not wite in what our Y schal 
come to thee. But thou hast a fewe4 
names in Sardis, whiche han not defoulid 
her clothis; and thei schulen walke* 
with me in whijt clothis, for thei ben 
worthi. He that ouercometh, schal bes 
clothid thus with whijt clothis; and Y 
schal not do awei his name fro the book 
of lijf, and Y schal knouleche his name 
bifore my fadir, and biforeY hise aungels. 
He that hath eeris, here he, what thee 
spirit seith to the? chirchis. And to the7 
aungel of the chirche of Filadelfie write 
thou, These thingis seith the hooli and 
trewe, that hath the keie of Dauid; 
which openeth, and no man closith, he 


t and that rxy. 
Z seith rv. 


§ til that rT. 

*Xand as ¥. Y morn P. 

e Om. s. f doyng o. dien sx. = & for r. 
mclad sx. 2 Om.G pr.m.N. © thingis 
tOm. rx. thatx. vOm.s. 


xwake K prom YOm.g. 2% Om. a. 


646 APOCALYPSE. 


werkes, and loo! I 3af bifore thee a dore 
openid, ‘the which* no man mai close ; for 
thou hast a litel vertu, and hast kept’ my 
9 word, and denyest? not my name. Lo! I 
shal 3iue to thee of the* synagogue of Sa- 
thanas, the? whiche® seien hem for‘ to be 
Jewes, and ben not, but lijen®. Lo! I 
shal make hem, that thei come, and wor- 
‘schipe bifore thi feet;* and thei shulen 
19 wite, forf I louede thee, for thou keptist® 
the word of my pacience. And I shal 
kepe thee froi the hour of temptacioun, 
that is to comynge* in to al the! world, 
for™ to tempte men dwellinge in erthe. 
it Lo! I come soone; holde" that that thou 
ihast, that no man take thi coroun. And 
him that shal ouercome, I shal make a 
piler in the temple of my God, and he 
shal no more go out; and I shal write on® 
him the name of my God, and the name of 
the citee of my God, of newe Jerusalem, 
that cometh doun fro heuene of my God, 
igzand my newe name. He that hath eres, 
here, what the spirit ‘shal seie? to chirchis4. 
1.And to the aungel of the chirche of Lao- 
dice11 wrijte thou, Thes thinges seith 
Amen, ‘that ts, verreylt', ‘the feithful wit- 
nesse and trewe’, thet which" is the’ bi- 
isgynnyng of Goddis creature. I woot thi 
werkes, for nether thou art coold’, nether* 
hoot’; I wolde thou? were coold?2, or? hoot@4; 
igbut for> thou art lew*, and nether coold, 
nether? hoot, I shal bigynne for® to ‘caste 
17thee out’ of my mouth. For thou seist®, 
That® I am riche, and ful of goodis, and I 
haue nede of! no man*; and thou woost! 
not, for™ thou art® a wrecche, and wrech- 
isful®, and pore, and blynd, and nakid. IP 
couuseile thee, for’ to bye of me ‘gold 
fijrid’, and proued, that thou be maad 
riche, and be’ clothid' with whijte clothis", 


Il. g—18. 


closith, and no man openith. I woot this 
werkis, and lo! Y 3af bifore thee a dore 
opened, which no man may close; for 
thou hast a litil vertu, and hast kept my 
word, and denyest® not my name. Lo!9 
Y¥ schal 3yue to thee of the synagoge of 
Sathanas, whiche seien that thei ben 
Jewis, and ben not, but lyen. Lo! Y 
schal make> hem, that thei come, and 
worschipe byfor thi feet; and thei schulen 
wite, that Y louyde thee, for thou keptist 10 
the word of my pacience. And Y schal 
kepe thee fro the our of temptacioun, 
that is to comynge in to al the world, 
to tempte men that dwellen in erthe. 
Lo! Y come soone; holde thou that 
that® thou hast, that no man take thi 
coroun. And hym that schal ouercome, 12 
Y schal make a! pilere in the temple of 
my God, and he schal no more go out; 
and Y schal write on hym the name of 
my God, and the name of the citee of my 
God, of¢ the newe Jerusalem, that cometh 
doun fro heuene of my God, and my 
newe name. He that hath eeris, here13 
he, what the spirit seith'to the chirchis. 


’ And to the aungel of the chirche of Lao- 14 


dice‘ write thou, These thingis seith 
Amen, the feithful witnesse and trewe, 
which is bigynnyng of Goddis creature. 
I woot thi werkis, for nether thou artis 
cold, nether thou art hoot ; Y wolde that 
thou were could, ethir hoot; but for thou 16 
art lewS, and nether cold, nether hoot, Y 
schal bigynne to caste thee out of my 
mouth. For thou seist, That Y am riche, 17 
and ful of goodis, and Y" haue nede of 
no thing; and thou wost! not, that thou 
art a wretche, and* wretcheful, ‘and pore', 
and blynde, and nakid. Y counsele thee 1s 
to bie of me brent gold, and preued, 


whane o, * whom tT. which ry. that x. Yykepteo. %denyedest nogstry. ®thin. » Om. rx. 


¢ that x. 4Om. sx. ¢aliene o. f that v. 
ithisn. ™Om.sx. N"holdethour. ° vpon Tf. 


sift. hOm.o. itoo. kKthing yr. 1! woot r. 


4Om.sx. ‘brent goldr. §Om.o. tclad sx. 


a denizedest rR. b take k pr. m. ¢ Om. Ra, 
A sec.m, marg. lewk ©. 4 Om. x. i wotist R. 


& kepest e. hwordis N. iin.  comen sx. 
P seith 7. the chirchis r. 99 Loadice v pr.m. y. 
rOm.er. §Om.e. tOm. rx. Uthat x. Vv Om. vr. 
nogsr. thou art cold xy. 2 that thou r. 22 hoot 6. 
eilher bilwixe hoot and coolldy. ner. ¢€ Om. sx. 


whot xy. *nevT. Y thou art hoot 4G sec.m. 
aeither yr. 22 colde«. © Om. a. ¢ lew, 
f vome thee 7. take thee out x. & seist of thi 


m™that vy. MYartnotr. °wrechedo. Pp AndI o. 
4 cloothinge o. 


a Om. a. €andofb. fLoadice bg. & warm 
kandaa. !Om.R. 


lil, 19-—IV. 6. 


that the confusioun* of thi nakidnesse 
appere not; and anoynte thin ijen withY 
colirie’, that ts, medicynal® for y3en, maad” 
190f diverse erbis, that thou see. I* ‘whom 
I loue®, reproue*, and chastise® ; ‘therfore 
20sue', ‘or doue®, and do penaunce. Lo! I 
stonde at the dore, and knocke; if ony 
man ‘shal here" my voys, and opene! the 
j3at!, I shal entre to him, and soupe with 
21him, and he with me. I shal 3iue to hiin 
that shal ouercome, for™ to sitte with me 
in my troone, as and I ouercam, and sat 
22with my fadir in his troone. He that 
hath eres, here, what the spirit shal seie 
to chirchis. 


CAP. IV. 


1 Aftir thes thinges I size, and lo! a dore 
openyd® in heuene. And the first voys that 
I herde, as® of a trumpe spekinge with me, 
seiynge?, Sti3e up hidir, and I shal shewe 
to thee whiche1 thinges" it* bihoueth fort 

2to be don soone aftir thes thinges. Anoon 
I was in spirit, and lo! a seete was put in 

3heuen, and on the seete oon sittinge. And 
he that sat, was lijk to ‘the sijt of" a’ 
stoone iaspis, and to sardyn”; and the 
reynbowe was in the cumpas of the seete, 
4lijk to* the** si3t of smaragdyn. And in 
cumpas’ of the seete foure’ and twenty 
smale seetes; and vpon* the troones® foure® 
and twenty eldre’ sittynge, gyrd® aboute 
with white clothis, and in the heedis' of 
shem golden crownes. And leytinges, and 
voyces, and thundringes® camen out of the 
troone; and seuen laumpes brennynge 
bifore the troone, the whiche ben seuen' 
éspirites of God. And in the si3t of the 
seete, as* a se! of glas, lijk to™ cristal; and 


x confusioun, or schame T. 
b gederid anosv xy. gederide togidir 9. 
whom I loue v. I chastise x. 


APOCALYPSE. 


647 


that thou be maad riche, and be clothid 
with whijt clothis, that the confusioun of 
thi nakidnesse be not seen; and anoynte 
thin ijen with a collerie®, that thou se. 
Y repreue, and chastise whom Y loue;19 
therfor sue thou goode men, and do 
penaunce. Lo! Y stonde at the dore, 20 
and knocke; if ony man herith my voys, 
and openith the 3ate to me, Y shal entre 
to hym, and soupe with hym, and he 
with me. And Y schal 3yue to hyma) 
that schalP ouerconie, to sitte with me in 
my trone, as also Y ouercaim, and sat 
with my fadir in his trone. He that 22 
hath eeris, here he, what the spirit seith 
to the chirchis. 


CAP. IV. 

Aftir these thingis Y say, and lo! a, 
dore? was openyd in heuene. And the 
firste vois that Y herde, was as™ of§ a 
trumpe spekinge with me, and seide, 
Stye thou vp hidur, and Y shal schewe 
to thee whiche thingis it bihoueth to be 
don soone aftir these thingus. Anoont Y 2 
was in spirit, and lo! a seete was sett in 
heuené, and vpon the seete oon sittynge. 
Aud he that sat, was lijk the si3t of as 
stoon iaspis, and to sardyn; and a reyn- 
bowe was in cumpas" of the seete, lijk 
the si3t of smaragdyn. And in the cum-4 
pas of the seete weren foure and twenti 
smale seetis; and aboue the troones’ 
foure and twenti eldre men sittinge, hilid 
aboute with whijt clothis, and in the 
heedis of hem goldun corouns. And>5 
leitis, and voices, and thundringis” camen 
out,of the trone; and seuene laumpis 
brennynge bifore the trone, whiche ben 
the* seuene spiritis of God. And bifor¢ 


Ywith a anesyxy. %coluryoc. 4 medicine aNosy. a medicine ox. 
¢ AndI o. 
f loue thou therfore 7. therfore sue thou good men vy. therfore sue thou x. 


ceOm.rv. blame o. Yrepreue x. © chastise 


& Om. orr. and loue x. = herith r. iopeneth or. *Om.asy. !3jatetome yr. ™ Om. 5x. 
o wasopened vy. Cwasasy. Pandseyinge o. andseide vy. 4whato. ‘'thingn. 8 Om. Garr. 


tOm.sx. "Om. nx. VOm.9. Wsardisx, *Om.7. %*Om.G pr.m. Ythe compas o. 7% weren 
foure TY. *®abone 4Nogsrx. abouen y.  ” trone o. C weren foure T. J siz foure r. d eelder men 
ory. elderess. Cand girdeo. fheuedes cor. &thondresos. bOm.vy. 140m, N. the seven ox. 
kwas rT. IlIseteo ™Om.r. 


° that is, a medicyn for t3en, gederide of dyuerse cerbis K sec. m. marg. 
Om. kK pr.m. 
x Om. rrb. - 


undirstonding of sertpturis K sec.m. marg. 
cumpas Ke. Vtronek. © thuudres agk. 


q that is, the 


Phek prim. 
u the 


8Om.b prem.  * And anoon x. 


648 


in the" mydle of the seete, and in cumpas°® 
of the seete, foure? beestes ful of izen bifore 
zand bihynde. And the first beest lijk to? 
a lyon; and the secounde beest lijk to™ a 
calf; and the thridde beest hauynge a 
face as‘ of" a” man; and the fourthe beest 
slijk tow an egle fleynge. And the foure 
beestes hadden ech* of hem sixe wynges; 
and in cumpas and with inne thei ben’ 
ful of i3en; and thei hadden not reste day 
and ny3t, seiynge, Holy, holy, holy, the” 
Lord God almizty, that was, and that is, 
gand that is to comynge*. And whan tho? 
foure beestes 3auen glory, and honour, and 
blessing to the sittinge on‘ the troone, to* 
10 the“4 lyuynge in to worldlis® of worldlis, the 
foure and twenty eldref fellen doun bifore 
the sittyng in troone®, and worschipeden 
the lyuynge in to worldlis® of worldlis. 
And thei senten her crownes bifore the 
11 troone, seiynge', Thou, Lord oure God, art 
worthi for‘ to take glory, and honour, and 
vertu; for thou madist of nou3t alle thinges, 
and! for thi wille thei™ weren, and ben 
maad of nou3t. 


CAP. V. 


1 And I size in the ri3thalf" of the 
sittinge® vpon? the troone, a book writun 
with inne and with oute, and seelid with 

2seuen seelis, And [4 size a strong aungel, 
preching with greet voys', Who is worthi 
for’ to opene the boke, and fort to vnbynde 

3the signetes" of it? And ‘no man mi3te’ in 
heuene, nether in erthe, nether vndir erthe 

4opene” the book, ne* biholdeY it. And I 
wepte miche, for ‘no man is? founden 
worthi” for? to opene the book, nether for 

sto see it. And oon of the eldre® seide to 
me, Wepe thou not; lo! a lyoun of the 


APOCALYPSE. 


IV, 7—=V. 5. 


the seete as a see of glas, lijk a8 crystal, 
and in the myddil® of the seete, and in 
the cumpas of the seete, foure beestis ful 
of i3en bifore and bihynde. And the7 
firste beeste lijk a lyoun; and the se- 
counde beeste lijk'a calf; and the thridde 
beeste hanynge a face as of a man; and 
the fourthe beeste lijk an egle fleynge. 
And the foure beestis hadden euery* of 
hem sixe wyngis; and al aboute and with 
ynne thei weren ful of ijen; and thei 
hadden not reste dai and ny3t, seiynge, 
Hooli, hooli, hooli, the Lord God almy3ti, 
that was, and that is, and that is to 
comynge. And whanne tho foure beestis9 
3auen glorie, and honour, and blessing to 
hym that sat on the trone, that lyueth in 
to worldis of worldis, the foure and 10 
twenti eldre men fellen doun bifor hym 
that sat on! the trone, and worschipiden 
hym that lyueth in to worldis of worldis. 
And thei casten™ her corouns bifor the 
trone, and seiden, Thou, Lord ‘oure God*, 11 
art® worthi to take glorie, and onour, and 
vertu; for thou madist of nou3t alle 
thingis, and for thi wille tho weren, and 
ben maad of nou3t. 


CAP. V. 


And Y say in the rij3thond of the1 
sittere on the trone, a book writun with 
ynne and with out, and seelid with seuene 
seelis. Aud Y say a strong aungel, prech- 2 
ynge with a greet vois, Who is worthi to 
opene the book, and to vndon the seelis of 
it? And noon in heuene, nether in erthe, 3 
nether vnder erthe, my3te opene the book, 
nether biholde it. And Y wepte inyche, 4 
for noon was founde worthi to opene the 
book, nethir to se it. And oon of thes 
eldre men seide to me, Wepe thou not ; 
lo! a lioun of the lynage of Juda, the 


1 Om. G pr.m.pT. © the compas 4G sec.m.No. PwerenfoureT. GOm.r. *Om.r. t Om. 7. 
uOm. sy pr.m. VYOm.nr, WOm.r.  * euery acporr. evueryche No. Ywereny. 7 Om.s. 
@comensx. Ptheogr, ¢vpont. ¢€ Om. 7. 4d Om.epr.m.mpr. © world rT. the worldis y. 
f elder men ogsrxy pr.m, & the trooneo. bworld r. iand seideny. kOm.sx. 10m.0. ™ thor. 
nrijthond Tr. © sittere ry. Pon aNogsyxy. 4Om. x. T° voys, and seyinge 0. §& Om. sx. t Om, sx. 
4 signes o. singnetis, either seelisy. Ynoon vy. Wmy3te openey. X*neither nr. Yhold 7. noon 
was r. no man worthiisy. 22Om.y. 8Om.sx. > Om.sx. ¢eldre men rx. 

€Om.o. Mimmyddisgk. ilijktoo. kechek. !inbog. M™castiden xk. °%Om,R. © thou art 


cmurk sec. m. o8. 


Vv. 6—14. 


lynage of Juda, the rote of Dauid, hath 
ouercomen for‘ to opene the book, and for 
sto vnbynde the® seuen signetesf of it. And 
I size, and Jo! in the® inydle of the troone, 
and ‘in the mydle" of foure! beestes, and in 
the* mydle of eldre!, a lomb stondinge as 
sleyn, hauynge seuene hornes, and seuen 
izen, the™ whiche ben seuen" spirites of 
7God, sent into ech lond. And he cam, 
and toke of the ri3thond® of the sittinge? 
sin troone’ the book. And whan he hadde 
openyd the book, foure’ beestes and foure 
and twenty eldre® fellen doun bifore the 
lomb; hauynge ech of hem harpes, and 
golden fioles ful of saueringis', whiche ben 
othe" preyers of seyntis. And thei sungen 
a newe song, seiynge, Lord’, thou art 
worthi for’ to take the boke, and* for** to 
opene the signetes of it; for thou were 
slayn, and a3en bou3tist us to God in thi 
blood, of alY lynage, and? tunge*, and” pu- 
10 ple®, and nacioun ; and madist us? ‘to oure 
God kingdom’, and prestis®; and we shulen 
11regne vpon" erthe. And I size, and herde 
the voys' of many aungels in cumpas* of 
the! trone, and of beestes, and of™ eldre®. 
And the nombre of hem ‘was a" thousynd° 
120f thousyndis, selynge with greet voys, 
The lomb that is? slayn, is worthi for? to 
take vertu, and ‘diuynite, o7 godhed", and 
wisdom, and strengthe, and hononr, and 
1s glory, and blessing. And ech creature that 
is in heuen, and that on® erthe, and vndert 
erthe, and the se, and whiche thinges ben" 
in it, I herde alle seiynge, To the sittynge 
in troone, and to the lomb, blessing, and 
honour, and glory, and power, in to world- 
14 lis" of worldlis. And theY foure beestes 
seiden, Amen. And the foure and twenty 
‘eldre men” felden doun ‘in to* her facis, 


€Om. sx. ¢€Om.o. 
hin mydle r. Om. vy. ithe foure r. 
n the seuene x. © riz3thalf aNogsx. 
t saueringis, ether swete odouris y. % Om. x. 
Yeech F. Zor Q. 
© puplis nv. 4 Om.Gcpr.m.  ¢ Om.r. 
ivoyces o. k the compas 1G sec.m. NOQSYXY. 
onQm. ry. © thousindis ry. P was P. 
dignyte, or godhede y. 
worldlis G sec.m. VY Om. Q. 
Xon v. 


k Om. r. 


q Om. sx. 


P Om. Kk prem. 
40 


VOL. TV. 


APOCALYPSE. 


f signetis, or smale sealis aNosy. singnetis, either smale seelis v. 
1 the eldrys aosry. eldris ng. eldre men 1. 
4 the trone FP. 
v Lord oure God r. 
@ tunge, or langagis aN. tunge, or langage s. tunge, either langage rv. 
fa kyngdom rr. 

LOm., soer. 
t dignite o. dynynyte ex. diuynite, ether godhed r. 
8 is on the G see. m. is vpon T. is on ¥. 
W senyours, or eldere men ANQSY. senyouris, either eldre men ¥. elderes x. 


P sittere rv. 


649 


roote of Dauid, hath ouercomun to opene 
the book, and to vndon the seneue seelis 
of it. And Y say, and lo! in the myddile 
of the trone, and of the foure beestis, and 
in the myddil of the eldre men, a lombe 
stondynge as slayn, that hadde seuene 
hornes, and seuene iz3en, whiche ben 
seuene spiritis of God, sent in to al the? 
erthe. And he cam, and took of the7 
ri3thond of the sittere in'the trone the 
book. And whanne he hadde opened thes 
book, the foure beestis and the foure and 
twenti eldre men fellen doun bifore the 
lomb; and hadden ech of hem harpis, 
and goldun violis ful of odours, whiche 
ben the preyeris of seyntis. And theis 
sungun a newe song, and seiden, Lord 
oure God, thou art worthi to take the 
book, and to opene the seelis of it; for 
thou were slayn, and a3enbou3tist vs to 
God in thi blood, of ech lynage, ‘and 
tunge?, and puple, and nacioun; and 1o 
madist vs a kyngdom, and prestis to oure 
God; and we schulen regne on erthe. 
And Y say, and herde the vois of many 11 
aungels al aboute the trone, and of the 
beestis, and of the eldre men. And the 
noumbre of hem was tliousyndis of thou- 
syndis, seiynge with a greet vois, The!2 
lomb that was slayn, is worthi to take 
vertu, and godhed, and wisdom, and 
strengthe, and onour, and glorie, and 
blessing. And ech creature that is in}3 
heuene, and ¢hat is on erthe, and vndur 
erthe, and tlie see, and whiche thingis 
ben in it, Y herde alle seiynge, To hym 
that sat in the trone, and to the lomb, 
blessyng, and onour, and glorie, and 
power, in to worldis of worldis. Andi 


And 


the foure beestis seiden, Amen. 


g Om. vr. 
m Om. Fx. 

rthe foure Tr. 5 elder men ost. 
wOm.sx. *Om. Nn. ** Om. sx. 
bina. 
£ prestis to oure God r. h on srx. 
m Om. 4Nosvxy¥. Meelder men or. eldris r. 
uu the 


tthat vnder x. that ben n. 


aq Om. rR. 


650 


and worschipeden the lyuynge in to world- 
lis of worldlis. 


CAP. VI. 


1 And I size, that the lomb haddeY openid 
oon of the seuen” signetes. And Y herde 
oon of the foure beestis seiynge, as a* voys 

2of thundre, Come, and see. And I si3e, 
‘and Jo®! a whijt hors; and he that sat on® 
him hadde a bowe, and a coroun is® 3ouun 
to him. And he wente out ouercomynge, 

3that he shulde ouercome. And whan he 
hadde openyd the secounde seel, I herde 
the secounde beest seiynge, Come thou, 
sand see. And an other reed hors wente 
out; and it is’ 3ouun to him ‘that sat on® 
him", that he shulde take pees fro erthe’, 
and that thei slee* to gydere hem! silf; and 
5a greet swerd is 3ouun to him. And whan 
he hadde openyd the thridde seel, I herde 
the thridde beest seiynge, Come thou”, 
and see. And loo! a" blak hors; and he 
that sat vpon® him hadde a balaunce in 
éhis hond. And I herde as? a voys in the 
mydle of foure’ beestis, seiynge, A bilibre 
of whete, ‘that ts, a wey3t of two pound’, 
for oo peny, and thre bilibres of barly for 
oo® peny; and hirte thou not wijn, and 
7oyle. And whan he hadde openyd the 
fourthe seel, I herde a voys of the fourthe 
sbeest, seilyng, Come thou, and see. And 
loo! a paal hors; and thes’ name Deeth' to 
him that sat on" him, and helley suede 
him. And power is¥ 3ouun to him on* 
foure partisY of the” erthe, for to sle with 
swerd, and hungre, and deeth, and with” 

y beestis ‘of erthe’. And whan he hadde 
openyd the fyuethe seel, I size vndir an¢ 
auter the soules of men sleyn for the word 
of God, and for witnessing that thei had- 


yOm.sy. ZOm.o. thes. Paso. 
bhim power tr. ‘b Om. r. 
n Om. o. © on ANOQSVX. P Om. 4 pr.m. o. 
8s Om. eG prim. tof Deeth o. was Deth r. 


ANoPGST. 2% Om.sx. #®Om. sx. 


© a thundir e. P Come thou Ro. 
rand g. Om. k pr. m. 
men with goode werkis Kk sec.m. marg. 


x fourthe beest Ro. 


APOCALYPSE. 


© vypon T. 

i the erthe 4G sec. m. NOSVXY. 
q the foure 4 pr.m. 
Uvpon T. 
b Om. anogsrxy. 


VI. 1—9. 


the foure and twenti eldre men fellen 
doun on her faces, and worschipiden 
hym that lyueth in to worldis of worldis. 


CAP. VI. 


And ¥Y sai, that the lomb hadde openyd1 
oon of the senene seelis. And Y herde 
oon of the foure beestis seiynge, as a vois 
of thundur®, Come?, and se. And Y2 
sai, and lo! a white hors1; and he that 
sat on hym hadde a bouwe, and a coroun 
was 30uun to hym. And he wente ont 
ouercomynge, that he schulde ouercome. 
And whanne he hadde openyd the se-3 
counde seel, I herde the secounde beest 
selynge, Come ‘thou, and’ se. And an-4 
other reed hors’ wente out; and it was 
jouun to hym that sat on hym, that he 
schulde take pees fro the erthe, and that 
thei sle to gidere hem silf; and a greet 
swerd was 3onun to hym. And whannes 
he hadde openyd the thridde seel, Y 
herde the thridde beest seiynge, Come 
thou, and se. And lo! a blak hors‘; and 
he that sat on hym hadde a balaunice in 
his hond. And Y herde ‘as a" vois ing 
the myddil of the foure beestis, seiynge, 
A bilibret of wheete for a’ peny, and thre 
bilibris of barli for a” peny; and hirte 
thou not wyn, ne oile. And whanne he7 
hadde openyd the fourthe seel, Y herde 
a vois of the ‘foure beestis*, seiynge, 
Come thou, and se.. And lo! a pales 
hors’; and the name was Deth to hymn 
that sat on hym, and helle* suede hym. 
And power was 3ouun to hym on foure 
partis of the erthe, for® to sle with swerd, 
and with hungur, and with deth, and 
with beestis of the erthe. And whanneg 
he hadde opened the fyuethe seel, Y say 
vudur the auter the soulis of men slayn 


4Om.o. eCwasr. fwasr. 
k schulden slea 7. |! him sry. 
r Om. v in text. 
x vpon T. 
d the r. 


& vpon rT. 
m Om. x. 

SaVx. 
Vdeth s. Wwasy. Y partyes 
€ Om. nx. of the eerthe o. 


4 that is, holi chirche maad feir with baptem K sec. m. marg. 
8 that ts, opene pursuers K sec. m. marg. 
2 Om. k pr. m. 
¥ that is, ipocritis shewing hem holie to the peple, thou; thei be nol. K sec. m. marg. 
z that is, men that neuere ben fulle of worldli goodis K sec. m. marg. 


t that is, hiding hire vicis to summe 


vo cuRUXbcegof. 00 EQRaa. *¥ 00 £. o xegk. 
t=} co] 


aOm. a. 


+ a bilibre is a 
wei3te of twey 
pound. v. 

that is, a weiste 
of twey pound, 
e. 


VI. to—VII. 2. 


woden. And thei crieden with greet voys, 
seiynge, Hou longe, Lord®, holy! aud trewe, 
demyst thous not, and vengist® our blood of 
uthes that dwellen in erthe? ‘And whijte 
stooles', ‘for ech soule a stoole*, ben! 3ouun 
to hem; and it is™ seid to hem, that thei 
shulden reste 3it a litel tyme, til the? euen 
seruauntes of hem be fulfillid®, and the 
britheren of hem, that ben to be slayn, as 
izand thei?, And I size, whan he hadde 
openyd the sixte seel, and lo! a4 greet 
erthe mouyng is™ maad; and the sunne is‘ 
maad blak, as at sack of heyre, and al the 
13moone is" maad as blood. And sterres of 
heuen fellen doun vpon’ theW erthe, as a 
fijge tree sendith his vnripe fyges, whan it 
14is mouyd of a greet wijnd. And heuen 
wente awey, as a book infoldid*; and all 
mounteyns and ijles’Y ben? moued fro her 
is places. And kinges of erthe, and princes, 
and tribunes, and riche, and stronge, and 
ech seruaunt?, and fre man, hidden hem in 
16 dennes and stoones of hillis. And thei seien 
to hillis and stoonys, Falle 3e on” us, and 
hijde 3e us fro the face of¢ the4 sittynge 
on® troonef, and fro wrath® of the lomb; 
17for the greet day of her wrath cometh, 
and who shal mowe? stonde ? 


CAP. VII. 


1 Aftir thes thinges I size foure aungels 
stondinge vponi the* foure corners of the! 
erthe, holdinge foure™ wijndis of the erthe, 
that thei blewen" not on® erthe?, nethir on9 

2 the’ se, nethir ‘in to* ony tree. And Y sije 
an other aungel stizing‘' fro the" risyng of 
the sunne, hauynge a signe of quike God. 


APOCALYPSE. 


651 


for the word of God, and for the witness- 
ing that thei hadden. And thei crieden 10 
with a geet vois, and seiden, Hou long 
thou, Lord, that art hooli and trewe, 
demest not, and vengest uot oure blood 
of these that dwellen in the erthe? Andi 
white stoolis, for ech soule a stoole, weren 
jouun to hem; and it was seide to hem, 
that thei schulden reste 3it a litil tyme, 
til the noumbre of her felowis and of her 
britheren ben fulfillid, that ben to be 
slayn, as also thei. And Y say, whanne tz 
he hadde openyd the sixte seel, and lo! a 
greet erthe mouyng was maad; and the 
sumne was maad blak, as a sak of heire, 
and al the moone was maad as blood. 
And the sterris of heuene felden doun on13 
the erthe, as a fige tre sendith his vnripe 
figis, whanne it is mouyd of a° greet 
wynd. And heuene wente awei, as ais 
book wlappid in; and alle’ munteyns 
and ilis® weren mouyd fro her placis. 
And kingis® of the? erthe, and princis, 15 
and tribunes, and riche, and stronge, and 
ech bonde man, aud freman, hidden hem 
in dennys and stoonys of} hillis. And 16 
thei seien to hillis and to stoonys, Falle 
je on vs, and hide 3e vs fro the face of 
hym that sittith on the trone, and fro 
the wrath of the lomb; for the greet dai 17 
of her wraththe cometh, and who schal 
mowe stonde? ? 


CAP. VII. 


Aftir these thingis Y sai foure aungelst 
stondinge on the foure corneris of the 
erthe, holdinge foure wyndis of the erthe, 
that thei blewen not on the erthe, nether 
on the see, nether on ony tre. And Y2 
saw3 anothir aungel stiynge‘ fro the ri- 
synge of the sunne, that hadde a signe of 


¢ thou, Lorde 4c sec.m. Nosrxy. ‘that art hooly yr. € Om. anosvxy. » vengist not yr. tand to 


hem ben 3ouen synguler whijt stoolis r. k Om. 7. to ech soule a stole x. l weren r. m was r. 
nthe noumbre of the x. © fillid 7. P thei weren r. Om. aNnogsyy. ‘'wasy. Swasr. tOm.a. 
uwasvy. Yon angosyxy. WOm.9. * wlappid yn anogsvxy. Y hillis x. 7 weren y. ® boond man r. 
bvponr. Conn. 4Om.nx. €vponr. fthetrone x. & the wraththe ox. 4 mai ny. Om. 7.’ 
ion anogsyxy. * Om. nor. !Om.anyx. ™ the foures. ®%blowen No. °vpon rT.  P the erthe 
ANOQSVXY. vpon tT. Om. 4Nosxy. Sinvy. tsittyngo. 4% Om. 7. 

6 Om. gk prom. ¢Om.o8. dallether. echillesa. ithe kingis K sec.m. & Om. 5. 1} and 


b sup. ras. 1 withstonde gk pr. m. 


kK stiynge up Ra sec. m. 


402 


652 


And he criede with a" greet voys tothe foure 
aungels, to whiche’ it” is* 3ouun for to 
snoize to* the erthe, and se*, seiynge®, Nyle 
3e noize the erthe, and4 se, nether to® trees, 
til’ we ‘signe, or markes, the seruauntes 
sof oure God in the forhedis3? of hem. And 
I herde the noumbre ‘of markid®, an hun- 
dridi and foure and fourty thousynd* 
markid!, of euery™ lynage of the sones of 
» Yrael; of the lynage of Juda, twelue thon- 
synd® signed®; of the lynage of Ruben, 
twelue thousynd® markid?; of the lynage 
cof Gad, twelue thousynd® markid?; of the 
lynage of Aser, twelue thousynd" markidP; 
of the lynage of Neptalym, twelue thou- 
syud® markid?; of the lynage of Manasse, 
7twelue thousynd’ markid?; of the lynage 
of Symeon, twelue thousynd” markid?; of 
the lynage of Leny, twelue thousynd® 
markid4; of the lynage of Ysacar, twelue 
sthousynd® markid’; of the lynage of Za- 
bulon, twelue thousynd" markid‘; of the 
lynage of Joseph, twelue thousynd" inark- 
id4; of the lynage of Beniamyn, twelue 
ythousynd® markid?. Aftir thes thinges I 
size a greet company, whom no man mi3te 
noumbre, of alle ‘folkis, and lynagis’, and 
puplis, and tungis', stondinge bifore the 
trone, in the® si3t of the lomb, couerid’, 
‘or clothid’, with whijte stoolis, and 
10 palmes* in the hondis of hem. And thei 
crieden with greet voys, seiynge, Helthe 
to oure God, that sittith on” trone’, and to 
ithe lomb. And alle aungels stoden in 
cumpas of the trone, and of? ‘senyouris, 
or eldre», and® foure beestis. And thei 
fellen* in the si3t of the® trone, ‘in tof her 
i2facis, and worschipiden God, seiynge§, 
Amen! blessyng, and cleernes, and wisdom, 


uOm.o. VY the whiche o. whom 7. 
band seide vy. © to the G see.m. T. 


singnen, either marken vy. && foreheuedis Go. 


APOCALYPSE. 


w Om. 4 pr.m. 
d and the srxy. 


VII. 3—12. 


the lyuynge God. And he criede with 
a greet vais to the foure aungels, to 
whiche it was 3ounn to noye the erthe, 
and the see, and seide, Nyle 3e noye thes 
erthe, and.see!, nether trees, til we mark- 
en the seruauntis of oure™ God in the 
forhedis of hem. And I herde the noum-4 
bre of inen that weren markid, an hun- 
drid thonsynde and foure and fourti™ 
thousynde markid, of euery lynage of 
the sones of Israel; of the lynage ofs 
Juda, twelue thousynde markid; of the 
lynage of Rubeu, twelue thousynde mark- 
id; of the lynage of Gad, twelue thon- 
synde markid; of the lynage of Aser,« 
twelue thousynde markid ; of the lynage 
of Neptalym, twelue thonsynde markid ; 
of the lynage of Manasse, twelue thou- 
synde markid ; of the lynage of Symeon,7 
twelue thousynde markid; of the lynage 
of Leuy, twelue thousynde markid; : of 
the lynage of Isachar, twelue thousynde 
markid; of the lynage of Zabulon,8 
twelue thousynde markid; of the lynage 
of Joseph}, twelue thousynde markid ; 
of the lynage of Beniamyn, twelue thou- 
synde markid. Aftir these thingis Y sai9 
a greet puple, whom no man my3te 
noumbre, of alle folkis, and lynagis, and 
puplis, and langagis, stondinge bifore the 
trone, in the si3t of the lomb; and thez 
weren clothid with white stoolis, and 
palmes weren in the hondis of hem. 
And thei crieden with greet™ vois, and 10 
seiden, Heelthe to oure God, that sittith 
on the troone, and to the lombe. And11 
alle’ aungels ‘stoden al? aboute the trone, 
and4 the eldre men, and the™ foure 
beestis. And thei fellen doun in the 


xwasr. yY Om. sx. 2 Om.ogr. @ the see r. 
eOm. anogsvxy. {to 7. & marke o7. signen ex. 


b of men signed, or markid «G sec.m. sy. of men singnyd N. 


of men markid o, of hem signed, or markid Q. of men marken 7. of men singned, either markid rv. signed, 


or markid x. i hundryd thousind r. 
o passim in hoc cap. © marked or. 

folkis x. :tlangagisy. Om. T. 
x psalmys N. palmes weren ¥. —-Y vpon T. 


« thousendis o. 
P signed anesvxy. 
Vlad o. and thet weren clothid r. 
z the trone aNoT. 


meche x. 4 thousondis 
T thonsendis os. § lynagis 
w Om. ogrx. or clad s. 

b senyourys, or 


I signed angsrxy. 
4 signid aNnsry. 


4 of the 4 pr. m. T. 


eldris ay. senyours Ng. elder men or. senyouris, or eldere men s. senyouris, either eldris r. elderes x. 


Candofr. ‘4fellendouny. ©Om.e. fon-r. 


I the see EKo pr.m. ™ 30n1e o. 
stonden 1 pr.m. stonden al i see. m. U. stoden M. 


D twenti K see. m. 
Gand of R. 


& and seiden r. 


on a greet E08. © alle the r. 


r On. o. 


P stondynge a. 


+ The lynage of 
Dan is left out 
here, for ante- 
crist scha] be 
born of that 
lynage, and the 
lynage of Jo- 
seph is set here 
in the stede of 
the lynage of 
Dan. Lire here. 
Ve 


VII. 13—VIII. 5. 


and doyng of thankingis, and honour, and 
vertu,. and strengthe to" oure God, in to 
13 worldlis of worldlis. Amen. And oon of 
the ‘eldre meni answeride, and seide to me, 
Who ben thes, that ben couerid*, ‘or cloth- 
id', with whijte stoolis™? and of" whennus 
l4camen thei? And I seide to him, My 
lord, thou woost. And he seide to me, 
Thes ben thei, that camen fro greet tribu- 
lacioun, and waschiden® her stooles, and 
maden hem? whijte in blood’ of the lomb. 
1s Therfore thei ben bifore the trone of God, 
and seruen to’ him day and ni3t, in his 
temple. And he that sittith in trone’,dwell- 
isith ont hem. Thei shulen no more hungre, 
and" thirste, nether sunne’ shal falle on” 
izhem, nether ony heete. For the lomb, 
that is in the* mydle of the’ trone, shal 
gouerne hem, and shal leede ‘hem forth? 
to the wellis of watris* of lijf; and-God 
shal wijpe awey ech teer fro ‘the i3en? of 
hem. 


CAP. VIII. 


1 And whan he hadde openid the seuenthe 
seel, silence is¢ maad in heuen, as ‘half an 
2hourt. And I size senen aungels stondinge 
in the si3t of, God, and seuen trumpes be* 
330uun to hem. And another aungel cam, 
and stode bifore the auter, hauynge® a 
golden censer; and many encenses bené 
3ouen to him, that he shulde 3iue of the 
preyers of alle seyntis vpon® the golden 
sauter, that is bifore the trone'. And the 
smoke of encensis* of the preyers of ha- 
lewis! stiz3ede up of™ the aungelis hond 
sbifore God. And the aungel toke the 
censer, and fillide it of the" fijr of the 
auter, and sente® itP in to erthe. And 


APOCALYPSE. 


thei? 


653 
si3t of the trone, on her faces, and wor- 
schipiden God, and seiden, Amen! bless-12 
yng, and clerenesse, and wisdom, and 
doynge of thankingis’, and honour, and 
vertu, and strengthe to oure God, in to 
worldis of worldis. Amen. And oon of1s 
the senyours' answerde, and seide to me, 
Who ben these, that ben clothid with 
white stoolis? and fro whennus came 
And Y seide to hym, My lord, 1s 
thon woost". And he seide to me, These 
ben thei, that camen fro greet tribula- 
cioun, and waischiden her stoolis, and 
maden hem white in the blood of the 
lomb. Therfor thei ben bifor the trone 1s 
of God, and seruen to hym dai and _ni3t, 
in his temple. And he that sittith in 
the trone, dwellith on hem. Thei schu-16 
len no more hungur, nether"® thirste, ne- 
ther sunne schal falle on hem, ne ony 
heete. For the lomb, that is in the myd-17 
dil of the trone, schal gouerne hem, and’ 
schal lede forth hem’ to the* wellis of 
watris of lijf; and God schal wipe awei 
ech teer fro the i3en of hem. 


CAP. VIII. 


And whanne he hadde openyd the: 
seuenthe seel, a silence was maad in he- 
uene, as half an our. And Y say seuene2z 
aungels stondinge in the si3t of God, and 
seuene trumpis weren 3ouun to hem. 
And another aungel cam, and stood bifors 
the auter, and hadde a goldum censer ; 
and many encencis weren 3ouun to hym, 
that he schulde 3yue of the preiers of 
alley seyntis on the goldun auter, that is 
bifor the trone of God. And the sinoke 4 
of YY encencis of the preiers of the* hooli 
men stiede vp fro the aungels hoond bifor 
God. And the aungel took the censere, 5 
and fillide it of the fier of the auter, and 


h be tor. be 30uen tov. isenyours anqsvxy. clothido. 'Om. Nogrx. orclads. ™ clothis 
vsec.m. %Om, ex. frov. weshensx. POm.s. athe bloodo, *Om.o. 8 the trone 7. 
tvpon Tr. Une anogsy. nether yx. Ythesunne rT. Wvponr. *Om.7. YOm.aosry. # forth 
hem vy. the wateres o. b y3e 0. c was V. 4 an half our rv. eweren y.  f and hadde r. 
Swereny. byvypo.onsyx. '‘troneofGody. ‘censero. ‘hoolymeny. ™fror. ™ Om. 7. 
osende y. P Om. anogsry. 

*thankisg. teldremenr. “wotistr. “nek. Vandhebpr.m. WOm.k prem * Om.o. 
yOm. x prom. Yvofthee. 2% Om. aehkof, 


654 


thundres, and voyces, and leytinges ben? 
6maad, and greet’ ‘erthe mouyng’. And 
the seuene aungelis, that hadden seuen 
trumpes, maden hem redy,that thei shulden 
7synge in trumpe’. ‘And the first aungel 
song in trumpet; and hayl is" maad, and 
fijr’ mengid” to gydere ‘in blood*; and it 
is’ sent in to erthe. And the thridde 
paart of erthe isY brent, and the thridde 
paart of trees isY brent, and al greene ‘hay, 
sor gras’, is* brent. And the secounde 
aungel song in trumpe>; and as a greet 
hil brennyng with fijr isc sent in to the 
se; and the thridde paart of the se is° maad 
9 blood, and the thridde paart of creatures* 
ise deed, that hadden soules’, ‘or dijfes®, in 
the se, and the thridde paart of shippis® 
1operschide. And the thridde aungel song 
in trumpe; and a great sterre brennynge 
as a litel' bronde, fel fro* heuen; and it! fel 
in to the thridde part of floodis, and in to 
liwellis of watris. And the name of the 
sterre is seid Wermod. And the thridde 
part of watris is™ maad in to wermod; 
and many men ben? deede of the watris, 
\2 for ‘thei ben® made bitter. And the fourthe 
aungel song in trumpe; and the thridde 
paart of sunne? is’ smytun, and the thridde 
paart of the’ moone, and the thridde paart 
of sterris’, so that the thridde paart of hem 
was derkid, and the thridde paart of day‘ 
1sshoone" not, and also of ni3t. And’ I 
size, and herde the” voys of an* egle fle- 
ynge bi mydleY heuen, seiynge with greet 
voys, Wo! wo! wo! to ‘the dwellinge 
men? in erthe, of othere* voycis of thre? 
aungels, that weren to syngynge® in 
trumpe. 


Pweren. ‘agret Tr. ° erth mouynges o. 
blood nv. * meyned ogy. meynt y. *Om.N. 
awasy. >atrnmpe Tr. © was Pr. 
& Om. nrx. h the schippes @. i Om. o. 
© tho weren ¥. P the sunne NosTrx. 

« schynyde r. v And also r. Wao. 
% men dwellinge yx. 8 the othere 9. thre T. 


akeste rn. > Om. cerkmQuxabcegaf, ¢ Om. b. 
hoona. itothirn, « the thre o, 


APOCALYPSE. 


§ trumpis GNSY. 
Y was Vv. 
4 creature Gopestvxy. the creature N. 
k doun fro o. 
q was F. 
X oon ANSYVY. oen X. 
bd the nesy. Om. x. 


4 the senene b. 


VIII. 6—13. 


castide* in to the’ erthe. And thundris, 
and voices, and leityngis weren maad, 
and a® greet erthe mouyng. And thee 
seuene aungels, that hadden seuene4 
trumpis, maden hem redi, that thei 
schulden trumpe. And the firste aungel7 
trumpide; and hail was maad, and fier 
meynd togidere in blood; and it was 
sent in to thee erthe. And the thridde 
part of the erthe was brent, and the 
thridde part of trees was brent, and al 
thef green gras was brent. And the se-s 
cunde aungel trumpide; and as a greet 
hil brennynge with fier was cast in to 
the see; and the thridde part of the see9 
was maad blood, and the thridde part of 
creature was deed, that hadde lyues in 
the see, and the thridde part of schippis 
perischide. And the thridde aungelio 
trumpide; and a greet sterre brennynge 
as a litil brond, felle fro heuene; and it 
felle in to the’ thridde part of floodis, 
and in to the wellis of watris. And then 
name of the sterre is seid Wormod. And 
the thridde part of watris was maad in 
to wormod; and many men weren deed 
of the watris, for tho weren maad bit- 
tere. And the fourthe aungel trumpide ; 12 
and the thridde part of the sunne was 
smytun, and the thridde part of the 
moone, and the thridde part of sterris, 
so that the thridde part of hem was 
derkid, and the thridde part of the dai 
schynede not, and also of the ny3t. And13 
Y say, and herde the vois of an" egle 
fleyuge bi the myddil of heuene, and 
seiynge with a greet vois, Wo! wo! wo! 
to men that dwellen in erthe, of the 
othir' voices of thre* aungels, that schu- 
Jen trumpe aftir. 


tOm. er. Uwasr. * fire and 
z gras o. hei x. greene trees, hey, or gras y. 
© of hem was v. f lyues Fr. 
10m. esx. m was Vy. B weren V. 
r Om. ANogsx. sthe sterris Gc. the day r. 
¥ the myddil of s. myddil of r. 
¢ singen sx. 


€ Om. Eqga8. fOm.b. &% Om. b. 


IX. 1— 11. 


CS SN Oe 


1 And the fyuethe aungel song in trumpe®; 
and I size a® sterre ‘for to hauef fallen 
doun fro heuen in to erthe; and the keye 
of the pitt of depnesse is® 3onun to him}. 

2And he! openyde* the pitt of depnesse, 
and smoke ‘of the pitt! stizede up, as the 
smoke of a greet fourneys; and the sunne 
is™ derkid, and the" eyr, of the® smoke of 

3the pitt. And ‘of smoke? of the pitt 
locustes wenten out’ in ‘to the® erthet; and 
power is" 30uun to hem, as scorpiouns of 
serthe han power. And it is" comaundid 
to hem, that thei shulden not hirte hay 

‘of the erthe’, nether al” grene thing, ne- 
ther ech* tree, no but onely men, that han 
not the markY of God in her forhedis?. 

5 And it is* 3ouun to hem, that thei :shul- 
den not sle hem, but that thei shulden be 
tourmentid® fyue monethes; and the tour- 
menting of hem, as the tourmentyng of ad 

6scorpioun, whan he smytith a man. And 
in tho dayes men shulen seke deeth, and 
thei shulen not fynde it; and thei® shulen 
desijre for to dye, and deeth shal flee fro 

zhem. And the lijknesses® of locustis ijk" 
to! horsis* made redy in! to bateyle; and 
on™ the heedis" of hem as crownes lijk 
to® gold, and the°? faces of hem as faces? 
sof men. And.thei hadden heeres, ‘as heeres" 
of wymmen; and the teeth of hem were 
gas the’ teeth of lyouns. And thei hadden 
haberiouns, as yren haberiouns, and the 
voys® of ‘the ilke' wyngis as the voys of 
chaaris of many horsis" rennynge in to 
iobateyl. And thei hadden tayles lijk of’ 
scorpiouns, and prickes weren in the 
tayles of hem; and the mi3t of hem for” 
11 to noy3e men bi* fyue monethis. And thei 


APOCALYPSE. 


655 


CAP. ES 


And the fyuethe aungel trumpide ; 1 
and Y say, that a sterre hadde falle doun 
fro heuene in to erthe; and the keye 
of the pit of depnesse* was 3ouun to it. 
And it openede the pit of depnesse, and 2 
a! smoke of the pit stiede vp, as the 
smoke of a greet furneis; and the sunne 
was derkid, and the eir, of the smoke of 
the pit. And locustis wenten out of thes 
smoke of the pit in to erthe; and power 
was 30uun to hem, as scorpiouns of the™ 
erthe han power. And it was comaund-4 
id to hem, that thei sehulden not hirte 
the gras of erthe™, nether ony grene 
thing, nether ony tre, but oneli men, that 
han not the signe of God in her forhedis. 
And it was 3ouun to hem, that theis 
schulden not sle hem, but that°® thei 
schulden ‘be turmentid? fyue! monethis ; 
and the turmentyng of hem, as the tur- 
mentyng of a scorpioun, whanne he 
smytith a man. And* in tho daies mené 
schulen seke deth, and thei schulen not 
fynde it; and thei schulen desire to die, 
and deth schal fle fro hem. And the7 
licnesse of locustis ben lijk horsis maad 
redi ‘in to’ batel; and on the heedis of 
hem as corouns lijk gold, and the facis 
of hem as the faces of men. And thei8 
hadden heeris, ast heeris of wymmen; 
and the teeth of hem weren as teeth" of 
liouns. And thei badden haburiouns, as9 — 
yren haburiouns, and the vois’ of her 
wengis as the vois” of charis of many 
horsis rennynge ‘in to*¥ batel. And thei19 
hadden tailis lijk scorpiouns, and prickis 
weren in the tailis of hem; and the my3t 
of hem was to noye men fyue monethis. 


datrumper. ¢thatay. ftohaue srx. haddery. &wasr. bit anogsrxy. fit anogsray. 
k openeth a9. }Om.o. ™wasy. 9 Om. ansx, °Om. 7. P the smoke anogsyxy. 49 Om. Nry. 
‘r loeustes wenten out of the smoke of pity. %Om.c.tor. taiero. Uwasy. V of erthe 4G sec. m. 
nosrxy.Om.o. Wenyor. *eny ry. Ysigne aNogsyxy. 2 forehenedes or. 4 was Fr. b hem in 
maundement Tr. ¢turmenty. Om. 7. ¢Om.r. fOm.sx. 8 henesse estxy.  » den lije rr. 
iQOm.rv. ‘hors x. !Om.str. ™vpontr. Mhenedesor. °Om.y. °° Om.Gpr.m. _ P the faces 
nsx. 90Om.r7. Om. u4osyy. ‘8 voieeso. ttho.x. Uhorssx. YOm. nv. tor. Ww Om. sx. 
was for TY. * Om. ANOQSFXY. 

k derknesse Fg. |} Om. a. the bh. ™ Om. gia sec.m. ® the erthe kKqngka. © Om. a. P turmente 
hem k pr.m. abifyuex. *Om.k prom. Stogk prim. tas the ex see.m.Q prim. “the teeth b. 
Y-voyces hg. W voices E. * tok. 


656 


hadden vponY hem a kyng, the? aungel of 
depnesse, to whom the name bi Ebru, 
Labadon’, forsothe bi Greke, Appolion, 
and bi Latyn ‘hauynge the name De- 
izstrier. Oo woo passid®, and Jo! 3it comen® 
istwo® wos. Aftir thes thingis and‘ the 
sixt aungel song in truinpe; and I herde 
oo$ voys of" foure! corners of the golden 
i4auter, that is bifore the izjen of God, sei- 
ynge* to the sixte aungel that hadde al 
truinpe, Vnbynde™ foure" aungels, that 
ben bounde® in the greet flood Eufrates. 
1sAnd the foure aungels ben? vnbounde, 
the? whiche weren redy into hour, and’ 
day, and monethe, and 3eer, ‘that thei 
shulden slee* the thridde paart' of men. 
1s And the nouinbre of the hoost of horsmen 
twenty" thousynd sithis ten thousyndis’. 
17]* herde the noumbre of hem. And so 
I sizeX horsesY in visioun?; and thei that 
saten on® hem hadden fijry haberiouns, 
and? iacynctines®, and brunstony4. And the 
heedis® of the horsis’ weren as heedis! 
of lyouns; and ‘of the mouth of hem fijr 
cometh! forth, and smoke and brunstonk. 
isOf thes thre plagis!, ‘or woundis™, the 
thridde paart of men is" slayn, of fijr®, 
andP of4 smoke’, and of® brunstont, that 
19camen out of the mouth of hem. Sotheli¥ 
the power of horsis’ is in the mouth of 
hem, and in the taylis of hem; forwhi the 
tailis of hem lijk” to serpentes*, hanynge 
20heedes’, and in hem thei noyen. And 
the? tothir? men , that ben® not slayn in 
thes plagis‘, nether diden penaunce of the 
werkis of her hondis, that thei worschip- 
iden not deuels, and simulacres golden®, 
silueren’, and$ brasen", and stooneni, and 


Yon ANOQSFXY. 2 an Q. 


APOCALYPSE. 


a Abbadon n. ts Laabadan r. 


IX. 12—20. 


And thei hadden on hem a kyng, then 
aungel of depnesse, to whom the name 
biY Ebrew zs? Laabadon*, but bi, Greek 
Appollion, and bi Latyn ‘he hath a” name 
‘Extermynans, that is*, a4 distriere. O12 
wo is passid, and lo! 3it comen® twei 
woes. Aftir these thingis also the sixte13 
aungel trumpide; and Y herde a vois 
fro fouref corneris of the goldun auter, 
that is bifore the i3en of God, and seide 14 
to the sixte aungel that hadde a trumpe, 
Vnbynde thou foure aungels, that ben 
boundun in the greet flood Eufrates. 
And the foure aungels weren vnboundun, 15 
whiche weren redi in to our, and dai, 
and monethe, and 3eer, to sle the thridde 
part of men. And the noumbre of the 16 
oost of horse men was twenti thousynde 
sithis ten thonsynde. Y® herde the 
noumbre of hem. And so Y say horsis 17 
in visioun; and thei that saten on hem 
hadden firy haburiouns, and of iacynt, 
and of brymstoon. And the heedis of 
thet horsis weren as heedis of liouns; 
and fier, and smoke, and brymston, com- 
eth forth of the mouth of hem. Of these 1s 
thre plagis the thridde part of men was 
slayn, of the! fier, and* of the! smoke, 
and" of the" brymston, that camen out 
of the mouth of hem. For the power of19 
the horsis is in the mouth of hem, and 
in the tailis of hem; for the tailis of 
hem ben lyk to serpentis, hauynge heedis, 
and in hem thei noyen. And the tothir® 20 
men, that weren not slayn in these 
plagis, nether dyden penaunce of? the 
werkis of her hondis, that thei worschip- 
eden‘ not deuelis, and simylacris of gold, 


b hath aoesvx. his N. © is passid 7. 


dcommeth no, ¢tweye anovy. falsov. 8a0g. hfrory. ithe foure r. * and seide ry. ! the x. 
m Vnbynde thou vy. the foure rx. © foundeny. Pwereny. G@Om.r. 1'Om.o. § toslee vr. 
t partio. %was twenty y. Vthousend syx, wAndI rv pr.m. *say yr. Yhors sx. 2 visionns N, 
avponT. andofr. © iacynctis Nx. iacinct y. 4 brymstoon NQ. of brimston v. © heuedes or. 


£ Om. anogsvxy. & hors sx. 
aud brymston cometh forth of the mouth of hem r. 
woundis V. 2 was Vr. 
3Om. x. tthe brunston 9. 4 For r. 
2that@. @othere es. » Om. o. 
euerelastinge v. © of gold v. 
stoon F. 


v hors sx. 
© weren Vv. 


Yink. 2 Om.R. 
g And Y hk pr. m. oa. 
n Om. rbk pr. m. 


a Abadon FQ. 
h Om. K pr. m. 
© othere rk, =P ino. 


h henedes of. the hedis sx. 
1 woundis o. 
© the fyer AG see.m. NOSVXY. 
w ben lijk rv. 
4 yeniaunces T. plaagis, weren slayn bi bodily deth and 
f and silnerene s. and siluer r. 


b Om. k pr. m, 
i Om. Rg. 
4 worschipen a. 


icam o. cometh ont s. ‘x fijer and smoke 
m Om. o9sx. or veniaunce T. either 
P Om. 4 pr.m. q Om. x. r the smoke Q. 
x the serpentis g. _y henedes or. 


&Om.Nn. andofy. Ebrasse y. ‘of 


¢Om.b. 4¢Om. Ebg. 
k Om. rbk. =! Om. rgk pr.m. 


€ cometh o. £ the iiij. 
m Om. E. 


1X, 21——X. 8. 


treenen!, the™ whiche® nether mowen see, 

2inether heere, nether wandre®; and didenP 
not penaunce of her mansleyngis, nether 
of her? venemyngis, nether of her forny- 
cacioun, nether of her" theftis’. 


CAP. X. 


1 And I size an other strong aungel com- 
ynge doun fro heuen, couerid*, ‘or cloth- 
id", with’ a cloude, and the raynbowe in 
his heed*; and the face of him was as 
sunne*, and the feet of him as a pyler of 

efijr. And he hadde in his hond a lite) book 
openyd; and he putteY his ri3t foot on’ 
the se, forsothe his® lift’ on® the’ erthe. 

3And he criede with greet voys, as a lyoun 
whan he rorith; and whan he hadde cried, 
aseuene thundres spaken her voices. And 
whan the®4 seuen thundres hadden spoke 
her voyces, I was to writynge®. And If 
herde a voys fro heuen, seiynge’, ‘Signe 
thou, ‘or marke’, what thinges* the seuen 
thundres spaken, and nyle thou write 
shem. And the aungel whom I size stond- 
inge abone the se, and aboue the erthe, 
sliftide! up his hond to™ heuen, and swoor 
by the lyuynge in to worldlis of worldlis, 
that made of nou3t heuen, and tho thinges 
that® ben in it, and the? erthe, and tho 
thinges that’ ben in it, and the se, and 
tho thinges that ben in it, for" tyme shal 
7no more be. But in the dayes of the voyce 
of the seuenthe aungel, whan he shal bi- 
gynne for* to synge in trumpe, the mys- 
teriet of God shal be endid", as he euan- 
sgelizide bi his seruauntis prophetis. And 
I herde a voys fro heuen eftsoone spek- 
inge with me, and’ seiynge, Go thou, and 
take the book openyd, of” the hond of the 
aungel stondinge aboue the se, and on* 


APOCALYPSE. 


657 


and of siluer, and of bras, and of stoon, 
and of tre, whiche nethir mown se, ne- 
ther heere, nether wandre; and diden not2! 
penaunce of her mansleyngis, nether of* 
her* witchecraftis*t, nethir of her fornica- 
cioun, nethir of her theftis, weren slayn. 


CAP. X. 


And Y say another stronge aungel! 
comynge doun fro heuene, clothid with 
a cloude®, and the reynbowe on his heed; 
and the face of him was as the sunne, 
and the feet of hym as av piler of fier. 
And he hadde in his hoond a litil book2 
openyd; and he sette his ri3t foot on the 
see, and the left foot on the erthe. And: 
he criede with a greet vois, as a lioun 
whanne he roreth ; and whanne he hadde 
cried, the seuene thundris spaken her 
voicis. And whanne the seuene thundris 4 
hadden spoken her voicis, Y was to writ- 
ynge”. And Y herde a vois fro heuene, 
seiynge, Marke thou what thingis* the 
seuene thundris spaken, and nyle thou 
write hem. And the aungel whom Y5 
say stondinge aboue the see, and aboue 
the erthe, lifte vp his hond to’ heuene, 
and swoor bi hym that lyueth in toé 
worldis of worldis, that maad of nou3t 
henene, and tho thingis whiche” ben in 
it, and the erthe, and tho thingis that 
ben in it, and the see, and tho thingis 
that ben in it, that time schal no more 
be. But in the daies of the vois of the7 
seuenethe aungel, whanne he schal bi- 
gyune to trumpe, the mysterie* of God «. 
schal be endid, as he prechide bi hise 
seruauntis prophetis. And Y herde as 
vois fro heuene eftsoone spekynge with 
me, and seiynge, Go thou, and take the 
book, that is’ openyd, fro the hoond of 


ltreen ast. of treer. ™Om. vx. Othatx. %gonx. Ptheidident. 4 Om. ap. © Om. N. 
8 3iftis a. t clothid r. «Om. orvx. or clad s. Vv Om. @. W heued o7. x the sunne Tr. 
Y puttide anv. putt in 7. 2 ypon T. 8 the 4NOQSrX. > lift foot vx. Cypon tT. 40m. 7. 
dd Om. anosyx. © writen sx. fOm.9. 8 seiyng to men. 4 Marke thou o. Marke thou, hauyng in 
mynde T. iQOm. ogTx. ether marke v.  * Om. ox. llifte anosy. Minton. © whiche anor. 
POm.o. ‘4whichen, 'thatvy. %sOm.srx. tmisterie, or prinyte T. fulfildeo. v Om. ce 
Wfrov. *aboue r. 


Om. K pr.m. & Om. K pr.m. ogk pr.m. 
¥ the Q pr.m.a. Om. Q sec.m. W write R. 
b was gk prim. 


VOL. IV. 4P 


t ether venemynges K sec.m. marg. 
x Om. Ek pr. m. 


u whi3t cloude k pr.m. 


Yintob. 2 that kqrk. 4% misteries r. 


658 


othe lond. And I wente to the’ aungel, 
seiynge’” to him, that he shulde 3iue to me 
the book. And he seide to me, Take the 
book, and deuoure it; and it shal make thi 
wombe for® to be bittir, but in thi mouth 

loit shal be swete ‘as hony». And I toke 
the book of the aungels hond, and deuour- 
ide it, and it was in my mouth as swete 
honey®; and whan I hadde deuourid it, 

ilmy wombe was bittir. And he seide to 
me, It bihoueth thee eftsoone for’ to pro- 
phecie to hethen men, and to puplis, and 
to® langagis‘, and to many kingis. 


CAP. XI. 

1 And a‘mesure lijk to% a 3erd is" 3ouun 
to me, and it is* seid to me, Rise thou, 
and mete the temple of God, and the 

2auter, and men worschipinge in it. For- 
sothe caste’ out the porche*, that is with 
out forth! the temple, and mete it not; for 
it is 3ouun to hethen men, and thei shulen 
defoule the holy citee bi fourty monethis 

3and two™ And I shal 3iue to my two" 

witnesses, and thei shulen prophecie a 
thousynd dayes two hundrid and sixty, 

4thei® clothid? with sackis. Thes ben two 
olyues, and two" candelstickes, ‘jeuynge 
lizt’, theit stondinge® in the’ si3t of the 

sLord of erthe. And if ony man ‘shal 
wolen™ for® to anoizeY hem, fijr shal go 
out of the mouth of hem, and shal de- 
uoure her enemyes. And if ony?” ‘shal 
wolen® for to hirte hem, thus it bihoueth 
shim for’ to be slayn. Thes han power ‘of 
shittinge® heuen, that it rayne not in the‘ 
dayes® of her prophecie®; and thei han 
power oni watirs, ‘of turnynge hem* in to 
blood; and for! to smyte the erthe with ‘al 
plage™, and hou ofte euer thei ‘shulen 


APOCALYPSE. 


X. 9—XI. 6. 


the aungel, that stondith aboue the see, 
and on the lond. And Y wente to theo 
aungel, and seide to hym, that he schulde 
3yue me the book. And he seide to me, 
Take the book, and denoure it; and it 
schal make thi wombe to be bittir, but 
in thi mouth it schal be swete as hony. 
And Y took the book of the aungels1o 
hond, and® denouride it, and it was in 
my mouth as swete hony; and whanne 
Y hadde deuourid it, my wombe was bit- 
tere. And he seide to me, It bihouethi 
thee eftsoone to prophesie to hethene 
men, and to puplis, and langagis, and to 
many kingis. 
CAP. XI. 

And a reed? lijk a 3erde was 30uun tol 
me, and it was seid to me, Rise thou, 
and meete the temple of God, and the 
auter, and inen that worschipen® inf it. 
But caste thou out the for3erd, that is2 
with out the temple, and mete not it; for 
it is 3onun to hethene men, and thei 
schulen defoule the hooli citee bi fourti 
monethis and tweyne. And Y schal 3yue3 
‘to my® twey witnessis4, and thei schulen 
prophesie a thousynde daies two hun- 
drid and sixti', and schulen be clothid 
with sackis. These‘ ben tweyne! olyues, 
and twei™ candilstikis®, and thei stonden 
in the si3t of the Lord of the erthe. Ands 
if ony man wole anoye® hem, fier schal 
go out of the mouth of hem, and schal 
deuoure her enemyes. And if ony wole 
hirte hem, thus it bihoueth hym to be 
slayn. These han power to close heuene, 6 
that it reyne not in the daies of her pro- 
phesie; and thei han power on watris, 
to turne hem? in to blood; and to smyte 
the erthe with euery plage, and as ofte 
as thei wolen. And whanne thei schulen7 


yOm.4. Zandseidey. ®Om.sx. %Om.o. Cashony er. Om. sx. © Om. aNnogsrx. 
f tungis x. & reeid, either mesure, lijk v. b was 7. i caste thou rv. k forzerd rv. 10m. 7. 
™ twenti 4. tweyne Nogy. tweye Nogy, © Om. Tx. andtheischulen bey. Pcladsx. 4 tweyne 
ANOQY. ‘twey aNogy. SOm.r. t Om. orx. and thei vr. ustonden 7. *°Om. tT. WY wole vr. 
xOm.srx. Ynojens. Zenymantr. ®woley. »%Om.srx. Chemn. 4Om. sx. © for to 
schitte o, to schitter. ftho r. &daix. 4 prophecies x. iof Nn. vpon tT. Etoturne ry, !Om. sx. 


m a wonde o. al wounde 7. al plage, either veniaunce rv. 


eand 1k pr.m. 
& Om. k prim. 
™ two Rh. 4 candilstikis schynynge 1 pr. m. 


4 ether mesure K sec.m. marg. 
® that is, Enok and Elye x marg. 
© noie R. 


© worschipiden g. 
i sixty and sixe 1 pr. m. 
P Om. R. 


f togidere in K pr.m. Om. R. 
kTherek. ltwoh. 


XI. 7—16. 


7wole". And whan thei shulen ende her 
witnessing, the beest that stijeth® up of? 
the depnesse’, shal make bateyl® a3ens 
hem, andt shal ouercome hem, and shal" 
sslee hem. And the bodies of hem shulen 
liggeY in the streetis of the grete citee, 
that is clepid goostly” Sodom, and Egipt, 
where the Lord of hem was crucified. 
9 And ‘thei shulen see* of lynagis, and of 
puplis, and tungis’, and? hethen men, the* 
bodies of hem bi thre dayes and an half; 
and ‘the bodies of hem shulen not be suf- 
10 frid® for* to be put in biriels. And men 
enhabitinge the erthe shulen haue ioye 
vpon* hem; and thei shulen make myry*, 
and! sende’ 3iftes to gydere, for thes two? 
prophetes tourmentiden hem that dwellen 
tion! erthe. And aftir thre dayes and an 
half, the spirit of ‘lijf of * God entride in 
to hem; and thei stoden on! her feet, and 
greet drede fel on™ hem that sijen hem. 
i2And thei herden a greet voys fro heuen, 
seiynge to hem, Stizje" up hidir. And thei 
stijeden® in to heuen in a cloude, and the 
13enemyes of hem sizen hem. And in that 
hour a greet erthe mouyng is? maad, and 
the tenthe paart of the citee fel4; and ‘ther 
ben’ slayn in the erthe mouyng the‘ 
‘names of men seuen thousynd'; and ‘the 
tother® ben” sent” in* drede, and 3auen 
14glory to God of heuen. The secounde 
woo wenteY, and lo! the thridde woo shal 
1scome soone. And the seuenthe aungel 
song in trumpe, and greete voices ben? 
maad in heuen, seiynge*, The reume of 
this world is maad-‘oure Lordis>, and of ¢ 
Cristis*, his sone; and thei shulen regne 
isin to worldlis of worldlis. Amen. And 


APOCALYPSE. 


659 


ende her witnessing, the beeste that sti- 
eth vp fro depnesse, schal make bate} 
a3ens hem, and schal overcome hem, and 
schal sle hem. And the bodies of hems 
schulen ligge in the stretis of the greet 
citee, that is clepid goostli Sodom, and 
Egipt, where the Lord of hem was cru- 
cified. And summe of4 lynagis, and of9 
puplis, and of langagis, and of" hethene 
men, schulen se the bodies of hem bi 
thre daies and an half; and thei schulen 
not suffre the bodies of hem to be put 
in biriels. And men enhabitynge the10 
erthe schulen haue ioye on hem; and 
thei schulen make myrie’, and schulen 
sende 3iftis togidere, for these twei pro- 
phetis turmentiden hem that dwellen on 
thet erthe. And aftir thre daies and ani 
half, the spirit of lijf of God entride in 
to hem; and thei stoden on her feet, and 
greet" dreed felle on hem that sayn hem. 
And thei herden a greet vois fro heuene, 12 
seiynge to hem, Come’ vp hidir. And 
thei stieden in to heuene in a cloude, and 
the enemyes of hem sayn hem. And in1s 
that our a greet erthe mouyng was 
maad, and the tenthe part of the citee 
felle doun; and the names of men seuene 
thousynde weren slayn in the erthe mou- 
yng; and the tother” weren sent in to 
drede, and 3auen glorie to God of heuene. 
The secounde wo is gon, and lo! the14 
thridde wo schal come soone. And the1s 
seuenthe aungel trumpide, and grete 
voicis* weren maad in heuene, and seiden, 
The rewme of this’ world is maad ‘oure 
Lordis?, and of Crist, his sone; and he 
schal regne in to worldis of worldis. 


the foure and twenty senyoures®, ‘or elder Amen. And the foure and twenti eldre is 
owoleny. stiedeo. Pfroyv. @Om.v. ‘depthes. ‘Sbatals4. tandhes. Om. x. 
vlyn sx. ©Om.7. *summe rv. Y tungis, or langagis ans. of tungis T. of langagis vy. % and of rv. 


a schulen see the r. 


Gpr.m.ofo.  ioye rT.  f and thei aes. 
ivpon or. inp. £Om.o. lvpon tT. ™vpon 7, 
Pwasy. 4 fel doun vr. 


other @. Vv weren /. Ww sent, or putte Tr. 
2 weren V. a and seiden r. 
Gsec.m. © elder men o7. 


4 of the gk pr.m. ‘ofthe k. , 8 myrthe gk. 
je K. Wothererrk. * vois k pr.m. 
A sec.m. EQ pr.m. gk pr. m. a, 


b thei schulen not suffre the bodies of hem r. 
& schulen seend 4G sec, m. ogsV xX. 


r the names of men seuene thousind weren r. 
X in to 4 prem. Vx, 
b of oure Lord c sec.m. of oure God 7. 


t Om. ehko. 
¥ the k pr.m. 


cOm. sx. 4on anosrvx. vp 

h twey ANogsr. 
0 Stie 3e anor. Stezith sx. © stizeden vp 7. 
8Om. or. tOm.r. 2% that 
Y wente, or is gon ANS. i8 goon V. 


¢ Om. aNnogsvx. d Crist 


ta greet k pr.m. v Cometh 1. Come 
z oure Lord A pr. m. @ sec.m. ¢. of oure Lorde 


4p 2 


660 


menf, that sitten in her seetes in the si3t 
of the Lord, fellen ‘in to® her facis, and 

i7worschipiden God}, seiynge!, We don 
thankinges to thee*, Lord! God almi3ty, 
which™ art, and which" was®, and which? 
art to comynge!; which" hast takun this 

is greet vertu, and hast regnyd. And folkes 
ben wrothe, and thi wrath cam, and tyme 
of deede men fort to be demyd, and for' to 
3elde hijre to thi seruauntis, and" prophe- 
tis, and halewis, and dredinge thi name, 
to smale and litley, and ‘of destriynge 
hem that corrumpeden the erthe. 


CAP. XII. 


i9 And the temple of God in heuen is* 
openyd, and the ark of his testament is* 
seyn in his temple; and leytinges ben 
maad, and voyces, and erthe inouyng, and 
igreet hayl. And a* greet token* apperide 
in heuene; a womman ‘couerid, or cloth- 
id°, with the’ sunne, and the® moone 
yndir hir feet, and in the’ heeds of hir® 
2a coroun of twelue sterris. And she hau- 
ynge! in wombe*; and she ‘criede, ber- 
inge! chijld, and is tourmentid, that she 
3bere clijld. And an other tokne™ is" seyn 
in heuen; and lo! a greet reed dragoun, 
hauynge seuen heedes®, and ten hornes, 
and in the heedis® of him seuen diademes. 
4And the tayl of him drew3 the thridde 
paart of sterres? of heuene, and? sente hem 
in to erthe. And the dragoun stood bi- 
fore the womman, that was to beringe™ 
chijld, that whan she hadde born chijld, 
she shulde deuoure hir sone. And she 
chijldide a ‘sone male’, that was to reul- 
inge‘ alle folkes in an yren" 3erd; and hir 
sone is’ rauyschid to God, and to his 
étrone. And the woinman flei3 in to wil- 


f Om. anoesTrx. 
m the whiche s. that x. 
Om. sx. 4Om.s. 
x was PF. Y weren Vv, 
4QOm. «nes. ¢€ Om. a. 
with chiide tT. the womhe r. 
P the sterris 9g. 4 and he 7. 
Vv was F. 


& on Vv. 

DB that x. 
V greete rx. 
z Om. nv. 

fhir 7. 


o were SVX. 


& heued or. 


T bern sx. 


4 corrumpen g. corruptiden k. corruppiden, or defouliden o. 


h sec. m. k. 
h Om. EI. 


ce anda B. 


dand a A pr.m. 1 sec.m. 
1man f. 


J gouerne rR, 


APOCALYPSE. 


h the Lord no. 


8 male son, either knaue chijid r. 


© Om. k prem. 


XI 17 — ees 


men, that saten in her seetis in the si3t 
of the Lord, fellen on her faces, and 
worschipiden God, and seiden, We don17 
thankyngis to thee, Lord God almy3ti, 
which art, and which were, and which 
art to comynge; which hast takun thi 
greet vertu, and hast regned. And folkis 18 
ben wrooth, and thi wraththe cam, and 
tyme of dede men to be demyd, and to 
3elde mede to thi seruauntis, and pro- 
phetis, and halewis, and dredynge thi 
name, to smale and to grete, and to di- 
strie hem that corrumpiden® the erthe. 


CAP. XII. 


And the temple of God in heuene was 19 
openyd, and the arke of his testament 
was seyn in his temple; and leityngis® 
Weren maad, and voices, and thondris, 
and ‘erthe mouyng®, and“ greet hail. And1 
a greet signe apperide in henene; a? 
womman clothid with the® sunne, and 
the moone vndur hir feet, and in the 
heed of hir a coroun of twelue sterris. 
And sche hadde in wombef, and sche2 
crieth®, trauelynge of child, and is tur- 
mentid, that sche bere child. And an-3 
other signe was seyn in heuene; and lo! 
a greet reede dragoun, that hadde seuene 
heedis, and ten hornes, and in the 
heedis of hym seuene diademes. And4 
the tail of hym drow the thridde part 
of sterris of heuene, and sente hem in to 
the" erthe. And the dragoun stood bi- 
fore the womman, that was to berynge 
child, that whanne sche hadde borun 
child, he schulde deuoure hir sone. Ands5 
sche bar a knaue' child, that was to 
reulinge) alle folkis in an yrun 3erde; 
and hir sone was rauyschid to God, and 


kK thee, Lord o. 
4 comen stx. ‘¢ that x. 


10m. r. 
5 Om, Tr. 


i and seiden r. 
P that sx. 


w Om. o. destriynge p. of destruyng, or outlawyng T. to distroie rv. 
a signe ANOQSVX. 

h Om. rt. 

1 crieth, traucilinge of v. 


© clad s. Om. x. 

k wombe, or beinge 
nwasr. © heuedes or. 
treulen sx. ™ yrenen o. 


b Om. ov. kouerid x. 
i hadde chijld r. 
™ signe ANOQSVX. 


b liztnyngis ko. ¢ erthemouyngis 


f the wombe a pr.m. & criede Ka. 


XI. 7-—16. 


dirnesse, where sche hath a place redy” 
of God, that she feede* hir there a thou- 
7synd dayes two hundrid and sixty. And 
aY greet bateyl is* maad in heuen, and 
Mychael and his aungels fau3ten with the 
dragoun. And the dragoun fau3t, and his 
saungels; and thei hadden not mi3t*, ne- 
ther the® place of hem is® founden more in 
gheuen. And ‘the ilke? dragoun is® cast 
doun, the greet oldef serpent, that is clepid 
the Devel; and Sathanas, that deceyueth® 
al the world, is® cast out! in to erthe*, and 
iohis aungels ben! sent with him. And I 
herde a greet voys in heuen, seiynge, Now 
is maad helthe, and vertu, and kingdom 
of oure God, and the power of his Crist ; 
for the accuser of oure britheren is cast 
doun™, whiche" accusede hem bifore the 
118i3t of oure God day and ni3t. And thei 
ouercamen him for the blood of the lomb, 
and forthe word of his witnessinge; and 
thei loueden not her soules®, ‘or dijfes?, 
12vntot deeth. Therfore ‘glade 3e, heuens’, 
and 3e that dwellen in hem. Wo to the 
erthe, and se; for the fend cam doun ‘to 
jou’, hauynge‘ greet wraththe, witinge 
13for" he hath litel tyme. And aftir that 
the dragoun size’, for” he was cast doun 
in to erthe, he pursuede the womman, 
14that chijldide a male sone. And two* 
wynges of a greet egle ben’ j3ouun to ‘the 
womman?, that she shulde flee in to de- 
sert, in to hir place, where she is fed* bi 
tyme, and tymes, and the half of tyme?, 
15 fro the® face of the serpent. And the ser- 
pent sente of his mouth aftir the womman 
watir ast flood’, that he shulde make hir 
icforf to be drawen of the flood. And the 
erthe helpide? the womman, and the erthe 
openyde his mouth, and soupide> the 
flood, that the dragoun sente! of his 


APOCALYPSE. 


661 


to his trone. And the womman flei iné 
to wildirnesse, where sche hath a place 
maad redi of God, that he fede hir there 
a thousynde daies two hundrid and sixti. 
And a greet batel was maad in heuene,7 
and My3hel and* hise aungels fou3ten 
with the dragoun. And the dragoun 
fau3t, and hise aungels; and thei haddens 
not my3t, nether the place of hem was 
foundun more in heuene. And thilkes 
dragoun was cast doun, the greet elde 
serpent, that is clepid the Deuel, and 
Sathanas, that disseyueth al the world; 
he was cast doun in to the! erthe, and 
hise aungels weren sent with hym. And to 
Y herde a greet vois in heuene, seiynge, 
Now is maad helthe, and vertu, and 
kyngdom of™ oure God, and the power 
of his Crist; for the accuser of oure bri- 
theren is cast doun, which accuside hem 
bifor the si3te of oure God dai and ny3t. 
And thei ouercamen hym for the blood ti 
of the lomb, and for the word of his 
witnessing ; and thei louyden not her 
lyues til to deth". Therfor, 3e heuenes, 12 
be 3e glad, and 3e that dwellen in hem. 
Wo to the erthe, and to the see; for the 
fend is come doun to 30u, and hath greet 
wraththe, witynge that he hath litil 
tyme. And after that the dragoun sai, 13 
that he was cast doun to®° the erthe, he 
pursuede the womman, that bare? the 
knaue’ child. And twei wengis of a greet 14 
egle weren 3ouun to the womman, that 
sche schulde flee in to deseert, in to hir 
place, where sche is’ fed by tyme, and’ 
tymes, and half a tyme, fro the face of 
the serpent. And the serpent sente out 15 
of his mouth aftir the womman watir as 
a flood, that he schulde make hir to be 
drawnn of the flood. And the erthe16 


wmaad redy vy. *fedder. YOm.7r. Zwasv. ®my3tmoreg. >bOm.4vr. Cwasr. 4 that x. 
ewasy. felderry. gdisceyuede. bhewasy. Idouny. ‘Ktheerthee. J] werenr. ™ outs. 
nthat x. Olynes ry. POm.osrx. til to anesrx. til to the o. vnto the r. 1 3e heuenes, be glad r. 
sOm.r. tand hath vr. uthat vy. VY saye o. w that rv. x tweyne 4. twei Noor. Y weren v. 
zhiro. ®Om.s. batymeo. ©Om.rx. ‘ofp. e¢aflodx. fOm.sx. ghelps. halp x. 


h soop vp 4Nogsr. soupide vp G sec. m. soupide P. sop vp x. 


1 Om. beh. 
5 of b. 


k with k pr.m. ™ to be. 


4man 8. * was k pr. m. 


0 the deeth rk, 


i gente oute Q. 


Sin toab pr.m. P hadde k pr. m. 


662 


i7mouth. And the dragoun is* wroth to! 
the womman, and he wente™ for" to make 
bateyl with othere of hir seed, that kepen 
the maundementes of God, and han the 

1s witnessing of Jhesu® Crist. And he stood 
on? the grauel of 4 the se. 


CAP. XIII. 


1 And I size™ a beest sti3inge up of the 
se, hauynge seuen heedes*, and ten hornes; 
and ont his hornes ten dyademes, and ont 

ahis heedes the names" of blasfemye. And 
the beest, whom I size, was lijk to’ a 
parde”, ‘or a lipard*, and his feet as the 
feet of a bere, and his mouth as the mouth 
of a lyoun; and the dragoun 3afY to ‘the 

3ilke® ‘his vertu, and greet power*. And 
I size oon of his heedis, as slayn in to 
deeth; and the wounde of his deeth is° 
curid’. And al erthe wondride aftir the 
abeest. And® thei worschipiden the drag- 
oun, that 3af power to the beest; and thei 
worschipiden the beest, seiyngef, Who8 
ijk to" the beest, and who shal mowe fizte 
swith iti? And a mouth spekinge greet 
thinges, and blasfemyes, isk 30uun to it}; 
and power is™ 3ouun to it", for® to do in 
6two and fourty monethis. And it? open- 
yde his mouth in to’ blasfemyes to’ God, 
for’ to blasfeme his name, and his taber- 
nacle, and hem that dwellen in heuen. 
7And it ist 3ouun to him for" to make 
bateyl with seyntis, and for" to ouercome 
hem; and power isY 3ouun to him, in to 
al” lynage*, and puple, and tungeY, and 
sfolk. And alle men worschipiden it, that 
dwellen? in erthe, whois names ben not? 
- writen in the book of lijf of the lomb, 


APOCALYPSE. 


XI. 17—XII1. 8. 


helpide the womman, and the erthe 
openyde his mouth, and soop up the 
flood, that the dragoun sente of his 
mouth. And the dragoun was wrooth 17 
ajens the womman, and he wente to 
make batel with othere of hir seed, that 
kepen’ the maundementis' of God, and 
han the witnessing of Jhesu Crist. And is 
he stood on the grauel of the see. 


CAP. XIII. 

And Y sai a beeste stiynge vp of the1 
see, hauynge seuene heedis, and ten 
hornes; and on hise hornes ten dia- 
demes, and on hise heedis the names of 
blasfemye. And the beeste, whom Y sai,2 
was lijk a pard, and hise feet as the feet 
of a beere, and his mouth as the mouth 
of a lioun; and the dragoun 3af his 
vertu and greet power tohym. And Y3 
sai oon of hise heedis, as" slayn in to 
deth’; and the wounde of his deth was 
curid. And al erthe® wondride* after 
the beeste. And thei worschipiden the4 
dragoun, that 3af power to the beeste ; 
and thei worschipeden the beeste, and 
seiden, Who is lijkY the beeste, and who 
schal mowe fijte with it? And a mouths 
spekynge grete thingis, and blasfemyes, 
was 30uun ‘to it”; and power was 3ouun 
to it, to do two and fourti monethis. 
And it openyde his mouth in to blasfe-6 
myes to God, to blasfeme his name, and 
his tabernacle, and hem that dwellen in 
heuene. And it was 3ouun to hym to7 
make batel with seyntis, and to ouer- 
come hem; and power was 3ouun to hym 
in to ech lynage, and puple, and langage, 
and folk. And alle men worschipiden it, 8 
that dwellen in erthe, whos names beu 
not writun in the book of lijf of the 


Kk was vy. lin to anogsx. ajens r. ™ sente Q. 2 Om. sx. © our Lord Jhesuo. P vpon 7. 
don N. fsayeo passim. § heuedis o ef rT passim. tvpon tT. Unameg. YOm. er. liberde o. 
x or liparde anos. Om. rx. or a lybard v.  ¥ 3af his vertu and greet power vy. 2 the ilke best T. that 
beestev. *%Om.y. Cwasr. ‘eurid, orhelidt. © Om.v. fandseideny. & Whois Tr. 
hOm.r. thimr. kwasy, lhymr, ™wasy. °Om.m. himt. °Om.sx. Phe r. 4Om.Q. 
Tintoo. SOm.sx. twasy. UtOm.sx. Ywasv. Wechesy. *lynagis x. Y tunge, or lan- 
gage AS. langage y. 2 dwelliden 7. %no 0. 

8 kepten rhk sec. m.  comaundementis g pr.m.h. 2Om.r, v the deeth a. w the erthe nak pr.m. 


x wandride h seem. Y lijk tongka. 2 Om. g. 


XHI. 9-—18. 


that is’ slayn fro the bigynnynge of the 
gworld. If ony man hath® eres ‘of her- 
1oinge’, here he. He that ‘shal lede* in to 
caytifte, shal go in to caytifte; he that 
‘shal slee in’ swerd, it bihoueth him for" to 
be slayn ini swerd. This is the* pacience 
liand feith of seyntis. And I size an other 
beest sti3ing up fro the erthe, and hadde! 
two hornes, lijk the™ lomb; and he" spake 
i2as° the dragoun, and dideP al the power 
of the former beest, in his si3t. And it 
made the erthe, and men dwellinge in it, 
for’ to worschipe the first beest, whois 
13 plage’ of deeth is* curid'. And it dide 
grete signes, that® also it made fijr for’ 
to come doun fro heuen in” to erthe, in 
ithe sijt of alle men; and* deceyueth men 
dwellinge in erthe, for signes ‘the whicheY 
ben 3ouun to it? for* to do in the si3t of 
the beest; seiynge to men dwellinge in 
erthe, that thei make an ymage of the 
beest, that hath the wounde> of swerd‘, 
1sand lyuede. And it is? 3onun to him, 
that he shulde 3iue a® spirit to the ymage 
of the beest, and thef ymage of the beest 
speke. And he shal make, that who’ 
euer ‘shal not honoure® the ymage of the 
16 beest, be slayn. And he! shal make alle, 
smale and greete, and* riche and pore, 
and! fre men™ and seruauntes", for® to 
haue a caracter? in the ri3t hond, or? in 
17her forhedis'; that no man mai bye, or4 
sille, no but thei® that hant the caracter, 
‘or lettre", or the’ name”, or the* noumbre 
isof his name. Heere is wisdom; he that 
hath vndirstonding, acounte the noumbre 
of the beest; sotheliY the? noumbre of 
man is*, and his noumbre is sixe hundrid 
sixty and sixe. 


bwasry. Chauex. TOm. rv. © leedith r. 
k Om. v. lit hadde rr. 
rwounde oTy. 8 was Fr. 
Y which orr. that x. 
G prim, 4 was pr. 
kOm.ox. !0Om.e. ™Om. x. 
either prente vr. either v passim. 
Ww name of the beest vy. * Om. r. 


t not helid r. 
Zhym tT. ® Om. sx. 
€ Om. ANOQSFX. 


Y for it is F. 


a makinge k prom. > Om. a prim. 
gOm.hprm. 88 Om. cz et alii. af. 
mQOm.g. 2 that dwellen ae. ° Om.k prim. 


8 carect 1. carecte, either marke x. *8 and h pr.m. 


APOCALYPSE. 


fand he s. 
™m to the AG sec. m. OST. 
Vand Tf. 
b plage, or wounde ans. plage ox. 
f that the r. 
2 boonde men r. 
r forehenedis 0. 8 he 7. 
z Om. sT. 


¢ penaunce k pr. m. 
» resceyue k pr.m. 
P hononreth rah. honoure k. 4 Om. k pr.m.a. 
* carect IR. 


663 


lomb, that was slayn fro the bigynnyng* 
of the world. If ony man hath eeris,» 
here he. He that ledith in to caitifte, 10 
schal go in to caitifte; he that sleeth 
with swerd, it bihoueth hym to be slayn 
with swerd. This is the? pacience® and 
the feith of seyntis. And Y sai another 11 
beeste stiynge vp fro the‘ erthe, and it 
hadde two hornes, lijk the lomb; and it 
spak as the dragoun, and dide al the12 
power of the formere beeste, in his si3t. 
And it made the erthe, and men® dwell- 
inge in it, to worschipe the firste beeste, 
whos wounde of deth was curid. Andi: 
itf dide grete signes, that also it made 
fier to come doun fro heuene in’ to thes? 
erthe, in the si3t of alle men. And itt 
disseyueth® men, that dwelleni in* erthe', 
for signes whiche ben 3ouun ‘to it™ to do 
in the siz3t of the beeste; seiynge to men 
dwellinge" in erthe, that thei make an 
ymage of the beeste, that hath the 
wounde of swerd, and lyuede. And itis 
was 3ouun to hym, that he schulde 3yue 
spirit to the ymage of the beeste, and 
that? the ymage of the beeste speke. 
And he schal make, that who euere hon- 
ouren? not the ymage of the beeste, be 
slayn. And he schal make alle, smale 16 
and grete, and‘ riche and pore, and" fre 
men and bonde men, to haue a carecter® 
in her ri3thoond, ethir in her forheedis ; 
that’s no man may bie, ethir sille, but17 
thei han the caractert, ether the’ name 
of the beeste, ethir the noumbre of his 
name. Here is’ wisdom; he that hathis 
vndurstonding, acounte the noumbre of 
the beeste; for it is the noumbre of man, 
and his noumbre is sixe hundrid sixti 
and sixe. 


i with rv. 
9 Om. sx. 

x and he 1. and it vr. 
© a swerd a. the swerd 
& whiche 4anosyx. onourennoty. iOm.s. 

o Om. sx. P caractre, or a token T. carecter, 
thath r. Om. orx. v Om. Q. his r. 
a Om. ¥. 


& sleeth with yr. » Om. sx. 
Dit y. Sofv. Pit dide r. 
vOm.sx. WOm.a. 


ethemenae. f Om. rR. 
kong. !the ertheh. 

r Om. a. 

vhe a pr.m. E1ka8. his o. 


d Om. h. 
i dwelliden k. 


u Om, R. 


664 


CAP. Xave 


1 And I size, and Jo! the’ lomb stood on® 
the mount Syon‘’, and with him an hun- 
drid® and foure and fourty thousynd8, 
hauynge his name, and the name of his 

afadir writun in her forhedis®. And I 
herde a voys fro heuen, as the voys of 
many watirs, and as the voys of greet 
thundre; and the voys whichi I herde, ‘as 

sof * harpers harpinge in her harpis. And 
thei sungen as! a newe song bifore the 
seete of God, and bifore the™ foure beestes, 
and the" ‘eldre men®. And no man mi3te 
seie the song, no? but thei an hundrid4 
and foure and fourty thousynd, that ben 

4bou3t off the erthe. Thes it ben, that ben 
not defoulid with wymmen®’; sothelit 
thei" ben virgynes. Thes suen the lomb, 
whidir euer he shal go; thes ben bou3t 
of alle’, primycies”, ‘or jirste fruytis*, to 

5 God, and to the lomb; and in the mouth 
of hem lesyng is not found ; sotheliY thei 
ben with outen wem bifore the troone of 

6God. And I size an other aungel, fle- 
ynge bi? mydle heuen*, hauynge the euer- 
lasting gospel, that he shulde euangelize 
to men sittynge on‘ erthe, and on® al! folk, 

.and lynage®, and® langage, and puple; 

7seiynge with greet voys, Drede 3e the 
Lord, and 3iue 3e to him honour, for the 
hour of his doom cometh; and worschipe 
3e him, that made heuen and erthe, the 
se, and alle thinges that ben in hem, and 

athe welles' of watirs. And an other aun- 
gel suede, seiynge, ‘The ilke* greet citee! 
Babilon™ ‘felde, felde, ‘the which® 3af 
drinke to alle folkis of the? wiju of4 
owraththe of hir fornicacioun. And the 
thridde aungel suede hem, seiynge" with 
greet voys, If ony man ‘shal worschipe® 


APOCALYPSE. 


XIV. I—g. 


CAP. XIV. 


And Y sai, and lo! a lomb stood on1 
the mount of Sion, and with hym an 
hundrid thousynde and foure and fourti 
thousynde”, hauynge his name, and the 
name of his fadir writun in her for- 
hedis. And Y herde a vois fro heuene, 2 
as the vois of many watris, and as the 
vois of a greet thundur; and the vois 
which is* herd, was as of many harp- 
eris harpinge in her harpis. And theis 
sungun as a newe song bifor the seete 
of God, and bifore the foure beestis, 
and senyouris’. And no man mi3te seie 
the song, but thei? an* hundrid thou- 
synde> and foure and fourti thousynde®, 
that ben bou3t fro the erthe. These it4 
ben, that ben not defoulid with wym- 
men; for thei ben virgyns. These suen 
the lomb, whidir euer he schal go; these 
ben bou3t of alle men, the firste fruytis to 
God, and to the lomb; and in the mouths 
of hem lesyng is not foundun; for thei 
ben with out wem bifor the trone of God. 
And Y say another aungel, fliynge bi thes 
myddil of heuene, hauynge an euerlast- 
inge gospel, that he schulde preche to 
men sittynge on erthe‘, and on ech folk, 
and lynage, and langage, and puple; andj 
seide with a greet vois, Drede 3e the 
Lord, and 3yue 3e to hym onour, for the 
our of his dom cometh; and worschipe 
je hym, that made heuene and erthe, the 
see, and alle thingis that ben in hem, 
and the wellis of watris. And anothirs 
aungel suede, seiynge, Thilke greet Ba- 
biloyne fel doun, fel doun, which 3af 
drinke to alle folkis of the wyn of 
wraththe of her fornycacioun. And thes 
thridde aungel suede hem, and seide with 


ba evx. © vpon 4NoeT. 4 of Syon 4 pr.m. cesTx. e hundrid thousind r. f Om. aenes. 
8 thousondis 0. »foreheuediso. ithat x. & wasas tT. wasasofy. 1Om.e. ™ Om, anogsrx. 
n Om. ANOQSPVX. © senyours ANQSV.X. P Om. o. 4 hundrid thousind r. T fro rv. Ss men V. 
tfor vy. Utheeso. Valle the 4G sec.m. Npostvx. Wpricisn. *Om.osx. Yfor 7. 2 bi the sx. 
aofheuen svx, ¢©Om. anogsy. vponor, ¢vponr. fOm. & pr.m. ech rv. & lyuynge n. 
hOm.e@ prem. iwellen. & That x. '}Om.r. ™ of Babilon o. ™ fell doun, fell doun o. felde or. 
feldoun r. ° which ry. that x. POm. x. 4 of the nx. r and seide r. 8 worschipide aNosvx. 


worschipe 9. 


wOm.b. *I Kraehkoaf. 
© the erthe bk. 


¥ the eldre men R. the senyouris ho. 


z thilk r. 


6 


a0Om.r. » thousendis c. 


XIV. to——18. 


the beest, and thet ymage of it, and take" 
‘the tokne’ in his forhed*, or ‘in his* 
10hond, andY this? shal drinke of* the wijn 
of Goddis wrath, that is meynd® with 
cleer? wijn in thee cuppe of his wraththe, 
and shalf be tourmentid with fijr and 
brunston, in the si3t of® holy aungelis, 
rand bifore the siz3t of the lomb. And the 
smoke of her tourmentis shal sti3e up in 
to worldlis of worldlis; nether thei han 
reste day and ni3t, ‘the whiche! worschip- 
iden* the beest, and his ymage, and if! 
ony man toke the carecte of his name. 
12This™ is the pacience of seyntis, and 
whiche kepen the maundementis of him, 
i3and° the? feith of Jhesu. And I herde a 
voys fro heuen, seiynge to me, Wrijte 
thou, Blessid the! deede men’, that dien’ 
in the Lord; fro hennus forth now the 
spirit seith, that thei reste of her trauélis ; 
forsothet the werkes of hem suen hem. 
14And I size, and lo! a whijt cloude, and 
aboue the cloude a'* sittinge", lijk to’ the 
sone of man, hanynge in his heed” a 
golden coroun, and in his hond a sharp 
1ssikel. And an other aungel wente ont of 
the temple, criynge* with greet voys to 
‘the sittyngeY vpon” the cloude, Sende thi 
sikel, and repe, for? hour cometh, that it 
be ropen; for the rijpe corn of erthe> 
igdriede*. And he that sat vpon‘ the cloude, 
sente his sikel in to erthe®, and repide! ‘in 
1;to® erthe. And an other aungel wente 
out of the temple, that is in heuen, ‘hau- 
isynge and he" a sharp sikel. And an 
other aungel wente out of! the auter, that 
hadde power onk fijr; and he criede with 
greet voys to him that hadde a sharp 
sikel, seiynge', Sende thi sharp sikel, and 
kutte of™ the clustres of the vijnezerd of 


t Om. sanoorx. 


APOCALYPSE. 


u took anogsr x. schal take 7. 


665 


a greet vois, If ony man worschipe! the 
beeste, and the ymage of it, and takith 
the carecter® in his forheed!, ether in his 
hoond, this schal drynke of the wyn of10 
Goddis wraththe, that is meynd® with 
clere wyn in the cuppe of his wraththe, 
and schal be turmentid with fier and 
brymston, in the si3t of hooli aungels, 
and bifore the si3t of the lomb. And thei 
smoke of her turmentis schal stie vp in 
to the worldis of worldis; nether thei han 
reste dai and ni3t, whiche worschipiden' 
the beeste and his ymage, and* yf ony 
man! take the carect™ of his name. Here12 
is the pacience of seyntis, whiche kepen 
the maundementis" of God, and° the feith 
of Jhesu. And Y herde a vois fro he-13 
uene, seiynge to me, Write thou, Blessid 
ben deed men, that dien in the Lord; 
fro hennus forth now the spirit seith, 
that thei reste of her traueilis; for the 
werkis of hem suen hem. And Y say,14 
and lo! a white cloude, and aboue the 
cloude a sittere, lijk the sone of man, 
hauynge in his heed? a goldun coroun, 
and in his hond a scharp sikil. Andis 
another aunge] wente out of the temple, 
and criede with greet vois to hym that 
sat on the cloude, Sende thi sikil, and 
repe, for the our cometh, that it be 
ropun; for the corn of the erthe is ripe. 
And he that sat on the cloude, sente his 16 
siki] in to the erthe, and rap the erthe. 
And another aungel wente out of the17 
temple, that is in heuene, and he also 
hadde a scharp sikile. And another aun-18 
gel wente out fro the auter, that? hadde 
power on fiert and water; and he criede 
with a greet vois to hyin that hadde thet 
scharp sikil, and seide, Sende thi scharp 
the carect sx. 


Vv carect anor. the carectir o. 


w forehened or. *Om.N. riz3ts. YOm.y. Zhethis7r. 2®Om.9. %Om.x. © mengid rx. 
dotherr. ¢Om.g. f heschalr. ofthe n. 48Om. 7. iwhich vy. that x. * wirschipen r. 
1Om.r. ™4Herer. God ty. Sinn. POm. x. 4 ben the anostr. be the G sec.m. * Om. x. 
$s diden o. t for rv. tt Om. m. on or. U sittere V. v Om. r. W hond xn. heued or. 
x and criede vy. .Ysittere vr. %on 4Nogsx. inv. forthe n. btheerthe no. C¢drieth r. on 
ANOQSVX. © the erthe r, frap aNnosvx. raapGo. &thery. band healsohadder. i fror. 
kK ypon r. Jand seide ry. ™ awey r. 


4 worschipith k. © carect ruaho. 


f heed K pr.m. 


 mengit E. mengid gk. i worschipen 


I prem. Kagks. k Om. K sec. m. hk sec.m. of. 10m. o. ™ carecter EQgkea. » comaundementis 
gpr.m. ino, Pheeueda. Gandg. ta Ergk. 
VOL. LY. 4Q 


+ Summe 
bookis han 
and on watir, 
but this is not 
of the text, 
neither is had 
in bookis 
amendid. Lire 
here. Vv. 


666 


igerthe, for the" grapes of it ben rijpe. And 
the aungel sente his sikel in to erthe®, and 
kutte? of the vijnezerd of erthe, and sente 
in to the greet lake of Goddis wraththe. 

20 And the lake is’ defoulid with oute the 
citee, and blood™ wente out of the lake 
‘vn to’ thet brijdels of horsis®, bi furlonges 
a thousynd and two’ hundrid. 


CAP. XV. 


1 And I size an other tokne” in heuen, 
greet* and wondirful; seuen aungels hau- 
ynge seuen they laste plages*, for the 
2wrath of God is endid in hem. And I 
sije as a* glasen se mengid> with fijr, and 
hem that ouercamen the beest, and his 
ymage, and the® noumbre of his name, 
stondinge aboue the glasen se, hauynge 
3the harpes of God; and syngyuge the song 
of Moyses, seruaunt* of God, and the song 
of the lomb, seiynge’, Greet and wondirful 
ben thi werkes, Lord God almi3ty; thi 
weies ben iust and trewe, Lord kyng of 
4worldlis. Lord, who shal not drede thee, 
and magnifie thi name? for thou aloone 
art piteous‘, ‘or merciful ®; for alle folkes 
shulen come, and shulen worschipe in thi 
5si3t, for thi domes ben opun*. And aftir 
thes thingis I size, and lo ! the temple of 
the! tabernacle of witnessinge in* heuen 
sis! openyd; and senene aungels hauynge 
the™ seuen plages", wenten out of the tem- 
ple, clothid® with a stoon cleene and whijt, 
and? bifore gyrd with golden gyrdlis 
z7aboute the brestis. And oon of the foure 
beestis 5af to the seuen aungels seven 
golden violes, ful of the’ wraththe of God 
8lyuynge in to worldlis of worldlis. And 
the temple ‘is fulfillid" with smoke of the 


© the erthe nv. 

tOm. 4 prem. “thors sx. 

x that was greet vy. ¥ Om. 7. 

4 the seruant o. 

kofs. lwasr. 
aOm. x. 


1 Om. P pr.m. Qs. 
8 til to aNogsrx. 
W signe ANOQSVX. 
ogy. ¢ Om. P. 
i Om. anoor. 


P and weren r. r was fillid r. 


§ troden doun k pr. m. tinto a, 


e sec. m. hkof. 


APOCALYPSE. 


P kittide anog. gaderide grapis r. 
Vv tweyne aN. twenty o. twey Q. sixe VY. vj X sec. m. 
% wondes o. veniauncis TY. 
e and seiden r. 
m Om. aNogsv x. 


u Om. ho. 
¥ the laste =. the laste seuene K pr.m. the seuene laste a, 


XIV. 19—XvV. 8. 


sikil, and kitte awei the clustris of the 
vyn3erd of the erthe, for the grapis of it 
ben ripe. And the aungel sente his sikilig 
in to the erthe, and gaderide grapis of 
the vyn3erd of the erthe, and sente into 
the greet lake of Goddis wraththe. And 20 
the lake was troddun’ without the citee, 
and the blood wente out of the lake til 
tot the" ‘bridels of horsis’, bi furlongis a 
thousynd and six” hundrid*. 


CAP. XV. 

And Y say another signe in heuene,1 
greet and wondurful; seuene aungels 
hauynge ‘seuene the laste” veniauncis, 
for the wraththe of God is endid in hem. 
And Y say as a glasun see meynd withe 
fier, and hem that ouercamen the beeste, 
and his ymage, and the noumbre of his 
naine, stondynge aboue the glasun see, 
hauynge the harpis of God; and syng-3 
ynge the’ song of Moises, the seruaunt 
of God, and the song of the lomb, and 
seiden, Grete and wondurful ben thi 
werkis, Lord God almy3ti; thi weies ben 
iust and trewe, Lord, kyng of worldis. 
Lord, who schal not drede thee, and4 
magnyfie thi name? for thou aloone 
art merciful; for alle folkis schulen 
come, and worschipe in thi si3t, for thi 
domes ben open. And aftir these thingiss 
Y say, and lo! the temple of the taber- 
nacle of witnessyng was opened in he- 
uene; and seuene aungels hauynge se-6 
uene plagis, wenten out of the temple, 
and weren clothid with a* stoon> clene 
and white, and weren bifor gird with 
goldun girdlis about the brestis. And7 
oon of the foure beestis 3af to the seuene 
aungels seuene goldun viols, ful of the 
wraththe of God, that lyueth in to 


Qwasv. “* the blode a. 


2Qm. rT. > meyned 
& Om. oerrx. 5 opened x. 
© clad sx. and weren clothid r. 


f merciful or. 
D woundis o. 


x hundridis c. 
b stoole cKurQRU 


W sixti A. 
2 Om. b. 


Vv horses bridlis 5. 
z Om. h. 


XVI. I-——I]0. 


mageste of God, and of the vertu of him; 
and no man mi3te entre in to the temple, 
til the seuene plages of the* seuene aungels 
weren endid. 


CAP. XVI. 


1 And I herde a greet voys fro heuen, 
seiynge to thet seuen aungelis, ‘Go 3e", 
and ‘schede 3eY out the seuen violes of 
2Goddis wrath in to’ erthe. And the first 
aungel wente, and shedde out his viole in 
to* erthe; and aY wounde feers and worst 
is’? maad ‘in to* alle that hadden the ca- 
recte, ‘or marke”, of the* beest, and ‘in to4 
hem that worschipiden the beest, and his 
3ymage. . And the secounde aungel shedde 
out his viole in to the se, and blood is® 
maad, as of deed thing; and ech ‘soule, or 
sljfé, lyuynge is" deed in the se. And 
the thridde shedde out his viole on‘ the 
floodes, and on* welles of watirs, and 
sblood is maad. And I herde the! aungel 
‘of watirs™ seiynge, Just art thou, Lord, 
that art, and that" was° holy, that demyst? 
6thes thinges; for thei shedden out the 
blood of halewis' and prophetis, and thou 
hast 3ouun hem’ blood fort to drinke; for- 
7sothe't thei ben worthi. And I herde an 
other" aungel” seiynge, 3he! Lord God al- 
smi3zty, trewe” and just thix domes. And the 
fourthe aungel shedde out his viole in to 
the sunne, and it is jouun to him for’ to 
stourmente men with heete’ and fijr. And 
men swayleden with greet heete, and 
blasfemeden the name of God hauynge 
power on* thes plages®, nether thei diden 
penaunce, that thei shulden 3iue glory to 
iohim. And the fyuethe aungel shedde 
out® his viole on® the seete® of the beest, 
and his kyngdom is‘ maad derk ; and thei 


APOCALYPSE. 


667 


worldis® of worldis. And the temples 
was fillid with smooke of the majestee 
of God, and of the vertu of hym; and 
no man my3te entre in to the temple, til 
the seuene plagis of seuene® angels weren 
endid. 

CAP. XVI. 

And Y herde a greet vois fro heuene, 1 
seiynge to the seuene aungels, Go 3e, and 
schede’ out the seuene viols of Goddis 
wraththe in to erthe’. And the firste2 
aungel wente, and schedde out his viol in 
to the erthe; and a wounde fers and 
werst was maad on alle that hadden the 
carect' of the beeste, and on hem that 
worschipiden the beeste, and his ymage. 
And the secounde aungel schedde out hiss 
viol in to the see, and thes blood was 
maad, as} of ai deed thing; and ech man 
lyuynge was deed in the see. And thea 
thridde aungel schedde out his viol on 
the floodis, and on the wellis of watris, 
and seide, Just art thou, Lord, that art,s 
and that were hooli, that demest these 
thingis ; for thei schedden out the" blood 6 
of halewis and prophetis, and thou hast 
j3ouun to hem blood to drinke; for thei 
ben worthi. And I herde anothir sei-7 
ynge, 3he! Lord God almi3ti, trewe and 
iust ben thi domes. And the fourthes 
aungel schedde out his viol in to the 
sunne, and it was 3ouun to hym to tur- 
mente men with heete and fier. And men 9 
swaliden' with greet heete, and blasfem- 
yden the name of God hauynge power 
on these plagis™, nether thei diden pen- 
aunce, that thei schulden 3yue glorie to 
hym. And the fifte aungel schedde out" 10 
his viol on the seete of the beeste, and his 
kyngdom was maad derk; and thei eten 
togidere her tungis for sorewe, and thei 11 


8 Om. anosyx,. tOm.09. Goth x. Yschede or. shedeth sx. Wtotheapr.m.r. *to 
then. Yooo. 2wasy. A®onvy. Om. 4anogsyx. ¢Om.c¢ prm. Conr. ewasr. fofa 
AGNPQSP. & lijf o. man r. soule x. hwasr. Ilvponr. ‘kvpon rt. onthe r. ! the ferth 7. 
™QOm.7r. 2Om. 7. © wast 4NoQg. were svx.  Pdemedist anox. 40Om.o. © the halowes 4No, 
thin halewis Qsx. 8 to hem F. t Om. sx. tt for 7. u Om. mw. v Om. r. w forwhi 
truen. *benthir. yYOm.sx. Zheetisn. vpont. %wounduso. ¢Om.r. 4vpon 7. 
€seed go. f was rv. 

© the worldis R. ¢¢ the seuene EB. 4 schede 3e R. © the erthe kqgkaS. f carectre rE. & Om. Rbhof. 


hOm.k. iOm. x prem. k Om. b. 


lswelten R. ™ plagis, etthir veniauncis n. 


n Om. ErKQbche. 


4Q2 


668 


eeten to gydere her tunges for sorowe, 
liand thei blasfemeden God of heuen, for 
sorowis and her’ woundis; and thei diden 
ignot penaunce of her werkis. And the 
sixte aungel shedde out his viole in to 
‘the ilke® greet flood Eufrates, and driede 
the! watir® of it, that! weie were rediede™ 
13to kyngis fro the sunne risynge. And I 
size thre vucleene spirites ‘in to" manere of 
froggis for® to? go out of the mouth of 
the dragoun, and of the mouth of the 
beest, and of the mouth of the false pro- 
14 phet. Sotheli4 ‘thei ben" spirites of deuelis, 
makinge® signes', and thei gon forth to" 
kyngis of al erthe, for” to gedere hem in’ 
to* bateyle, toY the greet day of almi3ti 
15God. Lo! I come, as a ni3t theef. Blessid 
he* that wakith, and kepith his clothes, 
that he wandre not nakid, and thei seen? 
i¢ his filthhed. And he? gederide® hem in to 
a place, that is clepid in Ebru Herma- 
i7gedon’. And the seuenthe aungel shedde 
out his viole in to® the eyr, and a greet 
voys wente out of heuen fro the trone, 
isseiynge’, It is don. And leytinges® ben? 
maad, and voyces‘, and thundres; and greet 
erthe mouyng* is! maad, which manere 
neuere was, sith men weren vpon™ erthe, 
igsich erthe mouyng so greet. And the 
greet citee ‘is brokun" in to° thre parties, 
and the citees of hethen men fellen doun ; 
and greet Babilon cam in to mynde? bi- 
fore God, for? to 3iue to it the cuppe of 
20 wijn of indignacioun of his wrath. And 
ech ijle fley awey, and hilles ben not 
2ifounde. And greet hayl as a talent cam 
doun fro heuen in to men; and men 
blasfemeden God for the plage* of hayl, 
for it ist maad wondirly" greet. 


APOCALYPSE. 


XVI. 11——21. 


blasfemyden God of heuene, for sorewis 
of her woundis; and thei diden not pen- 
aunce of her werkis. And the sixte12 
aungel schedde out his viol in° ‘that ilke? 
greet flood Eufratis, and driede the wa- 
tir of it, that weie were maad redi to 
kingis fro the sunne rysyng. And Y13 
say thre?P vnelene spiritis bi the! man- 
ner of froggis go" out of the mouth of 
the dragoun, and of the mouth of the 
beeste, and of the mouth of the fals pro- 
phete. For thei ben spiritis of deuels, 14 
makynge signes, and thei gon forth to 
kingis of al erthe, to gadere hem in to 
batel, to the greet dai of almi3ti God. 
Lo! Y come, as a ni3t theefe. Blessid 15 
is he that wakith, and kepith hise clothis, 
that he wandre not nakid, and that thei 
se not the filthhed of hym. And heic 
schal gadre hem in to a place, that is 
clepid in Ebreu Hermagedont. And the 17+ that is, inter- 

pretid, risinge 
seuenthe aungel schedde out his viol in pile. oe 
to the eyr, and a greet vois wente out of 
heuene fro the trone, and seide, It is 
don. And leityngis* weren maad, and 18 
voices, and thundris ; and a greet erthe 
mouyng was maad, which manere nevere 
was, sithen men weren on erthe, siche 
‘erthe mouyngt so greet. And the greet19 
citee was maad in to thre parties, and 
the citees of hethene men felden doun; 
and greet Babiloyne cam in to mynde 
byfor God, to 3yue to it the cuppe of 
wyn of the" indignacyoun of his wrath- 
the. And ech ile flei awei, and hillis2o 
ben not foundun. And greet’ hail” as a21 
talent cam doun fro heuene in to men; 
and men blasfemyden God, for the plage 
of hail, for it was maad ful greet. 


Sforherr. theo. thatvx. iOm.r.  watireso. lthatthe ~. ™redy o. maad redy r. 
bithe ry. °Om.svx. POm.rx. 4Forry. *Om.tT. § ben makyng Tr. +t signes, or wondres T. 
utoaller. vOm.sx. WOm.o. *toa Q intoo. *ishe Try. ®seenot 7. »Om.a. he schal rr. 
© gedere p. gedre Tr. 4 Hermagedon, in Latyn, togidre rysynge T. © Om. Ns. f and seide 7. 
§ greet leytynges 0. bwerenr. ‘Jvoise. mouyngisx. /!wasy. ™on ANogrx. ins, 4 was 
maad r. °to the nN. Om. s. P the mynde n. q Om. sTx. rOm.@ § woundeo. twas yr. 
u wondurful o. ful r. 

° in to C1K sec. m. MR 2 sec. m. hkoa§. P thilke 1k pr.m. a. that thilke k sec. m. PP the a prim. 
Egprm. 40Om.b. ‘goingk sec.m. §leytnyngiso. terthe mouyngiso. ® Om. Ea pr.m. ega. 
Yagreet g. W hailis Er. 


XVII. I—9. 


CAP. XVII. 


1 And oon of the seuen aungels cam, 
that hadden seuen violes, and spake with 
me, seiynge’, Come thou, IY shal shewe 
to thee the dampnacioun of the greet 
2hoore, that sittith on many watirs, with 
whiche* kynges of erthe diden fornyca- 
cioun; and thei that dwellenY in? erthe ben 
ful drunkun of the* wijn of hir leccherie. 
3And he toke ‘me awey* in to desert in 
spirit. And I size a womman sittynge on 
a reed beest, ful of namys of blasfemye, 
hauynge® seuen heedes*, and ten hornes. 
4And the womman was enuyround with 
purpur, and coccyn, ‘that is’, reed®, and 
engoldidf with gold, and with® precious 
stoon, and peerlis, hauynge a golden cuppe 
in hir hond, ful of abhomynaciouns and 
svneclennesse® of hir fornycacioun. And 
in the forhed' of hir a name writun, 
Mysterie, Babilon the greet, modir of 
fornycaciouns*, and of! abhomynaciouns 
sof erthe. And I siz3e a womman drunken 
of the blood of seyntis, and of the™ blood 
of martirs of Jhesu. And whan I sije 
hir, I wondride with greet wondringe. 
7And the aungel seide to me, Whi wou- 
drist thon? J shal seie to thee the" sacra- 
ment of thee womman, and of the beest 
that berith hir, that hath seuen? heedes‘ 
sand ten hornes. The beest whom’ thou 
size’, was, and is not; and she ‘is tot sti3- 
ing" vp’ fro” depnesse, and she shal go 
in to perisching. And men dwellinge in 
erthe shulen wondre, whois names ben 
not write in the book of lijf fro makynge 
of the world, seeynge the beest, that was, 
gand is not. And this is witt*, that hath 
wisdom. The seuen heedesY ben seuen 
hilles, on whom? the womman sittith®, 


wand I o. 


Vv seyyng to me o. and seide r. 
¢ henedes o. 


aaawey me v. > and hafyng o. 
& Om. ANOQSPX. h ynelennesses x. 


APOCALYPSE. 


* the whiche Nog. 
d or snogs. either vy. Om. x. 
i foreheued o. 


669 


CAP. XVII. 


And oon of the* senene aungels cam,1 
that hadde seuene viols, and spak with 
me, and seide, Come thou, Y schal schewe 
to thee the dampnacioun of the greet 
hoore, that sittith on many watris, 
with** which kyngis of ertheY diden for-2 
nicacioun ; and thei that dwellen in the 
erthe ben maad drunkun of the wyn of 
her letcherie. And he took me in tos 
desert in spirit. And Y say a womman 
sittynge on a reed beeste, ful of names 
of blasfemye, hauynge seuene heedis, and 
ten hornes. And the womman was en-4 
uyround with purpur, and reed, and 
ouergild with gold, and preciouse stoon, 
and peerls, hauynge a goldun cuppe in 
hir hoond, ful of abhomynaciouns and 
vnelennesse of her fornycacioun%. Ands 
a name writun in the forheed* of hir, 
Mysterie, Babiloyn the greet, modir of 
fornycaciouns®, and of* abhomynaciouns 
of erthe’, And Y say a womman drunkun 6 
of the blood of seyntis, and of the blood 
of martris of Jhesu. And whanne Y say 
hir, Y wondride with greet® wondryng. 
And the aungel seide to me, Whi won-7 
drist thou? JI schal seie to thee the sa- 
crament* of the womman, and of the 
beeste that berith hir, that hath seuene 
heedis and ten hornes. The‘ beeste which s 
thou seist, was, and is not; and sche schal 
stie® fro depnesse, and sche" schal go ‘in 
tot perisching. And men dwellinge in 
erthe schulen wondre, whos names ben 
not writun in the book of lijf fro the 
makinge of the world, seynge the beeste, 
that. was, and is not. And this is the*s 
witt +, who that hath wisdom. The 
seuene heedis ben seuene hillis, on 


ydwelliden o, Zong. ® Om. x. 
€ Om. x. f ouer gilt r. 


k fornycacioun N. 1 Om, anogs. not of c. 


mQOm. anesy. "Om. N. this ns. Ptheseueng. 4heuediso. ¢ whiche anogsry. that x. 
$ saiest 4Nog. sijest ¥. * schal r. U stejen sx. stize Vv. vOm.y. Wfrothes. * the wit r. 
yheuedes 0. 2 whiche anesyx. the which o. 4 sitt x. 

xOm.T. %Xbie. Ytheerthek. <fornycaciounsth. ®@heed Tr. » fornycacioun th. ¢ Om. 
Kpr.m.h. ‘the erthe e. agreetk. fAndtheapr.m. & stize vp iasec.m. 8 Om. hof. iin 
k prim. * Om. rv. 


* that is, priuy 
singnificacioun. 
Lire here. v. 


f that is, preuy 
vndirstonding. 
wisdom; that 
is, vndirstond- 
ing aboute the 
preuytes of holy 
scripturis. Lire 
here. Vv. 


670 


ioand ‘ben seuen> kinges. Fyue han fallen® 
doun, oon is, and an other cometh not 
3it. And whan he shal come, it bihoueth 
iihim for® to dwelle a short tyme. And 
the beest that was, and is not, and she is 
the ei3tthe, and is of thef seuen, and shal 
i2go in to persching. And the ten hornes 
whoms’ thou hast seyn, ben ten kynges, 
that 3it han not takun kingdom; but thei 
shulen take power as kinges, oon hour 
isaftir the beest. Thes han oo counsey]l, 
and shulen bitake her vertu and power 
14to the beest. Thes shulen fi3te with the 
lomb, and the lomb shal ouercome hem ; 
for he is Lord of lordis, and kyng of 
kyngis; and thei that ben with him 
15clepid®, andi chosen, and feithful. And he 
seyde to me, The watirs that* thou hast 
seyn', where the hoore sittith, ben puples, 
16folkes™, and tunges*. And the ten hornes 
that thou hast seyn in the beest, thes 
shulen haate the fornicarie womman®, and 
shulen make hir desolat, ‘or discoumfort- 
id?, and nakid, and shulen ete the flesch 
of hir, and shulen brenne ‘hir to gydere? 
i7with fijr. Sothelit God 3af ‘in to* the 
hertis of hem, that thei do that that is 
plesaunt tot him, that thei 3iue hir kyng- 
dom to the beest, til the wordis of God be 
isendid. And the womman whom thou 
hast seyn, is the greet citee, that hath 
kyngdom vpon" kinges of¥ erthe. 


CAP. XVIII. 

1 And aftir thes thinges I size an other 
aungel comyng doun fro heuen, hauynge 
greet power; and the erthe is” li3tned* of 

2his glorie; and criyngeY with strong 
voyce, seiynge’, Greet* Babilon fel doun, 
‘fel doun, and is maad the habitacioun® 
of deuelis, and the keping of eche vnclene 
spirit, and the keping of ech vnclene foul, 


APOCALYPSE. 


XVII. 1o—XVIHI. 2. 


whiche the womman sittith, and kyngis 
seuene ben. Fyue han feld doun, oon! 10 
is, and anothir cometh not 3it. And 
whanne he schal come, it bihoueth hym 
to dwelle a schort tyme. And the beeste 1! 
that was, and is not, and sche is the 
ei3tthe, and is of the seuene™, and schal 
go in to perischyng. And the ten hornes 12 
whiche" thou hast seyn, ben ten kyngis, 
that 3it han not take kyngdom; but thei 
schulen take power as kingis, oon our 
after the beeste. These han a° counsel, 13 
and schulen bitake her vertu and power 
to the beeste. These schulen fi3te with 14 
the lomb, and the lomb schal ouercome 
hem; for he is Lord of lordis, and kyng 
of kyngis; and thei that ben with hym, 
ben clepid, chosun, and feithful. And he15 
seide to me, The watris whiche thou 
hast seyn, where the hoore sittith, ben 
puplis, and folkis, and langagis. And 16 
the ten hornes that thou hast seyn in 
the beeste, these schulen make hir desolat 
and nakid, and schulen ete the fleischis : 
of hir, and schulen brenne togidere hir 
with fier. For God 3af in to the hertis17 
of hem, that thei do that that is plea- 
saunt to hym, that thei 3yue her kyng- 
dom to the beeste, til the wordis of God 
ben endid. And the womman whom18 
thou hast seyn, is the greet citee, that 
hath kingdom on? kyngis of the? erthe. 


CAP. XVIII. 

And aftir these thingis Y si3 another! 
aungel comynge doun fro heuene, hau- 
ynge greet power; and the erthe was 
liztned of his glorie. ‘And he criede™2 
with strong’ vois, ‘and seide', Greet Ba- 
biloyn felde doun, felde doun, and is® 
maad the’ habitacioun of deuelis, and 
the keping of ech vnclene spirit, and ‘the 


bsenene ben angsr. C¢feld ner. 4tocomethe. ©&Om.sx. fOm.ox. & whiche aNogsrx. 
h ben clepid vy. i Om.v. kwhiche ry. lyseieng. ™or folkis nN. and folkis vy. © tungis, or lan- 
gagis ANs. langages or, ° or hoore angs. Om. ox. either hoorev. POm.oox. 4 to gidere hir r. 
TForr. Stog inx., thiforns. Yon oar. Yon aNosx. Wwasy. *liz3tid sx. y he criede r. 


Zand seide vy. ® The greet cite o pr. m. 


m seuenethe tv. 
t sayng Tr. 


1 and oon b. 
3 a strong of. 


2 whom vr. 
witisT. VOm. 7. 


> Om. GNoox pr. m. 


° 00 T. 


¢ desolacioun 4 sup. ras. 


Ponthe E. ofther. 9%Om,£. ‘ criyng Tr. 


XVHL 312. 


sand haatful. For alle folkis drunken of 
the wraththe of the! fornicacioun of hir, 
and kinges of erthe, and marchauntes of 
erthe, diden fornycacioun with hir; and 
thei ben maad riche of the vertu of the* 
4delicis of hir. And Y herde an other voys 
of! heuen, seiyng, My puple, go 3e out ‘of 
it™, and be 3e" not parceners of the tres- 
passis® of it, and 3e shulen not receyue of 
sthe plagisP of it. For the synnes‘ of it 
cainen ‘vn to® heuen, and the Lord hadde 
e6mynde of the wickidnessis® of it. 3elde 
je to it, as and she 3eldidet to 30u; and 
double 3e double thinges, aftir® hir werkis; 
in’ the drinke that she medlide” to 3ou, 
7menge 3e double to hir. Hou miche* she 
glorifiedeY hir silf, and was in delijeis, so 
miche tourment 3iue* 3e* to hir, and wep- 
yng>; for ‘in hir herte® she seith, I 
sittel a queen, and I am not a® widewe, 
sand‘ I shal not see wepyng’. And ther- 
fore in oo day hir plages’ shulen come, 
deeth, and! moornyng, and hunger; and 
she shal be brent in fijr, for God is 
gstrong, that shal deme hir. And the 
kinges of erthe shulen wepe*, and weyle! 
hem™ on hir, the’ whiche® diden forny- 
cacioun with hir, and lyueden in delicis, 
whan thei shulenP see the smoke of bren- 
1onynge of hirt; stondinge fer for drede of 
tourmentis of hir’, seiynge, Wo! wo! wo! 
‘the ilkeS’ greet citee Babilon, and ‘the ilke’ 
stronge citee; for in oon hour thi doom 
ircometh. And marchauntes of erthe shu- 
len wepe ‘vpon hirt, and moorne", for no 
man shal bye more the marchaundiseY 
i20f hem; the marchaundises™ of gold, and* 
siluer, and* precious stoon’, and* marga- 
rite*, ‘or peerl, and® bijce, and° purpur4, 
and® silk, and coccyn‘, and ech tre thyme®, 


APOCALYPSE. 


671 


keping™ of ech vnclene foul, and hateful. 
For alle folkis drunkun of the wraththes 
of fornycacioun*® of hir, and kingis of 


’ theY erthe, and marchauntis of the erthe, 


diden fornycacioun with hir; and thei 
ben maad riche of the vertu of detices of 
hir. And Y herde another vois of he-4 
ene, seiynge, My puple, go 3e ont of it, 
and be 3e not parceneris of the trespassis 
of it, and 3e schulen not resseyue of the 
woundis of it. For the? synnes* of its 
camen ‘til to® heuene, and the Lord 


- hadde mynde of¢ the wickidnesse of it. 


3elde 3e to it, as sche jeldide to 30036 
and double 3e double thingis, aftir her 
werkis; in the drynke that she meddlid 
to 30u, mynge’ 3e double to hir. As7 
myche as sche glorifiede hir silf, and was 
in delicis, so myche turment 3yue€® to hir, 
and weilyng ; for in hir herte sche seith, 
Y sitte a queen, and Y am not a widewe, 
and Y schal not se weiling. And ther-s 
for in o day hir woundis schulen come, 
deth, and mornyng, and hungur; and 
sche schal be brent in fier, for God is 
strong, that schal deme hir. And thes 
kingis- of the’ erthe schulen biwepe, and 
biweile hem silf on hir, whiche® diden 
fornicacioun with hir, and lyueden in 
delicis, whanne thei schulen se the 
smoke of the brennyng of it; stondynge 10 
fer8%, for drede of the? turmentis of it, 
andi seiynge, Wo! wo! wo*! thilke greet 
citee Babiloyn, and thilke stronge citee; 
for in oon our thi dom cometh. And 
marchauntis of the erthe schulen wepe 
on it, and morne, for no man’ schal bie 
more the marchaundise of hem; the1z 
marchaundies! of gold, and of siluer, and 
of preciouse stoon, and of peerl, and of 


iOm.r. k Om. acnogsrx. lfrox. ™Om.s. 2 Om.9. © trespas Ne. P woundis o. wordis r. 
dsignes 0. ‘tilto avogsyx. into p. §& wickednesse r. t3elde aNogsx. %vp aNogsx. Vande. 
w medlith n. x mikel o. ¥ gloriede n. 2Om.N. 2 Om. or. b wepynge, or mournyng ANS. 
weyling y. ¢Om.o. ‘dsaato. e¢On.s.  f that n. & wepyng, or mournyng ANQs. weyling r. 
h woundis or. i Om. 9. & biwepe yr. !biweyle vy. ™hemselfy. "Om. vx. that x. POm.s. 
Git aogsy. Tit aNogsyx. Sthat x. tonit anosyx. Om.o. and mourne oz ito, * marchann- 
dises ox. Wmarchaundiesy. *andofy. Ystooneso. Zandofv. ®margaritis x. » Om. ox. 
candofy. 4purpuln. ¢andofv. fcoctyn, or reed anos. coctyn, etthir red scarlet vy. 8 clepid 
thymus r. 

w Om. K. x the fornycacioun ERT. yOm.h. 7O0Om.c. asynneb. bvyntor, Conk. 
4medle nr. ¢ 3eue 3e EQRgk sec.m. a. 3eueth 148. fOm.ir, the whiche1, safer 8, 4 Om. g. 
1Om.1prom.h, * Om. A sec.m. Q sec.m. Tg.  marchaundis Ego. marchaundises a. 


672 


and alle vessels of yuer, and alle vessels 
of precious stoon, and of bras, and" yren, 
izand! marble, and canel, and amome, 
‘that is, a swete saueringe tree‘, and 
of odoramentis!, and oynementis, and en- 
cense™, and of wijn, and" oyle, and® 
floure, and" wheete, and of inmentis®, ‘or 
werk beestes?, and‘ sheep, and’ horses", 
and’ cartes, andt of seruauntis", and of 
14soulis, ‘or lijfisY, of men. And” thin ap- 
ples, the* desijres of thiY lijf, wenten 
awey fro thee, and alle fatte thinges’, and 
15 ful cleere perschiden fro* thee. And mar- 
chauntes of thes men? shulen no® more! 
fynde ‘tho thinges®. Thei that ben maad 
riche of hir‘, shulen stonde fers, for drede 
of tourmentis of hir', wepinge, and moorn- 
1s ynge, and seiynge, Wo! wo! ‘the ilke! greet 
citee, that was clothid* with bijce, and 
purpur, and cocke!, and was goldid™ with 
gold, and precious stoon, and margaritis, 
17for in oon hour so many richessis™ ben 
destitute. And ech gouernour, and alle 
that shippen® in to place, and mariners, 
and that werchen in the se, stoden fer, 
isand crieden, seeynge the place of bren- 
nynge of hir?, seiynge, What! lijk" to® this 
l9greet citee? And thei senten poudir vp- 
ont her heedes, and crieden, wepinge, and 
moornynge, and" seiynge, Wo! wo! ‘the 
ilke’ grete citee, in whom” alle that han 
shippes in the se ben maad riche of prisis* 
20 of it; for in oon hour itY is desolate. Heuen, 
and holy apostles, ‘and prophetes?, ‘glade 
3e* on it, for God hath demyd 3oure doom 
2iof it. And oo strong aungel toke up a 
stoon, as a> greet mylne stoon, and sente 
in to the se, seiynge’, In this bire’ ‘the 
ilke® greet citee Babilon shal be sent, and 


b and of esr. tandofr. k Om. ox. 
beestis 0. P Om. ox. Gandofy. vt hors sx. 
seruauntis, either presoneris vr. =v Om. x. 
aawey froo. Pthingisry. ¢ not x, 
hit anogsy. ithat x. * clad sx. 
m clothid c. oner gilt r. 2 Om. N. 
rhehian. 8S Om.r. ton anogsrx. 
AGM ef alii. z Om. o. 
AG sec.m. NS. bire, either feersues v. 


u Om. s. 
€ that x. 
m purpul gE. D silner A. © of coctin h. 
t of canel k. wand of o. 


Y of othere Rgk pr.m. 2 fro a. 
done awey x. andthei tr. 4 thilke gk. 


APOCALYPSE. 


1 swete smelling thingis r. 
8 and of r. 
w And of @. 

4 more now Yr. 
lcoctyn, or reed 4. cocke, or reed ngs. coccyn o. red scarlet r. 
© sailen bi schip v. 
Vv that x, 
a make 3e ful out ioie r. 


P of ech k. 
V that is, a swete tre K sec.m. marg. 
a purpul E passim. 
€ casteden c. kesten kK. 


XVIII. 13-21. 


bies, and of purpur™, and of silk®, and 
coctyn°®, and ech? tre tymus, and alle 
vessels’ of yuer’, and alle vessels of pre- 
ciouse stoon, and of bras, and of yrun, 
and of marbil, and canel‘, and® amonye’, 13 
and of” swete smellinge thingis, and 
oynementis, and encense*, and of wyn, 
and of oyle, and of flour, and of whete, 
and of werk beestis, and of scheep, and 
of horsis, and of cartis, and of sernauntis, 
and other’ lyues of men. And thin ap-14 
plis of the desire of thi lijf wenten awei 
fro thee, and alle fatte thingis, and ful 
clere perischiden fro thee. And mar-15 
chaundis of these thingis schulen no more 
fynde tho thingis. ‘Thei that ben maad 
riche of it, schulen stonde fer, for? drede 
of turmentis of it, wepynge, and morn- 
ynge, and seiynge, Wo! wo! thilke greet 16 
citee, that was clothid with bijs, and pur- 
pur’, and reed scarlet, and was ouergild 
with gold, and preciouse stoon, and mar- 
garitis, for in oon our so many richessis 17 
ben destitute’. And ech gouernour, and 
alle that saylen bi schip in to place, and 
maryneris, and° that worchen in the see, 
stoden fer, and crieden, seynge the place 18 
of the brennyng of it, seiynge, What ts 
lijk this’ greet citee? And thei casten®19 
poudre on her heedis, and crieden, wep- 
ynge, and mornynge, and seiynge, Wo! 
wo! thilke greet citee, in which alle that 
han schippis in the see ben maad riche 
of pricis of it; for in oon our it is de- 
solat. Heuene, and hooli apostlis, and 20 
prophetis, make 3e ful out ioye on it, for 
God hath demed 30ure dom of# it. And 21 
o stronge aungel took vp a stoon, as a 
greet mylne stoon, and keste in to the 


meenss. Bandof rv. % werk 
u sernauntis, or caitifis ANOS. 
Y the r. 2 thinge N. 
fit sanogsy.  & afer N. 


t Om. a. 
x Om. ANOQSX. 
© these godis Nn. 


q What eitee is y. 
X pris x. ¥ Om. 
d bire, or feersuesse 


P it ANOSVX. 
wwhiche 4Nogsyx. 


bofao. Cand seide vr. 


(tre clepid vu. *vessela. §& yueri k. 
w Om. k. x of encense k sec. m. 
» ether forsaken K sec. m. marg. destitute, either 
f the pricis rko8. & on EKrh. 


2 


XVIII. 22—XIX. 6. 


22now ‘ouer shal not’ be founde. And the 
voys of harpers", and of men of musike, 
and syngynge with pijpe and trumpe, shal 
no more be herd in it. And ech ‘crafty 
man8, and eche craft, shal not" be founden 
in it. And the voys of mylne stoon shal 

23no' more‘ be herd in thee, and the 1i3t of 
lanterne*« shal no more shijne! to™ thee, 
and the voys of the" husbonde and of 
wijf™ shal ‘not 3it more® be herd in 
thee; for thi marchauntes weren princes 
of erthe. For in thi? venemous dedis alle 

atfolkes erreden. And the blood of pro- 
phetis and seyntis is founden in it, and 
of 4 alle men that ben slayn in erthe. 


CAP. XIX. 


1 Aftir thes thinges I herde as" a greet 
voys of many’ trumpis in heuen, seiynge, 
Alleluya‘; heriyng", and glory, and vertu 

zis to’ oure God; for trewe and iust ben 
the domes of him, the” whiche demeden* 
of the greet hoore, that corrumpideY the 
erthe in’ hir leccherie, and demyde*, ‘or 
vengide, the blood of his seruauntis, of 

3the hondis of hir. And eft thei seiden, 
Alleluya, ‘that is, Herie 3e the Lord®. 
And the’ smoke of it sti3ith® up, in to 
aworldlis of worldlis. And the foure and 
twenty ‘elder men‘ and the foure beestis 
fellen doun, and worschipiden God sittynge 
vpon® trone, seiynge!, Amen, Alleluya. 
5And a voys wente out of the trone, sei- 
ynge*, To! oure God ‘seie 3e, alle the ser- 
uauntis™ of" him®, heriyng?, and 3e that 

sdreden God, smale and greete. And Y 
herde a voys as% of a greet trumpe, and 
as the voys of" greete thundris, seiynge, 


APOCALYPSE. 


673 


see, and seide, In this bire thilke greet 
citee Babiloyn schal be sent, and now it 
schal no more be foundun. And the vois 22 
of harpis, and of men of musik, and 
syngynge with pipe and trumpe, schal 
no more be herd in it. And ech crafti 
man, and ech craft, schal no more be 
foundun in it. And the vois' of mylne! 
stoon schal no more be herde in thee, 
and the 1i3t of lanterne schal no more23 
schyne to* thee, and the vois of the 
hosebonde and of the wijf schal no more 
3it! be herd in thee; for thi marchauntis 
weren princis of the erthe. For in thi 
witchecraftis™ alle folkis erriden. And the 24 
blood of prophetis and seyntis" is foundun 
in it, and of.alle men that ben slayn in 
erthe. 
CAP. XIX. 

Aftir these thingis Y herde as a greet i 
vois of many trumpis in heuene, seiynge, 
Alleluya; heriynge, and glorie, and vertu 
is to oure God; for trewe and iust benz 
the domes of hym, whiche demede of° 
the greet hoore, that defoulide? the erthe 
in her letcherye, and vengide the blood 
of hise seruauntis, of the hondis of hir. 
And eft thei seiden, Alleluya. And thes 
smoke of it’ stieth™ vp, in to worldis® of 
worldis. And the foure and twenti se-4 
nyouris' and foure" beestis felden doun, 
and worschipiden God sittynge on the 
trone, and seiden, Amen, Alleluya. Ands 
a vois wente out of the trone, and seide, 
Alle the seruauntis of oure God, seie 3e 
heriyngus to oure God, and 3e that 
dreden God, smale and grete. And Y6 
herde a vois of a grete trumpe, as the 
vois of many watris, and as the vois of 
grete thundris, seiynge, Alleluya; for 


fit schal noo more vy. ffharpisG. & craftis man ogsxy. noo more vy. inotw. kOm.n. kk the 
lanterne y. !lizjten x. ™inc. Om. Nox. the wijf @ sec.m. © noo more 3it 7. no more x. 
Pthecy. 40Om.e. rOmo *&Om.N. 


a praysyng o. to the Lord n. 


t Alleluya, that is, herye (praise 0] 3e the Lord anosy. 
w Om. ANoQsrxy. 


xhe demede sy. _Y corrumpide, or destryede, 


or defonlide any. defouled 0. corumpede, or defoulede s. corumpide, either distroiede, either defoulide r. 


Zofn. 4vengidev. >Om.orvx. ©Om.anogsvxy. 4QOm.o. © stide o. stiede 9. f senyours 4Nes 
yxy. € Om. 4Nogsyxy. bon anogsyxy. iandseideny. ‘Kandseide vy. 1 Alle the sernauntis of 
oure God, seie 3e heryingis tor. ™Om.v. tog. Om.v. °Om.r. P preysyngo.Om.7. 10m. ev. 
¥ many watris, and as the vois of r. 

hvoicise. tamylneabe. *inr. 1Om.1K prim.  ™ ether venemyngis K sec.m. marg. © of 
seyntis b. ©°Om.bh. Pdefoulethe. Qhim1. stizedeegka. § the worldis Erkmqnuabceghkaf. 
teldre men rk. "the foure Er. 

VOL. IV. 4k 


674 


Alleluya; for oure® God almi3ty hath 
zregnyd. ‘Enioye wet, and ‘glade we" with 
oute forth, and 3iue we’ glory to him; 
for the weddinges of the lombe camen, 
and the wijf of him made redy hir silf. 
sAnd it is 3ouun to hir, that she couere 
hir” with whijte bijce* shijnynge; for- 
sotheY bijcen” ben* the> iustifiynges” of 
9seyntis. And he seide to me, Wrijte thou, 
Blessid thei‘, that ben clepid to the soper 
of weddingis’ of the lomb. And he seide 
to me, Thes® wordis of God ben trewe. 
1oAnd I fel doun bifore his feet, ‘that I 
shuldef worschipe him. And he seide to 
me, See’, that thou do not; I am thin 
even seruaunt, and of thi britheren, hau- 
ynge the" witnessing! of Jhesu*; wor- 
schipe thou God. Forsothe the witnessing 
nof Jhesu is! spirit of prophecie. And I 
size heuen openyd, and lo! a whijt hors, 
and he that sat vpon™ him was clepid 
Feithful and sothfast; and with ri3twis- 
12nesse he demith, and fiztith. Forsothe the 
i3en of him as" flaume of fijr, and in his 
heed® many diademes; hauynge? a name 
writun, whiche no man knew, no? but he. 
13 And he was clothid" in a clooth’ spreynd' 
with blood; and the name of him was 
14clepid The word" of God. And _ the 
hoostes’, ‘or companyes”, that ben in he- 
uen*, sueden him in whijte horsis’, cloth- 
15id? with bissyn, whijt and cleene. Anda 
swerd sharp on ech sijde cam forth of his 
mouth, that in* it he smyte folkes; and 
he shal reule hem in® an yren 3erd. And 
he tredith, ‘or defoulith®, the pressour® of 
wijn of woodnesse! of¢ wraththe of almi3ty 
16God. And hef hath writen in his clooth, 
and hemme®, King of kyngis and Lord 
170f lordis. And I size an* aungel stond- 
inge in the sunne; and he criede with 


8S oure Lord oy. + Ioye we within forth o. 
ANogsvxY. Yfor whiv. 2 bissyn anogsyxy. 
4 the weddyngis 0. ¢ The x. ffortor. 
Yhath theo. ™on anogsyxy. % weren as ¥. 
8 clothing x. _t sprengd x. 
panyes o, W¥Om.ox. * heuenes x. 
sure GM. 4 strong veniaunce Fr. 


y hors sx. 
© and of N. 


w is the k. 
a ri3twysnessis EQg. rizfulnesse R. 


¥ was gk. 
2% the spirit Rr. 
f hipe q. 


APOCALYPSE. 


u make we ioie 7. 

aisy. > Om. or. iustifiynge y. 
& Loke o. 
© heued o. 
u word, or sone AG sec.m. osy. word, or lowe N. kyndely sone 7. 
2 clad sx. 
f Om. s. 


x justifiyng Q pr. m. RTe. 
b hise izen k. 


XIX. 7-17. 


oure Lord God almy3ti hath regned. 
Ioye we, and make we myrthe, and 3yue7 
glorie to hym; for the weddingis of the 
lomb camen, and the wijf of hym made 
redy hir'silf. And it is’ 30uun to hir, thats 
sche kyuere hir with white bissyn schyn- 
ynge; for whi bissyn is" iustifiyngis* of 
seyntis. And he seide to me, Writes 
thou, Blessid ben thei that ben clepid 
to theY soper of weddyngis” of the lomb. 
And he seide to me, These wordis of 
God ben trewe. And Y felde doun bi-1i0 
fore hise feet, to worschipe hym. And 
he seide to me, Se thou, that thou do 
not; Y am a seruaunt with thee, and 
of thi britheren, hauynge the witness- 
yngt of Jhesu; worschipe thou God. 
For the witnessing of Jhesu is spirit”? of g 
profesie. And Y say henene openyd, 11 Zire here ©. 
and lo! a whit hors, and he that sat on 

hym was clepid Feithful and sothefast ; 

and with ri3twisnesse* he demeth,° and 

fiztith. And ‘the izen of hym> weren as iz 
flawme of fier, and-in his heed many 
diademys; and he hadde a name writun, 

which no man knew, but he. And heis 

was clothid in a cloth spreynt with 

blood; and the name of hym was clepid 

The sone of God. And the oostis that 14 

ben in heuene, sueden hym on white 

horsis, clothid with bissyn, white and 

clene. And a swerd scharp on ech¢ side4 15 

cam forth of his mouth, that with it he 

smyte folkis; and he shal reule hem 

with an yren 3erde. And he tredith the 

pressour of wyn of stronge veniaunce of 

the wraththe of almy3ti God. And he1s 

hath writun in his cloth, and in the 

hemme‘, Kyng of kyngis and Lord of 

lordis. And Y say an aungel, stond-17 

ynge in the sunne; and he criede with 


+ that is, alle 
profetis beren 
witnessing to 


vYOm.r. Whirself x.  * hissyn 

¢ ben thei a sec. m.Qv. 
hOm.o. iwittenesse o. * Jhesu Crist n. 
Pand he hadde ry. YOm.sy. 'fclad x. 
¥ com- 
¢Qm.ox. ©¢ pres- 


b oon AOSY. 


awith o. » into @. 
& in his hemme 7 sec. m. 


yOm.b. 2 the weddingis k sec. m. weddynge 8. 


Ceithirr. aside x. ¢his K. 


xix 18-——x XM. 


greet voys, seiynge to alle briddis, that 
flewen bi‘ the* mydle of ** heuen, ‘Come 
3e, and ‘be 3e™ gederid ‘to gydere® to the 
is greet soper of God, that 3e ete the flesches® 
of kingis, and the? flesches’ of tribunys, 
and the’ flesches’ of stronge‘, and flesches® 
of horsis’, and of the sittinge on” hem, 
and the-flesches* of alle fre men and ser- 
uauntis’, and of? smale and of” greete. 
19 And I size the beest, and kingis of erthe, 
and the hoostes* of hem gederid, to make 
bateyle with him, that sat in” the hors, 
zoand with his hoost®*. And the beest is@ 
cau3t, and with hir the fals* prophet, that 
made signes bifore hir; in whiche he de- 
ceyuede hem that token the carect® of the 
beest, and that worshipeden ‘the ymage 
of itt, Thes two! ben* sent quyke in to 
the! pool of fijr, brennynge in™ brunston. 
21And the othere" ben® slayn in? swerd4 of 
the’ sittynge on’ the hors, that cometh 
‘forth oft the mouth of him; and alle 
briddis ‘ben fulfillid® with’ the” fleschis* 
of hem. 


CAP. XX. 
1 And I size an aungel comynge doun fro 
heuene, hauynge the keyeY of depnesse, 
gand a greet cheyne in his hond. And he 
cau3te the dragoun, the olde serpent, that 
is the deuel and Sathanas; and he boonde 
3him bi a thousynd 3eeris*. And he sente 
him in to depnesse, and closide, and sign- 
ede’, ‘or selide®, on® him, that he deceyue* 
no more folkes, til a thousynd 3eeris® be 
fulfillid!, After thes thinges it bihoueth 
4him fors to be vnbounde a litel tyme. And 
I size seetes, and thei saten* on hem, and 
doom is‘ 3ouun to hem. And the soules 
of ‘bihedid men* for the! witnessing of 


APOCALYPSE. 


675 


greet8 vois, and seide to alle briddis that 
flowen bi the myddil of heuene, Come 3e, 
and be 3e" gaderid to the greet soper of 
God, that 3e ete the fleisch of kingis, and 1s 
fleisch of tribunes, and fleisch of stronge 
men, and fleischi of horsis, and of* tho! 
that sitten™ on hem, and the fleisch of 
alle® fre men and? bonde men?,.-and of 
smalei and of grete. And Y sai’ thei 
beeste, and the kyngis of the’ erthe, and 
the oostis of hem gaderid, to make batel 
with hym, that sat on the hors, and 
with his oost. And the beeste was20 
cau3t, and with hir the false prophete, 
that made signes bifor hir; in whiche 
he disseyuede hem that token the carect* 
of the beeste, and that worschipiden the 
ymage of it. These tweyne‘ weren sent 
quyke in to the pool of fier, brennynge 
with brymstoon. And the othere weren2! 
slayn" of Y swerd of hym that sat on the 
hors, that cometh forth of the mouth of 
hym; and alle briddis weren fillid with 
the fleisch of hem. 


CAP. XX. 
And. Y say an aungel comynge douni 


’ fro heuene, hauynge the keie of depnesse, 


and a greet chayne in his hoond. And2 
he cau3te the dragoun, the elde serpent, 
that is the deuel and Sathanas; and he 
boonde hym bi a thousynde 3eeris. And3 
he sente hym ‘in to” depnesse, and clos- 
ide on* hym, that he disseyue no more 


’ the folkis, til a thousynde 3eeris be fillid. 


Aftir these thingis it bihoueth hym to 
be vnboundun a litil tyme. “And Y say4 
seetis, and thei’ saten on hem, and doom 
was 3ounn to hem. And the soulis of 
men biheedid for the witnessyng of Jhe- 


jing. *Om.o. kk Om. y. 1Comeths. ™beth x. "Om. acnoestyxy. © flesh sx. P Om. 
ANogsvxy. flesh sx. * Om. acnopestvxy. $ flesh sx. 'strongemen vy. 4" flesh sx. V hors sx. 
Win acNnopstyxy. * flesh asx. Yboondemenvy. 7Om.v. 22Om.sx. ®companyeso. ono. 


dwas vy. 44 laste y. © mark 7. 
ANovy. Kwereny. 10m. aosxy. ™ with r. 
rhimo. &8vpon Tv. tfrov. ™ weren fillid 7. 
a selide o. Om. 0x. © vpon T. 
seten st. Ilwasr. 


© com panye o. 


f worshipen sy. 
4 tother rT. 
Vof o. 
4 desceynede gsxy. ‘© 3er sx. 
k men biheedid ansvy. byheuedid men o. men hedid x. 


&Om.o. 4 the beste s. | tweyne 
©wereny. Pwithr. 4 the swerd aNoerxy. 
wOm.rT. * flesch Nosx. Ykeies N. # 3er sx. 
f fillid ov. & Om. sx. 4 that 
10m. esy. 


gagreeto. 4Om.r. ! fleischisg. kOm.h prom. 10m.e. ™ sitteth vabcegk. = Om. hk sec. m. 


°and of bk. POm.o. 


4 smale men b pr. m. 
Y with the erkgrbeeghoaf, with k. 


W to the k. 


t Om. EIga. 
x and markide on K. 


ScarectereE. ttwoo. 4 yslayna. 
y thei that Eabek pr. m. 8. 


4n2 


676 


Jhesu™, and for" the word of God, and 
hem that worschepiden not the beest, ne- 
ther the? ymage of it, nether token the? 
earect! of it in forhedis', or® in hert hondis. 
And thei lyueden, and regneden ‘with 
5Crist" a thousynd 3eer’. The othere* of 
deede menY lyueden not, til a thousynd 
3eeres*. be endid. This* the first ajen ris- 
syng. Blessid and holy he’, that hath paart 
in the first ajen risyng. In thes® the se- 
counde deeth hath not? power; but thei 
shulen be prestis of God, and of Crist, and 
thei shulen regne with him® a thousynd 
73eerisf, And whan a thousynd 3eeres 
shulen be endid, Sathanas shal be vn- 
bounde of his prisoun; and he shal go 
out, and he® shal deceyue folkes, that ben 
on foure corners of the! erthe, Gog and 
Magog. And he shal gedere hem* in to 
bateyl, whois nonumbre is as the grauel of 
sthe se. And thei stijeden vp, on! the 
broodnesse of erthe™, and enuyrounden 
the castels of seyntis, and the loued citee. 
9And fijr cam doun of® God fro heuen, 
and denourede hem. And the deuel, that 
deceyuede hem®, is? sent in to the? pool 
10 of fijr and brunston, where and’ the beest 
and false prophetes shulen be tourmentid 
day and ni3t, in to worldlis of worldlis. 
uAmen. And I siz3e a greet white trone, 
and the sittynge on’ it, fro whois si3t 
erthe' fleiz3" and heuen; and place’ is not 
i2founden of hem. And I size deede men, 
greete and smale, stondinge in the si3t of 
the” trone; and bookes ben* openyd ; 
and an othir book is’ openyd, that is the 
book of lijf; and deede men ben? demyd 
of thes thingis that weren write in the 
13 bookis, aftir® the werkes> of hem. And 
the se 3af his deede men, that weren in it; 
and deeth and helle 3auen her deede men®, 


APOCALYPSE. 


XX. 5—13. 


su, and for the word of God, ‘and hem 
that worschipiden not. the beeste, nether 
the ymage of it, nethir token the carect* 
of it in her forheedis, nethir in her 
hoondis. And thei lyueden, and regneden 
with Crist a thousynde 3eeris. Othere*s 
of deed men lyueden not, til a thousynde 
3eeris ben> endid. This is the first ajen 
risynge. Blessid and hooli zs he, thaté 
hath part in the firste ajenrysyng. In 
these men the secunde deth hath not 
power; but thei schulen be prestis of 
God, and of Crist, and thei schulen 
regne with hym a thousynde 3eeris. And7 
whanne a thousynde 3eeris schulen be 
endid, Sathanas schal be vnboundun of 
his prisoun; and he schal go out, and 
scha] disseyue folkis, that ben on foure 
corners of* the erthe, Gog and Magog. 
And he schal gadere hem in to batel, 
whos noumbre is as the grauel of the 
see. And thei stieden vp on the brood-s 
nesse of erthe*, and enuyrounede the 
castels of seyntis, and the louyd citee. 
And fier cam doun ‘of God? fro heuene,9 
and deuourede hem. And the deuel, 
that disseyuede hem, was sent in to the 
pool of fier and off brymston, where 10 
bothe the beeste and fals prophetis schu- 
len be turmentid dai and ni3t, in to 
worldis of worldis. Amen. And Y say 
a greet white trone, and oon sittynge on 
it, fro whos si3t erthe fled and heuene; 
and the place® is not foundun ‘of hem). 
And Y sai deed men, grete and smale, 12 
stondynge in the si3t of the trone; and 
bookis weren opened, andi deed men 
weren demed of these thingis that weren 
writun in the bookis, aftir the werkis of 
hem. And the see 3af his deed men, 13 
that weren in it; and deth and helle 


m Jhesu Crist x. °Om.n. © Om. anesyxy. Pp Om. 4Nogsyxy. 4carectis @. * forehenedis o. 
Sneithery. tOm.c. UOm.N. V3eeris Nogyvy., WOmv. *¥Omv. yOm. x. %3er sx. 
a This is aNogsyxy. Dbishery. ¢thesemeny. noon. ehemo. fers et x passim. & Om. 
ANogsvx. Pino. vpont. Om. aogsyxy. * hem to gedirg. ofn. ™the eerth ogs. ® fro rx. 
°Om.Tr. Pwasr. 4Om.sx. 'Om. 7. bother. ‘Svpont. ttheerthe x. 4% fleiz3 awey sx. 
¥ ne place oo, ~Om. gyxy. *wereny. Ywasv. %wereny. vp anogsxy. bir. » writingis rv. 
© Om. x. 


2 carectir E. 
& place of hem r. 


a And othre rR. 
h Om. Rr. 


D weren I. 


© ona, 
iand anothir book was opened, that [which 8] is, the book of lijf; and 


dthe erthe kk. © Om. k prom. £Om. xk prim. 8. 


A marg. g sec.m. marg. oa8. and anothir booke is openid, which is the boke of lijf; and r. 


XX. 14—XXI. 9. 


that weren in hem. And it is’ demyd of 
\4alle®, vpf the werkes of hem. And ‘helle 
and deeth® ben sent in to the! pool of 
isfijr. This is the secounde deeth. And 
he that is* not founde writun in the book 
of lijf, is* sent in to the pool of fijr. 


CAP. XXI. 


1 And I size newe heuen and newe erthe; 
forsothe! the first heuen and the!’ first erthe 
wenten awey, and ‘now is not the se™. 

2And I Joon size the holy citee Jerusalem, 
newe, comynge doun fro heuen ‘of God, 
maad redy" as a wijf ourned® to hir hus- 

sbonde. And I herde a greet voys of? the 
trone, seiynge, Lo! the tabernacle of God 
with? men, and he shal dwelle with hem; 
and thei shulen be his puple, and he God 
4with hem shal be her God. And God shal 
wijpe awey* ech teer fro i3en® of seyntis' ; 
and deeth shal no more be, nether moorn- 
yng, nether criyng, nether sorowe shal be 
ouer; the" whiche firste thinges wenten 
sawey. And he seide, that sat in the trone, 
Lo! I make alle thinges newe. And he 
seide to me, Wrijte thou, for thes wordes 
ében moost feithful and trewe. And he 
seide to me, It is don; I am alpha and oo, 
the’ bigynnyng and ende’. I* shal 3iue 
frely ‘to the thirstinge’ of the welle of 
7quyk watir?. He that shal ouercoine, shal 
weelde thes thinges; and I shal be God to 
shim, and he shal be sone to me. Forsothe 
to* proude® men, and vnbileueful, and curs- 
id°, and manquellers, and fornicatours, and 
to men doynge venym, or sleynge men* 
by venym®, and‘ worschipers of ydolis, and 
to® alle lizers*, the paart of hem shal be 
in the pool brennynge with fijr and brun- 
9ston, that is the secounde deeth. And 
one cam of the seuen aungels, hauynge 


APOCALYPSE. 


677 


3auen her deed men, that weren in hem. 
And it was demed of ech, aftir the 
werkis of hem. And helle and dethii 
weren sent in to a¥ poole of fier. ‘This 
is the secunde deth!. And he that wasis 
not foundun writun™ in the book of lijf, 
was sent in to the" pool of fier. 


CAP. XXI. 


And Y sai newe heuene and newei 
erthe; for the firste heuene and the 
firste erthe wenten awei, and the see is 
not now. And Y Joon say the hooliz 
citee Jerusalem, newe, comynge doun fro 
heuene, maad redi of God, as a wijf 
ourned to hir hosebonde. And Y herdes 
a greet vois fro the trone, seiynge, Lo! 
the tabernacle of God zs with men, and 
he schal dwelle with hem; and thei schu- 
len be his puple, and he God with hem 
schal be her God. And God schal wipes 
awei ech teer fro the i3en of hem; and 
deth schal no more be, nether mornyng, 
nether criyng, nether sorewe schal be 
ouer; whiche ‘firste thingis® wenten awei. 
And he seide, that sat in the trone, Lo!s 
Y make alle thingis newe. And he seide 
to me, Write thou, for these wordis ben 
moost feithful and trewe. And he seideé 
to me, It is don; I am alpha and oo, the 
bigynnyng and ende?. Y schal 3yue freli 
of the welle of quic watir to hym that 
thirsteth. He that schal ouercome, schal7 
welde these things; and Y schal be God 
to hym, and he schal be sone to me. 
But to ferdful men, and vubileueful, and s 
cursid, and manquelleris, and fornyca- 
touris, and to witchis, and‘ worschiperis 
of idols, and to¥ alle lieris, the part of 
hem shal be in the pool brennynge with 
fier and brymstoon, that is the secounde 
deth. And oon cam of the seuene aun-» 


dwasy. ¢echy. faftur r. biv. ¢deth and helles. 4 wereny. !Om. noesrxy. was Pp. 
‘fory. NOm.y. ™the seis not now yxy. ™maadredy of God vy. ©anournyd rT. Pfrov. 4 is 
aqwithy. 'Om.x. "Om. y. Stheizjenerx. themy. %Om.r. YOm.9. W ending no. 
xAnd Ys. yOm. yr. tothirstinge p. 2 watir to him that thurstithy. ®Om.o. >» feerdful r. 


¢ cursid, ezther abomynable r. 


a sec.m. » leesyng mongeres aNogsxY. 


k the Ebgka. 
to R. 


1Om. o. 


m Om. bk pr.m. 
t Om. 1 pr.m. 


d other anosy. othere men vy. 


Dn Om. R. 


‘e Gloss om. in ex. fandtoo. & of 


© thingis firste @. Pthe eende rh. 4 and 


678 


violes ful of seuen' the laste plagis!. And 
he spake with me, seiynge™, Come thou, 
I" shal shewe to thee the spouse®, wijf? 
wof the lomb. And he toke me up? in 
spirit in to a greet hil and hi3; and he 
shewide to me the holy citee Jerusalem, 
ilcomynge doun fro heuen of God, hauynge 
the cleerte of God ; and the li3t of it lijk 
to" a precious stoon, as to® the stoon iaspis, 
i2as' cristal. And it hadde a wal greet and 
hi3, hauynge twelue 3ates, and in the" 
j3atis’ of it twelue aungels”, and names 
writun in, that ben the* names of the’ 
twelue lynagis of” the* sones of Yrael ; 
13fro the eest thre jates, and fro the north 
thre 3ates, and fro the south thre 3ates, 
i4and fro the west thre 3ates. And the wal 
of the citee hauynge” twelue founde- 
mentes, and in hem the names® of the® 
15 twelue apostlis, and of the lomb. And he 
that spake with me, hadde a golden me- 
sure of a reed, that he shulde mete the 
citee, and the jates of it, and the wal. 
i¢6 And the citee is ‘put in® square; and the 
lengthe ‘of itf is® so miche, hou miche 
and® the breede. And he mat the citee 
of‘ the reed, bi furlongis twelue thou- 
syndes*. And the hi3the, and lengthel, and 
17 breede of it, ben euen. And he mat the 
walles ‘of it™, of an hundrid and® foure 
and fourty cubytis, bi mesure of man, 
is that? is, of P aungel. And the bildyng? of 
the’ wal was of stoon iaspis. Sotheli the 
citee it™ silf was of® cleene gold, lijk tot 
19cleene glas. And the foundementes of 
the" wal of the citee ourned’ with al” 
precious stoon. The first foundement, ias- 
pis* ; the secounde, saphirus; the thridde, 
caleedonyus; theY fourthe, smaragdus ; 
20the? fyuethe, sardonix; the* sixte, sar- 
dius; the> seuenthe, crisolitus; the® ei;the, 


APOCALYPSE. 


XXII. 10o——20. 


gels, hauynge violis fulle of ‘seuene the® 
laste veniauncis. And he spak with me, 
and seide, Come thou, and Y schal schewe 
to thee the spousesse, the wijf of the 
lomb. And he took me vp in spirit in1o 
to a greet hille and hi3; and he schew- 
ide to me the hooli citee Jerusalem, com- 
ynge doun fro heuene of God, hauynge11 
the clerete of God; and the 1i3t of it 
lijk a preciouse stoon, as the stoon iaspis, 
as cristal. And it hadde a walle greet 12 
and hi3, hauynge twelue 3atis, and in 
the jatis of it twelue aungels, and names 
writun in‘, that ben the names of 
twelue lynagis of the sones of Israel ; 
fro the east thre jatis, and fro the north 13 
thre 3atis, and fro the south thre 3atis, 
and fro the west thre j3atis. And thei 
wal of the citee hadde twelue founde- 
mentis, and in hem the twelue names of 
twelue" apostlis, and of the lomb. Andis 
he that spak with me, hadde a goldun 
mesure of a rehed, that he schulde mete 
the citee, and the 3atis of it, and the wal. 
And the citee was set in’ square; and 16 
the lengthe of it is so miche, ‘as miche” 
as 7 the breede. And he mat* the citee 
with the rehed, bi furlongis twelue thou- 
syndis. And the hei3the, and the lengthe 
and breedeY of it, ben euene. And he17 
mat the wallis of it, of an hundrid and 
‘foure and fourti? cubitis, bi mesure of 
man, that is, of an* aungel. And the 18 
bildyng of the wal therof was of the 
stoon iaspis. And the citee it silf was 
clene gold, lijk clene glas. And the!9 
foundementis of the wal of the citee 
weren ourned with al preciouse stoon. 
The firste foundement, iaspis; the se- 
counde, safiris; the thridde, caleedonyus; 
the fourthe, smaragdus; the fyuethe, 20 


ithe seuene 9. * of the a pr.m. 1 wooundis 0. veniaunces y. ™andseidey. ‘and I sry: 
o spousesse yr. Pthewijf7. GOm.n. tTOm. ry. §Om. or. tandastT. 4 Om. asrxy. twelue N. 
V3ate G. Wcorneress. Om. y. *Om. x. y Om. anogstyxy. Zandofc. ®Om.sy. » was hau- 
yng T. hadde vr. ¢tweluenamesy. 4¢Om.anogsyxy. ¢Om.n. setin7. fOm.s. & Om. N. 
hisn. isandy. ‘Jwithy. kthousend sx. 'thelengthe rvy. ™Om.s. 2Om.Q. © whiche 7. 
P of an ANOQSVXY. 4 bilding, or makyng anesy. bilding, either making r. r Om. N. rr of it y. 
8Om.y. tOm.r, 4Om. Ne. VY was ourned T. weren ourned y. WaN. *wasiaspisT. Y Om. 
ney. 2Om. anogy. #Om. anogsy. >% Om. aNnogsy. ¢ Om. anogsy. 


8 the seuene K sec. m. Qk. the seuen the laste h sup.ras. tOm.k sec.m. ¥ the xij. gk&. Vin a EQga. 


wQOm.o. * that maad Eqg pr. m. 


y the brede Eka. 


2 fourti and four r. the R. 


XXI..21-—XXIL 5. 


berillus; the’ nynthe, topasius; the® 
tenthe, crisopassus; the’ eleuenthe, ia- 
2\cinctus; the? tweluthe, ametistus. And 
twelue 3ates* twelue margarites beni, by 
ech; and eche ‘3ates weren* of eche mar- 
garitis!. And the stretes of the citee clene™ 
22 gold, as® glas ful shijnynge. And I si3e 
no temple in it, forsothe® Lord? God al- 
mi3ty is' temple* of it, ‘and the lomb‘ 
23 And the citee hath no nede of sunne, ne- 
ther" moone, that thei shijne in it; forwhi 
the cleerte of God shal lizten it, and the 
24lomb is the lantern of it. And folkes shu- 
len walke in 1i3t” of it; and the kinges of 
erthe shulen bringe to” her glory and 
2shonour in to it. And the 3ates of it 
shulen not be closid bi daye; sotheli ni3t 
26shal not be there. And thei shulen bringe 
to* they glory and honour of folkis in to 
27it. Nethir ony thing defoulid? shal entre 
in to it, ‘and doynge abhomynacioun and 
lesyng*; no but thei> that ben writun in 
the book of lijf and of the lomb. 


CAP. XXII. 


1 And he shewide to me a flood of quyk 
watir, shinynge as cristal, comynge forth 
20f the seete of God, and of the lombe. In 
the mydle of the street of it, and on ech 
sijde of the flood, the tree of lijf, bringyng 
to twelue fruytes, ‘bi eche monethes 3eld- 
“inge his fruyt4; and the leefes of the tree 
3to® helthe of folkis. And ech cursid thing 
shal no more be; but the seetes of God 
and of the lomb shulen be in it. And the 
seruauntes of him shulen serue to him. 
4And thei shulen see his face, and his 
snamef in her forhedis. And ni3t shal no 
more be, and thei shulen not haue nede 
to the® 1i3t of lantern, nethir to lizt of 


e Om. ANosY. 
k gate was y. 3atis ben x. 


d Om. anoogsy. 
1Om. osrrxy. 


APOCALYPSE. 


f£ Om. Aanogsy. 
1 margarite 7. 


679 


sardony; the sixte, sardius; the se- 
uenthe, crisolitus; the ei3tthe, berillus ; 
the nynthe, topacius; the tenthe, criso- 
passus; the eleuenthe, iacinctus; the 
tweluethe, ametistus. And? twelue jatis21 
ben twelue margaritis, bi ech®; ‘and ech 
jate was of ech margarete*’. And the 
stretis of the citee weren clene gold, as 
of glas ful schynynge. And Y say no22 
temple in it, for the Lord God almy3ti 
and the lomb, is* temple of it. And the23 
citee hath no& nede of sunne®, nethir 
moone, that thei schyne in it; for the 
clerete' of God schal liz3tne* it; and the 
lomb is the lanterne of it. And folkis24 
schulen walke in li3t! of it; and the 
kyngis of the™ erthe schulen brynge her 
glorie and onour in to it. And the 3atis 25 
of it schulen not be closid bi dai; and 
ni3t schal not be there. And thei schulen 2¢ 
brynge the" glorie and onour of folkis 
in to it. Nether ony man defoulid, and®" 27 
doynge abhominacioun® and _leesyng, 
schal entre in to it; but thei that ben 
writun in the book of lijf and? of the 
lomb. 
CAP. XXII. 

And he schewide to me a flood of1 
quic watir, schinynge as cristal, comynge 
forth of the seete of God, and of the 
lomb, in the myddil of the street of it.2 
And on ech side of the flood, the tree of 
lijf, bryngynge forth twelue fruytis, 3eld- 
inge his fruit bi ech monethe; and the 
leeues of the tree ben to heelthe of folkis. 
And ech cursid thing schal no more be; 3 
but the seetis of God and of the lomb 
schulen be in it. And the seruauntis of 
hym schulen serue tod hym. And thei4 
schulen see his face, and his name in her 
forheedis. And ni3t schal no more be,5 
and thei schulen not haue nede to the 


& Om. anogys. 4} gatis ben orvx. ben yatis sy. 


m of cleene N. werenclene vy. ® as of rv. 


Ofor y. Pthe Lord aogrxy. 20Om.Q9. "and the lomb, is vy. *thetempel oryx. tOm.r. "ne Q. 
nether of y. Vtheliz3t nx. wWOm.ry. *Om.r. Ytother. 2 defoulid and doinge abomynacioun 
and lesing v. ®Om.v. thoon. Om. tr. ¢ forth y. 4 3eeldinge his fruit biech monthe 7. © ben 
tov. ‘fname schal be tT. & Om. Nogs. 

b And in the 1 pr.m. And ther sec.m. ra. Cech margariter. YOm xn. e¢inith. fthe temple 
KReof. Snot qsec.m.na. bthesunner. iclerenesse x. < listea. 1 the li3t nr. ™ Om. c1kmqru 
aceghoa8. “Om. kK prem. 28 ing. ©fornicacioun R. POm.Q@sec.m. 4 Om. R prim. bh pr.ni. 


680 


the" sunne; for the Lord God shal li3tue! 
hem*, and thei shulen regne in to worldlis 
sof worldlis. And he seide to me, Thes 
wordis ben moost feithful and truewe. And 
the Lord God of spiritis prophetis! sente 
his aungel™, for" to shewe to his ser- 
uauntis, what thinges it bihoueth for? to 
z7be don soone. And, lo! I come swiftly?. 
Blessid he4, that kepith the wordis of pro- 
sphecie of this book. And J* Joon, that 
herde and size thes thinges. And aftir‘ 
that I hadde herd and seyn, I fel doun, 
‘that I shuldet worschipe bifore the feet of 
the aungel, that schewide to me thes 
othinges. And he seide to me, See that 
thou do not; forsothe" I am thin euen 
sernaunt, and of thi britheren, prophetis, 
and of hem that kepen the’ wordes of pro- 
phecie of* this book; worschipe thou 
10God. And he seide to me, Signe*, ‘or 
seeleY, thou not the wordes of? prophecie 
‘of this book*; forsothe® the® tyme is ni3. 
11 He that noyeth, noye 3it; and he that is 
in filthis, wexe’ foul 3it; and ‘he that is 
iust®, be hef 3it iustified; and the holy, be 
izhe® halewid 3it. Lo! I come soone, and 
my mede with me, for® to 3elde to ech 
isman .aftir' his werkes. I am alpha and 
oo, the first and the last, bigynnyng and 
uende. Blessid thei*, that waschen her 
stooles ‘in blood of the lomb', that the 
power of hem be in the book™ of lijf, and 
isbi 3atis® entre in to the citee. Forsothe 
with oute forth, houndes®, and? ‘venym 
doers’, ‘or poyseners', and vnchaast men, 
and manquellers, and’ seruynge ‘to ydoles', 
icand ech that loueth and doith" lesyng. 1 
Jhesus sente myn aungel, for” to witnesse 
to 3ou thes thinges ‘in chirchis*. I am 
theY roote and kynde? of Dauid, a* shyn- 
17ynge moru? sterre. And the husbonde‘ 


APOCALYPSE. 


XXII. 6—17. 


li3t of lanterne’, nethir to 1i3t’ of sunne®; 
for the Lord God schal ly3tne hem, 
and thei schulen regne in to worldis of 
worldis. And he seide’ to me, Theseé 
wordis ben moost feithful and trewe. 
And the Lord God of spiritis of pro- 
phetis sente his aungel, to schewe hist 
seruauntis, what thingis it bihoueth to 
be don soone. ‘And lo! Y come swiftli®.7 
Blessid zs he, that kepith the wordis of 
prophesie of this book. And Y am Joon,s 
that herde and say these thingis. And 
aftirward” that Y hadde ‘herd and seyn*, 
Y felde doun, to worschipe bifor the feet 
of the aungel, that schewide to me these 
thingis. And he seide to me, Se thou,9 
that thon do not; for Y amy seruaunt 
‘with thee*, and of thi britheren, pro- 
phetis, and of hem that kepen the wordis 
of prophesie of this book; worschipe 
thou God. And he seide to me, ‘Signe, 10 


 ether® scele, thou not the wordis of pro- 


phesie of this book ; for the tyme is ni3. 
He that noyeth, noye he 3it; and heu 
that is in filthis, wexe> foul 3it; and a 
iust man, be iustified* 3it; and the hooli, 
be halewid 3it. Lo! Y come soone, and i2 
my mede with me, to 3elde to ech man 
aftir hise werkis. Y am alpha and 00,13 
the firste and the laste, bigynnyng and 
ende. Blessid be thei, that waischen her 14 
stoolis}, that the power of hem be in the + This tbat is 
tree of lijf, and entre® bi the 3atis in to ee 


. - +d ,,in the blood of 
the citee. For with outen forth houndis®, is); Laie aa 


* justified, ei- 
ther do ri3tful- 
nesse 3it. Vv. 


and witchis*, and unchast men, and man-_° the text, 
. , neither is had 
quelleris, and seruynge to idols, and ech _ in elde biblis. 


that loueth and makith leesyng. I The- 167" 
sus sente myn aungel, to witnesse to 30u 

these thingis in chirchis. Y am the 

roote and kyn of Dauid, and the schyn- 

ynge morewe sterre. And the spirit and 17 


hOm. aoorxy. ilistes. ktohemo. | of prophetis os pr.m. tr. ™ aungelsn. 2 Om. sx. 
© Om. sx. Psoneo. be he ano. ishe rr. *lamwnvr. 8 aftirward aNoosrx. tfortor. "for Fr, 
vyOm.n. Wandofo. *Seeleo. YOm.ox. ofthis book of 9. 2@Om.9. %forr. ¢ Om. x. 
4 wexe he 4c sec.m. Nogsxy. Caiustmany. fOm. plures. & Om. aNogsrxy. » Om. sx. ivp 
aogsxy.  benthei antr. 1 in the blood of the lomb 46é sec.m. Nogsxy. Om.r. ™treevy. 4 the 
gatis aNogsrxy. © schulen be schit houndis r. Por Q. 4 poyseneris 0. * Om. ox. either poyseneris v. 
sOm.o. tOm.ox. makithy. WOm.s. *Om.0. yOm.cpr.m. “%kynvy. Aandar. 


band morowe ANQSVXY. and a morowe o. 


dalanterne £. * the ]iz3t x8. 8 the sonne KS, + to his rho. 


YamaR. %Om.K pr.m. 
4 that is, false prechours K sec. m. marg. 


¢ spirit r. 


@ Signe, or R, Om. ae. Signe thou, ether b. 
e ether venemers K sec, m. marg. 


"QOm.g. Waftir a, *seien and herde r. 


bwexe he rk. Centre he r. 


XXII. 18—21. 


and the’ spouse®, ‘or wijf, seyn, Come 
thou. And he that herith, seitht, Come 
thou; and he that thirstith, come; and he 
that wole, take freely the watir of lijf. 
18 Forsothe Y witnesse to ech man heringe 
the wordes of prophecie of this book, if 
ony man shal put to to" thes!, God shal 
putte’ vpon' him the plages™ writun in 
19this book. And if ony man shal do awey 
of the wordis of the” book of this pro- 
phecie, God shal take awey° the? paart ‘of 
him fro? the book of lijf, and fro the holy 
citee, and fro thes thinges that ben writun 
20in this" book. He seith, that berith wit- 
nessyng of thes thingis, 3he, amen. Is 
come soone. Amen. Come thou, Lord Jhe- 
2isu. The grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist 
witht 30u alle. Amen. 


Heere endith the Apocalips, or Reue- 
lacioun of Seynt Joon the euangelist, and 
so the Newe Testament. Blessid be the 
Holy Trinite. Amen. 


4Qm.9. €spousesse r. f Om. ox. either wijf rv. 
k put to 4G sec. m. OPQsrx. 


APOCALYPSE. 


1 on AG sec. m. NOQSVX. 


681 


the spousessef seien, Come thou. And he 
that herith, seie’, Come thou; and he 
that thirstith, come’; and he that wole, 
take he freli the watir of lijf. And Tis 
witnesse to ech man herynge the wordis 
of prophesie of this book, if ony man 
schal putte to these thingis, God schal 
putte on hym the veniauncis writun in 
this book. And if ony man do awei of 19 
the wordis of the book of this prophesie, 
God schal take awei the part of hym fro 
the book of lijf, and fro the hooli citee, 
and fro these thingis that ben writun in 
this book. He seith, that berith wit-20 
nessyng of these thingis, 3he, amen. I 
come soone. Amen. Come thou, Lord 
Jhesu. The grace of oure Lord Jhesu2zi 
Crist be with 30u alle. Amen. 


Here endith the Apocalips, the laste 
book of the Bible; and here suwen the 
names of alle the bookis as thei stonden 
in ordre in this Bible, with the noumbre 
of her chapitris'. 


& seie aNogsy. b Om. norx. 
m woundis o. veniauncis TY. 
t be with rr. 


i thes thiuges Tr. 
n Om. 4NnoQs. 
u Here endith 


°Om.T. Pfrohimthe vn. :dofn. rtheo. 8s Lo! Ys prim. 
Apocalins. a. Here endith the Apocalips of Johu, the ende of the New Testament. n. Here endith the 


Apocalips of Jhesu Crist. ov. Heere eendith the Apocalips ; blessid be the holy Trinite. Amen. p. Here 
endeth the Apocalips of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. Amen. 9. No final rubric in esTxy. 
f spouse I pr.m. & seith c. seighe kK. 4 come he k. i From c. Here endith the Bible. x. Heere 


endith the Apocalips, that Joon wroot in the ile of Pathmos, the whiche is the ende of the Newe Testament. 1. 
Here endeth the Apocalips. Kq sec.m. hk. Here eendeth the Apocalips, the last book of Goddis lawe. pr. 
' Here endeth the Apocalips of Joon. abeo. Here endith the Apocalips of John, euangelist and apostle. c. 
Here endith the Newe Testemenet of oure Lord Jhesus Crist and ourc Sauyour. g. Here endith the Apo- 
calins of Jon, the ende of the Newe Testament. a. No final rubric in amq pr. m. v. 


VOL. IV. 





ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 





MATTHEW. 


@Tov3 al holi writt is ful trewe, nedeful and comfortable to mankynde, netheles the holy 
gospel, as the herte and? spirit therof, is moost profitable to synful men and¢ alle that schulen 
he saued. Therfore alle men and wymmen that han discrecioun, schulden moost bisily traueile 
to kunne and4 kepe the holi gospel, and teche it for the ahilite of her staat, namely in holy 
lyuynge, as Crisostom seith in his prologe on Matheu. Therfore Seint Austyn in his hook of 
kynde and of grace, in the lviij°. c. seith thus, The lawe of the gospel is lawe of charite and¢ 
of parfi3t fredom, without which noon may be saued. And therfore Seint Jerom translatide 
and expownede manye bookis of the bible to wymmen, as men moun pleynlif se in hise prologis 
ons dyuers bookis of the bible. 


Here begynneth another prolog*. 


Sithen aftir the assencioun of Crist the Holy Goost enspiride the hertis of the apostils, and 
sent them, and hertide hem to preche what Crist dide and tau3te, four speciali of alle weren 
departide, that prechide the conuersacioun of God in erthe. And also ther prechinge, the which 
is propirli callid the gospel, thei wroot in ther owne volyms for this entencioun, that the lif of 
oure Lord Jhesu and his conuersacioun in erthe, the which was perfijt ensample to oure 
lyuynge, schulde be in our mind, and shulde euermore be had bifore oure ijen as the rule of 
our lyuynge, and that his doctryne shulde not be distried thoru3 the witness of fals techinge 
of heretikis. Of the foure that made the gospel, first was Matheu, that whanne he first in the 
Jewrie with the apostlis hadde prechide the gospel of Crist, he in wil to passe to techinge of 
othir naciouns, that were callid gentilis, he wroot the gospel in Ebrew tunge, that he shulde be 
as present thoru3 his writinge to his hritheren, fro whom he wente bodili awei. The which 
writinge he left aftir him, as a thinge that schulde stirre hem to haue mynde of him, and 
speciali that he schulde conferme the feith of his firste britheren in God; that the schadowe 
of the old lawe schulde no more be vsid, but the sothfastness of the gospel; and also that false 
prechouris and peruerters of holi chirche schuld not ouer sowe in the gospel of Crist onyi - 
errouris. And aftir that holi chirch was largid, holi fadris bisiede hem, that the same gospel 
schulde be translatid into the langage of Grew and Latyn. And Mathews tretinge is speciali 
of the manhede of Crist, thou3 he seic othere secundarie thingis. Wherefore he bigynneth at 
the generacioun of his manhcde, seijnge in the bigynninge of his writinge, The booke of the 
generacioun of Jhesu Crist. And riz3tly is Matheu first sett, not as bi naturel order, bot bi 
artificial ordre; for bi the naturel ordre Joon, that was last, and moost passingli tretith of the 
godhede of Crist, schulde be first; for the godhede was or the manhede, and the godhede is 
hede of the manhede. But we trowen, that this was doon thoru3 the counseil of the Holi Goost, 
that he that tretith of the manhede of Crist, is sett first in ordre. For it is acordinge and 
skilful, that oure witt ascende litil and litil to the bettere, and that bi feith and the sacrament 


a This Prologue is taken from Ms. Eman. Coll. Cambr. 1. 4. 33. (designated p.) collated with Ms. 
Univ. Libr. Cambr. Ll. i. 13. (marked 3.) > of the p. € to p. 4 and to 3. € Om. p. —f openli 3. 


8 in 3. h This Prologue is taken from the Ms. Brit. Mus, Add. 15,521, (marked y) into which it was 
transcribed by Joseph Ames, from a Ms. written, as he states, in 1424, and belonging in 1731 to Thomas 
Granger. The editors have not heen able to trace this last Ms. ionth y. This and a few similar errors, 


which seem to have proceeded from the pen of Ames, have been eorrected from eonjeeture, but probably many 
more fanlts of transeription may remain. 


VOL. IV. 4 s* 


682> ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 


of the manhede taken of God, it schulde be brou;t to the euerlasting hede of the godhede. 
Netheles summe seien, that Matheu tellith the incarnacioun of Crist after the king of kingis, 
and therefore the kingis, ‘he seith*, come to seke, and seiden, Where is he, that is borne king 
of Jewis? And also he apperide as king bi the sterre; and also it is seid, that Heroude dredde 
the king that was born. Also Mathew, in acountinge of the generacioun of Crist, goith by 
Salamon. For Matheu to his bigynning, at the generacion of Crist aftir his manhede, and the 
ordre of his tellinge, he ledith to the resurreccion of Crist. Netheles, as it is seid, Matheu 
wroot the gospel for cause of them that reiside! the circumcisioun, and wolde not fulli be drawen 
fro there obseruaunce, thou3 thei hadde taken the baptym; and therefore his entente is to reise 
them fro ther fleischli vndirstondinge of the lawe to the goostli vndirstondinge of Crist, that 
thei schulde more sikirly take the sacrament of cristen feith, and that thei schulde more stabli 
hold the feith ; in as miche as thei se not ellis fulfillide, but that was bifore seid in the prophetis. 
And therefore to hem he writith his book, and seith, The book of the generacioun of Jhesu 
Crist. In the bigynninge of the book Matheu schewith opinli, that he wole trete of the gene- 
racioun of Crist, but of the fleischli generacioun, and not of the tothir, the which is euerlast- 
ynge. For holi scripture axith, and seith, Who schal telle his generacioun? Also in this, that 
Matheu is taken in liknes of man, is declaride that he biginnyth at the begynnynge of the 
generacion of Crist aftir his manhede. And it is to note also, that Matheu at the bigynnynge 
of his book followith the maner of the men of Ehrews; for thei were wont in the byginnyng 
of ther bookis for to set in the bigynnynge the name of the book, telling what thei treten in 
that book; as the first book of Moises is callyd the book of Genesis, for it tretith of the 
bigynnynge of the world and first formyng of mankinde. And as other books haue ther name 
of ther bigynnynge and tretinge, so Matheu, for he bigynneth at the generacioun of Crist after 
his manhede, therfore he bigynneth his gospel, and seith, The book of the generacioun of Jhesu 
Crist. And it is to note, that Matheu settith the generacioun of the new man Jhesu Crist 
ajens the generacioun of the olde man Adam, thoru3 whom we fell to the deeth and to synne, 
for to schewe to vs, that we ben fulli restorid by the generacioun of Crist, as we fell doan 
thoru3 the filid generacioun of Adam. Weel therfore acordith this new testament to the olde, 
for the old testament bigynnyth at the generacioun of the first man, and making of the world, 
and the new testament bigynneth at the generacioun of the second man Jhesu Crist, and at the 
restoringe of the world. The first book is callid the book of Genesis, and it treteth of the 
ordynancis, the which were in the biginnynge, but not perfi3t; for the old lawe brou3t no man 
to perfeccion, or to heuene. But this new book of the new lawe is callid the book of gene- 
racioun, and treteth of goostli thingis, the which bringith man to perfeccioun. The old book 
tretith of hostis offringe, and of old preesthood, and this not but in figure. But this book 
tretith of the verri preest Crist Jhesu, and how he was in the vern hoost offrid and parfit for 
vs, and fulfillid in the old lawe. The book of the old lawe tretith of the delyuering of the 
children of Israel out of Egipt; this book of the newe lawe tretith of the delyuering of the 
peple of God fro helle. The book of-the olde lawe tretith of the entre of the children of Israel 
into the lond of promission or of biheste; this book of the newe testament tretith how our 
caytifte was lede into heuene, and also it tellith of oure entring into the bliss of heuene. So 
alle thingis that were in figure in the tothir lawe, in this lawe of the gospel ben schewid alle 
tho fulfillid goostli. But it is seid bifore, this new generacioun is sette in remedie ajens the 
old generacioun ; for the firste generacioun brou3te vs to dampnacioun, and the secunde bringith 
vs to saluacioun and blis; that brou3te vs out of paradijs, this bringith vs into paradijs. 


MARK. 


Sith Seint Mark, so ful of the Holi Goost that he was maad of him to be oon of the iiii. 
gospellers, and to be martirid for Crist, held him silf so vnworthi to be preest, and therfore 
kutte of his thombe, to be vnable to preesthood; myche more we synful wrecchis, ful of vn- 
kunnyngis and synnis, schulen holde us silf vnworthi to the hise ordre of preesthood. But sith 
we haue bounden vs wilfulli to this holi ordre, amende we into bettir that that we haue doon 


k beseith y. 1 vside ? a This Prologue is from p. 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES.. 683° 


vnworthili bi ignoraunce, and studie we faste ny3t and day in holi writt, to amende our igno- 
raunce. And encrese we cuere in mekenes, in chastite, in wilful pouert, and in charite to God 
and to men, to freendis and enemyes; and euere be we bisy in holi preieris and gode werkis, 
that we mowen be worthi to write and teche Goddis lawe to oure lyues eende, and studie how 
the gospel of Crist schal be vndirstonden. The gospel spekith sumtyme in parablis and lijk- 
nessis and allegories, and vndirstondith a goosthi thing bi ertheli thing, outhir bi a propirte of 
kynde. In siche spechis and parablis and lijknes, loke that the sentence be groundid in open 
text, where the scripture spekith propirly withouten figuris, other in opun resoun that mai not 
be auoidid, so that al the sentence sounne to loue and charite of ne3cboris, and vertuous lyuynge. 
And this is the trewe sentence of alle derke placis of holy writt. Thus, whanne Crist is clepid a 
lomb, it is not vndirstonden of a doumbe lomb with iiij. feet, but the sentence is, that Crist is 
ynnocent and mylde as a lomb. Thus Crist is seid a stoon, that is, sad in vertues, that 
groundide othere men in vertues. Thus goode cristen men ben clepid scheep, that is vndir- 
stonden, mylde. And yuel cristen men ben clepid kiddis, foxis, wolues, and othir malicious 
beestis. In the olde testament God bihetith worldli goodis and temporal prosperitees to hem 
that kepten hise hestis, but it vndirstondith goosth goodis and the blisse of heuene, which is 
principal meede of vertues. But the gospel of Jhesu Crist bihetith tribulacioun and sorowe in 
this world to hise kepers, and aboundaunce of goostli comfort, and euerlastynge blisse in hcuen 
in bodi and soule. Therfore Jhesu Crist, that lyuede moost vertuousli, hadde grettist tribula- 
ciouns, dispisynge and pursuynge, and sclaundir and peyneful deeth in this lijf, and now he 
hath moost glorie of alle men in blsse. And alle hise apostlis and loued freendis hadden the 
same in this lijf; but with this thei hadden so greet comfort of the Holi Goost in her soulis, 
that thei hadde greet ioie in her tribulacioun; and the more that her bodi was‘ peyned for 
truthe, the more her soule was comfortid in God, with perfi;t charite to her enemyes. Therfor 
Crist seith in the gospel, in xvi. chapitre of Jon, The world schal haue ioie, and 3e schulen haue 
sorowe; but 3oure sorowe schal turne into ioie. And Austyn seith, If thou wolt not suffre 
pacienth tribulacioun, and hatrede of the world, and persecucioun with Crist, heed of holi chirche, 
thou forsakist to be a membre of Crist. For Poul seith in the ij. pistil to Tymothe, the ij. c°., 
Alle that wolen lyue piteuoush eithir feithfully in Jhesu Crist, schulen suffre persecucioun. 
But ful comfort Crist seith in the fifthe chapitre of Matheu, 3e schulen be blessid whanue men 
schulen curse 30u, and schulen pursue 30u, and seie al yuel azens 30u, liynge, for me, that is, for 
my lawe; make se ioie, and be 3e glad m that day, for 30oure mede is plenteuous in heucns. 
And therfore James seith in the i. c°., Mi britheren, deeme 3e al ioie, whanne 3e fallen into 
dyuers temptaciouns, that is, tribulaciouns. Therfore the apostlis 3eden ioiynge fro the si3t of 
the counseil, outher presence, for thei weren worthi to suffre dispijt for the name of Jhesu. 
And Poul seith ofte, We han glorie in tribulaciouns. And now we moun se, that now in tyme 
of grace vndir the newe testament, aduersitees and tribulaciouns is more schewynge of grace than 
prosperitees, thou3 the olde lawe bihete men prosperite that kepte it, as the Ps. Beati omnes 
qui timent Dominum, bisemeth to bihete, and manic other placis of the olde testament. For in 
the newe testament temporal prosperitees, that was bihote in the olde testament, is turned into 
aboundaunce of vertues and goosth comfort, with persecucioun and tribulaciouns, as Crist and 
hise seruauntis hadden. And therfore ech cristen man make him redi in wil, and euere crie to 
God with al his herte, that he 3eue to him grace, to suffre not oonli patientli, but also ioiefully, 
alle tribulaciouns in this world, and thus to be a trewe cristen man, truli suynge Crist. 


Another prologe on Mark». 


This gospeler Mark, the which was the disciple of Petir the apostil, and he si; not Crist in 
bodi, but he that herde the prechinge of his maistir, wroot the gospel in Italie, in tyme of 
Claudius the emperour. And the cause was this, for he was preied of the disciplis of Peter, at 
whose axing he wroot the gospel, the which Peter confirmed after, as Clemens seith. And this 
book hath three partics. The first part lastith vnto the tenth chapitre, in the which parti he 
passith schorth to the thritti 3eer of Crist ; and ther is conteyned xiiij. benefitis or myraclis, that 
he dide on the peple, to conferme that he was verry God and man. In the secunde partie ben 
putt xiiij. thingis, that parteyne to the..... of the citee of Jcrusalem; and this part lastith for 
the tenth chapitre vnto the xv. c°®. In the third part is maad mynde of the passioun of Crist, 


and of his resurrcccioun. 
b This prologue is from y. 


4 3* 2 


684» ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 


LUKE. 


aZuk hath manie special poyntis, and nameli of oure Ladi, and almoost alle the poyntis of 
Matheu and of Mark; and therfore he comprehendith moost lettre of alle the gospelleris, thou; 
he haue not so manye chapitris as Mathew. As Luyk was first a bodily leche bi craft of kynde, 
so he is a myche bettir goostli leche of cristen soulis, bi techinge, prechinge and writynge of 
Cristis gospel. Sith Luyk lefte his craft of bodily medecyne, and suede so bisili Poul, to lerne 
and preche and write the gospel; myche ou3ten Cristen preestis to putte awei worldly bisynes 
and erthely lucre, to lerne and preche and write the holi gospel. But as Grosthed seith, in his 
secunde Dicte, Manye clerkis lernen lucratijf sciencis, to gete richessis and honouris of the 
world. Summen lernen filosophie, to knowe kyndis of elementis, of beestis, of eerbis, and of 
othere creaturis, to be preisid of men for these sciencis; summen lernen fisik, to make mennis 
bodies hole of dyuers sijknessis, that herbi thei seme as to reise hem fro deeth to lif, and geten 
therwith myche riches and honouris; summen lernen musik, to chaunge mennis hertis into 
dyuers affecciouns bi swetncs of songis; summen lernen the craft of alkymye, to make clene of 
ynelene metal bi greet traucile and craft, as to make siluir and gold of vnclene metals. But, he 
seith, a trewe techere of Goddis lawe schal make myche bettir chaungis goostli, in turnynge 
synful soulis fro her synne, than ony of these othir clerkis doon bi here kyndely sciencis. For 
as seynt Austyn and seynt Bernard seien, It is miche bettere, that a man kneew God and 
himsilf, than that he kneew heuene and erthe, and alle othir elementis and kindis of creaturis, 
and kncew not God ne him silf. And whanne men ben sike in the mooste perilous sijknes of 
orrible synnes, the techere of Goddis word may reise hem to lijf of grace; and that is withouten 
comparisoun bettere than the lijf of kynde, and myche bettere to turne synful men out of synne 
bi techinge of Goddis lawe, than bi craft turne o metal into another, as alkemyneris doon. And 
goode God of his merci stire his peple to be more bisi aboute vertues and goostly riches, that 
euere schal laste, than aboute ertheli richesse, that soone schal perische. Amen. 


Another prologe on Luk, 


Whanne the gospel was spred bi Matheu in the Jewrie, and bi Mark in Italie, throu; the 
stiring of the Holi Gost, Luyk, that was the disciple of Poul, came the thridde in ordre; the 
which makinge hijere repcticioun, wroot the gospel to oon Teophile, in the cuntre of Acaye and 
Boyce. It is seid, that this Luyk was oon of the two disciplis, that wente to Emaws, to whom 
Crist aperide after his resurreccioun: and after he was the felawe of Poul, in preching to the © 
naciouns; to whom this was a special entent of his traueil, that to the new men of Grece schulde 
be schewid’ and declarid the manhede of Crist, that they schulde not 3eue ther entent to the 
fablis of Jewis for desier of the lawe; or ellis that thei schulde not be begilid thoru3 counseil of 
heresye of false apostils, and turned fro sothfastnes and teching of Crist. And Luk principali 
tretith of the prechinge of Crist, thou3 he lefte summe thingis vntold that other tellen. Where- 
fore he begynneth at the prechinge of Zacarie, Jones fadir, seiyng on this wise, There was in the 
daies of Eroude kinge, a prest, Zacarie bi name. And seint Luke ri3tly is lijkned to a calf, for 
it was a beest ordeined to sacrifise; and so of the sacrifise he tretith, of the temple, and of 
Jerusalem, in the processe of his gospel. In the bigynuynge he settith the preest preynge at 
the auter, and the folk stondinge withoute to preie. And also he tellith, as aftir the conseyu- 
ynge of Crist, Marie went to the bischopis hous Zacarie; where he makith mencioun of the gene- 
racioun of Marie and Elizabeth, the whiche was of the kyn of Aaron. And there he tellith the 
birthe of Baptist, and tellith also that Crist is born, and presentid with offrynge to the temple. 
There he tellith, how Crist with his modir visitide ech 3eer the temple, and seith also how Crist, 
whanne he was twelue 3ecr oold, sat in the temple, techinge the doctouris. And aftir sich 
seijngis he concludith, in the eende of his gospel, how the disciplis of Crist were in the louynge 
of Crist, in the temple. This gospeler Luyk, in acountinge of the generacioun of Crist, goith by 
Nathan the prophcte. 


a This prologue is from p. b This prologue is from y. 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 685 
JOHN. 
Another prologe*. 

Joon treetith moost of the Trynyte, and of the godhede and manhede togidere. Joon wroot 
this gospel in Greek, and almoost al the newe testament’ was writen in Greek’ first. “But the 
gospel of Matheu, and the pistlis to Ebrewis were’ first writen in Ebrew, as Jerom witnessith in 
his prolog on Matheu. Sunime ‘supposen resonable, that Mark wroot his gospel in Latyn, for 
as Jerom‘seith, he wroot into Italie, that is the cuntre of Latins. And so men supposen, that 
Poul wroot the pistil to Romayns in Latyn, for the same skille; for it was the moder tunge of 
that cuntre. And whi therfore schulde not men now write truly the lawe of God to cristen 
men in her modir tunge, that thei writen to? And alle the othere bookis off the newe testa- 
ment were writen in Greek. And as Jerom and othere doctouris seien, whanne ony doute is in 
the lettre of the olde testament, thei schulen be proued bi the origynals of Ebrewis; so whanne 
ony doute is in the lettre of the newe testament, it schal be proued bi the origynals of Greek. 
But, as Lire seith, we cristen men moten be weel war of the origynals of Ebrew in summe 
poyntis. For now the Jewis han corrupt her olde lettre in tho placis where it spekith openly 
of the godhede of Crist, and thei haue do this for hatrede to cristen men, lest we sehulden 
conuicte Jewis bi her owne lettre, that Crist is bothe God and man; but in alle othere placis we 
schulen take the origynals of Ebrewis. But for cristen men the newe testament is open ynow3. 
And whanne ony doute cometh in the lettre, outhir in ony vndirstondinge of the lettre, the Holi 
Goost schal teche us al truthe, as Crist seith in the gospel, if we doon truli that that is in us. 
And therfore thou; wickid men hadden brent alle oure bookis, God hath writen his lawe in 
cristen mennis soulis and consciencis, as he seith in the xxxi. chapitre of Jeremye. And ther- 
fore seint Joon seith in his firste pistil to cristen men, in the ij. chapitre, that the anoyntynge, 
that is, grace of the Hol Goost, techith 30u alle thingis that ben nedeful to saluacioun, and 3e 
han no nede that ony man teche jou, but as the anoyntynge'techith 3ou. For he that hath 
charite, hath Crist, in whom alle tresouris of wisdom and kunnynge ben. Netheles men schulde 
bisely lerne the bookis of holy writt, and speciali the newe testament, lest thei taken Goddis 
grace in veyn, and tempten God, in desirynge to haue kunnynge bi myracle, withoute traueile 
and lernynge of holy writ, where thei mowe come li3tly to verri knowynge of Goddis wil, bi good 
lyuynge and deuoute preiers, and bisi studie and lernynge of holi writt. And God graunte us a 
stidefast wil hereto. Amen. ; 


Here biqynneth another prologe of othere dyuers doctouris, on Seint Joones gospel. 


This fourthe gospeller, Joon the apostil and the euangelist, whanne the wickide techinge of 
Cherynthi and Hebion, and of other impugnynge the manhede of Crist, was rife in the euntre 
of Asie, aftir that Joon was reuocate fro® the exile of Pathmos, he was preied of alle the bisehops 
and other trewe cristen men of the chirch of Asie, that he schulde write sumwhat of the god- 
hede of Crist, wher thoru3 the rebelnesse of the heretikis my3te be ouer comen and distried. 
And for that he was so counseilid and stirid, thoru; the preier of his britheren in God, he seide 
that he wolde, if thei ordeynede a fastinge, and preiede the help of Jhesu Crist. And whanne 
this was don, he was fulfillid with the renelacioun of God, as eomynge fro heuene. He bigan 
first, and seide, In the bigynnynge was word, that is, Goddis sone. Also for that other euange- 
lists speke miche of the manhede of Crist, and litil of his godhede, therefore he bigan his gospel 
at the godhede of Crist, for to write passyngly bifore other therof; and more expresseli and 
openliere tretith of the godhede than other, thou3 he also ouer passe not vnseid other thingis, the 
whiche other gospellers treten of. And Joon takith his bigynnyng at the cuerlastinge godhede 
of Crist, and his gospel rechith to the ioie of the resurreccioun of Crist. And this book is 
departid into nyne partis. The first part is of the getynge of the euerlastinge word; and this 
part bigynneth thus, Jn the bigynnynge was word, that is, Goddis sone. The secounde part is. 
of the goynge forth or makynge of ereaturis, of God here makere, that bigynneth thus, By him 
alle thingis ben made. The third part is of the incarnacioun of the word, that is, Goddis sone, 
that bigynneth thus, And liz3t schijnede in derknessis. The fourth part is of the birth of Joon 


@ This prologue is from p. b This prologue is from y. ¢ for y. 


686° ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 


Baptist, that bigynneth thus, 4 man was sent fro God. The fifthe part is of the clepinge of the 
apostils, that bigynneth thus, And Jhesus turnede him, and seinge hem suynge him, seide to hem, 
Whom seken 3e? The sixth part is of the miraclis of him and of hise apostlis, the which per- 
taineth to the saluacioun of alle men, the whiche part in the second chap. bigynneth thus, The 
third day weddingis weren maad. The seuenth part is of the confermynge of iust men, the which 
is clepid the greete sermon of the Lord, that bigynneth in the xiii. chap. thus, Bifore the feeste 
day of pask. The eight part is of the passioun of Crist, in the xviii. chap., that begynneth thus, 
He went forth with his disciplis ouer the stronde of Cedron. The ninth part is of the resurrec- 
cioun, and the aperinge of Crist, in the xx. chap., that bigynneth thus, dnd in o day of the woke 
Marie Maudeleyn. And thus is maad open the mater of al the book of Joones gospel. 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


a As the apostil that cowde alle langagis, wroot the pistil to Romans in Latyn, so he wroot 
this pistil in Greek. Therfor as in the formere pistil he comendith grace, so in this pistil he 
discreueth sacramentis, in whiche grace is 3ouen. Therfore in the firste pistil he techeth Co- 
rinthis of the sacramentis of holy chirche, and in the secunde pistil, of the mynystris of sacra- 
mentis. .A postille here——Poul wroot this pistil to Corinthis, that ben of Acaie. Corinthis 
weren conuerted of the apostil him silf, whiche bi Goddis comaundement was resident at hem a 
sere and vj. monethis, and tan3te Goddis word among hem; but aftirward thei weren peruertid 
in manie maners bi false apostlis, so that thei departiden the vnyte of holi chirche, that is, 
cristen feith, and so pees of the chirche; and thei deniede the vertues and the valu of sacra- 
mentis, bi the meritis of mynystris. For thei gesside, that the sacramentis weren of sum valu, 
if thei weren tretid of goode men, and off more or of lasse valu, if thei weren 3euen of more goode 
men. Aftir, he repreueth hem of the lecchour, whom thei suffriden among hem, that heeld the 
wijf of his fadir. Aftir, he repreueth hem for fraude among hem silf. And aftir, he techith hem 
of matrymonye, and of takynge of the sacrament of the auter, where thei erride ful miche, and 
of manye othere thingis; and aboute the eende of the pistil he settith a moral, excitynge, that 
is, to fle synnus, and loue and holde vertues. 


Another prolog on the pistil to the Corinthis». 


As the apostil wroot the pistil that goith bifore, to my3ti men and proude, that is to say, to 
the Romayns, stiringe hem to acoord and charite, the which is seelden among riche men 
and my3ti of the world, so he wroot this secunde pistel to wise men and kunnynge, that is to 
seie, to Corinthis, mouynge hem to oonhede and lownesse of witt, or vndirstondinge, the which 
is seelden among kunnynge men. Wherfore in the iiii. chap. he seith, If God wole, I schal 
come to you soone, and I schal not knowe the wordis of hem that ben blowen with pride, but 
the vertu. These Corinthis erriden in thre sacramentis, that is to seie, in baptym and in 
doctryne of it, of the which it is maad mynde vnto the fifth chap. Also thei erriden in matri- 
monye, and in causis of it, of the whiche it is seid fro the v. chapter vnto the eijthe chapiter. 
Also thei erriden in the sacrament of the auter and spiritual mete, of the which it is maad 
mynde fro the cijth chap. vnto the xii. chap. Also thei erriden in oonhede of witt, bi stryues 
that were maad among them, of the which it is maade mynde fro the xii. chap. vnto the xv. 
chap. Also thei erriden in the resurreccioun of dede men, of the which it is maad mynde in 
the xv. chap. In the xvi. chap. is maad mynde of almesdede, by the which synnes ben for3ouen. 
And so al this pistil is deuydid into vi. partis. In the first part he makith mynd of the errour 
of baptym ; in the ii. part, of the error of matrimonye ; in the ii. part, of the bodi of Crist; in 
the iiij. part, of striues and discordis ; in the v. part, of errour of resurreccioun ; in the vi. part, 
of almesdede to be maad. 


a This prologue is from p. b This prologue is from y. 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. : 687% 


If. CORINTHIANS. 


a... stynatli the pistil, and magnified fals apostlis. But whanne summe of Corinthis weren 
amendid bi the firste pistil, for cause of othere of hem Poul writith this secunde pistil, and he 
puttith awei fals apostlis, and schewith the disceit of her prechynge. Also Poul blameth hem, 
for thei were scarse in almesdedis. And he comaundith thilke lecchour to be resseiued, whom 
he hadde bitaken to Sathanas. Also hem that weren in tribulacioun he comfortith bi ensaumple 
of hym silf, and techith that thei be not heuy ne grucchinge, for he is suget to pe......... 
be CONGEST 33 Ain endo b 6 on Oat 


And here bigynneth anothir prologe>. 


In the formere epistil the apostil scharpli reproues hem, and moost for thei forsook not 
the ilke open lecchour, and for that summe of hem were amendid, and summe dwellide vn- 
amendid; and for both these he writith this secunde epistil, that thei that were amendid bc 
callid to more grace, and the vnamendid to be amendid. And the apostil comendid him silf 
bi al the epistil, that he shewe what worschipe and loue owith to be to the prelat, the which 
labourith so bisily ahoute hise sugetis. And this epistil is departid into so many partis, as it 
hath chapitris, that is to seie, into xiij. In the firste chapitre, he comendith himsilf of pacience 
in tribulation, and vertue of word. In the ii, of pitee of relesinge, and in fruyt of preching. 
In the iij., of scripture, which he wrote in the hertis of hem, and of tho thingis that thei 
vndirstood in books. In the iiij., of ther amending of feith and of hope. In the v., of desire 
of the cuntre. In the vi., of the workis of penaunce, and a fadris chise sugetis. In the vij., of 
ensaumplis taken to innocent men, and of large almesse. In the ix., of the same. In the x., 
of cristen kny3thood, and of hise comparisouns to others. Jn the xi., of the greuousnesse of the 
gospel prechinge, and glorie of his kynrede, and ioie of tribulacioun a3ens false apostles. In 
the xij., of priuy4 reuelacioun. In the xiij., of loue of soulis, and autorite of prelacie. Therfore 
in this myrrour of prelatis, the first chap. is departid into iii. partis. In the first part, aftir the 
salutacioun, he doith thankingis to God the fadir, of the consolaciouns geuen to him and to 
hem. In the secunde part, he makith mynde of the disesis that he sufferide in Asie, and how 
he was delyuerid bi miracle, where he seith, Forsothe we wol, that 3e wite of oure tribulaciouns, 
ete. In the thridde, the cause of his tribulaciouns, that is to seie, the holyness of his conscience, 
where he seith, For whi oure glorie is this, the witnessynge of oure conscience. In the fourth, he 
excusith him, tellinge whi he turnede his purpos and his biheeste of comynge to the Corinthis, 
where he seith, And in that trist I wolde first come to 30u. 


GALATIANS. 


¢ Galathies ben Grekis, and thou3 Grekis ben of sharp witt, 3it the Galathies weren foolis 
and slou3 to vndirstonde; for thei weren 1i3tli temptid of false apostlis to bicome Jewis, that is, 
to holde hodili circumsicioun and fleischli serymonyes, othir sacrifisis of Moises lawe; as false 
apostlis excitide Galathies to adde Moises lawe to the gospel, for thei affermide, that the feith 
of Crist withouten fleischli obseruauncis suffisith not to heelthe, and that Petir and James and 
othere apostlis, that weren with the Lord, medliden kepingis of the olde lawe with the gospel. 
Thei affermyde also, that Poul hymsilf dide othir thingis in Judee, and prechide other thing 
amoung hethene men; and with these thingis thei peruertide Galathies into fleischli kepinge of 
the lawe. Therfore the apostle wroot to hem, and a;enclepid hem to fredom of the gospel and 
cristen feith. 


Here bigynneth anothir prologe to the Galathies*. 


Galathies ben Grekis, and thou; thei ben of scharp wit, 3itt thei weren folis and slow3 to 
vndirstonde; for thei weren li3tli temptid of false apostlis to hold bodili circumcicioun and 


a This prologue is from p. The commencement and conclusion have been torn away. b This prologue is 
from y. ¢ Sic in Ms. q privith y. ¢ This prologue is from p. f This prologue is from y. 


688° ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 


fleischli serimonies of Moises law with the gospel. For the false apostlis seiden, that Petir and 
James and othere apostlis, that were with the Lord, medliden kepingis of Moises lawe with the 
gospel. And also thei seiden, that the feith of Crist without fleischli obseruauncis suffisith not 
to heelthe of soule. Therfore the apostil wroot to hem, to fredom of the gospel, and cristen 
feith. And this epistil is departid into tweye principal partis. In the first principal part, he 
is aboute for to schewe that the feith of the gospel suffisith vnto heelth of lawful men; and this 
part therfor longith to the feith, and it lastith to the v. chap., there he seith, Crist delyueride vs, 
etc. And the secunde part, the which longith to maneris, lastith fro the forseid place vato the 
eende of the epistil. 


An othere prologe*. 


And thou3 Grekis ben of scharp wit, netheles Galathis weren foolis and ful slow to vndur- 
stonde. These Galathies token first of the postle the treuthe of feith and of techyng, but 
aftirward thei weren temptid of falsse apostlis to bicome Jewis, that is, to holde bodili cireum- 
sicioun and fleishli ceremonyes, ether sacrifices of Moises lawe. And false apostlis counceliden 
and excitiden Galathies in many maneris, to adde Moises lawe to the gospel; for thei afferm- 
yden, that the feith of Crist without fleishli obsernaunces sufficith not to heelthe, and that Petre 
and James and othere apostlis that weren with the Lord, medliden kepyngis of the lawe with 
the gospel. Thei affermyden also, that Poul him silf dide othere thing in Judee, and prechide 
othere thing among hethene men. Bi these thingis and othere siche, thei peruertiden Gala- 
thies, in so myche, that Galathies assentiden to hem, and passiden in to fleishli keping of the 
lawe. Therfor the postle a3enclepith hem to the trenthe of cristen feith and of the gospels 
techyng, and writith to hem fro Effesus, of grace of the gospel; of which he hadde writen also 
to Romayns, that worshipiden the lawe in hyk maner. But to Romayns, as to wise men, Poul 
vside hizcr wit, and deppere ether sotilier argumentis; and to these Galathies, as to lesse wise 
men, he vsith comyn word and esi. Also to these Galathies he seith, A! 3e witles Galathies, to 
ajenclepe hem so to treuthe. Therfor the entent of the postle in his pistle is, to brynge ajen 
Galathics to religioun of feith and to treuthe of the gospel, whiche Galathies weren disseyued 
bi disseitis of false apostlis. The maner is sich. He biforsettith salutacioun, where he touchith 
shortli bothe of his dignyte and of the grace of Crist, ajenus bacbiteris and hem that han glorie 
of workis of the lawe, and he comendith his persoone, whiche the false apostlis dispiseden. 
Aftir the salutacioun, he repreueth Galathies of vustablenesse ; aftirward he comendith largilier 
his owne persoone ; aftirward he repreueth Moises lawe in many maneres, and seith it shal not 
be holdun aftir Crist, that is, aftir Cristis deth and pupplisching of the gospel; for not onel it 
profitith not to rijtfulnesse and helthe, but also it anoieth ether harmeth now. At the laste, he 
- comendith the gospel and the feith of Crist, that it sufficith to heelthe. 


An. othere prologe. 


The fynal conclusioun of the postle in this pistle is this, that bodili cireumcisioun and othere 
sacrifices and obseruaunces of Moises lawe shulen not be kept with the feith of Crist, she, that 
tho ben avoided bi Crist, so that afterward tho ben cause of deeth ether of dampnacioun to her 
keperis. And he doith this, for Galathies, that weren conuertid bifor him, weren disseyued 
bi false apostlis, so that Galathies cireumcididen hem silf, and kepten othere obseruaunces of 
Moises lawe. And this pistle is departid in to fyue partis bi fyue maneris, bi whiche he pro- 
cedith to declare the forseid conclusion. 


An othere prologe. 


In the firste pistle, that is to Romayns, Poul tretith of power; in the laste pistle, that is, to 
Ebrews, he tretith of presthod and of hoolynesse; and in the myddil pistlis he tretith of wisdom, 
as in the twei pistlis to Corynthis and in this. And for errour is ajenus> wisdom, in this pistle 
he tretith of errour, that is, to distrie errour. The mater of this pistle is parfit treuthe of cristen 
feith, with remonyng of cerymonyals of Moises lawe. The entent is so to reduce Galathies to 


a This prologue, as well as the two which immediately follow, are from Sir Peregrine Acland’s Ms. (marked z. 
b senus z 
3 : 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 689° 


the treuthe of the feith, and to teching of. the gospel. Twei partis ben of this pistle. The first 
part is of treuthe of the gospel; the secounde part is of goodnesse of liyf. The pistle to 
Romayns is writen to my3ti men; the pistle to. Ebrews is writen to the worshiperis of God; and 
alle the myddil pistlis ben writen to wise men,.that is, to Grekis. Therfor in this pistle, in the 
firste chapitre, Poul comendith him silf and his cause, that is, his office and dignytc of apostle, 
and the treuthe and the fredom of the gospel. In the secounde chapitre he seith, hou for this 
cause he azenstood Petre. In the thridde chapitre he seith, hou the cerymonyes of Moises lawe 
shulden be expowned. In the fourthe chapitre, he expowneth bi allegorie. In the fyuethe 
chapitre, he spekith ajenus vices. In the sixte chapitre, he spekith of merci, bodili and gostli 


Here endith the prologis, and here bigynneth the pistle to Galatas. 


aoa 


EPHESIANS. 

aEffesies weren conuertid to” cristen feith bifore the comynge of the apostil, and he writith 
to hem comfortably, to strenkthe hem, and to excite hem to grettere vertucs and excellent 
werkis. [And this epistil is departid into two principal partis. In the first part, he enfoormeth 
hem in the feith, what thingis and how grete thingis God dide to mankinde; also he schewith 
to hem, of whom and wherto thei ben clepid; forthermore he schewith to hem the dignyte and 
the prelacie of Crist. In the secunde part, he stirith hem to goode maneris, and speciali to 
haue charite ech with other, there he seith in the fourth chapiter, Therfore I biseche 30u°.] 


PHILIPPIANS. 


4 These Filipensis tooken of the apostil the word of prechynge, and weren stidefast in feithe, 
and thei resseyueden nott false apostlis; and therfore the apostil preisith hemf. Thei sende sum 
catelé to Poul bi Epafrodite to Rome, whom he sendith® aj3en with this pistil, in which pistil, 
sith he mai not be present bodili, he makith hem stronge ajens double bateile, that is to seie, of 


false pursueris', and of fals prechouris [a3ens her soulis, that thei suffre alle aduersitces mckeli, 
for the loue of Crist, as Crist dide*.] 


COLOSSIANS. 


‘Poul wroot this pistil to Colocensis, to the whiche him silf prechide not, but hise disciplis 
Archippus and Epafras diden. Archippus hadde taken seruise on hem, but Epafras, that was 
born™ of hem, and was tau3t of apostil", confermede the techinge of Archippus; ‘therfore bi 
Archippus prechinge and Epafras confermynge his techynge, thei hadden lerid® the grace of 
Crist. But false apostlis camen, and enforside to peruerte hem, [and prechide fleischli obseru- 
aunce of Moyscs lawe. And the peple 1i3tli hadden doute of her techinge; therfore Poul 
schewith to hem, that the feith of Crist and the gospel suffisith to heelthe of hemP. And this 
epistil is departid into tweie partis. In the first part, bi al the first chapitre he enformeth hem 


4 This prologue is from p, collated with y, which last Ms. has the following rubric, Here begynneth unothir 
prologe to the Effesies. » to the y. ¢ The additional matter in brackets is found only in y. 4 This 
prologue is from p, collated with y, which last Ms. has this rubric, [ere bigynneth anothir prologe to the Phi- 
lipensis. € feith of Crist y. f hem, as he maketh mynde in the last chapitre. And y. 
h gente y. i persucris a3ens her bodies y. k Supplicd from Ms. y. 1 This prologue is from p, col- 
lated with y, in which last it has the following rubric, Here bigynneth anothir prologe to Colocensis. 
m bou3t y. ® the apostil y. © And so of bothe these thei learned y, P Ms. p. is imperfeet, but 
apparently ended here. 


VOL. IV. 4 T* 


& of her catel y. 


690% ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 


in the feith, and comendith to hem Crist, and schewith to hem that he suffisith to saluacioun. 
And bi al the ii. chapitre he schewith that the obseruauncis of the olde lawe ben to be left. 
In the ii. part he enformeth hem of goode vertues and maneris, there he seith in the thirde 
chapitre, If 3e risen with Crist, ¢c. And this part procedith so forth to the eende2.] 





I. THESSALONIANS. 


a “The apostil writith this to Tessalonisensis, that ben men of Macedonie>. Tessalonik is the 
cheef cite of Macedonie, which is a prouynce of Greekis. Tessalonisensis weren conuertid l3tly 
of the apostil, and wolden not be moued fro truthe of feith, neither bi tribulacioun‘, ne bi fals 
prechouris. The‘ apostle preisith hem, for thei dwelliden parfiz3tly in grace taken, and weren 
encressid in vertues ‘to encreessyng of meedee; for thei hadden so ‘greet swetnes off spirit and 
sof tristi feith, ‘that for? hope of thingis to comynge thei‘ suffride ‘with deuout soule* greete 
dispisyngis! and perels, for the name of Jhesu. Also™ summe of hem weren idil men and 
curious. Also" summe of hem vndirstoden not sufficiently of° risynge a3en, and therfore thei 
maden sorowe ‘ouertenderli ofP the deeth of4 freendis. Also™ summe of hem weren forny- 
catouris. Therfore the® apostle ‘amendith hem in this pistil, and monestith perfi3t ment ‘to 3eue 
not" stide to aduersitees’, ‘ne tow false apostlis, ‘and that thei amende othir men. These ben 
the laste pistlis, that the apostle writith to hethene men, for alle the epistlis suynge ben...... x 


II. THESSALONIANS. 


Here sueth anothir prologe to the Tessalonicensis’. 


This epistil, as the tother, is departid into tweie partis. In the first part he exciteth hem 
to take mekeli the passiouns, whiche now more thei suffre than thei dide bifore, or that he sent 
the first pistil. For whi bi siche passiouns ther gracis ben maad more. In the ii. part he 
enformeth hem of vertues. And these ben the last pistilis that the apostil writith to hethen 
men, for alle the epistlis suynge ben to persoones, that is, to Tymothe, and Tite, and Filemon. 


I. TIMOTHY. 


7 Poul the apostil writith this epistil to Tymothe, the which Tymothe was the sone of a 
feithful womman, outher cristen womman, and he was geten of an hethene fadir. And whanne 
he was not circumsidid, and was hethene, britheren that weren at Listus and at Yeonye 3auen 
good witnessinge to him. Poul wolde haue this Tymothe to go with him self, and therfore he 
circumsidide him, for Jewis that weren in tho placis. And Tymothe was lerned bothe in dyuyne 
scripturis and liberal sciencis. Poul made this Tymothe a bischop, and therfore he monestith 


z From y. @ This prologue is from p, collated with y, in which last it has the following rubric, Here 
bigynneth anothir prologe to the Thessalonicensis, > Om. y. ¢ tribulacioun of her owne citeseins y. 
d and the y. € Om. y. f Om. y. & and y. h come y. i that thei y. k deuoutli y. 
1 dispisinge y. ™ Nethelesse y. D and y. © of the y. P fory.” 4 of her y. tr And also y. 
Ss the entencioun of the y. t is to amende the yuele, and to stire the goode to perseueraunce in vertues and 
goodnes y. Wand not to 3eue y. Vv aduersarie y. Wand y. x Ms. p. is imperfect, wanting a line 
or two, Instead of the last paragraph, Ms. y continues thus; And this epistil is departide into tweie partis. 
In the first part he enformeth hem to haue perseuerance in feith, and to susteyne tribulaciouns; and there 
he puttith resouns whi thei owe to perseuere and to suffre yuelis. In the ij. part, in the fifthe chapitre, 


x euformeth hem in goode maners and vertues. Y This prologue is from y. Z This prologue is 
rom p. 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 691 


him, that he be bisi in ordynaunce of the chirche. Tymothe was bischop in Asie. The apostil 
writith of bischops office, that is, how he shal azenstonde false apostlis, how he schal teche the 
chirche, what maner preestis and dekenes he schal ordeyne, what maner widowis he schal 
honoure, how he scha] hane him silf in the chirche. 


Here bigynneth anothir prologe to the 1. pistil to Tymothe*. 


The apostil writith fro Rome to Tymothe, whom he ordeinede and maad bischop in Asia. 
And it is his wille to infoorme in him what thingis perteyneth to the offis of a bischop. And 
this epistil is departid into tweie partis. In the first part he informeth in him to haue in hate 
the doctryne of fablis and genologies, that ben not of the lawe of God; and how a bischop owith 
to haue him to hem that ben without the chirche, that is to seie, how he schal ajenstonde false 
apostils and fals prechouris. In the ii. part he infoormeth him, how he schal hane him to hem 
that ben in the chirch, and how he schal teche hem, and what maner prests and dekenes he 
schal ordeine, and what maner widows he schal honoure, and how he schal haue him silf in the 
chirche. 


Il. TIMOTHY. 


> Poul that schulde passe out of this world, wroot this ij. pistil fro Rome, fro prisoun, to 
Tymothe, maad wery with sijknes and aduersitees. And that Tymothe schulde traueile faste in 
the grace that God hadde 3euen to him, and excitith him to martirdom bi manye maners, and 
that he contynue in the office of ri3tful prechinge and holi worchinge. 


And here sueth another prologe on the ii. pistil to Tymothec. 


Poul the ii. tyme, whanne he was representid to Nero, witing that he schulde passe out of 
this world, wroote in persoun this ii. pisti] fro Rome to Tymothe, maad weri with snknesse and 
aduersites, that he schulde traueile faste in the grace that God hadde genen to him. And he 
excitith him to martirdom hi manie maners, and that he contynue in the offis of mi3tful prechinge 
and holi worchinge. And this pistil is departid into iii. principal [partis. In the i. principal*] 
part he moueth him to prechinge and pacience. In the ij. principal part he tellith to him of 
thingis that ben to come in the last daies, Perilous tymes schulen neize, etc. In the thirde part he 
schewith him his departinge on his passioun beinge ny3, where he seith in the nij. chap. thus, 
I witnesse bifore God, etc. 


TITUS. 


© Seint Poul ordeinede Tite erchebischop in Crete, and for Tite was ouer pacient, and meke, 
and necligent in correccioun of sngettis, therfore he monestith him to more steernes, and bisi 
execucioun and auctorite of his office. In this salutacioun ben markid iiij. thingis that a prelate 
profite, that is, holynesse of lijf, which is signified in the sernaunt of God. The ij. thing is 
truthe of techinge, which is signified in the knowing of feith; the thridde thing is abidynge of 
mede, the sah is signyfied in hope of SUBMARINES lijf; the iiij. thing is anctorite of offis, 
which is signyfied in the prechinge bita........ 


Here byginneth an other prologe on the pistil to Tites. 


Poul bigat Tite in the hileue of Crist, and he ordeynede him an erchebischop in Crete, the 
which is an yle or a kingdome. In the which he comaundith him to make honcst bischopis. 
And it is the wille of him, how he owith to haue him to alle men. And for that Tite was 
ouer pacient and meke, and necgligent in correccioun of sugetis, therefore he monestith to more 


a This prologue is from y. b This prologue is from p. ¢ This prologue is from y. 4 Omitted in Ms. 
¢ This prologue is from p. f About eight lines wanting. & This prologue is from y. 


4 T* 2 


692° ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 


steernes, and bisi execusioun and autorite of his office. And this pistil is departid into thre 
partis. In the first part he techith how he owith to haue him as to his bischops. In the 
ii. part he techith how he schal haue him to lower partis of the chirche, and most to hem that 
were conuertid of circumsisioun. In the iij. part he techith him, how he schal haue him to 
hem the whiche ben withoute the chirche, and speciali to heretikis. 


PHILEMON. 


zThe apostil writith this pistil to Filemon, a man of Colosis, that hadde no dignite of 
ministracioun in the chirche, but he was a worschipful man in the peple ; to whom Poul sendith 
homeli lettris, for Onesimus his seruaunt, that fledde with sum harm of Filemon, for he bar 
awei of summe of thingis of Filemon, but he was cristened of the apostil, whanne he hadde 
herd the gospel, to whom the apostil bisechith forjeuenes, and writith fro Rome fro prison to 
Filemon. The entent of the apostil is to biseche for Onesymus anentis Filemon. First the 
apostil salutith Filemon and his [wijf and¢] his sone; aftirward [he] doith thankingis [to God] 
for the goodis of [britheren, and*] preisith the feith and [the pitee®] of hem; aftirward [he] preieth 
Filemon, [that he®] spare Onesymus, [and that] he thanke God, thfat hea] resseynede Onesy- 
[mus as®] sich, and that he now gesse him not as a seruaunt, but a moost dereworthe brothir. 
The glose here. Crisostum seith, if Poul makith so greet bisynes for a seruaunt, for a theef, a 
fleer awei fro his maistir, it bicometh us to be bisi for siche; for Crist seith in the gospel of 
Mathew, v. c°. Blessid.......... b 


Here byginnith another prologe to Filemon®. 


The eutent of the apostle is, to biscche forzeuenesse of Filemon to Onesymus, his seruaunt, 
that wente awei with summe thingis of Filemon, but aftir he was cristened of the apostil Poul, 
whanne he hadde herd the gospel, he was recounsilid. Therefore Poul writith to Fiulemon, and 
preicth him, that he forz3eue Onesymus, and that he thanke God that he resceyuede him siche; 
and that he now gesse him not a seruaunt, but a most derworthe brothir. And in this pistil 
hen thre partis, aftir the salutacioun. In the first part is doinge of thankingis to God, for the 
feith and the pitee that Filemon hadde among britheren. In the ij. part is bisechinge, and 
tellinge of the dede and the conuersacioun of Onesymus, there he seith, For that thing, etc. In 


the iij. part is of his obedience, and of the harboringe of Poul, and of the salutaciouns of 
britheren. 


HEBREWS. 


4 Poul wroot this epistil more cleerli or exelently than othere pistlis; for ech man is moost 
expert outhir moost redi in his owne langage. Wherfore as Ebrew langage is formere than 
othere, as Isodre seith in the firste book of Ethimologies, so this pistil to Ebrewis, that was 
last writen, is the firste in ordre of techinge. For in this pistil is schewid the vnperfeccioun 
of Moises lawe, and the perfeccioun of the gospel; and so the ceessynge of cerymonies of 
Moises lawe is schewid azens the opynyoun of Jewis conuertid. Thre thingis ben in the lawe 
of God. The i. thing is the feith of God, for a lawe is not 30uen, no but to a peple, which is 
men gaderid togidere; and the first preisable gaderynge is the feith; the ij. is the truthe reul- 
ynge, 3euen of the auctour of lawe; and the thridde thinge is the eende of the lawe. Oure 
auctour is God, and the eende is the blis of heuene. 


Here sueth another prologe to Ebrews®. 


The apostil wroote to Ebrews this pistil in Ebrew tunge. And the entent of the apostil is 
to enfoorme and stir the conuertid of the Jewis al oonli to the feith of Crist, and to drawe awey 


& This prologue is from p. & Wanting in the Ms. b The end is torn away. © This prologue is from y. 
a This prologue is from p. € This prologue is from y. 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 693° 


hem fro the obseruauncis and serymonyes of the olde lawe. For in this pistil is schewid the 
vnperfeccioun of Moises lawe, and the perfeccioun of the gospel; and so the ceessynge of 
serymonies of the olde lawe is schewid ajens the opinyoun of Jewis conuertid. And this pistil is 
departid into foure principal partis. In the first he schewith Crist to be the mooste worthi 
creature of alle creaturis, and therefore in him is moost to be trowid; and this part lastith to 
the byginnynge of the vii. chap., there he seith, Forsothe this Melchesedech, etc. In the first 
chapitre ben ij. partis. In the first part forsothe he comendith Crist ouer alle prophetis and 
over alle men, and to be bigeten fro the bigynnyngce, a3ens the Jewis that seiden, We witen 
that God spak to Moises, but we knowen not this, of whens he is. In the ij. part he schewith him 
to be more worthi than ony resonable creaturis, that is to seie, aungels or oonli man, bi manye 
resouns, there he seith, So miche he is bettere than aungels. In the ii. principal part he proueth 
the preesthood of Crist to be bettere and worthiere than the preesthood of the Leuytis, or of 
the olde lawe. And this part lastith to the enleuenthe chapiter, there he seith, But feith is the 
substaunce of thingis to be trowid. In the third principal part he comendith the feith, bi the 
which is maad cominge to Crist, and that bi alle the xi. chapitre. In the fourth principal part 
he spekith of the goostli vndirstondinge, fro the xij. chapitre to the eende of the epistil. 


DEEDS OF APOSTLES. 


aThe principal conclusioun of the Deedis of Apostlis is this, that cristen feith entrid into the 
world bi miracle, ‘and grace of the Holi Goost», and not bi mannes wijsdom, and aftirward 
strenkthide and multipliede bi the same Holi Goost. [And this book is diuided generali into 
twei partis. In the first part is maad minde of tho thingis that ben comyne to alle the apo- 
stlis, and this part lastith to the fourth chapitre. In the ii. part is maad mynde of the propir 
deedis of Petir and of Poul *.] 


JAMES. 


Here followeth another prologe after St. Jeroms, on the pistils of cristen feith, 
whiche ben seuene in ordre. 


We reden that whanne Seynt Steuene was slayn, there was maad greet persecucioun in the 
chirche at Jerusalem; and alle, outaken the apostilis, weren scaterid bi the cuntrees of Juda 
and of Samarie. Therfore James the lasse, brothir of Judas, the apostil, and the sone of Alphei, 
that was bischop of Jerusalem, sente this pistil to hem that weren scaterid of the chirche, and 
suffride persecucioun for rijtwiisnesse, enfoormynge hem in vertues generaly as to ech astaat. 
And this pistil is departid into thre partis. In the first part he techith the concupicens of the 
fleish, that is to saie, worldli wiisdom to be fled, in that that he stirith hem to haue ioie in 
temptaciouns, in whiche the fleish is turmented; and this in the first chapitre. In the ii. part 
he techith pride of liif to be fled; and that in the ii. chapiter and iii. chapiter. But in the 
ii. chapiter he schewith how it is to be fled in other persoones, bi accepcioun or worschipinge 
of hem. In the thridde chapiter he techith, pride and worschipe of the peple to be fled in a 
mannes own silf, the which ofte tymes cometh of maisterschipe. In the thridde part he techith 
richessis of this world to be dispised; and that in the fourth and in the fifthe chapiter. In the 
iui. chapiter, as to the wille of hauynge of hem. But in the fifth chapiter, as to the holdynge 
of hem. And thus is maad open the dyuydynge of this pistil. 


a This prologue is from p, eollated with y, in whieh last is the following rubrie, Here biginneth a prologe on 
the deeds or acts of Aposties. + Om. y. ¢ This passage is supplied from p. d This prologue is 


from y. The prologue in p is for the greater part torn out. It began thus: Another prologe. James enformeth 
holy ehirehe general in vertues, as to ech staat in teching 


694> ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES, 


I. PETER. 


Here bigynneth a prologe on the first pistil of Petir*. 


In this first pistil Petir tretith of moral vertues, that is, of vertues of soule, that maken a 
man worthi to be saued. And this he doith bi dyuersite of statis and persoones. First he 
comfortith hem that ben in tribulacioun, and nameli hethene men newe conuertid to eristen 
feith, and pursued therefore, and exiled of her owne lond. The secunde tyme he techith cristen 
men to be suget to kyngis and dukis and to ech man for God, and seruauntis to be suget to 
her lordis; and techith men to suffre pacientli wrongis at ensaumple of Crist. The thridde 
tyme he techith wyues to be suget to her husbondis, and araye hem in vertues, and not in 
precious clothis, ne with gold, ne peerlis; and that husbondis honour her wyues, as euene eiris 
of grace, and that alle men be meke, and stidfast in feith and vertues, and 3ilde not yuel for 
yuel, but good ajens yuel, bi ensaumple of Crist. The fourthe tyme, that men be armed with 
thou3t of Cristis passioun, and haue feith in charite, and vse hospitalitie and other vertues, and 
dispose hem to speke wiseli Goddis wordis. The fifthe tyme he techith preestis to do weel her 
offis, and that 3onge men be suget to eldre men mekeli in alle good doyngis, and that alle men 
he meke and sobre, and wake a3ens the deuel, and a3enstonde him strongli in feith. This 
tellith apostillis here to men that of cristen lawe in the bigynninge of the chirche weren exilid 
fro her own euntre and placis. Therfore Petir comfortith hem in this pistil, and he wroot fro 
Rome, in the tyme of Claudius the emperour. 


LL PEER. 


A prologe on the seeunde pistil of Petir. 


In this seeunde pistil, first Petir tellith the giftis and the biheestis of God, that men fle 
synne, and be stidefast in feith and vertues, and the exelence of Cristis techinge. The secunde 
tyme he tellith as false prophetis weren in the peple, so aud false maistris sehulen be in sectis 
of perdieioun; [and he‘] disereueth the condieioun of these maistris with her sectis, and tellith 
also the greete peynis of hem that twmen a3en to her synnes. The thridde tyme he tellith of 
diseeiuers that schulen .ecome in the laste tymes, and lyue in lustis, and neither bileeue ne 
triste Crist to the doom to eomynge. And with this he tellith how eristen men schulden make 
hem redi with holi conuersacioun a3ens the doom. 


I. JOHN. 
A prolog on the 7. pistil of Joon. 


Seynt Joon the euangelist hadde a speeial loue to the noumbre of thre, for the misterie of the* 
Hoh Trynite. And as he made thre bookis, that is, the gospel, the apocalips, and these pistlis, 
so he departith‘ these pistlis into thre; fors kyndeli we han wey to go forth fro comynere thingis 
to thingis® lesse comin. Therfore the firste pistil enfoormeth alle cristeni men generalk; and the 
secunde pistil enfoormeth speciali a synguler meyne; and the thridde pistil enfoormeth a 
singeler persoone. 


@ This prologue is from y. In Ms. p there is no prologue. b This prologue is from y. The same 
prologue was written in p, but is now so mutilated that ouly some portions of lines remain. © Omitted 
in y. 4 This prologue is from p, collated with y, in which last Ms. it has the following rubric, Here 
bigynneth a prologe on the first pistil of Joon. © Om. y. f departid y. & and for y. bh Om. y. 


i Om. y. k generali y. 


ADDITIONAL PROLOGUES. 6955 


JUDE. 


Here bigynneth a prolog on the pistil of Jude. 


Judas the brothir of James, the which also is clepid Taddee, writith a3ens distroiers of feith, 
as Petir and Joon dide.......... : 


APOCALYPSE. 
Anothir prologek. 


This is a prolog sett comynli in manie biblis, and clerkis expownen this, thou3 it be not the 
prolog of Jerom, but of another expositour’. Also™ whanne Joon was distitute of al mannes 
speche and help, he was enspired of God. Bi this was" schewid to us, that in as miche as we 
goon awei more fro this ertheli voise, bi so miche we ben deemed more able to Goddis visita- 
cioun. Joon knew bi Goddis reuelacioun, that dyuers statis of the chirche schulden suffre 
manye thingis for the name of Crist; and that thei my3te the more esily suffre, he warneth hem 
bifore bi schewinge of the Holi Goost; and al this is do, to comende pacience, that who that 
suffrith pacientli, haue reward of blis, bothe of° bodi and soule. And Austyn seith to ech 
cristen man, If thou forsakistP to suffre hatrede for? Crist, thou forsakist to be a membre of 
Crist. 


h This prologue is from p. There is no additional prologue in y. i The rest is wanting in the Ms. 
k This prologue is from p, collated with y. 1 expositour. And here bigynneth another prologe of other 
doctouris. This and what precedes is rubricated in y. m Om. y. D it is y. o in y. P forsake y. 


4 of the world, with the heed, that is y. 





TABLE OF LESSONS, 


EPISTLES AND GOSPELS, THROUGHOUT THE YEAR.+ 


Here bigynneth a rule, that tellith in whiche chapitris of the bible 3e mai fynde the lessouns, pistlis, 
and gospels, that ben rad in the chirche ‘al the jeer*, after the vss of Salisbire, markid with 
lettris of the abc, at the bigynnynge of the chapitris, toward the myddil, or ende, after the 
ordre as the lettris stonden ‘in the a b e°; first ben sett sondaies and ferials togider, and after 
that® the sanetorum, bothe’ eomyn and propre togider, of al the 3eer ; first 1s‘ writun a clause of 


the bigynnynge®, and a clause! of the ending therof®, ‘for it bigynneth at the lettris of the abe, 
and endith at iy. strikis in the margyn*.t 


Firste Sonday of Aduente.Romayns: _xiij. jf We wytynge this tyme for hour ende the Lord Jhesu Crist. 
Matheuk xxj. @  Whanne Jhesus cam ny3 to Jerusalem ende in the name of the Lord. 
The Wednesday. James! v. ec Be 3e pacient til to the comyng ende in the name of the Lord. 
Mark i. a The bigynnynge of the gospel ende baptiside 30u in the Hooli Goost. 
The Fryday. Ysaye jj. a Here 3e me that folewen that is ende in to generacioun of generaciouns. 
Matheu ij. @ In thilk days cam Joon baptist ende knowlechynge her synnes. 
The secounde Sonday™. Romayns xv. @ What euer thingis ben writen ende and vertu of the Hooli Goost. 
Luk xxj. e  Toknes shulen be in sunne and mone ende mi wordis shulen not passe. 
The Wednesday. Zacharie viij. @ Tam turned ajen to Syon, and Y ende in trewthe and ristwisnes. 
Matheu xj. ¢  Trewli I seie to 30u, there roos ende hath eeris of herynge, here he. 
The Fryday. Ysaye lxij. d  Vpon thi wallis, Jerusalem, Y sette  ende cyte and not forsaken. 
: Joon i, 6 Joon berith witnessynge of hym ende he hath toolde out. 
The thridde Sonday®. i.Corynth. iiij. @ Soa man gesse vs as mynystris ende shal be to euery man of God. 
Matheu xj. @ Whanne Joon in boondis hadde ende make redi the weie hefore thee. 
The Wednysday and = Ysaye ij. a There shal be in the laste dayes ende in the list of the Lord oure God. 
Ymber day. Ysaye® vij. od To speke to Achas, seiynge, ende reprouen yuel and chosen good. 
Luk NE e The aungel Gabriel is sent fro ende be it don to me aftir thi word. 
The Fryday. Ysaye xj. @ There shal goon out a 3erde ende and feith, the girdil of his reynes. 
Luk j. d  Marye rysynge vp in tho daies ende in God myn helthe. 
The Satirday. Ysaye P xix. jf Thei shulen crye to the Lord ende plesid to hem and hele hem. 
Tsaye PP xxxv. a Giaden shal deseert ende in to wellis of watris. d 
Isaye4 xl. 6  Vpon an hei; hille stei3 vp ende in his bosum shal rere hem vp. 
Tsaye 44 xlv. @ Tomy Crist Cyro, whos risthond ende Y the Lord shope him. 
Daniel' ij. e An aungel of the Lord cam doun ende reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
ij.8 Tessalon. ij. a Bretheren, we preye 30u bi the ende of his comynge. 
Lukt iij. a ‘The fiftenthe 3eer of the empire ende shal see the helthe of God. 
The firthe Sonday®. Philipensis iiij. & Toye 3e in the Lord ever more ende in Crist Jhesu oure Lord. 
Joon, i. e  Jewis senten fro Jerusalem prestis ende where Joon was baptisynge. 


+ This table of lessons is printed from «r, and applies, in its readings, to the earlier text ; such insertions in it as are included within brackets, 
are taken from ssERXkM, and apply to the /aéer text. & at musse Me Om. k. b Om. R. ¢ Om. mk. d Om. atk. e bigynnyng 
therof uk. bigynnyng of the pistle and gospel n. f clausal rR. & therof also mrk. h Om. mak. + This rubric is taken from maka. 
Here biginnith a table with a rule, that tecchith in what book and chapitre of the bible me shal finde eueri lessoun at masse, and pistil, and 
gospel, that ben rad in the chirche, biginninge at the firste Sondai in Aduent. £. Ilere bigynneth a rule that tellith in what bookis and chapitris 
of the bible men mai fynde alle the lessouns, pistlis, and gospels, that ben rad in Sundaies and feries bi al the 3eer after Salisbery vss at masse ; 
pistlis and gospels of seyntis ben to fore in her ordre. x. No rubric in ar. i epistil. Romayns E. epistolu. Romayns rR. k gospel. Mathen E. 
evangelium. Matheu r. 1 epistola. James x, and so prefixed throughout the table to each portion read as the epistle. m Sonday in aduente. 
mek, 0 Sondayin aduent mRk. 0 lesson. Ysaye R. Pj, lessoun. Ysaye mrkm. pp ij. lessoun. Isaye urka. 11 ij. lessoun. Isaye s1nkm. 
99 tiij. lessoun. Isaye sekm. 1 v, lessoun Daniel urkw. 8 The pistil. ij. mnkm. t The gospel. Luk. mrku. 4 Sonday in aduente R. 


4§ 2 


684 TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 
The Wednesday. Joel ij.  f Toye 3e, sones of Syon ende and the Lord shal dwelle in Syon. 
Lok vij. ¢ This word wente out ende is more than he. 
The Fryday. Zacharie ij. ff Douster of Syon, here thou ende hooli dwellynge place. 
Mark vilj. ¢ Se3e, and be war of sourdow; ende seye to no man. 
Cristmasse euen*. Isaye lxij.. @ For Syon I shal not be stille ende plesid to the Lord in thee. 
Romayns =i. a Paul, seruaunt of Jhesu Crist ende and 3e ben clepid of Jhesu Crist. 
Matheu i. e Whanne Marie his moder ende his puple saaf fro her synnes. 
[fn the nyst at laudis. | Matheu i, a ‘The book of the generacioun ende that is clepid Crist ¥.] 
Cristmas day*, the firste Isaye ix, @ ‘The pnple that wente in derknes ende fro now and vn to withouten ende. 
massey. Tite ij. e The grace of God oure saueour ende spek thou thes thingis and moneste. 
Luk ij. a A maundement wente out ende pees to men of good wille. 
The secounde masse. _Isaye lxj. a@ The spirit of oure Lord ende holi puple and a3en boust of the Lord. 
Tite ij. ¢ The benygnyte and humanyte ende Jhesu Crist oure saueour. 
Luk ij. ec  Sheepherdis spaken to gidre ende as it is seid to hem. 
The heise masse®. Isaye lj. oc For that wite shal my puple ende the helthe 3yner of oure God. 
Hebrewis i. a Manyfolde and many maneris ende and thi 3eeris shulen not fayl. 
Joon i. a Inthe bigynnynge was the word ende ful of grace and trewthe. 
Seynt Steuens day Apost. Dedis vj. d  Steuen ful of grace and strengthe ende he slepte in the Lord. 
martir. Mathen xxiij. f Loo! I sende to 3on prophetis and ende that cometh in the name of the Lord. 
Seynt Joons day. Ecclesiast. xv. @ Who dredith God shal do good ende it shall heritage hym. 
Joon xxj. jf He seide to hym, Sue thou me ende his witnessynge is trewe. 
Childirmasse day. Apocalips —_xiiij.. ~@ — 1 saws, and lo! a lomb stode vpon ende before the trone of God. 
Matheu ij. d The aungel of the Lord aperide in ende conmfortid, for thei ben not. 
Seynt Thomas day. Hebrews v. a Eche bishope takyn of men is ende the ordre of Melchisedek. 
Luk xix. & Sum noble man wente in to ende before stiynge to Jerusalem. 
The sixte day». Galatas iiij. a How myche tyme the eyre is ende thaune and eyre bi God. 
Luk ij. e His fadir and his modir were ende the grace of God was in hym. 
Seynt Siluestre day. Ecelesiast. 1.¢ d Sea preest ende in swete sauoure. 
Mathen xxv. 6 Sum man wente a pilgrimage ende entre in to the ioye of thi Lord. 
New3eris day. Tite ij. e The grace of God oure saueour ende spek thou thes thingis and moneste. 
Luk ij. c  Aftir the ey3te dayes weren endid ende bifore he was conseyued in wombe. 
The twelfthe euen. Tite ij. ¢ The benygnyte and humanyte ende Jhesu Crist oure saueour. 
Matheu ij. ff  Heroude deed, loo! the aungel of ende he shal be clepid of Nazareth. 
‘The xij. day at matyns’, Luk ij. oe  Itis don, whanne al the puple ende turnede a3eu fro Jordan. 
‘The wij, day at mass®. Isaye lx. a Ryse, be thou listned Jerusalem, for ende to the Lord tellynge. 
Matheu ij. a Whanne Jhesus was born in Bethleem ende bi anothir weye in to her cuntree. 
The Sonday ‘in Octavis‘. Isaie lx. a _ Rise, be thou listened ende the Lord tellinge. 
Joon i. d Joon saw3 Jhesu comynge to ende for this is the sone of God. 
‘The Octavis of the xij. Isaie xxv. @ Lord my God thou art, I shal ende thes thingis in al the erthe. 
day Matheu ij. jf Jhesus cam fro Galilee to ende in the which I hane plesid to me. 
The firste Sondai aftir Romayns xij. @  Bretheren, | hiseche 30u bi the ende the tothir of anothir. 
Octaues, Luk ij. ff Whanne Jhesus was maad of ende and grace anentis God and man. 
The Wednysday. Romayns x. a The wil of myn herte and my ende to eche man bileuynge. 
Matheu ij. ¢ Whanne Jhesus hadde herde that ende shal come nei3. 
The Friday. Rom. xij. a@  Enery soule be suget ende for this same thinge seruynge. 
Lue. iiijj. 6 Jhesus turnede a3ein in vertu ende that came forthe of his mouthe, 
The ij, Sonday. Romayns xij. ¢  Hauynge 3iftis dyuersynge vp grace ende but consentynge to meke thinges. 
Joon ij. a Weddyngis ben maad in the Cane ende bileueden in to hym. 
The Wednesday. i. Tymothe 1. ce A trewe word and worthi al ende in to worldis of worldis. 
Matheu xij. g  Jhesus gon ont thenns wente ende for the vnbileue of hem. 
The Frydoy. Romayns xij. e 1 wote and trust in the Lord Jhesu —ende__ not of feith is synne. 
Luk iiij. e And he cam doun to Capharnaum ende im to ech place of the cuntree. 
The thridde Sonday. Romayns xij. f Nil 3e be prudent anentis ende yuel thing in good thing. 
Matheu viijj. @ Whanne Jhesus hadde come doun ende fro that our. 
The Wednesday. Romayns xv. g  Bretheren, I biseche 3o0u bi oure ende God of pees be with 3o0u alle. amen. 
Mark ij. a He entride eftsoone in to the ende the hoond is restorid to hym. 
The Friday. i. Corynth., ij. ¢  Wite3e not, thatse ben the temple § ende Crist sotheli of God. 
Mathen iiij. jf Jhesus ennyrounnynge al Galilee ende hym many companyes. 
The ferthe Sonday. Romayns xij. d To no man owe 3e ony thing ende the plente of lawe. 
Matheu vij. e  Jhesus stiynge vp in to a litil ship ende and the se obeishen to hym. 
The Wednesday. i. Corynth. vij. a@ It is good to no man for to touche ende for 30ure incontynence. 
Luk ix. g  Itis don, hem walkynge in the ende is able to the rewme of God. 


Vv euen. lessoun R. 
on Cristmas &. 
h Vias eka. 


w From MERXky. 


xX ny3t Mirxky. Y masse. lessoun. R. 
© xiilij. Bark. 


Z masse. lessoun. B. & massc. lessoun, Be 
@ In nizt at laudis £. The wij. ny3t mk. © On aij. day Emk. 


bd day 
£ withinne Vtas EMkM. 


& Vlas on aij. day Ek. 


The Fryday. 

The fifthe Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The Sonday in Septuages. 
The Wednesday. 

The Frydai. 

The Sonday in Sexages. 
The Wednesday. 

The Fryday. 

The Sonday in Quinquag. 
Ashe Wednesday. 

The Thursday. 

The Fryday. 

The Satirday. 

The i. Soaiey of Lentyn'. 
The Monday. 


The Tewisday. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


i. Corynth. — vij. 
Mark x. 
Colocenses ij. 
Matheu xtij. 
i. Tymothy — ij. 
Matheu xxj. 
i, Corynth. ix. 
Mathen XX 
ij. Corynth. _ iiij. 
Mark ix, 
ij. Corynth. _ iiij. 
Matheu xij. 
ij. Corynth. xj. 
Luk viij 
ij. Corynth. i. 
Mark itij. 
ij. Corynth. v. 
Luk xvij. 
i. Corynth. — xilj. 
Luk xviij. 
Joel ij. 
Matheu vj. 
Isaye XXXViij. 
Matheu viij. 
Isaye Iiij. 
Matheu v. 
Isaye Wiij. 
- Mark vj. 
ij. Corynth. vj. 
Matheu iiij. 
Ezechiel xxxiiij. 
Matheu XXV. 
Isaye ly 
Mathen xxj. 
Exodi xxiiij. 


The Wedzesday™, 


The Thursday. 
The Fryday. 


The Satirday Ymber™. 


The secounde Sonday®. 
The Monday. 
The Tewisday. 
The Wednesday. 
The Thursday. 
The Fryday. 
The Satirday. 
l elene Lent. k. 


essoun. ij. Mach. Maxm. 
gospel. Math. maxm. 


iij. of Kyngis xix. 


Matheu xij. 
Ezechiel xviij. 
Joon viij. 
Ezechiel xviij. 
Joon v. 
Deuteron. = xxvj. 
Deuteron.° xj. 

ij. Machabe.? i. 
Ecclesiast.4 xxxvj. 
Danyelr ij. 

i. Tessalon.§ v. 
Matheut xvij. 
i. Tessalon. _ iiij. 
Matheu xv. 
Danyel ix. 
Joon Vij. 
iij. of Kingis xvij. 
Matheu xxiij. 
Hester xiij. 
Mathen XX. 
Jeremye xvij. 
Joon Vv. 
Genesis XXXVIj. 
Mathen Xxj. 
Genesis xxvij. 
Lak xv. 


ePawyra S©Ank HKD ARRRA DAR R ANWAR GE ARHANMOANSOHTRAN®? ARR RA HAHA RARER AR®7 A TARKR ARQ OOK 


m Ymber Wednesday. lessoun. R. 
Q The iitj. lessoun. Eccl. MRXM. 
U Sonday in Lenten. ma. Sunday of Lente nu. 


Eche man in what clepynge 

Thei offriden to hym litil children 
Clothe 3e 30u as the chosen of 
The kyngdam of heuene is 

{ biseche firste of alle thingis 
Sum man hadde two sones 

Wite 3e not, that thei that rennen 
The kyngdom of heuene is lyk 
For if also oure gospel is 

Thei gon fro thennes wenten 
Hauynge the same spiryt of 

He that is not with me is 

3e euffren gladly vnwise men 
Whanne fulmyche companye 

I clepe God witnesse 

Jhesus began for to teche at 
Wytynge the drede of the Lord 
He axid of pharisees 

If I speke with tungis of men 
Jhesus took his twelue deciplis 
Be 3e conuertid to me in 
Whanne 3e fasten, nyl 3e 

In tho dayes siknede Ezechie 
Whanne he hadde entride 

Crye, ne ceesse thou, as a trumpe 
3e han herde that it is seid 

If thou shalt take aweie 

Whanne euenynge was 

We monesten, that 3ee resceyuen 
Jhesus was led in to desert 

Loo! I my silf shal a3en seke 
Whanne mannes sone shal come 
Sechith the Lord, while 3e may 
Whanne he hadde entryde 

The Lord seide to Moyses, Stie vp 
Cam in Bersabe Jnda, and 

The scribis and pharisees answerden 
And the word of the Lord is 
Shesus seide to hem Jewis that 
The soule that shal synne 

There was a feeste day of 
Biholde fro thi seyntnarie 

If forsothe 3e kepe the heestis 
Prestis made preyer, while the 
Haue mercy of us, God of alle 
An aungel of the Lord cam doun 
We preye 30u, reproue 3e vnquiete 
Jhesus took Petre, James and Joon 
Brethiren, we preyen 3on and biseche 
Jhesu goon out fro thennes 

And now, Lord oure God, that 

I go, and 3e shulen seche me 
The word of the Lord is don 
Jhesus spak to the cumpanyes 
Lord kyng almy3ti, in thi 

Jhesus stiynge vp to Jernsalem 
Cursid the man that trustith in 

I may not of my silf do 

Joseph seide to his brethiren 
There was an husbond man 

She seide to hir sone Jacob 

A man hadde two sones 


n Yonber. i. lessoun. MRXM. 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


© The ij. lessoun. Deuteron. MRXM. 
r The v. lessoun. Dan. MRXM. 


685 


dwelle 3e anentis God. 

vpon hem blesside hem. 

thankingis to God the fadir by him. 
whete in to my bern. 

in feith and trewthe. 

that 3e bileueden to hym. 

forsothe the stoon was Crist. 

hut fewe ben chosyn. 

lyf sotheli in 30u. 

but hym that sente me. 

ben everlastynge. 

thou shalt be dampned. 

virtue of Crist dwelle in me. 

fruyt in pacience. 

we vnknowen not his thoustis. 

he that hath eeris of herynge. 

and roos a3en. 

togidre and the eglis. 

the more of thes is charyte. 

3af heriynge to God. 

shenship in hethen men. 

there and thin herte is. 

and I shal defende it. 

was helid fro that hour. 

for merciful I am Lord thi God. 
shal 3eelde to thee. 

the month forsothe of the Lord spak. 
weren maad saaf. 

and weeldynge alle thingis. 

and serueden to hym. 

and I shal fede hem in doom. 

in to enerlastynge lyf. 

in tho dais to whiche I sende it. 
tau3zte hem of the kyndam of God. 
fourti dayes and fourti ny3tis. 

vn to the hil of God Oreb. 

brothir, sistir and moder. 

lyf he shal lyue, seith the Lord. 
herith the word of God. 

he shal lyue in lyf, and shal not die. 
Jhesu that made hym hool. 

as he hath spokyn. 

he hath spokyn to 30u. 

nethir forsake 30u in yuel tyme. 

thei tellen out thi grete worthi dedes. 
and heriful and glorions in to worldis. 
the comynge of onre Lord Jhesu Crist. 


* mannes sone ryse fro deeth. 


but in to hoolynes. 

was heelid fro that hour. 

on thi citee and on thi puple. 
that hen plesaunt to hym. 

in the hoond of Helye. 

shulen ben enhaunsid. 

of men preysynge thee. 
redempcioun for many. 

and aftir the fruyt of his fyndynges. 
bileue to my wordis. 

and 3eelde to his fader. 

thei hadde hym as a prophet. 
shal he thi blessynge. 

he perishide, and is fonndyn a3en. 


P The ij, 


8 The pistil. i. Tess. MRXM. t The 


686 


The thridde Sonday™. 
The Monday. 

The Tewisday. 

The Wednesday. 

The Thursday. 

The Friday. 

The Saturday. 

The Midlentyn Sonday’. 
The Monday. 

The Tewisday. 


The Wednisday™. 


The Thursday. 

The Fryday. 

The Satirday. 

Passioun Sonday. 

The Monday. 

The Tewisday. 

The Wednesday. 

The Thursday. 

The Fryday. 

The Satirday. 

Pale Sonday*. 
passioun, 

The Monday. 

The Tewisday. 
passioun. 


The Wednesday. 


passioun.s 
The Thursday®. 


Good Fryday. 


passioun.» 
Estre euen. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


Ephesies v. 
Luk xj. 
iij. of Kingis v. 
Luk iilj. 
itij. of Kingis iiij. 
Matheu xviij. 
Exodi XX. 
Mathen xv. 
Jeremye vij. 
Joon vj. 
Numbers = xx. 
Joon iiij. 
Daniel xiij. 
Joon viij. 
Galathas iiij. 
Joon vj. 
iij. of Kingis ij. 
Joon ij. 
Exodi XXxxij. 
Joon vij. 
Ezechiel XXXVj. 
Isaye i 
Joon 


iiij. of Kingis 1i3j 


Joon 

iij. of Kingis 
Joon 
Tsaye 
Joon 
Hebrews 
Joon 
Jonas 
Joon 
Daniel 
Joon 
Levitici 
Joon 
Danyel 
Joon 
Jeremye 
Joon 
Jeremye 
Joon 
Exodi 
Joony 
Philipensis 
Matheu 
Tsaye 
Joon 
Jeremye* 
Mark 
Isaye 
Tsaye¢ 
Luk 

i. Corinth. 
Joon 
Oseef 
Exodié 
Joon 
Genesis 
Exodik 


ix. 
ve 
xvij. 
xj. 
xlix. 
viij. 


“SS ee GR wWeaeke 8Wyaete ree Haw ayaAtereeaa So Km Sa oR KRaawerRa RC wmaeaRRFHRRARA WAR 


u Sonday in Lenten. m. Sonday of Lente. nM. 


lessoun. MRxkM. 
Isaye MRxkw. 


Y The gospel. Joon MRxkm. 
] d From sraxkzr. 
i The i. lessoun, Genesis mrkm. 


© Scher Thursdai. mk». 
K The ij. lessoun. Exodi unk. 


Be 3e folewers of God as 

Jhesus was castynge out a deuel 
Naaman, the prynce of chyualri 
How grete thingis have herd 

A womman of the wyues 
Forsothe if thi brothir shal synne 
Honour thi fadir and thi modir 
Thanne scribis and pharisees 
The word of the Lord is maad 
Worche 3e not mete that 

Thei camen a3ens Moises, and 
Jhesus cam bi a citee of Samari 
A man was in Bahiloyn, and 
Forsothe Jhesus wente in to the 
It is wrytyn, that Abraham 
Jhesus wente ouer the see of 
Camen two wymmen strumpets 
The paske of Jewis was nei3 

Go, descende, thi puple hath 
Now the feeste day medlynge 
Whanne Y shal be halewid in 
Be 3e washen, and beth clene 
Jhesus passynge saw; a man blynde 
There cam a woman 

Mi fadir worchith til now 

The sone of an huswyf womman 
There was a syk man, Lazarus 
In plesaunt tyme I ful out 

T am list of the world 

Crist beynge a bishop of 

Who of 30u shal repreue me 
And the word of the Lord is 
Pryncis and pharisees senten 

3if to vs Danyel, that distruyede 
Jhesus walkide in to Galilee fro 
3e shulen not do theft 

Feestis of halewynge of the 
Distruye not the testament 
Whanne thei hadden herde thes 
Alle that thee forsaken shulen 
The bishopis and the pharisees 
Cometh, and thenke we a3en 
But 3e shulen ete the flesh 

The sones of Israel forsothe camen 
A myche cumpanye that cam 
Fele 3e this thing in 30w 

Wite 3e that aftir two dayes 

The Lord God openyde to me 
Jhesus bifore sixe dayes of pask 
Thou forsothe, Lord, hast shewid 
Forsothe paske and the feeste of 
Seith to the doustir of Syon 
Who leuede to oure herynge 
The hooli day of therf looues 
3ou comynge togidere in to oon 
Bifore the feeste day of paske 
In her tribulacioun eerly 

The Lord seide to Moyses and 
He wente out with his disciplis 
In the firste made God of nost 
And now was comyn the 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


Vv Fourthe Sondai. emk. 4 Sondai of Lente. M. 


% pistil. Philip. mnxk. 


8 pistil. Jerem. uerxk. 
f i. lessoun. Osee mk. 


and ristwisnes and trewthe. 

the word of God, and kepen it. 

but oonli the God of Israel. 

wente bi the mydel of hem. 

lyueth of the remenaunt. 

seuenti sithes seuen sithes, 

be mynde of my name. 

defoulith not a man. 

to 3our fadris fro the world in to world. 
shal never thriste. 

and he is halewid in hem. 

vereyli the sauyour of the world. 

the giltles blood is saued in that dai. 
nil thou do synne. 

Crist hath made vs free. 

to come in to this world. 

to do doom. 

he wiste what was in man. 

that he hadde spokyn ajens his puple. 
manye bileveden in hym. 

and I shal be to 30u in to God. 

the godis of the erthe 3e shulen ete. 
and he fallinge doun worshipide hym. 
turnede a3en in to Galgala. 

in to rysynge a3en of doom. 

in thi mouth is sothe. 

what thingis he dide, bileueden in him. 
I neuverthelatir shal for3ete thee. 

his our cam not sit. 

of euerlastynge erytage. 

wente out of the temple. 

do to hem, and dide not. 

bileuynge into him were to take. 
delynere Danyel of the lake of liouns. 
for drede of Jewis. 

kepe 3e my lawis. 

and I in the fader. 

vpon the roundenes of erthis, 

eche in to his owne hows. 

with dowble tredynge to-trede hem. 
he dwellide with his disciplis. 

in tyme of thi woodnes, 

whanne he was oon of the twelue. 
of the Lord aperide in a clowde. 
loo! al the world wente aftir hym. 
in the glorie of the fader. 

markynge the stoon with keepers. 
and lene vpon his God. 

wente and hidde him fro hem. 

to thee forsothe I shewide my cause. 
at the dore of the sepulcre. 

that he hath 30lden to vs the Lord. 
and for trespassours preyede. 

3it eny was put in. 

dampned with this world. 

so and 3e doon. 

more than brent sacrifice. 

the passynge forth of the Lord. 

thei puttiden Jhesu. 

fro alle werkis that he hadde maade. 
to the Lord and seiden. 


w Wednesday. lessoun. Rt. x Sonday. 
> lessoun. Isaye uRXKkM. © pistil, 
& ij. lessoun. Exodi uk. h From mk. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


Isaye! iiij. 
Deuteron.™ xxxj. 
Coloscens® _ ij. 
Matheue Xxvilj. 
Estir day. i. Corynth. v. 
Mark xvj. 
The Monday. Apost. Dedis x. 
Luk xxii. 
The Tewisday. Apost. Dedis xiij. 
Luk xxiljj. 
The Wednisday. Apost. Dedis iij. 
Joon xxj. 
The Thursday. Apost. Dedis viij. 
Joon Xx. 
The Fryday. i. of Petir ij. 
Matheu Xxviij 
The Satirday. Lof Petir ij. 
Joon XX. 
The firste SondayP. LofJoon  v. 
Joon xx. 
The Wednesday. i, Corynth. xv. 
Mark Xvj. 
The Fryday. Hebrews xiij. 
_Matheu xxvilj. 
The secounde Sonday4. i. Petir ij. 
Joon x 
The Wednesday. i. Peter. i. 
Luk xxiiij. 
The Fryday. Romayns iv. 
Matheu ix. 
The thridde Sundayt. _ i. Petir ij. 
Joon xvj. 
The Wednesday. i, Joon ij. 
. Joon ij. 
The Fryday. i. Tessalon. v. 
Joon xij. 
The ferthe Sunday. James i. 
Joon Xvj- 
The Wednesday. James ij. 
Joon xvij. 
The Fryday. James ij. 
Joon xiij. 
The fifthe Sonday. James i. 
Joon Xvj. 
Monday in Rogacioun®, James v. 
Luk xj. 
The Wednesdayt. Apost. Dedis iiij. 
Joon xvij. 
The Assencioun day. | Apost. Dedis i. 
Mark xvj. 
The Sonday in Octauis™. i. Petir iiij. 
Joon XV. 
The viij.day fro Octauis’.i. Petir i 
Luk xxiilj. 
Witson ene. Genesis¥ = xxij. 
[i. lesson. Deutron.x = xxxj. 
aij. lessoun. Isaie iv. 
tiij. lessoun.Y Baruc ij. 
Apost. Dedis? xix. 
Joon® xiiij. 
Witsonday. Apost. Dedis ij. 
Joon xiiij. 


1 The iij. lessoun. Isaie urku. 
afler Ester. EMKM. 
Monday in the rogacioun dayes. u. 


Emgkm. The viij. day fro the Assencioun. 
a The gospel. Joon mku. 


Actus uk. 


m The titj. lessoun. Deut. s1rkm. 
q Sonday after Easter. M. 
t Assencioun euen. EMRKM. 


Fr 


a And seuen wymmen shulen 
Thanne wroot a songe, and tauste 
If 3e ben rysen togidere 
Forsothe in the euenynge of 
Clense 3e out the oold sourdow3 
Marie Mawdeleyn and Marie 
3e witen the word that is maad 
Two of hem wenten in that day 
Men bretheren, sones of the 
Jhesus stood in the mydil 
God of Abraham and God 
Jhesus eftsoones shewide hym 
An aungel of the Lord spak 
Marie stood at the graue 
Crist onys deed for oure syn 
Eleuen disciplis wenten 
Therfor puttynge awey 
In 00 saboth 
Al thing that is born 
Whanne even was, in that day 
If Crist is prechid, that he 
Jhesus risynge eerli in the 
Obey 3e to 3our prouostis 
Marie Maudeleyne and anothir 
Crist suffride for vs 
T am a good sheepherde 
Witynge that not bi 

“In one of the weke ful eerli 
3if in the gilt of oon in to 
Thanne the disciplis of Joon 
I biseche 30u as comelyngis 
A litil and now 3e shulen 
Mi litil sones, Y write to 
A questioun is maad 
Sotheli alle 3e ben sones 
A list cam in to this world 
Eche beste thing 3ouen 
I go to him that sente me 
Nil 3e in acceptacioun of person 
Hooli fadir, kepe hem in thin 
3e seen for a man is iustified 
Litil sones, 3it a Jitil 
Be 3e doers of the word 
Treuly, treuli, Y seie to 30u 
Knowleche se oon to anothir 
Who of ou shal have 
Of the multitude of men 
These thingis Jhesus spak 
Forsothe thou Teofile, firste 
Elleuene disciplis restynge, Jhesus 
Be 3e prudent, and wake 
Whanne the coumforter shal come 
That and 3o0ure silf be hooly 
And I shal sende the bihi;t 
God temptide Abraham 
Moyses wroot 
And seuen wymmen 
Here thou, Israel, the maundement 
It is don, whanne Apollo 
If 3e loue me, kepe 3ee my 
Whanne the daies of pentecost 

d@ If eny man loueth me 


£ 
a 
a 
d 
a 
ie 
6 
d 
J. 
d 
a 
€ 
¢ 
£ 
Zz 
a 
a 
b 
e 
b 
d 
e 
¢ 
6 
b 
e 
a 
J 
¢ 
ce 
c 
e 
ag 
b 
g 
d 
6 
a 
¢ 
I 
i 
vs 
e 
f 
a 
g 
a 
a 
e€ 
¢ 
g 
b 
h 
a 
ff 
a 
¢ 
a 
e 
a 


t Sonday after Eastir. 1k. 


w The j. lessoun. Gen. mk. 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


a The pistel. Colos. mrkm. 
8 Processioun Monedai. EM. 
u yj. Sendai. E. Sondai withinne Vias. uRkM. 
x From EMRxkm. 


687 


fro whirlwynd and fro reyne. 
and to the ende fulfillide. 

with hym in glorie. 

T haue bifore seide to sou. 

of clensynge and treuth. 

as he seide to 30u. 

remyssioun of synnes bi his name. 
in brekynge of breed. 

ajen reysynge Jhesus. 

in his name to alle folkis. 

jour synnes be don awey. 
whanne he roos a3en fro deeth. 
til he cam to Cesar. 

and thes thingis he seide to me. 
in the rist half of God. 

til the endynge of the world. 
now forsothe hauynge mercy. 
him for to ryse azen fro deeth. 
witnesse of God in hym. 

haue lyf in his name. 

eche man in his ordre. 

thei goynge toolden to othir. 
in to worldis of worldis amen.- 
at the Jewis til this day. 
bishop of oure soulis. 

o foold and o sheepherde. 

in to with outen ende. 
wondrynge that was don. 
euerlastinge lyf bi Jhesu Crist oure Lord. 
and bothe ben kept. 

but also to tyrauntis. 

shal take fro 30u 30ure ioye. 
verey li3t now shyneth. 

the wraththe of God dwellith on him. 
and edifie 3e eche other. 

seide to me, so Y speke. 

that may saue 3oure soulis. 
shal take and telle to 3ou. 
aboue reisith doom. 

but kepe hem fro yuel. 

with outen werkis is deed. 
thou shalt sue me aftirward. 
vndefoulid fro this world, 

thou wentist out fro God. 

the multitude of synnes. 

to men askynge hym. 

to eche as it was need. 

and I cam to thee, 

hym goynge in to heuene. 
with signes folewynge. 

bi Jhesu Crist oure Lord. 
3e hane mynde that I seide to 30u. 
of quyke God. 

heriynge and blessynge God. 
and he dwelte there. 

fulfillide it. 

sikirnes and hiding*.] 

and lyuede with me in erthe. 
of the kyngdom of God. 

shew to hym my silf. 

the grete thingis of God. 
comaundement to me, so I do. 


© The gospel. Math. mrky.  P Sonday 
Presessioun Mondai. km. The 
Vv Vias on Assencioun. 


yY From ukm. 2 The pistel. 


688 
The Monday. 
The Tewisday. 


The Wednesday ¢. 


The Thursday. 
The Fryday. 


The Satirday. 


The Trinyte Sonday. 

Corpus Christi day. 

The firste Sonday aftir 
the Trinyte. 

The Wednesday. 

The secounde Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The thridde Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The ferthe Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The fifthe Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The sizte Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The seuenthe Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The eistithe Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The nynthe Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The tenthe Sonday. 


The Wednesday. 


b Wit Monday. k. 


dij. lessoun. Deut. MAXKM. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND 


Apost. Dedis xj. 
Joon iij. 
Apost. Dedis viij. 
Joon x. 
Sapiens i. 
Apost. Dedis ij. 
Joon vie 
Apost. Dedis viij. 
Luk ix. 
Apost. Dedis ij. 
Luk v. 
Joel ij. 
Leuitici® xxiij. 
Deuteron.f — xxvj. 
Leuitici&® XXYj- 
Danyel® ij. 
Apost. Dedis! xiij. 
Lukk itij. 
Apocalips _iiij 
Joon iij. 
i. Corynth. — xj. 
Joon vj. 
i, Joon iiij. 
Luk xj. 
ij. Petir i. 
Matheu v. 
i, Joon ij. 
Luk xiii} 
Ephesies iiij. 
Mark xj- 
i. Peter v. 
Luk xv. 
ij. Tymothe _ iiij. 
Mathen v. 
Romayns _viij. 
Luk vj. 
i. Joon ij. 
Matheu xvij. 
i. Petir iij. 
Luk v. 
i. Tymothe _ ij. 
Luk vilj. 
Romayns vj. 
Matheu v. 
i. Joon ij. 
Mark x. 
Romayns vj. 
Mark viij. 
Romayns vilj. 
Matheu xij. 
Romayns _viij 
Mathen vij. 
Romayns v. 
Mark ix. 
i, Corynth. x. 
Luk xvj. 
Romayns yj. 
Luk Xxvj. 
ij. Corynth. xij. 
Luk xix. 
i. Corynth. xy. 
Luk xxj. 


¢ Ymber Wednesday, lesson. R. 
& The tiij. tessoun. Leuit. urxke. 


k The gospel. Luk. MRxkm. 


Maye oak oWraRersks Gato asc ae se GF tGR ea GAAMHPAwyQAaasWweaen esas oR BF STR AARR ODO SOR AD OS 


He comanndide vs to preche 
God lonede so the world 
Whanne apostlis, that weren 
Trewly, trewly, Y seie to 30n 
Lone 3e ri3twisnes, that 

Petre stondynge with elleuen 
No man may come to me 
Philip comynge doun in to 
Twelue apostles clepid 

Men of Israel, here 3e thes 

It is don in oon of dayes 

I shal helde out my spirit 

The Lord spak to Moyses 
Whanne thou comest in to the 
If se gon in myn heestis 

The aungel of the Lord 

All the citee cam togidre 
Jhesus rysynge of the synagoge 
T saw3 a dore open in heuene 
There was a man of the pharisees 
T haue taken of the Lord that 
Mi flesh is verey mete 

For God is charitee in this 

A man was riche, and was clothid 
We han maad knowen 

Nil se gesse, that I cam 

Nil 3e wondre if the world 

A man made a greet soper 
This thing I seie, and witnesse it ~ 
Whanne he walkide in to the 
Be 3e mekid vndir the my3ti 
Pupplicans and synful men 
The Lord stood ny3 to me 

Be thou consentynge to thin 
Trewly I deme that the 

Be 3e merciful, for 3oure fadir 
In this thing we wyten 

That the disciplis axeden 

Alle of o wille in preyer 
Whanne companyes of 

I biseche, firste of alle thinges 
Forsothe it is don in oon of 
Whiche euer we ben haptisid 
But 3our ristwisnesse 

I wroot not to 30w as to 
Whanne Jhesus was gon out 
T seye mannes thing for in 
Whanne myche companye 

No thing of dampnacioun 
Jhesus wente bi cornes on the 
Therfor, bretheren, we ben dettonrs 
Perseyne 3e, and fle 3e fro fals 
God comendith his charite 
Maystir, we saw3en sum men 
Be we not coueyteris of yuels 
There was a riche man that 
Wite 3e not for to whom 

Hie that is trewe in the leste 
3e witen that whanne 3e 
Whanne Jhesus neizede Jerusalem 
Not eche flesh the same 
Perseyue 3e to 30ur self 


GOSPELS. 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


a The j. lessoun. Joel mrxkx. 
h The v. lessoun. Danyel. mRxkm. 


© The ij. lessoun. Leuit. MRxkM. 


in the name of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 
for thei ben don in God. 
resceyneden the Hooli Goost. 

I hane more plenteuously. 
connynge hath of voys. 

of the Lord shal be saaf. 

for lyf of the world. 

is maad in that cytee. 

and helynge enery where. 

mirth with thi face. 

meruelous thingis to day. 

the name of the Lord, shal be saaf. 
generaciouns and 3our dwellynge places. 
that thi Lord God hath 3yne to thee. 
be to me a puple. 

and aboue reyse 3¢ hym in to worldes. 
with ioye and the Hooli Goost. 
euangelise the kyngdom of God. 
lyuynge in to worldis of worldis. . 
but hane ener lastynge lyf. 

not wysly demynge the bodi of the Lord. 
shal Jyue with outen ende. 

loue and his brothir. 

thei shulen bileue to hym. 
sprynge in 30ure hertis. 

greet in the kyngdam of heuen. 
but in werk and trewthe. 

shal taast my soper. 

aud hoolynes of trewthe. 

in what power I do thes thingis. 
and shal make sad. 

synful man doynge penaunce. 

in to worldis of worldis. amen. 

al thi bodi go in to helle. 

a3en brynge of oure body. 

of thi brothirs eye. 

walke as he walkide. 

tbe child was helid fro that our. 
Crist in 3oure hertis. 

thei sueden hym. 

in feith and in treuthe. 

and thei obeyen to hym. 

forsothe lynynge to God. 

shalt offre thi 3ifte. 

enerlastynge lyf. 

not anentis God. 

in Crist Jhesu oure Lord. 

and he lefte hem. 

of spirit lyf and pees. 

neuer dampned innocentis. 

euen eyris of Crist. 

in to the kyngdom of heuens. 

bi oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 

the fier is not quenchid. 

that 3e mowe snusteyne. 
euerlastynge tabirnaclis. 
seruauntis of riztwisnes. 
abomynacioun to fore God, 

bi hym silf as he wole. 

eche day in the temple. 

aftirward that is spiritual. 

bifore mannes sone. 


£ The 
i The pistit. Actus Maxkm. 


The ellenenthe Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The tweluethe Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The threttenthe Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The xiitij. Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The fiftenthe Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The sixtenthe Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The senententhe Sonday. 


‘The Wednysday Ymber\. 


The Frydai. 


Satirday Ymber®. 


The xviij. Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The nyntenthe Sondai. 
The Wednesday. 

The twentithe Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The xaj. Sonday. 

The Wednesday. 

The xxij. Sonday. 
The Wednesday. 

The xaxiij. Sonday. 


The Wednesday. 


1 Ymber Wednisday. Eka. 


Leuit. mrxkw. 
pistit, Ebr. srrxkm. 


VOL. IV. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


i. Corynth. 
Luk 

i, Corynth. 
Luk 

ij. Corynth. 
Mark 

ij. Corynth. 
Matheu 
Galathas 
Luk 

i. Tessalon. 
Matheu 
Galathas 
Luk 

ij. Corynth, 
Luk 
Galatas 
Matheu 

i. Tymothe 
Luk 
Ephesies 
Luk 
Colosensis 
Mark 
Ephesies 
Luk 
Amos™ 

ij. Esdre 
Mark 

Osee 

Luk 
Leuitici° 
LeuiticiP 
Miche4 
Zacharie™ 
Danyel® 
Hebrews*t 
Luk" 

i. Corynth. 
Matheu 
Romayns 
Matheu 
Ephesies 
Matheu 

ij. Tessalon. 
Matheu 
Ephesies 
Matheu 

ij. Tymothe 
Luk 
Ephesies 
Joon 

i. Tessalon. 
Luk 
Philipensis 
Matheu 
Romayns 
Mark 
Philipensis 
Matheu 
Romayns 
Matheu 


a 


MON eo Ra eR SWraae PR BATH ANWARUYSSTHR TANYA eA eA RWWA R ROD AOD TASA TA STR AA ae oa Sy oe 


m Lesson. Amos. R. 
a The iij. lessoun. Miche. rxkx. 
nu The gospel. Luk mrxkm. 


Bretheren, I make the gospel 
Jhesus seide to sum men that 
Wite 3e not that 30ur bodies 
He seide to his disciplis 
Forsothe we han suche trust 
Jhesus goynge out of the coostes 
We prechen not vs silf, but 
Jhesus began for to reproue 
Bihestis ben seid to Abraham 
Blessid ben eyen that seen 
Bretheren, 3e ben myndful of 
The pharisees goynge out 
Wandre 3e in spirit and 3e 
Whanne Jhesus wente to Jerusalem 
Nil 3e lede 30k with 

Sum man of the companye 

If we lyuen bi a spirit 

No man may serue to two 

We witen that the lawe is 

It is don in oon of daies 

Fayle 3e not in my tribulacioun 
Jhesus wente in to a cyte that 
Se 3e, that no man disseyue 
He cam to Bethsayda and 

I bounden in the Lord biseche 
Whanne he hadde entride 

Lo! dayes comen, seith the Lord 
All the puple is gadryd as 

And oon of the cumpanye 
Israel, be thou connertid to 
Oon of the pharisees preiede 
The Lord spak to Moyses 

The fiftenthe day of the seuenthe 
Fede thou thi puple in thi 3erde 
Thes thingis seith the Lord 
The aungel of the Lord cam 
The tabernacle was 

Sum man had a fige 

T do thankyngis to my God 
Oon of hem a techer of 

I biseche 30u bi oure Lord 

The kyngdom of heuenes 

Be 3e maad newe a3en 

Jhesus goynge in to a boot 
Bretheren, stonde 3ee and hoolde 
Expowne to vs the parable 

Se 3e how warli 3e go 

Jhesus answerynge seide eft 
Be 3e coumfortid in grace 
Whanne thou makist a feeste 
Bretheren, be 3e coumfortid in 
There was a litil kyng 

We witynge 3e moost loued 

It is doon in anothir saboth 
Tristynge this thinge for 

The kyngdom of heuenes is 
We witen for what euer 
Treweli I seie to 30u that 

Be 3e foleweris and 

Thanne pharisces goynge 

If in the gilt of oon 

Whanne he cam to Capharnaum 


n The Saterday. YEkKM. 


47 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


© The i. lessoun. Leuit. saxky. 


T The iiij. lessoun. Zaca. MRXKkM. 8 The v. lessoun. Danyel MRXkM. 


was not void or ydel. 

shal be enhaunsid. 

bere 3e God in 3our bodi. 

of his chosyn criynge to him. 

is plenteuous in glorie. 

and doumbe to speken. 

be shewide in oure bodies. 

at domesday than to 30u. 

to cristen men bileuynge. 

do thou on liche maner. 

worchith in 30u that hath bileued. 
shnlen hoope in his name. 

with vicis and concupiscens. 

thi feith hath maad thee saaf. 

in the dreed of the Lord. 

and God fedith hem. 

to housholde meyne of the feith. 
shnlen be cast to 30u. 

that is in Jhesu Crist. 

in what power I do thes thingis. 
generacioun of the world of worldis. 
hath visitid his puple. 

for3ynynge to 30u alle giltis, 

seie to no man. 

bi alle thingis in vs alle. 

mekith hym, shal be heized. 

I 3af to hem, seith the Lord thi God. 
ioye of the Lord is your strengthe. 
but in preyer and fastynge. 

and iuste men shulen walk in hem. 
go thou in pees. 

3e shulen halewe sour holi day. 
lond of Egipt, I the Lord sour God. 
to onre fadris fro oolde dayes. 
seith the Lord of oostis. 

reyse 3e hym in to worldis. 
euerlastynge redempcioun foundyn. 
gloriously don of hym. 

comynge of oure Lord Jhesu Crist. 
to axe hym more. 

God of pees be with 3o0u alle, amen. 
makynge of the world. 

to a man suffrynge nede. 

suche power to men. 

and pacience of Crist. 

of herynge, here he. 

in the drede of Crist. 

but fewe chosyn. 

in alle thingis vndirstondinge. 

in the rewme of God. 

that is the word of God. 

and alle his hows. 

fro deede men Jhesu. 

shulde don of Jhesu. 

to heriynge and glorie of God. 

to his brothir of sour hertis. 

the feith of Jhesu Crist. 

for3yue 30u 30ur synnes. 

alle thingis suget to hym. 

tho thingis that ben don of God. 

in Crist Jhesu oure Lord God. 
3yue to hem for me and for thee. 


P The ij. lessoun. 
t The 


689 


690 TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. | 


The xxitij. Sonday. Colosenses i. 


c We ceessen uot for 30u ende in remyssioun of synnes bi oure Lord. 
Matheu ix. d Jhesus spekynge thes thingis ende saaf fro that hour. 
The Wednesday. i. Corynth. x. e I wole not to be maad felewis ende in to the glorie of God. 
Matheu xxj. e Sum man hadde two sones ende that 3e bileueden in him. 
The xxv. Sonday. Jeremye xxiij. @ Lo! dayes comen, seith the Lord ende and thei shulen dwelle in her own loond. 
Joon vj. a Whanne Jhesus hadde lift vp his ende to comen in to this world. 
[ Wednesdat. James iidj. c Be 3e suget to God ende leese and delyuere. 
Luc © xij. g To whom myche is 3ouen ende_ 3ilde the laste ferthing. 
In the feste of relikis. Ecclesiast. -xhiiij. +c Tho ben men of merci ende the preisiug of hem. 
Matheu v. a Jhesus seinge the puple ende plenteuous in heuenes’. | 
The dedicacioun*. Apocalipsy xxj. a I Joon saw; the hooli citee ende lo! J make alle thingis newe. 
Luk xix, a Jhesus goynge in walkide ende thing that perishide. 
The Sondai in octauisyy. Luk Vj. g che that cometh to me ende is maad greet. 
In octanis?. Joon x. d New feestis of halewynge ende and I in the fadir. 
In reconnseilynge of a Apocalips®? xxj. a I saw3 the hooli citee Jernsalem eade I make alle thingis newe. 
Churche. Luk vj. Tt is not a good tree that ende ona sadde stoon. 


Here endith the Temperal, and here bigynneth the Propre Sanctorum. 


Nonembre®. 
Seynt Andrew enen4, Parab. x. Eccl. xliiij. a The blessynge of God vpou ende he clothide him with stole of glorie 
Joon i. e Anothir day Joon stoode ende vpon mannes sone. 
Seynt Andrew day®. Romayns x. ' @ Bi herte men bileuen to ende of the erthe her wordis. 
Matheu ij. e Jhesus walkynge besidis the ende thei sueden him. 
Seynt Nicholast. ‘Ecclesiast. —-xliiij.& d ‘Biholdith, this is the greet ¢¢ ende ‘in to the smel of softnes®. 
Matheu xxv. 6 A man goynge far in pilgrimage ende in to the ioye of thi Lord. 
December. 
Octanis of Seint Andrewi. Romayns Xs d_ Bi herte men bilenen to ende of the erthe her wordis. e 
"Mark i. e Aftir that Joon was taken ende thei sueden hymn. 
[Concepcioun of our Ladie, Ecclesiast. xxiiij. & Jas a vyne maad fruyt ende haue euerlastinge lijf. 
Matheu i. a The book of the generacioun ende that is clepid Crist. 
S. Lucie virgyni. Ecclesiast. —_j. ce Mi Lord God, thou hast ende thou art my God. 
Matheu xij. & The kingdom of heuenes is lik ende newe thingis and olde. 
Vigile of Tomas, apostle. Ecclesiast. xliiij. +g The blessing of the Lord ende the coroun of glorie. 
Jon xv. a lama verre} vyne, and my fadir ende schal he don to 30u*.} 
Seynt Thomas, apostle!. Ephesies ij. g Now 3e ben not herberwid ende of God in the Hooli Goost. 
Joon XX. ff Thomas oon of the twelue ende and han bileuede. 
Junner. 
[Seynt Felice™. ij. Tymothy _ iiij. a I witnesse bifor God ende that louen his comyng. 
: Matheu xij. & The kyngdom of heuenes is lik ende newe thingis and olde. 
Seynt Maury, abbot. Ecclesiast. xxxix. ¢ The rijtwis man schal 3eue ende in to generacioun. 
Luce xj. f No man tendith a Janterne ende  3iue list to thee. 
Seynt Marcellus, pope and Ebreus v. a_ Ech bisschop takun of men ende ordre of Melchisedech. 
martir. . Mark xij. f Se 3e, wake 3e, and preie 3e ende_ seie to alle, wake 3e. 
Seynt Sulfice, bischop and Sapiens x d The Lord ledde forth ende euerlastinge cleernes. 
confessour®. Matheu “xxv. & A man that goth in pilgrimage ende into the ioie of thi Lord. 
Seynt Prisce, virgin and Kicclesiast. _ jj. e¢ Mi Lord God, thou enhaunsidist ende thou art my God. 
martir. Matheu xiijj. A The kingdom of heuenes is lik ende newe thingis and olde. 
Seynt Walston, bischop and Ecclesiast. xliv. d Lo! the grete preest ende the smel of swetnes. 
confessour. Matheu xxv. & Asa man that goth in pilgrimage ende into the ioie of thi Lord. 
Seynt Fabian and Sebas- Ebreus xj. Sf Which bi feith ouercamen ende hi witnessing of feith. 
tian®. Luce vj. e Jhesus cam doun fro the hil ende is myche in heuene. 
Seynt Anneys, virgin and Ecclesiast.  ]j. a Lord king, I schal knouleche ende the Lord my God. 
martir. Matheu xij. oh The kingdom of heuenes is lik ende newe thingis and olde. 
Seynt Vincent, martir. Ecclesiast. _xiiij. f Blessid is the man that ende_ the Lord oure God. 
Jon xij. d Buta corn of whete ende schal worschipe him?.] 
Vv Inserted from EMRKM. X Dedicacioun Dai. Emu. In dedicacion of the chirche. x. Y The pistte of alle these duies. Apoc. R. yy Sondait 
withinne vias. EMRXkM. 2 viij. dai of dedicacioun. E. Vtas of dedicacioun. MRxkm. a The pistil of dedicacioun dai ts rad on these thre feestis. ¥. 


The pistle to alle these daies. km. b Here endith the Temperal, and biginnith the Commemoraciouns. First biginnith the Commemoracioun of oure Lady 
Seint Marie in Aduent. £. Here enden dominicals and ferials, and bigynnen Commemoraciouns in this ordre. uxkm. Here endith the dominicals and 
Serials togidere of at the 3eer. Now bigynneth the reute of the Sanctorum, bothe of the Propre Sanctorum, and of the Comune Sanctorum togidere. x. No 
rubric in y. In emxkw the lessons for the Commemorations immediately follow, instead of being placed at the end of the Commune Sanctorum, as in 


arn. In £ the lessons of the Propre Sanctorum commence with Seint Fetice. ¢ The months are inserted from m and k. a S. Suturnine 
vigile. E. © apostle. E. f Nycotus dai. wk. Nicholas bishop. nr. & Om. sre. From mrxk». se Lo! the greete preest EMRxky. 
h of swetnesse EMRXky. i Pitas of Andrew. EMKM. i virgin and martir. ©. K Inserted from EMRxku, 1 Thomas dai. mk. m Felice, 


martir and bishop. E. N confessour, and S. Anton, confessour. E. 9 Sebastian, martirs. E. P Inserted from EMRXKM. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


Conuersioun of Seynt Poul. Apost. Dedis ix. 


: Matheu xix. 
[Seynt Julian, bisschop ond Ecclus. xlvij. ¢ xxiiij. 
confessour. Mark xij. 
Seynt Anneis 7.4 ij. Corinth. x. 
Matheu XXV. 
Seynt Batild, qween. Sapiens vij. 
Matheu xiij. 
Feuerer. 
Seynt Brides. ij. Corinth. x. 
Matheu XXv, 
Condilmasse day". Malachie iij. 
Luk ij. 
[Seynt Blase, bishop and Ebreus v. 
martir. Matheu x. 
Seynt Agas, virgin. Ecclesiast. —_j. 
Mathen xiij. 
Seynt Vedast and Amand, Ebreus vij. 
confessour’. Luce xij. 
Seynt Scolast, virgin‘and Sapiens vij. 
martir™, Matheu XxXV. 
Seynt Valentyn, martir. Ecclesiast.  xxxj. 
ee Matheu Xxvj. 
Seynt Julian, virgin and Ecclesiast. _ ]j. 
martir. Matheu xilj 
Petre in the ChayereY, i. Petir i. 
Matheu xvj. 
Seynt Mathie‘apostilz. | Apost. Dedis i. 
Matheu xj. 
Marche. 
[Seynt Perpetue,‘and Fe- i. Corinth. _ vij. 
lice®, virgin and martir. Matheu XXV. 
Seynt Gregori, pope. James i. 
Mark xilj. 
Seynt Edward, king and  Ecclesiast. x xxj. 
martir. Luce xiiij. 
Seynt Cuthbert, bisschep Ecclesiast. _xtiilj. 
and confessour>, Matheu XXV. 
Seynt Benet, abbot ‘and icclesiast.  xxxix. 
confessour ©. Luce xj. 
Oure Ladi day in Lentyn4, Isaye vij. 
* Luk i 
April. 
[Seynt Richard, bisschop Ecclesiast. — xiiiij. 
and confessour. Matheu XXV. 


Seynt Ambrose, bisschop 


and confessour. Matheu 
Seynt Tiburs & Valerian®. Parables 
Jon 
Seynt Alfei, bisschop and Ebreus 
martyr. Jon 
Seynt George, ‘martire. James 
Joon 
Seynt Mark, ‘enangelist®. Ephesies 
Joon 
S. Philip and Jacob. Sapiens 
Joon 
Hoolkt Rode dayi. Galatas 
Joon 
[Seynt Jon Port Latyn. Ecclesiast. 
Jon 


9 tj. tyme. R. 


v S. Viti and Modesti conf. E. w From E. 
bmartir.m. ,¢ Frome.  ¢c¢ Inserted from EmRxka. 


f Inserted from Emaxky. £ From emexky. 


Ecclus. xlvij. ¢ xxiiij. 


xv. 
iijj. 
xv, 
v. 
xilij. 


h From emrxkm. 


So Rk Ba Hoe es % & a we ROR A ewe a ei a & a 


a AN Oo SF AS oS oO 8 o 


eR RR WR RR DOR TR SR 


8 Brigid ©. which adds, S. Ignacius, b. and m. Bride virgyn. Rr. 
x Inserted from EmMRxks. 


Saul 3it brether or blower of 

Loo! we han forsakyn alle thinges 
The Lord hath soue knowleching 
Se 3e, wake 3e, and preie 3e 

He that glorieth, haue glorie 

The rewme of heuenes 

Wisdom ouercometh malice 

The kingdom of heuenes is lik 


He that glorieth, haue glorie 
The kingdom of heuenes 

Loo! I shal sende myn angel 
Aftir that the dayes of 

Ech bisschop takun of men 
No thing is hid that schal 
Lord king, I schal knouleche 
The kingdom of heuenes is lik 
The othere weren maad 

Be 3oure lendis gird 

Wisdom ouercometh malice 
The kingdom of heuenes 
Blessid is the man 

If ony man wil come 

My Lord God, thou enhaunsidist 
The kingdom of heuenes is lik 
Petre apostle of Jhesu Crist 
Jhesu cam in to the parties 

In tho daies Petre rysynge vp 
I knoweleche to thee, fader 


Of virgins I haue no 

The kingdom of heuenes 
Brethren, deme 3e al ioie 

Se 3e, wake 3e, and preie 
Blessid is the man 

If ony man cometh to me . 
Lo! the greet preest 

A man that gooth in pilgrimage 
The ri3twis man schal 

No man tendith a lanterne 
To speke to Achas, seyynge 
The aungel Gabriel was sent 


Lo! the grete preest 

A man that goth in pilgrimage 
The Lord hath 30ue knowleching 
3e ben salt of the erthe 

The tunge of wise men 

I am a vyne, 3e the braunchis 
Nile 3e be led awei 

I am a vyne, 3e the braunchis 
Bretheren, gesse or deme 3e 

I am a verey vyne, and my fadir 
To eche of vs is gife grace 

I am a verey vyne, and my fadir 
Thanne shulen stoond ristful 

Be not 30ur hertis trublid 

I truste of 30u in the Lord 

There was a man of the pharisees 
Who dredith God 

He seith to him, Sue thou me 


472 


i shal be don to 300 EMRxka. 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


ende 
ende 
ende. 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


t Inserted from EmRrxks. 
Y Chayering of S. Peter. EMRKM. 
d Gretinge of oure lady. Ex. Annuneiacioun of oure ladie. mwRkM. 


691 


affermynge that is Crist. 
welde euerlastynge lijf. 
he schal be blessid. 

seie to alle, wake 3e. 
chaast virgyne to Crist. 
not the dai ne the our. 
of hise werkis. 

newe thingis and olde. 


chaast virgyne to Crist. 
not the dai ne the ourt.} 
as oolde 3eeris. 

of thi puple Israel. 

ordre of Melchisedech. 
that. is in heuene. 

the Lord my God 

newe thingis and olde. 

in offring himself. 

mannis sone schal come. 
of hise werkis. 

not the dai ne the our. 
hise almesdedis. 

comynge in his kingdom. 
thou art my God. 

newe thingis and olde *.} 
reuelacioun of Jhesu Crist. 
vnbounden and in heuene. 
with elleuen apostles. 

and my charge list. 


hooli in bodi and spirit. 
not the dai ne the our. 
men that louen him. 
seie to alle, wake 3e. 
hise almesdedis. 

not be my disciple. 

the smel of swetnes. 
into the ioie of thi Lord. 
in to generacioun. 

3yue list to theec¢.} 
repreuen yuel and chese good. 
to me aftir thi word. 


the smel of swetnes. 

into the ioie of thi Lord. 

he schal be blessid. 

that is in heuenes. 

be loued of the Lord. 

schal be don to 3ou. 

God is disserued. 

schal be don to 30u!.] 

to men louynge hym. 

and it schal be don to 30u. 

of plente of Crist. 

‘3our ioye be fulfilledi. 

among seyntis the lot of hem is. 
T shal do it. 

crucified to me, and I to the world. 
euerlastynge lyf. 

Lord oure God. 


witnessing is trewe. 


u Purifiing of oure ladi. E. 
z From EmRxkay. a From ERX. 
¢ Valerian, martirs. E. 


Jj Fynding of the cros. EuRrxkm. 


692 TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 
Seynt Gordian and Epy- Sapiens ij. a The soulis of iust men ende regne withouten ende. 
mache. Jon xv. & Iam a-vyne, 3e the braunchis ende_ schal be don to jou. 
Seynt Nerei, and Achillei, Sapiens v. d Just men schulen lyue ende into a certeyn place. 
and Pancras. Jon xv. & Tama vyne, 3e the hraunchis ende_ schal he don to 3o0u. 
Seynt Dunston, bisschop LEcclesiast. xliij. d Lo! the grete preest ende the smel of swetnes. 
and confessour. Jon xv. a lama verei vyne ende chal be don to 30u. 
Seynt Vrban and Aldelm. Sapiens x, d The Lord ledde forth ende Lord is oure God. 
Jon xv. a Jama verei vyne ende chal be don to 30u. 
S. Austyn, ‘of Yngelond*, Ecclus. xlvij. ¢ xxiiij.a The Lord hath 3oue knowleching ende he schal be blessid. 
Jon xv. a Jama verei vyne, and my fadir ende_ schal be don to 30u. 
Seynt German, bisschop cclesiast. xliij. d Lo! the grete preest ende the smel of swetnes. 
and confessour. Matheu xxv. 6 Asa man that goth in pilgrimage ende into the ioie of thi Lord. 
Seynt Pernel, virgyne. ij. Corinth. x. g He that glorieth, haue glorie ende chaast virgyn to Crist. 
Matheu xxv. a The rewme of heuenes ende not the dai ne the our. 
Juyn. 
Seynt Nicomede, martir. Ecclesiast. xiiij. f Blessid is the man ende the Lord oure God. 
Matheu xvj.  f Ifony man wil come ende comynge in his kingdom. 
Seynt Marcellyn! ‘and  Apocalips _vij. $d Oon of the senyouris ende fro the eizen of hem. 
Petre™, Luce XXj. e Whan 3e schal heere ende to 30u into witnessing. 
Seynt Bonefas, bisschop i. Corinth. _ itij. d We ben maad a spectacle ende moost derewurthe sones. 
and martir®, Matheu x: d Whanne thei pursuen 30u ende drede 3e not hem. 
Seynt Medard & Gildard°. Hebreus vij. ff The othere weren maad ende in offringe him self. 
Luce xij.  f Be s3oure leendie gird ende mannis sone schal come. 
Translacioun of S.Edmound?Ecclesiast. 1. a_ Biholde, this is the grete preest ende hi daies euerlastinge. 
Prime, and Felician. Matheu xxv. 6 Asaman that goth in pilgrimage, ende into the ioie of thi Lord. 
Seynt Barnabe, apostle. Effes. ij. f Now 3e hen not gestis ende in the Holi Goost. 
Jon xv, d This is my comaundement ende name he 3yueth to 3o0u. 
Seynt Basilides, and Cyryn, Sapiens iij. a The soulis of iust men ende regne withouten ende. 
‘and Nabor 4, Matheu x. c Lo! Y sende 30u as scheep ende the ende schal be saaf. 
Seynt Basile, confessour®. Ecclesiast. xliiij. d Lo! the grete prest ende the smel of swetnes. 
Matheu xxv. Asaman that goth in pilgrimage ende into the ioie of thi Lord. 
Seynt Vite and Modeste®, Sapiens v. d Just men schulen lyue ende into a certeyn place. 
Luce xj. hk Wo to 30u that bilden ende to accuse him. 
Seynt Botulf, abbot. Ecclesiast. xxxix. ¢ The ristwis man schal ende in to generacioun. 
Luce xj. f No mau tendith a lanterne ende 3yue list to thee. 
Seynt Mark and Marcellian. Parables xv. a The tunge of wise men ende be loued of the Lord. 
Mark xij. 4 Loke 3e that no man ende ende schal he saaf. 
Seynt Geruais and Protais. Romans vij. f We witen that to men that ende in Crist Jhesu oure Lord. 
Matheu xxilij. a Jhesu wente out of the temple ende ende schal he saaf. 
Translacioun of Seynt Ed- Ecclesiast. xxxj. 6 Bilessid is a man that ende hise almesdedis. 
ward, king. Luce xiiij. f If ony man cometh to me ende not be my disciple. 
Seynt Albou, martir of Sapiens iilj. ec A iust man, thou; he he ende on hise chosen men. 
Ynglond. Matheu xvj.  f If ony man wil come ende comynge in his kingdom*.] 
Midsomer euen®. Jeremye i. b Before that I fourmede thee in ende waste and bilde vp and plaunte. 
Luk i. a There was sum preest Zacharie ende a perfite puple to the Lord. 
Midsomer day¥. Isaye xlix. a@ Herith, 3e ilys, and takith hede ende the holi of Israel that chees thee. 
Luk i. Sf The tyme of childberynge ende redempcioun of his puple. 
[Jon and Poul, martris. Ecclesiast. xliiij.. ¢ Tho ben men of merci ende the preising of hem. 
Luc xij. a Be 3e war of the sourdou;3 ende aungels of God™.] . 
Seynt Petre euen®, Apost. Dedis iij. a Petre and Joon stieden in to the ende in that that hifelle to hem. 
Joon xxj. d Jhesus seide to Petre, Symount ende to glorifie God. 
Seynt Petre day. Apost. Dedis xij. a Heroude the kyng sente hondes ende of the puple of Jewis. 
Matheu xvj. d Jhesus cam in to the parties ende vnboundyn and in heuenes. 
Commemoracioun of Seynt Galathas ij. d I make the gospel knowen ende thei clarifieden God. 
Poul. Matheu xix g Loo! we han forsakyn alle ende euerlastynge lyf. 
Juyl. j 
Octauis® of Seynt Joon  Isaye xlix. a Herith, 3e ylis, and takith ende the hooli of Israel that cheese thee. 
Baptist. Luk i, b Forsothe the aungel seith to ende among men. 
[Seynt Swithyn,‘Processe, Hebreus xj. f Which hi feith ouercamen ende bi witnessing of feith. 
and Martinian», Jon xv. e These thingis I speke ende hate withouten cause®.] 


_ K erchibishop &. 1 Marcetl.km. = ™ From emnxka. 0 confessour. M. ° Gildard, bishop. x. P Edmound, bishop. x. q From Erxk. 
Y bischop and conf. n. bishop. x. 8 Modeste, martirs. Ex. t Inserted from EMRXxkm. u §. Etheldride vigile. £. Vigile of Baptist. wxku. Vigile 
of Jon Baptist. n. VY Natiuite of S. Jon Baptist. emnxku. Ww Inserted from EmRxku. * S. Leo Pape vigile. E. Vigite of Peter and Poul. mnxkm. 
yS. Bebe and Pow. ¥. Seint Petris dai and Pout. m. Feste of Petre and Pout. rk. a Vias EmBxkyr. b Om. m. ¢ Inserted from 
EMRXxkm. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


693 


Translacioun of Seynt Ecclesiast. —_xliiij. Loo! a greet prest that ende in to the smel of softnes. 
Martyn, Luk xij. d Nil3e, litil folk, drede ende manns sone shal come. 
In the octawis4 of Petir Ecclesiast. —_xhiij. These ben men of mercie ende the preisynge of hem. 
and Poul. Matheu xiiij. e Jhesus comaundide his disciplis ende vereli thou art Goddis sone. 
[Translacioun of Seint To- Ebreus v. a Ech bisschop taken of men ende ordre of Melchisedech. 
mas. Luce xix. 6 A wurthi man wente into ende ede vp to Jerusalem ®.] 
‘ Feeste of f Seuen Bretheren. Hebrews x. Ff Haue 3e in mynde of ende iust man lyueth of feith. 
Matheu xij. g 3it hym spekynge to ende he is my brothir, sistir and modir. 
Translacioun of Seynt Be- Ecclesiast. xxxix. c The ristwis schal 3eue ende in to generacioun. 
net abbot®. Luce xj. f No man teendith a lanterne ende 3eueth list to thee. 
Translacioun of Seynt Swi- Ebreus vij. f The othere weren maad ende in offringe him seif. 
thyn bishop», Luce xij. Jf Be 3oure lendis gird ende mavmis sone schal come. 
Seynt Kenelm, king and  Ecclesiast. xxx}. 6 Blessid is a man that ende hise almesdedis. 
martir. Luce xiij. f If ony man cometh ende be my disciple. 
Seynt Arnulfi, king‘and Ecclesiast. xiiij. f Blessid is the man ende the Lord oure God. 
martir*, Mathen xvj. f If ony man wole come ende comynge in his kingdom. 
Seynt Margrete, virgyn  Ecclesiast. _j. c¢ My Lord God, thou enhaunsidist ende thou art my God. 
‘and martir), Matheu xij. oh The kingdom of heuenes is lik ende ewe thingis and olde. 
Seynt Praxede, virgyne Sapiens vij. g Wisdom ouercometh malice ende techeresse of hise werkis. 
‘and martir™, Matheu xxv. @ The rewme of heuenes ende not the dai, ne the our®.] 
‘Marye Mawdeleyn®. Proverbior. xxxj. 4 A stronge womman who schal ende and preisen hir in the 3atis her werkes. 
Luk vij. | f Oon of the pharisees preiede ende go thou in pees. 
[Seynt Appolinar, martir. ij. Tymothy _ iiij. a I witnesse bifore God ende that louen his comyng. 
Luce xxij. d A strijf was maad ende_ kynredis of Israel P.] 
‘Seynt Jame euen4. Ecclesiast. xliiij. g The blessing of the Lord ende with the coroun of glorie. 
Joon xv. a Jama verrey vyne, and my ende and 3o0ur ioye be fulfillid. 
Seynt Jame day'. Ephesies ij. g Now 3e ben not gestis ende whiche weren helid alle. 
Matheu xx? d The modir of the sones of ende is maad redi of my fadir. 
[Seynt Anne,*oure Ladi Prouerbs xxxj. ¢ Who schal fynde a stronge ende _preise hir in the satis. 
modir§. Matheu i, a The book of the generacioun ende that is clepid Crist. 
Feestess of Seuene Slepers. Sapiens iij. a The soules of iust men ende regne withouten ende. 
Luce xxj. .¢ Whanne 3e schal heere ende to 30u in to witnessing. 
Seynt Sampson, bisschop cclesiast. xliiij. d Lo! the grete prest ende the smel of swetnes. 
and confessour. Matheu xxv. 6 Asa man that goth in ende the ioie of thi Lord. 
Seynt Felice and Simplice, Parables xv. a The tunge of wise men ende beloued of the Lord. 
and Faustin. Luce xij. a Be 3e war of the sour dou; ° ende the aungels of Godt.] 
Seynt Abdon‘and Sennes". ij. Corynth. i. a Blessid be God and fadir of our ende be and of coumfort. 
Mark xiij. b Se 3e, that noon disseyue 30u ende this shal be saaf. 
[Seynt German, bisschop Sapiens x. d The Lord ledde forth a iust ende the Lord is oure God. 
‘and confessour¥. Mark xiij. f See 3e, wake 3e, and preie ende seie to alle, wake 3e.] 
August. p 
Lammasse day. Apost. Dedis xij. d Cam to the hows of Marie ende wente in to anothir place. 
Mathen xvj.d@ Jhesus cam in to the parties of ende vnhoundyn and in heuens. - 
[Seynt Steuen, popeand Hebreus v. a ch bisschop taken of men ende ordre of Melchisedech. 
martir. Luce xix. 6 A wurthi man wente into ende vp to Jerusalem. 
Fynding of S. Steuen Actus vj. d Steuen ful of grace ende he deiede. 
‘martirY. Matheu xxilj. jf Lo! Y sende to jou ende in the name of the Lord. 
Seynt Oswold, king and icclesiast. xxxj. 6 Blessid is a man that ende _hise almesdedis. 
martir. ; Luce xiiij. f If ony man cometh to me ende not be my disciple. 
Seynt Sixte and‘ Felicisime, ij. Corinth. i. b Blessid be God and ende be also of coumfort. 
and Agapite, martris?. Luce xxj.¢ Whane 3e schal heere ende to 30u in to witnessing. 
Seynt Donat, bisschop and ij. Timothy jj. b No man holding knisthode ende with heuenli glorie. 
martir. Mark xij. f See, wake 3e, and preie ende  seie to alle, wake 3e.] 
Seynt Cyryace‘martir>, Ecclesiast. ij. e 3e dredynge the Lord, abide ende for piteuous and merciful is oure Lord. 
and his felawis. Mark xvj.  g +=3e goynge in to al the world ende shulen han hem wel. 
‘Seynt Laurence euen®. _—_ Ecclesiast. —_ Jj. a knoweleche to thee, Lord ende men susteynynge thee. 
Matheu xvj. f He that wole come aftir me ende Goddis sone comynge in his kyngdom. 
Seynt Laurence day. ij. Corynth. ix. b He that sowith scarseli ende of 3our ristwisnes. 
Joon xij. d@ But the corne of whete fal ende mi fadir shal worship him. 
d vias Emaxkm. e Inserted from Exrxkm. f From &x. & From rx. h From £. i Arnulf bischop R. k Om. E. 


1 From e. m From E. a Inserted from EnRxkm. 
Vigil of James aku. t apostle day EM. day, apostle k. 
v From Emky. w Inserted from EMaxky. 
S. Laurence ku. S. Romain mariir, vigit £. 


© Marie day Magdeleyn. r. 
8 modir of Marie ©. 
Y From ka. Z his felowis k. 


P Inserted from EmRxku. 4 Seynt Cristin, virgin. EX. 
88 From Ex. t Inserted from EstRxkm. u From EMRxk,. 
a Inserted from EmRxku. b From srxk. © Vigil of 


694 TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 
[Seynt Tiburs, martir. Ebreus xiij. ¢ Nile 3e be lad awei ende God is disserued. 
Matheu xvj. f If ony man wole come ende comynge in his kingdom. 
Seynt Ypolite, martir ‘with Sapiens iiij. e A iust man thou; he be ende hise chosen men. 
his felawis4, Luce xij. | @ Be 3e war of the sourdou; ende the aungels of God®.) 
‘The Assumpcioun euenf. Ecclesiast. xxiiij. ¢ Fro the bigynnynge and bifore ende of halewis my withholding. 
Luk xj. d Sum womman of the cumpanye ende and kepen it. 
The Assumpcioun day. Ecclesiast. xxiiij. 5 Incalle thingis reste I souste ende and 3af swetnesse of smelle. 
Cant. Cantic. iij. g Goth out, and seeth, 3e doustirs ende and thi tetis to clustris. 
Luk x. a Jhesus entride in to sum castel ende be takyn awei fro hir. 
The octauis 8 of Seynt ij. Corynth. ix. b He that scarseli sowith ende of 3our ristwisnesse. 
Laurence. Matheu x. g He that loueth fader or moder ende not lesse his mede. 
(Vtas of‘ Assumpciounee, Cant. iij. gy 3e doustris of Sion ende clustris of grapis. 
Luk x. g He entride into a castil ende awei from her. 
Vigile of Bartilmew». Prouerbs iij. e Blessid is the man that ende waxen togidre hy deew. 
Jon xv. a Jama verei vyne, and my fadir ende chal he don to 3o0ui,] 
Seynt Bartilmew day. Ephesies ij. g Now 3e ben not gestis ende of God in the Holy Goost. 
Luk xxij. oc A stryf is maad amonge ende kynredis of Israel. 
[Seynt Rufe, martir. Ecclesiast. xiiij. jf Blessid is the man that ende the Lord oure God. 
Matheu x e No thing is hid that ende that is in heuenes. 
Seynt Austyn, doctor*. Eccles. xlvij. ¢ xxiiij.a The Lord hath 3oue knowleching ende chal he hlessid. 
: Matheu v. 6 3e ben salt of the erthe ende that is in heuenes!.] 
The decollacionn™ of Seynt Parablis x. g The abidynge of ri3twismen ende shal be enhaunsid the citee. 
Joon Baptist. Mark vj. ce Heroude sente and helde Joon ende and putte in a biriel. 
[Seynt Felice and Adacte. Sapiens iij. a The soulis of iust men ende regne withouten ende. 
Luce xij. a Be 3e war of the sour dou; ende the aungels of God. 
Seynt Cutburge, virgyne. ij. Corinth. x. g He that glorieth, haue glorie ende chaast virgyne to Crist. 
Matheu xxv. @ The rewme of heuenes ende not the dai, ne the our".] 
[Seynt Gyle, abbot. Ecclesiast.  xxxix The ri3twise man shal ende into generacioun. 
Luk xj. f No man teendith a lanterne ende  3tue list to thee®.} 
September. 
[Translacioun of S.Cutberd.Ecclesiast. xliiij. d Lo! the grete prest ende ‘the emel swetnes. 
Matheu xxv. 6 Asa man that goth in ende the iote of thi Lord. 
Vigile of Natinite. Ecclesiast. xij. c¢ Fro the bigynnyng ende myn withholding. 
Luce Xj. e It was don whanne ende of God and kepen itP.} 
The Natiuite of oure Lady. Ecclesiast. xxiiij. d 1 as a vyne fruytide swetir ende lastynge lyf shulen haue. 
Sapiens iiijj. @ O how feyre is a chaste ende in refresshynge shulen ben. 
Matheu i. a The hoke of generacioun of Jhesn ende that is clepid Crist. 
‘Hooli rode day4, Galatas v. d_ I truste of 30u in the Lord ende forsothe I seye in Crist. 
Joon xij. e Now is doom of the world ende that 3e ben sones of list. 
[Vetas of ‘the Natiuiter. Sapiens jij. @ How feir is a chaast ende_schal be in refreisching. 
Luce xj. e It was don whanne ende of God, and kepen it. 
Seynt Edith‘and Enfemie, ij. Corinth. x. g Ue that glorieth, haue glorie ende chaast virgyn to Crist. 
virgins’, Matheu xxy. a@ The rewme of heuenes ende dai, ne the our. 
Seynt Lambert, martir. | Ebreus v. a ch hisschop taken of men ende ordre of Melchisedech. 
Matheu ix. g Jhesus wente uboute ende_ in to his ripe cornt.] 
*Seynt Matheu enen™. Prouerbior. _ iij. e Blessid be the man that fyndith ende clowdis bi dew togidere wexen. 
Luk v. f JThesus saw; a pupplican, Leuy ende synful men to penaunce. 
Seynt Matheu day’. Ezechiel i. ce The likenesse of the cheer ende the likenes of leyt shynynge. 
Matheu ix. 6 Jhesus passynge saw3 a man ende but synful men. 
[Seynt Maurice, with hise Ebreus xj. f Which bi feith ouercamen ende hi wituessing of feith. 
felawis. Luce vj. e Jhesus cam doun fro the hil ende is myche in heuene. 
Seynt Tecle, virgyn. ij. Corinth. x. g He that glorieth, haue glorie ende_chaast virgyn to Crist. 
Mathen xxv. a The reume of heuenes ende not the dai, ne the our. 
Seynt Firmyn, bisschop*. Ebreus v. a Ech hisschop taken of men ende ordre of Melchisedech. 
Matheu ix. g Jhesus wente aboute ende into his ripe corn. 
Seynt Cipriany and Justine, Sapiens v. d Just men schulen lyue ende hem to a certeyn place. i 
martirs. Matheu x. d Whanne thei pursuen 3ou ende drede 3e not hem. 
Seynt Cosme and Damian, ij. Corinth. i. 6 Bilessid be God and ende plenteuous in vs. 
martirs. Luce yj. f Whanne hise isen weren ende is myche in heuen.] 
*‘Mizelmas day*. Apocalips =i. a ‘God maad opyn thingis thats ende fro oure synnes in his blood. 
Matheu xviij. a Disciplis camen neze to Jhesu ende of my fadir that is in heuene. 


© Inserted from Esmnxkw. f Vigil of Assumpcioun Exkyu. Eusebi confessour x. & vias EMRXKMrF. 8 oure ladi x. 
i Inserted from EMRxké. k bishop Ex. 1 Inserted from EMRXkM. m biheding EMRxkm. Nn Inserted from EmMRxky. 
P Inserted from EMRxkM. 4 Rering of the cros Emxku. Exaliacion of the cros n. Y oure ladi E. Svirgin Er. t Inserted 

D Vigil ©. Vigil of S. Matheu rn. Vigil of Mathew apostle kx. Vv day, apostil. EMRXk™é. w Mauri ku. X martir EX. 


z Inserted from EMRXk3. aS. Myjhel archaungel ExRxkm. aa He signifiede sendinge EmRxka. 


@ From ERX. 
h §. Thimothe Ex. 
© Inserted from BE. 
from EMRxky¥. 
Y Ciprian bishop ERX. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 695 

[Seynt Jeram, doctor». _Eceles. xlvij. ¢ xxiiij.a The Lord hath 3oue knowleching ende he schal be blessid. 

Matheu v. b 3e ben salt of the erthe ende that is in heuenes. 
Oct obre. 

Seynt Remyge and Ger-  Ebreus vij.  f The othere weren maad ende in offringe him self. 

uase®. Luce xij. f Be 3oure lendes gird ende mannis sone schal come. 

Seynt Leodegar, bisschop. ii. Tymothe ij.c iij.d Be thou myndeful. ende sufferd persecucioun. 

- Luce Xe d He that herith 30u ende writen in heuenes. 

Seynt Feith, virgin®. Ecclesiast. —_j. ¢ Mi Lord God, thou enhaunsidist ende thou art my God. 

Matheu xiij. oh The kingdom of heuenes ende newe thingis and olde. 

Seynt Marci, Marcelli, and Ebreus xj. f Which bi feith ouercamen ende bi witnessing of feith. 

Apulei!, martirs. Luce xxj. .¢ Whanne 3e schal heere ende to 30u in to witnessing 8.} 

Seynt Denyes day». Apost. Dedis xvij. d Whanne Poule abood hem at ende and Denys Ariopage. 

Luk yj. e Jhesus comynge doun of the hil ende is mychil in heuene. 

[Seynt Gerodioni, with fe- Ebreus xj. ff Which bi feith ouercamen ende bi witnessing of feith. 

lawis. Luce xxj. ¢ Whanne 3e schal heere ende to 30u in to witnessing. 

Seynt Nicas*, with felowis. Ebreus x: Jf Haue 3e mynde on the former ende man lyueth of feith. 

Matheu 5-4 d Whanne thei pursuen 30u ende drede 3e not hem. 

Translacioun of Seynt Ed- Ecclesiast. xxxix. c The ristwis man schal ende in to generacioun. 

ward, king. Luce xj f No man tendeth a lantern ende 3eue list to thee. 
Seynt Kalizt,-pope and —_ Ebreus xiij. ¢ Nile 3e be led awei ende God is disserued. 
martir. Mark xij. f Se se, wake 3e, and ende  seie to alle, wake 3e. 
Seynt Wulfram, bissehop FEcclesiast. xliiij.. d Lo! the grete prest ende the smel of swetnes. 
and confessour. Matheu xxv. 6 Aman that goth in ende the ioie of thi Lord!.] 
S. Misel in the mount. Apocalips —_ xij. e There is maad a greet bateil ende and 3e that dwellen in hem. 
Matheu xviij. @ Disciplis camen nei; to Jhesu ende of my fadir that is in heuen. 
Seynt Luk day™, Ezechiel i. ce The likenes of the cheer ende the likenes of leyt shynynge. 
Luk X: a The Lord Jhesu ordeynede and othir ende is worthi his hire. 

['Feeste of ® xj. thousynd Sapiens iilj. a How feir is a chaast ende be in refreischinge. 

virgins®, Mathen xxv. a The rewme of heuenes ende the dai, ne the our. 

Seynt Romayn, confessourP. Sapiens x. d The Lord ledde forth ende euerlastinge cleernes. 

Mark xij. f See 3e, wake 3e, and ende  seie to alle, wake 3e. 

Seynt Crispin and Crispi- i. Corynth. — itj. d We hen maad a spectacle ende derewurthe sones. 

nian, martirs. Matheu x. ce Lo! Y sende 30u as ende_schal be saaf. 

Vigil of Symound and Jude, Sapiens ij. a The soules of just men ende regne withouten ende. 

apostlis. Jon xy. 6 Tama vyne, 3e the braunches ende schal be don to 30u4.] 

Seynt Symount day and Romayns  viij. a We witen that to men louynge ende in Jhesu Crist oure Lord. 

Jude. Joon xv. d This is my comaundemaunt ende and it shal be don to 30u. 

“Alle Halewe euen’. Apocalips —v. e I saws, and loo! in the mydel of ende in to worldis of worldis. 

Joon xvij. ¢ Hooli fader, kepe hem in thi ende and I in hem. 
Nouembre. 
Alle Halewe day. Apocalips —vij. 6 I saw; another aungel stiynge ende in to worldis of worldis. 
* Matheu v. a Jhesus seynge companyes ende plenteuous in heuene. 
{‘ Alle Soulen day’. i. Tessalon. itij. f£ We wolen not that 3e ende in these wordis. 
Jon xj. e Martha seide to him ende in to this world. 
Seynt Leyenard, abbott, Ecclesiast. xxxix. c The ristwis man schal ende in to generacioun. 
Luce xj. f No man tendith a lanterne ende 3eue list to thee. 

‘Feest of" wij. crowned Sapiens iij. a The soulis of iust men ende regne withouten ende. 

martirs. Luce xxj. ¢ Whanne 3e schal heere ende to 30u into witnessing. 

Seynt Teodore, martir.  Ecclesiast. xiiij. f xv. 6 Blessid is the man that ende the Lord oure God. 

Matheu xvj. ff Ifony man wole come ende comynge in his kingdom. 

Seynt Martyn, bisschop and Ecclesiast. xliiij. d Lo! the grete prest ende the smel of swetnes. 

confessour. Matheu xxv. 6 Asa man that goth in ende the ioie of thi Lord. 

Seynt Brice, bisschop and Sapiens x: d The Lord ledde forth ende euerlastinge cleernes. 

confessour. Luce xix. 64 A wurthi man wente ende vp to Jerusalem. 

Seynt Macute, bisschop' and Ecclesiast. _xiitij. +d Lo! the grete prest ende the smel of swetnes. 

confessour’. Luce xix. 6 A wurthi man wente ende vp to Jerusalem. 

Seynt Edmound, bisschop*. Ecclésiast. 1. a Biholde, this is the grete ende hi daies euerlastinge. 

Matheu xxv. 6 Asa man that goth in ende the ioie of thi Lord. 

Seynt Huwe, bisschop. Ecclesiast. xlv. a Loued of God and of men ende lijf and of teching. 

Mark xiij. f Se 3e, wake 3e, and ende_ seie to alle, wake 3e. 
Vtas of S. Martyn. Ecclestast. xliiij. d Lo! the grete prest ende the smel of swetnes. 
; Matheu xxv. 6 Asa man that goth in ende the ioie of thi Lord. 

b preest EX. © German Ex. 4 bishop and confessour E. martir m. © virgin and martir ¥. fOm.r. 8&8 Inserted from EMRxky. 5 with 
felawis Enrxkmu. ‘Gereon ERx. Geredionkm. * Nycolasm. ‘Inserted from EmRxkm. ™ euangelist Emnxkm. "From Ex. © meydens x. 
P bishop and confessaur E. bishop. 4 Inserted from EMRXkmM. 1 S. Quintin x. Vigil of al Halewis x. Vigil of alle Halewen km. 8 Commemora- 
cioun of Soulis Ex. t confessour and abbot ¥. a From Ex. Vv Om. km. W erchibishop EX. 


696 TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


Seyni Edmound, king*. Ecclesiast. xxxj. & Blessid is a man that 5 ende hise almesdedis. 
Luce xiiij. jf If ony man cometh to me ende not be my disciple. 
Seynt Cecile, virgyny. Ecclesiast. —_ lj. ¢ Mi Lord God, thou enhaunsidist ende thou art my God. 
Matheu xij. oh The kingdom of heuenes ende newe thingis and olde 2.] 
Seynt Clement, mariir®, Philipensis _iiij. a My moost dere and moost ende ben in the boke of lyf. 
Luk xix. 8 A noble man wente in to ende stiynge in to Jerusalem. 
[Seynt Grisagon, mariir. Prouerbs ij. ce Blessid is the man that ende waxen togidre bi dew. 
Luce Xx. d He that herith 30u ende writen in heuenes. 
Seynt Kateryne, virgin and _— Ecclesiast. _‘jj. a Lord king, I schal knowleche ende the Lord my God. 
martir. Matheu xiij. & The kingdom of heuenes ende newe thingis and olde. 
Seynt Lyne, pope and martir. Ebreus v. a Ech bisschop taken of men ende ordre of Melchisedech. 
Luce xix. 6 A wurthi man wente into ende vp to Jerusalem 5.] 


Here endith the Propre Sanctorum, and now* bigynneth the Commoun Sanctorum, 


In Esire tyme. Ecclesiast. xhiij.  g ende 
Pronerbior. _ iij. e Blessid be the man that fyndeth ende clowdis he dewe to gidere wexen. 
Joon xv. a lama verey vyne, and my fadir ende and it shal be don to 30u. 
Joon xv. & Tama -vyne, and 3e the braunchis ende be don to 30u. 

Of oon Apostle. Apost. Dedis v. c Bi the hondis of apostles ende whiche weren heelid alle. 
Ephesies ij. g Now 3e ben not herberwid ende of God in the Hooli Goost. 
Joon xv. d= This is my maundement that ende and it shal be don to 3ou. 
Joon xv e Thes thingis Y comannde to 30u ende for thei hadden me in haate. 
Matheu x. ce Lo! I sende 3ou as schepe ende this schal be saf. 
Luk xxij. d Astryf is maad amonge hem ende kynredis of Israel. 

Of the Euangeliste. Ezechiel i. ¢ The likenes of the semlaunte ende in to the liknes of leyt shynynge. 
Luk x. a Jhesus ordeyned other seuenti, and = ende_a werk man is worthi his hire. 

Of a Martir. Ecclesiast. xiiitj.. jf Blessid is the man that shal ende it shal heritage hym. 
Sapiens iiij. c The ristwis forsothe if he ende in to the chosyn of hym. 
ij. Corynth. i. a Blessid be God and the fadir ende be and of coumforte. 
Ecclesiast. xxxj. 8 Blessid is the ryche man that ende out telle the chirche of halewis. 
ij. Corynth. ij. b Be thou myndefnl, Lord ende shulen suffre persecucioun. 
ij. Tymothe iiij. a I witnesse to fore God and ende that loueth his comynge. 
ij. Tymothe ij. a No man holdynge kny3thod ende in Crist Jhesu with heuenli glorie. 
Ephesees i. a Blessid be God and the fader of ende that aboundide greetli in vs. 
Joon xij. d But the corne of whete fallinge ende_ worshipe hym whiche is in heuenes. 
Luk x. ce He that herith sou, herith me ende 3oure names ben wrytyn in heuenes. 
Mathen xvj. jf Ifony man wole come aftir ende comynge in his kyngdom. 
Luk xij. jf If ony man cometh to me and ende may not be my disciple. 
Matheu Xx. e Nothing is couered that shal not ende before my fadir that is in heuene. 
Joon xv. a lama verey vyne, and my fadir ende and it shal be don to 30u. 

Of a Martir and Bishop. Hebrews y. a Eche bishop takyn of men ende the ordre of Melchisedech. 
Hebrews xij. ¢ Nil3e be led awey with ende bi siche oostis God is disseyued. 
Matheu ix. g Jhesus compasside citees and castels ende and symple as dowfes. 

Of a Bishop exilid. Luk xix. 6 A noble man wente in to a fer ende stiynge in to Jerusalem. 

Of many Martirs. Sapiens ij. a The soulis of ristwis men ende shal regne in to with outen ende. 
Sapiens v. e Ristwis men forsothe in to with ende place thei shulen lepe in. 
i. Corynth. iiij. © d We be maad as spectacle ende moost derworth sones. 
Hebrews x. JS Hane 3e mynde of former ende mi iust man lyueth of feith. 
Ecclesiast. ij. c 3e dredynge the Lord sust ende for piteuous and merciful is our God. 
Sapiens X. f But seelde to ristwis men the ende ouercome thei presseden togidere. 
Apocalips vij. =f Oon of the seyntes answerde ende eche teere fro the eyen of hem. 
Parablis xv. a The tunge of wise men enourneth ende shal be loued of oure Lord. 
Ecclesiast. _-xliiij.. ~ Men of mercy ben, of whom ende the chirche shal shewen. 
Luk vj. c His eyen cast vp in his disciplis ende 30ur mede is myche in heuen. 
Matheu v. a Jhesus seynge companyes ende mede is plenteuous in heuens. 

X king and martir Exk. _‘Y virgin and martir Ex. z Inserted from EmRxku. a pope and martir wRk. pope M. b Inserted from EMRxka. 
¢ Om, ¥. 4 The Table in Ewk ends with the Proper Sanctorum; x ends with the Commemorations, and has the Proper Sanctorum inserted in a Ka- 


lendar prefixed; the following portion, liere intitled the Common Sanctorum, is omitted in EstRxkm. There is no final rubricin mM. The rubric in & is, 
The vigile of the Natiuite of oure Lord, with alle the twetue daies and the utacis of hem as thei stonden bi ordre, so thou shalt fynde hem stonde togidre in 
the Temporal. And euere thenke we oure Lord eendetes in Trinite. In 2, Heere endith the reule of the Sanctorum, both Propre and Comyn togidere. 
And now folewith heere the Commemoraciouns of al the 3cer, and first the Commemoracioun of oure lady in Aduent. In x, It is to undirstonde, that not ech 
fessoun of the oolde tawe is writun in the bible word bi word as it is rad in Chirche, but sum is takun a resoun of o chapitre and the remenaunt of another, 
and summe ben takun of mo chapitris, and that in diuerse placis, and 3it not acoordinge fulli to the text of the bible, as this pistle, In that tyme 3ifte 
shal be horn, bigynneth in Isa. xix co. toward the ende, and the remenaunt is in diuerse placis of the chapitre suynge, and also in many lessouns the Chirche 
hath set to bothe bigynnyngis and endingis, that ben not in the bible. Ink, Thus eendith the Kalender of lessouns, pistils and gospels of al the 3eer. In 
M, Here endith this Katender of lessouns, pistlis and gospets of at the 3eer, aftir the vss of Salisbire. 


Of Confessours and Bishops. 


Of Confessours and Doctours. 


Of Confessours and Abbots. 


Many Confessours. 


Virgyn and Martir. 


Virgyn, not Martir. 


Many Virgynes. 


TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


Luk xxj. 
Luk vj. 
Matheu x. 
Mark xiij. 
Luk xij. 
Matheu xxiiij. 
Matheu x. 
Matheu xxilij. 
Luk xj. 
Mark xiij. 
Joon xv. 
Ecclesiast. xliiij.d 1. 
Sapiens x. 
Ecclesiast. xiv. 
Matheu xxiiij. 
Matheu xxv. 
Mark xiij. 
Ecclesiast. —_xlvij. 
Sapiens vij- 
Matheu v. 
Ecclesiast.  xxxix. 
Luk xj. 
Hebrews vij. 


Ecclesiast. ij. 
Luk 
Matheu x: 


Ecclesiast. —_]j. 
Ecclesiast. Jj. 
Ecclesiast. x xiiij 
Matheu xiij. 
ij. Corynth. x. 
Sapiens viij 
Tsaye Lxj. 
Matheu xxv 
i. Corynth. — vij. 
Sapiens iiij. 
Matheu XXV. 


Ra eR OPH RW SHR ARR ATO ASA R © MOO 
. 


Ra RRO UWA 


* Whanne 3e shulen here bataile 


Jhesus comynge doun fro the hille 
Loo! I sende 30u as sheep 

Se 3e, that no man disceyue 

Be 3e war, and flee 3e fro the 
Jhesus sittynge on the hil of 

Nil 3e deme, that Y cam to sende 
Jhesus goynge out of the temple 
Woo to 30u that bilden birielis 
And whanne he wente out 

I am a verey vyn, and my fader 
The greet prest that in his lyf 
Ristwise fro the wraththe of 
Loued of God and men 

Therfor wake 3e, for 3e witen not 
A man goynge fer in pilgrimage 
Se 3e, wake 3e, and preye 3ee 

He 3af knowlechynge to holi 

I desirede, and there is 30uen to me 
3e ben salt of the erthe 

His herte he shal take to 

No man tendith a lantern, and 

Mo ben maad prestis aftir the 
Who dreden the Lord shal 

Be 3our leendis gyrt before 

Jhesus sente thes twelue, comaundynge 


.Thou hast enhaunsid vpon the 


I shal knoweleche to the Lord 
Wisdam shal preyse his soule 
The kyngdam of heuenes is 

He that glorieth, glorie in the 
Forsothe malice ouercometh not 
Joiynge I shal ioye in the Lord 
The kyngdom of heuens is 

Of virgyns I haue not precept 
How is chast generacioun with 
The kyngdam of heuenes is 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


697 


3e shulen welde 3our soulis, 
is myche in heuene. 

this shal be saaf. 

this shal be saaf. 

before the aungel of God. 
this shal he saaf. 

he shal not lese his mede. 
he this shal be saaf. 

that thei shulden accuse hym. 
he this shal be saaf. 

and it shal be don to 3ou. 


3af to hym euerlastynge clerenes.’ 
and to lawe of lyf. 

he shal ordeyne hym. 

in to the ioye of thi Lord. 

T seye to alle, wake 3e. 


maad of frendship of God. 

in the kyngdom of heuenes. 

fro generacioun in to generacioun. 
3yue hist to thee. 

oons offrynge hym silf. 

the maundements of hym. 

manns sone shal come. 

frely 3yne 3e. 

seye to the name of the Lord. 
takist out men susteyninge thee. 
braunchis of worship and of grace. 
newe thingis and oolde. 

a chast virgyne to o man Crist. 
and the chesers of the werkis of him. 
and ioyen vpon thee shal thi God. 
the day, ne the hour. 

hooli in bodi and spirit. 

in refresshynge shal be. 

the day, ne the hour. 


Here endith the Comoun Sanctorum, and bigynneth the Comemoracioun of the Trinite. 


Comemoracioun of the Dips: ij. Corynth. 


Of the Hooli Gost. 


Of the Crosse. 


©The Commemoracioun of cure Isaye 


Ladi in Aduent. 


The Commemoracioun fro Cris- Titus 


tenmasse to Candiimas. 


The Commemoracioun fro Can- Ecclesiast. 


dilmasse to ‘Paskee, 


The Cammemoracioun fro Pask Ecclesiast. 


to the Trinite. 


The grace of oure Lord Jhesu Crist 
O! the heiznes of ritchessis 
Whanne the Hooli Goost shal 
Whanne apostles that weren 
Who that loueth me, kepith 

He mekyde hym silf maad 
Jhesus stiynge vp to Jerusalem 
The Lord spak to Achaz 

The aungel of the Lord is sent 
The benygnyte of oure saviour 
The shepherdis spaken to 

Fro begynnynge and bifore 
Jhesu spekynge to the companye 
Fro the bigynnynge and bifore 
Besidis the cros of Jhesu 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


(Commemoracioun of our Lady in alle othere tymes of the seer is as on the Vigile of Assumpcioun‘.} 


For Bretheren‘ and Sisterst, and Isaye 


“good doers), 
For the Pees. 


For Clere Wedre. 


xii. og 
Romayns xi. g 
Joon XV. g 
Apost. Dedis viilj. 9 
Joon xij. 
Philipensis jj. b 
Matheu xx. 6 

vij. d 
Luk i. d 
ij. c 
Luk ij. c 
xxilij. ¢ 
Luk xj. d 
xxilj. @ 
Joon XIX, ne 
xix. ff 
Matheui xij. og 
ij. Machabeor. i. e 
Joon xv. 9 
Jeremye ixm f 
Luk viij. oc 


In that day shal be the autirs 
“3it hym spekynge to companye* 
Preestis maden preyer while 
Lo! the hour cometh, and now 
Rijs, prey thou in the ny3t 

Tt is doon in oon of dayes 


e Ta oiguaee the Commemorations of the Virgin precede the Commemoration of the ne 


& sistren uy. 
1 al her lijflude Ennxk». 


VOL. IV. 


h galus populi emxk. heelthe of the peple m. for sauacion of the peple n. 
m ‘Threnoram jj. iij. EMRxk. Jeremy ij. F. 


4uU 


ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 
ende 


ec Kester tyme R. 
{ Mark emRxk. 


be with jou alle. Amen. 
glorie in to the worldis. 

for I seide to 30u. 
resceyueden the Hooli Goost. 
to me, so Y do. 

in glorye of God the fader. 
the thridde day he shal rise. 
repreue yuel and chees good. 
he it don to me aftir thi word. 
aftir hope of euerlastynge lyf. 
as it is seid to hem. 

before hym Y seruede. 

the word of God and kepen it. 
before hym I seruede. 

took hir in to his. 


forsothe myn heritage Israel. 
‘brother, sister and modir}, 
nethir forsake 3ou in ydel tyme. 
I haue ouercome the world. 
thou asenbier of my lijf. 

and thei obeien to hym. 


f Inserted from EmRrxkar. 
k Jhesus settinge EmRxkM. 


698 TABLE OF LESSONS, EPISTLES AND GOSPELS. 


For Reyne. Jeremye xij. f Whethir throwynge of fer thou ende forsothe thou didist alle thes thinges. 
Matheu vj. g Nil3e be bisie, sechynge what ende shulen be cast to 30u. 
For Bateil and Pestilence®, _ Hestir xij. ¢ Lord king, almysti in thi ende and thin heritage don awei. 
Mark xj. e Who ever seith to this hil ende to 30u 30ur synnes. 
° Of Aungels. Apocalips xix. ¢ He seide to me, wryte thou, ende worship thou God. 
Joon v. a ‘There was a feeste day of Jewes ende he was holden with 
A Preest? for hym silf. Romayns vij. f I delite togidere to the lawe ende bi Jhesu Crist oure Lord. 
Joon xv. b If 3e shulen dwelle in me ende 30ure ioye be fulfillid. 
For Pestilence of Beestis. Jeremye xilij. ¢ Ifoure wickidnessis schulen ende ne forsake thou vs. 
Matheu vij. b Aske 3e, and it shal be 30uen ende to men askynge hym. 
For ‘ Weie ferynge Mena. Genesis xxiiij. @ Lord God of heuene, that took ende he sende his aungel to fore me. 
Matheu x. b 3e goynge, preche 3e, selynge ende thanne to that citee. 
For ‘oure Synnes*. Romayns iv. c Whanne we weren 3et in synnes ende in the lijf of hym 
Luk v. f JShesus wente out, and saw3 a ende synful men to penaunce. 
For Sijk‘ Mens, James v. e If onye of 30u is sorewful, preie ende that 3e be saaf. 
Luk ij. § f Jhesus rysynge of the synagoge ende by him silf helide hem. . 
For Weddynges. i, Corynth. yj. f Wite 3e not that 30ure ende bere 3e God in 30ur bodi. 
Matheu xix. a Pharisees camen ny3 to hym ende enioyned or knyt togidre. 
* For Pilgrymes. Genesis xxiij. @ Lord God of heuene that ende his aungel tofore me. 
Matheu x b 3e goynge, preche 3ee ende frely 3yue 3e. 
‘Masse of Requiem™. i. Tessalon. _ iiij. e We wolen not 3ou for to ende to gidre in these wordis. 
Pistlis’. ij. Machabe. xij. g Collacioun maad, he sente ende vnboundyn fro synnes. 
Apocalips _—xiiij. oe I herde a vois fro heuene ende the werkis of hem suen hem. 
Gospels¥, Sundai*. iy Corynth. xv.¥ cY ‘Crist roos fro deed # ende ‘man in his ordre. 
Monedai=. Joon xj ce Martha seide to Jhesu, Lord ende Crist, the sone of quyke God. 
Tewisdai *. Joon vj. d Al thing that my fader ende reyse hym in the last day. 
Wednesdai*, Joon v d ‘As the fader reyside dede> ende in to rysynge a3en of doom. 
Thursdaix, Joon v. d ‘He that herith my word¢ ende ‘in to rysynge a3en of doom4. 
Fridai*. Joon vj. f Yam quyke breed that ende reise hym in the laste day. 
Saterdai*. Joon yj. Ff ‘But 3e shulen ete my® ende reyse hym in the laste day‘. 


n For Batels £. In tyme of Bateils muxka. © This lesson comes in after the one Of the Cros, in EmRxkm. P Man EmRxkm. a Pilgrimes 
EMRXkM, I Sinnis E. Synners MRXM. 8 Om. ExRxkm. t Lesson omitted in Emrxka. u Of Requiem for the Deed 5. For the Deed rxk. 


Om. mM. Vv From mrxky. = W From m. x From Emrxky. y Om. ar. Inserted from emRxkm. 2 If Crist is prechid zxrexkm. & Om. ar. 
Inserted from Emrxka. b Treuli, treuli, I seye EmRxkm. ¢ For as the fadir extrxkm. 4 deeth into lijf Emrxkw. € Treuli, treuli, I seye 
EMRXkM. f No final rubric in ay. ere endith the Commemoraciouns, and biginnith the Sauntorum, Comin and Propre, alle undir oon, as thei 


fallin in the 3eer bi ordre, biginnynge next aftir the vtas of the twelfthe day. x. Here endith the reule of the Temperal, and bigynneth [the Sanctorum k] 
ae the Propre and the Comyn. mk. Ilere endith the reule of the Temperal, and bigynneth the reule of the Sanctorum, both of the Propre and the 
‘omyn. M. 


GLOSSARY. 


A. 

AAKE. 0. ake. 

a-bac, a-bak, adv. back, backward, Num. 
xi. 20. Ps. xhi. 2. Joh. vi. 67. 

abaischid, abaishid, abaischt, abaist, abasht, 
abasshid, p.p. made faint, afraid, abashed, 
Josb. ti. 9. Ez. xxi.14. Mk. v. 42. xvi. §. 
v. baishide. 

ahece, the alphabet, 1 Kings prol. p. 2. 
Esth. prol. p. 636; pl. abeces, abicees, 
1 Kings prol. p. 2. 

a-begging, for the purpose of begging, Ps. 
lviii. 7. 

abide, abijd, abyde, to wait, dwell, Lev. xix. 
13. Ruth i. 13. Is. xxviii. 10; pr.t. abid- 
ith, abytt, abit, 1 Kings ii. 36; pl. abiden, 
Tob. vi. 10; p.é. abod, abode, abood, 
aboode, Gen. xii. 10. Job xxx. 26. Lk. 
ii. 25; pl. aboden, abooden, abeden, 
abedin, abiden, abideden, abididen, Judg. 
ili. 25. 1 Kings xxx. 10, 21. Is. lix. 9. 
Deeds xxvii. 6. Lk. ii. 38. Joh. viii. 7. 
1 Pet. iii. 20; p.p. abeden, abedun, 
abidun, abiden, Gen. viii. 10. Mt. xv. 32. 
Deeds xviii. 18. v. bide. 

abiding, abidynge, n. expectation, Gen. xlix. 
10. Ps. xxxviii. 8. 

abie, fo suffer for, Job xx. 18. 

abitable, inhabitable, Ex. xvi. 35. 

abite, habit, dress, Gen. xxxviii. 14, 19. 
1 Tim. ii. 9. 

abited, p.p. inhabited, Jer. 1. 13. 

ablere, comp. mare fit, Eccles. xi. 4. 

abode, abood. v. abide. 

aboue-brouste, p.t. brought upon, Bar. iv. 
10, 14. 

aboue-enhaunse, imp. exalt greatly, Dan. iii. 
373 p-p. aboue-enhaunsid, Dan. iii. 52. 

aboue-hauncid, aboue-hauncyd, p.p. greatly 
evalted, Ps. xxxvi. 35. xxi. 16. 

aboue-lede, to bring upon, Dan. ix. 12. 

ahone-membrid, p.p. above mentioned, Tob. 
iv. 22. v. membrede. 

aboue-preisable, very worthy of praise, Dan. 
ili. 53. 

aboue-preiseful, very worthy of praise, Dan. 
iii. 53. 

aboue-reyse, imp. exalt greatly, Dan. iii. 58; 
pp. aboue-reysid, Dan. iii. 54. 

aboue-semynge, excellent, Eph. iii. 19. 





abone-strecche, to stretch above, Ez. xxxvii.6. 

aboun, abouen, abowen, adv. above, Judg. 
v. 10. Iv Kings iii. 21. 

aboute-waiteris, spiers about, Ps. xxx. 7. 

abregge, to make short, Ecclus. xxviii. 10; 
p-p. abreged, Mt. xxiv. 22; pr.p. abreg- 
gynge, Rom. ix. 28. v. breggid. 

ahreggyng, an abridging, Is. x. 23. xxviii.22. 

a-brode, a-brood, adv. abroad, Gen. ix. 27. 
xxvi. 22. xxvili. 14. 

abusioun, an abusing, Ps. xxx. 19. 

accept, p.p. accepted, Lk. iv. 19, 24. Rom. 
xv. 16. 11 Cor. vi. 2. 1 Tim. vy. 4. 

aclumsid, p.p. unloosed, Jer.vi. 24. Ez. xxi.7. 
v. clumsid. 

acolit, acolyt, an acolyte, Coloss. prol. p. 429. 
11 Thess. prol. p. 448. 

acoolynge, 2. @ cooling, refreshing, 11 Macc. 
iv. 46. ’ 

acordith, pr.t. is jit, agrees, Gen. x\lviii. 
18. Luc. v. 36; p.é.pl. acordiden, Ex, 
xxxix. 18; p.p. acordid, accordid, Mt. v. 
24. xx. 13. I Cor. vii. 11. 

acordyng, 2. agreement, reconciling, Job 
xxv, 2. Rom. v. 11. 

acquenchid, aquent, p.p. destrayed, quench - 
ed, Lk. prol.1. p.141. Deeds prol. p. 507. 

acreesynge, pr.p. increasing, Gen. xlix. 22. 

actouris, autours, pl. keepers, (Lat. actores,) 
Gal. iv. 2. 

acumblid, p.p. unloosed, Jer. vi. 24. 0. 
cumblid. 

acumbred, p.p. made heavy or stiff, Ex. 
xv. 15. 

adamaunt, adamant, Hos. xi.8. Zech. vii. 12. 

addris. v. eddre. 

adese, adze, 1s. xliv. 13. 

adiurement, @ charging, Tob. ix. 5. 

a-doun, adv. down, Num. iv. 5. Judg. ix. 48. 
Job xviii. 16. Mt. ili. 10. 

adrad, adred, p.p. afraid, Gen. xxvii. 33. 
1 Esdr. viii. 75. Judith xii.12. v. drede. 

a-feer, a-fer, a-ferre, adv. afar, Gen. xxi. 16. 
xxii. 4. Lev. xiv. 40. Lk. xiv. 32. 

afeere, afere, affer, to make afraid, Lev. 
xxvi.6. Job xi.19. Is. xvii. 2. Mk. xv. 403; 
p-p. aferd, afeerd, aferde, afered, afferid, 
affrayed, Gen. xxxii. 7. 1 Mace. vii. 30. 
Mt. xiv. 30. xxviii. 4. Lk. xxiv. 22. 
Joh. xiv. 27. v. feere. 


4U 2 


affitchide, p.p. affixed, tv Kings xviii. 16. 
v. ficche. 

a-fier, a-fiere, adv. on fire, Num. xxi. 6. Ez. 
xxviii. 14. Prov. xxx. 5. 

a-foote, a-fote, adv. on foot, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p. 68. Mk. vi. 33. 

a-fore, prep. before, Lev. iv. 6. 

a-forn a3ens, a-forn 3ens, adv. opposite, aver- 
against, Mk. xv. 39. _v. forn-a3ens. 

aftir-comers, aftir-comeris, posterity, Gen. 
xxi, 23. xxvi. 4. Lev. xvii. 7. 

aftir-comyngus, consequences, Ecclus. iii. 32. 
xi. 17. 


| agaste, to make greatly afraid, 11 Par. xxxii. 


18; p.p. agast, agastid, Gen. xliii, 18. 
Deut. i. 29. Mt. viii. 26. Lk. xxiv. 37. 
v. gaste. 

agregge, aggrege, to make heavy, to harden, 
Is.vi.10; pr.t.pl. agreggen, 1 Kings vi. 6; 
p.t. agreggide, agregide, 1 Kings vi. 6. 
111 Kings xii. 10; pl. aggregiden, Zech. 
vii.12; p.p.agredgyd, agreggid, Gen. xviii. 
20. Judg. xx. 34. v. gregge. 

a-goon,a-gon, adv. ago, Gen. xxxi.2. 11 Mace. 
xiv. 36. . gon. 

agreued, p.p. made heavy or hard, Ex. ix. 7. 

agrisen, to dread greatly, Ecclus. xxxviii. 4; 
p.t. agriside, Job xix. 17. v. grisedist. 

aymed. v. eyme. 

aisch, aische, aysche, asch, ashes, Gen. xviii. 
27. Deut. xxviii. 24. Mt. xi. 21; pl. 
aisshis, aischis, asches, ayshen, asshen, 
Gen. xviii. 6. 27. Num. iv. 13. v. aske. 

aisel, aysel, aycel, vinegar, Mt. xxvii. 48. 
Mk. xv. 36. Joh. xix. 29. v.eisel. ~ 

ake, aake, pr.t. ache, 1v Kings iv. 19. Jer. 
iv. 19; akith, 1v Kings iv. 19; p.t. akide, 
11 Kings xv. 23. 

akir, an acre, 1 Kings xiv. 14. 

al, all, alle, hal, an awl, Ex. xxi. 6. Deut. 
xv. 17. 

al-abide, to constantly dwell, Prov. xv. 31. 

al-aboute, al-abouten, adv. wholly, Gen. xlii. 
28. Ps. xvii. 24. Ecclus, xxxix. 17. 

alarge, to make large, Gen. xi, 27. xxxii, 12; 
pr-t.pl. alargen, Mt. xxiii. 5; p.t. 2 p. 
alargidist, Ps. xvii. 37; p.p.alargid, Gen. 
xxvi. 22, 11 Cor. vi. 11. 2. large. 

alargyng, n. making large, Bz. xxxi. 7. 

alblasters,alblasteris, crossbow men, 11 Kings 


700 


viii. 18. xv. 18. 1v Kings xi. 18. v. ar- 
blasteris. 

al-brekende, pr. p. breaking in pieces, Is. 
xxvili. 2. 

al-brent, p.p. wholly burnt, Gen. xxii, 2. 
Ex. xxxii. 6. v. brenne. 

al-closid, p.p. entirely closed, Wisd. ii. 5. 

al-conereden, p.t.pl. entirely covered, Ps. 
liv. 6. 

al-defouled, p.p. entirely ruined, Is. xxiv.10. 

al-delicen, to perfectly delight, Eccles. ii. 10. 

alder-he;est, most high, Deeds vii. 48. v. al- 
ther-heesist. 

al-disturbith, pr.t. disturbs altogether, Prov. 
xv. 27; p.t.pl. al-disturbiden, Ps. lxxxvii. 
18; p.p. al-disturbid, Ps. xli. 7. liv. 4, 5. 
lvi. 5. 

al-doun, adv. quite down, Judg. vii. 13. 

aldre, alder, adj. elder, Ex.iv.29. Deut.xxii.17. 

aldren, aldryn, elders, Ex. x. 9, pass. Deut. 
xxii. 18. v. eldren. 

aleggid, p.p. lightened, relieved, Is. ix. 1. 

aleis, aleies, aleyes, alleys, lanes, 111 Kings 
vii. 2. S. Sol. ii. 1. vi. ro. 

aleris. v. alure. 

al-folden, al-falt, p.p. wrapped up, Is. xxxviii. 
12. v. folden. 

al-for-slept, p.p. fast asleep, Prov. xxiii. 


algat, algatis, allegates, adv.wholly, in all man- 
ner, always, Gen. xxxiii. 15. Ex. ix. 4, 6. 
Mt. xxvi. 11. Rom. ii. ro. 2 Cor. v. 6. 

al-helid, p.p. perfectly healed, Jer. viii. 22. 

al-hool, al-hol, quite well, entire, Gen. xliii. 
28. 

alie, alye, relative, kinsman, Ex. xviii. 15. 

alienen, fo estrange, Ecclus. xi. 36; p.t. 
alienyde, 1 Macc. xv. 27; pl. alieneden, 
1 Mace. vi. 24; p.p. aliened, alienyd, Ps. 
Iii. 4. Ez. xiv. 7. 

alienyng, 2. estrangement, Job xxxi. 3. 

aliete, sea-eogle, ospray, (Lat. halieetus,) Lev. 
xi. 13. Deut. xiv. 12. 

alizted, p.p. lightened, relieved, \s. ix. 1. 

alistne, aliztte, to enlighten, 1 Cor. iv. 5. 
v, lijtne. 

almaunder, almond-tree, Eccles. xii. 5; pl. 
almanders, Gen. xxx. 37. 

almaundis, alemaundis, almonds, Gen. xliii. 
it. Num. xvii. 8. 

almery, almarie, store-chest, Pref. ep. c. iv. 
p- 64; pl. almeries, chronicles, (Lat. com- 
mentarii,) 11 Macc. ii. 13. v. armaries. 

almesse, alms, Mt. vi. 2; pl. almessis, Deeds 
x2? 

almesse-deede, almesse-deedis, alms-deeds, 
Tob. ii. 16, iv. 7.11, 12. ix. 9. 

almest, almost, Judg. viii. 1. 1 Mace. v. 13. 

al-onli,al-oonli, only, Ex.xxi.27. [s.xxviii.19. 

aloonenesse, aloonesse, desolate condition, 
Esth. xvi. 14. Joel ii. 3. 

aloothinge. pr.p. loathing, Lk. prol.1. p.142. 
Deeds prol. p. 508. v. lothende. 

al-out-driede, p.t. was extremely dry, Is. v. 
13; pp. al-out-dried, Gen. viii.13. 

alouwid, p.t. admitted, accounted, Wisd. iii. 6; 
p-p. alowid, Gen. xv. 6. v. loouwede. 


GLOSSARY. 


al-plesede, p.t. perfectly pleased, Is. xlii. 1. 

al-redi, ready, prompt, Gen. xvii. 3. 

al-rijsen, to rise together, Ps. xciii. 16. 

al-sory, quite sorrowful, Ps. liv. 3. 

al-stille, entirely quiet, Is. xxiv. 8. xxv. 37. 

all-sturbist, pr.t. 2p. greatly disturbest, Ps. 
xli, 12. 

al-take, to take altogether, Ps. xviii. 25. 

alther-best, adj. very good, 1 Kings ix. 10. 

alther-best, adv. very well, Gen. xxxix. 3. 

alther-fattest, very fat, 1 Kings xv. 32. 

alther-hee3ist, althir-heizest, alther-hesist, 
most high, Num. xxiv.16, 1v Kings xv. 35. 
Ps. xlv. 5. v. alder-he3est. 

al-to-brasten, al-to-brosten, p.t.pl. burst in 
pieces, 11 Par. xxv. 12; p.p. al-to-borsten, 
al-to-brostun, Num. v. 21. ¥. to-braste. 

al-to-breke, to break in pieces entirely, Deut. 
xxviii. 20. Jer. xxx. 8. Lk. xx. 18; p.t. 
al-to-brak, Josh. x. 10. 1v Kings xxi. 
9; pl. al-to-braken, 1v Kings x. 27; 
p-p.al-to-brokun, al-to-broke, Deut.xxviii. 
24. 1 Par. xxxiv. 7. Is. li. 6; pr.p. al- 
to-brekynge, Jer. xxiii. 29. v. to-breke. 

al-to-brende, p.t. burnt entirely, Ps. ev. 18. 
v. to-brenne. 

al-to-brese, al-to-brise, to break utterly in 
pieces, Ps. xlv.10. Mt. xxi. 44; pp. al-to- 
broste, Jer. ii. 20. v. to-brose. 

al-to-derened, p.p. utterly darkned, Ps. Ixviii. 
24. Is. xiii. 10. v. to-derened. 

al-to-drawynge, pr.p. dragging to pieces, Lk. 
ix. 39. v. to-drawe. 

al-to-feblid, p.p. made utterly feeble, Is. 
XNXVIlL. 14. 

al-to-foule, to utterly defoul, Is. xxx. 22; 
p.p. al-to-foulid, 1 Macc. x. 53. 

al-to-kut, p.p. cut to pieces, 1 Par. xx. 3. 

al-to-moued, p.p. greatly moved, Jer. li. 29. 
v. to-moued. 

al-to-powne, to break in pieces, Mt. xxi. 
443 p.p. al-to-powned, Deut. xxviii. 24. 
v. to-poone. 

al-to-pullid, p.p. pulled entirely in pieces, Is. 
xviii. 2. liv. 11. v. to-pulle. 

al-to-rende, to tear in pieces, Hos. xiii. 8. 

al-to-stereth, pr.t. altogether moves, Wisd. 
iii. 15; p.p. al-to-stirid, Ps. xxxvii. 17. 
v. to-stere. 

al-to-streit, very narrow, Is. xxviii. 20. 

al-to-sturbist, pr.t.2p. greatly disturbest, 
Ps, xiii. 5. 

al-to-trede, to tread down utterly, Deut. vii. 
24; p.t. al-to-trade, 1v Kings vii. 175 
pl. al-to-traden, Judg. ix. 27; p.p. al-to- 
troden, Jer. ii. 37. v. to-trede. 

al-to-trembliden, p.é.pl. trembled greatly, 
Jer. xxiii. 9. 

al-to-trublidist, p.t.2p. extremely afflictedst, 
Ps, Ixxiii. 13; pl. al-to-trubleden, Dan. 
v. 6. v. to-truble. 

al-to-wrappid, p.p. entirely folded up, Is. ix. 
18. 

al-to-wrastled, p.p. struggled greatly, Ecclus. 
li. 25. 

al-turned, p.p. converted, Ps. Ixx. 20. Jon. 
iii. 9; pr.p. al-turnende, Is, xliv. 25. 


al-whit, perfectly white, Ps. 1. 9. 

alure, alley, thoroughfare, open space serving 
as a window, 111 Kings vi. 36; pl. aluris, 
aleris, 111 Kings vii. 2. 1v Kings i. 2. 

amende, to make amends, chastise, mend, 
Prov. xxv. 8; p.p. amended, amendid, 
Lk, xxiii. 16; pr.p. amendynge, Mt. iv. 
21. 

amfore, pot, (Lat. amphora,) 1 Kings i. 24. 
Zech. v. 6. 

a-myddis, prep. amidst, Gen. xxxv. 2. 

amygal. v. mygal. 

a-mys, adv. astray, Gen. xxxvii. 15. 

amyse, clothing, apparel, Is. xxii. 17. 

amyt, amyte, hood, garment, Ex. xxxix. 21. 
Hebr. i. 12. 

amome, amonye, cinnamon, Apoc. xviii. 13. 

amoneste, to warn, admonish, 1 Cor. iv. 14. 
p.t. amonestide, amonestede, 111 Kings 
xv.13. Tob. viii.4. Rom. prol.2.p.303; pl. 
amonestiden, 1 Macc. xii. 50; p.p. amo- 
nestid, Rom. prol.1. p.300. v. moneste. 

amongis, prep. amongst, 1 Cor. xvi. 10. 

a-morewe, adv. in the morning, Deeds iv. 5. 

ampte, amte, anpte, ant, Prov. vi. 6; pl. 
amptis, amtis, Prov. xxx. 25. 

an-hie3e, an-hi;, adv. on high, Mt. ii. 18. 

anefeld, anefelt, anfeeld, an anvil, Job xli. 
15. Ecclus, xxxviil. 29. 

an-egge, on-egge, adv. on edge, Ez. xviii. 2. 

anelid, p.p. baked, Is, xvi. 7,11. 

anens, anent, anentis, anentys, anentist, 
anemptis, prep. with, at, Gen. xii. 15. 
xxxi, 32. xlii. 33. 1 Esdr. ix. 8. 111 Esdr. 
vi. 1. Wisd. ii. 1. Mt. xix. 26. Lk. i. 30. 
Rom. ii. 5. 

anese, anete, anise, Mt. xxiii. 23. 

angil-hoc, angling hook, Is. xix. 8. 

angwischide, p.t. tormented, 1 Kings i. 6; 
p-p. angwischid, Gen. xxxi. 40. 

angwishe, anguish, Gen. xlii. 21; pl. an- 
gwischis, anguysses, Deut. xxvi. 7. 

anyntische, to bring to nought, to destroy, Ps. 
exxxvi. 7. Ecclus. xiii. 8; p.p. anyntisch- 
id, anentyschid, Ps. Ixxiv. 9. Rom. iv. 14. 
v. eneyntisyng. 

a-ny3, adv. nigh, Jer. xxiil. 23. 

anoye, to grieve,.trouble, Num. xxi. 4; p.t. 
anoiede, anoyede, 11Cor.i. 8; p.p. anoyed, 
MK. xiv. 33. v. noise. 

anoye, annoyance, chagrin, Ps. cxviii. 28. 
pl. anoyes, Job vi. 9. 

anoynt, p.p. anointed, Gen. 1.3. Num. vi. 15. 
Ruth iii. 3. v. oynte. 

anoon, presently, Gen. iv. 7. Xv. 4. 

anowre, to worship, Ex. xxxiv. 143 p.t. an- 
ourede, anouride, Gen. xix. 1. xxiv. 485 
pl. anowryden, Gen. xxxiii. 73 p.p. an- 
owrned, (?) Gen. xxxiii. 7. v. onouryde. 

anourne, anowrn, to adorn, dress, Gen. xxiv. 
47. Ex. xxv. 7; p.t. anournede, rv Kings 
ix. 30; pl. anourneden, Mt. xxv. 7; 
p-p.anournyd, Apoc. xxi. 2. ». enourned. 

anournment, anornment, adorning, Ex. 
Xxxiil. 5. 

anowmnyng, x. adorning, Gen. ii. 1. 

anow3, enough, 1 Kings xxv. 15. 0. ynow. 


apaid, apayed, apaied, p.p. contented, satis- 
fied, Lk. iii. 14. 1 Tim. vi. 8. Hebr. xiii. 5. 
v. payd. 

a-parti, adv. partly, in part, Job prol. p.671. 

apassid, apast, p.p. past, Is. liv. 15. 

apechid, p.p. accused, Num. v. 14. 

apeyrith, pr. ¢. impairs, 1 Cor. v. 6; p.p. 
apeyrid, worn, Deut. xxix. 5. v. peire. 

apeirement, harm, injury, Phil. iii. 8. 

apeirere, injurer, Cath. Epp. prol. 1. p. 594. 

apeyryngis, injuries, Phil. iii. 7. 

apeliden, p.t.pl. appealed against, accused, 
1 Mace. x. 64. 

apert, open, Mk. iv. 22. Lk. viii. 173; in 
apert, openly, 1 Cor. ii. 33. 

apeertly, apertly, apertlich, manifestly, Pref. 
ep. c. vil. p. 71. Lev. xiii. 36. Tob. ii. 22. 
1 Tim. iii. 16. 

applie, applyen, to bring to, seek to, arrive at, 
Num. xvi. 5. 1 Par. ii. 16; tmp-.pl. aplieth, 
1 Kings xiv. 38; p.t. appliede, 1 Macc. 
iii. 42; pl. applieden, 1 Mace. iii. 4o. 

apon, upon, Mt. vii. 26. 

apostilhed, apostlehed, office of apostle, Rom. 
i. 5. 1 Cor. ix, 2. 11 Cor. xii. 12. 

appareyl, appareil, apparel, aparel, company, 
equipage, provision, 1 Macc. ix. 35, 39, 52- 
11 Macc. xii. 14; pl. appareils, apparels, 
ir Mace. xii. 27. 

appel-croke, kook to gather apples, Pref. ep. 
Cc. vil. p. 70. 

aquent. v. acquenchid. 

aquyte, to requite, Deut. xxxii. 41. v. quyte. 

a-rawe. v. a-rowe. 

araiers, preparers, Esth. viii. 9. 

arbitrouris, arbitrators, judges, 111 Esdr. 
viii. 26. 

arblasteris, crossbow men, 11 Kings viii. 18. 
xx. 7. v. alblasters, arow-hlasters. 

arblastis, engines to shoot arrows, 1 Macc. vi. 
20, 51. 

architriclyn, master‘of the feast, (Lat. archi- 
triclinus,) Joh. ii. 8. 

areche, arecche, to reach, extend, Gen. xlix. 
13. Jer. xv. 6. Lk, xi. 12. Joh. xiii. 26; 
pr-p. arechynge, Gen. xlix. 13. 

arede, areede, to declare, Mt. xxvi. 68. 
Mk. xiv. 65. Lk. xxii. 64. 

areyns. . ireyne. 

areiside, p.t. lifted up, Heb. 2.24; p.p. arei- 


sid, areysid, Mt. xi. 23. Joh. iii. 14. viti. | 


28; pr.p. areysynge, Obad. 3. 

arete, areere, to raise up, Ex. xiv. 16. xl. 2; 
p.t. arered, areeride, areride, Ex. x. 13. 
xl. 16. Mk. i. 31; pl. arereden, Gen. vii. 
17. Deut. xxxii. 16; p.p. arerid, Gen. 
xviil. 2, Mt. xi. 23; pr.p. arerynge, Ps. 
ci. II. v. rere. 

arereres, awakeners, Judith xiv. g. 

aresonyde, p.t. produced reasons to, 11 Esdr. 
xiil. 21. 

arette, to reckon, charge, Lev. xi. 4. Phi- 
lem. 18; p.t. arettide, Gen. xxxi. 15. 
Rom. iv. 8; p.p. arettid, Gen. xv. 6. 
1 Mace. x. 38. Mk. xv. 28. Lk. xxii. 37; 
pr.p. arettinge, Ex. xiii. 17. vo. rette. 

a-rewe. v. a-rowe. 


GLOSSARY. 


arewe, arwe, arrow, 11 Kings i. 22. Judith 
v.16; pl. arwes, arwe3, Gen. xxvii. 3. 
Jer. li. 11. 

arewe-caas, arwes-caas, arrow-case, Gen. 
xxvii. 3; pl. arewe-cases, arowe-caasis, 
1 Par. xviii. 7. 

arew-girdlis, quivers, Ez. xxvii. 11. 

argentarie, silversmith, Deeds xix. 24. 

ariel, upper part of the altar, Wiz. xliii. 14. 

armaries, pl. chronicles, (Lat. commentarii,) 
1 Esdr. iv.15. v. almeries. 

armeres, armeris, pi. weapons, arms, Gen. 
xxvii. 3. Deut. i. 41. Joh. xviii. 3. 

arm-sercle, armlet, Gen. xxxvili. 18; pl. 
arm-serclis, Gen. xxiv. 22, 30. 

arn. v. ben. 

aroos, p.f. arose, Gen. iv.8; pl.arisen, Judg. 
xx. 18, 19; p.p. arysun, Gen. xxxii. 22. 

arow-blasters, crossbowmen, 11 Kings viii. 
18. v. arblasteris. 

a-rowe, » a-Lewe, .a-Fawe, on-rowe, adv. in 
row,one after another, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
pp- 70, 72. Ps. xxxii. 15. Is. xiii. 14. 

arre, a scar, Lev. xxii. 22. ' y 

arreden (?), p.é. pl. excited, Deut. xxxii. 16. 

arsroppis, entrails, bowels, 1 Kings v. 9. 
v. ers. 

arst, previously, 1 Esdr. ii. 68, 

arte, ta narrow, confine, compress, Ecclus. 
ix.ig; p.t. artide, Judg. i. 34; p.p. 
artid, artyd, Pref. ep. c. vii. pp. 69, 72. 
Ex. xiv. 3. 

artou, artow, art thou, Mt. viii. 29. xi. 3. 

arwe. v, arewe. 

asale, asaye, assaye, to try, prove, tempt, 
Ex. xvi. 4. Deut, viii. 2. Judg. vi. 39. 
1 Kings xvii. 39; p.t. asayede, assaiede, 
Gen. xxii.1. Ex. xv. 25; p.p. asayed, 
assaied, 11 Par. xxxii. 31. Rom. xv. 26. 
1 Cor. ii.14; pr.p. asayinge, 11 Cor. i. 9. 
v. sayed. 

asaie, assay, @ trial, Phil. ii. 22. 

ascape, to escape, Deut. iv. 42; p.t. asca- 
pide, Gén. xiv. 13. ». scapen. 

aseelen, p.t. pl. seal, 11 Esdr. x.13 p.p- 
aseelid, aselid, Esth. iti.12. Wisd. ii. 5. 

a-seeth, a-seethe, satisfaction, 1 Kings iii. 
14. 1 Kings xix. 7. 1 Esdr. v. 5. Mk. 
xv. 15. 

aserche, aserchen, to search, 1 Kings xx. 


12, it Kings xx. 6; pr.p. aserchynge, | 


Gen. xxxi. 34. xliv. 12. 

asydis, adv. aside, Mt. xvii. 1. 

asidis-half, asydis-half, aside-half, adv. 
aside, by themselves, on one side, Gen. xxi. 
28, 29. Num. xvi.16. a Kings iii. 27. 
mit Kings xviii. 6. Mk. vi. 31, 32. 

asydis-hond, aside, by themselves, Gal. ii. 2. 
v. on-sidis-hend. 

asile, place of refuge, asylum, 11 Macc. iv. 
34- 

aske, ashes, Gen. xvili. 27. Mt. xi. 21; pl. 
asken, askes, askis, ashes, Ex. ix. 8. v. 
aisch. 

askynge, 2. @ petition, Judg. viii. 24. 111 
Kings ii. 20; pl. askingus, Ps. xxxvi. 4. 
v. askynge. 


701 


a-sleepe, a-slepe, adv. asleep, Judith xiii. 4. 
Ps. iii. 6. Jer. li. 39. 

aslepid, p.p. fast asleep, Judith xiii. 4. 
Prov. xxiii. 34. 

asoilen, assoile, assoyle, to solve, absolve, 
Judg. xiv. 13,14. 1 Macc. x. 29; p.t. 
assoilide, 11 Mace. iv. 47; p.p. assoylid, 
Deeds xix. 39. v. soiled. 

asoilingts, solutions, Wisd. viit. 8. 

aspie, aspyen, fo lay wait, watch privily, Gen. 
ili. 15. tv Kings vii. 13; p.t. pl. aspieden, 
Mk. iii. 2. Lk. vi. 73 p. p. aspied, 1 
Mace. xiv. 31; pr. p. aspiyng, aspying, 
Lk. ii. 54. xvii. 20. 

aspiere, spy, beholder, 1 Esdr. viil. 31. 
Ez. xxxiii. 2; pl. aspieris, Gen. xlii. 9. 
Jer. vi. 17. Lk. xx. 20. Hebr. xi. 31. 
v. spiere. 

aspies, wait, ambush, treason, Gen. iii. 15. 
Ex. xxi. 13. Mk. vi. 19. Deeds xxiii. 
16. v. spies. ‘ 

aspies, pl. spies, Gen. xlii. 30. 34." _ 

aspiyngli, tragtcrously, Ecclus, xxxii. 19. 

aspyingis, wait; ambush, treason, Deeds xx. 
1g. Eph. vi. 11. 

assaile, to come upon, 1 Par. vil. 215 p.t. 
assailide, asaylide, Gen. xv. 12. xxxv. 5; 
pl. assaileden, Gen. xv. 12. 

assossied, p.p. associated, 111 Kings xxii, 
50g. 

astericho, asterye, an asterisk, Pref. ep. 
c. ix. p. 75. 

astonieden, p.t. were astonished, Is. xxi. 4; 
p-p. astonyid, astoneyed, Lev. xxvi. 32. 
Is. xix.15. Mk. ix.14. Deeds ii. 6; pr.p. 
astonyinge, Judg. xv. 8. v. stone3e. 

astonying, n. astonishment, Gen. xxvii. 33- 

astronomyen, diviner by stars, Dan. ii. 10; 
pl. astronomyenes, astronomyens, Lev. 
xx. 6. Dan. ii. 2. Mt. ii. 1, 16. 

astronomier, diviner by stars, Dan. ii. 10; 
pl. astromyeris, astromiers, astronomyers, 
Lev. xix. 31. Dan. ij. 2. Mt. ii. 1, 16. 

atake, to overtake, take, Pref. ep. c. viii. 
p. 74. Lev. xxvi. 5. Josh. it. 53 p. p. 
ataken, atake, Gen. xxxi. 25. v. otaken. 

athinkith, pr.t. repenis, Gen. vi. 73 p.p. 
athoust, Ex. xili. 7. v. othenkyn. 

athenkynge, ». repentance, 1 Kings xv. 29. 

atier, atire, attyr, apparel, ornaments, Ex. 
xxxili. 4. Ez. xxiii. 40. 

a-treet, a-treed, adv. distinctly ,11 Esdr.viii.8. 

atte, at the, Mt. v. 23. 


| attentifly, attentively, Josh. xxii. 5. 


attercop, a spider, Is. lix. 5; pl. attercoppis, 
Job viii. 14. Is. lix. 5. 

at-worth, acceptably, worthily, (?) Ps. 1. 21. 

a-twynne, a-twynny, a-twyny, adv, in two, 
apart, Ex. xxviii. 28. Dan. xiii. 51. Mt. 
xxv. 33. Deeds xv. 39. Gal. v. 15. 

aube, cope, Ix. xxxix. 20. Lev. viii. 7. 

auncetry, ancestry, ancestors, Lev. xxvii, 22; 
pl. auncetries, Lev. xxvii. 22. 

austerne, stern, austere, Lk, xix. 21. 

austernesse, sternness, Esth. xv. 10. 

auter, altar, Gen. vili. 20; pl. auteris, au- 
teers, autris, Ex. xxxiv. 13. 


702 


au3t, anything, Prov. x. 4. 
aust, a3te, p.l. owed, Mt. xviii. 24. Lk. vii. 
41. Mk. prol. 1; p.p. a3t, Deut. xv. 1. 
xvili. 8. Josh. ix. 7. v. awe, ouste. 
auauntith, pr. t. boasts, Prov. xxviii, 25 ; pl. 
auaunten, Rom. prol. p. 302 m. 
auenture, issue, result (Lat, eventus), Ex. 
ii. 4. 
auerous, auerouse, auerowse, avaricious, 
Pref. ep. c. viii. p. 75. Prov. i. 19. xxix. 4. 
auerously, greedily, Job xxvii. 8. 
auyse, to consider, 11 Kings xxiv. 13. 
auysement, deliberation, Ex. xxi. 14, 
auysseli, auisili, advisedly, Gen. xxxii. 22. 
Deeds xxv. 4. 
auoide, auoyde, ta make void, do away, 
Ecclus. xiii. 6. 1 Cor, ix. 15. xv.245 p.p. 
auoided, auoidid, auoydid, Job xv. 4. 
Ecelus. ii. 8. Rom. iii. 3. Gal. v. 4. 
auoket, advocate, 1 Joh, ii. 1. 
auouter, auowter, an adulterer, Lev. xx. 10. 
Deut. xxii. 22; pd. auouters, auouteris, 
Mal. iti. 5. Lk. xviii. 11. 
_anoutrende, auoutrynge, pr.p. doing adul- 
tery, Wisd. xiv. 24. 11 Cor. ii. 17. 
auoutrere, auowtreer, adulterer, Deut. xxii. 
22. Mt. xii. 39; pl. auoutreres, anou- 
treris, auowtrerys, Mal. iii. 5. Lk. xviii. 
11. 1 Cor. vi. 10. 
auoutresse, auowtres, awowtresse, adulteress, 
Lev. xx. 10. Deut. xxii. 22, Mt. xii. 39. 
Rom. vii. 3; pl. auoutressis, Ez. xxiii. 
45: 
auoutrie, auowtrye, auowtrie, adultery, Gen. 
xxxix, 10, Lev. xx. 10, Mt. v. 32. Lk. 
xvi. 8; pl. auoutries, auowtries, Jer. xiii. 
27. Mt. xv. 19. 
auowe, to cow, Lev. xxvii. 14.16. Num. | 
Xxx. 3; p.t. anowide, Gen. xxviii. 20; 
p-p- auowid, Deut. xii. 26. 
auowe, 2. 2 vow, Gen. xxxi. 13. Num. xxx. 
73 pl. anowis, auowes, Ex. xxxvi. 3. Lev. 
xxi. 38. 
awe, pr.t. ought, Ex. xxi. 13; p.t. awste, 
Is.v. 4. 0. aust. 
aweytid, p.p. laid in wait for, Ex. xxi. 13. 
v. weitid. 
axcess. 0. excess. | 
axe, to ask, Gen. xxiv. 57. xxx. 31. Mt. | 
1.8; pr.t. axeth, axith, Mt. v. 42. Lk. 
prol. 1. p. 1413 imp. pl. axeth, axith, 
Mt. x. 11; p.é. axide, Gen. xxiii. 16. 
Judg. vi. go. Mt. xvi. 13; pl. axeden, | 
axden, Gen. xxiv. 58. Mt. xvii.to. Lk. 
iii. 10.143 p.p. axid, axide, Ex. xxi. 30, 
Mt. xiv.7; pr.p. axende, axynge, axinge, 
Mt. vii. ra. Mk. ix.13. Lk. i. 63. 
axer, axere, asker, Zech. ix. 8. Lk. xii. 58. 
axyng, #. a petition, Judg. viii. 24. 115 
Kings ii. 20; pl. axynges, axyngis, Ps. | 
xxxvi. 4. 1 Joh. v.15. v. askynge. 
axtre, acletree, Ecclus. xxxiil. 5; pl. ax- | 
trees, 1 Kings vii. 30. 
ajein, a3eyn, a3een, asen, adv. again, Gen. | 
iii. 1g. xxviii. 15. Mt. ii. 8. 12. 
ajen, a3ein, a3eins, a3ens, azenus, ajeinus, 
aeinys, aeynst, prep. against, Gen. iv. 8. 


— 














GLOSSARY. 


xxvi. 20, xxxii. 28. Is. xxxiv.14. Mt. v. 
IX. vii. 27. vill. 34. x. 35. xii. 30. 2. 
aforn-a3ens, euen-a3ens, forn-ajens. 

asen-aske, to require, Gen. xliii. 9. Deut. 
xxiv. 10; p.p. azeen-askid, Wisd. xv. 8. 

ajen-biere, ajeen-biere, a3en-byer, redeemer, 
Job. xix. 25. Ps. xvili.15. Deeds vii. 
35- 

a3eyn-byggen,a3zen-bygge, a3en-bie, a3en-bye, 
to redeem, Ex. vi. 6. xiii. 13. Lk. xxiv. 
21. Tit. ii. 14; p.t. 2 p. azen-biest, Ex. 
xiii.13; p.¢. a3en-bouste, Deut. vii. 8 ; 
2 p. aen-boustist, Ex. xv. 13. Apoc.v.9; 
p-p. aen-boust, a3en-bouste, Lev.xxv.31. 
Lk. xxiv. 21. Gal. iii. 13. 

azen-biggyng, azen-biyng, asen-byinge, a3ein- 
biynge, x». redemption, Lev. xxv. 24. 
Mk. x. 45. Rom. viii. 23. 

ajein-biheest, a3en-byhest, a3en-biheeste, 
repromission, Gal. iii. 18. Hebr. vi. 15; 
pl. asen-biheestis, Hebr. xi. 13. 

azeen-bihotere, a pledger, engager, Ecclus. 
Xxix. 21. 

az3een-bihoteth, pr. t. becomes surety for, Ec- 
clus. xxix. 23; p.¢@. a3en-bihizte, Hebr. 
X. 23. 


ajeen-bihoting, ». promise, engagement, Ec- | 


clus. xxix. 24. 

azen-beholdynge, pr. p. looking against, Ex. 
XXXVil. 9. 

awen-bowid, p.p. recurved, ur Kings vii. 
26. 

ajeen-bringe, to bring back, Tob. v. 20. 
Job x. 9; p.t. a3en-brouste, Ex, xv. 19; 
p-p. azeen-bro3t, Tob. xii. 3. Ps. Ixx. 
20. 

aseen-chiding, . chiding against, Ecclus. 
XXi. 5. 

ajen-clepe, fo recall, Tob. xiii. 12. Rom. x. 
73 p.t. pl. azen-clepiden, Ex. x. 8; p.p. 
ajen-clepid, Num. xii. 14. 

ajeen-cleping, n. a calling back, Esth. iv. 11. 


ajen-come, a3en-com, fo meet, Gen. xxiv. 


12. xlvi. 28. Ex, xxiii. 4; pr.p. ajen- 
comynge, Dent. i. 44. 





a3en-comyng, ”. meeting, Gen. xiv. 17. Xxx. 


16, xxxii. 6. 

ajen-drawe, imp. draw back, Iix. iv. 7; p.t. 
a3en-dren3, a3en-drewe, Ex. iv. 7. 

a3en-fistinge, pr.p. fighting against, Rom. 
vii. 23. 

ajeen-flourede, p.t. flourished again, Ps. 
XXVIi. 7. 

a3en-frusshiden, p.t.pl. became stiff (Lat.ob- 
riguerunt), Ex. xv. 15. 

a3en-goyng, n. a meeting, Gen. xiv. 17. 


| asen-goynge, pr.p. going back, Gen. viii. 3. 
| azen-holde, to retain, Gen. xxiv. 56. Ecclus. 


iv. 28. 


- baar. 


ajen-riden, p. t. pl. rode 
xxix. 7. 

a3en-risen, to rise against, Esth. ii. 21. 

ajen-risyng, 2. a resurrection, Joh. v. 29. 

ajeen-seche, fo seek again, Ps. exviii. 145 ; 
p.t. azeen-soste, Ps. exli. 5. 

a3een-sechere, a3ein-secher, one who seeks 
that which is lost, Jer, xxx. 17. 

ajen-seie, ajen-seye, fo contradict, reply, 
Gen. xliy. 16. Lk. xxi. 155 p.t. ajen- 
seide, Num. xxx. 6; p.p. ajeinseid, Lk. 
ii. 34. 

aen-seiyng, x. contradiction, Num. xx. 13. 
Hebr. vii. 7; pl. azen-selyngus, azen- 
seyngis, Ps. xvii. 44. 

ajen-seyeris, ajen-seyeres, pl. adversaries, 
Pref. ep. c. iti. p. 63. 

ajeen-serchere, one who seeks that which is 
lost, Jer. xxx. 17. 

a3een-shinen, pr. t. pl. become reflected, Prov. 
XXVil. 19. 

a3een-sounende, pr. p. resounding, Wisd. 
xvii. 18. 

ajen-spreynt, p. p. sprinkled again, Lev. xiv. 
44. 

a3ein-stonde, a3en-stonde, a3en-stonden, to 
withstand, resist, Gen. |. 19. Judith iv. 1. 
Mt. v. 39. Lk. ii. 53; pr.t. a3zen-stant, 
Rom. xiii. 2; p.t. a3en-stood, Judg. xi. 
20; pr.p. aen-stondynge, Judith ii. 16. 

asen-stondere, n. opposer, Num. xxii. 33. 

ajen-telle, fo tell again, 1 Kings xxii. 8. 

ajentis, at, Mt. vi. 1. v. anentis. 

aen-turned, p.p. turned back, Gen. xiv. 14. 

a3eyn-tornynge, n. turning back, Josh. prol. 
P- 557- 

a3en-ward, a3ein-ward, a3een-ward, adv. on 
the contrary, backward, Num. xxiii. 11. 
xxiv. 10; Mk. iv. 35. 11 Cor. i. 7. 1 Pet. 
iii. 9. 

ajen-withstoond, to resist against, Deut.ix.2. 

aj3en-witnessid, p.p. wituessed against, Jer. 
xlii. 19. 

ajen-write, to answer, write again, 11 Macc. 
xi. 37; p.t. pl. ajein-wryten, a3en-writi- 
den, 1 Mace. viii. 22. 

a3ein-wrytyng, ”. @ rescript, 1 Mace. viii. 22. 

asen-wynsed, p.t. kieked against, Deut. 
XXXxiL. 15. 

a3t, a3te. ov. aust. 


against, Is. 


B. 
v. bere. 


baas, a base, Ex. xxxi.g; pl. baasis, Ex. 
XXVi. 19. 


bae-half, the hinder part, Gen. xix. 6. Ex. 


a3een-keelen, fo cool again, Ecclus. xviii. | 


16. 
azen-knewe, pi. é. knew, 1 Kings xxiii. 9. 
aseen-lede, to bring back, Tob. v.15. 
a3en-legge, fo allege, 1 Kisdr. prol. p. 477. 


; aseen-mesuren, fo make exact retribution, 


Is. Ixv. 7. 
azein-rennyng, 7. an incursion, 11 Mace. vi. 3. 


xxvi. 23. 

backe, @ bat, Lev. xi. 19. Deut. xiv. 18; 
pl. backis, Is. ii. 20. 

baheu, an ornament of the neck, 1 Macc. iii. 
37. v. baseu. 

baili, baily, bailiff, magistrate, Lk. xvi. 1; 
pl. bailies, iv Kings x. 5. 

baishide, basshede, p. t. fainted, Josh. ii. 11; 
p.p. baschid, Josh. ii. 9. v. abaischid. 

bake, to bake, Gen. xi. 3; p. ¢. book, 
Is. xliv. 19; boke, 1 Kings xxvili. 24- 
p.p. baake, bakun, Lev. ii. 4. 


balistis, engines to cast arrows, etc. (Lat. 
baliste,) 1 Mac. vi. 20, 51. 

hallard, @ bald-headed man, tv Kings ii. 23. 

ballid, p.p. bald, Lev. xiii. 41. Mic. i. 16. 

ballidnes, ballidnesse, baldness, Lev. xiii. 42. 
Deut. xiv. 1. 

hallokis, testicles, Lev. xxii. 24. Deut. 
xxiii. 1. Job xl. 12. 

baptem, bapteme, baptym, Japtism, 11 
Esdr. iv. 23. Mt. iii. 7; pl. baptyms, 
baptimys, Hebr. vi. 2. 

barbar, barbarus, heathen man, berbarian, 
1 Cor. xiv. 11. Col. iti. 11; pl. barbares, 
barbaris, barbaries, 11 Macc. x. 4. Deeds 
xxviii. J, 4. 

barbarik, barbarian, 1 Cor. xiv. 11. 

barbaryns, barberyns, heathenmen, Rom.i.14. 

barbour, @ barber, Judg. xvi. 19. 

bare, n. naked skin, Mk. xiv. 51. 

bare-heed, bare-heeded, having the head 
bare, Lev. xiii. 45. 

bareres, pl. barriers, bars, Is. xv. 5. 

bareyn, bareyne, barren, childless, Gen. xxv. 
21. xxix. 31. 

bareynes, bareynesse, barrenness, scarcity, 
Gen. xxvi. I. xli. 26. 

bareynte, barrenness, scarcity, Gen. xxvi. 1. 
Iv Kings ii. 21. Job xxxix. 6. 

harli, barly, barlich, barley, Ex. ix. 31. 
Lev. xxvii. 16. 

barsten. v. breste. 

basen, an ornament of the neck, 1 Mace. xiii. 
37. 0. baheu. 

basynet, a helmet, 1 Kings xvii. 53 pl. 
basynetis, Jer. xlvi. 4. 

baschid, basshede. vv. baishide. 

battis, bats, clubs, staves, Mt. xxvi. 47. 

baumede, bawmede, p.t. anointed, be- 
smeared, Ex. ii. 3; p. p. bawmed, Ex. 
xxix. 2. Lev. ii. 4. Joh. ix. 6. 

bdelyum, bdelli, delium, Oddellium, Gen. 
ii.12, Num. xi. 7. 

be— ov. bi— 

beckes. v. bek. 

bedding, bed, Ps. xl. 4. exxxi. 3. 

bedel, bedele, @ herald, Gen. xii. 43. Ex. 
xxxii. §. xxxvi. 6. Dan. ili. 4; pl. bedels, 
bedelis, Josh. iii. 2. 

beden, bedun, bedyn, biden, byden, boden, 
bode, p. p. bidden, invited, Gen. xxvii. 
gi. xltii.17. 1 Kings ix. 22. Mt. xxii. 3. 
Lk. xiv. 7. 

bed-stre, bed-stree, bed, couch, Ps. vi. 7. 
xl. 3. Ixii. 7. 

beel, ulcer, boil, Lev. xiii. 18, 23. v. biel. 

been, beese, bes, bees, Deut. i. 44. Judg. 
xiv. 8. Ps. exvii. 12. 

beere, a person being, Ecclus. xix. 28. 

beestli, beestly, adj. animal, 1 Cor. ii. 14. 
xv. 44. Jam. iii. 15. Jude 19. 

before, beforn, in composition. v. bifore. 

beggingnesse, beggary, Prov. xxiv. 34. 

behalt, pr.t. behkolds, Job xxxix. 29. Ps. 
cili. 32; p.t. biheud, Gen. xxvi. 8; p.p. 
biholdun, behelden, biholdid, byholdid, 
Num. xiv. 34. Deut. i. 24. 

behoten. v. bihete. 


| belde. 


GLOSSARY. 


bek, nad, sign, beckoning, Job xxvi. 11; pl. 
beckes, beckis, Prov. vi. 25. Is. iit. 16. 

bekerue, to cut up, Is. xxviii. 24. 

v. bilde. 

belkid, p.t. belehed, Ps. xliv. 2. v. bolke. 

beleeuable, credible, Ps. xcii. 5. 

bellewiden, p. ¢. pl. lowed, Jer. 1. 11. 

belu, belw, a bellows, Jer. vi. 29. 

ben, to be, Gen. iii..5 ; pr.t. pl. ben, Gen. i. 
29. beth, beeth, Num. xiii. 32. Dent. 
xx. 20. Ecelus. prol. p. 123. Mk. prol. 1. 
p. 86. Lk. ii.7; arn, Ps. xxvi. 2; tmp. 
pl. beth, Ex. xix. 12; pr. p. beende, Rom. 
prol. 1. p. 298. 

bene, @ bean, Ez. iv.9; pl. beenys, benen, 
11 Kings xvii. 28. 

benefet, benefit, kindness, Esth. xvi. 16. 
Ecclus. xxix. 9; benfeetis, Judg. ix. 16. 
1 Par. xvii. 26. 

benyfice, kindness, 11 Macc. vi. 13; pl. be- 
nefices, benefises, Judg. ix. 16. 1 Par. 
xvii. 26. Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

benyngnete, beneficence, Ps. Ixiv. 12. 

benysoun, @ blessing, Gen. xxvii. 12. 

beot. v. bete. 

berd, beerd, beard, 11 Kings xix. 24; pl. 
beerdis, Jer. xli. 5. 

berdyd, berdid, p.p. trodden, Num. xx. 19. 
Jer. xviii. 15. v. berid. 


bere, bern, to give birth to, to carry, Is. x1. | 


11. xlvi. q4. Mt. i. 233 pr.t. 3 p. berth, 
Proy. xii. 4; pl. berith, berin, Mt. prol. 
2.p. 2; imp. pl. herth, Is. xxi. 14; pt. 
baar, beer, Lev. xxiv. 10. Prov. xvii. 25. 

beryng, 2. a bringing forth, birth, Gen. xxv. 
24. Xxxviii. 27. 

berynge-staues, poles for 
iv. 6. 

bere, beere, a bier, litter, 11 Macc. ix. 8. 
Lk. vii. 14. 

berid, beryd, p.p. trodden, Num. xx. 19. 
Judg. v. 6. Jer. xviii. 15. v. berdyd. 

berielis. v. biriel. 

bernacle, @ bit or snoffe for a horse, (Lat. 
camus,) 1v Kings xix. 28. Ps. xxxi. 9. 
Prov. xxvi. 3. 

bern, berne, @ barn, Dent. xxviii. 17. Mt. 
iii.12; pl. bernys, bernes, Gen. xli. 35. 
Mt. vi. 26. 

berthene, birthun, @ burden, Ps. xxxvii.s. Ec- 
clus. xxxiii. 25; pl.berthens, Num. iv. 47. 

besaunt, @ piece of money, Ez. xlv.12. Mt. 
xxv. 25; pl. besauntis, besauntes, 1 Esdr. 
ii. 69. Mt. xviii. 24. Lk. xv. 8. 

besme, beesme, a besom, broom, Is. xiv. 23; 
pl. besyms, beesmes, bismes, Mt. xii. 
44. Lk. xi. 25. 

bestayle, beestayle, a beast, Gen. i. 24. vii. 
14.3 pl. bestaylis, Gen. viii. 1. 

bete, to beat, Deut. xxii. 18; p.¢. beet, beot, 
bette, beeted, betide, Gen. xii.17.. Num. 
xxi, 23. 1 Kings xi. 11, Mt. xxvi. 675 
p-p- betun, Deut. xxv. 2; pr.p. beetynge, 
mending, Mt. iv. 21. 

beth. v. ben. 

betyngis, stripes, blows, Deut. xxv. 2. 
1 Par. prol. p. 315. 


carrying, Num. 


703 


betokenyngis, signs, 11 Par. prol. p. 385. 

betwe, prep. between, Num. xxx.16. Deut. 
i. 1. Mt. xxiii. 35. 

betwe-brac, p. t. clave in twa, Ps. Ixxvil. 15. 


betwe-brosure, a breaking between, Is. 
XXX: 13: 

betwen-vp-brac, p.¢. clave in sunder, Ps. 
lxxvii. 13. 


beze, beese, a neckchain, Gen. xli. 42. 
Prov. i. 9; pl. beesis, Ex. xxxv. 22. 
11 Kings viii. 7. Judg. viii. 26. v. hie. 

bible, @ book, bible, (Lat. bibliotheea,) 11 
Mace. ii. 13. 

biblet, book, bible, (Lat. bibliotheca,) 1 Esdr. 
v.17. 

biclippe, to embrace, Ps. xlvii. 13. Eccles. 
iit. 5; p.¢. biclippide, becleppede, Gen. 
xxix. 13. Mk. x. 16; pl. biclippiden, 
Job xxiv. 8. Lam. iv. 5; p.p. biclippid, 
byclippid, Gen. xlv. 14. Mk. ix. 355 
pr.p. biclippinge, biclyppyng, 11 Macc. 
vi.19. Mk. x. 16. Tit. i. 8. o. clippe. 

biclippingis, embraces, Gen. xlvi. 29. 

bide, to abide, remain, Lev. xix. 13; p.t. 
bode, bod, boid, bood, boode, 1 Kings 


xxiii. 14,18. Ps. exviti. 166. v. abide. 
biden. v. beden. 
biddyngis, commands, Ex. xv. 26. 
bie, to buy. v. bigge. 


bie, armlet, Gen. xxxviii. 18; pl. bies, byes, 
Gen. xxiv. 22, 29, 47. v. bese. 

biel, beel, byil, a boil, Deut. xxviii. 27, 
353; pl. biles, bilis, bylis, Ex. ix. 9. Lk. 
Xvi. 20. 

bielde. v. bilde. 

bifelde, bifelle, p.t. befel, Gen. xxiv. 67. 
xxvi.r; p.p. bifalle, Gen. xxxiv. 7. v. 
falle. 

bifalling, 2. an event, Gen. xli. 13. Wisd. 
xiii. 19; pl. bifallyngis, Wisd. viii. 8. 

biflappiden, p. ¢. pl. elapped, Lam. il. 15. ¢. 
flappe. 

bifor-brekyng, 2. @ previous fracture, Zech. 
XIV. 4. 

bifore-brokyn, p.p. previously broken, Zech. 
xiv. 4. : 

bifore-castyng, 2. forethought, deliberate 
purpose, Ex. xxi. 14. Jer. xxxvilil. 4. 

byfore-cummen, bifore-comen, p.p. antici- 
pated, 11 Mace. xiv. 31. 

bifor-determyned, p. p. previously deter- 
mined, iz. xxi. 25, 29. 

befor-girte, p.¢. girded, Ps. xvii. 33. xcti. 1; 
2 p. hefor-girtist, Ps. xvii. 40. 

befor-go, to go before, Ps. Ixxxviii. 15. 

bifore-goere, forerunner, Ex. xxxiii. 2; pl. 
bifor-goeris, Josh. iii. 3. Wisd. xii. 8. 

befor-greithe, to prepare, Ps. Ixxxvili. 5; 
p.t. hefor-greithide, Ps. xxiii. 2; pr. p. 
befor-greithende, Ps. xxviii. 9. 

befor-greithing, ». preparation, Ps. \xiv. 10. 
lxxxviii. 15. 

bifore-had, beforn-hadde, p.p. previous, Gen. 
xl, 13. 1v Kings xvii. 40. 

bifor-hond, biforn-hoond, adv. before, pre- 
viously, Gen. xiii. 3. xix. 27. xxviii. 19. 

bifor-kitte, imp. cut before, Dan. iv. 11. 


704 


bifore-knew, p.t. knew beforehand, Wisd. 
xix. 1; pr.p. bifore-knowynge, Gen. xv. 
13. 

befor-ocupie, to preengage, Ps. xciv. 2; pr.t. 
beforn-ocnpieth, Wisd. vi. 14; p.p. be- 
forn-ocupied, Wisd. iv. 7. 

beforn-passende, pr. p. excelling, Ecclus. 
xxxiii. 23. 

befor-rediyng, n. preparation, Ps. ix.* 17. 

before-renner, forerunner, EX. xxxiil. 2. 

before-rijp, adj. early ripe, Num. xiii. 21. 

bifore-se, to foresee, Eccles. iv. 133 p.t. be- 
forn-se3e, Ps.cxxxviii. 4; p. p. bifor-seien, 
Ps. exxxviili. 4. 

bifore-sente, p.t. sent before, 11 Macc. xii. 
21; p.p. bifor-sent, Wisd. xix. 2. 

beforn-sette, p.t. set before, Ecclus. xvii. 15; 
p.p. bifore sett, Dan. xi. 40; pr.p. befor- 
settende, Esth. i. 8. 

hifore-shewynge, pr.p. foretelling, Gen. xii. 
It. 

hifor-synge, to lead the chant, 1 Par. xv. 22. 
Ps. cxlvi. 7; p.t. before-song, Ex. xv. 21. 

bifor-spekere, spokesman, Ex. vii. 1. 

bifor-spekyng, byfore-spekyng, x. a prefac- 
ing, 11 Mace. ii. 33. 

befor-strecche, to stretch over, Ps. xxxv. 11. 

befor-taken, to take first or beforehand, Ps. 
Ixxviii. 8. Wisd. vii. 15; p.t. bifore-took, 
Ps. Ixxvi. 5; p.p. bifore-takun, Gen. xxx. 
15. 

before-tastid, bifore-taastid, p.p. tasted be- 
fore, Ex. xxii. 31. 

before-telle, to declare, Ps. xlix. 6; p.t. be- 
for-tolde, Ps. xxxix. 10. 

bifor-wal, bifor-walling, an outwork, Is. 
Xxvi. 1. 

bifore-war, aware before, Gen. vi. 6. 

bifore-warneden, biforn-warneden, p.é. pl. 
previously warned, Wisd. xviii. 19. 

before-wenen, pr.t. pl. spread over, Job 
XXXVI. 28. 

beforn-writen, bifor-writun, p.p. afore-writ- 
ten, 11 Par. xxx. 5. 

biforn, beforne, before, Gen. xxxii. 3. 11 Par. 
iii. 4. 

bigat, bigate, bigaat, begate, Gen. x. 26. 
Mt. i. 2; bigeten, bigetun, bigete, bygo- 
ten, bigotun, Gen. xxii. 12. Num. iii. 49. 
Mt. i. 25. v. gete. 

bigge, bie, bye, by, bise, to buy, Gen. xi. 
57- xii. 5. Mt. xiv. 15. Lk. xxii, 36. 
xxiv. 21; imp.pl. biggith, bieth, Gen. xliii. 
25. Is. lv.1. Mt. xxv. 9; p.t. bouste, Gen. 
xxv. 10; pl. bo3ten, 11 Par. i. 17; p.p. 
bouste, bowst, Gen. xvii. 23; pr.p. biende, 
biggynge, Gen. xlii.34. Mt. xxi.12. Mk. xi. 
15. Lk.xix.45. v.a3eyn-byggen, for-bigge. 

bigger, a buyer, Lev. xxv. 28, 30; pil. big- 
geris, biggerys, Gen. xlvil. 15. Mk. ii.15. 

biggyng, biyng, 2. a buying, Lev. xxv. 28. 
Kcclus. xlii. 5; pl. biyngis, Ecclus. xlii. 5. 

biheest, bihest, byheste, beheste, a promise, 
commend, Lev. xix. 23. Num. xxx. 9. 
Judith xi. 21. Lk. xxiv. 49. Rom. iv. 13; 
pl. biheestis, behestis, behestus, Num. 
xxx. 9. Esth. xiv. 9. Heb. xi. 13. v. heest. 


GLOSSARY. 


bihete, behoten, to promise, 1 Par. xxix. 9, 
14; pr.t. 3p. bihetith, byhetith, bihotith, 
Heb. xii. 26; 2p. bihetist, bihotist, Gen. 
xxxviil.17; pl. biheten, biheeten, bihooten, 
Num. xxxii. 20. 11 Pet. ii. 19; p.t. bihiste, 
bihist, byhiste, Gen. xxi. 1. xxxvill. 23. 
Mt. xiv. 7. Lk. xxii. 6; pl. bihisten, 
1 Par. xxix. 6. Mk. xiv. 113 p.p. bihist, 
bihote, byhote, bihoot, behoten, Gen. xxi. 
1. Num. xxx. 8. 11 Par. xxi. 7. Lk. xxiv. 
49. Rom. i.1; pr.p. bihetynge, biheeting, 
bihotynge, Deut. xiii.17. rTim. ii. ro. 11 
Pet. ii. 19. 

bibetere, bibeeter, a promiser, 11 Macc.x. 28. 
Heb. vii. 22. 

bihetynge, n. a promise, 11 Esdr. x. 29. 

bihend, byholdid. v. behalt. 

byhenedede, p.t. beheaded, Mt. xiv. 10; p.p. 
byheueded, byheuedid, bihedid, biheedid, 
Lk. ix. 9. Apoc. xx. 4. 

bihouen, fo bekove, Wisd. xv. 12; p.t. bi- 
hofte, byhofte, 11 Kings iv. 10. Wisd. xvi. 
4. Mt. xvi. 21. Rom. i. 27. 

bijs, biys, bijce, bijcen, bissyn, sidk, Gen. 
xli. 42. Ex. xxviii. 39. Lk. xvi. 1g. Apoc. 
xvili. 12. xix. 8. 

bikenen, pr.t. pl. beckon, make signs, Ps. 
xxxiv.19; p.t. bikenede, bekeneyde, Deeds 
xxi. 40; pl. bikeneden, bikenyden, beken- 
yden, Lk. i. 62. v. 7. 

bikenyng, 2. «a beckoning, suggestion, Gen. 
xlii. 6. 

biknow, byknow, to acknowledge, Mt. prol. 
I. p.t. 

bilde, bielde, fo build, Gen. xi. 8; p.t. 
bilde, bilte, bylde, belde, beeldide, bildide, 
Gen. ii. 22. iv.17. xii. 7. xxvi. 25. 111 
Kings xi. 7. Lk. vii. 5; pl. bilden, by!- 
den, beelden, byldeden, bildiden, beeldi- 
den, Ex, i. 11. 1 Kings iv. rr. 111 Kings 
xiv. 23. 1 Esdr. iii. 2. Lk. xvii. 28; pp. 
bild, bilde, bilden, beeld, beeldid, bildid, 
Josh. xxii. 19. 11 Kings vii. 7. 111 Kings 
ix. 3. xvi. 32. Mt. vii. 24. 

byleene, to deliver, Lk. xvi. 11. 

bilibre, a weight of two pounds, Apoc. vi. 6; 

pl. bilibres, Apoc. vi. 6. 

bilis, bills, beaks, Is. xli. 15. Zech. iv. 12. 

billis, bedds(?) Judg. viti. 21. 

bylyne, adv. forthwith, anon, Gen. xxiv. 
18. v. blyue. 

bimowe, bymowe, to mock, Ps. ii. 4. Prov. 
i. 26; p.t. pl. bimowiden, 11 Par. xxx. 
1o. Ps. xxix. 7. 

bymoornyiden, bymorneden, p. t. pl. bewail- 
ed, Lk. xxiii. 27; pr.p. bymorenynge, 
Deut. xxxiv. 8. 

byndyngis, bundles, 1 Kings xxx. 12. 

bynethen, binethe, beneath, Gen. vi.16. Mk. 
xiv. 66. 

bynyme, to deprive, draw away, Ecclus. 
xxviii. 19 ; imp. bynyme, Job vi. 23; p.p. 
benomen, Eccles. iv. 1. 

bire, birre, bure, force, rush, Deut. xxviii. 
49. Judg. v. 22. 1 Kings xxv. 29. 
Kings xi. 23. xxiii, 8. 111 Kings xxii. 
32. Judith xiv. 2. Ecclns. xlvi. 7. Mt. 


viii. 32. Mk. v.13. Lk, viii. 33. Jam. 
iii. 4. 2 Pet. iii. 10. 

bireyned, p.p. rained upon, Ez. xxii. 24. 
Amos iv. 7. 

biriel, tomb, burying-place, 1 Kings x. 2. 
Mt. xxvii. 60; pl. hiriels, birielis, berielis, 
Gen. xxiii. 6. Judg. xvi. 31. Mt. viii. 
28. xxiii. 29. Apoc. ii. 9. 

birle, to give to drink, Jer. xxv. 193 pr. t. 
birlith, Gen. Pro}. p. 51; p.t. birlide, 
Jer. xxv.17; pl. birliden, Amos ii. 12; 
pr. p. birling, Gen. Prol. p. 51. 

bischadowynge, pr. p. overshadowing, Mk. 
ix. 6. 

bischedde, p.t. besprinkled, wet, 1v Kings 
vili.15; p.p. bisched, beshed, Num. xii. 
10. 111 Kings xviii. 28. Esth.xv. 8. Dan. 
iv. 20. 

byschophooil, office of bishop, 1 Tim. prol. 
P- 453- 

bise, imp. see, look, Mt. xxvii. 5. 

bisechyng, x. a petition, prayer, 111 Kings 
ix. 3. ul Par. vi. 19; pl. bisechyngis, 
Deut. iv. 7. 

bysemen, pr.t. pl. beseem, are fitting, Rom. 
i. 28; p.t. bisemyde, Heb. vii. 26. 

bisetten, bisettiden, p.t.pl. engrafted, 1 Tim. 
vi. 103 pr.p. bysettynge, 1 Tim. vi. ro. 

beshrewith, pr.t. makes evil, depraves, Prov. 
x.9; p.p. bischrewid, beshrewid, Deut. 
xviii. 20. 111 Kings xi. 43 pr.p. bi- 
schrewynge, Is. ix. 14. 

biside, bisidis, bysydis, prep. beside, Gen. 
xiii. 18. Mt. xiii. 1. 

bisiede, bisyede, p.t. was busy, Lk. x. 40. 

bisiliche, busily, Mt. prol. 1. p.1; comp. bisi- 
liere, besyliere, bisiloker, Judg. xx. 39. 
1 Pet. i. 22. 

bisynesse, business, care, Eccles. iv. 4. 1 Pet. 
v.73 pl. bisynesses, besynesses, Eccles. 
iv. 4. Ez. xii. 19. 

bismes. v. besme. 

bispete, byspeete, bispitte, to spit upon, Mk. 
X. 34. xiv. 65; p.t. pl. bispatten, bispit- 
tiden, Mk. xv.19; p.p. bispat, bispet, bi- 
spattid, Lk. xviii. 32. v. spete. 

bispreynde, p.t. besprinkled, Heb. ix. 19; 
pl. bispreynten, Lam. ii. 10; p.p. bi- 
spreynd, bispreynt, byspreynt, Gen. 
XxX. 39. xxxi. 12. Num. xii. 10. v. 
sprenge. 

bitake, bitaak, betaken, to deliver, give up, 
Ex. xxx. 16. Mt. xxiv.9. xxv.275 p.t. 
bitoke, bitook, bytoke, Gen. xxi. 14. 
XXXix. 20, 22. Mt. xviii. 34; 2 p. bitokist, 
bytokist, Mt. xxv. 20; pl. bitoken, bi- 
tooken, 11 Macc. xi. 17. Mk. xv.1; p.p. 
bitakun, bitaken, bitake, Gen. xiv. 20. 
xxxiv. 8, 9. Mt. xxvi. 2. Mk. xv. 103; 
pr.p. bitakynge, 11 Macc. xi. 17. v. take. 

bitau;ten, p.t. pl. delivered, 1v Kings xvii. 
17; p.p. bitaust, Gen. xxxix. 4. 

bithenk, bythenke, to meditate, recollect, 
Gen. xxiv. 63. Mt. v. 23; pr.t. bythen- 
kith, bithenkith, Lk. xiv. 31; p.¢. bi- 
thouste, Gen. xli. 9; pr.p. bitbenkynge, 
bythenkynge, Lk. xii. 25. 


bitokenede, p. t. marked, Joh. vi. 27. 

bitouris, ditterns, Is. xiii. 22. 

bitternessis, bitter sorrows, Job xiii. 26. 

bitraneliden, p.¢. pl. oppressed, Judg. xx. 5. 
v. trauaile. 

bitwene-putte, to place between, Ez. xxii. 30. 

biweile, biweyle, to wail over, Gen. xxiii. 1. 
Lev. x. 6; p.¢. biweilide, 1 Kings xxv. 1; 
pl. biwayleden, biweileden, Lk. viii. 52 ; 
p-p. biweilid, 1 Kings xiii. 31. v. weilen. 

biwepe, to mourn, weep over, Gen. xxiii. 2. 
Apoc. xviii. 9; p.¢. biwepte, Gen. 1. 33 
pr. p. biwepynge, bywepynge, Matt. ii.18. 

biweperis, mourners, Wisd. xviii. 10. 

biwlappe, to wrap, Job xviii. 11. v. wlappe. 

bewrappe, fo wrap, Job xviii. 11. 

byzondes, bizende, bejonde, bisond, bezunde, 
prep. beyond, Deut. xxx. 13. 1 Kings xx. 
22. 1 Esdr. v. 3. viii. 36. Mt. iv. 25. 
2 Cor. x. 16. 

blaberen, to stammer, 1 Esdr. prol. p. 478. 

blameful, worthy of blame, Dent. xxviii. 29. 
Esth. xvi. 6. 

blamyng, x. blame, Deut. xxviii. 20. 11 Kings 
xxii. 16; pl. blamyngis, Job xxiii. 4. 

blasfeme, x. a blasphemer, Lev. xxiv. 14. 
11 Mace. ix. 28. 1 Tim. i. 13; pl. blas- 
femes, 11 Tim. iii. 2. 

blasfeme, adj. blasphemous, 11 Macc. x. 4. 
xiil. 11. 

bleckid, p. p. made black, Job xxx. 30. 

bleer-eyed, blere-ized, blerid, sore eyed, Gen. 
xxix.17. Lev. xxi. 20. 

bleyne, a dlain, Job ii. 7; pl. bleynes, Ex. 
ix. 9. 

blessidly, happily, Gén. xxx. 10. 

blet, a flock of sheep, Ps. Ixxvii. 70. 

blewen, p.t.pl. melted, blasted, 1v Kings xxii. 
g. v. blowith. 

blisse, blis, to bless, Gen. xii. 2. xvii. 16; 
p.t. blisside, Gen. i. 22; p.p. blissid, 
blissyd, Gen. xii. 3. xiv. 20. 

blisfulere, comp. happier, Eccles. iv. 3. 

blisfulnesse, blisfulnes, happiness, Gen. xxx. 
13. Ecclus. xxviii. 7. 

blyue, adv. hastily, Gen. xliv. 11. v. bylyue. 

blones, biueness, lividness, Ex. xxi. 25. 

blood-wreker, avenger of blood, Josh. xx. 5. 

blosme, fo blossom, Ps. ixxi. 16. 

blowith, pr.t. puffeth up, blows, 1 Cor. viii. 
1; imp. blo3, S. Sol. iv. 16; p.p. blowun, 
blowen, Wisd. iv. 19. 1 Cor. iv. 6, 19. 

bobbe, to mock, Jer. xxxviii. 19; pr.p. bob- 
bende, bobbynge, 111 Esdr. i. 57. 

bocche, botche, sore, scab, lump, hunch, 
Lev. xiii. 18, 19. xxi. 20. Is. xxx. 6. 

bocchyn, to mend, 11 Par. xxxiv. 10. 

bocherie, shambles, 1 Cor. x. 25. 

boces, boosis, basses, Is. iii. 18. 

bode. ». bide. 

bodun, hoden. v. beden. 

boenes. v. boon. 

boffat, buffat, buffet, blow, Joh. xviii. 22; 
pl. boffatis, buffatis, buffetis, Mt. xxvi. 
67. Mk. xiv. 65. Joh. xix. 3. 

boffaten, p. t. pl. buffeted, Mk. xv. 19. 

bogge, sore, Lev. xiii. 18. v. bocche. 


VOL. IV. 


GLOSSARY. 


boyle, buyle, to break forth or boil, Ex. xvi. 
20. Hab. iti. 16; p.t.pl. buyliden, booyle- 
den, 1 Kings v. 6. 11 Macc. ix. 9. 

boisch, bousche, boysche, buysch, bush, 
Ex. iii. 2. Mk. xii. 26. Lk. xx. 37. Deeds 
vil. 30; pl. buschis, Job xxx. 7. 

boyschel, buyschel, bushel, Lk. xi. 33. 

boke. v. bake. 

buystous, buystuouse, rough, rude, 11 Par. 
xiii. 7. Mt. ix.16; comp. booistousere, 
Jer, prol. p. 342. 

boket, bokat, bucket, Num. xxiv. 7. Is. xl. 
IB. 

bole, bool, a@ dull, Dent. xxxiii. 173; pl. 
boolis, bullis, Gen. xxxii. 15. 

bolke, to tell ont, Mt. xiii. 35; pr.t. bolk- 
eth, Ps. xvii. 3; pl. bolken, Ecelus. xi. 
32; p.t. bolkede, Wisd. xix. 10. ». 
belkid. 

boln, bolne, to become puffed or swoln, 
Deut. xvii. 13; p.t. bolnyde, Gen. xxxi. 
36; pl. bolneden, bolnden, Deut. i. 43. 
Judg. viii. 3; p.p. bolnun, bolnyd, bol- 
len, bollun, bollid, Num. v. 27. 1Cor. v.2. 
Col. ii. 18. 11 Tim. iii. 5; pr.p. bolnynge, 
Deut. i. 43. Job xxxviii. 11. 

bolnyng, 2. @ swelling, Dent. xviii. 22. 
Esth. xvi. 12; pl. bolnynges, 2 Cor. xii. 
20. 

honere, mild, Ps. xxxvi. 11. v. debonere. 

bonernesse, miidness, 1 Cor. iv. 21. 

bonys, stalks of flax, (Lat. stupa,) Is. i. 31. 

book. v. bake. 

bond, boond, p.t. bound, 1v Kings xxiii. 33. 
Jer. xxxix. 7; pl. bounden, Judg. xv. 13. 
p.p. ybounde, Col. prol. p. 429. 

boon, a bone, Gen. xxix.14; pl. boonys, 
boenes, Ecclus. xxviii. 21. Bar. vi. 42. 

boond, a band, Judg. xvi. 13; pl. boondis, 
Judg. xvi. 9. 

boosis.  v. boces. 

boostful, adj. rude (?) 11 Kings xii. 31. 

boot, boat, Joh. vi. 22; pl. bootis, botis, 
11 Mace. xii. 3. Joh. vi. 22, 23. 

boow, bou;, bo3, a bough, Judg. ix. 48. Mt. 
xxiv. 32; pl. bowis, boowis, Ez. xvii. 6. 
Mt. xxiv. 32. Mk. xi. 8. 

boowid. v. bowe. 

bord, boord, a table, Ex. xxv. 26, 27, 28. 
Deeds xvi. 34; pl. bordis, boordis, Mt. 
xxi. 12. Deeds vi. 2. 

hord-felawis, companions, Judg. xiv. 11. 

bordel, @ brothel, Lev. xix. 29. 

bordel-house, @ brothel, Baruch vi. 10. Ez. 
xvi. 24, 39. 

bordelrie, 2 brothel, Num. xxv. 8. 

borewing, borwyng, 2. @ loan, LK. vi. 34,35. 

borwe, pledge, surety, 2 Cor. xi. 2; pl. 
borewis, Prov. xxii. 26. 

borowis, borrowes, dens, holes, Mt. viii. 
20. 

boske-eddre, bosk-eddre, boske-addre, a 
bush-adder, Ex. iv. 3. vii. 9, 10. 

boteler, botler, butler, pl. boteleris, botlers, 
Gen. xl. 1, 2. 

boteraces, buttresses, abutments, Ez. xli. 15. 

botere, butter, Gen. xviii. 8. Deut. xxxil. 14. 


AX 


705 


botme, bottom, Wisd. v. 10. 

botouns, buttons, clasps, Ex. xxvi. 11. 

bouge, @ hunch, Lev. xxi.19. v. bocche, 
bogge. 

bouge, bowge, a bottle, Ps. xxxii. 7. Ixxvii. 
13. 

bourdeful, jocose, Wisd. i. 11 g. 

houwe, bowe, an arch, Prov. xx. 26. ° 

bouste. v. bigge. 

bowe, to incline, turn away, Josh. xxiv. 23; 
p.t. bowide, 1 Kings xix. 10. Joh. v.13; 
pl. boweden, bowiden, bowedyn, Judg. 
ix. 3. Rom. iii. 12; p.p. bowid, boowid, 
Ps. Ixi. 4. Is. xvii. 73 pr.p. bowynge, 
Jer. vi. 28. 

bowen, to breathe forth, Ps. exliv. 75 p. t. 
bowide, Ps. xliv. 2; pr. p. bowende, Ps. 
exlili. 13. 

bo3.  v. boow. 

braasny, of brass, Dent. xxviii. 23. 

bradder. ». brod. 

braggith, pr.t. brays as a trumpet, Josh. 
vi. 53 p.t. braggide, Josh. vi. 20; pr.p. 
braggynge, Josh. vi. 5. 

brayid, p.p. bruised, ground, 1 Kings xxv.18. 
v. to-brayd. 

brayne, brayneth, pr. ¢. dashes out the brains, 
Is. lxvi. 3. 

braunchy, braunchid, full of boughs, iv 
Kings xvii. 10. Is. lvii. 5. 

braundishen, ¢o brandish, vibrate, Job 
xxxix. 23. Ps, vii. 13. 

brawnes, sinews, Job xxii. 9. 

brechis, breeches, Gen. iii. 7. 

bredd, p. p. grown, Mk. iv. 32. 

brede, breed, bread, Gen. xxiv. 33. 

brede, breede, breadth, Gen. vi. 15. xiii. 17. 
Eph. iii. 18. 

breer-hook, e hook for briars, Is. vii. 25. 

breggere, an abridger, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 72. 

breggid, breiggid, p.p. abridged, Mt. xxiv. 
22, Mk. xiii. 20. Rom. ix. 28. », 
abregged. 

breggyng, n. an abridging, Is. x. 23. 

bregirdil, breigirdil, brigirdil, a waistband, 
or band for breeches, Jer. xiii. 1, 2, 4, 6, 
4, 11. 

breide, to draw, pull, Ps.xxiv.15. v.to-brayd. 

breke, breek, te break, Deut. xxiii. 25; p. t. 
brac, brak, breke, Num. xi. 8. Judith ii. 
14; pl. breeken, braken, 11 Par. xxxi, 1. 

brembil, brimbil, a bramble, Job xxxi. 4c. 
Ecclus. xiii. 21; pl. brembles, Gen. iii. 
18. 

brenk, brynke, brink, rim, Gen. xxii. 17. 
Ex, xxv. 243 pl. brynkis, Ex. xxviii. 24. 
1 Par, xii. 15. 

brenne, to burn, Levy. vi.12. Mt. iii. 12; 
p.t. brende, brente, Ex. xxiii, 20. Iv 
Kings xiv. 4; pl. brennyden, brenneden, 
brenden, Mt. xiii. 6. Rom. i. 27; p.p. 
brent, Gen. xxii. 3. Mt. xiii. 30; pr. p. 
brennende, brennynge, Ex. xxiv. 17. Job 
xxvii. 21. Lk. xii. 35. v. al-brent. 

brennynge, ”. @ burning, Gen. xli. 23; pl. 
brennyngus, 1 Esdr. prol. p. 478. 

brennyngli, ardently, Jer. ii. 25. 


706 


brenstoon. v. brunston. 

brerde, lip, margin, Ex. xxxvii. 11. 

brere, a briar, Is. xxvii. 4; pl. breres, breris, 
breeris, Gen. xxii. 13. Is. vil. 23, 24, 25. 
Mt. vii. 16. 

breste, berste, fo burst, Mk. ii. 22; p.t. pl. 
barsten, brasten, bristen, brosten, Gen. 
xhii. 30. Jer. v. 5; p.p. brosten, borstun, 
Gen. vii.11. Dan. xiv. 26. v. al-to-brasten, 
to-braste. 

brest-bundel, brest-girdil, band for the waist, 
Jer. ii. 32. 

brether, bretheren, britheren, brithren, bra- 
thers, Gen. ix. 22. xxv. 18. xxix. 4. 

bretherhed, britherhed, britherhede, brither- 
hod, dratherhaad, 1 Macc. xii. 10. 1 Thess. 
iv. g. 11 Pet. i. 6. 

bretil, britil, brotil, brutil, britile, jfictile, 
Lev. vi. 28, xi. 33. xiv. 5. 11 Cor. iv. 7. 
1 Tim. it. 20. 

brewis, browes, eye-braws, Lev. xiv. 9. 

brid, bridd, a bird, young of a bird, Lev. 
xvii. 13. Is. xxxvili. 14. Lk. xiii. 34; pl. 
briddis, Gen. xv. 10. Mt. viii. 20. xxiii. 


brydd-coniurers, diviners by birds, Deut. 
xviii. 14. 

brid-denyneres, diviners by birds, Jer. xxvii.g. 

bridale, brydale, nuptials, Judg. xiv. 15. 
Mt. xxii. 10; pl. bridalis, brydalis, Gen. 
xxix. 22. Lk. xiv. 8. 

brydil-reyne, a bridle, Ecclus. xxxiii. 26. 

brigirdil. v. bregirdil. 

brimstoon. ». brunston. 

brynke. v. brenk. 

brisse, ta break, bruise, Deut. ix. 3. xxiii. 253 
p.t. briside, brosede, broosede, brusede, 
Num. xxii. 25. rv Kings xviii. 4. xxiii. 
14; pl. broosiden, rv Kings xi. 18; p.p. 
brisde, brisid, brysid, brusid, Lev. ii. 16. 
Deut. iv. 3. Mt. xii. 20. Lk. xx. 18. 

britagis, parapets, battlements, 8, Sol.vii.9. 

bristnessis, splendors, Ps. cix. 3. 

broc-skynnes, brockis-skynnes, 
skins, Heb. xi. 37. 

broche, @ breach, Jer. iv. 30; pl. broches, 
brochis, brooches, Judg. viii. 26. S. Sol. 
i. g. Is. xi. 10. 

brod, brood, broad; comp. brodder, brad- 
der, Ez. xvii. 6. 11 Esdr. iv. 19. Amos 
vi. 2. 

broderere, broiderere, broudrere, an em- 
broiderer, Ex. xxviii. 39. XXxV. 33. Xxxvi. 
37. 1 Kings xxi. 19. 

broiderye, broydreie, embroidery, Ex. xxviii. 
39. xxxvi. 37; browdrye-craft, the art of 
embroidery, Ex. xxxix.8; broidery-werk, 
brouderi-werk, werk of embroidery, Ex. 
XXxvi. I. xxviii. 39. 

broke-footid, p.p. maimed in faot, Lev. xxi. 
39. 

bromes, braam trees, Jer. xvii. 6. 

bronde, a brand, torch, Is. v. 24. xxix. 53 
pl. brondis, broondis, Judg. xv. 4. Is. vil. 
4. Joh. xviii. 3. 

brosynge, n. a breaking, Is. xxx. 13. 

brosten. v. breste. 


badger- 


GLOSSARY. 


brosure, brusur, a bruising, breaking, Lev. 
xxiv. 20. Is. xxx. 13. Jer. xxx. 12. 

brotil. v. bretil. 

brouderi-werk. v. broiderye. 

bruk, bruke, @ Jacust, Lev. xxii. 22. 11 Par. 
vi. 28. 

brunston, brumston, brynstoon, brymstoon, 
brenstoon, brimstone, Gen. xix. 24. Dent. 
xxix. 23. Job xviii. 15. Ps. x. 7. Is. xxx. 
33. Apoc. ix. 18. 

brunstony, of brimstone, Apoc. ix. 17. 

brush, @ lecust, Is. xxxili. 4. v. bruk. 

brutil. ». bretil. 

buffatis. v. boffat. 

bufferes, stutterers, Is. xxxil. 4. 

bugle, buffala, Deut. xiv. 5. 1 Par. xvi. 35 
pl. buglis, 111 Kings iv. 23. 

bnyle, buyliden. v. boyle. 

buysch. v. boisch. 

bundelet, a@ little bundle, S. Sol. i. 12. 

burdones, burdowns, mules, 1v Kings v. 
17. 

bure. v. bire. 

burion, burioun, to produce, germinate, Gen. 
i. 11. iii. 183 pr.t.pl. buriounen, Lev. xix. 
23; p.t. buriownde, buriownede, Gen. ii. 
53 pl. buriowneden, Joel ii. 22; p.p. 
buriounned, 1 Par. v. 2; pr. p. burion- 
ynge, buriownynge, Ex. i. 5. Heb. xii. 
15. 

buriounnyngis, buddingis, clusters, offspring, 
Gen. xl. 10. Mt. xxiii. 33. 

bur3-town, bur3h-toun, a town, Josh. vii. 2. 
vii. 1; pl. borow-townes, bur3-towns, 
Gen, xiii. 12. Deut. xii. 21. 

busshement, an ambush, Josh. viii. 9; pl. 
busshementis, busschementis, buysche- 
mentis, Josh. viii. 2. tv Kings ix. 23. 

buxum, obedient, Judith ix. 16. Esth. xv. 
13. 


C. 

caas, a case, sheath, Gen. xxvii. 3; pl. caasis, 
1 Par. xviii. 7. 

cachid, p.p. caught, Mic. iv. 9. 

caitif, caytif, caytife, caytyf, a captive, Ex. 
xii. 29. 1v Kings v. 2. 1 Par. v. 6; pl. cai- 
tifs, caytyues, chaytyue, cheytiues, Gen. 
Xxxi. 26. xxxiv. 29. Num. xiv. 3. 

caitifte, caytiftee, captivity, Num. xxi. 29. 

caitifdoom, captivity, Ez. xxv. 3. 

caitynende, chatyuynge, pr.p. making cap- 
tive, Pref. ep. c. iit. p. 63. Jer. prol. 
P- 343: 

calamy, chaalamy, sweet cane, (Lat. calamus,) 
Ex. xxx. 24. Jer. vi. 20. 

caladrie, a kind of bird, (Lat. charadrius,) 
Deut. xiv. 18. 

caleng. v. chaleng. 

calflees, deprived of the calf, Job xxi. 10. 

calle, the cawl, Ex, xxix. 13. Lev. iii. 4. 

calu, bald, Lev. xiii. 40. 

calueren, calves, Num. xxix. 32. 

camelioun, a camelopard, Deut. xiv. 5. 

can. v. kunne. 

cancre, canker, kankir, any thing that cor- 
rodes, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 69. 2 Tim. ii. 
17. 


cancrynge, pr.p. cankering, Pref. ep. c. vii 
p. 69. 

candel-staf, candel-stik, candlestick, Ex. xxv. 
31, 33s 35- 

candel-quenchers, snuffers, Ex. xxv. 38. 
XXXxvil. 23. 

canell, canel, cinnamon, Ex. xxx. 23. Prov. 
vii. 17. Apoc. xviii. 13. 

cannes, pots, Joh. ii. 6. 

caperis, capparis, the caper-shrub, (Lat. cap- 
paris,) Eceles. xii. 5. 

capitle, shart chapter, Heb. viii. 1. 

capret, a wild goat, Deut. xii. 15. Is, xxxiv. 
11; pl. capretis, caprettis, 11 Kings ii.18. 

cardue, a@ thistle, (Lat. carduus,) tv Kings 
xiv. g. 1 Par. xxv. 18, 

carect, carecte, character, mark, Apoc. xiii. 
16. xiv.9; pl. carectis, Apoc. xx. 4. 

careyn, careyng, @ carcase, corpse, Gen. xv. 
it. Ex. xxi. 353 pl. careyns, Gen. xv. 11. 
Heb. iii. 17. 

carkeys, karkeis, a carcase, Ex. xxi. 35, 36. 

carouls, carols, choirs, 1 Kings xxi. 11. 

carpentarye, carpentrie, wark of a carpenter, 
Ex. xxxv. 33. 

carrys, cars, waggons, Num. vii. 9. v. chaar. 

cart, carte, cer, chariot, 111 Kings x. 29. 
Mt. prol. 2. p. 2. 

cast, @ throwing, blaw, Num. xxxv.17. 

caste, to cast, throw, conjecture, devise, Gen. 
xli.15. Job xx. 15; pr.t.pl. casten, Gen. 
xlii, 11; émp. pl. castith, Mt. x. 8; p.t. 
caste, keste, kest, castide, Gen. xxi. 15. 
1 Kings xx. 36. 1v Kings xiii. 17. Esth. 
prol. p. 636. Mt. viii. 16. xii. 42. Lk. 
xxi. 3; pl. casten, kesten, kestyn, castiden, 
kastiden, kestiden, Lev. x.s. Mt. xiit. 48. 
Mk, vi. 13. Lk. xxi. 1. xxill. 355 p.p. 
casten, 11 Kings xiv. 13. 

castel, atown, camp, 11Macc.xiv.16. Mt.x.11; 
pl. castels, castellis, Ex. xiv.19. Mt. ix.35. 

castere, a canjecturer, Prov. xxiii. 7. 

casting, castyng, n. a vomiting, Hab. it. 16. 
11 Pet. ii, 22. 

castyng-afore, forethought, Job xxxiv. 27. 

castis, designs, Esth. viii. 3. 

catchepollis, constables, 1 Kings xix. 20. 
Deeds xvi. 35. 

catel, substance, gaods, Gen. xv. 14. Lk. viii. 
433 pl. catels, Gen. xxxi. 14. 

cancion, @ bend, Lk. xvi. 6. 

caudron, candroun, @ pot, a caldron, Ps. 
evil. 9; pl. cawdrones, Ex. xxvii. 3. 

cautelouse, cautious, crafty, Job v. 13. 

cawe, a cave, Gen. xix. 30. 

ceelyng, x. @ seal, sign, Ecclus. xxii. 33. 

cenceris, censeris, censures, censers, Ex. xxv. 
29. xxxvii. 16. Num. iv. 7. 

cene, @ supper, Apoc. prol. 1. p. 638. 

cenefectorie, cenefectoryes, tent-making, tent- 
makers, Deeds xviii. 3. 

cense, incense, Lev. ii. 1, 2. xvi. 12. S. Sol. 
iv. 11. Apoc. xviii. 13. v. sense. 

ceremoyns, ceremonies, Deut. iv. 8. 

certeynere, comp. more certain, Deedsxxiil.20. 

certis, certes, adv. certainly, 1 Kings xvi. 2. 
Tob. ii. 1. Jer. ii. 11. 


eesynge-days, holidays, Lev. xxiil. 2, 4, 34. 
chaar, chare, charre, car, chariot, Gen. xli. 
43. u Par. i. 17. Deéds viii. 28; pl. 
chaaris, chares, charis, Ex. xiv. 18. Deut. 
xx. 1. Apoc. ix. 9. v. carrys, cart. 
chaf, cheff, straw, provender, Gen. xxiv. 25. 
Ex. v. 7,10; pl. chaffis, Mt. iii. 12. 
chaffare, to trade, Gen. xxxiv. 10, 31. Lk. 
xix. 13. 
chaffare, x. trade, merchandise, Is. xxiii. 3; 
pl. chaffaris, 11 Esdr. x. 31. xiv. 16. 
chaffarere, a merchant, Ecclus. xxvi. 28. 
chaffaring, chaffaryng, chaffering, n. trading, 
dealing, Prov. iii. 14. Is. xxiii. 2. Lk. xix. 
15. 1 Thess. iv. 6. 
chalenge, challengen, to accuse, toclaim,1 Par. 
xvi.21; pr.é. calengith, pl. calengen, cha- 
lengen, Pref.ep.c.vi. p.67; p.t.chalengide, 
1 Kings xii. 3; p.p. chalengid, 1 Kings 
xi. 4. Deeds xxiii. 25; pr.p. calengynge, 
chalengende, Prov. xxviii. 3. 
chalenge, caleng, 2. accusation, Gen. xliii. 
18. Jer. vii. 6; pl. chalengis, Is. xxiii. 12. 
chalengyng, . accusation, Gen. xhii. 18. 
chalengere, accuser, Ps. Ixxi.4; pl. chalen- 
geris, Job xxxv. 9. 
chalice, chalis, a cup, Gen. x]. 11. Ts. li. 175 
pl. chalicis, Ex. xxiv. 6. 1 Esdr. viii. 27. 
chamels, chamoilis, camels, Judg. viii. 21. 
1 Par. xii. 40. 
charge, @ burden, lading, 1v Kings v.17; 
pl. chaargis, 1v Kings viii. 9. 
charge, to lade, regard, care, Gen. xlv. 17; 
pr.t.2p. chargist, Mt. xxii. 16; p.¢. charg- 
ide, Gen. xxv. 34; p.p. chargid, Gen. xliv. 
13; pr.p. chargynge, Lev. xx. 4. 
chargeous, charious, chariouse, chargeable, 
burdensome, Prov. xxvii. 3. 11 Cor. xi. 9. 
charieter, charyeter, a charioteer, 111 Kings 
xxil. 34. IV Kings ii. 12. 
charkith, pr.t. ereaks, Amos ii. 13. 
chartre, paper or parchment, Tob. vii. 16. 
chastinge, 2. a chastising, Lev. xxvi. 18. 
chanfid, chaufed, p.p. made hot, Esth. i. 10. 
Is, xliv. 15. 
chaul, chaule, jaw, 1 Kings xvii. 35; pl. 
chaulis, Job xxix. 17. 
chaumbred, p.p. consisting of stories, Gen. 
vi. 16. 
chaundeler, chandler, Judg. iv. 4. 9. 
chaungable-while, adv. mutually, 1 Tim. v.5. 
chaungeablete, changeableness, 1 Kings xv. 
Tig: 
chaungeris, money-changers, Mt. xxi.12. 
chauntable, worthy to be recorded in song, 
Pref. ep. c. iv. p.64. Ps. exvili. 54. 
chatynynge. v. caityuende. 
chauns, chance, accident, Wisd. xiii. 19; pl. 
chaunsis, Wisd. viii. 8. 
cheek-boon, cheke-bon, jaw, Judg. xv. 14. 
Prov. xxv. 1. 
cheek-lap, cheke-lap, jow, Lev. xi. 29. Judg. 
Me Ts. 
chepinge, chepyng, cheepynge, market, Mt. 
xi, 16. xx. 3. Lk. vii. 32. Deeds xvi. 
19; pl. cheping, chepyngis, Lk. xi. 43. 
xx. 46. 


GLOSSARY. 


cheer, chere, face, Gen. iii. 19. iv. 5. xxxiii. 
10. Lk. ix. 29. Heb. ix. 243 pl. cheeres, 
cheeris, Ex. xxv. 20. Ez. x. 21. 

cheere, dear, beloved, Prov. v. 19. Wisd. 
xii. 7. 

cheestes, cheestis, chidings, Jam. iv. 1. 

cheff. v. chaf. 

cherl, cheer}, chirl, churl, a rustic, Pref. ep. 
c. iv. p. 65. Wisd. xvii. 16. 

cherlhed, chirlehede, rusticity, Pref. ep. c. iv. 
p. 64. Is. prol. p. 224. 

cherliche, rustic, Ecclus. xxvii. 7. 

cherlishe, churlishe, rustic, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p. 73. 1 Par. xxvii. 26. Ecclus. vii. 16. 

cherid, cheryd, p.p. made cheerful, Esth. i. 
10. Ruth iii. 7. 

chese, cheese, a cheese, Judith x. 5; pi. 
chesis, 5 Kings xvii. 18. 

chese, to choose, Gen. xiii. 9. Num. xvii. 5; 
p.t. ches, chees, cheese, Gen. xiii. 11. 
5 Kings xvii. go. Eph. i. 4; pl. cheseden, 
chesiden, cheesiden, chesden, chesen, 
chosen, Gen. vi. 2. xli. 18. Mt. xiii. 48. 
Lk. xiv. 7; p.p. chosun, ychoose, Gen. 
xxiii. 6. Deut. iv. 37. Deeds prol. p. 507. 

chesinge, chesyng, ». choice, election, Mat. 
prol.1. p.1. Rom. xi. 5. 1 Thess. i. 4. 

cheseresse, a female chooser, Wisd. vili. 4. 

chesiple, an ecclesiastical robe, Ex. xxv. 7. 

chesister, a female chooser, Wisd. viii. 4. 

chesoun, cause, reason, 111 Kings xxi. 29. 
1 Par. xix. 3. v. enchesoun. 

cheteles, chetelis, kettles, Lev. xi. 35. 

cheuenteyns, chieftains, Deut. xx. 9. 

cheytines. v. caitif. 

chichis, vetehes, 11 Kings xvii. 28. 

chiden, chide, to chide, wrangle, Ex. xvii. 2. 
Judg. xxi. 22. Judith xi. 15; p.é. chidde, 
Ex. xvii. 2; pl. chidden, Gen. xlix. 23. 
Joh. vi. 53. 

chykenys, fowls, Tob. viii. 11. 

childen, to bring forth child, Ex.i.19; p.t. 
childide, childe, Gen. iv.1. xvi.16. 1Kings 
ii. 5. Lk. ii. 75 pl. childiden, Ez. xxtii. 4. 

childinge, 2. a bringing forth child, Gen. 
XXV. 24, : 

childer, childre, pl. children, Deut. xxi. 15. 
Ruth ii. 8. Mt. ii. 16. Joh. xxi. 5. 

child-womman, maiden, Judith xiii. 5; pl. 
childer-wymmen, Esth. iv. 4. 

childli, childish, Tob. i. 4. 

chyne, an opening, chink, breach in a wall, 
S. Sol. ii. 14; pl. chinys, chynes, chynnis, 
chynis, 11 Esdr. iv. 7. Is. ii. 21. 

chirche, an assembly of people, 1 Macc. v. 16. 

chiteryng, n. @ chattering, chirping, Num. 
xxiv. 1. Deut. xviii. 10. 

chittes, whelps, Is. xxxiv. 15. 

chiualrie, chyualrye, host, army, Gen. xxi. 33. 
ut Kings x. 18. 11 Par. xviii. 30. 

chopyn, 4 gill, a measure of liquid, 111 Kings 
vii. 26. 9. 

chore, a measure, pl. chorys, coris, Num. xi. 
32. Lk. xvi. 7. 

chorys, chorus, dances, Judg. xi. 34. 

chosynes, chosen men, Rom. viii. 33. 

churl. v. cherl. 


4x2 


707 


cycer, vetches, 11 Kings xvii. 28. 

cyconye, a stork, Jer. viii. 7. 

cynoper, cinnabar, vermilion, Jer. xxii. 14. 

circumcide, circumside, to circumcise, Gen. 
xvii. 11. Deut. xxx.6; p.d. circumcidide, 
circumside, circumcide, Gen. xxi. 4. Josh. 
Vv. 33 pp. circumcidid, Gal. v. 1. 

cirogrille, hedge-hog, (Lat. choirogrillus,) 
Lev. xi. 5. Deut. xiv. 7. 

ciriely, adv. in the Syrian language, 1v Kings 
xviii. 26. 

cinylite, citizenship, Deeds xxii. 28. 

clappen, to clap, Judg. vii. 19. 

clarifien, to glorify, beautify, make clear, 
mt Esdr. viii. 82. Joh. xii. 28; p.¢. cla- 
rifiede, Heb. v. 5; p.p. clarified, Joh. xii. 
23. 11 Thess. iii. 1. 

clarioun, a trumpet, Ex. xix. 13,193 pl. cla- 
riouns, Josh. vi. 8. 

cle, clee, a hoof, Ex. x. 26; pl. cleen, cles, 
cleas, Gen. xlix. 17. Judg. vy. 22. Ps. 
lxviii. 32. 

cleer, clere, splendid, bright, Judith xvi. 16. 
Wisd. vi. 13. Jam. ii. 3. 

cleerid, p.p. made clear, Ex. xix. 16. 

cleerliere, cleerliker, comp. more clearly, 
1 Kings xiv. 19. 

clernesse, clerenesse, cleerness, glory, bright- 
ness, Joh. v. 41. xvii. 22. Apoc. vii. 12. 

clerte, clerete, cleerte, clearness, brightness, 
Tob. xiii. 20. Apoc. xxi. 11. 

cley, clay, Gen. xiv. 10. 

cleyye, cleyi, cle3y, clayey, 111 Kings vii. 46. 
Ecclus. xxii. 1. 

cleyene, made of clay, Job iv. 19. 

clemede, p.t. smeared, Ex. ii. 3. 

clepe, to call, Gen. iv. 26. Mt.i. 25; p.t. 
clepide, cleep, Josh. vi. 6. Mt. iv. a1; pl. 
clepen, clepeden, clepiden, Josh. xxii. 34. 
Wisd. xiii. 10. Mk. x. 49. LK. i. 595 p.p. 
clepid, iclepid, ycleeped, yclepid, Gen. 
xxix. 16. Mt. i.16. x.1. Deeds i.23. Apoc. 
prol. 1. p. 638. 

clepinge, clepyng, 2. @ calling, Mt. prol. 1. 
p.t. Eph. iv. 2. 

clepere, a caller, Judg. xv. 20; pl. clepers, 
Deut. xviii. 10. 

cliftus, clefts, Is. xxii. 9. 

clippe, to shear, to embrace, Gen. xxxi. 19. 
Job xxiv. 8; p.t. cleppide, clippide, Gen. 
xxxili. 4. 1 Kings xxv. 4. 11 Kings xiv. 
26; pl. clippeden, clyppiden, Gen. xli. 14. 
1 Kings xxv.7; p.p. cleppid, clippid, Gen. 
XXxvill.13. xlv.14. Lam.iv.5; pr.p. clipp- 
ynge, Gen. xxix. 13. v. biclippe. 

clippingis, clippingus, embraces, Gen. xlvi. 
29. Prov. vii. 18. Eccles. iii. 5. 

clippers, clypparis, shearers, Gen. xxxviit.12. 
1 Kings xxv. 11. 

closyngis, leaves of a gate, Judg. xvi. 3. 

clote, cloote, a bur, Hos. ix. 6. x. 8. 

clottis, clods, Job xxviii. 6. xxxvili. 38. 
XXXIX. 10. 

clout, a patch, Mt. ix. 16. 

cloutynge, pr.p. patching, mending, Mt. iv. 
21. Mk. i. 19. 

cloue, cleft, p.p. cleaved, rent, Mt. xxvii. 51. 


708 


clumsid, p.p. wnloosed, Is. xxxv. 3. Jer. 
xlvii. 3. v. aclumsid. 

cocatrice, kokatrice, a basilisk, Ps. xc. 13. 

cocco, cocto, coctun, coctyn, coccyn, cok, 
cocce, cocke, red, scarlet, (Lat. coccus,) 
Ex. xxvi. 36. xxvii. 16. xxviii. 5. 1 Kings 
prol. p. 4. Apoc. xvii. 4. xviii. 16. 

cockil, cokil, pl. cockelis, cockils, coklis, 
coclis, cockilis, cockle, Matt. xiii. 25, 29, 
30 36, 38. : 

code, the cud, Lev. xi. 3. Deut. xiv. 6. 
v. quede. 

coddes, coddis, pods, Ex. ix. 31. Lk. xv. 16. 

cofere, coffre, cofre, a chest, ark, coffer, Ex. 
xxv. 10,12. 1 Esdr. vi. 8. 

cofin, coffyn, a basket, (Lat. cophinus,) Ps. 
Ixxx. 7; pl. coffyns, cofynes, cofyns, 
1v Kings x. 7. Mt. xiv. 20. Lk. ix. 17. 

cognacioun, kindred, Gen. xxiv. 4; pl. cog- 
naciouns, Gen. x. 31. 

coyif, a cap, Ex. xxviii. 37. xxix. 63; pl. 
coyfes, Ex. xxviii. 4o. 

cokedril, cocodrille, a crocodile, Lev. xi. 29. 

colere, colre, colrye, the colic, (Lat. cholera,) 
Ecclus. xxxi. 23. xxxvii. 33. 

coliaundre, coriander, Ex. xvi. 31. 

colirie, collerie, eye-salve, Apoc. iii. 18. 

colyng, 2. @ cooling, 11 Mace. iv. 46. 

colit, an acolyte, 11 Thess. prol. p. 448. 

collacioun, a speaking together, 11 Macc. 
xil. 43. 

collect, a gathering, 11 Par. vii. 9. 11 Esdr. 
viii. 18; pé. collectis, 1 Cor. xvi.1. 

colle, to embrace, Eccles. iii. 5; p. t. collide, 
Gen. xxxiii. 4. 

collyngis, embraces, Gen. xlvi. 29. Prov. iii. 
5. vii. 18. Eccles. iii. 5. 

com, commen, to come, Gen. xviil. 10. 
1v Kings vi. 33 imp.pl. commith, cometh, 
Iv Kings vii. 4. Mt. iv.19; p.¢. com, cam, 
Gen. xx. 3; pl. comen, camen, Gen. xi. 
31; p.p. comen, Gen. vi. 13. 

comaunde, p.t. commanded, Josh. viii. 4. 

comelid, p. p. unloosed, Is. xxxv. 3. 0. 
cumblid. 

comelili, properly, becomingly, 1 Kings x. 7. 

comelyng, cumlinge, a stranger, Gen. xix. 
9. Lev. xxv. 47. Deeds vi. 5; pl. come- 
lyngis, cumelingis, cumlyngis, Ex. xii. 
19. Lev. xxv. 45. Deeds ii. 10. 1 Pet. 
id. 

comeling-wonyng, 2. @ sajourning, Wisd. 
xix. 10. 

comenaunt, comenount, a covenant, Gen. 
vi. 18. Ex. xxiv. 7. 

comenountid, p.t. covenanted, Gen. ix. 13; 
p-p. comenauntid, Ex. xxiv. 8. 

comyn, cummyn, cummin, Is. xxviii. 25. 
Mt. xxiii. 23. 

comyne, comunen, to commune, Ps. exl. 4. 
Ecclus. xiii.1; p.¢. comunede, Phil. iv. 
15; pl. comyneden, comuneden, Heb. ii. 
¥43; p.p. comynyd, Wisd. xiii. 21. 

comenynge, comynyng, 2. communication, 
communion, 1 Cor. x.16. 2 Cor. vill. 4. 

comynere, comuner, @ participator, 1 Pet. 
Vil. 


GLOSSARY. 


comoun, the commonalty, Ex. xii. 38; pl. 
comouns, comyns, Josh. vi. 9. 1v Kings 
XXV.19. 

comounli, in common, Gen. xiii. 6. 

comounte, comynte, the commonalty, Ex. 
xix. 23. Deeds xvii. 5. 

compacient, suffering with each other, 1 Pet. 
iii. 8. 

comparysoun, to compare, 1 Macc. x. 71. 

compaside, cumpasside, p.t. went round, 
Gen. xli. 46. Mt. ix. 35; pl. cumpassiden, 
Josh. vi. 14. 11 Par. xxiii. 2. 

compeers, fellows, Judg. xi. 38. 

compunct, compuncted, p.p. having com- 
punction, Ps. iv. 5. xxix.13. Deeds ii. 37. 

conceyuyng, n. conception, Gen. xxv.21; pl. 
conceyuyngis, Gen. iil. 16. 

concubyn, secondary wife, Gen. xxii. 24; 
pl. concubyns, Gen. xxv. 6. 

cony, conyng, a rabbit, Lev. xi. 5. 

coniecte, to conjecture, Ez. xxi. 19. 

coniectynge, coniecturing, 7. a divining, Ez. 
xxi. 19. 

coniure, to adjure, Gen. xxiv. 3; pr.t. coun- 
jour, Mt. xxvi. 63; p.p. coniurid, Gen. 
1. 6. Tob. ix. 5. 

coniured, p.¢. conspired, 1v Kings ix. 14; 
pl. coniureden, 1v Kings xii. 20. 

coniurysoun, @ conspiracy, 11 Kings xv. 12. 

connen. v. kunne. 

consistorie, consistory, Esth. v. 1. 

conspiracioun, conspiracy, 11 Par. xxxiii. 
24. 

constreyners, taskmasters, Ex. v. 6, 10, 14. 

constreynyngli, compulsorily, 1 Pet. v. 2. 

consuetude, custom, 1 Kings xx. 25. Esth, 
1X..3> 

consuls, chief men, Job tii. 14. 

consumpt, p.p. consumed, Josh. x. 20. 

contek, reviling, Mt. xxii. 6; pl. cuntekis, 
contakes, Lk. xx.11. 

contrarie, contrarye, to oppose, Ruth i. 16. 
Job xxi. 34; pr.p. contrariynge, Deut. 
i. 43. 

contrarious, contrary, perverse, Esth. xvi. 7. 
Mt. xiv. 24. 

conuenticulis, conventicles, Ps. xv. 4. 

conuersis, converts, proselytes, 1 Par. xxii. 
2. Deeds ii. 11. 

conuertid, p.p. turned back, 1 Macc. x. 72. 
Job. i. 38. Deeds xvi. 18. 

conuycte, conuyt, pr.p. convicted, Ex. xxi. 
17. Dan. xiii. 61. 

coode, pitch, Ex. ii. 3. 

coolding, 2. a cooling, 11 Mace. iv. 46. 

coombis, combys, combs, Is. iii. 19. 

coope, coepe, a cope, Ex. xxv. 7. Lev. viii. 
4. Ecclus. xlv. 10. 

coost, coast, side, limit, Num. iii. 35; pl. 
coostis, coostus, Num. xx. 17. xxxiv. 2. 

coostis, costis, expenses, 11 Par. viii. 16. 

coostieth, pr. ¢. borders, coasts, 1 Kings 
prol. p. 1. 

coote, cote, @ coat, Gen. xxxvil. 3. Mt. v. 
40; pl. cootis, kootis, Gen. iti. 21. 1 Par. 
xix. 4. Lk. iil. 11. 

coote, a coot, a bird, Lev. xi. 16. 


cop, top, Gen. xliv. 1. Lk. iv. 29; pl. cop- 
pis, cooppis, Gen. viii. 5. Is. xvii. 6. 

copyous, multitudinous, 1 Macc. xvi. 5. 

coraiouste, courageousness, Pa. liv. g. 

coriour, curiour, @ currier, Deeds ix. 43. 
x. 6. 

corlure, corolu, kurlu, a curlew, Ps. civ. 40; 
pl. curluris, corolues, kurlewis, Ex. xvi. 
13. 1 Par. prol. p. 313. 

cornes, corn, Gen. xli. 42, 47. Lk. vi. 1. 

coronal, a fillet for the head, Judith xvi. 
10. 

corour, @ courier, runner, Job ix. 25. 

correpcioun, corepcioun, a reproving, Eph. 
vi. 4. 11 Pet. ii. 16. 

cors, a corpse, Gen. xxiii. 3. 

cortyn, curtyn, a curtain, Ex. xxvi. 1. 
XXxvi. I1; pl. cortyns, curteyns, Ex. 
xxvi. I. xxxv.17. Num. iv. 26. 

corumpe, to destroy, corrupt, Hos. ii. 12; 
pr.t. corumpith, 1 Cor. v. 6; pl. corum- 
pen, 1 Cor. xv. 33; p.#¢. corrumpide, 
corumpide, Apoc. xix. 2; p.t. pl. cor- 
rumpiden, corrumpten, Nah. ii.2; p.p. 
corumped, corupt, corrumpted, 11 Cor. 
iv. 16. 

cos, coss, cosse, a kiss, Gen. xxvii. 26. 
S.Sol. i.1. Lk. xxii. 48; pl. cossis, kosses, 
Gen. xxix. 13. Prov. xxvii. 6. 

cosside, cossyde, p. t. kissed, Gen. xxvii. 26. 
Xxxili. 4. 

cosynage, family, relationship, Ex. 1.6. 11 
Mace. v. 9; pl. cosynages, Gen. xii. 3. 

cosyness, @ female cousin or relative, Lk. i. 
36. 

costagis, costs, expenses, Pref. ep. c. viii. 
Pp. 74- 

coste, imp. pay costs, be at charges, Deeds 
XXi. 24. 

costeuous, sumptuous, 11 Par. xxxv. 24. 

costretis, costrils, water vessels, Ruth ii. 9. 

cotes, cots, cottages, Wisd. xi. 2. 

couche, chamber, Mt. vi. 6. 

coueitise, lust, covetousness, Num. xi. 34. 
xxxii. 17. Tob. it. 16; pl. coueitises, 
Ecclus. xviii. 30. Jam. iv. 1. 

couenable, suitable, Gen. x). 5. Ex. xv. 23. 
Mk. xiv. 56. 

couenably, couenabli, suitably, Ps. ix. 1. 
Mk. xiv. 11. 

couenablenesse, suitableness, Eccles. viii. 6. 

couenablete, conenabletee, opportunity, 11 
Mace. xiv. 29. Mt. xxvi.16. Lk. xxii. 6. 

couent, assembly, 1 Par. prol. p. 315. Ps. 
lxiii. 3. Jam. ii. 2. 

couercheues, kercheues, kerchiefs, Is. iii. 
23. 

couerde, couerid, coouerede, p. p. recovered, 
1v Kings xx.12. Ig. xxxix. 1. 

couer-lyte, a bed covering, 1v Kings viil. 15. 

couertour, @ covering, Ex. xxxvi. 193 pl. 
couertours, Ex. xxxvi. 7. 

coumforting, x. comfort, Gen. xxxvii. 35. 

coumfortide, p. t. strengthened, fastened, Is. 
xl. 7. 

couplen, fo join, Is. v. 8; p.p. cowplid, 
Gen. xxix. 34. 


couplis, beams, rafters, 111 Kings vi. ro. 
S. Sol. i. 16. 

cowden. v. kunne. 

cracche, cratche, stall, crib, Jobvi.g. Lk.ii.7, 
125 pl.cratchis, 111 Kingsiv.26. 1 Par.iv.23. 

craft, handicraft, skill, Gen. x1.17. Lk. prol. 
1. p. 141; pl. eraftis, 1 Par. xxii. 15. 

craftyman, craftiman, craftisman, artificer, 
Ex. xxxvili. 23. 111 Kings vii.14. Heb. 
xi. 10. Apoc. xviii. 22; pl. crafty-men, 
crafti-men, craftise-men, 11 Kings v. 11. 
1 Par. xxii. 15. 

craftili, in manner of handicraft, skilfully, 
Ex. xxxvi.1. Ez. xli. 18. 

cram-cakes, fried cakes, pancakes, Ex.xxix.2. 

crammyd, p. p. filled to the full, Hos. xiii. 6. 

crasyng, n. @ cleft, breach in wall, 11 Par. 
xxiv. 13; pl. crasyngis, crasingis, 11 
Esdr. iv. 7. Is. ii. 21. Obad. 2. 

crauasis, creueysis, openings, chinks, Lev. 
xiv. 37. 11 Esdr. iv. 7. 

crawe, a crop of a bird, 1v Kings vi. 25. 

creaunsure, creaunsour, creaunser, creaun- 
cer, a creditor, 1v Kings iv.1, 7. Prov. 
xxix. 13. Is. 1.1. 

creeste, summit, Ex. xxviii. 23; pl. creestis, 
Ex. xxviii. 26. 

cresen, to increase, 1v Kings xx. 10. 

creueysis. v. crauasis. 

crious, clamorous, Prov. ix. 13. 

crippid, p.p. broken, cut, Lev. xxii. 24. 

crisp, curly, Judith xvi. 10. Is. iii. 24. 

cristendom, baptism, Rom. vi. 4. 

cristene, to baptise, Mt. iii. 11; p.p. cristen- 
ed, Rom. vi. 4. 

critouns, cratlings, refuse of frying pan, 
Ps. ci. 4. v. croote. 

crockere, a potter, Ps. ii. 9. Wisd. xv. 7. 

crokid-rigge, hunch-backed, crooked-backed, 
Lev. xxi. 20. 

crompid, p. p. fried, Ex. xxix. 23. 

crooken, crooke, to make crooked, curve, 
Ps. Ixviii. 24. Ecclus. xxxviii. 33; p.t. 
pl. crookeden, Ps. lvi. 7; p.p. crokid, 11 
Kings ix. 13; pr.p. crokynge, krokende, 
Job xxvi. 13. Is. ix. 14. 

croote, cratlings, refuse of frying pan, Ps. 
ci. 4. v. critouns. 

cros, crosse, a gibet, Gen. xl. 19. Josh. viii. 
2g. Esth. v.15. 

croude, crowde, a musical instrument, Lk. 
xv. 25; pl. croudis, Judg. xi. 34. 

crudded, cruddid, p. p. curded, Job x. 10. 
Ps. Ixvii. 16. exviii. 70. Wisd. vii. 2. 

cruetis, phials, Mk. vii. 4, 8. 

crustid, p. p. fried, Ex. xxix. 22. 

cubicularies, chamberlains, Judith xii. 6. 

cubit, hollow part, bending, Jer. xxxviil. 12. 

cucumeris, cucumbers, Bar. vi. ‘69. 

cuyschuns, cushions, 1 Kings v. 9. 

culter, cultre, a knife, Prov. xxiii. 2. 

culuer, culuere, « dove, pigeon, Gen. viii. 8. 
Mt. iii.16; pil. culuers, culueris, culueres, 
Lev. v. 7. Mt. x. 16. Job. ii. 14. 


| 
{ 


culuer-brid, a young pigeon, Lev. xii.6; pl. | 
culuer-briddis, culuere-briddis, Lev. i. | deadid, deadyd, dedid, p.p. dead, 1 Kings 


14. Lk. ii, 24. 


GLOSSARY. 


cumblid, p.p. wnloosed, Is. xxxv. 5. 2%. 
acumblid, comelid. 

cumlinge. v. comelyng. 

cumlyngnes, a sojourning, Ez. xx. 38. 

cunde. v. kunne. 

cundid, a conduit, 111 Kings xviii. 32. 

cunnen. v. kunne. 

curaiows, courageous, 1 Kings xvi. 18. 

cure, care, need, 11 Par. xxviii. 15. 1 Macc. 
xiv. 42. Mt. xxii. 16. Deeds xxvii. 3. 

cure, imp. keep, take care of, be intent on, 
heal, repair, 11 Tim. ii.15; pr.é. curen, 
Tit. iii. 8; p.¢. curede, curide, Gen. xx. 
17. 111 Kings xviii. 30; pl. curiden, 
Deeds viii. 2; p.p. curid, rv Kings v. 3. 

curiouste, curiosity, Num. iv. 20. 

curluris. v. corlure. 

cursful, accursed, Prov. xxviii.g. Ecclus.x.7. 

cursidere, comp. more cursed, Ecclus. x. 9. 

cursidhedes, cursidhedus, cursednesses, Lev. 
xviii. 27. Bar. ii. 33. 

curtus, courteous, Wisd. vii. 23. Is. prol. 
p. 224. 

curteysly, courteously, 1 Kings xxv. 14. 

curtesie, courtesy, 11 Macc. xiv. 9. 

customable, customary, usual, Num. xxix. 6. 
Ecclus. xx. 21. 

customablenesse, habit, custom, Ecclus. xx. 
27. 

customabli, usually, habitually, Ecclus.xx.26. 

customyd, p.p. accustomed, Ex. v. 18. 

cutten, v. kitte. 

D. 

daam. v. damme. 

dai-listen, to dawn, 1 Kings xxix. 10. 

dai-sterre, the morning-star, Job xxxviil. 32. 

dalf, dalue. v. delue. 

damesele, damysele, a maiden, damsel, Gen. 
XXiv. 85, 873 pl. damesels, Gen. xxiv. 61. 

damme, daam, a mother, dame, dam, Pref. 
ep. c. vi. p. 67. Deut. xxii. 6; pl. 
dammes, Deut. xxii. 6. 

dampne, to condemn, Ps. xxxvi. 33. Mk. x. 
33. Deeds xxv. 16; p.é. dampnede, 
ir Mace. iv. 47. Joh. viii. 10; p.p. 
dampnyd, 11 Macc. xiii. 8. Mt. xii. 37. 

dare, daren, to be hid from, Mk. vii. 24. 
Deeds xxvi. 26. 11 Pet. iii. 8; pr. it. 
daarith, dareth, 11 Pet. iii. 5. 

darnel, dernel, pi. darnales, darnels, derne- 
lis, derneiles, darnel, Mt. xili. 25, 29. 

darstis, dregs, Hos. iii. 1. v. drast. 

dasewe, daswen, to grow dim, Is. xxxii. 3; 
p.t. dasewide, daswed, Deut. xxxiv. 7; 
pl. dasewiden, daswiden, Gen. xxvii. 1. 
xlviii. ro. 1 Kings iii. 2. 

daunseresse, daunstere, a female dancer, Ec- 
clus. ix. 4. 

daunte, fo tame, Mk. v. 4. Jam. iii. 8; pr.t. 
dauntith, Dan. ii. 40. 

daunte, to dandle, fondle, cherish, Is. Ixvi. 
12,413: 

dawben, to plaster, Ez. xiii. 11; p.t. pl. 
dawbeden, Ez. xiii. 10; p.p. dawbid, 
Lev. xiv. 42, 43. 


XXV. 37. 


709 


debonere, deboner, adj. mild, meek, Ps. 
xxiv. 9. Is. lxi. 1. v. bonere. 

debonernesse, beauty, elegance, mildness, 
Ps. xliv. 5. 1 Cor. iv. 21. v. bonernesse. 

debreiding, pr. p. tearing, Mk. i. 26. ix. 25. 

debroken, p.p. broken down, rent asunder, 
Ez. xxxi. 15; pr. p. debrekynge, Mk. i. 26. 

debrisse, debrise, to break in pieces, Ez. xxx. 
18. xxxiv. 27; p.p. debrusid, Dan. ii. 42. 

deceptaciouns, disputations, Rom. xiv. 1. 

dedeyn, dedeyne, indignation, Mt. xxi. 15. 
xxvi. 8, Lk. xiii. 14. 

dedeynen (?), éo deign, Pref. ep. cvi. p. 67. 

dedeyneden, p.¢. pl. had indignation, Mt. 
xxi. 15. 

dedliche, deedli, deadli, deadly, mortal, Josh. 
pro]. p. 556. Esth. xiii. 2. Hebr. vii. 8. 
Jam. v.17. 

deedis-office, funeral service, 11 Par. xxi. 
19; pl. deed-offices, 11 Par. xxxii. 33. 

deel, a part, Ex. xxx. 15. 

defaylynge, pr. p. failing, Deut. xxviii. 32. 

defame. v. diffame. 

defaute, defect, failure, Job prol. p. 670. 
Wisd. viii. 18, xi. 5. 

defauten, to fail, Judg. viii. 5; p.t. defau- 
tide, Num. xi. 33; p.p. defautid, Judg. 
viii. 15. 

defautyng, n. a failing, failure, Wisd. xi. 5. 

defautiyf, defective, Ex. vi. 12. 

defend, to forbid, prohibit, Num. xi. 28 ; 
p.t. defendide, Judg. xv. 1; p.p. de- 
fended, Num. xxii. 13. 

defensable, capable of defence, Judg. vi. 2. 

defensioun, a defence, Ecclus. xviii. 7. 

defformyd, p. p. misformed, 11 Cor. iti. 7. 

defye, difye, to void, put forth, 1 Kings i. 
14; p.t. defiede, 11 Par. xxi.193 p. p- 
defied, Deut. xxiii. 13. xxviii. 27. 1 Kings 
xxv. 37. Rom. prol. 1. p. 298. 

defoule, to tread down, destroy, defile, Ps. 
exxxvili.11. 1 Macc. xv. 40. Heb. x. 29; 
p.t. defoulide, 1v Kings xxiii. 13 ; pl. de- 
fouleden, defouliden, 11 Par.xxxvi.14. Lk. 
xii.1; p.p. defoulid, Hos. ix. 3. 1 Cor. viii. 
73 pr. p. defoulinge, Lk. x. 19. 

defoulyng, 2. pollution, Judith iv. 10; pl. 
defoulynges, 11 Pet. ii. 20. 

defourme, adj. ill formed, Gen. xli. 19. 

deynte, dainty, Prov. xxi. 17. 

dekenehood, the office of deacon, 1.Tim. prol. 
P- 453- 

delen, to distribute, 1v Kings xii. 5. Lk. xi. 
22; p.t. delide, Lk. ix.16; p. p. deiid, 
Josh. xxi. 40. 

delynge, n. a distribution, Num. xxxvi. 4. 
1 Cor. x. 16. 

delicatis, pl. delicate persons, Bar. iv. 26. 

delice, delight, luxury, Gen. ii. 8,15; pl. de- 
lices, delicis, Gen. xlix. 20. Lk. vil. 25. 

delitable, delightful, Gen. iii. 6. Ps. Ixvi. 1. 
Eccles. xi. 7. 

delityng, delitende (?), n. delight, Wisd. viii. 
18; pl. delitingus, Ps. xv. ro. 

delyuere-doyng, 2. active work, Ecclus. ix. 4. 

delue, ¢o dig, pierce, Gen. xxvi. 25. Lk. 
xiii. 8; p.t. dalf, dalfe, dalfue,’ dalue, 


710 


deluyde, deluede, Gen.xxi.3o. l.5. Mt.xxi. 
33 xxv. 18; pl. dolue, delueden, Ps. 
xxi.17. lvi. 7; p.p. dolue, doluyn, dol- 
uun, delf, delued, Gen. xxvi. 15. Joh. 
prol. p. 233. Apoce. prol.1. p. 638. 

delues, pits, quarries, 11 Par. xxxiv. 11. 

delyuer, imp. deliberate, 11 Kings xxiv. 13. 

deme, to judge, Gen. xv. 14. Mt. vil. 13 p.d. 
demede, demyde, Gen. xxx. 6, Lk. xv. 
15; pl. demeden, Mt. xx. 10. 1 Cor. xi. 
31; p.p. demed, demyd, demede, Gen. 
xxx. 6, Mt.vii.r. Joh. iii. 18; prip. de- 
mynge, Mt. xix. 28. 

denes, denys, deenys, officers aver ten, Ex. 
xviii. 21, 25. Deut. i. 15. 

denoumbren, fo enumerate, Ps. 1xxxix. 11. 

dentyngis, rabbitings, morticings, Ex. xxvi. 
17. xxxvi. 24. 

deol, doel, deyl, duyl, deel, mourning, 
it Kings xiv. 2. 

departe, to divide, Gen. i. 6. Mt. x. 333 
imp. pl. departith, Mt. vii. 23; p.t. de- 
partide, Gen. i. 4. Joh. vi.11; pl. de- 
partiden, Mt. xxvii. 35; p.p. departid, 
Gen. x. 5. Rom.i.1; pr.p. departinge, 
Lk. xxiii. 35. 

departyng, 2. @ separation, division, Ex. viii. 
23. Rom. ili. 22. Heb. iv.12; pl. de- 
partyngis, departingis, Gen. xv.17. 1 Cor. 
xi. 18. xii. 4. 

departyngli, distinctly, separately, at inter- 
vals, Num. x. 7. 

departer, a divider, discerner, Lk. xii. 14. 
Heb. iy. 12. 

depeyntid, p.t. depicted, painted, Pref. ep. 
c. iii, p. 63; p.p. depeyntid, Lev. xi. 30. 

depoost, deposit, 1 Tim. vi. 20. 11 Tim. i. 
I4. 

depraueden, p.t. pl. turned to evil, Prov. 
i, 30. 

depute, attributable, Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

derkeden, p. t. pl. darkened, 1 Kings iv.15; 
pp. derkid, 111 Kings xviii. 45. Ron. 
ir. Tit. i r2. 

derkful, dark, Lk. xi. 34. 

derknessis, pl. darkness, Gen. i. 2. 
xxvii. 45. 

derworth, dereworth, derworthe, dereworthe, 
dear, 8. Sol. ti. 7. v.1. Mt. xvii. 3. Eph. 
i. 7; sup. derworthest, derewortheste, S. 
Sol. v. 1. Wisd. xii. 7. Jam. ii. 5. 

derelinge, derlyng, darling, Deut. xxxii. 
15. 8S. Sol. ii. g; pl. derlyngis, Ps. 
lix. 6. 

descryue, discriue, to write, to describe, 
Deut. xvii. 18. Prov. iii. 3; p. t. disery- 
uede, Num. xxxill. 2; p.p. descryued, 
discryued, Num. xi. 26. Lk. ii. 1. 

deseertnesse, desolation, Lev. xxvi. 43. 

deseruend, pr. p. serving, Wisd. xix. 6. 

desiderable, desirable, Ps. xviii. 11. 

desireful, desirable, Dan. x. 3. 

despeirable, desperate, Jer. xv. 18. 

despit, dispit, dispyt, dispiyt, contempt, Gen. 
XVL5. xxix. 33. 11 Esdr. iv. 4. Rom. ix. 
21; pl. dispitis, Rom. i. 24. 

destrie, destrye, distrye, distroye, distruye, 


Mt. 


GLOSSARY. 


to destroy, Ex. xxiii. 24. 1 Mace. ix. 73. 
Mt. ii.13. v.17. Lk. xii. 18; p. t. di- 
striede, distruyde, distruyede, Judg. vi. 
go. Mt. xxii. 7; p. p. destried, di- 
stried, destruyed, distruyed, Lev. xi. 35. 
Judg. vi. 30. Mt. ix.17. xxiv. 2; pr. p. 
destruynge, 11 Macc. xii. 7. 

dettid, p. p. owed, Deut. xv. 2. 

deue-dep, deue-doppe, dyue-dap, @ dab- 
chick, waterfowl, Lev. xi.17. Deut. xiv. 
17. 

deuel-cleperes, invokers of devils, Is. xlvii. 
9. Jer. xxvii. 9. 

deuouresse, a female devourer, Biz. xxxvi. 13. 

deweth, imp. pl. shed out dew, Is. xlv. 8. 

dialatik, dialectics, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 68. 

dichis, diches, pl. holes, Is. xxxiv. 15. 

diffame, to report abroad, Mk. i. 45; p.t. 
diffamide, Deut. xxii. 19; pi. defameden, 
diffameden, Mt. ix. 31; p.p. defamyd, 
Lk. xvi. 1. 1 Thess. i. 8. 

differre, to delay, pastpane, Deut. vil. 103 
p.t. differride, Deeds xxiv. 225; p. p. dif- 
ferrid, Ez. xii. 22. ; 

diffyned, deffyned, p.p. determined, Lk. xxii. 
22. 

diffynyng, x. a determining, Ez. xliii. 13. 

diffinicioun, final determination, Dan. xi. 36. 

difye. v. defye. 

dignacioun, indignation, Gen. xviii. 30. 

diyngis, dyes, colours, Job xxviii. 19. 

diligentlier, comp. more diligently, 111 Kings 
iii, 21. 11 Macc. xi. 36. 

diluuye, flood, Gen. vi. 17. 2 Pet. ii. 5. 

dymes, tithes, Gen. xiv. 20. xxviii. 22. 

dymynued, p. p. diminished, abated, Ez. 
XXXV. 13. 

dippere, a diver, a waterfowl, Lev. xi. 17. 
Deut. xiv. 17. 

disceyuably, treackerously, Num. xxxv. 20. 

disch, dishe, disc, quoit, 11 Mace. iv.14. 

discharge, to wnburden, unlade, Jam. v.15; 
p.t. dischargede, Gen. xxiv. 32; pl. dis- 
cargeden, Deeds xxvii. 38. 

disciplisse, a woman disciple, Deeds ix. 36. 

discomfort, discoumfort, distress, Ez. xii. 
19. Mt. xxiv. 15. 

discomforteden, p.t. discouraged, Num. prol. 
p. 36453 p.p. discoumfortid, Josh. v. 1. 

discordith, p. ¢. disagrees, Josh. prol.p. 555- 

discriuyng, discryuynge, ». a@ describing, 
11 Kings xxiv. 9. Lk. ii. 2; pl. disery- 
uyngis, Ez. xiii, 11. 

diseese, disese, trouble, Mk. iv. 19. 11 Cor. 
ie eaol ee 

disesy, uneasy, Prov. xv. 15. 

disesist, pr. t. 2 p. troublest, 1 Kings xxvi. 
15; p-p. disesid, 1 Kings xxviii. 15. 
Deeds xv. 19. 

diseseful, traublesame, distressing, 
xXxxix. 10. Ex. xxiii.g. Lk. xviii. 5. 

dishonestid, p. p. dishonored, Prov. xxv. 8. 

dismytte, dismytten, dismitte, to deliver, 
release, leave, Jer. xxvii. 11. Lk. xxiii. 
17; p.t. pl. dismittiden, Deeds xvii. 10; 
p.p- dismittid, dismyttid, 1 Mace. x. 43. 
Deeds iii. 13. xv. 30. 


Gen. 


disparple, to disperse, to tear asunder, Ez. 
xii.1g. 1 Cor. tii.17; pr. t. disparplith, 
disparpileth, Lk. ix. 39. Joh. x. 123 p.@. 
disparplid, disparpoilide, Gen. xi. 9. Lk. 
ix. 42; p.p. disparplid, disparplit, dis- 
parpulid, disparpoilid, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p.71. Mk. iii. 24. Joh. xvi. 32. Deeds v.36. 

dispender, dispendere, dispendour, a stew- 
ard, Gen. xiii. 16, 19. Lk. xii. 42. Tit. 
i. 73 pl. dispenderis, 1 Cor. iv. 1. 

dispending, 2. a dispensation, 1 Cor. ix. 17. 

dispensatour, @ steward, Gen. xiii. 16, 19. . 

dispensis, costs, expenses, 1 Par. xxil. 5. 

dispershen, ¢o perish, Judith vi. 3. Wisd. 
xvi. 29; p.¢. disperisht, Lam. v. 18. 

dispisable, worthy to be despised, Prov. 
xviii. I. 

dispitous, dispitouse, despiteful, cruel, Job 
Xxxvill. 2g. Rom. prol. 2. p. 302. 

disputesoun, disputisoun, a disputation, Job 
xxi. 4. Eccles. iti. 11; pl. disputisouns, 
dispitisouns, dispeticiouns, Rom. xiv. 1. 

dispuyle, ¢o spail, 1 Kings xxxi. 8; p.t. dis- 
puylide, 1 Kings xviii. 4; pl. dispuyliden, 
Gen. xxxvii. 23; p.p. dispoylid, Mk. iii. 
24. 2 Cor.v. 4. 

disseruyd, p.p. well served, Heb. xiii. 16. 

dissymelith, dissymulith, pr.t. dissembles, 
Prov. xii. 16; p.t. dissymelide, dissymy- 
lide, Gen. xix. 16. 1 Kings x. 27. xxiii. 
13; pp. dissymelid, Esth. v. 10. 

distreyne, to strip off, Ex. xvii. 22. 

distourble, disturble, to disturb, canfound, 
Ps. ii, 5. xx. 10; p.t. disturblide, Josh. 
X. 103 p.p. distourblid, disturblid, dis- 
troblid, distrublid, distroublid, Ex.xv.15. 
Ps. vi. ro. Mt. xxiv. 6. Lk. xxiv. 37. 
Joh. xiv. 27; pr.p. disturblinge, distrou- 
blinge, Deeds xvii. 13. 

distriere, destroyer, Judith viii. 25. 1 Cor. 
x. 103 pl. destrieris, Judg. ii. 16. 

disturblyng, distourblynge, distroublynge, 
a disturbance, Ps. xxx. 21. Lk. xxui. 19. 

ditee, dyte, a song, Ex. xv. 1. Deut. xxxi. 
19; pl. ditees, Ps. lili. 1. 

dyteris, writers, inditers, Esth, vil. g. 

diting, an inditing, writing, Wisd. prol. 
p. 85. 

diuersith, dyuersith, pr.t. differs, 1 Cor. xv. 
41. Cath. epp. prol. 2. p. 595. 

dyue-dap. v. deue dap. 

dyuersete, dyuersite, dyuerste, difference, va- 
riety, Ex. xxxi.5. Ps. xliv.10; pl. diuer- 
setees, Ps. xliv. 15. 

diuynyng, dyuynyng, deuynyng, @ divina- 
tion, Lev. xix. 26. Prov. xvi. 10. 

dyuynour, @ diviner, Num. xxii. 5; pl. di- 
uynouris, dyuyneris, deuynouris, Lev. 
xix. 31. Jer. xxvii. 9g. 

dizten, to prepare, dress, Gen. vi. 145 tmp. 
diste, Ez. xxxviti. 7; p.t. diste, Gen. xxii. 
3; p.p. dist, Ex. xii. 19. 

dodde, to cut off, Lev. xix. 27; imp. dodde, 
Jer. vil. 29; p.t. doddide, 1 Kings xiv. 
26 ; pl.doddiden, dedden (?), diden (?),Gen. 
xli. 14; p.p. dodded, doddid, 1 Kings 
xiv. 26. Jer. xxv. 23. 


doel. v. deol. 

doggische, surly, dogged, Ecclus. xii. 22 g. 

doluun. v. delue. 

dom, dome, doom, judgement, Gen. xviii. 
19. 25. Mt. v. go; pl. domes, 1 Cor. vi. 
4. Apoc. xix. 2. 

domesman, a judge, Ex. ti. 14. Mt.v. 25; pl. 
domysmen, domesmen, Num. xxv. 5. 
Mt. xii. 27. Lk, ix. 19. 

dom-place, judgment-hall, Deeds xvi. 19. 
xvii. 17. 

don, doon, to do, to put, Pref. ep. c. 9. p. 75. 
Ex. xix. 8; do doun, Mk. xv. 36; pr. ¢. 
2 p. doost, deest, dist, Ex. xviii.14. Deut. 
vii. 12; pl. doen, 111 Kings vili. 353 imp. 
do out, Mt. vii. 3; pl. doith, doth, Gen. 
xlii. 11. Mt. iii. 2; p.t. dide awei, Gen. 
xxxvii.14; pl. diden of, 11 Esdr. iv. 23; 
p.p. don doun, don off, don on, Gen. 
xxxvili. 14, 19; doo, 1v Kings ii. 93 
idon, Mt. vi. 10; pr. p. doende, Ps. prol. 
p- 738. 

dongy, moist, (?) Josh. xv. 19. 

doo, a doe, Prov. vi. 5. 

dore, to dare, to be bold, Pref. ep. c. ix. p. 
75; prt. dar, Rom: x. 20; pl. doren, do- 
run, durn, dur, der, Gen. xliv. 26. Num. 
xxxil. 7. 11 Cor. x. 12. 

Gotid, p.p. foolish, stupid, Ecclus. xxv. 4. 

doublefold, éwofold, Ps. prol. p. 737. 

doun-bowid, p.p. bowed down, Gen. xxxiii. 6. 

doun-flowede, p.t. flowed down, Is. xxiv. 4. 

doun-weried, p.p. worn down with fatigue, 
1 Kings xiv. 32. 

douty, doubtful, Ez. xii. 24. 

doutous, dowtows, dotous, doubtful, Pref. 
ep. c.ix. p. 77. Lev. xiii. 43. 11 Par. ix. 1. 

dou3, dowe, dough, Ex. xxii. 16. xxiii. 18. 

dou3tris, dou3tren, dow3stris, dow3tren, 
daughters, Gen. v. 22. xxviii. 6. xlvi. 7,15. 

dowue, dove, Mt. iii.16; pl.dowues, Mt.x.16. 

dowlis, fellies of a wheel, 111 Kings vii. 33. 

dowyng, x. a dower, Ex. xxii. 17. 

dowsti, doughty, Ex. xviii. 25. 

draf, dreg, refuse, Num. vi. 4. Ecclus. xxxiii. 
16; pl. draffis, Hos. iii. 1. 

draft, dregs, Ps. xxxix. 3; pl. draftis, Ps. 
XXXix. 3. 

dragme, a drachma, Lk. xv. 8; dragmes, 
dragmys, 11 Esdr. vii. 70. 11 Mace. iv. 
19. Lk. xv. 8. 

drast, dreg, Ps. Ixxiv. 9; pil. drastis, 1s. 
xlix. 6. vv. darstis, dreste. 

drawide. v. drow. 

drastis, drafts (?) copies, Esth. prol. p. 636. 

drede, dreed, to fear, Gen. xv. 13 p.é. 
dredde, drede, dred, Gen. iii. 10. xxxii. 7. 
1 Kings xii.19. Mt. ii. 22. xiv. 53 pl. 
dreden, dredden, Mt. xxi. 46. Lk. ii. 9. 
ov. adrad. 

drede, terror, dread, Gen. ix. 2; pl. dredis, 
1 Par. xvii. 21. 

dredeful, dreedful, dredful, dredyngful, fear- 
ful, fearing God, Deut. xxviii. 65. Judges 
vii. 3. Lk. ii. 25. Deeds viii. 2. 

dredy, timorous, full of fear, Judg. vii. 3. 

dreem-reder, expounder of dreams,Gen.x1.23. 


GLOSSARY. 


drenche, v. to drench, to drown, Deut. xxxii. 
42. Mt. xiv. 30; p.t. drenchid, Ex. xv. 
4.10; pl. drenchiden, 11 Macc. xii. 4. Rom. 
prol. 2. p. 301; p.p. drenchid, dreynt, Mt. 
xiv. go. Mk. v.13. Lk. x. 15; pr. p. 
drenchende, drenchynge, Ecclus. xliii. 19. 

drery, dreri, drury, sad, sorrowful, Gen. x1. 
6. 1 Kings i. 5. 11 Esdr. ii. 2; comp. 
dreryer, Gen. xl. 7. 

drerynesse, drurynesse, sadness, sorrow, 
Tob. vi. 1g. Ecclus. iv. 8. 

dresse, to prepare, to direct, reach, Gen. 
xxiv. 40. Mt. vii.9. Joh. xiti. 26; p.t. 
dresside, Josh. viii. 13. Ps. xxxix. 3. Lk. 
xxiv. 30; pl. dressiden, Gen. xiv. 8; 
p-p. Gressid, Gen. xxiv. 42. Lk. ii. 53 
pr-p. dressynge, Num. xxiv.1. Jam. iii. 4. 

dreste, dreg, Ps. lxxiv. 9; pl. drestis, dres- 
tus, dregs, Ps. xxxix. 3. Is. xlix. 6. 2. 
darstis, drast. 

drit, dung, dirt, Ecclus. xxii. 2. 

dryue, to drive, Gen. xxxi. 26; p.t. drof, 
drofe, droof, droue, Gen. xv. 11. 1 Kings 
xxiii. 5. 1 Par. xix. 14. 11 Pet. ii. 6; 
pl. dreuen, dreuin, drywen, dryueden, 
driueden, 11 Kings vi. 3. Job xxiv. 3; 
p-p. dreuen, dryuun, Ex. viii. 9. 

dromedis, dromedaries, Is. 1x. 6. 

drope-falling, 2. eaves-dropping, Ps. 1xxi. 6; 
pl. drope-fallingus, Ps. Ixiv. 11. 

drow, drowe, dro3, drow3, drawide, p. ¢. 
drew, Gen. xxiv. 45. Judg. v. 21. Is. x. 
13. Hab. i. 1g. Mk. xiv. 47. 

drunkede, p.t. made drunk, filled, Ecclus. 
xxxix. 28; 2p. drunkedest, Is. xliii. 24; 
pr. p. drunkinge, Ecclus. xxxii. 17. 

drunkelew, drunklew, drunkenlewe, dronke- 
lew, given to drink, Ecclus. xix. 1. xxvi. 
11. Mt. xxiv. 49. 1 Cor. vi. 10. Tit. i. 7. 

drunkenhed, drunkinhed, drunkenness, Ju- 
dith xiii. 19. Is. v. 11. 

drunkne, to make drunk, Is. xvi. g. Jer. 
xxxi. 14; pr.f. drunkneth, Is. lv. 10; 
p.t. drunknede, Is. 1xiii. 6. 

drury, drurynesse. v. drery, drerynesse. 

duchie, place or dignity of a duke, 11 Esdr. 
v. 18. 

duelich, duly, tn due manner, Num. xxix. 24. 

duyk, duk, @ leader, prince, Dan. iii. 38. 
Mt. ii. 6. 

duyl. v. deol. 

dullid, p.p. made dull, Eccles. xii. 3 g. 

dunne, grey, tawny, Gen. xxx. 33. 

duryde, p.t. endured, continued, Dan. vi. 28. 

during, x. an age, time, Ecclus. i.1, 43 pl. 
duringis, 111 Esdr. iv. 40. 

dusknesse, darkness, Job xxiii. 17; pl. 
dusknessis, Job xxiii. 17. 

dwelleresse, a female dweller, Jer. xxi. 13. 

dwellid, p.p.inkabited, Is.xlv.18. Jer.xvii.25. 

dwelstere, a female dweller, Jer. xxi. 13. 

dwyne, to pine, waste away, Ps. cxviii. 1393 
pt. dwynede, Ps. exviii. 158. cxxxviii. 21. 


E. 
ebruli, adv. in the Hebrew lunguage, Ps. 
prol. p. 736. 


711 


ecchingus, additions, Is. xv. 9. 

ech, eche, eiche, iche, yche, each, Ex. xii. 3. 
Lev. xxv. 10. Mt. vii. 26° xvili. 35. 

ech-on, ech-oon, eche-oon, each one, Gen. i. 
12. xxxii.16. Mt, xx. 10. 

echen, eche, eeche, to add, increase, Gen. 
xxxiy. 12. Eeclus. xviii. 5. Prov. xxii. 
16; imp.pl. eecheth, Jer. li. 12; p.t. ech- 
ide, Gen. xxiv. 25; p.p. eechid, Ecclus. 
xi. 353 pr. p. echynge, Lev. ix. 17. 

edder, eddre, an adder, serpent, Gen. iii. 1. 4. 
Mt. vii. 10; pl. eddres, eddris, addris, 
Num. xxi. 6, 8. Mt. xii. 34. v0. bosk 
eddre, shadewe eddre. 

edifien, to build, Gen. xi. 8; p.t. edefiede, 
Gen. ii. 22. viii. 20. 

eder, ivy, Jonah iv. 6. 11 Mace. vi. 7. 

edwite, fo upbraid, Ecclus. viii. 6; prt. ed- 
witeth, Wisd. ii.12; pl. edewiten, edwiten, 
Wisd. xv. 14. 

edwityng, n. reproach, Ecclus. vi. 1. Wisd. 
v. 3; pl. edwitingis, Ecclus. xviii. 18 g. 

eeld, eeren, etc. v. elde, eren, etc. 

eer, eere, ere, the ear, Ex. xxi. 6. Ps. xvi. 6; 
pl. eeris, eerys, eris, Ex. xxxii.2. Ps.v. 2. 

eerli, eerlich, erly, adv. early, Gen. xxi. 14. 
Deut. xxviii. 67. 

eere-ring, ere-ring, earring, Job xlii. 11; pl. 
eer-ryngis, eere-ryngis, Gen. xxiv. 22. 
Ex. xxxii. 2. 

eft, efte, again, Gen. xvii. g. Mt. xiii. 43, 47. 
Apoc. xix. 3. 

eft-biheest, a repeated promise, Deedis ii.39. 

eftsone, eftsoone, eftsones, eftsonys, eft- 
soonys, adv. again, forthwith, Gen. xvii. 9. 
xx. 10. xxix. 3. Mt. iv. 7. v.33. Joh. 
xix. 9. 

egge, edge, Heh. xi. 34; pl. eggys, egis, 
1 Kings xiii. 21. 

egge, to provoke, sharpen, Deut. xxxii. 21; 
p.t.pl. eggiden, Gen. xlix. 23. Deut. xxxii. 
16, 19; p.p. eggid, Deut. xxxii. 21. 

eggyng, n. a setting on edge, Amos iv. 6. 

egre, sour, Ps. evi. 11. 

egreli, sourly, Ecclus. iv. 9. 

ey, eye, an egg, Tob. xi. 14. Lk. xi. 12; 
pl. eiren, eyren, eyrun, eren, Deut. 
xxii. 6. Job xxxix.14. Is. x. 14. lix. 5. 

ee, @3e, Be, y3e, au eye, Ex. xxi. 24. 
Mt. v. 29. vi. 22. Lk. vi. 42; pl. eesen, 
een, eyen, isen, y3en, Gen. iii. 5. xiii. Lo. 
xx. 16. Num. xxiv. 2,16. Mt. ix. 28. 
Lk. ii. 30. 

eyme, to estimate, value, Is. prol. p. 224. 
Lev. xxvii. 8; pl. eymyde, 1 Kings i. 13; 
p.p. eymed, aymed, Gen. xli. 49. Lev, 
XXVii. 17. 

eymyng, 2. a valuation, estimation, Lev. v. 
18. xxvii. 8. 

eir, eire, air, sky, Esth. i. 6. viii. 15. Mt. vi, 
26; pl. eiris, 1 Cor. xiv. 9. 

eyre, eir, eire, an heir, Gen. xv. 2, 4. At. 
xxi, 38; pl. eyris, eiris, Gal. iii. 29. 

eisel, vinegar, Ex. xxv. 29. Num. vi. 3. 
Ruth ii. 14. Mt. xxvii. 48. o. aisel. 

eistith, eistety, eighty, 1 Kings xxii. 18. 

eke, also, Job xxi. 27. 


712 


eld, elde, eeld, eelde, old age, Gen. xv. 15. 
xxiv. 36. Lk. i. 36. 

eld, elde, old, Ps. vi. 8. xxxi. 3. Mt. v. 215 
comp. elder, eldere, Gen. xxiv. 2. 

elde-fader, grandfather, Ecclus. prol. p.123. 

eldeden, eeldeden, p.t.pl. grew old, Ps. xxxi. 
3. 11 Esdr. ix. 213; p.p. elded, eldid, oldid, 
Ps. vi. 8. xvii. 46. Bar. iii. 11. 1 Mace. 
Xvi. 3. 

eldnesse, eldenesse, oldness, Josh. ix. 5. 
Deut. viii. 4. 

eldren, eldres, eldre, elderes, fathers, seniors, 
Gen. xlvii. 30. Deut. xix. 12. Josh. viii. 
10. Apoc. iv. 4. v. aldren. 

electre, electrum, a metal, Ez. i. 4, 27. viii. 2. 

ellis, else, Gen. xliv. 26. Mt. vi. 1. 

em, an uncle, 1 Par. xxvii. 32. Esth. viii. 1. 
Jer. xxxii. 8, 9. 

eme-sone, emes-sone, son of an uncle, Is. v. 
1. Jer. xxxii. 8. 

emte, an ant, emmet, Prov. vi. 6. 

emblowid, p. p. inspired, Pref. ep. c. ix. 
P. 77: 

encense, ensense, incense, perfume, Fix. xXx. 
34; pl. encensis, Ex. xxv. 6. 

encenseris, ensensers, censers, Ex, xxxvii. 
16. Num. iv. 7. 

enchaufe, to grow hot, Job vi.17. v. chaufed. 

enchauntende, pr.p. enchanting, Ps. lvii. 6. 

enchaunter, an enchanter, Deut. xviii. 11; 
pl. enchaunteres, Ps. lvii. 6. 

enchesoun, cause, Gen. xxxvii. 5. v. chesoun. 

encle, an uncle, Esth. viii. 1. 

enclinaunt, enclynaunt, inelining, prone, 
Ex. xxxii. 22. Proy. xxii. 9. 

enclosere, a setter in metal, iv Kings xxiv. 
14; pl. enclosers, 1v Kings xxiv. 16. 

encrecis, increase, Prov. iv. 9. 

endentyngis, joints, rabetings, 1 Par. xxii. 3. 

endeyne, indeyne, to be angry, indignant, 
Gen. xviii. 30. Ex. xxxii. 22. Is. lvii. 6; 
pt. endeyned, Job xxxii. 2; pl. endeyn- 
eden, Wisd. xii. 27. 

endettid, p.p. brought under obligation, Rom. 
xili. 4. 

endyteres, writers, inditers, Esth. viii. g. 

endurith, pr.t. hardens, Rom. ix.18; p.p. 
endurid, Joh. xii. 40. Deeds xix. 9. 

ene, eene, sheep with lamb, Ps. exliii. 13. Is. 
xl.11. wv. yeene. 

eneyntisyng, 2. destruction, annihilation, Ju- 
dith xiii. 29. v. anyntische. 

enemyable, enmyable, hostile, Ecclus.xlvi. 4. 

enemyen, to be hostile, Ps. xxxiv. 19. 

enemyful, hostile, Is. i. 7. 

enemylich, enemyly, enmyly, hos¢ilely, Num. 
xxv. 18. 11 Mace. xiv. 11. 

enemyte, enmity, Gen. iii.15; pl. enemytees, 
Num, xxxv. 22. 

enfattid, infattid, p.p. made fat, Mt. xiii. 15. 
Deeds xxviii. 27. 

enfeblished, p.g. made feeble, Ex. xxii. 14. 

enforgid, p.p. made, fabricated, Deut. iv. 28, 

enforsen, to endeavour, strive, 11 Par. xx. 115 
p.t. enforside, Gen. xxxvii. 21. Judg. ix. 
17. Deeds xxiv. 6; pl. enforceden, Lk. 
InIs 


GLOSSARY. 


engoldid, p.p. gilt, Bar. vi. 7, 50, 56, 70. | 


Apoc. xvii. 4. 

engredgide, p.t. made heavy, Ex. viil. 153 
p-p. engredgid, engregid, Ex. vii. 14. viii. 
32. ix. 35. 

enhabiters, enhabiteris, inhabitants, Gen. 
xxiv. 13. XXXxvi. 20. 

enhaunse, to exalt, Gen. ]. 20. Ex. xv. 2. 
Jam. iv.10; p.é¢. enhaunside, 111 Kings 
xiv. 7. Lk.i.52; p. p. enhaunsid, mr 
Kings xiv. 7. Mt. xxiii. 12. 

enhaunsere, an exalter, Ex. xvii. 15. 

enhaunsyng, x. exaltation, Ex. xvii. 15. 

enhaunten, to exercise, 11 Par. xix. 6. Esth. 
ix. 12, Job x. 173 imp. enhaunte, Prov. 
xxiv. 27; p.f. enhauntide, 1 Par. ix. 26; 
pl. enhaunteden, Tob. ix. 12. v. haunte. 

enhurte, to exhort, 11 Kings xi. 25; pr.t. 
enorteth, Pref. ep. c. tii. p. 63. 

enioye, to rejoice, be glad, Lk. i. 14. Joh. 
xvi. 20. Apoc. xix. 7. 

enioynyde, p.t. knit together, Mt. xix. 6. 

enke, ink, Jer. xxxvi. 18, 11 Joh. 12. 

enk-horn, ynk-horn, ink-horn, Ez. ix. 2,11. 

enleuen, enleuene, enleue, eleven, Gen. xxxii. 
22. Mt. xxviii. 16. Lk. xxiv. 33. 

enleueth, eleventh, 1 Kings prol. p. 2. 

enmyes, enemies, 11 Mace. xti. 22. 

ennewe, to renew, Ecclus. xxxvi. 6; pr.t. 
ennewith, Ecclus. xxxviii. 30. 

enournen, to adorn, Esth. ii. 9; p.p. enourn- 
ed, 1 Tim. ii. 9. v. anoure. 

enournyng, 2. an adorning, ornament, Esth. 
ii. 9, 12. 

enourmentis, ornaments, Esth. ii. 3. 

enpeiring, 2. an impairing, Ex. xxii. 11. 

enplastre, a plaster, Is. xxxvili. 21. 

enpughe. v. impngue. 

enquere, to inguire into, 1 Kings xxviii. 7. 
Job x. 6; pr.p. enquerynge, Num. v. 15. 

ensaumple, example, Num. v. 21, 27. vill. 4. 
1 Thess. i. 7 ; pl. ensaumplis, Joh. xvi. 25. 

ensaumpler, pattern, copy, Heb. viii. 5; pl. 
ensaumpleris, Josh. prol. p. 353. Heb. 
ix. 24. 

ensegide, p.t. besieged, Judg. ix. 443 p. p. 
ensegid, Deut. xxviii. 52. 

enserchen, enserche, to search into, Job x.6. 
Prov. xviii. 17; pr.t.pl. enserchen, 1 Par. 
xix. 3; p.t. enserchide, Job xxviii. 11; 
pl. enserchiden, 1 Pet. i. 10; p.p. en- 
serchid, Gen. xxxi. 37. 

ensiluered, p.p. silvered, Bar. vi. 7, 50, 56, 
70. 

enspien, fo lay wait, Esth. xvi. 14. 

enstoore, enstore, instore, ¢o restore, 1v Kings 
xil. 5. Eph. i. 10; pr.t. pl. enstoren, Pref. 
ep. ¢. vil. p. 725; p.p. enstooride, instorid, 
iv Kings xii. 14. Ez. xxxvi. 10. Rom. 
xili. 9. 

enstorynge, nz. a@ reparation, tv Kings xii.12. 

entente, entent, heed, attention, Zech. i. 4. 
11 Pet. i. 19. 

ententif, bent upon, attentive, Gen. vi. 5. 
ir Par. vi. 3. 

ententijfly, ententifli, intentifli, earnestly, 
1 Kings xxiii. 22. 11 Par. xxxiii. 13. 


ententifnes, attention, Wisd. xii. 20. v. ten- 
tifnesse. 

enterpele, to appeal to, ask intervention, 
Deut. xxv. 7; p. p. interpeled, Deut. 
XXV. I. 

entre, an entrance, Gen. ii. 7. 

entremete, to meddle with, Job xxxviii. 2 g. 

enuyouste, envy, Ecclus. xxvi. 6. 

enuyroun, circuit, compass, Gen. xxiii. 17. 
Ex, vii. 24. Rom. xv. 19. 

enuyroune, enuyrowne, to go about, Ps. 
lviii. 7. 1 Tim. v. 13; p.¢. enuyrounede, 
Mt. iv. 23; p.p. enuyround, Job i. 7. 

enuyrounyngis, circuits, windings, Josh. 
Vv. 4. 

enwrappe. v. inwrappe. 

eny, ony, any, Gen. xix. 12. 

er, ere, before, 1v Kings ii. 9. Is. lxvi. 7. 

erand, business, Judg. xviii. 28. 

ere, eren, eeren, to plough, Gen. xlv. 6. 
Ex, xxxiv. 21. Deut. xxii. 10. Job xxxix. 
to; pr.t. erith, 1 Cor. ix. 10; pt. pl. 
ereden, eriden, Jobi. 14; p. p. eerid, erid, 
Gen. xlv. 6. Judg. xiv. 18; pr. p. eringe, 
erynge, Lk. xvii. 7. 

erere, a plougher, Amos ix. 6; pl. ereres, 
1 Kings viii. 12. 

eritagen, to inherit, to endow, Ps. xxxvi. 11. 
Is. liv. 35 p. ¢. eritagede, Ecclus. xvii. 9. 

ernes, cernes, ernest, earnest, pledge, 11 Cor. 
1, 22. v. 5. Eph. i. 14. 

erre, to wander, go astray, Num. v.12; pt. 
erride, Gen. xxi. 143 pr. p. errynge, Gen. 
Xxxvil. 15. 

erthe-mouynge, earthquake, Amos i.1. Mt. 
xxviii. 25 pl. erthe-mouyngis, Esth. xi. 5. 
Mt. xxiv. 7. 

erthe-quaues, earthquakes, Esth. xi. 5. 

erthe-schakyng, earthquake, Mt. xxviii. 2. 

erthe-tiliere, a tiller of land, Gen. xxi. 34. 
1s. lit. 4. 11 Tim. ii. 6; pl. erthe-tilieris, 
iv Kings xxv. 12. Mt. xxi. 34. 

erthe-tilthe, agriculture, 11 Par. xxvi. 10. 
Ecclus. vii. 16. 

erthe-tilthynge, erthe-tyllyinge, agriculture, 
11 Par. xxvi. 10. 

erthe-werching, agriculture, Ecclus. xxvii. 7. 

eruke, caterpillar, (Lat. eruca,) Joel i. 4. 
ii. 25. Amos iv. 9. 


| eryd, p.p. having ears or handles, Num. iv.7. 





ethchewe, eschewe, to avoid, Lev. xi. 11. 
Ecclus. xxxii, 21. 1 Tim. v.11; eth- 
chewith, eschewith, Prov. xi. 15. xvii. 16; 
p. t. ethchewide, eschewide, 11 Kings 
xix. 35 p.p. eschewid, Lev. xi, 13; pr.p. 
ethchewynge, 11 Cor. viii. 20. 1 Tim. vi. 20. 

est, eest, east, Gen. xi. 2. 

ete, to eat, Gen. iii. 14. Ex. xii. 8; p. t. ete, 
eet, eete, Gen. iii.13. Job xbi.tr. Ps. 
xl. 10; p.p. eten, etun, Lev. vii. 16. 

eternytees, eternal ages, Pref. ep. c.iv. p. 64. 

etyngis, repasts, Judg. ix. 27. 

euangelie, gospel, Rom. i.t. 1 Thess. ii. 9. 

euangelise, to preach, Lk. i. 193 pr.t. 2 p. 
euangelisist, Is. xl. 9; p.¢. euangeliside, 
Lk. iii. 18; pr. g. enangelizinge, Nah. i. 
1s. Lk. viii. 1. 


euangeliseris, preachers of good tidings, Ps. 
Ixvil. 12. 

enel-willi, yuel-willid, malevolent, Wisd. i. 4. 
Ecclus. xxxiii. 28. 

euen, equal, just, moderate, Lev. xix. 36. 
Job xix. 6. Lk. xx. 36. Rom. prol. 2. 
p- 301; comp. euener, Bar. iv. 5. 

enen-a3ens, enene-ajens, euen-azenst, near, 
over against, Gen. xvi.12. xxv. 9. Ex. 
v. 20. xxv. 37. Mk. xv. 39. 

euene-caytyf, fellow-prisoner, Col. iv. 10; 
pl. euene-caytifs, Rom. xvi. 7. 

euen-disciplis, fellow-disciples, Joh. xi. 16. 

enenen, to make even, Is. xxviii. 25; p.t. 
euenede, Judg. vii. 13. 111 Kings xi. 27; 
p.p. euened, 1 Par. iv. 27. Is. xl. 25. 

euene-eir, fellow-heir, Ecclus. xxii. 29; pl. 
euene-eyris, euenc-eiris, Rom. viii. 17. 
Eph. iii. 6. 

euen-eldis, euene-eeldis, persons of the same 
age, Dan. i. 10. Gal. i. 14. 

euene-eldre, fellow-elder, of the same age, 
1 Pet. v.15 pl. euene-eldris, Gal. i. 14. 

euenhede, equity, Ps. x. 8. 

euene-kny3t, fellow-soldier, Phil. ii. 25. 
Philem. 2. ; 

euenli, equitably, 1 Par. xxvi. 13. Job ix. 32. 

euene-lynagis, persons of the same tribe, 
1 Thess. ii. 14. 

euennesse, equity, Dent. ix. 5. 

euen-seruaunt, fellow-servant, Mt. xviii. 28, 
29. Apoc. xix,10; pl. enen-seruauntis, 
Mt. xviii. 28, 29. Apoc. vi. 11. 

euen-souker, euene-soukere, foster-brother, 
ur Mace, ix. 29. 

euene-sterre, eue-tid-sterre, evening-star, Job 
XXXVI. 32. 

euen-tid, evening-time, Gen. i. 5. 

euene-worchere, fellow-worker, Phil. ii. 25. 

euene-worth, of like value, Job xxviii. 19. 

euer-among, adv. at intervals, throughout, 
Ex. xxv. 25. 

euer-eche, euer-echon, every one, Ex. xvi. 29. 
Mt. v. 22. 

euere-durende, pr.p. continuing for ever, 
Job x. 22. Jer. li. 39. 

euer-eithir, either, Gen. xv. 10. 

enerlastyngnesse, eternity, Is. lvii.15; pl. 
enerlastyngnessis, Pref. ep. c. iv. p. 64. 
Dan. xii. 3. 

euerlastingte, eternity, Is. lvii. 15. 

euese, brow of a hill, Tob. xi. 5. 

euen-biyng, euyn-byinge, n. @ general pur- 
chasing up, 11 Macc. vill. 11, 

euete, a lizard, Prov. xxx. 28, 

ewe-lambren, female-lambs, Gen. xxi. 28, 
29, 30. 

exactours, torturers, Deut. xvi. 18. 9. 

excess, exces, axcess, exstasy of mind, (Lat. 
excessus,) Ps, xxx. 23. xvii. 28. Deeds 
Kel OueXLss: 

expert, p. p. experienced in, Eccles. viii. 5. 

expounen, to expound, set forth, Josh.xx. 9; 
p.t. expownede, Gen. xli. 8; Ex. xix. 7; 
pp. expounid, expownid, Mt. i. 23. v. 
41. 


expownyng, 2. an interpretation, 1Cor.xii.10. | 


VOL, IV. 


GLOSSARY. 


expownere, an expounder, interpreter ,Gen.xl. 
22; pl. expowneris, Gen. xli. 8. 

exsaumple, exsaumpler, example, copy, pat- 
tern, 1v Kings xvi. 10. 

extre, axle-tree, Ecclus. xxxiil. 5; pl.extrees, 
ur Kings vii. 30. v. axtre. 


F 


fableden, p. t. pl. talked, Lk. xxiv. 15. 

fablers, relaters of fables, Bar. iii. 23. 

faculte, goods, means, Tob. i. 25. 1 Cor. vii. 
353 pl. faculteis, facultees, Gen. xxxi. 14. 
Lk. viii. 3. 

fade, feeble, Ecclus. xi. 12. 

faden, to fade, Josh. xviii. 3; p. ¢. fadide, 
Is. xxi. 4. 

fader, fadir, father, Gen. ix. 23; pl. fadres, 
fadris, faders, fadryn, Gen. xv. 15. xlix. 
2g. Gal. i. 14. 

fage, faage, imp. flatter, speak smoothly or 
coaxingly, Judg. xiv. 15. 

fallace, fallase, fallas, deceitfulness, falsity, 
Mt. xiii. 22. Heb. iii. 13. 

falle, fal, to fall, befal, Gen. xlix.17. Ex. 
ix.19. Mt. xviii. 13; p.¢. fel, felde, fal- 
lide, Gen. xvii.17. xl.1. Lk.i.12; pl. 
fellen, felden, Gen. xiv. ro. 1 Cor. x. 8. 
Apoc. xix. 4; p.p. fallun, faln, falle, fallid, 
feld, Gen. xlii. 29. Lev. xi. 32, 35. 1 Esdr. 
viii. 92. Prov. vi. 3; pr.p. fallende, Ju- 
dith x. 20. 

falowe, newly broken or cropped land, Jer. 
iv. 3. 

falsere, a falsifier, Cath. epp. prol. 1. p. 594. 

falsnessis, frauds, Job xiii. 9. 

falt, p. p. folded, bent, Mt. xvii. 14. Lk. iv. 
20. v. folden. 

famyden, p.t. pl. spread the fame, Mt.ix.31. 

famousiste, sup. most famous, Judith ii. 13. 

fantasie, fancy, Josh. xxii. 19. 

fantum, an apparition, Mt. xiv. 26. Mk.vi.49. 

fardels, trusses, baggaye, burdens, Judg. 
xix.17. Ruth ii, g. 1 Kings xvii. 22. 
xxv. 13. Ez. xxvii. 24. 

fare, to be, to have oneself, 11 Macc. ix. 19, 
20. xi. 28; pr.t. farith, Gen. xxix. 6; 
pr. p. faring, merie-faring, Jer. xxv. 30. 
hen? 

fase, passover, (Lat. phase,) Ex. xii.21, 43,48. 

fastiden, p.t. pl. fastened, made firm, Ex. 
xv.17;3 p.p. fastede, fastid, Gen. xxviii. 
13. Ez. xxx. 21. 

fastne, to make fast, make firm, Lev. xxvi.9. 
ut Kings vii.12; p.t. fastnede, 11 Par. 
xi. 123 pl. fastneden, Jer. xxxv. 165 p.p. 
fastned, 11 Kings vii. 24. 

fastnesse, certainty, strength, Gen. xli. 32. 
Ps. xxiv. 14. 

fastnyng, x. strength, Ps. xvii, 2. 

fatnesses, fatness, Gen. iv. 4. 

fatten, to make fat, anoint with fatness, Ps. 
exl. 5; pr.t. fattith, Prov. xv. 30. Ec- 
clus. xxxv. 8; p.p. fattid, Deut. xxvii. 
15. Ps. xxii. 5. Is. xxxiv. 6. 

faucet, a vent, Job xxxii. 19. 

faunt, an infant, Ex. ii. 3. 11 Kings xii. 19, 
21. Tob. iv. 21; pl. fauntis, Job xxi. 11. 


AY 


713 


faunyng, n. a fawning, clapping, Tob. xi. 9. 
Judith xiv. 13. 

fautours, favorers, Job xiii. 4. 

febleden, p.t. pl. made feeble, Judith xv. 4. 
Ps. Ixxxvii. 10; p.p. feblid, Ex. xxii. 14. 
11 Esdr, iv. ro, Lam. 1.14. 

feblishid, p. p. enfeebled, Ex. xxii. 10. 

federed, p.p. bound by covenant, Prov. 
xvii. 9. 

feerli, adj. hasty, sudden, Prov. xii. 19. 

feerli,feerly, feerliche, feerlyche, suddenly, 
Num. xvi. 21. Josh. x. 9. 111 Kings xx. 
40. Job vii. 18. 

feermynge, pr.p. 1 Kings x. 2. 

feerse, feerste, fierceness, Judg. v.22. Judith 
iii, 11. 

feet-gynnes, foot-iraps, Jer. v. 26. v. foot- 
grene. 

feynere, a feigner, Prov. xi. 9; pl. feyneres, 
Job xxxvi. 13. 

feynyng, n. a feigning, pretending, Is. xxxii. 
6. 11 Mace. vi. 25. Rom. xii. 9. 

feisfull, fey3ful, faithful, Mt. xxv. 23. 

fel, skin, Job ii. 4. x.115 pl. fellis, Deut. 
xxvili. 57. 

fel, fell, felle, crafty, Esth. xvi. 6. Job 
xxxvi. 13. 1 Cor. iii. 19; comp. feller, 
Gen. iii. 1. 

felaw, felawship. v. felow, felowschipe. 

feld, felde, feeld, a field, Gen. ii. 5. xxv. 29; 
pl. feeldes, feeldis, Gen. xxxiv. 28. Num. 
xxii. 1. 

feeld-beestis, cattle, Num. xxxii. 26. 

feldi, feeldi, feeldy, feeldly, adj. plain, cham- 
pein, Gen. xiv.6. Num. xxii.1. Lk. vi.17. 

fele, feel, many, Gen, xxiv. 22, xxxii. 22. 
tv Kings xx. 9. Rom. prol. 1. p. 300. 

felen, feele, to feel, perceive, Num. xxv. 17. 
Prov. xiii. 3; p.t. felide, feelide, Gen. 
xix. 33. xxx. 9; pl. feleden, feeliden, 
Pref. ep.c. vi. p. 67. Wisd. xiv. 30; p. p. 
feelid, Gen. xxvii. 22. 

felendely, sensibly, Ecclus. xiii. 27. 

felenouse, wicked, felonious, Is. lili. 12. 

felijs, felys, parts of the circumference of 
a wheel, fellies, 111 Kings vii. 33. 

felle, to make to fall, Ex. viii. 26. 

felle-hocche, sore of the skin, Lev. xiii. 19. 

felle-wounde, fel-wounde, wound of the skin, 
Ley. xii. 19. Jer, xxx.17. 

felli, fellich, eraftily, Ex.xxxii.12. Josh. ix.4. 

felnesse, craftiness, Job v. 13. Prov. i. 4. 

felonye, great wickedness, Judg ix. 24. xx. 
3. Esth. xvi. 23; pl. felonyes, Job xxxv. 
13 

felow, felowe, felawe, companion, Gen. iii. 
12. Dent. v. 5; pl. felows, felawis, Gen. 
xiv. 15. xxxill.15. Jos. vill. 10. 

felowschipe, felawship, to associate, join, 
unite in, Deut. vii. 3; p.t. pl. felouschi- 
piden, felawshipten, 1 Kings xiv. 22; 
p-p. felowshipte, felawshipte, felowschi- 
pid, felashipid, felouschipid, Gen. xxvi. 7. 
xxxviil. 8. Prov. xxvi. 23. 

fen, fenne, dirt, mud, clay, 11 Kings xxii. 
43. Ez. xiii. 10. 1 Pet. ii. 22. 

fend, feend, devil, fiend, Tob. iii. 8. vi. 14; 


714 


pl. fendis, feendis,1 Kings xxviii. 3. Tob. 
vi. 8. 

fendli, feendli, feendly, devilish, Jam. ili. 15. 

fer, ferr, far, Gen. xliv. 17. Wisd. ix. 16; 
comp. ferrere, Rom. xv. 23. 

ferd, ferde, feerde, fear, Gen. ix. 2, Ex.xxili. 
q. Dent. xi. 25. xxviii. 67. 

ferdful, feerdful, feerful, dreadful,Gen.xx viii. 
17. Ex. xix. 18. Deut. xx. 8. Apoc. xxi. 8. 

ferdfulnesse, feerfulnesse, dread, Deut. xxviii. 


34- 


fere. v.meete-feere, plei-feris, sonkynge-fere. | 
fere, fear, 11 Par. xiv.14; pl. feris, feeris, | 


11 Par. xv. 5. Ps. lxxxvii. 17. 

feren, fere, feere, to make afraid, Lev. xxvi. 
36. 11 Esdr. vi. 9. Job xi. 19. Eccles. 
prol. p. 53. 11 Cor. x. 93 p.t. feride, feer- 
ide, 1 Mace. xiv. 12. 1 Kings vii. 103 pl. 
fereden, 11 Kings xxii. 5. 11 Esdr. vi. 9; 
pp. feryde, feerd, feerde, Gen. xli. 8. 
Deut. i. 28, 29. 

feries, holydays, (Lat. ferie,) Lev. xxiii. 2, 4. 

fermour, farmer, bailiff, Lk. xvi.1. 

fers, feerse, fierce, 11 Macc. x. 35. 

fersli, fersly, feersli, feersly, ferslich, fiercely, 
Gen. xxxi. 36. Num. xvi. 21. 11 Macc. 
xii. 15. xv. 23; comp. fersliere, feerslier, 
11 Mace. xiv. 30. 

feersnes, fersnesse, feersnesse, force, assault, 
Jierceness, Lev. xxv. 1g. Num. xxii. 3. 
Josh. x. 42. Heb. xi. 34. 

ferr-floun, p. p. fugitive, Jer. xxxix. 9. 

ferth, fourth, Gen. xxix. 35. 

feruentnesse, fervor, zeal, Num. xxv. 11. 

fernour, zeal, anger, Deut. xxix. 20. 

festeye, festene, to feast, Wisd. viii. 9. 

festu, a straw, mote, (Lat. festuea,) Prov. 
xxv. 26g. Mt. vii. 3, 4,5. Lk. vi. 41, 42. 

fy, fy3, fe, Mt. v. 22. Mk. xv. 29. 

ficche, a vetch, Is. xxviii. 25; pl. fetchis, Is. 
Xxvili. 25. 

fieche, fitche, to pitch, fiz, Gen. xvi. 12. 
Num. xvi. 38; p.f. ficchid, Ex. xix. 2; 
pl. fitchiden, fytchiden, Num. ii. 27. ix. 
18; p.p. ficchid, Gen. xiii. 3. Ps. xxxiv. 
16, Deeds xxvii. 41. Gal. ii. 19. 

ficching, fitchinge, n. 4 fixing, pl. fychyngis. 
Joh. xx. 25. 

figarde, a roebuck, (Lat. pygargus,) Deut. 
xiv. 5. y 

fier-panne, a frying pan or other pan for 
the fire, pl. fier-pannes, Ex, xxxviil. 3, 4. 

fijren, fyren, fyrene, fiery, 1v Kings ii. 11. 
vi. 17. Ecclus xliii. 4. 

fijrid, firid, fyrid, p.p. set on fire, burnt, 
Num. xxi. 6. Ps. exviii. 140. Prov. xxx. 5. 
11 Mace. x. 3. Apoc. iii. 18. 

fyr-brondis, firebrands, Is. vii. 4. 

filateries, phylacteries, Mt. xxiii. 5. 

filet, filete, a fillet, band, Ex. xxviii. 28. S. 
Sol. iv. 3; pl. filetis, Num. xv. 38. 

filynge, pr. p. defiling, 1 Cor. vi. 18. 

fill, fille, to fulfil, Gen. xxvii. 5. Mt. iii. 15; 
p-t. fillide, Jos. xxiii.15; pl. filliden, Num. 
xxxii. 12; p.p. filled, fillid, fillud, Gen. 
xxvii. go. Mt. i. 22. viii 17. Lk. i. 23; 
pr-p. fillinge, Lk. ix. 31. 


. filthheed, filthhed, 


GLOSSARY. 


filthe, dirtiness, shamefulness, Prov. vi. 33. 
filthehed, dirtiness, 
shamefulness, Lev. xviii. 7. Rom. i. 27. 
finding, fynding, 2. invention, Wisd. xiv. 12; 
pl. fyndyngis, Dent. xxviii. 20. 1 Par. 
xvi. 8. 

fyned, p.p. refined, Is. xxv. 6. 

fiole, fyol, fyole, viol, a vial, Num. vii. 13, 
37; pl. fiols, fioles, Ex. xxxviii.16. Apoc. 
v. 8. 

fir, fyrr, a fir tree, Is. xli. 19. Ix. 133 pl. 
firris, rv Kings xix. 23. 

firse, frijse, gorst, furze, Is.1v.13. Mic. vii. 4. 


| firsthed, primacy, first place, Ecclus.xxiv.10. 








fische-leep, a fish-basket, Job x1. 26. 

fischeris, fisscheris, fishermen, Is. xix. 8. 
Mt. iv. 19. 

fyuethe, fifth, Gen. xxx. 17. 

fyuethis, adv. five times, Ecelus. xiii. 8. 

flaggy, made of flags or rushes, Ex. ii. 5. 

flappe, fo clap, Ps. xevii. 8. Prov. xvii. 18; 
p.t. 2p. flappidist, Ez. xxv. 6; pl. flappe- 
den, Is. iii. 16. Jer. v. 31. Lam. ii. 15. 
v. biflappiden. 

flax-top, a head of flax, Ecclus. xxi. 10. Is. 
i. 31. 

fle, flee, flen, fo flee, Gen. xvi. 8. Judith 
xiv. 3; pr.t.pl. floun, Job xxx. 105 imp. 
pl. fleeth, Mt. vii. 15; p.t. fleis, fley, 
flow3, fledde, Gen. xxxi.4o. xxxv.1. Ex. iv. 
3. 1 Mace. ix. 7. Mk. xiv. 52; pl. fleen, 
flowen, floun, fledden, Deut.vii.20. Josh.x. 
16, Is. xxxiii. 3; pr.p. fleesinge, Mt.vi.26. 

flees, flese, a fleece, Gen. xxx. 355 pl. fleeses, 
1v Kings iii. 4. 


| fleisch, fleish, flehs, flesh, Gen. ii. 23. vi. 3; 


pl. fleschis, flesches, fleischis, Gen. xl. 19. 
Apoc. xix. 18, 

fleisch-flie, fleische-flie, gad-fly, Ps. Ixxvii. 
45. civ. 31. 

fleisch-hokis, flesh-hokes, fleischokis, flesh- 
okis, flesh-hooks, Ex, xxxviii. 3. Num. iv. 
34. 

fleischlynesse, sensuality, Deut. xvii. 17. 

flete, to flow, drop, float, Dent. xxxii. 2. 
Prov, iii. 31. 11 Macc. ii. 33; pr.t. pl. 
fleten, Heb. ii. 1; p.t. fletide, flette, fleet, 
iv Kings vi. 6. 1 Mace. ix. 7; pl. fleti- 
den, Ex. xxxix.19; pr.p. fletynge, Gen. 
xxxv. 14. Ex. xxv. 29. 

flewen, p.t.pl. flayed, Mic. iii. 3. 

flex, flexe, flaxe, flax, Judg.xvi.g. Dan. iii.46. 

flix, flux, Mt. ix. 20. Lk. viii. 43. 

floc-meel, floc-mele, flok-mel, adv. by flocks, 
1x Mace. iii. 18. xiv. 14. 

flod-wombe, abyss of waters, Is. xix. 7. 

flood, a river, Gen. ii. 14. Apoc. ix. 14. 

flom, stream, river, Mk. i. 5. 

floreyns, gold coins, florins, 1v Kings v. 5. 
m1 Par. ix. 16. 

florishe, flurshe, to flourish, blossom, Ps. 
Ixxxix. 6. Hab. iii. 17; pr.p. florischynge, 
brandishing, Job xii. 20. 11 Mace. xi. 8. 

flotereth, imp. pl. fluctuate or flow un- 
steadily, Is. xxix. g. 

flotering, n. an unsteady movement, rolling 
as the waves, Ps. liv. 23. 


flouren, to blossom, flourish, Eccles. xii. 5; 
pt. flourede, S. Sol. ii.ig; p.p. flourid, 
S. Sol. ii 153 pr.p. flourmge, Dan. iv. 1. 


| flowyngis, floods, streams, Josh. y.1. xiii. 8. 


fnesynge, nesing, n. a sneezing, snorting, Joh 
xh. 9. 

fnesting, 2. a snorting, Jer. viii. 16. 

foddred, p.p. fed, fattened, 1 Kings xxviii. 24. 

folden, foolden, foldyn, falt, foldid, p.p. bent, 
bowed, folded, Judg. vii. 5. 1 Mace. xiii. 
47. Mt. xvii. 14. xxvii. 29. Heb. x. 23. 

fole, fool, foli, foly, fooly, foolish, Ex. xviii. 
18. Deut. xxxii. 6. 21. Job i. 22. ii, 10. 
xit. 17. Lk. prol. 1. p.341. 1 Cor. i. 20. 

folily, foolishly, Gen. xxxi. 28. Deeds xix. 36. 

folowyngly, consequently, 11 Par. xxxii. 15. 

foltisch, foltische, foltes, foolish, 1 Cor. i. 
20, 27. 11 Tim. ii. 23. Tit. iii. 9. 

fometh, fomede. v. vome. 

fomynge, n. a vomiting, Num. xi. 20. 

fonned, foolish, Ex. xviii. 18. Dent. xxxii. 
21. Lk. prol. 2. p. 342. 1 Cor. i. 20. 

fonnednesse, foolishness, Jer. xxiii. 13. 

fool-hardili, foolhardily, 11 Kings xviii. 53. 

fool-hardynes, foolhardiness, Num. xviii.t g. 

foors, force, violence, Gen. xix. 9. 

foot-folowers, feet-folowers, followers on 
foot, 1 Kings xxv. 42. 111 Kings xx. 14. 

foot-grene, foot-trap, Job xviii. 10. 

foot-mesure, measure of the foot, Jer. li. 13. 

foot-stakys, foot-stanes, pedestals, supports, 
Ex. xxvii. 14. xxxvi. 24. 

fooste, p.p. faught, Is. xx. 1. 

forbede, to forbid, Lk. ix. 50; p.t. forbede, 
forbedde, forbeed, Ez. xxxi.15. Mt. iii.14; 
pl. forbediden, 1 Esdr. iv. 23. Jer. v. 25; 
pp. forhodun, forbodyn, forbedun, Lev. 
iv, 22. Lk. ix. 49. Deeds xvi. 6. 

for-bier, for-bigger, a redeemer, Pref. ep. c. 
vii. p. 68. 

for-bigge, for-beggin, to redeem, Ex. vi. 6. 
xiii. 13, 153 p.p. for-boust, Ex. xv. 13. 
v. bigge. 

for-brent, p.p. consumed, entirely burnt, Ex. 
iii. 2, 3. 

for-coueride, p.t. entirely covered, Gen. 
xxvii. 16. 

for-do, to destroy, undo, Mk. iii. 6; pr.t. for- 
doith, for-doth, Deut. xxvii. 17. 1 Joh. 
iv. 3; p.t. for-dide, Ecclus. x. 20. 

for-dro3, p.t. drew along, Prov. vii. 21. 

fore, adv. before, 1 Kings iii. 14. 

fore-castynge, n. forethought, Job xxxiv. 27. 
v. bifore-castyng. 

fore-hened, forehead, Apoc. xiv. 9; pl. fore- 
heuedes, Apoc. ix. 4. 

fore-wal, for-wal, an outer wall, Is. xxvi. 1. 
Lam. ii. 8. 

forewis, forowis, foorewis, furrows, Job 
xxxi. 38. Ecclus. vii. 3. Hos. x. 4. 

forfenden, forfende, to prohibit, to keep, Job 
xxxiy. 31. Prov. ii. 27; pr.t.pl. forfenden, 
Job xv. 11; imp. forfende, Prov. i. 16; 
p.t. forfendede, forfendide, Ps. cxviii. 101. 
Eccles. ii. 10; pl. forfendeden, 1 Esdr. 
iv. 23; p.p. forfendyd, 11 Kings xxiv. 
25. Iv Kings xii. 8. 


for-fistere, for-fystere, a champion, Is. xix.20. 
Ixiii. 1. 

forge, to make, fabricate, Ex. xxvii. 3; p.t. 
forgide, Ex. iv. 11; p.p. forgid, Ex. xxviii. 
28; pr. p. forgynge, 11 Par. xxxiv. 17. 

forgeable, capable of being fabricated or 
made by handicraft, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 67. 

forgere, fabricator, smith, Eccles. xi. 5; pl. 
forgers, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 67. 

for-gessing,n.a guessing before, Wisd.xvii.ro. 

forging, n. a fabricating, Ecclus. xxxii. 8. 

for-goer, a goer before, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 66. 
Heb. vi. 20. 

for-gon, p.p. deceived, Col. prol. p. 429. 

for-lete, p.p. left altagether, rv Kings prol. 
p- 236. 

far-leue, to leave altogether, give over, Lev. 
xxv. 46; p.p. for-left, Hag. i. 9. 

for-lookere, forth-loker, a provider, a looker 
out, Ecclus. iii. 34. xi. 32. 

formere, comp. forwarder, first in pasition, 
Gen. xxxii. 17. 

forme-fadris, formere-fadris, ancestors, Mk. 
prol. 1. p. 86. 

forn-a3ens, forn-a3eynst, over against, Gen. 
xvi. 12. xxi. 16. Num. viii. 2. rv Kings 
ii. 7. Mk. xv. 39. v. aforn-azens. 

forneys, fourneyse, furneys, furneis, furnace, 
Gen. xv. 17. Deut. iv. 20. Mt. vi. 30; pi. 
forneyses, Lev. xi. 35. 

forn-had, p.p. previously passessed, Judg. 
xvi. 28. 

fornycary, fornicarie, given to fornication, 
Pref. ep. c. vii. p.69. Apoc. xvii. 16. 

for-nootid, for-notid, p.p. before noted, Joh. 
prol. 1. p. 233. Apoe. prol. 1. p. 638. 

forn-seid, for-seid, p.p. afaresaid, Deut. xix. 
5. Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

” forn-ordeyned, for-ordenede, p.p. before or- 

dained, Mk. prol. 1. p. 86. 


forselet, a strong hold, Sartress, 1 Kings x. 5. | 


xili. 3. 1v Kings xvii. 9. 

forsemens, fortifications, Is. xxv. 12. 

for-sewith, p.t. pursueth, Rom. prol.1.p. 300. 

forsynge, 2. compulsion, violence, 1v Kingsv. 
16, 

for-slept. v. al-for-slept. 

for-spekere, one who speaks instead of an- 
other, Ex. vii. 1. 

farst, frost, Ps. lxxvii. 47. cxviii. 83. 

for-swerith, pr.t. swears falsely, Lev. vi. 3; 
pl. forsweren, forswern, Josh.ix.20. Wisd. 
xiv. 28. 

forth-clepinge, pr.p. calling forth, Deut. 
XEX. TT. 

forth-daies, adv. far advanced in the day, 
Mk. vi. 35. 

forthe, foorth, a ford, Gen. xxxii. 22; pl. 
forthis, Judg. iii. 28. xii. 5. 

for-thenkynge, n. repentance, Mt. xxi. 29. 
Rom. ii. 2. 

forther, adj. former, first, Gen. xxv. 26. 
xxxil. 17. 

forth-getingus, shoots, sprouts, Jer. v. 10. 


forth-goende, pr.p. coming forth, Judith xvi. 


Pe 
farth-going, n. progress, Ps. prol. p. 737. 


GLOSSARY. 


forthi, because, 11 Kings iii. 30. xii. 6. 

for-thinke, to repent, Ex. xxiii. 21. Mk. 1.153 
pr.t. far-thenkith, Gen. vi. 7. Lk. xvii. 4; 
p.t. for-thoust, Gen. vi. 6. Mt. xxi. 293 
pr-p. for-thenkyng; for-thinkynge, Rom. 
ii. 29. 11 Cor. vii. 8. 

forth-kutten, to cut up, Is. xxviii. 24. 

forth-passe, ta pass forth, Gen. xxviii. 2; 
p.p. forth-passid, Gen. xxviii. 5. 

forth-strast, p.p. directed, Ecclus. xxxix. 29. 

forth-3eden, p.t.pl. went forth, Gen. xliv. 4. 

for-to, prep. until, Gen. xxi. 26. Ex. xvi. 35. 

for-top, for-topp, crown of the head, Deut. 
xxxiil. 16. 

forwhi, forwhy, because, for, Gen. iti. 5. 
Mt. iii. 9. Rom. viii. 26. 

for-3erde, court, hall, Ez. x. 3. Apoc. xi. 2; 
pl. for-3erdis, 11 Esdr. viii. 16. 

forzete, to forget, Gen. xli. 51; p.t. forsat, 
farsete, Gen. xl. 23; pl. forzaten, forzeten, 
Judg. iii. 7. Mt. xvi. 5; p.p. forzeten, for- 
3ete, Ps. x. *13. 

forsetyng, . oblivion, Gen. xli. 30. 

forsetingnes, forgetfulness, 11 Pet. i. 9. 

forsyue, to forgive, Num. xxx. 9; p.t. for- 
3aue, forsaf, Mt. xvili. 27; p.p. forsif, for- 
3euen, forz;ouun, forjoue, Ps. xxxi. 5. Mt. 
ix. 2. Lk. v. 20. 

fostride, p.t. nursed, Is. xxxiv. 15. 

foul, adv. basely, badly, 11 Kings x. 5. 

foule, adj. base, vile, Lev. xxi. 7; comp. 
fowlere, 11 Kings vi. 22. 

foulere, a taker af birds, Prov. vi. 5; pl. 
fouleres, Jer. v. 26. 

fouli, fouly, foulich, foully, shamefully, Deut. 
xxv. 3. 1 Mace. xi.12. . 

foulid, p.p. defiled, Lev. vii. 20. 

fouling, . a defiling, filth, Gen. xxxiv. 27. 
Ez. xxiv. rt. 

foulnes, vileness, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 73. 

foun, a fawn, Prov. vi. 5. 

foundement, faundation, 1 Tim. vi. 19; pl. 
fundamentis, Heh. xi. 10. 

foundun, p.p. founded, Mt. vii. 25. 

foure-fingur-mele, adv. by measure af four 
Singers, Ex, xxv. 25. 

fraiel, basket of figs, Jer. xxiv. 2. 

fraude-doyng, n. a fraudulent proceeding, 
Dan. xi. 21. 

fraudid, p.p. defrauded, Jam. v. 4. 

fraunchise, freedom fram impast, immunity, 
1 Mace. x. 34. 

fraward, frauward, frowerd, froward, Deut. 
xxi, 18. 1 Tim. iii. 4. 

freel, frele, frail, feeble, sick, Wisd. xiv. 1. 
Rom. viii. 3. 1 Cor. vill. 9; comp. frelere, 
Wisd. xiv. 1. 

frees, freesede, p.t. freezed, Ecclus, xliii. 22. 

frely, frelich, freliche, freely, Ex.xxi.11. Lev. 
xiv. 53. 

frendesse, a female friend, Prov. vii. 4. 
S. Sol. i. 8. 

frendful, friendly, S. Sol. i.1 g. 

fretynge, . rust, wasting, 111 Kings viii. 37. 

frexfoold, threshold, Ez. x.18. Zeph. i. 9. 

frijse. v. firse. 

fro, from, Gen. i. 4. Mt. 1.17. 


4yY2 


715 


fro-a-syde, on the side, Is. Ix. 4. 

fro-azens, from-ajeyns, prep. over against, in 
opposition to, Lev. xxvi.21. Josh. viii. 11. 

fro-drawen, p.p. taken away, Deut. iii. 7. 

fro-forn-a3eyns, prep. over against, Josh. 
viii. 5. 

froytes, fruits, Mt. xxi. 43. 1 Cor. ix. 7. 

frosshe, a frog, Ps. lxxvii. 45. 

frote, to rub, Deut. xxiii. 253 p. p. frotid, 
Josh. v. 115 pr.p. frotinge, frotynge, Lk. 
vi. I. 

frotheth, frothith, pr.t. foams, Mk. ix. 17; 
pr.p. frothinge, Mk. ix. 19. 

frount, forehead, Is. xlviii. 4. 

fructuous, fruitful, Ps. evi. 34. Jer. xi. 16. 

frusshiden. v. azen-frusshiden. 

frutede, p.t. bare fruit, Ecclus. xxiv. 23. 

ful, adv. very, Gen. xiii. 2. pass. 

ful-brent, p.p. wholly burnt, Gen. xxxi. 36. 

ful-doun, adv. entirely down, Josh. vi. 5. 

ful-fattid, p.p. quite fattened, Deut. xxxii. 15. 

ful-fedyng, n. a being filled with food, Gen. 
xli, 21. 

fulfille, to fill, Ex. x. 6. Mt. xv. 333 p.d. ful- 
fillede, Judg. vi. 38; p.p. fulfillid, ifulfil- 
lid, Ex. xxxi. 3. Mt. xiii. 48. Apoc. prol.r. 
p. 638. 

fulfillynge, 2. a satiety, fulness, Lev. xxv. 19. 
Ps. ev. 15. 

ful-gresid, p.p. quite fattened, Deut. xxxii.15. 

fulliere, comp. more fully, Tob. viii. 19; 
sup. fulliest, fullokest, Rom. prol.1.p. 298. 

ful-out-gladen, to rejoice greatly, Is. Ixv.19; 
p.t. ful-out-gladede, Is. xiv. 7. 

ful-out-io3en, fo rejoice greatly, Is. lxi. 10. 

ful-sowneth, pr. t. sounds full or clearly, 
Judg. vii. 18; p.t. pl. ful-sowneden, Judg. 
vii. 20. 

ful-spede, ful-speed, adv. quick, ready, pre- 
pared, Num. xxxii. 20, 27. Deut. iii. 18. 

furel, a covering, sheath, Job xx. 25. 

furneys. v. forneys. 

G. 

gaastyde, gaastnes. v. gaste, gastnesse. 

gabbe, pr.t. lie, 11 Cor. xii. 31. Gal. i. 20. 

gabbyng, 2. a lying, 11 Thess. ii. 10. 

gadre, geder, gedere, fo gather, Gen. xli. 35. 
Ex. xxii. 10; p.¢. gaderide, gederyde, 
Gen. xlvii.14; pl. gadriden, Gen. xxxi. 
46; p.p. gadrid, gaderyd, gaderid, Gen, 
i. 9. xxv. 8. 

gaistnes. v. gastnesse. 

galban, the gum galbanum, Ex. xxx. 34. 
Ecclus. xxiv. 21. 

galoun, a vessel, pitcher, 1 Kings x. 3. Mk. 
xiv. 13; pl. galouns, Hagg. ii. 17. 

gan, p.t. began, Jer. prol. p. 343. 


_garlekes, garlekis, garlick, Num. xi. 5. 


garringe, garrende, pr.p. chiding, 111 Joh.10. 

gast, fearful, Deut. xx. 8. Jer. viii. 9. 

gaste, to make greatly afraid, 11 Par. xxxii. 
18; p.p. gaastyde, 1v Kings xxii.1g. v. 
agaste. 

gastful, fearful, affrighted, Deut. xx. 8. 

gastnes, gaistnes, fright, alarm, Josh. il. 
g. 1 Kings xxxi. 4. Prov. iii. 25; pl. gast- 
nessis, Job vi. 4. 


716 


gat, gate, gaat. v. gete. 

gauyl, to Jend upon interest, Deut. xxviii. 
44. 

gase, gay, Judith x. 3. xvi. It. 

gebat, gebet, gibite, gybet, iebat, iebet, a 
gallows, gibbet, Gen. x]. 22. Deut. xxi. 
22. Josh. viii. 29. Esth. ii. 23; pl. gi- 
betis, iebatis, iebettis, Num. xxv. 4. Josh. 
x. 27. Esth. xvi.18. 

geder. v. gadre. 

geet. v. gete. 

geet, gehet, geit, geyt, goet, goot, a goat, 
Gen. xv. 9. Lev. ix. 3. xvi. 8. xxii. 27. 
xxiii.1g; pl. geet, geete, geit, geyt, got, 
geetis, gootes, Gen. xxx. 33. xxxi. 38. 
Lev. iv. 22. xvi. 7. Prov. xxvii. 27. 

geet-buckis, he goats, Gen. xxx. 35. 

geldyng, an eunuch, Gen. xxxvii. 36. Deeds 
vill. 27; pl. geldyngis, Gen. xl.1. Mt. 
xix. 12. 

gelouse, ielous, ielouse, jealous, Ecclus. 
xxvi. 8, 9. 

gelousie, jealousy, Num. v. 14. 

gelousnes, ielousnesse, jealousy, Num. v.14. 
Prov. vi. 34. 

geloustee, gelouste, ielouste, jealousy, Num. 
v.14, 15- Ps. lxxvii. 58. 

gemels, iemeus, iemews, twins, Gen. xxxviil. 
27. 8. Sol. iv. 5. vii. 3. 

gemmarye, a jeweller, Ex. xxviii. 11. 

gemmarye-craft, gemmary-werk, art or work 
of a jeweller, TEx. xxxix. 6, 29. 

gemme, iemme, @ gem, Ez. xxvii.16. Ec- 
clus. xxxii. 7; pl. gemmes, iemmys, Ex. 
xxv. 7. lit Kings x. 2. 

genderers, gendrers, gendreris, parents, 
Zech. xiii. 3. 

gendre, to beget, Gen. xvii. 20; p.t. gen- 
dride, Gen. iv.18. Mt.i. 2; p.p. gen- 
drid, Gen. xxii. 2. 

gendryng, n. aw engenderiag, Num. xxv. 8. 

gendrure, au engendering, Job xl.12; pl. 
gendruris, Job xl. 12. 

genytale, pertaining to engendering, Num. 
xxv. 8. 

genologie, genealogy, Heb. vii. 3; pl. geno- 
logies, 1 Tim. i. 4. 

gerfawcun, gerfawkon, ierfakoun, a kind of 
falcon, Lev. xi. 19. Deut. xiv. 16. Job 
xxxix. 13. Ps. ciii.17. 

germayn. v. sister-germayn. 

gesse, to reckon, suppose, 11 Kings xili. 32; 
p.t. gesside, Gen. xl.17. 1 Kings i. 13; 
p.p. gessid, Wisd. ii. 16. 

geste, a guest, Wisd. v. 15; pl. gestes, ges- 
tis, Wisd. xix. 13. Eph. ii. 12. 

gestis, deeds, Pref. ep. c. vil. p. 69. 

gete, geete, to beget, produce, Deut. xxi. 18. 
Eccles. vi. 3; p.¢. gaat, gat, gate, geet, 
Gen. iv. 18. xi.10. Num. xxvi. 59. Mt. 
i. 2; pl. geeten, goten, Gen. vi. 4. Jer. 
xvi. 3; p.p. geten, getun, gotun, goten, 
Gen. v. 26. xxii, 2, 16. Mt. i. 25. 

getingus, produce, gains, Ecclus. vi. 20. 

giaunt, ieannt, a giant, Job xvi. 15; pl. ge- 
auntis, ieauntus, Deut. ii.11. Judith xvi. 8. 

gybet. v. gebat. 


GLOSSARY. 


gilden, ¢o gild, Ex. xxvi. 29. xxx. 53 p.t. 
gildide, Ex. xxxvi. 36. 11 Par. iii. 4; 
p-p. gildid, gilt, Ex. xxvi. 32. 1 Par. 
XXxIX. 4. 

gile, a gill of a fish, Tob. vi. 4. 

gile, guile, Gen. xxv. 27. xxxiv. 13; pl. 
gilis, giles, Job xiii. 7. Prov. xxvi. 24. 

gilid, p. ¢. beguiled, 11 Cor. vii. 2. xii. 18. 

gileful, gilful, deceitful, Job xiii. 7. Ps. v. 7. 

gilefuli, gylefulli, deceitfully, Ps. v.11. xii. 
3. Prov. xx. 19. 

gilefulnesse, deceit, Ecclus. xxxvii. 3. 

gilendeli, gilyngly, gilyngliche, deceitfully, 
Gen. xxvii. 35. Prov. xi. 13. Rom. iii. 13. 

gilesum, deceitful, Is. x. 6. 

gilour, giloure, gilere, deceiver, Prov. iii. 
32. ix. 12. Mt. xxvii. 63; pl. gilours, gi- 
leris, Ps. liv. 24. Is. xxviii. 14. Jude 18. 

gilouse, gylous, deceitful, treacherous, Col. 
ii. 8. 11 Cor. xi. 13. 

gilte, to gild, Ex. xxv. 11, 24. xxvi. 373 
p-t. giltide, Ex. xxxvi. 34. 

gilten, to tresspass, sin, Ps. xxxiii. 22, 23. 
XXXV. 2, xxxvili. 2; pr. é. gilteth, Ecclus. 
xix. 17. xxxvili.15; pr.p. giltende, Job 
ix, 28. Ecclus. xxvii. 3. 

gilteris, sinners, Ps. xxiv. 8. Ixxiv. 5. 

gynnyng, 2. @ beginning, Mt. prol. 1. p. 1. 

girde, to gird, fasten with a girdle, Ex. xii. 
1; p.t. girdide, girte, 11 Kings xxii. 33. 
Job xii.18; p.p. gird, gyrd, Gen. xlix. 
1g. Ley. xvi. 4. Ps. xvil. 33. 

girde, éo cut, smite, 11 Kings xvi. 9; p.t. 
girde, 1 Kings xvii. 51. Judith xvi. 11; 
pl. girden, girdiden, 1 Kings xxxi. 8. 
t Mace. vii. 47; p.p. gird, 1 Par. x. 9. 
tt Mace. i. 16. 

giterne, a lyre, Is.v.12; pl. giternes, giter- 
nis, giternys, 1 Par. xv.16, 20, 28. 1 Macc. 
xiii, 51. 

gyued, gyuede, p.p. bound in chains, Gen. 
xxxix. 22. Ps. ci. 21. Wisd. xvii. 2. 

gladen, glade, to rejoice, make glad, Is. xv. 
14. Joh. v. 35. Apoc. xix. 73; imp. pl. gla- 
deth, Mt. v.12; p.¢. gladede, gladide, 
Is. xiv. 7. 1 Mace. iii. 7. Lk. i. 41, 473 
pl. gladiden, Deeds vii. 41; p.p. gladid, 
1 Kings ii. 1. 

gladere, gladder, comp. more joyful, Ruth 
iii. 7. Esth. i. 10. . 

gladere, one who rejoices, Is. Ixiv. 5. 

gladyng, ». joy, 1 Kings iv. 8. Deeds ii. 
46. 

gladliche, joyfully, Gen. xlvii. 25. 

gladnesse, joy, 11 Par. xx. 35; pl. glad- 
nessys, 111 Esdr, iv. 63. 

gladsum, joyful, Ps. cili. 15. 

gladsumli, joyfully, Wisd. vi. 17. 

gleyue, a sword, (?) 1 Cor. ix. 24. 

glesenynge. v. glisnynge. 

glew, glu, glyu, glue, cement, Gen. vi. 14. 
xi. 3. Deut. x. 15. Is. xh. 7. 

glewide, p. ¢. cemented, Ex. ii. 33 p. p- 
glewid, glued, Gen. xxxiv. 3. Deut. x. 
15. 1 Kings xviii. 1. 

glewishe, glewyche, gluwy, adj. of cement or 
glue, Gen. xiv. to. Ex. ii. 3. 


glisnynge, glesenynge, pr. p. glistening, 
Habak. iii.11. Nah. iii. 3. 

glitteren, pr.t. pl. shine, Judg. v. 31. 

glob, gluh, glubbe, a@ mass, assemblage, 
Num. xvi.11. Josh. iii.13. Judg. ix. 47. 
Iv Kings ix.17. 

glorien, to boast, Prov. xx. 14. 

gloriousere,comp.more glorious,11 Kingsvi. 22. 

glose, to speak softly, flatter, coax, Judg. 
xiv. 15; pr.t. glosith, 1m Esdr. iv. 31; 
p-t. gloside, Esth. xv. 11. 

glosyng, n. flattery, 1 Thess. it. 5. 

gloterous, gluttonous, Lev. xi. 30. 

glotonye. glotenye, gluttony, 11 Macc. vi. 4; 
pl. glotonyes, Dent. xxi. 20. ». glotryes. 

glotounes, glotouns, gluttons, Prov. xxviii. 7. 

glotryes, acts of gluttony, Deut. xxi. 20. 

glub, glubbe. ». glob. 

gluggis, clods, Job xxviii. 6. 

gnare, @ snare, Ecclus. li. 3. Hos. ix. 8. 
Mt. xxvii. 5. Lk. xxi. 35. Rom. ii. 9. 
1 Tim. vi.g; pl. gnaris, 11 Kings xxii. 6. 

gnarid, gnared, p.p. snared, Prov. vi. 2. 
Is. xxviii. 13. 

gnast, a dead spark, ashes, Is. i. 31. v. 24. 
xxix. 5. 

gnaste, gnasten, to guash, creak, Ps. xxxvi. 
12. Is, v. 29. Amos ii. 3; pr.é. gnastith, 
Job xxxix. 24; pl. gnasten, Is. viii. 19; 
p-t. gnastide, Job xvi. 10; pl. gnastiden, 
gnaysteden, Ps. ii.1. xxxiv.16. Deeds 
iv. 255 pr.p. gnastyng, 111 Kings xxi. 4. 

gnasting, gnastyng, 2. @ guashing, 11 Kings 
xvili. 33 g. Jer. viii. 16. 

gnowen, gnewen, gnawiden, p.t. pl. gnaw- 
ed, Job xxx. 3. 

gobbe, a mass, Is. xl. 12. 

gobelyn, a goblin, demon, Ps. xc. 6. 

gobet, lump, heap, piece, Josh. iii.13. Rom. 
ix. 21; pil. gobetis, gobitis, 1v Kings ix. 
35. Mt. xiv. 20. 

gobet-mele, adv. piecemeal, 11 Macc. xv. 33. 

gogil-i3ed, gogil-y3ed, squint-eyed, one-eyed, 
Mk. ix. 46. 

gohode. v. goode. 

goldid, golden, p. p. gilt, Bar. vi. 69. 1 
Mace. v. 2. Apoc. xvili. 16. 

goldsmyst, a goldsmith, 1v Kings xxiv. 14; 
pl. goldsmy3this, tv Kings xxiv. 16. 

gollis, the young of birds, Deut. xxii. 6. 

gon, goon, goo, to go, Gen. xii. 5. Deut. 
xxii. 12, rv Kings iv. 23; pr.t. pl. goon, 
gooth, Josh. xviii. 3. Mt. xi. 5; imp. pl. 
goth, gooth, 1v Kings i. 2. Mt. x. 53 

. sede, 3ide, Gen. ii. 10. Jer. xlvili. 11. 

. xiii. 1; pl. 3eden, 3iden, Jer. xiv. 18. 

. vill. 32; p.p. gon, goon, Gen. vil. 
1g. xxxi.19. a lytil goon, 11 Mace. xiv. 
36; pr.p. goende, Judith v.12. Rom. 
prol. 1. p. 300. 

goode, gohode, a goad, Judg. ili. 31 y. 
Ecclus. xxxviii. 26. 

goodly, goodliche, adv. courteously, Gen. 
xliii. 27. xlv. 4. 

goordis, goordes, gourds, cucumbers, Num. 
xi. 5. Is. i. 8. 

goot. v. geet. 


gorst, furze, Is. lv. 13. 

goshauk, a kind of hawk, Job xxxix. 13. 

gospeller, @ preacher of the gospel, an evan- 
gelist, Is. xli. 27; pl. gospelleris, Mt. 
prol. 2. p. 2. 

goter, guter, gutter, flood, Hab. iii.10; pl. 
goteres, goteris, goterys, Gen. vil. 11. 
viii. 2. 1v Kings vii. 2. 

goueruail, governance, rudder, 1 Kings viii. 
11. Jam. iii. 4; pl. gouernaylis, goner- 
nails, gouernayls, gouernailis, Prov. xx.18. 
Deeds xxvii. 40. 1 Cor. xii. 28, 

gouernour, a steersman, Deeds xxvii. 11. 
Jam. ii. 4. 

goul, gowle, imp. howl, Ez. xxi. 12. xxx. 2. 

goulynge, n. @ howling, Ex. xxi. 22. 

graces, gracis, thanks, 11 Kings viii. 10. Lk. 
xxii.17. 1 Cor. x. 30. 

grace-doing, x. thanksgiving, Is. li. 3. 

graffeden, graffiden, p.t.pl. engrafted, 1Tim. 
vi. 10; p.p. graffid, Rom. xi. 17, 19. 

graithers. v. wulle-graithers. 

grane. v. grene. 

grape, grappe, to grope, Deut. xxvill. 29. 
Job xii. 25. 

graspen, graasp, fo grope, Deut. xxviii. 29. 
Joh v. 14. xii. 25. 

grauel, sand, Gen, xxii. 17. Mt. vii. 265 pl. 
graueils, gravelis, Deut. xxxiii. 19. 

graueli, full of gravel, Ecclus. xxv. 27. 

graunsire, grauntsir, grandfather, ancestor, 
Gen. xxviii. 4; pl. grauntsiris, Ex. x. 6. 

gredyrne, gredeyrne, a gridiron, Ex. xxvii. 
4) 5» XXxv. 16. 

gree, grece, @ degree, a step, Gen. xl. 13. 
1v Kings xxiii. 3. 01 Esdr. viii. g. Rom. 
prol. 1. p. 300; pl. grees, greeses, greces, 
Ex. xx. 26. 111 Kings x. 19. Ps. exviii. 1. 
Deeds xxi. 35. 

grees, grease, Judg. iii. 22. 

greet, grit, gravel, Job xxi. 33. 

greetli, greetlich, greatly, Judg. viii. s. 

greetnessis, gretenessis, great actions, 1Macc. 
ix. 22, 

greet-willi, noble minded, Judg. v. 15. 

greef, grief, trouble, grievance, Ecclus, xxii. 
153 pl. greenes, 111 Esdr. ii. 29. 

greene, to aggrieve, make heavy, 11 Kings 
xiii. 35; pr.t. greeueth, Ecclus. xi. 9; 
pt. greuyde, t Kings vi.6; p.p. greued, 
greuyd, Gen. xxxix. 10. 11 Kings iii. 34. 
Judith v.10. Mt. xxvi. 43. Lk. ix. 32. 
v. agreued. 

gregge, to make heavy, Ecclus. vill. 18; p.p. 
greggid, 1 Kings v.6. v. agregge. 

greithe, to prepare, Ex. xvi. 5; pr.t. greith- 
eth, Prov. vi. 8; p.t. greithide, greythede, 
Gen. xxvii. 14. Iv Kings iv. 24; p.p. 
greithid, Gen. xxiv. 31. 1 Cor. ii. 9. 

greithing, greithinge, 2. a preparation, 
1v Kings vi. 23. Eccles. prol. p. 53. 

grenching. v. grentyng. 

grene, grane, gryn, grynne, @ snare, Josh. 
xxiii. 13. Judith ix. 13. Job xviii. 9. 
Mt. xxvii. 5. Lk, xxi. 35. Rom. xi. 9; 
pl. grenes, granes, grynes, snares, Job 
xxii. 10. Ps. x. 7. Jer. xviii. 22. 


GLOSSARY. 


grenede, p.t. ensnared, Prov. vii. 21. Jer. }. 
243 p.p. grened, Is. viii. 15. 

grenneden, grennyden, grennden, gryntiden, 
grentyn, p.t.pl. gnashed, Deedis vii. 54. 

grentyng, grenching, grintinge, gryntynge, 
grynting, gruntyng, 2. a grinding, gnash- 
ing, Mt. viii. 12. xxii. 13. Lk. xiii. 28. 

gret-doingli, magnificently, 111 Esdr. ix. 55. 

grete, to salute, 1 Kings xii. 10; imp. pl. 
greeteth, Mt. x. 12; p.t. grette, Gen. xiii. 
27. Ex. xviii. 7. Lk. i. 40; pl. gretten, 
1 Macc. xi. 6. Mk. ix. 14; p.p. gret, grett, 
1 Kings x. 4. Deeds xxi. 19. 

greuoselyche, grievously, Lk. xi. 53; comp. 
greuousliere, Ez. xx. 40. 

greuousere, comp. more grievous, Job vi. 3. 
Mt. xxiii. 233 sup. greuousiste, greuouste, 
111 Kings xii. 4. 

grew, grw, adj. Greek, Pref. ep. c. iv. p. 65. 
1 Kings prol. p. 2. Rom. prol. 1. p. 300. 
Heb. prol. p. 480. 

greynes, grains, Lev. xix. 10. 

gridele, gridiron, Ex. xxvii. 4, 5. 

griffyn, griffun, grijp, grippe, gripe, a kind of 
eagle, a vulture, Lev. xi. 13. Deut. xiv.12. 

grijslich, terribly, Num. xvi. 21. 

grynde, to grind, Judg. xvi. 21; p.t. gronde, 
Ex. xxxii. 20. 

grynderis, grinders, Eccles. xii. 3. 

grynd-stoon, gryn-stoon, a grinding stone, 
millstone, Num. xi. 8. Deut. xxiv. 6. 

gryne, grynne. v. grene. 

gryntynge. v. grentyng. 

grisedist, p.t. 2p. dreadedst, Wisd. xii. 3; 
pl. grisiden, Judith xvi. 12. v. agrisen. 

griseful, grisful, dreadful, Deut. ii.10. Wisd. 
xi. 19. 

grisfulli, dreadfully, horribly, Wisd. xvii. 3. 

griselynesse, dreadfulness, Deut. ii. 11. 

grisynes, dread, horror, Gen. xv. 12. 

grising, 2. horror, terror, Job xviii. 20; 
pl. grysynges, 1 Par. xvii. 21. 

grith-place, place of security, Deut. xix. 3. 

groyne, to murmur, mutter, Is. xxix. 4; 
p-t. pl. groyneden, Mk. xiv. 5. 

groynere, a murmurer, Prov. xxvi. 20, 22. 

gronde. ». grynde. 

grope, groop, to grope, feel, Gen. xxvii. 12. 
Job. v. 14. Ps. exiii. 7; p.t.pl. gropiden, 
Is. lix. 10; p.p. groptd, Gen. xxvii. 22. 
Ex. x. 21. v. grape. 

groundid, p.p. founded, 1 Esdr. iii. 10. 

groundis, foundations, supports, 1 Esdr. v. 
16. Deeds iii. 7. 

growide, p.t. grew, Gen. xxi. 8. Ex. i. 20; 
pl. growiden, Gen. xli. 23. 

grucchen, grutche, to murmur, gnash, Num. 
xiv. 36. Joh. vi. 43; p.t. grucchide, Ex. 
xv. 24; pl. grucchiden, grutchiden, 
grutcheden, Mt. xx. 11. Lk. xv. 2. Joh. 
vi. 41. 1 Cor. x. 103; p.p. grucchid, Ex, 
xvi. 8; pr. p. grucching, grutchyng, 
rit Kings xxi. 4. Joh. vii. 12. 

grucchyng, n. a murmuring, Ex. xvi. 7. 

grucchingli, grucchendeli, after the manner 
of murmurers, Num. xiv.28. Ecclus.xii.t9. 


gruntyng. v. grentyng. 


717 


: iH. 

ha. v. han. 

haar, a hare, Lev. xi. 6. 

haatsum. ». hatesum. 

habérionn, haburion, haburioun, hawberi- 
oun, @ breastplate, 1 Kings xvii. 5, 38. 
Eph. vi. 14. 1 Thess. v. 8; pl. haberiouns, 
haburiouns, hauberiouns, 11 Par. xxii. 14. 
Apoe. ix. 9. 

haburiowned, hauberionned, p. p. having 
breastplates, 1 Macc. iv. 7. vi. 43. 

hahitacle, habytacle, dwelling, Mk. prol. 1. 
p.86. Deeds xii. 7. 

haft, handle, Deut. xix. 5. 

hailes, hailis, hail, Wisd. v. 23. xvi. 16. 

haire. v. heire. 

hal. vo. al. 

halewe, halwe, to sanctify, Ex. xiii. 25 imp. 
pl. halewith, Esth. xvi. 22; p.t. halwide, 
halewide, Gen. ti. 3. 

halewer, a sanctifier, Ez. xxxvii. 28. 

halewyng, halwyng, 2. @ sanctification, Ex. 
xxix. 36. 

halewis, halowes, holy things, saints, Lev.x. 
17. Prov. ii. 8. Apoc. viii. 4. xvi. 6. 

half, side, Ex. xiv. 29. Mt. xxv. 33. Lk. ix. 
10. 

halidaies, holy days, Lev. xxiii. 2. 

halpens, halpenns, halfpence, Ez. xlv. 12. 
Lk. xii. 6. 

halsende, pr.p. entreating, 11 Par. xxxiii.13. 

halten, halt, to halt, be lame, 111 Kings 
xviil, 21; p.t. haltide, Gen. xxxii. 31; 
pl. haltiden, Ps. xvii. 46; p.p. haltid, Ps. 
xvii. 46; pr.p. haltynge, Mic. iv. 7. 

haluen, to make the half, Ps. liv. 24. 

hamer-betere, a worker with a hammer, Gen. 
iv. 22. Job xli. 15. 

hamer-smyth, a worker with a hammer, Gen. 
iv. 22. 

han, ha, to have, Jer. xxx.18; pr.t.1 p. ha, 
1 Kings xv. 13. Is. xli.15; pl. han, hau- 
eth, Gen. xiv. 24. Ecclus. prol. p. 123. 
Mt. xiii. 51; imp. pl. haueth, Esth. xvi. 
22. 

handi-breede, a hands-breadth, Ez. xl. 5, 
43- 

hange, honge, to hang, Gen, xl.19; imp. pl. 
hangeth, Judith xiv. 1; p.¢. heeng, hynge, 
hangide, hengide, hongide, Gen. xxiv. 47. 
xl. 22. Josh. ii. 21. Mt. xxvii. 5; pil. 
heengen, hengen, hangiden, hongeden, 
1 Kings xxxi. 10. 11 Kings iv. 12. Lk. 
xxili. 39; p.p. hangid, hongid, Gen. xli. 
13. 

hap, happe, chance, Gen. xx.11. Judg. v. 30. 
11 Kings xi. 25. Mk. xii. 6. 

happili, by chance, Mk. ii. 13. 11 Cor. 

* xiii. 5. 

hard. v. of-hard. 

harde, to grow hard, to make hard, Deut. 
x. 16. Ps. Ixxxix. 6; p.t. hardide, Ex. 
xiv. 8; pl. hardeden, Jer. v. 3; p.p. 
hardid, Josh. xi. 20. Joh. xii. 40. 

hardi, hardy, bold, Deut. xix. 20. 

hardili, hardilich, boldly, Gen. xxxiv. 30. 
Job xii. 6. 


718 


hardynesse, hardnesse, boldness, wilfulness, 
1 Par. xvii. 6. Ecclus. i. 28. Heb. ii. 
27. 

hard-nollid, stiffrecked, Ecclus. xvi. 11. 

harlotrie, harlatrye, whoredom, Eph. v.-4. 

harmes, harmys, injuries, Judith iti. 2. 

harmful, injurious, Prov. i. 22. 

harpe, to play on the harp, 1 Kings xvi. 16; 
p-t. harpide, 1 Kings xviii. 10. 

harneis, harneys, herneis, privy member, 
Gen. ix. 22, 23. 

haste, to hasten, Gen. xix. 22; p.t. hastide, 
Gen. xxix. 12; p.p. hastid, Prov. xiii. 11. 

hastiliche, hastily, Gen. xxxii. 22. 

hastow, p.t. 2 p. hast thou, Gen. xxxi. 37. 

haterel, hatreel, the neck, 11 Par. xviii. 33. 
Is. xlviii. 4; pl. haterels, 1 Macc. i. 64. 

hatesum, haatsum, hateful, Gen. xxxiv. 30. 
1 Kings xiii. 15. Prov. i. 29. 

hatte, p.¢. was called, rv Kings xiv. 7. 
v. histe. 

hatter, hattere, comp. hotter, Dan. iii. 19. 

haueneden, p.t.pl.took harbour, Deeds xx.15. 

hauncing, 2. @ raising, Ecclus. xxvi. 12. 

haunsyuge, pr.p. exalting, Is. ii. 12. 

haunten, éo practise, use, Esth. ix. 12; pr.t. 
pl. hawnten, Mt. xx. 25; imp. haunte, 
1 Tim. iv. 7; p.é. hauntide, Ex. xiv. 31; 
pl. hauntiden, Gen. 1.17; p.p. hauntid, 
Heb. v.14; pr.p. hauntende, Prov. prol. 
p.1. uy Esdr. v. 73. 

hausterne, austere, Lk. xix. 22. 

hedid, p.p. beheaded, Apoc. xx. 4. v. bi- 
heuedede, of-hedid. 

helpe, to help, Dent. xxviii. 31; p.¢. halpe, 
halp, help, helpede, helpide, 1 Par. xviii. 
6. 1 Par. xxvi. 7. Ps. xciii. 17. Rom. 
xvi. 2. Apoc. xii. 16; 2p. helpidist, holp- 
edist, Judith xiii. 25; pl. holpen, help- 
eden, helpiden, Judg. ix. 24. 111 Kings 
i. 7. 1 Esdr. x.153 p.p. holpen, holpe, 
helpid, Gen. xxxi. 42. Ps, Ixxxv. 17. 
Prov. xviii. 19. 

holde, ¢o hold, take, Gen. xiii. 9; pr.t. halt, 
nit Kings i. 51; tmp.pl. holdith, Apoc. 
ii. 25; p.t. heelde, helde, 111 Kings i. 50. 
Ps. Ixxii. 24; pl. heelden, helden, Judith 
x. 11. Mt. xxviii. 9; p.p. holden, holdun, 
hooldun, Gen. xxiv. 8. xl. 4. 

hauers. v. soule-hauers. 

haw, a hawthorn tree, Dan. xiii. 54. 

hawle, hail, Ex. ix. 18. v. hailes. 

hebenyf, hebennus, ebony, Ez. xxvii. 15. 

hed, heed, heued, the head, Job i. 20. Is. 
vii. 8. Mt. v. 36; pl. hedis, heedis, 
heuedis, Gen. ii. 10. Mt. xxvii. go. 

hedi, hedy, heuedi, adj. headlong, Judg.v.15. 

hedlynge, hedlynges, heedlynge, heued- 
lynge, adv. headlong, Deut. xxii. 8. Judg. 
v. 22. Mt. viii. 32. Lk. viii. 33. 

heeding, 2. a beheading, Ecclus. xx. 23. 

heedis-men, chiefs, Num. i. 16. 

heedli, adv. headlong, suddenly, Judg. v. 22. 
Ecclus. iv. 33 g. vill. 18 g. 

heel, hele, health, Jer. xlv.5. Rom. xiii. 11. 

heelden, heelde, helde, to pour, Ex. iv. 9. 
Lev. iv. 17. Jer. xlviii. 12. Deeds ii. 17; 





| 


| 





GLOSSARY. 


pt. helde, helte, heldede, Gen. xxiv. 20. 
Mk. xiv. 3. Lk. x. 34; 2p. heeldedest, 
Ps. Ixxxviii. 46; pl. heelden, helden, 
1 Kings vii. 6; p.p. heeld, held, hellid, 
heeldid, Gen. xlvi. 4. Lev. iv. 12. Judg. 
xv. 9. Proy. prol. p. 2. Mk. ii. 223 pr.p. 
beeldynge, heldynge, Gen. xxiv. 20. Lk. 
X. 34. 

heelful, healthful, Lev. x. 14. Ecclus. vi. 31. 
XV. 3. 

heelyd, heled. v. hile. 

heeng. v. hange. 

heeng, a hinge, Prov. xxvi. 14; pl. heengis, 
it Kings vii. so. 

heenglis, henglis, hinges, 11 Esdr. iii. 14. Is. 
vi. 4. 

heep, hep, @ heap, S. Sol. vii. 2. 

heepils. v. hypil. 

heer. v. heire. 

heer, hair, Gen. xxvii. 11; pl. heeris, 111 
Kings ii. 9. Mt. iii. 4. 

heeren, heren, hairy, Ex. xxvi. 7. Lev. xi. 
32. 

heeri, hery, hairy, Gen. xxvii. 11. 1v Kings 
i. 8. Is. xxxiv. 14. 

heest, heste, command, Gen. xxvii. 5. Ps. 
ii. 6; pl. heestis, hestis, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p. 68. Gen. xxvi. 5. Lev. xxvi. 45. Mk. 
vii. 7. v. biheest. 

heeue, heue, to raise, lift, Gen. xiii. 14. 
xiv. 22; p.t. heuede, Gen. xxi. 16; p.p. 
heued, houun, Gen. xiii. 10. xxiv. 63. 

hee3, heeis, heis, his, x. a high place, height, 
1 Kings x.14. Mt. .18. 0. hist. 

hee3, hese, his, heis, hie, heye, adj. high, 
Gen. xiv. 22. xxix. 11. Ex. xxv. 25. Ps. 
lxiii. 7. Prov. viii. 2. Mt. iv. 8; comp. 
hisere, heijer, Gen. vil. 20; sup. heesist, 
hey3est, hiseste, heyxst, Gen. xiv. 20. 
Ex. xxvi. 28. Mt. xxi. 9. 

heezse, hezen, to hasten, Esth. ii. 9. Prov. 
ix. 93 imp. heese, hize, hy3e, hye, Gen. 
xviii. 6. Ps. xxx. 3. 11 Tim. iv. 8; pl. 
hieth, 11 Kings xv. 14; p.t. hisede, hyede, 
Gen. xviii. 7. xlili. 30; pl. heeseden, Ps. 
xv. 4; p.p. hized, 1 Thess. it. 175; pr.p. 
hiynge, heisynge, hy3zinge, hisynge, Gen. 
xxiv. 29. Josh. prol. p. 556. Lk. ii. 16. 
XIX. 5. 

heesyng, a. a hastening, haste, Ecclus. xiiit. 
24. Dan. xiii. 50. 

heire, heyre, heer, hayre, sackcloth, Gen. 
XXxxvil. 34. 1v Kings vi. 30. Judith viii. 6. 
Mt. xi. 21. Lk. x. 13. 

heys, grass, Prov. xxvii. 25. 

heithenly, hethenlich, after the manner of 
the heathen, 11 Macc. xv. 2. Gal. ii. 14. 

heyxst, hei3. v. hees. 

hele. v. hile. 

helkis. ». hulke. 

helle, grave, Gen. xxxvii. 35. Lk. xvi. 23; 
pl. hellis, Gen. xlii. 38. 

hellid. v. heelden. 

helm, a helmet, 1 Kings xvii. 38; pl. helmes, 
Jer. xlvi. 4. Ez. xxxviii. 5. 

helmyd, p.p. having helmets, 1 Kings prol. 
p- 4. Ez. xxxvili. 5. 


helpful, propitious, Lk. xviii. 13. Heb. viii. 12. 

helpeli, helpely, adj. helping, Prov. xii. 10. 
Ecclus. xiii. 27. 

helte. v. heelden. 

helue, a handle, Deut. xix. 5. 

hem, them, Gen. i. 27; pl. hem-silf, hem- 
seluen, hem-siluen, themselves, Gen. xviii. 
22. xxvi. 31. Mt. ix. 3. 

henne-forthward, hen-forward, adv. hence- 
forward, Phil. iii. 1. 1 Thess. iv. 1. 

hennes, hennus, hens, adv. hence, Gen. xlii. 
15. Mt. viii. 31. Phil. iii. 1. 

heo-geyt, @ she-goat, Lev. v. 6. 

heo-lombe, a she-lamb, Lev. v. 6. 

her, their, Gen. i.21. Mt. i. 21; gen. heren, 
hern, herne, herun, heres, theirs, of them, 
Josh. ti. 13. Job xxiv. 6. Mt. v. 3, 10. 
Deeds iv. 23. 11 Tim. iii. 9. 

herberewe, herbore, herborewe, herborou3, 
herborw, herburghe, lodging, inn, Judg. 
xix. 15, 19. Ecclus. xxix. 31. Mt. xxv. 
38. Deeds xxviii. 23. 1 Tim.v. 10. Philem. 
22. Heb. xiii. 1. 

herberewen, to lodge, to harbour, Ecclus. 
xxix. 32; p.t. pl. herberden, herboriden, 
herberowed, Mt. xxv. 35,373 p.p. herber- 
wid, herborid, Ecclus. xxix. 31. 1 Cor. 
xvi. 19; herborid-man, pl. herborid-men, 
Wisd. v.15. Eph. ii. 12; pr.p. herbere- 
wing, herboringe, Ecclus. xxix. 31. Rom. 
xii. 13. 

herbergrye, herborgerie, an inn, chamber, 
Gen. xxiv. 32. 111 Kings xviii. 27. Lk. 
xxii. 11; pl. herbergeries, Judith xiii. 1. 

herberlesse, herboreles, homeless, Mt. xxv. 35. 

herborgere, a host, Rom. xvi. 23. 

herde. v. hirde. 

herdis, threads of flax, Judg. xvi. 9. Is. 1. 
31. Dan. iii. 46. 

herfore, adv. therefore, Gen. xxv. 26. Rom. 
prol. p. 298. 11 Cor. iv. 1. 

herie, to praise, Ps. cxlviii. 1. Lk. xix. 37. 
Apoc. xix. 3; p.t.pl. herieden, 11 Par. 
xxx. 21. Rom. i. 25. Deeds ii. 47; pr.p. 
heriynge, 11 Par. xxx. 22. Lk. fi. 13. 

heryeris, herieris, worshippers, 1v Kings x. 
19, 23. ' 

heryful, worthy of praise, Dan. iii. 26. 

heriynge, 2. praise, Ex. xii. 14. Mt. xxvi. 
go. Heb. xiii. 15; pl. heriynges, Rom. 
prol. 2. p.302 m. Apoc. xix. 5. 

hern, gen. hers, of her, 1v Kings viii. 6. 
Dan. xiii. 33. 

herre, a hinge, Prov. xxvi. 14; pl. herris, 
mt Kings vii. 50. Job xxii.14. Prov. viii. 
26. 

hert, herte, a hart, Gen. xlix. 21. 

herte-feylynge, pr.p. fainting in heart, Nah. 
ii. 10. 

herteles, foolish, Prov. xii. 8. xxi.6. Ecclus. 
vi. 21. 

herti, intelligent, Deut. i. 13. 

hertid, p.p. wise, intelligent, Job xxxiv. 10. 

hertli, joyous, Ps. xlvi. 6. 

heste. v. heest. 

hethenesse, state of heathen men, 1 Par. xxii. 
2. Judith xiv. 6. 11 Mace. iv, 12. 


heued, heuede, heuedlynge. v. hed, hedi, 
hedlynge. 

heuy, troublesome, Lk. xi. 7. xviii. 5. 

heuye, to be heavy, Mk. xiv. 33; p. p. 
heuyed, Mt. xxvi. 43. Mk. xiv. go. Lk. 
ix. 32. 

heuye, adv. heavily, Mk. x. 14. 

heuysumli, grievously, Ecclus. vi. 26. 

hewen, fo cut in pieces, Job xl. 25; p.t. 
heew3, hew3, hewide, 1 Kings xv. 33. 
Job xv. 16; pl. hewyn, heweden, 1 Kings 
vi. 14; p.p. hewun, hewe, hewid, Gen. 
vi. 14. xxii. 3; pr.p. hewynge, Num. xiv. 
45. 

hesen. v. hizen. : 

heje-sett, p.p. set on high, Job xxxix. 28. 

hidendely, hidyngli, covertly, 11 Kings xii. 
12. Wisd. xviii. 9. 

hidils, hidlis, hiddlis, hudlys, secret places, 
Deut. xxvii. 15. Josh. ii. r. 1 Kings xiii. 
6. Is. xlvili. 16. Mt. vi. 4. Joh. xviii. 
20. 

hidous, hidows, great, fearful, Gen. 1. 10. 
Ex. xiv. 21. Joh xxxviii. 25. 

hidousenesse, Aorror, Gen. xv. 12. Judith 
xvi. 12. Job xviii. 20. Hos. xiii. 1. 

hidouside, p.t. was horrified, Dan. vii. 15. 

hydously, hidowsly, horribly, greatly, Gen. 
xix. 9. 1 Kings xxxi. 3. Iv Kings xvii. 
18. 1 Esdr. x. 13. 

hidoustee, Aorror, Deut. xxxii. 10. 11 Macc. 
vi. 12. 

hiyngli. .o. hisyngli. 

hile, hilyn, hille, hele, to cover, Ex. x. 5. 
Prov. xxv. 2. Hos. xi. 8. Mk. xiv. 65. 
1 Cor. ii. 7; pr.t. hilith, Lev. xiii. 12. 
Lk. viii. 16; p.¢. hilide, Gen. vii. 20. 
xxiv. 65; pl. hiliden, hilden, hileden, 
heliden, Gen. vii. 24. ix. 23. Mt. xxv. 
36; p.p. hilid, heelyd, heled, Gen. vii. 19. 
Mt. vi. 31. viii. 24, Lk. viii. 16. 

hildiden, p.t.pl. flayed, Mic. iii. 3. 

hilet, hylet, a place of shade and shelter, 111 
Kings xx. 16. Ecclus. xxxiv. 19. Is. i. 8; 
pl. hiletis, 111 Kings xx. 12. 

hiling, ». @ covering, tent, Ex. xxxvi. 19. 
Heh. x. 20; pl. hilyngis, hilingis, hyl- 
yngis, 11 Mace. iii. 25. Deeds xviii. 3. 

hilsnede, (?) p.t. entreated, 11 Par. xxxili. 13. 
ov. halsende. 

hynderere, hyndrere, comp. hinder, Gen. xvi. 
13. 111 Kings xxi. 21. 

hyndermore, hyndirmore, hiader part, Gen. 
xvi. 13. Ex. xxxiil. 23; pl. hyndirmores, 
111 Kings xvi. 3. xxi. 21. 

hindward, hyndward, backward, Ps. xlix. 
17. Ixix. 4. 

hyne, a labourer, Joh. x. 12. 

hynge. »v. hange. 

hipe, hippe, the hip, Gen.,xxiv. 3. xlvil. 29; 
pl. hipis, hupis, Joh. xix. 31. 

hipil, hypil, ¢ little heap, Gen. xxxi. 47. Is. 
xvii.t; pl. hipilis, heepils, 11 Par. xxxi. 9. 
Job xxiv. rr. 

hipyll-melum, adv. in heaps, Wisd. xviii. 25. 

hirde, herde, a shepherd, Joh. x. 11; pl. 
hirdis, hirdes, Mt. viii. 33. Lk. viii. 34. 


GLOSSARY. 


hiris, hijris, hyris, wages, Lev. xxv. 53. Ez. 
xvi. 33. Rom. vi. 23. 

hirte, hurten, to hurt, Ex. xii. 23; p.t. hirt- 
ide, Gen. xxvi. 29; p.p. hirt, Ex. ix. 31, 
32. 

hirte, fo stumble, strike against, Jer. xiii. 16; 
pr.t, hirtith, Num. xxxv. 20. Prov. xix. 2. 
Lk. ix. 39. Joh. xi.93 p.f.pl. hurten, 
Deeds xxvii. 41; pr.p. hirtynge, Tob. xi. 
10. 

hisshing, x. a hissing, 11 Par. xxix. 8; pl. 
hissyngis, Judg. v. 16. 

historial, historical, 1s. prol. p. 226. 

hij. v. hees. 

hise, hy3e. ». hee3e. 

hizen, hie, hesen, fo exalt, honor, Mt. xxiii. 
12; pr.t. hieth, hiseth, Mt. xxiii. 12, 
11 Cor. x. 5; p.p. hized, Lk. xiv. 11. 

hisyng. ov. heesyng. 

hiyngli, hiyngh, hastily, 11 Kings xvii. 20. 
ut Par. xxiv. 5. Deeds xvii. 15. 

hislier, more highly, Mt. prol. 2. p. 2. 

hignesse, height, top, Gen. xi. 4. Heb. xi. 21. 

hist, histh, heisthe, height, Gen. vi. 15. Mt. 
ii. 18. Eph. iv. 8; pl. histees, heisthis, 
Mk. xi. ro. 

hy3t, p.t. promised, Mt. xiv. 7; pl. histen, 
i Esdr. vy. 10. v. bihete. 

histe, p.¢. was called, Gen. xxxvi. 25; p.p. 
hist, Josh. xv. 13. v. hatte. 

hoel. v. hol. 

hok, hoke, a hook, Amos viti. 1. 

hol, hoel, hool, hoole, whole, well in health, 
Gen, xxix. 6. Josh. x. 21. Ps. xxi. 23. 
Jer. xxxviiil. 2. Mk. v. 34. Joh. v. 6. 

holid, hoolid, p.p. having holes, Hag. i. 6. 

holli, holly, hoolliche, wholly, altogether, 
Judith prol. p. 602. Ps. xxxix. 14. Rom. 
prol. 1. p. 299. Cath. Epp. prol. 1. p. 594. 

holouznesse, hollowness, a channel, Josh. iii. 
16. iv. 8,9. 

holpedist. v. help. 

holsum, hoolsum, wholesome, Lev. x. 14. 
Ecclus. vi. 31. 1 Tim. vi. 3. 

homli, homliche, homly, homeli, hoomly, 
hoomli, domestic, familiar, meek, 11 Kings 
xvi. 2. Mt. x. 36. xxi.5. Gal. vi. 10. Phi- 
lem. prol. p. 477. 

homlynesse, homelynesse, mildness, meek- 
ness, 11 Kings xxii. 36. 111 Kings xxii. 39. 
1 Cor. x.1. Jam. i. 21. 

hond, hoond, hoonde, the hand, Gen. iii. 22. 
xix. 10. Mt. iii, 12; pl. hondes, hondis, 
hoondis, hondyn, hoonden, hoonde, Gen. 
xxii. 6. Lev. xxiv. 14. Deut. xxxiit. 7. 
Mt. iv. 6. 

hondful, a handful; pi. hondfullis, Gen. 
XXXVil. 7. 

honesten, to make honorable, Eccles. xi. 
23; p.t. honestede, Wisd. viii. 10. 

honge. »v. hange. 

honysoukis, honeysuckles, (?) Mt. iit. 4. Mk. 
i. 6. 

honoure, fo worship, Deut. viii. 19. 111 Kings 
xii. 30; p.t. honowride, honouride, Gen. 
xix. 1. xxiv. 48. Hebr. xi. 21; pil. ho- 
noureden, honouredyn, 1 Kings i. 19. Ju- 


719 


dith viii. 18; p.p. honoured, Deut. xxvi. 
10; pr.p. honourende, Judith vi. 14. 

hoolid, p.p. hulled, having the hull taken off, 
Prov. xxvii. 22. 

hoolnes, hoolnesse, soundness, entireness, 
Josh. v. 7. 11 Mace. iii. 22. 

hoore, a whore, Gen. xxxviii. 21. 1 Cor. vi. 
16; pl. hooris, horis, 111 Kings iii. 16. 
Mt. xxi. 31. Lk. xv. 30. 

hoore, hoary, Gen. xlii. 38. 

hoore-frost, hoor-frost, hor-frost, hoar frost, 
Ex. xvi. 14. Ps. exviii. 83. 

hooreling, hoorling, horlyng, a letcher, Num. 
xxv. 15. Deut. xxiii. 17. 111 Kings xiv. 
24. 

hoorenesse, horenesse, hornesse, hoariness, 
Proy. xx. 29. 11 Mace. vi. 23. 

hoory, filthy, Lev. xxii. 5. v. horthe. 

hordam, « strumpet (?), Lev. xxi. 7. 

hordom, whoredom, Gen. xxxix. 10. Ez. 
xvi. 24. 

horse, hoorse, hoos, hoose, hoarse, Ps. 
Ixviit. 4. 

hoos, hose, Gen. xiv. 23; pl. hosis, hoosis, 
hosen, Deeds xii. 8. 

hoost, ledging-house, Deeds xxviii. 23. 

hoostes, sacrifices, 1 Pet. ii. 5. v. oost. 

hoosteesse, hoostresse, a hostess, Ex. iii. 22. 

hootith, pr.t. promises, Deut. xxiii. 23. tr. 
hy3t. % 

hornene, like a horn, of horn, Ps. prol. p. 
738. Ps. xevii. 6. 

horn-putter, horn-puttere, an animal that 
butts with the horns, Ex. xxi. 29, 36. 

hors, pl. horses, Ecclus. xlviii. 9. 

horse-colt, a foal, Ecclus. xxiii. 30. 

horse-fle3is, hors-fleesis, Aorse flies, Deut. 
vil. 20. Josh. xxiv. 12. 

horsynge, x. cavalry, Deut. xvii. 16. 

horthe, horrethe, horrede, filth, Deut. vii. 
26. 

hosewijf, huswijf, mistress of a family, 
mt Kings xvii. 17. i 

houe, @ hoof, Job xxxix. 21; pl. howues, 
tv Kings ix. 33. 

hound-fleze, hound-fleezxe, @ gad-fly, Ps. 
Ixxvii. 45. civ. 31. 

hounn. v. heeue. 

houynge, pr.p. hovering, Deut. xxxit. 11. 

hou3-senues, sinews of the hough, 1 Par. 
xviii. 4. 

hous-beestis, cattle, Num. xxxii. 26. 

hoxes, the houghs, 11 Kings viii. 4. 

hoxe, to hamstring, Josh. xi. 6; p.t. hoxide, 
Josh. xi. 9. u Kings viii. 4; pl. hoxeden, 
Gen. xlix. 6. 

hugeli, hugelye, greatly, Gen. xvii. 2. Iv 
Kings x. 4. Ps, xlvi. 10. 

hulke, hovel, shed, Is.i.8; pl. hulkis, helkis, 
ut Esdr. vii. 4g. Wisd. xi. 2. 

humelnesse, humility, Heh. prol. p. 480. 

humour, moisture, Jer. xvii. 8. 

hungrere, @ hungry person, Is. xxxii. 6. 

hupis. v. hipe. 

hurlith, pr.t. thrusts against, throws dow , 
Lk. ix. 39; p.. hurlide, 1 Kings xxi. 13; 
p-t.pl. hurliden, tv Kings xi. 16. Ez. 


720 


xxxiv. 21. Mt. vii. 27. Deeds xxvii. 41; 
pp. hurlid, Prov. xxi. 6. 

hurten. v. hirte. 

hurtlyn, burtle, hurtlen, to hurl, to dash 
down, 1v Kings viii. 12. Jer. xlviti. 12; 
prt. hurtlith, hirtlith, Num. xxxv. 20. 
Mk, ix. 17. Lk. ix. 39; p.t. hurtlide, 
hirtled, Jer. xlvi. 12. Lk. ix. 42; pl. hur- 
tliden, Deeds xxvii. 41 ; p.p. burtlid, Gen. 
xxv. 22. Proy. xxi. 6. Lk. vi. 48. 

hustylment, equipment, furniture, Ex. xxxix. 
32; pl. hustilmentis, Ex. xxx. 27. 

huswijf. v. hosewijf. 


1. 

iacynt, iacynkt, silk of hyacinth color, Ex. 
XXV. 4. xxviii. 15. £1 Par. ii. 7. 

lacynetis, hyacinths, S. Sol. v.14. 

iacynetyne, of hyacinth color, Ex. xxxix. 20; 
pl. iacynktynes, Ex. xxv. 5. 

iangle, to chide, Ex. xvii. 2. Deut. xxv. 11; 
pt. pl. iangliden, Num. xx. 13. Lam. iv. 
15; pr.p. ianglynge, Ex. xvii. 2. 

ianglyng, n. a chiding, Ex. xvii. 7. 

iasp, iaspis, jasper, Ex. xxvili.18. Is. liv. 12. 

ybounde. v. bond. 

iche, yche. wv. eche. 

ychoose. v. chese. 

iclepid, ycleeped. v. clepe. 

idel, ydel, vain, void, Gen. i. 2. Jam. ii. 20. 

ydilnesse, idleness, 11 Kings xi. 1 gs pl. 
idilnessis, 11 Kings xi. 1 9. 

idili, ydely, idillich, idly, in vain, Deut. v. 
11. 1 Mace. vii. 18. 

idolatrours, idolaters, 111 Kings xiii. 16 g. 

idon. »v. don. 

ydropesie, dropsy, Lk. xiv. 3. 

lecturing, 2. a conjecturing, Ez. xxi. 19. 

iemews. v. gemels. 

iencian, gentian, a shrub, Jer. xvii.6. xlviii.6. 

iewerie, country of the Jews, Lk. prol.1.p.141. 

iewinge, pr. p. judaizing, Job prol. p. 671. 

iewly, ieuli, iewelich, in the language or man- 
ner of Jews, 1v Kings xviii. 26, 28. 11 
Esdr. xv. 24. Is. xxxvi.11. Gal. ii. 14. 

ifulfilled. v. fulfille. 

ijs, iys, yss, ice, Wisd. xvi. 22. Dan. iii. 70; 
pl. yces, Dan. iii. 70. 

ilcke oon, each one, severally, Heb.-xi. 21. 

yledd. v. lede. 

ilefte. v. leeue. 

ilis, yles, ylis, islands, Gen. x. 5. Esth. x.1. 

illumyned, p.p. enlightened, Heb. vi. 4. 

imade, ymaad, p.p. made, Ecclus. prol. p. 
123. Deeds prol. p. 507. 

ymeete. v. meete. 

ympne, hymn, 111 Kings vill. 28. Mt. xxvi. 
30; pl. ympnes, Ps. lx. 1. xcix. 4. 

improbite, importunity, Lk. xi. 8. 

impugne, enpungne, to fight ogainst, 
oppose, 1 Esdr. vi. 12. 1 Mace. xv. 19. 
Cath. epp. prol.1. p. 594; p.t. inpugnide, 
enpugnyde, Judg. ix. 44. Deeds ix. 21; 
pl. impngneden, inpungneden, Ps. exix. 
7. 1 Mace. xi. 415 p.p. inpugnid, Cath. 
epp. prol. 2. p. 595; pr.p. inpugnende, 
Ps. xxxiv. 1. 


GLOSSARY. 


ynamyd, p.p. named, 1 Macc. x. t. 

inblowith, pr.t. puffeth up, 1 Cor. vit. 1; 
p-p- inblowyn, ynblowen, 1 Cor. iv. 6, 19. 
Col. ii. 18. 

inbowe, to bend down or in, to incline, Is. 
xxvi. 53 p.p. ynbowyd, Joh. xx. 5; pr.p. 
inbowende, inbowynge, Is. ix. 14. 1 Tim. 
v.21. 

inbrethede, p.t. inspired, Ecclus. iv. 12. 

inbrethinge, n. inspiration, 11 Kings xxii. 
16. Job xxxii. 8. Ps. xvii. 16. 

inbrynge, to bring in, Deut. xxx. 55 p.p. 
ynbroust, Gen. xxvi. 10. 

inchanngen, to change, Job xiv. 20; p.p. in- 
chaungid, 11 Mace. iii. 16. 1 Cor. xv. 51. 

inclepen, inclepe, to inwardly call, call 
upon, Joel ii. 32. Rom. x.12; pr.t.pl. in- 
clepyn, 1 Cor. i. 2; p. t. pl. inclepiden, 
Hos. vii. 11. Deeds ix. 21; p.p. inclepid, 
ynclepid, 11 Macc. xii. 5. Deeds xxii. 16. 
Jam. ii. 7; pr.p. ynclepynge, 11 Macc. 
vii. 37. Deeds vii. 58. 

yncleepynge, ». a calling upon, 11 Macc. 
vill. 15. 

incoming, incomyng, ». an entrance, Judith 
xiv. 9. Ecclus. i. 7. 

incroke, into-croke, imp. bow down, Rom. 
xi. 10. 

indeyne. v. endeyne. 

indeluede, p.t. digged in, buried, Gen. xxxv. 


4. 

indwelle, to dwell in, Ps. lxvii. 7; imp. in- 
dwelle, Ps. xxxvi. 27. 

indwelling, n. a dwelling in, Wisd. ix. 15. 

infattid. v. enfattid. 

infect, p.p. infected, stained, Lev. xiii. 49. 
11 Mace. xii. 16. 

inficchid, p.p. fized in, Ps. xxxvii. 3. Ixviii. 
hb 

infolewingis, consequences, Ecclus. xxxii. 23. 

ingoing, ingoyng, n. an entering, a begin- 
ning, Ps. Ixvii. 25. Ecclus. i. 5; pi. in- 
goingus. Ps. Ixvii. 25. 

yngoynge, ingoende, pr. p. entering, Gen. 
xxxvill. 16. Mk. xvi. 5. 

ingraffiden, p.t. engrafted, 1 Tim. vi. 10. 

inladde, p. t. brought in, Ps. Ixxvii. 54. 
Wisd. xv. 4; p.p. inlad, Gen. xliii. 24. 

inlappid. v. mwlappith. 

ynlistne, to enlighten, Epb. iii. 9; p.p. yn- 
listid, inlistid, 11 Cor. iv. 6, Eph. i. 18. 

ynly, inwardly, Deut. ii. 30. xxviii. 10. 

inmostis, the inmost parts, Prov. xxvi. 22. 

ynned, p. p. lodged, 1 Kings x. 22 9. 

ynnere, comp. innermore, Prov. xxvi. 22; 
sup. ynneste, innerest, Ecclus. x. 10. 
Prov. xxvi. 22. 

innerly, inwardly, Is. xxxiv. 6. 

inobedience, inobeishaunce, disobedience, 
Pref. ep. c. iii. p. 63. Rom. v. 19. 

inobeishaunt, disobedient, Deut. viii. 20. 

ynow, ynow3, ynew3, adv. enough, Lev. xiii. 
28. 1 Mace. vil. 21. Mt. x. 24. Mk. xv. 
15. 1 Pet. iv. 3. 

inparfitnesse, imperfection, Eeclus. xxxviii. 
31. 

inpolute, undefiled, Heb. vii. 26. 


inpossible, incapable, wanting in power, 
Wisd. xi. 18. 

ynputtide, p.¢. placed on or in, 1 Macc. xi. 
13; pl. ynputtiden, Deeds xxviii. 10. 

inrennyng, 7. an incursion, assault, Ps. xc. 6. 

inrisen, p. p. risen against, Ps. xxvi. 12. 

inriseris, risers against, Ps. xhii. 6. 

ynsekinge, pr. p. searching after, Heb. 
xi. 6. 

insent, p.p. ingrafted, Jam. i. 21. 

ynsett, inseet, p. p. set in, Rom. xi. 23, 
24; pr.p. ynsettinge, 11 Macc. vii. 21. 

inshed, p.p. poured over, wetted over, Ju- 
dith vii. 23. Dan. iv. 22. 

ynsmyten, p.p. struck into, 11 Macc. xin. 
22. 

insolible, indissoluble, Heb. vii. 16. 

instaunce, an urgent request, Judith iv. 8. 
1 Mace. xi. 40. 

instondynge, instoondynge, instondende, 
pr.p. being at hand, Gen. xxxviii. 27. 
Judg. xi. 5. 11 Esdr. vy. 47. 


instore. v. enstore. 

instued, instewed, p. p. instituted, Heb. 
stead 

intentifli, interpele. v. ententijfli, enter- 
pele. 


inturnyng, pr. p. turning in, Gen. xlii. 27. 

inwardliche, inwardly, Prov. ii. 2. 

inwardnesses, inwardnessis, entrails, Wisd. 
iv. 14. 11 Cor, vi. 12. 

inwet, inweetid, p.p. dipped in, Ps. Ixvii. 
24. 

inwitt, mind, heart, will, Gen. xxvi. 35. 
1 Kings i.10. Deeds xxvii. 22. 11 Cor. 
viii. 11. Col. iii, 23; pl. inwittis, Dent. 
xi. 18. 11 Macc. xiii. 4. Heb. xii. 3. 

inwlappith, pr. ¢. enwraps, 11 Tim. ii. 4; 
p-p. iawlappid, inlappid, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p. 71. 1 Pet. ii. 20; pr. p. inwlappynge, 
Ez. i. 4. 

inwrappe, enwrappe, to enwrap, 1 Kings 
xv. 6. Prov. xxix. 6; p.t. inwrappyde, 
1v Kings ii. 8; p.p. inwrappid, Num. 
iv. 15. 

inwrite, p.p. inscribed, Ecclus. xlviii. 10. 

iocounde, merry, 1 Kings xxv. 36. 

joynters, ioyntours, ioyntouris, ioynturis, 
iuncturis, junctures, joinings, Pref. ep. 
c. vii. p. 72. 1 Par. prol. p. 316. Deeds 
xxvil. 40. Heb. iv. 12. 

iolyf, iolif, ioly, wanton, Amos vi. 4. 

iolite, gladness, Judith x. 3. 

ionke, ionket, iunket, a basket made of 
rushes, Ex. ii. 3. Job prol. p. 671. 

iow, lowe, the jaw, jowl, Judg.xv.16. Tob. 
vi. 4. 

iosen, to rejoice, Tob. xi. 8; p.t. ioyede, 
iosede, Gen. xlv. 16. Tob. xi..g3 pl. i03- 
eden, 1 Kings vi. 13. Mt. ii. 10; pr.t. 
iozende, Rom. prol. 1. p. 300. 

ypurchasid, p.p. bought, Rom. prol. p. 299. 

irchoun, yrchoun, irchun, vrchon, a hedge- 
hog, Lev. xi. 5. Is. xiv. 23. Zeph. ii. 143 
pl. irchounes, Ps. ciii. 18. 

irefulnesse, wrath, 1 Kings xix. 21. 

ireyne, yreyne, @ spider, Ps. xxxvili. 12. 


kxxxix. 9. Is. lix. 5; pl. ireyns, yreyns, 
yreinus, areyns, Job viii. 14. Is. viii. 6. 

yren, yrun, iron, Gen. iv. 22. Dan. ii. 41. 

yren-smyth, yren-smith, iren-smyth, @ 
worker in iron, 1 Kings xiii. 19. Ecclus. 
xxxvill, 29. Is. xliv. 12. 

yrony, yrunny, made of tron, Deut. xxviii. 
23. Dan. ii. 40. 

yrettid. v. rette. 

iris, pl. anger, Prov. xxvi. 10. Xxx. 33- 

irreligiosite, irreligiousness, 111 Esdr. i. 52. 

is, yes, Jam. v. 12. 

ysett, ysorowid. . sette, sorewe. 

ispoilid, p.p. spoiled, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 72. 

ispoken. v. speken. 

issu, @ going out, Ps. exx. 8. 

itake. vv. take. 

itauste, p.p. taught, Ecclus. prol. p. 123. 

yturned, p. p. turned, 11 Kings ii. 23. 

iubilacioun, a rejoicing, Ps. cl. 5. 

yue, yuy, ivy, 11 Kings xix. 4. Jonah 
iv. 6. 

yuel, 2. evil, Gen. xix. 19; pl. yuelis, yuels, 
Deut. xxxi.17. Mk. vii. 23. 

yuel, yuele, adj, ill, evil, Gen. xlvii. 9. 

yuele, the Evil one, the Devil, 1 Joh. 
iil. 12. 

yuele, adv. evilly, Gen. iv. 7. Mt. xxi. 4). 

yner, ivory, Ps. xliv. 9. Apoc. xviii. 12. 

yuerene, of ivory, S. Sol. vii. 4. 

iument, work-beast, horse, Lk. x. 34; pil. 
iumentis, Gen. i. 24. vii.14. Deeds xxiii. 
24. Apoc. xviil. 13. 

iunctures, junket. v. ioynters, ionke. 

iustifiyngis, justifications, Num. ix. 14. 

justise, a judge, a magistrate, Jam. v. 9; pl. 
iustises, Deeds xix. 38. 

iwce, iuyshe, iwisch, iwissh, broth, juice, 
(Lat. jus,) Is. xv. q. 

yweischen, iwryten. v. waische, wryte. 

ywrowsten. v. worche. 

i3e. , else. 

isyue, y3if.  v. 3yue. 
[See also words beginning with e and g.] 


K. 


kaak, a cake, 1 Kings ii. 36. 

kanne, karf. ». kunne, kerue. 

karye, to carry, Gen. xlv. 23. 

kariyng, n. @ carrying, Gen. xlv. 19. 

kast, kest. v. caste. 

keetlynge, a whelp, Deut. xxxiii. 22. 

kele, koole, to cool, Ecclus. xvii. 16. Uk. 
Xvi. 24. 

kelynge, n. a refreshing, cooling, Deeds iii. 
20. 

kennende, kennynge, pr. p. knowing, Mt. 
prol.1. p.1. Rom. prol. 1. p. 298. ». 

_ kunne. 

kepe, to keep, to watch, Gen. xxvi. 5; p.t. 
kepte, kepide, Gen. xxviii. 20. Ruth ii. 
20; pl. kepten, Lk. xiv.1; p.p. kept, 
Gen. xxvi. 5. 

kepe, n. care, heed, Mk. xiii. 23. Lk. x. 40. 

kerchenes. v. couercheues. 

kerue, to cut, Lev.i.17; p.t. karf, keruyde, 


VOL. IV. 


GLOSSARY. 


Amos i. 13. tv Kings xv. 163; p. p. koru- 
en, coruen, koruun, Josh. prol. p. 555. 
Hos. xiv. 1; pr. p. keruynge, Judg. iv. 3. 
Prov. v. 4. 

keruyngis, rendings, rents, Amos vi. 12. 

kesteyn-tree, a chestnut tree, Is. xliv. 14. 

ketels, cheteles, ketiles, Lev. xi. 35. 

kenered. v. kynere. 

keuering, 2. a covering, 1 Pet. ii. 16. 

kidneris, kideneris, kydneers, kideneiren, 
the kidneys, Ex. xxix. 13, 22. Lev. iii. 4. 

kien, kyen, kiyn, pl. kine, Gen. xxxil. 15. 
xli. 2, 4. 1 Kings vi. 10. 

kike, kyke, to kick, Acts ix. 5; p.t. kikide, 
Deut. xxxii. 15; pl. kikiden, 11 Kings 
vi. 6. 

kyn, @ kind, generation, 1 Pet. ii. 9. 

kynde, nature, Deut. xxiii. 12. 

kyndely, kyndli, kyndly, adj. natural, accept- 
able, Lev. iv. 7. Wisd. xii. 10. Mt. vi. 
16. Rom. i. 27. xi. 21. 11 Pet. ii. 12. 

kyndely, kyndli, adv. naturally, Jude 10. 

kyndeles, kyndlis, kyndlyngis, kyndelyngis, 
offspring, young, Mt. xxiii. 33. Lk. 
iii. 7. 

kynrede, kindred, Gen. xii.1; pl. kynreden, 
kynredene, kynredun, kynredis, Gen. 
x. 20. xii, J. xxiv. go. Lev. xx. 20. 

kisse, to kiss, Gen. xxxi. 28; p. ¢. kisside, 
kiste, Ex. xviii. 7. 11 Kings xv. 3. Job 
xxxi. 27. v. cosside. 

kitte, kutte, to cut, rend, Lev. x. 6. xxi. 10; 
p.t. kitte, kut, kutt, kittide, Lev. viii. 20. 
Josh. vii. 6. 11 Kings x. 4. Mk. prol. 2. 
p. 87. Lk. xxii. go; pl. kitten, cutten, 
kuttyn, kittiden, Num. xiii. 24. 11 Kings 
xiii. gr. Mt. xxi. 8. Mk. xi. 8. Deeds 
xxvil. 32; p.p. kit, kitt, kitte, kyt, kut, 
Deut. xxi. 3. Is. xviii. 5. Mt. ili. ro. 
vii. 19. Lk, tii. g. xxiii. 45. 

kittinge, kittyng, x. a cutting, rent, Mt. ix. 
16. Mk. xiv. 63; pl. kyttyngis, kittingis, 
11 Kings xi. 31. Deeds xxviii. 3. 

kynere, keuere, to cover, recover, Hab. ii. 
17. Apoc. xix. 8; p.#. kyuerede, kyue- 
ride, keuerde, Gen. xxvii. 16. Hab. iil. 3; 
pl. keuereden, Heb. xi. 34; p.p. keuered, 
keuerid, koouered, kynerid, Hab. ii. 19. 
Mt. vi. 29. Rom. iv. 7. 1 Cor. xi. 6. 

knarres, knots in wood, Wisd. xiii. 13. 

knaue-child, a male child, Ex.i.16. Lev. 
xii. 7. Ecclus. xxxvi. 23. Apoc. xii. 5; 
pl. knaue-children, Ex. i. 18. 

kneen, kneesis, knees, Gen. xxx. 3. 1. 22. 
1v Kings i. 13. 

kne:, p. t. knew, Wisd. ix. 9. Jer. viii. 7. 

knelyngli, in a kneeling posture, Jer. xxxviii. 
26. 

knyt, knyttide, p.p. joined, Gen. xxxiv. 3. 
Ex. xxxvi. 18. xxxix. 18, 

knyttingis, pl. meshes, Job xviii. 8. 

knytche, knicchin, knycchoun, a diéttle bun- 
die, 1 Kings xxv. 29. Amos ix. 6; pl. 
knytchis, knycchyns, Mt. xiti. 30. 

kni3t, kny3t, soldier, Nah. ii, 7; knistis, 
knystis, Gen. xxvi. 26. Mt. viii. 9. v. 
euene-knyst. 


AZ, 


721 


kny3thod, knishode, kny3thode, army, war- 
fare, Pref. ep. c. ili. p. 63. Gen. xxi. 33. 
11 Cor. x. 4. Deeds vii. 42. 

knystli, military, warlike, 11 Mace. viii. 


knoppis, knobs, buttons, Ex. xxvi. 11. xxxvi. 
18. 

knowede, p. t. knew, 1v Kings ii.3. v. kne3. 

knowendeli, knowyngli, so as to know, Wisd. 
xili. 5. 

knowleche, acquaintance, Lk. ii. 44. 

knouleche, knowleche, knowliche, to con- 
fess, acknowledge, Gen. xxix. 35. Mt. vii. 
23. x. 31. Lk. ii. 5; p.t. knowlechide, 
knoulechide, Esth. viii. 1. Lk. ii. 38; 
pt. knoulechiden, knowlechiden, 11 Esdr. 
ix. 2. Mt. iii. 6. Mk. i. 5; pr.p. know- 
lechinge, knowlechynge, 111 Kings viii. 
33- Mt. iii. 6. Mk. i. . 

knowen, p.p. persons known, acquaintance, 
Lk. ii. 44. 

kokatrice, a cockatrice, Ps. xc. 13. 

koruen, koude. v. kerue, kunne. 

kouthly, familiarly, 1 Kings prol. p. 3. 

kude, the cud, Lev. xi. 3, 4. 

kundekenes, Levites, (?) Pref. ep. c. vii. 
P- 73: 

kunne, to know, Prov. iv.1. Eccles. vii. 26. 
Rom. xii. 3. 1 Cor. viii. 2; pr.é. can, 
kan, kanne, 11 Par. ii.1q. Joh. vii. 18; 
pl. kunnen, kunne, connen, cunnen, Pref. 
ep.c, iv. p.64. Judg. xiv. 13. Mt. vii.11. 
xxi. 16. xxvii. 65. Lk. xi. 133 p.t. koude, 
kouthe, 11 Par. ti.14. Job xix. 4; pi. 
kouden, cowden, Pref. ep. c. iv. p. 64. 
Ex. xxxvi.t; p.p. koud, kowd, cunde, 
Prov. i. 2. 1 Cor. xiv. 7. a Cor. 
iii. 2; pr. p. kunnynge, 1 Kings xiv. 
18. 

kunnyng, knowledge, Gen. ii. 9. xliv. 15. 

kurlu. v. corlure. 

kutte.  v. kitt. 
[See also words commencing with c¢.] 


L. 


laak, lake, a dungeon, pit, Gen. xl.15. Jer. 
xxxviii. 6, 7, 9. Dan. vi. 7. 

lacert, a lizard, Lev. xi. 30. 

ladde. vv. lede. 

ladi, mistress of a house, Gen, xvi. 4. 

lafte. v. leeue. 

laien. v. ligge. 

layner, @ thong, garter, Gen. xiv. 23. 

lambren. vv. lomb. 

lange, tongue, language, Gen. xi. 1; pl. lan- 
gis, Esth. i, 22. 

languor, disease, sickness, Mt. iv. 23; pl. 
languores, langours, Mt. iv. 24. Lk. iv. 
40. : 

languishide, p.f. was sick, Dan. viii. 27; 
pr. p. langwischinge, languysshende, 
Wisd. xvii. 8. Joh. v. 3. 

languyschis, langnisches, sicknesses, Lk. iv. 
40. vi. 18. vil. 21. 

langwischingis, languyshingis, sieknesses, 
LK. iv. 40. vi. 18. 


722 


lape, to lap, Judg. vii. 5; p.t. pl. lapiden, 
Judg. vii. 7; p.p. lapid, Judg. vii. 6. 

lappide, p.t. wrapped, Mt. xxvii. 59. 0. 
wlappe. 

lapwynk, leepwynke, @ lapwing, Lev. xi. 19. 
Deut. xiv. 18. 

lare, @ sea-gull, (Lat. larus,) Lev. xi. 16. 
Deut. xiv. 15. 

largen, large, laargen, to enlarge, 11 Kings 
xxi. 37. 111 Kings i. 47. 1 Par. xviii. 3; 
p-#. pl. largeden, Ecclus. 1. 20; p.p. lar- 
gid, Ecclus. xxxiii. 26. 

lassen, to diminish, make less, Ex. v. 8; p.é. 
lasside, Ps. evi. 38; 2p. lassedest, lasse- 
dist, Ps, vill. 6. Ixxxviii. 46; p. p. lassid, 
lessid, Gen. viii. 2,13. Ecclus. xvi. 23; 
pr. p. lassende, Ecclus. xxxi. 40. 

lassing, lassyng, ». a making less, Ecclus. 
XX.11. xxxix. 26. 

lastith, pr. t. continues, perseveres, Ps. 
cxviil. 91; imp. laste, 1 Mace. x. 273 
p-t. lastide, Ez. xi.13. Deeds xii. 16; 
pl. lastiden, lasteden, Ez. xiii. 6. Joh. 
vill. 7; pr.p. lastinge, Deeds i. 14. 

lastingli, constantly, Deeds i. 14. 

lat, to let go, suffer, Ex. viii. 8, 29; imp. lat, 
late, Gen. xxiv. 55, 56. xxx. 25; pl. 
leteth, 1 Esdr. vi. 7; p.é. leet, leete, 
lete, Gen. viii. 10. Josh. ii. 15. 11 Kings 
xi. 21. Mt. ii.zg. xviii. 27; pl. leten, Gen. 
xxiv. 59; p.p. letun, lete, Gen. xxxi. 7. 
Josh. ii. 18; pr.p. letyng, Gen. xxvi. 7. 

lateful, date, Hos. vi. 3. Jam. v. 7. 

latijs, latys, a lattice, Prov. ii. 6. vii. 63 pl. 
latises, latisis, S. Sol. ii. g. 

latinli, in the Latin language, Ps. prol. p. 
736. 

latoun, mixed metal, latten, 111 Kings vii. 
45. Ecclus. xvii. 20. Apoc. i. 15. 31.18. 

latsum, adj. obstructed, having impediment, 
Ex. iv. 10. 

laumprun, @ lamprey, Job prol. p. 671; pl. 
laumpreis, Is. iii. 20. 

lauoutoure, laver, font, Eph. v. 26. 

lawe-breche, breach of law, Is. i. 5. 

lawe-breke, ¢o transgress, Is. xlviii. 8; pr.p. 
lawe-breking, Is. xlviii. 8. 

lawfullich, lawfully, Num. xxviii. 10. 

lazhen, lazhe, lau3e, lanshen, lazen, laywhin, 
lawshe, leyse, leeze, lezen, to laugh, Gen. 
xxi. 6, Job v.22. ix. 23. Ps. ci. 8. Prov. 
i, 26. xxxi. 2%. Lk. vi. 21, 235 p.t. lows, 
loow3, low3e, loo3, loowe, leijede, leiside, 
Gen. xvii.17. xvili.1o. 111 Esdr. iv. 31. 
Job xxix. 24. Dan. xiv.18; 2p. lows, 
leizedist, Gen. xviii. 15. 

la3hing, lawyng, leising, leisyng, x. laughter, 
Gen. xxi. 6. Eccles. iii. 4. Ecclns. xxi. 23. 
Jam. iv. 9; pl. lesingis, Hab. i. 10. 

lecchour, a fornicator, Ex. xx. 10. 1 Cor. 
v. 113 pl. lecchours, 1 Cor. v. 9. 

leche, leeche, a physician, Ecclus. x. 11. 
Mt. ix. 12. Lk. prol.1. p. 141. iv. 23. 
Col. iv.14; pl. leches, Jechis, Gen. 1. 2. 
Mk. v. 26. Lk. viii. 43. 

Jechen, to administer a remedy, to heal, Ec- 
clus. xii. 13. Is. lxi. 1, 








GLOSSARY. 


lecherynge, pr. p. committing fornication, 
Num. xv. 39. 

leching, ”. a healing, Ecclus. vi. 16; pl. 

“ lechingus, Wisd. xii. 4. 

lede, to lead, draw, Ex. xxxii. 34; p. é. 
ladde, ledde, Gen. xxix. 13; p.p. lad, 
led, yledd, Ex. xxvi. 37. Wisd. xix. 11. 
1 Cor. prol. p. 338; pr. p. ledynge, 
ledinge, ledende, Judith iii. 10. Mt. xiii. 
48. Mk. xiv. 47. 

ledyng, n. a company, host, Gen. 1. 9. 

leede, a vessel of lead, 1 Kings ii. 14. 

leef, loved one, 111 Esdr. iv. 24. Prov. xxxi. 
2. 8. Sol. i. 8. vii. 9. 

leeffe, leeful, leful. v. leeue, leueful. 

leeisyngli, lyingly, Ez. xiii. 22. 

leende, the loin, Gen. xlvi. 26. xlix. 10; 
pl. leende, leendis, leendes, Gen. xxxv. 
11. ui Kings xx. 31. Mt. iti, 4. Lk. 
xii. 35. Eph. vi. 14. 

leene, to lend, Ex. xii. 36. Deut. xv. 6,93 
pr.t. pl. leenen, Lk. vi. 345 imp. leene, 
Lk. xi. 5; p.é. pl. lenten, 11 Esdr. v. 
10. 

leenere, lener, lender, usurer, Prov. xxii. 8. 
Lk. vii. 41. 

leep, leepwynke. v. lepe, lapwynk. 

leeren, leren, ¢o learn, to teach, Josh. iv. 
23. Is. xxix. 243 imp. lere, Mt. xxiv. 
32; pl. lereth, Mt. ix.13; p.¢. lerede, 
Mt. ii. 7; pl. lereden, Heb. xii. 10; p.p. 
lered, lerid, lerud, 1 Esdr. vii. 11.0 1 
Esdr. vii. 62. Lk. i. 4. Joh. vii. 15. 
Rom. prol. 1. p. 299; pr.p. lerende, 
11 Tim. iii. 7. Tit. ii. 12. 

leernen, ¢o learn, Lev. xxiii. 42. 

leese, lese, to destroy, Gen.xviii.23. Lev. xvii. 
10. Mt.ii.13. Lk. iv. 34. Joh. x. 105 pr.d. 
lesith, Mt. x. 39; p.?. loste, Ps, xxvii. 
45. Mt. xxii. 7. Lk. xvii. 273 2p. lostist, 
Ps. xxii. 27. Wisd. xviii. 5; pl. losten, 
Deut. iii. 6; p.p. lost, Ps. Ixxii. 27. 

leesyng, lesynge, lesinge, 7. a lie, falsehood, 
Gen. xxxvili. 23. Ex. xxili.1. Joh. viii, 
44. 1 Thess. ii.10; pl. leesingis, Prov. 
xix. 22. 11 Thess. ii. 10. 

leesing-makere, a tar, Prov. xxi. 6. 

leesyngmongere, a lar, Ecclus. xx. 27. 
Joh. viii. 44; pl. lesyngmongeris, leesyng- 
mongeres, Ecclus. xv. 8. 1 Tim.i. 10. 
Apoc. xxi. 8. 

leet. v. lat. 

leeuable, credible, 11 Par. vi. 18. v. beleeu- 
able. 

leene, lene, fo leave, deliver, dismiss, omit, 
Gen. xxviii.15. Mk. xv.11. Lk. iv. 19; 
pr.t. 2 p. leeuyst, Joh. xix. 12; tmp. 
leeffe, leeue, Gen. xiii. 33; p.é. lafte, 
laft, lefte, Gen. xxvi. 31. Ex. iv. 26. 
Judg. xv. 5. Mt. xxvii. 26. Mk. xv.15; 
pl. laften, leften, 11 Par. xviii. 323; p.p. 
laft, left, ilefte, Ex. x.15. Ecclus. prol. p. 
124. Mt. xxvii. 21; pr.p. leuende, Cath. 


epp. prol. p. 594. 


| leenen, pr.¢. pl. cease, Ex. ix. 28; imp. 


leue, 11 Par. xxxv. 21; p.p. laft, Gen. 
xviii, 11. XXX. 9. 


leeuen, pr.t. pl. remain, Gen. xlv. 6; p.t. 
pl. laften, Gen. xiv.10. Lev. x. 16. 

leeue, leue, leven, fo believe, Ex. iv.1. xix.9. 
Is. x. 203 pr. t. leeue, 1 Cor. xi. 18; p.t. 
leeuede, Is. liii. 1; pl. leueden, leeue- 
den, Num. xx.12. Lam. iv. 12. Deeds 
ix. 26; p.p. leeued, leuyd, Gen. xxvii. 
33- Rom. prol. 1. p. 299; pr.p. leeuende, 
Tob. xiii. 8. Judith xiii. 7. 

leeues, leues, leaves of a gate, Judg. xvi. 3. 
11 Esdr. iti. 15. Prov. i. 21. 

leeuyngis, remains, remnant, 11 Kings xxi. 
2, 

leeser, a Liar, 111 Kings xxii. 22. 

leesing. v. lize. 

leg-harneis, greaves, 1 Kings xvii. 6. 

leggen, lein, to lay, Gen. xlii. 25. 11 Esdr. 
xii. 215; pr. p. leggynge, leiende, leiynge, 
Heh. vi.1. 

leggen. ov». ligge. 

leggeris, leieris, leyers, liggeris, layers, men 
laying, 1 Par. xxii. 15. 1 Esdr. iii. 7. 

leit, leyt, lightning, Deut. xxxii. 41. Mt. 
xxiv. 27; pl. leitis, leityngis, Ex. ix. 23. 
Apoc. iv. 5. xvi. 18. 

leize. v. lize. 

leizen, ley3e, leizyng. v. lashen, lashing. 

leister, Jaughter, Job viii. 21. 

leme-meel, lym-mele, adv. limb from limb, 
11 Macc. i, 16. 

lemes, limbs, Lev. i. 6. 

lemman, a lover, Prov. vii. 4. S. Sol. i. 12, 
13. 

lente, lent, lentiles, 11 Kings xvii. 28. Ez. 
iv. 9; pl. lentes, 11 Kings xxiii. 11. 

leep, lep, a basket, Ex. ii. 3,5. Job xl. 26. 
11 Cor. xii. 325 pl. lepis, leepis, Job prol. 
p- 672. Mt. xv. 37. Mk. viii. 8. 

lepen, lepe, lype, lippe, to eap, dance, Wisd. 
v. 22, Is. xxxv. 6. Joel ii. 5. Mal. iv. 23 
p.t. lepe, leep, leepe, lepte, lippide, Judg. 
iv. 1g. 1 Kings x. 10. 11 Kings vi. 14. IV 
Kings v. 21. Dan. xiii. 39. Mt. xiv. 6. 
Deeds xiv.9; p.p. lepid, lippid, lopen, 
lept, Mt. xi.17. Uk. vii. 325 pr.p. le- 
pende, lepynge, lippinge, 11 Kings vi. 16. 
Deeds iii. 8. 

leperesse, a female dancer, Ecctus. ix. 4. 

lepful, lepisful, basketsful, Mk. viii. 8, 
20. 

lepre, leprosy, Lev. xiii. 44. 
10. 

lereris, teachers, Heb. xii. 9. 

lesewe, leswe, a pasture, Is. vii. 25. Lk 
viii. 345 pl. lesewis, leswis, Gen. xli. 18. 
1 Kings xvi. 19. Joh. x. 9. 

lesewith, lesuwith, lisewith, pr.t. pastures, 
1 Kings xvi.u1. 1 Cor. ix. 7; p.t. pl. 
leseweden, lesewiden, Lk. viii. 34; p. p- 
lesewed, 111 Kings iv. 23; pr.p. lese- 
wynge, Mt. viii. 30. Lk. viii. 32. 

lesid, p. p. gleaned, Lev. xix. 10. 

lessid. v. lassen. 

letherin, letheren, Jeathern, Lev. xiii. 59. 
1 Kings v. 9. 

lette, to hinder, 1 Esdr. iv. 4. Heb. xii.ig; 
p.t. lettide, 1 Esdr. iv. 4. Ps. Ixxvii. 31. 


Num. xii. 


Gal. v.7; p.p. lettid, lett, Ex. iv. 10. 
Rom. i, 1. xv. 22. 

lettynge, ». @ hindrance, 11 Par. xiv. 7. Wisd. 
xix.7. 1Cor.vii.353 pi.lettyngis, lettingis, 
1 Par. prol. p. 315. Prov. xv. 19 g. 

lettrure, literature, Ps. xx. 15. 

lene, permission, Ex. iii. 19. 

leueful, ready to believe, Gen. xxxix. 19. 

leueful, leeful, leefful, leeueful, leful, Zawful, 
Gen. xvi. 6. Lev. xvii.13. Mt. xii. 2. xiv. 4. 
Lk. vi.2. 1 Cor. vi. 12. 

leuere, comp. rather, Ecclus. 
1 Mace. xii. 10. 

leuour, @ lever, bar, Is, xxvii. 1. 

lew, lewk, warm, Apoc. iii. 16. 

lewid, lewide, lewde, leeuyd, Jay, common, 
unlearned, Pref. ep. c. iv. p. 65. 1 Kings 
xxi. 4. Deeds iv. 13. 

lewmes, lewmus, lights, Pref. ep. c. vi. 
p- 67. 

lybard, libarde, leopard, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 
71, 72. Apoc. xiii. 2. 

libel, a little book, writing, Num. v. 23. 
Deut. xxv.1. Mt. v. 31. 

librarijes, libraries, books, Esth. xii. 4. 

lic, liche, lich, lijk, like, Gen. xxx. 8. Job 
xvi. 4. Mt. vi. 8. xx. 1. 

licchi, lichi, lychi, licchy, lychy, lichy, like, 
Mt. vii. 26. xi.16. xiii. 24. Lk. iii, 11. 
vi. 47. X. 37. 

licnesse, liknesse, example, parable, Lk. v. 
36. vi. 39. xii. 16. 

licnessid, p. p. likened, Jam. i. 23. 

licour, any thing liquid, Num. xxix. 16; pl. 
licowres, licours, Gen. xxxv.14. Num. 
XXX. IE. 

liende. v. lize. 

liendely, lyingly, Jer. vii. 9. xxvii. 15. 

lifli, adj. living, Wisd. xv. 11. 

liften, lifteden, p. t. pl. lifted, Lk. xvii. 12. 

ligge, lygge, leggen, lyen, lyn, to lie down, 
Gen. xix. 4. Num. xiv. 29. Is. xxxiv. 
14. Apoc. prol.1. p.638; pr.t. liggith, lig- 
geth, lyth, lith, lijth, Gen. xlix. 31. Ex. 
xxi. 13. Deut. xxviii. 56. Mt. viii. 6; pl. 
liggen, lin, Deut. ii. 37; p.t. leye, ley, 
Gen. xix. 33. Ex. xii. 30. Deut. ix. 25; 
pl. laien, lien, lyen, Gen. xxviii. 11. Lev. 
X.53 pr.p. liggynge, liende, Gen. xxix. 2. 
Mt. viii. 14. Joh. v. 6. xx. 5. 

liggeris. v. leggeris. 

liggynge, x. a lying down, Rom. ix. 10; lig- 
ging-place, Prov. vii. 17. 

lijfiode, liflode, lyuelod, a living, sustenance, 
Gen. xlii. 7. Ecclus. xxix. 29; pl. lyue- 
lodis, Gen. xlii.1. xlvii. 23. Deut. ii. 28. 

lijpe, lippid, lippinge. _v. lepe. 

likith, pr. t. it pleases, Gen. xvi. 6. 

likyng, 2. delight, Gen. ii. 10. Ps. xxxv. 9. 

likyngli, probably, Is. prol. p. 226. 

lym-mele. v. leme-mele. 

lyne, linen, Kix. xxv. 4. Mt. xxvii. 60. 

lynage, family, Num. iv. 46; pl. lynagis, 
linagis, Gen. xxvii. 29. Josh. xviii. 2. 

lippe.  v. lepe. 

list, pr. t. impers. pleases, Prov. xxvi. 2. 

literes, litters, Ig. Ixvi. 20. 


xxili. 19. 





GLOSSARY. 


litil-maistir, @ schoolmaster, (Lat. padago- 
gus,) Gal. iii. 25. 

litil-mele, litil-mel, litil-melum, lytil-inelum, 
litil-melome, adv. by little and little, Gen. 
xxxiil. 14. xl.10. Deut. vii. 22. Judg. 
xx. 33. 1 Esdr. iv. 22. 1 Kings xiv. 39. 
it Par, xxi. 15. 

littoures, lictors, Deeds xvi. 35. 

lyuerede, p. t. delivered, Josh. xxiv. to. 

lineres, lyueres, lifers, living things, Gen. 
iii. 1. Ps. lv. 13. Lxviii. 29. 

lise, lye, lyzen, leise, fo tell lies, Lev. xix. 
11. Josh. xxiv. 27. 1v Kings iv. 16; p.t. 
liede, leeside, 1 Mace. xi. 53; pl. lieden 
Josh. vii.11; p.p. lowen, lowe, Judg. 
xvi. 1g. Ps. xxvi.12; pr.p. liende, ly- 
ende, leesxing, Mt. v.31. viii. 14. ix. 2. 
Deeds ix. 33. 

liste, p. t. alighted, Gen. xxiv. 64. 

lister, listlier, li3tloker, comp. easier, more ea- 
sily, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 73. 1 Kings xvi. 16. 
Mt. ix. 5. xix. 24. Mk. x. 25. Lk. v. 23. 

listful, bright, shining, Lk. xi. 34. 

listhed, lightness, levity, Jer. iii. 9. 

listi, listy, bright, shining, Mt. xvii. 5. Lk. 
xi. 34. 

listid, p.p. relieved, Is. ix.1. v. alizted. 

list-rmakers, luminaries, Ez. xxxii. 8. 

listne, listnen, liste, to enlighten, to shine, to 
dawn, Gen. i. 15. 1 Kings xxix. 10. 
1 Cor. iv. 5. Apoc. xxi. 23; prt. list- 
neth, Lk. viii. 16; p. ¢. listnede, liztede, 
ut Tim. i. 10; pl. listeden, Ps, Ixxvi. 19; 
p-p. listned, listid, listed, 1 Kings xiv. 27. 
ur Kings xvii. 22. Tob. xiv.1. Ps. exvii. 


273 pr.p. ltenynge, ‘listnynge, list- 
ynge, Ex. xiv. 20. xl. 33. Lk. viii. 
16. 


listnere, an enlightener, Prov. xxix. 13. 

listnesse, levity, 11 Cor. i. 17. 

listnyng, listing, 2. illumination, Ps. xxvi. 4. 
xliii. 4. Ixxvii.14. 1 Tim. i. 10. 

listsum, fudl of light, Ps. xviii. 9. 

list-3yuer, @ luminary, Gen. i.16. Ecclus. 
xliii. 7; pd. list-3iueris, li3t-3yuerys, Gen. 
i, 16. Ez. xxxii. 8. 

loes. v. loos. 

loewe, loew3, lous, low, humble, Is. xxix. 4. 
xxxiv. 9. Lk. iit 5. 11 Cor. xii. 21. 

loke, a lock, Wisd. v. 15. 

loken, p. p. locked, 114 Kings vii. 9. 

lokyng, x. appearance, Mt. xxviii. 3. 

lomb, loomb, a lamb, Lev. xxiii. 12. Num. 
xxix. 4; pl. lombes, lombis, loombes, 
lambren, Gen. xxi. 28. Lev. xxiii. 18, 19. 
Num. xxix. ro. Lk. x. 3. 

longe-abidyng, n. patience, longsuffering > 
Rom. ii. 4. 11 Cor. vi. 6. 

longen, longe, to elongate, remove to a dis- 
tance, to be far, Ps. xxi. 20. Ecclus. 
XXxV. 22; p.t. 2p. longedest, Ps. Ixxxvii. 
19; pl. longeden, Jer. ii. 5; p.p. longid, 
Ps. eviii. 18. 

loodly, vilely, basely, 11 Macc. ix. 2. 

loon, loone, a loan, Ex. xxii. 35. Deut. xv. 8. 

loond, land, Gen. xxi. 33. 

loos, loes, los, fame, 1 Kings ii, 24. 


422 


Ur 


723 


Kings x. &. a: Par. ix. 1, 6. Jer. vi. 
24. 

losid, leosid, p. p. reported, noised abroad, 
11 Esdr. iv. 12. 

loot, a lot, Lev. xvi. 8. 

looueful, lovely, Ecclus. xv. 33. 

loouesum, lovely, Esth. ii. 15. 

loowen, lowen, to low as cattle, Job vi. 5. 
Jer. li. 52; p.t.pl. looweden, lowiden, Jer. 
1.11. Joel 1.18; pr.p. loowende, lowynge, 
loowynge, 1 Kings vi.12. Wisd. xvii. 18. 

loouwede, p.t. accounted, Wisd. iii. 6. v. 
alouwid. 

loo3. v. lajhen, 

lopen. v. lepe. 

lordyngis, lords, rulers, Deut. x. 17. 

lordschip, dominion, Num. xvi. 13. Ps. cii. 
22. exliv. 13. Jude 8, 25. 

lordshipen, lordshepen, lordship, to have 
rule, Num. xxiv. 1g. Prov. xii. 24. xvii. 
2; pr.t. pl. lordschipen, Mk. x. 42. Lk. 
xxii. 25. Jude 1, 4; p.t. ee 
Judg. xiv. 4. Dan. xi. 4. 

lordschiper, lordschiper, Jord, sovereign, 
Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 69. Ex. xxxiv.6. Jude 4. 

lordschiping, x. domination, Ps. exliv. 13. 
Eph. i. 21. 11 Pet. ii. 10. 

lore, loore, learning, Pref. ep. c. iii. p. 63. 
Lev. viii. 8. 111 Kings iii. 9. 

lorkiden. v. lurkide. 

losneth. v. lousen. 

lothende, pr. p. loathing, Lk. prol. 3. p. 142. 
Deeds prol. p. 508. v. aloothinge. 

lousen, lowse, lose, losne, loosen, to loose, 
Gen. xxvii. go. Ex, iii. 5. Josh. v. 16. 
ri Esdr. ix.13. Job vi.g. Ps. ci. 21; 
pr.t. losneth, Ps. cxlv. 7; p.t. looside, 
loside, Job xxxix. 5. 

loutg, lowtun, lowt, to bow down, Gen. 
XXXvii. 7,9,10; pr.t. pl. lowten, Gen. 
xxvii. 29; p.t. lowtide, Gen. xviii. 2. 
xxiii, 7. Num. xxii. 313; pl. lowtiden, 
Gen. xliii. 26; p.p. lowtid, Gen. xlii. 6. 

lou;. wv. loewe. 

lowe. ». lize. 

lowen, to humble, Judg. xix. 24; p.t. low- 
ede, lowyde, lowide, loewede, 1 Par. xx. 4. 
Lam. iii. 33. Phil. ii. 7; p.p. lowid, Lam. 
ii. 5. Lk. xiv. 11. Phil. iv. 22. 

low;. v. lashen. 

lunge, lungs, 111 Kings xxii. 34. 

lurkide, p.t. lurked, & Par. xii. 8; pl. iets 
kiden, Josh. x. 27; pr. p. lurkinge, Josh. 
x.17. 

lustis, pleasures, Lk. viii. 14. 11 Tim. iii. 4. 

lustye, licentious (?) Tit. i. 12. 

lustsum, petulant, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 73. 


M. 


maal-tree, a mast-tree or fir, (Lat. malum,) 
Joel i. 12. 

maddith, pr.t. is mad, Joh. x. 20; p.t.2 p. 
maddist, Deeds xii. 15; p.p. maddid, 
Deeds viii. 11. 

magnifien, pr. t. pl. enlarge, Mt. xxiii. 5. 

mayde-child, maydyn-child, female child, 
Gen. xxiv. 55; 57- 


724 


maylid, mailid, p. p. made of plates or scales, 
1 Kings xvii. 5. 1 Macc. vi. 35. 

mayster, maistir, master, Gen. xxxvii. 36; 
pl. maystris, maystrys, Gen. xlvi. 6. 

maisterfuli, by force, Lev. vi. 2. 

maisterhed, supremacy, Apoc. prol. 1. 
638. 

maistirful, powerful, authorised, Lk. xii. 58. 

maystry, maistrie, maystrye, mastery, lord- 
ship, Gen. vii. 19. 1 Kings xvii. 9. Tob. 
vi. 16. 

malde-werp. v. mold-werp. 

male-ese, evil, sickness, Mt. iv. 24. 

malysoun, cursing, Gen. xxvii.12; pl. ma- 
lisouns, Deut. xxviii. 45. 

man, husband, Gen. ii. 
xxii. 5. 1 Cor. vii. 16. 

manaasith, pr.t. threatens, Gen. xxvii. 42; 
p.t. manaasside, manasside, 11 Par. xxvi. 
19. Mk. iii. 12. 

manaassis, manassis, threatenings, Ecclus. 
xxii. 30. Deeds ix. 1. Eph. vi. 9. 

mandragis, mandraggis, mandrogoris, man- 
drakes, Gen. xxx. 14, 15, 16. §. Sol. vii. 
13. 

maner, adj. a certain, Gen. xxviii. 11. IV 
iv. 8,11. 

maner, measure, moderation, Prov. xxiii. 4; 
pl. manerys, Ecclus. xliv. 5. 

manerly, adj. customary, moderate, Lev. xx. 
23. 1 Tim. iii. 3. 

manerly, measuredly, Judith xvi. 2. 

manernesse, moderation, mildzess, Prov. 
Xxil. 4. 

manheed, manhod, manhood, Mt. prol.2.p.2. 
Lk. prol. t. p. 141. 

manycles, manyclis, manacles, Ps. cxlix. 8. 
Is. xlv. 14. 

manly, adv. manfully, humanely, 1 Macc. 
vi. 31. 11 Mace. ix. 27. 

manlich, adj. manly, Deut. xxxi. 6. 

maulynesse, courtesy, 11 Macc. xiv. 9. 

manquellere, a murderer, executioner, 1 
Kings xii. 2g. Mk. vi. 27. Deeds xxviii. 
43 pl. manquelleris, menquelleris, Prov. 
xxix. 10. Apoc. xxi. 8. 

mansleer, executioner, Mk. vi. 27. 

marcat, a market, Ez, xxvii. 16. 

marchaundye, marchaundise, merchandise, 
trafic, Gen. xxxiv. 10, 21. Is. xxiii. 3. 
Mt. xxii.5; pl. marchaundies, marchaun- 
dises, Ez. xxvii. 33. 

marchaundise, te make a trade of, 11 Pet. 
ii. 3. 

marchaunt, a merchaunt, Zech. xiv. 21; pl. 
marchaundes, Gen. xxxvii. 28. 

marchis, borders, frontiers, 111 Esdr. iv. 45. 

mareis, marreis, a marsh, Gen. xli. 2,18; 


p- 


6, 16. Ecclus. 


pl. mareisis, maraisis, Jer. li. 32. Ez. 
xlvii. 11. 
margarite, pearl, Prov. xxv.12. Mt. xiii. 


46; pl. margaritis,-margarytis, Is. prol. 
p. 224. Mt. vii. 6. xiii. 46. 1 Tim. ii. 7. 
Apoc. xviii. 16. 

mary, mar, margh, mergh, mer3w, merew3, 
merow3, merow, merowe, merow3, mar- 
row, Pref. ep. c. vil. p. 71. Gen. xlv. 18. 


GLOSSARY. 


Num. xviii. 12. Deut. xxxii. 14. Ez. xvii. 
3.22. Job xxi. 24. Ps. ixv. 155 pl. me- 
rowis, Joh xxi. 24. Heb. iii. 12. 

markyngis, merkyngis, marks, 1 Kings 
prol. p. 2. 

martyn-apis, a sort of apes, Is. xxxiv. 14. 

massee, massive, Ecclus. 1. 10. 

mat. v. mete. 

maugre, adv. against the will, Wisd. xix. 
14. 

maundement, commandment, Num. xv. 15. 
Mt. xv. 3; pl. maundementis, maunde- 
mentus, maundemens, Gen. xxxii. 19. 
Deut. xxviii. 1. Mt. v. 19. 

mawe, the stomach, Ex. xxix. 13. 

mawilis, males, Rom. i. 27. 

mawmet, an idol, Lev. xx. 2. Deeds vii. 
41; pl. mawmetis, maumetis, maumettis, 
Gen. xxxi. 19, 32. Rom. prol.1. p. 298. 
1 Thess. i. 9. 

mawmetrie, mawmetrye, idolatry, 1 Kings 
xv. 23. Rom. prol.1. p. 298. Gal. i. 15. 

| me, men, used impersonally, Gen. xlv. 6. 
Mt. v.15. 

meche. v. myche. 

meddle, to mix, Gen. xviii. 6; p.¢t. med- 
lide, meddlid, Lk. xiii. 1. Apoc. xviii. 6; 
p.p. medled, meddlid, meddelid, Mt. 
xxvii. 34. Mk. xv. 23. 

| medeleris, those who meddle or treat of, Pref. 
ep. c. vi. p. 66. 

medewijf, meedwijf. ». mydwijf. 

medicynal, medicinable, salutary, Tit. ii. 8. 

medling, meddling, medlynge, n. mizture, 
joining, Gen. xxx. 42. Ps. Ixxiv. 9. Mt. 
ix.16. Lk. v. 36. Joh. vii. 14. xix. 393 
pl. medlyngis, 1 Par. xxii, 3. 

meede, mede, reward, Gen. xxix. 15. XXX. 
28. Mt. v.12; pl. meedis, meedus, me- 
dis, Gen. xxxi. 8. Is. xxiii, 18. 

meedeful, meritorious, 11 Kings xxii. 29 g. 
Eccles. vii. g. 13 9. 

meedefuly, deservedly, meritoriously, Prov. 
xxx. 69. 

meken, meeken, meke, meeke, fo humble, 
1 Par. xviii.r. Ps. x. *10. Mt. xxiii. 12; 
pr.t. mekith, 1 Kings ii. 7. Mt. xviii. 43 
p.t. mekede, Rom. prol. 2. p. 303; pl. 
mekeden, Judith iv. 8; p.p. mekid, Deut. 
xxi. 14. Mt. xxiii. 12 
mekende, Ps. exlvi. 6. Ecclus. xxxiv. 31. 
Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

meet-bord, a table, Ex. xxv. 23. xxxv. 13. 

meete-feere, @ companion at table, Dan. xiv. 
1; pl. mete-feris, Ecclus. ix. 22. 

mete-felawe, a companion at table, Ecclus. 
xxxvil. 4,5; pl. meet-felawis, mete-fe- 
lawes, 11 Kings xix. 28. Ecclus. ix. 22. 

meeth, meth, mead, 11 Esdr. viii. 10. 

meetship, meetshipe, meteship, a banquet, 
Num. x.10. ut Kings xii. 4. Tob. ii. 1; 
pl. meteshipis, Prov. xxiii. 20. 

meymed, p. p. maimed, Deut. xxiii. 15 g. 

meynd, meyngid, meynt. . meng. 

meine, meyne, meynee, household, family, 
Gen. xxvi.14. Num. xxvi. 38. Mt. x. 
25. Lk. ii. 14. Rom. xvi. 5; pi. meynes, 








3 pr.p. mekynge, | 





| mescheues. 


meynees, Gen. x. 32. Num. xxxvi. ares. 
Deeds iii. 25. 

meyneal, meynyal, seth aR xvi. a 

meyneals, those of one’s hie 11 Kings 
XVI. 2: “oss ‘ 

meire, meyr, chief justice, Mt. Xxvil, 2. 
xxxii. 5; pl. meyris, Mt. x. 18. 

meldew, mildew, Gen. xli.'6.) * 

mele. v. floc-meel, foure-fingur-mele, gobet- 
mele, hipyll-melum, leme-mele, litel-mele, 
parsel-mel, pase-mel, raueshe-melum, 
stownd-meel, whil-mele. 

melow, melowe, melu, meal, Gen. xl. 16. 
Ex. xii. 34. Num. v.15. 

membride, p. t. mentioned, remembered, Jer. 
ii, 34; pl. membreden, Wisd. xi. 145 p.p. 
membrid, Tob. iv. 22; pr.p. membrende, 
Wisd. viii. 17. 

mendere, an amender, Wisd. vii. a 

mene, mediator, Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

mene, adj. intervening, Gen. xlii, 23. 

meng, meynge, mynge, to mix, mingle, Gen. 
xviii. 6. Josh, xxiii.12. Dan. xiv. 10; 
p.t. mengide, mengde, myngede, myn- 
gide, 1 Kings xxviii. 24. 1 Par. prol. p. 
314. Ps. ci. 10. Lk. xili. 13 p.p. mengid, 
mengd, menged, meyngid, meengid, 
meynt, meynd, meyned, Ex. ix. 24. 
xxviii, 33. xxx. 35. Num. xviii. 4. Ps. 
Ixxiv. 9. Dan. ii. gr. Mt. xxvii. 34. 1 
Cor. v. 9. Heb. iv. 2, Apoc. iv. 2. viii. 
73 pr.p. mengynge, Ez, xxi. 21. 

mengyng, x. @ mixing, mizture, Lev. vil. 12. 
Lk. v. 36. 

mengingli, mengyngly, mixedly, ni Par. 
xxxv. 8. 1 Esdr. iii. 13. 

menetruate, menstruous, Ez. xxii. 10. 

mente, mint, Mt. xxiii. 23. 

mentil, a mantle, Gen. xxiv. 65; pl. mentils, 
Ex. xii. 34. 

menushid, menusid, —— 
nuschede. 

merciable, mercyable, merciful, Num. xiv. 
19. 11 Par. x. 7. Heb. ix. 5. 

mercy-doing, a deed of mercy, Judith viii. 
13; pl. mercy-doingus, Ps. xxxix. 12. 1. 3. 

merewi, marrowy, fat, Is. xxxiv. 6. 

merew3, mergh, merow. v. mary. 

merli3on, merlyoun, the osprey, Lev. xi. 13. 
Deut. xiv. 12. 

mermynus, mermaydens, mermaids, Josh. 
prol. p. 556. 

mershe, a marsh, Gen. xii. 18. 

mershi, marshy, Gen. xli. 2. 


Ts. 


v. my- 


| merueileden, p.t. pl. wondered at, Judith 


X. 7, 148 

merueilows, marvellous, Gen. xxxii. 29. 

v. myschef, 

mesel, mesele, messel, a leper, 1v Kings 
v.1. xv. 5. Is. lili. 4; pl. meseles, me- 
selis, mesels, rv Kings vii. 8. Mt. x. 8. 
Lk. iv. 27. vii. 22. 

mesell, messel, adj. leprows, 1v Kings v. 1, 
27. XV. 5. 

messageer, Messangere, a messenger, 1Kings 
iv. 19. xxiii. 27. 111 Kings ii. 28; pl. mes- 
gageris, messangeris, Gen. xxxil. 3, 6 


meste, most, Jer. xlii. 8. 

mesurable, limited, Ps. xxxviii. 6. 

mesurably, moderately, Ecclus, xxxi. 32. 

mete, meete, a feast, Tob. ii. 1. xii. 12. Lk. 
xiv. 12. a 

mete, meete, fo measure, Ps. lix. 8. Zech. 
ii. 2; pr. t. pl. meten, meeten, Mt. vii. 2. 
Lk. vi. 38; p.'t. mete, mette, maat, mat, 
matte, metide, Ruth iii. 153. 11 ' Kings 
viii. 2. Is. xl. 12. Hab. iii. 6. Apoc. xxi. 
16; pl. metiden, Ex. xvi.18; p.p. me- 
ten, metun, motun, meetid, metid, ymeete, 
Deut. xxi. 2. Josh. xvii. 5. 111 Kings 


Xvil. 21. Jer.xxxiil. 22. Mt. vii. 2. Lk. vi. 38." 


mete, fo dream, Joel ii. 28. 

metels, meetels, dreams, Gen. xxxvii. 5. 
Deeds ii. 17. 

meteship, a feast, Tob. ii. 1. 

mete-3yuyng, n. a banqueting, Ecclus. xxxvii. 
32. 

metrete, @ measure, 111 Kings vii. 26 g; 
pl. metretis, Joh. ii. 6. 

meue, to move, Gen. xli. 44. Num. xiv. 453 
p.t. pl. meueden, Gen. xliv. 22. Ex. xv. 
26; p.p. meued, meuyd, Gen. ix. 3. Lk. 
vil. 13. pr. p. meuynge, Num, xxi. 12. 

meuynge, x. a moving, Num. iv. 15. 

myche, meche, much, great, Gen. xxix. 7. 
xliv. 7. Ex. xiv.12. Joh. xil.12. v.moche. 

mychelnes, mychilnesse, mykilness, great- 
ness, Gen. xxxii. 12. Ex. ix. 24. Prov. 
viii. 25. 

mychenes, mychnes, greatness, Num. xxiii. 
to. 1 Par. xxi. 15. 

mydde, myddis, myddes, midst, Gen. xviii. 
26. Mt. x.16. xiii. 25. Lk. xvii. 11. 

mydmeste, mydelmest, middlemost, Mt. 
prol. I. p. I. 

myd-wijf, mede-wijf, meed-wijf, midwife, 
Gen, xxxv. 17. xxxviii. 27; pl. myd- 
wyues, Ex. i. 15. 

myd-wyuyng, 2. midwifery, Ex. i. 19. 

myist, mist, Deut. iv. 11. v.22. Job iii. 5. 

myisty, mistiness, Is. xxix. 18. 

myle, mylie, mylium, millet, Is. xxviii. 25. 
Ez. iv. 9. . 

mylkid, p.p. suckled, Job x. 19. 

mylne, @ mill, Mt. xxiv. 41. 

myln-stoon, mylle-stoon, a mill-stone, Judg. 
ix. 53. Mt. xviii. 6. 

mynde, a memorial, Wisd. x. 7. 

myndefulli, considerately, Job xxxv. 5. 

mynde-hyllis, Aillocks of memorial, Josh. 
xxil. TO. 

mynde-tocne, a memorial, Is. lvii. 8. 

myndende, pr.p. minding, Rom. prol.1.p.300. 

mynen, pr.t.pl. dig through, undermine, Job 
xxiv. 16; p.t.pl. myneden, Gen. xlix. 6; 
p.p. myned, mynyd, Mt. xxiv. 43. Lk. 
xii. 39. 

mynge. v. meng. 

mynour, a miner, digger, Prov. ii. 4 9. 

‘mynuschede, p.t. broke into small parts, di- 
minished, 1v Kings xxiii. 15; p.p. my- 
nuschid, mynushid, mynusht, menuschid, 
menushid, menusid, 111 Kings xvii. 14. 
Ps. xxxiii. 11. Wisd. xi. 8. 11 Mace. xiii. 


GLOSSARY. 


19. Joh. iii. 30. Heb. iii. 7; pr.p.mynusch- 
ing, menushinge, menusinge, Rom. xi. 12. 

mynnyd, p. p. diminished, 11 Mace. xiii. 19. 

mynutis, mynutes, mites, small pieces of 
money, Mk. xii. 42. Lk. xxi. 2. 

myres, miry places, Ps. xiv. 23. 

myri, myrie, merry, cheerful, 1 Macc. vi. 11. 
Apoe. xi. Io. : 

myrre, mitre, myrte-tree, myrrh-tree, Esth. 
ii. 12. 

myrte-tre, myrt-tree, a myrtle, 11 Esdr. viii. 
15. Is. xli. 19. lv. 13; pl. myrtis, mirtis, 
Zech. i. 8, 10. 

myrtine, of the myrrh-tree, Esth. ii. 12. 

mysbeleue, unbelief, Col. iii. 6. 11 Tim. ii. 
13. 

mysbileeueden, p.t. pl. disbelieved, Deut. 
xxxii. 8; p.p. mysbeleeued, Judith xiii. 
24. Wisd. x. 73 pr.p. misbileuynge, mys- 
bilenynge, Num. xiv. 40. Deut. i. 26. 

mysbileueful, unbelieving, Ecclus. i. 36. 

mischaunging, n. a false changing, Wisd. xiv. 
26. 

myschef, evil, Gen. xliv. 34; pl. meschenes, 
Prov. prol. p. 1. p. 1. 

mysdeme, messedeme, fo judge amiss, 
Num. xiv.11. Deut. xxiv. 17. 

mysdo, to do amiss, 11 Mace. iii. 39; p.p. 
mysdo, 1 Kings xvii. 29. 

myseis, myseys, myseise, mysese, want, dis- 
tress, Gen. xii. 31, 57. Ecclus. iv. 2. 
1 Cor. viii. 14; pl. mysseyseis, myseeses, 
myseses, mysesis, Gen. iii. 16. Mk. iv. 19. 

myseiste, myseste, poverty, need, Job v. 21. 
Mk. iv. 19. xii. 44. 11 Cor. viii. 14. 

myseesnesse, wretchedness, Job v. 21.° 

mysfeith, unbelief, Ecclus, ii. 18. 

mysfelende, pt. feeling or thinking amiss, 
Ecelus, xvi. 20. xxii. 14. xii. 8. 

mysleeful, unbelieving, Kcclus. i. 36. 

myslernyng, mislernyng, x. false learning, 
Ecclus. iv. 30. 

myslosedyn, p.t.pl. wnloosed, (?) Josh. xiv. 8. 

mysreuerence, irreverence, Ecclus. xxv. 
29. 

myssygge, myssey, to speak amiss, up- 
braid, Lev.xix. 33. Deut. xxxi. 20; p.t.pl. 
mysseyden, Judg. vill. 15; pr.p. mys- 
seiynge, mysseiende, Num. xiv. 36. 
Wisd. xv. 14. 

myssouneth, pr. t. discords, Josh.prol.p.555- 

mystik, mistik, mystical, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p- 68. 

mystili, mistiliche, mystically, Pref. ep. c. 
vil. p. 73. 1 Kings prol. p. 1. 

mystynes, mystynesse, mist, darkness, Deut. 
iv. 11. Prov. vii. 9; pl. mystynesses, Is. 
xxix. 18. 

mystrosten, fo mistrust, Ps. prol. p. 7373 
pr.p. waystrostende, Bar. i. 17. 

mystrouful, unbelieving, Is. Ixv. 2. 

mystrowable, incredible, unbelieving, Bar. i. 
19. 

mystrowande, pr. p. disbelieving, Bar. i. 17. 

mysturne, to pervert, Lam. iii. 36. Gal. 
1.73 pr.t. pl. mysturnen, Num, xxxii. 7; 
p.t. pl. mysturneden, Num. xxxii. 9. 


725 


1 Kings viii. 3; p.y. mysturnyd, Deut. 
xxuxil. 5. F 

mysyse, to abuse, Gen. xxxiv. 31; imp. pl. 
mysvsith, Gen. xix. 8; p.p. mysusid, 
Judg. xix. 25. 

mysusyng, 7. an abusing, Ps. xxx. 9. 

mist, my3t, mist, (?) Zech. x. 1. 

my3tis, mystus, power, Ps. xix. 7. Ixxxix. 10. 

my3tyeer, mystier, comp. stronger, Gen. xxvi. 
16. 

my3tihed, mightiness, Ecclus. x. 11. 

my3tilich, mightily, Judg. v. 26. 

mo, more, Lev. xxv. 16. Mt. xxi. 36. Lk. 
xviii. 30. 

moche, much, Mt. vi. 7. v. myche. 

mochefold, manifold, Eph. iii. 10. 

mochil, much, Gen. xxiv. 25. 

moder, modir, modre, mother, Gen. ii, 24. 
Prov. iv. 3. Mt. ii.13; pl. modris, moders, 
Gen. xxxii. 11. 

moyste, to moisten, water, Gen. ii. 10; pr.t. 
moystith, 1 Cor. iii. 8; p.¢. moystide, 
moistide, Gen. ii. 6. 1 Cor. iii. 6. 

mold-werp, malde-werp, a mole, Ley. xi. 
30; pl. molde-warpis, molde-werpes, Is. 
ii. 20. 

moltide, p.t. melted, Ex. xvi. 21; p.p. mol- 
tun, molten, Ex. xvi. 21. Josh. vii. 5. 

moneieris, monyeris, monyteris, money- 

. changers, Joh. ii. 14. 

moneishen, pr.t. pl. admonish, Josh. prol. 
p- 5543 p.t. monyschide, Judg. i. 14. 

moneste, to teach, admonish, Josh. prol. 
p- 554. Esth. iv. 8. 1 Cor. iv.17; pr.t. 
mouesteth, Rom. prol. 2. p. 303; pl. mo- 
nestyn, monesten, 11 Cor. vi.1; p.¢. mo- 
nestide, Judg. i. 14; pl. monestiden, 
1 Mace. xii. 30; p.p. monestid, Mt. ii. 22. 
xiv. 8. v, amoneste. 

monestinge, monestynge, x. an admonition, 
Lk. iii. 18. 1 Cor. xiv. 3; pl. monest- 
yngis, monestingus, Deut. xxi. 20. Tob. 
i. 15. 

moneth, a month, Gen. xxix.14; pl. mo- 
nethis, Ex. ii. 2. 

monyteris. v. moneieris. 

monstris, portents, wonders, 11 Mace. v. 4. 

more, moor, elder, greater, Gen. x. 21. 
xxvii. 1. Judith xiv. 11. Mt. xi, 11. Lk. 
ix. 46. 

more, forefathers, Deut. xxxii. 7; pl. moris, 
1v Kings xv. 7. ; 

more-tree, moor-tree, mulberry-tree, Lk. 
xvii. 6; pl. moore-trees, Ps. lxxvii. 47. 

moreyn, carcase, carrion, Jer. vii. 33. 

morenyng, 2. @ mourning, Gen. xxvii. 41. 

morewynge, morning, Mk. 1. 35. 

mortefied, p.p. made as dead, Ps. xliii. 22. 

morter, @ mortar, a vessel, Num. vii. 14. 
xi. 8; pl. morteris, morters, Num. iy. 7. 

morterd, p.p. plastered, Amos vii. 7. 

mortifyinge, x. @ putting to death, 11 Cor. 
iv. 10. 

moru, Morwe, morwen, morewen, morning, 
morrow, Gen. i. 5. Ex, ix, 18. xxiii. 19. 
Esth. ii. 14. Mt. xxvii. 1. moru-tide, mor- 
we-tide, Gen. i. 5. Judg. vi. 31. Joh. xviii. 


726 


28; pl. moru-tides, Ps. lxxii.14 ; morewe- 
dai, Judg. vi. 31. 1 Kings xi. 115 
inorewe-li3t, 1 Kings xxv. 34. 

most, moost, greatest, Mt. xiii. 32. 

mot, mote, moot, mote, particle, Mt. vii. 3. 
Lk. vi. 41. 

mot, moot, mut, must, Lk. xix. 5. 1 Cor. ix. 
16; pl. moten, Deeds iv. 20. 

mote-halle, moot-halle, Rall of assembly, 
Mt. xxvii. 27. Joh. xviii. 28. Phil. i. 13. 

moterynge, pr.p. muttering, 11 Kings xii.19. 

motetes, motetis, tunes, measures, Ecclus. 
xlvii. 11. 

motun. v. mete. 

mountuous, mountainous, Jer. xvii. 26. 

mouscacche, a mousetrap, Wisd. xiv. 11. 

moustre, a mustre, levy, 111 Kings v. 13. 

mou3te, mou3the, mo3he, mowghe, moughe, 
mowshe, mowste, a moth, Job iv. 19. xiii. 
28. Prov. xxv. 20. Mt. vi.19. Dk. xii. 
33; pl. moustis, moshis, moththis, mou3- 
this, Mt. vi. 19. Jam. v. 2. 

mow, mowe, moun, to be able, Gen. xiii. 16. 
xxiii. 6. Ps, exxxvili. 6. Lk. i. 20. xiii. 
24; pr. t. mow, mowe, Gen. xviii. 17. 
Lk. xiv. 29 ; pl. moun, mown, mowen, 
mowe, mow, Gen. vi. 20. xxiv. 50. Mt. 
vi. 24. ix. 15. xvi. 4. Lk. v. 343 pp. 
mo3t, Job prol. p. 671; pr. p. mowende, 
mowing, mowinge, Is. lvi. 10. 11 Cor. 
xiii. 9. 

mowe, a heap of corn, Ruth iii. 7. 

mowyng, mouwing, 7. a scorning, Ps. xxxiv. 
36, xliii. 14. Ixxvili. 4. Hos. vii. 16. v. 
bimowe. 

muk, dung, 111 Kings xiv. 10. 

mulhberies, mulberry trees, 11 Par. i. 15. 

multynge, 2. @ fine, tax, 1v Kings xxiii. 33. 

mussel, a morsel, Gen. xviii.5. 1 Kings ii. 36. 
Joh. xiii. 30; pl. musselis, Ps. exlvii. 17. 

must, new wine, Job xxxii.19. 8. Sol. viii. 2. 
Is. xlix. 26. Deeds ii. 13. 

musures, mufterers, Is. xxix. 24. 

N. 

nable. v. nanele. 

nablis, musical instruments (Lat. nablum), 
1 Mace. xiii. 51. 

nakyn, to make naked, Lev. xx. 19; p. t. 
nakide, Job xx. 19; pl. nakiden, Gen. 
XxxVil. 23; p. p. nakyd, 1 Par. x. 9; pr. 
p. nakynge, Joel i. 7. 

nakenen, to make naked, Is. iii. 173 p. p. 
nakenyd, nakened, 1 Par. x. 9. Is. xix. 7; 
pr. p. naknynge, Joel i. 7. 

nakidhed, nakedness, Jer. ti. 25. 

nal, an awl, Ex. xxi. 6. Deut. xv. 17. 

nameli, nameliche, especially, familiarly, 
Lev. x. 18. 1 Kings prol. p. 3. 

na, 70, Ez. xii. 25. 

nappen, to slumber, Ps. cxx. 4; p.t. nap- 
pide, Ps. exviii. 28; pl. nappeden, nap- 
piden, Ps. Ixxv. 7. Mt. xxv. 5. 

napping, 2. @ slumbering, Prov. xxiii. 29. 

napte, naphiha, Dan. iii. 46. 

narde, ointment of spikenard, S. Sol. i. 11. 
Joh. xii. 3. 


GLOSSARY. 


nat, not, Ex.xix.12. Mt.vi.13, 20. Mk.iv.17. 

naue, naaue, a nave of a wheel, 111 Kings 
vii. 33. Ecclus. xxxiii. 5. 

nauee, nauey, @ fleet, 111 Kings ix. 26; pl. 
nauees, 111 Kings xxii. 49. 

nauele, nawle, naule, nauil, nable, nouel, 
the navel, Judg. ix. 37. Job xl. 11. 
Prov. iii. 8. S. Sol. vii. 2. 

naue-stockis, nauel-stockis, naves of a wheel, 
ir Kings vii. 33. 

ne, neither, not, Gen. xv. 16. Mt. vi. 30. 
Lk. i. 30. 

necessarie, adj. near in kin or friendship, 
Job vi. 13. 

necessaries, kinsfolk or friends, 11 Macc. 
iv. 3. 

necke, nak, the neck, Gen. xxvii. 16. 

necke-couercheues, neckercheuys, necker- 
chiefs, Is. iii. 23. 

neddris, adders, Mt. xii. 34. 

nede, necessary, needful, Gen. xxxiil. 15. 
Mt. ix. 12. 

nede, @ business, cause, occasion, tv Kings 
iv. 13. Ps. xc. 63 pl. nedis, needis, 1 Macc. 
X. 35, 38. 1 Cor. vi. 4. 

nede, nedis, adv. necessarily, Deeds iv. 20. 

nedelich, necessarily, 1 Cor. ix. 16. 

nede-doeres, men of business, Is. xxiii. 8. 

nede-doing, traffic, Is. xlv. 14; pl. nede- 
doyngus, Is. xxiii. 18. 

neden, to want, to require, to compel, Prov. 
xxii. 16. xxviii. 27; p.t. pl. nededen, 1v 
Kings xii. 12; p.p. nedid, Gen. xlvii. 22; 
pr.t. nedende, S. Sol. vii. 2. 

nedle-foddris, (?) Is. iii. 20. 

neece, a granddaughter, grandchild, Lev. 
xvili. 10; pl. neces, Gen. xxxi. 43. Ex. 
Xxxiv. 7. 

neeldes, needles, Ex. xxxviil. 23. 

neelde-craft, needle art, Ex. xxxix. 28. 

neelde-werk, neeld-werk, needle work, Ex. 
XXVi. I. xxviii. 6. 

neentische, to bring to nothing, to make vain, 
Ecclus. xiii. 8. v. anyntische. 

neet, horned cattle, oxen, Jer. xxxi. 12. 
Amos vii. 14, 

neet-heerde, a herdsman, Amos vii. 14. 

nee3, neesh, ne3, ny3, nize, adv. nigh, nearly, 
111 Kings vii. 26. Prov. vii.8. Mt. iv. 11. 
xxi, 30. 

neezh, a neighbour, Prov. xxiii. 11. 

neiyng, neyenge, neynge, 2. a neighing, Job 
xxxix. 19. Jer. xii. 27; pl. neiyngis, 
nesingus, Jer. vill. 16. xiii, 27. 

neische, neshe, nesshe, sft, delicate, Pref. 
ep. c. iii. p. 63. Job xxiii. 16. Jer. li. 46. 
1 Cor. vi. 10. 

ne, neize, to approach, Gen. xxxiii. 3. 
Num. viii. 19. Mt. iii. 2. x. 73 p.t. new- 
ede, neiside, Gen. xviii. 23. xxvii. 26. 
Mt. viii. 5. Lk. vii. 14; pl. neiseden, 
neizedden, Mt. iv. 11. xv. 1. Lk. xiii. 1; 
p.p. need, Mt. iv. 17; pr. neisinge, nei3- 
ynge, Gen. xviii. 23. Mt. viii. 19. Lk. 
XV. 1. 

neizboresse, a female neighbour, Ex. iii. 
22. 


nemneth, pr. t. names, Pref. ep. c. v. p. 66. 
11 Tim. ii. 19; p. ¢. nemnyde, nempnede, 
nempned, nemyde, Gen. xxxviii. 4. Lk. 
vi. 135 p. p. nemned, nempned, Heb. iii. 
13. 

nemenyngis, names, appellations, 11 Par. 
prol. p. 385. 

neomenye, feast of new moon, Is.i. 13. Col. 
ii. 16. 

ner, nerre, near, Gen. xxvii. 22. xliv. 18; 
comp. nerre, neer, Ruth iii. 12. Heb. 
vi. 9. 

ner, nere, adv. never, Lev. vi. 13. Joh.ix.21. 

nerthelatere, nevertheless, Is, lxiii. 8. 

nese-thirles, nese-thorlis, nees-thrillis, nose- 
thirlis, noose-thyrlys, noose-thrillis, nos- 
trils, Num. xi. 20. 11 Kings xxii.9. Prov. 
xi. 22. 

nesing. v. fnesynge. 

nethelesse, nethelees, netheles, adv. never- 
theless, Gen, viii. 12. Lk. xii. 31. 

nether, lower, Josh. xviii. 13. 

nethermore, ower, Deut. xxiv.6. Josh.iii.16. 

nethermoris, lower parts, Ps. cxxxvili. 15. 

netwise, made like a net, Ex. xxxix. 39. 

neuermore, never, 11 Tim. iii. 7. 

neuerthelater, adv. nevertheless, Gen. viii. 
12. 

newen, newe, zo renew, Ps. 1. 12. Is. ix. 10. 
Lam. v. 21; pr. t. neweth, Wisd. vii. 27; 
p- p. newid, Job xxix. 20. Prov. xili. 23. 

ne3en, to neigh, Is. xxiv.14; imp. pl. ney- 
3eth, Jer. xxxi. 7; p. t. neizede, Jer. v. 8 ; 
pr. p. neizende, neisynge, Jer. vii. 16. 

nygard, a parsimonious person, Ecclus. xiv. 
33 pl. nygardis, 1 Cor. vi. 10. 

nyl, nyle, pr.t. p. will not, is unwilling, 
Gen. xxvii. 46. Mt. xxi. 29; 2p. nylte, 
nylt, Gen. xx. 7. Judg. xiv. 153 tmp. 
nyle, nyl, nile, nil, Judg. xviii.9. Mt. i. 
20. Lk. ii. 10; p.#. nolde, nold, Gen. 
xxxvil. 35. Mt. i. 19. Lk. xix. 27; 2p. 
noldist, Jer. iii. 3; pl. nolden, nulden, 
Num. xxxii. 11. Deut. xxiii. 4. Judith 
x. 12. 

nys, is not, Gen. xxviii. 17. 

ny3, nize. v. nee3. 

ny3t-crowe, ny3t-foul, an owl, Deut. xiv. 15, 
17. 

noblei, nobley, nobility, 11 Macc. vi. 23. 
Rom. prol. 2. p. 302. 

no-but, unless, except, Ecclus. xxxiv. 6. 
Mt. v. 20. 

noize, noy3en, noye, no3en, to hurt, trouble, 
Gen. xxi. 23. Ex. xxii. 22. 1v Kings i. 32. 
Esth. xii. 6. Mk. xvi.18. Lk. x. 19. 
Apoc. vii. 33 pr.t. pl. noyen, Deeds 
vii. 26; p.t.noiede, no3ede, noiside, Judith 
xia, xvi. 7. Lk. iv. 35. 1 Cor. i. 8; 
pl. noieden, Dan. vi. 22; pr. p. noiynge, 
Gen. xxvi. 14. v. anoye. 

noiful, noyful, noyeful, injurious, trouble- 
some, Ps, xxvi. 2, Wisd. xii. 249. Lk. 
xi. 7. 

noyntyn, fo anoint, 111 Kings xix. 16. 

noyouse, noyous, noious, no3ous, hurtful, 
annoying, Deut. xxviii. 66. rv Kings vi. 1. 


Wisd. vi. 20. 11 Thess. iii. 2. 1 Tim. 
vi. 9. 

noiseful, noisy, Prov. xx. 1. 

noy3e, no3e, annoyance, Tob. vii. 19. Ps. 
exvill. 28. Ecclus. xxix. 6. 

nol, noll, nolle, the head, the neck, Deut. ix. 6. 
1v Kings xvii. 14. Deeds vii. 51. xv. 103 
pl. nollis, nollys, nolles, Gen. xxvii. 4o. 
xlix. 8. Jer. xix. 15. 

nolde. ¢. nyl. 

nollid. v. hard-nollid. 

nomen, p. p. taken, Judg. xix. 8. 

noon, adv. not, Gen. xxiv. 21. 

noose-thyrlys, noose-thrillis. 
les. 

noot, not, note, ne wot, pr.t. knows not, 
Eccles. ix. 1. x. 14. Lk. xxii. 60. 11 Cor. 
xii. 3; 2 p. noost, Ecclus. xxxiii. 33. 

noryshe, noryse, nurish, nursch, @ nurse, 
Gen. xxiv. 59. 11 Kings iv. 4. 1 Thess. 
hiey 

norishyng, nurschyng, . a nourishing, sup- 
porting, nutriment, Ex. xxxv. 14; pl. 
nurschyngis, Ex. xxxv. 23. 

note, a nut, Pref. ep. c. vii. p.7. Ex. xxv. 
33- 

nother, no nother, noon other, xo other, 
Gen. xxviil. 17. 

nother, nothir, nouther, neither, Gen. xix. 
33- 1v Kings xviii. 5. Mk. prol. 1. p. 86. 

nouche, nowche, noche, a broach, clasp, Ex. 
xxviii. 4. 1 Macc. x. 8g. xi. 58. xiv. 44. 

noumbrable, capable of being numbered, Ps. 
xxi. 18. 

noumbrarie, arithmetic, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 
68. 

noumpere, ax umpire, Rom. prol. 2. p. 302. 

nounce, nounse, az ounce, Ex. xxx. 13. 

noun-power, want of power, Wisd. xii. 10 9. 

nouther. v. nother. 

noust, nost, nothing, Gen. xiv. 19. Gal. vi. 3. 
p. nost. . 

No3eris, injurious persons, Ps. xxv. 2. 

nozesum, noisome, injurious, Prov. i. 22. Is. 
prol. p. 224. 

nosher, adv. no where, Wisd. prol. p. 85. 

no30us. v. noyouse. 

no3t, adv. not, Gen. ii. 25. 

nulden, v. nyl. 

nurreis, nurselings, Num. xxxii. 14. 

nurshemens, nutrimeuts, Is, xxx. 33. 

nurshen, to nourish, feed, Is. vii. 213 p. p. 
nurschid, Jam. iv. 5; pr. p. nurshende, 
Mt. xxiv. 19. 

nurschere, a nurser, Esth. ii. 7; pl. nursh- 
eres, Is. xlix. 23. 

nouel, v. nauele. 


v. nese-thir- 


0. 
0, 00. v. oon, 


obeie, fo abey, Gen. xli. 40; pr.t. pl. obe3en, 
Mt. viii. 27; p.t. obeide, Gen. xxvi. 5. 

obeische, obeishe, obesche, obeshen, ta obey, 
Gen. xli.4o. Lk. xvii.6. Rom.i.5. Deeds 
vii. 39; pr. t. pl. obeishen, obeischen, 
obeyschen, Mt. viii. 27. Mk. i. 27; p.t. 
obeishide, obeschide, oheishid, Gen. xxii. 
18. Deedsvi.7; pr. p.obeishynge, obesch- 


GLOSSARY. 


ynge, obeshende, Gen. xxviii.7. Ecclus. 
iv. 15. Rom. i. 30. 

obeishaunce, obeisaunce, obedience, 1 Kings 
xv. 22. Eccles. iv. 17. Ecclus. iii. 1. 

obite, death, Gen. xxv. 11. 

oblisheth, pr. t. binds, binds fast, Prov. xiii. 
133 p.p. oblishid, oblisht, Num. xxx. 4. 
Ps. xix. 9. 

o-brood, of-brode, adv. abroad,Gen.xxviii.14. 

obsecracioun, @ prayer, 11 Par. xxxiil. 18; 
pl, obsecraciouns, Prov. xviii. 23. 

odoramentis, perfumes, Apoc. xviii. 13. 

of-brode. v. o-brood. 

o-ferre, o-feer, adv. afar, Gen. xxi. 16. 
xxii. 4. Lev. xiv. 40. xxxvii. 18. 

offencyoun, offence, stumblingblock, tv Kings 
xxiii. 13. Judith v. 25. 11 Cor. vi. 3; pl. 
offenciouns, offensiouns, Ecclus. xxxix. 
2g. Ez. xi. 18. 

of-gladynge, pr. p. greatlyrejoicing,111 Kings 
i. 40. 

of-hard, adv. with difficulty, Eccles. i. 16. 
iv. 12. Mt. xix. 23. 

of-hedid, of-heueded, p. p. beheaded, Judith 
xv. I, 

o-fier, adv. on fire, Ex. iii. 2. 

of-purpose, adv. purposely, Ruth ii. 16. 

of-take, to take, receive, Pref. ep. c. viii. p. 
14. v. atake. 

ofter, comp. more frequently, 1v Kings xxi. 13. 

oile-berie, olive-berry, Is. xvii. 6. 

oiletis, oyletis, loops, Ex. xxvi. 4, 5. 

oynement, ointment, Ex. xxv.6, Mt. xxvi.73 
pl. oynementis, oynemens, Wisd. ii. 7. 
Mt. xvi. 1. 

oyniouns, vniowns, onions, Num. xi. 5. 

oynten, fo anoint, Mk. xvi. 1.; p.t. oyntede, 
oyntide, Lev. viii. 12. Lk, iv. 18. Joh. 
xi. 2. Heb. i.9; p. p. oyntid, Num. vi. 
1g. Mic. vi. 15; p. pr. oyntende, Jam. v. 
14. 

oynting, n. an anointing, 1 Joh. ii. 27. 

oischer, usher, doorkeeper, 11 Kings iv. 5. 

oker, okyr, ta lend on interest, Deut. xxviil. 
12. 

oldid. v. eldeden. 

oldli, old, Job xli. 23. 

olyfaunt, an elephant, 1 Mace. vi. 46; pl. 
olefauntis, 111 Kings x. 22. 

olyuetis, oliveyards, Amos iv. 9. 

ol-egge. v. an-egge. 

onement, union, Ez. xxxvii. 17. 

oneste, onest, honorable, Wisd. x. 11. 1 Cor. 
xii. 243; comp. onestere, Ruth iii. 3. 

ony. . eny. 

onychyn, onychynus, an onyx, Gen. ii. 12. 

onyd, p. p. united, Tob. xii. £9 9. 

onlihed, onlinesse, solitary condition, Esth. 
Xvi. 14. 

on-lyue, adv. on life, alive, 1 Kings xxvii. 11. 
Iv Kings vii. 12. 

onouryde, p. t. worshipped, Gen. xxiv. 26; 
p. p. onowryd, Gen. xxii. 5. v. anowre. 

onournemens, ornaments, Judith x. 3. 

on-puttynge, pr. p. putting on, Josh. ix. 4. 

on-sidis-hond, on-sydis-hondis, adv. by them- 
selves, Mk. iv. 34. v. asydis-hond. 


127 


oof, woof, Gen. xiv. 23. Lev. xiii. 47. 

oof-werk, woven work, Gen. xiv. 23. 

oon, 00, 0, oe, one, a, Gen. i. 5. xxii. 2. 
xxxii, 16. Num. iii. 15. Jer. xxiv. 2. 
Mt. v. 18. Lk. ii. 44. 

oonhed, onhed, unity, Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 
t Tim. iii. 2. 

oonyng, onyng, x. union, Wisd. xiii. 12 9. 
Ez. xxxvii. 17. 

oonli, oonlich, oneli, onelich, adv. only, 
Gen. xxii. 2. xxvii. 38. Lev. vi. 18. Josh. 
xi. 13. 

oonli, oonlyche, adj. alone, Lk. iv. 4. 

oons, ones, onys, onus, adv. once, Gen. 
xvili. 27, 31. Lev. xvi. 34. 

oonlypi, conlepy, oonlippy, olypi, adj. only, 
Lk. vii. 12. vill. 42. ix. 38. 

oost, an army, force, Gen. xxi. 22. Deeds 
xxiii. 27; pl. oostis, Josh. x. 5. Apoc. 
xix. 14, 

oost, a sacrifice, Lev. i. 2. Rom. xii. 13 pl. 
oostis, Num. vii. 35. Deeds vii. 42. 

ooste, a lodging, Philem. 22. 

oothir, other, Gen. xix. 34. 
viii. 15. 

opyn, known, manifest, Deut. xxix. 29. Mt. 
xxvi. 73. 

opynyoun, a rumour, Mt. iv. 24; pl. opyn- 
iouns, Mk. xiii. 7. 

opon, upon, Deut. xxxii. 11. 

opp, up, Judg. vi. 3. 

o-purpose, adv. purposely, Ruth. ii. 16. 

ordynatli, orderly, 1 Macc. vi. 40. 

ordures, excrements, Deut. xxviii. 27. 

oriloge, orologie, orloge, a sun-dial, 1v Kings 
xx. 11. Is. xxxviii. 8. 

orisoun, an oration, Pref. Ep. c. ii. p. 63. 

orisoun, orysoun, @ prayer, 111 Kings viii. 
28. Prov. xv. 29; pl. orisouns, Prov. xv. 
29. 

orribilite, dreadfulness, Deut. xxviii. 61. 

orribleli, horribly, fearfully, Wisd. vi. 6. 

orrour, fear, horror, Deut.xxxii.10. Job vii.1 4. 

or than, before that, Gen. xxvii. 10. 

or-troweden. v. ouer-troweden. 

osteler, innkeeper, Ecclus. xxix.35. Lk.x.35. 

ostrie, an inn, Lk. x. 34. Deeds xxviii. 23. 

ostrig, ostriche, an ostrich, Ley. xi. 16. 
Lam. iv. 3; pl. ostrigis, Job xxx. 29. 

o-taken, p. p. taken, Gen. xx. 16. v. atake, 
of-take. 

otemost, outmost. ». vttermere. 

o-thenkyn, o-thinken, o-thinke, to repent. 
Ex, xiii. 17. Judith viii. 14. Ps. cix. 4; 
pr. t, o-thenkith, o-thinkith, Gen. vi. 7. 
1 Kings xv. 11; p.¢. o-thou3t, o-thoste, 
1 Kings xv. 35. Jer. iv. 28. v. athinkith. 

o-thenksnge, o-thenking, o-thinking, 2. re- 
pentance, Judg. xxi. 6. 1 Kings xv. 29. 
Jer. xviii. 8, Lo. 

other, othir, outher, or, Deut. xiv. 26. Mt. 
vi. 2. Lk. vii. 19. Joh. xvii. 34. 

other-while, sometimes, Wisd. xvii. 14. 

other-weies, adv. otherwise, Gen. xlii. 12. 

ouche, a broach, Ex. xxv. 7g. v. nouche. 

ouer, adv. more than, Gen. xxvii. 37. Mt. 


X. 37. 


iv Kings 


728 


oueral, every where, Wisd. ti. g. Vil. 24. 

ouerbeynge, pr. p. covering, prajecting, 111 
Kings vi. 18. 

ouerbere, to carry over ar beyond, Deut. 
xix. 14; pr.¢. ouerberith, Deut. xxvii.-17. 

ouercariede, p. t. carried over, Wisd. x. 
18. 

ouerchaunginge, n. a transmutation, change- 
ableness, Jam. i. 17. 

ouercome, t@ come upon, Prov. xxvii. 13 
p.t. ouercam, Ps. Ixxxix. 10; pl. ouer- 
camen, Ex. ii. 17; pr.p. ouercomende, 
ouercomyng, surpassing, Job xxxvi. 26. 

ouercheckis, lintels, Ex. xii. 7. 

ouercouerede, p.t. cavered aver, Ps. xiii. 
20; p.p. ouercouered, Jndith v. 9. 

ouercoueryng, . pratectian, Is. iv. 5. 

ouercustomed, p. p. taa much accustamed, 
Esth. iii. 8. 

ouerer, comp. upper, Job xxxviii. 30; sup. 
ouerest, Ex. xxxix. 20. 

ouerfalle, ta make ta fall, averwhelm, Lev. xx. 
27. 

ouerfleth, pr.t. flies or flees aver, Wisd. v. 
11; p.é. ouerflei3, 1 Kings xxix. 3. Wisd. 
v.11; p.p. oner-flowen, Josh. x. 1, 4. 

onergilde, to gild over, Ex. xxx. 53 p.p. 
ouergilt, ouergildid, Ps. xliv. 10. 

ouergoon, p.p. passed aver, Gen. xxxviii. 12. 
Deut. xxvii. 3; pr. p. ouergoende, Job 
XXXVI. 21, 

oueraboundide, ouerhabounde, p. f. greatly 
abounded, 1 Tim. i. 14. 

ouerhelen, ouerheelden, ouerhelde, to cover 
aver, Gen. ix. 143 p. p. ouerhilid, Num. 
xii. 12. 

ouerheld, p.p. poured aver, Jer. xviii. 11. 

ouerhesere, the superior, Job xxxi. 21. 

ouerholden, pr.t. hold aver, 11 Cor. x. 14. 

ouerhond, upperhand, mastery, 1v Kings iii. 
26. 

ouerhopede, ouerhopide, p.t. greatly hoped, 
Ps. cxviii. 43, 74; 81. 

ouerlargely, tea largely, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 
66. 

ouerleden, ta bring upan, to lead aver or 
away, Ecclus. xxxvi. 24. Wisd. iv. 20; 


pr.t.2 p. ouerledist, Wisd. xii. 17; p.t. , 


ouerladde, Gen. xxxii. 23. 11 Par. xxxiii, 
115 p.p. ouerled, 11 Pet. iii. 17. 

ouerleding, n. a leading aver or away, Wisd. 
xviii. 5. 

ouerleenen, fo leave, to remain over, Lev. 
xxv. 46; pr.t.pl. ouerleeuen, Josh. xxiii. 
4; p.t. ouerlafte, Ex. xiv. 28. 

ouerleie, ta appress, averwhelm, Ex. viii. 
26. 

ouerleying, ouerleiyng, n. trouble, averthraw, 
Lk, xxi. 2g. Joh, xvi. 33. 11 Cor. i. 4. 

onerlepen, ta leap aver, Ecclus. xxxviii. 
37- 

ouerlyueth, pr.t. survives, Ex. xxi. 22. 

ouermest, onermost, the upper part, surface, 
highest part, Gen. ii. 6. vii. 4. Ex. xxxvii. 
8. Is. xiii. 5; pl. ouermostus, Jer. xxv. 
32. 

ouermor, ady. moreover, Num. xx. 5. 


GLOSSARY. 


ouermore, upper, Deut. xxiv. 6.” 

ouermoris, the higher parts, Ps. ciii. 3. 

ouermyche, superfluously, 1 Par. prol. 
P- 314. 

ouerpasse, ta pass over, transgress, Gen. 
xviii. 3. Deut. xix. 14; p.t. 2p. ouer- 
passedist, Prov. xxxi. 29; p.p. ouerpass- 
id, ouerpassed, Gen, xxix. 28. 1 Par. 
ix. 6; pr.p. ouerpassynge, ouerpassende, 
Gen. xii. 8. Esth, xiii. 2. 

ouerscorchide, ouerscorchid, p. p. raughly 
hewed, 111 Kings v. 18. vi. 7. 

ouer-seile, imp. sail over, Is. xxiii. 12. 

ouersemynge, pr. p. most excellent, Eph. i. 
19. 

ouersenden, pr. t. pl. lead over, Judg. iii. 
28. 

ouerste3yng, n. a passing aver, Is. xvi. 2. 

onerthreswold, an upper lintel, Ex. xii. 22. 

ouerthwart, ouerthewert, ouerthwert, ouer- 
whert, perverse, fraward, Ley. xxvi. 21. 
Deut. xxi. 20. Ez, xli. 16. 11 Tim. iii. 4. 

ouerthewertly, perversely, Ecclus. i. 30 9. 

ouertraueylen, ouertraueyl, ouertraueile, 
to afflict, oppress, Gen. xvi. 6. xix. 9. 
Ex. i. 11; p.t.pl. ouertrauaileden, Ps. 
xcili, 53 pr. p. ouertraueilynge, Gen, 
xvi. 6. 

ouertroden, p. p. warn by walking, 11 Esdr. 
ix. 21. 

ouertrowable, capable af being suspected, 
Ecclus. xxv. 9. 

ouertroweden, ortroweden, p. t. pl. sup- 
pased, suspected, were consciaus, Judg.viii. 
11. 111 Kings xxii. 32; pr. p. ouertrow- 
ynge, 1 Cor. iv. 4. 

ouerturne, ta turn away, Ecclus. iv. 1. 

ouerveyne, entirely warthless, Wisd. xi. 16. 
xii. 24. 

onerveynly, ouerveynliche, greatly in vain, 
Ps. xxiv. 4. Xxx. 7. xxxiv. 7. 

ouervoide, entirely worthless, Wisd. xv. 9, 
10. xvi. 29. 

ouervoidenesse, great warthlessness, Wisd. 
xiv. 14. 

ouerwad, p.p. waded aver, Ez. xlvii. 5. 

ouerwrthi, more warthy, Ecclus. xiii. 32. 

ouerejeden, ouersiden, p. ft. pl. Gen. vii. 24. 
Ps. xxxvii. 5. 

ouerjotun, p.p. transfused, Pref. ep. c. ii. 
p. 63. 

ouer3ouun, p.t. given above, 11 Cor, xii. 
15. 

oure-silf, ourselves, Judith iii. 2. 1 Joh. i. 8. 

ourn, ourun, ourens, ourns, g. pl. ours, Gen. 
XXV1. 20, xxxiv. 21. Mk. xii. 7. Lk. xxiv. 
24. 

ourne, ta adorn, Gen. xxiv. 47. Tit. ii. 10; 
p.t.pl. ourneden, Mt. xxv. 7. 1 Pet. iii. 5; 
pp. ourned, Lk. xi. 25. xxi. g. 1 Tim. ii. 
93 pr.p. ournynge, 1 Tim. ii. 9. 

ournement, ernament, Gen. li. 1; pl. ourne- 
mentis, Judith x. 3. 

ournyng, ”. an adarning, Ex. xxv. 9. 1 Pet. 
iii. 3. 

outakun, outaken, outtaken, except, Gen. 
xxi, 26. Mt. v. 32. 


outbake, p.p. thoroughly baked or treated 
with fire, Is. xlviii. 10. 

outbrenne, ta greatly burn, Ecclus. xvi. 7.: 

outbrennyng, n. a burning aut, Is. Ixiv. 2. 

outclense, ta cleanse entirely, Lev. xvi. 32. 

ontecomyng, 2. an issue, Gen. xli. 13. 

outdrien, to dry thoroughly, Is. xlii. 15. 

outerli, wtterly, Deut. xv. 4. 

outfisten, to conquer in fight, Ecclus. iv. 
33; pr. t. outfaust, Josh. x. 3; p.p. out- 
foste, Ps. exxviil. 1. a 

outforth, adv. out, Is. xliii. 8. 

outefourmed, p.p. perfectly formed, Num. 
xvii. 8. 

outgladen, ta rejoice greatly, Is, Ixv. 19. 

ontglading, ». great jay, Is. lxv. 18. 

outgoers, emissaries, 1 Kings xxii. 17. 

outher. v. other. 

outheren, ta hear perfectly, Prov. i. 28. Is. 
xli. 173 p.t, outherde, Ps, xxxix. 3. 

ontiozen, ta rejoice greatly, Is. \xv. 18, 

outiosing, outiciyng. n. exultation, Ps. xli. 
5. Prov. iii. 35. 

outlargid, p.p. enlarged, Deut. xxxii. 15. 

outlawen, to banish, destroy, 111 Esdr. iv. 8. 
Judith iii. 13; p.¢. ontlawide, Ecclus. 
xxxi. 305 p.p. outlawid, Ps. xxxvi. 9. 

outlawynge, x. an outlawry, Josh. prol. 
p. 556. 

outlede, ta lead aut, Ps. xxx. 5; p.t. outlad, 
Gen. xv. 7. 

outmere, utter, outer, Mt. viii. 12. 

ontook, p.t. excepted, 1 Kings xiv. 24 g. 

outopenith, pr.t. explains, Gen. xli. 24. 

ontpassyng, 7. an ecstacy, Ps. xxx. 23. 

outpre3en, fo pray earnestly, Ecclus. ili. 4. 

outseching, 2. a seeking aut, Wisd. xiv. 12. 

outshameden, p.t. pl. were utterly ashamed, 
Is, xlv. 16. 

outesharpende, pr. p. provoking, Jer. v. 23. 

outshynynge, pr. p. resplendent, 1 Kings 
xv. 12. 

outso3te, p. zt. sought out, Ps. xxvi.8; pl. 
outsosten, Ps. exviii. 155; p.p. outsoust, 
Gen. xlii. 22; pr.p. outsechende, Ecclus. 
i. 3. iv. 12. 

outsterte, p.t. started up, Judith xiv. 15. 
v. stirte. 

outstourbe, ta utterly disturb, Josh. vii. 
25. 

outstra3t, outstrayed, p. p. stretched out, 
Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 66. Ecclus. xxxix. 29. 

outtend, p. p. kindled greatly, Ecclus. 
xvi. 7. 

outterreden, p.t. pl. exasperated, Ps. xxvii. 
40. 

outethenking, . device, Wisd. xv. 4. 

outturnynge, x. an ouerturning, Pref. ep. c. 
vii. p. 69. 

outwaggeth, p.t. greatly agitates, 1 Kings 
xvi. 15. 0. waggide. 

oust, ost, aught, anything, Lev. xiii. 48. 
Lk, ix. 36. Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. Gal. 
VI83: 

owe, pr.t.1 p. ought, Gen. xxiv. 5. Mt. ii. 
14; 2p. owest, rv Kings v. 13; 3p. 
owith, Ex. x. 26. Lk. v. 38. Joh. xix. 


xix. 7. 1 Joh. ii. 6; pl. owen, Ex. iv. 15. 
Deeds xxi. 21; p.t. ou3te, oust, owste, 
aw3te, Num. xii. 14. Is. v. 4. 1 Macc. 
xiii. 13. Mt. xviti. 24. Lk. vil. 413 
2 p. owedist, oustist, rv Kings v. 13; 
pl. ou3ten, oweden, owten, Gen. xxxiv. 
gr. Num. xv. 34. Lk. xvii. 10. Deeds 
xxi. 21; on3ten, owned, 1 Mace. xiii. 39. 
v. au3t. 
owhydre, adv. anywhere, tv Kings v. 25. 


oxes, oxis, oxys, oven, 111 Kings i. 25. Lk. | 


xvii. 7. 


P. 


paal, a stake, Ez. xv. 3. Zech. x. 4. 

paalnes, paleness, Lev. xiv. 37. 

paard, pard, parde, a leopard, Deut. xiv. 5. 
Apoe. xiii. 2; pl. pardis, S. Sol. iv. 8. 

paas, paase, pas, paaces, paces, 11 Kings vi. 
13. Num. xxxv. 5. Mt. v. 41. 

paast, a cake, Ex. xxix. 23; pl. pastis, 1 Par. 
xxiii. 29. 

pacche, a patch, Mk. ii. 21. 

pacienter, comp. more patient, Bar. iv. 5.27. 

paddis, frogs, Ex. viii. 8. 

paddok, a frog, Ps. Ixxvii. 45; pl. paddoks, 
paddokis, Ex. viii. 2, 3, 8, 11. 

pagyn, a page of a book, Jer. xxxvi. 23; pl. 
pagens, Jer. xxxvi. 23. 

payd, paied, payed, pased, pasid, p.p. con- 
tented, satisfied, Num. xviii. 23. tv Kings 
xiv. 10. Esth. viii. 3. 1 Tim. vi. 8. Heb. 
xii. 5. v. apaid. 

paynymmys, paynymes, paymes, gentiles, 
pagans, Mt. v. 48. Rom. prol. 1. p. 298. 
Heb. prol. p. 480. 

paynymrie, gentile condition, Rom. prol. 1. 
Pp 300. 

pal, a pall, a robe, Esth. viii. 15. 

palasie, palesie, palsy, 1 Macc. ix. 55. Mt. 
iv. 24. 4 

palat, palet, palate of the mouth, Lam. iv. 4. 

palfrey, a horse, Esth. vi. 11. 

palid, p.p. inclosed with pales, 1v Kings 
XXV. 2. 

palyure, a sort of thistle, (Lat. paliurus,) 
Mic. vii. 4. 

pament, pawment, pavement, Num. v. 17. 

pans. v. pens. 

panyere, a basket, Gen. xl.57. Ex. xxix. 2; 
pl. panyeris, Gen. x]. 16. 

parably, in parables, Mk. xii. 1. 

parceyueth, tmp. pl. perceive ye, Judg. v. 3. 
Deeds ii. 14. 

parcener, a partner, Prov. xxviii. 24. Wisd. 
vi. 25. 1 Cor. ix. 23; pl. parceneres, 
parceneris, Prov. v.17. Wisd. vii. 14. 
1 Cor. ix. 12. 

pardelun, a small kind of leopard, Deut. 
xiv. 5. 

parfyit, parfyt, perfit, perfeet, Eccles. ix. 
14. Mt. v. 48. Lk.i.173 comp. perfiter, 
Heb. ix. 11. 

parfitenesse, perfection, Col. iii. 14. 

parfytli, perfitli, perfectly, Amos v.10. Lk. 
i. 45. 

pargete, to plaster, Ez. xiii.10; pr.t. pl. 


VOL, Iv. 





a 


GLOSSARY. 


pargiten, Ez. xiii.1; -p.¢. pl. pargctiden, 
pargiteden, Ez. xiii. 10. xxii. 28; p.p. 
pargetid, Amos vii.-7. 
pargetyng, n. a plastering, Ecclus. xxii. 23. 
Ez, xiii. 12. 
parid, p.p. scraped, Lev. xiv. 41. 
paring, n. a scraping, Lev. xiv. 41; pl. pa- 
ringis, 1 Cor. iv. 13. 
parsel-mel, adv. without order, Pref. ep. e. 
vi. p. 67. 
party, a part, Gen. xxiii. 9g. Is. xxxiv. 14. 
Rom. xv.15; pl. partes, partise, parties, 
Gen. xliii. 34. Mt. ii. 23. 
partide, partyde, p.t. departed, Mk. i. 42; 
pl. partiden, partideden, divided, Josh. 
xix. 31. Mt. xxvii. 35. v. departe. 
partynge, 2. @ participation, division, Ex. 
‘viii. 23. 11 Cor. vi. 14. 
partrich, partritch, a partridge, 1 Kings 
XXV. 20. 
pase-mel, pas-mele, adv. without order, 
Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 67. 1 Kings iv. 2. 
pask, paske, pasch, passover, 1 Esdr. iv. 19. 
Ez. xiv. 21. Mt. xxvi. 17. Lk. ii. 41. 
passendeli, passyngly, surpassingly, 111 
Esdr. iii. 24. Gal. i. 13. 
passible, able to suffer, Deeds xxvi. 23. 
Jam. v. 17. 
passioun, suffering, disease, Lev. xv. 13. 
Heb. ii. 9; pl. passiouns, Heb. x. 32. 
pawme, palm of the hand, Mt. xxvi. 67; pl. 
paumes, Prov. xxxi. 20. 
pecken, pr. t. pl. peck, Prov. xxx. 17. 
pedage, toll, 1 Esdr. iv. 13, 20. 
peere, fellow, comrade, 11 Kings ii. 16; pl. 
peeris, Mt. ii. 16. : 
peerith, pr.t. appears, Lev. xiii. 93 p. t. 
pered, Pref. ep. c. 1. p. 613 pr.p. pe- 
rende, Job xxx. 8. 
peersable, able to pierce, Heb. iv. 12. 
peese, to assuage, appease, Gen. xxxvii. 353 
p-p. peesid, 1v Kings ix. 18; pr.p. pe- 
sende, pesynge, pesing, Col. i. 20. 
peyne, punishment, Gen. xxxvili. 25. 
peyned, p.p. punished, Deeds xxii. 5. 
peyne-taking, ». penance, Ecclus. v. 17. 
peynteur, peynture, a picture, Esth. i. 6. 
Wisd. xv. 4; pl. peynturis, 111 Kings 
vi. 29. 
peire, to injure, impair, become impaired, 
Ley. xxv. 14; p.¢. peyrede, 11 Kings 
xiii. 2; p.p. peirid, Rom. i. 1. vo. 
apeyrid. 
peirer, an tmpairer, Cath. Epp. prol. 2. p. 
595- 
peiryng, peyringe, peyrynge, n. damage, 
destruction, Mt. xvi. 26. Lk. ix. 25. 
1 Cor. iii. 15. v.35; pl. peiringis, Phil. 
iii. 7. 
peirement, peyrement, damage, detriment, 
Mt. xvi. 26. 11 Cor. vii. 9. Phil. iii. 8. 
peis, peyse, peys, weight, Gen. xlii. 21. 
Nom. vii. 25. + Kings xxv. 18. rv Kings 
xxv. 16. * 
peisere, a weigher, Prov. xvi. 2. 
peiseth, peisith, pr.t. weighs, Prov. xxi. 2; 
pl. peisen, Is. xlvi.6; p.¢. peiside, pey- 


5A 


——_—— SS —_—_— 
————————— re eS a EE, 


729 


side, Is. xl.12; p.p. peisid, peysid, Lev. 
xxvii. 25 ; pr. p. peisynge, Gen. xxiv. 20. 
peising, x. a weighing, Ecclus. vi. tg. xxvii. 
20. 
pekokis. v. pokokis. 
pennere, an inkhorn, Ez. ix. 2. 
pennes, pennys, wings, feathers, Ps. xvii. 
11. Eecles. x. 20. Lk. xiii. 34. 
penaunce, repentance, Lev. v. 5. Judg. xxi. 
6. Jer. xviii. 8,10. Mt. xxi. 29. 
pens, penis, pans, pennies, pence, Gen. xx. 
16. xxxvii. 28. Mt. xxvi.1g. Lk. vii. 41. 
pentacontarkes, pentacontrarkis, leaders of 
Jifty, 1 Mace. iii. 55. 
pentisis, penthouses, 11 Esdr. vii. 4 9. 
pepyn. v. popyn. 
peponys, gourds, cucumbers, Num. xi. 5. 
perauenture, perhaps, Gen. iti. 3. Mt. v. 25. 
perse, to pierce, penetrate, Job xl. 19. Prov. 
vil. 23. Heb. iv. 12; pr.t. pl. persen, 
peersen, Prov. vii. 27. 11 Tim. iii. 6; p.?. 
perside, Heb. iv.14; p.p. persid, Judith 
vi. 43 pr.p. persende, Prov. vii. 27. 
pershe, pershen, to perish, Ecclus. xxxi. 7. 
Jer. xiviii. 8; p. ¢. pershede, Wisd. 
x. 33 pl. pershyden, Num. xvi. 33. 
persuable, persuasible, 1 Cor. it, 4. 
perteyneth, pr.t. pl. appertain, Num. iv. 
27; p.t. pl. perteyneden, Gen. xxxii. 23. 
pesible, peaceful, appeasable, Gen. xxxiv. 
21. xiii. 14. S. Sol. viii. 11; pd. pesibles, 
peaceful or appeasing persons or things, 
S. Sol. viii. 12. Ez. xlvi. 2. 
pesibli, pesebli, peesilili, pesibleli, peaceably, 
Gen. xxvi. 31. xxxvil. 4. 11 Kings xix. 
30. Ps. xxxiv. 20. 
pesiblenesse, pesibilnesse, a calm, calmness, 
Wisd. xii. 18. Mt. viii. 26. Mk. iv. 39. 
pesyblete, pesiblete, a calm, peace, 11 Macc. 
ii. 23. Lk. viii. 24. 
pestel, a pestle, Ex. xvi.14. xxvii. 20; pl. 
pestels, r Par. xxi. 23. 
phane, a temple, Deut. iii. 29. iv. 46. 
phigarg, a roebuck, (Lat. pygargus,) Deut. 
Xiv. 5. ; 
philosofien, pr. t. pl. philosophize, Pref. ep. 
c. vi. p. 67. 
pibbil-ston, a pebble, Prov. xx. 17. 
picche, to fix, to pierce, Num. ii. 33 p. t. 
picchide, pischide, Judg. iv. 21; pl. pic- 
chiden, pisten, Num. ix. 18, 23. Joh. 
xix. 373 p.p. pst, Judg. iv. 22. 17 
Kings viii. 34. Ecclus. vi.1; pr.p. pic- 
chinge, pitchinge, Col. ii. 14. 
picoise, @ pick-ax, 1 Kings xiii. 20, 21; pil. 
picoisis, pikoysis, Joel iii. 10. 
pilche, a skin, wrapper for the body, Lev. 
xv. 147; pl. pilchis, Lev. xi. 32. 
pile, peel, skin, 11 Kings xvii. 19. 
pilde, pilede, pilide, p.t. stripped, peeled, 
mi Esdr. i. 36; p.p. pild, pilde, Gen. 
xxx. 37. m1 Kings xvii. 19. 
pilgrym, adj. strange, Heb. xiii. 9. 
pilgrimage, fo sojourn, Gen. xii. ro. xlvii. 
43 pt. pilgrimagid, Gen. xxxv. 2753 p.p. 
pilgrimagid, Gen. xxxii. 4; pr.p. pil- 
grimagende, Jer. xli. 17. 


730 


piltere, a butter with horns, Ex. xxi. 29. 
v. pultere. 

pimentis, pymentis, pigments, Esth. ii. 12. 
iv Kings xx. 13. 

piment-makere, @ maker of pigments, 11 
Esdr. iii. 8; pl. pyment-makers, 1 Par. 
xvi. 14. 

pymentarye, pymentarie, @ pigment maker, 
Ex. xxxvii. 29. S. Sol. iii. 6; pl. pymen- 
taries, S. Sol. v. 13. 

pistle, epistle, 11 Kings xi. 14. 1 Esdr. 
iv. 7. Rom, xvi. 22; pl. pistlis, 11 Par. 
xxx. 6. Deeds xxii. 5. 

pit, pitt. v. putte. 

pite, pytee, piety, mercy, Ecclus. xxxvii. 13. 
xlix. 4. 1 Tim. ii. 2; pl. pitees, Ecclus. 
xliv. ro. 11 Pet. iii, rz. 

pitouse, pitenous, merciful, pious, Ecclus. 
ii. 13. xxxi. 8g. 

pitously, piteuously, piously, Ecclus. xliii-. 
37. u Tim, iii. 12. 

pitoustees, acts of piety and mercy, Ecclus. 
xliv. Io. 

pist. v. picche. 

plaag, plage, side, coast, region, Gen. iv. 16. 
xiii. 1. xxv. 6. 

plaage, plage, a plague, wound, stripe, Lev. 
xiii. 2, Apoc. xiii. 12; pl. plagis, plages, 
Gen. xii.17. Lk. xii. 47, Apoc. xv. 1. 

plane, a plane tree, Gen. xxx. 37. 

plat, fat, Dan. viii. 18. 

platan, a plane tree, Ecclus. xxiv. 19; pl. 
platan-trees, Ez. xxxi. 8. 

platis, platys, pieces af money, Judg. ix. 4. 
Jer, xxxli. 9. Mt. xxvi. 15. 

platte, p.t. platted, falded, Judith x. 3; 
p.p. plattid, pleitid, plettid, Pref. ep. 
c. vii, viii. p. 73. Ex. xxxix. 3; pr.p. 
plattende, Is. xix. 9. 

plauntis, soles af the feet, Deeds iii. 7. 

ple, plea, debate, Ecclus. xx. 16. Heb. vi. 16. 

pleaunt, pliant, turning, Gen. iii. 24. 

plei-feris, playfellows, Judg. xi. 38. 

pleiynge, pr. p. macking, Gen. xix. 14. 

pleyne, pleyn, fo complain, Deut. xxx. 13; 
p.t. pleynede, Judg. xiv. 16; pr. p. pley- 
nynge, Jide ii. 16. 

pleynesse, playness, @ level, plain, 11 Macc. 
xiv. 33. 

pleynynges, playnyngis, complaints, Num. 
xvil. 10. Eccles. vii. 15. 

pleynt, playnt, complaint, quarrel, 11 Kings 
xix. 28, Lk. i. 6. Phil. ii. 15. Col. iii. 13; 
pl. pleyntis, playntis, Num. xvii. ro. 
Jude 16. 

plentenes, plenty, Gen. xli. 30. 

plenteousnesses, plenteousnessis, abundance, 
Deut. xxxiii. 23. Joh v. 26. Prov. viii. 18. 

plenteuous, plenteous, Judith viii. 7. Mt. v. 
12. Lk. v. 6. 

plenteuously, plenteously, 1 Par. xxix. 2; 
comp. plenteuousliere, Heb. vi. 17. 

plenteuouste, abundance, Deut. i. 25. xxx. 9. 

plentith, plentithe, plenty, Gen. xxvi. 33. 
xli. 31. 

plentithness, plentethnes, plenty, Gen. xli. 
30 47. 


GLOSSARY. 


plesable, placable, pleasant, acceptable, Gen. 
xlili.14. Is. lx. 7. Ixi. 2. 

plesaunce, will, pleasure, that whick is 
pleasing, Gen. xxiv. 50. 1 Esdr. x. 11. 
Ecclus. xli. 6. 

plesaunt, pleasing, Is. xlix. 8. Mt. xi. 26. 

plesyng, n. an appeasing, Ps. xlviii. 8; pl. 
plesyngis, 1 Macc. i. 47. 

pleten, plete, to complain, to plead, Judg. 
xxi, 22. Prov. xxxi. 8g. Ecclus. xxix. 6. 

pletere, complainer, a curser, Is. ix. 45 pl. 
pleteres, Is. iii. 12. 

plettid. v. platte. 

poynt, @ line af battle, Deut. xx. 2. 

poyntel, pointel, poyntil, @ style to write with, 
iv Kings xxi. 13. Job xix. 24. Jer. viii. 
8. Lk. i. 63. 

pokokis, pekokis, pecokis, peacocks, 111 
Kings x. 22. 11 Par. ix. 21. 

polische, to polish, 1 Par. xxii. 2; imp. pl. 
pulsheth, Jer. xlvi. 4; p.p. polishid, po- 
lischid, polshid, polischit, 1 Par. xxii. 2. 
111 Kings vi. 36. Bar. vi. 7. 

poll, tap af the head, Dan. xiv. 35. 

polliden, p. ¢. pl. cropped, clipped, Gen. xli. 
14; p.p. pollid, polled, Job i. 20. 1 Cor. 
xi, 5. 

pomel, a head, hilt, ar capital like an apple, 
Judg. iii. 22. Prov. xxv. 11; pl. pomels, 
111 Kings vii. 41. 

poos, peacocks, 11 Par. ix. 21. 

popil-serdis, poplar-twigs, Gen. xxx. 37. 

poplere, a paplar tree, Hos. iv.13; pl. po- 
peleris, Gen. xxx. 37. 

popyn, pepyn, @ grape stone, a kernel, a pip, 
Num. vi. 4; pl. pepynes, Eccles. xxsiii. 
169. 

porail, the cammon people, 1 Kings vi. 19 ; 
pl. porails, Prov. xxx. 14. 

porcionel, separate, distinct, 111 Esdr. viii. 
31; pl. porciounelis, 111 Esdr. viii. 31. 

porelet, @ poor person, Is. x. 30. li. 21. 
liv. rr. Lxvi. 2. 

pornesse, porenesse, poverty, 1 Par. xxii. 
14. Job xxxvi. 8. 

portenaunce, appurtenance, Gen. xxxi. 36. 

posnettis, sencepans, 11 Par. xxxv. 13. 

possessiouneris, passessors, Deeds iv. 34. 

posterne, postern, a back door, Judg. iii. 
24. Dan. xiii. 18, 26. 

postille, a glass or short exposition, Is. prol. 
p. 225. 

postle, an apostle, Heb. prol. p. 480; pl. 
postlis, Mk. vi. 30. Lk. prol. 1. p. 141. 

postlehed, affice af apastle, 11 Cor. xii. 12. 

potel, @ pattie, a measure of two quarts, 
111 Kings vii. 26. Is. x. 33. 

poten. v. putte. 

potestate, a patentate, 11 Esdr. vi.18; pi. 
potestatis, Lk. xii. 11. 

pott, earthenware, pattery, Dan. ii. 35. 

pouder, powdre, dust, Gen. iii. 19. Is. lxv. 
25. 

poueresht, p.p. impoverished, 11 Esdr. v.18. 

pouert, pouerte, poverty, Gen. xli. 31, 
52. Job xxxvi. 8. 11 Cor. viii. 2. Apoc. 
ii. 9. 


powm-garnet, a pomegranate, Ex. xxviii. 
34; pl. powm-garnettis, Ex. xxviii. 33. 
poune, to break in pieces, Mt. xxi. 44; pr.t. 
pl. pownen, Job xix. 1; p.p. powned, 
pownyd, Ex. xvi. 14. Josh. v. 11. 

prece, ta press, Pref. ep. c. 1. p. 61. 

precellent, more worthy, 1 Pet. ii. 13. 

preciouser, precyousere, camp. mare pre- 
cious, Prov. xvi. 16. Deeds xx. 24; sup. 
preciouseste, 1 Kings xii. 30. 

prefacioun, a prefacing, 11 Macc. ii. 33. 

preyable, capable af being entreated, Ps. 
Ixxxix. 13. 

preysable, worthy of praise, Ex. xv. 11. 

preiseful, full of praise, Lev. xix. 24. 

preysiden, p.t. pl. valued, Mt. xxvii. 9; 
p-p. preisid, preysid, Zech. xi.13. Mt. 
Xxvil. 9. 

prene, ta pierce through, 1 Kings xviii. 11. 
xix. 10; p.é. prenede, 1 Kings xix. 10. 

prepost, chief afficer, Deeds vii. 10; pl. 
prepostis, Heb. xiii. 24. 

prepucie, fareskin, Deut. x. 16. Rom. ii. 
253 pl. prepucies, Josh. v. 3. 

pressour, @ winepress, Deut. xv.14. Ec- 
clus. xxxiii. 17. Mtt. xxi. 33. Apoc. xix. 
13; pl. pressours, Ps. viii. 1. 

pressure, pressour, tribulation, pain, Joh. 
xvi. 21. 11 Cor. i. 4. 

prest, adj. ready, at hand, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p. 68. 

pretorie, justice hall, Deeds xxiii. 35. 

preven, preue, ta prove, Gen. xxvii. 21. 
Lk. xii. 56; p.p. preued, prenyd, Gen. 
xxiii. 16. 

preuyte. v. priuyte. 

prezen, prese, to pray, Ps. v.4. Jer. xv. 5. 
Joh. iv. 21; tmp. pl. preseth, preieth, 
Mt. xxv.13. Mk. xiv. 38; p.t. presede, 
Ps. eviii. 43 pr. p. presende, Jer. xv. 6. 

pricke, to pierce, Zech. xiii. 3; p.t. prick- 
eden, Zech. xii. 10; p.p. prickid, Deut. 
xix. 6. 

pricke, prik, a@ goad, a sting, 1 Kings xiii. 
21. Ecclus. xxxviii. 26. Jer. li. 27. 

pryis, price, Gen. xxiii. 15. 

primacie, primacye, first dignity, Col. i. 18. 
111 Job. 9. 

primatis, chief persons, 11 Mace. iv. 21. 

primatis-men, chief persons, Mic. v. 5. 

primycies, prymysies, primyssis, first fruits, 
Ez. xx. 40. 11 Thess. ii. 12. Apoc. xiv. 4. 

princehed, prynshode, prinshod, supremacy, 
princely dignity, Deut. xxxiii. 21. Prov. 
xxix. 2. Mk. x. 42. Jude 6; pl. prince- 
hodis, 1 Mace. xi. 28. 

principal, ruling, belanging ta a prince, 
Esth. ii. 18. Ps. 1.14. 

principat, power af the prince, Lk. xx. 
20; pl. principatis, Rom. viii. 38. 

prynte, an impress, 1 Macc. xv. 6. Mt. xxii. 
19. ; 

prisoned, p.p. imprisoned, 111 Kings xxi. 21. 

priue, priuei, pryny, secret, Gen. xlvii, 18. 
Tob. xii. 11. Joh. vii. 10. 

priuei-gagys, (?) private parts, Deut. xxv. 
Il. 


priuey-herneis, priuy-harneis, privy member, 
Gen. ix. 22, 23. 

priuen, pryue, to deprive, Esth. xvi. 12; 
p-p. priued, priuyde, pryued, Gen. xliii.14. 
Num. xxiv. 11. 1 Tim. vi. 5. 

priuyte, preuyte, mystery; pl. priuytees, 
Mt. prol. 2. p. 2. Mt. xiii. 11. 

proctour, procatour, precuratour, a steward, 
Gen. xv. 2. Mt. xx. 8. 

procurende, procurynge, pr.p. being procu- 
rator, Lk, iii. 1. 

profitablere, comp. more profitable, Eccles. 
vil. 12. 

profitide, p.¢. grew, 1 Kings u. 16. Lk. ii. 
523 pr. p. profytynge, Gen. xxvi. 13. 

profre, an offer, Gen. xxxiv. 18. 

progenye, descent, generation, Gen. xlili. 7. 
Ps. xlviii.12; pl. progenyes, Ps. xlviii. 20. 

prome, proone, prone, ready, Gen. viii. 21. 

proterue, froward, 11 Tim. iii. 4. 

prouable, approved, abe to be proved, Kcclus. 
xlti. 8. 11 Tim. ii. r5. 

proudeth, pr.t. 7s proud, Job xv.20. Ps.ix.*2. 

proueden, p.t.pl. approved, Rom. xv. 26. 

prouyng, preuyng, n. a@ trial, Tob. iii. 21. 
Ecclus. iv. 19. vi. 22. 

prouost, prouoost, chief officer, Judg. xx. 28. 
Esth. ji. 3. Deeds vii. 10; pl. prouestis, 
prouostes, prouostis, prououstis, Gen. xli. 
34. 11 Kings ix. 18. 1v Kings x. 5. 
Heb. xiii. 24. 

psautrie, a psaltery, Amos vi. 5. v. sautree. 

pulsbeth. v. polische. 

pultere, a butter with horns, Ex. xxi. 29. 
v. puttere. 

pultiden, p.t.pl. pushed, Deeds xix. 33; pr.p. 
pultyng, Deeds xix. 33. 

punchiden, p.t.pl. butted, pushed, Is. xxxiv. 
21. 

pungeden, p.t.pl. pricked, pierced, 1 Esdr. 
prol. p. 478. Judith xvi.14. Apoc. i. 7; 
p.p. pungid, Pref. ep. c. ix. p. 76. Ps. 
xxix. 13. Prov. xii. 18. 

pupilles, orphans, Jam. i. 27. 

pupplischiden, p.t.pl. published, 111 Kings 
xiii. 25. 

pure-blynde, lind, Ex. xxi. 26. 

purgacioun, @ purifying, Num. vi. 9. Lk. 
il. 22. 

purge, to purify, clear, cleanse, Josh. xvii. 
18. Lk. iii. 17; p.t. purgide, 111 Kings 
xv.12; p.p. purgid, Lev. xiv. 73 pr.p. 
purgynge, 11 Kings iv. 5. 

purgyng-hook, pruning hook,1 Kings xiii.20. 

purgingnesse, purgation, 11 Pet. i. 9. 

purid, p.p. purified, Ex, xxv. 24. 11 Kings 
XXIL. 31. 

purpur, purper, purple, Ex. xxv.4. Judith 
x.19. Mk. xv.17. Lk. xvi. 19. 

purprid, p.p. coloured with purple, 111 Esdr. 
L533. 

purpuresse, purpiresse, a maker of purple, 
Deeds xvi. 14. 

purseynt, precinct, 1v Kings xi. 8; pl. pur- 
seyntis, 1v Kings xi. 15. 

pursirioun, a cormorant, (Lat. porphyrio,) 
Dent. xiv. 17. 


GLOSSARY. 


puruyaunce, purueaunce, foresight, a pro- 
viding, Eccles. v. 5. Wisd. vi. 17. ix. 143 
pl. puruyaunces, purueauncis, Wisd. ix. 
14. 

putte, poten, to put, set, thrust, Gen. xliv- 
21. Mk. v. 10; p.f. putte, putted, put- 
tide, Gen. i. 17. Mt. xiii. 24. xiv. 3. 
Mk. i. 12; pl. putten, putteden, put- 
tedyn, puttiden, Gen. xix. ro. Lk. i. 66. 
xix. 35. Joh. xix. 37; p.p. putte, poten, 
pit, pitt, Lev. vi.15. Lk. xii. 19, 25; pr.p. 
puttinge, potende, Mk. xv. 19. Cath. epp. 
prol. 1. p. 594. 

puttere, a butter with horns, one who places, 
Ex. xxi. 20. Ecclus. x. 32. v. pultere. 


Q. 

quaken, to tremble, fear, Eccles. xii. 5; p.t. 
quakide, 1 Kings xxviii. 5. Judith prol. 
p. 602. 

quakynge, n. a trembling, dread, Mk. xvi. 8. 

quappe, ta struggle, sprawl, Tob. vi. 4; p.t. 
quappide, 11 Kings xviii. 14. Judith xiii. 
29. 

quarers, quarreris, quarieris, stone cutters, 
11 Par. xxxiv. 11. 1v Kings xxii. 6. 

quauyde, p. t. quaked, shook, 1 Kings 
Xxviil. 5. 

quauynge, quauyng, n. @ shaking, 111 Kings 
xix. 11. Is. xxix. 6. 

quede, quide, the cud, Lev. xi. 3. Deut. xiv. 
6. v. code. 

queer, quer, a@ choir, a daunce, a company, 
Ps.cxlix.3. cl.4; pl. querys, querus, queres, 
queeris, Ex. xxxii.19. Judg. ix. 27. 11 
Esdr. xii. 31. 8. Sol. vi. 12. 

queern, querne, a mill, Ex. xi. 5. Mt. xxiv. 
41. 

queerne-stoon, a morter,a millstone, a pound- 
ing or grinding stone, Num. xi. 8. Deut. 
xxiv. 6. Is. xlvii. 2. 

queynt. v. queuchen. 

queyntely, warily, Mk. xiv. 44. 

quelet, quylet, a gathering, collection, Lev. 
xxiii.36. Deut. xvi.8. Rom. prol. 1.p. 300. 

quellere, killer, murderer, Tob. tii. 9. 

quemeful, placable, Gen. xliii. 14. Ex. xxxii. 
12. Lev. xix. 5. Job xxxiii. 26. 

quenchen, to extinguish, S. Sol. vill. 7; p. p. 
quenchid, queynt, Judg. v. 11. Ps. iii. 6. 
Prov. xxvi. 20. Lk. prol. p. 141. 0. ac- 
quenchid. 

querels, complaints, Num. xvii. 10. 

querist, pr.t. 2p. enquirest, Cath. epp. prol. 
2. p. 595- 

quik, quyk, quycke, living, alive, Gen. xxvi. 
1g. Mt. xxvi.63. Lk. x. 30. Job. iv. 11. 
Deeds i. 3. 

quikene, quykne, quycken, to make alive, to 
revive, 11 Kings viii. 2. 1v Kings v. 7. 
Lk. xvii. 33.5 p. t. quickenyd, quykide, 
Gen. xlv. 27; p. p. quyckenede, quykid, 
Iv Kings viii. 5. Mk. prol. 1. p. 86. 

quylet. v. quelet. 

quynquagenarye, a chief of fifty, iv Kings 
i. Io. 

quite, quyte, fo requite, to pay, Deut. xxxii, 


5A 2 


731 


23, 41. 1 Macc. x. 28. Mt. xviii. 29; 
pr. p. quytynge, Num. xv. 3. v. aquyte. 
quytere, quyture, filth, corruption, Job ii. 8. 
Is. xiv. 9. 
quyterende, pr. p. rotting, Wisd. v. 25. 


R. 

raap, rap. ov. repe. 

rabitis, rabitynges, indentings, Ex. xxxvi. 
17, 22, 24. 

rad, radde. v. rede. 

rai-cloth, ray-cloth, striped cloth, Prov. 
xxxi, 22. Ez. xvi. 13. 

raied, p. p. arrayed, Esth. i. 6. 

railing, n. a branch, offshoot, Is. xvi. 8; pl. 
railingus, Ps. Ixxix. 12. Jer. xlviii. 52. 

ramne, a thorn, bramble, Judg. ix. 14, 15. 
Ps, lvii. 10. 

rampaunt, rapacious, ravishing, Ps. xxi. 14. 
v. raumpynge. 

rane. v. rennen. 

rasith, pr. ¢. scrapes, erases, Wisd. xiii. 11 ; 
imp. rase, Jer. xi. 19; p. t. raside, Pref. 
ep. c.ix. p. 763 p.p. rasid, raasid, Ex. 
Xxv. 25. 11T Kings vii. 28. 

rasyn, reisyn, @ bunch of grapes, refuse 
grapes, Judg. viii. 2. Is. xvii. 6; pl. ra- 
cyns, rasyns, reysouns, reysyns, Lev. 
xix. 10. Obad. 5. 

rasyng, n. a scraping, Lev. xiv. 41. 

raskeyl, common people, 1 Kings vi. 19. 

rather, rathere, rathir, former, earlier, Lev. 
xxv. 28. Is, xlviii. 3. Jer. xxxvi. 28. Rom. 
prol. 2. p. 302. 

raueyne, raueyn, rapine, robbery, Is. xlii. 22. 
Ez. xvii. 16. Mt. vii. 1g. Heb. x. 34; 
pl. raueyns, raueynes, Prov. xxi. 7. Ez. 
xviii. 12. 

rauenour, @ robber, Jer. li. 56; pl. raueyn- 
ouris, raueinouris, rauynouris, tv Kings 
xvii. 20. Lk. xviii. 1. 

raueshe-melum, rauyshe-meel, raueshe- 
meles, adv. in a violently rushing manner, 
Job vi. 15. 

raumpynge, pr. p. ravishing, rapacious, Gen. 
xlix. 27. 

rebelte, rebellion, Num. xxvi. 9. 11 Kiugs 
xxiv. I g. 

rebound, rebounden, to redownd, Josh. ii. 19. 
Prov. iii. 10; pr.¢. reboundeth, Esth. vii. 4; 
p. #, reboundide, Esth. x. 6; pr. p. re- 
boundende, Prov. xviii. 4. 

recche, recke, retche, to care, regard, 11 
Kings xviii. 3. Dan. xi. 37; p. ¢. rouste, 
reckide, Ex. ix. 21. Dan. vi. 13; pl. ro3- 
ten, reckeden, recken, Prov. i. 25. Mt. 
XXIi. 5. 

reccheles, reckless, Ecclus. xx. 7. 

recyne, resin, Jer. li. 8. 

recluse, to shut up, Lev. xiii. §, 21, 313 p.p. 
reclusyd, reclosid, Lev. xiii. 33. Wisd. 
Xvil. 15. 

recompensacioun, recompense, Judith vi.17. 

record, recorde, to remember, Gen. xl. 13. 
Prov. xxxi. 7; p. ¢. recordide, Gen. xix. 
29; pl. recorden, recordiden, recordeden, 
Joh. xii. 165 p. p. recordid, Gen. xxx. 22. 


732 


recordynge, recording, n. @ remembrance, 
Num. x.9. Eccles. i.13. 11 Tim. i. 5. 

recouncelere, a reconciler, Deut. v. 5. 

recounselide, recounsilide, p. ¢. recanciled, 
11 Cor. v. 18. Deeds vii. 26; p. p. re- 
counselid, recounseilid, Judg. xix. 3. Mt. 
Vv. 243 pr.p. recounselynge, 11 Cor. v. 19. 

recounselyng, recouncelynge, n. reconcilia- 
tion, Ecclus. xliv. 17. 11 Cor. v. 18. 

rede, to read, Deut. xvii. 19; p.t. pl. redeth, 
redit, Deeds prol. p. 507; p. é. radde, 
redde, 11 Esdr. viii. 3; pl. radde, rad- 
den, redden, 11 Esdr. viii. 8. Mk. ii. 25. 
Joh. xix. 20; p.p. rad, red, Esth. vi. 2. 
Mt. xix. 4. 11 Cor. i.13; pr.p. redende, 
Jer. xxxvi. 8. 

rede-horsis. v. rode-horsis. 

redels, redilis, riddles, Judg. xiv. 16, 19. 

rediede, p.p. made ready, Apoc. xvi. 12. 

redoundyn, ¢a overflow, 11 Par. xix. 6; p.t. 
redundede, Esth. xi.10; pl. redoundeden, 
Ecclus. xlvii. 29. 

reed, red, Gen. xxxvili. 27; fier-reed, Lev. 
xiv. 49; flawm-reed, Lev. xiv. 4. 

reeden, made of reeds, 1v Kings xviii. 21. 

reedy, reeddi, madc of reeds, full of reeds, 
tv Kings xviii. 21. Job viii. 11. 

refen, fo rab, Is. viii. 3; pr.t.pl. reuen, Prov. 
xi. 243 tmp. refe, Is. vili.1; p.p. reued, 
Jer. 1. 373 pr.p. reuende, Jer. 1. 11. 

refetiden, p.t.pl. refreshed, Deeds xxviii. 2. 

reformed, p.p. restored, recavered, Judith 
xiii. 30. 

refreiding, refreidynge, refreytynge, x. a re- 
Sreshing, 11 Mace. iv. 46. 

refreshing, refreischyng, x. refreshment, Is. 
Xxvili. 12. 

refuyt, refute, refuge, Deut. xix. 12. Jer. 
xvi. 19; pl. refuytis, Ps. ciii. 18. 

regalies, regaltees, pl. rayal estate, Wisd. 
vi. 22. 

regnen, pr.t.pl. reign, Prov. xxviii. 12; p.t. 
regnede, Gen. xxxvi. 353 pr.p. Tegnende, 
Prov. xxviii. 12. 

rehed, a reed, rush, Job xl. 16. Mt. xxvii. 
go. Apoc. xxi. 15; pl. rehedis, Josh. xvi.8. 

rehercende, pr.p. repeating, Jer. ii. 36. 

reynes, reenus, reins, loins, Wisd. i. 6. 

reyn-gottys, the lower bowels, 11 Kings xx. 8. 

reisende, pr.p. raising, Mt. xvii. 8. 

reysynis, reysonus. v. rasyn. 

rekes, ricks of corn, Ex. xxii. 6. 

rekene, rekyn, ta reckon, Mt. xviii. 24. 

tekeuere, fo recover, Ecclus. ii. 6; imp. re- 
kiuere, recouere, Ecclus. xxix. 27. 

rekyneryng, 2. a recovering, Ecclus. xi. 12. 

rekyuereris, rekuuerers, rekeueris, rekuueris, 
recaverers, Ecclus. xii. 26. 

rekure, to recaver, Ecclus. ii. 6. 

rekureres, recoverers, Ecclus. xiii. 26. 

rekuringe, 2. a recovering, Eeclus. xi. 12. 

relif, that which remains over, a fragment, 
Ex. xvi. 23. xxix. 34; pl. relyfs, relifs, re- 


lifis, relynes, relefes, releffis, Ex. viii. 3. | 


xxix. 34. 11 Kings xiv. 10, Mt. xiv. 20. 
xv. 37. Mk. viii. 8. Lk. xxiv. 43. Joh. vi. 
12. Rom. ix. 27. 


GLOSSARY. 


religiosete, religiouste, religiausness, Ecclus. 
i. 14, 18, 26. 

relikis, relykes, remains, Num. xxiv. 19; 
Josh. x. 39. 

remene, ta interpret, 11 Esdr. viii. 13. 

remener, remenour, an interpreter, expound- 
er, Gen. xl. 22. 1 Esdr. prol. p. 4783 pl. 
remenoures, 1 Esdr. prel. p. 478. Prov. 
prol. p. 2. 

remenynge, remenyng, ”. an interpreting, 
interpretation, Judg. vii. 15. Prov. prol. 
p.13 pl. remenyngus, Ecclus. xvii. 18. 

rennen, renne, ta run, 11 Kings xviii. 19. 
Prov. iv. 12; pr.t.pl. rennen, r Cor. ix. 
24; imp. ren, renne, Ecclus. vi. 3; p.t. 
ranne, rennyd, rennede, Gen. xviii. 7. 
xxiv. 20, 28; 2p. rennedist, Is. i. 23 9; 
pl. runnen, Judith ix. 6; p. p. ren- 
ned, ronned, ronnen, runne, Pref. ep. 
c. ii. p. 63. Ps. xviii. 6; pr.p. renninge, 
rennynge, rennende, Gen. xviii. 7. Prov. 
iv. 12. Mt. prol.3.p.1. xxvii. 48. 

renners, runners, Kz. vii. 22. 

renule, éa renew, Ps. ciii. 30; p.t. renulide, 
Ecclus. 1. 29. 1 Macc. xiv. 225 pup. re- 
nulid, renewlid, Ps. xxxviii. 3. 11 Cor. iv. 
16. Eph. iv. 23. Heb. vi. 6; pr.p. renul- 
ynge, 1 Mace. xiv. 22. 

renulyng, 2. @ renewal, 1 Macc. xii. 17. 

Tep. v. rip. 

reparele, repareyle, to repair, 1v Kings xii. 
5. Ez. xxxvi. 33; p.t. reparalide, repa- 
rilide, reparaileide, 11 Par. xxxii. 5g. 
i Mace. xii. 37. 1 Esdr. prol. p. 478; p.p. 
reparelid, 1v Kings xii. 7. Ez. xxxvi. 10. 

repe, to reap, Gen. xlv. 6; pr.t. pl. repen, 
repyn, Mt. vi. 26; p.t. rap, raap, repide, 
Ruth ii, 23. Apoc. xiv. 16; pl. ropen, 
Ruth i. 22; p.p. ropun, rope, repen, repe, 
ripe, Gen. xlv. 6. Lev. xxiii. 11, 22. 
Ruth i. 22. 

repe, a handful af corn, sheaf, Deut. xxiv. 
19; pl. reepis, Judith viii. 3. 

repleet, filled, Phil. iv. 38. 

repref, reproof, Judith vii. 16. Ps. eviii. 25. 

repreuable, reprovable, Prov. xxv. 10. 11 Cor. 
xiii. 6. Gal. ii. 11. 

repreuen, fo reprove, Prov. xxv. 10. 

repreuendeli, reprovingly, Wisd. ii. 12. 

Tepreuere, a reprover, Prov. xxvii. 11. 

rep-time, harvest, Prov. xxvi. 1. xxx. 25. 

repugne, to fight against, 1 Kings xv. 23. 
Job xxi. 343 pr.p. repugnynge, repungn- 
ynge, repngnende, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 67. 
1 Esdr. prol. p. 477. 

rere, reren, ta raise, ta raise from sleep, 
Gen. xxxviii. 8. Judith xiv. g; p.t. rer- 
ide, Ex. x. 13; pl. rereden, Deut. xxxii. 
16; p.p. reryd, rerid, Gen. xxxiii. 20. 
Mt. xi. 23; pr.p. rerende, Judith xiv. 14. 
v. arere. 

rere-mows, rere-mous, rere-mos, a bat, Lev. 
xi. 19. Deut. xiv. 18; pl. rere-myis, 
rere-mijse, rere-mees, Is. ji. 20. Bar. vi.21. 

rereres, rerers, raisers from sleep, Deut. 
xviii. 11. Judith xiv. 9. 


! reserite, a reseript, 1 Macc. xii. 7. 


resen, resin. v. risen. 
respit, a regard, Ps, Ixxii. 4. Wisd. ii. 20. 
resseittis, reseitis, receptacles, Ex. xxxviii. 3. 
Ecclus. i. 24. 
resshe, rush, Job prol. p. 671; pl. resshen, 
resshes, Ex. ii. 3, 5. 
resteiede, restesede, restide, p.t. went back, 
11 Kings xix. 39. 
restful, quiet, Wisd. xviii. 14. 
retche. v. reccbe. 
rette, to reckon, Deut. xxi. 8. Philem. 18; 
pt. rettide, Rom. iv. 8; p.p. rettid, ret- 
tyd, yrettid, Gen. xv. 6. Num. xxiv. 9. 
Gal. iii. 6. Jam. ii. 23; pr. p. rettinge, 
11 Cor. v.19. v. arette. 
reude. v. rude. 
reuen. v. refen. 
| revere, reuer, a robber, Jer. iv. 7. x1viii. 
32; pl. reueres, Job xii. 6. Jer. li. 48. 
reuyng, n. rapine, robbery, Jer. xlix. 32. 
reuleer, canonical, regular, (?) Prov. prol. 
p. 2. 
| reulen, to guide, rule, Prov. iii. 6. 
reuthe, rewthe, pity, Job xix. 21. Ps. xxxvi. 
26. Mt. ix. 36. Lk. vii. 13. 
rewarde, to regard, Job xxxix. 24. 
rewe, to repent, be sorry far, Heb. vii. 21; 
pr.t. rewith, 11 Cor. vii. 8; p.t. rewide, 
Esth. x. 12. 11 Cor. vii. 8; pr.p. rewende, 
Is. xxx. 19. Jer. ii. 2. 
rewere, reewer, one who pities, Is. xlix. io. 
liv. To. 
rewme, a realm, Gen. x. 10. Mt. iv. 23; pl. 
rewmes, rewmys, Deut. iii, 21. Mt. iv. 8. 
Lk. iv. 5. 
ribanes, ribbans, S. Sol. i. 10. 
ribaudis, ribalds, Prov. v. 9 g. 
richesse, rijcchesse, richessis, richesses, 
ritchesses, rytches, riches, Gen. xxxi. 16. 
Josh. xxii. 8. 1 Kings xvii. 25. Mt. vi. 24. 
Mk. x. 23. Lk. xvi. 9. 
richeth, pr.t. makes rich, 1 Kings ii. 7; p.p. 
| richid, Gen. xxxi.1. Jer. v. 27. 
riddlide, ridlide, p.t. sifted, 11 Kings xxii. 
12. Dan. xiv. 13. 
ridyng, rydinge, rydynge, rijdynge, ”. caval- 
ry, horsemen, Ex. xiv. 23. Deut. xx. 1. 
Josh. xxiv. 6. 1 Mace. vi. 38. 
riendis, ryndis, rinds, Gen. xxx. 37. 
rifeliden, rifliden, p.t. pl. plundered, Gen. 
Xxxiv. 27. 11 Par. xv. 14. 
tifelyng, 2. a plundering, Tob. iii. 4.° 
| rigge, rig, reg, ridge, back, Gen. xix. 6. Ps. 
| Ixy. 11. Prov. xxvi. 3; pl. riggis, reggus, 
Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 72. Is. xlv.1. 
rime, ryme, film, excretion af the eye, Tob. 
vi. Q. Xi 14. 
tinge, rynge, to tingle, 1 Kings iii. 11. 
1v Kings xxi. 12. 
rip, ripe, rijp, rep, harvest, Gen. viii. 22. 
11 Kings xxi. 9. Judith viii. 2. Joh xviii. 
16. 
Tipe. v. repe. 
rypid, p.p. became ripe, Joel iii. 13. 
ripynge, x. harvest, Judg. xv. 1. 
| rijply, rypeli, speedily, Deeds xxv. 4. 11 
|  Maee. vii. 37. 











. Tisen, ryse, to rise, Num. xxviii. 24. 1 Esdr. 
ii. 63; p.t. roos, Gen. xix. 1. Mt. i. 24; 
pl. resen, resin, risen, risiden, Judg. xx. 
33. 1 Macc. iv. 50. Mt. xxv. 7. Deeds 
vi.g; p.p. risen, rysun, Gen. xviii. 16; 
pr.p. risende, Deeds vi. 9. 

ryneling, ryuelyng, wrinkle, Eph. v. 27; 
pl. ryuelingis, Job xvi. 9. 

ryuelis, wrinkles, Job xvi. 9. 

ri3t-forth, adv. directly, Ps. 1xxxix.17. ci. 29. 

rizstful, just, right, straight, Gen. xxx. 30. 
Mt. i. 19. i. 3. Lk. xviii. 9. 

ri3tfulnesse, righteousness, Gen. xv. 6. xviii. 
19. Mt. iii. 15; pl. ristfulnessis, Deut. iv. 
Soe Niieva. 1. 

rizsty, rightful, Lk. iii. 4. 

ri3t-reulen, rizt-reule, to ditect, Jer. vii. 5. 
Xx. 233 imp. pl. right-reulith, Jer. xviii. 
11; p.p. rist-reulid, Is. liv. 17; pr. p. 
ri3t-reulende, Jer. xxvi. 5. 

ristwis, righteous, Gen. vi. 9. xviii. 23. Mt. 
i. 19. ix. 13. 

ry3twisnes, righteousness, Gen. xv. 6. xviii. 
1g. Mt. ii. 15. Lk. i. 753 pl. ri3twis- 
nesses, Deut. iv. 5. 

rochet, roket, a cloak, robe, Gen. xxxviiil.14. 
Ex, xxviii. 4. 

rode-horsis, roode-horsis, rood-horsis, reed- 
horsis, reade-horsis, rede-horsis, horses 
Sor riding, 111 Kings iv. 26. 

rodi, rody, ruddy, 1 Kings xvi. 12. Mt. 
rains BG 

ronned, ronnen. v. rennen. 

roof, p.t. pierced, 11 Kings ii. 23. 

roos. v. risen. 

roopis, cords, Esth. xvi. 5. 

rooues, rofys, roofs, 1v Kings xix. 26. Lk. 
xii. 3. 

ropen, ropun. v. repe. 

rot, rottenness, Prov. xii. 4. 

roten, to rot, Jer. xiii. 9; p.p. roten, rotun, 
rotid, Num. v. 21,22. Ps. xxxvii.6. Jer. 
xiii. 7. xxxvill. 17. 

roustith, pr.t. rusts, Ecclus. xii. 10. 

routeth, pr.t. snores, Prov. x. 5. 

rou3, row3, rowgh, Gen. xxv. 25. 1v Kings 
i. 8. 

rouste. vv. recche. 

rownende, rownynge, pr.p. whispering, Ec- 
clus. xxi. 31. 

rude, rudee, reude, raw, rough, Mt. ix. 16. 
Mk. ii. 21. 

ruggidli, roughly, sternly, Prov. xviii. 23. 

rundelis, rundels, balls, Ex. xxv. 33. 

runne. v. rennen. 

rusheden, russchiden, p.t.pl. rushed, Mt. vii. 
25. 

ruschyngli, violently, Job vi. 15. 

rute, ruwe, rue, Lk, xi. 42. 


® 


Ss. 
saaf, saif, saf, safe, whole, Gen. xix. 17. 
Mt. i. 21. Mk. v. 34. 
sabat, saboth, sahot, sabbath, Ex.xvi.23. Mt. 
xii. 1. Lk. vi. 1; pl. sabatis, sabothis, sa- 
botis, Lev. xix. 3. Mt. xii. 2. Lk. iv. 31. 
sabatisede, p.t. kept sabbath, 11 Esdr.i. 58. 


GLOSSARY. 


sachel, wallet, Lk. x. 4; pl. sachels, Lk. xii. 
33- 

sackis, sackcloth, coarse garments, 11 Kings 
iii. 31. 11 Esdr. ix. 1. 

sacrament, mystery, hidden thing, Dan. ii. 
18, 30. 1 Tim. iii. 16. 

sacrarie, @ place to keep holy things, 1 Cor. 
ix. 13. 

sacryfye, to sacrifice, Ex. x.11; imp. pl. 
sacrifyeth, Ex. x. 11; p.t. sacrifiede, Gen. 
Xxxv. 145 p.p. sacrified, Dan. ii. 46; 
pr.p. sacrifiende, sacrifyinge, Gen. xxxv. 
14. Jer. xvii. 2. 

sacrilegie, sacrilege, Num. xxv. 18. Rom. ii. 
228 

sacrileger, one who commits sacrilege, 11Macc. 
xiii. 6. 

sacryn, to consecrate, dedicate, 1v Kings 
xxiii. 10; p.t. sacride, sacrede, Lev. viii. 
13. Prov. prol. p. 1; pl. sacriden, Josh. 
vi. 24; p.p. sacrid, sacred, Ex. xxix. 7. 
1v Kings xii. 18. 

sacryng, 2. @ consecration, Lev. vii. 37. 

sad, sadd, heavy, firm, solid, Ex. xxxviii. 7. 
Ecelus. xxvi. 24. Lk. vi. 48. 11 Cor. i. 7. 
Heb. ii. 2. v.12; comp. saddere, sadder, 
1 Mace. ix. 14. 11 Pet. i. 19. 

saddid, sowdid, p. p. strengthened, Deeds 
iil. 7. 

sadnesse, solidity, firmness, Ps. xxiv. 14. 
Prov. xxii.21. Col. ii. 5. Heb. vi. 17. 
11 Pet. iii. 17. 

safrouned, p. p. dyed with saffron, Lam. 
iv. 5. 

sai, saye, woven stuff, Ex. xxvi. 8,12; pl. 
saies, says, Ex. xxvi. 8. 

say, saie, saz. v. seen. 

sayed. v. sazede. 

sayn. v. seie. 

salewis, sallows, 
Job xl. 17. 

salu, salew, saluwe, salutith, tmp. pl. salute 
ye, Mt. x.12. Rom. xvi. 3. 

sambuke, a musical instrument, Dan. iii. 
5, 7, 10. 

sandalies, sandals, Judith xvi. 11. Mk. 
vi. 9. 

sanguyn, blood-coloured, Ecclus. xlv. 12. 

sardenyk-ston, sardonyx, Job xxviii. 16. 

sarge, stuff of wool or hair, Ex. xxvi. 8, 103; 
pl. sarges, Ex. xxvi. 8, 12. 

sarpe, @ pruning-hook, 1 Kings xiii. 20. Is. 
vii. 23. 

satrape, a prince, nobleman, 1v Kings xviii. 
24; pl. satrapes, satrapis, Dan. iii. 
283: 

sauere, to know, perceive, understand, Rom. 
xii. 3; pr.t. sauerith, Rom. xiv. 6; 
pl.saueren, sauouren, sauerith, Cath. epp. 
prol. 1. p. 594. Phil. ili. 1g; p.t. sau- 
erede, Gen. viii. 21; pl. sauerden, sau- 
eriden, Deut. xxxii. 29; pr.p. sauerynge, 
Rom. xi. 16. 

saueringis, sweet odours, Apoc. v. 8. 

saumple, example, pattern, copy, Esth. i. 18. 
Bar. v. 9; pl. saumplis, Joh. xvi. 25. 
1 Pet. a. 10 g. 


willows, Lev. xxiii. 40. 


733 


saumpler, sawmpler, pattern, example, Pref. 
ep.c.vii.p.68. Deut. xvii.18. Heb. viii. 5 ; 
pl. saumpleris, Heb. ix. 23. 

saut, an assault, 11 Macc. x. 16. 

sautree, sautrie, sawtree, sawtrye, a psaltery, 
1 Kings x. 5. 1 Par. xvi. 5; pl. sawtrées, 
1 Par, xv. 16. 

sautrere, sawtrer, @ player on the psaltery, 
1v Kings iti. 15; pl. sawtrers, 1 Par. 
xxiii. 5. 

sauze. v. seen. 

sawe, @ saying, Gen. xviii. 14; pl. sawis, Ps. 
prol. p. 736. 

a3. v. seen, 

sajede, p.t. essayed, Eccles. vii. 24; p. p. 
sayed, Apoc. ii. 2. v. asaie. 

seapen, to escape, Ecclus. xi. 10. xxx. 8; 
pr.t. scapen, scapin, 11 Pet. ii. 18; p.¢. 
scapide, 11 Cor. xi. 33; pl. scapiden, Heb. 
xii. 25; p.p. scapid, Deeds xxviii. 1. 
v. ascape. 

scar, wound, scab, Lev. xxii. 22. 

scarnesse, (?) scarceness, need, Prov. xxviii. 
27. 

searre, rock, cliff, 1 Kings xiv. 5. 11 Par. 
xxv. 12; pl. scarris, 1 Kings xiv. 4. 

scarri, rocky, eliffy, Job xxxix. 28. 

scarseli, scarsli, scarsly, sparingly, Ecclus. 
xi. 18. 11 Cor. ix. 6. 

schake, shaak, shaake, to shake, thresh, Gen. 
xxvii. 40. Judg. xvi. 20; p.¢. schook, 
shoc, shockide, shakide, shekide, Judg. 
vi.i1. Ruth ii.17. 11 Esdr. v.13. Ps. 
exxxv. 15; p.p. schakun, 1 Esdr. v. 13; 
pr.p. shakynge, Ruth ii. 17. 

schamefast, shamefast, shamfast, deserving 
shame, producing shame, Lev. xvi. 4. Deut. 
xxv. 11. Jer. xiii. 22. 

schamefastnesse, schamfastnesse, modesty, 
Ecelus. vii. 21. xxxii. 14. 1 Tim. ii. 9. 

schamefulere, comp. more shameful, Jer. xiii. 
22. Ez. xxii. 10. 

schamely, in shameful manner, Ps. xxxiv. 26. 

schapli, schaply, shapplich, comely, tall, 
Gen. xxiv. 16. xxxix. 6. Deut. i. 28. 

schaplynesse, comediness, Ps. xliv. 5. 

schapp, shap, form, shape, 11 Kings xii. 31. 

schar, shaar, a plough-share, shears, Deut. 
xxxi. 3. Judg. iii. 31; pl. scharris, shares, 
sharys, sheeris, 1 Kings xiii. 21. 11 Kings 
xii. 31. 111 Kings xviii. 28. Is. ii. 1. 

schar, sheer, the loins, the hips, the womb, 
11 Kings ii. 23. iii. 27. iv. 63 pl. scharis, 
Deut. xxviil. 57. 

schaue, shauen, to shave, Lev. xiv. 8. Is. 
vii. 20; p.t. schoofe, shoofe, shooue, 
schauede, schauyde, Judg. xvi. 19. U1 
Kings x. 4. 1 Par. xix. 45 p. p. schauun, 
shauun, Lev. xiii. 33. Num. vi. 18, 19. 

schede, sheede, sheed, to pour, to draw, 
Gen. ix. 6. Ex. xxix. 7, 12. Ez. xxii. 
12; imp.schede, Ps. xxxiv.3; p.é.schedde. 
shede, shedde, Gen. -xxxvili. 9. Ex. 
xxiv. 6; pl. shadden, Ps. cv. 38; p. p. 
sched, shad, Gen. ix. 6. Deut. xxi. 7. 
Josh. xx. 9; pr. p. scheddynge, tv Kings 
vili. 11. 


734 


schedide, schoddide, schedde, p.t. combed, 
separated the hair into tresses, Judith 


Xs 35 


schefes, scheues, scheuys, sheues, sheaves, | 


Gen. xxxvil. 17. xli. 47. Ruth iii. 7. 
Judith viii. 3. Ecclus. xxi. 10. 

scheltrun, sheltrun, shiltroun, schetrome, 
an array, army, Gen. xiv. 8. 1 Kings 
iv. 2; pl. scheltruns, shiltrouns, 1 Kings 
xvii. 26. 

schende, to confound, to put to shame, Ec- 
clus. xiii. 8; pr.¢. schendith, shendith, 
Prov. xiii. 5; imp. scheende, schende, 
shend, Gen. xi. 7. 111 Kings ii.16, 20. 
Ps. lvi. 1; p.¢. schente, Judith xvi. 7; 
p. p. schent, shent, Num. xxxvi. 4. 
1 Kings xx. 34. 11 Kings x. 5. Rom. ix. 
33; pr.p. schendyng, Ecclus. xlii. 14. 

schendful, shenful, disgraceful, 1 Kings xx. 
30. Prov. xix. 26. 

schenschip, shenship, disgrace, reproof, 
Lev. xviii. 17. Lk. i. 25. vi. 22. Rom. 
i. 26; pl. schenschipis, shendshipis, Ez. 
xxxiv. 29. Rom. xv. 3. 

schenschipful, disgraceful, 11 Par. xxiv. 24. 

schenschipfuli, disgracefully, Ps. xxxviii. 
52e 

scheep, shep, sheep, Gen. iv. 2. xxxi. 38. 

scherd, sherd, shord, fragment, potsherd, 
Job ii. 8. Ps. xxi. 16. Is. xxx. 14. xlv.9. 
Ecelus. xxii. 7. 

schere, fo shear, Gen. xxxi. 193 p. p. schore, 
schorun, shorun, 1 Kings xxv. 2, 7. 1 
Kings xiii. 23, 24. 

schertnesse, shortness, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 
66. 

schet. v. schitte. 

schete, sheten, sheete, fo shoot, to strike by 
shooting, Ps. Ixiii. 5, 6. Is. xxxvii. 333 
p.t. schete, schette, schotte, 1 Kings xx. 
36. 1v Kings xiii. 17. 11 Par. xviii. 33; 
p. p. schott, 1 Kings xx. 37; pr. p. schet- 
ynge, Jer. xlvi. 9. 

scheters. v. sheter. 

schynyngere, shynendere, comp. more shin- 
ing, Lam. iv. 7. 

schynyngli, splendidly, Lk. xvi. 19. 

schip-hire, ship-hijre, fare, passage money, 
Jon. i. 3. 

schip-men, schippe-men, ship-men, sailors, 
11 Kings ix. 27. 11 Par. viii. 18. Jon. 
i. 5. 

schippe, shipen, fo take ship, to sail, Deeds 
xx. 3. xxi. 13 pl. schippiden, schepiden, 
Deeds xx. 13. xxi. 2; pr. p. schippinge, 
Deeds xx. 3. 

schirte, sherte, an inner garment, Lev. viii. 7; 
pl. schertis, shertes, Lev. xi. 32. 

schitte, fo shut, Is. xxii. 22; p.t. schitte, 
shitte, schutt, schittide, 1 Mace. x. 75. Lk. 
iii. 20; pl. schetten, Gen. xix. 10; 
p.p. schit, schitt, schet, Tob. viii. 18. 
Mt. vi. 6. xxiv. 10. Lk. xi. 7. Joh. xx. 
ig. Deeds v. 23; pr. p. shittinge, Apoc. 
xi. 6. 

schyueres, stubble or herds of flax, Josh. 
ii. 6. 





GLOSSARY. 


scho, schoo, shoe, Ex. iii. 5. Josh. v. 16; pl. 
schoon, schone, shoon, shon, Ex. xii. 11. 
Judith x. 3. xvi. rr. Mt. ili, rr. x. To. 
Lk. iii. 16. 

schodde, shodde, p. ¢. put on shoes, Ez. xvi. 
16; p.p. schod, schood, 11 Par. xxviii. 
15. Is. xi. 15. Mk. vi. 9. 

schoddide. v. schedide. 

schoggid, p. p. tossed, Mt. xiv. 24. 

schoen, shoen, p.f. shone, Mt. xxviii. 1. 
Lk. ii. 9. 

schone, shonnen, shonne, shunne, to avoid, 
beware of, shun, Lev. xi. 11. xv. 30. 1 Kings 
xviii. 1g. Ecclus. xxxii. 21 ; imp. schonye, 
11 Tim. ii. 23. Tit. ii. 10; pl. shonneth, 


Lev. xviii. 28; p. p. shoned, Lev. xi. 13; | 


pr. p. shonnynge, Judg. xi. 3. 

schop. . shape. 

schyue, fo shove, push, Judg. xvi. 19; 
pr. p. schoufynge, Deeds xix. 33. 

schredde, p.t. cut in pieces, chopped, 1v Kings 
iv. 39. 

schrewe, shrewe, @ depraved person, Joh ix. 
20; pl. schrewis, shrewis, Job v. 13. 
Prov. x. 31. 


schrewid, shrewid, p. p. depraved, Gen. | 
xxxix. 8. Deut. xviii. 20. Prov. x. 9; | 
| seended, p. t. sent, Mt. x. 5. 


pr. p. shrewende, Is. ix. 14. 

schrewidnes, depravity, wickedness, Gen. vi. 
11. xv. 16; pl. shreudenessys, shreude- 
nesses, Ps. liv. 16. Wisd. iv. 14. 

schridyng, n. a cutting of herbs, S. Sol. ii. 
12. 

schryue, to confess, Tob. xiii. 7. 

schulen, shulen, shuln, shul, pr. ¢. pl. shail, 
Gen. vi. 20. Ps. xxxvi.g. Mt. vi. 5, 9. 
Lk. x. 8. 

sclattis, slates, tiles, Lk. v. 19. 

sclaundre, evil fame, reproach, offence, Ex. 
x. 7. 1 Mace. v. 4. 1 Cor. xi. 14. 

sclaundre, to offend, Mk. ix. 42; pr. t. 
sclaundreth, Mk. ix. 42; pl. sclaundren, 
Mal. ii. 8; p. ¢. pl. sclaundriden, Mal. 
ii.8; p.p. sclaundred, sclaundrid, Ec- 
clus. i. 37. Mal. ii. 8. Mk. iv. 17. 

scol, the skudl, Deut. xxviii. 48; pl. scullis, 
skulles, Deut. xxi. 4. 1 Kings iv. 18. 

scot, payment, contribution, Prov. xxiii. 
21. 

scrabrouns, hornets, Ex. xxiii. 28. 

scraping-knyf, a scribe’s knife, an erasor, 
Jer. xxxvi. 23. 

scripil, @ seruple, 1 Kings xxv. 313 pl. scri- 
pilles, scruples in weight, Ex. xxx. 13. 

scrippe, scrip, wallet, bag, 1 Kings xvii. 
4o. Tob. viii. 2. Judith xiii. 11. Mt. x. 
10. Lk. xxii. 35, 36; pl. scrippis, 1 
Kings ix. 7. 

scrites, writings, Ecclus. xxxix. 38. 

scryuen, scryueyn, a scribe, Is. xxxvi. 3, 
22; pl. scryuens, 1 Par. ii. 55. 

scrowis, scrolls, Mt. xxiii. 5. 

sculptil, a graven image, Nah. i. 14; pl. 
sculptilis, Mic. 1.7. v.12. 

sechen, seche, fo inguire, require, Lev. 
xiii. 36. Judith viii. 20; pr.t. pl. sechith, 
Deeds prol. p. 507. 


secoundarye, secundary, not of the first 
rank, Gen. xxii. 34. xxv. 6. 

secoundli, secoundlich, secounde, a second 
time, Gen. xxvii. 36. xli. 32. Lev. xiti. 
58. 

seducioun, sedition, strife, Mk. xv. 7. 

see, a seat, 111 Kings i. 20. Prov. xx. 8. 
Jer. i, 15. 

seek. v. sijk. 

seen, se, seey3en, fo see, Gen. ii. 19. Deut. 
xxvii. 10. Ps. v.53 imp. pl. seeth, seizeth, 
Mt. xxviii. 6. Mk. vi. 38; p.t. say, saie, saye, 
8aiz, Sau3ze, SaWe, SaW3, Sa3, See3, Sel3, Seize, 
siz, size, sy3, Gen. i. 10. xxii. 4. xxix. 32. 
xxxvii. 6. xxxviil. 2. x1.16. Ez. viii. 10. 
Jer. vii. 11. Mt. iii. 16. iv. 16. ix. 23. 
Mk. viii. 25. Lk. i. 26. v. 2. Deeds vit. 24. 
Apoc. xix. i1; pl. saien, sayen, sayn, 
saujen, sawen, seen, seien, seizen, sien, 
sen, sy3en, Gen. xil. 14. XxXxvil. 25. 
xl. 8. Mt. ti. g. ix. a1. xxv. 37. Mk. ii. 
12. ix. 37. Lk. vill. 34. xviii. 15. Joh. i. 
39- Vi.19; p. p. 8a3, Seen, seien, seyn, 
sey, Gen. ix. 22. xxix. 32. xl.7. Mt. ix. 
333 pr. p. Seynge, seende, seande, Gen. 
xvi.4. Judith x. 9. Mt. ix. 36. 

seelde. vv. sellen. 


seer, seere, seare, @ prophet, 1 Kings ix. 9. 
11 Kings xv. 27; pl. seejers, seeris, iV 
Kings xvii. 13. 

seeten, saten, p.¢. pl. sat, Josh. viii. 9. 
1v Kings vi. 32. Mt. xiv.9; p.p. seete, 
sete, seten, sitten, 1 Kings xx. 25. Lk. 
vil. 37. 

seew3h. v. sowe. 

seew, potage, Gen. xxvii. 4,17. Ex. xii. 39. 
11 Kings xiii. 5; pl. sewis, Num. xv. 21. 

sege, seat, Mt. xxv. 31; pl. seegis, Mt. 
xix, 28. 

segen, pr.t. pl. besiege, Judith v. 3; p.t. pl. 
segedyn, segeden, Judg. i. 23. xvi. 2. 

segge. v. Sele. 

segge, rush, flag, Ex. ii. 3; pl. seggis, Gen. 
xii. 18. 

segyng, seging, seegyng,2.a siege, besieging, 
Deut. xxviii. 55. Is. xxix. 3. Jer. xix. 9. 
1 Mace. i. 11. 

seie, seye, seyn, segge, to say, Gen. xii. 12. 
xxxvii. 20. Deut. xxvii.16. Ps. lvii. 12. 
xciii. 4; pr.t. pl. seien, seyn, sayn, Mt. 
ix. 28. Mk. viii. 28; pr. p. seiende, Rom. 
prel. I. p. 300. 

seyntuary, seyntuarie, a sanctuary, Ex. xv.” 
17. Num. iv. 15; pl. seyntuaries, sayn- 
tuarise, Ex. xxvi. 33. 

sekere, a searcher, Gen. xxxi. 35. 

sei3, Selzeth. v. seen. 

selden, adv. seldom, Pref. ep. c. viii. p. 73. 

sely, blessed, happy, Ecclus. xiv. 2. 

selle, a cell, Is. xxxix. 2. 

sellen, sille, to sell, Gen. xlvii. 22. Lk. xii. 
33; imp. sel, sille, Gen. xxv. 31; p. f. 
seelde, selde, soold, soulde, Gen. xxv. 33. 
Prov. xxxi. 24. Ez. vii. 13. Mt. xiii. 46. 
Heb. xii. 16; pl. seelden, selden, solden, 
Gen. xxxvii. 28. xlv. 4. Uk. xvii. 28; 


p.p. seeld, seld, soold, solde, Gen. xxv. 
34. xlii.1. Ps. xlii.13. Mt. x. 29. Rom. 
vii. 4. 

sellis, seats, chairs, 11 Mace. xiv. 21. 

semblannt, semblaunte, semelant, features, 
Ez. i. 10. ii. 6. Lk. xxiv. 5. 

sembli, sembly, semely, semlich, comely, 
well-seeming, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 72. Gen. 
xxiv. 16, xlix. 22. 1 Kings xvi.12. Heb. 
xi. 23. 

sendel, linen cloth, Prov. xxxi. 24. Mt. 
xxvii. 59. Mk. xiv. 51. 

sene, a synod, Judith prol. p. 602. 

seneney, mustard, Mt. xiii. 31. xvii. 19. 
Lk. xiii. 19. 

senewe, synwe, a sinew, Gen. xxxii. 25; pl. 
senewis, synewis, Josh. xi. 6. 1 Par. 
xviii. 4. Job x. 11. 

sengid, p. p. burnt, Lev. xxiii. 11 g. 

sense, sens, incense, Lev. vi.13. Ecclus. i. 
g. v. cense. 

sense-vesselis, vessels for incense, Jer. lii. 
19. 

sepulture, a burying, Gen. xxiii. 4. 

sequestrid, p. p. separated, assigned, 1 Macc. 
Xi. 34. 

sergeauntis, officers, 1 Kings xix. 14. 

sermounende, pr. p. discoursing, Wisd. viii. 
12. 

sermounyng, 2. a@ discourse, converse, Prov. 
iii. 32. 

seruage, service, servitude, Gen. xv. 13. 
Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

seruauntesse, a female servant, Gen. xvi. 
2, 5. XXV.12. xxix. 29. Ruth iii. 9; pl. 
seruauntessis, Gen. xxxii. 22. xxxili. 1. 

seruytours, servants, 111 Kings x. 5. 

sethen, sethe, to cook, boil, prepare by fire, 
Gen. xi. 3. Is. i. 25; p.é. sethede, se- 
thide, seth, Gen. xviii. 7. xix. 3. xxv. 29. 
ut Kings xiii. 8. Is. xliv.19; pl. seethe- 
den, setheden, tv Kings vi. 29 ; p.p. so- 
then, soothen, sothun, sooden, sodun, 
sode, sodden, Gen. xviii. 8. xxvii. 31. 
Num. vi. tg. 18. xlviii. 10. 

sething, seethinge, x. potage, Gen. xxv. 30. 
1v Kings iv. 40. 

sette, fo put, Gen. il.15; p.t. settide, sette, 
Gen. i. 17. xvii. 8. Mt. iv. 5; pl. setti- 
den, setteden, setten, Gen. xix.17. Mk. 
vi. 5. Joh. viii. 3; p.p. set, ysett, Gen. 
xlviii. 17. Joh. prol.1. p. 233. 

seuerendely, separately, Is. prol. p. 224. 

seuethe, seventh, Ecclus. vii. 3. 

sew. v. owe. 

sewide, souwide, p.t. stitched, sewed, Job 
xvi. 16; pl. sewiden, soweden, Gen. iii. 7; 
p.p. sewid, sewide, sowed, Josh. ix. 4, 5. 
Ez. xvi. 16; pr. p. souwing, Eccles. 
ili. 7. 

sewyngly. v. suyngli. 

sewis. v. seew. 

sextarie, a pint, (Lat. sextarius,) Lev.xiv.10. 

shaar. v. schar. 

shab, a scab, Lev. xxii. 22. 

shad. v. schede. 

shadewe-eddre, an adder, Prov. xxiil. 32. 


GLOSSARY. 


xxx. 19. Eccles, x. 8. Ecchus. xxi. 2; 
pl. shadewe-edderes, Wisd. xvi. 5. 


shamefastli, shamefastliche, shamfastli, 
shamefully, Pref. ep. c. 1. p. 61. Ps. 
Xxxix. 15. 


shamen, to be ashamed, to make ashamed, 
Is. liv. 4; pr.t. schamyde, rv Kings iti. 
14. U1 Par. xxxvi.12. 11 Tim. 1.16; p. ¢. 
pl. shameden, Lam. iv. 16. v.12; p.p. 
shamed, Is. i. 29. 11 Tim. ii. 1g; pr. p. 
schamynge, Heb. xi. 27. 

shame-worthi, deserving of shame, Lev. 
xvi. 4. 

shape, pr.t. form, create, Is. lxv.17, 18; 
p.t. shop, schop, shoop, Is. xlv. 8. liv. 
16. lvii.19. Heb. xi. 7; p.p. shapen, 
shape, shapid, Ecelus, x. 22. Is. xlviii. 7; 
pr.p. shapende, Is. xlv. 7. 

shapere, a former, creator, Is. li. 13. 

shapplich. v. schaply. 

sharpe, to make sharp, Wisd. v.21; imp. 
pl. sharpeth, Jer. li.11; p.¢. pl. sharp- 
iden, sharpeden, scharpiden, Ps. lxiii. 4. 
exxxix. 4. 

shauen. v. schaue. 

sheed. _v. schede. 

sheer. v. schar. 

shekide. v. schake. 

sheten. v. schete. 

sheter, an archer, Gen. xxi.20; pl. scheters, 
sheeters, sheters, 1 Kings xxxi. 3. 1 
Kings xi. 24. 1 Par. x. 3. 

shewers, sheweres, mirrors, Ex. xxxviii. 8. 
Ts. iii, 23. 

shipbreche, shipwreck, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 70. 
ut Cor, xi. 25. 

shoc. v. schake. 

shoynge, shoing, 2. shoe, shoes, Ex. iti. 5. 
Ps, lix. 10. 

shoofe. v. schaue. 

shord. v. scherd. 

shortid, p. p. shortened, Job prol. p. 670. 

shorting, ». an abridgment, cutting short, 
Jer. prol. p. 342. 

shoueling, pr. p. shuffling, Tob. xi. 10. 

shrendely, wickedly, perversely, Is. i. 16. 

shrendenessys. v. schrewidnes. 

shrifte, confession, 111 Esdr. ix. 8. 

shuldryngis, brackets, supports, 111 Kings 
Vii. 30. 

shunne. v. schone. 

sich, siche, such, Gen. xli. 19. xliii. 32. 

sicle, a shekel, Ex. xxx.13; pl. sicles, Gen. 
xxiii, 15. 

sicomoris, sycomore trees, 111 Kings x. 27. 
11 Par. i. 15. 

side-coote, loose coat, long coat, Gen. xxxvii. 


23. 
syde-flowende, pr. p. flowing by, Is. xliv. 4. 
sidir. v. sither. 


siggen, pr.t. pl. say, Pref. ep. c. viii. p. 75. 
v. seie. 

sygnacle, little sign, 1 Cor. ix. 2. 

sijk, seeke, seek, seke, seik, sick, 1v Kings 
i. 2. Mt. xxv. 39. 

syken, to become sick, be sick, 1 Kings xxx. 
13; p.¢. sijkide, 1v Kings xiii. 14. 


735 


sikynyn, to become sick, 1 Kings xxx. 13; 
p-t. sicnede, sijknede, seekened, tv Kings 
viii. 29. xx. 1. Is, xxxviii. 1. 

sikir, secure, certain, Wisd. vii. 23. Mt. 
xxviii. 14. Heb. vi. 19; sup. sikereste, 
1 Kings xxiii. 19. 

sikirli, surely, Rom. prol. 1. p. 300; comp. 
sikirliere, 11 Kings viii. 6 g. 

sikirnesse, stkurness, security, Is. xxxii. 17. 
1 Thess. y. 3. 

siknyngus, sicknesses, Jer. xvi. 4. 

self, selue, seluen. v. hem, oure-silf, vs- 
silf. 

sillable, ready to be sold, Ecclus. x. 10. 

sille. v. sellen. 

silleris, sillers, sellers, Ez. xxvii. 22. 1 Tim. 
i. 10. 

sillyng, 2. @ selling, Gen. xlvii. 14. 

silueren, of silver, Gen. xliv. 2. 14 Tim. ii. 
20. 

symbalis, cymbals, 1 Par. xv. 16, 

syment, cement, Gen. xi. 3. 

symfonie, symphonye, @ musical instrument, 
Dan. iii. 5. Lk. xv. 25. 

symylacre, image, idol, Num. xxxiii. 21. 
1 Kings xix. 16. Deeds vii. 41; pl. sy- 
mylacris, symulacris, Ex. xxxiv. 15. Is. 
xlvi. 1. Rom. prol. 2. p. 302. 

simpleli, symplely, symplich, simply, Deut. 
xix. 5. Esth. prol. p. 636. Prov. ii. 7. 

singeressis, syngeresses, syngeressis, female 
singers, 1 Par. xxxv. 25. 1 Esdr. ii. 65. 

syngyn, to sownd, 1 Par. xvi. 5. 

syngsteres, syngsteris, syngsters, female 
singers, 11 Kings xix. 35. 11 Par. xxxv. 
25. 1 Esdr. ii. 65. 

singuler, alone, by himself, Mk. iv. 10. 

singulerli, syngulerli, severally, solitarily, 
Ps. iv. 10. xxxii. 15. cxl. 10. 

synneresse, female sinner, Lk. vii. 37. 

syne. v. senewe. 

sioun, syoun, a branch, shoot, Num. xiii. 24. 
Joh. xv.1, 4; pl. siouns, Gen. xl. 10. 
Ps, Ixxix. 12. 

sire-name, surname, Gen. xxxv. 6. 

syres, sirs, lords, Gen. xix. 2. 

sisteren, sistren, sosterys, sisters, Num. vi. 7. 
Mk. x. 29. 

sister-germayn, own sister, 111 Kings xi. 19. 

sith, sithen, adv. since, Gen. xviii. 18. Josh. 
ix. 22. Lk. xiii. 7. < 

sithe, a time, turn, Ex. x. 17; pl. sithe, 
sithes, sithis, sy3this, Gen. xxxiii. 3. Ex. 
xxiti. 14. Mt. xviii. 22. Lk. xvii. 4. Apoc. 
ix. 16. 

sither, sithur, cyther, sidir, sydur, cider, 
Judg. xiii. 4,14. Lk. i. 15. 

sitols, lyres, 11 Kings vi. 5. 111 Kings x. 
12. : 

sitt, sett, pr. ¢. sits, Ps. ix.* 8. 

sixte, sizth, Gen. xxx. 19. 

8i3, 8y3. 0. Seen. : 

sishe, pr.t. sigh, Job iil. 24; p.t. sizhede, 
side, si33ide, Josh. xv. 18. Ecclus. xxv. 
253 p-p. sid, Judg.i.14; pr.p. sizshende, 
siszyng, Pref. ep. c. ii, p. 63. Ecclus. 
XXX. 21. 


736 


skile, reason, Rom. iii. g. 

skilfuli, rightfully, Gen. xlii. 21. 

skunfite, 20 discomfit, Judg. vi. 16. 

skippe, to leap, 1 Kings x. 6. Wisd. v. 
22; p.t. skippide, scippide, 1 Kings x. 
10. xi. 6; pl. skipten, scipten, skippiden, 
11 Kings xviii. 26. Deeds xiv. 13. 

slacliere, comp. more remissly, 11 Mace. xii. 
14. 

slade, a declivity, 11 Kings xvi. 13. 

slake, imp. slacken, let down, Ecclus. xxxiii. 
26. Lk. v. 43 p.p. slakid, Ex. xxxix. 1g. 
Is. xxxiii. 23. 

slascht, p.p. roughly hewn, 111 Kings v. 
18, 

slea. wv. slen. 

sledery. v. slideri. 

sledis, sleddis, sleddus, sledges, 1 Par. 
Xx09: 

sleeresse, sleestere, a female murderer, Tob. 
iii. 9. 

slee3, sleei3, slize, sliz, cunning, wise, 11 Par. 
li. 12, 13. Mt. x. 16. xi. 25. 

sleesli, slislich, slyly, slily, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p. 68. c. ix. p. 75. Tob. ii. 43 comp. 
slelyer, 1 Kings xxiti. 22. 

sleyng, n. slaughter, Judg. ix. 24. 

sleizt, slyness, craftiness, Num. iv. 20. 

slen, sle, slee, slea, to slay, Gen. iv. 15. 
Ps. eviii, 17. Hos. ix. 16. Mt. ii. 13. 
vy. 213 imp.pl. sleeth, Ex. 1.16; p.t. 
slewe, slew3, sleu3, slo3, sloo3, slou3, slowe, 
slow3e, Gen. iv. 23. Ex. xiv. 24. 111 Kings 
li. 25. Jer. xx.17. Mt. ii.16. Lk. xv. 27. 
Heb. xi. 24; pl. slewen, slouzen, slowen, 
Gen. xxxiv. 26. Mt. xxiii. gr. Lk. xx. 
153 p.p. slayn, slawe, slawn, sleyn, Gen. 
ix. 11. Ex. xxix. 16. Lev. vii. 8. Num. 
XXX1. 19. 

slepis, pl. sleep, Gen. xxviil. 12. 

slewth, slouthe, sloth, Josh. xviii. 3. 

slew3. v. slen. 

slyde, to slide, Deut. xxxii. 35; p.t. slood, 
11 Kings xxii. 11. Ecclus. xiv. 1. Lam. 
iii. 535 p.p. sliden, slyden, slide, yslide, 
rir Kings xx. 39. Prov. xxiv. to. Lam. 
iii, 53. 

slideri, slidery, slydery, sledery, slidir, siip- 
pery, Job prol. p. 670. Ps. xxxiv. 6. 
Prov. xxvi. 28. Jer. xxiii, 12. xxxvili. 22. 
Lam. iy. 18. 

slidirnesse, slydirnesse, slipperiness, Ps. 
xxxiv. 6. Jer. xxxviil. 22. 

slim, sliym, slyme, slime, mud, Gen. ii. 7. 
Toh. viii. 8. Ps. xviii. 3. 

sliper, slyper, slippery, Prov. xxvi. 28. 

sliz3. v. slee3. 

sloo, a sloe, blackthorn, Dan. xiii. 54. 

slood. v. slyde. 

sloo3, slo3, slou3. ¢. slen. 

slou3, slowe, slough, 11 Pet. ii. 22. 


slow,: slo3, slow, slothful, dull, inert, 
ui Kings iii. 33. Prov. xii. 24. Judith 
xiv. 14. 

slow3e. v. slen. 


smaragd, smaragde, an emerald, Ecclus. 
xxxii. 8. 





GLOSSARY. 


smeek, smook, smoke, Gen. xix. 28. Ex. 
xix. 18. Judg. xix. 49. 

smekide, p.¢. smoked, Ecclus. xxiv. 21; 
pr. p. smekynge, Gen. xv. 17. 

smethe, smooth, Gen. xxvii. 11. 

smethenesse, smoothness, 111 Kings vi. 29; 
pl. smethenessis, 111 Kings vi. 18. 

smyte, to strike, Gen. vill. 21; imp. pl. 
smytith, Mt. x. 14; p.¢. smoot, smote, 
smy3t, Gen. iv. 22. xiv. 15. XXxxvi. 353 
pl. smoten, smote, smetin, smeten, smy- 
ten, smytiden, Gen. xix. 11. xxi. 27. 
Mt. xxvi. 67. Lk. xxiii, 48; p. p. 
smyte, ‘smyten, smytun, Gen. xiv. 5. 
xli. 6. 

smyter, a smith, Gen. iv. 22. 

smyting, x. a striking of money, 1 Macc. 
xv. 6. 

smy3th, smyst, a smith, Gen. iv. 22. 1 Kings 
xiii. 19. 

smockis, shérts, Is. iii. 22. 

snapere, fo stumble, Prov. iii. 23. Dan. xi. 
19; p.é. pl. snaperiden, Jer. xviii. 15. 

snybhe, imp. reprove, Mt. xviii. 15. 

snybhing, 2. reproof, Prov. vi. 23; pl. 
snybbyngis, Prov. v. 12. 

snyte, a snipe, Is. xxxiv. 11. 

snytels, snyters, seuffers, Num. iv. 9. 

snytid, snottid, p.p. snuffed, Ex. xxv. 38. 
XXxxvii. 23. 

snytyng-tongis, snuffers, Ex. xxxvii. 23. 

snobbyng, 2. @ sobbing, Lam. iii. 56. 

snottis, suuffs, Ex. xxv. 38. 

sno3, snow, Prov. xxv. 13. 

socied, p.p. associated, 1 Kings xiv. 24. 


ee 


sodeynlich, sodenli, suddenly, Josh. x. 9. | 


xi. 7. 

sodeknes, sodeknys, suddekns, subdeacons, 
1 Esdr. ii. Jo. 11 Esdr. x. 28. 

sodun. v. sethen. 

soffym, sophism, Ecclus. xxxvii. 23; pl. 
soffemys, Ecclus. xxxvii. 23. 

sofistre, @ sophist, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 67. 

softeth, pr.t. makes soft, Prov. ii. 16; p.p. 
softid, Ps. liv. 22. 

softnessis, caresses, Gen. xxxiv. 3. 

sogette. v. suget. 

soietable, capable of being subjected, Bar. 
i. 18, 

soylen, to solve, acquit, Judg. xiv. 12; p.p. 
soiled, soylid, 1 Par. prol. p. 316. 1 Mace. 
X. 33. v. asoilen. 

soilyng, 2. a solution, exposition, Eccles. vii. 
jo. Dan. ii. 25; pl. soilingis, Wisd. 
viii. 8. 

sok, n. suck, sucking, Is. xi. 8. 

solacys, consolations, Prov. prol. p. 1. 

soleyn, solitary, Job iii. 14. 

soleyntee, solitude, desolation, Js. xxiv. 12. 

soler, an upper room, Josh. ii. 6. 1v Kings 
i, 2. iv. 10, 11. Deeds i. 13. ix. 375 pl. 
soleris, Gen. vi. 16. Jer. xxii. 14. 

somenyd, somened, p.p. summoned, Deeds 
xxiv. 2. 

sondry, sondrynge, sunder, several, Josh. 
vii. 18. Judg. xxi. 21. 

soneles, without a son, Gen. xxvii. 45. 


soune, the sun, Josh. xii. 1. 

sooden. v. sethen. 

soold. v. sellen. 

soond, sand, Gen. xxii. 17. Mt. vii. 26. Heb. 
xi, 12. 

soop, soopen. %. soupen. 

soort, sort, lot, part, division, Ley. xxvii. 24. 
Josh. xvii. 17. Lk. i. 5, 8. Deeds xxvi. 
18. Eph. i. 11. 

soot, sote, sweet, Num. xv. 10. xxviii. 13. 

sootnes, sweetness, Num. xv. 3. 

sop, sopun. ». soupen. 

sorewen, sorewe, soru, to grieve, make sorry, 
Josh. prol. p.555- Zech. xii. 10; p. p. 
sorewid, ysorowid, Zech. xii. 10. 11 Cor. 
pro). p. 373- 

sorewfulnesse, much sorrow, 11 Mace. iii.17. 

sorewi, sorrowful, Ecclus. xiv. 10. 

sorewil, adv. sorrowfully, Ecclus. xxii. 16. 

sori, sad, comp. soriere, Gen. x]. 7. 

sori-hertid, weak-minded, Prov. vii. 7. ix.16. 

sorwe, sorewen, soreness, pain, sorrow, sick- 
ness, Gen. xxxiv. 25. Eeclus. xxxvili. 7; 
pl. sorwis, soris, Mk. i. 34. 

sosterys. v. sisteren. 

soth, sooth, truth, Josh. prol. p. 555. 
clus. iv. 24. 

soth, sooth, adj. true, Deut. xvii. 4. Josh. 
prol. p. 556. Ecclus. v. 13. 

sothfast, sothefast, true, Ex. xxxiv. 6. Mt. 
xxii. 16. Joh. iii. 33. Apoc. xix. 11. 

sothfastnes, sothefastness, truth, Pref. ep. 
ce. i, p. 61. Gen. xxiv. 27. Eph. vi. 14. 

sothen, soothen. v. sethen. 

sotheli, sothely, truly, Gen. iv. 3. Mt. 
iii. g. 

sothenes, truth, Gen. xxiv. 49. Ley. viii. 8. 

sothsawe, a proverb, Pref. ep. c. viii. 
Pp. 75: 

sotile, subtle, Wisd. vii. 22; comp. sotiler, 
Lev. xiii. 30. 

soude, sowde, sowede, wages, 11 Cor. ii. 8; 
pl. soudis, sowdis, 1 Mace. iii. 28. xiv. 32. 
Lk. iii. 14. 1 Cor. ix. 7. 

souereyne, high, supreme, Prov. viii. 2; sup. 
souereyneste, Prov. viii. 2. 

souereynly, in the highest degree, supremely, 
ut Kings i. 20 9. S. Sol. viii. 14 9. 

souereyns, persons set over others, Heb. xiii. 
1, 24. . 

souke, sowk, to suck, suckle, Gen. xxi. 7. 
Is, lx. 16; p.p. soukid, Job iti. 12; pr.p. 
sowkyng, Gen. xxi. 8. 

souken, souke, n. suck, sucking, Job iii. 12. 
Lam. iv. 3. v. sok. 

soukynge-fere, sowkynge-feere, foster-bro- 
ther, Deeds xiii. 1. 

soulde. v, sellen. 

soule-haners, diving creatures, Gen. iil. 14. 

soupen, soupe, fo swallow, sup up, Job xl. 
18. Apoc. iii. 20; pr.t. soupeth, Job 
xxxix. 24; p.t. sop, soop, soupede, sowp- 
ide, Deut. xi. 6. Jer. li. 34. Mt. xxvi. 
26. Apoc. xii. 16; pl. soupeden, Is. xlix. 
19; p.p. soopen, sopun, soupid, sowpyd, 
Num. xi, 2. 11 Kings xvii. 16. Jer. li. 44. 
1 Cor. xv. 34; pr.p. soupende, Is. xiv. 29. 


Ec- 


soupynge-mete, sop, 11 Kings xiii. 10; pl. 
soupinge-metis, 11 Kings xiii. 8. 

soupingis, soupyngis, sops, 11 Kings xiii. 6, 
8, Io. 

soupyng- place, sowpyng-place, supper-room, 
Judg. iii. 20. Deeds i. 13. ix. 375 pl. 
sowpyng-placis, Gen. vi. 16. 

sour-dou3, soute-dow3, leaven, Mt. xiii. 33. 

sour-dowid, sowr-dowid, p.p. leavened, Hos. 
vii. 4. Amos iv. 5. Mt. xiii. 33. 

souwide, souwing. ». sewide. 

sowdid. v. saddid. 

sowe, fo sow, Ley. xix.193 imp. pl. soweth, 
Gen. xlvii. 23; p.¢. sewe, sew, seeu3h, 
segh, sowide, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 71. Gen. 
xxvi. 12. Mt. xiii. 24; pl. sewen, sowiden, 
Jer. xii. 13; p.p. sowun, sowe, sowid, 
Lev. xxvii. 16, Num. xx. 5. Dent. xxii. 9; 
pr.p. sowende, Mt. xiii. 18. 

sowel, sowil, sowfful, potage, Gen. xxv. 34. 
xxvii. 4. Ex. xii. 39. 11 Kings xiii. 5; pl. 
sowelis, sowuels, sowlis, Num. xv. 18, 21. 

sowrid, p.p. made sour, Ex. xii. 34. Mt. xiii. 
33> 

soun, sown, sound, Ex. xix.19. Lk. xxi. 
PR: 

sowryng, 7”. sourness, 1 Cor. v. 7. 

sparcle, a spark, Gen. xix. 28. 11 Kings 
xiv. 17. Wisd. ii. 2. Is. i. 31; pl. sparcles, 
sparklis, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 72. Gen. xix. 
28. Wisd. iii. 7. 

sparlyuers, sparluris, calves of the leg, Deut. 
Xxvill. 35. 

sparowen, sparewis, sparrows, Ps. ciii. 17. 
sparpoild, sparpuylid, sparplyd, p.p. scat- 

~ tered, 11 Kings xviii. 8. Deeds v. 36. 
v. disparple. 

sparres, poles, rafters, Ecclus. xxix. 29. 

specialte, @ peculiar sort, Ex. xix. 5. 

specked, speckid, speckyd, p. p. spotted, 
Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 71. Gen. xxx. 32. 

specky, spotted, Gen. xxx. 32. 

spedeful, spedful, speedful, expedient, profit- 
able, Pref. ep. c. ii. p.63. 11 Par. xxxii. 4. 
Tob. iii. 6. 1 Cor. vi. 12. 

spedeth, spedith, speedith, pr.t. is expedient, 
profits, 1 Par. xiii. 12. Esth. iii. 8. Job 
xv. 3. Mt. xix. 10; pl. speden, Ecclus. 
Xxxvil. 30. 1 Cor. vi. 12; p. p. spedde, 
Lk. prol.1. p.141. 

speding, 2. an expedition, Judith ii. 7. 

speel, @ splinter, 1v Kings xviii. 21. 

speere, @ circle, sphere, Is. xxix. 3. 

speken, to speak, Gen. xxxvil. 4; p.t. spac, 
spack, spak, spake, speeke, Gen. viii. 15. 
11 Kings vii. 29. 11 Mace. vii. 43 p. p. 
ispoken, Ecclus. prol. p. 123 ; pr.p. spek- 
ende, Ecclus. prol. p. 123. 

spelonk, spelunc, spelunk, @ cave, Gen. xix. 
30. xxiii. 9. Josh. x. 27. 

Spence, cost, expensc, 1 Cor. ix. 18; pl. 
spenses, spensis, Dan. xiv. 7. 1 Mace. x. 
44. Lk. xiv. 28. i 

spendid, p.p. expended, Prov. xxiii. 21 g. 
MK. v. 26. 

spete, spitten, spute, fo spit, Deut. xxv. 9. 
Job xxx. ro. Ecclus. xxviii. 14; p.é. 

VOL. IV. 


GLOSSARY. 


spete, spette, spatte, spetide, Mk. vii. 33. 
viii. 23. Joh. ix. 6; pl. speten, spitten, 
spetteden, spittiden, Mt. xxvi. 67; p.p. 
spet, spette, Num. xii.14; pr.p. spetynge, 
Is. 1. 6. v. bispete. 

spewen, spewe, spue, to vomit, Lev. xviii. 28. 
Job xx. 15. 

spice, kind, species, Lev. xiii. 3. Prov. ix. 
59. 1 Thess. v.22. 2 Tim. iii. 5; pi. 
spices, Lev. xiv. 56. Ez. xlvii. 16. 

spicerie, spices, Gen. ii. 12; pl. spiceries, 
Gen, xxxvii. 25. 

spier, a reed, rush, Ex. ii. 3. Job viii. 11. 

spiere, one that lies in wait, Esth. viii. 5. 
Ecclus. viii. 14; pl. spieres, Heb. xi. 31. 
v. aspiere. 

spies, x. wait, ambush, treason, Gen. iii. 15. 
Ex. xxi. 13. xxxiv. 24. 111 Kings xvi. 20. 
v. aspies. 

spigot, @ vent-peg, Job xxxii. 19. 

spille, to destroy, to perish, Pref. ep. c. v. 
p- 65. Gen. xli. 31. Lev. vii. 21; p.t. 
spilde, Ecclus. x. 21. xxix. 24. 

spiren, to breathe, Ecclus. xliii. 17; p.t. 
spiride, Gen. ii. 7. 

spissemire, pismire, ant, Prov. vi. 6. 

spite, an obelisk, a dagger, Esth. x. 3. 

spitele, @ hospital, 111 Kings ii. 34 9. 

spithers, spiders, Job viii. 14. 

spleckid, p. p. specked, Pref. ep. c. vii. 
p- 71. 

splyndre, @ splinter, 1v Kings xviii. 21. 

splotty, spotted, Gen. xxx. 35. Xxxi. Io. 

spomnen, p.p. spun, Judg. xvi. 9. 

sposailis, sposeiles, sposeilis, sposeyls, spou- 
sayles, weddings, Gen. xxix. 26. 1 Kings 
xviii. 25. Mk. ii.19. Joh. prol. p. 233. 

spotel, spotele, spotle, spittle, Judg. xvi. 9. 
Job vii. 19. Joh. ix. 6; pl. spotelis, spo- 
tils, 1 Kings xxi. 13. 

spotti, spotted, Gen. xxx. 35. XXXi. 10, 12. 

spouse, husband, Prov. v. 19 g. 

spousesse, spouse, wife, Prov. v.19 9. S.Sol. 
ji. 7. Mt. xxv. 1. 

spouse, to espouse, Hos. ii. 20; p.p. spousid, 
spowsid, Ex. xxii. 16. Deut. xxii. 25. 
Mt. i. 18. 

spouse-breker, aduiterer, Mt. xii. 39. 

spousing, spousyng, . an espousal, S. Sol. 
iii. 11. Jer. ii. 2. 

spraule, to struggle, Tob. vi. 4; p.¢. spraul- 
ide, 11 Kings xviii. 14. 

sprede, fo spread, Gen. xxxii. 12; p. ¢. 
spredde, spradde, spredede, rv Kings viii. 
1s. Is. v.14; p.p. spred, sprad, Gen. 
xxviii. 14. Hos. v. 1. 

sprengen, sprenge, springe, to sprinkle, Is. 
xxvili. 25. lis. Mt.x.143 imp. sprenge, 
sprynge, Mic. i. 10; pl. sprengith, Ex. 
xii. 22; p.¢. sprengide, spreyngde, spring- 

: ide, spreynde, spreinte, spreynt, Ex. ix.1o. 
xxiv. 8. Lev. viii. 30. Heb. ix. 19; pl. 
sprengden, springden, spreynten, Job ii. 
12. Lam. ji.10; p.p. sprengd, springd, 
spreyned, spreynd, spreynt, Geu. xxx. 39. 
Num. xxviii. 9, 20. Dan. iv. 20. Heb. ix. 
13. x. 22. Apoc. xix.13; pr.p. sprengyng, 

5B 


737 


sprenkyng, spryngynge, Lev. iv. 17. 1 
Cor. v. 7. Heb. xii. 24. v. bispreynde. | 

sprengynge, springyng, spryngyng, n. an 
aspersion, Num. xix. 9. 1 Pet. i. 2. 

springinge-tyme, the season of spring, Ps. 
Ixxiii. 17. 

sprynkil, a little bunch to sprinkle with, Ex. 
xii. 22. : 

sprongun, p.p. sprung, Gen. xxv. 4. Ex. 
xii. 30. 

spuyl, spoil, robbery, Jer. xxi. 9; pl. spuylis, 
Gen. xlix. 27. Lk. xi. 22. 

spuyle, spoyle, to spoil, Ex. iii. 22. Mt. xii. 


29. 
spurne, to stumble, Jer. xxxi. 9. 
spute. v. spete. 


spute, to dispute, contend, Wisd. xv. 9. 

squat, p. p. squeezed, 11 Kings xxii. 8. 

squyer, an esquire, 1 Kings xiv. 6. 1 Par. 
Xie 

stablen, stable, fo establish, 1 Par. xvii. 12. 
a1 Kings vii.13. Ps. xx. 12. Heb. xiii. 
9; pr.t. stablith, Prov. xxi. 29; pl. sta- 
blen, Rom. iii. 31; p.¢. stablide, stabled, 
Prov. iii. 19. Col. i. 23; p.p. stablid, 
Gen. xxvii. 37. Lk. xvi. 26; pr.p. sta- 
blende, Is. xliv. 24. 

stable, steadfast, 111 Kings ii. 4x. Mt. xxiv. 
13. 

stabilly, stabli, stedfastly, Eccles. ii. 9. 
Deeds ii. 42. 

stablete, stability, Wisd. vi. 26. 

stablische, to establish, Ps. xx.12; pr.t. 
pl. stablischen, Rom. iii. 21; p. ¢. sta- 
blischide, Prov. iii.19; p.p. stablischid, 
Gen. xxvii. 37. 1 Kings xx. 31. Lk. xvi. 
26. 

stagis, banks or decks of « ship, Is. xxxiii. 
21. 

stal, staal. v. steln. 

staloun, a stallion, Ecclus. xxxiii. 6; pl. 
stalouns, Jer. v. 8. 

stalworth, stalwrthe, strong, Prov. xxiv. 5. 

stalworthnesse, stalwrthenesse, strength, Is. 
xl. 26, 29. Jer. xvi. 19. 

stampe, to tread to pieces, pound, Is. xiv. 
23; p.p. stampid, Is. xxv. Io. 

stant. v. stoonde. : 

stap, steppe, a step, a trace, Gen. xli. 21. 
Deut. ii. 5. 11 Kings xiv. 25. 

starke, stiff, stern, Ex. xv. 16. 11 Kings 
xxill. To. f 

stater, a@ piece of money, Jer. xxxii. 9 g. 
Mt. xvii. 26; gl. stateris, Jer. xxxii. 
9. 

stede, steede, stide, place, Ex. ii.10. Deeds 
xiii, 35. Gal. ii. 5. 

steere, steerne, helm, rudder, Prov. xxiii. 


34- é 

steer-staf, steerne-staf, @ helm, Prov. xxiii. 
34 

steernesse, sturnenesse, austereness, Ez. 
XXXIV. 4. 


stef, stiff, strong, Prov. xviii. 4,19; comp. 
steuere, Deut. ix. 14. 

steie, steyn, stey3. ». stie. 

steyneden, p.¢. pl. stained, Gen, xxxvil. 31. 


738 


steynyng, x. @ dying, Job xxviil. 19. 

steynour, @ painter, Ex. xxxv. 36. 

stelen, stelyn, made of steel, 1 Kings xvii. 
8, 6, 38. 

stellioun, an ewt, lizard, (Lat. stellio,) Lev. 
Xi. 30. 

steln, to steal, Jer. vii.g; p.¢. stal, staal, 
Gen. xxxi. 19, 32. Eph. iv. 28; p.p. 
stole, stoln, stolne, Gen. xxxi. 30, 32. 
xliv. 5. 

stene, a@ pitcher, 111 Kings xvii.12. Eccles. 
xii. 6; pl. etenes, stenys, steenys, Judg. 
vii. 20. 111 Kings vii. 50. 1v Kings xii. 
13. Jer. i. 19. Joh. ii. 6. 

steryng, n. a stirring, commotion, Mt. viii. 
24. 

steringli, forcibly, Ps. xciii. 4. 

stern, fo stir, move, Wisd. iv. 19. 

sterre, a star, Mt. ii. 2; pi. sterres, eterris, 
sternes, Pref. ep. c. i. p. 62. Gen. i. 17. 
Mt. xxiv. 29. 

stert, stertende. 

stesen. v. étie. 

sti, sty, stye, a path, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 66. 
Job xvi. 23. xxii.15; pl. sties, Job. vi. 
18. xxiv. 13. 

stide. v. stede. 

stidefastliere, more steadfastly, more strictly, 
1 Kings xxx. 25. 

stie, stye, steie, etey, steye, steyn, stey3, 
stey3en, stezen, stese, fo go up, go, Gen. 
xl, 43. 1.5. Ex. viii. 3. xix. 23. Judg. 
iva. iv Kings iii. 7. Ps. xxiii. 3. exxxi. 
3. Eccles. x. 4; pr.t. stieth, stiseth, 
styzeth, Mk. iv. 32. Joh. x. 15 pl. stizen, 
Mt. xx.183 imp. stie, stize, Mk. vi. 45. 
Lk. xiv. 10; p.é. stei3, stey3, stezede, 
steised, stiede, stizede, stide, styede, Gen. 
ii. 6. xvii. 22. Judg.i. 4. Jer. xlviii. 5. 
Mt. iil, 16. v.1. Lk. ii. 4. viii. 22. Apoc. 
xix. 3; pil. stieden, styeden, stizeden, 
steyden, steiden, Ex. xiii. 18. xv. 14. 
Josh. x. 5. Mk. iv. 7. Lk. viii. 22; p.p. 
stied, styzed, stize, stisede, steyed, Gen. 
xliv. 24. Mk. xv. 8. Joh. xx.173 pr. p. 
stiyng, stizynge, stelynge, stezende, Gen. 
xix. 28. Jer. xvii. 25. Mt. viii. 23. Mk. 
vi. 32. Lk. ii. 42. 

stiere, steier, steyer, a goer up, a rider, Gen. 
xlix. 17. Ex. xv. 21; pl. steyzers, 1v 
Kings xviii. 23. 

stiyng, stiynge, steyzinge, stezing, n. an 
ascent, ascending, Josh. xv. 7. 1 Par. xxvi. 
16, Jer. xlvili. 5; pl. stiyngis, stesxingus, 
1 Kingge xiv. 4. Ps. Ixxxiii. 6. 

stike, to pierce, 1 Kings xix.10. Prov. xxii. 
23; p. t. stikide, Num. xxv. 8; pi. 
stykeden, stekeden, 1v Kings xi. 16. 
Prov. xxii. 23; p.p. stikid, stickid, Ex. 
xix.13. Judith vi. 4. 

stille, silent, private, Lev. x. 4. Deut. xviii. 
21. 

stilli, stilly, stilleli, privately, quietly, Gen. 
xxiv. 21, 45. xxxvii. rz. Ecclus. xxi. 23. 

stillide, p. ¢. quieted, Gen. xiii. 31. 

stilnesse, stlence, Joh. xi. 28. 

stynke, to stink, Nuin. v. 21, 22; p.é. 


v. stirte. 


GLOSSARY. 


stonke, stonk, Ex. vii. 21. viii. 14. xvi. 
20; pl. stonken, stunken, 1 Kings v. 9. 
Ps. xxxvii. 6. 

stynkingnes, stench, filth, Lev. xviii. 19. 

stynte, to fail, be weary, Josh. prol. p. 555. 

stirke, a stroke in writing, a dagger, Esth. 
X.3. 0. Stric. 

stirte, p. t. started, jumped up, Esth. xv. 113 
p-p. stert, 111 Kings ii. 46; pr.p. stert- 
ende, stirtende, stertynge, sturtinge, Tob. 
ii. 3. ix. 8. Mk. x. 50. v. outsterte. 

stithie, an anvil, Job xli. 15. Ecclus. xxxviii. 
29. 

stithie, to forye, Josh. prol. p. 555. 

stobil, stobyl, stuble, stubble, straw, Gen. 
xli. 23. Josh. ii. 6. Ecclus, xxi. ro. 

stoc, stok, the stocks, Job xiii. 27. xxxiii. 
Ir. 

stok, a stock or stem of a tree, Num. viii. 4; 
pl. stockes, stockis, stockus, stokkis, 
Josh. x. 26. 11 Par. xvi.ro. Job xxxiii. 
1x. Jer. xx. 2, 3. 

stonen, stonene, stoonen, made of stone, 
Gen. xxxv. 14. Ex. xx. 25. 1 Esdr. iv. 
12. Apoc. ix. 20. 

stone-hepis, heaps of stones, tv Kings 
x. 8. 

stone3zen, stonese, stoneyn, to be astonished, 
to be stunned, Job xvii. 8. xviii. 20. Is. 
xii. 8. Jer. xix. 8; imp. pl. stoneseth, 
Is, xxxii. 11; p.é. pl. stoneseden, Is. lit. 
14; p.p. stoneid, stoneyd, stoneyed, 
stonyed, Gen. xxxii. 32. xiii, 28. Is. 
xxi. 4. Mt. x. 24. Lk. iv. 32. Deeds 
ii. 63 pr.p. stonesende, Judith x. 7. v. 
astonieden. 

stoneying, stoneynge, stonying, n. astonish- 
ment, Gen. xxvii. 33. Iv Kings xxii. 19. 
a Par. ix. 4. Mk. v. 42. Deeds iii. ro. 

stonges, n. stings, Ex. xxiii. 28. 

stonk. v. stynke. 

stoodes, poles, spars, Ecclus. xxix. 29. 

stool, stoole, stoele, stole, a robe, mantle, 
Gen. xli. 42. xlix. rr. Ecclus. vi. 32. 
Lk. xv. 22. Apoc. xv. 6; pi. stoolis, 
stolys, stolis, Gen. xlv. 22. 1 Mace. xiv. 
g. Mk. xii. 38. Lk. xx. 46. 

stoondis, pitchers, waterpots, Jer. li. 19. 
v. stene. 

stoonde, stonde, to stand, Gen. xxi. 29. 
Prov. xxii. 29; pr.t. stont, stonte, stoond- 
ith, stant, Num. v. 18. Judg. xvi. 26. 
Is. xi. ro. Joh. iii. 29; p.é. stod, Jer. 
prol. p. 343; pr.p. stondende, Deeds v. 
20. 

stownd-meel, adv. at several times, Num. 
xeqe 

strangliden, p. ¢. pl. strangled, Mk. iv. 19. 

stre, stree, straw, Ex. v. 7,13. Is. Ixv. 25. 

strecche, fo stretch, Ex. vil. 5; p. ft. 
strau3te, straw3te, streiste, Gen. viii. 9. 
xii, 8. Ex. x.13. Lev. ix. a2. Mt. xii. 
13. Rom. x. 21; pil. strau3ten, streizten, 
11 Kings vi. 27. Lk. xxii. 53; p.p. 
strau;te, strau3t, stra3t, stretchid, Gen. 
xxxi. 25. Ex. xiv. 21. Is. xiv. 27. 

streyne, fo draw tight, bind, Ex. xxviii. 39. 


Num. xxx.14. Job xxvii. 23. Ez. xvii. 
9; p.t. streynede, Ecclus. xlv.g 93 pl. 
streyneden, Ex. xxxix. 30; p.p. streyn- 
ed, streynyd, Gen. xxxi. 40. Job xx. 22. 
11 Mace. v. 35 pr.p. streynynge, Gen. 
xxxili. 4. 

streite, streyte, narrow, tight, Ex. xxvili. 4. 
xxxix. 15. Judg. iii. 22. 111 Kings vi. 4. 

streyte, to press, compress, straiten, Joel 
i.8; p.p. streitid, Job xviii. 7. Is. 
xxviii. 22. 

streitnesse, streytnes, streytnesse, brevity, 
narrowness, Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 66. 11 
Mace. xii. 21; pl. streytnesses, 11 Macc. 
xii. 22. 

stremed, p.p. poured out as a stream, Prov. 
v. 16. 

strenger, comp. stronger, more strongly, Ex. 
xxxix.19. Num. xiv. 12. 

strengereli, strengerli, strenglier, comp. more 
strongly, Pref. ep. c. ii. p. 63. Judg. xx. 
41. Job prol. p. 671. 

strengthe, to strengthen, Nah. ii. 15 pr.t.pl. 
strengthen, Judith vii.8; imp.pl. strength- 
eth, Is. xxxv. 3; p.é. strengthede, Ecclus. 
xIviii.19 ; pl. strengthiden, 1 Macc. vi. 26; 
p.p. strengthid, streynthid, Josh. x. 20. 
1 Par. prol. p.313. Is. xxxvi.1. 

strengthful, strong, 11 Kings x. 19. 

strengthing, strengtheing, nx. a fortifying, 
fortification, 1 Macc. iv. 61. vi. 26; pl. 
strengthinges, strengthingus, Jer. xlviii. 
7. Ez. xxi. 22, 

strengthis, pl. strength, strong places, Gen. 
xxxi. 6. Jer. xlviii. 7. 

streuen. . stroof. 

strewe, to lay along, spread, Is. liv.11; 
p.t. pl. strewen, strewiden, strowiden, 
Mt. xxi. 8; p.p. strewed, strouwed, Is. 
xiv. II. 

strewyngis, littering, Gen. xxxi. 34. 

stric, a stroke, a dagger in writing, Esth. 
x. 3. v. stirke. 

strifful, contentious, Ecclus. viii. 14. 

stryuede, striuende. ». stroof. 

striues, stryues, contentions, Deut. i. 12. 
Prov. vi. 14. 

stryuyng, 2. strife, Dent. xxxi. 27. 

stryuyngli, contentiously, Deut. xxxi. 27. 

striuous, contentious, Jer. viii. 5. 

stronde, a iorrent, stream, Num. xiii. 24. 
Dent. ix. 21; pl. strondis, Num. xxi. 14, 
15. 

strongli, stronglich, strongly, Judg. viii. 1; 
sup. stronglieste, Josh. viii. 20. Judg. 
ix. 51. 

stroof, stryuede, p.é. strove, contended, Judg. 
xi. 25. u Kings xix. 9. Ez. xx. 36. Jude 
i.g; pl. strenen, stryueden, Gen. xlix. 23; 
Num. xx. 24; p.p. streuen, Lev. xxiv. 
10; pr.p. striuende, Rom. prol. 1. p. 507. 

strosede, p.t. destroyed, Ecclus. xxviii. 17 ; 
p.p. stroxed, Lam. i. 4. v. destrie. 

strouwed. v. strewe. 

strubliden. v. sturbliden. 

strucioun, an ostrich, Lev. xi.16; pl. stru- 
ciouns, Mic. i. 8. 


sturbed, sturbid, p.p. troubled, Gen. xlii. 
28. Lk. x. 41. ». all-sturbest. 

sturbliden, strubliden, p.t.pl. troubled, Mic. 
vii. 3; p.p. sturblid, Ez. xxvi. 18. xxvii. 
28. 

sturblynge, sturbling,n. a confusion, trou- 
bling, Ez. xxi. 15. Deeds xix. 23. 

stupre, @ rape, (Lat. stuprum,) Gen. xxxiv. 
13, 27. 

sturnenesse. v. steernesse. 

stuttynge, pr.p. stuttering, Is. xxxii. 4. 

suadible, easy to persuade, Jam. iii. 17. 

subiecten, to make subject, 11 Par. xxviii. 
1o. Ecclus. v. 3. v. suget. 

suchon, such a one, Rom. prol. 1. p. 300, 
v. sich. 

sudarie, sweating-cloth, napkin, Lk. xix. 20. 
Joh. xi. 44. xx. 7; pl. sudaries, Deeds 
xix. 12. 

sudeynte, suddenness, Wisd. v. 2. 

sue, fo follow, Gen. xxiv. 8. Mt. viii. 19 ; 
pr.t. pl. suen, suwen, Joh. x. 45 imp. 
sue, swe, Mt. vill, 22. xvi. 245 p.t. 
suede, sude, Num. xiv. 4. Mt. ix. 19. 
Mk. iii. 7; pl. sueden, suden, suweden, 
sweden, Gen. xxiv. 61. Mt. iv. 20. viii. 1. 
Mk. i. 20. ji.1g. Lk. v.31; pr. p. su- 
ende, suynge, suwinge, Gen. xxix. 30. 
Mt. viii. go. Lk. vii. 9. xx. 30. 

suyngis, consequences, Ecclus. xxxil. 23. 

suere, a follower, Tit. ii. 14; pl. sueris, suw- 
eris, Ecclus. xli. 8 g. Heb. vi. 12. 

suffisaunt, sufficient, Prov. xii. 9. 

suget, sugette, sogette, to subject, Gen. i. 28. 
xv.13. xlii.18; dmp. sochete, Ecclus. 
iv. 31; p.t. sugettide, sugetide, Gen. 
xlvii. 20. 1 Cor. xv. 27. Heb. ii. 5; pl. 
sugetiden, Josh. xvii. 13; p.p. suget, 
sugett, Gen. xxxvii. 8. Ex. x. 3. Lk. ii. 
eile 

suyngli, sewyngly, consequently, Gen. xiii. 
7. 1 Par. xxxii. 1g. 

suir, sure, Mt. xxviii. 14. 

sum, @, @ certain, 11 Kings xviii.10. Lk. 
i. 5. vil. 41. 

sum-del, sum-deel, adv. partly, Gen. xl. 4. 
Lev. xiii. 19. 1 Cor. vii. 33. 

summen, some, 1 Cor. viii. 7. 

sumwhat, sumwhate, partly, something, 
Gen. xxxix. 11. Iv Kings v. 20. 

sunder. v. sondry. 

sundride, p. t. separated, Deut. xxxii. 8.' 

gunner, sunuere, comp. more quickly, Ruth 
i. 13. Joh. xiii. 27. 

superflu, superfluous, Eccles. ii. 26. Wisd. 
xii. 24. Lk. xi. 41. 

superfluli, superfluously, Ps. xxiv. 4. 

supettis, soppets, 11 Kings xiii. 8. 

surplesse, surplees, @ surplice, 1 Kings ii. 
18. xxii. 18; pl. surples, 1 Par. v. 
12, 

sustenaunces, means of support, 11 Esdr. 
v. 16. 

suwe, souwe, a sow, Lev. xi. 7. Deut. xiv. 
8. Prov. xi. 22. 

swagen, swage, to assuage, Gen. xxxvil. 35. 
Judith iii, 11; p.¢. swagide, swagid, 


GLOSSARY. 


Gen. xxiv. 67. xxxiv. 3; pl. swagiden, 
Deeds xiv. 17; p.p. swagid, Gen. viii. 2. 
Deeds xix. 36. 

swaging, swagyng, 2. an alleviation, Ecclus. 
XXXVi. 25. 

swalide, p. t. dried up, withered, Jonah 
iv. 8; pl. swaliden, swayleden, swelten, 
Mt. xiii. 6. Apoc. xvi.g; pr.p. swalynge, 
Jer. xx. 9. 

sweet, sweat, Ez. xxiv. 12. v. swoot. 

sweete, fo sweat, Josh. prol. p. 5553 p. t. 
swatte, Eccles. ii. 19; p. p. swat, swet, 
Eccles. ii. 11. Is. prol. p. 225. Ez. xxiv. 
12. 

swelow, to swallow, Jon. ii. 1. 

swelw3, swolowe, swolw3, a whirlpool, a pit, 
111 Kings xi. 27. Prov. xiii.15; pl. swele- 
wis, swelowis, swolewes, swolewis, swolo- 
wis, Job xxxvi. 27. Is. xviii. 18. Jer. 
xlvi. 7. Jonah ii. 4. 

swern, swere, to swear, Gen. xxi. 24. Jer. 
vil. 9; pr.t. swerth, Eccles. ix.2; p.t. 
swoor, swor, Gen. xxv. 34. Jer. xi.5; pl. 
sweren, sworen, Gen. xxvi. 31. Wisd. 
xiv. 30; p. p. swore, Deut. ii. 14. 

swetter, swettere, comp. sweeter, Judg. xiv. 
18. Ps. xviii. 11; sup. swettest, Lev. i. 
13. 

sweuen, Sweuene, sweuyn, @ dream, vision, 
Gen. xx. 3. xxxvii. 5. Mt. i. 20. xxvii. 
19; pl. sweuenes, sweuenys, Gen. xxxvil. 
8. xli. 12. Deeds ii. 17. 

sweueneres, dreamers, Jer. xxvii. 9. 

sweueneth, pr. ¢. dreams, Is. xxix. 8; p.t. 
pl. sweuenen, Jer. xxix. 8; p. ¢. swene- 
nede, Jer. xxiii. 25; p. p. swenened, Jer. 
xxix. 8; pr.p. sweuenende, Jer. xxiii. 
32. 

swiftloker, swiftliere, comp. more swiftly, 
Gen. xli. 32. Wisd. iii. 18. 

swijth, swithe, adv. speedily, 11 Par. xxiv. 5. 
Joh. xiii. 27. 

swymmed, swommen, p.p. swimmed, Deeds 
XXVii. 42. 

swoot, swote, swot, sweat, Gen. iii. 19. 
Ez. xliv. 18. 11 Mace. ii. 27. Lk. xxii. 
44. 0. sweet. 

swotnesse, sweetness, Ecclus. xxiv. 23. 

swounede, suounede, p.t. swooned, Esth. 
xv. 18. 

swown, a swoon, Esth. xv. 18. 


Ay 


table, a plank, board, Ex. xxvi. 17; pl. ta- 
bles, tablis, Ex. xxii. 24. 101 Kings vi. 5, 
10. 

table-beeldynge, n. planking, 111 Kings vi. 
10; pl. table-beeldyngis, 111 Kings vi. 15. 
vil. 3. 

tablid, p. p. boarded, planked, Ex. xxxv. 11. 
XXXVL. 34. 

take, to deliver, give, Ex. xxiii. 31. 1 Kings 
xxiii. 4. Mt. v.25. xxv. 27. xxvi. 46; 
pr.t. 2p. tokest, Mt. xxv. 20; p. ¢. toc, 
tok, toke, Ps. Ixxvii. 48. Mt. xviii. 
34. xxvii. 26; pl. token, Judg. ili. 6; 
p.p. take, taken, takun, itake, ytake, 


5B 


ee 





739 


Gen. xlvii. 22. Ecclus. prol. p.123. Mt. 
xi. 27. xxvi. 2. Mk. xv. ro. Phil. prol. 
p- 420. v. bitake. 

tale, fame, tidings, Mk. 1. 28. 

taliage, talage, toll, 1v Kings xv. 20. Mt. 
xxii. 17; pl. talagis, 11 Kings x. 15. Is. 
iii. 14 9. 

talows, talw3, fat, Ex. xxxiii. 18. Lev. vii. 3; 
pil. talw3s, talw3es, talewis, Ex, xxiii. 18. 
Lev. vi. 12. viii. 25. 

tapesere, tapserere, @ weaver of tapestry or 
carpets, Ex. xxxvili. 23. 

tapetis, tapitis, carpets, 11 Kings xvii. 28. 
Prov. vii. 16. Ez. xxvii. 20. 

tariere, one who delays, Jer. prol. p. 342. 

taris, tarys, tares, Mt. xiii. 25. 

tarre. v. terren. 

tasil, @ fuller’s thistle, 11 Par. xxv. 18. Is. 
XXxiV. 13. 

tauerner, a tavern-keeper, Ecclus. xxvi. 
28. 

tawier, tawer, a currier or tanner, Deeds ix. 


43- 

tastli, skilfully, Wisd. xiii. 11. 

techeresse, a female teacher, Wisd. viii. 4. 

teenden, teende, teend, tiende, to kindle, to 
light, Ex. xxx. 7. xxxv. 3. Judg. xx. 23. 
Ez, xxii. 20; pr. t. teendith, tendith, tyn- 
deth, Ex. xxii. 6. Lk. xi. 33; pl. tendyn, 
teenden, teendith, Mt.v.15.; p.¢. teende, 
tende, 111 Kings iii. 3. Ps. Ixxvii. 38; 
pl. teenden, tenden, teendiden, tendiden, 
Judith xiii. 16. 1 Mace. iv. go. xii. 28; 
p.p. tend, tende, teendid, tendid, Lev. 
xxiv. 2. Num. xi. 1. Ps. ix. 2. lxxix. 17. 
ut Par. xiii. 11. Dan. iii. 22; pr. p. teen- 
dende, Judith xiii. 16. 

tendynge, 2. @ kindling, Num. xi. 3. 

teere, teren, tern, to fear, Gen. x). 19. 
11 Kings. xxi. 10. Jer. xv. 3. v. to-tere. 

teerid, p. p. plastered, Amos vii. 7. 

teising, 2. a bending, Wisd. v. 22. 

telde, p. t. told, Gen. xl.9. Deeds ix. 27; 
pl. telden, Gen. xlii. 29. Lk. xxiv.9; p.p. 
teld, 11 Par. ix. 6. 

telleris, tellers, those who relate, 11 Kings iii. 
23. 

temperaunces, pl. moderation, Prov. xii. 
Il. 

tempre, to dispose, direct, assuage, Ez. xxvi. 
9; pr.t. tempreth, Prov. xvii. 275 p. é. 
temperide, temprede, Gen. xxiv.67. Job 

’ xxiii. 16; p. p. tempered, temperid, tem- 
prid. 11 Par. xxiv. 27. Prov. xvi. 33. 

temperynge, temperure, 2. a softening, mix- 
ing, Ez. xiii. 11; pl. tempringis, temper- 
ance, moderation, Prov. xii. 11. 

tempest, time, 1 Par. xxi. 29. 
XXVill. Q. 

tempte, imp. try, Dan. i. 12; p.t. temptide, 
Dan. i. 14. 

tenden, tendith, pr. t. pl. give attention, Ex. 
v.175 p.t. tentide, Judg. v. 175 pr. p. 
tendende, Proy. xxiii. 21. 

tent, tente, attention, heed. Ex. v.17. Judg. 
v.17. Prov. vii. 24. 1 Cor. vii. 5. 1 Tim. 
iv. 16. 


1 Par. 


740 


tentifnesse, attentiveness, Wisd. xii. 20. 
termyneth, pr. ¢. determines, limits, Heb. 
iv. 75 p. p. termyned, 1 Kings xx. 33. 
termis, teermes, ends, Dan.iv. 19. Mt. xxiv. 
gi. 

terren, terre, tarre, to provoke, Deut. iv. 25. 
Eph. vi. 4; p.é. terride, 1 Kings i. 75 pl. 
terriden, Deut. xxxii. 16. Rom. prol. 2. 
p- 3023 p.p. terred, terrid, 1v Kings xxiii. 
26. Zech. viii. 14; pr. p. terrynge, Ez. 
xii. 25. Rom. prol. 2. p. 302. 

terrere, a provoker, Ez. ii. 8. Zeph. iii. 1. 

terrynges, provocations, 1v Kings xxiii. 
26. 

tersis, foreskins, 1 Kings xviii. 25. 11 Kings 
iil. 14. 

tete, teete, a teat, Lev. xxii. 27; pl. tetis, 
teetis, Gen. xlix. 25. Apoc. i. 13. 

thankyngis, thonkyngis, thanksgivings, 
thanks, Lev. xxii. 29. 11 Kings viii. 10. 

theefli, thenelich, stealthily, thievishly, Gen. 
xl. 1g. Judith vii. 7. 

thees, theis, thighs, Lev. xi. 21. Is. xlvii. 2. 

they3.  v. thof. 

thenc, thenke, imp. meditate on, Prov. iii. 6. 

thenkingus, thoughts, Ecclus. xxxiii. 5. 

thennes, thennus, thens, thence, Gen. xi. 9. 
Mt. ix. 27. 

therf, unleavened, 1 Cor. v. 7. 

therf-breed, unleavened bread, Gen. xix. 3. 

therf-looues, unleavened bread, Ex. xii. 8. 
Mt. xxvi. 17. Lk. xxii. 1. 

ther-thur3, therefore, Gen. xvi. 11. xix. 13. 

therebynte, theribynte, therubynte, terebynt, 
the turpentine tree, Gen. xxxv.4. xhii.is. 
Hos. iv. 13. 

theue-thorn, a bramble, Judg. ix. 14. Ps. 
lvii. 10. 

thewis, manners, qualities, 1 Cor. xv. 33. 

thilke, thulke, thuke, that, Gen. xxvi. 7. 
Num. iii. 25. Lk. ii. 38. Cath. epp. prol.r. 
p- 3943 pl. thilke, tho ilke, those, Gen. vi. 
4. Mt. prol. 1. p.1. iii. 7. 

thirle.  v. thrillen. 

thirs, thrisse, a fabulous beast, Is. xxxiv. 15. 

thisis, gen. of this, Tob. vii. 5. 

tho, thoo, those, Gen. vi. 4. Mt. iii. 1. xiii. 
17. Lk. i. 39. 

thof, tho3, thon3, they3, though, Esth. v. 3. 
Eccles. viii.14. Wisd. ii. 2. Rom. prol.1. 
Pp. 299- 

tholmound, patient, 1 Tim. iii. 3. 

tholmoundenesse, pafience, Phil. iv. 5. 

thorou, thorw3. v. thur3. 

thoru3-held, p. ¢. spread over, covered over, 
it Par, xxx. 25; p. p. thur3-hilid, Num. 
xil. 11. 


thost, dung, excrement, Ecclus. ix. 10; pl. 


thostus, Lam. iv. 5. 
tho3. v. thof. 


thral, servant, slave, Gen. ix. 25. Jer. ii. 


14; pl. thrallis, Gen. ix. 25. 
thraldom, slavery, Gen. xv. 13. 


thrallesse, a female slave, Jer.xxxiv. 163; pl. 
thrallesses, thrallessis, Deut. xxviii. 68. 


Esth. vii. 4. Is. xiv. 2. 
thratte. v. threten. 


GLOSSARY. 


threische, thresshen, to thresh, Is. xxviii. 
28; p. t. threshide, threischide, Judg. vi. 
11. Ruth ii. 17. Amos i. 3; pl. threshiden, 
Amos i. 3; p.p. throsshe, throischun, 
threischid, threschid, 1 Par. xxi. 23. Is. 
Xxv.10, xxviii. 27; pr.p. thresshende, 
threeschynge, Is. xli. 17. 

threisfold, thresfold, threshfoold, thrisfold, 
threswald, threswold, threshold, Ex. xii. 
22, 23. Ez. ix. 3. xi.6. Zeph. ii. 143 pl. 
threschfoldis, threshfoldis, thrisfoldis, 
thressholdis, thresshwoldes, Ex. xii. 7. 
Amos ix. I. E 

threten, fo threat, Judith viii. 15; pr. t. 
thretith, Gen. xxvii. 42; p. ¢. thratt, 
thratte, thretid, threetide, Deut. ix. 25. 
11 Par. xxvi. 19. Judith xiii. 28. Mt. ix. 
go. Mk. i. 25, 433 pl. thratten, thret- 
eden, Mk. x.13; p.p. thrett, Josh. xxiii. 
153 pr. p. thretende, Job xvi. 10. 

thretenede, p.t. threatened, Ez. xx. 21. 

threting, 2. a threatening, threat, Jer. x. 10; 
pl. thretingis, Deeds iv. 29. 

thretti, thretty, thirty, Gen. xviii. 30. 

thres. v. throwen. 

thriddis, a third part, 1 Mace. x. 29. 

thrillen, thrille, thril, thirllen, thirle, therle, 
to pierce, Ex. xxi. 6. Num. xxiv. 8. Iv 
Kings xviii. 21. Job xl. a1. Prov. vii. 233 
pr.t. pl. thrillen, therlen, Job xiv. 19; p.p. 
thirlid, Job xxx. 17; pr.p. thrillynge, 
thirlende, Judg. v. 26. 

thringen, pr. t. pl. crowd, press, thrust, Lk. 
vill. 45; p. p. throngen, throngun, thrun- 
gen, Lk. viii. 42. 

thrisse.  v. thirs. 

thrist, threst, thirst, Ex. xvii. 3. Judg. xv. 
18. 

thristen, thriste, thrust, te thirst, Ruth ii. 9. 
Ecclus. xxiv. 2g; pr.t. thristith, Prov. xxv. 
21; p.t. thristide, Ex. xvii. 3. Judg. xv. 
18. Ps. lxii. 2. Mt. xxv. 353 pl. thriste- 
den, Is. xlviii. 21; pr. p. thristende, 
thristynge, threstynge, threstende, Judg. 
xv. 18. Ps. evi. 5. Is. litt, 2. Tit. i. 12. 

thristen, fo thrust, squeeze, Rom. prol. 1. 
p. 298; pr.#. thristith, threstith, Prov. 
XXX. 33; 2p. thristis, Job prol. p. 6713 
pl. thristen, Mt.v.6. Lk. vill. 453 pt. 
thrustede, Mk. v. 24. 

thristere, a thirsty person, Is. xxxii. 6. 

thristi, thirsty, Deut. xxix. 19. 

thrittene, threttene, thirteen, Gen. xvii. 25. 

throtyden. p.t. pl. cut the throats, 1v Kings 
x. 14. 

throwen, fo throw, cast, toss, weave, Jer. 
xxviii. 16; imp. thro3, Jer. vii. 29; p. t. 
thres, Jer. vi. 30; p. p. throwen, Judg. 
xvi. g. Mt. xiv. 24. 

thulke, thuke. v. thilke. 

thurs, thorou, thorow, thorw;, thors, through, 
Num. xxv. 8. rv Kings ii. 8. Mt. ix. 31. 





Mk. ii. 16. Lk. iv. 14. 
thurs-comen, pr. ¢. pl. penetrate, Prov. 
xviii. 8. 
| thurs-diggide, p. p. digged through, Ez. 
| viii. 8. 


thur3-drawende, pr. p. delineating through- 
out, Wisd. xiii. 14. 

thur3-droppende, pr. p. dropping through, 
Prov. xxvii. 15. 

thors-fleers, deserters, runaways, tv Kings 
XXV. TI. 

thur3-shed, p.p. entirely wet, Esth. xv. 8. 

thur3-sownede, p. t. sounded throughout, 1 
Kings iv. 5. 

thur3-trete, imp. theroughly consider, Job v. 
24. 

thwong, thong, Mk. i. 7. 
thwongis, Joh. i. 27. 

tidi, tidy, tideful, seasonable, Jam. v. 7. 

tiende. v. teenden. 

tyff, tifle, imp. deck out, array, Ecclus. xxxii. 
15. 

tiflyng, x. a decking, Ecclus. xxxii. 14 9. 

tyil, tyl, @ brick, Is. xvi. 7; pl. tiles, tiel, 
Gen. xi. 3. 

tiel-stoon, @ brick, [s.xvi. 11; pl. tiel-stoons, 
tile-stonys, Gen. xi. 3. 

tildeden, p.¢. pl. spread ont, 11 Kings xvi. 22. 

tile, tiln, to till, cultivate, Gen. ix. 20. Jer. 
xxvii. 11; imp. tile, tilie, Gen. xxxiv. 21 ; 
pl. tilthe, Gen. xxxiv. 10; p. t. pl. tilliden, 
1 Par. xxvii. 26. 

tily, made of tiles or bricks, Jer. xiii. 9. 
xlvili. 36. 

tilier, tiliere, tilyer, tilyere, a téller, Gen. iv. 
2. xxi. 34. xlvil. 19. v. erthe-tiliere. 

tillis, lentiles, Ez. iv. 9. 

tilthe, tilling, culture, Ex. xxiii. 19. Is. xxxii. 
17; pl. tilthis, Is. xvii. 9. 

tilthynge, tyllynge,n. culture, 11 Par. xxvi.1o. 

timbre, tymbre, @ fimbrel, Ps. xxx. 3. Is. 
v. 12; pl. timbres, tymbers, 1 Kings 
xviii. 6. 111 Esdr. v. 2. 

timeful, tymeful, seasonable, early, Jer. v. 
24. Hos. vi. 3. Jam. v. 7. 

tymeli, early, Jer. v. 24. 

tymiame, incense, (Lat. thymiama,) Ez. xxiii. 
41. 

tympan, @ timbrel, Ex. xv. 20; pl. tympans, 
Gen, xxxi. 27. Ps. Ixvii. 26. 

tympanystris, female players on timbrels, 
Ps, Ixvii, 26. 

tyyn-trees, tyme-trees, thyme, (Lat. thyina,) 
thya trees, 111 Kings x. 11,12. Apoc. 
xviii. 12. 

tynelen, tynclyn, tyncle, to ring, tingle, 


Joh. i. 273 pl. 


1 Kings iii. 11. 1v Kings xxi. 12. Jer. 
xix. 3. 
tyndeth. v. teenden. 


tyndynge, pr. p. fastening, Gen. xix. 6. 

tynkynge, pr. p. tinkling, 1 Cor. xiii. 1. 

tiraundise, tyraundise, tyranny, 111 Kings 
xvi. 20. Job xv. 20. 

tiraunterie, tirauntri, tyranny, Deut. xvii. 
16, Wisd. xvi. 4. 

tisiden, tysiden, p. ¢. pl. enticed, persuaded, 
Dan. vi. 6. Mt. xxvii. 20. 

tising, n. an enticement, 111 Kings xi. 5 g. 

tithing, n. a tenth part, Is. vi. 13. Tob. i. 7. 

tything, n. tidings, Mk. i. 28. 

tisten, p. t. pl. stretched, drew, set, Judg. xx. 
33: 


to-ajens, prep. against, Lk. prol. 1. p. 141. 

to-bite, p.p. gnawed in pieces, Job prol. p.670. 

to-brayd, to-braide, to-braidede, p. t. tore, 
bruised, Lk. ix. 42; p. p. to-braysede, 
11 Par. xxxiv. 7; pr.p. to-braydynge, to- 
breidinge, to-breidynge, Esth. xiv. 2. Mk. 
i. 26. ix. 25. v. brayid. 

to-braste, to-brast, to-barst, p. t. broke in 
pieces, burst in sunder, rv Kings xviii. 4. 
Deeds i. 18; pl. to-brasten, 11 Par. xxv. 
12. ». al-to-brasten. 

to-breke, to break in pieces, tear in pieces, Ex. 
XxViii.g2. Mt.vii.6. Lk.xx.18; tmp.to-breke, 
Ps. ii. 3; p.é. to-brac, Ps. civ. 41. Lam. ii. 
3; pl. to-breeken, Is. lix. 5; p. p. to- 
broke, to-broken, to-brokun, to-breek, 
Judg. viii. 12. Ps. xxxvi. 15. Jer. x. 20. 
Hab. i.g. Mt.ix.17; pr. p. to-brekende, 
Is. xvii. 14. Jer. xxiii. 29. v. al-to- 
breke. 

to-brenne, fo burn up, Ps. xlv. 10; p. t. to- 
brende, Is. xlii. 25. xlvii. 14; p. p. to- 
brend, Jer. xi. 16. 

to-brese, to-brose, to-broosen, to break to 
pieces, Ps, xlv. 10. Ecclus. xxviii. 21. 
Jer. xxx. 8; p.t. to-brosede, to-broside, 
to-brusede, rv Kings xviii. 4. Ps. cix. 5. 
Is. xxxvilil. 13; p. p. to-brisid, to-brosed, 
to-brosid, 1 Par. xx. 3. 1 Esdr. vi. 11. 
Lk. xx. 18. 2. al-to-brese. 

to-brosing, to-brosyng, ». contrition, break- 
ing in pieces, Ps. xii. 3. Is. xxx. 14. Jer. 
15228 

toc, toke. v. take. 

to-cleer, adv. clearly, Is. prol. p. 224. 

to-clippe, to embrace closely, Eccles. iii. 5. 

tocnyng, toknyng, n. @ betokening, a sign, 
Ps. lix. 6. Ecclus. i. 31. 

to-derened, p. p. utterly darkened, Lam. y. 
17. v. al-to-derened. 

to-drawe, to pull in pieces, Gen. xl. 19; pr.t. 
to-drawith, Lk. ix. 39; pl. to-drawen, 
Jer. xxiii. 1; p. p. to-drawen, to-drawyn, 
to-drawun, Ez. iv.14. Zech. xii. 3. Deeds 
xxiti, 10; pr. p. to-drawinge, Lk. ix. 39. 
v. al-to-drawynge. 

to-drunke, p. p. greatly inebriated, Jer. xvi. 
10. 

to-flappe, éo strike to pieces, 11 Kings xxii- 
43. 

to-fore, to-forn, to-for, prep. before, Gen. 
xxxi. 37. Mt. vi. 2. Lk. i. 8, 19. Rom. 
ott 

to-gider, to-gidre, to-gideres, to-giderys, to- 
gidrys, to-githers, adv. together, Gen. 
xiii. 6. xix. 4. xxxiv. 23, 26, 30. xliii. 
22: 

to-hewe, to cut in pieces, Ps. xxxvi. I5. 
Cxxvili. 4; p.t. to-heewe, 27. to-hewedist, 
Ps. xxix. 12. 

tolbothe, a place to receive toll, Mt. ix. 9. 
Lk. v. 27. 

tol-gaderer, a toll gatherer, Mt. prol. 2. 
p. 2. 

to-mynushen, fo break in small pieces, Is. 
xli.15; p.t. pl. to-mynushten, Is. xxxvii. 
193 P. P; to-mynusht, Is, xiv. 29. 


GLOSSARY. 


to-moued, p. p. greatly moved, Is. vi. 4. Jer. 
Vv. 22, 

to-name, a surname, Ecclus. xlvii. 19. 

to-neshende, pr. p. approaching, Judith xiv. 
14. 

too, toon, one, Gen. iv. 19. xxxii. gr. Mt. 
Vi. 24. 

toon, toos, toes, Dan. ii. 42. 

tootere, a looker out, Is. xxi. 6; pl. tooteres, 
Ts. lii. 8. lvi. ro. 

toot-bil, tote-hil, tute-hil, @ citadel, a strong 
place, a watch place, 11 Kings v. 7,9. Is. 
xxi. 5, 8. 

toow, tow3, tough, Gen. xi. 3. xiv. 10. 

top, crown of the head, Deut. xxviii. 35. 
1s Kings xiy. 25. v. cop. 

to-poone, fo break in pieces, Ps. xvii. 43. 
xxviii. 6; p. t. to-ponede, Ps. civ. 16. v. 
al-to-powne. 

to-pulle, imp. pull in pieces, Lam.i.22; p.t. 
2p. to-pulledist, Lam. i. 22; p. p. to-pul- 
lid, Is. xviii. 7. Lam. i. 12. 0. al-to- 
pullid. 

to-pungid, p.p. pricked thoroughly, Ps. 
xxix. 13. 

to-reende, to tear in pieces, Judg. viii. 7. 
Zech. xi. 6; p.t. to-rente, to-rendide, to- 
rentide, Judg. viii. 16. xiv.6; pl. to-ren- 
ten, Num. xiv. 6. 1 Mace. ii. 143 p. p. 
to-rent, to rente, Gen. xxxvit. go. Judg. 
xiv. 6. Ps. xxix. 12. Mt. xxvi. 65. xxvii. 
ip 

to-reendynge, ». a tearing in pieces, Nah. 
ili. 1. 

to-rotide, p.t. became utterly rotten, Jer. 
xvi. 15. : 

to-scatere, imp. scatter thoroughly, Jer. vi. 5; 
p. p. to-scaterede, 11 Par. xxxiv. 7. 

to-shaken, p. p. greatly shaken, Is. xxiv. 
20. 

to-sheende, imp. destroy utterly, Ps. lvi. 1. 

to-sprengd, p. p. wholly sprinkled, Jer. vi. 
26. 

to-stank, p.é. stunk greatly, Jer. xlvi. 15. 

to-stere, to move altogether, Ps. xxviii. 8. 
Jer. 1. 34; p.t. to-sterede, Ecclus. xxix. 
24; pl. to-stiriden, Ps. Ixxvii. 40; p. p. 
to-stired, to stirid, Is. xxiv. 20. Jer. li. 7. 
Lam. iv. 15. v. al-to-stirid. 

to-stering, n. @ great commotion, Is. xxiv. 
20. 

to-swelle, fo swell greatly, Jer. v. 22; p.t. 
to-swal, Job xvi. 17. 

to-teere, to-teer, to-tere, fo tear tn pieces, 
Judg. xiv. 6. Ez. xxiii. gq. Mt. vii. 6; 
pr.t. pl. to-teren, to-tern, Pref. ep. c. vi. 
p. 67. Jer. xxiii. 1; p. f. pl. to-teeren, 
to-tereden, tv Kings it. 24; p. p. to-torn, 
Job prol. p. 670. Is. xviii. 7. 

to-tering, to-teryng, to-terynge, to-teerynge, 
n.@ tearing, Esth. xiv. 2. Nahum iii. 1. 
Hab. ii. 7. 

to-terrynge, to-terynge, pr. p. greatly pro- 
voking, 11 Mace. xii. rq. 0. terren. 

tother, tothir, other, Gen. iv. 19. xxv. 26. 
Mt. v. 39. 


toting-place, totyng-place, a watch tower or | 


741 


place for watching, Is. xxi. 5. Jer. xxxi. 
21. 

to-trede, to tread down, Job xxxiv. 24. xxxix. 
15. Is. xlii. 3; p.¢. to trad, to-trade, to- 
tredede, 1v Kings xxi. 9. Ps. lv. 2; pl. 
to-treeden, to-tredden, rv Kings ix. 33. 
Ps. lv. 3; p. p. to-treden, to-troden, Job 
xiv. 12. xviii. 16. Is. xviii, 2. Jer. xlviii. 
43 pr. p. to-tredende, Jndith xvi. 3. Is. 
xli. 25. v. al-to-trede. 

to-treding, to-tredyng, n. affliction, destruc- 
tion, Is. v. 5. Jer. xlvili. 3, 5; pl. to-tre- 
dingis, Ps. lix. 4. 

to-truble, to greatly trouble, Ecclus. xxxv. 
22, 23. v. al-to-trublidist. 

to-turne, to turn altogether, Is. xxviii. 17. 

toucheable, capable of being touched, Heb. 
xii. 18. 

toukere, touker, a fuller, tv Kings xviii. 17. 
Is, xxxvi.2. Mk. ix. 2; pl. toukeris, Mal. 
iii. 2. 

toun, a farm, Lk. xiv. 18. 

tourbeling, towrblid. vv. turblide, turbling. 

to-wastid, p. p. wasted away, Jer. xiv. 15, 
18. 

townesse, toughness, 111 Kings ix. 25 g. 


tow3. v. toow. 
to-3en, prep. against, Lk. prol. i. p. 141. 
trad. v. treed. 


traye, to betray, Mt. xxvi. 46; p. p. trayed, 
tra3id, Ps. Ixxxvii. 10. Mt. xvii. 21. 

trailinge, pr. p. flowing down, Esth. xv. 7. 

trampith, pr. é. tramples, Prov. vi. 13. 

translate, to transfer, carry over, 1v Kings 
xvill, 32; p. ¢. translatide, translatid, 
Wisd. x. 18; 2 p. translatidist, Ps. 
Ixxix. 9; p. p. translatid, Jer. xxvii. 
22. 

trauailen, traueyl, trauele, to labour, toil, 
oppress, trouble, Gen. vill. 49. xxxili. 13. 
Prov. xxiii. 4. Lk. prol. 1. p. 1413 pr. ¢. 
trauaileth, trauaylith, trauelith, Prov. xvi. 
26. Lk. ix. 39. 1 Cor. ix.10; pl. traueilen, 
trauelen, Mt. vi. 28. xi. 28. Lk. xii. 27; 
p.t. trauailide, trauelide, Job xxxix. 16. 
Lk. prol. 1. p. 142; pl. trauaileden, tra- 
ueliden, Ps. exxvi. 6. Lk. v. 5. Joh. iv. 
38; p. p. trauailid, traueilid, trauelid, tra- 
ueyld, Josh. vii. 3. Job ix. 29. Mt. ix. 
36. Lk. vi. 185 p. pr. traueilinge, tranel- 
ynge, trauelinge, Prov. xvi. 26. Lk. prol. 
I. p. 142. 1 Cor. ix. 9. v. bitraueliden. 

trauailere, @ labourer, Prov. xvi. 26; tra- 
ueler of childe, tv Kings xix. 3; pl. tra- 
uelours, Ecclus. xxxiv. 26 9. 

trauailous, traueilows, trauelous, /aborious, 
troublesome, Ex. vi. 6. Job vii. 3. 1 Tim. 
iii. 1. 

trauailously, traueilousli, trauelously, /abo- 
riously, toilsomely, Pref. ep. c. 1. p. 61. 
Wisd. xv. 7. 

traueil, traueyl, trauel, dabour, toil, Gen. 
xxxi. 42. 1 Cor. xv. 58; pl. traueils, 
traueyls, traueylis, trauelis, trauayls, Gen. 
iii. 17. v. 29. xli. 51. 11 Cor. vi. 5. 

traueling, traueilyng, 2. Zabour, 1Tim. iv. 8. 

trazid. v. traye. 


742 


tre, wood, Wisd. x. 4. 11 Tim. ii. 20. 

treed, to tread, Gen. ili. 15; p.¢. trad, Deut. 
i. 36. Is. Ixiii. 3; pl. trooden, troden, 
treeden, treden, traden, tredden, trediden, 
trodeden, 1v Kings ix. 33. xiv.g. Lk. 
xii. 13 p. p. troden, tredid, Deut. i. 36. 
Job xxiv. 11. 

tredyng, ». @ destruction, Is. x. 6. 

treen, treene, trenen, treenen, trenned, 
wooden, Ex. vii. 19. Lev. xi. 32. 11 Tim. 
ii. 20. Apoc. ix. 20. 

tree-werkere, n. a carpenter, Is. xliv. 13. 

tregitour, a conjurer, enchanter, Deut. xviii. 
11; pl. trigetours, tregetours, trechetou- 
ris, 1 Par. xxxiii. 6. Is. xlvii. 9. 

tremblende, tremlyng, tremeling, pr. p. fear- 
ing, dreading, trembling, Is. lxvi.2. Deeds 
vii. 32. 

trendil, @ hoop, Is. xxix. 3. 

trendlid, p. p. trundled, Judg. vii. 13. 

trepeiettis, engines to cast stones, etc., 1Macc. 
vi. 20. 

trestlis, supports, Ex. xxvi. 20, 25. 

trete, to handle, entertain, treat, Col. ii. 21; 
p.t. tretede, tretide, Is. xiv. 24; pl. tret- 
iden, 1v Kings xii. 15. Mk. ix. 33. 1 Joh. 
eee , 

tretable, able to be touched, Heb. xii. 18, 

tretourli, traitourli, tretorousli, treacherous- 
ly, Reclus. xxxii. 15, 19. 

trewliere, comp. more truly, 1 Esdr. prol. 
p. 478. 

tried, tryed, p. p. refined, purified, Lev. ii. 
2575 

trist, trust, 1v Kings xviii. 19, 22. Is. xxxi. 
6. Mt. ix. 2. 

triste, trist, to trust, Ps. exvii. 8; pr.t. 2p. 
tristest, tristnest, tristnist, trustnest, Iv 
Kings xviii. 20. Rom. ii. 19; p.¢. trist- 
ede, tristide, tristinede, tristenyde, 11 Par. 
xvi.12. Zeph. iii. 2. Lk. xi. 22; pl. trist- 
iden, 11 Mace. x. 34. Lk. xviii. 9 ; pr. p. 
tristinge, tristende, tristnynge, Judith iy. 
13; 11 Macc. x. 34. Philem. 27. v. 
trosten. 

tristili, tristily, tristiliche, trustili, trustilych, 
boldly, confidently, Gen. xxxiv. 25. xliv. 
18. Deut. xxxiii. 28. Col. ii. 1g. 

tristinge, tristenyng, tristnynge, trustnynge, 
n. @ trust, 11 Cor. i. 15, Eph. iii. 12. 

tryuauntis, tyrants, 1 Pet. ii. 18. 

troden, trodeden. vz. treed. 

trone, troon, throne, Judg. iii. 20. Apoc. 
xix. 4. 

trost, @ trust, Is. xxxi. 1. Jer. xlviii. 7. 

trosten, trostnen, to trust, Ps. exvii. 8. 
exlv, 2; pr.t. trosteth, Ps. lvi. 2; 1p. 
trostne, Ps. xxiv. 2; p.t. 2 p. trostedist, 
Jer. xiii. 25. xlix. 4; p.p. trosted, Is. 
xxxi. 1; pr. p. trostende, Judith iv. 13. 
Phil. i. 14. ». triste. 

trostli, trostly, confidently, Prov. x.9. Is. 
xiv. 30. 

trouthe, truth, Gen. xxxix. 16. 

trow, trow3, channel, trough, Josh. iii. 15; 
pl. trousis, trowes, trowis, Gen. xxiv. 20. 
xxx. 38. Iv Kings xxv. 14. 


GLOSSARY. 


trowen, trowe, to believe, suppose, Deut. 
xxviii. 66. Mt. xxiv. 26. Rom. prol. 1. 
p- 298; pr. t. trowe, Tob. vii. 14; p. ¢. 
trowede, trowide, Gen. xxxviii. 15. xl.17. 
xlv. 26. 111 Kings xx. 25. Jer, xl. 14; 
pr. p. trowynge, 1 Cor. xv. 17. 

trubli, troubled, Josh. xiii. 3. 

trnel, trulle, @ trowel, Amos vii. 7, 8; pl. 
trullis, 1v Kings xxv. 14. 

trumpe, to sound with a trump, Apoc. viii. 6. 
pr.t. pl. trumpen, 11 Par. xiii. 123 tmp. 
pl. trumpeth, Jer. vi. 1; p. ¢. trumpide, 
11 Kings xviii. 16. Apoc. viii. 8; pl. 
trumpiden, Josh. vi. 8,13; pr. p. tromp- 
ynge, Josh. vi. 13. 

trustnynge. v. tristinge. 

tumblide, p.t. danced, Mt. xiv. 6. 

tumblith, imp. pl. throw down, Iv Kings 
ix. 33; pl. tumbleden, tumbliden, 1v 
Kings ix. 33. 11 Par. xxv. 12. 

tumbler, a dancer, Ecclus. ix. 4. 

tungy, talkative, Ecclus. viii. 4. xxv. 27. 

turblide, p. ¢. troubled, Mk. ix. 19; p. p. 
turblid, towrblid, Mt. ii. 3. Mk. v. 39. 
Lk. i. 29. Joh. xiv. 27. 

turbling, tourbeling, n. a troubling, disturb- 
ance, Deeds xix. 23. 

turnegidy, . vertigo, Is. xix. 14. 

turnours, parts of furniture turned in a 
lathe, 111 Kings vi. 18. 

turtil, turtle, turtur, a turtle dove, Gen. xv. 9. 
Ps. Ixxxiti. 4; pl. turtlis, turteles, turtris, 
turturis, turturs, Gen. xv. 9. Lev. i. 14. 
v. 7. Lk. ii, 24. 

tute-hil. v. toot-hil. 

twei, twey, tweyn, twe, two, Gen. vi. 20. 
xix. 36. Mt. iv. 18, 21. viii. 28. Lk. ii. 
24. ix. 3. 

twei-bitende, pr. p. double-edged, Prov. 
Vag: 

tweyne-eggid, two-edged, Heb. iv. 12. 

twineleth, pr. t. winks, Prov. vi. 13; pl. 
twincle, Ps. xxxiv. 19. 

twynclere, one who winks, Ecclus. xxvii. 
25. 

twynlingis, twynlingus, twins, Gen. xxv. 24. 
S. Sol. iv. 5. 

twynne, to part, divide, Prov. prol. p. 1; p.p. 
twynned, Ex. xxxix. 28. v. a-twinne. 

twisil-tunge, double tongue, Prov. viii. 13. 
xviii. 8. Ecclus. v. 16. xxviii. 1g. 

twisil-tungid, p. p. double-tongued, Ecclus. 
v. 16. vi. I. 

twistis, hinges, Amos viii. 3. 


V. 

vagaunt, wandering, Gen. iv. 14. 
v. 6. 

vah, vath, oh! fie! Is. xliv. 16. Mt. xxvii. 
40. 

vaile, to avail, Jer. xxxvii. 19. 

vangelie, the gospel, 1 Tim. i. 11. 

vanyschiden, p.t. pl. became vain, Rom. i. 
21, 

varye, of various colours, Gen. xxxi. 10. 
12) 

veer, ver, the spring, Ecclus. 1. 8. 


Prov. 


veer-tyme, ver-time, spring, Gen. xxxv. 16. 
Deut. xvi. 1. Ps. Ixxiii. 17. 

vencuse, to vanquish, 1 Cor. i. 25; p. t. 
venkusede, 1 Kings xiv. 47; pl. vencus- 
iden, Deut. vii. 75 p.p. vencusshid, 11 
Kings x. 19. 

venge, to avenge, Judg. xvi. 28. Mk. xviii. 
5; u Cor. x.6; p.¢t. vengide, Josh. x. 
13. Apoc. xix. 2; pl. vengiden, Esth. viii. 
22; p.p. vengid, 1 Kings xiv. 24. xxv. 
31. 

vengeable, able to take vengeance, Rom. 
xiii. 4. 

vengesour, veniesour, an avenger, Deut. xviii. 
1g. Num. xxxv. 25. 

venieris, avengers, Judg. vi. 31. 

venymed, venemyd, venymyd, p. p. empoi- 
soned, Wisd. xvi. 3 9, 10. Josh. prol. p. 
5553 pr.p. venemynge, Wisd. xvi. 3 9. 

venymyngis, poisonings, 1v Kings ix. 22. 

venym-makere, poison maker, Ps. lvii. 6. 

ver, verr, a glass cup, Prov. xxiii. 31. 

vermycle, vermilion, red cloth, Ex. xxxix. 1. 

vermyloun, vermilion, red silk or cloth, Ex. 
XXXV. 25. 

verre, verrei, verri, verry, verey, true, Lk. 
xvi. 11. Joh. i. g. Gal. iii, 213; sup. ver- 
reist, Rom. prol. 2. p. 303. 

verreili, verili, truly, Gen. xx. 12. 

vertues, military forces, 1 Macc. xiii. 54; 
miracles, Mt. xi. 20. 

vyce, vijs, @ winding staircase, 111 Kings 
vi. 8. : 

vikeried, vicariate, Ecclus. xxxiti. 6 9. 

vilensly, basely, 11 Kings x. 5. 

viliche, vilely, Lev. xviii. 28. 11 Macc. ix. 2. 

vilite, baseness, filthiness, Deut. xxiv. 1. 

vindage, vyndage, @ vintage, Lev. xxv. 5. 
11 Esdr. x. 37. 

viner, vyner, vinere, @ vineyard, Gen. ix. 20. 
xlix. 11. Mt.xx.1. Lk. xiii.6; pl. vyne- 
ris, Num. xvi. 14. 

vyn-tilieris, cultivators of vineyards, 1v Kings 
XXxV. 12. 

vynolent, given to wine, Tit. i. 7. 

vyrounde, p. p. travelled round, Pref. ep. 
c. i. p. 61. 

vitailid, p. p. supplied with provisions, Deeds 
xii. 20. 

vim-tree, an elm, Is. xli. 19. 

vmbylapped, p. p. envirouned, Heb. v. 2. 

vmbre, shadow, 1v Kings xx.g. Ps. evi. 10. 

vmpere, umpire, Rom. prol. 2. p. 302. v. 
noumpere. 

vnamendid, p. p. not corrected, 11 Par. prol. 
Pp. 385- 

vnauisely, vnauysely, wnadvisedly, 11 Kings 
xvi. 4g. 1 Tim. v. 1. 

vnauysid, p. p. unadvised, rash, Prov. xiii. 3. 

vnbileue, disbelief, Mk. xvi. 14. 

vnbileueful, vnbileeueful, vnbileuful, vnbe- 
leeful, unbelieving, incredible, Judg. xx. 5. 
Wisd. x. 7. Ecclus. ii. 18. xvi. 7. xxiii. 
33. Joh. xx. 27. 1 Pet. iii. 20. 

vunbileuefulness, unbelief, Mk. ix. 23. 

vubyndynge, 2. an unnerved condition, a 
loss of strength, 11 Macc. ili. 24. 


vnblessid, wnkappy, Ecclus. xxvii. 24. 1 
Mace. xv. 3. 
vnblisful, znhappy, Prov. xix. 26. 
vnbolde, cowardly, Judg. ix. 4 9. 
vnhowinge, pr. p. unbending, Heb. x. 23. 
ynbuxum, vnbuxhum, disobedient, Prov. 
xxix. 19. 11 Esdr. xv. 27. 
vnbuxumnesse, disobedience, Pref. ep. c. iii. 
p- 63. 
vneeli. v. vnseli. 
vneesendly, unceasingly, Is. prol. p. 225. 
ynchastisable, vnchaastisable, incorrigible, 
Ez. ii. 4. 
vochargid, unladen, Deeds xxi. 3. 
vnchastisid, p. p. not broken or tamed, Ec- 
clus. xxx. 8. 
vncircumeidid, p. p. uncircumcised, Jer. vi. 
10. 
vnelene, gen. wncle’s, Jer, Xxxil. 7. 
vnclothe, to take off the clothes, Ez. xliv. 193 
p. p. vnelothid, Bar. iv. 20. 
vncomunycable, incommunicable, Wisd. xiv. 
21. 
vneomprehensible, incomprehensible, Jer. 
XXXxii. 19. 
vncorrigible, ixcorrigible, Prov. xxiv. 19. 
yncouenable, vncouuenable, inconsistent, un- 
fitting, inopportune,Pref. ep. c. vi. p. 67. 
Wisd. xviii. 10. Ecclus. xxii. 5. Rom. i. 
31. 2 Thess. iii. 2. 
vneouenabli, vncouenably, tnconsistently, 
inopportunely, Pref. ep. c. vii. p.74. Ec- 
clus. xxxii. 6. 
vneoupable, vnculpable, blameless, Num. 
XXxil. 22. 
vneredible, incredible, Judg. xx. 5. 
vneurable, incurable, Deut. xxxii. 33. Ecclus. 
xxxvili, 30. Is. xiv. 6. 
vndampned, p. p. uncondemned, Deeds xvi. 
37: 
vndeadli, vndeedli, vndeedly, immortal,Prov. 
i. 15. 1 Tim. i. 19. 
yndedlynesse, vndeadlynesse, vndeedlynesse, 
immortality, Eccles. ii. 14 g. Wisd. ili. 4. 
1 Cor. xv. 53. 1 Tim. vi. 16. 
vndefoulid, p. p. not defouled, Lev. xiii. 57. 
Wisd. iv. 9. 
vndefoulingnesse, incorruption, 1 Pet. ili. 4. 
vndepartable, vnpartable, indivisible, Lk. 
prol. 1. p. 141. 
yvnder-bern, to support, supply, Ecclus. xii. 
143 pr. p. vndir-beringe, 11 Pet. i. 5. 
vndre-brenne, to set on fire, Nahum ii. 13. 
vndir-brethinge, pr.p. slightly breathing, 11 
Mace. vii. 5. 
vndir-caste, subjected, Wisd. xviii. 22; p.p. 
vndur-cast, Ex. xxi. 21. 
vndur-crepe, to secretly creep, Deut. xv. 9. 
vndir-cryeden, p. t. pl. called out, cried out, 
Lk. xxiii. 21; p. p. vnder-cried, Gen. 
xxxix.143 pr. p. vnder-criende, Ps. prol. 
p. 738- 
vnder-delue, to dig under, Ecclus. xii. 18; 
p.t. pl. vnder-doluen, vndur-delueden, 
Gen. xviii. 6. Is. xxiii. 133 p. p. vnder- 
doluen, vndur-doluun, Ps. Ixxix.17. Rom. 
xi. 3. 





GLOSSARY. 


vndir-diggid, p. p. undermined, Ez. xxxvi. 
35: 

vnder-dreynt, p. p. submerged, Ex. xv. 10. 

vnder-folewe, to follow close, Ps. xxii. 6; 
pr. t.pl. vndir-folewen, 1 Tim. v. 24. 

vndur-fonge, to receive, take, Apoc. prol. 2. 
p- 639; pr. t. vndur-fonge, Gal. iii, 14; 
plvnder-tongen,vndir-fenge, Rom. prol. 1. 
p. 299; p.p. vndur-fonge, vndur-fongun, 
Gal. i. 9. iii. 2; pr.p. vnder-fongende, 
Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

vnder-goynge, vndur-goynge, pr. p. going 
beneath, Nah. iit. 14. 

vndur-growith, pr. t. gradually increases, 
Ex. v. 5; pr. p. vndur-growynge, vndre- 
growynge, Gen. xxvi. 13. 1 Kings v. 
10. 

vnder-heue, vndur-heeue, fo lift beneath, 
Ex. xxiii. 5. Deut. xxii. 4. 

ynder-hilid, p. p. spread beneath, suffused, 
Num. xii. 14. 

vnder-ioyneth, pr. t. subjoins, Ps. prol. p. 
137: 

vnder-kutte, fo cut from beneath, Is. xxxviii. 
12. 

vnder-lazhende, pr. p. laughing secretly, Ec- 
clus. xiii. 7, 14. 

vndir-led, p. p. brought under, Ez. xxiii. 3, 
21. 

vnder-leyn, to place beneath, to set secretly, 
to subject, Jer. xxvii. 11; imp. vndir- 
leye, 111 Kings xxi. 10; pl. vnder-leith, 
Eeelus. li. 34. Jer. xxvii. 12; p. £. vnder- 
leide, Ps. xlvi. 4; p. p. vnder-leid, Esth. 
XV. 3. 

vnder-lye, vnder-lyn, vnder-ligge, vndur- 
ligge, to lie under, be liable to, submit, 
Ex. xxi. 32. Lev.v. 3. Num. v. 21. Esth. 
i. 15; pr.f. vnder-lieth, vnder-lith, Josh. 
xii. 3. Wisd. xii. 18; imp. vnder-leye, 
ynder-ly, vndir-ligge, Heb. xiii. 17; p.. pl. 
vnder-lejen, Esth. viii. 13. ix. 16; pr. p. 
vnder-liende, vnder-ligging, Deut. xxxiii. 
13. 11 Mace. xii. 3. 

vndirlingis, inferiors, Rom. prol. 2. p. 301. 

vndir-loute, vnder-lowt, p. p. subjected, made 
obedient, Gen. xxxvii.8. Ecclus.xxxiii. 30. 
Lk. ii. 51. 

vndir-maister, schoolmaster (Lat. pedago- 
gus), Gal. ili. 25. 

vndir-myne, vndur-myne, fo dig under, Ec- 
clus. xii. 18. Mt. vi. 20; p. ¢. pl. vndir- 
myneden, Gen. xlix.6; p.p. vnder-myn- 
ed, vndur-myned, Jer. i. 58. Ez. xxxvi. 
353 pr. p. vndur-mynynge, Ex. xxii. 2. 

vnder-mynyng, 2. a digging under, Jer. li. 
58. 

vnder-mynesteren, fo serve, Ecclus. xxxix. 
39; p.t. vnder-mynistrede, 1 Tim. v. 10. 

vnder-mouwe, to mock, to sneer at, Prov. i. 
26; p.t. vnder-mouwede, Is. xxxvil. 22; 
pl. vndre-moweden, 11 Par. xxxvi. 16. 
Ps. xxxiv. 16; pr. p. vnder-mouwing, 
vnder-mowynge, 11 Par. xxx. 10. Ps. xliti. 
14. 

vnder-nymen, vnder-nyme, vndir-nym, 
vndur-nym, vnder-nymme, to reprote, 


743 


blame, Gen. xxx. 33. xxxviii. 23. 11 Kings 
vii. 14. Is. ti. 4. 1 Joh. iii. 20; pr. t. 
vndir-nemeth, vndur-nymmeth, 1 Joh. iii. 
20. Apoc. prol. 2. p. 639; 2p. vndir-nym- 
ist, Gen. xxxi. 32; imp. pl. vnder-nemeth, 
Is. i. 18; p.f. vnder-nam, Gen. xxxi. 42; 
pl. vnder-nemen, vnder-nomyn, Tob. ii. 8. 
Rom. prol. 1. p. 300; p. p. vndur-nom, 
vndir-nomen, vndir-nommen, vnder- 
nummen, Num. v. 13. Deut. xxi. 18. 
tv Kings vii. 9. Joh. iii. 20. Gal. ii. 11; 
p. p. vnder-nemende, Wisd. xvii. 9. 

vnder-nymyng, 2. a reproof, Rom. pro]. 1. p. 
300; pl.vndir-nemyngus,vnder-nemyngis, 
vndir-nymyngis, Ps. xxxvii. 15. Prov. x. 
17. XV. 32. 

vnder-nymere, @ reprover, Is. xxix. 21. 

vndir-putte, vndur-puten, vnder-poten, fo 
set low, subject, put under, 111 Kings xviii. 
23. Prov. xxvi.25. Rom. prol. 1. p. 298; 
pr. t. vnder-put, vnder-putteth, Ps. xxxvi. 
24; 2p. vndur-puttist, Gen. xxix. 25; 
p.t. vnder-putte, vnder-puttide, Gen. xlix. 
15. 1 Mace. vi. 46; pl. vnder-putten, 
vndir-puttiden, 11 Esdr. iii. 5. Rom. xvi. 
43 p. p. vnder-put, Gen. xxviii. 18. Ex. 
xxvi. 213 pr. p. vnder-putting, Gen. 
XXvili. II. 

vnder-rauyshide, p. p. stole secretly, Gen. 
Xxvil. 36. 

vnder-reren, to lift from beneath, Is.xxii. 17; 
pr.t. vndur-rerith, 1 Kings ii. 7; pr. p. 
vnder-rerende, Ps. exii. 7. 

vndir-sailiden, p. ¢. pi. sailed near, Deeds 
XXvii. 4. 

vndir-sette, vndir-settide, p. t. placed be- 
neath, supported, Gen. xlix. 15; p. p. 
vndur-set, Eccles. iv. 10. 

vndur-settyngis, brackets, supports, Kz. xii. 
26, 

vnder-singing, n. singing the second part, 
Ps. prol. p. 738. 

vnder-stant, vnder-stondeth, pr. t. under- 
stands, Prov. xvii. 8. Mt. xiii. 19. 

vnderstandable, capable of understanding, 
Ecelus. iii. 32. 

vnderstondingus, vndurstondyngis, abilities, 
Ps, xxvii. 72. 

vnder-taken, to take up, Ps. xlvii. 4; p. ¢. 
vnder-toc, Ps. xviii. 30. Is. xli. 10; p.t. 
pl. vnder-token, Ps. xxxix. 12; p.p. vnder- 
take, Ps. xlvii. 10. 

vnder-taking, 2. a supporting, Ps. evii. 9. 

vnder-takere, n. taker up, Ps. xli. 10. iii. 6. 

vnder-tend, vndur-tent, p. p. kindled, Deut. 
xxxii. 22. Ps. xvii. 9. 

vndir-turne, vndur-turne, fo subvert, Ecclus. 
xii.ig. Ez. xxvi. 12; p.p. vndur-turned, 
Josh. xvii. 18. Ez. xxix. 12. 

vndur-weuyden, vnder-wouen, p. ¢. pl. sub- 
joined, 1 Kings prol. p. 3. 

vndur-wexynge, vndre-wexinge, pr.p. grow- 
ing gradually, Dan. viii. 3. 

vnder-3oke, vndir-3okeu, vndur-3oke, fo sub- 
due, subject, Pref. ep. c. iii. p. 63. Judith 
ii. 3,6; p.t. vndir-3okede, 11 Par. viii. 8; 
pl. vnder-3okeden, Jer, xxxiv. 113 p. p. 


744 


vndir-3ockid, ynder-3okid, Gen. xxvii. 37. 
1 Esdr. v. 5. Jam. iii. 7. ; 

vndisciplyned, p. p. unlearned, Wisd. xvii. 1. 
Ecclus. v. 14. 

yndiscreet, indiscreet, Ecclus. xxiii. 6. xxxi. 
24. 

vndistriable, indestructible, Wisd. ii. 23 g. 

yndon, vndo, to solve, unbind, destroy, Gen. 
xl. 8. Mt. v.17. Mk. i. 7. xiv. 58. Joh. 
ii. 19; pr.t. vndoth, Mt. v. 19; p.¢. vn- 
dide, Gen. xli. 8; p.p. vndo, Gen. xl. 
16. 

vndoyng, 2. exposition, solution, Gen. x). 5. 

vndoeris, interpreters, Cath. Epp. prol. 1. 
P- 594- 

vndren, vndrun, vnduren, vndurn, vndur, 
vndirne, the time from nine to twelve in 
the morning, Mk. xv. 25, 33. Joh. iv. 6. 
Deeds ii. 15. 

vndwellable, not habitable, Jer. vi. 8. 

vneymable, incapable of reckoning, Job 
XXxvi. 27. 

ynenarrable, vnnarrable, that may not be 
told, 11 Cor. ix.15. 1 Pet. i. 8. 

ynendid, vneendid, p.p. unfinished, endless, 
Wisd. iv. 5. 1 Tim. i. 4. 

vuequyte, injustice, Rom. iii. 5. 

vneuenli, not equitably, Gen. xvi. 5. 

vnexpugnable, impregnable, Ez. xxxvi. 12. 
1 Mace. xii. 21. 

vnfailende, pr.p. never failing, Ecclus. 
xxiv. 6. 

vnfastnen, to make weak, Is. xiv. 27; p. p. 
vufastned, Ps. xxv. 1. 

vnfilable, vnfillable, znsatiable, Ps. c. 5. 
Prov. xv.16. xxvii. 20. 

vnfyled, p. p._undefiled, Heb. vii. 26. 

vnfoulid, p. p. undefiled, 1 Pet. i. 19. 11 
Pet. iii. 14. 

vnfourmed, p. p. not shapen or fashioned, 
Deut. xxvii. 6. 

vnfructuous, vnfruytouse, unfruitful, Ex. 
xxiii. 26. Job xxiv. 20. Eph. v.11. Tit. 
ili. 14. 

vngilti, guiltless, Gen. xxxvii. 22. Num. 
xiv. 18. 

vnglorious, inglorious, Job xii. 19. 

vnhabitable, vnabitable, not habitable, Jer. 
ii. 6. vi. 8, 

vnheerid, p.p. stripped of hair, Biz. xxix. 18. 

vnheleable, incurable, Ecclus. xxviii. 30. 
Is, xiv. 6. Jer. xxx. 12. 

vnhewen, vnhewid, p.p. not hewn, Josh. viii. 
31. 

vnhile, fo uncover, Ruth iii. 4; p.é. vnhi- 
lide, Ecclus. xlvii. 16; pl. vnhiliden, 
vuhilliden, Ez. xxii. 10. Mk. ii. 43 pr.p. 
vuhilynge, 11 Kings vi. 20. 

ynholpen, vnhelpid, p.p. not helped, 111 Esdr. 
ix. 11. Wisd. xii. 5. 

vnhonest, vnonest, dishonest, dishonorable, 
base, Prov. xxv. 8. Ecclus. xxxvii. 13. 
1 Cor. xii. 23. 

vnhonestly, vnonestli, vnonestly, dishonor- 
ably, disgracefully, 11 Kings xiii. 2. Tob. 
iii, 17 9. 

vnhonourid, p. p. dishonored, Joh. viii. 49. 


GLOSSARY. 


vnhopid, p.p. not hoped for, Wisd. v. 2. 
xvii. 14. 

vniowns. ». oyniouns. 

vniuersite, vnyuersitee, multitude, universe, 
aggregate, Tob. viii. 19. 11 Macc. xiv. 35- 
Jam. iii. 6. 

vnknytte, p.é. loosed, unbound, Ecclus. 
xxvili.18; p.p. vnknit, vnknyt, Job vi. 
17. Ecclus. xxviii. 18; pr.p. vnknyt- 
tynge, Nah. ii. 10. 

vnknowith, pr.t. knows not, is ignorant, 
Gen. xxxix. 8. Ecclus. viii. 7. 1 Cor. 
xiv. 38; 1p. vnknowe, Gen. xxvii. 23 
pl. vnknowen, Gen. xliv. 153 tmp. 
vnknowe, Prov. xix. 27; p.¢. vnknewe, 
vukne3, Deut. viii. 3. Is. xiii. 16; pl. 
vuknewen, Is. lvi. 10; pr.p. vnknowynge, 
vnknowende, Gen. xx. 4. Prov. vii. 22. 

vnknowyngus, ignorances, Ecclus. xxiii. 2. 

vnkunnynge, vnkunnyng, vnkunnende, 
pr.p. not knowing, ignorant, Gen. xx. 4. 
Ecclus. xxxii. 12. Rom. x. 3. 


vnkunnyng, 2. ignorance, folly, Ps. lxviii. 6. | 
Wisd. xiv. 22. Rom. prol. 2. p. 302; pl. | 


vokunnyngis, Ps. xxiv. 7. Ecclus, xxiii.3. 


vnkunnyngenesse, ignorance, Lev. iv. 2. | 


1 Pet. i. 14; pl. vnkunnyngnessis, Ps. 
xxiv. 7. Ecclus. xxiii. 3. 


ynleefulnesse, an unlawful act, Wisd. xiv. 8. 


vnleeuable, unbelieving, Ecclus. xvi. 29. 

vnleeueful, znbdelieving, Ecclus. xxiii. 33. 

vnleueful, vnleeful, vnleful, unlawful, Gen. 
xxxiv. 7,14. 1 Par. xv. 13. 

vnleeuende, pr. p. unbelieving, Is. xxi. 2. 

vnlerid, vnlerud, p. p. unlearned, 1 Cor. xiv. 
16. 11 Cor. xi. 16. 

vnlettrid, p.p. illiterate, Prov. xxx. 2 g. 

vnlikned, p. p. made unlike, 111 Kings 
Xiv. 5. 

vnmaad, p. p. not created, Prov. viii. 22 g. 

vnmerciable, unmerciful, Jer. 1. 42. 

vumesurably, immoderately, Ecclus. xi. 109. 

vnmylde, cruel, Ecclus. xiii. 14. 11 Tim. 
iii. 3. 

vnmynding, x. forgetfulness, Wisd. xiv. 26. 

vamysti, wanting in power, Wisd. xi. 18. 

vnmouable, vnmeuable, immoveable, Ex. xv. 
16. 1 Par. xvi. 30. Heb. vi. 18. 

ynmouablenesse, immoveableness, Heb. vi. 
17. 

ynncis, ounces, 11 Kings xxi. 16. 

vnneth, vnnethis, adv. scarcely, Gen. xxvii. 
30. xxxii. 11. Deeds xiv. 17. 

vnnoble, ignoble, Job xxx. 8. Prov. xxii. 
29. 

vnnoblei, vnnobley, ignobleness, Bar. vi. 25. 
1 Cor. xv. 43. 01 Cor. vi. 8. xi. 27. 

vnnoumbrable, vnnoumbreable, innume- 
rable, Ex. x. 14. Par. prol. 1. p. 316. 
Eccles. v. 6. 

vnobedience, disobedience, Judg. ii. 22 g. 
Esth. xvi. 24. 

vnobedient, disobedient, Deut. viii. 20. 11 
Esdr. xv. 27. 

vnobeisaunce, disobedience, Pref. ep. c. iil. 
p. 63. Esth. xvi. 24. 

vnobeisaunt, disobedient, Prov. xxix. 24. 


vnobeshynge, vnobeschaunt, disobedient, 
111 Kings xiii. 26. 


‘ynordeyning, n.irregularity, disorganisation, 


Wisd. xiv. 26. 

vnordenat, irregular, ill-governed, Ecclus. 
xlv.9 9. 

vnordynatly, out of order, 11 Thess. iii. 6. 

ynouercomen, vnouercomun, ynouercumen, 
p.p. not conquered, surpassed, Judith prol. 
p. 602. 11 Mace. xi. 13. 

vnouerpassable, insurpassable, insuperable, 
Judith prol. p. 602. 

vnouertrowable, not capable of being sus- 
pected, Ecclus. xxv. 9. 

vnpacience, impatience, Judith viti. 24. 

vnpacient, impatient, Prov. vii. 11. 

vnparfit, vnperfit, imperfect, Ps. cxxxyiii. 16. 

vnpartable. v. vndepartable. 

vnperfeccioun, imperfection, Ecclus. xxxviii. 
3I. 

vnpesible, wnquiet, restless, 1 Thess. v. 14. 
Jam. iii. 8. 

vnpesiblely, vnpesibly, wnquietly, 11 Thess. 
iii. 11. 

vnpite, vnpitee, impiety, want of feeling, 
Prov. iv. 17. Zech. v. 8. Rom. i. 18. 
Jude ii. 15. 

vnpitous, vnpyteuows, impious, Ex. xxiii. 
1,7. Ez. xxi. 25. 11 Pet. ii. 5. Jude i. 4. 

vnpitously, impiously, Prov. xii. 2. 11 Pet. 
ii. 6. 

vnpitousnesse, vnpitowsnes, impiety, Lev. 
xix. 7. Ps. xxxi. 5; pl. vnpitousnesses, 
vnpitowsnesses, Lev. xxvi. 41. Jer. xiv. 
20. 

vnpitouste, impiety, Ecclus. xlvi. 23. 

vnpliable, unbending, Heb. x. 23. 

vnportable, insupportable, Mt. xxiii. 4. 

vnpossible, impossible, Wisd. xvi. 15. Mk. 
x. 27. Lk. xvii. 1. 

vnpreiable, incapable of being entreated, 
Lam. iii. 42. 

vnprofit, unprofitableness, Eccles. i. 1 g. 
Heb. vii. 18. 

vnprudent, unwise, Mk. vii. 18. 

vnpurueid, vnpurueyed, p.p. unforeseen, 
Wisd. vii. 21. 

vnquyetid, p. p. disturbed, Deeds xv. 19. 

vnredi, vnredy, not prepared, 11 Cor. ix. 4. 

vureligious, vnreligiouse, érreligious, 111 
Esdy. i. 24. Ecclus. xxxvii. 12. 

vnremediable, irremediable, Tob. ix. 4. 

vnresonable, irrational, Wisd. xv. 18. 

vnreste, disquiet, Judith xiv. 9. 

vnrestful, restless, unsatisfied, Prov. vii. 
13.9. Bar. iv.15. 11 Thess. iii. 2. 

vunrestfulnesse, restlessness, Judith xiv. 9. 
Lk. xi. 8. 

vnreuerence, irreverence, Ecclus. xxv. 29. 

vnryendide, p.t. took off the rind, Gen. 
XXX. 97. 

vunrist, unjust, Ecclus. v. 18. 

vnriztfulli, unrighteously, Wisd. xii. 23. 

vnriz3tfulnesse, unrighteousness, Job xi. 14. 
Joh. vii. 18; pl. vmnristfulnessis, Ps. 
Wii. 3. 

vunristwise, unrighteous, Ps. v. 6. 


vnrijtwisnesse, vnristwysenesse, unrighteous- | 


ness, Job xi. 14. Joh. vii. 18; 
ri3twisnesses, Ps. lvii. 3. 

vurystwisly, unrighteously, Lev. xix. 15. Ps. 
Ixviii. 5. 

vunsaciable, insatiable, Bar. iv. 15. 

vnsadde, unstable, Rom. xv. 1. 

vnsadnesse, instability, Heb. vii. 18. 

vnsaueri, wanting in taste or discretion, 
Ecclus. xxiii. 6. 

vnscapable, inevitable, Wisd. xvii. 16. 

vnschamefast, vnshamefast, 
shameless, Is. lvi. 11. Dan. viii. 23. 

vnschamefastli, vnschamfastli, vnshamefully, 
without shame, Pref. ep. c. i. p.61. Prov. 
xxi. 29. 

vnschamefastnesse, shamelessness, Job xv. 
277. 

vnschamyd, p.p. not ashamed, 11 Tim. ii. 
158 

vnschood, vnshod, p.p. without shoes, Is. 
SSS 

vnseli, vnsely, vnseely, vuceli, unhappy, 


Wisd. iii.11. xiii. 10. xv.14. Rom. vii. 
24. 

ynsemende, pr. p. unseemly, Prov. xxvi. 
Tr]: 

vnsistable, invisible, 1 Tim. i. 17. 

vnslei3, unwary, Prov. xxiii. 28. 

vnslo3, not slothful, Prov. vi. 11. 

vnsmyten, p. p. not smitten, Gen. xxxii. 8. 

vnsoupid, p.p. not having supped, Dan. vi. 
18. 

vnspekende, vnspekynge, pr. p. not speak- 
ing, Ps. viii. 3. Wisd. x. 21. 

vustrengthe, loss of strength, 11 Macc. iii. 
24. 

vnsuffrable, vnsuffreable, intolerable, Num. 
xi, ro. 1 Mace. viii. 9g. Judith xiv. 17. 
Ps. exxiii. 5. 

vnsuffryng, x. intolerableness, 11 Macc. ix. 
10, 

vnsuget, vnsugettid, p.p. not subject, Heb. 
ii. 8. 

vnsuspect, not suspected, Ecclus. xxv. 9. 

vntellable, ineffable, that may not be told, 
Wisd. xvii. 1. Ecelus. xxi. 21. xxxvi. 16. 
11 Cor. x. 15. 

vntemyd, vntame, p.p. untamed, Ecclus. 
xxx. 8. Jer. xxxi. 18. 

vntemperat, vntemperaunt, intemperate, Ec- 
clus. xxxi. 23. 

vntempter, not a tempter, Jam. i. 13. 

vutilied, p. p. vntilled, Ez. xxxvi. 35. 

vatymely, immature, Ps. civ. 28. 

vntolerable, insufferable, Judith xiv. 17. 

vn-to-smyten, p.p. unsmitten, Rom. prol. 1. 
P- 300. 

vuntrist, vntrust, disbelief, Rom. iv. 20. 

vntrowable, vntrouable, not expected, incre- 
dible, Judg. xx. 5. Esth. ii.1g. Ecclus. 
xi. 5. 

vnuenkusable, impregnable, Wisd. v. 20. 

vnuisible, vnuysible, invisible, Tob. xii. 19. 
Col. i. 16. 

vnwallid, p.p. not walled, 1 Kings vi. 18. 

vnwar, znwary, Proy. xxiii. 28. 


VOLe iv: 


pl. vn- 


vnshamfast,, 


GLOSSARY. 


vnwardid, p.p. wnfortified, Gen. xiii, 12. 

vnwarned, vnwarnyd, p.p. unexpected, not 
warned, 11 Mace. viii. 6. 

vnwarnesse, unwariness, Prov. xiv. 8. 

vnwatri, without water, Ps. Ixxvii. 17, 40. 

vnweyed, vnwaied, p.p. without a way, Hos. 
ii. 3. Ez. xiv. 15. xv. 8. 

ynwelewable, that may not fade, 1 Pet. i. 4. 
ve 4. 

vnwelsumnesse, ill success, Ps. xiii. 3. 

vnwemmed, vnwemmyd, p.p. without ble- 
mish, Lev. vi. 6. Ps. xviii.14. S. Sol. 
vy. 2. Col. i. 22. Heb. ix. 14. 

vnwisdam, vnwysdom, ignorance, folly, Ps. 
xxxviil. 6, Ixviti. 6. Lk. vi. 11. 1 Cor. 
xi. 21. 

vnwist, p.p. unknown, Gen. xxxv: 22. Ju- 
dith xi. 7. 

vnwitti, vuwittie, unwise, foolish, Wisd. iii. 
12. Ecclus. xvi. 20. 11 Cor. xii. 11. Gal. 
iii. 1. 

vnwitynge, pr.p. not knowing, Gen. xxxi. 
24. 

vnwittinge, vnwityng, vnwetinge, 2. igno- 
rance, Deeds iii. 17. 

vnwityngli, vuwityngly, vnwitendely, igno- 
rantly, Num. xv. 26. Wisd. xviii. 19. 
Ecelus. xiv. 7. 

vnwlappe, to unwrap, Jer. li. 25. 

vnworschipist, pr. ¢. dishonorest, Rom. ii. 
23; p.p. vuworshipid, vnworschipid, vn- 
wrshipid, Ecclus. xxii. 5. Nah. i. 14. 
Rom. prol. 1. p. 299. 

vnworsheping, 2. dishonor, Ecclus. i. 38. 

voiden, fo have leisure, make void, Esth. 
ix.17; p.p. voided, voydid, Job xv. 4. 
Ecclus. ii. 8. 1 Cor. i.17.  v. a-noide. 

voidenesse, voydenesse, emptiness, Wisd. 
xiv. 14. Ecclus. xxxviii. 25. 

volatil, volatile, volatijl, @ bird, Gen. i. 20. 
vii. 14; pl. volatilis, volatils, volatijls, 
Gen. i. 26. vii. ig. Mt. xxii. 4. 

volible, capable of revolving, Ez. x. 13. 

voluptee, delight, pleasure, Ez. xxxi. 9, 16, 
18; pl. voluptees, Mic. vi. 16. Lk. viii. 
14. U1 Pet. it. 13. Tit. iti. 3. 

voluptuouste, pleasure, Eccles. ii. 10. xi. 10. 
Jer. xxii. 28. 

vome, @ vomit, Is. xxviii, 8; pl. vomes, Is. 
xxviii, 8. 

vome, voome, voom, fo vomit, foam, Lev. 
xviii. 25. U1 Pet. ii, 22. Apoc. iti, 163 
pr.t. vometh, fometh, Mk. ix.17; imp. 
pl. vometh, Jer, xxv. 275 p.t. vomyd, 
fomede, Lev. xviii. 28. Mk. ix. 193 pr.p. 
vomende, vomynge, Prov. xxx. 1. Is, 
xix. 14. Mk. ix. 19. 

vomyng, 2. @ vomiting, Jer. x\vili. 26. 

vouchist-saaf, pr.t. 2 p. vouchsafest, Judith 
v. 8; p.é. pl. voucheden-saaf, Tob. prol. 
p- 576. 

vourer, vourere, @ glutton, Lk. vii. 34. 

vouteries, adulteries, Jer. xiii. 27. 

vowre, fo devour, Ex. xii. 9; p.é. vowrede, 
1 Kings xviii. 8. 11 Kings xviii. 38. 

vowtur, @ vulture, Job xxviii. 7. 

vp, vpe, prep. after, according to, 1 Kings 


745 


Xxii. 21. 1 Mace. xii. 2. Mt. ix.29. Uk. 
i. 9. 

vpbraiden, p. t. pl. upbraided, Mt. xxvii. 
44. 

vpbreke, to break up, Gen. xix. 9. 

vpon-sittende, pr. p. sitting upon, Ecclus. 
xxxiil. 6. 

vpon-write, to write upon, inscribe, Num. 
xvii. 2. 

vpreiser, @ raiser up, 11 Kings xxii. 3. 

vpreisith, pr.f. raises up, 1 Kings ii. 8; 
imp. vpreyse, Mt. x. 8. 

vprered, p.p. raised up, Prov. xv.18. Is. 
xxxiii. 10, 

vpsodonn, vpsedoun, upside-down, Pref. ep. 
¢. vii. p. 69. Ex. xxiii. 8. Lk. xv. 8. 

vpsopen, p.p. absorbed, swallowed up, Ps. 
exxili. 4. 

vpsteyeth, pr. t. goes up, Gen. xxxii. 26. 

vptakere, a teker up, Ps. xlv. 8,12. cxviil. 
114. 

vptaking, n. @ supporting, Ps. cvii. 9. 

vptook, p.t. took up, Is. xli.103; p.p. vp- 
take, Ps. xxix. 2. 

vpturnen, pr. t. pl. subvert, Tit. i. 11. 

vrchon. v. irchoun. 

vsen, pr.t. pl. deal with, Joh. iv. 9; p.t. 
pl. vsiden, Joh. iv. 9. 

vs-silf, ourselves, Judith iti. 2. Ps. xcix. 3. 
Rom. viii. 23. 1 Joh. i. 8. 

vsure, interest of money, Lev. xxv. 37. 
Deut. xxiii. 20; pl. vsuris, vsurys, vseris, 
Lev. xxv. 36. 11 Esdr. v. 7. Ps. Ixxi. 14. 
Mt. xxv. 27. Lk. xix. 23. 

vsurede, p. t. lent on interest, Jer. xv. 10. 

vttermere, vttermor, vttermore, vtmer, vt- 
mere, comp. outer, utter, Gen. xvii. 24. 
Ex. xx. 18. Mt. vill. 12. xxii. 133 sup. 
vttermest, vttremest, vttermost, vttir- 
moste, vttmest, otemost, outmost, Gen. 
xxiii. g. xlv. 21. Num. xxii. 39. Josh. 
xill. 27. Mt. viii. 12. 

vttermostis, vtmostes, furthest parts, 1s. 
xii, 10. 


W. 


waad, p.p. waded, Ez. xlvii. 5. 

waan, p.t. took, Judith i. 5. 

waardropis, privies, iv Kings x. 27. 

waastete, wastete, devastation, Deut. xxviii. 
53> 57- Iv Kings xxi. 14. - 

waastye, waaste, to make waste, destroy, 
Hos. xiii. 8. 

wageren, to stumble, reel, vacillate, Eccles. 
xii. 3. Ecclus. xxxvii. 16; imp. pl. wa- 
gereth, Is. xxix. 9; pr.p. wagringe, wa- 
gerende, Ps. cviii.1o. Hos. ix. 17. 

wagering, n. @ waving, moving to and fro as 
the waves, Ecclus. xl. 4. 

waggide, p. ¢. agitated, 1 Kings xvi. 14; p.p. 
wagid, waggid, Lk. vii. 24; pr. p. wag- 
gende, Job xxxviii. 41. v. outwaggeth. 

waggyng, n. a shaking, Ps. xiii. 15. 

wayed, p. p. having roads, Ez. xix. 13. 

wayles, without a road, Kz. xiv. 15. 

wayn, weyn, waggon, 1 Kings vi. 7, 8. Is. 
v.18; pl. waynes, Gen. xlv. 19. 


5c 


746 


waische, to wash, Gen. xxiv. 32; imp. pl. 
wayshith, Gen. xix. 2; p. t. wasche, 
wesh, waischide, 1v Kings v.14. Judith 
x. 3. Mt. xxvii. 24. Joh. xili.123; pl. 
weschen, waischiden, Gen. xliii. 24; p.p. 
waischun, wasshum, iwaschen, yweischen, 
waischid, wayshid, weysche, Gen. xviii. 4. 
Ex. xix.14. xxix.17. Mt. ii. 6. 1 Tim. 
vy. 10. 

wayte, weyt, a@ spy, Iv Kings ix. 17, 
20. 

waiten, fo keep watch, observe, 1 Esdr. xii. 
24. Judith xiii. 5; imp. wayte, weyte, 
Phil. tii.17; p.¢. weitid, weytyde, wey- 
tide, Deut. xix. 11. Iv Kings vi. 10. 
xxi. 6; p.p. waitende, weytynge, 1 Kings 
xxii. 8. Lam. iii. 10. v. a-weytid. 





| wariable, 


waitere, weyter, @ spy, a watcher, 11 Kings | 
| wariere, a curser, 1 Cor. v.11; pl. warieris, 


xiii. 34. xviii, 24. Iv Kings ix.175 pl. 
weyters, 1 Kings xiv. 16. v. aboute- 
waiteris. 

wayued. v. wawed. 

waken, to watch, to awake, Num. xxxi. 30. 
Jer. i. 12. xxxi. 28; p.t. woc, wakide, 
Jer. xxxi. 28; pl. wakiden, Num. xxxi. 
473 p.p. waken, wakid, Is. xxix. 8; pr.p. 
wakende, Jer. i. 12. 

wakere, a watcher, Dan.iv. 20; pl. wakeris, 
S. Sol. iii. 3. 

wakyng, n. @ watch, a watching, Ecclus. 
xxxvili. 27. Lk. xii. 38; pl. wakyngis, 
Wisd. xiii. 23. 

wakingli, watchfully, Ecclus. xiii. 17 g. 

wakir, watchful, Prov. xx. 13 9. 

walewith, pr. t. rolls, Prov. xxvi. 27; imp. 
walewe, Josh. x. 18. 1 Kings xiv. 33; 
p.t. walewide, walowid, Judith xiii. 10. 
Mt. xxvii. 60. Mk. ix.19. xv. 463 p.p. 
walewid, Judg. vil. 13. Mk. ix. 19. 
XVI. 4. 

walewinge, walwyng, x. @ rolling, 11 Pet. 
ii, 22. 

walkere, a fuller, Mk. ix. 2. 

walkynge, 2. a walk or path, Ez. xiii. 4. 


wallynge, 2. division by walls, 1v Kings | 


xxii. iq. 11 Par. xxxiv. 22. 

wallynge. v. wellynge. 

waltrid, waltryd, p. p. rolled, Judg. v. 27. 
Judith xiv. 4. 

wan, livid, blue, Ex. xxi. 25. 

wandren, pr.t. walk, Mt. xi. 53 p.t. pl. 
wandriden, Mk. xvi. 12; pr. p. wan- 
dringe, Mk. xvi. 12. 

wanen, wane, wanyen, fo waste away, Ec- 
clus. xl. 14. Is. xix. 1. 

wanhope, despair, Ps. prol. p. 738. 

wang-tooth, woong-tooth, a molar tooth, 
Judg. xv. 193 wang-teeth, wank-teeth, 
Prov. xxx.14. Joel. i. 6. 

wanyng, wenyng, n. @ weaning, Gen. xxi. 


wannesse, lividness, grief, Gen. iv. 23. Prov. 
XX. 30. 

war, waat, imp. beware, guard, Ecclus. ix. 
21. xii, 16. xxvi. 14. 

war, ware, wary, prudent, wise, aware, Mt. 
x. 16. xi. 25. Lk. xii.15. Dan. i. 4. 


GLOSSARY. 


| warde, keeping, custody, Gen. xlii.17. Prov. 


iv. 23. 

watdis, strongholds, Pref. ep. c. iii. p. 63. 

wardide, p. t. fortified, guarded, 1 Macc. iv. 
61; pl. wardiden, Mt. xxvii. 66. 

warding, wardyng, wardynge, ». a fortifica- 
tion, Ez. xxi. 22. 1 Macc. iv. 61; pl. 
wardingis, 11 Cor. x. 4. 

execrable, reproachable, Prov. 
xviii. 1. Ecclus. xxvii. 33. 

warie, wary, warye, to curse, Num. xxiii. 8. 
Mt. xxvi. 74. Rom. xii.143 pr.t. wa- 
rieth, werith, Num. xxiii. 8 ; p.¢. wariede, 
Ps. Ixxiii. 3. Prov. v.12. Ecclus. xvi. 9; 
pl. wariden, Joh. ix. 28; p.p. waried, 11 
Mace. v. 8; pr.p. wariende, Ps. xxv. 5. 

wariedhed, malignancy, accursedness, Wisd. 
V. 13, 24. 


Ps. xxi. 17. xxxvi. I. 1 Cor. vi. 10. 
wariyng, 2. a cursing, Rom. iii. 143 pl. wa- 
ryingis, 11 Mace. xii. 14. 


| warishe, to guard, Prov. iv. 6. 
| warli, warly, waarly, warily, cautiously, 1 


Kings xviii. 14. Tob. ii. 4. iv. 16. Ecclus. 
xxii, 32. Mk. xiv. 44. Eph. v. 15. 

warnesse, wariness, prudence, Deut. xxxii. 
28. Prov. prol. p.1. Prov. i. 4. 

warnyschid, warnysshit, p. p. strengthened, 
fortified, 11 Kings xxili. 5. 1v Kings xii. 
12. 

warnyschyng, 2. fortification, rv Kings xix. 
32. 

wast, void, vain, Gen. xvii.14. Eccles. ii. 
26. 

wastere, wastour, devastator, destroyer, Is. 
xvi. 4. 1 Cor. x.10; pl. wasteres, wast- 
ours, 1 Kings xiv. 48. Is. xlii. 24. 

wastli, in vain, Is. xxx. 7. 


| wastnesse, desolation, Is. xlvii. 11. 


| 
| 








water-banke, a shore, Deeds xxvii. 39. 

water-hepes, dillows, Is. xix. 6. xxxvii. 
25. 

watir-leche, a leach, Prov. xxx. 15; pl. 
water-lechis, Prov. xxx. 15. 

water-mous, a river mouse, Is. li. 20 g. 

water-trowis, watertroughs, Gen. xxiv. 20. 

watren, to give water, Gen. xxix. 8; p.t. 
wateryde, watride, Gen. xxiv. 46. Ps. 
Ixxvil. 15; p. p. watrid, wateryd, watered, 
Gen. xxix. 2, II. 

wawed, wawid, wayued, p. p. waved, moved, 
Mt. ii. 7. Lk. vii. 24. 

wawe, a wave, Mk. v.1. Jam. i. 6; pi. 
wawes, wawis, Job ix. 8. Mt. viii. 24. 
Lk. viii. 23. Jude 2, 13. 

wax, waxen. vw. wexe. 

waxing, 2. a growth, Is. xxii. 4; pl. wax- 
yngis, Num. xxxii. 14. 


| web, stuff, thing woven, film, Tob. vi. 9. xi. 


14. 

webhis, weavers, 1 Kings xvii. 7. 1 Par. xi. 
23. 

webstere, a weaver, Joh vii.6; pl. websters, 
1 Kings xvii. 7. 1 Par. xi. 23. 

wed, wedde, a pledge, Gen. xxxvili. 17. Ex. 
xxii. 26. 17 Cor. i, 22. v. 5. 


weder, wedre, a shower, Deut. xxxii. 2. Jer. 
iii. 3; pl. wederes, Jer. prot. p. 343. 

weeft, weft, Gen. xiv. 23. Ex. xxxix. 3. 

weel, adv. well, Ecclus. xiii. 27. 

weenden, weende, wende, to go, Num. viii. 
22. 111 Kings xii. 28. Jer. xli.18; imp. 
wende, Ex. xxxiii.1; p.p. went, Num. 
ix. 1. Mk. vii. 29; pr.p. weendynge, 
Num. x. 6. 

weet, wet, Jer. xxiii. 9. 

weetith, pr.¢. waters, Josh. xiii. 3. 

weieden, weysiden, p.t. pl. Zach. xi.12; 
pr.p. weiynge, Gen. xxiv. 22. 

wey-fode, provisions on a journey, Deut. 
xv. 14. 

weie-goer, wei-goer, a traveller, Proy. vi. 11; 
pl. weie-goers, Gen. xxxvii. 25. 

weihe, a balance, Is. xl. 12. 

weie-lot, weilot, @ crossway, Gen. xxxviii. 
14, 21; pl. weilottis, 11 Kings i. 20. 

weilen, weyle, wey], ¢o mourn, bewail, Gen. 
xxiii. 1. Mt. ix.1g. xxiv. 30; pt. pl. 
weileden, wayleden, Lk. xxiii. 27. viii. 
523 p.p. weilid, Mt. ii.173; pr.p. wei- 
lende, Jer. ix. 17. 

weileressis, weilsteris, female mourners, Jer. 
ix. 17. 

weilyng, weylynge, 2. lamentation, Gen. 
xxvii. 41. 1 Cor. v. 2. 

weyn. v. wayn. 

weysche. v. waische. 

weyte, »v. wayte. 

wel, well! alas! Ps, xxxiv. 21, 2g. 

welden, welde, weelde, weeld, weilde, to 
have power over, to possess, to have, Gen. 
xxiv. 60. Josh. xviii. 3. xxi.12. Ruth iv. 
4,9. Mt.v. 4. Lk. xviii. 18. Apoe. xxi.7; 
pr.t. weldith, Lk. xi. 21; pl. welden, Lk. 
xii. 33; p.t. weeldide, Judg. i. 19. iii. 13. 
xi. 21. Deeds i. 18; pl. weeldiden, weld- 
iden, Deut. iii. 12. Josh. xix. 47. xxi. 41; 
p. p. weeldid, Josh. xviii. 3. Deeds viii. 
20; pr.p. weldinge, weldynge, Josh. xvii. 
16. 11 Cor. vi. 10. 

welder, weldere, a possessor, ruler, Gen. xiv. 
22. Lev. xxv. 28; pl. welderes, weelders, 
Prov. i. 19. Deeds iv. 34. 

welefully, willefulli, prosperonsly, 111 Joh. 
2, 

welewen, to wither, dry up, Josh. xviii. 3. 
Is. xix. 6; pr.t. welewith, Jam. i. 11; 
pl. welewen, Josh. xviii. 3; p.t. welewide, 
welwide, 1v Kings xix. 26. Mk. iv. 6; 
pl. welewiden, welowiden, Ez. xix. 12. 
Mt. xiii. 6. 

wel-felende, weel-felende, pr.p. right think- 
ing, Ecclus. iv. 29. vii. 21, 23, 27. xviii. 
29. 

welle, to weld, beat together, smelt, Is. ii. 4. 
Ez. xxii. 20; imp. welle, Ecclus. xxviii. 
29; p.t. wellide, Jer. x.14; p.p. wellid, 
11 Par, xxxiv.17. Job xxviii. 1. Ez, xxii. 
21,22. Apoc. i.133 pr.p. wellyng, Prov. 
xxvil. 27. 

wellere, a welder of metal, Jer. vi. 29. li. 
17. 

wellyng, n. a welding, smelting, Jer. li. 17. 


wellynge, wallynge, pr.p. springing as water, 
Pref. ep. c. i. p.61. Gen. xxvi.19. 8. Sol. 
iv. Ig. 

welsom, welsum, weelsom, prosperous, Gen. 
xxiv. 21, 60, xxxvil.14; comp, welsumere, 
Eccles. iv. 3. 

welsumli, welsumly, prasperously, Gen. 


xxviii. 21. xxxix. 2. Ps. xliv. 5, 111 Joh. | 


2. 

wel-willingnesse, Benevolence, Ecclus. prol. 
p- 123. 

wem, wemme, a blemish, Prov. ix. 7. 8. Sol. 
iv. 7. Eph. i. 4, 7, 27. 11 Pet. ii. 13. 

wemmed, p.p. spotted, Deut. xii. 15. 

wene, to suppose, guess, Gen. xxvii.12; pr.t. 
weneth, Lk, viii, 18; 2. wenest, wenyst, 
Pref. ep. c. v. p. 66. Gen. xvii. 17; pl. 

_ wenen, weenen, Pref. ep. c. v. p. 66. Lk. 
xiii. 2; p.#. wenyde, weenyde, wende, 
weendide, Gen. xli. 17. xlii. 30. 1v Kings 
y. 11. Joh xxxi. 24; pl. weneden, 
weeneden, wenden, Wisd. xii. 27. xiii. 2. 
Is. Ixvi. 17; pr.p. wenende, Job prol. 
p- 672. 

weod-hook, a hook for cutting weeds or 
briars, Is. vii. 25. 

wepful, wepeful, mournful, Wisd. xviii. ro. 

wereden, werden, p.¢. pl. wore, 111 Esdr. 
iii. 2; p.p. wered, Josh. ix. 13. 

werelis, fly-flappers (?), (Lat. flabella,) Job 
prol. 2, p. 672. 

wermod, wormod, wormwood, Prov. v. 4. 
Lam. iii. 19. Apoc. viti. 11. 

wern, to forbid, Gen. xxiii. 6. 

werpe, 2. warp, Ex. xxxix, 3. Lev. xiii, 48. 

wesh. ». waische. 

wethir, @ ram, @ sheep, a battering ram, 
Gen. xv. 9; pl. wetheres, Gen, xxx. 35. 
11 Mace. xii, 15. 

wete, wheat, Deut. xxviii. 51; pl. wetis, 
Gen. xlii. 26. 

weu, fie! Ps. xxxiv. 21, 25. 

wexe, fo grow, become, Gen. xl. 10. Mt. 
xiii. 30; pr.t.pl. wexen, Mt. vi. 28; p.t. 
wexe, wex, wax, wexide, Gen. xii. 10. 
xxi, 20. xxvii. 1. Lk. ii. 40; pl. wexen, 
woxen, wexeden, wexiden, Ex. i. 7. Mt. 
xiii. 7. Lk. xxiii. 5, 23; p.p. wexen, 
wexun, wexe, waxen, waxun, wexid, Gen. 
iv, 23. Xxv. 27. xxvii. 2, 111 Kings i. 2. 
Mt. xiii. 32. Rom. v. 13; pr.p. wexynge, 
waxyng, Gen. iv. 23. viii. 21. 

weuen, weeue, to weave, make, Pref. ep. 
c. Vii. p. 71. Ex. xxxv. 33; p.é.pl. wouen, 
weueden, Is, lix. 5; p.p. wouen, weuyd, 
1 Kings prol. p. 2; pr. p. wenende, Is. 
xix. 9. 

whal, a whale, Job vii.12; pl. whallis, Gen. 
qe 20s 

whas, gen. whose, Mt. prol. 1. p.1. 

what, wherefore, Lk. xix. 33. xx. 23. Joh. 
xx. Ig. 

what-er, whatever, Deut. xxi. 5. 

whelke, a pustule, weal, Lev. xiii. 25 pl. 
whelkis, Lev. xiv. 56. 

whennus, whens, adv. whence, Gen. xvi. 8. 

wher, whether, Gen. xviii, 21. Mt. v. 46. 





GLOSSARY. 


wherto, wherefore, Mt. ix. 4. 

whether, either, or, Mk. iii. 4. 

whyet, white, Gen, xxx. 35. 

whijt-perle, albugo, Lev. xxi. 20, 

while, recompense, return, turn, 1 Kings 
xxiv. 20. 11 Kings xix. 36. Prov. xix. 17. 
Is. lix. 18. Jer, 11.6, Joel iii. 4; pl. whilis, 
111 Kings v.14. 11 Esdr. iv. 22. vii. 3. 
1 Par. xxiii. 24. Wisd. vii. 18. 

whilenesse, whilenesse, recompense, 
turn, turn, Joel iti. 4. Jam. i. 17. 

whilis, adv. while, Gen. xlvii. 19. 

whil-mele, while-melis, adv. by turn, 111 
Kings v. 14. 11 Esdr. iv. 22. Wisd. vii.18. 

whirlide, p.t. hurled, 1 Kings xvii. 49. 

whirle-puff, a whirling blast, Wisd. v. 24. 

whist, whisht, whischt, hush! Judg. xviii. 
19. 

whistlen, to whistle, Jer. xix. 8. 

whistlyng, n. @ hissing, contempt, 11 Par. 
xxix, 8. 

whistrende, whistringe, pr. p. whispering, 
Ecclus. xii. 19. xxviii. 13. 

whoche, which, Mt. prol. 1. p. 1. 

who-so-er, whosoever, Josh. xx. 3. 

wicchingis, witchcrafts, Deeds viii. 11. 

wicke, wyke, wicked, 1 Kings xxv. 25. 
ar Kings xxii. 49. 11 Par. vi. 23. Mt. viii. 
28. Lk. viii. 2. 

wickenesse, wickedness, Prov. iv. 17; pl. 
wickenesses, Prov. vy. 22. 

wickidlich, wickedly, Deut. xxxi. 29. 

widewhed, widowhood, Gen, xxxviii. 14. 
Judith x. 2, 

wielde, wild, Gen. xxxvii. 20. 

wike, wyke, week, Gen. xxix. 28. Mk. xvi. 2. 
v. wouke, 

wikett, a little gate, 111 Kings xxii, 10. 

wilful, willing, 11 Cor. viii. 3. 

wilfuli, wilfully, wylfulli, of free will, Lev. 
vii. 16. 1 Macc. x. 33. Deeds xii. 10. 

willefulli. v. welefully. 

willi. v. euel-willi, greet-willi. 

willidness, wilfulness, Wisd. v.13. 

wiln, wilne, to will, desire, Gen. xxvii. 4, 12. 
Lk. ix. 24; pr.é. wile, wole, wol, Dent. 
xxv. 7,8. 11 Kings xxiv. 3. Mt. xi. 27, 
vil. 10; 2p. wilt, wil, walt, wole, Gen. 
xv. I. xxii. 7; woltow, wilt thou, Esth. 
v.3. Mt. xiii. 28; pl. wolen, wollith, 
wiln, wilne, wil, Gen. xxi. 29. ‘11 Kings 
xvi.2. Mt. vii.12.xx.32. Mk. prol.1. p.86. 
Mk. xiv. 7; imp. wilne, wele, wole, Gen. 
xix. 17, xxi. 173 pl. wileth, woleth, Judg. 
xix, 23. Lam. iv.15; p.t. wolde, Gen. 
xxvil. 20, xxviii, 11; pl. wolden, Esth, 
ii. 21, Mt. xvii.12; p.p. wilned, Ecclus, 
x. 143 pr.p. wilnynge, wilnende, wil- 
lyng, willende, wolnynge, Gen. xxxvii. 22. 
Num. xxxv. 15. Deut. xxv. 11. Judg. 
xix. 3. Ecclus. xiv. 7. Lk. viii. 20. 

wilsumnesse, wilfulness, Ecclus. xxxi. 40. 

wyndewe, wyndowe, wynwe, wynewe,winewe, 
to winnow, Deut. xxxiii.17. 111 Kings xiv. 
14. Jer. xlix, 36. li, 2; pr.t. 2p. win- 
dewist, wyndowidist, Ez, xxxii. 2; pl. 
wynewiden, wynewden, wyndewiden, 


re- 


TAT 


winweden, wynnewiden, wyndowen, Is. 
xxxiv. 21. Zech. i. 19. 1 Macc. vii. 46; 
p. p. wyndewid, wyndowid, wynewid, 
winwed, 1 Kings xxii.12. Is. xxx. 24. 
Ez.xxxvi.19; pr.p.wyndewynge,wyndow- 
ynge, wynewing, wynewynge, wynwing, 
wynewende, wynnowynge, 11 Kings xxii. 
12. Is, xxix. 5. Jer. xv. 7. Dan. viii. q. 
Mt. iii. 12. 

wyndeweris, wyneweres, wyneweris, win- 
nowers, Jer. li. 2, 

wynnyng, 2. gain, lucre, Phil. i. 21. 1 Tim. 
iii. 8, 

wyn-violis, vessels for wine, 111 Kings vii. 
40, 45. 

wynside, p.é. winced, kicked, Deeds prol. p. 
507; pl. wynseden, 11 Kings vi. 6. vo. 
aj3en-wynsed. 

wynter, years, Gen. v. 3. xv. 13. 

wynterne, to winter, Deeds xxvii. 12. 

wirlynge-wynde, whirlwind, 1v Kings ii. 11; 
pl. whirlinge-wijndis, 11 Pet. ti. 17. 

wyse, manner, Gen. xxxii. 19. 

wiselyer, comp. mare wisely, 1 Kings xviii. 30. 

wist, wisten. v. wite. 

wit, with, Mt. vi. 2. 

wit, witt, knowledge, wisdam, Ecclus. iii. 25. 
Lk, xxiv. 45; pl. wittes, wittis, Jer. prol. 
p. 342. Ecclus. i. 6. © 

wite, to know, Gen, xxiv. 21. Mt. xvi. 4. 
Mk. v. 43. Lk. 1.18; pr.t. wyte, wite, 
wote, woot, wot, Gen. iii. 5. iv. 9. xviii. 
21. Prov. vii. 22. Eccles. x.14. Mt. vi. 8. 
Joh. iv. 25; 2 p. wost, woost, wotist, 
Num. xvi.15. 11 Kings i. 5. Tob. viii. 9. 
Mt. xv. 12. Joh. xiii. 7. Apoc. iii. 17. 
vil.14; pl. witen, wyten, woten, 1v Kings 
vii, 12, Lk. xx. 21. Joh. viii, 193 imp. 
wite, Gen. xv. 13. Num. xxxii. 23; pl. 
witeth, witith, Job xix. 29. Mt. xxiv. 33; 
p.t. wiste, Gen. xxi. 26. Ex. xxi. 36; 
2 p. wistest, Mt. xxv. 26; pl. wisten, 
1 Kings xxii.17. Joh. viii. 19. Lk. ii. 49; 
p-p. wist, Ley. xiv. 57. Is. Ixi. 9. Mt. x. 
26. Lk. xii. 2; pr.p. witinge, witynge, 
wytynge, 1 Kings xxii, 17. Mt. xii. 25. 
Lk, viii. 53. Deeds v. 2. 

witendely, wityngli, knowingly, Rom. prol.t. 
p. 299. prol. 2. p. 302. 

with-bern, pr.t.pl. carry with others, Is. 
lxii. 9. 

with-chaunge, to change, commute, Ecclus. 
xii, 19. 

with-departen, to part asunder, Ecclus.i. 24. 

with-eire, co-heir, Pref. ep. c. vii. p. 70. 

with-ficchid, p.p. fixed in, Ps. xxxi. 4. 

with-folweris, companions, Gen. xxiv. 59. 

with-heesing, 2. a hastening, Ps. Ixxvii. 33. 

with-hilden, p.t.pl. covered aver, Gen. vii. 
24. 

withiene, adj. of willow, Job xl. 17. 

withies, withthis, willows, willow-bands, Lev. 
xxiii. qo. Ps. exxxvi. 2. Is. xv. 7. Judith 
vi. 9. 

withinnen-forth, withynne-forth, withyn- 
forth, adv. within, 1v Kings iv. 4. Dan. 
xiv, 18. Mt. vii. 15. 11 Cor. vii. 5. 


5c 


‘ 


748 


withinne-wrappen, fo wrap up, Job xviii. 
113 p.p. withinne-wrappid, Job iii. 5. 
vi. 18. 

with-lawe, to laugh with, Gen. xxi. 6. 

withonten, prep. without, Gen. xxx.1. Heb. 
Xi. 40. ; 

without-forth, withoute-forth, adv. outward- 
ly, without, Gen. xix. 11. Mt. xii. 47. 

with-preisen, fo praise together, Eeclus.li.15. 

with-rysynge, pr. p. rising up, Gen. xxii. 3. 

with-seyn, with-seie, to contradict, Esth. 
viii. 8. Job vi. 10; pr.t. with-seith, Num. 
xxx. 6, 8, 9; 12; p.t.pl. with-seiden, Ju- 
dith i. x1. Jer. xxxvi. 2553 pr. p. with- 
seiende, Job xvi. 9. 

with-seieris, with-seggeris, 
Pref. ep. c. ili. p. 63. 

with-stonden, to resist, Judith v.13; pr.t. 
with-stont, Deut. xxv. 16. Rom. ix. 19; 
pr.p. with-stondende, Judith ii. 16. 

witid, wyited, p.p. adjudged, reckoned, im- 
puted, Judg. iv.9. Job xli. 8. Rom. y. 
13. 

witles, witlesse, witlees, unwise, wanting 
sense, Wisd. xv. 18. 11 Mace. xi. 13. 
Gal. iii. 1. 

witti, wise, Deut. i. 13. 

witnesse, a witty or wise saying or doing, 
Prov. viii. 5; pl. witnesses, wittynesses, 
Ecclus. i. 5. 

wist, a whit, 1 Kings i. 14. 

wlappe, to wrap, Num. iv. 5, 73 pr.é. wlap- 
pith, 1 Tim. ii. 4; p.¢. wlappide, Gen. 
xxvii. 16. Ex. xiv. 27. 1v Kings ii. 8. 
Mt. xxvii. 59. Lk. ii. 7; p.p. wlappid, 
Num, iv.15. Lk. ii.12. Joh. xx. 7. 11 Pet. 
ii. 20; pr. p. wlappynge, Job xxxviii. 2. 
v. biwlappe. 

wlapping, n. @ wrapping, 111 Kings xx. 
38 9. ‘ 

wlaten, wlate, wlaat, whlaten, fo loath, Judg. 
ix. 23. Prov. xxiv. 24. Is. xxxiv. 3, 43 
pr.t. wlatith, Num. xxi. 5; 2p. wlatist, 
Rom. ii. 22; pl. wlaten, wlatith, Gen. xlvi. 
34. Deeds prol. p. 508; p.é. wlatede, Jer. 
xiv. 193 2p. wlatidist, Wisd. xii. 3; pl. 
wlatiden, Rom. prol. 2. p. 3025 p.p. 
wlated, wlatid, Is. xlix. 7. Jer. xiv. 19. 

wlatyng, 2. a loathing, Num. xi.20. Dan.ix. 
Il. 

wlatyngnesse, loathsomeness, Dan. ix. 11. 

wlatsum, loathsome, Lev. xi. 11. 

woe. v. waken. 

wode, a wood, Gen. xxi. 33; pl. wodis, 
woodis, Josh. xv. 9. 

wode-bil, a hook for cutting briars, Is. vii. 
25. 

wode, wod, wood, woode, mad, fierce, Ley. 
xx. 27. Is. xxxvil. 29. Wisd.v. 4. Mt. 
yi. 28. Joh. x. 28. Deeds viti. 11. 1 Cor. 
xiv. 23. 

wodenesse, woodnes, woodnesse, woode- 
nesse, madness, rage, passion, Gen. xxvii. 
44. xlix. 6. Wisd. v. 4. Mk. ili, 21. 
Deeds xxvi. 24. Apoc. xix.15; pl. wood- 
nesses, Ps. xxxix. 5. 

wodewose, a wild man, savage, Is, xxxiv.143 


contradictors, 











GLOSSARY. 


pl. wodewoses, wodewosis, woodewosys, 
Is. xiii. 21. Jer. 1. 39. 

wodi, full of trees, Num. xiii. 21. xxiv. 6. 

woke. v. wouke, 

wole, woleth, wolde. v. wilne. 

wolle. v. wul. 

wommanysche, wommannysch, effeminate, 
111 Kings xiv. 24. xv. 12. 

wommanlich, effeminate, 111 Kings xiv. 
24, 

wonder-myche, adv. very greatly, Gen. xxx. 
43- 

wondirli, wonderfully, Job x. 16. 

wonen, wone, to dwell, abide, Prov. ii. 21. 
xiv. 9. Is. liv. 3; pr.é. woneth, Ps. xc. 1. 
Ecelus. xxxviii. 26; p.é. wonde, Jer. ii. 6; 
pl. woneden, Jer. xlvi. 21; p. p. woned, 
Num. xi. 12; pr. p. wonende, Prov. 
XXx. I. 

wonyng, 2. @ habitation, Ps. evi. 7, 36; pl. 
wonyngns, Ps, eviil. 10. Jer. xlix. 18. 

wonne, custom, Ex. xxxiti. 4. 

woodedist, p.t, 2p. wert mad, Is. xxxvi. 
29; p.p. wodid, Deeds vili.11. ~ 

woode-theues, wild robbers, Jer. 1. 39. 

woom, womyt, @ vomit, 11 Pet. ii. 22. v. 
yome. 

woong-tooth. v. wang-tooth. 

worche, wyrk, to work, Gen. iii. 23; p.t. 
wrouste, Gen. ii. 5. 1 Kings xxvii. 12; 
pl. wrou3ten, ywrou3ten, Deut. xx. 18. 
Is. xvii. 8; p. p. wrou3t, Gen. xxxiv. 7. 
Deut. xx. 18. 

word-bregger, abridger of words, Pref. ep. 
c. Vil. p. 72. 

wordy, woordi, full of words, Job xvi. 21. 
1 Cor. prol. 1. p. 339. 

worldlis, worlds, 1 Pet. 
xix. 3. 

worschipful, worthy to be revered, Gen. 
Xxvill. 175; comp. worschipfullere, Lk. 
xiv. 8. 

worste, the devil, Eph. vi. 16. 

wort, a herb, Lk. xi. 42; pl. wortis, Gen. 
ix.3. Mt. xiii. 32. Rom. xiv. 2. 

worte-werm, wort-worm, caterpillar, Pref. 
ep. c. vil. p. 69. Ps. civ. 34. Joel i. 4. 

wort-3erd, garden of herbs, 111 Kings 
xxi. 2. 

wost, wot, woot. v. wite. 

woughe, n. a wall, Ps. lxi. 4; pl. wowis, 
1 Esdr, iv. 12. v. 8. 

wouke, wonk, woke, a week, Gen. xxix. 28. 
Ex. xxxiv, 22. Lev. xxiii. 16. Lk. xxiv.1. 
Joh. xx. 1; pl. woukis, Ex. xxxiy. 22. 
Ley. xii. 5. 

woule, to yell, howl, Hos. v. 8; p.t. pl. 
wouliden, Hos. vii.14. ». 3olle. 

wowende, wowynge, pr.p. wooing, Prov. vii. 
13. 

wowendeli, devotedly, Prov. xxi. 29. 

wowers, wooers, Judg. xiv. 20. 

wowis. v. woughe. 

wrastled, wrastlede, wristlide, pt. wrestled, 
Gen, xxxii. 24. Ecelus. li, 25. 

wrathefulnesse, wrath, Ecclus. i. 28. 

wrathen, to be angry, Prov. xviii.14; p. t. 


iv. 11. Apoc. 


wrathede, Ps. ev. 4o; pl. wraththiden, 
Iv Kings xvii. 17; p. p. wrooth, wroth, 
wraththid, Gen. xviii. 32. Ex. xv. 14. 
Jer, xxvii. 14. Heb. iii. 17. 
wrathis, wraththis, anger, Prov. xxi. 14. 
xxvi. 10. Wisd. vii. 20. 
wraththeres, wraththers, provokers to anger, 
Ez. ii. 7, 8. 
wreche, wreek, to wreak, avenge, Dent. xxxii. 
43. Judg. xvi. 28. 
wreker, an avenger, Josh. xx. 4. 
wretchidnessis, wrecchidnessis, 
Gen. iii. 16. Job xiv. 1. 
wretcheful, wreccheful, miserable, 1 Kings 
1.15. Eccles. v. 15. 
wretchidful, miserable, Judg. v.27. 11 Macc. 
ix. 28. 
wreten. v. wryte. 
wrethe, wreath, neckchain, Gen. xli. 42. 
wrielys, wriels, coverings, veils, Job xxiv. 8. 
wrynclis, folds, Gen. xxxviii. 14. 
wryngeris, those who squeeze or press out, 
Is. xvi. 10. 
wristlide. v. wrastled. 
wryte, to write, Num. v. 23; p.t. wroot, 
Ex, xxiv. 4; pl. wreten, writen, wryten, 
Deeds xv. 23; p.p. iwryten, Rom. prol.1. 
Pp. 299. 
writhen. v. wrooth. 
wrist, a workman, artificer, 11 Mace, ii. 30; 
pl. wristis, tv Kings xxii. 5. 
wrong, p.t. wrested, twisted, squeezed, 11 
Kings xxiii. 21; p. p. wrong, wrongun, 
Gen. xl. 11. Lev. xxi. 19. Num. xxiv. 
10. 
wrongful, injurious, tyrannical, Lk. xii. 
58. 
wrooth, wroth. ». wrathen. 
wrooth, p.t. wrested, twisted, wrung, 11 Kings 
xxii. 21; p.p. writhen, writhun, Lev. i. 
15. Judg. xvi. 9. Ecclus. xlv. 13. Mk. 
xv.19. Joh. xix. 2. 1 Tim. ii. 9. 
wul, wolle, wool, Judg. vi. 37. 
wulle-graithers, preparers of wool, Pref. ep. 
c. vi. p. 67. 


miseries, 


3- 

3alow, 3elow, 3el3, 30low, yellow, Gen. xxx. 
32, 33. Jer. xxx. 6. 

3anynge. v. 3eneden. 

3ate, 3aat, a gate, Gen. xxiii. 10. xxviii. 17; 
pl. satis, Gen. xxii. 17. 

jate-leuis, foldings of a door, 11 Esdr. ii. 
14. 

3ea. v. 3he. 

3ede. v. gon. 

3ee, 3e, you, Gen. i. 28. xxiv. 49. 

3eene, 3ene, yeene, sheep with lamb, Ps. 
exliti. 13. Is. x]. 11. vo. ene. 

3eer, 3er, 3eers, 3erys, years, Gen. v. 
xxix. 30. xlvii. 9, 18. 

jeer-fruyt, 3eris-frute, yearly provision, sus- 
tenance, 1v Kings xxv. 30. Judith v. 
15. 

3eetere, a welder of metal, Jer. vi. 29. li. 17. 

jeldyn, 3elde, 3eeld, to yield, restore, repay, 
render, Gen. xx. 7. xxxi. 29. Mt. vi. 6. 


22. 


Lk. x. 35; inp. pl. 3eldeth, Tob. ii. 21; 
p.t. 30lde, 3elde, 3eld, 3eldide, 3ildide, Gen. 
xx. 14. xxxi. 39. Job xxix. 11. 11 Esdr. 
ii. 20. Lk. ix. 42; pl. 30ldun, 3elden, 3el- 
diden, Deeds iv. 33. xvi. 2; p.p. 30lden, 
30ldun, 3olde, 3oulde, 3elde, Lev. xiii. 7. 
1 Kings xxv. 39. Prov. vii. 14. Jer. prol. 
p. 342. Mt. xxvii. 58. Lk. xiv. 12, 145 
pr. p. 3eeldynge, 3eldynge, Deut. v. 9. 
vii. Io. 

3eldyng, 3eldynge, 3elding, n. reward, profit, 
retribution, Ps. xviii. 12. Lk. iv. 19. 

3ellen. v. 3olle. 

3en-biggynge, n. redemption, again-buying, 
Num. xviii. 16. 

3endis, prep. beyand, 1 Esdr. iv. 16. 

jeneden, p.t.pl. gaped, yawned, Ps. xxxiv. 
21; pr.p. 3anynge, 11 Mace. vi. 18. 

3erd, field, garden, Lk. xiii. 19. Joh. xviii. 1. 

3erde, 3eerd, 3eerde, staff, red, privy member, 
Gen. xvii.11. Ex. xiv. 16. Deut. xxiii. 1. 
Mt. x. 10. Heb. i.8. Apoc. xix.153; pl. 
3erdis, 11 Cor. xi. 25. Deeds xvi. 22. 

3erd-felles, foreskins, Jer. iv. 4. 

3ete, 3eete, to weld, to melt together, to pour, 
Ex. xxvi. 19. Jer. ix. 7; p.t. 30tte, 3etide, 
3etede, 3ettide, Ex. xxxvii. 3. 1v Kings 
iv. 5. Is. xliv. 10; p.p. 30tun, 3o0tyn, 30t, 
Ex. xxxii. 4. xxxvili. 27. 11 Par. xxxiv. 
173 pr.p. 3etynge, Ex. xxxvii. 3. 


GLOSSARY. 


3etyng, 3eting, n. a welding, melting of metal, 
Ex. xxxii, 4. Jer. li. 17. 

jeue. v. 3yue. 

3he, 3ea, yea, yes, Mt. v. 37. Joh. ii. 27. 

3his, 3is, yes, 1 Kings xv. 20. Mt. xvii. 23. 
Jam. v.12. 0. is. 

3icchyng, 2. an itching, itch, Deut. xxviii. 27. 

3if, if, Is. v. 9. Mt. iv. 3. 

sifte, gift, Num. iii. 9; pl. 3iftis, Gen. xxxii. 
18. 

sisterday, 3istirday, 3istai, yesterday, Gen. 
xix. 34. 1 Kings iv. 8. 

3it, yeé, Gen. iv. 25. Jer. xxviii. 3. 

3itchinge, pr.p. tiching, 11 Tim. iv. 3. 

3yue, 3ene, to give, Gen. xiii. 17. Mt. xx. 
143 tmp. pl. sifeth, 3euyth, m1 Kings iii. 
26. Deeds viii. 19; p.t. 3af, 3aue, Gen. 
ii. 6, Esth. vii. 2. Mk. xv. 375 p.t. 
jauen, 3euen, 30uen, Gen. xix. 33. Num. 
xvii. 6. 11 Esdr. ix. 17. Mt. xxvi. 67; 
p.p. 30ven, 30nUN, 3euuN, 3euen, y3if, syue, 
Gen. iv. 24. xxx.18. Mt. xi. 27. xiii. 11, 
Deeds prol. p. 307. Rom. prol. p. 298; 
pr.p. 3yuynge, Num. xi. 25. 

30c, 30k, @ yoke, Num, xxi. 30. 111 Kings 
xii. 4. Judith i.1; pl. 30ckis, 11 Kings 
xxiv. 22. 111 Kingis xix. 19. 

j3olden, 30ldun. ». 3elde. 

3olle, 3ellen, ¢o sound, to yell, cry aloud, 
Num. x. 7. Is. xv. 25; imp. pl. 3elleth, Is. 





749 


xii. 6. xxiii. 13 p.t. 3ollide, 3ellide, Judg. 
vy. 28. 1 Kings iv. 13; pl. 3elleden, 3ell- 
iden, Judg. v. 21. Judith xvi. 13; pr.p. 
3ollynge, 3ellende, 3ellynge, Num. x. 9. 
Judg. v.21. Is. xiii. 22. v. woule. 

30llynge, 3ellynge, sellyng, 3elling, 2. @ 
sounding, shouting, crying, Gen, xxvii. 38. 
Ex. xxxii. 17, Num. x. 6. Jer. xlviii. 5. 

3olow. v. 3alow. 

30ng, young, Gen. viii. 21. xlviil. 1. 

3onglyng, @ young man, Gen. xxxiv. 19. 
Judg. xvii. 73 pl. 3onglyngis, Dan. xi. 6. 

30ngthe, jongth, youth, Gen. xlviii. 17. 
Deut. xxxiii. 25. Mt. xix. 20. Mk. x. 20. 
Lk. xviii. 21. 

30re, adv. long ago, Deut. xxiv. 1. 1 Par. 
prol. p.314. Job prol. p. 670. Jer. xx. 8. 

30t, 30tte, 30tun. 2. 3ete. 

30un-silf, 3oure-silf, yourselves, Jam. ii. 4. 

30ule, to howl, Joel i. 5, 13. ii. 1. Mic. i. 8. 
p.t. pl. 30u0liden, Joel i. 11. v. goul, 
woule. 

30ulynge, 30wlyng, n. @ howling, Gen. xxvii. 
38. Zech. xi. 3. Jam. v. 1. 

3ouren, gen. yours, Gen. xxxiv. 16. xly. 20. 

30w, you, Gen. i. 29. 

30xide, p.t. sabbed, tv Kings iv. 36. 

3oxyng, n. @ sabbing, t Kings xxv. 31. Lam. 
ii, 56. 





CORRECTIONS. 


VOL. I. 


21. 1. 23. for grek read grete. 

. 40. 1. 29. for or dnuyne read of dyuyne. 

. 49. 1. 30. for religions read religious. 

. 8o. var. rr. 1. 4. for "EGLMPad read 'EGLPad. 
117. var. rr. 1. 2. for 2 the read 2 thi. 

128. c. 2. 1.16. for and axide4 read ‘and axide4, 
160. c. 2. 1. 4. for closis read clothis. 

178. c. 2. 1. 11. for 3e seidenY read ‘3e seideny, 
314. e. 1.1. 9. for Eliasar read Eliazar. 

331. var. rr. 1. 1. for 8 soote read 8 soote E. 
396. var. rr. 1. 3. for freli or read freli or. 

478- var. rr. 1. 8. for © either read ¢ either I. 
soi. c.1. 1. 38. for merlizon read merlizon. 
515. var. rr. 1. 6. for tbilonge read t bi longe. 
611. c. 1. 1. 3. for greue read grene. 

627. c. 1.1. 28. for fullen read fellen. 


VOL. U. 


. 38. c. 1. 1. 39. for hem read hern. 

123. var. rr. 1. 5. for t gitlees read t giltlees. 

193. c. 1.1.17. dele letter of reference after tyyn. 

231.1. 7. in both margins supply 29. 

. 278. in upper margin supply XV. 

- 314. c. 1. 1. 33. for hau read han. 

pp. 326—328. in upper margin supply 1. before PARALIPOMENON. 
P- 539. iz upper margin dele XIV. 

p- 546. c.1. 1. 22. for te read the. 

p. 708. c. 1. 1. 16. for corneris read corn eris. 


PUPPLEPP EP PEP UP T TS 


SP PUTS 


VOL, I. 


p. 45. var. rr. L. 3. for leendid read teendid. 

p- 53. var. rr. 1. 4. for © From I. read From K. 

p-149. c. 2. 1. 1. for stood read slood. 

p. 224. var. rr. 1. 2. for °m.c. read ¢ Om. c. 

p- 479. upper margin, for g9 read 58. 

p. 480. ibid. for 60 read go. 

ibid. ec. 2. 1. 1. dele 39 and place on last line of preceding column. 
p- 491. c. 2.1. 20. for han read kan. 

p. 572. ¢. 1. 1,12, for gedreden read gendreden. 


VOL. IV. 


p- 14. var. rr. 1. 7. for ielon read idon. 

p- 16. c. 2. 1. 32. for whether he wole ™ read whether ™ he wole. 

p. 17. upper margin, for V1. read VII. 

p- 29. c. 2. 1. 22. for Sone read sone. 

p. 56. var. rr. 1. 6, for dedegne read dedeyne. 

p- 90. ibid. ]. 2. for ® read 2 Om. UV. 

p. 130. ibid. 1. 8. add a8 after k. 

p-171. c. 2. 1. 3. for litsneth read listneth. 

p. 189. ¢. 1. 1. 4. for plentenous read plenteuous. 

p- 214. var. rr. last 1. for P breke gk pr.m. 4Om. g. read P Om. g. 
4 breke gk pr. m. 

p. 217. ¢. 1.1. 7. for plentenously read plentenously. 

p. 271. var. rr. 1. 4. for fufillid read fulfillid. 

p- 386. c. 2. 1. 3. dele 14 and place on line 4. 

p. 456. c. 1. 1. 4. for menf or to read men for to. 


